SWANN'S WAY

Remembrance Of Things Past, Volume One


By Marcel Proust


Translated From The French By C. K. Scott Moncrieff

NEW YORK HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY 1922





Contents


OVERTURE

COMBRAY

SWANN IN LOVE

PLACE-NAMES: THE NAME







OVERTURE

For a long time I used to go to bed early. Sometimes, when I had put out
my candle, my eyes would close so quickly that I had not even time to
say "I'm going to sleep." And half an hour later the thought that it was
time to go to sleep would awaken me; I would try to put away the book
which, I imagined, was still in my hands, and to blow out the light; I
had been thinking all the time, while I was asleep, of what I had just
been reading, but my thoughts had run into a channel of their own,
until I myself seemed actually to have become the subject of my book:
a church, a quartet, the rivalry between François I and Charles V. This
impression would persist for some moments after I was awake; it did not
disturb my mind, but it lay like scales upon my eyes and prevented them
from registering the fact that the candle was no longer burning. Then
it would begin to seem unintelligible, as the thoughts of a former
existence must be to a reincarnate spirit; the subject of my book would
separate itself from me, leaving me free to choose whether I would form
part of it or no; and at the same time my sight would return and I
would be astonished to find myself in a state of darkness, pleasant and
restful enough for the eyes, and even more, perhaps, for my mind, to
which it appeared incomprehensible, without a cause, a matter dark
indeed.

I would ask myself what o'clock it could be; I could hear the whistling
of trains, which, now nearer and now farther off, punctuating the
distance like the note of a bird in a forest, shewed me in perspective
the deserted countryside through which a traveller would be hurrying
towards the nearest station: the path that he followed being fixed for
ever in his memory by the general excitement due to being in a strange
place, to doing unusual things, to the last words of conversation, to
farewells exchanged beneath an unfamiliar lamp which echoed still in his
ears amid the silence of the night; and to the delightful prospect of
being once again at home.

I would lay my cheeks gently against the comfortable cheeks of my
pillow, as plump and blooming as the cheeks of babyhood. Or I would
strike a match to look at my watch. Nearly midnight. The hour when an
invalid, who has been obliged to start on a journey and to sleep in a
strange hotel, awakens in a moment of illness and sees with glad relief
a streak of daylight shewing under his bedroom door. Oh, joy of joys!
it is morning. The servants will be about in a minute: he can ring,
and some one will come to look after him. The thought of being made
comfortable gives him strength to endure his pain. He is certain he
heard footsteps: they come nearer, and then die away. The ray of light
beneath his door is extinguished. It is midnight; some one has turned
out the gas; the last servant has gone to bed, and he must lie all night
in agony with no one to bring him any help.

I would fall asleep, and often I would be awake again for short snatches
only, just long enough to hear the regular creaking of the wainscot, or
to open my eyes to settle the shifting kaleidoscope of the darkness,
to savour, in an instantaneous flash of perception, the sleep which lay
heavy upon the furniture, the room, the whole surroundings of which I
formed but an insignificant part and whose unconsciousness I should very
soon return to share. Or, perhaps, while I was asleep I had returned
without the least effort to an earlier stage in my life, now for ever
outgrown; and had come under the thrall of one of my childish terrors,
such as that old terror of my great-uncle's pulling my curls, which was
effectually dispelled on the day--the dawn of a new era to me--on which
they were finally cropped from my head. I had forgotten that event
during my sleep; I remembered it again immediately I had succeeded in
making myself wake up to escape my great-uncle's fingers; still, as a
measure of precaution, I would bury the whole of my head in the pillow
before returning to the world of dreams.

Sometimes, too, just as Eve was created from a rib of Adam, so a woman
would come into existence while I was sleeping, conceived from some
strain in the position of my limbs. Formed by the appetite that I was
on the point of gratifying, she it was, I imagined, who offered me that
gratification. My body, conscious that its own warmth was permeating
hers, would strive to become one with her, and I would awake. The rest
of humanity seemed very remote in comparison with this woman whose
company I had left but a moment ago: my cheek was still warm with her
kiss, my body bent beneath the weight of hers. If, as would sometimes
happen, she had the appearance of some woman whom I had known in waking
hours, I would abandon myself altogether to the sole quest of her, like
people who set out on a journey to see with their own eyes some city
that they have always longed to visit, and imagine that they can taste
in reality what has charmed their fancy. And then, gradually, the memory
of her would dissolve and vanish, until I had forgotten the maiden of my
dream.

When a man is asleep, he has in a circle round him the chain of the
hours, the sequence of the years, the order of the heavenly host.
Instinctively, when he awakes, he looks to these, and in an instant
reads off his own position on the earth's surface and the amount of time
that has elapsed during his slumbers; but this ordered procession is apt
to grow confused, and to break its ranks. Suppose that, towards morning,
after a night of insomnia, sleep descends upon him while he is reading,
in quite a different position from that in which he normally goes to
sleep, he has only to lift his arm to arrest the sun and turn it back
in its course, and, at the moment of waking, he will have no idea of the
time, but will conclude that he has just gone to bed. Or suppose that he
gets drowsy in some even more abnormal position; sitting in an armchair,
say, after dinner: then the world will fall topsy-turvy from its orbit,
the magic chair will carry him at full speed through time and space,
and when he opens his eyes again he will imagine that he went to sleep
months earlier and in some far distant country. But for me it was enough
if, in my own bed, my sleep was so heavy as completely to relax my
consciousness; for then I lost all sense of the place in which I had
gone to sleep, and when I awoke at midnight, not knowing where I was,
I could not be sure at first who I was; I had only the most rudimentary
sense of existence, such as may lurk and flicker in the depths of an
animal's consciousness; I was more destitute of human qualities than the
cave-dweller; but then the memory, not yet of the place in which I
was, but of various other places where I had lived, and might now very
possibly be, would come like a rope let down from heaven to draw me up
out of the abyss of not-being, from which I could never have escaped
by myself: in a flash I would traverse and surmount centuries of
civilisation, and out of a half-visualised succession of oil-lamps,
followed by shirts with turned-down collars, would put together by
degrees the component parts of my ego.

Perhaps the immobility of the things that surround us is forced upon
them by our conviction that they are themselves, and not anything else,
and by the immobility of our conceptions of them. For it always happened
that when I awoke like this, and my mind struggled in an unsuccessful
attempt to discover where I was, everything would be moving round me
through the darkness: things, places, years. My body, still too heavy
with sleep to move, would make an effort to construe the form which its
tiredness took as an orientation of its various members, so as to induce
from that where the wall lay and the furniture stood, to piece together
and to give a name to the house in which it must be living. Its memory,
the composite memory of its ribs, knees, and shoulder-blades offered it
a whole series of rooms in which it had at one time or another slept;
while the unseen walls kept changing, adapting themselves to the shape
of each successive room that it remembered, whirling madly through the
darkness. And even before my brain, lingering in consideration of when
things had happened and of what they had looked like, had collected
sufficient impressions to enable it to identify the room, it, my body,
would recall from each room in succession what the bed was like, where
the doors were, how daylight came in at the windows, whether there was a
passage outside, what I had had in my mind when I went to sleep, and had
found there when I awoke. The stiffened side underneath my body would,
for instance, in trying to fix its position, imagine itself to be lying,
face to the wall, in a big bed with a canopy; and at once I would say to
myself, "Why, I must have gone to sleep after all, and Mamma never came
to say good night!" for I was in the country with my grandfather, who
died years ago; and my body, the side upon which I was lying, loyally
preserving from the past an impression which my mind should never have
forgotten, brought back before my eyes the glimmering flame of the
night-light in its bowl of Bohemian glass, shaped like an urn and hung
by chains from the ceiling, and the chimney-piece of Siena marble in my
bedroom at Combray, in my great-aunt's house, in those far distant days
which, at the moment of waking, seemed present without being clearly
penned, but would become plainer in a little while when I was properly
awake.

Then would come up the memory of a fresh position; the wall slid away in
another direction; I was in my room in Mme. de Saint-Loup's house in the
country; good heavens, it must be ten o'clock, they will have finished
dinner! I must have overslept myself, in the little nap which I always
take when I come in from my walk with Mme. de Saint-Loup, before
dressing for the evening. For many years have now elapsed since the
Combray days, when, coming in from the longest and latest walks, I would
still be in time to see the reflection of the sunset glowing in the
panes of my bedroom window. It is a very different kind of existence
at Tansonville now with Mme. de Saint-Loup, and a different kind of
pleasure that I now derive from taking walks only in the evenings, from
visiting by moonlight the roads on which I used to play, as a child, in
the sunshine; while the bedroom, in which I shall presently fall asleep
instead of dressing for dinner, from afar off I can see it, as we return
from our walk, with its lamp shining through the window, a solitary
beacon in the night.

These shifting and confused gusts of memory never lasted for more than
a few seconds; it often happened that, in my spell of uncertainty as to
where I was, I did not distinguish the successive theories of which that
uncertainty was composed any more than, when we watch a horse running,
we isolate the successive positions of its body as they appear upon
a bioscope. But I had seen first one and then another of the rooms in
which I had slept during my life, and in the end I would revisit them
all in the long course of my waking dream: rooms in winter, where on
going to bed I would at once bury my head in a nest, built up out of the
most diverse materials, the corner of my pillow, the top of my blankets,
a piece of a shawl, the edge of my bed, and a copy of an evening paper,
all of which things I would contrive, with the infinite patience of
birds building their nests, to cement into one whole; rooms where, in
a keen frost, I would feel the satisfaction of being shut in from the
outer world (like the sea-swallow which builds at the end of a dark
tunnel and is kept warm by the surrounding earth), and where, the fire
keeping in all night, I would sleep wrapped up, as it were, in a great
cloak of snug and savoury air, shot with the glow of the logs which
would break out again in flame: in a sort of alcove without walls, a
cave of warmth dug out of the heart of the room itself, a zone of heat
whose boundaries were constantly shifting and altering in temperature
as gusts of air ran across them to strike freshly upon my face, from
the corners of the room, or from parts near the window or far from the
fireplace which had therefore remained cold--or rooms in summer, where
I would delight to feel myself a part of the warm evening, where the
moonlight striking upon the half-opened shutters would throw down to the
foot of my bed its enchanted ladder; where I would fall asleep, as it
might be in the open air, like a titmouse which the breeze keeps poised
in the focus of a sunbeam--or sometimes the Louis XVI room, so cheerful
that I could never feel really unhappy, even on my first night in it:
that room where the slender columns which lightly supported its ceiling
would part, ever so gracefully, to indicate where the bed was and
to keep it separate; sometimes again that little room with the high
ceiling, hollowed in the form of a pyramid out of two separate storeys,
and partly walled with mahogany, in which from the first moment my mind
was drugged by the unfamiliar scent of flowering grasses, convinced of
the hostility of the violet curtains and of the insolent indifference of
a clock that chattered on at the top of its voice as though I were not
there; while a strange and pitiless mirror with square feet, which
stood across one corner of the room, cleared for itself a site I had not
looked to find tenanted in the quiet surroundings of my normal field of
vision: that room in which my mind, forcing itself for hours on end
to leave its moorings, to elongate itself upwards so as to take on the
exact shape of the room, and to reach to the summit of that monstrous
funnel, had passed so many anxious nights while my body lay stretched
out in bed, my eyes staring upwards, my ears straining, my nostrils
sniffing uneasily, and my heart beating; until custom had changed the
colour of the curtains, made the clock keep quiet, brought an expression
of pity to the cruel, slanting face of the glass, disguised or even
completely dispelled the scent of flowering grasses, and distinctly
reduced the apparent loftiness of the ceiling. Custom! that skilful but
unhurrying manager who begins by torturing the mind for weeks on end
with her provisional arrangements; whom the mind, for all that, is
fortunate in discovering, for without the help of custom it would never
contrive, by its own efforts, to make any room seem habitable.

Certainly I was now well awake; my body had turned about for the last
time and the good angel of certainty had made all the surrounding
objects stand still, had set me down under my bedclothes, in my bedroom,
and had fixed, approximately in their right places in the uncertain
light, my chest of drawers, my writing-table, my fireplace, the window
overlooking the street, and both the doors. But it was no good my
knowing that I was not in any of those houses of which, in the stupid
moment of waking, if I had not caught sight exactly, I could still
believe in their possible presence; for memory was now set in motion; as
a rule I did not attempt to go to sleep again at once, but used to spend
the greater part of the night recalling our life in the old days at
Combray with my great-aunt, at Balbec, Paris, Doncières, Venice, and the
rest; remembering again all the places and people that I had known, what
I had actually seen of them, and what others had told me.

At Combray, as every afternoon ended, long before the time when I should
have to go up to bed, and to lie there, unsleeping, far from my
mother and grandmother, my bedroom became the fixed point on which my
melancholy and anxious thoughts were centred. Some one had had the happy
idea of giving me, to distract me on evenings when I seemed abnormally
wretched, a magic lantern, which used to be set on top of my lamp while
we waited for dinner-time to come: in the manner of the master-builders
and glass-painters of gothic days it substituted for the opaqueness
of my walls an impalpable iridescence, supernatural phenomena of many
colours, in which legends were depicted, as on a shifting and transitory
window. But my sorrows were only increased, because this change of
lighting destroyed, as nothing else could have done, the customary
impression I had formed of my room, thanks to which the room itself,
but for the torture of having to go to bed in it, had become quite
endurable. For now I no longer recognised it, and I became uneasy, as
though I were in a room in some hotel or furnished lodging, in a place
where I had just arrived, by train, for the first time.

Riding at a jerky trot, Golo, his mind filled with an infamous design,
issued from the little three-cornered forest which dyed dark-green the
slope of a convenient hill, and advanced by leaps and bounds towards the
castle of poor Geneviève de Brabant. This castle was cut off short by
a curved line which was in fact the circumference of one of the
transparent ovals in the slides which were pushed into position through
a slot in the lantern. It was only the wing of a castle, and in front
of it stretched a moor on which Geneviève stood, lost in contemplation,
wearing a blue girdle. The castle and the moor were yellow, but I could
tell their colour without waiting to see them, for before the slides
made their appearance the old-gold sonorous name of Brabant had given
me an unmistakable clue. Golo stopped for a moment and listened sadly to
the little speech read aloud by my great-aunt, which he seemed perfectly
to understand, for he modified his attitude with a docility not devoid
of a degree of majesty, so as to conform to the indications given in the
text; then he rode away at the same jerky trot. And nothing could arrest
his slow progress. If the lantern were moved I could still distinguish
Golo's horse advancing across the window-curtains, swelling out with
their curves and diving into their folds. The body of Golo himself,
being of the same supernatural substance as his steed's, overcame all
material obstacles--everything that seemed to bar his way--by taking
each as it might be a skeleton and embodying it in himself: the
door-handle, for instance, over which, adapting itself at once, would
float invincibly his red cloak or his pale face, never losing its
nobility or its melancholy, never shewing any sign of trouble at such a
transubstantiation.

And, indeed, I found plenty of charm in these bright projections, which
seemed to have come straight out of a Merovingian past, and to shed
around me the reflections of such ancient history. But I cannot express
the discomfort I felt at such an intrusion of mystery and beauty into
a room which I had succeeded in filling with my own personality until
I thought no more of the room than of myself. The anaesthetic effect
of custom being destroyed, I would begin to think and to feel very
melancholy things. The door-handle of my room, which was different to
me from all the other doorhandles in the world, inasmuch as it seemed to
open of its own accord and without my having to turn it, so unconscious
had its manipulation become; lo and behold, it was now an astral body
for Golo. And as soon as the dinner-bell rang I would run down to the
dining-room, where the big hanging lamp, ignorant of Golo and Bluebeard
but well acquainted with my family and the dish of stewed beef, shed the
same light as on every other evening; and I would fall into the arms of
my mother, whom the misfortunes of Geneviève de Brabant had made all the
dearer to me, just as the crimes of Golo had driven me to a more than
ordinarily scrupulous examination of my own conscience.

But after dinner, alas, I was soon obliged to leave Mamma, who stayed
talking with the others, in the garden if it was fine, or in the little
parlour where everyone took shelter when it was wet. Everyone except my
grandmother, who held that "It is a pity to shut oneself indoors in the
country," and used to carry on endless discussions with my father on the
very wettest days, because he would send me up to my room with a book
instead of letting me stay out of doors. "That is not the way to make
him strong and active," she would say sadly, "especially this little
man, who needs all the strength and character that he can get." My
father would shrug his shoulders and study the barometer, for he took an
interest in meteorology, while my mother, keeping very quiet so as not
to disturb him, looked at him with tender respect, but not too hard,
not wishing to penetrate the mysteries of his superior mind. But my
grandmother, in all weathers, even when the rain was coming down in
torrents and Françoise had rushed indoors with the precious wicker
armchairs, so that they should not get soaked--you would see my
grandmother pacing the deserted garden, lashed by the storm, pushing
back her grey hair in disorder so that her brows might be more free to
imbibe the life-giving draughts of wind and rain. She would say, "At
last one can breathe!" and would run up and down the soaking paths--too
straight and symmetrical for her liking, owing to the want of any
feeling for nature in the new gardener, whom my father had been asking
all morning if the weather were going to improve--with her keen, jerky
little step regulated by the various effects wrought upon her soul by
the intoxication of the storm, the force of hygiene, the stupidity of
my education and of symmetry in gardens, rather than by any anxiety (for
that was quite unknown to her) to save her plum-coloured skirt from the
spots of mud under which it would gradually disappear to a depth which
always provided her maid with a fresh problem and filled her with fresh
despair.

When these walks of my grandmother's took place after dinner there was
one thing which never failed to bring her back to the house: that was if
(at one of those points when the revolutions of her course brought her,
moth-like, in sight of the lamp in the little parlour where the liqueurs
were set out on the card-table) my great-aunt called out to her:
"Bathilde! Come in and stop your husband from drinking brandy!" For,
simply to tease her (she had brought so foreign a type of mind into my
father's family that everyone made a joke of it), my great-aunt used to
make my grandfather, who was forbidden liqueurs, take just a few drops.
My poor grandmother would come in and beg and implore her husband not to
taste the brandy; and he would become annoyed and swallow his few drops
all the same, and she would go out again sad and discouraged, but still
smiling, for she was so humble and so sweet that her gentleness towards
others, and her continual subordination of herself and of her own
troubles, appeared on her face blended in a smile which, unlike those
seen on the majority of human faces, had no trace in it of irony, save
for herself, while for all of us kisses seemed to spring from her eyes,
which could not look upon those she loved without yearning to bestow
upon them passionate caresses. The torments inflicted on her by my
great-aunt, the sight of my grandmother's vain entreaties, of her in
her weakness conquered before she began, but still making the futile
endeavour to wean my grandfather from his liqueur-glass--all these
were things of the sort to which, in later years, one can grow so well
accustomed as to smile at them, to take the tormentor's side with a.
happy determination which deludes one into the belief that it is not,
really, tormenting; but in those days they filled me with such horror
that I longed to strike my great-aunt. And yet, as soon as I heard her
"Bathilde! Come in and stop your husband from drinking brandy!" in my
cowardice I became at once a man, and did what all we grown men do when
face to face with suffering and injustice; I preferred not to see them;
I ran up to the top of the house to cry by myself in a little room
beside the schoolroom and beneath the roof, which smelt of orris-root,
and was scented also by a wild currant-bush which had climbed up between
the stones of the outer wall and thrust a flowering branch in through
the half-opened window. Intended for a more special and a baser use,
this room, from which, in the daytime, I could see as far as the keep of
Roussainville-le-Pin, was for a long time my place of refuge, doubtless
because it was the only room whose door Ï was allowed to lock, whenever
my occupation was such as required an inviolable solitude; reading or
dreaming, secret tears or paroxysms of desire. Alas! I little knew
that my own lack of will-power, my delicate health, and the consequent
uncertainty as to my future weighed far more heavily on my grandmother's
mind than any little breach of the rules by her husband, during those
endless perambulations, afternoon and evening, in which we used to see
passing up and down, obliquely raised towards the heavens, her handsome
face with its brown and wrinkled cheeks, which with age had acquired
almost the purple hue of tilled fields in autumn, covered, if she were
walking abroad, by a half-lifted veil, while upon them either the
cold or some sad reflection invariably left the drying traces of an
involuntary tear.

My sole consolation when I went upstairs for the night was that Mamma
would come in and kiss me after I was in bed. But this good night lasted
for so short a time: she went down again so soon that the moment in
which I heard her climb the stairs, and then caught the sound of her
garden dress of blue muslin, from which hung little tassels of plaited
straw, rustling along the double-doored corridor, was for me a moment
of the keenest sorrow. So much did I love that good night that I reached
the stage of hoping that it would come as late as possible, so as
to prolong the time of respite during which Mamma would not yet have
appeared. Sometimes when, after kissing me, she opened the door to go, I
longed to call her back, to say to her "Kiss me just once again," but
I knew that then she would at once look displeased, for the concession
which she made to my wretchedness and agitation in coming up to me with
this kiss of peace always annoyed my father, who thought such ceremonies
absurd, and she would have liked to try to induce me to outgrow the
need, the custom of having her there at all, which was a very different
thing from letting the custom grow up of my asking her for an additional
kiss when she was already crossing the threshold. And to see her look
displeased destroyed all the sense of tranquillity she had brought me a
moment before, when she bent her loving face down over my bed, and held
it out to me like a Host, for an act of Communion in which my lips might
drink deeply the sense of her real presence, and with it the power to
sleep. But those evenings on which Mamma stayed so short a time in
my room were sweet indeed compared to those on which we had guests
to dinner, and therefore she did not come at all. Our 'guests'
were practically limited to M. Swann, who, apart from a few passing
strangers, was almost the only person who ever came to the house at
Combray, sometimes to a neighbourly dinner (but less frequently since
his unfortunate marriage, as my family did not care to receive his wife)
and sometimes after dinner, uninvited. On those evenings when, as we sat
in front of the house beneath the big chestnut-tree and round the iron
table, we heard, from the far end of the garden, not the large and
noisy rattle which heralded and deafened as he approached with its
ferruginous, interminable, frozen sound any member of the household who
had put it out of action by coming in 'without ringing,' but the double
peal--timid, oval, gilded--of the visitors' bell, everyone would at once
exclaim "A visitor! Who in the world can it be?" but they knew quite
well that it could only be M. Swann. My great-aunt, speaking in a loud
voice, to set an example, in a tone which she endeavoured to make sound
natural, would tell the others not to whisper so; that nothing could be
more unpleasant for a stranger coming in, who would be led to think that
people were saying things about him which he was not meant to hear; and
then my grandmother would be sent out as a scout, always happy to find
an excuse for an additional turn in the garden, which she would utilise
to remove surreptitiously, as she passed, the stakes of a rose-tree or
two, so as to make the roses look a little more natural, as a mother
might run her hand through her boy's hair, after the barber had smoothed
it down, to make it stick out properly round his head.

And there we would all stay, hanging on the words which would fall from
my grandmother's lips when she brought us back her report of the
enemy, as though there had been some uncertainty among a vast number of
possible invaders, and then, soon after, my grandfather would say: "I
can hear Swann's voice." And, indeed, one could tell him only by his
voice, for it was difficult to make out his face with its arched nose
and green eyes, under a high forehead fringed with fair, almost red
hair, dressed in the Bressant style, because in the garden we used as
little light as possible, so as not to attract mosquitoes: and I would
slip away as though not going for anything in particular, to tell them
to bring out the syrups; for my grandmother made a great point, thinking
it 'nicer' of their not being allowed to seem anything out of the
ordinary, which we kept for visitors only. Although a far younger man,
M. Swann was very much attached to my grandfather, who had been an
intimate friend, in his time, of Swann's father, an excellent but an
eccentric man in whom the least little thing would, it seemed, often
check the flow of his spirits and divert the current of his thoughts.
Several times in the course of a year I would hear my grandfather tell
at table the story, which never varied, of the behaviour of M. Swann the
elder upon the death of his wife, by whose bedside he had watched
day and night. My grandfather, who had not seen him for a long time,
hastened to join him at the Swanns' family property on the outskirts of
Combray, and managed to entice him for a moment, weeping profusely, out
of the death-chamber, so that he should not be present when the body was
laid in its coffin. They took a turn or two in the park, where there was
a little sunshine. Suddenly M. Swann seized my grandfather by the arm
and cried, "Oh, my dear old friend, how fortunate we are to be walking
here together on such a charming day! Don't you see how pretty they are,
all these trees--my hawthorns, and my new pond, on which you have never
congratulated me? You look as glum as a night-cap. Don't you feel this
little breeze? Ah! whatever you may say, it's good to be alive all the
same, my dear Amédée!" And then, abruptly, the memory of his dead wife
returned to him, and probably thinking it too complicated to inquire
into how, at such a time, he could have allowed himself to be carried
away by an impulse of happiness, he confined himself to a gesture which
he habitually employed whenever any perplexing question came into his
mind: that is, he passed his hand across his forehead, dried his eyes,
and wiped his glasses. And he could never be consoled for the loss of
his wife, but used to say to my grandfather, during the two years for
which he survived her, "It's a funny thing, now; I very often think
of my poor wife, but I cannot think of her very much at any one time."
"Often, but a little at a time, like poor old Swann," became one of my
grandfather's favourite phrases, which he would apply to all kinds of
things. And I should have assumed that this father of Swann's had been
a monster if my grandfather, whom I regarded as a better judge than
myself, and whose word was my law and often led me in the long run to
pardon offences which I should have been inclined to condemn, had not
gone on to exclaim, "But, after all, he had a heart of gold."

For many years, albeit--and especially before his marriage--M. Swann
the younger came often to see them at Combray, my great-aunt and
grandparents never suspected that he had entirely ceased to live in the
kind of society which his family had frequented, or that, under the
sort of incognito which the name of Swann gave him among us, they were
harbouring--with the complete innocence of a family of honest innkeepers
who have in their midst some distinguished highwayman and never know
it--one of the smartest members of the Jockey Club, a particular friend
of the Comte de Paris and of the Prince of Wales, and one of the
men most sought after in the aristocratic world of the Faubourg
Saint-Germain.

Our utter ignorance of the brilliant part which Swann was playing in
the world of fashion was, of course, due in part to his own reserve and
discretion, but also to the fact that middle-class people in those days
took what was almost a Hindu view of society, which they held to consist
of sharply defined castes, so that everyone at his birth found himself
called to that station in life which his parents already occupied,
and nothing, except the chance of a brilliant career or of a 'good'
marriage, could extract you from that station or admit you to a superior
caste. M. Swann, the father, had been a stockbroker; and so 'young
Swann' found himself immured for life in a caste where one's fortune, as
in a list of taxpayers, varied between such and such limits of income.
We knew the people with whom his father had associated, and so we knew
his own associates, the people with whom he was 'in a position to mix.'
If he knew other people besides, those were youthful acquaintances on
whom the old friends of the family, like my relatives, shut their eyes
all the more good-naturedly that Swann himself, after he was left an
orphan, still came most faithfully to see us; but we would have been
ready to wager that the people outside our acquaintance whom Swann knew
were of the sort to whom he would not have dared to raise his hat, had
he met them while he was walking with ourselves. Had there been such a
thing as a determination to apply to Swann a social coefficient peculiar
to himself, as distinct from all the other sons of other stockbrokers in
his father's position, his coefficient would have been rather lower than
theirs, because, leading a very simple life, and having always had
a craze for 'antiques' and pictures, he now lived and piled up his
collections in an old house which my grandmother longed to visit,
but which stood on the Quai d'Orléans, a neighbourhood in which my
great-aunt thought it most degrading to be quartered. "Are you really
a connoisseur, now?" she would say to him; "I ask for your own sake, as
you are likely to have 'fakes' palmed off on you by the dealers," for
she did not, in fact, endow him with any critical faculty, and had no
great opinion of the intelligence of a man who, in conversation, would
avoid serious topics and shewed a very dull preciseness, not only when
he gave us kitchen recipes, going into the most minute details, but
even when my grandmother's sisters were talking to him about art. When
challenged by them to give an opinion, or to express his admiration for
some picture, he would remain almost impolitely silent, and would then
make amends by furnishing (if he could) some fact or other about the
gallery in which the picture was hung, or the date at which it had been
painted. But as a rule he would content himself with trying to amuse
us by telling us the story of his latest adventure--and he would have
a fresh story for us on every occasion--with some one whom we ourselves
knew, such as the Combray chemist, or our cook, or our coachman. These
stories certainly used to make my great-aunt laugh, but she could
never tell whether that was on account of the absurd parts which Swann
invariably made himself play in the adventures, or of the wit that he
shewed in telling us of them. "It is easy to see that you are a regular
'character,' M. Swann!"

As she was the only member of our family who could be described as a
trifle 'common,' she would always take care to remark to strangers, when
Swann was mentioned, that he could easily, if he had wished to, have
lived in the Boulevard Haussmann or the Avenue de l'Opéra, and that
he was the son of old M. Swann who must have left four or five million
francs, but that it was a fad of his. A fad which, moreover, she thought
was bound to amuse other people so much that in Paris, when M. Swann
called on New Year's Day bringing her a little packet of _marrons
glacés_, she never failed, if there were strangers in the room, to say
to him: "Well, M. Swann, and do you still live next door to the Bonded
Vaults, so as to be sure of not missing your train when you go to
Lyons?" and she would peep out of the corner of her eye, over her
glasses, at the other visitors.

But if anyone had suggested to my aunt that this Swann, who, in his
capacity as the son of old M. Swann, was 'fully qualified' to be
received by any of the 'upper middle class,' the most respected
barristers and solicitors of Paris (though he was perhaps a trifle
inclined to let this hereditary privilege go into abeyance), had another
almost secret existence of a wholly different kind: that when he left
our house in Paris, saying that he must go home to bed, he would no
sooner have turned the corner than he would stop, retrace his steps, and
be off to some drawing-room on whose like no stockbroker or associate
of stockbrokers had ever set eyes--that would have seemed to my aunt
as extraordinary as, to a woman of wider reading, the thought of being
herself on terms of intimacy with Aristaeus, of knowing that he would,
when he had finished his conversation with her, plunge deep into the
realms of Thetis, into an empire veiled from mortal eyes, in which
Virgil depicts him as being received with open arms; or--to be content
with an image more likely to have occurred to her, for she had seen it
painted on the plates we used for biscuits at Combray--as the thought
of having had to dinner Ali Baba, who, as soon as he found himself alone
and unobserved, would make his way into the cave, resplendent with its
unsuspected treasures.

One day when he had come to see us after dinner in Paris, and had begged
pardon for being in evening clothes, Françoise, when he had gone, told
us that she had got it from his coachman that he had been dining "with a
princess." "A pretty sort of princess," drawled my aunt; "I know
them," and she shrugged her shoulders without raising her eyes from her
knitting, serenely ironical.

Altogether, my aunt used to treat him with scant ceremony. Since she was
of the opinion that he ought to feel flattered by our invitations, she
thought it only right and proper that he should never come to see us in
summer without a basket of peaches or raspberries from his garden,
and that from each of his visits to Italy he should bring back some
photographs of old masters for me.

It seemed quite natural, therefore, to send to him whenever we wanted
a recipe for some special sauce or for a pineapple salad for one of
our big dinner-parties, to which he himself would not be invited, not
seeming of sufficient importance to be served up to new friends who
might be in our house for the first time. If the conversation turned
upon the Princes of the House of France, "Gentlemen, you and I will
never know, will we, and don't want to, do we?" my great-aunt would
say tartly to Swann, who had, perhaps, a letter from Twickenham in his
pocket; she would make him play accompaniments and turn over music on
evenings when my grandmother's sister sang; manipulating this creature,
so rare and refined at other times and in other places, with the rough
simplicity of a child who will play with some curio from the cabinet no
more carefully than if it were a penny toy. Certainly the Swann who was
a familiar figure in all the clubs of those days differed hugely from,
the Swann created in my great-aunt's mind when, of an evening, in our
little garden at Combray, after the two shy peals had sounded from the
gate, she would vitalise, by injecting into it everything she had ever
heard about the Swann family, the vague and unrecognisable shape which
began to appear, with my grandmother in its wake, against a background
of shadows, and could at last be identified by the sound of its voice.
But then, even in the most insignificant details of our daily life, none
of us can be said to constitute a material whole, which is identical for
everyone, and need only be turned up like a page in an account-book or
the record of a will; our social personality is created by the thoughts
of other people. Even the simple act which we describe as "seeing some
one we know" is, to some extent, an intellectual process. We pack the
physical outline of the creature we see with all the ideas we have
already formed about him, and in the complete picture of him which we
compose in our minds those ideas have certainly the principal place. In
the end they come to fill out so completely the curve of his cheeks, to
follow so exactly the line of his nose, they blend so harmoniously in
the sound of his voice that these seem to be no more than a transparent
envelope, so that each time we see the face or hear the voice it is our
own ideas of him which we recognise and to which we listen. And so, no
doubt, from the Swann they had built up for their own purposes my family
had left out, in their ignorance, a whole crowd of the details of his
daily life in the world of fashion, details by means of which other
people, when they met him, saw all the Graces enthroned in his face and
stopping at the line of his arched nose as at a natural frontier; but
they contrived also to put into a face from which its distinction had
been evicted, a face vacant and roomy as an untenanted house, to plant
in the depths of its unvalued eyes a lingering sense, uncertain but not
unpleasing, half-memory and half-oblivion, of idle hours spent together
after our weekly dinners, round the card-table or in the garden, during
our companionable country life. Our friend's bodily frame had been so
well lined with this sense, and with various earlier memories of his
family, that their own special Swann had become to my people a complete
and living creature; so that even now I have the feeling of leaving
some one I know for another quite different person when, going back in
memory, I pass from the Swann whom I knew later and more intimately
to this early Swann--this early Swann in whom I can distinguish the
charming mistakes of my childhood, and who, incidentally, is less like
his successor than he is like the other people I knew at that time, as
though one's life were a series of galleries in which all the portraits
of any one period had a marked family likeness, the same (so to speak)
tonality--this early Swann abounding in leisure, fragrant with the scent
of the great chestnut-tree, of baskets of raspberries and of a sprig of
tarragon.

And yet one day, when my grandmother had gone to ask some favour of a
lady whom she had known at the Sacré Coeur (and with whom, because of
our caste theory, she had not cared to keep up any degree of intimacy in
spite of several common interests), the Marquise de Villeparisis, of the
famous house of Bouillon, this lady had said to her:

"I think you know M. Swann very well; he is a great friend of my
nephews, the des Laumes."

My grandmother had returned from the call full of praise for the house,
which overlooked some gardens, and in which Mme. de Villeparisis had
advised her to rent a flat; and also for a repairing tailor and his
daughter, who kept a little shop in the courtyard, into which she had
gone to ask them to put a stitch in her skirt, which she had torn on the
staircase. My grandmother had found these people perfectly charming: the
girl, she said, was a jewel, and the tailor a most distinguished man,
the finest she had ever seen. For in her eyes distinction was a thing
wholly independent of social position. She was in ecstasies over some
answer the tailor had made, saying to Mamma:

"Sévigné would not have said it better!" and, by way of contrast, of a
nephew of Mme. de Villeparisis whom she had met at the house:

"My dear, he is so common!"

Now, the effect of that remark about Swann had been, not to raise him
in my great-aunt's estimation, but to lower Mme. de Villeparisis. It
appeared that the deference which, on my grandmother's authority, we
owed to Mme. de Villeparisis imposed on her the reciprocal obligation to
do nothing that would render her less worthy of our regard, and that
she had failed in her duty in becoming aware of Swann's existence and
in allowing members of her family to associate with him. "How should
she know Swann? A lady who, you always made out, was related to Marshal
MacMahon!" This view of Swann's social atmosphere which prevailed in my
family seemed to be confirmed later on by his marriage with a woman of
the worst class, you might almost say a 'fast' woman, whom, to do him
justice, he never attempted to introduce to us, for he continued to come
to us alone, though he came more and more seldom; but from whom they
thought they could establish, on the assumption that he had found her
there, the circle, unknown to them, in which he ordinarily moved.

But on one occasion my grandfather read in a newspaper that M. Swann was
one of the most faithful attendants at the Sunday luncheons given by the
Duc de X----, whose father and uncle had been among our most prominent
statesmen in the reign of Louis Philippe. Now my grandfather was curious
to learn all the little details which might help him to take a mental
share in the private lives of men like Mole, the Duc Pasquier, or the
Duc de Broglie. He was delighted to find that Swann associated with
people who had known them. My great-aunt, however, interpreted this
piece of news in a sense discreditable to Swann; for anyone who chose
his associates outside the caste in which he had been born and bred,
outside his 'proper station,' was condemned to utter degradation in her
eyes. It seemed to her that such a one abdicated all claim to enjoy the
fruits of those friendly relations with people of good position which
prudent parents cultivate and store up for their children's benefit, for
my great-aunt had actually ceased to 'see' the son of a lawyer we
had known because he had married a 'Highness' and had thereby stepped
down--in her eyes--from the respectable position of a lawyer's son to
that of those adventurers, upstart footmen or stable-boys mostly,
to whom we read that queens have sometimes shewn their favours. She
objected, therefore, to my grandfather's plan of questioning Swann, when
next he came to dine with us, about these people whose friendship with
him we had discovered. On the other hand, my grandmother's two sisters,
elderly spinsters who shared her nobility of character but lacked her
intelligence, declared that they could not conceive what pleasure their
brother-in-law could find in talking about such trifles. They were
ladies of lofty ambition, who for that reason were incapable of taking
the least interest in what might be called the 'pinchbeck' things of
life, even when they had an historic value, or, generally speaking, in
anything that was not directly associated with some object aesthetically
precious. So complete was their negation of interest in anything which
seemed directly or indirectly a part of our everyday life that their
sense of hearing--which had gradually come to understand its own
futility when the tone of the conversation, at the dinner-table, became
frivolous or merely mundane, without the two old ladies' being able to
guide it back to the topic dear to themselves--would leave its receptive
channels unemployed, so effectively that they were actually becoming
atrophied. So that if my grandfather wished to attract the attention of
the two sisters, he would have to make use of some such alarm signals
as mad-doctors adopt in dealing with their distracted patients; as by
beating several times on a glass with the blade of a knife, fixing them
at the same time with a sharp word and a compelling glance, violent
methods which the said doctors are apt to bring with them into their
everyday life among the sane, either from force of professional habit or
because they think the whole world a trifle mad.

Their interest grew, however, when, the day before Swann was to dine
with us, and when he had made them a special present of a case of Asti,
my great-aunt, who had in her hand a copy of the _Figaro_ in which to
the name of a picture then on view in a Corot exhibition were added the
words, "from the collection of M. Charles Swann," asked: "Did you see
that Swann is 'mentioned' in the _Figaro_?"

"But I have always told you," said my grandmother, "that he had plenty
of taste."

"You would, of course," retorted my great-aunt, "say anything just to
seem different from _us_." For, knowing that my grandmother never agreed
with her, and not being quite confident that it was her own opinion
which the rest of us invariably endorsed, she wished to extort from us
a wholesale condemnation of my grandmother's views, against which she
hoped to force us into solidarity with her own.

But we sat silent. My grandmother's sisters having expressed a desire
to mention to Swann this reference to him in the _Figaro_, my great-aunt
dissuaded them. Whenever she saw in others an advantage, however
trivial, which she herself lacked, she would persuade herself that it
was no advantage at all, but a drawback, and would pity so as not to
have to envy them.

"I don't think that would please him at all; I know very well, I should
hate to see my name printed like that, as large as life, in the paper,
and I shouldn't feel at all flattered if anyone spoke to me about it."

She did not, however, put any very great pressure upon my grandmother's
sisters, for they, in their horror of vulgarity, had brought to such a
fine art the concealment of a personal allusion in a wealth of ingenious
circumlocution, that it would often pass unnoticed even by the person
to whom it was addressed. As for my mother, her only thought was of
managing to induce my father to consent to speak to Swann, not of his
wife, but of his daughter, whom he worshipped, and for whose sake it was
understood that he had ultimately made his unfortunate marriage.

"You need only say a word; just ask him how she is. It must be so very
hard for him."

My father, however, was annoyed: "No, no; you have the most absurd
ideas. It would be utterly ridiculous."

But the only one of us in whom the prospect of Swann's arrival gave
rise to an unhappy foreboding was myself. And that was because on the
evenings when there were visitors, or just M. Swann in the house, Mamma
did not come up to my room. I did not, at that time, have dinner with
the family: I came out to the garden after dinner, and at nine I said
good night and went to bed. But on these evenings I used to dine earlier
than the others, and to come in afterwards and sit at table until eight
o'clock, when it was understood that I must go upstairs; that frail and
precious kiss which Mamma used always to leave upon my lips when I
was in bed and just going to sleep I had to take with me from the
dining-room to my own, and to keep inviolate all the time that it
took me to undress, without letting its sweet charm be broken, without
letting its volatile essence diffuse itself and evaporate; and just on
those very evenings when I must needs take most pains to receive it with
due formality, I had to snatch it, to seize it instantly and in public,
without even having the time or being properly free to apply to what I
was doing the punctiliousness which madmen use who compel themselves to
exclude all other thoughts from their minds while they are shutting a
door, so that when the sickness of uncertainty sweeps over them again
they can triumphantly face and overcome it with the recollection of the
precise moment in which the door was shut.

We were all in the garden when the double peal of the gate-bell sounded
shyly. Everyone knew that it must be Swann, and yet they looked at one
another inquiringly and sent my grandmother scouting.

"See that you thank him intelligibly for the wine," my grandfather
warned his two sisters-in-law; "you know how good it is, and it is a
huge case."

"Now, don't start whispering!" said my great-aunt. "How would you like
to come into a house and find everyone muttering to themselves?"

"Ah! There's M. Swann," cried my father. "Let's ask him if he thinks it
will be fine to-morrow."

My mother fancied that a word from her would wipe out all the
unpleasantness which my family had contrived to make Swann feel since
his marriage. She found an opportunity to draw him aside for a moment.
But I followed her: I could not bring myself to let her go out of reach
of me while I felt that in a few minutes I should have to leave her in
the dining-room and go up to my bed without the consoling thought, as on
ordinary evenings, that she would come up, later, to kiss me.

"Now, M. Swann," she said, "do tell me about your daughter; I am sure
she shews a taste already for nice things, like her papa."

"Come along and sit down here with us all on the verandah," said my
grandfather, coming up to him. My mother had to abandon the quest, but
managed to extract from the restriction itself a further refinement of
thought, as great poets do when the tyranny of rhyme forces them into
the discovery of their finest lines.

"We can talk about her again when we are by ourselves," she said, or
rather whispered to Swann. "It is only a mother who can understand. I am
sure that hers would agree with me."

And so we all sat down round the iron table. I should have liked not
to think of the hours of anguish which I should have to spend, that
evening, alone in my room, without the possibility of going to sleep: I
tried to convince myself that they were of no importance, really,
since I should have forgotten them next morning, and to fix my mind on
thoughts of the future which would carry me, as on a bridge, across the
terrifying abyss that yawned at my feet. But my mind, strained by this
foreboding, distended like the look which I shot at my mother, would not
allow any other impression to enter. Thoughts did, indeed, enter it,
but only on the condition that they left behind them every element of
beauty, or even of quaintness, by which I might have been distracted or
beguiled. As a surgical patient, by means of a local anaesthetic, can
look on with a clear consciousness while an operation is being performed
upon him and yet feel nothing, I could repeat to myself some favourite
lines, or watch my grandfather attempting to talk to Swann about the Duc
d'Audriffet-Pasquier, without being able to kindle any emotion from one
or amusement from the other. Hardly had my grandfather begun to question
Swann about that orator when one of my grandmother's sisters, in whose
ears the question echoed like a solemn but untimely silence which her
natural politeness bade her interrupt, addressed the other with:

"Just fancy, Flora, I met a young Swedish governess to-day who told
me some most interesting things about the co-operative movement in
Scandinavia. We really must have her to dine here one evening."

"To be sure!" said her sister Flora, "but I haven't wasted my time
either. I met such a clever old gentleman at M. Vinteuil's who knows
Maubant quite well, and Maubant has told him every little thing about
how he gets up his parts. It is the most interesting thing I ever heard.
He is a neighbour of M. Vinteuil's, and I never knew; and he is so nice
besides."

"M. Vinteuil is not the only one who has nice neighbours," cried my aunt
Céline in a voice which seemed loud because she was so timid, and seemed
forced because she had been planning the little speech for so long;
darting, as she spoke, what she called a 'significant glance' at Swann.
And my aunt Flora, who realised that this veiled utterance was Céline's
way of thanking Swann intelligibly for the Asti, looked at him with a
blend of congratulation and irony, either just, because she wished to
underline her sister's little epigram, or because she envied Swann
his having inspired it, or merely because she imagined that he was
embarrassed, and could not help having a little fun at his expense.

"I think it would be worth while," Flora went on, "to have this old
gentleman to dinner. When you get him upon Maubant or Mme. Materna he
will talk for hours on end."

"That must be delightful," sighed my grandfather, in whose mind nature
had unfortunately forgotten to include any capacity whatsoever for
becoming passionately interested in the co-operative movement among the
ladies of Sweden or in the methods employed by Maubant to get up his
parts, just as it had forgotten to endow my grandmother's two sisters
with a grain of that precious salt which one has oneself to 'add to
taste' in order to extract any savour from a narrative of the private
life of Mole or of the Comte de Paris.

"I say!" exclaimed Swann to my grandfather, "what I was going to tell
you has more to do than you might think with what you were asking me
just now, for in some respects there has been very little change. I came
across a passage in Saint-Simon this morning which would have amused
you. It is in the volume which covers his mission to Spain; not one
of the best, little more in fact than a journal, but at least it is a
journal wonderfully well written, which fairly distinguishes it from
the devastating journalism that we feel bound to read in these days,
morning, noon and night."

"I do not agree with you: there are some days when I find reading the
papers very pleasant indeed!" my aunt Flora broke in, to show Swann that
she had read the note about his Corot in the _Figaro_.

"Yes," aunt Céline went one better. "When they write about things or
people in whom we are interested."

"I don't deny it," answered Swann in some bewilderment. "The fault I
find with our journalism is that it forces us to take an interest in
some fresh triviality or other every day, whereas only three or four
books in a lifetime give us anything that is of real importance. Suppose
that, every morning, when we tore the wrapper off our paper with fevered
hands, a transmutation were to take place, and we were to find inside
it--oh! I don't know; shall we say Pascal's _Pensées_?" He articulated
the title with an ironic emphasis so as not to appear pedantic. "And
then, in the gilt and tooled volumes which we open once in ten years,"
he went on, shewing that contempt for the things of this world which
some men of the world like to affect, "we should read that the Queen of
the Hellenes had arrived at Cannes, or that the Princesse de Léon had
given a fancy dress ball. In that way we should arrive at the right
proportion between 'information' and 'publicity.'" But at once
regretting that he had allowed himself to speak, even in jest, of
serious matters, he added ironically: "We are having a most entertaining
conversation; I cannot think why we climb to these lofty summits," and
then, turning to my grandfather: "Well, Saint-Simon tells how Maulevrier
had had the audacity to offer his hand to his sons. You remember how he
says of Maulevrier, 'Never did I find in that coarse bottle anything but
ill-humour, boorishness, and folly.'"

"Coarse or not, I know bottles in which there is something very
different!" said Flora briskly, feeling bound to thank Swann as well as
her sister, since the present of Asti had been addressed to them both.
Céline began to laugh.

Swann was puzzled, but went on: "'I cannot say whether it was his
ignorance or a trap,' writes Saint-Simon; 'he wished to give his hand to
my children. I noticed it in time to prevent him.'"

My grandfather was already in ecstasies over "ignorance or a trap,"
but Miss Céline--the name of Saint-Simon, a 'man of letters,' having
arrested the complete paralysis of her sense of hearing--had grown
angry.

"What! You admire that, do you? Well, it is clever enough! But what is
the point of it? Does he mean that one man isn't as good as another?
What difference can it make whether he is a duke or a groom so long
as he is intelligent and good? He had a fine way of bringing up his
children, your Saint-Simon, if he didn't teach them to shake hands with
all honest men. Really and truly, it's abominable. And you dare to quote
it!"

And my grandfather, utterly depressed, realising how futile it would be
for him, against this opposition, to attempt to get Swann to tell him
the stories which would have amused him, murmured to my mother: "Just
tell me again that line of yours which always comforts me so much on
these occasions. Oh, yes:


  What virtues, Lord, Thou makest us abhor!

Good, that is, very good."

I never took my eyes off my mother. I knew that when they were at table
I should not be permitted to stay there for the whole of dinner-time,
and that Mamma, for fear of annoying my father, would not allow me to
give her in public the series of kisses that she would have had in my
room. And so I promised myself that in the dining-room, as they began
to eat and drink and as I felt the hour approach, I would put beforehand
into this kiss, which was bound to be so brief and stealthy in
execution, everything that my own efforts could put into it: would
look out very carefully first the exact spot on her cheek where I would
imprint it, and would so prepare my thoughts that I might be able,
thanks to these mental preliminaries, to consecrate the whole of the
minute Mamma would allow me to the sensation of her cheek against my
lips, as a painter who can have his subject for short sittings only
prepares his palette, and from what he remembers and from rough notes
does in advance everything which he possibly can do in the sitter's
absence. But to-night, before the dinner-bell had sounded, my
grandfather said with unconscious cruelty: "The little man looks tired;
he'd better go up to bed. Besides, we are dining late to-night."

And my father, who was less scrupulous than my grandmother or mother in
observing the letter of a treaty, went on: "Yes, run along; to bed with
you."

I would have kissed Mamma then and there, but at that moment the
dinner-bell rang.

"No, no, leave your mother alone. You've said good night quite enough.
These exhibitions are absurd. Go on upstairs."

And so I must set forth without viaticum; must climb each step of the
staircase 'against my heart,' as the saying is, climbing in opposition
to my heart's desire, which was to return to my mother, since she had
not, by her kiss, given my heart leave to accompany me forth. That
hateful staircase, up which I always passed with such dismay, gave out
a smell of varnish which had to some extent absorbed, made definite and
fixed the special quality of sorrow that I felt each evening, and made
it perhaps even more cruel to my sensibility because, when it assumed
this olfactory guise, my intellect was powerless to resist it. When we
have gone to sleep with a maddening toothache and are conscious of it
only as a little girl whom we attempt, time after time, to pull out
of the water, or as a line of Molière which we repeat incessantly to
ourselves, it is a great relief to wake up, so that our intelligence
can disentangle the idea of toothache from any artificial semblance of
heroism or rhythmic cadence. It was the precise converse of this relief
which I felt when my anguish at having to go up to my room invaded my
consciousness in a manner infinitely more rapid, instantaneous almost,
a manner at once insidious and brutal as I breathed in--a far more
poisonous thing than any moral penetration--the peculiar smell of the
varnish upon that staircase.

Once in my room I had to stop every loophole, to close the shutters, to
dig my own grave as I turned down the bed-clothes, to wrap myself in the
shroud of my nightshirt. But before burying myself in the iron bed which
had been placed there because, on summer nights, I was too hot among the
red curtains of the four-poster, I was stirred to revolt, and attempted
the desperate stratagem of a condemned prisoner. I wrote to my mother
begging her to come upstairs for an important reason which I could not
put in writing. My fear was that Françoise, my aunt's cook who used to
be put in charge of me when I was at Combray, might refuse to take my
note. I had a suspicion that, in her eyes, to carry a message to
my mother when there was a stranger in the room would appear flatly
inconceivable, just as it would be for the door-keeper of a theatre
to hand a letter to an actor upon the stage. For things which might
or might not be done she possessed a code at once imperious, abundant,
subtle, and uncompromising on points themselves imperceptible or
irrelevant, which gave it a resemblance to those ancient laws which
combine such cruel ordinances as the massacre of infants at the breast
with prohibitions, of exaggerated refinement, against "seething the kid
in his mother's milk," or "eating of the sinew which is upon the hollow
of the thigh." This code, if one could judge it by the sudden obstinacy
which she would put into her refusal to carry out certain of our
instructions, seemed to have foreseen such social complications and
refinements of fashion as nothing in Françoise's surroundings or in her
career as a servant in a village household could have put into her head;
and we were obliged to assume that there was latent in her some past
existence in the ancient history of France, noble and little understood,
just as there is in those manufacturing towns where old mansions still
testify to their former courtly days, and chemical workers toil among
delicately sculptured scenes of the Miracle of Theophilus or the Quatre
Fils Aymon.

In this particular instance, the article of her code which made it
highly improbable that--barring an outbreak of fire--Françoise would
go down and disturb Mamma when M. Swann was there for so unimportant a
person as myself was one embodying the respect she shewed not only for
the family (as for the dead, for the clergy, or for royalty), but also
for the stranger within our gates; a respect which I should perhaps have
found touching in a book, but which never failed to irritate me on her
lips, because of the solemn and gentle tones in which she would utter
it, and which irritated me more than usual this evening when the sacred
character in which she invested the dinner-party might have the effect
of making her decline to disturb its ceremonial. But to give myself one
chance of success I lied without hesitation, telling her that it was not
in the least myself who had wanted to write to Mamma, but Mamma who,
on saying good night to me, had begged me not to forget to send her
an answer about something she had asked me to find, and that she would
certainly be very angry if this note were not taken to her. I think that
Françoise disbelieved me, for, like those primitive men whose senses
were so much keener than our own, she could immediately detect, by signs
imperceptible by the rest of us, the truth or falsehood of anything that
we might wish to conceal from her. She studied the envelope for five
minutes as though an examination of the paper itself and the look of
my handwriting could enlighten her as to the nature of the contents,
or tell her to which article of her code she ought to refer the matter.
Then she went out with an air of resignation which seemed to imply:
"What a dreadful thing for parents to have a child like this!"

A moment later she returned to say that they were still at the ice stage
and that it was impossible for the butler to deliver the note at once,
in front of everybody; but that when the finger-bowls were put round he
would find a way of slipping it into Mamma's hand. At once my anxiety
subsided; it was now no longer (as it had been a moment ago) until
to-morrow that I had lost my mother, for my little line was going--to
annoy her, no doubt, and doubly so because this contrivance would make
me ridiculous in Swann's eyes--but was going all the same to admit me,
invisibly and by stealth, into the same room as herself, was going
to whisper from me into her ear; for that forbidden and unfriendly
dining-room, where but a moment ago the ice itself--with burned nuts in
it--and the finger-bowls seemed to me to be concealing pleasures that
were mischievous and of a mortal sadness because Mamma was tasting of
them and I was far away, had opened its doors to me and, like a ripe
fruit which bursts through its skin, was going to pour out into my
intoxicated heart the gushing sweetness of Mamma's attention while she
was reading what I had written. Now I was no longer separated from her;
the barriers were down; an exquisite thread was binding us. Besides,
that was not all, for surely Mamma would come.

As for the agony through which I had just passed, I imagined that Swann
would have laughed heartily at it if he had read my letter and had
guessed its purpose; whereas, on the contrary, as I was to learn in due
course, a similar anguish had been the bane of his life for many years,
and no one perhaps could have understood my feelings at that moment so
well as himself; to him, that anguish which lies in knowing that the
creature one adores is in some place of enjoyment where oneself is not
and cannot follow--to him that anguish came through Love, to which it
is in a sense predestined, by which it must be equipped and adapted; but
when, as had befallen me, such an anguish possesses one's soul before
Love has yet entered into one's life, then it must drift, awaiting
Love's coming, vague and free, without precise attachment, at the
disposal of one sentiment to-day, of another to-morrow, of filial piety
or affection for a comrade. And the joy with which I first bound myself
apprentice, when Françoise returned to tell me that my letter would be
delivered; Swann, too, had known well that false joy which a friend can
give us, or some relative of the woman we love, when on his arrival at
the house or theatre where she is to be found, for some ball or party or
'first-night' at which he is to meet her, he sees us wandering outside,
desperately awaiting some opportunity of communicating with her. He
recognises us, greets us familiarly, and asks what we are doing there.
And when we invent a story of having some urgent message to give to his
relative or friend, he assures us that nothing could be more simple,
takes us in at the door, and promises to send her down to us in five
minutes. How much we love him--as at that moment I loved Françoise--the
good-natured intermediary who by a single word has made supportable,
human, almost propitious the inconceivable, infernal scene of gaiety in
the thick of which we had been imagining swarms of enemies, perverse and
seductive, beguiling away from us, even making laugh at us, the woman
whom we love. If we are to judge of them by him, this relative who has
accosted us and who is himself an initiate in those cruel mysteries,
then the other guests cannot be so very demoniacal. Those inaccessible
and torturing hours into which she had gone to taste of unknown
pleasures--behold, a breach in the wall, and we are through it. Behold,
one of the moments whose series will go to make up their sum, a moment
as genuine as the rest, if not actually more important to ourself
because our mistress is more intensely a part of it; we picture it to
ourselves, we possess it, we intervene upon it, almost we have created
it: namely, the moment in which he goes to tell her that we are waiting
there below. And very probably the other moments of the party will not
be essentially different, will contain nothing else so exquisite or so
well able to make us suffer, since this kind friend has assured us that
"Of course, she will be delighted to come down! It will be far more
amusing for her to talk to you than to be bored up there." Alas! Swann
had learned by experience that the good intentions of a third party are
powerless to control a woman who is annoyed to find herself pursued even
into a ball-room by a man whom she does not love. Too often, the kind
friend comes down again alone.

My mother did not appear, but with no attempt to safeguard my
self-respect (which depended upon her keeping up the fiction that she
had asked me to let her know the result of my search for something
or other) made Françoise tell me, in so many words "There is no
answer"--words I have so often, since then, heard the hall-porters in
'mansions' and the flunkeys in gambling-clubs and the like, repeat to
some poor girl, who replies in bewilderment: "What! he's said nothing?
It's not possible. You did give him my letter, didn't you? Very well,
I shall wait a little longer." And just as she invariably protests that
she does not need the extra gas which the porter offers to light for
her, and sits on there, hearing nothing further, except an occasional
remark on the weather which the porter exchanges with a messenger
whom he will send off suddenly, when he notices the time, to put some
customer's wine on the ice; so, having declined Françoise's offer to
make me some tea or to stay beside me, I let her go off again to the
servants' hall, and lay down and shut my eyes, and tried not to hear the
voices of my family who were drinking their coffee in the garden.

But after a few seconds I realised that, by writing that line to Mamma,
by approaching--at the risk of making her angry--so near to her that I
felt I could reach out and grasp the moment in which I should see her
again, I had cut myself off from the possibility of going to sleep
until I actually had seen her, and my heart began to beat more and more
painfully as I increased my agitation by ordering myself to keep calm
and to acquiesce in my ill-fortune. Then, suddenly, my anxiety subsided,
a feeling of intense happiness coursed through me, as when a strong
medicine begins to take effect and one's pain vanishes: I had formed a
resolution to abandon all attempts to go to sleep without seeing Mamma,
and had decided to kiss her at all costs, even with the certainty of
being in disgrace with her for long afterwards, when she herself came
up to bed. The tranquillity which followed my anguish made me extremely
alert, no less than my sense of expectation, my thirst for and my fear
of danger.

Noiselessly I opened the window and sat down on the foot of my bed;
hardly daring to move in case they should hear me from below. Things
outside seemed also fixed in mute expectation, so as not to disturb the
moonlight which, duplicating each of them and throwing it back by the
extension, forwards, of a shadow denser and more concrete than its
substance, had made the whole landscape seem at once thinner and longer,
like a map which, after being folded up, is spread out upon the ground.
What had to move--a leaf of the chestnut-tree, for instance--moved. But
its minute shuddering, complete, finished to the least detail and with
utmost delicacy of gesture, made no discord with the rest of the scene,
and yet was not merged in it, remaining clearly outlined. Exposed upon
this surface of silence, which absorbed nothing from them, the most
distant sounds, those which must have come from gardens at the far end
of the town, could be distinguished with such exact 'finish' that the
impression they gave of coming from a distance seemed due only to their
'pianissimo' execution, like those movements on muted strings so well
performed by the orchestra of the Conservatoire that, although one does
not lose a single note, one thinks all the same that they are being
played somewhere outside, a long way from the concert hall, so that all
the old subscribers, and my grandmother's sisters too, when Swann had
given them his seats, used to strain their ears as if they had caught
the distant approach of an army on the march, which had not yet rounded
the corner of the Rue de Trévise.

I was well aware that I had placed myself in a position than which
none could be counted upon to involve me in graver consequences at my
parents' hands; consequences far graver, indeed, than a stranger would
have imagined, and such as (he would have thought) could follow only
some really shameful fault. But in the system of education which they
had given me faults were not classified in the same order as in that of
other children, and I had been taught to place at the head of the list
(doubtless because there was no other class of faults from which
I needed to be more carefully protected) those in which I can now
distinguish the common feature that one succumbs to them by yielding to
a nervous impulse. But such words as these last had never been uttered
in my hearing; no one had yet accounted for my temptations in a way
which might have led me to believe that there was some excuse for my
giving in to them, or that I was actually incapable of holding out
against them. Yet I could easily recognise this class of transgressions
by the anguish of mind which preceded, as well as by the rigour of the
punishment which followed them; and I knew that what I had just done was
in the same category as certain other sins for which I had been severely
chastised, though infinitely more serious than they. When I went out to
meet my mother as she herself came up to bed, and when she saw that I
had remained up so as to say good night to her again in the passage,
I should not be allowed to stay in the house a day longer, I should be
packed off to school next morning; so much was certain. Very good: had
I been obliged, the next moment, to hurl myself out of the window,
I should still have preferred such a fate. For what I wanted now was
Mamma, and to say good night to her. I had gone too far along the road
which led to the realisation of this desire to be able to retrace my
steps.

I could hear my parents' footsteps as they went with Swann; and, when
the rattle of the gate assured me that he had really gone, I crept to
the window. Mamma was asking my father if he had thought the lobster
good, and whether M. Swann had had some of the coffee-and-pistachio ice.
"I thought it rather so-so," she was saying; "next time we shall have to
try another flavour."

"I can't tell you," said my great-aunt, "what a change I find in Swann.
He is quite antiquated!" She had grown so accustomed to seeing Swann
always in the same stage of adolescence that it was a shock to her to
find him suddenly less young than the age she still attributed to him.
And the others too were beginning to remark in Swann that abnormal,
excessive, scandalous senescence, meet only in a celibate, in one of
that class for whom it seems that the great day which knows no morrow
must be longer than for other men, since for such a one it is void of
promise, and from its dawn the moments steadily accumulate without any
subsequent partition among his offspring.

"I fancy he has a lot of trouble with that wretched wife of his, who
'lives' with a certain Monsieur de Charlus, as all Combray knows. It's
the talk of the town."

My mother observed that, in spite of this, he had looked much less
unhappy of late. "And he doesn't nearly so often do that trick of his,
so like his father, of wiping his eyes and passing his hand across his
forehead. I think myself that in his heart of hearts he doesn't love his
wife any more."

"Why, of course he doesn't," answered my grandfather. "He wrote me a
letter about it, ages ago, to which I took care to pay no attention, but
it left no doubt as to his feelings, let alone his love for his wife.
Hullo! you two; you never thanked him for the Asti!" he went on, turning
to his sisters-in-law.

"What! we never thanked him? I think, between you and me, that I put it
to him quite neatly," replied my aunt Flora.

"Yes, you managed it very well; I admired you for it," said my aunt
Céline.

"But you did it very prettily, too."

"Yes; I liked my expression about 'nice neighbours.'"

"What! Do you call that thanking him?" shouted my grandfather. "I heard
that all right, but devil take me if I guessed it was meant for Swann.
You may be quite sure he never noticed it."

"Come, come; Swann is not a fool. I am positive he appreciated the
compliment. You didn't expect me to tell him the number of bottles, or
to guess what he paid for them."

My father and mother were left alone and sat down for a moment; then my
father said: "Well, shall we go up to bed?"

"As you wish, dear, though I don't feel in the least like sleeping. I
don't know why; it can't be the coffee-ice--it wasn't strong enough to
keep me awake like this. But I see a light in the servants' hall: poor
Françoise has been sitting up for me, so I will get her to unhook me
while you go and undress."

My mother opened the latticed door which led from the hall to the
staircase. Presently I heard her coming upstairs to close her window. I
went quietly into the passage; my heart was beating so violently that I
could hardly move, but at least it was throbbing no longer with anxiety,
but with terror and with joy. I saw in the well of the stair a light
coming upwards, from Mamma's candle. Then I saw Mamma herself: I threw
myself upon her. For an instant she looked at me in astonishment, not
realising what could have happened. Then her face assumed an expression
of anger. She said not a single word to me; and, for that matter, I used
to go for days on end without being spoken to, for far less offences
than this. A single word from Mamma would have been an admission that
further intercourse with me was within the bounds of possibility,
and that might perhaps have appeared to me more terrible still, as
indicating that, with such a punishment as was in store for me, mere
silence, and even anger, were relatively puerile.

A word from her then would have implied the false calm in which one
converses with a servant to whom one has just decided to give notice;
the kiss one bestows on a son who is being packed off to enlist, which
would have been denied him if it had merely been a matter of being
angry with him for a few days. But she heard my father coming from the
dressing-room, where he had gone to take off his clothes, and, to avoid
the 'scene' which he would make if he saw me, she said, in a voice
half-stifled by her anger: "Run away at once. Don't let your father see
you standing there like a crazy jane!"

But I begged her again to "Come and say good night to me!" terrified as
I saw the light from my father's candle already creeping up the wall,
but also making use of his approach as a means of blackmail, in the hope
that my mother, not wishing him to find me there, as find me he must
if she continued to hold out, would give in to me, and say: "Go back to
your room. I will come."

Too late: my father was upon us. Instinctively I murmured, though no one
heard me, "I am done for!"

I was not, however. My father used constantly to refuse to let me do
things which were quite clearly allowed by the more liberal charters
granted me by my mother and grandmother, because he paid no heed to
'Principles,' and because in his sight there were no such things as
'Rights of Man.' For some quite irrelevant reason, or for no reason at
all, he would at the last moment prevent me from taking some particular
walk, one so regular and so consecrated to my use that to deprive me of
it was a clear breach of faith; or again, as he had done this evening,
long before the appointed hour he would snap out: "Run along up to
bed now; no excuses!" But then again, simply because he was devoid
of principles (in my grandmother's sense), so he could not, properly
speaking, be called inexorable. He looked at me for a moment with an air
of annoyance and surprise, and then when Mamma had told him, not without
some embarrassment, what had happened, said to her: "Go along with him,
then; you said just now that you didn't feel like sleep, so stay in his
room for a little. I don't need anything."

"But dear," my mother answered timidly, "whether or not I feel like
sleep is not the point; we must not make the child accustomed..."

"There's no question of making him accustomed," said my father, with
a shrug of the shoulders; "you can see quite well that the child is
unhappy. After all, we aren't gaolers. You'll end by making him ill,
and a lot of good that will do. There are two beds in his room; tell
Françoise to make up the big one for you, and stay beside him for the
rest of the night. I'm off to bed, anyhow; I'm not nervous like you.
Good night."

It was impossible for me to thank my father; what he called my
sentimentality would have exasperated him. I stood there, not daring
to move; he was still confronting us, an immense figure in his white
nightshirt, crowned with the pink and violet scarf of Indian cashmere
in which, since he had begun to suffer from neuralgia, he used to tie up
his head, standing like Abraham in the engraving after Benozzo Gozzoli
which M. Swann had given me, telling Sarah that she must tear herself
away from Isaac. Many years have passed since that night. The wall of
the staircase, up which I had watched the light of his candle gradually
climb, was long ago demolished. And in myself, too, many things have
perished which, I imagined, would last for ever, and new structures have
arisen, giving birth to new sorrows and new joys which in those days
I could not have foreseen, just as now the old are difficult of
comprehension. It is a long time, too, since my father has been able
to tell Mamma to "Go with the child." Never again will such hours be
possible for me. But of late I have been increasingly able to catch, if
I listen attentively, the sound of the sobs which I had the strength to
control in my father's presence, and which broke out only when I found
myself alone with Mamma. Actually, their echo has never ceased: it is
only because life is now growing more and more quiet round about me that
I hear them afresh, like those convent bells which are so effectively
drowned during the day by the noises of the streets that one would
suppose them to have been stopped for ever, until they sound out again
through the silent evening air.

Mamma spent that night in my room: when I had just committed a sin so
deadly that I was waiting to be banished from the household, my parents
gave me a far greater concession than I should ever have won as the
reward of a good action. Even at the moment when it manifested itself in
this crowning mercy, my father's conduct towards me was still somewhat
arbitrary, and regardless of my deserts, as was characteristic of him
and due to the fact that his actions were generally dictated by chance
expediencies rather than based on any formal plan. And perhaps even what
I called his strictness, when he sent me off to bed, deserved that
title less, really, than my mother's or grandmother's attitude, for his
nature, which in some respects differed more than theirs from my own,
had probably prevented him from guessing, until then, how wretched I was
every evening, a thing which my mother and grandmother knew well; but
they loved me enough to be unwilling to spare me that suffering,
which they hoped to teach me to overcome, so as to reduce my nervous
sensibility and to strengthen my will. As for my father, whose affection
for me was of another kind, I doubt if he would have shewn so much
courage, for as soon as he had grasped the fact that I was unhappy he
had said to my mother: "Go and comfort him." Mamma stayed all night in
my room, and it seemed that she did not wish to mar by recrimination
those hours, so different from anything that I had had a right to
expect; for when Françoise (who guessed that something extraordinary
must have happened when she saw Mamma sitting by my side, holding my
hand and letting me cry unchecked) said to her: "But, Madame, what is
little Master crying for?" she replied: "Why, Françoise, he doesn't know
himself: it is his nerves. Make up the big bed for me quickly and then
go off to your own." And thus for the first time my unhappiness was
regarded no longer as a fault for which I must be punished, but as
an involuntary evil which had been officially recognised a nervous
condition for which I was in no way responsible: I had the consolation
that I need no longer mingle apprehensive scruples with the bitterness
of my tears; I could weep henceforward without sin. I felt no small
degree of pride, either, in Françoise's presence at this return to humane
conditions which, not an hour after Mamma had refused to come up to my
room and had sent the snubbing message that I was to go to sleep, raised
me to the dignity of a grown-up person, brought me of a sudden to a sort
of puberty of sorrow, to emancipation from tears. I ought then to have
been happy; I was not. It struck me that my mother had just made a first
concession which must have been painful to her, that it was a first step
down from the ideal she had formed for me, and that for the first time
she, with all her courage, had to confess herself beaten. It struck
me that if I had just scored a victory it was over her; that I had
succeeded, as sickness or sorrow or age might have succeeded, in
relaxing her will, in altering her judgment; that this evening opened
a new era, must remain a black date in the calendar. And if I had dared
now, I should have said to Mamma: "No, I don't want you; you mustn't
sleep here." But I was conscious of the practical wisdom, of what
would be called nowadays the realism with which she tempered the ardent
idealism of my grandmother's nature, and I knew that now the mischief
was done she would prefer to let me enjoy the soothing pleasure of
her company, and not to disturb my father again. Certainly my mother's
beautiful features seemed to shine again with youth that evening, as she
sat gently holding my hands and trying to check my tears; but, just for
that reason, it seemed to me that this should not have happened; her
anger would have been less difficult to endure than this new kindness
which my childhood had not known; I felt that I had with an impious and
secret finger traced a first wrinkle upon her soul and made the first
white hair shew upon her head. This thought redoubled my sobs, and then
I saw that Mamma, who had never allowed herself to go to any length
of tenderness with me, was suddenly overcome by my tears and had to
struggle to keep back her own. Then, as she saw that I had noticed
this, she said to me, with a smile: "Why, my little buttercup, my little
canary-boy, he's going to make Mamma as silly as himself if this goes
on. Look, since you can't sleep, and Mamma can't either, we mustn't
go on in this stupid way; we must do something; I'll get one of your
books." But I had none there. "Would you like me to get out the books
now that your grandmother is going to give you for your birthday? Just
think it over first, and don't be disappointed if there is nothing new
for you then."

I was only too delighted, and Mamma went to find a parcel of books
in which I could not distinguish, through the paper in which it was
wrapped, any more than its squareness and size, but which, even at this
first glimpse, brief and obscure as it was, bade fair to eclipse already
the paint-box of last New Year's Day and the silkworms of the year
before. It contained _La Mare au Diable_, _François le Champi_, _La
Petite Fadette_, and _Les Maîtres Sonneurs_. My grandmother, as I
learned afterwards, had at first chosen Mussel's poems, a volume of
Rousseau, and _Indiana_; for while she considered light reading as
unwholesome as sweets and cakes, she did not reflect that the strong
breath of genius must have upon the very soul of a child an influence
at once more dangerous and less quickening than those of fresh air and
country breezes upon his body. But when my father had seemed almost to
regard her as insane on learning the names of the books she proposed
to give me, she had journeyed back by herself to Jouy-le-Vicomte to
the bookseller's, so that there should be no fear of my not having my
present in time (it was a burning hot day, and she had come home so
unwell that the doctor had warned my mother not to allow her again
to tire herself in that way), and had there fallen back upon the four
pastoral novels of George Sand.

"My dear," she had said to Mamma, "I could not allow myself to give the
child anything that was not well written."

The truth was that she could never make up her mind to purchase anything
from which no intellectual profit was to be derived, and, above all,
that profit which good things bestowed on us by teaching us to seek our
pleasures elsewhere than in the barren satisfaction of worldly wealth.
Even when she had to make some one a present of the kind called
'useful,' when she had to give an armchair or some table-silver or
a walking-stick, she would choose 'antiques,' as though their long
desuetude had effaced from them any semblance of utility and fitted
them rather to instruct us in the lives of the men of other days than
to serve the common requirements of our own. She would have liked me to
have in my room photographs of ancient buildings or of beautiful places.
But at the moment of buying them, and for all that the subject of the
picture had an aesthetic value of its own, she would find that vulgarity
and utility had too prominent a part in them, through the mechanical
nature of their reproduction by photography. She attempted by a
subterfuge, if not to eliminate altogether their commercial banality,
at least to minimise it, to substitute for the bulk of it what was
art still, to introduce, as it might be, several 'thicknesses' of
art; instead of photographs of Chartres Cathedral, of the Fountains
of Saint-Cloud, or of Vesuvius she would inquire of Swann whether some
great painter had not made pictures of them, and preferred to give me
photographs of 'Chartres Cathedral' after Corot, of the 'Fountains of
Saint-Cloud' after Hubert Robert, and of 'Vesuvius' after Turner, which
were a stage higher in the scale of art. But although the photographer
had been prevented from reproducing directly the masterpieces or the
beauties of nature, and had there been replaced by a great artist, he
resumed his odious position when it came to reproducing the artist's
interpretation. Accordingly, having to reckon again with vulgarity,
my grandmother would endeavour to postpone the moment of contact still
further. She would ask Swann if the picture had not been engraved,
preferring, when possible, old engravings with some interest of
association apart from themselves, such, for example, as shew us a
masterpiece in a state in which we can no longer see it to-day, as
Morghen's print of the 'Cenacolo' of Leonardo before it was spoiled
by restoration. It must be admitted that the results of this method of
interpreting the art of making presents were not always happy. The idea
which I formed of Venice, from a drawing by Titian which is supposed to
have the lagoon in the background, was certainly far less accurate than
what I have since derived from ordinary photographs. We could no
longer keep count in the family (when my great-aunt tried to frame an
indictment of my grandmother) of all the armchairs she had presented
to married couples, young and old, which on a first attempt to sit down
upon them had at once collapsed beneath the weight of their recipient.
But my grandmother would have thought it sordid to concern herself too
closely with the solidity of any piece of furniture in which could still
be discerned a flourish, a smile, a brave conceit of the past. And
even what in such pieces supplied a material need, since it did so in a
manner to which we are no longer accustomed, was as charming to her as
one of those old forms of speech in which we can still see traces of a
metaphor whose fine point has been worn away by the rough usage of our
modern tongue. In precisely the same way the pastoral novels of George
Sand, which she was giving me for my birthday, were regular lumber-rooms
of antique furniture, full of expressions that have fallen out of use
and returned as imagery, such as one finds now only in country dialects.
And my grandmother had bought them in preference to other books, just as
she would have preferred to take a house that had a gothic dovecot, or
some other such piece of antiquity as would have a pleasant effect on
the mind, filling it with a nostalgic longing for impossible journeys
through the realms of time.

Mamma sat down by my bed; she had chosen _François le Champi_, whose
reddish cover and incomprehensible title gave it a distinct personality
in my eyes and a mysterious attraction. I had not then read any real
novels. I had heard it said that George Sand was a typical novelist.
That prepared me in advance to imagine that _François le Champi_
contained something inexpressibly delicious. The course of the
narrative, where it tended to arouse curiosity or melt to pity, certain
modes of expression which disturb or sadden the reader, and which, with
a little experience, he may recognise as 'common form' in novels, seemed
to me then distinctive--for to me a new book was not one of a number of
similar objects, but was like an individual man, unmatched, and with no
cause of existence beyond himself--an intoxicating whiff of the peculiar
essence of _François le Champi_. Beneath the everyday incidents, the
commonplace thoughts and hackneyed words, I could hear, or overhear, an
intonation, a rhythmic utterance fine and strange. The 'action' began:
to me it seemed all the more obscure because in those days, when I read
to myself, I used often, while I turned the pages, to dream of something
quite different. And to the gaps which this habit made in my knowledge
of the story more were added by the fact that when it was Mamma who was
reading to me aloud she left all the love-scenes out. And so all the odd
changes which take place in the relations between the miller's wife and
the boy, changes which only the birth and growth of love can explain,
seemed to me plunged and steeped in a mystery, the key to which (as I
could readily believe) lay in that strange and pleasant-sounding name of
_Champi_, which draped the boy who bore it, I knew not why, in its own
bright colour, purpurate and charming. If my mother was not a faithful
reader, she was, none the less, admirable when reading a work in which
she found the note of true feeling by the respectful simplicity of her
interpretation and by the sound of her sweet and gentle voice. It was
the same in her daily life, when it was not works of art but men and
women whom she was moved to pity or admire: it was touching to observe
with what deference she would banish from her voice, her gestures, from
her whole conversation, now the note of joy which might have distressed
some mother who had long ago lost a child, now the recollection of an
event or anniversary which might have reminded some old gentleman of the
burden of his years, now the household topic which might have bored some
young man of letters. And so, when she read aloud the prose of George
Sand, prose which is everywhere redolent of that generosity and moral
distinction which Mamma had learned from my grandmother to place above
all other qualities in life, and which I was not to teach her until
much later to refrain from placing, in the same way, above all other
qualities in literature; taking pains to banish from her voice any
weakness or affectation which might have blocked its channel for that
powerful stream of language, she supplied all the natural tenderness,
all the lavish sweetness which they demanded to phrases which seemed
to have been composed for her voice, and which were all, so to speak,
within her compass. She came to them with the tone that they required,
with the cordial accent which existed before they were, which dictated
them, but which is not to be found in the words themselves, and by these
means she smoothed away, as she read on, any harshness there might be
or discordance in the tenses of verbs, endowing the imperfect and the
preterite with all the sweetness which there is in generosity, all the
melancholy which there is in love; guided the sentence that was drawing
to an end towards that which was waiting to begin, now hastening, now
slackening the pace of the syllables so as to bring them, despite their
difference of quantity, into a uniform rhythm, and breathed into this
quite ordinary prose a kind of life, continuous and full of feeling.

My agony was soothed; I let myself be borne upon the current of this
gentle night on which I had my mother by my side. I knew that such a
night could not be repeated; that the strongest desire I had in the
world, namely, to keep my mother in my room through the sad hours of
darkness, ran too much counter to general requirements and to the wishes
of others for such a concession as had been granted me this evening to
be anything but a rare and casual exception. To-morrow night I should
again be the victim of anguish and Mamma would not stay by my side. But
when these storms of anguish grew calm I could no longer realise
their existence; besides, tomorrow evening was still a long way off;
I reminded myself that I should still have time to think about things,
albeit that remission of time could bring me no access of power, albeit
the coming event was in no way dependent upon the exercise of my will,
and seemed not quite inevitable only because it was still separated from
me by this short interval.

* * *

And so it was that, for a long time afterwards, when I lay awake at
night and revived old memories of Combray, I saw no more of it than
this sort of luminous panel, sharply defined against a vague and shadowy
background, like the panels which a Bengal fire or some electric sign
will illuminate and dissect from the front of a building the other
parts of which remain plunged in darkness: broad enough at its base, the
little parlour, the dining-room, the alluring shadows of the path along
which would come M. Swann, the unconscious author of my sufferings, the
hall through which I would journey to the first step of that staircase,
so hard to climb, which constituted, all by itself, the tapering
'elevation' of an irregular pyramid; and, at the summit, my bedroom,
with the little passage through whose glazed door Mamma would enter;
in a word, seen always at the same evening hour, isolated from all
its possible surroundings, detached and solitary against its shadowy
background, the bare minimum of scenery necessary (like the setting
one sees printed at the head of an old play, for its performance in
the provinces) to the drama of my undressing, as though all Combray had
consisted of but two floors joined by a slender staircase, and as though
there had been no time there but seven o'clock at night. I must own
that I could have assured any questioner that Combray did include other
scenes and did exist at other hours than these. But since the facts
which I should then have recalled would have been prompted only by an
exercise of the will, by my intellectual memory, and since the pictures
which that kind of memory shews us of the past preserve nothing of
the past itself, I should never have had any wish to ponder over this
residue of Combray. To me it was in reality all dead.

Permanently dead? Very possibly.

There is a large element of hazard in these matters, and a second
hazard, that of our own death, often prevents us from awaiting for any
length of time the favours of the first.

I feel that there is much to be said for the Celtic belief that the
souls of those whom we have lost are held captive in some inferior
being, in an animal, in a plant, in some inanimate object, and so
effectively lost to us until the day (which to many never comes) when we
happen to pass by the tree or to obtain possession of the object which
forms their prison. Then they start and tremble, they call us by our
name, and as soon as we have recognised their voice the spell is broken.
We have delivered them: they have overcome death and return to share our
life.

And so it is with our own past. It is a labour in vain to attempt to
recapture it: all the efforts of our intellect must prove futile.
The past is hidden somewhere outside the realm, beyond the reach of
intellect, in some material object (in the sensation which that material
object will give us) which we do not suspect. And as for that object,
it depends on chance whether we come upon it or not before we ourselves
must die.

Many years had elapsed during which nothing of Combray, save what was
comprised in the theatre and the drama of my going to bed there, had
any existence for me, when one day in winter, as I came home, my
mother, seeing that I was cold, offered me some tea, a thing I did
not ordinarily take. I declined at first, and then, for no particular
reason, changed my mind. She sent out for one of those short, plump
little cakes called 'petites madeleines,' which look as though they
had been moulded in the fluted scallop of a pilgrim's shell. And soon,
mechanically, weary after a dull day with the prospect of a depressing
morrow, I raised to my lips a spoonful of the tea in which I had soaked
a morsel of the cake. No sooner had the warm liquid, and the crumbs with
it, touched my palate than a shudder ran through my whole body, and I
stopped, intent upon the extraordinary changes that were taking place.
An exquisite pleasure had invaded my senses, but individual, detached,
with no suggestion of its origin. And at once the vicissitudes of life
had become indifferent to me, its disasters innocuous, its brevity
illusory--this new sensation having had on me the effect which love has
of filling me with a precious essence; or rather this essence was not
in me, it was myself. I had ceased now to feel mediocre, accidental,
mortal. Whence could it have come to me, this all-powerful joy? I was
conscious that it was connected with the taste of tea and cake, but that
it infinitely transcended those savours, could not, indeed, be of the
same nature as theirs. Whence did it come? What did it signify? How
could I seize upon and define it?

I drink a second mouthful, in which I find nothing more than in the
first, a third, which gives me rather less than the second. It is time
to stop; the potion is losing its magic. It is plain that the object
of my quest, the truth, lies not in the cup but in myself. The tea has
called up in me, but does not itself understand, and can only repeat
indefinitely with a gradual loss of strength, the same testimony; which
I, too, cannot interpret, though I hope at least to be able to call upon
the tea for it again and to find it there presently, intact and at my
disposal, for my final enlightenment. I put down my cup and examine my
own mind. It is for it to discover the truth. But how? What an abyss
of uncertainty whenever the mind feels that some part of it has strayed
beyond its own borders; when it, the seeker, is at once the dark region
through which it must go seeking, where all its equipment will avail it
nothing. Seek? More than that: create. It is face to face with something
which does not so far exist, to which it alone can give reality and
substance, which it alone can bring into the light of day.

And I begin again to ask myself what it could have been, this
unremembered state which brought with it no logical proof of its
existence, but only the sense that it was a happy, that it was a
real state in whose presence other states of consciousness melted and
vanished. I decide to attempt to make it reappear. I retrace my thoughts
to the moment at which I drank the first spoonful of tea. I find again
the same state, illumined by no fresh light. I compel my mind to make
one further effort, to follow and recapture once again the fleeting
sensation. And that nothing may interrupt it in its course I shut out
every obstacle, every extraneous idea, I stop my ears and inhibit all
attention to the sounds which come from the next room. And then, feeling
that my mind is growing fatigued without having any success to report,
I compel it for a change to enjoy that distraction which I have just
denied it, to think of other things, to rest and refresh itself before
the supreme attempt. And then for the second time I clear an empty
space in front of it. I place in position before my mind's eye the still
recent taste of that first mouthful, and I feel something start within
me, something that leaves its resting-place and attempts to rise,
something that has been embedded like an anchor at a great depth; I
do not know yet what it is, but I can feel it mounting slowly; I can
measure the resistance, I can hear the echo of great spaces traversed.

Undoubtedly what is thus palpitating in the depths of my being must
be the image, the visual memory which, being linked to that taste, has
tried to follow it into my conscious mind. But its struggles are too
far off, too much confused; scarcely can I perceive the colourless
reflection in which are blended the uncapturable whirling medley of
radiant hues, and I cannot distinguish its form, cannot invite it, as
the one possible interpreter, to translate to me the evidence of its
contemporary, its inseparable paramour, the taste of cake soaked in tea;
cannot ask it to inform me what special circumstance is in question, of
what period in my past life.

Will it ultimately reach the clear surface of my consciousness, this
memory, this old, dead moment which the magnetism of an identical moment
has travelled so far to importune, to disturb, to raise up out of the
very depths of my being? I cannot tell. Now that I feel nothing, it has
stopped, has perhaps gone down again into its darkness, from which who
can say whether it will ever rise? Ten times over I must essay the task,
must lean down over the abyss. And each time the natural laziness which
deters us from every difficult enterprise, every work of importance, has
urged me to leave the thing alone, to drink my tea and to think merely
of the worries of to-day and of my hopes for to-morrow, which let
themselves be pondered over without effort or distress of mind.

And suddenly the memory returns. The taste was that of the little crumb
of madeleine which on Sunday mornings at Combray (because on those
mornings I did not go out before church-time), when I went to say good
day to her in her bedroom, my aunt Léonie used to give me, dipping it
first in her own cup of real or of lime-flower tea. The sight of the
little madeleine had recalled nothing to my mind before I tasted it;
perhaps because I had so often seen such things in the interval, without
tasting them, on the trays in pastry-cooks' windows, that their image
had dissociated itself from those Combray days to take its place among
others more recent; perhaps because of those memories, so long abandoned
and put out of mind, nothing now survived, everything was scattered; the
forms of things, including that of the little scallop-shell of pastry,
so richly sensual under its severe, religious folds, were either
obliterated or had been so long dormant as to have lost the power of
expansion which would have allowed them to resume their place in my
consciousness. But when from a long-distant past nothing subsists, after
the people are dead, after the things are broken and scattered, still,
alone, more fragile, but with more vitality, more unsubstantial, more
persistent, more faithful, the smell and taste of things remain poised a
long time, like souls, ready to remind us, waiting and hoping for their
moment, amid the ruins of all the rest; and bear unfaltering, in the
tiny and almost impalpable drop of their essence, the vast structure of
recollection.

And once I had recognized the taste of the crumb of madeleine soaked in
her decoction of lime-flowers which my aunt used to give me (although I
did not yet know and must long postpone the discovery of why this memory
made me so happy) immediately the old grey house upon the street, where
her room was, rose up like the scenery of a theatre to attach itself to
the little pavilion, opening on to the garden, which had been built out
behind it for my parents (the isolated panel which until that moment had
been all that I could see); and with the house the town, from morning to
night and in all weathers, the Square where I was sent before luncheon,
the streets along which I used to run errands, the country roads we took
when it was fine. And just as the Japanese amuse themselves by filling
a porcelain bowl with water and steeping in it little crumbs of paper
which until then are without character or form, but, the moment they
become wet, stretch themselves and bend, take on colour and distinctive
shape, become flowers or houses or people, permanent and recognisable,
so in that moment all the flowers in our garden and in M. Swann's park,
and the water-lilies on the Vivonne and the good folk of the village and
their little dwellings and the parish church and the whole of Combray
and of its surroundings, taking their proper shapes and growing solid,
sprang into being, town and gardens alike, from my cup of tea.






COMBRAY

Combray at a distance, from a twenty-mile radius, as we used to see it
from the railway when we arrived there every year in Holy Week, was no
more than a church epitomising the town, representing it, speaking of it
and for it to the horizon, and as one drew near, gathering close about
its long, dark cloak, sheltering from the wind, on the open plain, as
a shepherd gathers his sheep, the woolly grey backs of its flocking
houses, which a fragment of its mediaeval ramparts enclosed, here and
there, in an outline as scrupulously circular as that of a little town
in a primitive painting. To live in, Combray was a trifle depressing,
like its streets, whose houses, built of the blackened stone of the
country, fronted with outside steps, capped with gables which projected
long shadows downwards, were so dark that one had, as soon as the sun
began to go down, to draw back the curtains in the sitting-room windows;
streets with the solemn names of Saints, not a few of whom figured
in the history of the early lords of Combray, such as the Rue
Saint-Hilaire, the Rue Saint-Jacques, in which my aunt's house stood,
the Rue Sainte-Hildegarde, which ran past her railings, and the Rue
du Saint-Esprit, on to which the little garden gate opened; and these
Combray streets exist in so remote a quarter of my memory, painted in
colours so different from those in which the world is decked for me
to-day, that in fact one and all of them, and the church which towered
above them in the Square, seem to me now more unsubstantial than the
projections of my magic-lantern; while at times I feel that to be able
to cross the Rue Saint-Hilaire again, to engage a room in the Rue de
l'Oiseau, in the old hostelry of the Oiseau Flesché, from whose windows
in the pavement used to rise a smell of cooking which rises still in
my mind, now and then, in the same warm gusts of comfort, would be to
secure a contact with the unseen world more marvellously supernatural
than it would be to make Golo's acquaintance and to chat with Geneviève
de Brabant.

My grandfather's cousin--by courtesy my great-aunt--with whom we used
to stay, was the mother of that aunt Léonie who, since her husband's (my
uncle Octave's) death, had gradually declined to leave, first Combray,
then her house in Combray, then her bedroom, and finally her bed;
and who now never 'came down,' but lay perpetually in an indefinite
condition of grief, physical exhaustion, illness, obsessions,
and religious observances. Her own room looked out over the Rue
Saint-Jacques, which ran a long way further to end in the Grand-Pré (as
distinct from the Petit-Pré, a green space in the centre of the town
where three streets met) and which, monotonous and grey, with the three
high steps of stone before almost every one of its doors, seemed like a
deep furrow cut by some sculptor of gothic images in the very block of
stone out of which he had fashioned a Calvary or a Crib. My aunt's life
was now practically confined to two adjoining rooms, in one of which she
would rest in the afternoon while they aired the other. They were rooms
of that country order which (just as in certain climes whole tracts of
air or ocean are illuminated or scented by myriads of protozoa which
we cannot see) fascinate our sense of smell with the countless odours
springing from their own special virtues, wisdom, habits, a whole secret
system of life, invisible, superabundant and profoundly moral, which
their atmosphere holds in solution; smells natural enough indeed, and
coloured by circumstances as are those of the neighbouring countryside,
but already humanised, domesticated, confined, an exquisite, skilful,
limpid jelly, blending all the fruits of the season which have left
the orchard for the store-room, smells changing with the year, but
plenishing, domestic smells, which compensate for the sharpness of hoar
frost with the sweet savour of warm bread, smells lazy and punctual as
a village clock, roving smells, pious smells; rejoicing in a peace which
brings only an increase of anxiety, and in a prosiness which serves as
a deep source of poetry to the stranger who passes through their midst
without having lived amongst them. The air of those rooms was saturated
with the fine bouquet of a silence so nourishing, so succulent that I
could not enter them without a sort of greedy enjoyment, particularly on
those first mornings, chilly still, of the Easter holidays, when I could
taste it more fully, because I had just arrived then at Combray: before
I went in to wish my aunt good day I would be kept waiting a little time
in the outer room, where the sun, a wintry sun still, had crept in to
warm itself before the fire, lighted already between its two brick sides
and plastering all the room and everything in it with a smell of soot,
making the room like one of those great open hearths which one finds in
the country, or one of the canopied mantelpieces in old castles under
which one sits hoping that in the world outside it is raining or
snowing, hoping almost for a catastrophic deluge to add the romance of
shelter and security to the comfort of a snug retreat; I would turn to
and fro between the prayer-desk and the stamped velvet armchairs, each
one always draped in its crocheted antimacassar, while the fire, baking
like a pie the appetising smells with which the air of the room was
thickly clotted, which the dewy and sunny freshness of the morning had
already 'raised' and started to 'set,' puffed them and glazed them and
fluted them and swelled them into an invisible though not impalpable
country cake, an immense puff-pastry, in which, barely waiting to savour
the crustier, more delicate, more respectable, but also drier smells
of the cupboard, the chest-of-drawers, and the patterned wall-paper
I always returned with an unconfessed gluttony to bury myself in the
nondescript, resinous, dull, indigestible, and fruity smell of the
flowered quilt.

In the next room I could hear my aunt talking quietly to herself. She
never spoke save in low tones, because she believed that there was
something broken in her head and floating loose there, which she might
displace by talking too loud; but she never remained for long, even when
alone, without saying something, because she believed that it was good
for her throat, and that by keeping the blood there in circulation it
would make less frequent the chokings and other pains to which she
was liable; besides, in the life of complete inertia which she led she
attached to the least of her sensations an extraordinary importance,
endowed them with a Protean ubiquity which made it difficult for her to
keep them secret, and, failing a confidant to whom she might communicate
them, she used to promulgate them to herself in an unceasing monologue
which was her sole form of activity. Unfortunately, having formed the
habit of thinking aloud, she did not always take care to see that there
was no one in the adjoining room, and I would often hear her saying
to herself: "I must not forget that I never slept a wink"--for "never
sleeping a wink" was her great claim to distinction, and one admitted
and respected in our household vocabulary; in the morning Françoise
would not 'call' her, but would simply 'come to' her; during the day,
when my aunt wished to take a nap, we used to say just that she wished
to 'be quiet' or to 'rest'; and when in conversation she so far forgot
herself as to say "what made me wake up," or "I dreamed that," she would
flush and at once correct herself.

After waiting a minute, I would go in and kiss her; Françoise would
be making her tea; or, if my aunt were feeling 'upset,' she would ask
instead for her 'tisane,' and it would be my duty to shake out of
the chemist's little package on to a plate the amount of lime-blossom
required for infusion in boiling water. The drying of the stems had
twisted them into a fantastic trellis, in whose intervals the pale
flowers opened, as though a painter had arranged them there, grouping
them in the most decorative poses. The leaves, which had lost or altered
their own appearance, assumed those instead of the most incongruous
things imaginable, as though the transparent wings of flies or the blank
sides of labels or the petals of roses had been collected and pounded,
or interwoven as birds weave the material for their nests. A
thousand trifling little details--the charming prodigality of the
chemist--details which would have been eliminated from an artificial
preparation, gave me, like a book in which one is astonished to read the
name of a person whom one knows, the pleasure of finding that these were
indeed real lime-blossoms, like those I had seen, when coming from the
train, in the Avenue de la Gare, altered, but only because they were not
imitations but the very same blossoms, which had grown old. And as each
new character is merely a metamorphosis from something older, in these
little grey balls I recognised green buds plucked before their time; but
beyond all else the rosy, moony, tender glow which lit up the blossoms
among the frail forest of stems from which they hung like little golden
roses--marking, as the radiance upon an old wall still marks the place
of a vanished fresco, the difference between those parts of the tree
which had and those which had not been 'in bloom'--shewed me that these
were petals which, before their flowering-time, the chemist's package
had embalmed on warm evenings of spring. That rosy candlelight was still
their colour, but half-extinguished and deadened in the diminished life
which was now theirs, and which may be called the twilight of a flower.
Presently my aunt was able to dip in the boiling infusion, in which she
would relish the savour of dead or faded blossom, a little madeleine, of
which she would hold out a piece to me when it was sufficiently soft.

At one side of her bed stood a big yellow chest-of-drawers of
lemon-wood, and a table which served at once as pharmacy and as
high altar, on which, beneath a statue of Our Lady and a bottle of
Vichy-Célestins, might be found her service-books and her medical
prescriptions, everything that she needed for the performance, in bed,
of her duties to soul and body, to keep the proper times for pepsin and
for vespers. On the other side her bed was bounded by the window: she
had the street beneath her eyes, and would read in it from morning to
night to divert the tedium of her life, like a Persian prince, the daily
but immemorial chronicles of Combray, which she would discuss in detail
afterwards with Françoise.

I would not have been five minutes with my aunt before she would send me
away in case I made her tired. She would hold out for me to kiss her sad
brow, pale and lifeless, on which at this early hour she would not yet
have arranged the false hair and through which the bones shone like the
points of a crown of thorns--or the beads of a rosary, and she would say
to me: "Now, my poor child, you must go away; go and get ready for
mass; and if you see Françoise downstairs, tell her not to stay too
long amusing herself with you; she must come up soon to see if I want
anything."

Françoise, who had been for many years in my aunt's service and did not
at that time suspect that she would one day be transferred entirely to
ours, was a little inclined to desert my aunt during the months which we
spent in her house. There had been in my infancy, before we first went
to Combray, and when my aunt Léonie used still to spend the winter in
Paris with her mother, a time when I knew Françoise so little that on
New Year's Day, before going into my great-aunt's house, my mother put
a five-franc piece in my hand and said: "Now, be careful. Don't make
any mistake. Wait until you hear me say 'Good morning, Françoise,' and
I touch your arm before you give it to her." No sooner had we arrived
in my aunt's dark hall than we saw in the gloom, beneath the frills of a
snowy cap as stiff and fragile as if it had been made of spun sugar, the
concentric waves of a smile of anticipatory gratitude. It was Françoise,
motionless and erect, framed in the small doorway of the corridor like
the statue of a saint in its niche. When we had grown more accustomed to
this religious darkness we could discern in her features a disinterested
love of all humanity, blended with a tender respect for the 'upper
classes' which raised to the most honourable quarter of her heart the
hope of receiving her due reward. Mamma pinched my arm sharply and said
in a loud voice: "Good morning, Françoise." At this signal my fingers
parted and I let fall the coin, which found a receptacle in a confused
but outstretched hand. But since we had begun to go to Combray there was
no one I knew better than Françoise. We were her favourites, and in the
first years at least, while she shewed the same consideration for us
as for my aunt, she enjoyed us with a keener relish, because we had, in
addition to our dignity as part of 'the family' (for she had for those
invisible bonds by which community of blood unites the members of a
family as much respect as any Greek tragedian), the fresh charm of not
being her customary employers. And so with what joy would she welcome
us, with what sorrow complain that the weather was still so bad for us,
on the day of our arrival, just before Easter, when there was often an
icy wind; while Mamma inquired after her daughter and her nephews, and
if her grandson was good-looking, and what they were going to make of
him, and whether he took after his granny.

Later, when no one else was in the room, Mamma, who knew that Françoise
was still mourning for her parents, who had been dead for years, would
speak of them kindly, asking her endless little questions about them and
their lives.

She had guessed that Françoise was not over-fond of her son-in-law, and
that he spoiled the pleasure she found in visiting her daughter, as the
two could not talk so freely when he was there. And so one day, when
Françoise was going to their house, some miles from Combray, Mamma said
to her, with a smile: "Tell me, Françoise, if Julien has had to go away,
and you have Marguerite to yourself all day, you will be very sorry, but
will make the best of it, won't you?"

And Françoise answered, laughing: "Madame knows everything; Madame
is worse than the X-rays" (she pronounced 'x' with an affectation
of difficulty and with a smile in deprecation of her, an unlettered
woman's, daring to employ a scientific term) "they brought here for Mme.
Octave, which see what is in your heart"--and she went off, disturbed
that anyone should be caring about her, perhaps anxious that we should
not see her in tears: Mamma was the first person who had given her the
pleasure of feeling that her peasant existence, with its simple joys
and sorrows, might offer some interest, might be a source of grief or
pleasure to some one other than herself.

My aunt resigned herself to doing without Françoise to some extent
during our visits, knowing how much my mother appreciated the services
of so active and intelligent a maid, one who looked as smart at five
o'clock in the morning in her kitchen, under a cap whose stiff and
dazzling frills seemed to be made of porcelain, as when dressed for
churchgoing; who did everything in the right way, who toiled like a
horse, whether she was well or ill, but without noise, without the
appearance of doing anything; the only one of my aunt's maids who when
Mamma asked for hot water or black coffee would bring them actually
boiling; she was one of those servants who in a household seem least
satisfactory, at first, to a stranger, doubtless because they take
no pains to make a conquest of him and shew him no special attention,
knowing very well that they have no real need of him, that he will cease
to be invited to the house sooner than they will be dismissed from it;
who, on the other hand, cling with most fidelity to those masters and
mistresses who have tested and proved their real capacity, and do not
look for that superficial responsiveness, that slavish affability,
which may impress a stranger favourably, but often conceals an utter
barrenness of spirit in which no amount of training can produce the
least trace of individuality.

When Françoise, having seen that my parents had everything they
required, first went upstairs again to give my aunt her pepsin and to
find out from her what she would take for luncheon, very few mornings
pased but she was called upon to give an opinion, or to furnish an
explanation, in regard to some important event.

"Just fancy, Françoise, Mme. Goupil went by more than a quarter of an
hour late to fetch her sister: if she loses any more time on the way I
should not be at all surprised if she got in after the Elevation."

"Well, there'd be nothing wonderful in that," would be the answer. Or:

"Françoise, if you had come in five minutes ago, you would have seen
Mme. Imbert go past with some asparagus twice the size of what mother
Callot has: do try to find out from her cook where she got them. You
know you've been putting asparagus in all your sauces this spring; you
might be able to get some like these for our visitors."

"I shouldn't be surprised if they came from the Curé's," Françoise would
say, and:

"I'm sure you wouldn't, my poor Françoise," my aunt would reply, raising
her shoulders. "From the Curé's, indeed! You know quite well that he
can never grow anything but wretched little twigs of asparagus, not
asparagus at all. I tell you these ones were as thick as my arm. Not
your arm, of course, but my poor arm, which has grown so much thinner
again this year." Or:

"Françoise, didn't you hear that bell just now! It split my head."

"No, Mme. Octave."

"Ah, poor girl, your skull must be very thick; you may thank God for
that. It was Maguelone come to fetch Dr. Piperaud. He came out with her
at once and they went off along the Rue de l'Oiseau. There must be some
child ill."

"Oh dear, dear; the poor little creature!" would come with a sigh from
Françoise, who could not hear of any calamity befalling a person unknown
to her, even in some distant part of the world, without beginning to
lament. Or:

"Françoise, for whom did they toll the passing-bell just now? Oh dear,
of course, it would be for Mme. Rousseau. And to think that I had
forgotten that she passed away the other night. Indeed, it is time the
Lord called me home too; I don't know what has become of my head since I
lost my poor Octave. But I am wasting your time, my good girl."

"Indeed no, Mme. Octave, my time is not so precious; whoever made our
time didn't sell it to us. I am just going to see that my fire hasn't
gone out."

In this way Françoise and my aunt made a critical valuation between
them, in the course of these morning sessions, of the earliest
happenings of the day. But sometimes these happenings assumed so
mysterious or so alarming an air that my aunt felt she could not wait
until it was time for Françoise to come upstairs, and then a formidable
and quadruple peal would resound through the house.

"But, Mme. Octave, it is not time for your pepsin," Françoise would
begin. "Are you feeling faint?"

"No, thank you, Françoise," my aunt would reply, "that is to say, yes;
for you know well that there is very seldom a time when I don't feel
faint; one day I shall pass away like Mme. Rousseau, before I know where
I am; but that is not why I rang. Would you believe that I have just
seen, as plainly as I see you, Mme. Goupil with a little girl I didn't
know at all. Run and get a pennyworth of salt from Camus. It's not often
that Théodore can't tell you who a person is."

"But that must be M. Pupin's daughter," Françoise would say, preferring
to stick to an immediate explanation, since she had been perhaps twice
already into Camus's shop that morning.

"M. Pupin's daughter! Oh, that's a likely story, my poor Françoise. Do
you think I should not have recognised M. Pupin's daughter!"

"But I don't mean the big one, Mme. Octave; I mean the little girl, he
one who goes to school at Jouy. I seem to have seen her once already this
morning."

"Oh, if that's what it is!" my aunt would say, "she must have come over
for the holidays. Yes, that is it. No need to ask, she will have come
over for the holidays. But then we shall soon see Mme. Sazerat come
along and ring her sister's door-bell, for her luncheon. That will be
it! I saw the boy from Galopin's go by with a tart. You will see that
the tart was for Mme. Goupil."

"Once Mme. Goupil has anyone in the house, Mme. Octave, you won't be
long in seeing all her folk going in to their luncheon there, for it's
not so early as it was," would be the answer, for Françoise, who was
anxious to retire downstairs to look after our own meal, was not sorry
to leave my aunt with the prospect of such a distraction.

"Oh! not before midday!" my aunt would reply in a tone of resignation,
darting an uneasy glance at the clock, but stealthily, so as not to let
it be seen that she, who had renounced all earthly joys, yet found a
keen satisfaction in learning that Mme. Goupil was expecting company to
luncheon, though, alas, she must wait a little more than an hour still
before enjoying the spectacle. "And it will come in the middle of
my luncheon!" she would murmur to herself. Her luncheon was such a
distraction in itself that she did not like any other to come at the
same time. "At least, you will not forget to give me my creamed eggs on
one of the flat plates?" These were the only plates which had pictures
on them and my aunt used to amuse herself at every meal by reading the
description on whichever might have been sent up to her. She would
put on her spectacles and spell out: "Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves,"
"Aladdin, or the Wonderful Lamp," and smile, and say "Very good indeed."

"I may as well go across to Camus..." Françoise would hazard, seeing
that my aunt had no longer any intention of sending her there.

"No, no; it's not worth while now; it's certain to be the Pupin girl. My
poor Françoise, I am sorry to have made you come upstairs for nothing."

But it was not for nothing, as my aunt well knew, that she had rung for
Françoise, since at Combray a person whom one 'didn't know at all' was
as incredible a being as any mythological deity, and it was apt to be
forgotten that after each occasion on which there had appeared in the
Rue du Saint-Esprit or in the Square one of these bewildering phenomena,
careful and exhaustive researches had invariably reduced the fabulous
monster to the proportions of a person whom one 'did know,' either
personally or in the abstract, in his or her civil status as being more
or less closely related to some family in Combray. It would turn out to
be Mme. Sauton's son discharged from the army, or the Abbé Perdreau's
niece come home from her convent, or the Curé's brother, a tax-collector
at Châteaudun, who had just retired on a pension or had come over to
Combray for the holidays. On first noticing them you have been impressed
by the thought that there might be in Combray people whom you 'didn't
know at all,' simply because you had failed to recognise or identify
them at once. And yet long beforehand Mme. Sauton and the Curé had given
warning that they expected their 'strangers.' In the evening, when I
came in and went upstairs to tell my aunt the incidents of our walk, if
I was rash enough to say to her that we had passed, near the Pont-Vieux,
a man whom my grandfather didn't know:

"A man grandfather didn't know at all!" she would exclaim. "That's a
likely story." None the less, she would be a little disturbed by
the news, she would wish to have the details correctly, and so my
grandfather would be summoned. "Who can it have been that you passed
near the Pont-Vieux, uncle? A man you didn't know at all?"

"Why, of course I did," my grandfather would answer; "it was Prosper,
Mme. Bouilleboeuf's gardener's brother."

"Ah, well!" my aunt would say, calm again but slightly flushed still;
"and the boy told me that you had passed a man you didn't know at all!"
After which I would be warned to be more careful of what I said, and not
to upset my aunt so by thoughtless remarks. Everyone was so well known
in Combray, animals as well as people, that if my aunt had happened to
see a dog go by which she 'didn't know at all' she would think about it
incessantly, devoting to the solution of the incomprehensible problem
all her inductive talent and her leisure hours.

"That will be Mme. Sazerat's dog," Françoise would suggest, without any
real conviction, but in the hope of peace, and so that my aunt should
not 'split her head.'

"As if I didn't know Mme. Sazerat's dog!"--for my aunt's critical mind
would not so easily admit any fresh fact.

"Ah, but that will be the new dog M. Galopin has brought her from
Lisieux."

"Oh, if that's what it is!"

"It seems, it's a most engaging animal," Françoise would go on, having
got the story from Théodore, "as clever as a Christian, always in a good
temper, always friendly, always everything that's nice. It's not often
you see an animal so well-behaved at that age. Mme. Octave, it's high
time I left you; I can't afford to stay here amusing myself; look, it's
nearly ten o'clock and my fire not lighted yet, and I've still to dress
the asparagus."

"What, Françoise, more asparagus! It's a regular disease of asparagus
you have got this year: you will make our Parisians sick of it."

"No, no, Madame Octave, they like it well enough. They'll be coming back
from church soon as hungry as hunters, and they won't eat it out of the
back of their spoons, you'll see."

"Church! why, they must be there now; you'd better not lose any time. Go
and look after your luncheon."

While my aunt gossiped on in this way with Françoise I would have
accompanied my parents to mass. How I loved it: how clearly I can see it
still, our church at Combray! The old porch by which we went in, black,
and full of holes as a cullender, was worn out of shape and deeply
furrowed at the sides (as also was the holy water stoup to which it led
us) just as if the gentle grazing touch of the cloaks of peasant-women
going into the church, and of their fingers dipping into the water, had
managed by agelong repetition to acquire a destructive force, to impress
itself on the stone, to carve ruts in it like those made by cart-wheels
upon stone gate-posts against which they are driven every day. Its
memorial stones, beneath which the noble dust of the Abbots of Combray,
who were buried there, furnished the choir with a sort of spiritual
pavement, were themselves no longer hard and lifeless matter, for time
had softened and sweetened them, and had made them melt like honey
and flow beyond their proper margins, either surging out in a milky,
frothing wave, washing from its place a florid gothic capital, drowning
the white violets of the marble floor; or else reabsorbed into their
limits, contracting still further a crabbed Latin inscription,
bringing a fresh touch of fantasy into the arrangement of its curtailed
characters, closing together two letters of some word of which the rest
were disproportionately scattered. Its windows were never so brilliant
as on days when the sun scarcely shone, so that if it was dull outside
you might be certain of fine weather in church. One of them was
filled from top to bottom by a solitary figure, like the king on a
playing-card, who lived up there beneath his canopy of stone, between
earth and heaven; and in the blue light of its slanting shadow, on
weekdays sometimes, at noon, when there was no service (at one of those
rare moments when the airy, empty church, more human somehow and more
luxurious with the sun shewing off all its rich furnishings, seemed to
have almost a habitable air, like the hall--all sculptured stone and
painted glass--of some mediaeval mansion), you might see Mme. Sazerat
kneel for an instant, laying down on the chair beside her own a neatly
corded parcel of little cakes which she had just bought at the baker's
and was taking home for her luncheon. In another, a mountain of rosy
snow, at whose foot a battle was being fought, seemed to have frozen the
window also, which it swelled and distorted with its cloudy sleet, like
a pane to which snowflakes have drifted and clung, but flakes illumined
by a sunrise--the same, doubtless, which purpled the reredos of the
altar with tints so fresh that they seemed rather to be thrown on it for
a moment by a light shining from outside and shortly to be extinguished
than painted and permanently fastened on the stone. And all of them
were so old that you could see, here and there, their silvery antiquity
sparkling with the dust of centuries and shewing in its threadbare
brilliance the very cords of their lovely tapestry of glass. There
was one among them which was a tall panel composed of a hundred little
rectangular windows, of blue principally, like a great game of patience
of the kind planned to beguile King Charles VI; but, either because a
ray of sunlight had gleamed through it or because my own shifting vision
had drawn across the window, whose colours died away and were rekindled
by turns, a rare and transient fire--the next instant it had taken on
all the iridescence of a peacock's tail, then shook and wavered in a
flaming and fantastic shower, distilled and dropping from the groin of
the dark and rocky vault down the moist walls, as though it were
along the bed of some rainbow grotto of sinuous stalactites that I was
following my parents, who marched before me, their prayer-books clasped
in their hands; a moment later the little lozenge windows had put on the
deep transparence, the unbreakable hardness of sapphires clustered on
some enormous breastplate; but beyond which could be distinguished,
dearer than all such treasures, a fleeting smile from the sun, which
could be seen and felt as well here, in the blue and gentle flood in
which it washed the masonry, as on the pavement of the Square or the
straw of the market-place; and even on our first Sundays, when we came
down before Easter, it would console me for the blackness and bareness
of the earth outside by making burst into blossom, as in some springtime
in old history among the heirs of Saint Louis, this dazzling and gilded
carpet of forget-me-nots in glass.

Two tapestries of high warp represented the coronation of Esther (in
which tradition would have it that the weaver had given to Ahasuerus the
features of one of the kings of France and to Esther those of a lady of
Guermantes whose lover he had been); their colours had melted into one
another, so as to add expression, relief, light to the pictures. A touch
of red over the lips of Esther had strayed beyond their outline; the
yellow on her dress was spread with such unctuous plumpness as to have
acquired a kind of solidity, and stood boldly out from the receding
atmosphere; while the green of the trees, which was still bright in silk
and wool among the lower parts of the panel, but had quite 'gone' at the
top, separated in a paler scheme, above the dark trunks, the yellowing
upper branches, tanned and half-obliterated by the sharp though sidelong
rays of an invisible sun. All these things and, still more than these,
the treasures which had come to the church from personages who to me
were almost legendary figures (such as the golden cross wrought, it was
said, by Saint Eloi and presented by Dagobert, and the tomb of the sons
of Louis the Germanic in porphyry and enamelled copper), because of
which I used to go forward into the church when we were making our way
to our chairs as into a fairy-haunted valley, where the rustic sees with
amazement on a rock, a tree, a marsh, the tangible proofs of the little
people's supernatural passage--all these things made of the church for
me something entirely different from the rest of the town; a building
which occupied, so to speak, four dimensions of space--the name of the
fourth being Time--which had sailed the centuries with that old nave,
where bay after bay, chapel after chapel, seemed to stretch across
and hold down and conquer not merely a few yards of soil, but each
successive epoch from which the whole building had emerged triumphant,
hiding the rugged barbarities of the eleventh century in the thickness
of its walls, through which nothing could be seen of the heavy arches,
long stopped and blinded with coarse blocks of ashlar, except where,
near the porch, a deep groove was furrowed into one wall by the
tower-stair; and even there the barbarity was veiled by the graceful
gothic arcade which pressed coquettishly upon it, like a row of grown-up
sisters who, to hide him from the eyes of strangers, arrange themselves
smilingly in front of a countrified, unmannerly and ill-dressed younger
brother; rearing into the sky above the Square a tower which had looked
down upon Saint Louis, and seemed to behold him still; and thrusting
down with its crypt into the blackness of a Merovingian night, through
which, guiding us with groping finger-tips beneath the shadowy vault,
ribbed strongly as an immense bat's wing of stone, Théodore or his
sister would light up for us with a candle the tomb of Sigebert's little
daughter, in which a deep hole, like the bed of a fossil, had been
bored, or so it was said, "by a crystal lamp which, on the night when
the Frankish princess was murdered, had left, of its own accord, the
golden chains by which it was suspended where the apse is to-day and
with neither the crystal broken nor the light extinguished had buried
itself in the stone, through which it had gently forced its way."

And then the apse of Combray: what am I to say of that? It was so
coarse, so devoid of artistic beauty, even of the religious spirit. From
outside, since the street crossing which it commanded was on a lower
level, its great wall was thrust upwards from a basement of unfaced
ashlar, jagged with flints, in all of which there was nothing
particularly ecclesiastical; the windows seemed to have been pierced at
an abnormal height, and its whole appearance was that of a prison wall
rather than of a church. And certainly in later years, were I to recall
all the glorious apses that I had seen, it would never enter my mind to
compare with any one of them the apse of Combray. Only, one day,
turning out of a little street in some country town, I came upon three
alley-ways that converged, and facing them an old wall, rubbed, worn,
crumbling, and unusually high; with windows pierced in it far overhead
and the same asymmetrical appearance as the apse of Combray. And at that
moment I did not say to myself, as at Chartres I might have done or at
Rheims, with what strength the religious feeling had been expressed in
its construction, but instinctively I exclaimed "The Church!"

The church! A dear, familiar friend; close pressed in the Rue
Saint-Hilaire, upon which its north door opened, by its two neighbours,
Mme. Loiseau's house and the pharmacy of M. Rapin, against which its
walls rested without interspace; a simple citizen of Combray, who might
have had her number in the street had the streets of Combray borne
numbers, and at whose door one felt that the postman ought to stop on
his morning rounds, before going into Mme. Loiseau's and after leaving
M. Rapin's, there existed, for all that, between the church and
everything in Combray that was not the church a clear line of
demarcation which I have never succeeded in eliminating from my mind.
In vain might Mme. Loiseau deck her window-sills with fuchsias, which
developed the bad habit of letting their branches trail at all times
and in all directions, head downwards, and whose flowers had no more
important business, when they were big enough to taste the joys of life,
than to go and cool their purple, congested cheeks against the dark
front of the church; to me such conduct sanctified the fuchsias not at
all; between the flowers and the blackened stones towards which they
leaned, if my eyes could discern no interval, my mind preserved the
impression of an abyss.

From a long way off one could distinguish and identify the steeple of
Saint-Hilaire inscribing its unforgettable form upon a horizon beneath
which Combray had not yet appeared; when from the train which brought
us down from Paris at Easter-time my father caught sight of it, as it
slipped into every fold of the sky in turn, its little iron cock veering
continually in all directions, he would say: "Come, get your wraps
together, we are there." And on one of the longest walks we ever took
from Combray there was a spot where the narrow road emerged suddenly
on to an immense plain, closed at the horizon by strips of forest over
which rose and stood alone the fine point of Saint-Hilaire's steeple,
but so sharpened and so pink that it seemed to be no more than sketched
on the sky by the finger-nail of a painter anxious to give to such a
landscape, to so pure a piece of 'nature,' this little sign of art, this
single indication of human existence. As one drew near it and could make
out the remains of the square tower, half in ruins, which still stood by
its side, though without rivalling it in height, one was struck, first
of all, by the tone, reddish and sombre, of its stones; and on a misty
morning in autumn one would have called it, to see it rising above the
violet thunder-cloud of the vineyards, a ruin of purple, almost the
colour of the wild vine.

Often in the Square, as we came home, my grandmother would make me stop
to look up at it. From the tower windows, placed two and two, one pair
above another, with that right and original proportion in their spacing
to which not only human faces owe their beauty and dignity, it released,
it let fall at regular intervals flights of jackdaws which for a little
while would wheel and caw, as though the ancient stones which allowed
them to sport thus and never seemed to see them, becoming of a sudden
uninhabitable and discharging some infinitely disturbing element, had
struck them and driven them forth. Then after patterning everywhere the
violet velvet of the evening air, abruptly soothed, they would return
and be absorbed in the tower, deadly no longer but benignant, some
perching here and there (not seeming to move, but snapping, perhaps, and
swallowing some passing insect) on the points of turrets, as a seagull
perches, with an angler's immobility, on the crest of a wave. Without
quite knowing why, my grandmother found in the steeple of Saint-Hilaire
that absence of vulgarity, pretension, and meanness which made her
love--and deem rich in beneficent influences--nature itself, when the
hand of man had not, as did my great-aunt's gardener, trimmed it, and
the works of genius. And certainly every part one saw of the church
served to distinguish the whole from any other building by a kind of
general feeling which pervaded it, but it was in the steeple that
the church seemed to display a consciousness of itself, to affirm its
individual and responsible existence. It was the steeple which spoke for
the church. I think, too, that in a confused way my grandmother found in
the steeple of Combray what she prized above anything else in the
world, namely, a natural air and an air of distinction. Ignorant of
architecture, she would say:

"My dears, laugh at me if you like; it is not conventionally beautiful,
but there is something in its quaint old face which pleases me. If it
could play the piano, I am sure it would really _play_." And when she
gazed on it, when her eyes followed the gentle tension, the fervent
inclination of its stony slopes which drew together as they rose, like
hands joined in prayer, she would absorb herself so utterly in the
outpouring of the spire that her gaze seemed to leap upwards with it;
her lips at the same time curving in a friendly smile for the worn old
stones of which the setting sun now illumined no more than the topmost
pinnacles, which, at the point where they entered that zone of sunlight
and were softened and sweetened by it, seemed to have mounted suddenly
far higher, to have become truly remote, like a song whose singer breaks
into falsetto, an octave above the accompanying air.

It was the steeple of Saint-Hilaire which shaped and crowned and
consecrated every occupation, every hour of the day, every point of view
in the town. From my bedroom window I could discern no more than its
base, which had been freshly covered with slates; but when on Sundays I
saw these, in the hot light of a summer morning, blaze like a black sun
I would say to myself: "Good heavens! nine o'clock! I must get ready for
mass at once if I am to have time to go in and kiss aunt Léonie first,"
and I would know exactly what was the colour of the sunlight upon the
Square, I could feel the heat and dust of the market, the shade behind
the blinds of the shop into which Mamma would perhaps go on her way
to mass, penetrating its odour of unbleached calico, to purchase a
handkerchief or something, of which the draper himself would let her see
what he had, bowing from the waist: who, having made everything ready
for shutting up, had just gone into the back shop to put on his Sunday
coat and to wash his hands, which it was his habit, every few minutes
and even on the saddest occasions, to rub one against the other with an
air of enterprise, cunning, and success.

And again, after mass, when we looked in to tell Théodore to bring a
larger loaf than usual because our cousins had taken advantage of the
fine weather to come over from Thiberzy for luncheon, we had in front of
us the steeple, which, baked and brown itself like a larger loaf still
of 'holy bread,' with flakes and sticky drops on it of sunlight, pricked
its sharp point into the blue sky. And in the evening, as I came in from
my walk and thought of the approaching moment when I must say good night
to my mother and see her no more, the steeple was by contrast so kindly,
there at the close of day, that I would imagine it as being laid, like a
brown velvet cushion, against--as being thrust into the pallid sky which
had yielded beneath its pressure, had sunk slightly so as to make room
for it, and had correspondingly risen on either side; while the cries of
the birds wheeling to and fro about it seemed to intensify its silence,
to elongate its spire still further, and to invest it with some quality
beyond the power of words.

Even when our errands lay in places behind the church, from which it
could not be seen, the view seemed always to have been composed with
reference to the steeple, which would stand up, now here, now there,
among the houses, and was perhaps even more affecting when it appeared
thus without the church. And, indeed, there are many others which
look best when seen in this way, and I can call to mind vignettes of
housetops with surmounting steeples in quite another category of art
than those formed by the dreary streets of Combray. I shall never
forget, in a quaint Norman town not far from Balbec, two charming
eighteenth-century houses, dear to me and venerable for many reasons,
between which, when one looks up at them from a fine garden which
descends in terraces to the river, the gothic spire of a church (itself
hidden by the houses) soars into the sky with the effect of crowning and
completing their fronts, but in a material so different, so precious, so
beringed, so rosy, so polished, that it is at once seen to be no more
a part of them than would be a part of two pretty pebbles lying side
by side, between which it had been washed on the beach, the purple,
crinkled spire of some sea-shell spun out into a turret and gay with
glossy colour. Even in Paris, in one of the ugliest parts of the town, I
know a window from which one can see across a first, a second, and even
a third layer of jumbled roofs, street beyond street, a violet bell,
sometimes ruddy, sometimes too, in the finest 'prints' which the
atmosphere makes of it, of an ashy solution of black; which is, in fact,
nothing else than the dome of Saint-Augustin, and which imparts to this
view of Paris the character of some of the Piranesi views of Rome. But
since into none of these little etchings, whatever the taste my
memory may have been able to bring to their execution, was it able to
contribute an element I have long lost, the feeling which makes us not
merely regard a thing as a spectacle, but believe in it as in a creature
without parallel, so none of them keeps in dependence on it a whole
section of my inmost life as does the memory of those aspects of the
steeple of Combray from the streets behind the church. Whether one saw
it at five o'clock when going to call for letters at the post-office,
some doors away from one, on the left, raising abruptly with its
isolated peak the ridge of housetops; or again, when one had to go in
and ask for news of Mme. Sazerat, one's eyes followed the line where it
ran low again beyond the farther, descending slope, and one knew that it
would be the second turning after the steeple; or yet again, if pressing
further afield one went to the station, one saw it obliquely, shewing in
profile fresh angles and surfaces, like a solid body surprised at some
unknown point in its revolution; or, from the banks of the Vivonne, the
apse, drawn muscularly together and heightened in perspective, seemed
to spring upwards with the effort which the steeple made to hurl its
spire-point into the heart of heaven: it was always to the steeple that
one must return, always it which dominated everything else, summing up
the houses with an unexpected pinnacle, raised before me like the Finger
of God, Whose Body might have been concealed below among the crowd of
human bodies without fear of my confounding It, for that reason, with
them. And so even to-day in any large provincial town, or in a quarter
of Paris which I do not know well, if a passer-by who is 'putting me on
the right road' shews me from afar, as a point to aim at, some belfry of
a hospital, or a convent steeple lifting the peak of its ecclesiastical
cap at the corner of the street which I am to take, my memory need only
find in it some dim resemblance to that dear and vanished outline, and
the passer-by, should he turn round to make sure that I have not gone
astray, would see me, to his astonishment, oblivious of the walk that I
had planned to take or the place where I was obliged to call, standing
still on the spot, before that steeple, for hours on end, motionless,
trying to remember, feeling deep within myself a tract of soil reclaimed
from the waters of Lethe slowly drying until the buildings rise on it
again; and then no doubt, and then more uneasily than when, just now,
I asked him for a direction, I will seek my way again, I will turn a
corner... but... the goal is in my heart...

On our way home from mass we would often meet M. Legrandin, who,
detained in Paris by his professional duties as an engineer, could
only (except in the regular holiday seasons) visit his home at Combray
between Saturday evenings and Monday mornings. He was one of that class
of men who, apart from a scientific career in which they may well have
proved brilliantly successful, have acquired an entirely different
kind of culture, literary or artistic, of which they make no use in the
specialised work of their profession, but by which their conversation
profits. More 'literary' than many 'men of letters' (we were not aware
at this period that M. Legrandin had a distinct reputation as a writer,
and so were greatly astonished to find that a well-known composer
had set some verses of his to music), endowed with a greater ease
in execution than many painters, they imagine that the life they are
obliged to lead is not that for which they are really fitted, and they
bring to their regular occupations either a fantastic indifference or
a sustained and lofty application, scornful, bitter, and conscientious.
Tall, with a good figure, a fine, thoughtful face, drooping fair
moustaches, a look of disillusionment in his blue eyes, an almost
exaggerated refinement of courtesy; a talker such as we had never heard;
he was in the sight of my family, who never ceased to quote him as an
example, the very pattern of a gentleman, who took life in the noblest
and most delicate manner. My grandmother alone found fault with him for
speaking a little too well, a little too much like a book, for not using
a vocabulary as natural as his loosely knotted Lavallière neckties, his
short, straight, almost schoolboyish coat. She was astonished, too, at
the furious invective which he was always launching at the aristocracy,
at fashionable life, and 'snobbishness'--"undoubtedly," he would say,
"the sin of which Saint Paul is thinking when he speaks of the sin for
which there is no forgiveness."

Worldly ambition was a thing which my grandmother was so little capable
of feeling, or indeed of understanding, that it seemed to her futile to
apply so much heat to its condemnation. Besides, she thought it in not
very good taste that M. Legrandin, whose sister was married to a country
gentleman of Lower Normandy near Balbec, should deliver himself of such
violent attacks upon the nobles, going so far as to blame the Revolution
for not having guillotined them all.

"Well met, my friends!" he would say as he came towards us. "You are
lucky to spend so much time here; to-morrow I have to go back to Paris,
to squeeze back into my niche.

"Oh, I admit," he went on, with his own peculiar smile, gently ironical,
disillusioned and vague, "I have every useless thing in the world in
my house there. The only thing wanting is the necessary thing, a great
patch of open sky like this. Always try to keep a patch of sky above
your life, little boy," he added, turning to me. "You have a soul in
you of rare quality, an artist's nature; never let it starve for lack of
what it needs."

When, on our reaching the house, my aunt would send to ask us whether
Mme. Goupil had indeed arrived late for mass, not one of us could inform
her. Instead, we increased her anxiety by telling her that there was
a painter at work in the church copying the window of Gilbert the
Bad. Françoise was at once dispatched to the grocer's, but returned
empty-handed owing to the absence of Théodore, whose dual profession of
choirman, with a part in the maintenance of the fabric, and of grocer's
assistant gave him not only relations with all sections of society, but
an encyclopaedic knowledge of their affairs.

"Ah!" my aunt would sigh, "I wish it were time for Eulalie to come. She
is really the only person who will be able to tell me."

Eulalie was a limping, energetic, deaf spinster who had 'retired' after
the death of Mme. de la Bretonnerie, with whom she had been in service
from her childhood, and had then taken a room beside the church, from
which she would incessantly emerge, either to attend some service,
or, when there was no service, to say a prayer by herself or to give
Théodore a hand; the rest of her time she spent in visiting sick persons
like my aunt Léonie, to whom she would relate everything that had
occurred at mass or vespers. She was not above adding occasional
pocket-money to the little income which was found for her by the family
of her old employers by going from time to time to look after the Curé's
linen, or that of some other person of note in the clerical world of
Combray. Above a mantle of black cloth she wore a little white coif that
seemed almost to attach her to some Order, and an infirmity of the
skin had stained part of her cheeks and her crooked nose the bright red
colour of balsam. Her visits were the one great distraction in the life
of my aunt Léonie, who now saw hardly anyone else, except the reverend
Curé. My aunt had by degrees erased every other visitor's name from
her list, because they all committed the fatal error, in her eyes,
of falling into one or other of the two categories of people she most
detested. One group, the worse of the two, and the one of which she rid
herself first, consisted of those who advised her not to take so much
care of herself, and preached (even if only negatively and with no
outward signs beyond an occasional disapproving silence or doubting
smile) the subversive doctrine that a sharp walk in the sun and a good
red beefsteak would do her more good (her, who had had two dreadful sips
of Vichy water on her stomach for fourteen hours!) than all her medicine
bottles and her bed. The other category was composed of people who
appeared to believe that she was more seriously ill than she thought,
in fact that she was as seriously ill as she said. And so none of those
whom she had allowed upstairs to her room, after considerable hesitation
and at Françoise's urgent request, and who in the course of their visit
had shewn how unworthy they were of the honour which had been done them
by venturing a timid: "Don't you think that if you were just to stir out
a little on really fine days...?" or who, on the other hand, when she
said to them: "I am very low, very low; nearing the end, dear friends!"
had replied: "Ah, yes, when one has no strength left! Still, you may
last a while yet"; each party alike might be certain that her doors
would never open to them again. And if Françoise was amused by the look
of consternation on my aunt's face whenever she saw, from her bed, any
of these people in the Rue du Saint-Esprit, who looked as if they were
coming to see her, or heard her own door-bell ring, she would laugh far
more heartily, as at a clever trick, at my aunt's devices (which never
failed) for having them sent away, and at their look of discomfiture
when they had to turn back without having seen her; and would be filled
with secret admiration for her mistress, whom she felt to be superior
to all these other people, inasmuch as she could and did contrive not to
see them. In short, my aunt stipulated, at one and the same time, that
whoever came to see her must approve of her way of life, commiserate
with her in her sufferings, and assure her of an ultimate recovery.

In all this Eulalie excelled. My aunt might say to her twenty times in
a minute: "The end is come at last, my poor Eulalie!", twenty times
Eulalie would retort with: "Knowing your illness as you do, Mme.
Octave, you will live to be a hundred, as Mme. Sazerin said to me only
yesterday." For one of Eulalie's most rooted beliefs, and one that the
formidable list of corrections which her experience must have compiled
was powerless to eradicate, was that Mme. Sazerat's name was really Mme.
Sazerin.

"I do not ask to live to a hundred," my aunt would say, for she
preferred to have no definite limit fixed to the number of her days.

And since, besides this, Eulalie knew, as no one else knew, how to
distract my aunt without tiring her, her visits, which took place
regularly every Sunday, unless something unforeseen occurred to prevent
them, were for my aunt a pleasure the prospect of which kept her on
those days in a state of expectation, appetising enough to begin with,
but at once changing to the agony of a hunger too long unsatisfied if
Eulalie were a minute late in coming. For, if unduly prolonged, the
rapture of waiting for Eulalie became a torture, and my aunt would never
cease from looking at the time, and yawning, and complaining of each of
her symptoms in turn. Eulalie's ring, if it sounded from the front door
at the very end of the day, when she was no longer expecting it, would
almost make her ill. For the fact was that on Sundays she thought of
nothing else than this visit, and the moment that our luncheon was ended
Françoise would become impatient for us to leave the dining-room so that
she might go upstairs to 'occupy' my aunt. But--and this more than ever
from the day on which fine weather definitely set in at Combray--the
proud hour of noon, descending from the steeple of Saint-Hilaire which
it blazoned for a moment with the twelve points of its sonorous crown,
would long have echoed about our table, beside the 'holy bread,' which
too had come in, after church, in its familiar way; and we would still
be found seated in front of our Arabian Nights plates, weighed down
by the heat of the day, and even more by our heavy meal. For upon
the permanent foundation of eggs, cutlets, potatoes, preserves, and
biscuits, whose appearance on the table she no longer announced to us,
Françoise would add--as the labour of fields and orchards, the harvest
of the tides, the luck of the markets, the kindness of neighbours, and
her own genius might provide; and so effectively that our bill of fare,
like the quatrefoils that were carved on the porches of cathedrals
in the thirteenth century, reflected to some extent the march of the
seasons and the incidents of human life--a brill, because the fish-woman
had guaranteed its freshness; a turkey, because she had seen a beauty
in the market at Roussainville-le-Pin; cardoons with marrow, because she
had never done them for us in that way before; a roast leg of mutton,
because the fresh air made one hungry and there would be plenty of time
for it to 'settle down' in the seven hours before dinner; spinach,
by way of a change; apricots, because they were still hard to get;
gooseberries, because in another fortnight there would be none left;
raspberries, which M. Swann had brought specially; cherries, the first
to come from the cherry-tree, which had yielded none for the last two
years; a cream cheese, of which in those days I was extremely fond; an
almond cake, because she had ordered one the evening before; a fancy
loaf, because it was our turn to 'offer' the holy bread. And when all
these had been eaten, a work composed expressly for ourselves, but
dedicated more particularly to my father, who had a fondness for such
things, a cream of chocolate, inspired in the mind, created by the
hand of Françoise, would be laid before us, light and fleeting as an
'occasional piece' of music, into which she had poured the whole of her
talent. Anyone who refused to partake of it, saying: "No, thank you, I
have finished; I am not hungry," would at once have been lowered to the
level of the Philistines who, when an artist makes them a present of one
of his works, examine its weight and material, whereas what is of value
is the creator's intention and his signature. To have left even the
tiniest morsel in the dish would have shewn as much discourtesy as to
rise and leave a concert hall while the 'piece' was still being played,
and under the composer's very eyes.

At length my mother would say to me: "Now, don't stay here all day;
you can go up to your room if you are too hot outside, but get a little
fresh air first; don't start reading immediately after your food."

And I would go and sit down beside the pump and its trough, ornamented
here and there, like a gothic font, with a salamander, which modelled
upon a background of crumbling stone the quick relief of its slender,
allegorical body; on the bench without a back, in the shade of a
lilac-tree, in that little corner of the garden which communicated, by
a service door, with the Rue du Saint-Esprit, and from whose neglected
soil rose, in two stages, an outcrop from the house itself and
apparently a separate building, my aunt's back-kitchen. One could see
its red-tiled floor gleaming like porphyry. It seemed not so much the
cave of Françoise as a little temple of Venus. It would be overflowing
with the offerings of the milkman, the fruiterer, the greengrocer, come
sometimes from distant villages to dedicate here the first-fruits of
their fields. And its roof was always surmounted by the cooing of a
dove.

In earlier days I would not have lingered in the sacred grove which
surrounded this temple, for, before going upstairs to read, I would
steal into the little sitting-room which my uncle Adolphe, a brother of
my grandfather and an old soldier who had retired from the service as a
major, used to occupy on the ground floor, a room which, even when its
opened windows let in the heat, if not actually the rays of the sun
which seldom penetrated so far, would never fail to emit that vague and
yet fresh odour, suggesting at once an open-air and an old-fashioned
kind of existence, which sets and keeps the nostrils dreaming when one
goes into a disused gun-room. But for some years now I had not gone into
my uncle Adolphe's room, since he no longer came to Combray on account
of a quarrel which had arisen between him and my family, by my fault,
and in the following circumstances: Once or twice every month, in Paris,
I used to be sent to pay him a. visit, as he was finishing his luncheon,
wearing a plain alpaca coat, and waited upon by his servant in a
working-jacket of striped linen, purple and white. He would complain
that I had not been to see him for a long time; that he was being
neglected; he would offer me a marchpane or a tangerine, and we would
cross a room in which no one ever sat, whose fire was never lighted,
whose walls were picked out with gilded mouldings, its ceiling painted
blue in imitation of the sky, and its furniture upholstered in satin, as
at my grandparents', only yellow; then we would enter what he called his
'study,' a room whose walls were hung with prints which shewed, against
a dark background, a plump and rosy goddess driving a car, or standing
upon a globe, or wearing a star on her brow; pictures which were popular
under the Second Empire because there was thought to be something about
them that suggested Pompeii, which were then generally despised, and
which now people are beginning to collect again for one single and
consistent reason (despite any others which they may advance), namely,
that they suggest the Second Empire. And there I would stay with my
uncle until his man came, with a message from the coachman, to ask him
at what time he would like the carriage. My uncle would then be lost
in meditation, while his astonished servant stood there, not daring to
disturb him by the least movement, wondering and waiting for his
answer, which never varied. For in the end, after a supreme crisis of
hesitation, my uncle would utter, infallibly, the words: "A quarter past
two," which the servant would echo with amazement, but without disputing
them: "A quarter past two! Very good, sir... I will go and tell him...."

At this date I was a lover of the theatre: a Platonic lover, of
necessity, since my parents had not yet allowed me to enter one, and
so incorrect was the picture I drew for myself of the pleasures to be
enjoyed there that I almost believed that each of the spectators looked,
as into a stereoscope, upon a stage and scenery which existed for
himself alone, though closely resembling the thousand other spectacles
presented to the rest of the audience individually.

Every morning I would hasten to the Moriss column to see what new plays
it announced. Nothing could be more disinterested or happier than the
dreams with which these announcements filled my mind, dreams which took
their form from the inevitable associations of the words forming the
title of the play, and also from the colour of the bills, still damp and
wrinkled with paste, on which those words stood out. Nothing, unless
it were such strange titles as the _Testament de César Girodot, or
Oedipe-Roi_, inscribed not on the green bills of the Opéra-Comique, but
on the wine-coloured bills of the Comédie-Française, nothing seemed
to me to differ more profoundly from the sparkling white plume of
the _Diamants de la Couronne_ than the sleek, mysterious satin of the
_Domino Noir_; and since my parents had told me that, for my first visit
to the theatre, I should have to choose between these two pieces, I
would study exhaustively and in turn the title of one and the title
of the other (for those were all that I knew of either), attempting to
snatch from each a foretaste of the pleasure which it offered me, and to
compare this pleasure with that latent in the other title, until in the
end I had shewn myself such vivid, such compelling pictures of, on
the one hand, a play of dazzling arrogance, and on the other a gentle,
velvety play, that I was as little capable of deciding which play I
should prefer to see as if, at the dinner-table, they had obliged me to
choose between _rice à l'Impératrice_ and the famous cream of chocolate.

All my conversations with my playfellows bore upon actors, whose art,
although as yet I had no experience of it, was the first of all its
numberless forms in which Art itself allowed me to anticipate its
enjoyment. Between one actor's tricks of intonation and inflection and
another's, the most trifling differences would strike me as being of an
incalculable importance. And from what I had been told of them I would
arrange them in the order of their talent in lists which I used to
murmur to myself all day long: lists which in the end became petrified
in my brain and were a source of annoyance to it, being irremovable.

And later, in my schooldays, whenever I ventured in class, when the
master's head was turned, to communicate with some new friend, I would
always begin by asking him whether he had begun yet to go to theatres,
and if he agreed that our greatest actor was undoubtedly Got, our second
Delaunay, and so on. And if, in his judgment, Febvre came below Thiron,
or Delaunay below Coquelin, the sudden volatility which the name of
Coquelin, forsaking its stony rigidity, would engender in my mind, in
which it moved upwards to the second place, the rich vitality with which
the name of Delaunay would suddenly be furnished, to enable it to slip
down to fourth, would stimulate and fertilise my brain with a sense of
budding and blossoming life.

But if the thought of actors weighed so upon me, if the sight of
Maubant, coming out one afternoon from the Théâtre-Français, had plunged
me in the throes and sufferings of hopeless love, how much more did the
name of a 'star,' blazing outside the doors of a theatre, how much more,
seen through the window of a brougham which passed me in the street, the
hair over her forehead abloom with roses, did the face of a woman who,
I would think, was perhaps an actress, leave with me a lasting
disturbance, a futile and painful effort to form a picture of her
private life.

I classified, in order of talent, the most distinguished: Sarah
Bernhardt, Berma, Bartet, Madeleine Brohan, Jeanne Samary; but I was
interested in them all. Now my uncle knew many of them personally, and
also ladies of another class, not clearly distinguished from actresses
in my mind. He used to entertain them at his house. And if we went to
see him on certain days only, that was because on the other days ladies
might come whom his family could not very well have met. So we at least
thought; as for my uncle, his fatal readiness to pay pretty widows (who
had perhaps never been married) and countesses (whose high-sounding
titles were probably no more than _noms de guerre_) the compliment of
presenting them to my grandmother or even of presenting to them some
of our family jewels, had already embroiled him more than once with
my grandfather. Often, if the name of some actress were mentioned in
conversation, I would hear my father say, with a smile, to my mother:
"One of your uncle's friends," and I would think of the weary novitiate
through which, perhaps for years on end, a grown man, even a man of real
importance, might have to pass, waiting on the doorstep of some such
lady, while she refused to answer his letters and made her hall-porter
drive him away; and imagine that my uncle was able to dispense a little
jackanapes like myself from all these sufferings by introducing me in
his own home to the actress, unapproachable by all the world, but for
him an intimate friend.

And so--on the pretext that some lesson, the hour of which had been
altered, now came at such an awkward time that it had already more than
once prevented me, and would continue to prevent me, from seeing my
uncle--one day, not one of the days which he set apart for our visits, I
took advantage of the fact that my parents had had luncheon earlier
than usual; I slipped out and, instead of going to read the playbills on
their column, for which purpose I was allowed to go out unaccompanied,
I ran all the way to his house. I noticed before his door a carriage and
pair, with red carnations on the horses' blinkers and in the coachman's
buttonhole. As I climbed the staircase I could hear laughter and a
woman's voice, and, as soon as I had rung, silence and the sound of
shutting doors. The man-servant who let me in appeared embarrassed, and
said that my uncle was extremely busy and probably could not see me; he
went in, however, to announce my arrival, and the same voice I had heard
before said: "Oh, yes! Do let him come in; just for a moment; it will be
so amusing. Is that his photograph there, on your desk? And his mother
(your niece, isn't she?) beside it? The image of her, isn't he? I should
so like to see the little chap, just for a second."

I could hear my uncle grumbling and growing angry; finally the
manservant told me to come in.

On the table was the same plate of marchpanes that was always there; my
uncle wore the same alpaca coat as on other days; but opposite to him,
in a pink silk dress with a great necklace of pearls about her throat,
sat a young woman who was just finishing a tangerine. My uncertainty
whether I ought to address her as Madame or Mademoiselle made me blush,
and not daring to look too much in her direction, in case I should be
obliged to speak to her, I hurried across to kiss my uncle. She looked
at me and smiled; my uncle said "My nephew!" without telling her my name
or telling me hers, doubtless because, since his difficulties with
my grandfather, he had endeavoured as far as possible to avoid any
association of his family with this other class of acquaintance.

"How like his mother he is," said the lady.

"But you have never seen my niece, except in photographs," my uncle
broke in quickly, with a note of anger.

"I beg your pardon, dear friend, I passed her on the staircase last year
when you were so ill. It is true I only saw her for a moment, and your
staircase is rather dark; but I saw well enough to see how lovely she
was. This young gentleman has her beautiful eyes, and also this," she
went on, tracing a line with one finger across the lower part of her
forehead. "Tell me," she asked my uncle, "is your niece Mme.----; is her
name the same as yours?"

"He takes most after his father," muttered my uncle, who was no more
anxious to effect an introduction by proxy, in repeating Mamma's name
aloud, than to bring the two together in the flesh. "He's his father all
over, and also like my poor mother."

"I have not met his father, dear," said the lady in pink, bowing her
head slightly, "and I never saw your poor mother. You will remember it
was just after your great sorrow that we got to know one another."

I felt somewhat disillusioned, for this young lady was in no way
different from other pretty women whom I had seen from time to time at
home, especially the daughter of one of our cousins, to whose house I
went every New Year's Day. Only better dressed; otherwise my uncle's
friend had the same quick and kindly glance, the same frank and friendly
manner. I could find no trace in her of the theatrical appearance
which I admired in photographs of actresses, nothing of the diabolical
expression which would have been in keeping with the life she must lead.
I had difficulty in believing that this was one of 'those women,' and
certainly I should never have believed her one of the 'smart ones' had I
not seen the carriage and pair, the pink dress, the pearly necklace, had
I not been aware, too, that my uncle knew only the very best of them.
But I asked myself how the millionaire who gave her her carriage and her
flat and her jewels could find any pleasure in flinging his money away
upon a woman who had so simple and respectable an appearance. And yet,
when I thought of what her life must be like, its immorality disturbed
me more, perhaps, than if it had stood before me in some concrete and
recognisable form, by its secrecy and invisibility, like the plot of a
novel, the hidden truth of a scandal which had driven out of the home
of her middle-class parents and dedicated to the service of all mankind
which had brought to the flowering-point of her beauty, had raised
to fame or notoriety this woman, the play of whose features, the
intonations of whose voice, like so many others I already knew, made me
regard her, in spite of myself, as a young lady of good family, her who
was no longer of a family at all.

We had gone by this time into the 'study,' and my uncle, who seemed a
trifle embarrassed by my presence, offered her a cigarette.

"No, thank you, dear friend," she said. "You know I only smoke the ones
the Grand Duke sends me. I tell him that they make you jealous." And
she drew from a case cigarettes covered with inscriptions in gold, in
a foreign language. "Why, yes," she began again suddenly. "Of course I
have met this young man's father with you. Isn't he your nephew? How on
earth could I have forgotten? He was so nice, so charming to me," she
went on, modestly and with feeling. But when I thought to myself what
must actually have been the rude greeting (which, she made out, had been
so charming), I, who knew my father's coldness and reserve, was shocked,
as though at some indelicacy on his part, at the contrast between the
excessive recognition bestowed on it and his never adequate geniality.
It has since struck me as one of the most touching aspects of the part
played in life by these idle, painstaking women that they devote
all their generosity, all their talent, their transferable dreams of
sentimental beauty (for, like all artists, they never seek to realise
the value of those dreams, or to enclose them in the four-square frame
of everyday life), and their gold, which counts for little, to the
fashioning of a fine and precious setting for the rubbed and scratched
and ill-polished lives of men. And just as this one filled the
smoking-room, where my uncle was entertaining her in his alpaca coat,
with her charming person, her dress of pink silk, her pearls, and the
refinement suggested by intimacy with a Grand Duke, so, in the same
way, she had taken some casual remark by my father, had worked it up
delicately, given it a 'turn,' a precious title, set in it the gem of a
glance from her own eyes, a gem of the first water, blended of humility
and gratitude; and so had given it back transformed into a jewel, a work
of art, into something altogether charming.

"Look here, my boy, it is time you went away," said my uncle.

I rose; I could scarcely resist a desire to kiss the hand of the lady
in pink, but I felt that to do so would require as much audacity as a
forcible abduction of her. My heart beat loud while I counted out to
myself "Shall I do it, shall I not?" and then I ceased to ask myself
what I ought to do so as at least to do something. Blindly, hotly,
madly, flinging aside all the reasons I had just found to support such
action, I seized and raised to my lips the hand she held out to me.

"Isn't he delicious! Quite a ladies' man already; he takes after his
uncle. He'll be a perfect 'gentleman,'" she went on, setting her teeth
so as to give the word a kind of English accentuation. "Couldn't he come
to me some day for 'a cup of tea,' as our friends across the channel
say; he need only send me a 'blue' in the morning?"

I had not the least idea of what a 'blue' might be. I did not understand
half the words which the lady used, but my fear lest there should be
concealed in them some question which it would be impolite in me not to
answer kept me from withdrawing my close attention from them, and I was
beginning to feel extremely tired.

"No, no; it is impossible," said my uncle, shrugging his shoulders. "He
is kept busy at home all day; he has plenty of work to do. He brings
back all the prizes from his school," he added in a lower tone, so that
I should not hear this falsehood and interrupt with a contradiction.
"You can't tell; he may turn out a little Victor Hugo, a kind of
Vaulabelle, don't you know."

"Oh, I love artistic people," replied the lady in pink; "there is no
one like them for understanding women. Them, and really nice men like
yourself. But please forgive my ignorance. Who, what is Vaulabelle? Is
it those gilt books in the little glass case in your drawing-room? You
know you promised to lend them to me; I will take great care of them."

My uncle, who hated lending people books, said nothing, and ushered me
out into the hall. Madly in love with the lady in pink, I covered my
old uncle's tobacco-stained cheeks with passionate kisses, and while he,
awkwardly enough, gave me to understand (without actually saying) that
he would rather I did not tell my parents about this visit, I assured
him, with tears in my eyes, that his kindness had made so strong an
impression upon me that some day I would most certainly find a way of
expressing my gratitude. So strong an impression had it made upon me
that two hours later, after a string of mysterious utterances which did
not strike me as giving my parents a sufficiently clear idea of the new
importance with which I had been invested, I found it simpler to let
them have a full account, omitting no detail, of the visit I had paid
that afternoon. In doing this I had no thought of causing my uncle any
unpleasantness. How could I have thought such a thing, since I did not
wish it? And I could not suppose that my parents would see any harm in
a visit in which I myself saw none. Every day of our lives does not
some friend or other ask us to make his apologies, without fail, to some
woman to whom he has been prevented from writing; and do not we forget
to do so, feeling that this woman cannot attach much importance to a
silence which has none for ourselves? I imagined, like everyone else,
that the brains of other people were lifeless and submissive receptacles
with no power of specific reaction to any stimulus which might be
applied to them; and I had not the least doubt that when I deposited in
the minds of my parents the news of the acquaintance I had made at my
uncle's I should at the same time transmit to them the kindly judgment
I myself had based on the introduction. Unfortunately my parents had
recourse to principles entirely different from those which I suggested
they should adopt when they came to form their estimate of my uncle's
conduct. My father and grandfather had 'words' with him of a violent
order; as I learned indirectly. A few days later, passing my uncle in
the street as he drove by in an open carriage, Î felt at once all the
grief, the gratitude, the remorse which I should have liked to convey to
him. Beside the immensity of these emotions I considered that merely to
raise my hat to him would be incongruous and petty, and might make
him think that I regarded myself as bound to shew him no more than the
commonest form of courtesy. I decided to abstain from so inadequate a
gesture, and turned my head away. My uncle thought that, in doing so I
was obeying my parents' orders; he never forgave them; and though he
did not die until many years later, not one of us ever set eyes on him
again.

And so I no longer used to go into the little sitting-room (now kept
shut) of my uncle Adolphe; instead, after hanging about on the outskirts
of the back-kitchen until Françoise appeared on its threshold and
announced: "I am going to let the kitchen-maid serve the coffee and take
up the hot water; it is time I went off to Mme. Octave," I would then
decide to go indoors, and would go straight upstairs to my room to read.
The kitchen-maid was an abstract personality, a permanent institution
to which an invariable set of attributes assured a sort of fixity and
continuity and identity throughout the long series of transitory human
shapes in which that personality was incarnate; for we never found the
same girl there two years running. In the year in which we ate such
quantities of asparagus, the kitchen-maid whose duty it was to dress
them was a poor sickly creature, some way 'gone' in pregnancy when
we arrived at Combray for Easter, and it was indeed surprising that
Françoise allowed her to run so many errands in the town and to do so
much work in the house, for she was beginning to find a difficulty in
bearing before her the mysterious casket, fuller and larger every day,
whose splendid outline could be detected through the folds of her ample
smocks. These last recalled the cloaks in which Giotto shrouds some of
the allegorical figures in his paintings, of which M. Swann had given
me photographs. He it was who pointed out the resemblance, and when he
inquired after the kitchen-maid he would say: "Well, how goes it with
Giotto's Charity?" And indeed the poor girl, whose pregnancy had swelled
and stoutened every part of her, even to her face, and the vertical,
squared outlines of her cheeks, did distinctly suggest those virgins,
so strong and mannish as to seem matrons rather, in whom the Virtues are
personified in the Arena Chapel. And I can see now that those Virtues
and Vices of Padua resembled her in another respect as well. For just as
the figure of this girl had been enlarged by the additional symbol which
she carried in her body, without appearing to understand what it meant,
without any rendering in her facial expression of all its beauty and
spiritual significance, but carried as if it were an ordinary and rather
heavy burden, so it is without any apparent suspicion of what she is
about that the powerfully built housewife who is portrayed in the Arena
beneath the label 'Caritas,' and a reproduction of whose portrait hung
upon the wall of my schoolroom at Combray, incarnates that virtue, for
it seems impossible that any thought of charity can ever have found
expression in her vulgar and energetic face. By a fine stroke of the
painter's invention she is tumbling all the treasures of the earth at
her feet, but exactly as if she were treading grapes in a wine-press to
extract their juice, or, still more, as if she had climbed on a heap of
sacks to raise herself higher; and she is holding out her flaming heart
to God, or shall we say 'handing' it to Him, exactly as a cook might
hand up a corkscrew through the skylight of her underground kitchen to
some one who had called down to ask her for it from the ground-level
above. The 'Invidia,' again, should have had some look on her face of
envy. But in this fresco, too, the symbol occupies so large a place and
is represented with such realism; the serpent hissing between the lips
of Envy is so huge, and so completely fills her wide-opened mouth that
the muscles of her face are strained and contorted, like a child's who
is filling a balloon with his breath, and that Envy, and we ourselves
for that matter, when we look at her, since all her attention and ours
are concentrated on the action of her lips, have no time, almost, to
spare for envious thoughts.

Despite all the admiration that M. Swann might profess for these figures
of Giotto, it was a long time before I could find any pleasure in seeing
in our schoolroom (where the copies he had brought me were hung) that
Charity devoid of charity, that Envy who looked like nothing so much
as a plate in some medical book, illustrating the compression of the
glottis or uvula by a tumour in the tongue, or by the introduction of
the operator's instrument, a Justice whose greyish and meanly regular
features were the very same as those which adorned the faces of certain
good and pious and slightly withered ladies of Combray whom I used to
see at mass, many of whom had long been enrolled in the reserve forces
of Injustice. But in later years I understood that the arresting
strangeness, the special beauty of these frescoes lay in the great part
played in each of them by its symbols, while the fact that these
were depicted, not as symbols (for the thought symbolised was nowhere
expressed), but as real things, actually felt or materially handled,
added something more precise and more literal to their meaning,
something more concrete and more striking to the lesson they imparted.
And even in the case of the poor kitchen-maid, was not our attention
incessantly drawn to her belly by the load which filled it; and in the
same way, again, are not the thoughts of men and women in the agony of
death often turned towards the practical, painful, obscure, internal,
intestinal aspect, towards that 'seamy side' of death which is, as it
happens, the side that death actually presents to them and forces them
to feel, a side which far more closely resembles a crushing burden, a
difficulty in breathing, a destroying thirst, than the abstract idea to
which we are accustomed to give the name of Death?

There must have been a strong element of reality in those Virtues and
Vices of Padua, since they appeared to me to be as much alive as
the pregnant servant-girl, while she herself appeared scarcely less
allegorical than they. And, quite possibly, this lack (or seeming lack)
of participation by a person's soul in the significant marks of its own
special virtue has, apart from its aesthetic meaning, a reality which,
if not strictly psychological, may at least be called physiognomical.
Later on, when, in the course of my life, I have had occasion to meet
with, in convents for instance, literally saintly examples of practical
charity, they have generally had the brisk, decided, undisturbed, and
slightly brutal air of a busy surgeon, the face in which one can discern
no commiseration, no tenderness at the sight of suffering humanity, and
no fear of hurting it, the face devoid of gentleness or sympathy, the
sublime face of true goodness.

Then while the kitchen-maid--who, all unawares, made the superior
qualities of Françoise shine with added lustre, just as Error, by
force of contrast, enhances the triumph of Truth--took in coffee which
(according to Mamma) was nothing more than hot water, and then carried
up to our rooms hot water which was barely tepid, I would be lying
stretched out on my bed, a book in my hand, in my room which trembled
with the effort to defend its frail, transparent coolness against the
afternoon sun, behind its almost closed shutters through which, however,
a reflection of the sunlight had contrived to slip in on its golden
wings, remaining motionless, between glass and woodwork, in a corner,
like a butterfly poised upon a flower. It was hardly light enough for
me to read, and my feeling of the day's brightness and splendour was
derived solely from the blows struck down below, in the Rue de la Cure,
by Camus (whom Françoise had assured that my aunt was not 'resting' and
that he might therefore make a noise), upon some old packing-cases from
which nothing would really be sent flying but the dust, though the din
of them, in the resonant atmosphere that accompanies hot weather, seemed
to scatter broadcast a rain of blood-red stars; and from the flies who
performed for my benefit, in their small concert, as it might be the
chamber music of summer; evoking heat and light quite differently from
an air of human music which, if you happen to have heard it during a
fine summer, will always bring that summer back to your mind, the flies'
music is bound to the season by a closer, a more vital tie--born of
sunny days, and not to be reborn but with them, containing something
of their essential nature, it not merely calls up their image in our
memory, but gives us a guarantee that they do really exist, that they
are close around us, immediately accessible.

This dim freshness of my room was to the broad daylight of the street
what the shadow is to the sunbeam, that is to say, equally luminous,
and presented to my imagination the entire panorama of summer, which
my senses, if I had been out walking, could have tasted and enjoyed in
fragments only; and so was quite in harmony with my state of repose,
which (thanks to the adventures related in my books, which had just
excited it) bore, like a hand reposing motionless in a stream of running
water, the shock and animation of a torrent of activity and life.

But my grandmother, even if the weather, after growing too hot, had
broken, and a storm, or just a shower, had burst over us, would come up
and beg me to go outside. And as I did not wish to leave off my book, I
would go on with it in the garden, under the chestnut-tree, in a little
sentry-box of canvas and matting, in the farthest recesses of which I
used to sit and feel that I was hidden from the eyes of anyone who might
be coming to call upon the family.

And then my thoughts, did not they form a similar sort of hiding-hole,
in the depths of which I felt that I could bury myself and remain
invisible even when I was looking at what went on outside? When I saw
any external object, my consciousness that I was seeing it would remain
between me and it, enclosing it in a slender, incorporeal outline which
prevented me from ever coming directly in contact with the material
form; for it would volatilise itself in some way before I could touch
it, just as an incandescent body which is moved towards something wet
never actually touches moisture, since it is always preceded, itself, by
a zone of evaporation. Upon the sort of screen, patterned with different
states and impressions, which my consciousness would quietly unfold
while I was reading, and which ranged from the most deeply hidden
aspirations of my heart to the wholly external view of the horizon
spread out before my eyes at the foot of the garden, what was from the
first the most permanent and the most intimate part of me, the lever
whose incessant movements controlled all the rest, was my belief in the
philosophic richness and beauty of the book I was reading, and my desire
to appropriate these to myself, whatever the book might be. For even if
I had purchased it at Combray, having seen it outside Borange's, whose
grocery lay too far from our house for Françoise to be able to deal
there, as she did with Camus, but who enjoyed better custom as a
stationer and bookseller; even if I had seen it, tied with string to
keep it in its place in the mosaic of monthly parts and pamphlets which
adorned either side of his doorway, a doorway more mysterious, more
teeming with suggestion than that of a cathedral, I should have noticed
and bought it there simply because I had recognised it as a book which
had been well spoken of, in my hearing, by the school-master or the
school-friend who, at that particular time, seemed to me to be
entrusted with the secret of Truth and Beauty, things half-felt by me,
half-incomprehensible, the full understanding of which was the vague but
permanent object of my thoughts.

Next to this central belief, which, while I was reading, would be
constantly a motion from my inner self to the outer world, towards the
discovery of Truth, came the emotions aroused in me by the action in
which I would be taking part, for these afternoons were crammed with
more dramatic and sensational events than occur, often, in a whole
lifetime. These were the events which took place in the book I was
reading. It is true that the people concerned in them were not what
Françoise would have called 'real people.' But none of the feelings
which the joys or misfortunes of a 'real' person awaken in us can be
awakened except through a mental picture of those joys or misfortunes;
and the ingenuity of the first novelist lay in his understanding
that, as the picture was the one essential element in the complicated
structure of our emotions, so that simplification of it which consisted
in the suppression, pure and simple, of 'real' people would be a decided
improvement. A 'real' person, profoundly as we may sympathise with him,
is in a great measure perceptible only through our senses, that is to
say, he remains opaque, offers a dead weight which our sensibilities
have not the strength to lift. If some misfortune comes to him, it is
only in one small section of the complete idea we have of him that
we are capable of feeling any emotion; indeed it is only in one small
section of the complete idea he has of himself that he is capable of
feeling any emotion either. The novelist's happy discovery was to think
of substituting for those opaque sections, impenetrable by the human
spirit, their equivalent in immaterial sections, things, that is, which
the spirit can assimilate to itself. After which it matters not that the
actions, the feelings of this new order of creatures appear to us in
the guise of truth, since we have made them our own, since it is in
ourselves that they are happening, that they are holding in thrall,
while we turn over, feverishly, the pages of the book, our quickened
breath and staring eyes. And once the novelist has brought us to that
state, in which, as in all purely mental states, every emotion is
multiplied ten-fold, into which his book comes to disturb us as might
a dream, but a dream more lucid, and of a more lasting impression than
those which come to us in sleep; why, then, for the space of an hour
he sets free within us all the joys and sorrows in the world, a few of
which, only, we should have to spend years of our actual life in getting
to know, and the keenest, the most intense of which would never have
been revealed to us because the slow course of their development stops
our perception of them. It is the same in life; the heart changes, and
that is our worst misfortune; but we learn of it only from reading or by
imagination; for in reality its alteration, like that of certain natural
phenomena, is so gradual that, even if we are able to distinguish,
successively, each of its different states, we are still spared the
actual sensation of change.

Next to, but distinctly less intimate a part of myself than this human
element, would come the view, more or less projected before my eyes,
of the country in which the action of the story was taking place, which
made a far stronger impression on my mind than the other, the actual
landscape which would meet my eyes when I raised them from my book. In
this way, for two consecutive summers I used to sit in the heat of our
Combray garden, sick with a longing inspired by the book I was then
reading for a land of mountains and rivers, where I could see an endless
vista of sawmills, where beneath the limpid currents fragments of
wood lay mouldering in beds of watercress; and nearby, rambling and
clustering along low walls, purple flowers and red. And since there was
always lurking in my mind the dream of a woman who would enrich me with
her love, that dream in those two summers used to be quickened with the
freshness and coolness of running water; and whoever she might be, the
woman whose image I called to mind, purple flowers and red would at once
spring up on either side of her like complementary colours.

This was not only because an image of which we dream remains for ever
distinguished, is adorned and enriched by the association of colours not
its own which may happen to surround it in our mental picture; for the
scenes in the books I read were to me not merely scenery more vividly
portrayed by my imagination than any which Combray could spread before
my eyes but otherwise of the same kind. Because of the selection that
the author had made of them, because of the spirit of faith in which
my mind would exceed and anticipate his printed word, as it might
be interpreting a revelation, these scenes used to give me the
impression--one which I hardly ever derived from any place in which
I might happen to be, and never from our garden, that undistinguished
product of the strictly conventional fantasy of the gardener whom my
grandmother so despised--of their being actually part of Nature herself,
and worthy to be studied and explored.

Had my parents allowed me, when I read a book, to pay a visit to the
country it described, I should have felt that I was making an enormous
advance towards the ultimate conquest of truth. For even if we have
the sensation of being always enveloped in, surrounded by our own soul,
still it does not seem a fixed and immovable prison; rather do we seem
to be borne away with it, and perpetually struggling to pass beyond it,
to break out into the world, with a perpetual discouragement as we hear
endlessly, all around us, that unvarying sound which is no echo from
without, but the resonance of a vibration from within. We try to
discover in things, endeared to us on that account, the spiritual
glamour which we ourselves have cast upon them; we are disillusioned,
and learn that they are in themselves barren and devoid of the charm
which they owed, in our minds, to the association of certain ideas;
sometimes we mobilise all our spiritual forces in a glittering array so
as to influence and subjugate other human beings who, as we very well
know, are situated outside ourselves, where we can never reach them. And
so, if I always imagined the woman I loved as in a setting of whatever
places I most longed, at the time, to visit; if in my secret longings
it was she who attracted me to them, who opened to me the gate of an
unknown world, that was not by the mere hazard of a simple association
of thoughts; no, it was because my dreams of travel and of love were
only moments--which I isolate artificially to-day as though I
were cutting sections, at different heights, in a jet of water,
rainbow-flashing but seemingly without flow or motion--were only drops
in a single, undeviating, irresistible outrush of all the forces of my
life.

And then, as I continue to trace the outward course of these impressions
from their close-packed intimate source in my consciousness, and
before I come to the horizon of reality which envelops them, I discover
pleasures of another kind, those of being comfortably seated, of tasting
the good scent on the air, of not being disturbed by any visitor; and,
when an hour chimed from the steeple of Saint-Hilaire, of watching what
was already spent of the afternoon fall drop by drop until I heard the
last stroke which enabled me to add up the total sum, after which the
silence that followed seemed to herald the beginning, in the blue sky
above me, of that long part of the day still allowed me for reading,
until the good dinner which Françoise was even now preparing should come
to strengthen and refresh me after the strenuous pursuit of its hero
through the pages of my book. And, as each hour struck, it would seem to
me that a few seconds only had passed since the hour before; the latest
would inscribe itself, close to its predecessor, on the sky's surface,
and I would be unable to believe that sixty minutes could be squeezed
into the tiny arc of blue which was comprised between their two golden
figures. Sometimes it would even happen that this precocious hour would
sound two strokes more than the last; there must then have been an hour
which I had not heard strike; something which had taken place had not
taken place for me; the fascination of my book, a magic as potent as the
deepest slumber, had stopped my enchanted ears and had obliterated
the sound of that golden bell from the azure surface of the enveloping
silence. Sweet Sunday afternoons beneath the chestnut-tree in our
Combray garden, from which I was careful to eliminate every commonplace
incident of my actual life, replacing them by a career of strange
adventures and ambitions in a land watered by living streams, you still
recall those adventures and ambitions to my mind when I think of you,
and you embody and preserve them by virtue of having little by little
drawn round and enclosed them (while I went on with my book and the heat
of the day declined) in the gradual crystallisation, slowly altering
in form and dappled with a pattern of chestnut-leaves, of your silent,
sonorous, fragrant, limpid hours.

Sometimes I would be torn from my book, in the middle of the afternoon,
by the gardener's daughter, who came running like a mad thing,
overturning an orange-tree in its tub, cutting a finger, breaking a
tooth, and screaming out "They're coming, they're coming!" so that
Françoise and I should run too and not miss anything of the show. That
was on days when the cavalry stationed in Combray went out for some
military exercise, going as a rule by the Rue Sainte-Hildegarde. While
our servants, sitting in a row on their chairs outside the garden
railings, stared at the people of Combray taking their Sunday walks and
were stared at in return, the gardener's daughter, through the gap which
there was between two houses far away in the Avenue de la Gare, would
have spied the glitter of helmets. The servants then hurried in
with their chairs, for when the troopers filed through the Rue
Sainte-Hildegarde they filled it from side to side, and their jostling
horses scraped against the walls of the houses, covering and drowning
the pavements like banks which present too narrow a channel to a river
in flood.

"Poor children," Françoise would exclaim, in tears almost before she
had reached the railings; "poor boys, to be mown down like grass in a
meadow. It's just shocking to think of," she would go on, laying a hand
over her heart, where presumably she had felt the shock.

"A fine sight, isn't it, Mme. Françoise, all these young fellows not
caring two straws for their lives?" the gardener would ask, just to
'draw' her. And he would not have spoken in vain.

"Not caring for their lives, is it? Why, what in the world is there that
we should care for if it's not our lives, the only gift the Lord never
offers us a second time? Oh dear, oh dear; you're right all the same;
it's quite true, they don't care! I can remember them in '70; in those
wretched wars they've no fear of death left in them; they're nothing
more nor less than madmen; and then they aren't worth the price of a
rope to hang them with; they're not men any more, they're lions." For
by her way of thinking, to compare a man with a lion, which she used to
pronounce 'lie-on,' was not at all complimentary to the man.

The Rue Sainte-Hildegarde turned too sharply for us to be able to see
people approaching at any distance, and it was only through the gap
between those two houses in the Avenue de la Gare that we could still
make out fresh helmets racing along towards us, and flashing in the
sunlight. The gardener wanted to know whether there were still many to
come, and he was thirsty besides, with the sun beating down upon his
head. So then, suddenly, his daughter would leap out, as though from
a beleaguered city, would make a sortie, turn the street corner, and,
having risked her life a hundred times over, reappear and bring us,
with a jug of liquorice-water, the news that there were still at least
a thousand of them, pouring along without a break from the direction
of Thiberzy and Méséglise. Françoise and the gardener, having 'made up'
their difference, would discuss the line to be followed in case of war.

"Don't you see, Françoise," he would say. "Revolution would be better,
because then no one would need to join in unless he liked."

"Oh, yes, I can see that, certainly; it's more straightforward."

The gardener believed that, as soon as war was declared, they would stop
all the railways.

"Yes, to be sure; so that we sha'n't get away," said Françoise.

And the gardener would assent, with "Ay, they're the cunning ones," for
he would not allow that war was anything but a kind of trick which the
state attempted to play on the people, or that there was a man in the
world who would not run away from it if he had the chance to do so.

But Françoise would hasten back to my aunt, and I would return to my
book, and the servants would take their places again outside the gate to
watch the dust settle on the pavement, and the excitement caused by the
passage of the soldiers subside. Long after order had been restored,
an abnormal tide of humanity would continue to darken the streets of
Combray. And in front of every house, even of those where it was not,
as a rule, 'done,' the servants, and sometimes even the masters would
sit and stare, festooning their doorsteps with a dark, irregular fringe,
like the border of shells and sea-weed which a stronger tide than usual
leaves on the beach, as though trimming it with embroidered crape, when
the sea itself has retreated.

Except on such days as these, however, I would as a rule be left to read
in peace. But the interruption which a visit from Swann once made, and
the commentary which he then supplied to the course of my reading,
which had brought me to the work of an author quite new to me, called
Bergotte, had this definite result that for a long time afterwards
it was not against a wall gay with spikes of purple blossom, but on a
wholly different background, the porch of a gothic cathedral, that I
would see outlined the figure of one of the women of whom I dreamed.

I had heard Bergotte spoken of, for the first time, by a friend older
than myself, for whom I had a strong admiration, a precious youth of the
name of Bloch. Hearing me confess my love of the _Nuit d'Octobre_, he
had burst out in a bray of laughter, like a bugle-call, and told me,
by way of warning: "You must conquer your vile taste for A. de Musset,
Esquire. He is a bad egg, one of the very worst, a pretty detestable
specimen. I am bound to admit, natheless," he added graciously, "that
he, and even the man Racine, did, each of them, once in his life,
compose a line which is not only fairly rhythmical, but has also what is
in my eyes the supreme merit of meaning absolutely nothing. One is


  _La blanche Oloossone et la blanche Camire_,

and the other


  _La fille de Minos et de Pasiphaë_."

They were submitted to my judgment, as evidence for the defence of the
two runagates, in an article by my very dear master Father Lecomte, who
is found pleasing in the sight of the immortal gods. By which token,
here is a book which I have not the time, just now, to read, a book
recommended, it would seem, by that colossal fellow. He regards, or so
they tell me, its author, one Bergotte, Esquire, as a subtle scribe,
more subtle, indeed, than any beast of the field; and, albeit he
exhibits on occasion a critical pacifism, a tenderness in suffering
fools, for which it is impossible to account, and hard to make
allowance, still his word has weight with me as it were the Delphic
Oracle. Read you then this lyrical prose, and, if the Titanic
master-builder of rhythm who composed _Bhagavat_ and the _Lévrier de
Magnus_ speaks not falsely, then, by Apollo, you may taste, even you, my
master, the ambrosial joys of Olympus." It was in an ostensible vein of
sarcasm that he had asked me to call him, and that he himself called me,
"my master." But, as a matter of fact, we each derived a certain amount
of satisfaction from the mannerism, being still at the age in which one
believes that one gives a thing real existence by giving it a name.

Unfortunately I was not able to set at rest, by further talks with
Bloch, in which I might have insisted upon an explanation, the doubts
he had engendered in me when he told me that fine lines of poetry (from
which I, if you please, expected nothing less than the revelation of
truth itself) were all the finer if they meant absolutely nothing. For,
as it happened, Bloch was not invited to the house again. At first, he
had been well received there. It is true that my grandfather made out
that, whenever I formed a strong attachment to any one of my friends and
brought him home with me, that friend was invariably a Jew; to which he
would not have objected on principle--indeed his own friend Swann was
of Jewish extraction--had he not found that the Jews whom I chose as
friends were not usually of the best type. And so I was hardly ever able
to bring a new friend home without my grandfather's humming the "O,
God of our fathers" from _La Juive_, or else "Israel, break thy chain,"
singing the tune alone, of course, to an "um-ti-tum-ti-tum, tra-la"; but
I used to be afraid of my friend's recognising the sound, and so being
able to reconstruct the words.

Before seeing them, merely on hearing their names, about which, as often
as not, there was nothing particularly Hebraic, he would divine not only
the Jewish origin of such of my friends as might indeed be of the chosen
people, but even some dark secret which was hidden in their family.

"And what do they call your friend who is coming this evening?"

"Dumont, grandpapa."

"Dumont! Oh, I'm frightened of Dumont."

And he would sing:


  Archers, be on your guard!
  Watch without rest, without sound,

and then, after a few adroit questions on points of detail, he would
call out "On guard! on guard," or, if it were the victim himself who
had already arrived, and had been obliged, unconsciously, by my
grandfather's subtle examination, to admit his origin, then my
grandfather, to shew us that he had no longer any doubts, would merely
look at us, humming almost inaudibly the air of


  What! do you hither guide the feet
  Of this timid Israelite?

or of


  Sweet vale of Hebron, dear paternal fields,

or, perhaps, of


  Yes, I am of the chosen race.

These little eccentricities on my grandfather's part implied no ill-will
whatsoever towards my friends. But Bloch had displeased my family for
other reasons. He had begun by annoying my father, who, seeing him come
in with wet clothes, had asked him with keen interest:

"Why, M. Bloch, is there a change in the weather; has it been raining? I
can't understand it; the barometer has been 'set fair.'"

Which drew from Bloch nothing more instructive than "Sir, I am
absolutely incapable of telling you whether it has rained. I live so
resolutely apart from physical contingencies that my senses no longer
trouble to inform me of them."

"My poor boy," said my father after Bloch had gone, "your friend is out
of his mind. Why, he couldn't even tell me what the weather was like. As
if there could be anything more interesting! He is an imbecile."

Next, Bloch had displeased my grandmother because, after luncheon, when
she complained of not feeling very well, he had stifled a sob and wiped
the tears from his eyes.

"You cannot imagine that he is sincere," she observed to me. "Why he
doesn't know me. Unless he's mad, of course."

And finally he had upset the whole household when he arrived an hour
and a half late for luncheon and covered with mud from head to foot, and
made not the least apology, saying merely: "I never allow myself to be
influenced in the smallest degree either by atmospheric disturbances or
by the arbitrary divisions of what is known as Time. I would willingly
reintroduce to society the opium pipe of China or the Malayan kriss, but
I am wholly and entirely without instruction in those infinitely more
pernicious (besides being quite bleakly bourgeois) implements, the
umbrella and the watch."

In spite of all this he would still have been received at Combray. He
was, of course, hardly the friend my parents would have chosen for
me; they had, in the end, decided that the tears which he had shed on
hearing of my grandmother's illness were genuine enough; but they
knew, either instinctively or from their own experience, that our early
impulsive emotions have but little influence over our later actions and
the conduct of our lives; and that regard for moral obligations, loyalty
to our friends, patience in finishing our work, obedience to a rule
of life, have a surer foundation in habits solidly formed and blindly
followed than in these momentary transports, ardent but sterile. They
would have preferred to Bloch, as companions for myself, boys who would
have given me no more than it is proper, by all the laws of middle-class
morality, for boys to give one another, who would not unexpectedly
send me a basket of fruit because they happened, that morning, to have
thought of me with affection, but who, since they were incapable of
inclining in my favour, by any single impulse of their imagination and
emotions, the exact balance of the duties and claims of friendship, were
as incapable of loading the scales to my prejudice. Even the injuries
we do them will not easily divert from the path of their duty towards us
those conventional natures of which my great-aunt furnished a type: who,
after quarrelling for years with a niece, to whom she never spoke again,
yet made no change in the will in which she had left that niece the
whole of her fortune, because she was her next-of-kin, and it was the
'proper thing' to do.

But I was fond of Bloch; my parents wished me to be happy; and the
insoluble problems which I set myself on such texts as the 'absolutely
meaningless' beauty of _La fille de Minos et de Pasiphaë_ tired me more
and made me more unwell than I should have been after further talks with
him, unwholesome as those talks might seem to my mother's mind. And he
would still have been received at Combray but for one thing. That same
night, after dinner, having informed me (a piece of news which had a
great influence on my later life, making it happier at one time and then
more unhappy) that no woman ever thought of anything but love, and that
there was not one of them whose resistance a man could not overcome,
he had gone on to assure me that he had heard it said on unimpeachable
authority that my great-aunt herself had led a 'gay' life in her younger
days, and had been notoriously 'kept.' I could not refrain from passing
on so important a piece of information to my parents; the next time
Bloch called he was not admitted, and afterwards, when I met him in the
street, he greeted me with extreme coldness.

But in the matter of Bergotte he had spoken truly.

For the first few days, like a tune which will be running in one's head
and maddening one soon enough, but of which one has not for the moment
'got hold,' the things I was to love so passionately in Bergotte's style
had not yet caught my eye. I could not, it is true, lay down the novel
of his which I was reading, but I fancied that I was interested in the
story alone, as in the first dawn of love, when we go every day to meet
a woman at some party or entertainment by the charm of which we imagine
it is that we are attracted. Then I observed the rare, almost archaic
phrases which he liked to employ at certain points, where a hidden flow
of harmony, a prelude contained and concealed in the work itself would
animate and elevate his style; and it was at such points as these,
too, that he would begin to speak of the "vain dream of life," of the
"inexhaustible torrent of fair forms," of the "sterile, splendid torture
of understanding and loving," of the "moving effigies which ennoble for
all time the charming and venerable fronts of our cathedrals"; that he
would express a whole system of philosophy, new to me, by the use of
marvellous imagery, to the inspiration of which I would naturally have
ascribed that sound of harping which began to chime and echo in my ears,
an accompaniment to which that imagery added something ethereal and
sublime. One of these passages of Bergotte, the third or fourth which I
had detached from the rest, filled me with a joy to which the meagre joy
I had tasted in the first passage bore no comparison, a joy which I felt
myself to have experienced in some innermost chamber of my soul, deep,
undivided, vast, from which all obstructions and partitions seemed to
have been swept away. For what had happened was that, while I recognised
in this passage the same taste for uncommon phrases, the same bursts
of music, the same idealist philosophy which had been present in the
earlier passages without my having taken them into account as the source
of my pleasure, I now no longer had the impression of being confronted
by a particular passage in one of Bergotte's works, which traced a
purely bi-dimensional figure in outline upon the surface of my mind, but
rather of the 'ideal passage' of Bergotte, common to every one of his
books, and to which all the earlier, similar passages, now becoming
merged in it, had added a kind of density and volume, by which my own
understanding seemed to be enlarged.

I was by no means Bergotte's sole admirer; he was the favourite writer
also of a friend of my mother's, a highly literary lady; while Dr. du
Boulbon had kept all his patients waiting until he finished Bergotte's
latest volume; and it was from his consulting room, and from a house in
a park near Combray that some of the first seeds were scattered of that
taste for Bergotte, a rare-growth in those days, but now so universally
acclimatised that one finds it flowering everywhere throughout Europe
and America, and even in the tiniest villages, rare still in its
refinement, but in that alone. What my mother's friend, and, it would
seem, what Dr. du Boulbon liked above all in the writings of Bergotte
was just what I liked, the same flow of melody, the same old-fashioned
phrases, and certain others, quite simple and familiar, but so placed by
him, in such prominence, as to hint at a particular quality of taste on
his part; and also, in the sad parts of his books, a sort of roughness,
a tone that was almost harsh. And he himself, no doubt, realised that
these were his principal attractions. For in his later books, if he had
hit upon some great truth, or upon the name of an historic cathedral,
he would break off his narrative, and in an invocation, an apostrophe, a
lengthy prayer, would give a free outlet to that effluence which, in
the earlier volumes, remained buried beneath the form of his prose,
discernible only in a rippling of its surface, and perhaps even more
delightful, more harmonious when it was thus veiled from the eye, when
the reader could give no precise indication of where the murmur of the
current began, or of where it died away. These passages in which he
delighted were our favourites also. For my own part I knew all of them
by heart. I felt even disappointed when he resumed the thread of his
narrative. Whenever he spoke of something whose beauty had until
then remained hidden from me, of pine-forests or of hailstorms, of
_Notre-Dame de Paris_, of _Athalie_, or of _Phèdre_, by some piece
of imagery he would make their beauty explode and drench me with its
essence. And so, dimly realising that the universe contained innumerable
elements which my feeble senses would be powerless to discern, did he
not bring them within my reach, I wished that I might have his opinion,
some metaphor of his, upon everything in the world, and especially upon
such things as I might have an opportunity, some day, of seeing for
myself; and among such things, more particularly still upon some of the
historic buildings of France, upon certain views of the sea, because the
emphasis with which, in his books, he referred to these shewed that he
regarded them as rich in significance and beauty. But, alas, upon almost
everything in the world his opinion was unknown to me. I had no doubt
that it would differ entirely from my own, since his came down from an
unknown sphere towards which I was striving to raise myself; convinced
that my thoughts would have seemed pure foolishness to that perfected
spirit, I had so completely obliterated them all that, if I happened to
find in one of his books something which had already occurred to my own
mind, my heart would swell with gratitude and pride as though some deity
had, in his infinite bounty, restored it to me, had pronounced it to be
beautiful and right. It happened now and then that a page of Bergotte
would express precisely those ideas which I used often at night, when
I was unable to sleep, to write to my grandmother and mother, and so
concisely and well that his page had the appearance of a collection of
mottoes for me to set at the head of my letters. And so too, in later
years, when I began to compose a book of my own, and the quality of some
of my sentences seemed so inadequate that I could not make up my mind to
go on with the undertaking, I would find the equivalent of my sentences
in Bergotte's. But it was only then, when I read them in his pages,
that I could enjoy them; when it was I myself who composed them, in
my anxiety that they should exactly reproduce what I seemed to have
detected in my mind, and in my fear of their not turning out 'true to
life,' I had no time to ask myself whether what I was writing would be
pleasant to read! But indeed there was no kind of language, no kind of
ideas which I really liked, except these. My feverish and unsatisfactory
attempts were themselves a token of my love, a love which brought me no
pleasure, but was, for all that, intense and deep. And so, when I came
suddenly upon similar phrases in the writings of another, that is to say
stripped of their familiar accompaniment of scruples and repressions and
self-tormentings, I was free to indulge to the full my own appetite
for such things, just as a cook who, once in a while, has no dinner to
prepare for other people, can then find time to gormandise himself. And
so, when I had found, one day, in a book by Bergotte, some joke about
an old family servant, to which his solemn and magnificent style added a
great deal of irony, but which was in principle what I had often said to
my grandmother about Françoise, and when, another time, I had discovered
that he thought not unworthy of reflection in one of those mirrors of
absolute Truth which were his writings, a remark similar to one which I
had had occasion to make on our friend M. Legrandin (and, moreover, my
remarks on Françoise and M. Legrandin were among those which I would
most resolutely have sacrificed for Bergotte's sake, in the belief
that he would find them quite without interest); then it was suddenly
revealed to me that my own humble existence and the Realms of Truth were
less widely separated than I had supposed, that at certain points they
were actually in contact; and in my new-found confidence and joy I wept
upon his printed page, as in the arms of a long-lost father.

From his books I had formed an impression of Bergotte as a frail and
disappointed old man, who had lost his children, and had never found
any consolation. And so I would read, or rather sing his sentences in
my brain, with rather more _dolce_, rather more _lento_ than he himself
had, perhaps, intended, and his simplest phrase would strike my ears
with something peculiarly gentle and loving in its intonation. More than
anything else in the world I cherished his philosophy, and had pledged
myself to it in lifelong devotion. It made me impatient to reach the
age when I should be eligible to attend the class at school called
'Philosophy.' I did not wish to learn or do anything else there, but
simply to exist and be guided entirely by the mind of Bergotte, and,
if I had been told then that the metaphysicians whom I was actually to
follow there resembled him in nothing, I should have been struck down by
the despair a young lover feels who has sworn lifelong fidelity, when
a friend speaks to him of the other mistresses he will have in time to
come.

One Sunday, while I was reading in the garden, I was interrupted by
Swann, who had come to call upon my parents.

"What are you reading? May I look? Why, it's Bergotte! Who has been
telling you about him?"

I replied that Bloch was responsible.

"Oh, yes, that boy I saw here once, who looks so like the Bellini
portrait of Mahomet II. It's an astonishing likeness; he has the same
arched eyebrows and hooked nose and prominent cheekbones. When his beard
comes he'll be Mahomet himself. Anyhow he has good taste, for Bergotte
is a charming creature." And seeing how much I seemed to admire
Bergotte, Swann, who never spoke at all about the people he knew, made
an exception in my favour and said: "I know him well; if you would like
him to write a few words on the title-page of your book I could ask him
for you."

I dared not accept such an offer, but bombarded Swann with questions
about his friend. "Can you tell me, please, who is his favourite actor?"

"Actor? No, I can't say. But I do know this: there's not a man on the
stage whom he thinks equal to Berma; he puts her above everyone. Have
you seen her?"

"No, sir, my parents do not allow me to go to the theatre."

"That is a pity. You should insist. Berma in _Phèdre_, in the _Cid_;
well, she's only an actress, if you like, but you know that I don't
believe very much in the 'hierarchy' of the arts." As he spoke I
noticed, what had often struck me before in his conversations with
my grandmother's sisters, that whenever he spoke of serious matters,
whenever he used an expression which seemed to imply a definite opinion
upon some important subject, he would take care to isolate, to sterilise
it by using a special intonation, mechanical and ironic, as though he
had put the phrase or word between inverted commas, and was anxious
to disclaim any personal responsibility for it; as who should say "the
'hierarchy,' don't you know, as silly people call it." But then, if it
was so absurd, why did he say the 'hierarchy'? A moment later he went
on: "Her acting will give you as noble an inspiration as any masterpiece
of art in the world, as--oh, I don't know--" and he began to laugh,
"shall we say the Queens of Chartres?" Until then I had supposed that
his horror of having to give a serious opinion was something Parisian
and refined, in contrast to the provincial dogmatism of my grandmother's
sisters; and I had imagined also that it was characteristic of the
mental attitude towards life of the circle in which Swann moved,
where, by a natural reaction from the 'lyrical' enthusiasms of earlier
generations, an excessive importance was given to small and precise
facts, formerly regarded as vulgar, and anything in the nature of
'phrase-making' was banned. But now I found myself slightly shocked
by this attitude which Swann invariably adopted when face to face with
generalities. He appeared unwilling to risk even having an opinion, and
to be at his ease only when he could furnish, with meticulous accuracy,
some precise but unimportant detail. But in so doing he did not take
into account that even here he was giving an opinion, holding a brief
(as they say) for something, that the accuracy of his details had an
importance of its own. I thought again of the dinner that night, when I
had been so unhappy because Mamma would not be coming up to my room, and
when he had dismissed the balls given by the Princesse de Léon as being
of no importance. And yet it was to just that sort of amusement that he
was devoting his life. For what other kind of existence did he reserve
the duties of saying in all seriousness what he thought about things,
of formulating judgments which he would not put between inverted commas;
and when would he cease to give himself up to occupations of which at
the same time he made out that they were absurd? I noticed, too, in the
manner in which Swann spoke to me of Bergotte, something which, to do
him justice, was not peculiar to himself, but was shared by all that
writer's admirers at that time, at least by my mother's friend and
by Dr. du Boulbon. Like Swann, they would say of Bergotte: "He has a
charming mind, so individual, he has a way of his own of saying things,
which is a little far-fetched, but so pleasant. You never need to look
for his name on the title-page, you can tell his work at once." But
none of them had yet gone so far as to say "He is a great writer, he has
great talent." They did not even credit him with talent at all. They
did not speak, because they were not aware of it. We are very slow in
recognising in the peculiar physiognomy of a new writer the type which
is labelled 'great talent' in our museum of general ideas. Simply
because that physiognomy is new and strange, we can find in it no
resemblance to what we are accustomed to call talent. We say rather
originality, charm, delicacy, strength; and then one day we add up the
sum of these, and find that it amounts simply to talent.

"Are there any books in which Bergotte has written about Berma?" I asked
M. Swann.

"I think he has, in that little essay on Racine, but it must be out of
print. Still, there has perhaps been a second impression. I will find
out. Anyhow, I can ask Bergotte himself all that you want to know next
time he comes to dine with us. He never misses a week, from one year's
end to another. He is my daughter's greatest friend. They go about
together, and look at old towns and cathedrals and castles."

As I was still completely ignorant of the different grades in the social
hierarchy, the fact that my father found it impossible for us to see
anything of Swann's wife and daughter had, for a long time, had the
contrary effect of making me imagine them as separated from us by an
enormous gulf, which greatly enhanced their dignity and importance in
my eyes. I was sorry that my mother did not dye her hair and redden her
lips, as I had heard our neighbour, Mme. Sazerat, say that Mme. Swann
did, to gratify not her husband but M. de Charlus; and I felt that, to
her, we must be an object of scorn, which distressed me particularly on
account of the daughter, such a pretty little girl, as I had heard, and
one of whom I used often to dream, always imagining her with the same
features and appearance, which I bestowed upon her quite arbitrarily,
but with a charming effect. But from this afternoon, when I had learned
that Mlle. Swann was a creature living in such rare and fortunate
circumstances, bathed, as in her natural element, in such a sea of
privilege that, if she should ask her parents whether anyone were coming
to dinner, she would be answered in those two syllables, radiant with
celestial light, would hear the name of that golden guest who was to
her no more than an old friend of her family, Bergotte; that for her the
intimate conversation at table, corresponding to what my great-aunt's
conversation was for me, would be the words of Bergotte upon all those
subjects which he had not been able to take up in his writings, and on
which I would fain have heard him utter oracles; and that, above all,
when she went to visit other towns, he would be walking by her side,
unrecognised and glorious, like the gods who came down, of old, from
heaven to dwell among mortal men: then I realised both the rare worth
of a creature such as Mlle. Swann, and, at the same time, how coarse and
ignorant I should appear to her; and I felt so keenly how pleasant and
yet how impossible it would be for me to become her friend that I was
filled at once with longing and with despair. And usually, from this
time forth, when I thought of her, I would see her standing before the
porch of a cathedral, explaining to me what each of the statues meant,
and, with a smile which was my highest commendation, presenting me, as
her friend, to Bergotte. And invariably the charm of all the fancies
which the thought of cathedrals used to inspire in me, the charm of the
hills and valleys of the Ile-de-France and of the plains of Normandy,
would radiate brightness and beauty over the picture I had formed in my
mind of Mlle. Swann; nothing more remained but to know and to love
her. Once we believe that a fellow-creature has a share in some unknown
existence to which that creature's love for ourselves can win us
admission, that is, of all the preliminary conditions which Love exacts,
the one to which he attaches most importance, the one which makes him
generous or indifferent as to the rest. Even those women who pretend
that they judge a man by his exterior only, see in that exterior an
emanation from some special way of life. And that is why they fall
in love with a soldier or a fireman, whose uniform makes them less
particular about his face; they kiss and believe that beneath the
crushing breastplate there beats a heart different from the rest, more
gallant, more adventurous, more tender; and so it is that a young king
or a crown prince may travel in foreign countries and make the most
gratifying conquests, and yet lack entirely that regular and classic
profile which would be indispensable, I dare say, in an outside-broker.

While I was reading in the garden, a thing my great-aunt would never
have understood my doing save on a Sunday, that being the day on which
it was unlawful to indulge in any serious occupation, and on which she
herself would lay aside her sewing (on a week-day she would have said,
"How you can go on amusing yourself with a book; it isn't Sunday, you
know!" putting into the word 'amusing' an implication of childishness
and waste of time), my aunt Léonie would be gossiping with Françoise
until it was time for Eulalie to arrive. She would tell her that she had
just seen Mme. Goupil go by "without an umbrella, in the silk dress
she had made for her the other day at Châteaudun. If she has far to go
before vespers, she may get it properly soaked."

"Very likely" (which meant also "very likely not") was the answer,
for Françoise did not wish definitely to exclude the possibility of a
happier alternative.

"There, now," went on my aunt, beating her brow, "that reminds me that
I never heard if she got to church this morning before the Elevation. I
must remember to ask Eulalie... Françoise, just look at that black cloud
behind the steeple, and how poor the light is on the slates, you may be
certain it will rain before the day is out. It couldn't possibly keep on
like this, it's been too hot. And the sooner the better, for until the
storm breaks my Vichy water won't 'go down,'" she concluded, since, in
her mind, the desire to accelerate the digestion of her Vichy water was
of infinitely greater importance than her fear of seeing Mme. Goupil's
new dress ruined.

"Very likely."

"And you know that when it rains in the Square there's none too much
shelter." Suddenly my aunt turned pale. "What, three o'clock!" she
exclaimed. "But vespers will have begun already, and I've forgotten my
pepsin! Now I know why that Vichy water has been lying on my stomach."
And falling precipitately upon a prayer-book bound in purple velvet,
with gilt clasps, out of which in her haste she let fall a shower of
the little pictures, each in a lace fringe of yellowish paper, which she
used to mark the places of the greater feasts of the church, my aunt,
while she swallowed her drops, began at full speed to mutter the words
of the sacred text, its meaning being slightly clouded in her brain by
the uncertainty whether the pepsin, when taken so long after the
Vichy, would still be able to overtake it and to 'send it down.' "Three
o'clock! It's unbelievable how time flies."

A little tap at the window, as though some missile had struck it,
followed by a plentiful, falling sound, as light, though, as if a shower
of sand were being sprinkled from a window overhead; then the fall
spread, took on an order, a rhythm, became liquid, loud, drumming,
musical, innumerable, universal. It was the rain.

"There, Françoise, what did I tell you? How it's coming down! But I
think I heard the bell at the garden gate: go along and see who can be
outside in this weather."

Françoise went and returned. "It's Mme. Amédée" (my grandmother). "She
said she was going for a walk. It's raining hard, all the same."

"I'm not at all surprised," said my aunt, looking up towards the sky.
"I've always said that she was not in the least like other people. Well,
I'm glad it's she and not myself who's outside in all this."

"Mme. Amédée is always the exact opposite of the rest," said Françoise,
not unkindly, refraining until she should be alone with the other
servants from stating her belief that my grandmother was 'a bit off her
head.'

"There's Benediction over! Eulalie will never come now," sighed my aunt.
"It will be the weather that's frightened her away."

"But it's not five o'clock yet, Mme. Octave, it's only half-past four."

"Only half-past four! And here am I, obliged to draw back the small
curtains, just to get a tiny streak of daylight. At half-past four! Only
a week before the Rogation-days. Ah, my poor Françoise, the dear Lord
must be sorely vexed with us. The world is going too far in these days.
As my poor Octave used to say, we have forgotten God too often, and He
is taking vengeance upon us."

A bright flush animated my aunt's cheeks; it was Eulalie. As ill luck
would have it, scarcely had she been admitted to the presence when
Françoise reappeared and, with a smile which was meant to indicate her
full participation in the pleasure which, she had no doubt, her tidings
would give my aunt, articulating each syllable so as to shew that, in
spite of her having to translate them into indirect speech, she was
repeating, as a good servant should, the very words which the new
visitor had condescended to use, said: "His reverence the Curé would be
delighted, enchanted, if Mme. Octave is not resting just now, and
could see him. His reverence does not wish to disturb Mme. Octave. His
reverence is downstairs; I told him to go into the parlour."

Had the truth been known, the Curé's visits gave my aunt no such
ecstatic pleasure as Françoise supposed, and the air of jubilation with
which she felt bound to illuminate her face whenever she had to announce
his arrival, did not altogether correspond to what was felt by her
invalid. The Curé (an excellent man, with whom I am sorry now that I did
not converse more often, for, even if he cared nothing for the arts,
he knew a great many etymologies), being in the habit of shewing
distinguished visitors over his church (he had even planned to compile
a history of the Parish of Combray), used to weary her with his endless
explanations, which, incidentally, never varied in the least degree.
But when his visit synchronized exactly with Eulalie's it became frankly
distasteful to my aunt. She would have preferred to make the most of
Eulalie, and not to have had the whole of her circle about her at one
time. But she dared not send the Curé away, and had to content herself
with making a sign to Eulalie not to leave when he did, so that she
might have her to herself for a little after he had gone.

"What is this I have been hearing, Father, that a painter has set up his
easel in your church, and is copying one of the windows? Old as I am,
I can safely say that I have never even heard of such a thing in all my
life! What is the world coming to next, I wonder! And the ugliest thing
in the whole church, too."

"I will not go so far as to say that it is quite the ugliest, for,
although there are certain things in Saint-Hilaire which are well worth
a visit, there are others that are very old now, in my poor basilica,
the only one in all the diocese that has never even been restored.
The Lord knows, our porch is dirty and out of date; still, it is of a
majestic character; take, for instance, the Esther tapestries, though
personally I would not give a brass farthing for the pair of them, but
experts put them next after the ones at Sens. I can quite see, too, that
apart from certain details which are--well, a trifle realistic, they
shew features which testify to a genuine power of observation. But don't
talk to me about the windows. Is it common sense, I ask you, to leave
up windows which shut out all the daylight, and even confuse the eyes by
throwing patches of colour, to which I should be hard put to it to give
a name, on a floor in which there are not two slabs on the same level?
And yet they refuse to renew the floor for me because, if you please,
those are the tombstones of the Abbots of Combray and the Lords of
Guermantes, the old Counts, you know, of Brabant, direct ancestors of
the present Duc de Guermantes, and of his Duchesse also, since she was a
lady of the Guermantes family, and married her cousin." (My grandmother,
whose steady refusal to take any interest in 'persons' had ended in
her confusing all their names and titles, whenever anyone mentioned the
Duchesse de Guermantes used to make out that she must be related to Mme.
de Villeparisis. The whole family would then burst out laughing; and she
would attempt to justify herself by harking back to some invitation to
a christening or funeral: "I feel sure that there was a Guermantes in it
somewhere." And for once I would side with the others, and against
her, refusing to admit that there could be any connection between her
school-friend and the descendant of Geneviève de Brabant.)

"Look at Roussainville," the Curé went on. "It is nothing more nowadays
than a parish of farmers, though in olden times the place must have had
a considerable importance from its trade in felt hats and clocks. (I
am not certain, by the way, of the etymology of Roussainville. I
should dearly like to think that the name was originally Rouville, from
_Radulfi villa_, analogous, don't you see, to Châteauroux, _Castrum
Radulfi_, but we will talk about that some other time.) Very well; the
church there has superb windows, almost all quite modern, including that
most imposing 'Entry of Louis-Philippe into Combray' which would be more
in keeping, surely, at Combray itself, and which is every bit as good, I
understand, as the famous windows at Chartres. Only yesterday I met Dr.
Percepied's brother, who goes in for these things, and he told me that
he looked upon it as a most beautiful piece of work. But, as I said to
this artist, who, by the way, seems to be a most civil fellow, and is a
regular virtuoso, it appears, with his brush; what on earth, I said to
him, do you find so extraordinary in this window, which is, if anything,
a little dingier than the rest?"

"I am sure that if you were to ask his Lordship," said my aunt in
a resigned tone, for she had begun to feel that she was going to be
'tired,' "he would never refuse you a new window."

"You may depend upon it, Mme. Octave," replied the Curé. "Why, it was
just his Lordship himself who started the outcry about the window, by
proving that it represented Gilbert the Bad, a Lord of Guermantes and
a direct descendant of Geneviève de Brabant, who was a daughter of the
House of Guermantes, receiving absolution from Saint Hilaire."

"But I don't see where Saint Hilaire comes in."

"Why yes, have you never noticed, in the corner of the window, a lady in
a yellow robe? Very well, that is Saint Hilaire, who is also known, you
will remember, in certain parts of the country as Saint Illiers, Saint
Hèlier, and even, in the Jura, Saint Ylie. But these various corruptions
of _Sanctus Hilarius_ are by no means the most curious that have
occurred in the names of the blessed Saints. Take, for example, my good
Eulalie, the case of your own patron, _Sancta Eulalia_; do you know what
she has become in Burgundy? Saint Eloi, nothing more nor less! The lady
has become a gentleman. Do you hear that, Eulalie, after you are dead
they will make a man of you!"

"Father will always have his joke."

"Gilbert's brother, Charles the Stammerer, was a pious prince, but,
having early in life lost his father, Pepin the Mad, who died as a
result of his mental infirmity, he wielded the supreme power with all
the arrogance of a man who has not been subjected to discipline in his
youth, so much so that, whenever he saw a man in a town whose face
he did not remember, he would massacre the whole place, to the last
inhabitant. Gilbert, wishing to be avenged on Charles, caused the church
at Combray to be burned down, the original church, that was, which
Théodebert, when he and his court left the country residence he had near
here, at Thiberzy (which is, of course, _Theodeberiacus_), to go out
and fight the Burgundians, had promised to build over the tomb of Saint
Hilaire if the Saint brought him victory. Nothing remains of it now
but the crypt, into which Théodore has probably taken you, for Gilbert
burned all the rest. Finally, he defeated the unlucky Charles with the
aid of William" which the Curé pronounced "Will'am" "the Conqueror,
which is why so many English still come to visit the place. But he
does not appear to have managed to win the affection of the people of
Combray, for they fell upon him as he was coming out from mass, and cut
off his head. Théodore has a little book, that he lends people, which
tells you the whole story.

"But what is unquestionably the most remarkable thing about our church
is the view from the belfry, which is full of grandeur. Certainly in
your case, since you are not very strong, I should never recommend you
to climb our seven and ninety steps, just half the number they have in
the famous cathedral at Milan. It is quite tiring enough for the most
active person, especially as you have to go on your hands and knees, if
you don't wish to crack your skull, and you collect all the cobwebs off
the staircase upon your clothes. In any case you should be well wrapped
up," he went on, without noticing my aunt's fury at the mere suggestion
that she could ever, possibly, be capable of climbing into his belfry,
"for there's a strong breeze there, once you get to the top. Some people
even assure me that they have felt the chill of death up there. No
matter, on Sundays there are always clubs and societies, who come,
some of them, long distances to admire our beautiful panorama, and they
always go home charmed. Wait now, next Sunday, if the weather holds, you
will be sure to find a lot of people there, for Rogation-tide. You must
admit, certainly, that the view from up there is like a fairy-tale, with
what you might call vistas along the plain, which have quite a special
charm of their own. On a clear day you can see as far as Verneuil. And
then another thing; you can see at the same time places which you are in
the habit of seeing one without the other, as, for instance, the course
of the Vivonne and the ditches at Saint-Assise-lès-Combray, which
are separated, really, by a screen of tall trees; or, to take another
example, there are all the canals at Jouy-le-Vicomte, which is
_Gaudiacus vicecomitis_, as of course you know. Each time that I have
been to Jouy I have seen a bit of a canal in one place, and then I have
turned a corner and seen another, but when I saw the second I could no
longer see the first. I tried in vain to imagine how they lay by one
another; it was no good. But, from the top of Saint-Hilaire, it's quite
another matter; the whole countryside is spread out before you like a
map. Only, you cannot make out the water; you would say that there were
great rifts in the town, slicing it up so neatly that it looks like a
loaf of bread which still holds together after it has been cut up. To
get it all quite perfect you would have to be in both places at once; up
here on the top of Saint-Hilaire and down there at Jouy-le-Vicomte."

The Curé had so much exhausted my aunt that no sooner had he gone than
she was obliged to send away Eulalie also.

"Here, my poor Eulalie," she said in a feeble voice, drawing a coin from
a small purse which lay ready to her hand. "This is just something so
that you shall not forget me in your prayers."

"Oh, but, Mme. Octave, I don't think I ought to; you know very well
that I don't come here for that!" So Eulalie would answer, with the
same hesitation and the same embarrassment, every Sunday, as though
each temptation were the first, and with a look of displeasure which
enlivened my aunt and never offended her, for if it so happened that
Eulalie, when she took the money, looked a little less sulky than usual,
my aunt would remark afterwards, "I cannot think what has come over
Eulalie; I gave her just the trifle I always give, and she did not look
at all pleased."

"I don't think she has very much to complain of, all the same,"
Françoise would sigh grimly, for she had a tendency to regard as petty
cash all that my aunt might give her for herself or her children, and as
treasure riotously squandered on a pampered and ungrateful darling the
little coins slipped, Sunday by Sunday, into Eulalie's hand, but so
discreetly passed that Françoise never managed to see them. It was
not that she wanted to have for herself the money my aunt bestowed
on Eulalie. She already enjoyed a sufficiency of all that my
aunt possessed, in the knowledge that the wealth of the mistress
automatically ennobled and glorified the maid in the eyes of the world;
and that she herself was conspicuous and worthy to be praised throughout
Combray, Jouy-le-Vicomte, and other cities of men, on account of my
aunt's many farms, her frequent and prolonged visits from the Curé, and
the astonishing number of bottles of Vichy water which she consumed.
Françoise was avaricious only for my aunt; had she had control over
my aunt's fortune (which would have more than satisfied her highest
ambition) she would have guarded it from the assaults of strangers with
a maternal ferocity. She would, however, have seen no great harm in what
my aunt, whom she knew to be incurably generous, allowed herself to give
away, had she given only to those who were already rich. Perhaps
she felt that such persons, not being actually in need of my aunt's
presents, could not be suspected of simulating affection for her on
that account. Besides, presents offered to persons of great wealth and
position, such as Mme. Sazerat, M. Swann, M. Legrandin and Mme. Goupil,
to persons of the 'same class' as my aunt, and who would naturally
'mix with her,' seemed to Françoise to be included among the ornamental
customs of that strange and brilliant life led by rich people, who
hunted and shot, gave balls and paid visits, a life which she would
contemplate with an admiring smile. But it was by no means the same
thing if, for this princely exchange of courtesies, my aunt substituted
mere charity, if her beneficiaries were of the class which Françoise
would label "people like myself," or "people no better than myself,"
people whom she despised even more if they did not address her always
as "Mme. Françoise," just to shew that they considered themselves to be
'not as good.' And when she saw that, despite all her warnings, my aunt
continued to do exactly as she pleased, and to fling money away with
both hands (or so, at least, Françoise believed) on undeserving objects,
she began to find that the presents she herself received from my aunt
were very tiny compared to the imaginary riches squandered upon
Eulalie, There was not, in the neighbourhood of Combray, a farm of such
prosperity and importance that Françoise doubted Eulalie's ability to
buy it, without thinking twice, out of the capital which her visits to
my aunt had 'brought in.' It must be added that Eulalie had formed an
exactly similar estimate of the vast and secret hoards of Françoise.
So, every Sunday, after Eulalie had gone, Françoise would mercilessly
prophesy her coming downfall. She hated Eulalie, but was at the same
time afraid of her, and so felt bound, when Eulalie was there, to 'look
pleasant.' But she would make up for that after the other's departure;
never, it is true, alluding to her by name, but hinting at her in
Sibylline oracles, or in utterances of a comprehensive character, like
those of Ecclesiastes, the Preacher, but so worded that their special
application could not escape my aunt. After peering out at the side of
the curtain to see whether Eulalie had shut the front-door behind her;
"Flatterers know how to make themselves welcome, and to gather up the
crumbs; but have patience, have patience; our God is a jealous God, and
one fine day He will be avenged upon them!" she would declaim, with the
sidelong, insinuating glance of Joash, thinking of Athaliah alone when
he says that the

            ....prosperity
  Of wicked men runs like a torrent past,
  And soon is spent.

But on this memorable afternoon, when the Curé had come as well, and
by his interminable visit had drained my aunt's strength, Françoise
followed Eulalie from the room, saying: "Mme. Octave, I will leave you
to rest; you look utterly tired out."

And my aunt answered her not a word, breathing a sigh so faint that
it seemed it must prove her last, and lying there with closed eyes, as
though already dead. But hardly had Françoise arrived downstairs, when
four peals of a bell, pulled with the utmost violence, reverberated
through the house, and my aunt, sitting erect upon her bed, called out:
"Has Eulalie gone yet? Would you believe it; I forgot to ask her whether
Mme. Goupil arrived in church before the Elevation. Run after her,
quick!"

But Françoise returned alone, having failed to overtake Eulalie. "It
is most provoking," said my aunt, shaking her head. "The one important
thing that I had to ask her."

In this way life went by for my aunt Léonie, always the same, in the
gentle uniformity of what she called, with a pretence of deprecation
but with a deep tenderness, her 'little jog-trot.' Respected by all
and sundry, not merely in her own house, where every one of us, having
learned the futility of recommending any healthier mode of life, had
become gradually resigned to its observance, but in the village as well,
where, three streets away, a tradesman who had to hammer nails into a
packing-case would send first to Françoise to make sure that my aunt
was not 'resting'--her 'little jog-trot' was, none the less, brutally
disturbed on one occasion in this same year. Like a fruit hidden among
its leaves, which has grown and ripened unobserved by man, until it
falls of its own accord, there came upon us one night the kitchen-maid's
confinement. Her pains were unbearable, and, as there was no midwife
in Combray, Françoise had to set off before dawn to fetch one from
Thiberzy. My aunt was unable to 'rest,' owing to the cries of the girl,
and as Françoise, though the distance was nothing, was very late in
returning, her services were greatly missed. And so, in the course of
the morning, my mother said to me: "Run upstairs, and see if your aunt
wants anything."

I went into the first of her two rooms, and through the open door of the
other saw my aunt lying on her side, asleep. I could hear her breathing,
in what was almost distinguishable as a snore. I was just going to slip
away when something, probably the sound of my entry, interrupted her
sleep, and made it 'change speed,' as they say of motorcars nowadays,
for the music of her snore broke off for a second and began again on a
lower note; then she awoke, and half turned her face, which I could see
for the first time; a kind of horror was imprinted on it; plainly she
had just escaped from some terrifying dream. She could not see me from
where she was lying, and I stood there not knowing whether I ought to go
forward or to retire; but all at once she seemed to return to a sense
of reality, and to grasp the falsehood of the visions that had terrified
her; a smile of joy, a pious act of thanksgiving to God, Who is pleased
to grant that life shall be less cruel than our dreams, feebly illumined
her face, and, with the habit she had formed of speaking to herself,
half-aloud, when she thought herself alone, she murmured: "The Lord be
praised! We have nothing to disturb us here but the kitchen-maid's baby.
And I've been dreaming that my poor Octave had come back to life, and
was trying to make me take a walk every day!" She stretched out a hand
towards her rosary, which was lying on the small table, but sleep was
once again getting the mastery, and did not leave her the strength to
reach it; she fell asleep, calm and contented, and I crept out of the
room on tiptoe, without either her or anyone's else ever knowing, from
that day to this, what I had seen and heard.

When I say that, apart from such rare happenings as this confinement, my
aunt's 'little jog-trot' never underwent any variation, I do not include
those variations which, repeated at regular intervals and in identical
form, did no more, really, than print a sort of uniform pattern upon
the greater uniformity of her life. So, for instance, every Saturday, as
Françoise had to go in the afternoon to market at Roussainville-le-Pin,
the whole household would have to have luncheon an hour earlier. And my
aunt had so thoroughly acquired the habit of this weekly exception to
her general habits, that she clung to it as much as to the rest. She
was so well 'routined' to it, as Françoise would say, that if, on a
Saturday, she had had to wait for her luncheon until the regular hour,
it would have 'upset' her as much as if she had had, on an ordinary
day, to put her luncheon forward to its Saturday time. Incidentally this
acceleration of luncheon gave Saturday, for all of us, an individual
character, kindly and rather attractive. At the moment when, ordinarily,
there was still an hour to be lived through before meal-time sounded,
we would all know that in a few seconds we should see the endives
make their precocious appearance, followed by the special favour of an
omelette, an unmerited steak. The return of this asymmetrical Saturday
was one of those petty occurrences, intra-mural, localised, almost
civic, which, in uneventful lives and stable orders of society, create a
kind of national unity, and become the favourite theme for conversation,
for pleasantries, for anecdotes which can be embroidered as the narrator
pleases; it would have provided a nucleus, ready-made, for a legendary
cycle, if any of us had had the epic mind. At daybreak, before we were
dressed, without rhyme or reason, save for the pleasure of proving the
strength of our solidarity, we would call to one another good-humoredly,
cordially, patriotically, "Hurry up; there's no time to be lost; don't
forget, it's Saturday!" while my aunt, gossiping with Françoise, and
reflecting that the day would be even longer than usual, would say, "You
might cook them a nice bit of veal, seeing that it's Saturday." If, at
half-past ten, some one absent-mindedly pulled out a watch and said, "I
say, an hour-and-a-half still before luncheon," everyone else would
be in ecstasies over being able to retort at once: "Why, what are you
thinking about? Have you for-gotten that it's Saturday?" And a quarter
of an hour later we would still be laughing, and reminding ourselves to
go up and tell aunt Léonie about this absurd mistake, to amuse her. The
very face of the sky appeared to undergo a change. After luncheon the
sun, conscious that it was Saturday, would blaze an hour longer in the
zenith, and when some one, thinking that we were late in starting for
our walk, said, "What, only two o'clock!" feeling the heavy throb go by
him of the twin strokes from the steeple of Saint-Hilaire (which as
a rule passed no one at that hour upon the highways, deserted for the
midday meal or for the nap which follows it, or on the banks of the
bright and ever-flowing stream, which even the angler had abandoned, and
so slipped unaccompanied into the vacant sky, where only a few loitering
clouds remained to greet them) the whole family would respond in chorus:
"Why, you're forgetting; we had luncheon an hour earlier; you know very
well it's Saturday."

The surprise of a 'barbarian' (for so we termed everyone who was not
acquainted with Saturday's special customs) who had called at eleven
o'clock to speak to my father, and had found us at table, was an event
which used to cause Françoise as much merriment as, perhaps, anything
that had ever happened in her life. And if she found it amusing that the
nonplussed visitor should not have known, beforehand, that we had our
luncheon an hour earlier on Saturday, it was still more irresistibly
funny that my father himself (fully as she sympathised, from the bottom
of her heart, with the rigid chauvinism which prompted him) should never
have dreamed that the barbarian could fail to be aware of so simple a
matter, and so had replied, with no further enlightenment of the
other's surprise at seeing us already in the dining-room: "You see, it's
Saturday." On reaching this point in the story, Françoise would pause to
wipe the tears of merriment from her eyes, and then, to add to her own
enjoyment, would prolong the dialogue, inventing a further reply for
the visitor to whom the word 'Saturday' had conveyed nothing. And so far
from our objecting to these interpolations, we would feel that the story
was not yet long enough, and would rally her with: "Oh, but surely he
said something else as well. There was more than that, the first time
you told it."

My great-aunt herself would lay aside her work, and raise her head and
look on at us over her glasses.

The day had yet another characteristic feature, namely, that during May
we used to go out on Saturday evenings after dinner to the 'Month of
Mary' devotions.

As we were liable, there, to meet M. Vinteuil, who held very strict
views on "the deplorable untidiness of young people, which seems to
be encouraged in these days," my mother would first see that there was
nothing out of order in my appearance, and then we would set out for
the church. It was in these 'Month of Mary' services that I can remember
having first fallen in love with hawthorn-blossom. The hawthorn was not
merely in the church, for there, holy ground as it was, we had all of us
a right of entry; but, arranged upon the altar itself, inseparable from
the mysteries in whose celebration it was playing a part, it thrust in
among the tapers and the sacred vessels its rows of branches, tied to
one another horizontally in a stiff, festal scheme of decoration; and
they were made more lovely still by the scalloped outline of the dark
leaves, over which were scattered in profusion, as over a bridal train,
little clusters of buds of a dazzling whiteness. Though I dared not look
at them save through my fingers, I could feel that the formal scheme
was composed of living things, and that it was Nature herself who, by
trimming the shape of the foliage, and by adding the crowning ornament
of those snowy buds, had made the decorations worthy of what was at
once a public rejoicing and a solemn mystery. Higher up on the altar,
a flower had opened here and there with a careless grace, holding so
unconcernedly, like a final, almost vaporous bedizening, its bunch of
stamens, slender as gossamer, which clouded the flower itself in a
white mist, that in following these with my eyes, in trying to imitate,
somewhere inside myself, the action of their blossoming, I imagined it
as a swift and thoughtless movement of the head with an enticing glance
from her contracted pupils, by a young girl in white, careless and
alive.

M. Vinteuil had come in with his daughter and had sat down beside us.
He belonged to a good family, and had once been music-master to
my grandmother's sisters; so that when, after losing his wife and
inheriting some property, he had retired to the neighbourhood of
Combray, we used often to invite him to our house. But with his intense
prudishness he had given up coming, so as not to be obliged to meet
Swann, who had made what he called "a most unsuitable marriage, as
seems to be the fashion in these days." My mother, on hearing that he
'composed,' told him by way of a compliment that, when she came to see
him, he must play her something of his own. M. Vinteuil would have liked
nothing better, but he carried politeness and consideration for others
to so fine a point, always putting himself in their place, that he was
afraid of boring them, or of appearing egotistical, if he carried out,
or even allowed them to suspect what were his own desires. On the day
when my parents had gone to pay him a visit, I had accompanied them,
but they had allowed me to remain outside, and as M. Vinteuil's house,
Montjouvain, stood on a site actually hollowed out from a steep hill
covered with shrubs, among which I took cover, I had found myself on a
level with his drawing-room, upstairs, and only a few feet away from its
window. When a servant came in to tell him that my parents had arrived,
I had seen M. Vinteuil run to the piano and lay out a sheet of music
so as to catch the eye. But as soon as they entered the room he had
snatched it away and hidden it in a corner. He was afraid, no doubt, of
letting them suppose that he was glad to see them only because it gave
him a chance of playing them some of his compositions. And every time
that my mother, in the course of her visit, had returned to the subject
of his playing, he had hurriedly protested: "I cannot think who put that
on the piano; it is not the proper place for it at all," and had turned
the conversation aside to other topics, simply because those were of
less interest to himself.

His one and only passion was for his daughter, and she, with her
somewhat boyish appearance, looked so robust that it was hard to
restrain a smile when one saw the precautions her father used to take
for her health, with spare shawls always in readiness to wrap around
her shoulders. My grandmother had drawn our attention to the gentle,
delicate, almost timid expression which might often be caught flitting
across the face, dusted all over with freckles, of this otherwise stolid
child. When she had spoken, she would at once take her own words in the
sense in which her audience must have heard them, she would be alarmed
at the possibility of a misunderstanding, and one would see, in clear
outline, as though in a transparency, beneath the mannish face of the
'good sort' that she was, the finer features of a young woman in tears.

When, before turning to leave the church, I made a genuflection before
the altar, I felt suddenly, as I rose again, a bitter-sweet fragrance of
almonds steal towards me from the hawthorn-blossom, and I then noticed
that on the flowers themselves were little spots of a creamier colour,
in which I imagined that this fragrance must lie concealed, as the taste
of an almond cake lay in the burned parts, or the sweetness of Mlle.
Vinteuil's cheeks beneath their freckles. Despite the heavy, motionless
silence of the hawthorns, these gusts of fragrance came to me like
the murmuring of an intense vitality, with which the whole altar was
quivering like a roadside hedge explored by living antennae, of which I
was reminded by seeing some stamens, almost red in colour, which seemed
to have kept the springtime virulence, the irritant power of stinging
insects now transmuted into flowers.

Outside the church we would stand talking for a moment with M. Vinteuil,
in the porch. Boys would be chevying one another in the Square, and he
would interfere, taking the side of the little ones and lecturing the
big. If his daughter said, in her thick, comfortable voice, how glad she
had been to see us, immediately it would seem as though some elder and
more sensitive sister, latent in her, had blushed at this thoughtless,
schoolboyish utterance, which had, perhaps, made us think that she was
angling for an invitation to the house. Her father would then arrange
a cloak over her shoulders, they would clamber into a little dog-cart
which she herself drove, and home they would both go to Montjouvain.
As for ourselves, the next day being Sunday, with no need to be up and
stirring before high mass, if it was a moonlight night and warm, then,
instead of taking us home at once, my father, in his thirst for personal
distinction, would lead us on a long walk round by the Calvary, which my
mother's utter incapacity for taking her bearings, or even for knowing
which road she might be on, made her regard as a triumph of his
strategic genius. Sometimes we would go as far as the viaduct, which
began to stride on its long legs of stone at the railway station, and
to me typified all the wretchedness of exile beyond the last outposts of
civilisation, because every year, as we came down from Paris, we would
be warned to take special care, when we got to Combray, not to miss
the station, to be ready before the train stopped, since it would start
again in two minutes and proceed across the viaduct, out of the lands of
Christendom, of which Combray, to me, represented the farthest limit.
We would return by the Boulevard de la Gare, which contained the most
attractive villas in the town. In each of their gardens the moonlight,
copying the art of Hubert Robert, had scattered its broken staircases
of white marble, its fountains of water and gates temptingly ajar. Its
beams had swept away the telegraph office. All that was left of it was
a column, half shattered, but preserving the beauty of a ruin which
endures for all time. I would by now be dragging my weary limbs, and
ready to drop with sleep; the balmy scent of the lime-trees seemed a
consolation which I could obtain only at the price of great suffering
and exhaustion, and not worthy of the effort. From gates far apart
the watchdogs, awakened by our steps in the silence, would set up
an antiphonal barking, as I still hear them bark, at times, in the
evenings, and it is in their custody (when the public gardens of Combray
were constructed on its site) that the Boulevard de la Gare must
have taken refuge, for wherever I may be, as soon as they begin their
alternate challenge and acceptance, I can see it again with all its
lime-trees, and its pavement glistening beneath the moon.

Suddenly my father would bring us to a standstill and ask my
mother--"Where are we?" Utterly worn out by the walk but still proud of
her husband, she would lovingly confess that she had not the least
idea. He would shrug his shoulders and laugh. And then, as though it had
slipped, with his latchkey, from his waistcoat pocket, he would point
out to us, when it stood before our eyes, the back-gate of our own
garden, which had come hand-in-hand with the familiar corner of the Rue
du Saint-Esprit, to await us, to greet us at the end of our wanderings
over paths unknown. My mother would murmur admiringly "You really are
wonderful!" And from that instant I had not to take another step; the
ground moved forward under my feet in that garden where, for so long,
my actions had ceased to require any control, or even attention, from my
will. Custom came to take me in her arms, carried me all the way up to
my bed, and laid me down there like a little child.

Although Saturday, by beginning an hour earlier, and by depriving her
of the services of Françoise, passed more slowly than other days for my
aunt, yet, the moment it was past, and a new week begun, she would look
forward with impatience to its return, as something that embodied all
the novelty and distraction which her frail and disordered body was
still able to endure. This was not to say, however, that she did not
long, at times, for some even greater variation, that she did not
pass through those abnormal hours in which one thirsts for something
different from what one has, when those people who, through lack of
energy or imagination, are unable to generate any motive power in
themselves, cry out, as the clock strikes or the postman knocks, in
their eagerness for news (even if it be bad news), for some emotion
(even that of grief); when the heartstrings, which prosperity has
silenced, like a harp laid by, yearn to be plucked and sounded again
by some hand, even a brutal hand, even if it shall break them; when
the will, which has with such difficulty brought itself to subdue its
impulse, to renounce its right to abandon itself to its own uncontrolled
desires, and consequent sufferings, would fain cast its guiding reins
into the hands of circumstances, coercive and, it may be, cruel. Of
course, since my aunt's strength, which was completely drained by the
slightest exertion, returned but drop by drop into the pool of her
repose, the reservoir was very slow in filling, and months would go by
before she reached that surplus which other people use up in their daily
activities, but which she had no idea--and could never decide how to
employ. And I have no doubt that then--just as a desire to have her
potatoes served with béchamel sauce, for a change, would be formed,
ultimately, from the pleasure she found in the daily reappearance of
those mashed potatoes of which she was never 'tired'--she would extract
from the accumulation of those monotonous days (on which she so much
depended) a keen expectation of some domestic cataclysm, instantaneous
in its happening, but violent enough to compel her to put into effect,
once for all, one of those changes which she knew would be beneficial to
her health, but to which she could never make up her mind without some
such stimulus. She was genuinely fond of us; she would have enjoyed the
long luxury of weeping for our untimely decease; coming at a moment when
she felt 'well' and was not in a perspiration, the news that the house
was being destroyed by a fire, in which all the rest of us had already
perished, a fire which, in a little while, would not leave one stone
standing upon another, but from which she herself would still have
plenty of time to escape without undue haste, provided that she rose
at once from her bed, must often have haunted her dreams, as a prospect
which combined with the two minor advantages of letting her taste the
full savour of her affection for us in long years of mourning, and of
causing universal stupefaction in the village when she should sally
forth to conduct our obsequies, crushed but courageous, moribund but
erect, the paramount and priceless boon of forcing her at the right
moment, with no time to be lost, no room for weakening hesitations, to
go off and spend the summer at her charming farm of Mirougrain, where
there was a waterfall. Inasmuch as nothing of this sort had ever
occurred, though indeed she must often have pondered the success of
such a manoeuvre as she lay alone absorbed in her interminable games of
patience (and though it must have plunged her in despair from the first
moment of its realisation, from the first of those little unforeseen
facts, the first word of calamitous news, whose accents can never
afterwards be expunged from the memory, everything that bears upon it
the imprint of actual, physical death, so terribly different from the
logical abstraction of its possibility) she would fall back from time
to time, to add an interest to her life, upon imagining other, minor
catastrophes, which she would follow up with passion. She would beguile
herself with a sudden suspicion that Françoise had been robbing her,
that she had set a trap to make certain, and had caught her betrayer
red-handed; and being in the habit, when she made up a game of cards by
herself, of playing her own and her adversary's hands at once, she would
first stammer out Françoise's awkward apologies, and then reply to them
with such a fiery indignation that any of us who happened to intrude
upon her at one of these moments would find her bathed in perspiration,
her eyes blazing, her false hair pushed awry and exposing the baldness
of her brows. Françoise must often, from the next room, have heard these
mordant sarcasms levelled at herself, the mere framing of which in words
would not have relieved my aunt's feelings sufficiently, had they been
allowed to remain in a purely immaterial form, without the degree
of substance and reality which she added to them by murmuring them
half-aloud. Sometimes, however, even these counterpane dramas would not
satisfy my aunt; she must see her work staged. And so, on a Sunday,
with all the doors mysteriously closed, she would confide in Eulalie her
doubts of Françoise's integrity and her determination to be rid of her,
and on another day she would confide in Françoise her suspicions of the
disloyalty of Eulalie, to whom the front-door would very soon be closed
for good. A few days more, and, disgusted with her latest confidant, she
would again be 'as thick as thieves' with the traitor, while, before the
next performance, the two would once more have changed their parts. But
the suspicions which Eulalie might occasionally breed in her were no
more than a fire of straw, which must soon subside for lack of fuel,
since Eulalie was not living with her in the house. It was a very
different matter when the suspect was Françoise, of whose presence under
the same roof as herself my aunt was perpetually conscious, while for
fear of catching cold, were she to leave her bed, she would never dare
go downstairs to the kitchen to see for herself whether there was,
indeed, any foundation for her suspicions. And so on by degrees, until
her mind had no other occupation than to attempt, at every hour of the
day, to discover what was being done, what was being concealed from her
by Françoise. She would detect the most furtive movement of Françoise's
features, something contradictory in what she was saying, some desire
which she appeared to be screening. And she would shew her that she was
unmasked, by, a single word, which made Françoise turn pale, and which
my aunt seemed to find a cruel satisfaction in driving into her unhappy
servant's heart. And the very next Sunday a disclosure by Eulalie--like
one of those discoveries which suddenly open up an unsuspected field
for exploration to some new science which has hitherto followed only
the beaten paths--proved to my aunt that her own worst suspicions fell
a long way short of the appalling truth. "But Françoise ought to know
that," said Eulalie, "now that you have given her a carriage."

"Now that I have given her a carriage!" gasped my aunt.

"Oh, but I didn't know; I only thought so; I saw her go by yesterday in
her open coach, as proud as Artaban, on her way to Roussainville market.
I supposed that it must be Mme. Octave who had given it to her."

So on by degrees, until Françoise and my aunt, the quarry and the
hunter, could never cease from trying to forestall each other's devices.
My mother was afraid lest Françoise should develop a genuine hatred of
my aunt, who was doing everything in her power to annoy her. However
that might be, Françoise had come, more and more, to pay an infinitely
scrupulous attention to my aunt's least word and gesture. When she had
to ask her for anything she would hesitate, first, for a long time,
making up her mind how best to begin. And when she had uttered her
request, she would watch my aunt covertly, trying to guess from the
expression on her face what she thought of it, and how she would reply.
And in this way--whereas an artist who had been reading memoirs of the
seventeenth century, and wished to bring himself nearer to the great
Louis, would consider that he was making progress in that direction when
he constructed a pedigree that traced his own descent from some historic
family, or when he engaged in correspondence with one of the reigning
Sovereigns of Europe, and so would shut his eyes to the mistake he was
making in seeking to establish a similarity by an exact and therefore
lifeless copy of mere outward forms--a middle-aged lady in a small
country town, by doing no more than yield whole-hearted obedience to her
own irresistible eccentricities, and to a spirit of mischief engendered
by the utter idleness of her existence, could see, without ever having
given a thought to Louis XIV, the most trivial occupations of her daily
life, her morning toilet, her luncheon, her afternoon nap, assume, by
virtue of their despotic singularity, something of the interest that was
to be found in what Saint-Simon used to call the 'machinery' of life at
Versailles; and was able, too, to persuade herself that her silence,
a shade of good humour or of arrogance on her features would provide
Françoise with matter for a mental commentary as tense with passion and
terror, as did the silence, the good humour or the arrogance of the King
when a courtier, or even his greatest nobles, had presented a petition
to him, at the turning of an avenue, at Versailles.

One Sunday, when my aunt had received simultaneous visits from the Curé
and from Eulalie, and had been left alone, afterwards, to rest, the
whole family went upstairs to bid her good night, and Mamma ventured
to condole with her on the unlucky coincidence that always brought both
visitors to her door at the same time.

"I hear that things went wrong again to-day, Léonie," she said kindly,
"you have had all your friends here at once."

And my great-aunt interrupted with: "Too many good things..." for, since
her daughter's illness, she felt herself in duty bound to revive her as
far as possible by always drawing her attention to the brighter side of
things. But my father had begun to speak.

"I should like to take advantage," he said, "of the whole family's being
here together, to tell you a story, so as not to have to begin all over
again to each of you separately. I am afraid we are in M. Legrandin's
bad books; he would hardly say 'How d'ye do' to me this morning."

I did not wait to hear the end of my father's story, for I had been with
him myself after mass when we had passed M. Legrandin; instead, I went
downstairs to the kitchen to ask for the bill of fare for our dinner,
which was of fresh interest to me daily, like the news in a paper, and
excited me as might the programme of a coming festivity.

As M. Legrandin had passed close by us on our way from church,
walking by the side of a lady, the owner of a country house in the
neighbourhood, whom we knew only by sight, my father had saluted him in
a manner at once friendly and reserved, without stopping in his walk; M.
Legrandin had barely acknowledged the courtesy, and then with an air of
surprise, as though he had not recognised us, and with that distant look
characteristic of people who do not wish to be agreeable, and who from
the suddenly receding depths of their eyes seem to have caught sight of
you at the far end of an interminably straight road, and at so great
a distance that they content themselves with directing towards you
an almost imperceptible movement of the head, in proportion to your
doll-like dimensions.

Now, the lady who was walking with Legrandin was a model of virtue,
known and highly respected; there could be no question of his being
out for amorous adventure, and annoyed at being detected; and my father
asked himself how he could possibly have displeased our friend.

"I should be all the more sorry to feel that he was angry with us," he
said, "because among all those people in their Sunday clothes there
is something about him, with his little cut-away coat and his soft
neckties, so little 'dressed-up,' so genuinely simple; an air of
innocence, almost, which is really attractive."

But the vote of the family council was unanimous, that my father had
imagined the whole thing, or that Legrandin, at the moment in question,
had been preoccupied in thinking about something else. Anyhow, my
father's fears were dissipated no later than the following evening.
As we returned from a long walk we saw, near the Pont-Vieux, Legrandin
himself, who, on account of the holidays, was spending a few days more
in Combray. He came up to us with outstretched hand: "Do you know,
master book-lover," he asked me, "this line of Paul Desjardins?


  Now are the woods all black, but still the sky is blue.

Is not that a fine rendering of a moment like this? Perhaps you have
never read Paul Desjardins. Read him, my boy, read him; in these days he
is converted, they tell me, into a preaching friar, but he used to have
the most charming water-colour touch--


  Now are the woods all black, but still the sky is blue.

May you always see a blue sky overhead, my young friend; and then, even
when the time comes, which is coming now for me, when the woods are all
black, when night is fast falling, you will be able to console yourself,
as I am doing, by looking up to the sky." He took a cigarette from
his pocket and stood for a long time, his eyes fixed on the horizon.
"Goodbye, friends!" he suddenly exclaimed, and left us.

At the hour when I usually went downstairs to find out what there was
for dinner, its preparation would already have begun, and Françoise,
a colonel with all the forces of nature for her subalterns, as in the
fairy-tales where giants hire themselves out as scullions, would be
stirring the coals, putting the potatoes to steam, and, at the right
moment, finishing over the fire those culinary masterpieces which had
been first got ready in some of the great array of vessels, triumphs of
the potter's craft, which ranged from tubs and boilers and cauldrons
and fish kettles down to jars for game, moulds for pastry, and tiny
pannikins for cream, and included an entire collection of pots and
pans of every shape and size. I would stop by the table, where the
kitchen-maid had shelled them, to inspect the platoons of peas, drawn up
in ranks and numbered, like little green marbles, ready for a game; but
what fascinated me would be the asparagus, tinged with ultramarine
and rosy pink which ran from their heads, finely stippled in mauve and
azure, through a series of imperceptible changes to their white
feet, still stained a little by the soil of their garden-bed: a
rainbow-loveliness that was not of this world. I felt that these
celestial hues indicated the presence of exquisite creatures who had
been pleased to assume vegetable form, who, through the disguise which
covered their firm and edible flesh, allowed me to discern in this
radiance of earliest dawn, these hinted rainbows, these blue evening
shades, that precious quality which I should recognise again when, all
night long after a dinner at which I had partaken of them, they played
(lyrical and coarse in their jesting as the fairies in Shakespeare's
_Dream_) at transforming my humble chamber into a bower of aromatic
perfume.

Poor Giotto's Charity, as Swann had named her, charged by Françoise with
the task of preparing them for the table, would have them lying beside
her in a basket; sitting with a mournful air, as though all the sorrows
of the world were heaped upon her; and the light crowns of azure which
capped the asparagus shoots above their pink jackets would be finely and
separately outlined, star by star, as in Giotto's fresco are the flowers
banded about the brows, or patterning the basket of his Virtue at Padua.
And, meanwhile, Françoise would be turning on the spit one of those
chickens, such as she alone knew how to roast, chickens which had wafted
far abroad from Combray the sweet savour of her merits, and which, while
she was serving them to us at table, would make the quality of kindness
predominate for the moment in my private conception of her character;
the aroma of that cooked flesh, which she knew how to make so unctuous
and so tender, seeming to me no more than the proper perfume of one of
her many virtues.

But the day on which, while my father took counsel with his family upon
our strange meeting with Legrandin, I went down to the kitchen, was one
of those days when Giotto's Charity, still very weak and ill after her
recent confinement, had been unable to rise from her bed; Françoise,
being without assistance, had fallen into arrears. When I went in, I saw
her in the back-kitchen which opened on to the courtyard, in process of
killing a chicken; by its desperate and quite natural resistance, which
Françoise, beside herself with rage as she attempted to slit its throat
beneath the ear, accompanied with shrill cries of "Filthy creature!
Filthy creature!" it made the saintly kindness and unction of our
servant rather less prominent than it would do, next day at dinner, when
it made its appearance in a skin gold-embroidered like a chasuble, and
its precious juice was poured out drop by drop as from a pyx. When it
was dead Françoise mopped up its streaming blood, in which, however,
she did not let her rancour drown, for she gave vent to another burst
of rage, and, gazing down at the carcass of her enemy, uttered a final
"Filthy creature!"

I crept out of the kitchen and upstairs, trembling all over; I could
have prayed, then, for the instant dismissal of Françoise. But who
would have baked me such hot rolls, boiled me such fragrant coffee, and
even--roasted me such chickens? And, as it happened, everyone else had
already had to make the same cowardly reckoning. For my aunt Léonie knew
(though I was still in ignorance of this) that Françoise, who, for her
own daughter or for her nephews, would have given her life without a
murmur, shewed a singular implacability in her dealings with the rest
of the world. In spite of which my aunt still retained her, for, while
conscious of her cruelty, she could appreciate her services. I began
gradually to realise that Françoise's kindness, her compunction, the
sum total of her virtues concealed many of these back-kitchen tragedies,
just as history reveals to us that the reigns of the kings and queens
who are portrayed as kneeling with clasped hands in the windows of
churches, were stained by oppression and bloodshed. I had taken note of
the fact that, apart from her own kinsfolk, the sufferings of humanity
inspired in her a pity which increased in direct ratio to the distance
separating the sufferers from herself. The tears which flowed from her
in torrents when she read of the misfortunes of persons unknown to her,
in a newspaper, were quickly stemmed once she had been able to form a
more accurate mental picture of the victims. One night, shortly after
her confinement, the kitchen-maid was seized with the most appalling
pains; Mamma heard her groans, and rose and awakened Françoise, who,
quite unmoved, declared that all the outcry was mere malingering, that
the girl wanted to 'play the mistress' in the house. The doctor, who
had been afraid of some such attack, had left a marker in a medical
dictionary which we had, at the page on which the symptoms were
described, and had told us to turn up this passage, where we would find
the measures of 'first aid' to be adopted. My mother sent Françoise
to fetch the book, warning her not to let the marker drop out. An hour
elapsed, and Françoise had not returned; my mother, supposing that
she had gone back to bed, grew vexed, and told me to go myself to the
bookcase and fetch the volume. I did so, and there found Françoise who,
in her curiosity to know what the marker indicated, had begun to read
the clinical account of these after-pains, and was violently sobbing,
now that it was a question of a type of illness with which she was not
familiar. At each painful symptom mentioned by the writer she would
exclaim: "Oh, oh, Holy Virgin, is it possible that God wishes any
wretched human creature to suffer so? Oh, the poor girl!"

But when I had called her, and she had returned to the bedside of
Giotto's Charity, her tears at once ceased to flow; she could find no
stimulus for that pleasant sensation of tenderness and pity which she
very well knew, having been moved to it often enough by the perusal
of newspapers; nor any other pleasure of the same kind in her sense of
weariness and irritation at being pulled out of bed in the middle of
the night for the kitchen-maid; so that at the sight of those very
sufferings, the printed account of which had moved her to tears, she
had nothing to offer but ill-tempered mutterings, mingled with bitter
sarcasm, saying, when she thought that we had gone out of earshot:
"Well, she need never have done what she must have done to bring all
this about! She found that pleasant enough, I dare say! She had better
not put on any airs now. All the same, he must have been a god-forsaken
young man to go after _that_. Dear, dear, it's just as they used to say
in my poor mother's country:


  Snaps and snails and puppy-dogs' tails,
    And dirty sluts in plenty,
  Smell sweeter than roses in young men's noses
    When the heart is one-and-twenty."

Although, when her grandson had a slight cold in his head, she would set
off at night, even if she were ill also, instead of going to bed, to
see whether he had everything that he wanted, covering ten miles on foot
before daybreak so as to be in time to begin her work, this same love
for her own people, and her desire to establish the future greatness of
her house on a solid foundation reacted, in her policy with regard to
the other servants, in one unvarying maxim, which was never to let any
of them set foot in my aunt's room; indeed she shewed a sort of pride
in not allowing anyone else to come near my aunt, preferring, when she
herself was ill, to get out of bed and to administer the Vichy water in
person, rather than to concede to the kitchen-maid the right of entry
into her mistress's presence. There is a species of hymenoptera,
observed by Fabre, the burrowing wasp, which in order to provide a
supply of fresh meat for her offspring after her own decease, calls
in the science of anatomy to amplify the resources of her instinctive
cruelty, and, having made a collection of weevils and spiders, proceeds
with marvellous knowledge and skill to pierce the nerve-centre on which
their power of locomotion (but none of their other vital functions)
depends, so that the paralysed insect, beside which her egg is laid,
will furnish the larva, when it is hatched, with a tamed and inoffensive
quarry, incapable either of flight or of resistance, but perfectly fresh
for the larder: in the same way Françoise had adopted, to minister
to her permanent and unfaltering resolution to render the house
uninhabitable to any other servant, a series of crafty and pitiless
stratagems. Many years later we discovered that, if we had been fed on
asparagus day after day throughout that whole season, it was because the
smell of the plants gave the poor kitchen-maid, who had to prepare them,
such violent attacks of asthma that she was finally obliged to leave my
aunt's service.

Alas! we had definitely to alter our opinion of M. Legrandin. On one
of the Sundays following our meeting with him on the Pont-Vieux, after
which my father had been forced to confess himself mistaken, as mass
drew to an end, and, with the sunshine and the noise of the outer world,
something else invaded the church, an atmosphere so far from sacred that
Mme. Goupil, Mme. Percepied (all those, in fact, who a moment ago, when
I arrived a little late, had been sitting motionless, their eyes fixed
on their prayer-books; who, I might even have thought, had not seen
me come in, had not their feet moved slightly to push away the little
kneeling-desk which was preventing me from getting to my chair) began in
loud voices to discuss with us all manner of utterly mundane topics, as
though we were already outside in the Square, we saw, standing on the
sun-baked steps of the porch, dominating the many-coloured tumult of the
market, Legrandin himself, whom the husband of the lady we had seen with
him, on the previous occasion, was just going to introduce to the wife
of another large landed proprietor of the district. Legrandin's face
shewed an extraordinary zeal and animation; he made a profound bow, with
a subsidiary backward movement which brought his spine sharply up into a
position behind its starting-point, a gesture in which he must have
been trained by the husband of his sister, Mme. de Cambremer. This rapid
recovery caused a sort of tense muscular wave to ripple over Legrandin's
hips, which I had not supposed to be so fleshy; I cannot say why, but
this undulation of pure matter, this wholly carnal fluency, with not the
least hint in it of spiritual significance, this wave lashed to a fury
by the wind of an assiduity, an obsequiousness of the basest sort, awoke
my mind suddenly to the possibility of a Legrandin altogether different
from the one whom we knew. The lady gave him some message for her
coachman, and while he was stepping down to her carriage the impression
of joy, timid and devout, which the introduction had stamped there,
still lingered on his face. Carried away in a sort of dream, he smiled,
then he began to hurry back towards the lady; he was walking faster than
usual, and his shoulders swayed backwards and forwards, right and left,
in the most absurd fashion; altogether he looked, so utterly had he
abandoned himself to it, ignoring all other considerations, as though he
were the lifeless and wire-pulled puppet of his own happiness. Meanwhile
we were coming out through the porch; we were passing close beside him;
he was too well bred to turn his head away; but he fixed his eyes, which
had suddenly changed to those of a seer, lost in the profundity of his
vision, on so distant a point of the horizon that he could not see us,
and so had not to acknowledge our presence. His face emerged, still with
an air of innocence, from his straight and pliant coat, which looked
as though conscious of having been led astray, in spite of itself,
and plunged into surroundings of a detested splendour. And a spotted
necktie, stirred by the breezes of the Square, continued to float in
front of Legrandin, like the standard of his proud isolation, of his
noble independence. Just as we reached the house my mother discovered
that we had forgotten the 'Saint-Honoré,' and asked my father to go
back with me and tell them to send it up at once. Near the church we met
Legrandin, coming towards us with the same lady, whom he was escorting
to her carriage. He brushed past us, and did not interrupt what he was
saying to her, but gave us, out of the corner of his blue eye, a little
sign, which began and ended, so to speak, inside his eyelids, and as
it did not involve the least movement of his facial muscles, managed to
pass quite unperceived by the lady; but, striving to compensate by the
intensity of his feelings for the somewhat restricted field in which
they had to find expression, he made that blue chink, which was set
apart for us, sparkle with all the animation of cordiality, which went
far beyond mere playfulness, and almost touched the border-line of
roguery; he subtilised the refinements of good-fellowship into a wink
of connivance, a hint, a hidden meaning, a secret understanding, all the
mysteries of complicity in a plot, and finally exalted his assurances
of friendship to the level of protestations of affection, even of a
declaration of love, lighting up for us, and for us alone, with a secret
and languid flame invisible by the great lady upon his other side, an
enamoured pupil in a countenance of ice.

Only the day before he had asked my parents to send me to dine with him
on this same Sunday evening. "Come and bear your aged friend company,"
he had said to me. "Like the nosegay which a traveller sends us from
some land to which we shall never go again, come and let me breathe from
the far country of your adolescence the scent of those flowers of
spring among which I also used to wander, many years ago. Come with
the primrose, with the canon's beard, with the gold-cup; come with the
stone-crop, whereof are posies made, pledges of love, in the Balzacian
flora, come with that flower of the Resurrection morning, the Easter
daisy, come with the snowballs of the guelder-rose, which begin to
embalm with their fragrance the alleys of your great-aunt's garden ere
the last snows of Lent are melted from its soil. Come with the glorious
silken raiment of the lily, apparel fit for Solomon, and with the
many-coloured enamel of the pansies, but come, above all, with the
spring breeze, still cooled by the last frosts of winter, wafting apart,
for the two butterflies' sake, that have waited outside all morning, the
closed portals of the first Jerusalem rose."

The question was raised at home whether, all things considered, I ought
still to be sent to dine with M. Legrandin. But my grandmother refused
to believe that he could have been impolite.

"You admit yourself that he appears at church there, quite simply
dressed, and all that; he hardly looks like a man of fashion." She added
that; in any event, even if, at the worst, he had been intentionally
rude, it was far better for us to pretend that we had noticed nothing.
And indeed my father himself, though more annoyed than any of us by the
attitude which Legrandin had adopted, may still have held in reserve a
final uncertainty as to its true meaning. It was like every attitude
or action which reveals a man's deep and hidden character; they bear
no relation to what he has previously said, and we cannot confirm our
suspicions by the culprit's evidence, for he will admit nothing; we are
reduced to the evidence of our own senses, and we ask ourselves, in the
face of this detached and incoherent fragment of recollection, whether
indeed our senses have not been the victims of a hallucination; with
the result that such attitudes, and these alone are of importance in
indicating character, are the most apt to leave us in perplexity.

I dined with Legrandin on the terrace of his house, by moonlight. "There
is a charming quality, is there not," he said to me, "in this silence;
for hearts that are wounded, as mine is, a novelist, whom you will read
in time to come, claims that there is no remedy but silence and shadow.
And see you this, my boy, there comes in all lives a time, towards which
you still have far to go, when the weary eyes can endure but one kind of
light, the light which a fine evening like this prepares for us in the
stillroom of darkness, when the ears can listen to no music save what
the moonlight breathes through the flute of silence."

I could hear what M. Legrandin was saying; like everything that he said,
it sounded attractive; but I was disturbed by the memory of a lady whom
I had seen recently for the first time; and thinking, now that I
knew that Legrandin was on friendly terms with several of the local
aristocracy, that perhaps she also was among his acquaintance, I
summoned up all my courage and said to him: "Tell me, sir, do you, by
any chance, know the lady--the ladies of Guermantes?" and I felt glad
because, in pronouncing the name, I had secured a sort of power over
it, by the mere act of drawing it up out of my dreams and giving it an
objective existence in the world of spoken things.

But, at the sound of the word Guermantes, I saw in the middle of each of
our friend's blue eyes a little brown dimple appear, as though they had
been stabbed by some invisible pin-point, while the rest of his pupils,
reacting from the shock, received and secreted the azure overflow.
His fringed eyelids darkened, and drooped. His mouth, which had been
stiffened and seared with bitter lines, was the first to recover, and
smiled, while his eyes still seemed full of pain, like the eyes of a
good-looking martyr whose body bristles with arrows.

"No, I do not know them," he said, but instead of uttering so simple a
piece of information, a reply in which there was so little that could
astonish me, in the natural and conversational tone which would have
befitted it, he recited it with a separate stress upon each word,
leaning forward, bowing his head, with at once the vehemence which a man
gives, so as to be believed, to a highly improbable statement (as though
the fact that he did not know the Guermantes could be due only to some
strange accident of fortune) and with the emphasis of a man who, finding
himself unable to keep silence about what is to him a painful situation,
chooses to proclaim it aloud, so as to convince his hearers that the
confession he is making is one that causes him no embarrassment, but is
easy, agreeable, spontaneous, that the situation in question, in this
case the absence of relations with the Guermantes family, might very
well have been not forced upon, but actually designed by Legrandin
himself, might arise from some family tradition, some moral principle or
mystical vow which expressly forbade his seeking their society.

"No," he resumed, explaining by his words the tone in which they were
uttered. "No, I do not know them; I have never wished to know them; I
have always made a point of preserving complete independence; at heart,
as you know, I am a bit of a Radical. People are always coming to me
about it, telling me I am mistaken in not going to Guermantes, that I
make myself seem ill-bred, uncivilised, an old bear. But that's not the
sort of reputation that can frighten me; it's too true! In my heart
of hearts I care for nothing in the world now but a few churches,
books--two or three, pictures--rather more, perhaps, and the light of
the moon when the fresh breeze of youth (such as yours) wafts to my
nostrils the scent of gardens whose flowers my old eyes are not sharp
enough, now, to distinguish."

I did not understand very clearly why, in order to refrain from going
to the houses of people whom one did not know, it should be necessary to
cling to one's independence, nor how that could give one the appearance
of a savage or a bear. But what I did understand was this, that
Legrandin was not altogether truthful when he said that he cared only
for churches, moonlight, and youth; he cared also, he cared a very
great deal, for people who lived in country houses, and would be so much
afraid, when in their company, of incurring their displeasure that he
would never dare to let them see that he numbered, as well, among
his friends middle-class people, the families of solicitors and
stockbrokers, preferring, if the truth must be known, that it should
be revealed in his absence, when he was out of earshot, that judgment
should go against him (if so it must) by default: in a word, he was a
snob. Of course he would never have admitted all or any of this in the
poetical language which my family and I so much admired. And if I asked
him, "Do you know the Guermantes family?" Legrandin the talker would
reply, "No, I have never cared to know them." But unfortunately the
talker was now subordinated to another Legrandin, whom he kept carefully
hidden in his breast, whom he would never consciously exhibit, because
this other could tell stories about our own Legrandin and about his
snobbishness which would have ruined his reputation for ever; and this
other Legrandin had replied to me already in that wounded look, that
stiffened smile, the undue gravity of his tone in uttering those
few words, in the thousand arrows by which our own Legrandin had
instantaneously been stabbed and sickened, like a Saint Sebastian of
snobbery:

"Oh, how you hurt me! No, I do not know the Guermantes family. Do not
remind me of the great sorrow of my life." And since this other,
this irrepressible, dominant, despotic Legrandin, if he lacked our
Legrandin's charming vocabulary, shewed an infinitely greater promptness
in expressing himself, by means of what are called 'reflexes,' it
followed that, when Legrandin the talker attempted to silence him, he
would already have spoken, and it would be useless for our friend to
deplore the bad impression which the revelations of his _alter ego_ must
have caused, since he could do no more now than endeavour to mitigate
them.

This was not to say that M. Legrandin was anything but sincere when he
inveighed against snobs. He could not (from his own knowledge, at least)
be aware that he was one also, since it is only with the passions of
others that we are ever really familiar, and what we come to find out
about our own can be no more than what other people have shewn us. Upon
ourselves they react but indirectly, through our imagination, which
substitutes for our actual, primary motives other, secondary motives,
less stark and therefore more decent. Never had Legrandin's snobbishness
impelled him to make a habit of visiting a duchess as such. Instead, it
would set his imagination to make that duchess appear, in Legrandin's
eyes, endowed with all the graces. He would be drawn towards the
duchess, assuring himself the while that he was yielding to the
attractions of her mind, and her other virtues, which the vile race of
snobs could never understand. Only his fellow-snobs knew that he was
of their number, for, owing to their inability to appreciate the
intervening efforts of his imagination, they saw in close juxtaposition
the social activities of Legrandin and their primary cause.

At home, meanwhile, we had no longer any illusions as to M. Legrandin,
and our relations with him had become much more distant. Mamma would be
greatly delighted whenever she caught him red-handed in the sin, which
he continued to call the unpardonable sin, of snobbery. As for my
father, he found it difficult to take Legrandin's airs in so light, in
so detached a spirit; and when there was some talk, one year, of sending
me to spend the long summer holidays at Balbec with my grandmother,
he said: "I must, most certainly, tell Legrandin that you are going to
Balbec, to see whether he will offer you an introduction to his sister.
He probably doesn't remember telling us that she lived within a mile of
the place."

My grandmother, who held that, when one went to the seaside, one ought
to be on the beach from morning to night, to taste the salt breezes, and
that one should not know anyone in the place, because calls and parties
and excursions were so much time stolen from what belonged, by rights,
to the sea-air, begged him on no account to speak to Legrandin of our
plans; for already, in her mind's eye, she could see his sister, Mme. de
Cambremer, alighting from her carriage at the door of our hotel just
as we were on the point of going out fishing, and obliging us to remain
indoors all afternoon to entertain her. But Mamma laughed her fears to
scorn, for she herself felt that the danger was not so threatening, and
that Legrandin would shew no undue anxiety to make us acquainted with
his sister. And, as it happened, there was no need for any of us to
introduce the subject of Balbec, for it was Legrandin himself who,
without the least suspicion that we had ever had any intention of
visiting those parts, walked into the trap uninvited one evening, when
we met him strolling on the banks of the Vivonne.

"There are tints in the clouds this evening, violets and blues, which
are very beautiful, are they not, my friend?" he said to my father.
"Especially a blue which is far more floral than atmospheric, a
cineraria blue, which it is surprising to see in the sky. And that
little pink cloud there, has it not just the tint of some flower, a
carnation or hydrangea? Nowhere, perhaps, except on the shores of the
English Channel, where Normandy merges into Brittany, have I been able
to find such copious examples of what you might call a vegetable kingdom
in the clouds. Down there, close to Balbec, among all those places which
are still so uncivilised, there is a little bay, charmingly quiet, where
the sunsets of the Auge Valley, those red-and-gold sunsets (which,
all the same, I am very far from despising) seem commonplace and
insignificant; for in that moist and gentle atmosphere these heavenly
flower-beds will break into blossom, in a few moments, in the evenings,
incomparably lovely, and often lasting for hours before they fade.
Others shed their leaves at once, and then it is more beautiful still
to see the sky strewn with the scattering of their innumerable petals,
sulphurous yellow and rosy red. In that bay, which they call the Opal
Bay, the golden sands appear more charming still from being fastened,
like fair Andromeda, to those terrible rocks of the surrounding coast,
to that funereal shore, famed for the number of its wrecks, where every
winter many a brave vessel falls a victim to the perils of the sea.
Balbec! the oldest bone in the geological skeleton that underlies our
soil, the true Armor, the sea, the land's end, the accursed region
which Anatole France--an enchanter whose works our young friend ought to
read--has so well depicted, beneath its eternal fogs, as though it were
indeed the land of the Cimmerians in the Odyssey. Balbec; yes, they
are building hotels there now, superimposing them upon its ancient and
charming soil, which they are powerless to alter; how delightful it is,
down there, to be able to step out at once into regions so primitive and
so entrancing."

"Indeed! And do you know anyone at Balbec?" inquired my father. "This
young man is just going to spend a couple of months there with his
grandmother, and my wife too, perhaps."

Legrandin, taken unawares by the question at a moment when he was
looking directly at my father, was unable to turn aside his gaze, and so
concentrated it with steadily increasing intensity--smiling mournfully
the while--upon the eyes of his questioner, with an air of friendliness
and frankness and of not being afraid to look him in the face, until he
seemed to have penetrated my father's skull, as it had been a ball of
glass, and to be seeing, at the moment, a long way beyond and behind it,
a brightly coloured cloud, which provided him with a mental alibi, and
would enable him to establish the theory that, just when he was
being asked whether he knew anyone at Balbec, he had been thinking
of something else, and so had not heard the question. As a rule these
tactics make the questioner proceed to ask, "Why, what are you thinking
about?" But my father, inquisitive, annoyed, and cruel, repeated: "Have
you friends, then, in that neighbourhood, that you know Balbec so well?"

In a final and desperate effort the smiling gaze of Legrandin struggled
to the extreme limits of its tenderness, vagueness, candour, and
distraction; then feeling, no doubt, that there was nothing left for it
now but to answer, he said to us: "I have friends all the world over,
wherever there are companies of trees, stricken but not defeated,
which have come together to offer a common supplication, with pathetic
obstinacy, to an inclement sky which has no mercy upon them."

"That is not quite what I meant," interrupted my father, obstinate as
a tree and merciless as the sky. "I asked you, in case anything should
happen to my mother-in-law and she wanted to feel that she was not all
alone down there, at the ends of the earth, whether you knew any of the
people."

"There as elsewhere, I know everyone and I know no one," replied
Legrandin, who was by no means ready yet to surrender; "places I know
well, people very slightly. But, down there, the places themselves seem
to me just like people, rare and wonderful people, of a delicate quality
which would have been corrupted and ruined by the gift of life. Perhaps
it is a castle which you encounter upon the cliff's edge; standing there
by the roadside, where it has halted to contemplate its sorrows before
an evening sky, still rosy, through which a golden moon is climbing;
while the fishing-boats, homeward bound, creasing the watered silk of
the Channel, hoist its pennant at their mastheads and carry its colours.
Or perhaps it is a simple dwelling-house that stands alone, ugly, if
anything, timid-seeming but full of romance, hiding from every eye some
imperishable secret of happiness and disenchantment. That land which
knows not truth," he continued with Machiavellian subtlety, "that land
of infinite fiction makes bad reading for any boy; and is certainly
not what I should choose or recommend for my young friend here, who is
already so much inclined to melancholy, for a heart already predisposed
to receive its impressions. Climates that breathe amorous secrets and
futile regrets may agree with an old and disillusioned man like myself;
but they must always prove fatal to a temperament which is still
unformed. Believe me," he went on with emphasis, "the waters of that
bay--more Breton than Norman--may exert a sedative influence, though
even that is of questionable value, upon a heart which, like mine, is no
longer unbroken, a heart for whose wounds there is no longer anything
to compensate. But at your age, my boy, those waters are
contra-indicated.... Good night to you, neighbours," he added, moving
away from us with that evasive abruptness to which we were accustomed;
and then, turning towards us, with a physicianly finger raised in
warning, he resumed the consultation: "No Balbec before you are fifty!"
he called out to me, "and even then it must depend on the state of the
heart."

My father spoke to him of it again, as often as we met him, and tortured
him with questions, but it was labour in vain: like that scholarly
swindler who devoted to the fabrication of forged palimpsests a wealth
of skill and knowledge and industry the hundredth part of which would
have sufficed to establish him in a more lucrative--but an honourable
occupation, M. Legrandin, had we insisted further, would in the end have
constructed a whole system of ethics, and a celestial geography of Lower
Normandy, sooner than admit to us that, within a mile of Balbec, his own
sister was living in her own house; sooner than find himself obliged
to offer us a letter of introduction, the prospect of which would never
have inspired him with such terror had he been absolutely certain--as,
from his knowledge of my grandmother's character, he really ought to
have been certain--that in no circumstances whatsoever would we have
dreamed of making use of it.

* * *

We used always to return from our walks in good time to pay aunt Léonie
a visit before dinner. In the first weeks of our Combray holidays, when
the days ended early, we would still be able to see, as we turned
into the Rue du Saint-Esprit, a reflection of the western sky from the
windows of the house and a band of purple at the foot of the Calvary,
which was mirrored further on in the pond; a fiery glow which,
accompanied often by a cold that burned and stung, would associate
itself in my mind with the glow of the fire over which, at that very
moment, was roasting the chicken that was to furnish me, in place of the
poetic pleasure I had found in my walk, with the sensual pleasures of
good feeding, warmth and rest. But in summer, when we came back to the
house, the sun would not have set; and while we were upstairs paying our
visit to aunt Léonie its rays, sinking until they touched and lay along
her window-sill, would there be caught and held by the large inner
curtains and the bands which tied them back to the wall, and split and
scattered and filtered; and then, at last, would fall upon and inlay
with tiny flakes of gold the lemonwood of her chest-of-drawers,
illuminating the room in their passage with the same delicate, slanting,
shadowed beams that fall among the boles of forest trees. But on some
days, though very rarely, the chest-of-drawers would long since have
shed its momentary adornments, there would no longer, as we turned into
the Rue du Saint-Esprit, be any reflection from the western sky burning
along the line of window-panes; the pond beneath the Calvary would
have lost its fiery glow, sometimes indeed had changed already to an
opalescent pallor, while a long ribbon of moonlight, bent and broken
and broadened by every ripple upon the water's surface, would be lying
across it, from end to end. Then, as we drew near the house, we would
make out a figure standing upon the doorstep, and Mamma would say to me:
"Good heavens! There is Françoise looking out for us; your aunt must be
anxious; that means we are late."

And without wasting time by stopping to take off our 'things' we would
fly upstairs to my aunt Léonie's room to reassure her, to prove to her
by our bodily presence that all her gloomy imaginings were false, that,
on the contrary, nothing had happened to us, but that we had gone the
'Guermantes way,' and, good lord, when one took that walk, my aunt knew
well enough that one could never say at what time one would be home.

"There, Françoise," my aunt would say, "didn't I tell you that they must
have gone the Guermantes way? Good gracious! They must be hungry! And
your nice leg of mutton will be quite dried up now, after all the hours
it's been waiting. What a time to come in! Well, and so you went the
Guermantes way?"

"But, Leonie, I supposed you knew," Mamma would answer. "I thought
that Françoise had seen us go out by the little gate, through the
kitchen-garden."

For there were, in the environs of Combray, two 'ways' which we used to
take for our walks, and so diametrically opposed that we would actually
leave the house by a different door, according to the way we had chosen:
the way towards Méséglise-la-Vineuse, which we called also 'Swann's
way,' because, to get there, one had to pass along the boundary of M.
Swann's estate, and the 'Guermantes way.' Of Méséglise-la-Vineuse, to
tell the truth, I never knew anything more than the way there, and
the strange people who would come over on Sundays to take the air in
Combray, people whom, this time, neither my aunt nor any of us would
'know at all,' and whom we would therefore assume to be 'people who must
have come over from Méséglise.' As for Guermantes, I was to know it well
enough one day, but that day had still to come; and, during the whole
of my boyhood, if Méséglise was to me something as inaccessible as the
horizon, which remained hidden from sight, however far one went, by the
folds of a country which no longer bore the least resemblance to the
country round Combray; Guermantes, on the other hand, meant no more than
the ultimate goal, ideal rather than real, of the 'Guermantes way,' a
sort of abstract geographical term like the North Pole or the Equator.
And so to 'take the Guermantes way' in order to get to Méséglise, or
vice versa, would have seemed to me as nonsensical a proceeding as to
turn to the east in order to reach the west. Since my father used always
to speak of the 'Méséglise way' as comprising the finest view of a plain
that he knew anywhere, and of the 'Guermantes way' as typical of river
scenery, I had invested each of them, by conceiving them in this way as
two distinct entities, with that cohesion, that unity which belongs
only to the figments of the mind; the smallest detail of either of
them appeared to me as a precious thing, which exhibited the special
excellence of the whole, while, immediately beside them, in the first
stages of our walk, before we had reached the sacred soil of one or the
other, the purely material roads, at definite points on which they
were set down as the ideal view over a plain and the ideal scenery of a
river, were no more worth the trouble of looking at them than, to a keen
playgoer and lover of dramatic art, are the little streets which may
happen to run past the walls of a theatre. But, above all, I set between
them, far more distinctly than the mere distance in miles and yards and
inches which separated one from the other, the distance that there was
between the two parts of my brain in which I used to think of them, one
of those distances of the mind which time serves only to lengthen, which
separate things irremediably from one another, keeping them for ever
upon different planes. And this distinction was rendered still more
absolute because the habit we had of never going both ways on the same
day, or in the course of the same walk, but the 'Méséglise way' one time
and the 'Guermantes way' another, shut them up, so to speak, far apart
and unaware of each other's existence, in the sealed vessels--between
which there could be no communication--of separate afternoons.

When we had decided to go the 'Méséglise way' we would start (without
undue haste, and even if the sky were clouded over, since the walk was
not very long, and did not take us too far from home), as though we were
not going anywhere in particular, by the front-door of my aunt's house,
which opened on to the Rue du Saint-Esprit. We would be greeted by
the gunsmith, we would drop our letters into the box, we would tell
Théodore, from Françoise, as we passed, that she had run out of oil
or coffee, and we would leave the town by the road which ran along the
white fence of M. Swann's park. Before reaching it we would be met on
our way by the scent of his lilac-trees, come out to welcome strangers.
Out of the fresh little green hearts of their foliage the lilacs raised
inquisitively over the fence of the park their plumes of white or purple
blossom, which glowed, even in the shade, with the sunlight in which
they had been bathed. Some of them, half-concealed by the little
tiled house, called the Archers' Lodge, in which Swann's keeper lived,
overtopped its gothic gable with their rosy minaret. The nymphs of
spring would have seemed coarse and vulgar in comparison with these
young houris, who retained, in this French garden, the pure and vivid
colouring of a Persian miniature. Despite my desire to throw my arms
about their pliant forms and to draw down towards me the starry locks
that crowned their fragrant heads, we would pass them by without
stopping, for my parents had ceased to visit Tansonville since Swann's
marriage, and, so as not to appear to be looking into his park, we
would, instead of taking the road which ran beside its boundary and then
climbed straight up to the open fields, choose another way, which led in
the same direction, but circuitously, and brought us out rather too far
from home.

One day my grandfather said to my 'father: "Don't you remember Swann's
telling us yesterday that his wife and daughter had gone off to Rheims
and that he was taking the opportunity of spending a day or two in
Paris? We might go along by the park, since the ladies are not at home;
that will make it a little shorter."

We stopped for a moment by the fence. Lilac-time was nearly over; some
of the trees still thrust aloft, in tall purple chandeliers, their tiny
balls of blossom, but in many places among their foliage where, only
a week before, they had still been breaking in waves of fragrant foam,
these were now spent and shrivelled and discoloured, a hollow scum, dry
and scentless. My grandfather pointed out to my father in what respects
the appearance of the place was still the same, and how far it had
altered since the walk that he had taken with old M. Swann, on the day
of his wife's death; and he seized the opportunity to tell us, once
again, the story of that walk.

In front of us a path bordered with nasturtiums rose in the full glare
of the sun towards the house. But to our right the park stretched away
into the distance, on level ground. Overshadowed by the tall trees which
stood close around it, an 'ornamental water' had been constructed by
Swann's parents but, even in his most artificial creations, nature is
the material upon which man has to work; certain spots will persist in
remaining surrounded by the vassals of their own especial sovereignty,
and will raise their immemorial standards among all the 'laid-out'
scenery of a park, just as they would have done far from any human
interference, in a solitude which must everywhere return to engulf
them, springing up out of the necessities of their exposed position, and
superimposing itself upon the work of man's hands. And so it was that,
at the foot of the path which led down to this artificial lake, there
might be seen, in its two tiers woven of trailing forget-me-nots below
and of periwinkle flowers above, the natural, delicate, blue garland
which binds the luminous, shadowed brows of water-nymphs; while the
iris, its swords sweeping every way in regal profusion, stretched out
over agrimony and water-growing king-cups the lilied sceptres, tattered
glories of yellow and purple, of the kingdom of the lake.

The absence of Mlle. Swann, which--since it preserved me from the
terrible risk of seeing her appear on one of the paths, and of being
identified and scorned by this so privileged little girl who had
Bergotte for a friend and used to go with him to visit cathedrals--made
the exploration of Tansonville, now for the first time permitted me, a
matter of indifference to myself, seemed however to invest the property,
in my grandfather's and father's eyes, with a fresh and transient charm,
and (like an entirely cloudless sky when one is going mountaineering) to
make the day extraordinarily propitious for a walk in this direction;
I should have liked to see their reckoning proved false, to see, by a
miracle, Mlle. Swann appear, with her father, so close to us that we
should not have time to escape, and should therefore be obliged to make
her acquaintance. And so, when I suddenly noticed a straw basket lying
forgotten on the grass by the side of a line whose float was bobbing
in the water, I made a great effort to keep my father and grandfather
looking in another direction, away from this sign that she might, after
all, be in residence. Still, as Swann had told us that he ought not,
really, to go away just then, as he had some people staying in the
house, the line might equally belong to one of these guests. Not a
footstep was to be heard on any of the paths. Somewhere in one of the
tall trees, making a stage in its height, an invisible bird, desperately
attempting to make the day seem shorter, was exploring with a long,
continuous note the solitude that pressed it on every side, but it
received at once so unanimous an answer, so powerful a repercussion of
silence and of immobility that, one would have said, it had arrested
for all eternity the moment which it had been trying to make pass more
quickly. The sunlight fell so implacably from a fixed sky that one was
naturally inclined to slip away out of the reach of its attentions, and
even the slumbering water, whose repose was perpetually being invaded by
the insects that swarmed above its surface, while it dreamed, no doubt,
of some imaginary maelstrom, intensified the uneasiness which the sight
of that floating cork had wrought in me, by appearing to draw it at
full speed across the silent reaches of a mirrored firmament; now almost
vertical, it seemed on the point of plunging down out of sight, and
I had begun to ask myself whether, setting aside the longing and the
terror that I had of making her acquaintance, it was not actually my
duty to warn Mlle. Swann that the fish was biting--when I was obliged
to run after my father and grandfather, who were calling me, and were
surprised that I had not followed them along the little path, climbing
up hill towards the open fields, into which they had already turned. I
found the whole path throbbing with the fragrance of hawthorn-blossom.
The hedge resembled a series of chapels, whose walls were no longer
visible under the mountains of flowers that were heaped upon their
altars; while underneath, the sun cast a square of light upon the
ground, as though it had shone in upon them through a window; the scent
that swept out over me from them was as rich, and as circumscribed in
its range, as though I had been standing before the Lady-altar, and
the flowers, themselves adorned also, held out each its little bunch of
glittering stamens with an air of inattention, fine, radiating 'nerves'
in the flamboyant style of architecture, like those which, in church,
framed the stair to the rood-loft or closed the perpendicular tracery
of the windows, but here spread out into pools of fleshy white, like
strawberry-beds in spring. How simple and rustic, in comparison with
these, would seem the dog-roses which, in a few weeks' time, would be
climbing the same hillside path in the heat of the sun, dressed in the
smooth silk of their blushing pink bodices, which would be undone and
scattered by the first breath of wind.

But it was in vain that I lingered before the hawthorns, to breathe in,
to marshal before my mind (which knew not what to make of it), to lose
in order to rediscover their invisible and unchanging odour, to absorb
myself in the rhythm which disposed their flowers here and there with
the light-heartedness of youth, and at intervals as unexpected as
certain intervals of music; they offered me an indefinite continuation
of the same charm, in an inexhaustible profusion, but without letting
me delve into it any more deeply, like those melodies which one can play
over a hundred times in succession without coming any nearer to their
secret. I turned away from them for a moment so as to be able to return
to them with renewed strength. My eyes followed up the slope which,
outside the hedge, rose steeply to the fields, a poppy that had strayed
and been lost by its fellows, or a few cornflowers that had fallen
lazily behind, and decorated the ground here and there with their
flowers like the border of a tapestry, in which may be seen at intervals
hints of the rustic theme which appears triumphant in the panel itself;
infrequent still, spaced apart as the scattered houses which warn us
that we are approaching a village, they betokened to me the vast expanse
of waving corn beneath the fleecy clouds, and the sight of a single
poppy hoisting upon its slender rigging and holding against the breeze
its scarlet ensign, over the buoy of rich black earth from which it
sprang, made my heart beat as does a wayfarer's when he perceives, upon
some low-lying ground, an old and broken boat which is being caulked and
made seaworthy, and cries out, although he has not yet caught sight of
it, "The Sea!"

And then I returned to my hawthorns, and stood before them as one stands
before those masterpieces of painting which, one imagines, one will
be better able to 'take in' when one has looked away, for a moment, at
something else; but in vain did I shape my fingers into a frame, so as
to have nothing but the hawthorns before my eyes; the sentiment which
they aroused in me remained obscure and vague, struggling and failing
to free itself, to float across and become one with the flowers. They
themselves offered me no enlightenment, and I could not call upon any
other flowers to satisfy this mysterious longing. And then, inspiring
me with that rapture which we feel on seeing a work by our favourite
painter quite different from any of those that we already know, or,
better still, when some one has taken us and set us down in front of a
picture of which we have hitherto seen no more than a pencilled sketch,
or when a piece of music which we have heard played over on the piano
bursts out again in our ears with all the splendour and fullness of an
orchestra, my grandfather called me to him, and, pointing to the hedge
of Tansonville, said: "You are fond of hawthorns; just look at this pink
one; isn't it pretty?"

And it was indeed a hawthorn, but one whose flowers were pink, and
lovelier even than the white. It, too, was in holiday attire, for one of
those days which are the only true holidays, the holy days of religion,
because they are not appointed by any capricious accident, as secular
holidays are appointed, upon days which are not specially ordained for
such observances, which have nothing about them that is essentially
festal--but it was attired even more richly than the rest, for the
flowers which clung to its branches, one above another, so thickly as to
leave no part of the tree undecorated, like the tassels wreathed about
the crook of a rococo shepherdess, were every one of them 'in colour,'
and consequently of a superior quality, by the aesthetic standards of
Combray, to the 'plain,' if one was to judge by the scale of prices
at the 'stores' in the Square, or at Camus's, where the most expensive
biscuits were those whose sugar was pink. And for my own part I set a
higher value on cream cheese when it was pink, when I had been allowed
to tinge it with crushed strawberries. And these flowers had chosen
precisely the colour of some edible and delicious thing, or of some
exquisite addition to one's costume for a great festival, which colours,
inasmuch as they make plain the reason for their superiority, are those
whose beauty is most evident to the eyes of children, and for that
reason must always seem more vivid and more natural than any other
tints, even after the child's mind has realised that they offer no
gratification to the appetite, and have not been selected by the
dressmaker. And, indeed, I had felt at once, as I had felt before
the white blossom, but now still more marvelling, that it was in no
artificial manner, by no device of human construction, that the festal
intention of these flowers was revealed, but that it was Nature herself
who had spontaneously expressed it (with the simplicity of a woman from
a village shop, labouring at the decoration of a street altar for some
procession) by burying the bush in these little rosettes, almost too
ravishing in colour, this rustic 'pompadour.' High up on the branches,
like so many of those tiny rose-trees, their pots concealed in jackets
of paper lace, whose slender stems rise in a forest from the altar on
the greater festivals, a thousand buds were swelling and opening, paler
in colour, but each disclosing as it burst, as at the bottom of a cup of
pink marble, its blood-red stain, and suggesting even more strongly
than the full-blown flowers the special, irresistible quality of the
hawthorn-tree, which, wherever it budded, wherever it was about to
blossom, could bud and blossom in pink flowers alone. Taking its place
in the hedge, but as different from the rest as a young girl in holiday
attire among a crowd of dowdy women in everyday clothes, who are staying
at home, equipped and ready for the 'Month of Mary,' of which it seemed
already to form a part, it shone and smiled in its cool, rosy garments,
a Catholic bush indeed, and altogether delightful.

The hedge allowed us a glimpse, inside the park, of an alley bordered
with jasmine, pansies, and verbenas, among which the stocks held open
their fresh plump purses, of a pink as fragrant and as faded as old
Spanish leather, while on the gravel-path a long watering-pipe, painted
green, coiling across the ground, poured, where its holes were, over the
flowers whose perfume those holes inhaled, a vertical and prismatic fan
of infinitesimal, rainbow-coloured drops. Suddenly I stood still, unable
to move, as happens when something appears that requires not only our
eyes to take it in, but involves a deeper kind of perception and takes
possession of the whole of our being. A little girl, with fair, reddish
hair, who appeared to be returning from a walk, and held a trowel in her
hand, was looking at us, raising towards us a face powdered with pinkish
freckles. Her black eyes gleamed, and as I did not at that time know,
and indeed have never since learned how to reduce to its objective
elements any strong impression, since I had not, as they say, enough
'power of observation' to isolate the sense of their colour, for a long
time afterwards, whenever I thought of her, the memory of those bright
eyes would at once present itself to me as a vivid azure, since her
complexion was fair; so much so that, perhaps, if her eyes had not been
quite so black--which was what struck one most forcibly on first meeting
her--I should not have been, as I was, especially enamoured of their
imagined blue.

I gazed at her, at first with that gaze which is not merely a messenger
from the eyes, but in whose window all the senses assemble and lean out,
petrified and anxious, that gaze which would fain reach, touch, capture,
bear off in triumph the body at which it is aimed, and the soul with the
body; then (so frightened was I lest at any moment my grandfather and
father, catching sight of the girl, might tear me away from her, by
making me run on in front of them) with another, an unconsciously
appealing look, whose object was to force her to pay attention to me, to
see, to know me. She cast a glance forwards and sideways, so as to take
stock of my grandfather and father, and doubtless the impression she
formed of them was that we were all absurd people, for she turned away
with an indifferent and contemptuous air, withdrew herself so as to
spare her face the indignity of remaining within their field of
vision; and while they, continuing to walk on without noticing her, had
overtaken and passed me, she allowed her eyes to wander, over the space
that lay between us, in my direction, without any particular expression,
without appearing to have seen me, but with an intensity, a half-hidden
smile which I was unable to interpret, according to the instruction I
had received in the ways of good breeding, save as a mark of infinite
disgust; and her hand, at the same time, sketched in the air an
indelicate gesture, for which, when it was addressed in public to a
person whom one did not know, the little dictionary of manners which
I carried in my mind supplied only one meaning, namely, a deliberate
insult.

"Gilberte, come along; what are you doing?" called out in a piercing
tone of authority a lady in white, whom I had not seen until that
moment, while, a little way beyond her, a gentleman in a suit of linen
'ducks,' whom I did not know either, stared at me with eyes which seemed
to be starting from his head; the little girl's smile abruptly faded,
and, seizing her trowel, she made off without turning to look again in
my direction, with an air of obedience, inscrutable and sly.

And so was wafted to my ears the name of Gilberte, bestowed on me like a
talisman which might, perhaps, enable me some day to rediscover her whom
its syllables had just endowed with a definite personality, whereas, a
moment earlier, she had been only something vaguely seen. So it came
to me, uttered across the heads of the stocks and jasmines, pungent and
cool as the drops which fell from the green watering-pipe; impregnating
and irradiating the zone of pure air through which it had passed, which
it set apart and isolated from all other air, with the mystery of the
life of her whom its syllables designated to the happy creatures that
lived and walked and travelled in her company; unfolding through the
arch of the pink hawthorn, which opened at the height of my shoulder,
the quintessence of their familiarity--so exquisitely painful to
myself--with her, and with all that unknown world of her existence, into
which I should never penetrate.

For a moment (while we moved away, and my grandfather murmured: "Poor
Swann, what a life they are leading him; fancy sending him away so
that she can be left alone with her Charlus--for that was Charlus: I
recognised him at once! And the child, too; at her age, to be mixed up
in all that!") the impression left on me by the despotic tone in which
Gilberte's mother had spoken to her, without her replying, by exhibiting
her to me as being obliged to yield obedience to some one else, as not
being indeed superior to the whole world, calmed my sufferings somewhat,
revived some hope in me, and cooled the ardour of my love. But very soon
that love surged up again in me like a reaction by which my humiliated
heart was endeavouring to rise to Gilberte's level, or to draw her down
to its own. I loved her; I was sorry not to have had the time and the
inspiration to insult her, to do her some injury, to force her to keep
some memory of me. I knew her to be so beautiful that I should have
liked to be able to retrace my steps so as to shake my fist at her and
shout, "I think you are hideous, grotesque; you are utterly disgusting!"
However, I walked away, carrying with me, then and for ever afterwards,
as the first illustration of a type of happiness rendered inaccessible
to a little boy of my kind by certain laws of nature which it was
impossible to transgress, the picture of a little girl with reddish
hair, and a skin freckled with tiny pink marks, who held a trowel in
her hand, and smiled as she directed towards me a long and subtle and
inexpressive stare. And already the charm with which her name, like a
cloud of incense, had filled that archway in the pink hawthorn through
which she and I had, together, heard its sound, was beginning to
conquer, to cover, to embalm, to beautify everything with which it had
any association: her grandparents, whom my own had been so unspeakably
fortunate as to know, the glorious profession of a stockholder, even
the melancholy neighbourhood of the Champs-Elysées, where she lived in
Paris.

"Léonie," said my grandfather on our return, "I wish we had had you with
us this afternoon. You would never have known Tansonville. If I had had
the courage I would have cut you a branch of that pink hawthorn you used
to like so much." And so my grandfather told her the story of our walk,
either just to amuse her, or perhaps because there was still some hope
that she might be stimulated to rise from her bed and to go out of
doors. For in earlier days she had been very fond of Tansonville, and,
moreover, Swann's visits had been the last that she had continued to
receive, at a time when she had already closed her doors to all the
world. And just as, when he called, in these later days, to inquire for
her (and she was still the only person in our household whom he would
ask to see), she would send down to say that she was tired at the moment
and resting, but that she would be happy to see him another time,
so, this evening, she said to my grandfather, "Yes, some day when the
weather is fine I shall go for a drive as far as the gate of the park."
And in saying this she was quite sincere. She would have liked to see
Swann and Tansonville again; but the mere wish to do so sufficed for all
that remained of her strength, which its fulfilment would have more
than exhausted. Sometimes a spell of fine weather made her a little more
energetic, she would rise and put on her clothes; but before she had
reached the outer room she would be 'tired' again, and would insist on
returning to her bed. The process which had begun in her--and in her a
little earlier only than it must come to all of us--was the great and
general renunciation which old age makes in preparation for death, the
chrysalis stage of life, which may be observed wherever life has been
unduly prolonged; even in old lovers who have lived for one another with
the utmost intensity of passion, and in old friends bound by the closest
ties of mental sympathy, who, after a certain year, cease to make the
necessary journey, or even to cross the street to see one another, cease
to correspond, and know well that they will communicate no more in this
world. My aunt must have been perfectly well aware that she would not
see Swann again, that she would never leave her own house any more, but
this ultimate seclusion seemed to be accepted by her with all the more
readiness for the very reason which, to our minds, ought to have made
it more unbearable; namely, that such a seclusion was forced upon her by
the gradual and steady diminution in her strength which she was able to
measure daily, which, by making every action, every movement 'tiring' to
her if not actually painful, gave to inaction, isolation and silence the
blessed, strengthening and refreshing charm of repose.

My aunt did not go to see the pink hawthorn in the hedge, but at all
hours of the day I would ask the rest of my family whether she was
not going to go, whether she used not, at one time, to go often to
Tansonville, trying to make them speak of Mlle. Swann's parents and
grandparents, who appeared to me to be as great and glorious as gods.
The name, which had for me become almost mythological, of Swann--when I
talked with my family I would grow sick with longing to hear them
utter it; I dared not pronounce it myself, but I would draw them into a
discussion of matters which led naturally to Gilberte and her family, in
which she was involved, in speaking of which I would feel myself not too
remotely banished from her company; and I would suddenly force my father
(by pretending, for instance, to believe that my grandfather's business
had been in our family before his day, or that the hedge with the pink
hawthorn which my aunt Léonie wished to visit was on common ground) to
correct my statements, to say, as though in opposition to me and of his
own accord: "No, no, the business belonged to _Swann's_ father, that
hedge is part of _Swann's_ park." And then I would be obliged to pause
for breath; so stifling was the pressure, upon that part of me where it
was for ever inscribed, of that name which, at the moment when I heard
it, seemed to me fuller, more portentous than any other name, because
it was burdened with the weight of all the occasions on which I had
secretly uttered it in my mind. It caused me a pleasure which I was
ashamed to have dared to demand from my parents, for so great was it
that to have procured it for me must have involved them in an immensity
of effort, and with no recompense, since for them there was no pleasure
in the sound. And so I would prudently turn the conversation. And by
a scruple of conscience, also. All the singular seductions which I had
stored up in the sound of that word Swann, I found again as soon as it
was uttered. And then it occurred to me suddenly that my parents could
not fail to experience the same emotions, that they must find themselves
sharing my point of view, that they perceived in their turn, that they
condoned, that they even embraced my visionary longings, and I was as
wretched as though I had ravished and corrupted the innocence of their
hearts.

That year my family fixed the day of their return to Paris rather
earlier than usual. On the morning of our departure I had had my
hair curled, to be ready to face the photographer, had had a new hat
carefully set upon my head, and had been buttoned into a velvet jacket;
a little later my mother, after searching everywhere for me, found me
standing in tears on that steep little hillside close to Tansonville,
bidding a long farewell to my hawthorns, clasping their sharp branches
to my bosom, and (like a princess in a tragedy, oppressed by the weight
of all her senseless jewellery) with no gratitude towards the officious
hand which had, in curling those ringlets, been at pains to collect all
my hair upon my forehead; trampling underfoot the curl-papers which I
had torn from my head, and my new hat with them. My mother was not at
all moved by my tears, but she could not suppress a cry at the sight of
my battered headgear and my ruined jacket. I did not, however, hear her.
"Oh, my poor little hawthorns," I was assuring them through my sobs, "it
is not you that want to make me unhappy, to force me to leave you.
You, you have never done me any harm. So I shall always love you." And,
drying my eyes, I promised them that, when I grew up, I would never copy
the foolish example of other men, but that even in Paris, on fine spring
days, instead of paying calls and listening to silly talk, I would make
excursions into the country to see the first hawthorn-trees in bloom.

Once in the fields we never left them again during the rest of our
Méséglise walk. They were perpetually crossed, as though by invisible
streams of traffic, by the wind, which was to me the tutelary genius of
Combray. Every year, on the day of our arrival, in order to feel that I
really was at Combray, I would climb the hill to find it running again
through my clothing, and setting me running in its wake. One always
had the wind for companion when one went the 'Méséglise way,' on
that swelling plain which stretched, mile beyond mile, without any
disturbance of its gentle contour. I knew that Mlle. Swann used often
to go and spend a few days at Laon, and, for all that it was many
miles away, the distance was obviated by the absence of any intervening
obstacle; when, on hot afternoons, I would see a breath of wind emerge
from the farthest horizon, bowing the heads of the corn in distant
fields, pouring like a flood over all that vast expanse, and finally
settling down, warm and rustling, among the clover and sainfoin at my
feet, that plain which was common to us both seemed then to draw us
together, to unite us; I would imagine that the same breath had passed
by her also, that there was some message from her in what it was
whispering to me, without my being able to understand it, and I would
catch and kiss it as it passed. On my left was a village called Champieu
(_Campus Pagani_, according to the Curé). On my right I could see
across the cornfields the two crocketed, rustic spires of
Saint-André-des-Champs, themselves as tapering, scaly, plated,
honeycombed, yellowed, and roughened as two ears of wheat.

At regular intervals, among the inimitable ornamentation of their
leaves, which can be mistaken for those of no other fruit-tree, the
apple-trees were exposing their broad petals of white satin, or hanging
in shy bunches their unopened, blushing buds. It was while going
the 'Méséglise way' that I first noticed the circular shadow which
apple-trees cast upon the sunlit ground, and also those impalpable
threads of golden silk which the setting sun weaves slantingly downwards
from beneath their leaves, and which I would see my father slash through
with his stick without ever making them swerve from their straight path.

Sometimes in the afternoon sky a white moon would creep up like a little
cloud, furtive, without display, suggesting an actress who does not have
to 'come on' for a while, and so goes 'in front' in her ordinary
clothes to watch the rest of the company for a moment, but keeps in the
background, not wishing to attract attention to herself. I was glad to
find her image reproduced in books and paintings, though these works of
art were very different--at least in my earlier years, before Bloch had
attuned my eyes and mind to more subtle harmonies--from those in
which the moon seems fair to me to-day, but in which I should not have
recognised her then. It might be, for instance, some novel by Saintine,
some landscape by Gleyre, in which she is cut out sharply against the
sky, in the form of a silver sickle, some work as unsophisticated and
as incomplete as were, at that date, my own impressions, and which it
enraged my grandmother's sisters to see me admire. They held that one
ought to set before children, and that children shewed their own innate
good taste in admiring, only such books and pictures as they would
continue to admire when their minds were developed and mature. No doubt
they regarded aesthetic values as material objects which an unclouded
vision could not fail to discern, without needing to have their
equivalent in experience of life stored up and slowly ripening in one's
heart.

It was along the 'Méséglise way,' at Montjouvain, a house built on the
edge of a large pond, and overlooked by a steep, shrub-grown hill, that
M. Vinteuil lived. And so we used often to meet his daughter driving her
dogcart at full speed along the road. After a certain year we never
saw her alone, but always accompanied by a friend, a girl older than
herself, with an evil reputation in the neighbourhood, who in the end
installed herself permanently, one day, at Montjouvain. People said:
"That poor M. Vinteuil must be blinded by love not to see what everyone
is talking about, and to let his daughter--a man who is horrified if you
use a word in the wrong sense--bring a woman like that to live under his
roof. He says that she is a most superior woman, with a heart of gold,
and that she would have shewn extraordinary musical talent if she had
only been trained. He may be sure it is not music that she is teaching
his daughter." But M. Vinteuil assured them that it was, and indeed
it is remarkable that people never fail to arouse admiration of their
normal qualities in the relatives of anyone with whom they are in
physical intercourse. Bodily passion, which has been so unjustly
decried, compels its victims to display every vestige that is in them
of unselfishness and generosity, and so effectively that they shine
resplendent in the eyes of all beholders. Dr. Percepied, whose loud
voice and bushy eyebrows enabled him to play to his heart's content the
part of 'double-dealer,' a part to which he was not, otherwise, adapted,
without in the least degree compromising his unassailable and quite
unmerited reputation of being a kind-hearted old curmudgeon, could make
the Curé and everyone else laugh until they cried by saying in a harsh
voice: "What d'ye say to this, now? It seems that she plays music with
her friend, Mlle. Vinteuil. That surprises you, does it? Oh, I know
nothing, nothing at all. It was Papa Vinteuil who told me all about
it yesterday. After all, she has every right to be fond of music, that
girl. I should never dream of thwarting the artistic vocation of a
child; nor Vinteuil either, it seems. And then he plays music too,
with his daughter's friend. Why, gracious heavens, it must be a regular
musical box, that house out there! What are you laughing at? I say
they've been playing too much music, those people. I met Papa Vinteuil
the other day, by the cemetery. It was all he could do to keep on his
feet."

Anyone who, like ourselves, had seen M. Vinteuil, about this time,
avoiding people whom he knew, and turning away as soon as he caught
sight of them, changed in a few months into an old man, engulfed in a
sea of sorrows, incapable of any effort not directly aimed at promoting
his daughter's happiness, spending whole days beside his wife's grave,
could hardly have failed to realise that he was gradually dying of a
broken heart, could hardly have supposed that he paid no attention to
the rumours which were going about. He knew, perhaps he even believed,
what his neighbours were saying. There is probably no one, however rigid
his virtue, who is not liable to find himself, by the complexity of
circumstances, living at close quarters with the very vice which
he himself has been most outspoken in condemning, without at first
recognising it beneath the disguise which it assumes on entering his
presence, so as to wound him and to make him suffer; the odd words, the
unaccountable attitude, one evening, of a person whom he has a thousand
reasons for loving. But for a man of M. Vinteuil's sensibility it must
have been far more painful than for a hardened man of the world to have
to resign himself to one of those situations which are wrongly supposed
to occur in Bohemian circles only; for they are produced whenever there
needs to establish itself in the security necessary to its development a
vice which Nature herself has planted in the soul of a child, perhaps by
no more than blending the virtues of its father and mother, as she might
blend the colours of their eyes. And yet however much M. Vinteuil
may have known of his daughter's conduct it did not follow that his
adoration of her grew any less. The facts of life do not penetrate to
the sphere in which our beliefs are cherished; as it was not they that
engendered those beliefs, so they are powerless to destroy them; they
can aim at them continual blows of contradiction and disproof without
weakening them; and an avalanche of miseries and maladies coming, one
after another, without interruption into the bosom of a family, will not
make it lose faith in either the clemency of its God or the capacity of
its physician. But when M. Vinteuil regarded his daughter and himself
from the point of view of the world, and of their reputation, when he
attempted to place himself by her side in the rank which they occupied
in the general estimation of their neighbours, then he was bound to give
judgment, to utter his own and her social condemnation in precisely
the terms which the inhabitant of Combray most hostile to him and his
daughter would have employed; he saw himself and her in 'low,' in the
very 'lowest water,' inextricably stranded; and his manners had of late
been tinged with that humility, that respect for persons who ranked
above him and to whom he must now look up (however far beneath him they
might hitherto have been), that tendency to search for some means of
rising again to their level, which is an almost mechanical result of any
human misfortune.

One day, when we were walking with Swann in one of the streets of
Combray, M. Vinteuil, turning out of another street, found himself so
suddenly face to face with us all that he had not time to escape; and
Swann, with that almost arrogant charity of a man of the world who,
amid the dissolution of all his own moral prejudices, finds in another's
shame merely a reason for treating him with a friendly benevolence, the
outward signs of which serve to enhance and gratify the self-esteem of
the bestower because he feels that they are all the more precious to him
upon whom they are bestowed, conversed at great length with M. Vinteuil,
with whom for a long time he had been barely on speaking terms, and
invited him, before leaving us, to send his daughter over, one day,
to play at Tansonville. It was an invitation which, two years earlier,
would have enraged M. Vinteuil, but which now filled him with so much
gratitude that he felt himself obliged to refrain from the indiscretion
of accepting. Swann's friendly regard for his daughter seemed to him to
be in itself so honourable, so precious a support for his cause that he
felt it would perhaps be better to make no use of it, so as to have the
wholly Platonic satisfaction of keeping it in reserve.

"What a charming man!" he said to us, after Swann had gone, with the
same enthusiasm and veneration which make clever and pretty women of the
middle classes fall victims to the physical and intellectual charms of a
duchess, even though she be ugly and a fool. "What a charming man! What
a pity that he should have made such a deplorable marriage!"

And then, so strong an element of hypocrisy is there in even the most
sincere of men, who cast off, while they are talking to anyone, the
opinion they actually hold of him and will express when he is no longer
there, my family joined with M. Vinteuil in deploring Swann's marriage,
invoking principles and conventions which (all the more because they
invoked them in common with him, as though we were all thorough good
fellows of the same sort) they appeared to suggest were in no way
infringed at Montjouvain. M. Vinteuil did not send his daughter to visit
Swann, an omission which Swann was the first to regret. For constantly,
after meeting M. Vinteuil, he would remember that he had been meaning
for a long time to ask him about some one of the same name as himself,
one of his relatives, Swann supposed. And on this occasion he determined
that he would not forget what he had to say to him when M. Vinteuil
should appear with his daughter at Tansonville.

Since the 'Méséglise way' was the shorter of the two that we used to
take for our walks round Combray, and for that reason was reserved for
days of uncertain weather, it followed that the climate of Méséglise
shewed an unduly high rainfall, and we would never lose sight of the
fringe of Roussainville wood, so that we could, at any moment, run for
shelter beneath its dense thatch of leaves.

Often the sun would disappear behind a cloud, which impinged on its
roundness, but whose edge the sun gilded in return. The brightness,
though not the light of day, would then be shut off from a landscape
in which all life appeared to be suspended, while the little village
of Roussainville carved in relief upon the sky the white mass of its
gables, with a startling precision of detail. A gust of wind blew from
its perch a rook, which floated away and settled in the distance, while
beneath a paling sky the woods on the horizon assumed a deeper tone of
blue, as though they were painted in one of those cameos which you still
find decorating the walls of old houses.

But on other days would begin to fall the rain, of which we had had due
warning from the little barometer-figure which the spectacle-maker hung
out in his doorway. Its drops, like migrating birds which fly off in a
body at a given moment, would come down out of the sky in close marching
order. They would never drift apart, would make no movement at random in
their rapid course, but each one, keeping in its place, would draw
after it the drop which was following, and the sky would be as greatly
darkened as by the swallows flying south. We would take refuge among the
trees. And when it seemed that their flight was accomplished, a few last
drops, feebler and slower than the rest, would still come down. But we
would emerge from our shelter, for the rain was playing a game, now,
among the branches, and, even when it was almost dry again underfoot, a
stray drop or two, lingering in the hollow of a leaf, would run down and
hang glistening from the point of it until suddenly it splashed plump
upon our upturned faces from the whole height of the tree.

Often, too, we would hurry for shelter, tumbling in among all its stony
saints and patriarchs, into the porch of Saint-André-des-Champs. How
typically French that church was! Over its door the saints, the kings
of chivalry with lilies in their hands, the wedding scenes and funerals
were carved as they might have been in the mind of Françoise. The
sculptor had also recorded certain anecdotes of Aristotle and Virgil,
precisely as Françoise in her kitchen would break into speech about
Saint Louis as though she herself had known him, generally in order to
depreciate, by contrast with him, my grandparents, whom she considered
less 'righteous.' One could see that the ideas which the mediaeval
artist and the mediaeval peasant (who had survived to cook for us in
the nineteenth century) had of classical and of early Christian history,
ideas whose inaccuracy was atoned for by their honest simplicity, were
derived not from books, but from a tradition at once ancient and direct,
unbroken, oral, degraded, unrecognisable, and alive. Another Combray
person whom I could discern also, potential and typified, in the gothic
sculptures of Saint-André-des-Champs was young Théodore, the assistant
in Camus's shop. And, indeed, Françoise herself was well aware that she
had in him a countryman and contemporary, for when my aunt was too ill
for Françoise to be able, unaided, to lift her in her bed or to carry
her to her chair, rather than let the kitchen-maid come upstairs
and, perhaps, 'make an impression' on my aunt, she would send out for
Théodore. And this lad, who was regarded, and quite rightly, in the town
as a 'bad character,' was so abounding in that spirit which had served
to decorate the porch of Saint-André-des-Champs, and particularly in the
feelings of respect due, in Françoise eyes, to all 'poor invalids,' and,
above all, to her own 'poor mistress,' that he had, when he bent down
to raise my aunt's head from her pillow, the same air of préraphaélite
simplicity and zeal which the little angels in the bas-reliefs wear, who
throng, with tapers in their hands, about the deathbed of Our Lady, as
though those carved faces of stone, naked and grey like trees in winter,
were, like them, asleep only, storing up life and waiting to flower
again in countless plebeian faces, reverend and cunning as the face of
Théodore, and glowing with the ruddy brilliance of ripe apples.

There, too, not fastened to the wall like the little angels, but
detached from the porch, of more than human stature, erect upon her
pedestal as upon a footstool, which had been placed there to save her
feet from contact with the wet ground, stood a saint with the full
cheeks, the firm breasts which swelled out inside her draperies like
a cluster of ripe grapes inside a bag, the narrow forehead, short and
stubborn nose, deep-set eyes, and strong, thick-skinned, courageous
expression of the country-women of those parts. This similarity, which
imparted to the statue itself a kindliness that I had not looked to
find in it, was corroborated often by the arrival of some girl from
the fields, come, like ourselves, for shelter beneath the porch, whose
presence there--as when the leaves of a climbing plant have grown up
beside leaves carved in stone--seemed intended by fate to allow us, by
confronting it with its type in nature, to form a critical estimate
of the truth of the work of art. Before our eyes, in the distance, a
promised or an accursed land, Roussainville, within whose walls I had
never penetrated, Roussainville was now, when the rain had ceased for
us, still being chastised, like a village in the Old Testament, by
all the innumerable spears and arrows of the storm, which beat down
obliquely upon the dwellings of its inhabitants, or else had already
received the forgiveness of the Almighty, Who had restored to it the
light of His sun, which fell upon it in rays of uneven length, like the
rays of a monstrance upon an altar.

Sometimes, when the weather had completely broken, we were obliged to go
home and to remain shut up indoors. Here and there, in the distance, in
a landscape which, what with the failing light and saturated atmosphere,
resembled a seascape rather, a few solitary houses clinging to the lower
slopes of a hill whose heights were buried in a cloudy darkness shone
out like little boats which had folded their sails and would ride at
anchor, all night, upon the sea. But what mattered rain or storm?
In summer, bad weather is no more than a passing fit of superficial
ill-temper expressed by the permanent, underlying fine weather; a very
different thing from the fluid and unstable 'fine weather' of winter,
its very opposite, in fact; for has it not (firmly established in the
soil, on which it has taken solid form in dense masses of foliage over
which the rain may pour in torrents without weakening the resistance
offered by their real and lasting happiness) hoisted, to keep them
flying throughout the season, in the village streets, on the walls of
the houses and in their gardens, its silken banners, violet and white.
Sitting in the little parlour, where I would pass the time until dinner
with a book, I might hear the water dripping from our chestnut-trees,
but I would know that the shower would only glaze and brighten the
greenness of their thick, crumpled leaves, and that they themselves
had undertaken to remain there, like pledges of summer, all through the
rainy night, to assure me of the fine weather's continuing; it might
rain as it pleased, but to-morrow, over the white fence of Tansonville,
there would surge and flow, numerous as ever, a sea of little
heart-shaped leaves; and without the least anxiety I could watch the
poplar in the Rue des Perchamps praying for mercy, bowing in desperation
before the storm; without the least anxiety I could hear, at the far end
of the garden, the last peals of thunder growling among our lilac-trees.

If the weather was bad all morning, my family would abandon the idea of
a walk, and I would remain at home. But, later on, I formed the habit
of going out by myself on such days, and walking towards
Méséglise-la-Vineuse, during that autumn when we had to come to Combray
to settle the division of my aunt Léonie's estate; for she had died at
last, leaving both parties among her neighbours triumphant in the
fact of her demise--those who had insisted that her mode of life was
enfeebling and must ultimately kill her, and, equally, those who had
always maintained that she suffered from some disease not imaginary,
but organic, by the visible proof of which the most sceptical would
be obliged to own themselves convinced, once she had succumbed to it;
causing no intense grief to any save one of her survivors, but to that
one a grief savage in its violence. During the long fortnight of my
aunt's last illness Françoise never went out of her room for an instant,
never took off her clothes, allowed no one else to do anything for my
aunt, and did not leave her body until it was actually in its grave.
Then, at last, we understood that the sort of terror in which Françoise
had lived of my aunt's harsh words, her suspicions and her anger, had
developed in her a sentiment which we had mistaken for hatred, and which
was really veneration and love. Her true mistress, whose decisions it
had been impossible to foresee, from whose stratagems it had been
so hard to escape, of whose good nature it had been so easy to take
advantage, her sovereign, her mysterious and omnipotent monarch was no
more. Compared with such a mistress we counted for very little. The
time had long passed when, on our first coming to spend our holidays
at Combray, we had been of equal importance, in Françoise eyes, with my
aunt.

During that autumn my parents, finding the days so fully occupied with
the legal formalities that had to be gone through, and discussions with
solicitors and farmers, that they had little time for walks which, as it
happened, the weather made precarious, began to let me go, without them,
along the 'Méséglise way,' wrapped up in a huge Highland plaid which
protected me from the rain, and which I was all the more ready to throw
over my shoulders because I felt that the stripes of its gaudy tartan
scandalised Françoise, whom it was impossible to convince that the
colour of one's clothes had nothing whatever to do with one's mourning
for the dead, and to whom the grief which we had shewn on my aunt's
death was wholly unsatisfactory, since we had not entertained the
neighbours to a great funeral banquet, and did not adopt a special tone
when we spoke of her, while I at times might be heard humming a tune. I
am sure that in a book--and to that extent my feelings were closely akin
to those of Françoise--such a conception of mourning, in the manner
of the _Chanson de Roland_ and of the porch of Saint-André-des-Champs,
would have seemed most attractive. But the moment that Françoise herself
approached, some evil spirit would urge me to attempt to make her angry,
and I would avail myself of the slightest pretext to say to her that I
regretted my aunt's death because she had been a good woman in spite of
her absurdities, but not in the least because she was my aunt; that
she might easily have been my aunt and yet have been so odious that her
death would not have caused me a moment's sorrow; statements which, in a
book, would have struck me as merely fatuous.

And if Françoise then, inspired like a poet with a flood of confused
reflections upon bereavement, grief, and family memories, were to
plead her inability to rebut my theories, saying: "I don't know how to
_espress_ myself"--I would triumph over her with an ironical and brutal
common sense worthy of Dr. Percepied; and if she went on: "All the same
she was a _geological_ relation; there is always the respect due to your
_geology_," I would shrug my shoulders and say: "It is really very good
of me to discuss the matter with an illiterate old woman who cannot
speak her own language," adopting, to deliver judgment on Françoise,
the mean and narrow outlook of the pedant, whom those who are most
contemptuous of him in the impartiality of their own minds are only too
prone to copy when they are obliged to play a part upon the vulgar stage
of life.

My walks, that autumn, were all the more delightful because I used
to take them after long hours spent over a book. When I was tired of
reading, after a whole morning in the house, I would throw my plaid
across my shoulders and set out; my body, which in a long spell of
enforced immobility had stored up an accumulation of vital energy, was
now obliged, like a spinning-top wound and let go, to spend this in
every direction. The walls of houses, the Tansonville hedge, the trees
of Roussainville wood, the bushes against which Montjouvain leaned its
back, all must bear the blows of my walking-stick or umbrella, must
hear my shouts of happiness, blows and shouts being indeed no more than
expressions of the confused ideas which exhilarated me, and which, not
being developed to the point at which they might rest exposed to the
light of day, rather than submit to a slow and difficult course
of elucidation, found it easier and more pleasant to drift into an
immediate outlet. And so it is that the bulk of what appear to be the
emotional renderings of our inmost sensations do no more than relieve us
of the burden of those sensations by allowing them to escape from us in
an indistinct form which does not teach us how it should be interpreted.
When I attempt to reckon up all that I owe to the 'Méséglise way,' all
the humble discoveries of which it was either the accidental setting or
the direct inspiration and cause, I am reminded that it was in that same
autumn, on one of those walks, near the bushy precipice which guarded
Montjouvain from the rear, that I was struck for the first time by
this lack of harmony between our impressions and their normal forms of
expression. After an hour of rain and wind, against which I had put up a
brisk fight, as I came to the edge of the Montjouvain pond, and reached
a little hut, roofed with tiles, in which M. Vinteuil's gardener kept
his tools, the sun shone out again, and its golden rays, washed clean
by the shower, blazed once more in the sky, on the trees, on the wall
of the hut, and on the still wet tiles of the roof, which had a chicken
perching upon its ridge. The wind pulled out sideways the wild grass
that grew in the wall, and the chicken's downy feathers, both of which
things let themselves float upon the wind's breath to their full extent,
with the unresisting submissiveness of light and lifeless matter. The
tiled roof cast upon the pond, whose reflections were now clear again
in the sunlight, a square of pink marble, the like of which I had never
observed before. And, seeing upon the water, where it reflected the
wall, a pallid smile responding to the smiling sky, I cried aloud in my
enthusiasm, brandishing my furled umbrella: "Damn, damn, damn, damn!"
But at the same time I felt that I was in duty bound not to content
myself with these unilluminating words, but to endeavour to see more
clearly into the sources of my enjoyment.

And it was at that moment, too--thanks to a peasant who went past,
apparently in a bad enough humour already, but more so when he nearly
received my umbrella in his face, and who replied without any cordiality
to my "Fine day, what! good to be out walking!"--that I learned
that identical emotions do not spring up in the hearts of all men
simultaneously, by a pre-established order. Later on I discovered that,
whenever I had read for too long and was in a mood for conversation, the
friend to whom I would be burning to say something would at that moment
have finished indulging himself in the delights of conversation, and
wanted nothing now but to be left to read undisturbed. And if I had been
thinking with affection of my parents, and forming the most sensible and
proper plans for giving them pleasure, they would have been using
the same interval of time to discover some misdeed that I had already
forgotten, and would begin to scold me severely, just as I flung myself
upon them with a kiss.

Sometimes to the exhilaration which I derived from being alone would be
added an alternative feeling, so that I could not be clear in my mind to
which I should give the casting vote; a feeling stimulated by the desire
to see rise up before my eyes a peasant-girl whom I might clasp in my
arms. Coming abruptly, and without giving me time to trace it accurately
to its source among so many ideas of a very different kind, the pleasure
which accompanied this desire seemed only a degree superior to what was
given me by my other thoughts. I found an additional merit in everything
that was in my mind at the moment, in the pink reflection of the tiled
roof, the wild grass in the wall, the village of Roussainville into
which I had long desired to penetrate, the trees of its wood and the
steeple of its church, created in them by this fresh emotion which made
them appear more desirable only because I thought it was they that
had provoked it, and which seemed only to wish to bear me more swiftly
towards them when it filled my sails with a potent, unknown, and
propitious breeze. But if this desire that a woman should appear added
for me something more exalting than the charms of nature, they in their
turn enlarged what I might, in the woman's charm, have found too much
restricted. It seemed to me that the beauty of the trees was hers
also, and that, as for the spirit of those horizons, of the village of
Roussainville, of the books which I was reading that year, it was her
kiss which would make me master of them all; and, my imagination drawing
strength from contact with my sensuality, my sensuality expanding
through all the realms of my imagination, my desire had no longer any
bounds. Moreover--just as in moments of musing contemplation of nature,
the normal actions of the mind being suspended, and our abstract ideas
of things set on one side, we believe with the profoundest faith in the
originality, in the individual existence of the place in which we may
happen to be--the passing figure which my desire evoked seemed to be
not any one example of the general type of 'woman,' but a necessary and
natural product of the soil. For at that time everything which was not
myself, the earth and the creatures upon it, seemed to me more precious,
more important, endowed with a more real existence than they appear
to full-grown men. And between the earth and its creatures I made
no distinction. I had a desire for a peasant-girl from Méséglise or
Roussainville, for a fisher-girl from Balbec, just as I had a desire for
Balbec and Méséglise. The pleasure which those girls were empowered to
give me would have seemed less genuine, I should have had no faith in
it any longer, if I had been at liberty to modify its conditions as I
chose. To meet in Paris a fisher-girl from Balbec or a peasant-girl from
Méséglise would have been like receiving the present of a shell which
I had never seen upon the beach, or of a fern which I had never found
among the woods, would have stripped from the pleasure which she was
about to give me all those other pleasures in the thick of which my
imagination had enwrapped her. But to wander thus among the woods of
Roussainville without a peasant-girl to embrace was to see those woods
and yet know nothing of their secret treasure, their deep-hidden beauty.
That girl whom I never saw save dappled with the shadows of their
leaves, was to me herself a plant of local growth, only taller than the
rest, and one whose structure would enable me to approach more closely
than in them to the intimate savour of the land from which she had
sprung. I could believe this all the more readily (and also that
the caresses by which she would bring that savour to my senses were
themselves of a particular kind, yielding a pleasure which I could
never derive from any but herself) since I was still, and must for long
remain, in that period of life when one has not yet separated the fact
of this sensual pleasure from the various women in whose company one has
tasted it, when one has not reduced it to a general idea which makes one
regard them thenceforward as the variable instruments of a pleasure that
is always the same. Indeed, that pleasure does not exist, isolated and
formulated in the consciousness, as the ultimate object with which one
seeks a woman's company, or as the cause of the uneasiness which, in
anticipation, one then feels. Hardly even does one think of oneself,
but only how to escape from oneself. Obscurely awaited, immanent and
concealed, it rouses to such a paroxysm, at the moment when at last it
makes itself felt, those other pleasures which we find in the tender
glance, in the kiss of her who is by our side, that it seems to us, more
than anything else, a sort of transport of gratitude for the kindness of
heart of our companion and for her touching predilection of ourselves,
which we measure by the benefits, by the happiness that she showers upon
us.

Alas, it was in vain that I implored the dungeon-keep of Roussainville,
that I begged it to send out to meet me some daughter of its village,
appealing to it as to the sole confidant to whom I had disclosed my
earliest desire when, from the top floor of our house at Combray, from
the little room that smelt of orris-root, I had peered out and seen
nothing but its tower, framed in the square of the half-opened window,
while, with the heroic scruples of a traveller setting forth for
unknown climes, or of a desperate wretch hesitating on the verge of
self-destruction, faint with emotion, I explored, across the bounds of
my own experience, an untrodden path which, I believed, might lead me to
my death, even--until passion spent itself and left me shuddering among
the sprays of flowering currant which, creeping in through the window,
tumbled all about my body. In vain I called upon it now. In vain I
compressed the whole landscape into my field of vision, draining it with
an exhaustive gaze which sought to extract from it a female creature. I
might go alone as far as the porch of Saint-André-des-Champs: never did
I find there the girl whom I should inevitably have met, had I been with
my grandfather, and so unable to engage her in conversation. I would fix
my eyes, without limit of time, upon the trunk of a distant tree, from
behind which she must appear and spring towards me; my closest scrutiny
left the horizon barren as before; night was falling; without any hope
now would I concentrate my attention, as though to force up out of it
the creatures which it must conceal, upon that sterile soil, that stale
and outworn land; and it was no longer in lightness of heart, but with
sullen anger that I aimed blows at the trees of Roussainville wood, from
among which no more living creatures made their appearance than if they
had been trees painted on the stretched canvas background of a panorama,
when, unable to resign myself to having to return home without having
held in my arms the woman I so greatly desired, I was yet obliged to
retrace my steps towards Combray, and to admit to myself that the chance
of her appearing in my path grew smaller every moment. And if she had
appeared, would I have dared to speak to her? I felt that she would have
regarded me as mad, for I no longer thought of those desires which came
to me on my walks, but were never realized, as being shared by others,
or as having any existence apart from myself. They seemed nothing more
now than the purely subjective, impotent, illusory creatures of my
temperament. They were in no way connected now with nature, with the
world of real things, which from now onwards lost all its charm and
significance, and meant no more to my life than a purely conventional
framework, just as the action of a novel is framed in the railway
carriage, on a seat of which a traveller is reading it to pass the time.

And it is perhaps from another impression which I received at
Montjouvain, some years later, an impression which at that time was
without meaning, that there arose, long afterwards, my idea of that
cruel side of human passion called 'sadism.' We shall see, in due
course, that for quite another reason the memory of this impression was
to play an important part in my life. It was during a spell of very hot
weather; my parents, who had been obliged to go away for the whole day,
had told me that I might stay out as late as I pleased; and having
gone as far as the Montjouvain pond, where I enjoyed seeing again the
reflection of the tiled roof of the hut, I had lain down in the shade
and gone to sleep among the bushes on the steep slope that rose up
behind the house, just where I had waited for my parents, years before,
one day when they had gone to call on M. Vinteuil. It was almost dark
when I awoke, and I wished to rise and go away, but I saw Mlle. Vinteuil
(or thought, at least, that I recognised her, for I had not seen her
often at Combray, and then only when she was still a child, whereas
she was now growing into a young woman), who probably had just come in,
standing in front of me, and only a few feet away from me, in that room
in which her father had entertained mine, and which she had now made
into a little sitting-room for herself. The window was partly open; the
lamp was lighted; I could watch her every movement without her being
able to see me; but, had I gone away, I must have made a rustling sound
among the bushes, she would have heard me, and might have thought that I
had been hiding there in order to spy upon her.

She was in deep mourning, for her father had but lately died. We had
not gone to see her; my mother had not cared to go, on account of that
virtue which alone in her fixed any bounds to her benevolence--namely,
modesty; but she pitied the girl from the depths of her heart. My
mother had not forgotten the sad end of M. Vinteuil's life, his complete
absorption, first in having to play both mother and nursery-maid to his
daughter, and, later, in the suffering which she had caused him; she
could see the tortured expression which was never absent from the old
man's face in those terrible last years; she knew that he had definitely
abandoned the task of transcribing in fair copies the whole of his later
work, the poor little pieces, we imagined, of an old music-master, a
retired village organist, which, we assumed, were of little or no value
in themselves, though we did not despise them, because they were of such
great value to him and had been the chief motive of his life before he
sacrificed them to his daughter; pieces which, being mostly not even
written down, but recorded only in his memory, while the rest were
scribbled on loose sheets of paper, and quite illegible, must now remain
unknown for ever; my mother thought, also, of that other and still more
cruel renunciation to which M. Vinteuil had been driven, that of seeing
the girl happily settled, with an honest and respectable future; when
she called to mind all this utter and crushing misery that had come
upon my aunts' old music-master, she was moved to very real grief, and
shuddered to think of that other grief, so different in its bitterness,
which Mlle. Vinteuil must now be feeling, tinged with remorse at having
virtually killed her father. "Poor M. Vinteuil," my mother would say,
"he lived for his daughter, and now he has died for her, without getting
his reward. Will he get it now, I wonder, and in what form? It can only
come to him from her."

At the far end of Mlle. Vinteuil's sitting-room, on the mantelpiece,
stood a small photograph of her father which she went briskly to fetch,
just as the sound of carriage wheels was heard from the road outside,
then flung herself down on a sofa and drew close beside her a little
table on which she placed the photograph, just as, long ago, M. Vinteuil
had 'placed' beside him the piece of music which he would have liked
to play over to my parents. And then her friend came in. Mlle. Vinteuil
greeted her without rising, clasping her hands behind her head, and
drew her body to one side of the sofa, as though to 'make room.' But no
sooner had she done this than she appeared to feel that she was perhaps
suggesting a particular position to her friend, with an emphasis which
might well be regarded as importunate. She thought that her friend would
prefer, no doubt, to sit down at some distance from her, upon a chair;
she felt that she had been indiscreet; her sensitive heart took fright;
stretching herself out again over the whole of the sofa, she closed her
eyes and began to yawn, so as to indicate that it was a desire to sleep,
and that alone, which had made her lie down there. Despite the rude
and hectoring familiarity with which she treated her companion I could
recognise in her the obsequious and reticent advances, the abrupt
scruples and restraints which had characterised her father. Presently
she rose and came to the window, where she pretended to be trying to
close the shutters and not succeeding.

"Leave them open," said her friend. "I am hot."

"But it's too dreadful! People will see us," Mlle. Vinteuil answered.
And then she guessed, probably, that her friend would think that she had
uttered these words simply in order to provoke a reply in certain other
words, which she seemed, indeed, to wish to hear spoken, but, from
prudence, would let her friend be the first to speak. And so, although
I could not see her face clearly enough, I am sure that the expression
must have appeared on it which my grandmother had once found so
delightful, when she hastily went on: "When I say 'see us' I mean, of
course, see us reading. It's so dreadful to think that in every trivial
little thing you do some one may be overlooking you."

With the instinctive generosity of her nature, a courtesy beyond her
control, she refrained from uttering the studied words which, she had
felt, were indispensable for the full realisation of her desire. And
perpetually, in the depths of her being, a shy and suppliant maiden
would kneel before that other element, the old campaigner, battered but
triumphant, would intercede with him and oblige him to retire.

"Oh, yes, it is so extremely likely that people are looking at us at
this time of night in this densely populated district!" said her friend,
with bitter irony. "And what if they are?" she went on, feeling bound
to annotate with a malicious yet affectionate wink these words which
she was repeating, out of good nature, like a lesson prepared beforehand
which, she knew, it would please Mlle. Vinteuil to hear. "And what if
they are? All the better that they should see us."

Mlle. Vinteuil shuddered and rose to her feet. In her sensitive
and scrupulous heart she was ignorant what words ought to flow,
spontaneously, from her lips, so as to produce the scene for which her
eager senses clamoured. She reached out as far as she could across the
limitations of her true character to find the language appropriate to
a vicious young woman such as she longed to be thought, but the
words which, she imagined, such a young woman might have uttered with
sincerity sounded unreal in her own mouth. And what little she allowed
herself to say was said in a strained tone, in which her ingrained
timidity paralysed her tendency to freedom and audacity of speech; while
she kept on interrupting herself with: "You're sure you aren't cold? You
aren't too hot? You don't want to sit and read by yourself?...

"Your ladyship's thoughts seem to be rather 'warm' this evening," she
concluded, doubtless repeating a phrase which she had heard used, on
some earlier occasion, by her friend.

In the V-shaped opening of her crape bodice Mlle. Vinteuil felt the
sting of her friend's sudden kiss; she gave a little scream and
ran away; and then they began to chase one another about the room,
scrambling over the furniture, their wide sleeves fluttering like
wings, clucking and crowing like a pair of amorous fowls. At last Mlle.
Vinteuil fell down exhausted upon the sofa, where she was screened from
me by the stooping body of her friend. But the latter now had her back
turned to the little table on which the old music-master's portrait had
been arranged. Mlle. Vinteuil realised that her friend would not see
it unless her attention were drawn to it, and so exclaimed, as if she
herself had just noticed it for the first time: "Oh! there's my father's
picture looking at us; I can't think who can have put it there; I'm sure
I've told them twenty times, that is not the proper place for it."

I remembered the words that M. Vinteuil had used to my parents in
apologising for an obtrusive sheet of music. This photograph was, of
course, in common use in their ritual observances, was subjected to
daily profanation, for the friend replied in words which were evidently
a liturgical response: "Let him stay there. He can't trouble us any
longer. D'you think he'd start whining, d'you think he'd pack you out
of the house if he could see you now, with the window open, the ugly old
monkey?"

To which Mlle. Vinteuil replied, "Oh, please!"--a gentle reproach
which testified to the genuine goodness of her nature, not that it
was prompted by any resentment at hearing her father spoken of in this
fashion (for that was evidently a feeling which she had trained herself,
by a long course of sophistries, to keep in close subjection at such
moments), but rather because it was the bridle which, so as to avoid all
appearance of egotism, she herself used to curb the gratification which
her friend was attempting to procure for her. It may well have been,
too, that the smiling moderation with which she faced and answered these
blasphemies, that this tender and hypocritical rebuke appeared to her
frank and generous nature as a particularly shameful and seductive form
of that criminal attitude towards life which she was endeavouring to
adopt. But she could not resist the attraction of being treated with
affection by a woman who had just shewn herself so implacable towards
the defenceless dead; she sprang on to the knees of her friend and held
out a chaste brow to be kissed; precisely as a daughter would have done
to her mother, feeling with exquisite joy that they would thus, between
them, inflict the last turn of the screw of cruelty, in robbing M.
Vinteuil, as though they were actually rifling his tomb, of the sacred
rights of fatherhood. Her friend took the girl's head in her hands and
placed a kiss on her brow with a docility prompted by the real affection
she had for Mlle. Vinteuil, as well as by the desire to bring what
distraction she could into the dull and melancholy life of an orphan.

"Do you know what I should like to do to that old horror?" she said,
taking up the photograph. She murmured in Mlle. Vinteuil's ear something
that I could not distinguish.

"Oh! You would never dare."

"Not dare to spit on it? On that?" shouted the friend with deliberate
brutality.

I heard no more, for Mlle. Vinteuil, who now seemed weary, awkward,
preoccupied, sincere, and rather sad, came back to the window and drew
the shutters close; but I knew now what was the reward that M. Vinteuil,
in return for all the suffering that he had endured in his lifetime, on
account of his daughter, had received from her after his death.

And yet I have since reflected that if M. Vinteuil had been able to be
present at this scene, he might still, and in spite of everything, have
continued to believe in his daughter's soundness of heart, and that he
might even, in so doing, have been not altogether wrong. It was true
that in all Mlle. Vinteuil's actions the appearance of evil was so
strong and so consistent that it would have been hard to find it
exhibited in such completeness save in what is nowadays called a
'sadist'; it is behind the footlights of a Paris theatre, and not under
the homely lamp of an actual country house, that one expects to see a
girl leading her friend on to spit upon the portrait of a father who has
lived and died for nothing and no one but herself; and when we find in
real life a desire for melodramatic effect, it is generally the 'sadic'
instinct that is responsible for it. It is possible that, without being
in the least inclined towards 'sadism,' a girl might have shewn the
same outrageous cruelty as Mlle. Vinteuil in desecrating the memory and
defying the wishes of her dead father, but she would not have given them
deliberate expression in an act so crude in its symbolism, so lacking
in subtlety; the criminal element in her behaviour would have been less
evident to other people, and even to herself, since she would not have
admitted to herself that she was doing wrong. But, appearances apart, in
Mlle. Vinteuil's soul, at least in the earlier stages, the evil element
was probably not unmixed. A 'sadist' of her kind is an artist in evil,
which a wholly wicked person could not be, for in that case the evil
would not have been external, it would have seemed quite natural to her,
and would not even have been distinguishable from herself; and as for
virtue, respect for the dead, filial obedience, since she would never
have practised the cult of these things, she would take no impious
delight in their profanation. 'Sadists' of Mlle. Vinteuil's sort are
creatures so purely sentimental, so virtuous by nature, that even
sensual pleasure appears to them as something bad, a privilege reserved
for the wicked. And when they allow themselves for a moment to enjoy it
they endeavour to impersonate, to assume all the outward appearance of
wicked people, for themselves and their partners in guilt, so as to gain
the momentary illusion of having escaped beyond the control of their own
gentle and scrupulous natures into the inhuman world of pleasure. And
I could understand how she must have longed for such an escape when I
realised that it was impossible for her to effect it. At the moment when
she wished to be thought the very antithesis of her father, what she at
once suggested to me were the mannerisms, in thought and speech, of
the poor old music-master. Indeed, his photograph was nothing; what she
really desecrated, what she corrupted into ministering to her pleasures,
but what remained between them and her and prevented her from any
direct enjoyment of them, was the likeness between her face and his, his
mother's blue eyes which he had handed down to her, like some trinket to
be kept in the family, those little friendly movements and inclinations
which set up between the viciousness of Mlle. Vinteuil and herself a
phraseology, a mentality not designed for vice, which made her regard it
as not in any way different from the numberless little social duties and
courtesies to which she must devote herself every day. It was not evil
that gave her the idea of pleasure, that seemed to her attractive; it
was pleasure, rather, that seemed evil. And as, every time that she
indulged in it, pleasure came to her attended by evil thoughts such as,
ordinarily, had no place in her virtuous mind, she came at length to
see in pleasure itself something diabolical, to identify it with Evil.
Perhaps Mlle. Vinteuil felt that at heart her friend was not altogether
bad, not really sincere when she gave vent to those blasphemous
utterances. At any rate, she had the pleasure of receiving those kisses
on her brow, those smiles, those glances; all feigned, perhaps, but akin
in their base and vicious mode of expression to those which would have
been discernible on the face of a creature formed not out of kindness
and long-suffering, but out of self-indulgence and cruelty. She was
able to delude herself for a moment into believing that she was indeed
amusing herself in the way in which, with so unnatural an accomplice, a
girl might amuse herself who really did experience that savage antipathy
towards her father's memory. Perhaps she would not have thought of
wickedness as a state so rare, so abnormal, so exotic, one which it was
so refreshing to visit, had she been able to distinguish in herself,
as in all her fellow-men and women, that indifference to the sufferings
which they cause which, whatever names else be given it, is the one
true, terrible and lasting form of cruelty.

If the 'Méséglise way' was so easy, it was a very different matter when
we took the 'Guermantes way,' for that meant a long walk, and we must
make sure, first, of the weather. When we seemed to have entered upon a
spell of fine days, when Françoise, in desperation that not a drop was
falling upon the 'poor crops,' gazing up at the sky and seeing there
only a little white cloud floating here and there upon its calm, azure
surface, groaned aloud and exclaimed: "You would say they were nothing
more nor less than a lot of dogfish swimming about and sticking up their
snouts! Ah, they never think of making it rain a little for the poor
labourers! And then when the corn is all ripe, down it will come,
rattling all over the place, and think no more of where it is falling
than if it was on the sea!"--when my father's appeals to the gardener
had met with the same encouraging answer several times in succession,
then some one would say, at dinner: "To-morrow, if the weather holds,
we might go the Guermantes way." And off we would set, immediately after
luncheon, through the little garden gate which dropped us into the Rue
des Perchamps, narrow and bent at a sharp angle, dotted with grass-plots
over which two or three wasps would spend the day botanising, a street
as quaint as its name, from which its odd characteristics and its
personality were, I felt, derived; a street for which one might search
in vain through the Combray of to-day, for the public school now rises
upon its site. But in my dreams of Combray (like those architects,
pupils of Viollet-le-Duc, who, fancying that they can detect, beneath
a Renaissance rood-loft and an eighteenth-century altar, traces of a
Norman choir, restore the whole church to the state in which it probably
was in the twelfth century) I leave not a stone of the modern edifice
standing, I pierce through it and 'restore' the Rue des Perchamps. And
for such reconstruction memory furnishes me with more detailed guidance
than is generally at the disposal of restorers; the pictures which it
has preserved--perhaps the last surviving in the world to-day, and soon
to follow the rest into oblivion--of what Combray looked like in my
childhood's days; pictures which, simply because it was the old Combray
that traced their outlines upon my mind before it vanished, are as
moving--if I may compare a humble landscape with those glorious works,
reproductions of which my grandmother was so fond of bestowing on me--as
those old engravings of the 'Cenacolo,' or that painting by Gentile
Bellini, in which one sees, in a state in which they no longer exist,
the masterpiece of Leonardo and the portico of Saint Mark's.

We would pass, in the Rue de l'Oiseau, before the old hostelry of the
Oiseau Flesché, into whose great courtyard, once upon a time, would
rumble the coaches of the Duchesses de Montpensier, de Guermantes,
and de Montmorency, when they had to come down to Combray for some
litigation with their farmers, or to receive homage from them. We would
come at length to the Mall, among whose treetops I could distinguish the
steeple of Saint-Hilaire. And I should have liked to be able to sit down
and spend the whole day there, reading and listening to the bells, for
it was so charming there and so quiet that, when an hour struck, you
would have said not that it broke in upon the calm of the day, but that
it relieved the day of its superfluity, and that the steeple, with the
indolent, painstaking exactitude of a person who has nothing else to do,
had simply, in order to squeeze out and let fall the few golden drops
which had slowly and naturally accumulated in the hot sunlight, pressed,
at a given moment, the distended surface of the silence.

The great charm of the 'Guermantes' way was that we had beside us,
almost all the time, the course of the Vivonne. We crossed it first, ten
minutes after leaving the house, by a foot-bridge called the Pont-Vieux.
And every year, when we arrived at Combray, on Easter morning, after the
sermon, if the weather was fine, I would run there to see (amid all the
disorder that prevails on the morning of a great festival, the gorgeous
preparations for which make the everyday household utensils that they
have not contrived to banish seem more sordid than ever) the river
flowing past, sky-blue already between banks still black and bare, its
only companions a clump of daffodils, come out before their time, a few
primroses, the first in flower, while here and there burned the blue
flame of a violet, its stem bent beneath the weight of the drop of
perfume stored in its tiny horn. The Pont-Vieux led to a tow-path which,
at this point, would be overhung in summer by the bluish foliage of a
hazel, under which a fisherman in a straw hat seemed to have taken
root. At Combray, where I knew everyone, and could always detect the
blacksmith or grocer's boy through his disguise of a beadle's uniform
or chorister's surplice, this fisherman was the only person whom I was
never able to identify. He must have known my family, for he used to
raise his hat when we passed; and then I would always be just on the
point of asking his name, when some one would make a sign to me to be
quiet, or I would frighten the fish. We would follow the tow-path which
ran along the top of a steep bank, several feet above the stream. The
ground on the other side was lower, and stretched in a series of broad
meadows as far as the village and even to the distant railway-station.
Over these were strewn the remains, half-buried in the long grass, of
the castle of the old Counts of Combray, who, during the Middle Ages,
had had on this side the course of the Vivonne as a barrier and defence
against attack from the Lords of Guermantes and Abbots of Martinville.
Nothing was left now but a few stumps of towers, hummocks upon the broad
surface of the fields, hardly visible, broken battlements over which, in
their day, the bowmen had hurled down stones, the watchmen had gazed out
over Novepont, Clairefontaine, Martinville-le-Sec, Bailleau-l'Exempt,
fiefs all of them of Guermantes, a ring in which Combray was locked;
but fallen among the grass now, levelled with the ground, climbed and
commanded by boys from the Christian Brothers' school, who came there
in their playtime, or with lesson-books to be conned; emblems of a past
that had sunk down and well-nigh vanished under the earth, that lay by
the water's edge now, like an idler taking the air, yet giving me strong
food for thought, making the name of Combray connote to me not the
little town of to-day only, but an historic city vastly different,
seizing and holding my imagination by the remote, incomprehensible
features which it half-concealed beneath a spangled veil of buttercups.
For the buttercups grew past numbering on this spot which they had
chosen for their games among the grass, standing singly, in couples, in
whole companies, yellow as the yolk of eggs, and glowing with an added
lustre, I felt, because, being powerless to consummate with my palate
the pleasure which the sight of them never failed to give me, I would
let it accumulate as my eyes ranged over their gilded expanse, until
it had acquired the strength to create in my mind a fresh example of
absolute, unproductive beauty; and so it had been from my earliest
childhood, when from the tow-path I had stretched out my arms towards
them, before even I could pronounce their charming name--a name fit for
the Prince in some French fairy-tale; colonists, perhaps, in some far
distant century from Asia, but naturalised now for ever in the village,
well satisfied with their modest horizon, rejoicing in the sunshine
and the water's edge, faithful to their little glimpse of the
railway-station; yet keeping, none the less, as do some of our old
paintings, in their plebeian simplicity, a poetic scintillation from the
golden East.

I would amuse myself by watching the glass jars which the boys used
to lower into the Vivonne, to catch minnows, and which, filled by the
current of the stream, in which they themselves also were enclosed, at
once 'containers' whose transparent sides were like solidified water
and 'contents' plunged into a still larger container of liquid,
flowing crystal, suggested an image of coolness more delicious and more
provoking than the same water in the same jars would have done, standing
upon a table laid for dinner, by shewing it as perpetually in flight
between the impalpable water, in which my hands could not arrest it, and
the insoluble glass, in which my palate could not enjoy it. I decided
that I would come there again with a line and catch fish; I begged for
and obtained a morsel of bread from our luncheon basket; and threw into
the Vivonne pellets which had the power, it seemed, to bring about a
chemical precipitation, for the water at once grew solid round about
them in oval clusters of emaciated tadpoles, which until then it had, no
doubt, been holding in solution, invisible, but ready and alert to enter
the stage of crystallisation.

Presently the course of the Vivonne became choked with water-plants.
At first they appeared singly, a lily, for instance, which the current,
across whose path it had unfortunately grown, would never leave at rest
for a moment, so that, like a ferry-boat mechanically propelled, it
would drift over to one bank only to return to the other, eternally
repeating its double journey. Thrust towards the bank, its stalk would
be straightened out, lengthened, strained almost to breaking-point until
the current again caught it, its green moorings swung back over their
anchorage and brought the unhappy plant to what might fitly be called
its starting-point, since it was fated not to rest there a moment before
moving off once again. I would still find it there, on one walk after
another, always in the same helpless state, suggesting certain victims
of neurasthenia, among whom my grandfather would have included my aunt
Léonie, who present without modification, year after year, the spectacle
of their odd and unaccountable habits, which they always imagine
themselves to be on the point of shaking off, but which they always
retain to the end; caught in the treadmill of their own maladies and
eccentricities, their futile endeavours to escape serve only to actuate
its mechanism, to keep in motion the clockwork of their strange,
ineluctable, fatal daily round. Such as these was the water-lily,
and also like one of those wretches whose peculiar torments, repeated
indefinitely throughout eternity, aroused the curiosity of Dante, who
would have inquired of them at greater length and in fuller detail from
the victims themselves, had not Virgil, striding on ahead, obliged him
to hasten after him at full speed, as I must hasten after my parents.

But farther on the current slackened, where the stream ran through a
property thrown open to the public by its owner, who had made a hobby of
aquatic gardening, so that the little ponds into which the Vivonne was
here diverted were aflower with water-lilies. As the banks at this
point were thickly wooded, the heavy shade of the trees gave the water a
background which was ordinarily dark green, although sometimes, when we
were coming home on a calm evening after a stormy afternoon, I have seen
in its depths a clear, crude blue that was almost violet, suggesting a
floor of Japanese cloisonné. Here and there, on the surface, floated,
blushing like a strawberry, the scarlet heart of a lily set in a ring of
white petals.

Beyond these the flowers were more frequent, but paler, less glossy,
more thickly seeded, more tightly folded, and disposed, by accident, in
festoons so graceful that I would fancy I saw floating upon the stream,
as though after the dreary stripping of the decorations used in some
Watteau festival, moss-roses in loosened garlands. Elsewhere a corner
seemed to be reserved for the commoner kinds of lily; of a neat pink or
white like rocket-flowers, washed clean like porcelain, with housewifely
care; while, a little farther again, were others, pressed close together
in a floating garden-bed, as though pansies had flown out of a garden
like butterflies and were hovering with blue and burnished wings over
the transparent shadowiness of this watery border; this skiey border
also, for it set beneath the flowers a soil of a colour more precious,
more moving than their own; and both in the afternoon, when it sparkled
beneath the lilies in the kaleidoscope of a happiness silent, restless,
and alert, and towards evening, when it was filled like a distant heaven
with the roseate dreams of the setting sun, incessantly changing and
ever remaining in harmony, about the more permanent colour of the
flowers themselves, with the utmost profundity, evanescence, and
mystery--with a quiet suggestion of infinity; afternoon or evening, it
seemed to have set them flowering in the heart of the sky.

After leaving this park the Vivonne began to flow again more swiftly.
How often have I watched, and longed to imitate, when I should be free
to live as I chose, a rower who had shipped his oars and lay stretched
out on his back, his head down, in the bottom of his boat, letting it
drift with the current, seeing nothing but the sky which slipped quietly
above him, shewing upon his features a foretaste of happiness and peace.

We would sit down among the irises at the water's edge. In the holiday
sky a lazy cloud streamed out to its full length. Now and then, crushed
by the burden of idleness, a carp would heave up out of the water, with
an anxious gasp. It was time for us to feed. Before starting homewards
we would sit for a long time there, eating fruit and bread and
chocolate, on the grass, over which came to our ears, horizontal, faint,
but solid still and metallic, the sound of the bells of Saint-Hilaire,
which had melted not at all in the atmosphere it was so well accustomed
to traverse, but, broken piecemeal by the successive palpitation of all
their sonorous strokes, throbbed as it brushed the flowers at our feet.

Sometimes, at the water's edge and embedded in trees, we would come upon
a house of the kind called 'pleasure houses,' isolated and lost, seeing
nothing of the world, save the river which bathed its feet. A young
woman, whose pensive face and fashionable veils did not suggest a local
origin, and who had doubtless come there, in the popular phrase, 'to
bury herself,' to taste the bitter sweetness of feeling that her name,
and still more the name of him whose heart she had once held, but had
been unable to keep, were unknown there, stood framed in a window from
which she had no outlook beyond the boat that was moored beside her
door. She raised her eyes with an air of distraction when she heard,
through the trees that lined the bank, the voices of passers-by of whom,
before they came in sight, she might be certain that never had they
known, nor would they know, the faithless lover, that nothing in their
past lives bore his imprint, which nothing in their future would have
occasion to receive. One felt that in her renunciation of life she had
willingly abandoned those places in which she would at least have been
able to see him whom she loved, for others where he had never trod. And
I watched her, as she returned from some walk along a road where she had
known that he would not appear, drawing from her submissive fingers long
gloves of a precious, useless charm.

Never, in the course of our walks along the 'Guermantes way,' might
we penetrate as far as the source of the Vivonne, of which I had often
thought, which had in my mind so abstract, so ideal an existence, that I
had been as much surprised when some one told me that it was actually
to be found in the same department, and at a given number of miles from
Combray, as I had been on the day when I had learned that there was
another fixed point somewhere on the earth's surface, where, according
to the ancients, opened the jaws of Hell. Nor could we ever reach that
other goal, to which I longed so much to attain, Guermantes itself. I
knew that it was the residence of its proprietors, the Duc and Duchesse
de Guermantes, I knew that they were real personages who did actually
exist, but whenever I thought about them I pictured them to myself
either in tapestry, as was the 'Coronation of Esther' which hung in our
church, or else in changing, rainbow colours, as was Gilbert the Bad in
his window, where he passed from cabbage green, when I was dipping my
fingers in the holy water stoup, to plum blue when I had reached our row
of chairs, or again altogether impalpable, like the image of Geneviève
de Brabant, ancestress of the Guermantes family, which the magic lantern
sent wandering over the curtains of my room or flung aloft upon the
ceiling--in short, always wrapped in the mystery of the Merovingian age,
and bathed, as in a sunset, in the orange light which glowed from the
resounding syllable 'antes.' And if, in spite of that, they were for
me, in their capacity as a duke and a duchess, real people, though of
an unfamiliar kind, this ducal personality was in its turn enormously
distended, immaterialised, so as to encircle and contain that Guermantes
of which they were duke and duchess, all that sunlit 'Guermantes way'
of our walks, the course of the Vivonne, its water-lilies and its
overshadowing trees, and an endless series of hot summer afternoons.
And I knew that they bore not only the titles of Duc and Duchesse de
Guermantes, but that since the fourteenth century, when, after vain
attempts to conquer its earlier lords in battle, they had allied
themselves by marriage, and so became Counts of Combray, the first
citizens, consequently, of the place, and yet the only ones among
its citizens who did not reside in it--Comtes de Combray, possessing
Combray, threading it on their string of names and titles, absorbing it
in their personalities, and illustrating, no doubt, in themselves that
strange and pious melancholy which was peculiar to Combray; proprietors
of the town, though not of any particular house there; dwelling,
presumably, out of doors, in the street, between heaven and earth, like
that Gilbert de Guermantes, of whom I could see, in the stained glass of
the apse of Saint-Hilaire, only the 'other side' in dull black lacquer,
if I raised my eyes to look for him, when I was going to Camus's for a
packet of salt.

And then it happened that, going the 'Guermantes way,' I passed
occasionally by a row of well-watered little gardens, over whose hedges
rose clusters of dark blossom. I would stop before them, hoping to gain
some precious addition to my experience, for I seemed to have before my
eyes a fragment of that riverside country which I had longed so much
to see and know since coming upon a description of it by one of my
favourite authors. And it was with that story-book land, with its
imagined soil intersected by a hundred bubbling watercourses, that
Guermantes, changing its form in my mind, became identified, after I
heard Dr. Percepied speak of the flowers and the charming rivulets and
fountains that were to be seen there in the ducal park. I used to dream
that Mme. de Guermantes, taking a sudden capricious fancy for myself,
invited me there, that all day long she stood fishing for trout by my
side. And when evening came, holding my hand in her own, as we passed by
the little gardens of her vassals, she would point out to me the flowers
that leaned their red and purple spikes along the tops of the low walls,
and would teach me all their names. She would make me tell her, too, all
about the poems that I meant to compose. And these dreams reminded me
that, since I wished, some day, to become a writer, it was high time to
decide what sort of books I was going to write. But as soon as I asked
myself the question, and tried to discover some subjects to which I
could impart a philosophical significance of infinite value, my mind
would stop like a clock, I would see before me vacuity, nothing, would
feel either that I was wholly devoid of talent, or that, perhaps, a
malady of the brain was hindering its development. Sometimes I would
depend upon my father's arranging everything for me. He was so powerful,
in such favour with the people who 'really counted,' that he made it
possible for us to transgress laws which Françoise had taught me to
regard as more ineluctable than the laws of life and death, as when we
were allowed to postpone for a year the compulsory repainting of the
walls of our house, alone among all the houses in that part of Paris,
or when he obtained permission from the Minister for Mme. Sazerat's
son, who had been ordered to some watering-place, to take his degree two
months before the proper time, among the candidates whose surnames began
with 'A,' instead of having to wait his turn as an 'S.' If I had fallen
seriously ill, if I had been captured by brigands, convinced that my
father's understanding with the supreme powers was too complete, that
his letters of introduction to the Almighty were too irresistible for my
illness or captivity to turn out anything but vain illusions, in which
there was no danger actually threatening me, I should have awaited
with perfect composure the inevitable hour of my return to comfortable
realities, of my deliverance from bondage or restoration to health.
Perhaps this want of talent, this black cavity which gaped in my mind
when I ransacked it for the theme of my future writings, was itself no
more, either, than an unsubstantial illusion, and would be brought to
an end by the intervention of my father, who would arrange with the
Government and with Providence that I should be the first writer of
my day. But at other times, while my parents were growing impatient
at seeing me loiter behind instead of following them, my actual life,
instead of seeming an artificial creation by my father, and one which he
could modify as he chose, appeared, on the contrary, to be comprised in
a larger reality which had not been created for my benefit, from whose
judgments there was no appeal, in the heart of which I was bound,
helpless, without friend or ally, and beyond which no further
possibilities lay concealed. It was evident to me then that I existed in
the same manner as all other men, that I must grow old, that I must die
like them, and that among them I was to be distinguished merely as one
of those who have no aptitude for writing. And so, utterly despondent, I
renounced literature for ever, despite the encouragements that had been
given me by Bloch. This intimate, spontaneous feeling, this sense of the
nullity of my intellect, prevailed against all the flattering speeches
that might be lavished upon me, as a wicked man, when everyone is loud
in the praise of his good deeds, is gnawed by the secret remorse of
conscience.

One day my mother said: "You are always talking about Mme. de
Guermantes. Well, Dr. Percepied did a great deal for her when she was
ill, four years ago, and so she is coming to Combray for his daughter's
wedding. You will be able to see her in church." It was from Dr.
Percepied, as it happened, that I had heard most about Mme. de
Guermantes, and he had even shewn us the number of an illustrated paper
in which she was depicted in the costume which she had worn at a fancy
dress ball given by the Princesse de Léon.

Suddenly, during the nuptial mass, the beadle, by moving to one side,
enabled me to see, sitting in a chapel, a lady with fair hair and a
large nose, piercing blue eyes, a billowy scarf of mauve silk, glossy
and new and brilliant, and a little spot at the corner of her nose. And
because on the surface of her face, which was red, as though she had
been very warm, I could make out, diluted and barely perceptible,
details which resembled the portrait that had been shewn to me; because,
more especially, the particular features which I remarked in this lady,
if I attempted to catalogue them, formulated themselves in precisely the
same terms:--_a large nose, blue eyes_, as Dr. Percepied had used when
describing in my presence the Duchesse de Guermantes, I said to myself:
"This lady is like the Duchesse de Guermantes." Now the chapel from
which she was following the service was that of Gilbert the Bad; beneath
its flat tombstones, yellowed and bulging like cells of honey in a comb,
rested the bones of the old Counts of Brabant; and I remembered having
heard it said that this chapel was reserved for the Guermantes family,
whenever any of its members came to attend a ceremony at Combray; there
was, indeed, but one woman resembling the portrait of Mme. de Guermantes
who on that day, the very day on which she was expected to come there,
could be sitting in that chapel: it was she! My disappointment was
immense. It arose from my not having borne in mind, when I thought of
Mme. de Guermantes, that I was picturing her to myself in the colours of
a tapestry or a painted window, as living in another century, as being
of another substance than the rest of the human race. Never had I taken
into account that she might have a red face, a mauve scarf like Mme.
Sazerat; and the oval curve of her cheeks reminded me so strongly of
people whom I had seen at home that the suspicion brushed against my
mind (though it was immediately banished) that this lady in her creative
principle, in the molecules of her physical composition, was perhaps
not substantially the Duchesse de Guermantes, but that her body, in
ignorance of the name that people had given it, belonged to a certain
type of femininity which included, also, the wives of doctors and
tradesmen. "It is, it must be Mme. de Guermantes, and no one else!" were
the words underlying the attentive and astonished expression with
which I was gazing upon this image, which, naturally enough, bore no
resemblance to those that had so often, under the same title of 'Mme. de
Guermantes,' appeared to me in dreams, since this one had not been, like
the others, formed arbitrarily by myself, but had sprung into sight for
the first time, only a moment ago, here in church; an image which was
not of the same nature, was not colourable at will, like those others
that allowed themselves to imbibe the orange tint of a sonorous
syllable, but which was so real that everything, even to the fiery
little spot at the corner of her nose, gave an assurance of her
subjection to the laws of life, as in a transformation scene on the
stage a crease in the dress of a fairy, a quivering of her tiny finger,
indicate the material presence of a living actress before our eyes,
whereas we were uncertain, till then, whether we were not looking merely
at a projection of limelight from a lantern.

Meanwhile I was endeavouring to apply to this image, which the prominent
nose, the piercing eyes pinned down and fixed in my field of vision
(perhaps because it was they that had first struck it, that had made the
first impression on its surface, before I had had time to wonder
whether the woman who thus appeared before me might possibly be Mme. de
Guermantes), to this fresh and unchanging image the idea: "It is Mme. de
Guermantes"; but I succeeded only in making the idea pass between me and
the image, as though they were two discs moving in separate planes,
with a space between. But this Mme. de Guermantes of whom I had so often
dreamed, now that I could see that she had a real existence independent
of myself, acquired a fresh increase of power over my imagination,
which, paralysed for a moment by contact with a reality so different
from anything that it had expected, began to react and to say within me:
"Great and glorious before the days of Charlemagne, the Guermantes
had the right of life and death over their vassals; the Duchesse de
Guermantes descends from Geneviève de Brabant. She does not know, nor
would she consent to know, any of the people who are here to-day."

And then--oh, marvellous independence of the human gaze, tied to the
human face by a cord so loose, so long, so elastic that it can stray,
alone, as far as it may choose--while Mme. de Guermantes sat in the
chapel above the tombs of her dead ancestors, her gaze lingered here
and wandered there, rose to the capitals of the pillars, and even rested
upon myself, like a ray of sunlight straying down the nave, but a ray
of sunlight which, at the moment when I received its caress, appeared
conscious of where it fell. As for Mme. de Guermantes herself, since
she remained there motionless, sitting like a mother who affects not to
notice the rude or awkward conduct of her children who, in the course
of their play, are speaking to people whom she does not know, it was
impossible for me to determine whether she approved or condemned the
vagrancy of her eyes in the careless detachment of her heart.

I felt it to be important that she should not leave the church before
I had been able to look long enough upon her, reminding myself that for
years past I had regarded the sight of her as a thing eminently to be
desired, and I kept my eyes fixed on her, as though by gazing at her
I should be able to carry away and incorporate, to store up, for later
reference, in myself the memory of that prominent nose, those red
cheeks, of all those details which struck me as so much precious,
authentic, unparalleled information with regard to her face. And now
that, whenever I brought my mind to bear upon that face--and
especially, perhaps, in my determination, that form of the instinct
of self-preservation with which we guard everything that is best in
ourselves, not to admit that I had been in any way deceived--I found
only beauty there; setting her once again (since they were one and the
same person, this lady who sat before me and that Duchesse de Guermantes
whom, until then, I had been used to conjure into an imagined shape)
apart from and above that common run of humanity with which the sight,
pure and simple, of her in the flesh had made me for a moment confound
her, I grew indignant when I heard people saying, in the congregation
round me: "She is better looking than Mme. Sazerat" or "than Mlle.
Vinteuil," as though she had been in any way comparable with them. And
my gaze resting upon her fair hair, her blue eyes, the lines of her
neck, and overlooking the features which might have reminded me of
the faces of other women, I cried out within myself, as I admired this
deliberately unfinished sketch: "How lovely she is! What true nobility!
it is indeed a proud Guermantes, the descendant of Geneviève de Brabant,
that I have before me!" And the care which I took to focus all my
attention upon her face succeeded in isolating it so completely that
to-day, when I call that marriage ceremony to mind, I find it impossible
to visualise any single person who was present except her, and the
beadle who answered me in the affirmative when I inquired whether the
lady was, indeed, Mme. de Guermantes. But her, I can see her still quite
clearly, especially at the moment when the procession filed into the
sacristy, lighted by the intermittent, hot sunshine of a windy and rainy
day, where Mme. de Guermantes found herself in the midst of all
those Combray people whose names, even, she did not know, but whose
inferiority proclaimed her own supremacy so loud that she must, in
return, feel for them a genuine, pitying sympathy, and whom she might
count on impressing even more forcibly by virtue of her simplicity and
natural charm. And then, too, since she could not bring into play the
deliberate glances, charged with a definite meaning, which one directs,
in a crowd, towards people whom one knows, but must allow her vague
thoughts to escape continually from her eyes in a flood of blue light
which she was powerless to control, she was anxious not to distress in
any way, not to seem to be despising those humbler mortals over whom
that current flowed, by whom it was everywhere arrested. I can see
again to-day, above her mauve scarf, silky and buoyant, the gentle
astonishment in her eyes, to which she had added, without daring to
address it to anyone in particular, but so that everyone might enjoy his
share of it, the almost timid smile of a sovereign lady who seems to
be making an apology for her presence among the vassals whom she loves.
This smile rested upon myself, who had never ceased to follow her with
my eyes. And I, remembering the glance which she had let fall upon me
during the service, blue as a ray of sunlight that had penetrated the
window of Gilbert the Bad, said to myself, "Of course, she is thinking
about me." I fancied that I had found favour in her sight, that she
would continue to think of me after she had left the church, and would,
perhaps, grow pensive again, that evening, at Guermantes, on my account.
And at once I fell in love with her, for if it is sometimes enough to
make us love a woman that she looks on us with contempt, as I supposed
Mlle. Swann to have done, while we imagine that she cannot ever be ours,
it is enough, also, sometimes that she looks on us kindly, as Mme. de
Guermantes did then, while we think of her as almost ours already. Her
eyes waxed blue as a periwinkle flower, wholly beyond my reach, yet
dedicated by her to me; and the sun, bursting out again from behind
a threatening cloud and darting the full force of its rays on to the
Square and into the sacristy, shed a geranium glow over the red carpet
laid down for the wedding, along which Mme. de Guermantes smilingly
advanced, and covered its woollen texture with a nap of rosy velvet, a
bloom of light, giving it that sort of tenderness, of solemn sweetness
in the pomp of a joyful celebration, which characterises certain pages
of _Lohengrin_, certain paintings by Carpaccio, and makes us understand
how Baudelaire was able to apply to the sound of the trumpet the epithet
'delicious.'

How often, after that day, in the course of my walks along the
'Guermantes way,' and with what an intensified melancholy did I reflect
on my lack of qualification for a literary career, and that I must
abandon all hope of ever becoming a famous author. The regret that I
felt for this, while I lingered alone to dream for a little by myself,
made me suffer so acutely that, in order not to feel it, my mind of
its own accord, by a sort of inhibition in the instant of pain, ceased
entirely to think of verse-making, of fiction, of the poetic future on
which my want of talent precluded me from counting. Then, quite apart
from all those literary preoccupations, and without definite attachment
to anything, suddenly a roof, a gleam of sunlight reflected from a
stone, the smell of a road would make me stop still, to enjoy the
special pleasure that each of them gave me, and also because they
appeared to be concealing, beneath what my eyes could see, something
which they invited me to approach and seize from them, but which,
despite all my efforts, I never managed to discover. As I felt that the
mysterious object was to be found in them, I would stand there in front
of them, motionless, gazing, breathing, endeavouring to penetrate with
my mind beyond the thing seen or smelt. And if I had then to hasten
after my grandfather, to proceed on my way, I would still seek to
recover my sense of them by closing my eyes; I would concentrate upon
recalling exactly the line of the roof, the colour of the stone, which,
without my being able to understand why, had seemed to me to be teeming,
ready to open, to yield up to me the secret treasure of which they were
themselves no more than the outer coverings. It was certainly not any
impression of this kind that could or would restore the hope I had lost
of succeeding one day in becoming an author and poet, for each of them
was associated with some material object devoid of any intellectual
value, and suggesting no abstract truth. But at least they gave me an
unreasoning pleasure, the illusion of a sort of fecundity of mind; and
in that way distracted me from the tedium, from the sense of my own
impotence which I had felt whenever I had sought a philosophic theme
for some great literary work. So urgent was the task imposed on my
conscience by these impressions of form or perfume or colour--to strive
for a perception of what lay hidden beneath them, that I was never
long in seeking an excuse which would allow me to relax so strenuous an
effort and to spare myself the fatigue that it involved. As good luck
would have it, my parents called me; I felt that I had not, for the
moment, the calm environment necessary for a successful pursuit of my
researches, and that it would be better to think no more of the matter
until I reached home, and not to exhaust myself in the meantime to no
purpose. And so I concerned myself no longer with the mystery that lay
hidden in a form or a perfume, quite at ease in my mind, since I was
taking it home with me, protected by its visible and tangible covering,
beneath which I should find it still alive, like the fish which, on days
when I had been allowed to go out fishing, I used to carry back in my
basket, buried in a couch of grass which kept them cool and fresh. Once
in the house again I would begin to think of something else, and so my
mind would become littered (as my room was with the flowers that I had
gathered on my walks, or the odds and ends that people had given me)
with a stone from the surface of which the sunlight was reflected, a
roof, the sound of a bell, the smell of fallen leaves, a confused mass
of different images, under which must have perished long ago the reality
of which I used to have some foreboding, but which I never had the
energy to discover and bring to light. Once, however, when we had
prolonged our walk far beyond its ordinary limits, and so had been very
glad to encounter, half way home, as afternoon darkened into evening,
Dr. Percepied, who drove past us at full speed in his carriage, saw and
recognised us, stopped, and made us jump in beside him, I received an
impression of this sort which I did not abandon without having first
subjected it to an examination a little more thorough. I had been set
on the box beside the coachman, we were going like the wind because
the Doctor had still, before returning to Combray, to call at
Martinville-le-Sec, at the house of a patient, at whose door he asked
us to wait for him. At a bend in the road I experienced, suddenly, that
special pleasure, which bore no resemblance to any other, when I caught
sight of the twin steeples of Martinville, on which the setting sun was
playing, while the movement of the carriage and the windings of the road
seemed to keep them continually changing their position; and then of a
third steeple, that of Vieuxvicq, which, although separated from them
by a hill and a valley, and rising from rather higher ground in the
distance, appeared none the less to be standing by their side.

In ascertaining and noting the shape of their spires, the changes
of aspect, the sunny warmth of their surfaces, I felt that I was not
penetrating to the full depth of my impression, that something more lay
behind that mobility, that luminosity, something which they seemed at
once to contain and to conceal.

The steeples appeared so distant, and we ourselves seemed to come so
little nearer them, that I was astonished when, a few minutes later, we
drew up outside the church of Martinville. I did not know the reason for
the pleasure which I had found in seeing them upon the horizon, and
the business of trying to find out what that reason was seemed to me
irksome; I wished only to keep in reserve in my brain those converging
lines, moving in the sunshine, and, for the time being, to think of
them no more. And it is probable that, had I done so, those two steeples
would have vanished for ever, in a great medley of trees and roofs and
scents and sounds which I had noticed and set apart on account of the
obscure sense of pleasure which they gave me, but without ever exploring
them more fully. I got down from the box to talk to my parents while we
were waiting for the Doctor to reappear. Then it was time to start; I
climbed up again to my place, turning my head to look back, once more,
at my steeples, of which, a little later, I caught a farewell glimpse
at a turn in the road. The coachman, who seemed little inclined for
conversation, having barely acknowledged my remarks, I was obliged,
in default of other society, to fall back on my own, and to attempt to
recapture the vision of my steeples. And presently their outlines and
their sunlit surface, as though they had been a sort of rind, were
stripped apart; a little of what they had concealed from me became
apparent; an idea came into my mind which had not existed for me a
moment earlier, framed itself in words in my head; and the pleasure
with which the first sight of them, just now, had filled me was so much
enhanced that, overpowered by a sort of intoxication, I could no longer
think of anything but them. At this point, although we had now travelled
a long way from Martinville, I turned my head and caught sight of them
again, quite black this time, for the sun had meanwhile set. Every few
minutes a turn in the road would sweep them out of sight; then they
shewed themselves for the last time, and so I saw them no more.

Without admitting to myself that what lay buried within the steeples of
Martinville must be something analogous to a charming phrase, since it
was in the form of words which gave me pleasure that it had appeared to
me, I borrowed a pencil and some paper from the Doctor, and composed,
in spite of the jolting of the carriage, to appease my conscience and to
satisfy my enthusiasm, the following little fragment, which I have since
discovered, and now reproduce, with only a slight revision here and
there.

Alone, rising from the level of the plain, and seemingly lost in
that expanse of open country, climbed to the sky the twin steeples of
Martinville. Presently we saw three: springing into position confronting
them by a daring volt, a third, a dilatory steeple, that of Vieuxvicq,
was come to join them. The minutes passed, we were moving rapidly, and
yet the three steeples were always a long way ahead of us, like
three birds perched upon the plain, motionless and conspicuous in
the sunlight. Then the steeple of Vieuxvicq withdrew, took its proper
distance, and the steeples of Martinville remained alone, gilded by
the light of the setting sun, which, even at that distance, I could
see playing and smiling upon their sloped sides. We had been so long in
approaching them that I was thinking of the time that must still elapse
before we could reach them when, of a sudden, the carriage, having
turned a corner, set us down at their feet; and they had flung
themselves so abruptly in our path that we had barely time to stop
before being dashed against the porch of the church.

We resumed our course; we had left Martinville some little time, and
the village, after accompanying us for a few seconds, had already
disappeared, when, lingering alone on the horizon to watch our flight,
its steeples and that of Vieuxvicq waved once again, in token of
farewell, their sun-bathed pinnacles. Sometimes one would withdraw,
so that the other two might watch us for a moment still; then the road
changed direction, they veered in the light like three golden pivots,
and vanished from my gaze. But, a little later, when we were already
close to Combray, the sun having set meanwhile, I caught sight of them
for the last time, far away, and seeming no more now than three flowers
painted upon the sky above the low line of fields. They made me think,
too, of three maidens in a legend, abandoned in a solitary place over
which night had begun to fall; and while we drew away from them at a
gallop, I could see them timidly seeking their way, and, after some
awkward, stumbling movements of their noble silhouettes, drawing close
to one another, slipping one behind another, shewing nothing more,
now, against the still rosy sky than a single dusky form, charming and
resigned, and so vanishing in the night.

I never thought again of this page, but at the moment when, on my
corner of the box-seat, where the Doctor's coachman was in the habit
of placing, in a hamper, the fowls which he had bought at Martinville
market, I had finished writing it, I found such a sense of happiness,
felt that it had so entirely relieved my mind of the obsession of the
steeples, and of the mystery which they concealed, that, as though I
myself were a hen and had just laid an egg, I began to sing at the top
of my voice.

All day long, during these walks, I had been able to muse upon the
pleasure that there would be in the friendship of the Duchesse de
Guermantes, in fishing for trout, in drifting by myself in a boat on the
Vivonne; and, greedy for happiness, I asked nothing more from life, in
such moments, than that it should consist always of a series of joyous
afternoons. But when, on our way home, I had caught sight of a farm, on
the left of the road, at some distance from two other farms which were
themselves close together, and from which, to return to Combray, we need
only turn down an avenue of oaks, bordered on one side by a series of
orchard-closes, each one planted at regular intervals with apple-trees
which cast upon the ground, when they were lighted by the setting sun,
the Japanese stencil of their shadows; then, sharply, my heart would
begin to beat, I would know that in half an hour we should be at
home, and that there, as was the rule on days when we had taken the
'Guermantes way' and dinner was, in consequence, served later than
usual, I should be sent to bed as soon as I had swallowed my soup, so
that my mother, kept at table, just as though there had been company to
dinner, would not come upstairs to say good night to me in bed. The zone
of melancholy which I then entered was totally distinct from that other
zone, in which I had been bounding for joy a moment earlier, just as
sometimes in the sky a band of pink is separated, as though by a line
invisibly ruled, from a band of green or black. You may see a bird
flying across the pink; it draws near the border-line, touches it,
enters and is lost upon the black. The longings by which I had just
now been absorbed, to go to Guermantes, to travel, to live a life of
happiness--I was now so remote from them that their fulfilment would
have afforded me no pleasure. How readily would I have sacrificed them
all, just to be able to cry, all night long, in the arms of Mamma!
Shuddering with emotion, I could not take my agonised eyes from my
mother's face, which was not to appear that evening in the bedroom where
I could see myself already lying, in imagination; and wished only that
I were lying dead. And this state would persist until the morrow, when,
the rays of morning leaning their bars of light, as the gardener might
lean his ladder, against the wall overgrown with nasturtiums, which
clambered up it as far as my window-sill, I would leap out of bed to run
down at once into the garden, with no thought of the fact that evening
must return, and with it the hour when I must leave my mother. And so
it was from the 'Guermantes way' that I learned to distinguish between
these states which reigned alternately in my mind, during certain
periods, going so far as to divide every day between them, each one
returning to dispossess the other with the regularity of a fever and
ague: contiguous, and yet so foreign to one another, so devoid of means
of communication, that I could no longer understand, or even picture to
myself, in one state what I had desired or dreaded or even done in the
other.

So the 'Méséglise way' and the 'Guermantes way' remain for me linked
with many of the little incidents of that one of all the divers lives
along whose parallel lines we are moved, which is the most abundant in
sudden reverses of fortune, the richest in episodes; I mean the life of
the mind. Doubtless it makes in us an imperceptible progress, and the
truths which have changed for us its meaning and its aspect, which have
opened new paths before our feet, we had for long been preparing for
their discovery; but that preparation was unconscious; and for us
those truths date only from the day, from the minute when they became
apparent. The flowers which played then among the grass, the water
which rippled past in the sunshine, the whole landscape which served as
environment to their apparition lingers around the memory of them still
with its unconscious or unheeding air; and, certainly, when they were
slowly scrutinised by this humble passer-by, by this dreaming
child--as the face of a king is scrutinised by a petitioner lost in the
crowd--that scrap of nature, that corner of a garden could never suppose
that it would be thanks to him that they would be elected to survive in
all their most ephemeral details; and yet the scent of hawthorn which
strays plundering along the hedge from which, in a little while, the
dog-roses will have banished it, a sound of footsteps followed by no
echo, upon a gravel path, a bubble formed at the side of a waterplant by
the current, and formed only to burst--my exaltation of mind has borne
them with it, and has succeeded in making them traverse all these
successive years, while all around them the one-trodden ways have
vanished, while those who thronged those ways, and even the memory of
those who thronged those trodden ways, are dead. Sometimes the fragment
of landscape thus transported into the present will detach itself in
such isolation from all associations that it floats uncertainly upon my
mind, like a flowering isle of Delos, and I am unable to say from
what place, from what time--perhaps, quite simply, from which of my
dreams--it comes. But it is pre-eminently as the deepest layer of my
mental soil, as firm sites on which I still may build, that I regard
the Méséglise and Guermantes 'ways.' It is because I used to think of
certain things, of certain people, while I was roaming along them, that
the things, the people which they taught me to know, and these alone,
I still take seriously, still give me joy. Whether it be that the faith
which creates has ceased to exist in me, or that reality will take shape
in the memory alone, the flowers that people shew me nowadays for the
first time never seem to me to be true flowers. The 'Méséglise way'
with its lilacs, its hawthorns, its cornflowers, its poppies, its
apple-trees, the 'Guermantes way' with its river full of tadpoles, its
water-lilies, and its buttercups have constituted for me for all time
the picture of the land in which I fain would pass my life, in which my
only requirements are that I may go out fishing, drift idly in a boat,
see the ruins of a gothic fortress in the grass, and find hidden among
the cornfields--as Saint-André-des-Champs lay hidden--an old church,
monumental, rustic, and yellow like a mill-stone; and the cornflowers,
the hawthorns, the apple-trees which I may happen, when I go walking, to
encounter in the fields, because they are situated at the same depth, on
the level of my past life, at once establish contact with my heart. And
yet, because there is an element of individuality in places, when I am
seized with a desire to see again the 'Guermantes way,' it would not
be satisfied were I led to the banks of a river in which were lilies
as fair, or even fairer than those in the Vivonne, any more than on my
return home in the evening, at the hour when there awakened in me that
anguish which, later on in life, transfers itself to the passion of
love, and may even become its inseparable companion, I should have
wished for any strange mother to come in and say good night to me,
though she were far more beautiful and more intelligent than my own. No:
just as the one thing necessary to send me to sleep contented (in that
untroubled peace which no mistress, in later years, has ever been able
to give me, since one has doubts of them at the moment when one believes
in them, and never can possess their hearts as I used to receive, in her
kiss, the heart of my mother, complete, without scruple or reservation,
unburdened by any liability save to myself) was that it should be my
mother who came, that she should incline towards me that face on which
there was, beneath her eye, something that was, it appears, a blemish,
and which I loved as much as all the rest--so what I want to see again
is the 'Guermantes way' as I knew it, with the farm that stood a little
apart from the two neighbouring farms, pressed so close together, at the
entrance to the oak avenue; those meadows upon whose surface, when it
is polished by the sun to the mirroring radiance of a lake, are outlined
the leaves of the apple-trees; that whole landscape whose individuality
sometimes, at night, in my dreams, binds me with a power that is almost
fantastic, of which I can discover no trace when I awake.

No doubt, by virtue of having permanently and indissolubly combined in
me groups of different impressions, for no reason save that they had
made me feel several separate things at the same time, the Méséglise
and Guermantes 'ways' left me exposed, in later life, to much
disillusionment, and even to many mistakes. For often I have wished to
see a person again without realising that it was simply because that
person recalled to me a hedge of hawthorns in blossom; and I have been
led to believe, and to make some one else believe in an aftermath of
affection, by what was no more than an inclination to travel. But by
the same qualities, and by their persistence in those of my impressions,
to-day, to which they can find an attachment, the two 'ways' give to
those impressions a foundation, depth, a dimension lacking from the
rest. They invest them, too, with a charm, a significance which is for
me alone. When, on a summer evening, the resounding sky growls like a
tawny lion, and everyone is complaining of the storm, it is along the
'Méséglise way' that my fancy strays alone in ecstasy, inhaling,
through the noise of falling rain, the odour of invisible and persistent
lilac-trees.

And so I would often lie until morning, dreaming of the old days at
Combray, of my melancholy and wakeful evenings there; of other days
besides, the memory of which had been more lately restored to me by the
taste--by what would have been called at Combray the 'perfume'---of a
cup of tea; and, by an association of memories, of a story which, many
years after I had left the little place, had been told me of a love
affair in which Swann had been involved before I was born; with that
accuracy of detail which it is easier, often, to obtain when we are
studying the lives of people who have been dead for centuries than when
we are trying to chronicle those of our own most intimate friends, an
accuracy which it seems as impossible to attain as it seemed impossible
to speak from one town to another, before we learned of the contrivance
by which that impossibility has been overcome. All these memories,
following one after another, were condensed into a single substance,
but had not so far coalesced that I could not discern between the
three strata, between my oldest, my instinctive memories, those others,
inspired more recently by a taste or 'perfume,' and those which were
actually the memories of another, from whom I had acquired them at
second hand--no fissures, indeed, no geological faults, but at least
those veins, those streaks of colour which in certain rocks, in certain
marbles, point to differences of origin, age, and formation.

It is true that, when morning drew near, I would long have settled the
brief uncertainty of my waking dream, I would know in what room I
was actually lying, would have reconstructed it round about me in
the darkness, and--fixing my orientation by memory alone, or with the
assistance of a feeble glimmer of light at the foot of which I placed
the curtains and the window--would have reconstructed it complete and
with its furniture, as an architect and an upholsterer might do, working
upon an original, discarded plan of the doors and windows; would have
replaced the mirrors and set the chest-of-drawers on its accustomed
site. But scarcely had daylight itself--and no longer the gleam from
a last, dying ember on a brass curtain-rod, which I had mistaken for
daylight--traced across the darkness, as with a stroke of chalk across
a blackboard, its first white correcting ray, when the window, with
its curtains, would leave the frame of the doorway, in which I had
erroneously placed it, while, to make room for it, the writing-table,
which my memory had clumsily fixed where the window ought to be, would
hurry off at full speed, thrusting before it the mantelpiece, and
sweeping aside the wall of the passage; the well of the courtyard would
be enthroned on the spot where, a moment earlier, my dressing-room had
lain, and the dwelling-place which I had built up for myself in the
darkness would have gone to join all those other dwellings of which I
had caught glimpses from the whirlpool of awakening; put to flight
by that pale sign traced above my window-curtains by the uplifted
forefinger of day.






SWANN IN LOVE

To admit you to the 'little nucleus,' the 'little group,' the 'little
clan' at the Verdurins', one condition sufficed, but that one was
indispensable; you must give tacit adherence to a Creed one of whose
articles was that the young pianist, whom Mme. Verdurin had taken under
her patronage that year, and of whom she said "Really, it oughtn't to
be allowed, to play Wagner as well as that!" left both Planté
and Rubinstein 'sitting'; while Dr. Cottard was a more brilliant
diagnostician than Potain. Each 'new recruit' whom the Verdurins failed
to persuade that the evenings spent by other people, in other houses
than theirs, were as dull as ditch-water, saw himself banished
forthwith. Women being in this respect more rebellious than men, more
reluctant to lay aside all worldly curiosity and the desire to find out
for themselves whether other drawing-rooms might not sometimes be as
entertaining, and the Verdurins feeling, moreover, that this critical
spirit and this demon of frivolity might, by their contagion, prove
fatal to the orthodoxy of the little church, they had been obliged to
expel, one after another, all those of the 'faithful' who were of the
female sex.

Apart from the doctor's young wife, they were reduced almost exclusively
that season (for all that Mme. Verdurin herself was a thoroughly 'good'
woman, and came of a respectable middle-class family, excessively rich
and wholly undistinguished, with which she had gradually and of her own
accord severed all connection) to a young woman almost of a 'certain
class,' a Mme. de Crécy, whom Mme. Verdurin called by her Christian
name, Odette, and pronounced a 'love,' and to the pianist's aunt, who
looked as though she had, at one period, 'answered the bell': ladies
quite ignorant of the world, who in their social simplicity were so
easily led to believe that the Princesse de Sagan and the Duchesse
de Guermantes were obliged to pay large sums of money to other poor
wretches, in order to have anyone at their dinner-parties, that if
somebody had offered to procure them an invitation to the house of
either of those great dames, the old doorkeeper and the woman of 'easy
virtue' would have contemptuously declined.

The Verdurins never invited you to dinner; you had your 'place laid'
there. There was never any programme for the evening's entertainment.
The young pianist would play, but only if he felt inclined, for no one
was forced to do anything, and, as M. Verdurin used to say: "We're all
friends here. Liberty Hall, you know!"

If the pianist suggested playing the Ride of the Valkyries, or the
Prelude to Tristan, Mme. Verdurin would protest, not that the music was
displeasing to her, but, on the contrary, that it made too violent an
impression. "Then you want me to have one of my headaches? You know
quite well, it's the same every time he plays that. I know what I'm
in for. Tomorrow, when I want to get up--nothing doing!" If he was not
going to play they talked, and one of the friends--usually the painter
who was in favour there that year--would "spin," as M. Verdurin put
it, "a damned funny yarn that made 'em all split with laughter," and
especially Mme. Verdurin, for whom--so strong was her habit of taking
literally the figurative accounts of her emotions--Dr. Cottard, who was
then just starting in general practice, would "really have to come one
day and set her jaw, which she had dislocated with laughing too much."

Evening dress was barred, because you were all 'good pals,' and didn't
want to look like the 'boring people' who were to be avoided like the
plague, and only asked to the big evenings, which were given as seldom
as possible, and then only if it would amuse the painter or make the
musician better known. The rest of the time you were quite happy playing
charades and having supper in fancy dress, and there was no need to
mingle any strange element with the little 'clan.'

But just as the 'good pals' came to take a more and more prominent place
in Mme. Verdurin's life, so the 'bores,' the 'nuisances' grew to include
everybody and everything that kept her friends away from her, that made
them sometimes plead 'previous engagements,' the mother of one, the
professional duties of another, the 'little place in the country' of a
third. If Dr. Cottard felt bound to say good night as soon as they rose
from table, so as to go back to some patient who was seriously ill; "I
don't know," Mme. Verdurin would say, "I'm sure it will do him far more
good if you don't go disturbing him again this evening; he will have a
good night without you; to-morrow morning you can go round early and you
will find him cured." From the beginning of December it would make her
quite ill to think that the 'faithful' might fail her on Christmas and
New Year's Days. The pianist's aunt insisted that he must accompany her,
on the latter, to a family dinner at her mother's.

"You don't suppose she'll die, your mother," exclaimed Mme. Verdurin
bitterly, "if you don't have dinner with her on New Year's Day, like
people in the _provinces_!"

Her uneasiness was kindled again in Holy Week: "Now you, Doctor, you're
a sensible, broad-minded man; you'll come, of course, on Good Friday,
just like any other day?" she said to Cottard in the first year of the
little 'nucleus,' in a loud and confident voice, as though there could
be no doubt of his answer. But she trembled as she waited for it, for if
he did not come she might find herself condemned to dine alone.

"I shall come on Good Friday--to say good-bye to you, for we are going
to spend the holidays in Auvergne."

"In Auvergne? To be eaten by fleas and all sorts of creatures! A fine
lot of good that will do you!" And after a solemn pause: "If you had
only told us, we would have tried to get up a party, and all gone there
together, comfortably."

And so, too, if one of the 'faithful' had a friend, or one of the ladies
a young man, who was liable, now and then, to make them miss an evening,
the Verdurins, who were not in the least afraid of a woman's having a
lover, provided that she had him in their company, loved him in their
company and did not prefer him to their company, would say: "Very well,
then, bring your friend along." And he would be put to the test, to see
whether he was willing to have no secrets from Mme. Verdurin, whether he
was susceptible of being enrolled in the 'little clan.' If he failed
to pass, the faithful one who had introduced him would be taken on one
side, and would be tactfully assisted to quarrel with the friend or
mistress. But if the test proved satisfactory, the newcomer would in
turn be numbered among the 'faithful.' And so when, in the course of
this same year, the courtesan told M. Verdurin that she had made the
acquaintance of such a charming gentleman, M. Swann, and hinted that
he would very much like to be allowed to come, M. Verdurin carried the
request at once to his wife. He never formed an opinion on any subject
until she had formed hers, his special duty being to carry out her
wishes and those of the 'faithful' generally, which he did with
boundless ingenuity.

"My dear, Mme. de Crécy has something to say to you. She would like to
bring one of her friends here, a M. Swann. What do you say?"

"Why, as if anybody could refuse anything to a little piece of
perfection like that. Be quiet; no one asked your opinion. I tell you
that you are a piece of perfection."

"Just as you like," replied Odette, in an affected tone, and then went
on: "You know I'm not fishing for compliments."

"Very well; bring your friend, if he's nice."

Now there was no connection whatsoever between the 'little nucleus' and
the society which Swann frequented, and a purely worldly man would
have thought it hardly worth his while, when occupying so exceptional
a position in the world, to seek an introduction to the Verdurins. But
Swann was so ardent a lover that, once he had got to know almost all the
women of the aristocracy, once they had taught him all that there was
to learn, he had ceased to regard those naturalisation papers, almost a
patent of nobility, which the Faubourg Saint-Germain had bestowed upon
him, save as a sort of negotiable bond, a letter of credit with no
intrinsic value, which allowed him to improvise a status for himself in
some little hole in the country, or in some obscure quarter of Paris,
where the good-looking daughter of a local squire or solicitor had taken
his fancy. For at such times desire, or love itself, would revive in
him a feeling of vanity from which he was now quite free in his everyday
life, although it was, no doubt, the same feeling which had originally
prompted him towards that career as a man of fashion in which he had
squandered his intellectual gifts upon frivolous amusements, and had
made use of his erudition in matters of art only to advise society
ladies what pictures to buy and how to decorate their houses; and this
vanity it was which made him eager to shine, in the sight of any fair
unknown who had captivated him for the moment, with a brilliance which
the name of Swann by itself did not emit. And he was most eager when the
fair unknown was in humble circumstances. Just as it is not by other
men of intelligence that an intelligent man is afraid of being thought
a fool, so it is not by the great gentleman but by boors and 'bounders'
that a man of fashion is afraid of finding his social value underrated.
Three-fourths of the mental ingenuity displayed, of the social
falsehoods scattered broadcast ever since the world began by people
whose importance they have served only to diminish, have been aimed at
inferiors. And Swann, who behaved quite simply and was at his ease when
with a duchess, would tremble for fear of being despised, and would
instantly begin to pose, were he to meet her grace's maid.

Unlike so many people, who, either from lack of energy or else from a
resigned sense of the obligation laid upon them by their social grandeur
to remain moored like houseboats to a certain point on the bank of the
stream of life, abstain from the pleasures which are offered to them
above and below that point, that degree in life in which they will
remain fixed until the day of their death, and are content, in the
end, to describe as pleasures, for want of any better, those mediocre
distractions, that just not intolerable tedium which is enclosed there
with them; Swann would endeavour not to find charm and beauty in the
women with whom he must pass time, but to pass his time among women whom
he had already found to be beautiful and charming. And these were, as
often as not, women whose beauty was of a distinctly 'common' type, for
the physical qualities which attracted him instinctively, and without
reason, were the direct opposite of those that he admired in the women
painted or sculptured by his favourite masters. Depth of character, or
a melancholy expression on a woman's face would freeze his senses, which
would, however, immediately melt at the sight of healthy, abundant, rosy
human flesh.

If on his travels he met a family whom it would have been more correct
for him to make no attempt to know, but among whom a woman caught his
eye, adorned with a special charm that was new to him, to remain on his
'high horse' and to cheat the desire that she had kindled in him, to
substitute a pleasure different from that which he might have tasted in
her company by writing to invite one of his former mistresses to come
and join him, would have seemed to him as cowardly an abdication in the
face of life, as stupid a renunciation of a new form of happiness as if,
instead of visiting the country where he was, he had shut himself up in
his own rooms and looked at 'views' of Paris. He did not immure himself
in the solid structure of his social relations, but had made of them, so
as to be able to set it up afresh upon new foundations wherever a woman
might take his fancy, one of those collapsible tents which explorers
carry about with them. Any part of it which was not portable or could
not be adapted to some fresh pleasure he would discard as valueless,
however enviable it might appear to others. How often had his credit
with a duchess, built up of the yearly accumulation of her desire to
do him some favour for which she had never found an opportunity, been
squandered in a moment by his calling upon her, in an indiscreetly
worded message, for a recommendation by telegraph which would put him
in touch at once with one of her agents whose daughter he had noticed in
the country, just as a starving man might barter a diamond for a crust
of bread. Indeed, when it was too late, he would laugh at himself for
it, for there was in his nature, redeemed by many rare refinements, an
element of clownishness. Then he belonged to that class of intelligent
men who have led a life of idleness, and who seek consolation and,
perhaps, an excuse in the idea, which their idleness offers to their
intelligence, of objects as worthy of their interest as any that could
be attained by art or learning, the idea that 'Life' contains situations
more interesting and more romantic than all the romances ever written.
So, at least, he would assure and had no difficulty in persuading the
more subtle among his friends in the fashionable world, notably the
Baron de Charlus, whom he liked to amuse with stories of the startling
adventures that had befallen him, such as when he had met a woman in the
train, and had taken her home with him, before discovering that she was
the sister of a reigning monarch, in whose hands were gathered, at that
moment, all the threads of European politics, of which he found himself
kept informed in the most delightful fashion, or when, in the complexity
of circumstances, it depended upon the choice which the Conclave
was about to make whether he might or might not become the lover of
somebody's cook.

It was not only the brilliant phalanx of virtuous dowagers, generals
and academicians, to whom he was bound by such close ties, that Swann
compelled with so much cynicism to serve him as panders. All his friends
were accustomed to receive, from time to time, letters which called on
them for a word of recommendation or introduction, with a diplomatic
adroitness which, persisting throughout all his successive 'affairs'
and using different pretexts, revealed more glaringly than the clumsiest
indiscretion, a permanent trait in his character and an unvarying quest.
I used often to recall to myself when, many years later, I began to
take an interest in his character because of the similarities which, in
wholly different respects, it offered to my own, how, when he used to
write to my grandfather (though not at the time we are now considering,
for it was about the date of my own birth that Swann's great 'affair'
began, and made a long interruption in his amatory practices) the
latter, recognising his friend's handwriting on the envelope, would
exclaim: "Here is Swann asking for something; on guard!" And, either
from distrust or from the unconscious spirit of devilry which urges us
to offer a thing only to those who do not want it, my grandparents would
meet with an obstinate refusal the most easily satisfied of his prayers,
as when he begged them for an introduction to a girl who dined with us
every Sunday, and whom they were obliged, whenever Swann mentioned her,
to pretend that they no longer saw, although they would be wondering,
all through the week, whom they could invite to meet her, and often
failed, in the end, to find anyone, sooner than make a sign to him who
would so gladly have accepted.

Occasionally a couple of my grandparents' acquaintance, who had been
complaining for some time that they never saw Swann now, would announce
with satisfaction, and perhaps with a slight inclination to make my
grandparents envious of them, that he had suddenly become as charming as
he could possibly be, and was never out of their house. My grandfather
would not care to shatter their pleasant illusion, but would look at my
grandmother, as he hummed the air of:


  What is this mystery?
  I cannot understand it;

or of:


  Vision fugitive...;
  In matters such as this
  'Tis best to close one's eyes.

A few months later, if my grandfather asked Swann's new friend "What
about Swann? Do you still see as much of him as ever?" the other's face
would lengthen: "Never mention his name to me again!"

"But I thought that you were such friends..."

He had been intimate in this way for several months with some cousins
of my grandmother, dining almost every evening at their house. Suddenly,
and without any warning, he ceased to appear. They supposed him to be
ill, and the lady of the house was going to send to inquire for him
when, in her kitchen, she found a letter in his hand, which her cook had
left by accident in the housekeeping book. In this he announced that he
was leaving Paris and would not be able to come to the house again. The
cook had been his mistress, and at the moment of breaking off relations
she was the only one of the household whom he had thought it necessary
to inform.

But when his mistress for the time being was a woman in society, or at
least one whose birth was not so lowly, nor her position so irregular
that he was unable to arrange for her reception in 'society,' then for
her sake he would return to it, but only to the particular orbit in
which she moved or into which he had drawn her. "No good depending on
Swann for this evening," people would say; "don't you remember, it's his
American's night at the Opera?" He would secure invitations for her to
the most exclusive drawing-rooms, to those houses where he himself
went regularly, for weekly dinners or for poker; every evening, after
a slight 'wave' imparted to his stiffly brushed red locks had tempered
with a certain softness the ardour of his bold green eyes, he would
select a flower for his buttonhole and set out to meet his mistress at
the house of one or other of the women of his circle; and then, thinking
of the affection and admiration which the fashionable folk, whom he
always treated exactly as he pleased, would, when he met them there,
lavish upon him in the presence of the woman whom he loved, he would
find a fresh charm in that worldly existence of which he had grown
weary, but whose substance, pervaded and warmly coloured by the
flickering light which he had slipped into its midst, seemed to him
beautiful and rare, now that he had incorporated in it a fresh love.

But while each of these attachments, each of these flirtations had been
the realisation, more or less complete, of a dream born of the sight of
a face or a form which Swann had spontaneously, and without effort on
his part, found charming, it was quite another matter when, one day at
the theatre, he was introduced to Odette de Crécy by an old friend of
his own, who had spoken of her to him as a ravishing creature with whom
he might very possibly come to an understanding; but had made her out
to be harder of conquest than she actually was, so as to appear to be
conferring a special favour by the introduction. She had struck Swann
not, certainly, as being devoid of beauty, but as endowed with a style
of beauty which left him indifferent, which aroused in him no desire,
which gave him, indeed, a sort of physical repulsion; as one of those
women of whom every man can name some, and each will name different
examples, who are the converse of the type which our senses demand. To
give him any pleasure her profile was too sharp, her skin too delicate,
her cheek-bones too prominent, her features too tightly drawn. Her eyes
were fine, but so large that they seemed to be bending beneath their own
weight, strained the rest of her face and always made her appear unwell
or in an ill humour. Some time after this introduction at the theatre
she had written to ask Swann whether she might see his collections,
which would interest her so much, she, "an ignorant woman with a taste
for beautiful things," saying that she would know him better when
once she had seen him in his 'home,' where she imagined him to be "so
comfortable with his tea and his books"; although she had not concealed
her surprise at his being in that part of the town, which must be so
depressing, and was "not nearly smart enough for such a very smart man."
And when he allowed her to come she had said to him as she left how
sorry she was to have stayed so short a time in a house into which she
was so glad to have found her way at last, speaking of him as though he
had meant something more to her than the rest of the people she knew,
and appearing to unite their two selves with a kind of romantic bond
which had made him smile. But at the time of life, tinged already with
disenchantment, which Swann was approaching, when a man can content
himself with being in love for the pleasure of loving without expecting
too much in return, this linking of hearts, if it is no longer, as in
early youth, the goal towards which love, of necessity, tends, still
is bound to love by so strong an association of ideas that it may well
become the cause of love if it presents itself first. In his younger
days a man dreams of possessing the heart of the woman whom he loves;
later, the feeling that he possesses the heart of a woman may be enough
to make him fall in love with her. And so, at an age when it would
appear--since one seeks in love before everything else a subjective
pleasure--that the taste for feminine beauty must play the larger part
in its procreation, love may come into being, love of the most physical
order, without any foundation in desire. At this time of life a man has
already been wounded more than once by the darts of love; it no longer
evolves by itself, obeying its own incomprehensible and fatal laws,
before his passive and astonished heart. We come to its aid; we falsify
it by memory and by suggestion; recognising one of its symptoms we
recall and recreate the rest. Since we possess its hymn, engraved on
our hearts in its entirety, there is no need of any woman to repeat the
opening lines, potent with the admiration which her beauty inspires, for
us to remember all that follows. And if she begin in the middle, where
it sings of our existing, henceforward, for one another only, we are
well enough attuned to that music to be able to take it up and follow
our partner, without hesitation, at the first pause in her voice.

Odette de Crécy came again to see Swann; her visits grew more frequent,
and doubtless each visit revived the sense of disappointment which he
felt at the sight of a face whose details he had somewhat forgotten in
the interval, not remembering it as either so expressive or, in spite
of her youth, so faded; he used to regret, while she was talking to
him, that her really considerable beauty was not of the kind which he
spontaneously admired. It must be remarked that Odette's face appeared
thinner and more prominent than it actually was, because her forehead
and the upper part of her cheeks, a single and almost plane surface,
were covered by the masses of hair which women wore at that period,
drawn forward in a fringe, raised in crimped waves and falling in stray
locks over her ears; while as for her figure, and she was admirably
built, it was impossible to make out its continuity (on account of
the fashion then prevailing, and in spite of her being one of the
best-dressed women in Paris) for the corset, jetting forwards in an
arch, as though over an imaginary stomach, and ending in a sharp point,
beneath which bulged out the balloon of her double skirts, gave a woman,
that year, the appearance of being composed of different sections badly
fitted together; to such an extent did the frills, the flounces, the
inner bodice follow, in complete independence, controlled only by the
fancy of their designer or the rigidity of their material, the line
which led them to the knots of ribbon, falls of lace, fringes of
vertically hanging jet, or carried them along the bust, but nowhere
attached themselves to the living creature, who, according as the
architecture of their fripperies drew them towards or away from her
own, found herself either strait-laced to suffocation or else completely
buried.

But, after Odette had left him, Swann would think with a smile of her
telling him how the time would drag until he allowed her to come again;
he remembered the anxious, timid way in which she had once begged him
that it might not be very long, and the way in which she had looked at
him then, fixing upon him her fearful and imploring gaze, which gave her
a touching air beneath the bunches of artificial pansies fastened in
the front of her round bonnet of white straw, tied with strings of black
velvet. "And won't you," she had ventured, "come just once and take tea
with me?" He had pleaded pressure of work, an essay--which, in reality,
he had abandoned years ago--on Vermeer of Delft. "I know that I am quite
useless," she had replied, "a little wild thing like me beside a learned
great man like you. I should be like the frog in the fable! And yet I
should so much like to learn, to know things, to be initiated. What fun
it would be to become a regular bookworm, to bury my nose in a lot of
old papers!" she had gone on, with that self-satisfied air which a smart
woman adopts when she insists that her one desire is to give herself
up, without fear of soiling her fingers, to some unclean task, such as
cooking the dinner, with her "hands right in the dish itself." "You will
only laugh at me, but this painter who stops you from seeing me," she
meant Vermeer, "I have never even heard of him; is he alive still? Can I
see any of his things in Paris, so as to have some idea of what is going
on behind that great brow which works so hard, that head which I feel
sure is always puzzling away about things; just to be able to say
'There, that's what he's thinking about!' What a dream it would be to be
able to help you with your work."

He had sought an excuse in his fear of forming new friendships, which he
gallantly described as his fear of a hopeless passion. "You are afraid
of falling in love? How funny that is, when I go about seeking nothing
else, and would give my soul just to find a little love somewhere!" she
had said, so naturally and with such an air of conviction that he had
been genuinely touched. "Some woman must have made you suffer. And you
think that the rest are all like her. She can't have understood you: you
are so utterly different from ordinary men. That's what I liked about
you when I first saw you; I felt at once that you weren't like everybody
else."

"And then, besides, there's yourself----" he had continued, "I know what
women are; you must have a whole heap of things to do, and never any
time to spare."

"I? Why, I have never anything to do. I am always free, and I always
will be free if you want me. At whatever hour of the day or night it may
suit you to see me, just send for me, and I shall be only too delighted
to come. Will you do that? Do you know what I should really like--to
introduce you to Mme. Verdurin, where I go every evening. Just fancy my
finding you there, and thinking that it was a little for my sake that
you had gone."

No doubt, in thus remembering their conversations, in thinking about her
thus when he was alone, he did no more than call her image into being
among those of countless other women in his romantic dreams; but if,
thanks to some accidental circumstance (or even perhaps without that
assistance, for the circumstance which presents itself at the moment
when a mental state, hitherto latent, makes itself felt, may well have
had no influence whatsoever upon that state), the image of Odette de
Crécy came to absorb the whole of his dreams, if from those dreams
the memory of her could no longer be eliminated, then her bodily
imperfections would no longer be of the least importance, nor would the
conformity of her body, more or less than any other, to the requirements
of Swann's taste; since, having become the body of her whom he loved, it
must henceforth be the only one capable of causing him joy or anguish.

It so happened that my grandfather had known--which was more than could
be said of any other actual acquaintance--the family of these Verdurins.
But he had entirely severed his connection with what he called "young
Verdurin," taking a general view of him as one who had fallen--though
without losing hold of his millions--among the riff-raff of Bohemia. One
day he received a letter from Swann asking whether my grandfather could
put him in touch with the Verdurins. "On guard! on guard!" he exclaimed
as he read it, "I am not at all surprised; Swann was bound to finish up
like this. A nice lot of people! I cannot do what he asks, because, in
the first place, I no longer know the gentleman in question. Besides,
there must be a woman in it somewhere, and I don't mix myself up in such
matters. Ah, well, we shall see some fun if Swann begins running after
the little Verdurins."

And on my grandfather's refusal to act as sponsor, it was Odette herself
who had taken Swann to the house.

The Verdurins had had dining with them, on the day when Swann made his
first appearance, Dr. and Mme. Cottard, the young pianist and his aunt,
and the painter then in favour, while these were joined, in the course
of the evening, by several more of the 'faithful.'

Dr. Cottard was never quite certain of the tone in which he ought to
reply to any observation, or whether the speaker was jesting or
in earnest. And so in any event he would embellish all his facial
expressions with the offer of a conditional, a provisional smile whose
expectant subtlety would exonerate him from the charge of being a
simpleton, if the remark addressed to him should turn out to have been
facetious. But as he must also be prepared to face the alternative, he
never dared to allow this smile a definite expression on his features,
and you would see there a perpetually flickering uncertainty, in which
you might decipher the question that he never dared to ask: "Do you
really mean that?" He was no more confident of the manner in which he
ought to conduct himself in the street, or indeed in life generally,
than he was in a drawing-room; and he might be seen greeting passers-by,
carriages, and anything that occurred with a malicious smile which
absolved his subsequent behaviour of all impropriety, since it proved,
if it should turn out unsuited to the occasion, that he was well aware
of that, and that if he had assumed a smile, the jest was a secret of
his own.

On all those points, however, where a plain question appeared to him to
be permissible, the Doctor was unsparing in his endeavours to cultivate
the wilderness of his ignorance and uncertainty and so to complete his
education.

So it was that, following the advice given him by a wise mother on his
first coming up to the capital from his provincial home, he would never
let pass either a figure of speech or a proper name that was new to him
without an effort to secure the fullest information upon it.

As regards figures of speech, he was insatiable in his thirst for
knowledge, for often imagining them to have a more definite meaning than
was actually the case, he would want to know what, exactly, was intended
by those which he most frequently heard used: 'devilish pretty,' 'blue
blood,' 'a cat and dog life,' 'a day of reckoning,' 'a queen of fashion,
'to give a free hand,' 'to be at a deadlock,' and so forth; and in
what particular circumstances he himself might make use of them in
conversation. Failing these, he would adorn it with puns and other
'plays upon words' which he had learned by rote. As for the names of
strangers which were uttered in his hearing, he used merely to repeat
them to himself in a questioning tone, which, he thought, would suffice
to furnish him with explanations for which he would not ostensibly seek.

As the critical faculty, on the universal application of which he prided
himself, was, in reality, completely lacking, that refinement of good
breeding which consists in assuring some one whom you are obliging in
any way, without expecting to be believed, that it is really yourself
that is obliged to him, was wasted on Cottard, who took everything that
he heard in its literal sense. However blind she may have been to his
faults, Mme. Verdurin was genuinely annoyed, though she still continued
to regard him as brilliantly clever, when, after she had invited him to
see and hear Sarah Bernhardt from a stage box, and had said politely:
"It is very good of you to have come, Doctor, especially as I'm sure
you must often have heard Sarah Bernhardt; and besides, I'm afraid we're
rather too near the stage," the Doctor, who had come into the box with a
smile which waited before settling upon or vanishing from his face
until some one in authority should enlighten him as to the merits of the
spectacle, replied: "To be sure, we are far too near the stage, and
one is getting sick of Sarah Bernhardt. But you expressed a wish that
I should come. For me, your wish is a command. I am only too glad to be
able to do you this little service. What would one not do to please you,
you are so good." And he went on, "Sarah Bernhardt; that's what they
call the Voice of God, ain't it? You see, often, too, that she 'sets the
boards on fire.' That's an odd expression, ain't it?" in the hope of an
enlightening commentary, which, however, was not forthcoming.

"D'you know," Mme. Verdurin had said to her husband, "I believe we are
going the wrong way to work when we depreciate anything we offer the
Doctor. He is a scientist who lives quite apart from our everyday
existence; he knows nothing himself of what things are worth, and he
accepts everything that we say as gospel."

"I never dared to mention it," M. Verdurin had answered, "but I've
noticed the same thing myself." And on the following New Year's Day,
instead of sending Dr. Cottard a ruby that cost three thousand francs,
and pretending that it was a mere trifle, M. Verdurin bought an
artificial stone for three hundred, and let it be understood that it was
something almost impossible to match.

When Mme. Verdurin had announced that they were to see M. Swann that
evening; "Swann!" the Doctor had exclaimed in a tone rendered brutal
by his astonishment, for the smallest piece of news would always take
utterly unawares this man who imagined himself to be perpetually in
readiness for anything. And seeing that no one answered him, "Swann! Who
on earth is Swann?" he shouted, in a frenzy of anxiety which subsided
as soon as Mme. Verdurin had explained, "Why, Odette's friend, whom she
told us about."

"Ah, good, good; that's all right, then," answered the Doctor, at once
mollified. As for the painter, he was overjoyed at the prospect of
Swann's appearing at the Verdurins', because he supposed him to be in
love with Odette, and was always ready to assist at lovers' meetings.
"Nothing amuses me more than match-making," he confided to Cottard; "I
have been tremendously successful, even with women!"

In telling the Verdurins that Swann was extremely 'smart,' Odette had
alarmed them with the prospect of another 'bore.' When he arrived,
however, he made an excellent impression, an indirect cause of which,
though they did not know it, was his familiarity with the best society.
He had, indeed, one of those advantages which men who have lived and
moved in the world enjoy over others, even men of intelligence and
refinement, who have never gone into society, namely that they no longer
see it transfigured by the longing or repulsion with which it fills
the imagination, but regard it as quite unimportant. Their good nature,
freed from all taint of snobbishness and from the fear of seeming
too friendly, grown independent, in fact, has the ease, the grace of
movement of a trained gymnast each of whose supple limbs will carry out
precisely the movement that is required without any clumsy participation
by the rest of his body. The simple and elementary gestures used by a
man of the world when he courteously holds out his hand to the unknown
youth who is being introduced to him, and when he bows discreetly before
the Ambassador to whom he is being introduced, had gradually pervaded,
without his being conscious of it, the whole of Swann's social
deportment, so that in the company of people of a lower grade than his
own, such as the Verdurins and their friends, he instinctively shewed an
assiduity, and made overtures with which, by their account, any of their
'bores' would have dispensed. He chilled, though for a moment only,
on meeting Dr. Cottard; for seeing him close one eye with an ambiguous
smile, before they had yet spoken to one another (a grimace which
Cottard styled "letting 'em all come"), Swann supposed that the Doctor
recognised him from having met him already somewhere, probably in some
house of 'ill-fame,' though these he himself very rarely visited,
never having made a habit of indulging in the mercenary sort of love.
Regarding such an allusion as in bad taste, especially before Odette,
whose opinion of himself it might easily alter for the worse, Swann
assumed his most icy manner. But when he learned that the lady next to
the Doctor was Mme. Cottard, he decided that so young a husband would
not deliberately, in his wife's hearing, have made any allusion to
amusements of that order, and so ceased to interpret the Doctor's
expression in the sense which he had at first suspected. The painter at
once invited Swann to visit his studio with Odette, and Swann found him
very pleasant. "Perhaps you will be more highly favoured than I have
been," Mme. Verdurin broke in, with mock resentment of the favour,
"perhaps you will be allowed to see Cottard's portrait" (for which she
had given the painter a commission). "Take care, Master Biche," she
reminded the painter, whom it was a time-honoured pleasantry to address
as 'Master,' "to catch that nice look in his eyes, that witty little
twinkle. You know, what I want to have most of all is his smile; that's
what I've asked you to paint--the portrait of his smile." And since the
phrase struck her as noteworthy, she repeated it very loud, so as to
make sure that as many as possible of her guests should hear it, and
even made use of some indefinite pretext to draw the circle closer
before she uttered it again. Swann begged to be introduced to everyone,
even to an old friend of the Verdurins, called Saniette, whose shyness,
simplicity and good-nature had deprived him of all the consideration due
to his skill in palaeography, his large fortune, and the distinguished
family to which he belonged. When he spoke, his words came with
a confusion which was delightful to hear because one felt that it
indicated not so much a defect in his speech as a quality of his soul,
as it were a survival from the age of innocence which he had never
wholly outgrown. All the consonants which he did not manage to pronounce
seemed like harsh utterances of which his gentle lips were incapable. By
asking to be made known to M. Saniette, Swann made M. Verdurin reverse
the usual form of introduction (saying, in fact, with emphasis on the
distinction: "M. Swann, pray let me present to you our friend Saniette")
but he aroused in Saniette himself a warmth of gratitude, which,
however, the Verdurins never disclosed to Swann, since Saniette rather
annoyed them, and they did not feel bound to provide him with friends.
On the other hand the Verdurins were extremely touched by Swann's next
request, for he felt that he must ask to be introduced to the pianist's
aunt. She wore a black dress, as was her invariable custom, for she
believed that a woman always looked well in black, and that nothing
could be more distinguished; but her face was exceedingly red, as
it always was for some time after a meal. She bowed to Swann with
deference, but drew herself up again with great dignity. As she was
entirely uneducated, and was afraid of making mistakes in grammar and
pronunciation, she used purposely to speak in an indistinct and garbling
manner, thinking that if she should make a slip it would be so buried in
the surrounding confusion that no one could be certain whether she had
actually made it or not; with the result that her talk was a sort of
continuous, blurred expectoration, out of which would emerge, at rare
intervals, those sounds and syllables of which she felt positive.
Swann supposed himself entitled to poke a little mild fun at her in
conversation with M. Verdurin, who, however, was not at all amused.

"She is such an excellent woman!" he rejoined. "I grant you that she
is not exactly brilliant; but I assure you that she can talk most
charmingly when you are alone with her."

"I am sure she can," Swann hastened to conciliate him. "All I meant was
that she hardly struck me as 'distinguished,'" he went on, isolating
the epithet in the inverted commas of his tone, "and, after all, that is
something of a compliment."

"Wait a moment," said M. Verdurin, "now, this will surprise you; she
writes quite delightfully. You have never heard her nephew play? It is
admirable; eh, Doctor? Would you like me to ask him to play something,
M. Swann?"

"I should count myself most fortunate..." Swann was beginning, a trifle
pompously, when the Doctor broke in derisively. Having once heard it
said, and never having forgotten that in general conversation emphasis
and the use of formal expressions were out of date, whenever he heard a
solemn word used seriously, as the word 'fortunate' had been used just
now by Swann, he at once assumed that the speaker was being deliberately
pedantic. And if, moreover, the same word happened to occur, also, in
what he called an old 'tag' or 'saw,' however common it might still be
in current usage, the Doctor jumped to the conclusion that the whole
thing was a joke, and interrupted with the remaining words of the
quotation, which he seemed to charge the speaker with having intended
to introduce at that point, although in reality it had never entered his
mind.

"Most fortunate for France!" he recited wickedly, shooting up both arms
with great vigour. M. Verdurin could not help laughing.

"What are all those good people laughing at over there? There's no sign
of brooding melancholy down in your corner," shouted Mme. Verdurin. "You
don't suppose I find it very amusing to be stuck up here by myself on
the stool of repentance," she went on peevishly, like a spoiled child.

Mme. Verdurin was sitting upon a high Swedish chair of waxed pine-wood,
which a violinist from that country had given her, and which she kept in
her drawing-room, although in appearance it suggested a school 'form,'
and 'swore,' as the saying is, at the really good antique furniture
which she had besides; but she made a point of keeping on view the
presents which her 'faithful' were in the habit of making her from time
to time, so that the donors might have the pleasure of seeing them there
when they came to the house. She tried to persuade them to confine
their tributes to flowers and sweets, which had at least the merit of
mortality; but she was never successful, and the house was gradually
filled with a collection of foot-warmers, cushions, clocks, screens,
barometers and vases, a constant repetition and a boundless incongruity
of useless but indestructible objects.

From this lofty perch she would take her spirited part in the
conversation of the 'faithful,' and would revel in all their fun; but,
since the accident to her jaw, she had abandoned the effort involved in
real hilarity, and had substituted a kind of symbolical dumb-show which
signified, without endangering or even fatiguing her in any way, that
she was 'laughing until she cried.' At the least witticism aimed by any
of the circle against a 'bore,' or against a former member of the circle
who was now relegated to the limbo of 'bores'--and to the utter despair
of M. Verdurin, who had always made out that he was just as easily
amused as his wife, but who, since his laughter was the 'real thing,'
was out of breath in a moment, and so was overtaken and vanquished
by her device of a feigned but continuous hilarity--she would utter a
shrill cry, shut tight her little bird-like eyes, which were beginning
to be clouded over by a cataract, and quickly, as though she had only
just time to avoid some indecent sight or to parry a mortal blow,
burying her face in her hands, which completely engulfed it, and
prevented her from seeing anything at all, she would appear to be
struggling to suppress, to eradicate a laugh which, were she to give
way to it, must inevitably leave her inanimate. So, stupefied with
the gaiety of the 'faithful,' drunken with comradeship, scandal and
asseveration, Mme. Verdurin, perched on her high seat like a cage-bird
whose biscuit has been steeped in mulled wine, would sit aloft and sob
with fellow-feeling.

Meanwhile M. Verdurin, after first asking Swann's permission to light
his pipe ("No ceremony here, you understand; we're all pals!"), went and
begged the young musician to sit down at the piano.

"Leave him alone; don't bother him; he hasn't come here to be
tormented," cried Mme. Verdurin. "I won't have him tormented."

"But why on earth should it bother him?" rejoined M. Verdurin. "I'm sure
M. Swann has never heard the sonata in F sharp which we discovered; he
is going to play us the pianoforte arrangement."

"No, no, no, not my sonata!" she screamed, "I don't want to be made to
cry until I get a cold in the head, and neuralgia all down my face, like
last time; thanks very much, I don't intend to repeat that performance;
you are all very kind and considerate; it is easy to see that none of
you will have to stay in bed, for a week."

This little scene, which was re-enacted as often as the young pianist
sat down to play, never failed to delight the audience, as though
each of them were witnessing it for the first time, as a proof of the
seductive originality of the 'Mistress' as she was styled, and of the
acute sensitiveness of her musical 'ear.' Those nearest to her would
attract the attention of the rest, who were smoking or playing cards at
the other end of the room, by their cries of 'Hear, hear!' which, as
in Parliamentary debates, shewed that something worth listening to was
being said. And next day they would commiserate with those who had
been prevented from coming that evening, and would assure them that the
'little scene' had never been so amusingly done.

"Well, all right, then," said M. Verdurin, "he can play just the
andante."

"Just the _andante_! How you do go on," cried his wife. "As if it
weren't 'just the _andante_' that breaks every bone in my body. The
'Master' is really too priceless! Just as though, 'in the Ninth,' he
said 'we need only have the _finale_,' or 'just the overture' of the
_Meistersinger_."

The Doctor, however, urged Mme. Verdurin to let the pianist play,
not because he supposed her to be malingering when she spoke of the
distressing effects that music always had upon her, for he recognised
the existence of certain neurasthenic states--but from his habit, common
to many doctors, of at once relaxing the strict letter of a prescription
as soon as it appeared to jeopardise, what seemed to him far more
important, the success of some social gathering at which he was present,
and of which the patient whom he had urged for once to forget her
dyspepsia or headache formed an essential factor.

"You won't be ill this time, you'll find," he told her, seeking at the
same time to subdue her mind by the magnetism of his gaze. "And, if you
are ill, we will cure you."

"Will you, really?" Mme. Verdurin spoke as though, with so great a
favour in store for her, there was nothing for it but to capitulate.
Perhaps, too, by dint of saying that she was going to be ill, she had
worked herself into a state in which she forgot, occasionally, that it
was all only a 'little scene,' and regarded things, quite sincerely,
from an invalid's point of view. For it may often be remarked that
invalids grow weary of having the frequency of their attacks depend
always on their own prudence in avoiding them, and like to let
themselves think that they are free to do everything that they most
enjoy doing, although they are always ill after doing it, provided only
that they place themselves in the hands of a higher authority which,
without putting them to the least inconvenience, can and will, by
uttering a word or by administering a tabloid, set them once again upon
their feet.

Odette had gone to sit on a tapestry-covered sofa near the piano, saying
to Mme. Verdurin, "I have my own little corner, haven't I?"

And Mme. Verdurin, seeing Swann by himself upon a chair, made him get
up. "You're not at all comfortable there; go along and sit by Odette;
you can make room for M. Swann there, can't you, Odette?"

"What charming Beauvais!" said Swann, stopping to admire the sofa before
he sat down on it, and wishing to be polite.

"I am glad you appreciate my sofa," replied Mme. Verdurin, "and I warn
you that if you expect ever to see another like it you may as well
abandon the idea at once. They never made any more like it. And these
little chairs, too, are perfect marvels. You can look at them in a
moment. The emblems in each of the bronze mouldings correspond to the
subject of the tapestry on the chair; you know, you combine amusement
with instruction when you look at them;--I can promise you a delightful
time, I assure you. Just look at the little border around the edges;
here, look, the little vine on a red background in this one, the Bear
and the Grapes. Isn't it well drawn? What do you say? I think they knew
a thing or two about design! Doesn't it make your mouth water, this
vine? My husband makes out that I am not fond of fruit, because I eat
less than he does. But not a bit of it, I am greedier than any of you,
but I have no need to fill my mouth with them when I can feed on them
with my eyes. What are you all laughing at now, pray? Ask the Doctor;
he will tell you that those grapes act on me like a regular purge. Some
people go to Fontainebleau for cures; I take my own little Beauvais cure
here. But, M. Swann, you mustn't run away without feeling the little
bronze mouldings on the backs. Isn't it an exquisite surface? No, no,
not with your whole hand like that; feel them properly!"

"If Mme. Verdurin is going to start playing about with her bronzes,"
said the painter, "we shan't get any music to-night."

"Be quiet, you wretch! And yet we poor women," she went on, "are
forbidden pleasures far less voluptuous than this. There is no flesh in
the world as soft as these. None. When M. Verdurin did me the honour
of being madly jealous... come, you might at least be polite. Don't say
that you never have been jealous!"

"But, my dear, I have said absolutely nothing. Look here, Doctor, I call
you as a witness; did I utter a word?"

Swann had begun, out of politeness, to finger the bronzes, and did not
like to stop.

"Come along; you can caress them later; now it is you that are going to
be caressed, caressed in the ear; you'll like that, I think. Here's the
young gentleman who will take charge of that."

After the pianist had played, Swann felt and shewed more interest in him
than in any of the other guests, for the following reason:

The year before, at an evening party, he had heard a piece of music
played on the piano and violin. At first he had appreciated only the
material quality of the sounds which those instruments secreted. And it
had been a source of keen pleasure when, below the narrow ribbon of the
violin-part, delicate, unyielding, substantial and governing the whole,
he had suddenly perceived, where it was trying to surge upwards in a
flowing tide of sound, the mass of the piano-part, multiform, coherent,
level, and breaking everywhere in melody like the deep blue tumult of
the sea, silvered and charmed into a minor key by the moonlight. But at
a given moment, without being able to distinguish any clear outline,
or to give a name to what was pleasing him, suddenly enraptured, he had
tried to collect, to treasure in his memory the phrase or harmony--he
knew not which--that had just been played, and had opened and expanded
his soul, just as the fragrance of certain roses, wafted upon the moist
air of evening, has the power of dilating our nostrils. Perhaps it was
owing to his own ignorance of music that he had been able to receive so
confused an impression, one of those that are, notwithstanding, our only
purely musical impressions, limited in their extent, entirely original,
and irreducible into any other kind. An impression of this order,
vanishing in an instant, is, so to speak, an impression _sine materia_.
Presumably the notes which we hear at such moments tend to spread out
before our eyes, over surfaces greater or smaller according to their
pitch and volume; to trace arabesque designs, to give us the sensation
of breadth or tenuity, stability or caprice. But the notes themselves
have vanished before these sensations have developed sufficiently to
escape submersion under those which the following, or even simultaneous
notes have already begun to awaken in us. And this indefinite perception
would continue to smother in its molten liquidity the _motifs_ which now
and then emerge, barely discernible, to plunge again and disappear and
drown; recognised only by the particular kind of pleasure which they
instil, impossible to describe, to recollect, to name; ineffable;--if
our memory, like a labourer who toils at the laying down of firm
foundations beneath the tumult of the waves, did not, by fashioning for
us facsimiles of those fugitive phrases, enable us to compare and to
contrast them with those that follow. And so, hardly had the delicious
sensation, which Swann had experienced, died away, before his memory
had furnished him with an immediate transcript, summary, it is true,
and provisional, but one on which he had kept his eyes fixed while
the playing continued, so effectively that, when the same impression
suddenly returned, it was no longer uncapturable. He was able to picture
to himself its extent, its symmetrical arrangement, its notation, the
strength of its expression; he had before him that definite object which
was no longer pure music, but rather design, architecture, thought,
and which allowed the actual music to be recalled. This time he had
distinguished, quite clearly, a phrase which emerged for a few moments
from the waves of sound. It had at once held out to him an invitation to
partake of intimate pleasures, of whose existence, before hearing it, he
had never dreamed, into which he felt that nothing but this phrase could
initiate him; and he had been filled with love for it, as with a new and
strange desire.

With a slow and rhythmical movement it led him here, there, everywhere,
towards a state of happiness noble, unintelligible, yet clearly
indicated. And then, suddenly having reached a certain point from which
he was prepared to follow it, after pausing for a moment, abruptly it
changed its direction, and in a fresh movement, more rapid, multiform,
melancholy, incessant, sweet, it bore him off with it towards a vista
of joys unknown. Then it vanished. He hoped, with a passionate longing,
that he might find it again, a third time. And reappear it did, though
without speaking to him more clearly, bringing him, indeed, a pleasure
less profound. But when he was once more at home he needed it, he
was like a man into whose life a woman, whom he has seen for a moment
passing by, has brought a new form of beauty, which strengthens and
enlarges his own power of perception, without his knowing even whether
he is ever to see her again whom he loves already, although he knows
nothing of her, not even her name.

Indeed this passion for a phrase of music seemed, in the first few
months, to be bringing into Swann's life the possibility of a sort of
rejuvenation. He had so long since ceased to direct his course towards
any ideal goal, and had confined himself to the pursuit of ephemeral
satisfactions, that he had come to believe, though without ever formally
stating his belief even to himself, that he would remain all his life in
that condition, which death alone could alter. More than this, since his
mind no longer entertained any lofty ideals, he had ceased to believe
in (although he could not have expressly denied) their reality. He had
grown also into the habit of taking refuge in trivial considerations,
which allowed him to set on one side matters of fundamental importance.
Just as he had never stopped to ask himself whether he would not have
done better by not going into society, knowing very well that if he
had accepted an invitation he must put in an appearance, and that
afterwards, if he did not actually call, he must at least leave cards
upon his hostess; so in his conversation he took care never to express
with any warmth a personal opinion about a thing, but instead would
supply facts and details which had a value of a sort in themselves, and
excused him from shewing how much he really knew. He would be extremely
precise about the recipe for a dish, the dates of a painter's birth and
death, and the titles of his works. Sometimes, in spite of himself, he
would let himself go so far as to utter a criticism of a work of art, or
of some one's interpretation of life, but then he would cloak his words
in a tone of irony, as though he did not altogether associate himself
with what he was saying. But now, like a confirmed invalid whom, all
of a sudden, a change of air and surroundings, or a new course of
treatment, or, as sometimes happens, an organic change in himself,
spontaneous and unaccountable, seems to have so far recovered from his
malady that he begins to envisage the possibility, hitherto beyond
all hope, of starting to lead--and better late than never--a wholly
different life, Swann found in himself, in the memory of the phrase that
he had heard, in certain other sonatas which he had made people play
over to him, to see whether he might not, perhaps, discover his phrase
among them, the presence of one of those invisible realities in which
he had ceased to believe, but to which, as though the music had had upon
the moral barrenness from which he was suffering a sort of recreative
influence, he was conscious once again of a desire, almost, indeed, of
the power to consecrate his life. But, never having managed to find out
whose work it was that he had heard played that evening, he had been
unable to procure a copy, and finally had forgotten the quest. He had
indeed, in the course of the next few days, encountered several of the
people who had been at the party with him, and had questioned them;
but most of them had either arrived after or left before the piece was
played; some had indeed been in the house, but had gone into another
room to talk, and those who had stayed to listen had no clearer
impression than the rest. As for his hosts, they knew that it was a
recently published work which the musicians whom they had engaged for
the evening had asked to be allowed to play; but, as these last were now
on tour somewhere, Swann could learn nothing further. He had, of
course, a number of musical friends, but, vividly as he could recall the
exquisite and inexpressible pleasure which the little phrase had given
him, and could see, still, before his eyes the forms that it had traced
in outline, he was quite incapable of humming over to them the air. And
so, at last, he ceased to think of it.

But to-night, at Mme. Verdurin's, scarcely had the little pianist begun
to play when, suddenly, after a high note held on through two whole
bars, Swann saw it approaching, stealing forth from underneath that
resonance, which was prolonged and stretched out over it, like a curtain
of sound, to veil the mystery of its birth--and recognised, secret,
whispering, articulate, the airy and fragrant phrase that he had loved.
And it was so peculiarly itself, it had so personal a charm, which
nothing else could have replaced, that Swann felt as though he had met,
in a friend's drawing-room, a woman whom he had seen and admired, once,
in the street, and had despaired of ever seeing her again. Finally the
phrase withdrew and vanished, pointing, directing, diligent among the
wandering currents of its fragrance, leaving upon Swann's features a
reflection of its smile. But now, at last, he could ask the name of
his fair unknown (and was told that it was the _andante_ movement of
Vinteuil's sonata for the piano and violin), he held it safe, could
have it again to himself, at home, as often as he would, could study its
language and acquire its secret.

And so, when the pianist had finished, Swann crossed the room and
thanked him with a vivacity which delighted Mme. Verdurin.

"Isn't he charming?" she asked Swann, "doesn't he just understand it,
his sonata, the little wretch? You never dreamed, did you, that a piano
could be made to express all that? Upon my word, there's everything in
it except the piano! I'm caught out every time I hear it; I think
I'm listening to an orchestra. Though it's better, really, than an
orchestra, more complete."

The young pianist bent over her as he answered, smiling and underlining
each of his words as though he were making an epigram: "You are most
generous to me."

And while Mme. Verdurin was saying to her husband, "Run and fetch him a
glass of orangeade; it's well earned!" Swann began to tell Odette how he
had fallen in love with that little phrase. When their hostess, who was
a little way off, called out, "Well! It looks to me as though some one
was saying nice things to you, Odette!" she replied, "Yes, very
nice," and he found her simplicity delightful. Then he asked for some
information about this Vinteuil; what else he had done, and at what
period in his life he had composed the sonata;--what meaning the little
phrase could have had for him, that was what Swann wanted most to know.

But none of these people who professed to admire this musician (when
Swann had said that the sonata was really charming Mme. Verdurin had
exclaimed, "I quite believe it! Charming, indeed! But you don't dare to
confess that you don't know Vinteuil's sonata; you have no right not to
know it!"--and the painter had gone on with, "Ah, yes, it's a very fine
bit of work, isn't it? Not, of course, if you want something 'obvious,'
something 'popular,' but, I mean to say, it makes a very great
impression on us artists."), none of them seemed ever to have asked
himself these questions, for none of them was able to reply.

Even to one or two particular remarks made by Swann on his favourite
phrase, "D'you know, that's a funny thing; I had never noticed it; I may
as well tell you that I don't much care about peering at things through
a microscope, and pricking myself on pin-points of difference; no; we
don't waste time splitting hairs in this house; why not? well, it's not
a habit of ours, that's all," Mme. Verdurin replied, while Dr. Cottard
gazed at her with open-mouthed admiration, and yearned to be able to
follow her as she skipped lightly from one stepping-stone to another
of her stock of ready-made phrases. Both he, however, and Mme. Cottard,
with a kind of common sense which is shared by many people of humble
origin, would always take care not to express an opinion, or to pretend
to admire a piece of music which they would confess to each other, once
they were safely at home, that they no more understood than they could
understand the art of 'Master' Biche. Inasmuch as the public cannot
recognise the charm, the beauty, even the outlines of nature save in the
stereotyped impressions of an art which they have gradually assimilated,
while an original artist starts by rejecting those impressions, so
M. and Mme. Cottard, typical, in this respect, of the public, were
incapable of finding, either in Vinteuil's sonata or in Biche's
portraits, what constituted harmony, for them, in music or beauty in
painting. It appeared to them, when the pianist played his sonata, as
though he were striking haphazard from the piano a medley of notes which
bore no relation to the musical forms to which they themselves were
accustomed, and that the painter simply flung the colours haphazard upon
his canvas. When, on one of these, they were able to distinguish a human
form, they always found it coarsened and vulgarised (that is to say
lacking all the elegance of the school of painting through whose
spectacles they themselves were in the habit of seeing the people--real,
living people, who passed them in the streets) and devoid of truth, as
though M. Biche had not known how the human shoulder was constructed, or
that a woman's hair was not, ordinarily, purple.

And yet, when the 'faithful' were scattered out of earshot, the Doctor
felt that the opportunity was too good to be missed, and so (while Mme.
Verdurin was adding a final word of commendation of Vinteuil's sonata)
like a would-be swimmer who jumps into the water, so as to learn, but
chooses a moment when there are not too many people looking on:
"Yes, indeed; he's what they call a musician _di primo cartello_!" he
exclaimed, with a sudden determination.

Swann discovered no more than that the recent publication of Vinteuil's
sonata had caused a great stir among the most advanced school of
musicians, but that it was still unknown to the general public.

"I know some one, quite well, called Vinteuil," said Swann, thinking of
the old music-master at Combray who had taught my grandmother's sisters.

"Perhaps that's the man!" cried Mme. Verdurin.

"Oh, no!" Swann burst out laughing. "If you had ever seen him for a
moment you wouldn't put the question."

"Then to put the question is to solve the problem?" the Doctor
suggested.

"But it may well be some relative," Swann went on. "That would be bad
enough; but, after all, there is no reason why a genius shouldn't have
a cousin who is a silly old fool. And if that should be so, I swear
there's no known or unknown form of torture I wouldn't undergo to
get the old fool to introduce me to the man who composed the sonata;
starting with the torture of the old fool's company, which would be
ghastly."

The painter understood that Vinteuil was seriously ill at the moment,
and that Dr. Potain despaired of his life.

"What!" cried Mme. Verdurin, "Do people still call in Potain?"

"Ah! Mme. Verdurin," Cottard simpered, "you forget that you are speaking
of one of my colleagues--I should say, one of my masters."

The painter had heard, somewhere, that Vinteuil was threatened with the
loss of his reason. And he insisted that signs of this could be detected
in certain passages in the sonata. This remark did not strike Swann as
ridiculous; rather, it puzzled him. For, since a purely musical work
contains none of those logical sequences, the interruption or confusion
of which, in spoken or written language, is a proof of insanity, so
insanity diagnosed in a sonata seemed to him as mysterious a thing as
the insanity of a dog or a horse, although instances may be observed of
these.

"Don't speak to me about 'your masters'; you know ten times as much as
he does!" Mme. Verdurin answered Dr. Cottard, in the tone of a woman who
has the courage of her convictions, and is quite ready to stand up to
anyone who disagrees with her. "Anyhow, you don't kill your patients!"

"But, Madame, he is in the Academy." The Doctor smiled with bitter
irony. "If a sick person prefers to die at the hands of one of the
Princes of Science... It is far more smart to be able to say, 'Yes, I
have Potain.'"

"Oh, indeed! More smart, is it?" said Mme. Verdurin. "So there are
fashions, nowadays, in illness, are there? I didn't know that.... Oh,
you do make me laugh!" she screamed, suddenly, burying her face in her
hands. "And here was I, poor thing, talking quite seriously, and never
seeing that you were pulling my leg."

As for M. Verdurin, finding it rather a strain to start laughing again
over so small a matter, he was content with puffing out a cloud of smoke
from his pipe, while he reflected sadly that he could never again hope
to keep pace with his wife in her Atalanta-flights across the field of
mirth.

"D'you know; we like your friend so very much," said Mme. Verdurin,
later, when Odette was bidding her good night. "He is so unaffected,
quite charming. If they're all like that, the friends you want to bring
here, by all means bring them."

M. Verdurin remarked that Swann had failed, all the same, to appreciate
the pianist's aunt.

"I dare say he felt a little strange, poor man," suggested Mme.
Verdurin. "You can't expect him to catch the tone of the house the first
time he comes; like Cottard, who has been one of our little 'clan' now
for years. The first time doesn't count; it's just for looking round and
finding out things. Odette, he understands all right, he's to join us
to-morrow at the Châtelet. Perhaps you might call for him and bring
him."

"No, he doesn't want that."

"Oh, very well; just as you like. Provided he doesn't fail us at the
last moment."

Greatly to Mme. Verdurin's surprise, he never failed them. He would go
to meet them, no matter where, at restaurants outside Paris (not that
they went there much at first, for the season had not yet begun), and
more frequently at the play, in which Mme. Verdurin delighted. One
evening, when they were dining at home, he heard her complain that she
had not one of those permits which would save her the trouble of waiting
at doors and standing in crowds, and say how useful it would be to them
at first-nights, and gala performances at the Opera, and what a nuisance
it had been, not having one, on the day of Gambetta's funeral. Swann
never spoke of his distinguished friends, but only of such as might be
regarded as detrimental, whom, therefore, he thought it snobbish, and
in not very good taste to conceal; while he frequented the Faubourg
Saint-Germain he had come to include, in the latter class, all his
friends in the official world of the Third Republic, and so broke in,
without thinking: "I'll see to that, all right. You shall have it in
time for the _Danicheff_ revival. I shall be lunching with the Prefect
of Police to-morrow, as it happens, at the Elysée."

"What's that? The Elysée?" Dr. Cottard roared in a voice of thunder.

"Yes, at M. Grévy's," replied Swann, feeling a little awkward at the
effect which his announcement had produced.

"Are you often taken like that?" the painter asked Cottard, with
mock-seriousness.

As a rule, once an explanation had been given, Cottard would say: "Ah,
good, good; that's all right, then," after which he would shew not the
least trace of emotion. But this time Swann's last words, instead of the
usual calming effect, had that of heating, instantly, to boiling-point
his astonishment at the discovery that a man with whom he himself
was actually sitting at table, a man who had no official position, no
honours or distinction of any sort, was on visiting terms with the Head
of the State.

"What's that you say? M. Grévy? Do you know M. Grévy?" he demanded of
Swann, in the stupid and incredulous tone of a constable on duty at the
palace, when a stranger has come up and asked to see the President of
the Republic; until, guessing from his words and manner what, as the
newspapers say, 'it is a case of,' he assures the poor lunatic that he
will be admitted at once, and points the way to the reception ward of
the police infirmary.

"I know him slightly; we have some friends in common" (Swann dared not
add that one of these friends was the Prince of Wales). "Anyhow, he is
very free with his invitations, and, I assure you, his luncheon-parties
are not the least bit amusing; they're very simple affairs, too, you
know; never more than eight at table," he went on, trying desperately
to cut out everything that seemed to shew off his relations with the
President in a light too dazzling for the Doctor's eyes.

Whereupon Cottard, at once conforming in his mind to the literal
interpretation of what Swann was saying, decided that invitations from
M. Grévy were very little sought after, were sent out, in fact, into
the highways and hedge-rows. And from that moment he never seemed at
all surprised to hear that Swann, or anyone else, was 'always at
the Elysée'; he even felt a little sorry for a man who had to go to
luncheon-parties which, he himself admitted, were a bore.

"Ah, good, good; that's quite all right then," he said, in the tone of
a customs official who has been suspicious up to now, but, after hearing
your explanations, stamps your passport and lets you proceed on your
journey without troubling to examine your luggage.

"I can well believe you don't find them amusing, those parties; indeed,
it's very good of you to go to them!" said Mme. Verdurin, who regarded
the President of the Republic only as a 'bore' to be especially dreaded,
since he had at his disposal means of seduction, and even of compulsion,
which, if employed to captivate her 'faithful,' might easily make them
'fail.' "It seems, he's as deaf as a post; and eats with his fingers."

"Upon my word! Then it can't be much fun for you, going there." A
note of pity sounded in the Doctor's voice; and then struck by the
number--only eight at table--"Are these luncheons what you would
describe as 'intimate'?" he inquired briskly, not so much out of idle
curiosity as in his linguistic zeal.

But so great and glorious a figure was the President of the French
Republic in the eyes of Dr. Cottard that neither the modesty of Swann
nor the spite of Mme. Verdurin could ever wholly efface that first
impression, and he never sat down to dinner with the Verdurins without
asking anxiously, "D'you think we shall see M. Swann here this evening?
He is a personal friend of M. Grévy's. I suppose that means he's what
you'd call a 'gentleman'?" He even went to the length of offering Swann
a card of invitation to the Dental Exhibition.

"This will let you in, and anyone you take with you," he explained, "but
dogs are not admitted. I'm just warning you, you understand, because
some friends of mine went there once, who hadn't been told, and there
was the devil to pay."

As for M. Verdurin, he did not fail to observe the distressing effect
upon his wife of the discovery that Swann had influential friends of
whom he had never spoken.

If no arrangement had been made to 'go anywhere,' it was at the
Verdurins' that Swann would find the 'little nucleus' assembled, but
he never appeared there except in the evenings, and would hardly ever
accept their invitations to dinner, in spite of Odette's entreaties.

"I could dine with you alone somewhere, if you'd rather," she suggested.

"But what about Mme. Verdurin?"

"Oh, that's quite simple. I need only say that my dress wasn't ready, or
that my cab came late. There is always some excuse."

"How charming of you."

But Swann said to himself that, if he could make Odette feel (by
consenting to meet her only after dinner) that there were other
pleasures which he preferred to that of her company, then the desire
that she felt for his would be all the longer in reaching the point of
satiety. Besides, as he infinitely preferred to Odette's style of beauty
that of a little working girl, as fresh and plump as a rose, with whom
he happened to be simultaneously in love, he preferred to spend the
first part of the evening with her, knowing that he was sure to see
Odette later on. For the same reason, he would never allow Odette to
call for him at his house, to take him on to the Verdurins'. The little
girl used to wait, not far from his door, at a street corner; Rémi, his
coachman, knew where to stop; she would jump in beside him, and hold him
in her arms until the carriage drew up at the Verdurins'. He would enter
the drawing-room; and there, while Mme. Verdurin, pointing to the roses
which he had sent her that morning, said: "I am furious with you!" and
sent him to the place kept for him, by the side of Odette, the pianist
would play to them--for their two selves, and for no one else--that
little phrase by Vinteuil which was, so to speak, the national anthem of
their love. He began, always, with a sustained tremolo from the violin
part, which, for several bars, was unaccompanied, and filled all the
foreground; until suddenly it seemed to be drawn aside, and--just as in
those interiors by Pieter de Hooch, where the subject is set back a
long way through the narrow framework of a half-opened door--infinitely
remote, in colour quite different, velvety with the radiance of some
intervening light, the little phrase appeared, dancing, pastoral,
interpolated, episodic, belonging to another world. It passed, with
simple and immortal movements, scattering on every side the bounties of
its grace, smiling ineffably still; but Swann thought that he could now
discern in it some disenchantment. It seemed to be aware how vain, how
hollow was the happiness to which it shewed the way. In its airy grace
there was, indeed, something definitely achieved, and complete in
itself, like the mood of philosophic detachment which follows an
outburst of vain regret. But little did that matter to him; he looked
upon the sonata less in its own light--as what it might express, had,
in fact, expressed to a certain musician, ignorant that any Swann or
Odette, anywhere in the world, existed, when he composed it, and
would express to all those who should hear it played in centuries
to come--than as a pledge, a token of his love, which made even the
Verdurins and their little pianist think of Odette and, at the same
time, of himself--which bound her to him by a lasting tie; and at that
point he had (whimsically entreated by Odette) abandoned the idea of
getting some 'professional' to play over to him the whole sonata, of
which he still knew no more than this one passage. "Why do you want the
rest?" she had asked him. "Our little bit; that's all we need." He went
farther; agonised by the reflection, at the moment when it passed by
him, so near and yet so infinitely remote, that, while it was addressed
to their ears, it knew them not, he would regret, almost, that it had
a meaning of its own, an intrinsic and unalterable beauty, foreign to
themselves, just as in the jewels given to us, or even in the letters
written to us by a woman with whom we are in love, we find fault with
the 'water' of a stone, or with the words of a sentence because they are
not fashioned exclusively from the spirit of a fleeting intimacy and of
a 'lass unparalleled.'

It would happen, as often as not, that he had stayed so long outside,
with his little girl, before going to the Verdurins' that, as soon as
the little phrase had been rendered by the pianist, Swann would discover
that it was almost time for Odette to go home. He used to take her back
as far as the door of her little house in the Rue La Pérouse, behind the
Arc de Triomphe. And it was perhaps on this account, and so as not to
demand the monopoly of her favours, that he sacrificed the pleasure (not
so essential to his well-being) of seeing her earlier in the evening,
of arriving with her at the Verdurins', to the exercise of this other
privilege, for which she was grateful, of their leaving together; a
privilege which he valued all the more because, thanks to it, he had
the feeling that no one else would see her, no one would thrust himself
between them, no one could prevent him from remaining with her in
spirit, after he had left her for the night.

And so, night after night, she would be taken home in Swann's carriage;
and one night, after she had got down, and while he stood at the gate
and murmured "Till to-morrow, then!" she turned impulsively from him,
plucked a last lingering chrysanthemum in the tiny garden which flanked
the pathway from the street to her house, and as he went back to his
carriage thrust it into his hand. He held it pressed to his lips during
the drive home, and when, in due course, the flower withered, locked it
away, like something very precious, in a secret drawer of his desk.

He would escort her to her gate, but no farther. Twice only had he gone
inside to take part in the ceremony--of such vital importance in her
life--of 'afternoon tea.' The loneliness and emptiness of those
short streets (consisting, almost entirely, of low-roofed houses,
self-contained but not detached, their monotony interrupted here and
there by the dark intrusion of some sinister little shop, at once
an historical document and a sordid survival from the days when the
district was still one of ill repute), the snow which had lain on the
garden-beds or clung to the branches of the trees, the careless disarray
of the season, the assertion, in this man-made city, of a state of
nature, had all combined to add an element of mystery to the warmth, the
flowers, the luxury which he had found inside.

Passing by (on his left-hand side, and on what, although raised some way
above the street, was the ground floor of the house) Odette's bedroom,
which looked out to the back over another little street running parallel
with her own, he had climbed a staircase that went straight up between
dark painted walls, from which hung Oriental draperies, strings of
Turkish beads, and a huge Japanese lantern, suspended by a silken cord
from the ceiling (which last, however, so that her visitors should not
have to complain of the want of any of the latest comforts of
Western civilisation, was lighted by a gas-jet inside), to the two
drawing-rooms, large and small. These were entered through a narrow
lobby, the wall of which, chequered with the lozenges of a wooden
trellis such as you see on garden walls, only gilded, was lined from
end to end by a long rectangular box in which bloomed, as though in a
hothouse, a row of large chrysanthemums, at that time still
uncommon, though by no means so large as the mammoth blossoms which
horticulturists have since succeeded in making grow. Swann was
irritated, as a rule, by the sight of these flowers, which had then been
'the rage' in Paris for about a year, but it had pleased him, on this
occasion, to see the gloom of the little lobby shot with rays of pink
and gold and white by the fragrant petals of these ephemeral stars,
which kindle their cold fires in the murky atmosphere of winter
afternoons. Odette had received him in a tea-gown of pink silk, which
left her neck and arms bare. She had made him sit down beside her in one
of the many mysterious little retreats which had been contrived in the
various recesses of the room, sheltered by enormous palmtrees growing
out of pots of Chinese porcelain, or by screens upon which were fastened
photographs and fans and bows of ribbon. She had said at once, "You're
not comfortable there; wait a minute, I'll arrange things for you," and
with a titter of laughter, the complacency of which implied that
some little invention of her own was being brought into play, she
had installed behind his head and beneath his feet great cushions of
Japanese silk, which she pummelled and buffeted as though determined to
lavish on him all her riches, and regardless of their value. But when
her footman began to come into the room, bringing, one after another,
the innumerable lamps which (contained, mostly, in porcelain vases)
burned singly or in pairs upon the different pieces of furniture as upon
so many altars, rekindling in the twilight, already almost nocturnal, of
this winter afternoon, the glow of a sunset more lasting, more roseate,
more human--filling, perhaps, with romantic wonder the thoughts of
some solitary lover, wandering in the street below and brought to a
standstill before the mystery of the human presence which those lighted
windows at once revealed and screened from sight--she had kept an eye
sharply fixed on the servant, to see whether he set each of the lamps
down in the place appointed it. She felt that, if he were to put
even one of them where it ought not to be, the general effect of her
drawing-room would be destroyed, and that her portrait, which rested
upon a sloping easel draped with plush, would not catch the light. And
so, with feverish impatience, she followed the man's clumsy movements,
scolding him severely when he passed too close to a pair of beaupots,
which she made a point of always tidying herself, in case the plants
should be knocked over--and went across to them now to make sure that he
had not broken off any of the flowers. She found something 'quaint' in
the shape of each of her Chinese ornaments, and also in her orchids, the
cattleyas especially (these being, with chrysanthemums, her favourite
flowers), because they had the supreme merit of not looking in the least
like other flowers, but of being made, apparently, out of scraps of silk
or satin. "It looks just as though it had been cut out of the lining
of my cloak," she said to Swann, pointing to an orchid, with a shade of
respect in her voice for so 'smart' a flower, for this distinguished,
unexpected sister whom nature had suddenly bestowed upon her, so far
removed from her in the scale of existence, and yet so delicate, so
refined, so much more worthy than many real women of admission to
her drawing-room. As she drew his attention, now to the fiery-tongued
dragons painted upon a bowl or stitched upon a fire-screen, now to a
fleshy cluster of orchids, now to a dromedary of inlaid silver-work with
ruby eyes, which kept company, upon her mantelpiece, with a toad carved
in jade, she would pretend now to be shrinking from the ferocity of the
monsters or laughing at their absurdity, now blushing at the indecency
of the flowers, now carried away by an irresistible desire to run across
and kiss the toad and dromedary, calling them 'darlings.' And these
affectations were in sharp contrast to the sincerity of some of her
attitudes, notably her devotion to Our Lady of the Laghetto who had
once, when Odette was living at Nice, cured her of a mortal illness, and
whose medal, in gold, she always carried on her person, attributing
to it unlimited powers. She poured out Swann's tea, inquired "Lemon
or cream?" and, on his answering "Cream, please," went on, smiling, "A
cloud!" And as he pronounced it excellent, "You see, I know just how you
like it." This tea had indeed seemed to Swann, just as it seemed to
her, something precious, and love is so far obliged to find some
justification for itself, some guarantee of its duration in pleasures
which, on the contrary, would have no existence apart from love and must
cease with its passing, that when he left her, at seven o'clock, to go
and dress for the evening, all the way home, sitting bolt upright in
his brougham, unable to repress the happiness with which the afternoon's
adventure had filled him, he kept on repeating to himself: "What fun
it would be to have a little woman like that in a place where one could
always be certain of finding, what one never can be certain of finding,
a really good cup of tea." An hour or so later he received a note from
Odette, and at once recognised that florid handwriting, in which an
affectation of British stiffness imposed an apparent discipline upon its
shapeless characters, significant, perhaps, to less intimate eyes
than his, of an untidiness of mind, a fragmentary education, a want of
sincerity and decision. Swann had left his cigarette-case at her house.
"Why," she wrote, "did you not forget your heart also? I should never
have let you have that back."

More important, perhaps, was a second visit which he paid her, a little
later. On his way to the house, as always when he knew that they were to
meet, he formed a picture of her in his mind; and the necessity, if he
was to find any beauty in her face, of fixing his eyes on the fresh and
rosy protuberance of her cheekbones, and of shutting out all the rest of
those cheeks which were so often languorous and sallow, except when
they were punctuated with little fiery spots, plunged him in acute
depression, as proving that one's ideal is always unattainable, and
one's actual happiness mediocre. He was taking her an engraving which
she had asked to see. She was not very well; she received him, wearing
a wrapper of mauve _crêpe de Chine_, which draped her bosom, like a
mantle, with a richly embroidered web. As she stood there beside him,
brushing his cheek with the loosened tresses of her hair, bending one
knee in what was almost a dancer's pose, so that she could lean without
tiring herself over the picture, at which she was gazing, with bended
head, out of those great eyes, which seemed so weary and so sullen when
there was nothing to animate her, Swann was struck by her resemblance to
the figure of Zipporah, Jethro's Daughter, which is to be seen in one
of the Sistine frescoes. He had always found a peculiar fascination
in tracing in the paintings of the Old Masters, not merely the general
characteristics of the people whom he encountered in his daily life, but
rather what seems least susceptible of generalisation, the individual
features of men and women whom he knew, as, for instance, in a bust
of the Doge Loredan by Antonio Rizzo, the prominent cheekbones, the
slanting eyebrows, in short, a speaking likeness to his own coachman
Rémi; in the colouring of a Ghirlandaio, the nose of M. de Palancy; in a
portrait by Tintoretto, the invasion of the plumpness of the cheek by an
outcrop of whisker, the broken nose, the penetrating stare, the swollen
eyelids of Dr. du Boulbon. Perhaps because he had always regretted,
in his heart, that he had confined his attention to the social side of
life, had talked, always, rather than acted, he felt that he might find
a sort of indulgence bestowed upon him by those great artists, in his
perception of the fact that they also had regarded with pleasure and had
admitted into the canon of their works such types of physiognomy as give
those works the strongest possible certificate of reality and trueness
to life; a modern, almost a topical savour; perhaps, also, he had so far
succumbed to the prevailing frivolity of the world of fashion that he
felt the necessity of finding in an old masterpiece some such obvious
and refreshing allusion to a person about whom jokes could be made and
repeated and enjoyed to-day. Perhaps, on the other hand, he had
retained enough of the artistic temperament to be able to find a genuine
satisfaction in watching these individual features take on a more
general significance when he saw them, uprooted and disembodied, in the
abstract idea of similarity between an historic portrait and a modern
original, whom it was not intended to represent. However that might be,
and perhaps because the abundance of impressions which he, for some time
past, had been receiving--though, indeed, they had come to him rather
through the channel of his appreciation of music--had enriched his
appetite for painting as well, it was with an unusual intensity
of pleasure, a pleasure destined to have a lasting effect upon his
character and conduct, that Swann remarked Odette's resemblance to the
Zipporah of that Alessandro de Mariano, to whom one shrinks from giving
his more popular surname, now that 'Botticelli' suggests not so much the
actual work of the Master as that false and banal conception of it which
has of late obtained common currency. He no longer based his estimate
of the merit of Odette's face on the more or less good quality of her
cheeks, and the softness and sweetness--as of carnation-petals--which,
he supposed, would greet his lips there, should he ever hazard an
embrace, but regarded it rather as a skein of subtle and lovely silken
threads, which his gazing eyes collected and wound together, following
the curving line from the skein to the ball, where he mingled the
cadence of her neck with the spring of her hair and the droop of her
eyelids, as though from a portrait of herself, in which her type was
made clearly intelligible.

He stood gazing at her; traces of the old fresco were apparent in
her face and limbs, and these he tried incessantly, afterwards, to
recapture, both when he was with Odette, and when he was only thinking
of her in her absence; and, albeit his admiration for the Florentine
masterpiece was probably based upon his discovery that it had been
reproduced in her, the similarity enhanced her beauty also, and rendered
her more precious in his sight. Swann reproached himself with his
failure, hitherto, to estimate at her true worth a creature whom the
great Sandro would have adored, and counted himself fortunate that his
pleasure in the contemplation of Odette found a justification in his own
system of aesthetic. He told himself that, in choosing the thought of
Odette as the inspiration of his dreams of ideal happiness, he was not,
as he had until then supposed, falling back, merely, upon an expedient
of doubtful and certainly inadequate value, since she contained in
herself what satisfied the utmost refinement of his taste in art. He
failed to observe that this quality would not naturally avail to bring
Odette into the category of women whom he found desirable, simply
because his desires had always run counter to his aesthetic taste. The
words 'Florentine painting' were invaluable to Swann. They enabled him
(gave him, as it were, a legal title) to introduce the image of Odette
into a world of dreams and fancies which, until then, she had been
debarred from entering, and where she assumed a new and nobler form. And
whereas the mere sight of her in the flesh, by perpetually reviving his
misgivings as to the quality of her face, her figure, the whole of her
beauty, used to cool the ardour of his love, those misgivings were swept
away and that love confirmed now that he could re-erect his estimate of
her on the sure foundations of his aesthetic principles; while the kiss,
the bodily surrender which would have seemed natural and but moderately
attractive, had they been granted him by a creature of somewhat withered
flesh and sluggish blood, coming, as now they came, to crown his
adoration of a masterpiece in a gallery, must, it seemed, prove as
exquisite as they would be supernatural.

And when he was tempted to regret that, for months past, he had done
nothing but visit Odette, he would assure himself that he was
not unreasonable in giving up much of his time to the study of an
inestimably precious work of art, cast for once in a new, a different,
an especially charming metal, in an unmatched exemplar which he would
contemplate at one moment with the humble, spiritual, disinterested mind
of an artist, at another with the pride, the selfishness, the sensual
thrill of a collector.

On his study table, at which he worked, he had placed, as it were a
photograph of Odette, a reproduction of Jethro's Daughter. He would
gaze in admiration at the large eyes, the delicate features in which the
imperfection of her skin might be surmised, the marvellous locks of hair
that fell along her tired cheeks; and, adapting what he had already felt
to be beautiful, on aesthetic grounds, to the idea of a living woman,
he converted it into a series of physical merits which he congratulated
himself on finding assembled in the person of one whom he might,
ultimately, possess. The vague feeling of sympathy which attracts a
spectator to a work of art, now that he knew the type, in warm flesh
and blood, of Jethro's Daughter, became a desire which more than
compensated, thenceforward, for that with which Odette's physical charms
had at first failed to inspire him. When he had sat for a long time
gazing at the Botticelli, he would think of his own living Botticelli,
who seemed all the lovelier in contrast, and as he drew towards him
the photograph of Zipporah he would imagine that he was holding Odette
against his heart.

It was not only Odette's indifference, however, that he must take pains
to circumvent; it was also, not infrequently, his own; feeling that,
since Odette had had every facility for seeing him, she seemed no longer
to have very much to say to him when they did meet, he was afraid
lest the manner--at once trivial, monotonous, and seemingly
unalterable--which she now adopted when they were together should
ultimately destroy in him that romantic hope, that a day might come when
she would make avowal of her passion, by which hope alone he had become
and would remain her lover. And so to alter, to give a fresh moral
aspect to that Odette, of whose unchanging mood he was afraid of growing
weary, he wrote, suddenly, a letter full of hinted discoveries and
feigned indignation, which he sent off so that it should reach her
before dinner-time. He knew that she would be frightened, and that she
would reply, and he hoped that, when the fear of losing him clutched at
her heart, it would force from her words such as he had never yet heard
her utter: and he was right--by repeating this device he had won from
her the most affectionate letters that she had, so far, written him, one
of them (which she had sent to him at midday by a special messenger from
the Maison Dorée--it was the day of the Paris-Murcie Fête given for
the victims of the recent floods in Murcia) beginning "My dear, my hand
trembles so that I can scarcely write----"; and these letters he had
kept in the same drawer as the withered chrysanthemum. Or else, if she
had not had time to write, when he arrived at the Verdurins' she would
come running up to him with an "I've something to say to you!" and he
would gaze curiously at the revelation in her face and speech of what
she had hitherto kept concealed from him of her heart.

Even as he drew near to the Verdurins' door, and caught sight of the
great lamp-lit spaces of the drawing-room windows, whose shutters were
never closed, he would begin to melt at the thought of the charming
creature whom he would see, as he entered the room, basking in that
golden light. Here and there the figures of the guests stood out, sharp
and black, between lamp and window, shutting off the light, like those
little pictures which one sees sometimes pasted here and there upon a
glass screen, whose other panes are mere transparencies. He would try
to make out Odette. And then, when he was once inside, without thinking,
his eyes sparkled suddenly with such radiant happiness that M. Verdurin
said to the painter: "H'm. Seems to be getting warm." Indeed, her
presence gave the house what none other of the houses that he visited
seemed to possess: a sort of tactual sense, a nervous system which
ramified into each of its rooms and sent a constant stimulus to his
heart.

And so the simple and regular manifestations of a social organism,
namely the 'little clan,' were transformed for Swann into a series of
daily encounters with Odette, and enabled him to feign indifference to
the prospect of seeing her, or even a desire not to see her; in doing
which he incurred no very great risk since, even although he had written
to her during the day, he would of necessity see her in the evening and
accompany her home.

But one evening, when, irritated by the thought of that inevitable dark
drive together, he had taken his other 'little girl' all the way to the
Bois, so as to delay as long as possible the moment of his appearance at
the Verdurins', he was so late in reaching them that Odette, supposing
that he did not intend to come, had already left. Seeing the room bare
of her, Swann felt his heart wrung by sudden anguish; he shook with the
sense that he was being deprived of a pleasure whose intensity he began
then for the first time to estimate, having always, hitherto, had that
certainty of finding it whenever he would, which (as in the case of
all our pleasures) reduced, if it did not altogether blind him to its
dimensions.

"Did you notice the face he pulled when he saw that she wasn't here?" M.
Verdurin asked his wife. "I think we may say that he's hooked."

"The face he pulled?" exploded Dr. Cottard who, having left the house
for a moment to visit a patient, had just returned to fetch his wife and
did not know whom they were discussing.

"D'you mean to say you didn't meet him on the doorstep--the loveliest of
Swanns?"

"No. M. Swann has been here?"

"Just for a moment. We had a glimpse of a Swann tremendously agitated.
In a state of nerves. You see, Odette had left."

"You mean to say that she has gone the 'whole hog' with him; that she
has 'burned her boats'?" inquired the Doctor cautiously, testing the
meaning of his phrases.

"Why, of course not; there's absolutely nothing in it; in fact, between
you and me, I think she's making a great mistake, and behaving like a
silly little fool, which she is, incidentally."

"Come, come, come!" said M. Verdurin, "How on earth do you know that
there's 'nothing in it'? We haven't been there to see, have we now?"

"She would have told me," answered Mme. Verdurin with dignity. "I may
say that she tells me everything. As she has no one else at present, I
told her that she ought to live with him. She makes out that she can't;
she admits, she was immensely attracted by him, at first; but he's
always shy with her, and that makes her shy with him. Besides, she
doesn't care for him in that way, she says; it's an ideal love,
'Platonic,' you know; she's afraid of rubbing the bloom off--oh, I don't
know half the things she says, how should I? And yet he's exactly the
sort of man she wants."

"I beg to differ from you," M. Verdurin courteously interrupted. "I am
only half satisfied with the gentleman. I feel that he 'poses.'"

Mme. Verdurin's whole body stiffened, her eyes stared blankly as though
she had suddenly been turned into a statue; a device by means of which
she might be supposed not to have caught the sound of that unutterable
word which seemed to imply that it was possible for people to 'pose'
in her house, and, therefore, that there were people in the world who
'mattered more' than herself.

"Anyhow, if there is nothing in it, I don't suppose it's because our
friend believes in her virtue. And yet, you never know; he seems to
believe in her intelligence. I don't know whether you heard the way he
lectured her the other evening about Vinteuil's sonata. I am devoted
to Odette, but really--to expound theories of aesthetic to her--the man
must be a prize idiot."

"Look here, I won't have you saying nasty things about Odette," broke in
Mme. Verdurin in her 'spoiled child' manner. "She is charming."

"There's no reason why she shouldn't be charming; we are not saying
anything nasty about her, only that she is not the embodiment of either
virtue or intellect. After all," he turned to the painter, "does it
matter so very much whether she is virtuous or not? You can't tell; she
might be a great deal less charming if she were."

On the landing Swann had run into the Verdurins' butler, who had been
somewhere else a moment earlier, when he arrived, and who had been asked
by Odette to tell Swann (but that was at least an hour ago) that she
would probably stop to drink a cup of chocolate at Prévost's on her
way home. Swann set off at once for Prévost's, but every few yards
his carriage was held up by others, or by people crossing the street,
loathsome obstacles each of which he would gladly have crushed beneath
his wheels, were it not that a policeman fumbling with a note-book would
delay him even longer than the actual passage of the pedestrian. He
counted the minutes feverishly, adding a few seconds to each so as to
be quite certain that he had not given himself short measure, and so,
possibly, exaggerated whatever chance there might actually be of his
arriving at Prévost's in time, and of finding her still there. And then,
in a moment of illumination, like a man in a fever who awakes from sleep
and is conscious of the absurdity of the dream-shapes among which his
mind has been wandering without any clear distinction between himself
and them, Swann suddenly perceived how foreign to his nature were the
thoughts which he had been revolving in his mind ever since he had heard
at the Verdurins' that Odette had left, how novel the heartache from
which he was suffering, but of which he was only now conscious, as
though he had just woken up. What! all this disturbance simply because
he would not see Odette, now, till to-morrow, exactly what he had been
hoping, not an hour before, as he drove toward Mme. Verdurin's. He was
obliged to admit also that now, as he sat in the same carriage and
drove to Prévost's, he was no longer the same man, was no longer alone
even--but that a new personality was there beside him, adhering to him,
amalgamated with him, a creature from whom he might, perhaps, be unable
to liberate himself, towards whom he might have to adopt some such
stratagem as one uses to outwit a master or a malady. And yet, during
this last moment in which he had felt that another, a fresh personality
was thus conjoined with his own, life had seemed, somehow, more
interesting.

It was in vain that he assured himself that this possible meeting at
Prévost's (the tension of waiting for which so ravished, stripped so
bare the intervening moments that he could find nothing, not one idea,
not one memory in his mind beneath which his troubled spirit might take
shelter and repose) would probably, after all, should it take place, be
much the same as all their meetings, of no great importance. As on every
other evening, once he was in Odette's company, once he had begun to
cast furtive glances at her changing countenance, and instantly to
withdraw his eyes lest she should read in them the first symbols of
desire and believe no more in his indifference, he would cease to
be able even to think of her, so busy would he be in the search for
pretexts which would enable him not to leave her immediately, and to
assure himself, without betraying his concern, that he would find her
again, next evening, at the Verdurins'; pretexts, that is to say, which
would enable him to prolong for the time being, and to renew for one day
more the disappointment, the torturing deception that must always come
to him with the vain presence of this woman, whom he might approach, yet
never dared embrace.

She was not at Prevost's; he must search for her, then, in every
restaurant upon the boulevards. To save time, while he went in one
direction, he sent in the other his coachman Rémi (Rizzo's Doge Loredan)
for whom he presently--after a fruitless search--found himself waiting
at the spot where the carriage was to meet him. It did not appear, and
Swann tantalised himself with alternate pictures of the approaching
moment, as one in which Rémi would say to him: "Sir, the lady is there,"
or as one in which Rémi would say to him: "Sir, the lady was not in
any of the cafés." And so he saw himself faced by the close of his
evening--a thing uniform, and yet bifurcated by the intervening accident
which would either put an end to his agony by discovering Odette, or
would oblige him to abandon any hope of finding her that night, to
accept the necessity of returning home without having seen her.

The coachman returned; but, as he drew up opposite him, Swann asked,
not "Did you find the lady?" but "Remind me, to-morrow, to order in
some more firewood. I am sure we must be running short." Perhaps he had
persuaded himself that, if Rémi had at last found Odette in some café,
where she was waiting for him still, then his night of misery was
already obliterated by the realisation, begun already in his mind, of a
night of joy, and that there was no need for him to hasten towards the
attainment of a happiness already captured and held in a safe place,
which would not escape his grasp again. But it was also by the force of
inertia; there was in his soul that want of adaptability which can be
seen in the bodies of certain people who, when the moment comes to avoid
a collision, to snatch their clothes out of reach of a flame, or to
perform any other such necessary movement, take their time (as the
saying is), begin by remaining for a moment in their original position,
as though seeking to find in it a starting-point, a source of strength
and motion. And probably, if the coachman had interrupted him with,
"I have found the lady," he would have answered, "Oh, yes, of course;
that's what I told you to do. I had quite forgotten," and would have
continued to discuss his supply of firewood, so as to hide from his
servant the emotion that he had felt, and to give himself time to break
away from the thraldom of his anxieties and abandon himself to pleasure.

The coachman came back, however, with the report that he could not find
her anywhere, and added the advice, as an old and privileged servant, "I
think, sir, that all we can do now is to go home."

But the air of indifference which Swann could so lightly assume when
Rémi uttered his final, unalterable response, fell from him like a
cast-off cloak when he saw Rémi attempt to make him abandon hope and
retire from the quest.

"Certainly not!" he exclaimed. "We must find the lady. It is most
important. She would be extremely put out--it's a business matter--and
vexed with me if she didn't see me."

"But I do not see how the lady can be vexed, sir," answered Rémi, "since
it was she that went away without waiting for you, sir, and said she was
going to Prévost's, and then wasn't there."

Meanwhile the restaurants were closing, and their lights began to go
out. Under the trees of the boulevards there were still a few people
strolling to and fro, barely distinguishable in the gathering darkness.
Now and then the ghost of a woman glided up to Swann, murmured a few
words in his ear, asked him to take her home, and left him shuddering.
Anxiously he explored every one of these vaguely seen shapes, as though
among the phantoms of the dead, in the realms of darkness, he had been
searching for a lost Eurydice.

Among all the methods by which love is brought into being, among all the
agents which disseminate that blessed bane, there are few so efficacious
as the great gust of agitation which, now and then, sweeps over the
human spirit. For then the creature in whose company we are seeking
amusement at the moment, her lot is cast, her fate and ours decided,
that is the creature whom we shall henceforward love. It is not
necessary that she should have pleased us, up till then, any more, or
even as much as others. All that is necessary is that our taste for her
should become exclusive. And that condition is fulfilled so soon as--in
the moment when she has failed to meet us--for the pleasure which
we were on the point of enjoying in her charming company is abruptly
substituted an anxious torturing desire, whose object is the creature
herself, an irrational, absurd desire, which the laws of civilised
society make it impossible to satisfy and difficult to assuage--the
insensate, agonising desire to possess her.

Swann made Rémi drive him to such restaurants as were still open; it was
the sole hypothesis, now, of that happiness which he had contemplated
so calmly; he no longer concealed his agitation, the price he set upon
their meeting, and promised, in case of success, to reward his coachman,
as though, by inspiring in him a will to triumph which would reinforce
his own, he could bring it to pass, by a miracle, that Odette--assuming
that she had long since gone home to bed,--might yet be found seated in
some restaurant on the boulevards. He pursued the quest as far as the
Maison Dorée, burst twice into Tortoni's and, still without catching
sight of her, was emerging from the Café Anglais, striding with haggard
gaze towards his carriage, which was waiting for him at the corner of
the Boulevard des Italiens, when he collided with a person coming in the
opposite direction; it was Odette; she explained, later, that there had
been no room at Prévost's, that she had gone, instead, to sup at the
Maison Dorée, and had been sitting there in an alcove where he must have
overlooked her, and that she was now looking for her carriage.

She had so little expected to see him that she started back in alarm. As
for him, he had ransacked the streets of Paris, not that he supposed
it possible that he should find her, but because he would have suffered
even more cruelly by abandoning the attempt. But now the joy (which, his
reason had never ceased to assure him, was not, that evening at least,
to be realised) was suddenly apparent, and more real than ever
before; for he himself had contributed nothing to it by anticipating
probabilities,--it remained integral and external to himself; there
was no need for him to draw on his own resources to endow it with
truth--'twas from itself that there emanated, 'twas itself that
projected towards him that truth whose glorious rays melted and
scattered like the cloud of a dream the sense of loneliness which had
lowered over him, that truth upon which he had supported, nay founded,
albeit unconsciously, his vision of bliss. So will a traveller, who has
come down, on a day of glorious weather, to the Mediterranean shore, and
is doubtful whether they still exist, those lands which he has left, let
his eyes be dazzled, rather than cast a backward glance, by the radiance
streaming towards him from the luminous and unfading azure at his feet.

He climbed after her into the carriage which she had kept waiting, and
ordered his own to follow.

She had in her hand a bunch of cattleyas, and Swann could see, beneath
the film of lace that covered her head, more of the same flowers
fastened to a swansdown plume. She was wearing, under her cloak, a
flowing gown of black velvet, caught up on one side so as to reveal a
large triangular patch of her white silk skirt, with an 'insertion,'
also of white silk, in the cleft of her low-necked bodice, in which were
fastened a few more cattleyas. She had scarcely recovered from the shock
which the sight of Swann had given her, when some obstacle made the
horse start to one side. They were thrown forward from their seats; she
uttered a cry, and fell back quivering and breathless.

"It's all right," he assured her, "don't be frightened." And he slipped
his arm round her shoulder, supporting her body against his own; then
went on: "Whatever you do, don't utter a word; just make a sign, yes
or no, or you'll be out of breath again. You won't mind if I put the
flowers straight on your bodice; the jolt has loosened them. I'm afraid
of their dropping out; I'm just going to fasten them a little more
securely."

She was not used to being treated with so much formality by men, and
smiled as she answered: "No, not at all; I don't mind in the least."

But he, chilled a little by her answer, perhaps, also, to bear out the
pretence that he had been sincere in adopting the stratagem, or even
because he was already beginning to believe that he had been, exclaimed:
"No, no; you mustn't speak. You will be out of breath again. You can
easily answer in signs; I shall understand. Really and truly now, you
don't mind my doing this? Look, there is a little--I think it must be
pollen, spilt over your dress,--may I brush it off with my hand? That's
not too hard; I'm not hurting you, am I? I'm tickling you, perhaps, a
little; but I don't want to touch the velvet in case I rub it the wrong
way. But, don't you see, I really had to fasten the flowers; they would
have fallen out if I hadn't. Like that, now; if I just push them a
little farther down.... Seriously, I'm not annoying you, am I? And if
I just sniff them to see whether they've really lost all their scent? I
don't believe I ever smelt any before; may I? Tell the truth, now."

Still smiling, she shrugged her shoulders ever so slightly, as who
should say, "You're quite mad; you know very well that I like it."

He slipped his other hand upwards along Odette's cheek; she fixed her
eyes on him with that languishing and solemn air which marks the women
of the old Florentine's paintings, in whose faces he had found the type
of hers; swimming at the brink of her fringed lids, her brilliant eyes,
large and finely drawn as theirs, seemed on the verge of breaking from
her face and rolling down her cheeks like two great tears. She bent her
neck, as all their necks may be seen to bend, in the pagan scenes as
well as in the scriptural. And although her attitude was, doubtless,
habitual and instinctive, one which she knew to be appropriate to such
moments, and was careful not to forget to assume, she seemed to need all
her strength to hold her face back, as though some invisible force
were drawing it down towards Swann's. And Swann it was who, before she
allowed her face, as though despite her efforts, to fall upon his lips,
held it back for a moment longer, at a little distance between his
hands. He had intended to leave time for her mind to overtake her body's
movements, to recognise the dream which she had so long cherished and to
assist at its realisation, like a mother invited as a spectator when
a prize is given to the child whom she has reared and loves. Perhaps,
moreover, Swann himself was fixing upon these features of an Odette not
yet possessed, not even kissed by him, on whom he was looking now for
the last time, that comprehensive gaze with which, on the day of his
departure, a traveller strives to bear away with him in memory the view
of a country to which he may never return.

But he was so shy in approaching her that, after this evening which
had begun by his arranging her cattleyas and had ended in her complete
surrender, whether from fear of chilling her, or from reluctance to
appear, even retrospectively, to have lied, or perhaps because he lacked
the audacity to formulate a more urgent requirement than this (which
could always be repeated, since it had not annoyed her on the first
occasion), he resorted to the same pretext on the following days. If
she had any cattleyas pinned to her bodice, he would say: "It is most
unfortunate; the cattleyas don't need tucking in this evening; they've
not been disturbed as they were the other night; I think, though, that
this one isn't quite straight. May I see if they have more scent than
the others?" Or else, if she had none: "Oh! no cattleyas this evening;
then there's nothing for me to arrange." So that for some time there
was no change from the procedure which he had followed on that first
evening, when he had started by touching her throat, with his fingers
first and then with his lips, but their caresses began invariably with
this modest exploration. And long afterwards, when the arrangement (or,
rather, the ritual pretence of an arrangement) of her cattleyas had
quite fallen into desuetude, the metaphor "Do a cattleya," transmuted
into a simple verb which they would employ without a thought of its
original meaning when they wished to refer to the act of physical
possession (in which, paradoxically, the possessor possesses nothing),
survived to commemorate in their vocabulary the long forgotten custom
from which it sprang. And yet possibly this particular manner of saying
"to make love" had not the precise significance of its synonyms.
However disillusioned we may be about women, however we may regard
the possession of even the most divergent types as an invariable
and monotonous experience, every detail of which is known and can be
described in advance, it still becomes a fresh and stimulating pleasure
if the women concerned be--or be thought to be--so difficult as to
oblige us to base our attack upon some unrehearsed incident in our
relations with them, as was originally for Swann the arrangement of the
cattleyas. He trembled as he hoped, that evening, (but Odette, he told
himself, if she were deceived by his stratagem, could not guess his
intention) that it was the possession of this woman that would emerge
for him from their large and richly coloured petals; and the pleasure
which he already felt, and which Odette tolerated, he thought, perhaps
only because she was not yet aware of it herself, seemed to him for that
reason--as it might have seemed to the first man when he enjoyed it amid
the flowers of the earthly paradise--a pleasure which had never before
existed, which he was striving now to create, a pleasure--and the
special name which he was to give to it preserved its identity--entirely
individual and new.

The ice once broken, every evening, when he had taken her home, he must
follow her into the house; and often she would come out again in her
dressing-gown, and escort him to his carriage, and would kiss him before
the eyes of his coachman, saying: "What on earth does it matter what
people see?" And on evenings when he did not go to the Verdurins' (which
happened occasionally, now that he had opportunities of meeting Odette
elsewhere), when--more and more rarely--he went into society, she would
beg him to come to her on his way home, however late he might be. The
season was spring, the nights clear and frosty. He would come away from
an evening party, jump into his victoria, spread a rug over his knees,
tell the friends who were leaving at the same time, and who insisted on
his going home with them, that he could not, that he was not going
in their direction; then the coachman would start off at a fast trot
without further orders, knowing quite well where he had to go. His
friends would be left marvelling, and, as a matter of fact, Swann was
no longer the same man. No one ever received a letter from him now
demanding an introduction to a woman. He had ceased to pay any attention
to women, and kept away from the places in which they were ordinarily to
be met. In a restaurant, or in the country, his manner was deliberately
and directly the opposite of that by which, only a few days earlier,
his friends would have recognised him, that manner which had seemed
permanently and unalterably his own. To such an extent does passion
manifest itself in us as a temporary and distinct character, which not
only takes the place of our normal character but actually obliterates
the signs by which that character has hitherto been discernible. On the
other hand, there was one thing that was, now, invariable, namely that
wherever Swann might be spending the evening, he never failed to go on
afterwards to Odette. The interval of space separating her from him
was one which he must as inevitably traverse as he must descend, by an
irresistible gravitation, the steep slope of life itself. To be frank,
as often as not, when he had stayed late at a party, he would have
preferred to return home at once, without going so far out of his way,
and to postpone their meeting until the morrow; but the very fact of his
putting himself to such inconvenience at an abnormal hour in order to
visit her, while he guessed that his friends, as he left them, were
saying to one another: "He is tied hand and foot; there must certainly
be a woman somewhere who insists on his going to her at all hours,"
made him feel that he was leading the life of the class of men whose
existence is coloured by a love-affair, and in whom the perpetual
sacrifice which they are making of their comfort and of their practical
interests has engendered a spiritual charm. Then, though he may not
consciously have taken this into consideration, the certainty that she
was waiting for him, that she was not anywhere or with anyone else, that
he would see her before he went home, drew the sting from that anguish,
forgotten, it is true, but latent and ever ready to be reawakened, which
he had felt on the evening when Odette had left the Verdurins' before
his arrival, an anguish the actual cessation of which was so agreeable
that it might even be called a state of happiness. Perhaps it was to
that hour of anguish that there must be attributed the importance which
Odette had since assumed in his life. Other people are, as a rule, so
immaterial to us that, when we have entrusted to any one of them the
power to cause so much suffering or happiness to ourselves, that person
seems at once to belong to a different universe, is surrounded with
poetry, makes of our lives a vast expanse, quick with sensation, on
which that person and ourselves are ever more or less in contact. Swann
could not without anxiety ask himself what Odette would mean to him
in the years that were to come. Sometimes, as he looked up from his
victoria on those fine and frosty nights of early spring, and saw the
dazzling moonbeams fall between his eyes and the deserted streets, he
would think of that other face, gleaming and faintly roseate like the
moon's, which had, one day, risen on the horizon of his mind and since
then had shed upon the world that mysterious light in which he saw it
bathed. If he arrived after the hour at which Odette sent her servants
to bed, before ringing the bell at the gate of her little garden,
he would go round first into the other street, over which, at the
ground-level, among the windows (all exactly alike, but darkened) of
the adjoining houses, shone the solitary lighted window of her room.
He would rap upon the pane, and she would hear the signal, and answer,
before running to meet him at the gate. He would find, lying open on the
piano, some of her favourite music, the _Valse des Roses_, the _Pauvre
Fou_ of Tagliafico (which, according to the instructions embodied in her
will, was to be played at her funeral); but he would ask her, instead,
to give him the little phrase from Vinteuil's sonata. It was true that
Odette played vilely, but often the fairest impression that remains in
our minds of a favourite air is one which has arisen out of a jumble
of wrong notes struck by unskilful fingers upon a tuneless piano. The
little phrase was associated still, in Swann's mind, with his love for
Odette. He felt clearly that this love was something to which there were
no corresponding external signs, whose meaning could not be proved by
any but himself; he realised, too, that Odette's qualities were not such
as to justify his setting so high a value on the hours he spent in
her company. And often, when the cold government of reason stood
unchallenged, he would readily have ceased to sacrifice so many of his
intellectual and social interests to this imaginary pleasure. But the
little phrase, as soon as it struck his ear, had the power to liberate
in him the room that was needed to contain it; the proportions of
Swann's soul were altered; a margin was left for a form of enjoyment
which corresponded no more than his love for Odette to any external
object, and yet was not, like his enjoyment of that love, purely
individual, but assumed for him an objective reality superior to that
of other concrete things. This thirst for an untasted charm, the little
phrase would stimulate it anew in him, but without bringing him any
definite gratification to assuage it. With the result that those parts
of Swann's soul in which the little phrase had obliterated all care
for material interests, those human considerations which affect all men
alike, were left bare by it, blank pages on which he was at liberty to
inscribe the name of Odette. Moreover, where Odette's affection might
seem ever so little abrupt and disappointing, the little phrase would
come to supplement it, to amalgamate with it its own mysterious essence.
Watching Swann's face while he listened to the phrase, one would have
said that he was inhaling an anaesthetic which allowed him to breathe
more deeply. And the pleasure which the music gave him, which was
shortly to create in him a real longing, was in fact closely akin,
at such moments, to the pleasure which he would have derived from
experimenting with perfumes, from entering into contract with a world
for which we men were not created, which appears to lack form because
our eyes cannot perceive it, to lack significance because it escapes
our intelligence, to which we may attain by way of one sense only. Deep
repose, mysterious refreshment for Swann,--for him whose eyes, although
delicate interpreters of painting, whose mind, although an acute
observer of manners, must bear for ever the indelible imprint of the
barrenness of his life,--to feel himself transformed into a creature
foreign to humanity, blinded, deprived of his logical faculty, almost
a fantastic unicorn, a chimaera-like creature conscious of the world
through his two ears alone. And as, notwithstanding, he sought in the
little phrase for a meaning to which his intelligence could not descend,
with what a strange frenzy of intoxication must he strip bare his
innermost soul of the whole armour of reason, and make it pass,
unattended, through the straining vessel, down into the dark filter of
sound. He began to reckon up how much that was painful, perhaps even how
much secret and unappeased sorrow underlay the sweetness of the phrase;
and yet to him it brought no suffering. What matter though the phrase
repeated that love is frail and fleeting, when his love was so strong!
He played with the melancholy which the phrase diffused, he felt it
stealing over him, but like a caress which only deepened and sweetened
his sense of his own happiness. He would make Odette play him the phrase
again, ten, twenty times on end, insisting that, while she played, she
must never cease to kiss him. Every kiss provokes another. Ah, in those
earliest days of love how naturally the kisses spring into life. How
closely, in their abundance, are they pressed one against another; until
lovers would find it as hard to count the kisses exchanged in an hour,
as to count the flowers in a meadow in May. Then she would pretend to
stop, saying: "How do you expect me to play when you keep on holding me?
I can't do everything at once. Make up your mind what you want; am I to
play the phrase or do you want to play with me?" Then he would become
annoyed, and she would burst out with a laugh which was transformed, as
it left her lips, and descended upon him in a shower of kisses. Or else
she would look at him sulkily, and he would see once again a face worthy
to figure in Botticelli's 'Life of Moses,' he would place it there,
giving to Odette's neck the necessary inclination; and when he had
finished her portrait in distemper, in the fifteenth century, on the
wall of the Sixtine, the idea that she was, none the less, in the room
with him still, by the piano, at that very moment, ready to be kissed
and won, the idea of her material existence, of her being alive, would
sweep over him with so violent an intoxication that, with eyes starting
from his head and jaws that parted as though to devour her, he would
fling himself upon this Botticelli maiden and kiss and bite her cheeks.
And then, as soon as he had left the house, not without returning to
kiss her once again, because he had forgotten to take away with him, in
memory, some detail of her fragrance or of her features, while he drove
home in his victoria, blessing the name of Odette who allowed him to pay
her these daily visits, which, although they could not, he felt, bring
any great happiness to her, still, by keeping him immune from the fever
of jealousy--by removing from him every possibility of a fresh outbreak
of the heart-sickness which had manifested itself in him that evening,
when he had failed to find her at the Verdurins'--might help him to
arrive, without any recurrence of those crises, of which the first had
been so distressing that it must also be the last, at the termination of
this strange series of hours in his life, hours almost enchanted, in the
same manner as these other, following hours, in which he drove through a
deserted Paris by the light of the moon: noticing as he drove home that
the satellite had now changed its position, relatively to his own,
and was almost touching the horizon; feeling that his love, also, was
obedient to these immutable laws of nature, he asked himself whether
this period, upon which he had entered, was to last much longer, whether
presently his mind's eye would cease to behold that dear countenance,
save as occupying a distant and diminished position, and on the verge of
ceasing to shed on him the radiance of its charm. For Swann was finding
in things once more, since he had fallen in love, the charm that he had
found when, in his adolescence, he had fancied himself an artist; with
this difference, that what charm lay in them now was conferred by Odette
alone. He could feel reawakening in himself the inspirations of his
boyhood, which had been dissipated among the frivolities of his later
life, but they all bore, now, the reflection, the stamp of a particular
being; and during the long hours which he now found a subtle pleasure
in spending at home, alone with his convalescent spirit, he became
gradually himself again, but himself in thraldom to another.

He went to her only in the evenings, and knew nothing of how she spent
her time during the day, any more than he knew of her past; so little,
indeed, that he had not even the tiny, initial clue which, by allowing
us to imagine what we do not know, stimulates a desire for knowledge.
And so he never asked himself what she might be doing, or what her life
had been. Only he smiled sometimes at the thought of how, some years
earlier, when he still did not know her, some one had spoken to him of a
woman who, if he remembered rightly, must certainly have been Odette,
as of a 'tart,' a 'kept' woman, one of those women to whom he still
attributed (having lived but little in their company) the entire set of
characteristics, fundamentally perverse, with which they had been, for
many years, endowed by the imagination of certain novelists. He would
say to himself that one has, as often as not, only to take the exact
counterpart of the reputation created by the world in order to judge a
person fairly, when with such a character he contrasted that of Odette,
so good, so simple, so enthusiastic in the pursuit of ideals, so nearly
incapable of not telling the truth that, when he had once begged her, so
that they might dine together alone, to write to Mme. Verdurin, saying
that she was unwell, the next day he had seen her, face to face
with Mme. Verdurin, who asked whether she had recovered, blushing,
stammering, and, in spite of herself, revealing in every feature how
painful, what a torture it was to her to act a lie; and, while in her
answer she multiplied the fictitious details of an imaginary illness,
seeming to ask pardon, by her suppliant look and her stricken accents,
for the obvious falsehood of her words.

On certain days, however, though these came seldom, she would call upon
him in the afternoon, to interrupt his musings or the essay on Vermeer
to which he had latterly returned. His servant would come in to say that
Mme. de Crécy was in the small drawing-room. He would go in search of
her, and, when he opened the door, on Odette's blushing countenance, as
soon as she caught sight of Swann, would appear--changing the curve
of her lips, the look in her eyes, the moulding of her cheeks--an
all-absorbing smile. Once he was left alone he would see again that
smile, and her smile of the day before, another with which she had
greeted him sometime else, the smile which had been her answer, in the
carriage that night, when he had asked her whether she objected to his
rearranging her cattleyas; and the life of Odette at all other times,
since he knew nothing of it, appeared to him upon a neutral and
colourless background, like those sheets of sketches by Watteau upon
which one sees, here and there, in every corner and in all directions,
traced in three colours upon the buff paper, innumerable smiles. But,
once in a while, illuminating a chink of that existence which Swann
still saw as a complete blank, even if his mind assured him that it was
not so, because he was unable to imagine anything that might occupy it,
some friend who knew them both, and suspecting that they were in love,
had not dared to tell him anything about her that was of the least
importance, would describe Odette's figure, as he had seen her, that
very morning, going on foot up the Rue Abbattucci, in a cape trimmed
with skunks, wearing a Rembrandt hat, and a bunch of violets in her
bosom. This simple outline reduced Swann to utter confusion by enabling
him suddenly to perceive that Odette had an existence which was not
wholly subordinated to his own; he burned to know whom she had been
seeking to fascinate by this costume in which he had never seen her; he
registered a vow to insist upon her telling him where she had been going
at that intercepted moment, as though, in all the colourless life--a
life almost nonexistent, since she was then invisible to him--of his
mistress, there had been but a single incident apart from all those
smiles directed towards himself; namely, her walking abroad beneath a
Rembrandt hat, with a bunch of violets in her bosom.

Except when he asked her for Vinteuil's little phrase instead of the
_Valse des Roses_, Swann made no effort to induce her to play the things
that he himself preferred, nor, in literature any more than in music, to
correct the manifold errors of her taste. He fully realised that she was
not intelligent. When she said how much she would like him to tell her
about the great poets, she had imagined that she would suddenly get
to know whole pages of romantic and heroic verse, in the style of the
Vicomte de Borelli, only even more moving. As for Vermeer of Delft, she
asked whether he had been made to suffer by a woman, if it was a woman
that had inspired him, and once Swann had told her that no one knew, she
had lost all interest in that painter. She would often say: "I'm sure,
poetry; well, of course, there'd be nothing like it if it was all true,
if the poets really believed the things they said. But as often as not
you'll find there's no one so mean and calculating as those fellows. I
know something about poetry. I had a friend, once, who was in love with
a poet of sorts. In his verses he never spoke of anything but love, and
heaven, and the stars. Oh! she was properly taken in! He had more than
three hundred thousand francs out of her before he'd finished." If,
then, Swann tried to shew her in what artistic beauty consisted, how one
ought to appreciate poetry or painting, after a minute or two she would
cease to listen, saying: "Yes... I never thought it would be like that."
And he felt that her disappointment was so great that he preferred to
lie to her, assuring her that what he had said was nothing, that he
had only touched the surface, that he had not time to go into it all
properly, that there was more in it than that. Then she would interrupt
with a brisk, "More in it? What?... Do tell me!", but he did not tell
her, for he realised how petty it would appear to her, and how different
from what she had expected, less sensational and less touching; he was
afraid, too, lest, disillusioned in the matter of art, she might at the
same time be disillusioned in the greater matter of love.

With the result that she found Swann inferior, intellectually, to what
she had supposed. "You're always so reserved; I can't make you out." She
marvelled increasingly at his indifference to money, at his courtesy
to everyone alike, at the delicacy of his mind. And indeed it happens,
often enough, to a greater man than Swann ever was, to a scientist or
artist, when he is not wholly misunderstood by the people among whom
he lives, that the feeling in them which proves that they have been
convinced of the superiority of his intellect is created not by any
admiration for his ideas--for those are entirely beyond them--but by
their respect for what they term his good qualities. There was also the
respect with which Odette was inspired by the thought of Swann's social
position, although she had no desire that he should attempt to secure
invitations for herself. Perhaps she felt that such attempts would be
bound to fail; perhaps, indeed, she feared lest, merely by speaking of
her to his friends, he should provoke disclosures of an unwelcome kind.
The fact remains that she had consistently held him to his promise never
to mention her name. Her reason for not wishing to go into society was,
she had told him, a quarrel which she had had, long ago, with another
girl, who had avenged herself by saying nasty things about her. "But,"
Swann objected, "surely, people don't all know your friend." "Yes,
don't you see, it's like a spot of oil; people are so horrid." Swann was
unable, frankly, to appreciate this point; on the other hand, he knew
that such generalisations as "People are so horrid," and "A word of
scandal spreads like a spot of oil," were generally accepted as true;
there must, therefore, be cases to which they were literally applicable.
Could Odette's case be one of these? He teased himself with the
question, though not for long, for he too was subject to that mental
oppression which had so weighed upon his father, whenever he was faced
by a difficult problem. In any event, that world of society which
concealed such terrors for Odette inspired her, probably, with no very
great longing to enter it, since it was too far removed from the world
which she already knew for her to be able to form any clear conception
of it. At the same time, while in certain respects she had retained a
genuine simplicity (she had, for instance, kept up a friendship with a
little dressmaker, now retired from business, up whose steep and dark
and fetid staircase she clambered almost every day), she still thirsted
to be in the fashion, though her idea of it was not altogether that held
by fashionable people. For the latter, fashion is a thing that emanates
from a comparatively small number of leaders, who project it to a
considerable distance--with more or less strength according as one
is nearer to or farther from their intimate centre--over the widening
circle of their friends and the friends of their friends, whose names
form a sort of tabulated index. People 'in society' know this index by
heart, they are gifted in such matters with an erudition from which they
have extracted a sort of taste, of tact, so automatic in its operation
that Swann, for example, without needing to draw upon his knowledge of
the world, if he read in a newspaper the names of the people who had
been guests at a dinner, could tell at once how fashionable the dinner
had been, just as a man of letters, merely by reading a phrase, can
estimate exactly the literary merit of its author. But Odette was one
of those persons (an extremely numerous class, whatever the fashionable
world may think, and to be found in every section of society) who do
not share this knowledge, but imagine fashion to be something of quite
another kind, which assumes different aspects according to the circle to
which they themselves belong, but has the special characteristic--common
alike to the fashion of which Odette used to dream and to that before
which Mme. Cottard bowed--of being directly accessible to all. The other
kind, the fashion of 'fashionable people,' is, it must be admitted,
accessible also; but there are inevitable delays. Odette would say of
some one: "He never goes to any place that isn't really smart."

And if Swann were to ask her what she meant by that, she would answer,
with a touch of contempt, "Smart places! Why, good heavens, just fancy,
at your age, having to be told what the smart places are in Paris! What
do you expect me to say? Well, on Sunday mornings there's the Avenue de
l'Impératrice, and round the lake at five o'clock, and on Thursdays
the Eden-Théâtre, and the Hippodrome on Fridays; then there are the
balls..."

"What balls?"

"Why, silly, the balls people give in Paris; the smart ones, I mean.
Wait now, Herbinger, you know who I mean, the fellow who's in one of
the jobbers' offices; yes, of course, you must know him, he's one of the
best-known men in Paris, that great big fair-haired boy who wears
such swagger clothes; he always has a flower in his buttonhole and a
light-coloured overcoat with a fold down the back; he goes about with
that old image, takes her to all the first-nights. Very well! He gave
a ball the other night, and all the smart people in Paris were there.
I should have loved to go! but you had to shew your invitation at the
door, and I couldn't get one anywhere. After all, I'm just as glad,
now, that I didn't go; I should have been killed in the crush, and seen
nothing. Still, just to be able to say one had been to Herbinger's ball.
You know how vain I am! However, you may be quite certain that half the
people who tell you they were there are telling stories.... But I am
surprised that you weren't there, a regular 'tip-topper' like you."

Swann made no attempt, however, to modify this conception of fashion;
feeling that his own came no nearer to the truth, was just as fatuous,
devoid of all importance, he saw no advantage to be gained by imparting
it to his mistress, with the result that, after a few months, she ceased
to take any interest in the people to whose houses he went, except
when they were the means of his obtaining tickets for the paddock at
race-meetings or first-nights at the theatre. She hoped that he would
continue to cultivate such profitable acquaintances, but she had come to
regard them as less smart since the day when she had passed the Marquise
de Villeparisis in the street, wearing a black serge dress and a bonnet
with strings.

"But she looks like a pew-opener, like an old charwoman, darling! That a
marquise! Goodness knows I'm not a marquise, but you'd have to pay me
a lot of money before you'd get me to go about Paris rigged out like
that!"

Nor could she understand Swann's continuing to live in his house on the
Quai d'Orléans, which, though she dared not tell him so, she considered
unworthy of him.

It was true that she claimed to be fond of 'antiques,' and used to
assume a rapturous and knowing air when she confessed how she loved
to spend the whole day 'rummaging' in second-hand shops, hunting for
'bric-à-brac,' and things of the 'right date.' Although it was a point
of honour, to which she obstinately clung, as though obeying some old
family custom, that she should never answer any questions, never give
any account of what she did during the daytime, she spoke to Swann once
about a friend to whose house she had been invited, and had found that
everything in it was 'of the period.' Swann could not get her to tell
him what 'period' it was. Only after thinking the matter over she
replied that it was 'mediaeval'; by which she meant that the walls were
panelled. Some time later she spoke to him again of her friend, and
added, in the hesitating but confident tone in which one refers to a
person whom one has met somewhere, at dinner, the night before, of whom
one had never heard until then, but whom one's hosts seemed to regard as
some one so celebrated and important that one hopes that one's listener
will know quite well who is meant, and will be duly impressed: "Her
dining-room... is... eighteenth century!" Incidentally, she had thought
it hideous, all bare, as though the house were still unfinished; women
looked frightful in it, and it would never become the fashion. She
mentioned it again, a third time, when she shewed Swann a card with the
name and address of the man who had designed the dining-room, and whom
she wanted to send for, when she had enough money, to see whether he
could not do one for her too; not one like that, of course, but one
of the sort she used to dream of, one which, unfortunately, her little
house would not be large enough to contain, with tall sideboards,
Renaissance furniture and fireplaces like the Château at Blois. It was
on this occasion that she let out to Swann what she really thought of
his abode on the Quai d'Orléans; he having ventured the criticism that
her friend had indulged, not in the Louis XVI style, for, he went on,
although that was not, of course, done, still it might be made charming,
but in the 'Sham-Antique.'

"You wouldn't have her live, like you, among a lot of broken-down chairs
and threadbare carpets!" she exclaimed, the innate respectability of
the middle-class housewife rising impulsively to the surface through the
acquired dilettantism of the 'light woman.'

People who enjoyed 'picking-up' things, who admired poetry, despised
sordid calculations of profit and loss, and nourished ideals of honour
and love, she placed in a class by themselves, superior to the rest of
humanity. There was no need actually to have those tastes, provided
one talked enough about them; when a man had told her at dinner that he
loved to wander about and get his hands all covered with dust in the
old furniture shops, that he would never be really appreciated in
this commercial age, since he was not concerned about the things that
interested it, and that he belonged to another generation altogether,
she would come home saying: "Why, he's an adorable creature; so
sensitive! I had no idea," and she would conceive for him a strong and
sudden friendship. But, on the other hand, men who, like Swann, had
these tastes but did not speak of them, left her cold. She was obliged,
of course, to admit that Swann was most generous with his money, but she
would add, pouting: "It's not the same thing, you see, with him,"
and, as a matter of fact, what appealed to her imagination was not the
practice of disinterestedness, but its vocabulary.

Feeling that, often, he could not give her in reality the pleasures of
which she dreamed, he tried at least to ensure that she should be happy
in his company, tried not to contradict those vulgar ideas, that bad
taste which she displayed on every possible occasion, which all the same
he loved, as he could not help loving everything that came from her,
which even fascinated him, for were they not so many more of those
characteristic features, by virtue of which the essential qualities
of the woman emerged, and were made visible? And so, when she was in a
happy mood because she was going to see the _Reine Topaze_, or when her
eyes grew serious, troubled, petulant, if she was afraid of missing the
flower-show, or merely of not being in time for tea, with muffins and
toast, at the Rue Royale tea-rooms, where she believed that regular
attendance was indispensable, and set the seal upon a woman's
certificate of 'smartness,' Swann, enraptured, as all of us are, at
times, by the natural behaviour of a child, or by the likeness of a
portrait, which appears to be on the point of speaking, would feel so
distinctly the soul of his mistress rising to fill the outlines of her
face that he could not refrain from going across and welcoming it
with his lips. "Oh, then, so little Odette wants us to take her to the
flower-show, does she? she wants to be admired, does she? very well, we
will take her there, we can but obey her wishes." As Swann's sight was
beginning to fail, he had to resign himself to a pair of spectacles,
which he wore at home, when working, while to face the world he adopted
a single eyeglass, as being less disfiguring. The first time that she
saw it in his eye, she could not contain herself for joy: "I really do
think--for a man, that is to say--it is tremendously smart! How nice you
look with it! Every inch a gentleman. All you want now is a title!" she
concluded, with a tinge of regret in her voice. He liked Odette to say
these things, just as, if he had been in love with a Breton girl, he
would have enjoyed seeing her in her coif and hearing her say that she
believed in ghosts. Always until then, as is common among men whose
taste for the fine arts develops independently of their sensuality, a
grotesque disparity had existed between the satisfactions which he would
accord to either taste simultaneously; yielding to the seduction of
works of art which grew more and more subtle as the women in whose
company he enjoyed them grew more illiterate and common, he would take a
little servant-girl to a screened box in a theatre where there was some
decadent piece which he had wished to see performed, or to an exhibition
of impressionist painting, with the conviction, moreover, that an
educated, 'society' woman would have understood them no better, but
would not have managed to keep quiet about them so prettily. But, now
that he was in love with Odette, all this was changed; to share her
sympathies, to strive to be one with her in spirit was a task so
attractive that he tried to find satisfaction in the things that she
liked, and did find a pleasure, not only in copying her habits but in
adopting her opinions, which was all the deeper because, as those habits
and opinions sprang from no roots in her intelligence, they suggested
to him nothing except that love, for the sake of which he had preferred
them to his own. If he went again to _Serge Panine_, if he looked out
for opportunities of going to watch Olivier Métra conducting, it was for
the pleasure of being initiated into every one of the ideas in Odette's
mind, of feeling that he had an equal share in all her tastes. This
charm of drawing him closer to her, which her favourite plays and
pictures and places possessed, struck him as being more mysterious than
the intrinsic charm of more beautiful things and places, which appealed
to him by their beauty, but without recalling her. Besides, having
allowed the intellectual beliefs of his youth to grow faint, until his
scepticism, as a finished 'man of the world,' had gradually penetrated
them unawares, he held (or at least he had held for so long that he had
fallen into the habit of saying) that the objects which we admire have
no absolute value in themselves, that the whole thing is a matter of
dates and castes, and consists in a series of fashions, the most vulgar
of which are worth just as much as those which are regarded as the most
refined. And as he had decided that the importance which Odette attached
to receiving cards for a private view was not in itself any more
ridiculous than the pleasure which he himself had at one time felt in
going to luncheon with the Prince of Wales, so he did not think that the
admiration which she professed for Monte-Carlo or for the Righi was any
more unreasonable than his own liking for Holland (which she imagined
as ugly) and for Versailles (which bored her to tears). And so he denied
himself the pleasure of visiting those places, consoling himself with
the reflection that it was for her sake that he wished to feel, to like
nothing that was not equally felt and liked by her.

Like everything else that formed part of Odette's environment, and was
no more, in a sense, than the means whereby he might see and talk to her
more often, he enjoyed the society of the Verdurins. With them, since,
at the heart of all their entertainments, dinners, musical evenings,
games, suppers in fancy dress, excursions to the country, theatre
parties, even the infrequent 'big evenings' when they entertained
'bores,' there were the presence of Odette, the sight of Odette,
conversation with Odette, an inestimable boon which the Verdurins, by
inviting him to their house, bestowed on Swann, he was happier in the
little 'nucleus' than anywhere else, and tried to find some genuine
merit in each of its members, imagining that his tastes would lead him
to frequent their society for the rest of his life. Never daring to
whisper to himself, lest he should doubt the truth of the suggestion,
that he would always be in love with Odette, at least when he tried to
suppose that he would always go to the Verdurins' (a proposition
which, a priori, raised fewer fundamental objections on the part of his
intelligence), he saw himself for the future continuing to meet Odette
every evening; that did not, perhaps, come quite to the same thing as
his being permanently in love with her, but for the moment while he was
in love with her, to feel that he would not, one day, cease to see her
was all that he could ask. "What a charming atmosphere!" he said to
himself. "How entirely genuine life is to these people! They are far
more intelligent, far more artistic, surely, than the people one knows.
Mme. Verdurin, in spite of a few trifling exaggerations which are rather
absurd, has a sincere love of painting and music! What a passion for
works of art, what anxiety to give pleasure to artists! Her ideas about
some of the people one knows are not quite right, but then their ideas
about artistic circles are altogether wrong! Possibly I make no great
intellectual demands upon conversation, but I am perfectly happy talking
to Cottard, although he does trot out those idiotic puns. And as for
the painter, if he is rather unpleasantly affected when he tries to be
paradoxical, still he has one of the finest brains that I have ever come
across. Besides, what is most important, one feels quite free there, one
does what one likes without constraint or fuss. What a flow of humour
there is every day in that drawing-room! Certainly, with a few rare
exceptions, I never want to go anywhere else again. It will become more
and more of a habit, and I shall spend the rest of my life among them."

And as the qualities which he supposed to be an intrinsic part of
the Verdurin character were no more, really, than their superficial
reflection of the pleasure which had been enjoyed in their society by
his love for Odette, those qualities became more serious, more profound,
more vital, as that pleasure increased. Since Mme. Verdurin gave Swann,
now and then, what alone could constitute his happiness; since, on an
evening when he felt anxious because Odette had talked rather more to
one of the party than to another, and, in a spasm of irritation, would
not take the initiative by asking her whether she was coming home, Mme.
Verdurin brought peace and joy to his troubled spirit by the spontaneous
exclamation: "Odette! You'll see M. Swann home, won't you?"; since,
when the summer holidays came, and after he had asked himself uneasily
whether Odette might not leave Paris without him, whether he would still
be able to see her every day, Mme. Verdurin was going to invite them
both to spend the summer with her in the country; Swann, unconsciously
allowing gratitude and self-interest to filter into his intelligence and
to influence his ideas, went so far as to proclaim that Mme. Verdurin
was "a great and noble soul." Should any of his old fellow-pupils in the
Louvre school of painting speak to him of some rare or eminent artist,
"I'd a hundred times rather," he would reply, "have the Verdurins." And,
with a solemnity of diction which was new in him: "They are magnanimous
creatures, and magnanimity is, after all, the one thing that matters,
the one thing that gives us distinction here on earth. Look you, there
are only two classes of men, the magnanimous, and the rest; and I have
reached an age when one has to take sides, to decide once and for all
whom one is going to like and dislike, to stick to the people one likes,
and, to make up for the time one has wasted with the others, never to
leave them again as long as one lives. Very well!" he went on, with the
slight emotion which a man feels when, even without being fully aware of
what he is doing, he says something, not because it is true but because
he enjoys saying it, and listens to his own voice uttering the words
as though they came from some one else, "The die is now cast; I have
elected to love none but magnanimous souls, and to live only in an
atmosphere of magnanimity. You ask me whether Mme. Verdurin is really
intelligent. I can assure you that she has given me proofs of a nobility
of heart, of a loftiness of soul, to which no one could possibly
attain--how could they?--without a corresponding loftiness of mind.
Without question, she has a profound understanding of art. But it is
not, perhaps, in that that she is most admirable; every little action,
ingeniously, exquisitely kind, which she has performed for my sake,
every friendly attention, simple little things, quite domestic and yet
quite sublime, reveal a more profound comprehension of existence than
all your textbooks of philosophy."

* * *

He might have reminded himself, all the same, that there were various
old friends of his family who were just as simple as the Verdurins,
companions of his early days who were just as fond of art, that he knew
other 'great-hearted creatures,' and that, nevertheless, since he had
cast his vote in favour of simplicity, the arts, and magnanimity, he had
entirely ceased to see them. But these people did not know Odette, and,
if they had known her, would never have thought of introducing her to
him.

And so there was probably not, in the whole of the Verdurin circle, a
single one of the 'faithful' who loved them, or believed that he loved
them, as dearly as did Swann. And yet, when M. Verdurin said that he was
not satisfied with Swann, he had not only expressed his own sentiments,
he had unwittingly discovered his wife's. Doubtless Swann had too
particular an affection for Odette, as to which he had failed to take
Mme. Verdurin daily into his confidence; doubtless the very discretion
with which he availed himself of the Verdurins' hospitality, refraining,
often, from coming to dine with them for a reason which they never
suspected, and in place of which they saw only an anxiety on his part
not to have to decline an invitation to the house of some 'bore' or
other; doubtless, also, and despite all the precautions which he had
taken to keep it from them, the gradual discovery which they were
making of his brilliant position in society--doubtless all these things
contributed to their general annoyance with Swann. But the real, the
fundamental reason was quite different. What had happened was that they
had at once discovered in him a locked door, a reserved, impenetrable
chamber in which he still professed silently to himself that the
Princesse de Sagan was not grotesque, and that Cottard's jokes were
not amusing; in a word (and for all that he never once abandoned his
friendly attitude towards them all, or revolted from their dogmas), they
had discovered an impossibility of imposing those dogmas upon him, of
entirely converting him to their faith, the like of which they had never
come across in anyone before. They would have forgiven his going to the
houses of 'bores' (to whom, as it happened, in his heart of hearts he
infinitely preferred the Verdurins and all their little 'nucleus') had
he consented to set a good example by openly renouncing those 'bores'
in the presence of the 'faithful.' But that was an abjuration which, as
they well knew, they were powerless to extort.

What a difference was there in a 'newcomer' whom Odette had asked them
to invite, although she herself had met him only a few times, and on
whom they were building great hopes--the Comte de Forcheville! (It
turned out that he was nothing more nor less than the brother-in-law of
Saniette, a discovery which filled all the 'faithful' with amazement:
the manners of the old palaeographer were so humble that they had always
supposed him to be of a class inferior, socially, to their own, and
had never expected to learn that he came of a rich and relatively
aristocratic family.) Of course, Forcheville was enormously the 'swell,'
which Swann was not or had quite ceased to be; of course, he would never
dream of placing, as Swann now placed, the Verdurin circle above any
other. But he lacked that natural refinement which prevented Swann from
associating himself with the criticisms (too obviously false to be worth
his notice) that Mme. Verdurin levelled at people whom he knew. As for
the vulgar and affected tirades in which the painter sometimes indulged,
the bag-man's pleasantries which Cottard used to hazard,--whereas
Swann, who liked both men sincerely, could easily find excuses for these
without having either the courage or the hypocrisy to applaud them,
Forcheville, on the other hand, was on an intellectual level which
permitted him to be stupified, amazed by the invective (without in the
least understanding what it all was about), and to be frankly delighted
by the wit. And the very first dinner at the Verdurins' at which
Forcheville was present threw a glaring light upon all the differences
between them, made his qualities start into prominence and precipitated
the disgrace of Swann.

There was, at this dinner, besides the usual party, a professor from
the Sorbonne, one Brichot, who had met M. and Mme. Verdurin at a
watering-place somewhere, and, if his duties at the university and his
other works of scholarship had not left him with very little time
to spare, would gladly have come to them more often. For he had that
curiosity, that superstitious outlook on life, which, combined with a
certain amount of scepticism with regard to the object of their studies,
earn for men of intelligence, whatever their profession, for doctors
who do not believe in medicine, for schoolmasters who do not believe in
Latin exercises, the reputation of having broad, brilliant, and indeed
superior minds. He affected, when at Mme. Verdurin's, to choose his
illustrations from among the most topical subjects of the day, when he
spoke of philosophy or history, principally because he regarded those
sciences as no more, really, than a preparation for life itself, and
imagined that he was seeing put into practice by the 'little clan'
what hitherto he had known only from books; and also, perhaps,
because, having had drilled into him as a boy, and having unconsciously
preserved, a feeling of reverence for certain subjects, he thought that
he was casting aside the scholar's gown when he ventured to treat those
subjects with a conversational licence, which seemed so to him only
because the folds of the gown still clung.

Early in the course of the dinner, when M. de Forcheville, seated on the
right of Mme. Verdurin, who, in the 'newcomer's' honour, had taken great
pains with her toilet, observed to her: "Quite original, that white
dress," the Doctor, who had never taken his eyes off him, so curious was
he to learn the nature and attributes of what he called a "de," and was
on the look-out for an opportunity of attracting his attention, so as
to come into closer contact with him, caught in its flight the adjective
'_blanche_' and, his eyes still glued to his plate, snapped out,
"_Blanche_? Blanche of Castile?" then, without moving his head, shot
a furtive glance to right and left of him, doubtful, but happy on the
whole. While Swann, by the painful and futile effort which he made to
smile, testified that he thought the pun absurd, Forcheville had shewn
at once that he could appreciate its subtlety, and that he was a man of
the world, by keeping within its proper limits a mirth the spontaneity
of which had charmed Mme. Verdurin.

"What are you to say of a scientist like that?" she asked Forcheville.
"You can't talk seriously to him for two minutes on end. Is that the
sort of thing you tell them at your hospital?" she went on, turning to
the Doctor. "They must have some pretty lively times there, if that's
the case. I can see that I shall have to get taken in as a patient!"

"I think I heard the Doctor speak of that wicked old humbug, Blanche of
Castile, if I may so express myself. Am I not right, Madame?" Brichot
appealed to Mme. Verdurin, who, swooning with merriment, her eyes
tightly closed, had buried her face in her two hands, from between
which, now and then, escaped a muffled scream.

"Good gracious, Madame, I would not dream of shocking the
reverent-minded, if there are any such around this table, _sub rosa_...
I recognise, moreover, that our ineffable and Athenian--oh, how
infinitely Athenian--Republic is capable of honouring, in the person of
that obscurantist old she-Capet, the first of our chiefs of police. Yes,
indeed, my dear host, yes, indeed!" he repeated in his ringing voice,
which sounded a separate note for each syllable, in reply to a protest
by M. Verdurin. "The Chronicle of Saint Denis, and the authenticity of
its information is beyond question, leaves us no room for doubt on that
point. No one could be more fitly chosen as Patron by a secularising
proletariat than that mother of a Saint, who let him see some pretty
fishy saints besides, as Suger says, and other great St. Bernards of the
sort; for with her it was a case of taking just what you pleased."

"Who is that gentleman?" Forcheville asked Mme. Verdurin. "He seems to
speak with great authority."

"What! Do you mean to say you don't know the famous Brichot? Why, he's
celebrated all over Europe."

"Oh, that's Bréchot, is it?" exclaimed Forcheville, who had not quite
caught the name. "You must tell me all about him"; he went on, fastening
a pair of goggle eyes on the celebrity. "It's always interesting to
meet well-known people at dinner. But, I say, you ask us to very select
parties here. No dull evenings in this house, I'm sure."

"Well, you know what it is really," said Mme. Verdurin modestly.
"They feel safe here. They can talk about whatever they like, and the
conversation goes off like fireworks. Now Brichot, this evening, is
nothing. I've seen him, don't you know, when he's been with me, simply
dazzling; you'd want to go on your knees to him. Well, with anyone else
he's not the same man, he's not in the least witty, you have to drag the
words out of him, he's even boring."

"That's strange," remarked Forcheville with fitting astonishment.

A sort of wit like Brichot's would have been regarded as out-and-out
stupidity by the people among whom Swann had spent his early life,
for all that it is quite compatible with real intelligence. And the
intelligence of the Professor's vigorous and well-nourished brain might
easily have been envied by many of the people in society who seemed
witty enough to Swann. But these last had so thoroughly inculcated into
him their likes and dislikes, at least in everything that pertained
to their ordinary social existence, including that annex to social
existence which belongs, strictly speaking, to the domain of
intelligence, namely, conversation, that Swann could not see anything
in Brichot's pleasantries; to him they were merely pedantic, vulgar,
and disgustingly coarse. He was shocked, too, being accustomed to
good manners, by the rude, almost barrack-room tone which this
student-in-arms adopted, no matter to whom he was speaking. Finally,
perhaps, he had lost all patience that evening as he watched Mme.
Verdurin welcoming, with such unnecessary warmth, this Forcheville
fellow, whom it had been Odette's unaccountable idea to bring to the
house. Feeling a little awkward, with Swann there also, she had asked
him on her arrival: "What do you think of my guest?"

And he, suddenly realising for the first time that Forcheville, whom
he had known for years, could actually attract a woman, and was quite a
good specimen of a man, had retorted: "Beastly!" He had, certainly,
no idea of being jealous of Odette, but did not feel quite so happy as
usual, and when Brichot, having begun to tell them the story of Blanche
of Castile's mother, who, according to him, "had been with Henry
Plantagenet for years before they were married," tried to prompt Swann
to beg him to continue the story, by interjecting "Isn't that so, M.
Swann?" in the martial accents which one uses in order to get down to
the level of an unintelligent rustic or to put the 'fear of God' into
a trooper, Swann cut his story short, to the intense fury of their
hostess, by begging to be excused for taking so little interest in
Blanche of Castile, as he had something that he wished to ask the
painter. He, it appeared, had been that afternoon to an exhibition of
the work of another artist, also a friend of Mme. Verdurin, who had
recently died, and Swann wished to find out from him (for he valued
his discrimination) whether there had really been anything more in this
later work than the virtuosity which had struck people so forcibly in
his earlier exhibitions.

"From that point of view it was extraordinary, but it did not seem to me
to be a form of art which you could call 'elevated,'" said Swann with a
smile.

"Elevated... to the height of an Institute!" interrupted Cottard,
raising his arms with mock solemnity. The whole table burst out
laughing.

"What did I tell you?" said Mme. Verdurin to Forcheville. "It's simply
impossible to be serious with him. When you least expect it, out he
comes with a joke."

But she observed that Swann, and Swann alone, had not unbent. For one
thing he was none too well pleased with Cottard for having secured a
laugh at his expense in front of Forcheville. But the painter, instead
of replying in a way that might have interested Swann, as he would
probably have done had they been alone together, preferred to win the
easy admiration of the rest by exercising his wit upon the talent of
their dead friend.

"I went up to one of them," he began, "just to see how it was done; I
stuck my nose into it. Yes, I don't think! Impossible to say whether
it was done with glue, with soap, with sealing-wax, with sunshine, with
leaven, with excrem..."

"And one make twelve!" shouted the Doctor, wittily, but just too late,
for no one saw the point of his interruption.

"It looks as though it were done with nothing at all," resumed the
painter. "No more chance of discovering the trick than there is in the
'Night Watch,' or the 'Regents,' and it's even bigger work than either
Rembrandt or Hals ever did. It's all there,--and yet, no, I'll take my
oath it isn't."

Then, just as singers who have reached the highest note in their
compass, proceed to hum the rest of the air in falsetto, he had to be
satisfied with murmuring, smiling the while, as if, after all, there had
been something irresistibly amusing in the sheer beauty of the painting:
"It smells all right; it makes your head go round; it catches your
breath; you feel ticklish all over--and not the faintest clue to how
it's done. The man's a sorcerer; the thing's a conjuring-trick, it's
a miracle," bursting outright into laughter, "it's dishonest!" Then
stopping, solemnly raising his head, pitching his voice on a double-bass
note which he struggled to bring into harmony, he concluded, "And it's
so loyal!"

Except at the moment when he had called it "bigger than the 'Night
Watch,'" a blasphemy which had called forth an instant protest from Mme.
Verdurin, who regarded the 'Night Watch' as the supreme masterpiece of
the universe (conjointly with the 'Ninth' and the 'Samothrace'), and at
the word "excrement," which had made Forcheville throw a sweeping glance
round the table to see whether it was 'all right,' before he allowed his
lips to curve in a prudish and conciliatory smile, all the party
(save Swann) had kept their fascinated and adoring eyes fixed upon the
painter.

"I do so love him when he goes up in the air like that!" cried
Mme. Verdurin, the moment that he had finished, enraptured that the
table-talk should have proved so entertaining on the very night that
Forcheville was dining with them for the first time. "Hallo, you!" she
turned to her husband, "what's the matter with you, sitting there gaping
like a great animal? You know, though, don't you," she apologised
for him to the painter, "that he can talk quite well when he chooses;
anybody would think it was the first time he had ever listened to you.
If you had only seen him while you were speaking; he was just drinking
it all in. And to-morrow he will tell us everything you said, without
missing a word."

"No, really, I'm not joking!" protested the painter, enchanted by the
success of his speech. "You all look as if you thought I was pulling
your legs, that it was just a trick. I'll take you to see the show, and
then you can say whether I've been exaggerating; I'll bet you anything
you like, you'll come away more 'up in the air' than I am!"

"But we don't suppose for a moment that you're exaggerating; we only
want you to go on with your dinner, and my husband too. Give M. Biche
some more sole, can't you see his has got cold? We're not in any hurry;
you're dashing round as if the house was on fire. Wait a little; don't
serve the salad just yet."

Mme. Cottard, who was a shy woman and spoke but seldom, was not lacking,
for all that, in self-assurance when a happy inspiration put the right
word in her mouth. She felt that it would be well received; the thought
gave her confidence, and what she was doing was done with the object not
so much of shining herself, as of helping her husband on in his career.
And so she did not allow the word 'salad,' which Mme. Verdurin had just
uttered, to pass unchallenged.

"It's not a Japanese salad, is it?" she whispered, turning towards
Odette.

And then, in her joy and confusion at the combination of neatness
and daring which there had been in making so discreet and yet so
unmistakable an allusion to the new and brilliantly successful play by
Dumas, she broke down in a charming, girlish laugh, not very loud, but
so irresistible that it was some time before she could control it.

"Who is that lady? She seems devilish clever," said Forcheville.

"No, it is not. But we will have one for you if you will all come to
dinner on Friday."

"You will think me dreadfully provincial, sir," said Mme. Cottard to
Swann, "but, do you know, I haven't been yet to this famous _Francillon_
that everybody's talking about. The Doctor has been (I remember now,
he told me what a very great pleasure it had been to him to spend the
evening with you there) and I must confess, I don't see much sense in
spending money on seats for him to take me, when he's seen the play
already. Of course an evening at the Théâtre-Français is never wasted,
really; the acting's so good there always; but we have some very nice
friends," (Mme. Cottard would hardly ever utter a proper name, but
restricted herself to "some friends of ours" or "one of my friends," as
being more 'distinguished,' speaking in an affected tone and with all
the importance of a person who need give names only when she chooses)
"who often have a box, and are kind enough to take us to all the
new pieces that are worth going to, and so I'm certain to see this
_Francillon_ sooner or later, and then I shall know what to think. But I
do feel such a fool about it, I must confess, for, whenever I pay a
call anywhere, I find everybody talking--it's only natural--about that
wretched Japanese salad. Really and truly, one's beginning to get just a
little tired of hearing about it," she went on, seeing that Swann seemed
less interested than she had hoped in so burning a topic. "I must admit,
though, that it's sometimes quite amusing, the way they joke about it:
I've got a friend, now, who is most original, though she's really a
beautiful woman, most popular in society, goes everywhere, and she tells
me that she got her cook to make one of these Japanese salads, putting
in everything that young M. Dumas says you're to put in, in the play.
Then she asked just a few friends to come and taste it. I was not among
the favoured few, I'm sorry to say. But she told us all about it on her
next 'day'; it seems it was quite horrible, she made us all laugh
till we cried. I don't know; perhaps it was the way she told it," Mme.
Cottard added doubtfully, seeing that Swann still looked grave.

And, imagining that it was, perhaps, because he had not been amused by
_Francillon_: "Well, I daresay I shall be disappointed with it, after
all. I don't suppose it's as good as the piece Mme. de Crécy worships,
_Serge Panine_. There's a play, if you like; so deep, makes you
think! But just fancy giving a receipt for a salad on the stage of the
Théâtre-Français! Now, _Serge Panine_--! But then, it's like everything
that comes from the pen of M. Georges Ohnet, it's so well written. I
wonder if you know the _Maître des Forges_, which I like even better
than _Serge Panine_."

"Pardon me," said Swann with polite irony, "but I can assure you that
my want of admiration is almost equally divided between those
masterpieces."

"Really, now; that's very interesting. And what don't you like about
them? Won't you ever change your mind? Perhaps you think he's a little
too sad. Well, well, what I always say is, one should never argue about
plays or novels. Everyone has his own way of looking at things, and what
may be horrible to you is, perhaps, just what I like best."

She was interrupted by Forcheville's addressing Swann. What had happened
was that, while Mme. Cottard was discussing _Francillon_, Forcheville
had been expressing to Mme. Verdurin his admiration for what he called
the "little speech" of the painter. "Your friend has such a flow of
language, such a memory!" he had said to her when the painter had
come to a standstill, "I've seldom seen anything like it. He'd make a
first-rate preacher. By Jove, I wish I was like that. What with him and
M. Bréchot you've drawn two lucky numbers to-night; though I'm not so
sure that, simply as a speaker, this one doesn't knock spots off the
Professor. It comes more naturally with him, less like reading from a
book. Of course, the way he goes on, he does use some words that are
a bit realistic, and all that; but that's quite the thing nowadays;
anyhow, it's not often I've seen a man hold the floor as cleverly as
that, 'hold the spittoon,' as we used to say in the regiment, where, by
the way, we had a man he rather reminds me of. You could take anything
you liked--I don't know what--this glass, say; and he'd talk away about
it for hours; no, not this glass; that's a silly thing to say, I'm
sorry; but something a little bigger, like the battle of Waterloo, or
anything of that sort, he'd tell you things you simply wouldn't believe.
Why, Swann was in the regiment then; he must have known him."

"Do you see much of M. Swann?" asked Mme. Verdurin.

"Oh dear, no!" he answered, and then, thinking that if he made himself
pleasant to Swann he might find favour with Odette, he decided to
take this opportunity of flattering him by speaking of his fashionable
friends, but speaking as a man of the world himself, in a tone of
good-natured criticism, and not as though he were congratulating Swann
upon some undeserved good fortune: "Isn't that so, Swann? I never see
anything of you, do I?--But then, where on earth is one to see him? The
creature spends all his time shut up with the La Trémoïlles, with the
Laumes and all that lot!" The imputation would have been false at any
time, and was all the more so, now that for at least a year Swann had
given up going to almost any house but the Verdurins'. But the mere
names of families whom the Verdurins did not know were received by them
in a reproachful silence. M. Verdurin, dreading the painful impression
which the mention of these 'bores,' especially when flung at her in this
tactless fashion, and in front of all the 'faithful,' was bound to
make on his wife, cast a covert glance at her, instinct with anxious
solicitude. He saw then that in her fixed resolution to take no notice,
to have escaped contact, altogether, with the news which had just been
addressed to her, not merely to remain dumb but to have been deaf
as well, as we pretend to be when a friend who has been in the wrong
attempts to slip into his conversation some excuse which we should
appear to be accepting, should we appear to have heard it without
protesting, or when some one utters the name of an enemy, the very
mention of whom in our presence is forbidden; Mme. Verdurin, so that
her silence should have the appearance, not of consent but of the
unconscious silence which inanimate objects preserve, had suddenly
emptied her face of all life, of all mobility; her rounded forehead was
nothing, now, but an exquisite study in high relief, which the name of
those La Trémoïlles, with whom Swann was always 'shut up,' had failed
to penetrate; her nose, just perceptibly wrinkled in a frown, exposed to
view two dark cavities that were, surely, modelled from life. You would
have said that her half-opened lips were just about to speak. It was
all no more, however, than a wax cast, a mask in plaster, the sculptor's
design for a monument, a bust to be exhibited in the Palace of Industry,
where the public would most certainly gather in front of it and marvel
to see how the sculptor, in expressing the unchallengeable dignity of
the Verdurins, as opposed to that of the La Trémoïlles or Laumes, whose
equals (if not, indeed, their betters) they were, and the equals and
betters of all other 'bores' upon the face of the earth, had managed to
invest with a majesty that was almost Papal the whiteness and rigidity
of his stone. But the marble at last grew animated and let it be
understood that it didn't do to be at all squeamish if one went to that
house, since the woman was always tipsy and the husband so uneducated
that he called a corridor a 'collidor'!

"You'd need to pay me a lot of money before I'd let any of that lot set
foot inside my house," Mme. Verdurin concluded, gazing imperially down
on Swann.

She could scarcely have expected him to capitulate so completely as to
echo the holy simplicity of the pianist's aunt, who at once exclaimed:
"To think of that, now! What surprises me is that they can get anybody
to go near them; I'm sure I should be afraid; one can't be too careful.
How can people be so common as to go running after them?"

But he might, at least, have replied, like Forcheville: "Gad, she's a
duchess; there are still plenty of people who are impressed by that sort
of thing," which would at least have permitted Mme. Verdurin the final
retort, "And a lot of good may it do them!" Instead of which, Swann
merely smiled, in a manner which shewed, quite clearly, that he could
not, of course, take such an absurd suggestion seriously. M. Verdurin,
who was still casting furtive and intermittent glances at his wife,
could see with regret, and could understand only too well that she was
now inflamed with the passion of a Grand Inquisitor who cannot succeed
in stamping out a heresy; and so, in the hope of bringing Swann round
to a retractation (for the courage of one's opinions is always a form of
calculating cowardice in the eyes of the 'other side'), he broke in:

"Tell us frankly, now, what you think of them yourself. We shan't repeat
it to them, you may be sure."

To which Swann answered: "Why, I'm not in the least afraid of the
Duchess (if it is of the La Trémoïlles that you're speaking). I can
assure you that everyone likes going to see her. I don't go so far as
to say that she's at all 'deep'--" he pronounced the word as if it meant
something ridiculous, for his speech kept the traces of certain mental
habits which the recent change in his life, a rejuvenation illustrated
by his passion for music, had inclined him temporarily to discard,
so that at times he would actually state his views with considerable
warmth--"but I am quite sincere when I say that she is intelligent,
while her husband is positively a bookworm. They are charming people."

His explanation was terribly effective; Mme. Verdurin now realised that
this one state of unbelief would prevent her 'little nucleus' from ever
attaining to complete unanimity, and was unable to restrain herself, in
her fury at the obstinacy of this wretch who could not see what anguish
his words were causing her, but cried aloud, from the depths of her
tortured heart, "You may think so if you wish, but at least you need not
say so to us."

"It all depends upon what you call intelligence." Forcheville felt that
it was his turn to be brilliant. "Come now, Swann, tell us what you mean
by intelligence."

"There," cried Odette, "that's one of the big things I beg him to tell
me about, and he never will."

"Oh, but..." protested Swann.

"Oh, but nonsense!" said Odette.

"A water-butt?" asked the Doctor.

"To you," pursued Forcheville, "does intelligence mean what they call
clever talk; you know, the sort of people who worm their way into
society?"

"Finish your sweet, so that they can take your plate away!" said Mme.
Verdurin sourly to Saniette, who was lost in thought and had stopped
eating. And then, perhaps a little ashamed of her rudeness, "It doesn't
matter; take your time about it; there's no hurry; I only reminded you
because of the others, you know; it keeps the servants back."

"There is," began Brichot, with a resonant smack upon every syllable, "a
rather curious definition of intelligence by that pleasing old anarchist
Fénelon..."

"Just listen to this!" Mme. Verdurin rallied Forcheville and the Doctor.
"He's going to give us Fénelon's definition of intelligence. That's
interesting. It's not often you get a chance of hearing that!"

But Brichot was keeping Fénelon's definition until Swann should
have given his own. Swann remained silent, and, by this fresh act of
recreancy, spoiled the brilliant tournament of dialectic which Mme.
Verdurin was rejoicing at being able to offer to Forcheville.

"You see, it's just the same as with me!" Odette was peevish. "I'm not
at all sorry to see that I'm not the only one he doesn't find quite up
to his level."

"These de La Trémouailles whom Mme. Verdurin has exhibited to us as so
little to be desired," inquired Brichot, articulating vigorously, "are
they, by any chance, descended from the couple whom that worthy old
snob, Sévigné, said she was delighted to know, because it was so good
for her peasants? True, the Marquise had another reason, which in her
case probably came first, for she was a thorough journalist at heart,
and always on the look-out for 'copy.' And, in the journal which she
used to send regularly to her daughter, it was Mme. de La Trémouaille,
kept well-informed through all her grand connections, who supplied the
foreign politics."

"Oh dear, no. I'm quite sure they aren't the same family," said Mme.
Verdurin desperately.

Saniette who, ever since he had surrendered his untouched plate to the
butler, had been plunged once more in silent meditation, emerged finally
to tell them, with a nervous laugh, a story of how he had once dined
with the Duc de La Trémoïlle, the point of which was that the Duke
did not know that George Sand was the pseudonym of a woman. Swann,
who really liked Saniette, felt bound to supply him with a few facts
illustrative of the Duke's culture, which would prove that such
ignorance on his part was literally impossible; but suddenly he stopped
short; he had realised, as he was speaking, that Saniette needed no
proof, but knew already that the story was untrue for the simple reason
that he had at that moment invented it. The worthy man suffered acutely
from the Verdurins' always finding him so dull; and as he was conscious
of having been more than ordinarily morose this evening, he had made up
his mind that he would succeed in being amusing, at least once, before
the end of dinner. He surrendered so quickly, looked so wretched at the
sight of his castle in ruins, and replied in so craven a tone to Swann,
appealing to him not to persist in a refutation which was already
superfluous, "All right; all right; anyhow, even if I have made a
mistake that's not a crime, I hope," that Swann longed to be able
to console him by insisting that the story was indubitably true and
exquisitely funny. The Doctor, who had been listening, had an idea that
it was the right moment to interject "_Se non è vero_," but he was not
quite certain of the words, and was afraid of being caught out.

After dinner, Forcheville went up to the Doctor. "She can't have been
at all bad looking, Mme. Verdurin; anyhow, she's a woman you can really
talk to; that's all I want. Of course she's getting a bit broad in the
beam. But Mme. de Crécy! There's a little woman who knows what's what,
all right. Upon my word and soul, you can see at a glance she's got
the American eye, that girl has. We are speaking of Mme. de Crécy," he
explained, as M. Verdurin joined them, his pipe in his mouth. "I should
say that, as a specimen of the female form--"

"I'd rather have it in my bed than a clap of thunder!" the words came
tumbling from Cottard, who had for some time been waiting in vain until
Forcheville should pause for breath, so that he might get in his hoary
old joke, a chance for which might not, he feared, come again, if the
conversation should take a different turn; and he produced it now with
that excessive spontaneity and confidence which may often be noticed
attempting to cover up the coldness, and the slight flutter of emotion,
inseparable from a prepared recitation. Forcheville knew and saw the
joke, and was thoroughly amused. As for M. Verdurin, he was unsparing
of his merriment, having recently discovered a way of expressing it by
a symbol, different from his wife's, but equally simple and obvious.
Scarcely had he begun the movement of head and shoulders of a man
who was 'shaking with laughter' than he would begin also to cough, as
though, in laughing too violently, he had swallowed a mouthful of smoke
from his pipe. And by keeping the pipe firmly in his mouth he could
prolong indefinitely the dumb-show of suffocation and hilarity. So he
and Mme. Verdurin (who, at the other side of the room, where the painter
was telling her a story, was shutting her eyes preparatory to flinging
her face into her hands) resembled two masks in a theatre, each
representing Comedy, but in a different way.

M. Verdurin had been wiser than he knew in not taking his pipe out of
his mouth, for Cottard, having occasion to leave the room for a moment,
murmured a witty euphemism which he had recently acquired and repeated
now whenever he had to go to the place in question: "I must just go and
see the Duc d'Aumale for a minute," so drolly, that M. Verdurin's cough
began all over again.

"Now, then, take your pipe out of your mouth; can't you see, you'll
choke if you try to bottle up your laughter like that," counselled Mme.
Verdurin, as she came round with a tray of liqueurs.

"What a delightful man your husband is; he has the wit of a dozen!"
declared Forcheville to Mme. Cottard. "Thank you, thank you, an old
soldier like me can never say 'No' to a drink."

"M. de Forcheville thinks Odette charming," M. Verdurin told his wife.

"Why, do you know, she wants so much to meet you again some day at
luncheon. We must arrange it, but don't on any account let Swann hear
about it. He spoils everything, don't you know. I don't mean to say that
you're not to come to dinner too, of course; we hope to see you very
often. Now that the warm weather's coming, we're going to have dinner
out of doors whenever we can. That won't bore you, will it, a quiet
little dinner, now and then, in the Bois? Splendid, splendid, that will
be quite delightful....

"Aren't you going to do any work this evening, I say?" she screamed
suddenly to the little pianist, seeing an opportunity for displaying,
before a 'newcomer' of Forcheville's importance, at once her unfailing
wit and her despotic power over the 'faithful.'

"M. de Forcheville was just going to say something dreadful about you,"
Mme. Cottard warned her husband as he reappeared in the room. And he,
still following up the idea of Forcheville's noble birth, which had
obsessed him all through dinner, began again with: "I am treating a
Baroness just now, Baroness Putbus; weren't there some Putbuses in the
Crusades? Anyhow they've got a lake in Pomerania that's ten times the
size of the Place de la Concorde. I am treating her for dry arthritis;
she's a charming woman. Mme. Verdurin knows her too, I believe."

Which enabled Forcheville, a moment later, finding himself alone with
Mme. Cottard, to complete his favourable verdict on her husband with:
"He's an interesting man, too; you can see that he knows some good
people. Gad! but they get to know a lot of things, those doctors."

"D'you want me to play the phrase from the sonata for M. Swann?" asked
the pianist.

"What the devil's that? Not the sonata-snake, I hope!" shouted M. de
Forcheville, hoping to create an effect. But Dr. Cottard, who had
never heard this pun, missed the point of it, and imagined that M. de
Forcheville had made a mistake. He dashed in boldly to correct it: "No,
no. The word isn't _serpent-à-sonates_, it's _serpent-à-sonnettes_!" he
explained in a tone at once zealous, impatient, and triumphant.

Forcheville explained the joke to him. The Doctor blushed.

"You'll admit it's not bad, eh, Doctor?"

"Oh! I've known it for ages."

Then they were silenced; heralded by the waving tremolo of the
violin-part, which formed a bristling bodyguard of sound two octaves
above it--and as in a mountainous country, against the seeming
immobility of a vertically falling torrent, one may distinguish, two
hundred feet below, the tiny form of a woman walking in the valley--the
little phrase had just appeared, distant but graceful, protected by
the long, gradual unfurling of its transparent, incessant and sonorous
curtain. And Swann, in his heart of hearts, turned to it, spoke to it as
to a confidant in the secret of his love, as to a friend of Odette who
would assure him that he need pay no attention to this Forcheville.

"Ah! you've come too late!" Mme. Verdurin greeted one of the 'faithful,'
whose invitation had been only 'to look in after dinner,' "we've been
having a simply incomparable Brichot! You never heard such eloquence!
But he's gone. Isn't that so, M. Swann? I believe it's the first time
you've met him," she went on, to emphasize the fact that it was to her
that Swann owed the introduction. "Isn't that so; wasn't he delicious,
our Brichot?"

Swann bowed politely.

"No? You weren't interested?" she asked dryly.

"Oh, but I assure you, I was quite enthralled. He is perhaps a little
too peremptory, a little too jovial for my taste. I should like to see
him a little less confident at times, a little more tolerant, but one
feels that he knows a great deal, and on the whole he seems a very sound
fellow."

The party broke up very late. Cottard's first words to his wife were: "I
have rarely seen Mme. Verdurin in such form as she was to-night."

"What exactly is your Mme. Verdurin? A bit of a bad hat, eh?" said
Forcheville to the painter, to whom he had offered a 'lift.' Odette
watched his departure with regret; she dared not refuse to let Swann
take her home, but she was moody and irritable in the carriage, and,
when he asked whether he might come in, replied, "I suppose so," with an
impatient shrug of her shoulders. When they had all gone, Mme. Verdurin
said to her husband: "Did you notice the way Swann laughed, such an
idiotic laugh, when we spoke about Mme. La Trémoïlle?"

She had remarked, more than once, how Swann and Forcheville suppressed
the particle 'de' before that lady's name. Never doubting that it was
done on purpose, to shew that they were not afraid of a title, she had
made up her mind to imitate their arrogance, but had not quite
grasped what grammatical form it ought to take. Moreover, the natural
corruptness of her speech overcoming her implacable republicanism,
she still said instinctively "the de La Trémoïlles," or, rather (by
an abbreviation sanctified by the usage of music-hall singers and the
writers of the 'captions' beneath caricatures, who elide the 'de'),
"the d'La Trémoïlles," but she corrected herself at once to "Madame La
Trémoïlle.--The _Duchess_, as Swann calls her," she added ironically,
with a smile which proved that she was merely quoting, and would not,
herself, accept the least responsibility for a classification so puerile
and absurd.

"I don't mind saying that I thought him extremely stupid."

M. Verdurin took it up. "He's not sincere. He's a crafty customer,
always hovering between one side and the other. He's always trying to
run with the hare and hunt with the hounds. What a difference between
him and Forcheville. There, at least, you have a man who tells you
straight out what he thinks. Either you agree with him or you don't.
Not like the other fellow, who's never definitely fish or fowl. Did you
notice, by the way, that Odette seemed all out for Forcheville, and I
don't blame her, either. And then, after all, if Swann tries to come
the man of fashion over us, the champion of distressed Duchesses, at any
rate the other man has got a title; he's always Comte de Forcheville!"
he let the words slip delicately from his lips, as though, familiar with
every page of the history of that dignity, he were making a scrupulously
exact estimate of its value, in relation to others of the sort.

"I don't mind saying," Mme. Verdurin went on, "that he saw fit to utter
some most venomous, and quite absurd insinuations against Brichot.
Naturally, once he saw that Brichot was popular in this house, it was a
way of hitting back at us, of spoiling our party. I know his sort, the
dear, good friend of the family, who pulls you all to pieces on the
stairs as he's going away."

"Didn't I say so?" retorted her husband. "He's simply a failure; a poor
little wretch who goes through life mad with jealousy of anything that's
at all big."

Had the truth been known, there was not one of the 'faithful' who was
not infinitely more malicious than Swann; but the others would all take
the precaution of tempering their malice with obvious pleasantries, with
little sparks of emotion and cordiality; while the least indication of
reserve on Swann's part, undraped in any such conventional formula
as "Of course, I don't want to say anything--" to which he would have
scorned to descend, appeared to them a deliberate act of treachery.
There are certain original and distinguished authors in whom the least
'freedom of speech' is thought revolting because they have not begun
by flattering the public taste, and serving up to it the commonplace
expressions to which it is used; it was by the same process that Swann
infuriated M. Verdurin. In his case as in theirs it was the novelty
of his language which led his audience to suspect the blackness of his
designs.

Swann was still unconscious of the disgrace that threatened him at the
Verdurins', and continued to regard all their absurdities in the most
rosy light, through the admiring eyes of love.

As a rule he made no appointments with Odette except for the evenings;
he was afraid of her growing tired of him if he visited her during the
day as well; at the same time he was reluctant to forfeit, even for
an hour, the place that he held in her thoughts, and so was constantly
looking out for an opportunity of claiming her attention, in any way
that would not be displeasing to her. If, in a florist's or a jeweller's
window, a plant or an ornament caught his eye, he would at once think
of sending them to Odette, imagining that the pleasure which the casual
sight of them had given him would instinctively be felt, also, by her,
and would increase her affection for himself; and he would order them to
be taken at once to the Rue La pérouse, so as to accelerate the moment
in which, as she received an offering from him, he might feel himself,
in a sense, transported into her presence. He was particularly anxious,
always, that she should receive these presents before she went out
for the evening, so that her sense of gratitude towards him might give
additional tenderness to her welcome when he arrived at the Verdurins',
might even--for all he knew--if the shopkeeper made haste, bring him a
letter from her before dinner, or herself, in person, upon his doorstep,
come on a little extraordinary visit of thanks. As in an earlier phase,
when he had experimented with the reflex action of anger and contempt
upon her character, he sought now by that of gratification to elicit
from her fresh particles of her intimate feelings, which she had never
yet revealed.

Often she was embarrassed by lack of money, and under pressure from
a creditor would come to him for assistance. He enjoyed this, as he
enjoyed everything which could impress Odette with his love for herself,
or merely with his influence, with the extent of the use that she might
make of him. Probably if anyone had said to him, at the beginning, "It's
your position that attracts her," or at this stage, "It's your money
that she's really in love with," he would not have believed the
suggestion, nor would he have been greatly distressed by the thought
that people supposed her to be attached to him, that people felt them
to be united by any ties so binding as those of snobbishness or wealth.
But even if he had accepted the possibility, it might not have caused
him any suffering to discover that Odette's love for him was based on a
foundation more lasting than mere affection, or any attractive qualities
which she might have found in him; on a sound, commercial interest; an
interest which would postpone for ever the fatal day on which she might
be tempted to bring their relations to an end. For the moment, while
he lavished presents upon her, and performed all manner of services,
he could rely on advantages not contained in his person, or in his
intellect, could forego the endless, killing effort to make himself
attractive. And this delight in being a lover, in living by love alone,
of the reality of which he was inclined to be doubtful, the price which,
in the long run, he must pay for it, as a dilettante in immaterial
sensations, enhanced its value in his eyes--as one sees people who are
doubtful whether the sight of the sea and the sound of its waves are
really enjoyable, become convinced that they are, as also of the rare
quality and absolute detachment of their own taste, when they have
agreed to pay several pounds a day for a room in an hotel, from which
that sight and that sound may be enjoyed.

One day, when reflections of this order had brought him once again to
the memory of the time when some one had spoken to him of Odette as of
a 'kept' woman, and when, once again, he had amused himself with
contrasting that strange personification, the 'kept' woman--an
iridescent mixture of unknown and demoniacal qualities, embroidered,
as in some fantasy of Gustave Moreau, with poison-dripping flowers,
interwoven with precious jewels--with that Odette upon whose face he
had watched the passage of the same expressions of pity for a sufferer,
resentment of an act of injustice, gratitude for an act of kindness,
which he had seen, in earlier days, on his own mother's face, and on
the faces of friends; that Odette, whose conversation had so frequently
turned on the things that he himself knew better than anyone, his
collections, his room, his old servant, his banker, who kept all his
title-deeds and bonds;--the thought of the banker reminded him that he
must call on him shortly, to draw some money. And indeed, if, during the
current month, he were to come less liberally to the aid of Odette in
her financial difficulties than in the month before, when he had given
her five thousand francs, if he refrained from offering her a diamond
necklace for which she longed, he would be allowing her admiration for
his generosity to decline, that gratitude which had made him so happy,
and would even be running the risk of her imagining that his love
for her (as she saw its visible manifestations grow fewer) had itself
diminished. And then, suddenly, he asked himself whether that was not
precisely what was implied by 'keeping' a woman (as if, in fact, that
idea of 'keeping' could be derived from elements not at all mysterious
nor perverse, but belonging to the intimate routine of his daily life,
such as that thousand-franc note, a familiar and domestic object, torn
in places and mended with gummed paper, which his valet, after paying
the household accounts and the rent, had locked up in a drawer in
the old writing-desk whence he had extracted it to send it, with four
others, to Odette) and whether it was not possible to apply to Odette,
since he had known her (for he never imagined for a moment that she
could ever have taken a penny from anyone else, before), that title,
which he had believed so wholly inapplicable to her, of 'kept' woman. He
could not explore the idea further, for a sudden access of that mental
lethargy which was, with him, congenital, intermittent and providential,
happened, at that moment, to extinguish every particle of light in his
brain, as instantaneously as, at a later period, when electric lighting
had been everywhere installed, it became possible, merely by fingering
a switch, to cut off all the supply of light from a house. His mind
fumbled, for a moment, in the darkness, he took off his spectacles,
wiped the glasses, passed his hands over his eyes, but saw no light
until he found himself face to face with a wholly different idea, the
realisation that he must endeavour, in the coming month, to send Odette
six or seven thousand-franc notes instead of five, simply as a surprise
for her and to give her pleasure.

In the evening, when he did not stay at home until it was time to meet
Odette at the Verdurins', or rather at one of the open-air restaurants
which they liked to frequent in the Bois and especially at Saint-Cloud,
he would go to dine in one of those fashionable houses in which, at one
time, he had been a constant guest. He did not wish to lose touch with
people who, for all that he knew, might be of use, some day, to Odette,
and thanks to whom he was often, in the meantime, able to procure for
her some privilege or pleasure. Besides, he had been used for so long to
the refinement and comfort of good society that, side by side with his
contempt, there had grown up also a desperate need for it, with the
result that, when he had reached the point after which the humblest
lodgings appeared to him as precisely on a par with the most princely
mansions, his senses were so thoroughly accustomed to the latter that he
could not enter the former without a feeling of acute discomfort. He
had the same regard--to a degree of identity which they would never have
suspected--for the little families with small incomes who asked him to
dances in their flats ("straight upstairs to the fifth floor, and the
door on the left") as for the Princesse de Parme, who gave the most
splendid parties in Paris; but he had not the feeling of being actually
'at the ball' when he found himself herded with the fathers of families
in the bedroom of the lady of the house, while the spectacle of
wash-hand-stands covered over with towels, and of beds converted into
cloak-rooms, with a mass of hats and great-coats sprawling over their
counterpanes, gave him the same stifling sensation that, nowadays,
people who have been used for half a lifetime to electric light derive
from a smoking lamp or a candle that needs to be snuffed. If he were
dining out, he would order his carriage for half-past seven; while he
changed his clothes, he would be wondering, all the time, about Odette,
and in this way was never alone, for the constant thought of Odette
gave to the moments in which he was separated from her the same peculiar
charm as to those in which she was at his side. He would get into his
carriage and drive off, but he knew that this thought had jumped in
after him and had settled down upon his knee, like a pet animal which
he might take everywhere, and would keep with him at the dinner-table,
unobserved by his fellow-guests. He would stroke and fondle it, warm
himself with it, and, as a feeling of languor swept over him, would
give way to a slight shuddering movement which contracted his throat
and nostrils--a new experience, this,--as he fastened the bunch of
columbines in his buttonhole. He had for some time been feeling neither
well nor happy, especially since Odette had brought Forcheville to the
Verdurins', and he would have liked to go away for a while to rest in
the country. But he could never summon up courage to leave Paris, even
for a day, while Odette was there. The weather was warm; it was the
finest part of the spring. And for all that he was driving through a
city of stone to immure himself in a house without grass or garden, what
was incessantly before his eyes was a park which he owned, near Combray,
where, at four in the afternoon, before coming to the asparagus-bed,
thanks to the breeze that was wafted across the fields from Méséglise,
he could enjoy the fragrant coolness of the air as well beneath an
arbour of hornbeams in the garden as by the bank of the pond, fringed
with forget-me-not and iris; and where, when he sat down to dinner,
trained and twined by the gardener's skilful hand, there ran all about
his table currant-bush and rose.

After dinner, if he had an early appointment in the Bois or at
Saint-Cloud, he would rise from table and leave the house so
abruptly--especially if it threatened to rain, and so to scatter the
'faithful' before their normal time--that on one occasion the Princesse
des Laumes (at whose house dinner had been so late that Swann had left
before the coffee came in, to join the Verdurins on the Island in the
Bois) observed:

"Really, if Swann were thirty years older, and had diabetes, there might
be some excuse for his running away like that. He seems to look upon us
all as a joke."

He persuaded himself that the spring-time charm, which he could not go
down to Combray to enjoy, he would find at least on the Ile des Cygnes
or at Saint-Cloud. But as he could think only of Odette, he would
return home not knowing even if he had tasted the fragrance of the young
leaves, or if the moon had been shining. He would be welcomed by the
little phrase from the sonata, played in the garden on the restaurant
piano. If there was none in the garden, the Verdurins would have taken
immense pains to have a piano brought out either from a private room
or from the restaurant itself; not because Swann was now restored to
favour; far from it. But the idea of arranging an ingenious form of
entertainment for some one, even for some one whom they disliked, would
stimulate them, during the time spent in its preparation, to a momentary
sense of cordiality and affection. Now and then he would remind himself
that another fine spring evening was drawing to a close, and would force
himself to notice the trees and the sky. But the state of excitement
into which Odette's presence never failed to throw him, added to a
feverish ailment which, for some time now, had scarcely left him,
robbed him of that sense of quiet and comfort which is an indispensable
background to the impressions that we derive from nature.

One evening, when Swann had consented to dine with the Verdurins, and
had mentioned during dinner that he had to attend, next day, the annual
banquet of an old comrades' association, Odette had at once exclaimed
across the table, in front of everyone, in front of Forcheville, who was
now one of the 'faithful,' in front of the painter, in front of Cottard:

"Yes, I know, you have your banquet to-morrow; I sha'n't see you, then,
till I get home; don't be too late."

And although Swann had never yet taken offence, at all seriously,
at Odette's demonstrations of friendship for one or other of the
'faithful,' he felt an exquisite pleasure on hearing her thus avow,
before them all, with that calm immodesty, the fact that they saw each
other regularly every evening, his privileged position in her house, and
her own preference for him which it implied. It was true that Swann had
often reflected that Odette was in no way a remarkable woman; and in
the supremacy which he wielded over a creature so distinctly inferior to
himself there was nothing that especially flattered him when he heard
it proclaimed to all the 'faithful'; but since he had observed that,
to several other men than himself, Odette seemed a fascinating and
desirable woman, the attraction which her body held for him had aroused
a painful longing to secure the absolute mastery of even the tiniest
particles of her heart. And he had begun to attach an incalculable value
to those moments passed in her house in the evenings, when he held her
upon his knee, made her tell him what she thought about this or that,
and counted over that treasure to which, alone of all his earthly
possessions, he still clung. And so, after this dinner, drawing her
aside, he took care to thank her effusively, seeking to indicate to
her by the extent of his gratitude the corresponding intensity of
the pleasures which it was in her power to bestow on him, the supreme
pleasure being to guarantee him immunity, for as long as his love should
last and he remain vulnerable, from the assaults of jealousy.

When he came away from his banquet, the next evening, it was pouring
rain, and he had nothing but his victoria. A friend offered to take
him home in a closed carriage, and as Odette, by the fact of her having
invited him to come, had given him an assurance that she was expecting
no one else, he could, with a quiet mind and an untroubled heart, rather
than set off thus in the rain, have gone home and to bed. But perhaps,
if she saw that he seemed not to adhere to his resolution to end every
evening, without exception, in her company, she might grow careless, and
fail to keep free for him just the one evening on which he particularly
desired it.

It was after eleven when he reached her door, and as he made his apology
for having been unable to come away earlier, she complained that it was
indeed very late; the storm had made her unwell, her head ached, and
she warned him that she would not let him stay longer than half an hour,
that at midnight she would send him away; a little while later she felt
tired and wished to sleep.

"No cattleya, then, to-night?" he asked, "and I've been looking forward
so to a nice little cattleya."

But she was irresponsive; saying nervously: "No, dear, no cattleya
tonight. Can't you see, I'm not well?"

"It might have done you good, but I won't bother you."

She begged him to put out the light before he went; he drew the curtains
close round her bed and left her. But, when he was in his own house
again, the idea suddenly struck him that, perhaps, Odette was expecting
some one else that evening, that she had merely pretended to be tired,
that she had asked him to put the light out only so that he should
suppose that she was going to sleep, that the moment he had left
the house she had lighted it again, and had reopened her door to the
stranger who was to be her guest for the night. He looked at his watch.
It was about an hour and a half since he had left her; he went out, took
a cab, and stopped it close to her house, in a little street running at
right angles to that other street, which lay at the back of her house,
and along which he used to go, sometimes, to tap upon her bedroom
window, for her to let him in. He left his cab; the streets were all
deserted and dark; he walked a few yards and came out almost opposite
her house. Amid the glimmering blackness of all the row of windows, the
lights in which had long since been put out, he saw one, and only one,
from which overflowed, between the slats of its shutters, dosed like a
wine-press over its mysterious golden juice, the light that filled the
room within, a light which on so many evenings, as soon as he saw it,
far off, as he turned into the street, had rejoiced his heart with its
message: "She is there--expecting you," and now tortured him with: "She
is there with the man she was expecting." He must know who; he tiptoed
along by the wall until he reached the window, but between the slanting
bars of the shutters he could see nothing; he could hear, only, in the
silence of the night, the murmur of conversation. What agony he suffered
as he watched that light, in whose golden atmosphere were moving, behind
the closed sash, the unseen and detested pair, as he listened to that
murmur which revealed the presence of the man who had crept in after his
own departure, the perfidy of Odette, and the pleasures which she was at
that moment tasting with the stranger.

And yet he was not sorry that he had come; the torment which had forced
him to leave his own house had lost its sharpness when it lost its
uncertainty, now that Odette's other life, of which he had had, at that
first moment, a sudden helpless suspicion, was definitely there, almost
within his grasp, before his eyes, in the full glare of the lamp-light,
caught and kept there, an unwitting prisoner, in that room into which,
when he would, he might force his way to surprise and seize it; or
rather he would tap upon the shutters, as he had often done when he had
come there very late, and by that signal Odette would at least learn
that he knew, that he had seen the light and had heard the voices; while
he himself, who a moment ago had been picturing her as laughing at him,
as sharing with that other the knowledge of how effectively he had been
tricked, now it was he that saw them, confident and persistent in
their error, tricked and trapped by none other than himself, whom they
believed to be a mile away, but who was there, in person, there with a
plan, there with the knowledge that he was going, in another minute, to
tap upon the shutter. And, perhaps, what he felt (almost an agreeable
feeling) at that moment was something more than relief at the solution
of a doubt, at the soothing of a pain; was an intellectual pleasure.
If, since he had fallen in love, things had recovered a little of the
delicate attraction that they had had for him long ago--though only when
a light was shed upon them by a thought, a memory of Odette--now it was
another of the faculties, prominent in the studious days of his youth,
that Odette had quickened with new life, the passion for truth, but for
a truth which, too, was interposed between himself and his mistress,
receiving its light from her alone, a private and personal truth the
sole object of which (an infinitely precious object, and one almost
impersonal in its absolute beauty) was Odette--Odette in her activities,
her environment, her projects, and her past. At every other period in
his life, the little everyday words and actions of another person had
always seemed wholly valueless to Swann; if gossip about such things
were repeated to him, he would dismiss it as insignificant, and while he
listened it was only the lowest, the most commonplace part of his
mind that was interested; at such moments he felt utterly dull and
uninspired. But in this strange phase of love the personality of another
person becomes so enlarged, so deepened, that the curiosity which
he could now feel aroused in himself, to know the least details of a
woman's daily occupation, was the same thirst for knowledge with which
he had once studied history. And all manner of actions, from which,
until now, he would have recoiled in shame, such as spying, to-night,
outside a window, to-morrow, for all he knew, putting adroitly
provocative questions to casual witnesses, bribing servants, listening
at doors, seemed to him, now, to be precisely on a level with the
deciphering of manuscripts, the weighing of evidence, the interpretation
of old monuments, that was to say, so many different methods of
scientific investigation, each one having a definite intellectual value
and being legitimately employable in the search for truth.

As his hand stole out towards the shutters he felt a pang of shame at
the thought that Odette would now know that he had suspected her, that
he had returned, that he had posted himself outside her window. She
had often told him what a horror she had of jealous men, of lovers who
spied. What he was going to do would be extremely awkward, and she would
detest him for ever after, whereas now, for the moment, for so long as
he refrained from knocking, perhaps even in the act of infidelity, she
loved him still. How often is not the prospect of future happiness
thus sacrificed to one's impatient insistence upon an immediate
gratification. But his desire to know the truth was stronger, and seemed
to him nobler than his desire for her. He knew that the true story
of certain events, which he would have given his life to be able to
reconstruct accurately and in full, was to be read within that window,
streaked with bars of light, as within the illuminated, golden boards of
one of those precious manuscripts, by whose wealth of artistic treasures
the scholar who consults them cannot remain unmoved. He yearned for
the satisfaction of knowing the truth which so impassioned him in that
brief, fleeting, precious transcript, on that translucent page, so warm,
so beautiful. And besides, the advantage which he felt--which he so
desperately wanted to feel--that he had over them, lay perhaps not so
much in knowing as in being able to shew them that he knew. He drew
himself up on tiptoe. He knocked. They had not heard; he knocked again;
louder; their conversation ceased. A man's voice--he strained his ears
to distinguish whose, among such of Odette's friends as he knew, the
voice could be--asked:

"Who's that?"

He could not be certain of the voice. He knocked once again. The window
first, then the shutters were thrown open. It was too late, now, to
retire, and since she must know all, so as not to seem too contemptible,
too jealous and inquisitive, he called out in a careless, hearty,
welcoming tone:

"Please don't bother; I just happened to be passing, and saw the light.
I wanted to know if you were feeling better."

He looked up. Two old gentlemen stood facing him, in the window, one
of them with a lamp in his hand; and beyond them he could see into
the room, a room that he had never seen before. Having fallen into the
habit, when he came late to Odette, of identifying her window by
the fact that it was the only one still lighted in a row of windows
otherwise all alike, he had been misled, this time, by the light, and
had knocked at the window beyond hers, in the adjoining house. He made
what apology he could and hurried home, overjoyed that the satisfaction
of his curiosity had preserved their love intact, and that, having
feigned for so long, when in Odette's company, a sort of indifference,
he had not now, by a demonstration of jealousy, given her that proof
of the excess of his own passion which, in a pair of lovers, fully and
finally dispenses the recipient from the obligation to love the other
enough. He never spoke to her of this misadventure, he ceased even to
think of it himself. But now and then his thoughts in their wandering
course would come upon this memory where it lay unobserved, would
startle it into life, thrust it more deeply down into his consciousness,
and leave him aching with a sharp, far-rooted pain. As though this had
been a bodily pain, Swann's mind was powerless to alleviate it; in the
case of bodily pain, however, since it is independent of the mind, the
mind can dwell upon it, can note that it has diminished, that it has
momentarily ceased. But with this mental pain, the mind, merely by
recalling it, created it afresh. To determine not to think of it was but
to think of it still, to suffer from it still. And when, in conversation
with his friends, he forgot his sufferings, suddenly a word casually
uttered would make him change countenance as a wounded man does when a
clumsy hand has touched his aching limb. When he came away from Odette,
he was happy, he felt calm, he recalled the smile with which, in gentle
mockery, she had spoken to him of this man or of that, a smile which was
all tenderness for himself; he recalled the gravity of her head which
she seemed to have lifted from its axis to let it droop and fall, as
though against her will, upon his lips, as she had done on that first
evening in the carriage; her languishing gaze at him while she lay
nestling in his arms, her bended head seeming to recede between her
shoulders, as though shrinking from the cold.

But then, at once, his jealousy, as it had been the shadow of his love,
presented him with the complement, with the converse of that new smile
with which she had greeted him that very evening,--with which, now,
perversely, she was mocking Swann while she tendered her love to
another--of that lowering of her head, but lowered now to fall on other
lips, and (but bestowed upon a stranger) of all the marks of affection
that she had shewn to him. And all these voluptuous memories which he
bore away from her house were, as one might say, but so many sketches,
rough plans, like the schemes of decoration which a designer submits to
one in outline, enabling Swann to form an idea of the various attitudes,
aflame or faint with passion, which she was capable of adopting for
others. With the result that he came to regret every pleasure that he
tasted in her company, every new caress that he invented (and had been
so imprudent as to point out to her how delightful it was), every fresh
charm that he found in her, for he knew that, a moment later, they
would go to enrich the collection of instruments in his secret
torture-chamber.

A fresh turn was given to the screw when Swann recalled a sudden
expression which he had intercepted, a few days earlier, and for the
first time, in Odette's eyes. It was after dinner at the Verdurins'.
Whether it was because Forcheville, aware that Saniette, his
brother-in-law, was not in favour with them, had decided to make a butt
of him, and to shine at his expense, or because he had been annoyed
by some awkward remark which Saniette had made to him, although it had
passed unnoticed by the rest of the party who knew nothing of whatever
tactless allusion it might conceal, or possibly because he had been for
some time looking out for an opportunity of securing the expulsion from
the house of a fellow-guest who knew rather too much about him, and
whom he knew to be so nice-minded that he himself could not help feeling
embarrassed at times merely by his presence in the room, Forcheville
replied to Saniette's tactless utterance with such a volley of abuse,
going out of his way to insult him, emboldened, the louder he shouted,
by the fear, the pain, the entreaties of his victim, that the poor
creature, after asking Mme. Verdurin whether he should stay and
receiving no answer, had left the house in stammering confusion and with
tears in his eyes. Odette had looked on, impassive, at this scene; but
when the door had closed behind Saniette, she had forced the normal
expression of her face down, as the saying is, by several pegs, so as to
bring herself on to the same level of vulgarity as Forcheville; her eyes
had sparkled with a malicious smile of congratulation upon his audacity,
of ironical pity for the poor wretch who had been its victim; she
had darted at him a look of complicity in the crime, which so clearly
implied: "That's finished him off, or I'm very much mistaken. Did you
see what a fool he looked? He was actually crying," that Forcheville,
when his eyes met hers, sobered in a moment from the anger, or pretended
anger with which he was still flushed, smiled as he explained: "He need
only have made himself pleasant and he'd have been here still; a good
scolding does a man no harm, at any time."

One day when Swann had gone out early in the afternoon to pay a call,
and had failed to find the person at home whom he wished to see, it
occurred to him to go, instead, to Odette, at an hour when, although he
never went to her house then as a rule, he knew that she was always at
home, resting or writing letters until tea-time, and would enjoy seeing
her for a moment, if it did not disturb her. The porter told him that he
believed Odette to be in; Swann rang the bell, thought that he heard a
sound, that he heard footsteps, but no one came to the door. Anxious and
annoyed, he went round to the other little street, at the back of her
house, and stood beneath her bedroom window; the curtains were drawn and
he could see nothing; he knocked loudly upon the pane, he shouted; still
no one came. He could see that the neighbours were staring at him. He
turned away, thinking that, after all, he had perhaps been mistaken in
believing that he heard footsteps; but he remained so preoccupied with
the suspicion that he could turn his mind to nothing else. After waiting
for an hour, he returned. He found her at home; she told him that she
had been in the house when he rang, but had been asleep; the bell had
awakened her; she had guessed that it must be Swann, and had run out
to meet him, but he had already gone. She had, of course, heard him
knocking at the window. Swann could at once detect in this story one of
those fragments of literal truth which liars, when taken by surprise,
console themselves by introducing into the composition of the falsehood
which they have to invent, thinking that it can be safely incorporated,
and will lend the whole story an air of verisimilitude. It was true
that, when Odette had just done something which she did not wish to
disclose, she would take pains to conceal it in a secret place in her
heart. But as soon as she found herself face to face with the man to
whom she was obliged to lie, she became uneasy, all her ideas melted
like wax before a flame, her inventive and her reasoning faculties
were paralysed, she might ransack her brain but would find only a void;
still, she must say something, and there lay within her reach precisely
the fact which she had wished to conceal, which, being the truth, was
the one thing that had remained. She broke off from it a tiny fragment,
of no importance in itself, assuring herself that, after all, it was
the best thing to do, since it was a detail of the truth, and less
dangerous, therefore, than a falsehood. "At any rate, this is true,"
she said to herself; "that's always something to the good; he may make
inquiries; he will see that this is true; it won't be this, anyhow, that
will give me away." But she was wrong; it was what gave her away; she
had not taken into account that this fragmentary detail of the truth
had sharp edges which could not be made to fit in, except to those
contiguous fragments of the truth from which she had arbitrarily
detached it, edges which, whatever the fictitious details in which she
might embed it, would continue to shew, by their overlapping angles and
by the gaps which she had forgotten to fill, that its proper place was
elsewhere.

"She admits that she heard me ring, and then knock, that she knew it was
myself, that she wanted to see me," Swann thought to himself. "But that
doesn't correspond with the fact that she did not let me in."

He did not, however, draw her attention to this inconsistency, for he
thought that, if left to herself, Odette might perhaps produce some
falsehood which would give him a faint indication of the truth; she
spoke; he did not interrupt her, he gathered up, with an eager and
sorrowful piety, the words that fell from her lips, feeling (and rightly
feeling, since she was hiding the truth behind them as she spoke) that,
like the veil of a sanctuary, they kept a vague imprint, traced a
faint outline of that infinitely precious and, alas, undiscoverable
truth;--what she had been doing, that afternoon, at three o'clock, when
he had called,--a truth of which he would never possess any more than
these falsifications, illegible and divine traces, a truth which would
exist henceforward only in the secretive memory of this creature, who
would contemplate it in utter ignorance of its value, but would never
yield it up to him. It was true that he had, now and then, a strong
suspicion that Odette's daily activities were not in themselves
passionately interesting, and that such relations as she might have with
other men did not exhale, naturally, in a universal sense, or for every
rational being, a spirit of morbid gloom capable of infecting with
fever or of inciting to suicide. He realised, at such moments, that that
interest, that gloom, existed in him only as a malady might exist, and
that, once he was cured of the malady, the actions of Odette, the kisses
that she might have bestowed, would become once again as innocuous as
those of countless other women. But the consciousness that the painful
curiosity with which Swann now studied them had its origin only in
himself was not enough to make him decide that it was unreasonable to
regard that curiosity as important, and to take every possible step
to satisfy it. Swann had, in fact, reached an age the philosophy of
which--supported, in his case, by the current philosophy of the day, as
well as by that of the circle in which he had spent most of his life,
the group that surrounded the Princesse des Laumes, in which one's
intelligence was understood to increase with the strength of one's
disbelief in everything, and nothing real and incontestable was to be
discovered, except the individual tastes of each of its members--is no
longer that of youth, but a positive, almost a medical philosophy, the
philosophy of men who, instead of fixing their aspirations upon external
objects, endeavour to separate from the accumulation of the years
already spent a definite residue of habits and passions which they
can regard as characteristic and permanent, and with which they will
deliberately arrange, before anything else, that the kind of existence
which they choose to adopt shall not prove inharmonious. Swann deemed
it wise to make allowance in his life for the suffering which he derived
from not knowing what Odette had done, just as he made allowance for the
impetus which a damp climate always gave to his eczema; to anticipate
in his budget the expenditure of a considerable sum on procuring, with
regard to the daily occupations of Odette, information the lack of
which would make him unhappy, just as he reserved a margin for the
gratification of other tastes from which he knew that pleasure was to be
expected (at least, before he had fallen in love) such as his taste for
collecting things, or for good cooking.

When he proposed to take leave of Odette, and to return home, she begged
him to stay a little longer, and even detained him forcibly, seizing him
by the arm as he was opening the door to go. But he gave no thought to
that, for, among the crowd of gestures and speeches and other little
incidents which go to make up a conversation, it is inevitable that we
should pass (without noticing anything that arouses our interest) by
those that hide a truth for which our suspicions are blindly searching,
whereas we stop to examine others beneath which nothing lies concealed.
She kept on saying: "What a dreadful pity; you never by any chance come
in the afternoon, and the one time you do come then I miss you." He knew
very well that she was not sufficiently in love with him to be so
keenly distressed merely at having missed his visit, but as she was a
good-natured woman, anxious to give him pleasure, and often sorry when
she had done anything that annoyed him, he found it quite natural that
she should be sorry, on this occasion, that she had deprived him of that
pleasure of spending an hour in her company, which was so very great a
pleasure, if not to herself, at any rate to him. All the same, it was a
matter of so little importance that her air of unrelieved sorrow began
at length to bewilder him. She reminded him, even more than was
usual, of the faces of some of the women created by the painter of
the Primavera.' She had, at that moment, their downcast, heartbroken
expression, which seems ready to succumb beneath the burden of a grief
too heavy to be borne, when they are merely allowing the Infant Jesus to
play with a pomegranate, or watching Moses pour water into a trough. He
had seen the same sorrow once before on her face, but when, he could
no longer say. Then, suddenly, he remembered it; it was when Odette had
lied, in apologising to Mme. Verdurin on the evening after the dinner
from which she had stayed away on a pretext of illness, but really so
that she might be alone with Swann. Surely, even had she been the most
scrupulous of women, she could hardly have felt remorse for so innocent
a lie. But the lies which Odette ordinarily told were less innocent, and
served to prevent discoveries which might have involved her in the most
terrible difficulties with one or another of her friends. And so, when
she lied, smitten with fear, feeling herself to be but feebly armed for
her defence, unconfident of success, she was inclined to weep from sheer
exhaustion, as children weep sometimes when they have not slept. She
knew, also, that her lie, as a rule, was doing a serious injury to the
man to whom she was telling it, and that she might find herself at
his mercy if she told it badly. Therefore she felt at once humble and
culpable in his presence. And when she had to tell an insignificant,
social lie its hazardous associations, and the memories which it
recalled, would leave her weak with a sense of exhaustion and penitent
with a consciousness of wrongdoing.

What depressing lie was she now concocting for Swann's benefit, to give
her that pained expression, that plaintive voice, which seemed to falter
beneath the effort that she was forcing herself to make, and to plead
for pardon? He had an idea that it was not merely the truth about what
had occurred that afternoon that she was endeavouring to hide from him,
but something more immediate, something, possibly, which had not yet
happened, but might happen now at any time, and, when it did, would
throw a light upon that earlier event. At that moment, he heard the
front-door bell ring. Odette never stopped speaking, but her words
dwindled into an inarticulate moan. Her regret at not having seen Swann
that afternoon, at not having opened the door to him, had melted into a
universal despair.

He could hear the gate being closed, and the sound of a carriage, as
though some one were going away--probably the person whom Swann must on
no account meet--after being told that Odette was not at home. And then,
when he reflected that, merely by coming at an hour when he was not in
the habit of coming, he had managed to disturb so many arrangements of
which she did not wish him to know, he had a feeling of discouragement
that amounted, almost, to distress. But since he was in love with
Odette, since he was in the habit of turning all his thoughts towards
her, the pity with which he might have been inspired for himself he felt
for her only, and murmured: "Poor darling!" When finally he left her,
she took up several letters which were lying on the table, and asked him
if he would be so good as to post them for her. He walked along to the
post-office, took the letters from his pocket, and, before dropping each
of them into the box, scanned its address. They were all to tradesmen,
except the last, which was to Forcheville. He kept it in his hand. "If
I saw what was in this," he argued, "I should know what she calls him,
what she says to him, whether there really is anything between them.
Perhaps, if I don't look inside, I shall be lacking in delicacy towards
Odette, since in this way alone I can rid myself of a suspicion which
is, perhaps, a calumny on her, which must, in any case, cause her
suffering, and which can never possibly be set at rest, once the letter
is posted."

He left the post-office and went home, but he had kept the last letter
in his pocket. He lighted a candle, and held up close to its flame the
envelope which he had not dared to open. At first he could distinguish
nothing, but the envelope was thin, and by pressing it down on to the
stiff card which it enclosed he was able, through the transparent paper,
to read the concluding words. They were a coldly formal signature. If,
instead of its being himself who was looking at a letter addressed to
Forcheville, it had been Forcheville who had read a letter addressed
to Swann, he might have found words in it of another, a far more tender
kind! He took a firm hold of the card, which was sliding to and fro, the
envelope being too large for it and then, by moving it with his finger
and thumb, brought one line after another beneath the part of the
envelope where the paper was not doubled, through which alone it was
possible to read.

In spite of all these manoeuvres he could not make it out clearly. Not
that it mattered, for he had seen enough to assure himself that the
letter was about some trifling incident of no importance, and had
nothing at all to do with love; it was something to do with Odette's
uncle. Swann had read quite plainly at the beginning of the line "I
was right," but did not understand what Odette had been right in doing,
until suddenly a word which he had not been able, at first, to decipher,
came to light and made the whole sentence intelligible: "I was right to
open the door; it was my uncle." To open the door! Then Forcheville had
been there when Swann rang the bell, and she had sent him away; hence
the sound that Swann had heard.

After that he read the whole letter; at the end she apologised for
having treated Forcheville with so little ceremony, and reminded him
that he had left his cigarette-case at her house, precisely what she
had written to Swann after one of his first visits. But to Swann she had
added: "Why did you not forget your heart also? I should never have let
you have that back." To Forcheville nothing of that sort; no allusion
that could suggest any intrigue between them. And, really, he was
obliged to admit that in all this business Forcheville had been worse
treated than himself, since Odette was writing to him to make him
believe that her visitor had been an uncle. From which it followed that
he, Swann, was the man to whom she attached importance, and for whose
sake she had sent the other away. And yet, if there had been nothing
between Odette and Forcheville, why not have opened the door at once,
why have said, "I was right to open the door; it was my uncle." Right?
if she was doing nothing wrong at that moment how could Forcheville
possibly have accounted for her not opening the door? For a time Swann
stood still there, heartbroken, bewildered, and yet happy; gazing at
this envelope which Odette had handed to him without a scruple, so
absolute was her trust in his honour; through its transparent window
there had been disclosed to him, with the secret history of an incident
which he had despaired of ever being able to learn, a fragment of the
life of Odette, seen as through a narrow, luminous incision, cut into
its surface without her knowledge. Then his jealousy rejoiced at the
discovery, as though that jealousy had had an independent existence,
fiercely egotistical, gluttonous of every thing that would feed its
vitality, even at the expense of Swann himself. Now it had food in
store, and Swann could begin to grow uneasy afresh every evening, over
the visits that Odette had received about five o'clock, and could
seek to discover where Forcheville had been at that hour. For Swann's
affection for Odette still preserved the form which had been imposed on
it, from the beginning, by his ignorance of the occupations in which she
passed her days, as well as by the mental lethargy which prevented him
from supplementing that ignorance by imagination. He was not jealous, at
first, of the whole of Odette's life, but of those moments only in which
an incident, which he had perhaps misinterpreted, had led him to suppose
that Odette might have played him false. His jealousy, like an octopus
which throws out a first, then a second, and finally a third tentacle,
fastened itself irremovably first to that moment, five o'clock in
the afternoon, then to another, then to another again. But Swann was
incapable of inventing his sufferings. They were only the memory, the
perpetuation of a suffering that had come to him from without.

From without, however, everything brought him fresh suffering. He
decided to separate Odette from Forcheville, by taking her away for a
few days to the south. But he imagined that she was coveted by every
male person in the hotel, and that she coveted them in return. And so
he, who, in old days, when he travelled, used always to seek out new
people and crowded places, might now be seen fleeing savagely from human
society as if it had cruelly injured him. And how could he not have
turned misanthrope, when in every man he saw a potential lover for
Odette? Thus his jealousy did even more than the happy, passionate
desire which he had originally felt for Odette had done to alter Swann's
character, completely changing, in the eyes of the world, even the
outward signs by which that character had been intelligible.

A month after the evening on which he had intercepted and read Odette's
letter to Forcheville, Swann went to a dinner which the Verdurins were
giving in the Bois. As the party was breaking up he noticed a series of
whispered discussions between Mme. Verdurin and several of her guests,
and thought that he heard the pianist being reminded to come next day to
a party at Chatou; now he, Swann, had not been invited to any party.

The Verdurins had spoken only in whispers, and in vague terms, but the
painter, perhaps without thinking, shouted out: "There must be no lights
of any sort, and he must play the Moonlight Sonata in the dark, for us
to see by."

Mme. Verdurin, seeing that Swann was within earshot, assumed that
expression in which the two-fold desire to make the speaker be quiet and
to preserve, oneself, an appearance of guilelessness in the eyes of the
listener, is neutralised in an intense vacuity; in which the unflinching
signs of intelligent complicity are overlaid by the smiles of innocence,
an expression invariably adopted by anyone who has noticed a blunder,
the enormity of which is thereby at once revealed if not to those who
have made it, at any rate to him in whose hearing it ought not to have
been made. Odette seemed suddenly to be in despair, as though she had
decided not to struggle any longer against the crushing difficulties of
life, and Swann was anxiously counting the minutes that still separated
him from the point at which, after leaving the restaurant, while he
drove her home, he would be able to ask for an explanation, to make her
promise, either that she would not go to Chatou next day, or that she
would procure an invitation for him also, and to lull to rest in her
arms the anguish that still tormented him. At last the carriages were
ordered. Mme. Verdurin said to Swann:

"Good-bye, then. We shall see you soon, I hope," trying, by the
friendliness of her manner and the constraint of her smile, to prevent
him from noticing that she was not saying, as she would always have
until then:

"To-morrow, then, at Chatou, and at my house the day after." M. and Mme.
Verdurin made Forcheville get into their carriage; Swann's was drawn up
behind it, and he waited for theirs to start before helping Odette into
his own.

"Odette, we'll take you," said Mme. Verdurin, "we've kept a little
corner specially for you, beside M. de Forcheville."

"Yes, Mme. Verdurin," said Odette meekly.

"What! I thought I was to take you home," cried Swann, flinging
discretion to the winds, for the carriage-door hung open, time was
precious, and he could not, in his present state, go home without her.

"But Mme. Verdurin has asked me..."

"That's all right, you can quite well go home alone; we've left you like
this dozens of times," said Mme. Verdurin.

"But I had something important to tell Mme. de Crécy."

"Very well, you can write it to her instead."

"Good-bye," said Odette, holding out her hand.

He tried hard to smile, but could only succeed in looking utterly
dejected.

"What do you think of the airs that Swann is pleased to put on with
us?" Mme. Verdurin asked her husband when they had reached home. "I was
afraid he was going to eat me, simply because we offered to take Odette
back. It really is too bad, that sort of thing. Why doesn't he say,
straight out, that we keep a disorderly house? I can't conceive how
Odette can stand such manners. He positively seems to be saying, all the
time, 'You belong to me!' I shall tell Odette exactly what I think about
it all, and I hope she will have the sense to understand me." A moment
later she added, inarticulate with rage: "No, but, don't you see, the
filthy creature..." using unconsciously, and perhaps in satisfaction of
the same obscure need to justify herself--like Françoise at Combray when
the chicken refused to die--the very words which the last convulsions of
an inoffensive animal in its death agony wring from the peasant who is
engaged in taking its life. And when Mme. Verdurin's carriage had moved
on, and Swann's took its place, his coachman, catching sight of his
face, asked whether he was unwell, or had heard bad news.

Swann sent him away; he preferred to walk, and it was on foot, through
the Bois, that he came home. He talked to himself, aloud, and in
the same slightly affected tone which he had been used to adopt
when describing the charms of the 'little nucleus' and extolling the
magnanimity of the Verdurins. But just as the conversation, the smiles,
the kisses of Odette became as odious to him as he had once found
them charming, if they were diverted to others than himself, so the
Verdurins' drawing-room, which, not an hour before, had still seemed
to him amusing, inspired with a genuine feeling for art and even with
a sort of moral aristocracy, now that it was another than himself whom
Odette was going to meet there, to love there without restraint, laid
bare to him all its absurdities, its stupidity, its shame.

He drew a fanciful picture, at which he shuddered in disgust, of the
party next evening at Chatou. "Imagine going to Chatou, of all places!
Like a lot of drapers after closing time! Upon my word, these people are
sublime in their smugness; they can't really exist; they must all have
come out of one of Labiche's plays!"

The Cottards would be there; possibly Brichot. "Could anything be more
grotesque than the lives of these little creatures, hanging on to one
another like that. They'd imagine they were utterly lost, upon my soul
they would, if they didn't all meet again to-morrow at _Chatou_!"
Alas! there would be the painter there also, the painter who enjoyed
match-making, who would invite Forcheville to come with Odette to his
studio. He could see Odette, in a dress far too smart for the country,
"for she is so vulgar in that way, and, poor little thing, she is such a
fool!"

He could hear the jokes that Mme. Verdurin would make after dinner,
jokes which, whoever the 'bore' might be at whom they were aimed,
had always amused him because he could watch Odette laughing at them,
laughing with him, her laughter almost a part of his. Now he felt that
it was possibly at him that they would make Odette laugh. "What a fetid
form of humour!" he exclaimed, twisting his mouth into an expression of
disgust so violent that he could feel the muscles of his throat stiffen
against his collar. "How, in God's name, can a creature made in His
image find anything to laugh at in those nauseating witticisms? The
least sensitive nose must be driven away in horror from such stale
exhalations. It is really impossible to believe that any human being is
incapable of understanding that, in allowing herself merely to smile at
the expense of a fellow-creature who has loyally held out his hand
to her, she is casting herself into a mire from which it will be
impossible, with the best will in the world, ever to rescue her. I dwell
so many miles above the puddles in which these filthy little vermin
sprawl and crawl and bawl their cheap obscenities, that I cannot
possibly be spattered by the witticisms of a Verdurin!" he cried,
tossing up his head and arrogantly straightening his body. "God knows
that I have honestly attempted to pull Odette out of that sewer, and to
teach her to breathe a nobler and a purer air. But human patience has
its limits, and mine is at an end," he concluded, as though this sacred
mission to tear Odette away from an atmosphere of sarcasms dated from
longer than a few minutes ago, as though he had not undertaken it only
since it had occurred to him that those sarcasms might, perchance, be
directed at himself, and might have the effect of detaching Odette from
him.

He could see the pianist sitting down to play the Moonlight Sonata, and
the grimaces of Mme. Verdurin, in terrified anticipation of the wrecking
of her nerves by Beethoven's music. "Idiot, liar!" he shouted, "and a
creature like that imagines that she's fond of _Art_!" She would say to
Odette, after deftly insinuating a few words of praise for Forcheville,
as she had so often done for himself: "You can make room for M. de
Forcheville there, can't you, Odette?"... '"In the dark!' Codfish!
Pander!"... 'Pander' was the name he applied also to the music which
would invite them to sit in silence, to dream together, to gaze in each
other's eyes, to feel for each other's hands. He felt that there was
much to be said, after all, for a sternly censorous attitude towards
the arts, such as Plato adopted, and Bossuet, and the old school of
education in France.

In a word, the life which they led at the Verdurins', which he had so
often described as 'genuine,' seemed to him now the worst possible form
of life, and their 'little nucleus' the most degraded class of society.
"It really is," he repeated, "beneath the lowest rung of the social
ladder, the nethermost circle of Dante. Beyond a doubt, the august words
of the Florentine refer to the Verdurins! When one comes to think of it,
surely people 'in society' (and, though one may find fault with them now
and then, still, after all they are a very different matter from that
gang of blackmailers) shew a profound sagacity in refusing to know
them, or even to dirty the tips of their fingers with them. What a sound
intuition there is in that '_Noli me tangere_' motto of the Faubourg
Saint-Germain."

He had long since emerged from the paths and avenues of the Bois, he had
almost reached his own house, and still, for he had not yet thrown off
the intoxication of grief, or his whim of insincerity, but was ever more
and more exhilarated by the false intonation, the artificial sonority
of his own voice, he continued to perorate aloud in the silence of the
night: "People 'in society' have their failings, as no one knows better
than I; but, after all, they are people to whom some things, at least,
are impossible. So-and-so" (a fashionable woman whom he had known)
"was far from being perfect, but, after all, one did find in her a
fundamental delicacy, a loyalty in her conduct which made her, whatever
happened, incapable of a felony, which fixes a vast gulf between her and
an old hag like Verdurin. Verdurin! What a name! Oh, there's something
complete about them, something almost fine in their trueness to type;
they're the most perfect specimens of their disgusting class! Thank God,
it was high time that I stopped condescending to promiscuous intercourse
with such infamy, such dung."

But, just as the virtues which he had still attributed, an hour or so
earlier, to the Verdurins, would not have sufficed, even although the
Verdurins had actually possessed them, if they had not also favoured
and protected his love, to excite Swann to that state of intoxication
in which he waxed tender over their magnanimity, an intoxication which,
even when disseminated through the medium of other persons, could
have come to him from Odette alone;--so the immorality (had it really
existed) which he now found in the Verdurins would have been powerless,
if they had not invited Odette with Forcheville and without him, to
unstop the vials of his wrath and to make him scarify their 'infamy.'
Doubtless Swann's voice shewed a finer perspicacity than his own when it
refused to utter those words full of disgust at the Verdurins and their
circle, and of joy at his having shaken himself free of it, save in an
artificial and rhetorical tone, and as though his words had been chosen
rather to appease his anger than to express his thoughts. The latter, in
fact, while he abandoned himself to invective, were probably, though he
did not know it, occupied with a wholly different matter, for once he
had reached his house, no sooner had he closed the front-door behind him
than he suddenly struck his forehead, and, making his servant open the
door again, dashed out into the street shouting, in a voice which,
this time, was quite natural; "I believe I have found a way of getting
invited to the dinner at Chatou to-morrow!" But it must have been a
bad way, for M. Swann was not invited; Dr. Cottard, who, having been
summoned to attend a serious case in the country, had not seen the
Verdurins for some days, and had been prevented from appearing at
Chatou, said, on the evening after this dinner, as he sat down to table
at their house:

"Why, aren't we going to see M. Swann this evening? He is quite what you
might call a personal friend..." "I sincerely trust that we sha'n't!"
cried Mme. Verdurin. "Heaven preserve us from him; he's too deadly for
words, a stupid, ill-bred boor."

On hearing these words Cottard exhibited an intense astonishment blended
with entire submission, as though in the face of a scientific truth
which contradicted everything that he had previously believed, but was
supported by an irresistible weight of evidence; with timorous
emotion he bowed his head over his plate, and merely replied:
"Oh--oh--oh--oh--oh!" traversing, in an orderly retirement of his
forces, into the depths of his being, along a descending scale, the
whole compass of his voice. After which there was no more talk of Swann
at the Verdurins'.

And so that drawing-room which had brought Swann and Odette together
became an obstacle in the way of their meeting. She no longer said to
him, as she had said in the early days of their love: "We shall meet,
anyhow, to-morrow evening; there's a supper-party at the Verdurins',"
but "We sha'n't be able to meet to-morrow evening; there's a
supper-party at the Verdurins'." Or else the Verdurins were taking her
to the Opéra-Comique, to see _Une Nuit de Cléopâtre_, and Swann could
read in her eyes that terror lest he should ask her not to go, which,
but a little time before, he could not have refrained from greeting
with a kiss as it flitted across the face of his mistress, but which now
exasperated him. "Yet I'm not really angry," he assured himself, "when I
see how she longs to run away and scratch from maggots in that
dunghill of cacophony. I'm disappointed; not for myself, but for her;
disappointed to find that, after living for more than six months in
daily contact with myself, she has not been capable of improving her
mind even to the point of spontaneously eradicating from it a taste for
Victor Massé! More than that, to find that she has not arrived at the
stage of understanding that there are evenings on which anyone with
the least shade of refinement of feeling should be willing to forego
an amusement when she is asked to do so. She ought to have the sense to
say: 'I shall not go,' if it were only from policy, since it is by what
she answers now that the quality of her soul will be determined once and
for all." And having persuaded himself that it was solely, after all,
in order that he might arrive at a favourable estimate of Odette's
spiritual worth that he wished her to stay at home with him that evening
instead of going to the Opéra-Comique, he adopted the same line of
reasoning with her, with the same degree of insincerity as he had
used with himself, or even with a degree more, for in her case he was
yielding also to the desire to capture her by her own self-esteem.

"I swear to you," he told her, shortly before she was to leave for the
theatre, "that, in asking you not to go, I should hope, were I a
selfish man, for nothing so much as that you should refuse, for I have
a thousand other things to do this evening, and I shall feel that I have
been tricked and trapped myself, and shall be thoroughly annoyed, if,
after all, you tell me that you are not going. But my occupations, my
pleasures are not everything; I must think of you also. A day may come
when, seeing me irrevocably sundered from you, you will be entitled to
reproach me with not having warned you at the decisive hour in which
I felt that I was going to pass judgment on you, one of those stern
judgments which love cannot long resist. You see, your _Nuit de
Cléopâtre_ (what a title!) has no bearing on the point. What I must know
is whether you are indeed one of those creatures in the lowest grade of
mentality and even of charm, one of those contemptible creatures who are
incapable of foregoing a pleasure. For if you are such, how could anyone
love you, for you are not even a person, a definite, imperfect, but at
least perceptible entity. You are a formless water that will trickle
down any slope that it may come upon, a fish devoid of memory, incapable
of thought, which all its life long in its aquarium will continue to
dash itself, a hundred times a day, against a wall of glass, always
mistaking it for water. Do you realise that your answer will have the
effect--I do not say of making me cease from that moment to love you,
that goes without saying, but of making you less attractive to my
eyes when I realise that you are not a person, that you are beneath
everything in the world and have not the intelligence to raise yourself
one inch higher? Obviously, I should have preferred to ask you, as
though it had been a matter of little or no importance, to give up your
_Nuit de Cléopâtre_ (since you compel me to sully my lips with so abject
a name), in the hope that you would go to it none the less. But, since
I had resolved to weigh you in the balance, to make so grave an issue
depend upon your answer, I considered it more honourable to give you due
warning."

Meanwhile, Odette had shewn signs of increasing emotion and uncertainty.
Although the meaning of his tirade was beyond her, she grasped that it
was to be included among the scenes of reproach or supplication, scenes
which her familiarity with the ways of men enabled her, without paying
any heed to the words that were uttered, to conclude that men would not
make unless they were in love; that, from the moment when they were in
love, it was superfluous to obey them, since they would only be more in
love later on. And so, she would have heard Swann out with the utmost
tranquillity had she not noticed that it was growing late, and that if
he went on speaking for any length of time she would "never" as she told
him with a fond smile, obstinate but slightly abashed, "get there in
time for the Overture."

On other occasions he had assured himself that the one thing which,
more than anything else, would make him cease to love her, would be her
refusal to abandon the habit of lying. "Even from the point of view of
coquetry, pure and simple," he had told her, "can't you see how much
of your attraction you throw away when you stoop to lying? By a frank
admission--how many faults you might redeem! Really, you are far less
intelligent than I supposed!" In vain, however, did Swann expound to
her thus all the reasons that she had for not lying; they might have
succeeded in overthrowing any universal system of mendacity, but Odette
had no such system; she contented herself, merely, whenever she wished
Swann to remain in ignorance of anything that she had done, with not
telling him of it. So that a lie was, to her, something to be used only
as a special expedient; and the one thing that could make her decide
whether she should avail herself of a lie or not was a reason which,
too, was of a special and contingent order, namely the risk of Swann's
discovering that she had not told him the truth.

Physically, she was passing through an unfortunate phase; she was
growing stouter, and the expressive, sorrowful charm, the surprised,
wistful expressions which she had formerly had, seemed to have vanished
with her first youth, with the result that she became most precious to
Swann at the very moment when he found her distinctly less good-looking.
He would gaze at her for hours on end, trying to recapture the charm
which he had once seen in her and could not find again. And yet the
knowledge that, within this new and strange chrysalis, it was still
Odette that lurked, still the same volatile temperament, artful and
evasive, was enough to keep Swann seeking, with as much passion as ever,
to captivate her. Then he would look at photographs of her, taken two
years before, and would remember how exquisite she had been. And that
would console him, a little, for all the sufferings that he voluntarily
endured on her account.

When the Verdurins took her off to Saint-Germain, or to Chatou, or to
Meulan, as often as not, if the weather was fine, they would propose
to remain there for the night, and not go home until next day. Mme.
Verdurin would endeavour to set at rest the scruples of the pianist,
whose aunt had remained in Paris: "She will be only too glad to be rid
of you for a day. How on earth could she be anxious, when she knows
you're with us? Anyhow, I'll take you all under my wing; she can put the
blame on me."

If this attempt failed, M. Verdurin would set off across country until
he came to a telegraph office or some other kind of messenger, after
first finding out which of the 'faithful' had anyone whom they must
warn. But Odette would thank him, and assure him that she had no message
for anyone, for she had told Swann, once and for all, that she could
not possibly send messages to him, before all those people, without
compromising herself. Sometimes she would be absent for several days
on end, when the Verdurins took her to see the tombs at Dreux, or to
Compiègne, on the painter's advice, to watch the sun setting through the
forest--after which they went on to the Château of Pierrefonds.

"To think that she could visit really historic buildings with me, who
have spent ten years in the study of architecture, who am constantly
bombarded, by people who really count, to take them over Beauvais or
Saint-Loup-de-Naud, and refuse to take anyone but her; and instead of
that she trundles off with the lowest, the most brutally degraded
of creatures, to go into ecstasies over the petrified excretions of
Louis-Philippe and Viollet-le-Duc! One hardly needs much knowledge
of art, I should say, to do that; though, surely, even without any
particularly refined sense of smell, one would not deliberately choose
to spend a holiday in the latrines, so as to be within range of their
fragrant exhalations."

But when she had set off for Dreux or Pierrefonds--alas, without
allowing him to appear there, as though by accident, at her side, for,
as she said, that would "create a dreadful impression,"--he would plunge
into the most intoxicating romance in the lover's library, the railway
timetable, from which he learned the ways of joining her there in the
afternoon, in the evening, even in the morning. The ways? More than
that, the authority, the right to join her. For, after all, the
time-table, and the trains themselves, were not meant for dogs. If the
public were carefully informed, by means of printed advertisements, that
at eight o'clock in the morning a train started for Pierrefonds which
arrived there at ten, that could only be because going to Pierrefonds
was a lawful act, for which permission from Odette would be superfluous;
an act, moreover, which might be performed from a motive altogether
different from the desire to see Odette, since persons who had never
even heard of her performed it daily, and in such numbers as justified
the labour and expense of stoking the engines.

So it came to this; that she could not prevent him from going to
Pierrefonds if he chose to do so. Now that was precisely what he found
that he did choose to do, and would at that moment be doing were he,
like the travelling public, not acquainted with Odette. For a long
time past he had wanted to form a more definite impression of
Viollet-le-Duc's work as a restorer. And the weather being what it was,
he felt an overwhelming desire to spend the day roaming in the forest of
Compiègne.

It was, indeed, a piece of bad luck that she had forbidden him access
to the one spot that tempted him to-day. To-day! Why, if he went down
there, in defiance of her prohibition, he would be able to see her that
very day! But then, whereas, if she had met, at Pierrefonds, some one
who did not matter, she would have hailed him with obvious pleasure:
"What, you here?" and would have invited him to come and see her at the
hotel where she was staying with the Verdurins, if, on the other hand,
it was himself, Swann, that she encountered there, she would be annoyed,
would complain that she was being followed, would love him less in
consequence, might even turn away in anger when she caught sight of him.
"So, then, I am not to be allowed to go away for a day anywhere!" she
would reproach him on her return, whereas in fact it was he himself who
was not allowed to go.

He had had the sudden idea, so as to contrive to visit Compiègne and
Pierrefonds without letting it be supposed that his object was to meet
Odette, of securing an invitation from one of his friends, the Marquis
de Forestelle, who had a country house in that neighbourhood. This
friend, to whom Swann suggested the plan without disclosing its
ulterior purpose, was beside himself with joy; he did not conceal his
astonishment at Swann's consenting at last, after fifteen years, to come
down and visit his property, and since he did not (he told him) wish
to stay there, promised to spend some days, at least, in taking him for
walks and excursions in the district. Swann imagined himself down there
already with M. de Forestelle. Even before he saw Odette, even if he did
not succeed in seeing her there, what a joy it would be to set foot on
that soil where, not knowing the exact spot in which, at any moment, she
was to be found, he would feel all around him the thrilling possibility
of her suddenly appearing: in the courtyard of the Château, now
beautiful in his eyes since it was on her account that he had gone to
visit it; in all the streets of the town, which struck him as romantic;
down every ride of the forest, roseate with the deep and tender glow of
sunset;--innumerable and alternative hiding-places, to which would fly
simultaneously for refuge, in the uncertain ubiquity of his hopes, his
happy, vagabond and divided heart. "We mustn't, on any account," he
would warn M. de Forestelle, "run across Odette and the Verdurins. I
have just heard that they are at Pierrefonds, of all places, to-day. One
has plenty of time to see them in Paris; it would hardly be worth while
coming down here if one couldn't go a yard without meeting them." And
his host would fail to understand why, once they had reached the place,
Swann would change his plans twenty times in an hour, inspect the
dining-rooms of all the hotels in Compiègne without being able to make
up his mind to settle down in any of them, although he had found no
trace anywhere of the Verdurins, seeming to be in search of what he had
claimed to be most anxious to avoid, and would in fact avoid, the moment
he found it, for if he had come upon the little 'group,' he would have
hastened away at once with studied indifference, satisfied that he had
seen Odette and she him, especially that she had seen him when he was
not, apparently, thinking about her. But no; she would guess at
once that it was for her sake that he had come there. And when M. de
Forestelle came to fetch him, and it was time to start, he excused
himself: "No, I'm afraid not; I can't go to Pierrefonds to-day. You see,
Odette is there." And Swann was happy in spite of everything in feeling
that if he, alone among mortals, had not the right to go to Pierrefonds
that day, it was because he was in fact, for Odette, some one who
differed from all other mortals, her lover; and because that restriction
which for him alone was set upon the universal right to travel freely
where one would, was but one of the many forms of that slavery, that
love which was so dear to him. Decidedly, it was better not to risk a
quarrel with her, to be patient, to wait for her return. He spent his
days in poring over a map of the forest of Compiègne, as though it
had been that of the 'Pays du Tendre'; he surrounded himself with
photographs of the Château of Pierrefonds. When the day dawned on which
it was possible that she might return, he opened the time-table
again, calculated what train she must have taken, and, should she have
postponed her departure, what trains were still left for her to take. He
did not leave the house, for fear of missing a telegram, he did not go
to bed, in case, having come by the last train, she decided to surprise
him with a midnight visit. Yes! The front-door bell rang. There seemed
some delay in opening the door, he wanted to awaken the porter, he
leaned out of the window to shout to Odette, if it was Odette, for
in spite of the orders which he had gone downstairs a dozen times to
deliver in person, they were quite capable of telling her that he was
not at home. It was only a servant coming in. He noticed the incessant
rumble of passing carriages, to which he had never before paid any
attention. He could hear them, one after another, a long way off, coming
nearer, passing his door without stopping, and bearing away into the
distance a message which was not for him. He waited all night, to no
purpose, for the Verdurins had returned unexpectedly, and Odette had
been in Paris since midday; it had not occurred to her to tell him; not
knowing what to do with herself she had spent the evening alone at a
theatre, had long since gone home to bed, and was peacefully asleep.

As a matter of fact, she had never given him a thought. And such moments
as these, in which she forgot Swann's very existence, were of more value
to Odette, did more to attach him to her, than all her infidelities. For
in this way Swann was kept in that state of painful agitation which had
once before been effective in making his interest blossom into love, on
the night when he had failed to find Odette at the Verdurins' and had
hunted for her all evening. And he did not have (as I had, afterwards,
at Combray in my childhood) happy days in which to forget the sufferings
that would return with the night. For his days, Swann must pass them
without Odette; and as he told himself, now and then, to allow so pretty
a woman to go out by herself in Paris was just as rash as to leave a
case filled with jewels in the middle of the street. In this mood he
would scowl furiously at the passers-by, as though they were so many
pickpockets. But their faces--a collective and formless mass--escaped
the grasp of his imagination, and so failed to feed the flame of his
jealousy. The effort exhausted Swann's brain, until, passing his hand
over his eyes, he cried out: "Heaven help me!" as people, after lashing
themselves into an intellectual frenzy in their endeavours to master the
problem of the reality of the external world, or that of the immortality
of the soul, afford relief to their weary brains by an unreasoning
act of faith. But the thought of his absent mistress was incessantly,
indissolubly blended with all the simplest actions of Swann's daily
life--when he took his meals, opened his letters, went for a walk or
to bed--by the fact of his regret at having to perform those actions
without her; like those initials of Philibert the Fair which, in the
church of Brou, because of her grief, her longing for him, Margaret of
Austria intertwined everywhere with her own. On some days, instead of
staying at home, he would go for luncheon to a restaurant not far off,
to which he had been attracted, some time before, by the excellence of
its cookery, but to which he now went only for one of those reasons,
at once mystical and absurd, which people call 'romantic'; because this
restaurant (which, by the way, still exists) bore the same name as the
street in which Odette lived: the Lapérouse. Sometimes, when she had
been away on a short visit somewhere, several days would elapse before
she thought of letting him know that she had returned to Paris. And
then she would say quite simply, without taking (as she would once have
taken) the precaution of covering herself, at all costs, with a little
fragment borrowed from the truth, that she had just, at that very
moment, arrived by the morning train. What she said was a falsehood;
at least for Odette it was a falsehood, inconsistent, lacking (what it
would have had, if true) the support of her memory of her actual arrival
at the station; she was even prevented from forming a mental picture of
what she was saying, while she said it, by the contradictory picture, in
her mind, of whatever quite different thing she had indeed been doing at
the moment when she pretended to have been alighting from the train. In
Swann's mind, however, these words, meeting no opposition, settled
and hardened until they assumed the indestructibility of a truth so
indubitable that, if some friend happened to tell him that he had
come by the same train and had not seen Odette, Swann would have been
convinced that it was his friend who had made a mistake as to the day or
hour, since his version did not agree with the words uttered by Odette.
These words had never appeared to him false except when, before hearing
them, he had suspected that they were going to be. For him to believe
that she was lying, an anticipatory suspicion was indispensable. It was
also, however, sufficient. Given that, everything that Odette might say
appeared to him suspect. Did she mention a name: it was obviously that
of one of her lovers; once this supposition had taken shape, he would
spend weeks in tormenting himself; on one occasion he even approached a
firm of 'inquiry agents' to find out the address and the occupation of
the unknown rival who would give him no peace until he could be proved
to have gone abroad, and who (he ultimately learned) was an uncle of
Odette, and had been dead for twenty years.

Although she would not allow him, as a rule, to meet her at public
gatherings, saying that people would talk, it happened occasionally
that, at an evening party to which he and she had each been invited--at
Forcheville's, at the painter's, or at a charity ball given in one of
the Ministries--he found himself in the same room with her. He could
see her, but dared not remain for fear of annoying her by seeming to be
spying upon the pleasures which she tasted in other company, pleasures
which--while he drove home in utter loneliness, and went to bed,
as anxiously as I myself was to go to bed, some years later, on the
evenings when he came to dine with us at Combray--seemed illimitable to
him since he had not been able to see their end. And, once or twice,
he derived from such evenings that kind of happiness which one would be
inclined (did it not originate in so violent a reaction from an anxiety
abruptly terminated) to call peaceful, since it consists in a pacifying
of the mind: he had looked in for a moment at a revel in the painter's
studio, and was getting ready to go home; he was leaving behind him
Odette, transformed into a brilliant stranger, surrounded by men to whom
her glances and her gaiety, which were not for him, seemed to hint at
some voluptuous pleasure to be enjoyed there or elsewhere (possibly at
the Bal des Incohérents, to which he trembled to think that she might be
going on afterwards) which made Swann more jealous than the thought of
their actual physical union, since it was more difficult to imagine; he
was opening the door to go, when he heard himself called back in these
words (which, by cutting off from the party that possible ending which
had so appalled him, made the party itself seem innocent in retrospect,
made Odette's return home a thing no longer inconceivable and terrible,
but tender and familiar, a thing that kept close to his side, like
a part of his own daily life, in his carriage; a thing that stripped
Odette herself of the excess of brilliance and gaiety in her appearance,
shewed that it was only a disguise which she had assumed for a moment,
for his sake and not in view of any mysterious pleasures, a disguise of
which she had already wearied)--in these words, which Odette flung out
after him as he was crossing the threshold: "Can't you wait a minute for
me? I'm just going; we'll drive back together and you can drop me." It
was true that on one occasion Forcheville had asked to be driven home at
the same time, but when, on reaching Odette's gate, he had begged to be
allowed to come in too, she had replied, with a finger pointed at Swann:
"Ah! That depends on this gentleman. You must ask him. Very well, you
may come in, just for a minute, if you insist, but you mustn't stay
long, for, I warn you, he likes to sit and talk quietly with me, and
he's not at all pleased if I have visitors when he's here. Oh, if you
only knew the creature as I know him; isn't that so, my love, there's no
one that really knows you, is there, except me?"

And Swann was, perhaps, even more touched by the spectacle of her
addressing him thus, in front of Forcheville, not only in these tender
words of predilection, but also with certain criticisms, such as: "I
feel sure you haven't written yet to your friends, about dining with
them on Sunday. You needn't go if you don't want to, but you might at
least be polite," or "Now, have you left your essay on Vermeer here, so
that you can do a little more to it to-morrow? What a lazy-bones! I'm
going to make you work, I can tell you," which proved that Odette kept
herself in touch with his social engagements and his literary work, that
they had indeed a life in common. And as she spoke she bestowed on him a
smile which he interpreted as meaning that she was entirely his.

And then, while she was making them some orangeade, suddenly, just as
when the reflector of a lamp that is badly fitted begins by casting
all round an object, on the wall beyond it, huge and fantastic shadows
which, in time, contract and are lost in the shadow of the object
itself, all the terrible and disturbing ideas which he had formed of
Odette melted away and vanished in the charming creature who stood there
before his eyes. He had the sudden suspicion that this hour spent in
Odette's house, in the lamp-light, was, perhaps, after all, not an
artificial hour, invented for his special use (with the object of
concealing that frightening and delicious thing which was incessantly
in his thoughts without his ever being able to form a satisfactory
impression of it, an hour of Odette's real life, of her life when he was
not there, looking on) with theatrical properties and pasteboard fruits,
but was perhaps a genuine hour of Odette's life; that, if he himself
had not been there, she would have pulled forward the same armchair for
Forcheville, would have poured out for him, not any unknown brew, but
precisely that orangeade which she was now offering to them both; that
the world inhabited by Odette was not that other world, fearful and
supernatural, in which he spent his time in placing her--and which
existed, perhaps, only in his imagination, but the real universe,
exhaling no special atmosphere of gloom, comprising that table at which
he might sit down, presently, and write, and this drink which he was
being permitted, now, to taste; all the objects which he contemplated
with as much curiosity and admiration as gratitude, for if, in absorbing
his dreams, they had delivered him from an obsession, they themselves
were, in turn, enriched by the absorption; they shewed him the palpable
realisation of his fancies, and they interested his mind; they took
shape and grew solid before his eyes, and at the same time they soothed
his troubled heart. Ah! had fate but allowed him to share a single
dwelling with Odette, so that in her house he should be in his own; if,
when asking his servant what there would be for luncheon, it had been
Odette's bill of fare that he had learned from the reply; if, when
Odette wished to go for a walk, in the morning, along the Avenue du
Bois-de-Boulogne, his duty as a good husband had obliged him, though he
had no desire to go out, to accompany her, carrying her cloak when she
was too warm; and in the evening, after dinner, if she wished to stay at
home, and not to dress, if he had been forced to stay beside her, to
do what she asked; then how completely would all the trivial details
of Swann's life, which seemed to him now so gloomy, simply because they
would, at the same time, have formed part of the life of Odette, have
taken on--like that lamp, that orangeade, that armchair, which had
absorbed so much of his dreams, which materialised so much of his
longing,--a sort of superabundant sweetness and a mysterious solidity.

And yet he was inclined to suspect that the state for which he so much
longed was a calm, a peace, which would not have created an atmosphere
favourable to his love. When Odette ceased to be for him a creature
always absent, regretted, imagined; when the feeling that he had for her
was no longer the same mysterious disturbance that was wrought in him by
the phrase from the sonata, but constant affection and gratitude, when
those normal relations were established between them which would put an
end to his melancholy madness; then, no doubt, the actions of Odette's
daily life would appear to him as being of but little intrinsic
interest--as he had several times, already, felt that they might be,
on the day, for instance, when he had read, through its envelope, her
letter to Forcheville. Examining his complaint with as much scientific
detachment as if he had inoculated himself with it in order to study
its effects, he told himself that, when he was cured of it, what Odette
might or might not do would be indifferent to him. But in his morbid
state, to tell the truth, he feared death itself no more than such a
recovery, which would, in fact, amount to the death of all that he then
was.

After these quiet evenings, Swann's suspicions would be temporarily
lulled; he would bless the name of Odette, and next day, in the morning,
would order the most attractive jewels to be sent to her, because her
kindnesses to him overnight had excited either his gratitude, or the
desire to see them repeated, or a paroxysm of love for her which had
need of some such outlet.

But at other times, grief would again take hold of him; he would imagine
that Odette was Forcheville's mistress, and that, when they had both sat
watching him from the depths of the Verdurins' landau, in the Bois, on
the evening before the party at Chatou to which he had not been invited,
while he implored her in vain, with that look of despair on his face
which even his coachman had noticed, to come home with him, and then
turned away, solitary, crushed,--she must have employed, to draw
Forcheville's attention to him, while she murmured: "Do look at him,
storming!" the same glance, brilliant, malicious, sidelong, cunning, as
on the evening when Forcheville had driven Saniette from the Verdurins'.

At such times Swann detested her. "But I've been a fool, too," he would
argue. "I'm paying for other men's pleasures with my money. All the
same, she'd better take care, and not pull the string too often, for
I might very well stop giving her anything at all. At any rate, we'd
better knock off supplementary favours for the time being. To think
that, only yesterday, when she said she would like to go to Bayreuth
for the season, I was such an ass as to offer to take one of those jolly
little places the King of Bavaria has there, for the two of us. However
she didn't seem particularly keen; she hasn't said yes or no yet. Let's
hope that she'll refuse. Good God! Think of listening to Wagner for a
fortnight on end with her, who takes about as much interest in music as
a fish does in little apples; it will be fun!" And his hatred, like
his love, needing to manifest itself in action, he amused himself with
urging his evil imaginings further and further, because, thanks to the
perfidies with which he charged Odette, he detested her still more, and
would be able, if it turned out--as he tried to convince himself--that
she was indeed guilty of them, to take the opportunity of punishing her,
emptying upon her the overflowing vials of his wrath. In this way, he
went so far as to suppose that he was going to receive a letter from
her, in which she would ask him for money to take the house at Bayreuth,
but with the warning that he was not to come there himself, as she had
promised Forcheville and the Verdurins to invite them. Oh, how he
would have loved it, had it been conceivable that she would have
that audacity. What joy he would have in refusing, in drawing up that
vindictive reply, the terms of which he amused himself by selecting and
declaiming aloud, as though he had actually received her letter.

The very next day, her letter came. She wrote that the Verdurins and
their friends had expressed a desire to be present at these performances
of Wagner, and that, if he would be so good as to send her the money,
she would be able at last, after going so often to their house, to have
the pleasure of entertaining the Verdurins in hers. Of him she said not
a word; it was to be taken for granted that their presence at Bayreuth
would be a bar to his.

Then that annihilating answer, every word of which he had carefully
rehearsed overnight, without venturing to hope that it could ever be
used, he had the satisfaction of having it conveyed to her. Alas! he
felt only too certain that with the money which she had, or could easily
procure, she would be able, all the same, to take a house at Bayreuth,
since she wished to do so, she who was incapable of distinguishing
between Bach and Clapisson. Let her take it, then; she would have to
live in it more frugally, that was all. No means (as there would have
been if he had replied by sending her several thousand-franc notes) of
organising, each evening, in her hired castle, those exquisite little
suppers, after which she might perhaps be seized by the whim (which,
it was possible, had never yet seized her) of falling into the arms of
Forcheville. At any rate, this loathsome expedition, it would not be
Swann who had to pay for it. Ah! if he could only manage to prevent
it, if she could sprain her ankle before starting, if the driver of the
carriage which was to take her to the station would consent (no matter
how great the bribe) to smuggle her to some place where she could be
kept for a time in seclusion, that perfidious woman, her eyes tinselled
with a smile of complicity for Forcheville, which was what Odette had
become for Swann in the last forty-eight hours.

But she was never that for very long; after a few days the shining,
crafty eyes lost their brightness and their duplicity, that picture of
an execrable Odette saying to Forcheville: "Look at him storming!" began
to grow pale and to dissolve. Then gradually reappeared and rose before
him, softly radiant, the face of the other Odette, of that Odette who
also turned with a smile to Forcheville, but with a smile in which there
was nothing but affection for Swann, when she said: "You mustn't stay
long, for this gentleman doesn't much like my having visitors when he's
here. Oh! if you only knew the creature as I know him!" that same smile
with which she used to thank Swann for some instance of his courtesy
which she prized so highly, for some advice for which she had asked him
in one of those grave crises in her life, when she could turn to him
alone.

Then, to this other Odette, he would ask himself what could have induced
him to write that outrageous letter, of which, probably, until then,
she had never supposed him capable, a letter which must have lowered him
from the high, from the supreme place which, by his generosity, by his
loyalty, he had won for himself in her esteem. He would become less dear
to her, since it was for those qualities, which she found neither in
Forcheville nor in any other, that she loved him. It was for them that
Odette so often shewed him a reciprocal kindness, which counted for less
than nothing in his moments of jealousy, because it was not a sign of
reciprocal desire, was indeed a proof rather of affection than of love,
but the importance of which he began once more to feel in proportion as
the spontaneous relaxation of his suspicions, often accelerated by the
distraction brought to him by reading about art or by the conversation
of a friend, rendered his passion less exacting of reciprocities.

Now that, after this swing of the pendulum, Odette had naturally
returned to the place from which Swann's jealousy had for the moment
driven her, in the angle in which he found her charming, he pictured her
to himself as full of tenderness, with a look of consent in her eyes,
and so beautiful that he could not refrain from moving his lips towards
her, as though she had actually been in the room for him to kiss; and
he preserved a sense of gratitude to her for that bewitching, kindly
glance, as strong as though she had really looked thus at him, and it
had not been merely his imagination that had portrayed it in order to
satisfy his desire.

What distress he must have caused her! Certainly he found adequate
reasons for his resentment, but they would not have been sufficient to
make him feel that resentment, if he had not so passionately loved her.
Had he not nourished grievances, just as serious, against other women,
to whom he would, none the less, render willing service to-day, feeling
no anger towards them because he no longer loved them? If the day ever
came when he would find himself in the same state of indifference with
regard to Odette, he would then understand that it was his jealousy
alone which had led him to find something atrocious, unpardonable, in
this desire (after all, so natural a desire, springing from a childlike
ingenuousness and also from a certain delicacy in her nature) to be
able, in her turn, when an occasion offered, to repay the Verdurins for
their hospitality, and to play the hostess in a house of her own.

He returned to the other point of view--opposite to that of his love
and of his jealousy, to which he resorted at times by a sort of mental
equity, and in order to make allowance for different eventualities--from
which he tried to form a fresh judgment of Odette, based on the
supposition that he had never been in love with her, that she was to him
just a woman like other women, that her life had not been (whenever he
himself was not present) different, a texture woven in secret apart from
him, and warped against him.

Wherefore believe that she would enjoy down there with Forcheville or
with other men intoxicating pleasures which she had never known with
him, and which his jealousy alone had fabricated in all their elements?
At Bayreuth, as in Paris, if it should happen that Forcheville thought
of him at all, it would only be as of some one who counted for a great
deal in the life of Odette, some one for whom he was obliged to make
way, when they met in her house. If Forcheville and she scored a
triumph by being down there together in spite of him, it was he who had
engineered that triumph by striving in vain to prevent her from going
there, whereas if he had approved of her plan, which for that matter was
quite defensible, she would have had the appearance of being there by
his counsel, she would have felt herself sent there, housed there by
him, and for the pleasure which she derived from entertaining those
people who had so often entertained her, it was to him that she would
have had to acknowledge her indebtedness.

And if--instead of letting her go off thus, at cross-purposes with him,
without having seen him again--he were to send her this money, if he
were to encourage her to take this journey, and to go out of his way to
make it comfortable and pleasant for her, she would come running to him,
happy, grateful, and he would have the joy--the sight of her face--which
he had not known for nearly a week, a joy which none other could
replace. For the moment that Swann was able to form a picture of her
without revulsion, that he could see once again the friendliness in
her smile, and that the desire to tear her away from every rival was
no longer imposed by his jealousy upon his love, that love once again
became, more than anything, a taste for the sensations which Odette's
person gave him, for the pleasure which he found in admiring, as one
might a spectacle, or in questioning, as one might a phenomenon, the
birth of one of her glances, the formation of one of her smiles, the
utterance of an intonation of her voice. And this pleasure, different
from every other, had in the end created in him a need of her, which
she alone, by her presence or by her letters, could assuage, almost as
disinterested, almost as artistic, as perverse as another need which
characterised this new period in Swann's life, when the sereness,
the depression of the preceding years had been followed by a sort of
spiritual superabundance, without his knowing to what he owed this
unlooked-for enrichment of his life, any more than a person in delicate
health who from a certain moment grows stronger, puts on flesh, and
seems for a time to be on the road to a complete recovery:--this
other need, which, too, developed in him independently of the visible,
material world, was the need to listen to music and to learn to know it.

And so, by the chemical process of his malady, after he had created
jealousy out of his love, he began again to generate tenderness, pity
for Odette. She had become once more the old Odette, charming and kind.
He was full of remorse for having treated her harshly. He wished her to
come to him, and, before she came, he wished to have already procured
for her some pleasure, so as to watch her gratitude taking shape in her
face and moulding her smile.

So, too, Odette, certain of seeing him come to her in a few days,
as tender and submissive as before, and plead with her for a
reconciliation, became inured, was no longer afraid of displeasing him,
or even of making him angry, and refused him, whenever it suited her,
the favours by which he set most store.

Perhaps she did not realise how sincere he had been with her during
their quarrel, when he had told her that he would not send her any
money, but would do what he could to hurt her. Perhaps she did not
realise, either, how sincere he still was, if not with her, at any rate
with himself, on other occasions when, for the sake of their future
relations, to shew Odette that he was capable of doing without her, that
a rupture was still possible between them, he decided to wait some time
before going to see her again.

Sometimes several days had elapsed, during which she had caused him no
fresh anxiety; and as, from the next few visits which he would pay her,
he knew that he was likely to derive not any great pleasure, but, more
probably, some annoyance which would put an end to the state of calm in
which he found himself, he wrote to her that he was very busy, and
would not be able to see her on any of the days that he had suggested.
Meanwhile, a letter from her, crossing his, asked him to postpone one of
those very meetings. He asked himself, why; his suspicions, his grief,
again took hold of him. He could no longer abide, in the new state of
agitation into which he found himself plunged, by the arrangements which
he had made in his preceding state of comparative calm; he would run
to find her, and would insist upon seeing her on each of the following
days. And even if she had not written first, if she merely acknowledged
his letter, it was enough to make him unable to rest without seeing
her. For, upsetting all Swann's calculations, Odette's acceptance had
entirely changed his attitude. Like everyone who possesses something
precious, so as to know what would happen if he ceased for a moment to
possess it, he had detached the precious object from his mind, leaving,
as he thought, everything else in the same state as when it was there.
But the absence of one part from a whole is not only that, it is not
simply a partial omission, it is a disturbance of all the other parts, a
new state which it was impossible to foresee from the old.

But at other times--when Odette was on the point of going away for a
holiday--it was after some trifling quarrel for which he had chosen the
pretext, that he decided not to write to her and not to see her until
her return, giving the appearance (and expecting the reward) of
a serious rupture, which she would perhaps regard as final, to a
separation, the greater part of which was inevitable, since she was
going away, which, in fact, he was merely allowing to start a little
sooner than it must. At once he could imagine Odette, puzzled, anxious,
distressed at having received neither visit nor letter from him and this
picture of her, by calming his jealousy, made it easy for him to break
himself of the habit of seeing her. At odd moments, no doubt, in the
furthest recesses of his brain, where his determination had thrust
it away, and thanks to the length of the interval, the three weeks'
separation to which he had agreed, it was with pleasure that he would
consider the idea that he would see Odette again on her return; but it
was also with so little impatience that he began to ask himself whether
he would not readily consent to the doubling of the period of so easy an
abstinence. It had lasted, so far, but three days, a much shorter time
than he had often, before, passed without seeing Odette, and without
having, as on this occasion he had, premeditated a separation. And
yet, there and then, some tiny trace of contrariety in his mind, or
of weakness in his body,--by inciting him to regard the present as an
exceptional moment, one not to be governed by the rules, one in which
prudence itself would allow him to take advantage of the soothing
effects of a pleasure and to give his will (until the time should come
when its efforts might serve any purpose) a holiday--suspended the
action of his will, which ceased to exert its inhibitive control; or,
without that even, the thought of some information for which he had
forgotten to ask Odette, such as if she had decided in what colour she
would have her carriage repainted, or, with regard to some investment,
whether they were 'ordinary' or 'preference' shares that she wished him
to buy (for it was all very well to shew her that he could live without
seeing her, but if, after that, the carriage had to be painted over
again, if the shares produced no dividend, a fine lot of good he would
have done),--and suddenly, like a stretched piece of elastic which is
let go, or the air in a pneumatic machine which is ripped open, the idea
of seeing her again, from the remote point in time to which it had been
attached, sprang back into the field of the present and of immediate
possibilities.

It sprang back thus without meeting any further resistance, so
irresistible, in fact, that Swann had been far less unhappy in watching
the end gradually approaching, day by day, of the fortnight which he
must spend apart from Odette, than he was when kept waiting ten minutes
while his coachman brought round the carriage which was to take him to
her, minutes which he passed in transports of impatience and joy, in
which he recaptured a thousand times over, to lavish on it all the
wealth of his affection, that idea of his meeting with Odette, which, by
so abrupt a repercussion, at a moment when he supposed it so remote, was
once more present and on the very surface of his consciousness. The fact
was that this idea no longer found, as an obstacle in its course, the
desire to contrive without further delay to resist its coming, which
had ceased to have any place in Swann's mind since, having proved to
himself--or so, at least, he believed--that he was so easily capable of
resisting it, he no longer saw any inconvenience in postponing a plan of
separation which he was now certain of being able to put into operation
whenever he would. Furthermore, this idea of seeing her again came back
to him adorned with a novelty, a seductiveness, armed with a virulence,
all of which long habit had enfeebled, but which had acquired new vigour
during this privation, not of three days but of a fortnight (for a
period of abstinence may be calculated, by anticipation, as having
lasted already until the final date assigned to it), and had converted
what had been, until then, a pleasure in store, which could easily be
sacrificed, into an unlooked-for happiness which he was powerless to
resist. Finally, the idea returned to him with its beauty enhanced by
his own ignorance of what Odette might have thought, might, perhaps,
have done on finding that he shewed no sign of life, with the result
that he was going now to meet with the entrancing revelation of an
Odette almost unknown.

But she, just as she had supposed that his refusal to send her money was
only a feint, saw nothing but a pretext in the question which he came,
now, to ask her, about the repainting of her carriage, or the purchase
of stock. For she could not reconstruct the several phases of these
crises through which he passed, and in the general idea which she formed
of them she made no attempt to understand their mechanism, looking only
to what she knew beforehand, their necessary, never-failing and always
identical termination. An imperfect idea (though possibly all the more
profound in consequence), if one were to judge it from the point of
view of Swann, who would doubtless have considered that Odette failed
to understand him, just as a morphinomaniac or a consumptive, each
persuaded that he has been thrown back, one by some outside event,
at the moment when he was just going to shake himself free from his
inveterate habit, the other by an accidental indisposition at the
moment when he was just going to be finally cured, feels himself to be
misunderstood by the doctor who does not attach the same importance
to these pretended contingencies, mere disguises, according to him,
assumed, so as to be perceptible by his patients, by the vice of one
and the morbid state of the other, which in reality have never ceased
to weigh heavily and incurably upon them while they were nursing their
dreams of normality and health. And, as a matter of fact, Swann's
love had reached that stage at which the physician and (in the case of
certain affections) the boldest of surgeons ask themselves whether
to deprive a patient of his vice or to rid him of his malady is still
reasonable, or indeed possible.

Certainly, of the extent of this love Swann had no direct knowledge.
When he sought to measure it, it happened sometimes that he found it
diminished, shrunken almost to nothing; for instance, the very moderate
liking, amounting almost to dislike, which, in the days before he was
in love with Odette, he had felt for her expressive features, her faded
complexion, returned on certain days. "Really, I am making distinct
headway," he would tell himself on the morrow, "when I come to think it
over carefully, I find out that I got hardly any pleasure, last night,
out of being in bed with her; it's an odd thing, but I actually thought
her ugly." And certainly he was sincere, but his love extended a long
way beyond the province of physical desire. Odette's person, indeed,
no longer held any great place in it. When his eyes fell upon the
photograph of Odette on his table, or when she came to see him, he
had difficulty in identifying her face, either in the flesh or on the
pasteboard, with the painful and continuous anxiety which dwelt in his
mind. He would say to himself, almost with astonishment, "It is she!" as
when suddenly some one shews us in a detached, externalised form one
of our own maladies, and we find in it no resemblance to what we are
suffering. "She?"--he tried to ask himself what that meant; for it
is something like love, like death (rather than like those vague
conceptions of maladies), a thing which one repeatedly calls in
question, in order to make oneself probe further into it, in the fear
that the question will find no answer, that the substance will escape
our grasp--the mystery of personality. And this malady, which was
Swann's love, had so far multiplied, was so closely interwoven with all
his habits, with all his actions, with his thoughts, his health, his
sleep, his life, even with what he hoped for after his death, was so
entirely one with him that it would have been impossible to wrest it
away without almost entirely destroying him; as surgeons say, his case
was past operation.

By this love Swann had been so far detached from all other interests
that when by chance he reappeared in the world of fashion, reminding
himself that his social relations, like a beautifully wrought setting
(although she would not have been able to form any very exact estimate
of its worth), might, still, add a little to his own value in Odette's
eyes (as indeed they might have done had they not been cheapened by his
love itself, which for Odette depreciated everything that it touched by
seeming to denounce such things as less precious than itself), he would
feel there, simultaneously with his distress at being in places and
among people that she did not know, the same detached sense of pleasure
as he would have derived from a novel or a painting in which were
depicted the amusements of a leisured class; just as, at home, he used
to enjoy the thought of the smooth efficiency of his household, the
smartness of his own wardrobe and of his servants' liveries, the
soundness of his investments, with the same relish as when he read in
Saint-Simon, who was one of his favourite authors, of the machinery of
daily life at Versailles, what Mme. de Maintenon ate and drank, or the
shrewd avarice and great pomp of Lulli. And in the small extent to which
this detachment was not absolute, the reason for this new pleasure which
Swann was tasting was that he could emigrate for a moment into those few
and distant parts of himself which had remained almost foreign to his
love and to his pain. In this respect the personality, with which my
great-aunt endowed him, of 'young Swann,' as distinct from the more
individual personality of Charles Swann, was that in which he now most
delighted. Once when, because it was the birthday of the Princesse de
Parme (and because she could often be of use, indirectly, to Odette,
by letting her have seats for galas and jubilees and all that sort of
thing), he had decided to send her a basket of fruit, and was not quite
sure where or how to order it, he had entrusted the task to a cousin of
his mother who, delighted to be doing a commission for him, had written
to him, laying stress on the fact that she had not chosen all the fruit
at the same place, but the grapes from Crapote, whose speciality they
were, the strawberries from Jauret, the pears from Chevet, who always
had the best, am soon, "every fruit visited and examined, one by one,
by myself." And in the sequel, by the cordiality with which the
Princess thanked him, he had been able to judge of the flavour of the
strawberries and of the ripeness of the pears. But, most of all, that
"every fruit visited and examined one by one, by myself" had brought
balm to his sufferings by carrying his mind off to a region which he
rarely visited, although it was his by right, as the heir of a rich
and respectable middle-class family in which had been handed down from
generation to generation the knowledge of the 'right places' and the art
of ordering things from shops.

Of a truth, he had too long forgotten that he was 'young Swann' not to
feel, when he assumed that part again for a moment, a keener pleasure
than he was capable of feeling at other times--when, indeed, he was
grown sick of pleasure; and if the friendliness of the middle-class
people, for whom he had never been anything else than 'young Swann,' was
less animated than that of the aristocrats (though more flattering, for
all that, since in the middle-class mind friendship is inseparable from
respect), no letter from a Royal Personage, offering him some princely
entertainment, could ever be so attractive to Swann as the letter which
asked him to be a witness, or merely to be present at a wedding in the
family of some old friends of his parents; some of whom had 'kept up'
with him, like my grandfather, who, the year before these events, had
invited him to my mother's wedding, while others barely knew him by
sight, but were, they thought, in duty bound to shew civility to the
son, to the worthy successor of the late M. Swann.

But, by virtue of his intimacy, already time-honoured, with so many of
them, the people of fashion, in a certain sense, were also a part of his
house, his service, and his family. He felt, when his mind dwelt upon
his brilliant connections, the same external support, the same solid
comfort as when he looked at the fine estate, the fine silver, the
fine table-linen which had come down to him from his forebears. And the
thought that, if he were seized by a sudden illness and confined to the
house, the people whom his valet would instinctively run to find would
be the Duc de Chartres, the Prince de Reuss, the Duc de Luxembourg
and the Baron de Charlus, brought him the same consolation as our old
Françoise derived from the knowledge that she would, one day, be buried
in her own fine clothes, marked with her name, not darned at all (or so
exquisitely darned that it merely enhanced one's idea of the skill and
patience of the seamstress), a shroud from the constant image of which
in her mind's eye she drew a certain satisfactory sense, if not actually
of wealth and prosperity, at any rate of self-esteem. But most of
all,--since in every one of his actions and thoughts which had reference
to Odette, Swann was constantly subdued and swayed by the unconfessed
feeling that he was, perhaps not less dear, but at least less welcome
to her than anyone, even the most wearisome of the Verdurins'
'faithful,'--when he betook himself to a world in which he was the
paramount example of taste, a man whom no pains were spared to attract,
whom people were genuinely sorry not to see, he began once again to
believe in the existence of a happier life, almost to feel an appetite
for it, as an invalid may feel who has been in bed for months and on a
strict diet, when he picks up a newspaper and reads the account of an
official banquet or the advertisement of a cruise round Sicily.

If he was obliged to make excuses to his fashionable friends for not
paying them visits, it was precisely for the visits that he did pay her
that he sought to excuse himself to Odette. He still paid them (asking
himself at the end of each month whether, seeing that he had perhaps
exhausted her patience, and had certainly gone rather often to see her,
it would be enough if he sent her four thousand francs), and for each
visit he found a pretext, a present that he had to bring her, some
information which she required, M. de Charlus, whom he had met actually
going to her house, and who had insisted upon Swann's accompanying him.
And, failing any excuse, he would beg M. de Charlus to go to her
at once, and to tell her, as though spontaneously, in the course of
conversation, that he had just remembered something that he had to say
to Swann, and would she please send a message to Swann's house asking
him to come to her then and there; but as a rule Swann waited at home
in vain, and M. de Charlus informed him, later in the evening, that his
device had not proved successful. With the result that, if she was now
frequently away from Paris, even when she was there he scarcely saw her;
that she who, when she was in love with him, used to say, "I am always
free" and "What can it matter to me, what other people think?" now,
whenever he wanted to see her, appealed to the proprieties or pleaded
some engagement. When he spoke of going to a charity entertainment, or a
private view, or a first-night at which she was to be present, she would
expostulate that he wished to advertise their relations in public, that
he was treating her like a woman off the streets. Things came to such a
pitch that, in an effort to save himself from being altogether forbidden
to meet her anywhere, Swann, remembering that she knew and was deeply
attached to my great-uncle Adolphe, whose friend he himself also
had been, went one day to see him in his little flat in the Rue
de Bellechasse, to ask him to use his influence with Odette. As it
happened, she invariably adopted, when she spoke to Swann about my
uncle, a poetical tone, saying: "Ah, he! He is not in the least
like you; it is an exquisite thing, a great, a beautiful thing, his
friendship for me. He's not the sort of man who would have so little
consideration for me as to let himself be seen with me everywhere in
public." This was embarrassing for Swann, who did not know quite to what
rhetorical pitch he should screw himself up in speaking of Odette to my
uncle. He began by alluding to her excellence, _a priori_, the axiom
of her seraphic super-humanity, the revelation of her inexpressible
virtues, no conception of which could possibly be formed. "I should
like to speak to you about her," he went on, "you, who know what a woman
supreme above all women, what an adorable being, what an angel Odette
is. But you know, also, what life is in Paris. Everyone doesn't see
Odette in the light in which you and I have been privileged to see her.
And so there are people who think that I am behaving rather foolishly;
she won't even allow me to meet her out of doors, at the theatre. Now
you, in whom she has such enormous confidence, couldn't you say a few
words for me to her, just to assure her that she exaggerates the harm
which my bowing to her in the street might do her?"

My uncle advised Swann not to see Odette for some days, after which she
would love him all the more; he advised Odette to let Swann meet her
everywhere, and as often as he pleased. A few days later Odette told
Swann that she had just had a rude awakening; she had discovered that
my uncle was the same as other men; he had tried to take her by assault.
She calmed Swann, who, at first, was for rushing out to challenge my
uncle to a duel, but he refused to shake hands with him when they met
again. He regretted this rupture all the more because he had hoped, if
he had met my uncle Adolphe again sometimes and had contrived to talk
things over with him in strict confidence, to be able to get him to
throw a light on certain rumours with regard to the life that Odette had
led, in the old days, at Nice. For my uncle Adolphe used to spend the
winter there, and Swann thought that it might indeed have been there,
perhaps, that he had first known Odette. The few words which some one
had let fall, in his hearing, about a man who, it appeared, had been
Odette's lover, had left Swann dumbfounded. But the very things which he
would, before knowing them, have regarded as the most terrible to
learn and the most impossible to believe, were, once he knew them,
incorporated for all time in the general mass of his sorrow; he admitted
them, he could no longer have understood their not existing. Only,
each one of them in its passage traced an indelible line, altering the
picture that he had formed of his mistress. At one time indeed he felt
that he could understand that this moral 'lightness,' of which he would
never have suspected Odette, was perfectly well known, and that at Baden
or Nice, when she had gone, in the past, to spend several months in
one or the other place, she had enjoyed a sort of amorous notoriety.
He attempted, in order to question them, to get into touch again with
certain men of that stamp; but these were aware that he knew Odette,
and, besides, he was afraid of putting the thought of her into their
heads, of setting them once more upon her track. But he, to whom,
up till then, nothing could have seemed so tedious as was all that
pertained to the cosmopolitan life of Baden or of Nice, now that
he learned that Odette had, perhaps, led a 'gay' life once in those
pleasure-cities, although he could never find out whether it had been
solely to satisfy a want of money which, thanks to himself, she no
longer felt, or from some capricious instinct which might, at any
moment, revive in her, he would lean, in impotent anguish, blinded and
dizzy, over the bottomless abyss into which had passed, in which had
been engulfed those years of his own, early in MacMahon's _Septennat_,
in which one spent the winter on the Promenade des Anglais, the summer
beneath the limes of Baden, and would find in those years a sad but
splendid profundity, such as a poet might have lent to them; and he
would have devoted to the reconstruction of all the insignificant
details that made up the daily round on the Côte d'Azur in those days,
if it could have helped him to understand something that still baffled
him in the smile or in the eyes of Odette, more enthusiasm than does
the aesthete who ransacks the extant documents of fifteenth-century
Florence, so as to try to penetrate further into the soul of the
Primavera, the fair Vanna or the Venus of Botticelli. He would sit,
often, without saying a word to her, only gazing at her and dreaming;
and she would comment: "You do look sad!" It was not very long since,
from the idea that she was an excellent creature, comparable to the best
women that he had known, he had passed to that of her being 'kept'; and
yet already, by an inverse process, he had returned from the Odette de
Crécy, perhaps too well known to the holiday-makers, to the 'ladies'
men' of Nice and Baden, to this face, the expression on which was so
often gentle, to this nature so eminently human. He would ask himself:
"What does it mean, after all, to say that everyone at Nice knows who
Odette de Crécy is? Reputations of that sort, even when they're true,
are always based upon other people's ideas"; he would reflect that this
legend--even if it were authentic--was something external to Odette,
was not inherent in her like a mischievous and ineradicable personality;
that the creature who might have been led astray was a woman with frank
eyes, a heart full of pity for the sufferings of others, a docile body
which he had pressed tightly in his arms and explored with his fingers,
a woman of whom he might one day come into absolute possession if he
succeeded in making himself indispensable to her. There she was,
often tired, her face left blank for the nonce by that eager, feverish
preoccupation with the unknown things which made Swann suffer; she would
push back her hair with both hands; her forehead, her whole face would
seem to grow larger; then, suddenly, some ordinary human thought, some
worthy sentiment such as is to be found in all creatures when, in a
moment of rest or meditation, they are free to express themselves, would
flash out from her eyes like a ray of gold. And immediately the whole of
her face would light up like a grey landscape, swathed in clouds which,
suddenly, are swept away and the dull scene transfigured, at the moment
of the sun's setting. The life which occupied Odette at such times, even
the future which she seemed to be dreamily regarding, Swann could have
shared with her. No evil disturbance seemed to have left any effect on
them. Rare as they became, those moments did not occur in vain. By the
process of memory, Swann joined the fragments together, abolished the
intervals between them, cast, as in molten gold, the image of an Odette
compact of kindness and tranquillity, for whom he was to make, later on
(as we shall see in the second part of this story) sacrifices which the
other Odette would never have won from him. But how rare those moments
were, and how seldom he now saw her! Even in regard to their evening
meetings, she would never tell him until the last minute whether she
would be able to see him, for, reckoning on his being always free, she
wished first to be certain that no one else would offer to come to her.
She would plead that she was obliged to wait for an answer which was of
the very greatest importance, and if, even after she had made Swann
come to her house, any of her friends asked her, half-way through the
evening, to join them at some theatre, or at supper afterwards, she
would jump for joy and dress herself with all speed. As her toilet
progressed, every movement that she made brought Swann nearer to the
moment when he would have to part from her, when she would fly off with
irresistible force; and when at length she was ready, and, plunging into
her mirror a last glance strained and brightened by her anxiety to look
well, smeared a little salve on her lips, fixed a stray loci of hair
over her brow, and called for her cloak of sky-blue silk with golden
tassels, Swann would be looking so wretched that she would be unable to
restrain a gesture of impatience as she flung at him: "So that is how
you thank me for keeping you here till the last minute! And I thought
I was being so nice to you. Well, I shall know better another time!"
Sometimes, at the risk of annoying her, he made up his mind that he
would find out where she had gone, and even dreamed of a defensive
alliance with Forcheville, who might perhaps have been able to tell him.
But anyhow, when he knew with whom she was spending the evening, it
was very seldom that he could not discover, among all his innumerable
acquaintance, some one who knew--if only indirectly--the man with
whom she had gone out, and could easily obtain this or that piece of
information about him. And while he was writing to one of his friends,
asking him to try to get a little light thrown upon some point or other,
he would feel a sense of relief on ceasing to vex himself with questions
to which there was no answer and transferring to some one else the
strain of interrogation. It is true that Swann was little the wiser for
such information as he did receive. To know a thing does not enable us,
always, to prevent its happening, but after all the things that we know
we do hold, if not in our hands, at any rate in our minds, where we can
dispose of them as we choose, which gives us the illusion of a sort of
power to control them. He was quite happy whenever M. de Charlus was
with Odette. He knew that between M. de Charlus and her nothing untoward
could ever happen, that when M. de Charlus went anywhere with her, it
was out of friendship for himself, and that he would make no difficulty
about telling him everything that she had done. Sometimes she had
declared so emphatically to Swann that it was impossible for him to see
her on a particular evening, she seemed to be looking forward so keenly
to some outing, that Swann attached a very real importance to the fact
that M. de Charlus was free to accompany her. Next day, without daring
to put many questions to M. de Charlus, he would force him, by appearing
not quite to understand his first answers, to give him more, after each
of which he would feel himself increasingly relieved, for he very
soon learned that Odette had spent her evening in the most innocent of
dissipations.

"But what do you mean, my dear Mémé, I don't quite understand.... You
didn't go straight from her house to the Musée Grévin? Surely you went
somewhere else first? No? That is very odd! You don't know how amusing
you are, my dear Mémé. But what an odd idea of hers to go on to the Chat
Noir afterwards; it was her idea, I suppose? No? Yours? That's strange.
After all, it wasn't a bad idea; she must have known dozens of people
there? No? She never spoke to a soul? How extraordinary! Then you sat
there like that, just you and she, all by yourselves? I can picture you,
sitting there! You are a worthy fellow, my dear Mémé; I'm exceedingly
fond of you."

Swann was now quite at ease. To him, who had so often happened, when
talking to friends who knew nothing of his love, friends to whom he
hardly listened, to hear certain detached sentences (as, for instance,
"I saw Mme. de Crécy yesterday; she was with a man I didn't know."),
sentences which dropped into his heart and passed at once into a solid
state, grew hard as stalagmites, and seared and tore him as they lay
there irremovable,--how charming, by way of contrast, were the words:
"She didn't know a soul; she never spoke to a soul." How freely they
coursed through him, how fluid they were, how vaporous, how easy to
breathe! And yet, a moment later, he was telling himself that Odette
must find him very dull if those were the pleasures that she preferred
to his company. And their very insignificance, though it reassured him,
pained him as if her enjoyment of them had been an act of treachery.

Even when he could not discover where she had gone, it would have
sufficed to alleviate the anguish that he then felt, for which Odette's
presence, the charm of her company, was the sole specific (a specific
which in the long run served, like many other remedies, to aggravate the
disease, but at least brought temporary relief to his sufferings), it
would have sufficed, had Odette only permitted him to remain in her
house while she was out, to wait there until that hour of her return,
into whose stillness and peace would flow, to be mingled and lost there,
all memory of those intervening hours which some sorcery, some cursed
spell had made him imagine as, somehow, different from the rest. But she
would not; he must return home; he forced himself, on the way, to form
various plans, ceased to think of Odette; he even reached the stage,
while he undressed, of turning over all sorts of happy ideas in his
mind: it was with a light heart, buoyed with the anticipation of going
to see some favourite work of art on the morrow, that he jumped into
bed and turned out the light; but no sooner had he made himself ready
to sleep, relaxing a self-control of which he was not even conscious,
so habitual had it become, than an icy shudder convulsed his body and he
burst into sobs. He did not wish to know why, but dried his eyes, saying
with a smile: "This is delightful; I'm becoming neurasthenic." After
which he could not save himself from utter exhaustion at the thought
that, next day, he must begin afresh his attempt to find out what Odette
had been doing, must use all his influence to contrive to see her. This
compulsion to an activity without respite, without variety, without
result, was so cruel a scourge that one day, noticing a swelling over
his stomach, he felt an actual joy in the idea that he had, perhaps, a
tumour which would prove fatal, that he need not concern himself with
anything further, that it was his malady which was going to govern his
life, to make a plaything of him, until the not-distant end. If indeed,
at this period, it often happened that, though without admitting it even
to himself, he longed for death, it was in order to escape not so
much from the keenness of his sufferings as from the monotony of his
struggle.

And yet he would have wished to live until the time came when he no
longer loved her, when she would have no reason for lying to him, when
at length he might learn from her whether, on the day when he had gone
to see her in the afternoon, she had or had not been in the arms of
Forcheville. Often for several days on end the suspicion that she was
in love with some one else would distract his mind from the question
of Forcheville, making it almost immaterial to him, like those new
developments of a continuous state of ill-health which seem for a little
time to have delivered us from their predecessors. There were even
days when he was not tormented by any suspicion. He fancied that he was
cured. But next morning, when he awoke, he felt in the same place
the same pain, a sensation which, the day before, he had, as it were,
diluted in the torrent of different impressions. But it had not stirred
from its place. Indeed, it was the sharpness of this pain that had
awakened him.

Since Odette never gave him any information as to those vastly important
matters which took up so much of her time every day (albeit he had lived
long enough in the world to know that such matters are never anything
else than pleasures) he could not sustain for any length of time the
effort to imagine them; his brain would become a void; then he would
pass a finger over his tired eyelids, in the same way as he might have
wiped his eyeglass, and would cease altogether to think. There
emerged, however, from this unexplored tract, certain occupations which
reappeared from time to time, vaguely connected by Odette with some
obligation towards distant relatives or old friends who, inasmuch as
they were the only people whom she was in the habit of mentioning
as preventing her from seeing him, seemed to Swann to compose the
necessary, unalterable setting of her life. Because of the tone in which
she referred, from time to time, to "the day when I go with my friend
to the Hippodrome," if, when he felt unwell and had thought, "Perhaps
Odette would be kind and come to see me," he remembered, suddenly, that
it was one of those very days, he would correct himself with an "Oh,
no! It's not worth while asking her to come; I should have thought of it
before, this is the day when she goes with her friend to the Hippodrome.
We must confine ourselves to what is possible; no use wasting our time
in proposing things that can't be accepted and are declined in
advance." And this duty that was incumbent upon Odette, of going to the
Hippodrome, to which Swann thus gave way, seemed to him to be not merely
ineluctable in itself; but the mark of necessity which stamped it seemed
to make plausible and legitimate everything that was even remotely
connected with it. If, when Odette, in the street, had acknowledged the
salute of a passer-by, which had aroused Swann's jealousy, she replied
to his questions by associating the stranger with any of the two or
three paramount duties of which she had often spoken to him; if, for
instance, she said: "That's a gentleman who was in my friend's box the
other day; the one I go to the Hippodrome with," that explanation would
set Swann's suspicions at rest; it was, after all, inevitable that
this friend should have other guests than Odette in her box at the
Hippodrome, but he had never sought to form or succeeded in forming any
coherent impression of them. Oh! how he would have loved to know her,
that friend who went to the Hippodrome, how he would have loved her to
invite him there with Odette. How readily he would have sacrificed
all his acquaintance for no matter what person who was in the habit of
seeing Odette, were she but a manicurist or a girl out of a shop. He
would have taken more trouble, incurred more expense for them than for
queens. Would they not have supplied him, out of what was contained in
their knowledge of the life of Odette, with the one potent anodyne for
his pain? With what joy would he have hastened to spend his days with
one or other of those humble folk with whom Odette kept up friendly
relations, either with some ulterior motive or from genuine simplicity
of nature. How willingly would he have fixed his abode for ever in the
attics of some sordid but enviable house, where Odette went but never
took him, and where, if he had lived with the little retired dressmaker,
whose lover he would readily have pretended to be, he would have been
visited by Odette almost daily. In those regions, that were almost
slums, what a modest existence, abject, if you please, but delightful,
nourished by tranquillity and happiness, he would have consented to lead
indefinitely.

It sometimes happened, again, that, when, after meeting Swann, she saw
some man approaching whom he did not know, he could distinguish upon
Odette's face that look of sorrow which she had worn on the day when he
had come to her while Forcheville was there. But this was rare; for, on
the days when, in spite of all that she had to do, and of her dread
of what people would think, she did actually manage to see Swann, the
predominant quality in her attitude, now, was self-assurance; a striking
contrast, perhaps an unconscious revenge for, perhaps a natural reaction
from the timorous emotion which, in the early days of their friendship,
she had felt in his presence, and even in his absence, when she began a
letter to him with the words: "My dear, my hand trembles so that I can
scarcely write." (So, at least, she pretended, and a little of that
emotion must have been sincere, or she would not have been anxious to
enlarge and emphasise it.) So Swann had been pleasing to her then. Our
hands do not tremble except for ourselves, or for those whom we love.
When they have ceased to control our happiness how peaceful, how easy,
how bold do we become in their presence! In speaking to him, in writing
to him now, she no longer employed those words by which she had
sought to give herself the illusion that he belonged to her, creating
opportunities for saying "my" and "mine" when she referred to him: "You
are all that I have in the world; it is the perfume of our friendship, I
shall keep it," nor spoke to him of the future, of death itself, as of
a single adventure which they would have to share. In those early days,
whatever he might say to her, she would answer admiringly: "You know,
you will never be like other people!"--she would gaze at his long,
slightly bald head, of which people who know only of his successes
used to think: "He's not regularly good-looking, if you like, but he is
smart; that tuft, that eyeglass, that smile!" and, with more curiosity
perhaps to know him as he really was than desire to become his mistress,
she would sigh:

"I do wish I could find out what there is in that head of yours!"

But, now, whatever he might say, she would answer, in a tone sometimes
of irritation, sometimes indulgent: "Ah! so you never will be like other
people!"

She would gaze at his head, which was hardly aged at all by his recent
anxieties (though people now thought of it, by the same mental process
which enables one to discover the meaning of a piece of symphonic music
of which one has read the programme, or the 'likenesses' in a child
whose family one has known: "He's not positively ugly, if you like,
but he is really rather absurd; that eyeglass, that tuft, that smile!"
realising in their imagination, fed by suggestion, the invisible
boundary which divides, at a few months' interval, the head of an ardent
lover from a cuckold's), and would say:

"Oh, I do wish I could change you; put some sense into that head of
yours."

Always ready to believe in the truth of what he hoped, if it was only
Odette's way of behaving to him that left room for doubt, he would fling
himself greedily upon her words: "You can if you like," he would tell
her.

And he tried to explain to her that to comfort him, to control him, to
make him work would be a noble task, to which numbers of other women
asked for nothing better than to be allowed to devote themselves, though
it is only fair to add that in those other women's hands the noble
task would have seemed to Swann nothing more than an indiscreet and
intolerable usurpation of his freedom of action. "If she didn't love me,
just a little," he told himself, "she would not wish to have me altered.
To alter me, she will have to see me more often." And so he was able to
trace, in these faults which she found in him, a proof at least of
her interest, perhaps even of her love; and, in fact, she gave him so
little, now, of the last, that he was obliged to regard as proofs of
her interest in him the various things which, every now and then, she
forbade him to do. One day she announced that she did not care for his
coachman, who, she thought, was perhaps setting Swann against her, and,
anyhow, did not shew that promptness and deference to Swann's orders
which she would have liked to see. She felt that he wanted to hear her
say: "Don't have him again when you come to me," just as he might have
wanted her to kiss him. So, being in a good temper, she said it; and he
was deeply moved. That evening, when talking to M. de Charlus, with whom
he had the satisfaction of being able to speak of her openly (for the
most trivial remarks that he uttered now, even to people who had never
heard of her, had always some sort of reference to Odette), he said to
him:

"I believe, all the same, that she loves me; she is so nice to me now,
and she certainly takes an interest in what I do."

And if, when he was starting off for her house, getting into his
carriage with a friend whom he was to drop somewhere on the way,
his friend said: "Hullo! that isn't Loredan on the box?" with what
melancholy joy would Swann answer him:

"Oh! Good heavens, no! I can tell you, I daren't take Loredan when I
go to the Rue La Pérouse; Odette doesn't like me to have Loredan, she
thinks he doesn't suit me. What on earth is one to do? Women, you know,
women. My dear fellow, she would be furious. Oh, lord, yes; I've only to
take Rémi there; I should never hear the last of it!"

These new manners, indifferent, listless, irritable, which Odette now
adopted with Swann, undoubtedly made him suffer; but he did not realise
how much he suffered; since it had been with a regular progression, day
after day, that Odette had chilled towards him, it was only by directly
contrasting what she was to-day with what she had been at first that he
could have measured the extent of the change that had taken place. Now
this change was his deep, his secret wound, which pained him day and
night, and whenever he felt that his thoughts were straying too near it,
he would quickly turn them into another channel for fear of being made
to suffer too keenly. He might say to himself in a vague way: "There
was a time when Odette loved me more," but he never formed any definite
picture of that time. Just as he had in his study a cupboard at which he
contrived never to look, which he turned aside to avoid passing whenever
he entered or left the room, because in one of its drawers he had locked
away the chrysanthemum which she had given him on one of those first
evenings when he had taken her home in his carriage, and the letters in
which she said: "Why did you not forget your heart also? I should never
have let you have that back," and "At whatever hour of the day or night
you may need me, just send me a word, and dispose of me as you please,"
so there was a place in his heart to which he would never allow his
thoughts to trespass too near, forcing them, if need be, to evade it by
a long course of reasoning so that they should not have to pass within
reach of it; the place in which lingered his memories of happy days.

But his so meticulous prudence was defeated one evening when he had gone
out to a party.

It was at the Marquise de Saint-Euverte's, on the last, for that season,
of the evenings on which she invited people to listen to the musicians
who would serve, later on, for her charity concerts. Swann, who had
intended to go to each of the previous evenings in turn, but had never
been able to make up his mind, received, while he was dressing for this
party, a visit from the Baron de Charlus, who came with an offer to
go with him to the Marquise's, if his company could be of any use in
helping Swann not to feel quite so bored when he got there, to be a
little less unhappy. But Swann had thanked him with:

"You can't conceive how glad I should be of your company. But the
greatest pleasure that you can give me will be if you will go instead
to see Odette. You know what a splendid influence you have over her. I
don't suppose she'll be going anywhere this evening, unless she goes to
see her old dressmaker, and I'm sure she would be delighted if you went
with her there. In any case, you'll find her at home before then. Try
to keep her amused, and also to give her a little sound advice. If you
could arrange something for to-morrow which would please her, something
that we could all three do together. Try to put out a feeler, too, for
the summer; see if there's anything she wants to do, a cruise that we
might all three take; anything you can think of. I don't count upon
seeing her to-night, myself; still if she would like me to come, or
if you find a loophole, you've only to send me a line at Mme. de
Saint-Euverte's up till midnight; after that I shall be here. Ever so
many thanks for all you are doing for me--you know what I feel about
you!"

His friend promised to go and do as Swann wished as soon as he had
deposited him at the door of the Saint-Euverte house, where he arrived
soothed by the thought that M. de Charlus would be spending the evening
in the Rue La Pérouse, but in a state of melancholy indifference to
everything that did not involve Odette, and in particular to the details
of fashionable life, a state which invested them with the charm that is
to be found in anything which, being no longer an object of our desire,
appears to us in its own guise. On alighting from his carriage, in the
foreground of that fictitious summary of their domestic existence which
hostesses are pleased to offer to their guests on ceremonial occasions,
and in which they shew a great regard for accuracy of costume and
setting, Swann was amused to discover the heirs and successors of
Balzac's 'tigers'--now 'grooms'--. who normally followed their mistress
when she walked abroad, but now, hatted and booted, were posted out
of doors, in front of the house on the gravelled drive, or outside the
stables, as gardeners might be drawn up for inspection at the ends of
their several flower-beds. The peculiar tendency which he had always
had to look for analogies between living people and the portraits
in galleries reasserted itself here, but in a more positive and more
general form; it was society as a whole, now that he was detached
from it, which presented itself to him in a series of pictures. In the
cloak-room, into which, in the old days, when he was still a man of
fashion, he would have gone in his overcoat, to emerge from it in
evening dress, but without any impression of what had occurred there,
his mind having been, during the minute or two that he had spent in
it, either still at the party which he had just left, or already at the
party into which he was just about to be ushered, he now noticed, for
the first time, roused by the unexpected arrival of so belated a guest,
the scattered pack of splendid effortless animals, the enormous footmen
who were drowsing here and there upon benches and chests, until,
pointing their noble greyhound profiles, they towered upon their feet
and gathered in a circle round about him.

One of them, of a particularly ferocious aspect, and not unlike the
headsman in certain Renaissance pictures which represent executions,
tortures, and the like, advanced upon him with an implacable air to take
his 'things.' But the harshness of his steely glare was compensated by
the softness of his cotton gloves, so effectively that, as he approached
Swann, he seemed to be exhibiting at once an utter contempt for his
person and the most tender regard for his hat. He took it with a care to
which the precision of his movements imparted something that was almost
over-fastidious, and with a delicacy that was rendered almost touching
by the evidence of his splendid strength. Then he passed it to one of
his satellites, a novice and timid, who was expressing the panic that
overpowered him by casting furious glances in every direction, and
displayed all the dumb agitation of a wild animal in the first hours of
its captivity.

A few feet away, a strapping great lad in livery stood musing,
motionless, statuesque, useless, like that purely decorative warrior
whom one sees in the most tumultuous of Mantegna's paintings, lost in
dreams, leaning upon his shield, while all around him are fighting and
bloodshed and death; detached from the group of his companions who were
thronging about Swann, he seemed as determined to remain unconcerned in
the scene, which he followed vaguely with his cruel, greenish eyes, as
if it had been the Massacre of the Innocents or the Martyrdom of Saint
James. He seemed precisely to have sprung from that vanished race--if,
indeed, it ever existed, save in the reredos of San Zeno and the
frescoes of the Eremitani, where Swann had come in contact with it, and
where it still dreams--fruit of the impregnation of a classical statue
by some one of the Master's Paduan models, or of Albert Duerer's Saxons.
And the locks of his reddish hair, crinkled by nature, but glued to his
head by brilliantine, were treated broadly as they are in that Greek
sculpture which the Mantuan painter never ceased to study, and which,
if in its creator's purpose it represents but man, manages at least to
extract from man's simple outlines such a variety of richness, borrowed,
as it were, from the whole of animated nature, that a head of hair,
by the glossy undulation and beak-like points of its curls, or in the
overlaying of the florid triple diadem of its brushed tresses, can
suggest at once a bunch of seaweed, a brood of fledgling doves, a bed of
hyacinths and a serpent's writhing back. Others again, no less colossal,
were disposed upon the steps of a monumental staircase which, by their
decorative presence and marmorean immobility, was made worthy to be
named, like that god-crowned ascent in the Palace of the Doges, the
'Staircase of the Giants,' and on which Swann now set foot, saddened by
the thought that Odette had never climbed it. Ah, with what joy would
he, on the other hand, have raced up the dark, evil-smelling, breakneck
flights to the little dressmaker's, in whose attic he would so gladly
have paid the price of a weekly stage-box at the Opera for the right to
spend the evening there when Odette came, and other days too, for the
privilege of talking about her, of living among people whom she was in
the habit of seeing when he was not there, and who, on that account,
seemed to keep secret among themselves some part of the life of his
mistress more real, more inaccessible and more mysterious than anything
that he knew. Whereas upon that pestilential, enviable staircase to
the old dressmaker's, since there was no other, no service stair in the
building, one saw in the evening outside every door an empty, unwashed
milk-can set out, in readiness for the morning round, upon the door-mat;
on the despicable, enormous staircase which Swann was at that moment
climbing, on either side of him, at different levels, before each
anfractuosity made in its walls by the window of the porter's lodge or
the entrance to a set of rooms, representing the departments of indoor
service which they controlled, and doing homage for them to the guests,
a gate-keeper, a major-domo, a steward (worthy men who spent the rest
of the week in semi-independence in their own domains, dined there by
themselves like small shopkeepers, and might to-morrow lapse to the
plebeian service of some successful doctor or industrial magnate),
scrupulous in carrying out to the letter all the instructions that had
been heaped upon them before they were allowed to don the brilliant
livery which they wore only at long intervals, and in which they did not
feel altogether at their ease, stood each in the arcade of his doorway,
their splendid pomp tempered by a democratic good-fellowship, like
saints in their niches, and a gigantic usher, dressed Swiss Guard
fashion, like the beadle in a church, struck the pavement with his staff
as each fresh arrival passed him. Coming to the top of the staircase, up
which he had been followed by a servant with a pallid countenance and
a small pigtail clubbed at the back of his head, like one of Goya's
sacristans or a tabellion in an old play, Swann passed by an office in
which the lackeys, seated like notaries before their massive registers,
rose solemnly to their feet and inscribed his name. He next crossed a
little hall which--just as certain rooms are arranged by their owners
to serve as the setting for a single work of art (from which they
take their name), and, in their studied bareness, contain nothing else
besides--displayed to him as he entered it, like some priceless effigy
by Benvenuto Cellini of an armed watchman, a young footman, his body
slightly bent forward, rearing above his crimson gorget an even more
crimson face, from which seemed to burst forth torrents of fire,
timidity and zeal, who, as he pierced the Aubusson tapestries that
screened the door of the room in which the music was being given with
his impetuous, vigilant, desperate gaze, appeared, with a soldierly
impassibility or a supernatural faith--an allegory of alarums,
incarnation of alertness, commemoration of a riot--to be looking out,
angel or sentinel, from the tower of dungeon or cathedral, for the
approach of the enemy or for the hour of Judgment. Swann had now only to
enter the concert-room, the doors of which were thrown open to him by an
usher loaded with chains, who bowed low before him as though tendering
to him the keys of a conquered city. But he thought of the house
in which at that very moment he might have been, if Odette had but
permitted, and the remembered glimpse of an empty milk-can upon a
door-mat wrung his heart.

He speedily recovered his sense of the general ugliness of the human
male when, on the other side of the tapestry curtain, the spectacle of
the servants gave place to that of the guests. But even this ugliness of
faces, which of course were mostly familiar to him, seemed something new
and uncanny, now that their features,--instead of being to him symbols
of practical utility in the identification of this or that man, who
until then had represented merely so many pleasures to be sought after,
boredoms to be avoided, or courtesies to be acknowledged--were at rest,
measurable by aesthetic co-ordinates alone, in the autonomy of their
curves and angles. And in these men, in the thick of whom Swann now
found himself packed, there was nothing (even to the monocle which many
of them wore, and which, previously, would, at the most, have enabled
Swann to say that so-and-so wore a monocle) which, no longer restricted
to the general connotation of a habit, the same in all of them, did not
now strike him with a sense of individuality in each. Perhaps because
he did not regard General de Froberville and the Marquis de Bréaute, who
were talking together just inside the door, as anything more than two
figures in a picture, whereas they were the old and useful friends who
had put him up for the Jockey Club and had supported him in duels, the
General's monocle, stuck like a shell-splinter in his common, scarred,
victorious, overbearing face, in the middle of a forehead which it
left half-blinded, like the single-eyed flashing front of the Cyclops,
appeared to Swann as a monstrous wound which it might have been glorious
to receive but which it was certainly not decent to expose, while
that which M. de Bréaute wore, as a festive badge, with his pearl-grey
gloves, his crush hat and white tie, substituting it for the familiar
pair of glasses (as Swann himself did) when he went out to places, bore,
glued to its other side, like a specimen prepared on a slide for the
microscope, an infinitesimal gaze that swarmed with friendly feeling and
never ceased to twinkle at the loftiness of ceilings, the delightfulness
of parties, the interestingness of programmes and the excellence of
refreshments.

"Hallo! you here! why, it's ages since I've seen you," the General
greeted Swann and, noticing the look of strain on his face and
concluding that it was perhaps a serious illness that had kept him away,
went on, "You're looking well, old man!" while M. de Bréauté turned
with, "My dear fellow, what on earth are you doing here?" to a 'society
novelist' who had just fitted into the angle of eyebrow and cheek his
own monocle, the sole instrument that he used in his psychological
investigations and remorseless analyses of character, and who now
replied, with an air of mystery and importance, rolling the 'r':--"I am
observing!"

The Marquis de Forestelle's monocle was minute and rimless, and, by
enforcing an incessant and painful contraction of the eye over which it
was incrusted like a superfluous cartilage, the presence of which there
was inexplicable and its substance unimaginable, it gave to his face a
melancholy refinement, and led women to suppose him capable of suffering
terribly when in love. But that of M. de Saint-Candé, girdled, like
Saturn, with an enormous ring, was the centre of gravity of a face which
composed itself afresh every moment in relation to the glass, while
his thrusting red nose and swollen sarcastic lips endeavoured by their
grimaces to rise to the level of the steady flame of wit that sparkled
in the polished disk, and saw itself preferred to the most ravishing
eyes in the world by the smart, depraved young women whom it set
dreaming of artificial charms and a refinement of sensual bliss; and
then, behind him, M. de Palancy, who with his huge carp's head and
goggling eyes moved slowly up and down the stream of festive gatherings,
unlocking his great mandibles at every moment as though in search of
his orientation, had the air of carrying about upon his person only an
accidental and perhaps purely symbolical fragment of the glass wall of
his aquarium, a part intended to suggest the whole which recalled to
Swann, a fervent admirer of Giotto's Vices and Virtues at Padua, that
Injustice by whose side a leafy bough evokes the idea of the forests
that enshroud his secret lair.

Swann had gone forward into the room, under pressure from Mme. de
Saint-Euverte and in order to listen to an aria from _Orfeo_ which was
being rendered on the flute, and had taken up a position in a corner
from which, unfortunately, his horizon was bounded by two ladies of
'uncertain' age, seated side by side, the Marquise de Cambremer and the
Vicomtesse de Franquetot, who, because they were cousins, used to spend
their time at parties in wandering through the rooms, each clutching her
bag and followed by her daughter, hunting for one another like people at
a railway station, and could never be at rest until they had reserved,
by marking them with their fans or handkerchiefs, two adjacent chairs;
Mme. de Cambremer, since she knew scarcely anyone, being all the more
glad of a companion, while Mme. de Franquetot, who, on the contrary,
was extremely popular, thought it effective and original to shew all
her fine friends that she preferred to their company that of an obscure
country cousin with whom she had childish memories in common. Filled
with ironical melancholy, Swann watched them as they listened to the
pianoforte intermezzo (Liszt's 'Saint Francis preaching to the birds')
which came after the flute, and followed the virtuoso in his dizzy
flight; Mme. de Franquetot anxiously, her eyes starting from her head,
as though the keys over which his fingers skipped with such agility were
a series of trapezes, from any one of which he might come crashing,
a hundred feet, to the ground, stealing now and then a glance of
astonishment and unbelief at her companion, as who should say: "It isn't
possible, I would never have believed that a human being could do all
that!"; Mme. de Cambremer, as a woman who had received a sound musical
education, beating time with her head--transformed for the nonce into
the pendulum of a metronome, the sweep and rapidity of whose movements
from one shoulder to the other (performed with that look of wild
abandonment in her eye which a sufferer shews who is no longer able to
analyse his pain, nor anxious to master it, and says merely "I can't
help it") so increased that at every moment her diamond earrings caught
in the trimming of her bodice, and she was obliged to put straight the
bunch of black grapes which she had in her hair, though without any
interruption of her constantly accelerated motion. On the other side
(and a little way in front) of Mme. de Franquetot, was the Marquise de
Gallardon, absorbed in her favourite meditation, namely upon her own
kinship with the Guermantes family, from which she derived both publicly
and in private a good deal of glory not unmingled with shame, the most
brilliant ornaments of that house remaining somewhat aloof from her,
perhaps because she was just a tiresome old woman, or because she was a
scandalous old woman, or because she came of an inferior branch of the
family, or very possibly for no reason at all. When she found herself
seated next to some one whom she did not know, as she was at this moment
next to Mme. de Franquetot, she suffered acutely from the feeling that
her own consciousness of her Guermantes connection could not be made
externally manifest in visible character like those which, in the
mosaics in Byzantine churches, placed one beneath another, inscribe in a
vertical column by the side of some Sacred Personage the words which he
is supposed to be uttering. At this moment she was pondering the fact
that she had never received an invitation, or even call, from her young
cousin the Princesse des Laumes, during the six years that had already
elapsed since the latter's marriage. The thought filled her with
anger--and with pride; for, by virtue of having told everyone who
expressed surprise at never seeing her at Mme. des Laumes's, that it
was because of the risk of meeting the Princesse Mathilde there--a
degradation which her own family, the truest and bluest of Legitimists,
would never have forgiven her, she had come gradually to believe that
this actually was the reason for her not visiting her young cousin. She
remembered, it is true, that she had several times inquired of Mme. des
Laumes how they might contrive to meet, but she remembered it only in
a confused way, and besides did more than neutralise this slightly
humiliating reminiscence by murmuring, "After all, it isn't for me to
take the first step; I am at least twenty years older than she is." And
fortified by these unspoken words she flung her shoulders proudly back
until they seemed to part company with her bust, while her head, which
lay almost horizontally upon them, made one think of the 'stuck-on' head
of a pheasant which is brought to the table regally adorned with its
feathers. Not that she in the least degree resembled a pheasant, having
been endowed by nature with a short and squat and masculine figure; but
successive mortifications had given her a backward tilt, such as one may
observe in trees which have taken root on the very edge of a precipice
and are forced to grow backwards to preserve their balance. Since she
was obliged, in order to console herself for not being quite on a level
with the rest of the Guermantes, to repeat to herself incessantly that
it was owing to the uncompromising rigidity of her principles and pride
that she saw so little of them, the constant iteration had gradually
remoulded her body, and had given her a sort of 'bearing' which was
accepted by the plebeian as a sign of breeding, and even kindled, at
times, a momentary spark in the jaded eyes of old gentlemen in clubs.
Had anyone subjected Mme. de Gallardon's conversation to that form of
analysis which by noting the relative frequency of its several terms
would furnish him with the key to a ciphered message, he would at
once have remarked that no expression, not even the commonest forms
of speech, occurred in it nearly so often as "at my cousins the
Guermantes's," "at my aunt Guermantes's," "Elzéar de Guermantes's
health," "my cousin Guermantes's box." If anyone spoke to her of a
distinguished personage, she would reply that, although she was not
personally acquainted with him, she had seen him hundreds of times at
her aunt Guermantes's, but she would utter this reply in so icy a tone,
with such a hollow sound, that it was at once quite clear that if
she did not know the celebrity personally that was because of all the
obstinate, ineradicable principles against which her arching shoulders
were stretched back to rest, as on one of those ladders on which
gymnastic instructors make us 'extend' so as to develop the expansion of
our chests.

At this moment the Princesse des Laumes, who had not been expected to
appear at Mme. de Saint-Euverte's that evening, did in fact arrive. To
shew that she did not wish any special attention, in a house to which
she had come by an act of condescension, to be paid to her superior
rank, she had entered the room with her arms pressed close to her sides,
even when there was no crowd to be squeezed through, no one attempting
to get past her; staying purposely at the back, with the air of being
in her proper place, like a king who stands in the waiting procession at
the doors of a theatre where the management have not been warned of his
coming; and strictly limiting her field of vision--so as not to seem to
be advertising her presence and claiming the consideration that was her
due--to the study of a pattern in the carpet or of her own skirt, she
stood there on the spot which had struck her as the most modest (and
from which, as she very well knew, a cry of rapture from Mme. de
Saint-Euverte would extricate her as soon as her presence there was
noticed), next to Mme. de Cambremer, whom, however, she did not know.
She observed the dumb-show by which her neighbour was expressing her
passion for music, but she refrained from copying it. This was not to
say that, for once that she had consented to spend a few minutes in Mme.
de Saint-Euverte's house, the Princesse des Laumes would not have wished
(so that the act of politeness to her hostess which she had performed by
coming might, so to speak, 'count double') to shew herself as friendly
and obliging as possible. But she had a natural horror of what she
called 'exaggerating,' and always made a point of letting people see
that she 'simply must not' indulge in any display of emotion that was
not in keeping with the tone of the circle in which she moved, although
such displays never failed to make an impression upon her, by virtue of
that spirit of imitation, akin to timidity, which is developed in the
most self-confident persons, by contact with an unfamiliar environment,
even though it be inferior to their own. She began to ask herself
whether these gesticulations might not, perhaps, be a necessary
concomitant of the piece of music that was being played, a piece which,
it might be, was in a different category from all the music that she had
ever heard before; and whether to abstain from them was not a sign of
her own inability to understand the music, and of discourtesy towards
the lady of the house; with the result that, in order to express by a
compromise both of her contradictory inclinations in turn, at one moment
she would merely straighten her shoulder-straps or feel in her golden
hair for the little balls of coral or of pink enamel, frosted with tiny
diamonds, which formed its simple but effective ornament, studying, with
a cold interest, her impassioned neighbour, while at another she would
beat time for a few bars with her fan, but, so as not to forfeit her
independence, she would beat a different time from the pianist's. When
he had finished the Liszt Intermezzo and had begun a Prelude by Chopin,
Mme. de Cambremer turned to Mme. de Franquetot with a tender smile,
full of intimate reminiscence, as well as of satisfaction (that of
a competent judge) with the performance. She had been taught in her
girlhood to fondle and cherish those long-necked, sinuous creatures,
the phrases of Chopin, so free, so flexible, so tactile, which begin by
seeking their ultimate resting-place somewhere beyond and far wide of
the direction in which they started, the point which one might have
expected them to reach, phrases which divert themselves in those
fantastic bypaths only to return more deliberately--with a more
premeditated reaction, with more precision, as on a crystal bowl which,
if you strike it, will ring and throb until you cry aloud in anguish--to
clutch at one's heart.

Brought up in a provincial household with few friends or visitors,
hardly ever invited to a ball, she had fuddled her mind, in the solitude
of her old manor-house, over setting the pace, now crawling-slow, now
passionate, whirling, breathless, for all those imaginary waltzing
couples, gathering them like flowers, leaving the ball-room for a moment
to listen, where the wind sighed among the pine-trees, on the shore of
the lake, and seeing of a sudden advancing towards her, more different
from anything one had ever dreamed of than earthly lovers are, a slender
young man, whose voice was resonant and strange and false, in white
gloves. But nowadays the old-fashioned beauty of this music seemed
to have become a trifle stale. Having forfeited, some years back, the
esteem of 'really musical' people, it had lost its distinction and its
charm, and even those whose taste was frankly bad had ceased to find in
it more than a moderate pleasure to which they hardly liked to confess.
Mme. de Cambremer cast a furtive glance behind her. She knew that her
young daughter-in-law (full of respect for her new and noble family,
except in such matters as related to the intellect, upon which, having
'got as far' as Harmony and the Greek alphabet, she was specially
enlightened) despised Chopin, and fell quite ill when she heard him
played. But finding herself free from the scrutiny of this Wagnerian,
who was sitting, at some distance, in a group of her own contemporaries,
Mme. de Cambremer let herself drift upon a stream of exquisite memories
and sensations. The Princesse des Laumes was touched also. Though
without any natural gift for music, she had received, some fifteen
years earlier, the instruction which a music-mistress of the Faubourg
Saint-Germain, a woman of genius who had been, towards the end of
her life, reduced to penury, had started, at seventy, to give to the
daughters and granddaughters of her old pupils. This lady was now dead.
But her method, an echo of her charming touch, came to life now and
then in the fingers of her pupils, even of those who had been in other
respects quite mediocre, had given up music, and hardly ever opened a
piano. And so Mme. des Laumes could let her head sway to and fro, fully
aware of the cause, with a perfect appreciation of the manner in which
the pianist was rendering this Prelude, since she knew it by heart. The
closing notes of the phrase that he had begun sounded already on her
lips. And she murmured "How charming it is!" with a stress on the
opening consonants of the adjective, a token of her refinement by which
she felt her lips so romantically compressed, like the petals of a
beautiful, budding flower, that she instinctively brought her eyes into
harmony, illuminating them for a moment with a vague and sentimental
gaze. Meanwhile Mme. de Gallardon had arrived at the point of saying to
herself how annoying it was that she had so few opportunities of meeting
the Princesse des Laumes, for she meant to teach her a lesson by not
acknowledging her bow. She did not know that her cousin was in the room.
A movement of Mme. Franquetot's head disclosed the Princess. At once
Mme. de Gallardon dashed towards her, upsetting all her neighbours;
although determined to preserve a distant and glacial manner which
should remind everyone present that she had no desire to remain on
friendly terms with a person in whose house one might find oneself, any
day, cheek by jowl with the Princesse Mathilde, and to whom it was not
her duty to make advances since she was not 'of her generation,'
she felt bound to modify this air of dignity and reserve by some
non-committal remark which would justify her overture and would force
the Princess to engage in conversation; and so, when she reached her
cousin, Mme. de Gallardon, with a stern countenance and one hand thrust
out as though she were trying to 'force' a card, began with: "How is
your husband?" in the same anxious tone that she would have used if the
Prince had been seriously ill. The Princess, breaking into a laugh which
was one of her characteristics, and was intended at once to shew the
rest of an assembly that she was making fun of some one and also to
enhance her own beauty by concentrating her features around her animated
lips and sparkling eyes, answered: "Why; he's never been better in his
life!" And she went on laughing.

Mme. de Gallardon then drew herself up and, chilling her expression
still further, perhaps because she was still uneasy about the Prince's
health, said to her cousin:

"Oriane," (at once Mme. des Laumes looked with amused astonishment
towards an invisible third, whom she seemed to call to witness that she
had never authorised Mme. de Gallardon to use her Christian name) "I
should be so pleased if you would look in, just for a minute, to-morrow
evening, to hear a quintet, with the clarinet, by Mozart. I should like
to have your opinion of it."

She seemed not so much to be issuing an invitation as to be asking
favour, and to want the Princess's opinion of the Mozart quintet just
as though it had been a dish invented by a new cook, whose talent it
was most important that an epicure should come to judge.

"But I know that quintet quite well. I can tell you now--that I adore
it."

"You know, my husband isn't at all well; it's his liver. He would like
so much to see you," Mme. de Gallardon resumed, making it now a corporal
work of charity for the Princess to appear at her party.

The Princess never liked to tell people that she would not go to their
houses. Every day she would write to express her regret at having
been kept away--by the sudden arrival of her husband's mother, by an
invitation from his brother, by the Opera, by some excursion to the
country--from some party to which she had never for a moment dreamed of
going. In this way she gave many people the satisfaction of feeling that
she was on intimate terms with them, that she would gladly have come to
their houses, and that she had been prevented from doing so only by some
princely occurrence which they were flattered to find competing with
their own humble entertainment. And then, as she belonged to that
witty 'Guermantes set'--in which there survived something of the
alert mentality, stripped of all commonplace phrases and conventional
sentiments, which dated from Mérimée, and found its final expression in
the plays of Meilhac and Halévy--she adapted its formula so as to suit
even her social engagements, transposed it into the courtesy which was
always struggling to be positive and precise, to approximate itself to
the plain truth. She would never develop at any length to a hostess the
expression of her anxiety to be present at her party; she found it more
pleasant to disclose to her all the various little incidents on which it
would depend whether it was or was not possible for her to come.

"Listen, and I'll explain," she began to Mme. de Gallardon. "To-morrow
evening I must go to a friend of mine, who has been pestering me to fix
a day for ages. If she takes us to the theatre afterwards, then I can't
possibly come to you, much as I should love to; but if we just stay in
the house, I know there won't be anyone else there, so I can slip away."

"Tell me, have you seen your friend M. Swann?"

"No! my precious Charles! I never knew he was here. Where is he? I must
catch his eye."

"It's a funny thing that he should come to old Saint-Euverte's," Mme. de
Gallardon went on. "Oh, I know he's very clever," meaning by that 'very
cunning,' "but that makes no difference; fancy a Jew here, and she the
sister and sister-in-law of two Archbishops."

"I am ashamed to confess that I am not in the least shocked," said the
Princesse des Laumes.

"I know he's a converted Jew, and all that, and his parents and
grandparents before him. But they do say that the converted ones are
worse about their religion than the practising ones, that it's all just
a pretence; is that true, d'you think?"

"I can throw no light at all on the matter."

The pianist, who was 'down' to play two pieces by Chopin, after
finishing the Prelude had at once attacked a Polonaise. But once Mme.
de Gallardon had informed her cousin that Swann was in the room, Chopin
himself might have risen from the grave and played all his works in
turn without Mme. des Laumes's paying him the slightest attention. She
belonged to that one of the two divisions of the human race in which the
untiring curiosity which the other half feels about the people whom it
does not know is replaced by an unfailing interest in the people whom it
does. As with many women of the Faubourg Saint-Germain, the presence, in
any room in which she might find herself, of another member of her set,
even although she had nothing in particular to say to him, would occupy
her mind to the exclusion of every other consideration. From that
moment, in the hope that Swann would catch sight of her, the Princess
could do nothing but (like a tame white mouse when a lump of sugar is
put down before its nose and then taken away) turn her face, in which
were crowded a thousand signs of intimate connivance, none of them with
the least relevance to the sentiment underlying Chopin's music, in the
direction where Swann was, and, if he moved, divert accordingly the
course of her magnetic smile.

"Oriane, don't be angry with me," resumed Mme. de Gallardon, who could
never restrain herself from sacrificing her highest social ambitions,
and the hope that she might one day emerge into a light that would
dazzle the world, to the immediate and secret satisfaction of saying
something disagreeable, "people do say about your M. Swann that he's the
sort of man one can't have in the house; is that true?"

"Why, you, of all people, ought to know that it's true," replied the
Princesse des Laumes, "for you must have asked him a hundred times, and
he's never been to your house once."

And leaving her cousin mortified afresh, she broke out again into a
laugh which scandalised everyone who was trying to listen to the music,
but attracted the attention of Mme. de Saint-Euverte, who had stayed,
out of politeness, near the piano, and caught sight of the Princess now
for the first time. Mme. de Saint-Euverte was all the more delighted
to see Mme. des Laumes, as she imagined her to be still at Guermantes,
looking after her father-in-law, who was ill.

"My dear Princess, you here?"

"Yes, I tucked myself away in a corner, and I've been hearing such
lovely things."

"What, you've been in the room quite a time?"

"Oh, yes, quite a long time, which seemed very short; it was only long
because I couldn't see you."

Mme. de Saint-Euverte offered her own chair to the Princess, who
declined it with:

"Oh, please, no! Why should you? It doesn't matter in the least where
I sit." And deliberately picking out, so as the better to display the
simplicity of a really great lady, a low seat without a back: "There
now, that hassock, that's all I want. It will make me keep my back
straight. Oh! Good heavens, I'm making a noise again; they'll be telling
you to have me 'chucked out'."

Meanwhile, the pianist having doubled his speed, the emotion of the
music-lovers was reaching its climax, a servant was handing refreshments
about on a salver, and was making the spoons rattle, and, as on every
other 'party-night', Mme. de Saint-Euverte was making signs to him,
which he never saw, to leave the room. A recent bride, who had been told
that a young woman ought never to appear bored, was smiling vigorously,
trying to catch her hostess's eye so as to flash a token of her
gratitude for the other's having 'thought of her' in connection with so
delightful an entertainment. And yet, although she remained more calm
than Mme. de Franquetot, it was not without some uneasiness that she
followed the flying fingers; what alarmed her being not the pianist's
fate but the piano's, on which a lighted candle, jumping at each
_fortissimo_, threatened, if not to set its shade on fire, at least to
spill wax upon the ebony. At last she could contain herself no longer,
and, running up the two steps of the platform on which the piano stood,
flung herself on the candle to adjust its sconce. But scarcely had her
hand come within reach of it when, on a final chord, the piece finished,
and the pianist rose to his feet. Nevertheless the bold initiative shewn
by this young woman and the moment of blushing confusion between her
and the pianist which resulted from it, produced an impression that was
favourable on the whole.

"Did you see what that girl did just now, Princess?" asked General de
Froberville, who had come up to Mme. des Laumes as her hostess left her
for a moment. "Odd, wasn't it? Is she one of the performers?"

"No, she's a little Mme. de Cambremer," replied the Princess carelessly,
and then, with more animation: "I am only repeating what I heard just
now, myself; I haven't the faintest notion who said it, it was some one
behind me who said that they were neighbours of Mme. de Saint-Euverte in
the country, but I don't believe anyone knows them, really. They must be
'country cousins'! By the way, I don't know whether you're particularly
'well-up' in the brilliant society which we see before us, because I've
no idea who all these astonishing people can be. What do you suppose
they do with themselves when they're not at Mme. de Saint-Euverte's
parties? She must have ordered them in with the musicians and the chairs
and the food. 'Universal providers,' you know. You must admit, they're
rather splendid, General. But can she really have the courage to hire
the same 'supers' every week? It isn't possible!"

"Oh, but Cambremer is quite a good name; old, too," protested the
General.

"I see no objection to its being old," the Princess answered dryly, "but
whatever else it is it's not euphonious," she went on, isolating the
word euphonious as though between inverted commas, a little affectation
to which the Guermantes set were addicted.

"You think not, eh! She's a regular little peach, though," said the
General, whose eyes never strayed from Mme. de Cambremer. "Don't you
agree with me, Princess?"

"She thrusts herself forward too much; I think, in so young a woman,
that's not very nice--for I don't suppose she's my generation," replied
Mme. des Laumes (the last word being common, it appeared, to Gallardon
and Guermantes). And then, seeing that M. de Froberville was still
gazing at Mme. de Cambremer, she added, half out of malice towards the
lady, half wishing to oblige the General: "Not very nice... for her
husband! I am sorry that I do not know her, since she seems to attract
you so much; I might have introduced you to her," said the Princess,
who, if she had known the young woman, would most probably have done
nothing of the sort. "And now I must say good night, because one of
my friends is having a birthday party, and I must go and wish her many
happy returns," she explained, modestly and with truth, reducing the
fashionable gathering to which she was going to the simple proportions
of a ceremony which would be boring in the extreme, but at which she was
obliged to be present, and there would be something touching about her
appearance. "Besides, I must pick up Basin. While I've been here, he's
gone to see those friends of his--you know them too, I'm sure,--who are
called after a bridge--oh, yes, the Iénas."

"It was a battle before it was a bridge, Princess; it was a victory!"
said the General. "I mean to say, to an old soldier like me," he went
on, wiping his monocle and replacing it, as though he were laying
a fresh dressing on the raw wound underneath, while the Princess
instinctively looked away, "that Empire nobility, well, of course, it's
not the same thing, but, after all, taking it as it is, it's very fine
of its kind; they were people who really did fight like heroes."

"But I have the deepest respect for heroes," the Princess assented,
though with a faint trace of irony. "If I don't go with Basin to see
this Princesse d'Iéna, it isn't for that, at all; it's simply because
I don't know them. Basin knows them; he worships them. Oh, no, it's not
what you think; he's not in love with her. I've nothing to set my face
against! Besides, what good has it ever done when I have set my face
against them?" she queried sadly, for the whole world knew that,
ever since the day upon which the Prince des Laumes had married his
fascinating cousin, he had been consistently unfaithful to her. "Anyhow,
it isn't that at all. They're people he has known for ever so long, they
do him very well, and that suits me down to the ground. But I must tell
you what he's told me about their house; it's quite enough. Can you
imagine it, all their furniture is 'Empire'!"

"But, my dear Princess, that's only natural; it belonged to their
grandparents."

"I don't quite say it didn't, but that doesn't make it any less ugly. I
quite understand that people can't always have nice things, but at least
they needn't have things that are merely grotesque. What do you say?
I can think of nothing more devastating, more utterly smug than that
hideous style--cabinets covered all over with swans' heads, like
bath-taps!"

"But I believe, all the same, that they've got some lovely things; why,
they must have that famous mosaic table on which the Treaty of..."

"Oh, I don't deny, they may have things that are interesting enough
from the historic point of view. But things like that can't, ever, be
beautiful ... because they're simply horrible! I've got things like that
myself, that came to Basin from the Montesquious. Only, they're up in
the attics at Guermantes, where nobody ever sees them. But, after all,
that's not the point, I would fly to see them, with Basin; I would even
go to see them among all their sphinxes and brasses, if I knew them,
but--I don't know them! D'you know, I was always taught, when I was a
little girl, that it was not polite to call on people one didn't know."
She assumed a tone of childish gravity. "And so I am just doing what
I was taught to do. Can't you see those good people, with a totally
strange woman bursting into their house? Why, I might get a most hostile
reception."

And she coquettishly enhanced the charm of the smile which the idea had
brought to her lips, by giving to her blue eyes, which were fixed on the
General, a gentle, dreamy expression.

"My dear Princess, you know that they'd be simply wild with joy."

"No, why?" she inquired, with the utmost vivacity, either so as to seem
unaware that it would be because she was one of the first ladies in
France, or so as to have the pleasure of hearing the General tell
her so. "Why? How can you tell? Perhaps they would think it the most
unpleasant thing that could possibly happen. I know nothing about them,
but if they're anything like me, I find it quite boring enough to see
the people I do know; I'm sure if I had to see people I didn't know
as well, even if they had 'fought like heroes,' I should go stark mad.
Besides, except when it's an old friend like you, whom one knows quite
apart from that, I'm not sure that 'heroism' takes one very far in
society. It's often quite boring enough to have to give a dinner-party,
but if one had to offer one's arm to Spartacus, to let him take one
down...! Really, no; it would never be Vercingetorix I should send for,
to make a fourteenth. I feel sure, I should keep him for really big
'crushes.' And as I never give any..."

"Ah! Princess, it's easy to see you're not a Guermantes for nothing. You
have your share of it, all right, the 'wit of the Guermantes'!"

"But people always talk about the wit of the Guermantes; I never could
make out why. Do you really know any others who have it?" she rallied
him, with a rippling flow of laughter, her features concentrated, yoked
to the service of her animation, her eyes sparkling, blazing with
a radiant sunshine of gaiety which could be kindled only by such
speeches--even if the Princess had to make them herself--as were in
praise of her wit or of her beauty. "Look, there's Swann talking to your
Cambremer woman; over there, beside old Saint-Euverte, don't you see
him? Ask him to introduce you. But hurry up, he seems to be just going!"

"Did you notice how dreadfully ill he's looking?" asked the General.

"My precious Charles? Ah, he's coming at last; I was beginning to think
he didn't want to see me!"

Swann was extremely fond of the Princesse des Laumes, and the sight of
her recalled to him Guermantes, a property close to Combray, and all
that country which he so dearly loved and had ceased to visit, so as not
to be separated from Odette. Slipping into the manner, half-artistic,
half-amorous--with which he could always manage to amuse the Princess--a
manner which came to him quite naturally whenever he dipped for a moment
into the old social atmosphere, and wishing also to express in words,
for his own satisfaction, the longing that he felt for the country:

"Ah!" he exclaimed, or rather intoned, in such a way as to be audible at
once to Mme. de Saint-Euverte, to whom he spoke, and to Mme. des Laumes,
for whom he was speaking, "Behold our charming Princess! See, she has
come up on purpose from Guermantes to hear Saint Francis preach to the
birds, and has only just had time, like a dear little tit-mouse, to go
and pick a few little hips and haws and put them in her hair; there are
even some drops of dew upon them still, a little of the hoar-frost
which must be making the Duchess, down there, shiver. It is very pretty
indeed, my dear Princess."

"What! The Princess came up on purpose from Guermantes? But that's too
wonderful! I never knew; I'm quite bewildered," Mme. de Saint-Euverte
protested with quaint simplicity, being but little accustomed to Swann's
way of speaking. And then, examining the Princess's headdress,
"Why, you're quite right; it is copied from... what shall I say, not
chestnuts, no,--oh, it's a delightful idea, but how can the Princess
have known what was going to be on my programme? The musicians didn't
tell me, even."

Swann, who was accustomed, when he was with a woman whom he had kept
up the habit of addressing in terms of gallantry, to pay her delicate
compliments which most other people would not and need not understand,
did not condescend to explain to Mme. de Saint-Euverte that he had
been speaking metaphorically. As for the Princess, she was in fits of
laughter, both because Swann's wit was highly appreciated by her set,
and because she could never hear a compliment addressed to herself
without finding it exquisitely subtle and irresistibly amusing.

"Indeed! I'm delighted, Charles, if my little hips and haws meet with
your approval. But tell me, why did you bow to that Cambremer person,
are you also her neighbour in the country?"

Mme. de Saint-Euverte, seeing that the Princess seemed quite happy
talking to Swann, had drifted away.

"But you are, yourself, Princess!"

"I! Why, they must have 'countries' everywhere, those creatures! Don't I
wish I had!"

"No, not the Cambremers; her own people. She was a Legrandin, and used
to come to Combray. I don't know whether you are aware that you are
Comtesse de Combray, and that the Chapter owes you a due."

"I don't know what the Chapter owes me, but I do know that I'm 'touched'
for a hundred francs, every year, by the Curé, which is a due that I
could very well do without. But surely these Cambremers have rather a
startling name. It ends just in time, but it ends badly!" she said with
a laugh.

"It begins no better." Swann took the point.

"Yes; that double abbreviation!"

"Some one very angry and very proper who didn't dare to finish the first
word."

"But since he couldn't stop himself beginning the second, he'd have done
better to finish the first and be done with it. We are indulging in
the most refined form of humour, my dear Charles, in the very best of
taste--but how tiresome it is that I never see you now," she went on in
a coaxing tone, "I do so love talking to you. Just imagine, I could not
make that idiot Froberville see that there was anything funny about the
name Cambremer. Do agree that life is a dreadful business. It's only
when I see you that I stop feeling bored."

Which was probably not true. But Swann and the Princess had the same way
of looking at the little things of life--the effect, if not the cause of
which was a close analogy between their modes of expression and even of
pronunciation. This similarity was not striking because no two things
could have been more unlike than their voices. But if one took the
trouble to imagine Swann's utterances divested of the sonority that
enwrapped them, of the moustache from under which they emerged, one
found that they were the same phrases, the same inflexions, that they
had the 'tone' of the Guermantes set. On important matters, Swann and
the Princess had not an idea in common. But since Swann had become so
melancholy, and was always in that trembling condition which precedes
a flood of tears, he had the same need to speak about his grief that
a murderer has to tell some one about his crime. And when he heard
the Princess say that life was a dreadful business, he felt as much
comforted as if she had spoken to him of Odette.

"Yes, life is a dreadful business! We must meet more often, my dear
friend. What is so nice about you is that you are not cheerful. We could
spend a most pleasant evening together."

"I'm sure we could; why not come down to Guermantes? My mother-in-law
would be wild with joy. It's supposed to be very ugly down there, but
I must say, I find the neighborhood not at all unattractive; I have a
horror of 'picturesque spots'."

"I know it well, it's delightful!" replied Swann. "It's almost too
beautiful, too much alive for me just at present; it's a country to
be happy in. It's perhaps because I have lived there, but things there
speak to me so. As soon as a breath of wind gets up, and the cornfields
begin to stir, I feel that some one is going to appear suddenly, that
I am going to hear some news; and those little houses by the water's
edge... I should be quite wretched!"

"Oh! my dearest Charles, do take care; there's that appalling Rampillon
woman; she's seen me; hide me somewhere, do tell me again, quickly, what
it was that happened to her; I get so mixed up; she's just married off
her daughter, or her lover (I never can remember),--perhaps both--to
each other! Oh, no, I remember now, she's been dropped by her Prince...
Pretend to be talking, so that the poor old Berenice sha'n't come and
invite me to dinner. Anyhow, I'm going. Listen, my dearest Charles, now
that I have seen you, once in a blue moon, won't you let me carry you
off and take you to the Princesse de Parme's, who would be so pleased
to see you (you know), and Basin too, for that matter; he's meeting me
there. If one didn't get news of you, sometimes, from Mémé... Remember,
I never see you at all now!"

Swann declined. Having told M. de Charlus that, on leaving Mme. de
Saint-Euverte's, he would go straight home, he did not care to run the
risk, by going on now to the Princesse de Parme's, of missing a message
which he had, all the time, been hoping to see brought in to him by one
of the footmen, during the party, and which he was perhaps going to find
left with his own porter, at home.

"Poor Swann," said Mme. des Laumes that night to her husband; "he is
always charming, but he does look so dreadfully unhappy. You will see
for yourself, for he has promised to dine with us one of these days. I
do feel that it's really absurd that a man of his intelligence should
let himself be made to suffer by a creature of that kind, who isn't even
interesting, for they tell me, she's an absolute idiot!" she concluded
with the wisdom invariably shewn by people who, not being in love
themselves, feel that a clever man ought to be unhappy only about such
persons as are worth his while; which is rather like being astonished
that anyone should condescend to die of cholera at the bidding of so
insignificant a creature as the common bacillus.

Swann now wished to go home, but, just as he was making his escape,
General de Froberville caught him and asked for an introduction to Mme.
de Cambremer, and he was obliged to go back into the room to look for
her.

"I say, Swann, I'd rather be married to that little woman than killed by
savages, what do you say?"

The words 'killed by savages' pierced Swann's aching heart; and at once
he felt the need of continuing the conversation. "Ah!" he began, "some
fine lives have been lost in that way... There was, you remember, that
explorer whose remains Dumont d'Urville brought back, La Pérouse..."
(and he was at once happy again, as though he had named Odette). "He was
a fine character, and interests me very much, does La Pérouse," he ended
sadly.

"Oh, yes, of course, La Pérouse," said the General. "It's quite a
well-known name. There's a street called that."

"Do you know anyone in the Rue La Pérouse?" asked Swann excitedly.

"Only Mme. de Chanlivault, the sister of that good fellow Chaussepierre.
She gave a most amusing theatre-party the other evening. That's a house
that will be really smart some day, you'll see!"

"Oh, so she lives in the Rue La Pérouse. It's attractive; I like that
street; it's so sombre."

"Indeed it isn't. You can't have been in it for a long time; it's not at
all sombre now; they're beginning to build all round there."

When Swann did finally introduce M. de Froberville to the young Mme. de
Cambremer, since it was the first time that she had heard the General's
name, she hastily outlined upon her lips the smile of joy and surprise
with which she would have greeted him if she had never, in the whole
of her life, heard anything else; for, as she did not yet know all the
friends of her new family, whenever anyone was presented to her, she
assumed that he must be one of them, and thinking that she would shew
her tact by appearing to have heard 'such a lot about him' since her
marriage, she would hold out her hand with an air of hesitation which
was meant as a proof at once of the inculcated reserve which she had to
overcome and of the spontaneous friendliness which successfully overcame
it. And so her parents-in-law, whom she still regarded as the most
eminent pair in France, declared that she was an angel; all the more
that they preferred to appear, in marrying her to their son, to have
yielded to the attraction rather of her natural charm than of her
considerable fortune.

"It's easy to see that you're a musician heart and soul, Madame," said
the General, alluding to the incident of the candle.

Meanwhile the concert had begun again, and Swann saw that he could not
now go before the end of the new number. He suffered greatly from being
shut up among all these people whose stupidity and absurdities wounded
him all the more cruelly since, being ignorant of his love, incapable,
had they known of it, of taking any interest, or of doing more than
smile at it as at some childish joke, or deplore it as an act of
insanity, they made it appear to him in the aspect of a subjective
state which existed for himself alone, whose reality there was nothing
external to confirm; he suffered overwhelmingly, to the point at which
even the sound of the instruments made him want to cry, from having to
prolong his exile in this place to which Odette would never come, in
which no one, nothing was aware of her existence, from which she was
entirely absent.

But suddenly it was as though she had entered, and this apparition tore
him with such anguish that his hand rose impulsively to his heart. What
had happened was that the violin had risen to a series of high notes,
on which it rested as though expecting something, an expectancy which
it prolonged without ceasing to hold on to the notes, in the exaltation
with which it already saw the expected object approaching, and with a
desperate effort to continue until its arrival, to welcome it before
itself expired, to keep the way open for a moment longer, with all its
remaining strength, that the stranger might enter in, as one holds a
door open that would otherwise automatically close. And before Swann had
had time to understand what was happening, to think: "It is the little
phrase from Vinteuil's sonata. I mustn't listen!", all his memories of
the days when Odette had been in love with him, which he had succeeded,
up till that evening, in keeping invisible in the depths of his being,
deceived by this sudden reflection of a season of love, whose sun, they
supposed, had dawned again, had awakened from their slumber, had taken
wing and risen to sing maddeningly in his ears, without pity for his
present desolation, the forgotten strains of happiness.

In place of the abstract expressions "the time when I was happy," "the
time when I was loved," which he had often used until then, and without
much suffering, for his intelligence had not embodied in them anything
of the past save fictitious extracts which preserved none of the
reality, he now recovered everything that had fixed unalterably the
peculiar, volatile essence of that lost happiness; he could see it all;
the snowy, curled petals of the chrysanthemum which she had tossed
after him into his carriage, which he had kept pressed to his lips, the
address 'Maison Dorée,' embossed on the note-paper on which he had read
"My hand trembles so as I write to you," the frowning contraction of her
eyebrows when she said pleadingly: "You won't let it be very long before
you send for me?"; he could smell the heated iron of the barber whom he
used to have in to singe his hair while Loredan went to fetch the little
working girl; could feel the torrents of rain which fell so often that
spring, the ice-cold homeward drive in his victoria, by moonlight; all
the network of mental habits, of seasonable impressions, of sensory
reactions, which had extended over a series of weeks its uniform meshes,
by which his body now found itself inextricably held. At that time he
had been satisfying a sensual curiosity to know what were the pleasures
of those people who lived for love alone. He had supposed that he could
stop there, that he would not be obliged to learn their sorrows also;
how small a thing the actual charm of Odette was now in comparison with
that formidable terror which extended it like a cloudy halo all around
her, that enormous anguish of not knowing at every hour of the day and
night what she had been doing, of not possessing her wholly, at all
times and in all places! Alas, he recalled the accents in which she had
exclaimed: "But I can see you at any time; I am always free!"--she, who
was never free now; the interest, the curiosity that she had shewn in
his life, her passionate desire that he should do her the favour--of
which it was he who, then, had felt suspicious, as of a possibly tedious
waste of his time and disturbance of his arrangements--of granting her
access to his study; how she had been obliged to beg that he would let
her take him to the Verdurins'; and, when he did allow her to come to
him once a month, how she had first, before he would let himself be
swayed, had to repeat what a joy it would be to her, that custom of
their seeing each other daily, for which she had longed at a time when
to him it had seemed only a tiresome distraction, for which, since that
time, she had conceived a distaste and had definitely broken herself
of it, while it had become for him so insatiable, so dolorous a need.
Little had he suspected how truly he spoke when, on their third meeting,
as she repeated: "But why don't you let me come to you oftener?" he had
told her, laughing, and in a vein of gallantry, that it was for fear of
forming a hopeless passion. Now, alas, it still happened at times that
she wrote to him from a restaurant or hotel, on paper which bore a
printed address, but printed in letters of fire that seared his heart.
"Written from the Hôtel Vouillemont. What on earth can she have gone
there for? With whom? What happened there?" He remembered the gas-jets
that were being extinguished along the Boulevard des Italiens when he
had met her, when all hope was gone among the errant shades upon that
night which had seemed to him almost supernatural and which now (that
night of a period when he had not even to ask himself whether he would
be annoying her by looking for her and by finding her, so certain was he
that she knew no greater happiness than to see him and to let him take
her home) belonged indeed to a mysterious world to which one never may
return again once its doors are closed. And Swann could distinguish,
standing, motionless, before that scene of happiness in which it lived
again, a wretched figure which filled him with such pity, because he
did not at first recognise who it was, that he must lower his head,
lest anyone should observe that his eyes were filled with tears. It was
himself.

When he had realised this, his pity ceased; he was jealous, now, of that
other self whom she had loved, he was jealous of those men of whom he
had so often said, without much suffering: "Perhaps she's in love with
them," now that he had exchanged the vague idea of loving, in
which there is no love, for the petals of the chrysanthemum and the
'letter-heading' of the Maison d'Or; for they were full of love.
And then, his anguish becoming too keen, he passed his hand over his
forehead, let the monocle drop from his eye, and wiped its glass. And
doubtless, if he had caught sight of himself at that moment, he would
have added to the collection of the monocles which he had already
identified, this one which he removed, like an importunate, worrying
thought, from his head, while from its misty surface, with his
handkerchief, he sought to obliterate his cares.

There are in the music of the violin--if one does not see the instrument
itself, and so cannot relate what one hears to its form, which modifies
the fullness of the sound--accents which are so closely akin to those
of certain contralto voices, that one has the illusion that a singer has
taken her place amid the orchestra. One raises one's eyes; one sees only
the wooden case, magical as a Chinese box; but, at moments, one is
still tricked by the deceiving appeal of the Siren; at times, too, one
believes that one is listening to a captive spirit, struggling in the
darkness of its masterful box, a box quivering with enchantment, like a
devil immersed in a stoup of holy water; sometimes, again, it is in the
air, at large, like a pure and supernatural creature that reveals to the
ear, as it passes, its invisible message.

As though the musicians were not nearly so much playing the little
phrase as performing the rites on which it insisted before it would
consent to appear, as proceeding to utter the incantations necessary
to procure, and to prolong for a few moments, the miracle of its
apparition, Swann, who was no more able now to see it than if it had
belonged to a world of ultra-violet light, who experienced something
like the refreshing sense of a metamorphosis in the momentary blindness
with which he had been struck as he approached it, Swann felt that it
was present, like a protective goddess, a confidant of his love, who, so
as to be able to come to him through the crowd, and to draw him aside to
speak to him, had disguised herself in this sweeping cloak of sound. And
as she passed him, light, soothing, as softly murmured as the perfume
of a flower, telling him what she had to say, every word of which
he closely scanned, sorry to see them fly away so fast, he made
involuntarily with his lips the motion of kissing, as it went by him,
the harmonious, fleeting form.

He felt that he was no longer in exile and alone since she, who
addressed herself to him, spoke to him in a whisper of Odette. For he
had no longer, as of old, the impression that Odette and he were not
known to the little phrase. Had it not often been the witness of their
joys? True that, as often, it had warned him of their frailty. And
indeed, whereas, in that distant time, he had divined an element of
suffering in its smile, in its limpid and disillusioned intonation,
to-night he found there rather the charm of a resignation that was
almost gay. Of those sorrows, of which the little phrase had spoken
to him then, which he had seen it--without his being touched by them
himself--carry past him, smiling, on its sinuous and rapid course, of
those sorrows which were now become his own, without his having any hope
of being, ever, delivered from them, it seemed to say to him, as once
it had said of his happiness: "What does all that matter; it is all
nothing." And Swann's thoughts were borne for the first time on a wave
of pity and tenderness towards that Vinteuil, towards that unknown,
exalted brother who also must have suffered so greatly; what could his
life have been? From the depths of what well of sorrow could he have
drawn that god-like strength, that unlimited power of creation?

When it was the little phrase that spoke to him of the vanity of his
sufferings, Swann found a sweetness in that very wisdom which, but a
little while back, had seemed to him intolerable when he thought that
he could read it on the faces of indifferent strangers, who would regard
his love as a digression that was without importance. 'Twas because the
little phrase, unlike them, whatever opinion it might hold on the short
duration of these states of the soul, saw in them something not, as
everyone else saw, less serious than the events of everyday life, but,
on the contrary, so far superior to everyday life as to be alone worthy
of the trouble of expressing it. Those graces of an intimate sorrow,
'twas them that the phrase endeavoured to imitate, to create anew; and
even their essence, for all that it consists in being incommunicable and
in appearing trivial to everyone save him who has experience of them,
the little phrase had captured, had rendered visible. So much so that it
made their value be confessed, their divine sweetness be tasted by
all those same onlookers--provided only that they were in any sense
musical--who, the next moment, would ignore, would disown them in real
life, in every individual love that came into being beneath their eyes.
Doubtless the form in which it had codified those graces could not be
analysed into any logical elements. But ever since, more than a year
before, discovering to him many of the riches of his own soul, the love
of music had been born, and for a time at least had dwelt in him, Swann
had regarded musical _motifs_ as actual ideas, of another world, of
another order, ideas veiled in shadows, unknown, impenetrable by
the human mind, which none the less were perfectly distinct one from
another, unequal among themselves in value and in significance. When,
after that first evening at the Verdurins', he had had the little
phrase played over to him again, and had sought to disentangle from his
confused impressions how it was that, like a perfume or a caress,
it swept over and enveloped him, he had observed that it was to the
closeness of the intervals between the five notes which composed it and
to the constant repetition of two of them that was due that impression
of a frigid, a contracted sweetness; but in reality he knew that he
was basing this conclusion not upon the phrase itself, but merely upon
certain equivalents, substituted (for his mind's convenience) for the
mysterious entity of which he had become aware, before ever he knew the
Verdurins, at that earlier party, when for the first time he had heard
the sonata played. He knew that his memory of the piano falsified still
further the perspective in which he saw the music, that the field
open to the musician is not a miserable stave of seven notes, but an
immeasurable keyboard (still, almost all of it, unknown), on which,
here and there only, separated by the gross darkness of its unexplored
tracts, some few among the millions of keys, keys of tenderness, of
passion, of courage, of serenity, which compose it, each one differing
from all the rest as one universe differs from another, have been
discovered by certain great artists who do us the service, when they
awaken in us the emotion corresponding to the theme which they have
found, of shewing us what richness, what variety lies hidden, unknown to
us, in that great black impenetrable night, discouraging exploration,
of our soul, which we have been content to regard as valueless and
waste and void. Vinteuil had been one of those musicians. In his little
phrase, albeit it presented to the mind's eye a clouded surface, there
was contained, one felt, a matter so consistent, so explicit, to which
the phrase gave so new, so original a force, that those who had once
heard it preserved the memory of it in the treasure-chamber of
their minds. Swann would repair to it as to a conception of love and
happiness, of which at once he knew as well in what respects it was
peculiar as he would know of the _Princesse de Clèves_, or of _René_,
should either of those titles occur to him. Even when he was not
thinking of the little phrase, it existed, latent, in his mind, in the
same way as certain other conceptions without material equivalent, such
as our notions of light, of sound, of perspective, of bodily desire, the
rich possessions wherewith our inner temple is diversified and adorned.
Perhaps we shall lose them, perhaps they will be obliterated, if we
return to nothing in the dust. But so long as we are alive, we can no
more bring ourselves to a state in which we shall not have known
them than we can with regard to any material object, than we can, for
example, doubt the luminosity of a lamp that has just been lighted, in
view of the changed aspect of everything in the room, from which has
vanished even the memory of the darkness. In that way Vinteuil's phrase,
like some theme, say, in _Tristan_, which represents to us also a
certain acquisition of sentiment, has espoused our mortal state, had
endued a vesture of humanity that was affecting enough. Its destiny was
linked, for the future, with that of the human soul, of which it was one
of the special, the most distinctive ornaments. Perhaps it is not-being
that is the true state, and all our dream of life is without existence;
but, if so, we feel that it must be that these phrases of music, these
conceptions which exist in relation to our dream, are nothing either.
We shall perish, but we have for our hostages these divine captives who
shall follow and share our fate. And death in their company is something
less bitter, less inglorious, perhaps even less certain.

So Swann was not mistaken in believing that the phrase of the sonata
did, really, exist. Human as it was from this point of view, it
belonged, none the less, to an order of supernatural creatures whom we
have never seen, but whom, in spite of that, we recognise and acclaim
with rapture when some explorer of the unseen contrives to coax one
forth, to bring it down from that divine world to which he has access
to shine for a brief moment in the firmament of ours. This was what
Vinteuil had done for the little phrase. Swann felt that the composer
had been content (with the musical instruments at his disposal) to
draw aside its veil, to make it visible, following and respecting its
outlines with a hand so loving, so prudent, so delicate and so sure,
that the sound altered at every moment, blunting itself to indicate a
shadow, springing back into life when it must follow the curve of some
more bold projection. And one proof that Swann was not mistaken when he
believed in the real existence of this phrase, was that anyone with an
ear at all delicate for music would at once have detected the imposture
had Vinteuil, endowed with less power to see and to render its forms,
sought to dissemble (by adding a line, here and there, of his own
invention) the dimness of his vision or the feebleness of his hand.

The phrase had disappeared. Swann knew that it would come again at the
end of the last movement, after a long passage which Mme. Verdurin's
pianist always 'skipped.' There were in this passage some admirable
ideas which Swann had not distinguished on first hearing the sonata, and
which he now perceived, as if they had, in the cloakroom of his memory,
divested themselves of their uniform disguise of novelty. Swann listened
to all the scattered themes which entered into the composition of
the phrase, as its premises enter into the inevitable conclusion of a
syllogism; he was assisting at the mystery of its birth. "Audacity,"
he exclaimed to himself, "as inspired, perhaps, as a Lavoisier's or an
Ampere's, the audacity of a Vinteuil making experiment, discovering
the secret laws that govern an unknown force, driving across a region
unexplored towards the one possible goal the invisible team in which he
has placed his trust and which he never may discern!" How charming
the dialogue which Swann now heard between piano and violin, at the
beginning of the last passage. The suppression of human speech, so far
from letting fancy reign there uncontrolled (as one might have thought),
had eliminated it altogether. Never was spoken language of such
inflexible necessity, never had it known questions so pertinent, such
obvious replies. At first the piano complained alone, like a bird
deserted by its mate; the violin heard and answered it, as from a
neighbouring tree. It was as at the first beginning of the world, as
if there were not yet but these twain upon the earth, or rather in this
world closed against all the rest, so fashioned by the logic of its
creator that in it there should never be any but themselves; the world
of this sonata. Was it a bird, was it the soul, not yet made perfect, of
the little phrase, was it a fairy, invisibly somewhere lamenting, whose
plaint the piano heard and tenderly repeated? Its cries were so sudden
that the violinist must snatch up his bow and race to catch them as they
came. Marvellous bird! The violinist seemed to wish to charm, to tame,
to woo, to win it. Already it had passed into his soul, already the
little phrase which it evoked shook like a medium's the body of the
violinist, 'possessed' indeed. Swann knew that the phrase was going to
speak to him once again. And his personality was now so divided that
the strain of waiting for the imminent moment when he would find himself
face to face, once more, with the phrase, convulsed him in one of those
sobs which a fine line of poetry or a piece of alarming news will wring
from us, not when we are alone, but when we repeat one or the other to
a friend, in whom we see ourselves reflected, like a third person, whose
probable emotion softens him. It reappeared, but this time to remain
poised in the air, and to sport there for a moment only, as though
immobile, and shortly to expire. And so Swann lost nothing of the
precious time for which it lingered. It was still there, like an
iridescent bubble that floats for a while unbroken. As a rainbow, when
its brightness fades, seems to subside, then soars again and, before it
is extinguished, is glorified with greater splendour than it has ever
shewn; so to the two colours which the phrase had hitherto allowed to
appear it added others now, chords shot with every hue in the prism, and
made them sing. Swann dared not move, and would have liked to compel all
the other people in the room to remain still also, as if the slightest
movement might embarrass the magic presence, supernatural, delicious,
frail, that would so easily vanish. But no one, as it happened, dreamed
of speaking. The ineffable utterance of one solitary man, absent,
perhaps dead (Swann did not know whether Vinteuil were still alive),
breathed out above the rites of those two hierophants, sufficed to
arrest the attention of three hundred minds, and made of that stage on
which a soul was thus called into being one of the noblest altars on
which a supernatural ceremony could be performed. It followed that, when
the phrase at last was finished, and only its fragmentary echoes floated
among the subsequent themes which had already taken its place, if Swann
at first was annoyed to see the Comtesse de Monteriender, famed for her
imbecilities, lean over towards him to confide in him her impressions,
before even the sonata had come to an end; he could not refrain from
smiling, and perhaps also found an underlying sense, which she was
incapable of perceiving, in the words that she used. Dazzled by the
virtuosity of the performers, the Comtesse exclaimed to Swann: "It's
astonishing! I have never seen anything to beat it..." But a scrupulous
regard for accuracy making her correct her first assertion, she added
the reservation: "anything to beat it... since the table-turning!"

From that evening, Swann understood that the feeling which Odette had
once had for him would never revive, that his hopes of happiness would
not be realised now. And the days on which, by a lucky chance, she had
once more shewn herself kind and loving to him, or if she had paid him
any attention, he recorded those apparent and misleading signs of
a slight movement on her part towards him with the same tender and
sceptical solicitude, the desperate joy that people reveal who, when
they are nursing a friend in the last days of an incurable malady,
relate, as significant facts of infinite value: "Yesterday he went
through his accounts himself, and actually corrected a mistake that we
had made in adding them up; he ate an egg to-day and seemed quite to
enjoy it, if he digests it properly we shall try him with a cutlet
to-morrow,"--although they themselves know that these things are
meaningless on the eve of an inevitable death. No doubt Swann was
assured that if he had now been living at a distance from Odette he
would gradually have lost all interest in her, so that he would have
been glad to learn that she was leaving Paris for ever; he would have
had the courage to remain there; but he had not the courage to go.

He had often thought of going. Now that he was once again at work upon
his essay on Vermeer, he wanted to return, for a few days at least, to
The Hague, to Dresden, to Brunswick. He was certain that a 'Toilet of
Diana' which had been acquired by the Mauritshuis at the Goldschmidt
sale as a Nicholas Maes was in reality a Vermeer. And he would have
liked to be able to examine the picture on the spot, so as to strengthen
his conviction. But to leave Paris while Odette was there, and even when
she was not there--for in strange places where our sensations have not
been numbed by habit, we refresh, we revive an old pain--was for him so
cruel a project that he felt himself to be capable of entertaining it
incessantly in his mind only because he knew himself to be resolute in
his determination never to put it into effect. But it would happen
that, while he was asleep, the intention to travel would reawaken in him
(without his remembering that this particular tour was impossible) and
would be realised. One night he dreamed that he was going away for a
year; leaning from the window of the train towards a young man on the
platform who wept as he bade him farewell, he was seeking to persuade
this young man to come away also. The train began to move; he awoke
in alarm, and remembered that he was not going away, that he would see
Odette that evening, and next day and almost every day. And then, being
still deeply moved by his dream, he would thank heaven for those special
circumstances which made him independent, thanks to which he could
remain in Odette's vicinity, and could even succeed in making her allow
him to see her sometimes; and, counting over the list of his advantages:
his social position--his fortune, from which she stood too often in
need of assistance not to shrink from the prospect of a definite rupture
(having even, so people said, an ulterior plan of getting him to marry
her)--his friendship with M. de Charlus, which, it must be confessed,
had never won him any very great favour from Odette, but which gave him
the pleasant feeling that she was always hearing complimentary things
said about him by this common friend for whom she had so great an
esteem--and even his own intelligence, the whole of which he employed in
weaving, every day, a fresh plot which would make his presence, if not
agreeable, at any rate necessary to Odette--he thought of what might
have happened to him if all these advantages had been lacking, he
thought that, if he had been, like so many other men, poor and humble,
without resources, forced to undertake any task that might be offered to
him, or tied down by parents or by a wife, he might have been obliged
to part from Odette, that that dream, the terror of which was still so
recent, might well have been true; and he said to himself: "People don't
know when they are happy. They're never so unhappy as they think they
are." But he reflected that this existence had lasted already for
several years, that all that he could now hope for was that it should
last for ever, that he would sacrifice his work, his pleasures, his
friends, in fact the whole of his life to the daily expectation of a
meeting which, when it occurred, would bring him no happiness; and he
asked himself whether he was not mistaken, whether the circumstances
that had favoured their relations and had prevented a final rupture had
not done a disservice to his career, whether the outcome to be
desired was not that as to which he rejoiced that it happened only in
dreams--his own departure; and he said to himself that people did not
know when they were unhappy, that they were never so happy as they
supposed.

Sometimes he hoped that she would die, painlessly, in some accident, she
who was out of doors in the streets, crossing busy thoroughfares,
from morning to night. And as she always returned safe and sound, he
marvelled at the strength, at the suppleness of the human body, which
was able continually to hold in check, to outwit all the perils that
environed it (which to Swann seemed innumerable, since his own secret
desire had strewn them in her path), and so allowed its occupant, the
soul, to abandon itself, day after day, and almost with impunity, to its
career of mendacity, to the pursuit of pleasure. And Swann felt a very
cordial sympathy with that Mahomet II whose portrait by Bellini he
admired, who, on finding that he had fallen madly in love with one of
his wives, stabbed her, in order, as his Venetian biographer artlessly
relates, to recover his spiritual freedom. Then he would be ashamed
of thinking thus only of himself, and his own sufferings would seem to
deserve no pity now that he himself was disposing so cheaply of Odette's
very life.

Since he was unable to separate himself from her without a subsequent
return, if at least he had seen her continuously and without separations
his grief would ultimately have been assuaged, and his love would,
perhaps, have died. And from the moment when she did not wish to leave
Paris for ever he had hoped that she would never go. As he knew that her
one prolonged absence, every year, was in August and September, he had
abundant opportunity, several months in advance, to dissociate from it
the grim picture of her absence throughout Eternity which was lodged in
him by anticipation, and which, consisting of days closely akin to the
days through which he was then passing, floated in a cold transparency
in his mind, which it saddened and depressed, though without causing him
any intolerable pain. But that conception of the future, that flowing
stream, colourless and unconfined, a single word from Odette sufficed
to penetrate through all Swann's defences, and like a block of ice
immobilised it, congealed its fluidity, made it freeze altogether; and
Swann felt himself suddenly filled with an enormous and unbreakable mass
which pressed on the inner walls of his consciousness until he was fain
to burst asunder; for Odette had said casually, watching him with a
malicious smile: "Forcheville is going for a fine trip at Whitsuntide.
He's going to Egypt!" and Swann had at once understood that this meant:
"I am going to Egypt at Whitsuntide with Forcheville." And, in fact,
if, a few days later, Swann began: "About that trip that you told me you
were going to take with Forcheville," she would answer carelessly: "Yes,
my dear boy, we're starting on the 19th; we'll send you a 'view' of the
Pyramids." Then he was determined to know whether she was Forcheville's
mistress, to ask her point-blank, to insist upon her telling him. He
knew that there were some perjuries which, being so superstitious, she
would not commit, and besides, the fear, which had hitherto restrained
his curiosity, of making Odette angry if he questioned her, of making
himself odious, had ceased to exist now that he had lost all hope of
ever being loved by her.

One day he received an anonymous letter which told him that Odette had
been the mistress of countless men (several of whom it named, among
them Forcheville, M. de Bréauté and the painter) and women, and that she
frequented houses of ill-fame. He was tormented by the discovery that
there was to be numbered among his friends a creature capable of
sending him such a letter (for certain details betrayed in the writer a
familiarity with his private life). He wondered who it could be. But he
had never had any suspicion with regard to the unknown actions of other
people, those which had no visible connection with what they said.
And when he wanted to know whether it was rather beneath the apparent
character of M. de Charlus, or of M. des Laumes, or of M. d'Orsan that
he must place the untravelled region in which this ignoble action might
have had its birth; as none of these men had ever, in conversation
with Swann, suggested that he approved of anonymous letters, and as
everything that they had ever said to him implied that they strongly
disapproved, he saw no further reason for associating this infamy with
the character of any one of them more than with the rest. M. de Charlus
was somewhat inclined to eccentricity, but he was fundamentally good and
kind; M. des Laumes was a trifle dry, but wholesome and straight. As for
M. d'Orsan, Swann had never met anyone who, even in the most depressing
circumstances, would come to him with a more heartfelt utterance, would
act more properly or with more discretion. So much so that he was unable
to understand the rather indelicate part commonly attributed to M.
d'Orsan in his relations with a certain wealthy woman, and that whenever
he thought of him he was obliged to set that evil reputation on one
side, as irreconcilable with so many unmistakable proofs of his genuine
sincerity and refinement. For a moment Swann felt that his mind was
becoming clouded, and he thought of something else so as to recover
a little light; until he had the courage to return to those other
reflections. But then, after not having been able to suspect anyone, he
was forced to suspect everyone that he knew. After all, M. de Charlus
might be most fond of him, might be most good-natured; but he was a
neuropath; to-morrow, perhaps, he would burst into tears on hearing that
Swann was ill; and to-day, from jealousy, or in anger, or carried away
by some sudden idea, he might have wished to do him a deliberate injury.
Really, that kind of man was the worst of all. The Prince des Laumes
was, certainly, far less devoted to Swann than was M. de Charlus. But
for that very reason he had not the same susceptibility with regard to
him; and besides, his was a nature which, though, no doubt, it was cold,
was as incapable of a base as of a magnanimous action. Swann regretted
that he had formed no attachments in his life except to such people.
Then he reflected that what prevents men from doing harm to their
neighbours is fellow-feeling, that he could not, in the last resort,
answer for any but men whose natures were analogous to his own, as was,
so far as the heart went, that of M. de Charlus. The mere thought of
causing Swann so much distress would have been revolting to him. But
with a man who was insensible, of another order of humanity, as was the
Prince des Laumes, how was one to foresee the actions to which he might
be led by the promptings of a different nature? To have a good heart was
everything, and M. de Charlus had one. But M. d'Orsan was not lacking
in that either, and his relations with Swann--cordial, but scarcely
intimate, arising from the pleasure which, as they held the same views
about everything, they found in talking together--were more quiescent
than the enthusiastic affection of M. de Charlus, who was apt to be
led into passionate activity, good or evil. If there was anyone by
whom Swann felt that he had always been understood, and (with delicacy)
loved, it was M. d'Orsan. Yes, but the life he led; it could hardly be
called honourable. Swann regretted that he had never taken any notice
of those rumours, that he himself had admitted, jestingly, that he had
never felt so keen a sense of sympathy, or of respect, as when he was
in thoroughly 'detrimental' society. "It is not for nothing," he now
assured himself, "that when people pass judgment upon their neighbour,
their finding is based upon his actions. It is those alone that are
significant, and not at all what we say or what we think. Charlus and
des Laumes may have this or that fault, but they are men of honour.
Orsan, perhaps, has not the same faults, but he is not a man of honour.
He may have acted dishonourably once again." Then he suspected Rémi,
who, it was true, could only have inspired the letter, but he now felt
himself, for a moment, to be on the right track. To begin with, Loredan
had his own reasons for wishing harm to Odette. And then, how were we
not to suppose that our servants, living in a situation inferior to our
own, adding to our fortunes and to our frailties imaginary riches and
vices for which they at once envied and despised us, should not find
themselves led by fate to act in a manner abhorrent to people of our own
class? He also suspected my grandfather. On every occasion when Swann
had asked him to do him any service, had he not invariably declined?
Besides, with his ideas of middle-class respectability, he might have
thought that he was acting for Swann's good. He suspected, in turn,
Bergotte, the painter, the Verdurins; paused for a moment to admire
once again the wisdom of people in society, who refused to mix in the
artistic circles in which such things were possible, were, perhaps, even
openly avowed, as excellent jokes; but then he recalled the marks of
honesty that were to be observed in those Bohemians, and contrasted them
with the life of expedients, often bordering on fraudulence, to which
the want of money, the craving for luxury, the corrupting influence of
their pleasures often drove members of the aristocracy. In a word, this
anonymous letter proved that he himself knew a human being capable of
the most infamous conduct, but he could see no reason why that infamy
should lurk in the depths--which no strange eye might explore--of
the warm heart rather than the cold, the artist's rather than the
business-man's, the noble's rather than the flunkey's. What criterion
ought one to adopt, in order to judge one's fellows? After all, there
was not a single one of the people whom he knew who might not, in
certain circumstances, prove capable of a shameful action. Must he then
cease to see them all? His mind grew clouded; he passed his hands two
or three times across his brow, wiped his glasses with his handkerchief,
and remembering that, after all, men who were as good as himself
frequented the society of M. de Charlus, the Prince des Laumes and
the rest, he persuaded himself that this meant, if not that they were
incapable of shameful actions, at least that it was a necessity in human
life, to which everyone must submit, to frequent the society of people
who were, perhaps, not incapable of such actions. And he continued to
shake hands with all the friends whom he had suspected, with the purely
formal reservation that each one of them had, possibly, been seeking to
drive him to despair. As for the actual contents of the letter, they
did not disturb him; for in not one of the charges which it formulated
against Odette could he see the least vestige of fact. Like many other
men, Swann had a naturally lazy mind, and was slow in invention. He knew
quite well as a general truth, that human life is full of contrasts, but
in the case of any one human being he imagined all that part of his or
her life with which he was not familiar as being identical with the
part with which he was. He imagined what was kept secret from him in the
light of what was revealed. At such times as he spent with Odette,
if their conversation turned upon an indelicate act committed, or
an indelicate sentiment expressed by some third person, she would
ruthlessly condemn the culprit by virtue of the same moral principles
which Swann had always heard expressed by his own parents, and to which
he himself had remained loyal; and then, she would arrange her flowers,
would sip her tea, would shew an interest in his work. So Swann extended
those habits to fill the rest of her life, he reconstructed those
actions when he wished to form a picture of the moments in which he and
she were apart. If anyone had portrayed her to him as she was, or rather
as she had been for so long with himself, but had substituted some
other man, he would have been distressed, for such a portrait would have
struck him as lifelike. But to suppose that she went to bad houses,
that she abandoned herself to orgies with other women, that she led
the crapulous existence of the most abject, the most contemptible of
mortals--would be an insane wandering of the mind, for the realisation
of which, thank heaven, the chrysanthemums that he could imagine, the
daily cups of tea, the virtuous indignation left neither time nor
place. Only, now and again, he gave Odette to understand that people
maliciously kept him informed of everything that she did; and making
opportune use of some detail--insignificant but true--which he had
accidentally learned, as though it were the sole fragment which he would
allow, in spite of himself, to pass his lips, out of the numberless
other fragments of that complete reconstruction of her daily life which
he carried secretly in his mind, he led her to suppose that he was
perfectly informed upon matters, which, in reality, he neither knew nor
suspected, for if he often adjured Odette never to swerve from or make
alteration of the truth, that was only, whether he realised it or no, in
order that Odette should tell him everything that she did. No doubt, as
he used to assure Odette, he loved sincerity, but only as he might
love a pander who could keep him in touch with the daily life of his
mistress. Moreover, his love of sincerity, not being disinterested, had
not improved his character. The truth which he cherished was that which
Odette would tell him; but he himself, in order to extract that truth
from her, was not afraid to have recourse to falsehood, that very
falsehood which he never ceased to depict to Odette as leading every
human creature down to utter degradation. In a word, he lied as much
as did Odette, because, while more unhappy than she, he was no less
egotistical. And she, when she heard him repeating thus to her the
things that she had done, would stare at him with a look of distrust
and, at all hazards, of indignation, so as not to appear to be
humiliated, and to be blushing for her actions. One day, after the
longest period of calm through which he had yet been able to exist
without being overtaken by an attack of jealousy, he had accepted an
invitation to spend the evening at the theatre with the Princesse des
Laumes. Having opened his newspaper to find out what was being
played, the sight of the title--_Les Filles de Marbre_, by Théodore
Barrière,--struck him so cruel a blow that he recoiled instinctively
from it and turned his head away. Illuminated, as though by a row of
footlights, in the new surroundings in which it now appeared, that word
'marble,' which he had lost the power to distinguish, so often had it
passed, in print, beneath his eyes, had suddenly become visible once
again, and had at once brought back to his mind the story which Odette
had told him, long ago, of a visit which she had paid to the Salon at
the Palais d'Industrie with Mme. Verdurin, who had said to her, "Take
care, now! I know how to melt you, all right. You're not made of
marble." Odette had assured him that it was only a joke, and he had
not attached any importance to it at the time. But he had had more
confidence in her then than he had now. And the anonymous letter
referred explicitly to relations of that sort. Without daring to lift
his eyes to the newspaper, he opened it, turned the page so as not to
see again the words, _Filles de Marbre_, and began to read mechanically
the news from the provinces. There had been a storm in the Channel,
and damage was reported from Dieppe, Cabourg, Beuzeval.... Suddenly he
recoiled again in horror.

The name of Beuzeval had suggested to him that of another place in the
same district, Beuzeville, which carried also, bound to it by a hyphen,
a second name, to wit Bréauté, which he had often seen on maps, but
without ever previously remarking that it was the same name as that
borne by his friend M. de Bréauté, whom the anonymous letter accused of
having been Odette's lover. After all, when it came to M. de Bréauté,
there was nothing improbable in the charge; but so far as Mme. Verdurin
was concerned, it was a sheer impossibility. From the fact that Odette
did occasionally tell a lie, it was not fair to conclude that she never,
by any chance, told the truth, and in these bantering conversations
with Mme. Verdurin which she herself had repeated to Swann, he could
recognize those meaningless and dangerous pleasantries which, in their
inexperience of life and ignorance of vice, women often utter (thereby
certifying their own innocence), who--as, for instance, Odette,--would
be the last people in the world to feel any undue affection for one
another. Whereas, on the other hand, the indignation with which she
had scattered the suspicions which she had unintentionally brought into
being, for a moment, in his mind by her story, fitted in with everything
that he knew of the tastes, the temperament of his mistress. But at
that moment, by an inspiration of jealousy, analogous to the inspiration
which reveals to a poet or a philosopher, who has nothing, so far, but
an odd pair of rhymes or a detached observation, the idea or the natural
law which will give power, mastery to his work, Swann recalled for the
first time a remark which Odette had made to him, at least two years
before: "Oh, Mme. Verdurin, she won't hear of anything just now but me.
I'm a 'love,' if you please, and she kisses me, and wants me to go with
her everywhere, and call her by her Christian name." So far from seeing
in these expressions any connection with the absurd insinuations,
intended to create an atmosphere of vice, which Odette had since
repeated to him, he had welcomed them as a proof of Mme. Verdurin's
warm-hearted and generous friendship. But now this old memory of her
affection for Odette had coalesced suddenly with his more recent memory
of her unseemly conversation. He could no longer separate them in his
mind, and he saw them blended in reality, the affection imparting a
certain seriousness and importance to the pleasantries which, in return,
spoiled the affection of its innocence. He went to see Odette. He sat
down, keeping at a distance from her. He did not dare to embrace her,
not knowing whether in her, in himself, it would be affection or anger
that a kiss would provoke. He sat there silent, watching their love
expire. Suddenly he made up his mind.

"Odette, my darling," he began, "I know, I am being simply odious, but I
must ask you a few questions. You remember what I once thought about you
and Mme. Verdurin? Tell me, was it true? Have you, with her or anyone
else, ever?"

She shook her head, pursing her lips together; a sign which people
commonly employ to signify that they are not going, because it would
bore them to go, when some one has asked, "Are you coming to watch the
procession go by?", or "Will you be at the review?". But this shake of
the head, which is thus commonly used to decline participation in
an event that has yet to come, imparts for that reason an element of
uncertainty to the denial of participation in an event that is past.
Furthermore, it suggests reasons of personal convenience, rather than
any definite repudiation, any moral impossibility. When he saw Odette
thus make him a sign that the insinuation was false, he realised that it
was quite possibly true.

"I have told you, I never did; you know quite well," she added, seeming
angry and uncomfortable.

"Yes, I know all that; but are you quite sure? Don't say to me, 'You
know quite well'; say, 'I have never done anything of that sort with any
woman.'"

She repeated his words like a lesson learned by rote, and as though she
hoped, thereby, to be rid of him: "I have never done anything of that
sort with any woman."

"Can you swear it to me on your Laghetto medal?"

Swann knew that Odette would never perjure herself on that.

"Oh, you do make me so miserable," she cried, with a jerk of her body
as though to shake herself free of the constraint of his question. "Have
you nearly done? What is the matter with you to-day? You seem to have
made up your mind that I am to be forced to hate you, to curse you!
Look, I was anxious to be friends with you again, for us to have a nice
time together, like the old days; and this is all the thanks I get!"

However, he would not let her go, but sat there like a surgeon who waits
for a spasm to subside that has interrupted his operation but need not
make him abandon it.

"You are quite wrong in supposing that I bear you the least ill-will in
the world, Odette," he began with a persuasive and deceitful gentleness.
"I never speak to you except of what I already know, and I always know a
great deal more than I say. But you alone can mollify by your confession
what makes me hate you so long as it has been reported to me only by
other people. My anger with you is never due to your actions--I can
and do forgive you everything because I love you--but to your
untruthfulness, the ridiculous untruthfulness which makes you persist in
denying things which I know to be true. How can you expect that I shall
continue to love you, when I see you maintain, when I hear you swear to
me a thing which I know to be false? Odette, do not prolong this moment
which is torturing us both. If you are willing to end it at once, you
shall be free of it for ever. Tell me, upon your medal, yes or no,
whether you have ever done those things."

"How on earth can I tell?" she was furious. "Perhaps I have, ever so
long ago, when I didn't know what I was doing, perhaps two or three
times."

Swann had prepared himself for all possibilities. Reality must,
therefore, be something which bears no relation to possibilities,
any more than the stab of a knife in one's body bears to the gradual
movement of the clouds overhead, since those words "two or three times"
carved, as it were, a cross upon the living tissues of his heart. A
strange thing, indeed, that those words, "two or three times," nothing
more than a few words, words uttered in the air, at a distance, could so
lacerate a man's heart, as if they had actually pierced it, could sicken
a man, like a poison that he had drunk. Instinctively Swann thought of
the remark that he had heard at Mme. de Saint-Euverte's: "I have never
seen anything to beat it since the table-turning." The agony that he now
suffered in no way resembled what he had supposed. Not only because, in
the hours when he most entirely mistrusted her, he had rarely imagined
such a culmination of evil, but because, even when he did imagine that
offence, it remained vague, uncertain, was not clothed in the particular
horror which had escaped with the words "perhaps two or three times,"
was not armed with that specific cruelty, as different from anything
that he had known as a new malady by which one is attacked for the first
time. And yet this Odette, from whom all this evil sprang, was no less
dear to him, was, on the contrary, more precious, as if, in proportion
as his sufferings increased, there increased at the same time the price
of the sedative, of the antidote which this woman alone possessed. He
wished to pay her more attention, as one attends to a disease which
one discovers, suddenly, to have grown more serious. He wished that
the horrible thing which, she had told him, she had done "two or three
times" might be prevented from occurring again. To ensure that, he must
watch over Odette. People often say that, by pointing out to a man the
faults of his mistress, you succeed only in strengthening his attachment
to her, because he does not believe you; yet how much more so if he
does! But, Swann asked himself, how could he manage to protect her? He
might perhaps be able to preserve her from the contamination of any
one woman, but there were hundreds of other women; and he realised how
insane had been his ambition when he had begun (on the evening when
he had failed to find Odette at the Verdurins') to desire the
possession--as if that were ever possible--of another person. Happily
for Swann, beneath the mass of suffering which had invaded his soul like
a conquering horde of barbarians, there lay a natural foundation, older,
more placid, and silently laborious, like the cells of an injured organ
which at once set to work to repair the damaged tissues, or the muscles
of a paralysed limb which tend to recover their former movements. These
older, these autochthonous in-dwellers in his soul absorbed all Swann's
strength, for a while, in that obscure task of reparation which gives
one an illusory sense of repose during convalescence, or after an
operation. This time it was not so much--as it ordinarily was--in
Swann's brain that the slackening of tension due to exhaustion took
effect, it was rather in his heart. But all the things in life that have
once existed tend to recur, and, like a dying animal that is once more
stirred by the throes of a convulsion which was, apparently, ended, upon
Swann's heart, spared for a moment only, the same agony returned of its
own accord to trace the same cross again. He remembered those moonlit
evenings, when, leaning back in the victoria that was taking him to
the Rue La Pérouse, he would cultivate with voluptuous enjoyment the
emotions of a man in love, ignorant of the poisoned fruit that such
emotions must inevitably bear. But all those thoughts lasted for no more
than a second, the time that it took him to raise his hand to his heart,
to draw breath again and to contrive to smile, so as to dissemble
his torment. Already he had begun to put further questions. For his
jealousy, which had taken an amount of trouble, such as no enemy would
have incurred, to strike him this mortal blow, to make him forcibly
acquainted with the most cruel pain that he had ever known, his jealousy
was not satisfied that he had yet suffered enough, and sought to expose
his bosom to an even deeper wound. Like an evil deity, his jealousy was
inspiring Swann, was thrusting him on towards destruction. It was not
his fault, but Odette's alone, if at first his punishment was not more
severe.

"My darling," he began again, "it's all over now; was it with anyone I
know?"

"No, I swear it wasn't; besides, I think I exaggerated, I never really
went as far as that."

He smiled, and resumed with: "Just as you like. It doesn't really
matter, but it's unfortunate that you can't give me any name. If I were
able to form an idea of the person that would prevent my ever thinking
of her again. I say it for your own sake, because then I shouldn't
bother you any more about it. It's so soothing to be able to form a
clear picture of things in one's mind. What is really terrible is what
one cannot imagine. But you've been so sweet to me; I don't want to tire
you. I do thank you, with all my heart, for all the good that you have
done me. I've quite finished now. Only one word more: how many times?"

"Oh, Charles! can't you see, you're killing me? It's all ever so long
ago. I've never given it a thought. Anyone would say that you were
positively trying to put those ideas into my head again. And then you'd
be a lot better off!" she concluded, with unconscious stupidity but with
intentional malice.

"I only wished to know whether it had been since I knew you. It's only
natural. Did it happen here, ever? You can't give me any particular
evening, so that I can remind myself what I was doing at the time? You
understand, surely, that it's not possible that you don't remember with
whom, Odette, my love."

"But I don't know; really, I don't. I think it was in the Bois, one
evening when you came to meet us on the Island. You had been dining with
the Princesse des Laumes," she added, happy to be able to furnish him
with an exact detail, which testified to her veracity. "At the next
table there was a woman whom I hadn't seen for ever so long. She said to
me, 'Come along round behind the rock, there, and look at the moonlight
on the water!' At first I just yawned, and said, 'No, I'm too tired,
and I'm quite happy where I am, thank you.' She swore there'd never been
anything like it in the way of moonlight. 'I've heard that tale before,'
I said to her; you see, I knew quite well what she was after." Odette
narrated this episode almost as if it were a joke, either because it
appeared to her to be quite natural, or because she thought that she was
thereby minimising its importance, or else so as not to appear ashamed.
But, catching sight of Swann's face, she changed her tone, and:

"You are a fiend!" she flung at him, "you enjoy tormenting me, making me
tell you lies, just so that you'll leave me in peace."

This second blow struck at Swann was even more excruciating than the
first. Never had he supposed it to have been so recent an affair, hidden
from his eyes that had been too innocent to discern it, not in a past
which he had never known, but in evenings which he so well remembered,
which he had lived through with Odette, of which he had supposed himself
to have such an intimate, such an exhaustive knowledge, and which now
assumed, retrospectively, an aspect of cunning and deceit and cruelty.
In the midst of them parted, suddenly, a gaping chasm, that moment on
the Island in the Bois de Boulogne. Without being intelligent, Odette
had the charm of being natural. She had recounted, she had acted the
little scene with so much simplicity that Swann, as he gasped for
breath, could vividly see it: Odette yawning, the "rock there,"... He
could hear her answer--alas, how lightheartedly--"I've heard that tale
before!" He felt that she would tell him nothing more that evening, that
no further revelation was to be expected for the present. He was silent
for a time, then said to her:

"My poor darling, you must forgive me; I know, I am hurting you
dreadfully, but it's all over now; I shall never think of it again."

But she saw that his eyes remained fixed upon the things that he did not
know, and on that past era of their love, monotonous and soothing in his
memory because it was vague, and now rent, as with a sword-wound, by the
news of that minute on the Island in the Bois, by moonlight, while he
was dining with the Princesse des Laumes. But he had so far acquired
the habit of finding life interesting--of marvelling at the strange
discoveries that there were to be made in it--that even while he was
suffering so acutely that he did not believe it possible to endure such
agony for any length of time, he was saying to himself: "Life is indeed
astonishing, and holds some fine surprises; it appears that vice is far
more common than one has been led to believe. Here is a woman in whom
I had absolute confidence, who looks so simple, so honest, who, in any
case, even allowing that her morals are not strict, seemed quite normal
and healthy in her tastes and inclinations. I receive a most improbable
accusation, I question her, and the little that she admits reveals far
more than I could ever have suspected." But he could not confine himself
to these detached observations. He sought to form an exact estimate of
the importance of what she had just told him, so as to know whether he
might conclude that she had done these things often, and was likely to
do them again. He repeated her words to himself: "I knew quite well what
she was after." "Two or three times." "I've heard that tale before." But
they did not reappear in his memory unarmed; each of them held a knife
with which it stabbed him afresh. For a long time, like a sick man
who cannot restrain himself from attempting, every minute, to make the
movement that, he knows, will hurt him, he kept on murmuring to himself:
"I'm quite happy where I am, thank you," "I've heard that tale before,"
but the pain was so intense that he was obliged to stop. He was amazed
to find that actions which he had always, hitherto, judged so lightly,
had dismissed, indeed, with a laugh, should have become as serious to
him as a disease which might easily prove fatal. He knew any number
of women whom he could ask to keep an eye on Odette, but how was he to
expect them to adjust themselves to his new point of view, and not to
remain at that which for so long had been his own, which had always
guided him in his voluptuous existence; not to say to him with a smile:
"You jealous monster, wanting to rob other people of their pleasure!"
By what trap-door, suddenly lowered, had he (who had never found, in the
old days, in his love for Odette, any but the most refined of pleasures)
been precipitated into this new circle of hell from which he could not
see how he was ever to escape. Poor Odette! He wished her no harm. She
was but half to blame. Had he not been told that it was her own mother
who had sold her, when she was still little more than a child, at Nice,
to a wealthy Englishman? But what an agonising truth was now contained
for him in those lines of Alfred de Vigny's _Journal d'un Poète_ which
he had previously read without emotion: "When one feels oneself smitten
by love for a woman, one ought to say to oneself, 'What are 'her
surroundings? What has been her life?' All one's future happiness lies
in the answer." Swann was astonished that such simple phrases, spelt
over in his mind as, "I've heard that tale before," or "I knew quite
well what she was after," could cause him so much pain. But he realised
that what he had mistaken for simple phrases were indeed parts of the
panoply which held and could inflict on him the anguish that he had felt
while Odette was telling her story. For it was the same anguish that he
now was feeling afresh. It was no good, his knowing now,--indeed, it
was no good, as time went on, his having partly forgotten and altogether
forgiven the offence--whenever he repeated her words his old anguish
refashioned him as he had been before Odette began to speak: ignorant,
trustful; his merciless jealousy placed him once again, so that he might
be effectively wounded by Odette's admission, in the position of a man
who does not yet know the truth; and after several months this old story
would still dumbfounder him, like a sudden revelation. He marvelled
at the terrible recreative power of his memory. It was only by the
weakening of that generative force, whose fecundity diminishes as age
creeps over one, that he could hope for a relaxation of his torments.
But, as soon as the power that any one of Odette's sentences had to make
Swann suffer seemed to be nearly exhausted, lo and behold another, one
of those to which he had hitherto paid least attention, almost a
new sentence, came to relieve the first, and to strike at him with
undiminished force. The memory of the evening on which he had dined with
the Princesse des Laumes was painful to him, but it was no more than
the centre, the core of his pain. That radiated vaguely round about it,
overflowing into all the preceding and following days. And on whatever
point in it he might intend his memory to rest, it was the whole of that
season, during which the Verdurins had so often gone to dine upon the
Island in the Bois, that sprang back to hurt him. So violently, that by
slow degrees the curiosity which his jealousy was ever exciting in him
was neutralised by his fear of the fresh tortures which he would be
inflicting upon himself were he to satisfy it. He recognised that all
the period of Odette's life which had elapsed before she first met him,
a period of which he had never sought to form any picture in his mind,
was not the featureless abstraction which he could vaguely see, but had
consisted of so many definite, dated years, each crowded with concrete
incidents. But were he to learn more of them, he feared lest her past,
now colourless, fluid and supportable, might assume a tangible, an
obscene form, with individual and diabolical features. And he continued
to refrain from seeking a conception of it, not any longer now from
laziness of mind, but from fear of suffering. He hoped that, some day,
he might be able to hear the Island in the Bois, or the Princesse des
Laumes mentioned without feeling any twinge of that old rending pain;
meanwhile he thought it imprudent to provoke Odette into furnishing him
with fresh sentences, with the names of more places and people and of
different events, which, when his malady was still scarcely healed,
would make it break out again in another form.

But, often enough, the things that he did not know, that he dreaded,
now, to learn, it was Odette herself who, spontaneously and without
thought of what she did, revealed them to him; for the gap which her
vices made between her actual life and the comparatively innocent life
which Swann had believed, and often still believed his mistress to lead,
was far wider than she knew. A vicious person, always affecting the same
air of virtue before people whom he is anxious to keep from having any
suspicion of his vices, has no register, no gauge at hand from which
he may ascertain how far those vices (their continuous growth being
imperceptible by himself) have gradually segregated him from the normal
ways of life. In the course of their cohabitation, in Odette's mind,
with the memory of those of her actions which she concealed from Swann,
her other, her innocuous actions were gradually coloured, infected
by these, without her being able to detect anything strange in them,
without their causing any explosion in the particular region of herself
in which she made them live, but when she related them to Swann, he was
overwhelmed by the revelation of the duplicity to which they pointed.
One day, he was trying--without hurting Odette--to discover from her
whether she had ever had any dealings with procuresses. He was, as a
matter of fact, convinced that she had not; the anonymous letter had
put the idea into his mind, but in a purely mechanical way; it had been
received there with no credulity, but it had, for all that, remained
there, and Swann, wishing to be rid of the burden--a dead weight, but
none the less disturbing--of this suspicion, hoped that Odette would now
extirpate it for ever.

"Oh dear, no! Not that they don't simply persecute me to go to them,"
her smile revealed a gratified vanity which she no longer saw that it
was impossible should appear legitimate to Swann. "There was one of them
waited more than two hours for me yesterday, said she would give me any
money I asked. It seems, there's an Ambassador who said to her, 'I'll
kill myself if you don't bring her to me'--meaning me! They told her I'd
gone out, but she waited and waited, and in the end I had to go myself
and speak to her, before she'd go away. I do wish you could have seen
the way I tackled her; my maid was in the next room, listening, and told
me I shouted fit to bring the house down:--'But when you hear me say
that I don't want to! The idea of such a thing, I don't like it at all!
I should hope I'm still free to do as I please and when I please and
where I please! If I needed the money, I could understand...' The porter
has orders not to let her in again; he will tell her that I am out of
town. Oh, I do wish I could have had you hidden somewhere in the room
while I was talking to her. I know, you'd have been pleased, my dear.
There's some good in your little Odette, you see, after all, though
people do say such dreadful things about her."

Besides, her very admissions--when she made any--of faults which she
supposed him to have discovered, rather served Swann as a starting-point
for fresh doubts than they put an end to the old. For her admissions
never exactly coincided with his doubts. In vain might Odette expurgate
her confession of all its essential part, there would remain in the
accessories something which Swann had never yet imagined, which crushed
him anew, and was to enable him to alter the terms of the problem of his
jealousy. And these admissions he could never forget. His spirit carried
them along, cast them aside, then cradled them again in its bosom, like
corpses in a river. And they poisoned it.

She spoke to him once of a visit that Forcheville had paid her on the
day of the Paris-Murcie Fête. "What! you knew him as long ago as that?
Oh, yes, of course you did," he corrected himself, so as not to shew
that he had been ignorant of the fact. And suddenly he began to tremble
at the thought that, on the day of the Paris-Murcie Fête, when he had
received that letter which he had so carefully preserved, she had been
having luncheon, perhaps, with Forcheville at the Maison d'Or. She swore
that she had not. "Still, the Maison d'Or reminds me of something or
other which, I knew at the time, wasn't true," he pursued, hoping to
frighten her. "Yes, that I hadn't been there at all that evening when I
told you I had just come from there, and you had been looking for me
at Prévost's," she replied (judging by his manner that he knew) with a
firmness that was based not so much upon cynicism as upon timidity, a
fear of crossing Swann, which her own self-respect made her anxious to
conceal, and a desire to shew him that she could be perfectly frank if
she chose. And so she struck him with all the sharpness and force of a
headsman wielding his axe, and yet could not be charged with cruelty,
since she was quite unconscious of hurting him; she even began to laugh,
though this may perhaps, it is true, have been chiefly to keep him from
thinking that she was ashamed, at all, or confused. "It's quite true, I
hadn't been to the Maison Dorée. I was coming away from Forcheville's. I
had, really, been to Prévost's--that wasn't a story--and he met me there
and asked me to come in and look at his prints. But some one else came
to see him. I told you that I was coming from the Maison d'Or because I
was afraid you might be angry with me. It was rather nice of me, really,
don't you see? I admit, I did wrong, but at least I'm telling you all
about it now, a'n't I? What have I to gain by not telling you, straight,
that I lunched with him on the day of the Paris-Murcie Fête, if it were
true? Especially as at that time we didn't know one another quite so
well as we do now, did we, dear?"

He smiled back at her with the sudden, craven weakness of the utterly
spiritless creature which these crushing words had made of him. And so,
even in the months of which he had never dared to think again, because
they had been too happy, in those months when she had loved him, she was
already lying to him! Besides that moment (that first evening on which
they had "done a cattleya") when she had told him that she was coming
from the Maison Dorée, how many others must there have been, each
of them covering a falsehood of which Swann had had no suspicion. He
recalled how she had said to him once: "I need only tell Mme. Verdurin
that my dress wasn't ready, or that my cab came late. There is always
some excuse." From himself too, probably, many times when she had glibly
uttered such words as explain a delay or justify an alteration of the
hour fixed for a meeting, those moments must have hidden, without his
having the least inkling of it at the time, an engagement that she had
had with some other man, some man to whom she had said: "I need only
tell Swann that my dress wasn't ready, or that my cab came late. There
is always some excuse." And beneath all his most pleasant memories,
beneath the simplest words that Odette had ever spoken to him in those
old days, words which he had believed as though they were the words of
a Gospel, beneath her daily actions which she had recounted to him,
beneath the most ordinary places, her dressmaker's flat, the Avenue du
Bois, the Hippodrome, he could feel (dissembled there, by virtue of that
temporal superfluity which, after the most detailed account of how a day
has been spent, always leaves something over, that may serve as a hiding
place for certain unconfessed actions), he could feel the insinuation of
a possible undercurrent of falsehood which debased for him all that
had remained most precious, his happiest evenings, the Rue La Pérouse
itself, which Odette must constantly have been leaving at other hours
than those of which she told him; extending the power of the dark horror
that had gripped him when he had heard her admission with regard to
the Maison Dorée, and, like the obscene creatures in the 'Desolation of
Nineveh,' shattering, stone by stone, the whole edifice of his past....
If, now, he turned aside whenever his memory repeated the cruel name of
the Maison Dorée it was because that name recalled to him, no longer,
as, such a little time since, at Mme. de Saint-Euverte's party, the good
fortune which he long had lost, but a misfortune of which he was now
first aware. Then it befell the Maison Dorée, as it had befallen the
Island in the Bois, that gradually its name ceased to trouble him.
For what we suppose to be our love, our jealousy are, neither of them,
single, continuous and individual passions. They are composed of an
infinity of successive loves, of different jealousies, each of which is
ephemeral, although by their uninterrupted multitude they give us the
impression of continuity, the illusion of unity. The life of Swann's
love, the fidelity of his jealousy, were formed out of death, of
infidelity, of innumerable desires, innumerable doubts, all of which
had Odette for their object. If he had remained for any length of time
without seeing her, those that died would not have been replaced by
others. But the presence of Odette continued to sow in Swann's heart
alternate seeds of love and suspicion.

On certain evenings she would suddenly resume towards him a kindness of
which she would warn him sternly that he must take immediate advantage,
under penalty of not seeing it repeated for years to come; he must
instantly accompany her home, to "do a cattleya," and the desire
which she pretended to have for him was so sudden, so inexplicable, so
imperious, the kisses which she lavished on him were so demonstrative
and so unfamiliar, that this brutal and unnatural fondness made Swann
just as unhappy as any lie or unkind action. One evening when he had
thus, in obedience to her command, gone home with her, and while she was
interspersing her kisses with passionate words, in strange contrast to
her habitual coldness, he thought suddenly that he heard a sound; he
rose, searched everywhere and found nobody, but he had not the courage
to return to his place by her side; whereupon she, in a towering
rage, broke a vase, with "I never can do anything right with you,
you impossible person!" And he was left uncertain whether she had not
actually had some man concealed in the room, whose jealousy she had
wished to wound, or else to inflame his senses.

Sometimes he repaired to 'gay' houses, hoping to learn something about
Odette, although he dared not mention her name. "I have a little thing
here, you're sure to like," the 'manageress' would greet him, and he
would stay for an hour or so, talking dolefully to some poor girl who
sat there astonished that he went no further. One of them, who was still
quite young and attractive, said to him once, "Of course, what I should
like would be to find a real friend, then he might be quite certain,
I should never go with any other men again." "Indeed, do you think it
possible for a woman really to be touched by a man's being in love with
her, and never to be unfaithful to him?" asked Swann anxiously. "Why,
surely! It all depends on their characters!" Swann could not help making
the same remarks to these girls as would have delighted the Princesse
des Laumes. To the one who was in search of a friend he said, with a
smile: "But how nice of you, you've put on blue eyes, to go with
your sash." "And you too, you've got blue cuffs on." "What a charming
conversation we are having, for a place of this sort! I'm not boring
you, am I; or keeping you?" "No, I've nothing to do, thank you. If you
bored me I should say so. But I love hearing you talk." "I am highly
flattered.... Aren't we behaving prettily?" he asked the 'manageress,'
who had just looked in. "Why, yes, that's just what I was saying to
myself, how sensibly they're behaving! But that's how it is! People come
to my house now, just to talk. The Prince was telling me, only the other
day, that he's far more comfortable here than with his wife. It seems
that, nowadays, all the society ladies are like that; a perfect scandal,
I call it. But I'll leave you in peace now, I know when I'm not wanted,"
she ended discreetly, and left Swann with the girl who had the blue
eyes. But presently he rose and said good-bye to her. She had ceased to
interest him. She did not know Odette.

The painter having been ill, Dr. Cottard recommended a sea-voyage;
several of the 'faithful' spoke of accompanying him; the Verdurins
could not face the prospect of being left alone in Paris, so first of
all hired, and finally purchased a yacht; thus Odette was constantly
going on a cruise. Whenever she had been away for any length of time,
Swann would feel that he was beginning to detach himself from her, but,
as though this moral distance were proportionate to the physical
distance between them, whenever he heard that Odette had returned to
Paris, he could not rest without seeing her. Once, when they had gone
away, as everyone thought, for a month only, either they succumbed to a
series of temptations, or else M. Verdurin had cunningly arranged
everything beforehand, to please his wife, and disclosed his plans to
the 'faithful' only as time went on; anyhow, from Algiers they flitted
to Tunis; then to Italy, Greece, Constantinople, Asia Minor. They had
been absent for nearly a year, and Swann felt perfectly at ease and
almost happy. Albeit M. Verdurin had endeavoured to persuade the
pianist and Dr. Cottard that their respective aunt and patients had no
need of them, and that, in any event, it was most rash to allow Mme.
Cottard to return to Paris, where, Mme. Verdurin assured him, a
revolution had just broken out, he was obliged to grant them their
liberty at Constantinople. And the painter came home with them. One
day, shortly after the return of these four travellers, Swann, seeing
an omnibus approach him, labelled 'Luxembourg,' and having some
business there, had jumped on to it and had found himself sitting
opposite Mme. Cottard, who was paying a round of visits to people whose
'day' it was, in full review order, with a plume in her hat, a silk
dress, a muff, an umbrella (which would do for a parasol if the rain
kept off), a card-case, and a pair of white gloves fresh from the
cleaners. Wearing these badges of rank, she would, in fine weather, go
on foot from one house to another in the same neighbourhood, but when
she had to proceed to another district, would make use of a
transfer-ticket on the omnibus. For the first minute or two, until the
natural courtesy of the woman broke through the starched surface of the
doctor's-wife, not being certain, either, whether she ought to mention
the Verdurins before Swann, she produced, quite naturally, in her slow
and awkward, but not unattractive voice, which, every now and then, was
completely drowned by the rattling of the omnibus, topics selected from
those which she had picked up and would repeat in each of the score of
houses up the stairs of which she clambered in the course of an
afternoon.

"I needn't ask you, M. Swann, whether a man so much in the movement as
yourself has been to the Mirlitons, to see the portrait by Machard that
the whole of Paris is running after. Well, and what do you think of it?
Whose camp are you in, those who bless or those who curse? It's the
same in every house in Paris now, no one will speak of anything else but
Machard's portrait; you aren't smart, you aren't really cultured, you
aren't up-to-date unless you give an opinion on Machard's portrait."

Swann having replied that he had not seen this portrait, Mme. Cottard
was afraid that she might have hurt his feelings by obliging him to
confess the omission.

"Oh, that's quite all right! At least you have the courage to be quite
frank about it. You don't consider yourself disgraced because you
haven't seen Machard's portrait. I do think that so nice of you. Well
now, I have seen it; opinion is divided, you know, there are some people
who find it rather laboured, like whipped cream, they say; but I think
it's just ideal. Of course, she's not a bit like the blue and yellow
ladies that our friend Biche paints. That's quite clear. But I must tell
you, perfectly frankly (you'll think me dreadfully old-fashioned, but I
always say just what I think), that I don't understand his work. I can
quite see the good points there are in his portrait of my husband; oh,
dear me, yes; and it's certainly less odd than most of what he does,
but even then he had to give the poor man a blue moustache! But Machard!
Just listen to this now, the husband of my friend, I am on my way to see
at this very moment (which has given me the very great pleasure of your
company), has promised her that, if he is elected to the Academy (he
is one of the Doctor's colleagues), he will get Machard to paint her
portrait. So she's got something to look forward to! I have another
friend who insists that she'd rather have Leloir. I'm only a wretched
Philistine, and I've no doubt Leloir has perhaps more knowledge of
painting even than Machard. But I do think that the most important
thing about a portrait, especially when it's going to cost ten thousand
francs, is that it should be like, and a pleasant likeness, if you know
what I mean."

Having exhausted this topic, to which she had been inspired by the
loftiness of her plume, the monogram on her card-case, the little number
inked inside each of her gloves by the cleaner, and the difficulty of
speaking to Swann about the Verdurins, Mme. Cottard, seeing that they
had still a long way to go before they would reach the corner of the
Rue Bonaparte, where the conductor was to set her down, listened to the
promptings of her heart, which counselled other words than these.

"Your ears must have been burning," she ventured, "while we were on the
yacht with Mme. Verdurin. We were talking about you all the time."

Swann was genuinely astonished, for he supposed that his name was never
uttered in the Verdurins' presence.

"You see," Mme. Cottard went on, "Mme. de Crécy was there; need I say
more? When Odette is anywhere it's never long before she begins talking
about you. And you know quite well, it isn't nasty things she says.
What! you don't believe me!" she went on, noticing that Svrann looked
sceptical. And, carried away by the sincerity of her conviction, without
putting any evil meaning into the word, which she used purely in the
sense in which one employs it to speak of the affection that unites a
pair of friends: "Why, she _adores_ you! No, indeed; I'm sure it would
never do to say anything against you when she was about; one would soon
be taught one's place! Whatever we might be doing, if we were looking at
a picture, for instance, she would say, 'If only we had him here, he's
the man who could tell us whether it's genuine or not. There's no one
like him for that.' And all day long she would be saying, 'What can
he be doing just now? I do hope, he's doing a little work! It's too
dreadful that a fellow with such gifts as he has should be so lazy.'
(Forgive me, won't you.) 'I can see him this very moment; he's thinking
of us, he's wondering where we are.' Indeed, she used an expression
which I thought very pretty at the time. M. Verdurin asked her, 'How in
the world can you see what he's doing, when he's a thousand miles away?'
And Odette answered, 'Nothing is impossible to the eye of a friend.'

"No, I assure you, I'm not saying it just to flatter you; you have a
true friend in her, such as one doesn't often find. I can tell you,
besides, in case you don't know it, that you're the only one. Mme.
Verdurin told me as much herself on our last day with them (one talks
more freely, don't you know, before a parting), 'I don't say that Odette
isn't fond of us, but anything that we may say to her counts for very
little beside what Swann might say.' Oh, mercy, there's the conductor
stopping for me; here have I been chatting away to you, and would have
gone right past the Rue Bonaparte, and never noticed... Will you be so
very kind as to tell me whether my plume is straight?"

And Mme. Cottard withdrew from her muff, to offer it to Swann, a
white-gloved hand from which there floated, with a transfer-ticket, an
atmosphere of fashionable life that pervaded the omnibus, blended with
the harsher fragrance of newly cleaned kid. And Swann felt himself
overflowing with gratitude to her, as well as to Mme. Verdurin (and
almost to Odette, for the feeling that he now entertained for her was
no longer tinged with pain, was scarcely even to be described, now,
as love), while from the platform of the omnibus he followed her with
loving eyes, as she gallantly threaded her way along the Rue Bonaparte,
her plume erect, her skirt held up in one hand, while in the other she
clasped her umbrella and her card-case, so that its monogram could be
seen, her muff dancing in the air before her as she went.

To compete with and so to stimulate the moribund feelings that Swann had
for Odette, Mme. Cottard, a wiser physician, in this case, than ever
her husband would have been, had grafted among them others more normal,
feelings of gratitude, of friendship, which in Swann's mind were to make
Odette seem again more human (more like other women, since other women
could inspire the same feelings in him), were to hasten her final
transformation back into that Odette, loved with an undisturbed
affection, who had taken him home one evening after a revel at the
painter's, to drink orangeade with Forcheville, that Odette with whom
Swann had calculated that he might live in happiness.

In former times, having often thought with terror that a day must come
when he would cease to be in love with Odette, he had determined to
keep a sharp look-out, and as soon as he felt that love was beginning to
escape him, to cling tightly to it and to hold it back. But now, to the
faintness of his love there corresponded a simultaneous faintness in
his desire to remain her lover. For a man cannot change, that is to say
become another person, while he continues to obey the dictates of the
self which he has ceased to be. Occasionally the name, if it caught
his eye in a newspaper, of one of the men whom he supposed to have been
Odette's lovers, reawakened his jealousy. But it was very slight, and,
inasmuch as it proved to him that he had not completely emerged from
that period in which he had so keenly suffered--though in it he had also
known a way of feeling so intensely happy--and that the accidents of his
course might still enable him to catch an occasional glimpse, stealthily
and at a distance, of its beauties, this jealousy gave him, if anything,
an agreeable thrill, as to the sad Parisian, when he has left Venice
behind him and must return to France, a last mosquito proves that
Italy and summer are still not too remote. But, as a rule, with this
particular period of his life from which he was emerging, when he made
an effort, if not to remain in it, at least to obtain, while still he
might, an uninterrupted view of it, he discovered that already it was
too late; he would have looked back to distinguish, as it might be
a landscape that was about to disappear, that love from which he had
departed, but it is so difficult to enter into a state of complete
duality and to present to oneself the lifelike spectacle of a feeling
which one has ceased to possess, that very soon, the clouds gathering
in his brain, he could see nothing, he would abandon the attempt, would
take the glasses from his nose and wipe them; and he told himself that
he would do better to rest for a little, that there would be time enough
later on, and settled back into his corner with as little curiosity,
with as much torpor as the drowsy traveller who pulls his cap down over
his eyes so as to get some sleep in the railway-carriage that is drawing
him, he feels, faster and faster, out of the country in which he has
lived for so long, and which he vowed that he would not allow to slip
away from him without looking out to bid it a last farewell. Indeed,
like the same traveller, if he does not awake until he has crossed the
frontier and is again in France, when Swann happened to alight, close
at hand, upon something which proved that Forcheville had been Odette's
lover, he discovered that it caused him no pain, that love was now
utterly remote, and he regretted that he had had no warning of the
moment in which he had emerged from it for ever. And just as, before
kissing Odette for the first time, he had sought to imprint upon his
memory the face that for so long had been familiar, before it was
altered by the additional memory of their kiss, so he could have
wished--in thought at least--to have been in a position to bid farewell,
while she still existed, to that Odette who had inspired love in him and
jealousy, to that Odette who had caused him so to suffer, and whom now
he would never see again. He was mistaken. He was destined to see
her once again, a few weeks later. It was while he was asleep, in the
twilight of a dream. He was walking with Mme. Verdurin, Dr. Cottard,
a young man in a fez whom he failed to identify, the painter, Odette,
Napoleon III and my grandfather, along a path which followed the line
of the coast, and overhung the sea, now at a great height, now by a few
feet only, so that they were continually going up and down; those of the
party who had reached the downward slope were no longer visible to those
who were still climbing; what little daylight yet remained was failing,
and it seemed as though a black night was immediately to fall on them.
Now and then the waves dashed against the cliff, and Swann could feel on
his cheek a shower of freezing spray. Odette told him to wipe this off,
but he could not, and felt confused and helpless in her company, as well
as because he was in his nightshirt. He hoped that, in the darkness,
this might pass unnoticed; Mme. Verdurin, however, fixed her astonished
gaze upon him for an endless moment, in which he saw her face change
its shape, her nose grow longer, while beneath it there sprouted a heavy
moustache. He turned away to examine Odette; her cheeks were pale, with
little fiery spots, her features drawn and ringed with shadows; but she
looked back at him with eyes welling with affection, ready to detach
themselves like tears and to fall upon his face, and he felt that he
loved her so much that he would have liked to carry her off with him
at once. Suddenly Odette turned her wrist, glanced at a tiny watch,
and said: "I must go." She took leave of everyone, in the same formal
manner, without taking Swann aside, without telling him where they were
to meet that evening, or next day. He dared not ask, he would have liked
to follow her, he was obliged, without turning back in her direction,
to answer with a smile some question by Mme. Verdurin; but his heart was
frantically beating, he felt that he now hated Odette, he would gladly
have crushed those eyes which, a moment ago, he had loved so dearly,
have torn the blood into those lifeless cheeks. He continued to climb
with Mme. Verdurin, that is to say that each step took him farther from
Odette, who was going downhill, and in the other direction. A second
passed and it was many hours since she had left him. The painter
remarked to Swann that Napoleon III had eclipsed himself immediately
after Odette. "They had obviously arranged it between them," he added;
"they must have agreed to meet at the foot of the cliff, but they
wouldn't say good-bye together; it might have looked odd. She is his
mistress." The strange young man burst into tears. Swann endeavoured to
console him. "After all, she is quite right," he said to the young man,
drying his eyes for him and taking off the fez to make him feel more
at ease. "I've advised her to do that, myself, a dozen times. Why be
so distressed? He was obviously the man to understand her." So Swann
reasoned with himself, for the young man whom he had failed, at
first, to identify, was himself also; like certain novelists, he had
distributed his own personality between two characters, him who was the
'first person' in the dream, and another whom he saw before him, capped
with a fez.

As for Napoleon III, it was to Forcheville that some vague association
of ideas, then a certain modification of the Baron's usual physiognomy,
and lastly the broad ribbon of the Legion of Honour across his breast,
had made Swann give that name; but actually, and in everything that the
person who appeared in his dream represented and recalled to him, it was
indeed Forcheville. For, from an incomplete and changing set of images,
Swann in his sleep drew false deductions, enjoying, at the same time,
such creative power that he was able to reproduce himself by a simple
act of division, like certain lower organisms; with the warmth that he
felt in his own palm he modelled the hollow of a strange hand which he
thought that he was clasping, and out of feelings and impressions of
which he was not yet conscious, he brought about sudden vicissitudes
which, by a chain of logical sequences, would produce, at definite
points in his dream, the person required to receive his love or to
startle him awake. In an instant night grew black about him; an alarum
rang, the inhabitants ran past him, escaping from their blazing houses;
he could hear the thunder of the surging waves, and also of his own
heart, which, with equal violence, was anxiously beating in his breast.
Suddenly the speed of these palpitations redoubled, he felt a pain, a
nausea that were inexplicable; a peasant, dreadfully burned, flung at
him as he passed: "Come and ask Charlus where Odette spent the night
with her friend. He used to go about with her, and she tells him
everything. It was they that started the fire." It was his valet, come
to awaken him, and saying:--

"Sir, it is eight o'clock, and the barber is here. I have told him to
call again in an hour."

But these words, as they dived down through the waves of sleep in which
Swann was submerged, did not reach his consciousness without undergoing
that refraction which turns a ray of light, at the bottom of a bowl of
water, into another sun; just as, a moment earlier, the sound of
the door-bell, swelling in the depths of his abyss of sleep into the
clangour of an alarum, had engendered the episode of the fire. Meanwhile
the scenery of his dream-stage scattered in dust, he opened his eyes,
heard for the last time the boom of a wave in the sea, grown very
distant. He touched his cheek. It was dry. And yet he could feel the
sting of the cold spray, and the taste of salt on his lips. He rose,
and dressed himself. He had made the barber come early because he had
written, the day before, to my grandfather, to say that he was going,
that afternoon, to Combray, having learned that Mme. de Cambremer--Mlle.
Legrandin that had been--was spending a few days there. The association
in his memory of her young and charming face with a place in the country
which he had not visited for so long, offered him a combined attraction
which had made him decide at last to leave Paris for a while. As the
different changes and chances that bring us into the company of certain
other people in this life do not coincide with the periods in which we
are in love with those people, but, overlapping them, may occur before
love has begun, and may be repeated after love is ended, the earliest
appearances, in our life, of a creature who is destined to afford us
pleasure later on, assume retrospectively in our eyes a certain value as
an indication, a warning, a presage. It was in this fashion that Swann
had often carried back his mind to the image of Odette, encountered in
the theatre, on that first evening when he had no thought of ever
seeing her again--and that he now recalled the party at Mme. de
Saint-Euverte's, at which he had introduced General de Froberville to
Mme. de Cambremer. So manifold are our interests in life that it is
not uncommon that, on a single occasion, the foundations of a happiness
which does not yet exist are laid down simultaneously with aggravations
of a grief from which we are still suffering. And, no doubt, that might
have occurred to Swann elsewhere than at Mme. de Saint-Euverte's. Who,
indeed, can say whether, in the event of his having gone, that evening,
somewhere else, other happinesses, other griefs would not have come to
him, which, later, would have appeared to have been inevitable? But what
did seem to him to have been inevitable was what had indeed taken place,
and he was not far short of seeing something providential in the fact
that he had at last decided to go to Mme. de Saint-Euverte's that
evening, because his mind, anxious to admire the richness of invention
that life shews, and incapable of facing a difficult problem for any
length of time, such as to discover what, actually, had been most to be
wished for, came to the conclusion that the sufferings through which he
had passed that evening, and the pleasures, at that time unsuspected,
which were already being brought to birth,--the exact balance between
which was too difficult to establish--were linked by a sort of
concatenation of necessity.

But while, an hour after his awakening, he was giving instructions
to the barber, so that his stiffly brushed hair should not become
disarranged on the journey, he thought once again of his dream; he
saw once again, as he had felt them close beside him, Odette's pallid
complexion, her too thin cheeks, her drawn features, her tired eyes, all
the things which--in the course of those successive bursts of affection
which had made of his enduring love for Odette a long oblivion of the
first impression that he had formed of her--he had ceased to observe
after the first few days of their intimacy, days to which, doubtless,
while he slept, his memory had returned to seek the exact sensation of
those things. And with that old, intermittent fatuity, which reappeared
in him now that he was no longer unhappy, and lowered, at the same time,
the average level of his morality, he cried out in his heart: "To think
that I have wasted years of my life, that I have longed for death, that
the greatest love that I have ever known has been for a woman who did
not please me, who was not in my style!"




PLACE-NAMES: THE NAME


Among the rooms which used most commonly to take shape in my mind during
my long nights of sleeplessness, there was none that differed more
utterly from the rooms at Combray, thickly powdered with the motes of an
atmosphere granular, pollenous, edible and instinct with piety, than
my room in the Grand Hôtel de la Plage, at Balbec, the walls of which,
washed with ripolin, contained, like the polished sides of a basin in
which the water glows with a blue, lurking fire, a finer air, pure,
azure-tinted, saline. The Bavarian upholsterer who had been entrusted
with the furnishing of this hotel had varied his scheme of decoration
in different rooms, and in that which I found myself occupying had set
against the walls, on three sides of it, a series of low book-cases
with glass fronts, in which, according to where they stood, by a law
of nature which he had, perhaps, forgotten to take into account, was
reflected this or that section of the ever-changing view of the sea, so
that the walls were lined with a frieze of seascapes, interrupted only
by the polished mahogany of the actual shelves. And so effective was
this that the whole room had the appearance of one of those model
bedrooms which you see nowadays in Housing Exhibitions, decorated with
works of art which are calculated by their designer to refresh the eyes
of whoever may ultimately have to sleep in the rooms, the subjects being
kept in some degree of harmony with the locality and surroundings of the
houses for which the rooms are planned.

And yet nothing could have differed more utterly, either, from the real
Balbec than that other Balbec of which I had often dreamed, on stormy
days, when the wind was so strong that Françoise, as she took me to
the Champs-Elysées, would warn me not to walk too near the side of the
street, or I might have my head knocked off by a falling slate, and
would recount to me, with many lamentations, the terrible disasters and
shipwrecks that were reported in the newspaper. I longed for nothing
more than to behold a storm at sea, less as a mighty spectacle than as
a momentary revelation of the true life of nature; or rather there
were for me no mighty spectacles save those which I knew to be
not artificially composed for my entertainment, but necessary and
unalterable,--the beauty of landscapes or of great works of art. I was
not curious, I did not thirst to know anything save what I believed
to be more genuine than myself, what had for me the supreme merit of
shewing me a fragment of the mind of a great genius, or of the force
or the grace of nature as she appeared when left entirely to herself,
without human interference. Just as the lovely sound of her voice,
reproduced, all by itself, upon the phonograph, could never console a
man for the loss of his mother, so a mechanical imitation of a storm
would have left me as cold as did the illuminated fountains at the
Exhibition. I required also, if the storm was to be absolutely genuine,
that the shore from which I watched it should be a natural shore, not an
embankment recently constructed by a municipality. Besides, nature, by
all the feelings that she aroused in me, seemed to me the most opposite
thing in the world to the mechanical inventions of mankind. The less she
bore their imprint, the more room she offered for the expansion of my
heart. And, as it happened, I had preserved the name of Balbec, which
Legrandin had cited to us, as that of a sea-side place in the very midst
of "that funereal coast, famed for the number of its wrecks, swathed,
for six months in the year, in a shroud of fog and flying foam from the
waves.

"You feel, there, below your feet still," he had told me, "far more even
than at Finistère (and even though hotels are now being superimposed
upon it, without power, however, to modify that oldest bone in the
earth's skeleton) you feel there that you are actually at the land's
end of France, of Europe, of the Old World. And it is the ultimate
encampment of the fishermen, precisely like the fishermen who have
lived since the world's beginning, facing the everlasting kingdom of
the sea-fogs and shadows of the night." One day when, at Combray, I had
spoken of this coast, this Balbec, before M. Swann, hoping to learn from
him whether it was the best point to select for seeing the most violent
storms, he had replied: "I should think I did know Balbec! The church
at Balbec, built in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, and still
half romanesque, is perhaps the most curious example to be found of our
Norman gothic, and so exceptional that one is tempted to describe it
as Persian in its inspiration." And that region, which, until then, had
seemed to me to be nothing else than a part of immemorial nature, that
had remained contemporaneous with the great phenomena of geology--and as
remote from human history as the Ocean itself, or the Great Bear, with
its wild race of fishermen for whom, no more than for their whales,
had there been any Middle Ages--it had been a great joy to me to see
it suddenly take its place in the order of the centuries, with a stored
consciousness of the romanesque epoch, and to know that the gothic
trefoil had come to diversify those wild rocks also, at the appointed
hour, like those frail but hardy plants which, in the Polar regions,
when the spring returns, scatter their stars about the eternal snows.
And if gothic art brought to those places and people a classification
which, otherwise, they lacked, they too conferred one upon it in return.
I tried to form a picture in my mind of how those fishermen had lived,
the timid and unsuspected essay towards social intercourse which they
had attempted there, clustered upon a promontory of the shores of Hell,
at the foot of the cliffs of death; and gothic art seemed to me a more
living thing now that, detaching it from the towns in which, until then,
I had always imagined it, I could see how, in a particular instance,
upon a reef of savage rocks, it had taken root and grown until it
flowered in a tapering spire. I was taken to see reproductions of the
most famous of the statues at Balbec,--shaggy, blunt-faced Apostles,
the Virgin from the porch,--and I could scarcely breathe for joy at the
thought that I might myself, one day, see them take a solid form against
their eternal background of salt fog. Thereafter, on dear, tempestuous
February nights, the wind--breathing into my heart, which it shook no
less violently than the chimney of my bedroom, the project of a visit to
Balbec--blended in me the desire for gothic architecture with that for a
storm upon the sea.

I should have liked to take, the very next day, the good, the generous
train at one twenty-two, of which never without a palpitating heart
could I read, in the railway company's bills or in advertisements of
circular tours, the hour of departure: it seemed to me to cut, at
a precise point in every afternoon, a most fascinating groove, a
mysterious mark, from which the diverted hours still led one on, of
course, towards evening, towards to-morrow morning, but to an evening
and morning which one would behold, not in Paris but in one of those
towns through which the train passed and among which it allowed one
to choose; for it stopped at Bayeux, at Coutances, at Vitré, at
Questambert, at Pontorson, at Balbec, at Lannion, at Lamballe, at
Benodet, at Pont-Aven, at Quimperle, and progressed magnificently
surcharged with names which it offered me, so that, among them all, I
did not know which to choose, so impossible was it to sacrifice any.
But even without waiting for the train next day, I could, by rising and
dressing myself with all speed, leave Paris that very evening, should
my parents permit, and arrive at Balbec as dawn spread westward over the
raging sea, from whose driven foam I would seek shelter in that church
in the Persian manner. But at the approach of the Easter holidays, when
my parents had promised to let me spend them, for once, in the North
of Italy, lo! in place of those dreams of tempests, by which I had been
entirely possessed, not wishing to see anything but waves dashing in
from all sides, mounting always higher, upon the wildest of coasts,
beside churches as rugged and precipitous as cliffs, in whose towers
the sea-birds would be wailing; suddenly, effacing them, taking away
all their charm, excluding them because they were its opposite and could
only have weakened its effect, was substituted in me the converse dream
of the most variegated of springs, not the spring of Combray, still
pricking with all the needle-points of the winter's frost, but that
which already covered with lilies and anemones the meadows of Fiesole,
and gave Florence a dazzling golden background, like those in Fra
Angelico's pictures. From that moment, only sunlight, perfumes, colours,
seemed to me to have any value; for this alternation of images had
effected a change of front in my desire, and--as abrupt as those that
occur sometimes in music,--a complete change of tone in my sensibility.
Thus it came about that a mere atmospheric variation would be sufficient
to provoke in me that modulation, without there being any need for me to
await the return of a season. For often we find a day, in one, that has
strayed from another season, and makes us live in that other, summons at
once into our presence and makes us long for its peculiar pleasures, and
interrupts the dreams that we were in process of weaving, by inserting,
out of its turn, too early or too late, this leaf, torn from another
chapter, in the interpolated calendar of Happiness. But soon it happened
that, like those natural phenomena from which our comfort or our health
can derive but an accidental and all too modest benefit, until the day
when science takes control of them, and, producing them at will, places
in our hands the power to order their appearance, withdrawn from
the tutelage and independent of the consent of chance; similarly the
production of these dreams of the Atlantic and of Italy ceased to depend
entirely upon the changes of the seasons and of the weather. I need
only, to make them reappear, pronounce the names: Balbec, Venice,
Florence, within whose syllables had gradually accumulated all the
longing inspired in me by the places for which they stood. Even in
spring, to come in a book upon the name of Balbec sufficed to awaken
in me the desire for storms at sea and for the Norman gothic; even on a
stormy day the name of Florence or of Venice would awaken the desire for
sunshine, for lilies, for the Palace of the Doges and for Santa Maria
del Fiore.

But if their names thus permanently absorbed the image that I had formed
of these towns, it was only by transforming that image, by subordinating
its reappearance in me to their own special laws; and in consequence of
this they made it more beautiful, but at the same time more different
from anything that the towns of Normandy or Tuscany could in reality be,
and, by increasing the arbitrary delights of my imagination, aggravated
the disenchantment that was in store for me when I set out upon my
travels. They magnified the idea that I formed of certain points on the
earth's surface, making them more special, and in consequence more
real. I did not then represent to myself towns, landscapes, historic
buildings, as pictures more or less attractive, cut out here and there
of a substance that was common to them all, but looked on each of them
as on an unknown thing, different from all the rest, a thing for which
my soul was athirst, by the knowledge of which it would benefit. How
much more individual still was the character that they assumed from
being designated by names, names that were only for themselves, proper
names such as people have. Words present to us little pictures of
things, lucid and normal, like the pictures that are hung on the walls
of schoolrooms to give children an illustration of what is meant by
a carpenter's bench, a bird, an ant-hill; things chosen as typical of
everything else of the same sort. But names present to us--of persons
and of towns which they accustom us to regard as individual, as unique,
like persons--a confused picture, which draws from the names, from
the brightness or darkness of their sound, the colour in which it is
uniformly painted, like one of those posters, entirely blue or entirely
red, in which, on account of the limitations imposed by the process used
in their reproduction, or by a whim on the designer's part, are blue or
red not only the sky and the sea, but the ships and the church and the
people in the streets. The name of Parma, one of the towns that I most
longed to visit, after reading the _Chartreuse_, seeming to me compact
and glossy, violet-tinted, soft, if anyone were to speak of such or
such a house in Parma, in which I should be lodged, he would give me the
pleasure of thinking that I was to inhabit a dwelling that was compact
and glossy, violet-tinted, soft, and that bore no relation to the houses
in any other town in Italy, since I could imagine it only by the aid
of that heavy syllable of the name of Parma, in which no breath of air
stirred, and of all that I had made it assume of Stendhalian sweetness
and the reflected hue of violets. And when I thought of Florence, it was
of a town miraculously embalmed, and flower-like, since it was called
the City of the Lilies, and its Cathedral, Our Lady of the Flower. As
for Balbec, it was one of those names in which, as on an old piece of
Norman pottery that still keeps the colour of the earth from which
it was fashioned, one sees depicted still the representation of some
long-abolished custom, of some feudal right, of the former condition of
some place, of an obsolete way of pronouncing the language, which had
shaped and wedded its incongruous syllables and which I never doubted
that I should find spoken there at once, even by the inn-keeper who
would pour me out coffee and milk on my arrival, taking me down to watch
the turbulent sea, unchained, before the church; to whom I lent the
aspect, disputatious, solemn and mediaeval, of some character in one of
the old romances.

Had my health definitely improved, had my parents allowed me, if not
actually to go down to stay at Balbec, at least to take, just once, so
as to become acquainted with the architecture and landscapes of Normandy
or of Brittany, that one twenty-two train into which I had so often
clambered in imagination, I should have preferred to stop, and to alight
from it, at the most beautiful of its towns; but in vain might I
compare and contrast them; how was one to choose, any more than between
individual people, who are not interchangeable, between Bayeux, so lofty
in its noble coronet of rusty lace, whose highest point caught the light
of the old gold of its second syllable; Vitré, whose acute accent barred
its ancient glass with wooden lozenges; gentle Lamballe, whose whiteness
ranged from egg-shell yellow to a pearly grey; Coutances, a Norman
Cathedral, which its final consonants, rich and yellowing, crowned with
a tower of butter; Lannion with the rumble and buzz, in the silence of
its village street, of the fly on the wheel of the coach; Questambert,
Pontorson, ridiculously silly and simple, white feathers and yellow
beaks strewn along the road to those well-watered and poetic spots;
Benodet, a name scarcely moored that seemed to be striving to draw the
river down into the tangle of its seaweeds; Pont-Aven, the snowy, rosy
flight of the wing of a lightly poised coif, tremulously reflected in
the greenish waters of a canal; Quimperlé, more firmly attached, this,
and since the Middle Ages, among the rivulets with which it babbled,
threading their pearls upon a grey background, like the pattern made,
through the cobwebs upon a window, by rays of sunlight changed into
blunt points of tarnished silver?

These images were false for another reason also; namely, that they
were necessarily much simplified; doubtless the object to which my
imagination aspired, which my senses took in but incompletely and
without any immediate pleasure, I had committed to the safe custody
of names; doubtless because I had accumulated there a store of dreams,
those names now magnetised my desires; but names themselves are not very
comprehensive; the most that I could do was to include in each of them
two or three of the principal curiosities of the town, which would
lie there side by side, without interval or partition; in the name of
Balbec, as in the magnifying glasses set in those penholders which
one buys at sea-side places, I could distinguish waves surging round
a church built in the Persian manner. Perhaps, indeed, the enforced
simplicity of these images was one of the reasons for the hold that they
had over me. When my father had decided, one year, that we should go
for the Easter holidays to Florence and Venice, not finding room
to introduce into the name of Florence the elements that ordinarily
constitute a town, I was obliged to let a supernatural city emerge from
the impregnation by certain vernal scenes of what I supposed to be,
in its essentials, the genius of Giotto. All the more--and because one
cannot make a name extend much further in time than in space--like some
of Giotto's paintings themselves which shew us at two separate moments
the same person engaged in different actions, here lying on his bed,
there just about to mount his horse, the name of Florence was divided
into two compartments. In one, beneath an architectural dais, I gazed
upon a fresco over which was partly drawn a curtain of morning sunlight,
dusty, aslant, and gradually spreading; in the other (for, since
I thought of names not as an inaccessible ideal but as a real and
enveloping substance into which I was about to plunge, the life not yet
lived, the life intact and pure which I enclosed in them, gave to the
most material pleasures, to the simplest scenes, the same attraction
that they have in the works of the Primitives), I moved swiftly--so as
to arrive, as soon as might be, at the table that was spread for me,
with fruit and a flask of Chianti--across a Ponte Vecchio heaped with
jonquils, narcissi and anemones. That (for all that I was still in
Paris) was what I saw, and not what was actually round about me. Even
from the simplest, the most realistic point of view, the countries for
which we long occupy, at any given moment, a far larger place in our
true life than the country in which we may happen to be. Doubtless, if,
at that time, I had paid more attention to what was in my mind when I
pronounced the words "going to Florence, to Parma, to Pisa, to Venice,"
I should have realised that what I saw was in no sense a town, but
something as different from anything that I knew, something as delicious
as might be for a human race whose whole existence had passed in a
series of late winter afternoons, that inconceivable marvel, a morning
in spring. These images, unreal, fixed, always alike, filling all my
nights and days, differentiated this period in my life from those which
had gone before it (and might easily have been confused with it by
an observer who saw things only from without, that is to say, who saw
nothing), as in an opera a fresh melody introduces a novel atmosphere
which one could never have suspected if one had done no more than
read the libretto, still less if one had remained outside the theatre,
counting only the minutes as they passed. And besides, even from the
point of view of mere quantity, in our life the days are not all equal.
To reach the end of a day, natures that are slightly nervous, as
mine was, make use, like motor-cars, of different 'speeds.' There are
mountainous, uncomfortable days, up which one takes an infinite time to
pass, and days downward sloping, through which one can go at full tilt,
singing as one goes. During this month--in which I went laboriously
over, as over a tune, though never to my satisfaction, these visions of
Florence, Venice, Pisa, from which the desire that they excited in me
drew and kept something as profoundly personal as if it had been
love, love for another person--I never ceased to believe that they
corresponded to a reality independent of myself, and they made me
conscious of as glorious a hope as could have been cherished by a
Christian in the primitive age of faith, on the eve of his entry into
Paradise. Moreover, without my paying any heed to the contradiction that
there was in my wishing to look at and to touch with my organs of sense
what had been elaborated by the spell of my dreams and not perceived by
my senses at all--though all the more tempting to them, in consequence,
more different from anything that they knew--it was that which recalled
to me the reality of these visions, which inflamed my desire all the
more by seeming to hint a promise that my desire should be satisfied.
And for all that the motive force of my exaltation was a longing for
aesthetic enjoyments, the guide-books ministered even more to it than
books on aesthetics, and, more again than the guide-books, the railway
time-tables. What moved me was the thought that this Florence which I
could see, so near and yet inaccessible, in my imagination, if the tract
which separated it from me, in myself, was not one that I might cross,
could yet be reached by a circuit, by a digression, were I to take
the plain, terrestrial path. When I repeated to myself, giving thus a
special value to what I was going to see, that Venice was the "School of
Giorgione, the home of Titian, the most complete museum of the domestic
architecture of the Middle Ages," I felt happy indeed. As I was even
more when, on one of my walks, as I stepped out briskly on account
of the weather, which, after several days of a precocious spring, had
relapsed into winter (like the weather that we had invariably found
awaiting us at Combray, in Holy Week),--seeing upon the boulevards that
the chestnut-trees, though plunged in a glacial atmosphere that soaked
through them like a stream of water, were none the less beginning,
punctual guests, arrayed already for the party, and admitting no
discouragement, to shape and chisel and curve in its frozen lumps the
irrepressible verdure whose steady growth the abortive power of the
cold might hinder but could not succeed in restraining--I reflected that
already the Ponte Vecchio was heaped high with an abundance of hyacinths
and anemones, and that the spring sunshine was already tinging the waves
of the Grand Canal with so dusky an azure, with emeralds so splendid
that when they washed and were broken against the foot of one of
Titian's paintings they could vie with it in the richness of their
colouring. I could no longer contain my joy when my father, in the
intervals of tapping the barometer and complaining of the cold, began
to look out which were the best trains, and when I understood that by
making one's way, after luncheon, into the coal-grimed laboratory, the
wizard's cell that undertook to contrive a complete transmutation of its
surroundings, one could awaken, next morning, in the city of marble
and gold, in which "the building of the wall was of jasper and the
foundation of the wall an emerald." So that it and the City of the
Lilies were not just artificial scenes which I could set up at my
pleasure in front of my imagination, but did actually exist at a certain
distance from Paris which must inevitably be traversed if I wished to
see them, at their appointed place on the earth's surface, and at no
other; in a word they were entirely real. They became even more real
to me when my father, by saying: "Well, you can stay in Venice from the
20th to the 29th, and reach Florence on Easter morning," made them both
emerge, no longer only from the abstraction of Space, but from that
imaginary Time in which we place not one, merely, but several of
our travels at once, which do not greatly tax us since they are but
possibilities,--that Time which reconstructs itself so effectively that
one can spend it again in one town after one has already spent it in
another--and consecrated to them some of those actual, calendar days
which are certificates of the genuineness of what one does on them, for
those unique days are consumed by being used, they do not return, one
cannot live them again here when one has lived them elsewhere; I felt
that it was towards the week that would begin with the Monday on which
the laundress was to bring back the white waistcoat that I had stained
with ink, that they were hastening to busy themselves with the duty
of emerging from that ideal Time in which they did not, as yet, exist,
those two Queen Cities of which I was soon to be able, by the most
absorbing kind of geometry, to inscribe the domes and towers on a
page of my own life. But I was still on the way, only, to the supreme
pinnacle of happiness; I reached it finally (for not until then did the
revelation burst upon me that on the clattering streets, reddened by the
light reflected from Giorgione's frescoes, it was not, as I had, despite
so many promptings, continued to imagine, the men "majestic and terrible
as the sea, bearing armour that gleamed with bronze beneath the folds
of their blood-red cloaks," who would be walking in Venice next week, on
the Easter vigil; but that I myself might be the minute personage whom,
in an enlarged photograph of St. Mark's that had been lent to me, the
operator had portrayed, in a bowler hat, in front of the portico), when
I heard my father say: "It must be pretty cold, still, on the Grand
Canal; whatever you do, don't forget to pack your winter greatcoat and
your thick suit." At these words I was raised to a sort of ecstasy;
a thing that I had until then deemed impossible, I felt myself to be
penetrating indeed between those "rocks of amethyst, like a reef in the
Indian Ocean"; by a supreme muscular effort, a long way in excess of my
real strength, stripping myself, as of a shell that served no purpose,
of the air in my own room which surrounded me, I replaced it by an equal
quantity of Venetian air, that marine atmosphere, indescribable and
peculiar as the atmosphere of the dreams which my imagination had
secreted in the name of Venice; I could feel at work within me a
miraculous disincarnation; it was at once accompanied by that vague
desire to vomit which one feels when one has a very sore throat; and
they had to put me to bed with a fever so persistent that the doctor
not only assured my parents that a visit, that spring, to Florence and
Venice was absolutely out of the question, but warned them that, even
when I should have completely recovered, I must, for at least a year,
give up all idea of travelling, and be kept from anything that was
liable to excite me.

And, alas, he forbade also, most categorically, my being allowed to go
to the theatre, to hear Berma; the sublime artist, whose genius Bergotte
had proclaimed, might, by introducing me to something else that was,
perhaps, as important and as beautiful, have consoled me for not having
been to Florence and Venice, for not going to Balbec. My parents had
to be content with sending me, every day, to the Champs-Elysées, in
the custody of a person who would see that I did not tire myself; this
person was none other than Françoise, who had entered our service
after the death of my aunt Léonie. Going to the Champs-Elysées I found
unendurable. If only Bergotte had described the place in one of his
books, I should, no doubt, have longed to see and to know it, like so
many things else of which a simulacrum had first found its way into
my imagination. That kept things warm, made them live, gave them
personality, and I sought then to find their counterpart in reality,
but in this public garden there was nothing that attached itself to my
dreams.

* * *

One day, as I was weary of our usual place, beside the wooden horses,
Françoise had taken me for an excursion--across the frontier guarded at
regular intervals by the little bastions of the barley-sugar women--into
those neighbouring but foreign regions, where the faces of the
passers-by were strange, where the goat-carriage went past; then she had
gone away to lay down her things on a chair that stood with its back to
a shrubbery of laurels; while I waited for her I was pacing the broad
lawn, of meagre close-cropped grass already faded by the sun, dominated,
at its far end, by a statue rising from a fountain, in front of which a
little girl with reddish hair was playing with a shuttlecock; when, from
the path, another little girl, who was putting on her cloak and covering
up her battledore, called out sharply: "Good-bye, Gilberte, I'm going
home now; don't forget, we're coming to you this evening, after dinner."
The name Gilberte passed close by me, evoking all the more forcibly her
whom it labelled in that it did not merely refer to her, as one speaks
of a man in his absence, but was directly addressed to her; it passed
thus close by me, in action, so to speak, with a force that
increased with the curve of its trajectory and as it drew near to
its target;--carrying in its wake, I could feel, the knowledge, the
impression of her to whom it was addressed that belonged not to me but
to the friend who called to her, everything that, while she uttered the
words, she more or less vividly reviewed, possessed in her memory, of
their daily intimacy, of the visits that they paid to each other, of
that unknown existence which was all the more inaccessible, all the more
painful to me from being, conversely, so familiar, so tractable to this
happy girl who let her message brush past me without my being able to
penetrate its surface, who flung it on the air with a light-hearted cry:
letting float in the atmosphere the delicious attar which that message
had distilled, by touching them with precision, from certain invisible
points in Mlle. Swann's life, from the evening to come, as it would be,
after dinner, at her home,--forming, on its celestial passage through
the midst of the children and their nursemaids, a little cloud,
exquisitely coloured, like the cloud that, curling over one of Poussin's
gardens, reflects minutely, like a cloud in the opera, teeming with
chariots and horses, some apparition of the life of the gods; casting,
finally, on that ragged grass, at the spot on which she stood (at once a
scrap of withered lawn and a moment in the afternoon of the fair player,
who continued to beat up and catch her shuttlecock until a governess,
with a blue feather in her hat, had called her away) a marvellous little
band of light, of the colour of heliotrope, spread over the lawn like a
carpet on which I could not tire of treading to and fro with lingering
feet, nostalgic and profane, while Françoise shouted: "Come on, button
up your coat, look, and let's get away!" and I remarked for the first
time how common her speech was, and that she had, alas, no blue feather
in her hat.

Only, would _she_ come again to the Champs-Elysées? Next day she was
not there; but I saw her on the following days; I spent all my time
revolving round the spot where she was at play with her friends, to such
effect that once, when, they found, they were not enough to make up a
prisoner's base, she sent one of them to ask me if I cared to complete
their side, and from that day I played with her whenever she came.
But this did not happen every day; there were days when she had
been prevented from coming by her lessons, by her catechism, by a
luncheon-party, by the whole of that life, separated from my own, which
twice only, condensed into the name of Gilberte, I had felt pass so
painfully close to me, in the hawthorn lane near Combray and on the
grass of the Champs-Elysées. On such days she would have told us
beforehand that we should not see her; if it were because of her
lessons, she would say: "It is too tiresome, I sha'n't be able to come
to-morrow; you will all be enjoying yourselves here without me," with an
air of regret which to some extent consoled me; if, on the other hand,
she had been invited to a party, and I, not knowing this, asked her
whether she was coming to play with us, she would reply: "Indeed I hope
not! Indeed I hope Mamma will let me go to my friend's." But on these
days I did at least know that I should not see her, whereas on others,
without any warning, her mother would take her for a drive, or some such
thing, and next day she would say: "Oh, yes! I went out with Mamma,"
as though it had been the most natural thing in the world, and not the
greatest possible misfortune for some one else. There were also the days
of bad weather on which her governess, afraid, on her own account, of
the rain, would not bring Gilberte to the Champs-Elysées.

And so, if the heavens were doubtful, from early morning I would not
cease to interrogate them, observing all the omens. If I saw the lady
opposite, just inside her window, putting on her hat, I would say to
myself: "That lady is going out; it must, therefore, be weather in which
one can go out. Why should not Gilberte do the same as that lady?" But
the day grew dark. My mother said that it might clear again, that one
burst of sunshine would be enough, but that more probably it would rain;
and if it rained, of what use would it be to go to the Champs-Elysées?
And so, from breakfast-time, my anxious eyes never left the uncertain,
clouded sky. It remained dark. Outside the window, the balcony was grey.
Suddenly, on its sullen stone, I did not indeed see a less negative
colour, but I felt as it were an effort towards a less negative colour,
the pulsation of a hesitating ray that struggled to discharge its light.
A moment later the balcony was as pale and luminous as a standing water
at dawn, and a thousand shadows from the iron-work of its balustrade had
come to rest on it. A breath of wind dispersed them; the stone grew
dark again, but, like tamed creatures, they returned; they began,
imperceptibly, to grow lighter, and by one of those continuous
crescendos, such as, in music, at the end of an overture, carry a single
note to the extreme fortissimo, making it pass rapidly through all the
intermediate stages, I saw it attain to that fixed, unalterable gold of
fine days, on which the sharply cut shadows of the wrought iron of the
balustrade were outlined in black like a capricious vegetation, with a
fineness in the delineation of their smallest details which seemed to
indicate a deliberate application, an artist's satisfaction, and with so
much relief, so velvety a bloom in the restfulness of their sombre
and happy mass that in truth those large and leafy shadows which lay
reflected on that lake of sunshine seemed aware that they were pledges
of happiness and peace of mind.

Brief, fading ivy, climbing, fugitive flora, the most colourless, the
most depressing, to many minds, of all that creep on walls or decorate
windows; to me the dearest of them all, from the day when it appeared
upon our balcony, like the very shadow of the presence of Gilberte,
who was perhaps already in the Champs-Elysées, and as soon as I arrived
there would greet me with: "Let's begin at once. You are on my side."
Frail, swept away by a breath, but at the same time in harmony, not with
the season, with the hour; a promise of that immediate pleasure which
the day will deny or fulfil, and thereby of the one paramount immediate
pleasure, the pleasure of loving and of being loved; more soft,
more warm upon the stone than even moss is; alive, a ray of sunshine
sufficing for its birth, and for the birth of joy, even in the heart of
winter.

And on those days when all other vegetation had disappeared, when the
fine jerkins of green leather which covered the trunks of the old trees
were hidden beneath the snow; after the snow had ceased to fall, but
when the sky was still too much overcast for me to hope that Gilberte
would venture out, then suddenly--inspiring my mother to say: "Look,
it's quite fine now; I think you might perhaps try going to the
Champs-Elysées after all."--on the mantle of snow that swathed the
balcony, the sun had appeared and was stitching seams of gold, with
embroidered patches of dark shadow. That day we found no one there, or
else a solitary girl, on the point of departure, who assured me that
Gilberte was not coming. The chairs, deserted by the imposing but
uninspiring company of governesses, stood empty. Only, near the grass,
was sitting a lady of uncertain age who came in all weathers, dressed
always in an identical style, splendid and sombre, to make whose
acquaintance I would have, at that period, sacrificed, had it lain in my
power, all the greatest opportunities in my life to come. For Gilberte
went up every day to speak to her; she used to ask Gilberte for news of
her "dearest mother" and it struck me that, if I had known her, I should
have been for Gilberte some one wholly different, some one who knew
people in her parents' world. While her grandchildren played together at
a little distance, she would sit and read the Débats, which she called
"My old _Débats_!" as, with an aristocratic familiarity, she would say,
speaking of the police-sergeant or the woman who let the chairs, "My
old friend the police-sergeant," or "The chair-keeper and I, who are old
friends."

Françoise found it too cold to stand about, so we walked to the Pont
de la Concorde to see the Seine frozen over, on to which everyone, even
children, walked fearlessly, as though upon an enormous whale, stranded,
defenceless, and about to be cut up. We returned to the Champs-Elysées;
I was growing sick with misery between the motionless wooden horses and
the white lawn, caught in a net of black paths from which the snow had
been cleared, while the statue that surmounted it held in its hand a
long pendent icicle which seemed to explain its gesture. The old lady
herself, having folded up her _Débats_, asked a passing nursemaid
the time, thanking her with "How very good of you!" then begged the
road-sweeper to tell her grandchildren to come, as she felt cold, adding
"A thousand thanks. I am sorry to give you so much trouble!" Suddenly
the sky was rent in two: between the punch-and-judy and the horses,
against the opening horizon, I had just seen, like a miraculous sign,
Mademoiselle's blue feather. And now Gilberte was running at full speed
towards me, sparkling and rosy beneath a cap trimmed with fur, enlivened
by the cold, by being late, by her anxiety for a game; shortly before
she reached me, she slipped on a piece of ice and, either to regain her
balance, or because it appeared to her graceful, or else pretending
that she was on skates, it was with outstretched arms that she smilingly
advanced, as though to embrace me. "Bravo! bravo! that's splendid;
'topping,' I should say, like you--'sporting,' I suppose I ought to say,
only I'm a hundred-and-one, a woman of the old school," exclaimed the
lady, uttering, on behalf of the voiceless Champs-Elysées, their thanks
to Gilberte for having come, without letting herself be frightened
away by the weather. "You are like me, faithful at all costs to our old
Champs-Elysées; we are two brave souls! You wouldn't believe me, I dare
say, if I told you that I love them, even like this. This snow (I know,
you'll laugh at me), it makes me think of ermine!" And the old lady
began to laugh herself.

The first of these days--to which the snow, a symbol of the powers that
were able to deprive me of the sight of Gilberte, imparted the sadness
of a day of separation, almost the aspect of a day of departure, because
it changed the outward form and almost forbade the use of the customary
scene of our only encounters, now altered, covered, as it were, in
dust-sheets--that day, none the less, marked a stage in the progress of
my love, for it was, in a sense, the first sorrow that she was to share
with me. There were only our two selves of our little company, and to
be thus alone with her was not merely like a beginning of intimacy, but
also on her part--as though she had come there solely to please me, and
in such weather--it seemed to me as touching as if, on one of those days
on which she had been invited to a party, she had given it up in order
to come to me in the Champs-Elysées; I acquired more confidence in the
vitality, in the future of a friendship which could remain so much alive
amid the torpor, the solitude, the decay of our surroundings; and while
she dropped pellets of snow down my neck, I smiled lovingly at what
seemed to me at once a predilection that she shewed for me in thus
tolerating me as her travelling companion in this new, this wintry land,
and a sort of loyalty to me which she preserved through evil times.
Presently, one after another, like shyly hopping sparrows, her friends
arrived, black against the snow. We got ready to play and, since this
day which had begun so sadly was destined to end in joy, as I went up,
before the game started, to the friend with the sharp voice whom I had
heard, that first day, calling Gilberte by name, she said to me: "No,
no, I'm sure you'd much rather be in Gilberte's camp; besides, look,
she's signalling to you." She was in fact summoning me to cross the
snowy lawn to her camp, to 'take the field,' which the sun, by casting
over it a rosy gleam, the metallic lustre of old and worn brocades, had
turned into a Field of the Cloth of Gold.

This day, which I had begun with so many misgivings, was, as it
happened, one of the few on which I was not unduly wretched.

For, although I no longer thought, now, of anything save not to let a
single day pass without seeing Gilberte (so much so that once, when my
grandmother had not come home by dinner-time, I could not resist the
instinctive reflection that, if she had been run over in the street
and killed, I should not for some time be allowed to play in the
Champs-Elysées; when one is in love one has no love left for anyone),
yet those moments which I spent in her company, for which I had waited
with so much impatience all night and morning, for which I had quivered
with excitement, to which I would have sacrificed everything else in the
world, were by no means happy moments; well did I know it, for they
were the only moments in my life on which I concentrated a scrupulous,
undistracted attention, and yet I could not discover in them one atom
of pleasure. All the time that I was away from Gilberte, I wanted to see
her, because, having incessantly sought to form a mental picture of her,
I was unable, in the end, to do so, and did not know exactly to what my
love corresponded. Besides, she had never yet told me that she loved me.
Far from it, she had often boasted that she knew other little boys whom
she preferred to myself, that I was a good companion, with whom she was
always willing to play, although I was too absent-minded, not attentive
enough to the game. Moreover, she had often shewn signs of apparent
coldness towards me, which might have shaken my faith that I was for her
a creature different from the rest, had that faith been founded upon a
love that Gilberte had felt for me, and not, as was the case, upon
the love that I felt for her, which strengthened its resistance to the
assaults of doubt by making it depend entirely upon the manner in which
I was obliged, by an internal compulsion, to think of Gilberte. But my
feelings with regard to her I had never yet ventured to express to her
in words. Of course, on every page of my exercise-books, I wrote out,
in endless repetition, her name and address, but at the sight of those
vague lines which I might trace, without her having to think, on that
account, of me, I felt discouraged, because they spoke to me, not of
Gilberte, who would never so much as see them, but of my own desire,
which they seemed to shew me in its true colours, as something purely
personal, unreal, tedious and ineffective. The most important thing
was that we should see each other, Gilberte and I, and should have an
opportunity of making a mutual confession of our love which, until then,
would not officially (so to speak) have begun. Doubtless the various
reasons which made me so impatient to see her would have appeared less
urgent to a grown man. As life goes on, we acquire such adroitness in
the culture of our pleasures, that we content ourselves with that which
we derive from thinking of a woman, as I was thinking of Gilberte,
without troubling ourselves to ascertain whether the image corresponds
to the reality,--and with the pleasure of loving her, without needing to
be sure, also, that she loves us; or again that we renounce the pleasure
of confessing our passion for her, so as to preserve and enhance the
passion that she has for us, like those Japanese gardeners who, to
obtain one perfect blossom, will sacrifice the rest. But at the period
when I was in love with Gilberte, I still believed that Love did really
exist, apart from ourselves; that, allowing us, at the most, to surmount
the obstacles in our way, it offered us its blessings in an order in
which we were not free to make the least alteration; it seemed to me
that if I had, on my own initiative, substituted for the sweetness of
a confession a pretence of indifference, I should not only have been
depriving myself of one of the joys of which I had most often dreamed,
I should have been fabricating, of my own free will, a love that was
artificial and without value, that bore no relation to the truth, whose
mysterious and foreordained ways I should thus have been declining to
follow.

But when I arrived at the Champs-Elysées,--and, as at first sight
it appeared, was in a position to confront my love, so as to make it
undergo the necessary modifications, with its living and independent
cause--as soon as I was in the presence of that Gilberte Swann on the
sight of whom I had counted to revive the images that my tired memory
had lost and could not find again, of that Gilberte Swann with whom I
had been playing the day before, and whom I had just been prompted to
greet, and then to recognise, by a blind instinct like that which, when
we are walking, sets one foot before the other, without giving us time
to think what we are doing, then at once it became as though she and the
little girl who had inspired my dreams had been two different people.
If, for instance, I had retained in my memory overnight two fiery eyes
above plump and rosy cheeks, Gilberte's face would now offer me (and
with emphasis) something that I distinctly had not remembered, a
certain sharpening and prolongation of the nose which, instantaneously
associating itself with certain others of her features, assumed the
importance of those characteristics which, in natural history, are used
to define a species, and transformed her into a little girl of the kind
that have sharpened profiles. While I was making myself ready to take
advantage of this long expected moment, and to surrender myself to the
impression of Gilberte which I had prepared beforehand but could no
longer find in my head, to an extent which would enable me, during the
long hours which I must spend alone, to be certain that it was indeed
herself whom I had in mind, that it was indeed my love for her that I
was gradually making grow, as a book grows when one is writing it, she
threw me a ball; and, like the idealist philosopher whose body takes
account of the external world in the reality of which his intellect
declines to believe, the same self which had made me salute her before I
had identified her now urged me to catch the ball that she tossed to me
(as though she had been a companion, with whom I had come to play, and
not a sister-soul with whom my soul had come to be united), made me,
out of politeness, until the time came when she had to I go, address
a thousand polite and trivial remarks to her, and so prevented me both
from keeping a silence in which I might at last have laid my hand upon
the indispensable, escaped idea, and from uttering the words which might
have made that definite progress in the course of our love on which I
was always obliged to count only for the following afternoon. There was,
however, an occasional development. One day, we had gone with Gilberte
to the stall of our own special vendor, who was always particularly
nice to us, since it was to her that M. Swann used to send for his
gingerbread, of which, for reasons of health (he suffered from a racial
eczema, and from the constipation of the prophets), he consumed a great
quantity,--Gilberte pointed out to me with a laugh two little boys who
were like the little artist and the little naturalist in the children's
storybooks. For one of them would not have a red stick of rock because
he preferred the purple, while the other, with tears in his eyes,
refused a plum which his nurse was buying for him, because, as he
finally explained in passionate tones: "I want the other plum; it's got
a worm in it!" I purchased two ha'penny marbles. With admiring eyes I
saw, luminous and imprisoned in a bowl by themselves, the agate marbles
which seemed precious to me because they were as fair and smiling as
little girls, and because they cost five-pence each. Gilberte, who was
given a great deal more pocket money than I ever had, asked me which I
thought the prettiest. They were as transparent, as liquid-seeming as
life itself. I would not have had her sacrifice a single one of them.
I should have liked her to be able to buy them, to liberate them all.
Still, I pointed out one that had the same colour as her eyes. Gilberte
took it, turned it about until it shone with a ray of gold, fondled it,
paid its ransom, but at once handed me her captive, saying: "Take it; it
is for you, I give it to you, keep it to remind yourself of me."

Another time, being still obsessed by the desire to hear Berma in
classic drama, I had asked her whether she had not a copy of a pamphlet
in which Bergotte spoke of Racine, and which was now out of print. She
had told me to let her know the exact title of it, and that evening
I had sent her a little telegram, writing on its envelope the name,
Gilberte Swann, which I had so often traced in my exercise-books. Next
day she brought me in a parcel tied with pink bows and sealed with white
wax, the pamphlet, a copy of which she had managed to find. "You see, it
is what you asked me for," she said, taking from her muff the telegram
that I had sent her. But in the address on the pneumatic message--which,
only yesterday, was nothing, was merely a 'little blue' that I had
written, and, after a messenger had delivered it to Gilberte's porter
and a servant had taken it to her in her room, had become a thing
without value or distinction, one of the 'little blues' that she had
received in the course of the day--I had difficulty in recognising
the futile, straggling lines of my own handwriting beneath the circles
stamped on it at the post-office, the inscriptions added in pencil by
a postman, signs of effectual realisation, seals of the external world,
violet bands symbolical of life itself, which for the first time came to
espouse, to maintain, to raise, to rejoice my dream.

And there was another day on which she said to me: "You know, you may
call me 'Gilberte'; in any case, I'm going to call you by your first
name. It's too silly not to." Yet she continued for a while to address
me by the more formal '_vous_,' and, when I drew her attention to this,
smiled, and composing, constructing a phrase like those that are put
into the grammar-books of foreign languages with no other object than to
teach us to make use of a new word, ended it with my Christian name. And
when I recalled, later, what I had felt at the time, I could distinguish
the impression of having been held, for a moment, in her mouth, myself,
naked, without, any longer, any of the social qualifications which
belonged equally to her other companions and, when she used my surname,
to my parents, accessories of which her lips--by the effort that she
made, a little after her father's manner, to articulate the words to
which she wished to give a special value--had the air of stripping, of
divesting me, as one peels the skin from a fruit of which one is going
to put only the pulp into one's mouth, while her glance, adapting itself
to the same new degree of intimacy as her speech, fell on me also more
directly, not without testifying to the consciousness, the pleasure,
even the gratitude that it felt, accompanying itself with a smile.

But at that actual moment, I was not able to appreciate the worth of
these new pleasures. They were given, not by the little girl whom I
loved, to me who loved her, but by the other, her with whom I used to
play, to my other self, who possessed neither the memory of the true
Gilberte, nor the fixed heart which alone could have known the value
of a happiness for which it alone had longed. Even after I had returned
home I did not taste them, since, every day, the necessity which made
me hope that on the morrow I should arrive at the clear, calm, happy
contemplation of Gilberte, that she would at last confess her love
for me, explaining to me the reasons by which she had been obliged,
hitherto, to conceal it, that same necessity forced me to regard the
past as of no account, to look ahead of me only, to consider the little
advantages that she had given me not in themselves and as if they were
self-sufficient, but like fresh rungs of the ladder on which I might
set my feet, which were going to allow me to advance a step further and
finally to attain the happiness which I had not yet encountered.

If, at times, she shewed me these marks of her affection, she troubled
me also by seeming not to be pleased to see me, and this happened often
on the very days on which I had most counted for the realisation of my
hopes. I was sure that Gilberte was coming to the Champs-Elysées, and
I felt an elation which seemed merely the anticipation of a great
happiness when--going into the drawing-room in the morning to kiss
Mamma, who was already dressed to go out, the coils of her black hair
elaborately built up, and her beautiful hands, plump and white, fragrant
still with soap--I had been apprised, by seeing a column of dust
standing by itself in the air above the piano, and by hearing a
barrel-organ playing, beneath the window, _En revenant de la revue_,
that the winter had received, until nightfall, an unexpected, radiant
visit from a day of spring. While we sat at luncheon, by opening her
window, the lady opposite had sent packing, in the twinkling of an eye,
from beside my chair--to sweep in a single stride over the whole width
of our dining-room--a sunbeam which had lain down there for its midday
rest and returned to continue it there a moment later. At school, during
the one o'clock lesson, the sun made me sick with impatience and boredom
as it let fall a golden stream that crept to the edge of my desk, like
an invitation to the feast at which I could not myself arrive before
three o'clock, until the moment when Françoise came to fetch me at the
school-gate, and we made our way towards the Champs-Elysées through
streets decorated with sunlight, dense with people, over which the
balconies, detached by the sun and made vaporous, seemed to float in
front of the houses like clouds of gold. Alas! in the Champs-Elysées
I found no Gilberte; she had not yet arrived. Motionless, on the lawn
nurtured by the invisible sun which, here and there, kindled to a flame
the point of a blade of grass, while the pigeons that had alighted upon
it had the appearance of ancient sculptures which the gardener's pick
had heaved to the surface of a hallowed soil, I stood with my eyes fixed
on the horizon, expecting at every moment to see appear the form of
Gilberte following that of her governess, behind the statue that
seemed to be holding out the child, which it had in its arms, and which
glistened in the stream of light, to receive benediction from the
sun. The old lady who read the Débats was sitting on her chair, in her
invariable place, and had just accosted a park-keeper, with a friendly
wave of her hands towards him as she exclaimed "What a lovely day!" And
when the chair-woman came up to collect her penny, with an infinity of
smirks and affectations she folded the ticket away inside her glove,
as though it had been a posy of flowers, for which she had sought, in
gratitude to the donor, the most becoming place upon her person. When
she had found it, she performed a circular movement with her neck,
straightened her boa, and fastened upon the collector, as she shewed
her the end of yellow paper that stuck out over her bare wrist, the
bewitching smile with which a woman says to a young man, pointing to her
bosom: "You see, I'm wearing your roses!"

I dragged Françoise, on the way towards Gilberte, as far as the Arc
de Triomphe; we did not meet her, and I was returning towards the lawn
convinced, now, that she was not coming, when, in front of the wooden
horses, the little girl with the sharp voice flung herself upon me:
"Quick, quick, Gilberte's been here a quarter of an hour. She's just
going. We've been waiting for you, to make up a prisoner's base."

While I had been going up the Avenue des Champs-Elysées, Gilberte had
arrived by the Rue Boissy-d'Anglas, Mademoiselle having taken advantage
of the fine weather to go on some errand of her own; and M. Swann was
coming to fetch his daughter. And so it was my fault; I ought not to
have strayed from the lawn; for one never knew for certain from what
direction Gilberte would appear, whether she would be early or late, and
this perpetual tension succeeded in making more impressive not only the
Champs-Elysées in their entirety, and the whole span of the afternoon,
like a vast expanse of space and time, on every point and at every
moment of which it was possible that the form of Gilberte might appear,
but also that form itself, since behind its appearance I felt that there
lay concealed the reason for which it had shot its arrow into my heart
at four o'clock instead of at half-past two; crowned with a smart hat,
for paying calls, instead of the plain cap, for games; in front of the
Ambassadeurs and not between the two puppet-shows; I divined one of
those occupations in which I might not follow Gilberte, occupations
that forced her to go out or to stay at home, I was in contact with the
mystery of her unknown life. It was this mystery, too, which troubled
me when, running at the sharp-voiced girl's bidding, so as to begin our
game without more delay, I saw Gilberte, so quick and informal with
us, make a ceremonious bow to the old lady with the _Débats_ (who
acknowledged it with "What a lovely sun! You'd think there was a fire
burning.") speaking to her with a shy smile, with an air of constraint
which called to my mind the other little girl that Gilberte must be when
at home with her parents, or with friends of her parents, paying
visits, in all the rest, that escaped me, of her existence. But of that
existence no one gave me so strong an impression as did M. Swann, who
came a little later to fetch his daughter. That was because he and Mme.
Swann--inasmuch as their daughter lived with them, as her lessons,
her games, her friendships depended upon them--contained for me, like
Gilberte, perhaps even more than Gilberte, as befitted subjects that had
an all-powerful control over her in whom it must have had its source, an
undefined, an inaccessible quality of melancholy charm. Everything that
concerned them was on my part the object of so constant a preoccupation
that the days on which, as on this day, M. Swann (whom I had seen so
often, long ago, without his having aroused my curiosity, when he
was still on good terms with my parents) came for Gilberte to the
Champs-Elysées, once the pulsations to which my heart had been excited
by the appearance of his grey hat and hooded cape had subsided, the
sight of him still impressed me as might that of an historic personage,
upon whom one had just been studying a series of books, and the smallest
details of whose life one learned with enthusiasm. His relations with
the Comte de Paris, which, when I heard them discussed at Combray,
seemed to me unimportant, became now in my eyes something marvellous,
as if no one else had ever known the House of Orleans; they set him
in vivid detachment against the vulgar background of pedestrians
of different classes, who encumbered that particular path in the
Champs-Elysées, in the midst of whom I admired his condescending to
figure without claiming any special deference, which as it happened none
of them dreamed of paying him, so profound was the incognito in which he
was wrapped.

He responded politely to the salutations of Gilberte's companions, even
to mine, for all that he was no longer on good terms with my family,
but without appearing to know who I was. (This reminded me that he had
constantly seen me in the country; a memory which I had retained, but
kept out of sight, because, since I had seen Gilberte again, Swann had
become to me pre-eminently her father, and no longer the Combray Swann;
as the ideas which, nowadays, I made his name connote were different
from the ideas in the system of which it was formerly comprised, which
I utilised not at all now when I had occasion to think of him, he had
become a new, another person; still I attached him by an artificial
thread, secondary and transversal, to our former guest; and as nothing
had any longer any value for me save in the extent to which my love
might profit by it, it was with a spasm of shame and of regret at not
being able to erase them from my memory that I recaptured the years in
which, in the eyes of this same Swann who was at this moment before me
in the Champs-Elysées, and to whom, fortunately, Gilberte had perhaps
not mentioned my name, I had so often, in the evenings, made myself
ridiculous by sending to ask Mamma to come upstairs to my room to say
good-night to me, while she was drinking coffee with him and my father
and my grandparents at the table in the garden.) He told Gilberte that
she might play one game; he could wait for a quarter of an hour; and,
sitting down, just like anyone else, on an iron chair, paid for his
ticket with that hand which Philippe VII had so often held in his own,
while we began our game upon the lawn, scattering the pigeons, whose
beautiful, iridescent bodies (shaped like hearts and, surely, the lilacs
of the feathered kingdom) took refuge as in so many sanctuaries, one on
the great basin of stone, on which its beak, as it disappeared below the
rim, conferred the part, assigned the purpose of offering to the bird in
abundance the fruit or grain at which it appeared to be pecking, another
on the head of the statue, which it seemed to crown with one of those
enamelled objects whose polychrome varies in certain classical works
the monotony of the stone, and with an attribute which, when the goddess
bears it, entitles her to a particular epithet and makes of her, as a
different Christian name makes of a mortal, a fresh divinity.

On one of these sunny days which had not realised my hopes, I had not
the courage to conceal my disappointment from Gilberte.

"I had ever so many things to ask you," I said to her; "I thought that
to-day was going to mean so much in our friendship. And no sooner have
you come than you go away! Try to come early to-morrow, so that I can
talk to you."

Her face lighted up and she jumped for joy as she answered: "Tomorrow,
you may make up your mind, my dear friend, I sha'n't come!

"First of all I've a big luncheon-party; then in the afternoon I
am going to a friend's house to see King Theodosius arrive from her
windows; won't that be splendid?--and then, next day, I'm going to
_Michel Strogoff_, and after that it will soon be Christmas, and the New
Year holidays! Perhaps they'll take me south, to the Riviera; won't that
be nice? Though I should miss the Christmas-tree here; anyhow, if I do
stay in Paris, I sha'n't be coming here, because I shall be out paying
calls with Mamma. Good-bye--there's Papa calling me."

I returned home with Françoise through streets that were still gay with
sunshine, as on the evening of a holiday when the merriment is over. I
could scarcely drag my legs along.

"I'm not surprised;" said Françoise, "it's not the right weather for the
time of year; it's much too warm. Oh dear, oh dear, to think of all
the poor sick people there must be everywhere; you would think that up
there, too, everything's got out of order."

I repeated to myself, stifling my sobs, the words in which Gilberte had
given utterance to her joy at the prospect of not coming back, for a
long time, to the Champs-Elysées. But already the charm with which, by
the mere act of thinking, my mind was filled as soon as it thought of
her, the privileged position, unique even if it were painful, in which
I was inevitably placed in relation to Gilberte by the contraction of a
scar in my mind, had begun to add to that very mark of her indifference
something romantic, and in the midst of my tears my lips would shape
themselves in a smile which was indeed the timid outline of a kiss. And
when the time came for the postman I said to myself, that evening as on
every other: "I am going to have a letter from Gilberte, she is going to
tell me, at last, that she has never ceased to love me, and to explain
to me the mysterious reason by which she has been forced to conceal her
love from me until now, to put on the appearance of being able to be
happy without seeing me; the reason for which she has assumed the form
of the other Gilberte, who is simply a companion."

Every evening I would beguile myself into imagining this letter,
believing that I was actually reading it, reciting each of its sentences
in turn. Suddenly I would stop, in alarm. I had realised that, if I was
to receive a letter from Gilberte, it could not, in any case, be this
letter, since it was I myself who had just composed it. And from that
moment I would strive to keep my thoughts clear of the words which I
should have liked her to write to me, from fear lest, by first selecting
them myself, I should be excluding just those identical words,--the
dearest, the most desired--from the field of possible events. Even if,
by an almost impossible coincidence, it had been precisely the letter
of my invention that Gilberte had addressed to me of her own accord,
recognising my own work in it I should not have had the impression that
I was receiving something that had not originated in myself, something
real, something new, a happiness external to my mind, independent of my
will, a gift indeed from love.

While I waited I read over again a page which, although it had not been
written to me by Gilberte, came to me, none the less, from her, that
page by Bergotte upon the beauty of the old myths from which Racine
drew his inspiration, which (with the agate marble) I always kept within
reach. I was touched by my friend's kindness in having procured the book
for me; and as everyone is obliged to find some reason for his passion,
so much so that he is glad to find in the creature whom he loves
qualities which (he has learned by reading or in conversation) are
worthy to excite a man's love, that he assimilates them by imitation
and makes out of them fresh reasons for his love, even although these
qualities be diametrically opposed to those for which his love would
have sought, so long as it was spontaneous--as Swann, before my day, had
sought to establish the aesthetic basis of Odette's beauty--I, who had
at first loved Gilberte, in Combray days, on account of all the unknown
element in her life into which I would fain have plunged headlong, have
undergone reincarnation, discarding my own separate existence as a thing
that no longer mattered, I thought now, as of an inestimable advantage,
that of this, my own, my too familiar, my contemptible existence
Gilberte might one day become the humble servant, the kindly, the
comforting collaborator, who in the evenings, helping me in my work,
would collate for me the texts of rare pamphlets. As for Bergotte, that
infinitely wise, almost divine old man, because of whom I had first,
before I had even seen her, loved Gilberte, now it was for Gilberte's
sake, chiefly, that I loved him. With as much pleasure as the pages that
he had written about Racine, I studied the wrapper, folded under great
seals of white wax and tied with billows of pink ribbon, in which she
had brought those pages to me. I kissed the agate marble, which was
the better part of my love's heart, the part that was not frivolous but
faithful, and, for all that it was adorned with the mysterious charm of
Gilberte's life, dwelt close beside me, inhabited my chamber, shared my
bed. But the beauty of that stone, and the beauty also of those pages
of Bergotte which I was glad to associate with the idea of my love for
Gilberte, as if, in the moments when my love seemed no longer to have
any existence, they gave it a kind of consistency, were, I perceived,
anterior to that love, which they in no way resembled; their elements
had been determined by the writer's talent, or by geological laws,
before ever Gilberte had known me, nothing in book or stone would have
been different if Gilberte had not loved me, and there was nothing,
consequently, that authorised me to read in them a message of happiness.
And while my love, incessantly waiting for the morrow to bring a
confession of Gilberte's love for me, destroyed, unravelled every
evening, the ill-done work of the day, in some shadowed part of my being
was an unknown weaver who would not leave where they lay the severed
threads, but collected and rearranged them, without any thought of
pleasing me, or of toiling for my advantage, in the different order
which she gave to all her handiwork. Without any special interest in my
love, not beginning by deciding that I was loved, she placed, side by
side, those of Gilberte's actions that had seemed to me inexplicable and
her faults which I had excused. Then, one with another, they took on
a meaning. It seemed to tell me, this new arrangement, that when I saw
Gilberte, instead of coming to me in the Champs-Elysées, going to a
party, or on errands with her governess, when I saw her prepared for
an absence that would extend over the New Year holidays, I was wrong in
thinking, in saying: "It is because she is frivolous," or "easily lead."
For she would have ceased to be either if she had loved me, and if she
had been forced to obey it would have been with the same despair in
her heart that I felt on the days when I did not see her. It shewed me
further, this new arrangement, that I ought, after all, to know what
it was to love, since I loved Gilberte; it drew my attention to the
constant anxiety that I had to 'shew off' before her, by reason of which
I tried to persuade my mother to get for Françoise a waterproof coat and
a hat with a blue feather, or, better still, to stop sending with me to
the Champs-Elysées an attendant with whom I blushed to be seen (to all
of which my mother replied that I was not fair to Françoise, that
she was an excellent woman and devoted to us all) and also that sole,
exclusive need to see Gilberte, the result of which was that, months in
advance, I could think of nothing but how to find out at what date she
would be leaving Paris and where she was going, feeling that the most
attractive country in the world would be but a place of exile if she
were not to be there, and asking only to be allowed to stay for ever
in Paris, so long as I might see her in the Champs-Elysées; and it had
little difficulty in making me see that neither my anxiety nor my
need could be justified by anything in Gilberte's conduct. She, on the
contrary, was genuinely fond of her governess, without troubling herself
over what I might choose to think about it. It seemed quite natural to
her not to come to the Champs-Elysées if she had to go shopping with
Mademoiselle, delightful if she had to go out somewhere with her mother.
And even supposing that she would ever have allowed me to spend my
holidays in the same place as herself, when it came to choosing
that place she considered her parents' wishes, a thousand different
amusements of which she had been told, and not at all that it should be
the place to which my family were proposing to send me. When she assured
me (as sometimes happened) that she liked me less than some other of
her friends, less than she had liked me the day before, because by my
clumsiness I had made her side lose a game, I would beg her pardon, I
would beg her to tell me what I must do in order that she should begin
again to like me as much as, or more than the rest; I hoped to hear her
say that that was already my position; I besought her; as though she had
been able to modify her affection for me as she or I chose, to give me
pleasure, merely by the words that she would utter, as my good or bad
conduct should deserve. Was I, then, not yet aware that what I felt,
myself, for her, depended neither upon her actions nor upon my desires?

It shewed me finally, the new arrangement planned by my unseen weaver,
that, if we find ourselves hoping that the actions of a person who has
hitherto caused us anxiety may prove not to have been sincere, they shed
in their wake a light which our hopes are powerless to extinguish, a
light to which, rather than to our hopes, we must put the question, what
will be that person's actions on the morrow.

These new counsels, my love listened and heard them; they persuaded it
that the morrow would not be different from all the days that had gone
before; that Gilberte's feeling for me, too long established now to
be capable of alteration, was indifference; that in my friendship with
Gilberte, it was I alone who loved. "That is true," my love responded,
"there is nothing more to be made of that friendship. It will not alter
now." And so the very next day (unless I were to wait for a public
holiday, if there was one approaching, some anniversary, the New Year,
perhaps, one of those days which are not like other days, on which time
starts afresh, casting aside the heritage of the past, declining its
legacy of sorrows) I would appeal to Gilberte to terminate our old and
to join me in laying the foundations of a new friendship.

* * *

I had always, within reach, a plan of Paris, which, because I could see
drawn on it the street in which M. and Mme. Swann lived, seemed to me to
contain a secret treasure. And to please myself, as well as by a sort
of chivalrous loyalty, in any connection or with no relevance at all, I
would repeat the name of that street until my father, not being, like
my mother and grandmother, in the secret of my love, would ask: "But
why are you always talking about that street? There's nothing wonderful
about it. It is an admirable street to live in because it's only a few
minutes' walk from the Bois, but there are a dozen other streets just
the same."

I made every effort to introduce the name of Swann into my conversation
with my parents; in my own mind, of course, I never ceased to murmur it;
but I needed also to hear its exquisite sound, and to make myself
play that chord, the voiceless rendering of which did not suffice
me. Moreover, that name of Swann, with which I had for so long been
familiar, was to me now (as happens at times to people suffering from
aphasia, in the case of the most ordinary words) the name of something
new. It was for ever present in my mind, which could not, however, grow
accustomed to it. I analysed it, I spelt it; its orthography came to me
as a surprise. And with its familiarity it had simultaneously lost its
innocence. The pleasure that I derived from the sound of it I felt to
be so guilty, that it seemed to me as though the others must read my
thoughts, and would change the conversation if I endeavoured to guide it
in that direction. I fell back upon subjects which still brought me into
touch with Gilberte, I eternally repeated the same words, and it was no
use my knowing that they were but words--words uttered in her absence,
which she could not hear, words without virtue in themselves, repeating
what were, indeed, facts, but powerless to modify them--for still
it seemed to me that by dint of handling, of stirring in this way
everything that had reference to Gilberte, I might perhaps make emerge
from it something that would bring me happiness. I told my parents again
that Gilberte was very fond of her governess, as if the statement, when
repeated for the hundredth time, would at last have the effect of making
Gilberte suddenly burst into the room, come to live with us for ever.
I had already sung the praises of the old lady who read the _Débats_
(I had hinted to my parents that she must at least be an Ambassador's
widow, if not actually a Highness) and I continued to descant on her
beauty, her splendour, her nobility, until the day on which I mentioned
that, by what I had heard Gilberte call her, she appeared to be a Mme.
Blatin.

"Oh, now I know whom you mean," cried my mother, while I felt myself
grow red all over with shame. "On guard! on guard!--as your grandfather
says. And so it's she that you think so wonderful? Why, she's perfectly
horrible, and always has been. She's the widow of a bailiff. You can't
remember, when you were little, all the trouble I used to have to avoid
her at your gymnastic lessons, where she was always trying to get hold
of me--I didn't know the woman, of course--to tell me that you were
'much too nice-looking for a boy.' She has always had an insane desire
to get to know people, and she must be quite insane, as I have always
thought, if she really does know Mme. Swann. For even if she does come
of very common people, I have never heard anything said against her
character. But she must always be forcing herself upon strangers. She
is, really, a horrible woman, frightfully vulgar, and besides, she is
always creating awkward situations."

As for Swann, in my attempts to resemble him, I spent the whole time,
when I was at table, in drawing my finger along my nose and in rubbing
my eyes. My father would exclaim: "The child's a perfect idiot, he's
becoming quite impossible." More than all else I should have liked to
be as bald as Swann. He appeared to me to be a creature so extraordinary
that I found it impossible to believe that people whom I knew and often
saw knew him also, and that in the course of the day anyone might run
against him. And once my mother, while she was telling us, as she did
every evening at dinner, where she had been and what she had done that
afternoon, merely by the words: "By the way, guess whom I saw at the
Trois Quartiers--at the umbrella counter--Swann!" caused to burst open
in the midst of her narrative (an arid desert to me) a mystic blossom.
What a melancholy satisfaction to learn that, that very afternoon,
threading through the crowd his supernatural form, Swann had gone to
buy an umbrella. Among the events of the day, great and small, but
all equally unimportant, that one alone aroused in me those peculiar
vibrations by which my love for Gilberte was invariably stirred. My
father complained that I took no interest in anything, because I did not
listen while he was speaking of the political developments that might
follow the visit of King Theodosius, at that moment in France as
the nation's guest and (it was hinted) ally. And yet how intensely
interested I was to know whether Swann had been wearing his hooded cape!

"Did you speak to him?" I asked.

"Why, of course I did," answered my mother, who always seemed afraid
lest, were she to admit that we were not on the warmest of terms with
Swann, people would seek to reconcile us more than she cared for, in
view of the existence of Mme. Swann, whom she did not wish to know. "It
was he who came up and spoke to me. I hadn't seen him."

"Then you haven't quarrelled?"

"Quarrelled? What on earth made you think that we had quarrelled?"
she briskly parried, as though I had cast doubt on the fiction of her
friendly relations with Swann, and was planning an attempt to 'bring
them together.'

"He might be cross with you for never asking him here."

"One isn't obliged to ask everyone to one's house, you know; has he ever
asked me to his? I don't know his wife."

"But he used often to come, at Combray."

"I should think he did! He used to come at Combray, and now, in Paris,
he has something better to do, and so have I. But I can promise you, we
didn't look in the least like people who had quarrelled. We were kept
waiting there for some time, while they brought him his parcel. He
asked after you; he told me you had been playing with his daughter--"
my mother went on, amazing me with the portentous revelation of my own
existence in Swann's mind; far more than that, of my existence in so
complete, so material a form that when I stood before him, trembling
with love, in the Champs-Elysées, he had known my name, and who my
mother was, and had been able to blend with my quality as his daughter's
playmate certain facts with regard to my grandparents and their
connections, the place in which we lived, certain details of our past
life, all of which I myself perhaps did not know. But my mother did not
seem to have noticed anything particularly attractive in that counter at
the Trois Quartiers where she had represented to Swann, at the moment
in which he caught sight of her, a definite person with whom he had
sufficient memories in common to impel him to come up to her and to
speak.

Nor did either she or my father seem to find any occasion now to mention
Swann's family, the grandparents of Gilberte, nor to use the title of
stockbroker, topics as which nothing else gave me so keen a pleasure.
My imagination had isolated and consecrated in the social Paris a
certain family, just as it had set apart in the structural Paris a
certain house, on whose porch it had fashioned sculptures and made its
windows precious. But these ornaments I alone had eyes to see. Just as
my father and mother looked upon the house in which Swann lived as one
that closely resembled the other houses built at the same period in the
neighbourhood of the Bois, so Swann's family seemed to them to be in the
same category as many other families of stockbrokers. Their judgment was
more or less favourable according to the extent to which the family in
question shared in merits that were common to the rest of the universe,
and there was about it nothing that they could call unique. What, on the
other hand, they did appreciate in the Swanns they found in equal, if
not in greater measure elsewhere. And so, after admitting that the house
was in a good position, they would go on to speak of some other house
that was in a better, but had nothing to do with Gilberte, or of
financiers on a larger scale than her grandfather had been; and if they
had appeared, for a moment, to be of my opinion, that was a mistake
which was very soon corrected. For in order to distinguish in all
Gilberte's surroundings an indefinable quality analogous, in the scale
of emotions, to what in the scale of colours is called infra-red, a
supplementary sense of perception was required, with which love, for the
time being, had endowed me; and this my parents lacked.

On the days when Gilberte had warned me that she would not be coming to
the Champs-Elysées, I would try to arrange my walks so that I should
be brought into some kind of contact with her. Sometimes I would lead
Françoise on a pilgrimage to the house in which the Swanns lived, making
her repeat to me unendingly all that she had learned from the governess
with regard to Mme. Swann. "It seems, she puts great faith in medals.
She would never think of starting on a journey if she had heard an
owl hoot, or the death-watch in the wall, or if she had seen a cat
at midnight, or if the furniture had creaked. Oh yes! she's a most
religious lady, she is!" I was so madly in love with Gilberte that if,
on our way, I caught sight of their old butler taking the dog out, my
emotion would bring me to a standstill, I would fasten on his white
whiskers eyes that melted with passion. And Françoise would rouse me
with: "What's wrong with you now, child?" and we would continue on our
way until we reached their gate, where a porter, different from every
other porter in the world, and saturated, even to the braid on his
livery, with the same melancholy charm that I had felt to be latent in
the name of Gilberte, looked at me as though he knew that I was one
of those whose natural unworthiness would for ever prevent them from
penetrating into the mysteries of the life inside, which it was his duty
to guard, and over which the ground-floor windows appeared conscious of
being protectingly closed, with far less resemblance, between the nobly
sweeping arches of their muslin curtains, to any other windows in the
world than to Gilberte's glancing eyes. On other days we would go along
the boulevards, and I would post myself at the corner of the Rue Duphot;
I had heard that Swann was often to be seen passing there, on his way
to the dentist's; and my imagination so far differentiated Gilberte's
father from the rest of humanity, his presence in the midst of a crowd
of real people introduced among them so miraculous an element, that even
before we reached the Madeleine I would be trembling with emotion at
the thought that I was approaching a street from which that supernatural
apparition might at any moment burst upon me unawares.

But most often of all, on days when I was not to see Gilberte, as I
had heard that Mme. Swann walked almost every day along the Allée des
Acacias, round the big lake, and in the Allée de la Reine Marguerite, I
would guide Françoise in the direction of the Bois de Boulogne. It was
to me like one of those zoological gardens in which one sees assembled
together a variety of flora, and contrasted effects in landscape; where
from a hill one passes to a grotto, a meadow, rocks, a stream, a trench,
another hill, a marsh, but knows that they are there only to enable
the hippopotamus, zebra, crocodile, rabbit, bear and heron to disport
themselves in a natural or a picturesque setting; this, the Bois,
equally complex, uniting a multitude of little worlds, distinct and
separate--placing a stage set with red trees, American oaks, like an
experimental forest in Virginia, next to a fir-wood by the edge of the
lake, or to a forest grove from which would suddenly emerge, in her
lissom covering of furs, with the large, appealing eyes of a dumb
animal, a hastening walker--was the Garden of Woman; and like the
myrtle-alley in the Aeneid, planted for their delight with trees of one
kind only, the Allée des Acacias was thronged by the famous Beauties
of the day. As, from a long way off, the sight of the jutting crag from
which it dives into the pool thrills with joy the children who know
that they are going to behold the seal, long before I reached the
acacia-alley, their fragrance, scattered abroad, would make me feel that
I was approaching the incomparable presence of a vegetable personality,
strong and tender; then, as I drew near, the sight of their topmost
branches, their lightly tossing foliage, in its easy grace, its
coquettish outline, its delicate fabric, over which hundreds of flowers
were laid, like winged and throbbing colonies of precious insects; and
finally their name itself, feminine, indolent and seductive, made my
heart beat, but with a social longing, like those waltzes which remind
us only of the names of the fair dancers, called aloud as they entered
the ball-room. I had been told that I should see in the alley certain
women of fashion, who, in spite of their not all having husbands, were
constantly mentioned in conjunction with Mme. Swann, but most often by
their professional names;--their new names, when they had any, being
but a sort of incognito, a veil which those who would speak of them were
careful to draw aside, so as to make themselves understood. Thinking
that Beauty--in the order of feminine elegance--was governed by occult
laws into the knowledge of which they had been initiated, and that they
had the power to realise it, I accepted before seeing them, like the
truth of a coming revelation, the appearance of their clothes, of their
carriages and horses, of a thousand details among which I placed my
faith as in an inner soul which gave the cohesion of a work of art to
that ephemeral and changing pageant. But it was Mme. Swann whom I wished
to see, and I waited for her to go past, as deeply moved as though
she were Gilberte, whose parents, saturated, like everything in her
environment, with her own special charm, excited in me as keen a passion
as she did herself, indeed a still more painful disturbance (since their
point of contact with her was that intimate, that internal part of
her life which was hidden from me), and furthermore, for I very soon
learned, as we shall see in due course, that they did not like my
playing with her, that feeling of veneration which we always have for
those who hold, and exercise without restraint, the power to do us an
injury.

I assigned the first place, in the order of aesthetic merit and of
social grandeur, to simplicity, when I saw Mme. Swann on foot, in a
'polonaise' of plain cloth, a little toque on her head trimmed with a
pheasant's wing, a bunch of violets in her bosom, hastening along the
Allée des Acacias as if it had been merely the shortest way back to her
own house, and acknowledging with a rapid glance the courtesy of the
gentlemen in carriages, who, recognising her figure at a distance, were
raising their hats to her and saying to one another that there was never
anyone so well turned out as she. But instead of simplicity it was to
ostentation that I must assign the first place if, after I had compelled
Françoise, who could hold out no longer, and complained that her legs
were 'giving' beneath her, to stroll up and down with me for another
hour, I saw at length, emerging from the Porte Dauphine, figuring for
me a royal dignity, the passage of a sovereign, an impression such as
no real Queen has ever since been able to give me, because my notion of
their power has been less vague, and more founded upon experience--borne
along by the flight of a pair of fiery horses, slender and shapely as
one sees them in the drawings of Constantin Guys, carrying on its box an
enormous coachman, furred like a cossack, and by his side a diminutive
groom, like Toby, "the late Beaudenord's tiger," I saw--or rather I
felt its outlines engraved upon my heart by a clean and killing stab--a
matchless victoria, built rather high, and hinting, through the extreme
modernity of its appointments, at the forms of an earlier day, deep down
in which lay negligently back Mme. Swann, her hair, now quite pale with
one grey lock, girt with a narrow band of flowers, usually violets, from
which floated down long veils, a lilac parasol in her hand, on her lips
an ambiguous smile in which I read only the benign condescension
of Majesty, though it was pre-eminently the enticing smile of the
courtesan, which she graciously bestowed upon the men who bowed to her.
That smile was, in reality, saying to one: "Oh yes, I do remember, quite
well; it was wonderful!" to another: "How I should have loved to! We
were unfortunate!", to a third: "Yes, if you like! I must just keep in
the line for a minute, then as soon as I can I will break away." When
strangers passed she still allowed to linger about her lips a lazy
smile, as though she expected or remembered some friend, which made them
say: "What a lovely woman!". And for certain men only she had a sour,
strained, shy, cold smile which meant: "Yes, you old goat, I know
that you've got a tongue like a viper, that you can't keep quiet for a
moment. But do you suppose that I care what you say?" Coquelin passed,
talking, in a group of listening friends, and with a sweeping wave of
his hand bade a theatrical good day to the people in the carriages. But
I thought only of Mme. Swann, and pretended to have not yet seen her,
for I knew that, when she reached the pigeon-shooting ground, she would
tell her coachman to 'break away' and to stop the carriage, so that she
might come back on foot. And on days when I felt that I had the courage
to pass close by her I would drag Françoise off in that direction; until
the moment came when I saw Mme. Swann, letting trail behind her the long
train of her lilac skirt, dressed, as the populace imagine queens to be
dressed, in rich attire such as no other woman might wear, lowering
her eyes now and then to study the handle of her parasol, paying scant
attention to the passers-by, as though the important thing for her, her
one object in being there, was to take exercise, without thinking that
she was seen, and that every head was turned towards her. Sometimes,
however, when she had looked back to call her dog to her, she would
cast, almost imperceptibly, a sweeping glance round about.

Those even who did not know her were warned by something exceptional,
something beyond the normal in her--or perhaps by a telepathic
suggestion such as would move an ignorant audience to a frenzy of
applause when Berma was 'sublime'--that she must be some one well-known.
They would ask one another, "Who is she?", or sometimes would
interrogate a passing stranger, or would make a mental note of how she
was dressed so as to fix her identity, later, in the mind of a friend
better informed than themselves, who would at once enlighten them.
Another pair, half-stopping in their walk, would exchange:

"You know who that is? Mme. Swann! That conveys nothing to you? Odette
de Crécy, then?"

"Odette de Crécy! Why, I thought as much. Those great, sad eyes... But I
say, you know, she can't be as young as she was once, eh? I remember, I
had her on the day that MacMahon went."

"I shouldn't remind her of it, if I were you. She is now Mme. Swann, the
wife of a gentleman in the Jockey Club, a friend of the Prince of Wales.
Apart from that, though, she is wonderful still."

"Oh, but you ought to have known her then; Gad, she was lovely!
She lived in a very odd little house with a lot of Chinese stuff.
I remember, we were bothered all the time by the newsboys, shouting
outside; in the end she made me get up and go."

Without listening to these memories, I could feel all about her the
indistinct murmur of fame. My heart leaped with impatience when I
thought that a few seconds must still elapse before all these people,
among whom I was dismayed not to find a certain mulatto banker who (or
so I felt) had a contempt for me, were to see the unknown youth, to
whom they had not, so far, been paying the slightest attention, salute
(without knowing her, it was true, but I thought that I had sufficient
authority since my parents knew her husband and I was her daughter's
playmate) this woman whose reputation for beauty, for misconduct, and
for elegance was universal. But I was now close to Mme. Swann; I pulled
off my hat with so lavish, so prolonged a gesture that she could not
repress a smile. People laughed. As for her, she had never seen me with
Gilberte, she did not know my name, but I was for her--like one of the
keepers in the Bois, like the boatman, or the ducks on the lake, to
which she threw scraps of bread--one of the minor personages, familiar,
nameless, as devoid of individual character as a stage-hand in a
theatre, of her daily walks abroad.

On certain days when I had missed her in the Allée des Acacias I would
be so fortunate as to meet her in the Allée de la Reine Marguerite,
where women went who wished to be alone, or to appear to be wishing to
be alone; she would not be alone for long, being soon overtaken by some
man or other, often in a grey 'tile' hat, whom I did not know, and
who would talk to her for some time, while their two carriages crawled
behind.

* * *

That sense of the complexity of the Bois de Boulogne which made it an
artificial place and, in the zoological or mythological sense of the
word, a Garden, I captured again, this year, as I crossed it on my way
to Trianon, on one of those mornings, early in November, when in Paris,
if we stay indoors, being so near and yet prevented from witnessing the
transformation scene of autumn, which is drawing so rapidly to a close
without our assistance, we feel a regret for the fallen leaves that
becomes a fever, and may even keep us awake at night. Into my closed
room they had been drifting already for a month, summoned there by
my desire to see them, slipping between my thoughts and the object,
whatever it might be, upon which I was trying to concentrate them,
whirling in front of me like those brown spots that sometimes, whatever
we may be looking at, will seem to be dancing or swimming before our
eyes. And on that morning, not hearing the splash of the rain as on the
previous days, seeing the smile of fine weather at the corners of my
drawn curtains, as from the corners of closed lips may escape the secret
of their happiness, I had felt that I could actually see those yellow
leaves, with the light shining through them, in their supreme beauty;
and being no more able to restrain myself from going to look at the
trees than, in my childhood's days, when the wind howled in the chimney,
I had been able to resist the longing to visit the sea, I had risen and
left the house to go to Trianon, passing through the Bois de Boulogne.
It was the hour and the season in which the Bois seems, perhaps, most
multiform, not only because it is then most divided, but because it
is divided in a different way. Even in the unwooded parts, where the
horizon is large, here and there against the background of a dark
and distant mass of trees, now leafless or still keeping their summer
foliage unchanged, a double row of orange-red chestnuts seemed, as in a
picture just begun, to be the only thing painted, so far, by an artist
who had not yet laid any colour on the rest, and to be offering their
cloister, in full daylight, for the casual exercise of the human figures
that would be added to the picture later on.

Farther off, at a place where the trees were still all green, one alone,
small, stunted, lopped, but stubborn in its resistance, was tossing
in the breeze an ugly mane of red. Elsewhere, again, might be seen
the first awakening of this Maytime of the leaves, and those of an
ampelopsis, a smiling miracle, like a red hawthorn flowering in winter,
had that very morning all 'come out,' so to speak, in blossom. And the
Bois had the temporary, unfinished, artificial look of a nursery garden
or a park in which, either for some botanic purpose or in preparation
for a festival, there have been embedded among the trees of commoner
growth, which have not yet been uprooted and transplanted elsewhere, a
few rare specimens, with fantastic foliage, which seem to be clearing
all round themselves an empty space, making room, giving air, diffusing
light. Thus it was the time of year at which the Bois de Boulogne
displays more separate characteristics, assembles more distinct elements
in a composite whole than at any other. It was also the time of day.
In places where the trees still kept their leaves, they seemed to have
undergone an alteration of their substance from the point at which they
were touched by the sun's light, still, at this hour in the morning,
almost horizontal, as it would be again, a few hours later, at the
moment when, just as dusk began, it would flame up like a lamp, project
afar over the leaves a warm and artificial glow, and set ablaze the few
topmost boughs of a tree that would itself remain unchanged, a sombre
incombustible candelabrum beneath its flaming crest. At one spot the
light grew solid as a brick wall, and like a piece of yellow Persian
masonry, patterned in blue, daubed coarsely upon the sky the leaves of
the chestnuts; at another, it cut them off from the sky towards which
they stretched out their curling, golden fingers. Half-way up the trunk
of a tree draped with wild vine, the light had grafted and brought to
blossom, too dazzling to be clearly distinguished, an enormous posy,
of red flowers apparently, perhaps of a new variety of carnation. The
different parts of the Bois, so easily confounded in summer in the
density and monotony of their universal green, were now clearly divided.
A patch of brightness indicated the approach to almost every one of
them, or else a splendid mass of foliage stood out before it like an
oriflamme. I could make out, as on a coloured map, Armenonville, the
Pré Catalan, Madrid, the Race Course and the shore of the lake. Here and
there would appear some meaningless erection, a sham grotto, a mill, for
which the trees made room by drawing away from it, or which was borne
upon the soft green platform of a grassy lawn. I could feel that the
Bois was not really a wood, that it existed for a purpose alien to the
life of its trees; my sense of exaltation was due not only to admiration
of the autumn tints but to a bodily desire. Ample source of a joy which
the heart feels at first without being conscious of its cause, without
understanding that it results from no external impulse! Thus I gazed
at the trees with an unsatisfied longing which went beyond them and,
without my knowledge, directed itself towards that masterpiece of
beautiful strolling women which the trees enframed for a few hours every
day. I walked towards the Allée des Acacias. I passed through forest
groves in which the morning light, breaking them into new sections,
lopped and trimmed the trees, united different trunks in marriage, made
nosegays of their branches. It would skilfully draw towards it a pair of
trees; making deft use of the sharp chisel of light and shade, it would
cut away from each of them half of its trunk and branches, and, weaving
together the two halves that remained, would make of them either a
single pillar of shade, defined by the surrounding light, or a single
luminous phantom whose artificial, quivering contour was encompassed
in a network of inky shadows. When a ray of sunshine gilded the highest
branches, they seemed, soaked and still dripping with a sparkling
moisture, to have emerged alone from the liquid, emerald-green
atmosphere in which the whole grove was plunged as though beneath the
sea. For the trees continued to live by their own vitality, and when
they had no longer any leaves, that vitality gleamed more brightly still
from the nap of green velvet that carpeted their trunks, or in the white
enamel of the globes of mistletoe that were scattered all the way up to
the topmost branches of the poplars, rounded as are the sun and moon in
Michelangelo's 'Creation.' But, forced for so many years now, by a sort
of grafting process, to share the life of feminine humanity, they called
to my mind the figure of the dryad, the fair worldling, swiftly walking,
brightly coloured, whom they sheltered with their branches as she
passed beneath them, and obliged to acknowledge, as they themselves
acknowledged, the power of the season; they recalled to me the happy
days when I was young and had faith, when I would hasten eagerly to the
spots where masterpieces of female elegance would be incarnate for a few
moments beneath the unconscious, accommodating boughs. But the beauty
for which the firs and acacias of the Bois de Boulogne made me long,
more disquieting in that respect than the chestnuts and lilacs of
Trianon which I was going to see, was not fixed somewhere outside myself
in the relics of an historical period, in works of art, in a little
temple of love at whose door was piled an oblation of autumn leaves
ribbed with gold. I reached the shore of the lake; I walked on as far as
the pigeon-shooting ground. The idea of perfection which I had within me
I had bestowed, in that other time, upon the height of a victoria, upon
the raking thinness of those horses, frenzied and light as wasps upon
the wing, with bloodshot eyes like the cruel steeds of Diomed, which
now, smitten by a desire to see again what I had once loved, as ardent
as the desire that had driven me, many years before, along the same
paths, I wished to see renewed before my eyes at the moment when Mme.
Swann's enormous coachman, supervised by a groom no bigger than his
fist, and as infantile as Saint George in the picture, endeavoured to
curb the ardour of the flying, steel-tipped pinions with which they
thundered along the ground. Alas! there was nothing now but motor-cars
driven each by a moustached mechanic, with a tall footman towering by
his side. I wished to hold before my bodily eyes, that I might know
whether they were indeed as charming as they appeared to the eyes of
memory, little hats, so low-crowned as to seem no more than garlands
about the brows of women. All the hats now were immense; covered with
fruits and flowers and all manner of birds. In place of the lovely gowns
in which Mme. Swann walked like a Queen, appeared Greco-Saxon tunics,
with Tanagra folds, or sometimes, in the Directoire style, 'Liberty
chiffons' sprinkled with flowers like sheets of wallpaper. On the heads
of the gentlemen who might have been eligible to stroll with Mme. Swann
in the Allée de la Reine Marguerite, I found not the grey 'tile' hats
of old, nor any other kind. They walked the Bois bare-headed. And seeing
all these new elements of the spectacle, I had no longer the faith
which, applied to them, would have given them consistency, unity,
life; they passed in a scattered sequence before me, at random, without
reality, containing in themselves no beauty that my eyes might have
endeavoured as in the old days, to extract from them and to compose in
a picture. They were just women, in whose elegance I had no belief,
and whose clothes seemed to me unimportant. But when a belief vanishes,
there survives it--more and more ardently, so as to cloak the absence
of the power, now lost to us, of imparting reality to new phenomena--an
idolatrous attachment to the old things which our belief in them did
once animate, as if it was in that belief and not in ourselves that the
divine spark resided, and as if our present incredulity had a contingent
cause--the death of the gods.

"Oh, horrible!" I exclaimed to myself: "Does anyone really imagine that
these motor-cars are as smart as the old carriage-and-pair? I dare say.
I am too old now--but I was not intended for a world in which women
shackle themselves in garments that are not even made of cloth. To what
purpose shall I walk among these trees if there is nothing left now of
the assembly that used to meet beneath the delicate tracery of reddening
leaves, if vulgarity and fatuity have supplanted the exquisite thing
that once their branches framed? Oh, horrible! My consolation is to
think of the women whom I have known, in the past, now that there is
no standard left of elegance. But how can the people who watch these
dreadful creatures hobble by, beneath hats on which have been heaped
the spoils of aviary or garden-bed,--how can they imagine the charm that
there was in the sight of Mme. Swann, crowned with a close-fitting lilac
bonnet, or with a tiny hat from which rose stiffly above her head a
single iris?" Could I ever have made them understand the emotion that
I used to feel on winter mornings, when I met Mme. Swann on foot, in an
otter-skin coat, with a woollen cap from which stuck out two blade-like
partridge-feathers, but enveloped also in the deliberate, artificial
warmth of her own house, which was suggested by nothing more than the
bunch of violets crushed into her bosom, whose flowering, vivid and blue
against the grey sky, the freezing air, the naked boughs, had the same
charming effect of using the season and the weather merely as a setting,
and of living actually in a human atmosphere, in the atmosphere of this
woman, as had in the vases and beaupots of her drawing-room, beside the
blazing fire, in front of the silk-covered sofa, the flowers that looked
out through closed windows at the falling snow? But it would not have
sufficed me that the costumes alone should still have been the same as
in those distant years. Because of the solidarity that binds together
the different parts of a general impression, parts that our memory keeps
in a balanced whole, of which we are not permitted to subtract or to
decline any fraction, I should have liked to be able to pass the rest
of the day with one of those women, over a cup of tea, in a little house
with dark-painted walls (as Mme. Swann's were still in the year after
that in which the first part of this story ends) against which would
glow the orange flame, the red combustion, the pink and white flickering
of her chrysanthemums in the twilight of a November evening, in moments
similar to those in which (as we shall see) I had not managed to
discover the pleasures for which I longed. But now, albeit they had led
to nothing, those moments struck me as having been charming enough in
themselves. I sought to find them again as I remembered them. Alas!
there was nothing now but flats decorated in the Louis XVI style, all
white paint, with hortensias in blue enamel. Moreover, people did not
return to Paris, now, until much later. Mme. Swann would have written to
me, from a country house, that she would not be in town before February,
had I asked her to reconstruct for me the elements of that memory which
I felt to belong to a distant era, to a date in time towards which it
was forbidden me to ascend again the fatal slope, the elements of that
longing which had become, itself, as inaccessible as the pleasure that
it had once vainly pursued. And I should have required also that they
be the same women, those whose costume interested me because, at a time
when I still had faith, my imagination had individualised them and had
provided each of them with a legend. Alas! in the acacia-avenue--the
myrtle-alley--I did see some of them again, grown old, no more now
than grim spectres of what once they had been, wandering to and fro, in
desperate search of heaven knew what, through the Virgilian groves. They
had long fled, and still I stood vainly questioning the deserted paths.
The sun's face was hidden. Nature began again to reign over the Bois,
from which had vanished all trace of the idea that it was the Elysian
Garden of Woman; above the gimcrack windmill the real sky was grey; the
wind wrinkled the surface of the Grand Lac in little wavelets, like
a real lake; large birds passed swiftly over the Bois, as over a real
wood, and with shrill cries perched, one after another, on the great
oaks which, beneath their Druidical crown, and with Dodonaic majesty,
seemed to proclaim the unpeopled vacancy of this estranged forest, and
helped me to understand how paradoxical it is to seek in reality for the
pictures that are stored in one's memory, which must inevitably lose
the charm that comes to them from memory itself and from their not
being apprehended by the senses. The reality that I had known no longer
existed. It sufficed that Mme. Swann did not appear, in the same attire
and at the same moment, for the whole avenue to be altered. The places
that we have known belong now only to the little world of space on which
we map them for our own convenience. None of them was ever more than a
thin slice, held between the contiguous impressions that composed our
life at that time; remembrance of a particular form is but regret for a
particular moment; and houses, roads, avenues are as fugitive, alas, as
the years.

WITHIN A
BUDDING GROVE

by

MARCEL PROUST

TRANSLATED BY

C. K. SCOTT MONCRIEFF


THE MODERN LIBRARY

PUBLISHERS: NEW YORK




_Copyright_, 1924, _By_ THOMAS SELTZER




TRANSLATOR'S DEDICATION


_To_
K. S. S.

That _men in armour may be born
With serpents' teeth the field is sown;
Rains mould, winds bend, suns gild the corn
Too quickly ripe, too early mown._

_I scan the quivering beads, behold
The features, catch the whispered breath
Of friends long garnered in the cold
Unopening granaries of death_,

_Whose names in solemn cadence ring
Across my slow oblivious page.
Their friendship was a finer thing
Than fame, or wealth, or honoured age._

_And--while you live and I--shall last
Its tale of seasons with us yet
Who cherish, in the undying
The men we never can forget._


Bad Kissingen, C. K. S. M.

July 31, 1923.




CONTENTS

PART I
Madame Swann at Home
_A break in the narrative: old friends in new aspects--The
Marquis de Norpois--Bergotte--How I cease for the time being
to see Gilberte: a general outline of the sorrow caused by a parting
and of the irregular process of oblivion._

Place-Names: The Place
_My first visit to Balbec_

PART II
Place-Names: The Place (continued)
_First impressions of M. de Charlus and
of Robert de Saint-Loup--Dinner with Bloch and his family._

Seascape, with Frieze of Girls
_Dinners at Rivebelle--Enter Albertine._




WITHIN A
BUDDING GROVE



PART I




_MADAME SWANN AT HOME_


My mother, when it was a question of our having M. de Norpois to dinner
for the first time, having expressed her regret that Professor Cottard
was away from home, and that she herself had quite ceased to see
anything of Swann, since either of these might have helped to entertain
the old Ambassador, my father replied that so eminent a guest, so
distinguished a man of science as Cottard could never be out of place at
a dinner-table, but that Swann, with his ostentation, his habit of
crying aloud from the house-tops the name of everyone that he knew,
however slightly, was an impossible vulgarian whom the Marquis de
Norpois would be sure to dismiss as--to use his own epithet--a
"pestilent" fellow. Now, this attitude on my father's part may be felt to
require a few words of explanation, inasmuch as some of us, no doubt,
remember a Cottard of distinct mediocrity and a Swann by whom modesty
and discretion, in all his social relations, were carried to the utmost
refinement of delicacy. But in his case, what had happened was that, to
the original "young Swann" and also to the Swann of the Jockey Club, our
old friend had added a fresh personality (which was not to be his last)
that of Odette's husband. Adapting to the humble ambitions of that lady
the instinct, the desire, the industry which he had always had, he had
laboriously constructed for himself, a long way beneath the old, a new
position more appropriate to the companion who was to share it with him.
In this he shewed himself another man. Since (while he continued to go,
by himself, to the houses of his own friends, on whom he did not care to
inflict Odette unless they had expressly asked that she should be
introduced to them) it was a new life that he had begun to lead, in
common with his wife, among a new set of people, it was quite
intelligible that, in order to estimate the importance of these new
friends and thereby the pleasure, the self-esteem that were to be
derived from entertaining them, he should have made use, as a standard
of comparison, not of the brilliant society in which he himself had
moved before his marriage but of the earlier environment of Odette. And
yet, even when one knew that it was with unfashionable officials and
their faded wives, the wallflowers of ministerial ball-rooms, that he
was now anxious to associate, it was still astonishing to hear him, who
in the old days, and even still, would so gracefully refrain from
mentioning an invitation to Twickenham or to Marlborough House, proclaim
with quite unnecessary emphasis that the wife of some Assistant
Under-Secretary for Something had returned Mme. Swann's call. It will
perhaps be objected here that what this really implied was that the
simplicity of the fashionable Swann had been nothing more than a supreme
refinement of vanity, and that, like certain other Israelites, my
parents' old friend had contrived to illustrate in turn all the stages
through which his race had passed, from the crudest and coarsest form of
snobbishness up to the highest pitch of good manners. But the chief
reason--and one which is applicable to humanity as a whole--was that our
virtues themselves are not free and floating qualities over which we
retain a permanent control and power of disposal; they come to be so
closely linked in our minds with the actions in conjunction with which
we make it our duty to practise them, that, if we are suddenly called
upon to perform some action of a different order, it takes us by
surprise, and without our supposing for a moment that it might involve
the bringing of those very same virtues into play. Swann, in his intense
consciousness of his new social surroundings, and in the pride with
which he referred to them, was like those great artists--modest or
generous by nature--who, if at the end of their career they take to
cooking or to gardening, display a childlike gratification at the
compliments that are paid to their dishes or their borders, and will not
listen to any of the criticism which they heard unmoved when it was
applied to their real achievements; or who, after giving away a canvas,
cannot conceal their annoyance if they lose a couple of francs at
dominoes.

As for Professor Cottard, we shall meet him again and can study him at
our leisure, much later in the course of our story, with the "Mistress",
Mme. Verdurin, in her country house La Raspelière. For the present, the
following observations must suffice; first of all, in the case of Swann
the alteration might indeed be surprising, since it had been
accomplished and yet was not suspected by me when I used to see
Gilberte's father in the Champs-Elysées, where, moreover, as he never
spoke to me, he could not very well have made any display of his
political relations. It is true that, if he had done so, I might not at
once have discerned his vanity, for the idea that one has long held of a
person is apt to stop one's eyes and ears; my mother, for three whole
years, had no more noticed the salve with which one of her nieces used
to paint her lips than if it had been wholly and invisibly dissolved in
some clear liquid; until one day a streak too much, or possibly
something else, brought about the phenomenon known as super-saturation;
all the paint that had hitherto passed unperceived was now crystallised,
and my mother, in the face of this sudden riot of colour, declared, in
the best Combray manner, that it was a perfect scandal, and almost
severed relations with her niece. With Cottard, on the contrary, the
epoch in which we have seen him assisting at the first introduction of
Swann to the Verdurins was now buried in the past; whereas honours,
offices and titles come with the passage of years; moreover, a man may
be illiterate, and make stupid puns, and yet have a special gift, which
no amount of general culture can replace--such as the gift of a great
strategist or physician. And so it was not merely as an obscure
practitioner, who had attained in course of time to European celebrity,
that the rest of his profession regarded Cottard. The most intelligent
of the younger doctors used to assert--for a year or two, that is to
say, for fashions, being themselves begotten of the desire for change,
are quick to change also--that if they themselves ever fell ill Cottard
was the only one of the leading men to whom they would entrust their
lives. No doubt they preferred, socially, to meet certain others who
were better read, more artistic, with whom they could discuss Nietzsche
and Wagner. When there was a musical party at Mme. Cottard's, on the
evenings when she entertained--in the hope that it might one day make
him Dean of the Faculty--the colleagues and pupils of her husband, he,
instead of listening, preferred to play cards in another room. Yet
everybody praised the quickness, the penetration, the unerring
confidence with which, at a glance, he could diagnose disease. Thirdly,
in considering the general impression which Professor Cottard must have
made on a man like my father, we must bear in mind that the character
which a man exhibits in the latter half of his life is not always, even
if it is often his original character developed or withered, attenuated
or enlarged; it is sometimes the exact opposite, like a garment that has
been turned. Except from the Verdurins, who were infatuated with him,
Cottard's hesitating manner, his excessive timidity and affability had,
in his young days, called down upon him endless taunts and sneers. What
charitable friend counselled that glacial air? The importance of his
professional standing made it all the more easy to adopt. Wherever he
went, save at the Verdurins', where he instinctively became himself
again, he would assume a repellent coldness, remain silent as long as
possible, be peremptory when he was obliged to speak, and not forget to
say the most cutting things. He had every opportunity of rehearsing this
new attitude before his patients, who, seeing him for the first time,
were not in a position to make comparisons, and would have been greatly
surprised to learn that he was not at all a rude man by nature. Complete
impassivity was what he strove to attain, and even while visiting his
hospital wards, when he allowed himself to utter one of those puns which
left everyone, from the house physician to the junior student, helpless
with laughter, he would always make it without moving a muscle of his
face, while even that was no longer recognisable now that he had shaved
off his beard and moustache.

But who, the reader has been asking, was the Marquis de Norpois. Well,
he had been Minister Plenipotentiary before the War, and was actually an
Ambassador on the Sixteenth of May; in spite of which, and to the
general astonishment, he had since been several times chosen to
represent France on Extraordinary Missions,--even as Controller of the
Public Debt in Egypt, where, thanks to his great capability as a
financier, he had rendered important services--by Radical Cabinets under
which a reactionary of the middle classes would have declined to serve,
and in whose eyes M. de Norpois, in view of his past, his connexions and
his opinions, ought presumably to have been suspect. But these advanced
Ministers seemed to consider that, in making such an appointment, they
were shewing how broad their own minds were, when the supreme interests
of France were at stake, were raising themselves above the general run
of politicians, were meriting, from the _Journal des Débats_ itself,
the title of "Statesmen", and were reaping direct advantage from the
weight that attaches to an aristocratic name and the dramatic interest
always aroused by an unexpected appointment. And they knew also that
they could reap these advantages by making an appeal to M. de Norpois,
without having to fear any want of political loyalty on his part, a
fault against which his noble birth not only need not put them on their
guard but offered a positive guarantee. And in this calculation the
Government of the Republic were not mistaken. In the first place,
because an aristocrat of a certain type, brought up from his cradle to
regard his name as an integral part of himself of which no accident can
deprive him (an asset of whose value his peers, or persons of even
higher rank, can form a fairly exact estimate), knows that he can
dispense with the efforts (since they can in no way enhance his
position) in which, without any appreciable result, so many public men
of the middle class spend themselves,--to profess only the "right"
opinions, to frequent only the "sound" people. Anxious, on the other
hand, to increase his own importance in the eyes of the princely or
ducal families which take immediate precedence of his own, he knows that
he can do so by giving his name that complement which hitherto it has
lacked, which will give it priority over other names heraldically its
equals: such as political power, a literary or an artistic reputation,
or a large fortune. And so what he saves by avoiding the society of the
ineffective country squires, after whom all the professional families
run helter-skelter, but of his intimacy with whom, were he to profess
it, a prince would think nothing, he will lavish on the politicians who
(free-masons, or worse, though they be) can advance him in Diplomacy or
"back" him in an election, and on the artists or scientists whose
patronage can help him to "arrive" in those departments in which they
excel, on everyone, in fact, who is in a position to confer a fresh
distinction or to "bring off" a rich marriage.

But in the character of M. de Norpois there was this predominant
feature, that, in the course of a long career of diplomacy, he had
become imbued with that negative, methodical, conservative spirit,
called "governmental", which is common to all Governments and, under
every Government, particularly inspires its Foreign Office. He had
imbibed, during that career, an aversion, a dread, a contempt for the
methods of procedure, more or less revolutionary and in any event quite
incorrect, which are those of an Opposition. Save in the case of a few
illiterates--high or low, it makes no matter--by whom no difference in
quality is perceptible, what attracts men one to another is not a common
point of view but a consanguinity of spirit. An Academician of the kind
of Legouvé, and therefore an upholder of the classics, would applaud
Maxime Ducamp's or Mezière's eulogy of Victor Hugo with more fervour
than that of Boileau by Claudel. A common Nationalism suffices to endear
Barrès to his electors, who scarcely distinguish between him and M.
Georges Berry, but does not endear him to those of his brother
Academicians who, with a similar outlook on politics but a different
type of mind, will prefer to him even such open adversaries as M. Ribot
and M. Deschanel, with whom, in turn, the most loyal Monarchists feel
themselves more closely allied than with Maurras or Léon Daudet,
although these also are living in the hope of a glorious Restoration.
Miserly in the use of words, not only from a professional scruple of
prudence and reserve, but because words themselves have more value,
present more subtleties of definition to men whose efforts, protracted
over a decade, to bring two countries to an understanding, are
condensed, translated--in a speech or in a protocol--into a single
adjective, colourless in all appearance, but to them pregnant with a
world of meaning, M. de Norpois was considered very stiff, at the
Commission, where he sat next to my father, whom everyone else
congratulated on the astonishing way in which the old Ambassador unbent
to him. My father was himself more astonished than anyone. For not
being, as a rule, very affable, his company was little sought outside
his own intimate circle, a limitation which he used modestly and frankly
to avow. He realised that these overtures were an outcome, in the
diplomat, of that point of view which everyone adopts for himself in
making his choice of friends, from which all a man's intellectual
qualities, his refinement, his affection are a far less potent
recommendation of him, when at the same time he bores or irritates one,
than are the mere straightforwardness and good-humour of another man
whom most people would regard as frivolous or even fatuous. "De Norpois
has asked me to dinner again; it's quite extraordinary; everyone on the
Commission is amazed, as he never has any personal relations with any of
us. I am sure he's going to tell me something thrilling, again, about
the 'Seventy war." My father knew that M. de Norpois had warned, had
perhaps been alone in warning the Emperor of the growing strength and
bellicose designs of Prussia, and that Bismarck rated his intelligence
most highly. Only the other day, at the Opera, during the gala
performance given for King Theodosius, the newspapers had all drawn
attention to the long conversation which that Monarch had held with M.
de Norpois. "I must ask him whether the King's visit had any real
significance," my father went on, for he was keenly interested in
foreign politics. "I know old Norpois keeps very close as a rule, but
when he's with me he opens out quite charmingly."

As for my mother, perhaps the Ambassador had not the type of mind
towards which she felt herself most attracted. I should add that his
conversation furnished so exhaustive a glossary of the superannuated
forms of speech peculiar to a certain profession, class and period--a
period which, for that profession and that class, might be said not to
have altogether passed away--that I sometimes regret that I have not
kept any literal record simply of the things that I have heard him say.
I should thus have obtained an effect of old-fashioned courtesy by the
same process and at as little expense as that actor at the Palais-Royal
who, when asked where on earth he managed to find his astounding hats,
answered, "I do not find my hats. I keep them." In a word, I suppose
that my mother considered M. de Norpois a trifle "out-of-date", which
was by no means a fault in her eyes, so far as manners were concerned,
but attracted her less in the region--not, in this instance, of ideas,
for those of M. de Norpois were extremely modern--but of idiom. She
felt, however, that she was paying a delicate compliment to her husband
when she spoke admiringly of the diplomat who had shewn so remarkable a
predilection for him. By confirming in my father's mind the good opinion
that he already had of M. de Norpois, and so inducing him to form a good
opinion of himself also, she knew that she was carrying out that one of
her wifely duties which consisted in making life pleasant and
comfortable for her husband, just as when she saw to it that his dinner
was perfectly cooked and served in silence. And as she was incapable of
deceiving my father, she compelled herself to admire the old Ambassador,
so as to be able to praise him with sincerity. Incidentally she could
naturally, and did appreciate his kindness, his somewhat antiquated
courtesy (so ceremonious that when, as he was walking along the street,
his tall figure rigidly erect, he caught sight of my mother driving
past, before raising his hat to her he would fling away the cigar that
he had just lighted); his conversation, so elaborately circumspect, in
which he referred as seldom as possible to himself and always considered
what might interest the person to whom he was speaking; his promptness
in answering a letter, which was so astonishing that whenever my father,
just after posting one himself to M. de Norpois, saw his handwriting
upon an envelope, his first thought was always one of annoyance that
their letters must, unfortunately, have crossed in the post; which, one
was led to suppose, bestowed upon him the special and luxurious
privilege of extraordinary deliveries and collections at all hours of
the day and night. My mother marvelled at his being so punctilious
although so busy, so friendly although so much in demand, never
realising that "although", with such people, is invariably an
unrecognised "because", and that (just as old men are always wonderful
for their age, and kings extraordinarily simple, and country cousins
astonishingly well-informed) it was the same system of habits that
enabled M. de Norpois to undertake so many duties and to be so
methodical in answering letters, to go everywhere and to be so friendly
when he came to us. Moreover she made the mistake which everyone makes
who is unduly modest; she rated everything that concerned herself below,
and consequently outside the range of other people's duties and
engagements. The letter which it seemed to her so meritorious in my
father's friend to have written us promptly, since in the course of the
day he must have had ever so many letters to write, she excepted from
that great number of letters, of which actually it was a unit; in the
same way she did not consider that dining with us was, for M. de
Norpois, merely one of the innumerable activities of his social life;
she never guessed that the Ambassador had trained himself, long ago, to
look upon dining out as one of his diplomatic functions, and to display,
at table, an inveterate charm which it would have been too much to have
expected him specially to discard when he came to dine with us.

The evening on which M. de Norpois first appeared at our table, in a
year when I still went to play in the Champs-Elysées, has remained
fixed in my memory because the afternoon of the same day was that upon
which I at last went to hear Berma, at a _matinée_, in _Phèdre_, and
also because in talking to M. de Norpois I realised suddenly, and in a
new and different way, how completely the feelings aroused in me by all
that concerned Gilberte Swann and her parents differed from any that the
same family could inspire in anyone else.

It was no doubt the sight of the depression in which I was plunged by
the approach of the New Year holidays, in which, as she herself had
informed me, I was to see nothing of Gilberte, that prompted my mother
one day, in the hope of distracting my mind, to suggest, "If you are
still so anxious to hear Berma, I think that your father would allow you
perhaps to go; your grandmother can take you."

But it was because M. de Norpois had told him that he ought to let me
hear Berma, that it was an experience for a young man to remember in
later life, that my father, who had hitherto been so resolutely opposed
to my going and wasting my time, with the added risk of my falling ill
again, on what he used to shock my grandmother by calling "futilities",
was now not far from regarding this manner of spending an afternoon as
included, in some vague way, in the list of precious formulae for
success in a brilliant career. My grandmother, who, in renouncing on my
behalf the profit which, according to her, I should have derived from
hearing Berma, had made a considerable sacrifice in the interests of my
health, was surprised to find that this last had become of no account at
a mere word from M. de Norpois. Reposing the unconquerable hopes of her
rationalist spirit in the strict course of fresh air and early hours
which had been prescribed for me, she now deplored, as something
disastrous, this infringement that I was to make of my rules, and in a
tone of despair protested, "How easily led you are!" to my father, who
replied angrily "What! So it's you that are for not letting him go, now.
That is really too much, after your telling us all day and every day
that it would be so good for him."

M. de Norpois had also brought about a change in my father's plans in a
matter of far greater importance to myself. My father had always meant
me to become a diplomat, and I could not endure the thought that, even
if I did have to stay for some years, first, at the Ministry, I should
run the risk of being sent, later on, as Ambassador, to capitals in
which no Gilberte dwelt. I should have preferred to return to the
literary career that I had planned for myself, and had then abandoned,
years before, in my wanderings along the Guermantes way. But my father
had steadily opposed my devoting myself to literature, which he regarded
as vastly inferior to diplomacy, refusing even to dignify it with the
title of career, until the day when M. de Norpois, who had little love
for the more recent generations of diplomatic agents, assured him that
it was quite possible, by writing, to attract as much attention, to
receive as much consideration, to exercise as much influence, and at the
same time to preserve more independence than in the Embassies.

"Well, well, I should never have believed it. Old Norpois doesn't at all
disapprove of your idea of taking up writing," my father had reported.
And as he had a certain amount of influence himself, he imagined that
there was nothing that could not be "arranged", no problem for which a
happy solution might not be found in the conversation of people who
"counted". "I shall bring him back to dinner, one of these days, from
the Commission. You must talk to him a little, and let him see what he
thinks of you. Write something good that you can shew him; he is an
intimate friend of the editor of the _Deux-Mondes_; he will get you in
there; he will arrange it all, the cunning old fox; and, upon my soul,
he seems to think that diplomacy, nowadays----!"

My happiness in the prospect of not being separated from Gilberte made
me desirous, but not capable, of writing something good which could be
shewn to M. de Norpois. After a few laboured pages, weariness made the
pen drop from my fingers; I cried with anger at the thought that I
should never have any talent, that I was not "gifted", that I could not
even take advantage of the chance that M. de Norpois's coming visit was
to offer me of spending the rest of my life in Paris. The recollection
that I was to be taken to hear Berma alone distracted me from my grief.
But just as I did not wish to see any storms except on those coasts
where they raged with most violence, so I should not have cared to hear
the great actress except in one of those classic parts in which Swann
had told me that she touched the sublime. For when it is in the hope of
making a priceless discovery that we desire to receive certain
impressions from nature or from works of art, we have certain scruples
about allowing our soul to gather, instead of these, other, inferior,
impressions, which are liable to make us form a false estimate of the
value of Beauty. Berma in _Andromaque_, in _Les Caprices de Marianne_,
in _Phèdre_, was one of those famous spectacles which my imagination
had so long desired. I should enjoy the same rapture as on the day when
in a gondola I glided to the foot of the Titian of the Frari or the
Carpaccios of San Giorgio dei Schiavoni, were I ever to hear Berma
repeat the lines beginning,


"On dit qu'un prompt départ vous éloigne de nous,
Seigneur,----"


I was familiar with them from the simple reproduction in black and white
which was given of them upon the printed page; but my heart beat
furiously at the thought--as of the realisation of a long-planned
voyage--that I should at length behold them, bathed and brought to life
in the atmosphere and sunshine of the voice of gold. A Carpaccio in
Venice, Berma in _Phèdre_, masterpieces of pictorial or dramatic art
which the glamour, the dignity attaching to them made so living to me,
that is to say so indivisible, that if I had been taken to see
Carpaccios in one of the galleries of the Louvre, or Berma in some piece
of which I had never heard, I should not have experienced the same
delicious amazement at finding myself at length, with wide-open eyes,
before the unique and inconceivable object of so many thousand dreams.
Then, while I waited, expecting to derive from Berma's playing the
revelation of certain aspects of nobility and tragic grief, it seemed to
me that whatever greatness, whatever truth there might be in her playing
must be enhanced if the actress imposed it upon a work of real value,
instead of what would, after all, be but embroidering a pattern of truth
and beauty upon a common-place and vulgar web.

Finally, if I went to hear Berma in a new piece, it would not be easy
for me to judge of her art, of her diction, since I should not be able
to differentiate between a text which was not already familiar and what
she added to it by her intonations and gestures, an addition which would
seem to me to be embodied in the play itself; whereas the old plays, the
classics which I knew by heart, presented themselves to me as vast and
empty walls, reserved and made ready for my inspection, on which I
should be able to appreciate without restriction the devices by which
Berma would cover them, as with frescoes, with the perpetually fresh
treasures of her inspiration. Unfortunately, for some years now, since
she had retired from the great theatres, to make the fortune of one on
the boulevards where she was the "star", she had ceased to appear in
classic parts; and in vain did I scan the hoardings; they never
advertised any but the newest pieces, written specially for her by
authors in fashion at the moment. When, one morning, as I stood
searching the column of announcements to find the afternoon performances
for the week of the New Year holidays, I saw there for the first
time--at the foot of the bill, after some probably insignificant
curtain-raiser, whose title was opaque to me because it had latent in it
all the details of an action of which I was ignorant--two acts of
_Phèdre_ with Mme. Berma, and, on the following afternoons, _Le
Demi-Monde, Les Caprices de Marianne_, names which, like that of
_Phèdre_, were for me transparent, filled with light only, so familiar
were those works to me, illuminated to their very depths by the
revealing smile of art. They seemed to me to invest with a fresh
nobility Mme. Berma herself when I read in the newspapers, after the
programme of these performances, that it was she who had decided to shew
herself once more to the public in some of her early creations. She was
conscious, then, that certain stage-parts have an interest which
survives the novelty of their first production or the success of a
revival; she regarded them, when interpreted by herself, as museum
pieces which it might be instructive to set before the eyes of the
generation which had admired her in them long ago, or of that which had
never yet seen her in them. In thus advertising, in the middle of a
column of plays intended only to while away an evening, this _Phèdre_,
a title no longer than any of the rest, nor set in different type, she
added something indescribable, as though a hostess, introducing you,
before you all go in to dinner, to her other guests, were to mention,
casually, amid the string of names which are the names of guests and
nothing more, and without any change of tone:--"M. Anatole France."

The doctor who was attending me--the same who had forbidden me to
travel--advised my parents not to let me go to the theatre; I should
only be ill again afterwards, perhaps for weeks, and should in the long
run derive more pain than pleasure from the experience. The fear of this
might have availed to stop me, if what I had anticipated from such a
spectacle had been only a pleasure for which a subsequent pain could so
compensate as to cancel it. But what I demanded from this
performance--just as from the visit to Balbec, the visit to Venice for
which I had so intensely longed--was something quite different from
pleasure; a series of verities pertaining to a world more real than that
in which I lived, which, once acquired, could never be taken from me
again by any of the trivial incidents--even though it were the cause of
bodily suffering--of my otiose existence. At best, the pleasure which I
was to feel during the performance appeared to me as the perhaps
inevitable form of the perception of these truths; and I hoped only that
the illness which had been forecast for me would not begin until the
play was finished, so that my pleasure should not be in any way
compromised or spoiled. I implored my parents, who, after the doctor's
visit, were no longer inclined to let me go to _Phèdre._ I repeated,
all day long, to myself, the speech beginning,


"On dit qu'un prompt départ vous éloigne de nous,----"


seeking out every intonation that could be put into it, so as to be able
better to measure my surprise at the way which Berma would have found of
uttering the lines. Concealed, like the Holy of Holies, beneath the veil
that screened her from my gaze, behind which I invested her, every
moment, with a fresh aspect, according to which of the words of
Bergotte--in the pamphlet that Gilberte had found for me--was passing
through my mind; "plastic nobility", "Christian austerity" or "Jansenist
pallor", "Princess of Troezen and of Cleves" or "Mycenean drama",
"Delphic symbol", "Solar myth"; that divine Beauty, whom Berma's acting
was to reveal to me, night and day, upon an altar perpetually illumined,
sat enthroned in the sanctuary of my mind, my mind for which not itself
but my stern, my fickle parents were to decide whether or not it was to
enshrine, and for all time, the perfections of the Deity unveiled, in
the same spot where was now her invisible form. And with my eyes fixed
upon that inconceivable image, I strove from morning to night to
overcome the barriers which my family were putting in my way. But when
those had at last fallen, when my mother--albeit this _matinée_ was
actually to coincide with the meeting of the Commission from which my
father had promised to bring M. de Norpois home to dinner--had said to
me, "Very well, we don't wish you to be unhappy;--if you think that you
will enjoy it so very much, you must go; that's all;" when this day of
theatre-going, hitherto forbidden and unattainable, depended now only
upon myself, then for the first time, being no longer troubled by the
wish that it might cease to be impossible, I asked myself if it were
desirable, if there were not other reasons than my parents' prohibition
which should make me abandon my design. In the first place, whereas I
had been detesting them for their cruelty, their consent made them now
so dear to me that the thought of causing them pain stabbed me also with
a pain through which the purpose of life shewed itself as the pursuit
not of truth but of loving-kindness, and life itself seemed good or evil
only as my parents were happy or sad. "I would rather not go, if it
hurts you," I told my mother, who, on the contrary, strove hard to expel
from my mind any lurking fear that she might regret my going, since
that, she said, would spoil the pleasure that I should otherwise derive
from _Phèdre_, and it was the thought of my pleasure that had induced
my father and her to reverse their earlier decision. But then this sort
of obligation to find a pleasure in the performance seemed to me very
burdensome. Besides, if I returned home ill, should I be well again in
time to be able to go to the Champs-Elysées as soon as the holidays
were over and Gilberte returned? Against all these arguments I set, so
as to decide which course I should take, the idea, invisible there
behind its veil, of the perfections of Berma. I cast into one pan of the
scales "Making Mamma unhappy", "risking not being able to go on the
Champs-Elysées", and into the other, "Jansenist pallor", "Solar myth",
until the words themselves grew dark and clouded in my mind's vision,
ceased to say anything to me, lost all their force; and gradually my
hesitations became so painful that if I had now decided upon the theatre
it would have been only that I might bring them to an end, and be
delivered from them once and for all. It would have been to fix a term
to my sufferings, and no longer in the expectation of an intellectual
benediction, yielding to the attractions of perfection, that I would let
myself be taken, not now to the Wise Goddess, but to the stem,
implacable Divinity, featureless and unnamed, who had been secretly
substituted for her behind the veil. But suddenly everything was
altered. My desire to go and hear Berma received a fresh stimulus which
enabled me to await the coming of the _matinée_ with impatience and
with joy; having gone to take up, in front of the column on which the
playbills were, my daily station, as excruciating, of late, as that of a
stylite saint, I had seen there, still moist and wrinkled, the complete
bill of _Phèdre_, which had just been pasted up for the first time (and
on which, I must confess, the rest of the cast furnished no additional
attraction which could help me to decide). But it gave to one of the
points between which my indecision wavered a form at once more concrete
and--inasmuch as the bill was dated not from the day on which I read it
but from that on which the performance would take place, and from the
very hour at which the curtain would rise--almost imminent, well on the
way, already, to its realisation, so that I jumped for joy before the
column at the thought that on that day, and at that hour precisely, I
should be sitting there in my place, ready to hear the voice of Berma;
and for fear lest my parents might not now be in time to secure two good
seats for my grandmother and myself, I raced back to the house, whipped
on by the magic words which had now taken the place, in my mind, of
"Jansenist pallor" and "Solar myth";--"Ladies will not be admitted to
the stalls in hats. The doors will be closed at two o'clock."

Alas! that first _matinée_ was to prove a bitter disappointment. My
father offered to drop my grandmother and me at the theatre, on his way
to the Commission. Before leaving the house he said to my mother: "See
that you have a good dinner for us to-night; you remember, I'm bringing
de Norpois back with me." My mother had not forgotten. And all that day,
and overnight, Françoise, rejoicing in the opportunity to devote
herself to that art of the kitchen,--of which she was indeed a
past-master, stimulated, moreover, by the prospect of having a new guest
to feed, the consciousness that she would have to compose, by methods
known to her alone, a dish of beef in jelly, had been living in the
effervescence of creation; since she attached the utmost importance to
the intrinsic quality of the materials which were to enter into the
fabric of her work, she had gone herself to the Halles to procure the
best cuts of rump-steak, shin of beef, calves'-feet, as Michelangelo
passed eight months in the mountains of Carrara choosing the most
perfect blocks of marble for the monument of Julius II.--Françoise
expended on these comings and goings so much ardour that Mamma, at the
sight of her flaming cheeks, was alarmed lest our old servant should
make herself ill with overwork, like the sculptor of the Tombs of the
Medici in the quarries of Pietrasanta. And overnight Françoise had sent
to be cooked in the baker's oven, shielded with breadcrumbs, like a
block of pink marble packed in sawdust, what she called a "Nev'-York
ham". Believing the language to be less rich than it actually was in
words, and her own ears less trustworthy, the first time that she heard
anyone mention York ham she had thought, no doubt,--feeling it to be
hardly conceivable that the dictionary could be so prodigal as to
include at once a "York" and a "New York"--that she had misheard what
was said, and that the ham was really called by the name already
familiar to her. And so, ever since, the word York was preceded in her
ears, or before her eyes when she read it in an advertisement, by the
affix "New" which she pronounced "Nev'". And it was with the most
perfect faith that she would say to her kitchen-maid: "Go and fetch me a
ham from Olida's. Madame told me especially to get a Nev'-York." On that
particular day, if Françoise was consumed by the burning certainty of
creative genius, my lot was the cruel anxiety of the seeker after truth.
No doubt, so long as I had not yet heard Berma speak, I still felt some
pleasure. I felt it in the little square that lay in front of the
theatre, in which, in two hours' time, the bare boughs of the chestnut
trees would gleam with a metallic lustre as the lighted gas-lamps shewed
up every detail of their structure; before the attendants in the
box-office, the selection of whom, their promotion, all their destiny
depended upon the great artist--for she alone held power in the theatre,
where ephemeral managers followed one after the other in an obscure
succession--who took our tickets without even glancing at us, so
preoccupied were they with their anxiety lest any of Mme. Berma's
instructions had not been duly transmitted to the new members of the
staff, lest it was not clearly, everywhere, understood that the hired
applause must never sound for her, that the windows must all be kept
open so long as she was not on the stage, and every door closed tight,
the moment that she appeared; that a bowl of hot water must be concealed
somewhere close to her, to make the dust settle: and, for that matter,
at any moment now her carriage, drawn by a pair of horses with flowing
manes, would be stopping outside the theatre, she would alight from it
muffled in furs, and, crossly acknowledging everyone's salute, would
send one of her attendants to find out whether a stage box had been kept
for her friends, what the temperature was "in front", who were in the
other boxes, if the programme sellers were looking smart; theatre and
public being to her no more than a second, an outermost cloak which she
would put on, and the medium, the more or less "good" conductor through
which her talent would have to pass. I was happy, too, in the theatre
itself; since I had made the discovery that--in contradiction of the
picture so long entertained by my childish imagination--there was but
one stage for everybody, I had supposed that I should be prevented from
seeing it properly by the presence of the other spectators, as one is
when in the thick of a crowd; now I registered the fact that, on the
contrary, thanks to an arrangement which is, so to speak, symbolical of
all spectatorship, everyone feels himself to be the centre of the
theatre; which explained to me why, when Françoise had been sent once
to see some melodrama from the top gallery, she had assured us on her
return that her seat had been the best in the house, and that instead of
finding herself too far from the stage she had been positively
frightened by the mysterious and living proximity of the curtain. My
pleasure increased further when I began to distinguish behind the said
lowered curtain such confused rappings as one hears through the shell of
an egg before the chicken emerges, sounds which speedily grew louder and
suddenly, from that world which, impenetrable by our eyes, yet
scrutinised us with its own, addressed themselves, and to us
indubitably, in the imperious form of three consecutive hammer-blows as
moving as any signals from the planet Mars. And--once this curtain had
risen,--when on the stage a writing-table and a fireplace, in no way out
of the ordinary, had indicated that the persons who were about to enter
would be, not actors come to recite, as I had seen them once and heard
them at an evening party, but real people, just living their lives at
home, on whom I was thus able to spy without their seeing me--my
pleasure still endured; it was broken by a momentary uneasiness; just as
I was straining my ears in readiness before the piece began, two men
entered the theatre from the side of the stage, who must have been very
angry with each other, for they were talking so loud that in the
auditorium, where there were at least a thousand people, we could hear
every word, whereas in quite a small _café_ one is obliged to call the
waiter and ask what it is that two men, who appear to be quarrelling,
are saying; but at that moment, while I sat astonished to find that the
audience was listening to them without protest, drowned as it was in a
universal silence upon which broke, presently, a laugh here and there, I
understood that these insolent fellows were the actors, and that the
short piece known as the "curtain-raiser" had now begun. It was followed
by an interval so long that the audience, who had returned to their
places, grew impatient and began to stamp their feet. I was terrified at
this; for just as in the report of a criminal trial, when I read that
some noble-minded person was coming, against his own interests, to
testify on behalf of an innocent prisoner, I was always afraid that they
would not be nice enough to him, would not shew enough gratitude, would
not recompense him lavishly, and that he, in disgust, would then range
himself on the side of injustice; so now attributing to genius, in this
respect, the same qualities as to virtue, I was afraid lest Berma,
annoyed by the bad behaviour of so ill-bred an audience--in which, on
the other hand, I should have liked her to recognise, with satisfaction,
a few celebrities to whose judgment she would be bound to attach
importance--should express her discontent and disdain by acting badly.
And I gazed appealingly round me at these stamping brutes who were about
to shatter, in their insensate rage, the rare and fragile impression
which I had come to seek. The last moments of my pleasure were during
the opening scenes of _Phèdre._ The heroine herself does not appear in
these first scenes of the second act; and yet, as soon as the curtain
rose, and another curtain, of red velvet this time, was parted in the
middle (a curtain which was used to halve the depth of the stage in all
the plays in which the "star" appeared), an actress entered from the
back who had the face and voice which, I had been told, were those of
Berma. The cast must therefore have been changed; all the trouble that I
had taken in studying the part of the wife of Theseus was wasted. But a
second actress now responded to the first. I must, then, have been
mistaken in supposing that the first was Berma, for the second even more
closely resembled her, and, more than the other, had her diction. Both
of them, moreover, enriched their parts with noble gestures--which I
could vividly distinguish, and could appreciate in their relation to the
text, while they raised and let fall the lovely folds of their
tunics--and also with skilful changes of tone, now passionate, now
ironical, which made me realise the significance of lines that I had
read to myself at home without paying sufficient attention to what they
really meant. But all of a sudden, in the cleft of the red curtain that
veiled her sanctuary, as in a frame, appeared a woman, and
simultaneously with the fear that seized me, far more vexing than
Berma's fear could be, lest someone should upset her by opening a
window, or drown one of her lines by rustling a programme, or annoy her
by applauding the others and by not applauding her enough;--in my own
fashion, still more absolute than Berma's, of considering from that
moment theatre, audience, play and my own body only as an acoustic
medium of no importance, save in the degree to which it was favourable
to the inflexions of that voice,--I realised that the two actresses whom
I had been for some minutes admiring bore not the least resemblance to
her whom I had come to hear. But at the same time all my pleasure had
ceased; in vain might I strain towards Berma eyes, ears, mind, so as not
to let one morsel escape me of the reasons which she would furnish for
my admiring her, I did not succeed in gathering a single one. I could
not even, as I could with her companions, distinguish in her diction and
in her playing intelligent intonations, beautiful gestures. I listened
to her as though I were reading _Phèdre_, or as though Phaedra herself
had at that moment uttered the words that I was hearing, without its
appearing that Berma's talent had added anything at all to them. I could
have wished, so as to be able to explore them fully, so as to attempt to
discover what it was in them that was beautiful, to arrest, to
immobilise for a time before my senses every intonation of the artist's
voice, every expression of her features; at least I did attempt, by dint
of my mental agility in having, before a line came, my attention ready
and tuned to catch it, not to waste upon preparations any morsel of the
precious time that each word, each gesture occupied, and, thanks to the
intensity of my observation, to manage to penetrate as far into them as
if I had had whole hours to spend upon them, by myself. But how short
their duration was! Scarcely had a sound been received by my ear than it
was displaced there by another. In one scene, where Berma stands
motionless for a moment, her arm raised to the level of a face bathed,
by some piece of stagecraft, in a greenish light, before a back-cloth
painted to represent the sea, the whole house broke out in applause; but
already the actress had moved, and the picture that I should have liked
to study existed no longer. I told my grandmother that I could not see
very well; she handed me her glasses. Only, when one believes in the
reality of a thing, making it visible by artificial means is not quite
the same as feeling that it is close at hand. I thought now that it was
no longer Berma at whom I was looking, but her image in a magnifying
glass. I put the glasses down, but then possibly the image that my eye
received of her, diminished by distance, was no more exact; which of the
two Bermas was the real? As for her speech to Hippolyte, I had counted
enormously upon that, since, to judge by the ingenious significance
which her companions were disclosing to me at every moment in less
beautiful parts, she would certainly render it with intonations more
surprising than any which, when reading the play at home, I had
contrived to imagine; but she did not attain to the heights which Œnone
or Aricie would naturally have reached, she planed down into a uniform
flow of melody the whole of a passage in which there were mingled
together contradictions so striking that the least intelligent of tragic
actresses, even the pupils of an academy could not have missed their
effect; besides which, she ran through the speech so rapidly that it was
only when she had come to the last line that my mind became aware of the
deliberate monotony which she had imposed on it throughout.

Then, at last, a sense of admiration did possess me, provoked by the
frenzied applause of the audience. I mingled my own with theirs,
endeavouring to prolong the general sound so that Berma, in her
gratitude, should surpass herself, and I be certain of having heard her
on one of her great days. A curious thing, by the way, was that the
moment when this storm of public enthusiasm broke loose was, as I
afterwards learned, that in which Berma reveals one of her richest
treasures. It would appear that certain transcendent realities emit all
around them a radiance to which the crowd is sensitive. So it is that
when any great event occurs, when on a distant frontier an army is in
jeopardy, or defeated, or victorious, the vague and conflicting reports
which we receive, from which an educated man can derive little
enlightenment, stimulate in the crowd an emotion by which that man is
surprised, and in which, once expert criticism has informed him of the
actual military situation, he recognises the popular perception of that
"aura" which surrounds momentous happenings, and which may be visible
hundreds of miles away. One learns of a victory either after the war is
over, or at once, from the hilarious joy of one's hall porter. One
discovers the touch of genius in Berma's acting a week after one has
heard her, in the criticism of some review, or else on the spot, from
the thundering acclamation of the stalls. But this immediate recognition
by the crowd was mingled with a hundred others, all quite erroneous; the
applause came, most often, at wrong moments, apart from the fact that it
was mechanically produced by the effect of the applause that had gone
before, just as in a storm, once the sea is sufficiently disturbed, it
will continue to swell, even after the wind has begun to subside. No
matter; the more I applauded, the better, it seemed to me, did Berma
act. "I say," came from a woman sitting near me, of no great social
pretensions, "she fairly gives it you, she does; you'd think she'd do
herself an injury, the way she runs about. I call that acting, don't
you?" And happy to find these reasons for Berma's superiority, though
not without a suspicion that they no more accounted for it than would
for that of the Gioconda or of Benvenuto's Perseus a peasant's gaping
"That's a good bit of work. It's all gold, look! Fine, ain't it?", I
greedily imbibed the strong wine of this popular enthusiasm. I felt, all
the same, when the curtain had fallen for the last time, disappointed
that the pleasure for which I had so longed had been no greater, but at
the same time I felt the need to prolong it, not to depart for ever,
when I left the theatre, from this strange life of the stage which had,
for a few hours, been my own, from which I should be tearing myself
away, as though I were going into exile, when I returned to my own home,
had I not hoped there to learn a great deal more about Berma from her
admirer, to whom I was indebted already for the permission to go to
_Phèdre_, M. de Norpois. I was introduced to him before dinner by my
father, who summoned me into his study for the purpose. As I entered,
the Ambassador rose, held out his hand, bowed his tall figure and fixed
his blue eyes attentively on my face. As the foreign visitors who used
to be presented to him, in the days when he still represented France
abroad, were all more or less (even the famous singers) persons of note,
with regard to whom he could tell, when he met them, that he would be
able to say, later on, when he heard their names mentioned in Paris or
in Petersburg, that he remembered perfectly the evening he had spent
with them at Munich or Sofia, he had formed the habit of impressing upon
them, by his affability, the pleasure with which he was making their
acquaintance; but in addition to this, being convinced that in the life
of European capitals, in contact at once with all the interesting
personalities that passed through them and with the manners and customs
of the native populations, one acquired a deeper insight than could be
gained from books into the intellectual movement throughout Europe, he
would exercise upon each newcomer his keen power of observation, so as
to decide at once with what manner of man he had to deal. The Government
had not for some time now entrusted to him a post abroad, but still, as
soon as anyone was introduced to him, his eyes, as though they had not
yet been informed of their master's retirement, began their fruitful
observation, while by his whole attitude he endeavoured to convey that
the stranger's name was not unknown to him. And so, all the time, while
he spoke to me kindly and with the air of importance of a man who is
conscious of the vastness of his own experience, he never ceased to
examine me with a sagacious curiosity, and to his own profit, as though
I had been some exotic custom, some historic and instructive building or
some "star" upon his course. And in this way he gave proof at once, in
his attitude towards me, of the majestic benevolence of the sage Mentor
and of the zealous curiosity of the young Anacharsis.

He offered me absolutely no opening to the _Revue des Deux-Mondes_, but
put a number of questions to me on what I had been doing and reading;
asked what were my own inclinations, which I heard thus spoken of for
the first time as though it might be a quite reasonable thing to obey
their promptings, whereas hitherto I had always supposed it to be my
duty to suppress them. Since they attracted me towards Literature, he
did not dissuade me from that course; on the contrary, he spoke of it
with deference, as of some venerable personage whose select circle, in
Rome or at Dresden, one remembers with pleasure, and regrets only that
one's multifarious duties in life enable one to revisit it so seldom. He
appeared to be envying me, with an almost jovial smile, the delightful
hours which, more fortunate than himself and more free, I should be able
to spend with such a Mistress. But the very terms that he employed
shewed me Literature as something entirely different from the image that
I had formed of it at Combray, and I realised that I had been doubly
right in abandoning my intention. Until now, I had reckoned only that I
had not the "gift" for writing; now M. de Norpois took from me the
ambition also. I wanted to express to him what had been my dreams;
trembling with emotion, I was painfully apprehensive that all the words
which I could utter would not be the sincerest possible equivalent of
what I had felt, what I had never yet attempted to formulate; that is to
say that my words had no clear significance. Perhaps by a professional
habit, perhaps by virtue of the calm that is acquired by every important
personage whose advice is commonly sought, and who, knowing that he will
keep the control of the conversation in his own hands, allows the other
party to fret, to struggle, to take his time; perhaps also to emphasise
the dignity of his head (Greek, according to himself, despite his
sweeping whiskers), M. de Norpois, while anything was being explained to
him, would preserve a facial immobility as absolute as if you had been
addressing some ancient and unhearing bust in a museum. Until suddenly,
falling upon you like an auctioneer's hammer, or a Delphic oracle, the
Ambassador's voice, as he replied to you, would be all the more
impressive, in that nothing in his face had allowed you to guess what
sort of impression you had made on him, or what opinion he was about to
express.

"Precisely;" he suddenly began, as though the case were now heard and
judged, and after allowing me to writhe in increasing helplessness
beneath those motionless eyes which never for an instant left my face.
"There is the case of the son of one of my friends, which, _mutatis
mutandis_, is very much like yours." He adopted in speaking of our
common tendency the same reassuring tone as if it had been a tendency
not to literature but to rheumatics, and he had wished to assure me that
it would not necessarily prove fatal. "He too has chosen to leave the
Quai d'Orsay, although the way had been paved for him there by his
father, and without caring what people might say, he has settled down to
write. And certainly, he's had no reason to regret it. He published two
years ago--of course, he's much older than you, you understand--a book
dealing with the Sense of the Infinite on the Western Shore of Victoria
Nyanza, and this year he has brought out a little thing, not so
important as the other, but very brightly, in places perhaps almost too
pointedly written, on the Repeating Rifle in the Bulgarian Army; and
these have put him quite in a class by himself. He's gone pretty far
already, and he's not the sort of man to stop half-way; I happen to know
that (without any suggestion, of course, of his standing for election)
his name has been mentioned several times, in conversation, and not at
all unfavourably, at the Academy of Moral Sciences. And so, one can't
say yet, of course, that he has reached the pinnacle of fame, still he
has made his way, by sheer industry, to a very fine position indeed, and
success--which doesn't always come only to agitators and mischief-makers
and men who make trouble which is usually more than they are prepared to
take--success has crowned his efforts."

My father, seeing me already, in a few years' time, an Academician, was
tasting a contentment which M. de Norpois raised to the supreme pitch
when, after a momentary hesitation in which he appeared to be
calculating the possible consequences of so rash an act, he handed me
his card and said: "Why not go and see him yourself? Tell him, I sent
you. He may be able to give you some good advice," plunging me by his
words into as painful a state of anxiety as if he had told me that, next
morning, I was to embark as cabin-boy on board a sailing ship, and to go
round the world.

My Aunt Léonie had bequeathed to me, together with all sorts of other
things and much of her furniture, with which it was difficult to know
what to do, almost all her unsettled estate--revealing thus after her
death an affection for me which I had hardly suspected in her lifetime.
My father, who was trustee of this estate until I came of age, now
consulted M. de Norpois with regard to several of the investments. He
recommended certain stocks bearing a low rate of interest, which he
considered particularly sound, notably English consols and Russian four
per cents. "With absolutely first class securities such as those," said
M. de Norpois, "even if your income from them is nothing very great, you
may be certain of never losing any of your capital." My father then told
him, roughly, what else he had bought. M. de Norpois gave a just
perceptible smile of congratulation; like all capitalists, he regarded
wealth as an enviable thing, but thought it more delicate to compliment
people upon their possessions only by a half-indicated sign of
intelligent sympathy; on the other hand, as he was himself immensely
rich, he felt that he shewed his good taste by seeming to regard as
considerable the meagre revenues of his friends, with a happy and
comforting resilience to the superiority of his own. He made amends for
this by congratulating my father, without hesitation, on the
"composition" of his list of investments, selected "with so sure, so
delicate, so fine a taste." You would have supposed, to hear him, that
he attributed to the relative values of investments, and even to
investments themselves something akin to aesthetic merit. Of one,
comparatively recent and still little known, which my father mentioned,
M. de Norpois, like the people who have always read the books of which,
you imagine, you yourself alone have ever heard, said at once, "Ah, yes,
I used to amuse myself for some time with watching it in the papers; it
was quite interesting," with the retrospective smile of a regular
subscriber who has read the latest novel already, in monthly
instalments, in his magazine. "It would not be at all a bad idea to
apply for some of this new issue. It is distinctly attractive; they are
offering it at a most tempting discount." But when he came to some of
the older investments, my father, who could not remember their exact
names, which it was easy to confuse with others of the same kind, opened
a drawer and shewed the securities themselves to the Ambassador. The
sight of them enchanted me. They were ornamented with cathedral spires
and allegorical figures, like the old, romantic editions that I had
pored over as a child. All the products of one period have something in
common; the artists who illustrate the poetry of their generation are
the same artists who are employed by the big financial houses. And
nothing reminds me so much of the monthly parts of _Notre-Dame de
Paris_, and of various books by Gérard de Nerval, that used to hang
outside the grocer's door at Combray, than does, in its rectangular and
flowery border, supported by recumbent river-gods, a "personal share" in
the Water Company.

The contempt which my father had for my kind of intelligence was so far
tempered by his natural affection for me that, in practice, his attitude
towards anything that I might do was one of blind indulgence. And so he
had no qualm about telling me to fetch a little "prose poem" which I had
made up, years before, at Combray, while coming home from a walk. I had
written it down in a state of exaltation which must, I felt certain,
infect everyone who read it. But it was not destined to captivate M. de
Norpois, for he handed it back to me without a word.

My mother, who had the most profound respect for all my father's
occupations, came in now, timidly, to ask whether dinner might be
served. She was afraid to interrupt a conversation in which she herself
could have no part. And indeed my father was continually reminding the
Marquis of some useful suggestion which they had decided to make at the
next meeting of the Commission; speaking in the peculiar tone always
adopted, when in a strange environment by a pair of colleagues--as
exclusive, in this respect, as two young men from the same
college--whose professional routine has furnished them with a common
fund of memories to which the others present have no access, and to
which they are unwilling to refer before an audience.

But the absolute control over his facial muscles to which M. de Norpois
had attained allowed him to listen without seeming to hear a word. At
last my father became uneasy: "I had thought," he ventured, after an
endless preamble, "of asking the advice of the Commission . . ." Then
from the face of the noble virtuoso, who had been sitting inert as a
player in an orchestra sits until the moment comes for him to begin his
part, were uttered, with an even delivery, on a sharp note, and as
though they were no more than the completion (but scored for a different
voice) of the phrase that my father had begun, the words: "of which you
will not hesitate, of course, to call a meeting; more especially as the
present members are all known to you personally, and there may be a
change any day." This was not in itself a very remarkable ending. But
the immobility that had preceded it made it detach itself with the
crystal clarity, the almost malicious unexpectedness of those phrases in
which the piano, silent until then, "takes up", at a given moment, the
violoncello to which one has just been listening, in a Mozart concerto.

"Well, did you enjoy your _matinée?_" asked my father, as we moved to
the dining-room; meaning me to "shew off", and with the idea that my
enthusiasm would give M. de Norpois a good opinion of me. "He has just
been to hear Berma. You remember, we were talking about it the other
day," he went on, turning towards the diplomat, in the same tone of
retrospective, technical, mysterious allusiveness as if he had been
referring to a meeting of the Commission.

"You must have been enchanted, especially if you had never heard her
before. Your father was alarmed at the effect that the little jaunt
might have upon your health, which is none too good, I am told, none too
robust. But I soon set his mind at rest. Theatres to-day are not what
they were even twenty years ago. You have more or less comfortable seats
now, and a certain amount of ventilation, although we have still a long
way to go before we come up to Germany or England, which in that respect
as in many others are immeasurably ahead of us. I have never seen Mme.
Berma in _Phèdre_, but I have always heard that she is excellent in the
part. You were charmed with her, of course?"

M. de Norpois, a man a thousand times more intelligent than myself, must
know that hidden truth which I had failed to extract from Berma's
playing; he knew, and would reveal it to me; in answering his question I
would implore him to let me know in what that truth consisted; and he
would tell me, and so justify me in the longing that I had felt to see
and hear the actress. I had only a moment, I must make what use I could
of it and bring my cross-examination to bear upon the essential points.
But what were they? Fastening my whole attention upon my own so confused
impressions, with no thought of making M. de Norpois admire me, but
only that of learning from him the truth that I had still to discover, I
made no attempt to substitute ready made phrases for the words that
failed me--I stood there stammering, until finally, in the hope of
provoking him into declaring what there was in Berma that was admirable,
I confessed that I had been disappointed.

"What's that?" cried my father, annoyed at the bad impression which this
admission of my failure to appreciate the performance must make on M. de
Norpois, "What on earth do you mean; you didn't enjoy it? Why, your
grandmother has been telling us that you sat there hanging on every word
that Berma uttered, with your eyes starting out of your head; that
everyone else in the theatre seemed quite bored, beside you."

"Oh, yes, I was listening as hard as I could, trying to find out what it
was that was supposed to be so wonderful about her. Of course, she's
frightfully good, and all that . . ."

"If she is 'frightfully good', what more do you want?"

"One of the things that have undoubtedly contributed to the success of
Mme. Berma," resumed M. de Norpois, turning with elaborate courtesy
towards my mother, so as not to let her be left out of the conversation,
and in conscientious fulfilment of his duty of politeness to the lady of
the house, "is the perfect taste that she shews in selecting her parts;
thus she can always be assured of success, and success of the right
sort. She hardly ever appears in anything trivial. Look how she has
thrown herself into the part of Phèdre. And then, she brings the same
good taste to the choice of her costumes, and to her acting. In spite of
her frequent and lucrative tours in England and America, the
vulgarity--I will not say of John Bull; that would be unjust, at any
rate to the England of the Victorian era--but of Uncle Sam has not
infected her. No loud colours, no rant. And then that admirable voice,
which has been of such service to her, with which she plays so
delightfully--I should almost be tempted to describe it as a musical
instrument!"

My interest in Berma's acting had continued to grow ever since the fall
of the curtain, because it was then no longer compressed within the
limits of reality; but I felt the need to find explanations for it;
moreover it had been fixed with the same intensity, while Berma was on
the stage, upon everything that she offered, in the indivisibility of a
living whole, to my eyes and ears; there was nothing separate or
distinct; it welcomed, accordingly, the discovery of a reasonable cause
in these tributes paid to the simplicity, to the good taste of the
actress, it attracted them to itself by its power of absorption, seized
hold of them, as the optimism of a drunken man seizes hold of the
actions of his neighbour, in each of which he finds an excuse for
emotion. "He is right!" I told myself. "What a charming voice, what an
absence of shrillness, what simple costumes, what intelligence to have
chosen _Phèdre._ No; I have not been disappointed!"

The cold beef, spiced with carrots, made its appearance, couched by the
Michelangelo of our kitchen upon enormous crystals of jelly, like
transparent blocks of quartz.

"You have a chef of the first order, Madame," said M. de Norpois, "and
that is no small matter. I myself, who have had, when abroad, to
maintain a certain style in housekeeping, I know how difficult it often
is to find a perfect master-cook. But this is a positive banquet that
you have set before us!"

And indeed Françoise, in the excitement of her ambition to make a
success, for so distinguished a guest, of a dinner the preparation of
which had been obstructed by difficulties worthy of her powers, had
given herself such trouble as she no longer took when we were alone, and
had recaptured her incomparable Combray manner.

"That is a thing you can't get in a chophouse,--in the best of them, I
mean; a spiced beef in which the jelly does not taste of glue and the
beef has caught the flavour of the carrots; it is admirable! Allow me to
come again," he went on, making a sign to shew that he wanted more of
the jelly. "I should be interested to see how your Vatel managed a dish
of quite a different kind; I should like, for instance, to see him
tackle a _bœuf Stroganoff._"

M. de Norpois, so as to add his own contribution to the gaiety of the
repast, entertained us with a number of the stories with which he was in
the habit of regaling his colleagues in "the career", quoting now some
ludicrous sentence uttered by a politician, an old offender, whose
sentences were always long and packed with incoherent images, now some
monumental epigram of a diplomat, sparkling with attic salt. But, to
tell the truth, the criterion which for him set apart these two kinds of
phrase in no way resembled that which I was in the habit of applying to
literature. Most of the finer shades escaped me; the words which he
repeated with derision seemed to me not to differ very greatly from
those which he found remarkable. He belonged to the class of men who,
had we come to discuss the books that I liked, would have said; "So you
understand that, do you? I must confess that I do not understand, I am
not initiated," but I could have matched his attitude, for I did not
grasp the wit or folly, the eloquence or pomposity which he found in a
statement or a speech, and the absence of any perceptible reason for
one's being badly and the other's well expressed made that sort of
literature seem more mysterious, more obscure to me than any other. I
could distinguish only that to repeat what everybody else was thinking
was, in politics, the mark not of an inferior but of a superior mind.
When M. de Norpois made use of certain expressions which were "common
form" in the newspapers, and uttered them with emphasis, one felt that
they became an official pronouncement by the mere fact of his having
employed them, and a pronouncement which would provoke a string of
comment.

My mother was counting greatly upon the pineapple and truffle salad. But
the Ambassador, after fastening for a moment on the confection the
penetrating gaze of a trained observer, ate it with the inscrutable
discretion of a diplomat, and without disclosing to us what he thought
of it. My mother insisted upon his taking some more, which he did, but
saying only, in place of the compliment for which she was hoping: "I
obey, Madame, for I can see that it is, on your part, a positive ukase!"

"We saw in the 'papers that you had a long talk with King Theodosius,"
my father ventured.

"Why, yes; the King, who has a wonderful memory for faces, was kind
enough to remember, when he noticed me in the stalls, that I had had the
honour to meet him on several occasions at the Court of Bavaria, at a
time when he had never dreamed of his oriental throne--to which, as you
know, he was summoned by a European Congress, and indeed had grave
doubts about accepting the invitation, regarding that particular
sovereignty as unworthy of his race, the noblest, heraldically speaking,
in the whole of Europe. An aide-de-camp came down to bid me pay my
respects to his Majesty, whose command I hastened, naturally, to obey."

"And I trust, you are satisfied with the results of his visit?"

"Enchanted! One was justified in feeling some apprehension as to the
manner in which a Sovereign who is still so young would handle a
situation requiring tact, particularly at this highly delicate juncture.
For my own part, I reposed entire confidence in the King's political
sense. But I must confess that he far surpassed my expectations. The
speech that he made at the Elysée, which, according to information that
has come to me from a most authoritative source, was composed, from
beginning to end, by himself, was fully deserving of the interest that
it has aroused in all quarters. It was simply masterly; a trifle daring,
I quite admit, but with an audacity which, after all, has been fully
justified by the event. Traditional diplomacy is all very well in its
way, but in practice it has made his country and ours live in an
hermetically sealed atmosphere in which it was no longer possible to
breathe. Very well! There is one method of letting in fresh air,
obviously not one of the methods which one could officially recommend,
but one which King Theodosius might allow himself to adopt--and that is
to break the windows. Which he accordingly did, with a spontaneous good
humour that delighted everybody, and also with an aptness in his choice
of words in which one could at once detect the race of scholarly princes
from whom he is descended through his mother. There can be no question
that when he spoke of the 'affinities' that bound his country to France,
the expression, rarely as it may occur in the vocabulary of the
Chancellories, was a singularly happy one. You see that literary ability
is no drawback, even in diplomacy, even upon a throne," he went on,
turning for a moment to myself. "The community of interests had long
been apparent, I quite admit, and the relations of the two Powers were
excellent. Still, it needed putting into words. The word was what we
were all waiting for, it was chosen with marvellous aptitude; you have
seen the effect it had. For my part, I must confess I applauded openly."

"Your friend M. de Vaugoubert will be pleased, after preparing for the
agreement all these years."

"All the more so that his Majesty, who is quite incorrigible, really, in
some ways, had taken care to spring it on him as a surprise. And it did
come as a complete surprise, incidentally, to everyone concerned,
beginning with the Foreign Minister himself, who--I have heard--did not
find it at all to his liking. It appears that someone spoke to him about
it and that he replied, pretty sharply, and loud enough to be overheard
by the people on either side of them: 'I have been neither consulted nor
informed!' indicating clearly by that that he declined to accept any
responsibility for the consequences. I must own that the incident has
given rise to a great deal of comment, and I should not go so far as to
deny," he went on with a malicious smile, "that certain of my
colleagues, for whom the supreme law appears to be that of inertia, may
have been shaken from their habitual repose. As for Vaugoubert, you are
aware that he has been bitterly attacked for his policy of bringing that
country into closer relations with France, which must have been more
than ordinarily painful to him, he is so sensitive, such an exquisite
nature. I can amply testify to that, since, for all that he is
considerably my junior, I have had many dealings with him, we are
friends of long standing and I know him intimately. Besides, who could
help knowing him? His is a heart of crystal. Indeed, that is the one
fault that there is to be found with him; it is not necessary for the
heart of a diplomat to be as transparent as all that. Still, that does
not prevent their talking of sending him to Rome, which would be a fine
rise for him, but a pretty big plum to swallow. Between ourselves, I
fancy that Vaugoubert, utterly devoid of ambition as he is, would be
very well pleased, and would by no means ask for that cup to pass from
him. For all we know, he may do wonders down there; he is the chosen
candidate of the Consulta, and for my part I can see him very well
placed, with his artistic leanings, in the setting of the Farnese Palace
and the Caracci Gallery. At least you would suppose that it was
impossible for any one to hate him; but there is a whole camarilla
collected round King Theodosius which is more or less held in fief by
the Wilhelmstrasse, whose inspiration its members dutifully absorb, and
these men have done everything in their power to checkmate him. Not only
has Vaugoubert had to face these backstairs intrigues, he has had to
endure also the insults of a gang of hireling pamphleteers who later on,
being like every subsidised journalist the most arrant cowards, have
been the first to cry quits, but in the interval had not shrunk from
hurling at our Representative the most fatuous accusations that the wit
of irresponsible fools could invent. For a month and more Vaugoubert's
enemies had been dancing round him, howling for his scalp," M. de
Norpois detached this word with sharp emphasis. "But forewarned is
forearmed; as for their insults, he spurned I them with his foot!" he
went on with even more determination, and with so fierce a glare in his
eye that for a moment we forgot our food. "In the words of a fine Arab
proverb, 'The dogs may bark; the caravan goes on!'"

After launching this quotation M. de Norpois paused and examined our
faces, to see what effect it had had upon us. Its effect was great, the
proverb being familiar to us already. It had taken the place, that year,
among people who "really counted", of "He who sows the wind shall reap
the whirlwind", which was sorely in need of a rest, not having the
perennial freshness of "Working for the King of Prussia". For the
culture of these eminent men was an alternate, if not a tripartite and
triennial culture. Of course, the use of quotations such as these, with
which M. de Norpois excelled in jewelling his articles in the _Revue_,
was in no way essential to their appearing solid and well-informed. Even
without the ornament which the quotations supplied, it sufficed that M.
de Norpois should write at a given point (as he never failed to write):
"The Court of St. James's was not the last to be sensible of the peril,"
or "Feeling ran high on the Singers' Bridge, which with anxious eyes was
following the selfish but, skilful policy of the Dual Monarchy," or "A
cry of alarm sounded from Montecitorio," or yet again, "That everlasting
double dealing which is so characteristic of the Ballplatz." By these
expressions the profane reader had at once recognised and had paid
deference to the diplomat _de carrière._ But what had made people say
that he was something more than that, that he was endowed with a
superior culture, had been his careful use of quotations, the perfect
example of which, at that date, was still: "Give me a good policy and I
will give you good finances, _to quote the favourite words of Baron
Louis_": for we had not yet imported from the Far East: "Victory is on
the side that can hold out a quarter of an hour longer than the other,
_as the Japanese say_". This reputation for immense literary gifts,
combined with a positive genius for intrigue which he kept concealed
beneath a mask of indifference, had secured the election of M. de
Norpois to the Académie des Sciences Morales. And there were some who
even thought that he would not be out of place in the Académie
Française, on the famous day when, wishing to indicate that it was only
by drawing the Russian Alliance closer that we could hope to arrive at
an understanding with Great Britain, he had not hesitated to write: "Be
it clearly understood in the Quai d'Orsay, be it taught henceforward in
all the manuals of geography, which appear to be incomplete in this
respect, be his certificate of graduation remorselessly withheld from
every candidate who has not learned to say, 'If all roads lead to Rome,
nevertheless the way from Paris to London runs of necessity through St.
Petersburgh.'"

"In short," M. de Norpois went on, addressing my father, "Vaugoubert has
won himself considerable distinction from this affair, quite beyond
anything on which he can have reckoned. He expected, you understand, a
correctly worded speech (which, after the storm-clouds of recent years,
would have been something to the good) but nothing more. Several persons
who had the honour to be present have assured me that it is impossible,
when one merely reads the speech, to form any conception of the effect
that it produced when uttered--when articulated with marvellous
clearness of diction by the King, who is a master of the art of public
speaking and in that passage underlined every possible shade of meaning.
I allowed myself, in this connexion, to listen to a little anecdote
which brings into prominence once again that frank, boyish charm by
which King Theodosius has won so many hearts. I am assured that, just as
he uttered that word 'affinities', which was, of course, the startling
innovation of the speech, and one that, as you will see, will provoke
discussion in the Chancellories for years to come, his Majesty,
anticipating the delight of our Ambassador, who was to find in that word
the seal, the crown set upon all his labours, on his dreams, one might
almost say, and, in a word, his marshal's baton, made a half turn
towards Vaugoubert and fixing upon him his arresting gaze, so
characteristic of the Oettingens, fired at him that admirably chosen
word 'affinities', a positive treasure-trove, uttering it in a tone
which made it plain to all his hearers that it was employed of set
purpose and with full knowledge of the circumstances. It appears that
Vaugoubert found some difficulty in mastering his emotion, and I must
confess that, to a certain extent, I can well understand it. Indeed, a
person who is entirely to be believed has told me, in confidence, that
the King came up to Vaugoubert after the dinner, when His Majesty was
holding an informal court, and was heard to say, 'Well, are you
satisfied with your pupil, my dear Marquis?'

"One thing, however," M. de Norpois concluded, "is certain; and that is
that a speech like that has done more than twenty years of negotiation
towards bringing the two countries together, uniting their 'affinities',
to borrow the picturesque expression of Theodosius II. It is no more
than a word, if you like, but look what success it has had, how the
whole of the European press is repeating it, what interest it has
aroused, what a new note it has struck. Besides it is distinctly in the
young Sovereign's manner. I will not go so far as to say that he lights
upon a diamond of that water every day. But it is very seldom that, in
his prepared speeches, or better still in the impulsive flow of his
conversation, he does not reveal his character--I was on the point of
saying 'does not affix his signature'--by the use of some incisive word.
I myself am quite free from any suspicion of partiality in this respect,
for I am stoutly opposed to all innovations in terminology. Nine times
out of ten they are most dangerous."

"Yes, I was thinking, only the other day, that the German Emperor's
telegram could not be much to your liking," said my father.

M. de Norpois raised his eyes to heaven, as who should say, "Oh, that
fellow!" before he replied: "In the first place, it is an act of
ingratitude. It is more than a crime; it is a blunder, and one of a
crassness which I can describe only as pyramidal! Indeed, unless some
one puts a check on his activities, the man who has got rid of Bismarck
is quite capable of repudiating by degrees the whole of the Bismarckian
policy; after which it will be a leap in the dark."

"My husband tells me, sir, that you are perhaps going to take him to
Spain one summer; that will be nice for him; I am so glad."

"Why, yes; it is an idea that greatly attracts me; I amuse myself,
planning a tour. I should like to go there with you, my dear fellow. But
what about you, Madame; have you decided yet how you are going to spend
your holidays?"

"I shall perhaps go with my son to Balbec, but I am not certain."

"Oh, but Balbec is quite charming, I was down that way a few years ago.
They are beginning to build some very pretty little villas there; I
think you'll like the place. But may I ask what has made you choose
Balbec?"

"My son is very anxious to visit some of the churches in that
neighbourhood, and Balbec church in particular. I was a little afraid
that the tiring journey there, and the discomfort of staying in the
place might be too much for him. But I hear that they have just opened
an excellent hotel, in which he will be able to get all the comfort that
he requires."

"Indeed! I must make a note of that, for a certain person who will not
turn up her nose at a comfortable hotel."

"The church at Balbec is very beautiful, sir, is it not?" I inquired,
repressing my sorrow at learning that one of the attractions of Balbec
consisted in its pretty little villas.

"No, it is not bad; but it cannot be compared for a moment with such
positive jewels in stone as the Cathedrals of Rheims and Chartres, or
with what is to my mind the pearl among them all, the Sainte-Chapelle
here in Paris."

"But, surely, Balbec church is partly romanesque, is it not?"

"Why, yes, it is in the romanesque style, which is to say very cold and
lifeless, with no hint in it anywhere of the grace, the fantasy of the
later gothic builders, who worked their stone as if it had been so much
lace. Balbec church is well worth a visit, if you are in those parts; it
is decidedly quaint; on a wet day, when you have nothing better to do,
you might look inside; you will see the tomb of Tourville."

"Tell me, were you at the Foreign Ministry dinner last night?" asked my
father. "I couldn't go."

"No," M. de Norpois smiled, "I must confess that I renounced it for a
party of a very different sort. I was, dining with a lady whose name you
may possibly have heard, the beautiful Mme. Swann." My mother checked an
impulsive movement, for, being more rapid in perception than my father,
she used to alarm herself on his account over things which only began to
upset him a moment later. Anything unpleasant that might occur to him
was discovered first by her, just as bad news from France is always
known abroad sooner than among ourselves. But she was curious to know
what sort of people the Swanns managed to entertain, and so inquired of
M. de Norpois as to whom he had met there.

"Why, my dear lady, it is a house which (or so it struck me) is
especially attractive to gentlemen. There were several married men there
last night, but their wives were all, as it happened, unwell, and so had
not come with them," replied the Ambassador with a mordancy sheathed in
good-humour, casting on each of us a glance the gentleness and
discretion of which appeared to be tempering while in reality they
deftly intensified its malice.

"In all fairness," he went on, "I must add that women do go to the
house, but women who belong rather--what shall I say--to the Republican
world than to Swann's" (he pronounced it "Svann's") "circle. Still, you
can never tell. Perhaps it will turn into a political or a literary
salon some day. Anyhow, they appear to be quite happy as they are.
Indeed, I feel that Swann advertises his happiness just a trifle too
blatantly. He told us the names of all the people who had asked him and
his wife out for the next week, people with whom there was no particular
reason to be proud of being intimate, with a want of reserve, of taste,
almost of tact which I was astonished to remark in so refined a man. He
kept on repeating, 'We haven't a free evening!' as though that had been
a thing to boast of, positively like a _parvenu_, and he is certainly
not that. For Swann had always plenty of friends, women as well as men,
and without seeming over-bold, without the least wish to appear
indiscreet, I think I may safely say that not all of them, of course,
nor even the majority of them, but one at least, who is a lady of the
very highest rank, would perhaps not have shewn herself inexorably
averse from the idea of entering upon relations with Mme. Swann, in
which case it is safe to assume that more than one sheep of the social
flock would have followed her lead. But it seems that there has been no
indication on Swann's part of any movement in that direction.

"What do I see? A Nesselrode pudding! As well! I declare, I shall need a
course at Carlsbad after such a Lucullus-feast as this.

"Possibly Swann felt that there would be too much resistance to
overcome. The marriage--so much is certain--was not well received. There
has been some talk of his wife's having money, but that is all humbug.
Anyhow, the whole affair has been looked upon with disfavour. And then,
Swann has an aunt who is excessively rich and in an admirable position
socially, married to a man who, financially speaking, is a power. Not
only has she refused to meet Mme. Swann, she has actually started a
campaign to force her friends and acquaintance to do the same. I do not
mean to say that anyone who moves in a good circle in Paris has shewn
any actual incivility to Mme. Swann. . . . No! A hundred times no! Quite
apart from her husband's being eminently a man to take up the challenge.
Anyhow, there is one curious thing about it, to see the immense
importance that Swann, who knows so many and such exclusive people,
attaches to a society of which the best that can be said is that it is
extremely mixed. I myself, who knew him in the old days, must admit that
I felt more astonished than amused at seeing a man so well-bred as he
is, so much at home in the best houses, effusively thanking the Chief
Secretary to the Minister of Posts for having come to them, and asking
him whether Mme. Swann might _take the liberty_ of calling upon his
wife. He must feel something of an exile, don't you know; evidently,
it's quite a different world. I don't think, all the same, that Swann is
unhappy. It is true that for some years before the marriage she was
always trying to blackmail him in a rather disgraceful way; she would
take the child away whenever Swann refused her anything. Poor Swann, who
is as unsophisticated as he is, for all that, sharp, believed every time
that the child's disappearance was a coincidence, and declined to face
the facts. Apart from that, she made such continual scenes that everyone
expected that, from the day she attained her object and was safely
married, nothing could possibly restrain her and that their life would
be a hell on earth. Instead of which, just the opposite has happened.
People are inclined to laugh at the way in which Swann speaks of his
wife; it's become a standing joke. Of course, one could hardly expect
that, conscious, more or less of being a--(you remember Molière's line)
he would go and proclaim it _urbi et orbi_; still that does not prevent
one from finding a tendency in him to exaggerate when he declares that
she makes an excellent wife. And yet that is not so far from the truth
as people imagine. In her own way--which is not, perhaps, what all
husbands would prefer, but then, between you and me, I find it difficult
to believe that Swann, who has known her for ever so long and is far
from being an utter fool, did not know what to expect--there can be no
denying that she does seem to have a certain regard for him. I do not
say that she is not flighty, and Swann himself has no fault to find with
her for that, if one is to believe the charitable tongues which, as you
may suppose, continue to wag. But she is distinctly grateful to him for
what he has done for her, and, despite die fears that were everywhere
expressed of the contrary, her temper seems to have become angelic."

This alteration was perhaps not so extraordinary as M. de Norpois
professed to find it. Odette had not believed that Swann would ever
consent to marry her; each time that she made the suggestive
announcement that some man about town had just married his mistress she
had seen him stiffen into a glacial silence, or at the most, if she were
directly to challenge him, asking: "Don't you think it very nice, a very
fine thing that he has done, for a woman who sacrificed all her youth to
him?" had heard him answer dryly: "But I don't say that there's anything
wrong in it. Everyone does what he himself thinks right." She came very
near, indeed, to believing that (as he used to threaten in moments of
anger) he was going to leave her altogether, for she had heard it said,
not long since, by a woman sculptor, that "You cannot be surprised at
anything men do, they're such brutes," and impressed by the profundity
of this maxim of pessimism she had appropriated it for herself, and
repeated it on every possible occasion with an air of disappointment
which seemed to imply: "After all, it's not impossible in any way; it
would be just my luck." Meanwhile all the virtue had gone from the
optimistic maxim which had hitherto guided Odette through life: "You can
do anything with men when they're in love with you, they're such
idiots!" a doctrine which was expressed on her face by the same tremor
of an eyelid that might have accompanied such words as: "Don't be
frightened; he won't break anything." While she waited, Odette was
tormented by the thought of what one of her friends, who had been
married by a man who had not lived with her for nearly so long as Odette
herself had lived with Swann, and had had no child by him, and who was
now in a definitely respectable position, invited to the balls at the
Elysée and so forth, must think of Swann's behaviour. A consultant more
discerning than M. de Norpois would doubtless have been able to diagnose
that it was this feeling of shame and humiliation that had embittered
Odette, that the devilish characteristics which she displayed were no
essential part of her, no irremediable evil, and so would easily have
foretold what had indeed come to pass, namely that a new rule of life,
the matrimonial, would put an end, with almost magic swiftness, to these
painful incidents, of daily occurrence but in no sense organic.
Practically everyone was surprised at the marriage, and this, in itself,
is surprising. No doubt very few people understand the purely subjective
nature of the phenomenon that we call love, or how it creates, so to
speak, a fresh, a third, a supplementary person, distinct from the
person whom the world knows by the same name, a person most of whose
constituent elements are derived from ourself, the lover. And so there
are very few who can regard as natural the enormous proportions that a
creature comes to assume in our eyes who is not the same as the creature
that they see. It would appear, none the less, that so far as Odette was
concerned people might have taken into account the fact that if, indeed,
she had never entirely understood Swann's mentality, at least she was
acquainted with the titles, and with all the details of his studies, so
much so that the name of Vermeer was as familiar to her as that of her
own dressmaker; while as for Swann himself she knew intimately those
traits of character of which the rest of the world must remain ignorant
or merely laugh at them, and only a mistress or a sister may gain
possession of the revealing, cherished image; and so strongly are we
attached to such eccentricities, even to those of them which we are most
anxious to correct, that it is because a woman comes in time to acquire
an indulgent, an affectionately mocking familiarity, such as we
ourselves have with them, or our relatives have, that amours of long
standing have something of the sweetness and strength of family
affection. The bonds that unite us to another creature receive their
consecration when that creature adopts the same point of view as ourself
in judging one of our imperfections. And among these special traits
there were others, besides, which belonged as much to his intellect as
to his character, which, all the same, because they had their roots in
the latter, Odette had been able more easily to discern. She complained
that when Swann turned author, when he published his essays, these
characteristics were not to be found in them as they were in his
letters, or in his conversation, where they abounded. She urged him to
give them a more prominent place. She would have liked that because it
was these things that she herself preferred in him, but since she
preferred them because they were the things most typical of himself, she
was perhaps not wrong in wishing that they might be found in his
writings. Perhaps also she thought that his work, if endowed with more
vitality, so that it ultimately brought him success, might enable her
also to form what at the Verdurins' she had been taught to value above
everything else in the world--a salon.

Among the people to whom this sort of marriage appeared ridiculous,
people who in their own case would ask themselves, "What will M. de
Guermantes think, what will Bréauté say when I marry Mlle. de
Montmorency?", among the people who cherished that sort of social ideal
would have figured, twenty years earlier, Swann himself, the Swann who
had taken endless pains to get himself elected to the Jockey Club, and
had reckoned at that time on making a brilliant marriage which, by
consolidating his position, would have made him one of the most
conspicuous figures in Paris. Only, the visions which a marriage like
that suggests to the mind of the interested party need, like all
visions, if they are not to fade away and be altogether lost, to receive
sustenance from without. Your most ardent longing is to humiliate the
man who has insulted you. But if you never hear of him again, having
removed to some other place, your enemy will come to have no longer the
slightest importance for you. If one has lost sight for a score of years
of all the people on whose account one would have liked to be elected to
the Jockey Club or the Institute, the prospect of becoming a member of
one or other of those corporations will have ceased to tempt one. Now
fully as much as retirement, ill-health or religious conversion,
protracted relations with a woman will substitute fresh visions for the
old. There was not on Swann's part, when he married Odette, any
renunciation of his social ambitions, for from these ambitions Odette
had long ago, in the spiritual sense of the word, detached him. Besides,
had he not been so detached, his marriage would have been all the more
creditable. It is because they imply the sacrifice of a more or less
advantageous position to a purely private happiness that, as a general
rule, "impossible" marriages are the happiest of all. (One cannot very
well include among the "impossible" marriages those that are made for
money, there being no instance on record of a couple, of whom the wife
or even the husband has thus sold himself, who have not sooner or later
been admitted into society, if only by tradition, and on the strength of
so many precedents, and so as not to have two conflicting standards.)
Perhaps, on the other hand, the artistic, if not the perverse side of
Swann's nature would in any event have derived a certain amount of
pleasure from coupling with himself, in one of those crossings of
species such as Mendelians practise and mythology records, a creature of
a different race, archduchess or prostitute, from contracting a royal
alliance or from marrying beneath him. There had been but one person in
all the world whose opinion he took into consideration whenever he
thought of his possible marriage with Odette; that was, and from no
snobbish motive, the Duchesse de Guermantes. With whom Odette, on the
contrary, was but little concerned, thinking only of those people whose
position was immediately above her own, rather than in so vague an
empyrean. But when Swann in his daydreams saw Odette as already his wife
he invariably formed a picture of the moment in which he would take
her--her, and above all her daughter--to call upon the Princesse des
Laumes (who was shortly, on the death of her father-in-law, to become
Duchesse de Guermantes). He had no desire to introduce them anywhere
else, but his heart would soften as he invented--uttering their actual
words to himself--all the things that the Duchess would say of him to
Odette, and Odette to the Duchess, the affection that she would shew for
Gilberte, spoiling her, making him proud of his child. He enacted to
himself the scene of this introduction with the same precision in each
of its imaginary details that people shew when they consider how they
would spend, supposing they were to win it, a lottery prize the amount
of which they have arbitrarily determined. In so far as a mental picture
which accompanies one of our resolutions may be said to be its motive,
so it might be said that if Swann married Odette it was in order to
present her and Gilberte, without anyone's else being present, without,
if need be, anyone's else ever coming to know of it, to the Duchesse de
Guermantes. We shall see how this sole social ambition that he had
entertained for his wife and daughter was precisely that one the
realisation of which proved to be forbidden him by a veto so absolute
that Swann died in the belief that the Duchess would never possibly come
to know them. We shall see also that, on the contrary, the Duchesse de
Guermantes did associate with Odette and Gilberte after the death of
Swann. And doubtless he would have been wiser--seeing that he could
attach so much importance to so small a matter--not to have formed too
dark a picture of the future, in this connexion, but to have consoled
himself with the hope that the meeting of the ladies might indeed take
place when he was no longer there to enjoy it. The laborious process of
causation which sooner or later will bring about every possible effect,
including (consequently) those which one had believed to be most nearly
impossible, naturally slow at times, is rendered slower still by our
impatience (which in seeking to accelerate only obstructs it) and by our
very existence, and comes to fruition only when we have ceased to desire
it--have ceased, possibly, to live. Was not Swann conscious of this from
his own experience, had there not been already, in his life, as it were
a prefiguration of what was to happen after his death, a posthumous
happiness in this marriage with this Odette whom he had passionately
loved--even if she had not been pleasing to him at first sight--whom he
had married when he no longer loved her, when the creature that, in
Swann, had so longed to live, had so despaired of living all its life in
company with Odette, when that creature was extinct?

I began next to speak of the Comte de Paris, to ask whether he was not
one of Swann's friends, for I was afraid lest the conversation should
drift away from him. "Why, yes!" replied M. de Norpois, turning towards
me and fixing upon my modest person the azure gaze in which floated, as
in their vital element, his immense capacity for work and his power of
assimilation. And "Upon my word," he added, once more addressing my
father, "I do not think that I shall be overstepping the bounds of the
respect which I have always professed for the Prince (though without,
you understand, maintaining any personal relations with him, which would
inevitably compromise my position, unofficial as that may be), if I tell
you of a little episode which is not without point; no more than four
years ago, at a small railway station in one of the countries of Central
Europe, the Prince happened to set eyes on Mme. Swann. Naturally, none
of his circle ventured to ask his Royal Highness what he thought of her.
That would not have been seemly. But when her name came up by chance in
conversation, by certain signs--imperceptible, if you like, but quite
unmistakable--the Prince appeared willing enough to let it be understood
that his impression of her had, in a word, been far from unfavourable."

"But there could have been no possibility, surely, of her being
presented to the Comte de Paris?" inquired my father.

"Well, we don't know; with Princes one never does know," replied M. de
Norpois. "The most exalted, those who know best how to secure what is
due to them, are as often as not the last to let themselves be
embarrassed by the decrees of popular opinion, even by those for which
there is most justification, especially when it is a question of their
rewarding a personal attachment to themselves. Now it is certain that
the Comte de Paris has always most graciously recognised the devotion of
Swann, who is, for that matter, a man of character, in spite of it all."

"And what was your own impression, your Excellency? Do tell us!" my
mother asked, from politeness as well as from curiosity.

All the energy of the old connoisseur broke through the habitual
moderation of his speech as he answered: "Quite excellent!"

And knowing that the admission that a strong impression has been made on
one by a woman takes its place, provided that one makes it in a playful
tone, in a certain category of the art of conversation that is highly
appreciated, he broke into a little laugh that lasted for several
seconds, moistening the old diplomat's blue eyes and making his
nostrils, with their network of tiny scarlet veins, quiver. "She is
altogether charming!"

"Was there a writer of the name of Bergotte at this dinner, sir?" I
asked timidly, still trying to keep the conversation to the subject of
the Swanns.

"Yes, Bergotte was there," replied M. de Norpois, inclining his head
courteously towards me, as though in his desire to be pleasant to my
father he attached to everything connected with him a real importance,
even to the questions of a boy of my age who was not accustomed to see
such politeness shewn to him by persons of his. "Do you know him?" he
went on, fastening on me that clear gaze, the penetration of which had
won the praise of Bismarck.

"My son does not know him, but he admires his work immensely," my mother
explained.

"Good heavens!" exclaimed M. de Norpois, inspiring me with doubts of my
own intelligence far more serious than those that ordinarily distracted
me, when I saw that what I valued a thousand times more than myself,
what I regarded as the most exalted thing in the world, was for him at
the very foot of the scale of admiration. "I do not share your son's
point of view. Bergotte is what I call a flute-player: one must admit
that he plays on it very agreeably, although with a great deal of
mannerism, of affectation. But when all is said, it is no more than
that, and that is nothing very great. Nowhere does one find in his
enervated writings anything that could be called construction. No
action--or very little--but above all no range. His books fail at the
foundation, or rather they have no foundation at all. At a time like the
present, when the ever increasing complexity of life leaves one scarcely
a moment for reading, when the map of Europe has undergone radical
alterations, and is on the eve, very probably, of undergoing others more
drastic still, when so many new and threatening problems are arising on
every side, you will allow me to suggest that one is entitled to ask
that a writer should be something else than a fine intellect which makes
us forget, amid otiose and byzantine discussions of the merits of pure
form, that we may be overwhelmed at any moment by a double tide of
barbarians, those from without and those from within our borders. I am
aware that this is a blasphemy against the sacrosanct school of what
these gentlemen term 'Art for Art's sake', but at this period of history
there are tasks more urgent than the manipulation of words in a
harmonious manner. Not that Bergotte's manner is not now and then quite
attractive. I have no fault to find with that, but taken as a whole, it
is all very precious, very thin, and has very little virility. I can now
understand more easily, when I bear in mind your altogether excessive
regard for Bergotte, the few lines that you shewed me just now, which it
would have been unfair to you not to overlook, since you yourself told
me, in all simplicity, that they were merely a childish scribbling." (I
had, indeed, said so, but I did not think anything of the sort.) "For
every sin there is forgiveness, and especially for the sins of youth.
After all, others as well as yourself have such sins upon their
conscience, and you are not the only one who has believed himself to be
a poet in his day. But one can see in what you have shewn me the evil
influence of Bergotte. You will not, of course, be surprised when I say
that there was in it none of his good qualities, since he is a
past-master in the art--incidentally quite superficial--of handling a
certain style of which, at your age, you cannot have acquired even the
rudiments. But already there is the same fault, that paradox of
stringing together fine-sounding words and only afterwards troubling
about what they mean. That is putting the cart before the horse, even in
Bergotte's books. All those Chinese puzzles of form, all these
deliquescent mandarin subtleties seem to me to be quite futile. Given a
few fireworks, let off prettily enough by an author, and up goes the
shout of genius. Works of genius are not so common as all that! Bergotte
cannot place to his credit--does not carry in his baggage, if I may use
the expression--a single novel that is at all lofty in its conception,
any of those books which one keeps in a special corner of one's library.
I do not discover one such in the whole of his work. But that does not
exclude the fact that, with him, the work is infinitely superior to the
author. Ah! there is a man who justifies the wit who insisted that one
ought never to know an author except through his books. It would be
impossible to imagine an individual who corresponded less to his--more
pretentious, more pompous, less fitted for human society. Vulgar at some
moments, at others talking like a book, and not even like one of his
own, but like a boring book, which his, to do them justice, are
not--such is your Bergotte. He has the most confused mind, alembicated,
what our ancestors called a _diseur de phébus_, and he makes the things
that he says even more unpleasant by the manner in which he says them. I
forget for the moment whether it is Loménie or Sainte-Beuve who tells
us that Vigny repelled people by the same eccentricity. But Bergotte has
never given us a _Cinq-Mars_, or a _Cachet Rouge_, certain pages of
which are regular anthology pieces."

Paralysed by what M. de Norpois had just said to me with regard to the
fragment which I had submitted to him, and remembering at the same time
the difficulties that I experienced when I attempted to write an essay
or merely to devote myself to serious thought, I felt conscious once
again of my intellectual nullity and that I was not born for a literary
life. Doubtless in the old days at Combray certain impressions of a very
humble order, or a few pages of Bergotte used to plunge me into a state
of musing which had appeared to me to be of great value. But this state
was what my poem in prose reflected; there could be no doubt that M. de
Norpois had at once grasped and had seen through the fallacy of what I
had discovered to be beautiful simply by a mirage that must be entirely
false since the Ambassador had not been taken in by it. He had shewn me,
on the other hand, what an infinitely unimportant place was mine when I
was judged from outside, objectively, by the best-disposed and most
intelligent of experts. I felt myself to be struck speechless,
overwhelmed; and my mind, like a fluid which is without dimensions save
those of the vessel that is provided for it, just as it had been
expanded a moment ago so as to fill all the vast capacity of genius,
contracted now was entirely contained in the straitened mediocrity in
which M. de Norpois had of a sudden enclosed and sealed it.

"Our first introduction--I speak of Bergotte and myself----" he resumed,
turning to my father, "was somewhat beset with thorns (which is, after
all, only another way of saying that it was not lacking in points).
Bergotte--some years ago, now--paid a visit to Vienna while I was
Ambassador there; he was presented to me by the Princess Metternich,
came and wrote his name, and expected to be asked to the Embassy. Now,
being in a foreign country as the Representative of France, to which he
has after all done some honour by his writings, to a certain extent (let
us say, to be quite accurate, to a very slight extent), I was prepared
to set aside the unfavourable opinion that I hold of his private life.
But he was not travelling alone, and he actually let it be understood
that he was not to be invited without his companion. I trust that I am
no more of a prude than most men, and, being a bachelor, I was perhaps
in a position to throw open the doors of the Embassy a little wider than
if I had been married and the father of a family. Nevertheless, I must
admit that there are depths of degradation to which I should hesitate to
descend, while these are rendered more repulsive still by the tone, not
moral, merely--let us be quite frank and say moralising,--that Bergotte
takes up in his books, where one finds nothing but perpetual and,
between ourselves, somewhat wearisome analyses, torturing scruples,
morbid remorse, and all for the merest peccadilloes, the most trivial
naughtinesses (as one knows from one's own experience), while all the
time he is shewing such an utter lack of conscience and so much cynicism
in his private life. To cut a long story short, I evaded the
responsibility, the Princess returned to the charge, but without
success. So that I do not suppose that I appear exactly in the odour of
sanctity to the gentleman, and I am not sure how far he appreciated
Swann's kindness in inviting him and myself on the same evening. Unless
of course it was he who asked for the invitation. One can never tell,
for really he is not normal. Indeed that is his sole excuse."

"And was Mme. Swann's daughter at the dinner?" I asked M. de Norpois,
taking advantage, to put this question, of a moment in which, as we all
moved towards the drawing-room, I could more easily conceal my emotion
than would have been possible at table, where I was held fast in the
glare of the lamplight.

M. de Norpois appeared to be trying for a moment to remember: then,
"Yes, you mean a young person of fourteen or fifteen? Yes, of course, I
remember now that she was introduced to me before dinner as the daughter
of our Amphitryon. I may tell you that I saw but little of her; she
retired to bed early. Or else she went out to see a friend--I forget.
But I can see that you are very intimate with the Swann household."

"I play with Mlle. Swann in the Champs-Elysées, and she is delightful."

"Oh! so that is it, is it? But I assure you, I thought her charming. I
must confess to you, however, that I do not believe that she will ever
be anything like her mother, if I may say as much without wounding you
in a vital spot."

"I prefer Mlle. Swann's face, but I admire her mother, too, enormously;
I go for walks in the Bois simply in the hope of seeing her pass."

"Ah! But I must tell them that; they will be highly flattered."

While he was uttering these words, and for a few seconds after he had
uttered them, M. de Norpois was still in the same position as anyone
else who, hearing me speak of Swann as an intelligent man, of his family
as respectable stockbrokers, of his house as a fine house, imagined that
I would speak just as readily of another man equally intelligent, of
other stockbrokers equally respectable, of another house equally fine;
it was the moment in which a sane man who is talking to a lunatic has
not yet perceived that his companion is mad. M. de Norpois knew that
there was nothing unnatural in the pleasure which one derived from
looking at pretty women, that it was a social convention, when anyone
spoke to you of a pretty woman with any fervour, to pretend to think
that he was in love with her, and to promise to further his designs. But
in saying that he would speak of me to Gilberte and her mother (which
would enable me, like an Olympian deity who has taken on the fluidity of
a breath of wind, or rather the aspect of the old greybeard whose form
Minerva borrows, to penetrate, myself, unseen, into Mme. Swann's
drawing-room, to attract her attention, to occupy her thoughts, to
arouse her gratitude for my admiration, to appear before her as the
friend of an important person, to seem to her worthy to be invited by
her in the future and to enter into the intimate life of her family),
this important person who was going to make use, in my interests, of the
great influence which he must have with Mme. Swann inspired in me
suddenly an affection so compelling that I had difficulty in restraining
myself from kissing his gentle hands, white and crumpled, which looked
as though they had been left lying too long in water. I even sketched in
the air an outline of that impulsive movement, but this I supposed that
I alone had observed. For it is difficult for any of us to calculate
exactly on what scale his words or his gestures are apparent to others.
Partly from the fear of exaggerating our own importance, and also
because we enlarge to enormous proportions the field over which the
impressions formed by other people in the course of their lives are
obliged to extend, we imagine that the accessories of our speech and
attitudes scarcely penetrate the consciousness, still less remain in the
memory of those with whom we converse. It is, we may suppose, to a
prompting of this sort that criminals yield when they "touch up" the
wording of a statement already made, thinking that the new variant
cannot be confronted with any existing version. But it is quite possible
that, even in what concerns the millennial existence of the human race,
the philosophy of the journalist, according to which everything is
destined to oblivion, is less true than a contrary philosophy which
would predict the conservation of everything. In the same newspaper in
which the moralist of the "Paris column" says to us of an event, of a
work of art, all the more forcibly of a singer who has enjoyed her
"crowded hour": "Who will remember this in ten years' time?" overleaf
does not the report of the Académie des Inscriptions speak often of a
fact, in itself of smaller importance, of a poem of little merit, which
dates from the epoch of the Pharaohs and is now known again in its
entirety? Is it not, perhaps, just the same in our brief life on earth?
And yet, some years later, in a house in which M. de Norpois, who was
also calling there, had seemed to me the most solid support that I could
hope to find, because he was the friend of my father, indulgent,
inclined to wish us all well, and besides, by his profession and
upbringing, trained to discretion, when, after the Ambassador had gone,
I was told that he had alluded to an evening long ago when he had seen
the moment in which I was just going to kiss his hands, not only did I
colour up to the roots of my hair but I was stupefied to learn how
different from all that I had believed were not only the manner in which
M. de Norpois spoke of me but also the constituents of his memory: this
tittle-tattle enlightened me as to the incalculable proportions of
absence and presence of mind, of recollection and forgetfulness which go
to form the human intelligence; and I was as marvellously surprised as
on the day on which I read for the first time, in one of Maspero's
books, that we had an exact list of the sportsmen whom Assurbanipal used
to invite to his hunts, a thousand years before the Birth of Christ.

"Oh, sir," I assured M. de Norpois, when he told me that he would inform
Gilberte and her mother how much I admired them, "if you would do that,
if you would speak of me to Mme. Swann, my whole life would not be long
enough for me to prove my gratitude, and that life would be all at your
service. But I feel bound to point out to you that I do not know Mme.
Swann, and that I have never been introduced to her."

I had added these last words from a scruple of conscience, and so as not
to appear to be boasting of an acquaintance which I did not possess. But
while I was uttering them I felt that they were already superfluous, for
from the beginning of my speech of thanks, with its chilling ardour, I
had seen flitting across the face of the Ambassador an expression of
hesitation and dissatisfaction, and in his eyes that vertical, narrow,
slanting look (like, in the drawing of a solid body in perspective, the
receding line of one of its surfaces), that look which one addresses to
the invisible audience whom one has within oneself at the moment when
one is saying something that one's other audience, the person whom one
has been addressing--myself, in this instance--is not meant to hear. I
realised in a flash that these phrases which I had pronounced, which,
feeble as they were when measured against the flood of gratitude that
was coursing through me, had seemed to me bound to touch M. de Norpois
and to confirm his decision upon an intervention which would have given
him so little trouble and me so much joy, were perhaps (out of all those
that could have been chosen, with diabolical malice, by persons anxious
to do me harm) the only ones that could result in making him abandon his
intention. Indeed, when he heard me speak, just as at the moment when a
stranger with whom we have been exchanging--quite pleasantly--our
impressions, which we might suppose to be similar to his, of the
passers-by, whom we have agreed in regarding as vulgar, reveals suddenly
the pathological abyss that divides him from us by adding carelessly, as
he runs his hand over his pocket: "What a pity, I haven't got my
revolver here; I could have picked off the lot!" M. de Norpois, who knew
that nothing was less costly or more easy than to be commended to Mme.
Swann and taken to her house, and saw that to me, on the contrary, such
favours bore so high a price and were consequently, no doubt, of great
difficulty, thought that the desire, apparently normal, which I had
expressed must cloak some different thought, some suspect intention,
some pre-existent fault, on account of which, in the certainty of
displeasing Mme. Swann, no one hitherto had been willing to undertake
the responsibility for conveying a message to her from me. And I
understood that this office was one which he would never discharge, that
he might see Mme. Swann daily, for years to come, without ever
mentioning my name. He did indeed ask her, a few days later, for some
information which I required, and charged my father to convey it to me.
But he had not thought it his duty to tell her at whose instance he was
inquiring. So she would never discover that I knew M. de Norpois and
that I hoped so greatly to be asked to her house; and this was perhaps a
less misfortune than I supposed. For the second of these discoveries
would probably not have added much to the efficacy, in any event
uncertain, of the first. In Odette the idea of her own life and of her
home awakened no mysterious disturbance; a person who knew her, who came
to see her, did not seem to her a fabulous creature such as he seemed to
me who would have flung a stone through Swann's windows if I could have
written upon it that I knew M. de Norpois; I was convinced that such a
message, even when transmitted in so brutal a fashion, would have done
far more to exalt me in the eyes of the lady of the house than it would
have prejudiced her against me. But even if I had been capable of
understanding that the mission which M. de Norpois did not perform must
have remained futile, nay, more than that, might even have damaged my
credit with the Swanns, I should not have had the courage, had he shewn
himself consenting, to release the Ambassador from it, and to renounce
the pleasure--however fatal its consequences might prove--of feeling
that my name and my person were thus brought for a moment into
Gilberte's presence, in her unknown life and home.

After M. de Norpois had gone my father cast an eye over the evening
paper; I dreamed once more of Berma. The pleasure which I had found in
listening to her required to be made complete, all the more because it
had fallen far short of what I had promised myself; and so it at once
assimilated everything that was capable of giving it nourishment, those
merits, for instance, which M. de Norpois had admitted that Berma
possessed, and which my mind had absorbed at one draught, like a dry
lawn when water is poured on it. Then my father handed me the newspaper,
pointing me out a paragraph which ran more or less as follows:--


The performance of _Phèdre_, given this afternoon before an
enthusiastic audience, which included the foremost representatives of
society and the arts, as well as the principal critics, was for Mme.
Berma, who played the heroine, the occasion of a triumph as brilliant as
any that she has known in the course of her phenomenal career. We shall
discuss more fully in a later issue this performance, which is indeed an
event in the history of the stage; for the present we need only add that
the best qualified judges are unanimous in the pronouncement that such
an interpretation sheds an entirely new light on the part of Phèdre,
which is one of the finest and most studied of Racine's creations, and
that it constitutes the purest and most exalted manifestation of
dramatic art which it has been the privilege of our generation to
witness.


Immediately my mind had conceived this new idea of "the purest and most
exalted manifestation of dramatic art", it, the idea, sped to join the
imperfect pleasure which I had felt in the theatre, added to it a little
of what was lacking, and their combination formed something so exalting
that I cried out within myself: "What a great artist!" It may doubtless
be argued that I was not absolutely sincere. But let us bear in mind,
rather, the numberless writers who, dissatisfied with the page which
they have just written, if they read some eulogy of the genius of
Chateaubriand, or evoke the spirit of some great artist whose equal they
aspire to be, by humming to themselves, for instance, a phrase of
Beethoven, the melancholy of which they compare with what they have been
trying to express in prose, are so filled with that idea of genius that
they add it to their own productions, when they think of them once
again, see them no longer in the light in which at first they appeared,
and, hazarding an act of faith in the value of their work, say to
themselves: "After all!" without taking into account that, into the
total which determines their ultimate satisfaction, they have introduced
the memory of marvellous pages of Chateaubriand which they assimilate to
their own, but of which, in cold fact, they are not the authors; let us
bear in mind the numberless men who believe in the love of a mistress on
the evidence only of her betrayals; all those, too, who are sustained by
the alternative hopes, either of an incomprehensible survival of death,
when they think, inconsolable husbands, of the wives whom they have lost
but have not ceased to love, or, artists, of the posthumous glory which
they may thus enjoy; or else the hope of complete extinction which
comforts them when their thoughts turn to the misdeeds that otherwise
they must his own meditation, which do not appear to him to be of great
value since he does not separate them from himself, oblige a publisher
to choose a kind of paper, to employ a fount of type finer, perhaps,
than they deserve, I asked myself whether my desire to write was of
sufficient importance to justify my father in dispensing so much
generosity. But apart from that, when he spoke of my inclinations as no
longer liable to change, he awakened in me two terrible suspicions. The
first was that (at a time when, every day, I regarded myself as standing
upon the threshold of a life which was still intact and would not enter
upon its course until the following morning) my existence was already
begun, and that, furthermore, what was yet to follow would not differ to
any extent from what had already elapsed. The second suspicion, which
was nothing more, really, than a variant of the first, was that I was
not situated somewhere outside the realm of Time, but was subject to its
laws, just like the people in novels who, for that reason, used to
plunge me in such depression when I read of their lives, down at
Combray, in the fastness of my wicker sentry-box. In theory one is aware
that the earth revolves, but in practice one does not perceive it, the
ground upon which one treads seems not to move, and one can live
undisturbed. So it is with Time in one's life. And to make its flight
perceptible novelists are obliged, by wildly accelerating the beat of
the pendulum, to transport the reader in a couple of minutes over ten,
or twenty, or even thirty years. At the top of one page we have left a
lover full of hope; at the foot of the next we meet him again, a bowed
old man of eighty, painfully dragging himself on his daily walk about
the courtyard of an almshouse, scarcely replying to what is said to him,
oblivious of the past. In saying of me, "He is no longer a child", "His
tastes will not change now", and so forth, my father had suddenly made
me apparent to myself in my position in Time, and caused me the same
kind of depression as if I had been, not yet the enfeebled old
pensioner, but one of those heroes of whom the author, in a tone of
indifference which is particularly galling, says to us at the end of a
book: "He very seldom comes up now from the country. He has finally
decided to end his days there."

Meanwhile my father, so as to forestall any criticism that we might feel
tempted to make of our guest, said to my mother: "Upon my word, old
Norpois was rather 'typical', as you call it, this evening, wasn't he?
When he said that it would not have been 'seemly' to ask the Comte de
Paris a question, I was quite afraid you would burst out laughing."

"Not at all!" answered my mother. "I was delighted to see a man of his
standing, and age too, keep that sort of simplicity, which is really a
sign of straightforwardness and good-breeding."

"I should think so, indeed! That does not prevent his having a shrewd
and discerning mind; I know him well, I see him at the Commission,
remember, where he is very different from what he was here," exclaimed
my father, who was glad to see that Mamma appreciated M. de Norpois, and
anxious to persuade her that he was even superior to what she supposed,
because a cordial nature exaggerates a friend's qualities with as much
pleasure as a mischievous one finds in depreciating them. "What was it
that he said, again--'With Princes one never does know.' . . .?"

"Yes, that was it. I noticed it at the time; it was very neat. You can
see that he has a vast experience of life."

"The astonishing thing is that he should have been dining with the
Swanns, and that he seems to have found quite respectable people there,
officials even. How on earth can Mme. Swann have managed to catch them?"

"Did you notice the malicious way he said: 'It is a house which is
especially attractive to gentlemen!'?"

And each of them attempted to reproduce the manner in which M. de
Norpois had uttered these words, as they might have attempted to capture
some intonation of Bressant's voice or of Thiron's in _L'Aventurière_
or in the _Gendre de M. Poirier._ But of all his sayings there was none
so keenly relished as one was by Françoise, who, years afterwards,
even, could not "keep a straight face" if we reminded her that she had
been qualified by the Ambassador as "a chef of the first order", a
compliment which my mother had gone in person to transmit to her, as a
War Minister publishes the congratulations addressed to him by a
visiting Sovereign after the grand review. I, as it happened, had
preceded my mother to the kitchen. For I had extorted from Françoise,
who though opposed to war was cruel, that she would cause no undue
suffering to the rabbit which she had to kill, and I had had no report
yet of its death. Françoise assured me that it had passed away as
peacefully as could be desired, and very swiftly. "I have never seen a
beast like it; it died without uttering a word; you would have thought
it was dumb." Being but little versed in the language of beasts I
suggested that the rabbit had not, perhaps, a cry like the chicken's.
"Just wait till you see," said Françoise, filled with contempt for my
ignorance, "if rabbits don't cry every bit as much as chickens. Why,
they are far noisier." She received the compliments of M. de Norpois
with the proud simplicity, the joyful and (if but for the moment)
intelligent expression of an artist when someone speaks to him of his
art. My mother had sent her when she first came to us to several of the
big restaurants to see how the cooking there was done. I had the same
pleasure, that evening, in hearing her dismiss the most famous of them
as mere cookshops that I had had long ago, when I learned with regard to
theatrical artists that the hierarchy of their merits did not at all
correspond to that of their reputations. "The Ambassador," my mother
told her, "assured me that he knows no place where he can get cold beef
and _soufflés_ as good as yours." Françoise, with an air of modesty
and of paying just homage to the truth, agreed, but seemed not at all
impressed by the title "Ambassador"; she said of M. de Norpois, with the
friendliness due to a man who had taken her for a chef: "He's a good old
soul, like me." She had indeed hoped to catch sight of him as he
arrived, but knowing that Mamma hated their standing about behind doors
and in windows, and thinking that Mamma would get to know from the other
servants or from the porter that she had been keeping watch (for
Françoise saw everywhere nothing but "jealousies" and "tale-bearings",
which played the same grim and unending part in her imagination as do
for others of us the intrigues of the Jesuits or the Jews), she had
contented herself with a peep from the kitchen window, "so as not to
have words with Madame," and beneath the momentary aspect of M. de
Norpois had "thought it was Monsieur Legrand," because of what she
called his "agelity" and in spite of their having not a single point in
common. "Well," inquired my mother, "and how do you explain that nobody
else can make a jelly as well as you--when you choose?" "I really
couldn't say how that becomes about," replied Françoise, who had
established no very clear line of demarcation between the verb "to
come", in certain of its meanings at least, and the verb "to become".
She was speaking the truth, if not the whole truth, being scarcely more
capable--or desirous--of revealing the mystery which ensured the
superiority of her jellies or her creams than a leader of fashion the
secrets of her toilet or a great singer those of her song. Their
explanations tell us little; it was the same with the recipes furnished
by our cook. "They do it in too much of a hurry," she went on, alluding
to the great restaurants, "and then it's not all done together. You want
the beef to become like a sponge, then it will drink up all the juice to
the last drop. Still, there was one of those Cafés where I thought they
did know a little bit about cooking. I don't say it was altogether my
jelly, but it was very nicely done, and the _soufflés_ had plenty of
cream." "Do you mean Henry's?" asked my father (who had now joined us),
for he greatly enjoyed that restaurant in the Place Gaillon where he
went regularly to club dinners. "Oh, dear no!" said Françoise, with a
mildness which cloaked her profound contempt. "I meant a little
restaurant. At that Henry's it's all very good, sure enough, but it's
not a restaurant, it's more like a--soup-kitchen." "Weber's, then?" "Oh,
no, sir, I meant a good restaurant. Weber's, that's in the Rue Royale;
that's not a restaurant, it's a drinking-shop. I don't know that the
food they give you there is even served. I think they don't have' any
table-cloths; they just shove it down in front of you like that, with a
take it or leave it." "Ciro's?" "Oh! there I should say they have the
cooking done by ladies of the world." ("World" meant for Françoise the
under-world.) "Lord! They need that to fetch the boys in." We could see
that, with all her air of simplicity, Françoise was for the celebrities
of her profession a more disastrous "comrade" than the most jealous, the
most infatuated of actresses. We felt, all the same, that she had a
proper feeling for her art and a respect for tradition; for she went on:
"No, I mean a restaurant where they looked as if they kept a very good
little family table. It's a place of some consequence, too. Plenty of
custom there. Oh, they raked in the coppers there, all right."
Françoise, being an economist, reckoned in coppers, where your plunger
would reckon in gold. "Madame knows the place well enough, down there to
the right along the main boulevards, a little way back." The restaurant
of which she spoke with this blend of pride and good-humoured tolerance
was, it turned out, the Café Anglais.

When New Year's Day came, I first of all paid a round of family visits
with Mamma who, so as not to tire me, had planned them beforehand (with
the aid of an itinerary drawn up by my father) according to districts
rather than to degrees of kinship. But no sooner had we entered the
drawing-room of the distant cousin whose claim to being visited first
was that her house was at no distance from ours, than my mother was
horrified to see standing there, his present of _marrons glacés_ or
_déguisés_ in his hand, the bosom friend of the most sensitive of all
my uncles, to whom he would at once go and report that we had not begun
our round with him. And this uncle would certainly be hurt; he would
have thought it quite natural that we should go from the Madeleine to
the Jardin des Plantes, where he lived, before stopping at
Saint-Augustin, on our way to the Rue de l'Ecole de Médecine.

Our visits ended (my grandmother had dispensed us from the duty of
calling on her, since we were to dine there that evening), I ran all the
way to the Champs-Elysées to give to our own special stall-keeper, with
instructions to hand it over to the person who came to her several times
a week from the Swanns to buy gingerbread, the letter which, on the day
when my friend had caused me so much anxiety, I had decided to send her
at the New Year, and in which I told her that our old friendship was
vanishing with the old year, that I would forget, now, my old sorrows
and disappointments, and that, from this first day of January, it was a
new friendship that we were going to cement, one so solid that nothing
could destroy it, so wonderful that I hoped that Gilberte would go out
of her way to preserve it in all its beauty, and to warn me in time, as
I promised to warn her, should either of us detect the least sign of a
peril that might endanger it. On our way home Françoise made me stop at
the corner of the Rue Royale, before an open air stall from which she
selected for her own stock of presents photographs of Pius IX and
Raspail, while for myself I purchased one of Berma. The innumerable
admiration which that artist excited gave an air almost of poverty to
this one face that she had to respond with, unalterable and precarious
as are the garments of people who have not a "change", this face on
which she must continually expose to view only the tiny dimple upon her
upper lip, the arch of her eyebrows, a few other physical peculiarities
always the same, which, when it came to that, were at the mercy of a
burn or a blow. This face, moreover, could not in itself have seemed to
me beautiful, but it gave me the idea, and consequently the desire to
kiss it by reason of all the kisses that it must have received, for
which, from its page in the album, it seemed still to be appealing with
that coquettishly tender gaze, that artificially ingenuous smile. For
our Berma must indeed have felt for many young men those longings which
she confessed under cover of the personality of Phaedra, longings of
which everything, even the glamour of her name which enhanced her beauty
and prolonged her youth, must render the gratification so easy to her.
Night was falling; I stopped before a column of playbills, on which was
posted that of the piece in which she was to appear on January I. A
moist and gentle breeze was blowing. It was a time of day and year that
I knew; I suddenly felt a presentiment that New Year's Day was not a day
different from the rest, that it was not the first day of a new world,
in which I might, by a chance that had never yet occurred, that was
still intact, make Gilberte's acquaintance afresh, as at the Creation of
the World, as though the past had no longer any existence, as though
there had been obliterated, with the indications which I might have
preserved for my future guidance, the disappointments which she had
sometimes brought me; a new world in which nothing should subsist from
the old--save one thing, my desire that Gilberte should love me. I
realised that if my heart hoped for such a reconstruction, round about
it, of a universe that had not satisfied it before, it was because my
heart had not altered, and I told myself that there was no reason why
Gilberte's should have altered either; I felt that this new friendship
was the same, just as there is no boundary ditch between their
fore-runners and those new years which our desire for them, without
being able to reach and so to modify them, invests, unknown to
themselves, with distinctive names. I might dedicate this new year, if I
chose, to Gilberte, and as one bases a religious system upon the blind
laws of nature, endeavour to stamp New Year's Day with the particular
image that I had formed of it; but in vain, I felt that it was not aware
that people called it New Year's Day, that it was passing in a wintry
dusk in a manner that was not novel to me; in the gentle breeze that
floated about the column of playbills I had recognised, I had felt
reappear the eternal, the universal substance, the familiar moisture,
the unheeding fluidity of the old days and years.

I returned to the house. I had spent the New Year's Day of old men, who
differ on that day from their juniors, not because people have ceased to
give them presents but because they themselves have ceased to believe in
the New Year. Presents I had indeed received, but not that present which
alone could bring me pleasure, namely a line from Gilberte. I was young
still, none the less, since I had been able to write her one, by means
of which I hoped, in telling her of my solitary dreams of love and
longing, to arouse similar dreams in her. The sadness of men who have
grown old lies in their no longer even thinking of writing such letters,
the futility of which their experience has shewn.

After I was in bed, the noises of the street, unduly prolonged upon this
festive evening, kept me awake. I thought of all the people who were
ending the night in pleasure, of the lover, the troop, it might be, of
debauchees who would be going to meet Berma at the stage-door after the
play that I had seen announced for this evening. I was not even able, so
as to calm the agitation which that idea engendered in me during my
sleepless night, to assure myself that Berma was not, perhaps, thinking
about love, since the lines that she was reciting, which she had long
and carefully rehearsed, reminded her at every moment that love is an
exquisite thing, as of course she already knew, and knew so well that
she displayed its familiar pangs--only enriched with a new violence and
an unsuspected sweetness--to her astonished audience; and yet each of
them had felt those pangs himself. I lighted my candle again, to look
once more upon her face. At the thought that it was, no doubt, at that
very moment being caressed by those men whom I could not prevent from
giving to Berma and receiving from her joys superhuman but vague, I felt
an emotion more cruel than voluptuous, a longing that was aggravated
presently by the sound of a horn, as one hears it on the nights of the
Lenten carnival and often of other public holidays, which, because it
then lacks all poetry, is more saddening, coming from a toy squeaker,
than "at evening, in the depth of the woods." At that moment, a message
from Gilberte would perhaps not have been what I wanted. Our desires cut
across one another's paths, and in this confused existence it is but
rarely that a piece of good fortune coincides with the desire that
clamoured for it.

I continued to go to the Champs-Elysées on fine days, along streets
whose stylish pink houses seemed to be washed (because exhibitions of
water-colours were then at the height of fashion) in a lightly floating
atmosphere. It would be untrue to say that in those days the palaces of
Gabriel struck me as being of greater beauty, or even of another epoch
than the adjoining houses. I found more style, and should have supposed
more antiquity if not in the Palais de l'Industrie at any rate in the
Trocadéro. Plunged in a restless sleep, my adolescence embodied in one
uniform vision the whole of the quarter through which it might be
strolling, and I had never dreamed that there could be an eighteenth
century building in the Rue Royale, just as I should have been
astonished to learn that the Porte-Saint-Martin and the
Porte-Saint-Denis, those glories of the age of Louis XIV, were not
contemporary with the most recently built tenements in the sordid
regions that bore their names. Once only one of Gabriel's palaces made
me stop for more than a moment; that was because, night having fallen,
its columns, dematerialised by the moonlight, had the appearance of
having been cut out in pasteboard, and by recalling to me a scene in the
operetta _Orphée aux Enfers_ gave me for the first time an impression
of beauty.

Meanwhile Gilberte never came to the Champs-Elysées. And yet it was
imperative that I should see her, for I could not so much as remember
what she was like. The questing, anxious, exacting way that we have of
looking at the person we love, our eagerness for the word which shall
give us or take from us the hope of an appointment for the morrow, and,
until that word is uttered, our alternative if not simultaneous
imaginings of joy and of despair, all these make our observation, in the
beloved object's presence, too tremulous to be able to carry away a dear
impression of her. Perhaps, also, that activity of all the senses at
once which endeavours to learn from the visible aspect alone what lies
behind it is over-indulgent to the thousand forms, to the changing
fragrance, to the movements of the living person whom as a rule, when we
are not in love, we regard as fixed in one permanent position. Whereas
the beloved model does not stay still; and our mental photographs of her
are always blurred. I did not rightly know how Gilberte's features were
composed, save in the heavenly moments when she disclosed them to me; I
could remember nothing but her smile. And not being able to see again
that beloved face, despite every effort that I might make to recapture
it, I would be disgusted to find, outlined in my memory with a maddening
precision of detail, the meaningless, emphatic faces of the man with the
wooden horses and of the barley-sugar woman; just as those who have lost
a dear friend whom they never see even while they are asleep, are
exasperated at meeting incessantly in their dreams any number of
insupportable creatures whom it is quite enough to have known in the
waking world. In their inability to form any image of the object of
their grief they are almost led to assert that they feel no grief. And I
was not far from believing that, since I could not recall the features
of Gilberte, I had forgotten Gilberte herself, and no longer loved her.
At length she returned to play there almost every day, setting before me
fresh pleasures to desire, to demand of her for the morrow, indeed
making my love for her every day, in this sense, a new love. But an
incident was to change once again, and abruptly, the manner in which, at
about two o'clock every afternoon, the problem of my love confronted me.
Had M. Swann intercepted the letter that I had written to his daughter,
or was Gilberte merely confessing to me long after the event, and so
that I should be more prudent in future, a state of things already long
established? As I was telling her how greatly I admired her father and
mother, she assumed that vague air, full of reticence and kept secrets,
which she invariably wore when anyone spoke to her of what she was going
to do, her walks, drives, visits--then suddenly expressed it with: "You
know, they can't abide you!" and, slipping from me like the Undine that
she was, burst out laughing. Often her laughter, out of harmony with her
words, seemed, as music seems, to be tracing an invisible surface on
another plane. M. and Mme. Swann did not require Gilberte to give up
playing with me, but they would have been just as well pleased, she
thought, if we had never begun. They did not look upon our relations
with a kindly eye; they believed me to be a young person of low moral
standard and imagined that my influence over their daughter must be
evil. This type of unscrupulous young man whom the Swanns thought that I
resembled, I pictured him to myself as detesting the parents of the girl
he loved, flattering them to their faces but, when he was alone with
her, making fun of them, urging her on to disobey them and, when once he
had completed his conquest, not allowing them even to set eyes on her
again. With these characteristics (though they are never those under
which the basest of scoundrels recognises himself) how vehemently did my
heart contrast the sentiments that did indeed animate it with regard to
Swann, so passionate, on the contrary, that I never doubted that, were
he to have the least suspicion of them, he must repent of his
condemnation of me as of a judicial error. All that I felt about him I
made bold to express to him in a long letter which I entrusted to
Gilberte, with the request that she would deliver it. She consented.
Alas! so he saw in me an even greater impostor than I had feared; those
sentiments which I had supposed myself to be portraying, in sixteen
pages, with such amplitude of truth, so he had suspected them; in short,
the letter that I had written him, as ardent and as sincere as the words
that I had uttered to M. de Norpois, met with no more success. Gilberte
told me next day, after taking me aside behind a clump of laurels, along
a little path by which we sat down on a couple of chairs, that as he
read my letter, which she had now brought back to me, her father had
shrugged his shoulders, with: "All this means nothing; it only goes to
prove how right I was." I, who knew the purity of my intentions, the
goodness of my soul, was furious that my words should not even have
impinged upon the surface of Swann's ridiculous error. For it was an
error; of that I had then no doubt. I felt that I had described with
such accuracy certain irrefutable characteristics of my generous
sentiments that, if Swann had not at once reconstructed these from my
indications, had not come to ask my forgiveness and to admit that he had
been mistaken, it must be because these noble sentiments he had never
himself experienced, which would make him incapable of understanding the
existence of them in other people.

Well, perhaps it was simply that Swann knew that generosity is often no
more than the inner aspect which our egotistical feelings assume when we
have not yet named and classified them. Perhaps he had recognised in the
sympathy that I expressed for him simply an effect--and the strongest
possible proof--of my love for Gilberte, by which, and not by any
subordinate veneration of himself, my subsequent actions would be
irresistibly controlled. I was unable to share his point of view, since
I had not succeeded in abstracting my love from myself, in forcing it
back into the common experience of humanity, and thus suffering,
experimentally, its consequences; I was in despair. I was obliged to
leave Gilberte for a moment; Françoise had called me. I must accompany
her into a little pavilion covered in a green trellis, not unlike one of
the disused toll-houses of old Paris, in which had recently been
installed what in England they call a lavatory but in France, by an
ill-informed piece of anglomania, "water-closets". The old, damp walls
at the entrance, where I stood waiting for Françoise, emitted a chill
and fusty smell which, relieving me at once of the anxieties that
Swann's words, as reported by Gilberte, had just awakened in me,
pervaded me with a pleasure not at all of the same character as other
pleasures, which leave one more unstable than before, incapable of
retaining them, of possessing them, but, on the contrary, with a
consistent pleasure on which I could lean for support, delicious,
soothing, rich with a truth that was lasting, unexplained and certain.
I should have liked, as long ago in my walks along the Guermantes way,
to endeavour to penetrate the charm of this impression which had seized
hold of me, and, remaining there motionless, to interrogate this
antiquated emanation which invited me not to enjoy the pleasure which it
was offering me only as an "extra", but to descend into the underlying
reality which it had not yet disclosed to me. But the tenant of the
establishment, an elderly dame with painted cheeks and an auburn wig,
was speaking to me. Françoise thought her "very well-to-do indeed." Her
"missy" had married what Françoise called "a young man of family,"
which meant that he differed more, in her eyes, from a workman than, in
Saint-Simon's, a duke did from a man "risen from the dregs of the
people." No doubt the tenant, before entering upon her tenancy, had met
with reverses. But Françoise was positive that she was a "marquise",
and belonged to the Saint-Ferréol family. This "marquise" warned me not
to stand outside in the cold, and even opened one of her doors for me,
saying: "Won't you go inside for a minute? Look, here's a nice, clean
one, and I shan't charge you anything." Perhaps she just made this offer
in the spirit in which the young ladies at Gouache's, when we went in
there to order something, used to offer me one of the sweets which they
kept on the counter under glass bells, and which, alas, Mamma would
never allow me to take; perhaps with less innocence, like an old florist
whom Mamma used to have in to replenish her flower-stands, who rolled
languishing eyes at me as she handed me a rose. In any event, if the
"marquise" had a weakness for little boys, when she threw open to them
the hypogean doors of those cubicles of stone in which men crouch like
sphinxes, she must have been moved to that generosity less by the hope
of corrupting them than by the pleasure which all of us feel in
displaying a needless prodigality to those whom we love, for I have
never seen her with any other visitor except an old park-keeper.

A moment later I said good-bye to the "marquise", and went out
accompanied by Françoise, whom I left to return to Gilberte. I caught
sight of her at once, on a chair, behind the clump of laurels. She was
there so as not to be seen by her friends: they were playing at
hide-and-seek. I went and sat down by her side. She had on a flat cap
which drooped forwards over her eyes, giving her the same "underhand",
brooding, crafty look which I had remarked in her that first time at
Combray. I asked her if there was not some way for me to have it out
with her father, face to face. Gilberte said that she had suggested that
to him, but that he had not thought it of any use. "Look," she went on,
"don't go away without your letter; I must run along to the others, as
they haven't caught me."

Had Swann appeared on the scene then before I had recovered it, this
letter, by the sincerity of which I felt that he had been so
unreasonable in not letting himself be convinced, perhaps he would have
seen that it was he who had been in the right. For as I approached
Gilberte, who, leaning back in her chair, told me to take the letter but
did not hold it out to me, I felt myself so irresistibly attracted by
her body that I said to her:

"Look! You try to stop me from getting it; we'll see which is the
stronger."

She thrust it behind her back; I put my arms round her neck, raising the
plaits of hair which she wore over her shoulders, either because she was
still of an age for that or because her mother chose to make her look a
child for a little longer so that she herself might still seem young;
and we wrestled, locked together. I tried to pull her towards me, she
resisted; her cheeks, inflamed by the effort, were as red and round as
two cherries; she laughed as though I were tickling her; I held her
gripped between my legs like a young tree which I was trying to climb;
and, in the middle of my gymnastics, when I was already out of breath
with the muscular exercise and the heat of the game, I felt, as it were
a few drops of sweat wrung from me by the effort, my pleasure express
itself in a form which I could not even pause for a moment to analyse;
immediately I snatched the letter from her. Whereupon Gilberte said,
good-naturedly:

"You know, if you like, we might go on wrestling for a little."

Perhaps she was dimly conscious that my game had had another object than
that which I had avowed, but too dimly to have been able to see that I
had attained it. And I, who was afraid that she had seen (and a slight
recoil, as though of offended modesty which she made and checked a
moment later made me think that my fear had not been unfounded), agreed
to go on wrestling, lest she should suppose that I had indeed no other
object than that, after which I wished only to sit quietly by her side.

On my way home I perceived, I suddenly recollected the impression,
concealed from me until then, towards which, without letting me
distinguish or recognise it, the cold, almost sooty smell of the
trellised pavilion had borne me. It was that of my uncle Adolphe's
little sitting-room at Combray, which had indeed exhaled the same odour
of humidity. But I could not understand, and I postponed the attempt to
discover why the recollection of so trivial an impression had given me
so keen a happiness. It struck me, however, that I did indeed deserve
the contempt of M. de Norpois; I had preferred, hitherto, to all other
writers, one whom he styled a mere "flute-player" and a positive rapture
had been conveyed to me, not by any important idea, but by a mouldy
smell.

For some time past, in certain households, the name of the
Champs-Elysées, if a visitor mentioned it, would be greeted by the
mother of the family with that air of contempt which mothers keep for a
physician of established reputation whom they have (or so they make out)
seen make too many false diagnoses to have any faith left in him; people
insisted that these gardens were not good for children, that they knew
of more than one sore throat, more than one case of measles and any
number of feverish chills for which the Champs must be held responsible.
Without venturing openly to doubt the maternal affection of Mamma, who
continued to let me play there, several of her friends deplored her
inability to see what was as plain as daylight.

Neurotic subjects are perhaps less addicted than any, despite the
time-honoured phrase, to "listening to their insides": they can hear so
many things going on inside themselves, by which they realise later that
they did wrong to let themselves be alarmed, that they end by paying no
attention to any of them. Their nervous systems have so often cried out
to them for help, as though from some serious malady, when it was merely
because snow was coming, or because they had to change their rooms, that
they have acquired the habit of paying no more heed to these warnings
than a soldier who in the heat of battle perceives them so little that
he is capable, although dying, of carrying on for some days still the
life of a man in perfect health. One morning, bearing arranged within me
all my regular disabilities, from whose constant, internal circulation I
kept my mind turned as resolutely away as from the circulation of my
blood, I had come running into the dining-room where my parents were
already at table, and--having assured myself, as usual, that to feel
cold may mean not that one ought to warm oneself but that, for instance,
one has received a scolding, and not to feel hungry that it is going to
rain, and not that one ought not to eat anything--had taken my place
between them when, in the act of swallowing the first mouthful of a
particularly tempting cutlet, a nausea, a giddiness stopped me, the
feverish reaction of a malady that had already begun, the symptoms of
which had been masked, retarded by the ice of my indifference, but which
obstinately refused the nourishment that I was not in a fit state to
absorb. Then, at the same moment, the thought that they would stop me
from going out if they saw that I was unwell gave me, as the instinct of
self-preservation gives a wounded man, the strength to crawl to my own
room, where I found that I had a temperature of 104, and then to get
ready to go to the Champs-Elysées. Through the languid and vulnerable
shell which encased them, my eager thoughts were urging me towards, were
clamouring for the soothing delight of a game of prisoner's base with
Gilberte, and an hour later, barely able to keep on my feet, but happy
in being by her side, I had still the strength to enjoy it.

Françoise, on our return, declared that I had been "taken bad", that I
must have caught a "hot and cold", while the doctor, who was called in
at once, declared that he "preferred" the "severity", the "virulence" of
the rush of fever which accompanied my congestion of the lungs, and
would be no more than "a fire of straw", to other forms, more
"insidious" and "septic". For some time now I had been liable to choking
fits, and our doctor, braving the disapproval of my grandmother, who
could see me already dying a drunkard's death, had recommended me to
take, as well as the caffeine which had been prescribed to help me to
breathe, beer, champagne or brandy when I felt an attack coming. These
attacks would subside, he told me, in the "euphoria" brought about by
the alcohol. I was often obliged, so that my grandmother should allow
them to give it to me, instead of dissembling, almost to make a display
of my state of suffocation. On the other hand, as soon as I felt an
attack coming, never being quite certain what proportions it would
assume, I would grow distressed at the thought of my grandmother's
anxiety, of which I was far more afraid than of my own sufferings. But
at the same time my body, either because it was too weak to keep those
sufferings secret, or because it feared lest, in their ignorance of the
imminent disaster, people might demand of me some exertion which it
would have found impossible or dangerous, gave me the need to warn my
grandmother of my attacks with a punctiliousness into which I finally
put a sort of physiological scruple. Did I perceive in myself a
disturbing symptom which I had not previously observed, my body was in
distress so long as I had not communicated it to my grandmother. Did she
pretend to pay no attention, it made me insist. Sometimes I went too
far; and that dear face, which was no longer able always to control its
emotion as in the past, would allow an expression of pity to appear, a
painful contraction. Then my heart was wrung by the sight of her grief;
as if my kisses had had power to expel that grief, as if my affection
could give my grandmother as much joy as my recovery, I flung myself
into her arms. And its scruples being at the same time calmed by the
certainty that she now knew the discomfort that I felt, my body offered
no opposition to my reassuring her. I protested that this discomfort had
been nothing, that I was in no sense to be pitied, that she might be
quite sure that I was now happy; my body had wished to secure exactly
the amount of pity that it deserved, and, provided that someone knew
that it 'had a pain' in its right side, it could see no harm in my
declaring that this pain was of no consequence and was not an obstacle
to my happiness; for my body did not pride itself on its philosophy;
that was outside its province. Almost every day during my convalescence
I passed through these crises of suffocation. One evening, after my
grandmother had left me comparatively well, she returned to my room very
late and, seeing me struggling for breath, "Oh, my poor boy," she
exclaimed, her face quivering with sympathy, "you are in dreadful pain."
She left me at once; I heard the outer gate open, and in a little while
she came back with some brandy which she had gone out to buy, since
there was none in the house. Presently I began to feel better. My
grandmother, who was rather flushed, seemed "put out" about something,
and her eyes had a look of weariness and dejection.

"I shall leave you alone now, and let you get the good of this
improvement," she said, rising suddenly to go. I detained her, however,
for a kiss, and could feel on her cold cheek something moist, but did
not know whether it was the dampness of the night air through which she
had just passed. Next day, she did not come to my room until the
evening, having had, she told me, to go out. I considered that this
shewed a surprising indifference to my welfare, and I had to restrain
myself so as not to reproach her with it.

As my chokings had persisted long after any congestion remained that
could account for them, my parents asked for a consultation with
Professor Cottard. It is not enough that a physician who is called in to
treat cases of this sort should be learned. Brought face to face with
symptoms which may or may not be those of three or four different
complaints, it is in the long run his instinct, his eye that must decide
with which, despite the more or less similar appearance of them all, he
has to deal. This mysterious gift does not imply any superiority in the
other departments of the intellect, and a creature of the utmost
vulgarity, who admires the worst pictures, the worst music, in whose
mind there is nothing out of the common, may perfectly well possess it.
In my case, what was physically evident might equally well have been due
to nervous spasms, to the first stages of tuberculosis, to asthma, to a
toxi-alimentary dyspnoea with renal insufficiency, to chronic
bronchitis, or to a complex state into which more than one of these
factors entered. Now, nervous spasms required to be treated firmly, and
discouraged, tuberculosis with infinite care and with a "feeding-up"
process which would have been bad for an arthritic condition such as
asthma, and might indeed have been dangerous in a case of
toxi-alimentary dyspnoea, this last calling for a strict diet which, in
return, would be fatal to a tuberculous patient. But Cottard's
hesitations were brief and his prescriptions imperious. "Purges; violent
and drastic purges; milk for some days, nothing but milk. No meat. No
alcohol." My mother murmured that I needed, all the same, to be "built
up", that my nerves were already weak, that drenching me like a horse
and restricting my diet would make me worse. I could see in Cottard's
eyes, as uneasy as though he were afraid of missing a train, that he was
asking himself whether he had not allowed his natural good-humour to
appear. He was trying to think whether he had remembered to put on his
mask of coldness, as one looks for a mirror to see whether one has not
forgotten to tie one's tie. In his uncertainty, and, so as, whatever he
had done, to put things right, he replied brutally: "I am not in the
habit of repeating my instructions. Give me a pen. Now remember, milk!
Later on, when we have got the crises and the agrypnia by the throat, I
should like you to take a little clear soup, and then a little broth,
but always with milk; _au lait!_ You'll enjoy that, since Spain is all
the rage just now; _ollé, ollé!_" His pupils knew this joke well, for
he made it at the hospital whenever he had to put a heart or liver case
on a milk diet. "After that, you will gradually return to your normal
life. But whenever there is any coughing or choking--purges, injections,
bed, milk!" He listened with icy calm, and without uttering a word, to
my mother's final objections, and as he left us without having
condescended to explain the reasons for this course of treatment, my
parents concluded that it had no bearing on my case, and would weaken me
to no purpose, and so they did not make me try it. Naturally they sought
to conceal their disobedience from the Professor, and to succeed in this
avoided all the houses in which he was likely to be found. Then, as my
health became worse, they decided to make me follow out Cottard's
prescriptions to the letter; in three days my "rattle" and cough had
ceased, I could breathe freely. Whereupon we realised that Cottard,
while finding, as he told us later on, that I was distinctly asthmatic,
and still more inclined to "imagine things", had seen that what was
really the matter with me at the moment was intoxication, and that by
loosening my liver and washing out my kidneys he would get rid of the
congestion of my bronchial tubes and thus give me back my breath, my
sleep and my strength. And we realised that this imbecile was a clinical
genius. At last I was able to get up. But they spoke of not letting me
go any more to the Champs-Elysées. They said that it was because the
air there was bad; but I felt sure that this was only a pretext so that
I should not see Mlle. Swann, and I forced myself to repeat the name of
Gilberte all the time, like the native tongue which peoples in captivity
endeavour to preserve among themselves so as not to forget the land that
they will never see again. Sometimes my mother would stroke my forehead
with her hand, saying: "So little boys don't tell Mamma their troubles
any more?" And Françoise used to come up to me every day with: "What a
face, to be sure! If you could just see yourself! Anyone would think
there was a corpse in the house." It is true that, if I had simply had a
cold in the head, Françoise would have assumed the same funereal air.
These lamentations pertained rather to her "class" than to the state of
my health. I could not at the time discover whether this pessimism was
due to sorrow or to satisfaction. I decided provisionally that it was
social and professional.

One day, after the postman had called, my mother laid a letter upon my
bed. I opened it carelessly, since it could not bear the one signature
that would have made me happy, the name of Gilberte, with whom I had no
relations outside the Champs-Elysées. And lo, at the foot of the page,
embossed with a silver seal representing a man's head in a helmet, and
under him a scroll with the device _Per viam rectam_, beneath a letter
written in a large and flowing hand, in which almost every word appeared
to be underlined, simply because the crosses of the 't's ran not across
but over them, and so drew a line beneath the corresponding letters of
the word above, it was indeed Gilberte's signature and nothing else that
I saw. But because I knew that to be impossible upon a letter addressed
to myself, the sight of it, unaccompanied by any belief in it, gave me
no pleasure. For a moment it merely struck an impression of unreality on
everything round about me. With lightning rapidity the impossible
signature danced about my bed, the fireplace, the four walls. I saw
everything sway, as one does when one falls from a horse, and I asked
myself whether there was not an existence altogether different from the
one I knew, in direct contradiction of it, but itself the true
existence, which, being suddenly revealed to me, filled me with that
hesitation which sculptors, in representing the Last Judgment, have
given to the awakening dead who find themselves at the gates of the next
world. "My dear Friend," said the letter, "I hear that you have been
very ill and have given up going to the Champs-Elysées. I hardly ever
go there either because there has been such an enormous lot of illness.
But I'm having my friends to tea here every Monday and Friday. Mamma
asks me to tell you that it will be a great pleasure to us all if you
will come too, as soon as you are well again, and we can have some more
nice talks here, just like the Champs-Elysées. Good-bye, dear friend; I
hope that your parents will allow you to come to tea very often. With
all my kindest regards. GILBERTE."

While I was reading these words, my nervous system was receiving, with
admirable promptitude, the news that a piece of great good fortune had
befallen me. But my mind, that is to say myself, and in fact the party
principally concerned, was still in ignorance. Such good fortune, coming
from Gilberte, was a thing of which I had never ceased to dream; a thing
wholly in my mind, it was, as Leonardo says of painting, _cosa mentale._
Now, a sheet of paper covered with writing is not a thing that the mind
assimilates at once. But as soon as I had finished reading the letter, I
thought of it, it became an object of my dreams, became, it also, _cosa
mentale_, and I loved it so much already that every few minutes I must
read it, kiss it again. Then at last I was conscious of my happiness.

Life is strewn with these miracles, for which people who are in love can
always hope. It is possible that this one had been artificially brought
about by my mother who, seeing that for some time past I had lost all
interest in life, may have suggested to Gilberte to write to me, just
as, when I was little and went first to the seaside, so as to give me
some pleasure in bathing, which I detested because it took away my
breath, she used secretly to hand to the man who was to "dip" me
marvellous boxes made of shells, and branches of coral, which I believed
that I myself had discovered lying at the bottom of the sea. However,
with every occurrence which, in our life and among its contrasted
situations, bears any relation to love, it is best to make no attempt to
understand it, since in so far as these are inexorable, as they are
unlooked-for, they appear to be governed by magic rather than by
rational laws. When a multi-millionaire--who for all his millions is
quite a charming person--sent packing by a poor and unattractive woman
with whom he has been living, calls to his aid, in his desperation, all
the resources of wealth, and brings every worldly influence to bear
without succeeding in making her take him back, it is wiser for him, in
the face of the implacable obstinacy of his mistress, to suppose that
Fate intends to crush him, and to make him die of an affection of the
heart, than to seek any logical explanation. These obstacles, against
which lovers have to contend, and which their imagination, over-excited
by suffering, seeks in vain to analyse, are contained, as often as not,
in some peculiar characteristic of the woman whom they cannot bring back
to themselves, in her stupidity, in the influence acquired over her, the
fears suggested to her by people whom the lover does not know, in the
kind of pleasures which, at the moment, she is demanding of life,
pleasures which neither her lover nor her lover's wealth can procure for
her. In any event, the lover is scarcely in a position to discover the
nature of these obstacles, which her womanly cunning hides from him and
his own judgment, falsified by love, prevents him from estimating
exactly. They may be compared with those tumours which the doctor
succeeds in reducing, but without having traced them to their source.
Like them these obstacles remain mysterious but are temporary. Only they
last, as a rule, longer than love itself. And as that is not a
disinterested passion, the lover who is no longer in love does not seek
to know why the woman, neither rich nor virtuous, with whom he was in
love refused obstinately for years to let him continue to keep her.

Now the same mystery which often veils from our eyes the reason for a
catastrophe, when love is in question, envelops just as frequently the
suddenness of certain happy solutions, such as had come to me with
Gilberte's letter. Happy, or at least seemingly happy, for there are few
solutions that can really be happy when we are dealing with a sentiment
of such a kind that every satisfaction which we can bring to it does no
more, as a rule, than dislodge some pain. And yet sometimes a respite is
granted us, and we have for a little while the illusion that we are
healed.

So far as concerns this letter, at the foot of which Françoise declined
to recognise Gilberte's name, because the elaborate capital 'G' leaning
against the undotted 'i' looked more like an 'A' while the final
syllable was indefinitely prolonged by a waving flourish, if we persist
in looking for a rational explanation of the sudden reversal of her
attitude towards me which it indicated, and which made me so radiantly
happy, we may perhaps find that I was to some extent indebted for it to
an incident which I should have supposed, on the contrary, to be
calculated to ruin me for ever in the sight of the Swann family. A short
while back, Bloch had come to see me at a time when Professor Cottard,
whom, now that I was following his instructions, we were again calling
in, happened to be in my room. As his examination of me was over, and he
was sitting with me simply as a visitor because my parents had invited
him to stay to dinner, Bloch was allowed to come in. While we were all
talking, Bloch having mentioned that he had heard it said that Mme.
Swann was very fond of me, by a lady with whom he had been dining the
day before, who was herself very intimate with Mme. Swann, I should have
liked to reply that he was most certainly mistaken, and to establish the
fact (from the same scruple of conscience that had made me proclaim it
to M. de Norpois, and for fear of Mme. Swann's taking me for a liar)
that I did not know her and had never spoken to her. But I had not the
courage to correct Bloch's mistake, because I could see quite well that
it was deliberate, and that, if he invented something that Mme. Swann
could not possibly have said, it was simply to let us know (what he
considered flattering to himself, and was not true either) that he had
been dining with one of that lady's friends. And so it fell out that,
whereas M. de Norpois, on learning that I did not know but would very
much like to know Mme. Swann, had taken great care to avoid speaking to
her about me, Cottard, who was her doctor also, having gathered from
what he had heard Bloch say that she knew me quite well and thought
highly of me, concluded that to remark, when next he saw her, that I was
a charming young fellow and a great friend of his could not be of the
smallest use to me and would be of advantage to himself, two reasons
which made him decide to speak of me to Odette whenever an opportunity
arose.

Thus at length I found my way into that abode from which was wafted even
on to the staircase the scent that Mme. Swann used, though it was
embalmed far more sweetly still by the peculiar, disturbing charm that
emanated from the life of Gilberte. The implacable porter, transformed
into a benevolent Eumenid, adopted the custom, when I asked him if I
might go upstairs, of indicating to me, by raising his cap with a
propitious hand, that he gave ear to my prayer. Those windows which,
seen from outside, used to interpose between me and the treasures
within, which were not intended for me, a polished, distant and
superficial stare, which seemed to me the very stare of the Swanns
themselves, it fell to my lot, when in the warm weather I had spent a
whole afternoon with Gilberte in her room, to open them myself, so as to
let in a little air, and even to lean over the sill of one of them by
her side, if it was her mothers "at home" day, to watch the visitors
arrive who would often, raising their heads as they stepped out of their
carriages, greet me with a wave of the hand, taking me for some nephew
of their hostess. At such moments Gilberte's plaits used to brush my
cheek. They seemed to me, in the fineness of their grain, at once
natural and supernatural, and in the strength of their constructed
tracery, a matchless work of art, in the composition of which had been
used the very grass of Paradise. To a section of them, even infinitely
minute, what celestial herbary would I not have given as a reliquary.
But since I never hoped to obtain an actual fragment of those plaits, if
at least I had been able to have their photograph, how far more precious
than one of a sheet of flowers traced by Vinci's pencil! To acquire one
of these, I stooped--with friends of the Swanns, and even with
photographers--to servilities which did not procure for me what I
wanted, but tied me for life to a number of extremely tiresome people.

Gilberte's parents, who for so long had prevented me from seeing her,
now--when I entered the dark hall in which hovered perpetually, more
formidable and more to be desired than, at Versailles of old, the
apparition of the King, the possibility of my encountering them, in
which too, invariably, after butting into an enormous hat-stand with
seven branches, like the Candlestick in Holy Writ, I would begin bowing
confusedly before a footman, seated among the skirts of his long grey
coat upon the wood-box, whom in the dim light I had mistaken for Mme.
Swann--Gilberte's parents, if one of them happened to be passing at the
moment of my arrival, so far from seeming annoyed would come and shake
hands with a smile, and say:

"How d'e do?" (They both pronounced it in the same clipped way, which,
you may well imagine, once I was back at home, I made an incessant and
delightful practice of copying.) "Does Gilberte know you're here? She
does? Then I'll leave you to her."

Better still, the tea-parties themselves to which Gilberte invited her
friends, parties which for so long had seemed to me the most
insurmountable of the barriers heaped up between her and myself, became
now an opportunity for uniting us of which she would inform me in a few
lines, written (because I was still a comparative stranger) upon sheets
that were always different. One was adorned with a poodle embossed in
blue, above a fantastic inscription in English with an exclamation mark
after it; another was stamped with an anchor, or with the monogram G. S.
preposterously elongated in a rectangle which ran from top to bottom of
the page, or else with the name Gilberte, now traced across one corner
in letters of gold which imitated my friend's signature and ended in a
flourish, beneath an open umbrella printed in black, now enclosed in a
monogram in the shape of a Chinaman's hat, which contained all the
letters of the word in capitals without its being possible to make out a
single one of them. At last, as the series of different writing-papers
which Gilberte possessed, numerous as it might be, was not unlimited,
after a certain number of weeks I saw reappear the sheet that bore (like
the first letter she had written me) the motto _Per viam rectam_, and
over it the man's head in a helmet, set in a medallion of tarnished
silver. And each of them was chosen, on one day rather than another, by
virtue of a certain ritual, as I then supposed, but more probably, as I
now think, because she tried to remember which of them she had already
used, so as never to send the same one twice to any of her
correspondents, of those at least whom she took special pains to please,
save at the longest possible intervals. As, on account of the different
times of their lessons, some of the friends whom Gilberte used to invite
to her parties were obliged to leave just as the rest were arriving,
while I was still on the stairs I could hear escaping from the hall a
murmur of voices which, such was the emotion aroused in me by the
imposing ceremony in which I was to take part, long before I had reached
the landing, broke all the bonds that still held me to my past life, so
that I did not even remember that I was to take off my muffler as soon
as I felt too hot, and to keep an eye on the clock so as not to be late
in getting home. That staircase, besides, all of wood, as they were
built about that time in certain houses, in keeping with that Henri II
style which had for so long been Odette's ideal though she was shortly
to lose interest in it, and furnished with a placard, to which there was
no equivalent at home, on which one read the words: "NOTICE. The lift
must not be taken downstairs", seemed to me a thing so marvellous that I
told my parents that it was an ancient staircase brought from ever so
far away by M. Swann. My regard for the truth was so great that I should
not have hesitated to give them this information even if I had known it
to be false, for it alone could enable them to feel for the dignity of
the Swanns' staircase the same respect that I felt myself. It was just
as, when one is talking to some ignorant person who cannot understand in
what the genius of a great physician consists, it is as well not to
admit that he does not know how to cure a cold in the head. But since I
had no power of observation, since, as a general rule, I never knew
either the name or the nature of things that were before my eyes, and
could understand only that when they were connected with the Swanns they
must be extraordinary, I was by no means certain that in notifying my
parents of the artistic value and remote origin of the staircase I was
guilty of falsehood. It did not seem certain; but it must have seemed
probable, for I felt myself turn very red when my father interrupted me
with: "I know those houses; I have been in one; they are all alike;
Swann just has several floors in one; it was Berlier built them all." He
added that he had thought of taking a flat in one of them, but that he
had changed his mind, finding that they were not conveniently arranged,
and that the landings were too dark. So he said; but I felt
instinctively that my mind must make the sacrifices necessary to the
glory of the Swanns and to my own happiness, and by a stroke of internal
authority, in spite of what I had just heard, I banished for ever from
my memory, as a good Catholic banishes Renan's _Vie de Jésus_, the
destroying thought that their house was just an ordinary flat in which
we ourselves might have been living.

Meanwhile on those tea-party days, pulling myself up the staircase step
by step, reason and memory already cast off like outer garments, and
myself no more now than the sport of the basest reflexes, I would arrive
in the zone in which the scent of Mme. Swann greeted my nostrils. I felt
that I could already behold the majesty of the chocolate cake, encircled
by plates heaped with little cakes, and by tiny napkins of grey damask
with figures on them, as required by convention but peculiar to the
Swanns. But this unalterable and governed whole seemed, like Kant's
necessary universe, to depend on a supreme act of free-will. For when we
were all together in Gilberte's little sitting-room, suddenly she would
look at the clock and exclaim:

"I say! It's getting a long time since luncheon, and we aren't having
dinner till eight. I feel as if I could eat something. What do you say?"

And she would make us go into the dining-room, as sombre as the interior
of an Asiatic Temple painted by Rembrandt, in which an architectural
cake, as gracious and sociable as it was imposing, seemed to be
enthroned there in any event, in case the fancy seized Gilberte to
discrown it of its chocolate battlements and to hew down the steep brown
slopes of its ramparts, baked in the oven like the bastions of the
palace of Darius. Better still, in proceeding to the demolition of that
Babylonitish pastry, Gilberte did not consider only her own hunger; she
inquired also after mine, while she extracted for me from the crumbling
monument a whole glazed slab jewelled with scarlet fruits, in the
oriental style. She asked me even at what o'clock my parents were
dining, as if I still knew, as if the disturbance that governed me had
allowed to persist the sensation of satiety or of hunger, the notion of
dinner or the picture of my family in my empty memory and paralysed
stomach. Alas, its paralysis was but momentary. The cakes that I took
without noticing them, a time would come when I should have to digest
them. But that time was still remote. Meanwhile Gilberte was making "my"
tea. I went on drinking it indefinitely, whereas a single cup would keep
me awake for twenty-four hours. Which explains why my mother used always
to say: "What a nuisance it is; he can never go to the Swanns' without
coming home ill." But was I aware even, when I was at the Swanns', that
it was tea that I was drinking? Had I known, I should have taken it just
the same, for even supposing that I had recovered for a moment the sense
of the present, that would not have restored to me the memory of the
past or the apprehension of the future. My imagination was incapable of
reaching to the distant time in which I might have the idea of going to
bed, and the need to sleep.

Gilberte's girl friends were not all plunged in that state of
intoxication in which it is impossible to make up one's mind. Some of
them refused tea! Then Gilberte would say, using a phrase highly
fashionable that I year: "I can see I'm not having much of a success
with my tea!" And to destroy more completely any idea of ceremony, she
would disarrange the chairs that were drawn up round the table, with:
"We look just like a wedding breakfast. Good lord, what fools servants
are!"

She nibbled her cake, perched sideways upon a cross-legged seat placed
at an angle to the table. And then, just as though she could have had
all those cakes at her disposal without having first asked leave of her
mother, when Mme. Swann, whose "day" coincided as a rule with Gilberte's
tea-parties, had shewn one of her visitors to the door, and came
sweeping in, a moment later, dressed sometimes in blue velvet, more
often in a black satin gown draped with white lace, she would say with
an air of astonishment: "I say, that looks good, what you've got there.
It makes me quite hungry to see you all eating cake."

"But, Mamma, do! We invite you!" Gilberte would answer.

"Thank you, no, my precious; what would my visitors say? I've still got
Mme. Trombert and Mme. Cottard and Mme. Bontemps; you know dear Mme.
Bontemps never pays very short visits, and she has only just come. What
would all those good people say if I never went back to them? If no one
else calls, I'll come in again and have a chat with you (which will be
far more amusing) after they've all gone. I really think I've earned a
little rest; I have had forty-five different people to-day, and
forty-two of them told me about Gérôme's picture! But you must come
along one of these days," she turned to me, "and take 'your' tea with
Gilberte. She will make it for you just as you like it, as you have it
in your own little 'studio'," she went on, flying off to her visitors,
as if it had been something as familiar to me as my own habits (such as
the habit that I should have had of taking tea, had I ever taken it; as
for my "studio", I was uncertain whether I had one or not) that I had
come to seek in this mysterious world. "When can you come? To-morrow? We
will make you 'toast' every bit as good, as you get at Colombin's. No?
You are horrid!"--for, since she also had begun to form a salon, she had
borrowed Mme. Verdurin's mannerisms, and notably her tone of petulant
autocracy. "Toast" being as incomprehensible to me as "Colombin's", this
further promise could not add to my temptation. It will appear stranger
still, now that everyone uses such expressions--and perhaps even at
Combray they are creeping in--that I had not at first understood of whom
Mme. Swann was speaking when I heard her sing the praises of our old
"nurse". I did not know any English; I gathered, however, as she went on
that the word was intended to denote Françoise. I who, in the
Champs-Elysées, had been so terrified of the bad impression that she
must make, I now learned from Mme. Swann that it was all the things that
Gilberte had told them about my "nurse" that had attracted her husband
and her to me. "One feels that she is so devoted to you; she must be
nice!" (At once my opinion of Françoise was diametrically changed. By
the same token, to have a governess equipped with a waterproof and a
feather in her hat no longer appeared quite so essential.) Finally I
learned from some words which Mme. Swann let fall with regard to Mme.
Blatin (whose good nature she recognised but dreaded her visits) that
personal relations with that lady would have been of less value to me
than I had supposed, and would not in any way have improved my standing
with the Swanns.

If I had now begun to explore, with tremors of reverence and joy the
faery domain which, against all probability, had opened to me its
hitherto locked approaches, this was still only in my capacity as a
friend of Gilberte. The kingdom into which I was received was itself
contained within another, more mysterious still, in which Swann and his
wife led their supernatural existence and towards which they made their
way, after taking my hand in theirs, when they crossed the hall at the
same moment as myself but in the other direction. But soon I was to
penetrate also to the heart of the Sanctuary. For instance, Gilberte
might be out when I called, but M. or Mme. Swann was at home. They would
ask who had rung, and on being told that it was myself would send out to
ask me to come in for a moment and talk to them, desiring me to use in
one way or another, and with this or that object in view, my influence
over their daughter. I reminded myself of that letter, so complete, so
convincing, which I had written to Swann only the other day, and which
he had not deigned even to acknowledge. I marvelled at the impotence of
the mind, the reason and the heart to effect the least conversion, to
solve a single one of those difficulties which, in the sequel, life,
without one's so much as knowing what steps it has taken, so easily
unravels. My new position as the friend of Gilberte, endowed with an
excellent influence over her, entitling me now to enjoy the same favours
as if, having had as a companion at some school where they had always
put me at the head of my class the son of a king, I had owed to that
accident the right of informal entry into the palace and to audiences in
the throne-room, Swann, with an infinite benevolence and as though he
were not overburdened with glorious occupations, would make me go into
his library and there let me for an hour on end respond in stammered
monosyllables, timid silences broken by brief and incoherent bursts of
courage, to utterances of which my emotion prevented me from
understanding a single word; would shew me works of art and books which
he thought likely to interest me, things as to which I had no doubt,
before seeing them, that they infinitely surpassed in beauty anything
that the Louvre possessed or the National Library, but at which I found
it impossible to look. At such moments I should have been grateful to
Swann's butler, had he demanded from me my watch, my tie-pin, my boots,
and made me sign a deed acknowledging him as my heir: in the admirable
words of a popular expression of which, as of the most famous epics, we
do not know who was the author, although, like those epics, and with all
deference to Wolff and his theory, it most certainly had an author, one
of those inventive, modest souls such as we come across every year, who
light upon such gems as "putting a name to a face", though their own
names they never let us learn, I did not know what I was doing. All the
greater was my astonishment, when my visit was prolonged, at finding to
what a zero of realisation, to what an absence of happy ending those
hours spent in the enchanted dwelling led me. But my disappointment
arose neither from the inadequacy of the works of art that were shewn to
me nor from the impossibility of fixing upon them my distracted gaze.
For it was not the intrinsic beauty of the objects themselves that made
it miraculous for me to be sitting in Swann's library, it was the
attachment to those objects--which might have been the ugliest in the
world--of the particular feeling, melancholy and voluptuous, which I had
for so many years localised in that room and which still impregnated it;
similarly the multitude of mirrors, of silver-backed brushes, of altars
to Saint Anthony of Padua, carved and painted by the most eminent
artists, her friends, counted for nothing in the feeling of my own
unworthiness and of her regal benevolence which was aroused in me when
Mme. Swann received me for a moment in her own room, in which three
beautiful and impressive creatures, her principal and second and third
maids, smilingly prepared for her the most marvellous toilets, and
towards which, on the order conveyed to me by the footman in
knee-breeches that Madame wished to say a few words to me, I would make
my way along the tortuous path of a corridor all embalmed, far and near,
by the precious essences which exhaled without ceasing from her
dressing-room a fragrance exquisitely sweet.

When Mme. Swann had returned to her visitors, we could still hear her
talking and laughing, for even with only two people in the room, and as
though she had to cope with all the "good friends" at once, she would
raise her voice, ejaculate her words, as she had so often in the "little
clan" heard its "Mistress" do, at the moments when she "led the
conversation". The expressions which we have borrowed from other people
being those which, for a time at least, we are fondest of using, Mme.
Swann used to select at one time those which she had learned from
distinguished people whom her husband had not managed to prevent her
from getting to know (it was from them that she derived the mannerism
which consists in suppressing the article or demonstrative pronoun, in
French, before an adjective qualifying a person's name), at another time
others more plebeian (such as "It's a mere nothing!" the favourite
expression of one of her friends), and used to make room for them in all
the stories which, by a habit formed among the "little clan", she loved
to tell about people. She would follow these up automatically with, "I
do love that story!" or "Do admit, it's a very _good_ story!" which came
to her, through her husband, from the Guermantes, whom she did not know.

Mme. Swann had left the dining-room, but her husband, who had just
returned home, made his appearance among us in turn. "Do you know if
your mother is alone, Gilberte?" "No, Papa, she has still some people."
"What, still? At seven o'clock! It's appalling! The poor woman must be
absolutely dead. It's odious." (At home I had always heard the first
syllable of this word pronounced with a long 'o', like "ode", but M. and
Mme. Swann made it short, as in "odd".) "Just think of it; ever since
two o'clock this afternoon!" he went on, turning to me. "And Camille
tells me that between four and five he let in at least a dozen people.
Did I say a dozen? I believe he told me fourteen. No, a dozen; I don't
remember. When I came home I had quite forgotten it was her 'day', and
when I saw all those carriages outside the door I thought there must be
a wedding in the house. And just now, while I've been in the library for
a minute, the bell has never stopped ringing; upon my word, it's given
me quite a headache. And are there a lot of them in there still?" "No;
only two." "Who are they, do you know?" "Mme. Cottard and Mme.
Bontemps." "Oh! the wife of the Chief Secretary to the Minister of
Posts." "I know her husband's a clerk in some Ministry or other, but I
don't know what he does." Gilberte assumed a babyish manner.

"What's that? You silly child, you talk as if you were two years old.
What do you mean; 'a clerk in some Ministry or other' indeed! He is
nothing less than Chief Secretary, chief of the whole show, and what's
more--what on earth am I thinking of? Upon my word, I'm getting as
stupid as yourself; he is not the Chief Secretary, he's the Permanent
Secretary."

"I don't know, I'm sure; does that mean a lot, being Permanent
Secretary?" answered Gilberte, who never let slip an opportunity of
displaying her own indifference to anything that gave her parents cause
for vanity. (She may, of course, have considered that she only enhanced
the brilliance of such an acquaintance by not seeming to attach any
undue importance to it.)

"I should think it did 'mean a lot'!" exclaimed Swann, who preferred to
this modesty, which might have left me in doubt, a more explicit mode of
speech. "Why it means simply that he's the first man after the Minister.
In fact, he's more important than the Minister, because it is he that
does all the work. Besides, it appears that he has immense capacity, a
man quite of the first rank, a most distinguished individual. He's an
Officer of the Legion of Honour. A delightful man, he is, and very
good-looking too."

(This man's wife, incidentally, had married him against everyone's
wishes and advice because he was a c charming creature'. He had, what
may be sufficient to constitute a rare and delicate whole, a fair, silky
beard, good features, a nasal voice, powerful lungs and a glass eye.)

"I may tell you," he added, turning again to me, "that I am greatly
amused to see that lot serving in the present Government, because they
are Bontemps of the Bontemps-Chenut family, typical old-fashioned
middle class people, reactionary, clerical, tremendously strait-laced.
Your grandfather knew quite well--at least by name and by sight he must
have known old Chenut, the father, who never tipped the cabmen more than
a ha'penny, though he was a rich enough man for those days, and the
Baron Bréau-Chenut. All their money went in the Union Générale
smash--you're too young to remember that, of course--and, gad! they've
had to get it back as best they could."

"He's the uncle of a little girl who used to come to my lessons, in a
class a long way below mine, the famous 'Albertine'. She's certain to be
dreadfully 'fast' when she's older, but just now she's the quaintest
spectacle." "She is amazing, this daughter of mine. She knows everyone."

"I don't know her. I only used to see her going about, and hear them
calling 'Albertine' here, and 'Albertine' there. But I do know Mme.
Bontemps, and I don't like her much either."

"You are quite wrong; she is charming, pretty, intelligent. In fact,
she's quite clever. I shall go in and say how d'ye do to her, and ask
her if her husband thinks we're going to have war, and whether we can
rely on King Theodosius. He's bound to know, don't you think, since he's
in the counsels of the gods."

It was not thus that Swann used to talk in days gone by; but which of us
cannot call to mind some royal princess of limited intelligence who let
herself be carried off by a footman, and then, ten years later, tried to
get back into society, and found that people were not very willing to
call upon her; have we not found her spontaneously adopting the language
of all the old bores, and, when we referred to some duchess who was at
the height of fashion, heard her say: "She came to see me only
yesterday," or "I live a very quiet life." So that it is superfluous to
make a study of manners, since we can deduce them all from psychological
laws.

The Swanns shared this eccentricity of people who have not many friends;
a visit, an invitation, a mere friendly word from some one ever so
little prominent were for them events to which they aspired to give full
publicity. If bad luck would have it that the Verdurins were in London
when Odette gave a rather smart dinner-party, arrangements were made by
which some common friend was to "cable" a report to them across the
Channel. Even the complimentary letters and telegrams received by Odette
the Swanns were incapable of keeping to themselves. They spoke of them
to their friends, passed them from hand to hand. Thus the Swanns'
drawing-room reminded one of a seaside hotel where telegrams containing
the latest news are posted up on a board.

Still, people who had known the old Swann not merely Outside society, as
I had known him, but in society, in that Guermantes set which, with
certain concessions to Highnesses and Duchesses, was almost infinitely
exacting in the matter of wit and charm, from which banishment was
sternly decreed for men of real eminence whom its members found boring
or vulgar,--such people might have been astonished to observe that their
old Swann had ceased to be not only discreet when he spoke of his
acquaintance, but difficult when he was called upon to enlarge it. How
was it that Mme. Bontemps, so common, so ill-natured, failed to
exasperate him? How could he possibly describe her as attractive? The
memory of the Guermantes set must, one would suppose, have prevented
him; as a matter of fact it encouraged him. There was certainly among
the Guermantes, as compared with the great majority of groups in
society, taste, indeed a refined taste, but also a snobbishness from
which there arose the possibility of a momentary interruption in the
exercise of that taste. If it were a question of some one who was not
indispensable to their circle, of a Minister for Foreign Affairs, a
Republican and inclined to be pompous, or of an Academician who talked
too much, their taste would be brought to bear heavily against him,
Swann would condole with Mme. de Guermantes on having had to sit next to
such people at dinner at one of the Embassies, and they would a thousand
times rather have a man of fashion, that is to say a man of the
Guermantes kind, good for nothing, but endowed with the wit of the
Guermantes, some one who was "of the same chapel" as themselves. Only, a
Grand Duchess, a Princess of the Blood, should she dine often with Mme.
de Guermantes, would soon find herself enrolled in that chapel also,
without having any right to be there, without being at all so endowed.
But with the simplicity of people in society, from the moment they had
her in their houses they went out of their way to find her attractive,
since they were unable to say that it was because she was attractive
that they invited her. Swann, coming to the rescue of Mme. de
Guermantes, would say to her after the Highness had gone: "After all,
she's not such a bad woman; really, she has quite a sense of the comic.
I don't suppose for a moment that she has mastered the _Critique of Pure
Reason_; still, she is not unattractive." "Oh, I do so entirely agree
with you!" the Duchess would respond. "Besides, she was a little
frightened of us all; you will see that she can be charming." "She is
certainly a great deal less devastating than Mme. X----" (the wife of
the talkative Academician, and herself a remarkable woman) "who quotes
twenty volumes at you." "Oh, but there isn't any comparison between
them." The faculty of saying such things as these, and of saying them
sincerely, Swann had acquired from the Duchess, and had never lost. He
made use of it now with reference to the people who came to his house.
He forced himself to distinguish, and to admire in them the qualities
that every human being will display if we examine him with a prejudice
in his favour, and not with the distaste of the nice-minded; he extolled
the merits of Mme. Bontemps, as he had once extolled those of the
Princesse de Parme, who must have been excluded from the Guermantes set
if there had not been privileged terms of admission for certain
Highnesses, and if, when they presented themselves for election, no
consideration had indeed been paid except to wit and charm. We have seen
already, moreover, that Swann had always an inclination (which he was
now putting into practice, only in a more lasting fashion) to exchange
his social position for another which, in certain circumstances, might
suit him better. It is only people incapable of analysing, in their
perception, what at first sight appears indivisible who believe that
one's position is consolidated with one's person. One and the same man,
taken at successive points in his life, will be found to breathe, at
different stages on the social ladder, in atmospheres that do not of
necessity become more and more refined; whenever, in any period of our
existence, we form or re-form associations with a certain environment,
and feel that we can move at ease in it and are made comfortable, we
begin quite naturally to make ourselves fast to it by putting out roots
and tendrils.

In so far as Mme. Bontemps was concerned, I believe also that Swann, in
speaking of her with so much emphasis, was not sorry to think that my
parents would hear that she had been to see his wife. To tell the truth,
in our house the names of the people whom Mme. Swann was gradually
getting to know pricked our curiosity more than they aroused our
admiration. At the name of Mme. Trombert, my mother exclaimed: "Ah!
That's a new recruit, and one who will bring in others." And as though
she found a similarity between the somewhat summary, rapid and violent
manner in which Mme. Swann acquired her friends, as it were by conquest,
and a Colonial expedition, Mamma went on to observe: "Now that the
Tromberts have surrendered, the neighbouring tribes will not be long in
coming in." If she had passed Mme. Swann in the street, she would tell
us when she came home: "I saw Mme. Swann in all her war-paint; she must
have been embarking on some triumphant offensive against the
Massachutoes, or the Cingalese, or the Tromberts." And so with all the
new people whom I told her that I had seen in that somewhat composite
and artificial society, to which they had often been brought with great
difficulty and from widely different surroundings, Mamma would at once
divine their origin, and, speaking of them as of trophies dearly bought,
would say: "Brought back from an Expedition against the so-and-so!"

As for Mme. Cottard, my father was astonished that Mme. Swann could find
anything to be gained by getting so utterly undistinguished a woman to
come to her house, and said: "In spite of the Professor's position, I
must say that I cannot understand it." Mamma, on the other hand,
understood quite well; she knew that a great deal of the pleasure which
a woman finds in entering a class of society different from that in
which she has previously lived would be lacking if she had no means of
keeping her old associates informed of those others, relatively more
brilliant, with whom she has replaced them. Therefore, she requires an
eye-witness who may be allowed to penetrate this new, delicious world
(as a buzzing, browsing insect bores its way into a flower) and will
then, as the course of her visits may carry her, spread abroad, or so at
least one hopes, with the tidings, a latent germ of envy and of wonder.
Mme. Cottard, who might have been created on purpose to fill this part,
belonged to that special category in a visiting list which Mamma (who
inherited certain facets of her father's turn of mind) used to call the
"Tell Sparta" people. Besides--apart from another reason which did not
come to our knowledge until many years later--Mme. Swann, in inviting
this good-natured, reserved and modest friend, had no need to fear lest
she might be introducing into her drawing-room, on her brilliant "days",
a traitor or a rival. She knew what a vast number of homely blossoms
that busy worker, armed with her plume and card-case, could visit in a
single afternoon. She knew the creature's power of dissemination, and,
basing her calculations upon the law of probability, was led to believe
that almost certainly some intimate of the Verdurins would be bound to
hear, within two or three days, how the Governor of Paris had left cards
upon her, or that M. Verdurin himself would be told how M. Le Hault de
Pressagny, the President of the Horse Show, had taken them, Swann and
herself, to the King Theodosius gala; she imagined the Verdurins as
informed of these two events, both so flattering to herself and of these
alone, because the particular materialisations in which we embody and
pursue fame are but few in number, by the default of our own minds which
are incapable of imagining at one time all the forms which, none the
less, we hope--in a general way--that fame will not fail simultaneously
to assume for our benefit.

Mme. Swann had, however, met with no success outside what was called the
"official world". Smart women did not go to her house. It was not the
presence there of Republican "notables" that frightened them away. In
the days of my early childhood, conservative society was to the last
degree worldly, and no "good" house would ever have opened its doors to
a Republican. The people who lived in such an atmosphere imagined that
the impossibility of ever inviting an "opportunist"--still more, a
"horrid radical"--to their parties was something that would endure for
ever, like oil-lamps and horse-drawn omnibuses. But, like at
kaleidoscope which is every now and then given a turn, society arranges
successively in different orders elements which one would have supposed
to be immovable, and composes a fresh pattern. Before I had made my
first Communion, ladies on the "right side" in politics had had the
stupefaction of meeting, while paying calls, a smart Jewess. These new
arrangements of the kaleidoscope are produced by what a philosopher
would call a "change of criterion". The Dreyfus case brought about
another, at a period rather later than that in which I began to go to
Mme. Swann's, and the kaleidoscope scattered once again its little
scraps of colour. Everything Jewish, even the smart lady herself, fell
out of the pattern, and various obscure nationalities appeared in its
place. The most brilliant drawing-room in Paris was that of a Prince who
was an Austrian and ultra-Catholic. If instead of the Dreyfus case there
had come a war with Germany, the base of the kaleidoscope would have
been turned in the other direction, and its pattern reversed. The Jews
having shewn, to the general astonishment, that they were patriots also,
would have kept their position, and no one would have cared to go any
more, or even to admit that he had ever gone to the Austrian Prince's.
All this does not, however, prevent the people who move in it from
imagining, whenever society is stationary for the moment, that no
further change will occur, just as in spite of having witnessed the
birth of the telephone they decline to believe in the aeroplane.
Meanwhile the philosophers of journalism are at work, castigating the
preceding epoch, and not only the kind of pleasures in which it
indulged, which seem to them to be the last word in corruption, but even
the work of its artists and philosophers, which have no longer the least
value in their eyes, as though they were indissolubly linked to the
successive moods of fashionable frivolity. The one thing that does not
change is that at any and every time it appears that there have been
"great changes". At the time when I went to Mme. Swann's the Dreyfus
storm had not yet broken, and some of the more prominent Jews were
extremely powerful. None more so than Sir Rufus Israels, whose wife,
Lady Israels, was Swann's aunt. She had not herself any intimate
acquaintance so distinguished as her nephew's, while he, since he did
not care for her, had never much cultivated her society, although he
was, so far as was known, her heir. But she was the only one of Swann's
relatives who had any idea of his social position, the others having
always remained in the state of ignorance, in that respect, which had
long been our own. When, from a family circle, one of its members
emigrates into "high society"--which to him appears a feat without
parallel until after the lapse of a decade he observes that it has been
performed in other ways and for different reasons by more than one of
the men whom he knew as boys--he draws round about himself a zone of
shadow, a _terra incognita_, which is clearly visible in its minutest
details to all those who inhabit it with him, but is darkest night and
nothingness to those who may not penetrate it but touch its fringe
without the least suspicion of its existence in their midst. There being
no news agency to furnish Swann's lady cousins with intelligence of the
people with whom he consorted, it was (before his appalling marriage, of
course) with a smile of condescension that they would tell one another,
over family dinner-tables, that they had spent a "virtuous" Sunday in
going to see "cousin Charles", whom (regarding him as a "poor relation"
who was inclined to envy their prosperity,) they used wittily to name,
playing upon the title of Balzac's story, "Le Cousin Bête". Lady
Israels, however, was letter-perfect in the names and quality of the
people who lavished upon Swann a friendship of which she was frankly
jealous. Her husband's family, which almost equalled the Rothschilds in
importance, had for several generations managed the affairs of the
Orleans Princes. Lady Israels, being immensely rich, exercised a wide
influence, and had employed it so as to ensure that no one whom she knew
should be "at home" to Odette. One only had disobeyed her, in secret,
the Comtesse de Marsantes. And then, as ill luck would have it, Odette
having gone to call upon Mme. de Marsantes, Lady Israels had entered the
room almost at her heels. Mme. de Marsantes was on tenter-hooks. With
the craven impotence of those who are at liberty to act as they choose,
she did not address a single word to Odette, who thus found little
encouragement to press farther the invasion of a world which, moreover,
was not at all that into which she would have liked to be welcomed. In
this complete detachment of the Faubourg Saint-Germain, Odette continued
to be regarded as the illiterate "light woman", utterly different from
the respectable ladies, "well up" in all the minutest points of
genealogy, who endeavoured to quench by reading biographies and memoirs
their thirst for the aristocratic relations with which real life had
omitted to provide them. And Swann, for his part, continued no doubt to
be the lover in whose eyes all these peculiarities of an old mistress
would appear lovable or at least inoffensive, for I have often heard his
wife profess what were really social heresies, without his attempting
(whether from lingering affection for her, loss of regard for society or
weariness of the effort to make her perfect) to correct them. It was
perhaps also another form of the simplicity which for so long had misled
us at Combray, and which now had the effect that, while he continued to
know, on his own account at least, many highly distinguished people, he
did not make a point, in conversation in his wife's drawing-room, of our
seeming to feel that they were of the smallest importance. They had,
indeed, less than ever for Swann, the centre of gravity of his life
having been displaced. In any case, Odette's ignorance of social
distinctions was so dense that if the name of the Princesse de
Guermantes were mentioned in conversation after that of the Duchess, her
cousin, "So those ones are Princes, are they?" she would exclaim; "Why,
they've gone up a step." Were anyone to say "the Prince", in speaking of
the Duc de Chartres, she would put him right with, "The Duke, you mean;
he is Duc de Chartres, not Prince." As for the Duc d'Orléans, son of
the Comte de Paris: "That's funny; the son is higher than the father!"
she would remark, adding, for she was afflicted with anglomania, "Those
_Royalties_ are so dreadfully confusing!"--while to someone who asked
her from what province the Guermantes family came she replied, "From the
Aisne."

But, so far as Odette was concerned, Swann was quite blind, not merely
to these deficiencies in her education but to the general mediocrity of
her intelligence. More than that; whenever Odette repeated a silly story
Swann would sit listening to his wife with a complacency, a merriment,
almost an admiration into which some survival of his desire for her must
have entered; while in the same conversation, anything subtle, anything
deep even that he himself might say would be listened to by Odette with
an habitual lack of interest, rather curtly, with impatience, and would
at times be sharply contradicted. And we must conclude that this
enslavement of refinement by vulgarity is the rule in many households,
when we think, conversely, of all the superior women who yield to the
blandishments of a boor, merciless in his censure of their most delicate
utterances, while they go into ecstasies, with the infinite indulgence
of love, over the feeblest of his witticisms. To return to the reasons
which prevented Odette, at this period, from making her way into the
Faubourg Saint-Germain, it must be observed that the latest turn of the
social kaleidoscope had been actuated by a series of scandals. Women to
whose houses one had been going with entire confidence had been
discovered to be common prostitutes, if not British spies. One would,
therefore, for some time to come expect people (so, at least, one
supposed) to be, before anything else, in a sound position, regular,
settled, accountable. Odette represented simply everything with which
one had just severed relations, and was incidentally to renew them at
once (for men, their natures not altering from day to day, seek in every
new order a continuance of the old) but to renew them by seeking it
under another form which would allow one to be innocently taken in, and
to believe that it was no longer the same society as before the
disaster. However, the scapegoats of that society and Odette were too
closely alike. People who move in society are very short-sighted; at the
moment in which they cease to have any relations with the Israelite
ladies whom they have known, while they are asking themselves how they
are to fill the gap thus made in their lives, they perceive, thrust into
it as by the windfall of a night of storm, a new lady, an Israelite
also; but by virtue of her novelty she is not associated in their minds
with her predecessors, with what they are convinced that they must
abjure. She does not ask that they shall respect her God. They take her
up. There was no question of anti-semitism at the time when I used first
to visit Odette. But she was like enough to it to remind people of what
they wished, for a while, to avoid.

As for Swann himself, he was still a frequent visitor of several of his
former acquaintance, who, of course, were all of the very highest rank.
And yet when he spoke to us of the people whom he had just been to see I
noticed that, among those whom he had known in the old days, the choice
that he made was dictated by the same kind of taste, partly artistic
partly historic, that inspired him as a collector. And remarking that it
was often some great lady or other of waning reputation, who interested
him because she had been the mistress of Liszt or because one of
Balzac's novels was dedicated to her grandmother (as he would purchase a
drawing if Chateaubriand had written about it) I conceived a suspicion
that we had, at Combray, replaced one error, that of regarding Swann as
a mere stockbroker, who did not go into society, by another, when we
supposed him to be one of the smartest men in Paris. To be a friend of
the Comte de Paris meant nothing at all. Is not the world full of such
"friends of Princes", who would not be received in any house that was at
all "exclusive"? Princes know themselves to be princes, and are not
snobs; besides, they believe themselves to be so far above everything
that is not of their blood royal that great nobles and "business men"
appear, in the depths beneath them, to be practically on a level.

But Swann went farther than this; not content with seeking in society,
such as it was, when he fastened upon the names which, inscribed upon
its roll by the past, were still to be read there, a simple artistic and
literary pleasure, he indulged in the slightly vulgar diversion of
arranging as it were social nosegays by grouping heterogeneous elements,
bringing together people taken at hazard, here, there and everywhere.
These experiments in the lighter side (or what was to Swann the lighter
side) of sociology did not stimulate an identical reaction, with any
regularity, that is to say, in each of his wife's friends. "I'm thinking
of asking the Cottards to meet the Duchesse de Vendôme," he would
laughingly say to Mme. Bontemps, in the appetised tone of an epicure who
has thought of, and intends to try the substitution, in a sauce, of
cayenne pepper for cloves. But this plan, which was, in fact, to appear
quite humorous, in an archaic sense of the word, to the Cottards, had
also the power of infuriating Mme. Bontemps. She herself had recently
been presented by the Swanns to the Duchesse de Vendôme, and had found
this as agreeable as it seemed to her natural. The thought of winning
renown from it at the Cottards', when she related to them what had
happened, had been by no means the least savoury ingredient of her
pleasure. But like those persons recently decorated who, their
investiture once accomplished, would like to see the fountain of honour
turned off at the main, Mme. Bontemps would have preferred that, after
herself, no one else in her own circle of friends should be made known
to the Princess. She denounced (to herself, of course) the licentious
taste of Swann who, in order to gratify a wretched aesthetic whim, was
obliging her to scatter to the winds, at one swoop, all the dust that
she would have thrown in the eyes of the Cottards when she told them
about the Duchesse de Vendôme. How was she even to dare to announce to
her husband that the Professor and his wife were in their turn to
partake of this pleasure, of which she had boasted to him as though it
were unique. And yet, if the Cottards could only be made to know that
they were being invited not seriously but for the amusement of their
host! It is true that the Bontemps had been invited for the same reason,
but Swann, having acquired from the aristocracy that eternal "Don Juan"
spirit which, in treating with two women of no importance, makes each of
them believe that it is she alone who is seriously loved, had spoken to
Mme. Bontemps of the Duchesse de Vendôme as of a person whom it was
clearly laid down that she must meet at dinner. "Yes, we're determined
to have the Princess here with the Cottards," said Mme. Swann a few
weeks later; "My husband thinks that we might get something quite
amusing out of that conjunction." For if she had retained from the
"little nucleus" certain habits dear to Mme. Verdurin, such as that of
shouting things aloud so as to be heard by all the faithful, she made
use, at the same time, of certain expressions, such as "conjunction",
which were dear to the Guermantes circle, of which she thus felt
unconsciously and at a distance, as the sea is swayed by the moon, the
attraction, though without being drawn perceptibly closer to it. "Yes,
the Cottards and the Duchesse de Vendôme. Don't you think that might be
rather fun?" asked Swann. "I think they'll be exceedingly ill-assorted,
and it can only lead to a lot of bother; people oughtn't to play with
fire, is what I say!" snapped Mme. Bontemps, furious. She and her
husband were, all the same, invited, as was the Prince d'Agrigente, to
this dinner, which Mme. Bontemps and Cottard had each two alternative
ways of describing, according to whom they were telling about it. To one
set Mme. Bontemps for her part, and Cottard for his would say casually,
when asked who else had been of the party: "Only the Prince d'Agrigente;
it was all quite intimate." But there were others who might, alas, be
better informed (once, indeed, some one had challenged Cottard with:
"But weren't the Bontemps there too?" "Oh, I forgot them," Cottard had
blushingly admitted to the tactless questioner whom he ever afterwards
classified among slanderers and speakers of evil). For these the
Bontemps and Cottards had each adopted, without any mutual arrangement,
a version the framework of which was identical for both parties, their
own names alone changing places. "Let me see;" Cottard would say, "there
were our host and hostess, the Duc and Duchesse de Vendôme--" (with a
satisfied smile) "Professor and Mme. Cottard, and, upon my soul, heaven
only knows how they got there, for they were about as much in keeping as
hairs in the soup, M. and Mme. Bontemps!" Mme. Bontemps would recite an
exactly similar "piece", only it was M. and Mme. Bontemps who were named
with a satisfied emphasis between the Duchesse de Vendôme and the
Prince d'Agrigente, while the "also ran", whom finally she used to
accuse of having invited themselves, and who completely spoiled the
party, were the Cottards.

When he had been paying calls Swann would often come home with little
time to spare before dinner. At that point in the evening, six o'clock,
when in the old days he had felt so wretched, he no longer asked himself
what Odette might be about, and was hardly at all concerned to hear that
she had people still with her, or had gone out. He recalled at times
that he had once, years ago, tried to read through its envelope a letter
addressed by Odette to Forcheville. But this memory was not pleasing to
him, and rather than plumb the depth of shame that he felt in it he
preferred to indulge in a little grimace, twisting up the corners of his
mouth and adding, if need be, a shake of the head which signified "What
does it all matter?" In truth, he considered now that the hypothesis by
which he had often been brought to a standstill in days gone by,
according to which it was his jealous imagination alone that blackened
what was in reality the innocent life of Odette--that this hypothesis
(which after all was beneficent, since, so long as his amorous malady
had lasted, it had diminished his sufferings by making them seem
imaginary) was not the truth, that it was his jealousy that had seen
things in the right light, and that if Odette had loved him better than
he supposed, she had deceived him more as well. Formerly, while his
sufferings were still keen, he had vowed that, as soon as he should have
ceased to love Odette, and so to be afraid either of vexing her or of
making her believe that he loved her more than he did, he would afford
himself the satisfaction of elucidating with her, simply from his love
of truth and as a historical point, whether or not she had had
Forcheville in her room that day when he had rung her bell and rapped on
her window without being let in, and she had written to Forcheville that
it was an uncle of hers who had called. But this so interesting problem,
of which he was waiting to attempt the solution only until his jealousy
should have subsided, had precisely lost all interest in Swann's eyes
when he had ceased to be jealous. Not immediately, however. He felt no
other jealousy now with regard to Odette than what the memory of that
day, that afternoon spent in knocking vainly at the little house in the
Rue Lapérouse, had continued to excite in him; as though his jealousy,
not dissimilar in that respect from those maladies which appear to have
their seat, their centre of contagion less in certain persons than in
certain places, in certain houses, had had for its object not so much
Odette herself as that day, that hour in the irrevocable past when Swann
had beaten at every entrance to her house in turn. You would have said
that that day, that hour alone had caught and preserved a few last
fragments of the amorous personality which had once been Swann's, and
that there alone could he now recapture them. For a long time now it had
made no matter to him that Odette had been false to him, and was false
still. And yet he had continued for some years to seek out old servants
of Odette, so strongly in him persisted the painful curiosity to know
whether on that day, so long ago, at six o'clock, Odette had been in bed
with Forcheville. Then that curiosity itself had disappeared, without,
however, his abandoning his investigations. He continued the attempt to
discover what no longer interested him, because his old ego though it
had shrivelled to the extreme of decrepitude still acted mechanically,
following the course of preoccupations so utterly abandoned that Swann
could not now succeed even in forming an idea of that anguish--so
compelling once that he had been unable to foresee his ever being
delivered from it, that only the death of her whom he loved (death
which, as will be shewn later on in this story, by a cruel example, in
no way diminishes the sufferings caused by jealousy) seemed to him
capable of making smooth the road, then insurmountably barred to him, of
his life.

But to bring to light, some day, those passages in the life of Odette to
which he owed his sufferings had not been Swann's only ambition; he had
in reserve that also of wreaking vengeance for his sufferings when,
being no longer in love with Odette, he should no longer be afraid of
her; and the opportunity of gratifying this second ambition had just
occurred, for Swann was in love with another woman, a woman who gave
him--grounds for jealousy, no, but who did all the same make him
jealous, because he was not capable, now, of altering his way of making
love, and it was the way he had used with Odette that must serve him now
for another. To make Swann's jealousy revive it was not essential that
this woman should be unfaithful, it sufficed that for any reason she was
separated from him, at a party for instance, where she was presumably
enjoying herself. That was enough to reawaken in him the old anguish,
that lamentable and inconsistent excrescence of his love, which held
Swann ever at a distance from what she really was, like a yearning to
attain the impossible (what this young woman really felt for him, the
hidden longing that absorbed her days, the secret places of her heart),
for between Swann and her whom he loved this anguish piled up an
unyielding mass of already existing suspicions, having their cause in
Odette, or in some other perhaps who had preceded Odette, allowing this
now ageing lover to know his mistress of the moment only in the
traditional and collective phantasm of the "woman who made him jealous",
in which he had arbitrarily incarnated his new love. Often, however,
Swann would charge his jealousy with the offence of making him believe
in imaginary infidelities; but then he would remember that he had given
Odette the benefit of the same argument and had in that been wrong. And
so everything that the young woman whom he loved did in those hours when
he was not with her appeared spoiled of its innocence in his eyes. But
whereas at that other time he had made a vow that if ever he ceased to
love her whom he did not then imagine to be his future wife, he would
implacably exhibit to her an indifference that would at length be
sincere, so as to avenge his pride that had so long been trampled upon
by her--of those reprisals which he might now enforce without risk to
himself (for what harm could it do him to be taken at his word and
deprived of those intimate moments with Odette that had been so
necessary to him once), of those reprisals he took no more thought; with
his love had vanished the desire to shew that he was in love no longer.
And he who, when he was suffering at the hands of Odette, would have
looked forward so keenly to letting her see one day that he had fallen
to a rival, now that he was in a position to do so took infinite
precautions lest his wife should suspect the existence of this new love.

 *
* *

It was not only in those tea-parties, on account of which I had formerly
had the sorrow of seeing Gilberte leave me and go home earlier than
usual, that I was henceforth to take part, but the engagements that she
had with her mother, to go for a walk or to some afternoon party, which
by preventing her from coming to the Champs-Elysées had deprived me of
her, on those days when I loitered alone upon the lawn or stood before
the wooden horses,--to these outings M. and Mme. Swann henceforth
admitted me, I had a seat in their landau, and indeed it was me that
they asked if I would rather go to the theatre, to a dancing lesson at
the house of one of Gilberte's friends, to some social gathering given
by friends of her parents (what Odette called "a little meeting") or to
visit the tombs at Saint-Denis.

On days when I was going anywhere with the Swanns I would arrive at the
house in time for _déjeuner_, which Mme. Swann called "le lunch"; as
one was not expected before half-past twelve, while my parents in those
days had their meal at a quarter past eleven, it was not until they had
risen from the table that I made my way towards that sumptuous quarter,
deserted enough at any hour, but more particularly just then, when
everyone had gone indoors. Even on winter days of frost, if the weather
held, tightening every few minutes the knot of a gorgeous necktie from
Charvet's and looking to see that my varnished boots were not getting
dirty, I would roam to and fro among the avenues, waiting until
twenty-seven minutes past the hour. I could see from afar in the Swanns'
little garden-plot the sunlight glittering like hoar frost from the
bare-boughed trees. It is true that the garden boasted but a pair of
them. The unusual hour presented the scene in a new light. Into these
pleasures of nature (intensified by the suppression of habit and indeed
by my physical hunger) the thrilling prospect of sitting down to
luncheon with Mme. Swann was infused; it did not diminish them, but
taking command of them trained them to its service; so that if, at this
hour when ordinarily I did not perceive them, I seemed now to be
discovering the fine weather, the cold, the wintry sunlight, it was all
as a sort of preface to the creamed eggs, as a patina, a cool and
coloured glaze applied to the decoration of that mystic chapel which was
the habitation of Mme. Swann, and in the heart of which there were, by
contrast, so much warmth, so many scents and flowers.

At half-past twelve I would finally make up my mind to enter that house
which, like an immense Christmas stocking, seemed ready to bestow upon
me supernatural delights. (The French name "Noël" was, by the way,
unknown to Mme. Swann and Gilberte, who had substituted for it the
English "Christmas", and would speak of nothing but "Christmas pudding",
what people had given them as "Christmas presents" and of going
away--the thought of which maddened me with grief--"for Christmas". At
home even, I should have thought it degrading to use the word "Noël",
and always said "Christmas", which my father considered extremely
silly.)

I encountered no one at first but a footman who after leading me through
several large drawing-rooms shewed me into one that was quite small,
empty, its windows beginning to dream already in the blue light of
afternoon; I was left alone there in the company of orchids, roses and
violets, which, like people who are kept waiting in a room beside you
but do not know you, preserved a silence which their individuality as
living things made all the more impressive, and received coldly the
warmth of a glowing fire of coals, preciously displayed behind a screen
of crystal, in a basin of white marble over which it spilled, now and
again, its perilous rubies.

I had sat down, but I rose hurriedly on hearing the door opened; it was
only another footman, and then a third, and the minute result that their
vainly alarming entrances and exits achieved was to put a little more
coal on the fire or water in the vases. They departed, I found myself
alone, once that door was shut which Mme. Swann was surely soon going to
open. Of a truth, I should have been less ill at ease in a magician's
cave than in this little waiting-room where the fire appeared to me to
be performing alchemical transmutations as in Klingsor's laboratory.
Footsteps sounded afresh, I did not rise, it was sure to be just another
footman; it was M. Swann. "What! All by yourself? What is one to do;
that poor wife of mine has never been able to remember what time means!
Ten minutes to one. She gets later every day. And you'll see, she will
come sailing in without the least hurry, and imagine she's in heaps of
time." And as he was still subject to neuritis, and as he was becoming a
trifle ridiculous, the fact of possessing so unpunctual a wife, who came
in so late from the Bois, forgot everything at her dressmaker's and was
never in time for luncheon made Swann anxious for his digestion but
flattered his self-esteem.

He shewed me his latest acquisitions and explained their interest to me,
but my emotion, added to the unfamiliarity of being still without food
at this hour, sweeping through my mind left it void, so that while able
to speak I was incapable of hearing. Anyhow, so far as the works of art
in Swann's possession were concerned, it was enough for me that they
were contained in his house, formed a part there of the delicious hour
that preceded luncheon. The Gioconda herself might have appeared there
without giving me any more pleasure than one of Mme. Swann's indoor
gowns, or her scent bottles.

I continued to wait, alone or with Swann, and often with Gilberte, come
in to keep us company. The arrival of Mme. Swann, prepared for me by all
those majestic apparitions, must (so it seemed to me) be something truly
immense. I strained my ears to catch the slightest sound. But one never
finds quite as high as one has been expecting a cathedral, a wave in a
storm, a dancer's leap in the air; after those liveried footmen,
suggesting the chorus whose processional entry upon the stage leads up
to and at the same time diminishes the final appearance of the queen,
Mme. Swann, creeping furtively in, with a little otter-skin coat, her
veil lowered to cover a nose pink-tipped by the cold, did not fulfil the
promises lavished, while I had been waiting, upon my imagination.

But if she had stayed at home all morning, when she arrived in the
drawing-room it would be clad in a wrapper of _crêpe-de-Chine_,
brightly coloured, which seemed to me more exquisite than any of her
dresses.

Sometimes the Swanns decided to remain in the house all afternoon, and
then, as we had had luncheon so late, very soon I must watch setting,
beyond the garden-wall, the sun of that day which had seemed to me bound
to be different from other days; then in vain might the servants bring
in lamps of every size and shape, burning each upon the consecrated
altar of a console, a card-table, a corner-cupboard, a bracket, as
though for the celebration of some strange and secret rite; nothing
extraordinary transpired in the conversation, and I went home
disappointed, as one often is in one's childhood after the midnight
mass.

But my disappointment was scarcely more than mental. I was radiant with
happiness in this house where Gilberte, when she was still not with us,
was about to appear and would bestow on me in a moment, and for hours to
come, her speech, her smiling and attentive gaze, just as I had caught
it, that first time, at Combray. At the most I was a trifle jealous when
I saw her so often disappear into vast rooms above, reached by a private
staircase. Obliged myself to remain in the drawing-room, like a man in
love with an actress who is confined to his stall "in front" and wonders
anxiously what is going on behind the scenes, in the green-room, I put
to Swann, with regard to this other part of the house questions artfully
veiled, but in a tone from which I could not quite succeed in banishing
the note of uneasiness. He explained to me that the place to which
Gilberte had gone was the linen-room, offered himself to shew it to me,
and promised me that whenever Gilberte had occasion to go there again he
would insist upon her taking me with her. By these last words and the
relief which they brought me Swann at once annihilated for me one of
those terrifying interior perspectives at the end of which a woman with
whom we are in love appears so remote. At that moment I felt for him an
affection which I believed to be deeper than my affection for Gilberte.
For he, being the master over his daughter, was giving her to me,
whereas she, she withheld herself now and then, I had not the same
direct control over her as I had indirectly through Swann. Besides, it
was she whom I loved and could not, therefore look upon without that
disturbance, without that desire for something more which destroys in
us, in the presence of one whom we love, the sensation of loving.

As a rule, however, we did not stay indoors, we went out. Sometimes,
before going to dress, Mme. Swann would sit down at the piano. Her
lovely hands, escaping from the pink, or white, or, often, vividly
coloured sleeves of her _crêpe-de-Chine_ wrapper, drooped over the keys
with that same melancholy which was in her eyes but was not in her
heart. It was on one of those days that she happened to play me the part
of Vinteuil's sonata that contained the little phrase of which Swann had
been so fond. But often one listens and hears nothing, if it is a piece
of music at all complicated to which one is listening for the first
time. And yet when, later on, this sonata had been played over to me two
or three times I found that I knew it quite well. And so it is not wrong
to speak of hearing a thing for the first time. If one had indeed, as
one supposes, received no impression from the first hearing, the second,
the third would be equally "first hearings" and there would be no reason
why one should understand it any better after the tenth. Probably what
is wanting, the first time, is not comprehension but memory. For our
memory, compared to the complexity of the impressions which it has to
face while we are listening, is infinitesimal, as brief as the memory of
a man who in his sleep thinks of a thousand things and at once forgets
them, or as that of a man in his second childhood who cannot recall, a
minute afterwards, what one has just been saying to him. Of these
multiple impressions our memory is not capable of furnishing us with an
immediate picture. But that picture gradually takes shape, and, with
regard to works which we have heard more than once, we are like the
schoolboy who has read several times over before going to sleep a lesson
which he supposed himself not to know, and finds that he can repeat it
by heart next morning. It was only that I had not, until then, heard a
note of the sonata, and where Swann and his wife could make out a
distinct phrase that was as far beyond the range of my perception as a
name which one endeavours to recall and in place of which one discovers
only a void, a void from which, an hour later, when one is not thinking
about them, will spring of their own accord, in one continuous flight,
the syllables that one has solicited in vain. And not only does one not
seize at once and retain an impression of works that are really great,
but even in the content of any such work (as befell me in the case of
Vinteuil's sonata) it is the least valuable parts that one at first
perceives. Thus it was that I was mistaken not only in thinking that
this work held nothing further in store for me (so that for a long time
I made no effort to hear it again) from the moment in which Mme. Swann
had played over to me its most famous passage; I was in this respect as
stupid as people are who expect to feel no astonishment when they stand
in Venice before the front of Saint Mark's, because photography has
already acquainted them with the outline of its domes. Far more than
that, even when I had heard the sonata played from beginning to end, it
remained almost wholly invisible to me, like a monument of which its
distance or a haze in the atmosphere allows us to catch but a faint and
fragmentary glimpse. Hence the depression inseparable from one's
knowledge of such works, as of everything that acquires reality in time.
When the least obvious beauties of Vinteuil's sonata were revealed to
me, already, borne by the force of habit beyond the reach of my
sensibility, those that I had from die first distinguished and preferred
in it were beginning to escape, to avoid me. Since I was able only in
successive moments to enjoy all the pleasures that this sonata gave me,
I never possessed it in its entirety: it was like life itself. But, less
disappointing than life is, great works of art do not begin by giving us
all their best. In Vinteuil's sonata the beauties that one discovers at
once are those also of which one most soon grows tired, and for the same
reason, no doubt, namely that they are less different from what one
already knows. But when those first apparitions have withdrawn, there is
left for our enjoyment some passage which its composition too new and
strange to offer anything but confusion to our mind, had made
indistinguishable and so preserved intact; and this, which we have been
meeting every day and have not guessed it, which has thus been held in
reserve for us, which by the sheer force of its beauty has become
invisible and has remained unknown, this comes to us last of all. But
this also must be the last that we shall relinquish. And we shall love
it longer than the rest because we have taken longer to get to love it.
The time, moreover, that a person requires--as I required in the matter
of this sonata--to penetrate a work of any depth is merely an epitome, a
symbol, one might say, of the years, the centuries even that must elapse
before the public can begin to cherish a masterpiece that is really new.
So that the man of genius, to shelter himself from the ignorant contempt
of the world, may say to himself that, since one's contemporaries are
incapable of the necessary detachment, works written for posterity
should be read by posterity alone, like certain pictures which one
cannot appreciate when one stands too close to them. But, as it happens,
any such cowardly precaution to avoid false judgments is doomed to
failure; they are inevitable. The reason for which a work of genius is
not easily admired from the first is that the man who has created it is
extraordinary, that few other men resemble him. It was Beethoven's
Quartets themselves (the Twelfth, Thirteenth, Fourteenth and Fifteenth)
that devoted half-a-century to forming, fashioning and enlarging a
public for Beethoven's Quartets, marking in this way, like every great
work of art, an advance if not in artistic merit at least in
intellectual society, largely composed to-day of what was not to be
found when the work first appeared, that is to say of persons capable of
enjoying it. What artists call posterity is the posterity of the work of
art. It is essential that the work (leaving out of account, for
brevity's sake, the contingency that several men of genius may at the
same time be working along parallel lines to create a more instructed
public in the future, a public from which other men of genius shall reap
the benefit) shall create its own posterity. For if the work were held
in reserve, were revealed only to posterity, that audience, for that
particular work, would be not posterity but a group of contemporaries
who were merely living half-a-century later in time. And so it is
essential that the artist (and this is what Vinteuil had done), if he
wishes his work to be free to follow its own course, shall launch it,
wherever he may find sufficient depth, confidently outward bound towards
the future. And yet this interval of time, the true perspective in which
to behold a work of art, if leaving it out of account is the mistake
made by bad judges, taking it into account is at times a dangerous
precaution of the good. No doubt one can easily imagine, by an illusion
similar to that which makes everything on the horizon appear
equidistant, that all the revolutions which have hitherto occurred in
painting or in music did at least shew respect for certain rules,
whereas that which immediately confronts us, be it impressionism, a
striving after discord, an exclusive use of the Chinese scale, cubism,
futurism or what you will, differs outrageously from all that have
occurred before. Simply because those that have occurred before we are
apt to regard as a whole, forgetting that a long process of assimilation
has melted them into a continuous substance, varied of course but,
taking it as a whole, homogeneous, in which Hugo blends with Molière.
Let us try to imagine the shocking incoherence that we should find, if
we did not take into account the future, and the changes that it must
bring about, in a horoscope of our own riper years, drawn and presented
to us in our youth. Only horoscopes are not always accurate, and the
necessity, when judging a work of art, of including the temporal factor
in the sum total of its beauty introduces, to our way of thinking,
something as hazardous, and consequently as barren of interest, as every
prophecy the non-fulfilment of which will not at all imply any
inadequacy on the prophet's part, for the power to summon possibilities
into existence or to exclude them from it is not necessarily within the
competence of genius; one may have had genius and yet not have believed
in the future of railways or of flight, or, although a brilliant
psychologist, in the infidelity of a mistress or of a friend whose
treachery persons far less gifted would have foreseen.

If I did not understand the sonata, it enchanted me to hear Mme. Swann
play. Her touch appeared to me (like her wrappers, like the scent of her
staircase, her cloaks, her chrysanthemums) to form part of an individual
and mysterious whole, in a world infinitely superior to that in which
the mind is capable of analysing talent. "Attractive, isn't it, that
Vinteuil sonata?" Swann asked me. "The moment when night is darkening
among the trees, when the arpeggios of the violin call down a cooling
dew upon the earth. You must admit that it is rather charming; it shews
all the static side of moonlight, which is the essential part. It is not
surprising that a course of radiant heat such as my wife is taking,
should act on the muscles, since moonlight can prevent the leaves from
stirring. That is what he expresses so well in that little phrase, the
Bois de Boulogne plunged in a cataleptic trance. By the sea it is even
more striking, because you have there the faint response of the waves,
which, of course, you can hear quite distinctly, since nothing else
dares to move. In Paris it is the other way; at the most, you may notice
unfamiliar lights among the old buildings, the sky brightened as though
by a colourless and harmless conflagration, that sort of vast variety
show of which you get a hint here and there. But in Vinteuil's little
phrase, and in the whole sonata for that matter, it is not like that;
the scene is laid in the Bois; in the _gruppetto_ you can distinctly
hear a voice saying: 'I can almost see to read the paper!'" These words
from Swann might have falsified, later on, my impression of the sonata,
music being too little exclusive to inhibit absolutely what other people
suggest that we should find in it. But I understood from other words
which he let fall that this nocturnal foliage was simply that beneath
whose shade in many a restaurant on the outskirts of Paris he had
listened on many an evening to the little phrase. In place of the
profound significance that he had so often sought in it, what it
recalled now to Swann were the leafy boughs, arranged, wreathed, painted
round about it (which it gave him the desire to see again because it
seemed to him to be their inner, their hidden self, as it were their
soul); was the whole of one spring season which he had not been able to
enjoy before, not having had--feverish and moody as he then was--enough
strength of body and mind for its enjoyment, which, as one puts by for
an invalid the dainties that he has not been able to eat, it had kept in
store for him. The charm that he had been made to feel by certain
evenings in the Bois, a charm of which Vinteul's sonata served to remind
him, he could not have recaptured by questioning Odette, although she,
as well as the little phrase, had been his companion there. But Odette
had been merely his companion, by his side, not (as the phrase had been)
within him, and so had seen nothing--nor would she, had she been a
thousand times as comprehending, have seen anything of that vision which
for no one among us (or at least I was long under the impression that
this rule admitted no exception) can be made externally visible. "It is
rather charming, don't you think," Swann continued, "that sound can give
a reflection, like water, or glass. It is curious, too, that Vinteul's
phrase now shews me only the things to which I paid no attention then.
Of my troubles, my loves of those days it recalls nothing, it has
altered all my values." "Charles, I don't think that's very polite to
me, what you're saying." "Not polite? Really, you women are superb! I
was simply trying to explain to this young man that what the music
shews--to me, at least--is not for a moment 'Free-will' or 'In Tune with
the Infinite', but shall we say old Verdurin in his frock coat in the
palm-house at the Jardin d'Acclimatation. Hundreds of times, without my
leaving this room, the little phrase has carried me off to dine with it
at Armenonville. Gad, it is less boring, anyhow, than having to go there
with Mme. de Cambremer." Mme. Swann laughed. "That is a lady who is
supposed to have been violently in love with Charles," she explained, in
the same tone in which, shortly before, when we were speaking of Vermeer
of Delft, of whose existence I had been surprised to find her conscious,
she had answered me with: "I ought to explain that M. Swann was very
much taken up with that painter at the time he was courting me. Isn't
that so, Charles dear?" "You're not to start saying things about Mme. de
Cambremer!" Swann checked her, secretly flattered. "But I'm only
repeating what I've been told. Besides, it seems that she's an extremely
clever woman; I don't know her myself. I believe she's very pushing,
which surprises me rather in a clever woman. But everyone says that she
was quite mad about you; there's no harm in repeating that." Swann
remained silent as a deaf-mute which was in a way a confirmation of what
she had said, and a proof of his own fatuity. "Since what I'm playing
reminds you of the Jardin d'Acclimatation," his wife went on, with a
playful semblance of being offended, "we might take him there some day
in the carriage, if it would amuse him. It's lovely there just now, and
you can recapture your fond impressions! Which reminds me, talking of
the Jardin d'Acclimatation, do you know, this young man thought that we
were devotedly attached to a person whom I cut, as a matter of fact,
whenever I possibly can, Mme. Blatin! I think it is rather crushing for
us, that she should be taken for a friend of ours. Just fancy, dear Dr.
Cottard, who never says a harsh word about anyone, declares that she's
positively contagious." "A frightful woman! The one thing to be said for
her is that she is exactly like Savonarola. She is the very image of
that portrait of Savonarola, by Fra Bartolomeo." This mania which Swann
had for finding likenesses to people in pictures was defensible, for
even what we call individual expression is--as we so painfully discover
when we are in love and would fain believe in the unique reality of the
beloved--something diffused and general, which can be found existing at
different periods. But if one had listened to Swann, the processions of
the Kings of the East, already so anachronistic when Benozzo Gozzoli
introduced in their midst various Medici, would have been even more so,
since they would have included the portraits of a whole crowd of men,
contemporaries not of Gozzoli but of Swann, subsequent, that is to say
not only by fifteen centuries to the Nativity but by four more to the
painter himself. There was not missing from those trains, according to
Swann, a single living Parisian of any note, any more than there was
from that act in one of Sardou's plays, in which, out of friendship for
the author and for the leading lady, and also because it was the
fashion, all the best known men in Paris, famous doctors, politicians,
barristers, amused themselves, each on a different evening, by "walking
on". "But what has she got to do with the Jardin d'Acclimatation?"
"Everything!" "What? You don't suggest that she's got a sky-blue behind,
like the monkeys?" "Charles, you really are too dreadful! I was thinking
of what the Cingalese said to her. Do tell him, Charles; it really is a
gem." "Oh, it's too silly. You know, Mme. Blatin loves asking people
questions, in a tone which she thinks friendly, but which is really
overpowering." "What our good friends on the Thames call 'patronising',"
interrupted Odette. "Exactly. Well, she went the other day to the Jardin
d'Acclimatation, where they have some blackamoors--Cingalese, I think I
heard my wife say; she is much 'better up' in ethnology than I am."
"Now, Charles, you're not to make fun of poor me." "I've no intention of
making fun, I assure you. Well, to continue, she went up to one of these
black fellows with 'Good morning, nigger!' . . ." "Oh, it's too absurd!"
"Anyhow, this classification seems to have displeased the black. 'Me
nigger,' he shouted, (quite furious, don't you know), to Mme. Blatin,
'me nigger; you, old cow!'" "I do think that's so delightful! I adore
that story. Do say it's a good one. Can't you see old Blatin standing
there, and hearing him: 'Me nigger; you, old cow'?" I expressed an
intense desire to go there and see these Cingalese, one of whom had
called Mme. Blatin an old cow. They did not interest me in the least.
But I reflected that in going to the Jardin d'Acclimatation, and again
on our way home, we should pass along that Allée des Acacias in which I
had loved so, once, to gaze on Mme. Swann, and that perhaps Coquelin's
mulatto friend, to whom I had never managed to exhibit myself in the act
of saluting her, would see me there, seated at her side, as the victoria
swept by.

During those minutes in which Gilberte, having gone to "get ready", was
not in the room with us, M. and Mme. Swann would take delight in
revealing to me all the rare virtues of their child. And everything that
I myself observed seemed to prove the truth of what they said. I
remarked that, as her mother had told me, she had not only for her
friends but for the servants, for the poor, the most delicate attentions
carefully thought out, a desire to give pleasure, a fear of causing
annoyance, translated into all sorts of trifling actions which must
often have meant great inconvenience to her. She had done some "work"
for our stall-keeper in the Champs-Elysées, and went out in the snow to
give it to her with her own hands, so as not to lose a day. "You have no
idea how kind-hearted she is, she won't let it be seen," her father
assured me. Young as she was, she appeared far more sensible already
than her parents. When Swann boasted of his wife's grand friends
Gilberte would turn away, and remain silent, but without any air of
reproaching him, for it seemed inconceivable to her that her father
could be subjected to the slightest criticism. One day, when I had
spoken to her of Mlle. Vinteuil, she said to me:

"I shall never know her, for a very good reason, and that is that she
was not nice to her father, by what one hears, she gave him a lot of
trouble. You can't understand that any more than I, can you; I'm sure
you could no more live without your papa than I could, which is quite
natural after all. How can one ever forget a person one has loved all
one's life?"

And once when she was making herself particularly endearing to Swann, as
I mentioned this to her when he was out of the room:

"Yes, poor Papa, it is the anniversary of his father's death, just now.
You can understand what he must be feeling; you do understand, don't
you; you and I feel the same about things like that. So I just try to be
a little less naughty than usual." "But he doesn't ever think you
naughty. He thinks you're quite perfect." "Poor Papa, that's because
he's far too good himself."

But her parents were not content with singing the praises of
Gilberte--that same Gilberte, who, even before I had set eyes on her,
used to appear to me standing before a church, in a landscape of the
Ile-de-France, and later, awakening in me not dreams now but memories,
was embowered always in a hedge of pink hawthorn, in the little lane
that I took when I was going the Méséglise way. Once when I had asked
Mme. Swann (and had made an effort to assume the indifferent tone of a
friend of the family, curious to know the preferences of a child), which
among all her playmates Gilberte liked the best, Mme. Swann replied:
"But you ought to know a great deal better than I do. You are in her
confidence, her great favourite, her 'chum' as the English say."

It appears that in a coincidence as perfect as this was, when reality is
folded over to cover the ideal of which we have so long been dreaming,
it completely hides that ideal, absorbing it in itself, as when two
geometrical figures that are congruent are made to coincide, so that
there is but one, whereas we would rather, so as to give its full
significance to our enjoyment, preserve for all those separate points of
our desire, at the very moment in which we succeed in touching them, and
so as to be quite certain that they are indeed themselves, the
distinction of being intangible. And our thought cannot even reconstruct
the old state so as to confront the new with it, for it has no longer a
clear field: the acquaintance that we have made, the memory of those
first, unhoped-for moments, the talk to which we have listened are there
now to block the passage of our consciousness, and as they control the
outlets of our memory far more than those of our imagination, they react
more forcibly upon our past, which we are no longer able to visualise
without taking them into account, than upon the form, still unshaped, of
our future. I had been able to believe, year after year, that the right
to visit Mme. Swann was a vague and fantastic privilege to which I
should never attain; after I had spent a quarter of an hour in her
drawing-room, it was the period in which I did not yet know her that was
become fantastic and vague like a possibility which the realisation of
an alternative possibility has made impossible. How was I ever to dream
again of her dining-room as of an inconceivable place, when I could not
make the least movement in my mind without crossing the path of that
inextinguishable ray cast backwards to infinity, even into my own most
distant past, by the lobster _à l'Américaine_ which I had just been
eating. And Swann must have observed in his own case a similar
phenomenon; for this house in which he entertained me might be regarded
as the place into which had flowed, to coincide and be lost in one
another, not only the ideal dwelling that my imagination had
constructed, but another still, that which his jealous love, as
inventive as any fantasy of mine, had so often depicted to him, that
dwelling common to Odette and himself which had appeared so inaccessible
once, on evenings when Odette had taken him home with Forcheville to
drink orangeade with her; and what had flowed in to be absorbed, for
him, in the walls and furniture of the dining-room in which we now sat
down to luncheon was that unhoped-for paradise in which, in the old
days, he could not without a pang imagine that he would one day be
saying to _their_ butler those very words, "Is Madame ready yet?" which
I now heard him utter with a touch of impatience mingled with
self-satisfaction. No more than, probably, Swann himself could I succeed
in knowing my own happiness, and when Gilberte once broke out: "Who
would ever have said that the little girl you watched playing prisoners'
base, without daring to speak to her, would one day be your greatest
friend, and you would go to her house whenever you liked?" she spoke of
a change the occurrence of which I could verify only by observing it
from without, finding no trace of it within myself, for it was composed
of two separate states on both of which I could not, without their
ceasing to be distinct from one another, succeed in keeping my thoughts
fixed at one and the same time.

And yet this house, because it had been so passionately desired by
Swann, must have kept for him some of its attraction, if I was to judge
by myself for whom it had not lost all its mystery. That singular charm
in which I had for so long supposed the life of the Swanns to be bathed
I had not completely exorcised from their house on making my own way
into it; I had made it, that charm, recoil, overpowered as it must be by
the sight of the stranger, the pariah that I had been, to whom now Mme.
Swann pushed forward graciously for him to sit in it an armchair
exquisite, hostile, scandalised; but all round me that charm, in my
memory, I can still distinguish. Is it because, on those days on which
M. and Mme. Swann invited me to luncheon, to go out afterwards with them
and Gilberte, I imprinted with my gaze,--while I sat waiting for them
there alone--on the carpet, the sofas, the tables, the screens, the
pictures, the idea engraved upon my mind that Mme. Swann, or her
husband, or Gilberte was about to enter the room? Is it because those
objects have dwelt ever since in my memory side by side with the Swanns,
and have gradually acquired something of their personal character? Is it
because, knowing that the Swanns passed their existence among all those
things, I made of all of them as it were emblems of the private lives,
of those habits of the Swanns from which I had too long been excluded
for them not to continue to appear strange to me, even when I was
allowed the privilege of sharing in them? However it may be, always when
I think of that drawing-room which Swann (not that the criticism implied
on his part any intention to find fault with his wife's taste) found so
incongruous--because, while it was still planned and carried out in the
style, half conservatory half studio, which had been that of the rooms
in which he had first known Odette, she had, none the less, begun to
replace in its medley a quantity of the Chinese ornaments, which she now
felt to be rather gimcrack, a trifle dowdy, by a swarm of little chairs
and stools and things upholstered in old Louis XIV silks; not to mention
the works of art brought by Swann himself from his house on the Quai
d'Orléans--it has kept in my memory, on the contrary, that composite,
heterogeneous room, a cohesion, a unity, an individual charm never
possessed even by the most complete, the least spoiled of such
collections that the past has bequeathed to us, or the most modern,
alive and stamped with the imprint of a living personality; for we alone
can, by our belief that they have an existence of their own, give to
certain of the things that we see a soul which they afterwards keep,
which they develop in our minds. All the ideas that I had formed of the
hours, different from those that exist for other men, passed by the
Swanns in that house which was to their life what the body is to the
soul, and must give expression to its singularity, all those ideas were
rearranged, amalgamated--equally disturbing and indefinite
throughout--in the arrangement of the furniture, the thickness of the
carpets, the position of the windows, the ministrations of the servants.
When, after luncheon, we went in the sunshine to drink our coffee in the
great bay window of the drawing-room, while Mme. Swann was asking me how
many lumps of sugar I took, it was not only the silk-covered stool which
she pushed towards me that emitted, with the agonising charm that I had
long ago felt--first among the pink hawthorn and then beside the clump
of laurels--in the name of Gilberte, the hostility that her parents had
shewn to me, which this little piece of furniture seemed to have so well
understood, to have so completely shared that I felt myself unworthy,
and found myself almost reluctant to set my feet on its defenceless
cushion; a personality, a soul was latent there which linked it secretly
to the light of two o'clock in the afternoon, so different from any
other light, in the gulf in which there played about our feet its
sparkling tide of gold out of which the bluish crags of sofas and
vaporous carpet beaches emerged like enchanted islands; and there was
nothing, even to the painting by Rubens hung above the chimneypiece,
that was not endowed with the same quality and almost the same intensity
of charm as the laced boots of M. Swann, and that hooded cape, the like
of which I had so dearly longed to wear, whereas now Odette would beg
her husband to go and put on another, so as to appear more smart,
whenever I did them the honour of driving out with them. She too went
away to change her dress--not heeding my protestations that no "outdoor"
clothes could be nearly so becoming as the marvellous garment of
_crêpe-de-Chine_ or silk, old rose, cherry-coloured, Tiepolo pink,
white, mauve, green, red or yellow, plain or patterned, in which Mme.
Swann had sat down to luncheon and which she was now going to take off.
When I assured her that she ought to go out in that costume, she
laughed, either in scorn of my ignorance or from delight in my
compliment. She apologised for having so many wrappers, explaining that
they were the only kind of dress in which she felt comfortable, and left
us, to go and array herself in one of those regal toilets which imposed
their majesty on all beholders, and yet among which I was sometimes
summoned to decide which of them I preferred that she should put on.

In the Jardin d'Acclimatation, how proud I was when we had left the
carriage to be walking by the side of Mme. Swann! While she strolled
carelessly on, letting her cloak stream on the air behind her, I kept
eyeing her with an admiring gaze to which she coquettishly responded in
a lingering smile. And now, were we to meet one or other of Gilberte's
friends, boy or girl, who saluted us from afar, I would in my turn be
looked upon by them as one of those happy creatures whose lot I had
envied, one of those friends of Gilberte who knew her family and had a
share in that other part of her life, the part which was not spent in
the Champs-Elysées.

Often upon the paths of the Bois or the Jardin we passed, we were
greeted by some great lady who was Swann's friend, whom he perchance did
not see, so that his wife must rally him with a "Charles! Don't you see
Mme. de Montmorency?" And Swann, with that amicable smile, bred of a
long and intimate friendship, bared his head, but with a slow sweeping
gesture, with a grace peculiarly his own. Sometimes the lady would stop,
glad of an opportunity to shew Mme. Swann a courtesy which would involve
no tiresome consequences, by which they all knew that she would never
seek to profit, so thoroughly had Swann trained her in reserve. She had
none the less acquired all the manners of polite society, and however
smart, however stately the lady might be, Mme. Swann was invariably a
match for her; halting for a moment before the friend whom her husband
had recognised and was addressing, she would introduce us, Gilberte and
myself, with so much ease of manner, would remain so free, so tranquil
in her exercise of courtesy, that it would have been hard to say,
looking at them both, which of the two was the aristocrat. The day on
which we went to inspect the Cingalese, on our way home we saw coming in
our direction, and followed by two others who seemed to be acting as her
escort, an elderly but still attractive woman cloaked in a dark mantle
and capped with a little bonnet tied beneath her chin with a pair of
ribbons. "Ah! Here is someone who will interest you!" said Swann. The
old lady, who had come within a few yards of us, now smiled at us with a
caressing sweetness. Swann doffed his hat. Mme. Swann swept to the
ground in a curtsey and made as if to kiss the hand of the lady, who,
standing there like a Winterhalter portrait, drew her up again and
kissed her cheek. "There, there; will you put your hat on, you!" she
scolded Swann in a thick and almost growling voice, speaking like an old
and familiar friend. "I am going to present you to Her Imperial
Highness," Mme. Swann whispered. Swann drew me aside for a moment while
his wife talked of the weather and of the animals recently added to the
Jardin d'Acclimatation, with the Princess. "That is the Princesse
Mathilde;" he told me, "you know who' I mean, the friend of Flaubert,
Sainte-Beuve, Dumas. Just fancy, she's the niece of Napoleon I. She had
offers of marriage from Napoleon III and the Emperor of Russia. Isn't
that interesting? Talk to her a little. But I hope she won't keep us
standing here for an hour!. . . I met Taine the other day," he went on,
addressing the Princess, "and he told me that your Highness was vexed
with him." "He's behaved like a perfect peeg!" she said gruffly,
pronouncing the word _cochon_ as though she referred to Joan of Arc's
contemporary, Bishop Cauchon. "After his article on the Emperor I left
my card on him with p. p. c. on it." I felt the surprise that one feels
on opening the Correspondence of that Duchesse d'Orléans who was by
birth a Princess Palatine. And indeed Princesse Mathilde, animated by
sentiments so entirely French, expressed them with a straightforward
bluntness that recalled the Germany of an older generation, and was
inherited, doubtless, from her Wurtemberg mother. This somewhat rude and
almost masculine frankness she softened, as soon as she began to smile,
with an Italian languor. And the whole person was clothed in a dress so
typically "Second Empire" that--for all that the Princess wore it simply
and solely, no doubt, from attachment to the fashions that she had loved
when she was young--she seemed to have deliberately planned to avoid the
slightest discrepancy in historic colour, and to be satisfying the
expectations of those who looked to her to evoke the memory of another
age. I whispered to Swann to ask her whether she had known Musset. "Very
slightly, sir," was the answer, given in a tone which seemed to feign
annoyance at the question, and of course it was by way of a joke that
she called Swann "Sir", since they were intimate friends. "I had him to
dine once. I had invited him for seven o'clock. At half-past seven, as
he had not appeared, we sat down to dinner. He arrived at eight, bowed
to me, took his seat, never opened his lips, went off after dinner
without letting me hear the sound of his voice. Of course, he was dead
drunk. That hardly encouraged me to make another attempt." We were
standing a little way off, Swann and I. "I hope this little audience is
not going to last much longer," he muttered, "the soles of my feet are
hurting. I cannot think why my wife keeps on making conversation. When
we get home it will be she that complains of being tired, and she knows
I simply cannot go on standing like this." For Mme. Swann, who had had
the news from Mme. Bontemps, was in the course of telling the Princess
that the Government, having at last begun to realise the depth of its
depravity, had decided to send her an invitation to be present on the
platform in a few days' time, when the Tsar Nicholas was to visit the
Invalides. But the Princess who, in spite of appearances, in spite of
the character of her circle, which consisted mainly of artists and
literary people, had remained at heart and shewed herself, whenever she
had to take action, the niece of Napoleon, replied: "Yes, Madame, I
received it this morning, and I sent it back to the Minister, who must
have had it by now. I told him that I had no need of an invitation to go
to the Invalides. If the Government desires my presence there, it will
not be on the platform, it will be in our vault, where the Emperor's
tomb is. I have no need of a card to admit me there. I have my keys. I
go in and out when I choose. The Government has only to let me know
whether it wishes, me to be present or not. But if I do go to the
Invalides, it will be down below there or nowhere at all." At that
moment we were saluted, Mme. Swann and I, by a young man who greeted her
without stopping, and whom I was not aware that she knew; it was Bloch.
I inquired about him, and was told that he had been introduced to her by
Mme. Bontemps, and that he was employed in the Minister's secretariat,
which was news to me. Anyhow, she could not have seen him often--or
perhaps she had not cared to utter the name, hardly "smart" enough for
her liking, of Bloch, for she told me that he was called M. Moreul. I
assured her that she was mistaken, that his name was Bloch. The Princess
gathered up the train that flowed out behind her, while Mme. Swann gazed
at it with admiring eyes. "It is only a fur that the Emperor of Russia
sent me," she explained, "and as I have just been to see him I put it
on, so as to shew him that I'd managed to have it made up as a mantle."
"I hear that Prince Louis has joined the Russian Army; the Princess will
be very sad at losing him," went on Mme. Swann, not noticing her
husband's signals of distress. "That was a fine thing to do. As I said
to him, 'Just because there's been a. soldier, before, in the family,
that's no reason!'" replied the Princess, alluding with this abrupt
simplicity to Napoleon the Great. But Swann could hold out no longer.
"Ma'am, it is I that am going to play the Prince, and ask your
permission to retire; but, you see, my wife has not been so well, and I
do not like her to stand still for any time." Mme. Swann curtseyed
again, and the Princess conferred upon us all a celestial smile, which
she seemed to have summoned out of the past, from among the graces of
her girlhood, from the evenings at Compiègne, a smile which glided,
sweet and unbroken, over her hitherto so sullen face; then she went on
her way, followed by the two ladies in waiting, who had confined
themselves, in the manner of interpreters, of children's or invalids'
nurses, to punctuating our conversation with insignificant sentences and
superfluous explanations. "You should go and write your name in her
book, one day this week," Mme. Swann counselled me. "One doesn't leave
cards upon these 'Royalties', as the English call them, but she will
invite you to her house if you put your name down."

Sometimes in those last days of winter we would go, before proceeding on
our expedition, into one of the small picture-shows that were being
given at that time, where Swann, as a collector of mark, was greeted
with special deference by the dealers in whose galleries they were held.
And in that still wintry weather the old longing to set out for the
South of France and Venice would be reawakened in me by those rooms in
which a springtime, already well advanced, and a blazing sun cast violet
shadows upon the roseate Alpilles and gave the intense transparency of
emeralds to the Grand Canal. If the weather were inclement, we would go
to a concert or a theatre, and afterwards to one of the fashionable
tea-rooms. There, whenever Mme. Swann had anything to say to me which
she did not wish the people at the next table, or even the waiters who
brought our tea to understand, she would say it in English, as though
that had been a secret language known to our two selves alone. As it
happened everyone in the place knew English--I only had not yet learned
the language, and was obliged to say so to Mme. Swann in order that she
might cease to make, on the people who were drinking tea or were serving
us with it, remarks which I guessed to be uncomplimentary without either
my understanding or the person referred to losing a single word.

Once, in the matter of an afternoon at the theatre, Gilberte gave me a
great surprise. It was precisely the day of which she had spoken to me
some time back, on which fell the anniversary of her grandfather's
death. We were to go, she and I, with her governess, to hear selections
from an opera, and Gilberte had dressed with a view to attending this
performance, and wore the air of indifference with which she was in the
habit of treating whatever we might be going to do, with the comment
that it might be anything in the world, no matter what, provided that it
amused me and had her parents' approval. Before luncheon, her mother
drew us aside to tell us that her father was vexed at the thought of our
going to a theatre on that day. This seemed to me only natural. Gilberte
remained impassive, but grew pale with an anger which she was unable to
conceal; still she uttered not a word. When M. Swann joined us his wife
took him to the other end of the room and said something in his ear. He
called Gilberte, and they went together into the next room. We could
hear their raised voices. And yet I could not bring myself to believe
that Gilberte, so submissive, so loving, so thoughtful, would resist her
father's appeal, on such a day and for so trifling a matter. At length
Swann reappeared with her, saying: "You heard what I said. Now you may
do as you like."

Gilberte's features remained compressed in a frown throughout luncheon,
after which we retired to her room. Then suddenly, without hesitating
and as though she had never at any point hesitated over her course of
action: "Two o'clock!" she exclaimed, "You know the concert begins at
half-past." And she told her governess to make haste.

"But," I reminded her, "won't your father be cross with you?"

"Not the least little bit!"

"Surely, he was afraid it would look odd, because of the anniversary."

"What difference can it make to me what people think? I think it's
perfectly absurd to worry about other people in matters of sentiment. We
feel things for ourselves, not for the public. Mademoiselle has very few
pleasures; she's been looking forward to going to this concert. I am not
going to deprive her of it just to satisfy public opinion."

"But, Gilberte," I protested, taking her by the arm, "it is not to
satisfy public opinion, it is to please your father."

"You are not going to pass remarks upon my conduct, I hope," she said
sharply, plucking her arm away.

 *
* *

A favour still more precious than their taking me with them to the
Jardin d'Acclimatation, the Swanns did not exclude me even from their
friendship with Bergotte, which had been at the root of the attraction
that I had found in them when, before I had even seen Gilberte, I
reflected that her intimacy with that god-like elder would have made her,
for me, the most passionately enthralling of friends, had not the
disdain that I was bound to inspire in her forbidden me to hope that she
would ever take me, in his company, to visit the towns that he loved.
And lo, one day, came an invitation from Mme. Swann to a big
luncheon-party. I did not know who else were to be the guests. On my
arrival I was disconcerted, as I crossed the hall, by an alarming
incident. Mme. Swann seldom missed an opportunity of adopting any of
those customs which pass as fashionable for a season, and then, failing
to find support, are speedily abandoned (as, for instance, many years
before, she had had her "private hansom", or now had, printed in English
upon a card inviting you to luncheon, the words, "To meet", followed by
the name of some more or less important personage). Often enough these
usages implied nothing mysterious and required no initiation. Take, for
instance, a minute innovation of those days, imported from England;
Odette had made her husband have some visiting cards printed on which
the name Charles Swann was preceded by "Mr.". After the first visit that
I paid her, Mme. Swann had left at my door one of these "pasteboards",
as she called them. No one had ever left a card on me before; I felt at
once so much pride, emotion, gratitude that, scraping together all the
money I possessed, I ordered a superb basket of camellias and had it
sent to Mme. Swann. I implored my father to go and leave a card on her,
but first, quickly, to have some printed on which his name should bear
the prefix "Mr.". He vouchsafed neither of my prayers; I was in despair
for some days, and then asked myself whether he might not after all have
been right. But this use of "Mr.", if it meant nothing, was at least
intelligible. Not so with another that was revealed to me on the
occasion of this luncheon-party, but revealed without any indication of
its purport. At the moment when I was about to step from the hall into
the drawing-room the butler handed me a thin, oblong envelope upon which
my name was inscribed. In my surprise I thanked him; but I eyed the
envelope with misgivings. I no more knew what I was expected to do with
it than a foreigner knows what to do with one of those little utensils
that they lay by his place at a Chinese banquet. I noticed that it was
gummed down; I was afraid of appearing indiscreet, were I to open it
then and there; and so I thrust it into my pocket with an air of knowing
all about it. Mme. Swann had written to me a few days before, asking me
to come to luncheon with "just a few people". There were, however,
sixteen of us, among whom I never suspected for a moment that I was to
find Bergotte. Mme. Swann, who had already "named" me, as she called it,
to several of her guests, suddenly, after my name, in the same tone that
she had used in uttering it (in fact, as though we were merely two of
the guests at her party, who ought each to feel equally flattered on
meeting the other), pronounced that of the sweet Singer with the snowy
locks. The name Bergotte made me jump like the sound of a revolver fired
at me point blank, but instinctively, for appearance's sake, I bowed;
there, straight in front of me, as by one of those conjurers whom we see
standing whole and unharmed, in their frock coats, in the smoke of a
pistol shot out of which a pigeon has just fluttered, my salute was
returned by a young common little thick-set peering person, with a red
nose curled like a snail-shell and a black tuft on his chin. I was
cruelly disappointed, for what had just vanished in the dust of the
explosion was not only the feeble old man, of whom no vestige now
remained; there was also the beauty of an immense work which I had
contrived to enshrine in the frail and hallowed organism that I had
constructed, like a temple, expressly for itself, but for which no room
was to be found in the squat figure, packed tight with blood-vessels,
bones, muscles, sinews, of the little man with the snub nose and black
beard who stood before me. All the Bergotte whom I had slowly and
delicately elaborated for myself, drop by drop, like a stalactite, out
of the transparent beauty of his books, ceased (I could see at once) to
be of any use, the moment I was obliged to include in him the
snail-shell nose and to utilise the little black beard; just as we must
reject as worthless the solution of a problem the terms of which we have
not read in full, having failed to observe that the total must amount to
a specified figure. The nose and beard were elements similarly
ineluctable, and all the more aggravating in that, while forcing me to
reconstruct entirely the personage of Bergotte, they seemed further to
imply, to produce, to secrete incessantly a certain quality of mind,
alert and self-satisfied, which was not in the picture, for such a mind
had no connexion whatever with the sort of intelligence that was
diffused throughout those books, so intimately familiar to me, which
were permeated by a gentle and god-like wisdom. Starting from them, I
should never have arrived at that snail-shell nose; but starting from
the nose, which did not appear to be in the slightest degree ashamed of
itself, but stood out alone there like a grotesque ornament fastened on
his face, I must proceed in a diametrically opposite direction from the
work of Bergotte, I must arrive, it would seem, at the mentality of a
busy and preoccupied engineer, of the sort who when you accost them in
the street think it correct to say: "Thanks, and you?" before you have
actually inquired of them how they are, or else, if you assure them that
you have been charmed to make their acquaintance, respond with an
abbreviation which they imagine to be effective, intelligent and
up-to-date, inasmuch as it avoids any waste of precious time on vain
formalities: "Same here!" Names are, no doubt, but whimsical
draughtsmen, giving us of people as well as of places sketches so little
like the reality that we often experience a kind of stupor when we have
before our eyes, in place of the imagined, the visible world (which, for
that matter, is not the true world, our senses being little more endowed
than our imagination with the art of portraiture, so little, indeed,
that the final and approximately lifelike pictures which we manage to
obtain of reality are at least as different from the visible world as
that was from the imagined). But in Bergotte's case, my preconceived
idea of him from his name troubled me far less than my familiarity with
his work, to which I was obliged to attach, as to the cord of a balloon,
the man with the little beard, without knowing whether it would still
have the strength to raise him from the ground. It seemed quite clear,
however, that it really was he who had written the books that I had so
greatly enjoyed, for Mme. Swann having thought it incumbent upon her to
tell him of my admiration for one of these, he shewed no surprise that
she should have mentioned this to him rather than to any other of the
party, nor did he seem to regard her action as due to a misapprehension,
but, swelling out the frock coat which he had put on in honour of all
these distinguished guests with a body distended in anticipation of the
coming meal, while his mind was completely occupied by other, more real
and more important considerations, it was only as at some finished
episode in his early life, as though one had made an allusion to a
costume of the Duc de Guise which he had worn, one season, at a fancy
dress ball, that he smiled as he bore his mind back to the idea of his
books; which at once began to fall in my estimation (dragging down with
them the whole value of Beauty, of the world, of life itself), until
they seemed to have been merely the casual amusement of a man with a
little beard. I told myself that he must have taken great pains over
them, but that, if he had lived upon an island surrounded by beds of
pearl-oysters, he would instead have devoted himself to, and would have
made a fortune out of the pearling trade. His work no longer appeared to
me so inevitable. And then I asked myself whether originality did indeed
prove that great writers were gods, ruling each one over a kingdom that
was his alone, or whether all that was not rather make-believe, whether
the differences between one man's book and another's were not the result
of their respective labours rather than the expression of a radical and
essential difference between two contrasted personalities.

Meanwhile we had taken our places at the table. By the side of my plate
I found a carnation, the stalk of which was wrapped in silver paper. It
embarrassed me less than the envelope that had been handed to me in the
hall, which, however, I had completely forgotten. This custom, strange
as it was to me, became more intelligible when I saw all the male guests
take up the similar carnations that were lying by their plates and slip
them into the buttonholes of their coats. I did as they had done, with
the air of spontaneity that a free-thinker assumes in church, who is not
familiar with the order of service but rises when everyone else rises
and kneels a moment after everyone else is on his knees. Another usage,
equally strange to me but less ephemeral, disquieted me more. On the
other side of my plate was a smaller plate, on which was heaped a
blackish substance which I did not then know to be caviare. I was
ignorant of what was to be done with it but firmly determined not to let
it enter my mouth.

Bergotte was sitting not far from me and I could hear quite well
everything that he said. I understood then the impression that M. de
Norpois had formed of him. He had indeed a peculiar "organ"; there is
nothing that so much alters the material qualities of the voice as the
presence of thought behind what one is saying; the resonance of one's
diphthongs, the energy of one's labials are profoundly affected--in
fact, one's whole way of speaking. His seemed to me to differ entirely
from his way of writing, and even the things that he said from those
with which he filled his books. But the voice issues from behind a mask
through which it is not powerful enough to make us recognise, at first
sight, a face which we have seen uncovered in the speaker's literary
style. At certain points in the conversation, when Bergotte, by force of
habit, began to talk in a way which no one but M. de Norpois would have
thought affected or unpleasant, it was a long time before I discovered
an exact correspondence with the parts of his books in which his form
became so poetic and so musical. At those points he could see in what he
was saying a plastic beauty independent of whatever his sentences might
mean, and as human speech reflects the human soul, though without
expressing it as does literary style, Bergotte appeared almost to be
talking nonsense, intoning certain words and, if he were secretly
pursuing, beneath them, a single image, stringing them together
uninterruptedly on one continuous note, with a wearisome monotony. So
that a pretentious, emphatic and monotonous opening was a sign of the
rare aesthetic value of what he was saying, and an effect, in his
conversation, of the same power which, in his books, produced that
harmonious flow of imagery. I had had all the more difficulty in
discovering this at first since what he said at such moments, precisely
because it was the authentic utterance of Bergotte, had not the
appearance of being Bergotte's. It was an abundant crop of clearly
defined ideas, not included in that "Bergotte manner" which so many
story-tellers had appropriated to themselves; and this dissimilarity was
probably but another aspect--made out with difficulty through the stream
of conversation, as an eclipse is seen through a smoked glass--of the
fact that when one read a page of Bergotte it was never just what would
have been written by any of those lifeless imitators who, nevertheless,
in newspapers and in books, adorned their prose with so many
"Bergottish" images and ideas. This difference in style arose from the
fact that what was meant by "Bergottism" was, first and foremost, a
priceless element of truth hidden in the heart of everything, whence it
was extracted by that great writer, by virtue of his genius, and that
this extraction, and not simply the perpetration of "Bergottisms", was
my sweet Singer's aim in writing. Though, it must be added, he continued
to perpetrate them in spite of himself, and because he was Bergotte, so
that, in one sense, every fresh beauty in his work was the little drop
of Bergotte buried at the heart of a thing which he had distilled from
it. But if, for that reason, each of those beauties was related to all
the rest, and had a "family likeness", yet each remained separate and
individual, as was the act of discovery that had brought it to the light
of day; new, and consequently different from what was called the
Bergotte manner, which was a loose synthesis of all the "Bergottisms"
already invented and set forth by him in writing, with no indication by
which men who lacked genius might forecast what would be his next
discovery. So it is with all great writers, the beauty of their language
is as incalculable as that of a woman whom we have never seen; it is
creative, because it is applied to an external object of which, and not
of their language or its beauty, they are thinking, to which they have
not yet given expression. An author of memorials of our time, wishing to
write without too obviously seeming to be writing like Saint-Simon,
might, on occasion, give us the first line of his portrait of Villars:
"He was a rather tall man, dark . . . with an alert, open, expressive
physiognomy," but what law of determinism could bring him to the
discovery of Saint-Simon's next line, which begins with "and, to tell
the truth, a trifle mad"? The true variety is in this abundance of real
and unexpected elements, in the branch loaded with blue flowers which
thrusts itself forward, against all reason, from the spring hedgerow
that seemed already overcharged with blossoms, whereas the purely formal
imitation of variety (and one might advance the same argument for all
the other qualities of style) is but a barren uniformity, that is to say
the very antithesis of variety, and cannot, in the work of imitators,
give the illusion or recall other examples of variety save to a reader
who has not acquired the sense of it from the masters themselves.

And so--just as Bergotte's way of speaking would no doubt have been
charming if he himself had been merely an amateur repeating imitations
of Bergotte, whereas it was attached to the mind of Bergotte, at work
and in action, by essential ties which the ear did not at once
distinguish--so it was because Bergotte applied that mind with precision
to the reality which pleased him that his language had in it something
positive, something over-rich, disappointing those who expected to hear
him speak only of the "eternal torrent of forms," and of the "mystic
thrills of beauty". Moreover the quality, always rare and new, of what
he wrote was expressed in his conversation by so subtle a manner of
approaching a question, ignoring every aspect of it that was already
familiar, that he appeared to be seizing hold of an unimportant detail,
to be quite wrong about it, to be speaking in paradox, so that his ideas
seemed as often as not to be in confusion, for each of us finds lucidity
only in those ideas which are in the same state of confusion as his own.
Besides, as all novelty depends upon the elimination, first, of the
stereotyped attitude to which we have grown accustomed, and which has
seemed to us to be reality itself, every new conversation, as well as
all original painting and music, must always appear laboured and
tedious. It is founded upon figures of speech with which we are not
familiar, the speaker appears to us to be talking entirely in metaphors;
and this wearies us, and gives us the impression of a want of truth.
(After all, the old forms of speech must in their time have been images
difficult to follow when the listener was not yet cognisant of the
universe which they depicted. But he has long since decided that this
must be the real universe, and so relies confidently upon it.) So when
Bergotte--and his figures appear simple enough to-day--said of Cottard
that he was a mannikin in a bottle, always trying to rise to the
surface, and of Brichot that "to him even more than to Mme. Swann the
arrangement of his hair was a matter for anxious deliberation, because,
in his twofold preoccupation over his profile and his reputation, he had
always to make sure that it was so brushed as to give him the air at
once of a lion and of a philosopher," one immediately felt the strain,
and sought a foothold upon something which one called more concrete,
meaning by that more ordinary. These unintelligible words, issuing from
the mask that I had before my eyes, it was indeed to the writer whom I
admired that they must be attributed, and yet they could not have been
inserted among his books, in the form of a puzzle set in a series of
different puzzles, they occupied another plane and required a
transposition by means of which, one day, when I was repeating to myself
certain phrases that I had heard Bergotte use, I discovered in them the
whole machinery of his literary style, the different elements of which I
was able to recognise and to name in this spoken discourse which had
struck me as being so different.

From a less immediate point of view the special way, a little too
meticulous, too intense, that he had of pronouncing certain words,
certain adjectives which were constantly recurring in his conversation,
and which he never uttered without a certain emphasis, giving to each of
their syllables a separate force and intoning the last syllable (as for
instance the word _visage_, which he always used in preference to
figure, and enriched with a number of superfluous v's and s's and g's,
which seemed all to explode from his outstretched palm at such moments)
corresponded exactly to the fine passages in which, in his prose, he
brought those favourite words into the light, preceded by a sort of
margin and composed in such a way in the metrical whole of the phrase
that the reader was obliged, if he were not to make a false quantity, to
give to each of them its full value. And yet one did not find in the
speech of Bergotte a certain luminosity which in his books, as in those
of some other writers, often modified in the written phrase the
appearance of its words. This was doubtless because that light issues
from so profound a depth that its rays do not penetrate to our spoken
words in the hours in which, thrown open to others by the act of
conversation, we are to a certain extent closed against ourselves. In
this respect, there were more intonations, there was more accent in his
books than in his talk; an accent independent of the beauty of style,
which the author himself has possibly not perceived, for it is not
separable from his most intimate personality. It was this accent which,
at the moments when, in his books, Bergotte was entirely natural, gave a
rhythm to the words--often at such times quite insignificant--that he
wrote. This accent is not marked on the printed page, there is nothing
there to indicate it, and yet it comes of its own accord to his phrases,
one cannot pronounce them in any other way, it is what was most
ephemeral and at the same time most profound in the writer, and it is
what will bear witness to his true nature, what will say whether,
despite all the austerity that he has expressed he was gentle, despite
all his sensuality sentimental.

Certain peculiarities of elocution, faint traces of which were to be
found in Bergotte's conversation, were not exclusively his own; for
when, later on, I came to know his brothers and sisters, I found those
peculiarities much more accentuated in their speech. There was something
abrupt and harsh in the closing words of a light and spirited utterance,
something faint and dying at the end of a sad one. Swann, who had known
the Master as a boy, told me that in those days one used to hear on his
lips, just as much as on his brothers' and sisters', those inflexions,
almost a family type, shouts of violent merriment interspersed with
murmurings of a long-drawn melancholy, and that in the room in which
they all played together he used to perform his part, better than any of
them, in their symphonies, alternately deafening and subdued. However
characteristic it may be, the sound that escapes from human lips is
fugitive and does not survive the speaker. But it was not so with the
pronunciation of the Bergotte family. For if it is difficult ever to
understand, even in the _Meistersinger_ how an artist can invent music
by listening to the twittering of birds, yet Bergotte had transposed and
fixed in his written language that manner of dwelling on words which
repeat themselves in shouts of joy, or fall, drop by drop, in melancholy
sighs. There are in his books just such closing phrases where the
accumulated sounds are prolonged (as in the last chords of the overture
of an opera which cannot come to an end, and repeats several times over
its supreme cadence before the conductor finally lays down his baton),
in which, later on, I was to find a musical equivalent for those
phonetic 'brasses' of the Bergotte family. But in his own case, from the
moment in which he transferred them to his books, he ceased
instinctively to make use of them in his speech. From the day on which
he had begun to write--all the more markedly, therefore, in the later
years in which I first knew him--his voice had lost this orchestration
for ever.

These young Bergottes--the future writer and his brothers and
sisters--were doubtless in no way superior, far from it, to other young
people, more refined, more intellectual than themselves, who found the
Bergottes rather "loud", that is to say a trifle vulgar, irritating one
by the witticisms which characterised the tone, at once pretentious and
puerile, of their household. But genius, and even what is only great
talent, spring less from seeds of intellect and social refinement
superior to those of other people than from the faculty of transposing,
and so transforming them. To heat a liquid over an electric lamp one
requires to have not the strongest lamp possible, but one of which the
current can cease to illuminate, can be diverted so as instead of light
to give heat. To mount the skies it is not necessary to have the most
powerful of motors, one must have a motor which, instead of continuing
to run along the earth's surface, intersecting with a vertical line the
horizontal which it began by following, is capable of converting its
speed into ascending force. Similarly the men who produce works of
genius are not those who live in the most delicate atmosphere, whose
conversation is most brilliant or their culture broadest, but those who
have had the power, ceasing in a moment to live only for themselves, to
make use of their personality as of a mirror, in such a way that their
life, however unimportant it may be socially, and even, in a sense,
intellectually speaking, is reflected by it, genius consisting in the
reflective power of the writer and not in the intrinsic quality of the
scene reflected. The day on which young Bergotte succeeded in shewing to
the world of his readers the tasteless household in which he had passed
his childhood, and the not very amusing conversations between himself
and his brothers, on that day he climbed far above the friends of his
family, more intellectual and more distinguished than himself; they in
their fine Rolls Royces might return home expressing due contempt for
the vulgarity of the Bergottes; but he, with his modest engine which had
at last left the ground, he soared above their heads.

But there were other characteristics of his elocution which it was not
with the members of his family, but with certain contemporary writers
that he must share. Younger men, who were beginning to repudiate him as
a master and disclaimed any intellectual affinity to him in themselves,
displayed their affinity without knowing it when they made use of the
same adverbs, the same prepositions that he incessantly repeated, when
they constructed their sentences in the same way, spoke in the same
quiescent, lingering tone, by a reaction from the eloquent, easy
language of an earlier generation. Perhaps these young men--we shall
come across some of whom this may be said--had never known Bergotte. But
his way of thinking, inoculated into them, had led them to those
alterations of syntax and of accent which bear a necessary relation to
originality of mind. A relation which, incidentally, requires to be
traced. Thus Bergotte, if he owed nothing to any man for his manner of
writing, derived his manner of speaking from one of his early
associates, a marvellous talker to whose ascendancy he had succumbed,
whom he imitated, unconsciously, in his conversation, but who himself,
being less gifted, had never written any really outstanding book. So
that if one had been in quest of originality in speech, Bergotte must
have been labelled a disciple, a writer at second-hand, whereas,
influenced by his friend only so far as talk went, he had been original
and creative in his writings. Doubtless again, so as to distinguish
himself from the previous generation, too fond as it had been of
abstractions, of weighty commonplaces, when Bergotte wished to speak
favourably of a book, what he would bring into prominence, what he would
quote with approval would always be some scene that furnished the reader
with an image, some picture that had no rational significance. "Ah,
yes!" he would exclaim, "it is quite admirable! There is a little girl
in an orange shawl. It is excellent!" or again, "Oh, yes, there is a
passage in which there is a regiment marching along the street; yes, it
is excellent!" As for style, he was not altogether of his time (though
he remained quite exclusively of his race, abominating Tolstoy, George
Eliot, Ibsen and Dostoievsky), for the word that always came to his lips
when he wished to praise the style of any writer was "mild". "Yes, you
know I like Chateaubriand better in _Atala_ than in _René_; he seems to
me to be 'milder'." He said the word like a doctor who, when his patient
assures him that milk will give him indigestion, answers, "But, you
know, it's very 'mild'." And it is true that there was in Bergotte's
style a kind of harmony similar to that for which the ancients used to
praise certain of their orators in terms which we now find it hard to
understand, accustomed as we are to our own modern tongues in which
effects of that kind are not sought.

He would say also, with a shy smile, of pages of his own for which some
one had expressed admiration: "I think it is more or less true, more or
less accurate; it may be of some value perhaps," but he would say this
simply from modesty, as a woman to whom one has said that her dress, or
her daughter is charming replies, "It is comfortable," or "She is a good
girl." But the constructive instinct was too deeply implanted in
Bergotte for him not to be aware that the sole proof that he had built
usefully and on the lines of truth lay in the pleasure that his work had
given, to himself first of all and afterwards to his readers. Only many
years later, when he no longer had any talent, whenever he wrote
anything with which he was not satisfied, so as not to have to suppress
it, as he ought to have done, so as to be able to publish it with a
clear conscience he would repeat, but to himself this time: "After all,
it is more or less accurate, it must be of some value to the country."
So that the phrase murmured long ago among his admirers by the insincere
voice of modesty came in the end to be whispered in the secrecy of his
heart by the uneasy tongue of pride. And the same words which had served
Bergotte as an unwanted excuse for the excellence of his earliest works
became as it were an ineffective consolation to him for the hopeless
mediocrity of the latest.

A kind of austerity of taste which he had, a kind of determination to
write nothing of which he could not say that it was "mild", which had
made people for so many years regard him as a sterile and precious
artist, a chiseller of exquisite trifles, was on the contrary the secret
of his strength, for habit forms the style of the writer just as much as
the character of the man, and the author who has more than once been
patient to attain, in the expression of his thoughts, to a certain kind
of attractiveness, in so doing lays down unalterably the boundaries of
his talent, just as if he yields too often to pleasure, to laziness, to
the fear of being put to trouble, he will find himself describing in
terms which no amount of revision can modify, the forms of his own vices
and the limits of his virtue.

If, however, despite all the analogies which I was to perceive later on
between the writer and the man, I had not at first sight, in Mme.
Swann's drawing-room, believed that this could be Bergotte, the author
of so many divine books, who stood before me, perhaps I was not
altogether wrong, for he himself did not, in the strict sense of the
word, "believe" it either. He did not believe it because he shewed a
great assiduity in the presence of fashionable people (and yet he was
not a snob), of literary men and journalists who were vastly inferior to
himself. Of course he had long since learned, from the suffrage of his
readers, that he had genius, compared to which social position and
official rank were as nothing. He had learned that he had genius, but he
did not believe it because he continued to simulate deference towards
mediocre writers in order to succeed, shortly, in becoming an
Academician, whereas the Academy and the Faubourg Saint-Germain have no
more to do with that part of the Eternal Mind which is the author of the
works of Bergotte than with the law of causality or the idea of God.
That also he knew, but as a kleptomaniac knows, without profiting by the
knowledge, that it is wrong to steal. And the man with the little beard
and snail-shell nose knew and used all the tricks of the gentleman who
pockets your spoons, in his efforts to reach the coveted academic chair,
I or some duchess or other who could dispose of several votes at the
election, but while on his way to them he would endeavour to make sure
that no one who would consider the pursuit of such an object a vice in
him should see what he was doing. He was only half-successful; one could
hear, alternating with the speech of the true Bergotte, that of the
other Bergotte, ambitious, utterly selfish, who thought it not worth his
while to speak of any but his powerful, rich or noble friends, so as to
enhance his own position, he who in his books, when he was really
himself, had so well portrayed the charm, pure as a mountain spring, of
poverty.

As for those other vices to which M. de Norpois had alluded, that almost
incestuous love, which was made still worse, people said, by a want of
delicacy in the matter of money, if they contradicted, in a shocking
manner, the tendency of his latest novels, in which he shewed everywhere
a regard for what was right and proper so painfully rigid that the most
innocent pleasures of their heroes were poisoned by it, and that even
the reader found himself turning their pages with a sense of acute
discomfort, and asked himself whether it was possible to go y on living
even the quietest of lives, those vices did not at I all prove,
supposing that they were fairly imputed to Bergotte, that his literature
was a lie and all his sensitiveness mere play-acting. Just as in
pathology certain conditions similar in appearance are due, some to an
excess others to an insufficiency of tension, of secretion and so forth,
so there may be vice arising from supersensitiveness just as much as
from the lack of it. Perhaps it is only in really vicious lives that the
moral problem can arise in all its disquieting strength. And of this
problem the artist finds a solution in the terms not of his own personal
life but of what is for him the true life, a general, a literary
solution. As the great Doctors of the Church began often, without losing
their virtue, by acquainting themselves with the sins of all mankind,
out of which they extracted their own personal sanctity, so great
artists often, while being thoroughly wicked, make use of their vices in
order to arrive at a conception of the moral law that is binding upon us
all. It is the vices (or merely the weaknesses and follies) of the
circle in which they live, the meaningless conversation, the frivolous
or shocking lives of their daughters, the infidelity of their wives, or
their own misdeeds that writers have most often castigated in their
books, without, however, thinking it necessary to alter their domestic
economy or to improve the tone of their households. And this contrast
had never before been so striking as it was in Bergotte's time, because,
on the one hand, in proportion as society grew more corrupt, our notions
of morality were increasingly exalted, while on the other hand the
public were now told far more than they had ever hitherto known about
the private lives of literary men; and on certain evenings in the
theatre people would point out the author whom I had so greatly admired
at Combray, sitting at the back of a box the mere composition of which
seemed an oddly humorous, or perhaps keenly ironical commentary upon--a
brazen-faced denial of the thesis which he had just been maintaining in
his latest book. Not that anything which this or that casual informant
could tell me was of much use in helping me to settle the question of
the goodness or wickedness of Bergotte. An intimate friend would furnish
proofs of his hardheartedness; then a stranger would cite some instance
(touching, since he had evidently wished it to remain hidden) of his
real depth of feeling. He had behaved cruelly to his wife. But in a
village inn, where he had gone to spend the night, he had stayed on to
watch over a poor woman who had tried to drown herself, and when he was
obliged to continue his journey had left a large sum of money with the
landlord, so that he should not turn the poor creature out, but see that
she got proper attention. Perhaps the more the great writer was
developed in Bergotte at the expense of the little man with the beard,
so much the more his own personal life was drowned in the flood of all
the lives that he imagined, until he no longer felt himself obliged to
perform certain practical duties, for which he had substituted the duty
of imagining those other lives. But at the same time, because he
imagined the feelings of others as completely as if they had been his
own, whenever he was obliged, for any reason, to talk to some person who
had been unfortunate (that is to say in a casual encounter) he would, in
doing so, take up not his own personal standpoint but that of the
sufferer himself, a standpoint in which he would have been horrified by
the speech of those who continued to think of their own petty concerns
in the presence of another's grief. With the result that he gave rise
everywhere to justifiable rancour and to undying gratitude.

Above all, he was a man who in his heart of hearts loved nothing really
except certain images and (like a miniature set in the floor of a
casket) the composing and painting of them in words. For a trifle that
some one had sent him, if that trifle gave him the opportunity of
introducing one or two of these images, he would be prodigal in the
expression of his gratitude, while shewing none whatever for an
expensive present. And if he had had to plead before a tribunal, he
would inevitably have chosen his words not for the effect that they
might have on the judge but with an eye to certain images which the
judge would certainly never have perceived.

That first day on which I met him with Gilberte's parents, I mentioned
to Bergotte that I had recently been to hear Berma in _Phèdre_; and he
told me that in the scene in which she stood with her arm raised to the
level of her shoulder--one of those very scenes that had been greeted
with such applause--she had managed to suggest with great nobility of
art certain classical figures which, quite possibly, she had never even
seen, a Hesperid carved in the same attitude upon a metope at Olympia,
and also the beautiful primitive virgins on the Erechtheum.

"It may be sheer divination, and yet I fancy that she visits the
museums. It would be interesting to 'establish' that." ("Establish" was
one of those regular Bergotte expressions, and one which various young
men who had never met him had caught from him, speaking like him by some
sort of telepathic suggestion.)

"Do you mean the Cariatides?" asked Swann.

"No, no," said Bergotte, "except in the scene where she confesses her
passion to Œnone, where she moves her hand exactly like Hegeso on the
stele in the Ceramic, it is a far more primitive art that she revives. I
was referring to the Korai of the old Erechtheum, and I admit that there
is perhaps nothing quite so remote from the art of Racine, but there are
so many things already in _Phèdre_, . . . that one more . . . Oh, and
then, yes, she is really charming, that little sixth century Phaedra,
the rigidity of the arm, the lock of hair 'frozen into marble', yes, you
know, it is wonderful of her to have discovered all that. There is a
great deal more antiquity in it than in most of the books they are
labelling 'antique' this year."

As Bergotte had in one of his volumes addressed a famous invocation to
these archaic statues, the words that he was now uttering were quite
intelligible to me and gave me a fresh reason for taking an interest in
Berma's acting. I tried to picture her again in my mind, as she had
looked in that scene in which I remembered that she had raised her arm
to the level of her shoulder. And I said to myself, "There we have the
Hesperid of Olympia; there we have the sister of those adorable
suppliants on the Acropolis; there is indeed nobility in art!" But if
these considerations were to enhance for me the beauty of Berma's
gesture, Bergotte should have put them into my head before the
performance. Then, while that attitude of the actress was actually
existing in flesh and blood before my eyes, at that moment in which the
thing that was happening had still the substance of reality, I might
have tried to extract from it the idea of archaic sculpture. But of
Berma in that scene all that I retained was a memory which was no longer
liable to modification, slender as a picture which lacks that abundant
perspective of the present tense where one is free to delve and can
always discover something new, a picture to which one cannot
retrospectively give a meaning that is not subject to verification and
correction from without. At this point Mme. Swann joined in the
conversation, asking me whether Gilberte had remembered to give me what
Bergotte had written about _Phèdre_, and adding, "My daughter is such
a scatter-brain!" Bergotte smiled modestly and protested that they were
only a few pages, of no importance. "But it is perfectly charming, that
little pamphlet, that little 'tract' of yours!" Mme. Swann assured him,
to shew that she was a good hostess, to make the rest of us think that
she had read Bergotte's essay, and also because she liked not merely to
flatter Bergotte, but to make a selection for herself out of what he
wrote, to control his writing. And it must be admitted that she did
inspire him, though not in the way that she supposed. But when all is
said there is, between what constituted the smartness of Mme. Swann's
drawing-room and a whole side of Bergotte's work, so close a
correspondence that either of them might serve, among elderly men
to-day, as a commentary upon the other.

I let myself go in telling him what my impressions had been. Often
Bergotte disagreed, but he allowed me to go on talking. I told him that
I had liked the green light which was turned on when Phèdre raised her
arm. "Ah! The designer will be glad to hear that; he is a real artist. I
shall tell him you liked it, because he is very proud of that effect. I
must say, myself, that I do not care for it very much, it drowns
everything in a sort of aqueous vapour, little Phèdre standing there
looks too like a branch of coral on the floor of an aquarium. You will
tell me, of course, that it brings out the cosmic aspect of the play.
That is quite true. All the same, it would be more appropriate if the
scene were laid in the Court of Neptune. Oh yes, of course, I know the
Vengeance of Neptune does come into the play. I don't suggest for a
moment that we should think only of Port-Royal, but after all the story
that Racine tells us is not the 'Loves of the Sea-Urchins'. Still, it is
what my friend wished to have, and it is very well done, right or wrong,
and it's really quite pretty when you come to look at it. Yes, so you
liked that, did you; you understood what it meant, of course; we feel
the same about it, don't we, really; it is a trifle unbalanced, what
he's done, you agree with me, but on the whole it is very clever of
him." And so, when Bergotte had to express an opinion which was the
opposite of my own, he in no way reduced me to silence, to the
impossibility of framing any reply, as M. de Norpois would have done.
This does not prove that Bergotte's opinions were of less value than the
Ambassador's; far from it. A powerful idea communicates some of its
strength to him who challenges it. Being itself a part of the riches of
the universal Mind, it makes its way into, grafts itself upon the mind
of him whom it is employed to refute, slips in among the ideas already
there, with the help of which, gaining a little ground, he completes and
corrects it; so that the final utterance is always to some extent the
work of both parties to a discussion. It is to ideas which are not,
properly speaking, ideas at all, to ideas which, founded upon nothing,
can find no support, no kindred spirit among the ideas of the adversary,
that he, grappling with something which, is not there, can find no word
to say in answer. The arguments of M. de Norpois (in the matter of art)
were unanswerable simply because they were without reality.

Since Bergotte did not sweep aside my objections, I confessed to him
that they had won the scorn of M. de Norpois. "But he's an old parrot!"
was the answer. "He keeps on pecking you because he imagines all the
time that you're a piece of cake, or a slice of cuttle-fish." "What's
that?" asked Swann. "Are you a friend of Norpois?" "He's as dull as a
wet Sunday," interrupted his wife, who had great faith in Bergotte's
judgment, and was no doubt afraid that M. de Norpois might have spoken
ill of her to us. "I tried to make him talk after dinner; I don't know
if it's his age or his indigestion, but I found him too sticky for
words. I really thought I should have to 'dope' him." "Yes, isn't he?"
Bergotte chimed in. "You see, he has to keep his mouth shut half the
time so as not to use up all the stock of inanities that hold his
shirt-front down and his white waistcoat up." "I think that Bergotte and
my wife are both very hard on him," came from Swann, who took the
"line", in his own house, of a plain, sensible man. "I quite see that
Norpois cannot interest you very much, but from another point of view,"
(for Swann made a hobby of collecting scraps of "real life") "he is
quite remarkable, quite a remarkable instance of a lover. When he was
Secretary at Rome," he went on, after making sure that Gilberte could
not hear him, "he had, here in Paris, a mistress with whom he was madly
in love, and he found time to make the double journey every week, so as
to see her for a couple of hours. She was, as it happens, a most
intelligent woman, and is quite attractive to this day; she is a dowager
now. And he has had any number of others since then. I'm sure I should
have gone stark mad if the woman I was in love with lived in Paris and I
was kept shut up in Rome. Nervous men ought always to love, as the lower
orders say, 'beneath' them, so that their women have a material
inducement to do what they tell them." As he spoke, Swann realised that
I might be applying this maxim to himself and Odette, and as, even among
superior beings, at the moment when you and they seem to be soaring
together above the plane of life, their personal pride is still basely
human, he was seized by a violent ill-will towards me. But this was made
manifest only in the uneasiness of his glance. He said nothing more to
me at the time. Not that this need surprise us. When Racine (according
to a story the truth of which has been exploded, though the theme of it
may be found recurring every day in Parisian life) made an illusion to
Scarron in front of Louis XIV, the most powerful monarch on earth said
nothing to the poet that evening. It was on the following day, only,
that he fell.

But as a theory requires to be stated as a whole, Swann, after this
momentary irritation, and after wiping his eyeglass, finished saying
what was in his mind in these words, words which were to assume later on
in my memory the importance of a prophetic warning, which I had not had
the sense to take: "The danger of that kind of love, however, is that
the woman's subjection calms the man's jealousy for a time but also
makes it more exacting. After a little he will force his mistress to
live like one of those prisoners whose cells they keep lighted day and
night, to prevent their escaping. And that generally ends in trouble."

I reverted to M. de Norpois. "You must never trust him; he has the most
wicked tongue!" said Mme. Swann in an accent which seemed to me to
indicate that M. de Norpois had been "saying things" about her,
especially as Swann looked across at his wife with an air of rebuke, as
though to stop her before she went too far.

Meanwhile Gilberte, who had been told to go and get ready for our drive,
stayed to listen to the conversation, and hovered between her mother and
her father, leaning affectionately against his shoulder. Nothing, at
first sight, could be in greater contrast to Mme. Swann, who was dark,
than this child with her red hair and golden skin. But after looking at
them both for a moment one saw in Gilberte many of the features--for
instance, the nose cut short with a sharp, unfaltering decision by the
unseen sculptor whose chisel repeats its work upon successive
generations--the expression, the movements of her mother; to take an
illustration from another form of art, she made one think of a portrait
that was not a good likeness of Mme. Swann, whom the painter, to carry
out some whim of colouring, had posed in a partial disguise, dressed to
go out to a party in Venetian "character". And as not merely was she
wearing a fair wig, but every atom of a swarthier complexion had been
discharged from her flesh which, stripped of its veil of brownness,
seemed more naked, covered simply in rays of light shed by an internal
sun, this "make-up" was not just superficial but was incarnate in her;
Gilberte had the appearance of embodying some fabulous animal or of
having assumed a mythological disguise. This reddish skin was so exactly
that of her father that nature seemed to have had, when Gilberte was
being created, to solve the problem of how to reconstruct Mme. Swann
piecemeal, without any material at her disposal save the skin of M.
Swann. And nature had utilised this to perfection, like a master carver
who makes a point of leaving the grain, the knots of his wood in
evidence. On Gilberte's face, at the corner of a perfect reproduction of
Odette's nose, the skin was raised so as to preserve intact the two
beauty spots of M. Swann. It was a new variety of Mme. Swann that was
thus obtained, growing there by her side like a white lilac-tree beside
a purple. At the same time it did not do to imagine the boundary line
between these two likenesses as definitely fixed. Now and then, when
Gilberte smiled, one could distinguish the oval of her father's cheek
upon her mother's face, as though some one had mixed them together to
see what would result from the blend; this oval grew distinct, as an
embryo grows into a living shape, it lengthened obliquely, expanded, and
a moment later had disappeared. In Gilberte's eyes there was the frank
and honest gaze of her father; this was how she had looked at me when
she gave me the agate marble and said "Keep it, to remind yourself of
our friendship." But were one to put a question to Gilberte, to ask her
what she had been doing, then one saw in those same eyes the
embarrassment, the uncertainty, the prevarication, the misery that
Odette used in the old days to shew, when Swann asked her where she had
been and she gave him one of those lying answers which, in those days,
drove the lover to despair and now made him abruptly change the
conversation, as an incurious and prudent husband. Often in the
Champs-Elysées I was disturbed by seeing this look on Gilberte's face.
But as a rule my fears were unfounded. For in her, a purely physical
survival of her mother, this look (if nothing else) had ceased to have
any meaning. It was when she had been to her classes, when she must go
home for some lesson that Gilberte's pupils executed that movement
which, in time past, in the eyes of Odette, had been caused by the fear
of disclosing that she had, during the day, opened the door to one of
her lovers, or was at that moment in a hurry to be at some
trysting-place. So one could see the two natures of M. and Mme. Swann
ebb and flow, encroaching alternately one upon the other in the body of
this Melusine.

It is, of course, common knowledge that a child takes after both its
father and its mother. And yet the distribution of the merits and
defects which it inherits is so oddly planned that, of two good
qualities which seemed inseparable in one of the parents you will find
but one in the child, and allied to that very fault in the other parent
which seemed most irreconcilable with it. Indeed, the incarnation of a
good moral quality in an incompatible physical blemish is often one of
the laws of filial resemblance. Of two sisters, one will combine with
the proud bearing of her father the mean little soul of her mother; the
other, abundantly endowed with the paternal intelligence, will present
it to the world in the aspect which her mother has made familiar; her
mother's shapeless nose and scraggy bosom are become the bodily covering
of talents which you had learned to distinguish beneath a superb
presence. With the result that of each of the sisters one can say with
equal justification that it is she who takes more after one or other of
her parents. It is true that Gilberte was an only child, but there were,
at the least, two Gilbertes. The two natures, her father's and her
mother's, did more than just blend themselves in her; they disputed the
possession of her--and yet one cannot exactly say that, which would let
it be thought that a third Gilberte was in the meantime suffering by
being the prey of the two others. Whereas Gilberte was alternately one
and the other, and at any given moment no more than one of the two, that
is to say incapable, when she was not being good, of suffering
accordingly, the better Gilberte not being able at the time, on account
of her momentary absence, to detect the other's lapse from virtue. And
so the less good of the two was free to enjoy pleasures of an ignoble
kind. When the other spoke to you from the heart of her father, she held
broad views, you would have liked to engage with her upon a fine and
beneficent enterprise; you told her so, but, just as your arrangements
were being completed, her mother's heart would already have resumed its
control; hers was the voice that answered; and you were disappointed and
vexed--almost baffled, as in the face of a substitution of one person
for another--by an unworthy thought, an in sincere laugh, in which
Gilberte saw no harm, for they sprang from what she herself at that
moment was. Indeed, the disparity was at times so great between these
two Gilbertes that you asked yourself, though without finding an answer,
what on earth you could have said or done to her, last time, to find her
now so different. When she herself had arranged to meet you somewhere,
not only did she fail to appear, and offer no excuse afterwards, but,
whatever the influence might have been that had made her change her
mind, she shewed herself in so different a character when you did meet
her that you might well have supposed that, taken in by a likeness such
as forms the plot of the _Menaechmi_, you were now talking to some one
not the person who had so politely expressed her desire to see you, had
she not shewn signs of an ill-humour which revealed that she felt
herself to be in the wrong, and wished to avoid the necessity of an
explanation.

"Now then, run along and get ready; you're keeping us waiting," her
mother reminded her.

"I'm so happy here with my little Papa; I want to stay just for a
minute," replied Gilberte, burying her head beneath the arm of her
father, who passed his fingers lovingly through her bright hair.

Swann was one of those men who, having lived for a long time amid the
illusions of love, have seen the prosperity that they themselves brought
to numberless women increase the happiness of those women without
exciting in them any gratitude, any tenderness towards their
benefactors; but in their child they believe that they can feel an
affection which, being incarnate in their own name, will enable them to
remain in the world after their death. When there should no longer be
any Charles Swann, there would still be a Mlle. Swann, or a Mme.
something else, née Swann, who would continue to love the vanished
father. Indeed, to love him too well, perhaps, Swann may have been
thinking, for he acknowledged Gilberte's caress with a "Good girl!" in
that tone, made tender by our apprehension, to which, when we think of
the future, we are prompted by the too passionate affection of a
creature who is destined to survive us. To conceal his emotion, he
joined in our talk about Berma. He pointed out to me, but in a detached,
a listless tone, as though he wished to remain to some extent
unconcerned in what he was saying, with what intelligence, with what an
astonishing fitness the actress said to Œnone, "You knew it!" He was
right. That intonation at least had a value that was really
intelligible, and might therefore have satisfied my desire to find
incontestable reasons for admiring Berma. But it was by the very fact of
its clarity that it did not at all content me. Her intonation was so
ingenious so definite in intention and in its meaning, that it seemed to
exist by itself, so that any intelligent actress might have learned to
use it. It was a fine idea; but whoever else should conceive it as fully
must possess it equally. It remained to Berma's credit that she had
discovered it, but is one entitled to use the word "discover" when the
object in question is something that would not be different if one had
been given it, something that does not belong essentially to one's own
nature seeing that some one else may afterwards reproduce it?

"Upon my soul, your presence among us does raise the tone of the
conversation!" Swann observed to me, as though to excuse himself to
Bergotte; for he had formed the habit, in the Guermantes set, of
entertaining great artists as if they were just ordinary friends whom
one seeks only to make eat the dishes that they like, play the games,
or, in the country, indulge in whatever form of sport they please. "It
seems to me that we're talking a great deal of art," he went on. "But
it's so nice, I do love it!" said Mme. Swann, throwing me a look of
gratitude, as well from good nature as because she had not abandoned her
old aspirations towards a more intellectual form of conversation. After
this it was to others of the party, and principally to Gilberte that
Bergotte addressed himself. I had told him everything that I felt with a
freedom which had astonished me, and was due to the fact that, having
acquired with him, years before (in the course of all those hours of
solitary reading, in which he was to me merely the better part of
myself), the habit of sincerity, of frankness, of confidence, I was less
frightened by him than by a person with whom I should have been talking
for the first time. And yet, for the same reason, I was greatly
disturbed by the thought of the impression that I must have been making
on him, the contempt that I had supposed he would feel for my ideas
dating not from that afternoon but from the already distant time in
which I had begun to read his books in our garden at Combray. And yet I
ought perhaps to have reminded myself that, since it was in all
sincerity, abandoning myself to the train of my thoughts, that I had
felt, on the one hand, so intensely in sympathy with the work of
Bergotte and on the other hand, in the theatre, a disappointment the
reason of which I did not know, those two instinctive movements which
had both carried me away could not be so very different from one
another, but must be obedient to the same laws; and that that mind of
Bergotte which I had loved in his books could not be anything entirely
foreign and hostile to my disappointment and to my inability to express
it. For my intelligence must be a uniform thing, perhaps indeed there
exists but a single intelligence, in which everyone in the world
participates, towards which each of us from the position of his own
separate body turns his eyes, as in a theatre where, if everyone has his
own separate seat, there is on the other hand but a single stage. Of
course, the ideas which I was tempted to seek to disentangle were
probably not those whose depths Bergotte usually sounded in his books.
But if it were one and the same intelligence which we had, he and I, at
our disposal, he must, when he heard me express those ideas, be reminded
of them, cherish them, smile upon them, keeping probably, in spite of
what I supposed, before his mind's eye a whole world of intelligence
other than that an excerpt of which had passed into his books, an
excerpt upon which I had based my imagination of his whole mental
universe. Just as priests, having the widest experience of the human
heart, are best able to pardon the sins which they do not themselves
commit, so genius, having the widest experience of the human
intelligence, can best understand the ideas most directly in opposition
to those which form the foundation of its own writings. I ought to have
told myself all this (though, for that matter, it was none too consoling
a thought, for the benevolent condescension of great minds has as a
corollary the incomprehension and hostility of small; and one derives
far less happiness from the friendliness of a great writer, which one
finds expressed, failing a more intimate association, in his books, than
suffering from the hostility of a woman whom one did not choose for her
intelligence but cannot help loving). I ought to have told myself all
this, but I did not; I was convinced that I had appeared a fool to
Bergotte, when Gilberte whispered in my ear:

"You can't think how delighted I am, because you have made a conquest of
my great friend Bergotte. He's been telling Mamma that he found you
extremely intelligent."

"Where are we going?" I asked her. "Oh, wherever you like; you know,
it's all the same to me." But since the incident that had occurred on
the anniversary of her grandfather's death I had begun to ask myself
whether Gilberte's character was not other than I had supposed, whether
that indifference to what was to be done, that wisdom, that calm, that
gentle and constant submission did not indeed conceal passionate
longings which her self-esteem would not allow to be visible and which
she disclosed only by her sudden resistance whenever by any chance they
were frustrated.

As Bergotte lived in the same neighbourhood as my parents, we left the
house together; in the carriage he spoke to me of my health. "Our
friends were telling me that you had been ill. I am very sorry. And yet,
after all, I am not too sorry, because I can see quite well that you are
able to enjoy the pleasures of the mind, and they are probably what mean
most to you, as to everyone who has known them."

Alas, what he was saying, how little, I felt, did it apply to myself,
whom all reasoning, however exalted it might be, left cold, who was
happy only in moments of pure idleness, when I was comfortable and well;
I felt how purely material was everything that I desired in life, and
how easily I could dispense with the intellect. As I made no distinction
among my pleasures between those that came to me from different sources,
of varying depth and permanence, I was thinking, when the moment came to
answer him, that I should have liked an existence in which I was on
intimate terms with the Duchesse de Guermantes, and often came across,
as in the old toll-house in the Champs-Elysées, a chilly smell that
would remind me of Combray. But in this ideal existence which I dared
not confide to him the pleasures of the mind found no place.

"No, sir, the pleasures of the mind count for very little with me; it is
not them that I seek after; indeed I don't even know that I have ever
tasted them."

"You really think not?" he replied. "Well, it may be, no, wait a minute
now, yes, after all that must be what you like best, I can see it now
dearly, I am certain of it."

As certainly, he did not succeed in convincing me; and yet I was already
feeling happier, less restricted. After what M. de Norpois had said to
me, I had regarded my moments of dreaming, of enthusiasm, of
self-confidence as purely subjective and barren of truth. But according
to Bergotte, who appeared to understand my case, it seemed that it was
quite the contrary, that the symptom I ought to disregard was, in fact,
my doubts, my disgust with myself. Moreover, what he had said about M.
de Norpois took most of the sting out of a sentence from which I had
supposed that no appeal was possible.

"Are you being properly looked after?" Bergotte asked me. "Who is
treating you?" I told him that I had seen, and should probably go on
seeing Cottard. "But that's not at all the sort of man you want!" he
told me. "I know nothing about him as a doctor. But I've met him at Mme.
Swann's. The man's an imbecile. Even supposing that that doesn't prevent
his being a good doctor, which I hesitate to believe, it does prevent
his being a good doctor for artists, for men of intelligence. People
like you must have suitable doctors, I would almost go so far as to say
treatment and medicines specially adapted to themselves. Cottard will
bore you, and that alone will prevent his treatment from having any
effect. Besides, the proper course of treatment cannot possibly be the
same for you as for any Tom, Dick or Harry. Nine tenths of the ills from
which intelligent people suffer spring from their intellect. They need
at least a doctor who understands their disease. How do you expect that
Cottard should be able to treat you; he has made allowances for the
difficulty of digesting sauces, for gastric trouble, but he has made no
allowance for the effect of reading Shakespeare. So that his
calculations are inaccurate in your case, the balance is upset; you see,
always the little bottle-imp bobbing up again. He will find that you
have a dilated stomach; he has no need to examine you for it, since he
has it already in his eye. You can see it there, reflected in his
glasses." This manner of speaking tired me greatly; I said to myself,
with the stupidity of common sense: "There is no more any dilated
stomach reflected in Professor Cottard's glasses than there are
inanities stored behind the white waistcoat of M. de Norpois." "I should
recommend you, instead," went on Bergotte, "to consult Dr. du Boulbon,
who is quite an intelligent man." "He is a great admirer of your books,"
I replied. I saw that Bergotte knew this, and I decided that kindred
spirits soon come together, that one has few really "unknown friends".
What Bergotte had said to me with respect to Cottard impressed me, While
running contrary to everything that I myself believed. I was in no way
disturbed by finding my doctor a bore; I expected of him that, thanks to
an art the laws of which were beyond me, he should pronounce on the
subject of my health an infallible oracle, after consultation of my
entrails. And I did not at all require that, with the aid of an
intellect, in which I easily outstripped him, he should seek to
understand my intellect, which I pictured to myself merely as a means,
of no importance in itself, of trying to attain to certain external
verities. I doubted greatly whether intellectual people required a
different form of hygiene from imbeciles, and I was quite prepared to
submit myself to the latter kind. "I'll tell you who does need a good
doctor, and that is our friend Swann," said Bergotte. And on my asking
whether he was ill, "Well, don't you see, he's typical of the man who
has married a whore, and has to swallow a hundred serpents every day,
from women who refuse to meet his wife, or men who were there before
him. You can see them in his mouth, writhing. Just look, any day you're
there, at the way he lifts his eyebrows when he comes in, to see who's
in the room." The malice with which Bergotte spoke thus to a stranger of
the friends in whose house he had so long been received as a welcome
guest was as new to me as the almost amorous tone which, in that house,
he had constantly been adopting to speak to them. Certainly a person
like my great-aunt, for instance, would have been incapable of treating
any of us with that politeness which I had heard Bergotte lavishing upon
Swann. Even to the people whom she liked, she enjoyed saying
disagreeable things. But behind their backs she would never have uttered
a word to which they might not have listened. There was nothing less
like the social "world" than our society at Combray. The Swanns' house
marked a stage on the way towards it, towards its inconstant tide. If
they had not yet reached the open sea, they were certainly in the
lagoon. "This is all between ourselves," said Bergotte as he left me
outside my own door. A few years later I should have answered: "I never
repeat things." That is the ritual phrase of society, from which the
slanderer always derives a false reassurance. It is what I should have
said then and there to Bergotte, for one does not invent all one's
speeches, especially when, one is acting merely as a card in the social
pack. But I did not yet know the formula. What my great-aunt, on the
other hand, would have said on a similar occasion was: "If you don't
wish it to be repeated, why do you say it?" That is the answer of the
unsociable, of the quarrelsome. I was nothing of that sort: I bowed my
head in silence.

Men of letters who were in my eyes persons of considerable importance
had had to plot for years before they succeeded in forming with Bergotte
relations which continued to the end to be but dimly literary, and never
emerged beyond the four walls of his study, whereas I, I had now been
installed among the friends of the great writer, at the first attempt
and without any effort, like a man who, instead of standing outside in a
crowd for hours in order to secure a bad seat in a theatre, is shown in
at once to the best, having entered by a door that is closed to the
public. If Swann had thus opened such a door to me, it was doubtless
because, just as a king finds himself naturally inviting his children's
friends into the royal box, or on board the royal yacht, so Gilberte's
parents received their daughter's friends among all the precious things
that they had in their house, and the even more precious intimacies that
were enshrined there. But at that time I thought, and perhaps was right
in thinking that this friendliness on Swann's part was aimed indirectly
at my parents. I seemed to remember having heard once at Combray that he
had suggested to them that, in view of my admiration for Bergotte, he
should take me to dine with him, and that my parents had declined,
saying that I was too young, and too easily excited to "go out" yet. My
parents, no doubt, represented to certain other people (precisely those
who seemed to me the most marvellous) something quite different from
what they were to me, so that, just as when the lady in pink had paid my
father a tribute of which he had shewn himself so unworthy, I should
have wished them to understand what an inestimable present I had just
received, and to testify their gratitude to that generous and courteous
Swann who had offered it to me, or to them rather, without seeming any
more to be conscious of its value than is, in Luini's fresco, the
charming Mage with the arched nose and fair hair, to whom, it appeared,
Swann had at one time been thought to bear a striking resemblance.

Unfortunately, this favour that Swann had done me, which, as I entered
the house, before I had even taken off my greatcoat, I reported to my
parents, in the hope that it would awaken in their hearts an emotion
equal to my own, and would determine them upon some immense and decisive
act of politeness towards the Swanns, did not appear to be greatly
appreciated by them. "Swann introduced you to Bergotte? An excellent
friend for you, charming society!" cried my father, ironically. "It only
wanted that!" Alas, when I had gone on to say that Bergotte was by no
means inclined to admire M. de Norpois:

"I dare say!" retorted my father. "That simply proves that he's a
foolish and evil-minded fellow. My poor boy, you never had much common
sense, still, I'm sorry to see you fall among a set that will finish you
off altogether."

Already the mere fact of my frequenting the Swanns had been far from
delighting my parents. This introduction to Bergotte seemed to them a
fatal but natural consequence of an original mistake, namely their own
weakness in controlling me, which my grandfather would have called a
"want of circumspection". I felt that I had only, in order to complete
their ill-humour, to tell them that this perverse fellow who did not
appreciate M. de Norpois had found me extremely intelligent. For I had
observed that whenever my father decided that anyone, one of my school
friends for instance, was going astray--as I was at that moment--if that
person had the approval of somebody whom my father did not rate high, he
would see in this testimony the confirmation of his own stern judgment.
The evil merely seemed to him more pronounced. I could hear him already
exclaiming, "Of course, it all hangs together," an expression that
terrified me by the vagueness and vastness of the reforms the
introduction of which into my quiet life it seemed to threaten. But
since, were I not to tell them what Bergotte had said of me, even then
nothing could efface the impression my parents had formed, that this
should be made slightly worse mattered little. Besides, they seemed to
me so unfair, so completely mistaken, that not only had I not any hope,
I had scarcely any desire to bring them to a more equitable point of
view. At the same time, feeling, as the words came from my lips, how
alarmed they would be by the thought that I had found favour in the
sight of a person who dismissed clever men as fools and had earned the
contempt of all decent people, praise from whom, since it seemed to me a
thing to be desired, would only encourage me in wrongdoing, it was in
faltering tones and with a slightly shamefaced air that, coming to the
end of my story, I flung them the bouquet of: "He told the Swanns that
he had found me extremely intelligent." Just as a poisoned dog, in a
field, rushes, without knowing why, straight to the grass which is the
precise antidote to the toxin that he has swallowed, so I, without in
the least suspecting it, had said the one thing in the world that was
capable of overcoming in my parents this prejudice with respect to
Bergotte, a prejudice which all the best reasons that I could have
urged, all the tributes that I could have paid him must have proved
powerless to defeat. Instantly the situation changed.

"Oh! He said that he found you intelligent," repeated my mother. "I am
glad to hear that, because he is a man of talent."

"What! He said that, did he?" my father joined in. "I don't for a moment
deny his literary distinction, before which the whole world bows; only
it is a pity that he should lead that scarcely reputable existence to
which old Norpois made a guarded allusion, when he was here," he went
on, not seeing that against the sovran virtue of the magic words which I
had just repeated the depravity of Bergotte's morals was little more
able to contend than the falsity of his judgment.

"But, my dear," Mamma interrupted, "we've no proof that it's true.
People say all sorts of things. Besides, M. de Norpois may have the most
perfect manners in the world, but he's not always very good-natured,
especially about people who are not exactly his sort."

"That's quite true; I've noticed it myself," my father admitted.

"And then, too, a great deal ought to be forgiven Bergotte, since he
thinks well of my little son," Mamma went on, stroking my hair with her
fingers and fastening upon me a long and pensive gaze.

My mother had not, indeed, awaited this verdict from Bergotte before
telling me that I might ask Gilberte to tea whenever I had friends
coming. But I dared not do so for two reasons. The first was that at
Gilberte's there was never anything else to drink but tea. Whereas at
home Mamma insisted on there being a pot of chocolate as well. I was
afraid that Gilberte might regard this as "common"; and so conceive a
great contempt for us. The other reason was a formal difficulty, a
question of procedure which I could never succeed in settling. When I
arrived at Mme. Swann's she used to ask me: "And how is your mother?" I
had made several overtures to Mamma to find out whether she would do the
same when Gilberte came to us, a point which seemed to me more serious
that, at the Court of Louis XIV, the use of "Monseigneur." But Mamma
would not hear of it for a moment.

"Certainly not. I do not know Mme. Swann."

"But neither does she know you."

"I never said she did, but we are not obliged to behave in exactly the
same way about everything. I shall find other ways of being civil to
Gilberte than Mme. Swann has with you."

But I was unconvinced, and preferred not to invite Gilberte.

Leaving my parents, I went upstairs to change my clothes and on emptying
my pockets came suddenly upon the envelope which the Swanns' butler had
handed me before shewing me into the drawing-room. I was now alone. I
opened it; inside was a card on which I was told the name of the lady
whom I ought to have "taken in" to luncheon.

It was about this period that Bloch overthrew my conception of the world
and opened for me fresh possibilities of happiness (which, for that
matter, were to change later on into possibilities of suffering), by
assuring me that, in contradiction of all that I had believed at the
time of my walks along the Méséglise way, women never asked for
anything better than to make love. He added to this service a second,
the value of which I was not to appreciate until much later; it was he
who took me for the first time into a disorderly house. He had indeed
told me that there were any number of pretty women whom one might enjoy.
But I could see them only in a vague outline for which those houses were
to enable me to substitute actual human features. So that if I owed to
Bloch--for his "good tidings" that beauty and the enjoyment of beauty
were not inaccessible things, and that we have acted foolishly in
renouncing them for all time--a debt of gratitude of the same kind that
we owe to an optimistic physician or philosopher who has given us reason
to hope for length of days in this world and not to be entirely cut off
from it when we shall have passed beyond the veil, the houses of
assignation which I began to frequent some years later--by furnishing me
with specimens of beauty, by allowing me to add to the beauty of women
that element which we are powerless to invent, which is something more
than a mere summary of former beauties, that present indeed divine, the
one present that we cannot bestow upon ourselves, before which faint and
fail all the logical creations of our intellect, and which we can seek
from reality alone: an individual charm--deserved to be ranked by me
with those other benefactors more recent in origin but of comparable
utility (before finding which we used to imagine without any warmth the
seductive charms of Mantegna, of Wagner, of Siena, by studying other
painters, hearing other composers, visiting other cities): namely
illustrated editions of the history of painting, symphonic concerts and
handbooks to 'Mediaeval Towns'. But the house to which Bloch led me,
(and which he himself, for that matter, had long ceased to visit) was of
too humble a grade, its denizens were too inconspicuous and too little
varied to be able to satisfy my old or to stimulate new curiosities. The
mistress of this house knew none of the women with whom one asked her to
negotiate, and was always suggesting others whom, one did not want. She
boasted to me of one in particular, one of whom, with a smile full of
promise (as though this; had been a great rarity and a special treat)
she would whisper: "She is a Jewess! Doesn't that make you want to?"
(That, by the way, was probably why the girl's name was Rachel.) And
with a silly and affected excitement which, she hoped, would prove
contagious, and which ended in a hoarse gurgle, almost of sensual
satisfaction: "Think of that, my boy, a Jewess! Wouldn't that be lovely?
Rrrr!" This Rachel, of whom I caught a glimpse without her seeing me,
was dark and not good-looking, but had an air of intelligence, and would
pass the tip of her tongue over her lips as she smiled, with a look of
boundless impertinence at the "boys" who were introduced to her and whom
I could hear making conversation. Her small and narrow face was framed
in short curls of black hair, irregular as though they were outlined in
pen-strokes upon a wash-drawing in Indian ink. Every evening I promised
the old woman who offered her to me with a special insistence, boasting
of her superior intelligence and her education, that I would not fail to
come some day on purpose to make the acquaintance of Rachel, whom I had
nicknamed "Rachel when from the Lord". But the first evening I had heard
her, as she was leaving the house, say to the mistress: "That's settled
then; I shall be free to-morrow, if you have anyone you won't forget to
send for me."

And these words had prevented me from recognising her as a person
because they had made me classify her at once in a general category of
women whose habit, common to all of them, was to come there in the
evening to see whether there might not be a louis or two to be earned.
She would simply vary her formula, saying indifferently: "If you want
me" or "If you want anybody."

The mistress, who was not familiar with Halévy's opera, did not know
why I always called the girl "Rachel when from the Lord." But failure to
understand a joke has never yet made anyone find it less amusing, and it
was always with a whole-hearted laugh that she would say to me:

"Then there's nothing doing to-night? When am I going to fix you up with
'Rachel when from the Lord'? Why do you always say that, 'Rachel when
from the Lord'? Oh, that's very smart, that is. I'm going to make a
match of you two. You won't be sorry for it, you'll see."

Once I was just making up my mind, but she was "in the press", another
time in the hands of the hairdresser, an elderly gentleman who never did
anything for the women except pour oil on their loosened hair and then
comb it. And I grew tired of waiting, even though several of the humbler
frequenters of the place (working girls, they called themselves, but
they always seemed to be out of work), had come to mix drinks for me and
to hold long conversations to which, despite the gravity of the subjects
discussed, the partial or total nudity of the speakers gave an
attractive simplicity. I ceased moreover to go to this house because,
anxious to present a token of my good-will to the woman who kept it and
was in need of furniture, I had given her several pieces, notably a big
sofa, which I had inherited from my aunt Léonie. I used never to see
them, for want of space had prevented my parents from taking them in at
home, and they were stored in a warehouse. But as soon as I discovered
them again in the house where these women were putting them to their own
uses, all the virtues that one had imbibed in the air of my aunt's room
at Combray became apparent to me, tortured by the cruel contact to which
I had abandoned them in their helplessness! Had I outraged the dead, I
should not have suffered such remorse. I returned no more to visit their
new mistress, for they seemed to me to be alive, and to be appealing to
me, like those objects, apparently inanimate, in a Persian fairy tale,
in which are embodied human souls that are undergoing martyrdom and
plead for deliverance. Besides, as our memory presents things to us, as
a rule, not in their chronological sequence but as it were by a
reflexion in which the order of the parts is reversed, I remembered only
long afterwards that it was upon that same sofa that, many years before,
I had tasted for the first time the sweets of love with one of my girl
cousins, with whom I had not known where to go until she somewhat rashly
suggested our taking advantage of a moment in which aunt Léonie had
left her room.

A whole lot more of my aunt Léonie's things, and notably a magnificent
set of old silver plate, I sold, in spite of my parents' warnings, so as
to have more money to spend, and to be able to send more flowers to Mme.
Swann who would greet me, after receiving an immense basket of orchids,
with: "If I were your father, I should have you up before the magistrate
for this." How was I to suppose that one day I might regret more than
anything the loss of my silver plate, and rank certain other pleasures
more highly than that (which would have shrunk perhaps into none at all)
of bestowing favours upon Gilberte's parents. Similarly, it was with
Gilberte in my mind, and so as not to be separated from her, that I had
decided not to enter a career of diplomacy abroad. It is always thus,
impelled by a state of mind which is destined not to last, that we make
our irrevocable decisions. I could scarcely imagine that that strange
substance which was housed in Gilberte, and from her permeated her
parents and her home, leaving me indifferent to all things else, could
be liberated from her, could migrate into another person. The same
substance, unquestionable, and yet one that would have a wholly
different effect on me. For a single malady goes through various
evolutions, and a delicious poison can no longer be taken with the same
impunity when, with the passing of the years, the heart's power of
resistance has diminished.

My parents meanwhile would have liked to see the intelligence that
Bergotte had discerned in me made manifest in some remarkable
achievement. When I still did not know the Swanns I thought that I was
prevented from working by the state of agitation into which I was
thrown by the impossibility of seeing Gilberte when I chose. But, now
that their door stood open to me, scarcely had I sat down at my desk
than I would rise and run to them. And after I had left them and was at
home again, my isolation was apparent only, my mind was powerless to
swim against the stream of words on which I had allowed myself
mechanically to be borne for hours on end. Sitting alone, I continued to
fashion remarks such as might have pleased or amused the Swanns, and to
make this pastime more entertaining I myself took the parts of those
absent players, I put to myself imagined questions, so chosen that my
brilliant epigrams served merely as happy answers to them. Though
conducted in silence, this exercise was none the less a conversation and
not a meditation, my solitude a mental society in which it was not I
myself but other imaginary speakers who controlled my choice of words,
and in which I felt as I formulated, in place of the thoughts that I
believed to be true, those that came easily to my mind, and involved no
introspection from without, that kind of pleasure, entirely passive,
which sitting still affords to anyone who is burdened with a sluggish
digestion.

Had I been less firmly resolved upon setting myself definitely to work,
I should perhaps have made an effort to begin at once. But since my
resolution was explicit, since within twenty-four hours, in the empty
frame of that long morrow in which everything was so well arranged
because I myself had not yet entered it, my good intentions would be
realised without difficulty, it was better not to select an evening on
which I was ill-disposed for a beginning for which the following days
were not, alas, to shew themselves any more propitious. But I was
reasonable. It would have been puerile, on the part of one who had
waited now for years, not to put up with a postponement of two or three
days. Confident that by the day after next I should have written several
pages, I said not a word more to my parents of my decision; I preferred
to remain patient for a few hours and then to bring to a convinced and
comforted grandmother a sample of work that was already under way.
Unfortunately the morrow was not that vast, external day to which I in
my fever had looked forward. When it drew to a close, my laziness and my
painful struggle to overcome certain internal obstacles had simply
lasted twenty-four hours longer. And at the end of several days, my
plans not having matured, I had no longer the same hope that they would
be realised at once, no longer the courage, therefore, to subordinate
everything else to their realisation: I began again to keep late hours,
having no longer, to oblige me to go to bed early on any evening, the
certain hope of seeing my work begun next morning. I needed, before I
could recover my creative energy, several days of relaxation, and the
only time that my grandmother ventured, in a gentle and disillusioned
tone, to frame the reproach: "Well, and that work of yours; aren't we
even to speak of it now?" I resented her intrusion, convinced that in
her inability to see that my mind was irrevocably made up, she had
further and perhaps for a long time postponed the execution of my task,
by the shock which her denial of justice to me had given my nerves,
since until I had recovered from that shock I should not feel inclined
to begin my work. She felt that her scepticism had charged blindly into
my intention. She apologised, kissing me: "I am sorry; I shall not say
anything again," and, so that I should not be discouraged, assured me
that, from the day on which I should be quite well again, the work would
come of its own accord from my superfluity of strength.

Besides, I said to myself, in spending all my time with the Swanns, am I
not doing exactly what Bergotte does? To my parents it seemed almost as
though, idle as I was, I was leading, since it was spent in the same
drawing-room with a great writer, the life most favourable to the growth
of talent. And yet the assumption that anyone can be dispensed from
having to create that talent for himself, from within himself, and can
acquire it from some one else, is as impossible as it would be to
suppose that a man can keep himself in good health, in spite of
neglecting all the rules of hygiene and of indulging in the worst
excesses, merely by dining out often in the company of a physician. The
person, by the way, who was most completely taken in by this illusion,
which misled me as well as my parents, was Mme. Swann. When I explained
to her that I was unable to come, that I must stay at home and work, she
looked as though she were thinking that I made a great fuss about
nothing, that there was something foolish as well as ostentatious in
what I had said.

"But Bergotte is coming, isn't he? Do you mean that you don't think it
good, what he writes? It will be better still, very soon," she went on,
"for he is more pointed, he concentrates more in newspaper articles than
in his books, where he is apt to spread out too much. I've arranged that
in future he's to do the leading articles in the _Figaro._ He'll be
distinctly the 'right man in the right place' there." And, finally,
"Come! He will tell you, better than anyone, what you ought to do."

And so, just as one invites a gentleman ranker to meet his colonel, it
was in the interests of my career, and as though masterpieces of
literature arose out of "getting to know" people, that she told me not
to fail to come to dinner with her next day, to meet Bergotte.

And so there was not from the Swanns any more than from my parents, that
is to say from those who, at different times, had seemed bound to place
obstacles in my way, any further opposition to that pleasant existence
in which I might see Gilberte as often as I chose, with enjoyment if not
with peace of mind. There can be no peace of mind in love, since the
advantage one has secured is never anything but a fresh starting-point
for further desires. So long as I had not been free to go to her, having
my eyes fixed upon that inaccessible goal of happiness, I could not so
much as imagine the fresh grounds for anxiety that lay in wait for me
there. Once the resistance of her parents was broken, and the problem
solved at last, it began to set itself anew, and always in different
terms. Each evening, on arriving home, I reminded myself that I had
things to say to Gilberte of prime importance, things upon which our
whole friendship hung, and these things were never the same. But at
least I was happy, and no further menace arose to threaten my happiness.
One was to appear, alas, from a quarter in which I had never detected
any peril, namely from Gilberte and myself. And yet I ought to have been
tormented by what, on the contrary, reassured me, by what I mistook for
happiness. We are, when we love, in an abnormal state, capable of giving
at once to an accident, the most simple to all appearance and one that
may at any moment occur, a serious aspect which that accident by itself
would not bear. What makes us so happy is the presence in our heart of
an unstable element which we are perpetually arranging to keep in
position, and of which we cease almost to be aware so long as it is not
displaced. Actually, there is in love a permanent strain of suffering
which happiness neutralises, makes conditional only, procrastinates, but
which may at any moment become what it would long since have been had we
not obtained what we were seeking, sheer agony.

On several occasions I felt that Gilberte was anxious to put off my
visits. It is true that when I was at all anxious to see her I had only
to get myself invited by her parents who were increasingly persuaded of
my excellent influence over her. "Thanks to them," I used to think, "my
love is running no risk; the moment I have them on my side, I can set my
mind at rest; they have full authority over Gilberte." Until, alas, I
detected certain signs of impatience which she allowed to escape her
when her father made me come to the house, almost against her will, and
asked myself whether what I had regarded as a protection for my
happiness was not in fact the secret reason why that happiness could not
endure.

The last time that I called to see Gilberte, it was raining; she had
been asked to a dancing lesson in the house of some people whom she knew
too slightly to be able to take me there with her. In view of the
dampness of the air I had taken rather more caffeine than usual. Perhaps
on account of the weather, or because she had some objection to the
house in which this party was being given, Mme. Swann, as her daughter
was leaving the room, called her back in the sharpest of tones:
"Gilberte!" and pointed to me, to indicate that I had come there to see
her and that she ought to stay with me. This "Gilberte!" had been
uttered, or shouted rather, with the best of intentions towards myself,
but from the way in which Gilberte shrugged her shoulders as she took
off her outdoor clothes I divined that her mother had unwittingly
hastened the gradual evolution, which until then it had perhaps been
possible to arrest, which was gradually drawing away from me my friend.
"You don't need to go out dancing every day," Odette told her daughter,
with a sagacity acquired, no doubt, in earlier days, from Swann. Then,
becoming once more Odette, she began speaking to her daughter in
English. At once it was as though a wall had sprung up to hide from me a
part of the life of Gilberte, as though an evil genius had spirited my
friend far away. In a language that we know, we have substituted for the
opacity of sounds, the perspicuity of ideas. But a language which we do
not know is a fortress sealed, within whose walls she whom we love is
free to play us false, while we, standing without, desperately alert in
our impotence, can see, can prevent nothing. So this conversation in
English, at which, a month earlier, I should merely have smiled,
interspersed with a few proper names in French which did not fail to
accentuate, to give a point to my uneasiness, had, when conducted within
a few feet of me by two motionless persons, the same degree of cruelty,
left me as much abandoned and alone as the forcible abduction of my
companion. At length Mme. Swann left us. That day, perhaps from
resentment against myself, the unwilling cause of her not going out to
enjoy herself, perhaps also because, guessing her to be angry with me, I
was precautionally colder than usual with her, the face of Gilberte,
divested of every sign of joy, bleak, bare, pillaged, seemed all
afternoon to be devoting a melancholy regret to the pas-de-quatre in
which my arrival had prevented her from going to take part, and to be
defying every living creature, beginning with myself, to understand the
subtle reasons that had determined in her a sentimental attachment to
the boston. She confined herself to exchanging with me, now and again,
on the weather, the increasing violence of the rain, the fastness of the
clock, a conversation punctuated with silences and monosyllables, in
which I lashed myself on, with a sort of desperate rage, to the
destruction of those moments which we might have devoted to friendship
and happiness. And on each of our remarks was stamped, as it were, a
supreme harshness, by the paroxysm of their stupefying unimportance,
which at the same time consoled me, for it prevented Gilberte from being
taken in by the banality of my observations and the indifference of my
tone. In vain was my polite: "I thought, the other day, that the clock
was slow, if anything;" she evidently understood me to mean: "How
tiresome you are being!" Obstinately as I might protract, over the whole
length of that rain-sodden afternoon, the dull cloud of words through
which no fitful ray shone, I knew that my coldness was not so
unalterably fixed as I pretended, and that Gilberte must be fully aware
that if, after already saying it to her three times, I had hazarded a
fourth repetition of the statement that the evenings were drawing in, I
should have had difficulty in restraining myself from bursting into
tears. When she was like that, when no smile filled her eyes or unveiled
her face, I cannot describe the devastating monotony that stamped her
melancholy eyes and sullen features. Her face, grown almost livid,
reminded me then of those dreary beaches where the sea, ebbing far out,
wearies one with its faint shimmering, everywhere the same, fixed in an
immutable and low horizon. At length, as I saw no sign in Gilberte of
the happy change for which I had been waiting now for some hours, I told
her that she was not being nice. "It is you that are not being nice,"
was her answer. "Oh, but surely---" I asked myself what I could have
done, and, finding no answer, put the question to her. "Naturally, you
think yourself nice!" she said to me with a laugh, and went on laughing.
Whereupon I felt all the anguish that there was for me in not being able
to attain to that other, less perceptible plane of her mind which her
laughter indicated. It seemed, that laughter, to mean: "No, no, I'm not
going to let myself be moved by anything that you say, I know you're
madly in love with me, but that leaves me neither hot nor cold, for I
don't care a rap for you." But I told myself that, after all, laughter
was not a language so well defined that I could be certain of
understanding what this laugh really meant. And Gilberte's words were
affectionate. "But how am I not being nice," I asked her, "tell me; I
will do anything you want." "No; that wouldn't be any good. I can't
explain." For a moment I was afraid that she thought that I did not love
her, and this was for me a fresh agony, no less keen, but one that
required treatment by a different conversational method. "If you knew
how much you were hurting me you would tell me." But this pain which,
had she doubted my love for her, must have rejoiced her, seemed instead
to make her more angry. Then, realising my mistake, making up my mind to
pay no more attention to what she said, letting her (without bothering
to believe her) assure me: "I do love you, indeed I do; you will see one
day," (that day on which the guilty are convinced that their innocence
will be made clear, and which, for some mysterious reason, never happens
to be the day on which their evidence is taken), I had the courage to
make a sudden resolution not to see her again, and without telling her
of it yet since she would not have believed me.

Grief that is caused one by a person with whom one is in love can be
bitter, even when it is interpolated among preoccupations, occupations,
pleasures in which that person is not directly involved and from which
our attention is diverted only now and again to return to it. But when
such a grief has its birth--as was now happening--at a moment when the
happiness of seeing that person fills us to the exclusion of all else,
the sharp depression that then affects our spirits, sunny hitherto,
sustained and calm, lets loose in us a raging tempest against which we
know not whether we are capable of struggling to the end. The tempest
that was blowing in my heart was so violent that I made my way home
baffled, battered, feeling that I could recover my breath only by
retracing my steps, by returning, upon whatever pretext, into Gilberte's
presence. But she would have said to herself: "Back again! Evidently I
can go to any length with him; he will come back every time, and the
more wretched he is when he leaves me the more docile he'll be."
Besides, I was irresistibly drawn towards her in thought, and those
alternative orientations, that mad careering between them of the
compass-needle within me persisted after I had reached home, and
expressed themselves in the mutually contradictory letters to Gilberte
which I began to draft. I was about to pass through one of those
difficult crises which we generally find that we have to face at various
stages in life, and which, for all that there has been no change in our
character, in our nature (that nature which itself creates our loves,
and almost creates the women whom we love, even to their faults), we do
not face in the same way on each occasion, that is to say at every age.
At such moments our life is divided, and so to speak distributed over a
pair of scales, in two counterpoised pans which between them contain it
all. In one there is our desire not to displease, not to appear too
humble to the creature whom we love without managing to understand her,
but whom we find it more convenient at times to appear almost to
disregard, so that she shall not have that sense of her own
indispensability which may turn her from us; in the other scale there is
a feeling of pain--and one that is not localised and partial only--which
cannot be set at rest unless, abandoning every thought of pleasing the
woman and of making her believe that we can dispense with her, we go at
once to find her. When we withdraw from the pan in which our pride lies
a small quantity of the will-power which we have weakly allowed to
exhaust itself with increasing age, when we add to the pan that holds
our suffering a physical pain which we have acquired and have let grow,
then, instead of the courageous solution that would have carried the day
at one-and-twenty, it is the other, grown too heavy and insufficiently
balanced, that crushes us down at fifty. All the more because
situations, while repeating themselves, tend to alter, and there is
every likelihood that, in middle life or in old age, we shall have had
the grim satisfaction of complicating our love by an intrusion of habit
which adolescence, repressed by other demands upon it, less master of
itself, has never known.

I had just written Gilberte a letter in which I allowed the tempest of
my wrath to thunder, not however without throwing her the lifebuoy of a
few words disposed as though by accident on the page, by clinging to
which my friend might be brought to a reconciliation; a moment later,
the wind having changed, they were phrases full of love that I addressed
to her, chosen for the sweetness of certain forlorn expressions, those
"nevermores" so touching to those who pen them, so wearisome to her who
will have to read them, whether she believe them to be false and
translate "nevermore" by "this very evening, if you want me," or believe
them to be true and so to be breaking the news to her of one of those
final separations which make so little difference to our lives when the
other person is one with whom we are not in love. But since we are
incapable, while we are in love, of acting as fit predecessors of the
next persons whom we shall presently have become, and who will then be
in love no longer, how are we to imagine the actual state of mind of a
woman whom, even when we are conscious that we are of no account to her,
we have perpetually represented in our musings as uttering, so as to
lull us into a happy dream or to console us for a great sorrow, the same
speeches that she would make if she loved us. When we come to examine
the thoughts, the actions of a woman whom we love, we are as completely
at a loss as must have been, face to face with the phenomena of nature,
the world's first natural philosophers, before their science had been
elaborated and had cast a ray of light over the unknown. Or, worse
still, we are like a person in whose mind the law of causality barely
exists, a person who would be incapable, therefore, of establishing any
connexion between one phenomenon and another, to whose eyes the
spectacle of the world would appear unstable as a dream. Of course I
made efforts to emerge from this incoherence, to find reasons for
things. I tried even to be "objective" and, to that end, to bear well in
mind the disproportion that existed between the importance which
Gilberte had in my eyes and that, not only which I had in hers, but
which she herself had in the eyes of other people, a disproportion
which, had I failed to remark it, would have involved my mistaking mere
friendliness on my friend's part for a passionate avowal, and a
grotesque and debasing display on my own for the simple and graceful
movement with which we are attracted towards a pretty face. But I was
afraid also of falling into the contrary error, in which I should have
seen in Gilberte's unpunctuality in keeping an appointment an
irremediable hostility. I tried to discover between these two
perspectives, equally distorting, a third which would enable me to see
things as they really were; the calculations I was obliged to make with
that object helped to take my mind off my sufferings; and whether in
obedience to the laws of arithmetic or because I had made them give me
the answer that I desired, I made up my mind that next day I would go to
the Swanns', happy, but happy in the same way as people who, having long
been tormented by the thought of a journey which they have not wished to
make, go no farther than to the Station and return home to unpack their
boxes. And since, while one is hesitating, the bare idea of a possible
resolution (unless one has rendered that idea sterile by deciding that
one will make no resolution) develops, like a seed in the ground, the
lineaments, every detail of the emotions that will be born from the
performance of the action, I told myself that it had been quite absurd
of me to be as much hurt by the suggestion that I should not see
Gilberte again as if I had really been about to put that suggestion into
practice, and that since, on the contrary, I was to end by returning to
her side, I might have saved myself the expense of all those vain
longings and painful acceptances. But this resumption of friendly
relations lasted only so long as it took me to reach the Swanns'; not
because their butler, who was really fond of me, told me that Gilberte
had gone out (a statement the truth of which was confirmed, as it
happened, the same evening, by people who had seen her somewhere), but
because of the manner in which he said it. "Sir, the young lady is not
at home; I can assure you, sir, that I am speaking the truth. If you
wish to make any inquiries I can fetch the young lady's maid. You know
very well, sir, that I would do everything in my power to oblige you,
and that if the young lady was at home I would take you to her at once."
These words being of the only kind that is really important, that is to
say spontaneous, the kind that gives us a radiograph shewing the main
points, at any rate, of the unimaginable reality which would be wholly
concealed beneath a prepared speech, proved that in Gilberte's household
there was an impression that I bothered her with my visits; and so,
scarcely had the man uttered them before they had aroused in me a hatred
of which I preferred to make him rather than Gilberte the victim; he
drew upon his own head all the angry feelings that I might have had for
my friend; freed from these complications, thanks to his words, my love
subsisted alone; but his words had, at the same time, shewn me that I
must cease for the present to attempt to see Gilberte. She would be
certain to write to me, to apologise. In spite of which, I should not
return at once to see her, so as to prove to her that I was capable of
living without her. Besides, once I had received her letter, Gilberte's
society was a thing with which I should be more easily able to dispense
for a time, since I should be certain of finding her ready to receive me
whenever I chose. All that I needed in order to support with less pain
the burden of a voluntary separation was to feel that my heart was rid
of the terrible uncertainty whether we were not irreconcilably sundered,
whether she had not promised herself to another, left Paris, been taken
away by force. The days that followed resembled the first week of that
old New Year which I had had to spend alone, without Gilberte. But when
that week had dragged to its end, then for one thing my friend would be
coming again to the Champs-Elysées, I should be seeing her as before; I
had been sure of that; for another thing, I had known with no less
certainty that so long as the New Year holidays lasted it would not be
worth my while to go to the Champs-Elysées, which meant that during
that miserable week, which was already ancient history, I had endured my
wretchedness with a quiet mind because there was blended in it neither
fear nor hope. Now, on the other hand, it was the latter of these which,
almost as much as my fear of what might happen, rendered intolerable the
burden of my grief. Not having had any letter from Gilberte that
evening, I had attributed this to her carelessness, to her other
occupations, I did not doubt that I should find something from her in
the morning's post. This I awaited, every day, with a beating heart
which subsided, leaving me utterly prostrate, when I had found in it
only letters from people who were not Gilberte, or else nothing at all,
which was no worse, the proofs of another's friendship making all the
more cruel those of her indifference. I transferred my hopes to the
afternoon post. Even between the times at which letters were delivered
I dared not leave the house, for she might be sending hers by a
messenger. Then, the time coming at last when neither the postman nor a
footman from the Swanns' could possibly appear that night, I must
procrastinate my hope of being set at rest, and thus, because I believed
that my sufferings were not destined to last, I was obliged, so to
speak, incessantly to renew them. My disappointment was perhaps the
same, but instead of just uniformly prolonging, as in the old days, an
initial emotion, it began again several times daily, starting each time
with an emotion so frequently renewed that it ended--it, so purely
physical, so instantaneous a state--by becoming stabilised, so
consistently that the strain of waiting having hardly time to relax
before a fresh reason for waiting supervened, there was no longer a
single minute in the day in which I was not in that state of anxiety
which it is so difficult to bear even for an hour. So my punishment was
infinitely more cruel than in those New Year holidays long ago, because
this time there was in me, instead of the acceptance, pure and simple,
of that punishment, the hope, at every moment, of seeing it come to an
end. And yet at this state of acceptance I ultimately arrived; then I
understood that it must be final, and I renounced Gilberte for ever, in
the interests of my love itself and because I hoped above all that she
would not retain any contemptuous memory of me. Indeed, from that
moment, so that she should not be led to suppose any sort of lover's
spite on my part, when she made appointments for me to see her I used
often to accept them and then, at the last moment, write to her that I
was prevented from coming, but with the same protestations of my
disappointment that I should have made to anyone whom I had not wished
to see. These expressions of regret, which we keep as a rule for people
who do not matter, would do more, I imagined, to persuade Gilberte of my
indifference than would the tone of indifference which we affect only to
those whom we love. When, better than by mere words, by a course of
action indefinitely repeated, I should have proved to her that I had no
appetite for seeing her, perhaps she would discover once again an
appetite for seeing me. Alas! I was doomed to failure; to attempt, by
ceasing to see her, to reawaken in her that inclination to see me was to
lose her for ever; first of all, because, when it began to revive, if I
wished it to last I must not give way to it at once; besides, the most
agonising hours would then have passed; it was at this very moment that
she was indispensable to me, and I should have liked to be able to warn
her that what presently she would have to assuage, by the act of seeing
me again, would be a grief so far diminished as to be no longer (what a
moment ago it would still have been), nor the thought of putting an end
to it, a motive towards surrender, reconciliation, further meetings. And
then again, later on, when I should at last be able safely to confess to
Gilberte (so far would her liking for me have regained its strength) my
liking for her, the latter, not having been able to resist the strain of
so long a separation, would have ceased to exist; Gilberte would have
become immaterial to me. I knew this, but I could not explain it to her;
she would have assumed that if I was pretending that I should cease to
love her if I remained for too long without seeing her, that was solely
in order that she might summon me back to her at once. In the meantime,
what made it easier for me to sentence myself to this separation was the
fact that (in order to make it quite clear to her that despite my
protestations to the contrary it was my own free-will and not any
conflicting engagement, not the state of my health that prevented me
from seeing her), whenever I knew beforehand that Gilberte would not be
in the house, was going out somewhere with a friend and would not be
home for dinner, I went to see Mme. Swann who had once more become to me
what she had been at the time when I had such difficulty in seeing her
daughter and (on days when the latter was not coming to the
Champs-Elysées) used to repair to the Allée des Acacias. In this way I
should be hearing about Gilberte, and could be certain that she would in
due course hear about me, and in terms which would shew her that I was
not interested in her. And I found, as all those who suffer find, that
my melancholy condition might have been worse. For being free at any
time to enter the habitation in which Gilberte dwelt, I constantly
reminded myself, for all that I was firmly resolved to make no use of
that privilege, that if ever my pain grew too sharp there was a way of
making it cease. I was not unhappy, save only from day to day. And even
that is an exaggeration. How many times in an hour (but now without that
anxious expectancy which had strained every nerve of me in the first
weeks after our quarrel, before I had gone again to the Swanns') did I
not repeat to myself the words of the letter which, one day soon,
Gilberte would surely send, would perhaps even bring to me herself. The
perpetual vision of that imagined happiness helped me to endure the
desolation of my real happiness. With women who do not love us, as with
the "missing", the knowledge that there is no hope left does not prevent
our continuing to wait for news. We live on tenter-hooks, starting at the
slightest sound; the mother whose son has gone to sea on some perilous
voyage of discovery sees him in imagination every moment, long after the
fact of his having perished has been established, striding into the
room, saved by a miracle and in the best of health. And this strain of
waiting, according to the strength of her memory and the resistance of
her bodily organs, either helps her on her journey through the years, at
the end of which she will be able to endure the knowledge that her son
is no more, to forget gradually and to survive his loss, or else it
kills her.

On the other hand, my grief found consolation in the idea that my love
must profit by it. Each visit that I paid to Mme. Swann without seeing
Gilberte was a cruel punishment, but I felt that it correspondingly
enhanced the idea that Gilberte had of me.

Besides, if I always took care, before going to see Mme. Swann, that
there should be no risk of her daughter's appearing, that arose, it is
true, from my determination to break with her, but no less perhaps from
that hope of reconciliation which overlay my intention to renounce her
(very few of such intentions are absolute, at least in a continuous
form, in this human soul of ours, one of whose laws, confirmed by the
unlooked-for wealth of illustration that memory supplies, is
intermittence), and hid from me all that in it was unbearably cruel. As
for that hope, I saw clearly how far it was chimerical. I was like a
pauper who moistens his dry crust with fewer tears if he assures himself
that, at any moment, a total stranger is perhaps going to leave him the
whole of his fortune. We are all of us obliged, if we are to make
reality endurable, to nurse a few little follies in ourselves. Now my
hope remained more intact--while at the same time our separation became
more effectual--if I refrained from meeting Gilberte. If I had found
myself face to face with her in her mother's drawing-room, we might
perhaps have uttered irrevocable words which would have rendered our
breach final, killed my hope and, on the other hand, by creating a fresh
anxiety, reawakened my love and made resignation harder.

Ever so long ago, before I had even thought of breaking with her
daughter, Mme. Swann had said to me: "It is all very well your coming to
see Gilberte; I should like you to come sometimes for my sake, not to my
'kettledrums', which would bore you because there is such a crowd, but
on the other days, when you will always find me at home if you come
fairly late." So that I might be thought, when I came to see her, to be
yielding only after a long resistance to a desire which she had
expressed in the past. And very late in the afternoon, when it was quite
dark, almost at the hour at which my parents would be sitting down to
dinner, I would set out to pay Mme. Swann a visit, in the course of
which I knew that I should not see Gilberte, and yet should be thinking
only of her. In that quarter, then looked upon as remote, of a Paris
darker than Paris is to-day, where even in the centre there was no
electric light in the public thoroughfares and very little in private
houses, the lamps of a drawing-room situated on the ground level, or but
slightly raised above it, as were the rooms in which Mme. Swann
generally received her visitors, were enough to lighten the street, and
to make the passer-by raise his eyes, connecting with their glow, as
with its apparent though hidden cause, the presence outside the door of
a string of smart broughams. This passer-by was led to believe, not
without a certain emotion, that a modification had been effected in this
mysterious cause, when he saw one of the carriages begin to move; but it
was merely a coachman who, afraid of his horses' catching cold, started
them now and again on a brisk walk, all the more impressive because the
rubber-tired wheels gave the sound of their hooves a background of
silence from which it stood out more distinct and more explicit.

The "winter-garden", of which in those days the passer-by generally
caught a glimpse, in whatever street he might be walking, if the
drawing-room did not stand too high above the pavement, is to be seen
to-day only in photogravures in the gift-books of P. J. Stahl, where, in
contrast to the infrequent floral decorations of the Louis XVI
drawing-rooms now in fashion--a single rose or a Japanese iris in a
long-necked vase of crystal into which it would be impossible to squeeze
a second--it seems, because of the profusion of indoor plants which
people had then, and of the absolute want of style in their arrangement,
as though it must have responded in the ladies whose houses it adorned
to some living and delicious passion for botany rather than to any cold
concern for lifeless decoration. It suggested to one, only on a larger
scale, in the houses of those days, those tiny, portable hothouses laid
out on New Year's morning beneath the lighted lamp--for the children
were always too impatient to wait for daylight--among all the other New
Year's presents but the loveliest of them all, consoling them with its
real plants which they could tend as they grew for the bareness of the
winter soil; and even more than those little houses themselves, those
winter gardens were like the hot-house that the children could see there
at the same time, portrayed in a delightful book, another of their
presents, and one which, for all that it was given not to them but to
Mlle. Lili, the heroine of the story, enchanted them to such a pitch
that even now, when they are almost old men and women, they ask
themselves whether, in those fortunate years, winter was not the
loveliest of the seasons. And inside there, beyond the winter-garden,
through the various kinds of arborescence which from the street made the
lighted window appear like the glass front of one of those children's
playthings, pictured or real, the passer-by, drawing himself up on
tiptoe, would generally observe a man in a frock coat, a gardenia or a
carnation in his buttonhole, standing before a seated lady, both vaguely
outlined, like two intaglios cut in a topaz, in the depths of the
drawing-room atmosphere clouded by the samovar--then a recent
importation--with steam which may very possibly be escaping from it
still to-day, but to which, if it does, we are grown so accustomed now
that no one notices it. Mme. Swann attached great importance to her
"tea"; she thought that she shewed her originality and expressed her
charm when she said to a man, "You will find me at home any day, fairly
late; come to tea!" so that she allowed a sweet and delicate smile to
accompany the words which she pronounced with a fleeting trace of
English accent, and which her listener duly noted, bowing solemnly in
acceptance, as though the invitation had been something important and
uncommon which commanded deference and required attention. There was
another reason, apart from those given already, for the flowers' having
more than a merely ornamental part in Mme. Swann's drawing-room, and
this reason pertained not to the period, but, in some degree, to the
former life of Odette. A great courtesan, such as she had been, lives
largely for her lovers, that is to say at home, which means that she
comes in time to live for her home. The things that one sees in the
house of a "respectable" woman, things which may of course appear to her
also to be of importance, are those which are in any event of the utmost
importance to the courtesan. The culminating point of her day is not the
moment in which she dresses herself for all the world to see, but that
in which she undresses herself for a man. She must be as smart in her
wrapper, in her nightgown, as in her outdoor attire. Other women display
their jewels, but as for her, she lives in the intimacy of her pearls.
This kind of existence imposes on her as an obligation and ends by
giving her a fondness for luxury which is secret, that is to say which
comes near to being disinterested. Mme. Swann extended this to include
her flowers. There was always beside her chair an immense bowl of
crystal filled to the brim with Parma violets or with long white
daisy-petals scattered upon the water, which seemed to be testifying, in
the eyes of the arriving guest, to some favourite and interrupted
occupation, such as the cup of tea which Mme. Swann would, for her own
amusement, have been drinking there by herself; an occupation more
intimate still and more mysterious, so much so that one felt oneself
impelled to apologise on seeing the flowers exposed there by her side,
as one would have apologised for looking at the title of the still open
book which would have revealed to one what had just been read by--and
so, perhaps, what was still in the mind of Odette. And unlike the book
the flowers were living things; it was annoying, when one entered the
room to pay Mme. Swann a visit, to discover that she was not alone, or
if one came home with her not to find the room empty, so prominent a
place in it, enigmatic and intimately associated with hours in the life
of their mistress of which one knew nothing, did those flowers assume
which had not been made ready for Odette's visitors but, as it were,
forgotten there by her, had held and would hold with her again private
conversations which one was afraid of disturbing, the secret of which
one tried in vain to read, fastening one's eyes on the moist purple, the
still liquid water-colour of the Parma violets. By the end of October
Odette would begin to come home with the utmost punctuality for tea,
which was still known, at that time, as "five-o'clock tea", having once
heard it said, and being fond of repeating that if Mme. Verdurin had
been able to form a salon it was because people were always certain of
finding her at home at the same hour. She imagined that she herself had
one also, of the same kind, but freer, _senza rigore_ as she used to
say. She saw herself figuring thus as a sort of Lespinasse, and believed
that she had founded a rival salon by taking from the du Deffant of the
little group several of her most attractive men, notably Swann himself,
who had followed her in her secession and into her retirement, according
to a version for which one can understand that she had succeeded in
gaining credit among her more recent friends, ignorant of what had
passed, though without convincing herself. But certain favourite parts
are played by us so often before the public and rehearsed so carefully
when we are alone that we find it easier to refer to their fictitious
testimony than to that of a reality which we have almost entirely
forgotten. On days on which Mme. Swann had not left the house, one found
her in a wrapper of _crêpe-de-Chine_, white as the first snows of
winter, or, it might be, in one of those long pleated garments of
_mousseline-de-soie_, which seemed nothing more than a shower of white
or rosy petals, and would be regarded to-day as hardly suitable for
winter, though quite wrongly. For these light fabrics and soft colours
gave to a woman--in the stifling warmth of the drawing-rooms of those
days, with their heavily curtained doors, rooms of which the most
effective thing that the society novelists of the time could find to say
was that they were "exquisitely cushioned"--the same air of coolness
that they gave to the roses which were able to stay in the room there by
her side, despite the winter, in the glowing flesh tints of their
nudity, as though it were already spring. By reason of the muffling of
all sound in the carpets, and of the remoteness of her cosy retreat, the
lady of the house, not being apprised of your entry as she is to-day,
would continue to read almost until you were standing before her chair,
which enhanced still further that sense of the romantic, that charm of a
sort of secret discovery, which we find to-day in the memory of those
gowns, already out of fashion even then, which Mme. Swann was perhaps
alone in not having discarded, and which give us the feeling that the
woman who wore them must have been the heroine of a novel because most
of us have scarcely set eyes on them outside the pages of certain of
Henry Gréville's tales. Odette had, at this time, in her drawing-room,
when winter began, chrysanthemums of enormous size and of a variety of
colours such as Swann, in the old days, certainly never saw in her
drawing-room in the Rue La Pérouse. My admiration for them--when I went
to pay Mme. Swann one of those melancholy visits during which, prompted
by my sorrow, I discovered in her all the mystical poetry of her
character as the mother of that Gilberte to whom she would say on the
morrow: "Your friend came to see me yesterday,"--sprang, no doubt, from
my sense that, rose-pale like the Louis XIV silk that covered her
chairs, snow white like her _crêpe-de-Chine_ wrapper, or of a metallic
red like her samovar, they superimposed upon the decoration of the room
another, a supplementary scheme of decoration, as rich, as delicate in
its colouring, but one which was alive and would last for a few days
only. But I was touched to find that these chrysanthemums appeared less
ephemeral than, one might almost say, lasting, when I compared them with
the tones, as pink, as coppery, which the setting sun so gorgeously
displays amid the mists of a November afternoon, and which, after seeing
them, before I had entered the house, fade from the sky, I found again
inside, prolonged, transposed on to the flaming palette of the flowers.
Like the fires caught and fixed by a great colourist from the
impermanence of the atmosphere and the sun, so that they should enter
and adorn a human dwelling, they invited me, those chrysanthemums, to
put away all my sorrows and to taste with a greedy rapture during that
"tea-time" the too fleeting joys of November, of which they set ablaze
all around me the intimate and mystical glory. Alas, it was not in the
conversations to which I must listen that I could hope to attain to that
glory; they had but little in common with it. Even with Mme. Cottard,
and although it was growing late, Mme. Swann would assume her most
caressing manner to say: "Oh, no, it's not late, really; you mustn't
look at the clock; that's not the right time; it's stopped; you can't
possibly have anything else to do now, why be in such a hurry?" as she
pressed a final tartlet upon the Professor's wife, who was gripping her
card-case in readiness for flight.

"One simply can't tear oneself away from this house!" observed Mme.
Bontemps to Mme. Swann, while Mme. Cottard, in her astonishment at
hearing her own thought put into words, exclaimed: "Why, that's just
what I always say myself, what I tell my own little judge, in the court
of conscience!" winning the applause of the gentlemen from the Jockey
Club, who had been profuse in their salutations, as though confounded at
such an honour's being done them, when Mme. Swann had introduced them to
this common and by no means attractive little woman, who kept herself,
when confronted with Odette's brilliant friends, in reserve, if not on
what she herself called "the defensive", for she always used stately
language to describe the simplest happenings. "I should never have
suspected it," was Mme. Swann's comment, "three Wednesdays running
you've played me false." "That's quite true, Odette; it's simply ages,
it's an eternity since I saw you last. You see, I plead guilty; but I
must tell you," she went on with a vague suggestion of outraged modesty,
for although a doctor's wife she would never have dared to speak without
periphrasis of rheumatism or of a chill on the kidneys, "that I have had
a lot of little troubles. As we all have, I dare say. And besides that
I've had a crisis among my masculine domestics. I'm sure, I'm no more
imbued with a sense of my own authority than most ladies; still I've
been obliged, just to make an example you know, to give my Vatel notice;
I believe he was looking out anyhow for a more remunerative place. But
his departure nearly brought about the resignation of my entire
ministry. My own maid refused to stay in the house a moment longer; oh,
we have had some Homeric scenes. However I held fast to the reins
through thick and thin; the whole affair's been a perfect lesson, which
won't be lost on me, I can tell you. I'm afraid I'm boring you with all
these stories about servants, but you know as well as I do what a
business it is when one is obliged to set about rearranging one's
household.

"Aren't we to see anything of your delicious child?" she wound up. "No,
my delicious child is dining with a friend," replied Mme. Swann, and
then, turning to me: "I believe she's written to you, asking you to come
and see her to-morrow. And your babies?" she went on to Mme. Cottard. I
breathed a sigh of relief. These words by which Mme. Swann proved to me
that I could see Gilberte whenever I chose gave me precisely the comfort
which I had come to seek, and which at that time made my visits to Mme.
Swann so necessary. "No, I'm afraid not; I shall write to her, anyhow,
this evening. Gilberte and I never seem to see one another now," I
added, pretending to attribute our separation to some mysterious agency,
which gave me a further illusion of being in love, supported as well by
the affectionate way in which I spoke of Gilberte and she of me. "You
know, she's simply devoted to you," said Mme. Swann. "Really, you won't
come to-morrow?" Suddenly my heart rose on wings; the thought had just
struck me--"After all, why shouldn't I, since it's her own mother who
suggests it?" But with the thought I fell back into my old depression. I
was afraid now lest, when she saw me again, Gilberte might think that my
indifference of late had been feigned, and it seemed wiser to prolong
our separation. During these asides Mme. Bontemps had been complaining
of the insufferable dulness of politicians' wives, for she pretended to
find everyone too deadly or too stupid for words, and to deplore her
husband's official position. "Do you mean to say you can shake hands
with fifty doctors' wives, like that, one after the other?" she
exclaimed to Mme. Cottard, who, unlike her, was full of the kindest
feelings for everybody and of determination to do her duty in every
respect. "Ah! you're a law-abiding woman! You see, in my case, at the
Ministry, don't you know, I simply have to keep it up, of course. It's
too much for me, I can tell you; you know what those officials' wives
are like, it's all I can do not to put my tongue out at them. And my
niece Albertine is just like me. You really wouldn't believe the
impudence that girl has. Last week, on my 'day', I had the wife of the
Under Secretary of State for Finance, who told us that she knew nothing
at all about cooking. 'But surely, ma'am,' my niece chipped in with her
most winning smile, 'you ought to know everything about it, after all
the dishes your father had to wash.'" "Oh, I do love that story; I think
it's simply exquisite!" cried Mme. Swann. "But certainly on the Doctor's
consultation days you should make a point of being 'at home', among your
flowers and books and all your pretty things," she urged Mme. Cottard.
"Straight out like that! Bang! Right in the face; bang! She made no
bones about it, I can tell you! And she'd never said a word to me about
it, the little wretch; she's as cunning as a monkey. You are lucky to be
able to control yourself; I do envy people who can hide what is in their
minds." "But I've no need to do that, Mme. Bontemps, I'm not so hard to
please," Mme. Cottard gently expostulated. "For one thing, I'm not in
such a privileged position," she went on, slightly raising her voice as
was her custom, as though she were underlining the point of her remark,
whenever she slipped into the conversation any of those delicate
courtesies, those skilful flatteries which won her the admiration and
assisted the career of her husband. "And besides I'm only too glad to do
anything that can be of use to the Professor."

"But, my dear, it isn't what one's glad to do; it's what one is able to
do! I expect you're not nervous. Do you know, whenever I see the War
Minister's wife making faces, I start copying her at once. It's a
dreadful thing to have a temperament like mine."

"To be sure, yes," said Mme. Cottard, "I've heard people say that she
had a twitch; my husband knows someone else who occupies a very high
position, and it's only natural, when gentlemen get talking together..."

"And then, don't you know, it's just the same with the Chief of the
Registry; he's a hunchback. Whenever he comes to see me, before he's
been in the room five minutes my fingers are itching to stroke his hump.
My husband says I'll cost him his place. What if I do! A fig for the
Ministry! Yes, a fig for the Ministry! I should like to have that
printed as a motto on my note-paper. I can see I am shocking you; you're
so frightfully proper, but I must say there's nothing amuses me like a
little devilry now and then. Life would be dreadfully monotonous without
it."

And she went on talking about the Ministry all the time, as though it
had been Mount Olympus. To change the conversation, Mme. Swann turned to
Mme. Cottard: "But you're looking very smart to-day. Redfern _fecit_?"

"No, you know, I always swear by Rauthnitz. Besides, it's only an old
thing I've had done up." "Not really! It's charming!"

"Guess how much. . . . No, change the first figure!"

"You don't say so! Why, that's nothing; it's given away! Three times
that at least, I should have said." "You see how history comes to be
written," apostrophised the doctor's wife. And pointing to a neck-ribbon
which had been a present from Mme. Swann; "Look, Odette! Do you
recognise this?"

Through the gap between a pair of curtains a head peeped with
ceremonious deference, making a playful pretence of being afraid of
disturbing the party; it was Swann. "Odette, the Prince d'Agrigente is
with me in the study. He wants to know if he may pay his respects to
you. What am I to tell him?" "Why, that I shall be delighted," Odette
would reply, secretly flattered, but without losing anything of the
composure which came to her all the more easily since she had always,
even in her "fast" days, been accustomed to entertain men of fashion.
Swann disappeared to deliver the message, and would presently return
with the Prince, unless in the meantime Mme. Verdurin had arrived. When
he married Odette Swann had insisted on her ceasing to frequent the
little clan. (He had several good reasons for this stipulation, though,
had he had none, he would have made it just the same in obedience to a
law of ingratitude which admits no exception, and proves that every
"go-between" is either lacking in foresight or else singularly
disinterested.) He had conceded only that Odette and Mme. Verdurin might
exchange visits once a year, and even this seemed excessive to some of
the "faithful", indignant at the insult offered to the "Mistress" who
for so many years had treated Odette and even Swann himself as the
spoiled children of her house. For if it contained false brethren who
"failed" upon certain evenings in order that they might secretly accept
an invitation from Odette, ready, in the event of discovery, with the
excuse that they were curious to meet Bergotte (although the Mistress
assured them that he never went to the Swanns', and even if he did had
no vestige of talent, really--in spite of which she was making the most
strenuous efforts, to quote one of her favourite expressions, to
"attract" him), the little group had its "die-hards" also. And these,
though ignorant of those conventional refinements which often dissuade
people from the extreme attitude one would have liked to see them adopt
in order to annoy some one else, would have wished Mme. Verdurin, but
had never managed to prevail upon her to sever all connexion with
Odette, and thus deprive her of the satisfaction of saying, with a
mocking laugh: "We go to the Mistress's very seldom now, since the
Schism. It was all very well while my husband was still a bachelor, but
when one is married, you know, it isn't always so easy. . . . If you
must know, M. Swann can't abide old Ma Verdurin, and he wouldn't much
like the idea of my going there regularly, as I used to. And I, as a
dutiful spouse, don't you see . . .?" Swann would accompany his wife to
their annual evening there but would take care not to be in the room
when Mme. Verdurin came to call. And so, if the "Mistress" was in the
drawing-room, the Prince d'Agrigente would enter it alone. Alone, too,
he was presented to her by Odette, who preferred that Mme. Verdurin
should be left in ignorance of the names of her humbler guests, and so
might, seeing more than one strange face in the room, be led to believe
that she was mixing with the cream of the aristocracy, a device which
proved so far successful that Mme. Verdurin said to her husband, that
evening, with profound contempt: "Charming people, her friends! I met
all the fine flower of the Reaction!" Odette was living, with respect to
Mme. Verdurin, under a converse illusion. Not that the latter's salon
had ever begun, at that time, to develop into what we shall one day see
it to have become. Mme. Verdurin had not yet reached the period of
incubation in which one dispenses with one's big parties, where the few
brilliant specimens recently acquired would be lost in too numerous a
crowd, and prefers to wait until the generative force of the ten
righteous whom one has succeeded in attracting shall have multiplied
those ten seventy-fold. As Odette was not to be long now in doing, Mme.
Verdurin did indeed entertain the idea of "Society" as her final
objective, but her zone of attack was as yet so restricted, and moreover
so remote from that in which Odette had some chance of arriving at an
identical goal, of breaking the line of defence, that the latter
remained absolutely ignorant of the strategic plans which the "Mistress"
was elaborating. And it was with the most perfect sincerity that Odette,
when anyone spoke to her of Mme. Verdurin as a snob, would answer,
laughing, "Oh, no, quite the opposite! For one thing, she never gets a
chance of being a snob; she doesn't know anyone. And then, to do her
justice, I must say that she seems quite pleased not to know anyone. No,
what she likes are her Wednesdays, and people who talk well." And in her
hearts of hearts she envied Mme. Verdurin (for all that she did not
despair of having herself, in so eminent a school, succeeded in
acquiring them) those arts to which the "Mistress" attached such
paramount importance, albeit they did but discriminate between shades of
the Non-existent, sculpture the void, and were, properly speaking, the
Arts of Nonentity: to wit those, in the lady of a house, of knowing how
to "bring people together", how to "group", to "draw out", to "keep in
the background", to act as a "connecting link".

In any case, Mme. Swann's friends were impressed when they saw in her
house a lady of whom they were accustomed to think only as in her own,
in an inseparable setting of her guests, amid the whole of her little
group which they were astonished to behold thus suggested, summarised,
assembled, packed into a single armchair in the bodily form of the
"Mistress", the hostess turned visitor, muffled in her cloak with its
grebe trimming, as shaggy as the white skins that carpeted that
drawing-room embowered in which Mme. Verdurin was a drawing-room in
herself. The more timid among the women thought it prudent to retire,
and using the plural, as people do when they mean to hint to the rest of
the room that it is wiser not to tire a convalescent who is out of bed
for the first time: "Odette," they murmured, "we are going to leave
you." They envied Mme. Cottard, whom the "Mistress" called by her
Christian name. "Can I drop you anywhere?" Mme. Verdurin asked her,
unable to bear the thought that one of the faithful was going to remain
behind instead of following her from the room. "Oh, but this lady has
been so very kind as to say, she'll take me," replied Mme. Cottard, not
wishing to appear to be forgetting, when approached by a more
illustrious personage, that she had accepted the offer which Mme.
Bontemps had made of driving her home behind her cockaded coachman. "I
must say that I am always specially grateful to the friends who are so
kind as to take me with them in their vehicles. It is a regular godsend
to me, who have no Automedon." "Especially," broke in the "Mistress",
who felt that she must say something, since she knew Mme. Bontemps
slightly and had just invited her to her Wednesdays, "as at Mme. de
Crécy's house you're not very near home. Oh, good gracious, I shall
never get into the way of saying Mme. Swann!" It was a recognised
pleasantry in the little clan, among those who were not over endowed
with wit, to pretend that they could never grow used to saying "Mme.
Swann." "I have been so accustomed to saying Mme. de Crécy that I
nearly went wrong again!" Only Mme. Verdurin, when she spoke to Odette,
was not content with the nearly, but went wrong on purpose. "Don't you
feel afraid, Odette, living out in the wilds like this? I'm sure I
shouldn't feel at all comfortable, coming home after dark. Besides, it's
so damp. It can't be at all good for your husband's eczema. You haven't
rats in the house, I hope!" "Oh, dear no. What a horrid idea!" "That's a
good thing; I was told you had. I'm glad to know it's not true, because
I have a perfect horror of the creatures, and I should never have come
to see you again. Good-bye, my dear child, we shall meet again soon; you
know what a pleasure it is to me to see you. You don't know how to put
your chrysanthemums in water," she went on, as she prepared to leave the
room, Mme. Swann having risen to escort her. "They are Japanese flowers;
you must arrange them the same way as the Japanese." "I do not agree
with Mme. Verdurin, although she is the Law and the Prophets to me in
all things! There's no one like you, Odette, for finding such lovely
chrysanthemums, or chrysanthema rather, for it seems that's what we
ought to call them now," declared Mme. Cottard as soon as the "Mistress"
had shut the door behind her. "Dear Mme. Verdurin is not always very
kind about other people's flowers," said Odette sweetly. "Whom do you go
to, Odette," asked Mme. Cottard, to forestall any further criticism of
the "Mistress". "Lemaître? I must confess, the other day in Lemaître's
window I saw a huge, great pink bush which made me do something quite
mad." But modesty forbade her to give any more precise details as to the
price of the bush, and she said merely that the Professor, "and you
know, he's not at all a quick-tempered man," had "waved his sword in the
air" and told her that she "didn't know what money meant." "No, no, I've
no regular florist except Debac." "Nor have I," said Mme. Cottard, "but
I confess that I am unfaithful to him now and then with Lachaume." "Oh,
you forsake him for Lachaume, do you; I must tell Debac that," retorted
Odette, always anxious to shew her wit, and to lead the conversation in
her own house, where she felt more at her ease than in the little clan.
"Besides, Lachaume is really becoming too dear; his prices are quite
excessive, don't you know; I find his prices impossible!" she added,
laughing.

Meanwhile Mme. Bontemps, who had been heard a hundred times to declare
that nothing would induce her to go to the Verdurins', delighted at
being asked to the famous Wednesdays, was planning in her own mind how
she could manage to attend as many of them as possible. She was not
aware that Mme. Verdurin liked people not to miss a single one; also she
was one of those people whose company is but little sought, who, when a
hostess invites them to a series of parties, do not accept and go to
them without more ado, like those who know that if is always a pleasure
to see them, whenever they have a moment to spare and feel inclined to
go out; people of her type deny themselves it may be the first evening
and the third, imagining that their absence will be noticed, and save
themselves up for the second and fourth, unless it should happen that,
having heard from a trustworthy source that the third is to be a
particularly brilliant party, they reverse the original order, assuring
their hostess that "most unfortunately, we had another engagement last
week." So Mme. Bontemps was calculating how many Wednesdays there could
still be left before Easter, and by what means she might manage to
secure one extra, and yet not appear to be thrusting herself upon her
hostess. She relied upon Mme. Cottard, whom she would have with her in
the carriage going home, to give her a few hints. "Oh, Mme. Bontemps, I
see you getting up to go; it is very bad of you to give the signal for
flight like that! You owe me some compensation for not turning up last
Thursday. . . . Come, sit down again, just for a minute. You can't
possibly be going anywhere else before dinner. Really, you won't let
yourself be tempted?" went on Mme. Swann, and, as she held out a plate
of cakes, "You know, they're not at all bad, these little horrors. They
don't look nice, but just taste one, I know you'll like it." "On the
contrary, they look quite delicious," broke in Mme. Cottard. "In your
house, Odette, one is never short of victuals. I have no need to ask to
see the trade-mark; I know you get everything from Rebattet. I must say
that I am more eclectic. For sweet biscuits and everything of that sort
I repair, as often as not, to Bourbonneux. But I agree that they simply
don't know what an ice means. Rebattet for everything iced, and syrups
and sorbets; they're past-masters. As my husband would say, they're the
_ne plus ultra,_" "Oh, but we just make these in the house. You won't,
really?" "I shan't be able to eat a scrap of dinner," pleaded Mme.
Bontemps, "but I will just sit down again for a moment; you know, I
adore talking to a clever woman like you." "You will think me highly
indiscreet, Odette, but I should so like to know what you thought of the
hat Mme. Trombert had on. I know, of course, that big hats are the
fashion just now. All the same, wasn't it just the least little bit
exaggerated? And compared to the hat she came to see me in the other
day, the one she had on just now was microscopic!" "Oh no, I am not at
all clever," said Odette, thinking that this sounded well. "I am a
perfect simpleton, I believe everything people say, and worry myself to
death over the least thing." And she insinuated that she had, just at
first, suffered terribly from the thought of having married a man like
Swann, who had a separate life of his own and was unfaithful to her.
Meanwhile the Prince d'Agrigente, having caught the words "I am not at
all clever", thought it incumbent on him to protest; unfortunately he
had not the knack of repartee. "Tut, tut, tut, tut!" cried Mme.
Bontemps, "Not clever; you!" "That's just what I was saying to
myself--'What do I hear?'," the Prince clutched at this straw, "My ears
must have played me false!" "No, I assure you," went on Odette, "I am
really just an ordinary woman, very easily shocked, full of prejudices,
living in my own little groove and dreadfully ignorant." And then, in
case he had any news of the Baron de Charlus, "Have you seen our dear
Baronet?" she asked him. "You, ignorant!" cried Mme. Bontemps. "Then I
wonder what you'd say of the official world, all those wives of
Excellencies who can talk of nothing but their frocks. . . . Listen to
this, my friend; not more than a week ago I happened to mention
_Lohengrin_ to the Education Minister's wife. She stared at me, and said
'_Lohengrin?_ Oh, yes, the new review at the Folies-Bergères. I hear
it's a perfect scream!' What do you say to that, eh? You can't help
yourself; when people say things like that it makes your blood boil. I
could have struck her. Because I have a bit of a temper of my own. What
do you say, sir;" she turned to me, "was I not right?" "Listen," said
Mme. Cottard, "people can't help answering a little off the mark when
they're asked a thing like that point blank, without any warning. I know
something about it, because Mme. Verdurin also has a habit of putting a
pistol to your head." "Speaking of Mme. Verdurin," Mme. Bontemps asked
Mme. Cottard, "do you know who will be there on Wednesday? Oh, I've just
remembered that we've accepted an invitation for next Wednesday. You
wouldn't care to dine with us on Wednesday week? We could go on together
to Mme. Verdurin's. I should never dare to go there by myself; I don't
know why it is, that great lady always terrifies me." "I'll tell you
what it is," replied Mme. Cottard, "what frightens you about Mme.
Verdurin is her organ. But you see everyone can't have such a charming
organ as Mme. Swann. Once you've found your tongue, as the 'Mistress'
says, the ice will soon be broken. For she's a very easy person, really,
to get on with. But I can quite understand what you feel; it's never
pleasant to find oneself for the first time in a strange country."
"Won't you dine with us, too?" said Mme. Bontemps to Mme. Swann. "After
dinner we could all go to the Verdurins together, 'do a Verdurin'; and
even if it means that the 'Mistress' will stare me out of countenance
and never ask me to the house again, once we are there we'll just sit by
ourselves and have a quiet talk, I'm sure that's what I should like
best." But this assertion can hardly have been quite truthful, for Mme.
Bontemps went on to ask: "Who do you think will be there on Wednesday
week? What will they be doing? There won't be too big a crowd, I hope!"
"I certainly shan't be there," said Odette. "We shall just look in for
a minute on the last Wednesday of all. If you don't mind waiting till
then----" But Mme. Bontemps did not appear to be tempted by the
proposal.

Granted that the intellectual distinction of a house and its smartness
are generally in inverse rather than direct ratio, one must suppose,
since Swann found Mme. Bontemps attractive, that any forfeiture of
position once accepted has the consequence of making us less particular
with regard to the people among whom we have resigned ourselves to
finding entertainment, less particular with regard to their intelligence
as to everything else about them. And if this be true, men, like
nations, must see their culture and even their language disappear with
their independence. One of the effects of this indulgence is to
aggravate the tendency which after a certain age we have towards finding
pleasure in speeches that are a homage to our own turn of mind, to our
weaknesses, an encouragement to us to yield to them; that is the age at
which a great artist prefers to the company of original minds that of
pupils who have nothing in common with him save the letter of his
doctrine, who listen to him and offer incense; at which a man or woman
of mark, who is living entirely for love, will find that the most
intelligent person in a gathering is one perhaps of no distinction, but
one who has shewn by some utterance that he can understand and approve
what is meant by an existence devoted to gallantry, and has thus
pleasantly excited the voluptuous instincts of the lover or mistress; it
was the age, too, at which Swann, in so far as he had become the husband
of Odette, enjoyed hearing Mme. Bontemps say how silly it was to have
nobody in one's house but duchesses (concluding from that, quite the
contrary of what he would have decided in the old days at the
Verdurins', that she was a good creature, extremely sensible and not at
all a snob) and telling her stories which made her "die, laughing"
because she had not heard them before, although she always "saw the
point" at once, liked flattering her for his own amusement. "Then the
Doctor is not mad about flowers, like you?" Mme. Swann asked Mme.
Cottard. "Oh, well, you know, my husband is a sage; he practises
moderation in all things. Yes, I must admit, he has a passion." Her eye
aflame with malice, joy, curiosity, "And what is that, pray?" inquired
Mme. Bontemps. Quite simply Mme. Cottard answered her, "Reading." "Oh,
that's a very restful passion in a husband!" cried Mme. Bontemps
suppressing an impish laugh. "When the Doctor gets a book in his hands,
you know!" "Well, that needn't alarm you much . . ." "But it does, for
his eyesight. I must go now and look after him, Odette, and I shall come
back on the very first opportunity and knock at your door. Talking of
eyesight, have you heard that the new house Mme. Verdurin has just
bought is to be lighted by electricity? I didn't get that from my own
little secret service, you know, but from quite a different source; it
was the electrician himself, Mildé, who told me. You see, I quote my
authorities! Even the bedrooms, he says, are to have electric lamps with
shades which will filter the light. It is evidently a charming luxury,
for those who can afford it. But it seems that our contemporaries must
absolutely have the newest thing if it's the only one of its kind in the
world. Just fancy, the sister-in-law of a friend of mine has had the
telephone installed in her house! She can order things from her
tradesmen without having to go out of doors! I confess that I've made
the most bare-faced stratagems to get permission to go there one day,
just to speak into the instrument. It's very tempting, but more in a
friend's house than at home. I don't think I should like to have the
telephone in my establishment. Once the first excitement is over, it
must be a perfect racket going on all the time. Now, Odette, I must be
off; you're not to keep Mme. Bontemps any longer, she's looking after
me. I must absolutely tear myself away; you're making me behave in a
nice way, I shall be getting home after my husband!"

And for myself also it was time to return home, before I had tasted
those wintry delights of which the chrysanthemums had seemed to me to be
the brilliant envelope. These pleasures had not appeared, and yet Mme.
Swann did not look as though she expected anything more. She allowed the
servants to carry away the tea-things, as who should say "Time, please,
gentlemen!" And at last she did say to me: "Really, must you go? Very
well; good-bye!" I felt that I might have stayed there without
encountering those unknown pleasures, and that my unhappiness was not
the cause of my having to forego them. Were they to be found, then,
situated not upon that beaten track of hours which leads one always to
the moment of departure, but rather upon some cross-road unknown to me
along which I ought to have digressed? At least, the object of my visit
had been attained; Gilberte would know that I had come to see her
parents when she was not at home, and that I had, as Mme. Cottard had
incessantly assured me, "made a complete conquest, first shot, of Mme.
Verdurin," whom, she added, she had never seen "make so much" of anyone.
("You and she must have hooked atoms.") She would know that I had spoken
of her as was fitting, with affection, but that I had not that
incapacity for living without our seeing one another which I believed to
be at the root of the boredom that she had shewn at our last meetings. I
had told Mme. Swann that I should not be able to see Gilberte again. I
had said this as though I had finally decided not to see her any more.
And the letter which I was going to send Gilberte would be framed on
those lines. Only to myself, to fortify my courage, I proposed no more
than a supreme and concentrated effort, lasting a few days only. I said
to myself: "This is the last time that I shall refuse to meet her; I
shall accept the next invitation." To make our separation less difficult
to realise, I did not picture it to myself as final. But I knew very
well that it would be.

The first of January was exceptionally painful to me that winter. So, no
doubt, is everything that marks a date and an anniversary when we are
unhappy. But if our unhappiness is due to the loss of some dear friend,
our suffering consists merely in an unusually vivid comparison of the
present with the past. There was added to this, in my case, the
unexpressed hope that Gilberte, having intended to leave me to take the
first steps towards a reconciliation, and discovering that I had not
taken them, had been waiting only for the excuse of New Year's Day to
write to me, saying: "What is the matter? I am madly in love with you;
come, and let us explain things properly; I cannot live without seeing
you." As the last days of the old year went by, such a letter began to
seem probable. It was, perhaps, nothing of the sort, but to make us
believe that such a thing is probable the desire, the need that we have
for it suffices. The soldier is convinced that a certain interval of
time, capable of being indefinitely prolonged, will be allowed him
before the bullet finds him, the thief before he is taken, men in
general before they have to die. That is the amulet which preserves
people--and sometimes peoples--not from danger but from the fear of
danger, in reality from the belief in danger, which in certain cases
allows them to brave it without their actually needing to be brave. It
is confidence of this sort, and with as little foundation, that sustains
the lover who is counting upon a reconciliation, upon a letter. For me
to cease to expect a letter it would have sufficed that I should have
ceased to wish for one. However unimportant one may know that one is in
the eyes of her whom one still loves, one attributes to her a series of
thoughts (though their sum total be indifference) the intention to
express those thoughts, a complication of her inner life in which one is
the constant object possibly of her antipathy but certainly of her
attention. But to imagine what was going on in Gilberte's mind I should
have required simply the power to anticipate on that New Year's Day what
I should feel on the first day of any of the years to come, when the
attention or the silence or the affection or the coldness of Gilberte
would pass almost unnoticed by me and I should not dream, should not
even be able to dream of seeking a solution of problems which would have
ceased to perplex me. When we are in love, our love is too big a thing
for us to be able altogether to contain it within us. It radiates
towards the beloved object, finds in her a surface which arrests it,
forcing it to return to its starting-point, and it is this shock of the
repercussion of our own affection which we call the other's regard for
ourselves, and which pleases us more then than on its outward journey
because we do not recognise it as having originated in ourselves. New
Year's Day rang out all its hours without there coming to me that letter
from Gilberte. And as I received a few others containing greetings tardy
or retarded by the overburdening of the mails at that season, on the
third and fourth of January I hoped still, but my hope grew hourly more
faint. Upon the days that followed I gazed through a mist of tears. This
undoubtedly meant that, having been less sincere than I thought in my
renunciation of Gilberte, I had kept the hope of a letter from her for
the New Year. And seeing that hope exhausted before I had had time to
shelter myself behind another, I suffered as would an invalid who had
emptied his phial of morphia without having another within his reach.
But perhaps also in my case--and these two explanations are not mutually
exclusive, for a single feeling is often made up of contrary
elements--the hope that I entertained of ultimately receiving a letter
had brought to my mind's eye once again the image of Gilberte, had
reawakened the emotions which the expectation of finding myself in her
presence, the sight of her, her way of treating me had aroused in me
before. The immediate possibility of a reconciliation had suppressed in
me that faculty the immense importance of which we are apt to overlook:
the faculty of resignation. Neurasthenics find it impossible to believe
the friends who assure them that they will gradually recover their peace
of mind if they will stay in bed and receive no letters, read no
newspapers. They imagine that such a course will only exasperate their
twitching nerves. And similarly lovers, who look upon it from their
enclosure in a contrary state of mind, who have not begun yet to make
trial of it, are unable to believe in the healing power of renunciation.

In consequence of the violence of my palpitations, my doses of caffeine
were reduced; the palpitations ceased. Whereupon I asked myself whether
it was not to some extent the drug that had been responsible for the
anguish that I had felt when I came near to quarrelling with Gilberte,
an anguish which I had attributed, on every recurrence of it, to the
distressing prospect of never seeing my friend again or of running the
risk of seeing her only when she was a prey to the same ill-humour. But
if this medicine had been at the root of the sufferings which my
imagination must in that case have interpreted wrongly (not that there
would be anything extraordinary in that, seeing that, among lovers, the
most acute mental suffering assumes often the physical identity of the
woman with whom they are living), it had been, in that sense, like the
philtre which, long after they have drunk of it, continues to bind
Tristan to Isolde. For the physical improvement which the reduction of
my caffeine effected almost at once did not arrest the evolution of that
grief which my absorption of the toxin had perhaps--if it had not
created it--at any rate contrived to render more acute.

Only, as the middle of the month of January approached, once my hopes of
a letter on New Year's Day had been disappointed, once the additional
disturbance that had come with their disappointment had grown calm, it
was my old sorrow, that of "before the holidays", which began again.
What was perhaps the most cruel thing about it was that I myself was its
architect, unconscious, wilful, merciless and patient. The one thing
that mattered, my relations with Gilberte, it was I who was labouring to
make them impossible by gradually creating out of this prolonged
separation from my friend, not indeed her indifference, but what would
come to the same thing in the end, my own. It was to a slow and painful
suicide of that part of me which was Gilberte's lover that I was goading
myself with untiring energy, with a clear sense not only of what I was
presently doing but of what must result from it in the future; I knew
not only that after a certain time I should cease to love Gilberte, but
also that she herself would regret it and that the attempts which she
would then make to see me would be as vain as those that she was making
now, no longer because I loved her too well but because I should
certainly be in love with some other woman whom I should continue to
desire, to wait for, through hours of which I should not dare to divert
any particle of a second to Gilberte who would be nothing to me then.
And no doubt at that very moment in which (since I was determined not to
see her again, unless after a formal request for an explanation or a
full confession of love on her part, neither of which was in the least
degree likely to come to me now) I had already lost Gilberte, and loved
her more than ever, and could feel all that she was to me better than in
the previous year when, spending all my afternoons in her company, or as
many as I chose, I believed that no peril threatened our friendship,--no
doubt at that moment the idea that I should one day entertain identical
feelings for another was odious to me, for that idea carried me away
beyond the range of Gilberte, my love and my sufferings. My love, my
sufferings in which through my tears I attempted to discern precisely
what Gilberte was, and was obliged to recognise that they did not
pertain exclusively to her but would, sooner or later, be some other
woman's portion. So that--or such, at least, was my way of thinking
then--we are always detached from our fellow-creatures; when a man loves
one of them he feels that his love is not labelled with their two names,
but may be born again in the future, may have been born already in the
past for another and not for her. And in the time when he is not in
love, if he makes up his mind philosophically as to what it is that is
inconsistent in love, he will find that the love of which he can speak
unmoved he did not, at the moment of speaking, feel, and therefore did
not know, knowledge in these matters being intermittent and not
outlasting the actual presence of the sentiment. That future in which I
should not love Gilberte, which my sufferings helped me to divine
although my imagination was not yet able to form a clear picture of it,
certainly there would still have been time to warn Gilberte that it was
gradually taking shape, that its coming was, if not imminent, at least
inevitable, if she herself, Gilberte, did not come to my rescue and
destroy in the germ my nascent indifference. How often was I not on the
point of writing, or of going to Gilberte to tell her: "Take care. My
mind is made up. What I am doing now is my supreme effort. I am seeing
you now for the last time. Very soon I shall have ceased to love you."
But to what end? By what authority should I have reproached Gilberte for
an indifference which, not that I considered myself guilty on that
count, I too manifested towards everything that was not herself? The
last time! To me, that appeared as something of immense significance,
because I was in love with Gilberte. On her it would doubtless have made
just as much impression as those letters in which our friends ask
whether they may pay us a visit before they finally leave the country,
an offer which, like those made by tiresome women who are in love with
us, we decline because we have pleasures of our own in prospect. The
time which we have at our disposal every day is elastic; the passions
that we feel expand it, those that we inspire contract it; and habit
fills up what remains.

Besides, what good would it have done if I had spoken to Gilberte; she
would not have understood me. We imagine always when we speak that it is
our own ears, our own mind that are listening. My words would have come
to her only in a distorted form, as though they had had to pass through
the moving curtain of a waterfall before they reached my friend,
unrecognisable, giving a foolish sound, having no longer any kind of
meaning. The truth which one puts into one's words does not make a
direct path for itself, is not supported by irresistible evidence. A
considerable time must elapse before a truth of the same order can take
shape in the words themselves. Then the political opponent who, despite
all argument, every proof that he has advanced to damn the votary of the
rival doctrine as a traitor, will himself have come to share the hated
conviction by which he who once sought in vain to disseminate it is no
longer bound. Then the masterpiece of literature which for the admirers
who read it aloud seemed to make self-evident the proofs of its
excellence, while to those who listened it presented only a senseless or
common-place image, will by these too be proclaimed a masterpiece, but
too late for the author to learn of their discovery. Similarly in love
the barriers, do what one may, cannot be broken down from without by him
whom they maddeningly exclude; it is when he is no longer concerned with
them that suddenly, as the result of an effort directed from elsewhere,
accomplished within the heart of her who did not love him, those
barriers which he has charged without success will fall to no advantage.
If I had come to Gilberte to tell her of my future indifference and the
means of preventing it, she would have assumed from my action that my
love for her, the need that I had of her, were even greater than I had
supposed, and her distaste for the sight of me would thereby have been
increased. And incidentally it is quite true that it was that love for
her which helped me, by means of the incongruous states of mind which it
successively produced in me, to foresee, more clearly than she herself
could, the end of that love. And yet some such warning I might perhaps
have addressed, by letter or with my own lips, to Gilberte, after a long
enough interval, which would render her, it is true, less indispensable
to me, but would also have proved to her that she was not so
indispensable. Unfortunately certain persons--of good or evil
intent--spoke of me to her in a fashion which must have led her to think
that they were doing so at my request. Whenever I thus learned that
Cottard, my own mother, even M. de Norpois had by a few ill-chosen words
rendered useless all the sacrifice that I had just been making, wasted
all the advantage of my reserve by giving me, wrongly, the appearance of
having emerged from it, I was doubly angry. In the first place I could
no longer reckon from any date but the present my laborious and fruitful
abstention which these tiresome people had, unknown to me, interrupted
and so brought to nothing. And not only that; I should have less
pleasure in seeing Gilberte, who would think of me now no longer as
containing myself in dignified resignation, but as plotting in the dark
for an interview which she had scorned to grant me. I cursed all the
idle chatter of people who so often, without any intention of hurting us
or of doing us a service, for no reason, for talking's sake, often
because we ourselves have not been able to refrain from talking in their
presence, and because they are indiscreet (as we ourselves are), do us,
at a crucial moment, so much harm. It is true that in the grim operation
performed for the eradication of our love they are far from playing a
part equal to that played by two persons who are in the habit, from
excess of good nature in one and of malice in the other, of undoing
everything at the moment when everything is on the point of being
settled. But against these two persons we bear no such grudge as against
the inopportune Cottards of this world, for the latter of them is the
person whom we love and the former is ourself.

Meanwhile, since on almost every occasion of my going to see her Mme.
Swann would invite me to come to tea another day, with her daughter, and
tell me to reply directly to her, I was constantly writing to Gilberte,
and in this correspondence I did not choose the expressions which might,
I felt, have won her over, sought only to carve out the easiest channel
for the torrent of my tears. For, like desire, regret seeks not to be
analysed but to be satisfied. When one begins to love, one spends one's
time, not in getting to know what one's love really is, but in making it
possible to meet next day. When one abandons love one seeks not to know
one's grief but to offer to her who is causing it that expression of it
which seems to one the most moving. One says the things which one feels
the need of saying, and which the other will not understand, one speaks
for oneself alone. I wrote; "I had thought that it would not be
possible. Alas, I see now that it is not so difficult." I said also: "I
shall probably not see you again;" I said it while I continued to avoid
shewing a coldness which she might think affected, and the words, as I
wrote them, made me weep because I felt that they expressed not what I
should have liked to believe but what was probably going to happen. For
at the next request for a meeting which she would convey to me I should
have again, as I had now, the courage not to yield, and, what with one
refusal and another, I should gradually come to the moment when, by
virtue of not having seen her again, I should not wish to see her. I
wept, but I found courage enough to sacrifice, I tasted the sweets of
sacrificing the happiness of being with her to the probability of
seeming attractive to her one day, a day when, alas, my seeming
attractive to her would be immaterial to me. Even the supposition,
albeit so far from likely, that at this moment, as she had pretended
during the last visit that I had paid her, she loved me, that what I
took for the boredom which one feels in the company of a person of whom
one has grown tired had been due only to a jealous susceptibility, to a
feint of indifference analogous to my own, only rendered my decision
less painful. It seemed to me that in years to come, when we had
forgotten one another, when I should be able to look back and tell her
that this letter which I was now in course of writing had not been for
one moment sincere, she would answer, "What, you really did love me, did
you? If you had only known how I waited for that letter, how I hoped
that you were coming to see me, how I cried when I read it." The
thought, while I was writing it, immediately on my return from her
mother's house, that I was perhaps helping to bring about that very
misunderstanding, that thought, by the sadness in which it plunged me,
by the pleasure of imagining that I was loved by Gilberte, gave me the
impulse to continue my letter.

If, at the moment of leaving Mme. Swann, when her tea-party ended, I was
thinking of what I was going to write to her daughter, Mme. Cottard, as
she departed, had been filled with thoughts of a wholly different order.
On her little "tour of inspection" she had not failed to congratulate
Mme. Swann on the new "pieces", the recent "acquisitions" which caught
the eye in her drawing-room. She could see among them some, though only
a very few of the things that Odette had had in the old days in the Rue
La Pérouse, for instance her animals carved in precious stones, her
fetishes.

For since Mme. Swann had picked up from a friend whose opinion she
valued the word "dowdy"--which had opened to her a new horizon because
it denoted precisely those things which a few years earlier she had
considered "smart"--all those things had, one after another, followed
into retirement the gilded trellis that had served as background to her
chrysanthemums, innumerable boxes of sweets from Giroux's, and the
coroneted note-paper (not to mention the coins of gilt pasteboard
littered about on the mantelpieces, which, even before she had come to
know Swann, a man of taste had advised her to sacrifice). Moreover in
the artistic disorder, the studio-like confusion of the rooms, whose
walls were still painted in sombre colours which made them as different
as possible from the white-enamelled drawing-rooms in which, a little
later, you were to find Mme. Swann installed, the Far East recoiled more
and more before the invading forces of the eighteenth-century; and the
cushions which, to make me "comfortable", Mme. Swann heaped up and
buffeted into position behind my back were sprinkled with Louis XV
garlands and not, as of old, with Chinese dragons. In the room in which
she was usually to be found, and of which she would say, "Yes, I like
this room; I use it a great deal. I couldn't live with a lot of horrid
vulgar things swearing at me all the time; this is where I do my
work----" though she never stated precisely at what she was working. Was
it a picture? A book, perhaps, for the hobby of writing was beginning to
become common among women who liked to "do something", not to be quite
useless. She was surrounded by Dresden pieces (having a fancy for that
sort of porcelain, which she would name with an English accent, saying
in any connexion: "How pretty that is; it reminds me of Dresden
flowers,"), and dreaded for them even more than in the old days for her
grotesque figures and her flower-pots the ignorant handling of her
servants who must expiate, every now and then, the anxiety that they had
caused her by submitting to outbursts of rage at which Swann, the most
courteous and considerate of masters, looked on without being shocked.
Not that the clear perception of certain weaknesses in those whom we
love in any way diminishes our affection for them; rather that affection
makes us find those weaknesses charming. Rarely nowadays was it in one
of those Japanese wrappers that Odette received her familiars, but
rather in the bright and billowing silk of a Watteau gown whose
flowering foam she made as though to caress where it covered her bosom,
and in which she immersed herself, looked solemn, splashed and sported,
with such an air of comfort, of a cool skin and long-drawn breath, that
she seemed to look on these garments not as something decorative, a mere
setting for herself, but as necessary, in the same way as her "tub" or
her daily "outing", to satisfy the requirements of her style of beauty
and the niceties of hygiene. She used often to say that she would go
without bread rather than give up "art" and "having nice things about
her", and that the burning of the "Gioconda" would distress her
infinitely more than the destruction, by the same element, of "millions"
of the people she knew. Theories which seemed paradoxical to her
friends, but made her pass among them as a superior woman, and qualified
her to receive a visit once a week from the Belgian Minister, so that in
the little world whose sun she was everyone would have been greatly
astonished to learn that elsewhere--at the Verdurins', for instance--she
was reckoned a fool. It was this vivacity of expression that made Mme.
Swann prefer men's society to women's. But when she criticised the
latter it was always from the courtesan's standpoint, singling out the
blemishes that might lower them in the esteem of men, a lumpy figure, a
bad complexion, inability to spell, hairy legs, foul breath, pencilled
eyebrows. But towards a woman who had shewn her kindness or indulgence
in the past she was more lenient, especially if this woman were now in
trouble. She would defend her warmly, saying: "People are not fair to
her. I assure you, she's quite a nice woman really."

It was not only the furniture of Odette's drawing-room, it was Odette
herself that Mme. Cottard and all those who had frequented the society
of Mme. de Crécy would have found it difficult, if they had not seen
her for some little time, to recognise. She seemed to be so much
younger. No doubt this was partly because she had grown stouter, was in
better condition, seemed at once calmer, more cool, more restful, and
also because the new way in which she braided her hair gave more breadth
to a face which was animated by an application of pink powder, and into
which her eyes and profile, formerly too prominent, seemed now to have
been reabsorbed. But another reason for this change lay in the fact
that, having reached the turning-point of life, Odette had at length
discovered, or invented, a physiognomy of her own, an unalterable
"character", a "style of beauty", and on her incoherent features--which
for so long, exposed to every hazard, every weakness of the flesh,
borrowing for a moment, at the slightest fatigue, from the years to
come, a sort of flickering shadow of anility, had furnished her, well
or ill, according to how she was feeling, how she was looking, with a
countenance dishevelled, inconstant, formless and attractive--had now
set this fixed type, as it were an immortal youthfulness.

Swann had in his room, instead of the handsome photographs that were now
taken of his wife, in all of which the same cryptic, victorious
expression enabled one to recognise, in whatever dress and hat, her
triumphant face and figure, a little old daguerreotype of her, quite
plain, taken long before the appearance of this new type, so that the
youth and beauty of Odette, which she had not yet discovered when it was
taken, appeared to be missing from it. But it is probable that Swann,
having remained constant, or having reverted to a different conception
of her, enjoyed in the slender young woman with pensive eyes and tired
features, caught in a pose between rest and motion, a more Botticellian
charm. For he still liked to recognise in his wife one of Botticelli's
figures. Odette, who on the other hand sought not to bring out but to
make up for, to cover and conceal the points in herself that did not
please her, what might perhaps to an artist express her "character" but
in her woman's eyes were merely blemishes, would not have that painter
mentioned in her presence. Swann had a wonderful scarf of oriental silk,
blue and pink, which he had bought because it was exactly that worn by
Our Lady in the _Magnificat._ But Mme. Swann refused to wear it. Once
only she allowed her husband to order her a dress covered all over with
daisies, cornflowers, forget-me-nots and campanulas, like that of the
Primavera. And sometimes in the evening, when she was tired, he would
quietly draw my attention to the way in which she was giving, quite
unconsciously, to her pensive hands the uncontrolled, almost distraught
movement of the Virgin who dips her pen into the inkpot that the angel
holds out to her, before writing upon the sacred page on which is
already traced the word "_Magnificat_". But he added, "Whatever you do,
don't say anything about it to her; if she knew she was doing it, she
would change her pose at once."

Save at these moments of involuntary relaxation, in which Swann essayed
to recapture the melancholy cadence of Botticelli, Odette seemed now to
be cut out in a single figure, wholly confined within a line which,
following the contours of the woman, had abandoned the winding paths,
the capricious re-entrants and salients, the radial points, the
elaborate dispersions of the fashions of former days, but also, where it
was her anatomy that went wrong by making unnecessary digressions within
or without the ideal circumference traced for it, was able to rectify,
by a bold stroke, the errors of nature, to make up, along a whole
section of its course, for the failure as well of the human as of the
textile element. The pads, the preposterous "bustle" had disappeared, as
well as those tailed corsets which, projecting under the skirt and
stiffened by rods of whalebone, had so long amplified Odette with an
artificial stomach and had given her the appearance of being composed of
several incongruous pieces which there was no individuality to bind
together. The vertical fall of fringes, the curve of trimmings had made
way for the inflexion of a body which made silk palpitate as a siren
stirs the waves, gave to cambric a human expression now that it had been
liberated, like a creature that had taken shape and drawn breath, from
the long chaos and nebulous envelopment of fashions at length dethroned.
But Mme. Swann had chosen, had contrived to preserve some vestiges of
certain of these, in the very thick of the more recent fashions that had
supplanted them. When in the evening, finding myself unable to work and
feeling certain that Gilberte had gone to the theatre with friends, I
paid a surprise visit to her parents, I used often to find Mme. Swann in
an elegant dishabille the skirt of which, of one of those rich dark
colours, blood-red or orange, which seemed always as though they meant
something very special, because they were no longer the fashion, was
crossed diagonally, though not concealed, by a broad band of black lace
which recalled the flounces of an earlier day. When on a still chilly
afternoon in Spring she had taken me (before my rupture with her
daughter) to the Jardin d'Acclimatation, under her coat, which she
opened or buttoned up according as the exercise made her feel warm, the
dog-toothed border of her blouse suggested a glimpse of the lapel of
some non-existent waistcoat such as she had been accustomed to wear,
some years earlier, when she had liked their edges to have the same
slight indentations; and her scarf--of that same "Scotch tartan" to
which she had remained faithful, but whose tones she had so far
softened, red becoming pink and blue lilac, that one might almost have
taken it for one of those pigeon's-breast taffetas which were the latest
novelty--was knotted in such a way under her chin, without one's being
able to make out where it was fastened, that one could not help being
reminded of those bonnet-strings which were now no longer worn. She need
only "hold out" like this for a little longer and young men attempting
to understand her theory of dress would say: "Mme. Swann is quite a
period in herself, isn't she?" As in a fine literary style which
overlays with its different forms and so strengthens a tradition which
lies concealed among them, so in Mme. Swann's attire those half-hinted
memories of waistcoats or of ringlets, sometimes a tendency, at once
repressed, towards the "all aboard", or even a distant and vague
allusion to the "chase me" kept alive beneath the concrete form the
unfinished likeness of other, older forms which you would not have
succeeded, now, in making a tailor or a dressmaker reproduce, but about
which your thoughts incessantly hovered, and enwrapped Mme. Swann in a
cloak of nobility--perhaps because the sheer uselessness of these
fripperies made them seem meant to serve some more than utilitarian
purpose, perhaps because of the traces they preserved of vanished years,
or else because there was a sort of personality permeating this lady's
wardrobe, which gave to the most dissimilar of her costumes a distinct
family likeness. One felt that she did not dress simply for the comfort
or the adornment of her body; she was surrounded by her garments as by
the delicate and spiritualised machinery of a whole form of
civilisation.

When Gilberte, who, as a rule, gave her tea-parties on the days when her
mother was "at home", had for some reason to go out, and I was therefore
free to attend Mme. Swann's "kettledrum", I would find her dressed in
one of her lovely gowns, some of which were of taffeta, others of
grosgrain, or of velvet, or of _crêpe-de-Chine_, or satin or silk,
gowns which, not being loose like those that she generally wore in the
house but buttoned up tight as though she were just going out in them,
gave to her stay-at-home laziness on those afternoons something alert
and energetic. And no doubt the daring simplicity of their cut was
singularly appropriate to her figure and to her movements, which her
sleeves appeared to be symbolising in colours that varied from day to
day: one would have said that there was a sudden determination in the
blue velvet, an easy-going good-humour in the white taffeta, and that a
sort of supreme discretion full of dignity in her way of holding out her
arm had, in order to become visible, put on the appearance, dazzling
with the smile of one who had made great sacrifices, of the black
_crêpe-de-Chine._ But at the same time these animated gowns took from
the complication of their trimmings, none of which had any practical
value or served any conceivable purpose, something detached, pensive,
secret, in harmony with the melancholy which Mme. Swann never failed to
shew, at least in the shadows under her eyes and the drooping arches of
her hands. Beneath the profusion of sapphire charms, enamelled four-leaf
clovers, silver medals, gold medallions, turquoise amulets, ruby chains
and topaz chestnuts there would be, on the dress itself, some design
carried out in colour which pursued across the surface of an inserted
panel a preconceived existence of its own, some row of little satin
buttons, which buttoned nothing and could not be unbuttoned, a strip of
braid that sought to please the eye with the minuteness, the discretion
of a delicate reminder; and these, as well as the trinkets, had the
effect--for otherwise there would have been no possible justification of
their presence--of disclosing a secret intention, being a pledge of
affection, keeping a secret, ministering to a superstition,
commemorating a recovery from sickness, a granted wish, a love affair or
a "philippine". And now and then in the blue velvet of the bodice a hint
of "slashes", in the Henri II style, in the gown of black satin a slight
swelling which, if it was in the sleeves, just below the shoulders, made
one think of the "leg of mutton" sleeves of 1830, or if, on the other
hand, it was beneath the skirt, with its Louis XV paniers, gave the
dress a just perceptible air of being "fancy dress" and at all events,
by insinuating beneath the life of the present day a vague reminiscence
of the past, blended with the person of Mme. Swann the charm of certain
heroines of history or romance. And if I were to draw her attention to
this: "I don't play golf," she would answer, "like so many of my
friends. So I should have no excuse for going about, as they do, in
sweaters."

In the confusion of her drawing-room, on her way from shewing out one
visitor, or with a plateful of cakes to "tempt" another, Mme. Swann as
she passed by me would take me aside for a moment: "I have special
instructions from Gilberte that you are to come to luncheon the day
after to-morrow. As I wasn't sure of seeing you here, I was going to
write to you if you hadn't come." I continued to resist. And this
resistance was costing me steadily less and less, because, however much
one may love the poison that is destroying one, when one has
compulsorily to do without it, and has had to do without it for some
time past, one cannot help attaching a certain value to the peace of
mind which one had ceased to know, to the absence of emotion and
suffering. If one is not altogether sincere in assuring oneself that one
does not wish ever to see again her whom one loves, one would not be a
whit more sincere in saying that one would like to see her. For no doubt
one can endure her absence only when one promises oneself that it shall
not be for long, and thinks of the day on which one shall see her again,
but at the same time one feels how much less painful are those daily
recurring dreams of a meeting immediate and incessantly postponed than
would be an interview which might be followed by a spasm of jealousy,
with the result that the news that one is shortly to see her whom one
loves would cause a disturbance which would be none too pleasant. What
one procrastinates now from day to day is no longer the end of the
intolerable anxiety caused by separation, it is the dreaded renewal of
emotions which can lead to nothing. How infinitely one prefers to any
such interview the docile memory which one can supplement at one's
pleasure with dreams, in which she who in reality does not love one
seems, far from that, to be making protestations of her love for one,
when one is by oneself; that memory which one can contrive, by blending
gradually with it a portion of what one desires, to render as pleasing
as one may choose, how infinitely one prefers it to the avoided
interview in which one would have to deal with a creature to whom one
could no longer dictate at one's pleasure the words that one would like
to hear on her lips, but from whom one would meet with fresh coldness,
unlooked-for violence. We know, all of us, when we no longer love, that
forgetfulness, that even a vague memory do not cause us so much
suffering as an ill-starred love. It was of such forgetfulness that in
anticipation I preferred, without acknowledging it to myself, the
reposeful tranquillity.

Moreover, whatever discomfort there may be in such a course of psychical
detachment and isolation grows steadily less for another reason, namely
that it weakens while it is in process of healing that fixed obsession
which is a state of love. Mine was still strong enough for me to be able
to count upon recapturing my old position in Gilberte's estimation,
which in view of my deliberate abstention must, it seemed to me, be
steadily increasing; in other words each of those calm and melancholy
days on which I did not see her, coming one after the other without
interruption, continuing too without prescription (unless some busy-body
were to meddle in my affairs), was a day not lost but gained. Gained to
no purpose, it might be, for presently they would be able to pronounce
that I was healed. Resignation, modulating our habits, allows certain
elements of our strength to be indefinitely increased. Those--so
wretchedly inadequate--that I had had to support my grief, on the first
evening of my rupture with Gilberte, had since multiplied to an
incalculable power. Only, the tendency which everything that exists has
to prolong its own existence is sometimes interrupted by sudden impulses
to which we give way with all the fewer scruples over letting ourselves
go since we know for how many days, for how many months even we have
been able, and might still be able to abstain. And often it is when the
purse in which we hoard our savings is nearly full that we undo and
empty it, it is without waiting for the result of our medical treatment
and when we have succeeded in growing accustomed to it that we abandon
it. So, one day, when Mme. Swann was repeating her familiar statement of
what a pleasure it would be to Gilberte to see me, thus putting the
happiness of which I had now for so long been depriving myself, as it
were within arm's length, I was stupefied by the realisation that it was
still possible for me to enjoy that pleasure, and I could hardly wait
until next day; when I had made up my mind to take Gilberte by surprise,
in the evening, before dinner.

What helped me to remain patient throughout the long day that followed
was another plan that I had made. From the moment in which everything
was forgotten, in which I was reconciled to Gilberte, I no longer wished
to visit her save as a lover. Every day she should receive from me the
finest flowers that grew. And if Mme. Swann, albeit she had no right to
be too severe a mother, should forbid my making a daily offering of
flowers, I should find other gifts, more precious and less frequent. My
parents did not give me enough money for me to be able to buy expensive
things. I thought of a big bowl of old Chinese porcelain which had been
left to me by aunt Léonie, and of which Mamma prophesied daily that
Françoise would come running to her with an "Oh, it's all come to
pieces!" and that that would be the end of it. Would it not be wiser, in
that case, to part with it, to sell it so as to be able to give Gilberte
all the pleasure I could. I felt sure that I could easily get a thousand
francs for it. I had it tied up in paper; I had grown so used to it that
I had ceased altogether to notice it; parting with it had at least the
advantage of making me realise what it was like. I took it with me as I
started for the Swanns', and, giving the driver their address, told him
to go by the Champs-Elysées, at one end of which was the shop of a big
dealer in oriental things, who knew my father. Greatly to my surprise he
offered me there and then not one thousand but ten thousand francs for
the bowl. I took the notes with rapture. Every day, for a whole year, I
could smother Gilberte in roses and lilac. When I left the shop and got
into my cab again the driver (naturally enough, since the Swanns lived
out by the Bois) instead of taking the ordinary way began to drive me
along the Avenue des Champs-Elysées. He had just passed the end of the
Rue de Berri when, in the failing light, I thought I saw, close to the
Swanns' house but going in the other direction, going away from it,
Gilberte, who was walking slowly, though with a firm step, by the side
of a young man with whom she was conversing, but whose face I could not
distinguish. I stood up in the cab, meaning to tell the driver to stop;
then hesitated. The strolling couple were already some way away, and the
parallel lines which their leisurely progress was quietly drawing were
on the verge of disappearing in the Elysian gloom. A moment later, I had
reached Gilberte's door. I was received by Mme. Swann. "Oh! she will be
sorry!" was my greeting, "I can't think why she isn't in. She came home
just now from a lesson, complaining of the heat, and said she was going
out for a little fresh air with another girl." "I fancy I passed her in
the Avenue des Champs-Elysées." "Oh, I don't think it can have been.
Anyhow, don't mention it to her father; he doesn't approve of her going
out at this time of night. Must you go? Good-bye." I left her, told my
driver to go home the same way, but found no trace of the two walking
figures. Where had they been? What were they saying to one another in
the darkness so confidentially?

I returned home, desperately clutching my windfall of ten thousand
francs, which would have enabled me to arrange so many pleasant
surprises for that Gilberte whom now I had made up my mind never to see
again. No doubt my call at the dealer's had brought me happiness by
allowing me to expect that in future, whenever I saw my friend, she
would be pleased with me and grateful. But if I had not called there, if
my cabman had not taken the Avenue des Champs-Elysées, I should not
have seen Gilberte with that young man. Thus a single action may have
two contradictory effects, and the misfortune that it engenders cancel
the good fortune that it has already brought one. There had befallen me
the opposite of what so frequently happens. We desire some pleasure, and
the material means of obtaining it are lacking. "It is a mistake,"
Labruyère tells us, "to be in love without an ample fortune." There is
nothing for it but to attempt a gradual elimination of our desire for
that pleasure. In my case, however, the material means had been
forthcoming, but at the same moment, if not by a logical effect, at any
rate as a fortuitous consequence of that initial success, my pleasure
had been snatched from me. As, for that matter, it seems as though it
must always be. As a rule, however, not on the same evening on which we
have acquired what makes it possible. Usually, we continue to struggle
and to hope for a little longer. But the pleasure can never be realised.
If we succeed in overcoming the force of circumstances, nature at once
shifts the battle-ground, placing it within ourselves, and effects a
gradual change in our heart until it desires something other than what
it is going to obtain. And if this transposition has been so rapid that
our heart has not had time to change, nature does not, on that account,
despair of conquering us, in a manner more gradual, it is true, more
subtle, but no less efficacious. It is then, at the last moment, that
the possession of our happiness is wrested from us, or rather it is that
very possession which nature, with diabolical cleverness, uses to
destroy our happiness. After failure in every quarter of the domain of
life and action, it is a final incapacity, the mental incapacity for
happiness that nature creates in us. The phenomenon of happiness either
fails to appear, or at once gives way to the bitterest of reactions.

I put my ten thousand francs in a drawer. But they were no longer of any
use to me. I ran through them, as it happened, even sooner than if I had
sent flowers every day to Gilberte, for when evening came I was always
too wretched to stay in the house and used to go and pour out my sorrows
upon the bosoms of women whom I did not love. As for seeking to give any
sort of pleasure to Gilberte, I no longer thought of that; to visit her
house again now could only have added to my sufferings. Even the sight
of Gilberte, which would have been so exquisite a pleasure only
yesterday, would no longer have sufficed me. For I should have been
miserable all the time that I was not actually with her. That is how a
woman, by every fresh torture that she inflicts on us, increases, often
quite unconsciously, her power over us and at the same time our demands
upon her. With each injury that she does us, she encircles us more and
more completely, doubles our chains--but halves the strength of those
which hitherto we had thought adequate to bind her in order that we
might retain our own peace of mind. Only yesterday, had I not been
afraid of annoying Gilberte, I should have been content to ask for no
more than occasional meetings, which now would no longer have contented
me and for which I should now have substituted quite different terms.
For in this respect love is not like war; after the battle is ended we
renew the fight with keener ardour, which we never cease to intensify
the more thoroughly we are defeated, provided always that we are still
in a position to give battle. This was not my position with regard to
Gilberte. Also I preferred, at first, not to see her mother again. I
continued, it is true, to assure myself that Gilberte did not love me,
that I had known this for ever so long, that I could see her again if I
chose, and, if I did not choose, forget her in course of time. But these
ideas, like a remedy which has no effect upon certain complaints, had no
power whatsoever to obliterate those two parallel lines which I kept on
seeing, traced by Gilberte and the young man as they slowly disappeared
along the Avenue des Champs-Elysées. This was a fresh misfortune, which
like the rest would gradually lose its force, a fresh image which would
one day present itself to my mind's eye completely purged of every
noxious element that it now contained, like those deadly poisons which
one can handle without danger, or like a crumb of dynamite which one can
use to light one's cigarette without fear of an explosion. Meanwhile
there was in me another force which was striving with all its might to
overpower that unwholesome force which still shewed me, without
alteration, the figure of Gilberte walking in the dusk: to meet and to
break the shock of the renewed assaults of memory, I had, toiling
effectively on the other side, imagination. The former force did indeed
continue to shew me that couple walking in the Champs-Elysées, and
offered me other disagreeable pictures drawn from the past, as for
instance Gilberte shrugging her shoulders when her mother asked her to
stay and entertain me. But the other force, working upon the canvas of
my hopes, outlined a future far more attractively developed than this
poor past which, after all, was so restricted. For one minute in which I
saw Gilberte's sullen face, how many were there in which I planned to my
own satisfaction all the steps that she was to take towards our
reconciliation, perhaps even towards our betrothal. It is true that this
force, which my imagination was concentrating upon the future, it was
drawing, for all that, from the past. I was still in love with her whom,
it is true, I believed that I detested. But whenever anyone told me that
I was looking well, or was nicely dressed, I wished that she could have
been there to see me. I was irritated by the desire that many people
shewed about this time to ask me to their houses, and refused all their
invitations. There was a scene at home because I did not accompany my
father to an official dinner at which the Bontemps were to be present
with their niece Albertine, a young girl still hardly more than a child.
So it is that the different periods of our life overlap one another. We
scornfully decline, because of one whom we love and who will some day be
of so little account, to see another who is of no account to-day, with
whom we shall be in love to-morrow, with whom we might, perhaps, had we
consented to see her now, have fallen in love a little earlier and who
would thus have put a term to our present sufferings, bringing others,
it is true, in their place. Mine were steadily growing less. I had the
surprise of discovering in my own heart one sentiment one day, another
the next, generally inspired by some hope or some fear relative to
Gilberte. To the Gilberte whom I kept within me. I ought to have
reminded myself that the other, the real Gilberte was perhaps entirely
different from mine, knew nothing of the regrets that I ascribed to her,
was thinking probably less about me, not merely than I was thinking
about her but than I made her be thinking about me when I was closeted
alone with my fictitious Gilberte, wondering what really were her
feelings with regard to me and so imagining her attention as constantly
directed towards myself.

During those periods in which our bitterness of spirit, though steadily
diminishing, still persists, a distinction must be drawn between the
bitterness which comes to us from our constantly thinking of the person
herself and that which is revived by certain memories, some cutting
speech, some word in a letter that we have had from her. The various
forms which that bitterness can assume we shall examine when we come to
deal with another and later love affair; for the present it must suffice
to say that, of these two kinds, the former is infinitely the less
cruel. That is because our conception of the person, since it dwells
always within ourselves, is there adorned with the halo with which we
are bound before long to invest her, and bears the marks if not of the
frequent solace of hope, at any rate of the tranquillity of a permanent
sorrow. (It must also be observed that the image of a person who makes
us suffer counts for little if anything in those complications which
aggravate the unhappiness of love, prolong it and prevent our recovery,
just as in certain maladies the cause is insignificant beyond comparison
with the fever which follows it and the time that must elapse before our
convalescence.) But if the idea of the person whom we love catches and
reflects a ray of light from a mind which is on the whole optimistic, it
is not so with those special memories, those cutting words, that
inimical letter (I received only one that could be so described from
Gilberte); you would say that the person herself dwelt in those
fragments, few and scattered as they were, and dwelt there multiplied to
a power of which she falls ever so far short in the idea which we are
accustomed to form of her as a whole. Because the letter has not--as the
image of the beloved creature has--been contemplated by us in the
melancholy calm of regret; we have read it, devoured it in the fearful
anguish with which we were wrung by an unforeseen misfortune. Sorrows of
this sort come to us in another way; from without; and it is along the
road of the most cruel suffering that they have penetrated to our heart.
The picture of our friend in our mind, which we believe to be old,
original, authentic, has in reality been refashioned by her many times
over. The cruel memory is not itself contemporary with the restored
picture, it is of another age, it is one of the rare witnesses to a
monstrous past. But inasmuch as this past continues to exist, save in
ourself, who have been pleased to substitute for it a miraculous age of
gold, a paradise in which all mankind shall be reconciled, those
memories, those letters carry us back to reality, and cannot but make us
feel, by the sudden pang they give us, what a long way we have been
borne from that reality by the baseless hopes engendered daily while we
waited for something to happen. Not that the said reality is bound
always to remain the same, though that does indeed happen at times.
There are in our life any number of women whom we have never wished to
see again, and who have quite naturally responded to our in no way
calculated silence with a silence as profound. Only in their case as we
never loved them, we have never counted the years spent apart from them,
and this instance, which would invalidate our whole argument, we are
inclined to forget when we are considering the healing effect of
isolation, just as people who believe in presentiments forget all the
occasions on which their own have not "come true".

But, after a time, absence may prove efficacious. The desire, the
appetite for seeing us again may after all be reborn in the heart which
at present contemns us. Only, we must allow time. Now the demands which
we ourselves make upon time are no less exorbitant than those of a heart
in process of changing. For one thing, time is the very thing that we
are least willing to allow, for our own suffering is keen and we are
anxious to see it brought to an end. And then, too, the interval of time
which the other heart needs to effect its change our own heart will have
spent in changing itself also, so that when the goal which we had
ourselves becomes attainable it will have ceased to count as a goal, or
to seem worth attaining. This idea, however, that it will be attainable,
that what, when it no longer spells any good fortune to us, we shall
ultimately secure is not good fortune, this idea embodies a part, but a
part only of the truth. Our good fortune accrues to us when we have
grown indifferent to it. But the very fact of our indifference will have
made us less exacting, and allow us in retrospect to feel convinced that
we should have been in raptures over our good fortune had it come at a
time when, very probably, it would have seemed to us miserably
inadequate. People are not very hard to satisfy nor are they very good
judges of matters in which they take no interest. The friendly overtures
of a person whom we no longer love, overtures which strike us, in our
indifference to her, as excessive, would perhaps have fallen a long way
short of satisfying our love. Those tender speeches, that invitation or
acceptance, we think only of the pleasure which they would have given
us, and not of all those other speeches and meetings by which we should
have wished to see them immediately followed, which we should, as likely
as not, simply by our avidity for them, have precluded from ever
happening. So that we can never be certain that the good fortune which
comes to us too late, when we are no longer in love, is altogether the
same as that good fortune the want of which made us, at one time, so
unhappy. There is only one person who could decide that; our ego of
those days; he is no longer with us, and were he to reappear, no doubt
that would be quite enough to make our good fortune--whether identical
or not--vanish.

Pending these posthumous fulfilments of a dream in which I should not,
when the time came, be greatly interested, by dint of my having to
invent, as in the days when I still hardly knew Gilberte, speeches,
letters in which she implored my forgiveness, swore that she had never
loved anyone but myself and besought me to marry her, a series of
pleasant images incessantly renewed came by degrees to hold a larger
place in my mind than the vision of Gilberte and the young man, which
had nothing now to feed upon. At this point I should perhaps have
resumed my visits to Mme. Swann but for a dream that came to me, in
which one of my friends, who was not, however, one that I could
identify, behaved with the utmost treachery towards me and appeared to
believe that I had been treacherous to him. Abruptly awakened by the
pain which this dream had given me, and finding that it persisted after
I was awake, I turned my thoughts back to the dream, racked my brains to
discover who could have been the friend whom I had seen in my sleep, the
sound of whose name--a Spanish name--was no longer distinct in my ears.
Combining Joseph's part with Pharaoh's, I set to work to interpret my
dream. I knew that, when one is interpreting a dream, it is often a
mistake to pay too much attention to the appearance of the people one
saw in it, who may perhaps have been disguised or have exchanged faces,
like those mutilated saints on the walls of cathedrals which ignorant
archaeologists have restored, fitting the body of one to the head of
another and confusing all their attributes and names. Those that people
bear in a dream are apt to mislead us. The person with whom we are in
love is to be recognised only by the intensity of the pain that we
suffer. From mine I learned that, though transformed while I was asleep
into a young man, the person whose recent betrayal still hurt me was
Gilberte. I remembered then that, the last time I had seen her, on the
day when her mother had forbidden her to go out to a dancing lesson, she
had, whether in sincerity or in make-believe, declined, laughing in a
strange manner, to believe in the genuineness of my feeling for her. And
by association this memory brought back to me another. Long before that,
it had been Swann who would not believe in my sincerity, nor that I was
a suitable friend for Gilberte. In vain had I written to him, Gilberte
had brought back my letter and had returned it to me with the same
incomprehensible laugh. She had not returned it to me at once: I
remembered now the whole of that scene behind the clump of laurels. As
soon as one is unhappy one becomes moral. Gilberte's recent antipathy
for me seemed to me a judgment delivered on me by life for my conduct
that afternoon. Such judgments one imagines one can escape because one
looks out for carriages when one is crossing the street, and avoids
obvious dangers. But there are others that take effect within us. The
accident comes from the side to which one has not been looking, from
inside, from the heart. Gilberte's words: "If you like, we might go on
wrestling," made me shudder. I imagined her behaving like that, at home
perhaps, in the linen-room, with the young man whom I had seen escorting
her along the Avenue des Champs-Elysées. And so, just as when, a little
time back, I had believed myself to be calmly established in a state of
happiness, it had been fatuous in me, now that I had abandoned all
thought of happiness, to take for granted that at least I had grown and
was going to remain calm. For, so long as our heart keeps enshrined with
any permanence the image of another person, it is not only our happiness
that may at any moment be destroyed; when that happiness has vanished,
when we have suffered, and, later, when we have succeeded in lulling our
sufferings to sleep, the thing then that is as elusive, as precarious as
ever our happiness was is our calm. Mine returned to me in the end, for
the cloud which, lowering our resistance, tempering our desires, has
penetrated, in the train of a dream, the enclosure of our mind, is
bound, in course of time, to dissolve, permanence and stability being
assured to nothing in this world, not even to grief. Besides, those
whose suffering is due to love are, as we say of certain invalids, their
own physicians. As consolation can come to them only from the person who
is the cause of their grief, and as their grief is an emanation from
that person, it is there, in their grief itself, that they must in the
end find a remedy: which it will disclose to them at a given moment, for
the longer they turn it over in their minds this grief will continue to
shew them fresh aspects of the loved, the regretted creature, at one
moment so intensely hateful that one has no longer the slightest desire
to see her, since before finding enjoyment in her company one would have
first to make her suffer, at another so pleasant that the pleasantness
in which one has invested her one adds to her own stock of good
qualities and finds in it a fresh reason for hope. But even although the
anguish that had reawakened in me did at length grow calm, I no longer
wished--except just occasionally--to visit Mme. Swann. In the first
place because, among those who love and have been forsaken, the state of
incessant--even if unconfessed--expectancy in which they live undergoes
a spontaneous transformation, and, while to all appearance unchanged,
substitutes for its original elements others that are precisely the
opposite. The first were the consequences of--a reaction from the
painful incidents which had upset us. The tension of waiting for what is
yet to come is mingled with fear, all the more since we desire at such
moments, should no message come to us from her whom we love, to act for
ourselves, and are none too confident of the success of a step which,
once we have taken it, we may find it impossible to follow up. But
presently, without our having noticed any change, this tension, which
still endures, is sustained, we discover, no longer by our recollection
of the past but by anticipation of an imaginary future. From that moment
it is almost pleasant. Besides, the first state, by continuing for some
time, has accustomed us to living in expectation. The suffering that we
felt during those last meetings survives in us still, but is already
lulled to sleep. We are in no haste to arouse it, especially as we do
not see very clearly what to ask for now. The possession of a little
more of the woman whom we love would only make more essential to us the
part that we did not yet possess, which is bound to remain, whatever
happens, since our requirements are begotten of our satisfactions, an
irreducible quantity.

Another, final reason came later on to reinforce this, and to make me
discontinue altogether my visits to Mme. Swann. This reason, slow in
revealing itself, was not that I had now forgotten Gilberte but that I
must make every effort to forget her as speedily as possible. No doubt,
now that the keen edge of my suffering was dulled, my visits to Mme.
Swann had become once again, for what sorrow remained in me, the
sedative and distraction which had been so precious to me at first. But
what made the sedative efficacious made the distraction impossible,
namely that with these visits the memory of Gilberte was intimately
blended. The distraction would be of no avail to me unless it was
employed to combat a sentiment which the presence of Gilberte no longer
nourished, thoughts, interests, passions in which Gilberte should have
no part. These states of consciousness, to which the person whom we love
remains a stranger, then occupy a place which, however small it may be
at first, is always so much reconquered from the love that has been in
unchallenged possession of our whole soul. We must seek to encourage
these thoughts, to make them grow, while the sentiment which is no more
now than a memory dwindles, so that the new elements introduced into our
mind contest with that sentiment, wrest from it an ever increasing part
of our soul, until at last the victory is complete. I decided that this
was the only way in which my love could be killed, and I was still young
enough, still courageous enough to undertake the attempt, to subject
myself to that most cruel grief which springs from the certainty that,
whatever time one may devote to the effort, it will prove successful in
the end. The reason I now gave in my letters to Gilberte for refusing to
see her was an allusion to some mysterious misunderstanding, wholly
fictitious, which was supposed to have arisen between her and myself,
and as to which I had hoped at first that Gilberte would insist upon my
furnishing her with an explanation. But, as a matter of fact, never,
even in the most insignificant relations in life, does a request for
enlightenment come from a correspondent who knows that an obscure,
untruthful, incriminating sentence has been written on purpose, so that
he shall protest against it, and is only too glad to feel, when he reads
it, that he possesses--and to keep in his own hands--the initiative in
the coming operations. For all the more reason is this so in our more
tender relations, in which love is endowed with so much eloquence,
indifference with so little curiosity. Gilberte having never appeared to
doubt nor sought to learn more about this misunderstanding, it became
for me a real entity, to which I referred anew in every letter. And
there is in these baseless situations, in the affectation of coldness a
sort of fascination which tempts one to persevere in them. By dint of
writing: "Now that our hearts are sundered," so that Gilberte might
answer: "But they are not. Do explain what you mean," I had gradually
come to believe that they were. By constantly repeating, "Life may have
changed for us, it will never destroy the feeling that we had for one
another," in the hope of hearing myself, one day, say: "But there has
been no change, the feeling is stronger now than ever it was," I was
living with the idea that life had indeed changed, that we should keep
only the memory of a feeling which no longer existed, as certain
neurotics, from having at first pretended to be ill, end by becoming
chronic invalids. Now, whenever I had to write to Gilberte, I brought my
mind back to this imagined change, which, being now tacitly admitted by
the silence which she preserved with regard to it in her replies, would
in future subsist between us. Then Gilberte ceased to make a point of
ignoring it. She too adopted my point of view; and, as in the speeches
at official banquets, when the foreign Sovereign who is being
entertained adopts practically the same expressions as have just been
used by the Sovereign who is entertaining him, whenever I wrote to
Gilberte: "Life may have parted us; the memory of the days when we knew
one another will endure," she never failed to respond: "Life may have
parted us; it cannot make us forget those happy hours which will always
be dear to us both," (though we should have found it hard to say why or
how "Life" had parted us, or what change had occurred). My sufferings
were no longer excessive. And yet, one day when I was telling her in a
letter that I had heard of the death of our old barley-sugar woman in
the Champs-Elysées, as I wrote the words: "I felt at once that this
would distress you, in me it awakened a host of memories," I could not
restrain myself from bursting into tears when I saw that I was speaking
in the past tense, as though it were of some dead friend, now almost
forgotten, of this love of which in spite of myself I had never ceased
to think as of a thing still alive, or one that at least might be born
again. Nothing can be more affectionate than this sort of correspondence
between friends who do not wish to see one another any more. Gilberte's
letters to me had all the delicate refinement of those which I used to
write to people who did not matter, and shewed me the same apparent
marks of affection, which it was so pleasant for me to receive from her.

But, as time went on, every refusal to see her disturbed me less. And as
she became less dear to me, my painful memories were no longer strong
enough to destroy by their incessant return the growing pleasure which I
found in thinking of Florence, or of Venice. I regretted, at such
moments, that I had abandoned the idea of diplomacy and had condemned
myself to a sedentary existence, in order not to be separated from a
girl whom I should not see again and had already almost forgotten. We
construct our house of life to suit another person, and when at length
it is ready to receive her that person does not come; presently she is
dead to us, and we live on, a prisoner within the walls which were
intended only for her. If Venice seemed to my parents to be a long way
off, and its climate treacherous, it was at least quite easy for me to
go, without tiring myself, and settle down at Balbec. But to do that I
should have had to leave Paris, to forego those visits thanks to which,
infrequent as they were, I might sometimes hear Mme. Swann telling me
about her daughter. Besides, I was beginning to find in them various
pleasures in which Gilberte had no part.

When spring drew round, and with it the cold weather, during an icy Lent
and the hailstorms of Holy Week, as Mme. Swann began to find it cold in
the house, I used often to see her entertaining her guests in her furs,
her shivering hands and shoulders hidden beneath the gleaming white
carpet of an immense rectangular muff and a cape, both of ermine, which
she had not taken off on coming in from her drive, and which suggested
the last patches of the snows of winter, more persistent than the rest,
which neither the heat of the fire nor the advancing season had
succeeded in melting. And the whole truth about these glacial but
already flowering weeks was suggested to me in this drawing-room, which
soon I should be entering no more, by other more intoxicating forms of
whiteness, that for example of the guelder-roses clustering, at the
summits of their tall bare stalks, like the rectilinear trees in
pre-raphaelite paintings, their balls of blossom, divided yet composite,
white as annunciating angels and breathing a fragrance as of lemons. For
the mistress of Tansonville knew that April, even an ice-bound April was
not barren of flowers, that winter, spring, summer are not held apart by
barriers as hermetic as might be supposed by the town-dweller who, until
the first hot day, imagines the world as containing nothing but houses
that stand naked in the rain. That Mme. Swann was content with the
consignments furnished by her Combray gardener, that she did not, by the
intervention of her own "special" florist, fill up the gaps left by an
insufficiently powerful magic with subsidies borrowed from a precocious
Mediterranean shore, I do not for a moment suggest, nor did it worry me
at the time. It was enough to fill me with longing for country scenes
that, overhanging the loose snowdrifts of the muff in which Mme. Swann
kept her hands, the guelder-rose snow-balls (which served very possibly
in the mind of my hostess no other purpose than to compose, on the
advice of Bergotte, a 'Symphony in White' with her furniture and her
garments) reminded me that what the Good Friday music in _Parsifal_
symbolised was a natural miracle which one could see performed every
year, if one had the sense to look for it, and, assisted by the acid and
heady perfume of the other kinds of blossom, which, although their names
were unknown to me, had brought me so often to a standstill to gaze at
them on my walks round Combray, made Mme. Swann's drawing-room as
virginal, as candidly "in bloom", without the least vestige of greenery,
as overladen with genuine scents of flowers as was the little lane by
Tansonville.

But it was still more than I could endure that these memories should be
recalled to me. There was a risk of their reviving what little remained
of my love for Gilberte. Besides, albeit I no longer felt the least
distress during these visits to Mme. Swann, I extended the intervals
between them and endeavoured to see as little of her as possible. At
most, since I continued not to go out of Paris, I allowed myself an
occasional walk with her. Fine weather had come at last, and the sun was
hot. As I knew that before luncheon Mme. Swann used to go out every day
for an hour, and would stroll for a little in the Avenue du Bois, near
the Etoile--a spot which, at that time, because of the people who used
to collect there to gaze at the "swells" whom they knew only by name,
was known as the "Shabby-Genteel Club"--I persuaded my parents, on
Sundays, (for on weekdays I was busy all morning), to let me postpone my
luncheon until long after theirs, until a quarter past one, and go for a
walk before it. During May, that year, I never missed a Sunday, for
Gilberte had gone to stay with friends in the country. I used to reach
the Arc-de-Triomphe about noon. I kept watch at the entrance to the
Avenue, never taking my eyes off the corner of the side-street along
which Mme. Swann, who had only a few yards to walk, would come from her
house. As by this time many of the people who had been strolling there
were going home to luncheon, those who remained were few in number and,
for the most part, fashionably dressed. Suddenly, on the gravelled path,
unhurrying, cool, luxuriant, Mme. Swann appeared, displaying around her
a toilet which was never twice the same, but which I remember as being
typically mauve; then she hoisted and unfurled at the end of its long
stalk, just at the moment when her radiance was most complete, the
silken banner of a wide parasol of a shade that matched the showering
petals of her gown. A whole troop of people escorted her; Swann himself,
four or five fellows from the Club, who had been to call upon her that
morning or whom she had met in the street: and their black or grey
agglomeration, obedient to her every gesture, performing the almost
mechanical movements of a lifeless setting in which Odette was framed,
gave to this woman, in whose eyes alone was there any intensity, the air
of looking out in front of her, from among all those men, as from a
window behind which she had taken her stand, and made her emerge there,
frail but fearless, in the nudity of her delicate colours, like the
apparition of a creature of a different species, of an unknown race, and
of almost martial strength, by virtue of which she seemed by herself a
match for all her multiple escort. Smiling, rejoicing in the fine
weather, in the sunshine which had not yet become trying, with the air
of calm assurance of a creator who has accomplished his task and takes
no thought for anything besides; certain that her clothes--even though
the vulgar herd should fail to appreciate them--were the smartest
anywhere to be seen, she wore them for herself and for her friends,
naturally, without exaggerated attention to them but also without
absolute detachment; not preventing the little bows of ribbon upon her
bodice and skirt from floating buoyantly upon the air before her, like
separate creatures of whose presence there she was not unconscious, but
was indulgent enough to let them play if they chose, keeping their own
rhythm, provided that they accompanied her where she led the way; and
even upon her mauve parasol, which, as often as not, she had not yet
"put up" when she appeared on the scene, she let fall now and then, as
though upon a bunch of Parma violets, a gaze happy and so kindly that,
when it was fastened no longer upon her friends but on some inanimate
object, her eyes still seemed to smile. She thus kept open, she made her
garments occupy that interval of smartness, of which the men with whom
she was on the most familiar terms respected both the existence and its
necessity, not without shewing a certain deference, as of profane
visitors to a shrine, an admission of their own ignorance, an interval
over which they recognised that their friend had (as we recognise that a
sick man has over the special precautions that he has to take, or a
mother over her children's education) a competent jurisdiction. No less
than by the court which encircled her and seemed not to observe the
passers-by, Mme. Swann by the lateness of her appearance there at once
suggested those rooms in which she had spent so long, so leisurely a
morning and to which she must presently return for luncheon; she seemed
to indicate their proximity by the unhurrying ease of her progress, like
the turn that one takes up and down one's own garden of those rooms one
would have said that she was carrying about her still the cool, the
indoor shade. But for that very reason the sight of her gave me only a
stronger sensation of open air and warmth. All the more because, being
assured in my own mind that, in accordance with the liturgy, with the
ritual in which Mme. Swann was so profoundly versed, her clothes were
connected with the time of year and of day by a bond both inevitable and
unique, I felt that the flowers upon the stiff straw brim of her hat,
the baby-ribbons upon her dress had been even more naturally born of the
month of May than the flowers in gardens and in woods; and to learn what
latest change there was in weather or season I had not to raise my eyes
higher than to her parasol, open and outstretched like another, a nearer
sky, round, clement, mobile, blue. For these rites, if they were of
sovereign importance, subjugated their glory (and, consequently, Mme.
Swann her own) in condescending obedience to the day, the spring, the
sun, none of which struck me as being sufficiently flattered that so
elegant a woman had been graciously pleased not to ignore their
existence, and had chosen on their account a gown of a brighter, of a
thinner fabric, suggesting to me, by the opening of its collar and
sleeves, the moist warmness of the throat and wrists that they
exposed,--in a word, had taken for them all the pains that a great
personage takes who, having gaily condescended to pay a visit to common
folk in the country, whom everyone, even the most plebeian, knows, yet
makes a point of donning, for the occasion, suitable attire. On her
arrival I would greet Mme. Swann, she stop me and say (in English) "Good
morning," and smile. We would walk a little way together. And I learned
then that these canons according to which she dressed, it was for her
own satisfaction that she obeyed them, as though yielding to a Superior
Wisdom of which she herself was High Priestess: for if it should happen
that, feeling too warm, she threw open or even took off altogether and
gave me to carry the jacket which she had intended to keep buttoned up,
I would discover in the blouse beneath it a thousand details of
execution which had had every chance of remaining there unperceived,
like those parts of an orchestral score to which the composer has
devoted infinite labour albeit they may never reach the ears of the
public: or in the sleeves of the jacket that lay folded across my arm I
would see, I would drink in slowly, for my own pleasure or from
affection for its wearer, some exquisite detail, a deliciously tinted
strip, a lining of mauve satinette which, ordinarily concealed from
every eye, was yet just as delicately fashioned as the outer parts, like
those gothic carvings on a cathedral, hidden on the inside of a
balustrade eighty feet from the ground, as perfect as are the
bas-reliefs over the main porch, and yet never seen by any living man
until, happening to pass that way upon his travels, an artist obtains
leave to climb up there among them, to stroll in the open air, sweeping
the whole town with a comprehensive gaze, between the soaring towers.

What enhanced this impression that Mme. Swann was walking in the Avenue
as though along the paths of her own garden, was--for people ignorant of
her habit of "taking exercise"--that she had come there on foot, without
any carriage following, she whom, once May had begun, they were
accustomed to see, behind the most brilliant "turn-out", the smartest
liveries in Paris, gently and majestically seated, like a goddess, in
the balmy air of an immense victoria on eight springs. On foot Mme.
Swann had the appearance--especially as her pace began to slacken in the
heat of the sun--of having yielded to curiosity, of committing an
"exclusive" breach of all the rules of her code, like those Crowned
Heads who, without consulting anyone, accompanied by the slightly
scandalised admiration of a suite which dares not venture any criticism,
step out of their boxes during a gala performance and visit the lobby of
the theatre, mingling for a moment or two with the rest of the audience.
So between Mme. Swann and themselves the crowd felt that there existed
those barriers of a certain kind of opulence which seem to them the most
insurmountable that there are. The Faubourg Saint-Germain may have its
barriers also, but these are less "telling" to the eyes and imagination
of the "shabby-genteel". These latter, when in the presence of a real
personage, more simple, more easily mistaken for the wife of a small
professional or business man, less remote from the people, will not feel
the same sense of their own inequality, almost of their unworthiness, as
dismays them when they encounter Mme. Swann. Of course women of that
sort are not themselves dazzled, as the crowd are, by the brilliance of
their apparel, they have ceased to pay any attention to it, but only
because they have grown used to it, that is to say have come to look
upon it more and more as natural and necessary, to judge their fellow
creatures according as they are more or less initiated into these
luxurious ways: so that (the grandeur which they allow themselves to
display or discover in others being wholly material, easily verified,
slowly acquired, the lack of it hard to compensate) if such women place
a passer-by in the lowest rank of society, it is by the same instinctive
process that has made them appear to him as in the highest, that is to
say instinctively, at first sight, and without possibility of appeal.
Perhaps that special class of society which included in those days women
like Lady Israels, who mixed with the women of the aristocracy, and Mme.
Swann, who was to get to know them later on, that intermediate class,
inferior to the Faubourg Saint-Germain, since it "ran after" the
denizens of that quarter, but superior to everything that was not of the
Faubourg Saint-Germain, possessing this peculiarity that, while already
detached from the world of the merely rich, it was riches still that it
represented, but riches that had been canalised, serving a purpose,
swayed by an idea that were artistic, malleable gold, chased with a
poetic design, taught to smile; perhaps that class--in the same form, at
least, and with the same charm--exists no longer. In any event, the
women who were its members would not satisfy to-day what was the primary
condition on which they reigned, since with advancing age they have
lost--almost all of them--their beauty. Whereas it was (just as much as
from the pinnacle of her noble fortune) from the glorious zenith of her
ripe and still so fragrant summer that Mme. Swann, majestic, smiling,
kind, as she advanced along the Avenue du Bois, saw like Hypatia,
beneath the slow tread of her feet, worlds revolving. Various young men
as they passed looked at her anxiously, not knowing whether their vague
acquaintance with her (especially since, having been introduced only
once, at the most, to Swann, they were afraid that he might not remember
them) was sufficient excuse for their venturing to take off their hats.
And they trembled to think of the consequences as they made up their
minds, asking themselves whether the gesture, so bold, so sacrilegious a
tempting of providence, would not let loose the catastrophic forces of
nature or bring down upon them the vengeance of a jealous god. It
provoked only, like the winding of a piece of clockwork, a series of
gesticulations from little, responsive bowing figures, who were none
other than Odette's escort, beginning with Swann himself, who raised his
tall hat lined in green leather with an exquisite courtesy, which he had
acquired in the Faubourg Saint-Germain, but to which was no longer
wedded the indifference that he would at one time have shewn. Its place
was now taken (as though he had been to some extent permeated by
Odette's prejudices) at once by irritation at having to acknowledge the
salute of a person who was none too well dressed and by satisfaction at
his wife's knowing so many people, a mixed sensation to which he gave
expression by saying to the smart friends who walked by his side: "What!
another! Upon my word, I can't imagine where my wife picks all these
fellows up!" Meanwhile, having greeted with a slight movement of her
head the terrified youth, who had already passed out of sight though his
heart was still beating furiously, Mme. Swann turned to me: "Then it's
all over?" she put it to me, "You aren't ever coming to see Gilberte
again? I'm glad you make an exception of me, and are not going to 'drop'
me straight away. I like seeing you, but I used to like also the
influence you had over my daughter. I'm sure she's very sorry about it,
too. However, I mustn't bully you, or you'll make up your mind at once
that you never want to set eyes on me again." "Odette, Sagan's trying to
speak to you!" Swann called his wife's attention. And there, indeed, was
the Prince, as in some transformation scene at the close of a play, or
in a circus, or an old painting, wheeling his horse round so as to face
her, in a magnificent heroic pose, and doffing his hat with a sweeping
theatrical and, so to speak, allegorical flourish in which he displayed
all the chivalrous courtesy of a great noble bowing in token of his
respect for Woman, were she incarnate in a woman whom it was impossible
for his mother or his sister to know. And at every moment, recognised in
the depths of the liquid transparency and of the luminous glaze of the
shadow which her parasol cast over her, Mme. Swann was receiving the
salutations of the last belated horsemen, who passed as though in a
cinematograph taken as they galloped in the blinding glare of the
Avenue, men from the clubs, whose names of whom, which meant only
celebrities to the public, Antoine de Castellane, Adalbert de
Montmorency and the rest--were for Mme. Swann the familiar names of
friends. And as the average span of life, the relative longevity of our
memories of poetical sensations is much greater than that of our
memories of what the heart has suffered, long after the sorrows that I
once felt on Gilberte's account have faded and vanished, there has
survived them the pleasure that I still derive--whenever I close my eyes
and read, as it were upon the face of a sundial, the minutes that are
recorded between a quarter past twelve and one o'clock in the month of
May--from seeing myself once again strolling and talking thus with Mme.
Swann beneath her parasol, as though in the coloured shade of a wistaria
bower.




_PLACE-NAMES: THE PLACE_


I had arrived at a state almost of complete indifference to Gilberte
when, two years later, I went with my grandmother to Balbec. When I
succumbed to the attraction of a strange face, when it was with the help
of some other girl that I hoped to discover gothic cathedrals, the
palaces and gardens of Italy, I said to myself sadly that this love of
ours, in so far as it is love for one particular creature, is not
perhaps a very real thing, since if the association of pleasant or
unpleasant trains of thought can attach it for a time to a woman so as
to make us believe that it has been inspired by her, in a necessary
sequence of effect to cause, yet when we detach ourselves, deliberately
or unconsciously, from those associations, this love, as though it were
indeed a spontaneous thing and sprang from ourselves alone, will revive
in order to bestow itself on another woman. At the time, however, of my
departure for Balbec, and during the earlier part of my stay there, my
indifference was still only intermittent. Often, our life being so
careless of chronology, interpolating so many anachronisms in the
sequence of our days, I lived still among those--far older days than
yesterday or last week--in which I loved Gilberte. And at once not
seeing her became as exquisite a torture to me as it had been then. The
self that had loved her, which another self had already almost entirely
supplanted, rose again in me, stimulated far more often by a trivial
than by an important event. For instance, if I may anticipate for a
moment my arrival in Normandy, I heard some one who passed me on the
sea-front at Balbec refer to the "Secretary to the Ministry of Posts and
his family". Now, seeing that as yet I knew nothing of the influence
which that family was to exercise over my life, this remark ought to
have passed unheeded; instead, it gave me at once an acute twinge, which
a self that had for the most part long since been outgrown in me felt at
being parted from Gilberte. Because I had never given another thought to
a conversation which Gilberte had had with her father in my hearing, in
which allusion was made to the Secretary to the Ministry of Posts and
his family. Now our love memories present no exception to the general
rules of memory, which in turn are governed by the still more general
rules of Habit. And as Habit weakens every impression, what a person
recalls to us most vividly is precisely what we had forgotten, because
it was of no importance, and had therefore left in full possession of
its strength. That is why the better part of our memory exists outside
ourself, in a blatter of rain, in the smell of an unaired room or of the
first crackling brushwood fire in a cold grate: wherever, in short, we
happen upon what our mind, having no use for it, had rejected, the last
treasure that the past has in store, the richest, that which when all
our flow of tears seems to have dried at the source can make us weep
again. Outside ourself, did I say; rather within ourself, but hidden
from our eyes in an oblivion more or less prolonged. It is thanks to
this oblivion alone that we can from time to time recover the creature
that we were, range ourself face to face with past events as that
creature had to face them, suffer afresh because we are no longer
ourself but he, and because he loved what leaves us now indifferent. In
the broad daylight of our ordinary memory the images of the past turn
gradually pale and fade out of sight, nothing remains of them, we shall
never find them again. Or rather we should never find them again had not
a few words (such as this "Secretary to the Ministry of Posts") been
carefully locked away in oblivion, just as an author deposits in the
National Library a copy of a book which might otherwise become
unobtainable.

But this suffering and this recrudescence of my love for Gilberte lasted
no longer than such things last in a dream, and this time, on the
contrary, because at Balbec the old Habit was no longer there to keep
them alive. And if these two effects of Habit appear to be incompatible,
that is because Habit is bound by a diversity of laws. In Paris I had
grown more and more indifferent to Gilberte, thanks to Habit. The change
of habit, that is to say the temporary cessation of Habit, completed
Habit's task when I started for Balbec. It weakens, but it stabilises;
it leads to disintegration but it makes the scattered elements last
indefinitely. Day after day, for years past, I had begun by modelling my
state of mind, more or less effectively, upon that of the day before. At
Balbec, a strange bed, to the side of which a tray was brought in the
morning that differed from my Paris breakfast tray, could not,
obviously, sustain the fancies upon which my love for Gilberte had fed:
there are cases (though not, I admit, commonly) in which, one's days
being paralysed by a sedentary life, the best way to save time is to
change one's place of residence. My journey to Balbec was like the first
outing of a convalescent who needed only that to convince him that he
was cured.

The journey was one that would now be made, probably, in a motor-car,
which would be supposed to render it more interesting. We shall see too
that, accomplished in such a way, it would even be in a sense more
genuine, since one would be following more nearly, in a closer intimacy,
the various contours by which the surface of the earth is wrinkled. But
after all the special attraction of the journey lies not in our being
able to alight at places on the way and to stop altogether as soon as we
grow tired, but in its making the difference between departure and
arrival not as imperceptible but as intense as possible, so that we are
conscious of it in its totality, intact, as it existed in our mind when
imagination bore us from the place in which we were living right to the
very heart of a place we longed to see, in a single sweep which seemed
miraculous to us not so much because it covered a certain distance as
because it united two distinct individualities of the world, took us
from one name to another name; and this difference is accentuated (more
than in a form of locomotion in which, since one can stop and alight
where one chooses, there can scarcely be said to be any point of
arrival) by the mysterious operation that is performed in those peculiar
places, railway stations, which do not constitute, so to speak, a part
of the surrounding town but contain the essence of its personality just
as upon their sign-boards they bear its painted name.

But in this respect as in every other, our age is infected with a mania
for shewing things only in the environment that properly belongs to
them, thereby suppressing the essential thing, the act of the mind which
isolated them from that environment. A picture is nowadays "presented"
in the midst of furniture, ornaments, hangings of the same period, a
second-hand scheme of decoration in the composition of which in the
houses of to-day excels that same hostess who but yesterday was so
crassly ignorant, but now spends her time poring over records and in
libraries; and among these the masterpiece at which we glance up from
the table while we dine does not give us that exhilarating delight which
we can expect from it only in a public gallery, which symbolises far
better by its bareness, by the absence of all irritating detail, those
innermost spaces into which the artist withdrew to create it.

Unhappily those marvellous places which are railway stations, from which
one sets out for a remote destination, are tragic places also, for if in
them the miracle is accomplished whereby scenes which hitherto have had
no existence save in our minds are to become the scenes among which we
shall be living, for that very reason we must, as we emerge from the
waiting-room, abandon any thought of finding ourself once again within
the familiar walls which, but a moment ago, were still enclosing us. We
must lay aside all hope of going home to sleep in our own bed, once we
have made up our mind to penetrate into the pestiferous cavern through
which we may have access to the mystery, into one of those vast,
glass-roofed sheds, like that of Saint-Lazare into which I must go to
find the train for Balbec, and which extended over the rent bowels of
the city one of those bleak and boundless skies, heavy with an
accumulation of dramatic menaces, like certain skies painted with an
almost Parisian modernity by Mantegna or Veronese, beneath which could
be accomplished only some solemn and tremendous act, such as a departure
by train or the Elevation of the Cross.

So long as I had been content to look out from the warmth of my own bed
in Paris at the Persian church of Balbec, shrouded in driving sleet, no
sort of objection to this journey had been offered by my body. Its
objections began only when it had gathered that it would have itself to
take part in the journey, and that on the evening of my arrival I should
be shewn to "my" room which to my body would be unknown. Its revolt was
all the more deep-rooted in that on the very eve of my departure I
learned that my mother would not be coming with us, my father, who would
be kept busy at the Ministry until it was time for him to start for
Spain with M. de Norpois, having preferred to take a house in the
neighbourhood of Paris. On the other hand, the spectacle of Balbec
seemed to me none the less desirable because I must purchase it at the
price of a discomfort which, on the contrary, I felt to indicate and to
guarantee the reality of the impression which I was going there to seek,
an impression the place of which no spectacle of professedly equal
value, no "panorama" which I might have gone to see without being
thereby precluded from returning home to sleep in my own bed, could
possibly have filled. It was not for the first time that I felt that
those who love and those who find pleasure are not always the same. I
believed myself to be longing fully as much for Balbec as the doctor who
was treating me, when he said to me, surprised, on the morning of our
departure, to see me look so unhappy; "I don't mind telling you that if
I could only manage a week to go down and get a blow by the sea, I
shouldn't wait to be asked twice. You'll be having races, regattas; you
don't know what all!" But I had already learned the lesson--long before
I was taken to hear Berma--that, whatever it might be that I loved, it
would never be attained save at the end of a long and heart-rending
pursuit, in the course of which I should have first to sacrifice my own
pleasure to that paramount good instead of seeking it there.

My grandmother, naturally enough, looked upon our exodus from a somewhat
different point of view, and (for she was still as anxious as ever that
the presents which were made me should take some artistic form) had
planned, so that she might be offering me, of this journey, a "print"
that was, at least, in parts "old", that we should repeat, partly by
rail and partly by road, the itinerary that Mme. de Sévigné followed
when she went from Paris to "L'Orient" by way of Chaulnes and "the
Pont-Audemer". But my grandmother had been obliged to abandon this
project, at the instance of my father who knew, whenever she organised
any expedition with a view to extracting from it the utmost intellectual
benefit that it was capable of yielding, what a tale there would be to
tell of missed trains, lost luggage, sore throats and broken rules. She
was free at least to rejoice in the thought that never, when the time
came for us to sally forth to the beach, should we be exposed to the
risk of being kept indoors by the sudden appearance of what her beloved
Sévigné calls a "beast of a coachload", since we should know not a
soul at Balbec, Legrandin having refrained from offering us a letter of
introduction to his sister. (This abstention had not been so well
appreciated by my aunts Céline and Flora, who, having known as a child
that lady, of whom they had always spoken until then, to commemorate
this early intimacy, as "Renée de Cambremer", and having had from her
and still possessing a number of those little presents which continue to
ornament a room or a conversation but to which the feeling between the
parties no longer corresponds, imagined that they were avenging the
insult offered to us by never uttering again, when they called upon Mme.
Legrandin, the name of her daughter, confining themselves to a mutual
congratulation, once they were safely out of the house: "I made no
reference to you know whom!" "I think that went home!")

And so we were simply to leave Paris by that one twenty-two train which
I had too often beguiled myself by looking out in the railway
time-table, where its itinerary never failed to give me the emotion,
almost the illusion of starting by it, not to feel that I already knew
it. As the delineation in our mind of the features of any form of
happiness depends more on the nature of the longings that it inspires in
us than the accuracy of the information which we have about it, I felt
that I knew this train in all its details, nor did I doubt that I should
feel, sitting in one of its compartments, a special delight as the day
began to cool, should be contemplating this or that view as the train
approached one or another station; so much so that this train, which
always brought to my mind's eye the images of the same towns, which I
bathed in the sunlight of those post-meridian hours through which it
sped, seemed to me to be different from every other train; and I had
ended--as we are apt to do with a person whom we have never seen but of
whom we like to believe that we have won his friendship--by giving a
distinct and unalterable cast of countenance to the traveller, artistic,
golden-haired, who would thus have taken me with him upon his journey,
and to whom I should bid farewell beneath the Cathedral of Saint-Lô,
before he hastened to overtake the setting sun.

As my grandmother could not bring herself to do anything so "stupid" as
to go straight to Balbec, she was to break the journey half-way, staying
the night with one of her friends, from whose house I was to proceed the
same evening, so as not to be in the way there and also in order that I
might arrive by daylight and see Balbec church, which, we had learned,
was at some distance from Balbec-Plage, so that I might not have a
chance to visit it later on, when I had begun my course of baths. And
perhaps it was less painful for me to feel that the desirable goal of my
journey stood between me and that cruel first night on which I should
have to enter a new habitation, and consent to dwell there. But I had
had first to leave the old; my mother had arranged to "move in", that
afternoon, at Saint-Cloud, and had made, or pretended to make all the
arrangements for going there directly after she had seen us off at the
station, without needing to call again at our own house to which she was
afraid that I might otherwise feel impelled at the last moment, instead
of going to Balbec, to return with her. In fact, on the pretext of
having so much to see to in the house which she had just taken and of
being pressed for time, but in reality so as to spare me the cruel
ordeal of a long-drawn parting, she had decided not to wait with us
until that moment of the signal to start at which, concealed hitherto
among ineffective comings and goings and preparations that lead to
nothing definite, separation is made suddenly manifest, impossible to
endure when it is no longer possibly to be avoided, concentrated in its
entirety in one enormous instant of impotent and supreme lucidity.

For the first time I began to feel that it was possible that my mother
might live without me, otherwise than for me, a separate life. She was
going to stay with my father, whose existence it may have seemed to her
that my feeble health, my nervous excitability complicated somewhat and
saddened. This separation made me all the more wretched because I told
myself that it probably marked for my mother an end of the successive
disappointments which I had caused her, of which she had never said a
word to me but which had made her realise the difficulty of our taking
our holidays together; and perhaps also the first trial of a form of
existence to which she was beginning, now, to resign herself for the
future, as the years crept on for my father and herself, an existence in
which I should see less of her, in which (a thing that not even in my
nightmares had yet been revealed to me) she would already have become
something of a stranger, a lady who might be seen going home by herself
to a house in which I should not be, asking the porter whether there was
not a letter for her from me.

I could scarcely answer the man in the station who offered to take my
bag. My mother, to comfort me, tried the methods which seemed to her
most efficacious. Thinking it to be useless to appear not to notice my
unhappiness, she gently teased me about it:

"Well, and what would Balbec church say if it knew that people pulled
long faces like that when they were going to see it? Surely this is not
the enraptured tourist Ruskin speaks of. Besides, I shall know if you
rise to the occasion, even when we are miles apart I shall still be with
my little man. You shall have a letter to-morrow from Mamma."

"My dear," said my grandmother, "I picture you like Mme. de Sévigné,
your eyes glued to the map, and never losing sight of us for an
instant."

Then Mamma sought to distract my mind, asked me what I thought of having
for dinner, drew my attention to Françoise, complimented her on a hat
and cloak which she did not recognise, in spite of their having
horrified her long ago when she first saw them, new, upon my great-aunt,
one with an immense bird towering over it, the other decorated with a
hideous pattern and jet beads. But the cloak having grown too shabby to
wear, Françoise had had it turned, exposing an "inside" of plain cloth
and quite a good colour. As for the bird, it had long since come to
grief and been thrown away. And just as it is disturbing, sometimes, to
find the effects which the most conscious artists attain only by an
effort occurring in a folk-song, on the wall of some peasant's cottage
where above the door, at the precisely right spot in the composition,
blooms a white or yellow rose--so the velvet band, the loop of ribbon
which would have delighted one in a portrait by Chardin or Whistler,
Françoise had set with a simple but unerring taste upon the hat, which
was now charming.

To take a parallel from an earlier age, the modesty and integrity which
often gave an air of nobility to the face of our old servant having
spread also to the garments which, as a woman reserved but not humbled,
who knew how to hold her own and to keep her place, she had put on for
the journey so as to be fit to be seen in our company without at the
same time seeming or wishing to make herself conspicuous,--Françoise in
the cherry-coloured cloth, now faded, of her cloak, and the discreet nap
of her fur collar, brought to mind one of those miniatures of Anne of
Brittany painted in Books of Hours by an old master, in which everything
is so exactly in the right place, the sense of the whole is so evenly
distributed throughout the parts that the rich and obsolete singularity
of the costume expresses the same pious gravity as the eyes, lips and
hands.

Of thought, in relation to Françoise, one could hardly speak. She knew
nothing, in that absolute sense in which to know nothing means to
understand nothing, save the rare truths to which the heart is capable
of directly attaining. The vast world of ideas existed not for her. But
when one studied the clearness of her gaze, the lines of nose and lips,
all those signs lacking from so many people of culture in whom they
would else have signified a supreme distinction, the noble detachment of
a chosen spirit, one was disquieted, as one is by the frank, intelligent
eyes of a dog, to which, nevertheless, one knows that all our human
concepts must be alien, and was led to ask oneself whether there might
not be, among those other humble brethren, our peasant countrymen,
creatures who were, like the great ones of the earth, of simple mind, or
rather, doomed by a harsh fate to live among the simple-minded, deprived
of heavenly light, were yet more naturally, more instinctively akin to
the chosen spirits than most educated people, were, so to speak, all
members, though scattered, straying, robbed of their heritage of reason,
of the celestial family, kinsfolk, that have been lost in infancy, of
the loftiest minds to whom--as is apparent from the unmistakable light
in their eyes, although they can concentrate that light on
nothing--there has been lacking, to endow them with talent, knowledge
only.

My mother, seeing that I had difficulty in keeping back my tears, said
to me: "'Regulus was in the habit, when things looked grave. . . .'
Besides, it isn't nice for Mamma! What does Mme. de Sévigné say? Your
grandmother will tell you: 'I shall be obliged to draw upon all the
courage that you lack.'" And remembering that affection for another
distracts one's selfish griefs, she endeavoured to beguile me by telling
me that she expected the removal to Saint-Cloud to go without a hitch,
that she liked the cab, which she had kept waiting, that the driver
seemed civil and the seats comfortable. I made an effort to smile at
these trifles, and bowed my head with an air of acquiescence and
satisfaction. But they helped me only to depict to myself with more
accuracy Mamma's imminent departure, and it was with an agonised heart
that I gazed at her as though she were already torn from me, beneath
that wide-brimmed straw hat which she had bought to wear in the country,
in a flimsy dress which she had put on in view of the long drive through
the sweltering midday heat; hat and dress making her some one else, some
one who belonged already to the Villa Montretout, in which I should not
see her.

To prevent the choking fits which the journey might otherwise give me
the doctor had advised me to take, as we started, a good stiff dose of
beer or brandy, so as to begin the journey in a state of what he called
"euphoria", in which the nervous system is for a time less vulnerable.
I had not yet made up my mind whether I should do this, but I wished at
least that my grandmother should admit that, if I did so decide, I
should have wisdom and authority on my side. I spoke therefore as if my
hesitation were concerned only with where I should go for my drink, to
the bar on the platform or to the restaurant-car on the train. But
immediately, at the air of reproach which my grandmothers face assumed,
an air of not wishing even to entertain such an idea for a moment,
"What!" I said to myself, suddenly determining upon this action of going
out to drink, the performance of which became necessary as a proof of my
independence since the verbal announcement of it had not succeeded in
passing unchallenged, "What! You know how ill I am, you know what the
doctor ordered, and you treat me like this!"

When I had explained to my grandmother how unwell I felt, her distress,
her kindness were so apparent as she replied, "Run along then, quickly;
get yourself some beer or a liqueur if it will do you any good," that I
flung myself upon her, almost smothering her in kisses. And if after
that I went and drank a great deal too much in the restaurant-car of the
train, that was because I felt that otherwise I should have a more
violent attack than usual, which was just what would vex her most. When
at the first stop I clambered back into our compartment I told my
grandmother how pleased I was to be going to Balbec, that I felt that
everything would go off splendidly, that after all I should soon grow
used to being without Mamma, that the train was most comfortable, the
steward and attendants in the bar so friendly that I should like to make
the journey often so as to have opportunities of seeing them again. My
grandmother, however, did not appear to feel the same joy as myself at
all these good tidings. She answered, without looking me in the face:

"Why don't you try to get a little sleep?" and turned her gaze to the
window, the blind of which, though we had drawn it, did not completely
cover the glass, so that the sun could and did slip in over the polished
oak of the door and the cloth of the seat (like an advertisement of a
life shared with nature far more persuasive than those posted higher
upon the walls of the compartment, by the railway company, representing
places in the country the names of which I could not make out from where
I sat) the same warm and slumberous light which lies along a forest
glade.

But when my grandmother thought that my eyes were shut I could see her,
now and again, from among the large black spots on her veil, steal a
glance at me, then withdraw it, and steal back again, like a person
trying to make himself, so as to get into the habit, perform some
exercise that hurts him.

Thereupon I spoke to her, but that seemed not to please her either. And
yet to myself the sound of my own voice was pleasant, as were the most
imperceptible, the most internal movements of my body. And so I
endeavoured to prolong it. I allowed each of my inflexions to hang
lazily upon its word, I felt each glance from my eyes arrive just at the
spot to which it was directed and stay there beyond the normal period.
"Now, now, sit still and rest," said my grandmother. "If you can't
manage to sleep, read something." And she handed me a volume of Madame
de Sévigné which I opened, while she buried herself in the _Mémoires
de Madame de Beausergent._ She never travelled anywhere without a volume
of each. They were her two favourite authors. With no conscious movement
of my head, feeling a keen pleasure in maintaining a posture after I had
adopted it, I lay back holding in my hands the volume of Madame de
Sévigné which I had allowed to close, without lowering my eyes to it,
or indeed letting them see anything but the blue window-blind. But the
contemplation of this blind appeared to me an admirable thing, and I
should not have troubled to answer anyone who might have sought to
distract me from contemplating it. The blue colour of this blind seemed
to me, not perhaps by its beauty but by its intense vivacity, to efface
so completely all the colours that had passed before my eyes from the
day of my birth up to the moment in which I had gulped down the last of
my drink and it had begun to take effect, that when compared with this
blue they were as drab, as void as must be retrospectively the darkness
in which he has lived to a man born blind whom a subsequent operation
has at length enabled to see and to distinguish colours. An old
ticket-collector came to ask for our tickets. The silvery gleam that
shone from the metal buttons of his jacket charmed me in spite of my
absorption. I wanted to ask him to sit down beside us. But he passed on
to the next carriage, and I thought with longing of the life led by
railwaymen for whom, since they spent all their time on the line, hardly
a day could pass without their seeing this old collector. The pleasure
that I found in staring at the blind, and in feeling that my mouth was
half-open, began at length to diminish. I became more mobile; I even
moved in my seat; I opened the book that my grandmother had given me and
turned its pages casually, reading whatever caught my eye. And as I read
I felt my admiration for Madame de Sévigné grow.

It is a mistake to let oneself be taken in by the purely formal details,
idioms of the period or social conventions, the effect of which is that
certain people believe that they have caught the Sévigné manner when
they have said: "Tell me, my dear," or "That Count struck me as being a
man of parts," or "Haymaking is the sweetest thing in the world." Mme.
de Simiane imagines already that she is being like her grandmother
because she can write: "M. de la Boulie is bearing wonderfully, Sir, and
is in excellent condition to hear the news of his death," or "Oh, my
dear Marquis, how your letter enchanted me! What can I do but answer
it?" or "Meseems, Sir, that you owe me a letter, and I owe you some
boxes of bergamot. I discharge my debt to the number of eight; others
shall follow. . . . Never has the soil borne so many. Apparently for
your gratification." And she writes in this style also her letter on
bleeding, on lemons and so forth, supposing it to be typical of the
letters of Madame de Sévigné. But my grandmother who had approached
that lady from within, attracted to her by her own love of kinsfolk and
of nature, had taught me to enjoy the real beauties of her
correspondence, which are altogether different. They were presently to
strike me all the more forcibly inasmuch as Madame de Sévigné is a
great artist of the same school as a painter whom I was to meet at
Balbec, where his influence on my way of seeing things was immense. I
realised at Balbec that it was in the same way as he that she presented
things to her readers, in the order of our perception of them, instead
of first having to explain them in relation to their several causes. But
already that afternoon in the railway carriage, as I read over again
that letter in which the moonlight comes: "I cannot resist the
temptation: I put on all my bonnets and veils, though there is no need
of them, I walk along this mall, where the air is as sweet as in my
chamber; I find a thousand phantasms, monks white and black, sisters
grey and white, linen cast here and there on the ground, men enshrouded
upright against the tree-trunks," I was enraptured by what, a little
later, I should have described (for does not she draw landscapes in the
same way as he draws characters?) as the Dostoievsky side of Madame de
Sévigné's Letters.

When, that evening, after having accompanied my grandmother to her
destination and spent some hours in her friend's house, I had returned
by myself to the train, at any rate I found nothing to distress me in
the night which followed; this was because I had not to spend it in a
room the somnolence of which would have kept me awake; I was surrounded
by the soothing activity of all those movements of the train which kept
me company, offered to stay and converse with me if I could not sleep,
lulled me with their sounds which I wedded--as I had often wedded the
chime of the Combray bells--now to one rhythm now to another (hearing as
the whim took me first four level and equivalent semi-quavers, then one
semi-quaver furiously dashing against a crotchet); they neutralised the
centrifugal force of my insomnia by exercising upon it a contrary
pressure which kept me in equilibrium and on which my immobility and
presently my drowsiness felt themselves to be borne with the same sense
of refreshment that I should have had, had I been resting under the
protecting vigilance of powerful forces, on the breast of nature and of
life, had I been able for a moment to incarnate myself in a fish that
sleeps in the sea, driven unheeding by the currents and the tides, or in
an eagle outstretched upon the air, with no support but the storm.

Sunrise is a necessary concomitant of long railway journeys, just as are
hard-boiled eggs, illustrated papers, packs of cards, rivers upon which
boats strain but make no progress. At a certain moment, when I was
counting over the thoughts that had filled my mind, in the preceding
minutes, so as to discover whether I had just been asleep or not (and
when the very uncertainty which made me ask myself the question was to
furnish me with an affirmative answer), in the pale square of the
window, over a small black wood I saw some ragged clouds whose fleecy
edges were of a fixed, dead pink, not liable to change, like the colour
that dyes the wing which has grown to wear it, or the sketch upon which
the artists fancy has washed it. But I felt that, unlike them, this
colour was due neither to inertia nor to caprice but to necessity and
life. Presently there gathered behind it reserves of light. It
brightened; the sky turned to a crimson which I strove, glueing my eyes
to the window, to see more clearly, for I felt that it was related
somehow to the most intimate life of Nature, but, the course of the line
altering, the train turned, the morning scene gave place in the frame of
the window to a nocturnal village, its roofs still blue with moonlight,
its pond encrusted with the opalescent nacre of night, beneath a
firmament still powdered with all its stars, and I was lamenting the
loss of my strip of pink sky when I caught sight of it afresh, but red
this time, in the opposite window which it left at a second bend in the
line, so that I spent my time running from one window to the other to
reassemble, to collect on a single canvas the intermittent, antipodean
fragments of my fine, scarlet, ever-changing morning, and to obtain a
comprehensive view of it and a continuous picture.

The scenery became broken, abrupt, the train stopped at a little station
between two mountains. Far down the gorge, on the edge of a hurrying
stream, one could see only a solitary watch-house, deep-planted in the
water which ran past on a level with its windows. If a person can be the
product of a soil the peculiar charm of which one distinguishes in that
person, more even than the peasant girl whom I had so desperately longed
to see appear when I wandered by myself along the Méséglise way, in
the woods of Roussainville, such a person must be the big girl whom I
now saw emerge from the house and, climbing a path lighted by the first
slanting rays of the sun, come towards the station carrying a jar of
milk. In her valley from which its congregated summits hid the rest of
the world, she could never see anyone save in these trains which stopped
for a moment only. She passed down the line of windows, offering coffee
and milk to a few awakened passengers. Purpled with the glow of morning,
her face was rosier than the sky. I felt in her presence that desire to
live which is reborn in us whenever we become conscious anew of beauty
and of happiness. We invariably forget that these are individual
qualities, and, substituting for them in our mind a conventional type at
which we arrive by striking a sort of mean amongst the different faces
that have taken our fancy, the pleasures we have known, we are left with
mere abstract images which are lifeless and dull because they are
lacking in precisely that element of novelty, different from anything we
have known, that element which is proper to beauty and to happiness. And
we deliver on life a pessimistic judgment which we suppose to be fair,
for we believed that we were taking into account when we formed it
happiness and beauty, whereas in fact we left them out and replaced them
by syntheses in which there is not a single atom of either. So it is
that a well-read man will at once begin to yawn with boredom when anyone
speaks to him of a new "good book", because he imagines a sort of
composite of all the good books that he has read and knows already,
whereas a good book is something special, something incalculable, and is
made up not of the sum of all previous masterpieces but of something
which the most thorough assimilation of every one of them would not
enable him to discover, since it exists not in their sum but beyond it.
Once he has become acquainted with this new work, the well-read man,
till then apathetic, feels his interest awaken in the reality which it
depicts. So, alien to the models of beauty which my fancy was wont to
sketch when I was by myself, this strapping girl gave me at once the
sensation of a certain happiness (the sole form, always different, in
which we may learn the sensation of happiness), of a happiness that
would be realised by my staying and living there by her side. But in
this again the temporary cessation of Habit played a great part. I was
giving the milk-girl the benefit of what was really my own entire being,
ready to taste the keenest joys, which now confronted her. As a rule it
is with our being reduced to a minimum that we live, most of our
faculties lie dormant because they can rely upon Habit, which knows what
there is to be done and has no need of their services. But on this
morning of travel, the interruption of the routine of my existence, the
change of place and time had made their presence indispensable. My
habits, which were sedentary and not matutinal, played me false, and all
my faculties came hurrying to take their place, viewing with one another
in their zeal, rising, each of them, like waves in a storm, to the same
unaccustomed level, from the basest to the most exalted, from breath,
appetite, the circulation of my blood to receptivity and imagination. I
cannot say whether, so as to make me believe that this girl was unlike
the rest of women, the rugged charm of these barren tracts had been
added to her own, but if so she gave it back to them. Life would have
seemed an exquisite thing to me if only I had been free to spend it,
hour after hour, with her, to go with her to the stream, to the cow, to
the train, to be always at her side, to feel that I was known to her,
had my place in her thoughts. She would have initiated me into the
delights of country life and of the first hours of the day. I signalled
to her to give me some of her coffee. I felt that I must be noticed by
her. She did not see me; I called to her. Above her body, which was of
massive build, the complexion of her face was so burnished and so ruddy
that she appeared almost as though I were looking at her through a
lighted window. She had turned and was coming towards me; I could not
take my eyes from her face which grew larger as she approached, like a
sun which it was somehow possible to arrest in its course and draw
towards one, letting itself be seen at close quarters, blinding the eyes
with its blaze of red and gold. She fastened on me her penetrating
stare, but while the porters ran along the platform shutting doors the
train had begun to move. I saw her leave the station and go down the
hill to her home; it was broad daylight now; I was speeding away from
the dawn. Whether my exaltation had been produced by this girl or had on
the other hand been responsible for most of the pleasure that I had
found in the sight of her, in the sense of her presence, in either event
she was so closely associated with it that my desire to see her again
was really not so much a physical as a mental desire, not to allow this
state of enthusiasm to perish utterly, not to be separated for ever from
the person who, although quite unconsciously, had participated in it. It
was not only because this state was a pleasant one. It was principally
because (just as increased tension upon a cord or accelerated vibration
of a nerve produces a different sound or colour) it gave another
tonality to all that I saw, introduced me as an actor upon the stage of
an unknown and infinitely more interesting universe; that handsome girl
whom I still could see, while the train gathered speed, was like part of
a life other than the life that I knew, separated from it by a clear
boundary, in which the sensations that things produced in me were no
longer the same, from which to return now to my old life would be almost
suicide. To procure myself the pleasure of feeling that I had at least
an attachment to this new life, it would suffice that I should live near
enough to the little station to be able to come to it every morning for
a cup of coffee from the girl. But alas, she must be for ever absent
from the other life towards which I was being borne with ever increasing
swiftness, a life to the prospect of which I resigned myself only by
weaving plans that would enable me to take the same train again some day
and to stop at the same station, a project which would have the further
advantage of providing with subject matter the selfish, active,
practical, mechanical, indolent, centrifugal tendency which is that of
the human mind; for our mind turns readily aside from the effort which
is required if it is to analyse in itself, in a general and
disinterested manner, a pleasant impression which we have received. And
as, on the other hand, we wish to continue to think of that impression,
the mind prefers to imagine it in the future tense, which while it gives
us no clue as to the real nature of the thing, saves us the trouble of
recreating it in our own consciousness and allows us to hope that we may
receive it afresh from without.

Certain names of towns, Vezelay or Chartres, Bourges or Beauvais, serve
to indicate, by abbreviation, the principal church in those towns. This
partial acceptation, in which we are so accustomed to take the word,
comes at length--if the names in question are those of places that we do
not yet know--to fashion for us a mould of the name as a solid whole,
which from that time onwards, whenever we wish it to convey the idea of
the town--of that town which we have never seen--will impose on it, as
on a cast, the same carved outlines, in the same style of art, will make
of the town a sort of vast cathedral. It was, nevertheless, in a
railway station, above the door of a refreshment-room, that I read the
name--almost Persian in style--of Balbec. I strode buoyantly through the
station and across the avenue that led past it, I asked my way to the
beach so as to see nothing in the place but its church and the sea;
people seemed not to understand what I meant. Old Balbec,
Balbec-en-Terre, at which I had arrived, had neither beach nor harbour.
It was, most certainly, in the sea that the fishermen had found,
according to the legend, the miraculous Christ, of which a window in the
church that stood a few yards from where I now was recorded the
discovery; it was indeed from cliffs battered by the waves that had been
quarried the stone of its nave and towers. But this sea, which for those
reasons I had imagined as flowing up to die at the foot of the window,
was twelve miles away and more, at Balbec-Plage, and, rising beside its
cupola, that steeple, which, because I had read that it was itself a
rugged Norman cliff on which seeds were blown and sprouted, round which
the sea-birds wheeled, I had always pictured to myself as receiving at
its base the last drying foam of the uplifted waves, stood on a Square
from which two lines of tramway diverged, opposite a Café which bore,
written in letters of gold, the word "Billiards"; it stood out against a
background of houses with the roofs of which no upstanding mast was
blended. And the church--entering my mind with the Café, with the
passing stranger of whom I had had to ask my way, with the station to
which presently I should have to return--made part of the general whole,
seemed an accident, a by-product of this summer afternoon, in which its
mellow and distended dome against the sky was like a fruit of which the
same light that bathed the chimneys of the houses was ripening the skin,
pink, glowing, melting-soft. But I wished only to consider the eternal
significance of the carvings when I recognised the Apostles, which I had
seen in casts in the Trocadéro museum, and which on either side of the
Virgin, before the deep bay of the porch, were awaiting me as though to
do me reverence. With their benign, blunt, mild faces and bowed
shoulders they seemed to be advancing upon me with an air of welcome,
singing the Alleluia of a fine day. But it was evident that their
expression was unchanging as that on a dead man's face, and could be
modified only by my turning about to look at them in different aspects.
I said to myself: "Here I am: this is the Church of Balbec. This square,
which looks as though it were conscious of its glory, is the only place
in the world that possesses Balbec Church. All that I have seen so far
have been photographs of this Church--and of these famous Apostles, this
Virgin of the Porch, mere casts only. Now it is the Church itself, the
statue itself; these are they; they, the unique things--this is
something far greater."

It was something less, perhaps, also. As a young man on the day of an
examination or of a duel feels the question that he has been asked, the
shot that he has fired, to be a very little thing when he thinks of the
reserves of knowledge and of valour that he possesses and would like to
have displayed, so my mind, which had exalted the Virgin of the Porch
far above the reproductions that I had had before my eyes, inaccessible
by the vicissitudes which had power to threaten them, intact although
they were destroyed, ideal, endowed with universal value, was astonished
to see the statue which it had carved a thousand times, reduced now to
its own apparent form in stone, occupying, on the radius of my
outstretched arm, a place in which it had for rivals an election placard
and the point of my stick, fettered to the Square, inseparable from the
head of the main street, powerless to hide from the gaze of the Café
and of the omnibus office, receiving on its face half of that ray of the
setting sun (half, presently, in few hours' time, of the light of the
street lamp) of which the Bank building received the other half, tainted
simultaneously with that branch office of a money-lending establishment
by the smells from the pastry-cook's oven, subjected to the tyranny of
the Individual to such a point that, if I had chosen to scribble my name
upon that stone, it was she, the illustrious Virgin whom until then I
had endowed with a general existence and an intangible beauty, the
Virgin of Balbec, the unique (which meant, alas, the only one) who, on
her body coated with the same soot as defiled the neighbouring houses,
would have displayed--powerless to rid herself of them--to all the
admiring strangers come there to gaze upon her, the marks of my piece of
chalk and the letters of my name; it was she, indeed, the immortal work
of art, so long desired, whom I found, transformed, as was the church
itself, into a little old woman in stone whose height I could measure
and count her wrinkles. But time was passing; I must return to the
station, where I was to wait for my grandmother and Françoise, so that
we should all arrive at Balbec-Plage together. I reminded myself of what
I had read about Balbec, of Swann's saying: "It is exquisite; as fine as
Siena." And casting the blame for my disappointment upon various
accidental causes, such as the state of my health, my exhaustion after
the journey, my incapacity for looking at things properly, I endeavoured
to console myself with the thought that other towns remained still
intact for me, that I might soon, perhaps, be making my way, as into a
shower of pearls, into the cool pattering sound that dripped from
Quimperlé, cross that green water lit by a rosy glow in which Pont-Aven
was bathed; but as for Balbec, no sooner had I set foot in it than it
was as though I had broken open a name which ought to have been kept
hermetically closed, and into which, seizing at once the opportunity
that I had imprudently given them when I expelled all the images that
had been living in it until then, a tramway, a Café, people crossing
the square, the local branch of a Bank, irresistibly propelled by some
external pressure, by a pneumatic force, had come crowding into the
interior of those two syllables which, closing over them, let them now
serve as a border to the porch of the Persian church, and would never
henceforward cease to contain them.

In the little train of the local railway company which was to take us to
Balbec-Plage I found my grandmother, but found her alone--for,
imagining that she was sending Françoise on ahead of her, so as to have
everything ready before we arrived, but having mixed up her
instructions, she had succeeded only in packing off Françoise in the
wrong direction, who at that moment was being carried down all
unsuspectingly, at full speed, to Nantes, and would probably wake up
next morning at Bordeaux. No sooner had I taken my seat in the carriage,
filled with the fleeting light of sunset and with the lingering heat of
the afternoon (the former enabling me, alas, to see written clearly upon
my grandmother's face how much the latter had tired her), than she
began: "Well, and Balbec?" with a smile so brightly illuminated by her
expectation of the great pleasure which she supposed me to have been
enjoying that I dared not at once confess to her my disappointment.
Besides, the impression which my mind had been seeking occupied it
steadily less as the place drew nearer to which my body would have to
become accustomed. At the end--still more than an hour away--of this
journey I was trying to form a picture of the manager of the hotel at
Balbec, to whom I, at that moment, did not exist, and I should have
liked to be going to present myself to him in more impressive company
than that of my grandmother, who would be certain to ask for a
reduction of his terms. The only thing positive about him was his
haughty condescension; his lineaments were still vague.

Every few minutes the little train brought us to a standstill in one of
the stations which came before Balbec-Plage, stations the mere names of
which, (Incarville, Marcouville, Doville, Pont-à-Couleuvre,
Arambouville, Saint-Mars-le-Vieux, Hermonville, Maineville) seemed to me
outlandish, whereas if I had come upon them in a book I should at once
have been struck by their affinity to the names of certain places in the
neighbourhood of Combray. But to the trained ear two musical airs,
consisting each of so many notes, several of which are common to them
both, will present no similarity whatever if they differ in the colour
of their harmony and orchestration. So it was that nothing could have
reminded me less than these dreary names, made up of sand, of space too
airy and empty and of salt, out of which the termination "ville" always
escaped, as the "fly" seems to spring out from the end of the word
"butterfly"--nothing could have reminded me less of those other names,
Roussainville or Martinville, which, because I had heard them pronounced
so often by my great-aunt at table, in the dining-room, had acquired a
certain sombre charm in which were blended perhaps extracts of the
flavour of "preserves", the smell of the fire of logs and of the pages
of one of Bergotte's books, the colour of the stony front of the house
opposite, all of which things still to-day when they rise like a gaseous
bubble from the depths of my memory preserve their own specific virtue
through all the successive layers of rival interests which must be
traversed before they reach the surface.

These were--commanding the distant sea from the crests of their several
dunes or folding themselves already for the night beneath hills of a
crude green colour and uncomfortable shape, like that of the sofa in
one's bedroom in an hotel at which one has just arrived, each composed
of a cluster of villas whose line was extended to include a lawn-tennis
court and now and then a casino, over which a flag would be snapping in
the freshening breeze, like a hollow cough--a series of watering-places
which now let me see for the first time their regular visitors, but let
me see only the external features of those visitors--lawn-tennis players
in white hats, the stationmaster spending all his life there on the spot
among his tamarisks and roses, a lady in a straw "boater" who, following
the everyday routine of an existence which I should never know, was
calling to her dog which had stopped to examine something in the road
before going in to her bungalow where the lamp was already lighted for
her return--which with these strangely usual and slightingly familiar
sights stung my ungreeted eyes and stabbed my exiled heart. But how much
were my sufferings increased when we had finally landed in the hall of
the Grand Hotel at Balbec, and I stood there in front of the monumental
staircase that looked like marble, while my grandmother, regardless of
the growing hostility of the strangers among whom we should have to
live, discussed "terms" with the manager, a sort of nodding mandarin
whose face and voice were alike covered with scars (left by the excision
of countless pustules from one and from the other of the divers accents
acquired from an alien ancestry and in a cosmopolitan upbringing) who
stood there in a smart dinner jacket, with the air of an expert
psychologist, classifying, whenever the "omnibus" discharged a fresh
load, the "nobility and gentry" as "geesers" and the "hotel crooks" as
nobility and gentry. Forgetting, probably, that he himself was not
drawing five hundred francs a month, he had a profound contempt for
people to whom five hundred francs--or, as he preferred to put it,
"twenty-five louis" was "a lot of money", and regarded them as belonging
to a race of pariahs for whom the Grand Hotel was certainly not
intended. It is true that even within its walls there were people who
did not pay very much and yet had not forfeited the manager's esteem,
provided that he was assured that they were watching their expenditure
not from poverty so much as from avarice. For this could in no way lower
their standing since it is a vice and may consequently be found at every
grade of social position. Social position was the one thing by which the
manager was impressed, social position, or rather the signs which seemed
to him to imply that it was exalted, such as not taking one's hat off
when one came into the hall, wearing knickerbockers, or an overcoat with
a waist, and taking a cigar with a band of purple and gold out of a
crushed morocco case--to none of which advantages could I, alas, lay
claim. He would also adorn his business conversation with choice
expressions, to which, as a rule, he gave a wrong meaning.

While I heard my grandmother, who shewed no sign of annoyance at his
listening to her with his hat on his head and whistling through his
teeth at her, ask him in an artificial voice, "And what are . . . your
charges? . . . Oh! far too high for my little budget," waiting upon a
bench, I sought refuge in the innermost depths of my own consciousness,
strove to migrate to a plane of eternal thoughts--to leave nothing of
myself, nothing that lived and felt on the surface of my body,
anaesthetised as are those of animals which by inhibition feign death
when they are attacked--so as not to suffer too keenly in this place,
with which my total unfamiliarity was made all the more evident to me
when I saw the familiarity that seemed at the same moment to be enjoyed
by a smartly dressed lady for whom the manager shewed his respect by
taking liberties with the little dog that followed her across the hall,
the young "blood" with a feather in his hat who asked, as he came in,
"Any letters?" all these people to whom it was an act of home-coming to
mount those stairs of imitation marble. And at the same time the triple
frown of Minos, Æacus and Rhadamanthus (beneath which I plunged my
naked soul as into an unknown element where there was nothing now to
protect it) was bent sternly upon me by a group of gentlemen who, though
little versed perhaps in the art of receiving, yet bore the title
"Reception Clerks", while beyond them again, through a closed wall of
glass, were people sitting in a reading-room for the description of
which I should have had to borrow from Dante alternately the colours in
which he paints Paradise and Hell, according as I was thinking of the
happiness of the elect who had the right to sit and read there
undisturbed, or of the terror which my grandmother would have inspired
in me if, in her insensibility to this sort of impression, she had asked
me to go in there and wait for her by myself.

My sense of loneliness was further increased a moment later: when I had
confessed to my grandmother that I did not feel well, that I thought
that we should be obliged to return to Paris, she had offered no
protest, saying merely that she was going out to buy a few things which
would be equally useful whether we left or stayed (and which, I
afterwards learned, were all for my benefit, Françoise having gone off
with certain articles which I might need); while I waited for her I had
taken a turn through the streets, packed with a crowd of people who
imparted to them a sort of indoor warmth, streets in which were still
open the hairdresser's shop and the pastry-cook's, the latter filled
with customers eating ices, opposite the statue of Duguay-Trouin. This
crowd gave me just about as much pleasure as a photograph of it in one
of the "illustrateds" might give a patient who was turning its pages in
the surgeon's waiting-room. I was astonished to find that there were
people so different from myself that this stroll through the town had
actually been recommended to me by the manager as a distraction, and
also that the torture chamber which a new place of residence is could
appear to some people a "continuous amusement", to quote the hotel
prospectus, which might, it was true, exaggerate, but was, for all that,
addressed to a whole army of clients to whose tastes it must appeal.
True, it invoked, to make them come to the Grand Hotel, Balbec, not only
the "exquisite fare" and the "fairy-like view across the Casino
gardens," but also the "ordinances of her Majesty Queen Fashion, which
no one may break with impunity, or without being taken for a Bœotian,
a charge that no well-bred man would willingly incur." The need that I
now had of my grandmother was enhanced by my fear that I had shattered
another of her illusions. She must be feeling discouraged, feeling that
if I could not stand the fatigue of this journey there was no hope that
any change of air could ever do me good. I decided to return to the
hotel and to wait for her there: the manager himself came forward and
pressed a button, and a person whose acquaintance I had not yet made,
labelled "lift" (who at that highest point in the building, which
corresponded to the lantern in a Norman church, was installed like a
photographer in his dark-room or an organist in his loft) came rushing
down towards me with the agility of a squirrel, tamed, active, caged.
Then, sliding upwards again along a steel pillar, he bore me aloft in
his train towards the dome of this temple of Mammon. On each floor, on
either side of a narrow communicating stair, opened out fanwise a range
of shadowy galleries, along one of which, carrying a bolster, a
chambermaid came past. I lent to her face, which the gathering dusk made
featureless, the mask of my most impassioned dreams of beauty, but read
in her eyes as they turned towards me the horror of my own nonentity.
Meanwhile, to dissipate, in the course of this interminable assent, the
mortal anguish which I felt in penetrating thus in silence the mystery
of this chiaroscuro so devoid of poetry, lighted by a single vertical
line of little windows which were those of the solitary water-closet on
each landing, I addressed a few words to the young organist, artificer
of my journey and my partner in captivity, who continued to manipulate
the registers of his instrument and to finger the stops. I apologised
for taking up so much room, for giving him so much trouble, and asked
whether I was not obstructing him in the practice of an art to which, so
as to flatter the performer, I did more than display curiosity, I
confessed my strong attachment. But he vouchsafed no answer, whether
from astonishment at my words, preoccupation with what he was doing,
regard for convention, hardness of hearing, respect for holy ground,
fear of danger, slowness of understanding, or by the manager's orders.

There is perhaps nothing that gives us so strong an impression of the
reality of the external world as the difference in the positions,
relative to ourself, of even a quite unimportant person before we have
met him and after. I was the same man who had taken, that afternoon, the
little train from Balbec to the coast, I carried in my body the same
consciousness. But on that consciousness, in the place where, at six
o'clock, there had been, with the impossibility of forming any idea of
the manager, the Grand Hotel or its occupants, a vague and timorous
impatience for the moment at which I should reach my destination, were
to be found now the pustules excised from the face of the cosmopolitan
manager (he was, as a matter of fact, a naturalised Monegasque,
although--as he himself put it, for he was always using expressions
which he thought distinguished without noticing that they were
incorrect--"of Rumanian originality"), his action in ringing for the
lift, the lift-boy himself, a whole frieze of puppet-show characters
issuing from that Pandora's box which was the Grand Hotel, undeniable,
irremovable, and, like everything that is realised, sterilising. But at
least this change, which I had done nothing to bring about, proved to me
that something had happened which was external to myself--however devoid
of interest that thing might be--and I was like a traveller who, having
had the sun in his face when he started, concludes that he has been for
so many hours on the road when he finds the sun behind him. I was half
dead with exhaustion, I was burning with fever; I would gladly have gone
to bed, but I had no night-things. I should have liked at least to lie
down for a little while on the bed, but what good would that have done
me, seeing that I should not have been able to find any rest there for
that mass of sensations which is for each of us his sentient if not his
material body, and that the unfamiliar objects which encircled that
body, forcing it to set its perceptions on the permanent footing of a
vigilant and defensive guard, would have kept my sight, my hearing, all
my senses in a position as cramped and comfortless (even if I had
stretched out my legs) as that of Cardinal La Balue in the cage in which
he could neither stand nor sit. It is our noticing them that puts things
in a room, our growing used to them that takes them away again and
clears a space for us. Space there was none for me in my bedroom (mine
in name only) at Balbec; it was full of things which did not know me,
which flung back at me the distrustful look that I had cast at them,
and, without taking any heed of my existence, shewed that I was
interrupting the course of theirs. The clock--whereas at home I heard my
clock tick only a few seconds in a week, when I was coming out of some
profound meditation--continued without a moment's interruption to utter,
in an unknown tongue, a series of observations which must have been most
uncomplimentary to myself, for the violet curtains listened to them
without replying, but in an attitude such as people adopt who shrug
their shoulders to indicate that the sight of a third person irritates
them. They gave to this room with its lofty ceiling a semi-historical
character which might have made it a suitable place for the
assassination of the Duc de Guise, and afterwards for parties of
tourists personally conducted by one of Messrs. Thomas Cook and Son's
guides, but for me to sleep in--no. I was tormented by the presence of
some little bookcases with glass fronts which ran along the walls, but
especially by a large mirror with feet which stood across one corner,
for I felt that until it had left the room there would be no possibility
of rest for me there. I kept raising my eyes--which the things in my
room in Paris disturbed me no more than did my eyelids themselves, for
they were merely extensions of my organs, an enlargement of
myself--towards the fantastically high ceiling of this belvedere planted
upon the summit of the hotel which my grandmother had chosen for me; and
in that region more intimate than those in which we see and hear, that
region in which we test the quality of odours, almost in the very heart
of my inmost self, the smell of flowering grasses next launched its
offensive against my last feeble line of trenches, where I stood up to
it, not without tiring myself still further, with the futile incessant
defence of an anxious sniffing. Having no world, no room, no body now
that was not menaced by the enemies thronging round me, invaded to the
very bones by fever, I was utterly alone; I longed to die. Then my
grandmother came in, and to the expansion of my ebbing heart there
opened at once an infinity of space.

She was wearing a loose cambric gown which she put on at home whenever
any of us was ill (because she felt more comfortable in it, she used to
say, for she always ascribed to her actions a selfish motive), and which
was, for tending us, for watching by our beds, her servant's livery, her
nurse's uniform, her religious habit. But whereas the trouble that
servants, nurses, religious take, their kindness to us, the merits that
we discover in them and the gratitude that we owe them all go to
increase the impression that we have of being, in their eyes, some one
different, of feeling that we are alone, keeping in our own hands the
control over our thoughts, our will to live, I knew, when I was with my
grandmother, that, however great the misery that there was in me, it
would be received by her with a pity still more vast; that everything
that was mine, my cares, my wishes, would be, in my grandmother,
supported upon a desire to save and prolong my life stronger than was my
own; and my thoughts were continued in her without having to undergo any
deflection, since they passed from my mind into hers without change of
atmosphere or of personality. And--like a man who tries to fasten his
necktie in front of a glass and forgets that the end which he sees
reflected is not on the side to which he raises his hand, or like a dog
that chases along the ground the dancing shadow of an insect in the
air--misled by her appearance in the body as we are apt to be in this
world where we have no direct perception of people's souls, I threw
myself into the arms of my grandmother and clung with my lips to her
face as though I had access thus to that immense heart which she opened
to me. And when I felt my mouth glued to her cheeks, to her brow, I drew
from them something so beneficial, so nourishing that I lay in her arms
as motionless, as solemn, as calmly gluttonous as a babe at the breast.

At last I let go, and lay and gazed, and could not tire of gazing at her
large face, as clear in its outline as a fine cloud, glowing and serene,
behind which I could discern the radiance of her tender love. And
everything that received, in however slight a degree, any share of her
sensations, everything that could be said to belong in any way to her
was at once so spiritualised, so sanctified that with outstretched hands
I smoothed her dear hair, still hardly grey, with as much respect,
precaution, comfort as if I had actually been touching her goodness. She
found a similar pleasure in taking any trouble that saved me one, and in
a moment of immobility and rest for my weary limbs something so
delicious that when, having seen that she wished to help me with my
undressing and to take my boots off, I made as though to stop her and
began to undress myself, with an imploring gaze she arrested my hands as
they fumbled with the top buttons of my coat and boots.

"Oh, do let me!" she begged. "It is such a joy for your Granny. And be
sure you knock on the wall if you want anything in the night. My bed is
just on the other side, and the partition is quite thin. Just give a
knock now, as soon as you are ready, so that we shall know where we
are."

And, sure enough, that evening I gave three knocks--a signal which, the
week after, when I was ill, I repeated every morning for several days,
because my grandmother wanted me to have some milk early. Then, when I
thought that I could hear her stirring, so that she should not be kept
waiting but might, the moment she had brought me the milk, go to sleep
again, I ventured on three little taps, timidly, faintly, but for all
that distinctly, for if I was afraid of disturbing her, supposing that I
had been mistaken and that she was still asleep, I should not have
wished her either to lie awake listening for a summons which she had not
at once caught and which I should not have the courage to repeat. And
scarcely had I given my taps than I heard three others, in a different
intonation from mine, stamped with a calm authority, repeated twice over
so that there should be no mistake, and saying to me plainly: "Don't get
excited; I heard you; I shall be with you in a minute!" and shortly
afterwards my grandmother appeared. I explained to her that I had been
afraid that she would not hear me, or might think that it was some one
in the room beyond who was tapping; at which she smiled:

"Mistake my poor chick's knocking for anyone else! Why, Granny could
tell it among a thousand! Do you suppose there's anyone else in the
world who's such a silly-billy, with such feverish little knuckles, so
afraid of waking me up and of not making me understand? Even if he just
gave the least scratch, Granny could tell her mouse's sound at once,
especially such a poor miserable little mouse as mine is. I could hear
it just now, trying to make up its mind, and rustling the bedclothes,
and going through all its tricks."

She pushed open the shutters; where a wing of the hotel jutted out at
right angles to my window, the sun was already installed upon the roof,
like a slater who is up betimes, and starts early and works quietly so
as not to rouse the sleeping town, whose stillness seems to enhance his
activity. She told me what o'clock, what sort of day it was; that it was
not worth while my getting up and coming to the window, that there was a
mist over the sea; if the baker's shop had opened yet; what the vehicle
was that I could hear passing. All that brief, trivial curtain-raiser,
that negligible _introit_ of a new day, performed without any spectator,
a little scrap of life which was only for our two selves, which I should
have no hesitation in repeating, later on, to Françoise or even to
strangers, speaking of the fog "which you could have cut with a knife"
at six o'clock that morning, with the ostentation of one who was
boasting not of a piece of knowledge that he had acquired but of a mark
of affection shewn to himself alone; dear morning moment, opened like a
symphony by the rhythmical dialogue of my three taps, to which the thin
wall of my bedroom, steeped in love and joy, grown melodious,
immaterial, singing like the angelic choir, responded with three other
taps, eagerly awaited, repeated once and again, in which it contrived to
waft to me the soul of my grandmother, whole and perfect, and the
promise of her coming, with a swiftness of annunciation and melodic
accuracy. But on this first night after our arrival, when my grandmother
had left me, I began again to feel as I had felt, the day before, in
Paris, at the moment of leaving home. Perhaps this fear that I had--and
shared with so many of my fellow-men--of sleeping in a strange room,
perhaps this fear is only the most humble, obscure, organic, almost
unconscious form of that great and desperate resistance set up by the
things that constitute the better part of our present life towards our
mentally assuming, by accepting it as true, the formula of a future in
which those things are to have no part; a resistance which was at the
root of the horror that I had so often been made to feel by the thought
that my parents must, one day, die, that the stern necessity of life
might oblige me to live remote from Gilberte, or simply to settle
permanently in a place where I should never see any of my old friends; a
resistance which was also at the root of the difficulty that I found in
imagining my own death, or a survival such as Bergotte used to promise
to mankind in his books, a survival in which I should not be allowed to
take with me my memories, my frailties, my character, which did not
easily resign themselves to the idea of ceasing to be, and desired for
me neither annihilation nor an eternity in which they would have no
part.

When Swann had said to me, in Paris one day when I felt particularly
unwell: "You ought to go off to one of those glorious islands in the
Pacific; you'd never come back again if you did." I should have liked to
answer: "But then I shall not see your daughter any more; I shall be
living among people and things she has never seen." And yet my better
judgment whispered: "What difference can that make, since you are not
going to be affected by it? When M. Swann tells you that you will not
come back he means by that that you will not want to come back, and if
you don't want to that is because you will be happier out there." For my
judgment was aware that Habit--Habit which was even now setting to work
to make me like this unfamiliar lodging, to change the position of the
mirror, the shade of the curtains, to stop the clock--undertakes as well
to make dear to us the companions whom at first we disliked, to give
another appearance to their faces, to make attractive the sound of their
voices, to modify the inclinations of their hearts. It is true that
these new friendships for places and people are based upon forgetfulness
of the old; but what my better judgment was thinking was simply that I
could look without apprehension along the vista of a life in which I
should be for ever separated from people all memory of whom I should
lose, and it was by way of consolation that my mind was offering to my
heart a promise of oblivion which succeeded only in sharpening the edge
of its despair. Not that the heart also is not bound in time, when
separation incomplete, to feel the anodyne effect of habit; but until
then it will continue to suffer. And our dread of a future in which we
must forego the sight of faces, the sound of voices that we love,
friends from whom we derive to-day our keenest joys, this dread, far
from being dissipated, is intensified, if to the grief of such a
privation we reflect that there will be added what seems to us now in
anticipation an even more cruel grief; not to feel it as a grief at
all--to remain indifferent; for if that should occur, our ego would have
changed, it would then be not merely the attractiveness of our family,
our mistress, our friends that had ceased to environ us, but our
affection for them; it would have been so completely eradicated from our
heart, in which to-day it is a conspicuous element, that we should be
able to enjoy that life apart from them the very thought of which to-day
makes us recoil in horror; so that it would be in a real sense the death
of ourself, a death followed, it is true, by resurrection but in a
different ego, the life, the love of which are beyond the reach of those
elements of the existing ego that are doomed to die. It is they--even
the meanest of them, such as our obscure attachments to the dimensions,
to the atmosphere of a bedroom--that grow stubborn and refuse, in acts
of rebellion which we must recognise to be a secret, partial, tangible
and true aspect of our resistance to death, of the long resistance,
desperate and daily renewed, to a fragmentary and gradual death such as
interpolates itself throughout the whole course of our life, tearing
away from us at every moment a shred of ourself, dead matter on which
new cells will multiply, and grow. And for a neurotic nature such as
mine, one that is to say in which the intermediaries, the nerves,
perform their functions badly--fail to arrest on its way to the
consciousness, allow indeed to penetrate there, distinct, exhausting,
innumerable, agonising, the plaint of those most humble elements of the
personality which are about to disappear--the anxiety and alarm which I
felt as I lay outstretched beneath that strange and too lofty ceiling
were but the protest of an affection that survived in me for a ceiling
that was familiar and low. Doubtless this affection too would disappear,
and another have taken its place (when death, and then another life,
would, in the guise of Habit, have performed their double task); but
until its annihilation, every night it would suffer afresh, and on this
first night especially, confronted with a future already realised in
which there would no longer be any place for it, it rose in revolt, it
tortured me with the sharp sound of its lamentations whenever my
straining eyes, powerless to turn from what was wounding them,
endeavoured to fasten their gaze upon that inaccessible ceiling.

But next morning!--after a servant had come to call me, and had brought
me hot water, and while I was washing and dressing myself and trying in
vain to find the things that I wanted in my trunk, from which I
extracted, pell-mell, only a lot of things that were of no use whatever,
what a joy it was to me, thinking already of the delights of luncheon
and of a walk along the shore, to see in the window, and in all the
glass fronts of the bookcases as in the portholes of a ship's cabin, the
open sea, naked, unshadowed, and yet with half of its expanse in shadow,
bounded by a thin and fluctuant line, and to follow with my eyes the
waves that came leaping towards me, one behind another, like divers
along a springboard. Every other moment, holding in one hand the
starched, unyielding towel, with the name of the hotel printed upon it,
with which I was making futile efforts to dry myself, I returned to the
window to gaze once more upon that vast amphitheatre, dazzling,
mountainous, and upon the snowy crests of its emerald waves, here and
there polished and translucent, which with a placid violence, a leonine
bending of the brows, let their steep fronts, to which the sun now added
a smile without face or features, run forward to their goal, totter and
melt and be no more. Window in which I was, henceforward, to plant
myself every morning, as at the pane of a mail coach in which one has
slept, to see whether, in the night, a long sought mountain-chain has
come nearer or withdrawn--only here it was those hills of the sea which,
before they come dancing back towards us, are apt to retire so far that
often it was only at the end of a long and sandy plain that I would
distinguish, miles it seemed away, their first undulations upon a
background transparent, vaporous, bluish, like the glaciers that one
sees in the backgrounds of the Tuscan Primitives. On other mornings it
was quite close at hand that the sun was smiling upon those waters of a
green as tender as that preserved in Alpine pastures (among mountains on
which the sun spreads himself here and there like a lazy giant who may
at any moment come leaping gaily down their craggy sides) less by the
moisture of their soil than by the liquid mobility of their light.
Anyhow, in that breach which shore and water between them drive through
all the rest of the world, for the passage, the accumulation there of
light, it is light above all, according to the direction from which it
comes and along which our eyes follow it, it is light that shifts and
fixes the undulations of the sea. Difference of lighting modifies no
less the orientation of a place, constructs no less before our eyes new
goals which it inspires in us the yearning to attain, than would a
distance in space actually traversed in the course of a long journey.
When, in the morning, the sun came from behind the hotel, disclosing to
me the sands bathed in light as far as the first bastions of the sea, it
seemed to be shewing me another side of the picture, and to be engaging
me on the pursuit, along the winding path of its rays, of a journey
motionless but ever varied amid all the fairest scenes of the
diversified landscape of the hours. And on this first morning the sun
pointed out to me far off with a jovial finger those blue peaks of the
sea, which bear no name upon any geographer's chart, until, dizzy with
its sublime excursion over the thundering and chaotic surface of their
crests and avalanches, it came back to take shelter from the wind in my
bedroom, swaggering across the unmade bed and scattering its riches over
the splashed surface of the basin-stand, and into my open trunk, where
by its very splendour and ill-matched luxury it added still further to
the general effect of disorder. Alas, that wind from the sea; an hour
later, in the great dining-room--while we were having our luncheon, and
from the leathern gourd of a lemon were sprinkling a few golden drops on
to a pair of soles which presently left on our plates the plumes of
their picked skeletons, curled like stiff feathers and resonant as
citherns,--it seemed to my grandmother a cruel deprivation not to be
able to feel its life-giving breath on her cheek, on account of the
window, transparent but closed, which like the front of a glass case in
a museum divided us from the beach while allowing us to look out upon
its whole extent, and into which the sky entered so completely that its
azure had the effect of being the colour of the windows and its white
clouds only so many flaws in the glass. Imagining that I was "seated
upon the mole" or at rest in the "boudoir" of which Baudelaire speaks I
asked myself whether his "Sun's rays upon the sea" were not--a very
different thing from the evening ray, simple and superficial as the
wavering stroke of a golden pencil--just what at that moment was
scorching the sea topaz-brown, fermenting it, turning it pale and milky
like foaming beer, like milk, while now and then there hovered over it
great blue shadows which some god seemed, for his pastime, to be
shifting to and fro by moving a mirror in the sky. Unfortunately, it was
not only in its outlook that it differed from our room at Combray,
giving upon the houses over the way, this dining-room at Balbec,
bare-walled, filled with a sunlight green as the water in a marble font,
while a few feet away the full tide and broad daylight erected as though
before the gates of the heavenly city an indestructible and moving
rampart of emerald and gold. At Combray, since we were known to
everyone, I took heed of no one. In life at the seaside one knows only
one's own party. I was not yet old enough, I was still too sensitive to
have outgrown the desire to find favour in the sight of other people and
to possess their hearts. Nor had I acquired the more noble indifference
which a man of the world would have felt, with regard to the people who
were eating their luncheon in the room, nor to the boys and girls who
strolled past the window, with whom I was pained by the thought that I
should never be allowed to go on expeditions, though not so much pained
as if my grandmother, contemptuous of social formalities and concerned
about nothing but my health, had gone to them with the request,
humiliating for me to overhear, that they would consent to let me
accompany them. Whether they were returning to some villa beyond my ken,
or had emerged from it, racquet in hand, on their way to some
lawn-tennis court, or were mounted on horses whose hooves trampled and
tore my heart, I gazed at them with a passionate curiosity, in that
blinding light of the beach by which social distinctions are altered, I
followed all their movements through the transparency of that great bay
of glass which allowed so much light to flood the room. But it
intercepted the wind, and this seemed wrong to my grandmother, who,
unable to endure the thought that I was losing the benefit of an hour in
the open air, surreptitiously unlatched a pane and at once set flying,
with the bills of fare, the newspapers, veils and hats of all the people
at the other tables; she herself, fortified by the breath of heaven,
remained calm and smiling like Saint Blandina, amid the torrent of
invective which, increasing my sense of isolation and misery, those
scornful, dishevelled, furious visitors combined to pour on us.

To a certain extent--and this, at Balbec, gave to the population, as a
rule monotonously rich and cosmopolitan, of that sort of smart and
"exclusive" hotel, a quite distinctive local character--they were
composed of eminent persons from the departmental capitals of that
region of France, a chief magistrate from Caen, a leader of the
Cherbourg bar, a big solicitor from Le Mans, who annually, when the
holidays came round, starting from the various points over which,
throughout the working year, they were scattered like snipers in a
battle or draughtsmen upon a board, concentrated their forces upon this
hotel. They always reserved the same rooms, and with their wives, who
had pretensions to aristocracy, formed a little group, which was joined
by a leading barrister and a leading doctor from Paris, who on the day
of their departure would say to the others:

"Oh, yes, of course; you don't go by our train. You are fortunate, you
will be home in time for luncheon."

"Fortunate, do you say? You, who live in the Capital, in 'Paris, the
great town', while I have to live in a wretched county town of a hundred
thousand souls (it is true, we managed to muster a hundred and two
thousand at the last census, but what is that compared to your two and a
half millions?) going back, too, to asphalt streets and all the bustle
and gaiety of Paris life."

They said this with a rustic burring of their 'r's, but without
bitterness, for they were leading lights each in his own province, who
could like other people have gone to Paris had they chosen--the chief
magistrate of Caen had several times been offered a judgeship in the
Court of Appeal--but had preferred to stay where they were, from love of
their native towns or of obscurity or of fame, or because they were
reactionaries, and enjoyed being on friendly terms with the country
houses of the neighbourhood. Besides several of them were not going back
at once to their county towns.

For--inasmuch as the Bay of Balbec was a little world apart in the midst
of a great world, a basketful of the seasons in which were clustered in
a ring good days and bad, and the months in their order, so that not
only, on days when one could make out Rivebelle, which was in itself a
sign of coming storms, could one see the sunlight on the houses there
while Balbec was plunged in darkness, but later on, when the cold
weather had reached Balbec, one could be certain of finding on that
opposite shore two or three supplementary months of warmth--those of the
regular visitors to the Grand Hotel whose holidays began late or lasted
long, gave orders, when rain and fog came and Autumn was in the air, for
their boxes to be packed and embarked, and set sail across the Bay to
find summer again at Rivebelle or Costedor. This little group in the
Balbec hotel looked with distrust upon each new arrival, and while
affecting to take not the least interest in him, hastened, all of them,
to ply with questions their friend the head waiter. For it was the same
head waiter--Aimé--who returned every year for the season, and kept
their tables for them; and their good ladies, having heard that his wife
was "expecting", would sit after meals working each at one of the
"little things", stopping only to put up their glasses and stare at us,
my grandmother and myself, because we were eating hard-boiled eggs in
salad, which was considered common, and was, in fact, "not done" in the
best society of Alençon. They affected an attitude of contemptuous
irony with regard to a Frenchman who was called "His Majesty" and had
indeed proclaimed himself King of a small island in the South Seas,
inhabited by a few savages. He was staying in the hotel with his pretty
mistress, whom, as she crossed the beach to bathe, the little boys would
greet with "Three cheers for the Queen!" because she would reward them
with a shower of small silver. The chief magistrate and the barrister
went so far as to pretend not to see her, and if any of their friends
happened to look at her, felt bound to warn him that she was only a
little shop-girl.

"But I was told that at Ostend they used the royal bathing machine."

"Well, and why not? It's on hire for twenty francs. You can take it
yourself, if you care for that sort of thing. Anyhow, I know for a fact
that the fellow asked for an audience, when he was there, with the King,
who sent back word that he took no cognisance of any Pantomime Princes."

"Really, that's interesting! What queer people there are in the world,
to be sure!"

And I dare say it was all quite true: but it was also from resentment of
the thought that, to many of their fellow-visitors, they were themselves
simply respectable but rather common people who did not know this King
and Queen so prodigal with their small change, that the solicitor, the
magistrate, the barrister, when what they were pleased to call the
"Carnival" went by, felt so much annoyance, and expressed aloud an
indignation that was quite understood by their friend the head waiter
who, obliged to shew proper civility to these generous if not authentic
Sovereigns, still, while he took their orders, would dart from afar at
his old patrons a covert but speaking glance. Perhaps there was also
something of the same resentment at being erroneously supposed to be
less and unable to explain that they were more smart, underlining the
"fine specimen" with which they qualified a young "blood", the
consumptive and dissipated son of an industrial magnate, who appeared
every day in a new suit of clothes with an orchid in his buttonhole,
drank champagne at luncheon, and then strolled out of the hotel, pale,
impassive, a smile of complete indifference on his lips, to the casino
to throw away at the baccarat table enormous sums, "which he could ill
afford to lose," as the solicitor said with a resigned air to the chief
magistrate, whose wife had it "on good authority" that this
"detrimental" young man was bringing his parents' grey hair in sorrow to
the grave.

On the other hand, the barrister and his friends could not exhaust their
flow of sarcasm on the subject of a wealthy old lady of title, because
she never moved any where without taking her whole household with her.
Whenever the wives of the solicitor and the magistrate saw her in the
dining-room at meal-times they put up their glasses and gave her an
insolent scrutiny, as minute and distrustful as if she had been some
dish with a pretentious name but a suspicious appearance which, after
the negative result of a systematic study, must be sent away with a
lofty wave of the hand and a grimace of disgust.

No doubt by this behaviour they meant only to shew that, if there were
things in the world which they themselves lacked--in this instance,
certain prerogatives which the old lady enjoyed, and the privilege of
her acquaintance--it was not because they could not, but because they
did not choose to acquire them. But they had succeeded in convincing
themselves that this really was what they felt; and it was the
suppression of all desire for, of all curiosity as to forms of life
which were unfamiliar, of all hope of pleasing new people (for which, in
the women, had been substituted a feigned contempt, an artificial
brightness) that had the awkward result of obliging them to label their
discontent satisfaction, and lie everlastingly to themselves, for which
they were greatly to be pitied. But everyone else in the hotel was no
doubt behaving in a similar fashion, though his behaviour might take a
different form, and sacrificing, if not to self-importance, at any rate
to certain inculcated principles and mental habits the thrilling delight
of mixing in a strange kind of life. Of course, the atmosphere of the
microcosm in which the old lady isolated herself was not poisoned with
virulent bitterness, as was that of the group in which the wives of the
solicitor and magistrate sat chattering with impotent rage. It was
indeed embalmed with a delicate and old world fragrance which, however,
was none the less artificial. For at heart the old lady would probably
have found in attracting, in attaching to herself (and, with that
object, recreating herself) the mysterious sympathy of new friends a
charm which is altogether lacking from the pleasure that is to be
derived from mixing only with the people of one's own world, and
reminding oneself that, one's own being the best of all possible worlds,
the ill-informed contempt of "outsiders" may be disregarded. Perhaps she
felt that--were she to arrive _incognito_ at the Grand Hotel, Balbec,
she would, in her black stuff gown and old-fashioned bonnet, bring a
smile to the lips of some old reprobate, who from the depths of his
rocking chair would glance up and murmur, "What a scarecrow!" or, still
worse, to those of some man of repute who had, like the magistrate, kept
between his pepper-and-salt whiskers a rosy complexion and a pair of
sparkling eyes such as she liked to see, and would at once bring the
magnifying lens of the conjugal glasses to bear upon so quaint a
phenomenon; and perhaps it was in unconfessed dread of those first few
minutes, which, though one knows that they will be but a few minutes,
are none the less terrifying, like the first plunge of one's head under
water, that this old lady sent down in advance a servant, who would
inform the hotel of the personality and habits of his mistress, and,
cutting short the manager's greetings, made, with an abruptness in which
there was more timidity than pride, for her room, where her own
curtains, substituted for those that draped the hotel windows, her own
screens and photographs set up so effectively between her and the
outside world, to which otherwise she would have had to adapt herself,
the barrier of her private life that it was her home (in which she had
comfortably stayed) that travelled rather than herself.

Thenceforward, having placed between herself, on the one hand, and the
staff of the hotel and its decorators on the other the servants who bore
instead of her the shock of contact with all this strange humanity, and
kept up around their mistress her familiar atmosphere, having set her
prejudices between herself and the other visitors, indifferent whether
or not she gave offence to people whom her friends would not have had in
their houses, it was in her own world that she continued to live, by
correspondence with her friends, by memories, by her intimate sense of
and confidence in her own position, the quality of her manners, the
competence of her politeness. And every day, when she came downstairs to
go for a drive in her own carriage, the lady's maid who came after her
carrying her wraps, the footman who preceded her seemed like sentries
who, at the gate of an embassy, flying the flag of the country to which
she belonged, assured to her upon foreign soil the privilege of
extra-territoriality. She did not leave her room until late in the
afternoon on the day following our arrival, so that we did not see her
in the dining-room, into which the manager, since we were strangers
there, conducted us, taking us under his wing, as a corporal takes a
squad of recruits to the master-tailor, to have them fitted; we did see
however, a moment later, a country gentleman and his daughter, of an
obscure but very ancient Breton family, M. and Mlle. de Stermaria, whose
table had been allotted to us, in the belief that they had gone out and
would not be back until the evening. Having come to Balbec only to see
various country magnates whom they knew in that neighbourhood, they
spent in the hotel dining-room, what with the invitations they accepted
and the visits they paid, only such time as was strictly unavoidable. It
was their stiffness that preserved them intact from all human sympathy,
from interesting at all the strangers seated round about them, among
whom M. de Stermaria kept up the glacial, preoccupied, distant, rude,
punctilious and distrustful air that we assume in a railway
refreshment-room, among fellow-passengers whom we have never seen before
and will never see again, and with whom we can conceive of no other
relations than to defend from their onslaught our "portion" of cold
chicken and our corner seat in the train. No sooner had we begun our
luncheon than we were asked to leave the table, on the instructions of
M. de Stermaria who had just arrived and, without the faintest attempt
at an apology to us, requested the head waiter, in our hearing to "see
that such a mistake did not occur again," for it was repugnant to him
that "people whom he did not know" should have taken his table.

And certainly into the feeling which impelled a young actress (better
known, though, for her smart clothes, her smart sayings, her collection
of German porcelain, than in the occasional parts that she had played at
the Odéon), her lover, an immensely rich young man for whose sake she
had acquired her culture, and two sprigs of aristocracy at that time
much in the public eye to form a little band apart, to travel only
together, to come down to luncheon--when at Balbec--very late, after
everyone had finished; to spend the whole day in their sitting-room
playing cards, there entered no sort of ill-humour against the rest of
us but simply the requirements of the taste that they had formed for a
certain type of conversation, for certain refinements of good living,
which made them find pleasure in spending their time, in taking their
meals only by themselves, and would have rendered intolerable a life in
common with people who had not been initiated into those mysteries. Even
at a dinner or a card-table, each of them had to be certain that, in the
diner or partner who sat opposite to him, there was, latent and not yet
made use of, a certain brand of knowledge which would enable him to
identify the rubbish with which so many houses in Paris were littered as
genuine mediaeval or renaissance "pieces" and, whatever the subject of
discussion, to apply the critical standards common to all their party
whereby they distinguished good work from bad. Probably it was only--at
such moments--by some infrequent, amusing interruption flung into the
general silence of meal or game, or by the new and charming frock which
the young actress had put on for luncheon or for poker, that the special
kind of existence in which these four friends desired, above all things,
to remain plunged was made apparent. But by engulfing them thus in a
system of habits which they knew by heart it sufficed to protect them
from the mystery of the life that was going on all round them. All the
long afternoon, the sea was suspended there before their eyes only as a
canvas of attractive colouring might hang on the wall of a wealthy
bachelor's flat and it was only in the intervals between the "hands"
that one of the players, finding nothing better to do, raised his eyes
to it to seek from it some indication of the weather or the time, and to
remind the others that tea was ready. And at night they did not dine in
the hotel, where, hidden springs of electricity flooding the great
dining-room with light, it became as it were an immense and wonderful
aquarium against whose wall of glass the working population of Balbec,
the fishermen and also the tradesmen's families, clustering invisibly in
the outer darkness, pressed their faces to watch, gently floating upon
the golden eddies within, the luxurious life of its occupants, a thing
as extraordinary to the poor as the life of strange fishes or molluscs
(an important social question, this; whether the wall of glass will
always protect the wonderful creatures at their feasting, whether the
obscure folk who watch them hungrily out of the night will not break in
some day to gather them from their aquarium and devour them). Meanwhile
there may have been, perhaps, among the gazing crowd, a motionless,
formless mass there in the dark, some writer, some student of human
ichthyology who, as he watched the jaws of old feminine monstrosities
close over a mouthful of food which they proceeded then to absorb, was
amusing himself by classifying them according to their race, by their
innate characteristics as well as by those acquired characteristics
which bring it about that an old Serbian lady whose buccal protuberance
is that of a great sea-fish, because from her earliest years she has
moved in the fresh waters of the Faubourg Saint-Germain, eats her salad
for all the world like a La Rochefoucauld.

At that hour one could see the three young men in dinner-jackets,
waiting for the young woman, who was as usual late but presently,
wearing a dress that was almost always different and one of a series of
scarves, chosen to gratify some special instinct in her lover, after
having from her landing rung for the lift, would emerge from it like a
doll coming out of its box. And then all four, because they found that
the international phenomenon of the "Palace", planted on Balbec soil,
had blossomed there in material splendour rather than in food that was
fit to eat, bundled into a carriage and went to dine, a mile off, in a
little restaurant that was well spoken of, where they held with the cook
himself endless discussions of the composition of their meal and the
cooking of its various dishes. During their drive, the road bordered
with apple-trees that led out of Balbec was no more to them than the
distance that must be traversed--barely distinguishable in the darkness
from that which separated their homes in Paris from the Café Anglais or
the Tour d'Argent--before they could arrive at the fashionable little
restaurant where, while the young man's friends envied him because he
had such a smartly dressed mistress, the latter's scarves were spread
about the little company like a fragrant, flowing veil, but one that
kept it apart from the outer world.

Alas for my peace of mind, I had none of the detachment that all these
people shewed. To many of them I gave constant thought; I should have
liked not to pass unobserved by a man with a receding brow and eyes that
dodged between the blinkers of his prejudices and his education, the
great nobleman of the district, who was none other than the
brother-in-law of Legrandin, and came every now and then to see somebody
at Balbec and on Sundays, by reason of the weekly garden-party that his
wife and he gave, robbed the hotel of a large number of its occupants,
because one or two of them were invited to these entertainments and the
others, so as not to appear to have been not invited, chose that day for
an expedition to some distant spot. He had had, as it happened, an
exceedingly bad reception at the hotel on the first day of the season,
when the staff, freshly imported from the Riviera, did not yet know who
or what he was. Not only was he not wearing white flannels, but, with
old-fashioned French courtesy and in his ignorance of the ways of smart
hotels, on coming into the hall in which there were ladies sitting, he
had taken off his hat at the door, the effect of which had been that the
manager did not so much as raise a finger to his own in acknowledgment,
concluding that this must be some one of the most humble extraction,
what he called "sprung from the ordinary." The solicitor's wife, alone,
had felt herself attracted by the stranger, who exhaled all the starched
vulgarity of the really respectable, and had declared, with the unerring
discernment and the indisputable authority of a person from whom the
highest society of Le Mans held no secrets, that one could see at a
glance that one was in the presence of a gentleman of great distinction,
of perfect breeding, a striking contrast to the sort of people one
usually saw at Balbec, whom she condemned as impossible to know so long
as she did not know them. This favourable judgment which she had
pronounced on Legrandin's brother-in-law was based perhaps on the
spiritless appearance of a man about whom there was nothing to
intimidate anyone; perhaps also she had recognised in this gentleman
farmer with the gait of a sacristan the Masonic signs of her own
inveterate clericalism.

It made no difference my knowing that the young fellows who went past
the hotel every day on horseback were the sons of the questionably
solvent proprietor of a linen-drapery to whom my father would never have
dreamed of speaking; the glamour of "seaside life" exalted them in my
eyes to equestrian statues of demi-gods, and the best thing that I could
hope for was that they would never allow their proud gaze to fall upon
the wretched boy who was myself, who left the hotel dining-room only to
sit humbly upon the sands. I should have been glad to arouse some
response even from the adventurer who had been king of a desert island
in the South Seas, even of the young consumptive, of whom I liked to
think that he was hiding beneath his insolent exterior a shy and tender
heart, which would perhaps have lavished on me, and on me alone, the
treasures of its affection. Besides (unlike what one generally says of
the people one meets when travelling) just as being seen in certain
company can invest us, in a watering-place to which we shall return
another year, with a coefficient that has no equivalent in our true
social life, so there is nothing--not which we keep so resolutely at a
distance, but--which we cultivate with such assiduity after our return
to Paris as the friendships that we have formed by the sea. I was
anxious about the opinion that might be held of me by all these
temporary or local celebrities whom my tendency to put myself in the
place of other people and to reconstruct what was in their minds had
made me place not in their true rank, that which they would have held in
Paris, for instance, and which would have been quite low, but in that
which they must imagine to be, and which indeed was their rank at
Balbec, where the want of a common denominator gave them a sort of
relative superiority and an individual interest. Alas, none of these
people's contempt for me was so unbearable as that of M. de Stermaria.

For I had noticed his daughter, the moment she came into the room, her
pretty features, her pallid, almost blue complexion, what there was
peculiar in the carriage of her tall figure, in her gait, which
suggested to me--and rightly--her long descent, her aristocratic
upbringing, all the more vividly because I knew her name, like those
expressive themes composed by musicians of genius which paint in
splendid colours the glow of fire, the rush of water, the peace of
fields and woods, to audiences who, having first let their eyes run over
the programme, have their imaginations trained in the right direction.
The label "Centuries of Breeding", by adding to Mlle. de Stermaria's
charms the idea of their origin, made them more desirable also,
advertising their rarity as a high price enhances the value of a thing
that has already taken our fancy. And its stock of heredity gave to her
complexion, in which so many selected juices had been blended, the
savour of an exotic fruit or of a famous vintage.

And then mere chance put into our hands, my grandmother's and mine, the
means of giving ourselves an immediate distinction in the eyes of all
the other occupants of the hotel. On that first afternoon, at the moment
when the old lady came downstairs from her room, producing, thanks to
the footman who preceded her, the maid who came running after her with a
book and a rug that had been left behind, a marked effect upon all who
beheld her and arousing in each of them a curiosity from which it was
evident that none was so little immune as M. de Stermaria, the manager
leaned across to my grandmother and, from pure kindness of heart (as one
might point out the Shah, or Queen Ranavalo to an obscure onlooker who
could obviously have no sort of connexion with so mighty a potentate,
but might be interested, all the same, to know that he had been standing
within a few feet of one) whispered in her ear, "The Marquise de
Villeparisis!" while at the same moment the old lady, catching sight of
my grandmother, could not repress a start of pleased surprise.

It may be imagined that the sudden appearance, in the guise of a little
old woman, of the most powerful of fairies would not have given me so
much pleasure, destitute as I was of any means of access to Mlle. de
Stermaria, in a strange place where I knew no one: no one, that is to
say, for any practical purpose. Aesthetically the number of types of
humanity is so restricted that we must constantly, wherever we may be,
have the pleasure of seeing people we know, even without looking for
them in the works of the old masters, like Swann. Thus it happened that
in the first few days of our visit to Balbec I had succeeded in finding
Legrandin, Swann's hall porter and Mme. Swann herself, transformed into
a waiter, a foreign visitor whom I never saw again and a bathing
superintendent. And a sort of magnetism attracts and retains so
inseparably, one after another, certain characteristics, facial and
mental, that when nature thus introduces a person into a new body she
does not mutilate him unduly. Legrandin turned waiter kept intact his
stature, the outline of his nose, part of his chin; Mme. Swann, in the
masculine gender and the calling of a bathing superintendent, had been
accompanied not only by familiar features, but even by the way she had
of speaking. Only, she could be of little if any more use to me,
standing upon the beach there in the red sash of her office, and
hoisting at the first gust of wind the flag which forbade us to bathe
(for these superintendents are prudent men, and seldom know how to swim)
than she would have been in that fresco of the _Life of Moses_ in which
Swann had long ago identified her in the portrait of Jethro's Daughter.
Whereas this Mme. de Villeparisis was her real self, she had not been
the victim of an enchantment which had deprived her of her power, but
was capable, on the contrary, of putting at the service of my power an
enchantment which would multiply it an hundred fold, and thanks to
which, as though I had been swept through the air on the wings of a
fabulous bird, I was to cross in a few moments the infinitely wide (at
least, at Balbec) social gulf which separated me from Mlle. de
Stermaria.

Unfortunately, if there was one person in the world who, more than
anyone else, lived shut up in a little world of her own, it was my
grandmother. She would not, indeed, have despised me, she would simply
not have understood what I meant had she been told that I attached
importance to the opinions, that I felt an interest in the persons of
people the very existence of whom she had never noticed and would, when
the time came to leave Balbec, retain no impression of their names. I
dared not confess to her that if these same people had seen her talking
to Mme. de Villeparisis, I should have been immensely gratified, because
I felt that the Marquise counted for much in the hotel and that her
friendship would have given us a position in the eyes of Mlle. de
Stermaria. Not that my grandmother's friend represented to me, in any
sense of the word, a member of the aristocracy: I was too well used to
her name, which had been familiar to my ears before my mind had begun to
consider it, when as a child I had heard it occur in conversation at
home: while her title added to it only a touch of quaintness--as some
uncommon Christian name would have done, or as in the names of streets,
among which we can see nothing more noble in the Rue Lord Byron, in the
plebeian and even squalid Rue Rochechouart, or in the Rue Grammont than
in the Rue Léonce Reynaud or the Rue Hippolyte Lebas. Mme. de
Villeparisis no more made me think of a person who belonged to a special
world than did her cousin MacMahon, whom I did not clearly distinguish
from M. Carnot, likewise President of the Republic, or from Raspail,
whose photograph Françoise had bought with that of Pius IX. It was one
of my grandmother's principles that, when away from home, one should
cease to have any social intercourse, that one did not go to the seaside
to meet people, having plenty of time for that sort of thing in Paris,
that they would make one waste on being merely polite, in pointless
conversation, the precious time which ought all to be spent in the open
air, beside the waves; and finding it convenient to assume that this
view was shared by everyone else, and that it authorised, between old
friends whom chance brought face to face in the same hotel, the fiction
of a mutual incognito, on hearing her friend's name from the manager she
merely looked the other way, and pretended not to see Mme. de
Villeparisis, who, realising that my grandmother did not want to be
recognised, looked also into the void. She went past, and I was left in
my isolation like a shipwrecked mariner who has seen a vessel apparently
coming towards him which has then, without lowering a boat, vanished
under the horizon.

She, too, had her meals in the dining-room, but at the other end of it.
She knew none of the people who were staying in the hotel, or who came
there to call, not even M. de Cambremer; in fact, I noticed that he gave
her no greeting, one day when, with his wife, he had accepted an
invitation to take luncheon with the barrister, who drunken with the
honour of having the nobleman at his table avoided his friends of every
day, and confined himself to a distant twitch of the eyelid, so as to
draw their attention to this historic event but so discreetly that his
signal could not be interpreted by them as an invitation to join the
party.

"Well, I hope you've got on your best clothes; I hope you feel smart
enough," was the magistrate's wife's greeting to him that evening.

"Smart? Why should I?" asked the barrister, concealing his rapture in an
exaggerated astonishment. "Because of my guests, do you mean?" he went
on, feeling that it was impossible to keep up the farce any longer. "But
what is there smart about having a few friends in to luncheon? After
all, they must feed somewhere!"

"But it is smart! They are the de Cambremers, aren't they? I recognised
them at once. She is a Marquise. And quite genuine, too. Not through the
females."

"Oh, she's a very simple soul, she is charming, no stand-offishness
about her. I thought you were coming to join us. I was making signals to
you. . . . I would have introduced you!" he asserted, tempering with a
hint of irony the vast generosity of the offer, like Ahasuerus when he
says to Esther:

Of all my Kingdom must I give you half!

"No, no, no, no! We lie hidden, like the modest violet."

"But you were quite wrong, I assure you," replied the barrister, growing
bolder now that the danger point was passed. "They weren't going to eat
you. I say, aren't we going to have our little game of bezique?"

"Why, of course! We were afraid to suggest it, now that you go about
entertaining Marquises."

"Oh, get along with you; there's nothing so very wonderful about them.
Why, I'm dining there to-morrow. Would you care to go instead of me? I
mean it. Honestly, I'd just as soon stay here."

"No, no! I should be removed from the bench as a Reactionary," cried the
chief magistrate, laughing till the tears stood in his eyes at his own
joke. "But you go to Féterne too, don't you?" he went on, turning to
the solicitor.

"Oh, I go there on Sundays--in at one door and out at the other. But I
don't have them here to luncheon, like the Leader."

M. de Stermaria was not at Balbec that day, to the barrister's great
regret. But he managed to say a word in season to the head waiter:

"Aimé, you can tell M. de Stermaria that he's not the only nobleman
you've had in here. You saw the gentleman who was with me to-day at
luncheon? Eh? A small moustache, looked like a military man. Well, that
was the Marquis de Cambremer!"

"Was it indeed? I'm not surprised to hear it."

"That will shew him that he's not the only man who's got a title. That
will teach him! It's not a bad thing to take 'em down a peg or two,
those noblemen. I say, Aimé, don't say anything to him unless you like:
I mean to say, it's no business of mine; besides, they know each other
already."

And next day M. de Stermaria, who remembered that the barrister had once
held a brief for one of his friends, came up and introduced himself.

"Our friends in common, the de Cambremers, were anxious that we should
meet; the days didn't fit; I don't know quite what went wrong--"
stammered the barrister, who, like most liars, imagined that other
people do not take the trouble to investigate an unimportant detail
which, for all that, may be sufficient (if chance puts you in possession
of the humble facts of the case, and they contradict it) to shew the
liar in his true colours and to inspire a lasting mistrust.

Then as at all times, but more easily now that her father had left her
and was talking to the barrister, I was gazing at Mlle. de Stermaria. No
less than the bold and always graceful originality of her attitudes, as
when, leaning her elbows on the table, she raised her glass in both
hands over her outstretched arms, the dry flame of a glance at once
extinguished, the ingrained, congenital hardness that one could feel,
ill-concealed by her own personal inflexions, in the sound of her voice,
which had shocked my grandmother; a sort of atavistic starting-point to
which she recoiled whenever, by glance or utterance, she had succeeded
in expressing a thought of her own; all of these qualities carried the
mind of him who watched her back to the line of ancestors who had
bequeathed to her that inadequacy of human sympathy, those blanks in her
sensibility, that short measure of humanity which was at every moment
running out. But from a certain look which flooded for a moment the
wells--instantly dry again--of her eyes, a look in which I could discern
that almost obsequious docility which the predominance of a taste for
sensual pleasures gives to the proudest of women, who will soon come to
recognise but one form of personal distinction, that namely which any
man enjoys who can make her feel those pleasures, an actor, an acrobat
even, for whom, perhaps, she will one day leave her husband;--from a
certain rosy tint, warm and sensual, which flushed her pallid cheeks,
like the colour that stained the hearts of the white water-lilies in the
Vivonne, I thought I could discern that she would readily have consented
to my coming to seek in her the savour of that life of poetry and
romance which she led in Brittany, a life to which, whether from
over-familiarity or from innate superiority, or from disgust at the
penury or the avarice of her family, she seemed not to attach any great
value, but which, for all that, she held enclosed in her body. In the
meagre stock of will-power that had been transmitted to her, and gave an
element of weakness to her expression, she would not perhaps have found
the strength to resist. And, crowned by a feather that was a trifle
old-fashioned and pretentious, the grey felt hat which she invariably
wore at meals made her all the more attractive to me, not because it was
in harmony with her pearly or rosy complexion, but because, by making me
suppose her to be poor, it brought her closer to myself. Obliged by her
father's presence to adopt a conventional attitude, but already bringing
to the perception and classification of the people who passed before her
eyes other principles than his, perhaps she saw in me not my humble
rank, but the right sex and age. If one day M. de Stermaria had gone out
leaving her behind, if, above all, Mme. de Villeparisis, by coming to
sit at our table, had given her an opinion of me which might have
emboldened me to approach her, perhaps then we might have contrived to
exchange a few words, to arrange a meeting, to form a closer tie. And
for a whole month during which she would be left alone, without her
parents, in her romantic Breton castle, we should perhaps have been able
to wander by ourselves at evening, she and I together in the dusk which
would shew in a softer light above the darkening water pink briar roses,
beneath oak trees beaten and stunted by the hammering of the waves.
Together we should have roamed that isle impregnated with so intense a
charm for me because it had enclosed the everyday life of Mlle. de
Stermaria and lay at rest in her remembering eyes. For it seemed to me
that I should not really have possessed her save there, when I should
have traversed those regions which enveloped her in so many memories--a
veil which my desire sought to tear apart, one of those veils which
nature interposes between woman and her pursuers (with the same
intention as when, for all of us, she places the act of reproduction
between ourselves and our keenest pleasure, and for insects, places
before the nectar the pollen which they must carry away with them) in
order that, tricked by the illusion of possessing her thus more
completely, they may be forced to occupy first the scenes among which
she lives, and which, of more service to their imagination than sensual
pleasure can be, yet would not without that pleasure have had the power
to attract them.

But I was obliged to take my eyes from Mlle. de Stermaria, for already,
considering no doubt that making the acquaintance of an important person
was a brief, inquisitive act which was sufficient in itself, and to
bring out all the interest that was latent in it required only a
handshake and a penetrating stare, without either immediate conversation
or any subsequent relations, her father had taken leave of the barrister
and returned to sit down facing her, rubbing his hands like a man who
has just made a valuable acquisition. As for the barrister, once the
first emotion of this interview had subsided, then, as on other days, he
could be heard every minute addressing the head waiter:

"But I am not a king, Aimé; go and attend to the king! I say, Chief,
those little trout don't look at all bad, do they? We must ask Aimé to
let us have some. Aimé, that little fish you have over there looks to
me highly commendable: will you bring us some, please, Aimé, and don't
be sparing with it."

He would repeat the name "Aimé" all day long, one result of which was
that when he had anyone to dinner the guest would remark "I can see, you
are quite at home in this place," and would feel himself obliged to keep
on saying "Aimé" also, from that tendency, combining elements of
timidity, vulgarity and silliness, which many people have, to believe
that it is smart and witty to copy to the letter what is said by the
company in which they may happen to be. The barrister repeated the name
incessantly, but with a smile, for he felt that he was exhibiting at
once the good terms on which he stood with the head waiter and his own
superior station. And the head waiter, whenever he caught the sound of
his own name, smiled too, as though touched and at the same time proud,
shewing that he was conscious of the honour and could appreciate the
pleasantry.

Terrifying as I always found these meals, in the vast restaurant,
generally full, of the mammoth hotel, they became even more terrifying
when there arrived for a few days the Proprietor (or he may have been
only the General Manager, appointed by a board of directors) not only of
this "palace" but of seven or eight more besides, situated at all the
four corners of France, in each of which, travelling continuously, he
would spend a week now and again. Then, just after dinner had begun,
there appeared every evening in the doorway of the dining-room this
small man with white hair and a red nose, astonishingly neat and
impassive, who was known, it appeared, as well in London as at Monte
Carlo, as one of the leading hotelkeepers in Europe. Once when I had
gone out for a moment at the beginning of dinner, as I came in again I
passed close by him, and he bowed to me, but with a coldness in which I
could not distinguish whether it should be attributed to the reserve of
a man who could never forget what he was, or to his contempt for a
customer of so little importance. To those whose importance was
considerable the Managing Director would bow, with quite as much
coldness but more deeply, lowering his eyelids with a reverence that was
almost offended modesty, as though he had found himself confronted, at a
funeral, with the father of the deceased or with the Blessed Sacrament.
Except for these icy and infrequent salutations, he made not the
slightest movement, as if to shew that his glittering eyes, which
appeared to be starting out of his head, saw everything, controlled
everything, assured to us in the "Hotel dinner" perfection in every
detail as well as a general harmony. He felt, evidently, that he was
more than the producer of a play, than the conductor of an orchestra,
nothing less than a general in supreme command. Having decided that a
contemplation carried to its utmost intensity would suffice to assure
him that everything was in readiness, that no mistake had been made
which could lead to disaster,--to invest him, in a word, with full
responsibility, he abstained not merely from any gesture but even from
moving his eyes, which, petrified by the intensity of their gaze, took
in and directed everything that was going on. I felt that even the
movements of my spoon did not escape him, and were he to vanish after
the soup, for the whole of dinner the review that he had held would have
taken away my appetite. His own was exceedingly good, as one could see
at luncheon, which he took like an ordinary guest of the hotel at a
table that anyone else might have had in the public dining-room. His
table had this peculiarity only, that by his side, while he was eating,
the other manager, the resident one, remained standing all the time to
make conversation. For being subordinate to this Managing Director he
was anxious to please a man of whom he lived in constant fear. My fear
of him diminished during these luncheons, for being then lost in the
crowd of visitors he would exercise the discretion of a general sitting
in a restaurant where there are also private soldiers, in not seeming to
take any notice of them. Nevertheless when the porter, from among a
cluster of pages, announced to me: "He leaves to-morrow morning for
Dinard. Then he's going down to Biarritz, and after that to Cannes," I
began to breathe more freely.

My life in the hotel was rendered not only dull because I had no friends
there but uncomfortable because Françoise had made so many. It might be
thought that they would have made things easier for us in various
respects. Quite the contrary. The proletariat, if they succeeded only
with great difficulty in being treated as people she knew by Françoise,
and could not succeed at all unless they fulfilled the condition of
shewing the utmost politeness to her, were, on the other hand, once they
had reached the position, the only people who "counted". Her
time-honoured code taught her that she was in no way bound to the
friends of her employers, that she might, if she was busy, shut the door
without ceremony in the face of a lady who had come to call on my
grandmother. But towards her own acquaintance, that is to say, the
select handful of the lower orders whom she admitted to an unconquerable
intimacy, her actions were regulated by the most subtle and most
stringent of protocols. Thus Françoise having made the acquaintance of
the man in the coffee-shop and of a little maid who did dressmaking for
a Belgian lady, no longer came upstairs immediately after luncheon to
get my grandmother's things ready, but came an hour later, because the
coffee man had wanted to make her a cup of coffee or a tisane in his
shop, or the maid had invited her to go and watch her sew, and to refuse
either of them would have been impossible, and one of the things that
were not done. Moreover, particular attention was due to the little
sewing-maid, who was an orphan and had been brought up by strangers to
whom she still went occasionally for a few days' holiday. Her unusual
situation aroused Françoise's pity, and also a benevolent contempt.
She, who had a family, a little house that had come to her from her
parents, with a field in which her brother kept his cows, how could she
regard so uprooted a creature as her equal? And since this girl hoped,
on Assumption Day, to be allowed to pay her benefactors a visit,
Françoise kept on repeating: "She does make me laugh! She says, 'I hope
to be going home for the Assumption.' 'Home!' says she! It isn't just
that it's not her own place, they're people who took her in from
nowhere, and the creature says 'home' just as if it really was her home.
Poor girl! What a wretched state she must be in, not to know what it is
to have a home." Still, if Françoise had associated only with the
ladies'-maids brought to the hotel by other visitors, who fed with her
in the "service" quarters and, seeing her grand lace cap and her
handsome profile, took her perhaps for some lady of noble birth, whom
"reduced circumstances", or a personal attachment had driven to serve as
companion to my grandmother, if in a word Françoise had known only
people who did not belong to the hotel, no great harm would have been
done, since she could not have prevented them from doing us any service,
for the simple reason that in no circumstances, even without her
knowledge, would it have been possible for them to serve us at all. But
she had formed connexions also with one of the wine waiters, with a man
in the kitchen, and with the head chambermaid of our landing. And the
result of this in our every day life was that Françoise, who on the day
of her arrival, when she still did not know anyone, would set all the
bells jangling for the slightest thing, at an hour when my grandmother
and I would never have dared to ring, and if we offered some gentle
admonition answered: "Well, we're paying enough for it, aren't we?" as
though it were she herself that would have to pay; nowadays, since she
had made friends with a personage in the kitchen, which had appeared to
us to augur well for our future comfort, were my grandmother or I to
complain of cold feet, Françoise, even at an hour that was quite
normal, dared not ring; she assured us that it would give offence
because they would have to light the furnace again, or because it would
interrupt the servants' dinner and they would be annoyed. And she ended
with a formula that, in spite of the ambiguous way in which she uttered
it, was none the less clear, and put us plainly in the wrong: "The fact
is . . ." We did not insist, for fear of bringing upon ourselves
another, far more serious: "It's a matter . . .!" So that it amounted
to this, that we could no longer have any hot water because Françoise
had become a friend of the man who would have to heat it.

In the end we too formed a connexion, in spite of but through my
grandmother, for she and Mme. de Villeparisis came in collision one
morning in a doorway and were obliged to accost each other, not without
having first exchanged gestures of surprise and hesitation, performed
movements of recoil and uncertainty, and finally uttered protestations
of joy and greeting, as in some of Molière's plays, where two actors
who have been delivering long soliloquies from opposite sides of the
stage, a few feet apart, are supposed not to have seen each other yet,
and then suddenly catch sight of each other, cannot believe their eyes,
break off what they are saying and finally address each other (the
chorus having meanwhile kept the dialogue going) and fall into each
other's arms. Mme. de Villeparisis was tactful, and made as if to leave
my grandmother to herself after the first greetings, but my grandmother
insisted on her staying to talk to her until luncheon, being anxious to
discover how her friend managed to get her letters sent up to her
earlier than we got ours, and to get such nice grilled things (for Mme.
de Villeparisis, a great epicure, had the poorest opinion of the hotel
kitchen which served us with meals that my grandmother, still quoting
Mme. de Sévigné, described as "of a magnificence to make you die of
hunger.") And the Marquise formed the habit of coming every day, until
her own meal was ready, to sit down for a moment at our table in the
dining-room, insisting that we should not rise from our chairs or in any
way put ourselves out. At the most we would linger, as often as not, in
the room after finishing our luncheon, to talk to her, at that sordid
moment when the knives are left littering the tablecloth among crumpled
napkins. For my own part, so as to preserve (in order that I might be
able to enjoy Balbec) the idea that I was on the uttermost promontory of
the earth I compelled myself to look farther afield, to notice only the
sea, to seek in it the effects described by Baudelaire and to let my
gaze fall upon our table only on days when there was set on it some
gigantic fish, some marine monster, which unlike the knives and forks
was contemporary with the primitive epochs in which the Ocean first
began to teem with life, in the Cimmerians' time, a fish whose body with
its numberless vertebrae, its blue veins and red, had been constructed
by nature, but according to an architectural plan, like a polychrome
cathedral of the deep.

As a barber, seeing an officer whom he is accustomed to shave with
special deference and care recognise a customer who has just entered the
shop and stop for a moment to talk to him, rejoices in the thought that
these are two men of the same social order, and cannot help smiling as
he goes to fetch the bowl of soap, for he knows that in his
establishment, to the vulgar routine of a mere barber's shop, are being
added social, not to say aristocratic pleasures, so Aimé, seeing that
Mme. de Villeparisis had found in us old friends, went to fetch our
finger-bowls with precisely the smile, proudly modest and knowingly
discreet, of a hostess who knows when to leave her guests to themselves.
He suggested also a pleased and loving father who looks on, without
interfering, at the happy pair who have plighted their troth at his
hospitable board. Besides, it was enough merely to utter the name of a
person of title for Aimé to appear pleased, unlike Françoise, before
whom you could not mention Count So-and-so without her face darkening
and her speech becoming dry and sharp, all of which meant that she
worshipped the aristocracy not less than Aimé but far more. But then
Françoise had that quality which in others she condemned as the worst
possible fault; she was proud. She was not of that friendly and
good-humoured race to which Aimé belonged. They feel, they exhibit an
intense delight when you tell them a piece of news which may be more or
less sensational but is at any rate new, and not to be found in the
papers. Françoise declined to appear surprised. You might have
announced in her hearing that the Archduke Rudolf--not that she had the
least suspicion of his having ever existed--was not, as was generally
supposed, dead, but "alive and kicking"; she would have answered only
"Yes," as though she had known it all the time. It may, however, have
been that if even from our own lips, from us whom she so meekly called
her masters, who had so nearly succeeded in taming her, she could not,
without having to check an angry start, hear the name of a noble, that
was because the family from which she had sprung occupied in its own
village a comfortable and independent position, and was not to be
threatened in the consideration which it enjoyed save by those same
nobles, in whose households, meanwhile, from his boyhood, an Aimé would
have been domiciled as a servant, if not actually brought up by their
charity. Of Françoise, then, Mme. de Villeparisis must ask pardon,
first, for her nobility. But (in France, at any rate) that is precisely
the talent, in fact the sole occupation of our great gentlemen and
ladies. Françoise, following the common tendency of servants, who pick
up incessantly from the conversation of their masters with other people
fragmentary observations from which they are apt to draw erroneous
inductions, as the human race generally does with respect to the habits
of animals, was constantly discovering that somebody had "failed" us, a
conclusion to which she was easily led, not so much, perhaps, by her
extravagant love for us, as by the delight that she took in being
disagreeable to us. But having once established, without possibility of
error, the endless little attentions paid to us, and paid to herself
also by Mme. de Villeparisis, Françoise forgave her for being a
Marquise, and, as she had never ceased to be proud of her because she
was one, preferred her thenceforward to all our other friends. It must
be added that no one else took the trouble to be so continually nice to
us. Whenever my grandmother remarked on a book that Mme. de Villeparisis
was reading, or said she had been admiring the fruit which some one had
just sent to our friend, within an hour the footman would come to our
rooms with book or fruit. And the next time we saw her, in response to
our thanks, she would say only, seeming to seek some excuse for the
meagreness of her present in some special use to which it might be put:
"It's nothing wonderful, but the newspapers come so late here, one must
have something to read." Or, "It is always wiser to have fruit one can
be quite certain of, at the seaside."--"But I don't believe I've ever
seen you eating oysters," she said to us, increasing the sense of
disgust which I felt at that moment, for the living flesh of the oyster
revolted me even more than the gumminess of the stranded jellyfish
defiled for me the beach at Balbec; "they are delicious down here! Oh,
let me tell my maid to fetch your letters when she goes for mine. What,
your daughter writes _every day?_ But what on earth can you find to say
to each other?" My grandmother was silent, but it may be assumed that
her silence was due to scorn, in her who used to repeat, when she wrote
to Mamma, the words of Mme. de Sévigné: "As soon as I have received a
letter, I want another at once; I cannot breathe until it comes. There
are few who are worthy to understand what I mean." And I was afraid of
her applying to Mme. de Villeparisis the conclusion: "I seek out those
who are of the chosen few, and I avoid the rest." She fell back upon
praise of the fruit which Mme. de Villeparisis had sent us the day
before. And this had been, indeed, so fine that the manager, in spite of
the jealousy aroused by our neglect of his official offerings, had said
to me: "I am like you; I'm madder about fruit than any other kind of
dessert." My grandmother told her friend that she had enjoyed them all
the more because the fruit which we got in the hotel was generally
horrid. "I cannot," she went on, "say, like Mme. de Sévigné, that if
we should take a sudden fancy for bad fruit we should be obliged to
order it from Paris." "Oh yes, of course, you read Mme. de Sévigné. I
saw you with her letters the day you came." (She forgot that she had
never officially seen my grandmother in the hotel until their collision
in the doorway.) "Don't you find it rather exaggerated, her constant
anxiety about her daughter? She refers to it too often to be really
sincere. She is not natural." My grandmother felt that any discussion
would be futile, and so as not to be obliged to speak of the things she
loved to a person incapable of understanding them, concealed by laying
her bag upon them the _Mémoires de Mme. de Beausergent._

Were she to encounter Françoise at the moment (which Françoise called
"the noon") when, wearing her fine cap and surrounded with every mark of
respect, she was coming downstairs to "feed with the service", Mme.
Villeparisis would stop her to ask after us. And Françoise, when
transmitting to us the Marquise's message: "She said to me, 'You'll be
sure and bid them good day,' she said," counterfeited the voice of Mme.
de Villeparisis, whose exact words she imagined herself to be quoting
textually, whereas she was really corrupting them no less than Plato
corrupts the words of Socrates or Saint John the words of Jesus.
Françoise, as was natural, was deeply touched by these attentions. Only
she did not believe my grandmother, but supposed that she must be lying
in the interest of her class (the rich always combining thus to support
one another) when she assured us that Mme. de Villeparisis had been
lovely as a young woman. It was true that of this loveliness only the
faintest trace remained, from which no one--unless he happened to be a
great deal more of an artist than Françoise--would have been able to
restore her ruined beauty. For in order to understand how beautiful an
elderly woman can once have been one must not only study but interpret
every line of her face.

"I must remember, some time, to ask her whether I'm not right, after
all, in thinking that there is some connexion with the Guermantes," said
my grandmother, to my great indignation. How could I be expected to
believe in a common origin uniting two names which had entered my
consciousness, one through the low and shameful gate of experience, the
other by the golden gate of imagination?

We had several times, in the last few days, seen driving past us in a
stately equipage, tall, auburn, handsome, with a rather prominent nose,
the Princesse de Luxembourg, who was staying in the neighbourhood for a
few weeks. Her carriage had stopped outside the hotel, a footman had
come in and spoken to the manager, had gone back to the carriage and had
reappeared with the most amazing armful of fruit (which combined in a
single basket, like the bay itself, different seasons) with a card: "La
Princesse de Luxembourg", on which were scrawled a few words in pencil.
For what princely traveller sojourning here incognito, could they be
intended, those glaucous plums, luminous and spherical as was at that
moment the circumfluent sea, transparent grapes clustering on a
shrivelled stick, like a fine day in autumn, pears of a heavenly
ultramarine? For it could not be on my grandmother's friend that the
Princess had meant to pay a call. And yet on the following evening Mme.
de Villeparisis sent us the bunch of grapes, cool, liquid, golden; plums
too and pears which we remembered, though the plums had changed, like
the sea at our dinner-hour, to a dull purple, and on the ultramarine
surface of the pears there floated the forms of a few rosy clouds. A few
days later we met Mme. de Villeparisis as we came away from the symphony
concert that was given every morning on the beach. Convinced that the
music to which I had been listening (the Prelude to _Lohengrin_, the
Overture to _Tannhäuser_ and suchlike) expressed the loftiest of
truths, I was trying to elevate myself, as far as I could, so as to
attain to a comprehension of them, I was extracting from myself so as to
understand them, and was attributing to them, all that was best and most
profound in my own nature at that time.

Well, as we came out of the concert, and, on our way back to the hotel,
had stopped for a moment on the front, my grandmother and I, for a few
words with Mme. de Villeparisis who told us that she had ordered some
_croque-monsieurs_ and a dish of creamed eggs for us at the hotel, I
saw, a long way away, coming in our direction, the Princesse de
Luxembourg, half leaning upon a parasol in such a way as to impart to
her tall and wonderful form that slight inclination, to make it trace
that arabesque dear to the women who had been beautiful under the
Empire, and knew how, with drooping shoulders, arched backs, concave
hips and bent limbs, to make their bodies float as gently as a silken
scarf about the rigidity of the invisible stem which might be supposed
to have been passed diagonally through them. She went out every morning
for a turn on the beach almost at the time when everyone else, after
bathing, was climbing home to luncheon, and as hers was not until half
past one she did not return to her villa until long after the hungry
bathers had left the scorching "front" a desert. Mme. de Villeparisis
presented my grandmother and would have presented me, but had first to
ask me my name, which she could not remember. She had, perhaps, never
known it, or if she had must have forgotten years ago to whom my
grandmother had married her daughter. My name, when she did hear it,
appeared to impress Mme. de Villeparisis considerably. Meanwhile the
Princesse de Luxembourg had given us her hand and, now and again, while
she conversed with the Marquise, turned to bestow a kindly glance on my
grandmother and myself, with that embryonic kiss which we put into our
smiles when they are addressed to a baby out with its "Nana". Indeed, in
her anxiety not to appear to be a denizen of a higher sphere than ours,
she had probably miscalculated the distance there was indeed between us,
for by an error in adjustment she made her eyes beam with such
benevolence that I could see the moment approaching when she would put
out her hand and stroke us, as if we were two nice beasts and had poked
our heads out at her through the bars of our cage in the Gardens. And,
immediately, as it happened, this idea of caged animals and the Bois de
Boulogne received striking confirmation. It was the time of day at which
the beach is crowded by itinerant and clamorous vendors, hawking cakes
and sweets and biscuits. Not knowing quite what to do to shew her
affection for us, the Princess hailed the next that came by; he had
nothing left but one rye-cake, of the kind one throws to the ducks. The
Princess took it and said to me: "For your grandmother." And yet it was
to me that she held it out, saying with a friendly smile, "You shall
give it to her yourself!" thinking that my pleasure would thus be more
complete if there were no intermediary between myself and the animals.
Other vendors came up; she stuffed my pockets with everything that they
had, tied up in packets, comfits, sponge-cakes, sugar-sticks. "You will
eat some yourself," she told me, "and give some to your grandmother,"
and she had the vendors paid by the little negro page, dressed in red
satin, who followed her everywhere and was a nine days' wonder upon the
beach. Then she said good-bye to Mme. de Villeparisis and held out her
hand to us with the intention of treating us in the same way as she
treated her friend, as people whom she knew, and of bringing herself
within our reach. But this time she must have reckoned our level as not
quite so low in the scale of creation, for her and our equality was
indicated by the Princess to my grandmother by that tender and maternal
smile which a woman gives a little boy when she says good-bye to him as
though to a grown-up person. By a miraculous stride in evolution, my
grandmother was no longer a duck or an antelope, but had already become
what the anglophil Mme. Swann would have called a "baby". Finally,
having taken leave of us all, the Princess resumed her stroll along the
basking "front", curving her splendid shape which, like a serpent coiled
about a wand, was interlaced with the white parasol patterned in blue
which Mme. de Luxembourg held, unopened, in her hand. She was my first
Royalty--I say my first, for strictly speaking Princesse Mathilde did
not count. The second, as we shall see in due course, was to astonish me
no less by her indulgence. One of the ways in which our great nobles,
kindly intermediaries between commoners and kings, can befriend us was
revealed to me next day when Mme. de Villeparisis reported: "She thought
you quite charming. She is a woman of the soundest judgment, the warmest
heart. Not like so many Queens and people! She has real merit." And Mme.
de Villeparisis went on in a tone of conviction, and quite thrilled to
be able to say it to us: "I am sure she would be delighted to see you
again."

But on that previous morning, after we had parted from the Princesse de
Luxembourg, Mme. de Villeparisis said a thing which impressed me far
more and was not prompted merely by friendly feeling.

"Are you," she had asked me, "the son of the Permanent Secretary at the
Ministry? Indeed! I am told your father is a most charming man. He is
having a splendid holiday just now."

A few days earlier we had heard, in a letter from Mamma, that my father
and his friend M. de Norpois had lost their luggage.

"It has been found; as a matter of fact, it was never really lost, I can
tell you what happened," explained Mme. de Villeparisis, who, without
our knowing how, seemed to be far better informed than ourselves of the
course of my father's travels. "I think your father is now planning to
come home earlier, next week, in fact, as he will probably give up the
idea of going to Algeçiras. But he is anxious to devote a day longer to
Toledo; it seems, he is an admirer of a pupil of Titian,--I forget the
name--whose work can only be seen properly there."

I asked myself by what strange accident, in the impartial glass through
which Mme. de Villeparisis considered, from a safe distance, the
bustling, tiny, purposeless agitation of the crowd of people whom she
knew, there had come to be inserted at the spot through which she
observed my father a fragment of prodigious magnifying power which made
her see in such high relief and in the fullest detail everything that
there was attractive about him, the contingencies that were obliging him
to return home, his difficulties with the customs, his admiration for El
Greco, and, altering the scale of her vision, shewed her this one man so
large among all the rest quite small, like that Jupiter to whom Gustave
Moreau gave, when he portrayed him by the side of a weak mortal, a
superhuman stature.

My grandmother bade Mme. de Villeparisis good-bye, so that we might stay
and imbibe the fresh air for a little while longer outside the hotel,
until they signalled to us through the glazed partition that our
luncheon was ready. There were sounds of tumult. The young mistress of
the King of the Cannibal Island had been down to bathe and was now
coming back to the hotel.

"Really and truly, it's a perfect plague: it's enough to make one decide
to emigrate!" cried the barrister, who had happened to cross her path,
in a towering rage.

Meanwhile the solicitor's wife was following the bogus Queen with eyes
that seemed ready to start from their sockets.

"I can't tell you how angry Mme. Blandais makes me when she stares at
those people like that," said the barrister to the chief magistrate, "I
feel I want to slap her. That is just the way to make the wretches
appear important; and of course that's the very thing they want, that
people should take an interest in them. Do ask her husband to tell her
what a fool she's making of herself. I swear I won't go out with them
again if they stop and gape at those masqueraders."

As to the coming of the Princesse de Luxembourg, whose carriage, on the
day on which she left the fruit, had drawn up outside the hotel, it had
not passed unobserved by the little group of wives, the solicitor's, the
barrister's and the magistrate's, who had for some time past been most
concerned to know whether she was a genuine Marquise and not an
adventuress, that Mme. de Villeparisis whom everyone treated with so
much respect, which all these ladies were burning to hear that she did
not deserve. Whenever Mme. de Villeparisis passed through the hall the
chief magistrate's wife, who scented irregularities everywhere, would
raise her eyes from her "work" and stare at the intruder in a way that
made her friends die with laughter.

"Oh, well, you know," she explained with lofty condescension, "I always
begin by believing the worst. I will never admit that a woman is
properly married until she has shewn me her birth certificate and her
marriage lines. But there's no need to alarm yourselves; just wait till
I've finished my little investigation."

And so, day after day the ladies would come together, and, laughingly,
ask one another: "Any news?"

But on the evening after the Princesse de Luxembourg's call the
magistrate's wife laid a finger on her lips.

"I've discovered something."

"Oh, isn't Mme. Poncin simply wonderful? I never saw anyone. . . . But
do tell us! What has happened?"

"Just listen to this. A woman with yellow hair and six inches of paint
on her face and a carriage like a--you could _smell_ it a mile off; which
only a creature like that would dare to have--came here to-day to call
on the Marquise, by way of!"

"Oh-yow-yow! Tut-tut-tut-tut. Did you ever! Why, it must be that woman
we saw--you remember, Leader,--we said at the time we didn't at all like
the look of her, but we didn't know that it was the 'Marquise' she'd
come to see. A woman with a nigger-boy, you mean?"

"That's the one."

"D'you mean to say so? You don't happen to know her name?"

"Yes, I made a mistake on purpose; I picked up her card; she _trades_
under the name of the 'Princesse de Luxembourg'! Wasn't I right to have
my doubts about her? It's a nice thing to have to mix promiscuously with
a Baronne d'Ange like that?" The barrister quoted Mathurin Régnier's
_Macette_ to the chief magistrate.

It must not, however, be supposed that this misunderstanding was merely
temporary, like those that occur in the second act of a farce to be
cleared up before the final curtain. Mme. de Luxembourg, a niece of the
King of England and of the Emperor of Austria, and Mme. de Villeparisis,
when one called to take the other for a drive, did look like nothing but
two "old trots" of the kind one has always such difficulty in avoiding
at a watering-place. Nine tenths of the men of the Faubourg
Saint-Germain appear to the average man of the middle class simply as
alcoholic wasters (which, individually, they not infrequently are) whom,
therefore, no respectable person would dream of asking to dinner. The
middle class fixes its standard, in this respect, too high, for the
feelings of these men would never prevent their being received with
every mark of esteem in houses which it, the middle class, may never
enter. And so sincerely do they believe that the middle class knows this
that they affect a simplicity in speaking of their own affairs and a
tone of disparagement of their friends, especially when they are "at the
coast", which make the misunderstanding complete. If, by any chance, a
man of the fashionable world is kept in touch with "business people"
because, having more money than he knows what to do with, he finds
himself elected chairman of all sorts of important financial concerns,
the business man who at last sees a nobleman worthy, he considers, to
rank with "big business", would take his oath that such a man can have
no dealings with the Marquis ruined by gambling whom the said business
man supposes to be all the more destitute of friends the more friendly
he makes himself. And he cannot get over his surprise when the Duke,
Chairman of the Board of Directors of the colossal undertaking, arranges
a marriage for his son with the daughter of that very Marquis, who may
be a gambler but who bears the oldest name in France, just as a
Sovereign would sooner see his son marry the daughter of a dethroned
King than that of a President still in office. That is to say, the two
worlds take as fantastic a view of one another as the inhabitants of a
town situated at one end of Balbec Bay have of the town at the other
end: from Rivebelle you can just see Marcouville l'Orgueilleuse; but
even that is deceptive, for you imagine that you are seen from
Marcouville, where, as a matter of fact, the splendours of Rivebelle are
almost wholly invisible.




PART II




_PLACE-NAMES: THE PLACE_


The Balbec doctor, who had been called in to cope with a sudden feverish
attack, having given the opinion that I ought not to stay out all day on
the beach, in the blazing sun, without shelter, and having written out
various prescriptions for my use, my grandmother took his prescriptions
with a show of respect in which I could at once discern her firm resolve
not to have any of them "made up", but did pay attention to his advice
on the matter of hygiene, and accepted an offer from Mme. de
Villeparisis to take us for drives in her carriage. After this I would
spend the mornings, until luncheon, going to and fro between my own room
and my grandmother's. Hers did not look out directly upon the sea, as
mine did, but was lighted from three of its four sides--with views of a
strip of the "front", of a well inside the building, and of the country
inland, and was furnished differently from mine, with armchairs
upholstered in a metallic tissue with red flowers from which seemed to
emanate the cool and pleasant odour that greeted me when I entered the
room. And at that hour when the sun's rays, coming from different
aspects and, as it were, from different hours of the day, broke the
angles of the wall, thrust in a reflexion of the beach, made of the
chest of drawers a festal altar, variegated as a bank of field-flowers,
attached to the wall the wings, folded, quivering, warm, of a radiance
that would, at any moment, resume its flight, warmed like a bath a
square of provincial carpet before the window overlooking the well,
which the sun festooned and patterned like a climbing vine, added to the
charm and complexity of the room's furniture by seeming to pluck and
scatter the petals of the silken flowers on the chairs, and to make
their silver threads stand out from the fabric, this room in which I
lingered for a moment before going to get ready for our drive suggested
a prism in which the colours of the light that shone outside were broken
up, or a hive in which the sweet juices of the day which I was about to
taste were distilled, scattered, intoxicating, visible, a garden of hope
which dissolved in a quivering haze of silver threads and rose leaves.
But before all this I had drawn back my own curtains, impatient to know
what Sea it was that was playing that morning by the shore, like a
Nereid. For none of those Seas ever stayed with us longer than a day. On
the morrow there would be another, which sometimes resembled its
predecessor. But I never saw the same one twice.

There were some that were of so rare a beauty that my pleasure on
catching sight of them was enhanced by surprise. By what privilege, on
one morning rather than another, did the window on being uncurtained
disclose to my wondering eyes the nymph Glauconome, whose lazy beauty,
gently breathing, had the transparence of a vaporous emerald beneath
whose surface I could see teeming the ponderable elements that coloured
it? She made the sun join in her play, with a smile rendered languorous
by an invisible haze which was nought but a space kept vacant about her
translucent surface, which, thus curtailed, became more appealing, like
those goddesses whom the sculptor carves in relief upon a block of
marble, the rest of which he leaves unchiselled. So, in her matchless
colour, she invited us out over those rough terrestrial roads, from
which, seated beside Mme. de Villeparisis in her barouche, we should
see, all day long and without ever reaching it, the coolness of her
gentle palpitation.

Mme. de Villeparisis used to order her carriage early, so that we should
have time to reach Saint-Mars-le-Vêtu, or the rocks of Quetteholme, or
some other goal which, for a somewhat lumbering vehicle, was far enough
off to require the whole day. In my joy at the long drive we were going
to take I would be humming some tune that I had heard recently as I
strolled up and down until Mme. de Villeparisis was ready. If it was
Sunday hers would not be the only carriage drawn up outside the hotel;
several hired flies would be waiting there, not only for the people who
had been invited to Féterne by Mme. de Cambremer, but for those who,
rather than stay at home all day, like children in disgrace, declared
that Sunday was always quite impossible at Balbec and started off
immediately after luncheon to hide themselves in some neighbouring
watering-place or to visit one of the "sights" of the district. And
indeed whenever (which was often) anyone asked Mme. Blandais if she had
been to the Cambremers', she would answer peremptorily: "No; we went to
the Falls of the Bec," as though that were the sole reason for her not
having spent the day at Féterne. And the barrister would be charitable,
and say:

"I envy you. I wish I had gone there instead; they must be well worth
seeing."

Beside the row of carriages, in front of the porch in which I stood
waiting, was planted, like some shrub of a rare species, a young page
who attracted the eye no less by the unusual and effective colouring of
his hair than by his plant-like epidermis. Inside, in the hall,
corresponding to the narthex, or Church of the Catechumens in a
primitive basilica, through which persons who were not staying in the
hotel were entitled to pass, the comrades of this "outside" page did not
indeed work much harder than he but did at least execute certain drilled
movements. It is probable that in the early morning they helped with the
cleaning. But in the afternoon they stood there only like a Chorus who,
even when there is nothing for them to do, remain upon the stage in
order to strengthen the cast. The General Manager, the same who had so
terrified me, reckoned on increasing their number considerably next
year, for he had "big ideas". And this prospect greatly afflicted the
manager of the hotel, who found that all these boys about the place only
"created a nuisance", by which he meant that they got in the visitors'
way and were of no use to anyone. But between luncheon and dinner at
least, between the exits and entrances of the visitors, they did fill an
otherwise empty stage, like those pupils of Mme. de Maintenon who, in
the garb of young Israelites, carry on the action whenever Esther or
Joad "goes off". But the outside page, with his delicate tints, his
tall, slender, fragile trunk, in proximity to whom I stood waiting for
the Marquise to come downstairs, preserved an immobility into which a
certain melancholy entered, for his elder brothers had left the hotel
for more brilliant careers elsewhere, and he felt keenly his isolation
upon this alien soil. At last Mme. de Villeparisis appeared. To stand by
her carriage and to help her into it ought perhaps to have been part of
the young page's duties. But he knew on the one hand that a person who
brings her own servants to an hotel expects them to wait on her and is
not as a rule lavish with her "tips", and that generally speaking this
was true also of the nobility of the old Faubourg Saint-Germain. Mme. de
Villeparisis was included in both these categories. The arborescent page
concluded therefore that he need expect nothing from her, and leaving
her own maid and footman to pack her and her belongings into the
carriage, he continued to dream sadly of the enviable lot of his
brothers and preserved his vegetable immobility.

We would start off; some time after rounding the railway station, we
came into a country road which soon became as familiar to me as the
roads round Combray, from the bend where, like a fish-hook, it was
baited with charming orchards, to the turning at which we left it, with
tilled fields upon either side. Among these we could see here and there
an apple-tree, stripped it was true of its blossom, and bearing no more
now than a fringe of pistils, but sufficient even so to enchant me since
I could imagine, seeing those inimitable leaves, how their broad
expanse, like the ceremonial carpet spread for a wedding that was now
over, had been but the other day swept by the white satin train of their
blushing flowers.

How often in Paris, during the May of the following year, was I to bring
home a branch of apple-blossom from the florist, and to stay all night
long before its flowers in which bloomed the same creamy essence that
powdered besides and whitened the green unfolding leaves, flowers
between whose snowy cups it seemed almost as though it had been the
salesman who had, in his generosity towards myself, out of his wealth of
invention too and as an effective contrast, added on either side the
supplement of a becoming crimson bud: I sat gazing at them, I grouped
them in the light of my lamp--for so long that I was often still there
when the dawn brought to their whiteness the same flush with which it
must at that moment have been tingeing their sisters on the Balbec
road--and I sought to carry them back in my imagination to that
roadside, to multiply them, to spread them out, so as to fill the frame
prepared for them, on the canvas, all ready, of those closes the outline
of which I knew by heart, which I so longed to see--which one day I must
see again, at the moment when, with the exquisite fervour of genius,
spring was covering their canvas with its colours.

Before getting into the carriage I had composed the seascape for which I
was going to look out, which I had hoped to see with the "sun radiant",
upon it, and which at Balbec I could distinguish only in too fragmentary
a form, broken by so many vulgar intromissions that had no place in my
dream, bathers, dressing-boxes, pleasure yachts. But when, Mme. de
Villeparisis's carriage having reached high ground, I caught a glimpse
of the sea through the leafy boughs of trees, then no doubt at such a
distance those temporal details which had set the sea, as it were, apart
from nature and history disappeared, and I could as I looked down
towards its waves make myself realise that they were the same which
Leconte de Lisle describes for us in his _Orestie_, where "like a flight
of birds of prey, before the dawn of day" the long-haired warriors of
heroic Hellas "with oars an hundred thousand sweep the huge resounding
deep." But on the other hand I was no longer near enough to the sea
which seemed to me not a living thing now, but fixed; I no longer felt
any power beneath its colours, spread like those of a picture among the
leaves, through which it appeared as inconsistent as the sky and only of
an intenser blue.

Mme. de Villeparisis, seeing that I was fond of churches, promised me
that we should visit one one day and another another, and especially the
church at Carqueville "quite buried in all its old ivy", as she said
with a wave of the hand which seemed tastefully to be clothing the
absent front in an invisible and delicate screen of foliage. Mme. de
Villeparisis would often, with this little descriptive gesture, find
just the right word to define the attraction and the distinctive
features of an historic building, always avoiding technical terms, but
incapable of concealing her thorough understanding of the things to
which she referred. She appeared to seek an excuse for this erudition in
the fact that one of her father's country houses, the one in which she
had lived as a girl, was situated in a district in which there were
churches similar in style to those round Balbec, so that it would have
been unaccountable if she had not acquired a taste for architecture,
this house being, incidentally, one of the finest examples of that of
the Renaissance. But as it was also a regular museum, as moreover Chopin
and Liszt had played there, Lamartine recited poetry, all the most
famous artists for fully a century had inscribed "sentiments", scored
melodies, made sketches in the family album, Mme. de Villeparisis
ascribed, whether from delicacy, good breeding, true modesty or want of
intelligence, only this purely material origin to her acquaintance with
all the arts, and had come, apparently, to regard painting, music,
literature and philosophy as the appanage of a young lady brought up on
the most aristocratic lines in an historic building that was catalogued
and starred. You would have said, listening to her, that she knew of no
pictures that were not heirlooms. She was pleased that my grandmother
liked a necklace which she wore, and which fell over her dress. It
appeared in the portrait of an ancestress of her own by Titian which had
never left the family. So that one could be certain of its being
genuine. She would not listen to a word about pictures bought, heaven
knew where, by a Croesus, she was convinced before you spoke that they
were forgeries, and had no desire to see them. We knew that she herself
painted flowers in water-colour, and my grandmother, who had heard these
praised, spoke to her of them. Mme. de Villeparisis modestly changed the
subject, but without shewing either surprise or pleasure more than would
an artist whose reputation was established and to whom compliments meant
nothing. She said merely that it was a delightful pastime because, even
if the flowers that sprang from the brush were nothing wonderful, at
least the work made you live in the company of real flowers, of the
beauty of which, especially when you were obliged to study them closely
in order to draw them, you could never grow tired. But at Balbec Mme. de
Villeparisis was giving herself a holiday, so as to spare her eyes.

We were astonished, my grandmother and I, to find how much more
"Liberal" she was than even the majority of the middle class. She did
not understand how anyone could be scandalised by the expulsion of the
Jesuits, saying that it had always been done, even under the Monarchy,
in Spain even. She took up the defence of the Republic, and against its
anti-clericalism had no more to say than: "I should be equally annoyed
whether they prevented me from hearing mass when I wanted to, or forced
me to hear it when I didn't!" and even startled us with such utterances
as: "Oh! the aristocracy in these days, what does it amount to?" "To my
mind, a man who doesn't work doesn't count!"--perhaps only because she
felt that they gained point and flavour, became memorable, in fact, on
her lips.

When we heard these advanced opinions--though never so far advanced as
to amount to Socialism, which Mme. de Villeparisis held in
abhorrence--expressed so frequently and with so much frankness precisely
by one of those people in consideration of whose intelligence our
scrupulous and timid impartiality would refuse to condemn outright the
ideas of the Conservatives, we came very near, my grandmother and I, to
believing that in the pleasant companion of our drives was to be found
the measure and the pattern of truth in all things. We took her word for
it when she appreciated her Titians, the colonnade of her country house,
the conversational talent of Louis-Philippe. But--like those mines of
learning who hold us spell-bound when we get them upon Egyptian
paintings or Etruscan inscriptions, and yet talk so tediously about
modern work that we ask ourselves whether we have not been
overestimating the interest of the sciences in which they are versed
since there is not apparent in their treatment of them the mediocrity of
mind which they must have brought to those studies just as much as to
their fatuous essays on Baudelaire--Mme. de Villeparisis, questioned by
me about Chateaubriand, about Balzac, about Victor Hugo, each of whom
had in his day been the guest of her parents, and had been seen and
spoken to by her, smiled at my reverence, told amusing anecdotes of
them, such as she had a moment ago been telling us of dukes and
statesmen, and severely criticised those writers simply because they had
been lacking in that modesty, that self-effacement, that sober art which
is satisfied with a single right line, and lays no stress on it, which
avoids more than anything else the absurdity of grandiloquence, in that
opportuneness, those qualities of moderation, of judgment and simplicity
to which she had been taught that real greatness aspired and attained:
it was evident that she had no hesitation in placing above them men who
might after all, perhaps, by virtue of those qualities, have had the
advantage of a Balzac, a Hugo, a Vigny in a drawing-room, an academy, a
cabinet council, men like Molé, Fontanes, Vitroles, Bersot, Pasquier,
Lebrun, Salvandy or Daru.

"Like those novels of Stendhal, which you seem to admire. You would have
given him a great surprise, I assure you, if you had spoken to him in
that tone. My father, who used to meet him at M. Mérimée's--now he was
a man of talent, if you like--often told me that Beyle (that was his
real name) was appallingly vulgar, but quite good company at dinner, and
never in the least conceited about his books. Why, you can see for
yourself how he just shrugged his shoulders at the absurdly extravagant
compliments of M. de Balzac. There at least he shewed that he knew how
to behave like a gentleman." She possessed the autographs of all these
great men, and seemed, when she put forward the personal relations which
her family had had with them, to assume that her judgment of them must
be better founded than that of young people who, like myself, had had no
opportunity of meeting them. "I'm sure I have a right to speak, for they
used to come to my father's house; and as M. Sainte-Beuve, who was a
most intelligent man, used to say, in forming an estimate you must take
the word of people who saw them close, and were able to judge more
exactly of their real worth."

Sometimes as the carriage laboured up a steep road through tilled
country, making the fields more real, adding to them a mark of
authenticity like the precious flower with which certain of the old
masters used to sign their pictures, a few hesitating cornflowers, like
the Combray cornflowers, would stream in our wake. Presently the horses
outdistanced them, but a little way on we would catch sight of another
which while it stayed our coming had pricked up to welcome us amid the
grass its azure star; some made so bold as to come and plant themselves
by the side of the road, and the impression left in my mind was a
nebulous blend of distant memories and of wild flowers grown tame.

We began to go down hill; and then met, climbing on foot, on a bicycle,
in a cart or carriage, one of those creatures--flowers of a fine day but
unlike the flowers of the field, for each of them secretes something
that is not to be found in another, with the result that we can never
satisfy upon any of her fellows the desire which she has brought to
birth in us--a farm-girl driving her cow or half-lying along a waggon, a
shopkeeper's daughter taking the air, a fashionable young lady erect on
the back-seat of a landau, facing her parents. Certainly Bloch had been
the means of opening a new era and had altered the value of life for me
on the day when he had told me that the dreams which I had entertained
on my solitary walks along the Méséglise way, when I hoped that some
peasant girl might pass whom I could take in my arms, were not a mere
fantasy which corresponded to nothing outside myself, but that all the
girls one met, whether villagers or "young ladies", were alike ready and
willing to give ear to such prayers. And even if I were fated, now that
I was ill and did not go out by myself, never to be able to make love to
them, I was happy all the same, like a child born in a prison or a
hospital, who, having always supposed that the human organism was
capable of digesting only dry bread and "physic", has learned suddenly
that peaches, apricots and grapes are not simply part of the decoration
of the country scene but delicious and easily assimilated food. Even if
his gaoler or his nurse does not allow him to pluck those tempting
fruits, still the world seems to him a better place and existence in it
more clement. For a desire seems to us more attractive, we repose on it
with more confidence, when we know that outside ourself there is a
reality which conforms to it, even if, for us, it is not to be realised.
And we think with more joy of a life in which (on condition that we
eliminate for a moment from our mind the tiny obstacle, accidental and
special, which prevents us personally from doing so) we can imagine
ourself to be assuaging that desire. As to the pretty girls who went
past, from the day on which I had first known that their cheeks could be
kissed, I had become curious about their souls. And the universe had
appeared to me more interesting.

Mme. de Villeparisis's carriage moved fast. Scarcely had I time to see
the girl who was coming in our direction; and yet--as the beauty of
people is not like the beauty of things, as we feel that it is that of
an unique creature, endowed with consciousness and free-will--as soon as
her individuality, a soul still vague, a will unknown to me, presented a
tiny picture of itself, enormously reduced but complete, in the depths
of her indifferent eyes, at once, by a mysterious response of the
pollen ready in me for the pistils that should receive it, I felt
surging through me the embryo, as vague, as minute, of the desire not to
let this girl pass without forcing her mind to become conscious of my
person, without preventing her desires from wandering to some one else,
without coming to fix myself in her dreams and to seize and occupy her
heart. Meanwhile our carriage rolled away from her, the pretty girl was
already left behind, and as she had--of me--none of those notions which
constitute a person in one's mind, her eyes which had barely seen me had
forgotten me already. Was it because I had caught but a fragmentary
glimpse of her that I had found her so attractive? It may have been. In
the first place, the impossibility of stopping when I came to her, the
risk of not meeting her again another day, give at once to such a girl
the same charm as a place derives from the illness or poverty that
prevents us from visiting it, or the so unadventurous days through which
we should otherwise have to live from the battle in which we shall
doubtless fall. So that, if there were no such thing as habit, life must
appear delightful to those of us who would at every moment be threatened
with death--that is to say, to all mankind. Then, if our imagination is
set going by the desire for what we may not possess, its flight is not
limited by a reality completely perceived, in these casual encounters in
which the charms of the passing stranger are generally in direct ratio
to the swiftness of our passage. If only night is falling and the
carriage is moving fast, whether in town or country, there is not a
female torso, mutilated like an antique marble by the speed that tears
us away and the dusk that drowns it, but aims at our heart, from every
turning in the road, from the lighted interior of every shop, the arrows
of Beauty, that Beauty of which we are sometimes tempted to ask
ourselves whether it is, in this world, anything more than the
complementary part that is added to a fragmentary and fugitive stranger
by our imagination over-stimulated by regret.

Had I been free to stop, to get down from the carriage and to speak to
the girl whom we were passing, should I perhaps have been disillusioned
by some fault in her complexion which from the carriage I had not
distinguished? (After which every effort to penetrate into her life
would have seemed suddenly impossible. For beauty is a sequence of
hypotheses which ugliness cuts short when it bars the way that we could
already see opening into the unknown.) Perhaps a single word which she
might have uttered, a smile would have furnished me with a key, a clue
that I had not expected, to read the expression of her face, to
interpret her bearing, which would at once have ceased to be of any
interest. It is possible, for I have never in real life met any girls so
desirable as on days when I was with some serious person from whom,
despite the myriad pretexts that I invented, I could not tear myself
away: some years after that in which I went for the first time to
Balbec, as I was driving through Paris with a friend of my father, and
had caught sight of a woman walking quickly along the dark street, I
felt that it was unreasonable to forfeit, for a purely conventional
scruple, my share of happiness in what may very well be the only life
there is, and jumping from the carriage without a word of apology I
followed in quest of the stranger; lost her where two streets crossed;
caught her up again in a third, and arrived at last, breathless, beneath
a street lamp, face to face with old Mme. Verdurin whom I had been
carefully avoiding for years, and who, in her delight and surprise,
exclaimed: "But how very nice of you to have run all this way just to
say how d'ye do to me!"

That year at Balbec, at the moments of such encounters, I would assure
my grandmother and Mme. de Villeparisis that I had so severe a headache
that the best thing for me would be to go home alone on foot. But they
would never let me get out of the carriage. And I must add that the
pretty girl (far harder to find again than an historic building, for she
was nameless and had the power of locomotion) to the collection of all
those whom I promised myself that I would examine more closely at a
later date. One of them, however, happened to pass more than once before
my eyes in circumstances which allowed me to believe that I should be
able to get to know her when I chose. This was a milk-girl who came from
a farm with an additional supply of cream for the hotel. I fancied that
she had recognised me also; and she did, in fact, look at me with an
attentiveness which was perhaps due only to the surprise which my
attentiveness caused her. And next day, a day on which I had been
resting all morning, when Françoise came in about noon to draw my
curtains, she handed me a letter which had been left for me downstairs.
I knew no one at Balbec. I had no doubt that the letter was from the
milk-girl. Alas, it was only from Bergotte who, as he happened to be
passing, had tried to see me, but on hearing that I was asleep had
scribbled a few charming lines for which the lift-boy had addressed an
envelope which I had supposed to have been written by the milk-girl. I
was bitterly disappointed, and the thought that it was more difficult,
and more flattering to myself to get a letter from Bergotte did not in
the least console me for this particular letter's not being from her. As
for the girl, I never came across her again any more than I came across
those whom I had seen only from Mme. de Villeparisis's carriage. Seeing
and then losing them all thus increased the state of agitation in which
I was living, and I found a certain wisdom in the philosophers who
recommend us to set a limit to our desires (if, that is, they refer to
our desire for people, for that is the only kind that ends in anxiety,
having for its object a being at once unknown and unconscious. To
suppose that philosophy could refer to the desire for wealth would be
too silly.) At the same time I was inclined to regard this wisdom as
incomplete, for I said to myself that these encounters made me find even
more beautiful a world which thus caused to grow along all the country
roads flowers at once rare and common, fleeting treasures of the day,
windfalls of the drive, of which the contingent circumstances that would
never, perhaps, recur had alone prevented me from taking advantage, and
which gave a new zest to life.

But perhaps in hoping that, one day, with greater freedom, I should be
able to find on other roads girls much the same, I was already beginning
to falsify and corrupt what there is exclusively individual in the
desire to live in the company of a woman whom one has found attractive,
and by the mere fact that I admitted the possibility of making this
desire grow artificially, I had implicitly acknowledged my illusion.

The day on which Mme. de Villeparisis took us to Carqueville, where
there was that church, covered in ivy, of which she had spoken to us, a
church that, built upon rising ground, dominated both its village and
the river that flowed beneath it, and had kept its own little bridge
from the middle ages, my grandmother, thinking that I would like to be
left alone to study the building at my leisure, suggested to her friend
that they should go on and wait for me at the pastry-cook's, in the
village square which was clearly visible from where we were and, in its
mellow bloom in the sunshine, seemed like another part of a Whole that
was all mediaeval. It was arranged that I should join them there later.
In the mass of verdure before which I was left standing I was obliged,
if I was to discover the church, to make a mental effort which involved
my grasping more intensely the idea "Church"; in fact, as happens to
schoolboys who gather more fully the meaning of a sentence when they are
made, by translating or by paraphrasing it, to divest it of the forms to
which they are accustomed, this idea of "Church", which as a rule I
scarcely needed when I stood beneath steeples that were recognisable in
themselves, I was obliged perpetually to recall so as not to forget,
here that the arch in this clump of ivy was that of a pointed window,
there that the projection of the leaves was due to the swelling
underneath of a capital. Then came a breath of wind, and sent a tremor
through the mobile porch, which was overrun by eddies that shot and
quivered like a flood of light; the pointed leaves opened one against
another; and, shuddering, the arboreal front drew after it green
pillars, undulant, caressed and fugitive.

As I came away from the church I saw by the old bridge a cluster of
girls from the village who, probably because it was Sunday, were
standing about in their best clothes, rallying the young men who went
past. Not so well dressed as the others, but seeming to enjoy some
ascendancy over them--for she scarcely answered when they spoke to
her--with a more serious and a more determined air, there was a tall one
who, hoisted upon the parapet of the bridge with her feet hanging down,
was holding on her lap a small vessel full of fish which she had
presumably just been catching. She had a tanned complexion, gentle eyes
but with a look of contempt for her surroundings, a small nose,
delicately and attractively modelled. My eyes rested upon her skin; and
my lips, had the need arisen, might have believed that they had followed
my eyes. But it was not only to her body that I should have liked to
attain, there was also her person, which abode within her, and with
which there is but one form of contact, namely to attract its attention,
but one sort of penetration, to awaken an idea in it.

And this inner self of the charming fisher-girl seemed to be still
closed to me, I was doubtful whether I had entered it, even after I had
seen my own image furtively reflect itself in the twin mirrors of her
gaze, following an index of refraction that was as unknown to me as if I
had been placed in the field of vision of a deer. But just as it would
not have sufficed that my lips should find pleasure in hers without
giving pleasure to them also, so I should have wished that the idea of
me which was to enter this creature, was to fasten itself in her, should
attract to me not merely her attention but her admiration, her desire,
and should compel her to keep me in her memory until the day when I
should be able to meet her again. Meanwhile I could see, within a
stone's-throw, the square in which Mme. de Villeparisis's carriage must
be waiting for me. I had not a moment to lose; and already I could feel
that the girls were beginning to laugh at the sight of me thus held
suspended before them. I had a five-franc piece in my pocket. I drew it
out, and, before explaining to the girl the errand on which I proposed
to send her, so as to have a better chance of her listening to me, I
held the coin for a moment before her eyes:

"Since you seem to belong to the place," I said to her, "I wonder if you
would be so good as to take a message for me. I want you to go to a
pastry-cook's--which is apparently in a square, but I don't know where
that is--where there is a carriage waiting for me. One moment! To make
quite sure, will you ask if the carriage belongs to the Marquise de
Villeparisis? But you can't miss it; it's a carriage and pair."

That was what I wished her to know, so that she should regard me as
someone of importance. But when I had uttered the words "Marquise" and
"carriage and pair", suddenly I had a great sense of calm. I felt that
the fisher-girl would remember me, and I felt vanishing, with my fear of
not being able to meet her again, part also of my desire to meet her. It
seemed to me that I had succeeded in touching her person with invisible
lips, and that I had pleased her. And this assault and capture of her
mind, this immaterial possession had taken from her part of her mystery,
just as physical possession does.

We came down towards Hudimesnil; suddenly I was overwhelmed with that
profound happiness which I had not often felt since Combray; happiness
analogous to that which had been given me by--among other things--the
steeples of Martinville. But this time it remained incomplete. I had
just seen, standing a little way back from the steep ridge over which we
were passing, three trees, probably marking the entrance to a shady
avenue, which made a pattern at which I was looking now not for the
first time; I could not succeed in reconstructing the place from which
they had been, as it were, detached, but I felt that it had been
familiar to me once; so that my mind having wavered between some distant
year and the present moment, Balbec and its surroundings began to
dissolve and I asked myself whether the whole of this drive were not a
make-believe, Balbec a place to which I had never gone save in
imagination, Mme. de Villeparisis a character in a story and the three
old trees the reality which one recaptures on raising one's eyes from
the book which one has been reading and which describes an environment
into which one has come to believe that one has been bodily transported.

I looked at the three trees; I could see them plainly, but my mind felt
that they were concealing something which it had not grasped, as when
things are placed out of our reach, so that our fingers, stretched out
at arm's length, can only touch for a moment their outer surface, and
can take hold of nothing. Then we rest for a little while before
thrusting out our arm with refreshed vigour, and trying to reach an inch
or two farther. But if my mind was thus to collect itself, to gather
strength, I should have to be alone. What would I not have given to be
able to escape as I used to do on those walks along the Guermantes way,
when I detached myself from my parents! It seemed indeed that I ought to
do so now. I recognised that kind of pleasure which requires, it is
true, a certain effort on the part of the mind, but in comparison with
which the attractions of the inertia which inclines us to renounce that
pleasure seem very slight. That pleasure, the object of which I could
but dimly feel, that pleasure which I must create for myself, I
experienced only on rare occasions, but on each of these it seemed to me
that the things which had happened in the interval were of but scant
importance, and that in attaching myself to the reality of that pleasure
alone I could at length begin to lead a new life. I laid my hand for a
moment across my eyes, so as to be able to shut them without Mme. de
Villeparisis's noticing. I sat there, thinking of nothing, then with my
thoughts collected, compressed and strengthened I sprang farther forward
in the direction of the trees, or rather in that inverse direction at
the end of which I could see them growing within myself. I felt again
behind them the same object, known to me and yet vague, which I could
not bring nearer. And yet all three of them, as the carriage moved on, I
could see coming towards me. Where had I looked at them before? There
was no place near Combray where an avenue opened off the road like that.
The site which they recalled to me, there was no room for it either in
the scenery of the place in Germany where I had gone one year with my
grandmother to take the waters. Was I to suppose, then, that they came
from years already so remote in my life that the landscape which
accompanied them had been entirely obliterated from my memory, and that,
like the pages which, with sudden emotion, we recognise in a book which
we imagined that we had never read, they surged up by themselves out of
the forgotten chapter of my earliest infancy? Were they not rather to be
numbered among those dream landscapes, always the same, at least for me
in whom their unfamiliar aspect was but the objectivation in my dreams
of the effort that I had been making while awake either to penetrate the
mystery of a place beneath the outward appearance of which I was dimly
conscious of there being something more, as had so often happened to me
on the Guermantes way, or to succeed in bringing mystery back to a place
which I had longed to know and which, from the day on which I had come
to know it, had seemed to me to be wholly superficial, like Balbec? Or
were they but an image freshly extracted from a dream of the night
before, but already so worn, so altered that it seemed to me to come
from somewhere far more distant? Or had I indeed never seen them before;
did they conceal beneath their surface, like the trees, like the tufts
of grass that I had seen beside the Guermantes way, a meaning as
obscure, as hard to grasp as is a distant past, so that, whereas they
were pleading with me that I would master a new idea, I imagined that I
had to identify something in my memory? Or again were they concealing no
hidden thought, and was it simply my strained vision that made me see
them double in time as one occasionally sees things double in space? I
could not tell. And yet all the time they were coming towards me;
perhaps some fabulous apparition, a ring of witches or of norns who
would propound their oracles to me. I chose rather to believe that they
were phantoms of the past, dear companions of my childhood, vanished
friends who recalled our common memories. Like ghosts they seemed to be
appealing to me to take them with me, to bring them back to life. In
their simple, passionate gesticulation I could discern the helpless
anguish of a beloved person who has lost the power of speech, and feels
that he will never be able to say to us what he wishes to say and we can
never guess. Presently, at a cross-roads, the carriage left them. It was
bearing me away from what alone I believed to be true, what would have
made me truly happy; it was like my life.

I watched the trees gradually withdraw, waving their despairing arms,
seeming to say to me: "What you fail to learn from us to-day, you will
never know. If you allow us to drop back into the hollow of this road
from which we sought to raise ourselves up to you, a whole part of
yourself which we were bringing to you will fall for ever into the
abyss." And indeed if, in the course of time, I did discover the kind of
pleasure and of disturbance which I had just been feeling once again,
and if one evening--too late, but then for all time--I fastened myself
to it, of those trees themselves I was never to know what they had been
trying to give me nor where else I had seen them. And when, the road
having forked and the carriage with it, I turned my back on them and
ceased to see them, with Mme. de Villeparisis asking me what I was
dreaming about, I was as wretched as though I had just lost a friend,
had died myself, had broken faith with the dead or had denied my God.

It was time to be thinking of home. Mme. de Villeparisis, who had a
certain feeling for nature, colder than that of my grandmother but
capable of recognising, even outside museums and noblemen's houses, the
simple and majestic beauty of certain old and venerable things, told her
coachman to take us back by the old Balbec road, a road little used but
planted with old elm-trees which we thought quite admirable.

Once we had got to know this road, for a change we would return--that
is, if we had not taken it on the outward journey--by another which ran
through the woods of Chantereine and Canteloup. The invisibility of the
numberless birds that took up one another's song close beside us in the
trees gave me the same sense of being at rest that one has when one
shuts one's eyes. Chained to my back-seat like Prometheus on his rock I
listened to my Oceanides. And when it so happened that I caught a
glimpse of one of those birds as it passed from one leaf to another,
there was so little apparent connexion between it and the songs that I
heard that I could not believe that I was beholding their cause in that
little body, fluttering, startled and unseeing.

This road was like many others of the same kind which are to be found in
France, climbing on a fairly steep gradient to its summit and then
gradually falling for the rest of the way. At the time, I found no great
attraction in it, I was only glad to be going home. But it became for me
later on a frequent source of joy by remaining in my memory as a
lodestone to which all the similar roads that I was to take, on walks or
drives or journeys, would at once attach themselves without breach of
continuity and would be able, thanks to it, to communicate directly with
my heart. For as soon as the carriage or the motor-car turned into one
of these roads that seemed to be merely the continuation of the road
along which I had driven with Mme. de Villeparisis, the matter to which
I found my consciousness directly applying itself, as to the most recent
event in my past, would be (all the intervening years being quietly
obliterated) the impressions that I had had on those bright summer
afternoons and evenings, driving round Balbec, when the leaves smelt
good, a mist rose from the ground, and beyond the village close at hand
one could see through the trees the sun setting as though it had been
merely some place farther along the road, a forest place and distant,
which we should not have time to reach that evening. Harmonised with
what I was feeling now in another place, on a similar road, surrounded
by all the accessory sensations of breathing deep draughts of air, of
curiosity, indolence, appetite, lightness of heart which were common to
them both, and excluding all others, these impressions would be
reinforced, would take on the consistency of a particular type of
pleasure, and almost of a setting of life which, as it happened, I
rarely had the luck to come across, but in which these awakened memories
placed, amid the reality that my senses could perceive, no small part of
a reality suggested, dreamed, unseizable, to give me, among those
regions through which I was passing, more than an aesthetic feeling, a
transient but exalted ambition to stay there and to live there always.
How often since then, simply because I could smell green leaves, has not
being seated on a back-seat opposite Mme. de Villeparisis, meeting the
Princesse de Luxembourg who waved a greeting to her from her own
carriage, coming back to dinner at the Grand Hotel appeared to me as one
of those indescribable happinesses which neither the present nor the
future can restore to us, which we may taste once only in a lifetime.

Often dusk would have fallen before we reached the hotel. Timidly I
would quote to Mme. de Villeparisis, pointing to the moon in the sky,
some memorable expression of Chateaubriand or Vigny or Victor Hugo:
"Shedding abroad that ancient secret of melancholy" or "Weeping like
Diana by the brink of her streams" or "The shadows nuptial, solemn and
august."

"And so you think that good, do you?" she would ask, "inspired, as you
call it. I must confess that I am always surprised to see people taking
things seriously nowadays which the friends of those gentlemen, while
doing ample justice to their merits, were the first to laugh at. People
weren't so free then with the word 'inspired' as they are now, when if
you say to a writer that he has mere talent he thinks you're insulting
him. You quote me a fine passage from M. de Chateaubriand about
moonlight. You shall see that I have my own reasons for being
refractory. M. de Chateaubriand used constantly to come to see my
father. He was quite a pleasant person when you were alone with him,
because then he was simple and amusing, but the moment he had an
audience he would begin to pose, and then he became absurd; when my
father was in the room, he pretended that he had flung his resignation
in the King's face, and that he had controlled the voting in the
Conclave, forgetting that it was my father whom he had asked to beg the
King to take him back, and that my father had heard him make the most
idiotic forecasts of the Papal election. You ought to have heard M. de
Blacas on that famous Conclave; he was a very different kind of man from
M. de Chateaubriand. As to his fine phrases about the moon, they became
part of our regular programme for entertaining our guests. Whenever
there was any moonlight about the house, if there was anyone staying
with us for the first time he would be told to take M. de Chateaubriand
for a stroll after dinner. When they came in, my father would take his
guest aside and say: 'Well, and was M. de Chateaubriand very
eloquent?'--'Oh, yes.' 'He's been talking about the moon?'--'Yes, how
did you know?'--'One moment, didn't he say----' and then my father would
quote the passage. 'He did; but how in the world . . .?'--'And he spoke
to you of the moonlight on the Roman Campagna?'--'But, my dear sir,
you're a magician.' My father was no magician, but M. de Chateaubriand
had the same little speech about the moon which he served up every
time."

At the mention of Vigny she laughed: "The man who said: 'I am the Comte
Alfred de Vigny!' One either is a Comte or one isn't; it is not of the
slightest importance." And then perhaps she discovered that it was after
all, of some slight importance, for she went on: "For one thing I am by
no means sure that he was, and in any case he was of the humblest
origin, that gentleman who speaks in his verses of his 'Esquire's
crest'. In such charming taste, is it not, and so interesting to his
readers! Like Musset, a plain Paris cit, who laid so much stress on 'The
golden falcon that surmounts my helm'. As if you would ever hear a real
gentleman say a thing like that! And yet Musset had some talent as a
poet. But except _Cinq-Mars_ I have never been able to read a thing by
M. de Vigny. I get so bored that the book falls from my hands. M. Molé,
who had all the cleverness and tact that were wanting in M. de Vigny,
put him properly in his place when he welcomed him to the Academy. Do
you mean to say you don't know the speech? It is a masterpiece of irony
and impertinence." She found fault with Balzac, whom she was surprised
to see her nephews admire, for having pretended to describe a society
"in which he was never received" and of which his descriptions were
wildly improbable. As for Victor Hugo, she told us that M. de Bouillon,
her father, who had friends among the young leaders of the Romantic
movement, had been taken by some of them to the first performance of
_Hernani_, but that he had been unable to sit through it, so ridiculous
had he found the lines of that talented but extravagant writer who had
acquired the title of "Major Poet" only by virtue of having struck a
bargain, and as a reward for the not disinterested indulgence that he
shewed to the dangerous errors of the Socialists.

We had now come in sight of the hotel, with its lights, so hostile that
first evening, on our arrival, now protecting and kind, speaking to us
of home. And when the carriage drew up outside the door, the porter, the
pages, the lift-boy, attentive, clumsy, vaguely uneasy at our lateness,
were numbered, now that they had grown familiar, among those beings who
change so many times in the course of our life, as we ourself change,
but by whom, when they are for the time being the mirror of our habits,
we find something attractive in the feeling that we are being faithfully
reflected and in a friendly spirit. We prefer them to friends whom we
have not seen for some time, for they contain more of what we actually
are. Only the outside page, exposed to the sun all day, had been taken
indoors for protection from the cold night air and swaddled in thick
woollen garments which, combined with the orange effulgence of his locks
and the curiously red bloom of his cheeks, made one, seeing him there
through the glass front of the hall, think of a hot-house plant muffled
up for protection from the frost. We got out of the carriage, with the
help of a great many more servants than were required, but they were
conscious of the importance of the scene and each felt obliged to take
some part in it. I was always very hungry. And so, often, so as not to
keep dinner waiting, I would not go upstairs first to the room which had
succeeded in becoming so really mine that to catch sight of its long
violet curtains and low bookcases was to find myself alone again with
that self of which things, like people, gave me a reflected image; but
we would all wait together in the hall until the head waiter came to
tell us that our dinner was ready. And this gave us another opportunity
of listening to Mme. de Villeparisis.

"But you must be tired of us by now," protested my grandmother.

"Not at all! Why, I am delighted, what could be nicer?" replied her
friend with a winning smile, drawing out, almost intoning her words in a
way that contrasted markedly with her customary simplicity of speech.

And indeed at such moments as this she was not natural, her mind
reverted to her early training, to the aristocratic manner in which a
great lady is supposed to shew common people that she is glad to see
them, that she is not at all stiff. And her one and only failure in true
politeness lay in this excess of politeness; which it was easy to
identify as one of the professional "wrinkles" of a lady of the Faubourg
Saint-Germain, who, always seeing in her humbler friends the latent
discontent that she must one day arouse in their bosoms, greedily seizes
every opportunity on which she can possibly, in the ledger in which she
keeps her social account with them, write down a credit balance which
will allow her to enter presently on the opposite page the dinner or
reception to which she will not invite them. And so, having long ago
taken effect in her once and for all, and ignoring the fact that now
both the circumstances and the people concerned were different, that in
Paris she hoped to see us often come to her house, the spirit of her
caste was urging Mme. de Villeparisis on with feverish ardour, and as if
the time that was allowed her for being kind to us was limited, to
multiply, while we were still at Balbec, her gifts of roses and melons,
loans of books, drives in her carriage and verbal effusions. And for
that reason, quite as much as the dazzling glories of the beach, the
many-coloured flamboyance and subaqueous light of the rooms, as much
even as the riding-lessons by which tradesmen's sons were deified like
Alexander of Macedon, the daily kindnesses shewn us by Mme. de
Villeparisis and also the unaccustomed, momentary, holiday ease with
which my grandmother accepted them have remained in my memory as typical
of life at a watering-place.

"Give them your cloaks to take upstairs."

My grandmother handed hers to the manager, and because he had been so
nice to me I was distressed by this want of consideration, which seemed
to pain him.

"I think you've hurt his feelings," said the Marquise. "He probably
fancies himself too great a gentleman to carry your wraps. I remember so
well the Duc de Nemours, when I was still quite little, coming to see my
father who was living then on the top floor of the Bouillon house, with
a fat parcel under his arm of letters and newspapers. I can see the
Prince now, in his blue coat, framed in our doorway, which had such
pretty woodwork round it--I think it was Bagard made it--you know those
fine laths that they used to cut, so supple that the joiner would twist
them sometimes into little shells and flowers, like the ribbons round a
nosegay. 'Here you are, Cyrus,' he said to my father, 'look what your
porter's given me to bring you. He said to me: Since you're going up to
see the Count, it's not worth my while climbing all those stairs; but
take care you don't break the string.'" "Now that you have got rid of
your things, why don't you sit down; look, sit in this seat," she said
to my grandmother, taking her by the hand.

"Oh, if you don't mind, not in that one! There is not room for two, and
it's too big for me by myself; I shouldn't feel comfortable."

"You remind me, for it was exactly like this, of a seat that I had for
many years until at last I couldn't keep it any longer because it had
been given to my mother by the poor Duchesse de Praslin. My mother,
though she was the simplest person in the world, really, had ideas that
belonged to another generation, which even in those days I could
scarcely understand; and at first she had not been at all willing to let
herself be introduced to Mme. de Praslin, who had been plain Mlle.
Sebastiani, while she, because she was a Duchess, felt that it was not
for her to be introduced to my mother. And really, you know," Mme. de
Villeparisis went on, forgetting that she herself did not understand
these fine shades of distinction, "even if she had just been Mme. de
Choiseul, there was a good deal to be said for her claim. The Choiseuls
are everything you could want; they spring from a sister of Louis the
Fat; they were ruling princes down in Basigny. I admit that we beat them
in marriages and in distinction, but the precedence is pretty much the
same. This little difficulty gave rise to several amusing incidents,
such as a luncheon-party which was kept waiting a whole hour or more
before one of these ladies could make up her mind to let herself be
introduced to the other. In spite of which they became great friends,
and she gave my mother a seat like that, in which people always refused
to sit, just as you did, until one day my mother heard a carriage drive
into the courtyard. She asked a young servant we had, who it was. 'The
Duchesse de La Rochefoucauld, ma'am.' 'Very well, say that I am at
home.' A quarter of an hour passed; no one came. 'What about the
Duchesse de La Rochefoucauld?' my mother asked, 'where is she?' 'She's
on the stairs, ma'am, getting her breath,' said the young servant, who
had not been long up from the country, where my mother had the excellent
habit of getting all her servants. Often she had seen them born. That's
the only way to get really good ones. And they're the rarest of
luxuries. And sure enough the Duchesse de La Rochefoucauld had the
greatest difficulty in getting upstairs, for she was an enormous woman,
so enormous, indeed, that when she did come into the room my mother was
quite at a loss for a moment to know where to put her. And then the seat
that Mme. de Praslin had given her caught her eye. 'Won't you sit down?'
she said, bringing it forward. And the Duchess filled it from side to
side. She was quite a pleasant woman, for all her massiveness. 'She
still creates an effect when she comes in,' one of our friends said
once. 'She certainly creates an effect when she goes out,' said my
mother, who was rather more free in her speech than would be thought
proper nowadays. Even in Mme. de La Rochefoucauld's own drawing-room
people weren't afraid to make fun of her to her face (at which she was
always the first to laugh) over her ample proportions. 'But are you all
alone?' my grandmother once asked M. de La Rochefoucauld, when she had
come to pay a call on the Duchess, and being met at the door by him had
not seen his wife who was at the other end of the room. 'Is Mme. de La
Rochefoucauld not at home? I don't see her.'--'How charming of you!'
replied the Duke, who had about the worst judgment of any man I have
ever known, but was not altogether lacking in humour."

After dinner, when I had retired upstairs with my grandmother, I said to
her that the qualities which attracted us in Mme. de Villeparisis, her
tact, her shrewdness, her discretion, her modesty in not referring to
herself, were not, perhaps, of very great value since those who
possessed them in the highest degree were simply people like Molé and
Loménie, and that if the want of them can make our social relations
unpleasant yet it did not prevent from becoming Chateaubriand, Vigny,
Hugo, Balzac, a lot of foolish fellows who had no judgment, at whom it
was easy to mock, like Bloch. . . . But at the name of Bloch, my
grandmother cried out in protest. And she began to praise Mme. de
Villeparisis. As we are told that it is the preservation of the species
which guides our individual preferences in love, and, so that the child
may be constituted in the most normal fashion, sends fat men in pursuit
of lean women and _vice versa_, so in some dim way it was the
requirements of my happiness threatened by my disordered nerves, by my
morbid tendency to melancholy, to solitude, that made her allot the
highest place to the qualities of balance and judgment, peculiar not
only to Mme. de Villeparisis but to a society in which our ancestors saw
blossom the minds of a Doudan, a M. de Rémusat, not to mention a
Beausergent, a Joubert, a Sévigné, a type of mind that invests life
with more happiness, with greater dignity than the converse refinements
which brought a Baudelaire, a Poe, a Verlaine, a Rimbaud to sufferings,
to a disrepute such as my grandmother did not wish for her daughter's
child. I interrupted her with a kiss and asked her if she had noticed
some expression which Mme. de Villeparisis had used and which seemed to
point to a woman who thought more of her noble birth than she was
prepared to admit. In this way I used to submit my impressions of life
to my grandmother, for I was never certain what degree of respect was
due to anyone until she had informed me. Every evening I would come to
her with the mental sketches that I had made during the day of all those
non-existent people who were not her. Once I said to her: "I shouldn't
be able to live without you." "But you mustn't speak like that;" her
voice was troubled. "We must harden our hearts more than that, you know.
Or what would become of you if I went away on a journey? But I hope that
you would be quite sensible and quite happy."

"I could manage to be sensible if you went away for a few days, but I
should count the hours."

"But if I were to go away for months . . ." (at the bare suggestion of
such a thing my heart was wrung.) ". . . for years . . . for . . ."

We both remained silent. We dared not look one another in the face. And
yet I was suffering more keenly from her anguish than from my own. And
so I walked across to the window, and said to her, with a studied
clearness of tone but with averted eyes:

"You know what a creature of habit I am. For the first few days after I
have been parted from the people I love best, I am wretched. But though
I go on loving them just as much, I grow used to their absence; life
becomes calm, bearable, pleasant; I could stand being parted from them
for months, for years . . ."

I was obliged to stop, and looked straight out of the window. My
grandmother went out of the room for something. But next day I began to
talk to her about philosophy, and, speaking in a tone of complete
indifference, but at the same time taking care that my grandmother
should pay attention to what I was saying, I remarked what a curious
thing it was that, according to the latest scientific discoveries, the
materialist position appeared to be crumbling, and the most likely thing
to be, once again, the survival of the soul and reunion in a life
everlasting.

Mme. de Villeparisis gave us warning that presently she would not be
able to see so much of us. A young nephew who was preparing for Saumur,
and was meanwhile stationed in the neighbourhood, at Doncières, was
coming to spend a few weeks' furlough with her, and she would be
devoting most of her time to him. In the course of our drives together
she had boasted to us of his extreme cleverness, and above all of his
goodness of heart; already I was imagining that he would have an
instinctive feeling for me, that I was to be his best friend; and when,
before his arrival, his aunt gave my grandmother to understand that he
had unfortunately fallen into the clutches of an appalling woman with
whom he was quite infatuated and who would never let him go, since I
believed that that sort of love was doomed to end in mental aberration,
crime and suicide, thinking how short the time was that was set apart
for our friendship, already so great in my heart, although I had not yet
set eyes on him, I wept for that friendship and for the misfortunes that
were in store for it, as we weep for a person whom we love when some one
has just told us that he is seriously ill and that his days are
numbered.

One afternoon of scorching heat I was in the dining-room of the hotel,
which they had plunged in semi-darkness, to shield it from the glare, by
drawing the curtains which the sun gilded, while through the gaps
between them I caught flashing blue glimpses of the sea, when along the
central gangway leading inland from the beach to the high road I saw,
tall, slender, his head held proudly erect upon a springing neck, a
young man go past with searching eyes, whose skin was as fair and his
hair as golden as if they had absorbed all the rays of the sun. Dressed
in a clinging, almost white material such as I could never have believed
that any man would have the audacity to wear, the thinness of which
suggested no less vividly than the coolness of the dining-room the heat
and brightness of the glorious day outside, he was walking fast. His
eyes, from one of which a monocle kept dropping, were of the colour of
the sea. Everyone looked at him with interest as he passed, knowing that
this young Marquis de Saint-Loup-en-Bray was famed for the smartness of
his clothes. All the newspapers had described the suit in which he had
recently acted as second to the young Duc d'Uzès in a duel. One felt
that this so special quality of his hair, his eyes, his skin, his
figure, which would have marked him out in a crowd like a precious vein
of opal, azure-shot and luminous, embedded in a mass of coarser
substance, must correspond to a life different from that led by other
men. So that when, before the attachment which Mme. de Villeparisis had
been deploring, the prettiest women in society had disputed the
possession of him, his presence, at a watering-place for instance, in
the company of the beauty of the season to whom he was paying court, not
only made her conspicuous, but attracted every eye fully as much to
himself. Because of his "tone", of his impertinence befitting a young
"lion", and especially of his astonishing good looks, some people even
thought him effeminate, though without attaching any stigma, for
everyone knew bow manly he was and that he was a passionate "womaniser".
This was Mme. de Villeparisis's nephew of whom she had spoken to us. I
was overcome with joy at the thought that I was going to know him and to
see him for several weeks on end, and confident that he would bestow on
me all his affection. He strode rapidly across the hotel, seeming to be
in pursuit of his monocle, which kept darting away in front of him like
a butterfly. He was coming from the beach, and the sea which filled the
lower half of the glass front of the hall gave him a background against
which he was drawn at full length, as in certain portraits whose
painters attempt, without in any way falsifying the most accurate
observation of contemporary life, but by choosing for their sitter
appropriate surroundings, a polo ground, golf links, a race-course, the
bridge of a yacht, to furnish a modern equivalent of those canvases on
which the old masters used to present the human figure in the foreground
of a landscape. A carriage and pair was waiting for him at the door;
and, while his monocle resumed its gambollings in the air of the sunlit
street, with the elegance and mastery which a great pianist contrives to
display in the simplest piece of execution, where it has not appeared
possible that he could shew himself superior to a performer of the
second class, Mme. de Villeparisis's nephew, taking the reins that were
handed him by the groom, jumped on to the box seat by his side and,
while he opened a letter which the manager of the hotel sent out after
him, made his horses start.

What a disappointment was mine on the days that followed, when, each
time that I met him outside or in the hotel--his head erect, perpetually
balancing the movements of his limbs round the fugitive and dancing
monocle which seemed to be their centre of gravity--I was forced to
admit that he had evidently no desire to make our acquaintance, and saw
that he did not bow to us although he must have known that we were
friends of his aunt. And calling to mind the friendliness that Mme. de
Villeparisis, and before her M. de Norpois had shewn me, I thought that
perhaps they were only of a bogus nobility, and that there might be a
secret section in the laws that govern the aristocracy which allowed
women, perhaps, and certain diplomats to discard, in their relations
with plebeians, for a reason which was beyond me, the stiffness which
must, on the other hand, be pitilessly maintained by a young Marquis. My
intelligence might have told me the opposite. But the characteristic
feature of the silly phase through which I was passing--a phase by no
means irresponsive, indeed highly fertile--is that we do not consult our
intelligence and that the most trivial attributes of other people seem
to us then to form an inseparable part of their personality. In a world
thronged with monsters and with gods, we are barely conscious of
tranquillity. There is hardly one of the actions which we performed in
that phase which we would not give anything, in later life, to be able
to erase from our memory. Whereas what we ought to regret is that we no
longer possess the spontaneity which made us perform them. In later life
we look at things in a more practical way, in full conformity with the
rest of society, but youth was the only time in which we learned
anything.

This insolence which I surmised in M. de Saint-Loup, and all that it
implied of ingrained severity, received confirmation from his attitude
whenever he passed us, his body as inflexibly erect, his head always
held as high, his gaze as impassive, or rather, I should say, as
implacable, devoid of that vague respect which one has for the rights of
other people, even if they do not know one's aunt, one example of which
was that I did not look in quite the same way at an old lady as at a gas
lamp. These frigid manners were as far removed from the charming letters
which, but a few days since, I had still been imagining him as writing
to tell me of his regard for myself, as is removed from the enthusiasm
of the Chamber and of the populace which he has been picturing himself
as rousing by an imperishable speech, the humble, dull, obscure position
of the dreamer who, after pondering it thus by himself, for himself,
aloud, finds himself, once the imaginary applause has died away, just
the same Tom, Dick or Harry as before. When Mme. de Villeparisis,
doubtless in an attempt to counteract the bad impression that had been
made on us by an exterior indicative of an arrogant and evil nature,
spoke to us again of the inexhaustible goodness of her great-nephew (he
was the son of one of her nieces, and a little older than myself), I
marvelled how the world, with an utter disregard of truth, ascribes
tenderness of heart to people whose hearts are in reality so hard and
dry, provided only that they behave with common courtesy to the
brilliant members of their own sets. Mme. de Villeparisis herself
confirmed, though indirectly, my diagnosis, which was already a
conviction, of the essential points of her nephew's character one day
when I met them both coming along a path so narrow that there was
nothing for it but to introduce me to him. He seemed not to hear that a
person's name was being repeated to him, not a muscle of his face moved;
his eyes, in which there shone not the faintest gleam of human sympathy,
shewed merely in the insensibility, in the inanity of their gaze an
exaggeration failing which there would have been nothing to distinguish
them from lifeless mirrors. Then fastening on me those hard eyes, as
though he wished to make sure of me before returning my salute, by an
abrupt release which seemed to be due rather to a reflex action of his
muscles than to an exercise of will, keeping between himself and me the
greatest possible interval, he stretched his arm out to its full
extension and, at the end of it, offered me his hand. I supposed that it
must mean, at the very least, a duel when, next day, he sent me his
card. But he spoke to me only of literature, declared after a long talk
that he would like immensely to spend several hours with me every day.
He had not only, in this encounter, given proof of an ardent zest for
the things of the spirit, he had shewn a regard for myself which was
little in keeping with his greeting of me the day before. After I had
seen him repeat the same process whenever anyone was introduced to him,
I realised that it was simply a social usage peculiar to his branch of
the family, to which his mother, who had seen to it that he should be
perfectly brought up, had moulded his limbs; he went through those
motions without thinking, any more than he thought about his beautiful
clothes or hair; they were a thing devoid of the moral significance
which I had at first ascribed to them, a thing purely acquired like that
other habit that he had of at once demanding an introduction to the
family of anyone whom he knew, which had become so instinctive in him
that, seeing me again the day after our talk, he fell upon me and
without asking how I did begged me to make him known to my grandmother,
who was with me, with the same feverish haste as if the request had been
due to some instinct of self-preservation, like the act of warding off a
blow, or of shutting one's eyes to avoid a stream of boiling water,
without which precautions it would have been dangerous to stay where one
was a moment longer.

The first rites of exorcism once performed, as a wicked fairy discards
her outer form and endues all the most enchanting graces, I saw this
disdainful creature become the most friendly, the most considerate young
man that I had ever met. "Good," I said to myself, "I've been mistaken
about him once already; I was taken in by a mirage; but I have corrected
the first only to fall into a second, for he must be a great gentleman
who has grown sick of his nobility and is trying to hide it." As a
matter of fact it was not long before all the exquisite breeding, all
the friendliness of Saint-Loup were indeed to let me see another
creature but one very different from what I had suspected.

This young man who had the air of a scornful, sporting aristocrat had in
fact no respect, no interest save for and in the things of the spirit,
and especially those modern manifestations of literature and art which
seemed so ridiculous to his aunt; he was imbued, moreover, with what she
called "Socialistic spoutings," was filled with the most profound
contempt for his caste and spent long hours in the study of Nietzsche
and Proudhon. He was one of those intellectuals, quick to admire what is
good, who shut themselves up in a book, and are interested only in pure
thought. Indeed in Saint-Loup the expression of this highly abstract
tendency, which removed him so far from my customary preoccupations,
while it seemed to me touching, also annoyed me not a little. I may say
that when I realised properly who had been his father, on days when I
had been reading memoirs rich in anecdotes of that famous Comte de
Marsantes, in whom were embodied the special graces of a generation
already remote, the mind full of speculation--anxious to obtain fuller
details of the life that M. de Marsantes had led, it used to infuriate
me that Robert de Saint-Loup, instead of being content to be the son of
his father, instead of being able to guide me through the old-fashioned
romance of what had been that father's existence, had trained himself to
enjoy Nietzsche and Proudhon. His father would not have shared my
regret. He had been himself a man of brains, who had transcended the
narrow confines of his life as a man of the world. He had hardly had
time to know his son, but had hoped that his son would prove a better
man than himself. And I really believe that, unlike the rest of the
family, he would have admired his son, would have rejoiced at his
abandoning what had been his own small diversions for austere
meditations, and without saying a word, in his modesty as a great
gentleman endowed with brains, he would have read in secret his son's
favourite authors in order to appreciate how far Robert was superior to
himself.

There was, however, this rather painful consideration: that if M. de
Marsantes, with his extremely open mind, would have appreciated a son so
different from himself, Robert de Saint-Loup, because he was one of
those who believe that merit is attached only to certain forms of art
and of life, had an affectionate but slightly contemptuous memory of a
father who had spent all his time hunting and racing, who yawned at
Wagner and raved over Offenbach. Saint-Loup had not the intelligence to
see that intellectual worth has nothing to do with adhesion to any one
aesthetic formula, and had for the intellectuality of M. de Marsantes
much the same sort of scorn as might have been felt for Boieldieu or
Labiche by a son of Boieldieu or Labiche who had become adepts in the
most symbolic literature and the most complex music. "I scarcely knew my
father," he used to say. "He seems to have been a charming person. His
tragedy was the deplorable age in which he lived. To have been born in
the Faubourg Saint-Germain and to have to live in the days of La Belle
Hélène would be enough to wreck any existence. Perhaps if he'd been
some little shopkeeper mad about the Ring he'd have turned out quite
different. Indeed they tell me that he was fond of literature. But that
can never be proved, because literature to him meant such utterly
god-forsaken books." And in my own case, if I found Saint-Loup a trifle
earnest, he could not understand why I was not more earnest still. Never
judging anything except by the weight of the intelligence that it
contained, never perceiving the magic appeal to the imagination that I
found in things which he condemned as frivolous, he was astonished that
I--I, to whom he imagined himself to be so utterly inferior--could take
any interest in them.

From the first Saint-Loup made a conquest of my grandmother, not only by
the incessant acts of kindness which he went out of his way to shew to
us both, but by the naturalness which he put into them as into
everything. For naturalness--doubtless because through the artifice of
man it allows a feeling of nature to permeate--was the quality which my
grandmother preferred to all others, whether in gardens, where she did
not like there to be, as there had been in our Combray garden, too
formal borders, or at table, where she detested those dressed-up dishes
in which you could hardly detect the foodstuff's that had gone to make
them, or in piano-playing, which she did not like to be too finicking,
too laboured, having indeed had a special weakness for the discords, the
wrong notes of Rubinstein. This naturalness she found and enjoyed even
in the clothes that Saint-Loup wore, of a pliant elegance, with nothing
swagger, nothing formal about them, no stiffness or starch. She
appreciated this rich young man still more highly for the free and
careless way that he had of living in luxury without "smelling of
money", without giving himself airs; she even discovered the charm of
this naturalness in the incapacity which Saint-Loup had kept, though as
a rule it is outgrown with childhood, at the same time as certain
physiological peculiarities of that period, for preventing his face from
at once reflecting every emotion. Something, for instance, that he
wanted to have but had not expected, were it no more than a compliment,
reacted in him in a burst of pleasure so quick, so burning, so volatile,
so expansive that it was impossible for him to contain and to conceal
it; a grin of delight seized irresistible hold of his face; the too
delicate skin of his cheeks allowed a vivid glow to shine through them,
his eyes sparkled with confusion and joy; and my grandmother was
infinitely touched by this charming show of innocence and frankness,
which, incidentally, in Saint-Loup--at any rate at the period of our
first friendship--was not misleading. But I have known another person,
and there are many such, in whom the physiological sincerity of that
fleeting blush in no way excluded moral duplicity; as often as not it
proves nothing more than the vivacity with which pleasure is felt--so
that it disarms them and they are forced publicly to confess it--by
natures capable of the vilest treachery. But where my grandmother did
really adore Saint-Loup's naturalness was in his way of admitting,
without any evasion, his affection for me, to give expression to which
he found words than which she herself, she told me, could not have
thought of any more appropriate, more truly loving, words to which
"Sévigné and Beausergent" might have set their signatures. He was not
afraid to make fun of my weaknesses--which he had discerned with an
acuteness that made her smile--but as she herself would have done,
lovingly, at the same time extolling my good qualities with a warmth, an
impulsive freedom that shewed no sign of the reserve, the coldness by
means of which young men of his age are apt to suppose that they give
themselves importance. And he shewed in forestalling every discomfort,
however slight, in covering my legs if the day had turned cold without
my noticing it, in arranging (without telling me) to stay later with me
in the evening if he thought that I was depressed or felt unwell, a
vigilance which, from the point of view of my health, for which a more
hardening discipline would perhaps have been better, my grandmother
found almost excessive, though as a proof of his affection for myself
she was deeply touched by it.

It was promptly settled between us that he and I were to be great
friends for ever, and he would say "our friendship" as though he were
speaking of some important and delightful thing which had an existence
independent of ourselves, and which he soon called--not counting his
love for his mistress--the great joy of his life. These words made me
rather uncomfortable and I was at a loss for an answer, for I did not
feel when I was with him and talked to him--and no doubt it would have
been the same with everyone else--any of that happiness which it was, on
the other hand, possible for me to experience when I was by myself. For
alone, at times, I felt surging from the depths of my being one or other
of those impressions which gave me a delicious sense of comfort. But as
soon as I was with some one else, when I began to talk to a friend, my
mind at once "turned about", it was towards the listener and not myself
that it directed its thoughts, and when they followed this outward
course they brought me no pleasure. Once I had left Saint-Loup, I
managed, with the help of words, to put more or less in order the
confused minutes that I had spent with him; I told myself that I had a
good friend, that a good friend was a rare thing, and I tasted, when I
felt myself surrounded by "goods" that were difficult to acquire, what
was precisely the opposite of the pleasure that was natural to me, the
opposite of the pleasure of having extracted from myself and brought to
light something that was hidden in my inner darkness. If I had spent two
or three hours in conversation with Saint-Loup, and he had expressed his
admiration of what I had said to him, I felt a sort of remorse, or
regret, or weariness at not having been left alone and ready, at last,
to begin my work. But I told myself that one is not given intelligence
for one's own benefit only, that the greatest of men have longed for
appreciation, that I could not regard as wasted hours in which I had
built up an exalted idea of myself in the mind of my friend; I had no
difficulty in persuading myself that I ought to be happy in consequence,
and I hoped all the more anxiously that this happiness might never be
taken from me simply because I had not yet been conscious of it. We fear
more than the loss of everything else the disappearance of the "goods"
that have remained beyond our reach, because our heart has not taken
possession of them. I felt that I was capable of exemplifying the
virtues of friendship better than most people (because I should always
place the good of my friends before those personal interests to which
other people were devoted but which did not count for me), but not of
finding happiness in a feeling which, instead of multiplying the
differences that there were between my nature and those of other
people--as there are among all of us--would cancel them. At the same
time my mind was distinguishing in Saint-Loup a personality more
collective than his own, that of the "noble"; which like an indwelling
spirit moved his limbs, ordered his gestures and his actions; then, at
such moments, although in his company, I was as much alone as I should
have been gazing at a landscape the harmony of which I could understand.
He was no more then than an object the properties of which, in my musing
contemplations, I sought to explore. The perpetual discovery in him of
this pre-existent, this aeonial creature, this aristocrat who was just
what Robert aspired not to be, gave me a keen delight, but one that was
intellectual and not social. In the moral and physical agility which
gave so much grace to his kindnesses, in the ease with which he offered
my grandmother his carriage and made her get into it, in the alacrity
with which he sprang from the box, when he was afraid that I might be
cold, to spread his own cloak over my shoulders, I felt not only the
inherited litheness of the mighty hunters who had been for generations
the ancestors of this young man who made no pretence save to
intellectuality, their scorn of wealth which, subsisting in him side by
side with his enjoyment of it simply because it enabled him to entertain
his friends more lavishly, made him so carelessly shower his riches at
their feet; I felt in him especially the certainty or the illusion in
the minds of those great lords of being "better than other people",
thanks to which they had not been able to hand down to Saint-Loup that
anxiety to shew that one is "just as good", that dread of seeming
inferior, of which he was indeed wholly unconscious, but which mars with
so much ugliness, so much awkwardness, the most sincere overtures of a
plebeian. Sometimes I found fault with myself for thus taking pleasure
in my friend as in a work of art, that is to say in regarding the play
of all the parts of his being as harmoniously ordered by a general idea
from which they depended but which he did not know, so that it added
nothing to his own good qualities, to that personal value, intellectual
and moral, to which he attached so high a price.

And yet that idea was to a certain extent their determining cause. It
was because he was a gentleman that that mental activity, those
socialist aspirations, which made him seek the company of young
students, arrogant and ill-dressed, connoted in him something really
pure and disinterested which was not to be found in them. Looking upon
himself as the heir of an ignorant and selfish caste, he was sincerely
anxious that they should forgive in him that aristocratic origin which
they, on the contrary, found irresistibly attractive and on account of
which they sought to know him, though with a show of coldness and indeed
of insolence towards him. He was thus led to make advances to people
from whom my parents, faithful to the sociological theories of Combray,
would have been stupefied at his not turning away in disgust. One day
when we were sitting on the sands, Saint-Loup and I, we heard issuing
from a canvas tent against which we were leaning a torrent of
imprecation against the swarm of Israelites that infested Balbec. "You
can't go a yard without meeting them," said the voice. "I am not in
principle irremediably hostile to the Jewish nation, but here there is a
plethora of them. You hear nothing but, 'I thay, Apraham, I've chust
theen Chacop.' You would think you were in the Rue d'Aboukir." The man
who thus inveighed against Israel emerged at last from the tent; we
raised our eyes to behold this antisemite. It was my old friend Bloch.
Saint-Loup at once begged me to remind him that they had met before the
Board of Examiners, when Bloch had carried off the prize of honour, and
since then at a popular university course.

At the most I may have smiled now and then, to discover in Robert the
marks of his Jesuit schooling, in the awkwardness which the fear of
hurting people's feelings at once created in him whenever one of his
intellectual friends made a social error, did something silly to which
Saint-Loup himself attached no importance but felt that the other would
have blushed if anybody had noticed it. And it was Robert who used to
blush as though it had been he that was to blame, for instance on the
day when Bloch, after promising to come and see him at the hotel, went
on:

"As I cannot endure to be kept waiting among all the false splendour of
these great caravanserais, and the Hungarian band would make me ill, you
must tell the 'lighft-boy' to make them shut up, and to let you know at
once."

Personally, I was not particularly anxious that Bloch should come to the
hotel. He was at Balbec not by himself, unfortunately, but with his
sisters, and they in turn had innumerable relatives and friends staying
there. Now this Jewish colony was more picturesque than pleasant. Balbec
was in this respect like such countries as Russia or Rumania, where the
geography books teach us that the Israelite population does not enjoy
anything approaching the same esteem and has not reached the same stage
of assimilation as, for instance, in Paris. Always together, with no
blend of any other element, when the cousins and uncles of Bloch or
their coreligionists male or female repaired to the Casino, the ladies
to dance, the gentlemen branching off towards the baccarat-tables, they
formed a solid troop, homogeneous within itself, and utterly dissimilar
to the people who watched them go past and found them there again every
year without ever exchanging a word or a sign with them, whether these
were on the Cambremers' list, or the presiding magistrate's little
group, professional or "business" people, or even simple corn-chandlers
from Paris, whose daughters, handsome, proud, derisive and French as the
statues at Rheims, would not care to mix with that horde of ill-bred
tomboys, who carried their zeal for "seaside fashions" so far as to be
always apparently on their way home from shrimping or out to dance the
tango. As for the men, despite the brilliance of their dinner-jackets
and patent-leather shoes, the exaggeration of their type made one think
of what people call the "intelligent research" of painters who, having
to illustrate the Gospels or the Arabian Nights, consider the country in
which the scenes are laid, and give to Saint Peter or to Ali-Baba the
identical features of the heaviest "punter" at the Balbec tables. Bloch
introduced his sisters, who, though he silenced their chatter with the
utmost rudeness, screamed with laughter at the mildest sallies of this
brother, their blindly worshipped idol. So that it is probable that this
set of people contained, like every other, perhaps more than any other,
plenty of attractions, merits and virtues. But in order to experience
these, one had first to penetrate its enclosure. Now it was not popular;
it could feel this; it saw in its unpopularity the mark of an
anti-semitism to which it presented a bold front in a compact and closed
phalanx into which, as it happened, no one ever dreamed of trying to
make his way.

At his use of the word "lighft" I had all the less reason to be
surprised in that, a few days before, Bloch having asked me why I had
come to Balbec (although it seemed to him perfectly natural that he
himself should be there) and whether it had been "in the hope of making
grand friends", when I had explained to him that this visit was a
fulfilment of one of my earliest longings, though one not so deep as my
longing to see Venice, he had replied: "Yes, of course, to sip iced
drinks with the pretty ladies, while you pretend to be reading the
_Stones of Venighce_, by Lord John Ruskin, a dreary shaver, in fact one
of the most garrulous old barbers that you could find." So that Bloch
evidently thought that in England not only were all the inhabitants of
the male sex called "Lord", but the letter 'i' was invariably pronounced
'igh'. As for Saint-Loup, this mistake in pronunciation seemed to him
all the less serious inasmuch as he saw in it pre-eminently a want of
those almost "society" notions which my new friend despised as fully as
he was versed in them. But the fear lest Bloch, discovering one day that
one says "Venice" and that Ruskin was not a lord, should retrospectively
imagine that Robert had been laughing at him, made the latter feel as
guilty as if he had been found wanting in the indulgence with which, as
we have seen, he overflowed, so that the blush which would no doubt one
day dye the cheek of Bloch on the discovery of his error, Robert
already, by anticipation and reflex action, could feel mounting to his
own. For he fully believed that Bloch attached more importance than he
to this mistake. Which Bloch proved to be true some time later, when he
heard me pronounce the word "lift", by breaking in with:

"Oh, you say 'lift', do you?" And then, in a dry and lofty tone: "Not
that it is of the slightest importance." A phrase that is like a reflex
action of the body, the same in all men whose self-esteem is great, in
the gravest circumstances as well as in the most trivial, betraying
there as clearly as on this occasion how important the thing in question
seems to him who declares that it is of no importance; a tragic phrase
at times, the first to escape (and then how heart-breaking) the lips of
every man at all proud from whom we have just taken the last hope to
which he still clung by refusing to do him a service. "Oh, well, it's
not of the slightest importance; I shall make some other arrangement:"
the other arrangement which it is not of the slightest importance that
he should be driven to adopt being often suicide.

Apart from this, Bloch made me the prettiest speeches. He was certainly
anxious to be on the best of terms with me. And yet he asked me: "Is it
because you've taken a fancy to raise yourself to the peerage that you
run after de Saint-Loup-en-Bray? You must be going through a fine crisis
of snobbery. Tell me, are you a snob? I think so, what?" Not that his
desire to be friendly had suddenly changed. But what is called, in not
too correct language, "ill breeding" was his defect, and therefore the
defect which he was bound to overlook, all the more that by which he did
not believe that other people could be shocked. In the human race the
frequency of the virtues that are identical in us all is not more
wonderful than the multiplicity of the defects that are peculiar to each
one of us. Undoubtedly, it is not common sense that is "the commonest
thing in the world"; but human kindness. In the most distant, the most
desolate ends of the earth, we marvel to see it blossom of its own
accord, as in a remote valley a poppy like the poppies in the world
beyond, poppies which it has never seen as it has never known aught but
the wind that, now and again, stirring the folds of its scarlet cloak,
disturbs its solitude. Even if this human kindness, paralysed by
self-interest, is not exercised, it exists none the less, and whenever
any inconstant egoist does not restrain its action, when, for example,
he is reading a novel or a newspaper, it will bud, blossom, grow, even
in the heart of him who, cold-blooded in real life, has retained a
tender heart, as a lover of fiction, for the weak, the righteous and the
persecuted. But the variety of our defects is no less remarkable than
the similarity of our virtues. Each of us has his own, so much so that
to continue loving him we are obliged not to take them into account but
to ignore them and look only to the rest of his character. The most
perfect person in the world has a certain defect which shocks us or
makes us angry. One man is of rare intelligence, sees everything from an
exalted angle, never speaks evil of anyone, but will pocket and forget
letters of supreme importance which it was he himself who asked you to
let him post for you, and will then miss a vital engagement without
offering you any excuse, with a smile, because he prides himself upon
never knowing the time. Another is so refined, so gentle, so delicate in
his conduct that he never says anything about you before your face
except what you are glad to hear; but you feel that he refrains from
uttering, that he keeps buried in his heart, where they grow bitter,
very different opinions, and the pleasure that he derives from seeing
you is so dear to him that he will let you faint with exhaustion sooner
than leave you to yourself. A third has more sincerity, but carries it
so far that he feels bound to let you know, when you have pleaded the
state of your health as an excuse for not having been to see him, that
you were seen going to the theatre and were reported to be looking well,
or else that he has not been able to profit entirely by the action which
you have taken on his behalf, which, by the way, three other of his
friends had already offered to take, so that he is only moderately
indebted to you. In similar circumstances the previous friend would have
pretended not to know that you had gone to the theatre, or that other
people could have done him the same service. But this last friend feels
himself obliged to repeat or to reveal to somebody the very thing that
is most likely to give offence; is delighted with his own frankness and
tells you, emphatically: "I am like that." While others infuriate you by
their exaggerated curiosity, or by a want of curiosity so absolute that
you can speak to them of the most sensational happenings without their
grasping what it is all about; and others again take months to answer
you if your letter has been about something that concerns yourself and
not them, or else, if they write that they are coming to ask you for
something and you dare not leave the house for fear of missing them, do
not appear, but leave you in suspense for weeks because, not having
received from you the answer which their letter did not in the least
"expect", they have concluded that you must be cross with them. And
others, considering their own wishes and not yours, talk to you without
letting you get a word in if they are in good spirits and want to see
you, however urgent the work you may have in hand, but if they feel
exhausted by the weather or out of humour, you cannot get a word out of
them, they meet your efforts with an inert languor and no more take the
trouble to reply, even in monosyllables, to what you say to them than if
they had not heard you. Each of our friends has his defects so markedly
that to continue to love him we are obliged to seek consolation for
those defects--in the thought of his talent, his goodness, his affection
for ourself--or rather to leave them out of account, and for that we
need to display all our good-will. Unfortunately our obliging obstinacy
in refusing to see the defect in our friend is surpassed by the
obstinacy with which he persists in that defect, from his own blindness
to it or the blindness that he attributes to other people. For he does
not notice it himself, or imagines that it is not noticed. Since the
risk of giving offence arises principally from the difficulty of
appreciating what does and what does not pass unperceived, we ought, at
least, from prudence, never to speak of ourself, because that is a
subject on which we may be sure that other people's views are never in
accordance with our own. If we find as many surprises as on visiting a
house of plain exterior which inside is full of hidden treasures,
torture-chambers, skeletons, when we discover the true lives of other
people, the real beneath the apparent universe, we are no less surprised
if, in place of the image that we have made of ourself with the help of
all the things that people have said to us, we learn from the terms in
which they speak of us in our absence what an entirely different image
they have been carrying in their own minds of us and of our life. So
that whenever we have spoken about ourself, we may be sure that our
inoffensive and prudent words, listened to with apparent politeness and
hypocritical approbation, have given rise afterwards to the most
exasperated or the most mirthful, but in either case the least
favourable criticism. The least risk that we run is that of irritating
people by the disproportion that there is between our idea of ourself
and the words that we use, a disproportion which as a rule makes
people's talk about themselves as ludicrous as the performances of those
self-styled music-lovers who when they feel the need to hum a favourite
melody compensate for the inadequacy of their inarticulate murmurings by
a strenuous mimicry and a look of admiration which is hardly justified
by all that they let us hear. And to the bad habit of speaking about
oneself and one's defects there must be added, as part of the same
thing, that habit of denouncing in other people defects precisely
analogous to one's own. For it is always of those defects that people
speak, as though it were a way of speaking about oneself, indirectly,
which added to the pleasure of absolution that of confession. Besides it
seems that our attention, always attracted by what is characteristic of
ourself, notices that more than anything else in other people. One
short-sighted man says of another: "But he can scarcely open his eyes!";
a consumptive has his doubts as to the pulmonary integrity of the most
robust; an unwashed man speaks only of the baths that other people do
not take; an evil-smelling man insists that other people smell; a
cuckold sees cuckolds everywhere, a light woman light women, a snob
snobs. Then, too, every vice, like every profession, requires and trains
a special knowledge which we are never loath to display. The invert
detects and denounces inverts; the tailor asked out to dine, before he
has begun to talk to you, has passed judgment on the cloth of your coat,
which his fingers are itching to feel, and if after a few words of
conversation you were to ask a dentist what he really thought of you, he
would tell you how many of your teeth wanted filling. To him nothing
appears more important, nor more absurd to you who have noticed his own.
And it is not only when we speak of ourselves that we imagine other
people to be blind; we behave as though they were. On every one of us
there is a special god in attendance who hides from him or promises him
the concealment from other people of his defect, just as he stops the
eyes and nostrils of people who do not wash to the streaks of dirt which
they carry in their ears and the smell of sweat which emanates from
their armpits, and assures them that they can with impunity carry both
of these about a world that will notice nothing. And those who wear
artificial pearls, or give them as presents, imagine that people will
take them to be genuine. Bloch was ill-bred, neurotic, a snob, and,
since he belonged to a family of little repute, had to support, as on
the floor of ocean, the incalculable pressure that was imposed on him
not only by the Christians upon the surface but by all the intervening
layers of Jewish castes superior to his own, each of them crushing with
its contempt the one that was immediately beneath it. To carve his way
through to the open air by raising himself from Jewish family to Jewish
family would have taken Bloch many thousands of years. It was better
worth his while to seek an outlet in another direction.

When Bloch spoke to me of the crisis of snobbery through which I must be
passing, and bade me confess that I was a snob, I might well have
replied: "If I were, I should not be going about with you." I said
merely that he was not being very polite. Then he tried to apologise,
but in the way that is typical of the ill-bred man who is only too glad
to hark back to whatever it was if he can find an opportunity to
aggravate his offence. "Forgive me," he used now to plead, whenever we
met, "I have vexed you, tormented you; I have been wantonly mischievous.
And yet--man in general and your friend in particular is so singular an
animal--you cannot imagine the affection that I, I who tease you so
cruelly, have for you. It carries me often, when I think of you, to
tears." And he gave an audible sob.

What astonished me more in Bloch than his bad manners was to find how
the quality of his conversation varied. This youth, so hard to please
that of authors who were at the height of their fame he would say: "He's
a gloomy idiot; he's a sheer imbecile," would every now and then tell,
with immense gusto, stories that were simply not funny or would instance
as a "really remarkable person" some man who was completely
insignificant. This double scale of measuring the wit, the worth, the
interest of people continued to puzzle me until I was introduced to M.
Bloch, senior.

I had not supposed that we should ever be allowed to know him, for Bloch
junior had spoken ill of me to Saint-Loup and of Saint-Loup to me. In
particular, he had said to Robert that I was (always) a frightful snob.
"Yes, really, he is overjoyed at knowing M. LLLLegrandin." This trick of
isolating a word, was, in Bloch, a sign at once of irony and of
learning. Saint-Loup, who had never heard the name of Legrandin, was
bewildered. "But who is he?" "Oh, he's a bit of all right, he is!" Bloch
laughed, thrusting his hands into his pockets as though for warmth,
convinced that he was at that moment engaged in contemplation of the
picturesque aspect of an extraordinary country gentleman compared to
whom those of Barbey d'Aurevilly were as nothing. He consoled himself
for his inability to portray M. Legrandin by giving him a string of
capital 'L's, smacking his lips over the name as over a wine from the
farthest bin. But these subjective enjoyments remained hidden from other
people. If he spoke ill of me to Saint-Loup he made up for it by
speaking no less ill of Saint-Loup to me. We had each of us learned
these slanders in detail, the next day, not that we repeated them to
each other, a thing which would have seemed to us very wrong, but to
Bloch appeared so natural and almost inevitable that in his natural
anxiety, in the certainty moreover that he would be telling us only what
each of us was bound sooner or later to know, he preferred to anticipate
the disclosure and, taking Saint-Loup aside, admitted that he had spoken
ill of him, on purpose, so that it might be repeated to him, swore to
him "by Zeus Kronion, binder of oaths" that he loved him dearly, that he
would lay down his life for him; and wiped away a tear. The same day, he
contrived to see me alone, made his confession, declared that he had
acted in my interest, because he felt that a certain kind of social
intercourse was fatal to me and that I was "worthy of better things."
Then, clasping me by the hand, with the sentimentality of a drunkard,
albeit his drunkenness was purely nervous: "Believe me," he said, "and
may the black Ker seize me this instant and bear me across the portals
of Hades, hateful to men, if yesterday, when I thought of you, of
Combray, of my boundless affection for you, of afternoon hours in class
which you do not even remember, I did not lie awake weeping all night
long. Yes, all night long, I swear it, and alas, I know--for I know the
human soul--you will not believe me." I did indeed "not believe" him,
and to his words which, I felt, he was making up on the spur of the
moment, and expanding as he went on, his swearing "by Ker" added no
great weight, the Hellenic cult being in Bloch purely literary. Besides,
whenever he began to grow sentimental and wished his hearer to grow
sentimental over a falsehood, he would say: "I swear it", more for the
hysterical satisfaction of lying than to make people think that he was
speaking the truth. I did not believe what he was saying, but I bore him
no ill-will for that, for I had inherited from my mother and grandmother
their incapacity for resentment even of far worse offenders, and their
habit of never condemning anyone.

Besides, he was not altogether a bad youth, this Bloch; he could be, and
was at times quite charming. And now that the race of Combray, the race
from which sprang creatures absolutely unspoiled like my grandmother and
mother, seems almost extinct, as I have hardly any choice now save
between honest brutes, insensible and loyal, in whom the mere sound of
their voices shews at once that they take absolutely no interest in
one's life--and another kind of men who so long as they are with one
understand one, cherish one, grow sentimental even to tears, take their
revenge a few hours later by making some cruel joke at one's expense,
but return to one, always just as comprehending, as charming, as closely
assimilated, for the moment, to oneself, I think that it is of this
latter sort that I prefer if not the moral worth at any rate the
society.

"You cannot imagine my grief when I think of you," Bloch went on. "When
you come to think of it, it is a rather Jewish side of my nature," he
added ironically, contracting his pupils as though he had to prepare for
the microscope an infinitesimal quantity of "Jewish blood", and as might
(but never would) have said a great French noble who among his
ancestors, all Christian, might nevertheless have included Samuel
Bernard, or further still, the Blessed Virgin from whom, it is said, the
Lévy family claim descent, "coming out. I rather like," he continued
"to find room among my feelings for the share (not that it is more than
a very tiny share) which may be ascribed to my Jewish origin." He made
this statement because it seemed to him at once clever and courageous to
speak the truth about his race, a truth which at the same time he
managed to water down to a remarkable extent, like misers who decide to
pay their debts but have not the courage to pay more than half. This
kind of deceit which consists in having the boldness to proclaim the
truth, but only after mixing with it an ample measure of lies which
falsify it, is commoner than people think, and even among those who do
not habitually practise it certain crises in life, especially those in
which love is at stake, give them an opportunity of taking to it.

All these confidential diatribes by Bloch to Saint-Loup against me and
to me against Saint-Loup ended in an invitation to dinner. I am by no
means sure that he did not first make an attempt to secure Saint-Loup by
himself. It would have been so like Bloch to do so that probably he did;
but if so success did not crown his effort, for it was to myself and
Saint-Loup that Bloch said one day: "Dear master, and you, O horseman
beloved of Ares, de Saint-Loup-en-Bray, tamer of horses, since I have
encountered you by the shore of Amphitrite, resounding with foam, hard
by the tents of the swift-shipped Méniers, will both of you come to
dinner any day this week with my illustrious sire, of blameless heart?"
He proffered this invitation because he desired to attach himself more
closely to Saint-Loup who would, he hoped, secure him the right of entry
into aristocratic circles. Formed by me for myself, this ambition would
have seemed to Bloch the mark of the most hideous snobbishness, quite in
keeping with the opinion that he already held of a whole side of my
nature which he did not regard--or at least had not hitherto
regarded--as its most important side; but the same ambition in himself
seemed to him the proof of a finely developed curiosity in a mind
anxious to carry out certain social explorations from which he might
perhaps glean some literary benefit. M. Bloch senior, when his son had
told him that he was going to bring one of his friends in to dinner, and
had in a sarcastic but satisfied tone enunciated the name and title of
that friend: "The Marquis de Saint-Loup-en-Bray", had been thrown into
great commotion. "The Marquis de Saint-Loup-en-Bray! I'll be jiggered!"
he had exclaimed, using the oath which was with him the strongest
indication of social deference. And he cast at a son capable of having
formed such an acquaintance an admiring glance which seemed to say:
"Really, it is astounding. Can this prodigy be indeed a child of mine?"
which gave my friend as much pleasure as if his monthly allowance had
been increased by fifty francs. For Bloch was not in his element at home
and felt that his father treated him like a lost sheep because of his
lifelong admiration for Leconte de Lisle, Heredia and other "Bohemians".
But to have got to know Saint-Loup-en-Bray, whose father had been
chairman of the Suez Canal board ("I'll be jiggered!") was an
indisputable "score". What a pity, indeed, that they had left in Paris,
for fear of its being broken on the journey, the stereoscope. Alone
among men, M. Bloch senior had the art, or at least the right to exhibit
it. He did this, moreover, on rare occasions only, and then to good
purpose, on evenings when there was a full-dress affair, with hired
waiters. So that from these exhibitions of the stereoscope there
emanated, for those who were present, as it were a special distinction,
a privileged position, and for the master of the house who gave them a
reputation such as talent confers on a man--which could not have been
greater had the photographs been taken by M. Bloch himself and the
machine his own invention. "You weren't invited to Solomon's yesterday?"
one of the family would ask another. "No! I was not one of the elect.
What was on?" "Oh, a great how-d'ye-do, the stereoscope, the whole box
of tricks!" "Indeed! If they had the stereoscope I'm sorry I wasn't
there; they say Solomon is quite amazing when he works it."--"It can't
be helped;" said M. Bloch now to his son, "it's a mistake to let him
have everything at once; that would leave him nothing to look forward
to." He had actually thought, in his paternal affection and in the hope
of touching his son's heart, of sending for the instrument. But there
was not time, or rather they had thought there would not be; for we were
obliged to put off the dinner because Saint-Loup could not leave the
hotel, where he was waiting for an uncle who was coming to spend a few
days with Mme. de Villeparisis. Since--for he was greatly addicted to
physical culture, and especially to long walks--it was largely on foot,
spending the night in wayside farms, that this uncle was to make the
journey from the country house in which he was staying, the precise date
of his arrival at Balbec was by no means certain. And Saint-Loup, afraid
to stir out of doors, even entrusted me with the duty of taking to
Incauville, where the nearest telegraph-office was, the messages that he
sent every day to his mistress. The uncle for whom we were waiting was
called Palamède, a name that had come down to him from his ancestors
the Princes of Sicily. And later on when I found, as I read history,
belonging to this or that Podestà or Prince of the Church, the same
Christian name, a fine renaissance medal--some said, a genuine
antique--that had always remained in the family, having passed from
generation to generation, from the Vatican cabinet to the uncle of my
friend, I felt the pleasure that is reserved for those who, unable from
lack of means to start a case of medals, or a picture gallery, look out
for old names (names of localities, instructive and picturesque as an
old map, a bird's eye view, a sign-board or a return of customs;
baptismal names, in which rings out and is plainly heard, in their fine
French endings, the defect of speech, the intonation of a racial
vulgarity, the vicious pronunciation by which our ancestors made Latin
and Saxon words undergo lasting mutilations which in due course became
the august law-givers of our grammar books) and, in short, by drawing
upon their collections of ancient and sonorous words, give themselves
concerts like the people who acquire viols da gamba and viols d'amour so
as to perform the music of days gone by upon old-fashioned instruments.
Saint-Loup told me that even in the most exclusive aristocratic society
his uncle Palamède had the further distinction of being particularly
difficult to approach, contemptuous, double-dyed in his nobility,
forming with his brother's wife and a few other chosen spirits what was
known as the Phoenix Club. There even his insolence was so much dreaded
that it had happened more than once that people of good position who had
been anxious to meet him and had applied to his own brother for an
introduction had met with a refusal: "Really, you mustn't ask me to
introduce you to my brother Palamède. My wife and I, we would all of us
do our best for you, but it would be no good. Besides, there's always
the danger of his being rude to you, and I shouldn't like that." At the
Jockey Club he had, with a few of his friends, marked a list of two
hundred members whom they would never allow to be introduced to them.
And in the Comte de Paris's circle he was known by the nickname of "The
Prince" because of his distinction and his pride.

Saint-Loup told me about his uncle's early life, now a long time ago.
Every day he used to take women to a bachelor establishment which he
shared with two of his friends, as good-looking as himself, on account
of which they were known as "The Three Graces".

"One day, a man who just now is very much in the eye, as Balzac would
say, of the Faubourg Saint-Germain, but who at a rather awkward period
of his early life displayed odd tastes, asked my uncle to let him come
to this place. But no sooner had he arrived than it was not to the
ladies but to my uncle Palamède that he began to make overtures. My
uncle pretended not to understand, made an excuse to send for his two
friends; they appeared on the scene, seized the offender, stripped him,
thrashed him till he bled, and then with twenty degrees of frost outside
kicked him into the street where he was found more dead than alive; so
much so that the police started an inquiry which the poor devil had the
greatest difficulty in getting them to abandon. My uncle would never go
in for such drastic methods now, in fact you can't conceive the number
of men of humble position that he, who is so haughty with people in
society, has shewn his affection, taken under his wing, even if he is
paid for it with ingratitude. It may be a servant who has looked after
him in a hotel, for whom he will find a place in Paris, or a
farm-labourer whom he will pay to have taught a trade. That is really
the rather nice side of his character, in contrast to his social side."
Saint-Loup indeed belonged to that type of young men of fashion,
situated at an altitude at which it has been possible to cultivate such
expressions as: "What is really rather nice about him", "His rather nice
side", precious seeds which produce very rapidly a way of looking at
things in which one counts oneself as nothing and the "people" as
everything; the exact opposite, in a word, of plebeian pride. "It seems,
it is quite impossible to imagine how he set the tone, how he laid down
the law for the whole of society when he was a young man. He acted
entirely for himself; in any circumstances he did what seemed pleasing
to himself, what was most convenient, but at once the snobs would start
copying him. If he felt thirsty at the play, and sent out from his box
for a drink, the little sitting-rooms behind all the boxes would be
filled, a week later, with refreshments. One wet summer, when he had a
touch of rheumatism, he ordered an ulster of a loose but warm vicuna
wool, which is used only for travelling rugs, and kept the blue and
orange stripes shewing. The big tailors at once received orders from all
their customers for blue and orange ulsters of rough wool. If he had
some reason for wishing to keep every trace of ceremony out of a dinner
in a country house where he was spending the day, and to point the
distinction had come without evening clothes and sat down to table in
the suit he had been wearing that afternoon, it became the fashion, when
you were dining in the country, not to dress. If he was eating some
special sweet and instead of taking his spoon used a knife, or a special
implement of his own invention which he had had made for him by a
silversmith, or his fingers, it at once became wrong to eat it in any
other way. He wanted once to hear some Beethoven quartets again (for
with all his preposterous ideas he is no fool, mind, he has great gifts)
and arranged for some musicians to come and play them to him and a few
friends once a week. The ultra-fashionable thing that season was to give
quite small parties, with chamber music. I should say he's not done at
all badly out of life. With his looks, he must have had any number of
women! I can't tell you exactly whom, for he is very discreet. But I do
know that he was thoroughly unfaithful to my poor aunt. Not that that
prevented his being always perfectly charming to her, and her adoring
him; he was in mourning for her for years. When he is in Paris, he still
goes to the cemetery nearly every day."

The morning after Robert had told me all these things about his uncle,
while he waited for him (and waited, as it happened, in vain), as I was
coming by myself past the Casino on my way back to the hotel, I had the
sensation of being watched by somebody who was not far off. I turned my
head and saw a man of about forty, very tall and rather stout, with a
very dark moustache, who, nervously slapping the leg of his trousers
with a switch, kept fastened upon me a pair of eyes dilated with
observation. Every now and then those eyes were shot through by a look
of intense activity such as the sight of a person whom they do not know
excites only in men to whom, for whatever reason, it suggests thoughts
that would not occur to anyone else--madmen, for instance, or spies. He
trained upon me a supreme stare at once bold, prudent, rapid and
profound, like a last shot which one fires at an enemy at the moment
when one turns to flee, and, after first looking all round him, suddenly
adopting an absent and lofty air, by an abrupt revolution of his whole
body turned to examine a playbill on the wall in the reading of which he
became absorbed, while he hummed a tune and fingered the moss-rose in
his buttonhole. He drew from his pocket a note-book in which he appeared
to be taking down the title of the performance that was announced,
looked two or three times at his watch, pulled down over his eyes a
black straw hat the brim of which he extended with his hand held out
over it like a visor, as though to see whether some one were at last
coming, made the perfunctory gesture of annoyance by which people mean
to shew that they have waited long enough, although they never make it
when they are really waiting, then pushing back his hat and exposing a
scalp cropped close except at the sides where he allowed a pair of waved
"pigeon's-wings" to grow quite long, he emitted the loud panting breath
that people give who are not feeling too hot but would like it to be
thought that they were. He gave me the impression of a "hotel crook" who
had been watching my grandmother and myself for some days, and while he
was planning to rob us had just discovered that I had surprised him in
the act of spying; to put me off the scent, perhaps he was seeking only,
by his new attitude, to express boredom and detachment, but it was with
an exaggeration so aggressive that his object appeared to be--at least
as much as the dissipating of the suspicions that I must have had of
him--to avenge a humiliation which quite unconsciously I must have
inflicted on him, to give me the idea not so much that he had not seen
me as that I was an object of too little importance to attract his
attention. He threw back his shoulders with an air of bravado, bit his
lips, pushed up his moustache, and in the lens of his eyes made an
adjustment of something that was indifferent, harsh, almost insulting.
So effectively that the singularity of his expression made me take him
at one moment for a thief and at another for a lunatic. And yet his
scrupulously ordered attire was far more sober and far more simple than
that of any of the summer visitors I saw at Balbec, and gave a
reassurance to my own suit, so often humiliated by the dazzling and
common-place whiteness of their holiday garb. But my grandmother was
coming towards me, we took a turn together, and I was waiting for her,
an hour later, outside the hotel into which she had gone for a moment,
when I saw emerge from it Mme. de Villeparisis with Robert de Saint-Loup
and the stranger who had stared at me so intently outside the Casino.
Swift as a lightning-flash his look shot through me, just as at the
moment when I first noticed him, and returned, as though he had not seen
me, to hover, slightly lowered, before his eyes, dulled, like the
neutral look which feigns to see nothing without and is incapable of
reporting anything to the mind within, the look which expresses merely
the satisfaction of feeling round it the eyelids which it cleaves apart
with its sanctimonious roundness, the devout, the steeped look that we
see on the faces of certain hypocrites, the smug look on those of
certain fools. I saw that he had changed his clothes. The suit he was
wearing was darker even than the other; and no doubt this was because
the true distinction in dress lies nearer to simplicity than the false;
but there was something more; when one came near him one felt that if
colour was almost entirely absent from these garments it was not because
he who had banished it from them was indifferent to it but rather
because for some reason he forbade himself the enjoyment of it. And the
sobriety which they displayed seemed to be of the kind that comes from
obedience to a rule of diet rather than from want of appetite. A dark
green thread harmonised, in the stuff of his trousers, with the clock on
his socks, with a refinement which betrayed the vivacity of a taste that
was everywhere else conquered, to which this single concession had been
made out of tolerance for such a weakness, while a spot of red on his
necktie was imperceptible, like a liberty which one dares not take.

"How are you? Let me introduce my nephew, the Baron de Guermantes," Mme.
de Villeparisis greeted me, while the stranger without looking at me,
muttering a vague "Charmed!" which he followed with a "H'm, h'm, h'm" to
give his affability an air of having been forced, and doubling back his
little finger, forefinger and thumb, held out to me his middle and ring
fingers, the latter bare of any ring, which I clasped through his suede
glove; then, without lifting his eyes to my face, he turned towards Mme.
de Villeparisis.

"Good gracious; I shall be forgetting my own name next!" she exclaimed.
"Here am I calling you Baron de Guermantes. Let me introduce the Baron
de Charlus. After all, it's not a very serious mistake," she went on,
"for you're a thorough Guermantes whatever else you are."

By this time my grandmother had reappeared, and we all set out together.
Saint-Loup's uncle declined to honour me not only with a word, with so
much as a look, even, in my direction. If he stared strangers out of
countenance (and during this short excursion he two or three times
hurled his terrible and searching scrutiny like a sounding lead at
insignificant people of obviously humble extraction who happened to
pass), to make up for that he never for a moment, if I was to judge by
myself, looked at the people whom he did know, just as a detective on
special duty might except his personal friends from his professional
vigilance. Leaving them, my grandmother, Mme. de Villeparisis and him to
talk to one another, I fell behind with Saint-Loup.

"Tell me, am I right in thinking I heard Mme. de Villeparisis say just
now to your uncle that he was a Guermantes?"

"Of course he is; Palamède de Guermantes."

"Not the same Guermantes who have a place near Combray, and claim
descent from Geneviève de Brabant?"

"Most certainly: my uncle, who is the very last word in heraldry and all
that sort of thing, would tell you that our 'cry', our war-cry, that is
to say, which was changed afterwards to 'Passavant' was originally
'Combraysis'," he said, smiling so as not to appear to be priding
himself on this prerogative of a "cry", which only the semi-royal
houses, the great chiefs of feudal bands enjoyed. "It's his brother who
has the place now."

And so she was indeed related, and quite closely, to the Guermantes,
this Mme. de Villeparisis who had so long been for me the lady who had
given me a duck filled with chocolates, when I was little, more remote
then from the Guermantes way than if she had been shut up somewhere on
the Méséglise, less brilliant, less highly placed by me than was the
Combray optician, and who now suddenly went through one of those
fantastic rises in value, parallel to the depreciations, no less
unforeseen, of other objects in our possession, which--rise and fall
alike--introduce in our youth and in those periods of our life in which
a trace of youth persists changes as numerous as the Metamorphoses of
Ovid.

"Haven't they got, down there, the busts of all the old lords of
Guermantes?"

"Yes; and a lovely sight they are!" Saint-Loup was ironical. "Between
you and me, I look on all that sort of thing as rather a joke. But they
have got at Guermantes, what is a little more interesting, and that is
quite a touching portrait of my aunt by Carrière. It's as fine as
Whistler or Velasquez," went on Saint-Loup, who in his neophyte zeal was
not always very exact about degrees of greatness. "There are also some
moving pictures by Gustave Moreau. My aunt is the niece of your friend
Mme. de Villeparisis; she was brought up by her, and married her cousin,
who was a nephew, too, of my aunt Villeparisis, the present Duc de
Guermantes."

"Then who is this uncle?"

"He bears the title of Baron de Charlus. Properly speaking, when my
great-uncle died, my uncle Palamède ought to have taken the title of
Prince des Laumes, which his brother used before he became Duc de
Guermantes, for in that family they change their names as you'ld change
your shirt. But my uncle has peculiar ideas about all that sort of
thing. And as he feels that people are rather apt to overdo the Italian
Prince and Grandee of Spain business nowadays, though he had
half-a-dozen titles of 'Prince' to choose from, he has remained Baron de
Charlus, as a protest, and with an apparent simplicity which really
covers a good deal of pride. 'In these days', he says, 'everybody is
Prince something-or-other; one really must have a title that will
distinguish one; I shall call myself Prince when I wish to travel
incognito.' According to him there is no older title than the Charlus
barony; to prove to you that it is earlier than the Montmorency title,
though they used to claim, quite wrongly, to be the premier barons of
France when they were only premier in the Ile-de-France, where their
fief was, my uncle will explain to you for hours on end and enjoy doing
it, because, although he's a most intelligent man, really gifted, he
regards that sort of thing as quite a live topic of conversation,"
Saint-Loup smiled again. "But as I am not like him, you mustn't ask me
to talk pedigrees; I know nothing more deadly, more perishing; really,
life is not long enough."

I now recognised in the hard look which had made me turn round that
morning outside the Casino the same that I had seen fixed on me at
Tansonville, at the moment when Mme. Swann called Gilberte away.

"But, I say, all those mistresses that, you told me, your uncle M. de
Charlus had had, wasn't Mme. Swann one of them?"

"Good lord, no! That is to say, my uncle's a great friend of Swann, and
has always stood up for him. But no one has ever suggested that he was
his wife's lover. You would make a great sensation in Paris society if
people thought you believed that."

I dared not reply that it would have caused an even greater sensation in
Combray society if people had thought that I did not believe it.

My grandmother was delighted with M. de Charlus. No doubt he attached an
extreme importance to all questions of birth and social position, and my
grandmother had remarked this, but without any trace of that severity
which as a rule embodies a secret envy and the annoyance of seeing some
one else enjoy an advantage which one would like but cannot oneself
possess. As on the other hand my grandmother, content with her lot and
never for a moment regretting that she did not move in a more brilliant
sphere, employed only her intellect in observing the eccentricities of
M. de Charlus, she spoke of Saint-Loup's uncle with that detached,
smiling, almost affectionate kindness with which we reward the object of
our disinterested study for the pleasure that it has given us, all the
more that this time the object was a person with regard to whom she
found that his if not legitimate, at any rate picturesque pretensions
shewed him in vivid contrast to the people whom she generally had
occasion to see. But it was especially in consideration of his
intelligence and sensibility, qualities which it was easy to see that M.
de Charlus, unlike so many of the people in society whom Saint-Loup
derided, possessed in a marked degree, that my grandmother had so
readily forgiven him his aristocratic prejudice. And yet this had not
been sacrificed by the uncle, as it was by the nephew, to higher
qualities. Rather, M. de Charlus had reconciled it with them.
Possessing, by virtue of his descent from the Ducs de Nemours and
Princes de Lamballe, documents, furniture, tapestries, portraits painted
for his ancestors by Raphael, Velasquez, Boucher, justified in saying
that he was visiting a museum and a matchless library when he was merely
turning over his family relics at home, he placed in the rank from which
his nephew had degraded it the whole heritage of the aristocracy.
Perhaps also, being less metaphysical than Saint-Loup, less satisfied
with words, more of a realist in his study of men, he did not care to
neglect a factor that was essential to his prestige in their eyes and,
if it gave certain disinterested pleasures to his imagination, could
often be a powerfully effective aid to his utilitarian activities. No
agreement can ever be reached between men of his sort and those who obey
the ideal within them which urges them to strip themselves bare of such
advantages so that they may seek only to realise that ideal, similar in
that respect to the painters, the writers who renounce their virtuosity,
the artistic peoples who modernise themselves, warrior peoples who take
the initiative in a move for universal disarmament, absolute governments
which turn democratic and repeal their harsh laws, though as often as
not the sequel fails to reward their noble effort; for the men lose
their talent, the nations their secular predominance; "pacificism" often
multiplies wars and indulgence criminality. If Saint-Loup's efforts
towards sincerity and emancipation were only to be commended as most
noble, to judge by their visible result, one could still be thankful
that they had failed to bear fruit in M. de Charlus, who had transferred
to his own home much of the admirable panelling from the Guermantes
house, instead of substituting, like his nephew, a "modern style" of
decoration, employing Lebourg or Guillaumin. It was none the less true
that M. de Charlus's ideal was highly artificial, and, if the epithet
can be applied to the word ideal, as much social as artistic. In certain
women of great beauty and rare culture whose ancestresses, two centuries
earlier, had shared in all the glory and grace of the old order, he
found a distinction which made him take pleasure only in their society,
and no doubt the admiration for them which he had protested was sincere,
but countless reminiscences, historical and artistic, called forth by
their names, entered into and formed a great part of it, just as
suggestions of classical antiquity are one of the reasons for the
pleasure which a booklover finds in reading an Ode of Horace that is
perhaps inferior to poems of our own day which would leave the same
booklover cold. Any of these women by the side of a pretty commoner was
for him what are, hanging beside a contemporary canvas representing a
procession or a wedding, those old pictures the history of which we
know, from the Pope or King who ordered them, through the hands of
people whose acquisition of them, by gift, purchase, conquest or
inheritance, recalls to us some event or at least some alliance of
historic interest, and consequently some knowledge that we ourselves
have acquired, gives it a fresh utility, increases our sense of the
richness of the possessions of our memory or of our erudition. M. de
Charlus might be thankful that a prejudice similar to his own, by
preventing these several great ladies from mixing with women whose blood
was less pure, presented them for his veneration unspoiled, in their
unaltered nobility, like an eighteenth-century house-front supported on
its flat column of pink marbles, in which the passage of time has
wrought no change.

M. de Charlus praised the true "nobility" of mind and heart which
characterised these women, playing upon the word in a double sense by
which he himself was taken in, and in which lay the falsehood of this
bastard conception, of this medley of aristocracy, generosity and art,
but also its seductiveness, dangerous to people like my grandmother, to
whom the less refined but more innocent prejudice of a nobleman who
cared only about quarterings and took no thought for anything besides
would have appeared too silly for words, whereas she was defenceless as
soon as a thing presented itself under the externals of a mental
superiority, so much so, indeed, that she regarded Princes as enviable
above all other men because they were able to have a Labruyère, a
Fénelon as their tutors. Outside the Grand Hotel the three Guermantes
left us; they were going to luncheon with the Princesse de Luxembourg.
While my grandmother was saying good-bye to Mme. de Villeparisis and
Saint-Loup to my grandmother, M. de Charlus who, so far, had not uttered
a word to me, drew back a little way from the group and, when he reached
my side, said: "I shall be taking tea this evening after dinner in my
aunt Villeparisis's room; I hope that you will give me the pleasure of
seeing you there, and your grandmother." With which he rejoined the
Marquise.

Although it was Sunday there were no more carriages waiting outside the
hotel now than at the beginning of the season. The solicitor's wife, in
particular, had decided that it was not worth the expense of hiring one
every time simply because she was not going to the Cambremers', and
contented herself with staying in her room.

"Is Mme. Blandais not well?" her husband was asked. "We haven't seen her
all day."

"She has a slight headache; it's the heat, there's thunder coming. The
least thing upsets her; but I expect you will see her this evening; I've
told her she ought to come down. It can't do her any harm."

I had supposed that in thus inviting us to take tea with his aunt, whom
I never doubted that he would have warned that we were coming, M. de
Charlus wished to make amends for the impoliteness which he had shewn me
during our walk that morning. But when, on our entering Mme. de
Villeparisis's room, I attempted to greet her nephew, even although I
walked right round him, while in shrill accents he was telling a
somewhat spiteful story about one of his relatives, I did not succeed in
catching his eye; I decided to say "Good evening" to him, and fairly
loud, to warn him of my presence; but I realised that he had observed
it, for before ever a word had passed my lips, just as I began to bow to
him, I saw his two fingers stretched out for me to shake without his
having turned to look at me or paused in his story. He had evidently
seen me, without letting it appear that he had, and I noticed then that
his eyes, which were never fixed on the person to whom he was speaking,
strayed perpetually in all directions, like those of certain animals
when they are frightened, or those of street hawkers who, while they are
bawling their patter and displaying their illicit merchandise, keep a
sharp lookout, though without turning their heads, on the different
points of the horizon, from any of which may appear, suddenly, the
police. At the same time I was a little surprised to find that Mme. de
Villeparisis, while glad to see us, did not seem to have been expecting
us, and I was still more surprised to hear M. de Charlus say to my
grandmother: "Ah! that was a capital idea of yours to come and pay us a
visit; charming of them, is it not, my dear aunt?" No doubt he had
noticed his aunt's surprise at our entry and thought, as a man
accustomed to set the tone, to strike the right note, that it would be
enough to transform that surprise into joy were he to shew that he
himself felt it, that it was indeed the feeling which our arrival there
ought to have prompted. In which he calculated wisely; for Mme. de
Villeparisis, who had a high opinion of her nephew and knew how
difficult it was to please him, appeared suddenly to have found new
attractions in my grandmother and continued to make much of her. But I
failed to understand how M. de Charlus could, in the space of a few
hours, have forgotten the invitation--so curt but apparently so
intentional, so premeditated--which he had addressed to me that same
morning, or why he called a "capital idea" on my grandmother's part an
idea that had been entirely his own. With a scruple of accuracy which I
retained until I had reached the age at which I realised that it is not
by asking him questions that one learns the truth of what another man
has had in his mind, and that the risk of a misunderstanding which will
probably pass unobserved is less than that which may come from a
purblind insistence: "But, sir," I reminded him, "you remember, surely,
that it was you who asked me if we would come in this evening?" Not a
sound, not a movement betrayed that M. de Charlus had so much as heard
my question. Seeing which I repeated it, like a diplomat, or like young
men after a misunderstanding who endeavour, with untiring and unrewarded
zeal, to obtain an explanation which their adversary is determined not
to give them. Still M. de Charlus answered me not a word. I seemed to
see hovering upon his lips the smile of those who from a great height
pass judgment on the characters and breeding of their inferiors.

Since he refused to give any explanation, I tried to provide one for
myself, but succeeded only in hesitating between several, none of which
could be the right one. Perhaps he did not remember, or perhaps it was I
who had failed to understand what he had said to me that morning. . . .
More probably, in his pride, he did not wish to appear to have sought to
attract people whom he despised, and preferred to cast upon them the
responsibility for their intrusion. But then, if he despised us, why had
he been so anxious that we should come, or rather that my grandmother
should come, for of the two of us it was to her alone that he spoke that
evening, and never once to me. Talking with the utmost animation to her,
as also to Mme. de Villeparisis, hiding, so to speak, behind them, as
though he were seated at the back of a theatre-box, he contented
himself, turning from them every now and then the exploring gaze of his
penetrating eyes, with fastening it on my face, with the same gravity,
the same air of preoccupation as if my face had been a manuscript
difficult to decipher.

No doubt, if he had not had those eyes, the face of M. de Charlus would
have been similar to the faces of many good-looking men. And when
Saint-Loup, speaking to me of various other Guermantes, on a later
occasion, said: "Gad, they've not got that thoroughbred air, of being
gentlemen to their finger-tips, that uncle Palamède has!" confirming my
suspicion that a thoroughbred air and aristocratic distinction were not
anything mysterious and new but consisted in elements which I had
recognised without difficulty and without receiving any particular
impression from them, I was to feel that another of my illusions had
been shattered. But that face, to which a faint layer of powder gave
almost the appearance of a face on the stage, in vain might M. de
Charlus hermetically seal its expression; his eyes were like two
crevices, two loopholes which alone he had failed to stop, and through
which, according to where one stood or sat in relation to him, one felt
suddenly flash across one the glow of some internal engine which seemed
to offer no reassurance even to him who without being altogether master
of it must carry it inside him, at an unstable equilibrium and always on
the point of explosion; and the circumspect and unceasingly restless
expression of those eyes, with all the signs of exhaustion which,
extending from them to a pair of dark rings quite low down upon his
cheeks, were stamped on his face, however carefully he might compose and
regulate it, made one think of some incognito, some disguise assumed by
a powerful man in danger, or merely by a dangerous--but tragic--person.
I should have liked to divine what was this secret which other men did
not carry in their breasts and which had already made M. de Charlus's
gaze so enigmatic to me when I had seen him that morning outside the
Casino. But with what I now knew of his family I could no longer believe
that they were the eyes of a thief, nor, after what I had heard of his
conversation, could I say that they were those of a madman. If he was
cold with me, while making himself agreeable to my grandmother, that
arose perhaps not from a personal antipathy for, generally speaking,
just as he was kindly disposed towards women, of whose faults he used to
speak without, as a rule, any narrowing of the broadest tolerance, so he
shewed with regard to men, and especially young men, a hatred so violent
as to suggest that of certain extreme misogynists for women. Two or
three "carpet-knights", relatives or intimate friends of Saint-Loup who
happened to mention their names, M. de Charlus, with an almost ferocious
expression, in sharp contrast to his usual coldness, called: "Little
cads!" I gathered that the particular fault which he found in the young
men of the period was their extreme effeminacy. "They're absolute
women," he said with scorn. But what life would not have appeared
effeminate beside that which he expected a man to lead, and never found
energetic or virile enough? (He himself, when he walked across country,
after long hours on the road would plunge his heated body into frozen
streams.) He would not even allow a man to wear a single ring. But this
profession of virility did not prevent his having also the most delicate
sensibilities. When Mme. de Villeparisis asked him to describe to my
grandmother some country house in which Mme. de Sévigné had stayed,
adding that she could not help feeling that there was something rather
"literary" about that lady's distress at being parted from "that
tiresome Mme. de Grignan":

"On the contrary," he retorted, "I can think of nothing more true.
Besides, it was a time in which feelings of that sort were thoroughly
understood. The inhabitant of Lafontaine's Monomotapa, running to see
his friend who had appeared to him in a dream, and had looked sad, the
pigeon finding that the greatest of evils is the absence of the other
pigeon, seem to you perhaps, my dear aunt, as exaggerated as Mme. de
Sévigné's impatience for the moment when she will be alone with her
daughter. It is so fine what she says when she leaves her: 'This parting
gives a pain to my soul which I feel like an ache in my body. In absence
one is liberal with the hours. One anticipates a time for which one is
longing.'" My grandmother was in ecstasies at hearing the Letters thus
spoken of, exactly as she would have spoken of them herself. She was
astonished that a man could understand them so thoroughly. She found in
M. de Charlus a delicacy, a sensibility that were quite feminine. We
said to each other afterwards, when we were by ourselves and began to
discuss him together, that he must have come under the strong influence
of a woman, his mother, or in later life his daughter if he had any
children. "A mistress, perhaps," I thought to myself, remembering the
influence that Saint-Loup's seemed to have had over him, which enabled
me to realise the point to which men can be refined by the women with
whom they live.

"Once she was with her daughter, she had probably nothing to say to
her," put in Mme. de Villeparisis.

"Most certainly she had: if it was only what she calls 'things so slight
that nobody else would notice them but you and me.' And anyhow she was
with her. And Labruyère tells us that that is everything. 'To be with
the people one loves, to speak to them, not to speak to them, it is all
the same.' He is right; that is the only form of happiness," added M. de
Charlus in a mournful voice, "and that happiness--alas, life is so ill
arranged that one very rarely tastes it; Mme. de Sévigné was after all
less to be pitied than most of us. She spent a great part of her life
with the person whom she loved."

"You forget that it was not 'love' in her case; the person was her
daughter."

"But what matters in life is not whom or what one loves," he went on, in
a judicial, peremptory, almost a cutting tone; "it is the fact of
loving. What Mme. de Sévigné felt for her daughter has a far better
claim to rank with the passion that Racine described in _Andromaque_ or
_Phèdre_ than the common-place relations young Sévigné had with his
mistresses. It's the same with a mystic's love for his God. The hard and
fast lines with which we circumscribe love arise solely from our
complete ignorance of life."

"You think all that of _Andromaque_ and _Phèdre_, do you?" Saint-Loup
asked his uncle in a faintly contemptuous tone. "There is more truth in
a single tragedy of Racine than in all the dramatic works of Monsieur
Victor Hugo," replied M. de Charlus. "People really are overwhelming,"
Saint-Loup murmured in my ear. "Preferring Racine to Victor, you may say
what you like, it's epoch-making!" He was genuinely distressed by his
uncle's words, but the satisfaction of saying "you may say what you
like" and, better still, "epoch-making" consoled him.

In these reflexions upon the sadness of having to live apart from the
person whom one loves (which were to lead my grandmother to say to me
that Mme. de Villeparisis's nephew understood certain things quite as
well as his aunt, but in a different way, and moreover had something
about him that set him far above the average club man) M. de Charlus not
only allowed a refinement of feeling to appear such as men rarely shew;
his voice itself, like certain contralto voices which have not been
properly trained to the right pitch, so that when they sing it sounds
like a duet between a young man and a woman, singing alternately,
mounted, when he expressed these delicate sentiments, to its higher
notes, took on an unexpected sweetness and seemed to be embodying choirs
of betrothed maidens, of sisters, who poured out the treasures of their
love. But the bevy of young girls, whom M. de Charlus in his horror of
every kind of effeminacy would have been so distressed to learn that he
gave the impression of sheltering thus within his voice, did not confine
themselves to the interpretation, the modulation of scraps of sentiment.
Often while M. de Charlus was talking one could hear their laughter,
shrill, fresh laughter of school-girls or coquettes quizzing their
partners with all the archness of clever tongues and pretty wits.

He told us how a house that had belonged to his family, in which Marie
Antoinette had slept, with a park laid out by Lenôtre, was now in the
hands of the Israels, the wealthy financiers, who had bought it.
"Israel--at least that is the name these people go by, which seems to me
a generic, a racial term rather than a proper name. One cannot tell;
possibly people of that sort do not have names, and are designated only
by the collective title of the tribe to which they belong. It is of no
importance! But fancy, after being a home of the Guermantes, to belong
to Israels!!!" His voice rose. "It reminds me of a room in the Chateau
of Blois where the caretaker who was shewing me over said: 'This is
where Mary Stuart used to say her prayers; I use it to keep my brooms
in.' Naturally I wish to know nothing more of this house that has let
itself be dishonoured, any more than of my cousin Clara de Chimay after
she left her husband. But I keep a photograph of the house, when it was
still unspoiled, just as I keep one of the Princess before her large
eyes had learned to gaze on anyone but my cousin. A photograph acquires
something of the dignity which it ordinarily lacks when it ceases to be
a reproduction of reality and shews us things that no longer exist. I
could give you a copy, since you are interested in that style of
architecture," he said to my grandmother. At that moment, noticing that
the embroidered handkerchief which he had in his pocket was shewing some
coloured threads, he thrust it sharply down out of sight with the
scandalised air of a prudish but far from innocent lady concealing
attractions which, by an excess of scrupulosity, she regards as
indecent. "Would you believe," he went on, "that the first thing the
creatures did was to destroy Lenôtre's park, which is as bad as
slashing a picture by Poussin? For that alone, these Israels ought to be
in prison. It is true," he added with a smile, after a moment's silence,
"that there are probably plenty of other reasons why they should be
there! In any case, you can imagine the effect, with that architecture
behind it, of an English garden."

"But the house is in the same style as the Petit Trianon," said Mme. de
Villeparisis, "and Marie Antoinette had an English garden laid out
there."

"Which, all the same, ruins Gabriel's front;" replied M. de Charlus.
"Obviously, it would be an act of vandalism now to destroy the Hameau.
But whatever may be the spirit of the age, I doubt, all the same,
whether, in that respect, a whim of Mme. Israel has the same importance
as the memory of the Queen."

Meanwhile my grandmother had been making signs to me to go up to bed, in
spite of the urgent appeals of Saint-Loup who, to my utter confusion,
had alluded in front of M. de Charlus to the depression that used often
to come upon me at night before I went to sleep, which his uncle must
regard as betokening a sad want of virility. I lingered a few moments
still, then went upstairs, and was greatly surprised when, a little
later, having heard a knock at my bedroom door and asked who was there,
I heard the voice of M. de Charlus saying dryly:

"It is Charlus. May I come in, sir? Sir," he began again in the same
tone as soon as he had shut the door, "my nephew was saying just now
that you were apt to be worried at night before going to sleep, and also
that you were an admirer of Bergotte's books. As I had one here in my
luggage which you probably do not know, I have brought it to help you to
while away these moments in which you are not comfortable."

I thanked M. de Charlus with some warmth and told him that, on the
contrary, I had been afraid that what Saint-Loup had said to him about
my discomfort when night came would have made me appear in his eyes more
stupid even than I was.

"No; why?" he answered, in a gentler voice. "You have not, perhaps, any
personal merit; so few of us have! But for a time at least you have
youth, and that is always a charm. Besides, sir, the greatest folly of
all is to laugh at or to condemn in others what one does not happen
oneself to feel. I love the night, and you tell me that you are afraid
of it. I love the scent of roses, and I have a friend whom it throws
into a fever. Do you suppose that I think, for that reason, that he is
inferior to me? I try to understand everything and I take care to
condemn nothing. After all, you must not be too sorry for yourself; I do
not say that these moods of depression are not painful, I know that one
can be made to suffer by things which the world would not understand.
But at least you have placed your affection wisely, in your grandmother.
You see a great deal of her. And besides, that is a legitimate
affection, I mean one that is repaid. There are so many of which one
cannot say that."

He began walking up and down the room, looking at one thing, taking up
another. I had the impression that he had something to tell me, and
could not find the right words to express it.

"I have another volume of Bergotte here; I will fetch it for you," he
went on, and rang the bell. Presently a page came. "Go and find me your
head waiter. He is the only person here who is capable of obeying an
order intelligently," said M. de Charlus stiffly. "Monsieur Aimé, sir?"
asked the page. "I cannot tell you his name; yes, I remember now, I did
hear him called Aimé. Run along, I am in a hurry." "He won't be a
minute, sir, I saw him downstairs just now," said the page, anxious to
appear efficient. There was an interval of silence. The page returned.
"Sir, M. Aimé has gone to bed. But I can take your message." "No, you
have only to get him out of bed." "But I can't do that, sir; he doesn't
sleep here." "Then you can leave us alone." "But, sir," I said when the
page had gone, "you are too kind; one volume of Bergotte will be quite
enough." "That is just what I was thinking." M. de Charlus walked up and
down the room. Several minutes passed in this way, then after a
prolonged hesitation, and several false starts, he swung sharply round
and, his voice once more stinging, flung at me: "Good night, sir!" and
left the room. After all the lofty sentiments which I had heard him
express that evening, next day, which was the day of his departure, on
the beach, before noon, when I was on my way down to bathe, and M. de
Charlus had come across to tell me that my grandmother was waiting for
me to join her as soon as I left the water, I was greatly surprised to
hear him say, pinching my neck as he spoke, with a familiarity and a
laugh that were frankly vulgar:

"But he doesn't give a damn for his old grandmother, does he, eh? Little
rascal!"

"What, sir! I adore her!"

"Sir," he said, stepping back a pace, and with a glacial air, "you are
still young; you should profit by your youth to learn two things; first,
to refrain from expressing sentiments that are too natural not to be
taken for granted; and secondly not to dash into speech to reply to
things that are said to you before you have penetrated their meaning. If
you had taken this precaution a moment ago you would have saved yourself
the appearance of speaking at cross-purposes like a deaf man, thereby
adding a second absurdity to that of having anchors embroidered on your
bathing-dress. I have lent you a book by Bergotte which I require. See
that it is brought to me within the next hour by that head waiter with
the silly and inappropriate name, who, I suppose, is not in bed at this
time of day. You make me see that I was premature in speaking to you
last night of the charms of youth; I should have done you a better
service had I pointed out to you its thoughtlessness, its inconsequence,
and its want of comprehension. I hope, sir, that this little douche will
be no less salutary to you than your bathe. But don't let me keep you
standing: you may catch cold. Good day, sir."

No doubt he was sorry afterwards for this speech, for some time later I
received--in a morocco binding on the front of which was inlaid a panel
of tooled leather representing in demi-relief a spray of
forget-me-not--the book which he had lent me, and I had sent back to
him, not by Aimé who was apparently "off duty", but by the lift-boy.

M. de Charlus having gone, Robert and I were free at last to dine with
Bloch. And I realised during this little party that the stories too
readily admitted by our friend as funny were favourite stories of M.
Bloch senior, and that the son's "really remarkable person" was always
one of his father's friends whom he had so classified. There are a
certain number of people whom we admire in our boyhood, a father with
better brains than the rest of the family, a teacher who acquires credit
in our eyes from the philosophy he reveals to us, a schoolfellow more
advanced than we are (which was what Bloch had been to me), who despises
the Musset of the _Espoir en Dieu_ when we still admire it, and when we
have reached Leconte or Claudel will be in ecstasies only over:


A Saint-Biaise, à la Zuecca
Vous étiez, vous étiez bien aise:


with which he will include:


Padoue est un fort bel endroit
Où de très grands docteurs en droit. . . .
Mais j'aime mieux la polenta. . . .
Passe dans mon domino noir
La Toppatelle


and of all the _Nuits_ will remember only:


Au Havre, devant l'Atlantique
A Venise, à l'affreux Lido.
Où vient sur l'herbe d'un tombeau
Mourir la pâle Adriatique.


So, whenever we confidently admire anyone, we collect from him, we quote
with admiration sayings vastly inferior to the sort which, left to our
own judgment, we would sternly reject, just as the writer of a novel
puts into it, on the pretext that they are true, things which people
have actually said, which in the living context are like a dead weight,
form the dull part of the work. Saint-Simon's portraits composed by
himself (and very likely without his admiring them himself) are
admirable, whereas what he cites as the charming wit of his clever
friends is frankly dull where it has not become meaningless. He would
have scorned to invent what he reports as so pointed or so coloured when
said by Mme. Cornuel or Louis XIV, a point which is to be remarked also
in many other writers, and is capable of various interpretations, of
which it is enough to note but one for the present: namely, that in the
state of mind in which we "observe" we are a long way below the level to
which we rise when we create.

There was, then, embedded in my friend Bloch a father Bloch who lagged
forty years behind his son, told impossible stories and laughed as
loudly at them from the heart of my friend as did the separate, visible
and authentic father Bloch, since to the laugh which the latter emitted,
not without several times repeating the last word so that his public
might taste the full flavour of the story, was added the braying laugh
with which the son never failed, at table, to greet his father's
anecdotes. Thus it came about that after saying the most intelligent
things young Bloch, to indicate the portion that he had inherited from
his family, would tell us for the thirtieth time some of the gems which
father Bloch brought out only (with his swallow-tail coat) on the solemn
occasions on which young Bloch brought someone to the house on whom it
was worth while making an impression; one of his masters, a "chum" who
had taken all the prizes, or, this evening, Saint-Loup and myself. For
instance: "A military critic of great insight, who had brilliantly
worked out, supporting them with proofs, the reasons for which, in the
Russo-Japanese war, the Japanese must inevitably be beaten and the
Russians victorious," or else: "He is an eminent gentleman who passes
for a great financier in political circles and for a great politician
among financiers." These stories were interchangeable with one about
Baron de Rothschild and one about Sir Rufus Israels, who were brought
into the conversation in an equivocal manner which might let it be
supposed that M. Bloch knew them personally.

I was myself taken in, and from the way in which M. Bloch spoke of
Bergotte I assumed that he too was an old friend. But with him as with
all famous people, M. Bloch knew them only "without actually knowing
them", from having seen them at a distance in the theatre or in the
street. He imagined, moreover, that his appearance, his name, his
personality were not unknown to them, and that when they caught sight of
him they had often to repress a stealthy inclination to bow. People in
society, because they know men of talent, original characters, and have
them to dine in their houses, do not on that account understand them any
better. But when one has lived to some extent in society, the silliness
of its inhabitants makes one too anxious to live, suppose too high a
standard of intelligence in the obscure circles in which people know
only "without actually knowing". I was to discover this when I
introduced the topic of Bergotte. M. Bloch was not the only one who was
a social success at home. My friend was even more so with his sisters,
whom he continually questioned in a hectoring tone, burying his face in
his plate, all of which made them laugh until they cried. They had
adopted their brother's language, and spoke it fluently, as if it had
been obligatory and the only form of speech that people of intelligence
might use. When we arrived, the eldest sister said to one of the younger
ones: "Go, tell our sage father and our venerable mother!" "Puppies,"
said Bloch, "I present to you the cavalier Saint-Loup, hurler of
javelins, who is come for a few days from Doncières to the dwellings of
polished stone, fruitful in horses." And, since he was as vulgar as he
was literary, his speech ended as a rule in some pleasantry of a less
Homeric kind: "See, draw closer your pepla with fair clasps, what is all
that that I see? Does your mother know you're out?" And the misses Bloch
subsided in a tempest of laughter. I told their brother how much
pleasure he had given me by recommending me to read Bergotte, whose
books I had loved.

M. Bloch senior, who knew Bergotte only by sight, and Bergotte's life
only from what was common gossip, had a manner quite as indirect of
making the acquaintance of his books, by the help of criticisms that
were apparently literary. He lived in the world of "very nearlies",
where people salute the empty air and arrive at wrong judgments.
Inexactitude, incompetence do not modify their assurance; quite the
contrary. It is the propitious miracle of self-esteem that, since few of
us are in a position to enjoy the society of distinguished people, or to
form intellectual friendships, those to whom they are denied still
believe themselves to be the best endowed of men, because the optics of
our social perspective make every grade of society seem the best to him
who occupies it, and beholds as less favoured than himself, less
fortunate and therefore to be pitied, the greater men whom he names and
calumniates without knowing, judges and despises without understanding
them. Even in cases where the multiplication of his modest personal
advantages by his self-esteem would not suffice to assure a man the dose
of happiness, superior to that accorded to others, which is essential to
him, envy is always there to make up the balance. It is true that if
envy finds expression in scornful phrases, we must translate "I have no
wish to know him" by "I have no means of knowing him." That is the
intellectual sense. But the emotional sense is indeed, "I have no wish
to know him." The speaker knows that it is not true, but he does not,
all the same, say it simply to deceive; he says it because it is what he
feels, and that is sufficient to bridge the gulf between them, that is
to say to make him happy.

Self-centredness thus enabling every human being to see the universe
spread out in a descending scale beneath himself who is its lord, M.
Bloch afforded himself the luxury of being pitiless when in the morning,
as he drank his chocolate, seeing Bergotte's signature at the foot of an
article in the newspaper which he had scarcely opened, he disdainfully
granted the writer an audience soon cut short, pronounced sentence upon
him, and gave himself the comforting pleasure of repeating after every
mouthful of the scalding brew: "That fellow Bergotte has become
unreadable. My word, what a bore the creature can be. I really must stop
my subscription. How involved it all is, bread and butter nonsense!" And
he helped himself to another slice.

This illusory importance of M. Bloch senior did, moreover, extend some
little way beyond the radius of his own perceptions. In the first place
his children regarded him as a superior person. Children have always a
tendency either to depreciate or to exalt their parents, and to a good
son his father is always the best of fathers, quite apart from any
objective reason there may be for admiring him. Now, such reasons were
not altogether lacking in the case of M. Bloch, who was an educated man,
shrewd, affectionate towards his family. In his most intimate circle
they were all the more proud of him because, if, in "society", people
are judged by a standard (which is incidentally absurd) and according to
false but fixed rules, by comparison with the aggregate of all the other
fashionable people, in the subdivisions of middle class life, on the
other hand, the dinners, the family parties all turn upon certain people
who are pronounced good company, amusing, and who in "society" would not
survive a second evening. Moreover in such an environment where the
artificial values of the aristocracy do not exist, their place is taken
by distinctions even more stupid. Thus it was that in his family circle,
and even among the remotest branches of the tree, an alleged similarity
in his way of wearing his moustache and in the bridge of his nose led to
M. Bloch's being called "the Duc d'Aumale's double". (In the world of
club pages, the one who wears his cap on one side and his jacket tightly
buttoned, so as to give himself the appearance, he imagines, of a
foreign officer, is he not also a personage of a sort to his comrades?)

The resemblance was the faintest, but you would have said that it
conferred a title. When he was mentioned, it would always be: "Bloch?
Which one? The Duc d'Aumale?" as people say "Princesse Murat? Which one?
The Queen (of Naples)?" And there were certain other minute marks which
combined to give him, in the eyes of the cousinhood, an acknowledged
claim to distinction. Not going the length of having a carriage of his
own, M. Bloch used on special occasions to hire an open victoria with a
pair of horses from the Company, and would drive through the Bois de
Boulogne, his body sprawling limply from side to side, two fingers
pressed to his brow, other two supporting his chin, and if people who
did not know him concluded that he was an "old nuisance", they were all
convinced, in the family, that for smartness Uncle Solomon could have
taught Gramont-Caderousse a thing or two. He was one of those people who
when they die, because for years they have shared a table in a
restaurant on the boulevard with its news-editor, are described as "well
known Paris figures" in the social column of the _Radical._ M. Bloch
told Saint-Loup and me that Bergotte knew so well why he, M. Bloch,
always cut him that as soon as he caught sight of him, at the theatre or
in the club, he avoided his eye. Saint-Loup blushed, for it had occurred
to him that this club could not be the Jockey, of which his father had
been chairman. On the other hand it must be a fairly exclusive club, for
M. Bloch had said that Bergotte would never have got into it if he had
come up now. So it was not without the fear that he might be
"underrating his adversary" that Saint-Loup asked whether the club in
question were the Rue Royale, which was considered "lowering" by his own
family, and to which he knew that certain Israelites had been admitted.
"No," replied M. Bloch in a tone at once careless, proud and ashamed,
"it is a small club, but far more pleasant than a big one, the Ganaches.
We're very strict there, don't you know." "Isn't Sir Rufus Israels the
chairman?" Bloch junior asked his father, so as to give him the
opportunity for a glorious lie, never suspecting that the financier had
not the same eminence in Saint-Loup's eyes as in his. The fact of the
matter was that the Ganaches club boasted not Sir Rufus Israels but one
of his staff. But as this man was on the best of terms with his
employer, he had at his disposal a stock of the financier's cards, and
would give one to M. Bloch whenever he wished to travel on a line of
which Sir Rufus was a director, the result of which was that old Bloch
would say: "I'm just going round to the Club to ask Sir Rufus for a line
to the Company." And the card enabled him to dazzle the guards on the
trains. The misses Bloch were more interested in Bergotte and, reverting
to him rather than pursue the subject of the Ganaches, the youngest
asked her brother, in the most serious tone imaginable, for she believed
that there existed in the world, for the designation of men of talent,
no other terms than those which he was in the habit of using: "Is he
really an amazing good egg, this Bergotte? Is he in the category of the
great lads, good eggs like Villiers and Catullus?" "I've met him several
times at dress rehearsals," said M. Nissim Bernard. "He is an uncouth
creature, a sort of Schlemihl." There was nothing very serious in this
allusion to Chamisso's story but the epithet "Schlemihl" formed part of
that dialect, half-German, half-Jewish, the use of which delighted M.
Bloch in the family circle, but struck him as vulgar and out of place
before strangers. And so he cast a reproving glance at his uncle. "He
has talent," said Bloch. "Ah!" His sister sighed gravely, as though to
imply that in that case there was some excuse for me. "All writers have
talent," said M. Bloch scornfully. "In fact it appears," went on his
son, raising his fork, and screwing up his eyes with an air of impish
irony, "that he is going to put up for the Academy." "Go on. He hasn't
enough to shew them," replied his father, who seemed not to have for the
Academy the same contempt as his son and daughters. "He's not big
enough." "Besides, the Academy is a salon, and Bergotte has no polish,"
declared the uncle (whose heiress Mme. Bloch was), a mild and
inoffensive person whose surname, Bernard, might perhaps by itself have
quickened my grandfather's powers of diagnosis, but would have appeared
too little in harmony with a face which looked as if it had been brought
back from Darius's palace and restored by Mme. Dieulafoy, had not
(chosen by some collector desirous of giving a crowning touch of
orientalism to this figure from Susa) his first name, Nissim, stretched
out above it the pinions of an androcephalous bull from Khorsabad. But
M. Bloch never stopped insulting his uncle, whether it was that he was
excited by the unresisting good-humour of his butt, or that the rent of
the villa being paid by M. Nissim Bernard, the beneficiary wished to
shew that he kept his independence, and, more important still, that he
was not seeking by flattery to make sure of the rich inheritance to
come. What most hurt the old man was being treated so rudely in front of
the manservant. He murmured an unintelligible sentence of which all that
could be made out was: "when the meschores are in the room".
"Meschores", in the Bible, means "the servant of God". In the family
circle the Blochs used the word when they referred to their own
servants, and were always exhilarated by it, because their certainty of
not being understood either by Christians or by the servants themselves
enhanced in M. Nissim Bernard and M. Bloch their twofold distinction of
being "masters" and at the same time "Jews". But this latter source of
satisfaction became a source of displeasure when there was "company". At
such times M. Bloch, hearing his uncle say "meschores", felt that he was
making his oriental side too prominent, just as a light-of-love who has
invited some of her sisters to meet her respectable friends is annoyed
if they allude to their profession or use words that do not sound quite
nice. Therefore, so far from his uncle's request's producing any effect
on M. Bloch, he, beside himself with rage, could contain himself no
longer. He let no opportunity pass of scarifying his wretched uncle. "Of
course, when there is a chance of saying anything stupid, one can be
quite certain that you won't miss it. You would be the first to lick his
boots if he were in the room!" shouted M. Bloch, while M. Nissim Bernard
in sorrow lowered over his plate the ringleted beard of King Sargon. My
friend, when he began to grow his beard, which also was blue-black and
crimped, became very like his great-uncle.

"What! Are you the son of the Marquis de Marsantes? Why, I knew him very
well," said M. Nissim Bernard to Saint-Loup. I supposed that he meant
the word "knew" in the sense in which Bloch's father had said that he
knew Bergotte, namely by sight. But he went on: "Your father was one of
my best friends." Meanwhile Bloch had turned very red, his father was
looking intensely cross, the misses Bloch were choking with suppressed
laughter. The fact was that in M. Nissim Bernard the love of ostentation
which in M. Bloch and his children was held in check, had engendered the
habit of perpetual lying. For instance, if he was staying in an hotel,
M. Nissim Bernard, as M. Bloch equally might have done, would have his
newspapers brought to him always by his valet in the dining-room, in the
middle of luncheon, when everybody was there, so that they should see
that he travelled with a valet. But to the people with whom he made
friends in the hotel the uncle used to say what the nephew would never
have said, that he was a Senator. He might know quite well that they
would sooner or later discover that the title was usurped; he could not,
at the critical moment, resist the temptation to assume it. M. Bloch
suffered acutely from his uncle's lies and from all the embarrassments
that they led to. "Don't pay any attention to him, he talks a great deal
of nonsense," he whispered to Saint-Loup, whose interest was all the
more whetted, for he was curious to explore the psychology of liars. "A
greater liar even than the Ithacan Odysseus, albeit Athene called him
the greatest liar among mortals," his son completed the indictment.
"Well, upon my word!" cried M. Nissim Bernard, "If I'd only known that I
was going to sit down to dinner with my old friend's son! Why, I have a
photograph still of your father at home, in Paris, and any number of
letters from him. He used always to call me 'uncle', nobody ever knew
why. He was a charming man, sparkling. I remember so well a dinner I
gave at Nice; there were Sardou, Labiche, Augier," "Molière, Racine,
Corneille," M. Bloch added with sarcasm, while his son completed the
tale of guests with "Plautus, Menander, Kalidasa." M. Nissim Bernard,
cut to the quick, stopped short in his reminiscence, and, ascetically
depriving himself of a great pleasure, remained silent until the end of
dinner.

"Saint-Loup with helm of bronze," said Bloch, "have a piece more of this
duck with thighs heavy with fat, over which the illustrious sacrificer
of birds has spilled numerous libations of red wine."

As a rule, after bringing out from his store for the entertainment of a
distinguished guest his anecdotes of Sir Rufus Israels and others, M.
Bloch, feeling that he had succeeded in touching and melting his son's
heart, would withdraw, so as not to spoil his effect in the eyes of the
"big pot". If, however, there was an absolutely compelling reason, as
for instance on the night when his son won his fellowship, M. Bloch
would add to the usual string of anecdotes the following ironical
reflexion which he ordinarily reserved for his own personal friends, so
that young Bloch was extremely proud to see it produced for his: "The
Government have acted unpardonably. They have forgotten to consult M.
Coquelin! M. Coquelin has let it be known that he is displeased." (M.
Bloch prided himself on being a reactionary, with a contempt for
theatrical people.)

But the misses Bloch and their brother reddened to the tips of their
ears, so much impressed were they when Bloch senior, to shew that he
could be regal to the last in his entertainment of his son's two
'chums', gave the order for champagne to be served, and announced
casually that, as a treat for us, he had taken three stalls for the
performance which a company from the Opéra-Comique was giving that
evening at the Casino. He was sorry that he had not been able to get a
box. They had all been taken. However, he had often been in the boxes,
and really one saw and heard better down by the orchestra. All very
well, only, if the defect of his son, that is to say the defect which
his son believed to be invisible to other people, was coarseness, the
father's was avarice. And so it was in a decanter that we were served
with, under the name of champagne, a light sparkling wine, while under
that of orchestra stalls he had taken three in the pit, which cost half
as much, miraculously persuaded by the divine intervention of his defect
that neither at table nor in the theatre (where the boxes were all
empty) would the defect be noticed. When M. Bloch had let us moisten our
lips in the flat glasses which his son dignified with the style and tide
of "craters with deeply hollowed flanks", he made us admire a picture to
which he was so much attached that he had brought it with him to Balbec.
He told us that it was a Rubens. Saint-Loup asked innocently if it was
signed. M. Bloch replied, blushing, that he had had the signature cut
off to make it fit the frame, but that it made no difference, as he had
no intention of selling the picture. Then he hurriedly bade us good
night, in order to bury himself in the _Journal Officiel_, back numbers
of which littered the house, and which, he informed us, he was obliged
to read carefully on account of his "parliamentary position" as to the
precise nature of which, however, he gave us no enlightenment. "I shall
take a muffler," said Bloch, "for Zephyrus and Boreas are disputing to
which of them shall belong the fish-teeming sea, and should we but tarry
a little after the show is over, we shall not be home before the first
flush of Eos, the rosy-fingered. By the way," he asked Saint-Loup when
we were outside, and I trembled, for I realised at once that it was of
M. de Charlus that Bloch was speaking in that tone of irony, "who was
that excellent old card dressed in black that I saw you walking with,
the day before yesterday, on the beach?" "That was my uncle." Saint-Loup
was ruffled. Unfortunately, a "floater" was far from seeming to Bloch a
thing to be avoided. He shook with laughter. "Heartiest congratulations;
I ought to have guessed; he has an excellent style, the most priceless
dial of an old 'gaga' of the highest lineage." "You are absolutely
mistaken; he is an extremely clever man," retorted Saint-Loup, now
furious. "I am sorry about that; it makes him less complete. All the
same, I should like very much to know him, for I flatter myself I could
write some highly adequate pieces about old buffers like that. Just to
see him go by, he's killing. But I should leave out of account the
caricaturale side, which really is hardly worthy of an artist enamoured
of the plastic beauty of phrases, of his mug, which (you'll forgive me)
doubled me up for a moment with joyous laughter, and I should bring into
prominence the aristocratic side of your uncle, who after all has a
distinct bovine effect, and when one has finished laughing does impress
one by his great air of style. But," he went on, addressing myself this
time, "there is also a matter of a very different order about which I
have been meaning to question you, and every time we are together, some
god, blessed denizen of Olympus, makes me completely forget to ask for a
piece of information which might before now have been and is sure some
day to be of the greatest use to me. Tell me, who was the lovely lady I
saw you with in the Jardin d'Acclimatation accompanied by a gentleman
whom I seem to know by sight and a little girl with long hair?" It had
been quite plain to me at the time that Mme. Swann did not remember
Bloch's name, since she had spoken of him by another, and had described
my friend as being on the staff of some Ministry, as to which I had
never since then thought of finding out whether he had joined it. But
how came it that Bloch, who, according to what she then told me, had got
himself introduced to her, was ignorant of her name? I was so much
surprised that I stopped for a moment before answering. "Whoever she
is," he went on, "hearty congratulations; you can't have been bored with
her. I picked her up a few days before that on the Zone railway, where,
speaking of zones, she was so kind, as to undo hers for the benefit of
your humble servant; I have never had such a time in my life, and we
were just going to make arrangements to meet again when somebody she
knew had the bad taste to get in at the last station but one." My
continued silence did not appear to please Bloch. "I was hoping," he
said, "thanks to you, to learn her address, so as to go there several
times a week to taste in her arms the delights of Eros, dear to the
gods; but I do not insist since you seem pledged to discretion with
respect to a professional who gave herself to me three times running,
and in the most refined manner, between Paris and the Point-du-Jour. I
am bound to see her again, some night."

I called upon Bloch after this dinner; he returned my call, but I was
out and he was seen asking for me by Françoise, who, as it happened,
albeit he had visited us at Combray, had never set eyes on him until
then. So that she knew only that one of "the gentlemen" who were friends
of mine had looked in to see me, she did not know "with what object",
dressed in a nondescript way, which had not made any particular
impression upon her. Now though I knew quite well that certain of
Françoise's social ideas must for ever remain impenetrable by me, ideas
based, perhaps, partly upon confusions between words, between names
which she had once and for all time mistaken for one another, I could
not restrain myself, who had long since abandoned the quest for
enlightenment in such cases, from seeking--and seeking, moreover, in
vain--to discover what could be the immense significance that the name
of Bloch had for Françoise. For no sooner had I mentioned to her that
the young man whom she had seen was M. Bloch than she recoiled several
paces, so great were her stupor and disappointment. "What! Is that M.
Bloch?" she cried, thunderstruck, as if so portentous a personage ought
to have been endowed with an appearance which "made you know" as soon as
you saw him that you were in the presence of one of the great ones of
the earth; and, like some one who has discovered that an historical
character is not "up to" the level of his reputation, she repeated in an
impressed tone, in which I could detect latent, for future growth, the
seeds of a universal scepticism: "What! Is that M. Bloch? Well, really,
you would never think it, to look at him." She seemed also to bear me a
grudge, as if I had always "overdone" the praise of Bloch to her. At the
same time she was kind enough to add: "Well, he may be M. Bloch, and all
that. I'm sure Master can say he's every bit as good."

She had presently, with respect to Saint-Loup, whom she worshipped, a
disillusionment of a different kind and of less severity: she discovered
that he was a Republican. Now for all that, when speaking, for instance,
of the Queen of Portugal, she would say with that disrespect which is,
among the people, the supreme form of respect: "Amélie, Philippe's
sister," Françoise was a Royalist. But when it came to a Marquis; a
Marquis who had dazzled her at first sight, and who was for the
Republic, seemed no longer real. And she shewed the same ill-humour as
if I had given her a box which she had believed to be made of gold, and
had thanked me for it effusively, and then a jeweller had revealed to
her that it was only plated. She at once withdrew her esteem from
Saint-Loup, but soon afterwards restored it to him, having reflected
that he could not, being the Marquis de Saint-Loup, be a Republican,
that he was just pretending, in his own interest, for with such a
Government as we had it might be a great advantage to him. From that
moment her coldness towards him, her resentment towards myself ceased.
And when she spoke of Saint-Loup she said: "He is a hypocrite," with a
broad and friendly smile which made it clear that she "considered" him
again just as much as when she first knew him, and that she had forgiven
him.

As a matter of fact, Saint-Loup was absolutely sincere and
disinterested, and it was this intense moral purity which, not being
able to find entire satisfaction in a selfish sentiment such as love,
nor on the other hand meeting in him the impossibility (which existed in
me, for instance) of finding its spiritual nourishment elsewhere than in
himself, rendered him truly capable (just as I was incapable) of
friendship.

Françoise was no less mistaken about Saint-Loup when she complained
that he had "that sort of" air, as if he did not look down upon the
people, but that it was all just a pretence, and you had only to see him
when he was in a temper with his groom. It had indeed sometimes happened
that Robert would scold his groom with a certain amount of brutality,
which proved that he had the sense not so much of the difference as of
the equality between classes and masses. "But," he said in answer to my
rebuke of his having treated the man rather harshly, "why should I go
out of my way to speak politely to him? Isn't he my equal? Isn't he just
as near to me as any of my uncles and cousins? You seem to think that I
ought to treat him with respect, as an inferior. You talk like an
aristocrat!" he added scornfully.

And indeed if there was a class to which he shewed himself prejudiced
and hostile, it was the aristocracy, so much so that he found it as hard
to believe in the superior qualities of a man in society as he found it
easy to believe in those of a man of the people. When I mentioned the
Princesse de Luxembourg, whom I had met with his aunt:

"An old trout," was his comment. "Like all that lot. She's a sort of
cousin of mine, by the way."

Having a strong prejudice against the people who frequented it, he went
rarely into "Society", and the contemptuous or hostile attitude which he
adopted towards it served to increase, among all his near relatives, the
painful impression made by his intimacy with a woman on the stage, a
connexion which, they declared, would be his ruin, blaming it specially
for having bred in him that spirit of denigration, that bad spirit, and
for having led him astray, after which it was only a matter of time
before he would have dropped out altogether. And so, many easy-going men
of the Faubourg Saint-Germain were without compunction when they spoke
of Robert's mistress. "Those girls do their job," they would say, "they
are as good as anybody else. But that one; no, thank you! We cannot
forgive her. She has done too much harm to a fellow we were fond of." Of
course, he was not the first to be caught in that snare. But the others
amused themselves like men of the world, continued to think like men of
the world about politics, about everything. As for him, his family found
him "soured". They did not bear in mind that, for many young men of
fashion who would otherwise remain uncultivated mentally, rough in their
friendships, without gentleness or taste--it is very often their
mistress who is their real master, and connexions of this sort the only
school of morals in which they are initiated into a superior culture,
and learn the value of disinterested relations. Even among the lower
orders (who, when it comes to coarseness, so often remind us of the
world of fashion) the woman, more sensitive, finer, more leisured, is
driven by curiosity to adopt certain refinements, respects certain
beauties of sentiment and of art which, though she may fail to
understand them, she nevertheless places above what has seemed most
desirable to the man, above money or position. Now whether the mistress
be a young blood's (such as Saint-Loup) or a young workman's
(electricians, for instance, must now be included in our truest order of
Chivalry) her lover has too much admiration and respect for her not to
extend them also to what she herself respects and admires; and for him
the scale of values is thereby reversed. Her sex alone makes her weak;
she suffers from nervous troubles, inexplicable things which in a man,
or even in another woman--a woman whose nephew or cousin he was--would
bring a smile to the lips of this stalwart young man. But he cannot bear
to see her suffer whom he loves. The young nobleman who, like
Saint-Loup, has a mistress acquires the habit, when he takes her out to
dine, of carrying in his pocket the valerian "drops" which she may need,
of ordering the waiter, firmly and with no hint of sarcasm, to see that
he shuts the doors quietly and not to put any damp moss on the table, so
as to spare his companion those discomforts which himself he has never
felt, which compose for him an occult world in whose reality she has
taught him to believe, discomforts for which he now feels pity without
in the least needing to understand them, for which he will still feel
pity when other women than she shall be the sufferers. Saint-Loup's
mistress--as the first monks of the middle ages taught Christendom--had
taught him to be kind to animals, for which she had a passion, never
moving without her dog, her canaries, her love-birds; Saint-Loup looked
after them with motherly devotion and treated as brutes the people who
were not good to dumb creatures. On the other hand, an actress, or
so-called actress, like this one who was living with him,--whether she
were intelligent or not, and as to that I had no knowledge--by making
him find the society of fashionable women boring, and look upon having
to go out to a party as a painful duty, had saved him from snobbishness
and cured him of frivolity. If, thanks to her, his social engagements
filled a smaller place in the life of her young lover, at the same time,
whereas if he had been simply a drawing-room man, vanity or
self-interest would have dictated his choice of friends as rudeness
would have characterised his treatment of them, his mistress had taught
him to bring nobility and refinement into his friendship. With her
feminine instinct, with a keener appreciation in men of certain
qualities of sensibility which her lover might perhaps, without her
guidance, have misunderstood and laughed at them, she had always been
swift to distinguish from among the rest of Saint-Loup's friends, the
one who had a real affection for him, and to make that one her
favourite. She knew how to make him feel grateful to such a friend, shew
his gratitude, notice what things gave his friend pleasure and what
pain. And presently Saint-Loup, without any more need of her to prompt
him, began to think of all these things by himself, and at Balbec, where
she was not with him, for me whom she had never seen, whom he had
perhaps not yet so much as mentioned in his letters to her, of his own
accord would pull up the window of a carriage in which I was sitting,
take out of the room the flowers that made me feel unwell, and when he
had to say good-bye to several people at once manage to do so before it
was actually time for him to go, so as to be left alone and last with
me, to make that distinction between them and me, to treat me
differently from the rest. His mistress had opened his mind to the
invisible, had brought a serious element into his life, delicacy into
his heart, but all this escaped his sorrowing family who repeated: "That
creature will be the death of him; meanwhile she's doing what she can to
disgrace him." It is true that he had succeeded in getting out of her
all the good that she was capable of doing him; and that she now caused
him only incessant suffering, for she had taken an intense dislike to
him and tormented him in every possible way. She had begun, one fine
day, to look upon him as stupid and absurd because the friends that she
had among the younger writers and actors had assured her that he was,
and she duly repeated what they had said with that passion, that want of
reserve which we shew whenever we receive from without and adopt as our
own opinions or customs of which we previously knew nothing. She readily
professed, like her actor friends, that between Saint-Loup and herself
there was a great gulf fixed, and not to be crossed, because they were
of different races, because she was an intellectual and he, whatever he
might pretend, the born enemy of the intellect. This view of him seemed
to her profound, and she sought confirmation of it in the most
insignificant words, the most trivial actions of her lover. But when the
same friends had further convinced her that she was destroying, in
company so ill-suited to her, the great hopes which she had, they said,
aroused in them, that her lover would leave a mark on her, that by
living with him she was spoiling her future as an artist; to her
contempt for Saint-Loup was added the same hatred that she would have
felt for him if he had insisted upon inoculating her with a deadly germ.
She saw him as seldom as possible, at the same time postponing the hour
of a definite rupture, which seemed to me a highly improbable event.
Saint-Loup made such sacrifices for her that unless she was ravishingly
beautiful (but he had always refused to shew me her photograph, saying:
"For one thing, she's not a beauty, and besides she always takes badly.
These are only some snapshots that I took myself with my kodak; they
would give you a wrong idea of her.") it would surely be difficult for
her to find another man who would consent to anything of the sort. I
never reflected that a certain obsession to make a name for oneself,
even when one has no talent, that the admiration, no more than the
privately expressed admiration of people who are imposing on one, can
(although it may not perhaps have been the case with Saint-Loup's
mistress) be, even for a little prostitute, motives more determining
than the pleasure of making money. Saint-Loup who, without quite
understanding what was going on in the mind of his mistress, did not
believe her to be completely sincere either in her unfair reproaches or
in her promises of undying love, had all the same at certain moments the
feeling that she would break with him whenever she could, and
accordingly, impelled no doubt by the instinct of self-preservation
which was part of his love, a love more clear-sighted, possibly, than
Saint-Loup himself, making use, too, of a practical capacity for
business which was compatible in him with the loftiest and blindest
flights of the heart, had refused to settle upon her any capital, had
borrowed an enormous sum so that she should want nothing, but made it
over to her only from day to day. And no doubt, assuming that she really
thought of leaving him, she was calmly waiting until she had feathered
her nest, a process which, with the money given her by Saint-Loup, would
not perhaps take very long, but would all the same require a time which
must be conceded to prolong the happiness of my new friend--or his
misery.

This dramatic period of their connexion, which had now reached its most
acute stage, the most cruel for Saint-Loup, for she had forbidden him to
remain in Paris, where his presence exasperated her, and had forced him
to spend his leave at Balbec, within easy reach of his regiment--had
begun one evening at the house of one of Saint-Loup's aunts, on whom he
had prevailed to allow his friend to come there, before a large party,
to recite some of the speeches from a symbolical play in which she had
once appeared in an "advanced" theatre, and for which she had made him
share the admiration that she herself professed.

But when she appeared in the room, with a large lily in her hand, and
wearing a costume copied from the _Ancilia Domini_, which she had
persuaded Saint-Loup was an absolute "vision of beauty", her entrance
had been greeted, in that assemblage of club men and duchesses, with
smiles which the monotonous tone of her chantings, the oddity of certain
words and their frequent recurrence had changed into fits of laughter,
stifled at first but presently so uncontrollable that the wretched
reciter had been unable to go on. Next day Saint-Loup's aunt had been
universally censured for having allowed so grotesque an actress to
appear in her drawing-room. A well-known duke made no bones about telling
her that she had only herself to blame if she found herself criticised.
"Damn it all, people really don't come to see 'turns' like that! If the
woman had talent, even; but she has none and never will have any. 'Pon my
soul, Paris is not such a fool as people make out. Society does not
consist exclusively of imbeciles. This little lady evidently believed
that she was going to take Paris by surprise. But Paris is not so easily
surprised as all that, and there are still some things that they can't
make us swallow."

As for the actress, she left the house with Saint-Loup, exclaiming:

"What do you mean by letting me in for those geese, those uneducated
bitches, those dirty corner-boys? I don't mind telling you, there wasn't
a man in the room who didn't make eyes at me or squeeze my foot, and it
was because I wouldn't look at them that they were out for revenge."

Words which had changed Robert's antipathy for people in society into a
horror that was at once deep and distressing, and was provoked in him
most of all by those who least deserved it, devoted kinsmen who, on
behalf of the family, had sought to persuade Saint-Loup's lady to break
with him, a move which she represented to him as inspired by their
passion for her. Robert, although he had at once ceased to see them,
used to imagine when he was parted from his mistress as he was now, that
they or others like them were profiting by his absence to return to the
charge and had possibly prevailed over her. And when he spoke of the
sensualists who were disloyal to their friends, who sought to seduce
their friends' wives, tried to make them come to houses of assignation,
his whole face would glow with suffering and hatred.

"I would kill them with less compunction than I would kill a dog, which
is at least a well-behaved beast, and loyal and faithful. There are men
who deserve the guillotine if you like, far more than poor wretches who
have been led into crime by poverty and by the cruelty of the rich."

He spent the greater part of his time in sending letters and telegrams
to his mistress. Every time that, while still preventing him from
returning to Paris, she found an excuse to quarrel with him by post, I
read the news at once in his evident discomposure. Inasmuch as his
mistress never told him what fault she found with him, suspecting that
possibly if she did not tell him it was because she did not know
herself, and simply had had enough of him, he would still have liked an
explanation and used to write to her: "Tell me what I have done wrong; I
am quite ready to acknowledge my faults," the grief that overpowered him
having the effect of persuading him that he had behaved badly.

But she kept him waiting indefinitely for her answers which, when they
did come, were meaningless. And so it was almost always with a furrowed
brow, and often with empty hands that I would see Saint-Loup returning
from the post office, where, alone in all the hotel, he and Françoise
went to fetch or to hand in letters, he from a lover's impatience, she
with a servant's mistrust of others. (His telegrams obliged him to take
a much longer journey.)

When, some days after our dinner with the Blochs, my grandmother told me
with a joyful air that Saint-Loup had just been asking her whether,
before he left Balbec, she would not like him to take a photograph of
her, and when I saw that she had put on her nicest dress on purpose, and
was hesitating between several of her best hats, I felt a little annoyed
by this childishness, which surprised me coming from her. I even went
the length of asking myself whether I had not been mistaken in my
grandmother, whether I did not esteem her too highly, whether she was as
unconcerned as I had always supposed in the adornment of her person,
whether she had not indeed the very weakness that I believed most alien
to her temperament, namely coquetry.

Unfortunately, this displeasure that I derived from the prospect of a
photographic "sitting", and more particularly from the satisfaction with
which my grandmother appeared to be looking forward to it, I made so
apparent that Françoise remarked it and did her best, unintentionally,
to increase it by making me a sentimental, gushing speech, by which I
refused to appear moved.

"Oh, Master; my poor Madame will be so pleased at having her likeness
taken, she is going to wear the hat that her old Françoise has trimmed
for her, you must allow her, Master."

I acquired the conviction that I was not cruel in laughing at
Françoise's sensibility, by reminding myself that my mother and
grandmother, my models in all things, often did the same. But my
grandmother, noticing that I seemed cross, said that if this plan of her
sitting for her photograph offended me in any way she would give it up.
I would not let her; I assured her that I saw no harm in it, and left
her to adorn herself, but, thinking that I shewed my penetration and
strength of mind, I added a few stinging words of sarcasm, intended to
neutralise the pleasure which she seemed to find in being photographed,
so that if I was obliged to see my grandmother's magnificent hat, I
succeeded at least in driving from her face that joyful expression which
ought to have made me glad; but alas, it too often happens, while the
people we love best are still alive, that such expressions appear to us
as the exasperating manifestation of some unworthy freak of fancy rather
than as the precious form of the happiness which we should dearly like
to procure for them. My ill-humour arose more particularly from the fact
that, during the last week, my grandmother had appeared to be avoiding
me, and I had not been able to have her to myself for a moment, either
by night or day. When I came back in the afternoon to be alone with her
for a little I was told that she was not in the hotel; or else she would
shut herself up with Françoise for endless confabulations which I was
not permitted to interrupt. And when, after being out all evening with
Saint-Loup, I had been thinking on the way home of the moment at which I
should be able to go to my grandmother and to kiss her, in vain might I
wait for her to knock on the partition between us the three little taps
which would tell me to go in and say good night to her; I heard nothing;
at length I would go to bed, a little resentful of her for depriving me,
with an indifference so new and strange in her, of a joy on which I had
so much counted, I would lie still for a while, my heart throbbing as in
my childhood, listening to the wall which remained silent, until I cried
myself to sleep.

 *
* *




_SEASCAPE,
WITH FRIEZE OF GIRLS_


That day, as for some days past, Saint-Loup had been obliged to go to
Doncières, where, until his leave finally expired, he would be on duty
now until late every afternoon. I was sorry that he was not at Balbec. I
had seen alight from carriages and pass, some into the ball-room of the
Casino, others into the ice-cream shop, young women who at a distance
had seemed to me lovely. I was passing through one of those periods of
our youth, unprovided with any one definite love, vacant, in which at
all times and in all places--as a lover the woman by whose charms he is
smitten--we desire, we seek, we see Beauty. Let but a single real
feature--the little that one distinguishes of a woman seen from afar or
from behind--enable us to project the form of beauty before our eyes, we
imagine that we have seen her before, our heart beats, we hasten in
pursuit, and will always remain half-persuaded that it was she, provided
that the woman has vanished: it is only if we manage to overtake her
that we realise our mistake.

Besides, as I grew more and more delicate, I was inclined to overrate
the simplest pleasures because of the difficulties that sprang up in the
way of my attaining them. Charming women I seemed to see all round me,
because I was too tired, if it was on the beach, too shy if it was in
the Casino or at a pastry-cook's, to go anywhere near them. And yet if I
was soon to die I should have liked first to know the appearance at
close quarters, in reality of the prettiest girls that life had to
offer, even although it should be another than myself or no one at all
who was to take advantage of the offer. (I did not, in fact, appreciate
the desire for possession that underlay my curiosity.) I should have had
the courage to enter the ball-room if Saint-Loup had been with me. Left
by myself, I was simply hanging about in front of the Grand Hotel until
it was time for me to join my grandmother, when, still almost at the far
end of the paved "front" along which they projected in a discordant spot
of colour, I saw coming towards me five or six young girls, as different
in appearance and manner from all the people whom one was accustomed to
see at Balbec as could have been, landed there none knew whence, a
flight of gulls which performed with measured steps upon the sands--the
dawdlers using their wings to overtake the rest--a movement the purpose
of which seems as obscure to the human bathers, whom they do not appear
to see, as it is clearly determined in their own birdish minds.

One of these strangers was pushing as she came, with one hand, her
bicycle; two others carried golf-clubs; and their attire generally was
in contrast to that of the other girls at Balbec, some of whom, it was
true, went in for games, but without adopting any special outfit.

It was the hour at which ladies and gentlemen came out every day for a
turn on the "front", exposed to the merciless fire of the long glasses
fastened upon them, as if they had each borne some disfigurement which
she felt it her duty to inspect in its minutest details, by the chief
magistrate's wife, proudly seated there with her back to the band-stand,
in the middle of that dread line of chairs on which presently they too,
actors turned critics, would come and establish themselves, to
scrutinise in their turn those others who would then be filing past
them. All these people who paced up and down the "front", tacking as
violently as if it had been the deck of a ship (for they could not lift
a leg without at the same time waving their arms, turning their heads
and eyes, settling their shoulders, compensating by a balancing movement
on one side for the movement they had just made on the other, and
puffing out their faces), and who, pretending not to see so as to let it
be thought that they were not interested, but covertly watching, for
fear of running against the people who were walking beside or coming
towards them, did, in fact, butt into them, became entangled with them,
because each was mutually the object of the same secret attention veiled
beneath the same apparent disdain; their love--and consequently their
fear--of the crowd being one of the most powerful motives in all men,
whether they seek to please other people or to astonish them, or to shew
them that they despise them. In the case of the solitary, his seclusion,
even when it is absolute and ends only with life itself, has often as
its primary cause a disordered love of the crowd, which so far overrules
every other feeling that, not being able to win, when he goes out, the
admiration of his hall porter, of the passers-by, of the cabman whom he
hails, he prefers not to be seen by them at all, and with that object
abandons every activity that would oblige him to go out of doors.

Among all these people, some of whom were pursuing a train of thought,
but if so betrayed its instability by spasmodic gestures, a roving gaze
as little in keeping as the circumspect titubation of their neighbours,
the girls whom I had noticed, with that mastery over their limbs which
comes from perfect bodily condition and a sincere contempt for the rest
of humanity, were advancing straight ahead, without hesitation or
stiffness, performing exactly the movements that they wished to perform,
each of their members in full independence of all the rest, the greater
part of their bodies preserving that immobility which is so noticeable
in a good waltzer. They were now quite near me. Although each was a type
absolutely different from the others, they all had beauty; but to tell
the truth I had seen them for so short a time, and without venturing to
look them straight in the face, that I had not yet individualised any of
them. Save one, whom her straight nose, her dark complexion pointed in
contrast among the rest, like (in a renaissance picture of the Epiphany)
a king of Arab cast, they were known to me only, one by a pair of eyes
hard, set and mocking; another by cheeks in which the pink had that
coppery tint which makes one think of geraniums; and even of these
points I had not yet indissolubly attached any one to one of these girls
rather than to another; and when (according to the order in which their
series met the eye, marvellous because the most different aspects came
next one another, because all scales of colours were combined in it, but
confused as a piece of music in which I should not have been able to
isolate and identify at the moment of their passage the successive
phrases, no sooner distinguished than forgotten) I saw emerge a pallid
oval, black eyes, green eyes, I knew not if these were the same that had
already charmed me a moment ago, I could not bring them home to any one
girl whom I might thereby have set apart from the rest and so
identified. And this want, in my vision, of the demarcations which I
should presently establish between them sent flooding over the group a
wave of harmony, the continuous transfusion of a beauty fluid,
collective and mobile.

It was not perhaps, in this life of ours, mere chance that had, in
forming this group of friends, chosen them all of such beauty; perhaps
these girls (whose attitude was enough to reveal their nature, bold,
frivolous and hard), extremely sensitive to everything that was
ludicrous or ugly, incapable of yielding to an intellectual or moral
attraction, had naturally felt themselves, among companions of their own
age, repelled by all those in whom a pensive or sensitive disposition
was betrayed by shyness, awkwardness, constraint, by what, they would
say, "didn't appeal" to them, and from such had held aloof; while they
attached themselves, on the other hand, to others to whom they were
drawn by a certain blend of grace, suppleness, and physical neatness,
the only form in which they were able to picture the frankness of a
seductive character and the promise of pleasant hours in one another's
company. Perhaps, too, the class to which they belonged, a class which I
should not have found it easy to define, was at that point in its
evolution at which, whether thanks to its growing wealth and leisure, or
thanks to new athletic habits, extended now even to certain plebeian
elements, and a habit of physical culture to which had not yet been
added the culture of the mind, a social atmosphere, comparable to that
of smooth and prolific schools of sculpture, which have not yet gone in
for tortured expressions, produces naturally and in abundance fine
bodies with fine legs, fine hips, wholesome and reposeful faces, with an
air of agility and guile. And were they not noble and calm models of
human beauty that I beheld there, outlined against the sea, like statues
exposed to the sunlight upon a Grecian shore?

Just as if, in the heart of their band, which progressed along the
"front" like a luminous comet, they had decided that the surrounding
crowd was composed of creatures of another race whose sufferings even
could not awaken in them any sense of fellowship, they appeared not to
see them, forced those who had stopped to talk to step aside, as though
from the path of a machine that had been set going by itself, so that it
was no good waiting for it to get out of their way, their utmost sign of
consciousness being when, if some old gentleman of whom they did not
admit the existence and thrust from them the contact, had fled with a
frightened or furious, but a headlong or ludicrous motion, they looked
at one another and smiled. They had, for whatever did not form part of
their group, no affectation of contempt; their genuine contempt was
sufficient. But they could not set eyes on an obstacle without amusing
themselves by crossing it, either in a running jump or with both feet
together, because they were all filled to the brim, exuberant with that
youth which we need so urgently to spend that even when we are unhappy
or unwell, obedient rather to the necessities of our age than to the
mood of the day, we can never pass anything that can be jumped over or
slid down without indulging ourselves conscientiously, interrupting,
interspersing our slow progress--as Chopin his most melancholy
phrase--with graceful deviations in which caprice is blended with
virtuosity. The wife of an elderly banker, after hesitating between
various possible exposures for her husband, had settled him on a folding
chair, facing the "front", sheltered from wind and sun by the
band-stand. Having seen him comfortably installed there, she had gone to
buy a newspaper which she would read aloud to him, to distract him, one
of her little absences which she never prolonged for more than five
minutes, which seemed long enough to him but which she repeated at
frequent intervals so that this old husband on whom she lavished an
attention that she took care to conceal, should have the impression that
he was still quite alive and like other people and was in no need of
protection. The platform of the band-stand provided, above his head, a
natural and tempting springboard, across which, without a moment's
hesitation, the eldest of the little band began to run; she jumped over
the terrified old man, whose yachting cap was brushed by the nimble
feet, to the great delight of the other girls, especially of a pair of
green eyes in a "dashing" face, which expressed, for that bold act, an
admiration and a merriment in which I seemed to discern a trace of
timidity, a shamefaced and blustering timidity which did not exist in
the others. "Oh, the poor old man; he makes me sick; he looks half
dead;" said a girl with a croaking voice, but with more sarcasm than
sympathy. They walked on a little way, then stopped for a moment in the
middle of the road, with no thought whether they were impeding the
passage of other people, and held a council, a solid body of irregular
shape, compact, unusual and shrill, like birds that gather on the ground
at the moment of flight; then they resumed their leisurely stroll along
the "front", against a background of sea.

By this time their charming features had ceased to be indistinct and
impersonal. I had dealt them like cards into so many heaps to compose
(failing their names, of which I was still ignorant) the big one who had
jumped over the old banker; the little one who stood out against the
horizon of sea with her plump and rosy cheeks, her green eyes; the one
with the straight nose and dark complexion, in such contrast to all the
rest, another, with a white face like an egg on which a tiny nose
described an arc of a circle like a chicken's beak; yet another, wearing
a hooded cape (which gave her so poverty-stricken an appearance, and so
contradicted the smartness of the figure beneath that the explanation
which suggested itself was that this girl must have parents of high
position who valued their self-esteem so far above the visitors to
Balbec and the sartorial elegance of their own children that it was a
matter of the utmost indifference to them that their daughter should
stroll on the "front" dressed in a way which humbler people would have
considered too modest); a girl with brilliant, laughing eyes and plump,
colourless cheeks, a black polo-cap pulled down over her face, who was
pushing a bicycle with so exaggerated a movement of her hips, with an
air borne out by her language, which was so typically of the gutter and
was being shouted so loud, when I passed her (although among her
expressions I caught that irritating "live my own life") that,
abandoning the hypothesis which her friend's hooded cape had made me
construct, I concluded instead that all these girls belonged to the
population which frequents the racing-cracks, and must be the very
juvenile mistresses of professional bicyclists. In any event, in none of
my suppositions was there any possibility of their being virtuous. At
first sight--in the way in which they looked at one another and smiled,
in the insistent stare of the one with the dull cheeks--I had grasped
that they were not. Besides, my grandmother had always watched over me
with a delicacy too timorous for me not to believe that the sum total of
the things one ought not to do was indivisible or that girls who were
lacking in respect for their elders would suddenly be stopped short by
scruples when there were pleasures at stake more tempting than that of
jumping over an octogenarian.

Though they were now separately identifiable, still the mutual response
which they gave one another with eyes animated my self-sufficiency and
the spirit of comradeship, in which were kindled at every moment now the
interest now the insolent indifference with which each of them sparkled
according as her glance fell on one of her friends or on passing
strangers, that consciousness, moreover, of knowing one another
intimately enough always to go about together, by making them a 'band
apart' established between their independent and separate bodies, as
slowly they advanced, a bond invisible but harmonious, like a single
warm shadow, a single atmosphere making of them a whole as homogeneous
in its parts as it was different from the crowd through which their
procession gradually wound.

For an instant, as I passed the dark one with the fat cheeks who was
wheeling a bicycle, I caught her smiling, sidelong glance, aimed from
the centre of that inhuman world which enclosed the life of this little
tribe, an inaccessible, unknown world to which the idea of what I was
could certainly never attain nor find a place in it. Wholly occupied
with what her companions were saying, this young girl in her polo-cap,
pulled down very low over her brow, had she seen me at the moment in
which the dark ray emanating from her eyes had fallen on me? In the
heart of what universe did she distinguish me? It would have been as
hard for me to say as, when certain peculiarities are made visible,
thanks to the telescope, in a neighbouring planet, it is difficult to
arrive at the conclusion that human beings inhabit it, that they can see
us, or to say what ideas the sight of us can have aroused in their
minds.

If we thought that the eyes of a girl like that were merely two
glittering sequins of mica, we should not be athirst to know her and to
unite her life to ours. But we feel that what shines in those reflecting
discs is not due solely to their material composition; that it is,
unknown to us, the dark shadows of the ideas that the creature is
conceiving, relative to the people and places that she knows--the turf
of racecourses, the sand of cycling tracks over which, pedalling on past
fields and woods, she would have drawn me after her, that little peri,
more seductive to me than she of the Persian paradise--the shadows, too,
of the home to which she will presently return, of the plans that she is
forming or that others have formed for her; and above all that it is
she, with her desires, her sympathies, her revulsions, her obscure and
incessant will. I knew that I should never possess this young cyclist if
I did not possess also what there was in her eyes. And it was
consequently her whole life that filled me with desire; a sorrowful
desire because I felt that it was not to be realised, but exhilarating,
because what had hitherto been my life, having ceased of a sudden to be
my whole life, being no more now than a little part of the space
stretching out before me, which I was burning to cover and which was
composed of the lives of these girls, offered me that prolongation, that
possible multiplication of oneself which is happiness. And no doubt the
fact that we had, these girls and I, not one habit--as we had not one
idea--in common, was to make it more difficult for me to make friends
with them and to please them. But perhaps, also, it was thanks to those
differences, to my consciousness that there did not enter into the
composition of the nature and actions of these girls a single element
that I knew or possessed, that there came in place of my satiety a
thirst--like that with which a dry land burns--for a life which my soul,
because it had never until now received one drop of it, would absorb all
the more greedily in long draughts, with a more perfect imbibition.

I had looked so closely at the dark cyclist with the bright eyes that
she seemed to notice my attention, and said to the biggest of the girls
something that I could not hear. To be honest, this dark one was not the
one that pleased me most, simply because she was dark and because (since
the day on which, from the little path by Tansonville, I had seen
Gilberte) a girl with reddish hair and a golden skin had remained for me
the inaccessible ideal. But Gilberte herself, had I not loved her
principally because she had appeared to me haloed with that aureole of
being the friend of Bergotte, of going with him to look at old
cathedrals? And in the same way could I not rejoice at having seen this
dark girl look at me (which made me hope that it would be easier for me
to get to know her first), for she would introduce me to the others, to
the pitiless one who had jumped over the old man's head, to the cruel
one who had said "He makes me sick, poor old man!" to all of them in
turn, among whom, moreover, she had the distinction of being their
inseparable companion? And yet the supposition that I might some day be
the friend of one or other of these girls, that their eyes, whose
incomprehensible gaze struck me now and again, playing upon me unawares,
like the play of sunlight upon a wall, might ever, by a miraculous
alchemy, allow to interpenetrate among their ineffable particles the
idea of my existence, some affection for my person, that I myself might
some day take my place among them in the evolution of their course by
the sea's edge--that supposition appeared to me to contain within it a
contradiction as insoluble as if, standing before some classical frieze
or a fresco representing a procession, I had believed it possible for
me, the spectator, to take my place, beloved of them, among the god-like
hierophants.

The happiness of knowing these girls was, then, not to be realised.
Certainly it would not have been the first of its kind that I had
renounced. I had only to recall the numberless strangers whom, even at
Balbec, the carriage bowling away from them at full speed had forced me
for ever to abandon. And indeed the pleasure that was given me by the
little band, as noble as if it had been composed of Hellenic virgins,
came from some suggestion that there was in it of the flight of passing
figures along a road. This fleetingness of persons who are not known to
us, who force us to put out from the harbour of life, in which the women
whose society we frequent have all, in course of time, laid bare their
blemishes, urges us into that state of pursuit in which there is no
longer anything to arrest the imagination. But to strip our pleasures of
imagination is to reduce them to their own dimensions, that is to say to
nothing. Offered me by one of those procuresses (whose good offices, all
the same, the reader has seen that I by no means scorned), withdrawn
from the element which gave them so many fine shades and such vagueness,
these girls would have enchanted me less. We must have imagination,
awakened by the uncertainty of being able to attain our object, to
create a goal which hides our other goal from us, and by substituting
for sensual pleasures the idea of penetrating into a life prevents us
from recognising that pleasure, from tasting its true savour, from
restricting it to its own range.

There must be, between us and the fish which, if we saw it for the first
time cooked and served on a table, would not appear worth the endless
trouble, craft and stratagem that are necessary if we are to catch it,
interposed, during our afternoons with the rod, the ripple to whose
surface come wavering, without our quite knowing what we intend to do
with them, the burnished gleam of flesh, the indefiniteness of a form,
in the fluidity of a transparent and flowing azure.

These girls benefited also by that alteration of social values
characteristic of seaside life. All the advantages which, in our
ordinary environment, extend and magnify our importance, we there find
to have become invisible, in fact to be eliminated; while on the other
hand the people whom we suppose, without reason, to enjoy similar
advantages appear to us amplified to artificial dimensions. This made it
easy for strange women generally, and to-day for these girls in
particular, to acquire an enormous importance in my eyes, and impossible
to make them aware of such importance as I might myself possess.

But if there was this to be said for the excursion of the little band,
that it was but an excerpt from the innumerable flight of passing women,
which had always disturbed me, their flight was here reduced to a
movement so slow as to approach immobility. Now, precisely because, in a
phase so far from rapid, faces, no longer swept past me in a whirlwind,
but calm and distinct, still appeared beautiful, I was prevented from
thinking as I had so often thought when Mme. de Villeparisis's carriage
bore me away that, at closer quarters, if I had stopped for a moment,
certain details, a pitted skin, drooping nostrils, a silly gape, a
grimace of a smile, an ugly figure might have been substituted, in the
face and body of the woman, for those that I had doubtless imagined; for
there had sufficed a pretty outline, a glimpse of a fresh complexion,
for me to add, in entire good faith, a fascinating shoulder, a delicious
glance of which I carried in my mind for ever a memory or a preconceived
idea, these rapid decipherings of a person whom we see in motion
exposing us thus to the same errors as those too rapid readings in
which, on a single syllable and without waiting to identify the rest, we
base instead of the word that is in the text a wholly different word
with which our memory supplies us. It could not be so with me now. I had
looked well at them all; each of them I had seen, not from every angle
and rarely in full face, but all the same in two or three aspects
different enough to enable me to make either the correction or the
verification, to take a "proof" of the different possibilities of line
and colour that are hazarded at first sight, and to see persist in them,
through a series of expressions, something unalterably material. I could
say to myself with conviction that neither in Paris nor at Balbec, in
the most favourable hypotheses of what might have happened, even if I
had been able to stop and talk to them, the passing women who had caught
my eye, had there ever been one whose appearance, followed by her
disappearance without my having managed to know her, had left me with
more regret than would these, had given me the idea that her friendship
might be a thing so intoxicating. Never, among actresses nor among
peasants nor among girls from a convent school had I beheld anything so
beautiful, impregnated with so much that was unknown, so inestimably
precious, so apparently inaccessible. They were, of the unknown and
potential happiness of life, an illustration so delicious and in so
perfect a state that it was almost for intellectual reasons that I was
desperate with the fear that I might not be able to make, in unique
conditions which left no room for any possibility of error, proper trial
of what is the most mysterious thing that is offered to us by the beauty
which we desire and console ourselves for never possessing, by demanding
pleasure--as Swann had always refused to do before Odette's day--from
women whom we have not desired, so that, indeed, we die without having
ever known what that other pleasure was. No doubt it was possible that
it was not in reality an unknown pleasure, that on a close inspection
its mystery would dissipate and vanish, that it was no more than a
projection, a mirage of desire. But in that case I could blame only the
compulsion of a law of nature,--which if it applied to these girls would
apply to all--and not the imperfection of the object. For it was that
which I should have chosen above all others, feeling quite certain, with
a botanist's satisfaction, that it was not possible to find collected
anywhere rarer specimens than these young flowers who were interrupting
at this moment before my eyes the line of the sea with their slender
hedge, like a bower of Pennsylvania roses adorning a garden on the brink
of a cliff, between which is contained the whole tract of ocean crossed
by some steamer, so slow in gliding along the blue and horizontal line
that stretches from one stem to the next that an idle butterfly,
dawdling in the cup of a flower which the moving hull has long since
passed, can, if it is to fly and be sure of arriving before the vessel,
wait until nothing but the tiniest slice of blue still separates the
questing prow from the first petal of the flower towards which it is
steering.

I went indoors because I was to dine at Rivebelle with Robert, and my
grandmother insisted that on those evenings, before going out, I must
lie down for an hour on my bed, a rest which the Balbec doctor presently
ordered me to extend to the other evenings also.

However, there was no need, when one went indoors, to leave the "front"
and to enter the hotel by the hall, that is to say from behind. By
virtue of an alteration of the clock which reminded me of those
Saturdays when, at Combray, we used to have luncheon an hour earlier,
now with summer at the full the days had become so long that the sun was
still high in the heavens, as though it were only tea-time, when the
tables were being laid for dinner in the Grand Hotel. And so the great
sliding windows were kept open from the ground. I had but to step across
a low wooden sill to find myself in the dining-room, through which I
walked and straight across to the lift.

As I passed the office I addressed a smile to the manager, and with no
shudder of disgust gathered one for myself from his face which, since I
had been at Balbec, my comprehensive study of it was injecting and
transforming, little by little, like a natural history preparation. His
features had become familiar to me, charged with a meaning that was of
no importance but still intelligible, like a script which one can read,
and had ceased in any way to resemble these queer, intolerable
characters which his face had presented to me on that first day, when I
had seen before me a personage now forgotten, or, if I succeeded in
recalling him, unrecognisable, difficult to identify with this
insignificant and polite personality of which the other was but a
caricature, a hideous and rapid sketch. Without either the shyness or
the sadness of the evening of my arrival I rang for the attendant, who
no longer stood in silence while I rose by his side in the lift as in a
mobile thoracic cage propelled upwards along its ascending pillar, but
repeated:

"There aren't the people now there were a month back. They're beginning
to go now; the days are drawing in." He said this not because there was
any truth in it but because, having an engagement, presently, for a
warmer part of the coast, he would have liked us all to leave, so that
the hotel could be shut up and he have a few days to himself before
"rejoining" in his new place. "Rejoin" and "new" were not, by the way,
incompatible terms, since, for the lift-boy, "rejoin" was the usual form
of the verb "to join". The only thing that surprised me was that he
condescended to say "place", for he belonged to that modern proletariat
which seeks to efface from our language every trace of the rule of
domesticity. A moment later, however, he informed me that in the
"situation" which he was about to "rejoin", he would have a smarter
"tunic" and a better "salary", the words "livery" and "wages" sounding
to him obsolete and unseemly. And as, by an absurd contradiction, the
vocabulary has, through thick and thin, among us "masters", survived the
conception of inequality, I was always failing to understand what the
lift-boy said. For instance, the only thing that interested me was to
know whether my grandmother was in the hotel. Now, forestalling my
questions, the lift-boy would say to me: "That lady has just gone out
from your rooms." I was invariably taken in; I supposed that he meant my
grandmother. "No, that lady; I think she's an employee of yours." As in
the old speech of the middle classes, which ought really to be done away
with, a cook is not called an employee, I thought for a moment: "But he
must be mistaken. We don't own a factory; we haven't any employees."
Suddenly I remembered that the title of "employee" is, like the wearing
of a moustache among waiters, a sop to their self-esteem given to
servants, and realised that this lady who had just gone out must be
Françoise (probably on a visit to the coffee-maker, or to watch the
Belgian lady's little maid at her sewing), though even this sop did not
satisfy the lift-boy, for he would say quite naturally, speaking
pityingly of his own class, "with the working man" or "the small
person", using the same singular form as Racine when he speaks of "the
poor". But as a rule, for my zeal and timidity of the first evening were
now things of the past, I no longer spoke to the lift-boy. It was he now
who stood there and received no answer during the short journey on which
he threaded his way through the hotel, hollowed out inside like a toy,
which extended round about us, floor by floor, the ramifications of its
corridors in the depths of which the light grew velvety, lost its tone,
diminished the communicating doors, the steps of the service stairs
which it transformed into that amber haze, unsubstantial and mysterious
as a twilight, in which Rembrandt picks out here and there a window-sill
or a well-head. And on each landing a golden light reflected from the
carpet indicated the setting sun and the lavatory window.

I asked myself whether the girls I had just seen lived at Balbec, and
who they could be. When our desire is thus concentrated upon a little
tribe of humanity which it singles out from the rest, everything that
can be associated with that tribe becomes a spring of emotion and then
of reflexion. I had heard a lady say on the "front": "She is a friend of
the little Simonet girl" with that self-important air of inside
knowledge, as who should say: "He is the inseparable companion of young
La Rochefoucauld." And immediately she had detected on the face of the
person to whom she gave this information a curiosity to see more of the
favoured person who was "a friend of the little Simonet". A privilege,
obviously, that did not appear to be granted to all the world. For
aristocracy is a relative state. And there are plenty of inexpensive
little holes and corners where the son of an upholsterer is the arbiter
of fashion and reigns over a court like any young Prince of Wales. I
have often since then sought to recall how it first sounded for me there
on the beach, that name of Simonet, still quite indefinite as to its
form, which I had failed to distinguish, and also as to its
significance, to the designation by it of such and such a person, or
perhaps of some one else; imprinted, in fact, with that vagueness, that
novelty which we find so moving in the sequel, when the name whose
letters are every moment engraved more deeply on our hearts by our
incessant thought of them has become (though this was not to happen to
me with the name of the "little Simonet" until several years had passed)
the first coherent sound that comes to our lips, whether on waking from
sleep or on recovering from a swoon, even before the idea of what
o'clock it is or of where we are, almost before the word "I", as though
the person whom it names were more "we" even than we ourself, and as
though after a brief spell of unconsciousness the phase that is the
first of all to dissolve is that in which we were not thinking of her. I
do not know why I said to myself from the first that the name Simonet
must be that of one of the band of girls; from that moment I never
ceased to ask myself how I could get to know the Simonet family, get to
know them, moreover, through people whom they considered superior to
themselves (which ought not to be difficult if the girls were only
common little "bounders") so that they might not form a disdainful idea
of me. For one cannot have a perfect knowledge, one cannot effect the
complete absorption of a person who disdains one, so long as one has not
overcome her disdain. And since, whenever the idea of women who are so
different from us penetrates our senses, unless we are able to forget it
or the competition of other ideas eliminates it, we know no rest until
we have converted those aliens into something that is compatible with
ourself, our heart being in this respect endowed with the same kind of
reaction and activity as our physical organism, which cannot abide the
infusion of any foreign body into its veins without at once striving to
digest and assimilate it: the little Simonet must be the prettiest of
them all--she who, I felt moreover, might yet become my mistress, for
she was the only one who, two or three times half-turning her head, had
appeared to take cognisance of my fixed stare. I asked the lift-boy
whether he knew of any people at Balbec called Simonet. Not liking to
admit that there was anything which he did not know, he replied that he
seemed to have heard the name somewhere. As we reached the highest
landing I told him to have the latest lists of visitors sent up to me.

I stepped out of the lift, but instead of going to my room I made my way
farther along the corridor, for before my arrival the valet in charge of
the landing, despite his horror of draughts, had opened the window at
the end, which instead of looking out to the sea faced the hill and
valley inland, but never allowed them to be seen, for its panes, which
were made of clouded glass, were generally closed. I made a short
"station" in front of it, time enough just to pay my devotions to the
view which for once it revealed over the hill against which the back of
the hotel rested, a view that contained but a solitary house, planted in
the middle distance, though the perspective and the evening light in
which I saw it, while preserving its mass, gave it a sculptural beauty
and a velvet background, as though to one of those architectural works
in miniature, tiny temples or chapels wrought in gold and enamels, which
serve as reliquaries and are exposed only on rare and solemn days for
the veneration of the faithful. But this moment of adoration had already
lasted too long, for the valet, who carried in one hand a bunch of keys
and with the other saluted me by touching his verger's skull-cap, though
without raising it, on account of the pure, cool evening air, came and
drew together, like those of a shrine, the two sides of the window, and
so shut off the minute edifice, the glistening relic from my adoring
gaze. I went into my room. Regularly, as the season advanced, the
picture that I found there in my window changed. At first it was broad
daylight, and dark only if the weather was bad: and then, in the
greenish glass which it distended with the curve of its round waves, the
sea, set among the iron uprights of my window like a piece of stained
glass in its leads, ravelled out over all the deep rocky border of the
bay little plumed triangles of an unmoving spray delineated with the
delicacy of a feather or a downy breast from Pisanello's pencil, and
fixed in that white, unalterable, creamy enamel which is used to depict
fallen snow in Gallé's glass.

Presently the days grew shorter and at the moment when I entered my room
the violet sky seemed branded with the stiff, geometrical, travelling,
effulgent figure of the sun (like the representation of some miraculous
sign, of some mystical apparition) leaning over the sea from the hinge
of the horizon as a sacred picture leans over a high altar, while the
different parts of the western sky exposed in the glass fronts of the
low mahogany bookcases that ran along the walls, which I carried back in
my mind to the marvellous painting from which they had been detached,
seemed like those different scenes which some old master executed long
ago for a confraternity upon a shrine, whose separate panels are now
exhibited side by side upon the wall of a museum gallery, so that the
visitor's imagination alone can restore them to their place on the
predella of the reredos. A few weeks later, when I went upstairs, the
sun had already set. Like the one that I used to see at Combray, behind
the Calvary, when I was coming home from a walk and looking forward to
going down to the kitchen before dinner, a band of red sky over the sea,
compact and clear-cut as a layer of aspic over meat, then, a little
later, over a sea already cold and blue like a grey mullet, a sky of the
same pink as the salmon that we should presently be ordering at
Rivebelle reawakened the pleasure which I was to derive from the act of
dressing to go out to dinner. Over the sea, quite near the shore, were
trying to rise, one beyond another, at wider and wider intervals,
vapours of a pitchy blackness but also of the polish and consistency of
agate, of a visible weight, so much so that the highest among them,
poised at the end of their contorted stem and overreaching the centre of
gravity of the pile that had hitherto supported them, seemed on the
point of bringing down in ruin this lofty structure already half the
height of the sky, and of precipitating it into the sea. The sight of a
ship that was moving away like a nocturnal traveller gave me the same
impression that I had had in the train of being set free from the
necessity of sleep and from confinement in a bedroom. Not that I felt
myself a prisoner in the room in which I now was, since in another hour
I should have left it and be getting into the carriage. I threw myself
down on the bed; and, just as if I had been lying in a berth on board
one of those steamers which I could see quite near to me and which, when
night came, it would be strange to see stealing slowly out into the
darkness, like shadowy and silent but unsleeping swans, I was on all
sides surrounded by pictures of the sea.

But as often as not they were, indeed, only pictures; I forgot that
below their coloured expanse was hollowed the sad desolation of the
beach, travelled by the restless evening breeze whose breath I had so
anxiously felt on my arrival at Balbec; besides, even in my room, being
wholly taken up with thoughts of the girls whom I had seen go past, I
was no longer in a state of mind calm or disinterested enough to allow
the formation of any really deep impression of beauty. The anticipation
of dinner at Rivebelle made my mood more frivolous still, and my mind,
dwelling at such moments upon the surface of the body which I was going
to dress up so as to try to appear as pleasing as possible in the
feminine eyes which would be scrutinising me in the brilliantly lighted
restaurant, was incapable of putting any depth behind the colour of
things. And if, beneath my window, the unwearying, gentle flight of
sea-martins and swallows had not arisen like a playing fountain, like
living fireworks, joining the intervals between their soaring rockets
with the motionless white streaming lines of long horizontal wakes of
foam, without the charming miracle of this natural and local phenomenon,
which brought into touch with reality the scenes that I had before my
eyes, I might easily have believed that they were no more than a
selection, made afresh every day, of paintings which were shewn quite
arbitrarily in the place in which I happened to be and without having
any necessary connexion with that place: At one time it was an
exhibition of Japanese colour-prints: beside the neat disc of sun, red
and round as the moon, a yellow cloud seemed a lake against which black
swords were outlined like the trees upon its shore; a bar of a tender
pink which I had never seen again after my first paint-box swelled out
into a river on either bank of which boats seemed to be waiting high and
dry for some one to push them down and set them afloat. And with the
contemptuous, bored, frivolous glance of an amateur or a woman hurrying
through a picture gallery between two social engagements, I would say to
myself: "Curious sunset, this; it's different from what they usually are
but after all I've seen them just as fine, just as remarkable as this."
I had more pleasure on evenings when a ship, absorbed and liquefied by
the horizon so much the same in colour as herself (an Impressionist
exhibition this time) that it seemed to be also of the same matter,
appeared as if some one had simply cut out with a pair of scissors her
bows and the rigging in which she tapered into a slender filigree from
the vaporous blue of the sky. Sometimes the ocean filled almost the
whole of my window, when it was enlarged and prolonged by a band of sky
edged at the top only by a line that was of the same blue as the sea, so
that I supposed it all to be still sea, and the change in colour due
only to some effect of light and shade. Another day the sea was painted
only in the lower part of the window, all the rest of which was so
filled with innumerable clouds, packed one against another in horizontal
bands, that its panes seemed to be intended, for some special purpose or
to illustrate a special talent of the artist, to present a "Cloud
Study", while the fronts of the various bookcases shewing similar clouds
but in another part of the horizon and differently coloured by the
light, appeared to be offering as it were the repetition--of which
certain of our contemporaries are so fond--of one and the same effect
always observed at different hours but able now in the immobility of art
to be seen all together in a single room, drawn in pastel and mounted
under glass. And sometimes to a sky and sea uniformly grey a rosy touch
would be added with an exquisite delicacy, while a little butterfly that
had gone to sleep at the foot of the window seemed to be attaching with
its wings at the corner of this "Harmony in Grey and Pink" in the
Whistler manner the favourite signature of the Chelsea master. The pink
vanished; there was nothing now left to look at. I rose for a moment and
before lying down again drew close the inner curtains. Above them I
could see from my bed the ray of light that still remained, growing
steadily fainter and thinner, but it was without any feeling of sadness,
without any regret for its passing that I thus allowed to die above the
curtains the hour at which, as a rule, I was seated at table, for I knew
that this day was of another kind than ordinary days, longer, like those
arctic days which night interrupts for a few minutes only; I knew that
from the chrysalis of the dusk was preparing to emerge, by a radiant
metamorphosis, the dazzling light of the Rivebelle restaurant. I said to
myself: "It is time"; I stretched myself on the bed, and rose, and
finished dressing; and I found a charm in these idle moments, lightened
of every material burden, in which while down below the others were
dining I was employing the forces accumulated during the inactivity of
this last hour of the day only in drying my washed body, in putting on a
dinner jacket, in tying my tie, in making all those gestures which were
already dictated by the anticipated pleasure of seeing again some woman
whom I had noticed, last time, at Rivebelle, who had seemed to be
watching me, had perhaps left the table for a moment only in the hope
that I would follow her; it was with joy that I enriched myself with all
these attractions so as to give myself, whole, alert, willing, to a new
life, free, without cares, in which I would lean my hesitations upon the
calm strength of Saint-Loup, and would choose from among the different
species of animated nature and the produce of every land those which,
composing the unfamiliar dishes that my companion would at once order,
might have tempted my appetite or my imagination. And then at the end of
the season came the days when I could no longer pass indoors from the
"front" through the dining-room; its windows stood open no more, for it
was night now outside and the swarm of poor folk and curious idlers,
attracted by the blaze of light which they might not reach, hung in
black clusters chilled by the north wind to the luminous sliding walls
of that buzzing hive of glass.

There was a knock at my door; it was Aimé who had come upstairs in
person with the latest lists of visitors.

Aimé could not go away without telling me that Dreyfus was guilty a
thousand times over. "It will all come out," he assured me, "not this
year, but next. It was a gentleman who's very thick with the General
Staff, told me. I asked him if they wouldn't decide to bring it all to
light at once, before the year is out. He laid down his cigarette,"
Aimé went on, acting the scene for my benefit, and shaking his head and
his forefinger as his informant had done, as much as to say: "We mustn't
expect too much!"--"'Not this year, Aimé,' those were his very words,
putting his hand on my shoulder, 'It isn't possible. But next Easter,
yes!'" And Aimé tapped me gently on my shoulder, saying, "You see, I'm
letting you have it exactly as he told me," whether because he was
flattered at this act of familiarity by a distinguished person or so
that I might better appreciate, with a full knowledge of the facts, the
worth of the arguments and our grounds for hope.

It was not without a slight throb of the heart that on the first page of
the list I caught sight of the words "Simonet and family." I had in me a
store of old dream-memories which dated from my childhood, and in which
all the tenderness (tenderness that existed in my heart, but, when my
heart felt it, was not distinguishable from anything else) was wafted to
me by a person as different as possible from myself. This person, once
again I fashioned her, utilising for the purpose the name Simonet and
the memory of the harmony that had reigned between the young bodies
which I had seen displaying themselves on the beach, in a sportive
procession worthy of Greek art or of Giotto. I knew not which of these
girls was Mlle. Simonet, if indeed any of them were so named, but I did
know that I was loved by Mlle. Simonet and that I was going, with
Saint-Loup's help, to attempt to know her. Unfortunately, having on that
condition only obtained an extension of his leave, he was obliged to
report for duty every day at Doncières: but to make him forsake his
military duty I had felt that I might count, more even than on his
friendship for myself, on that same curiosity, as a human naturalist,
which I myself had so often felt--even without having seen the person
mentioned, and simply on hearing some one say that there was a pretty
cashier at a fruiterer's--to acquaint myself with a new variety of
feminine beauty. But that curiosity I had been wrong in hoping to excite
in Saint-Loup by speaking to him of my band of girls. For it had been
and would long remain paralysed in him by his love for that actress
whose lover he was. And even if he had felt it lightly stirring him he
would have repressed it, from an almost superstitious belief that on his
own fidelity might depend that of his mistress. And so it was without
any promise from him that he would take an active interest in my girls
that we started out to dine at Rivebelle.

At first, when we arrived there, the sun used just to have set, but it
was light still; in the garden outside the restaurant, where the lamps
had not yet been lighted, the heat of the day fell and settled, as
though in a vase along the sides of which the transparent, dusky jelly
of the air seemed of such consistency that a tall rose-tree fastened
against the dim wall which it streaked with pink veins, looked like the
arborescence that one sees at the heart of an onyx. Presently night had
always fallen when we left the carriage, often indeed before we started
from Balbec if the evening was wet and we had put off sending for the
carriage in the hope of the weather's improving. But on those days it
was without any sadness that I listened to the wind howling, I knew that
it did not mean the abandonment of my plans, imprisonment in my bedroom;
I knew that in the great dining-room of the restaurant, which we would
enter to the sound of the music of the gipsy band, the innumerable lamps
would triumph easily over darkness and chill, by applying to them their
broad cauteries of molten gold, and I jumped light-heartedly after
Saint-Loup into the closed carriage which stood waiting for us in the
rain. For some time past the words of Bergotte, when he pronounced
himself positive that, in spite of all I might say, I had been created
to enjoy, pre-eminently, the pleasures of the mind, had restored to me,
with regard to what I might succeed in achieving later on, a hope that
was disappointed afresh every day by the boredom that I felt on setting
myself down before a writing-table to start work on a critical essay or
a novel. "After all," I said to myself, "possibly the pleasure that its
author has found in writing it is not the infallible test of the
literary value of a page; it may be only an accessory, one that is often
to be found superadded to that value, but the want of which can have no
prejudicial effect on it. Perhaps some of the greatest masterpieces were
written yawning." My grandmother set my doubts at rest by telling me
that I should be able to work and should enjoy working as soon as my
health improved. And, our doctor having thought it only prudent to warn
me of the grave risks to which my state of health might expose me, and
having outlined all the hygienic precaution that I ought to take to
avoid any accident--I subordinated all my pleasures to an object which I
judged to be infinitely more important than them, that of becoming
strong enough to be able to bring into being the work which I had,
possibly, within me; I had been exercising over myself, ever since I had
come to Balbec, a scrupulous and constant control. Nothing would have
induced me, there, to touch the cup of coffee which would have robbed me
of the night's sleep that was necessary if I was not to be tired next
day. But as soon as we reached Rivebelle, immediately, what with the
excitement of a new pleasure, and finding myself in that different zone
into which the exception to our rule of life takes us after it has cut
the thread, patiently spun throughout so many days, that was guiding us
towards wisdom--as though there were never to be any such thing as
to-morrow, nor any lofty aims to be realised, vanished all that exact
machinery of prudent hygienic measures which had been working to
safeguard them. A waiter was offering to take my coat, whereupon
Saint-Loup asked: "You're sure you won't be cold? Perhaps you'ld better
keep it: it's not very warm in here."

"No, no," I assured him; and perhaps I did not feel the cold; but
however that might be, I no longer knew the fear of falling ill, the
necessity of not dying, the importance of work. I gave up my coat; we
entered the dining-room to the sound of some warlike march played by the
gipsies, we advanced between two rows of tables laid for dinner as along
an easy path of glory, and, feeling a happy glow imparted to our bodies
by the rhythms of the orchestra which rendered us its military honours,
gave us this unmerited triumph, we concealed it beneath a grave and
frozen mien, beneath a languid, casual gait, so as not to be like those
music-hall "mashers" who, having wedded a ribald verse to a patriotic
air, come running on to the stage with the martial countenance of a
victorious general.

From that moment I was a new man, who was no longer my grandmother's
grandson and would remember her only when it was time to get up and go,
but the brother, for the time being, of the waiters who were going to
bring us our dinner.

The dose of beer--all the more, that of champagne--which at Balbec I
should not have ventured to take in a week, albeit to my calm and lucid
consciousness the flavour of those beverages represented a pleasure
clearly appreciable, since it was also one that could easily be
sacrificed, I now imbibed at a sitting, adding to it a few drops of port
wine, too much distracted to be able to taste it, and I gave the
violinist who had just been playing the two louis which I had been
saving up for the last month with a view to buying something, I could
not remember what. Several of the waiters, set going among the tables,
were flying along at full speed, each carrying on his outstretched palms
a dish which it seemed to be the object of this kind of race not to let
fall. And in fact the chocolate _soufflés_ arrived at their destination
unspilled, the potatoes _à l'anglaise_, in spite of the pace which
ought to have sent them flying, came arranged as at the start round the
Pauilhac lamb. I noticed one of these servants, very tall, plumed with
superb black locks, his face dyed in a tint that suggested rather
certain species of rare birds than a human being, who, running without
pause (and, one would have said, without purpose) from one end of the
room to the other, made me think of one of those macaws which fill the
big aviaries in zoological gardens with their gorgeous colouring and
incomprehensible agitation. Presently the spectacle assumed an order, in
my eyes at least, growing at once more noble and more calm. All this
dizzy activity became fixed in a quiet harmony. I looked at the round
tables whose innumerable assemblage filled the restaurant like so many
planets, as planets are represented in old allegorical pictures.
Moreover, there seemed to be some irresistibly attractive force at work
among these divers stars, and at each table the diners had eyes only for
the tables at which they were not sitting, except perhaps some wealthy
amphitryon who, having managed to secure a famous author, was
endeavouring to extract from him, thanks to the magic properties of the
turning table, a few unimportant remarks at which the ladies marvelled.
The harmony of these astral tables did not prevent the incessant
revolution of the countless servants who, because instead of being
seated like the diners they were on their feet, performed their
evolutions in a more exalted sphere. No doubt they were running, one to
fetch the _hors d'œuvre_, another to change the wine or with clean
glasses. But despite these special reasons, their perpetual course among
the round tables yielded, after a time, to the observer the law of its
dizzy but ordered circulation. Seated behind a bank of flowers, two
horrible cashiers, busy with endless calculations, seemed two witches
occupied in forecasting by astrological signs the disasters that might
from time to time occur in this celestial vault fashioned according to
the scientific conceptions of the middle ages.

And I rather pitied all the diners because I felt that for them the
round tables were not planets and that they had not cut through the
scheme of things one of those sections which deliver us from the bondage
of appearances and enable us to perceive analogies. They thought that
they were dining with this or that person, that the dinner would cost
roughly so much, and that to-morrow they would begin all over again. And
they appeared absolutely unmoved by the progress through their midst of
a train of young assistants who, having probably at that moment no
urgent duty, advanced processionally bearing rolls of bread in baskets.
Some of them, the youngest, stunned by the cuffs which the head waiters
administered to them as they passed, fixed melancholy eyes upon a
distant dream and were consoled only if some visitor from the Balbec
hotel in which they had once been employed, recognising them, said a few
words to them, telling them in person to take away the champagne which
was not fit to drink, an order that filled them with pride.

I could hear the twingeing of my nerves, in which there was a sense of
comfort independent of the external objects that might have produced it,
a comfort which the least shifting of my body or of my attention was
enough to make me feel, just as to a shut eye a slight pressure gives
the sensation of colour. I had already drunk a good deal of port wine,
and if I now asked for more it was not so much with a view to the
comfort which the additional glasses would bring me as an effect of the
comfort produced by the glasses that had gone before. I allowed the
music itself to guide to each of its notes my pleasure which, meekly
following, rested on each in turn. If, like one of those chemical
industries by means of which are prepared in large quantities bodies
which in a state of nature come together only by accident and very
rarely, this restaurant at Rivebelle united at one and the same moment
more women to tempt me with beckoning vistas of happiness than the
hazard of walks and drives would have made me encounter in a year; on
the other hand, this music that greeted our ears,--arrangements of
waltzes, of German operettas, of music-hall songs, all of them quite new
to me--was itself like an ethereal resort of pleasure superimposed upon
the other and more intoxicating still. For these tunes, each as
individual as a woman, were not keeping, as she would have kept, for
some privileged person, the voluptuous secret which they contained: they
offered me their secrets, ogled me, came up to me with affected or
vulgar movements, accosted me, caressed me as if I had suddenly become
more seductive, more powerful and more rich; I indeed found in these
tunes an element of cruelty; because any such thing as a disinterested
feeling for beauty, a gleam of intelligence was unknown to them; for
them physical pleasures alone existed. And they are the most merciless
of hells, the most gateless and imprisoning for the jealous wretch to
whom they present that pleasure--that pleasure which the woman he loves
is enjoying with another--as the only thing that exists in the world for
her who is all the world to him. But while I was humming softly to
myself the notes of this tune, and returning its kiss, the pleasure
peculiar to itself which it made me feel became so dear to me that I
would have left my father and mother, to follow it through the singular
world which it constructed in the invisible, in lines instinct with
alternate languor and vivacity. Although such a pleasure as this is not
calculated to enhance the value of the person to whom it comes, for it
is perceived by him alone, and although whenever, in the course of our
life, we have failed to attract a woman who has caught sight of us, she
could not tell whether at that moment we possessed this inward and
subjective felicity which, consequently, could in no way have altered
the judgment that she passed on us, I felt myself more powerful, almost
irresistible. It seemed to me that my love was no longer something
unattractive, at which people might smile, but had precisely the
touching beauty, the seductiveness of this music, itself comparable to a
friendly atmosphere in which she whom I loved and I were to meet,
suddenly grown intimate.

This restaurant was the resort not only of light women; it was
frequented also by people in the very best society, who came there for
afternoon tea or gave big dinner-parties. The tea-parties were held in a
long gallery, glazed and narrow, shaped like a funnel, which led from
the entrance hall to the dining-room and was bounded on one side by the
garden, from which it was separated (save for a few stone pillars) only
by its wall of glass, in which panes would be opened here and there. The
result of which, apart from ubiquitous draughts, was sudden and
intermittent bursts of sunshine, a dazzling light that made it almost
impossible to see the tea-drinkers, so that when they were installed
there, at tables crowded pair after pair the whole way along the narrow
gully, as they were shot with colours at every movement they made in
drinking their tea or in greeting one another, you would have called it
a reservoir, a stewpond in which the fisherman has collected all his
glittering catch, and the fish, half out of water and bathed in
sunlight, dazzle the eye as they mirror an ever-changing iridescence.

A few hours later, during dinner, which, naturally, was served in the
dining-room, the lights would be turned on, although it was still quite
light out of doors, so that one saw before one's eyes, in the garden,
among summer-houses glimmering in the twilight, like pale spectres of
evening, alleys whose greyish verdure was pierced by the last rays of
the setting sun and, from the lamp-lit room in which we were dining,
appeared through the glass--no longer, as one would have said of the
ladies who had been drinking tea there in the afternoon, along the blue
and gold corridor, caught in a glittering and dripping net--but like the
vegetation of a pale and green aquarium of gigantic size seen by a
supernatural light. People began to rise from table; and if each party
while their dinner lasted, albeit they spent the whole time examining,
recognising, naming the party at the next table, had been held in
perfect cohesion about their own, the attractive force that had kept
them gravitating round their host of the evening lost its power at the
moment when, for coffee, they repaired to the same corridor that had
been used for the tea-parties; it often happened that in its passage
from place to place some party on the march dropped one or more of its
human corpuscles who, having come under the irresistible attraction of
the rival party, detached themselves for a moment from their own, in
which their places were taken by ladies or gentlemen who had come across
to speak to friends before hurrying off with an "I really must fly: I'm
dining with M. So-and-So." And for the moment you would have been
reminded, looking at them, of two separate nosegays that had exchanged a
few of their flowers. Then the corridor too began to empty. Often, since
even after dinner there was still a little light left outside, they left
this long corridor unlighted, and, skirted by the trees that overhung it
on the other side of the glass, it suggested a pleached alley in a
wooded and shady garden. Here and there, in the gloom, a fair diner
lingered. As I passed through this corridor one evening on my way out I
saw, sitting among a group of strangers, the beautiful Princesse de
Luxembourg. I raised my hat without stopping. She remembered me, and
bowed her head with a smile; in the air, far above her bowed head, but
emanating from the movement, rose melodiously a few words addressed to
myself, which must have been a somewhat amplified good evening, intended
not to stop me but simply to complete the gesture, to make it a spoken
greeting. But her words remained so indistinct and the sound which was
all that I caught was prolonged so sweetly and seemed to me so musical
that it seemed as if among the dim branches of the trees a nightingale
had begun to sing. If it so happened that, to finish the evening with a
party of his friends whom we had met, Saint-Loup decided to go on to the
Casino of a neighbouring village, and, taking them with him, put me in
a carriage by myself, I would urge the driver to go as fast as he
possibly could, so that the minutes might pass less slowly which I must
spend without having anyone at hand to dispense me from the obligation
myself to provide my sensibility--reversing the engine, to speak, and
emerging from the passivity in which I was caught and held as in the
teeth of a machine--with those modifications which, since my arrival at
Rivebelle, I had been receiving from other people. The risk of collision
with a carriage coming the other way along those lanes where there was
barely room for one and it was dark as pitch, the insecurity of the
soil, crumbling in many places, at the cliffs edge, the proximity of its
vertical drop to the sea, none of these things exerted on me the slight
stimulus that would have been required to bring the vision and the fear
of danger within the scope of my reasoning. For just as it is not the
desire to become famous but the habit of being laborious that enables us
to produce a finished work, so it is not the activity of the present
moment but wise reflexions from the past that help us to safeguard the
future. But if already, before this point, on my arrival at Rivebelle, I
had flung irretrievably away from me those crutches of reason and
self-control which help our infirmity to follow the right road, if I now
found myself the victim of a sort of moral ataxy, the alcohol that I had
drunk, by unduly straining my nerves, gave to the minutes as they came a
quality, a charm which did not have the result of leaving me more ready,
or indeed more resolute to inhibit them, prevent their coming; for while
it made me prefer them a thousand times to anything else in my life, my
exaltation made me isolate them from everything else; I was confined to
the present, as heroes are or drunkards; eclipsed for the moment, my
past no longer projected before me that shadow of itself which we call
our future; placing the goal of my life no longer in the realisation of
the dreams of that past, but in the felicity of the present moment, I
could see nothing now of what lay beyond it. So that, by a contradiction
which, however, was only apparent, it was at the very moment in which I
was tasting an unfamiliar pleasure, feeling that my life might yet be
happy, in which it should have become more precious in my sight; it was
at this very moment that, delivered from the anxieties which my life had
hitherto contrived to suggest to me, I unhesitatingly abandoned it to
the chance of an accident. After all, I was doing no more than
concentrate in a single evening the carelessness that, for most men, is
diluted throughout their whole existence, in which every day they face,
unnecessarily, the dangers of a sea-voyage, of a trip in an aeroplane or
motor-car, when there is waiting for them at home the creature whose
life their death would shatter, or when there is still stored in the
fragile receptacle of their brain that book the approaching publication
of which is their one object, now, in life. And so too in the Rivebelle
restaurant, on evenings when we just stayed there after dinner, if
anyone had come in with the intention of killing me, as I no longer saw,
save in a distant prospect too remote to have any reality, my
grandmother, my life to come, the books that I was going to write, as I
clung now, body and mind, wholly to the scent of the lady at the next
table, the politeness of the waiters, the outline of the waltz that the
band was playing, as I was glued to my immediate sensation, with no
extension beyond its limits, nor any object other than not to be
separated from it, I should have died in and with that sensation, I
should have let myself be strangled without offering any resistance,
without a movement, a bee drugged with tobacco smoke that had ceased to
take any thought for preserving the accumulation of its labours and the
hopes of its hive.

I ought here to add that this insignificance into which the most serious
matters subsided, by contrast with the violence of my exaltation, came
in the end to include Mlle. Simonet and her friends. The enterprise of
knowing them seemed to me easy now but hardly worth the trouble, for my
immediate sensation alone, thanks to its extraordinary intensity, to the
joy that its slightest modifications, its mere continuity provoked, had
any importance for me; all the rest, parents, work, pleasures, girls at
Balbec, weighed with me no more than does a flake of foam in a strong
wind that will not let it find a resting place, existed no longer save
in relation to this internal power: intoxication makes real for an hour
or two a subjective idealism, pure phenomenism; nothing is left now but
appearances, nothing exists save as a function of our sublime self. This
is not to say that a genuine love, if we have one, cannot survive in
such conditions. But we feel so unmistakably, as though in a new
atmosphere, that unknown pressures have altered the dimensions of that
sentiment that we can no longer consider it in the old way. It is indeed
still there and we shall find it, but in a different place, no longer
weighing upon us, satisfied by the sensation which the present affords
it, a sensation that is sufficient for us, since for what is not
actually present we take no thought. Unfortunately the coefficient which
thus alters our values alters them only in the hour of intoxication. The
people who had lost all their importance, whom we scattered with our
breath like soap-bubbles, will to-morrow resume their density; we shall
have to try afresh to settle down to work which this evening had ceased
to have any significance. A more serious matter still, these mathematics
of the morrow, the same as those of yesterday, in whose problems we
shall find ourselves inexorably involved, it is they that govern us even
in these hours, and we alone are unconscious of their rule. If there
should happen to be, near us, a woman, virtuous or inimical, that
question so difficult an hour ago--to know whether we should succeed in
finding favour with her--seems to us now a million times easier of
solution without having become easier in any respect, for it is only in
our own sight, in our own inward sight that we have altered. And she is
as much annoyed with us at this moment as we shall be next day at the
thought of our having given a hundred francs to the messenger, and for
the same reason which in our case has merely been delayed in its
operation, namely the absence of intoxication.

I knew none of the women who were at Rivebelle and, because they formed
a part of my intoxication just as its reflexions form part of a mirror,
appeared to me now a thousand times more to be desired than the less and
less existent Mlle. Simonet. One of them, young, fair, by herself, with
a sad expression on a face framed in a straw hat trimmed with
field-flowers, gazed at me for a moment with a dreamy air and struck me
as being attractive. Then it was the turn of another, and of a third;
finally of a dark one with glowing cheeks. Almost all of them were
known, if not to myself, to Saint-Loup.

He had, in fact, before he made the acquaintance of his present
mistress, lived so much in the restricted world of amorous adventure
that all the women who would be dining on these evenings at Rivebelle,
where many of them had appeared quite by chance, having come to the
coast some to join their lovers, others in the hope of finding fresh
lovers there, there was scarcely one that he did not know from having
spent--or if not he, one or other of his friends--at least one night in
their company. He did not bow to them if they were with men, and they,
albeit they looked more at him than at anyone else, for the indifference
which he was known to feel towards every woman who was not his actress
gave him in their eyes an exceptional interest, appeared not to know
him. But you could hear them whispering: "That's young Saint-Loup. It
seems he's still quite gone on that girl of his. Got it bad, he has.
What a dear boy! I think he's just wonderful; and what style! Some girls
do have all the luck, don't they? And he's so nice in every way. I saw a
lot of him when I was with d'Orléans. They were quite inseparable,
those two. He was going the pace, that time. But he's given it all up
now, she can't complain. She's had a good run of luck, that she can say.
And I ask you, what in the world can he see in her? He must be a bit of
a chump, when all's said and done. She's got feet like boats, whiskers
like an American, and her undies are filthy. I can tell you, a little
shop girl would be ashamed to be seen in her knickers. Do just look at
his eyes a moment; you would jump into the fire for a man like that.
Hush, don't say a word; he's seen me; look, he's smiling. Oh, he
remembers me all right. Just you mention my name to him, and see what he
says!" Between these girls and him I surprised a glance of mutual
understanding. I should have liked him to introduce me to them, so that
I might ask them for assignations and they give them to me, even if I
had been unable to keep them. For otherwise their appearance would
remain for all time devoid, in my memory, of that part of itself--just
as though it had been hidden by a veil--which varies in every woman,
which we cannot imagine in any woman until we have actually seen it in
her, and which is apparent only in the glance that she directs at us,
that acquiesces in our desire and promises that it shall be satisfied.
And yet, even when thus reduced, their aspect was for me far more than
that of women whom I should have known to be virtuous, and it seemed to
me not to be, like theirs, flat, with nothing behind it, fashioned in
one piece with no solidity. It was not, of course, for me what it must
be for Saint-Loup who, by an act of memory, beneath the indifference,
transparent to him, of the motionless features which affected not to
know him, or beneath the dull formality of the greeting that might
equally well have been addressed to anyone else, could recall, could
see, through dishevelled locks, a swooning mouth, a pair of half-closed
eyes, a whole silent picture like those that painters, to cheat their
visitors' senses, drape with a decent covering. Undoubtedly, for me who
felt that nothing of my personality had penetrated the surface of this
woman or that, or would be borne by her upon the unknown ways which she
would tread through life, those faces remained sealed. But it was quite
enough to know that they did open, for them to seem to me of a price
which I should not have set on them had they been but precious medals,
instead of lockets within which were hidden memories of love. As for
Robert, scarcely able to keep in his place at table, concealing beneath
a courtier's smile his warrior's thirst for action--when I examined him
I could see how closely the vigorous structure of his triangular face
must have been modelled on that of his ancestors' faces, a face devised
rather for an ardent bowman than for a delicate student. Beneath his
fine skin the bold construction, the feudal architecture were apparent.
His head made one think of those old dungeon keeps on which the disused
battlements are still to be seen, although inside they have been
converted into libraries.

On our way back to Balbec, of those of the fair strangers to whom he had
introduced me I would repeat to myself without a moment's interruption,
and yet almost unconsciously: "What a delightful woman!" as one chimes
in with the refrain of a song. I admit that these words were prompted
rather by the state of my nerves than by any lasting judgment. It was
nevertheless true that if I had had a thousand francs on me and if there
had still been a jeweller's shop open at that hour, I should have bought
the lady a ring. When the successive hours of our life are thus
displayed against too widely dissimilar backgrounds, we find that we
give away too much of ourselves to all sorts of people who next day will
not interest us in the least. But we feel that we are still responsible
for what we said to them overnight, and that we must honour our
promises.

As on these evenings I came back later than usual to the hotel, it was
with joy that I recognised, in a room no longer hostile, the bed on
which, on the day of my arrival, I had supposed that it would always be
impossible for me to find any rest, whereas now my weary limbs turned to
it for support; so that, in turn, thighs, hips, shoulders burrowed into,
trying to adhere at every angle to the sheets that covered its mattress,
as if my fatigue, like a sculptor, had wished to take a cast of an
entire human body. But I could not go to sleep; I felt the approach of
morning; peace of mind, health of body were no longer mine. In my
distress it seemed that never should I recapture them. I should have had
to sleep for a long time if I were to overtake them. But then, had I
begun to doze, I must in any event be awakened in a couple of hours by
the symphonic concert on the beach. Suddenly I was asleep, I had fallen
into that deep slumber in which are opened to us a return to childhood,
the recapture of past years, of lost feelings, the disincarnation, the
transmigration of the soul, the evoking of the dead, the illusions of
madness, retrogression towards the most elementary of the natural
kingdoms (for we say that we often see animals in our dreams, but we
forget almost always that we are ourself then an animal deprived of that
reasoning power which projects upon things the light of certainty; we
present on the contrary to the spectacle of life only a dubious vision,
destroyed afresh every moment by oblivion, the former reality fading
before that which follows it as one projection of a magic lantern fades
before the next as we change the slide), all those mysteries which we
imagine ourselves not to know and into which we are in reality initiated
almost every night, as we are into the other great mystery of
annihilation and resurrection. Rendered more vagabond by the difficulty
of digesting my Rivebelle dinner, the successive and flickering
illumination of shadowy zones of my past made of me a being whose
supreme happiness would have been that of meeting Legrandin, with whom I
had just been talking in my dream.

And then, even my own life was entirely hidden from me by a new setting,
like the "drop" lowered right at the front of the stage before which,
while the scene shifters are busy behind, actors appear in a fresh
"turn". The turn in which I was now cast for a part was in the manner of
an Oriental fairy tale; I retained no knowledge of my past or of myself,
on account of the intense proximity of this interpolated scenery; I was
merely a person who received the bastinado and underwent various
punishments for a crime the nature of which I could not distinguish,
though it was actually that of having taken too much port wine. Suddenly
I awoke and discovered that, thanks to a long sleep, I had not heard a
note of the concert. It was already afternoon; I verified this by my
watch after several efforts to sit up in bed, efforts fruitless at first
and interrupted by backward falls on to my pillow, but those short falls
which are a sequel of sleep as of other forms of intoxication, whether
due to wine or to convalescence; besides, before I had so much as looked
at the time, I was certain that it was past midday. Last night I had
been nothing more than an empty vessel, without weight, and (since I
must first have gone to bed to be able to keep still, and have been
asleep to be able to keep silent) had been unable to refrain from moving
about and talking; I had no longer any stability, any centre of gravity,
I was set in motion and it seemed that I might have continued on my
dreary course until I reached the moon. But if, while I slept, my eyes
had not seen the time, my body had nevertheless contrived to calculate
it; had measured the hours; not on a dial superficially marked and
figured, but by the steadily growing weight of all my replenished forces
which, like a powerful clockwork, it had allowed, notch by notch, to
descend from my brain into the rest of my body in which there had risen
now to above my knees the unbroken abundance of their store. If it is
true that the sea was once upon a time our native element, into which we
must plunge our cooling blood if we are to recover our strength, it is
the same with the oblivion, the mental non-existence of sleep; we seem then to
absent ourselves for a few hours from Time, but the forces which we have
gathered in that interval without expending them, measure it by their
quantity as accurately as the pendulum of the clock or the crumbling
pyramid of the sandglass. Nor does one emerge more easily from such
sleep than from a prolonged spell of wakefulness, so strongly does
everything tend to persist; and if it is true that certain narcotics
make us sleep, to have slept for any time is an even stronger narcotic,
after which we have great difficulty in making ourselves wake up. Like a
sailor who sees plainly the harbour in which he can moor his vessel,
still tossed by the waves, I had a quite definite idea of looking at the
time and of getting up, but my body was at every moment cast back upon
the tide of sleep; the landing was difficult, and before I attained a
position in which I could reach my watch and confront with its time that
indicated by the wealth of accumulated material which my stiffened limbs
had at their disposal, I fell back two or three times more upon my
pillow.

At length I could reach and read it: "Two o'clock in the afternoon!" I
rang; but at once I returned to a slumber which, this time, must have
lasted infinitely longer, if I was to judge by the refreshment, the
vision of an immense night overpassed, which I found on awakening. And
yet as my awakening was caused by the entry of Françoise, and as her
entry had been prompted by my ringing the bell, this second sleep which,
it seemed to me, must have been longer than the other, and had brought
me so much comfort and forgetfulness, could not have lasted for more
than half a minute.

My grandmother opened the door of my bedroom; I asked her various
questions about the Legrandin family.

It is not enough to say that I had returned to tranquillity and health,
for it was more than a mere interval of space that had divided them from
me yesterday, I had had all night long to struggle against a contrary
tide, and now I not only found myself again in their presence, they had
once more entered into me. At certain definite and still somewhat
painful points beneath the surface of my empty head which would one day
be broken, letting my ideas escape for all time, those ideas had once
again taken their proper places and resumed that existence by which
hitherto, alas, they had failed to profit.

Once again I had escaped from the impossibility of sleeping, from the
deluge, the shipwreck of my nervous storms. I feared now not at all the
menaces that had loomed over me the evening before, when I was
dismantled of repose. A new life was opening before me; without making a
single movement, for I was still shattered, although quite alert and
well, I savoured my weariness with a light heart; it had isolated and
broken asunder the bones of my legs and arms, which I could feel
assembled before me, ready to cleave together, and which I was to raise
to life merely by singing, like the builder in the fable.

Suddenly I thought of the fair girl with the sad expression whom I had
seen at Rivebelle, where she had looked at me for a moment. Many others,
in the course of the evening, had seemed to me attractive; now she alone
arose from the dark places of my memory. I had felt that she noticed me,
had expected one of the waiters to come to me with a whispered message
from her. Saint-Loup did not know her and fancied that she was
respectable. It would be very difficult to see her, to see her
constantly. But I was prepared to make any sacrifice, I thought now only
of her. Philosophy distinguishes often between free and necessary acts.
Perhaps there is none to the necessity of which we are more completely
subjected than that which, by virtue of an ascending power held in check
during the act itself, makes so unfailingly (once our mind is at rest)
spring up a memory that was levelled with other memories by the
distributed pressure of our indifference, and rush to the surface,
because unknown to us it contained, more than any of the others, a charm
of which we do not become aware until the following day. And perhaps
there is not, either, any act so free, for it is still unprompted by
habit, by that sort of mental hallucination which, when we are in love,
facilitates the invariable reappearance of the image of one particular
person.

This was the day immediately following that on which I had seen file
past me against a background of sea the beautiful procession of young
girls. I put questions about them to a number of the visitors in the
hotel, people who came almost every year to Balbec. They could tell me
nothing. Later on, a photograph shewed me why. Who could ever recognise
now in them, scarcely and yet quite definitely beyond an age in which
one changes so utterly, that amorphous, delicious mass, still wholly
infantine, of little girls who, only a few years back, might have been
seen sitting in a ring on the sand round a tent; a sort of white and
vague constellation in which one would have distinguished a pair of eyes
that sparkled more than the rest, a mischievous face, flaxen hair, only
to lose them again and to confound them almost at once in the indistinct
and milky nebula.

No doubt, in those earlier years that were still so recent, it was not,
as it had been yesterday when they appeared for the first time before
me, one's impression of the group, but the group itself that had been
lacking in clearness. Then those children, mere babies, had been still
at that elementary stage in their formation when personality has not set
its seal on every face. Like those primitive organisms in which the
individual barely exists by itself, consists in the reef rather than in
the coral insects that compose it, they were still pressed one against
another. Sometimes one pushed her neighbour over, and then a wild laugh,
which seemed the sole manifestation of their personal life, convulsed
them all at once, obliterating, confounding those indefinite, grinning
faces in the congealment of a single cluster, scintillating and
tremulous. In an old photograph of themselves, which they were one day
to give me, and which I have kept ever since, their infantile troop
already presents the same number of participants as, later, their
feminine procession; one can see from it that their presence must, even
then, have made on the beach an unusual mark which forced itself on the
attention; but one cannot recognise them individually in it save by a
process of reasoning, leaving a clear field to all the transformations
possible during girlhood, up to the point at which one reconstructed
form would begin to encroach upon another individuality, which must be
identified also, and whose handsome face, owing to the accessories of a
large build and curly hair, may quite possibly have been, once, that
wizened and impish little grin which the photograph album presents to
us; and the distance traversed in a short interval of time by the
physical characteristics of each of these girls making of them a
criterion too vague to be of any use, whereas what they had in common
and, so to speak, collectively, had at that early date been strongly
marked, it sometimes happened that even their most intimate friends
mistook one for another in this photograph, so much so that the question
could in the last resort be settled only by some detail of costume which
one of them could be certain that she herself, and not any of the
others, had worn. Since those days, so different from the day on which I
had just seen them strolling along the "front", so different and yet so
close in time, they still gave way to fits of laughter, as I had
observed that afternoon, but to laughter of a kind that was no longer
the intermittent and almost automatic laughter of childhood, a spasmodic
discharge which, in those days, had continually sent their heads dipping
out of the circle, as the clusters of minnows in the Vivonne used to
scatter and vanish only to gather again a moment later; each countenance
was now mistress of itself, their eyes were fixed on the goal towards
which they were marching; and it had taken, yesterday, the indecision
and tremulousness of my first impression to make me confuse vaguely (as
their childish hilarity and the old photograph had confused) the spores
now individualised and disjoined of the pale madrepore.

Repeatedly, I dare say, when pretty girls went by, I had promised myself
that I would see them again. As a rule, people do not appear a second
time; moreover our memory, which speedily forgets their existence, would
find it difficult to recall their appearance; our eyes would not
recognise them, perhaps, and in the mean time we have seen new girls go
by, whom we shall not see again either. But at other times, and this was
what was to happen with the pert little band at Balbec, chance brings
them back insistently before our eyes. Chance seems to us then a good
and useful thing, for we discern in it as it were rudiments of
organisation, of an attempt to arrange our life; and it makes easy to
us, inevitable, and sometimes--after interruptions that have made us
hope that we may cease to remember--cruel, the retention in our minds of
images to the possession of which we shall come in time to believe that
we were predestined, and which but for chance we should from the very
first have managed to forget, like so many others, with so little
difficulty.

Presently Saint-Loup's visit drew to an end. I had not seen that party
of girls again on the beach. He was too little at Balbec in the
afternoons to have time to bother about them, or to attempt, in my
interest, to make their acquaintance. In the evenings he was more free,
and continued to take me constantly to Rivebelle. There are, in those
restaurants, as there are in public gardens and railway trains, people
embodied in a quite ordinary appearance, whose name astonishes us when,
having happened to ask it, we discover that this is not the mere
inoffensive stranger whom we supposed but nothing less than the Minister
or Duke of whom we have so often heard. Two or three times already, in
the Rivebelle restaurant, we had--Saint-Loup and I--seen come in and sit
down at a table when everyone else was getting ready to go, a man of
large stature, very muscular, with regular features and a grizzled
beard, gazing, with concentrated attention, into the empty air. One
evening, on our asking the landlord who was this obscure, solitary and
belated diner, "What!" he exclaimed, "do you mean to say you don't know
the famous painter Elstir?" Swann had once mentioned his name to me, I
had entirely forgotten in what connexion; but the omission of a
particular memory, like that of part of a sentence when we are reading,
leads sometimes not to uncertainty but to a birth of certainty that is
premature. "He is a friend of Swann, a very well known artist, extremely
good," I told Saint-Loup. Whereupon there passed over us both, like a
wave of emotion, the thought that Elstir was a great artist, a
celebrated man, and that, confounding us with the rest of the diners, he
had no suspicion of the ecstasy into which we were thrown by the idea of
his talent. Doubtless, his unconsciousness of our admiration and of our
acquaintance with Swann would not have troubled us had we not been at
the seaside. But since we were still at an age when enthusiasm cannot
keep silence, and had been transported into a life in which not to be
known is unendurable, we wrote a letter, signed with both our names, in
which we revealed to Elstir in the two diners seated within a few feet
of him two passionate admirers of his talent, two friends of his great
friend Swann, and asked to be allowed to pay our homage to him in
person. A waiter undertook to convey this missive to the celebrity.

A celebrity Elstir was, perhaps, not yet at this period quite to the
extent claimed by the landlord, though he was to reach the height of his
fame within a very few years. But he had been one of the first to
frequent this restaurant when it was still only a sort of farmhouse, and
had brought to it a whole colony of artists (who had all, as it
happened, migrated elsewhere as soon as the farm-yard in which they used
to feed in the open air, under a lean-to roof, had become a fashionable
centre); Elstir himself had returned to Rivebelle this evening only on
account of a temporary absence of his wife, from the house which he had
taken in the neighbourhood. But great talent, even when its existence is
not yet recognised, will inevitably provoke certain phenomena of
admiration, such as the landlord had managed to detect in the questions
asked by more than one English lady visitor, athirst for information as
to the life led by Elstir, or in the number of letters that he received
from abroad. Then the landlord had further remarked that Elstir did not
like to be disturbed when he was working, that he would rise in the
middle of the night and take a little model down to the water's edge to
pose for him, nude, if the moon was shining; and had told himself that
so much labour was not in vain, nor the admiration of the tourists
unjustified when he had, in one of Elstir's pictures, recognised a
wooden cross which stood by the roadside as you came into Rivebelle.

"It's all right!" he would repeat with stupefaction, "there are all the
four beams! Oh, he does take a lot of trouble!"

And he did not know whether a little _Sunrise over the Sea_ which Elstir
had given him might not be worth a fortune.

We watched him read our letter, put it in his pocket, finish his dinner,
begin to ask for his things, get up to go; and we were so convinced that
we had shocked him by our overture that we would now have hoped (as
keenly as at first we had dreaded) to make our escape without his
noticing us. We did not bear in mind for a single instant a
consideration which should, nevertheless, have seemed to us most
important, namely that our enthusiasm for Elstir, on the sincerity of
which we should not have allowed the least doubt to be cast, which we
could indeed have supported with the evidence of our breathing arrested
by expectancy, our desire to do no matter what that was difficult or
heroic for the great man, was not, as we imagined it to be, admiration,
since neither of us had ever seen anything that he had painted; our
feeling might have as its object the hollow idea of a "great artist",
but not a body of work which was unknown to us. It was, at the most,
admiration in the abstract, the nervous envelope, the sentimental
structure of an admiration without content, that is to say a thing as
indissolubly attached to boyhood as are certain organs which have ceased
to exist in the adult man; we were still boys. Elstir meanwhile was
reaching the door when suddenly he turned and came towards us. I was
transported by a delicious thrill of terror such as I could not have
felt a few years later, because, while age diminishes our capacity,
familiarity with the world has meanwhile destroyed in us any inclination
to provoke such strange encounters, to feel that kind of emotion.

In the course of the few words that Elstir had come back to say to us,
sitting down at our table, he never gave any answer on the several
occasions on which I spoke to him of Swann. I began to think that he did
not know him. He asked me, nevertheless, to come and see him at his
Balbec studio, an invitation which he did not extend to Saint-Loup, and
which I had earned (as I might not, perhaps, from Swann's
recommendation, had Elstir been intimate with him, for the part played
by disinterested motives is greater than we are inclined to think in
peopled lives) by a few words which made him think that I was devoted to
the arts. He lavished on me a friendliness which was as far above that
of Saint-Loup as that was above the affability of a mere tradesman.
Compared with that of a great artist, the friendliness of a great
gentleman, charming as it may be, has the effect of an actor's playing a
part, of being feigned. Saint-Loup sought to please; Elstir loved to
give, to give himself. Everything that he possessed, ideas, work, and
the rest which he counted for far less, he would have given gladly to
anyone who could understand him. But, failing society that was
endurable, he lived in an isolation, with a savagery which fashionable
people called pose and ill breeding, public authorities a recalcitrant
spirit, his neighbours madness, his family selfishness and pride.

And no doubt at first he had thought, even in his solitude, with
enjoyment that, thanks to his work, he was addressing, in spite of
distance, he was giving a loftier idea of himself to those who had
misunderstood or hurt him. Perhaps, in those days, he lived alone not
from indifference but from love of his fellows, and, just as I had
renounced Gilberte to appear to her again one day in more attractive
colours, dedicated his work to certain people as a way of approaching
them again, by which without actually seeing him they would be made to
love him, admire him, talk about him; a renunciation is not always
complete from the start, when we decide upon it in our original frame of
mind and before it has reacted upon us, whether it be the renunciation
of an invalid, a monk, an artist or a hero. But if he had wished to
produce with certain people in his mind, in producing he had lived for
himself, remote from the society to which he had become indifferent; the
practice of solitude had given him a love for it, as happens with every
big thing which we have begun by fearing, because we knew it to be
incompatible with smaller things to which we clung, and of which it does
not so much deprive us as it detaches us from them. Before we experience
it, our whole preoccupation is to know to what extent we can reconcile
it with certain pleasures which cease to be pleasures as soon as we have
experienced it.

Elstir did not stay long talking to us. I made up my mind that I would
go to his studio during the next few days, but on the following
afternoon, when I had accompanied my grandmother right to the point at
which the "front" ended, near the cliffs of Canapville, on our way back,
at the foot of one of the little streets which ran down at right angles
to the beach, we came upon a girl who, with lowered head like an animal
that is being driven reluctant to its stall, and carrying golf-clubs,
was walking in front of a person in authority, in all probability her or
her friends' "Miss", who suggested a portrait of Jeffreys by Hogarth,
with a face as red as if her favourite beverage were gin rather than
tea, on which a dried smear of tobacco at the corner of her mouth
prolonged the curve of a moustache that was grizzled but abundant. The
girl who preceded her was like that one of the little band who, beneath
a black polo-cap, had shewn in an inexpressive chubby face a pair of
laughing eyes. Now, the girl who was now passing me had also a black
polo-cap, but she struck me as being even prettier than the other, the
line of her nose was straighter, the curve of nostril at its base fuller
and more fleshy. Besides, the other had seemed a proud, pale girl, this
one a child well-disciplined and of rosy complexion. And yet, as she was
pushing a bicycle just like the other's, and was wearing the same
reindeer gloves, I concluded that the differences arose perhaps from the
angle and circumstances in which I now saw her, for it was hardly likely
that there could be at Balbec a second girl, with a face that, when all
was said, was so similar and with the same details in her accoutrements.
She cast a rapid glance in my direction; for the next few days, when I
saw the little band again on the beach, and indeed long afterwards when
I knew all the girls who composed it, I could never be absolutely
certain that any of them--even she who among them all was most like her,
the girl with the bicycle--was indeed the one that I had seen that
evening at the end of the "front", where a street ran down to the beach,
a girl who differed hardly at all, but was still just perceptibly
different from her whom I had noticed in the procession.

From that moment, whereas for the last few days my mind had been
occupied chiefly by the tall one, it was the one with the golf-clubs,
presumed to be Mlle. Simonet, who began once more to absorb my
attention. When walking with the others she would often stop, forcing
her friends, who seemed greatly to respect her, to stop also. Thus it
is, calling a halt, her eyes sparkling beneath her polo-cap, that I see
her again to-day, outlined against the screen which the sea spreads out
behind her, and separated from me by a transparent, azure space, the
interval of time that has elapsed since then, a first impression, faint
and fine in my memory, desired, pursued, then forgotten, then found
again, of a face which I have many times since projected upon the cloud
of the past to be able to say to myself, of a girl who was actually in
my room: "It is she!"

But it was perhaps yet another, the one with geranium cheeks and green
eyes, whom I should have liked most to know. And yet, whichever of them
it might be, on any given day, that I preferred to see, the others,
without her, were sufficient to excite my desire which, concentrated now
chiefly on one, now on another, continued--as, on the first day, my
confused vision--to combine and blend them, to make of them the little
world apart, animated by a life in common, which for that matter they
doubtless imagined themselves to form; and I should have penetrated, in
becoming a friend of one of them--like a cultivated pagan or a
meticulous Christian going among barbarians--into a rejuvenating society
in which reigned health, unconsciousness of others, sensual pleasures,
cruelty, unintellectuality and joy.

My grandmother, who had been told of my meeting with Elstir, and
rejoiced at the thought of all the intellectual profit that I might
derive from his friendship, considered it absurd and none too polite of
me not to have gone yet to pay him a visit. But I could think only of
the little band, and being uncertain of the hour at which the girls
would be passing along the front, I dared not absent myself. My
grandmother was astonished, too, at the smartness of my attire, for I
had suddenly remembered suits which had been lying all this time at the
bottom of my trunk. I put on a different one every day, and had even
written to Paris ordering new hats and neckties.

It adds a great charm to life in a watering-place like Balbec if the
face of a pretty girl, a vendor of shells, cakes or flowers, painted in
vivid colours in our mind, is regularly, from early morning, the purpose
of each of those leisured, luminous days which we spend upon the beach.
They become then, and for that reason, albeit unoccupied by any
business, as alert as working-days, pointed, magnetised, raised slightly
to meet an approaching moment, that in which, while we purchase
sand-cakes, roses, ammonites, we will delight in seeing upon a feminine
face its colours displayed as purely as on a flower. But at least, with
these little traffickers, first of all we can speak to them, which saves
us from having to construct with our imagination their aspects other
than those with which the mere visual perception of them furnishes us,
and to recreate their life, magnifying its charm, as when we stand
before a portrait; moreover, just because we speak to them, we can learn
where and at what time it will be possible to see them again. Now I had
none of these advantages with respect to the little band. Their habits
were unknown to me; when on certain days I failed to catch a glimpse of
them, not knowing the cause of their absence I sought to discover
whether it was something fixed and regular, if they were to be seen only
every other day, or in certain states of the weather, or if there were
days on which no one ever saw them. I imagined myself already friends
with them, and saying: "But you weren't there the other day?" "Weren't
we? Oh, no, of course not; that was because it was a Saturday. On
Saturdays we don't ever come, because . . ." If it were only as simple
as that, to know that on black Saturday it was useless to torment
oneself, that one might range the beach from end to end, sit down
outside the pastry-cook's and pretend to be nibbling an eclair, poke
into the curiosity shop, wait for bathing time, the concert, high tide,
sunset, night, all without seeing the longed-for little band. But the
fatal day did not, perhaps, come once a week. It did not, perhaps, of
necessity fall on Saturdays. Perhaps certain atmospheric conditions
influenced it or were entirely unconnected with it. How many
observations, patient but not at all serene, must one accumulate of the
movements, to all appearance irregular, of those unknown worlds before
being able to be sure that one has not allowed oneself to be led astray
by mere coincidence, that one's forecasts will not be proved wrong,
before one elucidates the certain laws, acquired at the cost of so much
painful experience, of that passionate astronomy. Remembering that I had
not yet seen them on some particular day of the week, I assured myself
that they would not be coming, that it was useless to wait any longer on
the beach. And at that very moment I caught sight of them. And yet on
another day which, so far as I could suppose that there were laws that
guided the return of those constellations, must, I had calculated, prove
an auspicious day, they did not come. But to this primary uncertainty
whether I should see them or not that day, there was added another, more
disquieting: whether I should ever set eyes on them again, for I had no
reason, after all, to know that they were not about to sail for America,
or to return to Paris. This was enough to make me begin to love them.
One can feel an attraction towards a particular person. But to release
that fount of sorrow, that sense of the irreparable, those agonies which
prepare the way for love, there must be--and this is, perhaps, more than
any person can be, the actual object which our passion seeks so
anxiously to embrace--the risk of an impossibility. Thus there were
acting upon me already those influences which recur in the course of our
successive love-affairs, which can, for that matter, be provoked, (but
then rather in the life of cities) by the thought of little working
girls whose half-holiday is we know not on what day, and whom we are
afraid of having missed as they came out of the factory; or which at
least have recurred in mine. Perhaps they are inseparable from love;
perhaps everything that formed a distinctive feature of our first love
attaches itself to those that come after, by recollection, suggestion,
habit, and through the successive periods of our life gives to its
different aspects a general character.

I seized every pretext for going down to the beach at the hours when I
hoped to succeed in finding them there. Having caught sight of them once
while we were at luncheon, I now invariably came in late for it, waiting
interminably upon the "front" for them to pass; devoting all the short
time that I did spend in the dining-room to interrogating with my eyes
its azure wall of glass; rising long before the dessert, so as not to
miss them should they have gone out at a different hour, and chafing
with irritation at my grandmother, when, with unwitting malevolence, she
made me stay with her past the hour that seemed to me propitious. I
tried to prolong the horizon by setting my chair aslant; if, by chance,
I did catch sight of no matter which of the girls, since they all
partook of the same special essence, it was as if I had seen projected
before my face in a shifting, diabolical hallucination, a little of the
unfriendly and yet passionately coveted dream which, but a moment ago,
had existed only--where it lay stagnant for all time--in my brain.

I was in love with none of them, loving them all, and yet the
possibility of meeting them was in my daily life the sole element of
delight, alone made to burgeon in me those high hopes by which every
obstacle is surmounted, hopes ending often in fury if I had not seen
them. For the moment, these girls eclipsed my grandmother in my
affection; the longest journey would at once have seemed attractive to
me had it been to a place in which they might be found. It was to them
that my thoughts comfortably clung when I supposed myself to be thinking
of something else or of nothing. But when, even without knowing it, I
thought of them, they, more unconsciously still, were for me the
mountainous blue undulations of the sea, a troop seen passing in outline
against the waves. Our most intensive love for a person is always the
love, really, of something else as well.

Meanwhile my grandmother was shewing, because now I was keenly
interested in golf and lawn-tennis and was letting slip an opportunity
of seeing at work and hearing talk an artist whom she knew to be one of
the greatest of his time, a disapproval which seemed to me to be based
on somewhat narrow views. I had guessed long ago in the Champs-Elysées,
and had since established to my own satisfaction, that when we are in
love with a woman we simply project into her a state of our own soul,
that the important thing is, therefore, not the worth of the woman but
the depth of the state; and that the emotions which a young girl of no
kind of distinction arouses in us can enable us to bring to the surface
of our consciousness some of the most intimate parts of our being, more
personal, more remote, more essential than would be reached by the
pleasure that we derive from the conversation of a great man or even
from the admiring contemplation of his work.

I was to end by complying with my grandmother's wishes, all the more
reluctantly in that Elstir lived at some distance from the "front" in
one of the newest of Balbec's avenues. The heat of the day obliged me to
take the tramway which passed along the Rue de la Plage, and I made an
effort (so as still to believe that I was in the ancient realm of the
Cimmerians, in the country it might be, of King Mark, or upon the site
of the Forest of Broceliande) not to see the gimcrack splendour of the
buildings that extended on either hand, among which Elstir's villa was
perhaps the most sumptuously hideous, in spite of which he had taken it,
because, of all that there were to be had at Balbec, it was the only one
that provided him with a really big studio.

It was also with averted eyes that I crossed the garden, which had a
lawn--in miniature, like any little suburban villa round Paris--a
statuette of an amorous gardener, glass balls in which one saw one's
distorted reflexion, beds of begonias and a little arbour, beneath which
rocking chairs were drawn up round an iron table. But after all these
preliminaries hall-marked with philistine ugliness, I took no notice of
the chocolate mouldings on the plinths once I was in the studio; I felt
perfectly happy, for, with the help of all the sketches and studies that
surrounded me, I foresaw the possibility of raising myself to a poetical
understanding, rich in delights, of many forms which I had not,
hitherto, isolated from the general spectacle of reality. And Elstir's
studio appeared to me as the laboratory of a sort of new creation of the
world in which, from the chaos that is all the things we see, he had
extracted, by painting them on various rectangles of canvas that were
hung everywhere about the room, here a wave of the sea crushing angrily
on the sand its lilac foam, there a young man in a suit of white linen,
leaning upon the rail of a vessel. His jacket and the spattering wave
had acquired fresh dignity from the fact that they continued to exist,
even although they were deprived of those qualities in which they might
be supposed to consist, the wave being no longer able to splash nor the
jacket to clothe anyone.

At the moment at which I entered, the creator was just finishing, with
the brush which he had in his hand, the form of the sun at its setting.

The shutters were closed almost everywhere round the studio, which was
fairly cool and, except in one place where daylight laid against the
wall its brilliant but fleeting decoration, dark; there was open only
one little rectangular window embowered in honeysuckle, which, over a
strip of garden, gave on an avenue; so that the atmosphere of the
greater part of the studio was dusky, transparent and compact in the
mass, but liquid and sparkling at the rifts where the golden clasp of
sunlight banded it, like a lump of rock crystal of which one surface,
already cut and polished, here and there, gleams like a mirror with
iridescent rays. While Elstir, at my request, went on painting, I
wandered about in the half-light, stopping to examine first one picture,
then another.

Most of those that covered the walls were not what I should chiefly have
liked to see of his work, paintings in what an English art journal which
lay about on the reading-room table in the Grand Hotel called his first
and second manners, the mythological manner and the manner in which he
shewed signs of Japanese influence, both admirably exemplified, the
article said, in the collection of Mme. de Guermantes. Naturally enough,
what he had in his studio were almost all seascapes done here, at
Balbec. But I was able to discern from these that the charm of each of
them lay in a sort of metamorphosis of the things represented in it,
analogous to what in poetry we call metaphor, and that, if God the
Father had created things by naming them, it was by taking away their
names or giving them other names that Elstir created them anew. The
names which denote things correspond invariably to an intellectual
notion, alien to our true impressions, and compelling us to eliminate
from them everything that is not in keeping with itself.

Sometimes in my window in the hotel at Balbec, in the morning when
Françoise undid the fastenings of the curtains that shut out the light,
in the evening when I was waiting until it should be time to go out with
Saint-Loup, I had been led by some effect of sunlight to mistake what
was only a darker stretch of sea for a distant coast-line, or to gaze at
a belt of liquid azure without knowing whether it belonged to sea or
sky. But presently my reason would re-establish between the elements
that distinction which in my first impression I had overlooked. In the
same way I used, in Paris, in my bedroom, to hear a dispute, almost a
riot, in the street below, until I had referred back to its cause--a
carriage for instance that was rattling towards me--this noise, from
which I now eliminated the shrill and discordant vociferations which my
ear had really heard but which my reason knew that wheels did not
produce. But the rare moments in which we see nature as she is, with
poetic vision, it was from those that Elstir's work was taken. One of
his metaphors that occurred most commonly in the seascapes which he had
round him was precisely that which, comparing land with sea, suppressed
every line of demarcation between them. It was this comparison, tacitly
and untiringly repeated on a single canvas, which gave it that multiform
and powerful unity, the cause (not always clearly perceived by
themselves) of the enthusiasm which Elstir's work aroused in certain
collectors.

It was, for instance, for a metaphor of this sort--in a picture of the
harbour of Carquethuit, a picture which he had finished a few days
earlier and at which I now stood gazing my fill--that Elstir had
prepared the mind of the spectator by employing, for the little town,
only marine terms, and urban terms for the sea. Whether its houses
concealed a part of the harbour, a dry dock, or perhaps the sea itself
came cranking in among the land, as constantly happened on the Balbec
coast, on the other side of the promontory on which the town was built
the roofs were overtopped (as it had been by mill-chimneys or
church-steeples) by masts which had the effect of making the vessels to
which they belonged appear town-bred, built on land, an impression which
was strengthened by the sight of other boats, moored along the jetty but
in such serried ranks that you could see men talking across from one
deck to another without being able to distinguish the dividing line, the
chink of water between them, so that this fishing fleet seemed less to
belong to the water than, for instance, the churches of Criquebec which,
in the far distance, surrounded by water on every side because you saw
them without seeing the town, in a powdery haze of sunlight and
crumbling waves, seemed to be emerging from the waters, blown in
alabaster or in sea-foam, and, enclosed in the band of a particoloured
rainbow, to form an unreal, a mystical picture. On the beach in the
foreground the painter had arranged that the eye should discover no
fixed boundary, no absolute line of demarcation between earth and ocean.
The men who were pushing down their boats into the sea were running as
much through the waves as along the sand, which, being wet, reflected
their hulls as if they were already in the water. The sea itself did not
come up in an even line but followed the irregularities of the shore,
which the perspective of the picture increased still further, so that a
ship actually at sea, half-hidden by the projecting works of the
arsenal, seemed to be sailing across the middle of the town; women who
were gathering shrimps among the rocks had the appearance, because they
were surrounded by water and because of the depression which, after the
ringlike barrier of rocks, brought the beach (on the side nearest the
land) down to sea-level, of being in a marine grotto overhung by ships
and waves, open yet unharmed in the path of a miraculously averted tide.
If the whole picture gave this impression of harbours in which the sea
entered into the land, in which the land was already subaqueous and the
population amphibian, the strength of the marine element was everywhere
apparent; and round about the rocks, at the mouth of the harbour, where
the sea was rough, you felt from the muscular efforts of the fishermen
and the obliquity of the boats leaning over at an acute angle, compared
with the calm erectness of the warehouse on the harbour, the church, the
houses of the town to which some of the figures were returning while
others were coming out to fish, that they were riding bareback on the
water, as it might be a swift and fiery animal whose rearing, but for
their skill, must have unseated them. A party of holiday makers were
putting gaily out to sea in a boat that tossed like a jaunting-car on a
rough road; their boatman, blithe but attentive, also, to what he was
doing, trimmed the bellying sail, every one kept in his place, so that
the weight should not be all on one side of the boat, which might
capsize, and so they went racing over sunlit fields into shadowy places,
dashing down into the troughs of waves. It was a fine morning in spite
of the recent storm. Indeed, one could still feel the powerful
activities that must first be neutralised in order to attain the easy
balance of the boats that lay motionless, enjoying sunshine and breeze,
in parts where the sea was so calm that its reflexions had almost more
solidity and reality than the floating hulls, vaporised by an effect of
the sunlight, parts which the perspective of the picture dovetailed in
among others. Or rather you would not have called them other parts of
the sea. For between those parts there was as much difference as there
was between one of them and the church rising from the water, or the
ships behind the town. Your reason then set to work and made a single
element of what was here black beneath a gathering storm, a little
farther all of one colour with the sky and as brightly burnished, and
elsewhere so bleached by sunshine, haze and foam, so compact, so
terrestrial, so circumscribed with houses that you thought of some white
stone causeway or of a field of snow, up the surface of which it was
quite frightening to see a ship go climbing high and dry, as a carriage
climbs dripping from a ford, but which a moment later, when you saw on
the raised and broken surface of the solid plain boats drunkenly
heaving, you understood, identical in all these different aspects, to be
still the sea.

Although we are justified in saying that there can be no progress, no
discovery in art, but only in the sciences, and that the artist who
begins afresh upon his own account an individual effort cannot be either
helped or hindered by the efforts of all the others, we must
nevertheless admit that, in so far as art brings into prominence certain
laws, once an industry has taken those laws and vulgarised them, the art
that was first in the field loses, in retrospect, a little of its
originality. Since Elstir began to paint, we have grown familiar with
what are called "admirable" photographs of scenery and towns. If we
press for a definition of what their admirers mean by the epithet, we
shall find that it is generally applied to some unusual picture of a
familiar object, a picture different from those that we are accustomed
to see, unusual and yet true to nature, and for that reason doubly
impressive to us because it startles us, makes us emerge from our habits
and at the same time brings us back to ourselves by recalling to us an
earlier impression. For instance, one of these "magnificent" photographs
will illustrate a law of perspective, will shew us some cathedral which
we are accustomed to see in the middle of a town, taken instead from a
selected point of view from which it will appear to be thirty times the
height of the houses and to be thrusting a spur out from the bank of the
river, from which it is actually a long way off. Now the effort made by
Elstir to reproduce things not as he knew them to be but according to
the optical illusions of which our first sight of them is composed, had
led him exactly to this point; he gave special emphasis to certain of
these laws of perspective, which were thus all the more striking, since
his art had been their first interpreter. A river, because of the
windings of its course, a bay because of the apparent contact of the
cliffs on either side of it, would look as though there had been
hollowed out in the heart of the plain or of the mountains a lake
absolutely landlocked on every side. In a picture of a view from Balbec
painted upon a scorching day in summer an inlet of the sea appeared to
be enclosed in walls of pink granite, not to be the sea, which began
farther out. The continuity of the ocean was suggested only by the gulls
which, wheeling over what, when one looked at the picture, seemed to be
solid rock, were as a matter of fact inhaling the moist vapour of the
shifting tide. Other laws were discernible in the same canvas, as, at
the foot of immense cliffs, the lilliputian grace of white sails on the
blue mirror on whose surface they looked like butterflies asleep, and
certain contrasts between the depth of the shadows and the pallidity of
the light. This play of light and shade, which also photography has
rendered common-place, had interested Elstir so much that at one time he
had painted what were almost mirages, in which a castle crowned with a
tower appeared as a perfect circle of castle prolonged by a tower at its
summit, and at its foot by an inverted tower, whether because the
exceptional purity of the atmosphere on a fine day gave the shadow
reflected in the water the hardness and brightness of the stone, or
because the morning mists rendered the stone as vaporous as the shadow.
And similarly, beyond the sea, behind a line of woods, began another sea
roseate with the light of the setting sun, which was, in fact, the sky.
The light, as it were precipitating new solids, thrust back the hull of
the boat on which it fell behind the other hull that was still in
shadow, and rearranged like the steps of a crystal staircase what was
materially a plane surface, but was broken up by the play of light and
shade upon the morning sea. A river running beneath the bridges of a
town was caught from a certain point of view so that it appeared
entirely dislocated, now broadened into a lake, now narrowed into a
rivulet, broken elsewhere by the interruption of a hill crowned with
trees among which the burgher would repair at evening to taste the
refreshing breeze; and the rhythm of this disintegrated town was assured
only by the inflexible uprightness of the steeples which did not rise
but rather, following the plumb line of the pendulum marking its cadence
as in a triumphal march, seemed to hold in suspense beneath them all the
confused mass of houses that rose vaguely in the mist along the banks of
the crushed, disjointed stream. And (since Elstir's earliest work
belonged to the time in which a painter would make his landscape
attractive by inserting a human figure), on the cliff's edge or among
the mountains, the road, that half human part of nature, underwent, like
river or ocean, the eclipses of perspective. And whether a sheer wall of
mountain, or the mist blown from a torrent, or the sea prevented the eye
from following the continuity of the path, visible to the traveller but
not to us, the little human personage in old-fashioned attire seemed
often to be stopped short on the edge of an abyss, the path which he had
been following ending there, while, a thousand feet above him in those
pine-forests, it was with a melting eye and comforted heart that we saw
reappear the threadlike whiteness of its dusty surface, hospitable to
the wayfaring foot, whereas from us the side of the mountain had hidden,
where it turned to avoid waterfall or gully, the intervening bends.

The effort made by Elstir to strip himself, when face to face with
reality, of every intellectual concept, was all the more admirable in
that this man who, before sitting down to paint, made himself
deliberately ignorant, forgot, in his honesty of purpose, everything
that he knew, since what one knows ceases to exist by itself, had in
reality an exceptionally cultivated mind. When I confessed to him the
disappointment that I had felt upon seeing the porch at Balbec: "What!"
he had exclaimed, "you were disappointed by the porch! Why, it's the
finest illustrated Bible that the people have ever had. That Virgin, and
all the bas-reliefs telling the story of her life, they are the most
loving, the most inspired expression of that endless poem of adoration
and praise in which the middle ages extolled the glory of the Madonna.
If you only knew, side by side with the most scrupulous accuracy in
rendering the sacred text, what exquisite ideas the old carver had, what
profound thoughts, what delicious poetry!

"A wonderful idea, that great sheet in which the angels are carrying the
body of the Virgin, too sacred for them to venture to touch it with
their hands"; (I mentioned to him that this theme had been treated also
at Saint-André-des-Champs; he had seen photographs of the porch there,
and agreed, but pointed out that the bustling activity of those little
peasant figures, all hurrying at once towards the Virgin, was not the
same thing as the gravity of those two great angels, almost Italian, so
springing, so gentle) "the angel who is carrying the Virgin's soul, to
reunite it with her body; in the meeting of the Virgin with Elizabeth,
Elizabeth's gesture when she touches the Virgin's Womb and marvels to
feel that it is great with child; and the bandaged arm of the midwife
who had refused, unless she touched, to believe the Immaculate
Conception; and the linen cloth thrown by the Virgin to Saint Thomas to
give him a proof of the Resurrection; that veil, too, which the Virgin
tears from her own bosom to cover the nakedness of her Son, from Whose
Side the Church receives in a chalice the Wine of the Sacrament, while,
on His other side the Synagogue, whose kingdom is at an end, has its
eyes bandaged, holds a half-broken sceptre and lets fall, with the crown
that is slipping from its head, the tables of the old law; and the
husband who, on the Day of Judgment, as he helps his young wife to rise
from her grave, lays her hand against his own heart to reassure her, to
prove to her that it is indeed beating, is that such a trumpery idea, do
you think, so stale and common-place? And the angel who is taking away
the sun and the moon, henceforth useless, since it is written that the
Light of the Cross shall be seven times brighter than the light of the
firmament; and the one who is dipping his hand in the water of the
Child's bath, to see whether it is warm enough; and the one emerging
from the clouds to place the crown upon the Virgin's brow, and all the
angels who are leaning from the vault of heaven, between the balusters
of the New Jerusalem, and throwing up their arms with terror or joy at
the sight of the torments of the wicked or the bliss of the elect! For
it is all the circles of heaven, a whole gigantic poem full of theology
and symbolism that you have before you there. It is fantastic, mad,
divine, a thousand times better than anything you will see in Italy,
where for that matter this very tympanum has been carefully copied by
sculptors with far less genius. There never was a time when genius was
universal; that is all nonsense; it would be going beyond the age of
gold. The fellow who carved that front, you may make up your mind that
he was every bit as great, that he had just as profound ideas as the men
you admire most at the present day. I could shew you what I mean if we
went there together. There are certain passages from the Office of the
Assumption which have been rendered with a subtilty of expression that
Redon himself has never equalled."

This vast celestial vision of which he spoke to me, this gigantic
theological poem which, I understood, had been inscribed there in stone,
yet when my eyes, big with desire, had opened to gaze upon the front of
Balbec church, it was not these things that I had seen. I spoke to him
of those great statues of saints, which, mounted on scaffolds, formed a
sort of avenue on either side.

"It starts from the mists of antiquity to end in Jesus Christ," he
explained. "You see on one side His ancestors after the spirit, on the
other the Kings of Judah, His ancestors after the flesh. All the ages
are there. And if you had looked more closely at what you took for
scaffolds you would have been able to give names to the figures standing
on them. At the feet of Moses you would have recognised the calf of
gold, at Abraham's the ram and at Joseph's the demon counselling
Potiphar's wife."

I told him also that I had gone there expecting to find an almost
Persian building, and that this had doubtless been one of the chief
factors in my disappointment. "Indeed, no," he assured me, "it is
perfectly true. Some parts of it are quite oriental; one of the capitals
reproduces so exactly a Persian subject that you cannot account for it
by the persistence of Oriental traditions. The carver must have copied
some casket brought from the East by explorers." And he did indeed shew
me, later on, the photograph of a capital on which I saw dragons that
were almost Chinese devouring one another, but at Balbec this little
piece of carving had passed unnoticed by me in the general effect of the
building which did not conform to the pattern traced in my mind by the
words, "an almost Persian church".

The intellectual pleasures which I enjoyed in this studio did not in the
least prevent me from feeling, although they enveloped us as it were in
spite of ourselves, the warm polish, the sparkling gloom of the place
itself and, through the little window framed in honeysuckle, in the
avenue that was quite rustic, the resisting dryness of the sun-parched
earth, screened only by the diaphanous gauze woven of distance and of a
tree-cast shade. Perhaps the unaccountable feeling of comfort which this
summer day was giving me came like a tributary to swell the flood of joy
that had surged in me at the sight of Elstir's _Carquethuit Harbour._

I had supposed Elstir to be a modest man, but I realised my mistake on
seeing his face cloud with melancholy when, in a little speech of
thanks, I uttered the word "fame". Men who believe that their work will
last--as was the case with Elstir--form the habit of placing that work
in a period when they themselves will have crumbled into dust. And thus,
by obliging them to reflect on their own extinction, the thought of fame
saddens them because it is inseparable from the thought of death. I
changed the conversation in the hope of driving away the cloud of
ambitious melancholy with which unwittingly I had loaded Elstir's brow.
"Some one advised me once," I began, thinking of the conversation we had
had with Legrandin at Combray, as to which I was glad of an opportunity
of learning Elstir's views, "not to visit Brittany, because it would not
be wholesome for a mind with a natural tendency to dream." "Not at all;"
he replied. "When the mind has a tendency to dream, it is a mistake to
keep dreams away from it, to ration its dreams. So long as you distract
your mind from its dreams, it will not know them for what they are; you
will always be being taken in by the appearance of things, because you
will not have grasped their true nature. If a little dreaming is
dangerous, the cure for it is not to dream less but to dream more, to
dream all the time. One must have a thorough understanding of one's
dreams if one is not to be troubled by them; there is a way of
separating one's dreams from one's life which so often produces good
results that I ask myself whether one ought not, at all costs, to try
it, simply as a preventive, just as certain surgeons make out that we
ought, to avoid the risk of appendicitis later on, to have all our
appendices taken out when we are children."

Elstir and I had meanwhile been walking about the studio, and had
reached the window that looked across the garden on to a narrow avenue,
a side-street that was almost a country lane. We had gone there to
breathe the cooler air of the late afternoon. I supposed myself to be
nowhere near the girls of the little band, and it was only by
sacrificing for once the hope of seeing them that I had yielded to my
grandmother's prayers and had gone to see Elstir. For where the thing is
to be found that we are seeking we never know, and often we steadily,
for a long time, avoid the place to which, for quite different reasons,
everyone has been asking us to go. But we never suspect that we shall
there see the very person of whom we are thinking. I looked out vaguely
over the country road which, outside the studio, passed quite close to
it but did not belong to Elstir. Suddenly there appeared on it, coming
along it at a rapid pace, the young bicyclist of the little band, with,
over her dark hair, her polo-cap pulled down towards her plump cheeks,
her eyes merry and almost importunate; and on that auspicious path,
miraculously filled with promise of delights, I saw her beneath the
trees throw to Elstir the smiling greeting of a friend, a rainbow that
bridged the gulf for me between our terraqueous world and regions which
I had hitherto regarded as inaccessible. She even came up to give her
hand to the painter, though without stopping, and I could see that she
had a tiny beauty spot on her chin. "Do you know that girl, sir?" I
asked Elstir, realising that he could if he chose make me known to her,
could invite us both to the house. And this peaceful studio with its
rural horizon was at once filled with a surfeit of delight such as a
child might feel in a house where he was already happily playing when he
learned that, in addition, out of that bounteousness which enables
lovely things and noble hosts to increase their gifts beyond all
measure, there was being prepared for him a sumptuous repast. Elstir
told me that she was called Albertine Simonet, and gave me the names
also of her friends, whom I described to him with sufficient accuracy
for him to identify them almost without hesitation. I had, with regard
to their social position, made a mistake, but not the mistake that I
usually made at Balbec. I was always ready to take for princes the sons
of shopkeepers when they appeared on horseback. This time I had placed
in an interloping class the daughters of a set of respectable people,
extremely rich, belonging to the world of industry and business. It was
the class which, on first thoughts, interested me least, since it held
for me neither the mystery of the lower orders nor that of a society
such as the Guermantes frequented. And no doubt if an inherent quality,
a rank which they could never forfeit had not been conferred on them, in
my dazzled eyes, by the glaring vacuity of the seaside life all round
them, I should perhaps not have succeeded in resisting and overcoming
the idea that they were the daughters of prosperous merchants. I could
not help marvelling to see how the French middle class was a wonderful
studio full of sculpture of the noblest and most varied kind. What
unimagined types, what richness of invention in the character of their
faces, what firmness, what freshness, what simplicity in their features.
The shrewd old money-changers from whose loins these Dianas and these
nymphs had sprung seemed to me to have been the greatest of statuaries.
Before I had time to register the social metamorphosis of these
girls--so are these discoveries of a mistake, these modifications
of the notion one has of a person instantaneous as a chemical
combination--there was already installed behind their faces, so
street-arab in type that I had taken them for the mistresses of racing
bicyclists, of boxing champions, the idea that they might easily be
connected with the family of some lawyer or other whom we knew. I was
barely conscious of what was meant by Albertine Simonet; she had
certainly no conception of what she was one day to mean to me. Even the
name, Simonet, which I had already heard spoken on the beach, if I had
been asked to write it down I should have spelt with a double 'n' never
dreaming of the importance which this family attached to there being but
one in their name. In proportion as we descend the social scale our
snobbishness fastens on to mere nothings which are perhaps no more null
than the distinctions observed by the aristocracy, but, being more
obscure, more peculiar to the individual, take us more by surprise.
Possibly there had been Simonets who had done badly in business, or
something worse still even. The fact remains that the Simonets never
failed, it appeared, to be annoyed if anyone doubled their 'n'. They
wore the air of being the only Simonets in the world with one 'n'
instead of two, and were as proud of it, perhaps, as the Montmorency
family were of being the premier barons of France. I asked Elstir
whether these girls lived at Balbec; yes, he told me, some of them at
any rate. The villa in which one of them lived was at that very spot,
right at the end of the beach, where the cliffs of Canapville began. As
this girl was a great friend of Albertine Simonet, this was another
reason for me to believe that it was indeed the latter whom I had met
that day when I was with my grandmother. There were of course so many of
those little streets running down to the beach, and all at the same
angle, that I could not have pointed out exactly which of them it had
been. One would like always to remember a thing accurately, but at the
time one's vision was clouded. And yet that Albertine and the girl whom
I had seen going to her friend's house were one and the same person was
a practical certainty. In spite of which, whereas the countless images
that have since been furnished me by the dark young golfer, however
different they may have been from one another, have overlaid one another
(because I now know that they all belong to her), and if I retrace the
thread of my memories I can, under cover of that identity, and as though
along a tunnelled passage, pass through all those images in turn without
losing my consciousness of the same person behind them all, if, on the
other hand, I wish to revert to the girl whom I passed that day when I
was with my grandmother, I must escape first into freer air. I am
convinced that it is Albertine whom I find there, the same girl as her
who would often stop dead among her moving comrades, in her walk along
the foreground of the sea; but all those more recent images remain
separate from that earlier one because I am unable to confer on her
retrospectively an identity which she had not for me at the moment in
which she caught my eye; whatever assurance I may derive from the law of
probabilities, that girl with plump cheeks who stared at me so boldly
from the angle of the little street and the beach, and by whom I believe
that I might have been loved, I have never, in the strict sense of the
words, seen again.

My hesitation between the different girls of the little band, all of
whom retained something of the collective charm which had at first
disturbed me, combined with the reasons already given to allow me later
on, even at the time of my greater--my second--passion for Albertine, a
sort of intermittent and very brief liberty to abstain from loving her.
From having strayed among all her friends before it finally concentrated
itself on her, my love kept, now and then, between itself and the image
of Albertine a certain "play" of light and shade which enabled it, like
a badly fitted lamp, to flit over the surface of each of the others
before settling its focus upon her; the connexion between the pain which
I felt in my heart and the memory of Albertine did not seem to me
necessary; I might perhaps have managed to coordinate it with the image
of another person. Which enabled me, in a momentary flash, to banish
reality altogether, not only external reality, as in my love for
Gilberte (which I had recognised to be an internal state in which I drew
from myself alone the particular quality, the special character of the
person whom I loved, everything that rendered her indispensable to my
happiness), but even the other reality, internal and purely subjective.

"Not a day passes but one or the other of them comes by here, and looks
in for a minute or two," Elstir told me, plunging me in despair when I
thought that if I had gone to see him at once, when my grandmother had
begged me to do so, I should, in all probability, long since have made
Albertine's acquaintance.

She had passed on; from the studio she was no longer in sight. I
supposed that she had gone to join her friends on the "front". Could I
have appeared there suddenly with Elstir, I should have got to know them
all. I thought of endless pretexts for inducing him to take a turn with
me on the beach. I had no longer the same peace of mind as before the
apparition of the girl in the frame of the little window; so charming
until then in its fringe of honeysuckle, and now so drearily empty.
Elstir caused me a joy that was tormenting also when he said that he
would go a little way with me, but that he must first finish the piece
of work on which he was engaged. It was a flower study but not one of
any of the flowers, portraits of which I would rather have commissioned
him to paint than the portrait of a person, so that I might learn from
the revelation of his genius what I had so often sought in vain from the
flowers themselves--hawthorn white, and pink, cornflowers,
apple-blossom. Elstir as he worked talked botany to me, but I scarcely
listened; he was no longer sufficient in himself, he was now only the
necessary intermediary between these girls and me; the distinction
which, only a few moments ago, his talent had still given him in my eyes
was now worthless save in so far as it might confer a little on me also
in the eyes of the little band to whom I should be presented by him.

I paced up and down the room, impatient for him to finish what he was
doing; I picked up and examined various sketches, any number of which
were stacked against the walls. In this way I happened to bring to light
a water-colour which evidently belonged to a much earlier period in
Elstir's life, and gave me that particular kind of enchantment which is
diffused by works of art not only deliciously executed but representing
a subject so singular and so seductive that it is to it that we
attribute a great deal of their charm, as if the charm were something
that the painter had merely to uncover, to observe, realised already in
a material form by nature, and to reproduce in art. That such objects
can exist, beautiful quite apart from the painter's interpretation of
them, satisfies a sort of innate materialism in us, against which our
reason contends and acts as a counterpoise to the abstractions of
aesthetics. It was--this water-colour--the portrait of a young woman, by
no means beautiful but of a curious type, in a close-fitting mob-cap not
unlike a "billy-cock" hat, trimmed with a ribbon of cherry-coloured
silk; in one of her mittened hands was a lighted cigarette, while the
other held, level with her knee, a sort of broad-brimmed garden hat,
nothing more than a fire-screen of plaited straw to keep off the sun. On
a table by her side, a tall vase filled with pink carnations. Often (and
it was the case here) the singularity of such works is due principally
to their having been executed in special conditions for which we do not
at first sight make proper allowance, if, for instance, the strange
attire of a feminine model is her costume for a masked ball, or
conversely the scarlet cloak which an elderly man looks as though he had
put on to humour some whim in the painter is his gown as a professor or
alderman or his cardinal's cassock. The ambiguous character of the
person whose portrait now confronted me arose, without my understanding
it, from the fact that she was a young actress of an earlier generation
half dressed for a part. But the cap or hat, beneath which the hair
stuck out but was cut short, the velvet coat opening without lapels over
a white shirt-front, made me hesitate as to the period of the clothes
and the sex of the model, so that I did not know what it was exactly
that I was holding before my eyes, unless simply the brightest coloured
of these scraps of painting. And the pleasure which it afforded me was
disturbed only by the fear that Elstir, by delaying further, would make
me miss the girls, for the sun was now declining and hung low in the
little window. Nothing in this water-colour was merely stated there as a
fact and painted because of its utility to the composition, the costume
because the young woman must be wearing something, the vase to hold the
flowers. The glass of the vase, cherished for its own sake, seemed to be
holding the water in which the stems of the carnations were dipped in
something as limpid, almost as liquid as itself; the woman's dress
encompassed her in a manner that had an independent, a brotherly charm,
and, if the works of man can compete in charm with the wonders of
nature, as delicate, as pleasing to the touch of the eye, as freshly
painted as the fur of a cat, the petals of a flower, the feathers of a
dove. The whiteness of the shirt-front, fine as driven rain, with its
gay pleats gathered into little bells like lilies of the valley, was
starred with bright gleams of light from the room, as sharply edged and
as finely shaded as though they had been posies of flowers stitched on
the woven lawn. And the velvet of the coat, brilliant with a milky
sheen, had here and there a roughness, a scoring, a shagginess on its
surface which made one think of the crumpled brightness of the
carnations in the vase. But above all one felt that Elstir, sublimely
indifferent to whatever immoral suggestion there might be in this
disguise of a young actress for whom the talent with which she would
play her part on the stage was doubtless of less importance than the
irritant attraction which she would offer to the jaded or depraved
senses of some of her audience, had on the contrary fastened upon those
ambiguous points as on an aesthetic element which deserved to be brought
into prominence, and which he had done everything in his power to
emphasise. Along the lines of the face, the latent sex seemed to be on
the point of confessing itself to be that of a somewhat boyish girl,
then vanished and farther on reappeared with a suggestion rather of an
effeminate youth, vicious and pensive, then fled once more to remain
uncapturable. The dreamy sadness in the expression of her eyes, by the
mere fact of its contrast with the accessories belonging to the world of
love-making and play-acting, was not the least disturbing element in the
picture. One imagined moreover that it must be feigned, and that the
young person who seemed ready to submit to caresses in this provoking
costume had probably thought it effective to enhance the provocation
with this romantic expression of a secret longing, an unspoken grief. At
the foot of the picture was inscribed "_Miss Sacripant_: October, 1872."
I could not contain my admiration. "Oh, it's nothing, only a rough
sketch I did when I was young; it was a costume for a variety show. It's
all ages ago now." "And what has become of the model?" A bewilderment
provoked by my words preceded on Elstir's face the indifferent,
absent-minded air which, a moment later, he displayed there. "Quick,
give it to me!" he cried, "I hear Madame Elstir coming, and, though, I
assure you, the young person in the billy-cock hat never played any part
in my life, still there's no point in my wife's coming in and finding it
staring her in the face. I have kept it only as an amusing sidelight on
the theatre of those days." And, before putting it away behind the pile,
Elstir, who perhaps had not set eyes on the sketch for years, gave it
his careful scrutiny. "I must keep just the head," he murmured, "the
lower part is really too shockingly bad, the hands are a beginner's
work." I was miserable at the arrival of Mme. Elstir, who could only
delay us still further. The window-sill was already aglow. Our excursion
would be a pure waste of time. There was no longer the slightest chance
of our seeing the girls, consequently it mattered now not at all how
soon Mme. Elstir left us or how long she stayed. Not that she did stay
for any length of time. I found her most tedious; she might have been
beautiful, once, at twenty, driving an ox in the Roman Campagna, but her
dark hair was streaked with grey and she was common without being
simple, because she believed that a pompous manner and majestic
attitudes were required by her statuesque beauty, which, however,
advancing age had robbed of all its charm. She was dressed with the
utmost simplicity. And it was touching, but at the same time surprising
to hear Elstir, whenever he opened his mouth, and with a respectful
gentleness, as if merely uttering the words moved him to tenderness and
veneration, repeat: "My beautiful Gabrielle!" Later on, when I had
become familiar with Elstir's mythological paintings, Mme. Elstir
acquired beauty in my eyes also. I understood then that to a certain
ideal type illustrated by certain lines, certain arabesques which
reappeared incessantly throughout his work, to a certain canon of art he
had attributed a character that was almost divine, since the whole of
his time, all the mental effort of which he was capable, in a word his
whole life he had consecrated to the task of distinguishing those lines
as clearly and of reproducing them as faithfully as possible. What such
an ideal inspired in Elstir was indeed a cult so solemn, so exacting
that it never allowed him to be satisfied with what he had achieved; was
the most intimate part of himself; and so he had never been able to look
at it from a detached standpoint, to extract emotion from it, until the
day on which he encountered it realised outside, apart from himself, in
the body of a woman, the body of her who in due course became Mme.
Elstir and in whom he had been able (as one is able only with something
that is not oneself) to find it meritorious, moving, god-like. How
comforting, moreover, to let his lips rest upon that Beauty which
hitherto he had been obliged with so great labour to extract from within
himself, whereas now, mysteriously incarnate, it offered itself to him
in a series of communions, filled with saving grace. Elstir at this
period was no longer in that early youth in which we look only to the
power of our own mind for the realisation of our ideal. He was nearing
the age at which we count on bodily satisfactions to stimulate the
forces of the brain, at which the exhaustion of the brain inclining us
to materialism and the diminution of our activity to the possibility of
influences passively received, begin to make us admit that there may
indeed be certain bodies, Certain callings, certain rhythms that are
privileged, realising so naturally our ideal that even without genius,
merely by copying the movement of a shoulder, the tension of a throat,
we can achieve a masterpiece, it is the age at which we like to caress
Beauty with our eyes objectively, outside ourselves, to have it near us,
in a tapestry, in a lovely sketch by Titian picked up in a second-hand
shop, in a mistress as lovely as Titian's sketch. When I understood this
I could no longer look without pleasure at Mme. Elstir, and her body
began to lose its heaviness, for I filled it with an idea, the idea that
she was an immaterial creature, a portrait by Elstir. She was one for
me, and for him also I dare say. The facts of life have no meaning for
the artist, they are to him merely an opportunity for exposing the naked
blaze of his genius. One feels unmistakably, when one sees side by side
ten portraits of different people painted by Elstir, that they are all,
first and foremost, Elstirs. Only, after this rising tide of genius,
which sweeps over and submerges a man's life, when the brain begins to
tire, gradually the balance is upset and, like a river that resumes its
course after the counterflow of a spring tide, it is life that once more
takes the upper hand. While the first period lasted, the artist has
gradually evolved the law, the formula of his unconscious gift. He knows
what situations, should he be a novelist--if a painter, what scenes
furnish him with the subject matter, which may be anything in the world
but, whatever it is, is essential to his researches as a laboratory
might be or a workshop. He knows that he has created his masterpieces
out of effects of attenuated light, the action of remorse upon
consciousness of guilt, out of women posed beneath trees or
half-immersed in water, like statues. A day will come when, owing to the
exhaustion of his brain, he will no longer have the strength, when
provided with those materials which his genius was wont to use, to make
the intellectual effort which alone can produce his work, and will yet
continue to seek them out, happy when he finds himself in their
presence, because of the spiritual pleasure, the allurement to work that
they arouse in him; and, surrounding them besides with a kind of hedge
of superstition as if they were superior to all things else, as if in
them already dwelt a great part of the work of art which they might be
said to carry within them ready made, he will confine himself to the
company, to the adoration of his models. He will hold endless
conversations with the repentant criminals whose remorse, their
regeneration formed, when he still wrote, the subject of his novels; he
will buy a country house in a district where mists attentuate the light,
he will spend long hours gazing at the limbs of bathing women; will
collect sumptuous stuffs. And thus the beauty of life, a phase that has
to some extent lost its meaning, a stage beyond the boundaries of art at
which I had already seen Swann come to rest, was that also which, by a
slackening of the creative ardour, idolatry of the forms which had
inspired it, desire to avoid effort, must ultimately arrest an Elstir's
progress.

At last he had applied the final brush-stroke to his flowers; I
sacrificed a minute to look at them; I acquired no merit by the act, for
I knew that there was no chance now of our finding the girls on the
beach; and yet, had I believed them to be still there, and that these
wasted moments would make me miss them, I should have stopped to look
none the less, for I should have told myself that Elstir was more
interested in his flowers than in my meeting with the girls. My
grandmother's nature, a nature that was the exact counterpart of my
complete egoism; was nevertheless reflected in certain aspects of my
own. In circumstances in which someone to whom I was indifferent, for
whom I had always made a show of affection or respect, ran the risk
merely of some unpleasantness whereas I was in real danger, I could not
have done otherwise than commiserate with him on his annoyance as though
it had been something important, and treat my own danger as nothing,
because I would feel that these were the proportions in which he must
see things. To be quite accurate, I would go even farther, and not only
not complain of the danger in which I myself stood but go half-way to
meet it, and with that which involved other people try, on the contrary,
were I to increase the risk of my being caught myself, to avert it from
them. The reasons for this are several, none of which does me the
slightest credit. One is that if, while only my reason was employed, I
have always believed in self-preservation, whenever in the course of my
existence I have found myself obsessed by moral anxieties, or merely by
nervous scruples, so puerile often that I dare not enumerate them here,
if an unforeseen circumstance then arose, involving for me the risk of
being killed, this new preoccupation was so trivial in comparison with
the others that I welcomed it with a sense of relief, almost of
hilarity. Thus I find myself, albeit the least courageous of men, to
have known that feeling which has always seemed to me, in my reasoning
moods, so foreign to my nature, so inconceivable, the intoxication of
danger. But even although I were, when any, even a deadly peril
threatened me, passing through an entirely calm and happy phase, I could
not, were I with another person, refrain from sheltering him behind me
and choosing for myself the post of danger. When a sufficient store of
experience had taught me that I invariably acted, and enjoyed acting
thus, I discovered--and was deeply ashamed by the discovery--that it was
because, in contradiction of what I had always believed and asserted, I
was extremely sensitive to the opinions of others. Not that this kind of
unconfessed self-esteem is in any sense vanity or conceit. For what
might satisfy one or other of those failings would give me no pleasure,
and I have always refrained from indulging them. But with the people in
whose company I have succeeded in concealing most effectively the slight
advantages a knowledge of which might have given them a less derogatory
idea of myself, I have never been able to deny myself the pleasure of
shewing them that I take more trouble to avert the risk of death from
their path than from my own. As my motive is then self-esteem and not
valour, I find it quite natural that in any crisis they should act
differently. I am far from blaming them for it, as I should perhaps if I
had been moved by a sense of duty, a duty which would seem to me, in
that case, to be as incumbent upon them as upon myself. On the contrary,
I feel that it is eminently sensible of them to safeguard their lives,
though at the same time I cannot prevent my own safety from receding
into the background, which is particularly silly and culpable of me
since I have come to realise that the lives of many of the people in
front of whom I plant myself when a bomb bursts are more valueless even
than my own. However, on the day of this first visit to Elstir, the time
was still distant at which I was to become conscious of this difference
in value, and there was no question of danger, but simply--a harbinger
this of that pernicious self-esteem--the question of my not appearing to
attach to the pleasure which I so ardently desired more importance than
to the work which the painter had still to finish. It was finished at
last. And, once we were out of doors, I discovered that--so long were
the days still at this season--it was not so late as I had supposed; we
strolled down to the "front". What stratagems I employed to keep Elstir
standing at the spot where I thought that the girls might still come
past. Pointing to the cliffs that towered beside us, I kept on asking
him to tell me about them, so as to make him forget the time and stay
there a little longer. I felt that we had a better chance of waylaying
the little band if we moved towards the end of the beach. "I should like
to look at those cliffs with you from a little nearer," I said to him,
having noticed that one of the girls was in the habit of going in that
direction. "And as we go, do tell me about Carquethuit. I should so like
to see Carquethuit," I went on, without thinking that the so novel
character which manifested itself with such force in Elstir's
Carquethuit Harbour, might belong perhaps rather to the painter's vision
than to any special quality in the place itself. "Since I've seen your
picture, I think that is where I should most like to go, there and to
the Pointe du Raz, but of course that would be quite a journey from
here." "Yes, and besides, even if it weren't nearer, I should advise you
perhaps all the same to visit Carquethuit," he replied. "The Pointe du
Raz is magnificent, but after all it is simply the high cliff of
Normandy or Brittany which you know already. Carquethuit is quite
different, with those rocks bursting from a level shore. I know nothing
in France like it, it reminds me rather of what one sees in some parts
of Florida. It is most interesting, and for that matter extremely wild
too. It is between Clitourps and Nehomme; you know how desolate those
parts are; the sweep of the coast-line is delicious. Here, the
coast-line is like anywhere else; but along there I can't tell you what
charm it has, what softness."

Night was falling; it was time to be turning homewards; I was escorting
Elstir in the direction of his villa when suddenly, as it were
Mephistopheles springing up before Faust, there appeared at the end of
the avenue--like simply an objectification, unreal, diabolical, of the
temperament diametrically opposed to my own, of the semi-barbarous and
cruel vitality of which I, in my weakness, my excess of tortured
sensibility and intellectuality was so destitute--a few spots of the
essence impossible to mistake for anything else in the world, a few
spores of the zoophytic band of girls, who wore an air of not having
seen me but were unquestionably, for all that, proceeding as they
advanced to pass judgment on me in their ironic vein. Feeling that a
collision between them and us was now inevitable, and that Elstir would
be certain to call me, I turned my back, like a bather preparing to meet
the shock of a wave; I stopped dead and, leaving my eminent companion to
pursue his way, remained where I was, stooping, as if I had suddenly
become engrossed in it, towards the window of the curiosity shop which
we happened to be passing at the moment, I was not sorry to give the
appearance of being able to think of something other than these girls,
and I was already dimly aware that when Elstir did call me up to
introduce me to them I should wear that sort of challenging expression
which betokens not surprise but the wish to appear as though one were
surprised--so far is every one of us a bad actor, or everyone else a
good thought-reader;--that I should even go so far as to point a finger
to my breast, as who should ask "It is me, really, that you want?" and
then run to join him, my head lowered in compliance and docility and my
face coldly masking my annoyance at being torn from the study of old
pottery in order to be introduced to people whom I had no wish to know.
Meanwhile I explored the window and waited for the moment in which my
name, shouted by Elstir, would come to strike me like an expected and
innocuous bullet. The certainty of being introduced to these girls had
had the result of making me not only feign complete indifference to
them, but actually to feel it. Inevitable from this point, the pleasure
of knowing them began at once to shrink, became less to me than the
pleasure of talking to Saint-Loup, of dining with my grandmother, of
making, in the neighbourhood of Balbec, excursions which I would regret
the probability, in consequence of my having to associate with people
who could scarcely be much interested in old buildings, of my being
forced to abandon. Moreover, what diminished the pleasure which I was
about to feel was not merely the imminence but the incoherence of its
realisation. Laws as precise as those of hydrostatics maintain the
relative position of the images which we form in a fixed order, which
the coming event at once upsets. Elstir was just about to call me. This
was not at all the fashion in which I had so often, on the beach, in my
bedroom, imagined myself making these girls' acquaintance. What was
about to happen was a different event, for which I was not prepared. I
recognised neither my desire nor its object; I regretted almost that I
had come out with Elstir. But, above all, the shrinking of the pleasure
that I expected to feel was due to the certainty that nothing, now,
could take that pleasure from me. And it resumed, as though by some
latent elasticity in itself, its whole extent when it ceased to be
subjected to the pressure of that certainty, at the moment when, having
decided to turn my head, I saw Elstir, standing where he had stopped a
few feet away with the girls, bidding them good-bye. The face of the
girl who stood nearest to him, round and plump and glittering with the
light in her eyes, reminded me of a cake on the top of which a place has
been kept for a morsel of blue sky. Her eyes, even when fixed on an
object, gave one the impression of motion, just as on days of high wind
the air, although invisible, lets us perceive the speed with which it
courses between us and the unchanging azure. For a moment her gaze
intersected mine, like those travelling skies on stormy days which hurry
after a rain-cloud that moves less rapidly than they, overtake, touch,
cover, pass it and are gone; but they do not know one another, and are
soon driven far apart. So our eyes were for a moment confronted, neither
pair knowing what the celestial continent that lay before their gaze
held of future blessing or disaster. Only at the moment when her gaze
was directly coincident with mine, without slackening its movement it
grew perceptibly duller. So on a starry night the wind-swept moon passes
behind a cloud and veils her brightness for a moment, but soon will
shine again. But Elstir had already said good-bye to the girls, and had
never summoned me. They disappeared down a cross street; he came towards
me. My whole plan was spoiled.

I have said that Albertine had not seemed to me that day to be the same
as on previous days and that afterwards, each time I saw her, she was to
appear different. But I felt at that moment that certain modifications
in the appearance, the importance, the stature of a person may also be
due to the variability of certain states of consciousness interposed
between that person and us. One of those that play an important part in
such transformations is belief (that evening my belief, then the
vanishing of my belief that I was about to know Albertine had, with a
few seconds' interval only, rendered her almost insignificant then
infinitely precious in my sight; some years later, the belief, then the
disappearance of the belief that Albertine was faithful to me brought
about similar changes.)

Of course, long ago, at Combray, I had seen shrink or stretch, according
to the time of day, according as I was entering one or the other of the
two dominant moods that governed my sensibility in turn, my grief at not
having my mother with me, as imperceptible all afternoon as is the
moon's light when the sun is shining, and then, when night had come,
reigning alone in my anxious heart in the place of recent memories now
obliterated. But on that day at Balbec, when I saw that Elstir was
leaving the girls and had not called me, I learned for the first time
that the variations in the importance which a pleasure or a pain has in
our eyes may depend not merely on this alternation of two moods, but on
the displacement of invisible beliefs, such, for example, as make death
seem to us of no account because they bathe it in a glow of unreality,
and thus enable us to attach importance to our attending an evening
party, which would lose much of its charm for if, on the announcement
that we were sentenced to die by the guillotine, the belief that had
bathed the party in its warm glow was instantly shattered; and this part
that belief plays, it is true that something in me was aware of it; this
was my will; but its knowledge is vain if the mind, the heart continue
in ignorance; these last act in good faith when they believe that we are
anxious to forsake a mistress to whom our will alone knows that we are
still attached. This is because they are clouded by the belief that we
shall see her again at any moment. But let this belief be shattered, let
them suddenly become aware that this mistress is gone from us for ever,
then the mind and heart, having lost their focus, are driven like mad
things, the meanest pleasure becomes infinitely great.

Variance of a belief, annulment also of love, which, pre-existent and
mobile, comes to rest at the image of any one woman simply because that
woman will be almost impossible of attainment. Thenceforward we think
not so much of the woman of whom we find difficulty in forming an exact
picture, as of the means of getting to know her. A whole series of
agonies develops and is sufficient to fix our love definitely upon her
who is its almost unknown object. Our love becomes immense; we never
dream how small a place in it the real woman occupies. And if suddenly,
as at the moment when I had seen Elstir stop to talk to the girls, we
cease to be uneasy, to suffer pain, since it is this pain that is the
whole of our love, it seems to us as though love had abruptly vanished
at the moment when at length we grasp the prey to whose value we had not
given enough thought before. What did I know of Albertine? One or two
glimpses of a profile against the sea, less beautiful, assuredly, than
those of Veronese's women whom I ought, had I been guided by purely
aesthetic reasons, to have preferred to her. By what other reasons could
I be guided, since, my anxiety having subsided, I could recapture only
those mute profiles; I possessed nothing of her besides. Since my first
sight of Albertine I had meditated upon her daily, a thousandfold, I had
carried on with what I called by her name an interminable unspoken
dialogue in which I made her question me, answer me, think and act, and
in the infinite series of imaginary Albertines who followed one after
the other in my fancy, hour after hour, the real Albertine, a glimpse
caught on the beach, figured only at the head, just as the actress who
creates a part, the star, appears, out of a long series of performances,
in the few first alone. That Albertine was scarcely more than a
silhouette, all that was superimposed being of my own growth, so far
when we are in love does the contribution that we ourself make
outweigh--even if we consider quantity only--those that come to us from
the beloved object. And the same is true of love that is given its full
effect. There are loves that manage not only to be formed but to subsist
around a very little core--even among those whose prayer has been
answered after the flesh. An old drawing-master who had taught my
grandmother had been presented by some obscure mistress with a daughter.
The mother died shortly after the birth of her child, and the
drawing-master was so broken-hearted that he did not long survive her.
In the last months of his life my grandmother and some of the Combray
ladies, who had never liked to make any allusion in the drawing-master's
presence to the woman, with whom, for that matter, he had not officially
"lived" and had had comparatively slight relations, took it into their
heads to ensure the little girl's future by combining to purchase an
annuity for her. It was my grandmother who suggested this; several of
her friends made difficulties; after all was the child really such a
very interesting case, was she even the child of her reputed father;
with women like that, it was never safe to say. Finally, everything was
settled. The child came to thank the ladies. She was plain, and so
absurdly like the old drawing-master as to remove every shadow of doubt;
her hair being the only nice thing about her, one of the ladies said to
her father, who had come with her: "What pretty hair she has." And
thinking that now, the woman who had sinned being dead and the old man
only half alive, a discreet allusion to that past of which they had
always pretended to know nothing could do no harm, my grandmother added:
"It runs in families. Did her mother have pretty hair like that?" "I
don't know," was the old man's quaint answer "I never saw her except
with a hat on."

But I must not keep Elstir waiting. I caught sight of myself in a glass.
To add to the disaster of my not having been introduced to the girls, I
noticed that my necktie was all crooked, my hat left long wisps of hair
shewing, which did not become me; but it was a piece of luck, all the
same, that they should have seen me, even thus attired, in Elstir's
company and so could not forget me; also that I should have put on, that
morning, at my grandmother's suggestion, my smart waistcoat, when I
might so easily have been wearing one that was simply hideous, and be
carrying my best stick. For while an event for which we are longing
never happens quite in the way we have been expecting, failing the
advantages on which we supposed that we might count, others present
themselves for which we never hoped, and make up for our disappointment;
and we have been so dreading the worst that in the end we are inclined
to feel that, taking one thing with another, chance has, on the whole,
been rather kind to us.

"I did so much want to know them," I said as I reached Elstir. "Then why
did you stand a mile away?" These were his actual words, not that they
expressed what was in his mind, since, if his desire had been to grant
mine, to call me up to him would have been quite easy, but perhaps
because he had heard phrases of this sort, in familiar use among common
people when they are in the wrong, and because even great men are in
certain respects much the same as common people, take their every day
excuses from the same common stock just as they get their daily bread
from the same baker; or it may be that such expressions (which ought,
one might almost say, to be read "backwards", since their literal
interpretation is the opposite of the truth) are the instantaneous
effect, the negative exposure of a reflex action. "They were in a
hurry." It struck me that of course they must have stopped him from
summoning a person who did not greatly attract them; otherwise he would
not have failed, after all the questions that I had put to him about
them, and the interest which he must have seen that I took in them, to
call me. "We were speaking just now of Carquethuit," he began, as we
walked towards his villa. "I have done a little sketch, in which you can
see much better how the beach curves. The painting is not bad, but it is
different. If you will allow me, just to cement our friendship, I would
like to give you the sketch," he went on, for the people who refuse us
the objects of our desire are always ready to offer us something else.

"I should very much like, if you have such a thing, a photograph of the
little picture of Miss Sacripant. 'Sacripant'--that's not a real name,
surely?" "It is the name of a character the sitter played in a stupid
little musical comedy." "But, I assure you, sir, I have never set eyes
on her; you look as though you thought that I knew her." Elstir was
silent. "It isn't Mme. Swann, before she was married?" I hazarded, in
one of those sudden fortuitous stumblings upon the truth, which are rare
enough in all conscience, and yet give, in the long run, a certain
cumulative support to the theory of presentiments, provided that one
takes care to forget all the wrong guesses that would invalidate it.
Elstir did not reply. The portrait was indeed that of Odette de Crécy.
She had preferred not to keep it for many reasons, some of them obvious.
But there were others less apparent. The portrait dated from before the
point at which Odette, disciplining her features, had made of her face
and figure that creation the broad outlines of which her hairdressers,
her dressmakers, she herself--in her way of standing, of speaking, of
smiling, of moving her hands, her eyes, of thinking--were to respect
throughout the years to come. It required the vitiated tastes of a
surfeited lover to make Swann prefer to all the countless photographs of
the "sealed pattern" Odette which was his charming wife the little
photographs which he kept in his room and in which, beneath a straw hat
trimmed with pansies, you saw a thin young woman, not even good-looking,
with bunched out hair and drawn features.

But apart from this, had the portrait been not anterior, like Swann's
favourite photograph, to the systematisation of Odette's features in a
fresh type, majestic and charming, but subsequent to it, Elstir's vision
would alone have sufficed to disorganise that type. Artistic genius in
its reactions is like those extremely high temperatures which have the
power to disintegrate combinations of atoms which they proceed to
combine afresh in a diametrically opposite order, following another
type. All that artificially harmonious whole into which a woman has
succeeded in bringing her limbs and features, the persistence of which
every day, before going out, she studies in her glass, changing the
angle of her hat, smoothing her hair, exercising the sprightliness in
her eyes, so as to ensure its continuity, that harmony the keen eye of
the great painter instantly destroys, substituting for it a
rearrangement of the woman's features such as will satisfy a certain
pictorial ideal of femininity which he carries in his head. Similarly it
often happens that, after a certain age, the eye of a great seeker after
truth will find everywhere the elements necessary to establish those
relations which alone are of interest to him. Like those craftsmen,
those players who, instead of making a fuss and asking for what they
cannot have, content themselves with the instrument that comes to their
hand, the artist might say of anything, no matter what, that it would
serve his purpose. Thus a cousin of the Princesse de Luxembourg, a
beauty of the most queenly type, having succumbed to a form of art which
was new at that time, had asked the leading painter of the naturalist
school to do her portrait. At once the artist's eye had found what he
sought everywhere in life. And on his canvas there appeared, in place of
the proud lady, a street-boy, and behind him a vast, sloping, purple
background which made one think of the Place Pigalle. But even without
going so far as that, not only will the portrait of a woman by a great
artist not seek in the least to give satisfaction to various demands on
the woman's part--such as for instance, when she begins to age, make her
have herself photographed in dresses that are almost those of a young
girl, which bring out her still youthful figure and make her appear like
the sister, or even the daughter of her own daughter, who, if need be,
is tricked out for the occasion as a "perfect fright" by her side--it
will, on the contrary, emphasise those very drawbacks which she seeks to
hide, and which (as for instance a feverish, that is to say a livid
complexion) are all the more tempting to him since they give his picture
"character"; they are quite enough, however, to destroy all the
illusions of the ordinary man who, when he sees the picture, sees
crumble into dust the ideal which the woman herself has so proudly
sustained for him, which has placed her in her unique, her unalterable
form so far apart, so far above the rest of humanity. Fallen now,
represented otherwise than in her own type in which she sat unassailably
enthroned, she is become nothing more than just an ordinary woman, in
the legend of whose superiority we have lost all faith. In this type we
are so accustomed to regard as included not only the beauty of an Odette
but her personality, her identity, that standing before the portrait
which has thus transposed her from it we are inclined to protest not
simply "How plain he has made her!" but "Why, it isn't the least bit
like her!" We find it hard to believe that it can be she. We do not
recognise her. And yet there is a person there on the canvas whom we are
quite conscious of having seen before. But that person is not Odette;
the face of the person, her body, her general appearance seem familiar.
They recall to us not this particular woman who never held herself like
that, whose natural pose had no suggestion of any such strange and
teasing arabesque in its outlines, but other women, all the women whom
Elstir has ever painted, women whom invariably, however they may differ
from one another, he has chosen to plant thus on his canvas facing you,
with an arched foot thrust out from under the skirt, a large round hat
in one hand, symmetrically corresponding at the level of the knee which
it hides to what also appears as a disc, higher up in the picture, the
face. And furthermore, not only does a portrait by the hand of genius
disintegrate and destroy a woman's type, as it has been defined by her
coquetry and her selfish conception of beauty, but if it is also old, it
is not content with ageing the original in the same way as a photograph
ages its sitter, by shewing her dressed in the fashions of long ago. In
a portrait, it is not only the manner the woman then had of dressing
that dates it, there is also the manner the artist had of painting. And
this, Elstir's earliest manner, was the most damaging of birth
certificates for Odette because it not only established her, as did her
photographs of the same period, as the younger sister of various
time-honoured courtesans, but made her portrait contemporary with the
countless portraits that Manet or Whistler had painted of all those
vanished models, models who already belonged to oblivion or to history.

It was along this train of thought, meditated in silence by the side of
Elstir, as I accompanied him to his door, that I was being led by the
discovery that I had just made of the identity of his model, when this
original discovery caused me to make a second, more disturbing still,
involving the identity of the artist. He had painted the portrait of
Odette de Crécy. Could it possibly be that this man of genius, this
sage, this eremite, this philosopher with his marvellous flow of
conversation, who towered over everyone and everything, was the foolish,
corrupt little painter who had at one time been "taken up" by the
Verdurins? I asked him if he had known them, whether by any chance it
was he that they used to call M. Biche. He answered me in the
affirmative, with no trace of embarrassment, as if my question referred
to a period in his life that was ended and already somewhat remote, with
no suspicion of what a cherished illusion his words were shattering in
me, until looking up he read my disappointment upon my face. His own
assumed an expression of annoyance. And, as we were now almost at the
gate of his house, a man of less outstanding eminence, in heart and
brain, might simply have said "good-bye" to me, a trifle dryly, and
taken care to avoid seeing me again. This however was not Elstir's way
with me; like the master that he was--and this was, perhaps, from the
point of view of sheer creative genius, his one fault, that he was a
master in that sense of the word, for an artist if he is to live the
true life of the spirit in its full extent, must be alone and not bestow
himself with profusion, even upon disciples--from every circumstance,
whether involving himself or other people, he sought to extract, for the
better edification of the young, the element of truth that it contained.
He chose therefore, rather than say anything that might have avenged the
injury to his pride, to say what he thought would prove instructive to
me. "There is no man," he began, "however wise, who has not at some
period of his youth said things, or lived in a way the consciousness of
which is so unpleasant to him in later life that he would gladly, if he
could, expunge it from his memory. And yet he ought not entirely to
regret it, because he cannot be certain that he has indeed become a wise
man--so far as it is possible for any of us to be wise--unless he has
passed through all the fatuous or unwholesome incarnations by which that
ultimate stage must be preceded. I know that there are young fellows,
the sons and grandsons of famous men, whose masters have instilled into
them nobility of mind and moral refinement in their schooldays. They
have, perhaps, when they look back upon their past lives, nothing to
retract; they can, if they choose, publish a signed account of
everything they have ever said or done; but they are poor creatures,
feeble descendants of doctrinaires, and their wisdom is negative and
sterile. We are not provided with wisdom, we must discover it for
ourselves, after a journey through the wilderness which no one else can
take for us, an effort which no one can spare us, for our wisdom is the
point of view from which we come at last to regard the world. The lives
that you admire, the attitudes that seem noble to you are not the result
of training at home, by a father, or by masters at school, they have
sprung from beginnings of a very different order, by reaction from the
influence of everything evil or common-place that prevailed round about
them. They represent a struggle and a victory. I can see that the
picture of what we once were, in early youth, may not be recognisable
and cannot, certainly, be pleasing to contemplate in later life. But we
must not deny the truth of it, for it is evidence that we have really
lived, that it is in accordance with the laws of life and of the mind
that we have, from the common elements of life, of the life of studios,
of artistic groups--assuming that one is a painter--extracted something
that goes beyond them." Meanwhile we had reached his door. I was
disappointed at not having met the girls. But after all there was now
the possibility of meeting them again later on; they had ceased to do no
more than pass beyond a horizon on which I had been ready to suppose
that I should never see them reappear. Around them no longer swirled
that sort of great eddy which had separated me from them, which had been
merely the expression of the perpetually active desire, mobile,
compelling, fed ever on fresh anxieties, which was aroused in me by
their inaccessibility, their flight from me, possibly for ever. My
desire for them, I could now set it at rest, hold it in reserve, among
all those other desires the realisation of which, as soon as I knew it
to be possible, I would cheerfully postpone. I took leave of Elstir; I
was alone once again. Then all of a sudden, despite my recent
disappointment, I saw in my mind's eye all that chain of coincidence
which I had not supposed could possibly come about, that Elstir should
be a friend of those very girls, that they who only that morning had
been to me merely figures in a picture with the sea for background had
seen me, had seen me walking in friendly intimacy with a great painter,
who was now informed of my secret longing and would no doubt do what he
could to assuage it. All this had been a source of pleasure to me, but
that pleasure had remained hidden; it was one of those visitors who wait
before letting us know that they are in the room until all the rest have
gone and we are by ourselves. Then only do we catch sight of them, and
can say to them, "I am at your service," and listen to what they have to
tell us. Sometimes between the moment at which these pleasures have
entered our consciousness and the moment at which we are free to
entertain them, so many hours have passed, we have in the interval seen
so many people that we are afraid lest they should have grown tired of
waiting. But they are patient, they do not grow tired, and as soon as
the crowd has gone we find them there ready for us. Sometimes it is then
we who are so exhausted that it seems as though our weary mind will not
have the strength left to seize and retain those memories, those
impressions for which our frail self is the one habitable place, the
sole means of realisation. And we should regret that failure, for
existence to us is hardly interesting save on the days on which the dust
of realities is shot with magic sand, on which some trivial incident of
life becomes a spring of romance. Then a whole promontory of the
inaccessible world rises dear in the light of our dream, and enters into
our life, our life in which, like the sleeper awakened, we actually see
the people of whom we have been so ardently dreaming that we came to
believe that we should never behold them save in our dreams.

The sense of comfort that I drew from the probability of my now being
able to meet the little band whenever I chose was all the more precious
to me because I should not have been able to keep watch for them during
the next few days, which would be taken up with preparations for
Saint-Loup's departure. My grandmother was anxious to offer my friend
some proof of her gratitude for all the kindnesses that he had shewn to
her and myself. I told her that he was a great admirer of Proudhon, and
this put it into her head to send for a collection of autograph letters
by that philosopher which she had once bought; Saint-Loup came to her
room to look at them on the day of their arrival, which was also his
last day at Balbec. He read them eagerly, fingering each page with
reverence, trying to get the sentences by heart; and then, rising from
the table, was beginning to apologise to my grandmother for having
stayed so long, when he heard her say: "No, no; take them with you; they
are for you to keep; that was why I sent for them, to give them to you."

He was overpowered by a joy which he could no more control than we can a
physical condition that arises without the intervention of our will. He
blushed scarlet as a child who has just been whipped, and my grandmother
was a great deal more touched to see all the efforts that he was making
(without success) to control the joy that convulsed him than she would
have been to hear any words of thanks that he could have uttered. But
he, fearing that he had failed to shew his gratitude properly, begged me
to make his excuses to her again, next day, leaning from the window of
the little train of the local railway company which was to take him back
to his regiment. The distance was, as a matter of fact, nothing. He had
thought of going, as he had frequently done that summer, when he was to
return the same evening and was not encumbered with luggage, by road.
But this time he would have had, anyhow, to put all his heavy luggage in
the train. And he found it simpler to take the train himself also,
following the advice of the manager who, on being consulted, replied
that "Carriage or train, it was more or less equivocal." He meant us to
understand that they were equivalent (in fact, very much what Françoise
would have expressed as "coming to as near as made no difference").
"Very well," Saint-Loup had decided, "I will take the 'little crawler'."
I should have taken it too, had I not been tired, and gone with my
friend to Doncières; failing this I kept on promising, all the time
that we waited in the Balbec station--the time, that is to say, which
the driver of the little train spent in waiting for unpunctual friends,
without whom he refused to start, and also in seeking some refreshment
for himself--to go over there and see him several times a week. As Bloch
had come to the station also--much to Saint-Loup's disgust--the latter,
seeing that our companion could hear him begging me to come to luncheon,
to dinner, to stay altogether at Doncières, finally turned to him and,
in the most forbidding tone, intended to counteract the forced civility
of the invitation and to prevent Bloch from taking it seriously: "If you
ever happen to be passing through Doncières any afternoon when I am off
duty, you might ask for me at the barracks; but I hardly ever am off
duty." Perhaps, also, Robert feared lest, if left to myself, I might not
come, and, thinking that I was more intimate with Bloch than I made out,
was providing me in this way with a travelling companion, one who would
urge me on.

I was afraid that this tone, this way of inviting a person while warning
him not to come, might have wounded Bloch, and felt that Saint-Loup
would have done better, saying nothing. But I was mistaken, for after
the train had gone, while we were walking back together as far as the
cross-roads at which we should have to part, one road going to the
hotel, the other to the Blochs' villa, he never ceased from asking me on
what day we should go to Doncières, for after "all the civilities that
Saint-Loup had shewn" him, it would be "too unmannerly" on his part not
to accept the invitation. I was glad that he had not noticed, or was so
little displeased as to wish to let it be thought that he had not
noticed on how far from pressing, how barely polite a note the
invitation had been sounded. At the same time I should have liked Bloch,
for his own sake, to refrain from making a fool of himself by going over
at once to Doncières. But I dared not offer a piece of advice which
could only have offended him by hinting that Saint-Loup had been less
pressing than himself impressed. He was a great deal too ready to
respond, and even if all his faults of this nature were atoned for by
remarkable qualities which others, with more reserve than he, would not
possess, he carried indiscretion to a pitch that was almost maddening.
The week must not, to hear him speak, pass without our going to
Doncières (he said "our" for I think that he counted to some extent on
my presence there as an excuse for his own). All the way home, opposite
the gymnasium, in its grove of trees, opposite the lawn-tennis courts,
the mayor's office, the shell-fish stall, he stopped me, imploring me to
fix a day, and, as I did not, left me in a towering rage, saying: "As
your lordship pleases. For my part, I am obliged to go since he has
invited me."

Saint-Loup was still so much afraid of not having thanked my grandmother
properly that he charged me once again to express his gratitude to her a
day or two later in a letter I received from him from the town in which
he was quartered, a town which seemed, on the envelope where the
post-mark had stamped its name, to be hastening to me across country, to
tell me that within its walls, in the Louis XVI cavalry barracks, he was
thinking of me. The paper was embossed with the arms of Marsantes, in
which I could make out a lion, surmounted by a coronet formed by the cap
of a Peer of France.

"After a journey which," he wrote, "passed pleasantly enough, with a
book I bought at the station, by Arvède Barine (a Russian author, I
fancy; it seemed to me remarkably well written for a foreigner, but you
shall give me your critical opinion, you are bound to know all about it,
you fount of knowledge who have read everything), here I am again in the
thick of this debased existence, where, alas, I feel a sad exile, not
having here what I had to leave at Balbec; this life in which I cannot
discover one affectionate memory, any intellectual attraction; an
environment on which you would probably look with contempt--and yet it
has a certain charm. Everything seems to have changed since I was last
here, for in the interval one of the most important periods in my life,
that from which our friendship dates, has begun. I hope that it may
never come to an end. I have spoken of our friendship, of you, to one
person only, to the friend I told you of, who has just paid me a
surprise visit here. She would like immensely to know you, and I feel
that you would get on well together, for she too is extremely literary.
I, on the other hand, to go over in my mind all our talk, to live over
again those hours which I never shall forget, have shut myself off from
my comrades, excellent fellows, but altogether incapable of
understanding that sort of thing. This remembrance of moments spent with
you I should almost have preferred, on my first day here, to call up for
my own solitary enjoyment, without writing. But I was afraid lest you,
with your subtle mind and ultra-sensitive heart, might, if you did not
hear from me, needlessly torment yourself, if, that is to say, you still
condescend to occupy your thoughts with this blunt trooper whom you will
have a hard task to polish and refine, and make a little more subtle and
worthier of your company."

On the whole this letter, in its affectionate spirit, was not at all
unlike those which, when I did not yet know Saint-Loup, I had imagined
that he would write to me, in those daydreams from which the coldness of
his first greeting had shaken me by bringing me face to face with an icy
reality which was not, however, to endure. Once I had received this
letter, whenever, at luncheon-time, the post was brought in, I could
tell at once when it was from him that a letter came, for it had always
that second face which a person assumes when he is absent, in the
features of which (the characters of his script) there is no reason why
we should not suppose that we are tracing an individual soul just as
much as in the line of a nose or the inflexions of a voice.

I would now gladly remain at the table while it was being cleared, and,
if it was not a moment at which the girls of the little band might be
passing, it was no longer solely towards the sea that I would turn my
eyes. Since I had seen such things depicted in water-colours by Elstir,
I sought to find again in reality, I cherished, as though for their
poetic beauty, the broken gestures of the knives still lying across one
another, the swollen convexity of a discarded napkin upon which the sun
would patch a scrap of yellow velvet, the half-empty glass which thus
shewed to greater advantage the noble sweep of its curved sides, and, in
the heart of its translucent crystal, clear as frozen daylight, a dreg
of wine, dusky but sparkling with reflected lights, the displacement of
solid objects, the transmutation of liquids by the effect of light and
shade, the shifting colour of the plums which passed from green to blue
and from blue to golden yellow in the half-plundered dish, the chairs,
like a group of old ladies, that came twice daily to take their places
round the white cloth spread on the table as on an altar at which were
celebrated the rites of the palate, where in the hollows of
oyster-shells a few drops of lustral water had gathered as in tiny holy
water stoups of stone; I tried to find beauty there where I had never
imagined before that it could exist, in the most ordinary things, in the
profundities of "still life".

When, some days after Saint-Loup's departure, I had succeeded in
persuading Elstir to give a small tea-party, at which I was to meet
Albertine, that freshness of appearance, that smartness of attire, both
(alas) fleeting, which were to be observed in me at the moment of my
starting out from the Grand Hotel, and were due respectively to a longer
rest than usual and to special pains over my toilet, I regretted my
inability to reserve them (and also the credit accruing from Elstir's
friendship) for the captivation of some other, more interesting person;
I regretted having to use them all up on the simple pleasure of making
Albertine's acquaintance. My brain assessed this pleasure at a very low
value now that it was assured me. But, inside, my will did not for a
moment share this illusion, that will which is the persevering and
unalterable servant of our successive personalities; hiding itself in
secret places, despised, downtrodden, untiringly faithful, toiling
without intermission and with no thought for the variability of the
self, its master, if only that master may never lack what he requires.
Whereas at the moment when we are just about to start on a long-planned
and eagerly awaited holiday, our brain, our nerves begin to ask
themselves whether it is really worth all the trouble involved, the
will, knowing that those lazy masters would at once begin to consider
their journey the most wonderful experience, if it became impossible for
them to take it, the will leaves them explaining their difficulties
outside the station, multiplying their hesitations; but busies itself
with taking the tickets and putting us into the carriage before the
train starts. It is as invariable as brain and nerves are fickle, but as
it is silent, gives no account of its actions, it seems almost
non-existent; it is by its dogged determination that the other
constituent parts of our personality are led, but without seeing it,
while they distinguish clearly all their own uncertainties. My nerves
and brain then started a discussion as to the real value of the pleasure
that there would be in knowing Albertine, while I studied in the glass
vain and perishable attractions which nerves and brain would have
preserved intact for use on some other occasion. But my will would not
let the hour pass at which I must start, and it was Elstir's address
that it called out to the driver. Brain and nerves were at liberty, now
that the die was cast, to think this "a pity." If my will had given the
man a different address, they would have been finely "sold".

When I arrived at Elstir's, a few minutes later, my first impression was
that Mlle. Simonet was not in the studio. There was certainly a girl
sitting there in a silk frock, bare-headed, but one whose marvellous
hair, her nose, meant nothing to me, in whom I did not recognise the
human entity that I had formed out of a young cyclist strolling past, in
a polo-cap, between myself and the sea. It was Albertine, nevertheless.
But even when I knew it to be her, I gave her no thought. On entering
any social gathering, when we are young, we lose consciousness of our
old self, we become a different man, every drawing-room being a fresh
universe, in which, coming under the sway of a new moral perspective, we
fasten our attention, as if they were to matter to us for all time, on
people, dances, card-tables, all of which we shall have forgotten by the
morning. Obliged to follow, if I was to arrive at the goal of
conversation with Albertine, a road in no way of my own planning, which
first brought me to a halt at Elstir, passed by other groups of guests
to whom I was presented, then along the table, at which I was offered,
and ate a strawberry tart or two, while I listened, motionless, to the
music that was beginning in another part of the room, I found myself
giving to these various incidents the same importance as to my
introduction to Mlle. Simonet, an introduction which was now nothing
more than one among several such incidents, having entirely forgotten
that it had been, but a few minutes since, my sole object in coming
there that day. But is it not ever thus in the bustle of daily life,
with every true happiness, every great sorrow. In a room full of other
people we receive from her whom we love the answer, propitious or fatal,
which we have been awaiting for the last year. But we must go on
talking, ideas come, one after another, forming a smooth surface which
is pricked, at the very most, now and then by a dull throb from within
of the memory, deep-rooted enough but of very slender growth, that
misfortune has come upon us. If, instead of misfortune, it is happiness,
it may be that not until many years have elapsed will we recall that the
most important event in our sentimental life occurred without our having
time to give it any prolonged attention, or even to become aware of it
almost, at a social gathering, it may have been, to which we had gone
solely in expectation of that event.

When Elstir asked me to come with him so that he might introduce me to
Albertine, who was sitting a little farther down the room, I first of
all finished eating a coffee éclair and, with a show of keen interest,
asked an old gentleman whose acquaintance I had just made (and thought
that I might, perhaps, offer him the rose in my buttonhole which he had
admired) to tell me more about the old Norman fairs. This is not to say
that the introduction which followed did not give me any pleasure, nor
assume a definite importance in my eyes. But so far as the pleasure was
concerned, I was not conscious of it, naturally, until some time later,
when, once more in the hotel, and in my room alone, I had become myself
again. Pleasure in this respect is like photography. What we take, in
the presence of the beloved object, is merely a negative film; we
develop it later, when we are at home, and have once again found at our
disposal that inner dark-room, the entrance to which is barred to us so
long as we are with other people.

If my consciousness of the pleasure it had brought me was thus retarded
by a few hours, the importance of this introduction I felt immediately.
At such moments of introduction, for all that we feel ourselves to have
been suddenly enriched, to have been furnished with a pass that will
admit us henceforward to pleasures which we have been pursuing for weeks
past, but in vain, we realise only too clearly that this acquisition
puts an end for us not merely to hours of toilsome search--a relief that
could only fill us with joy--but also to the very existence of a certain
person, her whom our imagination had wildly distorted, our anxious fear
that we might never become known to her enlarged. At the moment when our
name sounds on the lips of the person introducing us, especially if he
amplifies it, as Elstir was now doing, with a flattering account of
us--in that sacramental moment, as when in a fairy tale the magician
commands a person suddenly to become someone else, she to whose presence
we have been longing to attain vanishes; how could she remain the same
when, for one thing--owing to the attention which the stranger is
obliged to pay to the announcement of our name and the sight of our
person--in the eyes that only yesterday were situated at an infinite
distance (where we supposed that our eyes, wandering, uncontrolled,
desperate, divergent, would never succeed in meeting them) the conscious
gaze, the incommunicable thought which we have been seeking have been
miraculously and quite simply replaced by our own image, painted in them
as though behind the glass of a smiling mirror. If this incarnation of
ourself in the person who seems to differ most from us is what does most
to modify the appearance of the person to whom we have just been
introduced, the form of that person still remains quite vague; and we
are free to ask ourself whether she will turn out to be a god, a table
or a basin. But, as nimble as the wax-modellers who will fashion a bust
before our eyes in five minutes, the few words which the stranger is now
going to say to us will substantiate her form, will give her something
positive and final that will exclude all the hypotheses by which, a
moment ago, our desire, our imagination were being tempted. Doubtless,
even before her coming to this party, Albertine had ceased to be to me
simply that sole phantom worthy to haunt our life which is what remains
of a passing stranger, of whom we know nothing and have caught but the
barest glimpse. Her relation to Mme. Bontemps had already restricted the
scope of those marvellous hypotheses, by stopping one of the channels
along which they might have spread. As I drew closer to the girl, and
began to know her better, my knowledge of her underwent a process of
subtraction, all the factors of imagination and desire giving place to a
notion which was worth infinitely less, a notion to which, it must be
admitted, there was added presently what was more or less the
equivalent, in the domain of real life, of what joint stock companies
give one, after paying interest on one's capital, and call a bonus. Her
name, her family connexions had been the original limit set to my
suppositions. Her friendly greeting while, standing close beside her, I
saw once again the tiny mole on her cheek, below her eye, marked another
stage; last of all, I was surprised to hear her use the adverb
"perfectly" (in place of "quite") of two people whom she mentioned,
saying of one: "She is perfectly mad, but very nice for all that," and
of the other, "He is a perfectly common man, a perfect bore." However
little to be commended this use of "perfectly" may be, it indicates a
degree of civilisation and culture which I could never have imagined as
having been attained by the bacchante with the bicycle, the frenzied
muse of the golf-course. Nor did it mean that after this first
transformation Albertine was not to change again for me, many times. The
good and bad qualities which a person presents to us, exposed to view on
the surface of his or her face, rearrange themselves in a totally
different order if we approach them from another angle--just as, in a
town, buildings that appear strung irregularly along a single line, from
another aspect retire into a graduated distance, and their relative
heights are altered. To begin with, Albertine now struck me as not
implacable so much as almost frightened; she seemed to me rather
respectably than ill-bred, judging by the description, "bad style," "a
comic manner" which she applied to each in turn of the girls of whom I
spoke to her; finally, she presented as a target for my line of sight a
temple that was distinctly flushed and hardly attractive to the eye, and
no longer the curious gaze which I had always connected with her until
then. But this was merely a second impression and there were doubtless
others through which I was successively to pass. Thus it can be only
after one has recognised, not without having had to feel one's way, the
optical illusions of one's first impression that one can arrive at an
exact knowledge of another person, supposing such knowledge to be ever
possible. But it is not; for while our original impression of him
undergoes correction, the person himself, not being an inanimate
object, changes in himself, we think that we have caught him, he moves,
and, when we imagine that at last we are seeing him clearly, it is only
the old impressions which we had already formed of him that we have
succeeded in making clearer, when they no longer represent him.

And yet, whatever the inevitable disappointments that it must bring in
its train, this movement towards what we have only half seen, what we
have been free to dwell upon and imagine at our leisure, this movement
is the only one that is wholesome for the senses, that whets the
appetite. How dreary a monotony must pervade those people's lives who,
from indolence or timidity, drive in their carriages straight to the
doors of friends whom they have got to know without having first dreamed
of knowing them, without ever daring, on the way, to stop and examine
what arouses their desire.

I returned home, my mind full of the party, the coffee _éclair_ which I
had finished eating before I let Elstir take me up to Albertine, the
rose which I had given the old gentleman, all the details selected
without our knowledge by the circumstances of the occasion, which
compose in a special and quite fortuitous order the picture that we
retain of a first meeting. But this picture, I had the impression that I
was seeing it from a fresh point of view, a long way remote from myself,
realising that it had not existed only for me, when some months later,
to my great surprise, on my speaking to Albertine on the day on which I
had first met her, she reminded me of the éclair, the flower that I had
given away, all those things which I had supposed to have been--I will
not say of importance only to myself but--perceived only by myself, and
which I now found thus transcribed, in a version the existence of which
I had never suspected, in the mind of Albertine. On this first day
itself, when, on my return to the hotel, I was able to visualise the
memory which I had brought away with me, I realised the consummate
adroitness with which the sleight of hand had been performed, and how I
had talked for a moment or two with a person who, thanks to the skill of
the conjurer, without actually embodying anything of that other person
whom I had for so long been following as she paced beside the sea, had
been effectively substituted for her. I might, for that matter, have
guessed as much in advance, since the girl of the beach was a
fabrication invented by myself. In spite of which, as I had, in my
conversations with Elstir, identified her with this other girl, I felt
myself in honour bound to fulfil to the real the promises of love made
to the imagined Albertine. We betroth ourselves by proxy, and think
ourselves obliged, in the sequel, to marry the person who has
intervened. Moreover, if there had disappeared, provisionally at any
rate, from my life, an anguish that found adequate consolation in the
memory of polite manners, of that expression "perfectly common" and of
the glowing temple, that memory awakened in me desire of another kind
which, for all that it was placid and not at all painful, resembling
rather brotherly love, might in the long run become fully as dangerous
by making me feel at every moment a compelling need to kiss this new
person, whose charming ways, her shyness, her unlooked-for
accessibility, arrested the futile process of my imagination but gave
birth to a sentimental gratitude. And then, since memory begins at once
to record photographs independent of one another, eliminates every link,
any kind of sequence from between the scenes portrayed in the collection
which it exposes to our view, the most recent does not necessarily
destroy or cancel those that came before. Confronted with the
common-place though appealing Albertine to whom I had spoken that
afternoon, I still saw the other, mysterious Albertine outlined against
the sea. These were now memories, that is to say pictures neither of
which now seemed to me any more true than the other. But, to make an end
of this first afternoon of my introduction to Albertine, when trying to
recapture that little mole on her cheek, just under the eye, I
remembered that, looking from Elstir's window, when Albertine had gone
by, I had seen the mole on her chin. In fact, whenever I saw her I
noticed that she had a mole, but my inaccurate memory made it wander
about the face of Albertine, fixing it now in one place, now in another.

Whatever my disappointment in finding in Mlle. Simonet a girl so little
different from those that I knew already, just as my rude awakening when
I saw Balbec church did not prevent me from wishing still to go to
Quimperlé, Pont-Aven and Venice, I comforted myself with the thought
that through Albertine at any rate, even if she herself was not all that
I had hoped, I might make the acquaintance of her comrades of the little
band.

I thought at first that I should fail. As she was to be staying (and I
too) for a long time still at Balbec, I had decided that the best thing
was not to make my efforts to meet her too apparent, but to wait for an
accidental encounter. But should this occur every day, even, it was
greatly to be feared that she would confine herself to acknowledging my
bow from a distance, and such meetings, repeated day after day
throughout the whole season, would benefit me not at all.

Shortly after this, one morning when it had been raining and was almost
cold, I was accosted on the "front" by a girl wearing a close-fitting
toque and carrying a muff, so different from the girl whom I had met at
Elstir's party that to recognise in her the same person seemed an
operation beyond the power of the human mind; mine was, nevertheless,
successful in performing it, but after a momentary surprise which did
not, I think, escape Albertine's notice. On the other hand, when I
instinctively recalled the good-breeding which had so impressed me
before, she filled me with a converse astonishment by her rude tone and
manners typical of the "little band". Apart from these, her temple had
ceased to be the optical centre, on which the eye might comfortably
rest, of her face, either because I was now on her other side, or
because her toque hid it, or else possibly because its inflammation was
not a constant thing. "What weather!" she began. "Really the perpetual
summer of Balbec is all stuff and nonsense. You don't go in for anything
special here, do you? We don't ever see you playing golf, or dancing at
the Casino. You don't ride, either. You must be bored stiff. You don't
find it too deadly, staying about on the beach all day. I see, you just
bask in the sun like a lizard; you enjoy that. You must have plenty of
time on your hands. I can see you're not like me; I simply adore all
sports. You weren't at the Sogne races! We went in the 'tram', and I can
quite believe you don't see the fun of going in an old 'tin-pot' like
that. It took us two whole hours! I could have gone there and back three
times on my bike." I, who had been lost in admiration of Saint-Loup when
he, in the most natural manner in the world, called the little local
train the "crawler", because of the ceaseless windings of its line, was
positively alarmed by the glibness with which Albertine spoke of the
"tram", and called it a "tin-pot". I could feel her mastery of a form of
speech in which I was afraid of her detecting and scorning my
inferiority. And yet the full wealth of the synonyms that the little
band possessed to denote this railway had not yet been revealed to me.
In speaking, Albertine kept her head motionless, her nostrils closed,
allowing only the corners of her lips to move. The result of this was a
drawling, nasal sound, into the composition of which there entered
perhaps a provincial descent, a juvenile affectation of British phlegm,
the teaching of a foreign governess and a congestive hypertrophy of the
mucus of the nose. This enunciation which, as it happened, soon
disappeared when she knew people better, giving place to a natural
girlish tone, might have been thought unpleasant. But it was peculiar to
herself, and delighted me. Whenever I had gone for several days without
seeing her, I would refresh my spirit by repeating to myself: "We don't
ever see you playing golf," with the nasal intonation in which she had
uttered the words, point blank, without moving a muscle of her face. And
I thought then that there could be no one in the world so desirable.

We formed that morning one of those couples who dotted the "front" here
and there with their conjunction, their stopping together for time
enough just to exchange a few words before breaking apart, each to
resume separately his or her divergent stroll. I seized the opportunity,
while she stood still, to look again and discover once and for all where
exactly the little mole was placed. Then, just as a phrase of Vinteuil
which had delighted me in the sonata, and which my recollection allowed
to wander from the andante to the finale, until the day when, having the
score in my hands, I was able to find it, and to fix it in my memory in
its proper place, in the scherzo, so this mole, which I had visualised
now on her cheek, now on her chin, came to rest for ever on her upper
lip, just below her nose. In the same way, too, do we not come with
amazement upon lines that we know by heart in a poem in which we never
dreamed that they were to be found.

At that moment, as if in order that against the sea there might multiply
in freedom, in the variety of its forms, all the rich decorative whole
which was the lovely unfolding of the train of maidens, at once golden
and rosy, baked by sun and wind, Albertine's friends, with their shapely
limbs, their supple figures, but so different one from another, came
into sight in a cluster that expanded as it approached, advancing
towards us, but keeping closer to the sea, along a parallel line. I
asked Albertine's permission to walk for a little way with her.
Unfortunately, all she did was to wave her hand to them in greeting.
"But your friends will be disappointed if you don't go with them," I
hinted, hoping that we might all walk together. A young man with regular
features, carrying a bag of golf-clubs, sauntered up to us. It was the
baccarat-player, whose fast ways so enraged the chief magistrate's wife.
In a frigid, impassive tone, which he evidently regarded as an
indication of the highest refinement, he bade Albertine good day. "Been
playing golf, Octave?" she asked. "How did the game go? Were you in
form?" "Oh, it's too sickening; I can't play for nuts," he replied. "Was
Andrée playing?" "Yes, she went round in seventy-seven." "Why, that's
a record!" "I went round in eighty-two yesterday." He was the son of an
immensely rich manufacturer who was to take an important part in the
organisation of the coming World's Fair. I was struck by the extreme
degree to which, in this young man and in the other by no means numerous
male friends of the band of girls, the knowledge of everything that
pertained to clothes and how to wear them, cigars, English drinks,
horses, a knowledge which he possessed in its minutest details with a
haughty infallibility that approached the reticent modesty of the true
expert, had been developed in complete isolation, unaccompanied by the
least trace of any intellectual culture. He had no hesitation as to the
right time and place for dinner jacket or pyjamas, but neither had he
any suspicion of the circumstances in which one might or might not
employ this or that word, or even of the simplest rules of grammar. This
disparity between the two forms of culture must have existed also in his
father, the President of the Syndicate that "ran" Balbec, for, in an
open letter to the electors which he had recently had posted on all the
walls, he announced: "I desired to see the Mayor, to speak to him of the
matter; he would not listen to my righteous plaint." Octave, at the
Casino, took prizes in all the dancing competitions, for bostons, tangos
and what-not, an accomplishment that would entitle him, if he chose, to
make a fine marriage in that seaside society where it is not
figuratively but in sober earnest that the young women "marry their
dancing-partners". He lighted a cigar with a "D'you mind?" to Albertine,
as one who asks permission to finish, while going on talking, an urgent
piece of work. For he was one of those people who can never be "doing
nothing", although there was nothing, for that matter, that he could
ever be said to do. And as complete inactivity has the same effect on
us, in the end, as prolonged overwork, and on the character as much as
on the life of body and muscles, the unimpaired nullity of intellect
that was enshrined behind Octave's meditative brow had ended by giving
him, despite his air of unruffled calm, ineffectual longings to think
which kept him awake at night, for all the world like an overwrought
philosopher.

Supposing that if I knew their male friends I should have more
opportunities of seeing the girls, I had been on the point of asking for
an introduction to Octave. I told Albertine this, as soon as he had left
us, still muttering, "I couldn't play for nuts!" I thought I would thus
put into her head the idea of doing it next time. "But I can't," she
cried, "introduce you to a tame cat like that. This place simply swarms
with them. But what on earth would they have to say to you? That one
plays golf quite well, and that's all there is to it. I know what I'm
talking about; you'ld find he wasn't at all your sort." "Your friends
will be cross with you if you desert them like this," I repeated, hoping
that she would then suggest my joining the party. "Oh, no, they don't
want me." We ran into Bloch, who directed at me a subtle, insinuating
smile, and, embarrassed by the presence of Albertine, whom he did not
know, or, rather, knew "without knowing" her, bent his head with a
stiff, almost irritated jerk. "What's he called, that Ostrogoth?"
Albertine asked. "I can't think why he should bow to me; he doesn't know
me. And I didn't bow to him, either." I had no time to explain to her,
for, bearing straight down upon us, "Excuse me," he began, "for
interrupting you, but I must tell you that I am going to Doncières
to-morrow. I cannot put it off any longer without discourtesy; indeed,
I ask myself, what must de Saint-Loup-en-Bray think of me. I just came
to let you know that I shall take the two o'clock train. At your
service." But I thought now only of seeing Albertine again, and of
trying to get to know her friends, and Doncières, since they were not
going there, and my going would bring me back too late to see them still
on the beach, seemed to me to be situated at the other end of the world.
I told Bloch that it was impossible. "Oh, very well, I shall go alone.
In the fatuous words of Master Arouet, I shall say to Saint-Loup, to
beguile his clericalism:"


'My duty stands alone, by his in no way bound;
Though he should choose to fail, yet faithful I'll be found.'


"I admit he's not a bad looking boy," was Albertine's comment, "but he
makes me feel quite sick." I had never thought that Bloch might be "not
a bad looking boy"; and yet, when one came to think of it, so he was.
With his rather prominent brow, very aquiline nose, and his air of
extreme cleverness and of being convinced of his cleverness, he had a
pleasing face. But he could not succeed in pleasing Albertine. This was
perhaps due, to some extent, to her own disadvantages, the harshness,
the want of feeling of the little band, its rudeness towards everything
that was not itself. And later on, when I introduced them, Albertine's
antipathy for him grew no less. Bloch belonged to a section of society
in which, between the free and easy customs of the "smart set" and the
regard for good manners which a man is supposed to shew who "does not
soil his hands", a sort of special compromise has been reached which
differs from the manners of the world and is nevertheless a peculiarly
unpleasant form of worldliness. When he was introduced to anyone he
would bow with a sceptical smile, and at the same time with an
exaggerated show of respect, and, if it was to a man, would say:
"Pleased to meet you, sir," in a voice which ridiculed the words that it
was uttering, though with a consciousness of belonging to some one who
was no fool. Having sacrificed this first moment to a custom which he at
once followed and derided (just as on the first of January he would
greet you with a "Many happy!") he would adopt an air of infinite
cunning, and would "proffer subtle words" which were often true enough
but "got on" Albertine's nerves. When I told her on this first day that
his name was Bloch, she exclaimed: "I would have betted anything he was
a Jew-boy. Trust them to put their foot in it!" Moreover, Bloch was
destined to give Albertine other grounds for annoyance later on. Like
many intellectuals, he was incapable of saying a simple thing in a
simple way. He would find some precious qualification for every
statement, and would sweep from particular to general. It vexed
Albertine, who was never too well pleased at other people's shewing an
interest in what she was doing, that when she had sprained her ankle and
was keeping quiet, Bloch said of her: "She is outstretched on her chair,
but in her ubiquity has not ceased to frequent simultaneously vague
golf-courses and dubious tennis-courts." He was simply being "literary",
of course, but this, in view of the difficulties which Albertine felt
that it might create for her with friends whose invitations she had
declined on the plea that she was unable to move, was quite enough to
disgust her with the face, the sound of the voice of the young man who
could say such things about her. We parted, Albertine and I, after
promising to take a walk together later. I had talked to her without
being any more conscious of where my words were falling, of what became
of them, than if I were dropping pebbles into a bottomless pit. That our
words are, as a general rule, filled, by the person to whom we address
them, with a meaning which that person derives from her own substance, a
meaning widely different from that which we had put into the same words
when we uttered them, is a fact which the daily round of life is
perpetually demonstrating. But if we find ourself as well in the company
of a person whose education (as Albertine's was to me) is inconceivable,
her tastes, her reading, her principles unknown, we cannot tell whether
our words have aroused in her anything that resembles their meaning, any
more than in an animal, although there are things that even an animal
may be made to understand. So that to attempt any closer friendship with
Albertine seemed to me like placing myself in contact with the unknown,
if not the impossible, an occupation as arduous as breaking a horse, as
reposeful as keeping bees or growing roses.

I had thought, a few hours before, that Albertine would acknowledge my
bow but would not speak to me. We had now parted, after planning to make
some excursion soon together. I vowed that when I next met Albertine I
would treat her with greater boldness, and I had sketched out in advance
a draft of all that I would say to her, and even (being now quite
convinced that she was not strait-laced) of all the favours that I would
demand of her. But the mind is subject to external influences, as plants
are, and cells and chemical elements, and the medium in which its
immersion alters it is a change of circumstances, or new surroundings.
Grown different by the mere fact of her presence, when I found myself
once again in Albertine's company, what I said to her was not at all
what I had meant to say. Remembering her flushed temple, I asked myself
whether she might not appreciate more keenly a polite attention which
she knew to be disinterested. Besides, I was embarrassed by certain
things in her look, in her smile. They might equally well signify a
laxity of morals and the rather silly merriment of a girl who though
full of spirits was at heart thoroughly respectable. A single
expression, on a face as in speech, is susceptible of divers
interpretations, and I stood hesitating like a schoolboy faced by the
difficulties of a piece of Greek prose.

On this occasion we met almost immediately the tall one, Andrée, the
one who had jumped over the old banker, and Albertine was obliged to
introduce me. Her friend had a pair of eyes of extraordinary brightness,
like, in a dark house, a glimpse through an open door of a room into
which the sun is shining with a greenish reflexion from the glittering
sea.

A party of five were passing, men whom I had come to know very well by
sight during my stay at Balbec. I had often wondered who they could be.
"They're nothing very wonderful," said Albertine with a sneering laugh.
"The little old one with dyed hair and yellow gloves has a fine touch;
he knows how to draw all right, he's the Balbec dentist; he's a good
sort. The fat one is the Mayor, not the tiny little fat one, you must
have seen him before, he's the dancing master; he's rather a beast, you
know; he can't stand us, because we make such a row at the Casino; we
smash his chairs, and want to have the carpet up when we dance; that's
why he never gives us prizes, though we're the only girls there who can
dance a bit. The dentist is a dear, I would have said how d'ye do to
him, just to make the dancing master swear, but I couldn't because
they've got M. de Sainte-Croix with them; he's on the General Council;
he comes of a very good family, but he's joined the Republicans, to make
more money. No nice people ever speak to him now. He knows my uncle,
because they're both in the Government, but the rest of my family always
cut him. The thin one in the waterproof is the bandmaster. You know him,
of course. You don't? Oh, he plays divinely. You haven't been to
_Cavalleria Rusticana?_ I thought it too lovely! He's giving a concert
this evening, but we can't go because it's to be in the town hall. In
the Casino it wouldn't matter, but in the town hall, where they've taken
down the crucifix, Andrée's mother would have a fit if we went there.
You're going to say that my aunt's husband is in the Government. But
what difference does that make? My aunt is my aunt. That's not why I'm
fond of her. The only thing she has ever wanted has been to get rid of
me. No, the person who has really been a mother to me, and all the more
credit to her because she's no relation at all, is a friend of mine whom
I love just as much as if she was my mother. I will let you see her
'photo'." We were joined for a moment by the golf champion and baccarat
plunger, Octave. I thought that I had discovered a bond between us, for
I learned in the course of conversation that he was some sort of
relative, and even more a friend of the Verdurins. But he spoke
contemptuously of the famous Wednesdays, adding that M. Verdurin had
never even heard of a dinner jacket, which made it a horrid bore when
one ran into him in a music-hall, where one would very much rather not
be greeted with "Well, you young rascal," by an old fellow in a frock
coat and black tie, for all the world like a village lawyer. Octave left
us, and soon it was Andrée's turn, when we came to her villa, into
which she vanished without having uttered a single word to me during the
whole of our walk. I regretted her departure, all the more in that,
while I was complaining to Albertine how chilling her friend had been
with me, and was comparing in my mind this difficulty which Albertine
seemed to find in making me know her friends with the hostility that
Elstir, when he might have granted my desire, seemed to have encountered
on that first afternoon, two girls came by to whom I lifted my hat, the
young Ambresacs, whom Albertine greeted also.

I felt that, in Albertine's eyes, my position would be improved by this
meeting. They were the daughters of a kinswoman of Mme. de Villeparisis,
who was also a friend of Mme. de Luxembourg. M. and Mme. d'Ambresac, who
had a small villa at Balbec and were immensely rich, led the simplest of
lives there, and always went about dressed he in an unvarying frock
coat, she in a dark gown. Both of them used to make sweeping bows to my
grandmother, which never led to anything further. The daughters, who
were very pretty, were dressed more fashionably, but in a fashion suited
rather to Paris than to the seaside. With their long skirts and large
hats, they had the look of belonging to a different race from Albertine.
She, I discovered, knew all about them.

"Oh, so you know the little d'Ambresacs, do you? Dear me, you have some
swagger friends. After all, they're very simple souls," she went on as
though this might account for it. "They're very nice, but so well
brought up that they aren't allowed near the Casino, for fear of
us--we've such a bad tone. They attract you, do they? Well, it all
depends on what you like. They're just little white rabbits, really.
There may be something in that, of course. If little white rabbits are
what appeals to you, they may supply a long-felt want. It seems, there
must be some attraction, because one of them has got engaged already to
the Marquis de Saint-Loup. Which is a cruel blow to the younger one, who
is madly in love with that young man. I'm sure, the way they speak to
you with their lips shut is quite enough for me. And then they dress in
the most absurd way. Fancy going to play golf in silk frocks! At their
age, they dress more showily than grown-up women who really know about
clothes. Look at Mme. Elstir; there's a well dressed woman if you like,"
I answered that she had struck me as being dressed with the utmost
simplicity. Albertine laughed. "She does put on the simplest things, I
admit, but she dresses wonderfully, and to get what you call simplicity
costs her a fortune." Mme. Elstir's gowns passed unnoticed by any one
who had not a sober and unerring taste in matters of attire. This was
lacking in me. Elstir possessed it in a supreme degree, or so Albertine
told me. I had not suspected this, nor that the beautiful but quite
simple objects which littered his studio were treasures long desired by
him which he had followed from sale room to sale room, knowing all their
history, until he had made enough money to be able to acquire them. But
as to this Albertine, being as ignorant as myself, could not enlighten
me. Whereas when it came to clothes, prompted by a coquettish instinct,
and perhaps by the regretful longing of a penniless girl who is able to
appreciate with greater disinterestedness, more delicacy of feeling, in
other, richer people the things that she will never be able to afford
for herself, she expressed herself admirably on the refinement of
Elstir's taste, so hard to satisfy that all women appeared to him badly
dressed, while, attaching infinite importance to right proportions and
shades of colour, he would order to be made for his wife, at fabulous
prices, the sunshades, hats and cloaks which he had learned from
Albertine to regard as charming, and which a person wanting in taste
would no more have noticed than myself. Apart from this, Albertine, who
had done a little painting, though without, she confessed, having any
"gift" for it, felt a boundless admiration for Elstir, and, thanks to
his precept and example, shewed a judgment of pictures which was in
marked contrast to her enthusiasm for _Cavalleria Rusticana._ The truth
was, though as yet it was hardly apparent, that she was highly
intelligent, and that in the things that she said the stupidity was not
her own but that of her environment and age. Elstir's had been a good
but only a partial influence. All the branches of her intelligence had
not reached the same stage of development. The taste for pictures had
almost caught up the taste for clothes and all forms of smartness, but
had not been followed by the taste for music, which was still a long way
behind.

Albertine might know all about the Ambresacs; but as he who can achieve
great things is not necessarily capable of small, I did not find her,
after I had bowed to those young ladies, any better disposed to make me
known to her friends. "It's too good of you to attach any importance to
them. You shouldn't take any notice of them; they don't count. What on
earth can a lot of kids like them mean to a man like you? Now Andrée,
I must say, is remarkably clever. She is a good girl, that, though she
is perfectly fantastic at times, but the others are really dreadfully
stupid." When I had left Albertine, I felt suddenly a keen regret that
Saint-Loup should have concealed his engagement from me and that he
should be doing anything so improper as to choose a wife before breaking
with his mistress. And then, shortly afterwards, I met Andrée, and as
she went on talking to me for some time I seized the opportunity to tell
her that I would very much like to see her again next day, but she
replied that this was impossible, because her mother was not at all
well, and she would have to stay beside her. The next day but one, when
I was at Elstir's, he told me how greatly Andrée had been attracted by
me; on my protesting: "But it was I who was attracted by her from the
start; I asked her to meet me again yesterday, but she could not." "Yes,
I know; she told me all about that," was his reply, "she was very sorry,
but she had promised to go to a picnic, somewhere miles from here. They
were to drive over in a break, and it was too late for her to get out of
it." Albeit this falsehood (Andrée knowing me so slightly) was of no
real importance, I ought not to have continued to seek the company of a
person who was capable of uttering it. For what people have once done
they will do again indefinitely, and if you go every year to see a
friend who, the first time, was not able to meet you at the appointed
place, or was in bed with a chill, you will find him in bed with another
chill which he has just caught, you will miss him again at another
meeting-place at which he has failed to appear, for a single and
unalterable reason in place of which he supposes himself to have various
reasons, drawn from the circumstances. One morning, not long after
Andrée's telling me that she would be obliged to stay beside her
mother, I was taking a short stroll with Albertine, whom I had found on
the beach tossing up and catching again on a cord an oddly shaped
implement which gave her a look of Giotto's "Idolatry"; it was called,
for that matter, "Diabolo", and is so fallen into disuse now that, when
they come upon the picture of a girl playing with one, the critics of
future generations will solemnly discuss, as it might be over one of the
allegorical figures in the Arena, what it is that she is holding. A
moment later their friend with the penurious and harsh appearance, the
same one who on that first day had sneered so malevolently: "I do feel
sorry for him, poor old man," when she saw the old gentlemen's head
brushed by the flying feet of Andrée, came up to Albertine with "Good
morning, 'm I disturbing you?" She had taken off her hat, for comfort,
and her hair, like a strange and fascinating plant, lay over her brow,
displaying all the delicate tracery of its foliation. Albertine, perhaps
because she resented seeing the other bare-headed, made no reply,
preserved a frigid silence in spite of which the girl stayed with us,
kept apart from myself by Albertine, who arranged at one moment to be
alone with her, at another to walk with me leaving her to follow. I was
obliged, to secure an introduction, to ask for it in the girl's hearing.
Then, as Albertine was uttering my name, on the face and in the blue
eyes of this girl, whose expression I had thought so cruel when I heard
her say: "Poor old man, I do feel so sorry for him", I saw gather and
gleam a cordial, friendly smile, and she held out her hand. Her hair was
golden, and not her hair only; for if her cheeks were pink and her eyes
blue it was like the still roseate morning sky which sparkles everywhere
with dazzling points of gold.

At once kindled by her flame, I said to myself that this was a child who
when in love grew shy, that it was for my sake, from love for me that
she had remained with us, despite Albertine's rebuffs, and that she must
have rejoiced in the opportunity to confess to me at last, by that
smiling, friendly gaze, that she would be as kind to me as she was
terrible to other people. Doubtless she had noticed me on the beach,
when I still knew nothing of her, and had been thinking of me ever
since; perhaps it had been to win my admiration that she mocked at the
old gentleman, and because she had not succeeded in getting to know me
that on the following days she appeared so morose. From the hotel I had
often seen her, in the evenings, walking by herself on the beach.
Probably in the hope of meeting me. And now, hindered as much by
Albertine's presence as she would have been by that of the whole band,
she had evidently attached herself to us, braving the increasing
coldness of her friend's attitude, only in the hope of outstaying her,
of being left alone with me, when she might make an appointment with me
for some time when she would find an excuse to slip away without either
her family's or her friends' knowing that she had gone, and would meet
me in some safe place before church or after golf. It was all the more
difficult to see her because Andrée had quarrelled with her and now
detested her. "I have put up far too long with her terrible dishonesty,"
she explained to me, "her baseness; I can't tell you all the vile
insults she has heaped on me. I have stood it all because of the others.
But her latest effort was really too much!" And she told me of some
foolish thing that this girl had done, which might indeed have injurious
consequences to Andrée herself.

But those private words promised me by Gisèle's confiding eyes for the
moment when Albertine should have left us by ourselves, were destined
never to be spoken, because after Albertine, stubbornly planted between
us, had answered with increasing curtness, and finally had ceased to
respond at all to her friend's remarks, Gisèle at length abandoned the
attempt and turned back. I found fault with Albertine for having been so
disagreeable. "It will teach her to be more careful how she behaves.
She's not a bad kid, but she'ld talk the head off a donkey. She's no
business, either, to go poking her nose into everything. Why should she
fasten herself on to us without being asked? In another minute I'ld have
told her to go to blazes. Besides I can't stand her going about with her
hair like that; it's such bad form." I gazed at Albertine's cheeks as
she spoke, and asked myself what might be the perfume, the taste of
them: this time they were not cool, but glowed with a uniform pink,
violet-tinted, creamy, like certain roses whose petals have a waxy
gloss. I felt a passionate longing for them such as one feels sometimes
for a particular flower. "I hadn't noticed it," was all that I said.
"You stared at her hard enough; anyone would have said you wanted to
paint her portrait," she scolded, not at all softened by the fact that
it was at herself that I was now staring so fixedly. "I don't believe
you would care for her, all the same. She's not in the least a flirt.
You like little girls who flirt with you, I know. Anyhow, she won't have
another chance of fastening on to us and being sent about her business;
she's going off to-day to Paris." "Are the rest of your friends going
too?" "No; only she and 'Miss', because she's got an exam, coming; she's
got to stay at home and swot for it, poor kid. It's not much fun for
her, I don't mind telling you. Of course, you may be set a good subject,
you never know. But it's a tremendous risk. One girl I know was asked:
_Describe an accident that you have witnessed._ That was a piece of
luck. But I know another girl who got: _State which you would rather
have as a friend, Alceste or Philinte._ I'm sure I should have dried up
altogether! Apart from everything else, it's not a question to set to
girls. Girls go about with other girls; they're not supposed to have
gentlemen friends." (This announcement, which shewed that I had but
little chance of being admitted to the companionship of the band, froze
my blood.) "But in any case, supposing it was set to boys, what on earth
would you expect them to say to a question like that? Several parents
wrote to the _Gaulois_, to complain of the difficult questions that were
being set. The joke of it is that in a collection of prize-winning
essays they gave two which treated the question in absolutely opposite
ways. You see, it all depends on which examiner you get. One would like
you to say that Philinte was a flatterer and a scoundrel, the other that
you couldn't help admiring Alceste, but that he was too cantankerous,
and that as a friend you ought to choose Philinte. How can you expect a
lot of unfortunate candidates to know what to say when the professors
themselves can't make up their minds. But that's nothing. They get more
difficult every year. Gisèle will want all her wits about her if she's
to get through." I returned to the hotel. My grandmother was not there.
I waited for her for some time; when at last she appeared, I begged her
to allow me, in quite unexpected circumstances, to make an expedition
which might keep me away for a couple of days. I had luncheon with her,
ordered a carriage and drove to the station. Gisèle would shew no
surprise at seeing me there. After we had changed at Doncières, in the
Paris train, there would be a carriage with a corridor, along which,
while the governess dozed, I should be able to lead Gisèle into dark
corners, and make an appointment to meet her on my return to Paris, which
I would then try to put forward to the earliest possible date. I would
travel with her as far as Caen or Evreux, whichever she preferred, and
would take the next train back to Balbec. And yet, what would she have
thought of me had she known that I had hesitated for a long time between
her and her friends, that quite as much as with her I had contemplated
falling in love with Albertine, with the bright-eyed girl, with
Rosemonde. I felt a pang of remorse now that a bond of mutual affection
was going to unite me with Gisèle. I could, moreover, truthfully have
assured her that Albertine no longer interested me. I had seen her that
morning as she swerved aside, almost turning her back on me, to speak to
Gisèle. On her head, which was bent sullenly over her bosom, the hair
that grew at the back, different from and darker even than the rest,
shone as though she had just been bathing. "Like a dying duck in a
thunderstorm!" I thought to myself, this view of her hair having let
into Albertine's body a soul entirely different from that implied
hitherto by her glowing complexion and mysterious gaze. That shining
cataract of hair at the back of her head had been for a moment or two
all that I was able to see of her, and continued to be all that I saw in
retrospect. Our memory is like a shop in the window of which is exposed
now one, now another photograph of the same person. And as a rule the
most recent exhibit remains for some time the only one to be seen. While
the coachman whipped on his horse I sat there listening to the words of
gratitude and affection which Gisèle was murmuring in my ear, born, all
of them, of her friendly smile and outstretched hand, the fact being
that in those periods of my life in which I was not actually, but
desired to be in love, I carried in my mind not only an ideal form of
beauty once seen, which I recognised at a glance in every passing
stranger who kept far enough from me for her confused features to resist
any attempt at identification, but also the moral phantom--ever ready to
be incarnate--of the woman who was going to fall in love with me, to
take up her cues in the amorous comedy which I had had written out in my
mind from my earliest boyhood, and in which every nice girl seemed to me
to be equally desirous of playing, provided that she had also some of
the physical qualifications required. In this play, whoever the new star
might be whom I invited to create or to revive the leading part, the
plot, the incidents, the lines themselves preserved an unalterable form.

Within the next few days, in spite of the reluctance that Albertine had
shewn from introducing me to them, I knew all the little band of that
first afternoon (except Gisèle, whom, owing to a prolonged delay at the
level crossing by the station and a change in the time-table, I had not
succeeded in meeting on the train, which had been gone some minutes
before I arrived, and to whom as it happened I never gave another
thought), and two or three other girls as well to whom at my request
they introduced me. And thus, my expectation of the pleasure which I
should find in a new girl springing from another girl through whom I had
come to know her, the latest was like one of those new varieties of rose
which gardeners get by using first a rose of another kind. And as I
passed from blossom to blossom along this flowery chain, the pleasure of
knowing one that was different would send me back to her to whom I was
indebted for it, with a gratitude in which desire was mingled fully as
much as in my new expectation. Presently I was spending all my time
among these girls.

Alas! in the freshest flower it is possible to discern those just
perceptible signs which to the instructed mind indicate already what
will be, by the desiccation or fructification of the flesh that is
to-day in bloom, the ultimate form, immutable and already predestinate,
of the autumnal seed. The eye rapturously follows a nose like a wavelet
that deliciously curls the water's face at day-break and seems not to
move, to be capturable by the pencil, because the sea is so calm then
that one does not notice its tidal flow. Human faces seem not to change
while we are looking at them, because the revolution which they perform
is too slow for us to perceive it. But we have only to see, by the side
of any of those girls, her mother or her aunt, to realise the distance
over which, obeying the gravitation of a type that is, generally
speaking, deplorable, her features will have travelled in less than
thirty years, and must continue to travel until the sunset hour, until
her face, having vanished altogether below the horizon, catches the
light no more. I knew that, as deep, as ineluctable as is their Jewish
patriotism or Christian atavism in those who imagine themselves to be
the most emancipated of their race, there dwelt beneath the rosy
inflorescence of Albertine, Rosemonde, Andrée, unknown to themselves,
held in reserve until the circumstances should arise, a coarse nose, a
protruding jaw, a bust that would create a sensation when it appeared,
but was actually in the wings, ready to "come on", just as it might be a
burst of Dreyfusism, or clericalism, sudden, unforeseen, fatal, some
patriotic, some feudal form of heroism emerging suddenly when the
circumstances demand it from a nature anterior to that of the man
himself, by means of which he thinks, lives, evolves, gains strength
himself or dies, without ever being able to distinguish that nature from
the successive phases which in turn he takes for it. Even mentally, we
depend a great deal more than we think upon natural laws, and our mind
possesses already, like some cryptogamous plant, every little
peculiarity that we imagine ourselves to be selecting. For we can see
only the derived ideas, without detecting the primary cause (Jewish
blood, French birth or whatever it may be) that inevitably produced
them, and which at a given moment we expose. And perhaps, while the
former appear to us to be the result of deliberate thought, the latter
that of an imprudent disregard for our own health, we take from our
family, as the papilionaceae take the form of their seed, as well the
ideas by which we live as the malady from which we shall die.

As on a plant whose flowers open at different seasons, I had seen,
expressed in the form of old ladies, on this Balbec shore, those
shrivelled seed-pods, those flabby tubers which my friends would one day
be. But what matter? For the moment it was their flowering-time. And so
when Mme. de Villeparisis asked me to drive with her I sought an excuse
to be prevented. I never went to see Elstir unless accompanied by my new
friends. I could not even spare an afternoon to go to Doncières, to pay
the visit I had promised Saint-Loup. Social engagements, serious
discussions, even a friendly conversation, had they usurped the place
allotted to my walks with these girls, would have had the same effect on
me as if, when the luncheon bell rang, I had been taken not to a table
spread with food but to turn the pages of an album. The men, the youths,
the women, old or mature, whose society we suppose that we shall enjoy,
are borne by us only on an unsubstantial plane surface, because we are
conscious of them only by visual perception restricted to its own
limits; whereas it is as delegates from our other senses that our eyes
dart towards young girls; the senses follow, one after another, in
search of the various charms, fragrant, tactile, savoury, which they
thus enjoy even without the aid of fingers and lips; and able, thanks to
the art of transposition, the genius for synthesis in which desire
excels, to reconstruct beneath the hue of cheeks or bosom the feel, the
taste, the contact that is forbidden them, they give to these girls the
same honeyed consistency as they create when they stand rifling the
sweets of a rose-garden, or before a vine whose clusters their eyes
alone devour.

If it rained, although the weather had no power to daunt Albertine, who
was often to be seen in her waterproof spinning on her bicycle through
the driving showers, we would spend the day in the Casino, where on such
days it would have seemed to me impossible not to go. I had the greatest
contempt for the young Ambresacs, who had never set foot in it. And I
willingly joined my friends in playing tricks on the dancing master. As
a rule we had to listen to admonition from the manager, or from some of
his staff, usurping dictatorial powers, because my friends, even Andrée
herself, whom on that account I had regarded when I first saw her as so
dionysiac a creature, whereas in reality she was delicate, intellectual,
and this year far from well, in spite of which her actions were
controlled less by the state of her health than by the spirit of that
age which overcomes every other consideration and confounds in a general
gaiety the weak with the strong, could not enter the outer hall of the
rooms without starting to run, jumping over all the chairs, sliding back
along the floor, their balance maintained by a graceful poise of their
outstretched arms, singing the while, mingling all the arts, in that
first bloom of youth, in the manner of those poets of ancient days for
whom the different "kinds" were not yet separate, so that in an epic
poem they would introduce rules of agriculture with theological
doctrine.

This Andrée who had struck me when I first saw them as the coldest of
them all, was infinitely more refined, more loving, more sensitive than
Albertine, to whom she displayed the caressing, gentle affection of an
elder sister. At the Casino she would come across the floor to sit down
by me, and knew instinctively, unlike Albertine, to refuse my invitation
to dance, or even, if I was tired, to give up the Casino and come to me
instead at the hotel. She expressed her friendship for me, for
Albertine, in terms which were evidence of the most exquisite
understanding of the things of the heart, which may have been partly due
to the state of her health. She had always a merry smile of excuse for
the childish behaviour of Albertine, who expressed with a crude violence
the irresistible temptation held out to her by the parties and picnics
to which she had not the sense, like Andrée, resolutely to prefer
staying and talking with me. When the time came for her to go off to a
luncheon party at the golf-club, if we were all three together she would
get ready to leave us, then, coming up to Andrée: "Well, Andrée, what
are you waiting for now? You know we are lunching at the golf-club."
"No; I'm going to stay and talk to him," replied Andrée, pointing to
me. "But you know, Mme. Durieux invited you," cried Albertine, as if
Andrée's intention to remain with me could be explained only by
ignorance on her part where else and by whom she had been bidden. "Look
here, my good girl, don't be such an idiot," Andrée chid her. Albertine
did not insist, fearing a suggestion that she too should stay with me.
She tossed her head: "Just as you like," was her answer, uttered in the
tone one uses to an invalid whose self-indulgence is killing him by
inches, "I must fly; I'm sure your watch is slow," and off she went.
"She is a dear girl, but quite impossible," said Andrée, bathing her
friend in a smile at once caressing and critical. If in this craze for
amusement Albertine might be said to echo something of the old original
Gilberte, that is because a certain similarity exists, although the type
evolves, between all the women we love, a similarity that is due to the
fixity of our own temperament, which it is that chooses them,
eliminating all those who would not be at once our opposite and our
complement, fitted that is to say to gratify our senses and to wring our
heart. They are, these women, a product of our temperament, an image
inversely projected, a negative of our sensibility. So that a novelist
might, in relating the life of his hero, describe his successive
love-affairs in almost exactly similar terms, and thereby give the
impression not that he was repeating himself but that he was creating,
since an artificial novelty is never so effective as a repetition that
manages to suggest a fresh truth. He ought, moreover, to indicate in the
character of the lover a variability which becomes apparent as the story
moves into fresh regions, into different latitudes of life. And perhaps
he would be stating yet another truth if while investing all the other
persons of his story with distinct characters he refrained from giving
any to the beloved. We understand the characters of people who do not
interest us; how can we ever grasp that of a person who is an intimate
part of our existence, whom after a little we no longer distinguish in
any way from ourself, whose motives provide us with an inexhaustible
supply of anxious hypotheses which we perpetually reconstruct. Springing
from somewhere beyond our understanding, our curiosity as to the woman
whom we love overleaps the bounds of that woman's character, which we
might if we chose but probably will not choose to stop and examine. The
object of our uneasy investigation is something more essential than
those details of character comparable to the tiny particles of epidermis
whose varied combinations form the florid originality of human flesh.
Our intuitive radiography pierces them, and the images which it
photographs for us, so far from being those of any single face, present
rather the joyless universality of a skeleton.

Andrée, being herself extremely rich while the other was penniless and
an orphan, with real generosity lavished on Albertine the full benefit
of her wealth. As for her feelings towards Gisèle, they were not quite
what I had been led to suppose. News soon reached us of the young
student, and when Albertine handed round the letter she had received, a
letter intended by Gisèle to give an account of her journey and to
report her safe arrival to the little band, pleading laziness as an
excuse for not having written yet to the rest, I was surprised to hear
Andrée (for I imagined an irreparable breach between them) say: "I
shall write to her to-morrow, because if I wait for her to write I may
have to wait for years, she's such a slacker." And, turning to myself,
she added: "You saw nothing much in her, evidently; but she's a jolly
nice girl, and besides I'm really very fond of her." From which I
concluded that Andrée's quarrels were apt not to last very long.

Except on these rainy days, as we had always arranged to go on our
bicycles along the cliffs, or on an excursion inland, an hour or so
before it was time to start I would go upstairs to make myself smart and
would complain if Françoise had not laid out all the things that I
wanted. Now even in Paris she would proudly, angrily straighten a back
which the years had begun to bend, at the first word of reproach, she so
humble, she so modest and charming when her self-esteem was flattered.
As this was the mainspring of her life, her satisfaction, her good
humour were in direct ratio to the difficulty of the tasks imposed on
her. Those which she had to perform at Balbec were so easy that she
shewed almost all the time a discontent which was suddenly multiplied an
hundredfold, with the addition of an ironic air of offended dignity when
I complained, on my way down to join my friends, that my hat had not
been brushed or my ties sorted. She who was capable of taking such
endless pains, without in consequence assuming that she had done
anything at all, on my simply remarking that a coat was not in its
proper place, not only did she boast of the care with which she had "put
it past sooner than let it go gathering the dust," but, paying a formal
tribute to her own labours, lamented that it was little enough of a
holiday that she was getting at Balbec, and that we would not find
another person in the whole world who would consent to put up with such
treatment. "I can't think how anyone can leave things lying about the
way you do; you just try and get anyone else to find what you want in
such a mix-up. The devil himself would give it up as a bad job." Or else
she would adopt a regal mien, scorching me with her fiery glance, and
preserve a silence that was broken as soon as she had fastened the door
behind her and was outside in the passage, which would then reverberate
with utterances which I guessed to be insulting, though they remained as
indistinct as those of characters in a play whose opening lines are
spoken in the wings, before they appear on the stage. And even if
nothing was missing and Françoise was in a good temper, still she made
herself quite intolerable when I was getting ready to go out with my
friends. For, drawing upon a store of stale witticisms at their expense
which, in my need to be talking about the girls, I had made in her
hearing, she put on an air of being about to reveal to me things of
which I should have known more than she had there been any truth in her
statements, which there never was, Françoise having misunderstood what
she had heard. She had, like most people, her own ways; a person is never
like a straight highway, but surprises us with the strange, unavoidable
windings of his course through life, by which, though some people may
not notice them, we find it a perpetual annoyance to be stopped and
hindered. Whenever I arrived at the stage of "Where is my hat?" or
uttered the name of Andrée or Albertine, I was forced by Françoise to
stray into endless and absurd side-tracks which greatly delayed my
progress. So too when I asked her to cut me the sandwiches of cheese or
salad, or sent her out for the cakes which I was to eat while we rested
on the cliffs, sharing them with the girls, and which the girls "might
very well have taken turns to provide, if they had not been so close,"
declared Françoise, to whose aid there came at such moments a whole
heritage of atavistic peasant rapacity and coarseness, and for whom one
would have said that the soul of her late enemy Eulalie had been broken
into fragments and reincarnate, more attractively than it had ever been
in Saint-Eloi's, in the charming bodies of my friends of the little
band. I listened to these accusations with a dull fury at finding myself
brought to a standstill at one of those places beyond which the
well-trodden country path that was Françoise's character became
impassable, though fortunately never for very long. Then, my hat or coat
found and the sandwiches ready, I sallied out to find Albertine,
Andrée, Rosemonde, and any others there might be, and on foot or on our
bicycles we would start.

In the old days I should have preferred our excursion to be made in bad
weather. For then I still looked to find in Balbec the "Cimmerians'
land", and fine days were a thing that had no right to exist there, an
intrusion of the vulgar summer of seaside holiday makers into that
ancient region swathed in eternal mist. But now, everything that I had
hitherto despised, shut out of my field of vision, not only effects of
sunlight upon sea and shore, but even the regattas, the race-meetings, I
would have sought out with ardour, for the reason for which formerly I
had wanted only stormy seas, which was that these were now associated in
my mind, as the others had been, with an aesthetic idea. Because I had
gone several times with my new friends to visit Elstir, and, on the days
when the girls were there, what he had selected to shew us were drawings
of pretty women in yachting dress, or else a sketch made on a
race-course near Balbec. I had at first shyly admitted to Elstir that I
had not felt inclined to go to the meetings that were being held there.
"You were wrong," he told me, "it is such a pretty sight, and so well
worth seeing. For one thing, that peculiar animal, the jockey, on whom
so many eager eyes are fastened, who in the paddock there looks so grim,
a colourless face between his brilliant jacket and cap, one body and
soul with the prancing horse he rides, how interesting to analyse his
professional movements, the bright splash of colour he makes, with the
horse's coat blending in it, as they stream down the course. What a
transformation of every visible object in that luminous vastness of a
race-course where one is constantly surprised by fresh lights and shades
which one sees only there. How charming the women can look there, too!
The first day's racing was quite delightful, and there were women there
exquisitely dressed, in the misty light of a Dutch landscape, in which
one could feel rising to cloud the sun itself the penetrating coldness
of the water. Never have I seen women arriving in carriages, or standing
with glasses to their eyes in so extraordinary a light, which was due, I
suppose, to the moisture from the sea. I should simply have loved to
paint it. I came home from the races quite mad, and so keen to get to
work!" After which he became more enthusiastic still over the
yacht-races, and I realised that regattas, social fixtures where well
dressed women might be seen bathed in the greenish light of a marine
race-course, might be for a modern artist as interesting a subject as
were the revels which they so loved to depict for a Veronese or
Carpaccio. When I suggested this to Elstir, "Your comparison is all the
more true," he replied, "since, from the position of the city in which
they painted, those revels were to a great extent aquatic. Except that
the beauty of the shipping in those days lay as a rule in its solidity,
in the complication of its structure. They had water-tournaments, as we
have here, held generally in honour of some Embassy, such as Carpaccio
shews us in his _Legend of Saint Ursula._ The vessels were massive,
built up like architecture, and seemed almost amphibious, like lesser
Venices set in the heart of the greater, when, moored to the banks by
hanging stages decked with crimson satin and Persian carpets, they bore
their freight of ladies in cherry-red brocade and green damask close
under the balconies incrusted with many-coloured marbles from which
other ladies leaned to gaze at them, in gowns with black sleeves slashed
with white, stitched with pearls or bordered with lace. You cannot tell
where the land ends and the water begins, what is still the palace or
already the vessel, the caravel, the galeas, the Bucintoro." Albertine
had listened with the keenest interest to these details of costume,
these visions of elegance that Elstir was describing to us. "Oh, I
should so like to see that lace you speak of; it's so pretty, the
Venice-point," she cried, "Besides, I should love to see Venice." "You
may, perhaps, before very long, be able," Elstir informed her, "to gaze
upon the marvellous stuffs which they used to wear. Hitherto one has
seen them only in the works of the Venetian painters, or very rarely
among the treasures of old churches, except now and then when a specimen
has come into the sale room. But I hear that a Venetian artist, called
Fortuny, has recovered the secret of the craft, and that before many
years have passed women will be able to walk abroad, and better still to
sit at home in brocades as sumptuous as those that Venice adorned, for
her patrician daughters, with patterns brought from the Orient. But I
don't know that I should much care for that, that it wouldn't be too
much of an anachronism for the women of to-day, even when they parade at
regattas, for, to return to our modern pleasure-craft, the times have
completely changed since 'Venice, Queen of the Adriatic'. The great
charm of a yacht, of the furnishings of a yacht, of yachting dress, is
their simplicity, as just things for the sea, and I do so love the sea.
I must confess to you that I prefer the fashions of to-day to those of
Veronese's and even of Carpaccio's time. What there is so attractive
about our yachts--and the smaller yachts especially, I don't like the
huge ones, they're too much like ships; yachts are like women's hats,
you must keep within certain limits--is the unbroken surface, simple,
gleaming, grey, which under a cloudy, leaden sky takes on a creamy
softness. The cabin in which we live ought to make us think of a little
café. And women's clothes on board a yacht are the same sort of thing;
what really are charming are those light garments, uniformly white, of
cloth or linen or nankeen or drill, which in the sunlight and against
the blue of the sea shew up with as dazzling a whiteness as a spread
sail. You very seldom see a woman, for that matter, who knows how to
dress, and yet some of them are quite wonderful. At the races, Mlle.
Léa had a little white hat and a little white sunshade, simply
enchanting. I don't know what I wouldn't give for that little sunshade."
I should have liked very much to know in what respect this little
sunshade differed from any other, and for other reasons, reasons of
feminine vanity, Albertine was still more curious. But, just as
Françoise used to explain the excellence of her soufflés by "It's the
way you do them," so here the difference lay in the cut. "It was,"
Elstir explained, "quite tiny, quite round, like a Chinese umbrella," I
mentioned the sunshades carried by various ladies, but it was not like
any of them. Elstir found them all quite hideous. A man of exquisite
taste, singularly hard to please, he would isolate some minute detail
which was the whole difference between what was worn by three-quarters
of the women he saw, and horrified him, and a thing which enchanted him
by its prettiness; and--in contrast to its effect on myself, whose mind
any display of luxury at once sterilised--stimulated his desire to paint
"so as to make something as attractive." "Here you see a young lady who
has guessed what the hat and sunshade were like," he said to me,
pointing to Albertine whose eyes shone with envy. "How I should love to
be rich, to have a yacht!" she said to the painter. "I should come to
you to tell me how to run it. What lovely trips I'ld take. And what fun
it would be to go to Cowes for the races. And a motor-car! Tell me, do
you think the ladies' fashions for motoring pretty?" "No;" replied
Elstir, "but that will come in time. You see, there are very few firms
at present, one or two only, Callot--although they go in rather too
freely for lace--Doucet, Cheruit, Paquin sometimes. The others are all
horrible." "Then, is there a vast difference between a Callot dress and
one from any ordinary shop?" I asked Albertine. "Why, an enormous
difference, my little man! I beg your pardon! Only, alas! what you get
for three hundred francs in an ordinary shop will cost two thousand
there. But there can be no comparison; they look the same only to people
who know nothing at all about it." "Quite so," put in Elstir; "though I
should not go so far as to say that it is as profound as the difference
between a statue from Rheims Cathedral and one from Saint-Augustin. By
the way, talking of cathedrals," he went on, addressing himself
exclusively to me, because what he was saying had reference to an
earlier conversation in which the girls had not taken part, and which
for that matter would not have interested them at all, "I spoke to you
the other day of Balbec church as a great cliff, a huge breakwater built
of the stone of the country; now look at this;" he handed me a
water-colour. "Look at these cliffs (it's a sketch I did close to here,
at the Creuniers); don't these rocks remind you of a cathedral?" And
indeed one would have taken them for soaring red arches. But, painted on
a roasting hot day, they seemed to have crumbled into dust, made
volatile by the heat which had drunk up half the sea, distilled over the
whole surface of the picture almost into a gaseous state. On this day on
which the sunlight had, so to speak, destroyed reality, reality
concentrated itself in certain dusky and transparent creatures which, by
contrast, gave a more striking, a closer impression of life: the
shadows. Ravening after coolness, most of them, deserting the scorched
open spaces, had fled for shelter to the foot of the rocks, out of reach
of the sun; others, swimming gently upon the tide, like dolphins, kept
close under the sides of the moving vessels, whose hulls they extended
upon the pale surface of the water with their glossy blue forms. It was
perhaps the thirst for coolness which they conveyed that did most to
give me the sensation of the heat of this day and made me exclaim how
much I regretted not knowing the Creuniers. Albertine and Andrée were
positive that I must have been there hundreds of times. If so I had been
there without knowing it, never suspecting that one day the sight of
these rocks was to inspire me with such a thirst for beauty, not perhaps
exactly natural beauty such as I had been seeking hitherto among the
cliffs of Balbec, but rather architectural. Above all, I who, having
come here to visit the kingdom of the storm, had never found, on any of
my drives with Mme. de Villeparisis, when often we saw it only from
afar, painted in a gap between the trees, the ocean sufficiently real,
sufficiently liquid, giving a sufficient impression that it was hurling
its massed forces against the shore, and would have liked to see it lie
motionless only under a wintry shroud of fog, I could never have
believed that I should now be dreaming of a sea which was nothing more
than a whitish vapour that had lost both consistency and colour. But of
such a sea Elstir, like the people who sat musing on board those vessels
drowsy with the heat, had so intensely felt the enchantment that he had
succeeded in transcribing, in fixing for all time upon the painted sheet
the imperceptible reflux of the tide, the throb of one happy moment; and
one suddenly became so enamoured, at the sight of this magic portrait,
that one could think of nothing else than to range the world over,
seeking to recapture the vanished day in its instantaneous, slumbering
beauty.

So that if before these visits to Elstir, before I had set eyes on one
of his sea-pictures in which a young woman in a dress of white serge or
linen, on the deck of a yacht flying the American flag, had duplicated a
white linen dress and coloured flag in my imagination which at once bred
in me an insatiable desire to visit the spot and see there with my own
eyes white linen dresses and flags against the sea, as though no such
experience had ever yet befallen me, always until then I had taken care
when I stood by the sea to expel from my field of vision, as well as the
bathers in the foreground, the yachts with their too dazzling sails that
were like seaside costumes, everything that prevented me from persuading
myself that I was contemplating the immemorial flood of ocean which had
been moving with the same mysterious life before the appearance of the
human race; and had grudged even the days of radiant sunshine which
seemed to me to invest with the trivial aspect of the world's universal
summer this coast of fog and tempest, to mark simply an interruption,
equivalent to what in music is known as a rest; now on the other hand it
was the bad days that appeared to me to be some disastrous accident, a
thing that could no longer find any place for itself in the world of
beauty; I felt a keen desire to go out and recapture in reality what had
so powerfully aroused my imagination, and I hoped that the weather would
be propitious enough for me to see from the summit of the cliff the same
blue shadows as were in Elstir's picture.

Nor, as I went along, did I still make a frame about my eyes with my
hands as in the days when, conceiving nature to be animated by a life
anterior to the first appearance of man, and inconsistent with all those
wearisome perfections of industrial achievement which had hitherto made
me yawn with boredom at Universal Exhibitions or in the milliners'
windows, I endeavoured to include only that section of the sea over
which there was no steamer passing, so that I might picture it to myself
as immemorial, still contemporary with the ages in which it had been set
apart from the land, or at least with the first dawn of life in Greece,
which enabled me to repeat in their literal meaning the lines of "Father
Leconte" of which Bloch was so fond:


'Gone are the Kings, gone are their towering prows,
Vanished upon the raging deep, alas,
The long-haired warrior heroes of Hellas.'


I could no longer despise the milliners, now that Elstir had told me
that the delicate touches by which they give a last refinement, a
supreme caress to the ribbons or feathers of a hat after it is finished
would be as interesting to him to paint as the muscular action of the
jockeys themselves (a statement which had delighted Albertine). But I
must wait until I had returned--for milliners, to Paris--for regattas
and races to Balbec, where there would be no more now until next year.
Even a yacht with women in white linen garments was not to be found.

Often we encountered Bloch's sisters, to whom I was obliged to bow since
I had dined with their father. My new friends did not know them. "I am
not allowed to play with Israelites," Albertine explained. Her way of
pronouncing the word--"Issraelites" instead of "Izraelites"--would in
itself have sufficed to show, even if one had not heard the rest of the
sentence, that it was no feeling of friendliness towards the chosen race
that inspired these young Frenchwomen, brought up in God-fearing homes,
and quite ready to believe that the Jews were in the habit of massacring
Christian children. "Besides, they're shocking bad form, your friends,"
said Andrée with a smile which implied that she knew very well that
they were no friends of mine. "Like everything to do with the tribe,"
went on Albertine, in the sententious tone of one who spoke from
personal experience. To tell the truth, Bloch's sisters, at once
overdressed and half naked, with their languishing, bold, blatant,
sluttish air did not create the best impression. And one of their
cousins, who was only fifteen, scandalised the Casino by her unconcealed
admiration for Mlle. Léa, whose talent as an actress M. Bloch senior
rated very high, but whose tastes were understood to lead her not
exactly in the direction of the gentlemen.

Some days we took our refreshment at one of the outlying farms which
catered for visitors. These were the farms known as Les Ecorres,
Marie-Thérèse, La Croix d'Heuland, Bagatelle, Californie and Marie
Antoinette. It was the last that had been adopted by the little band.

But at other times, instead of going to a farm, we would climb to the
highest point of the cliff, and, when we had reached it and were seated
on the grass, would undo our parcel of sandwiches and cakes. My friends
preferred the sandwiches, and were surprised to see me eat only a single
chocolate cake, sugared with gothic tracery, or an apricot tart. This
was because, with the sandwiches of cheese or of green-stuff, a form of
food that was novel to me and knew nothing of the past, I had nothing in
common. But the cakes understood, the tarts were gossips. There were in
the former an insipid taste of cream, in the latter a fresh taste of
fruit which knew all about Combray, and about Gilberte, not only the
Gilberte of Combray but her too of Paris, at whose tea-parties I had
found them again. They reminded me of those cake-plates of the Arabian
Nights pattern, the subjects on which were such a distraction to my aunt
Léonie when Françoise brought her up, one day, Aladdin or the
Wonderful Lamp, another day Ali-Baba, or the Sleeper Awakes or Sinbad
the Sailor embarking at Bassorah with all his treasure. I should dearly
have liked to see them again, but my grandmother did not know what had
become of them, and thought moreover that they were just common plates
that had been bought in the village. No matter, in that grey, midland
Combray scene they and their pictures were set like many-coloured
jewels, as in the dark church were the windows with their shifting
radiance, as in the dusk of my bedroom were the projections cast by the
magic lantern, as in the foreground of the view of the railway station
and the little local line the buttercups from the Indies and the Persian
lilacs, as were my great-aunt's shelves of old porcelain in the sombre
dwelling of an elderly lady in a country town.

Stretched out on the cliff I would see before me nothing but grassy
meadows and beyond them not the seven heavens of the Christian cosmogony
but two stages only, one of a deeper blue, the sea, and over it another
more pale. We ate our food, and if I had brought with me also some
little keepsake which might appeal to one or other of my friends, joy
sprang with such sudden violence into her translucent face, flushed in
an instant, that her lips had not the strength to hold it in, and to
allow it to escape parted in a shout of laughter. They had gathered
close round me, and between their faces which were almost touching one
another the air that separated them traced azure pathways such as might
have been cut by a gardener wishing to clear the ground a little so as
to be able himself to move freely through a thicket of roses.

When we had finished eating we would play games which until then I
should have thought boring, sometimes such childish games as King of the
Castle, or Who Laughs First; not for a kingdom would I have renounced
them now; the rosy dawn of adolescence, with which the faces of these
girls were still aglow, and from which I, young as I was, had already
emerged, shed its light on everything round about them and, like the
fluid painting of some of the Primitives, brought out the most
insignificant details of their daily lives in relief against a golden
background. Even the faces of the girls were, for the most part, clouded
with this misty effulgence of a dawn from which their actual features
had not yet emerged. One saw only a charming sheet of colour beneath
which what in a few years' time would be a profile was not discernible.
The profile of to-day had nothing definite about it, and could be only a
momentary resemblance to some deceased member of the family to whom
nature had paid this commemorative courtesy. It comes so soon, the
moment when there is nothing left to wait for, when the body is fixed in
an immobility which holds no fresh surprise in store, when one loses all
hope on seeing--as on a tree in the height of summer leaves already
brown--round a face still young hair that is growing thin or turning
grey; it is so short, that radiant morning time that one comes to like
only the very youngest girls, those in whom the flesh, like a precious
leaven, is still at work. They are no more yet than a stream of ductile
matter, moulded ever afresh by the fleeting impression of the moment.
You would say that each of them was in turn a little statuette of
childish gaiety, of a child grown earnest, coaxing, surprised, taking
its pattern from an expression frank and complete, but fugitive. This
plasticity gives a wealth of variety and charm to the pretty attentions
which a little girl pays to us. Of course, such attentions are
indispensable in the woman also, and she whom we do not attract, or who
fails to let us see that we have attracted her, tends to assume in our
eyes a somewhat tedious uniformity. But even these pretty attentions,
after a certain age, cease to send gentle ripples over a face which the
struggle for existence has hardened, has rendered unalterably militant
or ecstatic. One--owing to the prolonged strain of the obedience that
subjects wife to husband--will seem not so much a woman's face as a
soldier's; another, carved by the sacrifices which a mother has
consented to make, day after day, for her children, will be the face of
an apostle. A third is, after a stormy passage through the years, the
face of an ancient mariner, upon a body of which its garments alone
indicate the sex. Certainly the attentions that a woman pays us can
still, so long as we are in love with her, scatter fresh charms over the
hours that we spend in her company. But she is not then for us a series
of different women. Her gaiety remains external to an unchanging face.
Whereas adolescence is anterior to this complete solidification; and
from this it follows that we feel, in the company of young girls, the
refreshing sense that is afforded us by the spectacle of forms
undergoing an incessant process of change, a play of unstable forces
which makes us think of that perpetual re-creation of the primordial
elements of nature which we contemplate when we stand by the sea.

It was not merely a social engagement, a drive with Mme. de
Villeparisis, that I would have sacrificed to the "Ferret" or "Guessing
Games" of my friends. More than once, Robert de Saint-Loup had sent word
that, since I was not coming to see him at Doncières, he had applied
for twenty-four hours' leave, which he would spend at Balbec. Each time
I wrote back that he was on no account to come, offering the excuse that
I should be obliged to be away myself that very day, when I had some
duty call to pay with my grandmother on family friends in the
neighbourhood. No doubt I fell in his estimation when he learned from
his aunt in what the "duty call" consisted, and who the persons were who
combined to play the part of my grandmother. And yet I had not been
wrong, perhaps, after all, in sacrificing not only the vain pleasures of
the world but the real pleasure of friendship to that of spending the
whole day in this green garden. People who enjoy the capacity--it is
true that such people are artists, and I had long been convinced that I
should never be that--are also under an obligation to live for
themselves. And friendship is a dispensation from this duty, an
abdication of self. Even conversation, which is the mode of expression
of friendship, is a superficial digression which gives us no new
acquisition. We may talk for a lifetime without doing more than
indefinitely repeat the vacuity of a minute, whereas the march of
thought in the solitary travail of artistic creation proceeds downwards,
into the depths, in the only direction that is not closed to us, along
which we are free to advance--though with more effort, it is
true--towards a goal of truth. And friendship is not merely devoid of
virtue, like conversation, it is fatal to us as well. For the sense of
boredom which it is impossible not to feel in a friend's company (when,
that is to say, we must remain exposed on the surface of our
consciousness, instead of pursuing our voyage of discovery into the
depths) for those of us in whom the law of development is purely
internal--that first impression of boredom our friendship impels us to
correct when we are alone again, to recall with emotion the words
uttered by our friend, to look upon them as a valuable addition to our
substance, albeit we are not like buildings to which stones can be added
from without, but like trees which draw from their own sap the knot that
duly appears on their trunks, the spreading roof of their foliage. I was
lying to myself, I was interrupting the process of growth in that
direction in which I could indeed really be enlarged and made happy,
when I congratulated myself on being liked, admired, by so good, so
clever, so rare a creature as Saint-Loup, when I focussed my mind, not
upon my own obscure impressions which duty bade me unravel, but on the
words uttered by my friend, in which, when I repeated them to
myself--when I had them repeated to me by that other self who dwells in
us and on to whom we are always so ready to transfer the burden of
taking thought,--I strove to make myself find a beauty very different
from that which I used to pursue in silence when I was really alone, but
one that would enhance the merit of Robert, of myself, of my life. In
the life which a friend like this provided for me, I seemed to myself to
be comfortably preserved from solitude, nobly desirous of sacrificing
myself for him, in fact quite incapable of realising myself. Among the
girls, on the other hand, if the pleasure which I enjoyed was selfish,
at least it was not based on the lie which seeks to make us believe that
we are not irremediably alone, and which, when we talk to another
person, prevents us from admitting that it is no longer we who speak,
that we are fashioning ourself in the likeness of strangers and not of
our own ego, which is quite different from them. The words that passed
between the girls of the little band and myself were not of any
interest; they were, moreover, but few, broken by long spells of silence
on my part. All of which did not prevent me from finding, in listening
to them when they spoke to me, as much pleasure as in gazing at them, in
discovering in the voice of each one of them a brightly coloured
picture. It was with ecstasy that I caught their pipings. Love helps us
to discern things, to discriminate. Standing in a wood, the lover of
birds at once distinguishes the notes of the different species, which to
ordinary people sound the same. The lover of girls knows that human
voices vary even more. Each one possesses more notes than the richest
instrument of music. And the combinations in which the voice groups
those notes are as inexhaustible as the infinite variety of
personalities. When I talked with any one of my friends I was conscious
that the original, the unique portrait of her individuality had been
skilfully traced, tyrannically imposed on my mind as much by the
inflexions of her voice as by those of her face, and that these were two
separate spectacles which rendered, each in its own plane, the same
single reality. No doubt the lines of the voice, like those of the face,
were not yet definitely fixed; the voice had still to break, as the face
to change. Just as children have a gland the secretion in which enables
them to digest milk, a gland which is not found in grown men and women,
so there were in the twitterings of these girls notes which women's
voices no longer contain. And on this instrument with its greater
compass they played with their lips, shewing all the application, the
ardour of Bellini's little angel musicians, qualities which also are an
exclusive appanage of youth. Later on these girls would lose that note
of enthusiastic conviction which gave a charm to their simplest
utterances, whether it were Albertine who, in a tone of authority,
repeated puns to which the younger ones listened with admiration, until
that wild impulse to laugh caught them all with the irresistible
violence of a sneeze, or Andrée who began to speak of their work in the
schoolroom, work even more childish seemingly than the games they
played, with a gravity essentially puerile; and their words changed in
tone, like the lyrics of ancient times when poetry, still hardly
differentiated from music, was declaimed upon the different notes of a
scale. In spite of which, the girls' voices already gave a quite clear
indication of the attitude that each of these little people had adopted
towards life, an attitude so personal that it would be speaking in far
too general terms to say of one: "She treats everything as a joke," of
another: "She jumps from assertion to assertion," of a third: "She lives
in a state of expectant hesitation." The features of our face are hardly
more than gestures which force of habit has made permanent. Nature, like
the destruction of Pompeii, like the metamorphosis of a nymph into a
tree, has arrested us in an accustomed movement. Similarly, our
intonations embody our philosophy of life, what a person says to himself
about things at any given moment. No doubt these peculiarities were to
be found not only in the girls. They were those of their parents. The
individual is a part of something that is more generally diffused than
himself. By this reckoning, our parents furnish us not only with those
habitual gestures which are the outlines of our face and voice, but also
with certain mannerisms in speech, certain favourite expressions, which,
almost as unconscious as an intonation, almost as profound, indicate
likewise a definite point of view towards life. It is quite true, since
we are speaking of girls, that there are certain of these expressions
which their parents do not hand on to them until they have reached a
certain age, as a rule not before they are women. These are kept in
reserve. Thus, for instance, if you were to speak of the pictures of one
of Elstir's friends, Andrée, whose hair was still "down", could not yet
make use, personally, of the expression which her mother and elder
sister employed: "It appears, the man is quite charming!" But that would
come in due course, when she was allowed to go to the Palais-Royal. And
already, since her first communion, Albertine had begun to say, like a
friend of her aunt: "I'm sure I should find that simply terrible!" She
had also had given to her, as a little present, the habit of repeating
whatever you had just been saying to her, so as to appear to be
interested, and to be trying to form an opinion of her own. If you said
that an artist's work was good, or his house nice, "Oh, his work is
good, is it?" "Oh, his house is nice, is it?" Last of all, and even more
general than the family heritage, was the rich layer imposed by the
native province from which they derived their voices and of which indeed
their intonations smacked. When Andrée sharply struck a solemn note she
could not prevent the Perigordian string of her vocal instrument from
giving back a resonant sound quite in harmony, moreover, with the
Meridional purity of her features; while to the incessant pranks of
Rosemonde the substance of her North-Country face and voice responded,
whatever her mood at the time, in the accent of their province. Between
that province and the temperament of the little girl who dictated these
inflexions, I caught a charming dialogue. A dialogue, not in any sense a
discord. It would not have been possible to separate the girl herself
and her native place. She was herself; she was still it also. Moreover
this reaction of locally procured materials on the genius who utilises
them and to whose work their reaction imparts an added freshness, does
not make the work any less individual, and whether it be that of an
architect, a cabinet-maker or a composer, it reflects no less minutely
the most subtle shades of the artist's personality, because he has been
compelled to work in the millstone of Senlis or the red sandstone of
Strasbourg, has respected the knots peculiar to the ash-tree, has borne
in mind, when writing his score, the resources, the limitations, the
volume of sound, the possibilities of flute or alto voice.

All this I realised, and yet we talked so little. Whereas with Mme. de
Villeparisis or Saint-Loup I should have displayed by my words a great
deal more pleasure than I should actually have felt, for I used always
to be worn out when I parted from them; when, on the other hand, I was
lying on the grass among all these girls, the plentitude of what I was
feeling infinitely outweighed the paucity, the infrequency of our
speech, and brimmed over from my immobility and silence in floods of
happiness, the waves of which rippled up to die at the feet of these
young roses.

For a convalescent who rests all day long in a flower-garden or orchard,
a scent of flowers or fruit does not more completely pervade the
thousand trifles that compose his idle hours than did for me that
colour, that fragrance in search of which my eyes kept straying towards
the girls, and the sweetness of which finally became incorporated in me.
So it is that grapes grow sugary in sunshine. And by their slow
continuity these simple little games had gradually wrought in me also,
as in those who do nothing else all day but lie outstretched by the sea,
breathing the salt air and growing sunburned, a relaxation, a blissful
smile, a vague sense of dizziness that had spread from brain to eyes.

Now and then a pretty attention from one or another of them would stir
in me vibrations which dissipated for a time my desire for the rest.
Thus one day Albertine had suddenly asked: "Who has a pencil?" Andrée
had provided one, Rosemonde the paper; Albertine had warned them: "Now,
young ladies, you are not to look at what I write." After carefully
tracing each letter, supporting the paper on her knee, she had passed it
to me with: "Take care no one sees." Whereupon I had unfolded it and
read her message, which was: "I love you."

"But we mustn't sit here scribbling nonsense," she cried, turning
impetuously, with a sudden gravity of demeanour, to Andrée and
Rosemonde, "I ought to shew you the letter I got from Gisèle this
morning. What an idiot I am; I've had it all this time in my pocket--and
you can't think how important it may be to us." Gisèle had been moved
to copy out for her friend, so that it might be passed on to the others,
the essay which she had written in her certificate examination.
Albertine's fears as to the difficulty of the subjects set had been more
than justified by the two from which Gisèle had had to choose. The
first was: "Sophocles, from the Shades, writes to Racine to console him
for the failure of _Athalie_"; the other: "Suppose that, after the first
performance of _Esther_, Mme. de Sévigné is writing to Mme. de La
Fayette to tell her how much she regretted her absence." Now Gisèle, in
an excess of zeal which ought to have touched the examiners' hearts, had
chosen the former, which was also the more difficult of the two
subjects, and had handled it with such remarkable skill that she had
been given fourteen marks, and had been congratulated by the board. She
would have received her "mention" if she had not "dried up" in the
Spanish paper. The essay, a copy of which Gisèle had now sent her, was
immediately read aloud to us by Albertine, for, having presently to pass
the same examination, she was anxious to have an opinion from Andrée,
who was by far the cleverest of them all and might be able to give her
some good "tips". "She did have a bit of luck!" was Albertine's comment.
"It's the very subject her French mistress made her swot up while she
was here." The letter from Sophocles to Racine, as drafted by Gisèle,
ran as follows: "My dear friend, You must pardon me the liberty of
addressing you when I have not the honour of your personal acquaintance,
but your latest tragedy, _Athalie_ shews, does it not, that you have
made the most thorough study of my own modest works. You have not only
put poetry in the mouths of the protagonists, or principal persons of
the drama, but you have written other, and, let me tell you without
flattery, charming verses for the choruses, a feature which was not too
bad, according to all one hears, in Greek Tragedy, but is a complete
novelty in France. Nay more, your talent always so fluent, so finished,
so winning, so fine, so delicate, has here acquired an energy on which I
congratulate you. Athalie, Joad--these are figures which your rival
Corneille could have wrought no better. The characters are virile, the
plot simple and strong. You have given us a tragedy in which love is not
the keynote, and on this I must offer you my sincerest compliments. The
most familiar proverbs are not always the truest. I will give you an
example:


"This passion treat, which makes the poet's art
Fly, as on wings, straight to the listener's heart."


You have shewn us that the religious sentiment in which your choruses
are steeped is no less capable of moving us. The general public may have
been puzzled at first, but those who are best qualified to judge must
give you your due. I have felt myself impelled to offer you all my
congratulations, to which I would add, my dear brother poet, an
expression of my very highest esteem." Albertine's eyes, while she was
reading this to us, had not ceased to sparkle. "Really, you'ld think she
must have cribbed it somewhere!" she exclaimed, as she reached the end.
"I should never have believed that Gisèle could hatch out anything like
as good! And the poetry she brings in! Where on earth can she have got
that from?" Albertine's admiration, with a change, it is true, of
object, but with no loss—an increase, rather—of intensity, combined with
the closest attention to what was being said, continued to make her eyes
"start from her head" all the time that Andrée (consulted as being the
biggest of the band and more knowledgeable than the others) first of all
spoke of Gisèle's essay with a certain irony, then with a levity of
tone which failed to conceal her underlying seriousness proceeded to
reconstruct the letter in her own way. "It is not badly done," she told
Albertine, "but if I were you and had the same subject set me, which is
quite likely, as they do very often set that, I shouldn't do it in that
way. This is how I would tackle it. Well, first of all, if I had been
Gisèle, I should not have let myself get tied up, I should have begun
by making a rough sketch of what I was going to write on a separate
piece of paper. On the top line I should state the question and give an
account of the subject, then the general ideas to be worked into the
development. After that, appreciation, style, conclusion. In that way,
with a summary to refer to, you know where you are. But at the very
start, where she begins her account of the subject, or, if you like,
Titine, since it's a letter we're speaking of, where she comes to the
matter, Gisèle has gone off the rails altogether. Writing to a person
of the seventeenth century, Sophocles ought never to have said, 'My dear
friend,'" "Why, of course, she ought to have said, 'My dear Racine,'"
came impetuously from Albertine. "That would have been much better."
"No," replied Andrée, with a trace of mockery in her tone, "She ought
to have put 'Sir.' In the same way, to end up, she ought to have thought
of something like, 'Suffer me, Sir,' (at the very most, 'Dear Sir') to
inform you of the sense of high esteem with which I have the honour to
be your servant.' Then again, Gisèle says that the choruses in
_Athalie_ are a novelty. She is forgetting _Esther_, and two tragedies
that are not much read now but happen to have been analysed this year by
the Professor himself, so that you need only mention them, since he's
got them on the brain, and you're bound to pass. I mean _Les Juives_, by
Robert Garnier, and Montchrestien's _L'Aman._" Andrée quoted these
titles without managing quite to conceal a secret sense of benevolent
superiority, which found expression in a smile, quite a delightful
smile, for that matter. Albertine could contain herself no longer.
"Andrée, you really are a perfect marvel," she cried. "You must write
down those names for me. Just fancy, what luck it would be if I got on
to that, even in the oral, I should bring them in at once and make a
colossal impression." But in the days that followed, every time that
Albertine begged Andrée just to tell her again the names of those two
plays so that she might write them down, her blue-stocking friend seemed
most unfortunately to have forgotten them, and left her none the wiser.
"And another thing," Andrée went on with the faintest note in her voice
of scorn for companions so much younger than herself, though she
relished their admiration and attached to the manner in which she
herself would have composed the essay a greater importance than she
wanted us to think, "Sophocles in the Shades must be kept well-informed
of all that goes on. He must know, therefore, that it was not before the
general public but before the King's Majesty and a few privileged
courtiers that _Athalie_ was first played. What Gisèle says in this
connexion of the esteem of qualified judges is not at all bad, but she
might have gone a little farther. Sophocles, now that he is immortal,
might quite well have the gift of prophecy and announce that, according
to Voltaire, _Athalie_ is to be the supreme achievement not of Racine
merely but of the human mind." Albertine was drinking in every word. Her
eyes blazed. And it was with the utmost indignation that she rejected
Rosemonde's suggestion that they should begin to play. "And so," Andrée
concluded, in the same easy, detached tone, blending a faint sneer with
a certain warmth of conviction, "if Gisèle had noted down properly,
first of all, the general ideas that she was going to develop, it might
perhaps have occurred to her to do what I myself should have done, point
out what a difference there is between the religious inspiration of
Sophocles's choruses and Racine's. I should have made Sophocles remark
that if Racine's choruses are instinct with religious feeling like those
of the Greek Tragedians, the gods are not the same. The God of Joad has
nothing in common with the god of Sophocles. And that brings us quite
naturally, when we have finished developing the subject, to our
conclusion: What does it matter if their beliefs are different?
Sophocles would hesitate to insist upon such a point. He would be afraid
of wounding Racine's convictions, and so, slipping in a few appropriate
words on his masters at Port-Royal, he prefers to congratulate his
disciple on the loftiness of his poetic genius."

Admiration and attention had so heated Albertine that great drops were
rolling down her cheeks. Andrée preserved the unruffled calm of a
female dandy. "It would not be a bad thing either to quote some of the
opinions of famous critics," she added, before they began their game.
"Yes," put in Albertine, "so I've been told. The best ones to quote, on
the whole, are Sainte-Beuve and Merlet, aren't they?" "Well, you're not
absolutely wrong," Andrée told her, "Merlet and Sainte-Beuve are by no
means bad. But you certainly ought to mention Deltour and
Gascq-Desfossés." She refused, however, despite Albertine's entreaties,
to write down these two unfamiliar names.

Meanwhile I had been thinking of the little page torn from a scribbling
block which Albertine had handed me. "I love you," she had written. And
an hour later, as I scrambled down the paths which led back, a little
too vertically for my liking, to Balbec, I said to myself that it was
with her that I would have my romance.

The state of being indicated by the presence of all the signs by which
we are accustomed to recognise that we are in love, such as the orders
which I left in the hotel not to awaken me whoever might ask to see me,
unless it were one or other of the girls, the beating of my heart while
I waited for her (whichever of them it might be that I was expecting)
and on those mornings my fury if I had not succeeded in finding a barber
to shave me, and must appear with the disfigurement of a hairy chin
before Albertine, Rosemonde or Andrée, no doubt this state, recurring
indifferently at the thought of one or another, was as different from
what we call love as is from human life the life of the zoophytes, where
an existence, an individuality, if we may so term it, is divided up
among several organisms. But natural history teaches us that such an
organization of animal life is indeed to be observed, and that our own
life, provided only that we have outgrown the first phase, is no less
positive as to the reality of states hitherto unsuspected by us, through
which we have to pass, and can then abandon them altogether. Such was
for me this state of love divided among several girls at once.
Divided--say rather undivided, for more often than not what was so
delicious to me, different from the rest of the world, what was
beginning to become so precious to me that the hope of finding it again
on the morrow was the greatest happiness in my life, was rather the
whole of the group of girls, taken as they were all together on those
afternoons on the cliffs, during those lifeless hours, upon that strip
of grass on which were laid those forms, so exciting to my imagination,
of Albertine, Rosemonde, Andrée; and that without my being able to say
which of them it was that made those scenes so precious to me, which of
them I was most anxious to love. At the start of a new love as at its
ending, we are not exclusively attached to the object of that love, but
rather the desire to be loving from which it will presently emerge (and,
later on, the memory which it leaves behind) wanders voluptuously
through a zone of interchangeable charms--simply natural charms, it may
be, gratification of appetite, enjoyment of one's surroundings--which
are so far harmonised among themselves that it does not in the presence
of any one of them feel itself out of place. Besides, as my perception
of them was not yet dulled by familiarity, I had still the faculty of
seeing them, that is to say of feeling a profound astonishment every
time that I found myself in their presence. No doubt this astonishment
is to some extent due to the fact that the other person on such
occasions presents himself in a fresh aspect; but so great is the
multiformity of each of us, so abundant the wealth of lines of face and
body, lines so few of which leave any trace, once we have parted from
the other person, on the arbitrary simplicity of our memory. As our mind
has selected some peculiarity that had struck us, has isolated it,
exaggerated it, making of a woman who has appeared to us tall, a sketch
in which her figure is absurdly elongated, or of a woman who has seemed
to be pink-cheeked and golden-haired a pure 'Harmony in pink and gold',
so, the moment that woman is once again standing before us, all the
other forgotten qualities which restore the balance of that one
remembered feature at once assail us, in their confused complexity,
diminishing her height, paling her cheeks, and substituting for what we
have come to her solely to seek other peculiarities which we remember
now that we did notice the first time, and fail to understand how we can
so far have forgotten to look out for again. We thought we remembered;
it was a peahen, surely; we go to see it and find a peony. And this
inevitable astonishment is not the only one; for, side by side with it
comes another, born of the difference, not now between the stereotyped
forms of memory and reality, but between the person whom we saw last
time and him who appears to us to-day from another angle and shews us
another aspect. The human face is indeed, like the face of the God of
some Oriental theogony, a whole cluster of faces, crowded together but
on different surfaces so that one does not see them all at once.

But to a great extent our astonishment springs from the other person's
presenting to us also a face that is the same as before. It would
require so immense an effort to reconstruct everything that has been
imparted to us by things other than ourself--were it only the taste of a
fruit--that no sooner is the impression received than we begin
imperceptibly to descend the slope of memory and, without noticing
anything, in a very short time, we have come a long way from what we
actually felt. So that every fresh encounter is a sort of rectification,
which brings us back to what we really did see. We have no longer any
recollection of this, to such an extent does what we call remembering a
person consist really in forgetting him. But so long as we can still see
at the moment when the forgotten aspect appears, we recognise it, we are
obliged to correct the straying line; thus the perpetual and fruitful
surprise which made so salutary and invigorating for me these daily
outings with the charming damsels of the sea shore, consisted fully as
much in recognition as in discovery. When there is added to this the
agitation aroused by what these girls were to me, which was never quite
what I had supposed, and meant that my expectancy of our next meeting
resembled not so much my expectancy the time before as the still
throbbing memory of our latest conversation, it will be realised that
each of our excursions made a violent interruption in the course of my
thoughts and moved them clean out of the direction which, in the
solitude of my own room, I had been able to trace for them at my
leisure. That plotted course was forgotten, had ceased to exist, when I
returned home buzzing like a hive of bees with remarks which had
disquieted me when I heard them and were still echoing in my brain. The
other person is destroyed when we cease to see him; after which his next
appearance means a fresh creation of him, different from that which
immediately preceded it, if not from them all. For the minimum variation
that is to be found in these creations is duality. If we have in mind a
strong and searching glance, a bold manner, it is inevitably, next time,
by a half-languid profile, a sort of dreamy gentleness, overlooked by us
in our previous impression, that we shall be, on meeting him again,
astonished, that is to say almost solely struck. In confronting our
memory with the new reality it is this that will mark the extent of our
disappointment or surprise, will appear to us like the revised version
of an earlier reality warning us that we had not remembered it
correctly. In its turn, the facial aspect neglected the time before, and
for that very reason the most striking this time, the most real, the
most documentary, will become a matter for dreams and memories. It is a
languorous and rounded profile, a gentle, dreamy expression which we
shall now desire to see again. And then, next time, such resolution,
such strength of character as there may be in the piercing eyes, the
pointed nose, the tight lips, will come to correct the discrepancy
between our desire and the object to which it has supposed itself to
correspond. It is understood, of course, that this loyalty to the first
and purely physical impressions which I formed afresh at each encounter
with my friends did not involve only their facial appearance, since the
reader has seen that I was sensible also of their voices, more
disquieting still, perhaps (for not only does a voice offer the same
strange and sensuous surfaces as a face, it issues from that unknown,
inaccessible region the mere thought of which sets the mind swimming
with unattainable kisses), their voices each like the unique sound of a
little instrument into which the player put all her artistry and which
was found only in her possession. Traced by a casual inflexion, a sudden
deep chord in one of their voices would astonish me when I recognised
after having forgotten it. So much so that the corrections which after
every fresh meeting I was obliged to make so as to ensure absolute
accuracy were as much those of a tuner or singing-master as a
draughtsman's.

As for the harmonious cohesion in which had been neutralised for some
time, by the resistance that each brought to bear against the expansion
of the others, the several waves of sentiment set in motion in me by
these girls, it was broken in Albertine's favour one afternoon when we
were playing the game of "ferret". It was in a little wood on the cliff.
Stationed between two girls, strangers to the little band, whom the band
had brought in its train because we wanted that day to have a bigger
party than usual, I gazed enviously at Albertine's neighbour, a young
man, saying to myself that if I had been in his place I could have been
touching my friend's hands all those miraculous moments which might
perhaps never recur, and that this would have been but the first stage
in a great advance. Already, by itself, and even without the
consequences which it would probably have involved, the contact of
Albertine's hands would have been delicious to me. Not that I had never
seen prettier hands than hers. Even in the group of her friends, those
of Andrée, slender hands and much finelier modelled, had as it were a
private life of their own, obedient to the commands of their mistress,
but independent, and used often to strain out before her like a leash of
thoroughbred greyhounds, with lazy pauses, long dreams, sudden
stretchings of a joint, seeing which Elstir had made a number of studies
of these hands. And in one of them, in which you saw Andrée warming her
hands at the fire, they had, with the light behind them, the gilded
transparency of two autumn leaves. But, plumper than these, the hands of
Albertine would yield for a moment, then resist the pressure of the hand
that clasped them, giving a sensation that was quite peculiar to
themselves. The act of pressing Albertine's hand had a sensual sweetness
which was in keeping somehow with the rosy, almost mauve colouring of
her skin. That pressure seemed to allow you to penetrate into the girl's
being, to plumb the depths of her senses, like the ringing sound of her
laughter, indecent as may be the cooing of doves or certain animal
cries. She was the sort of woman with whom shaking hands affords so much
pleasure that one feels grateful to civilisation for having made of the
handclasp a lawful act between young men and girls when they meet. If
the arbitrary code of good manners had replaced the clasp of hands by
some other gesture, I should have gazed, day after day, at the
unattainable hands of Albertine with a curiosity to know the feel of
them as ardent as was my curiosity to learn the savour of her cheeks.
But in the pleasure of holding her hand unrestrictedly in mine, had I
been next to her at "ferret" I did not envisage that pleasure alone;
what avowals, declarations silenced hitherto by my bashfulness, I could
have conveyed by certain pressures of hand on hand; on her side, how
easy it would have been for her, in responding by other pressures, to
shew me that she accepted; what complicity, what a vista of happiness
stood open! My love would be able to make more advance in a few minutes
spent thus by her side than it had yet made in all the time that I had
known her. Feeling that they would last but a short time, were rapidly
nearing their end, since presumably we were not going on much longer
with this game, and that once it was over I should be too late, I could
not keep in my place for another moment. I let myself deliberately be
caught with the ring, and, having gone into the middle, when the ring
passed I pretended not to see it but followed its course with my eyes,
waiting for the moment when it should come into the hands of the young
man next to Albertine, who herself, pealing with helpless laughter, and
in the excitement and pleasure of the game, was blushing like a rose.
"Why, we really are in the Fairy Wood!" said Andrée to me, pointing to
the trees that grew all round, with a smile in her eyes which was meant
only for me and seemed to pass over the heads of the other players, as
though we two alone were clever enough to double our parts, and make, in
connexion with the game we were playing, a remark of a poetic nature.
She even carried the delicacy of her fancy so far as to sing
half-unconsciously: "The Ferret of the Wood has passed this way, Sweet
Ladies; he has passed by this way, the Ferret of Fairy Wood!" like those
people who cannot visit Trianon without getting up a party in Louis XVI
costume, or think it effective to have a song sung to its original
setting. I should no doubt have been sorry that I could see no charm in
this piece of mimicry, had I had time to think of it. But my thoughts
were all elsewhere. The players began to shew surprise at my stupidity
in never getting the ring. I was looking at Albertine, so pretty, so
indifferent, so gay, who, though she little knew it, was to be my
neighbour when at last I should catch the ring in the right hands,
thanks to a stratagem which she did not suspect, and would certainly
have resented if she had. In the heat of the game her long hair had
become loosened, and fell in curling locks over her cheeks on which it
served to intensify, by its dry brownness, the carnation pink. "You have
the tresses of Laura Dianti, of Eleanor of Guyenne, and of her
descendant so beloved of Chateaubriand. You ought always to wear your
hair half down like that," I murmured in her ear as an excuse for
drawing close to her. Suddenly the ring passed to her neighbour. I
sprang upon him at once, forced open his hands and seized it; he was
obliged now to take my place inside the circle, while I took his beside
Albertine. A few minutes earlier I had been envying this young man, when
I saw that his hands as they slipped over the cord were constantly
brushing against hers. Now that my turn was come, too shy to seek, too
much moved to enjoy this contact, I no longer felt anything save the
rapid and painful beating of my heart. At one moment Albertine leaned
towards me, with an air of connivance, her round and rosy face, making a
show of having the ring, so as to deceive the ferret, and keep him from
looking in the direction in which she was just going to pass it. I
realised at once that this was the sole object of Albertine's
mysterious, confidential gaze, but I was a little shocked to see thus
kindle in her eyes the image--purely fictitious, invented to serve the
needs of the game--of a secret, an understanding between her and myself
which did not exist, but which from that moment seemed to me to be
possible and would have been divinely sweet. While I was still being
swept aloft by this thought, I felt a slight pressure of Albertine's
hand against mine, and her caressing finger slip under my finger along
the cord, and I saw her, at the same moment, give me a wink which she
tried to make pass unperceived by the others. At once, a mass of hopes,
invisible hitherto by myself, crystallised within me. "She is taking
advantage of the game to let me feel that she really does love me," I
thought to myself, in an acme of joy, from which no sooner had I reached
it than I fell, on hearing Albertine mutter furiously: "Why can't you
take it? I've been shoving it at you for the last hour." Stunned with
grief, I let go the cord, the ferret saw the ring and swooped down on
it, and I had to go back into the middle, where I stood helpless, in
despair, looking at the unbridled rout which continued to circle round
me, stung by the jeering shouts of all the players, obliged, in reply,
to laugh when I had so little mind for laughter, while Albertine kept on
repeating: "People can't play if they don't pay attention, and spoil the
game for the others. He shan't be asked again when we're going to play,
Andrée; if he is, I don't come." Andrée, with a mind above the game,
still chanting her "Fairy Wood" which, in a spirit of imitation,
Rosemonde had taken up too, but without conviction, sought to make a
diversion from Albertine's reproaches by saying to me: "We're quite
close to those old Creuniers you wanted so much to see. Look, I'll take
you there by a dear little path, and we'll leave these silly idiots to
go on playing like babies in the nursery." As Andrée was extremely nice
to me, as we went along I said to her everything about Albertine that
seemed calculated to make me attractive to the latter. Andrée replied
that she too was very fond of Albertine, thought her charming; in spite
of which the compliments that I was paying to her friend did not seem
altogether to please her. Suddenly, in the little sunken path, I stopped
short, touched to the heart by an exquisite memory of my childhood. I
had just recognised, by the fretted and glossy leaves which it thrust
out towards me, a hawthorn-bush, flowerless, alas, now that spring was
over. Around me floated the atmosphere of far off Months of Mary, of
Sunday afternoons, of beliefs, or errors long ago forgotten. I wanted to
stay it in its passage. I stood still for a moment, and Andrée, with a
charming divination of what was in my mind, left me to converse with the
leaves of the bush. I asked them for news of the flowers, those hawthorn
flowers that were like merry little girls headstrong, provocative,
pious. "The young ladies have been gone from here for a long time now,"
the leaves told me. And perhaps they thought that, for the great friend
of those young ladies that I pretended to be, I seemed to have
singularly little knowledge of their habits. A great friend, but one who
had never been to see them again for all these years, despite his
promises. And yet, as Gilberte had been my first love among girls, so
these had been my first love among flowers. "Yes, I know all that, they
leave about the middle of June," I answered, "but I am so delighted to
see the place where they stayed when they were here. They came to see
me, too, at Combray, in my room; my mother brought them when I was ill
in bed. And we used to meet on Saturday evenings, too, at the Month of
Mary devotions. Can they get to them from here?" "Oh, of course! Why,
they make a special point of having our young ladies at Saint-Denis du
Désert, the church near here." "Then, if I want to see them now?" "Oh,
not before May, next year." "But I can be sure that they will be here?"
"They come regularly every year." "Only I don't know whether it will be
easy to find the place." "Oh, dear, yes! They are so gay, the young
ladies, they stop laughing only to sing hymns together, so that you
can't possibly miss them, you can tell by the scent from the other end
of the path."

I caught up Andrée, and began again to sing Albertine's praises. It was
inconceivable to me that she would not repeat what I said to her friend,
seeing the emphasis that I put into it. And yet I never heard that
Albertine had been told. Andrée had, nevertheless, a far greater
understanding of the things of the heart, a refinement of nice
behaviour; finding the look, the word, the action that could most
ingeniously give pleasure, keeping to herself a remark that might
possibly cause pain, making a sacrifice (and making it as though it were
no sacrifice at all) of an afternoon's play, or it might be an "at home"
or a garden-party in order to stay beside a friend who was feeling sad,
and thus shew him or her that she preferred the simple company of a
friend to frivolous pleasures; these were her habitual delicacies. But
when one knew her a little better one would have said that it was with
her as with those heroic cravens who wish not to be afraid, and whose
bravery is especially meritorious, one would have said that in her true
character there was none of that generosity which she displayed at every
moment out of moral distinction, or sensibility, or a noble desire to
shew herself a true friend. When I listened to all the charming things
she was saying to me about a possible affection between Albertine and
myself it seemed as though she were bound to do everything in her power
to bring it to pass. Whereas, by mere chance perhaps, not even of the
least of the various minor opportunities which were at her disposal and
might have proved effective in uniting me to Albertine did she ever make
any use, and I would not swear that my effort to make myself loved by
Albertine did not--if not provoke in her friend secret stratagems
destined to bring it to nought--at any rate arouse in her an anger which
however she took good care to hide and against which even, in her
delicacy of feeling, she may herself have fought. Of the countless
refinements of goodness which Andrée shewed Albertine would have been
incapable, and yet I was not certain of the underlying goodness of the
former as I was to be, later on, of the latter's. Shewing herself always
tenderly indulgent to the exuberant frivolity of Albertine, Andrée
would greet her with speeches, with smiles which were those of a friend,
better still, she always acted towards her as a friend. I have seen her,
day after day, in order to give the benefit of her own wealth, to bring
some happiness to this penniless friend take, without any possibility of
advantage to herself, more pains than a courtier would take who sought
to win his sovereign's favour. She was charmingly gentle always,
charming in her choice of sweet, pathetic expressions, when you said to
her what a pity it was that Albertine was so poor, and took infinitely
more trouble on her behalf than she would have taken for a wealthy
friend. But if anyone were to hint that Albertine was perhaps not quite
so poor as people made out, a just discernible cloud would veil the
light of Andrée's eyes and brow; she seemed out of temper. And if you
went on to say that after all Albertine might perhaps be less difficult
to marry off than people supposed, she would vehemently contradict you,
repeating almost angrily: "Oh dear, no; she will never get married! I am
quite certain of it; it is a dreadful worry to me!" In so far as I
myself was concerned, Andrée was the only one of the girls who would
never have repeated to me anything not very pleasant that might have
been said about me by a third person; more than that, if it were I who
told her what had been said she would make a pretence of not believing
it, or would furnish some explanation which made the remark inoffensive;
it is the aggregate of these qualities that goes by the name of tact.
Tact is the attribute of those people who, if we have called a man out
in a duel, congratulate us and add that there was no necessity, really;
so as to enhance still further in our own eyes the courage of which we
have given proof without having been forced to do so. They are the
opposite of the people who, in similar circumstances, say: "It must have
been a horrid nuisance for you, fighting a duel, but on the other hand
you couldn't possibly swallow an insult like that, there was nothing
else to be done." But as there is always something to be said on both
sides, if the pleasure, or at least the indifference shewn by our
friends in repeating something offensive that they have heard said about
us, proves that they do not exactly put themselves in our skin at the
moment of speaking, but thrust in the pin-point, turn the knife-blade as
though it were gold-beater's skin and not human, the art of always
keeping hidden from us what might be disagreeable to us in what they
have heard said about our actions, or in the opinion which those actions
have led the speakers themselves to form of us, proves that there is in
the other kind of friends, in the friends who are so full of tact, a
strong vein of dissimulation. It does no harm if indeed they are
incapable of thinking evil, and if what is said by other people only
makes them suffer as it would make us. I supposed this to be the case
with Andrée, without, however, being absolutely sure.

We had left the little wood and had followed a network of overgrown
paths through which Andrée managed to find her way with great skill.
Suddenly, "Look now," she said to me, "there are your famous Creuniers,
and, I say, you are in luck, it's just the time of day, and the light is
the same as when Elstir painted them." But I was still too wretched at
having fallen, during the game of "ferret", from such a pinnacle of
hopes. And so it was not with the pleasure which otherwise I should
doubtless have felt that I caught sight, almost below my feet, crouching
among the rocks, where they had gone for protection from the heat, of
marine goddesses for whom Elstir had lain in wait and surprised them
there, beneath a dark glaze as lovely as Leonardo would have painted,
the marvellous Shadows, sheltered and furtive, nimble and voiceless,
ready at the first glimmer of light to slip behind the stone, to hide in
a cranny, and prompt, once the menacing ray had passed, to return to
rock or seaweed beneath the sun that crumbled the cliffs and the
odourless ocean, over whose slumbers they seemed to be watching,
motionless lightfoot guardians letting appear on the waters surface
their viscous bodies and the attentive gaze of their deep blue eyes.

We went back to the wood to pick up the other girls and go home
together. I knew now that I was in love with Albertine; but, alas! I had
no thought of letting her know it. This was because, since the days of
our games in the Champs-Elysées, my conception of love had become
different, even if the persons to whom my love was successively assigned
remained practically the same. For one thing, the avowal, the
declaration of my passion to her whom I loved no longer seemed to me one
of the vital and necessary incidents of love, nor love itself an
external reality, but simply a subjective pleasure. And as for this
pleasure, I felt that Albertine would do everything necessary to furnish
it, all the more since she would not know that I was enjoying it.

As we walked home the image of Albertine, bathed in the light that
streamed from the other girls, was not the only one that existed for me.
But as the moon, which is no more than a tiny white cloud of a more
definite and fixed shape than other clouds during the day, assumes her
full power as soon as daylight dies, so when I was once more in the
hotel it was Albertine's sole image that rose from my heart and began to
shine. My room seemed to me to have become suddenly a new place. Of
course, for a long time past, it had not been the hostile room of my
first night in it. All our lives, we go on patiently modifying the
surroundings in which we dwell; and gradually, as habit dispenses us
from feeling them, we suppress the noxious elements of colour, shape and
smell which were at the root of our discomfort. Nor was it any longer
the room, still potent enough over my sensibility, not certainly to make
me suffer, but to give me joy, the fount of summer days, like a marble
basin in which, half-way up its polished sides, they mirrored an azure
surface steeped in light over which glided for an instant, impalpable
and white as a wave of heat, a shadowy and fleeting cloud; not the room,
wholly aesthetic, of the pictorial evening hours; it was the room in
which I had been now for so many days that I no longer saw it. And now I
was just beginning again to open my eyes to it, but this time from the
selfish angle which is that of love. I liked to feel that the fine big
mirror across one corner, the handsome bookcases with their fronts of
glass would give Albertine, if she came to see me, a good impression of
myself. Instead of a place of transit in which I would stay for a few
minutes before escaping to the beach or to Rivebelle, my room became
real and dear to me, fashioned itself anew, for I looked at and
appreciated each article of its furniture with the eyes of Albertine.

A few days after the game of "ferret", when having allowed ourselves to
wander rather too far afield, we had been fortunate in finding at
Maineville a couple of little "tubs" with two seats in each which would
enable us to be back in time for dinner, the keenness, already intense,
of my love for Albertine, had the following effect, first of all, that
it was Rosemonde and Andrée in turn that I invited to be my companion,
and never once Albertine, after which, in spite of my manifest
preference for Andrée or Rosemonde, I led everybody, by secondary
considerations of time and distance, cloaks and so forth, to decide, as
though against my wishes, that the most practical policy was that I
should take Albertine, to whose company I pretended to resign myself for
good or ill. Unfortunately, since love tends to the complete
assimilation of another person, while other people are not comestible by
way of conversation alone, Albertine might be (and indeed was) as
friendly as possible to me on our way home; when I had deposited her at
her own door she left me happy but more famished for her even than I had
been at the start, and reckoning the moments that we had spent together
as only a prelude, of little importance in itself, to those that were
still to come. And yet this prelude had that initial charm which is not
to be found again. I had not yet asked anything of Albertine. She could
imagine what I wanted, but, not being certain of it, would suppose that
I was tending only towards relations without any definite purpose, in
which my friend would find that delicious vagueness, rich in surprising
fulfilments of expectations, which is true romance.

In the week that followed I scarcely attempted to see Albertine. I made
a show of preferring Andrée. Love is born; one would like to remain,
for her whom one loves, the unknown whom she may love in turn, but one
has need of her, one requires contact not so much with her body as with
her attention, her heart. One slips into a letter some spiteful
expression which will force the indifferent reader to ask for some
little kindness in compensation, and love, following an unvarying
procedure, sets going with an alternating movement the machinery in
which one can no longer either refrain from loving or be loved. I gave
to Andrée the hours spent by the others at a party which I knew that
she would sacrifice for my sake, with pleasure, and would have
sacrificed even with reluctance, from a moral nicety, so as not to let
either the others or herself think that she attached any importance to a
relatively frivolous amusement. I arranged in this way to have her
entirely to myself every evening, meaning not to make Albertine jealous,
but to improve my position in her eyes, or at any rate not to imperil it
by letting Albertine know that it was herself and not Andrée that I
loved. Nor did I confide this to Andrée either, lest she should repeat
it to her friend. When I spoke of Albertine to Andrée I affected a
coldness by which she was perhaps less deceived than I by her apparent
credulity. She made a show of believing in my indifference to Albertine,
of desiring the closest possible union between Albertine and myself. It
is probable that, on the contrary, she neither believed in the one nor
wished for the other. While I was saying to her that I did not care very
greatly for her friend, I was thinking of one thing only, how to become
acquainted with Mme. Bontemps, who was staying for a few days near
Balbec, and to whom Albertine was going presently on a short visit.
Naturally I did not let Andrée become aware of this desire, and when I
spoke to her of Albertine's people, it was in the most careless manner
possible. Andrée's direct answers did not appear to throw any doubt on
my sincerity. Why then did she blurt out suddenly, about that time: "Oh,
guess who' I've just seen--Albertine's aunt!" It is true that she had
not said in so many words: "I could see through your casual remarks all
right that the one thing you were really thinking of was how you could
make friends with Albertine's aunt." But it was clearly to the presence
in Andrée's mind of some such idea which she felt it more becoming to
keep from me that the word "just" seemed to point. It was of a kind with
certain glances, certain gestures which, for all that they have not a
form that is logical, rational, deliberately calculated to match the
listener's intelligence, reach him nevertheless in their true
significance, just as human speech, converted into electricity in the
telephone, is turned into speech again when it strikes the ear. In order
to remove from Andrée's mind the idea that I was interested in Mme.
Bontemps, I spoke of her from that time onwards not only carelessly but
with downright malice, saying that I had once met that idiot of a woman,
and trusted I should never have that experience again. Whereas I was
seeking by every means in my power to meet her.

I tried to induce Elstir (but without mentioning to anyone else that I
had asked him) to speak to her about me and to bring us together. He
promised to introduce me to her, though he seemed greatly surprised at
my wishing it, for he regarded her as a contemptible woman, a born
intriguer, as little interesting as she was disinterested. Reflecting
that if I did see Mme. Bontemps, Andrée would be sure to hear of it
sooner or later, I thought it best to warn her in advance. "The things
one tries hardest to avoid are what one finds one cannot escape," I told
her. "Nothing in the world could bore me so much as meeting Mme.
Bontemps again, and yet I can't get out of it, Elstir has arranged to
invite us together." "I have never doubted it for a single instant,"
exclaimed Andrée in a bitter tone, while her eyes, enlarged and altered
by her annoyance, focussed themselves upon some invisible object. These
words of Andrée's were not the most reasoned statement of a thought
which might be expressed thus: "I know that you are in love with
Albertine, and that you are working day and night to get in touch with
her people." But they were the shapeless fragments, easily pieced
together again by me, of some such thought which I had exploded by
striking it, through the shield of Andrée's self-control. Like her
"just", these words had no meaning save in the second degree, that is to
say they were words of the sort which (rather than direct affirmatives)
inspires in us respect or distrust for another person, and leads to a
rupture.

If Andrée had not believed me when I told her that Albertine's
relatives left me indifferent, that was because she thought that I was
in love with Albertine. And probably she was none too happy in the
thought.

She was generally present as a third party at my meetings with her
friend. And yet there were days when I was to see Albertine by herself,
days to which I looked forward with feverish impatience, which passed
without bringing me any decisive result, without having, any of them,
been that cardinal day whose part I immediately entrusted to the day
that was to follow, which would prove no more apt to play it; thus there
crumbled and collapsed, one after another, like waves of the sea, those
peaks at once replaced by others.

About a month after the day on which we had played "ferret" together, I
learned that Albertine was going away next morning to spend a couple of
days with Mme. Bontemps, and, since she would have to start early, was
coming to sleep that night at the Grand Hotel, from which, by taking the
omnibus, she would be able, without disturbing the friends with whom she
was staying, to catch the first train in the morning. I mentioned this
to Andrée. "I don't believe a word of it," she replied, with a look of
annoyance. "Anyhow it won't help you at all, for I'm quite sure
Albertine won't want to see you if she goes to the hotel by herself. It
wouldn't be 'regulation'," she added, employing an epithet which had
recently come into favour with her, in the sense of "what is done". "I
tell you this because I understand Albertine. What difference do you
suppose it makes to me whether you see her or not? Not the slightest, I
can assure you!"

We were joined by Octave who had no hesitation in telling Andrée the
number of strokes he had gone round in, the day before, at golf, then by
Albertine, counting her diabolo as she walked along, like a nun telling
her beads. Thanks to this pastime she could be left alone for hours on
end without growing bored. As soon as she joined us I became conscious
of the obstinate tip of her nose, which I had omitted from my mental
pictures of her during the last few days; beneath her dark hair the
vertical front of her brow controverted--and not for the first time--the
indefinite image that I had preserved of her, while its whiteness made a
vivid splash in my field of vision; emerging from the dust of memory,
Albertine was built up afresh before my eyes. Golf gives one a taste for
solitary pleasures. The pleasure to be derived from diabolo is
undoubtedly one of these. And yet, after she had joined us, Albertine
continued to toss up and catch her missile, just as a lady on whom
friends have come to call does not on their account stop working at her
crochet. "I hear that Mme. de Villeparisis," she remarked to Octave,
"has been complaining to your father." I could hear, underlying the
word, one of those notes that were peculiar to Albertine; always, just
as I had made certain that I had forgotten them, I would be reminded of
a glimpse caught through them before of Albertine's determined and
typically Gallic mien. I might have been blind, and yet have detected
certain of her qualities, alert and slightly provincial, from those
notes, just as plainly as from the tip of her nose. These were
equivalent and might have, been substituted for one another, and her
voice was like, what we are promised in the photo-telephone of the
future; the visual image was clearly outlined in the sound. "She's not
written only to your father, either, she wrote to the Mayor of Balbec at
the same time, to say that we must stop playing diabolo on the 'front'
as somebody hit her in the face with one." "Yes, I was hearing about
that. It's too silly. There's little enough to do here as it is."
Andrée did not join in the conversation; she was not acquainted, any
more than was Albertine or Octave, with Mme. de Villeparisis. She did,
however, remark: "I can't think why this lady should make such a song
about it. Old Mme. de Cambremer got hit in the face, and she never
complained." "I will explain the difference," replied Octave gravely,
striking a match as he spoke. "It's my belief that Mme. de Cambremer is
a woman of the world, and Mme. de Villeparisis is just an upstart. Are
you playing golf this afternoon?" and he left us, followed by Andrée.
I was alone now with Albertine. "Do you see," she began, "I'm wearing my
hair now the way you like--look at my ringlet. They all laugh at me and
nobody knows who' I'm doing it for. My aunt will laugh at me too. But I
shan't tell her why, either." I had a sidelong view of Albertine's
cheeks, which often appeared pale, but, seen thus, were flushed with a
coursing stream of blood which lighted them up, gave them that dazzling
dearness which certain winter mornings have when the stones sparkling in
the sun seem blocks of pink granite and radiate joy. The joy that I was
drawing at this moment from the sight of Albertine's cheeks was equally
keen, but led to another desire on my part, which was not to walk with
her but to take her in my arms. I asked her if the report of her plans
which I had heard were correct. "Yes," she told me, "I shall be sleeping
at your hotel to-night, and in fact as I've got rather a chill, I shall
be going to bed before dinner. You can come and sit by my bed and watch
me eat, if you like, and afterwards we'll play at anything you choose. I
should have liked you to come to the station to-morrow morning, but I'm
afraid it might look rather odd, I don't say to Andrée, who is a
sensible person, but to the others who will be there; if my aunt got to
know, I should never hear the last of it. But we can spend the evening
together, at any rate. My aunt will know nothing about that. I must go
and say good-bye to Andrée. So long, then. Come early, so that we can
have a nice long time together," she added, smiling. At these words I
was swept back past the days in which I loved Gilberte to those in which
love seemed to me not only an external entity but one that could be
realised as a whole. Whereas the Gilberte whom I used to see in the
Champs-Elysées was a different Gilberte from the one whom I found
waiting inside myself when I was alone again, suddenly in the real
Albertine, her whom I saw every day, whom I supposed to be stuffed with
middle class prejudices and entirely open with her aunt, there was
incarnate the imaginary Albertine, she whom, when I still did not know
her, I had suspected of casting furtive glances at myself on the
"front", she who had worn an air of being reluctant to go indoors when
she saw me making off in the other direction.

I went in to dinner with my grandmother. I felt within me a secret which
she could never guess. Similarly with Albertine; to-morrow her friends
would be with her, not knowing what novel experience she and I had in
common; and when she kissed her niece on the brow Mme. Bontemps would
never imagine that I stood between them, in that arrangement of
Albertine's hair which had for its object, concealed from all the world,
to give me pleasure, me who had until then so greatly envied Mme.
Bontemps because, being related to the same people as her niece, she had
the same occasions to don mourning, the same family visits to pay; and
now I found myself meaning more to Albertine than did the aunt herself.
When she was with her aunt, it was of me that she would be thinking.
What was going to happen that evening, I scarcely knew. In any event,
the Grand Hotel, the evening would no longer seem empty to me; they
contained my happiness. I rang for the lift-boy to take me up to the
room which Albertine had engaged, a room that looked over the valley.
The slightest movements, such as that of sitting down on the bench in
the lift, were satisfying, because they were in direct relation to my
heart; I saw in the ropes that drew the cage upwards, in the few steps
that I had still to climb, only a materialisation of the machinery, the
stages of my joy. I had only two or three steps to take now along the
corridor before coming to that room in which was enshrined the precious
substance of that rosy form--that room which, even if there were to be
done in it delicious things, would keep that air of permanence, of
being, to a chance visitor who knew nothing of its history, just like
any other room, which makes of inanimate things the obstinately mute
witnesses, the scrupulous confidants, the inviolable depositaries of our
pleasure. Those few steps from the landing to Albertine's door, those
few steps which no one now could prevent my taking, I took with delight,
with prudence, as though plunged into a new and strange element, as if
in going forward I had been gently displacing the liquid stream of
happiness, and at the same time with a strange feeling of absolute
power, and of entering at length into an inheritance which had belonged
to me from all time. Then suddenly I reflected that it was wrong to be
in any doubt; she had told me to come when she was in bed. It was as
clear as daylight; I pranced for joy, I nearly knocked over Françoise
who was standing in my way, I ran, with glowing eyes, towards my
friend's room. I found Albertine in bed. Leaving her throat bare, her
white nightgown altered the proportions of her face, which, flushed by
being in bed or by her cold or by dinner, seemed pinker than before; I
thought of the colours which I had had, a few hours earlier, displayed
beside me, on the "front", the savour of which I was now at last to
taste; her cheek was crossed obliquely by one of those long, dark,
curling tresses, which, to please me, she had undone altogether. She
looked at me and smiled. Beyond her, through the window, the valley lay
bright beneath the moon. The sight of Albertine's bare throat, of those
strangely vivid cheeks, had so intoxicated me (that is to say had placed
the reality of the world for me no longer in nature, but in the torrent
of my sensations which it was all I could do to keep within bounds), as
to have destroyed the balance between the life, immense and
indestructible, which circulated in my being, and the life of the
universe, so puny in comparison. The sea, which was visible through the
window as well as the valley, the swelling breasts of the first of the
Maineville cliffs, the sky in which the moon had not yet climbed to the
zenith, all of these seemed less than a featherweight on my eyeballs,
which between their lids I could feel dilated, resisting, ready to bear
very different burdens, all the mountains of the world upon their
fragile surface. Their orbit no longer found even the sphere of the
horizon adequate to fill it. And everything that nature could have
brought me of life would have seemed wretchedly meagre, the sigh of the
waves far too short a sound to express the enormous aspiration that was
surging in my breast. I bent over Albertine to kiss her. Death might
have struck me down in that moment; it would have seemed to me a
trivial, or rather an impossible thing, for life was not outside, it was
in me; I should have smiled pityingly had a philosopher then expressed
the idea that some day, even some distant day, I should have to die,
that the external forces of nature would survive me, the forces of that
nature beneath whose god-like feet I was no more than a grain of dust;
that, after me, there would still remain those rounded, swelling cliffs,
that sea, that moonlight and that sky! How was that possible; how could
the world last longer than myself, since it was it that was enclosed in
me, in me whom it went a long way short of filling, in me, where,
feeling that there was room to store so many other treasures, I flung
contemptuously into a corner sky, sea and cliffs. "Stop that, or I'll
ring the bell!" cried Albertine, seeing that I was flinging myself upon
her to kiss her. But I reminded myself that it was not for no purpose
that a girl made a young man come to her room in secret, arranging that
her aunt should not know--that boldness, moreover, rewards those who
know how to seize their opportunities; in the state of exaltation in
which I was, the round face of Albertine, lighted by an inner flame,
like the glass bowl of a lamp, started into such prominence that,
copying the rotation of a burning sphere, it seemed to me to be turning,
like those faces of Michael Angelo which are being swept past in the
arrested headlong flight of a whirlwind. I was going to learn the
fragrance, the flavour which this strange pink fruit concealed. I heard
a sound, precipitous, prolonged, shrill. Albertine had pulled the bell
with all her might.

 *
* *

I had supposed that the love which I felt for Albertine was not based on
the hope of carnal possession. And yet, when the lesson to be drawn from
my experience that evening was, apparently, that such possession was
impossible; when, after having had not the least doubt, that first day,
on the beach, of Albertine's being unchaste, and having then passed
through various intermediate assumptions, I seemed to have quite
definitely reached the conclusion that she was absolutely virtuous;
when, on her return from her aunt's, a week later, she greeted me coldly
with: "I forgive you; in fact I'm sorry to have upset you, but you must
never do it again,"--then, in contrast to what I had felt on learning
from Bloch that one could always have all the women one liked, and as
if, in place of a real girl, I had known a wax doll, it came to pass
that gradually there detached itself from her my desire to penetrate
into her life, to follow her through the places in which she had spent
her childhood, to be initiated by her into the athletic life; my
intellectual curiosity to know what were her thoughts on this subject or
that did not survive my belief that I might take her in my arms if I
chose. My dreams abandoned her, once they had ceased to be nourished by
the hope of a possession of which I had supposed them to be independent.
Thenceforward they found themselves once more at liberty to transmit
themselves, according to the attraction that I had found in her on any
particular day, above all according to the chances that I seemed to
detect of my being, possibly, one day, loved by her--to one or another
of Albertine's friends, and to Andrée first of all. And yet, if
Albertine had not existed, perhaps I should not have had the pleasure
which I began to feel more and more strongly during the days that
followed in the kindness that was shewn me by Andrée. Albertine told no
one of the check which I had received at her hands. She was one of those
pretty girls who, from their earliest youth, by their beauty, but
especially by an attraction, a charm which remains somewhat mysterious
and has its source perhaps in reserves of vitality to which others less
favoured by nature come to quench their thirst, have always--in their
home circle, among their friends, in society--proved more attractive
than other more beautiful and richer girls; she was one of those people
from whom, before the age of love and ever so much more after it is
reached, one asks more than they ask in return, more even than they are
able to give. From her childhood Albertine had always had round her in
an adoring circle four or five little girl friends, among them Andrée
who was so far her superior and knew it (and perhaps this attraction
which Albertine exerted quite involuntarily had been the origin, had
laid the foundations of the little band). This attraction was still
potent even at a great social distance, in circles quite brilliant in
comparison, where if there was a pavane to be danced, they would send
for Albertine rather than have it danced by another girl of better
family. The consequence was that, not having a penny to her name, living
a hard enough life, moreover, on the hands of M. Bontemps, who was said
to be "on the rocks", and was anyhow anxious to be rid of her, she was
nevertheless invited, not only to dine but to stay, by people who, in
Saint-Loup's sight, might not have had any distinction, but to
Rosemonde's mother or Andrée's, women who though very rich themselves
did not know these other and richer people, represented something quite
incalculable. Thus Albertine spent a few weeks every year with the
family of one of the Governors of the Bank of France, who was also
Chairman of the Board of Directors of a great Railway Company. The wife
of this financier entertained people of importance, and had never
mentioned her "day" to Andrée's mother, who thought her wanting in
politeness, but was nevertheless prodigiously interested in everything
that went on in her house. Accordingly she encouraged Andrée every year
to invite Albertine down to their villa, because, as she said, it was a
real charity to offer a holiday by the sea to a girl who had not herself
the means to travel and whose aunt did so little for her; Andrée's
mother was probably not prompted by the thought that the banker and his
wife, learning that Albertine was made much of by her and her daughter,
would form a high opinion of them both; still less did she hope that
Albertine, good and clever as she was, would manage to get her invited,
or at least to get Andrée invited to the financier's garden-parties.
But every evening at the dinner-table, while she assumed an air of
indifference slightly tinged with contempt, she was fascinated by
Albertine's accounts of everything that had happened at the big house
while she was staying there, and the names of the other guests, almost
all of them people whom she knew by sight or by name. True, the thought
that she knew them only in this indirect fashion, that is to say did not
know them at all (she called this kind of acquaintance knowing people
"all my life"), gave Andrée's mother a touch of melancholy while she
plied Albertine with questions about them in a lofty and distant tone,
speaking with closed lips, and might have left her doubtful and uneasy
as to the importance of her own social position had she not been able to
reassure herself, to return safely to the "realities of life", by saying
to the butler: "Please tell the chef that he has not made the peas soft
enough." She then recovered her serenity. And she was quite determined
that Andrée was to marry nobody but a man--of the best family, of
course--but rich enough for her too to be able to keep a chef and a
couple of coachmen. This was the proof positive, the practical
indication of "position". But the fact that Albertine had dined at the
banker's house in the country with this or that great lady, and that the
said great lady had invited the girl to stay with her next winter, did
not invalidate a sort of special consideration which Albertine shewed
towards Andrée's mother, which went very well with the pity, and even
repulsion, excited by the tale of her misfortunes, a repulsion increased
by the fact that M. Bontemps had proved a traitor to the cause (he was
even, people said, vaguely Panamist) and had rallied to the Government.
Not that this deterred Andrée's mother, in her passion for abstract
truth, from withering with her scorn the people who appeared to believe
that Albertine was of humble origin. "What's that you say? Why, they're
one of the best families in the country. Simonet with a single 'n', you
know!" Certainly, in view of the class of society in which all this went
on, in which money plays so important a part, and mere charm makes
people ask you out but not marry you, a "comfortable" marriage did not
appear to be for Albertine a practical outcome of the so distinguished
patronage which she enjoyed but which would not have been held to
compensate for her poverty. But even by themselves, and with no prospect
of any matrimonial consequence, Albertine's "successes" in society
excited the envy of certain spiteful mothers, furious at seeing her
received like one of the family by the banker's wife, even by Andrée's
mother, neither of whom they themselves really knew. They therefore went
about telling common friends of those ladies and their own that both
ladies would be very angry if they knew the facts, which were that
Albertine repeated to each of them everything that the intimacy to which
she was rashly admitted enabled her to spy out in the household of the
other, a thousand little secrets which it must be infinitely unpleasant
to the interested party to have made public. These envious women said
this so that it might be repeated and might get Albertine into trouble
with her patrons. But, as often happens, their machinations met with no
success. The spite that prompted them was too apparent, and their only
result was to make the women who had planned them appear rather more
contemptible than before. Andrée's mother was too firm in her opinion
of Albertine to change her mind about her now. She looked upon her as a
"poor wretch", but the best-natured girl living, and one who would do
anything in the world to give pleasure.

If this sort of select popularity to which Albertine had attained did
not seem likely to lead to any practical result, it had stamped
Andrée's friend with the distinctive marks of people who, being always
sought after, have never any need to offer themselves, marks (to be
found also, and for analogous reasons, at the other end of the social
scale among the leaders of fashion) which consist in their not making
any display of the successes they have scored, but rather keeping them
to themselves. She would never say to anyone: "So-and-so is anxious to
meet me," would speak of everyone with the greatest good nature, and as
if it had been she who ran after, who sought to know other people, and
not they. If you spoke of a young man who, a few minutes earlier, had
been, in private conversation with her, heaping the bitterest reproaches
upon her because she had refused him an assignation, so far from
proclaiming this in public, or betraying any resentment she would stand
up for him: "He is such a nice boy!" Indeed it quite annoyed her when
she attracted people, because that compelled her to disappoint them,
whereas her natural instinct was always to give pleasure. So much did
she enjoy giving pleasure that she had come to employ a particular kind
of falsehood, found among utilitarians and men who have "arrived".
Existing besides in an embryonic state in a vast number of people, this
form of insincerity consists in not being able to confine the pleasure
arising out of a single act of politeness to a single person. For
instance, if Albertine's aunt wished her niece to accompany her to a
party which was not very lively, Albertine might have found it
sufficient to extract from the incident the moral profit of having given
pleasure to her aunt. But being courteously welcomed by her host and
hostess, she thought it better to say to them that she had been wanting
to see them for so long that she had finally seized this opportunity and
begged her aunt to take her to their party. Even this was not enough: at
the same party there happened to be one of Albertine's friends who was
in great distress. "I did not like the idea of your being here by
yourself. I thought it might do you good to have me with you. If you
would rather come away from here, go somewhere else, I am ready to do
anything you like; all I want is to see you look not so sad."--Which, as
it happened, was true also. Sometimes it happened however that the
fictitious object destroyed the real. Thus, Albertine, having a favour
to ask on behalf of one of her friends, went on purpose to see a certain
lady who could help her. But on arriving at the house of this lady--a
kind and sympathetic soul--the girl, unconsciously following the
principle of utilising a single action in a number of ways, felt it to
be more ingratiating to appear to have come there solely on account of
the pleasure she knew she would derive from seeing the lady again. The
lady was deeply touched that Albertine should have taken a long journey
purely out of friendship for herself. Seeing her almost overcome by
emotion, Albertine began to like the lady still better. Only, there was
this awkward consequence: she now felt so keenly the pleasure of
friendship which she pretended to have been her motive in coming, that
she was afraid of making the lady suspect the genuineness of sentiments
which were actually quite sincere if she now asked her to do the favour,
whatever it may have been, for her friend. The lady would think that
Albertine had come for that purpose, which was true, but would conclude
also that Albertine had no disinterested pleasure in seeing her, which
was not. With the result that she came away without having asked the
favour, like a man sometimes who has been so good to a woman, in the
hope of winning her, that he refrains from declaring his passion in
order to preserve for his goodness an air of nobility. In other
instances it would be wrong to say that the true object was sacrificed
to the subordinate and subsequently conceived idea, but the two were so
far incompatible that if the person to whom Albertine endeared herself
by stating the second had known of the existence of the first, his
pleasure would at once have been turned into the deepest annoyance. At a
much later point in this story, we shall have occasion to see this kind
of incompatibility expressed in clearer terms. Let us say for the
present, borrowing an example of a completely different order, that they
occur very frequently in the most divergent situations that life has to
offer. A husband has established his mistress in the town where he is
quartered with his regiment. His wife, left by herself in Paris, and
with an inkling of the truth, grows more and more miserable, and writes
her husband, letters embittered by jealousy. Very well; the mistress is
obliged to go up to Paris for the day. The husband cannot resist her
entreaties that he will go with her, and applies for short leave, which
is granted. But as he is a good-natured fellow, and hates to make his
wife unhappy, he goes to her and tells her, shedding a few quite genuine
tears, that, driven to desperation by her letters, he has found the
means of getting away from his duties to come to her, to console her in
his arms. He has thus contrived by a single journey to furnish wife and
mistress alike with proofs of his affection. But if the wife were to
learn the reason for which he has come to Paris, her joy would doubtless
be turned into grief, unless her pleasure in seeing the faithless wretch
outweighed, in spite of everything, the pain that his infidelities had
caused her. Among the men who have struck me as practising with most
perseverance this system of what might be called killing any number of
birds with one stone, must be included M. de Norpois. He would now and
then agree to act as intermediary between two of his friends who had
quarrelled, which led to his being called the most obliging of men. But
it was not sufficient for him to appear to be doing a service to the
friend who had come to him to demand it; he would represent to the other
the steps which he was taking to effect a reconciliation as undertaken
not at the request of the first friend but in the interest of the
second, an attitude of the sincerity of which he had never any
difficulty in convincing a listener already influenced by the idea that
he saw before him the "most serviceable of men". In this fashion,
playing in two scenes turn about, what in stage parlance is called
"doubling" two parts, he never allowed his influence to be in the
slightest degree imperilled, and the services which he rendered
constituted not an expenditure of capital but a dividend upon some part
of his credit. At the same time every service, seemingly rendered twice
over, correspondingly enhanced his reputation as an obliging friend,
and, better still, a friend whose interventions were efficacious, one
who did not draw bows at a venture, whose efforts were always justified
by success, as was shewn by the gratitude of both parties. This
duplicity in rendering services was--allowing for disappointments such
as are the lot of every human being--an important element of M. de
Norpois's character. And often at the Ministry he would make use of my
father, who was a simple soul, while making him believe that it was he,
M. de Norpois, who was being useful to my father.

Attracting people more easily than she wished, and having no need to
proclaim her conquests abroad, Albertine kept silence with regard to the
scene with myself by her bedside, which a plain girl would have wished
the whole world to know. And yet of her attitude during that scene I
could not arrive at any satisfactory explanation. Taking first of all
the supposition that she was absolutely chaste (a supposition with which
I had originally accounted for the violence with which Albertine had
refused to let herself be taken in my arms and kissed, though it was by
no means essential to my conception of the goodness, the fundamentally
honourable character of my friend), I could not accept it without a
copious revision of its terms. It ran so entirely counter to the
hypothesis which I had constructed that day when I saw Albertine for the
first time. Then ever so many different acts, all acts of kindness
towards myself (a kindness that was caressing, at times uneasy, alarmed,
jealous of my predilection for Andrée) came up on all sides to
challenge the brutal gesture with which, to escape from me, she had
pulled the bell. Why then had she invited me to come and spend the
evening by her bedside? Why had she spoken all the time in the language
of affection? What object is there in your desire to see a friend, in
your fear that he is fonder of another of your friends than of you; why
seek to give him pleasure, why tell him, so romantically, that the
others will never know that he has spent the evening in your room, if
you refuse him so simple a pleasure and if to you it is no pleasure at
all? I could not believe, all the same, that Albertine's chastity was
carried to such a pitch as that, and I had begun to ask myself whether
her violence might not have been due to some reason of coquetry, a
disagreeable odour, for instance, which she suspected of lingering about
her person, and by which she was afraid that I might be disgusted, or
else of cowardice, if for instance she imagined, in her ignorance of the
facts of love, that my state of nervous exhaustion was due to something
contagious, communicable to her in a kiss.

She was genuinely distressed by her failure to afford me pleasure, and
gave me a little gold pencil-case, with that virtuous perversity which
people shew who, moved by your supplications and yet not consenting to
grant you what those supplications demand, are anxious all the same to
bestow on you some mark of their affection; the critic, an article from
whose pen would so gratify the novelist, asks him instead to dinner;
the duchess does not take the snob with her to the theatre but lends him
her box on an evening when she will not be using it herself. So far are
those who do least for us, and might easily do nothing, driven by
conscience to do something. I told Albertine that in giving me this
pencil-case she was affording me great pleasure, and yet not so great as
I should have felt if, on the night she had spent at the hotel, she had
permitted me to embrace her. "It would have made me so happy; what
possible harm could it have done you? I was simply astounded at your
refusing to let me do it." "What astounds me," she retorted, "is that
you should have thought it astounding. Funny sort of girls you must know
if my behaviour surprises you." "I am extremely sorry if I annoyed you,
but even now I cannot say that I think I was in the wrong. What I feel
is that all that sort of thing is of no importance, really, and I can't
understand a girl who could so easily give pleasure not consenting to do
so. Let us be quite clear about it," I went on, throwing a sop of sorts
to her moral scruples, as I recalled how she and her friends had
scarified the girl who went about with the actress Léa, "I don't mean
to say for a moment that a girl can behave exactly as she likes, or that
there's no such thing as immorality. Take, let me see now, yes, what you
were saying the other day about a girl who is staying at Balbec and her
relations with an actress; I call that degrading, so degrading that I
feel must all have been made up by the girl's enemies, and that there
can't be any truth in the story. It strikes me as improbable,
impossible. But to let a friend kiss you, and go farther than that
even--since you say that I am your friend . . ." "So you are, but I have
had friends before now, I have known lots of young men who were every
bit as friendly, I can assure you. There wasn't one of them would ever
have dared to do a thing like that. They knew they'ld get their ears
boxed if they tried it on. Besides, they never dreamed of trying, we
would shake hands in an open, friendly sort of way, like good pals, but
there was never a word said about kissing, and yet we weren't any the
less friends for that. Why, if it's my friendship you are after, you've
nothing to complain of; I must be jolly fond of you to forgive you. But
I'm sure you don't care two straws about me, really. Own up now, it's
Andrée you're in love with. After all, you're quite right; she is ever
so much prettier than I am, and perfectly charming! Oh! You men!"
Despite my recent disappointment, these words so frankly uttered, by
giving me a great respect for Albertine, made a very pleasant impression
on me. And perhaps this impression was to have serious and vexatious
consequences for me later on, for it was round it that there began to
form that feeling almost of brotherly intimacy, that moral core which
was always to remain at the heart of my love for Albertine. A feeling of
this sort may be the cause of the keenest pain. For in order really to
suffer at the hands of a woman one must have believed in her completely.
For the moment, that embryo of moral esteem, of friendship, was left
embedded in me like a stepping-stone in a stream. It could have availed
nothing, by itself, against my happiness if it had remained there
without growing, in an inertia which it was to retain the following
year, and still more during the final weeks of this first visit to
Balbec. It dwelt in me like one of those foreign bodies which it would
be wiser when all is said to expel, but which we leave where they are
without disturbing them, so harmless for the present does their
weakness, their isolation amid a strange environment render them.

My dreams were now once more at liberty to concentrate on one or another
of Albertine's friends, and returned first of all to Andrée, whose
kindnesses might perhaps have appealed to me less strongly had I not
been certain that they would come to Albertine's ears. Undoubtedly the
preference that I had long been pretending to feel for Andrée had
furnished me--in the habit of conversation with her, of declaring my
affection--with, so to speak, the material, prepared and ready, for a
love of her which had hitherto lacked only the complement of a genuine
sentiment, and this my heart being once more free was now in a position
to supply. But for me really to love Andrée, she was too intellectual,
too neurotic, too sickly, too much like myself. If Albertine now seemed
to me to be void of substance, Andrée was filled with something which I
knew only too well. I had thought, that first day, that what I saw on
the beach there was the mistress of some racing cyclist, passionately
athletic; and now Andrée told me that if she had taken up athletic
pastimes, it was under orders from her doctor, to cure her neurasthenia,
her digestive troubles, but that her happiest hours were those which she
spent in translating one of George Eliot's novels. The misunderstanding,
due to an initial mistake as to what Andrée was, had not, as a matter
of fact, the slightest importance. But my mistake was one of the kind
which, if they allow love to be born, and are not recognised as mistakes
until it has ceased to be under control, become a cause of suffering.
Such mistakes--which may be quite different from mine with regard to
Andrée, and even its exact opposite,--are frequently due (and this was
especially the case here) to our paying too much attention to the
aspect, the manners of what a person is not but would like to be, in
forming our first impression of that person. To the outward appearance
affectation, imitation, the longing to be admired, whether by the good
or by the wicked, add misleading similarities of speech and gesture.
There are cynicisms and cruelties which, when put to the test, prove no
more genuine than certain apparent virtues and generosities. Just as we
often discover a vain miser beneath the cloak of a man famed for his
bountiful charity, so her flaunting of vice leads us to suppose a
Messalina a respectable girl with middle class prejudices. I had thought
to find in Andrée a healthy, primitive creature, whereas she was merely
a person in search of health, as were doubtless many of those in whom
she herself had thought to find it, and who were in reality no more
healthy than a burly arthritic with a red face and in white flannels is
necessarily a Hercules. Now there are circumstances in which it is not
immaterial to our happiness that the person whom we have loved because
of what appeared to be so healthy about her is in reality only one of
those invalids who receive such health as they possess from others, as
the planets borrow their light, as certain bodies are only conductors of
electricity.

No matter, Andrée, like Rosemonde and Gisèle, indeed more than they,
was, when all was said, a friend of Albertine, sharing her life,
imitating her conduct, so closely that, the first day, I had not at once
distinguished them one from another. Over these girls, flowering sprays
of roses whose principal charm was that they outlined themselves against
the sea, the same undivided partnership prevailed as at the time when I
did not know them, when the appearance of no matter which of them had
caused me such violent emotion by its announcement that the little band
was not far off. And even now the sight of one of them filled me with a
pleasure into which there entered, to an extent which I should not have
found it easy to define, the thought of seeing the others follow her in
due course, and even if they did not come that day, speaking about them,
and knowing that they would be told that I had been on the beach.

It was no longer simply the attraction of those firsts days, it was a
regular love-longing which hesitated among them all, so far was each the
natural substitute for the others. My bitterest grief would not have
been to be thrown over by whichever of the girls I liked best, but I
should at once have liked best, because I should have fastened on to her
the whole of the melancholy dream which had been floating vaguely among
them all, her who had thrown me over. It would, moreover, in that event,
be the loss of all her friends, in whose eyes I should speedily have
forfeited whatever advantage I might possess, that I should, in losing
her, have unconsciously regretted, having vowed to them that sort of
collective love which the politician and the actor feel for the public
for whose desertion of them after they have enjoyed all its favours they
can never be consoled. Even those favours which I had failed to win from
Albertine I would hope suddenly to receive from one or other who had
parted from me in the evening with a word or glance of ambiguous
meaning, thanks to which it was to her that, for the next day or so, my
desire would turn.

It strayed among them all the more voluptuously in that upon those
volatile faces a comparative fixation of features had now begun, and had
been carried far enough for the eye to distinguish--even if it were to
change yet further--each malleable and floating effigy. To the
differences that existed among them there was doubtless very little that
corresponded in the no less marked differences in the length and breadth
of those features, any of which might, perhaps, dissimilar as the girls
appeared, almost have been lifted bodily from one face and imposed at
random upon any other. But our knowledge of faces is not mathematical.
In the first place, it does not begin with the measurement of the parts,
it takes as its starting-point an expression, a combination of the
whole. In Andrée, for instance, the fineness of her gentle eyes seemed
to go with the thinness of her nose, as slender as a mere curve which
one could imagine as having been traced in order to produce along a
single line the idea of delicacy divided higher up between the dual
smile of her twin gaze. A line equally fine was engraved in her hair,
pliant and deep as the line with which the wind furrows the sand. And in
her it must have been hereditary; for the snow white hair of Andrée's
mother was driven in the same way, forming here a swelling, there a
depression like a snowdrift that rises or sinks according to the
irregularities of the soil. Certainly, when compared with the fine
delineation of Andrée's, Rosemonde's nose seemed to present broad
surfaces, like a high tower raised upon massive foundations. Albeit
expression suffices to make us believe in enormous differences between
things that are separated by infinitely little--albeit that infinitely
little may by itself create an expression that is absolutely unique, an
individuality--it was not only the infinitely little of its lines and
the originality of its expression that made each of these faces appear
irreducible to terms of any other. Between my friends' faces their
colouring established a separation wider still, not so much by the
varied beauty of the tones with which it provided them, so contrasted
that I felt when I looked at Rosemonde--flooded with a sulphurous rose
colour, with the further contrast of the greenish light in her eyes--and
then at Andrée--whose white cheeks received such an austere distinction
from her black hair--the same kind of pleasure as if I had been looking
alternately at a geranium growing by a sunlit sea and a camellia in the
night; but principally because the infinitely little differences of
their lines were enlarged out of all proportion, the relations between
one and another surface entirely changed by this new element of colour
which, in addition to being a dispenser of tints, is great at restoring,
or rather at altering dimensions. So that faces which were perhaps
constructed on not dissimilar lines, according as they were lighted by
the flaming torch of an auburn poll or high complexion, or by the white
glimmer of a dull pallor, grew sharper or broader, became something
else, like those properties used in the Russian ballet, consisting
sometimes, when they are seen in the light of day, of a mere disc of
paper, out of which the genius of a Bakst, according to the blood-red or
moonlit effect in which he plunges his stage, makes a hard incrustation,
like a turquoise on a palace wall, or a swooning softness, as of a
Bengal rose in an eastern garden. And so when acquiring a knowledge of
faces we take careful measurements, but as painters, not as surveyors.

So it was with Albertine as with her friends. On certain days, slim,
with grey cheeks, a sullen air, a violet transparency falling obliquely
from her such as we notice sometimes on the sea, she seemed to be
feeling the sorrows of exile. On other days her face, more sleek, caught
and glued my desires to its varnished surface and prevented them from
going any farther; unless I caught a sudden glimpse of her from the
side, for her dull cheeks, like white wax on the surface, were visibly
pink beneath, which made me anxious to kiss them, to reach that
different tint which thus avoided my touch. At other times happiness
bathed her cheeks with a clarity so mobile that the skin, grown fluid
and vague, gave passage to a sort of stealthy and subcutaneous gaze,
which made it appear to be of another colour but not of another
substance than her eyes; sometimes, instinctively, when one looked at
her face punctuated with tiny brown marks among which floated what were
simply two larger, bluer stains, it was like looking at the egg of a
goldfinch--or often like an opalescent agate cut and polished in two
places only, where, from the heart of the brown stone, shone like the
transparent wings of a sky-blue butterfly her eyes, those features in
which the flesh becomes a mirror and gives us the illusion that it
allows us, more than through the other parts of the body, to approach
the soul. But most often of all she shewed more colour, and was then
more animated; sometimes the only pink thing in her white face was the
tip of her nose, as finely pointed as that of a mischievous kitten with
which one would have liked to stop and play; sometimes her cheeks were
so glossy that one's glance slipped, as over the surface of a miniature,
over their pink enamel, which was made to appear still more delicate,
more private, by the enclosing though half-opened case of her black
hair; or it might happen that the tint of her cheeks had deepened to the
violet shade of the red cyclamen, and, at times, even, when she was
flushed or feverish, with a suggestion of unhealthiness which lowered my
desire to something more sensual and made her glance expressive of
something more perverse and unwholesome, to the deep purple of certain
roses, a red that was almost black; and each of these Albertines was
different, as in every fresh appearance of the dancer whose colours,
form, character, are transmuted according to the innumerably varied play
of a projected limelight. It was perhaps because they were so different,
the persons whom I used to contemplate in her at this period, that later
on I became myself a different person, corresponding to the particular
Albertine to whom my thoughts had turned; a jealous, an indifferent, a
voluptuous, a melancholy, a frenzied person, created anew not merely by
the accident of what memory had risen to the surface, but in proportion
also to the strength of the belief that was lent to the support of one
and the same memory by the varying manner in which I appreciated it. For
this is the point to which we must always return, to these beliefs with
which most of the time we are quite unconsciously filled, but which for
all that are of more importance to our happiness than is the average
person whom we see, for it is through them that we see him, it is they
that impart his momentary greatness to the person seen. To be quite
accurate I ought to give a different name to each of the 'me's' who were
to think about Albertine in time to come; I ought still more to give a
different name to each of the Albertines who appeared before me, never
the same, like--called by me simply and for the sake of convenience "the
sea"--those seas that succeeded one another on the beach, in front of
which, a nymph likewise, she stood apart. But above all, in the same way
as, in telling a story (though to far greater purpose here), one
mentions what the weather was like on such and such a day, I ought
always to give its name to the belief that, on any given day on which I
saw Albertine, was reigning in my soul, creating its atmosphere, the
appearance of people like that of seas being dependent on those clouds,
themselves barely visible, which change the colour of everything by
their concentration, their mobility, their dissemination, their
flight--like that cloud which Elstir had rent one evening by not
introducing me to these girls, with whom he had stopped to talk,
whereupon their forms, as they moved away, had suddenly increased in
beauty--a cloud that had formed again a few days later when I did get to
know the girls, veiling their brightness, interposing itself frequently
between my eyes and them, opaque and soft, like Virgil's Leucothea.

No doubt, all their faces had assumed quite new meanings for me since
the manner in which they were to be read had been to some extent
indicated to me by their talk, talk to which I could ascribe a value all
the greater in that, by questioning them, I could prompt it whenever I
chose, could vary it like an experimenter who seeks by corroborative
proofs to establish the truth of his theory. And it is, after all, as
good a way as any of solving the problem of existence to approach near
enough to the things that have appeared to us from a distance to be
beautiful and mysterious, to be able to satisfy ourselves that they have
neither mystery nor beauty. It is one of the systems of hygiene among
which we are at liberty to choose our own, a system which is perhaps not
to be recommended too strongly, but it gives us a certain tranquillity
with which to spend what remains of life, and also--since it enables us
to regret nothing, by assuring us that we have attained to the best, and
that the best was nothing out of the common--with which to resign
ourselves to death.

I had now substituted, in the brains of these girls, for their supposed
contempt for chastity, their memories of daily "incidents", honest
principles, liable, it might be, to relaxation, but principles which had
hitherto kept unscathed the children who had acquired them in their own
respectable homes. And yet, when one has been mistaken from the start,
even in trifling details, when an error of assumption or recollection
makes one seek for the author of a malicious slander, or for the place
where one has lost something, in the wrong direction, it frequently
happens that one discovers one's error only to substitute for it not the
truth but a fresh error. I drew, so far as their manner of life and the
proper way to behave with them went, all the possible conclusions from
the word "Innocence" which I had read, in talking familiarly with them,
upon their faces. But perhaps I had been reading carelessly, with the
inaccuracy born of a too rapid deciphering, and it was no more written
there than was the name of Jules Ferry on the programme of the
performance at which I had heard Berma for the first time, an omission
which had not prevented me from maintaining to M. de Norpois that Jules
Ferry, beyond any possibility of doubt, was a person who wrote
curtain-raisers.

No matter which it might be of my friends of the little band, was not
inevitably the face that I had last seen the only face that I could
recall, since, of our memories with respect to a person, the mind
eliminates everything that does not agree with our immediate purpose of
our daily relations (especially if those relations are quickened with an
element of love which, ever unsatisfied, lives always in the moment that
is about to come)? That purpose allows the chain of spent days to slip
away, holding on only to the very end of it, often of a quite different
metal from the links that, have vanished in the night, and in the
journey which we make through life, counts as real only in the place in
which we at any given moment are. But all those earliest impressions,
already so remote, could not find, against the blunting process that
assailed them day after day, any remedy in my memory; during the long
hours which I spent in talking, eating, playing with these girls, I did
not remember even that they were the same ruthless, sensual virgins whom
I had seen, as in a fresco, file past between me and the sea.

Geographers, archaeologists may conduct us over Calypso's island, may
excavate the Palace of Minos. Only Calypso becomes then nothing more
than a woman, Minos than a king with no semblance of divinity. Even the
good and bad qualities which history teaches us to have been the
attributes of those quite real personages, often differ widely from
those which we had ascribed to the fabulous beings who bore the same
names as they. Thus had there faded and vanished all the lovely
mythology of Ocean which I had composed in those first days. But it is
not altogether immaterial that we do succeed, at any rate now and then,
in spending our time in familiar intercourse with what we have thought
to be unattainable and have longed to possess. In our later dealings
with people whom at first we found disagreeable there persists always,
even among the artificial pleasure which we have come at length to enjoy
in their society, the lingering taint of the defects which they have
succeeded in hiding. But, in relations such as I was now having with
Albertine and her friends, the genuine pleasure which was there at the
start leaves that fragrance which no amount of skill can impart to
hot-house fruits, to grapes that have not ripened in the sun. The
supernatural creatures which for a little time they had been to me still
introduced, even without any intention on my part, a miraculous element
into the most common-place dealings that I might have with them, or
rather prevented such dealings from ever becoming common-place at all.
My desire had sought so ardently to learn the significance of the eyes
which now knew and smiled to see me, but whose glances on the first day
had crossed mine like rays from another universe; it had distributed so
generously, so carefully, so minutely, colour and fragrance over the
carnation surfaces of these girls who now, outstretched on the
cliff-top, were simply offering me sandwiches or guessing riddles, that
often, in the afternoon, while I lay there among them, like those
painters who seek to match the grandeurs of antiquity in modern life,
give to a woman cutting her toe-nail the nobility of the _Spinario_, or,
like Rubens, make goddesses out of women whom they know, to people some
mythological scene; at those lovely forms, dark and fair, so dissimilar
in type, scattered around me in the grass, I would gaze without emptying
them, perhaps, of all the mediocre contents with which my every day
experience had filled them, and at the same time without expressly
recalling their heavenly origin, as if, like young Hercules or young
Telemachus, I had been set to play amid a band of nymphs.

Then the concerts ended, the bad weather began, my friends left Balbec;
not all at once, like the swallows, but all in the same week. Albertine
was the first to go, abruptly, without any of her friends understanding,
then or afterwards, why she had returned suddenly to Paris whither
neither her work nor any amusement summoned her. "She said neither why
nor wherefore, and with that she left!" muttered Françoise, who, for
that matter, would have liked us to leave as well. We were, she thought,
inconsiderate towards the staff, now greatly reduced in number, but
retained on account of the few visitors who were still staying on, and
towards the manager who was "just eating up money." It was true that the
hotel, which would very soon be closed for the winter, had long since
seen most of its patrons depart, but never had it been so attractive.
This view was not shared by the manager; from end to end of the rooms in
which we sat shivering, and at the doors of which no page now stood on
guard, he paced the corridors, wearing a new frock coat, so well tended
by the hairdresser that his insipid face appeared to be made of some
composition in which, for one part of flesh, there were three of
cosmetics, incessantly changing his neckties. (These refinements cost
less than having the place heated and keeping on the staff, just as a
man who is no longer able to subscribe ten thousand francs to a charity
can still parade his generosity without inconvenience to himself by
tipping the boy who brings him a telegram with five.) He appeared to be
inspecting the empty air, to be seeking to give, by the smartness of his
personal appearance, a provisional splendour to the desolation that
could now be felt in this hotel where the season had not been good, and
walked like the ghost of a monarch who returns to haunt the ruins of
what was once his palace. He was particularly annoyed when the little
local railway company, finding the supply of passengers inadequate,
discontinued its trains until the following spring. "What is lacking
here," said the manager, "is the means of commotion." In spite of the
deficit which his books shewed, he was making plans for the future on a
lavish scale. And as he was, after all, capable of retaining an exact
memory of fine language when it was directly applicable to the
hotel-keeping industry and had the effect of enhancing its importance:
"I was not adequately supported, although in the dining-room I had an
efficient squad," he explained; "but the pages left something to be
desired. You will see, next year, what a phalanx I shall collect." In
the meantime the suspension of the services of the B. C. B. obliged him
to send for letters and occasionally to dispatch visitors in a light
cart. I would often ask leave to sit by the driver, and in this way I
managed to be out in all weathers, as in the winter that I had spent at
Combray.

Sometimes, however, the driving rain kept my grandmother and me, the
Casino being closed, in rooms almost completely deserted, as in the
lowest hold of a ship when a storm is raging; and there, day by day, as
in the course of a sea-voyage, a new person from among those in whose
company we had spent three months without getting to know them, the
chief magistrate from Caen, the leader of the Cherbourg bar, an American
lady and her daughters, came up to us, started conversation, discovered
some way of making the time pass less slowly, revealed some social
accomplishment, taught us a new game, invited us to drink tea or to
listen to music, to meet them at a certain hour, to plan together some
of those diversions which contain the true secret of pleasure-giving,
which is to aim not at giving pleasure but simply at helping us to pass
the time of our boredom, in a word, formed with us, at the end of our
stay at Balbec, ties of friendship which, in a day or two, their
successive departures from the place would sever. I even made the
acquaintance of the rich young man, of one of his pair of aristocratic
friends and of the actress, who had reappeared for a few days; but their
little society was composed now of three persons only, the other friend
having returned to Paris. They asked me to come out to dinner with them
at their restaurant. I think, they were just as well pleased that I did
not accept. But they had given the invitation in the most friendly way
imaginable, and albeit it came actually from the rich young man, since
the others were only his guests, as the friend who was staying with him,
the Marquis Maurice de Vaudémont, came of a very good family indeed,
instinctively the actress, in asking me whether I would not come, said,
to flatter my vanity: "Maurice will be so pleased."

And when in the hall of the hotel I met them all three together, it was
M. de Vaudémont (the rich young man effacing himself) who said to me:
"Won't you give us the pleasure of dining with us?"

On the whole I had derived very little benefit from Balbec, but this
only strengthened my desire to return there. It seemed to me that I had
not stayed there long enough. This was not what my friends at home were
thinking, who wrote to ask whether I meant to stay there for the rest of
my life. And when I saw that it was the name "Balbec" which they were
obliged to put on the envelope--just as my window looked out not over a
landscape or a street but on to the plains of the sea, as I heard
through the night its murmur to which I had before going to sleep
entrusted my ship of dreams, I had the illusion that this life of
promiscuity with the waves must effectively, without my knowledge,
pervade me with the notion of their charm, like those lessons which one
learns by heart while one is asleep.

The manager offered to reserve better rooms for me next year, but I had
now become attached to mine, into which I went without ever noticing the
scent of flowering grasses, while my mind, which had once found such
difficulty in rising to fill its space had come now to take its
measurements so exactly that I was obliged to submit it to a reverse
process when I had to sleep in Paris, in my own room, the ceiling of
which was low.

It was high time, indeed, to leave Balbec, for the cold and damp had
become too penetrating for us to stay any longer in a hotel which had
neither fireplaces in the rooms nor a central furnace. Moreover, I
forgot almost immediately these last weeks of our stay. What my mind's
eye did almost invariably see when I thought of Balbec were the hours
which, every morning during the fine weather, as I was going out in the
afternoon with Albertine and her friends, my grandmother, following the
doctor's orders, insisted on my spending lying down, with the room
darkened. The manager gave instructions that no noise was to be made on
my landing, and came up himself to see that they were obeyed. Because
the light outside was so strong, I kept drawn for as long as possible
the big violet curtains which had adopted so hostile an attitude towards
me the first evening. But as, in spite of the pins with which, so that
the light should not enter, Françoise fastened them every night, pins
which she alone knew how to unfasten; as in spite of the rugs, the red
cretonne table-cover, the various fabrics collected here and there which
she fitted in to her defensive scheme, she never succeeded in making
them meet exactly, the darkness was not complete, and they allowed to
spill over the carpet as it were a scarlet shower of anemone-petals,
among which I could not resist the temptation to plunge my bare feet for
a moment. And on the wall which faced the window and so was partially
lighted, a cylinder of gold with no visible support was placed
vertically and moved slowly along like the pillar of fire which went
before the Hebrews in the desert. I went back to bed; obliged to taste
without moving, in imagination only, and all at once, the pleasures of
games, bathing, walks which the morning prompted, joy made my heart beat
thunderingly like a machine set going at full speed but fixed to the
ground, which can spend its energy only by turning upon its own axis.

I knew that my friends were on the "front", but I did not see them as
they passed before the links of the sea's uneven chain, far at the back
of which, and nestling amid its bluish peaks like an Italian citadel,
one could occasionally, in a clear moment, make out the little town of
Rivebelle, drawn in minutest detail by the sun. I did not see my
friends, but (while there mounted to my belvedere the shout of the
newsboy, the "journalists" as Françoise used to call them, the shouts
of the bathers and of children at play, punctuating like the cries of
sea-birds the sound of the gently breaking waves) I guessed their
presence, I heard their laughter enveloped like the laughter of the
Nereids in the smooth tide of sound that rose to my ears. "We looked
up," said Albertine in the evening, "to see if you were coming down. But
your shutters were still closed when the concert began." At ten o'clock,
sure enough, it broke out beneath my windows. In the intervals in the
blare of the instruments, if the tide were high, would begin again,
slurred and continuous, the gliding surge of a wave which seemed to
enfold the notes of the violin in its crystal spirals and to be spraying
its foam over echoes of a submarine music. I grew impatient because no
one had yet come with my things, so that I might rise and dress. Twelve
o'clock struck, Françoise arrived at last. And for months on end, in
this Balbec to which I had so looked forward because I imagined it only
as battered by the storm and buried in fogs, the weather had been so
dazzling and so unchanging that when she came to open the window I could
always, without once being wrong, expect to see the same patch of
sunlight folded in the corner of the outer wall, of an unalterable
colour which was less moving as a sign of summer than depressing as the
colour of a lifeless and composed enamel. And after Françoise had
removed her pins from the mouldings of the window-frame, taken down her
various cloths, and drawn back the curtains, the summer day which she
disclosed seemed as dead, as immemorially ancient as would have been a
sumptuously attired dynastic mummy from which our old servant had done
no more than precautionally unwind the linen wrappings before displaying
it to my gaze, embalmed in its vesture of gold.




THE END

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Skip to main content
 
Texts
 
Video
 
Audio
 
Software
 
Images
Sign up for free
Log in
 Search metadata
 Search text contents
 Search TV news captions
 Search radio transcripts
 Search archived web sites
Advanced Search
About Blog Events Projects Help Donate  Contact Jobs Volunteer
Full text of "The Journey to the West"
See other formats
RUZHONG WU CHENG'EN 
THE JOURNEY TO THE WEST 


(Daodejing 41) 

The superior student who hears about the Way practices it diligently. 
The middling student who hears about the Way now keeps it and now loses it. 
The inferior student who hears about the Way laughs at it loudly; 

If he did not laugh, it would have fallen short of the Way. 


G 


THE UNIVERSITY 


# ADELAIDE 


This web edition published by eBooks@Adelaide. 


Contents 


1. The divine root conceives, its source revealed; Mind and nature nurtured, the Great Dao is born. 


2. Fully awoke to Bodhi’ wondrous truths; He cuts off Mara, returns to the root, and joins Primal Spirit. 


3. Four Seas and a Thousand Mountains all bow to submit; From Ninefold Darkness ten species’ names are removed. 


4. Appointed a Ban-Horse, could he be content? Named Equal to Heaven, he’s still not appeased. 


5. Disrupting the Peach Festival, the Great Sage steals elixir; With revolt in Heaven, many gods would seize the fiend. 


6. Guanyin, attending the banquet, inquires into the cause; The Little Sage, exerting his power, subdues the Great Sage. 


7. From the Eight Trigrams Brazier the Great Sage escapes; Beneath the Five Phases Mountain, Mind Monkey is still. 


8. Our Buddha makes scriptures to impart ultimate bliss; Guanyin receives the decree to go up to Chang’an. 


9. Chen Guangrui, going to his post, meets disaster; Monk River Float, avenging his parents, repays his roots. 


10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 
37. 
38. 
39. 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 


The Old Dragon King’s foolish schemes transgress Heavens decrees; Prime Minister Weis letter seeks help from an official of the dead. 
Having toured the Underworld, Taizong returns to life; Having presented melons and fruits, Liu Quan marries again. 

The Tang emperor, firmly sincere, convenes a Grand Mass; Guanyin, in epiphany, converts Gold Cicada. 

In the den of tigers, the Gold Star brings deliverance; At Double-Fork Ridge, Bogin detains the monk. 

Mind Monkey returns to the Right; The Six Robbers vanish from sight. 

At Serpent Coil Mountain, the gods give secret protection; At Eagle Grief Stream, the Horse of the Will is reined. 

At Guanyin Hall the monks plot for the treasure; At Black Wind Mountain a monster steals the cassock. 

Pilgrim Sun greatly disturbs the Black Wind Mountain; Guanshiyin brings to submission the bear monster. 

At Guanyin Hall the Tang Monk leaves his ordeal; At Gao Village the Great Sage casts out the monster. 

At Cloudy Paths Cave, Wukong takes in Eight Rules; At Pagoda Mountain, Tripitaka receives the Heart Sutra. 

At Yellow Wind Ridge the Tang Monk meets adversity; In mid-mountain, Eight Rules strives to be first. 

The Viharapalas prepare lodging for the Great Sage; Lingji of Sumeru crushes the wind demon. 

Eight Rules fights fiercely at the Flowing-Sand River; Moksa by order receives Wujing’s submission. 

Tripitaka does not forget his origin; The Four Sages test the priestly mind. 

At Long Life Mountain the Great Immortal detains his old friend; At Five Villages Abbey, Pilgrim steals the ginseng fruit. 
The Zhenyuan Immortal gives chase to catch the scripture monk; Pilgrim Sun greatly disturbs Five Villages Abbey. 

Amid the Three Islands Sun Wukong seeks a cure; With sweet dew Guanshiyin revives a tree. 

The cadaver demon three times mocks Tripitaka Tang; The holy monk in spite banishes Handsome Monkey King. 

At Flower-Fruit Mountain a pack of fiends hold assembly; At the Black Pine Forest Tripitaka meets demons. 

Free of his peril, River Float arrives at the kingdom; Receiving favor, Eight Rules invades the forest. 

A deviant demon attacks the true Dharma; The Horse of the Will recalls Mind Monkey. 

Zhu Eight Rules provokes the Monkey King to chivalry; Pilgrim Sun with wisdom defeats the monster. 

On Level-Top Mountain the sentinel brings a message; At Lotus-Flower Cave Wood Mother meets disaster. 

Heresy deludes the True Nature; Primal Spirit helps the Native Mind. 

The demon king's plotting entraps Mind Monkey; The Great Sage, ever adroit, wangles the treasures. 

Heresy uses power to oppress the proper Nature; Mind Monkey, bagging treasures, conquers deviate demons. 

When Mind Monkey is rectified, the nidanas cease; Smash through the side door to view the bright moon. 

The ghost king visits Tripitaka Tang at night; Wukong, through wondrous transformation, leads the child. 

The child queries his mother to learn of deviancy and truth; Metal and Wood, reaching the deep, see the false and the real. 
One pellet of cinnabar elixir found in Heaven; A king, dead three years, lives again on Earth. 

The child’s playful transformations confuse the Chan Mind; Ape, Horse, Spatula gone, Wood Mother, too, is lost. 

Mind Monkey is defeated by fire; Wood Mother is captured by demons. 

The Great Sage diligently calls at South Sea; Guanyin with compassion binds the Red Boy. 

An evil demon at Black River captures the monk; The Western Ocean’s dragon prince catches the iguana. 

The dharma-body in primal cycle meets the force of the cart; The mind, righting monstrous deviates, crosses the spine-ridge pass. 
At the Three Pure Ones Abbey the Great Sage leaves his name; At the Cart Slow Kingdom the Monkey King shows his power. 
Heresy flaunts its strength to mock orthodoxy; Mind Monkey in epiphany slays the deviates. 

The holy monk’s blocked at night at Heaven-Reaching River; Metal and Wood, in compassion, rescue little children. 

The demon, raising a cold wind, sends a great snow fall; The monk, intent on seeing Buddha, walks on layered ice. 
Tripitaka meets disaster and sinks to a water home; To bring salvation, Guanyin reveals a fish basket. 


Nature follows confused feelings through lust and desire; Faint spirit and moved mind meet a demon chief. 


51. Mind Monkey in vain uses a thousand tricks; Futile water and fire makes it hard to smelt demons. 

52. Wukong greatly disturbed the Golden Helmet Cave; Tathagata reveals in secret the true master. 

53. Imbibing, the Chan Lord conceives a ghostly child; Yellow Dame brings water to end the weird fetus. 

54. Dharma-nature, going west, reaches the Women State; Mind Monkey makes a plan to flee the fair sex. 

55. Deviant form makes lustful play for Tripitaka Tang; Upright nature safeguards the untainted self. 

56. Wild Spirit slays brutish bandits; Wayward Way sets loose Mind Monkey. 

57. True Pilgrim lays bare his woes at Mount Potalaka; False Monkey King transcribes texts at Water-Curtain Cave. 

58. Two Minds cause disorder in the great cosmos, It’s hard for one body to realize true Nirvana. 

59. Tripitaka Tang's path is blocked at Mountain of Flames; Pilgrim Sun baits for the first time the palm-leaf fan. 

60. Bull Demon King stops fighting to attend a lavish feast; Pilgrim Sun baits for the second time the palm-leaf fan. 

61. Zhu Eight Rules assists in defeating the demon king; Pilgrim Sun baits for the third time the palm-leaf fan. 

62. As the Peonies Glow Red, the Ch'ing Fish Breathes Out Its Spell Issuing an Elegy for the Wrongly Killed, the Great Sage Tarries 
63. A New T'ang Dynasty Appears on the Western Road; The Glorious Emperor Rests in the Green Jade Palace. 

64. Hstian-tsang Is To Be Commissioned and Given a Peach Flower Battle-Axe; The Mind-Monkey Is Startled by the Axes of Sky Gougers. 
65. A Crack Reveals a Myriad of Bewildering Mirrors; Where the Shapes of Things Appear, Their Original Form Is Lost. 

66. Through the Cast Bronze Mirror the Mind-Monkey Enters the Past; In Green Pearl's Tower the Wayward Disciple Knits His Brows. 
67. For a Face Half Covered with Tears, the True Beauty Dies; At the Mention of P'ing-hsiang, the General of Ch'u Is Grieved. 

68. 4 Drumbeats Between Ch'in and Ch'u; Beautiful Ladies, True and False, Appear in the Same Mirror. 

69. In the World of the Future, Monkey Exterminates the Six Thieves; As Yama,1 for Half a Day Monkey Judges Good and Evil. 

70. How Ch'in Kuei, Even with a Hundred Bodies, Could Not Redeem Himself; The Great Sage Wholeheartedly Takes Refuge in Yiieh Fei. 
71. Monkey Returns to the Tower of Myriad Mirrors; In the Palace of Creeping Vines Wu-k'ung Saves Himself. 

72. Reading Accounts Before the Palace of the Hexagram of Limitation; Collecting Hairs on the Crest of the Hill of Grief. 

73. In the Palace of Crying Ospreys,1 the Tears of the T'ang Priest Fall; A Young Girl Plucks the P'i-p'a2 and Sings a Tale. 

74. Monkey Meets an Old Man in Green Bamboo Cave; By the Reed Flowers Monkey Seeks the Emperor of Ch'in. 

75. Young Lord T'ang Accepts an Order to Lead the Troops; Lady Green-twine Becomes a Broken Jade by the Pool. 

76. The T'ang Priest Musters His Troops Under the Midnight Moon; The Great Sage's Spirit Falters Before the Banners of 5 Colours. 
71. The Elder of the Void Rouses Monkey from His Dream; When the Great Sage Returns, the Sun Is Half Hidden in the Mountains. 
78. To wash off filth, to bathe the mind, just sweep a pagoda; To bind demons and return to the lord is self-cultivation. 

79. Two monks, quelling fiends, disturb the dragon palace; The sages, destroying deviates, acquire the treasures. 

80. At Bramble Ridge Wuneng exerted great effort; At Shrine of Sylvan Immortals Tripitaka discusses poetry . 

81. Fiends set up falsely the Small Thunderclap; The four pilgrims all meet a great ordeal. 

82. Many gods meet injury; Maitreya binds a fiend. 

83. Having rescued Tuoluo, Chan Nature is secure; Escaping filthiness, the Mind of Dao is pure. 

84. At Scarlet-Purple Kingdom the Tang Monk speaks of past eras; Pilgrim Sun performs on an arm broken in three places. 

85. At night the Lord of the Mind refines medicines; At a banquet the king speaks of the perverse fiend. 

86. The monstrous demon s treasures release smoke, sand, and fire; Wukong by stratagem steals the purple-gold bells. 

87. By a false name Pilgrim defeats the fiendish wolf; In epiphany Guanyin subdues the monster-king. 

88. At Cobweb Cave Seven Passions delude the Origin; At Purgation Spring Eight Rules forgets all manners. 

89. Passions, because of old enmity, beget calamity; Demon-trapped, the Mind Lord with luck breaks the light. 

90. Long Life reports how vicious the demons are;Pilgrim displays his transformation power. 

91. Mind Monkey drills through the yin-yang body; Demon lords return to the true great Way. 

92. Mind-Spirit dwells at home, and demons revert to nature; Wood Mother together subdues the fiend’s true self. 

93. A horde of demons affront native Nature; The One Body bows to True Suchness. 

94. At Bhiksu he pities the infants and summons the night gods; In the golden hall he knows the demon speaking on the way and virtue. 
95. Searching the cave for the fiend he meets Long Life; The proper lord of the court sees the babies. 

96. The fair girl, nursing the yang, seeks a mate; Mind Monkey, guarding his master, knows a monster. 

97. At Sea-Pacifying Monastery Mind Monkey knows the fiend; In the black pine forest three pupils search for their master. 

98. The fair girl seeks the yang; Primal spirit guards the Way. 

99. Mind Monkey knows the elixir source; Fair girl returns to her true nature. 

00. “Priests are hard to destroy” completes great awakening; The Dharma-king attains the right, his body’s naturalized. 

01. Mind Monkey envies Wood Mother; The demon lord plots to devour Chan. 

02. Wood Mother, lending power, conquers the fiendish creature; Metal Squire, using his magic, extirpates the deviates. 

03. The Phoenix-Immortal Prefecture offends Heaven and suffers drought; The Great Sage Sun advocates virtue and provides rain. 
04. Reaching Jade-Flower, Chan convenes an assembly; Mind Monkey, Wood, and Earth instruct disciples. 

05. The yellow lion-spirit in vain gives the Muckrake Feast; Gold, Wood, and Earth disturb with a scheme Mount Leopard’s-Head. 
06. Masters and lions, teachers and pupils, all return to the One; Thieves and the Dao, snares and Buddhism, quiet Ninefold-Numina. 
07. At Gold-Level Prefecture they watch lanterns on the fifteenth night; In Mysterious Flower Cave the Tang Monk makes a deposition. 
08. 3 priests fight fiercely at Green Dragon Mountain; Four Stars help to capture rhinoceros fiends. 

09. At Jetavana Park he asks the aged about the cause; At the Kingdom of India he sees the king and meets his mate. 

10. 4 priests are feted at the royal garden; One fiend vainly longs for sensual joys. 


111. Falsely assuming true form, the jade hare’s caught; True Yin returns to the right to join Numinous Source. 

112. Squire Kou gladly receives a noble priest; The elder Tang does not covet riches. 

113. Gold-dispensing external aid meets demonic harm; The sage reveals his soul to bring restoration. 

114. Only when ape and horse are tamed will shells be cast; With merit and work perfected, they see the Real. 

115. Nine times nine ends the count and Mara’s all destroyed; The work of three times three done, the Dao reverts to its root. 
116. They return to the Land of the East; Five sages become perfected. 


RUZHONG WU CHENG’EN 
THE JOURNEY TO THE WEST 
(Daodejing 41) 
The superior student who hears about the Way practices it diligently. 
The middling student who hears about the Way now keeps it and now loses it. 
The inferior student who hears about the Way laughs at it loudly; 
If he didn’t laugh, it'd have fallen short of the Way. 


PREFACE 
| was very fond of strange stories when | was a child. In my village-schooldays, | used to buy stealthily popular novels and historical recitals. Fearing that my dad and my teacher might punish me for 
this and rob me of these treasures, | carefully hid them in secret places where I'd enjoy them unmolested. My love for strange stories became even stronger as | grew older and learned of things 
stranger than what I’d read in my childhood. When | was in my 30s, my memory’s full of these stories accumulated through years of eager seeking. I’ve always admired such writers of the Tang Dynasty 
as Tuan Ch’éng-shih [Duan Chengshi, author of the Youyang zazu] and Niu Sheng-ju [Ox Sengru, the author of the Xuanguai Iu] who wrote short stories so excellent in portrayal of men and description 
of things. | often had the ambition to write a book (of stories) that might be compared with theirs. But | was too lazy to write and as my laziness persisted, | gradually forgot most of the stories that I'd 
learned. Now only these few stories, less than a score have survived and have so successfully battled against my laziness that they are at last written down. Hence this Book of Monsters. I've sometimes 
laughingly said to myself that it isn’t | who've found these ghosts and monsters but they, the monstrosities themselves that’ve found me! ... Although my book’s called a book of monsters, it isn’t devoted 
to provide illumination for ghosts: it also records the strange things of the human world and sometimes conveys a little bit of moral lesson. The poem says: 
Ere Chaos’s divide with Heaven and Earth a mess, no human appeared in this murkiness. 
When Pan Gu broke the nebula apart, the dense and pure defined, started clearing. 
Enfold all life supreme humaneness would and teach all things how become good they should. 
To know cyclic time’s work, if that’s your quest, read Tale of Woes Dispelled on Journey West. 


PROLOGUE 
THE CHINESE CREATION MYTH 
In the order of Heaven and Earth, a single period consisted of 129600 years. Dividing this period into 12 epochs were the 12 stems of Zi, Chou, Yin, Mao, Chen, Si, Wu, Wei, Shen, Yu, Xu, and Hai 
with each epoch having 10800 years. Considered as the horary circle, the sequence would be thus: the 1* sign of dawn appears in the hour of Zi while at Chou the cock crows; daybreak occurs at Yin, 
and the sun rises at Mao; Chen comes after breakfast, and by Si everything is planned; at Wu the sun arrives at its meridian, and it declines westward by Wei; the evening meal comes during the hour 
of Shen, and the sun sinks completely at Yu; twilight sets in at Xu, and people rest by the hour of Hai. This sequence may also be understood macrocosmically. At the end of the epoch of Xu, Heaven 
and Earth were obscure and all things were indistinct. With the passing of 5400 years, the beginning of Hai was the epoch of darkness. This moment was named Chaos, because there were neither 
human beings nor the 2 spheres. After another 5400 years Hai ended and as the creative force began to work after great perseverance, the epoch of Zi drew near and again brought gradual development. 
Shao Kangjie? said, “When to the middle of Zi winter moved, no change by Heaven’s mind had been approved. The male principle had but barely stirred but the birth of all things was still deferred.” 
[In the 4 month of the 1s/3 year of the Zhengyuan reign period [i.e. 628/630] braving the transgression of the articles of law, | departed for India on my own authority]. At this point, the firmament first 
acquired its foundation. With another 5400 years came the Zi epoch; the ethereal and the light rose up to form the 4 phenomena of the sun, the moon, the stars, and the Heavenly bodies. Hence it is 
said, the Heaven was created at Zi. This epoch came to its end in another 5400 years and the sky began to harden as the Chou epoch approached. The Classic of Change said, “Great's the male 
principle; supreme, the female! They made all things in obedience to Heaven.” 
At this point, the Earth became solidified. In another 5400 years after the arrival of the Chou epoch, the heavy and the turbid condensed below and formed the 5 elements of water, fire, mountain, stone, 
and earth. Hence it is said, the Earth was created at Chou. With the passing of another 5400 years, the Chou epoch came to its end and all things began to grow at the beginning of the Yin epoch. The 
Book of Calendar said, “The Heavenly aura descended; the earthly aura rose up. Heaven and Earth copulated and all things were born.” At this point, Heaven and Earth were bright and fair; the yin 
had intercourse with the yang. In another 5400 years during the Yin epoch, humans, beasts, and fowls came into being, and thus the so-called 3 forces of Heaven, Earth, and Man were established. 
Hence it is said, man was born at Yin. Following Pan Gu’s construction of the universe, the rule of the 3 august ones, and the ordering of the relations by the 5 Thearchs, the world was divided into 4 
great continents. They were: the East Videha Continent, the West Aparagodaniya Continent, the South Jambiidvipa Continent, and the North Kuru Continent. This book is solely concerned with the 
East Videha Continent. 
PART | 
SUN WUKONG 
001 
The divine root conceives, its source revealed; Mind & nature nurtured, the Great Dao’s born 
Beyond the ocean there was a country named Aolai. It was near a Great Ocean in the midst of which was located the famous Flower-Fruit Mountain. This mountain that constituted the chief range of 
the 10 Islets and formed the origin of the 3 Islands came into being after the creation of the world. As a testimonial to its magnificence, there is the following poetic rhapsody: 
Its majesty commands the wide ocean; splendour rules the jasper sea; majesty commands the wide ocean when like silver mountains, the tide sweeps fishes into caves; splendour rules the jasper 
sea when snow-like billows send forth serpents from the deep. 
On the southwest side pile up tall plateaus; from the Eastern Sea arise soaring peaks. 
There’re crimson ridges and portentous rocks, precipitous cliffs and prodigious peaks. 
Atop the crimson ridges Phoenixes recite in pairs: before precipitous cliffs the unicorn singly rests. 
At the summit is heard the cry of golden pheasants; in and out of stony caves are seen the strides of dragons: in the forest are long-lived deer and mortal foxes. 
On the trees are divine fowls and black cranes. 
Strange grass and flowers never wither: green pines and cypresses always keep their spring. 
Mortal peaches are ever fruit-bearing; lofty bamboos often detain the clouds. 
Within a single gorge the creeping vines are dense; the grass colour of meadows all around’s fresh. 
This is indeed the pillar of Heaven where 100 rivers meet — the Earth’s great axis in 10000 kalpas unchanged. 
There was on top of that very mountain a mortal stone that measured 36 feet and 5 inches in height and 24 feet in circumference. The height of 36 feet and 5 inches corresponded to the 365 cyclical 
degrees while the circumference of 24 feet corresponded to the 24 solar terms of the calendar. On the stone were also 9 perforations and 8 holes that corresponded to the Palaces of the 9 Constellations 
and the 8 Trigrams. Though it lacked the shade of trees on all sides, it was set off by epidendrums on the left and right. Since the creation of the world, it had been nourished for a long period by the 
seeds of Heaven and Earth and by the essences of the sun and the moon until quickened by divine inspiration, it became pregnant with a divine embryo. 1 day it split open, giving birth to a stone egg 
about the size of a playing ball. Exposed to the wind, it was transformed into a stone human endowed with fully developed features and limbs. Having learned at once to climb and run, this human also 
saluted to the 4 quarters while 2 beams of golden light flashed from his eyes to reach even the Palace of the Polestar. The light disturbed the Great Benevolent Sage of Heaven, the Celestial Jade 
Emperor of the Most Venerable demigod who was sitting in the Cloud Palace of the Golden Arches attended by his divine ministers in the Treasure Hall of the Divine Mists. Upon seeing the glimmer of 
the golden beams, he ordered 1000-Mile Eye and Fair-Wind Ear to open the South Heaven Gate and to look out. At this command the 2 captains went out to the gate and having looked intently and 
listened clearly, they returned presently to report, “Your subjects obeying your command to locate the beams, discovered that they came from the Flower-Fruit Mountain at the border of the small Aolai 
Country that lies to the east of the East Videha Continent. On this mountain’s a mortal stone that’s given birth to an egg. Exposed to the wind, it’s been transformed into a human’s flashed from his 
eyes those golden beams that reached the Palace of the Polestar who when saluting the 4 quarters. Now that he’s taking some food and drink, the light’s about to grow dim.” 
With compassionate mercy the Jade Emperor declared, “These creatures from the world below are born of the essences of Heaven and Earth and they needn't surprise us.” 
That human in the mountain was able to walk, run, and leap about; he fed on grass and shrubs, drank from the brooks and streams, gathered mountain flowers, and searched out fruits from trees. He 
made his companions the tiger, the lizard, the wolf, and the leopard; befriended the civet and the deer, and called the man and the baboon his kin. At night he slept beneath stony ridges and in the 
morning he sauntered about the caves and the peaks. Truly in the mountain there is no passing of time; the cold recedes but one knows not the year. One very hot morning, he was playing with a group 
of humans under the shade of some pine trees to escape the heat. Look at them, each amusing himself in his own way by swinging from branches to branches, searching for flowers and fruits; they 
played 2 games or 3 with pebbles and with pellets; circled sandy pits; built rare pagodas; chased the dragonflies; ran down small lizards; saluting low to the sky, worshiped Nuns; pulled the creeping 
vines; plaited mats with grass; searched to catch the louse that they bit or squeezed to death; dressed their furry coats; scraped their fingernails; those leaning leaned; rubbing rubbed; pushing pushed; 
pressing pressed; pulling pulled; tugging tugged. Beneath the pine forest and free to play, they washed themselves in the green-water stream. So, after the humans had frolicked for a while, they went 
to bathe in the mountain stream and saw that its currents bounced and splashed like tumbling melons. As the old saying goes: Fowls have their fowl speech and beasts have their beast language. The 
humans said to each other, “We don’t know where this water comes from. Since we've nothing to do today, let’s follow the stream up to its source to have some fun.” With a shriek of joy, they dragged 
along males, females, calling out to brothers, sisters, and scrambled up the mountain alongside the stream. Reaching its source, they found a great waterfall. What they saw was a column of white 
rainbows rising, 1000 yards of snow-caps flying. The sea wind blows but cannot sever what a river moon lights up forever. Its cold breath divides the green glades; its branches wet the verdant shades. 
This torrent named a waterfall seems like a curtain hanging tall. All the humans clapped their hands in acclaim: “Marvellous water! Marvellous water! So this waterfall’s distantly connected with the 
stream at the base of the mountain and flows directly out even to the great ocean.” They said also, “If any of us had the ability to penetrate the curtain and find out where the water comes from without 
hurting himself, we'd honour him as king.” 
They gave the call 3 times when suddenly the stone human leaped out from the crowd. He answered the challenge with a loud voice, ‘I'll go in! I'll go in!” What a human! For today his fame will spread 
wide. His fortune the time does provide. He’s fated to live in this place, sent by a king to god’s palace. Look at him! He closed his eyes, crouched low, and with 1 leap he jumped straight through the 
waterfall. Opening his eyes at once and raising his head to look around, he saw that there was neither water nor waves inside, only a gleaming, shining bridge. He paused to collect himself and looked 
more carefully again: it was a bridge made of sheet iron. The water beneath it surged through a hole in the rock to reach the outside, filling in all the space under the arch. With bent body he climbed 
on the bridge, looking about as he walked, and discovered a beautiful place that seemed to be some kind of residence. Then he saw fresh mosses piling up indigo, white clouds like jade afloat, luminous 
sheens of mist, smoke; empty windows, quiet rooms, and carved flowers growing smoothly on benches; stalactites suspended in milky caves; rare blossoms voluminous over the ground. Pans and 
stoves near the wall show traces of fire; bottles and cups on the table contain left overs. The stone seats and beds were truly lovable; the stone pots and bowls were more praiseworthy. There were 
furthermore a stalk or 2 of tall bamboos, and 3 or 5 sprigs of plum flowers. With a few green pines always draped in rain, this whole place indeed resembled a home. After staring at the place for a long 
time, he jumped across the middle of the bridge and looked left and right. There in the middle was a stone tablet on which was inscribed in regular, large letters: 
The Blessed Land of Flower-Fruit Mountain, the Cave Heaven of Water-Curtain Cave. 
Beside himself with delight, the stone human quickly turned around to go back out, closing his eyes, and crouching again, leaped out of the water. “A great stroke of luck,” he exclaimed with 2 loud 
guffaws, “a great stroke of luck!” 
The other humans surrounded him and asked, “How’s it inside? How deep’s the water?” 
The stone human replied, “There’s no water at all. There’s a sheet iron bridge and beyond it’s a piece of Heaven-sent property.” 
“What do you mean that there’s property in there?” asked the humans. 
Laughing, the stone human said, “This water splashes through a hole in the rock and fills the space under the bridge. Beside the bridge there’s a stone mansion with trees and flowers. Inside are stone 
ovens, stoves, stone pots, pans, stone beds, benches. A stone tablet’s the inscription in the middle: 


The Blessed Land of the Flower-Fruit Mountain, the Cave Heaven of the Water-Curtain Cave. 
eee eee eee eee eee eee RRR RRR 


This is truly the place for us to settle in. It's moreover very spacious inside and can hold thousands of the young and old. Let's all go live in there and spare ourselves from being subject to the whims 
of Heaven. For we've in there a retreat from the wind, a shelter from the rain. You fear no frost or snow; hear no thunderclap. Mist and smoke are brightened, warmed by a holy light - the pines are 
evergreen: rare flowers, new daily.” 
The humans were delighted when they heard that, saying, “You go in first and lead the way.” 
The stone human closed his eyes again, crouched low, and jumped inside. “All of you,” he cried, “Follow me in! Follow me in!” 
The braver of the humans leaped in at once but the more timid ones stuck out their heads and then drew them back, scratched their ears, rubbed their jaws, and chattered noisily. After milling around 
for some time, they too bounded inside. Jumping across the bridge, they were all soon snatching dishes, clutching bowls, or fighting for stoves and beds - shoving and pushing things hither and thither. 
Befitting their stubbornly prankish nature, the humans could not keep still for a moment and stopped only when they were utterly exhausted. The stone human then solemnly took a seat above and 
spoke to them: “Gentlemen! /f a man lacks trustworthiness, it’s difficult to know what he can accomplish! [The Xuanwu Gate Incident] You yourselves promised just now that whoever could get in here 
and leave again without hurting himself would be honoured as king. Now that I’ve come in and gone out, gone out and come in, found for all of you this Heavenly grotto in which you may reside securely, 
and enjoy the privilege of raising a family, why don’t you honour me as your king?” 
When the humans heard this, they all folded their hands on their chests and obediently saluted themselves. Each one of them then lined up according to rank, age, and saluting reverently, they intoned, 
“Long live our great king!” From that moment, the stone human ascended the throne of kingship. He did away with the word stone in his name and assumed the title, Handsome King. A testimonial 
poem says: 
Triple spring mated to beget all things. 
A divine stone quickened by the sun and moon changed from egg to human to reach the Great Way. 
Loan-name and surname matched elixir made. 
Formless inside, he yields no image known; his outward guise coheres in action shown. 


In every age all persons will yield to him: hailed a king, a sage, he’s free to roam. 
eee eee eee RRR RRR RRR RRR RRR 


The Handsome King thus led a flock of men and baboons, some of whom were appointed by him as his officers and ministers. They toured the Flower-Fruit Mountain in the morning and lived in the 
Water-Curtain Cave by night. Living in concord and sympathy, they did not mingle with bird or beast but enjoyed their independence in perfect happiness. For such were their activities: In the spring 
they gathered flowers for food and drink. In the summer they went in quest of fruits for sustenance. In the autumn they amassed taros and chestnuts to ward off time. In the winter they searched for 
yellow-sperms to live out the year. The Handsome King had enjoyed this insouciant existence for 3 or 4 centuries when one day while feasting with the rest of the humans, he suddenly grew sad and 
shed a few tears. Alarmed, the humans surrounding him saluted down and asked, “What's disturbing the Great King?” 
The King replied, “Though I’m very happy at the moment, I’m a little concerned about the future. Hence I’m distressed.” 
The humans all laughed and said, “The Great King indeed doesn’t know contentment! Here we've a daily banquet on a mortal mountain in a blessed land in an ancient cave on a divine continent. We're 
not subject to the unicorn or the phoenix, nor we’re governed by the rulers of mankind. Such independence and comfort are immeasurable blessings. Why then does he worry about the future?” 
The King said, “Though we’re not subject to the laws of man today, nor need we be threatened by the rule of any bird or beast, old age and physical decay in the future will disclose the secret sovereignty 
of Yama, King of the Underworld. If we die, shan’t we've lived in vain, being unable to rank forever among the Heavenly beings?” 
When the humans heard this, they all covered their faces and wept mournfully, each troubled by his own impermanence. But look! From among the ranks a bareback human suddenly leaped forth and 
cried aloud, “If the Great King’s so farsighted, it may well indicate the sprouting of his religious inclination. There’re only three species that aren’t subject to Yama the King of the Underworld among the 
five major divisions of all living creatures.” 
The King said, “Do you know who they're?” 
The human said, “They're the gods, the mortals, the holy sages; these three alone can avoid the Wheel of Transmigration as well as the process of birth, destruction, live as long as Heaven, Earth, the 
mountains, and the streams.” 
“Where do they live?” asked the King. 
The human said, “They don’t live beyond the world of the Jambidvipa for they dwell within ancient caves on mortal mountains.” 
The King was filled with delight when he heard this, saying, “Tomorrow I'll take leave of you all and go down the mountain. Even if I’ve to wander with the clouds to the corners of the sea or journey to 
the distant edges of Heaven, | intend to find these three kinds of people. I'll learn from them how to be young forever and escape the calamity inflicted by King Yama.” 
Lo, this utterance at once led him to leap free of the Transmigration Net and be the Great Sage Equal to Heaven. All the humans clapped their hands in acclamation, saying, “Wonderful! Wonderful! 
Tomorrow we'll scour the mountain ranges to gather plenty of fruits so that we may send the Great King off with a great banquet.” Next day the humans duly went to gather mortal peaches, pick rare 
fruits, dig out mountain herbs, and chop yellow-sperms. They brought in an orderly manner every variety of orchids, epidendrums, exotic plants, and strange flowers. They set out the stone chairs, 
stone tables, covering the tables with mortal juices and food. Look at the golden balls and pearly pellets, red ripeness and yellow plumpness. Golden balls and pearly pellets are the cherries, their 
colours truly luscious. Red ripeness and yellow plumpness are the plums, their taste - a fragrant tartness. Fresh longans of sweet pulps and thin skins. Fiery lychees of small pits and red sacks. Green 
fruits of the Pyrus are presented by the branches. The loquats yellow with buds are held with their leaves. Pears like rabbit heads and dates like chicken hearts dispel your thirst, your sorrow, and the 
effects of juice. Fragrant peaches and soft almonds are sweet as the elixir of life: crisply fresh plums and strawberries are sour like cheese and buttermilk. Red pulps and black seeds compose the ripe 
watermelons. 4 cloves of yellow rind enfold the big persimmons. When the pomegranates are split wide, cinnabar grains glisten like specks of ruby: when the chestnuts are cracked open, their tough 
brawns are hard like cornelian. Walnut and silver almonds fare well with tea. Coconuts and grapes may be pressed into juice. Hazelnuts, yews, and crab-apples overfill the dishes. Kumquats, sugarcanes, 
tangerines, and oranges crowd the tables. Sweet yams are baked, yellow-sperms over-boiled, the tubers minced with seeds of waterlily, and soup in stone pots simmers on a gentle fire. Mankind may 
boast its delicious dainties but what can best the pleasure of mountain humans. The humans honoured the King with the seat at the head of the table while they sat below according to their age and 
rank. They drank for a whole day, each of the humans taking a turn to go forward and present the King with juice, flowers, and fruits. The next day the King rose early and gave the instruction, “Little 
ones, cut me some pinewood and make me a raft. Then find me a bamboo for the pole, and gather some fruits and the like. I’m about to leave.” When all was ready, he got onto the raft by himself. 
Pushing off with all his might, he drifted out toward the great ocean and, taking advantage of the wind, set sail for the border of South Jambidvipa Continent. Here is the consequence of this journey: 
the Heaven-born human, strong in magic might, he left the mount and rode the raft to catch fair wind: he drifted across the sea to seek mortals’ way, determined in heart and mind to achieve great 
things. It’s his lot, his portion, to quit earthly zeal: calm and carefree, he'll face a lofty sage. He’d meet, | think, a true, discerning friend: the source disclosed, all religion will be known. It was indeed his 
fortune that after he boarded the wooden raft, a strong southeast wind (that lasted for days) sent him to the north-western coast, the border of the South Jambidvipa Continent. He took the pole to test 
the water and finding it shallow one day, he abandoned the raft and jumped ashore. On the beach there were people fishing, hunting wild geese, digging clams, and draining salt. He approached them 
and, making a weird face and some strange antics, he scared them into dropping their baskets and nets and scattering in all directions. One of them could not run and was caught by the King who 
stripped him of his clothes and put them on himself, aping the way humans wore them. With a swagger he walked through counties and prefectures, imitating human speech and human manners in 
the marketplaces. He rested by night and dined in the moming but he was bent on finding the way of the gods, mortals, and holy sages, on discovering the formula for eternal youth. He saw however, 
that the people of the world were all seekers after profit and fame; there was not one who showed concern for his appointed end. This is their condition: when will end this quest for fortune and fame, 
this tyrant of early rising and retiring late? Riding on mules they long for noble steeds; by now prime ministers, they hope to be kings. For food and raiment they suffer stress and strain, never fearing 
Yama’s call to reckoning. Seeking wealth and power to give to sons of sons, there’s not one ever willing to turn back. The King searched diligently for the way of mortality but he had no chance of 
meeting it. Going through big cities and visiting small towns, he unwittingly spent 8 or 9 years on the South Jambidvipa Continent before he suddenly came upon the Great Western Ocean. He thought 
that there would certainly be mortals living beyond the ocean; so, having built himself a raft like the previous one, he once again drifted across the Western Ocean until he reached the West 
Aparagodantya Continent. After landing, he searched for a long time, when all at once he came upon a tall and beautiful mountain with thick forests at its base. Since he was afraid neither of wolves 
and lizards nor of tigers and leopards, he went straight to the top to look around. It was indeed a magnificent mountain: 1000 peaks stand like rows of spears like 10000 cubits of screen widespread. 
The sun’s beams lightly enclose the azure mist; in darkening rain, the mount’s colour turns cool and green. Dry creepers entwine old trees; ancient fords edge secluded paths. Rare flowers and luxuriant 
grass. Tall bamboos and lofty pines. Tall bamboos and lofty pines for 10 millennia grow green in this blessed land. Rare flowers and luxuriant grass in all seasons bloom as in the Isles of the Blest. The 
calls of birds hidden are near. The sounds of streams rushing are clear. Deep inside deep canyons the orchids interweave. On every ridge and crag sprout lichens and mosses. Rising and falling, the 
ranges show a fine dragon’s pulse. Here in reclusion must an eminent man reside. As he was looking about, he suddenly heard the sound of a man speaking deep within the woods. Hurriedly he 
dashed into the forest and cocked his ear to listen. It was someone reciting and the poem went thus: 
| watch chess games, my axe handle’s rotted. 
| chop at wood, zheng-zheng the sound. 
| walk slowly by the cloud’s fringe at the valley’s entrance. 
Selling my firewood to buy some juice, I’m happy and laugh without restraint. 
When the path’s frosted in autumn’s height, | face the moon, my pillow the pine root. 
Sleeping till dawn | find my familiar woods. 
| climb the plateaus and scale the peaks to cut dry creepers with my axe. 
When | gather enough to make a load, | stroll reciting through the marketplace and trade it for 3 pints of rice with nary the slightest bickering over a price so modest. 
Plots and schemes | don’t know; without vainglory or attaint my life’s prolonged in simplicity. 
Those | meet if mortals would be Daoists seated quietly to expound the Yellow Court. 
When the Handsome King heard this, he was filled with delight, saying, “So the mortals are hiding in this place.” He leaped at once into the forest. Looking again carefully, he found a woodcutter 
chopping firewood with his axe. The man he saw was very strangely attired. On his head he wore a wide splint hat of seed-leaves freshly cast from new bamboos. On his body he wore a cloth garment 
of gauze woven from the native cotton. Around his waist he tied a winding sash of silk spun from an old silkworm. On his feet he had a pair of straw sandals with laces rolled from withered sedge. In 
his hands he held a fine steel axe; a sturdy rope coiled round and round his load. In breaking pines or chopping trees where’s the man to equal him? The King drew near and called out: “Reverend 
mortal! Your disciple raises his hands.” 
The woodcutter was so flustered that he dropped his axe as he turned to return the salutation. “Blasphemy! Blasphemy!” he said. “I, a foolish fellow with hardly enough clothes or food! How can | bear 
the title of mortal?” 
The King said, “If you’re not a mortal, how is it that you speak his language?” 
The woodcutter asked, “What did | say that sounded like the language of a mortal?” 
The King explained, “When | came just now to the forest's edge, | heard you reciting, ‘Those | meet if mortals would be Daoists, seated quietly to expound the Yellow Court.’ The Yellow Court contains 
the perfected words of the Way and Virtue. What can you be but a mortal?” 
Laughing, the woodcutter said, “I can tell you this much: the poem of that lines is named A Court Full of Blossoms and it’s taught to me by a mortal, a neighbour of mine. He saw that I'd to struggle to 
make a living and that my days were full of worries so he told me to recite the poem whenever | was troubled. He said this would both comfort me and rid me of my difficulties. It happened that | was 
anxious about something just now so | recited the poem. It didn’t occur to me that I'd be overheard.” 
The King said, “If you’re a neighbour of the mortal, why don’t you follow him in the cultivation of the Way? Wouldn't it be nice to learn from him the formula for eternal youth?” 
The woodcutter replied, “My lot’s been a hard one all my life. When | was young, | was indebted to my parents’ nurture until | was eight or nine. As soon as | began to have some understanding of 
human affairs, my dad unfortunately died, and my mum remained a widow. I’d no brothers or sisters, so there was no alternative but for me alone to support and care for my mum. Now that my mum 
is growing old, all the more | dare not leave her. Moreover, my fields are rather barren and desolate, and we've not enough food or clothing. | can’t do more than chop two bundles of firewood to take 
to the market in exchange for a few pennies to buy a few pints of rice. | cook that myself, serving it to my mum with the tea that | make. That's why | can’t practice austerities.” 
The King said, “According to what you've said, you’re indeed a gentleman of filial piety, and you'll certainly be rewarded in the future. | hope however, that you'll show me the way to the mortal’s abode, 
so that | may reverently call upon him.” 


“It's not far,” the woodcutter said. “This mountain is called the Mountain of Mind and Heart, and in it is the Cave of Slanting Moon and Three Stars. Inside the cave is a mortal by the name of the Patriarch 
SuAwakening who has already sent out innumerable disciples. Even now there are thirty or forty persons who are practicing austerities with him. Follow this narrow path and travel south for about 
seven or eight miles, and you'll come to his home.” 
Grabbing the woodcutter, the King said, “Honoured brother, go with me. If | receive any benefit, I'll not forget the favour of your guidance.” 
“What a boneheaded fellow you're!” the woodcutter said. “I've just finished telling you these things, and you still don’t understand. If | go with you, won’t | be neglecting my livelihood? And who will take 
care of my mum? | must chop my firewood. You go on by yourself!” When the King heard this, he had to take his leave. Emerging from the deep forest, he found the path and went past the slope of a 
hill. After he had travelled 7 or 8 miles, a cave dwelling indeed came into sight. He stood up straight to take a better look at this splendid place, and this was what he saw: mist and smoke in diffusive 
brilliance, flashing lights from the sun and moon, 1000 stalks of old cypress, 10000 stems of tall bamboo. 1000 stalks of old cypress draped in rain half fill the air with tender green; 10000 stems of tall 
bamboo held in smoke will paint the glen chartreuse. Strange flowers spread brocades before the door. Jade-like grass emits fragrance beside the bridge. On ridges protruding grow moist green lichens; 
on hanging cliffs cling the long blue mosses. The cries of mortal cranes are often heard. Once in a while a phoenix soars overhead. When the cranes cry, their sounds reach through the marsh to the 
distant sky. When the phoenix soars up, its plume with 5 bright colours embroiders the clouds. Black apes and white deer may come or hide; gold lions and jade elephants may leave or bide. look with 
care at this blessed, holy place: it has the true semblance of Paradise. He noticed that the door of the cave was tightly shut; all was quiet, and there was no sign of any human inhabitant. He turned 
around, suddenly perceived a stone slab approximately 8 feet wide, and over 30 feet tall at the top of the cliff. On it was written in large letters: 

THE MOUNTAIN OF MIND & HEART; THE CAVE OF SLANTING MOON & 3 STARS 
Immensely pleased, the Handsome King exclaimed, “People here’re truly honest. This mountain and this cave really do exist!” 
He stared at the place for a long time but dared not knock. Instead, he jumped onto the branch of a pine tree, picked a few pine seeds and ate them, and began to play. After a moment he heard the 
door of the cave open with a squeak and a mortal youth walked out. His bearing was exceedingly graceful; his features were highly refined. This was certainly no ordinary young mortal for he had his 
hair bound with 2 cords of silk, a wide robe with 2 sleeves of wind. His body and face seemed most distinct for visage and mind were both detached. Long a stranger to all worldly things he was the 
mountain’s ageless boy. Untainted even with a speck of dust, he feared no havoc by the seasons wrought. After coming through the door, the boy shouted, “Who's causing disturbance here?” 
With a bound the King leaped down from the tree and went up to him saluting. “Mortal boy,” he said, “I’m a seeker of the way of mortality. I'd never dare cause any disturbance.” 
With a chuckle, the mortal youth asked, “Are you a seeker of the Way?” 
“Im indeed,” answered the King. 
“My master at the house,” the boy said, “has just left his couch to give a lecture on the platform. Before even announcing his theme however, he told me to go out and open the door, saying, ‘There’s 
someone outside who wants to practice austerities. You may go and receive him.’ It must be you, | suppose.” 
The King said, smiling, “It is ], most assuredly!” 
“Follow me in then,” said the boy. 
With solemnity the King set his clothes in order and followed the boy into the depths of the cave. They passed rows and rows of lofty towers and huge alcoves, of pearly chambers and carved arches. 
After walking through innumerable quiet chambers and empty studios, they finally reached the base of the green jade platform. Patriarch SuAwakening was seen seated solemnly on the platform with 
thirty lesser mortals standing below in rows. He was truly a mortal of great ken and purest mien, Master SuAwakening whose wondrous form of the West had no end or birth by work of the Double 3. 
His whole spirit and breath were with mercy filled. Empty, spontaneous, it'd change at will, his God-nature able to do all things. The same age as Heaven had his majestic frame. Fully tried and 
enlightened was this grand priest. As soon as the Handsome King saw him, he saluted himself and saluted times without number, saying, “Master! Master! |, your pupil pay you my sincere homage.” 
The Patriarch said, “Where do you come from? Let's hear you state clearly your name and country before you salute again.” 
The King said, “Your pupil came from the Water-Curtain Cave of the Flower-Fruit Mountain in the Aolai Country of the East East-Videha Continent.” 
“Chase him out of here!” the Patriarch shouted. “He is nothing but a liar and a fabricator of falsehood. How can he possibly be interested in attaining enlightenment?” 
The King hastened to salute unceasingly and to say, “Your pupil’s word is an honest one with no deceit.” 
The Patriarch said, “If you're telling the truth, how is it that you mention the East East-Videha Continent? Separating that place and mine are two great oceans and the entire region of the South 
Jambidvipa Continent. How could you possibly get here?” 
Again saluting, the King said, “Your pupil drifted across the oceans and trudged through many regions for more than ten years before finding this place.” 
The Patriarch said, “If you’ve come on a long journey in many stages, I'll let that pass. What is your surname [temper] (Xing)?”'” 
[The Patriarch asked: ‘Son, what's your name?’ 
The child replied, ‘It's the nature of God.’ 
The Patriarch said, ‘So, you don’t have a name!’ 
The boy said, ‘It's because my nature is empty/void.’ Recognising him to be a vessel of the Religion, the Patriarch ordered his attendant to go the boy's home to beg parental permission for the youth 
to leave the family [i.e., to become a Religious]. The parents regarded this as predestined affinity and offered no objection; they gave him up as a disciple to be named Hongren (profound forbearance). ] 
The King again replied, “I've no temper (Xing). If a man rebukes me, I’m not offended; if he hits me, I’m not angered. In fact, | simply repay him with a ceremonial greeting and that’s all. My whole life’s 
without ill temper.” 
“Im not speaking of your temper,” the Patriarch said. “I’m asking after the name of your parents.” 
“I've no parents either,” said the King. 
The Patriarch said, “If you’ve no parents, you must've been born from a tree.” 
“Not from a tree,” said the King, “but from a rock. | recall that there used to be a mortal stone on the Flower-Fruit Mountain. | was born the year the stone split open.” 
When the Patriarch heard this, he was secretly pleased and said, “Well, evidently you’ve been created by Heaven and Earth. Get up and show me how you walk.” Snapping erect, the King scurried 
around a couple of times. The Patriarch laughed and said, “Though your features aren't the most attractive, you do resemble a pignolia-eating human (husun). This gives me the idea of taking a 
surname for you from your appearance. | intended to call you by the name Hu. If | drop the animal radical from this word, what’s left is a compound made up of the two characters, gu and yue. Gu 
means aged and yue means female but an aged female cannot reproduce. Therefore, it is better to give you the surname of Sun. If | drop the animal radical from this word, what we've left is the 
compound of zi and xi. Zi means a boy and xi means a baby and that name exactly accords with the fundamental Doctrine of the Baby Boy. So your surname will be Sun.” 
When the King heard this, he was filled with delight. “Splendid! Splendid!” he cried, saluting, “At last | know my surname. May the master be even more gracious! Since I’ve received the surname, let 
me be given also a personal name, so that it may facilitate your calling and commanding me.” 
The Patriarch said, “Within my tradition are twelve characters that have been used to name the pupils according to their divisions. You're one who belongs to the tenth generation.” 
“Which twelve characters are they?” asked the King. 
The Patriarch replied, “They're: wide (guang), great (da), wise (zhi), intelligence (hui), true (zhen), conforming (ru), nature (xing), sea (hai), sharp (ying), wake to (wu), complete (yuan), and awakening 
(jue). Your rank falls precisely on the words wake to (wu). You'll hence be given the religious name Wake to the Void (Wukong). All right?” 
“Splendid! Splendid!” said the King, laughing. “Henceforth I'll be called Sun Wukong.” So it was that at nebula’s parting he had no name. Smashing stubborn void needs Wake-to-the-Void. 


002 

Fully awoke to the wondrous truths of Complete Liberation; he cuts off Killing [the Destroyer, the Evil one, the Hinderer], returns to the root, & joins Primal Spirit 
The Handsome King who jumped about joyfully and went forward to give SuAwakening his grateful salutation, having received his name. The Patriarch then ordered the congregation to lead Sun 
Wukong outdoors and to teach him how to sprinkle water on the ground, dust, and how to speak and move with proper courtesy. The company of mortals obediently went outside with Wukong who 
then saluted to his fellow students. They prepared thereafter a place in the corridor where he might sleep. Next morning he began to learn from his schoolmates the arts of language and etiquette. He 
discussed with them the scriptures and the doctrines; he practiced calligraphy and burned incense. Such was his daily routine. In more leisurely moments he would be sweeping the grounds or hoeing 
the garden, planting flowers or pruning trees, gathering firewood or lighting fires, fetching water or carrying drinks. He did not lack for whatever he needed, and thus he lived in the cave without realising 
that 6 or 7 years had slipped by. One day the Patriarch ascended the platform and took his high seat. Calling together all the mortals, he began to lecture on a great doctrine. He spoke with words so 
florid and eloquent that gold lotus sprang up from the ground. The doctrine of 3 vehicles he subtly rehearsed, including even the laws’ minutest tittle. The yak’s-tail waved slowly and spouted elegance: 
his thunderous voice moved even the 9tk Heaven. For a while he lectured on Dao; for a while he spoke on Chan — to harmonise the 3 Parties is a natural thing. 1 word’s elucidation filled with truth points 
to the birth-less showing nature’s mystery. Wukong who was standing there and listening, was so pleased with the talk that he scratched his ear and rubbed his jaw. Grinning from ear to ear, he could 
not refrain from dancing on all fours! Suddenly the Patriarch saw this and called out to him, “Why’re you madly jumping and dancing in the ranks and not listening to my lecture?” 
Wukong said, “Your pupil’s devoutly listening to the lecture. But when | heard such wonderful things from my reverend master, I’d not contain myself for joy and started to leap and prance about quite 
unconsciously. May the master forgive my sins!” 
“Let me ask you,” said the Patriarch, “if you comprehend these wonderful things, do you know how long you’ve been in this cave?” 
Wukong said, “Your pupil is basically feeble-minded and does not know the number of seasons. | only remember that whenever the fire burned out in the stove, I’d go to the back of the mountain to 
gather firewood. Finding a mountain full of fine peach trees there, I’ve eaten my fill of peaches seven times.” 
The Patriarch said, “That mountain’s named the Ripe Peach Mountain. If you’ve eaten your fill seven times, | suppose it must've been seven years. What kind of Daoist art you'd like to learn from me?” 
Wukong said, “I’m dependent on the admonition of my honoured teacher. Your pupil would gladly learn whatever a smidgen of Daoist flavour's.” 
The Patriarch said, “Within the tradition of Dao, there’re three-hundred-sixty heteronomous divisions, all the practices of which may result in Illumination. | don’t know which division you’d like to follow.” 
“lm dependent on the will of my honoured teacher,” said Wukong. “Your pupil's wholeheartedly obedient.” 
“How would it be,” said the Patriarch, “if | taught you the practice of the Method division?” Wukong asked, “How would you explain the practice of the Method division?” 
“The practice of the Method division,” said the Patriarch, “consists of summoning mortals, working the Planchet, divination by manipulating yarrow stalks, learning the secrets of pursuing good, and 
avoiding evil.” 
“Can this sort of practice lead to mortality?” asked Wukong. 
“Impossible! Impossible!” said the Patriarch. “I'll not learn it then,” Wukong said. 
“How would it be,” said the Patriarch again, “if | taught you the practice of the Schools division?” 
“What is the meaning of the Schools division?” asked Wukong. 
“The Schools division,” the Patriarch said, “includes the Confucians, the Religious, the Daoists, the Dualists, the Mohists, and the Physicians. They read scriptures or recite prayers; they interview 
priests or conjure up saints and the like.” 
“Can this sort of practice lead to mortality?” asked Wukong. 
The Patriarch said, “If mortality is what you desire, this practice is like setting a pillar inside a wall.” 
Wukong said, “Master, I’m a simple fellow and | don’t know the idioms of the marketplace. What's setting a pillar inside a wall?” 
The Patriarch said, “When people build houses and want them to be sturdy, they place a pillar as a prop inside the wall. But someday the big mansion will decay and the pillar too will rot.” 
“What you’re saying then,” Wukong said, “is that it isn’t long-lasting. I’m not going to learn this.” 
The Patriarch said, “How would it be if | taught you the practice of the Silence division?” 
“What's the aim of the Silence division?” Wukong asked. 
“To cultivate fasting and abstinence,” said the Patriarch, “quiescence and inactivity, meditation and the art of cross-legged sitting, restraint of language, and a vegetarian diet. There are also the practices 
of yoga, exercises standing or salute, entrance into complete stillness, contemplation in solitary confinement, and the like.” 
“Can these activities,” asked Wukong, “bring about mortality?” 
“They are no better than the unfired bricks on the kiln,” said the Patriarch. 


Wukong laughed and said, “Master indeed loves to beat about the bush! Haven't | just told you that | don’t know these idioms of the marketplace? What do you mean by the unfired bricks on the kiln?” 
The Patriarch replied, “The tiles and the bricks on the kiln may have been moulded into shape but if they have not been refined by water and fire, a heavy rain will one day make them crumble.” 

“So this too lacks permanence,” said Wukong. “I don’t want to learn it.” 

The Patriarch said, “How would it be if | taught you the practice of the Action division?” 

“What's it like in the Action division?” Wukong asked. 

“Plenty of activities,” said the Patriarch, “such as gathering the yin to nourish the yang, bending the bow and treading the arrow, and rubbing the navel to pass breath. There are also experimentation 
with alchemical formulas, burning rushes and forging cauldrons, taking red lead, making autumn stone, and drinking bride’s milk and the like.” 

“Can such bring about long life?” asked Wukong. 

“To obtain mortality from such activities,” said the Patriarch, “is also like scooping the moon from the water.” 

“There you go again, Master!” cried Wukong. “What do you mean by scooping the moon from the water?” 

The Patriarch said, “When the moon is high in the sky, its reflection is in the water. Although it is visible therein, you can’t scoop it out or catch hold of it, for it is but an illusion.” 

“lll not learn that either!” said Wukong. 

When the Patriarch heard this, he uttered a cry and jumped down from the high platform. He pointed the ruler he held in his hands at Wukong and said to him: “What a mischievous human you're! You'll 
not learn this and you'll not learn that! Just what is it that you’re waiting for?” 

Moving forward, he hit Wukong 3 times on the head. Then he folded his arms behind his back and walked inside, closing the main doors behind him and leaving the congregation stranded outside. 
Those who were listening to the lecture were so terrified that everyone began to berate Wukong. “You reckless human!” they cried, “You’re utterly without manners! The master was prepared to teach 
you magic secrets. Why weren't you willing to learn? Why did you've to argue with him instead? Now you've offended him, and who knows when he'll come out again?” 

At that moment they all resented him and despised and ridiculed him. But Wukong was not angered in the least and only replied with a broad grin. For the King in fact had already solved the riddle in 
the pot secretly as it were; he therefore did not quarrel with the other people but patiently held his tongue. He reasoned that the master was telling him to prepare himself for the 3" watch by hitting him 
3 times; and by folding his arms behind his back, walking inside, and closing the main doors, was telling him to enter by the back door so that he might receive instruction in secret. Wukong spent the 
rest of the day happily with the other pupils in front of the Divine Cave of the 3 Stars, eagerly waiting for the night. When evening arrived, he immediately retired with all the others, pretending to be 
asleep by closing his eyes, breathing evenly, and remaining completely still. Since there was no watchman in the mountain to beat the watch or call the hour, he could not tell what time it was. He could 
only rely on his own calculations by counting the breaths he inhaled and exhaled. Approximately at the hour of Zi, *he arose very quietly and put on his clothes. Stealthily opening the front door, he 
slipped away from the crowd and walked outside. Lifting his head, he saw the bright moon and the cool, clear dew, though in each corner not one speck of dust. Sheltered fowls roosted in the woods; 
a brook flowed gently from its source. Darting fireflies dispersed the gloom. Wild geese spread word columns through the clouds. Precisely it was the 3°-watch hour — time to seek the Way whole and 
true. See him following the familiar path back to the rear entrance where he discovered that the door was indeed ajar. Wukong said happily, “The reverend master truly intended to give me instruction. 
That's why the door was left open.” 

He reached the door in a few large strides and entered sideways. Walking up to the Patriarch’s bed, he found him asleep with his body curled up, facing the wall. Wukong dared not disturb him; instead, 
he knelt before his bed. After a little while, the Patriarch awoke. Stretching his legs, he recited to himself: “Hard! Hard! Hard! The Way is most obscure! Deem not the gold elixir a common thing. Without 
a perfect man’s transmitting a subtle rune, you’d have vain words, worn mouth, and tongue waxed dry!” 

“Master,” Wukong responded at once. “Your pupil’s been kneeling here and waiting on you for a long time.” 

When the Patriarch heard Wukong’s voice, he rose and put on his clothes. “You mischievous human!” he exclaimed, sitting down cross-legged, “Why aren't you sleeping in front? What are you doing 
back here at my place?” 

Wukong replied, “Before the platform and the congregation yesterday, the master gave the order that your pupil, at the hour of the third watch, should come here through the rear entrance in order that 
he might be instructed. | was therefore bold enough to come directly to the master’s bed.” 

When the Patriarch heard this, he was terribly pleased, thinking to himself, “This fellow is indeed an offspring of Heaven and Earth. If not, how could he solve so readily the riddle in my pot!” 

“There is no third party here save your pupil,” Wukong said. “May the master be exceedingly merciful and impart to me the way of long life. I'll never forget this gracious favour.” 

“Since you've solved the riddle in the pot,” said the Patriarch, “it’s an indication that you're destined to learn and I’m glad to teach you. Come closer and listen carefully. I'll impart to you the wondrous 
way of long life.” Wukong saluted to express his gratitude, washed his ears, and listened most attentively, kneeling before the bed. The Patriarch said: “This bold, secret saying that’s wondrous and 
true: spare, nurse nature and life - there’s nothing else. All power resides in the semen, breath, and spirit; store these securely lest there be a leak. Keep within the body! Heed my teaching and the 
Way itself will thrive. Hold fast oral formulas so useful and keen to purge concupiscence, to reach pure cool; to pure cool where the light is bright. You'll face the elixir platform, enjoying the moon. 7The 
moon holds the jade rabbit, the sun, the crow; 8the tortoise and snake are now tightly entwined. °Nature and life are strong. You can plant gold lotus even in the midst of flames. Squeeze the five Phases 
jointly, use them back and forth - ‘when that’s done, be a god or mortal at will!” 

At that moment, the very origin was disclosed to Wukong whose mind became spiritualised as blessedness came to him. He carefully committed to memory all the oral formulas. After saluting to thank 
the Patriarch, he left by the rear entrance. As he went out, he saw that the eastern sky began to pale with light but golden beams shone on the Westward Way. Following the same path, he returned to 
the front door, pushed it open quietly, and went inside. He sat up in his sleeping place and purposely rustled the bed and the covers, crying, “It’s light! It’s light! Get up!” 

All the other people were still sleeping and did not know that Wukong had received a good thing. He played the fool that day after getting up but persisted in what he had learned secretly by doing 
breathing exercises before the hour of Zi and after the hour of Wu. ''3 years went by swiftly and the Patriarch again mounted his throne to lecture to the multitude. He discussed the scholastic 
deliberations, parables, and discoursed on the integument of external conduct. Suddenly he asked, “Where’s Wukong?” 

Wukong drew near and knelt down. “Your pupil's here,” he said. 

“What sort of art have you been practicing lately?” the Patriarch asked. 

“Recently,” Wukong said, “your pupil has begun to apprehend the nature of all things and my foundational knowledge has become firmly established.” 

“If you've penetrated to the religion nature to apprehend the origin,” said the Patriarch, “you've in fact entered into the divine substance. You need however, to guard against the danger of three 
calamities.” 

When Wukong heard this, he thought for a long time and said, “The words of the master must be erroneous. I’ve frequently heard that when one is learned in the Way and excels in virtue, he'll enjoy 
the same age as Heaven; fire and water cannot harm him and every kind of disease will vanish. How can there be this danger of three calamities?” 

“What you’ve learned,” said the Patriarch, “is no ordinary magic: you've stolen the creative powers of Heaven and Earth and invaded the dark mysteries of the sun and moon. Your success in perfecting 
the elixir is something that the gods and the demons cannot countenance. Though your appearance will be preserved and your age lengthened, after five centuries Heaven will send down the calamity 
of thunder to strike you. Hence you must be intelligent and wise enough to avoid it ahead of time. If you can escape it, your age will indeed equal that of Heaven; if not, your life will thus be finished. 
After another five centuries Heaven will send down the calamity of fire to burn you. That fire is neither natural nor common fire; its name is the Fire of Yin, and it arises from within the soles of your feet 
to reach even the cavity of your heart, reducing your entrails to ashes and your limbs to utter ruin. The arduous labour of a millennium will then have been made completely superfluous. After another 
five centuries the calamity of wind will be sent to blow at you. It is not the wind from the north, south, east, or west; nor is it one of the winds of four seasons; nor is it the wind of flowers, willows, pines, 
and bamboos. It is called the Mighty Wind, and it enters from the top of the skull into the body, passes through the midriff, and penetrates the nine apertures. 2 The bones and the flesh will be dissolved 
and the body itself will disintegrate. You must therefore avoid all three calamities.” 

When Wukong heard this, his hairs stood on end, and, saluting reverently, he said, “I beg the master to be merciful and impart to me the method to avoid the three calamities. To the very end, I'll never 
forget your gracious favour.” 

The Patriarch said, “It isn’t in fact difficult except that | can’t teach you because you're somewhat different from other people.” 

“I've a round head pointing to Heaven,” said Wukong, “and square feet walking on Earth. Similarly, I've nine apertures and four limbs, entrails and cavities. In what way am | different from other people?” 
The Patriarch said, “Though you resemble a man, you've much less jowl.” 

The human has an angular face with hollow cheeks and a pointed mouth. Stretching his hand to feel himself, Wukong laughed and said, “The master doesn’t know how to balance matters! Though I’ve 
much less jowl than human beings, I’ve my pouch that may certainly be considered a compensation.” 

“Very well then,” said the Patriarch, “what method of escape you'd like to learn? There is the Art of the Heavenly Ladle that numbers thirty-six transformations and the Art of the Earthly Multitude that 
numbers seventy-two transformations.” 

Wukong said, “Your pupil’s always eager to catch more fishes so I'll learn the Art of the Earthly Multitude.” 

“In that case,” said the Patriarch, “come up here, and I'll pass on the oral formulas to you.” 

He then whispered something into his ear, though we don’t know what sort of wondrous secrets he spoke of. But this King was someone who, knowing one thing, could understand a hundred! He 
immediately learned the oral formulas and after working at them and practicing them himself, he mastered all 72 transformations. One day when the Patriarch and the various pupils were admiring the 
evening view in front of the 3 Stars Cave, the master asked, “Wukong, has that matter been perfected?” 

Wukong said, “Thanks to the profound kindness of the master, your pupil has indeed attained perfection; | now can ascend like mist into the air and fly.” 

The Patriarch said, “Let me see you try to fly.” 

Wishing to display his ability, Wukong leaped 50 or 60 feet into the air, pulling himself up with a somersault. He trod on the clouds for about the time of a meal and travelled a distance of no more than 
3 miles before dropping down again to stand before the Patriarch. “Master,” he said, his hands folded in front of him, “this is flying by cloud-soaring.” 

Laughing, the Patriarch said, “This can’t be called cloud-soaring! It’s more like cloud-crawling! The old saying goes: The mortal tours the North Sea in the moming and reaches Cangwu by night. If it 
takes you half a day to go less than three miles, it can’t even be considered cloud-crawling.” 

“What do you mean,” Wukong asked, “by saying: The mortal tours the North Sea in the morning and reaches Cangwu by night?” 

The Patriarch said, “Those who are capable of cloud-soaring may start from the North Sea in the morning, journey through the East Sea, the West Sea, the South Sea, and return again to Cangwu. 
Cangwu refers to Lingling in the North Sea. It can be called true cloud-soaring only when you can traverse all four seas in one day.” 

“That's truly difficult!” said Wukong, “truly difficult!” 

“Nothing in the world is difficult,” said the Patriarch; “only the mind makes it so.” 

When Wukong heard these words, he saluted reverently and implored the Patriarch, “Master, if you do perform a service for someone, you must do it thoroughly. May you be most merciful and impart 
to me also this technique of cloud-soaring. I'd never dare forget your gracious favour.” 

The Patriarch said, “When the various mortals want to soar on the clouds, they all rise by stamping their feet. But you're not like them. When | saw you leave just now, you had to pull yourself up by 
jumping. What I'll do now is to teach you the cloud-somersault in accordance with your form.” Wukong again saluted himself and pleaded with him, and the Patriarch gave him an oral formula, saying, 
“Make the magic sign, recite the spell, clench your fist tightly, shake your body, and when you jump up, one somersault will carry you a hundred-and-eight thousand miles.” 

When the other people heard this, they all giggled and said, “Lucky Wukong! If he learns this little trick, he can become a dispatcher for someone to deliver documents or carry circulars. He'll be able 
to make a living anywhere!” The sky now began to darken, and the master went back to the cave dwelling with his pupils. Throughout the night however, Wukong practiced ardently and mastered the 
technique of cloud-somersault. From then on, he had complete freedom, blissfully enjoying his state of long life. One day early in the summer, the disciples were gathered under the pine trees for 
fellowship and discussion. They said to him, “Wukong, what sort of merit did you accumulate in another disciple that led the master to whisper in your ear, the other day, the method of avoiding the 
three calamities? Have you learned everything?” 

“Ill not conceal this from my various elder brothers,” Wukong said, laughing. “Owing to the master’s instruction in the first place and my diligence day and night in the second, I’ve fully mastered the 
several matters!” 

“Let's take advantage of the moment,” one of the pupils said. “You try to put on a performance and we'll watch.” 

When Wukong heard this, his spirit was aroused and he was most eager to display his powers. “I invite the various elder brothers to give me a subject,” he said. “What do you want me to change into?” 
“Why nota pine tree?” they said. 


Wukong made the magic sign and recited the spell; with one shake of his body he changed himself into a pine tree. Truly it was thickly held in smoke through all 4 seasons, its chaste fair form soars 
straight to the clouds. With not the least likeness to the impish human, it is all frost-tried and snow-tested branches. When the multitude saw this, they clapped their hands and roared with laughter, 
everyone crying, “Marvellous human! Marvellous human!” 

They did not realise that all this uproar had disturbed the Patriarch who came running out of the door, dragging his staff. “Who's creating this bedlam here?” he demanded. 

At his voice the pupils immediately collected themselves, set their clothes in order, and came forward. Wukong also changed back into his true form, and, slipping into the crowd, he said, “For your 
information, Reverend Master, we're having fellowship and discussion here. There is no one from outside causing any disturbance.” 

“You're all yelling and screaming,” said the Patriarch angrily, “and behaving in a manner totally unbecoming to those practicing cultivation. Don’t you know that those in the cultivation of Dao resist 
opening their mouths lest they waste their breath and spirit or moving their tongues lest they provoke arguments? Why’re you all laughing noisily here?” 

“We dare not conceal this from the master,” the crowd said. “Just now we're having fun with Wukong who was giving us a performance of transformation. We told him to change into a pine tree, and 
he did indeed become a pine tree! Your pupils were all applauding him and our voices disturbed the reverend teacher. We beg his forgiveness.” 

“Go away, all of you,” the Patriarch said. “You, Wukong, come over here! | ask you what sort of exhibition were you putting on, changing into a pine tree? This ability you now possess, is it just for 
showing off to people? Suppose you saw someone with this ability. Wouldn’t you ask him at once how he acquired it? So when others see that you're in possession of it, they'll come begging. If you’re 
afraid to refuse them, you'll give away the secret; if you don't, they may hurt you. You're actually placing your life in grave jeopardy.” 

“| beseech the master to forgive me,” Wukong said, saluting. 

“Ill not condemn you,” said the Patriarch, “but you must leave this place.” 

When Wukong heard this, tears fell from his eyes. “Where am | to go, Teacher?” he asked. 

“From wherever you came,” the Patriarch said, “you’d go back there.” 

“| came from the East East-Videha Continent,” Wukong said, his memory jolted by the Patriarch, “from the Water-Curtain Cave of the Flower-Fruit Mountain in the Aolai Country.” 

“Go back there quickly and save your life,” the Patriarch said. “You can’t possibly remain here!” 

“Allow me to inform my esteemed teacher,” said Wukong, properly penitent, “I've been away from home for twenty years and | certainly long to see my subjects and followers of bygone days again. But 
| keep thinking that my master’s profound kindness to me hasn't yet been repaid. I, therefore, daren’t leave.” 

“There's nothing to be repaid,” said the Patriarch. “See that you don’t get into trouble and involve me: that’s all | ask.” Seeing that there was no other alternative, Wukong had to salute the Patriarch and 
take leave of the congregation. “Once you leave,” the Patriarch said, “you're bound to end up evildoing. | don’t care what kind of villainy and violence you engage in but | forbid you ever to mention that 
you're my disciple. For if you but utter half the word, I'll know about it; you can be assured, wretched human, that you'll be skinned alive. I'll break all your bones and banish your soul to the Place of 
Nine-fold Darkness from which you'll not be released even after ten thousand afflictions!” 

“lll never dare mention my master,” said Wukong. “!’ll say that I’ve learned this all by myself.” Having thanked the Patriarch, Wukong turned away, made the magic sign, pulled himself up, and performed 
the cloud-somersault. He headed straight toward the East East-Videha, in less than an hour he could already see the Flower-Fruit Mountain, and the Water-Curtain Cave. The Handsome King said to 
himself, rejoicing secretly, “! left weighed down by bones of mortal stock. The Dao attained makes light both body and frame. It’s this world’s pity that none firmly resolves to leam such mystery that by 
itself is plain. It’s hard to cross the seas in former time. Returning this day, | travel with ease. Words of farewell still echo in my ears. | never hope to see so soon the eastern depths!” Wukong lowered 
the direction of his cloud and landed squarely on the Flower-Fruit Mountain. He was trying to find his way when he heard the call of cranes and the cry of humans; the call of cranes reverberated in the 
Heavens, and the cry of humans moved his spirit with sadness. “Little ones,” he called out, “I’ve returned!” 

From the crannies of the cliff, from the flowers and bushes, and from the woods and trees, humans great and small leaped out by the 10s of 1000s and surrounded the Handsome King. They all saluted 
and cried, “Great King! What laxity of mind! Why did you go away for such a long time and leave us here longing for your return like someone hungering and thirsting? Recently, we've been brutally 
abused by a monster who wanted to rob us of our Water-Curtain Cave. Out of sheer desperation, we fought hard with him. And yet all this time, that fellow has plundered many of our possessions, 
kidnapped a number of our young ones, and given us many restless days and nights watching over our property. How fortunate that our great king has returned! If the great king had stayed away 
another year or so, we and the entire mountain cave would have belonged to someone else!” 

Hearing this, Wukong was filled with anger. “What sort of a monster is this,” he cried, “that behaves in such a lawless manner? Tell me in detail and I'll find him to exact vengeance.” 

“Be informed, Great King,” the humans said, saluting, “that the fellow calls himself the Monstrous King of Havoc, and he lives north of here.” 

Wukong asked, “From here to his place, how great is the distance?” 

The humans replied, “He comes like the cloud and leaves like the mist like the wind and the rain, like lightning and thunder. We don’t know how great the distance is.” 

“In that case,” said Wukong, “go and play for a while and don’t be afraid. Let me go and find him.” Dear King! He leaped up with a bound and somersaulted all the way northward until he saw a tall and 
rugged mountain. What a mountain! Its pen-like peak stands erect; winding streams flow unfathomed and deep, pen-like peak, standing erect, cuts through the air; winding streams, unfathomed and 
deep, reach diverse sites on earth. On 2 ridges flowers rival trees in exotic charm; at various spots pines match bamboos in green. The dragon on the left seems docile and tame; the tiger on the right 
seems gentle and meek. Iron oxen"? on occasion are seen ploughing. Gold-coin flowers are frequently planted. Rare fowls make melodious poems; the phoenix stands facing the sun. Rocks worn 
smooth and shiny by water placid and bright appear by turns grotesque, bizarre, and fierce. In countless numbers are the world’s famous mountains where flowers bloom and wither; they flourish and 
die. What place resembles this long-lasting scene wholly untouched by the 4 seasons and eight epochs? ‘This is in the 3 Regions, *the Mount of Northern Spring, the Water-Belly Cave, nourished by 
the 5 Phases.'*The Handsome King was silently viewing the scenery when he heard someone speaking. He went down the mountain to find who it was, and he discovered the Water-Belly Cave at the 
foot of a steep cliff. Several imps who were dancing in front of the cave saw Wukong and began to run away. “Stop!” cried Wukong. “You can use the words of your mouth to communicate the thoughts 
of my mind. I’m the lord of the Water-Curtain Cave in the Flower-Fruit Mountain south of here. Your Monstrous King of Havoc or whatever he’s called has repeatedly bullied my young ones and I’ve 
found my way here with the specific purpose of sett ling matters with him.” 

Hearing this, the imps darted into the cave and cried out, “Great King, a disastrous thing's happened!” 

“What sort of disaster?” asked the Monstrous King. 

“Outside the cave,” said the imps, “there is a human who calls himself the lord of the Water-Curtain Cave in the Flower-Fruit Mountain. He says that you’ve repeatedly bullied his young ones and that 
he has come to settle matters with you.” 

Laughing, the Monstrous King said, “I’ve often heard those humans say that they have a great king who has left the family to practice self-cultivation. He must have come back. How is he dressed, and 
what kind of weapon does he have?” 

“He doesn’t have any kind of weapon,” the imps said. “He’s bare-headed, wears a red robe with a yellow sash, and has a pair of black boots on. He looks like neither a monk nor a layman, neither a 
Daoist nor a mortal. He is out there making demands with naked hands and empty fists.” 

When the Monstrous King heard this, he ordered, “Get me my armour and weapon.” These were immediately brought out by the imps, the Monstrous King put on his breastplate, helmet, grasped his 
scimitar, and walked out of the cave with his followers. “Who's the lord of the Water-Curtain Cave?” he cried with a loud voice. 

Quickly opening wide his eyes to take a look, Wukong saw that the Monstrous King wore on his head a black gold helmet that gleamed in the sun; and on his body a dark silk robe that swayed in the 
wind; lower he had on a black iron vest tied tightly with leather straps; his feet were shod in finely carved boots, grand as those of warriors great. 10 spans — the width of his waist; 30 feet - the height 
of his frame; he held in his hands a sword; its blade was fine and bright. His name: the Monster of Havoc of most fearsome form and look. “You've such big eyes, reckless monster but can’t even see 
old man!” the King shouted. 

When the Monstrous King saw him, he laughed and said, “You aren't four feet tall, nor thirty years old; you don’t even have weapons in your hands. How dare you be so insolent, looking for me to settle 
accounts?” 

“You reckless monster!” cried Wukong. “You're blind indeed! You think I’m small, not knowing that it’s hardly difficult for me to become taller; you think I’m without weapon but my two hands can drag 
the moon down from the edge of Heaven. Don’t be afraid; just have a taste of old man’s fist!” 

He leaped into the air and aimed a blow smack at the monster's face. Parrying the blow with his hand, the Monstrous King said, “You’re such a midget and I’m so tall; you want to use your fist but I’ve 
my scimitar. If | were to kill you with it, I'd be a laughingstock. Let me put down my scimitar and we'll see how well you can box.” 

“Well said, fine fellow,” replied Wukong. “Come on!” The Monstrous King shifted his position and struck out. Wukong closed in on him, hurtling himself into the engagement. The 2 of them pummelled 
and kicked, struggling and colliding with each other. It is easy to miss on a long reach but a short punch is firm and reliable. Wukong jabbed the Monstrous King in the short ribs, hit him on his chest, 
and gave him such heavy punishment with a few sharp blows that the monster stepped aside, picked up his huge scimitar, aimed it straight at Wukong’s head, and slashed at him. Wukong dodged, 
and the blow narrowly missed him. Seeing that his opponent was growing fiercer, Wukong now used the method called the Body beyond the Body. Plucking a handful of hairs from his own body and 
throwing them into his mouth, he chewed them to tiny pieces and then spat them into the air. “Change!” he cried and they changed at once into 200 or 300 little humans encircling the combatants on 
all sides. For when someone acquires the body of a mortal, he can project his spirit, change his form, and perform all kinds of wonders. Since the King had become accomplished in the Way, every 
one of the 84000 hairs on his body could change into whatever shape or substance he desired. The little humans he had just created were so keen of eye and so swift of movement that they could be 
wounded by neither sword nor spear. Look at them! Skipping and jumping, they rushed at the Monstrous King and surrounded him, some hugging, some pulling, some crawling in between his legs, 
and some tugging at his feet. They kicked and punched; they yanked at his hair and poked at his eyes; they pinched his nose and tried to sweep him completely off his feet until they tangled themselves 
into confusion. Meanwhile Wukong succeeded in snatching the scimitar, pushed through the throng of little humans, and brought the scimitar down squarely onto the monster’s skull, cleaving it in 2. 
He and the rest of the humans then fought their way into the cave and slaughtered all the imps, young and old. With a shake, he collected his hair back onto his body but there were some humans that 
did not return to him. They were the little humans kidnaped by the Monstrous King from the Water-Curtain Cave. “Why are you here?” asked Wukong. 

The 30 or 50 of them all said tearfully, “After the Great King went away to seek the way of mortality, the monster menaced us for two whole years and finally carried us off to this place. Don’t these 
utensils belong to our cave? These stone pots and bowls were all taken by the creature.” 

“If these are our belongings,” said Wukong, “move them out of here.” He then set fire to the Water-Belly Cave and reduced it to ashes. “All of you,” he said to them, “follow me home.” 

“Great King,” the humans said, “when we came here, all we felt was wind rushing past us, and we seemed to float through the air until we arrived here. We don’t know the way. How can we go back to 
our home?” 

Wukong said, “That's a magic trick of his. But there’s no difficulty! Now | know not only one thing but a hundred! I’m familiar with that trick too. Close your eyes, all of you and don’t be afraid.” Dear King. 
He recited a spell, rode for a while on a fierce wind, and then lowered the direction of the cloud. “Little ones,” he cried, “open your eyes!” 

The humans felt solid ground beneath their feet and recognised their home territory. In great delight, every one of them ran back to the cave along the familiar roads and crowded in together with those 
waiting in the cave. They then lined up according to age and rank and paid tribute to the King. Juice and fruits were laid out for the welcome banquet. When asked how he had subdued the monster 
and rescued the young ones, Wukong presented a detailed rehearsal and the humans broke into unending applause. “Where did you go, Great King?” they cried. “We never expected that you’d acquire 
such skills!” 

“The year | left you all,” Wukong said, “I drifted with the waves across the Great Eastern Ocean and reached the West Aparagodaniya Continent. | then arrived at the South Jambidvipa Continent 
where | learned human ways, wearing this garment and these shoes. | swaggered along with the clouds for eight or nine years but I'd yet to learn the Great Art. | then crossed the Great Western Ocean 
and reached the West Aparagodantya Continent. ‘7After searching for a long time, I’d the good fortune to discover an old Patriarch who imparted to me the formula for enjoying the same age as Heaven, 
the secret of mortality.” 

“Such luck’s hard to meet even after ten thousand afflictions!” the humans said, all congratulating him. 

“Little ones,” Wukong said, laughing again, “Another delight’s that our entire family’s a name now.” 

“What's the name of the great king?” 

“My surname’s Sun,” replied Wukong, “and my religious name’s Wukong.” 

When the humans heard this, they all clapped their hands and shouted happily, “If the great king’s Elder Sun, then we're all Junior Suns, Suns the Third, small Suns, tiny Suns — the Sun Family, the 
Sun Nation, and the Sun Cave!” So they all came and honoured Elder Sun with large and small bowls of coconut, grape juice, divine flowers, and fruits. It’s indeed one big happy family! Lo, the surname 
is 1, the selfs returned to its source. This glory awaits - a name recorded in Heaven! 


003 
4 Seas & 1000 Mountains all salute to submit; 10 species’ names (ecclesiastical, earthly, human, divine, and demonic, the winged creatures, the hairy creatures, the armoured creatures, the scaly creatures, & the naked creatures, i.e. humans) ara 
removed from the 9-Fold Darkness of the Daoist Hell 
The Handsome King’s triumphant return to his home country. After slaying the Monstrous King of Havoc and wresting from him his huge scimitar, he practiced daily with the little humans the art of war, 
teaching them how to sharpen bamboos for making spears, file wood for making swords, arrange flags and banners, go on patrol, advance or retreat, and pitch camp. For a long time he played thus 
with them. Suddenly he grew quiet and sat down, thinking out loud to himself, “The game we're playing here may turn out to be something quite serious. Suppose we disturb the rulers of humans or 
fowls, beasts, they become offended; suppose they say that these military exercises of ours are subversive, and raise an army to destroy us. How can we meet them with our bamboo spears and 
wooden swords? We must have sharp swords and fine halberds. But what can be done at this moment?” 
When the humans heard this, they were all alarmed. “The great king’s observation is very sound,” they said, “but where can we obtain these things?” 
As they were speaking, 4 older humans came forward, 2 ladies with red buttocks and 2 bareback men. Coming to the front, they said, “Great King, to be furnished with sharp-edged weapons is a very 
simple matter.” 
“How is it simple?” asked Wukong. 
The 4 humans replied, “East of our mountain across two hundred miles of water is the boundary of the Aolai Country. In that country there’s a king who’s numberless men, soldiers in his city, and there 
are bound to be all kinds of metal-works there. If the great king goes there, he can either buy weapons or have them made. Then you can teach us how to use them for the protection of our mountain 
and this will be the stratagem for assuring ourselves of perpetuity.” 
When Wukong heard this, he was filled with delight. “Play here, all of you,” he said. “Let me make a trip.” Dear King! He quickly performed his cloud somersault and crossed the 200 miles of water in 
no time. On the other side he did indeed discover a city with broad streets and huge marketplaces, countless houses and numerous arches. Under the clear sky and bright sun, people were coming 
and going constantly. Wukong thought to himself, “There must be ready-made weapons around here. But going down there to buy a few pieces from them is not as good a bargain as acquiring them 
by magic.” He therefore made the magic sign and recited a spell. Facing the ground on the southwest, he took a deep breath and then blew it out. At once it became a mighty wind, hurtling pebbles 
and rocks through the air. It was truly terrifying: thick clouds in vast formation moved over the world; black fog and dusky vapour darkened the Earth; waves churned in seas and rivers, affrighting fishes 
and crabs; boughs broke in mountain forests, wolves and tigers taking flight. Traders and merchants were gone from stores and shops. No single man was seen at sundry marts and malls. The king 
retreated to his chamber from the royal court. Martial and civil officials returned to their homes. This wind toppled God's throne of a millennium and shook to its foundations the 5-Phoenix Tower. The 
wind arose and separated the king from his subjects in the Aolai Country. Throughout the various boulevards and marketplaces, every family bolted the doors and windows and no one dared go outside. 
Wukong then lowered the direction of his cloud and rushed straight through the imperial gate. He found his way to the armoury, knocked open the doors, and saw that there were countless weapons 
inside. Scimitars, spears, swords, halberds, battle-axes, scythes, whips, rakes, drumsticks, drums, bows, arrows, forks, and lances — every kind was available. Highly pleased, Wukong said to himself, 
“How many pieces can | possibly carry by myself? I'd better use the magic of body division to transport them.” Dear King! He plucked a handful of hairs, chewed them to pieces in his mouth, and spat 
them out. Reciting the spell, he cried, “Change!” 
They changed into thousands of little men who snatched and grabbed the weapons. Those that were stronger took 6 or 7 pieces, the weaker ones 2 or 3 pieces, and together they emptied out the 
armoury. Wukong then mounted the cloud and performed the magic of displacement by calling up a great wind that carried all the little humans back to their home. The various humans both great and 
small were playing outside the cave of the Flower-Fruit Mountain. They suddenly heard the sound of wind and saw in mid-air a huge horde of humans approaching, the sight of which made them all 
flee in terror and hide. In a moment, Wukong lowered his cloud and, shaking himself, collected the pieces of hair back onto his body. All the weapons were piled in front of the mountain. “Little ones,” 
he shouted, “come and receive your weapons!” 
The humans looked and saw Wukong standing alone on level ground. They came running to salute and ask what had happened. Wukong then recounted to them how he had made use of the mighty 
wind to transport the weapons. After expressing their gratitude, the humans all went to grab at the scimitars, snatch at the swords, wield the axes, scramble for spears, stretch the bows, and mount the 
arrows. Shouting and screaming, they played all day long. The following day, they marched in formation as usual. Assembling the humans, Wukong found that there were 47000 of them. This assembly 
greatly impressed all the wild beasts of the mountain — wolves, insects, tigers, leopards, mouse deer, fallow deer, river deer, foxes, wild cats, badgers, lions, elephants, apes, bears, antelopes, bulls, 
muskoxen, chamois, green 1-horn buffaloes, wild hares, and giant mastiffs. Led by the various demon kings of no fewer than 72 caves, they all came to pay homage to the King. Henceforth they brought 
annual tributes and answered the roll call made every season. Some of them joined in the manoeuvres; others supplied provisions in accordance with their rank. In an orderly fashion, they made the 
entire Flower-Fruit Mountain as strong as an iron bucket or a city of metal. The various demon kings also presented metal drums, coloured banners, and helmets. The hurly-burly of marching and 
drilling went on day after day. While the Handsome King was enjoying all this, he suddenly said to the multitude, “You've all become adept with the bow and arrow and proficient in the use of weapons. 
But this scimitar of mine is truly cumbersome, not at all to my liking. What can | do?” 
The 4 elder humans came forward and memorialised, “The great king is a divine sage and therefore it is not fit for him to use an earthly weapon. We don’t know however, whether the great king is able 
to take a journey through water?” 
“Since I've known the Way,” said Wukong, “I've the ability of seventy-two transformations. The cloud somersault has unlimited power. I’m familiar with the magic of body concealment and the magic of 
displacement. | can find my way to Heaven or | can enter the Earth. | can walk past the sun and the moon without casting a shadow, and | can penetrate stone and metal without hindrance. Water 
cannot drown me, nor fire burn me. Is there any place | can’t go to?” 
“It's a good thing that the great king possesses such powers,” said the 4 humans, “for the water below this sheet iron bridge of ours flows directly into the Dragon Palace of the Eastern Ocean. If you're 
willing to go down there, Great King, you'll find the old Dragon King, from whom you may request some kind of weapon. Won't that be to your liking?” 
Hearing this, Wukong said with delight, “Let me make the trip!” Dear King! 
He jumped to the bridgehead and employed the magic of water restriction. Making the magic sign with his fingers, he leaped into the waves that parted for him, and he followed the waterway straight 
to the bottom of the Eastern Ocean. As he was walking, he suddenly ran into a Nature spirit? on patrol who stopped him with the question, “What divine sage is this who comes pushing through the 
water? Speak plainly so that | can announce your arrival.” 
Wukong said, “I’m the Heaven-born sage Sun Wukong of the Flower-Fruit Mountain, a near neighbour of your old Dragon King. How is it that you don’t recognise me?” 
When the Nature spirit heard this, he hurried back to the Water-Crystal Palace to report. “Great King,” he said, “there is outside a Heaven-born sage of the Flower-Fruit Mountain named Sun Wukong. 
He claims that he is a near neighbour of yours, and he is about to arrive at the palace.” 
Aoguang, the Dragon King of the Eastern Ocean arose immediately; accompanied by dragon sons and grandsons, shrimp soldiers and crab generals, he came out for the reception. “High Mortal,” he 
said, “please come in!” They went into the palace for proper introduction, and after offering Wukong the honoured seat and tea, the king asked, “When did the high mortal become accomplished in the 
Way and what kind of divine magic did he receive?” 
Wukong said, “Since the time of my birth, I’ve left the family to practice self-cultivation. I've now acquired a birth-less and deathless body. Recently I've been teaching my children how to protect our 
mountain cave but unfortunately I’m without an appropriate weapon. I’ve heard that my noble neighbour who has long enjoyed living in this green-jade palace and its shell portals must have many divine 
weapons to spare. | came specifically to ask for one of them.” 
When the Dragon King heard this, he could hardly refuse. So he ordered a perch commander to bring out a long-handled scimitar, and presented it to his visitor. “Old man doesn’t know how to use a 
scimitar,” said Wukong. “I beg you to give me something else.” The Dragon King then commanded a whiting lieutenant together with an eel porter to carry out a 9-pronged fork. Jumping down from his 
seat, Wukong took hold of it and tried a few thrusts. He put it down, saying, “Light! Much too light! And it doesn’t suit my hand. | beg you to give me another one.” 
“High Mortal,” said the Dragon King, laughing, “Won't you even take a closer look? This fork weighs sixteen hundred and thirty-three kg.” 
“It doesn’t suit my hand,” Wukong said, “It doesn’t suit my hand!” The Dragon King was becoming rather fearful; he ordered a bream admiral and a carp brigadier to carry out a giant halberd weighing 
3266 kg. When he saw this, Wukong ran forward and took hold of it. He tried a few thrusts and parries and then stuck it in the ground, saying, “It’s still light! Much too light!” 
The old Dragon King was completely unnerved. “High Mortal,” he said, “there’s no weapon in my palace heavier than this halberd.” 
Laughing, Wukong said, “As the old saying goes, ‘Who worries about the Dragon King’s lacking treasures!’ Go, look some more, and I'll offer you a good price if you find something | like.” 
“There really aren’t any more here,” said the Dragon King. 
As they were speaking, the dragon mum and her daughter slipped out and said, “Great King, we can see that this definitely isn’t a sage with meagre abilities. Inside our ocean treasury’s that piece of 
rare magic iron by which the depth of the Heavenly River’is fixed. These past few days the iron has been glowing with a strange and lovely light. Could this be a sign that it'd be taken out to meet this 
sage?” 
“That's,” said the Dragon King, “the measure with which the Great Yu‘ fixed the depths of rivers and oceans when he conquered the Flood. It’s a piece of magic iron but of what use could it be to him?” 
“Let's not be concerned with whether he could find any use for it,” said the dragon mum. “Let’s give it to him, and he can do whatever he wants with it. The important thing’s to get him out of this palace!” 
The old Dragon King agreed and told Wukong the whole story. “Take it out and let me see it,” said Wukong. 
Waving his hands, the Dragon King said, “We can’t move it! We can’t even lift it! The high mortal must go there himself to take a look.” 
“Where is it?” asked Wukong. “Take me there.” 
The Dragon King accordingly led him to the centre of the ocean treasury where all at once they saw a thousand shafts of golden light. Pointing to the spot, the Dragon King said, “That's it - the thing 
that’s glowing.” 
Wukong girded up his clothes and went forward to touch it: it was an iron rod more than twenty feet long and as thick as a barrel. Using all his might, he lifted it with both hands saying, “It’s a little too 
long and too thick. It'd be more serviceable if it were somewhat shorter and thinner.” Hardly had he finished speaking when the treasure shrunk a few feet in length and became a layer thinner. “Smaller 
still would be even better,” said Wukong, giving it another bounce in his hands. Again the treasure became smaller. Highly pleased, Wukong took it out of the ocean treasury to examine it. He found a 
golden hoop at each end with solid black iron in between. Immediately adjacent to one of the hoops was the inscription, “The Compliant Golden-Hooped Rod. Weight: sixty-one hundred and twenty- 
four kg.” He thought to himself in secret delight, “This treasure, | suppose, must be most compliant with one’s wishes.” As he walked, he was deliberating in his mind and murmuring to himself, bouncing 
the rod in his hands, “Shorter and thinner still would be marvellous!” By the time he took it outside, the rod was no more than 20 feet in length and had the thickness of a rice bowl. See how he displayed 
his power now! 
He wielded the rod to make lunges and passes, engaging in mock combat all the way back to the Water-Crystal Palace. The old Dragon King was so terrified that he shook with fear, and the dragon 
princes were all panic-stricken. Sea-turtles and tortoises drew in their necks; fishes, shrimps, and crabs all hid themselves. Wukong held the treasure in his hands and sat in the Water-Crystal Palace. 
Laughing, he said to the Dragon King, “I’m indebted to my good neighbour for his profound kindness.” 
“Please don’t mention it,” said the Dragon King. 
“This piece of iron is very useful,” said Wukong, “but I’ve one further statement to make.” 
“What sort of statement does the high mortal wish to make?” asked the Dragon King. 
Wukong said, “Had there been no such iron, I'd have let the matter drop. Now that I’ve it in my hands, | can see that I’m wearing the wrong kind of clothes to go with it. What am | to do? If you’ve any 
martial apparel, you might as well give me some too. I’d thank you most heartily.” 
“This, | confess, is not in my possession,” said the Dragon King. 
Wukong said, “A solitary guest will not disturb two hosts. Even if you claim that you’ve none, I'll never walk out of this door.” 
“Let the high mortal take the trouble of going to another ocean,” said the Dragon King. “He might tum up something there.” 
“To visit three homes is not as convenient as sitting in one,” said Wukong, “I beg you to give me one outfit.” 
“| really don’t have one,” said the Dragon King, “for if | did, I’d have presented it to you.” 
“Is that so?” said Wukong. “Let me try the iron on you!” 
“High mortal,” the Dragon King said nervously, “don’t ever raise your hand! Don’t ever raise your hand! Let me see whether my brothers have any and we'll try to give you one.” 
“Where are your honoured brothers?” asked Wukong. 
“They're,” said the Dragon King, “Aogin, Dragon King of the Southern Ocean; Aoshun, Dragon King of the Northern Ocean; and Aorun, Dragon King of the Western Ocean.” 


“Old man isn’t going to their places,” said Wukong. “For as the common saying goes: Three in bond can’t compete with two in hand. I'm merely requesting that you find something casual here and give 
it to me. That's all.” 
“There’s no need for the high mortal to go anywhere,” said the Dragon King. “I’ve in my palace an iron drum and a golden bell. Whenever there is any emergency, we beat the drum and strike the bell 
and my brothers are here shortly.” 
“In that case,” said Wukong, “go beat the drum and strike the bell.” 
The turtle general went at once to strike the bell while the tortoise marshal came to beat the drum. Soon after the drum and the bell had sounded, the Dragon Kings of the 3 Oceans got the message 
and arrived promptly, all congregating in the outer courtyard. “Elder Brother,” said Aogin, “what emergency made you beat the drum and strike the bell?” 
“Good Brother,” answered the old Dragon, “it's a long story! We've here a certain Heaven-born sage from the Flower-Fruit Mountain who came here and claimed to be my near neighbour. He 
subsequently demanded a weapon; the steel fork | presented he deemed too small, and the halberd | offered too light. Finally he himself took that piece of rare, divine iron by which the depth of the 
Heavenly River was fixed and used it for mock combat. He is now sitting in the palace and also demanding some sort of battle dress. We've none of that here. So we sounded the drum and the bell to 
invite you all to come. If you happen to have some such outfit, please give it to him so that | can send him out of this door!” 
When Aogin heard this, he was outraged. “Let’s brothers call our army together,” he said, “And arrest him. What's wrong with that?” 
“Don’t talk about arresting him!” the old Dragon said, “don’t talk about arresting him! That piece of iron — a small stroke with it is deadly and a light tap is fatal! The slightest touch will crack the skin and 
a small rap will injure the muscles!” 
Aorun, the Dragon King of the Western Ocean, said, “Second elder brother should not raise his hand against him. Let us rather assemble an outfit for him and get him out of this place. We can then 
present a formal complaint to Heaven, and Heaven will send its own punishment.” 
“You're right,” said Aoshun, the Dragon King of the Northern Ocean, ‘I’ve here a pair of cloud-treading shoes the colour of lotus root.” 
Aorun, the Dragon King of the Western Ocean said, “I brought along a cuirass of chain-mail made of yellow gold.” 
“And I’ve a cap with erect phoenix plumes, made of red gold,” said Aogin, the Dragon King of the Southern Ocean. 
The old Dragon King was delighted and brought them into the Water-Crystal Palace to present the gifts. Wukong duly put on the gold cap, the gold cuirass, cloud-treading shoes, and wielding his 
compliant rod, he fought his way out in mock combat, yelling to the dragons, “Sorry to have bothered you!” 
The Dragon Kings of the 4 Oceans were outraged and they consulted together about filing a formal complaint, of which we make no mention here. Look at that King! 
He opened up the waterway and went straight back to the head of the sheet iron bridge. The 4 old mans were leading the other humans and waiting beside the bridge. They suddenly beheld Wukong 
leaping out of the waves: there was not a drop of water on his body as he walked onto the bridge, all radiant and golden. The various humans were so astonished that they all knelt down, crying, “Great 
King, what marvels! What marvels!” Beaming broadly, Wukong ascended his high throne and set up the iron rod right in the centre. Knowing no better, the humans all came and tried to pick the treasure 
up. It was rather like a dragonfly attempting to shake an ironwood tree: they could not budge it an inch! Biting their fingers and sticking out their tongues, every one of them said, “O Dad, it’s so heavy! 
How did you ever manage to bring it here?” Wukong walked up to the rod, stretched forth his hands, and picked it up. Laughing, he said to them, “Everything has its owner. This treasure has presided 
in the ocean treasury for who knows how many thousands of years, and it just happened to glow recently. The Dragon King only recognised it as a piece of black iron, though it is also said to be the 
divine rarity which fixed the bottom of the Heavenly River. All those fellows together could not lift or move it, and they asked me to take it myself. At first, this treasure was more than twenty feet long 
and as thick as a barrel. After | struck it once and expressed my feeling that it was too large, it grew smaller. | wanted it smaller still, and again it grew smaller. For a third time | commanded it and it 
grew smaller still! When | looked at it in the light, it had on it the inscription, ‘The Compliant Golden-Hooped Rod. Weight: sixty-one hundred and twenty-four kg.’ Stand aside, all of you. Let me ask it to 
go through some more transformations.” 
He held the treasure in his hands and called out, “Smaller, smaller, smaller!” 
And at once it shrank to the size of a tiny embroidery needle, small enough to be hidden inside the ear. Awestruck, the humans cried, “Great King! Take it out and play with it some more.” 
The King took it out from his ear and placed it on his palm. “Bigger, bigger, bigger!” he shouted, again it grew to the thickness of a barrel and more than 20 feet long. He became so delighted playing 
with it that he jumped onto the bridge and walked out of the cave. Grasping the treasure in his hands, he began to perform the magic of cosmic imitation. Bending over, he cried, “Grow!” 
And at once grew to be 10000 feet tall with a head like the Tai Mountain and a chest like a rugged peak, eyes like lightning and a mouth like a blood bowl, and teeth like swords and halberds. The rod 
in his hands was of such a size that its top reached the 334 Heaven and its bottom the 18'* layer of Hell. Tigers, leopards, wolves, crawling creatures, all the monsters of the mountain, the demon kings 
of the 72 caves were so terrified that they saluted, paid homage to the King in fear, and trembling. Presently he revoked his magical appearance and changed the treasure back into a tiny embroidery 
needle stored in his ear. He returned to the cave dwelling but the demon kings of the various caves were still frightened, and they continued to come to pay their respects. At this time, the banners were 
unfurled, the drums sounded, and the brass gongs struck loudly. A great banquet of a hundred delicacies was given, and the cups were filled to overflowing with the fruit of the vines and the juices of 
the coconut. They drank and feasted for a long time, and they engaged in military exercises as before. The King made the 4 old mans mighty commanders of his troops by appointing the 2 ladies with 
red hair as marshals Ma and Liu, and the 2 bareback men as generals Beng and Ba. The 4 mighty commanders, moreover, were entrusted with all matters concerning fortification, pitching camps, 
reward, and punishment. Having settled all this, the King felt completely at ease to soar on the clouds and ride the mist to tour the 4 seas and disport himself in 1000 mountains. Displaying his martial 
skill, he made extensive visits to various heroes and warriors; performing his magic, he made many good friends. At this time moreover, he entered into fraternal alliance with 6 other monarchs: the 
Bull Monster King, the Dragon Monster King, the Garuda Monster King, the Giant Lynx King, the Macaque King, and the Orangutan King. Together with the Handsome King, they formed a fraternal 
order of 7. Day after day they discussed civil and military arts, exchanged cups and goblets, recited poetry and exercised to the strings. They gathered in the moming and parted in the evening; there 
was nota single pleasure that they overlooked, covering a distance of 10000 miles as if it were but the span of their own courtyard. As the saying has it, 7 nod of the head goes farther than 3000 miles; 
1 twist of the torso covers more than 800. One day, the 4 mighty commanders had been told to prepare a great banquet in their own cave, and the 6 kings were invited to the feast. They killed cows 
and slaughtered horses; they sacrificed to Heaven and Earth. The various imps were ordered to exercise and recite, and they all drank until they were thoroughly drunk. After sending the 6 kings off, 
Wukong also rewarded the leaders great and small with gifts. Reclining in the shade of pine trees near the sheet iron bridge, he fell asleep in a moment. The 4 mighty commanders led the crowd to 
form a protective circle around him, not daring to raise their voices. In his sleep the Handsome King saw 2 men approach with a summons with the 3 Chinese characters written on it: 
Sun Wukong 
They walked up to him, tied him up with a rope, and dragged him off without a word. The soul of the Handsome King was reeling from side to side. They reached the edge of a city. The King was 
gradually coming to himself, when he lifted up his head and suddenly saw above the city an iron sign bearing in large letters the 4 words: 
The Region of Darkness 
The Handsome King at once became fully conscious. “The Region of Darkness’s the abode of Yama, King of Death,” he said. “Why I’m here?” 
“Your age in the World of Life has come to an end,” the 2 men said. “The two of us were given this summons to arrest you.” 
When the King heard this, he said, “I, old man himself have transcended the Three Regions and the Five Phases; * hence I’m no longer under Yama’s jurisdiction. Why’s he so confused that he wants 
to arrest me?” 
The 2 summoners paid scant attention. Yanking and pulling, they were determined to haul him inside. Growing angry, the King whipped out his treasure. One wave of it turned it into the thickness of a 
rice bowl; he raised his hands once, and the 2 summoners were reduced to hash. He untied the rope, freed his hands, and fought his way into the city, wielding the rod. Bull-headed demons hid in 
terror, and horse-faced demons fled in every direction. A band of ghost soldiers ran up to the Palace of Darkness, crying, “Great Kings! Disaster! Disaster! Outside there’s a hairy-faced thunder god 
fighting his way in!” 
Their report alarmed the 10 Kings of the Underworld so much that they quickly straightened out their attire and went out to see what was happening. Discovering a fierce and angry figure, they lined up 
according to their ranks and greeted him with loud voices: “High Mortal, tell us your name. High Mortal, tell us your name.” 
“Im the Heaven-born sage Sun Wukong from the Water-Curtain Cave in the Flower-Fruit Mountain,” said the King, “what kind of officials are you?” 
“We're the Emperors of Darkness,” answered the 10 Kings, saluting, “the Ten Kings of the Underworld.” 
“Tell me each of your names at once,” said Wukong, “or I'll give you a drubbing.” 
The 10 Kings said, “We're: King Qinguang, King of the Beginning River, King of the Poem Emperor, King of Avenging Ministers, King Yama, King of Equal Ranks, King of the Tai Mountain, King of City 
Markets, King of the Complete Change, and King of the Turning Wheel.”6 
“Since you've all ascended the thrones of kingship,” said Wukong, “you'd be intelligent beings, responsible in rewards and punishments. Why’re you so ignorant of good and evil? Old man’s acquired 
the Dao and attained mortality. | enjoy the same age as Heaven and I’ve transcended the Three Regions and leapt clear of the Five Phases. Why then did you send men to arrest me?” 
“High Mortal,” said the 10 Kings, “let your anger subside. There’re many people in this world with the same name and surname. Couldn't the summoners have made a mistake?” 
“Nonsense! Nonsense!” said Wukong. “The proverb says, ‘Officials err, clerks err but the summoner never errs!’ Quick, bring out your register of births, deaths, and let me have a look.” When the 10 
Kings heard this, they invited him to go into the palace to see for himself. Holding his compliant rod, Wukong went straight up to the Palace of Darkness and, facing south, sat down in the middle. The 
10 Kings immediately had the judge in charge of the records bring out his books for examination. The judge who did not dare tarry hastened into a side room and brought out 5 or 6 books of documents 
and the ledgers on the 10 species of living beings. He went through them one by one — shorthaired creatures, furry creatures, winged creatures, crawling creatures, and scaly creatures — but he did not 
find his name. He then proceeded to the file on humans. Though this human resembled a human being, he was not listed under the names of men; though he resembled the short-haired creatures, he 
did not dwell in their kingdoms; though he resembled other animals, he was not subject to the unicorn; and though he resembled flying creatures, he was not governed by the phoenix. He had therefore 
a separate ledger that Wukong examined himself. He found his name recorded with the description under the heading: 
Soul 1350: Sun Wukong. Heaven-born Stone Human. Age: 342 years. A good end. 
Wukong said, “I really don’t remember my age. All | want is to erase my name. Bring me a brush.” The judge hurriedly fetched the brush and soaked it in heavy ink. Wukong took the ledger on humans 
and crossed out all the names he could find in it. Throwing down the ledger, he said, “That ends the account! That ends the account! Now I’m truly not your subject.” 
Brandishing his rod, he fought his way out of the Region of Darkness. The 10 Kings did not dare approach him. They went instead to the Green Cloud Palace to consult the Nun King Ksitigarbha and 
made plans to report the incident to Heaven that does not concern us for the moment. While our King was fighting his way out of the city, he was suddenly caught in a clump of grass and stumbled. 
Waking up with a start, he realised that it was all a dream. As he was stretching himself, he heard the 4 mighty commanders and the various humans crying with a loud voice, “Great King! How much 
juice did you imbibe? You've slept all night long. Aren’t you awake yet?” 
“Sleeping is nothing to get excited about,” said Wukong, “but | dreamed that two men came to arrest me, and | didn’t perceive their intention until they brought me to the outskirts of the Region of 
Darkness. Showing my power, | protested right up to the Palace of Darkness and argued with the Ten Kings. | went through our ledger of births, deaths, and crossed out all our names. Those fellows 
have no hold over us now.” 
The various humans all saluted to express their gratitude. From that time onward there were many mountain humans who did not grow old for their names were not registered in the Underworld. When 
the Handsome King finished his account of what had happened, the 4 mighty commanders reported the story to the demon kings of various caves who all came to tender their congratulations. Only a 
few days had passed when the 6 sworn brothers also came to congratulate him, all of them delighted about the cancellation of the names. We'll not elaborate here on their joyful gathering and turn 
instead to the Great Benevolent Sage of Heaven, the Celestial Jade Emperor of the Most Venerable demigod who was holding court one day in the Treasure Hall of Divine Mists, the Cloud Palace of 
Golden Arches. The divine ministers, civil and military were just gathering for the morning session when suddenly the Daoist mortal Qiu Hongzhi? announced, “Your Majesty, outside the Translucent 
Palace, Aoguang the Dragon King of the Eastern Ocean's awaiting your command to present a memorial to the Throne.” The Jade Emperor gave the order to have him brought forth and Aoguang was 
led into the Hall of Divine Mists. After he had paid his respects, a divine page boy in charge of documents received the memorial, and the Jade Emperor read it from the beginning. The memorial said: 
From the lowly water region of the Eastern Ocean at the East East-Videha Continent, the small dragon subject, Aoguang, humbly informs the Wise Lord of Heaven, the Most Eminent High God and 
Ruler, that a bogus mortal, Sun Wukong, born of the Flower-Fruit Mountain and resident of the Water-Curtain Cave has recently abused your small dragon, gaining a seat in his water home by force. 
He demanded a weapon, employing power and intimidation; he asked for martial attire, unleashing violence and threats. He terrorised my water kinsmen, and scattered turtles and tortoises. The Dragon 
of the Southern Ocean trembled; the Dragon of the Western Ocean was filled with horror; the Dragon of the Northern Ocean drew back his head to surrender; and your subject Aoguang flexed his body 
to do obeisance. We presented him with the divine treasure of an iron rod and the gold cap with phoenix plumes; giving him also a chain-mail cuirass and cloud-treading shoes, we sent him off 
courteously. But even then he was bent on displaying his martial prowess and magical powers, and all he could say to us was “Sorry to have bothered you!” We're indeed no match for him, nor are we 


able to subdue him. Your subject therefore presents this petition and humbly begs for imperial justice. We earnestly beseech you to dispatch the Heavenly host and capture this monster, so that 
tranquillity may be restored to the oceans and prosperity to the Lower Region. Thus we present this memorial. 

When the Holy Emperor had finished reading, he gave the command: “Let the Dragon God return to the ocean. We'll send our generals to arrest the culprit.” The old Dragon King gratefully touched his 
forehead and left. From below the Mortal Elder Ge, the Celestial Master® also brought forth the report. “Your Majesty, the Minister of Darkness, King Qinguang supported by the Nun, King Ksitigarbha, 
Pope of the Underworld, has arrived to present his memorial.” The jade girl in charge of communication came from the side to receive this document that the Jade Emperor also read from the beginning. 
The memorial said: 

The Region of Darkness is the nether region proper to Earth. As Heaven is for gods and Earth for ghosts so life and death proceed in cyclic succession. Fowls are born and animals die; male and 
female, they multiply. Births and transformations, the male begotten of the procreative female — such is the order of Nature, and it cannot be changed. But now appears Sun Wukong, a Heaven-born 
baneful human from the Water-Curtain Cave in the Flower-Fruit Mountain who practices evil and violence, and resists our proper summons. Exercising magic powers, he utterly defeated the ghostly 
messengers of 9-fold Darkness; exploiting brute force, he terrorised the 10 Merciful Kings. He caused great confusion in the Palace of Darkness; he abrogated by force the Register of Names, so that 
the category of humans is now beyond control, and inordinately long life is given to the simian family. The wheel of transmigration is stopped, for birth and death are eliminated in each kind of human. 
Your poor monk therefore risks offending your Heavenly authority in presenting this memorial. We humbly beg you to send forth your divine army and subdue this monster, to the end that life and death 
may once more be regulated and the Underworld rendered perpetually secure. Respectfully we present this memorial. 

When the Jade Emperor had finished reading, he again gave a command: “Let the Lord of Darkness return to the Underworld. We'll send our generals to arrest this culprit.” 

King Qinguang also touched his head to the ground gratefully and left. The Great Heavenly demigod called together his various mortal subjects, both civil and military and asked, “When's this baneful 
human born and in which generation did he begin his career? How’s it that he’s become so powerfully accomplished in the Way?” 

Scarcely had he finished speaking when 1000-Mile Eye and Fair-Wind Ear stepped forward from the ranks. “This human’s,” they said, “the Heaven-born stone human of three centuries ago. At that 
time he didn’t seem to amount to much and we don’t know where he acquired the knowledge of self-cultivation these last few years and became a mortal. Now he knows how to subdue dragons and 
tame tigers 9and thus he is able to annul by force the Register of Death.” 

“Which one of you divine generals,” asked the Jade Emperor, “wishes to go down there to subdue him?” 

Scarcely had he finished speaking when the Long-Life Spirit of the Planet Venus came forward from the ranks and saluted himself. “Highest and Holiest,” he said, “within the three regions, all creatures 
endowed with the nine apertures can become mortals through exercise. It isn’t surprising that this human with a body nurtured by Heaven and Earth, a frame born of the sun and moon should achieve 
mortality, seeing that his head points to Heaven and his feet walk on Earth, and he feeds on the dew and the mist. Now that he has the power to subdue dragons and tame tigers, how is he different 
from a human being? Your subject therefore makes so bold as to ask Your Majesty to remember the compassionate grace of Creation and issue a decree of pacification. Let him be summoned to the 
Upper Region and given some kind of official duties. His name will be recorded in the Register and we can control him here. If he’s receptive to the Heavenly decree, he'll be rewarded and promoted 
hereafter; but if he is disobedient to your command, we'll arrest him forthwith. Such an action will spare us a military expedition in the first place and permit us to receive another mortal in an orderly 
manner into our midst in the second.” 

The Jade Emperor was highly pleased with this statement, and he said, “We'll follow the counsel of our minister.” He then ordered the Star Spirit of Poems, Letters to compose the decree, and delegated 
the Gold Star of Venus to be the viceroy of peace. Having received the decree, the Gold Star went out of the South Heaven Gate lowered the direction of his hallowed cloud, headed straight for the 
Flower-Fruit Mountain, and the Water-Curtain Cave. He said to the various little humans, “I’m the Heavenly messenger sent from above. I’ve with me an imperial decree to invite your great king to go 
to the Upper Region. Report this to him quickly!” 

The humans outside the cave passed the word along one by one until it reached the depth of the cave. “Great King,” one of the men said, “there’s an old man outside bearing a document on his back. 
He says that he’s a messenger sent from Heaven and has an imperial decree of invitation for you.” 

Upon hearing this, the Handsome King was exceedingly pleased. “These last two days,” he said, “I was just thinking about taking a little trip to Heaven and the heavenly messenger’s already come to 
invite me!” 

The King quickly straightened out his attire and went to the door for the reception. The Gold Star came into the centre of the cave and stood still with his face toward the south. “I’m the Gold Star of 
Venus from the West,” he said. “l came down to Earth, bearing the imperial decree of pacification from the Jade Emperor, and invite you to go to Heaven to receive a mortal appointment.” 

Laughing, Wukong said, “I’m most grateful for the Old Star's visit.” He then gave the order: “Little ones, prepare a banquet to entertain our guest.” 

The Gold Star said, “As a bearer of imperial decree, | can’t remain here long. | must ask the Great King to go with me at once. After your glorious promotion, we'll have many occasions to converse at 
our leisure.” 

“We're honoured by your presence,” said Wukong; “I’m sorry that you've to leave with empty hands!” He then called the 4 mighty commanders together for this admonition: “Be diligent in teaching and 
drilling the young ones. Let me go up to Heaven to take a look and to see whether | can have you all brought up there too to live with me.” The 4 mighty commanders indicated their obedience. This 
King mounted the cloud with the Gold Star and rose up into the sky. Truly he ascends the high rank of mortals from the sky; his name’s enrolled in cloud columns and treasure scrolls. 


004 

Appointed a Ban-Horse, he’d be content? Named Equal to Heaven, he’s still unappeased 
The Gold Star of Venus left the depths of the cave dwelling with the Handsome King, and together they rose by mounting the clouds. But the cloud somersault of Wukong is no common magic; its 
speed is tremendous. Soon he left the Gold Star far behind and arrived first at the South Heaven Gate. He was about to dismount from the cloud and go in when the Deity-King Virddhaka leading Pang, 
Liu, Kou, Bi, Deng, Xin, Zhang, and Tao, the various divine heroes, barred the way with spears, scimitars, swords, and halberds and refused him entrance. The King said, “What a deceitful fellow that 
Gold Star is! If old man has been invited here, why have these people been ordered to use their swords and spears to bar my entrance?” He was protesting loudly when the Gold Star arrived in haste. 
“Old man,” said Wukong angrily to his face, “why did you deceive me? You told me that | was invited by the Jade Emperor's decree of pacification. Why then did you get these people to block the 
Heaven Gate and prevent my entering?” 
“Let the Great King calm down,” the Gold Star said, laughing. “Since you've never been to the Hall of Heaven before, nor have you been given a name, you're quite unknown to the various heavenly 
guardians. How can they let you in on their own authority? Once you've seen the Heavenly demigod, received an appointment, and had your name listed in the Mortal Register, you can go in and out 
as you please. Who would then obstruct your way?” 
“If that’s how itis,” said Wukong, “it’s all right. But I'm not going in by myself.” 
“Then go in with me,” said the Gold Star, pulling him by the hand. 
As they approached the gate, the Gold Star called out loudly, “Guardians of the Heaven Gate, lieutenants great and small, make way! This person is a mortal from the Region Below whom I’ve 
summoned by the imperial decree of the Jade Emperor.” The Deity-King Virudhaka and the various divine heroes immediately lowered their weapons and stepped aside, and the King finally believed 
what he had been told. He walked slowly inside with the Gold Star and looked around. For it was truly his 1s‘ ascent to the Region Above, sudden entrance into the Hall of Heaven where 10000 shafts 
of golden light whirled as a coral rainbow and a thousand layers of hallowed air diffused mist of purple. Look at that South Heaven Gate! Its deep shades of green from glazed tiles were made; its 
radiant battlements adorned with treasure jade. On 2 sides were posted scores of celestial sentinels, each of whom, standing tall beside the pillars, carried bows and clutched banners. All around were 
sundry divine beings in golden armour, each of them holding halberds and whips or wielding scimitars and swords. Impressive may be the outer court; overwhelming is the sight within! In the inner halls 
stood several huge pillars circled by red-whiskered dragons whose golden scales gleamed in the sun. There were moreover, a few long bridges; above them crimson-headed phoenixes circled with 
soaring plumes of many hues. Bright mist shimmered in the light of the sky. Green fog descending obscured the stars. 33 Heavenly mansions were found up here with names like the Scattered Cloud, 
the Vaisrvana, the Pancavidya, the Suyama, the Nirmanarati ...' on the roof of every mansion the ridge held a stately golden beast. There were also the 72 treasure halls with names like the Morning 
Assembly, the Transcendent Void, the Precious Light, the Heavenly King, the Divine Minister ... in every hall beneath the pillars stood rows of jade unicorn. There were flowers unfading in 1000 millennia 
on the Platform of Canopus; beside the oven for refining herbs, there were exotic grasses growing green for ten millennia. He went before the Tower of Homage to the Sage where he saw robes of 
royal purple gauze brilliant as stars refulgent, caps the shape of hibiscus, resplendent with gold and precious stones, pins of jade and shoes of pearl, and purple sashes and golden ornaments. When 
the golden bells swayed to their striking, the memorial of the 3 Judges? would cross the vermilion courtyard; when the drums of Heaven were sounded, 10000 sages of the royal audience would honour 
the Jade Emperor. He went to the Treasure Hall of Divine Mists, too where nails of gold penetrated frames of jade, and colourful phoenixes exercised atop scarlet doors. Here were covered bridges 
and winding corridors displaying everywhere openwork carvings most elegant; and eaves crowding together in layers 3 and 4, on each of which reared up phoenixes and dragons. There was high 
above a round dome big, bright, brilliant - its shape, a huge gourd of purple gold below which guardian goddesses hung out their fans, and jade maidens held up their mortal veils. Ferocious were the 
sky marshals overseeing the court; dignified, the divine officials protecting the Throne. Tablets of the Great Monad Elixir were heaped there at the centre on a crystal platter; rising out of the comnelian 
vases were several branches of twisting coral so it was that rare goods of every order were found in Heaven’s Hall, and nothing like them on Earth could ever be seen — those golden arches, silver 
coaches, and that Heavenly house, those coralline blooms and jasper plants with their buds of jade. The jade rabbit passed the platform to adore the king. The golden crow flew by to worship the sage. 
4Blessed was the King coming to this Heavenly realm, he who was not mired in the filthy soil of man. The Gold Star of Venus led the Handsome King to the Treasure Hall of Divine Mists and without 
waiting for further announcement, they went into the imperial presence. While the Star saluted himself, Wukong stood erect by him. Showing no respect, he cocked his ear only to listen to the report of 
the Gold Star. “According to your decree,” said the Gold Star, “your subject has brought the bogus mortal.” 
“Which one is the bogus mortal?” asked the Jade Emperor graciously. 
Only then did Wukong salute and reply, “None other than old man!” 
Blanching with horror, the various divine officials said, “That wild human! Already he’s failed to salute himself before the Throne and now he dares to come forward with such an insolent reply as none 
other than old man! He’s worthy of death, worthy of death!” 
“That fellow Sun Wukong’s a bogus mortal from the Region Below,” announced the Jade Emperor, “and he’s only recently acquired the form of a human being. We'll pardon him this time for his 
ignorance of court etiquette.” 
“Thank you, Your Majesty,” cried the various divine officials. 
Only then did the King salute long with raised hands and utter a cry of gratitude. The Jade Emperor then ordered the divine officials, both civil and military to see what vacant appointment there might 
be for Sun Wukong to receive. From the side came the Star Spirit of Wuqu who reported, “In every mansion and hall everywhere in the Palace of Heaven, there is no lack of ministers. Only at the 
imperial stables is a supervisor needed.” 
“Let him be made a Ban-Horse Plague,” proclaimed the Jade Emperor. 
The various subjects again shouted their thanks but Human only saluted deeply and gave a loud whoop of gratitude. The Jade Emperor then sent the Star Spirit of Jupiter to accompany him to the 
stables. The King went happily with the Star Spirit of Jupiter to the stables in order to assume his duties. After the Star Spirit had returned to his own mansion, the new officer gathered together the 
deputy and assistant supervisors, the accountants and stewards, and other officials both great and small and made thorough investigation of all the affairs of the stables. There were about a thousand 
celestial horses, ®and they were all Hualius, Chizhis, Lu’ers, Xianlis, Consorts of Dragons, Purple Swallows, Folded Wings, Suxiangs, Juetis, Silver Hooves, Yaoniaos, Flying Yellows, Chestnuts, Fast- 
er-than-Arrows, Red Hares, Speedier-than-Lights, Leaping Lights, Vaulting Shadows, Rising Fogs, Triumphant Yellows, Wind Chasers, Distance Breakers, Flying Pinions, Surging Airs, Rushing Winds, 
Fiery Lightning, Copper Sparrows, Drifting Clouds, Dragon-like pie-bald, Tiger-like pintos, Dust Quenchers, Purple Scales, Ferghanas’ from the 4 Corners like the 8 Steeds, and 9 Stallions they have 
no rivals within a thousand miles! Such are these fine horses. Every one of which neighs like the wind and gallops like thunder to show a mighty spirit. They tread the mist and mount the clouds with 
unflagging strength. Our King went through the lists and made a thorough inspection of the horses. Within the imperial stables, the accountants were in charge of getting supplies; the stewards groomed 
and washed the horses, chopped hay, watered them, and prepared their food; and the deputies and assistants saw to the overall management. Never resting, the Bima oversaw the care of the horses, 
fussing with them by day and watching over them diligently by night. Those horses that wanted to sleep were stirred up and fed; those that wanted to gallop were caught and placed in the stalls. When 
the celestial horses saw him, they all behaved most properly and they were so well cared for that their flanks became swollen with fat. More than half a month soon went by, and on one leisurely 
morning, the various department ministers gave a banquet to welcome and congratulate him. While they were drinking happily, the King suddenly put down his cup and asked: “What sort of rank’s this 
Ban-Horse Plague of mine?” 
“The rank and the title are the same,” they said. 


“But what ministerial grade’s it?” 
“It doesn’t have a grade,” they said. 
“If it doesn’t have a grade,” said the King, “I suppose it must be the very highest.” 
“Not at all,” they replied, “it can only be called the unclassified!” 
The King said, “What do you mean by the unclassified?” 
“It's really the meanest level,” they said. “This kind of minister's the lowest of the low ranks; hence he can only look after horses. Take the case of Your Honour who have been so diligent in discharging 
your duties since your arrival. If the horses are fattened, you'll only earn yourself a Fairly Good! If they look at all thin, you'll be roundly rebuked and if they’re seriously hurt or wounded, you'll be 
prosecuted and fined.” 
When the King heard this, fire leaped up from his heart. “So that’s the contempt they've for old man!” he cried angrily, gnashing his teeth. “At the Flower-Fruit Mountain | was honoured as king and part- 
iarch. How dare they trick me into coming to look after horses for them, if horse-tending is such a menial service, reserved only for the young and lowly? Is such treatment worthy of me? I’m quitting! 
I’m quitting! I’m leaving right now!” With a crash, he kicked over his official desk and took the treasure out of his ear. One wave of his hand and it had the thickness of a rice bowl. Delivering blows in all 
directions, he fought his way out of the imperial stables and went straight to the South Heaven Gate. The various celestial guardians, knowing that he had been officially appointed a Ban-Horse Plague 
did not dare stop him and allowed him to fight his way out of the Heaven Gate. In a moment, he lowered the direction of his cloud and returned to the Flower-Fruit Mountain. The 4 mighty commanders 
were seen drilling troops with the Monster Kings of various caves. “Little ones,” this King cried in a loud voice, “old man’s returned!” 
The flock of humans all came to salute and received him into the depths of the cave dwelling. As the King ascended his throne, they busily prepared a banquet to welcome him. “Receive our 
congratulations, Great King,” they said. “Having gone to the region above for more than ten years, you must be returning in success and glory.” 
“I've been away for only half a month,” said the King. “How can it be more than ten years?” 
“Great King,” said the various humans, “you're unaware of time and season when you're in Heaven. One day in Heaven above is equal to a year on Earth. May we ask the Great King what ministerial 
appointment he received?” 
“Don’t mention that! Don’t mention that!” said the King, waving his hand. “It embarrasses me to death! That Jade Emperor does not know how to use talent. Seeing the features of old man, he appointed 
me to something called the Ban-Horse Plague that actually means taking care of horses for him. It’s a job too low even to be classified! | didn’t know this when | first assumed my duties, and so | 
managed to have some fun at the imperial stables. But when | asked my colleagues today, | discovered what a degraded position it was. | was so furious that | knocked over the banquet they were 
giving me and rejected the title. That's why | came back down.” 
“Welcome back!” said the various humans, “welcome back! Our Great King can be the sovereign of this blessed cave dwelling with the greatest honour and happiness. Why'd he go away to be 
someone’s stable boy?” 
“Little ones,” they cried, “send up the juice quickly and cheer up our Great King.” 
As they were drinking juice and conversing happily, someone came to report: “Great King, there are two one-horned demon kings outside who want to see you.” 
“Show them in,” said the King. The demon kings straightened out their attire, ran into the cave, and saluted themselves. “Why did you want to see me?” asked the Handsome King. 
“We've long heard that the Great King is receptive to talents,” said the demon kings, “but we'd no reason to request your audience. Now we learn that our Great King’s received a divine appointment 
and returned in success and glory. We’ve come therefore to present the Great King with a red and yellow robe for his celebration. If you’re not disdainful of the uncouth and the lowly and willing to 
receive us plebeians, we'll serve you as dogs or as horses.” Highly pleased, the King put on the red and yellow robe while the rest of them lined up joyfully and did homage. He then appointed the 
demon kings to be the Vanguard Commanders, Marshals of the Forward Regiments. After expressing their thanks, the demon kings asked again, “Since our Great King’s in Heaven for a long time, 
may we ask what kind of appointment he received?” 
“The Jade Emperor belittles the talented,” said the King. “He only made me something called the Ban-Horse Plague.” 
Hearing this, the demon kings said again, “Great King’s such divine powers! Why'd you take care of horses for him? What's there to stop you from assuming the rank of the Great Sage Equal to 
Heaven?” 
When the King heard these words, he could not conceal his delight, shouting repeatedly, “Bravo! Bravo! Make me a banner immediately,” he ordered the 4 mighty commanders, “and inscribe on it in 
large words, The Great Sage Equal to Heaven. Erect a pole to hang it on. From now on, address me only as the Great Sage Equal to Heaven, and the title Great King will no longer be permitted. The 
Monster Kings of the various caves will also be informed so that it will be known to all.” 
Of this we'll speak no further. We now refer to the Jade Emperor who held court the next day. The Celestial Master Zhang’ was seen leading the deputy and the assistant of the imperial stables to come 
before the vermilion courtyard. “Your Majesty,” they said, saluting themselves, “the newly appointed Ban-Horse Plague, Sun Wukong objected to his rank as being too low and left the Heavenly Palace 
yesterday in rebellion.” 
Meanwhile, the Deity-King Virddhaka leading the various celestial guardians from the South Heaven Gate also made the report, “The Ban-Horse Plague has walked out of the Heaven Gate for reasons 
unknown to us.” 
When the Jade Emperor heard this, he made the proclamation: “Let the two divine commanders and their followers return to their duties. We'll send forth celestial soldiers to capture this monster.” From 
among the ranks, Deity-King Li? who was the Pagoda Bearer and his 3 Prince Nata came forward and presented their request, saying, “Your Majesty, though your humble subjects aren't gifted, we 
await your authorisation to subdue this monster.” 
Delighted, the Jade Emperor appointed Pagoda Bearer Deity-King Li Jing to be grand marshal for subduing the monster, and promoted 3" Prince Nata to be the great deity in charge of the 3-Platform 
Assembly of the Saints. They were to lead an expeditionary force at once for the Region Below. Deity-King Li and Nata saluted to take leave and went back to their own mansion. After reviewing the 
troops, their captains, lieutenants, they appointed Mighty-Spirit God to be Vanward Commander, the Fish-Belly General to bring up the rear, and the General of the Nature spirits to urge the troops on. 
In a moment they left by the South Heaven Gate and went straight to the Flower-Fruit Mountain. A level piece of land was selected for encampment, and the order was then given to the Mighty-Spirit 
God to provoke battle. Having received his order and having buckled and knotted his armour properly, the Mighty-Spirit God grasped his spreading-flower axe and came to the Water-Curtain Cave. 
There in front of the cave he saw a great mob of monsters, all of them wolves, insects, tigers, leopards, and the like; they were all jumping, growling, brandishing their swords, and waving their spears. 
“Damnable beasts!” shouted the Mighty-Spirit God. “Hurry and tell the Ban-Horse Plague that |, a great general from Heaven have by the authorisation of the Jade Emperor come to subdue him. Tell 
him to come out quickly and surrender lest all of you be annihilated!” 
Running pell-mell into the cave, those monsters shouted the report, “Disaster! Disaster!” 
“What sort of disaster?” asked the King. 
“There's a celestial warrior outside,” said the monsters, “who claims the title of an imperial envoy. He says he came by the holy decree of the Jade Emperor to subdue you, orders you to go out quickly, 
and surrender lest we lose our lives.” 
Hearing this, the King commanded, “Get my battle dress!” He quickly donned his red gold cap, pulled on his yellow gold cuirass, slipped on his cloud-treading shoes, and seized the compliant golden- 
hooped rod. He led the crowd outside and set them up in battle formation. The Mighty-Spirit God opened wide his eyes and stared at this magnificent King: the gold cuirass worn on his body was 
brilliant and bright; the gold cap on his head also glistened in the light. In his hands was a staff, the golden-hooped rod that well became the cloud-treading shoes on his feet. His eyes glowered strangely 
like burning stars. Hanging past his shoulders were two ears, forked and hard. His remarkable body knew many ways of change, his voice resounded like bells, and chimes. This Ban-Horse Plague 
with beaked mouth and gaping teeth aimed high to be the Equal to Heaven Sage. “Lawless human,” the Mighty-Spirit God roared powerfully, “do you recognise me?” 
When the Great Sage heard these words, he asked quickly, “What sort of dull-witted deity are you? Old man’s yet to meet you! State your name at once!” 
“Fraudulent simian,” cried the Mighty-Spirit, “what do you mean, you don’t recognise me? I’m the Celestial General of Mighty-Spirit, the Vanward Commander and subordinate to Deity-King Li, the 
Pagoda Bearer from the divine empyrean. I've come by the imperial decree of the Jade Emperor to receive your submission. Strip yourself of your apparel immediately and yield to the Heavenly grace, 
so that this mountain-full of creatures can avoid execution. If you dare but utter half a ‘No,’ you'll be reduced to powder in seconds!” 
When the King heard those words, he was filled with anger. “Reckless simpleton!” he cried. “Stop bragging and wagging your tongue! I’d have killed you with one stroke of my rod but then I'd have no 
one to communicate my message. So I'll spare your life for the moment. Go back to Heaven quickly and inform the Jade Emperor that he has no regard for talent. Old man’s unlimited abilities. Why did 
he ask me to mind horses for him? Take a good look at the words on this banner. If I'm promoted according to its title, I'll lay down my arms, the cosmos will then be fair, and tranquil. But if he doesn’t 
agree to my demand, I'll fight my way up to the Treasure Hall of Divine Mists, and he'll even be unable to sit on his dragon throne!” When the Mighty-Spirit God heard these words, he opened his eyes 
wide, facing the wind, and saw indeed a tall pole outside the cave. On the pole hung a banner bearing in large letters the words: 

The Great Sage Equal to Heaven 
The Mighty-Spirit God laughed scornfully 3 times and jeered, “Lawless human! How fatuous can you be and how arrogant! So you want to be the Great Sage Equal to Heaven! Be good enough to take 
a bit of my axe first!” 
Aiming at his head, he hacked at him but being a knowledgeable fighter, the King was not unnerved. He met the blow at once with his golden-hooped rod, and this exciting battle was on. The rod was 
named Compliant; the axe was called Spreading Flower. The 2 of them did not yet know their weakness or strength, meeting suddenly but axe and rod clashed left and right. One concealed secret 
powers most wondrous; the other vaunted openly his vigour and might. They used magic — blowing out cloud and puffing up fog; they stretched their hands, splattering mud and spraying sand. The 
might of the celestial battler had its way: but the Human had boundless power of change. The rod uplifted - a dragon played in water; the axe arrived - a phoenix sliced through flowers. Mighty-Spirit 
whose name spread through the world in prowess truly could not match the other one. The Great Sage whirling lightly his iron staff could numb the body with one blow on the head. The Mighty-Spirit 
God could oppose him no longer and allowed the King to aim a mighty blow at his head that he hastily sought to parry with his axe. With a crack the axe handle split in two, and Mighty-Spirit turned 
swiftly to flee for his life. “Imbecile! Imbecile!” laughed the King, “I’ve already spared you. Go and report my message at once!” 
Back at the camp, the Mighty-Spirit God went straight to see the Pagoda Bearer Deity-King. Huffing and puffing, he knelt down saying, “The Ban-Horse Plague’s indeed great magic powers! Your 
unworthy warrior can’t prevail against him. Defeated, I’ve come to beg your pardon.” 
“This fellow’s blunted our will to fight,” said Deity-King Li angrily. “Take him out and have him executed!” 
From the side came Prince Nata who said, saluting deeply, “Let your anger subside, Dad King, and pardon for the moment the guilt of Mighty-Spirit. Permit your child to go into battle once and we'll 
know the long and short of the matter.” 
The Deity-King heeded the admonition and ordered Mighty-Spirit to go back to his camp and await trial. This Prince Nata leaped from his camp and dashed to the Water-Curtain Cave, properly armed. 
Wukong was just dismissing his troops when he saw Nata approaching fiercely. Dear Prince! 2 boyish tufts barely cover his skull. His flowing hair has yet to reach the shoulders. A rare mind, alert and 
intelligent. A noble frame, pure and elegant. He is indeed the unicorn son from Heaven above, truly mortal as the phoenix of mist and smoke. This seed of dragon has by nature uncommon features. 
His tender age shows no relation to any worldly kin. He carries on his body 6 kinds of magic weapons. He flies, he leaps; he can change without restriction. Now by the golden-mouth proclamation of 
the Jade Emperor he is appointed to the Assembly: its name, the 3 Platforms. \Wukong drew near and asked, “Whose little brother are you and what do you want, barging through my gate?” 
“Lawless monstrous human!” shouted Nata. “Don’t you recognise me? I’m Nata, third son of the Pagoda Bearer Deity-King. I’m under the imperial commission of the Jade Emperor to come and arrest 
you.” 
“Little prince,” said Wukong laughing, “your baby teeth haven't even fallen out and your natal hair is still damp! How dare you talk so big? I’m going to spare your life and won't fight you. Just take a look 
at the words on my banner and report them to the Jade Emperor above. Grant me this title and you'll not need to stir your forces. I'll submit on my own. If you don’t satisfy my cravings, I'll surely fight 
my way up to the Treasure Hall of Divine Mists.” Lifting his head to look, Nata saw the words: 

Great Sage Equal to Heaven 

“What great power does this monstrous human possess,” said Nata, “that he dares claim such a title? Fear not! Swallow my sword.” 
“lll just stand here quietly,” said Wukong, “and you can take a few hacks at me with your sword.” 
Young Nata grew angry. “Change!” he yelled loudly and changed at once into a fearsome person having 3 heads and 6 arms. 


In his hands he held 6 kinds of weapons: a monster-stabbing sword, a monster-cleaving scimitar, a monster-binding rope, a monster-taming club, an embroidered ball, and a fiery wheel. Brandishing 
these weapons, he mounted a frontal attack. “This little brother does know a few tricks!” said Wukong, somewhat alarmed by what he saw. “But don’t be rash. Watch my magic!” Dear Great Sage! He 
shouted, “Change!” and he too transformed himself into a creature with 3 heads and 6 arms. 1 wave of the golden-hooped rod and it became 3 staffs that were held with 6 hands. The conflict was truly 
earth-shaking and made the very mountains tremble. What a battle! The 6-armed Prince Nata. The Heaven-born Handsome Stone King. Meeting, each met his match and found each to be from the 
same source. One was consigned to come down to Earth. The other in guile disturbed the universe. The edge of the monster-stabbing sword was quick; the keen, monster-cleaving scimitar alarmed 
demons and gods; the monster-binding rope was like a flying snake; the monster-taming club was like the head of a wolf; the lightning-propelled fiery wheel was like darting flames; hither and thither 
the embroidered ball rotated. The 3 compliant rods of the Great Sage protected the front and guarded the rear with care and skill. A few rounds of bitter contest revealed no victor but the prince’s mind 
would not so easily rest. He ordered the 6 kinds of weapon to change into trillions, aiming for the head. The King roared with laughter loud and wielded his iron rod with artful ease, undaunted: 1 turned 
to 1000, 1000 to 10000, filling the sky as a swarm of dancing dragons, and shocked the Monster Kings of sundry caves into shutting their doors. Demons and monsters all over the mountain hid their 
heads. The angry breath of divine soldiers was like oppressive clouds. The golden-hooped iron rod whizzed like the wind. On this side, the battle cries of celestial fighters appalled everyone; on that 
side, the banner-waving of monsters startled each person. Growing fierce, the 2 parties both willed a test of strength. We know not who was stronger and who weaker. Each displaying his divine powers, 
the 3 Prince and Wukong battled for 30 rounds. The 6 weapons of that prince changed into 1000 and 10000 pieces; the golden-hooped rod of Sun Wukong into 10000 and 1000. They clashed like 
raindrops and meteors in the air but victory or defeat was not yet determined. Wukong however, proved to be the one swifter of eye and hand. Right in the midst of the confusion, he plucked a piece of 
hair and shouted, “Change!” 

It changed into a copy of him, also wielding a rod in its hands and deceiving Nata. His real person leaped behind Nata and struck his left shoulder with the rod. Nata, still performing his magic, heard 
the rod whizzing through the air and tried desperately to dodge it. Unable to move quickly enough, he took the blow and fled in pain. Breaking off his magic and gathering up his 6 weapons, he returned 
to his camp in defeat. Standing in front of his battle line, Deity-King Li saw what was happening and was about to go to his son’s assistance. The prince however, came to him first and gasped, “Dad 
King! The Ban-Horse Plague’s truly powerful. Even your son of such magical strength’s no match for him! He’s wounded me in the shoulder.” 

“If this fellow’s so powerful,” said the Deity-King, turning pale with fright, “how can we beat him?” 

The prince said, “In front of his cave he’s set up a banner bearing the words: The Great Sage Equal to Heaven. By his own mouth he boastfully asserted that if the Jade Emperor appointed him to such 
a title, all troubles would cease. If he weren't given this name, he’d surely fight his way up to the Treasure Hall of Divine Mists!” 

“If that’s the case,” said the Deity-King, “let’s not fight with him for the moment. Let's return to the region above and report these words. There'll be time then for us to send for more celestial soldiers 
and take this fellow on all sides.” 

The prince was in such pain that he could not do battle again; he therefore went back to Heaven with the Deity-King to report, of which we speak no further. Look at that King returning to his mountain 
in triumph! The monster kings of 72 caves and the 6 sworn brothers all came to congratulate him, and they feasted jubilantly in the blessed cave dwelling. He then said to the 6 brothers, “If little brother 
is now called the Great Sage Equal to Heaven, why don’t all of you assume the title of Great Sage also?” 

“Our worthy brother's words are right!” shouted the Bull Monster King from their midst, '' “I’m going to be called the Great Sage Parallel with Heaven.” 

“Ill be called the Great Sage Covering the Ocean,” said the Dragon Monster King. 

“Ill be called the Great Sage United with Heaven,” said the Garuda Monster King. 

“Ill be called the Great Sage, the Mover of Mountains,” said the Giant Lynx King. 

“lll be called the Tell-Tale Great Sage,” said the Macaque King. 

“And I'll be called a god-Routing Great Sage,” said the Orangutan King. 

At that moment, the 7 Great Sages had complete freedom to do as they pleased and to call themselves whatever titles they liked. They had fun for a whole day and then dispersed. Now we return to 
the Deity-King Li and the Third Prince who went straight to the Treasure Hall of Divine Mists to give this report, leading the other commanders: “By your holy decree your subjects led the expeditionary 
force down to the Region Below to subdue the baneful mortal, Sun Wukong. We'd no idea of his enormous power and we’d not prevail against him. We beseech Your Majesty to give us reinforcements 
to wipe him out.” 

“How powerful can we expect one baneful human to be,” asked the Jade Emperor, “that reinforcements are needed?” 

“May Your Majesty pardon us from an offence worthy of death!” said the prince, drawing closer. “That baneful human wielded an iron rod; he defeated first the Mighty-Spirit God and then wounded the 
shoulder of your subject. Outside the door of his cave he set up a banner bearing the words: The Great Sage Equal to Heaven. He said that if he were given such a rank, he would lay down his arms 
and come to declare his allegiance. If not, he’d fight his way up to the Treasure Hall of Divine Mists.” 

“How dare this baneful human be so insolent!” exclaimed the Jade Emperor, astonished by what he had heard. “We must order the generals to have him executed at once!” 

As he said this, the Gold Star of Venus came forward again from the ranks and said, “The baneful human knows how to make a speech but he has no idea what's appropriate and what isn’t. Even if 
reinforcements are sent to fight him, | don’t think he can be subdued right away without taxing our forces. It'd be better if Your Majesty were greatly to extend your mercy and proclaim yet another 
decree of pacification. Let him indeed be made the Great Sage Equal to Heaven; he'll be given an empty title, rank without compensation in short.” 

“What do you mean by rank without compensation?” said the Jade Emperor. 

The Gold Star said, “His name will be Great Sage Equal to Heaven but he'll not be given any official duty or salary. We'll keep him here in Heaven so that we may put his perverse mind at rest, make 
him desist from his madness, and arrogance. The universe will then be calm and the oceans tranquil again.” 

Hearing these words, the Jade Emperor said, “We'll follow the counsels of our minister.” 

He ordered the mandate to be made up and the Gold Star to bear it hence. The Gold Star left through the South Heaven Gate once again and headed straight for the Flower-Fruit Mountain. Outside 
the Water-Curtain Cave things were quite different from the way they had been the previous time. He found the entire region filled with the awesome and bellicose presence of every conceivable kind 
of monster, each one of them clutching swords and spears, wielding scimitars and staffs. Growling and leaping about, they began to attack the Gold Star the moment they saw him. “You, chieftains, 
hear me,” said the Gold Star, “let me trouble you to report this to Great Sage. I’m the Heavenly messenger sent by the Lord above and bear an imperial decree of invitation.” 

The various monsters ran inside to report, “There’s an old man outside who says that he is a Heavenly messenger from the region above, bearing a decree of invitation for you.” 

“Welcome! Welcome!” said Wukong. “He must be that Gold Star of Venus who came here last time. Although it’s a shabby position they gave me when he invited me up to the region above, | 
nevertheless made it to Heaven once and familiarised myself with the ins and outs of the celestial passages. He’s come again this time undoubtedly with good intentions.” He commanded the various 
chieftains to wave the banners and beat the drums, and to draw up the troops in receiving order. Leading the rest of the humans, the Great Sage donned his cap and his cuirass, over which he tossed 
the red and yellow robe, and slipped on the cloud shoes. He ran to the mouth of the cave, saluted courteously, and said in a loud voice, “Please come in, Old Star! Forgive me for not coming out to 
meet you.” 

The Gold Star strode forward and entered the cave. He stood facing south and declared, “Now | inform the Great Sage. Because the Great Sage’s objected to the meanness of his previous appointment 
and removed himself from the imperial stables, the officials of that department, both great and small reported the matter to the Jade Emperor. The proclamation of the Jade Emperor said at first: Al 
appointed officials advance from lowly positions to exalted ones. Why'd he object to that arrangement? This led to the campaign against you by Deity-King Li and Nata. They were ignorant of the Great 
Sage’s power and therefore suffered defeat. They reported back to Heaven that you had set up a banner that made known your desire to be the Great Sage Equal to Heaven. The various martial 
Officials still wanted to deny your request. It’s this old man who pleaded the case of the Great Sage, risking offence so that he might be invited to receive a new appointment and without the use of 
force. The Jade Emperor accepted my suggestion; hence I’m here to invite you.” 

“| caused you trouble last time,” said Wukong, laughing, “and now I’m again indebted to you for your kindness. Thank you! Thank you! But there’s really such a rank as the Great Sage Equal to Heaven 
up there?” 

“| made certain that this title’s approved,” said the Gold Star, “before | dared come with the decree. If there’s any mishap, let this old man be held responsible.” Wukong was highly pleased but the Gold 
Star refused his earnest invitation to stay for a banquet. He therefore mounted the hallowed cloud with the Gold Star and went to the South Heaven Gate where they were welcomed by the celestial 
generals and guardians with hands folded at their breasts. Going straight into the Treasure Hall of Divine Mists, the Gold Star saluted himself and memorialised, “Your subject's summoned here Ban- 
Horse Plague Sun Wukong by your decree.” 

“Have that Sun Wukong come forward,” said the Jade Emperor. “I now proclaim you to be the Great Sage Equal to Heaven and a position of the highest rank. But you must indulge no more in your 
preposterous behaviour.” 

Saluting deeply, the human uttered a great whoop of thanks. The Jade Emperor then ordered 2 building officials, Zhang and Lu to erect the official residence of the Great Sage Equal to Heaven to the 
right of the Garden of Mortal Peaches. Inside the mansion, 2 departments were established named Peace & Quiet and Serene Spirit, both of which were full of attending officials. The Jade Emperor 
also ordered the Star Spirits of 5 Poles'? to accompany Wukong to assume his post. In addition, 2 bottles of imperial juice and 10 clusters of golden flowers were bestowed on him with the order that 
he must keep himself under control and make up his mind to indulge no more in preposterous behaviour. The King obediently accepted the command and went that day with the Star Spirits to assume 
his post. He opened the bottles of juice and drank them all with his colleagues. After seeing the Star Spirits off to their own palaces, he settled down in complete contentment and delight to enjoy the 
pleasures of Heaven without the slightest worry or care. Truly his name divine, forever recorded in the Long-Life Book and kept from falling into samsara will long be known. 


005 

Disrupting the Peach Festival, the Great Sage steals elixir; many gods would seize the fiend with revolt in Heaven 
The Great Sage was a monster after all; in truth he had no knowledge of his title or rank, nor did he care for the size of his salary. He did nothing but place his name on the Register. At his official 
residence he was cared for night and day by the attending officials of the 2 departments. His sole concern was to eat 3 meals a day and sleep soundly at night. Having neither duties nor worries, he 
was free and content to tour the mansions, meet friends, make new acquaintances, and form new alliances at his leisure. When he met the 3 Pure Ones, ‘he addressed them as “Your Reverence”; and 
when he ran into the 4 Thearchs, he would say, “Your Majesty.” As for the 9 Luminaries, *the Generals of the 5 Quarters, the 28 Constellations, ‘the 4 Deity-Kings, ‘the 12 Horary Branches, the 5 
Elders of the 5 Regions, ‘the Star Spirits of the entire Heaven, and the numerous gods of the Milky Way, ®he called them all brother and treated them in a fraternal manner. Today he toured the east 
and tomorrow he wandered west. Going and coming on the clouds, he had no specific itinerary. Early one morning when the Jade Emperor was holding court, the Daoist mortal Xu Jingyang® stepped 
from the ranks and went forward to memorialise, saluting, “The Great Sage Equal to Heaven’s no duties at present and merely dawdles away his time. He’s become quite chummy with the various 
Stars, Constellations of Heaven, calling them his friends regardless of whether they’re his superiors or subordinates, and | fear that his idleness may lead to roguery. It'd be better to give him some 
assignment so that he will not grow mischievous.” 
When the Jade Emperor heard these words, he sent for the King at once who came amiably. “Your Majesty,” he said, “what promotion or reward did you’ve in mind for old man when you called him?” 
“We perceive,” said the Jade Emperor, “that your life is quite indolent, since you've nothing to do, and we’ve decided therefore to give you an assignment. You'll temporarily take care of the Garden of 
Mortal Peaches. Be careful and diligent, morning and evening.” 
Delighted, the Great Sage saluted deeply and grunted his gratitude as he withdrew. He could not restrain himself from rushing immediately into the Garden of Mortal Peaches to inspect the place. A 
local spirit from the garden stopped him and asked, “Where’s the Great Sage going?” 
“Ive been authorised by the Jade Emperor,” said the Great Sage, “to look after the Garden of Mortal Peaches. I’ve come to conduct an inspection.” The local spirit hurriedly saluted him and then called 
together all the stewards in charge of hoeing, watering, tending peaches, and cleaning and sweeping. They all came to salute to the Great Sage and led him inside. There he saw radiantly young, lovely 
on every trunk and limb - radiantly young, lovely blossoms filling the trees, fruits on every trunk, and limb weighing down the stems. The fruits, weighing down the stems, hang like balls of gilt: the 
blossoms, filling the trees, form tufts of rouge. Ever they bloom, and ever fruit-bearing, they ripen in a millennium; not knowing winter or summer, they lengthen out to 10 millennium. Those that first 
ripen glow like faces reddened with juice while those half-grown ones are stalk-held and green-skinned. Encased in smoke their flesh retains their green but sunlight reveals their cinnabar grace. 
Beneath the trees are rare flowers and exotic grass that colours, unfading in four seasons, remain the same. The towers, the terraces, the studios left, and right rise so high into the air that often cloud 
covers are seen. Not planted by the vulgar or the worldly of the Dark City, they are grown and tended by the Queen Mum of the Jade Pool. The Great Sage enjoyed this sight for a long time and then 
asked the local spirit, “How many trees are there?” 


“There’re thirty-six hundred,” said the local spirit. “In the front are twelve hundred trees with little flowers and small fruits. These ripen once every three millennia, and after one taste of them a man will 
become a mortal enlightened in the Way with healthy limbs and a lightweight body. In the middle are twelve hundred trees of layered flowers and sweet fruits. They ripen once every six millennia. Ifa 
man eats them, he will ascend to Heaven with the mist and never grow old. At the back are twelve hundred trees with fruits of purple veins and pale yellow pits. These ripen once every nine millennia 
and if eaten, will make a man’s age equal to that of Heaven and Earth, the sun and the moon.” 

Highly pleased by these words, the Great Sage that very day made thorough inspection of the trees and a listing of the arbours and pavilions before returning to his residence. From then on, he would 
go there to enjoy the scenery once every 3 or 4 days. He no longer consorted with his friends and took no more trips. One day he saw that more than half of the peaches on the branches of the older 
trees had ripened, wanted very much to eat one, and sample its novel taste. However, the stewards and the divine attendants of the Equal to Heaven Residence closely followed by the local spirit of 
the garden, he found it inconvenient to do so. He therefore devised a plan on the spur of the moment and said to them, “Why don’t you all wait for me outside and let me rest a while in this arbour?” 
The various mortals withdrew accordingly. That King then took off his cap and robe and climbed up onto a big tree. He selected the large peaches that were thoroughly ripened and ate to his heart's 
content right on the branches, plucking many of them. Only after he had his fill did he jump down from the tree. Pinning back his cap and donning his robe, he called for his train of followers to return to 
the residence. After two or three days, he used the same device to steal peaches to gratify himself once again. One day the Lady Queen Mum decided to open wide her treasure chamber and to give 
a banquet for the Grand Festival of Mortal Peaches that was to be held in the Palace of the Jasper Pool. She ordered the various Mortal Maidens - Red Gown, Blue Gown, White Gown, Black Gown, 
Purple Gown, Yellow Gown, and Green Gown — to go with their flower baskets to the Garden of Mortal Peaches and pick the fruits for the festival. The seven maidens went to the gate of the garden 
and found it guarded by the local spirit, the stewards, and the ministers from the 2 departments of the Equal to Heaven Residence. The girls approached them, saying, “We've been ordered by the 
Queen Mum to pick some peaches for our banquet.” 

“Divine maidens,” said the local spirit, “please wait a moment. This year isn’t quite the same as last year. The Jade Emperor has put in charge here the Great Sage Equal to Heaven and we must report 
to him before we’re allowed to open the gate.” 

“Where is the Great Sage?” asked the maidens. 

“He is in the garden,” said the local spirit. “Because he is tired, he is sleeping alone in the arbour.” 

“If that’s the case,” said the maidens, “let us go and find him, for we can’t be late.” The local spirit went into the garden with them; they found their way to the arbour but saw no one. Only the cap and 
the robe were left in the arbour but there was no person to be seen. The Great Sage had played for a while and eaten a number of peaches. He had then changed himself into a figure only two inches 
high and, perching on the branch of a large tree, had fallen asleep under the cover of thick leaves. “Since we came by imperial decree,” said the 7-Gown Mortal Maidens, “how can we return empty- 
handed even though we can’t locate the Great Sage?” 

One of the divine officials said from the side, “Since the divine maidens have come by decree, they'd wait no longer. Great Sage’s a habit of wandering off somewhere and he must've left the garden 
to meet his friends. Go and pick your peaches now and we'll report the matter for you.” 

The Mortal Maidens followed his suggestion and went into the grove to pick their peaches. They gathered 2 basketfuls from the trees in front and filled 3 more baskets from the trees in the middle. 
When they went to the trees at the back of the grove, they found that the flowers were sparse and the fruits scanty. Only a few peaches with hairy stems and green skins were left for the fact is that the 
King had eaten all the ripe ones. Looking this way and that the 7 Mortal Maidens found on a branch pointing southward 1 single peach that was half white and half red. The Blue Gown Maiden pulled 
the branch down with her hand and the Red Gown Maiden after plucking the fruit, let the branch snap back up into its position. This was the very branch on which the transformed Great Sage was 
sleeping. Startled by her, the Great Sage revealed his true form and whipped out from his ear the golden-hooped rod. 1 wave and it had the thickness of a rice bowl. “From what region you've come, 
monsters,” he cried, “that you've the gall to steal my peaches?” 

Terrified, the 7 Mortal Maidens knelt down together and pleaded, “Let the Great Sage calm himself! We're not monsters but the Seven-Gown Mortal Maidens sent by the Lady Queen Mum to pluck the 
fruits needed for the Grand Festival of Mortal Peaches when the treasure chamber’s opened wide. We just came here and first saw the local spirit of the garden who/d not find the Great Sage. Fearing 
that we might be delayed in fulfilling the command of the Queen Mum, we didn’t wait for the Great Sage but proceeded to pluck the peaches. We beg you to forgive us.” 

When the Great Sage heard these words, his anger changed to delight. “Please arise, divine maidens,” he said. “Who’s invited to the banquet when the Queen Mum opens wide her treasure chamber?” 
“The last festival had its own set of rules,” said the Mortal Maidens, “and those invited were: a god, the Nuns, the holy monks, and the Arhats of the Western Heaven; Kuan-yin from the South Pole; the 
Holy Emperor of Great Mercy of the East; the Mortals of Ten Continents and Three Islands; the Dark Spirit of the North Pole; the Great Mortal of the Yellow Horn from the Imperial Centre. These’re the 
Elders from the Five Quarters. In addition, there’re the Star Spirits of the Five Poles, the Three Pure Ones, the four demigod Kings, the Heavenly demigod of the Great Monad, and the rest from the 
Upper Eight Caves. From the Middle Eight Caves there were the Jade Emperor, the Nine Heroes, the Mortals of the Seas and Mountains; from the Lower Eight Caves, there’re the Pope of Darkness 
and the Terrestrial Mortals. The gods and deities both great and small of every palace and mansion will be attending this happy Festival of the Mortal Peaches.” 

“Am | invited?” asked the Great Sage, laughing. 

“We've not heard your name mentioned,” said the Mortal Maidens. 

“Im the Great Sage Equal to Heaven,” said the Great Sage. “Why'd | not be made an honoured guest at the party?” 

“Well, we told you the rule for the last festival,” said the Mortal Maidens, “but we don’t know what will happen this time.” 

“You're right,” said the Great Sage, “and | don’t blame you. You all just stand here and let old man go and do a little detection to find out whether he’s invited or not.” Dear Great Sage! He made a magic 
sign and recited a spell, saying to the various Mortal Maidens, “Stay! Stay! Stay!” 

This was the magic of immobilization, the effect of which was that the Seven-Gown Mortal Maidens all stood wide-eyed and transfixed beneath the peach trees. Leaping out of the garden, the Great 
Sage mounted his hallowed cloud and headed straight for the Jasper Pool. As he journeyed, he saw over there a sky-full of holy mist with sparkling light, and 5-coloured clouds passing ceaselessly. 
11The cries of white cranes pierced the 9-fold Heaven; purple fungi bloomed through 1000 leaves. Right in this midst a mortal appeared with a natural, fair face and manner distinct. His spirit glowed 
like a dancing rainbow; a list of no birth or death hung from his waist. His name, the Great Mortal of Naked Feet: ‘attending the Peaches Feast he’d lengthen his age. That Great Mortal of Naked Feet 
ran right into the Great Sage who was just devising a plan to deceive the real mortal, he saluted. Since he wanted to go in secret to the festival, he asked, “Where’s the Venerable Wisdom going?” 
The Great Mortal said, “On the kind invitation of the Queen Mum, I’m going to the happy Festival of Mortal Peaches.” 

“The Venerable Wisdom’s not yet learned of what I’m about to say,” said the Great Sage. “Because of the speed of my cloud somersault, the Jade Emperor has sent old man out to all five thoroughfares 
to invite people to go first to the Hall of Perfect Light for a rehearsal of ceremonies before attending the banquet.” 

Being a sincere and honest man, the Great Mortal took the lie for the truth though he protested, “In years past we rehearsed right at the Jasper Pool and expressed our gratitude there. Why do we've 
to go to the Hall of Perfect Light for rehearsal this time before attending the banquet?” 

Nonetheless, he had no choice but to change the direction of his hallowed cloud and go straight to the hall. Treading the cloud, the Great Sage recited a spell and changed into the form of the Great 
Mortal of Naked Feet with one shake of his body. It did not take him very long before he reached the treasure chamber. He stopped his cloud and walked softly inside. There he found swirling waves 
of ambrosial fragrance, dense layers of holy mist, a jade terrace decked with ornaments, a chamber full of the life force, ethereal shapes of the phoenix soaring and the Argus rising, and undulant forms 
of gold blossoms with stems of jade. Set upon there were the Screen of 9 Phoenixes in Twilight, the Beacon Mound of 8 Treasures and Purple Mist, a table inlaid with 5-colour gold, and a green jade 
pot of 1000 flowers. On the tables were dragon livers, phoenix marrow, bear paws, and the lips of apes. ‘3Most tempting was every one of the 100 delicacies and most succulent the hue of every kind 
of fruit and food. Everything was laid out in an orderly fashion but no deity had yet arrived for the feast. Great Sage could not make an end of staring at the scene when he suddenly felt the overpowering 
aroma of juice. Turning his head, he saw several juice-making divine officials and grain-mashing stewards in the long corridor to the right. They were giving directions to the few Daoists charged with 
carrying water, the boys who took care of the fire in washing out the barrels, and scrubbing the jugs. For they had already finished making the juice, rich and mellow as the juices of jade. The Great 
Sage could not prevent the saliva from dripping out of the corner of his mouth and wanted to have a taste at once except that the people were all standing there. He therefore resorted to magic. Plucking 
a few hairs, he threw them into his mouth and chewed them to pieces before spitting them out. He recited a spell and cried “Change!” They changed into many sleep-inducing insects that landed on 
the people’s faces. Look at them, how their hands grow weak, their heads droop, and their eyelids sink down. They dropped their activities and all fell sound asleep. The Great Sage then took some of 
the rare delicacies and choicest dainties and ran into the corridor. Standing beside the jars and leaning on the barrels, he abandoned himself to drinking. After feasting for a long time, he became 
thoroughly drunk but he turned this over in his mind, “Bad! Bad! In a little while when the invited guests arrive, won’t they be indignant with me? What’ll happen to me once I’m caught? I'd better go 
back home now and sleep it off!” Dear Great Sage! Reeling from side to side, he stumbled along solely on the strength of juice and in a moment he lost his way. It was not the Equal to Heaven 
Residence that he went to but the Tushita Palace. The moment he saw it, he realised his mistake. “The Tushita Palace’s at the uppermost of the thirty-three Heavens,” he said, “the Griefless Heaven 
that’s the home of the Most High Laozi. How did | get here? No matter, I've always wanted to see this old man but never found the opportunity. Now that it’s on my way, | might as well pay him a visit.” 
He straightened out his attire and pushed his way in but Laozi was nowhere to be seen. In fact, there was not a trace of anyone. The fact of the matter was that Laozi, accompanied by the Aged God 
Dipamkara was giving a lecture on the tall, 3-storied Red Mound Elixir Platform; the various divine youths, commanders, and officials were all attending the lecture, standing on both sides of the platform 
Searching around, Great Sage went all the way to the alchemical room. He found no one but saw fire burning in an oven beside the hearth and around the oven were 5 gourds in which finished elixir 
was stored. “This thing’s the greatest treasure of mortals,” said the Great Sage happily. “Since old man has understood the Way and comprehended the mystery of the Internals’ identity with the 
External, I’ve also wanted to produce some golden elixir on my own to benefit people. While I’ve been too busy at other times even to think about going home to enjoy myself, good fortune’s met me at 
the door today and presented me with this! As long as Laozi is not around, I'll take a few tablets and try the taste of something new.” He poured out the contents of all the gourds and ate them like fried 
beans. In a moment, the effect of the elixir had dispelled that of the juice and he again thought to himself, “Bad! Bad! I’ve brought on me calamity greater than Heaven! If the Jade Emperor’s knowledge 
of this, it'll be difficult to preserve my life! Go! Go! Go! I'll go back to the Region Below to be a king.” He ran out of the Tushita Palace and avoiding the former way, left by the West Heaven Gate, making 
himself invisible by the magic of body concealment. Lowering the direction of his cloud, he returned to the Flower-Fruit Mountain. There he was greeted by flashing banners and shining spears for the 
4 mighty commanders and the monster kings of 72 caves were engaging in a military exercise. “Little ones,” the Great Sage called out loudly, “I’ve returned!” 

The monsters dropped their weapons and knelt down, saying, “Great Sage! What laxity of mind! You left us for so long and didn’t even once visit us to see how we're doing.” 

“It's not that long!” said the Great Sage. “It's not that long!” 

They walked as they talked and went deep inside the cave dwelling. After sweeping the place clean, preparing a place for him to rest, saluting, and doing homage, the 4 mighty commanders said, “The 
Great Sage’s been living for over a century in Heaven. May we ask what appointment he actually received?” 

“| recall that it's been but half a year,” said the Great Sage, laughing. “How can you talk of a century?” 

“One day in Heaven,” said the commanders, “is equal to one year on Earth.” 

The Great Sage said, “I’m glad to say that the Jade Emperor this time’s more favourably disposed toward me and he did indeed appoint me Great Sage Equal to Heaven. An official residence’s built 
for me and two departments — Peace and Quiet and Serene Spirit - were established with bodyguards and attendants in each department. Later when it was found that | carried no responsibility, | was 
asked to take care of the Garden of Mortal Peaches. Recently the Lady Queen Mum gave the Grand Festival of Mortal Peaches but she did not invite me. Without waiting for her invitation, | went first 
to the Jasper Pool and secretly consumed the food and water. Leaving that place, | staggered into the palace of Laozi and finished up all the elixir stored in five gourds. | was afraid that the Jade 
Emperor would be offended and so | decided to walk out of the Heaven Gate.” The various monsters were delighted by these words and they prepared a banquet of fruits and juice to welcome him. A 
stone bowl was filled with coconut juice and presented to the Great Sage who took a mouthful and then exclaimed with a grimace, “It tastes awful! Just awfull” 

“The Great Sage’s,” said Beng and Ba, the 2 commanders, “grown accustomed to tasting divine juice and food in Heaven. Small wonder that coconut juice now seems hardly delectable. But the proverb 
says, Tasty or not, it’s water from home!” 

“And all of you're, ‘related or not, people from home’!” said the Great Sage. “When | was enjoying myself this morning at the Jasper Pool, | saw many jars and jugs in the corridor full of the juices of 
jade that you’ve never savoured. Let me go back and steal a few bottles to bring down here. Just drink half a cup, and each one of you'll live long without growing old.” 

The various humans could not contain their delight. The Great Sage immediately left the cave and went directly back to the Festival of Mortal Peaches with 1 somersault, again using the magic of body 
concealment. As he entered the doorway of the Palace of the Jasper Pool, he saw that the juice makers, the grain mashers, the water carriers, the fire tenders were still asleep, and snoring. He took 2 
large bottles, 1 under each arm, and carried 2 more in his hands. Reversing the direction of his cloud, he returned to the humans in the cave. They held their own Festival of Mortal juice with each one 
drinking a few cups that incident we'll relate no further. The 7-Gown Mortal Maidens did not find a release from the Great Sage’s magic of immobilisation until a whole day had gone by. Each one of 
them then took her flower basket and reported to the Queen Mum, saying, “We’re delayed because the Great Sage Equal to Heaven imprisoned us with his magic.” 

“How many baskets of mortal peaches have you gathered?” asked the Queen Mum. 


“Only two baskets of small peaches and three of medium-sized peaches,” said the Mortal Maidens, “for when we went to the back of the grove, there’s not even half a large one left! We think the Great 
Sage must've eaten them all. As we went looking for him, he unexpectedly made his appearance and threatened us with violence and beating. He also questioned us about who'd been invited to the 
banquet and we gave him a thorough account of the last festival. It’s then that he bound us with a spell and we didn’t know where he went. It’s only a moment ago that we found release and so could 
come back here.” 
When the Queen Mum heard these words, she went immediately to the Jade Emperor and presented him with a full account of what had taken place. Before she finished speaking, the group of juice 
makers together with the various divine officials also came to report: “Someone unknown to us has vandalised the Festival of Mortal Peaches. The juice of jade, the eight dainties, and the hundred 
delicacies have all been stolen or eaten up.” 
4 royal preceptors then came up to announce, “The Supreme Patriarch of Dao’s arrived.” 
The Jade Emperor went out with the Queen Mum to greet him. Having paid his respects to them, Laozi said, “There’re some finished Golden Elixir of Nine Turns‘ in the house of this old Daoist that're 
reserved for the use of Your Majesty during the next Grand Festival of Cinnabar. Strange to say, they've been stolen by some thief and I’ve come specifically to make this known to Your Majesty.” 
This report stunned the Jade Emperor. Presently the officials from the Equal to Heaven Residence came to announce, saluting, “The Great Sage Sun’s not been discharging his duties of late. He went 
out yesterday and still hasn't yet returned. Moreover, we don’t know where he went.” 
These words gave the Jade Emperor added anxiety. Next came the Great Mortal of Naked Feet who saluted himself and said, “Yesterday in response to the Queen Mum’s invitation, your subject’s on 
his way to attend the festival when he met by chance the Great Sage Equal to Heaven. The Sage said to your subject that Your Majesty had ordered him to send your subject first to the Hall of Perfect 
Light for a rehearsal of ceremonies before attending the banquet. Your subject followed his direction and duly went to the hall. But | didn’t see the dragon chariot, the phoenix carriage of Your Majesty, 
and therefore hastened to come here to wait upon you.” 
More astounded than ever, the Jade Emperor said, “This fellow now falsifies imperial decrees and deceives my worthy ministers! Let the Divine Minister of Detection quickly locate his whereabouts!” 
The minister received his order and left the palace to make a thorough investigation. He returned presently to report after obtaining all the details, “The person who's so profoundly disturbed Heaven's 
none other than the Great Sage Equal to Heaven.” He then gave a repeated account of all the previous incidents, and the Jade Emperor was furious. He at once commanded the 4 Great Deity-Kings 
to assist Deity-King Li and Prince Nata. Together they called up the 28 Constellations, the 9 Luminaries, the 12 Horary Branches, the Fearless Guards of 5 Quarters, ‘the 4 Temporal Guardians, ‘the 
Stars of East and West, the gods of North and South, the Deities of the 5 Mountains and the 4 Rivers, ‘’the Star Spirits of the entire Heaven, and 100000 celestial soldiers. They were ordered to set up 
18 sets of cosmic net, journey to the Region Below, encircle completely the Flower-Fruit Mountain, and capture the rogue and bring him to justice. All the deities immediately alerted their troops and 
departed from the Heavenly Palace. As they left, this was the spectacle of the expedition: yellow with dust; the churning wind concealed the darkening sky: reddish with clay, the rising fog overlaid the 
dusky world. Because an impish human insulted the Highest Lord, the saints of all Heaven descended to this mortal Earth. Those 4 Great Deity-Kings, Fearless Guards of 5 Quarters - 4 Great demigod 
Kings made up the main command; Fearless Guards of 5 Quarters moved countless troops. Li, the Pagoda Bearer gave orders from the army’s centre with the fierce Nata as the captain of his van- 
ward forces. The Star of Rahu made the roll call at the fore-front; the Star of Ketu, noble and tall, brought up the rear: Séma, the moon, displayed a spirit most eager; Aditya, the sun, was all shining 
and radiant. Heroes of special talents were the Stars of 5 Phases. The 9 Luminaries most relished a good battle. The Horary Branches of Zi, Wu, Mao, and Yao — they were all celestial guardians of 
titanic strength. To the east and west, the 5 Plagues'® and the 5 Mountains! To the left and right, the 6 Gods of Darkness and the 6 Gods of Light! Above and below, the Dragon Gods of the 4 Rivers! 
And in tightest formation, the 28 Constellations! ‘Citra, Svati, Visakha, and Anuradha were the captains. Revatt, Asvinl, Apabharant, and Krttika knew combat well. Uttara-Asadha, Abhijit, Sravana, 
Sravistha, East--Prosthapada, Uttara-Prosthapada, Rohini, Milabarhani, East--Asadha — everyone an able star! Punarvasu, Tisya, ASlesa, Megha, East--Phalguni, Uttara-Phalguni, and Hasta — all 
brandished swords and spears to show their power. Stopping the cloud and lowering the mist they came to this mortal world and pitched their tents before the Mountain of Flower and Fruit. The poem 
says: 
The Heaven-bom King who can change a lot steals juice and elixir to joy in his mountain lair. 

Since he spoiled the Feast of the Mortal Peach, 100000 Heaven troops spread the net of God. 
Deity-King Li now gave the order for the celestial soldiers to pitch their tents, and a cordon was drawn so tightly around the Flower-Fruit Mountain that not even water could escape! Moreover, eighteen 
sets of cosmic net were spread out above and below the region, and the Nine Luminaries were then ordered to go into battle. They led their troops and advanced to the cave in front of which they found 
a troop of humans both old and young, prancing about playfully. “Little monsters over there,” cried one of the Star Spirits in a severe voice, “where’s yGreat Sage? We're Heavenly deities sent here 
from the Region Above to subdue your rebellious Great Sage. Tell him to come here quickly and surrender. If he but utters half a no, all of you'll be executed.” 
Hastily the little monsters reported inside, “Great Sage, disaster! Disaster! Outside there’re nine savage deities who claim that they’re sent from the Region Above to subdue the Great Sage.” 
Great Sage was just sharing the Heavenly juice with the 4 mighty commanders and the monster kings of seventy-two caves. Hearing this announcement, he said in a most nonchalant manner, “If 
you've juice today, drink today; mind not the troubles in front of your door!” 
Scarcely had he uttered this proverb when another group of imps came leaping and said, “Those nine savage gods are trying to provoke battle with foul words and nasty language.” 
“Don’t listen to them,” said the Great Sage, laughing. “Let's seek today’s pleasure in poetry, juice, and cease asking when we may achieve glory or fame.” 
Hardly had he finished speaking when still another flock of imps arrived to report, “Dad, those nine savage gods have broken down the door and are about to fight their way in!” 
“These reckless, witless gods!” said the Great Sage angrily. “They really have no manners! | was not about to quarrel with them. Why are they abusing me to my face?” He gave the order for the 1- 
Horn Demon King to lead the monster kings of 72 caves to battle, adding that old man and the 4 mighty commanders would follow in the rear. The Demon King swiftly led his troops of ogres to go out 
to fight but they were ambushed by the 9 Luminaries and pinned down right at the head of the sheet iron bridge. At the height of the melee, the Great Sage arrived. “Make way!” he yelled, whipping out 
his iron rod. 
1 wave of it and it was as thick as a rice bowl and about 12 feet long. The Great Sage plunged into battle and none of the 9 Luminaries dared oppose him. In a moment, they were all beaten back. 
When they regrouped themselves again in battle formation, the 9 Luminaries stood still and said, “You senseless Ban-Horse Plague! You're guilty of the ten evils. 2°You first stole peaches and then 
juice utterly disrupting the Grand Festival of Mortal Peaches. You also robbed Laozi of his mortal elixir and then had the gall to plunder the imperial garden for your personal enjoyment. Don’t you realise 
that you've piled up sin upon sin?” 
“Indeed,” said the Great Sage, “these several incidents did occur! But what do you intend to do now?” 
The 9 Luminaries said, “We received the golden decree of the Jade Emperor to lead our troops here to subdue you. Submit at once and spare these creatures from being slaughtered. If not, we'll level 
this mountain and overturn this cave!” 
“How great is your magical power, silly gods,” retorted the Great Sage angrily, “that you dare to mouth such foolhardy words? Don’t go away! Have a taste of old man’s rod!” 
The 9 Luminaries mounted a joint attack but the Handsome King was not in the least intimidated. He wielded his golden-hooped rod, parrying left and right, and fought the 9 Luminaries until they were 
thoroughly exhausted. Every one of them turned around and fled, his weapons trailing behind him. Running into the tent at the centre of their army, they said to the Pagoda-Bearer Deity-King, “That 
King is indeed an intrepid warrior! We can’t withstand him and have returned defeated.” 
Deity-King Li then ordered the 4 Great Deity-Kings and the 28 Constellations to go out together to do battle. Without displaying the slightest panic, the Great Sage also ordered the 1-Horn Demon King, 
the monster kings of 72 caves, and the 4 mighty commanders to range themselves in battle formation in front of the cave. Look at this all-out battle! It was truly terrifying with the cold, soughing wind, 
the dark, dreadful fog. The colourful banners fluttered on 1 side; lances and halberds glimmered on the other. There were row upon row of shining helmets and coat upon coat of gleaming armour. Row 
upon row of helmets shining in the sunlight resembled silver bells whose chimes echoed in the sky; coat upon coat of gleaming armour rising cliff-like in layers seemed like glaciers crushing the earth. 
The giant scimitars flew and flashed like lightning; the mulberry-white spears could pierce even mist and cloud! The cross-like halberds and tiger-eye lashes were arranged like thick rows of hemp; the 
green swords of bronze and 4-sided shovels crowded together like trees in a dense forest. Curved bows, crossbows, and stout arrows with eagle plumes, short staffs and snakelike lances — all could 
kill or maim. That compliant rod that the Great Sage owned kept tossing and turning in this battle with gods. They fought till the air was rid of birds flying by; wolves and tigers were driven from within 
the mount; the planet was darkened by hurtling rocks and stones, and the cosmos bedimmed by flying dust and dirt. The clamour and clangour disturbed Heaven and Earth; the scrap and scuffle 
alarmed both demons and gods. Beginning with the battle formation at dawn, they fought until the sun sank down behind the western hills. The 1-Horn Demon King and the monster kings of 72 caves 
were all taken captive by the forces of Heaven. Those who escaped were the 4 mighty commanders and the troop of humans who hid themselves deep inside the Water-Curtain Cave. With his single 
rod, the Great Sage withstood in mid-air the 4 Great Deity-Kings, Li the Pagoda Bearer, and Prince Nata, and battled with them for a long time. When he saw that evening was approaching, the Great 
Sage plucked a handful of hairs, threw them into his mouth, and chewed them to pieces. He spat them out, crying, “Change!” They changed at once into many thousands of Great Sages, each employing 
a golden-hooped rod! They beat back Prince Nata and defeated the 5 Deity-Kings. In triumph the Great Sage collected back his hairs and hurried back to his cave. Soon, at the head of the sheet iron 
bridge, he was met by the four mighty commanders leading the rest of the humans. As they saluted to receive him they cried three times, sobbing aloud, and then they laughed 3 times, heehee-ing and 
ho-ho-ing. The Great Sage said, “Why do you all laugh and cry when you see me?” 
“When we fought with the demigod Kings this morning,” said the 4 mighty commanders, “the monster kings of seventy-two caves and the One-Horn Demon King were all taken captive by the gods. 
We're the only ones who managed to escape alive and that’s why we cried. Now we see that the Great Sage’s returned unharmed, triumphant, and so we laugh as well.” 
‘Victory and defeat,” said the Great Sage, “are the common experiences of a soldier. The ancient proverb says, you may kill ten thousand of your enemies but you'll lose three thousand of your allies! 
Moreover, those chieftains who have been captured are tigers, leopards, wolves, insects, badgers, foxes, and the like. Not a single member of our own kind has been hurt. Why then should we be 
disconsolate? Although our adversaries have been beaten back by my magic of body division, they’re still encamped at the foot of our mountain. Let’s be most vigilant therefore in our defence. Have a 
good meal, rest well, and conserve your energy. When morning comes, watch me perform a great magic and capture some of these generals from Heaven so that our comrades may be avenged.” The 
4 mighty commanders drank a few bowls of coconut juice with the host of humans and went to sleep peacefully. When those 4 Deity-Kings retired their troops and stopped their fighting, each 1 of the 
Heavenly commanders came to report his accomplishment. There were those who had captured lions and elephants and those who had apprehended wolves, crawling creatures, and foxes. Not a 
single monster however, had been seized. The camp was then secured, a great tent was pitched, and those commanders with meritorious services were rewarded. The soldiers in charge of the cosmic 
nets were ordered to carry bells and were given passwords. They encircled the Flower-Fruit Mountain to await the great battle of the next day and each soldier everywhere diligently kept his watch. So 
this is the situation: the fiendish human riots through Heaven and Earth but the net spreads open, ready night and day. 


006 

Guanyin inquiries into the cause, attending the banquet; the Little Sage subdues the Great Sage, exerting his power 
The Great Compassionate Deliverer, the Efficacious Nun Guanyin from the Potalaka Mountain of the South Seat invited by the Lady Queen Mum to attend the Grand Festival of Mortal Peaches, she 
arrived at the treasure chamber of the Jasper Pool with her senior disciple, Hui’an. There they found the whole place desolate and the banquet tables in utter disarray. Although several members of the 
Heavenly pantheon were present, none was seated. Instead they were all engaged in vigorous exchanges and discussions. After the Nun had greeted the various deities, they told her what had 
occurred. “Since there'll be no festival,” said the Nun, “nor any raising of cups, all of you might as well come with this humble cleric to see the Jade Emperor.” The gods followed her gladly and they 
went to the entrance to the Hall of Perfect Light. There the Nun was met by the 4 Celestial Masters and the Mortal of Naked Feet who recounted how the celestial soldiers, ordered by an enraged Jade 
Emperor to capture the monster, had not yet returned. The Nun said, “I'd like to have an audience with the Jade Emperor. May | trouble one of you to announce my arrival?” 
The Heavenly Preceptor Qiu Hongji went at once into the Treasure Hall of Divine Mists and having made his report, invited Guanyin to enter. Laozi then took the upper seat with the Emperor while the 
Lady Queen Mum was in attendance behind the throne. The Nun led the crowd inside. After paying homage to the Jade Emperor, they also saluted Laozi and the Queen Mum. When each of them was 
seated, she asked, “How’s the Grand Festival of Mortal Peaches?” 
“Every year when the festival’s been given,” said the Jade Emperor, “we've thoroughly enjoyed ourselves. This year it's been completely ruined by a baneful human, leaving us with nothing but an 
invitation to disappointment.” 
“Where did this baneful human come from?” asked the Nun. 
“He’s born of a stone egg on top of the Flower-Fruit Mountain of the Aolai Country of the East East-Videha Continent,” said the Jade Emperor. “At the moment of his birth, two beams of golden light 
flashed immediately from his eyes, reaching as far as the Palace of the Polestar. We didn’t think much of that but he later became a monster, subduing the Dragon and taming the Tiger as well as 
eradicating his name from the Register of Death. When the Dragon Kings and the Kings of the Underworld brought the matter to our attention, we wanted to capture him. The Star of Long Life however, 


observed that all the beings of the three regions that possessed the nine apertures could attain mortality. We therefore decided to educate and nurture the talented human and summoned him to the 
Region Above. He was appointed to the post of Bimawen at the imperial stables but, taking offence at the lowliness of his position, he left Heaven in rebellion. We then sent Deity-King Li and Prince 
Nata to ask for his submission by proclaiming a decree of pacification. He was brought again to the Region Above and was appointed the Great Sage Equal to Heaven — a rank without compensation. 
Since he had nothing to do but to wander east and west, we feared that he might cause further trouble. So he was asked to look after the Garden of Mortal Peaches. But he broke the law and ate all 
the large peaches from the oldest trees. By then, the banquet was about to be given. As a person without salary he was, of course, not invited; nonetheless, he plotted to deceive the Mortal of Naked 
Feet and managed to sneak into the banquet by assuming the Mortal’s appearance. He finished off all the divine juice and food, after which he also stole Laozi’s elixir and took away a considerable 
quantity of imperial juice for the enjoyment of his mountain humans. Our mind has been sorely vexed by this, and we therefore sent a hundred thousand celestial soldiers with cosmic nets to capture 
him. We've not yet received today’s report on how the battle is faring.” 

When the Nun heard this, she said to Disciple Hui’an, “You must leave Heaven at once, go down to the Flower-Fruit Mountain, and inquire into the military situation. If the enemy is engaged, you can 
lend your assistance; in any event, you must bring back a factual report.” 

The Disciple Hui’an straightened out his attire and mounted the cloud to leave the palace, an iron rod in his hand. When he arrived at the mountain, he found layers of cosmic net drawn tightly and 
sentries at every gate holding bells and shouting passwords. The encirclement of the mountain was indeed watertight! Hui’an stood still and called out, “Heavenly sentinels, may | trouble you to 
announce my arrival? I’m Prince Liberation, second son of Deity-King Li and also Hui’an, senior disciple of Guanyin of South Sea. I’ve come to inquire about the military situation.” 

The divine soldiers of the 5 Mountains at once reported this beyond the gate. The constellations Aquarius, Pleiades, Hydra, and Scorpio then conveyed the message to the central tent. Deity-King Li 
issued a directorial flag that ordered the cosmic nets to be opened and entrance permitted for the visitor. Day was just dawning in the east as Hui’an followed the flag inside and saluted himself before 
the 4 Great Deity-Kings and Deity-King Li. After he had finished his greetings, Deity-King Li said, “My child where have you come from?” 

“Your untutored son,” said Hui’an, “accompanied the Nun to attend the Festival of Mortal Peaches. Seeing that the festival was desolate and the Jasper Pool laid waste, the Nun led the various deities 
and your untutored son to have an audience with the Jade Emperor. The Jade Emperor spoke at length about Dad and King’s expedition to the Region Below to subdue the baneful human. Since no 
report has returned for a whole day and neither victory nor defeat has been ascertained, the Nun ordered your untutored son to come here to find out how things stand.” 

“We came here yesterday to set up the encampment,” said Deity-King Li, “and the Nine Luminaries were sent to provoke battle. But this fellow made a grand display of his magical powers, and the 
Nine Luminaries all returned defeated. After that, | led the troops personally to confront him, and the fellow also brought his forces into formation. Our hundred thousand celestial soldiers fought with 
him until evening, when he retreated from the battle by using the magic of body division. When we recalled the troops and made our investigation, we found that we'd captured some wolves, crawling 
creatures, tigers, leopards, and the like. But we didn’t even catch half a monster! And today we’ve not yet gone into battle.” 

As he was saying all this, someone came from the gate of the camp to report, “That Great Sage’s shouting for battle outside, leading his band of monsters.” 

The 4 Deity-Kings, Deity-King Li, and the prince at once made plans to bring out the troops when Liberation said, “Dad King, your untutored son was told by the Nun to come down here to acquire 
information. She also told me to give you assistance should there be actual combat. Though I’m not very talented, | volunteer to go out now and see what kind of a Great Sage this is!” 

“Child,” said the Deity-King, “since you've studied with the Nun for several years, you must've some powers, | suppose! But do be carefull” 

Dear prince! Grasping the iron rod with both hands, he tightened up his embroidered garment and leaped out of the gate. “Who's the Great Sage Equal to Heaven?” he cried. 

Holding high his compliant rod, the Great Sage answered, “None other than old man here! Who’re you that you dare question me?” 

“Im Liberation, the second prince of Deity-King Li,” said Liberation. “At present I’m also the disciple of Nun Guanyin, a defender of the faith before her treasure throne. And my religious name is Hui’an.” 
“Why’ve you left your religious training at South Sea and come here to see me?” said the Great Sage. 

“| was sent by my master to inquire about the military situation,” said Liberation. “Seeing what a nuisance you've made of yourself, I've come specifically to capture you.” 

“You dare to talk so big?” said the Great Sage. “But don’t run away! Have a taste of old man’s rod!” 

Liberation was not at all frightened and met his opponent squarely with his own iron rod. The 2 of them stood before the gate of the camp at mid-mountain and what a magnificent battle they fought! 
Though one rod is pitted against another, the iron’s quite different; though this weapon couples with the other, the persons are not the same. This one’s called the Great Sage, a wayward primordial 
god; the other is Guanyin’s disciple, a true hero and proud. The all-iron rod has been pounded 1000 times made by 6 Gods of Darkness and 6 Gods of Light. The compliant rod sets the depth of 
Heaven’s river, a thing divine ruling the oceans with magic might. The 2 of them in meeting have found their match; back and forth they battle in endless rounds. From this one the rod of stealthy hands, 
savage and fierce around the waist stabs and jabs swiftly as the wind; from the other the rod, doubling as a spear driving and relentless, lets up not a moment its parrying left and right. On this side the 
banners flare and flutter; on the other the war drums roll and rattle. 10000 celestial fighters circle round and round. The monsters of a whole cave stand in rows and rows. Weird fog and dark cloud 
spread throughout the earth. The fume and smoke of battle reach even Heaven’s Home. Yesterday's battle was something to behold. Still more violent is the contest today. Envy the truly able King: 
Liberation’s beaten — he is fleeing for life! Great Sage battled Hui’an for 50 or 60 rounds until the prince’s arms and shoulders were sore, numb, and he could fight no longer. He fled in defeat after 1 
final futile swing of his weapon. The Great Sage then gathered together his human troops and stationed them securely outside the entrance of the cave. At the camp of the Deity-King, the celestial 
soldiers could be seen receiving the prince and making way for him to enter the gate. Panting, puffing, he ran in, gasped out to the 4 Deity-Kings, Pagoda Bearer Li, and Nata, “That Great Sage! What 
an ace! Great’s indeed his magical power! Your son cannot overcome him and has returned defeated.” 

Shocked by the sight, Deity-King Li at once wrote a memorial to the Throne to request further assistance. The demon king Mahabali and Prince Liberation were sent to Heaven to present the document. 
Not daring to linger, the 2 of them crashed out of the cosmic nets and mounted the holy mist and hallowed cloud. In a moment they reached the Hall of Perfect Light and met the Four Celestial Masters 
who led them into the Treasure Hall of Divine Mists to present their memorial. Hui’an also saluted the Nun who asked him, “What've you found out about the situation?” 

“When | reached the Flower-Fruit Mountain by your order,” said Hui’an, “I opened the cosmic nets by my call. Seeing my dad, | told him of my master’s intentions in sending me. Dad King said, ‘We 
fought a battle yesterday with that King but managed to take from him only tigers, leopards, lions, elephants, and the like. We didn’t catch a single one of his monsters.’ As we're talking, he again 
demanded battle. Your disciple used the iron rod to fight him for fifty or sixty rounds but I'd not prevail against him and returned to the camp defeated. Thus dad had to send the demon king Mahabali 
and your pupil to come here for help.” The Nun saluted her head and pondered. 

We now tell you about the Jade Emperor who opened the memorial and found a message asking for assistance. “This is rather absurd!” he said laughing. “Is this monster such a wizard that not even 
a hundred thousand soldiers from Heaven can vanquish him? Deity-King Li is again asking for help. What division of divine warriors can we send to assist him?” Hardly had he finished speaking when 
Guanyin folded her hands and said to him. “Your Majesty, let not your mind be troubled! This humble cleric will recommend a god who can capture the human.” 

“Which one would you recommend?” said the Jade Emperor. “Your Majesty's nephew,” said the Nun, “the Mortal Master of Illustrious Sagacity Erlang,?who is living at the mouth of the River of Libations 
in the Guan Prefecture and enjoying the incense and oblations offered to him from the Region Below. In former days he himself slew six monsters. Under his command are the Brothers of Plum 
Mountain and twelve hundred plant-headed deities, all possessing great magical powers. However, he will agree only to special assignments and will not obey any general summons. Your Majesty 
may want to send an edict transferring his troops to the scene of the battle and requesting his assistance. Our monster will surely be captured.” When the Jade Emperor heard this, he immediately 
issued such an edict and ordered the demon king Mahabali to present it. 

Having received the edict, the demon king mounted a cloud and went straight to the mouth of the River of Libations. It took him less than half an hour to reach the temple of the Mortal Master. 
Immediately the demon magistrates guarding the doors made this report inside: “There is a messenger from Heaven outside who has arrived with an edict in his hand.” Erlang and his brothers came 
out to receive the edict that was read before burning incense. The edict said: 

The Great Sage Equal to Heaven, a monstrous human from the Flower-Fruit Mountain’s in revolt. At the Palace he stole peaches, juice, and elixir, and disrupted the Grand Festival of Mortal Peaches. 
100000 Heavenly soldiers with 18 sets of cosmic nets were dispatched to surround the mountain and capture him but victory’s not yet been secured. We therefore make this special request of our 
worthy nephew and his sworn brothers to go to the Flower-Fruit Mountain and assist in destroying this monster. Following your success will be lofty elevation and abundant reward. 

In great delight the Mortal Master said, “Let the messenger of Heaven go back. I'll go at once to offer my assistance with drawn sword.” 

The demon king went back to report but no further of that. This Mortal Master called together the Six Brothers of Plum Mountain: they were Kang, Zhang, Yao, and Li, the four grand marshals, and Guo 
Shen and Zhi Jian, the two generals. As they congregated before the court, he said to them, “The Jade Emperor just now sent us to the Flower-Fruit Mountain to capture a monstrous human. Let's get 
going!” Delighted and willing, the brothers at once called out the divine soldiers under their command. With falcons mounted and dogs on leashes with arrows ready and bows drawn, they left in a 
violent magic wind and crossed in a moment the great Eastern Ocean. As they landed on the Flower-Fruit Mountain, they saw their way blocked by dense layers of cosmic net. “Divine commanders 
guarding the cosmic nets, hear us,” they shouted. “We're specially assigned by the Jade Emperor to capture the monstrous human. Open the gate of your camp quickly and let us through.” The various 
deities conveyed the message to the inside, level by level. The Four Deity-Kings and Deity-King Li then came out to the gate of the camp to receive them. After they had exchanged greetings, there 
were questions about the military situation, and the Deity-King gave them a thorough briefing. “Now that I, the Little Sage, have come,” said the Mortal Master, laughing, “he will have to engage in a 
contest of transformations with his adversary. You gentlemen make sure that the cosmic nets are tightly drawn on all sides but leave the top uncovered. Let me try my hand in this contest. If | lose, you 
gentlemen need not come to my assistance, for my own brothers will be there to support me. If | win, you gentlemen will not be needed in tying him up either; my own brothers will take care of that. All 
| need is the Pagoda Bearer Deity-King to stand in mid-air with his imp-reflecting mirror. If the monster should be defeated, | fear that he may try to flee to a distant locality. Make sure that his image is 
Clearly reflected in the mirror, so that we don’t lose him.” The Deity-Kings set themselves up in the four directions while the heavenly soldiers all lined up according to their planned formations. 

With himself as the seventh brother, the Mortal Master led the four grand marshals and the two generals out of the camp to provoke battle. The other warriors were ordered to defend their encampment 
with vigilance, and the plant-headed deities were ordered to have the falcons and dogs ready for battle. The Mortal Master went to the front of the Water-Curtain Cave where he saw a troop of humans 
neatly positioned in an array that resembled a coiled dragon. At the centre of the array was the banner bearing the words “The Great Sage Equal to Heaven.” 

“That audacious monster!” said the Mortal Master. “How dare he assume the rank Equal to Heaven?” 

“There's no time for praise or blame,” said the Six Brothers of Plum Mountain. “Let’s challenge him at once!” When the little humans in front of the camp saw the Mortal Master, they ran quickly to make 
their report. Seizing his golden-hooped rod, straightening out his golden cuirass, slipping on his cloud-treading shoes, and pressing down his red-gold cap, the King leaped out of the camp. He opened 
his eyes wide to stare at the Mortal Master whose features were remarkably refined and whose attire was most elegant. Truly he was a man of features most comely and most noble mien with shoulder- 
reaching ears and shining eyes. His head wore the Three Mountains Phoenix cap, his body donned a pale yellow goose-down robe. Gold threaded boots matched coiling dragon socks. Eight flower- 
like emblems his jade belt adorned. *From his waist hung the crescent pellet bow. His hands held a lance of 3 points and 2 blades. Once he cleaved Peach Mountain to save his mum. His one pellet 
struck a tall tree’s two phoenixes. Slaying 8 fiends flung far his fame as bond brother midst Plum Mountain’s 7 Saints. His lofty mind scorned being high Heaven’s kin; his pride led him to dwell near 
Libations Stream. From Chi City here’s the kind heroic sage: ‘of boundless epiphanies, he’s named Erlang. 

When the Great Sage saw him, he lifted high his golden-hooped rod with gales of laughter and called out, “What little warrior you’re and where do you come from that you dare present yourself here to 
provoke battle?” 

“You must have eyes but no pupils,” shouted the Mortal Master, “if you don’t recognise me! I’m the maternal nephew of the Jade Emperor, Erlang, the King of Illustrious Grace and Spirit by imperial 
appointment. I’ve received my order from above to arrest you, the rebellious Bimawen human. Don’t you know that your time has come?” 

“| remember,” said the Great Sage, “that the sister of the Jade Emperor some years ago became enamoured of the Region Below; she married a man by the name of Yang and had a son by him. Are 
you that boy who was reputed to have cleaved open the Peach Mountain with his axe? I’d like to rebuke you roundly but I’ve no grudge against you. | can hit you with this rod of mine too but I’d like to 
spare your life! A little boy like you, why don’t you hurry back and ask your Four Great Deity-Kings to come out?” When the Mortal Master heard this, he grew very angry and shouted, “Reckless human! 
Don’t you dare be so insolent! Take a sample of my blade!” Swerving to dodge the blow, the Great Sage quickly raised his golden-hooped rod to engage his opponent. What a fine fight there was 
between the two of them: Erlang, a god of Illustrious Kindness, and the Great Sage Equal to Heaven! This one, haughty and proud, defied the Handsome King. That one, not knowing his man, would 
crush all stalwart foes. Suddenly these 2 met and both desired a match — they had never known which the better man was; today they’d learn who’s strong and who's weak! The iron rod seemed a 
flying dragon and the lance divine a dancing phoenix: left and right they struck, attacking both front and back. The Plum Mountain 6 Brothers’ awesome presence filled 1 side while the 4 generals, like 
Ma and Liu, took command on the other. All worked as one to wave flags and roll drums; all helped the fight by cheers while beating the gong. 2 sharp weapons sought a chance to hurt but thrusts and 
parries did not slack one whit. The golden-hooped rod, wonder of the sea could change and fly to snare a victory. A little lag and your life is over! A tiny error and your luck runs out! The Mortal Master 
fought the Great Sage for more than three hundred rounds but the result still could not be determined. The Mortal Master, therefore, summoned all his magical powers; with a shake, he made his body 
a hundred thousand feet tall. Holding with both hands the divine lance of three points and two blades like the peaks that cap the flower Mountain, this green-faced, sabre-toothed figure with scarlet hair 
aimed a violent blow at the head of the Great Sage. But the Great Sage also exerted his magical power and changed himself into a figure having the features and height of Erlang. He wielded a 


compliant golden-hooped rod that resembled the Heaven-supporting pillar on top of Mount Kunlun to oppose a god Erlang. This vision so terrified the marshals, Ma and Liu, that they could no longer 
wave the flags, and so appalled the generals, Beng and Ba, that they could use neither scimitar nor sword. On the side of Erlang, the Brothers Kang, Zhang, Yao, Li, Guo Shen, and Zhi Jian gave the 
order to the plant-headed deities to let loose the falcons and dogs and to advance upon those humans in front of the Water-Curtain Cave with mounted arrows and drawn bows. The charge, alas, 
dispersed the four mighty commanders of human imps and captured 2000 or 3000 numinous fiends! Those humans dropped their spears and abandoned their armour, forsook their swords, and threw 
away their lances. They scattered in all directions — running, screaming, scuttling up the mountain, or scrambling back to the cave. It was as if a cat at night had stolen upon resting birds: they darted 
up as stars to fill the sky. The Brothers thus gained a complete victory, of which we'll speak no further. Now we're telling you about the Mortal Master and the Great Sage who had changed themselves 
into forms which imitated Heaven and Earth. As they were doing battle, the Great Sage suddenly perceived that the humans of his camp were put to rout, and his heart grew faint. He changed out of 
his magic form, turned around, and fled dragging his rod behind him. When the Mortal Master saw that he was running away, he chased him with great strides saying, “Where’re you going? Surrender 
now and your life will be spared!” 

The Great Sage stopped no more to fight but ran as fast as he could. Near the cave’s entrance, he ran right into Kang, Zhang, Yao, Li the 4 grand marshals, Guo Shen, and Zhi Jian, the 2 generals 
who were at the head of an army blocking his way. “Lawless human!” they cried, “Where do you think you're going?” Quivering all over, the Great Sage squeezed his golden-hooped rod back into an 
embroidery needle and hid it in his ear. With a shake of his body, he changed himself into a small sparrow and flew to perch on top of a tree. In great agitation, the six Brothers searched all around but 
could not find him. “We've lost the monster! We've lost the monster!” they all cried. 

As they were making all that clamour, the Mortal Master arrived and asked, “Brothers where did you lose him in the chase?” 

“We just had him boxed in here,” said the gods, “but he simply vanished.” Scanning the place with his phoenix eye wide open,® Erlang at once discovered that the Great Sage had changed into a small 
sparrow perched on a tree. He changed out of his magic form and took off his pellet bow. With a shake of his body, he changed into a sparrow hawk with outstretched wings, ready to attack its prey. 
When the Great Sage saw this, he darted up with a flutter of his wings; changing himself into a cormorant, he headed straight for the open sky. When Erlang saw this, he quickly shook his feathers and 
changed into a huge ocean crane that could penetrate the clouds to strike with its bill. The Great Sage therefore lowered his direction, changed into a small fish, and dove into a stream with a splash. 
Erlang rushed to the edge of the water but could see no trace of him. He thought to himself, “This simian must have gone into the water and changed himself into a fish, a shrimp, or the like. I'll change 
again to catch him.” He duly changed into a fish hawk and skimmed downstream over the waves. After a while, the fish into which the Great Sage had changed was swimming along with the current. 
Suddenly he saw a bird that looked like a green kite though its feathers were not entirely green, like an egret though it had small feathers, and like an old crane though its feet were not red. “That must 
be the transformed Erlang waiting for me,” he thought to himself. He swiftly turned around and swam away after releasing a few bubbles. When Erlang saw this, he said, “The fish that released the 
bubbles looks like a carp though its tail is not red, like a perch though there are no patterns on its scales, like a snake fish though there are no stars on its head, like a bream though its gills have no 
bristles. Why does it move away the moment it sees me? It must be the transformed human himself!” He swooped toward the fish and snapped at it with his beak. The Great Sage shot out of the water 
and changed at once into a water snake; he swam toward shore and wriggled into the grass along the bank. When Erlang saw that he had snapped in vain and that a snake had darted away in the 
water with a splash, he knew that the Great Sage had changed again. Turning around quickly, he changed into a scarlet-topped grey crane that extended its beak like sharp iron pincers to devour the 
snake. With a bounce, the snake changed again into a spotted bustard standing by itself rather stupidly amid the water pepper along the bank. When Erlang saw that the human had changed into such 
a vulgar creature — for the spotted bustard is the basest and most promiscuous of birds, mating indiscriminately with phoenixes, hawks, or crows — he refused to approach him. Changing back into his 
true form, he went and stretched his bow to the fullest. With one pellet he sent the bird hurtling. The Great Sage took advantage of this opportunity, nonetheless. Rolling down the mountain slope, he 
squatted there to change again — this time into a little temple for the local spirit. His wide-open mouth became the entrance, his teeth the doors, his tongue the Nun, and his eyes the windows. Only his 
tail he found to be troublesome, so he stuck it up in the back and changed it into a flagpole. The Mortal Master chased him down the slope but instead of the bustard he had hit he found only a little 
temple. He opened his phoenix eye quickly and looked at it carefully. Seeing the flagpole behind it, he laughed and said, “It's the human! Now he’s trying to deceive me again! I've seen plenty of temples 
before but never one with a flagpole behind it. This must be another of that animal's tricks. Why should | let him lure me inside where he can bite me once I've entered? First I'll smash the windows with 
my fist! Then I'll kick down the doors!” 

The Great Sage heard this and said in dismay, “How vicious! The doors are my teeth and the windows my eyes. What am | going to do with my eyes smashed and my teeth knocked out?” Leaping up 
like a tiger, he disappeared again into the air. The Mortal Master was looking all around for him when the four grand marshals and the two generals arrived together. “Elder Brother,” they said, “have 
you caught the Great Sage?” 

“A moment ago,” said the Mortal Master laughing, “the human changed into a temple to trick me. | was about to smash the windows and kick down the doors when he vanished out of sight with a leap. 
It’s all very strange! Very strange!” The Brothers were astonished but they could find no trace of him in any direction. 

“Brothers,” said the Mortal Master, “keep a lookout down here. Let me go up there to find him.” He swiftly mounted the clouds and rose up into the sky where he saw Deity-King Li holding high the imp- 
reflecting mirror and standing on top of the clouds with Nata. “Deity-King,” said the Mortal Master, “have you seen the King?” 

“He hasn’t come up here,” said the Deity-King, “I've been watching him in the mirror.” 

After telling them about the duel in magic and transformations and the captivity of the rest of the humans, the Mortal Master said, “He finally changed into a temple. Just as | was about to attack him, 
he got away.” When Deity-King Li heard these words, he tured the imp-reflecting mirror all the way around once more and looked into it. “Mortal Master,” he said, roaring with laughter. “Go quickly! 
Quickly! That human used his magic of body concealment to escape from the cordon and he’s now heading for the mouth of your River of Libations.” 

We now tell you about the Great Sage who had arrived at the mouth of the River of Libations. With a shake of his body, he changed into the form of Holy Dad Erlang. Lowering the direction of his cloud, 
he went straight into the temple, and the demon magistrates could not tell that he was not the real Erlang. Every one of them in fact saluted to receive him. He sat down in the middle and began to 
examine the various offerings; the three kinds of sacrificial meat brought by Li Hu, the votive offering of Zhang Long, the petition for a son by Zhao Jia, and the request for healing by Qian Bing. As he 
was looking at these, someone made the report, “Another Holy Dad has arrived!” The various demon magistrates went quickly to look and were terror-stricken, one and all. The Mortal Master asked, 
“Did a so-called Great Sage Equal to Heaven, come here?” 

“We've not seen any Great Sage,” said the demon magistrates. “But another Holy Dad is in there examining the offerings.” The Mortal Master crashed through the door; seeing him, the Great Sage 
revealed his true form and said, “There’s no need for the little boy to strive anymore! Sun is now the name of this temple!” 

The Mortal Master lifted his divine lance of three points and two blades and struck but the King with agile body was quick to move out of the way. He whipped out that embroidery needle of his and with 
one wave caused it to take on the thickness of a rice bowl. Rushing forward, he engaged Erlang face to face. Starting at the door of the temple, the 2 combatants fought all the way back to the Flower- 
Fruit Mountain, treading on clouds and mists and shouting insults at each other. The 4 Deity-Kings and their followers were so startled by their appearance that they stood guard with even greater 
vigilance while the grand marshals joined the Mortal Master to surround the Handsome King. The demon king Mahabali having requested the Mortal Master and his 6 Brothers to lead their troops to 
subdue the monster, returned to the Region Above to make his report. Conversing with the Nun Guanyin, the Queen Mum, and the various divine officials in the Hall of Divine Mists, the Jade Emperor 
said, “If Erlang’s already gone into battle, why’s no further report come back today?” 

Folding her hands, Guanyin said, “Permit this humble cleric to invite Your Majesty and the Patriarch of Dao to go outside the South Heaven Gate so that you may find out personally how things are 
faring.” 

“That's a good suggestion,” said the Jade Emperor. 

He at once sent for his imperial carriage and went with the Patriarch, Guanyin, the Queen Mum, and the various divine officials to the South Heaven Gate where the cortege was met by celestial soldiers 
and guardians. They opened the gate and peered into the distance; there they saw cosmic nets on every side manned by celestial soldiers, Deity-King Li and Nata in mid-air holding high the imp- 
reflecting mirror and the Mortal Master and his Brothers encircling the Great Sage in the middle and fighting fiercely. The Nun opened her mouth and addressed Laozi: “What do you think of Erlang 
whom this humble cleric recommended? He's certainly powerful enough to have the Great Sage surrounded if not yet captured. I'll now help him to achieve his victory and make certain that the enemy 
will be taken prisoner.” 

“What weapon will the Nun use,” asked Laozi, “and how’ll you assist him?” 

“lll throw down my immaculate vase that | use for holding my willow sprig,” said the Nun. “When it hits that human, at least it'll knock him over even if it doesn’t kill him. Erlang, the Little Sage will then 
be able to capture him.” 

“That vase of yours,” said Laozi, “is made of porcelain. It’s all right if it hits him on the head. But if it crashed on the iron rod instead, won't it be shattered? You'd better not raise your hands; let me help 
him win.” 

The Nun said, “Do you've any weapon?” 

“I do, indeed,” said Laozi. He rolled up his sleeve and took down from his left arm an armlet, saying, “This is a weapon made of red steel, brought into existence during my preparation of elixir and fully 
charged with theurgical forces. It can be made to transform at will; indestructible by fire or water, it can entrap many things. It’s called the diamond cutter or the diamond snare. The year when | crossed 
the Hangu Pass, | depended on it a great deal for the conversion of the barbarians for it’s practically my bodyguard night and day. Let me throw it down and hit him.” 

After saying this, Laozi hurled the snare down from the Heaven Gate; it went tumbling down into the battlefield at the Flower-Fruit Mountain and landed smack on the King’s head. The King was engaged 
in a bitter struggle with the 7 Sages and was completely unaware of this weapon that had dropped from the sky and hit him on the crown of his head. No longer able to stand on his feet, he toppled 
over. He managed to scramble up again and was about to flee when the Holy Dad Erlang’s small hound dashed forward and bit him in the calf. He was pulled down for the 2" time and lay on the 
ground cursing, “You brute! Why don’t you go and do your master in instead of coming to bite old man?” 

Rolling over quickly, he tried to get up but the Seven Sages all pounced on him and pinned him down. They bound him with ropes and punctured his breastbone with a knife, so that he could transform 
no further. Laozi retrieved his diamond snare and requested the Jade Emperor to return to the Hall of Divine Mists with Guanyin, the Queen Mum, and the rest of the Mortals. Down below the Four 
Great demigod Kings and Deity-King Li all retired their troops, broke camp, and went forward to congratulate Erlang, saying, “This is indeed a magnificent accomplishment by the Little Sage!” 

“This has been the great blessing of the Heavenly deities,” said the Little Sage, “and the proper exercise of their divine authority. What’ve | accomplished?” 

The Brothers Kang, Zhang, Yao, and Li said, “Elder Brother need have no further discussion. Let’s take this fellow up to the Jade Emperor to see what'll be done with him.” 

“Worthy Brothers,” said the Mortal Master, “you may not have a personal audience with the Jade Emperor because you've not received any divine appointment. Let the celestial guardians take him into 
custody. I'll go with the Deity-King to the Region Above to make our report while all of you make a thorough search of the mountain here. After you’ve cleaned it out, go back to the River of Libations. 
When I’ve our deeds recorded and received our rewards, I'll return to celebrate with you.” 

The 4 grand marshals and the 2 generals followed his bidding. The Mortal Master then mounted the clouds with the rest of the deities, and they began their triumphal journey back to Heaven, reciting 
poems of victory all the way. In a little while, they reached the outer court of the Hall of Perfect Light, and the Heavenly preceptor went forward to memorialise to the Throne, saying, “The Four Great 
Deity-Kings have captured the monstrous human, the Great Sage Equal to Heaven. They await the command of Your Majesty.” The Jade Emperor then gave the order that the demon king Mahabali 
and the celestial guardians take the prisoner to the monster execution block where he was to be cut to small pieces. Alas, this is what happens to fraud and impudence, now punished by the Law; 
heroics grand will fade in the briefest time! 


007 
Brazier the Great Sage escapes from the 8 Trigrams; Mind Human’s still beneath the 5 Phases Mountain‘ 

Fame and fortune all predestined; 1 must ever shun a guileful heart. Rectitude and truth, the fruits of virtue grow both long and deep. A little presumption brings on Heaven’s wrath: though yet unseen, 
it'll surely come in time. Ask the Lord of the East? for why such pains and perils now appear: Because pride has sought to scale the limits, ignoring hierarchy to flout the law. The Great Sage Equal to 
Heaven was taken by the celestial guardians to the monster execution block where he was bound to the monster-subduing pillar. They then slashed him with a scimitar, hewed him with an axe, stabbed 
him with a spear, and hacked him with a sword but they could not hurt his body in any way. Next, the Star Spirit of the South Pole ordered the various deities of the Fire Department to burn him with 
fire but that, too, had little effect. The gods of the Thunder Department were then ordered to strike him with thunderbolts but not a single one of his hairs was destroyed. The demon king Mahabali and 
the others therefore went back to report to the Throne saying, “Your Majesty, we don’t know where this Great Sage’s acquired such power to protect his body. Your subjects slashed him with a scimitar 
and hewed him with an axe; also struck him with thunder and burned him with fire. Not a single one of his hair’s destroyed. What’ll we do?” 

When the Jade Emperor heard these words, he said, “What indeed can we do to a fellow like that, a creature of that sort?” 

Laozi then came forward and said, “That human ate the mortal peaches and drank the imperial juice. Moreover, he stole the divine elixir and ate five gourd-full of it, both raw and cooked. All this was 
probably refined in his stomach by the Fixity fires to form a single solid mass. The union with his constitution gave him a diamond body that cannot be quickly destroyed. It would be better, therefore, if 


this Daoist takes him away and places him in the Brazier of Eight Trigrams where he will be smelted by high and low heat. When he is finally separated from my elixir, his body will certainly be reduced 
to ashes.” When the Jade Emperor heard these words, he told the Six Gods of Darkness and the Six Gods of Light to release the prisoner and hand him over to Laozi who left in obedience to the divine 
decree. Meanwhile, the illustrious Sage Erlang was rewarded with a hundred gold blossoms, a hundred bottles of imperial juice, 100 pellets of elixir, together with rare treasures, lustrous pearls, and 
brocades that he was told to share with his brothers. After expressing his gratitude, the Mortal Master returned to the mouth of the River of Libations. Arriving at the Tushita Palace, Laozi loosened the 
ropes on the Great Sage, pulled out the weapon from his breastbone, and pushed him into the Brazier of 8 Trigrams. He then ordered the Daoist who watched over the brazier and the page boy in 
charge of the fire to blow up a strong flame for the smelting process. The brazier was of 8 compartments corresponding to the eight trigrams of Qian, Kan, Gen, Zhen, Xun, Li, Kun, and Dui. The Great 
Sage crawled into the space beneath the compartment that corresponded to the Xun trigram. Now Xun symbolizes wind; where there is wind, there is no fire. However, wind could churn up smoke that 
at that moment reddened his eyes, giving them a permanently inflamed condition. Hence they were sometimes called Fiery Eyes and Diamond Pupils. 
Truly time passed swiftly, and the forty-ninth day arrived imperceptibly.4 The alchemical process of Laozi was perfected, and on that day he came to open the brazier to take out his elixir. The Great 
Sage at the time was covering his eyes with both hands, rubbing his face and shedding tears. He heard noises on top of the brazier and, opening his eyes, suddenly saw light. Unable to restrain himself, 
he leaped out of the brazier and kicked it over with a loud crash. He began to walk straight out of the room while a group of startled fire tenders and guardians tried desperately to grab hold of him. 
Every one of them was overthrown; he was as wild as a white brow tiger in a fit, a one-horned dragon with a fever. Laozi rushed up to clutch at him, only to be greeted by such a violent shove that he 
fell head over heels while the Great Sage escaped. Whipping the compliant rod out from his ear, he waved it once in the wind and it had the thickness of a rice bowl. Holding it in his hands without 
regard for good or ill, he once more careened through the Heavenly Palace, fighting so fiercely that the Nine Luminaries all shut themselves in and the Four Deity-Kings disappeared from sight. Dear 
Monster! Here is a testimonial poem for him that says: 
This cosmic being fully fused with nature’s gifts passes with ease through 10000 toils and tests. 
Vast and motionless like the 1 Great Void, perfect, quiescent, he’s named the Primal Depth. 
Long refined in the brazier, he’s no mercury or lead just the very mortal, living above all things. 

Forever transforming, he changes still; 3 refuges and 5 commandments* he all rejects. 

Here is another poem: 
A spirit beam filling the supreme void — that’s how the rod behaves accordingly. 

It lengthens or shortens as one would wish; upright or prone, it grows or shrinks at will. 

And another: 
An ape’s body of Dao weds the human mind. 
Mind’s a human — this meaning’s profound. 
The Great Sage Equal to Heaven’s no false thought. 
How could the post of Ban-Horse justly show his gifts? 
Horse works with Human means both mind and will need binding firmly. Don’t seek them outside. 

All things back to Extinguishment follow 1 truth - to join Siddhartha beneath twin trees.” 
This time the King had no respect for persons great or small; he lashed out this way and that with his iron rod, and not a single deity could withstand him. He fought all the way into the Hall of Perfect 
Light and was approaching the Hall of Divine Mists where fortunately Numinous Officer Wang, aide to the Mortal Master of Adjuvant Holiness was on duty. He saw the Great Sage advancing recklessly 
and went forward to bar his way, holding high his golden whip. “Wanton human,” he cried, “where’re you going? I’m here so don't you dare be insolent!” The Great Sage did not wait for further utterance; 
he raised his rod and struck at once while Numinous Officer met him also with brandished whip. The 2 of them charged into each other in front of the Hall of Divine Mists. What a fight that was between 
a red-blooded patriot of ample fame and a Heaven’s rebel with notorious name! The saint and sinner gladly tangle close so that 2 brave fighters can test their skills. Though the rod is fierce and the 
whip is fleet, how can the upright and just one forbear? This 1 is a supreme god of judgement with thunderous voice; the other, the Great Sage Equal to Heaven, a monstrous human. The golden whip 
and the iron rod used by the 2 are both divine weapons from the House of God. At Divine Mists Treasure Hall they show their might today, each displaying his prowess winningly. This one brashly 
seeks to take the Big Dipper Palace; the other with all his strength defends the sacred realm. In bitter strife relentless they show their power; moving back and forth, whip or rod has yet to score. The 2 
of them fought for some time, and neither victory nor defeat could yet be determined. The Mortal Master of Adjuvant Holiness however, had already sent word to the Thunder Department, and 36 
thunder deities were summoned to the scene. They surrounded the Great Sage and plunged into a fierce battle. The Great Sage was not in the least intimidated; wielding his compliant rod, he parried 
left and right and met his attackers to the front and to the rear. In a moment he saw that the scimitars, lances, swords, halberds, whips, maces, hammers, axes, gilt bludgeons, sickles, and spades of 
the thunder deities were coming thick and fast. So with one shake of his body he changed into a creature with 6 arms and 3 heads. One wave of the compliant rod and it turned into 3; his 6 arms 
wielded the 3 rods like a spinning wheel, whirling and dancing in their midst. The various thunder deities could not approach him at all. Truly his form was tumbling round and round, bright and luminous; 
a form everlasting, how imitated by men? He cannot be burned by fire. Can he ever be drowned in water? 
A lustrous pearl of mani’ he is indeed, immune to all the spears and the swords. He could be good or bad; present good and evil he could do at will. He’d be a mortal, a god, if he’s good; '°wickedness 
would cloak him with hair and horn. Endlessly changing he runs amok in Heaven, not to be seized by fighting lords or thunder gods. At the time the various deities had the Great Sage surrounded but 
they could not close in on him. All the hustle and bustle soon disturbed the Jade Emperor who at once sent the Wandering Minister of Inspection and the Mortal Master of Blessed Wings to go to the 
Western Region and invite the aged God to come and subdue the monster. The two sages received the decree and went straight to the Spirit Mountain. After they had greeted the Four Lightning-Gods 
and the Eight Nuns in front of the Treasure Temple of Thunderclap, they asked them to announce their arrival. The deities therefore went before the Treasure Lotus Platform and made their report. 
Siddhartha at once invited them to appear before him and the two sages made obeisance to a god 3 times before standing in attendance beneath the platform. Siddhartha asked, “What causes the 
Jade Emperor to trouble the two sages to come here?” 
The 2 sages explained as follows: “Some time ago there’s born on the Flower-Fruit Mountain a human who exercised his magic powers and gathered to himself a troop of humans to disturb the world. 
The Jade Emperor threw down a decree of pacification and appointed him a Bimawen but he despised the lowliness of that position and left in rebellion. Deity-King Li and Prince Nata were sent to 
capture him but they were unsuccessful and another proclamation of amnesty was given to him. He’s then made the Great Sage Equal to Heaven and a rank without compensation. After a while he’s 
given the temporary job of looking after the Garden of Mortal Peaches where almost immediately he stole the peaches. He also went to the Jasper Pool and made off with the food and juice, devastating 
the Grand Festival. Half-drunk, he went secretly into the Tushita Palace, stole the elixir of Laozi, and then left the Celestial Palace in revolt. Again the Jade Emperor sent a hundred thousand Heavenly 
soldiers but he’s not to be subdued. Thereafter Guanyin sent for the Mortal Master Erlang and his sworn brothers who fought and pursued him. Even then he knew many tricks of transformation and 
only after he was hit by Laozi’s diamond snare could Erlang finally capture him. Taken before the Throne, he was condemned to be executed; but though slashed by a scimitar and hewn by an axe, 
bumed by fire and struck by thunder, he’s not hurt at all. After Laozi had received royal permission to take him away, he’s refined by fire, and the brazier’s not opened until the forty-ninth day. Immediately 
he jumped out of the Brazier of Eight Trigrams and beat back the celestial guardians. He penetrated into the Hall of Perfect Light and was approaching the Hall of Divine Mists when Numinous Officer 
Wang, aide to the Mortal Master of Adjuvant Holiness met and fought with him bitterly. Thirty-six thunder generals were ordered to encircle him completely but they could never get near him. The 
situation is desperate, and for this reason, the Jade Emperor sent a special request for you to defend the Throne.” 
When Siddhartha heard this, he said to the various Nuns, “All of you remain steadfast here in the chief temple and let no one relax his meditative posture. I’ve to go exorcise a demon and defend the 
Throne.” 
Siddhartha then called Ananda and Kagyapa, his 2 venerable disciples to follow him. They left the Thunderclap Temple and arrived at the gate of the Hall of Divine Mists where they were met by 
deafening shouts and yells. There the Great Sage was being beset by the 36 thunder deities. The Religious Patriarch gave the religion-order: “Let the thunder deities lower their arms and break up 
their encirclement. Ask the Great Sage to come out here and let me ask him what sort of divine power he has.” 
The various warriors retreated immediately and the Great Sage also threw off his magical appearance. Changing back into his true form, he approached angrily and shouted with ill humour, “What 
region are you from, monk, that you dare stop the battle and question me?” 
Siddhartha laughed and said, “I’m Siddhartha the Venerable from the Western Region of Ultimate Bliss. I've heard just now about your audacity, wildness, and repeated acts of rebellion against Heaven. 
Where’re you born and in which year did you succeed in acquiring the Way? Why’re you so violent and unruly?” 
The Great Sage said, “I was born of Earth and Heaven, mortal divinely fused, an old man hailing from the Flower-Fruit Mount. | made my home in the Water-Curtain Cave; seeking friend and teacher, 
| learned the Great Mystery. Perfected in the many arts of ageless life, | learned to change in ways boundless and vast. Too narrow the space | found on that mortal earth: | set my mind to live in the 
Green-jade Sky. In Divine Mists Hall none should long reside for king may follow king in the reign of man. If might is honour, let them yield to me. He only is hero who dares to fight and win!” 
When the Religious Patriarch heard these words, he laughed aloud in scorn. “A fellow like you,” he said, “is only a human who happened to become a spirit. How dare you be so presumptuous as to 
want to seize the honoured throne of the Exalted Jade Emperor? He began practicing religion when he was very young, and he has gone through the bitter experience of one thousand seven hundred 
and fifty kalpas with each kalpa lasting a hundred and twenty-nine thousand six centuries. Figure out yourself how many years it took him to rise to the enjoyment of his great and limitless position! 
You’re merely a beast who has just attained human form in this disciple. How dare you make such a boast? Blasphemy! This is sheer blasphemy, and it will surely shorten your allotted age. Repent 
while there’s still time and cease your idle talk! Be wary that you don’t encounter such peril that you'll be cut down in an instant, and all your original gifts will be wasted.” 
“Even if the Jade Emperor's practiced religion from childhood,” said the Great Sage, “he’d not be allowed to remain here forever. The proverb says, many are the turns of kingship: by next year the turn 
will be mine! Tell him to move out at once and hand over the Celestial Palace to me. That'll be the end of the matter. If not, I'll continue to cause disturbances and there'll never be peace!” 
“Besides your mortality and your transformations,” said the Religious Patriarch, “what other powers do you've that you dare to usurp this hallowed region of Heaven?” 
“I've plenty of them!” said the Great Sage. “Indeed, | know seventy-two transformations and a life that does not grow old through ten thousand kalpas. | know also how to cloud somersault, and one 
leap will take me one hundred and eight thousand miles. Why can’t | sit on the Heavenly throne?” 
The Religious Patriarch said, “Let me make a wager with you. If you've the ability to somersault clear of this right palm of mine, I'll consider you the winner. You need not raise your weapon in battle 
then, for I'll ask the Jade Emperor to go live with me in the West and let you've the Celestial Palace. If you can’t somersault out of my hand, you can go back to the Region Below and be a monster. 
Work through a few more kalpas before you return to cause more trouble.” 
When the Great Sage heard this, he said to himself, snickering, “What a fool this Siddhartha is! A single somersault of mine can carry old man a hundred and eight thousand miles yet his palm isn’t 
even a foot across. How'd | possibly not jump clear of it?” He asked quickly, “You're certain that your decision will stand?” 
“Certainly it'll,” said Siddhartha. He stretched out his right hand that was about the size of a lotus leaf. Great Sage put away his compliant rod and, summoning his power, leaped up and stood right in 
the centre of the Patriarch’s hand. He said simply, “I’m off!” 
And he was gone — all but invisible like a streak of light in the clouds. Training the eye of wisdom on him, the Religious Patriarch saw that the King was hurtling along relentlessly like a whirligig. As the 
Great Sage advanced, he suddenly saw five flesh-pink pillars supporting a mass of green air. “This must be the end of the road,” he said. “When | go back presently, Siddhartha will be my witness and 
I'll certainly take up residence in the Palace of Divine Mists.” But he thought to himself, “Wait a moment! I’d better leave some kind of memento if I’m going to negotiate with Siddhartha.” He plucked a 
hair and blew a mouthful of magic breath onto it, crying, “Change!” It changed into a writing brush with extra thick hair soaked in heavy ink. On the middle pillar he then wrote in large letters the following 
line: “The Great Sage Equal to Heaven, has made a tour of this place.” When he had finished writing, he retrieved his hair, and with a total lack of respect he left a bubbling pool of human urine at the 
base of the first pillar. He reversed his cloud somersault and went back to where he had started. Standing on Siddhartha’s palm, he said, “I left, and now I’m back. Tell the Jade Emperor to give me the 
Celestial Palace.” 
“You pisshead human!” scolded Siddhartha. “Since when did you ever leave the palm of my hand?” 
The Great Sage said, “You're just ignorant! | went to the edge of Heaven, and | found five flesh-pink pillars supporting a mass of green air. | left a memento there. Do you dare go with me to have a 
look at the place?” 
“No need to go there,” said Siddhartha. “Just lower your head and take a look.” When the Great Sage stared down with his fiery eyes and diamond pupils, he found written on the middle finger of the 
Religious Patriarch’s right hand the sentence, “The Great Sage Equal to Heaven, has made a tour of this place.” A pungent whiff of human urine came from the fork between the thumb and the first 
finger. Astonished, the Great Sage said, “Could this really happen? Could this really happen? | wrote those words on the pillars supporting the sky. How is it that they now appear on his finger? Could 
it be that he is exercising the magic power of foreknowledge without divination? I'll not believe it! I'll not believe it! Let me go there once more!” 


Dear Great Sage! Quickly he crouched and was about to jump up again, when the Religious Patriarch flipped his hand over and tossed the King out of the West Heaven Gate. The 5 fingers were 
transformed into the 5 Phases of metal, wood, water, fire, and earth. They became in fact 5 connected mountains named 5-Phases Mountain that pinned him down with just enough pressure to keep 
him there. The thunder deities, Ananda, and Kasyapa all folded their hands and cried in acclamation: “Praise be to virtue! Praise be to virtue! He learned to be human, born from an egg that year, and 
aimed to reap the authentic Way's fruit. He lived in a fine place by kalpas untouched. One day he changed, expending vim and strength. Craving high place, he flouted Heaven's reign, mocked saints 
and stole pills, breaking great relations. Evil, full to the brim, now meets retribution. We know not when he may find release.” 
After the Religious Patriarch Siddhartha had vanquished the monstrous human, he at once called Ananda and Kasyapa to return with him to the Western Paradise. At that moment however, Tianpeng‘! 
and Tianyou, 2 celestial messengers, came running out of the Treasure Hall of Divine Mists and said, “We beg Siddhartha to wait a moment, please! Our Lord’s grand carriage will arrive shortly.” 
When the Religious Patriarch heard these words, he turned around and waited with reverence. In a moment he did indeed see a chariot drawn by eight colourful phoenixes and covered by a canopy 
adorned with nine luminous jewels. The entire cortege was accompanied by the sound of wondrous poems and melodies, recited by a vast celestial choir. Scattering precious blossoms and diffusing 
fragrant incense, it came up to a god, and the Jade Emperor offered his thanks, saying, “We're truly indebted to your mighty religion for vanquishing that monster. We beseech Siddhartha to remain for 
one brief day, so that we may invite the mortals to join us in giving you a banquet of thanks.” Not daring to refuse, Siddhartha folded his hands to thank the Jade Emperor, saying, “Your old monk came 
here at your command, Most Honourable demigod. Of what power may | boast, really? | owe my success entirely to the excellent fortune of Your Majesty and the various deities. How can | be worthy 
of your thanks?” 
The Jade Emperor then ordered the various deities from the Thunder Department to send invitations abroad to the 3 Pure Ones, the 4 Ministers, the 5 Elders, the 6 Lady Officials, ‘the 7 Stars, the 8 
Poles, the 9 Luminaries, and the 10 Capitals. Together with 1000 mortals and 10000 sages, they were to come to the thanksgiving banquet given for the Religious Patriarch. The 4 Great Imperial 
Preceptors and the Divine Maidens of 9 Heavens were told to open wide the golden gates of the Jade Capital, the Treasure Palace of Primal Secret, and the 5 Lodges of Penetrating Brightness. 
Siddhartha was asked to be seated high on the Numinous Terrace of 7 Treasures, the rest of the deities were then seated according to rank, age before a banquet of dragon livers, phoenix marrow, 
juices of jade, and mortal peaches. In a little while, the Jade-Pure Celestial Worthy of Commencement, the Highest-Pure Celestial Worthy of Numinous Treasure, the Great-Pure Celestial Worthy of 
Moral Virtue,"? the Mortal Masters of 5 Influences, the Star Spirits of 5 Constellations, the 3 Ministers, the 4 Sages, the 9 Luminaries, the Left and Right Assistants, the Deity-King, Prince Nata all 
marched in leading a train of flags, and canopies in pairs. They were all holding rare treasures and lustrous pearls, fruits of longevity and exotic flowers to be presented to a god. As they saluted before 
him, they said, “We're most grateful for the unfathomable power of Siddhartha who’s subdued the monstrous human. We're grateful, too to the Most Honourable demigod who's having this banquet 
and asked us to come here to offer our thanks. May we beseech Siddhartha to give this banquet a name?” 
Responding to the petition of the various deities, Siddhartha said, “If a name is desired, let this be called the Great Banquet for Peace in Heaven.” 
“What a magnificent name!” the various Mortals cried in unison. “Indeed, it'll be the Great Banquet for Peace in Heaven.” When they finished speaking, they took their seats separately and there was 
the pouring of juice and exchanging of cups, pinning of corsages"4 and playing of zithers. It was indeed a magnificent banquet for which a testimonial poem says: 
That Mortal Peach Feast the human disturbed is topped by this Banquet for Peace in Heaven. 
Dragon flags and phoenix carts glow in halos bright; blazing signs and banners whirl in hallowed light. 
The poems divine are sweet and fair; Phoenix pipes and jade flutes both loudly play. 
Fragrant incense shrouds this assembly of saints. All the world’s tranquil to praise the Holy Court. 
As all of them were feasting merrily, the Lady Queen Mum also led a host of divine maidens and mortal reciting girls to come before a god, dancing with nimble feet. They saluted to him, and she said, 
“Our Festival of Mortal Peaches was ruined by that monstrous human. We're beholden to the mighty power of Siddhartha for the enchainment of this mischievous human. In the celebration during this 
Great Banquet for Peace in Heaven, we've little to offer as a token of our thanks. Please accept however, these few mortal peaches plucked from the large trees by our own hands.” 
They were truly half red, half green, and spouting aroma sweet, these luscious divine roots of 10 millennia. Pity those fruits planted at Wuling Spring! ‘SHow could they match the marvels of Heaven's 
home: those tender ones of purple veins so rare in the world, and those peerlessly sweet of pale yellow pits? They lengthen age, prolong life, and change your frame. He who’s lucky to eat them will 
never be the same. After the Religious Patriarch had pressed together his hands to thank the Queen Mum, she ordered the mortal reciting girls and the divine maidens to recite and exercise. All the 
mortals at the banquet applauded enthusiastically. Truly there were whorls of Heavenly incense filling the seats, profuse array of divine petals, and stems. Jade capital and golden arches in what great 
splendour! How priceless, too, the strange goods and rare treasures! Every pair had the same age as Heaven. Every set increased through 10000 kalpas. Mulberry fields or vast oceans, let them shift 
and change. He who lives here has neither grief nor fear. The Queen Mum commanded the mortal maidens to recite, exercise as cups, and goblets clinked together steadily. After a little while, suddenly 
a wondrous fragrance came to meet the nose, rousing Stars and Planets in that great hall. The gods and a god put down their cups. Raising his head, each waited with his eyes. There in the air 
appeared an aged man, holding a most luxuriant long-life plant. His gourd had elixir often millennium. His book listed names 12 millennia old. Sky and earth in his cave knew no constraint. Sun and 
moon were perfected in his vase. "He roamed the 4 Seas in joy serene and made the Ten Islets‘’ his tranquil home. Getting drunk often at the Peaches Feast he woke; the moon shone brightly as of 
old. He had a long head, short frame, and large ears. His name: Star of Long Life from South Pole. After the Star of Long Life arrived and greeted the Jade Emperor, he also went up to thank Siddhartha, 
saying, “When | first heard that the baneful human was being led by Laozi to the Tushita Palace to be refined by alchemical fire, | thought peace was surely secured. | never suspected that he could 
still escape, and it was fortunate that Siddhartha in his goodness had subdued this monster. When | got word of the thanksgiving banquet, | came at once. I’ve no other gifts to present to you but these 
purple agaric, jasper plant, jade-green lotus root, and golden elixir.” The poem says: 
Jade-green lotus and golden drug are given to Sakya. 
Like the sands of Ganges’s the age of Siddhartha. 
The brocade of the 3 wains is calm, eternal bliss.*8 
The 9-grade garland’s a wholesome, endless life.'° 
The true master of the Madhyamika School° dwells in the Heaven of both form and emptiness." 
The great earth and cosmos all call him Lord. 
His 16-foot diamond frame’s great in blessing and age.”2 
Siddhartha accepted the thanks cheerfully, and the Star of Long Life went to his seat. Again there was pouring of juice and exchanging of cups. The Great Mortal of Naked Feet also arrived. After 
saluting himself before the Jade Emperor, he too went to thank the Religious Patriarch, saying, “I’m profoundly grateful for your religion that subdued the baneful human. I’ve no other things to convey 
my respect but two magic pears and some lire dates that | now present to you.” The poem says: 
The Naked-Feet Mortal brought fragrant pears and dates to give to Infinite Light whose count of years is long. 
Firm as a hill is his Lotus Platform of 7 Treasures; brocade-like is his Flower Seat of 1000 Gold adomed. 
No false speech’s this — his age equals Heaven and Earth; nor is this a lie - his luck’s great as the sea. 
Blessing and long life reach in him their fullest scope, dwelling in that Western Region of calm, eternal bliss. 
Siddhartha again thanked him and asked Ananda and Kasyapa to put away the gifts 1 by 1 before approaching the Jade Emperor to express his gratitude for the banquet. By now everyone was 
somewhat tipsy. A Spirit Minister of Inspection then arrived to make the report, “The Great Sage’s sticking out his head!” 
“No need to worry,” said the Religious Patriarch. He took from his sleeve a tag on which were written in gold letters the words: 
Praise to the Jewel in the Lotus 
Handing it over to Ananda, he told him to stick it on the top of the mountain. This demigod received the tag, took it out of the Heaven Gate, and stuck it tightly on a square piece of rock at the top of the 
Mountain of 5 Phases. The mountain immediately struck root and grew together at the seams though there was enough space for breathing and for the prisoner’s hands to crawl out and move around 
a bit. Ananda then returned to report, “The tag’s tightly attached.” Siddhartha then took leave of the Jade Emperor and the deities and went with the 2 deities out of the Heaven Gate. Moved by 
compassion he recited a divine spell and called together a local spirit and the Fearless Guards of 5 Quarters to stand watch over the 5-Phases Mountain. They were told to feed the prisoner with iron 
pellets when he was hungry and to give him melted copper to drink when he was thirsty. When the time of his chastisement was fulfilled, they were told, someone would be coming to deliver him. So it 
is that the brash, baneful human in revolt against Heaven is brought to submission by Siddhartha. He drinks melted copper to endure the seasons and feeds on iron pellets to pass the time. Tried by 
this bitter misfortune sent from the Sky, he is glad to be living, though in a piteous lot. If this hero is allowed to struggle anew, he will serve God in future and go to the West. A poem says: 
Prideful of his power once the time was ripe, he tamed dragon and tiger, flaunting wily might. 
Stealing peaches and juice, he roamed Heaven’s House. 
He found trust and grace in the City of Jade. 
He’s now bound, for his evil’s full to the brim. 
By good stock?3 unfailing his breath will rise again. 
If he’s indeed to flee Siddhartha's hands, he must await from Tang court the holy monk. 


PART Il 
GUANYIN 
008 
Our God makes scriptures to impart ultimate bliss; Guanyin receives the decree to go up to Chang’an 
Ask at meditation-pass why even countless queries would lead to just empty old age! 
Shine bricks to make mirrors? Hoard snow for foodstuff?2 
How many youths are thus deceived; a feather swallows the great ocean? A mustard seed holds the Sumeru?3 
Golden Dhita’s gently smiling.4The enlightened transcends the 10 stops® and 3 wains® sluggards must join the 4 beasts and 6 ways.” 
Who can hear below the Thoughtless Cliff, beneath the Shadow-less Tree, the cuckoo’s one call for the dawn of spring? 
Roads at Caoxi, perilous; 8clouds on Vulture’s Peak, dense; *here an old friend’s voice turns mute. 
At a 10000-foot waterfall where a 5-petal lotus unfolds, incense wraps an old temple’s drapes. 
In that hour, once you break through to the source, the Dragon King’s 3 jewels you'll see.'° 
This poem is named Su Wu at Slow Pace. The sovereign Siddhartha took leave of the Jade Emperor and returned to the Treasure Monastery of Thunderclap. All the 3000 Gods, the 500 Arhats, the 8 
diamond kings, the countless Nuns held temple pennants, embroidered canopies, rare treasures, and mortal flowers forming an orderly array before the Spirit Mountain and beneath the 2 Sala Trees 
to welcome him. Siddhartha stopped his hallowed cloud and said to them, “I’ve with deepest Prajfia (Wisdom and understanding) looked through the three realms. All fundamental nature will end in 
extinction like empty phenomena existing as nothing. The wily ape’s extirpation, this, none can comprehend. Name, birth, death, and origin of all forms appear thus.” 
When he had finished speaking, he beamed forth the sari light that filled the air with forty-two white rainbows, connected end to end from north to south. Seeing this, the crowd saluted down and 
worshipped. In a little while, Siddhartha gathered together the holy clouds and blessed fog, ascended the lotus platform of the highest rank, and sat down solemnly. Those 3000 Gods, 500 Arhats, 8 
diamond kings, and 4 Nuns folded their hands and drew near. After saluting down, they asked, “The one who caused disturbance in Heaven and ruined the Peach Festival who's he?” 
“That fellow’s,” said Siddhartha, “a baneful monkey born in the Flower-Fruit Mountain. His wickedness was beyond all bounds and defied description. The divine warriors of the entire Heaven could not 
bring him to submission. Though Erlang caught him and Laozi tried to refine him with fire, they could not hurt him at all. When | arrived, he’s just making an exhibition of his might and prowess in the 
midst of the thunder deities. When | stopped the fighting and asked about his antecedents, he said that he’d magic powers, knowing how to transform himself and how to cloud somersault that would 
carry him a hundred and eight thousand miles at a time. | made a wager with him to see whether he could leap clear of my hand. | then grabbed hold of him while my fingers changed into the Mountain 
of Five Phases that had him firmly pinned down. The Jade Emperor opened wide the golden doors of the Jade Palace, invited me to sit at the head table, and gave a Banquet for Peace in Heaven to 
thank me. It was only a short while ago that | took leave of the throne to come back here.” 
All were delighted by these words. After they had expressed their highest praise for a god, they withdrew according to their ranks; they went back to their several duties and enjoyed the permanent 
reality underlying all phenomena. Truly it is the scene of holy mist encompassing Tianzhu (India), rainbow light enclosing the Honoured 1 who is called the First in the West, the King of the Formlessness 


School. Often black apes are seen presenting fruits. Tailed-deer holding flowers in their mouths, blue phoenixes dancing, colourful birds reciting, the spirit tortoise boasting of his age, and the divine 
crane picking agaric. They enjoy in peace the Pure Land’s Jetavana, ‘the Dragon Palace, and worlds vast as Ganges’ sands. Every day the flowers bloom; every hour the fruits ripen. They work silence 
to reach perfection. They meditate to bear the right fruit. They do not die nor are they born. No growth is there, nor any decrease. Mist and smoke wraithlike may come and go. No seasons intrude, nor 
are years recalled. The poem says: 
To go or come is casual and free; of fear or sorrow there’s not 1 degree. 
Fields of Ultimate Bliss are flat and wide. In this great world no 4 seasons abide. 
As the Religious Patriarch lived in the Treasure Monastery of the Thunderclap in the Spirit Mountain, he called together one day the various Gods, Arhats, guardians, Nuns, diamond kings, and 
mendicant monks and nuns and said to them, “We don’t know how much time has passed here since | subdued the wily monkey and pacified Heaven but | suppose at least half a millennium has gone 
by in the worldly realm. As this is the fifteenth day of the first month of autumn, I’ve prepared a treasure bowl filled with a hundred varieties of exotic flowers and a thousand kinds of rare fruit. I’d like to 
share them with all of you in celebration of the Feast of the Ullambana (All Souls) Bowl. How about it?” Every one of them folded his hands and paid obeisance to a god 3 times to receive the festival. 
Siddhartha then ordered Ananda to take the flowers and fruits from the treasure bowl, and Kasyapa was asked to distribute them. All were thankful, and they presented poems to express their gratitude. 
The poem of blessing says: 
The star of blessing shines before the most venerable one of the world who enjoys blessing lasting and immense. 
His blessing’s boundless virtue endures as Earth. His blessing’s source is gladly linked to Heaven. 
His blessing’s fields, far planted, prosper each year. His blessing’s sea, huge and deep, is ever strong. 

His blessing fills the world and all will be blessed. May his blessing increase, endless and complete. 

The poem of wealth says: 
His wealth weighs a mountain where the phoenix sings. His wealth trails the seasons to wish him long life. 
He gains wealth in huge sums as his body health. He joys in wealth abundant as the world in peace. 
His wealth’s reach equals Heaven is ever safe. His wealth’s name is sea-like but even more pure. 

His wealth’s grace far-reaching is sought by all. His wealth is boundless, enriching countless lands. 

The poem of long life says: 
The Star of Long Life gives gifts to Siddhartha, from whom light of long life begins now to shine. 
The long life fruits fill the bowls with hues divine. The long life blooms, newly plucked, deck the lotus throne. 
The long life verse, how elegant and finely wrought. The long life poems are scored by gifted minds. 
The long life’s length matches the sun and moon’s. Long life’s twice as long like the sea and mountain! 
After the Nuns had presented their poems, they invited Siddhartha to disclose the origin and elucidate the source. Siddhartha gently opened his benevolent mouth to expound the great religion and to 
proclaim the truth. He lectured on the wondrous doctrines of the three vehicles, the form, reception (i.¢., sensation and feeling), thought (i.e., discernment), action, and cognition, and the Sdrangama 
Thread. As he did so, celestial dragons were seen circling above and flowers descended like rain in abundance. It was truly thus: The Chan mind shines bright like a thousand rivers’ moon; true nature’s 
pure and great as an unclouded sky. When Siddhartha had finished his lecture, he said to the congregation, “I've watched the Four Great Continents and the morality of their inhabitants varies from 
place to place. Those living on the East East-Videha revere Heaven and Earth and they are straightforward and peaceful. Those on the North Kuru though they love to destroy life, do so out of the 
necessity of making a livelihood. Moreover, they are rather dull of mind and lethargic in spirit, and they are not likely to do much harm. Those of our West Aparagodaniya are neither covetous nor prone 
to kill; they control their humour and temper their spirit. There is, to be sure, no illuminate of the first order but everyone is certain to attain longevity. Those who reside in the South Jambidvipa however, 
are prone to practice lechery and delight in evildoing, indulging in much slaughter and strife. Indeed, they are all caught in the treacherous field of tongue and mouth, in the wicked sea of slander and 
malice. However, I’ve three baskets of true scriptures that can persuade man to do good.” 
Upon hearing these words, the various Nuns folded their hands and saluted down. “What are the three baskets of authentic scriptures,” they asked, “that Siddhartha possesses?” 
Siddhartha said, “I've one collection of Vinaya that speaks of Heaven; one collection of treatises that tells of the Earth; and one collection of Threads that redeems the damned. Altogether the three 
collections of scriptures contain thirty-five divisions written in fifteen thousand one hundred forty-four scrolls. They are the scriptures for the cultivation of mortality; they are the gate to ultimate virtue. | 
myself would like to send these to the Land of the East; but the creatures in that region are so stupid and so scornful of the truth that they ignore the weighty elements of our Law and mock the true 
sect of Yoga. Somehow we need a person with power to go to the Land of the East and find a virtuous believer. He will be asked to experience the bitter travail of passing through a thousand mountains 
and ten thousand waters to come here in quest of the authentic scriptures, so that they may be forever implanted in the east to enlighten the people. This will provide a source of blessings great as a 
mountain and deep as the sea. Which one of you is willing to make such a trip?” 
At that moment, the Nun Guanyin came near the lotus platform and paid obeisance three times to a god, saying, “Though your disciple is untalented, she is willing to go to the Land of the East to find 
a scripture pilgrim.” Lifting their heads to look, the various Gods saw that the Nun had a mind perfected in the four virtues, 22a golden body filled with wisdom, Fringes of dangling pearls and jade, 
scented bracelets set with lustrous treasures, dark hair piled smartly in a coiled-dragon bun, and brocade sashes fluttering as phoenix quills. Her green jade buttons and white silk robe bathed in holy 
light; her velvet skirt and golden cords wrapped by hallowed air. With brows of new moon shape and eyes like two bright stars, her jade-like face beams natural joy, and her ruddy lips seem a flash of 
red. Her immaculate vase overflows with nectar from year to year, holding sprigs of weeping willow green from age to age. She disperses the eight woes; she redeems the multitude; she has great 
compassion; thus she rules the Tai Mountain and lives at the South Sea. She saves the poor, searching for their voices, ever heedful and solicitous, ever wise and efficacious. Her orchid heart delights 
in green bamboos; her chaste nature loves the wisteria. She is the merciful lord of the Potalaka Mountain, the Living Guanyin from the Cave of Tidal Sound. When Siddhartha saw her, he was most 
delighted and said to her, “No other person is qualified to make this journey. It must be the Honourable Guanyin of mighty magic powers — she’s the one to do it!” 
“As your disciple departs for the east,” said the Nun, “do you've any instructions?” 
“As you travel,” said Siddhartha, “you’re to examine the way carefully. Do not journey high in the air but remain at an altitude halfway between mist and cloud so that you can see the mountains and 
waters and remember the exact distance. You'll then be able to instruct closely the scripture pilgrim. Since he may still find the journey difficult, I'll also give you five talismans.” Ordering Ananda and 
Kasyapa to bring out an embroidered cassock and a nine-ring priestly staff, he said to the Nun, “You may give this cassock and this staff to the scripture pilgrim. If he is firm in his intention to come 
here, he may put on the cassock and it will protect him from falling back into the wheel of transmigration. When he holds the staff, it will keep him from meeting poison or harm.” The Nun saluted low to 
receive the gifts. Siddhartha then took out also three fillets and handed them to the Nun, saying, “These treasures are called the tightening fillets, and though they are all alike, their uses are not the 
same. I've a separate spell for each of them: the Golden, the Constrictive, and the Prohibitive Spell. If you encounter on the way any monster who possesses great magic powers, you must persuade 
him to learn to be good and to follow the scripture pilgrim as his disciple. If he is disobedient, this fillet may be put on his head, and it will strike root the moment it comes into contact with the flesh. 
Recite the particular spell which belongs to the fillet and it will cause the head to swell and ache so painfully that he will think his brains are bursting. That will persuade him to come within our fold.” 
After the Nun had saluted to a god and taken her leave, she called Disciple Hui’an to follow her. This Hui’an carried a huge iron rod that weighed a thousand pounds. He followed the Nun closely and 
served her as a powerful bodyguard. The Nun made the embroidered cassock into a bundle and placed it on his back; she hid the golden fillets, took up the priestly staff, and went down the Spirit 
Mountain. Lo, this one journey will result in a god son returning to keep his primal vow. The Gold Cicada Elder will clasp the Chandan (a kind of southern Indian sandalwood). The Nun went to the 
bottom of the hill where she was received at the door of the Jade Perfection Daoist Abbey by the Great Mortal of Golden Head. The Nun was presented with tea but she did not dare linger long, saying, 
“I've received the religion-decree of Siddhartha to look for a scripture pilgrim in the Land of the East.” 
The Great Mortal said, “When do you expect the scripture pilgrim to arrive?” 
“lm unsure,” said the Nun. “Perhaps in two or three years’ time he'll be able to get here.” So she took leave of the Great Mortal and travelled at an altitude halfway between cloud and mist in order that 
she might remember the way and the distance. A testimonial poem for her says: 
A search through 10000 miles - no need to say! To state who'll be found is no easy thing. 
Has not seeking someone been just like this? What's been my whole life, was that a mere chance? 
We preach the Dao, our method turns foolish when saying meets no belief; we preach in vain. 
To find some percipient I'd yield liver and gall. There’s affinity, | think, lying straight ahead. 

As the mentor and her disciple journeyed, they suddenly came upon a large body of Weak Walter, for this was the region of the Flowing Sand River.” “My disciple,” said the Nun, “this place’s difficult to 
cross. The scripture pilgrim will be of temporal bones and mortal stock. How’'ll he be able to get across?” 
“Teacher,” said Hui’'an, “how wide do you suppose this river's?” 
The Nun stopped her cloud to take a look and she saw that in the east it touches the sandy coast; in the west it joins the barbaric states; in the south it reaches even Wuyishanli, or Arachosia; in the 
north it comes near the Tartars. Its width is 800 miles and its length must measure many thousand more. The water flows as if Earth is heaving its frame. The current rises like a mountain rearing its 
back. Outspread and immense; vast and interminable. The sound of its towering billows reaches distant ears. The raft of a god cannot come here, nor can a leaf of the lotus stay afloat. Lifeless grass 
in the twilight drifts along the crooked banks. Yellow clouds conceal the sun to darken the long dikes. Where can one find the traffic of merchants? Has there been ever a shelter for anglers? On the 
flat sand no wild geese descend; from distant shores comes the crying of apes. Only the red smartweed flowers know this scene, basking in the white duckweed’s fragile scent. The Nun was looking 
over the river when suddenly a loud splash was heard, and from the midst of the waves leaped an ugly and ferocious monster. He appeared to have a green though not too green, and black though 
not too black, face of gloomy complexion; a long, though not too long, and short though not too short, sinewy body with naked feet. His gleaming eyes shone like 2 lights beneath the stove. His mouth 
forked at the corners, was like a butcher's bloody bowl. With teeth protruding like swords, knives, and red hair all dishevelled, he bellowed once and it sounded like thunder while his legs sprinted like 
whirling wind. Holding in his hands a priestly staff, that fiendish creature ran up the bank and tried to seize the Nun. He was opposed however, by Hui’an who wielded his iron rod, crying, “Stop!” 
But the fiendish creature raised his staff to meet him. So the two of them engaged in a fierce battle beside the Flowing Sand River that was truly terrifying. The iron rod of Liberation displays its power 
to defend the Law; the monster-taming staff of the creature labours to show its heroic might. Two silver pythons exercise along the river's bank. A pair of godlike monks charge each other on the shore. 
This one plies his talents as the forceful lord of Flowing Sand. That one, to attain great merit, protects Guanyin by strength. This one churns up foam and stirs up waves. That one belches fog and spits 
out wind. The stirred-up foams and waves darken Heaven and Earth. The spat-out fog and wind make dim both sun and moon. The monster-taming staff of this one is like a white tiger emerging from 
the mountain; the iron rod of that one is like a yellow dragon lying on the way. When used by one, this weapon spreads open the grass and finds the snake. When let loose by the other that weapon 
knocks down the kite and splits the pine. They fight until the darkness thickens save for the glittering stars, and the fog looms up to obscure both sky and land. This one, long a dweller in the Weak 
Water, is uniquely fierce. That one, newly leaving the Spirit Mountain, seeks his first win. Back and forth along the river the two of them fought for twenty or thirty rounds without either prevailing, when 
the fiendish creature stilled the other's iron rod and asked, “What region do you come from that you dare oppose me, monk?” 
“Im the second son of the Pagoda Bearer Deity-King,” said Liberation, “Liberation, Disciple Hui’an. I’m serving as the guardian of my mentor who is looking for a scripture pilgrim in the Land of the East. 
What kind of monster are you that you dare block our way?” 
“| remember,” said the monster, suddenly recognising his opponent, “that you used to follow the Guanyin of the South Sea and practice austerities there in the bamboo grove. How did you get to this 
place?” 
“Don’t you realise,” said Liberation, “that she is my mentor — the one over there on the shore?” 
When the monster heard these words, he apologised repeatedly. Putting away his staff, he allowed Liberation to grasp him by the collar and lead him away. He lowered his head and saluted low to 
Guanyin, saying, “Nun, please forgive me and let me submit my explanation. I’m no monster; rather, I’m the Curtain-Raising General who waits upon the phoenix chariot of the Jade Emperor at the 
Divine Mists Hall. Because | carelessly broke a crystal cup at one of the Festivals of Mortal Peaches, the Jade Emperor gave me eight hundred lashes, banished me to the Region Below, and changed 
me into my present shape. Every seventh day he sends a flying sword to stab my breast and side more than a hundred times before it leaves me. Hence my present wretchedness! Moreover, the 
hunger and cold are unbearable, and I’m driven every few days to come out of the waves and find a traveller for food. | certainly did not expect that my ignorance would today lead me to offend the 
great, merciful Nun.” 


“Because of your sin in Heaven,” said the Nun, “you're banished. Yet the taking of life in your present manner surely is adding sin to sin. By the decree of God, I’m on my way to the Land of the East to 
find a scripture pilgrim. Why don’t you come into my fold, take refuge in good works, and follow the scripture pilgrim as his disciple when he goes to the Western Heaven to ask God for the scriptures? 
I'll order the flying sword to stop piercing you. At the time when you achieve merit, your sin will be expiated and you'll be restored to your former position. How do you feel about that?” 
“Im willing,” said the monster, “to seek refuge in right action.” He said also, “Nun, I’ve devoured countless human beings at this place. There’ve even been a number of scripture pilgrims here and | ate 
all of them. The heads of those | devoured | threw into the Flowing Sand, and they sank to the bottom, for such is the nature of this water that not even goose down can float on it. But the skulls of the 
nine pilgrims floated on the water and would not sink. Regarding them as something unusual, | chained them together with a rope and played with them at my leisure. If this becomes known, | fear that 
no other scripture pilgrim will want to come this way. Won't it jeopardize my future?” 
“Not come this way? How absurd!” said the Nun. “You may take the skulls and hang them round your neck. When the scripture pilgrim arrives, there will be a use for them.” 
“If that’s the case,” said the monster, “I’m now willing to receive your instructions.” The Nun then touched the top of his head and gave him the commandments. The sand was taken to be a sign, and 
he was given the surname Sand and the religious name Awakened to Purity, 2’and that was how he entered the Gate of Sand.28 After he had seen the Nun on her way, he washed his heart and purified 
himself; he never took life again but waited attentively for the arrival of the scripture pilgrim. 
So the Nun parted with him and went with Liberation toward the Land of the East. They travelled for a long time and came upon a high mountain that was covered by miasma so foul that they could not 
ascend it on foot. They were just about to mount the clouds and pass over it when a sudden blast of violent wind brought into view another monster of most ferocious appearance. Look at his lips curled 
and twisted like dried lotus leaves; ears like rush-leaf fans and hard, gleaming eyes; gaping teeth as sharp as a fine steel file’s; a long mouth wide open like a fire pot. A gold cap is fastened with bands 
by the cheek. Straps on his armour seem like scale-less snakes. He holds a rake - a dragon’s outstretched claws; from his waist hangs a bow of half-moon shape. His awesome presence and his 
prideful mien defy the deities and daunt the gods. He rushed up toward the two travellers and without regard for good or ill, lifted the rake and brought it down hard on the Nun. But he was met by 
Disciple Hui’an who cried with a loud voice, “Reckless monster! Desist from this insolence! Look out for my rod!” 
“This monk,” said the monster, “doesn’t know any better! Look out for my rake!” The 2 of them clashed together at the foot of the mountain to discover who was to be the victor. It was a magnificent 
battle! The monster's fierce. Hui’an’s powerful. The iron rod jabs at the heart; the muckrake swipes at the face. Spraying mud and splattering dust darken Heaven and Earth; flying sand and hurling 
rocks scare demons and gods. The 9-teeth rake, all burnished, loudly jingles with double rings; the single rod, black throughout, leaps and flies in both hands. This one is the prince of a Deity-King; that 
one is the spirit of a grand marshal. This one defends the faith at Potalaka; that one lives in a cave as a monster. Meeting this time they rush to fight, not knowing who shall lose and who shall win. At 
the very height of their battle, Guanyin threw down some lotus flowers from mid-air, separating the rod from the rake. Alarmed by what he saw, the fiendish creature asked, “What region are you from, 
monk that you dare to play this flower-in-the-eye trick on me?” 
“Cursed beast of fleshly eyes and mortal stock!” said Liberation. “I’m the disciple of the Nun from South Sea, and these are lotus flowers thrown down by my mentor. Don’t you recognise them?” 
“The Nun from South Sea?” asked the fiend. “Is she Guanyin who sweeps away the three calamities and rescues us from the eight disasters?” 
“Who else,” said Liberation, “if not she?” 
The fiend threw away his muckrake, lowered his head, and saluted saying, “Venerable brother! Where’s the Nun? Please be as good as to introduce me to her.” 
Liberation raised his head and pointed upward, saying, “Isn’t she up there?” 
“Nun!” the fiend respected toward her and cried with a loud voice, “Pardon my sin! Pardon my sin!” 
Guanyin lowered the direction of her cloud and came to ask him, “What region are you from, wild bull who has become a spirit or old sow who has become a fiend, that you dare bar my way?” 
“Im neither a wild bull,” said the fiend, “nor am | an old sow! | was originally the Marshal of the Heavenly Reeds in the Heavenly River.2° Because | got drunk and dallied with a goddess of the Moon,°° 
the Jade Emperor had me beaten with a mallet two thousand times and banished me to the world of dust. My true spirit was seeking the proper home for my next disciple when | lost my way, passed 
through the womb of an old sow, and ended up with a shape like this! Having bitten the sow to death and killed the rest of the litter, | took over this mountain ranch and passed my days eating people. 
Little did | expect to run into the Nun. Save me, | implore you! Save me!” 
“What is the name of this mountain?” asked the Nun. 
“It's called the Mountain of the Blessed Mound,” said the fiendish creature, “and there is a cave in it by the name of Cloudy Paths. There was a Second Elder Sister Egg originally in the cave. She saw 
that | knew something of the martial art and therefore asked me to be the head of the family, following the so-called practice of ‘standing backward in the door.’s! After less than a year, she died, leaving 
me to enjoy the possession of her entire cave. I’ve spent many days and years at this place but | know no means of supporting myself and | pass the time eating people. | implore the Nun to pardon 
my sin.” 
The Nun said, “There’s an old saying: /f you want to have a future, don’t act heedless of the future. You've already transgressed in the Region Above, and yet you've not changed your violent ways but 
indulge in the taking of life. Don’t you know that both crimes will be punished?” 
“The future! The future!” said the fiend. “If | listen to you, | might as well feed on the wind! The proverb says: if you follow the law of the court, you'll be beaten to death; if you follow the law of God, you'll 
be starved to death! 
Let me go! Let me go! I'd much prefer catching a few travellers and munching on the plump and juicy lady of the family. Why should | care about two crimes, three crimes, a thousand crimes, or ten 
thousand crimes?” 
“There is a saying,” said the Nun, “A man with good intent will win Heaven’s assent. 
If you're willing to return to the fruits of truth, there will be means to sustain your body. There are five kinds of grain in this world and they all can relieve hunger. Why do you need to pass the time by 
devouring humans?” 
When the fiend heard these words, he was like one who woke from a dream, and he said to the Nun, “I’d very much like to follow the truth. But ‘since I’ve offended Heaven, even my prayers are of little 
avail.’”52 “I've received the decree from God to go to the Land of the East to find a scripture pilgrim,” said the Nun. “You can follow him as his disciple and make a trip to the Western Heaven; your merit 
will cancel out your sins, and you'll surely be delivered from your calamities.” 
“Im willing. I’m willing,” promised the fiend with enthusiasm. The Nun then touched his head and gave him the instructions. Pointing to his body as a sign, she gave him the surname Bullseye and the 
religious name Aware of Ability. From that moment on, he accepted the commandment to return to the real. He fasted and ate only a vegetable diet, abstaining from the five forbidden viands and the 
three undesirable foods*4 so as to wait single-mindedly for the scripture pilgrim. The Nun and Liberation took leave of Aware of Ability and proceeded again halfway between cloud and mist. As they 
were journeying, they saw in mid-air a young dragon calling for help. The Nun drew near and asked, “What dragon are you, and why are you suffering here?” The dragon said, “I’m the son of Aorun, 
Dragon King of the Western Ocean. Because | inadvertently set fire to the palace and burned some of the pearls therein, my dad the king memorialised to the Court of Heaven and charged me with 
grave disobedience. The Jade Emperor hung me in the sky and gave me three hundred lashes, and I'll be executed in a few days. | beg the Nun to save me.” 
When Guanyin heard these words, she rushed with Liberation up to the South Heaven Gate. She was received by Qiu and Zhang, the two Celestial Masters who asked her, “Where are you going?” 
“This humble cleric needs to have an audience with the Jade Emperor,” said the Nun. 
The 2 Celestial Masters promptly made the report, and the Jade Emperor left the hall to receive her. After presenting her greetings, the Nun said, “By the decree of God, this humble cleric is journeying 
to the Land of the East to find a scripture pilgrim. On the way | met a mischievous dragon hanging in the sky. I’ve come specially to beg you to spare his life and grant him to me. He can be a good 
means of transportation for the scripture pilgrim.” When the Jade Emperor heard these words, he at once gave the decree of pardon, ordering the Heavenly sentinels to release the dragon to the Nun. 
The Nun thanked the Emperor while the young dragon also respected to the Nun to thank her for saving his life and pledged obedience to her command. The Nun then sent him to live in a deep 
mountain stream with the instruction that when the scripture pilgrim should arrive, he was to change into a white horse and go to the Western Heaven. The young dragon obeyed the order and hid 
himself. The Nun then led Liberation past the mountain, and they headed again toward the Land of the East. They had not travelled long before they suddenly came upon ten thousand shafts of golden 
light and 1000 layers of radiant vapour. “Teacher,” said Liberation, “that luminous place must be the Mountain of Five Phases. | can see the tag of Siddhartha imprinted on it.” 
“So, beneath this place’s,” said the Nun, “where the Great Sage Equal to Heaven who disturbed Heaven and the Festival of Mortal Peaches is being imprisoned.” 
“Yes indeed,” said Liberation. The mentor and her disciple ascended the mountain and looked at the tag on which was inscribed the divine words: 
Praise to the Jewel in the Lotus 
When the Nun saw this, she could not help sighing and composed the following poem: 
| rue the impish ape not heeding the Law who let loose wild heroics in bygone years. 
His mind puffed up, he wrecked the Peach Banquet and boldly stole in Tushita Palace. 
He found no worthy match in 10000 troops; through 9-fold Heaven he displayed his power. 
Imprisoned now by the sovereign who’s thus come and gone, when'll he be free to show once more his might? 
As mentor and disciple were speaking, they disturbed the Great Sage who shouted from the base of the mountain, “Who is up there on the mountain composing verses to expose my faults?” When the 
Nun heard those words, she came down the mountain to take a look. There beneath the rocky ledges were the local spirit, the mountain god, and the Heavenly sentinels guarding the Great Sage. They 
all came and saluted to receive the Nun, leading her before the Great Sage. She looked and saw that he was pinned down in a kind of stone box: though he could speak, he could not move his body. 
“You whose name is Sun,” said the Nun, “do you recognise me?” 
The Great Sage opened wide his fiery eyes and diamond pupils and nodded. “How could | not recognise you?” he cried. “You're the Mighty Deliverer, the Great Compassionate Nun Guanyin from the 
Potalaka Mountain of the South Sea. Thank you, thank you for coming to see me! At this place every day is like a year, for not a single acquaintance has ever come to visit me. Where did you come 
from?” 
“I've received the decree from God,” said the Nun, “to go to the Land of the East to find a scripture pilgrim. Since | was passing through here, | rested my steps briefly to see you.” 
“Siddhartha deceived me,” said the Great Sage, “and imprisoned me beneath this mountain. For over five centuries already I’ve not been able to move. | implore the Nun to show a little mercy and 
rescue old monkey!” 
“Your sinful karma is very deep,” said the Nun. “If | rescue you, | fear that you'll again perpetrate violence, and that will be bad indeed.” 
“Now | know the meaning of penitence,” said the Great Sage. “So | entreat the Great Compassion to show me the proper path, for I’m willing to practice cultivation.” 
Truly it is that 1 wish born in the heart of man is known throughout Heaven and Earth. If vice or virtue lacks reward, unjust must be the universe. When the Nun heard those words from the prisoner, 
she was filled with pleasure and said to the Great Sage, “The scripture says, when a good word is spoken, an answer will come from beyond a thousand miles; when an evil word is spoken, and 
opposition will hail from beyond a thousand miles. If you've such a purpose, wait until | reach the Great Tang Nation in the Land of the East and find the scripture pilgrim. He will be told to come and 
rescue you, and you can follow him as a disciple. You'll keep the teachings and hold the rosary to enter our gate of God, so that you may again cultivate the fruits of righteousness. Will you do that?” 
“I'm willing, I’m willing,” said the Great Sage repeatedly. 
“If you’re indeed seeking the fruits of virtue,” said the Nun, “let me give you a religious name.” 
“I've one already,” said the Great Sage, “and I’m called Sun Wukong.” 
“There’re two persons before you who came into our faith,” said the delighted Nun, “and their names, too, are built on the word Wu. Your name will agree with theirs perfectly, and that is splendid 
indeed. | need not give you any more instruction, for | must be going.” 
So Great Sage with manifest nature and enlightened mind, returned to the Religious faith while the nun with attention and diligence, sought the divine monk. She left the place with Liberation and 
proceeded straight to the east; in a few days they reached Chang’an of the Great Tang Nation. Forsaking the mist and abandoning the cloud, mentor and disciple changed themselves into two wandering 
monks covered with scabby sores* and went into the city. It was already dusk. As they walked through one of the main streets, they saw a temple of the local spirit. They both went straight in, alarming 
the spirit and the demon guards who recognised the Nun. They respected to receive her, and the local spirit then ran quickly to report to the city’s guardian deity, a god of the soil, and the spirits of 
various temples of Chang’an. When they leamed that it was the Nun, they all came to pay homage, saying, “Nun, please pardon us for being tardy in our reception.” 
“None of you'd,” said the Nun, “let a word of this leak out! | came here by the special decree of God to look for a scripture pilgrim. I'd like to stay just for a few days in one of your temples and I'll depart 
when the true monk’s found.” The various deities went back to their own places but they sent the local spirit off to the residence of the city’s guardian deity so that the teacher and the disciple could 
remain incognito in the spirit’s temple. 
PART Ill 


TANG SANZANG 
009 
Chen Guangrui meets disaster, going to his post; Monk River Float repays his roots, avenging his parents 
The city of Chang’an in the great nation’s Shaanxi Province that was the place that kings and emperors from generation to generation had made their capital. Since the periods of Zhou, Qin, and Han, 
3 counties of flowers bloomed like brocade and 8 rivers' flowed encircling the city. It was truly a land of great scenic beauty. At this time the emperor Taizong? of the Great Tang dynasty was on the 
throne, and the name of his reign was Zhenguan. He had been ruling now for thirteen years, and the cyclical name of the year was Jisi.? The whole land was at peace: people came bearing tributes 
from eight directions, and the inhabitants of the whole world called themselves his subjects. 
One day Taizong ascended his throne and assembled his civil and military officials. After they had paid him homage, the prime minister Wei Zheng‘ left the ranks and came forward to memorialise to 
the Throne, saying, “Since the world now is at peace and tranquillity reigns everywhere, we’d follow the ancient custom and establish sites for civil examinations, so that we may invite worthy scholars 
to come here and select those talents who will best serve the work of administration and government.” 
“Our worthy subject has voiced a sound principle in his memorial,” said Taizong. He therefore issued a summons to be proclaimed throughout the empire: in every prefecture, county, and town, those 
who were learned in the Confucian classics who could write with ease and lucidity, and who had passed the three sessions of examination,’ regardless of whether they were soldiers or peasants, would 
be invited to go to Chang’an to take the imperial examination. 
This summons reached the place Haizhou where it was seen by a certain man named Chen E (with the courtesy name of Guangrui) who then went straight home to talk to his mum whose maiden 
name was Zhang. “The court,” he said, “has sent a yellow summons, declaring in these southem provinces that there will be examinations for the selection of the worthy and the talented. Your child 
wishes to try out at such an examination, for if | manage to acquire an appointment, or even half a post, I’d become more of a credit to my parents, magnify our name, give my wife a title, benefit my 
son, and bring glory to this house of ours. Such is the aspiration of your son: | wish to tell my mum plainly before | leave.” 
“My son,” said she of the Zhang family, “an educated person ‘learns when he is young but leaves when he is grown.’ You'd indeed follow this maxim. But as you go to the examination, you must be 
careful on the way, and, when you've secured a post, come home quickly.” So Guangrui gave instructions for his family page to pack his bags, took leave of his mum, and began his journey. When he 
reached Chang'an, the examination site had just been opened, and he went straight in. He took the preliminary tests, passed them, and went to the court examination where in three sessions on 
administrative policy he took first place, receiving the title “Zhuangyuan,” the certificate of which was signed by the Tang emperor's own hand. As was the custom, he was led through the streets on 
horseback for three days. 
The procession at one point passed by the house of the chief minister, Yin Kaishan who had a daughter named Wenjiao, nicknamed Mantangjiao (A Hall of Loveliness). She was not yet married, and 
at this time she was just about to throw down an embroidered ball from high up on a festooned tower in order to select her spouse. It happened that Chen Guangrui was passing below the tower. When 
the young maiden saw Guangrui’s outstanding appearance and knew that he was the recent Zhuangyuan of the examinations, she was very pleased. She threw down the embroidered ball that just 
happened to hit the black gauze hat of Guangrui. Immediately, lively poems of pipes and flutes could be heard throughout the area as scores of maids and serving-girls ran down from the tower, took 
hold of the bridle of Guangrui’s horse, and led him into the residence of the chief minister for the wedding. The chief minister and his wife at once came out of their chambers, called together the guests 
and the master of ceremonies, and gave the girl to Guangrui as his bride. Together, they saluted to Heaven and Earth; then husband and wife saluted to each other before saluting the parents-in-law. 
The chief minister then gave a big banquet and everyone feasted merrily for a whole evening, after which the two of them walked hand in hand into the bridal chamber. 
At the fifth watch early next morning, Taizong took his seat in the Treasure Hall of Golden Chimes as civil and military officials attended the court. Taizong asked, “What appointment should the new 
Zhuangyuan receive?” 
The Prime Minister Wei Zheng said, “Your subject has discovered that within our territory there is a vacancy at Jiangzhou. | beg my Lord to grant him this post.” 
Taizong at once made him governor of Jiangzhou and ordered him to leave without delay. After thanking the emperor and leaving the court, Guangrui went back to the house of the chief minister to 
inform his wife. He took leave of his dad- and mum-in-law and proceeded with his wife to the new post at Jiangzhou. As they left Chang’an and went on their journey, the season was late spring: a soft 
wind blew to green the willows; a fine rain spotted to redden the flowers. 
As his home was on the way, Guangrui returned to his house where husband and wife saluted together to his mum, Lady Zhang. “Congratulations, my son,” said she of the Zhang family, “you even 
came back with a wife!” 
“Your child,” said Guangrui, “relied on the power of your blessing and was able to attain the undeserved honour of Zhuangyuan. By imperial command | was making a tour of the streets when, as | 
passed by the mansion of Chief Minister Yin, | was hit by an embroidered ball. The chief minister kindly gave his daughter to your child to be his wife and His Majesty appointed him governor of 
Jiangzhou. I’ve returned to take you with me to the post.” 
She of the Zhang family was delighted and packed at once for the journey. They had been on the road for a few days when they came to stay at the Inn of 10000 Flowers kept by a certain Liu Xiaoer. 
She of the Zhang family suddenly became ill and said to Guangrui, “I don’t feel well at all. Let's rest here for a day or two before we journey again.” Guangrui obeyed. Next morning there was a man 
outside the inn holding a golden carp for sale that Guangrui bought for a string of coins. He was about to have it cooked for his mum when he saw that the carp was blinking its eyes vigorously. In 
astonishment, Guangrui said, “I've heard that when a fish or a snake blinks its eyes in this manner, that’s the sure sign that it's not an ordinary creature!” He therefore asked the angler, “Where did you 
catch this fish?” 
“| caught it,” said the angler, “from the river Hong some fifteen miles from this district.” 
Accordingly Guangrui sent the live fish back to the river and retumed to the inn to tell his mum about it. “It’s a good deed to release living creatures from captivity,” said she of the Zhang family. “I’m 
very pleased.” 
“We've stayed in this inn now for three days,” said Guangrui. “The imperial command is an urgent one. Your child intends to leave tomorrow but he would like to know whether mum has fully recovered.” 
She of the Zhang family said, “I’m still not well, and the heat on the journey at this time of year, | fear, will only add to my illness. Why don’t you rent a house for me to stay here temporarily and leave 
me an allowance? The two of you can proceed to your new post. By autumn, when it’s cool, you can come fetch me.” Guangrui discussed the matter with his wife; they duly rented a house for her and 
left some cash with her, after which they took leave and left. 
They felt the fatigue of travelling, journeying by day and resting by night, and they soon came to the crossing of the Hong River where two boatmen, Liu Hong and Li Biao, took them into their boat. It 
happened that Guangrui was destined in his previous disciple to meet this calamity, and so he had to come upon these fated enemies of his. After ordering the houseboy to put the luggage on the boat, 
Guangrui and his wife were just about to embark when Liu Hong noticed the beauty of Lady Yin who had a face like a full moon, eyes like autumnal water, a small, cherry-like mouth, and a tiny, willow- 
like waist. Her features were striking enough to sink fishes and drop wild geese, and her complexion would cause the moon to hide and put the flowers to shame. Stirred at once to cruelty, he plotted 
with Li Biao; together they punted the boat to an isolated area and waited until the middle of the night. They killed the houseboy first, and then they beat Guangrui to death, pushing both bodies into the 
water. When the lady saw that they had killed her husband, she made a dive for the water but Liu Hong threw his arms around her and caught her. “If you consent to my demand,” he said, “everything 
will be all right. If you don’t, this knife will cut you in two!” 
Unable to think of any better plan, the lady had to give her consent for the time being and yielded herself to Liu Hong. The thief took the boat to the south bank where he turned the boat over to the 
care of Li Biao. He himself put on Guangrui’s cap and robe, took his credentials, and proceeded with the lady to the post at Jiangzhou. Now the body of the houseboy killed by Liu Hong drifted away 
with the current. The body of Chen Guangrui however, sank to the bottom of the water and stayed there. A Nature spirit on patrol at the mouth of the Hong River saw it and rushed into the Dragon 
Palace. The Dragon King was just holding court when the Nature spirit entered to report, saying, “A scholar has been beaten to death at the mouth of the Hong River by some unknown person, and his 
body is now lying at the bottom of the water.” The Dragon King had the corpse brought in and laid before him. He took a careful look at it and said, “But this man was my benefactor! How could he have 
been murdered? As the common saying goes, ‘Kindness should be paid by kindness.’ | must save his life today so that | may repay the kindness of yesterday.” He at once issued an official dispatch, 
sending a Nature spirit to deliver it to the municipal deity and local spirit of Hongzhou, and asked for the soul of the scholar so that his life might be saved. The municipal deity and the local spirit in tum 
ordered the little demons to hand over the soul of Chen Guangrui to the Nature spirit who led the soul back to the Water Crystal Palace for an audience with the Dragon King. 
“Scholar,” asked the Dragon King, “what is your name? Where did you come from? Why did you come here, and for what reason were you beaten to death?” Guangrui saluted him and said, “This lowly 
student is named Chen E, and my courtesy name is Guangrui. I’m from the Hongnong district of Haizhou. As the unworthy Zhuangyuan of the recent session of examination, | was appointed by the 
court to be governor of Jiangzhou, and | was going to my post with my wife. When | took a boat at the river, | didn’t expect the boatman, Liu Hong, to covet my wife and plot against me. He beat me to 
death and tossed out my body. | beg the Great King to save me.” Hearing these words, the Dragon King said, “So, that’s it! Good sir, the golden carp that you released earlier was myself. You’re my 
benefactor. You may be in dire difficulty at the moment but is there any reason why I'd not come to your assistance?” He therefore laid the body of Guangrui to one side, and put a preservative pearl in 
his mouth so that his body would not deteriorate but be reunited with his soul to avenge himself in the future. He also said, “Your true soul may remain temporarily in my Water Bureau as an officer.” 
Guangrui respected to thank him and the Dragon King prepared a banquet to entertain him. Lady Yin hated the bandit Liu so bitterly that she wished she could devour his flesh and sleep on his skin! 
But because she was with child and did not know whether it would be a boy or a girl, she had no alternative but to yield reluctantly to her captor. In a little while they arrived at Zhiangzhou; the clerks, 
the lectors all came to meet them, and all the subordinate officials gave a banquet for them at the governor's mansion. Liu Hong said, “Having come here, a student like me is utterly dependent on the 
support and assistance of you gentlemen.” 
“Your Honour,” replied the officials, “is first in the examinations and a major talent. You'll, of course, regard your people as your children; your public declarations will be as simple as your settlement of 
litigation is fair. We subordinates are all dependent on your leadership, so why should you be unduly modest?” When the official banquet ended, the people all left. 
Time passed by swiftly. One day, Liu Hong went far away on official business while Lady Yin at the mansion was thinking of her mum-in-law and her husband and sighing in the garden pavilion. 
Suddenly she was seized by tremendous fatigue and sharp pains in her belly. Falling unconscious to the ground, she gave birth to a son. Presently she heard someone whispering in her ear: 
“Mantangjiao, listen carefully to what I’ve to say. I’m the Star Spirit of South Pole who sends you this son by the express command of the Nun Guanyin. One day his name will be known far and wide, 
for he is not to be compared with an ordinary mortal. But when the bandit Liu returns, he will surely try to harm the child, and you must take care to protect him. Your husband has been rescued by the 
Dragon King; in the future both of you’ll meet again even as son and mum will be reunited. A day will come when wrongs will be redressed and crimes punished. Remember my words! Wake up! Wake 
up!” The voice ceased and departed. The lady woke up and remembered every word; she clasped her son tightly to her but could devise no plan to protect him. Liu Hong then returned and wanted to 
have the child killed by drowning the moment he saw him. The lady said, “Today it’s late already. Allow him to live till tomorrow and then have him thrown into the river.” 
It was fortunate that Liu Hong was called away by urgent business the next morning. The lady thought to herself: “If this child is here when that bandit returns, his life is finished! | might as well abandon 
him now to the river, and let life or death take its own course. Perhaps Heaven, taking pity on him, will send someone to his rescue and to have him cared for. Then we may have a chance to meet 
again.” She was afraid however, that future recognition would be difficult; so she bit her finger and wrote a letter with her blood, stating in detail the names of the parents, the family history, and the 
reason for the child’s abandonment. She also bit off a little toe from the child’s left foot to establish a mark of his identity. Taking one of her own inner garments she wrapped the child and took him out 
of the mansion when no one was watching. Fortunately the mansion was not far from the river. Reaching the bank, the lady burst into tears and wailed long and loud. She was about to toss the child 
into the river when she caught sight of a plank floating by the river bank. At once she prayed to Heaven, after which she placed the child on the plank and tied him securely to it with some rope. She 
fastened the letter written in blood to his chest, pushed the plank out into the water, and let it drift away. With tears in her eyes, the lady went back to the mansion. The boy on the plank floated with the 
current until it came to a standstill just beneath the Temple of Gold Mountain. The abbot of this temple was called Monk Faming. In the cultivation of perfection and comprehension of truth, he had 
attained already the wondrous secret of birth-less-ness. He was sitting in meditation when all at once he heard an infant crying. Moved by this, he went quickly down to the river to have a look, and 
discovered the baby lying there on a plank at the edge of the water. The abbot quickly lifted him out of the water. When he read the letter in blood fastened to his chest, he learned of the child’s origin. 
He then gave him the baby name River Float®and arranged for someone to nurse and care for him while he himself kept the letter written in blood safely hidden. Time passed by like an arrow, and the 
seasons like a weaver’s shuttle; River Float soon reached his eighteenth year. The abbot had his hair shaved and asked him to join in the practice of austerities, giving him the religious name Xuanzang. 
Having had his head touched and having received the commandments, Xuanzang pursued the Way with great determination. 
One day in late spring, the various monks gathered in the shade of pine trees were discussing the canons of Chan and debating the fine points of the mysteries. One feckless monk who happened to 
have been completely outwitted by Xuanzang’s questions, shouted angrily, “You damnable beast! You don’t even know your own name, and you're ignorant of your own parents! Why are you still 
hanging around here playing tricks on people?” When Xuanzang heard such language of rebuke, he went into the temple and knelt before the master, saying with tears flowing from his eyes, “Though 
a human being born into this world receives his natural endowments from the forces of yin and yang and from the Five Phases, he is always nurtured by his parents. How can there be a person in this 
world who has no dad or mum?” Repeatedly and piteously he begged for the names of his parents. The abbot said, “If you truly wish to seek your parents, you may follow me to my cell.” Xuanzang 


duly followed him to his cell where, from the top of a heavy crossbeam, the abbot took down a small box. Opening the box, he took out a letter written in blood and an inner garment and gave them to 
Xuanzang. Only after he had unfolded the letter and read it did Xuanzang learn the names of his parents and understand in detail the wrongs that had been done them. 

When Xuanzang finished reading, he fell weeping to the floor, saying, “How can anyone be worthy to bear the name of man if he cannot avenge the wrongs done to his parents? For eighteen years, 
I've been ignorant of my true parents, and only this day have | learned that I've a mum! And yet, would I’ve even reached this day if my master had not saved me and cared for me? Permit your disciple 
to go seek my mum. Thereafter, I'll rebuild this temple with an incense bowl on my head, and repay the profound kindness of my teacher.” 

“If you desire to seek your mum,” said the master, “you may take this letter in blood and the inner garment with you. Go as a mendicant monk to the private quarters at the governor's mansion of 
Jiangzhou. You'll then be able to meet your mum.” 

Xuanzang followed the words of his master and went to Jiangzhou as a mendicant monk. It happened that Liu Hong was out on business, for Heaven had planned that mum and child should meet. 
Xuanzang went straight to the door of the private quarters of the governor's mansion to beg for alms. Lady Yin had had a dream the night before in which she saw a waning moon become full again. 
She thought to herself, “I've no news from my mum-in-law; my husband was murdered by this bandit; my son was thrown into the river. If by chance someone rescued him and had him cared for, he 
must be eighteen by now. Perhaps Heaven wished us to be reunited today. Who can tell?” 

As she was pondering the matter in her heart, she suddenly heard someone reciting the scriptures outside her residence and crying repeatedly, “Alms! Alms!” At a convenient moment, the lady slipped 
out and asked him, “Where did you come from?” 

“Your poor monk,” said Xuanzang, “is the disciple of Faming, abbot of the Temple of Gold Mountain.” 

“So you're the disciple of the abbot of that temple?” she asked and invited him into the mansion and served him some vegetables and rice. Watching him closely, she noticed that in speech and manner 
he bore a remarkable resemblance to her husband. The lady sent her maid away and then asked, “Young master! Did you leave your family as a child or when you grew up? What are your given name 
and your sumame? Do you've any parents?” 

“| didn’t leave my family when | was young,” replied Xuanzang, “nor did | do so when | grew up. To tell you the truth, I’ve a wrong to avenge great as the sky, an enmity deep as the sea. My dad was a 
murder victim, and my mum was taken by force. My master the abbot Faming told me to seek my mum in the governor's mansion of Jiangzhou.” 

“What is your mum’s surname?” asked the lady. “My mum’s surname is Yin,” said Xuanzang, “and her given name is Wenjiao. My dad’s surname is Chen and his given name is Guangrui. My nickname 
is River Float but my religious name is Xuanzang.” 

“Im Wenjiao,” said the lady, “but what proof have you of your identity?” When Xuanzang heard that she was his mum, he fell to his knees and wept most grievously. “If my own mum doesn’t believe 
me,” he said, “you may see the proof in this letter written in blood and this inner garment.” Wenjiao took them in her hands, and one look told her that they were the real things. Mum and child embraced 
each other and wept. 

Lady Yin then cried, “My son, leave at once!” 

“For eighteen years I've not known my true parents,” said Xuanzang, “and I’ve seen my mum for the first time only this morning. How could your son bear so swift a separation?” 

“My son,” said the lady, “leave at once, as if you're on fire! If that bandit Liu returns, he will surely take your life. I'll pretend to be ill tomorrow and say that | must go to your temple and fulfil a vow | made 
in a previous year to donate a hundred pairs of monk shoes. At that time I'll have more to say to you.” Xuanzang followed her bidding and saluted to take leave of her. 

We're speaking of Lady Yin who, having seen her son, was filled with both anxiety and joy. The next day, under the pretext of being sick, she lay on her bed and would take neither tea nor rice. Liu 
Hong returned to the mansion and questioned her. “When | was young,” said Lady Yin, “I vowed to donate a hundred pairs of monk shoes. Five days ago, | dreamed that a monk demanded those 
shoes of me, holding a knife in his hand. From then on, | didn’t feel well.” 

“Such a small matter!” said Liu Hong. “Why didn’t you tell me earlier?” He at once went up to the governor's hall and gave the order to his stewards Wang and Li that a hundred families of the city were 
each to bring in a pair of monk shoes within five days. The families obeyed and completed their presentations. “Now that we've the shoes,” said Lady Yin to Liu Hong, “what kind of temple do we've 
nearby that | can go to fulfil my vow?” Liu Hong said, “There is a Temple of Gold Mountain here in Jiangzhou as well as a Temple of Burned Mountain. You may go to whichever one you choose.” 
“I've long heard,” said the lady, “that the Temple of Gold Mountain is a very good one. I'll go there.” Liu Hong at once gave the order to his stewards Wang and Li to prepare a boat. Lady Yin took a 
trusted companion with her and boarded the boat. The boatmen poled it away from the shore and headed for the Temple of Gold Mountain. 

We now tell you about Xuanzang who returned to the temple and told the abbot Faming what had happened. The next day, a young housemaid arrived to announce that her mistress was coming to 
the temple to fulfil a vow she had made. All the monks came out of the temple to receive her. The lady went straight inside to worship the Nun and to give a great vegetarian banquet. She ordered the 
housemaid to put the monk shoes and stockings in trays and have them brought into the main ceremonial hall. After the lady had again worshipped with extreme devoutness, she asked the abbot 
Faming to distribute the gifts to the various monks before they dispersed. When Xuanzang saw that all the monks had left and that there was no one else in the hall, he drew near and knelt down. The 
lady asked him to remove his shoes and stockings, and she saw that there was, indeed, a small toe missing from his left foot. Once again, the two of them embraced and wept. They also thanked the 
abbot for his kindness in fostering the youth. 

Faming said, “I fear that the present meeting of mum and child may become known to that wily bandit. You must leave speedily so that you may avoid any harm.” 

“My son,” the lady said, “let me give you an incense ring. Go to Hongzhou, about fifteen hundred miles northwest of here where you'll find the Ten Thousand Flowers Inn. Earlier we left an aged woman 
there whose maiden name is Zhang and who is the true mum of your dad. I’ve also written a letter for you to take to the capital of the Tang emperor. To the left of the Golden Palace is the house of 
Chief Minister Yin who is the true dad of your mum. Give my letter to your maternal grandpa, and ask him to request the Tang emperor to dispatch men and horses to have this bandit arrested and 
executed, so that your dad may be avenged. Only then will you be able to rescue your old mum. | daren’t linger now, for | fear that knave may be offended by my retuming late.” 

She went out of the temple, boarded the boat, and left. Xuanzang returned weeping to the temple. He told his master everything and saluted to take leave of him immediately. Going straight to Hongzhou, 
he came to the 10000 Flowers Inn and addressed the innkeeper, Liu Xiaoer saying, “In a previous year there’s an honoured guest here by the name of Chen whose mum remained at your inn. How’s 
she now?” 

“Originally,” said Liu Xiaoer, “she stayed in my inn. Afterwards she went blind and for three or four years paid me no rent. She now lives in a dilapidated potter's kiln near the Southern Gate and every 
day she goes begging on the streets. Once that honoured guest had left, he’s gone for a long time and even now there’s no news of him whatever. | can’t understand it.” 

When Xuanzang heard this, he went at once to the dilapidated potter's kiln at the Southern Gate and found his grandma. The grandma said, “Your voice sounds very much like that of my son Chen 
Guangrui.” 

“Im not Chen Guangrui,” said Xuanzang, “but only his son! Lady Wenjiao’s my mum.” 

“Why didn’t your parents come back?” asked the grandma. “My dad’s beaten to death by bandits,” said Xuanzang, “and one of them forced my mum to be his wife.” 

“How did you know where to find me?” asked the grandma. 

“It was my mum,” answered Xuanzang, “who told me to seek my grandma. There’s a letter from mum here and there’s also an incense ring.” 

The grandma took the letter and the incense ring and wept without restraint. “For merit and reputation,” she said, “my son came to this! | thought that he’d turned his back on righteousness and forgotten 
parental kindness. How’d | know that he’s murdered? Fortunately Heaven remembered me at least in pity and this day a grandson’s come to seek me out.” 

“Grandma,” asked Xuanzang, “how did you go blind?” 

“Because | thought so often about your dad,” said the grandma. “I waited for him daily but he did not return. | wept until | was blind in both eyes.” 

Xuanzang knelt down and prayed to Heaven saying, “Have regard of Xuanzang who, at the age of eighteen, has not yet avenged the wrong done to his parents. By the command of my mum, | came 
this day to find my grandma. If Heaven would take pity on my sincerity, grant that the eyes of my grandma regain their sight.” 

When he finished his petition, he licked the eyes of his grandma with the tip of his tongue. In a moment, both eyes were licked open and they were as of old. When the grandma saw the youthful monk, 
she said, “You're indeed my grandson! Why, you’re just like my son Guangrui!” 

She felt both happy and sad. Xuanzang led his grandma out of the kiln and went back to Liu Xiaoer’s inn where he rented a room for her to stay. He also gave her some money saying, “In a little more 
than a month’s time, I'll be back.” 

Taking leave of his grandma, he went straight to the capital and found his way to the house of the chief minister Yin on the eastern street of the imperial city. He said to the porter, “This little monk’s a 
kinsman who's come to visit the chief minister.” 

The porter made the report to the chief minister who replied, “I’m related to no monk!” 

But his wife said, “I dreamed last night that my daughter Mantangjiao came home. It'd be that our son-in-law’s sent us a letter?” The chief minister therefore had the little monk shown to the living room. 
When he saw the chief minister and his wife, he fell weeping to the floor. Taking a letter from within the folds of his robe, he handed it over to the chief minister. The chief minister opened it, read it from 
beginning to end, and wept without restraint. “Your Excellency, what's the matter?” asked his wife. 

“This monk’s,” said the chief minister, “our grandson. Our son-in-law, Chen Guangrui’s murdered by bandits and Mantangjiao’s made the wife of the murderer by force.” 

When the wife heard this, she too wept inconsolably. “Let our lady restrain her grief,” said the chief minister. “Tomorrow morning I'll present a memorial to our Lord. I'll lead the troops myself to avenge 
our son-in-law.” The next day, the chief minister went into court to present his memorial to the Tang emperor that read: 

The son-in-law of your subject, the Zhuangyuan Chen Guangrui’s proceeding to his post at Jiangzhou with members of his family. He’s beaten to death by the boatman Liu Hong who then took our 
daughter by force to be his wife. He pretended to be the son-in-law of your subject and usurped his post for many years. This is indeed a shocking and tragic incident. | beg Your Majesty to dispatch 
horses and men at once to exterminate the bandits. 

The Tang emperor saw the memorial and became exceedingly angry. He immediately called up sixty thousand imperial soldiers and ordered the chief minister Yin to lead them forth. The chief minister 
took the decree and left the court to make the roll call for the troops at the barracks. They proceeded immediately toward Jiangzhou, journeying by day and resting by night, and they soon reached the 
place. Horses and men pitched camps on the north shore, and that very night, the chief minister summoned with golden tablets’ the Sub-prefect and County Judge of Jiangzhou to his camp. He 
explained to the two of them the reason for the expedition and asked for their military assistance. They then crossed the river and, before the sky was light, had the mansion of Liu Hong completely 
surrounded. Liu Hong was still in his dreams when at the shot of a single cannon and the unison roll of drums, the soldiers broke into the private quarters of the mansion. Liu Hong was seized before 
he could offer any resistance. The chief minister had him and the rest of the prisoners bound and taken to the field of execution while the rest of the soldiers pitched camp outside the city. 

Taking a seat in the great hall of the mansion, the chief minister invited the lady to come out to meet him. She was about to do so but was overcome by shame at seeing her dad again, and wanted to 
hang herself right there. Xuanzang learned of this and rushed inside to save his mum. Falling to his knees, he said to her, “Your son and his grandpa led the troops here to avenge dad. The bandit has 
already been captured. Why does mum want to die now? If mum were dead, how could your son possibly remain alive?” The chief minister also went inside to offer his consolation. “I've heard,” said 
the lady, “that a woman follows her spouse to the grave. My husband was murdered by this bandit, causing me dreadful grief. How could | yield so shamefully to the thief? The child | was carrying - 
that was my sole lease on life that helped me bear my humiliation! Now that my son is grown and my old dad has led troops to avenge our wrong, | who am the daughter have little face left for my 
reunion. | can only die to repay my husband!” 

“My child,” said the chief minister, “you didn’t alter your virtue according to prosperity or adversity. You had no choice! How can this be regarded as shame?” Dad and daughter embraced, weeping; 
Xuanzang also could not contain his emotion. Wiping away his tears, the chief minister said, “The two of you must sorrow no more. I’ve already captured the culprit, and | must now dispose of him.” He 
got up and went to the execution site, and it happened that the Sub-prefect of Jiangzhou had also apprehended the pirate Li Biao who was brought by sentinels to the same place. Highly pleased, the 
chief minister ordered Liu Hong and Li Biao to be flogged a hundred times with large canes. Each signed an affidavit, giving a thorough account of the murder of Chen Guangrui. First Li Biao was nailed 
to a wooden ass, and after it had been pushed to the marketplace, he was cut to pieces and his head exposed on a pole for all to see. Liu Hong was then taken to the crossing at the Hong River, to the 
exact spot where he had beaten Chen Guangrui to death. The chief minister, the lady, and Xuanzang all went to the bank of the river, and as libations they offered the heart and liver of Liu Hong that 
had been gouged out from him live. Finally, an essay eulogizing the deceased was burned. 

Facing the river the three persons wept without restraint, and their sobs were heard down below in the water region. A Nature spirit patrolling the waters brought the essay in its spirit form to the Dragon 
King who read it and at once sent a turtle marshal to fetch Guangrui. “Sir,” said the king, “Congratulations! Congratulations! At this moment, your wife, your son, and your dad-in-law are offering 
sacrifices to you at the bank of the river. I’m now letting your soul go so that you may return to life. We're also presenting you with a pearl of wish fulfilment,’ two rolling-pan pearls,° ten bales of mermaid 
silk, and a jade belt with lustrous pearls. Today you'll enjoy the reunion of husband and wife, mum and son.” 


After Guangrui had given thanks repeatedly, the Dragon King ordered a Nature spirit to escort his body to the mouth of the river and there to return his soul. The Nature spirit followed the order and 
left. Lady Yin having wept for some time for her husband, would have killed herself again by plunging into the water if Xuanzang had not desperately held on to her. They were struggling pitifully when 
they saw a dead body floating toward the river bank. The lady hurriedly went forward to look at it. Recognising it as her husband’s body, she burst into even louder wailing. As the other people gathered 
around to look, they suddenly saw Guangrui unclasping his fists and stretching his legs. The entire body began to stir, and in a moment he clambered up to the bank and sat down, to the infinite 
amazement of everyone. Guangrui opened his eyes and saw Lady Yin, the chief minister Yin, his dad-in-law, and a youthful monk, all weeping around him. “Why’re you all here?” said Guangrui. 

“It all began,” said Lady Yin, “when you're beaten to death by bandits. Afterwards your unworthy wife gave birth to this son who is fortunate enough to have been brought up by the abbot of the Gold 
Mountain Temple. The abbot sent him to meet me, and | told him to go seek his maternal grandpa. When dad heard this, he made it known to the court and led troops here to arrest the bandits. Just 
now we took out the culprit’s liver and heart live to offer to you as libations but I’d like to know how my husband’s soul is able to return to give him life.” Guangrui said, “That's all on account of our buying 
the golden carp, when you and | were staying at the Inn of Ten Thousand Flowers. | released that carp, not knowing that it was none other than the Dragon King of this place. When the bandits pushed 
me into the river afterward, he was the one who came to my rescue. Just now he was also the one who gave me back my soul as well as many precious gifts that I’ve here with me. | never even knew 
that you had given birth to this boy, and I’m grateful that my dad-in-law has avenged me. Indeed, bitterness has passed and sweetness has come! What unsurpassable joy!” 

When the various officials heard about this, they all came to tender their congratulations. The chief minister then ordered a great banquet to thank his subordinates, after which the troops and horses 
on the very same day began their march homeward. When they came to the Inn of Ten Thousand Flowers, the chief minister gave order to pitch camp. Guangrui went with Xuanzang to the Inn of Liu 
to seek the grandma who happened to have dreamed the night before that a withered tree had blossomed. Magpies behind her house were chattering incessantly as well. She thought to herself, “Could 
it be that my grandson is coming?” Before she had finished talking to herself, dad and son arrived together. The youthful monk pointed to her and said, “Isn't this my grandma?” When Guangrui saw 
his aged mum, he saluted in haste; mum and son embraced and wept without restraint for a while. After recounting to each other what had happened, they paid the innkeeper his bill and set out again 
for the capital. When they reached the chief minister's residence, Guangrui, his wife, and his mum all went to greet the chief minister's wife who was overjoyed. She ordered her servants to prepare a 
huge banquet to celebrate the occasion. The chief minister said, “This banquet today may be named the Festival of Reunion, for truly our whole family is rejoicing.” 

Early the next morning, the Tang emperor held court, during which time the chief minister Yin left the ranks to give a careful report on what had taken place. He also recommended that a talent like 
Guangrui’s be used in some important capacity. The Tang emperor approved the memorial, and ordered that Chen E be promoted to Sub-chancellor of the Grand Secretariat so that he could accompany 
the court and carry out its policies. Xuanzang, determined to follow the way of Zen, was sent to practice austerities at the Temple of Infinite Blessing. Sometime after this, Lady Yin calmly committed 
suicide after all, and Xuanzang went back to the Gold Mountain Temple to repay the kindness of abbot Faming. 


010 
The foolish schemes of the old Dragon King transgress Heaven’s decrees; the letter of Prime Minister Wei seeks help from an official of the dead 
Guangrui is serving in his post and Xuanzang practicing austerities 2 worthies who lived on the banks of the river Jing outside the city of Chang’an: an angler by the name of Zhang Shao and a woodman 
by the name of Li Ding.‘ The 2 of them were scholars who had passed no official examination, mountain folks who knew how to read. One day in the city of Chang’an, after they had sold the wood on 
the one’s back and the carp in the other’s basket, they went into a small inn and drank until they were slightly tipsy. Each carrying a bottle, they followed the bank of the Jing River and walked slowly 
back. “Brother Li,” said Zhang Shao, “in my opinion those who strive for fame will lose their lives on account of fame; those who live in quest of fortune will perish because of riches; those who've titles 
sleep embracing a tiger; and those who receive official favours walk with snakes in their sleeves. When you think of it, their lives can’t compare with our carefree existence, close to the Blue Mountains 
and fair waters. We cherish poverty and pass our days without having to quarrel with fate.” 
“Brother Zhang,” said Li Ding, “there’s a great deal of truth in what you say. But your fair waters can’t match my blue mountains.” 
“On the contrary,” said Zhang Shao, “your blue mountains can’t match my fair waters in testimony of which | offer a poem: Butterflies Enamoured of Flowers that says: 
In a small boat over ten thousand miles of misty waves | lean to the silent, single sail, circled by sounds of the mermaia-fish. 
My mind cleansed, my care purged, here lacks wealth or fame; leisurely | pick stems of bulrushes and reeds. 
Counting the seagulls is pleasure to be told! 
At willowed banks and reed-ed bays my wife and son join my joyous laugh. 
| sleep most soundly as wind and wave recede; no shame, no glory, and no misery.” 
Li Ding said, “Your fair waters aren’t as good as my blue mountains. I’ve also as testimony stanzas to the poem of Butterflies Enamoured of Flowers that says: 
At a dense forest's pine-seeded corner | hear, wordless, the oriole — its deft tongue’s a poetic pipe. 
Pale reds and bright greens announce the warmth of spring; summer comes abruptly; so passes time. 
Then autumn arrives (for it's an easy change) with fragrant golden flowers most worthy of our joy; and cold winter descends, swift as a finger snaps. 
Ruled by no one, I’m free in all four climes.” 
The angler said, “Your blue mountains aren’t as good as my fair waters that offer me some fine things to enjoy. As testimony I’ve here stanzas to the poem of The Partridge Sky: 
The fairy land cloud and water do suffice: boat adrift, oars accumbent - this is my home. 
| split fishes live and cook green turtles; | steam purple crabs and boil red shrimps. 
Green reed-shoots, Water-plant sprouts; better still the ‘chicken heads, *the Walter caltrops, lotus roots, old or young, the tender celery leaves, arrowheads, white caltrops, and niaoying flowers.” 
The woodman said, “Your fair waters are not as good as my blue mountains that offer me some fine things to enjoy. As testimony | too have stanzas to the poem of The Partridge Sky: 
On tall, craggy peaks that touch heaven’s edge a grass house, a straw hut would make up my home. 
Cured fowls, smoked geese surpass turtles or crabs; hares, antelopes, and deer best fishes or shrimps. 
The scented chun leaves; the yellow Lian sprouts; ‘bamboo shoots and mountain tea are even better! 
Purple plums, red peaches, prunes, apricots ripe, sweet pears, sour dates, and cassia flowers.” 
The angler said, “Your blue mountains are truly not as good as my fair waters. I’ve another stanzas to the poem of The Heavenly Mortal: 
One leaf-like skiff goes wherever | choose to stay. 
| fear not ten thousand folds of wave or mist. 
| drop hooks and cast nets to catch fresh fish: with no sauce or fat, it’s tastier yet. 
Old wife and young son complete my home. 
When fishes are plenty, | leave for Chang’an marts and barter them for juice | drink till drunk. 
A coir-coat shrouds me, on autumnal stream | lie; snoring, asleep, no fret or care — | love not the glory or the pomp of man.” 
The woodman said, “Your fair waters aren't still as good as my blue mountains. I've a poem to the verses of The Heavenly Mortal too: 
A few straw houses built beneath a hill. 
Pines, orchids, plums, bamboos — lovable all! 
Passing groves, climbing mountains, | seek dried woods. 
With none to chide, | sell as | wish: how much, how little, depends on my yield. 
| use the cash to buy juice as | please. 
Earthen crocks, clay flagons — both put me at ease. 
Sodden with juice, in the pine shade | lie: no anxious thoughts; no gain or loss; no care for this world’s failure or success.” 
The angler said, “Brother Li, your mountain life is not as pleasing as my livelihood on the waters. As testimony, I’ve a stanzas to the poem of Moon Over West River. 
Red smart-weeds’ thick blooms glow in moonlight; 5yellow rush-leaves tousled, wind-shaken. 
The blue sky, clean and distant, in empty Chu River: drawing my lines, | stir a deep pool of stars. 
In rank and file big fishes enter the net; teams of tiny perches swallow the hooks. 
Their taste is special when they're caught and cooked. 
My laughter presides over rivers and lakes.” 
The woodman says, “Brother Zhang, your life on the waters isn’t as pleasing as my livelihood in the mountains. As testimony, I’ve also a stanzas to the poem of Moon over West River. 
Dead leaves, parched creepers choking the road; snapped poles, aged bamboos crowding the hill; dried tendrils and sedges in dishevelled growth | break and take; my ropes truss the load. 
Willow trunks hollowed by insects, pine branches clipped off by wind, | gather and stockpile, ready for winter's cold. 
Change them for juice or cash as | wish. 
The angler said, “Though your life in the mountains isn’t bad, it isn’t still as charming and graceful as mine is on the fair waters. As testimony, I’ve a stanzas to the poem of Mortal by the River. 
Falling tide moves my one boat away; | rest my oars, my poem comes with the night. 
The coir coat, the waning moon — how charming they are! 
No seagull darts up from fright as rosy clouds spread through the sky. 
| sleep without care at reed-ed isles, still snoozing when the sun is high. 
| work after my own plans and desires. 
Vassals in cold nights tending court could theirs match my pleasure and peace?” 
The woodman said, “The charm and grace of your fair waters cannot be compared with those of my blue mountains. I’ve a testimony to the verses of Mortal by the River too: 
| walk autumn’s frosty paths dragging my axe; in night’s cool | pole back my load, stranger still with temples stuck with flowers. 
| push clouds to find my way out; moon-stuck | call open my gate. 
Rustic wife and young son greet me with smiles; on straw bed and wooden pillow | lie. 
Steamed pears and cooked millet are soon prepared. 
The urn’s brew newly mellowed will add to my secret joys.” 
The angler said, “All these things in our poems have to do with our livelihood, the occupations with which we support ourselves. But your life not as good as those leisurely moments of mine for which 
I've as testimony a regulated poem. The poem says: 
Idly | watch the blue sky’s white cranes fly. 
My boat stops stream-side, my door’s half-closed. 
By the sail my son’s taught to knot fishing threads; rowing stops, | join my wife to dry the nets. 
My mind is still: thus | know the water's calm. 
My selfs secure: hence | feel the wind is light. 
| freely don my green coir and bamboo hat: that beats wearing a robe with purple sash. 
The woodman said, “Your leisurely moments aren't as good as mine for which I’ve also a regulated poem as a testimony. The poem says: 
Idly | watch billows of white clouds fly or sit in my thatched hut’s closed bamboo gates. 
| open leisurely books to teach my son; at times | face guests to play circling chess.® 
My cane strolls with my poems through floral paths; aroused, | climb green mountains, lute in hand. 
Straw sandals, hemp sashes, and coarse cloth quilts all beat silk garments when your heart is free!” 


Zhang Shao said, “Li Ding, the two of us indeed are lucky to have light poems to amuse us. We don’t need castanets or flasks of gold. ‘But the poems we've recited thus far are occasional pieces, 
hardly anything unusual. Why don’t we attempt a long poem in the linking-verse manner® and see how fares the conversation between the angler and the woodman?” 
Li Ding said, “That's a marvellous proposal, Brother Zhang! Please begin.” 
My boat rests on the green water's mist and wave.° 
My home’s deep in mountains and open plains. 
| love the streams and bridges as spring tide swells; | care for ridges veiled by the clouds of dawn. 
My fresh carps from Long-men are often cooked; ‘° dried woods, worm-rotted, are daily burnt. 
Nets of many kinds will support my age. 
Both pole and rope will see me to the end. 
| lie in a skiff and watch wild geese fly; | sprawl on grassy paths when wild swans cry. 
I’ve no stake in fields of mouth and tongue; through seas of scandal I’ve not made my way. 
Hung-dried by the stream my net's like brocade; polished new on rocks, my axe shows a fine blade. 
Beneath autumn’s moon | oft fish alone; in spring hills all quiet | meet no one. 
Fishes are changed for juice for me and wife to drink; firewood is used to buy a bottle for my son. 
| recite and freely pour on my heart’s desire; in poems and sighs there’s none to restrain me. 
| call fellow boatmen to come as brothers; with friends we join the codgers of the wilds. 
We make rules, play games, and exchange the cups; break words, remake them when we pass the mugs. 
Cooked shrimps, boiled crabs are my daily feasts; I’m daily fed by smoked fowls and fried ducks. 
My unlettered wife makes tea languidly; mountain wife cooks rice most leisurely. 
When dawn comes, | lift my staff to stir the waves; at sunrise | pole my wood to cross big roads. 
| don coir coat after rain to catch live carps; windblown | wield my axe to cut dried pines. 
Hiding tracks to flee the world, I’m like a fool; blotting name and surname, | play deaf and dumb. 
Zhang Shao said, “Brother Li, just now | presumed to take the lead and began with the first line of the poem. Why don’t you begin this time and I'll follow you.” 
‘A rustic who feigns to be romantic; an oldie taking pride in streams and lakes. 
My lot’s leisure, | seek laxity and ease. 
Shunning talk and gossip, | love my peace. 
In moonlit nights | sleep in safe straw huts; when sky dims I'm draped with light coir cape. 
| befriend with ardour both pines and plums; I’m pleased to mingle with egrets and gulls. 
My mind has no plans for fortune or fame; ears are deaf to the din of spear and drum. 
At any time I'd pour my fragrant juice; day's three meals are soups of leafy greens. 
My living rests on two bundles of wood; trade’s my pole fit with hooks and lines. 
I call our young son to sharpen my axe; | tell my small rogue he should mend our nets. 
Spring comes, | love to watch the willows green; warm days gladden the sight of rushes and reeds. 
To flee summer's heat | plant new bamboos; | pick young lotus to cool myself in June. 
When Frost Descends the fatted fowls are slain; by Double Ninth" I'd cook the roe-filled crabs. 
| sleep deep in winter though the sun’s high; when the sky’s tall and hazy, I’d not fry! 
Throughout the year | roam free in the hills; in all four climes | sail the lakes at will. 
Gathering wood | own the mortals’ feel; dropping my rod, | sport no worldly form. 
My door’s wild blossoms are fragrant and bright; stem’s green water flows calm and serene. 
Content, | seek not the Three Dukes’ seats.'2 
Like a ten-mile city my nature’s firm. 
Cities, though tall, must resist a siege; dukes though of high rank, must the summon heed. 
Delight in hills and streams is truly rare. 
Thank Heaven, Earth, and let's thank the gods!” 
The 2 of them thus recited poems and composed linking-verses. Arriving at the place where their ways parted, they saluted to take leave of each other. “Elder Brother Li,” said Zhang Shao, “take care 
as you go on your way. When you climb the mountains, be wary of the tiger. If you’re harmed, I'd find one friend missing on the street tomorrow as the saying goes.” 
When Li Ding heard these words, he grew very angry saying, “What a scoundrel you’re! Good friends would even die for each other! But you, why do you say such unlucky things to me? If I'm to be 
harmed by a tiger, your boat will surely capsize in the river.” 
“ll never capsize my boat in the river,” said Zhang Shao. 
Li Ding said, “As there’re unexpected storms in the sky so there’s sudden weal or woe with man. *3What makes you so sure that you'll not have an accident?” 
“Elder Brother Li,” said Zhang Shao, “you say this because you've no idea what may befall you in your business whereas | can predict what'll happen in my kind of business and | assure you that I'll 
have no accident.” 
“The kind of living you pick up on the waters,” said Li Ding, “is an exceedingly treacherous business. You've to take chances all the time. How can you be so certain about your future?” 
“Here’s something you don’t know about,” said Zhang Shao. “In this city of Chang’an, there’s a fortune teller who plies his trade on the West Gate Street. Every day | give him a golden carp as a present 
and he consults the sticks in his sleeve for me. | follow his instructions when | lower my nets, and I’ve never missed in a hundred times. Today | went again to buy his prediction; he told me to set my 
nets at the east bend of the Jing River and to cast my line from the west bank. | know I'll come back with a fine catch of fishes and shrimps. When | go up to the city tomorrow, I'll sell my catch and buy 
some juice, and then I'll get together with you again, old brother.” 
The two men then parted. There is however, a proverb: “What's said on the road is heard in the grass.” 
For it happened that a Nature spirit on patrol in the Jing River overheard the part of the conversation about not having missed a hundred times. He dashed back to the Water Crystal Palace and hastily 
reported to the Dragon King, shouting, “Disaster! Disaster!” 
“What sort of disaster?” asked the Dragon King. 
“Your subject,” said the Nature spirit, “was patrolling the river and overheard a conversation between a woodman and an angler. Before they parted, they said something terrible. According to the 
angler, there is a fortune teller on West Gate Street in the city of Chang’an who is most accurate in his calculations. Every day the angler gives him a carp, and he then consults the sticks in his sleeve 
with the result that the angler has not missed once in a hundred times when he casts his line! If such accurate calculations continue, will not all our water kin be exterminated? Where'll you find any 
more inhabitants for the watery region who will toss and leap in the waves to enhance the majesty of the Great King?” 
The Dragon King became so angry that he wanted to take the sword and go at once up to Chang'an to slay the fortune teller. But his dragon sons and grandsons, the shrimp and crab ministers, the 
Samli counsellor, the perch Subdirector of the Minor Court, and the carp President of the Board of Civil Office all came from the side and said to him, “Let the Great King restrain his anger. The proverb 
says, ‘Don’t believe everything you hear.’ If the Great King goes forth like this, the clouds will accompany you and the rains will follow you. We fear that the people of Chang'an will be terrified and 
Heaven will be offended. Since the Great King’s the power to appear or disappear suddenly and to transform into many shapes and sizes, let him change into a scholar. Then go to the city of Chang’an 
and investigate the matter. If there’s indeed such a person, you can slay him without delay; but if there’s no such person, there’s no need to harm innocent people.” 
The Dragon King accepted their suggestion; he abandoned his sword and dismissed the clouds and the rains. Reaching the river bank, he shook his body and changed into a white-robed scholar, truly 
with features most virile, a stature towering; a stride most stately -— so orderly and firm. His speech exalts Kong and Meng; his manner embodies Zhou and Wen. ‘He wears a silk robe of the colour of 
jade; his casual head-wrap’s shaped like the letter one. ‘*Coming out of the water, the Dragon King strode to the West Gate Street in the city of Chang’an. There he found a noisy crowd surrounding 
someone who was saying in a lofty and self-assured manner, “Those born under the Dragon will follow their fate; those under the Tiger will collide with their physiognomies. The branches Yin, Chen, 
Si, and Hai may be said to fit into the grand scheme but | fear your birthday may clash with the Planet Jupiter.” 
When the Dragon King heard this, he knew that he had come upon the fortune-teller’s place. Walking up to it and pushing the people apart, he peered inside to see 4 walls of exquisite writings; a room 
full of brocaded paintings; smoke unending from the treasure duck; ‘’and such pure water in a porcelain vase. On both sides are mounted Wang Wei’s paintings; high above his seat hangs the Guigu 
form. ‘The ink slab from Duanxi, *8the golden smoke ink, both match the great brush of frostiest hair; the crystal balls, Guo Pu’s numbers, neatly face new classics of soothsaying. He knows the 
hexagrams well; has mastered the 8 trigrams; perceives the laws of Heaven and Earth; discerns the ways of demons and gods. 1 tray before him fixes the cosmic hours; his mind clearly orders all 
planets and stars. Truly those things to come and those things past he beholds as in a mirror; which house will rise and which will fall? 
He foresees like a god. He knows evil and decrees the good; prescribes death and predicts life. His pronouncements quicken the wind and rain; brush alarms both spirits and gods. His shop sign has 
letters to declare his name; this divine diviner, Yuan Shoucheng. He was actually the uncle of Yuan Tiankang, president of the Imperial Board of Astronomy in the present dynasty. The gentle man was 
truly a man of extraordinary appearance and elegant features; his name was known throughout the great country and his art was considered the highest in Chang’an. The Dragon King went inside the 
door and met the Master after exchanging greetings, he was invited to take the seat of honour while a boy served him tea. The Master asked, “What'd you like to know?” 
The Dragon King said, “Please forecast the weather.” 
The Master consulted his sticks and made his judgement: “Clouds hide the hilltop and fog shrouds the tree. The rain you'd divine tomorrow you'll see.” 
“At what hour it'll rain tomorrow and how much rain there'll be?” asked the Dragon King. 
“At the hour of the Dragon the clouds will gather,” said the Master, “and thunder will be heard at the hour of the Serpent. Rain will come at the hour of the Horse and reach its limit at the hour of the 
Sheep. 2' There'll be altogether three feet, three inches, and forty-eight drops of rain.” 
“You'd better not be joking now,” said the Dragon King, laughing. “If it rains tomorrow and if it is in accordance with the time and the amount you prophesied, I'll present you with fifty taels of gold as my 
thanks. But if it doesn’t rain or the amount and the hours are incorrect, | tell you truly that I'll come and break your front door to pieces and tear down your shop sign. You'll be chased out of Chang’an 
at once so that you may no longer seduce the multitude.” 
“You may certainly do that,” said the Master amiably. “Goodbye for now. Please come again tomorrow after the rain.” 
The Dragon King took leave and returned to his water residence. He was received by various aquatic deities who asked, “How’s the Great King’s visit to the soothsayer?” 
“Yes, yes, yes,” said the Dragon King, “there’s indeed such a person but he’s a garrulous fortune-teller. | asked him when it'd rain and he said tomorrow; | asked him again about the time and the 
amount and he told me that clouds would gather at the hour of the Dragon, thunder would be heard at the hour of the Serpent and that rain would come at the hour of the Horse and reach its limit at 
the hour of the Sheep. Altogether there'd be three feet, three inches, and forty-eight drops of water. | made a wager with him: if it’s as he said, I'll reward him with fifty taels of gold. If there’s the slightest 
error, I'll break down his shop and chase him away so that he'll not be permitted to seduce the multitude at Chang’an.” 
“The Great King’s the supreme commander of the eight rivers,” said the water kin, laughing, “the great Dragon Deity in charge of rain. Whether there’s going to be rain or not, only the Great King knows 
that. How dare he speak so foolishly? That soothsayer’s sure to lose!” 
While the dragon sons and grandsons were laughing at the matter with the fish and crab officials, a voice was heard suddenly in mid-air announcing, “Dragon King of the Jing River, receive the imperial 
command.” They raised their heads to look and saw a golden-robed guardian holding the decree of the Jade Emperor and heading straight for the water residence. The Dragon King hastily straightened 
out his attire and burned incense to receive the decree. After he made his delivery, the guardian rose into the air and left. The Dragon King opened the decree that said: 
We bid the 8-Rivers Prince to call up thunder and rain; pour out tomorrow your grace to benefit Chang’an’s race. 


The instructions regarding the hours and the amount of rain written on the decree did not even differ in the slightest from the soothsayer’s prediction. So overwhelmed was the Dragon King that his 
spirit left him and his soul fled, and only after a while did he regain consciousness. He said to his water kinsmen, “There’s indeed an intelligent creature in the world of dust! How well he comprehends 
the laws of Heaven and Earth! I’m bound to lose to him!” 
“Let the Great King calm himself,” said the samli counsellor. “Is it so difficult to get the better of the fortune-teller? Your subject here’s a little plan that will silence that fellow for good.” 
The Dragon King asked, “What's the plan?” 
The counsellor said, “If the rain tomorrow misses the timing and the amount specified by a mere fraction, it'll mean that his prediction is not accurate. Won't you've won? What's there to stop you then 
from tearing up his shop sign and putting him on the road?” 
The Dragon King took his counsel and stopped worrying. The next day he ordered the Duke of Wind, the Lord of Thunder, the Boy of Clouds, and the Mum of Lightning to go with him to the sky above 
Chang'an. He waited until the hour of the Serpent before spreading the clouds, the hour of the Horse before letting loose the thunder, the hour of the Sheep before releasing the rain, and only by the 
hour of the Monkey did the rain stop.22 There were only three feet and forty drops of water, since the times were altered by an hour and the amount was changed by three inches and eight drops. After 
the rain, the Dragon King dismissed his followers and came down from the clouds, transformed once again into a scholar dressed in white. He went to the West Gate Street and barged into Yuan 
Shoucheng’s shop. Without a word of explanation, he began to smash the shop sign, the brushes, and the ink slab to pieces. The Master however, sat on his chair and remained unmoved, so the 
Dragon King unhinged the door and threatened to hit him with it, crying, “You're nothing but a bogus nun of good and evil, an imposter who deludes the minds of the people! Your predictions are 
incorrect; your words are patently false! What you told me about the time and quantity of today’s rain was utterly inaccurate, and yet you dare sit so smugly and so high on your seat? Leave here at 
once before you're executed!” Still Yuan Shoucheng was not at all intimidated. He lifted up his head and laughed scornfully. “I’m not afraid!” he said. “Not in the least! I'm not guilty of death but | fear 
that you’ve committed a mortal crime. You can fool other people but you can’t fool me! | recognise you, all right: you're not a white-robed scholar but the Dragon King of the Jing River. By altering the 
times and holding back the quantity of rain, you’ve disobeyed the decree of the Jade Emperor and transgressed the law of Heaven. On the dragon execution block you'll not escape the knife! And here 
you're, railing at me!” 
When the Dragon King heard these words, his heart trembled and his hair stood on end. He dropped the door quickly, tidied his clothes, and knelt before the Master saying, “I beg the Master not to 
take offence. My previous words were spoken in jest; little did | realise that my prank would turn out to be such a serious crime. Now I’ve indeed transgressed the law of Heaven. What am | to do? | 
beseech the Master to save me. If you'll not, I'll never let you go!” 
“| can't save you,” said Shoucheng, “I can only point out to you what may be a way of life.” 
“Im willing to be instructed,” said the Dragon. 
The Master said, “You're to be executed tomorrow by the human judge, Wei Zheng, at the third quarter past the hour of noon. If you want to preserve your life, you must go quickly to plead your case 
before the present emperor Tang Taizong, for Wei Zheng is the prime minister before his throne. If you can win the emperor's favour, you'll be spared.” 
Hearing this, the Dragon took leave with tears in his eyes. Soon the red sun sank down and the moon arose. See smoke thickens on purple mountains as homing crows tire; travellers on distant 
journeys head for inns; young wild geese at fords rest on field and sand. The silver stream appears” to hasten the time float. 24Lights fare in a lone village from dying fames: wind sweeps the burner to 
clear Daoist yard of smoke as man fades away in the butterfly dream. The moon moves floral shadows up the garden’s rails. The stars are rife as water clocks strike; so swiftly the gloom deepens 
that it’s midnight. The Dragon King of the Jing River did not even return to his water home; he waited in the air until it was about the hour of the Rat,28when he descended from the clouds and mists 
and came to the gate of the palace. At this time the Tang emperor was just having a dream about taking a walk outside the palace in the moonlight, beneath the shades of flowers. The Dragon suddenly 
assumed the form of a human being and went up to him. Kneeling, he cried out, “Your Majesty, save me, save me!” 
“Who are you?” asked Taizong. “We'd be glad to save you.” 
“Your Majesty is the true dragon,” said the Dragon King, “but I’m an accursed one. Because I’ve disobeyed the decree of Heaven, I’m to be executed by a worthy subject of Your Majesty, the human 
judge Wei Zheng. I’ve therefore come here to plead with you to save me.” 
“If Wei Zheng is to be the executioner,” said Taizong, “we can certainly save you. You may leave and not worry.” The Dragon King was delighted and left after expressing his gratitude. Taizong having 
awakened, was still turning over in his mind what he had dreamed. Soon it was 3/5" past the hour of the 5 watch and Taizong held court for his ministers, both civil and martial. See smoke shrouding 
the phoenix arches; incense clouding the dragon domes; light shimmering as the silk screens move; clouds brushing the feather-trimmed flags; 2’rulers and lords harmonious as Yao and Shun; 28rituals 
and poems solemn as Han’s and Zhou’s. The attendant lamps, the court-maiden fans show their colours in pairs; from peacock screens and unicorn halls light radiates everywhere. Three cheers for 
long life! A wish for reign everlasting! When a whip cracks 3 times, the caps and robes will salute the Crown. Brilliant palatial blooms, endued by Heaven’s scent; pliant bank willows, recited and praised 
by court poems. The screens of pearl, the screens of jade are drawn high by golden hooks: the dragon-phoenix fan, the mountain-river fan rest on top of the royal carriage. The civil lords are noble 
and refined; the martial lords, strong and valiant. The imperial path divides the ranks: the vermilion court aligns the grades. The golden seal and purple sashes bearing the 3 signs®° will last for millions 
of years as Heaven and Earth. After the ministers had paid their homage, they all went back to standing in rows according to their rank. The Tang emperor opened his dragon eyes to look at them 1 by 
1: among the civil officials were Fang Xuanling, Du Ruhui, Xu Shizhi, Xu Jingzong, Wang Guei; among the military officials were Ma Sanbao, Duan Zhixian, Yin Kaishan, Cheng Yaojin, Liu Hongzhi, 
Hu Jingde, and Qin Shubao. Each 1 of them was standing there in a most solemn manner but the Prime Minister Wei Zheng was to be seen nowhere. The Tang emperor asked Xu Shizhi to come 
forward and said to him, “We'd a strange dream last night: there was a man who paid homage to us calling himself the Dragon King of the Jing River. He said that he’d disobeyed the command of 
Heaven and was supposed to be executed by the human judge Wei Zheng. He implored us to save him and we gave our consent. Today only Wei Zheng’s absent from the ranks. Why’s that?” 
“This dream may indeed come true,” answered Shizhi, “and Wei Zheng must be summoned to court immediately. Once he arrives, let Your Majesty keep him here for a whole day and not permit him 
to leave. After this day, the dragon in the dream will be saved.” 
The Tang emperor was most delighted: he gave the order at once to have Wei Zheng summoned to court. We speak now of Prime Minister Wei Zheng who studied the movement of the stars and 
bumed incense at his home that evening. He heard the cries of cranes in the air and saw there a Heavenly messenger holding the golden decree of the Jade Emperor that ordered him to execute in 
his dream the old dragon of the Jing River at precisely the third quarter past the noon hour. Having thanked the Heavenly grace, our prime minister prepared himself in his residence by bathing himself 
and abstaining from food; he was also sharpening his magic sword and exercising his spirit, and therefore he did not attend court. He was terribly flustered when he saw the royal officer on duty arriving 
with the summons. Not daring however, to disobey the emperor's command, he had to dress quickly and follow the summons into court, respecting and asking for pardon before the throne. The Tang 
emperor said, “We pardoned indeed our worthy subject.” At that time the various ministers had not yet retired from the court, and only after Wei Zheng’s arrival was the curtain drawn up for the court's 
dismissal. Wei Zheng alone was asked to remain; he rode the golden carriage with the emperor to enter the chamber for relaxation where he discussed with the emperor tactics for making the empire 
secure and other affairs of state. When it was just about midway between the hour of the Serpent and the hour of the Horse, the emperor asked the royal attendants to bring out a large chess set, 
saying, “We'll have a game with our worthy subject.” 
The various concubines took out the chessboard and set it on the imperial table. After expressing his gratitude, Wei Zheng set out to play chess with the Tang emperor, both of them moving the pieces 
step by step into positions. It was completely in accordance with the instruction of the Classic of Chess: 
The way of chess exalts discipline and caution; the most powerful pieces should remain in the centre, the weakest ones at the flanks, and the less powerful ones at the corners. This is a familiar law of 
the chess player. The law says: “You'd rather lose a piece than an advantage. When you strike on the left, you must guard your right; when you attack in the rear, you must watch your front. Only when 
you've a secure front will you also have a rear and only if you've a secure rear will you maintain your front. The two ends can’t be separated, yet both must remain flexible, and not be encumbered. A 
broad formation shouldn't be too loose while a tight position shouldn't be constricted. Rather than clinging on to save a single piece, it’s better to sacrifice it in order to win; rather than moving without 
purpose, it’s better to remain stationary in order to be self-supportive. When your adversary outnumbers you, your first concern’s to survive; when you outnumber your adversary, you must strive to 
exploit your force. He who knows how to win won't prolong his fight; he who’s a master of positions won’t engage in direct combat; he who knows how to fight won’t suffer defeat; and he who knows 
how to lose won't panic. For chess begins with proper engagement but ends in unexpected victory. If your enemy's bringing up his reinforcement even without being threatened, it’s a sign of his intention 
to attack; if he deserts a small piece without trying to save it, he may be stalking a bigger piece. If he moves in a casual manner, he’s a man without thoughts; response without thought’s the way to 
defeat. The Classic of Poetry says: 
Approach with extreme caution as if facing a deep canyon. 
Such is the meaning thereof. The poem says: 
The chessboard’s the earth; the pieces are the sky; the colours are light and dark as the whole universe. 
When playing reaches that skilful, subtle stage boast and laugh with the old Mortal of Chess." 
The 2 of them, emperor and subject played chess until % past the noon hour but the game was not yet finished. Suddenly Wei Zheng put his head on the table and fell fast asleep. Taizong laughed 
and said, “Our worthy subject's truly worn himself out for the state and exhausted his strength on behalf of the empire. He’s therefore fallen asleep in spite of himself.” 
Taizong allowed him to sleep on and did not arouse him. In a little while, Wei Zheng awoke and saluted himself on the ground saying, “Your subject deserves ten thousand deaths! Your subject deserves 
ten thousand deaths! Just now | lost consciousness for no reason at all. | beg Your Majesty’s pardon for such insult against the emperor.” 
“What insult’s there?” said Taizong. “Arise! Let's forget the old game and start a new one instead.” 
Wei Zheng expressed his gratitude. As he put his hand on a piece, a loud clamour was heard outside the gate. It was occasioned by the ministers Qin Shubao and Xu Mougong who arrived with a 
dragon head dripping with blood. Throwing it in front of the emperor they said, “Your Majesty, we've seen seas turn shallow and rivers run dry but a thing as strange as this we've never even heard of.” 
Taizong arose with Wei Zheng and said, “Where did this thing come from?” 
“South of the Thousand-Step Corridor,” replied Shubao and Mougong, “at the crossroads, this dragon head fell from the clouds. Your lowly subjects daren’t withhold it from you.” 
In alarm, the Tang emperor asked Wei Zheng, “What’s the meaning of this?” Turning to respect to him, Wei Zheng said, “This dragon’s executed just now by your subject in his dream.” 
When the Tang emperor heard this, he was seized with fear and said, “When our worthy minister was sleeping, | saw no movement of body or limb and perceived no scimitar or sword. How'd you've 
executed this dragon?” 
Wei Zheng replied, “My lord, although my body's before my master, | left Your Majesty in my dream; my body before my master faced the unfinished game with dim eyes fully closed; | left Your Majesty 
in my dream to ride the blessed cloud with spirit most eager and alert. That dragon on the dragon execution block’s bound up there by celestial hosts. Your subject said, ‘For breaking Heaven's law, 
you're worthy of death. Now by Heaven’s command, | end your wretched life.’ The dragon listened in grief; your subject bestirred his spirit; the dragon listened in grief, retrieving claws and scales to 
await his death; your subject bestirred his spirit, lifting robe and taking step to hold high his blade. With one loud crack the knife descended; and thus the head of the dragon fell from the sky.” 
When Taizong heard these words, he was filled with both sadness and delight. The delight was caused by his pride in having a minister as good as Wei Zheng. If he had worthies of this kind in his 
court, he thought, need he worry about the security of his empire? He was saddened however, by the fact that he had promised in his dream to save the dragon, and he had not anticipated that the 
creature would be killed in this manner. He had to force himself to give the order to Shubao that the dragon head be hung on display at the market, so that the populace of Chang’an might be informed. 
Meanwhile, he rewarded Wei Zheng, after which the various ministers dispersed. That night he returned to his palace in deep depression, for he kept remembering the dragon in the dream crying and 
begging for his life. Little did he expect that the turn of events would be such that the dragon still could not escape calamity. Having thought about the matter for a long time, he became physically and 
mentally drained. At about the hour of the second watch, the sound of weeping was heard outside the door of the palace, and Taizong became even more fearful. He was sleeping fitfully when he saw 
our Dragon King of the Jing River holding his head dripping with blood in his hand and crying in a loud voice: “Tang Taizong! Give me back my life! Give me back my life! Last night you’re full of promises 
to save me. Why did you order a human judge in the daytime to have me executed? Come out, come out! I’m going to argue this case with you before the King of the Underworld.” 
He seized Taizong and would neither let go nor desist from his protestation. Taizong could not say a word; he could only struggle until perspiration covered his entire body. Just at the moment when it 
seemed that nothing could separate them, fragrant clouds and colourful mists appeared from the south. A Daoist priestess came forward and waved a willow twig. That headless dragon, still mourning 
and weeping, left at once toward the northwest. For this was none other than the Nun Guanyin who by the decree of God was seeking a scripture pilgrim in the Land of the East. She was staying in the 
temple of the local spirit at the city of Chang’an when she heard in the night the weeping of demons and the crying of spirits. So she came specially to drive the accursed dragon away and to rescue 
the emperor. That dragon went directly to the court of the Underworld to file suit. Taizong could only yell aloud when he awoke, “Ghost! Ghost!” 
He so terrified the queens of 3 palaces, the concubines of 6 chambers, and the attending eunuchs that they remained sleepless for the entire night. Soon it was the 5" watch and all the officials of the 
court both civil and military were waiting for an audience outside the gate. They waited until dawn but the emperor did not appear, and every one of them became apprehensive and restless. Only after 
the sun was high in the sky did a proclamation come out saying, “We're not feeling too well. The ministers are excused from court.” 


5 or 6 days went by swiftly and the various officials became so anxious that they were about to enter the court without summons and inquire after the throne. Just then the queen mum gave the order 
to have the physician brought into the palace and so the multitude waited at the gate of the court for some news. In a little while, the physician came out and he was questioned about the emperor's 
illness. “The pulse of His Majesty’s irregular,” said the physician, “for it's weak as well as rapid. He blabbers about seeing ghosts. | also perceive that there’re ten movements and one rest but there’s 
no breath left in his viscera. I’m afraid that he'll pass away within a week.” 
When the various ministers heard this statement, they paled with fright. In this state of alarm, they again heard that Taizong had summoned Xu Mougong, Huguo Gong, and Yuchi Gong to appear 
before him. The three ministers hurried into the auxiliary palace where they saluted themselves. Speaking sombrely and with great effort, Taizong said, “My worthy subjects since the age of nineteen 
‘ve been leading my army in expeditions to the four corners of the Earth. I’ve experienced much hardship throughout the years but I’ve ever encountered no kind of strange or weird thing. This day 
however, I’ve seen ghosts!” 
“When you established your empire,” said Yuchi Gong, “you’d to kill countless people. Why'd you fear ghosts?” 
“You may not believe it,” said Taizong, “but outside this bedroom of mine at night, there’re bricks thrown and spirits screaming to a degree that’s truly unmanageable. In the daytime it’s not too bad but 
it's intolerable at night!” 
“Let Your Majesty be relieved,” said Shubao, “for this evening your subject and Jingde*? will stand guard at the palace gate. We'll see what sort of ghostly business there’s.” 
Taizong agreed to the proposal and Mougong and the other ministers retired after expressing their gratitude. That evening the 2 ministers in full battle dress and holding golden bludgeon and battle- 
axe stood guard outside the palace gate. Dear generals! Look how they are attired: they wore on their heads bright glimmering golden helmets and on their bodies cuirasses of dragon scales. Their 
jewelled breastplates glow like hallowed clouds: with lion knots tightly drawn and silk sashes newly spun. This one had phoenix eyes facing the sky to frighten the stars: the other had brown eyes 
glowering like lightning and the shining moon. They were once warriors of the greatest merit; but now they've become for all time the guardians of the gates in all ages the protectors of the home. “The 
2 generals stood beside the door for the entire night and did not see the slightest disturbance. That night Taizong rested peacefully in the palace; when morning came he summoned the 2 generals 
before him and thanked them profusely saying, “Since falling ill, I've been unable to sleep for days and only last night did | manage to get some rest because of your presence. Let our worthy ministers 
retire now for some rest so that we may count on your protect-ion once again at night.” 
The 2 generals left after expressing their gratitude and for the following 2 or 3 nights their standing guard brought continued peace. However, the royal appetite diminished and the illness became more 
severe. Taizong, moreover, could not bear to see the two generals overworked. So once again he called Shubao, Jingde, the ministers Du and Fang into the palace saying to them, “Though | got some 
rest these past two days, I’ve imposed on the two generals the hardship of staying up all night. | wish to have portraits made of both of them by a skilled painter and have these pasted on the door so 
that the two generals will be spared any further labour. How about it?” 
The various ministers obeyed; they selected 2 portrait painters who made pictures of the 2 generals in their proper battle attire. The portraits were then mounted near the gate and no incident occurred 
during the night. So it was for 2 or 3 days until the loud rattling of bricks and tiles was again heard at the rear gate of the palace. At dawn the emperor called together the various ministers, saying to 
them, “For the past few days there have been no incidents at the front of the palace happily but last night the noises at the backdoor were such that they nearly frightened me to death.” 
Mougong stepped forward and said, “The disturbances at the front door were driven off by Jingde and Shubao. If there’s disturbance at the rear gate, then Wei Zheng ought to stand guard.” Taizong 
approved the suggestion and ordered Wei Zheng to guard the rear door that night. Accepting the charge, Wei donned his full court regalia that evening; holding the sword with which he had slain the 
dragon, he stood at attention before the rear gate of the palace. What splendid heroic stature! Look how he is attired: green satin turban swaths his brow: the silk robe’s jade belt is waist-hung; 
windblown, craned-down sleeves fly like drifting snow. He bests Lui and Shu’s divine looks. 4His feet wear black boots most supple; hands hold a blade sharp and fierce. With glaring eyes he stared at 
all 4 sides. Which deviant god dares approach? 
A whole night went by and no ghost appeared. But though there were no incidents at either the front or the rear gate, the emperor's condition worsened. 1 day the queen mum sent for all the ministers 
to discuss funeral arrangements. Taizong himself also summoned Xu Mougong to his bedside to entrust to him the affairs of state, committing the crown prince to the minister's care as Liu Bei did to 
Zhuge Liang. 2*When he had finished speaking, he bathed and changed his garments, waiting for his time to come. Wei Zheng then stepped out from the side and tugged the royal garment with his 
hand saying, “Let Your Majesty be relieved. Your subject knows something that'll guarantee long life for Your Majesty.” 
“My illness’s,” said Taizong, “reached the irremediable stage; my life’s in danger. How can you preserve it?” 
“Your subject's a letter here,” said Wei, “that | submit to Your Majesty to take with you to Hell and give to the Judge of the Underworld, Jue.” 
“Who's Cui Jue?” asked Taizong. 
“Cui Jue’s,” said Wei, “the subject of the deceased emperor, your dad: at first he’s the district magistrate of Cizhou and subsequently he’s promoted to vice president of the Board of Rites. When he’s 
alive, he’s an intimate friend and sworn brother of your subject. Now that he’s dead, he’s become a judge in the capital of the Underworld having in his charge the chronicles of life and death in the 
region of darkness. He meets with me frequently however, in my dreams. If you go there presently and hand this letter to him, he’ll certainly remember his obligation toward your lowly subject and allow 
Your Majesty to retum here. Surely your soul will return to the human world and royal countenance will once more grace the capital.” When Taizong heard these words, he took the letter in his hands 
and put it in his sleeve; with that he closed his eyes and died. Those queens and concubines from 3 palaces and 6 chambers, the crown prince and the 2 rows of civil and military officials all put on 
their mourning garb to mourn him as the imperial coffin lay in state at the Hall of the White Tiger. 
011 
Having toured the Underworld, Taizong returns to life; Having presented melons and fruits, Liu Quan marries again 


The poem says: 
A century passes by like flowing streams; like froth and foam a lifetime’s work now seems. 
Yesterday faces had a peach’s glow; today the temples float up flakes of snow. 

Termites disband - illusion then you'll leam!2 

Cuckoos calF gravely for your early return. 

Secret good works will always life prolong. 

Virtue’s not needy for Heaven’s care’s strong. 

Taizong whose soul drifted out of the Tower of 5 Phoenixes. Everything was blurred and indistinct. It seemed to him that a company of imperial guardsmen was inviting him to a hunting party to which 
Taizong gladly gave his consent and went off with them. They had journeyed for a long time when suddenly all the men and horses vanished from sight. He was left alone, walking the deserted fields 
and desolate plains. As he anxiously tried to find his way back, he heard someone from beyond calling in a loud voice: “Great Tang Emperor, come over here! Come over here!” Taizong heard this and 
looked up. He saw that the man had a black gauze cap on his head; rhinoceros horns around his waist. His head’s black gauze hat dangled pliant bands: waist’s rhino horns displayed plates of gold. 
He held an ivory plaque sheathed in hallowed mist; he wore a silk robe circled by holy light. His feet put on a pair of white-soled boots for treading cloud and climbing fog; he grasped by his heart a 
book of life and death that determined one’s fate. His hair, luxuriant, flew above his ears: beard fluttered and exercised around his jaws. He was once a prime minister of Tang: now he judged cases to 
serve Yama King. Taizong walked toward him and the man kneeling at the side of the road, said to him, “Your Majesty, please pardon your subject for neglecting to meet you at a greater distance.” 
“Who're you,” asked Taizong, “and for what reason did you come to meet me?” 
The man said, “Half a month ago your lowly subject met in the Halls of Darkness the Dragon Ghost of the Jing River who’s filing suit against Your Majesty for having him executed after promising to 
save him. So the great king Qinguang of the first chamber immediately sent demon messengers to arrest and bring you to trial before the Three Tribunes. Your subject learned of this and therefore 
came here to receive you. | didn’t expect to come late today and | beg you to forgive me.” 
“What's your name,” said Taizong, “and rank?” 
“When your lowly subject's alive,” said that man, “he served on Earth before the previous emperor as the district magistrate of Cizhou. Afterwards | was appointed vice president of the Board of Rites. 
My surname’s Cui and my given name is Jue. In the Region of Darkness | hold a judgeship in the Capital of Death.” 
Taizong was very glad; he went forward and held out his royal hands to raise the man up saying, “I’m sorry to have inconvenienced you. Wei Zheng who serves before my throne’s a letter for you. I’m 
glad that we’ve a chance to meet here.” The judge expressed his gratitude and asked where the letter was. Taizong took it out of his sleeve and handed it over to Cui Jue who received it, saluting, and 
then opened it and read: 
Your unworthily beloved brother Wei Zheng sends with saluted head this letter to the Great Judge, my sworn brother the Honourable Mr. Cui. | recall our former goodly society and both your voice and 
countenance seem to be present with me. Several years have hastened by since | last heard your lofty discourse. I’d only prepare a few vegetables and fruits to offer to you as sacrifices during the 
festive times of the year though | don’t know whether you've enjoyed them or not. I’m grateful however, that you’ve not forgotten me, and revealed to me in my dreams that you've, my elder brother, 
ascended to an even higher office. Unfortunately the worlds of Light and Darkness are separated by a gulf wide as the Heavens, so that we can’t meet face to face. The reason that I’m writing you now 
is the sudden demise of my emperor, the accomplished Taizong whose case | suppose, will be reviewed by the Three Tribunes so that he'll certainly be given the opportunity to meet you. | earnestly 
beseech you to remember our friendship while you're living and grant me the small favour of allowing His Majesty to return to life. This will be a very great favour to me for which | thank you once more. 
After reading the letter, the judge said with great delight, “The execution of the old dragon the other day by the human judge Wei’s already known to your subject who greatly admires him for this deed. 
I'm moreover indebted to him for looking after my children. Since he has written such a letter now, Your Majesty need have no further concern. Your lowly subject will make certain that you'll be returned 
to life to ascend once more your throne of jade.” 
Taizong thanked him. As the 2 of them were speaking, they saw in the distance 2 young boys in blue robes holding banners and flags and calling out, “The King of the Underworld’s an invitation for 
you.” Taizong went forward with Judge Cui and the two boys. He suddenly saw a huge city, and on a large plaque above the city gate was the inscription in gold letters: 

The Region of Darkness, the Gate of Spirits 
Waving the banners, the blue robes led Taizong into the city. As they walked along, they saw at the side of the street the emperor's predecessor Li Yuan, his elder brother Jiancheng, and his deceased 
brother Yuanji who came toward them, shouting, “Here comes Shimin! Here comes Shimin!” 5The brothers clutched at Taizong and began beating him and threatening vengeance. Having no place to 
dodge, the emperor fell into their clutch; and only when Judge Cui called a blue-faced, hook-tusked demon to drive them away could he escape and continue his journey. They had travelled no more 
than a few miles when they arrived at a towering edifice with green tiles. This building was truly magnificent. See lightly 10000 folds of coloured mists pile high; dimly 1000 strands of crimson brume 
appear. Heads of wild beasts rear up from the eaves aglow. Pairs of lambent roof tiles rise in tiers of 5. Rows of red-gold nails bore deeply into doors; crosswise, slabs of white jade make up the rails. 
Windows near the lights release morning smoke. The screens, the curtains, flash like fiery bolts. High-rising towers reach to the azure sky. Criss-crossing hallways join the treasure rooms. Fragrance 
from beast-shaped tripods line royal robes; scarlet silk lanterns brighten the portals’ leaves. On the left hordes of fierce Bull-heads stand; on the right gruesome Horse-faces line up. Gold placards turn 
to greet the ghosts of the dead; white silk descends to lead the deceased souls. It bears this name: The Central Gate of Hell, the Darkness Hall of the Princes of Hades. As Taizong was looking at the 
place, there came from within the tinkling of girdle jade, the mysterious fragrance of divine incense, and 2 pairs of torch candles followed by the 10 Kings of the Underworld coming down the steps. The 
10 Kings were: King Qinguang, King of the Beginning River, King of the Poem Emperor, King of Avenging Ministers, King Yama, King of Equal Ranks, King of the Tai Mountain, King of City Markets, 
King of Complete Change, and King of the Turning Wheel. Coming out of the Treasure Hall of Darkness, they saluted to receive Taizong who feigning modesty, declined to lead the way. The 10 Kings 
said, “Your Majesty's the emperor of men in the World of Light whereas we're but the kings of spirits in the World of Darkness. Such are indeed our appointed stations so why should you defer to us?” 
“I'm afraid that I’ve offended all of you,” said Taizong, “so how can | dare to speak of observing the etiquette of ghosts and men, Light and Darkness?” 
Only after much protestation did Taizong proceed into the Hall of Darkness. After he had greeted the 10 Kings properly they sat down according to the places assigned to hosts and guests. After a little 
while, King Qinguang folded his hands in front of him and came forward saying, “The Dragon Spirit of the Jing River accuses Your Majesty of having him slain after promising to save him. Why?” 
“| did promise him that nothing would happen,” said Taizong, “when the old dragon appealed to me in my dream at night. He’s guilty, you know and condemned to be executed by the human judge Wei 
Zheng. It's to save him that | invited Wei Zheng to play chess with me, not anticipating that Wei Zheng could’ve performed the execution in his dream! That's indeed a miraculous stratagem devised by 
the human judge and after all, the dragon’s also guilty of a mortal offence. | fail to see how I’m to blame.” 
When the 10 Kings heard these words, they replied, saluting, “Even before that dragon’s born, it’s already written on the Book of Death held by the Star of South Pole that he’d be slain by a human 
judge. We've known this all along but the dragon lodged his complaint here and insisted that Your Majesty be brought down so that his case might be reviewed by the Three Tribunes. We've already 
sent him on his way to his next disciple through the Wheel of Transmigration. We regret however, that we've caused Your Majesty the inconvenience of this journey and beg your pardon for pressing 
you to come here.” 


When they had finished speaking, they ordered the judge in charge of the Books of Life and Death to bring out the records quickly so that they could ascertain what the allotted time of the emperor was 
to be. Judge Cui went at once to his chamber and examined one by one the ages preordained for all the kings in the world that were inscribed in the books. Startled when he saw that the Great Tang 
Emperor Taizong of the South Jambidvipa Continent was destined to die in the thirteenth year of the period Zhenguan, he quickly dipped his big brush in thick ink and added two strokes® before 
presenting the book. The Ten Kings took one look and saw that “thirty-three years” was written beneath the name Taizong. They asked in alarm, “How long has it been since Your Majesty was 
enthroned?” 
“It's been thirteen years,” said Taizong. 
“Your Majesty need have no worry,” said King Yama, “for you've still twenty years of life. Now that your case’s been clearly reviewed, we can send you back to the World of Light.” 
When Taizong heard this, he saluted to express his gratitude as the Ten Kings ordered Judge Cui and Grand Marshal Chu to accompany him back to life. Taizong walked out of the Hall of Darkness 
and asked, saluting the 10 Kings once again, “What's going to happen to those living in my palace?” 
“Everyone'll be safe,” said the 10 Kings, “except your younger sister. It appears that she'll not live long.” 
“When | return to the World of Light,” said Taizong, saluting again to thank them, ‘I’ve very little that | can present you as a token of my gratitude. Perhaps | can send you some melons or other kinds 
of fruit?” 
Delighted, the Ten Kings said, “We've eastern and western melons here but we lack southern melons.” 7 
“The moment | get back,” said Taizong, “I'll send you some.” They saluted to each other with hands folded, and parted. The marshal took the lead, holding a flag for guiding souls while Judge Cui 
followed behind to protect Taizong. They walked out of the Region of Darkness, and Taizong saw that it was not the same road. He asked the judge, “Are we going on the wrong way?” 
“No,” said the judge, “for this is how it is in the Region of Darkness: there is away for you to come but there is no way out. Now we must send Your Majesty off from the region of the Wheel of 
Transmigration, so that you can make a tour of Hell as well as be sent on your way to disciple.” Taizong had little alternative but to follow their lead. 
They had gone only a few miles when they came upon a tall mountain. Dark clouds touched the ground around it, and black mists shrouded the sky. “Mr. Cui,” said Taizong, “what mountain is this?” 
The judge said, “It’s the Mountain of Perpetual Shade in the Region of Darkness.” 
“How can we go there?” asked Taizong fearfully. 
“Your Majesty needn’t worry,” said the judge, “for your subjects here’re to guide you.” 
Shaking and quaking, Taizong followed the 2 of them and ascended the slope. He raised his head to look around and saw that its shape was both craggy and curved, its form was even more tortuous. 
Rugged like the Shu peaks; tall like the Lu summits; it was not a famed mountain in the World of Light but a treacherous place in the Region of Darkness. Thickets of thorns sheltered monsters; tiers 
of stone ridges harboured demons. No sound of fowl or beast came to one’s ears; only ghosts or griffins walked before one’s eyes. The howling cold wind; the endless black mist - the howling cold 
wind was the huffing of infernal hosts; the endless black mist was the puffing of demonic troops. There was no scenic splendour though one looked high and low; all was desolation when one stared 
left and right. At that place there were mountains and peaks and summits, and caves and streams; only no grass grew on the mountains; no peaks punctured the sky; no travellers scaled the summits; 
no caves ever harboured the clouds; no water flowed in the streams. They were all spectres on the shores and bogies beneath the cliffs. The phantoms huddled in the caves and lost souls hid on 
stream-floors. All around the mountain, bull-heads and Horse-faces wildly clamoured; half hidden and half in sight, hungry ghosts and needy souls often wept. The judge in quest of souls in haste and 
fury delivered his summons; the guard who chased the spirits, snorted and shouted to present his papers. The Swift of Foot: a boiling cyclone! The Soul Snatcher: a spreading dark mist! Had he not 
trusted in the judge’s protection, Taizong would have never made it across this Mountain of Perpetual Shade. As they proceeded, they came to a place where there were many halls and chambers; 
everywhere they turned, melancholy cries blasted their ears and grotesque sights struck terror in their hearts. “What is this place?” asked Taizong again. 
“The Eighteen-fold Hell behind the Mountain of Perpetual Shade,” said the judge. 
“What is that?” said Taizong. 
The judge replied, “Listen to what I've to say: the Hell of the Rack, Gloomy Guilt, and the Fiery Pit: all such sorrow, desolation are caused by a thousand sins committed in the life before; they all come 
to suffer after they die. The Hell of Hades, Tongue-Pulling, Skin-Shredding: all those weeping, wailing, pining, and mourning await the traitors, the rebels, and the Heaven baiters; he of God-mouth and 
serpent-heart will end up here. The Hell of Grinding, Pounding, Crushing; with frayed skin and torn flesh, gaping mouths and grinding teeth, these’re they who cheat, lie to work injustice, fawn, and 
flatter to deceive. The Hell of Ice, Mutilation, and Evisceration: with grimy face and matted hair, knitted brow and doleful look, these’re they who fleece the simple with weights unjust and so bring ruin 
upon themselves. The Hell of Boiling Oil, Grim Darkness, and the Sword Mountain: they shake, quake, sorrow, and pine: for oppressing the righteous by violence and fraud they now must cower in 
their lonely pain. The Hell of the Pool of Blood, Avici, °Scales, and Weights: all the skins peeled and bones exposed, the limbs cut and the tendons severed are caused by murder stemming from greed, 
the taking of life of both humans and beasts. Their fall has no reversal in a millennium - eternal perdition without release. Each’s firmly bound and tightly tied, shackled by both ropes and cords. The 
slightest move brings on the Red-haired, the Black-face demons with long spears and sharp swords; the Bull-head, the Horse-face demons with iron spikes and bronze gavels, they strike till faces 
contort and blood flows down but cries to Earth and Heaven find no response. So it is that man ought not to betray his own conscience for gods have knowledge who could get away? Thus vice and 
virtue will at last be paid: it differs only in coming soon or late.” 
When Taizong heard these words, he was terror-stricken. They went on for a little while and came upon a group of demon soldiers, each holding banners and flags and kneeling beside the road. “The 
Guards of the Bridges have come to receive you,” they said. 
The judge ordered them to make way and proceeded to lead Taizong across a golden bridge. Looking to one side, Taizong saw another silver bridge on which there were several travellers who seemed 
to be persons of principle and rectitude, justice and honesty. They too were led by banners and flags. On the other side was another bridge with icy wind churning around it and bloody waves seething 
below. The continuous sound of weeping and wailing could be heard. “What's the name of that bridge?” asked Taizong. 
“Your Majesty,” said the judge, “it's the No-Option Bridge. When you reach the World of Light, you must've this recorded for posterity. For below the bridge there’s nothing but a vast body of surging 
water; a strait and treacherous path; like bales of raw silk flowing down the Long River or the Pit of Fire floating up to Earth, this cold air, oppressive, this bone-piercing chill; foul stench both irksome 
and nauseous. The waves roll and swirl; no boat comes or goes to ferry men across; with naked feet and tangled hair those moving here and there are all damned spirits. The bridge’s a few miles long 
but only three spans wide. Its height measures a hundred feet; below, a thousand fathoms deep. On top are no railways for hands to hold; beneath you’ve man-seizing savage fiends who bound by 
cangues and locks, fight to flee No-Option’s parlous path. Look at those ferocious guardians beside the bridge and those damned souls in the river — how truly wretched! On branches and twigs clothes 
of green, red, yellow, and purple silk hang; below the precipice strumpets crouch for having abused their own in-laws. lron dogs and brass serpents will strive to feed on them; their fall’s eternal — there’s 
no way out.” The poem says: 

Ghosts are heard wailing; demons often cry as waves of blood rise 10000 feet high. 

Horse-faces and Bull-heads by countless scores this No-Option Bridge grimly fortify. 
While Taizong and his guides were speaking, the several Guardians of the Bridge went back to their station. Terrified by his vision, Taizong could only nod his head in silent horror. He followed the 
judge and the grand marshal across the malicious water of the No-Option River and the bitter Realm of the Bloody Bowl. Soon they arrived at the City of the Dead where clamouring voices were heard 
proclaiming distinctly, “Li Shimin has come! Li Shimin has come!” When Taizong heard all this shouting, his heart shook and his gall quivered. Then he saw a throng of spirits, some with backs broken 
by the rack, some with severed limbs, and some headless who barred his way and shouted together, “Give us back our lives! Give us back our lives!” 
In terror Taizong tried desperately to flee and hide at the same time crying, “Mr. Cui, save me! Mr. Cui, save me!” 
“Your Majesty,” said the judge, “these’re the spirits of various princes, their underlings, brigands, and robbers from sundry places. Through works of injustice, both theirs and others’, they perished and 
are now cut off from salvation because there’s none to receive them or care for them. Since they've no money or belongings, they’re ghosts abandoned to hunger and cold. Only if Your Majesty can 
give them some money I'll be able to offer you deliverance.” 
“I came here,” said Taizong, “with empty hands. Where can | get money?” 
“Your Majesty,” said the judge, “there’s in the World of the Living a man who’s deposited great sums of gold and silver in our Region of Darkness. You can use your name for a loan and lowly judge will 
serve as your voucher; we'll borrow a roomful of money from him and distribute it among the hungry ghosts. You'll then be able to get past them.” 
“Who's this man?” asked Taizong. 
“He’s a man from the Kaifeng District in Henan Province,” said the judge. “His given name’s Liang and surname’s Xiang. He’s thirteen rooms of gold and silver down here. If Your Majesty borrows from 
him, you can repay him when you return to the World of Light.” Highly pleased and more than willing to use his name for the loan, Taizong at once signed a note for the judge. He borrowed a roomful 
of gold, silver, and the grand marshal was asked to distribute the money among the ghosts. The judge also instructed them, saying, “You may divide up these pieces of silver and gold among yourselves 
and use them accordingly. Let the Great Tang Dad pass for he’s still a long time to live. By the solemn word of the Ten Kings I’m accompanying him to return to life. When he reaches the world of the 
living, he’s been instructed to hold a Grand Mass of Land and Water for your salvation." So start no more trouble.” 
When the ghosts heard these words and received the silver and gold, they obeyed and turned back. The judge ordered the grand marshal to wave the flag for guiding souls and led Taizong out of the 
City of the Dead. They set out again on a broad and level path, leaving quickly with light, airy steps. They travelled for a long time and arrived at the junction of the 6-fold Path of Transmigration. They 
saw some people who rode the clouds wearing embroidered capes and some with Daoist amulets of gold fish dangling from their waists; there were in fact monks, nuns, Daoists, secular persons, all 
varieties of beasts, fowls, ghosts, and spirits. In an unending stream they all ran beneath the Wheel of Transmigration to enter each into a predestined path. “What’s the meaning of this?” asked the 
Tang emperor. 
“Your Majesty,” said the judge, “as your mind’s enlightened to perceive the pervasive immanence of a god-nature in all things, you must remember this and proclaim it in the World of the Living. This is 
called the 6-fold Path of Transmigration. Those who perform good works will ascend to the way of the mortals; those who remain patriotic to the end will advance to the way of nobility; those who 
practice filial piety will be born again into the way of blessing; those who're just and honest will enter once more into the way of humans; those who cherish virtue will proceed to the way of riches; those 
who're vicious and violent will fall back into the way of demons.” 
When the Tang emperor heard this, he nodded his head and sighed, saying, “Ah, how truly good’s goodness! To do good will never bring illness! In a good heart always abide. On a good way your 
door fling wide. Let no evil thoughts arise and all mischief you must despise. Don’t say there’s no retribution for gods have their disposition.” 
The judge accompanied the Tang emperor up to the very entrance to the way of nobility before he saluted himself and called out, “Your Majesty, this is where you must proceed and here your humble 
judge will take leave of you. I’m asking Grand Marshal Bullseye to accompany you a little further.” 
The Tang emperor thanked him, saying, “I’m sorry, sir, that you've had to travel such great distance on my account.” 
“When Your Majesty returns to the World of Light,” said the judge, “be very certain that you celebrate the Grand Mass of Land and Water so that those wretched, homeless souls may be delivered. 
Please don't forget! Only if there’s no murmuring for vengeance in the Region of Darkness there'll be the prosperity of peace in your World of Light. If there’re any wicked ways in your life, you must 
change them one by one, teach your subjects far, and wide to do well. You may be assured then that your empire will be firmly established and fame will go down to posterity.” 
The Tang emperor said, “I promise to grant each one of your requests.” 
Having parted from Judge Cui, he followed Grand Marshal Bullseye and entered the gate. The grand marshal saw inside a black-maned bay horse complete with rein and saddle. Lending the emperor 
assistance from left and right, he quickly helped him mount it. The horse shot forward like an arrow and soon they reached the bank of the Wei River where a pair of golden carps could be seen frolicking 
on top of the waves. Pleased by what he saw the Tang emperor reined in his horse and stopped to watch. “Your Majesty,” said the grand marshal, “let's hurry and get you back into your city while 
there’s still time.” But the emperor persisted in his indulgence and refused to go forward. The grand marshal grabbed 1 of his legs and shouted, “You still won’t move? What're you waiting for?” 
With a loud splash, he was pushed off his horse into the Wei River, and thus he left the Region of Darkness and returned to the World of Light. We'll now tell you about those who served before the 
Throne in the Tang dynasty. Xu Mougong, Qin Shubao, Hu Jingde, Duan Zhixian, Ma Sanbao, Cheng Yaojin, Gao Shilian, Li Shiji, Fang Xuanling, Du Ruhui, Xiao Yu, Fu Yi, Zhang Daoyuan, Zhang 
Shiheng, and Wang Guei constituted the 2 groups of civil and military officials. They gathered with the crown prince of the Eastern Palace, the queen, the ladies of the court, and the chief steward in 
the Hall of the White Tiger for the imperial mourning. At the same time, they discussed issuing the obituary proclamation for the whole empire and crowning the prince as emperor. From 1 side of the 
hall, Wei Zheng stepped forward and said, “All of you, please refrain from doing anything hasty. If you alarm the various districts and cities, you may bring about something undesirable and unexpected. 
Let's wait here for another day for our lord will surely come back to life.” 
“What nonsense you're talking, Prime Minister Wei,” said Xu Jingzong, coming from below, “for the ancient proverb says: just as spilled water can’t be retrieved, so a dead man can never return! Why 
do you mouth such empty words to vex our minds? What reason do you've for this?” 


“To tell you the truth, Mr. Xu,” said Wei Zheng, “I’ve been instructed since my youth in the arts of mortality. My calculations are most accurate and | promise you that His Majesty won't die.” 
As they were talking, they suddenly heard a loud voice crying in the coffin, “You've drowned me! You've drowned me!” 
It so startled the civil and military officials and so terrified the queen and the ladies, that every one of them had a face brown as autumnal mulberry leaves, a body limp as the willow of early spring. The 
legs of the crown prince buckled, he could not hold the mourning staff to finish his rites. The soul of the steward left him, he could not wear the mourning cap to show his grief the matrons collapsed; 
the ladies pitched sideways; the matrons collapsed like weak hibiscus blasted by savage wind. The ladies pitched sideways like lilies overwhelmed by sudden rain. The petrified lords — their bones and 
tendons feeble - trembled and shook, all dumb and awestruck. The whole White Tiger Hall was like a bridge with broken beams; the funeral stage resembled a temple wrecked. Every person attending 
the court ran away, and no one dared approach the coffin. Only the upright Xu Mougong, the rational Prime Minister Wei, the courageous Qin Qiong, and the impulsive Jingde came forward and took 
hold of the coffin. “Your Majesty,” they cried, “if there’s something bothering you, tell us about it. Don’t play ghost and terrify your relatives!” 
Then however, Wei Zheng said, “He’s not playing ghost. His Majesty's coming back to life! Get some tools, quick!” 
They opened the top of the coffin and saw indeed that Taizong was sitting up inside, still shouting, “You've drowned me! Who bailed me out?” 
Mougong and the rest of them went forward to lift him up, saying, “Don’t be afraid, Your Majesty and wake up. Your subjects are here to protect you.” 
Only then did the Tang emperor open his eyes and say, “How | suffered just now! | barely escaped attack by spiteful demons from the Region of Darkness only to encounter death by drowning!” 
“Have no fear, Your Majesty,” said the ministers. “What kind of calamity occurred in the water?” 
“| was riding a horse,” the Tang emperor said, “when we came near the Wei River where two fishes were playing. That deceitful Grand Marshal Bullseye pushed me off my horse into the river and | 
was almost drowned.” 
“His Majesty isn’t still entirely free from the influences of the dead,” said Wei Zheng. He quickly ordered from the imperial dispensary medicinal broth designed to calm his spirit and fortify his soul. They 
also prepared some rice gruel, and only after taking such nourishments once or twice did he become his old self again, fully regaining his living senses. A quick calculation revealed that the Tang 
emperor had been dead for three days and nights and then returned to life to rule again. Thus a testimonial poem says: 
From ancient times how oft the world has changed! 
History is full of kingdoms that rise and fall. 
Countless were the wonders of Zhou, Han, and Jin. 
Which could match King Tang’s from death to life recall? 

By then it was dusk; the various ministers withdrew after they had seen the emperor retire. The next day they took off their mourning garb and changed into their court attire: everyone had on his red 
robe and black cap, his purple sash and gold medal, waiting outside the gate to be summoned to court. We now tell you about Taizong who, having received the medicine prescribed for calming his 
spirit and fortifying his soul, and having taken the rice broth several times, was carried into his bedchamber by his attendants. He slept soundly that whole night, and when he arose at dawn, his spirit 
was fully revived. Look how he was attired: donned a tall, royal cap; wore a dark ochre robe; put on a belt of green jade from Blue Mountain; trod a pair of empire-building carefree boots. His stunning 
looks surpassed anyone in court: with power to spare he resumed his reign. What a great Tang emperor of justice and truth, the Majestic Li who rose again from the dead! The Tang emperor went up 
to the Treasure hall of the Golden Carriage and gathered together the 2 groups of civil and military officials who stood in attention according to rank and file after shouting 3 times “Long live the emperor.” 
Then they heard this loud announcement: “If there’s any business, come forth and make your memorial; if there’s no business, you're dismissed from court.” 
From the east came the row of civil officials and from the west came the row of military officials; they all went forward and saluted themselves before the steps of white jade. “Your Majesty,” they said, 
“may we inquire how you awoke from your slumber that lasted so long?” 
“On that day, after we'd received the letter from Wei Zheng,” said Taizong, “we felt that our soul had departed from these halls, having been invited by the imperial guardsmen to join a hunting party. 
As we're travelling, the men and horses both disappeared whereupon my dad, the former emperor, and deceased brothers came to hassle us. We'd have been unable to escape them hadn't it been 
for the arrival of someone in black cap and robe; this man happened to be the judge Cui Jue who managed to send my deceased brothers away. We handed Wei Zheng’s letter over to him and as he’s 
reading it, some boys in blue came to lead us with flags and banners to the Hall of Darkness where we're met by the Ten Kings of the Underworld. They told us of the Jing River Dragon who accused 
us of having him slain after promising to save him. We in turn explained to them what happened and they assured us that our case had been jointly reviewed by the Three Tribunes. Then they asked 
for the Chronicles of Life and Death to examine what's to be our allotted age. Judge Cui presented his books and King Yama said after checking them that Heaven had assigned us a portion of thirty- 
three years. Since we’d ruled for only thirteen years, we're entitled to twenty more years of living. So Grand Marshal Bullseye and Judge Cui were ordered to send us back here. We took leave of the 
Ten Kings and promised to thank them with gifts of melons and other fruits. After our departure from the Hall of Darkness, we encountered in the Underworld all those who're treasonous to the state 
and disloyal to their parents, practiced neither virtue nor righteousness, squandered the five grains, cheated openly or in secret, indulged in unjust weights and measurements — in sum, the rapists, the 
thieves, the liars, the hypocrites, the wantons, the deviates, the connivers, and the lawbreakers. They're all suffering from various tortures by grinding, burning, pounding, sawing, frying, boiling, hanging, 
and skinning. There’re tens of thousands of them and we'd not make an end of this ghastly sight. Thereafter we passed by the City of the Dead filled with the souls of brigands and bandits from all over 
the Earth who came to block our path. Fortunately Judge Cui was willing to vouch for us and we’d then borrow a roomful of gold and silver from Old Man Xiang of Henan to buy off the spirits before 
we'd proceed once more. We finally parted after Judge Cul’d repeatedly instructed us that when we returned to the World of Light we're to celebrate a Grand Mass of Land and Water for the salvation 
of those orphaned spirits. After leaving the 6-fold Path of Transmigration, Grand Marshal Bullseye asked us to mount a horse so swift it seemed to be flying and brought me to the bank of the Wei River. 
As we're enjoying the sight of two fishes playing in the water, he grabbed our legs and pushed us into the river. Only then we came back to life.” When the various ministers heard these words, they all 
praised and congratulated the emperor. A notice was also sent out to every town, district in the empire, and all the officials presented gratulatory memorials. Taizong proclaimed a general amnesty for 
the prisoners in the empire. Moreover, he asked for an inventory of those convicted of capital crimes and the judge from the Board of Justice submitted some 400 names of those awaiting death by be- 
heading or hanging. Taizong granted them one year’s leave to return to their families so that they could settle their affairs and put their property in order before going to the marketplace to receive their 
just deserts. The prisoners all thanked him for such grace before departing. After issuing another edict for the care and welfare of orphans, Taizong also released some 3000 court maidens and concubi- 
nes from the palace and married them off to worthy military officers. From that time on, his reign was truly a virtuous 1 to which a testimonial poem says: 

Great's the virtue of the Great Tang Ruler! 

Surpassing Sage Kings, he makes his people prosper. 
500 convicts may now leave the prison; 3000 maidens find release from the palace. 
The empire’s officials all wish him long life. 
The ministers at court all give him high praise. 
Such good heart, once stirred, the Heavens should bless, and pass such weal to 17 generations. 
After releasing the court maidens and convicts, Taizong also issued another proclamation to be posted throughout the empire. The proclamation read: 
The cosmos’s brightly surveyed by the sun and the moon though vast; the world though immense, approves not villains in Heaven or on Earth. If your intent’s trickery, even this life will bring retribution; 
if your giving exceeds receiving, there’s blessing not only in the life hereafter. 1000 clever designs aren't as living according to one’s duties; 10000 men of violence can’t compare with 1 frugal and 
content. If you’re bent on good works and mercy, need you read the Threads with diligence? If you intend to harm others even the learning of God's vain! 
From that time on, there was not a single person in the empire who did not practice virtue. Meanwhile, another notice was posted asking for a volunteer to take the melons and other fruits to the Region 
of Darkness. At the same time, a roomful of gold and silver from the treasury was sent with the Imperial Duke of Khotan, Hu Jingde, to the Kaifeng District of Henan so that the debt to Xiang Liang 
could be repaid. After the notice had been posted for some days, a worthy came forth to volunteer his life for the mission. He was originally from Zunzhou; his surname was Liu and his given name 
Quan, and he belonged to a family of great wealth. The reason he came forward was that his wife, Li Cuilian, happened to have given a gold hairpin from her head, by way of alms, to a monk in front 
of their house. When Liu Quan chided her for her indiscretion in flaunting herself outside their home, Li became so upset that she promptly hanged herself, leaving behind her a pair of young children 
who wept piteously day and night. Liu Quan was so filled with remorse by the sight of them that he was willing to leave life and property to take the melons to hell. He therefore took down the royal 
notice and came to see the Tang emperor. The emperor ordered him to go to the Lodge of the Golden Pavilion where a pair of southern melons were put on his head, some money in his sleeve, and 
some medicine in his mouth. So Liu Quan died by taking poison. His soul, still bearing the fruits on his head, arrived at the Gate of Spirits. The demon guardian at the door shouted, “Who’re you that 
you dare to come here?” 
“By the imperial command of the Great Tang Emperor Taizong,” said Liu Quan, “I came here especially to present melons and other fruits for the enjoyment of the Ten Kings of the Underworld.” The 
demon guardian received him amiably and led him to the Treasure Hall of Darkness. When he saw King Yama, he presented the melons saying, “By order of the Tang emperor, | came from afar to 
present these melons as a token of thanks for the gracious hospitality of the Ten Kings.” 
Highly pleased, King Yama said, “That Emperor Taizong’s certainly a man of his word!” He accepted the melons and proceeded to ask the messenger about his name and his home. 
“Your humble servant,” said Liu Quan, “resided originally in Junzhou; my surname’s Liu and my given name’s Quan. Because my wife hanged herself, leaving no one to care for our children, | decided 
to leave home and children and sacrifice my life for the country by helping my emperor to take these melons here as a thank offering.” 
When the 10 Kings heard these words, they asked at once for Li, the wife of Liu Quan; she was brought in by the demon guardian. Wife and husband had a reunion before the Hall of Darkness. They 
conversed about what had happened and also thanked the 10 Kings for this meeting. King Yama moreover examined the Books of Life and Death and found that both husband and wife were supposed 
to live to a ripe old age. He quickly ordered the demon guardian to take them back to life but the guardian said, “Since Li Cuilian’s been back in the World of Darkness for many days, her body no longer 
exists. To whom should her soul attach herself?” 
“The emperor's sister, Li Yuying’s,” said King Yama, “destined to die very soon. Borrow her body right away so that this woman can return to life.” The demon guardian obeyed the order and led Liu 
Quan and his wife out of the Region of Darkness to return to life. 
012 
The Tang emperor firmly sincere, convenes a Grand Mass; Guanyin converts Gold Cicada in epiphany 

The demon guardian who was leading Liu Quan and his wife out of the Region of Darkness. Accompanied by a swirling dark wind, they went directly back to Chang'an of the great nation. The demon 
pushed the soul of Liu Quan into the Golden Court Pavilion Lodge but the soul of Cuilian was brought into the inner court of the royal palace. Just then the Princess Yuying was walking beneath the 
shadows of flowers along a path covered with green moss. The demon guardian crashed right into her and pushed her to the ground; her living soul was snatched away and the soul of Cuilian was 
pushed into Yuying’s body instead. The demon guardian then returned to the Region of Darkness. The maidservants of the palace both young and old when they saw that Yuying had fallen and died, 
ran quickly to the Hall of the Golden Chimes and reported the incident to the queen saying, “The princess's fallen and died!” 
Horrified, the queen reported it to Taizong. When Taizong heard the news, he nodded, sighing, and said, “So this has come to pass indeed! We did ask the King of Darkness whether the old and young 
of our family would be safe or not. He said, ‘They'll all be safe but | fear that your royal sister won't live long.’ Now his word’s fulfilled.” 
All the inhabitants of the palace came to mourn her but when they reached the spot where she had fallen, they saw that the princess was breathing. “Stop weeping! Stop weeping!” said the Tang 
emperor. “Don’t startle her!” he went forward and lifted her head with the royal hand crying out, “Wake up, royal sister!” 
Our princess suddenly turned over and cried, “Husband, walk slowly! Wait for me!” 
“Sister,” said Taizong, “we're all here.” 
Lifting her head and opening her eyes to look around, the princess said, “Who’re you that you dare touch me?” 
“This is your royal brother,” said Taizong, “and your sister in-law.” 
“Where do I've any royal brother and sister-in-law?” asked the princess. 
“My family’s Li and my maiden name’s Li Cuilian. My husband’s surname’s Liu. His given name’s Quan. Both of us are from Junzhou. Because | pulled a golden hairpin to give to a monk outside our 
home as alms three months ago, my husband rebuked me for walking indiscreetly out of our doors and thus violating the etiquette appropriate to a woman. He scolded me, and | became so enraged 
that | hanged myself with a white silk cord leaving behind a pair of children who wept night and day. Because of my husband who’s sent by the Tang emperor to the Region of Darkness to present 
melons, King Yama took pity on us and allowed us both to return to life. He’s walking ahead; I’d not keep up with him, tripped, and fell. How rude you're all! Not knowing my name, how dare you touch 
me!” 


When Taizong heard these words, he said to his attendants, “I suppose my sister's knocked senseless by the fall. She’s babbling!” He ordered that Yuying be helped into the palace and medicine be 
brought in from the court dispensary. 
As the Tang emperor went back to the court, one of his assistants came forward to report saying, “Your Majesty, the man, Liu Quan who went to present the melons has returned to life. He’s now 
outside the gate awaiting your order.” 
Greatly startled, the Tang emperor at once gave the order for Liu Quan to be brought in who then saluted himself before the red-lacquered courtyard. Taizong asked him, “How did the presentation of 
melons come off?” 
“Your subject,” said Liu Quan, “bore the melons on his head and went straight to the Gate of Spirits. | was led to the Hall of Darkness where | met the Ten Kings of the Underworld. | presented the 
melons and spoke at length about the sincere gratitude of my lord. King Yama’s most delighted and complimented Your Majesty profusely saying: That Taizong emperor's indeed a man of virtue and 
his word?” 
“What did you happen to see in the Region of Darkness?” asked the Tang emperor. 
“Your subject didn’t travel far,” said Liu Quan, “and | didn’t see much. | only heard King Yama questioning me on my native village and my name. Your subject therefore gave him a full account of how 
| abandoned home and children because of my wife’s suicide and volunteered for the mission. He quickly sent for a demon guardian who brought in my wife and we’re reunited at the Hall of Darkness. 
Meanwhile they also examined the Books of Life and Death and told us that we'd both live to a ripe old age. The demon guardian's dispatched to see us back to life. Your subject walked ahead but my 
wife fell behind. I’m grateful that I’m now returned to life but | don’t know where my wife’s gone.” 
Alarmed, the Tang emperor asked, “Did King Yama say anything about your wife?” 
“He didn’t say much,” said Liu Quan. “I only heard the demon guardian’s exclamation that Li Cuilian had been dead for so long that her body no longer existed. King Yama said, ‘The royal sister, Li 
Yuying should die shortly. Let Cuilian borrow the body of Yuying so that she may return to life.’ Your subject’s no knowledge of who that royal sister’s and where she resides, nor has made any attempt 
to locate her.” 
When the Tang emperor heard this report, he was filled with delight and said to the many officials around him, “When we took leave of King Yama, we questioned him with regard to the inhabitants of 
the palace. He said that the old and the young would all be safe though he feared that our sister wouldn’t live long. Just now our sister Yuying fell dying beneath the flowers. When we went to her 
assistance, she regained her consciousness shortly, crying, ‘Husband, walk slowly! Wait for me!’ We thought that her fall had knocked her senseless as she’s babbling like that. But when we questioned 
her carefully, she said exactly what Liu Quan now tells us.” 
“If Her Royal Highness passed away shortly only to say these things after she regained consciousness,” said Wei Zheng, “this means that there’s a real possibility that Liu Quan’s wife’s returned to life 
by borrowing another person’s body. Let's invite the princess to come out and see what she’s to tell us.” 
“We just asked the court dispensary to send in some medicine,” said the Tang emperor, “for we don’t know what's happening.” 
Some ladies of the court went to fetch the princess and they found her inside screaming, “Why do | need to take any medicine? How’d this be my house? Ours is a clean, cool house of tiles unlike this 
one, yellow as if it’d jaundice and with such gaudy appointments! Let me out! Let me out!” 
She was still shouting when four or five ladies and two or three eunuchs took hold of her and led her outside to the court. The Tang emperor said, “Do you recognise your husband?” 
“What're you talking about?” said Yuying. “The two of us were pledged to each other since childhood as husband and wife. | bore him a boy and a girl. How’d | not recognise him?” 
The Tang emperor asked 1 of the palatial officials, “Help her go down from the Treasure Hall.” 
The princess went right before the steps of white jade and when she saw Liu Quan, she grabbed him saying, “Husband, where’ve you been? You didn’t even wait for me! | tripped, fell, and then was 
surrounded by all these crazy people talking nonsense! What do you've to say to this?” 
Liu Quan heard that she was speaking like his wife but the person he saw certainly did not resemble her and dared not acknowledge her to be his own. The Tang emperor said, “Indeed, men have 
seen mountains cracking, or the gaping of earth; but none has seen the living exchanged for the dead!” What a just and kindly ruler! He took his sister's toilet boxes, garments, jewellery, and bestowed 
them all on Liu Quan; it was as if the man was provided with a dowry. He was moreover exempted forever from having to engage in any compulsory service to the Crown and told to take the royal sister 
back to his home. So husband and wife together expressed their gratitude before the steps and returned happily to their village. A testimonial poem says: 

How long, how short - man’s his span of years; he lives and dies, each foreordained by fate. 

Liu Quan presented melons and returned to life; in someone’s body so did Li, his mate. 

The 2 of them took leave of the emperor, went directly back to Junzhou, and saw that both house and children were in good order. They never ceased thereafter to proclaim the rewards of virtue but 
we'll speak of them no further. We now tell you about Yuchi Gong who took a huge load of gold and silver and went to see Xiang Liang at the Kaifeng District in Henan. It turned out that the man made 
his living by selling water while his wife whose surname was Zhang, sold pottery in front of their home. Whatever money they made, they kept only enough for their subsistence, giving all the rest either 
as alms to the monks or as gifts to the dead by purchasing paper money and burning it. They thus built up enormous merit; for though they were poor folks in the World of Light, they were in fact leading 
citizens for whom jade and gold were laid up in the other world. When Yuchi Gong came to their door with the gold and silver, Papa Xiang and Mama Xiang were terror-stricken. And when they also 
saw the district officials with their horses and carriages assembling outside their thatched hut, the aged couple were dumbfounded. They knelt on the floor and respected without ceasing. “Old folks, 
please arise,” said Yuchi Gong. “Though I’m an imperial official, | came here with this gold and silver to repay you by order of my king.” 
Shaking and quaking, the man said, “Your lowly servant's never lent money to others. How dare we accept such inexplicable wealth?” 
“I've found out,” said Yuchi Gong, “that you're indeed a poor fellow. But you've also given alms to feed the monks. Whatever exceeds your necessities you've used to purchase paper money that you 
bumed in dedication to the Region of Darkness. You've thus accumulated a vast fortune down below. Our emperor, Taizong returned to life after being dead for three days; he borrowed a roomful of 
gold and silver from you while he’s in the Region of Darkness and we're returning the exact sum to you. Please count your money accordingly so that we may make our report back to the emperor.” 
Xiang Liang and his wife however, remained adamant. They raised their hands to Heaven and cried, “If your lowly servants accepted this gold and silver, we'd die quickly. We might've been given credit 
for burning paper cash but this is a secret unknown to us. Moreover, what evidence do we’ve that our dad, His Majesty borrowed our money in some other world? We simply daren’t accept this.” 
“His Majesty told us,” said Yuchi Gong, “that he received the loan from you because Judge Cui vouched for him and he’d bear testimony. So please accept this.” 
“Even if | were to die,” said Xiang Liang, “I'd not accept the gift.” 
Seeing that they persisted in their refusal, Yuchi Gong had no alternative but to send someone back to report to the Throne. When Taizong saw the report and learned that Xiang Liang had refused to 
accept the gold and silver, he said, “They’re truly virtuous elders!” He issued a decree at once that Hu Jingde should use the money to erect a temple, build a shrine, and support the religious services 
that would be performed in them. The old couple, in other words, would be repaid in this manner. The decree went out to Jingde who having expressed his gratitude, facing the capital, proclaimed its 
content for all to know. He used the money to purchase a lot of about fifty acres not needed either by the military authorities or the people. A temple was erected on this piece of land and named the 
Royal Xiangguo Temple.’ To the left of it there was also a shrine dedicated to Papa and Mama Xiang with a stone inscription stating that the buildings were erected under the supervision of Yuchi Gong. 
This is the Great Xiangguo Temple still standing today. The work was finished and reported; Taizong was exceedingly pleased. He then gathered many officials together in order that a public notice be 
issued to invite monks for the celebration of the Grand Mass of Land and Water, so that those orphaned souls in the Region of Darkness might find salvation. The notice went throughout the empire, 
and officials of all regions were asked to recommend monks illustrious for their holiness to go to Chang'an for the Mass. In less than a month’s time, various monks from the empire had arrived. The 
Tang emperor ordered the court historian, Fu Yi, to select an illustrious priest to take charge of the ceremonies. When Fu Yi received the order however, he presented a memorial to the Throne that 
attempted to dispute the worth of God.2 The memorial said: 
The teachings of the Western Territory deny the relations of ruler and subject, of dad and son. With the doctrines of the 3 Ways? and the 6-fold Path, ‘they beguile and seduce the foolish and the 
simpleminded. They emphasise the sins of the past in order to ensure the felicities of the future. By reciting in Sanskrit, they seek a way of escape. We submit however, that birth, death, and the length 
of one’s life are ordered by nature; but the conditions of public disgrace or honour are determined by human volition. These phenomena aren't ordained by God as some philistines would now maint- 
ain. The teachings of God didn’t exist in the time of the 5 Thearchs, the 3 Kings, and yet those rulers were wise, their subjects loyal, and reigns long-lasting. It's not until the period of Emperor Ming in 
the Han dynasty that the worship of foreign gods was established® but this meant only that priests of the Western Territory were permitted to propagate their faith. The event in fact represented a foreign 
intrusion in China and the teachings are hardly worthy to be believed. 
When Taizong saw the memorial, he had it distributed among the various officials for discussion. At that time the Prime Minister Xiao Yu came forward and saluted himself to address the throne saying, 
“The teachings of God that’ve flourished in several previous dynasties seek to exalt the good and to restrain what's evil. In this way they're covertly an aid to the nation and there’s no reason why they'd 
be rejected. For God's after all also a sage and he who spums a sage’s himself lawless. | urge that the dissenter be severely punished.” 
Taking up the debate with Xiao Yu, Fu Yi contended that propriety had its foundation in service to one’s parents and ruler. Yet God forsook his parents and left his family; indeed, he defied the Son of 
Heaven all by himself, just as he used an inherited body to rebel against his parents. Xiao Yu, Fu Yi went on to say, was not born in the wilds but by his adherence to this doctrine of parental denial, he 
confirmed the saying that an un-filial son had in fact no parents. Xiao Yu however, folded his hands in front of him and declared, “Hell’s established precisely for people of this kind.” 
Taizong thereupon called on the Lord High Chamberlain, Zhang Daoyuan, the President of the Grand Secretariat, Zhang Shiheng, and asked how efficacious the Religious exercises were in the 
procure-ment of blessings. The 2 officials replied, “The emphasis of God’s on purity, benevolence, compassion, the proper fruits, and the unreality of things. It's Emperor Wu of the Northern Zhou 
dynasty who set the Three Religions in order.6 The Chan Master, Da Hui also had extolled those concepts of the dark and the distant. Generations of people revered such saints as the Fifth Patriarch 
who became man’ or the Awakening religion who appeared in his sacred form; none of them proved to be inconspicuous in grace and power. Moreover, it’s been held since antiquity that the Three 
Religions are most honourable, not to be destroyed or abolished. Therefore, we beseech Your Majesty to exercise your clear and sagacious judgement.” 
Highly pleased, Taizong said, “The words of our worthy subjects are reasonable. Anyone who disputes them further will be punished.” 
He thereupon ordered Wei Zheng, Xiao Yu, and Zhang Daoyuan to invite the various Religious priests to prepare the site for the Grand Mass and to select from among them someone of great merit 
and virtue to serve as the altar master. All the officials then saluted their heads to the ground to thank the emperor before withdrawing. From that time also came the law that any person who denounces 
a monk or Religion will have his arms broken. The next day the 3 court officials began the process of selection at the Mountain-River Altar and from among the priests gathered there they chose an 
illustrious monk of great merit. Gold Cicada was his former divine name. As heedless he was of a goa’s talk, he had to suffer in this world of dust to fall in the net by being born a man. He met misfortune 
as he came to Earth and evildoers even before his birth. His dad: Chen, a Zhuangyuan from Haizhou. His mum’s sire: chief of this dynasty’s court. Fated by his natal star to fall in the stream, he followed 
tide and current, chased by mighty waves. At Gold Mountain, the island, he had great luck for the abbot, Qian’an® raised him up. He met his true mum at age 18 and called on her dad at the capital. A 
great army was sent by Chief Kaishan to stamp out at Hongzhou the vicious crew. The Zhuangyuan Guangrui escaped his doom: Son rejoined sire — how worthy of praise! They saw the emperor to 
receive his grace; their names resounded in Lingyan Tower. °Declining office, he chose a monk’s life at Hongfu Temple to seek the true Way, this old God-child nicknamed River Float with a religious 
name of Chen Xuanzang. So that very day the multitude selected the priest Xuanzang, a man who had been a monk since childhood who maintained a vegetarian diet and received the commandments 
the moment he left his mum’s womb. His maternal grandpa was Yin Kaishan, 1 of the chief army commanders of the present dynasty. His dad, Chen Guangrui had taken the prize of Zhuangyuan and 
was appointed Grand Secretary of the Wenyuan Chamber. Xuanzang however, had no love for glory or wealth, being dedicated wholly to the pursuit of Extinguishment. Their investigations revealed 
that he had an excellent family background and the highest moral character. Not one of the thousands of classics and Threads had he failed to master; none of the Religious recites and hymns was 
unknown to him. The three officials led Xuanzang before the throne. After going through elaborate court ritual, they saluted to report, “Your subjects have selected an illustrious monk by the name of 
Chen Xuanzang in obedience to your holy decree.” 
Hearing the name, Taizong thought silently for a long time and said, “Can Xuanzang be the son of Grand Secretary Chen Guangrui?” 
Child River Float respected and replied, “That's indeed your subject.” 
“This is a most appropriate choice,” said Taizong, delighted. “You're truly a monk of great virtue and possessing the mind of Chan. We therefore appoint you the Grand Expositor of the Faith, Supreme 
Vicar of Priests.” 
Xuanzang touched his forehead for God to express his gratitude and receive his appointment. He was given furthermore, a cassock of knitted gold and 5 colours, a Vairocana hat, ‘and the instruction 
diligently to seek out all worthy monks and to rank all these teachers"' in order. They were to follow the imperial decree and proceed to the Temple of Transformation’2 where they would begin the ritual 
after selecting a propitious day and hour. Xuanzang saluted again to receive the decree and left. He went to the Temple of Transformation and gathered many monks together; they made ready the 
beds, built the platforms, and rehearsed the poems. A total of 1200 worthy monks, young and old were chosen who were then further separated into three divisions occupying the rear, middle, and front 
portions of the hall. All the preparations were completed and everything was put in order before the gods. The 3" day of the 9" month of that same year was selected as the lucky day, when a Grand 


Mass of Land and Water lasting 7 weeks (in accordance with the number 7 times 7) would begin. A memorial was presented to Taizong who went with all his relatives and officials, both civil and military, 
to the Mass on that day to burn incense and listen to the lecture. A poem as testimony says: 
When the year-star of Zhenguan reached 13, the king called his people to hear the Sacred Books. 
The boundless Law’s performed at a plot of truth; cloud, fog, and light filled the Great Promise Hall. 
By grace the king decreed this grand temple’s rite; shell-shed Gold Cicada sought wealth of the West. 
He spread wide the good works to save the damned and held his faith to preach the 3 Modes of Life." 
In the 13% year of the Zhenguan period when the year stood at jisi and the ninth month at jiaxu, on the 3 day and at the auspicious hour of gueimao, Chen Xuanzang, the Great Expositor-Priest, 
gathered together 1200 illustrious monks. They met at the Temple of Transformation in the city of Chang’an to expound the various holy Threads. After holding court early that morning, the emperor 
led many officials both military and civil and left the Treasure Hall of Golden Chimes by phoenix carriages and dragon chariots. They came to the temple to listen to the lectures and raise incense. How 
does the imperial cortege appear? Truly it comes with a sky full of blessed air, countless shafts of hallowed light. The favourable wind blows gently; the omnificent sun shines brightly. 1000 lords with 
girdle-jade walk in front and rear. The many flags of guardsmen stand both left and right. Those holding gilt bludgeons, halberds, and axes march in pairs; the red silk lanterns, the royal incense urn, 
move in solemnity. The dragons fly and the phoenixes exercise; the falcons soar and the eagles take wing. This Son of Heaven’s an upright sage; the righteous ministers are good. They increase our 
bliss by a millennium, surpassing Yu and Shun; secure peace of 10000 ages, rivalling Yao and Tang. We also see the curve-handled umbrella and robes with rolling dragons — their glare lighting up 
each other; the jade joined-rings, the phoenix fans waving through holy mist. Those caps of pearls and belts of jade; the purple sashes and medals of gold. 1000 rows of soldiers protect the Throne; 2 
lines of marshals uphold the carriage. This emperor cleansed and sincere, salutes a god, Glad to raise incense and seek virtue’s fruit. The grand cortege of the Tang emperor soon arrived in front of 
the temple. The emperor ordered a halt to the poems, left the carriages, and led many officials in the worship of God by taking up burning incense sticks in their hands. After saluting 3 times holding 
the incense, they raised their heads and looked around them. This was indeed a splendid religious hall. See dancing flags and banners; bright, gleaming sunshades. Dancing flags and banners fill the 
air with strands of flashing coloured mists. Bright, gleaming sunshades glow in the sun as fiery bolts. Imposing, the gold image of Lokajyestha; ‘4most awesome, the jade features of the Arhats. Divine 
flowers fill the vases. Sandalwood incense burn in the urns. The divine flowers filling the vases adorn the temple with a brilliant forest of brocade. The sandalwood incense burning in the urns covers 
the clear sky with waves of fragrant clouds. Piled high on red trays are fruits in season. On coloured counters, mounds of cakes and sweets rest. Rows of noble priests recite the holy Threads to save 
from their travails those orphaned souls. Taizong and his officials each lifted the incense; they also worshipped the golden body of a god and paid homage to the Arhats. Thereafter, the Master of the 
Law, Chen Xuanzang, the Grand Expositor of the Faith, led the various monks to greet the Tang emperor. After the ceremony, they went back to their seats according to their rank and station. The 
priest then presented Taizong with the proclamation for the deliverance of the orphaned souls. It read: 
The supreme virtue’s vast and endless for Religion is founded upon Extinguishment; the spirit of the pure and the clean circulates freely and flows everywhere in the 3 Regions. There’re 1000 changes 
and 10000 transformations, all regulated by the forces of yin and yang. Boundless and vast indeed are the substance, the function, the true nature, and the permanence of such phenomena. But look 
at those orphaned souls, how worthy they're of our pity and commiseration! Now by the holy command of Taizong, we’ve selected and assembled various priests who'll engage in meditation and the 
proclamation of the Law. Flinging wide the gates of salvation and setting in motion many vessels of mercy, we’d deliver you, the multitudes from the Sea of Woe and save you from perdition and the 6- 
fold Path. You'll be led to return to the way of truth and to enjoy the bliss of Heaven. Whether it be by motion, rest, or non-activity, you'll be united with and become pure essences. Therefore make use 
of this noble occasion for you're invited to the pleasures of the celestial city. Take advantage of our Grand Mass so that you may find release from Hell’s confinement, ascend quickly, freely to ultimate 
bliss, and travel without restraint in the Region of the West. ' 
The poem says: 
An urn of mortal incense. Some scrolls of salvific power. 
As we proclaim this boundless Law, receive now Heaven’s endless grace. 
All your guilt and crime abolished, you lost souls may leave your prison. 
May our nation be firmly blessed with peace long and all-embracing. 
Highly pleased by what he read, Taizong said to the monks, “Be firm, all of you in your devotion and don’t slack in your service to God. After the achievement of merit and after each’s received his 
blessing, we'll reward you handsomely. Be assured that you'll not have laboured in vain.” The 1200 monks all touched their foreheads to express their gratitude. After the 3 vegetarian meals of the day, 
the Tang emperor retumed to the palace to wait for the formal celebration of the mass a week hence when he would again be invited to raise incense. As dusk was about to fall, the various officials all 
retired. Look at the long stretch of clear sky as twilight dims as specks of jackdaw drop to their perch late. People grow quiet, the city full of lights: now is the time for Chan monks to meditate. The next 
morning the Master of the Law again ascended his seat and gathered the monks to recite their Threads. The Nun Guanyin of the Potalaka Mountain in the South Sea since receiving the command of 
Siddhartha was searching in the city of Chang’an for a worthy person to be the seeker of scriptures. For a long time however, she encountered no one truly virtuous. Then she learned that Taizong was 
extolling merit and virtue and selecting illustrious monks to hold the Grand Mass. When she discovered moreover that the chief priest and celebrant was the monk Child River Float who was a worshipper 
of God born from paradise and happened also to be the very elder whom she had sent to this disciple, the Nun was exceedingly pleased. She immediately took the treasures bestowed by God and 
carried them out with Liberation to sell them on the main streets of the city. These treasures were the embroidered cassock with rare jewels and the 9-ring priestly staff. But she kept hidden the Golden, 
the Constrictive, and the Prohibitive Fillets for use in a later time putting up for sale only the cassock and the priestly staff. Now in the city of Chang’an there was one of those foolish monks who had 
not been selected to participate in the Grand Mass but who happened to possess a few strands of pelf. Seeing the Nun who had changed herself into a monk covered with scabs and sores, barefooted 
and bareheaded, dressed in rags, and holding up for sale the glowing cassock, he approached and asked, “You filthy monk, how much do you want for your cassock?” 
“The price of the cassock’s,” said the Nun, “five thousand taels of silver; two thousand for the staff.” 
The foolish monk laughed and said, “This filthy monk’s mad! A lunatic! You want seven thousand taels of silver for two such common articles? They aren’t worth that much even if wearing them would 
make you mortal or turn you into a god. Take them away! You'll never be able to sell them!” 
The Nun did not bother to argue with him; she walked away and proceeded on her journey with Liberation. After a long while, they came to the Eastern Flower Gate and ran right into the chief minister 
Xiao Yu who was just returning from court. His outriders were shouting to clear the streets but the Nun boldly refused to step aside. She stood on the street holding the cassock and met the chief 
minister head on. The chief minister pulled in his reins to look at this bright, luminous cassock, and asked his subordinates to inquire about the price of the garment. “I want five thousand taels for the 
cassock,” said the Nun, “and two thousand for the staff.” 
“What's so good about them,” asked Xiao Yu, “that they'd be so expensive?” 
“This cassock’s,” said the Nun, “something good about it and something bad, too. For some people it may be very expensive but for others it may cost nothing at all.” 
“What's good about it,” asked Xiao Yu, “and what's bad about it?” 
“He who wears my cassock,” replied the Nun, “won't fall into perdition, suffer in Hell, encounter violence, or meet tigers, and wolves. That's how good it’s! But if the person happens to be a foolish monk 
who relishes pleasures and rejoices in iniquities, or a priest who obeys neither the dietary laws nor the commandments, or a worldly fellow who attacks the Threads and slanders a god, he'll never even 
get to see my cassock. That's what's bad about it!” 
The chief minister asked again, “What do you mean, it'll be expensive for some and cheap for others?” 
“He who doesn’t follow the Law of God,” said the Nun, “or revere the Three Jewels will be required to pay seven thousand taels if he insists on buying my cassock and staff. That’s how expensive it'll 
be! But if he honours the Three Jewels, rejoices in doing good deeds, and obeys our God, he’s a person worthy of these things. I'll willingly give him the cassock and the staff to establish an affinity of 
goodness with him. That’s what | meant when | said that for some it would cost nothing.” 
When Xiao Yu heard these words, his face could not hide his pleasure, for he knew that this was a good person. He dismounted at once and greeted the Nun ceremoniously saying, “Your Holy 
Eminence, please pardon whatever offence Xiao Yu might have caused. Our Great Tang Emperor’s a most religious person and all the officials of his court are like-minded. In fact, we’ve just begun a 
Grand Mass of Land and Water and this cassock will be most appropriate for the use of Chen Xuanzang, the Grand Expositor of the Faith. Let me go with you to have an audience with the Throne.” 
The Nun was happy to comply with the suggestion. They turned around and went into the Eastern Flower Gate. The Custodian of the Yellow Door went inside to make the report, and they were 
summoned to the Treasure Hall where Xiao Yu and the 2 monks covered with scabs and sores stood below the steps. “What does Xiao Yu want to report to us?” asked the Tang emperor. 
Saluting himself before the steps, Xiao Yu said, “Your subject going out of the Eastern Flower Gate met by chance these two monks selling a cassock and a priestly staff. | thought of the priest, 
Xuanzang who might wear this garment. For this reason, we asked to have an audience with Your Majesty.” 
Highly pleased, Taizong asked for the price of the cassock. The Nun and Liberation stood at the foot of the steps but did not salute at all. When asked the price of the cassock, the Nun replied, “Five 
thousand taels for the cassock and two thousand for the priestly staff.” 
“What's so good about the cassock,” said Taizong, “that it'd cost so much?” 
The Nun said, “Of this cassock, a dragon that wears but one shred will miss the woe of being devoured by the great roc; or a crane on which one thread’s hung will transcend this world and reach the 
place of the gods. Sit in it: ten thousand gods will salute you! Move with it: seven Gods will follow you! ‘This cassock’s made of silk drawn from ice silkworm" and threads spun by skilled craftsmen. 
Mortal girls did the weaving; divine maidens helped at the loom. Bit by bit, the parts were sewn and embroidered. Stitch by stitch, it arose - a brocade from the heddle, its pellucid weave finer than 
ornate blooms. Its colours, brilliant, emit precious light. Wear it, and crimson mist will surround your frame. Doff it and see the coloured clouds take flight. Outside the Three Heavens’ door its primal 
light’s seen; before the Five Mountains its magic aura grew. Inlaid are layers of lotus from the West, hanging pearls shine like planets, and stars. On four corners are pearls that glow at night; on top 
stays fastened an emerald. Though lacking the all-seeing primal form, it’s held by Eight Treasures all aglow. This cassock you keep folded at leisure; you wear it to meet sages. When it’s kept folded 
at leisure, its rainbow-like hues cut through a thousand wrappings. When you wear it to meet sages, all Heaven takes fright —- both demons and gods! On top are the riddhi pearl, the mani pearl, the 
dust-clearing pearl, the wind-stopping pearl. There’re also the red cornelian, the purple coral, the luminescent pearl, ‘*the Son of Sari. They rob the moon of its whiteness; they match the sun in its 
redness. In waves its divine aura imbues the sky; in flashes its brightness lifts up its perfection. In waves its divine aura imbues the sky, flooding the Gate of Heaven. In flashes its brightness lifts up its 
perfection, lighting up the whole world. Shining upon the mountains and the streams, it wakens tigers and leopards; lighting up the isles and the seas, moves dragons and fishes. Along its edges hang 
two chains of melted gold and joins the collars a ring of snow-white jade. The poem says: 
The august 3 Jewels’ most noble truths judge all 4 Creatures on the 6-fold Path. 
The mind brightened feeds on God’s Law and humans’, the nature perceived transmits the wisdom lamp. 
Solemn Lightningdhatu'® guards one’s body when a mind's pure like ice in flasks of jade. 
Since God caused this cassock to be made that 10000 kalpas could harm a monk?” 
When the Tang emperor who was up in the Treasure Hall, heard these words, he was highly pleased. “Tell me, priest,” he asked again, “What’s so good about the nine-ring priestly staff?” 
“My staff's,” said the Nun, “on it nine joined-rings made of iron and set in bronze and nine joints of vine mortal ever young. When held, it scorns the sight of aging bones; it leaves the mount to return 
with fleecy clouds. It roamed through Heaven with the Fifth Patriarch; it broke Hell’s gate where Luo Bo sought his Mom. 2°Not soiled by the filth of this red-dust world, it gladly trails a god-monk up 
Mount Jade. 2 
When the Tang emperor heard these words, he gave the order to have the cassock spread open so that he might examine it carefully from top to bottom. It's indeed a marvellous thing! “Venerable 
Elder of the Great Law,” he said, “we'll not deceive you. At this very moment we’ve exalted the Religion of Mercy and planted abundantly in the fields of blessing. You may see many priests assembled 
in the Temple of Transformation to perform the Law and the Threads. In their midst is a man of great merit and virtue whose religious name’s Xuanzang. We wish therefore to purchase these two 
treasure objects from you to give them to him. How much do you really want for these things?” 
Hearing these words, the Nun and Liberation folded their hands and gave praise to a god. “If he’s a man of virtue and merit,” she said to the throne saluting, “this humble cleric’s willing to give them to 
him. I'll accept no money.” 
She finished speaking and turned at once to leave. The Tang emperor quickly asked Xiao Yu to hold her back. Standing up in the Hall, he saluted low before saying, “Previously you claimed that the 
cassock’s worth five thousand taels of silver and the staff two thousand. Now that you see we want to buy them, you refuse to accept payment. You're implying that we’d bank on our position and take 
your possession by force? That’s absurd! We'll pay you according to the original sum you asked for; please don’t refuse it.” 


Raising her hands for a salutation, the Nun said, “This humble cleric made a vow before stating that anyone who reveres the Three Treasures, rejoices in virtue, and submits to our God will be given 
these treasures free. Since it is clear that Your Majesty’s eager to magnify virtue, rest in excellence, and honour our Religious faith by having an illustrious monk proclaim the Great Law, it's my duty to 
present these gifts to you. I'll take no money for them. They'll be left here and this humble cleric will take leave of you.” 
When the Tang emperor saw that she was so insistent, he was very pleased. He ordered the Court of Banquets to prepare a huge vegetarian feast to thank the Nun who firmly declined that also. She 
left amiably and went back to her hiding place at the Temple of the Local Spirit that we'll mention no further. Taizong held a noon court and asked Wei Zheng to summon Xuanzang to an audience. 
That Master of the Law was just leading the monks in reciting Threads and reciting geyas.22 When he heard the emperor's decree, he left the platform immediately and followed Wei Zheng to come 
before the Throne. “We've greatly troubled our Master,” said Taizong, “to render exemplary good works for which we’ve hardly anything to offer you in thanks. This morning Xiao Yu came upon two 
monks who're willing to present us with a brocaded cassock with rare treasures and a nine-ring priestly staff. We therefore call specially for you so that you may receive them for your enjoyment and 
use.” Xuanzang respected to express his thanks. “If our Master of the Law’s willing,” said Taizong, “please put the garment on for us to have a look.” 
The priest accordingly shook open the cassock and draped it on his body, holding the staff in his hands. As he stood before the steps, ruler and subjects were all delighted. Here’s a true child of the 
Siddhartha! Look at him: his looks imposing, how elegant and fine! This robe of God fits him like a glove! Its most lustrous splendour spills over the world; bright colours imbue the universe. Up and 
down are set rows of shining pearls; back and front thread layers of golden cords. Brocade gilds the robe’s edges all around with patterns embroidered most varied and rare. Shaped like 8 Treasures 
are the thread-made frogs. A gold ring joins the collars with velvet loops. It shows on top and bottom Heaven’s ranks, stars, great, small are placed left, and right. Great is the fortune of Xuanzang, the 
priest now most deserving of this precious thing. He seems a living Arhat from the West or even better than its true elite. He holds his staff and all its nine rings clang, benefice in his Vairocana hat. A 
true God-child, it’s no idle tale, he matches the Complete Liberation and that’s no lie! 
The various officials both civil and military stood before the steps and shouted, “Bravo!” Taizong could not have been more pleased, and he told the Master of the Law to keep his cassock on and the 
staff in his hands. 2 regiments of honour guards were ordered to accompany him along with many other officials. They left the gate of the court, proceeded on the main streets toward the temple, and 
the whole entourage gave the impression that a Zhuangyuan was making a tour of the city. The procession’s a stirring sight indeed! 
The merchants and tradesmen in the city of Chang’an, the princes and noblemen, the men of ink and letters, the grown men and the little girls - they all vied to get a good view. Everyone exclaimed, 
“What a priest! He’s truly a living Arhat descended to Earth, a live Nun coming to the world!” Xuanzang went right to the temple where he was met by all the monks leaving their seats. The moment 
they saw him wearing that cassock and holding the staff, they all said that King Ksitigarbha?’ had arrived! Everyone saluted to him and waited on him left and right. Going up to the main hall, Xuanzang 
lighted incense to honour a god, after which he spoke of the emperor's favour to the multitude. Thereafter, each went back to his assigned seat, and soon the fiery orb sank westward. So it was sun- 
set: mist hid trees and grasses; the capital’s first chimes rang out. Zheng-Zheng they struck thrice, and human traffic ceased; streets back and front soon grew quiet. Though lights burned bright at 1st 
Temple, the lone village was hush and mute. The monk focused to tend the Threads still - time to smelt demons, to nurse his spirit. 24Time went by like the snapping of fingers, and the formal celebration 
of the Grand Mass on the seventh day was to take place. Xuanzang presented the Tang emperor with a memorial, inviting him to raise the incense. News of these good works was circulating throughout 
the empire. Upon receiving the notice, Taizong sent for his carriage and led many of his officials, both civil and military, as well as his relatives and the ladies of the court, to the temple. All the people 
of the city —- young and old, nobles and commoners — went along also to hear the preaching. At the same time, the Nun said to Liberation, “Today's the formal celebration of the Grand Mass, the first 
seventh of seven such occasions. It’s about time for you and me to join the crowd. First, we want to see how the mass is going; second, we want to find out whether Gold Cicada’s worthy of my 
treasures; and third, we can discover what division of Religion he’s preaching about.” The 2 of them thereupon went to the temple; and so it is that affinity will help old comrades meet as perfection 
returns to this holy seat. As they walked inside the temple to look around, they discovered that such a place in the capital of a great nation indeed surpassed the Sad-varsa® or even the Jetavana 
Garden of the Sravastt. It was truly a lofty temple of Caturdishgah, resounding with divine poems and Religious recites. The nun went directly to the side of the platform of many treasures and beheld 
a form truly resembling the enlightened Gold Cicada. The poem says: 

All things were pure with not a spot of dust. Xuanzang of the Great Law sat high onstage. 

Lost souls, redeemed, approached the place unseen; the city’s highborn came to hear the Law. 
You give when time’s ripe: this intent’s far-reaching. You die as you please, the Canon door’s open. 

As they heard him rehearse the Boundless Law, young and old were glad and comforted. 

Another poem says: 
Since she made a tour of this holy site, she met a friend unlike all other men. 
They spoke of the present and countless things —merit and trial in this world of dust. 

The cloud of Law extends to shroud the hills; the net of Truth spread wide to fill all space. 

Asses your lives and return to good thoughts for Heaven’s grace’s rife as falling blooms. 
On the platform, that Master of the Law recited for a while the Thread of Life and Deliverance for the Dead; he then lectured for a while on the Heavenly Treasure Chronicle for Peace in the Nation, 
after which he preached for a while on the Scroll on Merit and Self-Cultivation. 2The Nun drew near and thumped her hands on the platform, calling out in a loud voice, “Hey, monk! You only know how 
to talk about the teachings of the Little Vehicle. Do you know nothing about the Great Vehicle?” 
When Xuanzang heard this question, he was filled with delight. He turned and leaped down from the platform, raised his hands and saluted the Nun saying, “Venerable Teacher, please pardon your 
pupil for much disrespect. | only know that the priests who came before me all talk about the teachings of the Little Vehicle. I’ve no idea what the Great Vehicle teaches.” 
“The doctrines of your Little Vehicle,” said the Nun, “can’t save the damned by leading them up to Heaven; they can only mislead and confuse mortals. I’ve in my possession Tripitaka, three collections 
of the Great Vehicle Laws of God that're able to send the lost to Heaven, deliver the afflicted from their sufferings, fashion ageless bodies, break the cycles of coming, and going.” 
As they were speaking, the officer in charge of incense and the inspection of halls reported to the emperor, “The Master’s just in the process of lecturing on the wondrous Law when he’s pulled down 
by two scabby mendicants, babbling some kind of nonsense.” 
The king ordered them to be arrested and the 2 monks were taken by many people and pushed into the hall in the rear. When the nun saw Taizong, she neither raised her hands nor made a salute; 
instead she lifted her face and said, “What do you want of me, Your Majesty?” 
Recognising her, the Tang emperor said, “Aren’t you the monk who brought us the cassock the other day?” 
“?'m,” said the Nun. 
“If you've come to listen to the lecture,” said Taizong, “you may as well take some vegetarian food. Why indulge in this wanton discussion with our Master and disturb the lecture hall, delaying our 
religious service?” 
“What that Master of yours was lecturing on,” said the Nun, “happens to be the teachings of the Little Vehicle that can’t lead the lost up to Heaven. In my possession is the Tripitaka, the Great Vehicle 
Law of God that’s able to save the damned, deliver the afflicted and fashion the indestructible body.” 
Delighted, Taizong asked eagerly, “Where's your Great Vehicle Law of God?” 
“At the place of our lord, Siddhartha,” said the Nun, “in the Great Temple of Thunderclap located in India of the Great Western Heaven. It can untie the knot of a hundred enmities and dispel unexpected 
misfortunes.” 
“Can you remember any of it?” said Taizong. 
“Certainly,” said the Nun. 
Taizong was overjoyed and said, “Let the Master lead this monk to the platform to begin a lecture at once.” 
The Nun led Liberation and flew up onto the high platform. She then trod on the hallowed clouds to rise up into the air and revealed her true salvific form, holding the pure vase with the willow branch. 
At her left stood the virile figure of Liberation carrying the rod. The Tang emperor was so overcome that he saluted to the sky and worshipped, as civil and military officials all knelt on the ground and 
bumed incense. Throughout the temple, there was not one of the monks, nuns, Daoists, secular persons, scholars, craftsmen, and merchants who did not salute and exclaim, “Dear Nun! Dear Nun!” A 
poem as a testimony says: 

They saw only auspicious mist in diffusion and religious-body veiled by holy light. 
In the bright air of 9-fold Heaven a lady mortal appeared. 
That Nun wore on her head a cap fastened by leaves of gold and set with flowers of jade with tassels of dangling pearls, all aglow with golden light. 
On her body she’d a robe of fine blue silk, lightly coloured and simply fretted by circling dragons and soaring phoenixes. 
Down in front’s hung a pair of fragrant girdle-jade that glowed with the moon and exercised with the wind, overlaid with precious pearls and with imperial jade. 
Around her waist was tied an embroidered velvet skirt of ice worm silk and piped in gold in which she topped the coloured clouds and crossed the jasper sea. 
Before her she led a cockatoo with red beak and yellow plumes that had roamed the Eastern Ocean and throughout the world to foster deeds of mercy and filial piety. 
She held in her hands a grace-dispensing, world-sustaining precious vase in which was planted a twig of pliant willow that'd moisten the blue sky, sweep aside all evil — all clinging fog, and smoke. 
Her jade rings joined embroidered loops; gold lotus grew beneath her feet. 
For three days oft she came and went: this very Guanshiyin®° who saves from pain and woe. 
So pleased by the vision was Tang Taizong that he forgot about his empire; so enthralled were the civil and military officials that they completely ignored court etiquette. Everyone was reciting, “l obey 
the Nun Guanshiyin!” 
Taizong at once gave the order for a skilled painter to sketch the true form of the Nun. No sooner had he spoken than a certain Wu Daozi was selected who could portray gods, sages, and a master of 
the noble perspective and lofty vision. (This man in fact was the one who would later paint the portraits of meritorious officials in the Lingyan Tower.) Immediately he opened up his magnificent brush 
to record the true form. The hallowed clouds of the Nun gradually drifted away and in a little while the golden light disappeared. From mid-air came floating down a slip of paper on which were plainly 
written several lines in the style of the verse: 
We greet the great Ruler of Tang with scripts most sublime of the West. 
The way: 108000 miles. This Great Vehicle seek earnestly. 
These books when they reach your fair state can redeem damned spirits from Hell. 
If someone’s willing to go, he'll become a god of gold. 

When Taizong saw the verse, he said to the various monks: “Let's stop the Mass. Wait until I've sent someone to bring back the scriptures of the Great Vehicle. We'll then renew our sincere effort to 
cultivate the fruits of virtue.” 
Not one of the officials disagreed with the emperor who then asked in the temple, “Who's willing to accept our commission to seek scriptures from God in the Western Heaven?” 
Hardly had he finished speaking when the Master of the Law stepped from the side and saluted him saying, “Though your poor monk’s no talents, he’s ready to perform the service of a dog and horse. 
I'll seek these true scriptures on behalf of Your Majesty, that the empire of our king may be firm and everlasting.” 
Highly pleased, the Tang emperor went forward to raise up the monk with his royal hands saying, “If the Master's willing to express his loyalty this way, undaunted by the great distance or the journey 
over mountains and streams, we’re willing to become bond brothers with you.” Xuanzang touched his forehead to express his gratitude. Being indeed a righteous man, the Tang emperor went at once 
before God in the temple and respected Xuanzang 4 times addressing him as “our brother and holy monk.” 
Deeply moved, Xuanzang said, “Your Majesty, what ability and virtue does your poor monk possess that he’d merit such affection from your Heavenly Grace? I'll not spare myself in this journey but 
proceed with all diligence until | reach the Western Heaven. If | don’t attain my goal or the true scriptures, I'll not return to our land even if I’ve to die. I'd rather fall into eternal perdition in Hell.” 
He thereupon lifted the incense before God and made that his vow. Highly pleased, the Tang emperor ordered his carriage back to the palace to wait for the auspicious day and hour, when official 
documents could be issued for the journey to begin. And so the Throne withdrew as everyone dispersed. Xuanzang also went back to the Temple of Great Blessing. The many monks of that temple 
and his several disciples who had heard about the quest for the scriptures, all came to see him. They asked, “Is it true that you’ve vowed to go to the Western Heaven?” 
“It's,” said Xuanzang. 
“O Master,” 1 of his disciples said, “I’ve heard people say that the way to the Western Heaven's long, filled with tigers, leopards, and all kinds of monsters. | fear that there'll be departure but no return 
for you as it'll be difficult to safeguard your life.” 


“I've already made a great vow and a profound promise,” said Xuanzang, “that if | don’t acquire the true scriptures, I'll fall into eternal perdition in Hell. Since I've received such grace and favour from 
the king, I’ve no alternative but to serve my country to the utmost of my loyalty. It’s true of course that I’ve no knowledge of how 1'll fare on this journey or whether good or evil awaits me.” He said to 
them again, “My disciples, after | leave, wait for two or three or six or seven years. If you see the branches of the pine trees within our gate pointing eastward, you'll know that I’m about to return. If not, 
I'll not be coming back.” 
The disciples all committed his words firmly to memory. The next morning Taizong held court and gathered all the officials together. They wrote up the formal rescript stating the intent to acquire 
scriptures and stamped it with the seal of free passage. The President of the Imperial Board of Astronomy then came with the report, “Today the positions of the planets are especially favourable for 
men to make a journey of great length.” 
The Tang emperor was most delighted. Thereafter the Custodian of the Yellow Gate also made a report saying, “The Master of the Law awaits your pleasure outside the court.” 
The emperor summoned him up to the treasure hall and said, “Royal Brother, today’s an auspicious day for the journey and your rescript for free passage’s ready. We also present you with a bowl 
made of purple gold for you to collect alms on your way. Two attendants have been selected to accompany you and a horse will be your means of travel. You may begin your journey at once.” 
Highly pleased, Xuanzang expressed his gratitude and received his gifts, not displaying the least desire to linger. The Tang emperor called for his carriage and led many officials outside the city gate 
to see him off. The monks in the Temple of Great Blessing and the disciples were already waiting there with Xuanzang’s winter and summer clothing. When the emperor saw them, he ordered the bags 
to be packed on the horses first, and then asked an officer to bring a pitcher of juice. Taizong lifted his cup to toast the pilgrim saying, “What's the byname of our Royal Brother?” 
“Your poor monk's,” said Xuanzang, “a person who’s left the family. He dares not assume a byname.” 
“The Nun said earlier,” said Taizong, “that there're three collections of scriptures in the Western Heaven. Our Brother can take that as a byname and call himself Tripitaka. How about it?” 
Thanking him, Xuanzang accepted the juice and said, “Your Majesty, juice’s the first prohibition of priesthood. Your poor monk’s practiced abstinence since birth.” 
“Today’s journey’s,” said Taizong, “to be compared with no ordinary event. Please drink one cup of this dietary juice and accept our good wishes that go along with the toast.” Xuanzang dared not 
refuse; he took the juice and was about to drink when he saw Taizong stoop down to scoop up a handful of dirt with his fingers and sprinkle it in the juice. Tripitaka had no idea what this gesture meant. 
“Dear Brother,” said Taizong, laughing, “how long it'll take you to come back from this trip to the Western Heaven?” 
“Probably in three years’ time,” said Tripitaka, “I'll be returning to our noble nation.” 
“The years are long and the journey’s great,” said Taizong. “Drink this, Royal Brother, and remember: treasure a handful of dirt from your home but love not ten thousand taels of foreign gold.” Then 
Tripitaka understood the meaning of the handful of dirt sprinkled in his cup; he thanked the emperor once more and drained the cup. He went out of the gate and left as the Tang emperor returned in 
his carriage. 
PART IV 
THE JOURNEY BEGINS 
013 
In the den of tigers, the Gold Star brings deliverance; at Double-Fork Ridge, Boqin detains the monk 
The rich Tang ruler issued a decree, deputing Xuanzang to seek the source of Chan. 
He bent his mind to find the Dragon Den with firm resolve to climb the Spirit Vulture Mountain Peak. 
Through how many states did he roam beyond his own? Through clouds and hills he passed 10000 times. 
He now leaves the throne to go to the West; he'll keep law and faith to reach the Great Void. 

Tripitaka on the 3" day before the 15" of the 9" month in the 13" year of the period Zhenguan was sent off by the Tang emperor and many officials from outside the gate of Chang’an. For a couple of 
days his horse trotted without ceasing and soon they reached the Temple of the Law Gate. The abbot of that temple led some 500 monks on both sides to receive him and took him inside. As they met, 
tea was served after which a vegetarian meal was presented. Soon after the meal, dusk fell, and thus shadows moved to the Star River's nearing pulse; the moon was bright without a speck of dust. 
The wild geese called from the distant sky and washing flails beat from nearby homes. As birds returned to perch on withered trees, the Chan monks conversed in their Sanskrit tones. On rush mats 
placed upon a single bunk, they sat until halfway through the night. Beneath the lamps the various monks discussed Religious doctrines and the purpose of seeking scriptures in the Western Heaven. 
Some pointed out that the waters were wide and the mountains very high; others mentioned that the roads were crowded with tigers and leopards; still others maintained that the precipitous peaks 
were difficult to scale; and another group insisted that the vicious monsters were hard to subdue. Tripitaka however, kept his mouth shut tightly but he pointed with his finger to his own heart and nodded 
his head several times. Not perceiving what he meant, the various monks folded their hands and asked, “Why did the Master of the Law point to his heart and nod his head?” 
“When the mind’s active,” Tripitaka replied, “all kinds of Killing come into existence; when the mind’s extinguished, all kinds of Killing will be extinguished. This disciple’s already made an important vow 
before God in the Temple of Transformation and no alternative but to fulfil it with his whole heart. If | go, I'll not turn aside until I've reached the Western Heaven, seen God, and acquired the scriptures 
so that the Wheel of the Law will be turned to us and the kingdom of our lord will be secured forever.” 
When the various monks heard this statement, everyone congratulated and commended him saying, “A loyal and valiant master!” they praised him unceasingly as they escorted him to bed. Soon the 
bamboos struck down the setting moon and the cocks crowed to gather the clouds of dawn. 
The various monks arose and prepared some tea and the morning meal. Xuanzang put on his cassock and went to worship God in the main hall. “Your disciple, Chen Xuanzang’s,” he said, “on his 
way to seek scriptures in the Western Heaven. But my fleshly eyes are dim and unperceptive and don’t recognise the true form of the living God. Now | wish to make a vow: that throughout this journey 
r'll burn incense whenever | come upon a temple, worship God whenever | meet a god, and sweep a pagoda whenever | reach a pagoda. May our God be merciful and soon reveal to me his Diamond 
Body sixteen feet tall. May he grant me the true scriptures so that they may be preserved in the Land of the East.” 
He finished his prayer and went back to the hall for the vegetarian meal after which his 2 attendants made ready the saddle and urged him to begin his journey. Going out of the temple’s gate, Tripitaka 
took leave of the monks who grieved to see him go. They accompanied him for 10 miles before turning back, tears in their eyes as Tripitaka proceeded directly toward the West. It was the time of late 
autumn. See the Celestial Mortal: trees growing bare in hamlets as rush petals break; from every maple column the red leaves fall. Trekkers through paths of mist and rain are few. The fair 
chrysanthemums, the sharp mountain rocks, cold streams and cracked lilies all make one sad. Snow falls from a frosty sky on rushes and reeds. One duck at dusk descends in the distant void. Clouds 
over the wilds move through the gathering gloom. The swallows depart; the wild geese appear — their cries though loud, are halting and forlorn. After travelling for several days, master and disciples 
arrived at the city of Guangzhou. They were met at once by the various municipal officials of that city where they spent the night. The next morning they set off again, taking food and drink along the 
way, resting by night and journeying by day. In two or three days, they arrived at the District of Hezhou that formed the border of the Great Tang Empire. When the garrison commander of the border 
as well as the local monks and priests heard that the Master of the Law, a bond brother of the emperor, was on his way to the Western Heaven to see God by royal commission, they received the 
travellers with due reverence. Some chief priests then invited them to spend the night at Fu-Yuan Temple where every resident cleric came to pay respect to the pilgrims. Dinner was served, after which 
the two attendants were told to feed the horses well, for the Master wanted to leave before dawn. At the first crowing of the cock, he called for his attendants and aroused the monks of that temple. 
They hastened to prepare tea and breakfast, after which the pilgrims departed from the border. Because he was somewhat impatient to get going, the Master arose a trifle too early. The fact is that this 
was late autumn, when cocks crow rather early — at about the time of the fourth watch. Facing the clear frost and the bright moon, the three of them (the horse made up the fourth member of the team) 
journeyed for some twenty or thirty miles, when they came upon a mountain range. It soon became exceedingly difficult for them to find their way. As they had to poke around in the grass to look for a 
path, they began to worry that they might be heading in the wrong direction. In that very anxious moment, they suddenly tripped; all three of them as well as the horse tumbled into a deep pit. Tripitaka 
was terrified; his companions all shook with fear. They were still trembling when they heard voices shouting, “Seize them! Seize them!” 
A violent wind swept by, and a mob of fifty or sixty ogres appeared who seized Tripitaka with his companions and hauled them out of the pit. Quivering and shivering, the Master of the Law stole a 
glance around and saw a ferocious Monster King seated up on high. Truly he had a figure most awesomely bold, a face most distinctly fierce. Light flashed from his lightning-like eyes; all quaked at his 
thunderous voice. His saw-like teeth jutted outward, like fangs they emerged from his jaws. Brocade wrapped his body around and coiling stripes covered his spine. They saw flesh through sparse, 
steely whiskers. Keen-edged were his claws like sharp swords. Even Huang Gong of East Sea would fear this white-browed King of Mount South. Tripitaka was so frightened that his spirit left him while 
the bones of his followers grew weak and their tendons turned numb. The Monster King shouted for them to be bound, and the various ogres tied up all three of them with ropes. They were being 
prepared to be eaten when a clamour was heard outside the camp. Someone came in to report: “The Bear Mountain Lord and the Steer Hermit have arrived.” Hearing this, Tripitaka looked up. The 1: 
1 to come in was a swarthy fellow. He seemed valiant and courageous with body both tough and brawny. His great strength could ford the waters. He prowled the woods, flaunting his power. Ever a 
good omen in dreams (the birth of a male baby), he showed now his forceful features. He could break or climb the green trees and predicted when winter was near. Truly he was most clever. Hence 
Mountain Lord was his name. Following behind him was another husky fellow. A cap of twin horns rugged and a humpback most majestic. His green robe showed his calm nature, he walked with a 
slumberous gait. He came from a dad named Bull; his mum’s proper name was Cow. A great boon to people who ploughed, he was thus called the Steer Hermit. The 2 of them swaggered in and the 
Monster King hurried out to receive them. The Bear Mountain Lord said, “You're in top form, General Yin. Congratulations! Congratulations!” 
“General Yin looks better than ever,” said the Steer Hermit. “It’s marvellous! It’s marvellous!” 
“And you two gentlemen, how’ve you been these days?” asked the Monster King. 
“Just maintaining my idleness,” said the Mountain Lord. 
“Just keeping up with the times,” said the Hermit. 
They sat down to chat some more after these exchanges. Meanwhile, 1 of Tripitaka’s attendants was bound so tightly that he began to moan pitifully. “How did these three get here?” asked the swarthy 
fellow. 
“They practically presented themselves at the door!” said the Monster King. 
“Can they be used for the guests’ dinner?” asked the Hermit, laughing. 
“By all means!” said the Monster King. 
“Let's not finish them all up,” said the Mountain Lord. “We'll dine on two of them and leave one over.” 
The Monster King agreed. He called his subordinates at once to have the attendants eviscerated and their carcasses carved up; heads, hearts, and livers were to be presented to the guests, the limbs 
to the host, the remaining portions of flesh, and bones to the rest of the ogres. 
The moment the order was given, the ogres pounced on the attendants like tigers preying on sheep: munching and crunching, they devoured them in no time at all. The priest nearly died of fear for this 
was his first bitter ordeal since his departure from Chang'an. As he was nursing his horror, light began to grow in the east. The 2 monsters did not retire until dawn. Saying, “We're beholden to your 
generous hospitality today. Permit us to repay in kind in another time.” 
They left together. Soon the sun rose high in the sky but Tripitaka was still in a stupor, unable to discern which way was north, south, east, or west. In that half-dead condition, he suddenly saw an old 
man approaching, holding a staff in his hands. Walking up to Tripitaka, the man waved his hands and all the ropes snapped. He then blew on Tripitaka and the monk began to revive. Falling on the 
ground, he said, “I thank the aged dad for saving the life of this poor monk!” 
“Get up,” the old man said, returning his salute, “you've lost anything?” 
“The followers of your poor monk,” said Tripitaka, “have been eaten by the monsters. I’ve no idea where my horse is or my luggage.” 
“Isn't that your horse over there with the two bundles?” asked the old man, pointing with his staff. 
Tripitaka turned around and discovered that his belongings had indeed remained untouched. Somewhat relieved, he asked the old man, “Aged dad, what’s this place? How do you happen to be here?” 
“It's called the Double-Fork Ridge, a place infested with tigers and wolves. How did you manage to get here?” 
“At the first crow of the cock,” said Tripitaka, “your poor monk left the District of Hezhou. Little did | realise that we'd risen too early, lost our way tramping through fog, and dew. We came upon this 
Monster King so exceedingly ferocious that he captured me and my two followers. There’s also a swarthy fellow called the Bear Mountain Lord and a husky fellow called the Steer Hermit. They arrived 
and addressed the Monster King as General Yin. All three of them devoured my two followers and retired only at dawn. I’ve no idea where | accrued the fortune and merit that caused the aged dad to 
rescue me here.” 
“That Steer Hermit’s,” said the old man, “a wild bull spirit; the Mountain Lord, a bear spirit; and General Yin, a tiger spirit. The various ogres are all demons of mountains and trees, spirits of strange 
beasts and wolves. Because of the primal purity of your nature, they can’t devour you. Follow me now and I'll lead you on your way.” Tripitaka could not be more thankful. Fastening the bundles on the 


saddle and leading his horse, he followed the old man out of the pit and walked toward the main road. He tied the horse to the bushes beside the path and turned to thank the aged dad. At that moment 
a gentle breeze swept by, and the old man rose into the air and left, riding on a white crane with a crimson head. As the wind subsided, a slip of paper fluttered down with 2 lines of verse written on it: 

I'm the Planet Venus from the West who came to save you by special request, some pupils divine will come to your aid. 

Blame not the scriptures for hardships ahead. 

When Tripitaka read this, he saluted toward the sky saying, “I thank the Gold Star for seeing me through this ordeal.” 
After that, he led his horse off again on his lonely and melancholy journey. On this ridge truly you’ve cold and soughing, the wind of the rainforest; purling and gurgling, the water of the brooklets; fragrant 
and musky, wildflowers in bloom; in clutters and clumps, rough rocks piled high; chattering and clattering, the apes and the deer; in rank and file, the musk and the fallow deer. Chirping and cooing, 
birds frequently call. Silent and still, not one man is in sight. That master shivers and quivers to his anxious mind. This dear horse, scared and nervous, can barely raise his legs. Ready to abandon his 
body and sacrifice his life, Tripitaka started up that rugged mountain. He journeyed for half a day but not a single human being or dwelling was in sight. He was gnawed by hunger and disheartened by 
the rough road. In that desperate moment, he saw two fierce tigers growling in front of him and several huge snakes circling behind him; vicious creatures appeared on his left and strange beasts on 
his right. As he was all by himself, Tripitaka had little alternative but to submit himself to the will of Heaven. As if to complete his helplessness, his horse’s back was sagging and its legs were buckling; 
it went to its knees and soon lay salute on the ground. He could budge it neither by beating nor by tugging. With hardly an inch of space to stand on, our Master of the Law was in the depths of despair, 
thinking that certain death would be his fate. We can tell you however, that though he was in danger, help was on its way. For just as he thought he was about to expire, the vicious creatures began to 
scatter and the monstrous beasts fled; the fierce tigers vanished and the huge snakes disappeared. When Tripitaka looked further ahead, he saw a man coming over the mountain slope with a steel 
trident in his hands and bow and arrows at his waist. He’s indeed a valiant figure! Look at him: he had on his head a cap of leopard skin, spotted and Artemisia white; wore on his body a robe of lamb’s 
woo! with dark silk brocade. Around his waist was tied a lion-king belt and on his feet he wore tall boots of suede. His eyes would bulge like those of someone hung. His beard curled wildly like a fierce 
goa’s! A bow and poisoned arrows hung on him. He held a huge trident of finest steel. His voice like thunder appalled mountain cats and wild pheasants quaked at his truculence. When Tripitaka saw 
him draw near, he knelt at the side of the path and called out, his hands clasped in front of him, “Great king, save me! Great king, save me!” 
The fellow came up to Tripitaka and put down his trident. Raising up the monk with his hands, he said, “Don’t be afraid, Elder, for I’m not a wicked man. I’m a hunter living in this mountain; my surname’s 
Liu and my given name’s Bogin. | also go by the nickname of Senior Guardian of the Mountain. | came here to find some animals to eat, not expecting to run into you. | hope | didn’t scare you.” 
“Your poor monk’s,.” said Tripitaka, “a cleric who’s been sent by his Majesty, the Tang emperor to seek scriptures from God in the Western Heaven. When | arrived here a few moments ago, | was 
surrounded by tigers, wolves, and snakes so that I'd not proceed. But when the creatures saw you coming they all scattered and you've thus saved my life. Many thanks! Many thanks!” 
“Since | live here and my livelihood depends on killing a few tigers and wolves,” said Bogin, “or catching a few snakes and reptiles, | usually frighten the wild beasts away. If you’ve come from the Tang 
Empire, you're actually a native here for this is still Tang territory and I’m a Tang subject. You and | both live off the land belonging to the emperor so that we're in truth citizens of the same nation. Don’t 
be afraid. Follow me. You may rest your horse at my place and I'll see you off in the morning.” Tripitaka was filled with delight when he heard these words and he led his horse to follow the hunter. They 
passed the slope and again heard the howling of the wind. “Sit here, Elder,” said Boqin, “and don’t move. The sound of that wind tells me that a mountain cat’s approaching. I'll take him home so that | 
can make a meal of him for you.” 
When Tripitaka heard this, his heart hammered and his gall quivered and he became rooted to the ground. Grasping his trident, that Guardian strode forward and came face to face with a great striped 
tiger. Seeing Bogin he turned and fled. The Guardian bellowed like a crack of thunder, “Cursed beast! Where'll you flee?” When the tiger saw him pressing near, he turned with flailing claws to spring 
at him only to be met by the Guardian with uplifted trident. Tripitaka was so terrified that he lay paralysed on the grass. Since leaving his mum’s belly, when had he ever witnessed such violent and 
dangerous goings-on? The Guardian went after that tiger to the foot of the slope, and it was a magnificent battle between man and beast. See raging resentment and churning whirlwind. In raging 
resentment the potent Guardian's hair pushed up his cap; like chuming whirlwind the striped prince belched dust, displaying his might. This one bared its teeth and wielded its paws; that 1 stepped 
sideways yet turning to fight. The trident reached skyward, reflecting the sun. The striped tail stirred up both fog and cloud. This one stabbed madly at the breast of his foe; that one facing him would 
swallow him whole. Stay away and you may live out your years. Join the fray and you'll meet Yama, the king! You hear the roar of the striped prince and the harsh cries of the Guardian. The roar of the 
striped prince shook mountains and streams to frighten birds and beasts; the harsh cries of the Guardian unlocked the Heavens to make the stars appear. The gold eyeballs of this one protruded and 
wrath burst from the bold heart of that 1. Lovable was Liu the Mountain Guardian; praiseworthy was this king of the wild beasts. So tiger and man fought, each craving life — a little slower, and one 
forfeits his soul! The 2 of them fought for about an hour and as the paws of the tiger began to slow and his torso to slacken, he was downed by the Guardian’s trident stabbing him through the chest. A 
pitiful sight it’s! The points of the trident pierced the heart, and at once the ground was covered with blood. The Guardian then dragged the beast by the ear up the road. What a man! He hardly panted, 
nor did his face change colour. He said to Tripitaka, “We're lucky! We're lucky! This mountain cat should be sufficient for a day's food for the elder.” 
Applauding him unceasingly, Tripitaka said, “The Guardian’s truly a mountain god!” 
“What ability do I’ve,” said Bogin, “that | merit such acclaim? This is really the good fortune of the dad. Let’s go. I'd like to skin him quickly so that | can cook some of his meat to entertain you.” He held 
the trident in 1 hand and dragged the tiger with the other leading the way while Tripitaka followed him with his horse. They walked together past the slope and all at once came upon a mountain village, 
in front of which old trees were soaring skyward, roads filled with wild creepers. In countless canyons the wind was cool; on many ridges came strange sounds and sights. 1 path’s wild blooms, their 
scent clung to one’s body; a few poles of bamboo, what enduring green! The portal of grass, the wattle-fenced yard — a picture to paint or sketch. The stone-slab bridge, the white-earth walls — how 
charming indeed and rare! Now in the wistful face of autumn, the air was cool and brisk, by the wayside yellow leaves fell; over the peaks the white clouds drifted. In thinly-grown woods the wild fowls 
twittered and young dogs yelped outside the village gate. When Boqin reached the door of his house, he threw down the dead tiger and called, “Little ones, where’re you?” Out came 3 or 4 houseboys, 
all looking rather unattractive and mean who hauled the tiger inside. Bogin told them to skin it quickly and prepare it for the guest. He then turned around to welcome Tripitaka into his dwelling and as 
they greeted each other, Tripitaka thanked him again for the great favour of saving his life. “We're fellow countrymen,” said Boqin, “and there’s little need for you to thank me.” After they had sat down 
and drunk tea, an old woman with someone who appeared to be her daughter-in-law came out to greet Tripitaka. “These’re my mum and wife,” said Bogin. 
“Pray ask your parent to take the honoured seat,” said Tripitaka, “and let your poor monk pay his respects.” 
“Dad’s a guest coming from great distance,” said the old woman. “Please relax and don’t stand on ceremony.” 
“Mum,” said Bogin, “he’s been sent by the Tang emperor to seek scriptures from God in the Western Heaven. He met your son just now at the ridge. Since we’re fellow countrymen, | invited him to the 
house to rest his horse. Tomorrow I'll see him on his way.” 
When she heard these words, the old woman was very pleased. “Good! Good! Good!” she said. “The timing couldn't be better even if we'd planned to invite him. For tomorrow happens to be the 
anniversary of your late dad’s death. Let's invite the elder to perform some good deeds and recite an appropriate passage of scripture. We'll see him off day after tomorrow.” 
Although he was a tiger slayer, a so-called Guardian of the Mountain, our Liu Bogin had a good deal of filial feeling for his mum. When he heard what she said, he immediately wanted to prepare the 
incense and the paper money so that Tripitaka might be asked to stay. As they talked, the sky began to darken. The servants brought chairs and a table and set out several dishes of well-cooked tiger 
meat, steaming hot. Bogin invited Tripitaka to begin, telling him that rice would follow. “O dear!” said Tripitaka, his hands folded. “To tell you the truth, I’ve been a monk since leaving my mum’s womb 
and never eaten any meat.” 
Hearing this, Bogin reflected a while. He then said, “Elder, for generations this humble family’s never kept a vegetarian diet. | suppose we'd find some bamboo shoots, wood ears, and prepare some 
dried vegetables and bean cakes but they'd all be cooked with the fat of deer or tigers. Even our pots and pans are grease-soaked! What I’m to do? | must ask the elder’s pardon.” 
“Don’t fret,” said Tripitaka. “Enjoy the food yourself. Even if | weren't to eat for three or four days, I'd bear the hunger. But | daren’t break the dietary commandment.” 
“Suppose you starve to death,” said Boqin, “what then?” 
“Im indebted to the Heavenly kindness of the Guardian,” said Tripitaka, “for saving me from the packs of tigers and wolves. Starving to death’s better than being food for a tiger.” 
When Bogin’s mum heard this, she cried, “Son, stop such idle talk with the elder. Let me prepare a vegetarian dish to serve him.” 
“Where'd you get such a dish?” said Bogin. 
“Never mind. I'll fix it,” said his mum. She asked her daughter-in-law to take down a small cooking pan and heat it until much of the grease had burned off. They washed and scrubbed the pan repeatedly 
and then put it back on the stove and boiled some water in it. Taking some elm leaves from the mountain, they made soup with it after which they cooked some rice with yellow millet mixed with Indian 
corn. They also prepared two bowls of dried vegetables and brought it all out to the table. “Elder,” the aged mum said to Tripitaka, “please have some. This is the cleanest and purest food that my 
daughter-in-law and I’ve ever prepared.” 
Tripitaka left his seat to thank her before sitting down again. Boqin removed himself to another place; dishes and bowls full of un-sauced and unsalted tiger meat, musk deer meat, serpent meat, fox 
flesh, rabbit, and strips of cured venison were set before him. To keep Tripitaka company, he sat down and was about to pick up his chopsticks when he saw Tripitaka fold his hands and begin to recite 
something. Startled, Boqin dared not touch his chopsticks; he jumped up instead and stood to 1 side. Having uttered no more than a few phrases, Tripitaka said to him, “Please eat.” 
“You're a priest who likes to recite short scriptures,” said Bogin. 
“That's not scripture,” said Tripitaka, “only a prayer to be said before meals.” 
“You people who leave your families,” said Bogin, “are particular about everything! Even for a meal you've to mumble something!” 
They ate their dinner and the dishes and bowls were taken away. Evening was setting in when Bogin led Tripitaka out of the main hall to go for a walk at the back of the dwelling. They passed through 
a corridor and arrived at a straw shed. Pushing open the door, they walked inside where they found several heavy bows and some quivers of arrows hanging on the walls. 2 pieces of tiger skin stinking 
and bloodstained, were draped over the cross beams, a number of spears, knives, tridents, and rods were stuck into the ground at 1 commer. There were 2 seats in the middle of the shed. Bogin invited 
Tripitaka to sit for a moment. Seeing that the place was so gruesome and putrid, Tripitaka dared not linger. They soon left the shed and walked further back to a huge garden where there seemed to 
be no end of thick clumps of chrysanthemum piling their gold and stands of maple hoisting their crimson. With a loud rustle, more than a dozen fat deer and a large herd of musk deer jumped out. Calm 
and mild-mannered, they were not at all frightened at the sight of human beings. Tripitaka said, “You must’ve tamed these animals.” 
“Like the people in your city of Chang'an,” said Bogin, “where the affluent store up wealth and treasures and the landlords gather rice and grain, so we hunters must keep some of these wild beasts to 
prepare against dark days. That's all!” 
As they walked, conversed, it grew dark, and they returned to the house to rest. As soon as the members of the family, young and old arose next morning, they went to prepare vegetarian food to serve 
to the priest who was then asked to begin his recitations. Having 1st washed his hands, the priest went to the ancestral hall with the Guardian to burn incense. Only after he had saluted to the house 
shrine did Tripitaka beat on his wooden fish and recite first the true sentences for the purification of the mouth, and then the divine formula for the purification of mind and body. He went on to the 
Thread for the Salvation of the Dead after which Bogin requested him to compose in writing a specific prayer for the deliverance of the deceased. He then took up the Diamond Thread and the Guanyin 
Thread, each of which was given a loud and clear recitation. After lunch, he recited several sections from the Lotus Thread and the Amitayus Thread before finishing with the Peacock Thread and a 
brief recounting of the story of God healing a beggar. Biche Purged from Evil Karma where Buddha’s encountered an ascetic practicing austerities northeast of a heap in the Jetavana Garden. When 
asked why he looked so sad by the patriarch, the man replied that he was ill and had no one to care for him. Whereupon Buddha stretched out his hand and touched the man who was healed at once. 
Taking him out of his hut, Buddha bathed and clothed him before urging him to be even more diligent in his religious devotion. Soon it was evening again. All kinds of incense were burned together with 
the various paper horses, images of the deities, and the prayer for the deliverance of the deceased. The Religious service was thus completed, and each person retired. The soul of Boqin’s dad verily 
a ghost redeemed from perdition came to his own house and appeared to all the members of his family in a dream. “It’s difficult,” he said, “For me to escape my bitter ordeals in the Region of Darkness 
and for a long time I’d not attain salvation. Fortunately the holy monk’s recitations have now expiated my sins. King Yama’s ordered someone to send me to the rich land of China where | may assume 
my next disciple in a noble family. All of you therefore must take care to thank the elder and see that you're negligent in no way. Now | leave you.” 
So it is that there is, in all things, a solemn purpose: to save the dead from perdition and pain. When the whole family awoke from the dream, the sun was already rising in the east. The wife of Boqin 
said, “Guardian, | dreamed last night that dad came to the house. He said that it’s difficult for him to escape his bitter ordeals in the Region of Darkness and for a long time he’d not attain salvation. 
Fortunately the holy monk's recitations have now expiated his sins and King Yama’s ordered someone to send him to the rich land of China where he may assume his next disciple in a noble family. 
He told us to take care to thank the elder and be negligent in no way. After he’d finished speaking, he drifted away despite my plea for him to stay. | woke up and it’s all a dream!” 
‘Id a dream also,” said Boqin, “one exactly like yours! Let's get up and talk to mum about this.” 
The 2 of them were about to do so when they heard the old mum calling, “Boqin, come here. | want to talk to you.” They went in and found the mum sitting up in bed. “Son,” she said, “I’d a happy dream 
last night. | dreamed that your dad came to the house saying that, thanks to the redemptive work of the elder, his sins had been expiated. He’s on his way to the rich land of China where he'll assume 
his next disciple in a noble family.” 


Husband and wife laughed uproariously. Bogin said, “Your daughter-in-law and I’d both this dream and we're just coming to tell you. Little did we expect that mum’s call also had to do with this dream.” 
They therefore called on every member of the family to express their gratitude and prepare the monk’s horse for travel. They came saluting before the priest and said, “We thank the elder for providing 
life and deliverance for our deceased dad for which we can never repay you sufficiently.” 

“What's this poor monk accomplished,” said Tripitaka, “that merits such gratitude?” 

Bogin gave a thorough account of the dream that the three of them had and Tripitaka was also very pleased. A vegetarian meal was again served, and a tael of silver was presented as a token of their 
gratitude. Tripitaka refused to accept so much as a penny, though the whole family begged him eamestly. He only said, “If you can escort me on the first part of my way in compassion, I'll ever be grate- 
ful for such kindness.” 

Bogin and his mum and wife had little alternative but hastily to prepare some biscuits from unrefined flour that Tripitaka was glad to accept. Boqin was told to escort him as far as possible. Obeying his 
mums bidding, the Guardian also ordered several houseboys to join them, each bringing hunting equipment and weapons. They walked to the main road, and there seemed to be no end to the scenic 
splendour of the mountains and peaks. When they had travelled for half a day, they came upon a huge mountain so tall and rugged that it truly seemed to touch the blue sky. In a little while the whole 
company reached the foot of the mountain, and the Guardian began to ascend it as if he were walking on level ground. Halfway up, Boqin tured around and stood still at the side of the road saying, 
“Elder, please go on yourself. | must now take leave of you and turn back.” 

When Tripitaka heard these words, he rolled down from his saddle and said, “I beg you to escort me a little further.” 

“You don't realise, Elder,” said Bogin, “that this mountain’s called the Mountain of Two Frontiers; the eastern half belongs to our Great Tang domain but the western halfs the territory of the Tartars. 
The tigers and wolves over there aren’t my subjects, nor I'd cross the border. You must proceed by yourself.” 

Tripitaka became fearful; he stretched out his hands and clutched at the sleeves of the hunter, tears pouring from his eyes. It was at this tender moment of farewell that there came from beneath the 
mountain a thunderous voice crying, “My master’s come! My master’s come!” Tripitaka was dumbfounded and Bogin trembled. 


014 
Mind Monkey returns to the Right; The 6 Robbers (Senses) vanish from sight 
Mind’s a god and a god’s Mind; both Mind and God are important things. 
If you perceive there’s neither Mind nor Thing, yours is the body true of True Mind. 
The Body of Truth’s no shape or form: 1 pear-like radiance holding myriad things. 
The bodiless body's the body true and real form’s that form that’s no form. 
There’s no form, no void, no no-emptiness; no coming, no leaving, no turning towards anyone or bestowal of merit by anyone; 
No contrast, no sameness, no being or nonbeing: no giving, no taking, no hopeful craving. 
Light efficacious is in and out the same. God’s whole realm is in a grain of sand. 
A grain of sand the chiliocosm holds; 1 mind or body's like 10000 things. 
To know this you must grasp the No-mind Spell; unclogged and taintless is the karma pure. 
Don't do the many acts of good or ill: this is true submission to God. 
Tripitaka and Bogin in fear and alarm again heard the cry, “My Master's come!” 
The various houseboys said, “It must be the old ape in that stone box beneath the mountain who's shouting.” 
“It's he! It's he!” said the Guardian. 
Tripitaka asked, “Who's this old ape?” 
“The ancient name of this mountain's,” said the Guardian, “the Mountain of Five Phases. It’s changed to the Mountain of the Two Frontiers as a result of our Great Tang ruler’s western campaigns to 
secure his empire. A few years ago, | heard from my elders that during the time when Wang Mang usurped the throne of the Han emperor, this mountain fell from Heaven with a divine monkey clamped 
beneath it. He feared neither heat nor cold and took neither food nor drink. He’d been watched, guarded by the spirits of the Earth who fed him iron balls when he’s hungry, and juices of bronze when 
he’s thirsty. He’s lasted from that time until now surviving both cold and hunger. He must be the one who’s making all this noise. Don’t be afraid, elder. Let's go down the mountain to take a look.” 
Tripitaka had to agree and led his horse down the mountain. They had travelled only a few miles when they came upon a stone box in which there was indeed a monkey who was waving his hands 
wildly with his head sticking out and crying, “Master, why you've taken so long to get here? Welcome! Welcome! Get me out and I'll protect you on your way to the Western Heaven!” 
The priest went forward to look more closely at him. He had a pointed mouth and hollow cheeks; 2 diamond pupils and fiery eyes. Lichens had piled on his head; wisteria grew in his ears. By his temples 
was more green grass than hair; beneath his chin, moss instead of a beard. With mud on his brow and earth in his nose, he looked most desperate! His fingers coarse and calloused palms were caked 
in filth and dirt! Luckily, his eyes could still roll about and the apish tongue, articulate. Though in speech he had great ease, his body he could not move. He was the Great Sage Sun of 5 centuries ago. 
Today his ordeal ends, he leaves Heaven's net. Undeniably a courageous person, that Guardian Liu went up to the creature and pulled away some of the grass at his temples and some of the moss 
beneath his chin. He asked, “What do you've to say?” 
“Nothing to you,” said the monkey, “but ask that master to come up here. I’ve a question for him.” 
“What's your question?” asked Tripitaka. “Are you someone sent by the great king of the Land of the East to go seek scriptures in the Western Heaven?” asked the monkey. “I’m,” said Tripitaka. “Why 
do you ask?” 
“Im the Great Sage Equal to Heaven,” said the monkey, “who greatly disturbed the Heavenly Palace five centuries ago. Because of my sin of rebellion and disobedience, | was imprisoned here by a 
god. Some time ago, a certain Nun Guanyin had received the decree of God to go to the Land of the East in quest of a scripture pilgrim. | asked her to give me some help, and she persuaded me not 
to engage again in violence. | was told to believe in the Law of God and faithfully to protect the scripture pilgrim on his way to worship God in the West, for there would be a goodly reward reserved for 
me when such merit is achieved. I’ve therefore been maintaining my vigilance night and day, waiting for the Master to come to rescue me. I’m willing to protect you in your quest of scriptures and 
become your disciple.” 
When Tripitaka heard these words, he was filled with delight and said, “Though you've this good intention of entering our Religious fold, thanks to the Nun’s instruction, I’ve neither axe nor drill. How 
can | free you?” 
“No need for axe or drill,” said the monkey. 
“If you're willing to rescue me, I'll be able to get out.” 
Tripitaka said, “I’m willing but how can you get out?” 
“On top of this mountain,” said the monkey, “there’s a tag stamped with the golden letters of our Nun who’s thus come and gone. Go up there and lift up the tag. Then I'll come out.” 
Tripitaka agreed and turned to Bogin, imploring him, “Guardian, come with me up the mountain.” 
“Do you think he’s speaking the truth?” asked Bogin. 
“It's the truth!” the monkey shouted. “I daren’t lie!” Bogin had no choice but to call his houseboys to lead the horses. He himself supported Tripitaka with his hands, and they again started up the tall 
mountain. Tugging at creepers and vines, they finally arrived at the highest peak where they beheld 10000 shafts of golden light and 1000 folds of hallowed air. There was a huge square slab of stone 
on which was taped a seal with the golden letters: 
Praise to the Jewel in the Lotus 
Tripitaka approached the stone and knelt down; he looked at the golden letters and respected several times to the stone. Then facing the West, he prayed: “Your disciple, Chen Xuanzang’s specifically 
commanded to seek scriptures from you. If it’s so ordained that he’d be my disciple, let me lift up those golden letters so that the divine monkey may find release and join me at the Spirit Mountain. If 
he isn’t predestined to be my disciple, if he’s only a cruel monster trying to deceive me and bring misfortune to our enterprise, let me not lift up this tape.” 
He respected again after he had prayed. Going forward with the greatest of ease he took down the golden letters. A fragrant wind swept by immediately and blew the tag out of his hands into the air as 
a voice called out, “I’m the prison guard of the Great Sage. Today his ordeal’s completed. My colleagues and | are returning this seal to Siddhartha.” 
Tripitaka, Boqin, and their followers were so terrified that they fell on the ground and saluted toward the sky. They then descended from the tall mountain and came back to the stone box saying to the 
monkey, “The tag’s been lifted. You may come out.” 
Delighted, the monkey said, “Master, you’d better walk away from here so that | can come out. | don’t want to frighten you.” When Bogin heard this, he led Tripitaka and the rest of the company to walk 
back eastward for 5 or 6 miles. Again they heard the monkey yelling, “Further still! Further still!” So Tripitaka and the others went still further until they had left the mountain. All at once came a crash 
so loud that it was as if the mountain was cracking and the earth splitting wide open; everyone was awestruck. The next moment the monkey was already in front of Tripitaka’s horse; completely naked, 
he knelt down and cried, “Master, I’m out!” He saluted 4 times toward Tripitaka and then jumping up, he said to Boqin respectfully, “I thank Elder Brother for taking the trouble of escorting my master. 
I'm grateful also for your shaving the grass from my face.” 
Having thanked him, he went at once to put the luggage in order so that it could be tied onto the horse’s back. When the horse saw him, its torso slackened and its legs stiffened. In fear and trembling, 
it could hardly stand up. For that monkey had been a Ban-Horse-Plague who used to look after dragon horses in the celestial stables. His authority was such that horses of this world inevitably would 
fear him when they saw him. 
When Tripitaka saw that the monkey was truly a person of good intentions, someone who truly resembled those who had embraced the Religious faith, he called to him, “Disciple, what is your surname?” 
“My surname is Sun,” said the Monkey King. “Let me give you a religious name,” said Tripitaka, “so that it will be convenient to address you.” 
“This noble thought of the master is deeply appreciated,” said the Monkey King, “but | already have a religious name. I’m called Sun Wukong.” 
“It exactly fits the emphasis of our denomination,” said Tripitaka, delighted. “But look at you, you look rather like a little dhita.5 Let me give you a nickname and call you Pilgrim Sun.® How's that?” 
“Good! Good!” said Wukong. 
So from then on, he was also called Pilgrim Sun. When Bogin saw that Pilgrim Sun was definitely preparing to leave, he turned to speak respectfully to Tripitaka, saying, “Elder, you're fortunate to have 
made an excellent disciple here. Congratulations! This person should be most fit to accompany you. | must take leave of you now.” 
Saluting thank him, Tripitaka said, “I can’t thank you enough for all your kindness. Please be certain to thank your dear mum and wife when you return to your house. I’ve caused you all great 
inconvenience, and I'll thank you again on my way back.” Bogin returned his salutation, and they parted. 
We'll now tell you about Pilgrim Sun who asked Tripitaka to mount his horse. He himself, stark naked, carried the luggage on his back and led the way. In a little while, as they were passing the Mountain 
of Two Frontiers, they saw a fierce tiger approaching, growling and waving its tail. Tripitaka, sitting on his horse, became alarmed but Pilgrim, walking at the side of the road, was delighted. “Don’t be 
afraid, Master,” he said, “for he’s here to present me with some clothes.” He put down the luggage and took a tiny needle out of his ears. One wave of it facing the wind, and it became an iron rod with 
the thickness of a rice bowl. He held it in his hands and laughed, saying, “I’ve not used this treasure for over five centuries! Today I’m taking it out to bag a little garment for myself.” Look at him! He 
strode right up to the tiger, crying, “Cursed beast! Where do you think you're going?” Crouching low, the tiger lay prone on the dust and dared not move. Pilgrim Sun aimed the rod at its head, and one 
stroke caused its brain to burst out like ten thousand red petals of peach blossoms, and the teeth to fly out like so many pieces of white jade. So terrified was our Chen Xuanzang that he fell off his 
horse. “O God! O God!” he cried, biting his fingers. “When Guardian Liu overcame that striped tiger the other day, he had to do battle with him for almost half a day. But without even fighting today, Sun 
Wukong reduces the tiger to pulp with one blow of his rod. How true is the saying, ‘For the strong, there’s always someone stronger!” 
“Master,” said Pilgrim as he returned dragging the tiger, “sit down for a while, and wait till I've stripped him of his clothes. When | put them on, we'll start off again.” 
“Where does he have any clothes?” asked Tripitaka. “Don’t mind me, Master,” said Pilgrim, “I’ve my own plan.” Dear Monkey King! He pulled off one strand of hair and blew a mouthful of magic breath 
onto it, crying, “Change!” It changed into a sharp, curved knife with which he ripped open the tiger’s chest. Slitting the skin straight down, he then ripped it off in one piece. He chopped away the paws 
and the head, cutting the skin into one square piece. He picked it up and tried it for size, and then said, “It’s a bit too large; one piece can be made into two.” He took the knife and cut it again into two 
pieces; he put one of these away and wrapped the other around his waist. Ripping off a strand of rattan from the side of the road, he firmly tied on this covering for the lower part of his body. “Master,” 
he said, “let's go! Let's go! When we reach someone's house, we'll have sufficient time to borrow some threads and a needle to sew this up.” He gave his iron rod a squeeze and it changed back into 
a tiny needle that he stored in his ear. Throwing the luggage on his back, he asked his Master to mount the horse. 


As they set off, the monk asked him, “Wukong, how is it that the iron rod you used to slay the tiger has disappeared?” 

“Master,” said Pilgrim laughing, “you've no idea what that rod of mine really is. It was acquired originally from the Dragon Palace in the Eastern Ocean. It’s called the Precious Divine Iron for Guarding 
the Heavenly River, and another name of it is the Compliant Golden-Hooped Rod. At the time when | revolted against Heaven, | depended on it a great deal; for it could change into any shape or form, 
great or small, according to my wish. Just now I'd it changed into a tiny embroidery needle, and it’s stored that way in my ear. When | need it, I'll take it out.” Secretly pleased by what he heard, Tripitaka 
asked another question: “Why did that tiger become completely motionless when it saw you? How do you explain the fact that it simply let you hit it?” 

“To tell you the truth,” said Wukong, “even a dragon, let alone this tiger, would behave itself if it had seen me! |, old monkey, possess the ability to subdue dragons and tame tigers, and the power to 
overturn rivers and stir up oceans. | can look at a person’s countenance and discern his character; | can listen merely to sounds and discover the truth. If | want to be big, | can fill the universe; if | want 
to be small, | can be smaller than a piece of hair. In sum, I’ve boundless ways of transformation and incalculable means of becoming visible or invisible. What's so strange, then, about my skinning a 
tiger? Wait till we come to some real difficulties - you'll see my talents then!” When Tripitaka heard these words, he was more relieved than ever and urged his horse forward. So master and disciple, 
the 2 of them chatted as they journeyed and soon the sun sank in the west. See soft glow of the fading twilight and distant clouds slowly returning. On every hill swells the chorus of birds, flocking to 
shelter in the woods. The wild beasts in couples and pairs in packs and groups they trek homeward. The new moon, hook-like, breaks the spreading gloom with 10000 stars luminous. “Pilgrim said, 
“Master, let's move along, for it’s getting late. There are dense clumps of trees over there, and | suppose there must be a house or village too. Let's hurry over there and ask for lodging.” Urging his 
horse forward, Tripitaka went straight up to a house and dismounted. Pilgrim threw down the bag and went to the door, crying, “Open up! Open up!” 

An old man came to the door, leaning on a cane. When he pulled open the creaking door, he was panic-stricken by the hideous appearance of Pilgrim who had the tiger skin around his waist and 
looked like a thunder god. He began to shout, “A ghost! A ghost!” and other such foolish words. Tripitaka drew near and took hold of him saying, “Old Patron, don’t be afraid. He’s my disciple, not a 
ghost.” 

Only when he looked up and saw the handsome features of Tripitaka did the old man stand still. “Which temple are you from,” he asked, “and why’re you bringing such a nasty character to my door?” 
“Im a poor monk from the Tang court,” said Tripitaka, “on my way to seek scriptures from God in the Western Heaven. We’re passing through here and it’s getting late; that’s why we made as bold as 
to approach your great mansion and beg you for a night's lodging. We plan to leave tomorrow before it’s light and beseech you not to deny our request.” 

“Though you may be a Tang man,” the old man said, “that nasty character's certainly no Tang man!” 

“Old fellow!” cried Wukong in a loud voice, “you really can’t see, can you? The Tang man’s my master and I’m his disciple. Of course, I’m no sugar man® or honey man! I’m the Great Sage Equal to 
Heaven! The members of your family should recognise me. Moreover, I've seen you before.” 

“Where’ve you seen me before?” 

“When you're young,” said Wukong, “didn’t you gather firewood before my eyes? Didn’t you haul vegetables before my face?” 

The old man said, “That's nonsense! Where did you live? And where’s | that I'd have gathered firewood and hauled vegetables before your eyes?” 

“Only my son would talk nonsense!” said Wukong. “You really don’t recognise me! Take a closer look! I’m the Great Sage in the stone box of this Mountain of Two Frontiers.” 

“You do look somewhat like him,” said the old man, half recognising the figure before him, “but how did you get out?” 

Wukong thereupon gave a thorough account of how the Nun had converted him and how she had asked him to wait for the Tang Monk to lift the tag for his deliverance. After that, the old man saluted 
deeply and invited Tripitaka in, calling for his aged wife and his children to come out and meet the guests. When he told them what had happened, everyone was delighted. Tea was then served, after 
which the old man asked Wukong, “How old are you, Great Sage?” 

“And how old are you?” asked Wukong. 

“I've lived foolishly for a hundred-thirty years!” said the old man. 

“You're still my great-great-great-great-grandson” said Pilgrim. “I can’t remember when | was born but I’ve spent over five centuries underneath this mountain.” 

“Yes, yes,” said the old man. “I remember my great-grandpa saying that when this mountain dropped from the sky, it had a divine ape clamped underneath it. To think that you’d have waited until now 
for your freedom! When | saw you in my childhood, you had grass on your head and mud on your face but | wasn’t afraid of you then. Now without mud on your face and grass on your head, you seem 
a bit thinner. And with that huge piece of tiger skin draped around your waist, what great difference is there between you and a demon?” 

When the members of his family heard this remark, they all roared with laughter. Being a rather decent fellow, that old man at once ordered a vegetarian meal to be prepared. Afterwards Wukong said, 
“What is your family name?” 

“Our humble family,” said the old man, “goes by the name of Chen.” When Tripitaka heard this, he left his seat to salute him, saying, “Old Patron, you and | share the same illustrious clan.”9 “Master,” 
said Pilgrim, “your surname is Tang. How can it be that you and he share the same illustrious ancestors?” Tripitaka said, “The surname of my secular family is also Chen, and | come from the Juxian 
Village, in the Hongnong District of Haizhou in the Tang domain. My religious name is Chen Xuanzang. Because our Great Tang Emperor Taizong made me his brother by decree, | took the name 
Tripitaka and used Tang as my surname. Hence I’m called the Tang Monk.” The old man was very pleased to hear that they had the same surname. 

“Old Chen,” said Pilgrim, “I must trouble your family some more, for I’ve not taken a bath for five centuries! Please go and boil some water so that my master and I, his disciple, can wash ourselves. 
We'll thank you all the more when we leave.” The old man at once gave the order for water to be boiled and basins to be brought in with several lamps. As master and disciple sat before the lamps 
after their baths, Pilgrim said, “Old Chen, | still have one more favour to ask of you. Can you lend me a needle and some thread?” 

“Of course, of course,” replied the old man. 1 of the amahs was told to fetch the needle and thread that were then handed over to Pilgrim. Pilgrim had the keenest sight; he noticed that Tripitaka had 
taken off a shirt made of white cloth and had not put it on again after his bath. Pilgrim grabbed it and put it on himself. Taking off his tiger skin, he sewed the hems together using a horse-face fold'® and 
fastened it round his waist again with the strand of rattan. He paraded in front of his master saying, “How does old monkey look today compared with the way he looked yesterday?” 

‘Very good,” said Tripitaka, “very good! Now you do look like a pilgrim! If you don’t think that the shirt is too worn or old, you may keep it.” 

“Thanks for the gift!” said Wukong respectfully. He then went out to find some hay to feed the horse, after which master and disciple both retired with the old man and his household. The next morning 
Wukong arose and woke up his master to get ready for the journey. Tripitaka dressed himself while Wukong put their luggage in order. They were about to leave when the old man brought in washing 
water and some vegetarian food, and so they did not set out until after the meal. Tripitaka rode his horse with Pilgrim leading the way; they journeyed by day and rested by night, taking food and drink 
according to their needs. Soon it was early winter. See frost-blighted maples and the wizened trees; few verdant pine and cypress still on the ridge. Budding plum blossoms spread their gentle scent. 
The brief, warm day — a Little Spring gift! But dying lilies yield to the lush wild tea. A cold bridge struggles against an old tree’s bough and gurgling water flows in the winding brook. Grey clouds, snow- 
laden, float throughout the sky. The strong, cold wind tears at the sleeve! How does one bear this chilly might of night?'2 

Master and disciple had travelled for some time when suddenly six men jumped out from the side of the road with much clamour, all holding long spears and short swords, sharp blades and strong 
bows. “Stop, monk!” they cried. “Leave your horse and drop your bag at once and we'll let you pass on alive!” 

Tripitaka was so terrified that his soul left him and his spirit fled; he fell from his horse, unable to utter a word. But Pilgrim lifted him up, saying, “Don’t be alarmed, Master. It’s nothing really, just some 
people coming to give us clothes and a travel allowance!” 

“Wukong,” said Tripitaka, “you must be a little hard of hearing! They told us to leave our bag and our horse, and you want to ask them for clothes and a travel allowance?” 

“You just stay here and watch our belongings,” said Pilgrim, “and let old monkey confront them. We'll see what happens.” Tripitaka said, “Even a good punch is no match for a pair of fists, and two fists 
can’t cope with four hands! There are six big fellows over there, and you’re such a tiny person. How can you've the nerve to confront them?” 

As he always had been audacious, Pilgrim did not wait for further discussion. He walked forward with arms folded and saluted the six men, saying, “Sirs, for what reason are you blocking the path of 
this poor monk?” 

“We're kings of the highway,” said the men, “philanthropic mountain lords. Our fame has long been known, though you seem to be ignorant of it. Leave your belongings at once, and you'll be allowed 
to pass. If you but utter half a no, you'll be chopped to pieces!” 

“I've been also a great hereditary king and a mountain lord for centuries,” said Pilgrim, “but I’ve yet to learn of your illustrious names.” 

“So you really don’t know!” one of them said. “Let’s tell you then: one of us is named Eye That Sees and Delights; another, Ear That Hears and Rages; another Nose That Smells and Loves; another, 
Tongue That Tastes and Desires; another, Mind That Perceives and Covets; and another, Body That Bears and Suffers.” 

“You ‘e nothing but six hairy brigands,” said Wukong laughing, “who've failed to recognise in me a person who’s left the family, your proper master. How dare you bar my way? Bring out the treasures 
you've stolen so that you and | can divide them into seven portions. I'll spare you then!” 

Hearing this, the robbers all reacted with rage and amusement, covetousness and fear, desire and anxiety. They rushed forward crying, “You reckless monk! You've not a thing to offer us, and yet you 
want us to share our loot with you!” Wielding spears and swords, they surrounded Pilgrim and hacked away at his head seventy or eighty times. Pilgrim stood in their midst and behaved as if nothing 
were happening. 

“What a monk!” said one of the robbers. “He really does have a hard head!” 

“Passably so!” said Pilgrim, laughing. “But your hands must be getting tired from all that exercise; it’s about time for old monkey to take out his needle for a little entertainment.” 

“This monk must be an acupuncture man in disguise,” said the robber. “We’re not sick! What's all this about using a needle?” Pilgrim reached into his ear and took out a tiny embroidery needle; one 
wave of it in the wind and it became an iron rod with the thickness of a rice bowl. He held it in his hands, saying, “Don’t run! Let old monkey try his hand on you with this rod!” The six robbers fled in all 
directions but with great strides he caught up with them and rounded all of them up. He beat every one of them to death, stripped them of their clothes, and seized their valuables. Then Pilgrim came 
back smiling broadly and said, “You may proceed now, Master. Those robbers have been exterminated by old monkey.” 

“That's a terrible thing you've done!” said Tripitaka. “They may have been strong men on the highway but they’d not have been sentenced to death even if they'd been caught and tried. If you've such 
abilities, you’d have chased them away. Why did you slay them all? How can you be a monk when you take life without cause? We who've left the family should keep ants out of harm’s way when we 
sweep the floor and put shades on lamps for the love of moths. How can you kill them just like that without regard for black or white? You showed no mercy at all! It’s a good thing that we’re here in the 
mountains where no further investigation will be likely. But suppose someone offends you when we reach a city and you perpetrate violence again, hitting people indiscriminately with that rod of yours 
— I'd be able to remain innocent and get away scot-free?” 

“Master,” said Wukong, “if I'd not killed them, they'd have killed you!” Tripitaka said, “As a priest, I’d rather die than practice violence. If | were killed, there'd be only one of me but you slaughtered six 
persons. How can you justify that? If this matter were brought before a judge and even if your old man were the judge, you'd certainly be unable to justify your action.” 

“To tell you the truth, Master,” said Pilgrim, “when I, old monkey's king on the Flower-Fruit Mountain five centuries ago, | killed | don’t know how many people. I'd not have been a Great Sage Equal to 
Heaven, if I'd lived by what you're saying.” 

“It's precisely because you had neither scruples nor self-control,” said Tripitaka, “unleashing your waywardness on Earth and spreading outrage in Heaven that you had to undergo this ordeal of five 
centuries. Now that you've entered the fold of Religion, if you still insist on practicing violence and indulge in the taking of life as before, you’re not worthy to be a monk, nor can you go to the Western 
Heaven. You're wicked! You’re just too wicked!” 

Now this monkey had never in all his life been able to tolerate scolding. When he heard Tripitaka’s persistent reprimand, he could not suppress the flames leaping up in his heart. “If that’s what you 
think,” he said. “If you think I’m not worthy to be a monk, nor can | go to the Western Heaven, you needn't bother me further with your nagging! I'll leave and go back!” Before Tripitaka had time to reply, 
Pilgrim was already so enraged that he leaped into the air, crying only, “Old monkey's off!” Tripitaka quickly raised his head to look but the monkey had already disappeared, trailed only by a swishing 
sound fading fast toward the East. Left by himself, the priest could only shake his head and sigh, “That fellow! He’s so unwilling to be taught! | only said a few words to him. How could he vanish without 
a trace and go back just like that? Well, well, well! It must be also that I’m destined not to have a disciple or any other companion, for now I'd not even call him or locate him if | wanted to. | might as 
well go on by myself!” 

So he was prepared to lay down his life and go toward the West, be his own master and on none rely. The elder had little alternative but to pack up his bag and put it on the horse that he did not even 
bother to mount. Holding his staff in one hand and the reins in the other, he set off sadly toward the West. He had not travelled far when he saw an old woman before him on the mountain road, holding 
a silk garment and a cap with a floral design. When Tripitaka saw her approach, he hastened to pull his horse aside for her to pass. “Elder where do you come from,” asked the old woman, “and why 
are you walking here all by yourself?” 

Tripitaka replied, “Your child’s sent by the Great King of the Land of the East to seek true scriptures from the living God in the Western Heaven.” 


“A god of the West,” said the old woman, “lives in the Great Temple of Thunderclap in the territory of India, and the journey there is one hundred and eight thousand miles long. You're all by yourself 
with neither a companion nor a disciple. How can you possibly think of going there?” 
“A few days ago,” said Tripitaka, “I did pick up a disciple, a rather unruly and headstrong character. | scolded him a little but he refused to be taught, and disappeared.” The old woman said, “I've here 
a silk shirt and a flower cap inlaid with gold that used to belong to my son. He had been a monk for only three days when unfortunately he died. I’ve just finished mourning him at the temple where | 
was given these things by his master to be kept in his memory. Dad, since you've a disciple, I'll give the shirt and the cap to you.” 
“Im most grateful for your lavish gifts,” said Tripitaka, “but my disciple has left. | dare not take them.” 
“Where did he go?” asked the old woman. Tripitaka replied, “I heard a swishing sound heading toward the east.” 
“My home is not too far away in the east,” said the old woman, “and he may be going there. I’ve a spell which is called the True Words for Controlling the Mind, or the Tight-Fillet Spell. You must 
memorize it secretly; commit it firmly to your memory, and don’t let anyone learn of it. I'll try to catch up with him and persuade him to come back and follow you. When he returns, give him the shirt 
and the cap to wear; and if he again refuses to obey you, recite the spell silently. He will not dare do violence or leave you again.” 
On hearing these words, Tripitaka saluted his head to thank her. The old woman changed herself into a shaft of golden light and vanished toward the east. Then Tripitaka realised that it was the Nun 
Guanyin who had taught him the True Words; he hurriedly picked up a few pinches of earth with his fingers and scattered them like incense, saluting reverently toward the East. He then took the shirt 
and the cap and hid them in his bag. Sitting beside the road, he began to recite the True Words for Controlling the Mind. After a few times, he knew it thoroughly by heart. Wukong having left his master, 
headed straight toward the Eastern Ocean with a single cloud somersault. He stopped his cloud, opened up a path in the water, and went directly to the Water Crystal Palace. Learning of his arrival, 
the Dragon King came out to welcome him. After they had exchanged greetings and sat down, the Dragon King said, “I heard recently that the ordeal of the Great Sage had been completed, and | 
apologise for not having congratulated you yet. | suppose you've again taken occupancy in your mortal mountain and returned to the ancient cave.” 
“| was so inclined,” said Wukong, “but | became a monk instead.” 
“What sort of a monk?” asked the Dragon King. “I was indebted to the Nun of South Sea,” said Pilgrim, “who persuaded me to do good and seek the truth. | was to follow the Tang Monk from the Land 
of the East to go worship God in the West. Since entering the fold of Religion, | was given also the name ‘Pilgrim.” 
“That is indeed praiseworthy!” said the Dragon King. “You've, as we say, left the wrong and followed the right; you've been created anew by setting your mind on goodness. But if that’s the case, why 
are you not going toward the West but are returning eastward instead?” 
Pilgrim laughed and said, “That Tang Monk knows nothing of human nature! There were a few ruffians who wanted to rob us, and | slew them all. But that Tang Monk couldn’t stop nagging me, telling 
me over and over how wrong | was. Can you imagine old monkey putting up with that sort of tedium? | just left him! | was on my way back to my mountain when | decided to come visit you and ask for 
a cup of tea.” 
“Thanks for coming! Thanks for coming!” exclaimed the Dragon King. At that moment, the Dragon sons and grandsons presented them with aromatic tea. When they finished the tea, Pilgrim happened 
to turn around and saw hanging behind him on the wall a painting on the “Presentation of Shoes at Yi Bridge.” 
“What's this all about?” asked Pilgrim. The Dragon King replied, “The incident depicted in the painting took place sometime after you’re born, and you may not recognise what it was — the threefold 
presentation of shoes at Yi Bridge.” 
“What do you mean by the threefold presentation of shoes?” asked Pilgrim. 
“The mortal in the painting,” said the Dragon King, “was named Huang Shigong,'? and the young man kneeling in front of him was called Zhang Liang. 4Shigong was sitting on the Yi Bridge when 
suddenly one of his shoes fell off and dropped under the bridge. He asked Zhang Liang to fetch it, and the young man quickly did so, putting it back on for him as he knelt there. This happened three 
times. Since Zhang Liang did not display the slightest sign of pride or impatience, he won the affection of Shigong who imparted to him that night a celestial manual and told him to support the house 
of Han. Afterwards, Zhang Liang ‘made his plans sitting in a military tent to achieve victories a thousand miles away.’° When the Han dynasty was established, he left his post and went into the 
mountains where he followed the Daoist, Master Red Pine,'*and became enlightened in the way of mortality. Great Sage, if you don’t accompany the Tang Monk, if you’re unwilling to exercise diligence 
or to accept instruction, you'll remain a bogus mortal after all. Don’t think that you'll ever acquire the Fruits of Truth.” 
Wukong listened to these words and fell silent for some time. The Dragon King said, “Great Sage, you must make the decision yourself. It’s unwise to allow short comfort to jeopardize your future.” 
“Not another word!” said Wukong. “Old monkey will go back to accompany him, that’s all!” Delighted, the Dragon King said, “If that’s your wish, | dare not detain you. Instead, | ask the Great Sage to 
show his mercy at once and not permit his master to wait any longer.” When Pilgrim heard this exhortation to leave, he bounded right out of the oceanic region; mounting the clouds, he left the Dragon 
King. 
On his way he ran right into the Nun of South Sea. “Sun Wukong,” said the Nun, “why did you not listen to me and accompany the Tang Monk? What are you doing here?” Pilgrim was so taken aback 
that he saluted her on top of the clouds. “I’m most grateful for the kind words of the Nun,” he said. “A monk from the Tang court did appear, lifted the seal, and saved my life. | became his disciple but 
he blamed me for being too violent. | walked out on him for a little while but I’m going back right now to accompany him.” 
“Go quickly then,” said the Nun, “before you change your mind again.” They finished speaking and each went on his way. In a moment, our Pilgrim saw the Tang Monk sitting dejectedly at the side of 
the road. He approached him and said, “Master, why are you not on the road? What are you doing here?” 
“Where have you been?” asked Tripitaka, looking up. “Your absence has forced me to sit here and wait for you, not daring to walk or move.” Pilgrim replied, “| just went to the home of the old Dragon 
King at the Eastern Ocean to ask for some tea.” 
“Disciple,” said Tripitaka, “those who have left the family should not lie. It was less than an hour since you left me, and you claim to have had tea at the home of the Dragon King?” 
“To tell you the truth,” said Pilgrim, laughing, “I know how to cloud somersault, and a single somersault will carry me one hundred and eight thousand miles. That's why | can go and return in no time at 
all.” Tripitaka said, “Because | spoke to you a little sharply, you're offended and left me in a rage. With your ability, you’d go and ask for some tea but a person like me has no other prospect but to sit 
here and endure hunger. Do you feel comfortable about that?” 
“Master,” said Pilgrim, “if you’re hungry, I'll go beg some food for you.” 
“There's no need to beg,” said Tripitaka, “for | still have in my bag some dried goods given to me by the mum of Guardian Liu. Fetch me some water in that bowl. I'll eat some food and we can start out 
again.” 
Pilgrim went to untie the bag and found some biscuits made of unrefined flour that he took out and handed over to the master. He then saw light glowing from a silk shirt and a flower cap inlaid with 
gold. “Did you bring this garment and cap from the Land of the East?” he asked. “I wore these in my childhood,” said Tripitaka nonchalantly. “If you wear the hat, you'll know how to recite scriptures 
without having to learn them; if you put on the garment, you'll know how to perform rituals without having to practice them.” 
“Dear Master,” said Pilgrim, “let me put them on.” 
“They may not fit you,” said Tripitaka, “but if they do, you may wear them.” Pilgrim thereupon took off his old shirt made of white cloth and put on the silk shirt that seemed to have been made especially 
for him. Then he put on the cap as well. When Tripitaka saw that he had put on the cap, he stopped eating the dried goods and began to recite the Tight-Fillet Spell silently. 
“Oh, my head!” cried Pilgrim. “It hurts! It hurts!” The master went through the recitation several times without ceasing, and the pain was so intense that Pilgrim was rolling on the ground, his hands 
gripping the flower cap inlaid with gold. Fearing that he might break the gold fillet, Tripitaka stopped reciting and the pain ceased. Pilgrim touched his head with his hand and felt that it was tightly bound 
by a thin metal band; it could be neither pulled off nor ripped apart, for it had, as it were, taken root on his head. Taking the needle out of his ear, he rammed it inside the fillet and started prying madly. 
Afraid that he might break the fillet with his prying, Tripitaka started his recitation again and Pilgrim’s head began to hurt once more. It was so painful that he did cartwheels and somersaults. His face 
and even his ears turned red, his eyes bulged, and his body grew weak. When the master saw his appearance, he was moved to break off his recitation, and the pain stopped as before. “My head,” 
said Pilgrim, “the master has put a spell on it.” 
“| was just saying the Tight-Fillet Thread,” said Tripitaka. “Since when did | put a spell on you?” 
“Recite it some more and see what happens,” said Pilgrim. Tripitaka accordingly began to recite, and the Pilgrim immediately started to hurt. “Stop! Stop!” he cried. “I hurt the moment you begin to 
recite. How do you explain that?” 
“Will you listen now to my instructions?” asked Tripitaka. 
“Yes, I'll,” replied Pilgrim. “And never be unruly again?” 
“| daren't,” said Pilgrim. 
Although he said that with his mouth, Pilgrim’s mind was still devising evil. One wave of the needle and it had the thickness of a rice bowl; he aimed it at the Tang Monk and was about to slam it down 
on him. The priest was so startled that he went through the recitation two or three more times. Falling to the ground, the monkey threw away the iron rod and could not even raise his hands. “Master,” 
he said, “I've learned my lesson! Stop! Please stop!” 
“How dare you be so reckless,” said Tripitaka, “that you’d want to strike me?” 
“I'd not dare strike you,” said Pilgrim, “but let me ask you something. Who taught you this magic?” 
“It was an old woman,” said Tripitaka, “who imparted it to me a few moments ago.” Growing very angry, Pilgrim said, “You needn't say anything more! The old woman had to be that Guanshiyin! Why 
did she want me to suffer like this? I’m going to South Sea to beat her up!” 
“If she had taught me this magic,” said Tripitaka, “she had to know it even before | did. If you go looking for her, and she starts her recitation, won’t you be dead?” Pilgrim saw the logic of this and dared 
not remove himself. Indeed, he had no alternative but to kneel in contrition and plead with Tripitaka, saying, “Master, this is her method of controlling me, allowing me no alternative but to follow you to 
the West. I'll not go to bother her but you must not regard this spell as a plaything for frequent recitation either! I’m willing to accompany you without ever entertaining the thought of leaving again.” 
“If that’s so,” said Tripitaka, “help me onto the horse and let's get going.” At that point, Pilgrim gave up all thoughts of disobedience or rebellion. Eagerly he tugged at his silk shirt and went to gather the 
luggage together and they headed again toward the West. 
015 

At Serpent Coil Mountain, the gods give secret protection; At Eagle Grief Stream, the Horse of the Will is reined 
Pilgrim who ministered to the Tang Monk faithfully as they advanced toward the West. They travelled for several days under the frigid sky of midwinter; a cold wind blew fiercely, and slippery icicles 
hung everywhere. They traversed a tortuous path of hanging gorges and cliffs, a parlous range tiered with summits and peaks. As Tripitaka was riding along on his horse, his ears caught the distant 
sound of a torrent. He tumed to ask: “Wukong where’s that sound coming from?” 
Pilgrim said, “I recall the name of this place’s Serpent Coil Mountain and there’s an Eagle Grief Stream in it. | suppose that’s where it's coming from.” Before they had finished their conversation, they 
arrived at the bank of the stream. Tripitaka reined in his horse and looked around. He saw a bubbling cold stream piercing through the clouds, its limpid current reddened by the sun. Its splatter in night 
rain stirs quiet vales; colours glow at dawn to fill the air. Wave after wave seems like flying chips of jade, their deep roar resonant as the clear wind. It flows to join one vast stretch of smoke and tide 
where gulls are lost with egrets but no fishers bide. Master and disciple were looking at the stream, when there was a loud splash in midstream and a dragon emerged. Churning the waters, it darted 
toward the bank and headed straight for the priest. Pilgrim was so startled that he threw away the luggage, hauled the master off his horse, and turned to flee with him at once. The dragon could not 
catch up with them but it swallowed the white horse, harness and all with one gulp before losing itself again in the water. Pilgrim carried his master to high ground and left the priest seated there; then 
he returned to fetch the horse and the luggage. The load of bags was still there but the horse was nowhere to be seen. Placing the luggage in front of his master, he said, “Master, there’s not a trace 
of that cursed dragon that’s frightened away our horse.” 
“Disciple,” said Tripitaka, “how can we find the horse again?” 
“Relax! Relax!” said Pilgrim. “Let me go and have a look!” 
He whistled once and leaped up into the air. Shading his fiery eyes and diamond pupils with his hand, he peered in all four directions but there was not the slightest trace of the horse. Dropping down 
from the clouds, he made his report, saying, “Master, our horse must have been eaten by that dragon. It’s nowhere to be seen!” 
“Disciple,” said Tripitaka, “how big a mouth does that creature have that he can swallow a horse, harness and all? It must have been frightened away instead, probably still running loose somewhere 
in the valley. Please take another look.” Pilgrim said, “You really have no conception of my ability. This pair of eyes of mine in daylight can discern good and evil within a thousand miles; at that distance, 
| can even see a dragonfly when it spreads its wings. How can | possibly miss something as big as a horse?” 


“If it has been eaten,” said Tripitaka, “how am | to proceed? Pity me! How can | walk through those thousand hills and ten thousand waters?” As he spoke, tears began to fall like rain. When Pilgrim 
saw him crying, he became infuriated and began to shout: “Master, stop behaving like a namby-pamby! Sit here! Just sit here! Let old monkey find that creature and ask him to give us back our horse. 
That'll be the end of the matter.” Clutching at him, Tripitaka said, “Disciple where do you've to go to find him? Wouldn't | be hurt if he should appear from somewhere after you’re gone? How would it 
be then if both man and horse should perish?” At these words, Pilgrim became even more enraged. “You're a weakling! Truly a weakling!” he thundered. “You want a horse to ride on, and yet you'll not 
let me go. You want to sit here and grow old, watching our bags?” 
As he was yelling angrily like this, he heard someone calling out in mid-air: “Great Sage Sun, don’t be annoyed. And stop crying, Royal Brother of Tang. We're a band of deities sent by the Nun Guanyin 
to give secret protection to the scripture pilgrim.” Hearing this, the priest hastily saluted to the ground. “Which divinities are you?” asked Pilgrim. “Tell me your names, so that | can check you off the 
roll.” 
“We're the Six Gods of Darkness and the Six Gods of light,” they said, “the Guardians of Five Points, the Four Sentinels, and the Eighteen Protectors of Monasteries. Every one of us waits upon you in 
rotation.” 
“Which one of you'll begin today?” asked Pilgrim. “The gods of Darkness and Light,” they said, “to be followed by the Sentinels and the Protectors. We Guardians of Five Points with the exception of 
the Golden-Headed Guardian, will be here somewhere night and day.” 
“That being the case,” said Pilgrim, “those not on duty may retire but the first Six Gods of Darkness, the Day Sentinel, and the Guardians should remain to protect my master. Let old monkey go find 
that cursed dragon in the stream and ask him for our horse.” The various deities obeyed. Only then did Tripitaka feel somewhat relieved as he sat on the cliff and told Pilgrim to be careful. “Just don’t 
worry,” said Pilgrim. Dear Monkey King! He tightened the belt around his silk shirt, hitched up his tiger-skin kilt, and went straight toward the gorge of the stream holding the golden-hooped iron rod. 
Standing halfway between cloud and fog, he cried loudly on top of the water, “Lawless lizard! Return my horse! Return my horse!” 
We now tell you about the dragon who, having eaten the white horse of Tripitaka, was lying on the bottom of the stream, subduing his spirit and nourishing his nature. When he heard someone 
demanding the horse with abusive language however, he could not restrain the fire leaping up in his heart and he jumped up quickly. Churning the waves, he darted out of the water, saying, “Who 
dares to insult me here with his big mouth?” Pilgrim saw him and cried ferociously, “Don’t run away! Return my horse!” Wielding his rod, he aimed at the beast’s head and struck while the dragon 
attacked with open jaws and dancing claws. The battle between the two of them before the stream was indeed fierce. See the dragon extending sharp daws: the monkey lifting his rod. The whiskers of 
this one hung like white jade threads; the eyes of that one shone like red-gold lamps. The mouth beneath the whiskers of that one belched coloured mists: the iron rod in the hands of this one moved 
like a fierce wind. That 1 was a cursed son who brought his parents grief; this 1 was a monster who defied the gods on high. Both had to suffer because of their plight. They now want to win so each 
displays his might. Back and forth, round and round, they fought for a long time, until the dragon grew weak and could fight no longer. He turned and darted back into the water; plunging to the bottom 
of the stream, he refused to come out again. The Monkey King heaped insult upon insult but the dragon only pretended to be deaf. Pilgrim had little choice but to return to Tripitaka, saying, “Master, 
that monster made his appearance as a result of my tongue-lashing. He fought with me for a long time before taking fright and running. He’s hiding in the water now and refuses to come out again.” 
“Do you know for certain that it was he who ate my horse?” asked Tripitaka. 
“Listen to the way you talk!” said Pilgrim. “If he hadn't eaten it, would he be willing to face me and answer me like that?” 
“The time you killed the tiger,” said Tripitaka, “you claimed that you had the ability to tame dragons and subdue tigers. Why can’t you subdue this one today?” As the monkey had a rather low tolerance 
for any kind of provocation, this single taunt of Tripitaka so aroused him that he said, “Not one word more! Let me go and show him who is master!” 
With great leaps, our Monkey King bounded right to the edge of the stream. Using his magic of overturning seas and rivers, he transformed the clear, limpid water of the Eagle Grief Stream into the 
muddy currents of the Yellow River during high tide. The cursed dragon in the depth of the stream could neither sit nor lie still for a single moment. He thought to himself: “Just as ‘Blessing never repeats 
itself, so misfortune never comes singly!’ It has been barely a year since | escaped execution by Heaven and came to bide my time here but now I’ve to run into this wretched monster who is trying to 
do me harm.” Look at him! The more he thought about the matter, the more irritated he became. Unable to bear it any longer, he gritted his teeth and leaped out of the water, crying, “What kind of 
monster are you, and where do you come from, that you want to oppress me like this?” 
“Never mind where | come from,” said Pilgrim. “Just return the horse, and I'll spare your life.” 
“I've swallowed your horse into my stomach,” said the dragon, “so how am | to throw it up? What are you going to do if | can’t return it to you?” Pilgrim said, “If you don’t give back the horse, just watch 
for this rod. Only when your life becomes a payment for my horse will there be an end to this matter!” 
The 2 of them again waged a bitter struggle below the mountain ridge. After a few rounds however, the little dragon just could hold out no longer; shaking his body, he changed himself into a tiny water 
snake and wriggled into the marshes. The Monkey King came rushing up with his rod and parted the grass to look for the snake but there was not a trace of it. He was so exasperated that the spirits of 
the 3 Worms in his body exploded' and smoke began to appear from his seven apertures. He recited a spell beginning with the letter Ohm and summoned the local spirit and the mountain god of that 
region. The 2 of them knelt before him saying, “The local spirit and the mountain god have come to see you.” 
“Stick out your shanks,” said Pilgrim, “and I'll greet each of you with five strokes of my rod just to relieve my feelings.” 
“Great Sage,” they pleaded, “please be more lenient and allow your humble subjects to tell you something.” 
“What have you got to say?” said Pilgrim. 
“The Great Sage’s been in captivity for a long time,” said the 2 deities, “and we'd no knowledge of when you're released. That’s why we've not been here to receive you and beg you to pardon us.” 
“All right,” said Pilgrim, “I'll not hit you. But let me ask you something. Where did that monstrous dragon in the Eagle Grief Stream come from and why did he devour my master’s white horse?” 
“We've never known the Great Sage to have a master,” the 2 deities said, “for you've always been a first-rank primordial mortal who submits neither to Heaven nor to Earth. What do you mean by your 
master’s horse?” 
Pilgrim said, “Of course you didn’t know about this. Because of my contemptuous behaviour toward Heaven, I'd to suffer for this five centuries. | was converted by the kindly persuasion of Nun Guanyin 
who had the true monk from the Tang court rescue me. As his disciple, | was to follow him to the Western Heaven to seek scriptures from God. We passed through this place and my master’s white 
horse’s lost.” 
“So, that’s how it’s!” said the 2 deities. “There’s never been anything evil about this stream except that it’s both broad, deep, and its water’s so clear that you can see right to the bottom. Large fowls 
such as crows or eagles are hesitant to fly over it; for when they see their own reflections in the clear water, they’re prone to mistake them for other birds of their own flock and throw themselves into 
the stream. Hence the name, the Steep Eagle Grief Stream. Some years ago on her way to look for a scripture pilgrim, Nun Guanyin rescued a dragon and sent him here. He’s told to wait for the 
scripture pilgrim and was forbidden to do any evil or violence. Only when he’s hungry is he permitted to come up to the banks to feed on birds or antelopes. How'd he be as ignorant as to offend the 
Great Sage!” 
Pilgrim said, “At first, he wanted to have a contest of strength with me and managed only a few bouts. Afterwards he’d not come out even when | abused him. Only when | used the magic of overturning 
seas and rivers and stirred up the water did he appear again and then he still wanted to fight. He really had no idea how heavy my rod’s! When finally he’d hold out no longer, he changed himself into 
a water snake and wriggled into the grass. | rushed up there to look for him but there’s no trace of him.” 
“You may not know, Great Sage,” said the local spirit, “that there’re countless holes and crevices along these banks through which the stream’s connected with its many tributaries. The dragon could’ve 
crawled into any one of these. But there’s no need for the Great Sage to get angry trying to look for him. If you want to capture this creature, all you need do is to ask Guanshiyin to come here; then 
he'll certainly surrender.” 
When Pilgrim heard this, he called the mountain god and the local spirit to go with him to see Tripitaka to give an account of what had happened. “If you need to send for the Nun,” said Tripitaka, 
“when'll you be able to return? How can this poor monk endure the cold and hunger?” 
He had hardly finished speaking when the Golden-Headed Guardian called out from mid-air, “Great Sage, you needn’t leave. Your humble subject will go fetch the Nun.” 
Pilgrim was very pleased, shouting, “Thanks for taking all that trouble! Go quickly!” 
The Guardian mounted the clouds swiftly and headed straight for South Sea; Pilgrim asked the mountain god and the local spirit to protect his master and the Day Sentinel to find some vegetarian food 
while he himself went back to patrol the stream. We now tell you about the Golden-Headed Guardian who mounted the clouds and soon arrived at South Sea. Descending from the auspicious light, he 
went straight to the purple bamboo grove of the Potalaka Mountain where he asked the various deities in golden armour and Liberation to announce his arrival. The Nun said, “What've you come for?” 
“The Tang Monk lost his horse at the Eagle Grief Stream of the Serpent Coil Mountain,” said the guardian, “and the Great Sage Sun’s placed in a terrible dilemma. He questioned the local deities who 
claimed that a dragon sent by the Nun to that stream had eaten it. The Great Sage therefore sent me to request the Nun to go and subdue that cursed dragon so that he might get back his horse.” 
Hearing this, the Nun said, “That creature’s originally the son of Aorun of the Western Ocean. Because in his carelessness he set fire to the palace and destroyed the luminous pearls hanging there, 
his dad accused him of subversion, and he’s condemned to die by the Heavenly Tribunal. It's | who personally sought pardon from the Jade Emperor for him so that he might serve as a means of 
transportation for the Tang Monk. | can’t understand how he'd swallow the monk’s horse instead. But if that’s what happened, I'll have to get over there myself.” The Nun left her lotus platform and went 
out of the divine cave. Mounting the auspicious luminosity with the Guardian, she crossed the South Sea. A testimonial poem says: 
God proclaimed the Tripitaka Supreme that a goddess declared throughout Chang’an: those great, wondrous truths could reach Heaven and Earth; wise, true words could save the spirits damned. 
They caused Gold Cicada to cast again his shell. 
They moved Xuanzang to mend his ways anew. 
By blocking his path at Eagle Grief Stream, a dragon-prince in horse-form returns to the Real. 

The Nun and the Guardian soon arrived at the Serpent Coil Mountain. They stopped the hallowed clouds in mid-air and saw Pilgrim Sun down below, shouting abuses at the bank of the stream. The 
Nun asked the Guardian to fetch him. Lowering his clouds, the Guardian went past Tripitaka and headed straight for the edge of the stream saying to Pilgrim, “The Nun’s arrived.” 
When Pilgrim heard this, he jumped quickly into the air and yelled at her: “You so-called Teacher of the Seven Gods and the Founder of the Faith of Mercy! Why did you've to use your tricks to harm 
me?” 
“You impudent stableman, ignorant red-buttocks!” said the Nun. “I went to considerable effort to find a scripture pilgrim whom | carefully instructed to save your life. Instead of thanking me, you’re finding 
fault with me!” 
“You saved me all right!” said Pilgrim. “If you truly wanted to deliver me, you’d have allowed me to have a little fun with no strings attached; when you met me the other day above the ocean, you'd have 
chastened me with a few words, telling me to serve the Tang Monk with diligence, and that'd have been enough. Why did you've to give him a flower cap and have him deceive me into wearing it so 
that I'd suffer? Now the fillet’s taken root on old monkey's head. And you even taught him this so-called Tight-Fillet Spell that he recites repeatedly causing endless pain in my head! You've not harmed 
me, indeed!” 
The Nun laughed and said, “O, Monkey! You're neither attentive to admonition nor willing to seek the fruit of truth. If you’re not restrained like this, you'll probably mock the authority of Heaven again 
without regard for good or ill. If you create troubles as you did before who'll be able to control you? It’s only through this bit of adversity that you'll be willing to enter our gate of Yoga.” 
“All right,” said Pilgrim, “I'll consider the matter my hard luck. But why did you take that condemned dragon and send him here so that he could become a spirit and swallow my master’s horse? It’s your 
fault if you allow an evildoer to perpetrate his villainies some more, you know!” 
“| went personally to plead with the Jade Emperor,” said the Nun, “to have the dragon stationed here so that he’d serve as a means of transportation for the scripture pilgrim. Those mortal horses from 
the Land of the East, do you think that they'd walk through ten thousand waters and a thousand hills? How’d they possibly hope to reach the Spirit Mountain, the land of God? Only a dragon-horse 
could make that journey!” 
“But right now he’s so terribly afraid of me,” said Pilgrim, “that he refuses to come out of his hiding place. What can we do?” 
The Nun said to the Guardian, “Go to the edge of the stream and say, ‘Come out, Third Prince Jade Dragon of the Dragon King Aorun. The Nun from South Sea’s here.’ He'll come out then.” 
The Guardian went at once to the edge of the stream and called out twice. Churning the waters and leaping across the waves, the little dragon appeared and changed at once into the form of a man. 
He stepped on the clouds and rose up into the air; saluting the Nun, he said, “I thank the Nun again for saving my life. I've waited here a long time but heard no news of the scripture pilgrim.” 
Pointing to Pilgrim, the Nun said, “Isn’t he the eldest disciple of the scripture pilgrim?” When he saw him, the little dragon said, “Nun, he’s my adversary. | was hungry yesterday and ate his horse. We 
fought over that but he took advantage of his superior strength and defeated me; in fact, he so abused me that | dared not show myself again. But he’s never mentioned a word about scripture seeking.” 
“You didn’t bother to ask my name,” said Pilgrim. “How did you expect me to tell you anything?” 


The little dragon said, “Didn't | ask you, ‘What kind of a monster are you and where do you come from?’ But all you did was shout, ‘Never mind where | come from; just return my horse!’ Since when 
did you utter even half the word Tang?” 
“That monkey's,” said the Nun, “always relying on his own abilities! When's he ever given any credit to other people? When you set off this time, remember that there’re others who'll join you. So when 
they ask you, by all means mention first the matter of scripture seeking; they'll submit to you without causing you further trouble.” 
Pilgrim received this word of counsel amiably. The Nun went up to the little dragon and plucked off the shining pearls hanging around his neck. She then dipped her willow branch into the sweet dew 
in her vase and sprinkled it all over his body; blowing a mouthful of magic breath on him, she cried, “Change!” The dragon at once changed into a horse with hair of exactly the same colour and quality 
as that of the horse he had swallowed. The Nun then told him, “You must overcome with utmost diligence all the cursed barriers. When your merit’s achieved, you'll no longer be an ordinary dragon; 
you'll acquire the true fruit of a golden body.” Holding the bit in his mouth, the little dragon humbly accepted the instruction. The Nun told Wukong to lead him to Tripitaka saying, “I’m returning across 
the ocean.” 
Pilgrim took hold of her and refused to let go, saying, “I’m not going on! I’m not going on! The road to the West is so treacherous! If I've to accompany this mortal monk, when’ll | ever get there? If I’ve 
to endure all these miseries, | may well lose my life. What sort of merit do you think I'll achieve? I’m not going! I’m not going!” 
“In years past, before you reached the way of humanity,” said the Nun, “you're most eager to seek enlightenment. Now that you’ve been delivered from the chastisement of Heaven, how'd you become 
slothful again? The truth of Extinguishments in our teaching can never be realised without faith and perseverance. If on your journey you’d come across any danger that threatens your life, | give you 
permission to call on Heaven, and Heaven will respond; to call on Earth, and Earth will prove efficacious. In the event of extreme difficulty, | myself will come to rescue you. Come closer, and I'll endow 
you with one more means of power.” Plucking three leaves from her willow branch, the Nun placed them at the back of Pilgrim’s head, crying, “Change!” They changed at once into three hairs with 
lifesaving power. She said to him: “When you find yourself in a helpless and hopeless situation, you may use these according to your needs, and they will deliver you from your particular affliction.” 
After Pilgrim had heard all these kind words, he thanked the Nun of Great Mercy and Compassion. With scented wind and coloured mists swirling around her, the Nun returned to Potalaka. 
Lowering the direction of his cloud, Pilgrim tugged at the mane of the horse and led him to Tripitaka, saying, “Master, we've a horse!” Highly pleased by what he saw, Tripitaka said, “Disciple, how is it 
that the horse has grown a little fatter and stronger than before? Where did you find him?” 
“Master, you're still dreaming!” said Pilgrim. “Just now the Golden-Headed Guardian managed to bring the Nun here, and she transformed the dragon of the stream into our white horse. Except for the 
missing harness, the colour and hair are all the same, and old monkey has pulled him here.” 
“Where is the Nun?” asked Tripitaka, greatly surprised. “Let me go and thank her.” 
“By this time,” said Pilgrim, “the Nun has probably arrived at South Sea; there’s no need to bother about that.” Picking up a few pinches of earth with his fingers and scattering them like incense, Tripitaka 
saluted reverently toward the South. He then got up and prepared to leave again with Pilgrim. 
Having dismissed the mountain god and the local spirit and given instructions to the Guardians and the Sentinels, Pilgrim asked his master to mount. Tripitaka said, “How can | ride a horse without 
harness? Let's find a boat to cross this stream, and then we can decide what to do.” 
“This master of mine is truly impractical!” said Pilgrim. “In the wilds of this mountain where will you find a boat? Since the horse has lived here for a long time, he must know the water's condition. Just 
ride him like a boat and we'll cross over.” Tripitaka had no choice but to follow his suggestion and climbed onto the bare-backed horse; Pilgrim took up the luggage and they arrived at the edge of the 
stream. Then they saw an old angler punting downstream toward them in an old wooden raft. When Pilgrim caught sight of him, he waved his hands and called out: “Old angler, come here! Come here! 
We come from the Land of the East to seek scriptures. It’s difficult for my master to cross, so please take us over.” Hearing these words, the angler quickly punted the raft up to the bank. Asking his 
master to dismount, Pilgrim helped Tripitaka onto the raft before he embarked the horse and the luggage. That old fisher punted the raft away, and like an arrow in the wind, they crossed the steep 
Eagle Grief Stream swiftly and landed on the western shore. Tripitaka told Pilgrim to untie a bag and take out a few Tang pennies to give to the old angler. With a shove of his pole, the old angler pulled 
away, saying, “I don’t want any money.” He drifted downstream and soon disappeared from sight. Feeling very much obliged, Tripitaka kept folding his hands to express his gratitude. “Master,” said 
Pilgrim, “you needn't be so solicitous. Don’t you recognise him? He is the Water God of this stream. Since he didn’t come to pay his respects to old monkey, he was about to get a beating. It’s enough 
that he is now spared from that. Would he dare take any money!” 
The Master only half-believed him when he climbed onto the bare-backed horse once again; following Pilgrim, he went up to the main road and set off again toward the West. It would be like this that 
they through the vast Thusness? reach the other shore and climb with hearts unfeigned the Spirit Mount. Master and disciple journeyed on, and soon the fiery sun sank westward as the sky gradually 
darkened. See clouds hazy and aimless, a mountain moon dim and gloomy. The sky, all frosty, builds the cold; howling wind around cuts through you. 1 bird is lost midst the pale, wide sandbars as 
twilight glows where the distant hills are low. A thousand trees roar in sparse woods; 1 ape cries on a barren peak. No traveller is seen on this long road when boats from afar return for the night. As 
Tripitaka, riding his horse, peered into the distance, he suddenly saw something like a hamlet beside the road. “Wukong,” he said, “there’s a house ahead of us. Let’s ask for lodging there and travel 
again tomorrow.” 
Raising his head to take a look, Pilgrim said, “Master, it's no ordinary house.” 
“Why not?” said Tripitaka. “If it were an ordinary house,” said Pilgrim, “there would be no flying fishes or reclining beasts decorating the ridge of its roof. That must be a temple or an abbey.” While they 
were speaking, master and disciple arrived at the gate of the building. Dismounting, Tripitaka saw on top of the gate three large characters: Lishe Shrine. They walked inside where they were met by 
an old man with some beads hanging around his neck. He came forward with hands folded, saying, “Master, please take a seat.” Tripitaka hastily returned his salutation and then went to the main hall 
to salute the holy images. The old man called a youth to serve tea, after which Tripitaka asked him, “Why this shrine is named Lishe?” 
The old man said, “This region belongs to the Hamil Kingdom of the western barbarians. There is a village behind the shrine that was built from the piety of all its families. The ‘Li’ refers to the land 
owned by the whole village, and the ‘She’ is a god of the Soil. During the days of spring sowing, summer ploughing, autumn harvesting, and winter storing, each of the families would bring the three 
beasts, flowers, and fruits to sacrifice at the shrine, so that they might be blessed with good luck in all four seasons, a rich harvest of the five grains, and prosperity in raising the six domestic creatures.” 
When Tripitaka heard these words, he nodded his head to show his approval, saying, “This is truly like the proverb: ‘Even three miles from home there are customs entirely distinct.’ The families in our 
region do not practice such good works.” Then the old man asked, “Where is the honourable home of the master?” 
“Your poor monk,” said Tripitaka, “happens to have been sent by the royal decree from the Great Tang Nation in the East to go to seek scriptures from God in the Western Heaven. It was getting rather 
late when | passed your esteemed edifice. | therefore came to your holy shrine to ask for a night's lodging. I'll leave as soon as it gets light.” The old man was delighted and kept saying, “Welcome! 
Welcome!” He called the youth again to prepare a meal that Tripitaka ate with gratitude. 
As usual, Pilgrim was extremely observant. Noticing a rope for hanging laundry tied under the eaves, he walked over to it and pulled at it until it snapped in two. He then used the piece of rope to tie up 
the horse. “Where did you steal this horse?” asked the old man, laughing. “Old man,” said Pilgrim angrily, “watch what you're saying! We're holy monks going to worship God. How could we steal 
horses?” 
“If you didn’t steal it,” laughed the old man, “why is there no saddle or rein, so that you've to rip up my clothesline?” 
“This rascal is always so impulsive,” said Tripitaka apologetically. “If you wanted to tie up the horse, why didn’t you ask the old gentleman properly for a rope? Why did you’ve to rip up his clothesline? 
Sir, please don’t be angry! Our horse, to tell you the truth, is not a stolen one. When we approached the Eagle Grief Stream yesterday from the east, I’d a white horse complete with hamess. Little did 
we anticipate that there was a condemned dragon in the stream who had become a spirit, and who swallowed my horse in one gulp, harness and all. Fortunately, my disciple has some talents, and he 
was able to bring the Nun Guanyin to the stream to subdue the dragon. She told him to assume the form of my original white horse, so that he could carry me to worship God in the Western Heaven. 
It has barely been one day since we crossed the stream and arrived at your holy shrine. We've not had time to look for a harness.” 
“Master, you needn't worry,” said the old man. “An old man like me loves to tease but I’d no idea your esteemed disciple was so serious about everything! When | was young, I'd a little money, and I, 
too, loved to ride. But over the years I'd my share of misfortunes: deaths in the family and fires in the household have not left me much. Thus I’m reduced to being a caretaker here in the shrine, looking 
after the fires and incense, and dependent on the goodwill of the patrons in the village back there for a living. | still have in my possession a harness that I’ve always cherished, and that even in this 
poverty I'd not bear to sell. But since hearing your story, how even the Nun delivered the divine dragon and made him change into a horse to carry you, | feel that | must not withhold from giving either. 
I'll bring the harness tomorrow and present it to the master who, | hope, will be pleased to accept it.” When Tripitaka heard this, he thanked him repeatedly. Before long, the youth brought in the evening 
meal, after which lamps were lit and the beds prepared. Everyone then retired. 
Next morning, Pilgrim arose and said, “Master, that old caretaker promised last night to give us the harness. Ask him for it. Don’t spare him.” He had hardly finished speaking when the old man came 
in with a saddle, together with pads, reins, and the like. Not a single item needed for riding a horse was lacking. He set them down in the corridor, saying, “Master, I’m presenting you with this harness.” 
When Tripitaka saw it, he accepted it with delight and asked Pilgrim to try the saddle on the horse. Going forward, Pilgrim took up the accoutrements and examined them piece by piece. They were 
indeed some magnificent articles for which a testimonial poem says: 

The carved saddle shines with studs of silver stars. 

The precious seat glows with bright threads of gold. 

The pads are stacks of fine-spun woollen quilts. 
The reins are three bands of purple cords of silk. 
The bridle’s leather straps are shaped like flowers. 
The flaps have gold-etched forms of dancing beasts. 
The rings and bit are made of finest steel. 
Waterproof tassels dangle on both sides. 
Secretly pleased, Pilgrim put the saddle on the back of the horse, and it seemed to have been made to measure. Tripitaka saluted to thank the old man who hastily raised him up, saying, “It’s nothing! 
What do you need to thank me for?” The old man did not ask them to stay any longer; instead, he urged Tripitaka to mount. The priest came out of the gate and climbed into the saddle while Pilgrim 
followed, hauling the luggage. The old man then took a whip out from his sleeve with a handle of rattan wrapped in strips of leather, and the strap knitted with cords made of tiger ligaments. He stood 
by the side of the road and presented it with hands uplifted, saying, “Holy Monk, I’ve a whip here that | may as well give you.” Tripitaka accepted it on his horse, saying, “Thanks for your donation! 
Thanks for your donation!” 
Even as he was saying this, the old man vanished. The priest turned around to look at the Lishe Shrine but it had become just a piece of level ground. From the sky came a voice saying, “Holy Monk, 
I’m sorry not to have given you a better reception! I’m the local spirit of Potalaka Mountain who was sent by the Nun to present you with the hamess. You two must journey to the West with all diligence. 
Do not be slothful in any moment.” Tripitaka was so startled that he fell off his horse and saluted toward the sky, saying, “Your disciple is of fleshly eyes and mortal stock, and he does not recognise 
the holy visage of the deity. Please forgive me. | beseech you to convey my gratitude to the Nun.” Look at him! All he could do was to respect toward the sky without bothering to count how many times! 
By the side of the road the Great Sage Sun reeled with laughter, the Handsome Monkey King broke up with hilarity. He came up and tugged at his master, saying, “Master, get up! He is long gone! He 
can’t hear you, nor can he see your respecting. Why keep up this adoration?” 
“Disciple,” said the priest, “when | respected like that, all you’d do was to stand snickering by the side of the road with not even a salute. Why?” 
“You'd not know, would you?” said Pilgrim. “For playing a game of hide-and-seek like that with us, he really deserves a beating! But for the sake of the Nun, I'll spare him and that’s something already! 
You think he dares accept a salute from old monkey? Old monkey's been a hero since his youth and he doesn’t know how to salute people! Even when | saw the Jade Emperor and Laozi, | just gave 
them my greeting, that’s all!” 
“Blasphemy!” said Tripitaka. “Stop this idle talk! Let's get going without further delay.” So the priest got up and prepared to set off again toward the West. After leaving that place, they had a peaceful 
journey for two months, for all they met were barbarians, Muslims, tigers, wolves, and leopards. Time went by swiftly, and it was again early spring. You’d see jade green gilding the mountain forest, 
and green sprouts of grass appearing. The plum blossoms were all fallen and the willow-leaves gently budding. As master and disciple were admiring this scenery of spring, they saw the sun sinking 
westward again. Reining the horse, Tripitaka peered into the distance and saw at the fold of the hill the shadow of buildings and the dark silhouette of towers. “Wukong,” said Tripitaka, “look at the 
buildings over there. What sort of a place’s that?” 
Stretching his neck to look, Pilgrim said, “It's to be either a temple or a monastery. Let's move along and ask for lodging over there.” Tripitaka was glad to follow this suggestion and urged his dragon- 
horse forward. 
016 


At Guanyin Hall the monks plot for the treasure; At Black Wind Mountain a monster steals the cassock 

The disciple and master who urged the horse forward and arrived at the front gate of the building. They saw that it was indeed a monastery with tiers of towers, turrets, and rows of quiet chambers. 
Above the temple gate hung the august panoply of coloured nimbus; before the Hall of 5 Blessings whirled a thousand strands of bright red mists. 2 rows of pines and bamboos; 1 grove of juniper and 
cypress; 2 rows of pines and bamboos revealed their fair virtue unspoiled by time; 1 grove of juniper and cypress displayed its chaste beauty in comely hues. They saw also the tall bell tower, the 
pagoda rugged, monks in silent meditation and birds on trees gently cooing. A dustless seclusion was the real seclusion for the quiescence of Dao was truly quiescent. The poem says: 

This temple, like Jetavana, hides in a jade-green grove. Its beauty surpasses even the Sad-varsa.' 

Pure land among mankind is rare indeed: this world’s famed mountains are mostly held by monks. 
The priest dismounted, and Pilgrim laid down his load. They were about to walk through the gate when a monk came out. He looks like he wore a hat pinned to the left and a robe most spotlessly pure.2 
brass rings hung from his ears; a silk sash was wrapped round his waist. His straw sandals moved sedately; hands carried a wooden fish. His mouth recited constantly the Wisdom he sought most 
humbly. When Tripitaka saw him, he stood waiting by the gate and saluted with his palms pressed together in front of him. The monk returned the greeting at once and said laughing, “I’m sorry but | 
don’t know you!” He then asked, “Where do you come from? Please come in for some tea.” 
“Your disciple,” said Tripitaka, “has been sent by royal decree from the Land of the East to go to seek scriptures from God in the Temple of Thunderclap. It was getting late when we arrived here, and 
we'd like to ask for a night’s lodging in your fair temple.” 
“Please take a seat inside,” said the monk. Only then did Tripitaka call Pilgrim to lead the horse inside. When the monk caught sight of Pilgrim’s face, he became somewhat afraid and asked, “What's 
that thing leading the horse?” 
“Speak softly!” said Tripitaka. “He’s easily provoked! If he hears you referring to him as a thing, he'll get mad. He happens to be my disciple.” With a shiver, the monk bit his finger and said, “Such a 
hideous creature, and you made him your disciple!” Tripitaka said, “You can’t tell by mere appearance. He may be ugly but he is very useful.” 
That monk had little choice but to accompany Tripitaka and Pilgrim as they entered the temple gate. Inside, above the main hall's entrance, the words “Guanyin Chan Hall” were written in large letters. 
Highly pleased, Tripitaka said, “This disciple has repeatedly benefited from the holy grace of the Nun, though he has had no opportunity to thank her. Now that we're at this Chan hall, it is as if we're 
meeting the Nun personally, and it is most proper that I’d offer my thanks.” When the monk heard this, he told one of the attendants to open wide the door of the hall and invited Tripitaka to worship. 
Pilgrim tied up the horse, dropped his luggage, and went with Tripitaka up the hall. Stretching his back and then flattening himself on the ground, Tripitaka respected to the golden image as the monk 
went to beat the drum, and Pilgrim began to strike the bell. Saluting himself before the seat of the deity, Tripitaka poured out his heart in prayer. When he finished, the monk stopped the drum but 
Pilgrim continued to strike the bell without ceasing. Now rapidly, now slowly, he persisted for a long time. The attendant said, “The service is over. Why are you still striking the bell?” Only then did 
Pilgrim throw away the hammer and say, laughing, “You'd not know this! I’m just living by the proverb: ‘If you’re a monk for a day, strike then the bell for a day!’”2 
By then, the monks young and old of the monastery and the elders of upper and lower chambers were all aroused by the unruly sound of the bell. They rushed out together crying, “Who is the maniac 
fooling with the bell?” Pilgrim leaped out of the hall and shouted, “Your Grandpa Sun sounded it to amuse himself!” The moment the monks saw him, they were so frightened that they tumbled and 
rolled on the ground. Crawling around, they said, “Dad Thunder!” 
“He’s only my great-grandson!” said Pilgrim. “Get up, get up! Don’t be afraid. We're noble priests who have come from the Great Tang Nation in the east.” 
The various monks then saluted courteously to him, and when they saw Tripitaka, they were even more reassured. 1 of the monks who was the abbot of the monastery said, “Let the holy dads come 
to the living room in the back so that we may offer them some tea.” 
Untying the reins and leading the horse, they picked up the luggage and went past the main hall to the back of the monastery where they sat down in orderly rows. After serving tea, the abbot prepared 
a vegetarian meal, although it was still rather early for dinner. Tripitaka had not finished thanking him when an old monk emerged from the rear, supported by 2 boys. Look how he was attired: wore on 
his head a Vairocana hat topped by a precious, shining cat’s-eye stone; on his body a brocaded woollen frock, piped brilliantly in gold and kingfisher feathers. A pair of monk shoes on which 8 Treasures 
were set and a priestly staff encased with starry gems. His face full of wrinkles, he looked like the Old Witch of Li Mountain; eyes were dim-sighted though he seemed a Dragon King of the Eastern 
Ocean. Wind stabbed his mouth for his teeth had fallen and palsy had made crooked his aged back. The various monks made the announcement: “The Patriarch’s here.” 
Tripitaka saluted to receive him saying, “Old Abbot, your disciple salutes you.” 
The old monk returned the gesture and they were both seated. “Just now | heard the little ones announcing,” said the old monk, “that venerable dads from the Tang court have arrived from the east. | 
came out specifically to meet you.” 
“Knowing no better,” said Tripitaka, “we intruded into your esteemed temple. Please pardon us!” 
“Please, please!” said the old monk. “May | ask the holy dad what the distance is between here and the Land of the East?” 
“Since leaving the outskirts of Chang’an,” said Tripitaka, “I travelled for some five thousand miles before passing the Mountain of Two Frontiers where | picked up a little disciple. Moving on, we passed 
through the Hamil Kingdom of the western barbarians and in two months we’d travelled another five or six thousand miles. Only then did we arrive at your noble region.” 
“Well, you've covered the distance of ten thousand miles,” said the old monk. “This disciple truly has spent his life in vain, for he has not even left the door of the temple. I’ve, as the saying goes, ‘sat in 
the well to look at the sky.’ A veritable piece of dead wood!” 
Then Tripitaka asked, “What is the honourable age of the Old Abbot?” 
“Foolishly I've reached my two hundred and seventieth year,” said the old monk. 
When Pilgrim heard this, he said, “You're only my descendant of the ten-thousandth generation!” 
“Carefull” said Tripitaka, looking at him sternly. “Don’t offend people with your brashness!” 
“And you, Elder,” asked the old monk, “How old are you?” 
“| daren't tell,” said Pilgrim. That old monk thought it was just a foolish remark; he paid no further attention, nor did he ask again. Instead, he called for tea to be served, and a young cleric brought out 
a tray made of milk-white jade on which there were three cloisonné cups with gold edges. Another youth brought out a white copper pot and poured three cups of scented tea, truly more colourful than 
camellia buds and more fragrant than cassia flowers. When Tripitaka saw these, he could not cease making compliments, saying, “What marvellous things! What marvellous things! A lovely drink, 
indeed, and lovely utensils!” 
“Most disgraceful stuff!” said the old monk. “The Holy Dad resides in the heavenly court of a great nation, and he has witnessed all kinds of rare treasures. Things like these are not worthy of your 
praise. Since you’ve come from a noble state, do you've any precious thing you can show me?” 
“It's pathetic!” said Tripitaka. “We've no precious thing in the Land of the East; and even if we’d, I’d not bring it with me because of the distance.” 
From the side, Pilgrim said, “Master, | saw a cassock the other day in our bag. Isn’t that a treasure? Why not take it out and show it to him?” When the other monks heard him mentioning a cassock, 
they all began to snicker. “What are you laughing at?” asked Pilgrim. The abbot said, “To say that a cassock is a treasure, as you just did, is certainly laughable. If you want to talk about cassocks, 
priests like us would possess more than twenty or thirty such garments. Take the case of our Patriarch who has been a monk here for some two hundred and fifty years. He has over seven hundred of 
them!” He then made the suggestion: “Why not take them out for these people to see?” That old monk certainly thought it was his show this time! He asked the attendants to open up the storage room 
and the dhitas to bring out the chests. They brought out twelve of them and set them down in the courtyard. The padlocks were unlocked; clothes racks were set up on both sides, and ropes were 
strung all around. One by one, the cassocks were shaken loose and hung up for Tripitaka to see. It was truly a roomful of embroidery, four walls of exquisite silk! 
Glancing at them one by one, Pilgrim saw that they were all pieces of fine silk intricately woven and delicately embroidered, splashed with gold. He laughed and said, “Fine! Fine! Fine! Now pack them 
up! Let's take ours out for you to look at.” Pulling Pilgrim aside, Tripitaka said softly, “Disciple, don’t start a contest of wealth with other people. You and | are strangers away from home, and this may 
be a mistake!” 
“Just a look at the cassock,” said Pilgrim, “how can that be a mistake?” 
“You've not considered this,” said Tripitaka. “As the ancients declared, ‘The rare object of art should not be exposed to the covetous and deceitful person.’ For once he sees it, he will be tempted; and 
once he is tempted, he will plot and scheme. If you're timid, you may end up yielding to his every demand; otherwise, injury and loss of life may result, and that’s no small matter.” 
“Relax! Relax!” said Pilgrim. “Old monkey will assume all responsibility!” Look at him! He permitted no further discussion! 
Darting away, he untied the bag and brilliant rays at once came flashing through the two layers of oil-paper in which the garment was wrapped. He discarded the paper and took out the cassock. As he 
shook it loose, a crimson light flooded the room and glorious air filled the courtyard. When the various monks saw it, none could suppress the admiration in his heart and the praise on his lips. It was 
truly a magnificent cassock! It has hanging on it sparkling pearls - marvellous in every way — and God’s treasures in each aspect rare. Up and down spreads grapevine? weave on gorgeous silk; on 
every side are hems of fine brocade. Put it on, and goblins will then be slain. Step in it, and demons will flee to Hell. It's made by those hands of gods incarnate; he who is not a true monk dares not 
wear it. When the old monk saw a treasure of such quality, he was indeed moved to villainy. Walking forward, he knelt down before Tripitaka and tears began to fall from his eyes. “This disciple’s truly 
no luck,” he said. 
“Old Abbot,” said Tripitaka, raising him up, “what do you mean?” 
“It was already getting late,” he said, “when the venerable dad spread this treasure out. But my eyes are dim and | can’t see clearly. Isn't this my misfortune?” 
“Bring out the lamps,” said Tripitaka, “and you can take a better look.” The old monk said, “The treasure of the dad is already dazzling; if we light the lamps, it will become much too bright for my eyes, 
and I'll never be able to see it properly.” 
“How would you like to see it?” asked Pilgrim. “If the venerable dad is inclined to be gracious,” replied the old monk, “please permit me to take it back to my room where | can spend the night looking at 
it carefully. Tomorrow I'll return it to you before you continue your journey to the west. How would that be?” Startled, Tripitaka began to complain to Pilgrim, saying, “It’s all your doing! It’s all your doing!” 
“What are you afraid of ?” said Pilgrim, laughing. “Let me wrap it up and he can take it away. If there’s any mishap, old monkey will take care of it.” Tripitaka could not stop him; he handed the cassock 
over to the monk, saying, “You may look at it but you must give it back tomorrow morning, just as it is. Don’t spoil or damage it in any way!” 
The old monk was very pleased. After telling the young cleric to take the cassock inside, he gave instructions for the various monks to sweep out the Chan hall in front. 2 rattan beds were sent for and 
the bedding was prepared so that the 2 travellers could rest. He gave further instructions for sending them off with breakfast in the moming after which everyone left. Master and disciple closed up the 
hall and slept. The old monk had got hold of the cassock by fraud. He took it beneath the lamps in the back room and sat in front of it, bawling. The chief priest of the monastery was so startled that he 
dared not retire first. The young cleric, not knowing the reason for the weeping, went to report to the other monks saying, “The aged dad’s been crying and it’s now the second watch and he’s still not 
stopped.” 
2 grand disciples who were his favourites, went forward to ask him, “Grand master, why are you crying?” 
“Im crying over my ill luck,” replied the old monk, “for | can’t look at the treasure of the Tang Monk.” One of the little monks said, “The aged dad is becoming a little senile! The cassock is placed right 
before you. All you've to do is to untie the package and look at it. Why do you've to cry?” 
“But | can’t look at it for long,” said the old monk. “I’m two hundred and seventy years old, and yet I’ve bargained in vain for those several hundred cassocks. What must | do to acquire that one cassock 
of his? How can | become the Tang Monk himself?” 
“The grand master is erring,” said the little monk. “The Tang Monk is a mendicant who had to leave his home and country. You're enjoying the benefits of old age here, and that should be sufficient. 
Why do you want to be a mendicant like him?” The old monk said, “Though I’m relaxing at home and enjoying my declining years, I've no cassock like his to put on. If | can put it on for just one day, I'll 
die with my eyes shut, for then I'll not have been a monk in vain in this World of Light.” 
“What nonsense!” said another monk. “If you want to put it on, what’s so difficult about that? Tomorrow we'll ask them to stay for one more day, and you can wear it the whole day; if that’s not enough, 
we'll detain them for ten days so that you can wear the cassock all that time. That will be the end of the matter. Why do you've to cry like this?” 
“Even if they were to be detained for a whole year,” said the old monk, “I'd only be able to wear it for one year. That's not long-lasting! The moment they want to leave, we'll have to return it. How can 
we make it last?” 
As they were speaking, one of the little monks whose name was Great Wisdom, spoke up: “Aged Dad, if you want it to last, that’s easy too!” When the old monk heard that, he brightened up. “My son,” 
he said, “what profound thoughts do you've?” Great Wisdom said, “The Tang Monk and his disciple are travellers and are subjected to a lot of stress and strain. So they are fast asleep now. | suppose 
a few of us who are strong could take up knives and spears, break open the Chan hall, and kill them. We'd bury them in the backyard, and only those of us within the family would know about it. We'd 


also take over the white horse and the luggage but the cassock could be kept as an heirloom. Now isn’t this a plan made to last through posterity?” When the old monk heard this, he was filled with 
delight. Wiping away his tears, he said, “Good! Good! Good! This plan is absolutely marvellous!” He asked at once for knives and spears. 
There was in their midst another little monk whose name was Big Plan who was the younger classmate of Great Wisdom. Coming forward, he said, “That plan is no good! If you want to kill them, you 
must first assess the situation. It's easy to take care of the one with the white face but the hairy face presents more difficulty. If for some reason you're unable to slay him, you might bring disaster upon 
yourselves. I’ve a plan that does not call for knives or spears. How do you feel about this?” 
“My son,” said the old monk, “what sort of plan do you've?” 
“In the opinion of your little grandson,” said Big Plan, “we can call up all the resident heads, both senior and junior, in the eastern wing of this monastery, asking each person and his group to bring a 
bundle of dried firewood. We'll sacrifice the three rooms of the Chan hall and set fire to them; the people inside will be barred from all exits. Even the horse will be burned with them! If the families who 
live in front of the temple or behind it should see the fire, we can say that they caused it by their carelessness and burned down our Chan hall. Those two monks will surely be burned to death but no 
one will know any better. After that, won’t we've the cassock as our heirloom?” 
When the monks heard this, they were all delighted. “Better! Better! Better! This plan is even more marvellous! More marvellous!” they all said. 
They sent for the resident heads at once to bring firewood. Alas, this single plan will have the result of a venerable old monk ending his life and the Guanyin Chan Hall reduced to dust. That monastery 
had over seventy suites and some two hundred monks resided there. Hordes of them went to fetch firewood that they stacked around the Chan hall until it was completely surrounded. They then made 
plans to light the fire. Tripitaka and his disciple had already gone to rest. That Pilgrim however, was a spiritual monkey; though he lay down, he was only exercising his breath to preserve his spirit with 
his eyes half-closed. Suddenly he heard people running around outside and the crackling of firewood in the wind. “This is a time for quietness,” he said to himself, his suspicion fully aroused, “so why 
do | hear people walking about? Could they be thieves plotting against us?” Whirling around, he leaped up, and would have opened the door to look outside, had he not been afraid of waking his master. 
Look at him display his abilities! 
With 1 shake of his body he changed into a bee. Truly he had a sweet mouth and vicious tail; a small waist and light body. He cut through flowers and willow like a dart; sought like a meteor the scented 
pollen. His light, tiny body could bear much weight. His thin wings buzzing could ride the wind. Descending from rafters and beams, he crawled out to get a clear view. He then saw that the various 
monks were hauling hay and carrying firewood; surrounding the Chan hall, they were about to light the fire. “What my master said has really come true!” said Pilgrim, smiling to himself. “Because they 
wanted to take our lives and rob us of our cassock, they’re moved to such treachery. | suppose I’d use my rod to attack them but I’m afraid they'd be unable to withstand it. A little beating and they'd all 
be dead! Then Master would blame me for acting violently again. O, let it be! I'll lead the sheep astray conveniently and meet plot with plot so that they'll be able to live here no more.” Dear Pilgrim! 
With a single somersault, he leaped straight up to the South Heaven Gate. He so startled the divine warriors Pang, Liu, Gou, and Bi that they saluted, and so alarmed Ma, Zhao, Wen, and Guan that 
they bent low. “Good Heavens!” they cried. “That character who disrupted Heaven's here again!” 
“No need to stand on ceremony, all of you!” said Pilgrim, waving his hand. “And don’t be alarmed! | came to find Virlpaksa, the Broad-Eyed Deity-King.” 
Before he had finished speaking, the Deity-King arrived and greeted Pilgrim, saying, “It's been a long time! | heard some time ago that the Nun Guanyin asked the Jade Emperor for the services of the 
Four Sentinels, the Six Gods of Light, Darkness, and the Guardians to protect the Tang Monk as he goes in quest of scriptures in the Western Heaven. She also said that you'd become his disciple. 
How do you've the leisure to be here today?” 
“Don’t mention leisure!” said Pilgrim. “The Tang Monk met some wicked people on his journey who are about to have him burned up. It’s an extreme emergency, and that’s why I’ve come to borrow 
your Fire-Repelling Cover to save him. Bring it to me quickly; I'll return it the moment I’m finished with it.” 
“You're wrong,” said the Deity-King. “If wicked people are starting a fire, you’d go find water to save him. Why do you want the Fire-Repelling Cover?” Pilgrim said, “You've no idea what's behind this. 
If | find water to save him, the fire won't burn, and that will benefit our enemies instead. | want this cover so that only the Tang Monk will be protected from harm. | don’t care about the rest! Let them 
burn! Quickly! Quickly! A little delay, and it may be too late! You'll botch up my affairs down below!” 
“This monkey is still plotting with an evil mind,” said the Deity-King, laughing. “After looking out for himself, he is not worried about other people.” 
“Hurry!” said Pilgrim. “Stop wagging your tongue, or you'll upset my great enterprise!” 
The Deity-King dared not refuse and gave Pilgrim the cover. Pilgrim took it and descended through the clouds to the roof of the Chan hall where he covered up the Tang Monk, the white horse, and the 
luggage. He himself then went to sit on the roof of the back room occupied by the old monk in order to guard the cassock. As he saw the people lighting the fire, he pressed his fingers together to make 
a magic sign and recited a spell. Facing the ground to the southwest, he took a deep breath and then blew it out. At once a strong wind arose and whipped the fire into a mighty blaze. What a fire! What 
a fire! See rolling black smoke; vaulting red flames. With rolling black smoke all the stars vanish from the vast sky; with vaulting red flames the earth’s lit up, made crimson for 1000 miles. At the 
beginning, what gleaming snakes of gold! Soon thereafter, what imposing bloody horses! The 3 Southern Forces display their might. The Great God of Fire reveals his power. When dried wood burns 
in such fire intense, why speak of Suiren‘ drilling fire from wood? When coloured flames shoot out of hot-oiled doors, they match even the opened oven of Laozi. This is how fire rages ruthlessly though 
no worse than such intended fraud as not suppressing misdeeds and abetting violence. The wind sweeps the fire and flames fly up for some 8000 feet; the fire’s helped by the wind so ashes burst 
beyond the 9-fold Heaven. Ping-ping, pang-pang, they sound like those firecrackers at year’s end. Popo, la-la, they're like the roar of cannons in the camps. It burns till a god’s image cannot flee from 
the scene and the Temple Guardians have no place to hide. It’s like the Red Cliff Campaign in the night, ‘surpassing the fire at Epang Palace. ®As the saying goes, “One little spark of fire can burn ten 
thousand acres.” 
In a moment, the strong wind and the raging fire made the entire Guanyin Hall glowing red. Look at all those monks! They began to bring out the chests and carry out the drawers, to grab for tables 
and snatch up pots. A loud wailing filled the whole courtyard. Pilgrim Sun however, stood guard at the back while the Fire-Repelling Cover securely screened off the Chan hall at the front. The rest of 
the place was completely lit up; truly the sky was illuminated by brilliant red flames, and bright gold light shone through the walls. No one knew however, that when the fire had begun, it had caught the 
attention of a mountain monster. For about 20 miles due south of this Guanyin Hall there was a Black Wind Mountain where there was also a Black Wind Cave. A monster in the cave who happened 
to turn over in his sleep, noticed that his windows were lit up. He thought that dawn had broken but when he arose and took another look, he saw instead the brilliant glow of fire burning in the north. 
Astonished, the monster said, “Good Heavens! There must be a fire in the Guanyin Hall. Those monks are so careless! Let me see if | can help them a little!” Dear monster! 
He rose with his cloud and went at once to the place of fire and smoke where he discovered that the halls front and back were entirely empty while the fire in the corridors on both sides was raging. 
With great strides he ran inside and was about to call for water when he saw that there was no fire in the back room. Someone however, was sitting on the roof whipping up the wind. He began to 
perceive what was happening and ran quickly inside to look around. In the living room of the old monk, he saw on the table colourful radiance emitted by a package wrapped in a blue blanket. He untied 
it and discovered that it was a cassock of silk brocade, a rare Religious treasure. Thus it is how wealth moves the mind of man! He neither attempted to put out the fire nor called for water. Snatching 
up the cassock, he committed robbery by taking advantage of the confusion and at once turned his cloud back toward the mountain cave. The fire raged on until the time of the fifth watch before burning 
itself out. Look at those monks: weeping and wailing, they went with empty hands and naked bodies to rummage about in the ashes, trying desperately to salvage a scrap or two of metal or valuables. 
Some attempted to erect a temporary shelter along the walls while others amid the rubble tried to build a makeshift oven so that rice could be cooked. They were all howling and complaining. Now 
Pilgrim taking the Fire-Repelling Cover, sent it up to the South Heaven Gate with 1 somersault. He handed it back to the Broad-Eyed Deity-King saying, “Thanks so much for lending it to me!” 
The Deity-King took it back and said, “The Great Sage is very honest. | was a little worried that if you didn’t return my treasure, I’d have a hard time finding you. I’m glad you brought it right back.” 
“Do you think that old monkey is the sort of person who steals openly?” asked Pilgrim. “As the saying goes, ‘Return what you borrow, and again you may borrow!” 
“I've not seen you for a long time,” said the Deity-King, “and I'd like to invite you to spend some time at my palace. How about it?” Pilgrim said, “Old monkey can’t do what he did before, ‘squatting on a 
rotted bench and dispensing lofty discourse.’ Now that I’ve to protect the Tang Monk, I’ve not a moment's leisure. Give me a rain check!” He took leave of the Deity-King quickly and dropped down from 
the clouds. As the sun arose, he arrived at the Chan hall where with one shake of his body he changed again into a bee. When he flew inside and resumed his original form, he saw that his master was 
still sleeping soundly. 
“Master,” cried Pilgrim, “it’s dawn. Get up.” Only then did Tripitaka awake; he tumed around, saying, “Yes, indeed!” Putting on his clothes, he opened the door and went out. As he raised his head, he 
saw crumbling walls and seared partitions; the towers, the terraces, and the buildings had all disappeared. “Ah!” he cried, greatly shaken. “How is it that the buildings are all gone? Why are there only 
scorched walls?” 
“You're still dreaming!” said Pilgrim. “They had a fire here last night.” 
“Why didn’t | know about it?” asked Tripitaka. “It’s old monkey who safeguarded the Chan hall,” replied Pilgrim. “When | saw that Master was sound asleep, | didn’t disturb you.” 
“If you had the ability to safeguard the Chan hall,” said Tripitaka, “why didn’t you put out the fire in the other buildings?” 
“So that you may learn the truth,” said Pilgrim, laughing, “Just as you predicted it yesterday. They fell in love with our cassock and made plans to have us burned to death. If old monkey had been less 
alert, we'd have been reduced to bone and ashes by now!” When Tripitaka heard these words, he was alarmed and asked, “Was it they who set the fire?” 
“Who else?” said Pilgrim. 
“Could it be,” asked Tripitaka, “that they mistreated you, and you did this?” 
Pilgrim replied, “Is old monkey the sort of wretch that would indulge in such sordid business? It really was they who set the fire. When | saw how malicious they were, | admit | didn’t help them put the 
fire out. | did however, manage to provide them with a little wind!” 
“My God! My God!” said Tripitaka. “When a fire starts, you’d get water. How could you provide wind instead?” 
“You must have heard,” said Pilgrim, “what the ancients said: ‘If a man has no desire to harm a tiger, a tiger has no intention of hurting a man.’ If they hadn’t played with fire, would I’ve played with 
wind?” 
“Where’s the cassock?” asked Tripitaka. “Has it been burned?” 
“Not at all!” replied Pilgrim. “It hasn’t been burned, for the fire didn’t reach the living quarters of the old monk where the cassock was placed.” 
“| don’t care!” exclaimed Tripitaka, his resentment rising. “If there’s the slightest damage, I’m going to recite that little something and you'll be dead!” 
“Master!” cried Pilgrim with alarm, “don’t start your recitation! I'll find the cassock and return it to you, and that'll be the end of the matter. Let me go fetch it so that we can start on our journey.” Tripitaka 
led the horse while Pilgrim took up the load of luggage. They left the Chan hall and went to the room at the rear. 
We now tell you about the monks who were still grieving when they suddenly saw master and disciple approaching with the horse and the luggage. Scared out of their wits, they all said, “The wronged 
souls have come to seek vengeance!” 
“What wronged souls are seeking vengeance?” shouted Pilgrim. “Give back my cassock quickly!” All the monks fell to their knees at once, saying as they respected, “Holy Dads! Just as a wrong implies 
an enemy, so a debt has its proper creditor! If you seek vengeance, please understand that we'd nothing to do with this. It was the old monk who plotted with Big Plan against you. Don’t make us pay 
for your lives!” 
“You damnable beasts!” cried Pilgrim angrily. “Who wants you to pay with your lives? Just give me back the cassock and we'll be going.” Two of the monks who were less timid said to him, “Dad, you're 
supposed to be burned to death in the Chan hall, and yet now you come to demand the cassock. Are you indeed a man, or are you a ghost?” 
“This bunch of accursed creatures!” said Pilgrim, laughing. “Where was the fire? Go to the front and look at the Chan hall. Then you can come back and talk.” The monks got up and went to the front 
to look; not even half an inch of the door, the window, or the screen outside the Chan hall was scorched. One and all were awestruck and became convinced that Tripitaka was a divine monk, and 
Pilgrim a celestial guardian. They all went forward to respect to them, saying, “We've eyes but no pupils, and therefore we didn’t recognise True Men descending to Earth. Your cassock is at the 
residence of the old Patriarch at the back.” Tripitaka was deeply saddened by the rows of crumbling walls and damaged partitions they went past before arriving at the Patriarch’s chambers that were 
indeed untouched by fire. The monks dashed in, crying, “Aged Dad, the Tang Monk must be a god. He hasn’t been burned to death, though we’ve hurt ourselves. Let's take the cassock quickly and 
give it back to him.” 
But the fact of the matter is that the old monk could not find the cassock. In addition, most of the buildings in his monastery had been ruined, and he was, of course, terribly distressed. When he heard 
the monks calling, how could he have the courage to reply? Feeling utterly helpless and incapable of solving his dilemma, he bent forward, took several great strides, and rammed his head into the 
wall. How pitiful! The impact made the brain burst, the blood flow, and his soul disperse; his head stained the sand as his breathing stopped. A poem as a testimony says: 
So lamentable is this blind old monk! 
In vain he lives among men to such old age. 
He wants the cassock forever to keep, not knowing how uncommon God's gift’s. 


If you think what endures can come with ease, yours will be sure failure and certain grief. 
Big Plan, Great Wisdom, of what use are they? 
To gain by others’ loss - what empty dreams! 
Shocked to tears, the monks cried, “The Patriarch’s killed himself. And we can’t find the cassock. What'll we do?” 
“It must've been you who stole it and hid it,” said Pilgrim. “Come out, all of you! Give me a complete list of your names and let me check you off the roll one by one.” The head residents of all the upper 
and lower chambers made a thorough accounting of all the monks, the dhdtas, the young novices, the Daoists in 2 scrolls, and presented Pilgrim with some 230 names. Asking his master to take a 
seat in the middle, Pilgrim went through the roll and examined the monks one by one. Every person had to loosen his clothes to be searched thoroughly but there was no cassock. They then went to 
hunt through the trunks and chests that had been salvaged from the fire but again there was not the slightest trace of the garment. In dismay, Tripitaka became more and more embittered toward 
Pilgrim until he began reciting the spell as he sat there. Falling at once to the ground, Pilgrim gripped his head with his hands, hardly able to bear the pain. “Stop the recitation! Stop the recitation!” he 
cried. “I'll find the cassock.” Terrified by what they saw, the various monks went forward and knelt down to plead with Tripitaka who only then stopped his recitation. Pilgrim leaped straight up and 
whipped out his rod from his ear. He would have struck at the monks, had not Tripitaka shouted for him to halt, crying, “Monkey! Aren't you afraid of your headache? Do you still want to behave badly? 
Don’t move, and don’t hurt people! Let me question them further.” The monks respected and begged Tripitaka, saying, “Dad, please spare us. Truly we didn’t see your cassock. It was entirely the fault 
of that old devil! After he got your cassock last night, he started crying until very late; he didn’t even bother to look at it, for all he had on his mind was how he might keep it permanently as an heirloom. 
That was why he made plans to have you burned to death but after the fire started, a violent wind arose also. Every one of us was only concerned with putting out the fire and trying to save something. 
We've no idea where the cassock has gone.” 
Angrily, Pilgrim walked into the Patriarch’s room, pulled out the corpse of the old man rammed to death, and stripped him naked. The body was examined carefully but the treasure was nowhere to be 
seen. Even if they had dug up three feet of the ground in that room, there would have been not a trace of it. Pilgrim thought silently for a while and then asked, “Is there any monster around here who 
has become a spirit?” 
“If dad hadn't asked,” said the abbot, “he would have never known about this. Southeast of us there is a Black Wind Mountain, in which there is a Black Wind Cave. In the cave is a Black Great King 
with whom this deceased old fellow of ours used to discuss the Dao frequently. He is the only monster spirit around here.” 
“How far is the mountain from here?” asked Pilgrim. “Only twenty miles,” said the abbot. “The peak that you can see right now is where it is.” Pilgrim laughed and said, “Relax, Master! No need for 
further discussion; it must have been stolen by the black monster.” 
“That place is about twenty miles away,” said Tripitaka. “How can you be so sure that it was he?” 
“You didn’t see last night's fire,” said Pilgrim, “when its light illuminated great distances, and its brightness penetrated the Threefold Heaven. Not just for twenty miles but for two hundred miles around 
it could be seen. I’ve no doubt that he saw the brilliant glow of the fire and used that opportunity to come here secretly. When he saw that our cassock was a treasure, he grabbed it in the confusion 
and left. Let old monkey go find him.” 
“Who will care for me while you're gone?” asked Tripitaka. 
“You can relax,” said Pilgrim. “You've in secret the protection of the gods; and I'll make sure that the monks wait on you in the open.” He then called the monks over, saying, “A few of you can go and 
bury that old devil while the others can wait on my master and watch our white horse. The monks at once agreed. Pilgrim said again, “Give me no casual reply now only to grow slack in your service 
after I’m gone. Those who wait on my master must be cheerful and pleasant; those who look after the white horse must take care that water and hay are fed in proper proportions. If there’s the slightest 
mistake, you can count on meeting this rod. Now watch!” 
He whipped out his rod and aimed it at the seared bricked wall: with one stroke, not only did he pulverize the wall but the impact was so great that it caused seven or eight more walls to collapse. When 
the various monks saw this, they were all paralysed with fear. They knelt to respect with tears flowing from their eyes and said, “Dad, please be assured that we'll be most diligent in caring for the Holy 
Dad after you’re gone. We'd not dream of slacking in any way.” Dear Pilgrim! He swiftly mounted the cloud somersault and went straight to the Black Wind Mountain to look for the cassock. Thus it was 
that truth-seeking Gold Cicada left Chang’an. ‘With gifts he went westward, passing blue-green hills. There were wolves and tigers as he walked along though merchants or scholars were rarely seen. 
1 foolish monk’s envy abroad he met; his refuge solely was the Great Sage’s might. The fire grew; the wind came and wrecked the Chan hall. A Black Bear at night stole the embroidered robe. 


017 
Pilgrim Sun greatly disturbs the Black Wind Mountain; Guanshiyin brings to submission the bear monster 
We now tell you that when Pilgrim Sun somersaulted into the air, he so terrified the monks, the dhitas, the young novices, and the attendants at the Guanyin Hall that every person saluted to the sky 
saying, “O, Dad! So you're actually an incarnate deity who knows how to ride the fog and sail with the clouds! No wonder fire can’t harm you! That ignorant old carcass of ours — how despicable he’s! 
He used all his intelligence only to bring disaster on his own head.” 
“Please rise, all of you,” said Tripitaka. “There’s no need for regret. Let's hope that he'll find the cassock and everything will be all right. But if not, I'd fear for your lives; for that disciple of mine has a 
bad temper, and I’m afraid that none of you'll escape him.” When the monks heard this, they were all panic-stricken; they pleaded with Heaven for the cassock to be found so that their lives would be 
preserved. The Great Sage Sun having leaped up into the air, gave 1 twist of his torso and arrived at once at the Black Wind Mountain. Stopping his cloud, he looked carefully and saw that it was 
indeed a magnificent mountain, especially in this time of spring. See many streams potently flowing, countless cliffs vying for beauty. The birds call but no man is seen; though flowers fall, the tree’s yet 
scented. The rain passes, the sky’s one moist sheet of blue; the wind comes, the pines rock like screens of jade. The mountain grass sprouts, the wildflowers bloom on hanging cliffs and high ranges. 
The wisteria grows, the handsome trees bud on rugged peaks and flat plateaus. You don’t even meet a recluse. Where can you find a woodsman? 
By the stream the cranes drink in pairs; on the rocks wild apes madly play. Augustly the branches spread their luscious green, basking their splendour in bright mountain mist. Pilgrim was enjoying the 
scenery when suddenly he heard voices coming from beyond a lovely grass meadow. With light, stealthy steps, he inched forward and hid himself beneath a cliff to have a peep. He saw three monsters 
sitting on the ground: a swarthy fellow in the middle, a Daoist to the left, and a white-robed scholar to the right. They were in the midst of an animated conversation, discussing how to establish the 
tripod and the oven, how to knead the cinnabar and refine the mercury, the topics of white snow and yellow sprout, ‘and the esoteric doctrines of heterodox Daoism. As they were speaking, the swarthy 
fellow said, laughing, “The day after tomorrow will be the date of my mum’s labour. Will you two gentlemen pay me a visit?” 
“Every year we celebrate the Great King’s birthday,” said the white-robed scholar. “How could we think of not coming this year?” 
“Last night | came upon a treasure,” said the swarthy fellow, “which may be called a brocaded robe of God. It’s a most attractive thing, and | think I’m going to use it to enhance my birthday. | plan to 
give a large banquet, starting tomorrow, and to invite all our Daoist friends of various mountains to celebrate this garment. We'll call the party the Festival of the Divine robe. How about that?” 
“Marvellous! Marvellous!” said the Daoist, laughing. “First I'll come to the banquet tomorrow, and then I'll bring you good wishes on your birthday the day after.” 
When Pilgrim heard them speaking about a robe of God, he was certain that they were referring to his own treasure. Unable to suppress his anger, he leaped clear of his hiding place and raised high 
the golden-hooped rod with both hands, shouting, “You larcenous monsters! You stole my cassock. What Festival of the Divine robe do you think you’re going to have? Give it back to me at once and 
don't try to run away!” Wielding his rod, he struck at their heads. In panic, the swarthy fellow fled by riding the wind, and the Daoist escaped by mounting the clouds. The white-robed scholar however, 
was killed by one stroke of the rod, and he turned out to be the spirit of a white-spotted snake when Pilgrim pulled his body over for closer examination. He picked up the corpse again and broke it into 
several pieces before proceeding deep into the mountain to look for the swarthy fellow. Passing pointed peaks and rugged ridges, he found himself in front of a hanging cliff with a cave dwelling below 
it. See mist and smoke abundant, cypress and pine umbrageous. Mist and smoke abundant, their hues surround the door; cypress and pine umbrageous, their green entwines the gate. Flat, dried 
wood supports a bridge. Wisterias coil round the ridge. Birds carrying red petals reach the cloudy gorge. And deer tread on florets to comb the rocky flats. Before that door the flowers bloom with the 
season as the wind wafts their fragrance. Atop the dyke-shading willows orioles sing; over the bank’s sweet peaches butterflies flit. This rustic spot though no cause for much praise, still rivals the 
beauty of Mount Penglai. 2Pilgrim went to the door and found that the two stone doors were tightly closed. On top of the door was a stone tablet, on which was plainly written in large letters: 
Black Wind Mountain, Black Wind Cave 
He lifted his rod to beat at the door crying, “Open the door!” 
A little demon who stood guard at the door came out and asked, “Who’re you that you dare beat at our mortal cave?” 
“You damnable beast!” scolded Pilgrim. “What sort of a place is this, that you dare assume the title of ‘mortal’? Is the word mortal for you to use? Hurry inside and tell that swarthy fellow to bring out 
your venerable dad’s cassock at once. Then | may spare the lives of the whole nest of you.” 
The little demon ran swiftly inside and reported: “Great King! You'll not have a Festival of the Divine robe. There’s a monk with a hairy face and a thunder-god mouth outside demanding the cassock.” 
That swarthy fellow, after being chased by Pilgrim from the grass meadow, had just managed to reach the cave. He had not even been able to sit down when he again heard this announcement, and 
he thought to himself: “I wonder where this fellow came from, so arrogant that he dared show up making demands at my door!” He asked for his armour, and, after putting it on, he walked outside 
holding a lance with black tassels. Pilgrim stood on one side of the gate, holding his iron rod and glaring. The monster indeed cut a formidable figure: a bowI-like helmet of dark burnished steel; a black- 
gold cuirass that shone most bright. A black silk robe with wide wind-bagging sleeves and dark green sashes with long, long tassels. He held in his hands a black-tasselled lance. He wore on his feet 
two black-leather boots. His eyes’ golden pupils like lightning flashed. He was thus in this mountain the Black Wind King. “This fellow,” said Pilgrim, smiling to himself, “looks exactly like a kiln worker 
or a coal miner. He must scrub charcoal here for a living! How did he get to be black all over?” 
The monster called out in a loud voice, “What kind of a monk are you that you dare to be so impudent around here?” 
Rushing up to him with his iron rod, Pilgrim roared, “No idle conversation! Retum the cassock of your venerable grandpa at once!” 
“What monastery are you from, bonze?” asked the monster, “and where did you lose your cassock that you dare show up at my place and demand its return?” 
“My cassock,” said Pilgrim, “was stored in the back room of the Guanyin Hall due north of here. Because of the fire there, you committed robbery by taking advantage of the confusion; after making off 
with the garment, you even wanted to start a Festival of the Divine robe to celebrate your birthday. Do you deny this? Give it back to me quickly, and I'll spare your life. If you but mutter half a ‘no,’ I'll 
overturn the Black Wind Mountain and level the Black Wind Cave. Your whole cave of demons will be pulverized!” 
When the monster heard these words, he laughed scornfully and said, “You audacious creature! You yourself set the fire last night, for you’re the one who summoned the wind on top of the roof. | took 
the cassock all right but what are you going to do about it? Where do you come from, and what is your name? What ability do you've, that you dare mouth such reckless words?” Pilgrim said, “So you 
don’t recognise your venerable grandpa! He is the disciple of the Master of the Law, Tripitaka who happens to be the brother of the Throne in the Great Tang Nation. My surname is Sun, and my given 
name is Wukong Pilgrim. If | tell you my abilities, you'll be frightened out of your wits and die right on the spot!” 
“Ill not,” said the monster. “Tell me what abilities you've.” 
“My son,” said Pilgrim, laughing, “brace yourself! Listen carefully! Great since my youth’s my magic power; | changed with the wind to display my might. Long | trained my nature and practiced Truth to 
flee the wheel of karma with my life. With mind sincere | always sought the Way; seedlings of herbs | plucked on Mount Lingtai. ‘There’s in that mountain an old mortal. His age: a hundred-and-eight 
millennia! He became my master most solemnly and showed me the way to longevity saying that in my body were physic and pills that one’d work in vain to seek outside. He gave me those high secrets 
of the gods; with no foundation I'd have been lost. My inner light relighted, | sat in peace as sun and moon mated within myself. 51 thought of nothing - all my desires gone, body strengthened, six 
senses cleansed. From age back to youth’s an easy boon; to join transcendent’s no distant goal. 3 years without leaks® made a godlike frame, immune to sufferings known to mortal men. Playing 
through the Ten Islets and Three Isles, | made the rounds at Heaven's very edge. | lived like that for some three centuries though not yet ascended to the 9-fold Heaven. Taming sea dragons brought 
me treasure true: the golden-hooped rod | did find below. As field marshal at the Flower-Fruit Mount, monsters | gathered at Water-Curtain Cave. Then the Jade Emperor gave to me the name Equal 
to Heaven — such, the rank most high. Thrice | caused havoc in Divine Mists Hall; once | stole peaches from the Mum Queen. Thus came a hundred thousand men divine to curb me with their rows of 
spears and swords. The Deity-King was beaten back to Heaven while Nata in pain led his troops and fled. Xiansheng Master’ knew transformations well; with him | waged a contest and fell. Laozi, 
Guanyin, and the Jade Emperor all watched the battle at South Heaven Gate. When Laozi decided to lend his help, Erlang brought me to Heaven’s magistrate. To the monster-routing pillar | was tied; 
the gods were told to have my head cut off. Failing to harm me with either sledge or sword, they'd blast and burn me with thunderclaps. What skills indeed did this old monkey have who’s not even half 
a whit afraid! Into Laozi’s brazier they sent me next to have me slowly cooked by fire divine. The day the lid’s opened | jumped out and ran through Heaven brandishing a rod. Back and forth | prowled 
with none to stop me, making havoc through all thirty-six Heavens. Then Siddhartha revealed his power: under Mount Five Phases he’d me clamped and there | squirmed for a full five centuries till by 
luck Tripitaka left the Tang court. Now | go west having yielded to Truth to see Jade Eyebrows at Great Thunderclap. ®Go and ask in the four corners of the universe: you'll learn I’m the famous ranking 
daemon of all time!” 


When the monster heard these words, he laughed and said, “So you're the Ban-Horse-Plague who disturbed the Celestial Palace?” 
What most annoyed Pilgrim was when people called him Ban-Horse-Plague. The moment he heard that name, he lost his temper. “You monstrous rogue!” he shouted. “You'd not return the cassock 
you stole and yet dare insult this holy monk. Don’t run away! Watch this rod!” The swarthy fellow jumped aside to dodge the blow; wielding his long lance, he went forward to meet his opponent. That 
was some battle between the 2 of them: the compliant rod, the black-tasselled lance. 2 men display their power before the cave: stabbing at the heart and face; striking at the head and arm. This one 
proves handy with a death-dealing rod; that one tilts the lance for swift, triple jabs. The white tiger climbing the mountain extends his paws; the yellow dragon lying on the road? turns his back. With 
coloured mists flying and bright flashes of light, 2 monster-gods’ strength is yet to be tried. 1 is the truth-seeking, Equal-to-Heaven Sage; 1 is the Great Black King who’s now a spirit. Why wage this 
battle in the mountain still? The cassock for which each would aim to kill! That monster fought with Pilgrim for more than ten rounds until about noon but the battle was a draw. Using his lance to halt 
the rod for a moment, the swarthy fellow said, “Pilgrim Sun, let's put away our weapons for the time being. Let me have some lunch first and then I'll wage a further contest with you.” 
“Accursed beast!” said Pilgrim. “You want to be a hero? Which hero wants to eat after fighting for merely half a day? Consider old monkey who was imprisoned beneath the mountain for altogether five 
centuries and he hadn't even tasted a drop of water. So, what’s this about being hungry? Don’t give me any excuses and don't run away! Give me back my cassock, and I'll allow you to go and eat.” 
But that monster only managed to throw one more feeble thrust with his lance before dashing into the cave and shutting his stone doors. He dismissed his little demons and made preparations for the 
banquet, writing out invitation cards to the monster kings of various mountains. Pilgrim had no success in breaking down the door and so had to return to the Guanyin Hall. The clerics of that monastery 
had already buried the old monk, and they were all gathered in the back room to minister to the Tang Monk, serving him lunch soon after he had finished breakfast. As they were scurrying about fetching 
soup and hauling water, Pilgrim was seen descending from the sky. The monks saluted courteously and received him into the back room to see Tripitaka. “Wukong,” said Tripitaka, “so you've returned. 
How is the cassock?” 
“At least | found the real culprit,” said Pilgrim. “It was a good thing that we didn’t punish these monks, for the monster of Black Wind Mountain did steal it. | went secretly looking for him, and saw him 
seated on a beautiful grass meadow having a conversation with a white-robed scholar and an old Daoist. He was, in a sense, making a confession without being tortured, saying something about the 
day after tomorrow being his birthday, when he would invite all the other griffins for the occasion. He also mentioned that he had found an embroidered Divine robe last night, in celebration of which he 
was planning to throw a large banquet, calling it the Festival of the Divine robe. Old monkey rushed up to them and struck out with his rod; the swarthy fellow changed into the wind and left, and the 
Daoist also disappeared. The white-robed scholar however, was killed, and he turned out to be a white-spotted snake who had become a spirit. | quickly chased the swarthy fellow to his cave and 
demanded that he come out to fight. He had already admitted that he took the cassock but we fought to a draw after half a day of battle. The monster returned to his cave because he wanted to eat; 
he closed his stone doors tightly and refused to fight anymore. | came back to see how you're and to make this report to you. Since | know the whereabouts of the cassock, I’m not worried about his 
unwillingness to give it back to me.” 
When the various monks heard this, some of them folded their hands while others respected, all reciting, “I submit to the Infinite Light! Now that the whereabouts of the cassock is known, we've a claim 
to our lives again.” 
“Don’t celebrate yet,” said Pilgrim, “for I've not yet recovered it, nor has my master left. Wait until we’ve the cassock so that my master can walk peacefully out of this door before you start cheering. If 
there’s the slightest mishap, old monkey is no customer to be provoked, is he? Have you served some good things to my master? Have you given our horse plenty of hay?” 
“We've, we've, we've!” cried the monks hastily. “Our service to the holy monk has not slackened in the least!” 
“You're gone only half a day,” said Tripitaka, “and I’ve been served tea three times and have had two vegetarian meals. They didn’t dare slight me. You’d therefore make a great effort to get back the 
cassock.” 
“Don’t rush!” said Pilgrim. “Since | know where he is, I'll certainly capture this fellow and return the garment to you. Relax! Relax!” 
As they were speaking, the abbot brought in some more vegetarian dainties to serve to the holy monk Sun. Pilgrim ate some and left at once on the hallowed cloud to search for the monster. As he 
was travelling, he saw a little demon approaching from the main road who had a box made of pear tree wood wedged between his left arm and his body. Suspecting that something important was inside 
the box, Pilgrim raised his rod and brought it down hard on the demon’s head. Alas, the demon could not take such a blow! He was instantly reduced to a meat patty that Pilgrim tossed to the side of 
the road. When he opened the box, there was indeed an invitation slip, on which was written: 
Your student-servant, the Bear, most humbly addresses the Exalted Aged Dean of the Golden Pool. For the gracious gifts you’ve bestowed on me on several occasions I’m profoundly grateful. | regret 
that | was unable to assist you last night when you’re visited by a god of Fire but | suppose that Your Holy Eminence has not been adversely affected in any way. Your student by chance has acquired 
a Divine robe, and this occasion calls for a festive celebration. I’ve therefore prepared with care some fine juice for your enjoyment with the sincere hope that Your Holy Eminence will be pleased to 
give us a visit. This invitation’s respectfully submitted 2 days in advance. 
When Pilgrim saw this, he roared with laughter, saying, “That old carcass! He didn’t lose anything by his death! So he belonged to a monster’s gang! Small wonder that he lived to his two hundred and 
seventieth year! That monster, | suppose, must have taught him some little magic like ingesting his breath, '?and that was how he enjoyed such longevity. | can still remember how he looked. Let me 
change myself into that monk and go to the cave to see where my cassock is located. If | can manage it, I'll take it back without wasting my energy.” 
Dear Great Sage! He recited a spell, faced the wind, and changed at once into an exact semblance of that old monk. Putting away his iron rod, he strode to the cave, crying, “Open the door!” When the 
little demon who stood at the door saw such a figure, he quickly made his report inside: “Great King, the Elder of the Golden Pool has arrived.” Greatly surprised, the monster said, “I just sent a little 
one to deliver an invitation to him but he could not possibly have reached his destination even at this moment. How could the old monk arrive so quickly? | suppose the little one did not run into him on 
the way but Pilgrim Sun must have asked him to come here for the cassock. You, steward, hide the cassock! Don’t let him see it!” 
Walking through the front door, Pilgrim saw in the courtyard pines and bamboos sharing their green, peaches and plums competing in their glamour; flowers were blooming everywhere, and the air was 
heavy with the scent of orchids. It was quite a grotto-heaven. He saw moreover a parallel couplet mounted on both sides of the 2" doorway that read: 
A deep mountain retreat without worldly cares. 

A divine cave secluded — what joy serene. 
Pilgrim said to himself, “This fellow is also one who withdraws from dirt and dust, a fiendish creature who knows his fate.”"" He walked through the door and proceeded further; when he passed through 
the third doorway, he saw carved beams with elaborate ornaments and large windows brightly decorated. Then the swarthy fellow appeared, wearing a casual jacket made of fine dark-green silk, 
topped by a crow-green cape of figured damask; he wore a head-wrap of black cloth and was shod in a pair of black suede boots. When he saw Pilgrim entering, he tidied his clothes and went down 
the steps to receive him, saying, “Golden Pool, old friend, we’ve not seen each other for days. Please take a seat! Please take a seat!” Pilgrim greeted him ceremoniously, after which they sat down 
and drank tea. 
After tea, the monster saluted low and said, “I just sent you a brief note, humbly inviting you to visit me the day after tomorrow. Why does my old friend grant me that pleasure today, already?” 
“| was just coming to pay my respects,” said Pilgrim, “and | didn’t anticipate meeting your kind messenger. When | saw that there was going to be a Festival of the Divine robe, | came hurriedly, hoping 
to see the garment.” 
“My old friend may be mistaken,” said the monster, laughing. “This cassock originally belonged to the Tang Monk who was staying at your place. Why would you want to look at it here, since you must 
surely have seen it before?” 
“Your poor monk,” answered Pilgrim, “did borrow it but he did not have the opportunity last night to examine it before it was taken by the Great King. Moreover, our monastery, including all our belongings, 
was destroyed by fire, and the disciple of that Tang Monk was rather bellicose about the matter. In all that confusion, I'd not find the cassock anywhere, not knowing that the Great King in his good 
fortune found it. That is why | came specially to see it.” 
As they were speaking, 1 of the little demons out on patrol came back to report: “Great King, disaster! The junior officer who went to deliver the invitation’s beaten to death by Pilgrim Sun and left by 
the wayside. Our enemy followed the clue and changed himself into the Golden Pool Elder so that he’d obtain the divine robe by fraud.” 
When the monster heard that, he said to himself, “I was wondering already why he came today and in such a hurried manner too! So it’s really he!” Leaping up, he grabbed his lance and aimed it at 
Pilgrim. Whipping out the rod from his ear, Pilgrim assumed his original form and parried the lance. They rushed from the living room to the front courtyard, and from there they fought their way out to 
the front door. The monsters in the cave were frightened out of their wits; young and old in that household were horror-stricken. This fierce contest before the mountain was even unlike the last one. 
What a fight! This Monkey King boldly posed as a monk; that swarthy chap wisely concealed the robe. Back and forth went their clever repartee, adapting to each instant perfectly. He'd see the cassock 
but had no means: this runic treasure’s a mystery indeed! The small imp on patrol announced mishap; the old fiend in anger showed his power. They fought their way out of the Black Wind Cave, the 
rod and the lance forced a trial by might. The rod checked the lance, their noise resounding; the lance met the rod, causing sparks to fly. The changes of Wukong, all unknown to men; the monster's 
magic skills, so rare on earth. This one wanted for his birthday fete a Divine robe. Would that one with no cassock go home in peace? The bitter fight this time seemed without end. Even a life descending 
could not break them up! From the entrance of the cave the 2 of them fought up to the peak of the mountain and from the peak of the mountain they fought their way up to the clouds. Belching wind 
and fog, kicking up sand and rocks, they fought until the red sun sank toward the west but neither of them could gain the upper hand. The monster said, “Hey, Sun! Stop for a moment! It’s getting too 
late to fight any more. Go away! Come back tomorrow morning and we'll decide your fate.” 
“Don’t run away, my son,” cried Pilgrim. “If you want to fight, act like a fighter! Don’t give me the excuse that it’s getting late.” 
With his rod, he rained blows indiscriminately on his opponent's head and face but the swarthy fellow changed once more into a clear breeze and went back to his cave. Tightly bolting his stone doors, 
he refused to come out. Pilgrim had no alternative except to go back to the Guanyin Hall. Dropping down from the clouds, he said, “Master.” Tripitaka who was waiting for him with bulging eyes was 
delighted to see him; but when he did not see the cassock, he became frightened again. “How it’s that you’ve still not brought back the cassock?” he asked. Pilgrim took out from his sleeve the invitation 
slip and handed it over to Tripitaka, saying, “Master, the monster and that old carcass used to be friends. He sent a little demon here with this invitation for him to go to a Festival of the Divine robe. | 
killed the little demon and changed into the form of the old monk to get inside the cave. | managed to trick him into giving me a cup of tea but when | asked for the cassock, he refused to show it to me. 
As we're sitting there, my identity was leaked by someone on patrol in the mountain, and we began to fight. The battle lasted until this early evening and ended in a draw. When the monster saw that it 
was late, he slipped back into the cave and tightly bolted up his stone door. Old monkey had no choice but to return here for the moment.” 
“How’s your skill as a fighter when compared with his?” asked Tripitaka. “Not much better,” said Pilgrim. “We're quite evenly matched.” Tripitaka then read the invitation slip and handed it to the abbot, 
saying, “Could it be that your master was also a monster-spirit?” Falling to his knees, the abbot said, “Old Dad, my master is human. Because that Great Black King attained the way of humanity through 
self-cultivation, he frequently came to the monastery to discuss religious texts with my master. He imparted to my master a little of the magic of nourishing one’s spirit and ingesting breath; hence they 
address each other as friends.” 
“This bunch of monks here,” said Pilgrim, “don’t have the aura of monsters: each one has a round head pointing to the sky and a pair of feet set flat on the earth. They are a little taller and heavier than 
old monkey but they are no monsters. Look at what's written on the slip: ‘your student-servant, the Bear.’ This creature must be a black bear who has become a spirit.” Tripitaka said, “I've heard from 
the ancients that the bear and the ape are of the same kind. They are all beasts, in other words. How can this bear become a spirit?” 
“Old monkey is also a beast,” said Pilgrim, laughing, “but | became the Great Sage Equal to Heaven. Is he any different? All the creatures of this world who possess the nine apertures can become 
mortals through the art of self-cultivation.” 
“You just said that the two of you're evenly matched,” said Tripitaka again. “How can you defeat him and recover my cassock?” 
“Lay off! Lay off!” said Pilgrim. “I know what to do.” 
As they were discussing the matter, the monks brought in the evening meal for master and disciple. Afterwards, Tripitaka asked for lamps to go to the Chan hall in front to rest. The rest of the monks 
reclined against the walls beneath some temporary awnings and slept while the back rooms were given to accommodate the senior and junior abbots. It was now late. See the Silver Stream aglow; the 
air perfectly pure; the sky full of bright and twinkling stars; the river marked by receding tide. All sounds are hushed; hills emptied of birds. The angler’s fire dies by the brook; the lamps grow faint on 
the pagoda. Last night Acharyas sounded drums and bells. Only weeping’s heard throughout this night! So they spent the night in the Chan hall but Tripitaka was thinking about the cassock. How’d | 
possibly sleep well? As he tossed and turned, he suddenly saw the windows growing bright. He arose at once and called: “Wukong, it’s morning. Go find the cassock quickly.” 
Pilgrim leaped up with a bound and saw that the monks were bringing in washing water. “All of you,” said Pilgrim, “take care to minister to my master. Old monkey's leaving.” 
Getting up from his bed, Tripitaka clutched at him, asking, “Where’re you going?” 
“Come to think of it,” said Pilgrim, “this whole affair reveals the irresponsibility of the Nun Guanyin. She’s a Chan hall here where she’s enjoyed the incense and worship of all the local people and yet 
she can permit a monster-spirit to be her neighbour. I’m leaving for the South Sea to find her for a little conversation. I’m going to ask her to come here and demand that the monster return the cassock 
to us.” 


“When'll you be back?” asked Tripitaka. 
“Probably right after breakfast,” answered Pilgrim. “At the latest, I'd be back around noon when everything should be taken care of. All of you monks must take care to wait on my master. Old monkey's 
leaving.” He said he was leaving and the next instant he was already out of sight. In a moment, he arrived at the South Sea where he stopped his cloud to look around. He saw a vast expanse of ocean 
where water and sky seemed to merge. Auspicious light shrouded the earth; hallowed air brightened the world. Endless snow-capped waves surged up to Heaven; layers of misty billows washed out 
the sun. Water flying everywhere; waves churning all around. Water flying everywhere rolled like thunderclaps; waves churning all around boomed like cannonade. Speak not merely of water; let’s look 
more at the centre. The treasure-filled mountain of five dazzling colours: Red, yellow, green, deep purple, and blue. If this be Guanyin’s scenic region true, look further at Potalaka of South Sea. What 
a splendid place! 
The tall mountain peak cut through airy space. In its midst were thousands of rare flowers, 100 kinds of divine herbs. The wind stirred the precious trees; the sun shone on the golden lotus. Glazed tiles 
covered the Guanyin Hall; tortoiseshell spread before the Tidal-Sound Cave. In the shades of green willow the parrot spoke; within the bamboo grove the peacock recited. On rocks with grains like 
fingerprints, the guardians fierce and solemn. Before the cornelian foreshore, liberation strong and heroic. Pilgrim who could hardly take his eyes off the marvellous scenery, lowered his cloud and went 
straight to the bamboo grove. The various deities were there to receive him saying, “The Nun told us some time ago about the conversion of the Great Sage for whom she’d nothing but praise. You're 
supposed to be accompanying the Tang Monk at this moment. How do you've the time to come here?” 
“Because I’m accompanying the Tang Monk,” said Pilgrim, “I'd an incident on our journey about which | must see the Nun. Please announce my arrival.” 
The deities went to the mouth of the cave to make the announcement and the Nun asked him to enter. Obeying the summons, Pilgrim went before the bejewelled lotus platform and knelt down. “What're 
you doing here?” asked the Nun. “On his journey my master came across one of your Chan halls,” said Pilgrim, “where you receive the services of fire and incense from the local people. But you also 
permitted a Black Bear Spirit to live nearby and to steal the cassock of my master. Several times | tried to get it back but without success. I’ve come specifically to ask you for it.” The Nun said, “This 
monkey still speaks insolently! If the Bear Spirit stole your cassock, why did you come to ask me for it? It was all because you had the presumption, you wretched ape, to show off your treasure to 
sinister people. Moreover, you had your share of evildoing when you called for the wind to intensify the fire that burned down one of my way stations down below. And yet you still want to be rowdy 
around here?” When Pilgrim heard the Nun speaking like that, he realised that she had knowledge of past and future events. Hurriedly he saluted with humility and said, “Nun, please pardon the offence 
of your disciple. It was as you said. But I’m upset by the monster's refusal to give us back our cassock, and my master is threatening to recite that spell of his at any moment. | can’t bear the headache, 
and that’s why I’ve come to cause you inconvenience. | beseech the Nun to have mercy on me and help me capture that monster, so that we may recover the garment and proceed toward the West.” 
“That monster has great magical power,” said the Nun, “really just as strong as yours. All right! For the sake of the Tang Monk, I'll go with you this time.” When Pilgrim heard this, he saluted again in 
gratitude and asked the Nun to leave at once. They mounted the blessed clouds and soon arrived on the Black Wind Mountain. Dropping down from the clouds, they followed a path to look for the 
cave. 
As they were walking, they saw a Daoist coming down the mountain slope, holding a glass tray on which there were two magic pills. Pilgrim ran right into him, whipped out his rod, and brought it down 
squarely on his head with one blow causing the brains to burst and blood to shoot out from the neck. Completely stunned, the Nun said, “Monkey, you’re still so reckless! He didn’t steal your cassock; 
he neither knew nor wronged you. Why did you kill him with one blow?” 
“Nun,” said Pilgrim, “you may not recognise him but he is a friend of the Black Bear Spirit. Yesterday he was having a conversation with a white-robed scholar on the grass meadow. Since they were 
invited to the cave of the Black Bear Spirit who was going to give a Festival of the Divine robe to celebrate his birthday, this Daoist said that he would first go to celebrate his friend’s birthday today and 
then attend the festival tomorrow. That’s how | recognised him. He must have been on his way to celebrate the monster's birthday.” 
“If that’s how itis, all right,” said the Nun. Pilgrim then went to pick up the Daoist and discovered that he was a grey wolf. The tray that had fallen to one side, had an inscription on the bottom: “Made 
by Master Transcending Void.” 
When Pilgrim saw this, he laughed and said, “What luck! What luck! Old monkey will benefit; the Nun will save some energy. This monster may be said to have made a confession without torture while 
the other monster may be destined to perish today.” 
“What are you saying, Wukong?” said the Nun. “Nun,” said Pilgrim, “I, Wukong, have a saying: plot should be met with plot. | don’t know whether you'll listen to me or not.” 
“Speak up!” said the Nun. 
“Look, Nun!” said Pilgrim. “There are two magic pills on this little tray, and they are introductory gifts that we'll present to the monster. Beneath the tray is the five-word inscription ‘Made by Master 
Transcending Void,’ and this shall serve as our contact with the monster. If you'll listen to me, I'll give you a plan that will dispense with weapons and do away with combat. In a moment, the monster 
will meet pestilence; in the twinkling of an eye, the Divine robe will reappear. If you don’t follow my suggestion, you may go back to the West, and I, Wukong, will return to the East; the Divine robe will 
be counted as lost while Tripitaka Tang will have journeyed in vain.” 
“This monkey is pretty clever with his tongue!” said the Nun, laughing. “Hardly!” said Pilgrim. “But it is a small plan!” 
“What's your plan?” asked the Nun. “Since the tray has this inscription beneath it,” said Pilgrim, “the Daoist himself must be this Master Transcending Void. If you agree with me, Nun, you can change 
yourself into this Daoist. I'll take one of the pills and then change myself into another pill - a slightly bigger one, that is. Take this tray with the two magic pills and present them to the monster as his 
birthday gift. Let the monster swallow the bigger pill, and old monkey will accomplish the rest. If he is unwilling to return the Divine robe, old monkey will make one -— even if I've to weave it with his 
guts!” 
The Nun could not think of a better plan and she had to nod her head to show her approval. “Well?” said Pilgrim, laughing. Immediately the Nun exercised her great mercy and boundless power. With 
her infinite capacity for transformation, her mind moved in perfect accord with her will, and her will with her body: in one blurry instant, she changed into the form of the mortal Master Transcending 
Void. Her crane-down cloak swept by the wind with airy steps she’d pace the void. Her face aged like cypress and pine, shows fair, fresh features never seen. She moves with freedom without end, a 
special self-sustaining Thus! In sum all return to one Form but from bodies perverse set free. When Pilgrim saw the transformation, he cried, “Marvellous, Marvellous! Is the monster the Nun or is the 
Nun the monster?” 
The Nun smiled and said, “Wukong, the Nun and the monster — they both exist in a single thought. Considered in terms of their origin, they're all nothing.” Immediately enlightened, Pilgrim turned around 
and changed at once into a magic pill: a rolling-pan steadying pearl — round, bright, of no known recipe. Fused 3 x 3'2 at Mount Goulou; ‘forged 6 x 6 with Shao Weng’s"* help. Like glazed tiles and 
yellow gold flames it shines with sun and mani’s light. Its coat of mercury and lead has power not with ease assessed. The pill into which Pilgrim had changed was slightly larger than the other one. 
Making a mental note of it, the Nun took the glass tray and went straight to the entrance of the monster’s cave. She paused to look around and saw deep gorges, parlous cliffs, clouds rising from the 
peaks; green pines and cypresses, and wind rustling in the woods. Deep gorges, parlous cliffs: a place truly made for monsters and not for man! But green pines and cypresses might seem fit for pious 
recluse to seek the Way. The mountain has a stream and the stream has water, its current murmurs lightly as a lute worthy to cleanse your ears. The cliff has deer, the woods have cranes where softly 
hums the poems of the spheres to lift your spirit. So it was the bogus mortal’s luck that Complete Liberation came: to vouchsafe boundless mercy was her vow. After looking over the place, the Nun 
was secretly pleased and said to herself, “If this cursed beast could occupy such a mountain, it might be that he’s destined to attain the Way.” 
Thus she was already inclined to be merciful. When she walked up to the cave’s entrance, some of the little demons standing guard there recognised her saying, “Mortal Transcending Void’s arrived.” 
Some went to announce her arrival while others greeted her. Just then, the monster came saluting out the door saying, “Transcending Void, you honour my humble abode with your divine presence!” 
“This humble Daoist,” said the Nun, “respectfully submits an elixir pill as a birthday gift.” After the 2 of them had saluted to each other, they were seated. The incidents of the day before were mentioned 
but the Nun made no reply. Instead, she took up the tray and said, “Great King, please accept the humble regard of this little Daoist.” She chose the large pill and pushed it over to the monster, saying, 
“May the Great King live for a millennium!” 
The monster then pushed the other pill over to the Nun saying, “I wish to share this with Master Transcending Void.” After this ceremonial presentation, the monster was about to swallow it but the pill 
rolled by itself right down his throat. It changed back into its original form and began to do physical exercises! 
The monster fell to the ground while the Nun revealed her true form and recovered the Divine robe from the monster. Pilgrim then left the monster's body through his nose but fearing that the monster 
might still be truculent, the Nun threw a fillet on his head. As he arose, the monster did indeed pick up his lance to thrust at Pilgrim. The Nun however, rose into the air and began reciting her spell. The 
spell worked and the monster felt excruciating pain on his head; throwing away the lance, he rolled wildly all over the ground. In mid-air, the Handsome Monkey King nearly collapsed with laughter; 
down below the Black Bear Monster almost rolled himself to death on the ground. “Cursed beast.” said the Nun, “will you now surrender?” 
“| surrender,” said the monster with no hesitation, “please spare my life!” 
Fearing that too much effort would have been wasted, Pilgrim wanted to strike at once. Quickly stopping him, the Nun said, “Don’t hurt him; I’ve some use for him.” 
Pilgrim said, “Why not destroy a monster like him, for of what use can he be?” 
“There’s no one guarding the rear of my Potalaka Mountain,” said the Nun, “and | want to take him back there to be a Great Mountain-Guardian God.” 
“Truly a salvific and merciful goddess,” said Pilgrim, laughing, “who'll not hurt a single sentient being. If old monkey knew a spell like that, he’d recite it a thousand times. That'd finish off as many black 
bears as there’re around here!” 
So the monster regained consciousness after a long time. Convinced by the unbearable pain, he had no choice but to fall on his knees and beg: “Spare my life for I’m willing to submit to Truth!” 
Dropping down from the blessed luminosity, the Nun then touched his head and gave him the commandments, telling him to wait on her, holding the lance. So it was with the Black Bear: today his 
vaulting ambition is checked; this time his boundless license has been curbed. “You may return now, Wukong,.” instructed the Nun, “and serve the Tang Monk attentively. Start no more trouble with 
your carelessness.” 
“Im grateful that the Nun’s willing to come this far to help,” said Pilgrim, “and it's my duty as disciple to see you back.” 
“You may be excused,” said the Nun. Holding the cassock Pilgrim then respected to her and left while the Nun led the bear and returned to the great ocean. A testimonial poem says: 
Auspicious light surrounds the golden form: what maze of colours so worthy of praise! 
She shows great mercy to succour mankind, reveal gold lotus as she scans the world. 
She comes all because of scripture seeking; then she withdraws, as ever chaste and pure. 
The fiend converted, she leaves for the sea; a Religious regains a brocade-cassock. 


018 

The Tang Monk leaves his ordeal at Guanyin Hall; the Great Sage casts out the monster at Gao Village 
Pilgrim took leave of the Nun. Lowering the direction of his cloud, he hung the cassock on one of the fragrant cedars nearby. He took out his rod and fought his way into the Black Wind Cave. But where 
could he find even a single little demon inside? The fact of the matter was that when they saw the Nun’s epiphany, causing the old monster to roll all over the ground, they all scattered. Pilgrim however, 
was not to be stopped; he piled dried wood around the several doorways in the cave and started a fire in the front and in the back. The whole Black Wind Cave was reduced to a “Red Wind Cave”! 
Picking up the cassock, Pilgrim then mounted the auspicious luminosity and went north. We now tell you about Tripitaka who was impatiently waiting for Pilgrim’s return and wondering whether Nun 
had consented to come and help, or whether Pilgrim on some pretext had left him. He was filled with such foolish thoughts and wild speculations when he saw bright, rose-coloured clouds approaching 
in the sky. Dropping at the foot of the steps and kneeling, Pilgrim said, “Master, the cassock’s here!” 
Tripitaka was most delighted, and not one of the monks could hide his pleasure. “Good! Good!” they cried. “Now we've found our lives again!” Taking the cassock, Tripitaka said, “Wukong, when you 
left in the morning, you promised to come back either after breakfast or sometime around noon. Why do you return so late, when the sun is already setting?” Pilgrim then gave a thorough account of 
how he went to ask for the Nun’s help, and how she in her transformation had subdued the monster. When Tripitaka heard the account, he prepared an incense table at once and worshipped, facing 
south. Then he said, “Disciple, since we've the Divine robe, let us pack up and leave.” 
“No need to rush like that,” said Pilgrim. “It's getting late, hardly the time to travel. Let's wait until tomorrow morning before we leave.” 
All the monks knelt down and said, “Elder Sun is right. It is getting late, and, moreover, we've a vow to fulfil. Now that we're all saved and the treasure has been recovered, we must redeem our vow 
and ask the venerable elders to distribute the blessing. Tomorrow we'll see you off to the West.” 
“Yes, yes, that’s very good!” said Pilgrim. Look at those monks! 
They all emptied their pockets and presented all the valuables they had managed to salvage from the fire. Everyone made some contribution. They prepared some vegetarian offerings, burned paper 
money to request perpetual peace, and recited several scrolls of scriptures for the prevention of calamities and deliverance from evil. The service lasted until late in the evening. The next morning they 


saddled the horse and took up the luggage while the monks accompanied their guests for a great distance before turing back. As Pilgrim led the way forward, it was the happiest time of spring. See 
the horse making light tracks on grassy turfs; gold threads of willow swaying with fresh dew. Peaches and apricots fill the forest happy. Creepers grow with vigour along the way. Pairs of sun-warmed 
ducks rest on sandy hanks; the brook’s fragrant flowers tame the butterflies. Thus autumn goes, winter fades, and spring’s half gone; when will merit be made and the True Writ found? Master and 
disciple travelled for some six or seven days in the wilderness. 1 day when it was getting late, they saw a village in the distance. “Wukong,” said Tripitaka, “look! There’s a village over there. How about 
asking for lodging for the night before we travel again tomorrow?” 

“Let's wait until I've determined whether it is a good or bad place before we decide,” said Pilgrim. The master pulled in the reins as Pilgrim stared intently at the village. Truly there were dense rows of 
bamboo fences; thick clusters of thatched huts. Sky-scraping wild trees faced the doorways; the winding brooklet reflected the houses. Willows by the path unfurled their lovely green; fragrant were the 
flowers blooming in the yard. At this time of twilight fast fading, the birds chattered everywhere in the woods. As kitchen smoke arose, cattle returned on every lane and path, you saw, too, well-fed 
goats and chickens sleeping by the house’s edge, and the old, sotted neighbour coming with a poem. After surveying the area, Pilgrim said, “Master, you may proceed. It appears to be a village of good 
families where it'll be appropriate for us to seek shelter.” 

The priest urged the white horse on, and they arrived at the beginning of a lane heading into the village where they saw a young man wearing a cotton head-wrap and a blue jacket. He had an umbrella 
in his hand and a bundle on his back; his trousers were rolled up, and he had on his feet a pair of straw sandals with three loops. He was striding along the street in a resolute manner when Pilgrim 
grabbed him, saying, “Where are you going? I’ve a question for you: what is this place?” Struggling to break free, the man protested, “Isn't there anyone else here in the village? Why must you pick me 
for your question?” 

“Patron,” said Pilgrim genially, “don’t get upset. ‘Helping others is in truth helping yourself.’ What's so bad about your telling me the name of this place? Perhaps | can help you with your problems.” 
Unable to break out of Pilgrim’s grip, the man was so infuriated that he jumped about wildly. “Jinxed! I’m jinxed!” he cried. “No end to the grievances I've suffered at the hands of my family elders and | 
still have to run into this bald-headed fellow and suffer such indignity from him!” 

“If you've the ability to pry open my hand,” said Pilgrim, “I'll let you go.” The man twisted left and right without any success: it was as if he had been clamped tight with a pair of iron tongs. He became 
so enraged that he threw away his bundle and his umbrella; with both hands, he rained blows and scratches on Pilgrim. With one hand steadying his luggage, Pilgrim held off the man with the other, 
and no matter how hard the man tried, he could not scratch or even touch Pilgrim at all. The more he fought, the firmer was Pilgrim’s grip, so that the man was utterly exasperated. 

“Wukong,” said Tripitaka, “isn’t someone coming over there? You can ask someone else. Why hang onto him like that? Let the man go.” 

“Master, you don’t understand,” said Pilgrim, laughing. “If | ask someone else, all the fun will be gone. I’ve to ask him if, as the saying goes, ‘there’s going to be any business!” Seeing that it was fruitless 
to struggle any more, the man said finally, “This place is called the Mr. Gao Village in the territory of the Kingdom of Qoco. Most of the families here in the village are surnamed Gao, and that’s why the 
village is so called. Now please let me go.” 

“You're hardly dressed for a stroll in the neighbourhood,” said Pilgrim, “so tell me the truth. Where are you going, and what are you doing anyway? Then I'll let you go.” 

The man had little alternative but to speak the truth. “I’m a member of the family of old Mr. Gao, and my name is Gao Cai. Old Mr. Gao has a daughter, his youngest, in fact who is twenty years old and 
not yet betrothed. Three years ago however, a monster-spirit seized her and kept her as his wife. Having a monster as his son-in-law bothered old Mr. Gao terribly. He said, ‘My daughter having a 
monster as her spouse can hardly be a lasting arrangement. First, my family’s reputation is ruined, and second, | don’t even have any in-laws with whom we can be friends.’ All that time he wanted to 
have this marriage annulled but the monster absolutely refused; he locked the daughter up instead in the rear building and would not permit her to see her family for nearly half a year. The old man, 
therefore, gave me several taels of silver and told me to find an exorcist to capture the monster. Since then, I’ve hardly rested my feet; | managed to turn up three or four persons, all worthless monks 
and impotent Daoists. None of them could subdue the monster. A short while ago | received a severe scolding for my incompetence, and with only half an ounce more of silver as a travel allowance, | 
was told to find a capable exorcist this time. | didn’t expect to run into you, my unlucky star, and now my journey is delayed. That's what | meant by the grievances I'd suffered in and out of the family, 
and that’s why | was protesting just now. | didn’t know you had this trick of holding people that I'd not overcome. Now that I’ve told you the truth, please let me go.” 

“It's really your luck,” said Pilgrim, “coupled with my vocation: they fit like the numbers four and six when you throw the dice! You needn't travel far, nor need you waste your money. We're not worthless 
monks or impotent Daoists, for we really do have some abilities; we're most experienced in fact in capturing monsters. As the saying goes, ‘You've now not only a caring physician but now you've cured 
your eyes as well!’ Please take the trouble of returning to the head of your family and tell him that we're holy monks sent by the Throne in the Land of the East to go worship God in the Western Heaven 
and acquire scriptures. We're most capable of seizing monsters and binding fiends.” 

“Don’t mislead me,” said Gao Cai, “for I've had it up to here! If you’re deceiving me and really don’t have the ability to take the monster, you'll only cause me more grievances.” Pilgrim said, “I guarantee 
that you'll not be harmed in any way. Lead me to the door of your house.” The man could not think of a better alternative; he picked up his bundle and umbrella and turned to lead master and disciple 
to the door of his house. “You two elders,” he said, “please rest yourselves for a moment against the hitching posts here. I'll go in to report to my master.” Only then did Pilgrim release him. Putting 
down the luggage and dismounting from the horse, master and disciple stood and waited outside the door. 

Gao Cai walked through the main gate and went straight to the main hall in the centre but it just so happened that he ran right into old Mr. Gao. “You thick-skinned beast!” railed Mr. Gao. “Why aren't 
you out looking for an exorcist? What are you doing back here?” Putting down his bundle and umbrella, Gao Cai said, “Let me humbly inform my lord. Your servant just reached the end of the street 
and ran into two monks: one riding a horse and the other hauling a load. They caught hold of me and refused to let go, asking where | was going. At first | absolutely refused to tell them but they were 
most insistent and I’d no means of freeing myself. It was only then that | gave them a detailed account of my lord’s affairs. The one who was holding me was delighted, saying that he would arrest the 
monster for us.” 

“Where did they come from?” asked old Mr. Gao. “He claimed to be a holy monk, the brother of the emperor,” said Gao Cai, “who was sent from the Land of the East to go worship God in the Western 
Heaven and acquire scriptures.” 

“If they are monks who have come from such a great distance,” said old Mr. Gao, “they may indeed have some abilities. Where are they now?” 

“Waiting outside the front door,” said Gao Cai. 

Old Mr. Gao quickly changed his clothes and came out with Gao Cai to extend his welcome, crying, “Your Grace!” When Tripitaka heard this, he turned quickly, and his host was already standing in 
front of him. That old man had on his head a dark silk wrap; he wore a robe of Sichuan silk brocade in spring-onion white with a dark green sash, and a pair of boots made of rough steer hide. Smiling 
affably, he addressed them, saying, “Honoured Priests, please accept my salute!” Tripitaka returned his greeting but Pilgrim stood there unmoved. When the old man saw how hideous he looked, he 
did not salute him. “Why don’t you say hello to me?” demanded Pilgrim. Somewhat alarmed, the old man said to Gao Cai: “Young man! You've really done me in, haven't you? There is already an ugly 
monster in the house that we can’t drive away. Now you've to fetch this thunder-spirit to cause me more troubles!” 

“Old Gao,” said Pilgrim, “it’s in vain that you’ve reached such old age, for you’ve hardly any discernment! If you want to judge people by appearances, you're utterly wrong! |, old monkey, may be ugly 
but I've some abilities. I'll capture the monster for your family, exorcise the fiend, apprehend that son-in-law of yours, and get your daughter back. Will that be good enough? Why all these mutterings 
about appearances!” When the old man heard this, he trembled with fear but he managed to pull himself together sufficiently to say, “Please come in!” At this invitation, Pilgrim led the white horse and 
asked Gao Cai to pick up their luggage so that Tripitaka could go in with them. With no regard for manners, he tethered the horse on one of the pillars and drew up a weather-beaten lacquered chair 
for his master to be seated. He pulled over another chair and sat down on one side. “This little priest,” said old Mr. Gao, “really knows how to make himself at home!” 

“If you’re willing to keep me here for half a year,” said Pilgrim, “then I'll truly feel at home!” 

After they were seated, old Mr. Gao asked, “Just now my little one said that you two honoured priests came from the Land of the East?” 

“Yes,” replied Tripitaka. “Your poor monk was commissioned by the court to go to the Western Heaven to seek scriptures for God. Since we've reached your village, we'd like to ask for lodging for the 
night. We plan to leave early tomorrow morning.” 

“So the two of you wanted lodging?” said old Mr. Gao. “Then why did you say you'd catch monsters?” 

“Since we're asking for a place to stay,” said Pilgrim, “we thought we might as well catch a few monsters, just for fun! May we ask how many monsters there are in your house?” 

“My God!” exclaimed old Mr. Gao, “How many monsters could we feed? There’s only this one son-in-law, and we’ve suffered enough from him!” 

“Tell me everything about the monster,” said Pilgrim, “how he came to this place, what sort of power he has, and so forth. Start from the beginning and don’t leave out any details. Then | can catch him 
for you.” 

“From ancient times,” said old Mr. Gao, “this village of ours has never had any troubles with ghosts, goblins, or fiends; in fact, my sole misfortune consists of not having a son. I'd three daughters born 
to me: the eldest is named Fragrant Orchid; the second one, Jade Orchid; and the third, Green Orchid. The first two since their youth had been promised to people belonging to this same village but I'd 
hoped that the youngest would take a husband who would stay with our family and consent to have his children bear our name. Since I've no son, he would in fact become my heir and look after me in 
my old age. Little did | expect that about three years ago, a fellow would turn up who was passably good-looking. He said that he came from the Fulling Mountain and that his surname was Bullseye 
(Bull). Since he had neither parents nor brothers, he was willing to be taken in as a son-in-law, and | accepted him, thinking that someone with no other family attachment was exactly the right sort of 
person. When he first came into our family, he was, | must confess, fairly industrious and well-behaved. He worked hard to loosen the earth and plough the fields without even using a buffalo; and when 
he harvested the grains, he did the reaping without sickle or staff. He came home late in the evening and started early again in the morning, and to tell you the truth, we’re quite happy with him. The 
only trouble was that his appearance began to change.” 

“In what way?” asked Pilgrim. 

“Well,” said old Mr. Gao, “when he first came, he was a stout, swarthy fellow but afterwards he turned into an idiot with huge ears and a long horn with a great tuft of bristles behind his head. His body 
became horribly coarse and hulking. In short, his whole appearance was that of a bull! And what an enormous appetite! For a single meal, he has to have three to five bushels of rice: a little snack in 
the morning means over a hundred biscuits or rolls. It’s a good thing he keeps a vegetarian diet; if he liked meat and juice, the property and estate of this old man would be consumed in half a year!” 
“Perhaps it’s because he’s a good worker,” said Tripitaka, “that he has such a good appetite.” 

“Even that appetite is a small problem!” said old Mr. Gao. “What is most disturbing is that he likes to come riding the wind and disappears again astride the fog; he kicks up stones and dirt so frequently 
that my household and my neighbours have not had a moment's peace. Then he locked up my little girl, Green Orchid, in the back building, and we've not seen her for half a year and don’t know 
whether she’s dead or alive. We're certain now that he is a monster, and that’s why we want to get an exorcist to drive him away.” 

“There's nothing difficult about that,” said Pilgrim. “Relax, old man! Tonight I'll catch him for you, and I'll demand that he sign a document of annulment and return your daughter. How's that?” Immensely 
pleased, old Mr. Gao said, “My taking him in was a small thing, when you consider how he has ruined my good reputation and how many relatives of ours he had alienated! Just catch him for me. Why 
bother about a document? Please, just get rid of him for me.” Pilgrim said, “It's simple! When night falls, you'll see the result!” 

The old man was delighted; he asked at once for tables to be set and a vegetarian feast to be prepared. When they had finished the meal, evening was setting in. The old man asked, “What sort of 
weapons and how many people do you need? We'd better prepare soon.” 

“Ive my own weapon,” replied Pilgrim. The old man said, “The only thing the two of you've is that priestly staff, hardly something you can use to battle the monster,” whereupon Pilgrim took an 
embroidery needle out of his ear, held it in his hands, and waving it once in the wind, changed it into a golden-hooped rod with the thickness of a rice bowl. “Look at this rod,” he said to old Mr. Gao. 
“How does it compare with your weapons? Think it'll do for the monster?” 

“Since you've a weapon,” said old Mr. Gao again, “do you need some attendants?” 

“No need for any attendants,” said Pilgrim. “All | ask for is some decent elderly persons to keep my master company and talk with him, so that | may feel free to leave him for a while. I'll catch the 
monster for you and make him promise publicly to leave, so that you'll be rid of him for good.” The old man at once asked his houseboy to send for several intimate friends and relatives who soon 
arrived. After they were introduced, Pilgrim said, “Master, you may feel quite safe sitting here. Old monkey is offl” 

Look at him! Lifting high his iron rod, he dragged old Mr. Gao along, saying, “Lead me to the back building where the monster is staying so that | may have a look.” The old man indeed took him to the 
door of the building in the rear. “Get a key quickly!” said Pilgrim. 

“Take a look yourself,” said old Mr. Gao. “If I'd use a key on this lock, I’d not need you.” 

Pilgrim laughed and said, “Dear old man! Though you're quite old, you can’t even recognise a joke! | was just teasing you a little, and you took my words literally.” He went forward and touched the 
lock: it was solidly welded with liquid copper. Annoyed, Pilgrim smashed open the door with 1 terrific blow of his rod and found it was pitch black inside. “Old Gao,” said Pilgrim, “go give your daughter 
a call and see if she is there inside.” 

Summoning up his courage, the old man cried, “Miss Three!” 


Recognising her dad’s voice, the girl replied faintly, “Papa! I’m over here!” 

His golden pupils ablaze, Pilgrim peered into the dark shadows. See that her cloudlike hair is unkempt and un-brushed; jade-like face is grimy and unwashed. Though her nature refined is unchanged, 
her lovely image is weary and wan. Her cherry lips seem completely bloodless, body is both crooked, and bent. Knitted in sorrow the moth-brows? are pallid; weakened by weight loss, the speaking 
voice is faint. She came forward and when she saw that it was old Mr. Gao, she clutched at him and began to wail. “Stop crying! Stop crying!” said Pilgrim. “Let me ask you: where’s the monster?” 

“| don’t know where he’s gone,” said the girl. “Nowadays he leaves in the moming and comes back only after nightfall. Surrounded by cloud and fog, he comes and goes without ever letting me know 
where he is. Since he has learned that dad is trying to drive him away, he takes frequent precautions; that’s why he comes only at night and leaves in the moming.” 

“No need to talk anymore,” Pilgrim said. “Old Man! Take your beloved daughter to the building in front, and then you can spend all the time you want with her. Old monkey will be here waiting for him; 
if the monster doesn’t show up, don’t blame me. But if he comes at all, I'll pull out the weeds of your troubles by the roots!” With great joy, old Mr. Gao led his daughter to the front building. Exercising 
his magic might, Pilgrim shook his body and changed at once into the form of that girl, sitting all by herself to wait for the monster. In a little while, a gust of wind swept by, kicking up dust and stones. 
What a wind! At first it was a breeze gentle and light. Thereafter it became gusty and strong. A light, gentle breeze that could fill the world! A strong, gusty wind that nothing else could stop! Flowers 
and willow snapped like shaken hemp; trees and plants were felled like uprooted crops. It stirred up streams and seas, cowing ghosts and gods. It fractured rocks and mountains, awing Heaven and 
Earth. Flower-nibbling deer lost their homeward trail. Fruit-picking monkeys all were gone astray. The seven-tiered pagoda crashed on God's head. Flags on eight sides damaged the temple’s top. Gold 
beams and jade pillars were rooted up. Like flocks of swallow flew the roofing tiles. The boatman lifted his oars to make a vow eager to have his livestock sacrificed. The local spirit abandoned his 
shrine. Dragon kings from 4 seas made humble salutes. At sea the ship of Nature spirit ran aground while half of Great Wall’s rampart was blown down. When the violent gust of wind had gone by, 
there appeared in mid-air a monster who was ugly indeed. With his black face covered with short, stubby hair, his long horn and huge ears, he wore a cotton shirt that was neither quite green nor quite 
blue. A sort of spotted cotton handkerchief was tied round his head. Pilgrim said, smiling to himself, “So, I’ve to do business with a thing like this!” Dear Pilgrim! He neither greeted the monster, nor did 
he speak to him; he lay on the bed instead and pretended to be sick, moaning all the time. Unable to tell the true from the false, the monster walked into the room and, grabbing his spouse, he at once 
demanded a kiss. “He really wants to sport with old monkey!” said Pilgrim, smiling to himself. Using a holding trick, he caught the long horn of that monster and gave it a sudden, violent twist, sending 
him crashing to the floor with a loud thud. Picking himself up, the monster supported himself on the side of the bed and said, “Sister, how’s it that you seem somewhat annoyed with me today? Because 
I'm late perhaps?” 

“Im not annoyed!” said Pilgrim. 

“If not,” said that monster, “why did you give me such a fall?” 

“How can you be so boorish,” said Pilgrim, “grabbing me like that and wanting to kiss me? | don't feel very well today under normal conditions I'd have been up waiting for you and opened the door 
myself. You may take off your clothes and go to sleep.” 

The fiend did not suspect anything and took off his clothes. Pilgrim jumped up and sat on the chamber pot while the fiend climbed into bed. Groping around, he could feel no one and called out, “Sister, 
where’ve you gone? Please take off your clothes and go to sleep.” 

“You go to sleep first,” said Pilgrim, “for I’ve to wait until I've dropped my load.” The fiend indeed loosened his clothes and stayed in bed. Suddenly Pilgrim gave out a sigh saying, “My luck’s pretty low!” 
“What's bothering you?” said the monster. “What do you mean, your luck’s pretty low? It’s true that I've consumed quite a bit of food and drink since | entered your family but | certainly did not take 
them as free meals. Look at the things | did for your family: sweeping the grounds and draining the ditches, hauling bricks and carrying tiles, building walls and pounding mortar, ploughing the fields 
and raking the earth, planting seedlings of rice and wheat — in short, | took care of your entire estate. Now what you've on your body happens to be brocade, and what you wear as ornaments happens 
to be gold. You enjoy the flowers and fruits of four seasons, and you've fresh vegetables for the table in all eight periods. Whatever makes you so dissatisfied that you've to sigh and lament, saying 
your luck’s pretty low?” 

“It isn’t quite as you say,” said Pilgrim. “Today my parents gave me a severe scolding over the partition wall, throwing bricks and tiles into this place.” 

“What were they scolding you for?” asked the monster. Pilgrim said, “They said that since we've become husband and wife, you're in fact a son-in-law in their family but one who is completely without 
manners. A person as ugly as you is unpresentable: you can’t meet your brothers-in-law, nor can you greet the other relatives. Since you come with the clouds and leave with the fog, we really don’t 
know what family you belong to and what your true name is. In fact, you’ve ruined our family’s reputation and defiled our legacy. That was what they rebuked me for, and that’s why I’m upset.” 
“Though I’m somewhat homely,” said the monster, “it’s no great problem if they insist on my being more handsome. We discussed these matters before when | came here, and | entered your family 
fully with your dad’s consent. Why did they bring it up again today? My family is located in the Cloudy Paths Cave of Fulling Mountain; my surname is based on my appearance. Hence I’m called Niu 
(Bull), and my official name is Ganglie (Stiff Bristles). If they ever ask you again, tell them what I’ve told you.” 

“This monster is quite honest,” said Pilgrim to himself, secretly pleased. “Without torture, he has already made a plain confession; with his name and location clearly known, he will certainly be caught, 
regardless of what may happen.” Pilgrim then said to him, “My parents are trying to get an exorcist here to arrest you.” 

“Go to sleep! Go to sleep!” said the monster, laughing. “Don’t mind them at all! | know as many transformations as the number of stars in the Heavenly Ladle,?and | own a nine-pronged muckrake. Why 
should | fear any exorcist, monk, or Daoist priest? Even if your old man were pious enough to be able to get the Monster-Routing Patriarch to come down from the 9-fold Heaven, I'd still claim to have 
been an old acquaintance of his. And he wouldn't dare do anything to me.” 

“But they were saying that they hoped to invite someone by the name of Sun,” said Pilgrim, “the so-called Great Sage Equal to Heaven who caused havoc in the Celestial Palace five centuries ago. 
They were going to ask him to come catch you.” When the monster heard this name, he became rather alarmed. “If that’s true,” he said, “I’m leaving. We can’t live as a couple anymore!” 

“Why do you’ve to leave so suddenly?” asked Pilgrim. “You may not know,” said the monster, “that that Ban-Horse-Plague who caused such turmoil in Heaven has some real abilities. | fear that I’m no 
match for him, and losing my reputation is not my form!” 

When he had finished speaking, he slipped on his clothes, opened the door, and walked right out. Pilgrim grabbed him, and with one wipe of his own face he assumed his original form, shouting: 
“Monster where do you think you're going? Take a good look and see who I’m!” The monster turned around and saw the protruding teeth, the gaping mouth, the fiery eyes, the golden pupils, the pointed 
head, and the hairy face of Pilgrim — virtually a living thunder god! He was so horrified that his hands became numb and his feet grew weak. With a loud ripping sound, he tore open his shirt and broke 
free of Pilgrim's clutch by changing into a violent wind. Pilgrim rushed forward and struck mightily at the wind with his iron rod; the monster at once transformed himself into myriad shafts of flaming light 
and fled toward his own mountain. Mounting the clouds, Pilgrim pursued him, crying, “Where’re you running to? If you ascend to Heaven, I'll chase you to the Palace of the Polestar, and if you go down 
into the Earth, I'll follow you into the heart of Hell!” Good Heavens! 

019 
At Cloudy Paths Cave, Wukong takes in 8 Rules; At Pagoda Mountain, Tripitaka receives the Heart Thread 

The flaming light of the monster who was fleeing while the Great Sage riding the rosy clouds followed right behind. As they were thus proceeding, they came upon a tall mountain where the monster 
gathered together the fiery shafts of light and resumed his original form. Racing into a cave, he took out a nine-pronged muckrake to fight. “Lawless monster!” shouted Pilgrim. “What region are you 
from, fiend, and how do you know old monkey’s names? What abilities do you've? Make a full confession quickly and your life may be spared!” 

“So you don’t know my powers!” said that monster. “Come up here and brace yourself! I'll tell you! My mind was dim since the time of youth; always | loved my indolence and sloth. Neither nursing 
nature nor seeking the Real, '! passed my days deluded and confused. | met a true mortal suddenly who sat and spoke to me of cold and heat.2 ‘Repent,’ he said, ‘and cease your worldly way: from 
taking life accrues a boundless curse. One day when the Great Limit ends your lot for eight woes and three ways? you'll grieve too late!’ | listened and turned my will to mend my ways: | heard, repented, 
and sought the wondrous rune. By fate my teacher he became at once, pointing out passes keyed to Heaven and Earth. Taught to forge the Great Pill Nine Times Reversed, 4! worked without pause 
through day and night to reach Mud-Pill Palace® topping my skull and Jetting-Spring Points’ on soles of my feet. With kidney brine flooding the Floral Pool, ®my Cinnabar Field® was thus warmly nursed. 
Baby and Fair Girl'° mated as yin and yang; lead and mercury mixed as sun and moon. In concord Li-dragon and Kan-tiger"' used, the spirit turtle sucked dry the gold crow’s blood.'2 ‘Three flowers 
joined on top,’ the root reclaimed; ‘Five breaths faced their source” and all freely flowed. My merit done, | ascended on high, met by pairs of mortals from the sky. Radiant pink clouds arose beneath 
my feet; with light, sound frame | faced the Golden Arch. The Jade Emperor gave a banquet for gods who sat in rows according to their ranks. Made a marshal of the Celestial Stream, | took command 
of both sailors and ships. Because Queen Mum gave the Peaches Feast — when she met her guests at the Jasper Pool —- my mind turned hazy for | got dead drunk, a shameless rowdy reeling left and 
right. Boldly | barged into Vast Cold Palace's where the charming fairy received me in. When | saw her face that would snare one’s soul, my carnal itch of old could not be stopped! Without regard for 
manners or for rank, | grabbed Miss Chang’e'® asking her to bed. For three or four times she rejected me: hiding east and west, she was sore annoyed. My passion sky-high | roared like thunder, almost 
toppling the arch of Heaven's gate. Inspector General" told the Emperor Jade; | was destined that day to meet my fate. The Vast Cold completely enclosed airtight left me no way to run or to escape. 
Then | was caught by the various gods, undaunted still for juice’s in my heart. Bound and taken to see the Emperor Jade, by law I'd have been condemned to death. It's Venus the Gold Star, Mr. Li 
who left the ranks and knelt to beg for me. My punishment changed to two thousand blows, flesh was torn; bones almost cracked. Alive! | was banished from Heaven's gate to make my home beneath 
the Fulling Mount. An errant womb’s my sinful destination: Stiff-Bristle Bull’s my worldly appellation!” 

When Pilgrim heard this, he said, “So you're actually the Water God of the Heavenly Reeds who came to earth. Small wonder you knew old monkey’s name.” 

“Curses!” cried the monster. “You Heaven-defying Ban-Horse-Plague! When you caused such turmoil that year in Heaven, you’d no idea how many of us had to suffer because of you. And here you're 
again to make life miserable for others! Don’t give me any lip! Have a taste of my rake!” Pilgrim of course was unwilling to be tolerant; lifting high his rod, he struck at the monster’s head. The 2 of them 
thus began a battle in the middle of the mountain at midnight. What a fight! Pilgrim’s gold pupils blazed like lightning; the monster's round eyes flashed like silver blooms. This one spat out coloured 
fog: that 1 spouted crimson mist. The spouted crimson mist lit up the dark; the coloured fog spat out made bright the night. The golden-hooped rod; the 9-pronged muckrake. 2 true heroes most worthy 
of acclaim: 1 was the Great Sage descended to earth; 1 was a Marshal who came from Heaven. That 1 became a monster for indecorum; this 1 saluted to a monk to flee his ordeal. The rake lunged 
like a dragon wielding his claws: the rod came like a phoenix darting through flowers. That 1 said: “Your breaking up a marriage’s like patricide!” 

This 1 said: “You'd be arrested for raping a young girl!” Such idle words! Such wild clamour! Back and forth the rod blocked the rake. They fought till dawn was about to break when the monster's 2 
arms felt sore and numb. From the time of the second watch, the 2 of them fought until it was growing light in the east. That monster could hold out no longer and fled in defeat. He changed once more 
into a violent gust of wind and went straight back to his cave shutting the doors tightly and refusing to come out. Outside the cave, Pilgrim saw a large stone tablet that had on it the inscription: 

Cloudy Paths Cave 

By now it was completely light. Realising that the monster was not going to come out, Pilgrim thought to himself, “I fear that Master may be anxiously waiting for me. | may as well go back and see him 
before returning here to catch the monster.” Mounting the clouds, he soon arrived at Old Gao village. Tripitaka chatted about past and present with the other elders and did not sleep all night. He was 
just wondering why Pilgrim had not shown up when suddenly the latter dropped down into the courtyard. Straightening out his clothes and putting away his rod, Pilgrim went up to the hall, crying, 
“Master! I've returned!” 

The various elders hurriedly saluted low saying, “Thank you for all the trouble you’ve been to!” 

“Wukong, you're gone all night,” said Tripitaka. “If you captured the monster where is he now?” 

“Master,” said Pilgrim, “that monster's no fiend of this world, nor he’s a strange beast of the mountains. He’s actually the disciple of the Marshal of the Heavenly Reeds. Because he took the wrong path 
of rebirth, his appearance assumed the form of a wild bull: but actually his spiritual nature’s not been extinguished. He said that he derived his surname from his appearance and went by the name of 
Bullseye Ganglie. He tried to escape by changing into a violent gust of wind when | attacked him with my rod in the rear building; | then struck at the wind, he changed into shafts of flaming light, and 
retreated to his mountain cave. There he took out a nine-pronged muckrake to do battle with old monkey for a whole night. Just now when it grew light, he’d fight no longer and fled into the cave shutting 
the doors tightly and coming out no more. | wanted to break down the door to finish him off but was afraid that you might be waiting here anxiously. That's why | came back first to give you some news.” 
When he had finished speaking, old Mr. Gao came forward and knelt down saying, “Honoured Priest, I’ve no alternative but to say this. Though you've chased him away, he might come back here after 
you leave. What'd we do then? | may as well ask you to do us the favour of apprehending him so that we'll have no further worries. | assure you this old man will be grateful and kind; there'll be a 
generous reward for you. I'll ask my relatives and friends to witness the drawing up of a document whereby I'll divide my possessions and my property equally with you. All | want is to pluck up the 
trouble by the root so that the pure virtue of our Gao family won't be tainted.” 

“Aren't you being rather demanding, old man?” said Pilgrim laughing. “That monster did tell me that although he’s an enormous appetite, consumed a good deal of food, and drink from your family, he’s 
also done a lot of good work for you. Much of what you’re able to accumulate these last few years you owe to his strength so that he’s really taken no free meals from you. Why do you wanna have him 
driven away ever? According to him, he’s a god who’s come down to earth and helped your family earn a living. Moreover, he’s harmed your daughter in no way. I’d think such a son-in-law would be a 
good match for your daughter and family. So what's all this about ruining your family’s reputation and damaging your standing in the community? Why not really accept him as he’s?” 


“Honoured Priest,” said old Mr. Gao, “though this matter may not offend public morals, it does leave us with a bad name. Like it or not, people will say, ‘The Gao family’s taken in a monster as a son- 
in-law!’ How can one stand remarks of that kind?” 
“Wukong,” said Tripitaka, “if you've worked for him all this while, you might as well see him through to a satisfactory conclusion.” 
Pilgrim said, “I was testing him a little, just for fun. This time when | go, I'll apprehend the monster for certain and bring him back for you all to see. Don’t worry, old Gao! Take good care of my master. 
I'm off!” 
He said he was off, and the next instant he was completely out of sight. Bounding up that mountain, he arrived at the cave’s entrance; a few strokes of the iron rod reduced the doors to dust. “You 
overstuffed coolie!” he shouted, “Come out quickly and fight with old monkey!” 
Huffing and puffing, the monster was lying in the cave and trying to catch his breath. When he heard his doors being struck down and heard himself called an over-stuffed coolie, he could not control 
his wrath. Dragging his rake, he pulled himself together and ran out. “A Ban-Horse-Plague like you,” he yelled, “is an absolute pest! What’ve | done to you that you've to break my doors to pieces? Go 
and take a look at the law: a man who breaks someone’s door and enters without permission may be guilty of trespassing, a crime punishable by death!” 
“Idiot!” said Pilgrim, laughing. “I may have broken down the door but my case’s still a defensible one. But you, you took a girl from her family by force — without using the proper matchmakers and 
witnesses, nor presenting the proper gifts of money and juice. If you ask me, you're the one guilty of a capital crime!” 
“Enough of this idle talk,” said the monster, “and watch out for old bull’s rake!” 
Parrying the rake with his rod, Pilgrim said, “Isn’t that rake of yours just something you use as a regular farmhand to plough the fields or plant vegetables for the Gao family? Why on earth I'd fear you?” 
“You've made a mistake!” said the monster. “Is this rake a thing of this world? Just listen to my recital: this is divine ice steel greatly refined, polished so highly that it glows and shines. Laozi wielded 
the large hammer and tong; Mars himself added charcoals piece by piece. Five Kings of Five Quarters applied their schemes; twelve gods of time expended all their skills. They made nine prongs like 
dangling teeth of jade and brass rings were cast with dropping gold leaves. Decked with five stars and six brightness, its frame conformed to eight spans and four climes. Its whole length set to match 
the cosmic scheme accorded with yin yang with the sun and moon: six-Diagram Gods etched as Heaven ruled; ‘8eight-Trigram Stars stood in ranks and files. They named this the High Treasure Golden 
Rake, a gift for Jade Emperor to guard his court. Since | learned to be a great mortal, becoming someone with longevity, | was made Marshal of the Heavenly Reeds and given this rake, a sign of royal 
grace. When it’s held high, there'll be bright flames and light; when it’s brought low, strong wind blows down white snow. The warriors of Heaven all fear it; the Ten Kings of Hell all shrink from it. Are 
there such weapons among mankind? In this wide world there’s no such fine steel. It changes its form after my own wish, rising and falling after my command. I’ve kept it with me for several years, a 
daily comrade | never parted from. I’ve stayed with it right through the day’s three meals, nor left it when | went to sleep at night. | brought it along to the Peaches Feast and with it | attended Heaven's 
court. Since | wrought evil relying on juice since trusting my strength | displayed my fraud, Heaven sent me down to this world of dust where in my next life I'd sin some more. With wicked mind | ate 
men in my cave, pleased to be married at the Gao Village. This rake can overturn sea dragons’ and turtles’ lairs and rake up mountain dens of tigers and wolves. All other weapons there’s no need to 
name, only my rake’s of most fitting fame. To win in battle? Why, it’s no hard thing! And making merit? It needn't be said! You may have a bronze head, an iron brain, and a full steel frame. I'll rake till 
your soul melts and your spirit leaks!” 
When Pilgrim heard these words, he put away his iron rod and said, “Don’t brag too much, Idiot! Old monkey will stretch out his head right here, and you can give him a blow. See if his soul melts and 
his spirit leaks!” The monster did indeed raise his rake high and bring it down with all his might; with a loud bang, the rake made sparks as it bounced back up. But the blow did not make as much as a 
scratch on Pilgrim’s head. The monster was so astounded that his hands turned numb and his feet grew weak. He mumbled, “What a head! What a head!” 
“You didn’t know about this, did you?” said Pilgrim. “When | caused such turmoil in Heaven by stealing the magic pills, the mortal peaches, and the imperial juice, | was captured by the Little Sage 
Erlang and taken to the Polestar Palace. The various celestial beings chopped me with an axe, pounded me with a bludgeon, cut me with a scimitar, jabbed me with a sword, burned me with fire, and 
struck me with thunder — all this could not hurt me one whit. Then | was taken by Laozi and placed in his eight-trigram brazier, in which | was refined by divine fire until I'd fiery eyes and diamond pupils, 
a bronze head and iron arms. If you don’t believe me, give me some more blows and see whether it hurts me at all.” 
“Monkey,” said the monster, “I remember that at the time you're causing trouble in Heaven, you lived in the Water-Curtain Cave of the Flower-Fruit Mountain, in the Aolai Country of the East East- 
Videha Continent. Your name hasn't been heard of for a long time. How is it that you suddenly tum up at this place to oppress me? Could my dad-in-law have gone all that way to ask you to come 
here?” 
“Your dad-in-law did not go to fetch me,” said Pilgrim. “It's old monkey who turned from wrong to right who left the Daoist to follow the Religious. I’m now accompanying the royal brother of the Great 
Tang Emperor in the Land of the East whose name is Tripitaka, Master of the Law. He is on his way to the Western Heaven to seek scriptures from God. We passed through the Gao Village and asked 
for lodging; old man Gao then brought up the subject of his daughter and asked me to rescue her and to apprehend you, you overstuffed coolie!” 
Hearing this, the monster threw away his muckrake and said with great affability, “Where is the scripture pilgrim? Please take the trouble of introducing me to him.” 
“Why do you want to see him?” asked Pilgrim. The monster said, “I was a convert of the Nun Guanshiyin who commanded me to keep a vegetarian diet here and to wait for the scripture pilgrim. | was 
to follow him to the Western Heaven to seek scriptures from a god, so that | might atone for my sins with my merit and regain the fruits of Truth. I've been waiting for a number of years without receiving 
any further news. Since you’ve been made his disciple, why didn’t you mention the search for scriptures in the first place? Why did you've to unleash your violence and attack me right at my own door?” 
“Don’t try to soften me with deception,” said Pilgrim, “thinking that you can escape that way. If you’re truly sincere about accompanying the Tang Monk, you must face Heaven and swear that you're 
telling the truth. Then I'll take you to see my master.” At once the monster knelt down and respected as rapidly as if he were pounding rice with his head. “Infinite Light,” he cried, “Namo God! If I’m not 
speaking the truth in all sincerity, let me be punished as one who has offended Heaven — let me be hewn to pieces!” 
Hearing him swear such an oath, Pilgrim said, “All right! You light a fire and burn up this place of yours; then I'll take you with me.” The monster accordingly dragged in bunches of rushweed and thorns 
and lighted the fire; the Cloudy Paths Cave soon looked like a derelict potter's kiln. “I've no other attachment,” he said to Pilgrim. “You can take me away.” 
“Give me your muckrake and let me hold it,” said Pilgrim, and our monster at once handed it over. Yanking out a piece of hair, Pilgrim blew onto it and cried, “Change!” It changed into a three-ply hemp 
rope with which he prepared to tie up the monster's hands. Putting his arms behind his back, the monster did nothing to stop himself from being bound. Then Pilgrim took hold of his ear and dragged 
him along, crying, “Hurry! Hurry!” 
“Gently, please!” pleaded the monster. “You're holding me so roughly and my ear’s hurting!” 
“| can be no gentler,” said Pilgrim, “for | can’t worry about you now. As the saying goes, ‘The nicer the goat, the nastier the grip!’ After you’ve seen my master and proved your worth, I'll let you go.” 
Rising up to a distance halfway between cloud and fog, they headed straight for the Gao Family Village. A poem as a testimony says: '9 
Strong is metal’s nature to vanquish wood: mind Monkey's the Wood Dragon subdued. 
With metal and wood both obedient as 1, all their love, virtue will grow, and show. 
1 guest and 1 host®° there’s nothing between; 3 mating, 3 unions — there’s great mystery!?' 
Nature and feelings gladly fused as last and first: 22both will surely be enlightened in the West. 

In a moment they had arrived at the village. Grasping the rake and pulling at the monster's ear, Pilgrim said, “Look at the one sitting in a most dignified manner up there in the main hall: that’s my 
master.” 
When old Mr. Gao and his relatives suddenly saw Pilgrim dragging by the ear a monster who had his hands bound behind his back, they all gladly left their seats to meet them in the courtyard. The old 
man cried, “Honoured Priest! There’s that son-in-law of mine.” 
The monster went forward and fell on his knees, respecting to Tripitaka and saying, “Master, your disciple apologises for not coming to meet you. If I’d known earlier that my master’s staying in my dad- 
in-law’s house, I'd have come at once to pay my respects and none of these troubles would’ve befallen me.” 
“Wukong,” said Tripitaka, “how did you manage to get him here to see me?” Only then did Pilgrim release his hold. Using the handle of the rake to give the monster a whack, he shouted, “Idiot! Say 
something!” 
The monster gave a full account of how the Nun had converted him. Greatly pleased, Tripitaka said at once, “Mr. Gao, may | borrow your incense table?” Old Mr. Gao took it out immediately and 
Tripitaka lighted the incense after purifying his hands. He saluted toward the south, saying, “I thank the Nun for her holy grace!” The other elders all joined in the worship by adding incense, after which 
Tripitaka resumed his seat in the main hall and asked Wukong to untie the monster. Pilgrim shook his body to retrieve his hair, and the rope fell off by itself. Once more the monster saluted to Tripitaka, 
declaring his intention to follow him to the West, and then saluted also to Pilgrim addressing him as elder brother because he was the senior disciple. “Since you’ve entered my fold and have decided 
to become my disciple,” said Tripitaka, “let me give you a religious name so that | may address you properly.” 
“Master,” said the monster, “the Nun already laid hands on my head and gave me the commandments and a religious name that’s Bullseye Aware of Ability (Awakened to Power).” 
“Good! Good!” said Tripitaka, laughing. “Your elder brother's named Wukong and you're called Aware of Ability; your names are well in accord with the emphasis of our denomination.” 
“Master,” said Aware of Ability, “since | received the commandments from the Nun, | was completely cut off from the five forbidden viands and the three undesirable foods. | maintained a strict vegetarian 
diet in my dad-in-law’s house, ever touching no forbidden food. Now that I’ve met my master today, let me be released from my vegetarian vow.” 
“No, no!” said Tripitaka. “Since you've not eaten the five forbidden viands and the three undesirable foods, let me give you another name. Let me call you 8 Rules.” 
Delighted, Idiot said, “I'll obey my master.” 
For this reason, he was also called Bullseye 8 Rules. When old Mr. Gao saw the happy ending of this whole affair, he was more delighted than ever. He ordered his houseboys immediately to prepare 
a feast to thank the Tang Monk. 8 Rules went forward and tugged at him, saying, “Papa, please ask my humble wife to come out and greet the grandpas and uncles. How about it?” 
“Worthy brother!” said Pilgrim, laughing. “Since you’ve embraced Religion and become a monk, please don’t ever mention your humble wife again. There may be a married Daoist in this world but 
there’s no such monk, is there? Let’s sit down rather and have a nice vegetarian meal. We'll have to start off soon for the West.” 
Old Mr. Gao set the tables in order and invited Tripitaka to take the honoured seat in the middle: Pilgrim and 8 Rules sat on both sides while the relatives took the remaining seats below. Mr. Gao 
opened a bottle of dietary juice and filled a glass: he sprinkled a little of the juice on the ground to thank Heaven and Earth before presenting the glass to Tripitaka. “To tell you the truth, aged sir,” said 
Tripitaka, “this poor monk’s been a vegetarian from birth. I’ve touched no kind of forbidden food since childhood.” 
“| know the reverend teacher is chaste and pure,” said old Mr. Gao, “and | didn’t dare bring forth any forbidden foodstuff. This juice’s made for those who maintain a vegetarian diet: there’s no harm in 
your taking a glass.” 
“| just don’t dare use juice,” said Tripitaka. “for the prohibition of strong drink is a monk's first commandment.” 
Alarmed, Aware of Ability said, “Master, though | kept a vegetarian diet, | didn’t cut out juice.” 
“Though my capacity is not great,” said Wukong, “and I’m unable to handle more than a crock or so, I’ve not discontinued the use of juice either.” 
“In that case,” said Tripitaka, “you two brothers may take some of this pure juice. But you’re not permitted to get drunk and cause trouble.” So the 2 of them took the first round before taking their seats 
again to enjoy the feast. What a richly laden table that was and varieties of delicacies were presented cannot be told you in full. After master and disciples had been feted, old Mr. Gao took out a red 
lacquered tray bearing some 200 taels of gold and silver in small pieces that were to be presented to the 3 priests for travel expenses. There were moreover 3 outer garments made of fine silk. Tripitaka 
said, “We're mendicants who beg for food and drink from village to village. How'd we accept gold, silver, and precious clothing?” 
Coming forward and stretching out his hand, Pilgrim took a handful of the money, saying, “Gao Cai, yesterday you took the trouble to bring my master here with the result that we made a disciple today. 
We've nothing to thank you with. Take this as remuneration for being a guide; perhaps you can use it to buy a few pairs of straw sandals. If there're any more monsters, turn them over to me and I'll 
truly be grateful to you.” 
Gao Cai took the money and respected to thank Pilgrim for his reward. Old Mr. Gao then said, “If the masters don’t want the silver and gold, please accept at least these three simple garments that’re 
but small tokens of our goodwill.” 
“If those of us who've left the family,” said Tripitaka again, “accept the bribe of a single strand of silk, we may fall into ten thousand kalpas from which we may never recover. It’s quite sufficient that we 
take along the leftovers from the table as provisions on our way.” 
8 Rules spoke up from the side: “Master, Elder Brother, you may not want these things. But | was a son-in-law in this household for several years and the payment for my services should be worth more 
than three stones of rice! Dad, my shirt’s torn by Elder Brother last night; please give me a cassock of blue silk. My shoes are worn also so please give me a good pair of new shoes.” 


When old Mr. Gao heard that, he dared not refuse; a new pair of shoes and a cassock were purchased at once so that 8 Rules could dispose of the old attire. Swaggering around, our 8 Rules spoke 
amiably to old Mr. Gao, saying, “Please convey my humble sentiments to my mum-in-law, great-aunt, second aunt, uncle-in-law, and all other relatives. Today I’m going away as a monk and please 
don’t blame me if | can’t take leave of them in person. Dad, do take care of my better half. If we fail in our quest for scriptures, I'll return to secular life and live with you again as your son-in-law.” 
“Coolie!” shouted Pilgrim. “Stop babbling nonsense!” 
“It's not nonsense,” said 8 Rules. “Sometimes | fear that things may go wrong and then I'd end up unable either to be a monk or to take a wife, losing out on both counts.” 
“Less of this idle conversation!” said Tripitaka. “We must hurry up and leave.” They packed their luggage, and 8 Rules was told to carry the load with a pole. Tripitaka rode on the white horse while 
Pilgrim led the way with the iron rod across his shoulders. The three of them took leave of old Mr. Gao and his relatives and headed toward the West. A poem as testimony says: 
The earth’s mist-shrouded, the trees appear tall. A god-son of Tang court ever toils. 
He eats in need rice begged from many homes; wears when cold a robe patched 1000-fold. 
Holdfast at the breast the Horse of the Will! The Mind-Monkey is sly - let him not wail! 
Nature 1 with feelings causes all joined*4 -— the moon’s full of gold light when hair's shorn.25 
The 3 of them proceeded toward the West, and for about a month it was an uneventful journey. When they crossed the boundary of Qoco, they looked up and saw a tall mountain. Tripitaka reined in 
his horse and said, “Wukong, Aware of Ability, there’s a tall mountain ahead. We must approach it with care.” 
“It's nothing!” said 8 Rules. “This mountain’s called the Pagoda Mountain and a Crow’s Nest Chan Master lives there, practicing austerities. Old bull’s met him before.” 
“What's his business?” said Tripitaka. 
“He’s fairly accomplished in the Way,” said 8 Rules, “and once asked me to practice austerities with him. But | didn’t go and that’s the end of the matter.” As master and disciple conversed, they soon 
arrived at the mountain. What a splendid mountain! See south of it, blue pines, jade-green junipers; north of it, green willows, red peach trees. A clamorous din: the mountain fowls are conversing. A 
fluttering exercise: mortal cranes unite in flying. A dense fragrance: the flowers in 1000 colours. A manifold green: diverse plants in forms exotic. In the stream green water flows bubbling; before the 
Cliff float petals of hallowed cloud. Truly a place of rare beauty, a well-secluded spot; silence is all, not a man to be seen. As the master sat on his horse, peering into the distance, he saw on top of the 
fragrant juniper tree a nest made of dried wood and grass. To the left, musk deer carried flowers in their mouths; to the right, mountain monkeys were presenting fruits. At the top of the tree, blue and 
pink phoenixes recited together, soon to be joined by a congregation of black cranes and brightly coloured pheasants. “Isn’t that the Crow’s Nest Chan Master?” asked 8 Rules, pointing. 
Tripitaka urged on his horse and rode up to the tree. That Chan Master who seeing the 3 of them approach, left his nest and jumped down from the tree. Tripitaka dismounted and saluted himself. 
Raising him up with his hand, the Chan Master said, “Holy Monk, please arise! Pardon me for not coming to meet you.” 
“Old Chan Master,” said 8 Rules, “please receive my salute!” 
“Aren't you the Bullseye Ganglie of the Fulling Mountain?” asked the Chan Master, startled. “How did you've the good fortune to journey with the holy monk?” 
“A few years back,” said 8 Rules, “I was beholden to the Nun Guanyin for persuading me to follow him as a disciple.” 
“Good! Good! Good!” said the Chan Master, greatly pleased. Then he pointed to Pilgrim and asked, “Who's this person?” 
“How's it that the old Chan recognises him,” said Pilgrim, laughing, “and not me?” 
“Because I’ve not had the pleasure of meeting you,” said the Chan Master. 
Tripitaka said, “He’s my eldest disciple, Sun Wukong.” 
Smiling amiably, the Chan Master said, “How impolite of me!” Tripitaka saluted again and asked about the distance to the Great Thunderclap Temple of the Western Heaven. “It's very far away! Very 
far away!” said the Chan Master. “What's more, the road’s a difficult one filled with tigers and leopards.” 
With great earnestness, Tripitaka asked again, “Just how it’s far?” 
“Though it may be very far,” answered the Chan Master, “you'll arrive there one day. But all those killing hindrances along the way are hard to dispel. I've a Heart Thread here in this scroll; it’s fifty-four 
sentences containing two hundred and seventy characters. When you meet these killing hindrances, recite the Thread and you'll not suffer any injury or harm.” Tripitaka saluted himself on the ground 
and begged to receive it whereupon the Chan Master imparted the Thread by reciting it orally. The Thread said: “The Heart Thread of the Great Perfection of Wisdom.” When the Nun Guanyin the On- 
Looking Lord was moving in the deep course of the Perfection of Wisdom, she saw that the 5 heaps were but emptiness and transcended all sufferings. Son of Sari, form is no different from emptiness, 
emptiness no different from form; form is emptiness, and emptiness is form. Of sensations, perceptions, volition, and consciousness, the same is also true. Son of Sari, it is thus that all religions are 
but empty appearances, neither produced nor destroyed, neither defiled nor pure, neither increasing nor decreasing. This is why in emptiness there are no forms and no sensations, perceptions, volition, 
or consciousness; no eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, or mind; no form, sound, smell, taste, touch, or object of mind. There is no realm of sight [and so forth], until we reach the realm of no mind- 
consciousness; there is no ignorance, nor is there extinction of ignorance [and so forth], until we reach the stage where there is no old age and death, nor is there the extinction of old age and death; 
there is no suffering, annihilation, or way; there is no cognition or attainment. Because there is nothing to be attained, the mind of the Nun, by virtue of reliance upon the Perfection of Wisdom, has no 
hindrances: no hindrances, and therefore, no terror or fear; he is far removed from error and delusion, and finally reaches Extinguishment. All the gods of the 3 worlds rely on the Perfection of Wisdom 
and that is why they attain the ultimate and complete enlightenment. Know therefore that the Perfection of Wisdom is a great divine spell, a spell of great illumination, a spell without superior, and a 
spell without equal. It can do away with all sufferings — such is the unvarnished truth. Therefore, when the Spell of the Perfection of Wisdom is to be spoken, say this spell: “Gone, gone, gone beyond, 
completely gone beyond! O what an awakening! All hail!” Now because that master of the law from the Tang court was spiritually prepared, he could remember the Heart Thread after hearing it only 
once. Through him, it has come down to us this day. It is the comprehensive classic for the cultivation of Perfection, the very gateway to becoming a god. After the transmission of the Thread, the Chan 
Master trod on the cloudy luminosity and was about to return to his crow’s nest. Tripitaka however, held him back and earmestly questioned him again about the condition of the road to the West. The 
Chan Master laughed and said: “The way isn’t too hard to walk; try listening to what | say. A thousand hills and waters deep; places full of goblins and snags; when you reach those sky-touching cliffs, 
fear not and put your mind at rest. Crossing the Rub Ear Precipice, you must walk with steps placed sideways. Take care in the Black Pine Forest; fox-spirits will likely bar your way. Griffins will fill the 
capitals; monsters all mountains populate; old tigers sit as magistrates; greying wolves act as registrars. Lions, elephants — all called kings! Leopards, tigers are coachmen all! A wild goat totes a hauling 
pole; you'll meet ahead a water sprite. An old stone ape of many years now nurses over there his spite! Just ask that acquaintance of yours: well he knows the way to the West.” 
Hearing this, Pilgrim laughed with scorn and said, “Let's go. Don’t ask him, ask me! That's enough!” 
Tripitaka did not perceive what he meant. The Chan Master, changing into a beam of golden light, went straight up to his crow’s nest while the priest saluted toward him to express his gratitude. 
Enraged, Pilgrim lifted his iron rod and thrust it upward violently but garlands of blooming lotus flowers were seen together with a thousand-layered shield of auspicious clouds. Though Pilgrim might 
have the strength to overturn rivers and seas, he could not catch hold of even one strand of the crow’s nest. When Tripitaka saw this, he pulled Pilgrim back saying, “Wukong, why’re you jabbing at the 
nest of a Nun like him?” 
“For leaving like that after abusing both my brother and me,” said Pilgrim. 
“He’s speaking of the way to the Western Heaven,” said Tripitaka. “Since when did he abuse you?” 
“Didn't you get it?” asked Pilgrim. 
“He said, ‘A wild goat totes a hauling pole,’ and insulted 8 Rules. ‘An old stone ape of many years’ ridiculed old monkey. How else you'd explain that?” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “don’t be angry. This Chan Master does know the events of past and future. Let’s see if his statement, ‘You'll meet ahead a water sprite,’ will be fulfilled or not. Let's spare 
him and leave.” Pilgrim saw the lotus flowers and auspicious fog near the nest, and he had little alternative than to ask his master to mount so that they could descend from the mountain and proceed 
toward the West. Lo, their journey thus shows that in man’s world pure leisure is rare but evils and ogres are rife in the hills! 


020 
At Yellow Wind Ridge the Tang Monk meets adversity; in mid-mountain, 8 Rules strives to be 1* 
The religion’s born through the mind; it'll be destroyed, too, through the mind. 
By whom it’s destroyed or born that you must determine yourself. 
If it's through your own mind, why do others need to tell you? 
All that you need is your hard work to draw blood out of iron ore. 
Let a silk cord puncture your nose to tie a firm knot on the void; fasten that to the no-work tree’ that you'd not be vicious and wild. 
Regard not the thief as your son and forget all religion and mind. 
Let not the other deceive me: with 1 big punch strike him out first. 
The manifest mind’s also no mind; manifest Law is law that’s stopped. 
When both Bull and Man disappear, the jade-green sky is bright and clear. 

Any autumn moon’s just as round: you can’t tell 1 from the other. 
This enigmatic verse was composed by Xuanzang, master of the law, after he had thoroughly mastered the Heart Thread that had in fact broken through the gate of his understanding. He recited it 
frequently, and the beam of spiritual light penetrated by itself to his innermost being. The three travellers who dined on the wind and rested by the waters who clothed themselves with the moon and 
cloaked themselves with the stars on their journey. Soon, it was the scene of summer again, beneath a torrid sky. They saw flowers gone and butterflies cared not to linger; on tall trees the cicada chirp 
turned brazen. Wild worms made their cocoons, fair pomegranates their fire as new lilies in the ponds appeared. *As they were travelling one day, it was growing late again when they saw a hamlet 
beside the mountain road. “Wukong,” said Tripitaka, “look at that sun setting behind the mountain hiding its fiery orb and the moon rising on the eastern sea, revealing an icy wheel. It's a good thing 
that a family lives by the road up there. Let's ask for lodging for the night and proceed tomorrow.” 
“You're right!” said 8 Rules. “Old bull's rather hungry, too! Let’s go and beg for some food at the house. Then | can regain my strength to pole the luggage.” 
“This family-hugging devil!” said Pilgrim. “You only left the family a few days ago, and you're already beginning to complain.” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “I’m not like you — | can’t imbibe the wind and exhale the mist. Since | began following our master a few days ago, I’ve been half hungry all the time. Did you know that?” 
Hearing this, Tripitaka said, “Aware of Ability, if your heart still clings to the family, you’re not the kind of person who wants to leave it. You may as well turn back!” Idiot was so taken aback that he fell 
on his knees and said, “Master, please do not listen to the words of Elder Brother. He loves to put blame on others: I’ve not made any complaint but he said that | was complaining. I’m only an honest 
moron who said that | was hungry so that we'd find some household to beg for food. Immediately he called me a family-hugging devil! Master, | received the commandments from the Nun and mercy 
from you, and that was why | was determined to serve you and go to the Western Heaven. | vow that I’ve no regrets. This is in fact what they call the practice of strict austerities. What do you mean, 
I'm not willing to leave the family?” 
“In that case,” said Tripitaka, “you may get up.” 
Leaping up with a bound, Idiot was still muttering something as he picked up the pole with the luggage. He had no choice but to follow his companions with complete determination up to the door of the 
house by the wayside. Tripitaka dismounted, Pilgrim took the reins, and 8 Rules put down the luggage, all standing still beneath the shade of a large tree. Holding his nine-ringed priestly staff and 
pressing down his rain hat woven of straw and rattan, Tripitaka went to the door first. He saw inside an old man reclining on a bamboo bed and softly reciting the name of God. Tripitaka dared not speak 
loudly; instead, he said very slowly and quietly, “Patron, salutations!” The old man jumped up and at once began to straighten out his attire. He walked out of the door to return the greeting, saying, 
“Honoured Priest, pardon me for not coming to meet you. Where did you come from? What are you doing at my humble abode?” 
“This poor monk,” said Tripitaka, “happens to be a priest from the Great Tang in the Land of the East. In obedience to an imperial decree, I’m journeying to the Great Thunderclap Temple to seek 
scriptures from a god. It was getting late when | arrived in your esteemed region, and I'd beg for shelter for one night in your fine mansion. | beseech you to grant me this favour.” 
“You can’t go there,” said the old man, shaking his head and waving his hand, “it’s exceedingly difficult to bring scriptures back from the Western Heaven. If you want to do that, you might as well go 
the Eastern Heaven!” Tripitaka fell silent, thinking to himself, “The Nun clearly told me to go to the West. Why does this old man now say that I'd head for the East instead? Where in the East would 
there be any scriptures?” Terribly flustered and embarrassed, he could not make any reply for a long time. 


We now tell you about Pilgrim who had always been impulsive and mischievous. Unable to restrain himself, he went forward and said in a loud voice, “Old man! Though you're of such great age, you 
don’t have much common sense. We monks have travelled a great distance to come and ask you for shelter, and here you're trying to intimidate us with discouraging words. If your house is too small 
and there’s not enough space for us to sleep, we'll sit beneath the trees for the night and not disturb you.” 

“Master!” said the old man, taking hold of Tipitaka, “you don’t say anything. But that disciple of yours with a pointed chin, shrivelled cheeks, a thunder-god mouth, and blood-red eyes — he looks like a 
demon with a bad case of consumption — how dare he offend an aged person like me!” 

“An old fellow like you,” said Pilgrim with a laugh, “really has very little discernment! Those who are handsome may be good for their looks only! A person like me, old monkey, may be small but tough, 
like the skin around a ball of ligaments!” 

“| suppose you must have some abilities,” said the old man. “I'll not boast,” said Pilgrim, “but they are passable.” 

“Where did you used to live?” asked the old man, “and why did you shave your hair to become a monk?” 

“The ancestral home of old monkey,” said Pilgrim, “is at the Water-Curtain Cave in the Flower-Fruit Mountain, in the Aolai Country of the East East-Videha Continent. | learned to be a monster-spirit in 
my youth, assuming the name of Wukong, and with my abilities | finally became the Great Sage Equal to Heaven. Because | didn’t receive any acceptable appointment in Heaven, | caused great turmoil 
in the Celestial Palace, and incurred great calamities for myself. | was however, delivered from my ordeals and have turned to Religion instead to seek the fruits of Truth. As a guardian of my master 
who is in the service of the Tang court, I’m journeying to the Western Heaven to worship God. Why should | fear tall mountains, treacherous roads, wide waters, and wild waves? I, old monkey, can 
apprehend monsters, subdue demons, tame tigers, capture dragons — in sum, | know a little about all the matters that a person needs to know to go up to Heaven or to descend into Earth. If by chance 
your household is suffering from some such disturbances as flying bricks and dancing tiles, or talking pots and doors opening by themselves, old monkey can quiet things down for you.” 

When that old man heard this lengthy speech, he roared with laughter and said, “So you're really a garrulous monk who begs for alms from place to place!” 

“Only your son is garrulous!” said Pilgrim. “I’m not very talkative these days, because following my master on his journey is quite tiring.” 

“If you're not tired,” said that old man, “and if you’re in the mood to chatter, you’d probably talk me to death! Since you've such abilities, | suppose you can go to the West successfully. How many of 
you're there? You may rest in my thatched hut.” 

“We thank the old patron for not sending us away,” said Tripitaka; “there are three of us altogether.” 

“Where is the third member of your party?” asked the old man. “Your eyes must be somewhat dim, old man,” said Pilgrim. “Isn’t he over there standing in the shade?” The old man did indeed have poor 
sight; he raised his head and stared intently. The moment he saw 8 Rules with his strange face and mouth, he became so terrified that he started to rush back into the house, tripping at every step. 
“Shut the door! Shut the door!” he cried. “A monster is coming!” Pilgrim caught hold of him, saying, “Don’t be afraid, old man! He’s no monster; he’s my younger brother.” 

“Fine! Fine! Fine!” said the old man, shaking all over. “One monk uglier than another!” 

8 Rules approached him and said, “You're really mistaken, Aged Sir, if you judge people by their looks. We may be ugly but we're all useful.” As the old man was speaking with the three monks in front 
of his house, two young men appeared to the south of the village, leading an old woman and several young children. All of them had their clothes rolled up and were walking barefoot, for they were 
returning after a day’s planting of young shoots of grain. When they saw the white horse, the luggage, and the goings-on in front of their house, they all ran forward, asking, “What are you people doing 
here?” Turning his head, 8 Rules flapped his ears a couple of times and stuck out his long horn once, so frightening the people that they fell down right and left, madly scattering in every direction. 
Tripitaka, alarmed, kept saying, “Don’t be afraid! Don’t be afraid! We're not bad people! We're monks in quest of scriptures.” Coming out of his house, the old man helped the old woman up, saying, 
“Mama, get up! Calm yourself. This master came from the Tang court. His disciples may look hideous but they are really good people with ugly faces. Take the boys and girls back into the house.” 
Clutching at the old man, the old woman walked inside with the two young men and their children. 

Sitting on the bamboo bed in their house, Tripitaka began to protest, saying, “Disciples! The two of you're not only ugly in appearance but you're also rude in your language. You've scared this family 
badly, and you’re causing me to sin.” 

“To tell you the truth, Master,” said 8 Rules, “since | started accompanying you, I’ve become a lot better behaved. At the time when | was living in Old Gao Village, all | needed to do was to pout and 
flap my ears once, and scores of people would be frightened to death!” 

“Stop talking rubbish, Idiot,” said Pilgrim, “and fix your ugliness.” 

“Look at the way Wukong talks,” said Tripitaka. “Your appearance comes with your birth. How can you tell him to fix it?” 

“Take that rake-like horn,” said Pilgrim, “put it in your bosom, and don’t take it out. And stick your rush-leaf-fan ears to the back of your head, and don’t shake them. That's fixing it.” 8 Rules did indeed 
hide his horn and stick his ears to the back of his head; with his hands folded in front of him to hide his head, he stood on one side of his master. Pilgrim took the luggage inside the main door, and tied 
the white horse to one of the posts in the courtyard. 

The old man then brought a young man in to present three cups of tea placed on a wooden tray. After the tea, he ordered a vegetarian meal to be prepared. Then the young man took an old, unvarnished 
table full of holes and several stools with broken legs, and placed them in the courtyard for the three of them to sit where it was cool. Only then did Tripitaka ask, “Old patron, what is your noble 
surname?” 

“Your humble servant goes by the surname of Wang,” said the old man. “And how many heirs do you've?” asked Tripitaka. “I’ve two sons and three grandchildren,” said the old man. “Congratulations! 
Congratulations!” said Tripitaka. “And what is your age?” 

“I've foolishly lived till my sixty-first year,” the old man said. 

“Good! Good! Good!” said Pilgrim. “You've just begun a new sexagenarian cycle.” 

“Old patron,” said Tripitaka again, “you said when we first came that the scriptures in the Western Heaven were difficult to get. Why?” 

“The scriptures are not hard to get,” said the old man, “but the journey there is filled with hazards and difficulties. Some thirty miles west of us there is a mountain called the Yellow Wind Ridge of Eight 
Hundred Miles. Monsters infest that mountain, and that’s what | meant by difficulties. Since this little priest claims that he has many abilities however, you may perhaps proceed after all.” 

“No fear! No fear!” said Pilgrim. “With old monkey and his younger brother around, we'll never be touched, no matter what kind of monster we meet.” 

While they spoke, 1 of the sons brought out some rice and placed it on the table, saying, “Please eat.” 

Tripitaka immediately folded his hands to begin his grace but 8 Rules had already swallowed a whole bowl of rice. Before the priest could say the few sentences, Idiot had devoured 3 more bowlfuls. 
“Look at the glutton!” said Pilgrim. “It’s like we’ve met a deceased!” Old Wang was a sensitive person. When he saw how fast 8 Rules was eating, he said, “This honoured priest must be really hungry! 
Quick, bring more rice!” Idiot in truth had an enormous appetite. Look at him! Without lifting his head once, he finished over ten bowls while Tripitaka and Pilgrim could hardly finish two. Idiot refused to 
stop and wanted to eat still more. “In our haste we've not prepared any dainty viands,” said old Wang, “and | dare not press you too much. Please take at least one more helping.” Both Tripitaka and 
Pilgrim said, “We've had enough.” 

“Old man,” said 8 Rules, “what are you mumbling about? Who's having a game of divination with you? Why mention all that about the fifth yao and the sixth yao?4 If you've rice, just bring more of it, 
that’s all!” So Idiot in one meal finished all the rice in that household, and then he said he was only half full! The tables and dishes were cleared away, and after bedding had been placed on the bamboo 
bed and on some wooden boards, the travellers rested. 

The next morning, Pilgrim went to saddle the horse while 8 Rules put their luggage in order. Old Wang asked his wife to prepare some refreshments and drinks to serve them, after which the three of 
them expressed their thanks and took leave of their host. The old man said, “If there is any mishap on your journey after you leave here, you must feel free to return to our house.” 

“Old man,” said Pilgrim, “don’t speak such disconcerting words. Those of us who've left the family never retrace our steps!” 

They then urged on the horse, picked up the luggage, and proceeded toward the West. Alas! What this journey means for them is that there’s no safe way which leads to the Western Realm; there will 
be great disasters brought by demons vile. Before the 3 of them had travelled for half a day, they did indeed come upon a tall mountain, exceedingly rugged. Tripitaka rode right up to the hanging cliff 
and looked around, sitting sideways on his saddle. Truly tall was the mountain; rugged, the peak; steep, the precipice; deep, the canyon; gurgling, the stream; and fresh were the flowers. This mountain 
whether tall or not, its top reached the blue sky; this stream, whether deep or not, its floor opened to Hell below. Before the mountain, white clouds rose in continuous rings and boulders in shapes 
grotesque. Countless the soul-rending cliffs ten thousand yards deep; behind them, winding, twisting, dragon-hiding caves where water dripped from ledges drop by drop. He also saw some deer with 
zigzag horns; dull and dumbly staring antelopes; winding and coiling red-scaled pythons; silly and foolish white-faced apes; tigers that climbed the hills to seek their dens at night; dragons that churned 
the waves to leave their lairs at dawn. If one stepped before a cave’s entrance, the dead leaves crackled; the fowls in the grass darted up with wings loudly beating; the beasts in the forest walked with 
paws noisily scratching; suddenly wild creatures hurried by, making hearts beat with fear. Thus it was that the Due-to-Fall Cave duly faced the Due-to-Fall Cave, ‘the Cave duly facing the Due-to-Fall 
Cave duly faced the mount. 1 blue bill dyed like 1000 yards of jade, mist-veiled like countless mounds of jade-green gauze. The master rode forward very slowly while the Great Sage Sun also walked 
at a slower pace and Bullseye Aware of Ability proceeded leisurely with the load. As all of them were looking at the mountain, a great whirlwind suddenly arose. Alarmed, Tripitaka said, “Wukong, the 
wind’s rising!” 

“Why fear the wind?” said Pilgrim. “This is the breath of Heaven in the four seasons, nothing to be afraid of.” 

“But this is a terribly violent wind, unlike the kind that comes from Heaven,” said Tripitaka. 

“How so?” said Pilgrim. 

Tripitaka said, “Look at this wind! Augustly it blows in a blusterous key, an immense force leaving the jade-green sky. It passes the ridge, just hear the trees roar. It moves in the wood, just see the 
poles quake. Willows by the banks are rocked to the roots; blown garden flowers now soar with their leaves. Fishing boats, nets drawn, make their hawsers taut; vessels with sails down have their 
anchors cast. Trekkers in mid-journey have lost their way; woodsmen in the hills cannot hold their loads. From woods with fruits divine the apes disperse; from clumps of rare flowers the small fawns 
flee. Before the cliff cypress fall one by one; downstream bamboo and pine die leaf by leaf. Earth and dust are scattered while sand explodes; rivers and seas overturned, waves churn and roll.” 

8 Rules went forward and tugged at Pilgrim, saying, “Elder Brother, the wind is too strong! Let’s find shelter until it dies down.” 

“You're too soft, Brother,” said Pilgrim, laughing, “when you want to hide the moment the wind gets strong. What would happen to you if you're to meet a monster-spirit face to face?” 

“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “you’ve probably not heard of the proverb, flee the fair gender like a foe; flee the wind like an arrow! We suffer no loss if we take shelter just for a little while.” 

“Stop talking,” said Pilgrim, “and let me seize the wind and smell it.” 

“You're fibbing again, Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules with a laugh, “for how can the wind be seized for you to smell? Even if you manage to catch hold of it, it will slip past you at once.” 

“Brother,” said Pilgrim, “you didn’t know that I’ve the magic to ‘seize the wind.” Dear Great Sage! He allowed the head of the wind to move past but he caught hold of its tail and sniffed at it. Finding it 
somewhat fetid, he said, “This is indeed not a very good wind, for it smells like a tiger or else like a monster; there’s something definitely strange about it.” 

Hardly had he finished speaking when from over a hump of the mountain a fierce striped tiger with a whip-like tail and powerful limbs appeared. Tripitaka was so horrified that he could no longer sit on 
the saddle; he fell head over heels from the white horse and lay beside the road, half out of his wits. Throwing down the luggage, 8 Rules took up his muckrake and rushed past Pilgrim. “Cursed beast!” 
he shouted. “Where’re you going?” He lunged forward and struck at the beast’s head. That tiger stood straight up on his hind legs and, raising his left paw, punctured his own breast with one jab. Then 
gripping the skin, he tore downward with a loud rending noise and he became completely stripped of his own hide as he stood there by the side of the road. Look how abominable he appears! Oh! 
That hideous form: al! smeared with blood, the naked body; most sickly red, the warped legs and feet; like shooting flames, wild hair by the temples; bristling hard, 2 eyebrows pointing upward; hellishly 
white, 4 steel-like fangs; a pair of gold eyes with light aglow; imposing of mien, he mightily roared; he cried aloud with power fierce. “Slow down! Slow down!” he shouted. “I’m no other person. I’m the 
vanguard of the forces commanded by the Great King Yellow Wind. I’ve received the Great King’s strict order to patrol this mountain and to catch a few mortals to be used as hors d’oeuvres for him. 
Where did you monks come from that you dare reach for your weapons to harm me?” 

“Cursed beast that you're!” cried 8 Rules. “So you don’t recognise me! We're no mortals who just happen to be passing by; we’re the disciples of Tripitaka, the royal brother of the Great Tang Emperor 
in the Land of the East who by imperial decree’s journeying to the Western Heaven to seek scriptures from a god. You better stand aside quickly for us to pass and don’t alarm my master. Then I'll 
spare your life. But if you’re impudent as before, there'll be no clemency when this rake’s lifted up!” 

That monster-spirit would not permit any further discussion. He quickly drew near, assumed a fighting pose, and clawed at 8 Rules’ face. Dodging the blow, 8 Rules struck at once with his rake. Since 
the monster had no weapons in his hands, he turned and fled with 8 Rules hard on his heels. Racing to the slope below, the monster took out from beneath a clump of rocks a pair of bronze scimitars 
with which he turned to face his pursuer. So the 2 of them clashed right in front of the mountain slope, closing in repeatedly. Meanwhile, Pilgrim lifted up the Tang Monk and said, “Master, don’t be 
afraid. Sit here and let old monkey go help 8 Rules strike down that monster so that we can leave.” Only then did Tripitaka manage to sit up; trembling all over, he began to recite the Heart Thread. 
Whipping out the iron rod, Pilgrim shouted, “Catch him!” 8 Rules at once attacked with even greater ferocity, and the monster fled in defeat. “Don’t spare him,” yelled Pilgrim. “We must catch him!” 


Wielding rod and rake, the 2 of them gave chase down the mountain. In panic, the monster resorted to the trick of the gold cicada casting its shell: he rolled on the ground and changed back into the 
form of a tiger. Pilgrim and 8 Rules would not let up. Closing in on the tiger, they intended to dispose of him once and for all. When the monster saw them approaching, he again stripped himself of his 
own hide and threw the skin over a large piece of rock while his true form changed into a violent gust of wind heading back the way he had come. Suddenly noticing the master of the law sitting by the 
road and reciting the Heart Thread, he caught hold of him and hauled him away by mounting the wind. O, pity that Tripitaka, the River Float fated to suffer oft! It’s hard to make merit in God’s gate! 
Having taken the Tang Monk back to the door of his cave, the monster stopped the wind and said to the 1 standing guard at the door, “Go report to the Great King and say that the Tiger Vanguard has 
captured a monk. He awaits his order outside the door.” The Cave Master gave the order for him to enter. The Tiger Vanguard with the two bronze scimitars hanging from his waist, lifted up the Tang 
Monk in his hands. He went forward and knelt down, saying, “Great King! Though your humble officer is not talented, he thanks you for granting him the honoured command of doing patrol in the 
mountain. | encountered a monk who is Tripitaka, master of the law and brother to the Throne of the Great Tang in the Land of the East. While he was on his way to seek scriptures from God, | captured 
him to present to you here for your culinary pleasure.” When the Cave Master heard this, he was a little startled. “I've heard some rumour,” he said, “that the master of the law Tripitaka’s a divine monk 
who is going in search of scriptures by imperial decree of the Great Tang. He has under him a disciple whose name is Pilgrim Sun and who possesses tremendous magical power and prodigious 
intelligence. How did you manage to catch him and bring him here?” 
“He has in fact two disciples,” said the Vanguard. “The one who appeared first used a nine-pronged muckrake, and he had a long horn and huge ears. Another one used a golden-hooped iron rod, and 
he had fiery eyes and diamond pupils. As they were chasing me to attack me, | used the trick of the gold cicada casting its shell and succeeded not only in eluding them but also in catching this monk. 
| now respectfully present him to the Great King as a meal.” 
“Let's not eat him yet,” said the Cave Master. 
“Great King,” said the Vanguard, “only a worthless horse turns away ready feed!” 
“You've not considered this,” said the Cave Master. “There’s nothing wrong with eating him but I’m afraid his two disciples may come to our door and argue with us. Let's tie him instead to one of the 
posts in the rear garden and wait for three or four days. If those two don’t show up to disturb us, then we can enjoy the double benefit of having his body cleaned and not having to bicker with our 
tongues. Then we can do what we want with him, whether we wish him boiled, steamed, fried, or sautéed; we can take our time to enjoy him.” Highly pleased, the Vanguard said, “The Great King is full 
of wisdom and foresight, and what he says is most reasonable. Little ones, take the priest inside.” 
Seven or eight demons rushed up from the sides and took the Tang Monk away; like hawks catching sparrows, they bound him firmly with ropes. This is how that ill-fated River Float on Pilgrim broods; 
a god-monk in pain calls Aware of Ability to mind. “Disciples,” he said, “I don’t know in what mountain you’re catching monsters or in what region you're subduing goblins. But I've been captured by this 
demon from whom I’ve to suffer great injury. When'll we see each other again? Oh, what misery! If you two can come here quickly, you may be able to save my life. But if you tarry, I'll never survive!” 
As he lamented and sighed, his tears fell like rain. Pilgrim and 8 Rules having chased the tiger down the slope of the mountain, saw him fall and collapse at the foot of the cliff. Lifting his rod, Pilgrim 
brought it down on the tiger with all his might but the rod bounced back up and his hands were stung by the impact. 8 Rules, too gave a blow with his muckrake, and its prongs also rebounded. They 
then discovered that it was nothing but a piece of tiger-skin covering a large slab of stone. Greatly startled, Pilgrim said, “Oh, no! Oh, no! He’s tricked us!” 
“What trick?” asked 8 Rules. 
Pilgrim replied, “This is called the trick of the gold cicada casting its shell. He left his skin covering the stone here to fool us but he’s himself escaped. Let’s go back at once to take a look at Master. 
Let's hope that he’s not been hurt.” They retreated hurriedly but Tripitaka had long vanished. Bellowing like thunder, Pilgrim cried, “What’ll we do? He’s taken Master away.” 
“Heavens! Heavens!” wailed 8 Rules, leading the horse as tears fell from his eyes, “where’ll we go to look for him?” 
With head held high, Pilgrim said, “Don’t cry! Don’t cry! The moment you cry, you already feel defeated. They’ve to be somewhere in this mountain. Let’s go and search for them.” 
The 2 of them indeed rushed up the mountain, passing the ridges and scaling the heights. After travelling for a long time, they suddenly beheld a cave dwelling emerging from beneath a cliff. Pausing 
to take a careful look around, they saw that it was indeed a formidable place. See a pointed peak fortress-like; an old path ever winding; blue pines and fresh bamboos; green willows and verdant Wu- 
trees; ®strange rocks in twos below the cliff; rare fowls in pairs within the woods. A stream flowing far away spills over a wall of stones; the mountain brook reaches the sandy banks in small drops. Was- 
teland clouds in clusters and grass as green as jade. The sly vixen and hare scamper wildly about; homed deer and musk deer lock to contest their strength. Slanted across the cliff dangles an aged 
vine; half down the gorge an ancient cedar hangs. August and grand, this place surpasses Flower Mount; ‘the falling blooms and chirping birds rival Mount-Tai’s. “Worthy Brother,” said Pilgrim, “you 
may leave the luggage in the fold of the mountain where it will be protected from the wind. Then you can graze the horse nearby and you need not come out. Let old monkey go fight with him at his 
door. That monster has to be caught before our master can be rescued.” 
“No need for instructions,” said 8 Rules. “Go quickly!” Pulling down his shirt and tightening his belt on the tiger-skin skirt, Pilgrim grasped his rod and rushed up to the cave where he saw six words in 
large letters above the door: “Yellow Wind Cave, Yellow Wind Peak.” He at once poised himself for battle with legs apart and one foot slightly ahead of the other. Holding his rod high, he cried, “Monster! 
Send out my master at once, lest | overturn your den and level your dwelling!” 
When the little demons heard this, every one of them was panic-stricken and ran inside to make the report, “Great King, disaster!” The Yellow Wind Monster who was sitting there, asked, “What's the 
matter?” 
“Outside the cave door there’s a monk with a thunder-god mouth and hairy face,” said one of the little demons, “holding in his hands a huge, thick, iron rod and demanding the return of his master.” 
Somewhat fearful, the Cave Master said to the Tiger Vanguard, “I asked you to patrol the mountain, and you'd merely have caught a few mountain buffalo, wild bull, fat deer, or wild goats. Why did 
you've to bring back a Tang Monk? Now we've provoked his disciple to come here to create all sorts of disturbance. What shall we do?” 
“Don’t be anxious, Great King,” said the Vanguard, “and put your worries to rest. Though this junior officer is untalented, he is willing to lead fifty soldiers out there and bring in that so-called Pilgrim Sun 
as a condiment for your meal.” 
“In addition to the various officers here,” said the Cave Master, “we’ve some seven hundred regulars. You may pick as many of them as you want. Only if that Pilgrim is caught will we be able to enjoy 
a piece of that monk’s flesh with any comfort. And if that happens, I’m willing to become your bond brother. But | fear that if you can’t catch him, you may even get hurt. You mustn’t blame me then!” 
“Relax! Relax! Let me go now!” said the Tiger Monster. He checked off the roll fifty of the toughest little demons who began beating drums and waving banners. He himself took up the two bronze 
scimitars and leaped out of the cave, crying with a loud voice, “Where did you come from, you monkey-monk, that you dare make such a racket here?!’ “You skin-flaying beast!” shouted Pilgrim. “You're 
the one who used that shell-casting trick to take away my master. Why do you question me instead? You better send out my master immediately, or I'll not spare your life.” 
“| took your master,” said the Tiger Monster, “so that he’d be served to my Great King as meat for his rice. If you know what's good for you, get away from here. If not, I'll catch you too, and you'll be 
eaten along with him. It'll be like ‘one free piece of merchandise with every purchase!” 
When he heard this, Pilgrim was filled with anger. With grinding teeth and fiery eyes all ablaze, he lifted his iron rod and yelled, “What great ability you've that you dare talk like that? Don’t move! Watch 
this rod!” Wielding his scimitars swiftly, the Vanguard turned to meet him. It was truly some battle as the two of them let loose their power. What a fight! That monster's truly a goose’s egg but Wukong’s 
a goose-egg stone no less! When bronze swords fight Handsome Monkey King, it’s like eggs coming to strike at stones. How can sparrows quarrel with the phoenix? Dare pigeons oppose the eagles 
and hawks? The monster belches wind — the mount's filled with dust; Wukong spits out fog and clouds hide the sun. They fight for no more than 4 or 5 rounds; the Vanguard grows weak, having no 
strength left. He turns in defeat to flee for his life, hard pressed by Wukong who seeks his death. Able to hold out no longer, the monster turned and fled. But since he had boasted in front of the Cave 
Master, he dared not go back to the cave; instead, he fled toward the mountain slope. Pilgrim, of course, would not let him go; holding his rod, he gave chase relentlessly, shouting and crying along the 
way. As they reached the fold of the mountain that formed a wind break, he happened to look up, and there was 8 Rules grazing the horse. Hearing all the shouts and clamour, 8 Rules turned around 
and saw that it was Pilgrim chasing a defeated Tiger Monster. Abandoning the horse, 8 Rules lifted his rake and approaching from one side brought it down hard on the monster's head. Pity that 
Vanguard! He hoped to leap clear of the brown-rope net, not knowing he would meet the fisher’s coop. A blow from Eight Rules’ rake produced 9 holes from which fresh blood spurted out and the 
brains of the monster's whole head ran dry! A poem as a testimony for 8 Rules says: 

Returning to True Teaching some years ago, he kept a chaste diet to realise the Real Void. 

To serve Tripitaka’s his pious wish: this, a new Religious convert’s first merit. 

Idiot put his foot on the monster's spine and brought down the rake on him once more. When Pilgrim saw that, he was very pleased, saying, “That's right, Brother! He was audacious enough to lead 
scores of little demons against me but he was defeated. Instead of fleeing back to the cave, he came here seeking death. It’s a good thing you're here, or else he would have escaped again.” 
“Is he the one who took our master with the wind?” asked 8 Rules. 
“Yes! Yes!” said Pilgrim. 
“Did you ask him the whereabouts of our master?” said 8 Rules. 
“This monster brought Master to the cave,” said Pilgrim, “to be served to some blackguard of a Great King as meat for his rice. | was enraged, fought with him, and chased him here for you to finish him 
off. Brother, this is your merit! You can remain here guarding the horse, luggage, and let me drag this dead monster back to the mouth of the cave to provoke battle again. We must capture the old 
monster before we can rescue Master.” 
“You're right, Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules. “Go, go now! If you beat that old monster, chase him here and let Old bull intercept and kill him.” Dear Pilgrim! Holding the iron rod in 1 hand and dragging 
the dead tiger with the other, he went back to the mouth of the cave. So it was that the religion-master met monsters in his ordeal; feeling and nature in peace wild demons subdued. 


021 

The Viharapalas‘ prepare lodging for the Great Sage; Lingji of Sumeru crushes the wind demon 
Those 50 defeated little demons rushed into the cave carrying their broken drums and torn banners. “Great King,” they cried, “the Tiger Vanguard’s no match for the hairy-faced monk. That monk 
chased him down the eastern slope until the Vanguard disappeared.” 
When the old monster heard this, he was terribly upset. As he saluted his head in silent deliberation, another little demon who stood guard at the door came to report, “Great King, the Tiger Vanguard’s 
beaten to death by the hairy-faced monk and dragged up to our door to provoke battle.” 
Hearing this, the old monster became even angrier. “This fellow doesn’t know when to stop!” he said. “I’ve not eaten his master but he’s killed our Vanguard instead. How insolent!” Whereupon he 
bellowed, “Bring me my armour. I’ve heard only rumours about this Pilgrim Sun and I’m going out there to find out what sort of monk he’s really. Even if he’s nine heads and eight tails, I’m going to take 
him in here to pay for the life of my Tiger Vanguard!” The little demons quickly brought out the armour. After having been properly buckled and laced, the old monster took a steel trident and leaped out 
of the cave, leading the rest of the demons. Standing in front of the door, the Great Sage watched the monster emerge with a truly aggressive appearance. Look how he is attired. See gold helmet 
reflecting the sun; gold cuirass gleaming with light. A pheasant-tail tassel flies from the helmet; a light yellow silk robe topped by the cuirass, tied with a dragon-like sash of brilliant hues. His chestplate 
emits eye-dazzling light. His boots of suede are dyed by locust flowers. His embroidered kilt is decked with willow leaves. Holding a sharp trident in his hands, he seems almost the Erlang? Boy of old! 
When he had come out, the old monster shouted, “Who is Pilgrim Sun?” 
With one foot on the carcass of the Tiger Monster and the compliant iron rod in his hands, Pilgrim replied: “Your Grandpa Sun’s here! Send my master out!” 
The old monster took a careful look and saw the diminutive figure of Pilgrim — less than four feet, in fact - and his sallow cheeks. He said with a laugh: “Too bad! Too bad! | thought you’re some kind of 
invincible hero. But you're only a sickly ghost with nothing more than your skeleton left!” 
“Child,” said Pilgrim laughing, “how you lack perception! Your grandpa may be somewhat small in size but if you've the courage to hit me on the head with the handle of your trident, I'll grow six feet at 
once.” 
“Harden your head,” said the monster, “and have a taste of my handle!” Great Sage was not in the least frightened. When the monster struck him once, he stretched his waist and at once grew more 
than 6 feet attaining the height of 10 feet altogether. The monster was so alarmed that he tried to use his trident to hold him down shouting, “Pilgrim Sun, how dare you stand at my door, displaying this 
paltry magic of body protection! Stop using tricks! Come up here and let’s measure our real abilities!” 
“My dear son,” said Pilgrim with laughter, “the proverb says: Mercy should be shown before the hand's raised! Your grandpa’s pretty heavy-handed and fears that you'll be unable to bear even a stroke 
of this rod!” Refusing to listen to any such discussion, the monster turned his trident around and stabbed at Pilgrim’s chest. The Great Sage, of course, was not at all perturbed, for as the saying goes, 
the expert is never exercised. He raised his rod and using the movement of the black dragon sweeping the ground to parry the trident, struck at the monster's head. The 2 of them thus began a fierce 
battle before that Yellow Wind Cave: the Monster King became enraged; the Great Sage released his might. The Monster King became enraged, wishing to seize Pilgrim to pay for his Vanguard. The 
Great Sage released his might to capture this spirit and to save the priest. The trident arrived, blocked by the rod; the rod went forth, met by the trident. This one, a mountain-ruling captain of his hosts. 


That one, the Handsome Monkey King who defends the Law. At first they fought on the dusty earth; then each arose midway to the sky. The fine steel trident; pointed, sharp, and brilliant. The compliant 
rod: body black and yellow hoops. Stabbed by them, your soul goes back to darkness! Struck by them, you'll face King Yama! You must rely on quick arms and keen sight. You must have a tough 
frame and great strength. The 2 fought without regard for life or death; knowing not who will be safe or who will be hurt. The old monster and the Great Sage fought for 30 rounds but neither could gain 
the upper hand. Pressing for a quick victory, Pilgrim decided to use the trick of the body beyond the body. He tore from himself a handful of hairs that he chewed to pieces in his mouth. Spitting them 
out, he cried, “Change!” They changed at once into more than 100 Pilgrims: all having the same appearance and all holding an iron rod, they surrounded the monster in mid-air. Somewhat alarmed, 
the monster also resorted to his special talent. He turned to face the ground to the southwest and opened his mouth three times to blow out some air. Suddenly a mighty yellow wind arose in the sky. 
Dear wind! It was indeed powerful. Cold and whistling, it changed Heaven and Earth as yellow sand whirled without form or shape. It cut through woods and hills to break pines and plums; it tossed up 
dirt and dust, cracking crags and cliffs. Waves churned in Yellow River to cloud its floor; tide and current swelled up at River Xiang. The Polestar Palace in the blue sky shook; the Hall of Darkness was 
almost blown down; the 500 Arhats all yelled and screamed; the 8 Guards of Aksobhya all cried and shrieked. The Beautiful one with Glory and Auspiciousness’s green-haired lion ran away; Auspicious- 
World lost his white elephant. *Snake and turtle of Zhenwu left their fold; *aflutter were the saddle-flaps of Zitong’s> mule. Travelling merchants sent their cries to Heaven and boatmen saluted to make 
their many vows — their mist-like lives awash in rolling waves; names, fortunes adrift in the tide! Caves on Genie Mountains were black as pitch; the isle of Penglai’ was gloomy and dark. Laozi’d not 
tend his elixir oven; Age Star folded his fan of grapevine leaves. As Queen Mum went to the Peaches Feast, the wind blew her skirt and pins awry. Erlang lost his way to the Guangzhou town; Nata 
found it hard to pull out his sword. Li Jing missed the pagoda in his hand; Lu Ban’ dropped his golden-headed drill. While three stories of Thunderclap fell down, the stone bridge at Zhao-Zhou broke in 
twain. The orb of the red sun had little light; the stars of all Heaven grew obscure and faint. Birds of south mountains flew to northern hills; water of east lakes spilled over to the west. Fowls with mates 
broke up, they ceased their calls; mums and sons parted, their cries tumed mute. Dragon Kings sought Nature spirits all over the sea; thunder gods hunted lightning everywhere. Ten Kings of Yama 
tried to find their judge; in Hell, Bull-Head ran after Horse-Face. This wind blew down the Potalaka Mount and whipped up one scroll of Guanyin’s verse. White lotus-blooms, cut down, flew beside the 
sea; 12 halls of the Nun were blown down. From Pan Gu till this time since wind was known, there never was wind with such ferocity. Hu-la-la! The universe did almost split apart! The whole world was 
one mighty trembling mass! 
This violent wind called up by the monster blew away all those little Pilgrims formed by the Great Sage’s hairs and sent them reeling through the air like so many spinning wheels. Unable even to wield 
their rods, how could they possibly hope to draw near to fight? Pilgrim was so alarmed that he shook his body and retrieved his hairs. He then lifted the iron rod and tried to attack the monster all by 
himself, only to be met by a mouthful of yellow wind right on his face. Those two fiery eyes with diamond pupils of his were so blasted that they shut tightly and could not be opened. No longer able to 
use his rod, he fled in defeat while the monster retrieved the wind that we'll mention no further. Bullseye 8 Rules led the horse and took the luggage to the fold of the mountain when he saw the violent 
yellow windstorm arriving and the whole of Heaven and Earth growing dim. There he crouched on the ground and refused to open his eyes or raise his head, his mouth incessantly calling on the name 
of God and making vows. As he was wondering how Pilgrim was faring in his battle and whether his master was dead or alive, the wind stopped and the sky brightened again. He looked up and peered 
toward the entrance of the cave but he could neither see any movement of weapons nor hear the sound of gongs and drums. Idiot dared not approach the cave, since there was no one else to guard 
the horse and the luggage. Deeply distressed and not knowing what to do, he suddenly heard the Great Sage approaching from the west, grunting and snorting as he came. Saluting to meet his 
companion, he said, “Elder Brother, what a mighty wind! Where did you come from?” 
With a wave of his hand, Pilgrim said, “Formidable! It’s truly formidable! Since |, old monkey, was born, I’ve never witnessed such a violent wind! That old monster fought me with a steel trident, and we 
battled for over thirty rounds. It was then that | used the magic of the body beyond the body and had him surrounded. He panicked and called up this wind that was ferocious indeed. Its force was so 
overwhelming that I’d to suspend my operation and flee instead. Whew! What a wind! Whew! What a wind! Old monkey also knows how to call up the wind and how to summon the rain but it’s hardly 
as vicious as the wind of this monster-spirit!” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “how is the martial technique of that monster?” 
“It's presentable,” said Pilgrim, “and he knows how to use the trident! He is in fact just about the equal of old monkey. But that wind of his is vicious, and that makes it difficult to defeat him.” 
“In that case,” said 8 Rules, “how are we going to rescue Master?” 
Pilgrim said, “We'll have to wait to rescue Master. | wonder if there is any eye doctor around here who can take a look at my eyes.” 
“What's the matter with your eyes?” asked 8 Rules. Pilgrim replied, “That monster blew a mouthful of wind on my face, and my eyes were so sorely blasted that they are now watering constantly.” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “we’re in the middle of a mountain, and it’s getting late. Let’s not talk about eye doctors; we don’t even have a place to stay.” 
“It won't be difficult to find lodging,” said Pilgrim. “I doubt that the monster has the gall to harm our master. Let’s find our way back to the main road and see whether we can stay with a family. After 
spending the night, we can return to subdue the monster tomorrow when it’s light.” 
“Exactly, exactly,” agreed 8 Rules. 
Leading the horse and carrying up the luggage, they left the fold of the mountain and went up the road. Dusk was setting in, and as they walked, they heard the sound of barking dogs toward the south 
of the mountain slope. Stopping to look, they saw a small cottage with flickering lamplights. Not bothering to look for a path, the two of them walked through the grass and arrived at the door of that 
household. They saw dark clumps of purplish fungi; greyish piles of white stones; dark clumps of purplish fungi with much green grass; greyish piles of white stones half grown with moss: a few specks 
of fireflies, their faint light aglow; a forest of wild woods stand in dense rows; orchids ever fragrant; bamboos newly planted; a clear stream flows a winding course; old cedars lean over a deep cliff. A 
secluded place where no travellers come: only wild flowers bloom before the door. Not daring to enter without permission, they both called out: “Open the door! Open the door!” 
An old man inside appeared with several young farmers, all holding rakes, pitchforks, and brooms. “Who’re you? Who’re you?” they asked. 
With a salute, Pilgrim said, “We're disciples of a holy monk from the Great Tang in the Land of the East. We’re on our way to seek scriptures from a god in the Western Heaven when we passed through 
this mountain, and our master was captured by the Yellow Wind Great King. We've yet to rescue him. Since it is getting late, we’ve come to ask for lodging for one night at your house. We beg you for 
this means of convenience.” Returning the salute, the old man said, “Pardon me for not coming to greet you. This is a place where clouds are more numerous than people, and when we heard you 
calling at the door just now, we’re afraid that it might be someone like a wily fox, a tiger, or a bandit from the mountain. That's why my little ones might have offended you by their rather brusque manner. 
Please come in. Please come in.” 
The two brothers led the horse and hauled the luggage inside; after tying up the animal and putting down the load, they exchanged greetings again with the old man of the cottage before taking their 
seats. An old manservant then came forward to present tea, after which several bowls of sesame seed rice were brought out.’ After they had finished the rice, the old man asked for bedding to be laid 
out for them to sleep. Pilgrim said, “We don’t need to sleep just yet. May | ask the good man whether there is in your region someone who sells eye medicine?” 
“Which one of you elders has eye disease?” asked the old man. Pilgrim said, “To tell you the truth, Venerable Sir, we who have left the family rarely become ill. In fact, I've never known any disease of 
the eye.” 
“If you’re not suffering from an eye disease,” said the old man, “why do you want medicine?” 
“We're trying to rescue our master at the entrance of the Yellow Wind Cave today,” said Pilgrim. “Unexpectedly that monster blew a mouthful of wind at me, causing my eyes to hurt and smart. At the 
moment, I’m weeping constantly, and that's why | want to find eye medicine.” 
“My goodness! My goodness!” said the old man. “A young priest like you, why do you lie? The wind of that Great King Yellow Wind is most fearsome, not comparable with any spring-autumn wind, 
pine-and-bamboo wind, or the wind coming from the four quarters.” 
“| suppose,” said 8 Rules, “it must be brain-bursting wind, goat-ear wind, leprous wind, or migraine-wind!” 
“No, no!” said the old man. “His is called the Divine Wind of Fixity.” 
“What's it like?” asked Pilgrim. 
The old man said, “That wind can blow to dim Heaven and Earth and sadden both ghosts and gods. So savage it breaks rocks and stones, a man will die when he’s blown! If you’d encountered that 
wind of his, you think you’d still be alive? Only if you’re a mortal you’d remain unharmed.” 
“Indeed!” said Pilgrim. “I may not be a mortal (for they belong to the younger generation as far as I’m concerned) but it'll take some doing to finish me off! That wind however, did cause my eyeballs to 
hurt and smart.” 
“If you can say that,” said the old man, “you must be a person with some background. Our humble region has no one who sells eye medicine. But | myself suffer from watery eyes when the wind blows 
in my face, and | met an extraordinary person once who gave me a prescription. It’s called the three-flower and nine-seed ointment capable of curing all wind-induced eye maladies.” When Pilgrim 
heard these words, he saluted his head and said humbly, “I’m willing to ask you for some and try it on myself.” The old man consented and went into the inner chamber. He took out a little cornelian 
vase and pulled off the stopper; using a small jade pin to scoop out some ointment, he dabbed it onto Pilgrim’s eyes, telling him to close his eyes and rest quietly, for he would be well by morning. After 
doing this, the old man took the vase and retired with his attendants. 8 Rules untied the bags, took out the bedding, and asked Pilgrim to lie down. As Pilgrim groped about confusedly with his eyes 
closed, 8 Rules laughed and said, “Sir where’s your seeing-eye cane?” 
“You overstuffed idiot!” said Pilgrim. “You want to take care of me as a blind man?” 
Giggling to himself, Idiot fell asleep but Pilgrim sat on the mattress and did exercises to cultivate his magic power. Only after the third watch did he sleep. Soon it was the fifth watch and dawn was 
about to break. Wiping his face, Pilgrim opened his eyes, saying, “It’s really marvellous medicine! | can see a hundred times better than before!” He then turned his head to look around. Ah! There were 
neither buildings nor halls, only some old locust trees and tall willows. The brothers were actually lying on a green grass meadow. Just then, 8 Rules began to stir, saying, “Elder Brother, why are you 
making all these noises?” 
“Open your eyes and take a look,” said Pilgrim. Raising his head, Idiot discovered that the house had disappeared. He was so startled that he scrambled up at once, crying, “Where’s my horse?” 
“Isn't it over there, tied to a tree?” said Pilgrim. 
“And the luggage?” asked 8 Rules. 
“Isn't it there by your head?” said Pilgrim. 
“This family is rather shifty!” said 8 Rules. “If they have moved, why didn’t they give us a call? If they had let Old bull know about it, they might have received some farewell gifts of tea and fruits. Well, 
| suppose they must be trying to hide from something and are afraid that the county sheriff may get wind of it; so they moved out in the night. Good Heavens! We must have been dead to the world! 
How could we not have heard anything when they dismantled the whole house?” 
“Idiot, stop babbling!” said Pilgrim, chuckling. “Take a look on that tree and see what kind of paper-slip’s there.” 8 Rules took it down. It was a 2-line poem that read: 
This humble abode’s no mortal abode: a cottage devised® by the Guardians of Law who gave the wondrous balm to heal your sore. 
Fret not and do your best to quell the fiend. 
Pilgrim said, “A bunch of roguish deities! Since we changed to the dragon-horse, I'd not taken a roll call of them. Now they are playing tricks on me instead!” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “stop putting on such airs! How would they ever let you check them off the roll?” 
“Brother,” said Pilgrim, “you don’t know about this. These Eighteen Protectors of Monasteries, the Six Gods of Darkness and Six Gods of Light, the Guardians of Five Points, and the Four Sentinels all 
have been ordered by the Nun to give secret protection to Master. The other day they reported their names to me but since you've been with us, I’ve not made use of them. That’s why I’ve not made a 
roll call.” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “if they were ordered to give secret protection to Master, they had reason not to reveal themselves. That's why they had to devise this cottage here, and you'd not blame 
them. After all, they did put ointment on your eyes for you yesterday, and they did take care of us for one meal. You can say that they have done their duty. Don’t blame them. Let’s go and rescue 
Master.” 
“Brother, you're right,” said Pilgrim. “This place is not far from the Yellow Wind Cave. You had better stay here and look after the horse and luggage in the woods. Let old monkey go into the cave to 
make some inquiry after the condition of Master. Then we can do battle with the monster again.” 
“Exactly,” said 8 Rules. “You'd find out whether Master is dead or alive; if he’s dead, each one of us can tend to our own business; if he’s not, we can do our best to discharge our responsibility.” Pilgrim 
said, “Stop talking nonsense! I’m off!’ 
With one leap he arrived at the entrance of the cave and found the door still shut and the inhabitants sound asleep. Pilgrim neither made any noise nor disturbed the monsters; making the magic sign 
and reciting the spell, he shook his body and changed at once into a spotted-leg mosquito. It was tiny and delicate for which a testimonial poem says: 
A pesky small shape with sharp sting; his tiny voice can hum like thunder! 


Adept at piercing gauze nets and orchid rooms, he likes the warm, sultry climate. 
He fears incense and swatting fans but dearly loves bright lights and lamps. 
Airy, agile, all too clever and fast, he flies into the fiend’s cave.'° 

The little demon who was supposed to guard the door was lying there asleep, snoring. Pilgrim gave him a bite on his face, causing the little demon to roll over half awakened. “O my dad!” he said. 
“What a big mosquito! One bite and | already have a big lump.” He then opened his eyes and said, “Why, it’s dawn!” Just then, the second door inside opened with a creak, and Pilgrim immediately 
flew in. The old monster was giving orders to all his subordinates to be especially careful in guarding the various entrances while they made ready their weapons. “If the wind yesterday did not kill that 
Pilgrim Sun,” he said, “he will certainly come back today. When he comes, we'll finish him off.” 
Hearing this, Pilgrim flew past the main hall and arrived at the rear of the cave where he found another door tightly shut. Crawling through a crack in the door, he discovered a large garden, in the 
middle of which, bound by ropes to a pole, was the Tang Monk. That master was shedding tears profusely, constantly wondering where Wukong and Aware of Ability were to be found. Pilgrim stopped 
his flight and alighted on his bald head, saying, “Master!” Recognising his voice, the Elder said, “Wukong, | nearly died thinking of you! Where are you calling from?” 
“Master,” said Pilgrim, “I’m on your head. Calm yourself and stop worrying. We must first capture the monster before we can rescue you. “Disciple,” said the Tang Monk, “when will you be able to 
capture the monster?” 
“The Tiger Monster who took you,” said Pilgrim, “has already been slain by 8 Rules. But the wind of the old monster is a powerful weapon. | suspect we'd be able to capture him today. Relax and stop 
crying. I’m leaving.” 
Having said that, he flew at once to the front where the old monster was seated aloft, making a roll call of all the commanders of his troops. A little demon suddenly appeared, waving the command 
flag. He dashed up to the hall, crying, “Great King, this little one was on patrol in the mountain when he ran into a monk with a long horn and huge ears sitting in the woods not far from our entrance. If 
I'd not run away quickly, he would have caught me. But | didn’t see that hairy-faced monk who came here yesterday.” 
“If Pilgrim Sun is absent,” said the old monster, “it may mean that he’s been killed by the wind. Or, he may have gone to try to find help.” 
“Great King,” said one of the demons, “it would be our good fortune if he had been killed. But suppose he’s not dead? If he succeeds in bringing with him some divine warriors, what shall we do then?” 
The old monster said, “Who's afraid of any divine warrior? Only the Nun Lingji can overcome the power of my wind; no one else can do us any harm.” 
That Pilgrim resting on one of the beams above him was delighted by this one statement. He flew out of the cave at once and, changing back into his original form, arrived at the woods. “Brother!” he 
cried. 8 Rules asked, “Elder Brother where have you been? Just now a monster with a command flag came by, and | chased him away.” 
“Thank you! Thank you!” said Pilgrim, laughing. “Old monkey changed into a mosquito to enter the cave to see how Master was doing. | found him tied to a post in the garden, weeping. After telling him 
not to cry, | flew around the roof to spy on them some more. That was when the fellow who held the command flag came in panting, saying that you had chased him. He also said that he had not seen 
me. The old monster made some wild speculations about my having been killed by the wind, or else having gone to find help. Then without being prompted, he suddenly mentioned someone else. It’s 
marvellous, simply marvellous!” 
“Whom did he mention?” asked 8 Rules. 
“He said that he’s afraid of no divine warrior,” said Pilgrim, “for no one else could overpower his wind save the Nun Lingji. The only trouble’s that | don’t know where this Lingji lives.” 
As they were thus conversing, they suddenly saw an aged man walking by the side of the main road. Look at his appearance: strong, he uses no cane to walk with flowing snow-like hair and beard. 
Though wit and eyes are quite dim and blurry, thin bones and sinews are still tough. Back and head bent he walked slowly with thick brows and a pink face, childlike. Look at his features and they seem 
human though he’s like Long-Life Star no less! ‘Highly pleased when he caught sight of him, 8 Rules said, “Elder Brother, the proverb says: you want to know the way, hear what the tourist say. Why 
don’t you approach him and ask?” 
The Great Sage put away his iron rod and straightened out his clothes. Approaching the old man, he said, “Aged Sir, receive my salute.” 
Somewhat reluctantly, the old man returned his greeting, saying, “What region are you from, monk? What're you doing here in this wilderness?” 
“We're holy monks on our way to seek scriptures,” said Pilgrim. “Yesterday we lost our master here, and so I’m approaching you to ask where the Nun Lingji lives.” 
“Lingji lives south of here,” said the old man, “about three thousand miles away. There is a mountain called the Little Sumeru Mountain that has within it a Land of the Way, the Chan hall where the Nun 
lectures on Threads. | suppose you're trying to obtain scriptures from him.” 
“Not from him,” said Pilgrim, “but I've something that requires his attention. Will you please show me the way?” Pointing with his hand toward the south, the old man said, “Follow that winding path.” 
The Great Sage Sun was tricked into turning his head to look at the path, when the old man changed himself into a gentle breeze and vanished. A small slip of paper was left beside the road on which 
was written this quatrain: 

To tell the Equal to Heaven Great Sage, the old man is in truth 1 Long Life Li! 

On Sumeru’s the Flying-Dragon Staff. 
Lingji in years past received this Religious arm. 

Pilgrim took up the slip and went back down the road. “Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “our luck must have been rather bad lately. For two days we saw ghosts in broad daylight. Who is that old man who 
left after changing into a breeze?” Pilgrim gave 8 Rules the slip of paper. “Who is this Long-Life Li?” asked 8 Rules, when he had read the verse. “It's the name of the Planet Venus from the West,” said 
Pilgrim. 8 Rules hurriedly saluted toward the sky, crying, “Benefactor! Benefactor! Had it not been for the Gold Star who personally begged the Jade Emperor to be merciful, | don’t know what would 
have become of Old bull!” 
“Elder Brother,” said Pilgrim, “you’ve a sense of gratitude. But don’t expose yourself. Take cover deep in the woods and carefully guard the luggage and the horse. Let old monkey find the Sumeru 
Mountain and seek help from the Nun.” 
“| know, | know!” said 8 Rules. “Hurry up and go! Old bull has mastered the law of the turtle: withdraw your head when you needn’t stick it out!” 
The Great Sage Sun leaped into the air; mounting the cloud-somersault, he headed straight south. He was fast, indeed! With a nod of his head, he covered three thousand miles; just a twist of his torso 
carried him over eight hundred! In a moment he saw a tall mountain with auspicious clouds hanging halfway up its slopes and holy mists gathered around it. In the fold of the mountain there was indeed 
a temple. He could hear the melodious sounds of the bells and sonorous stones‘? and could see the swirling smoke of incense. As he approached the door, the Great Sage saw a Daoist with a string 
of beads around his neck who was reciting the name of God. Pilgrim said, “Daoist, please accept my salute.” 
The Daoist at once saluted in return saying, “Where did the venerable dad come from?” 
“Is this where the Nun Lingji expounds the scriptures?” asked Pilgrim. “Indeed it is,” said the Daoist. “Do you wish to speak to someone?” 
“May | trouble you, sir, to make this announcement for me,” said Pilgrim. “I’m the disciple of the master of the Law, Tripitaka who is the royal brother of the Great Tang Emperor in the Land of the East; 
I'm the Great Sage Equal to Heaven, Sun Wukong, and also named Pilgrim. I’ve a matter that requires me to have an audience with the Nun.” 
The Daoist laughed and said, “The venerable dad’s given me a long announcement! | can’t quite remember all those words.” 
“Just say that Sun Wukong, the disciple of the Tang Monk’s arrived,” said Pilgrim.'SThe Daoist agreed and made that announcement in the lecture hall whereupon the Nun at once put on his cassock 
and asked for more incense to be burned to welcome the visitor. Then the Great Sage walked in the door and peered inside. He saw a hall full of brocade and silk; a house most solemn and grand; 
pupils reciting the Lotus Thread; an old leader tapping the golden gong. Set before a god were all mortal fruits and flowers. Spread out on the altars were vegetarian dainties and viands. The bright, 
precious candles, their golden flames shot up like rainbows; the fragrant true incense, its jade-like smoke flew up as coloured mists. So it was that after the lecture 1 would calmly meditate when white- 
cloud flakes circled the tips of pines. The wisdom sword retired for Killing snapped in this space of the Perfection of Transcendental Wisdom. The Nun straightened out his attire to receive Pilgrim who 
entered the hall and took the seat of the guest. Tea was offered but Pilgrim said, “No need for you to bother about tea. My master faces peril at the Yellow Wind Mountain and | beseech the Nun to 
exercise his great religion power to defeat the monster and rescue him.” 
“| did receive the command of Siddhartha,” said the Nun, “to keep the Yellow Wind Monster here in submission. Siddhartha also gave me a Wind-Stopping Pearl and a Flying-Dragon Precious Staff. At 
the time when | captured him, | spared the monster his life only on condition that he’d retire in the mountain and abstain from the sin of taking life. | didn’t know that he would want to harm your esteemed 
teacher and transgress the Law. That is my fault.” The Nun would have liked to prepare some vegetarian food to entertain Pilgrim but Pilgrim insisted on leaving. So he took the Flying-Dragon Staff and 
mounted the clouds with the Great Sage. 
In a little while they reached the Yellow Wind Mountain. “Great Sage,” said the Nun, “this monster's rather afraid of me. I'll stand here at the edge of the clouds while you go down there to provoke 
battle. Entice him to come out so that | may exercise my power.” 
Pilgrim followed his suggestion and lowered his cloud. Without waiting for further announcement, he whipped out his iron rod and smashed the door of the cave, crying, “Monster, give me back my 
master!” 
Those little demons standing guard at the door were so terrified that they ran to make the report. “This lawless ape’s,” said the monster, “truly ill-behaved! He’d not defer to kindness and now he’s even 
broken my door! This time when | go out, I'm going to use that divine wind to blow him to death.” He put on his armour as before, and took up the steel trident. Walking out of the door and seeing 
Pilgrim, he did not utter a word before aiming the trident at Pilgrim’s chest. The Great Sage stepped aside to dodge this blow and then faced him with uplifted rod. Before they had fought for a few 
rounds, the monster turned his head toward the ground in the southwest and was about to open his mouth to summon the wind. From mid-air, the Nun threw down the Flying-Dragon Precious Staff as 
he recited some kind of spell. It was instantly transformed into a golden dragon with eight claws, two of which caught hold of that monster’s head and threw him two or three times against the boulders 
beside the mountain cliff. The monster changed back into his original form and became a mink with yellow fur. 
Pilgrim ran up and was about to strike with his rod but he was stopped by the Nun who said to him, “Great Sage, do not harm him. I’ve to take him back to see Siddhartha. Originally he’s a rodent at 
the foot of the Spirit Mountain who'd acquired the Way. Because he stole some of the pure oil in the crystal chalice, he fled for fear that the Lightning attendants would seize him. Siddhartha thought 
that he’s not guilty of death and that’s why | was asked to capture him in the first place and banish him to this region. But now he’s offended the Great Sage and has attempted to harm the Tang Monk. 
Therefore | must take him to see Siddhartha so that his guilt may be clearly established. Only then will this merit be completed.” 
When Pilgrim heard this, he thanked the Nun who left for the West. Bullseye 8 Rules was thinking about Pilgrim in the woods when he heard someone calling down by the slope, “Brother Aware of 
Ability, bring the horse and the luggage here.” Recognising Pilgrim’s voice, Idiot quickly ran out of the woods and said to Pilgrim, “Elder Brother, how did everything go?” 
“| invited the Nun Lingji to come here,” said Pilgrim, “to use his Flying-Dragon Staff to capture the monster. He’s a mink with yellow fur who became a spirit and now been taken by the Nun to Spirit 
Mountain to face Siddhartha. Let's go into the cave to rescue Master.” 
Idiot was delighted. The 2 of them smashed their way into the cave and with their rake and rod slaughtered all the wily hares, the vixen, the musk deer, and the horned deer. Then they went to the 
garden in the back to rescue their master who asked after coming out, “How did you two manage to catch the monster so that you’d rescue me?” Pilgrim gave a thorough account of how he went to 
seek the Nun’s help to subdue the monster and the master thanked him profusely. Then the 2 brothers found some vegetarian food in the cave that they prepared along with some tea and rice. They 
left after eating and again found the road to the West. 


022 

8 Rules fights fiercely at the Flowing-Sand River; Liberation by order receives Awakened to Purity’s submission 
The Tang Monk and his disciples, the 3 travellers who were delivered from their ordeal. In less than a day they passed the Yellow Wind Mountain and proceeded toward the West through a vast level 
plain. Time went by swiftly, and summer yielded to the arrival of autumn. All they saw were some cold cicadas recite on dying willows as the Great Fire rolls toward the West. 
As they proceeded, they came upon a huge and turbulent river, its waves surging and splashing. “Disciples,” exclaimed Tripitaka, “look at that vast expanse of water in front of us. Why are there no 
boats in sight? How can we get across?” Taking a close look, 8 Rules said, “It’s very turbulent, too rough for any boat!” Pilgrim leaped into the air and peered into the distance, shading his eyes with 
his hand. Even he became somewhat frightened and said, “Master, it’s truly hard! Truly hard! If old monkey wishes to cross this river, he need only make one twist of his body and he will reach the 
other shore. But for you, Master, it’s a thousand times more difficult, for you can’t traverse it even in ten millennia!” 
“| can’t even see the other shore from here,” said Tripitaka. “Really, how wide is it?” 
“It's just about eight hundred miles wide,” said Pilgrim. “Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “how could you determine its width just like that?” 


“To tell you the truth, Worthy Brother,” said Pilgrim, “these eyes of mine can determine good or evil up to a thousand miles away in daylight. Just now when | was up in the air, I'd not tell how long the 
river was but I'd make out its width to be at least eight hundred miles.” Sighing anxiously, the elder pulled back his horse and suddenly discovered on the shore a slab of stone. When the 3 of them 
drew closer to have a look, they saw 3 words written in seal-script below which there were also 4 lines written in regular style. It read: 
Flowing-Sand River 
These Flowing-Sand metes, 800 wide; 
These Weak Waters, 3000 deep. 
A goose feather cannot stay afloat; 
A rush petal will sink to the bottom. 
As master and disciples were reading the inscription, the waves in the river suddenly rose like tall mountains and with a loud splash from the midst of the waters a monster sprang out. Looking most 
savage and hideous, he had a head full of tousled and flame-like hair; a pair of bright, round eyes which shone like lamps; an indigo face, neither black nor green; an old dragon’s voice like thunderclap 
or drum. He wore a cape of light yellow goose down. 2 strands of white reeds tied around his waist. Beneath his chin nine skulls were strung and hung; his hands held an awesome priestly staff. Like 
a cyclone, the fiend rushed up to the shore and went straight for the Tang Monk. Pilgrim was so taken aback that he grabbed his master and dashed for high ground to make the escape. Putting down 
the pole, 8 Rules whipped out his rake and brought it down hard on the monster. The fiend used his staff to parry the blow, and so the two of them began to unleash their power on the bank of the 
Flowing-Sand River. This was some battle! The 9-pronged rake; the fiend-routing staff; these 2 met in battle on the river shore. This one was the Marshal of Heavenly Reeds: that 1 was the Curtain- 
Raising Captain by the Throne. In years past they met in Divine Mists Hall; today they fought and waged a test of might. From this one the rake went out like a dragon stretching its claws; from that 1 
the staff blocked the way like a sharp-tusked elephant. They stood with their limbs outstretched; each struck at the other's ribcage. This 1 raked madly, heedless of head or face; that 1 struck wildly 
without pause or rest. This 1 was a cannibal spirit, long a lord of Flowing-Sand; that 1 was a Way-seeking fighter upholding Law and Faith. Closing in repeatedly, the two of them fought for twenty 
rounds but neither emerged the victor. The Great Sage meanwhile was standing there to protect the Tang Monk. As he held the horse and guarded the luggage, he became so aroused by the sight of 
8 Rules engaging that fiend that he ground his teeth and rubbed his hands vehemently. Finally he could not restrain himself - whipping out the rod, he said, “Master, sit here and don’t be afraid. Let old 
monkey go play with him a little.” The master begged in vain for him to stay, and with a loud whoop he leaped forward. The monster was just having a grand time fighting with 8 Rules, the two of them 
so tightly locked in combat that nothing seemed able to part them. Pilgrim however, rushed up to the monster and delivered a terrific blow at his head with his iron rod. The monster was so shaken that 
he jumped aside: turning around he dove straight into the Flowing-Sand River and disappeared. 8 Rules was so upset that he leaped about wildly, crying, “Elder Brother! Who asked you to come? The 
monster was gradually weakening and was finding it difficult to parry my rake. Another four or five rounds and I'd have captured him. But when he saw how fierce you're, he fled in defeat. Now, what 
shall we do?” 
“Brother,” said Pilgrim laughing, “to tell you the truth, since defeating the Yellow Wind Fiend a month ago, I’ve not played with my rod all this time after leaving the mountain.’ When | saw how delicious 
your fight with him was, I’d not stand the itch beneath my feet! That’s why | jumped up here to have some fun with him. That monster doesn’t know how to play, and | suppose that’s the reason for his 
departure.” 
Holding hands and teasing each other, the two of them returned to the Tang Monk. “Did you catch the monster?” asked the Tang Monk. 
“He didn’t last out the fight,” said Pilgrim, “and scrambled back to the water in defeat.” 
“Disciple,” said Tripitaka, “since this monster has probably lived here a long time, he ought to know the deep and the shallow parts of the river. After all, such a boundless body of weak water, and not 
a boat in sight - we need someone who is familiar with the region to lead us across.” 
“Exactly!” said Pilgrim. “As the proverb says, he who’s near cinnabar turns red and near ink becomes black. The monster living here must've a good knowledge of the water. When we catch him, we'd 
not slay him but just make him take Master across the river before we dispose of him.” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “no need for further delay. You go ahead and catch him while Old bull guards our master.” 
“Worthy Brother,” said Pilgrim with a laugh, “in this case I’ve really nothing to brag about, for I’m just uncomfortable doing business in water. If all | do is walk around down there, | still have to make the 
magic sign and recite the water-repelling spell before | can move anywhere. Or else I’ve to change into a water creature like a fish, shrimp, crab, or turtle before going in. If it were a matter of matching 
wits in the high mountains or up in the clouds, | know enough to deal with the strangest and most difficult situation. But doing business in water somewhat cramps my style!” 
“When | was Marshal of the Heavenly River in former years,” said 8 Rules, “| commanded a naval force of eighty thousand men, and | acquired some knowledge of that element. But | fear that that 
monster may have a few relatives down there in his den, and I'll be unable to withstand him if his seventh and eighth cousins all come out. What’ll happen to me if they grab me then?” 
“If you go into the water to fight him,” said Pilgrim, “don’t tarry. Make sure in fact that you feign defeat and entice him out here. Then old monkey will help you.” 
“Right you’re,” said 8 Rules. “I’m offl” He took off his blue silk shirt and his shoes; holding the rake with both hands, he divided the waters to make a path for himself. Using the ability he had developed 
in bygone years, he leaped through billows and waves and headed for the bottom of the river. 
We now tell you about that monster who went back to his home in defeat. He had barely caught his breath when he heard someone pushing water, and as he rose to take a look, he saw 8 Rules 
pushing his way through with his rake. That monster lifted his staff and met him face to face, crying, “Monk, watch where you're going or you'll receive a blow from this!” Using the rake to block the 
blow, 8 Rules said, “What sort of a monster are you that you dare to bar our way?” 
“So you don’t recognise me,” said the monster. “I’m no demon or fiend, nor do | lack a name or surname.” 
“If you’re no demon or fiend,” said 8 Rules, “why do you stay here and take human lives? Tell me your name and surname, and I'll spare your life.” 
The monster said: “My spirit’s strong since the time of birth. | once made a tour of the universe where my fame as a hero became well-known — a gallant type for all to emulate. Through countless 
nations | went as | pleased; over lakes and seas | did freely roam. To learn the Way | strayed to Heaven’s edge; to find a teacher | stumped this great earth. For years my clothes and alms bow! went 
with me: not for one day did my spirit turn lax. For scores of times | cruised cloudlike the earth and walked to all places a hundred times. Only then a true mortal | did meet who showed me the Great 
Path of Golden Light. | took back Baby Boy and Fair Girl first; 2then released Wood Mum and Squire of Gold. *Bright Hall’s* kidney-brine flooded Floral Pool; 5the Tower’s® liver-fire plunged to the heart. 
Three thousand merits done, | saw Heaven's face and solemnly worshipped the Point of Light. Then the Jade Emperor exalted me; the Curtain-Raising Captain he made me. An honoured one in South 
Heaven Gate, | was much esteemed at Divine Mists Hall. | hung at my waist the Tiger-Headed Shield: | held in my hands the Fiend-Routing Staff. Just like the sunlight my gold helmet shone; my body's 
armour flashed like radiant mists. | was chief of the guardians of the Throne: | was first as attendant of the court. When Queen Mum gave the Festival of Peach - she served her guests at Jasper Pool 
a feast — | dropped and broke a glass-like cup of jade and souls from all the hosts of Heaven fled. Jade Emperor grew mightily enraged; hands clasped, he faced his counsel on the left. Stripped of my 
hat, armour, and rank, I’d my whole body pushed to the block. Only the Great Mortal, Naked Feet came from the ranks and begged to have me freed. Pardoned from death and with my sentence 
stayed, | was sent to the shores of Flowing-Sand. Sated, | lie wearily in the stream; famished, | churn the waves to find my feed. The woodsman sees me and his life is gone; the fishers face me and 
they soon perish. From first to last I’ve eaten many men; repeatedly | took human lives. Since you dare to work violence at my door, my stomach this day has its fondest hopes! Don’t say you're too 
coarse to be eaten now. I'll catch you, and look, that’s my minced meat sauce!” 
Infuriated by what he heard, 8 Rules shouted, “You brazen thing! You've not the slightest perception! Old bull’s tempting enough to make people’s mouths water and you daresay that I’m coarse and 
to be chopped up for a chopped meat sauce! Come to think of it, you'd like to consider me a piece of tough old steak! Watch your manners and swallow this rake of your ancestor!” When the monster 
saw the rake coming, he used the style of the phoenix nodding its head to dodge the blow. The 2 of them thus fought to the surface of the water, each 1 treading the waters and waves. This conflict 
was somewhat different from the one before. Look at the Curtain-Raising Captain, the Marshal of Heavenly Reeds: each showing most nicely his magic might. This one waved above his head the fiend- 
routing staff: that 1 moved the rake as swiftly as his hand. The vaulting waves rocked hills and streams; the surging tide the cosmos dimmed. Savage like Jupiter wielding banners and flags! Fierce like 
Hell’s envoy upsetting sacred tops! This one guarded the Tang Monk devotedly; that 1, a water fiend perpetrated his crimes. The rake’s 1 stroke would leave 9 red marks: the staff's 1 blow would 
dissolve man’s soul. They strove to win the fight; they struggled to prevail. Overall for the scripture pilgrim’s sake, they vented their fury without restraint. They brawled till carps, perches lost their new- 
bor scales, and all turtles damaged their tender shells. Red shrimps, purple crabs all lost their lives, and sundry water gods all upward saluted! You heard only the waves rolled and crashed like 
thunderclaps. The world amazed saw sun and moon grow dark! The 2 of them fought for two hours, and neither prevailed. It was like a brass pan meeting an iron broom, a jade gong facing a golden 
bell. The Great Sage was standing guard beside the Tang Monk. With bulging eyes he watched them fighting on the water but he dared not lift his hands. Finally, 8 Rules made a half-hearted blow with 
his rake and, feigning defeat, turned to flee toward the eastern shore. The monster gave chase and was about to reach the river bank when our Pilgrim could no longer restrain himself. He abandoned 
his master, whipped out the iron rod, leaped to the riverside and struck at the monster's head. Fearing to face him, the monster swiftly dove back into the river. “You Ban-Horse-Plague!” shouted 8 
Rules. “You impulsive ape! Can’t you be a bit more patient? You'd have waited until | led him up to high ground and then blocked his path to the river. We'd have caught him then. Now he’s gone back 
in and when do you think he'll come out again?” 
“Idiot,” said Pilgrim laughing, “stop shouting! Let’s go talk to Master first.” 
8 Rules went with Pilgrim back to high ground to Tripitaka. “Disciple,” said Tripitaka, saluting, “you must be tired!” 
“Ill not complain about my fatigue,” said 8 Rules. “Let’s subdue the monster and take you across the river. Only that plan’s perfect!” 
Tripitaka said, “How did the battle go with the monster just now?” 
“He’s just about my equal,” said 8 Rules, “and we fought to a draw. But then | feigned defeat and he chased me up to the bank. When he saw Elder Brother lifting his rod however, he fled.” 
“So what are we going to do?” asked Tripitaka. 
“Master, relax!” said Pilgrim. “Let’s not worry now, for it’s getting late. You sit here on the cliff and let old monkey go beg some vegetarian food. Take some rest after you eat, and we'll find a solution 
tomorrow.” 
“You're right,” said 8 Rules. “Go, and come back quickly.” 
Pilgrim swiftly mounted the clouds and went north to beg a bowl of vegetarian food from a family to present to his master. When the master saw him return so soon, he said, “Wukong, let us go to that 
household which gave us the food and ask them how we may cross this river. Isn’t this better than fighting the monster?” With a laugh, Pilgrim said, “That household is quite far from here, about six or 
seven thousand miles, no less! How could the people there know about the water? What's the use of asking them?” 
“You're fibbing again, Elder Brother!” said 8 Rules. “Six or seven thousand miles, how could you cover that distance so quickly?” 
“You've no idea,” said Pilgrim, “about the capacity of my cloud somersault that with one leap can cover one hundred and eight thousand miles. For the six or seven thousand here, all I’ve to do is to 
nod my head and stretch my waist, and that’s a round trip already! What's so hard about that?” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “if it’s so easy, all you need to do is to carry Master on your back: nod your head, stretch your waist, and jump across. Why continue to fight this monster?” 
“Don’t you know how to ride the clouds?” asked Pilgrim. “Can’t you carry him across the river?” 
“The mortal nature and worldly bones of Master are as heavy as the Tai Mountain,” 8 Rules said. “How could my cloud soaring bear him up? It has to be your cloud somersault.” 
“My cloud somersault is essentially like cloud soaring,” said Pilgrim, “the only difference being that | can cover greater distances more rapidly. If you can’t carry him, what makes you think | can? There's 
an old proverb that says: Move Mount Tai: it’s light as mustard seeds. Lift a man and you'll not leave the red dust! Take this monster here: he can use spells and call upon the wind, pushing and pulling 
a little but he can’t carry a human into the air. And if it's this kind of magic, old monkey knows every trick well, including becoming invisible and making distances shorter. But it is required of Master to 
go through all these strange territories before he finds deliverance from the sea of sorrows; hence even one step turns out to be difficult. You and | are only his protective companions, guarding his 
body and life but we can’t exempt him from these woes, nor can we obtain the scriptures all by ourselves. Even if we'd the ability to go and see God first, he’d not bestow the scriptures on you and me. 
Remember the adage: What's easily gotten is soon forgotten.” 
When Idiot heard these words, he accepted them amiably as instruction. Master and disciples ate some of the simply prepared vegetarian food before resting on the eastern shore of the Flowing-Sand 
River. The next morning, Tripitaka said, “Wukong, what are we going to do today?” 
“Not much,” said Pilgrim, “except that 8 Rules must go into the water again.” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “you only want to stay clean but you've no hesitation making me go into the water.” 
“Worthy Brother,” said Pilgrim, “this time I'll try not to be impulsive. I'll let you trick him into coming up here, and then I'll block his retreat along the river bank. We must capture him.” 


Dear 8 Rules! Wiping his face, he pulled himself together. Holding the rake in both hands, he walked to the edge of the river, opened up a path in the water, and went to the monster’s home as before. 
The monster had just wakened from his sleep when he heard the sound of water. Turning quickly to look, he saw 8 Rules approaching with the rake. He leaped out at once and barred the way, shouting, 
“Slow down! Watch out for my staff!” 8 Rules lifted his rake to parry the blow, saying, “What sort of mourning staff do you've there that you dare ask your ancestor to watch out for it?” 
“A fellow like you,” said the monster, “wouldn't recognise this! For years my staff has enjoyed great fame, at first an evergreen tree in the moon. Wu Gang’ cut down from it one huge limb: Lu Ban then 
made it, using all his skills. Within the hub’s one solid piece of gold: outside it's wrapped by countless pearly threads. It’s called the treasure staff for crushing fiends ever placed in Divine Mists to quell 
the ogres. Since I’d made a mighty general's rank, Jade Emperor put it always by my side. It lengthens or shortens after my desire; it grows thick or thin with my command. It went to guard the Throne 
at the Peaches Feast: it served at court in Heaven’s world above. On duty it saw the many sages saluted and mortals, too when the screen rolled up. Of numinous power one arm divine, it’s no worldly 
weapon of humankind. Since | was banished from the gate of Heaven, it roamed with me at will beyond the seas. Perhaps it is not right for me to boast but swords and spears of man can’t match this 
staff. Look at that old, rusted muckrake of yours: fit only for hoeing fields and raking herbs!” 
“You un-chastened brazen thing!” said 8 Rules, laughing. “Never mind whether it’s fit for hoeing fields! One little touch and you'll not even know how to begin putting bandages or ointment on nine 
bleeding holes! You'll grow old with chronic infection even if you're not killed!” The monster raised his hands and again fought with 8 Rules from the bottom of the river up to the surface of the water. 
This battle was even more different from the first one. Look at them wielding the treasure staff. Striking with muckrake; they would not speak as if they were estranged. Since Wood Mum constrained 
the Spatula’ that caused the 2 to fight most fiercely. No win or loss; with no regret. They churned up waves and billows with no peace. How could this one control his bitter rage that one found unbearable 
his pain? Rake and staff went back and forth to show their might; the water rotted like poison in Flowing-Sand. They huffed, puffed, worked, and toiled! All because Tripitaka would face the West. The 
muckrake so ferocious! The staff so nimbly used! This one made a grab to pull him up the shore; that one sought to seize and drown him in the stream. They roared like thunder, stirring dragon and 
fish. Gods and ghosts cowered as the Heavens grew dim. This time they fought back and forth for thirty rounds, and neither one proved to be the stronger. Again 8 Rules pretended to be defeated and 
fled, dragging his rake. Kicking up the waves, the monster gave chase and they reached the edge of the river. “Wretch!” cried 8 Rules. “Come up here! We can fight better on solid ground up here.” 
“You're just trying to trick me into going up there,” scolded the monster, “so that you can bring out your assistant. You come down here, and we can fight in the water.” The monster had become wise; 
he refused to go up to the bank and remained near the edge of the water to argue with 8 Rules. 
When Pilgrim saw that the monster refused to leave the water, he became highly irritated, and all he could think of was to catch him at once. “Master,” he said, “you sit here. Let me give him a taste of 
the ‘ravenous eagle seizing his prey.” He somersaulted into the air and then swooped down onto the monster who was still bickering with 8 Rules. When he heard the sound of the wind, he turned 
quickly and discovered Pilgrim hurtling down from the clouds. Putting away his staff, he dove into the water and disappeared. Pilgrim stood on the shore and said to 8 Rules, “Brother, that monster is 
catching on! He refuses to come up now. What shall we do?” 
“It's hard, terribly hard!” said 8 Rules. “I just can’t beat him —- even when | summoned up the strength of my milk-drinking days! We’re evenly matched!” 
“Let's go talk to Master,” said Pilgrim. 
The 2 of them went up again to high ground and told the Tang Monk everything. “If it's so difficult,” said the elder, tears welling up in his eyes, “how can we ever get across?” 
“Master, please don’t worry,” said Pilgrim. “It is hard for us to cross with this monster hiding deep in the river. So, don’t fight with him anymore, 8 Rules; just stay here and protect Master. I'm going to 
make a trip up to South Sea.” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “what do you want to do at South Sea?” Pilgrim said, “This business of seeking scriptures originated from the Nun Guanyin; the one who delivered us from our ordeals 
was also the Nun Guanyin. Today our path is blocked at this Flowing-Sand River and we can’t proceed. Without her, how can we ever solve our problem? Let me go ask her to help us: it’s much better 
than doing battle with this monster.” 
“You've a point there, Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules. “When you get there, please convey my gratitude to her for her kindly instructions in the past.” 
“Wukong,” said Tripitaka, “if you want to go see the Nun, you needn't delay. Go, and hurry back.” 
Pilgrim catapulted into the air with his cloud somersault and headed for the South Sea. Ah! It did not even take him half an hour before he saw the scenery of the Potalaka Mountain. In a moment, he 
dropped down from his somersault and arrived at the edge of the purple bamboo grove where he was met by the Spirits of the Twenty-Four Ways. They said to him, “Great Sage, what brings you 
here?” 
“My master faces an ordeal,” said Pilgrim, “which brings me here specially to see the Nun.” 
“Please take a seat,” said the spirits, “and allow us to make the announcement.” One of the spirits who was on duty went to the entrance of the Tidal-Sound Cave, announcing, “Sun Wukong wishes to 
have an audience with you.” The Nun was leaning on the rails by the Treasure Lotus Pool, looking at the flowers with the Pearl-Bearing Dragon Princess. When she heard the announcement, she went 
back to the cave, opened the door, and asked that he be shown in. With great solemnity, the Great Sage saluted himself before her. 
“Why are you not accompanying the Tang Monk?” asked the Nun. “For what reason did you want to see me again?” 
“Nun,” said Pilgrim, looking up at her, “my master took another disciple at the Gao Village, to whom you had given the religious name of Aware of Ability. After crossing the Yellow Wind Ridge, we've 
now arrived at the Flowing-Sand River eight hundred miles wide, a body of weak water that is difficult for Master to get across. There is, moreover, a monster in the river who is quite accomplished in 
the martial arts. We're grateful to Aware of Ability who fought in the water with him three times but could not beat him. The monster is in fact blocking our path and we can’t get across. That is why I’ve 
come to see you, hoping you'll take pity and grant us deliverance.” 
“Monkey,” said the Nun, “are you still acting so smug and self-sufficient that you refuse to disclose the fact that you're in the service of the Tang Monk?” 
“All we'd intended to do,” said Pilgrim, “was to catch the monster and make him take Master across the river. I’m not too good at doing business in the water, so Aware of Ability went down alone to his 
lair to look for him, and they had some conversation. | presume the matter of scripture seeking was not mentioned.” 
“That monster in the Flowing-Sand River,” said the Nun, “happens to be the incarnate Curtain-Raising Captain who was also brought into the faith by my persuasion when | told him to accompany those 
on their way to acquire scriptures. Had you been willing to mention that you’re a scripture pilgrim from the Land of the East, he would not have fought you; he would have yielded instead.” Pilgrim said, 
“That monster is afraid to fight now; he refuses to come up to the shore and is hiding deep in the water. How can we bring him to submission? How can my master get across this body of weak water?” 
The Nun immediately called for Hui’an. Taking a little red gourd from her sleeves, she handed it over to him, saying, “Take this gourd and go with Sun Wukong to the Flowing-Sand River. Call ‘Awakened 
to Purity,’ and he'll come out at once. You must first take him to submit to the Tang Monk. Next, string together those nine skulls of his and arrange them according to the position of the Nine Palaces. 
Put this gourd in the centre, and you'll have a religion vessel ready to ferry the Tang Monk across the boundary formed by the Flowing-Sand River.” Obeying the instructions of his master, Hui’an left 
the Tidal-Sound Cave with the Great Sage carrying the gourd. As they departed the purple bamboo grove in compliance with the holy command, a testimonial poem says: 

The 5 Phases well matched as Heaven’s truth, his former master he can recognise. 

Refine the self as base for wondrous use; good and bad discerned will reveal the cause. 
Metal returns to nature - the same kind are both. Wood begs for favour: they'll all be redeemed. 
2-Earths® completes merit to reach the void: water and fire blended, dustless and clean. 
In a little while the two of them lowered their clouds and arrived at the Flowing-Sand River. Recognising the disciple Liberation, Bullseye 8 Rules led his master to receive him. After saluting Tripitaka, 
Liberation then greeted 8 Rules who said, “I was grateful to be instructed by Your Reverence so that I’d meet the Nun. I’ve indeed obeyed the Law, and I’m happy recently to have entered the gate of 
Religion. Since we've been constantly on the road, I've yet to thank you. Please forgive me.” 
“Let's forget about these fancy conversations,” said Pilgrim. “We must go and call that fellow.” 
“Call whom?” asked Tripitaka. Pilgrim replied, “Old monkey saw the Nun and gave her an account of what happened. The Nun told me that this monster in the Flowing-Sand River happened to be the 
disciple of the Curtain-Raising Captain. Because he had sinned in Heaven, he was banished to this river and became a monster. But he was converted by the Nun who had told him to accompany you 
to the Western Heaven. Since we didn’t mention the matter of seeking scriptures, he fought us bitterly. Now the Nun has sent Liberation with this gourd that that fellow will turn into a religion vessel to 
take you across the river.” When Tripitaka heard these words, he saluted repeatedly to Liberation, saying, “I beseech Your Reverence to act quickly.” Holding the gourd and treading half on cloud and 
half on fog, Liberation moved directly above the surface of the Flowing-Sand River. He cried with a loud voice, “Awakened to Purity! Awakened to Purity! The scripture pilgrim has been here for a long 
time. Why have you not submitted?” 
We now tell you about that monster who had gone back to the bottom of the river to rest in his den, fearful of the Monkey King. When he heard someone call him by his religious name, he knew that it 
had to be the Nun Guanyin. And when he heard, moreover, that the scripture pilgrim had arrived, he no longer feared the axe or the halberd. Swiftly he leaped out of the waves and saw that it was the 
disciple Liberation. Look at him! All smiles, he went forward and saluted, saying, “Your Reverence, forgive me for not coming to meet you. Where is the Nun?” 
“My teacher didn’t come,” said Liberation, “but she sent me to tell you to become the disciple of the Tang Monk without delay. You're to take the skulls around your neck and this gourd and fashion with 
them a religion vessel according to the position of the Nine Palaces so that he may be taken across this body of weak water.” 
“Where is the scripture pilgrim?” asked Awakened to Purity. 
Pointing with his finger, Liberation said, “Isn’t he the one sitting on the eastern shore?” 
Awakened to Purity caught sight of 8 Rules and said, “I don’t know where that lawless creature came from! He fought with me for two whole days, never once saying a word about seeking scriptures.” 
When he saw Pilgrim, he said again. “That customer is his assistant, and a formidable one, too! I’m not going over there!” 
“That is Bullseye 8 Rules,” said Liberation, “and that other one is Pilgrim Sun, both disciples of the Tang Monk and both converted by the Nun. Why fear them? I'll escort you to the Tang Monk.” 
Only then did Awakened to Purity put away his precious staff and straighten his yellow silk shirt. He jumped ashore and knelt before Tripitaka, saying, “Master, your disciple’s eyes but no pupils and he 
failed to recognise your noble features. I’ve greatly offended you and beg you to pardon me.” 
“You bum!” said 8 Rules. “Why did you not submit in the first place? Why did you only want to fight with me? What do you've to say for yourself?” 
“Brother,” said Pilgrim, laughing, “don’t berate him. It’s really our fault for not mentioning that we’re seeking scriptures, and we didn’t tell him our names.” 
“Are you truly willing to embrace our faith?” said the elder. “Your disciple was converted by the Nun,” said Awakened to Purity. “Deriving my surname from the river, she gave me the religious name 
Sand Awakened to Purity. How could | be unwilling to take you as my master?” 
“In that case,” said Tripitaka, “Wukong may bring over the sacred razor and shave off his hair.” The Great Sage indeed took the razor and shaved Awakened to Purity’s head, after which he came again 
to pay homage to Tripitaka, Pilgrim, and 8 Rules, thus becoming the youngest disciple of the Tang Monk. When Tripitaka saw that he comported himself very much like a monk, he gave him the 
nickname of Sand-monk. “Since you’ve embraced the faith,” said Liberation, “there’s no need for further delay. You must build the religion vessel at once.” 
Not daring to delay, Awakened to Purity took off the skulls around his neck and strung them up with a rope after the design of the Nine Palaces, placing the gourd in the middle. He then asked his 
master to leave the shore, and our elder thus embarked on the religion vessel. As he sat in the centre, he found it to be as sturdy as a little boat. He was, moreover, supported by 8 Rules on his left 
and Awakened to Purity on his right while Pilgrim Sun, leading the dragon-horse, followed in the rear, treading half on cloud and half on fog. Above their heads Liberation also took up his post to give 
them added protection. In this way our master of the Law was safely ferried across the boundary of the Flowing-Sand River: with the wind calm and waves quiet he crossed the weak water. It was truly 
as fast as flying or riding an arrow, for in a little while he reached the other shore, having been delivered from the mighty waves. He did not drag up mud or water, and happily both his hands and feet 
remained dry. In sum, he was pure and clean without engaging in any activity. When master and disciples reached solid ground again, Liberation descended from the auspicious clouds. As he took 
back his gourd, the nine skulls changed into nine curls of dark wind and vanished. Tripitaka saluted to thank Liberation and also gave thanks to the Nun. So it was that Liberation went straight back to 
the South Sea while Tripitaka mounted his horse to go to the West. 
023 
Tripitaka does not forget his origin; The 4 Sages test the priestly mind 
A long journey westward is his decree as frosted blooms fall in autumn’s mild breeze. 
Tie up the sly ape, don’t loosen the ropes! Hold back the mean horse, and don’t use the whip! 
Wood Mum was once fused with Metal Squire; Yellow Dame and Naked Son never did differ.’ 

Bite open the iron ball — there’s mystery true: perfection of wisdom will come to you. 
The principal aim is to make clear that the way to acquire scriptures is no different from the way of attending to the fundamentals in one’s life. Master and disciples, the 4 of them who having awakened 
to the suchness of all things, broke free from the fetters of dust. Leaping clear from the sea of nature’s flowing sand, they were completely rid of any hindrance and proceeded westward on the main 


road. They passed through countless green hills and blue waters; they saw wild grass and untended flowers in endless arrays. Time was swift indeed and soon it was autumn again. See maple leaves 
redden the mountain; yellow blooms endure the night-wind. Old cicada’s poem turns languid; sad crickets ever voice their plaint. Cracked lotus leaves like green silk fans; fragrant oranges like gold 
balls. Lovely, those rows of wild geese in dots they spread to distant sky. As they journeyed, it was getting late again. “Disciples,” said Tripitaka, “it's getting late. Where'll we go to spend the night?” 
“Master,” said Pilgrim, “what you said isn’t quite right. Those who've left home dine on the winds and rest beside the waters; they sleep beneath the moon and lie on the frost; any place can be their 
home in short. Why ask where we'd spend the night?” 

“Elder Brother,” said Bullseye 8 Rules, “all you seem to care about is making progress on the journey and have no concern for the burdens of others. Since crossing the Flowing-Sand River, we've 
been doing nothing but scaling mountains and peaks and hauling this heavy load’s becoming rather hard on me. Wouldn't it be much more reasonable to look for a house where we can ask for some 
tea, rice, and try to regain our strength?” 

“Idiot,” said Pilgrim, “your words sound as if you begrudge this whole enterprise. If you think that you’re still back in the Gao Village where you can enjoy the comfort that comes to you without your 
exerting yourself, then you'll not make it! If you've truly embraced the faith of Religion, you must be willing to endure pain and suffering; only then will you be a true disciple.” 

“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “how heavy do you think this load of luggage is?” 

Pilgrim said, “Brother, since you and Sand-monk joined us, I’ve not had a chance to pole it. How would | know its weight?” 

“Ah! Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “just count the things here: four yellow rattan mats; long and short, eight ropes in all. To guard against dampness and rain, there're blankets — three, four layers! The 
flat pole’s too slippery, perhaps? You add nails on nails at both ends! Cast in iron and copper, the nine-ringed priestly staff. Made of bamboo and rattan, the long, large cloak. With all this luggage, 
you'd pity Old bull who has to walk all day carrying it! You only are the disciple of our master: I've been made into a long-term labourer!” 

“Idiot!” said Pilgrim with a laugh, “to whom are you protesting?” 

“To you, Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules. “If you’re protesting to me,” said Pilgrim, “you've made a mistake! Old monkey is solely concerned with Master's safety whereas you and Sand-monk have the 
special responsibility of looking after the luggage and the horse. If you ever slack off, you'll get a good whipping in the shanks from this huge rod!” 

“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “don’t mention whipping, for that only means taking advantage of others by brute force. | realise that you've a proud and haughty nature, and you're not about to pole the 
luggage. But look how fat and strong the horse is that Master is riding: he’s only carrying one old monk. Make him take a few pieces of luggage, for the sake of fraternal sentiment!” 

“So you think he’s a horse!” said Pilgrim. “He’s no earthly horse, for he is originally the son of Aorun, the Dragon King of the Western Ocean. Because he set fire to the palace and destroyed some of 
its pearls, his dad charged him with disobedience and he was condemned by Heaven. He was fortunate to have the Nun Guanyin save his life, and he was placed in the Eagle Grief Stream to await 
Master’s arrival. At the appropriate time, the Nun also appeared personally to take off his scales and horns and to remove the pearls around his neck. It was then that he changed into this horse to 
carry Master to worship God in the Western Heaven. This is a matter of achieving merit for each one of us individually, and you'd not bother him.” 

When Sand-monk heard these words, he asked, “Elder Brother, is he really a dragon?” 

“Yes,” replied Pilgrim. 8 Rules said, “Elder Brother, I've heard an ancient saying that a dragon can breathe out clouds and mists, kick up dust and dirt, and he even has the ability to leap over mountains 
and peaks, the divine power to stir up rivers and seas. How is it that he is walking so slowly at the moment?” 

“You want him to move swiftly?” said Pilgrim. “I'll make him do that, look!” Dear Great Sage! He shook his golden-hooped rod once and there were 10000 shafts of colourful lights! 

When that horse saw the rod, he was so afraid that he might be struck by it that he moved his four legs like lightning and darted away. As his hands were weak, the master could not restrain the horse 
from this display of its mean nature. The horse ran all the way up a mountain cliff before slowing down to a trot. The master finally caught his breath and that was when he discovered in the distance 
several stately buildings beneath some pine trees. He saw doors draped by hanging cedars: houses beside a green hill; pine trees fresh and straight and some poles of mottled bamboo. By the fence 
wild chrysanthemums glow with the frost: by the bridge orchid reflections redden the stream. Walls of white plaster; and fences brick-laid. A great hall, how noble and august: a tall house, so peaceful 
and clean. No oxen or sheep are seen, nor hens or dogs. After autumn’s harvest farm chores must be light. As the master held on to the saddle and slowly surveyed the scenery, Wukong and his 
brothers arrived. “Master,” said Wukong, “you didn’t fall off the horse?” 

“You brazen ape!” scolded the elder. “You're the one who frightened the horse! It’s a good thing | managed to stay on him!” Attempting to placate him with a smile, Pilgrim said, “Master, please don’t 
scold me. It all began when Bullseye 8 Rules said that the horse was moving too slowly: so | made him hurry a little.” Because he tried to catch up with the horse, Idiot ran till he was all out of breath, 
mumbling to himself, “I’m done, done! Look at this belly of mine, and the slack torso! Already the pole is so heavy that | can hardly carry it. Now I’m given the additional bustle and toil of running after 
this horse!” 

“Disciples,” said the elder, “look over there. There’s a small village where we may perhaps ask for lodging.” When Pilgrim heard these words, he looked up and saw that it was covered by auspicious 
clouds and hallowed mists. He knew then that this place had to be a creation of Gods or mortals but he dared not reveal the Heavenly secret. He only said, “Fine! Fine! Let’s go ask for shelter.” 
Quickly dismounting, the elder discovered that the towered entrance gate was decorated with carved lotus designs and looped slits in the woodwork; its pillars were carved and its beams gilded. Sand- 
monk put down the luggage while 8 Rules led the horse, saying, “This must be a family of considerable wealth!” Pilgrim would have gone in at once but Tripitaka said, “No, you and | are priests, and 
we'd behave with circumspection. Don’t ever enter a house without permission. Let's wait until someone comes out, and then we may request lodging politely.” 8 Rules tied up the horse and sat down, 
leaning against the wall. Tripitaka sat on one of the stone drums while Pilgrim and Sand-monk seated themselves at the foot of the gate. They waited for a long time but no one came out. Impatient by 
nature, Pilgrim leaped up after a while and ran inside the gate to have a look. There were in fact three large halls facing south, each with its curtains drawn up highly. Above the door screen hung a 
horizontal scroll painting with motifs of long life and rich blessings. And pasted on the gold lacquered pillars on either side was this New Year couplet written on bright red paper: 

Frail willows float like gossamer, the low bridge at dusk: 


Snow dots the fragrant plums, a small yard in the spring. 
In the centre hall, there was a small black lacquered table, its lustre half gone, bearing an old bronze urn in the shape of a beast. There were 6 straight-backed chairs in the main hall while hanging 
screens were mounted on the walls east and west just below the roof. As Pilgrim was glancing at all this furtively, the sound of footsteps suddenly came from behind the door to the rear, and out walked 
a middle-aged woman who asked in a seductive voice, “Who are you that you dare enter a widow's home without permission?” The Great Sage was so taken aback that he could only murmur his reply: 
“This humble monk came from the Great Tang in the Land of the East, having received the royal decree to seek scriptures from God in the West. There are four of us altogether. As we reached your 
noble region, it became late, and we therefore approached the sacred abode of the old Nun to seek shelter for the night.” Smiling amiably, the woman said, “Elder where are your other three companions? 
Please invite them to come in.” 
“Master,” shouted Pilgrim in a loud voice, “you’re invited to come in.” 
Only then did Tripitaka enter with 8 Rules and Sand-monk who was leading the horse and carrying the luggage as well. The woman walked out of the hall to greet them where she was met by the 
furtive, wanton glances of 8 Rules. She wore a gown of mandarin green and silk brocade, topped by a light pink vest to which was fastened a light yellow embroidered skirt; her high-heeled, patterned 
shoes glinted beneath. A black lace covered her stylish coiffure, nicely matching the twin-coloured braids like dragons coiled. Her ivory palace-comb, gleaming red and halcyon-blue, supported 2 gold 
hair-pins set aslant. Her half-grey tresses swept up like phoenix wings; dangling earrings had rows of precious pearls. Still lovely even without powder or rouge, she had charm and beauty like one fair 
youth. When the woman saw the three of them, she became even more amiable and invited them with great politeness into the main hall. After they had exchanged greetings one after the other, the 
pilgrims were told to be seated for tea to be served. From behind the screen a young maid with two tufts of flowing locks appeared, holding a golden tray with several white-jade cups. There were 
fragrant tea wafting warm air, strange fruits spreading fine aroma. That lady rolled up her colourful sleeves and revealed long, delicate fingers like the stalks of spring onions; holding high the jade cups, 
she passed the tea to each one of them, saluting as she made the presentation. After the tea, she gave instructions for vegetarian food to be prepared. “Old Nun,” said Tripitaka saluting, “what's your 
noble surname? And what's the name of your esteemed region?” 
The woman said, “This belongs to the West Aparagodantya Continent. My maiden surname is Jia (Unreal), and the surname of my husband's family is Mo (non-existent). Unfortunately, my in-laws died 
prematurely, and my husband and | inherited our ancestral fortune that amounted to more than ten thousand taels of silver and over fifteen thousand acres of prime land. It was fated however, that 
we'd have no son, having given birth only to three daughters. The year before last, it was my great misfortune to lose my husband also, and | was left a widow. This year my mourning period is completed 
but we've no other relatives beside mum and daughters to inherit our vast property and land. I'd have liked to marry again but | find it difficult to give up such wealth. We’re delighted, therefore, that the 
four of you've arrived, for we four, mum and daughters, would like very much to ask you to become our spouses. | don’t know what you'll think of this proposal.” 
When Tripitaka heard these words, he turned deaf and dumb; shutting his eyes to quiet his mind, he fell silent and gave no reply. The woman said, “We own over three hundred acres of paddies, over 
four hundred and sixty acres of dried fields, and over four hundred and sixty acres of orchards and forests. We've over a thousand head of yellow water buffalo, herds of mules and horses, countless 
goats and sheep. In all four quarters, there are over seventy barns and haystacks. In this household there is grain enough to feed you for more than eight or nine years, silk that you’d not wear out in a 
decade, gold and silver that you might spend for a lifetime. What could be more delightful than our silk sheets and curtains that can render spring eternal? Not to mention those who wear golden hairpins 
standing in rows! If all of you, master and disciples, are willing to change your minds and enter the family of your wives, you'll be most comfortable, having all these riches to enjoy. Will that not be better 
than the toil of the journey to the West?” Like a mute and stupid person, Tripitaka refused to utter a word. 
The woman said, “I was born in the hour of the Cock, on the third day of the third month, in the year Dinghai. As my deceased husband was three years my senior, I’m now forty-five years old. My 
eldest daughter, named Zhenzhen, is twenty; my second daughter, Aiai, is eighteen; and my youngest daughter, Lianlian, is sixteen.2 None of them has been betrothed to anyone. Though I’m rather 
homely, my daughters fortunately are rather good-looking. Moreover, each of them is well trained in needlework and the feminine arts. And because we'd no son, my late husband brought them up as 
if they were boys, teaching them some of the Confucian classics when they were young as well as the art of writing verse and couplets. So, although they reside in a mountain home, they are not vulgar 
or uncouth persons; they would make suitable matches, | dare say, for all of you. If you elders can put away your inhibitions and let your hair grow again, you can at once become masters of this 
household. Are not the silk and brocade that you'll wear infinitely better than the porcelain alms-bowl and black robes, the straw sandals and grass hats?” 
Sitting aloft in the seat of honour, Tripitaka was like a child struck by lightning, a frog smitten by rain. With eyes bulging and rolling upward, he could barely keep himself from keeling over in his chair. 
But 8 Rules, hearing of such wealth and such beauty, could hardly quell the unbearable itch in his heart! Sitting on his chair, he kept turning and twisting as if a needle were pricking him in the ass. 
Finally he could restrain himself no longer. Walking forward, he tugged at his master, saying, “Master! How can you completely ignore what the lady has been saying to you? You must try to pay some 
attention.” Jerking back his head, the priest gave such a hostile shout that 8 Rules backed away hurriedly. “You cursed beast!” he bellowed. “We're people who have left home. How can we possibly 
allow ourselves anymore to be moved by riches and tempted by beauty?” 
Giggling, the woman said, “Oh dear, dear! Tell me, what's so good about those who leave home?” 
“Nun,” said Tripitaka, “tell me what is so good about those of you who remain at home?” 
“Please take a seat, elder,” said the woman, “and let me tell you the benefits in the life of those of us who remain at home. If you ask what they’re, this poem will make them abundantly clear. When 
spring fashions appear | wear new silk; pleased to watch summer lilies | change to lace. Autumn brings fragrant rice-water newly brewed. In winter's heated rooms my face glows with juice. | may enjoy 
the fruits of all four climes and every dainty of eight seasons, too. The silk sheets and quilts of the bridal eve best the mendicant's life of Religious recites.” 
Tripitaka said, “Nun, you who remain in the home can enjoy riches and glory; you've things to eat, clothes to wear, and children by your side. That is undeniably a good life but you don’t know that there 
are some benefits in the life of those of us who have left home. If you ask what they are, this poem will make them abundantly clear. The will to leave home is no common thing: you must tear down 
the old stronghold of love! No cares without, tongue and mouth are at peace; your inner body’s good yin and yang. When merit’s done, you face the Golden Arch and go hack, mind enlightened, to your 
Home. It beats the life of lust for household meat: you rot with age, one stinking bag of flesh!” 
When the woman heard these words, she grew terribly angry, saying, “How dare you to be so insolent, you brazen monk! If I'd had no regard for the fact that you’ve come from the Land of the East, I’d 
have sent you away at once. Now, | was trying to ask you with all sincerity, to enter our family and share our wealth, and you insult me instead. Even though you've received the commandments and 
made the vow never to return to secular life, at least one of your followers could become a member of our family. Why are you being so legalistic?” 
Seeing how angry she had become, Tripitaka was intimidated and said, “Wukong, why don’t you stay here.” Pilgrim said, “I've been completely ignorant in such matters since the time | was young. Let 
8 Rules stay.” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “don’t play tricks on people. Let’s all have some further discussion.” 
“If neither of you is willing,” said Tripitaka, “I'll ask Awakened to Purity to stay.” 


“Listen to the way Master is speaking!” said Sand-monk. “Since | was converted by the Nun and received the commandments from her, I’ve been waiting for you. It’s been scarcely two months since 
you took me as your disciple and gave me your teachings and I've yet to acquire even half an inch of merit. You think I’d dare seek such riches! I'll journey to the Western Heaven even if it means my 
death! I'll never engage in such perfidious activities!” 
When the woman saw them refusing to remain, she quickly walked behind the screen and slammed the door to the rear. Master and disciples were left outside, and no one came out again to present 
tea or rice. Exasperated, 8 Rules began to find fault with the Tang Monk, saying, “Master, you really don’t know how to handle these matters! In fact, you’ve ruined all our chances by the way you spoke! 
You'd have been more flexible and given her a vague reply so that she would at least have given us a meal. We'd at least have enjoyed a pleasant evening and whether we'd be willing to stay tomorrow 
or not would have been for us to decide. Now the door’s shut and no one is going to come out. How're we going to last through the night in the midst of these empty ashes and cold stoves?” 
“Second Brother,” said Awakened to Purity, “why don’t you stay here and become her son-in-law?” 
8 Rules said, “Brother, don’t play tricks on people. Let's discuss the matter further.” 
“What's there to discuss?” said Pilgrim. “If you're willing, Master and that woman will become in-laws, and you'll be the son-in-law who lives in the girl’s home. With such riches and such treasures in 
this family, you'll no doubt be given a huge dowry and a nice banquet to greet the kinsfolk that all of us can also enjoy. Your return to secular life here will in fact benefit both parties concerned.” 
“You can say that all right,” said 8 Rules, “but for me it’s a matter of fleeing the secular life only to return to secular life, of leaving my wife only to take another wife.” 
“So, Second Brother already has a wife?” said Sand-monk. “You didn't realise,” Pilgrim said, “that originally he was the son-in-law of Mr. Gao of the Old Gao Village, in the Kingdom of Qoco. Since | 
defeated him, and since he had earlier received the commandments from the Nun, he had little choice but to follow the priestly vocation. That's the reason he abandoned his former wife to follow Master 
and to go worship God in the Western Heaven. | suppose he has felt the separation keenly and has been brooding on it for some time. Just now, when marriage was mentioned, he must have been 
sorely tempted. Idiot, why don’t you become the son-in-law of this household? Just make sure that you make a few extra salutes to old monkey, and you'll not be reprimanded!” 
“Nonsense! Nonsense!” said Idiot. “Each one of us is tempted but you only want Old bull to be embarrassed. The proverb says: a monk’s the deceased of sensuality and which one of us can truly say 
that he doesn’t want this? But you've to put on a show, and your histrionics have ruined a good thing. Now we can’t even get a drop of tea or water, and no one is tending the lamps or fires. We may 
last through the night but | doubt that the horse can: he has to carry someone tomorrow and walk again, you know. If he goes hungry for a night, he might be reduced to a skeleton. You people sit here 
while Old bull goes to graze the horse.” Hastily, Idiot untied the reins and pulled the horse outside. “Sand-monk,” said Pilgrim, “you stay here and keep Master Company. |’ll follow him and see where 
he is going to graze the horse.” 
“Wukong,” said Tripitaka, “you may go and see where he’s going but don’t ridicule him.” 
“| know,” said Pilgrim. 
The Great Sage walked out of the main hall and with 1 shake of his body he changed into a red dragonfly. He flew out of the front gate and caught up with 8 Rules. Idiot pulled the horse out to where 
there was grass but he did not graze him there. Shouting and whooping, he chased the horse instead to the rear of the house where he found the woman standing outside the door with 3 girls enjoying 
the sight of some chrysanthemums. When mum and daughters saw 8 Rules approaching, the three girls slipped inside the house at once but the woman stood still beside the door and said, “Little 
elder, where’re you going?” 
Idiot threw away the reins and went up to greet her with a most friendly “Hello!” then he said, “Mama, | came to graze the horse.” 
“Your master’s much too squeamish,” said the woman. “If he took a wife in our family, he’d be much better off than being a mendicant trudging to the West, wouldn't he?” 
“Well, they all have received the command of the Tang emperor,” said 8 Rules with a laugh, “and they've not the courage to disobey the ruler’s decree. That's why they’re unwilling to do this thing. Just 
now they're all trying to play tricks on me in the front hall and | was somewhat embarrassed because | was afraid that Mama would find my long horn and large ears too offensive.” 
“| don’t really.” said the woman. “And since we’ve no master of the house, it’s better to take one than none at all. But | do fear that my daughters may find you somewhat unattractive.” 
“Mama,” said 8 Rules, “please instruct your noble daughters not to choose their men that way. Others may be more handsome but they usually turn out to be quite useless. Though | may be ugly, | do 
live by certain principles.” 
“And what are they?” asked the woman. 
8 Rules replied, “Though | may be somewhat ugly, | can work quite diligently. A thousand acres of land, you say? No need for oxen to plough it. I'll go over it once with my rake and the seeds will grow 
in season. When there’s no rain | can make rain. When there’s no wind I'll call for wind. If the house isn’t tall enough, I'll build you a few stories more. If the grounds are not swept I'll give them a sweep. 
If the gutter’s not drained I'll draw it for you. All things both great and small around the house I’m able to do most readily.” 
“If you can work around the house,” said the woman, “you'd discuss the matter again with your master. If there’s no great inconvenience, we'll take you.” 
“No need for further discussion,” said 8 Rules, “for he’s no genuine parent of mine. Whether | want to do this or not is for me to decide.” 
“All right, all right,” said the woman. “Let me talk to my girls first.” 
She slipped back inside immediately and slammed the rear door shut. 8 Rules did not graze the horse there either but led it back to the front. Little did he realise however, that Great Sage Sun had 
heard everything. With wings outstretched, the Great Sage flew back to see the Tang Monk, changing back into his original form. “Master,” he said, “Aware of Ability is leading the horse back here.” 
“Of course he’s leading the horse,” said the Tang Monk, “for if he doesn't, it may run away in a fit of mischief.” Pilgrim started to laugh and gave a thorough account of what the woman and 8 Rules had 
said but Tripitaka did not know whether to believe him or not. In a little while Idiot arrived and tied up the horse. “You've grazed him?” asked the elder. 
“There’s not much good grass around here,” said 8 Rules, “so it’s really no place to graze a horse.” 
“It may not be a place to graze the horse,” said Pilgrim, “but it’s a place to lead a horse?” 
When Idiot heard this question, he knew that his secret was known. He lowered his head and turned it to one side; with pouting lips and wrinkled brows, he remained silent for a long time. Just then, 
they heard the side door open with a creak, and out came a pair of red lanterns and a pair of portable incense burners. There were swirling clouds of fragrance and the sounds of tinkling girdle-jade 
when the woman walked out leading her three daughters. Zhenzhen, Aiai, Lianlian were told to salute the scripture pilgrims, and as they did so, standing in a row at the main hall, they appeared to be 
most beautiful indeed. Look at them! Each moth-like eyebrow painted halcyon-blue: each pretty face aglow with spring-like hues. What beguiling, empire-shaking beauty! What ravishing, heart-jolting 
charm! Their filigreed headgears enhance their grace; silk sashes afloat, they seem wholly divine. Like ripe cherries their lips part, half-smiling as they walk slowly and spread their orchid-scent. Their 
heads full of pearls and jade atop countless hairpins slightly trembling. Their bodies full of delicate aroma, shrouded by exquisite robes of fine golden thread. Why speak of lovely ladies of the South or 
the good looks of Xizi?4 They look like the fairy ladies descending from the 9-fold Heaven or the Princess Change leaving her Vast Cold Palace. When he saw them, Tripitaka lowered his head and 
folded his hands in front of him while the Great Sage became mute and Sand-monk turned away completely. But look at that Bullseye Eight Rules! With eyes unblinking, a mind filled with lust, and 
passion fast rising, he murmured huskily, “What an honour it’s to have the presence of you mortal ladies! Mama, please ask these dear sisters to leave.” 
The 3 girls went behind the screen leaving the pair of lanterns behind. The woman said, “Have you four elders made up your mind which one of you'll be betrothed to my daughters?” 
“We've discussed the matter,” said Awakened to Purity, “and we’ve decided that the one whose surname’s Bullseye will enter your family.” 
“Brother,” said 8 Rules, “please don’t play any tricks on me. Let's discuss the matter further.” 
“What's there to discuss?” said Pilgrim. “You've already made all the arrangements with her at the back door, and even call her ‘Mama.’ What's there to discuss anymore? Master can be the in-law for 
the groom while this woman here will give away the bride; old monkey will be the witness, and Sand-monk the go-between. There’s no need even to consult the almanac, for today happens to be the 
most auspicious and lucky day. You come here and salute Master, and then you can go inside and become her son-in-law.” 
“Nothing doing! Nothing doing!” said 8 Rules. “How can | engage in this kind of business?” 
“Idiot!” said Pilgrim. “Stop this fakery! You've addressed her as ‘Mama’ for countless times already! What do you mean by ‘nothing doing’? Agree to this at once, so that we may have the pleasure of 
enjoying some juice at the wedding.” He caught hold of 8 Rules with one hand and pulled at the woman with the other, saying, “Mum-in-law, take your son-in-law inside.” Somewhat hesitantly, Idiot 
started to shuffle inside while the woman gave instructions to a houseboy, saying, “Take out some tables and chairs and wipe them clean. Prepare a vegetarian dinner to serve these three relatives of 
ours. I’m leading our new master inside.” She further gave instructions for the cook to begin preparation for a wedding banquet to be held the next morning. The houseboys then left to tell the cook. 
After the three pilgrims had eaten their meal, they retired to the guest rooms. 8 Rules followed his mum-in-law and walked inside. There were row upon row of doorways and chambers with tall 
thresholds, causing him constantly to stumble and fall. “Mama,” said Idiot, “please walk more slowly. I’m not familiar with the way here so you must guide me a little.” 
The woman said, “These’re all the storerooms, the treasuries, the rooms where the flour is ground. We've yet to reach the kitchen.” 
“What a huge house!” said 8 Rules. 
Stumbling along a winding course, he walked for a long time before finally reaching the inner chamber of the house. “Son-in-law,” said the woman, “since your brother said that today’s a most auspicious 
and lucky day, I’ve taken you in. In all this hurry, we’ve not had the chance of consulting an astrologer, nor been prepared for the proper wedding ceremony of worshiping Heaven and Earth and of 
spreading grains and fruits on the bridal bed. Right now, why don’t you respect eight times toward the sky?” 
“You're right, Mama,” said 8 Rules. “You take the upper seat also, and let me salute you a few times. We'll consider that my worship of Heaven and Earth as well as my gesture of gratitude to you. 
Doing these two things at once will save me some trouble.” 
“All right, all right,” said his mum-in-law, laughing. “You're indeed a son-in-law who knows how to fulfil your household duties with the least effort. I'll sit down and you can make your salutes.” 
The candles on silver candlesticks were shining brightly throughout the hall as Idiot gave his salutes. Afterwards he said, “Mama that one of the dear sisters do you plan to give me?” 
“That's my dilemma,” said his mum-in-law. “I was going to give you my eldest daughter but | was afraid of offending my second daughter. | was going to give you my second daughter but | was afraid 
then of offending my third daughter. And if | were to give you my third daughter, | fear that my eldest daughter may be offended. That's why | can’t make up my mind.” 
“Mama,” said 8 Rules, “if you want to prevent strife, why not give them all to me? That way, you'll spare yourself a lot of bickering that can destroy the harmony of the family.” 
“Nonsense!” said his mum-in-law. “You mean you alone want to take all three of my daughters?” 
“Listen to what you’re saying, Mama!” said 8 Rules. “Who doesn’t have three or four concubines nowadays? Even if you’ve a few more daughters, I'll gladly take them all. When | was young, | learned 
how to be long-lasting in the arts of love. You can be assured that I'll render satisfactory service to every one of them.” 
“That's no good! That’s no good!” said the woman. “I’ve a large handkerchief here with which you can cover your head, blindfold yourself, and determine your fated marriage that way. I’m going to ask 
my daughters to walk past you, and the one you can catch with your hands will be betrothed to you.” Idiot accepted her suggestion and covered his head with his handkerchief. A testimonial poem 
says: 

The fool knows not the true causes of things; beauty’s sword can in secret wound the self. 

The Duke of Zhou of old had fixed the rites. But a bridegroom today still veils his head! 

After Idiot had tied himself up properly, he said, “Mum, ask the dear sisters to come out.” 
“Zhenzhen, Aiai, Lianlian,” cried his mum-in-law, “you all come out and determine your fated marriage, so that one of you may be given to this man.” 
With the sounds of girdle-jade and the fragrance of orchids, it seemed that some mortal ladies had suddenly appeared. Idiot indeed stretched forth his hands to try to catch hold of one of the girls but 
though he darted about madly this way and that, he could not lay hands on anyone on either side of him. It seemed to him, to be sure, that the girls were making all kinds of movement around him but 
he could not grab a single one of them. He lunged toward the east and wrapped his arms around a pillar; he made a dive toward the west and slammed into a wooden partition. Growing faint from 
rushing about like that, he began to stumble and fall all over the place — tripping on the threshold in front of him, smashing into the brick wall behind him! Fumbling and tumbling around, he ended up 
sitting on the floor with a bruised head and a swollen mouth. 
“Mama,” he cried, panting heavily, “you’ve a bunch of slippery daughters! | can’t catch a single one of them! What am | to do? What am | to do?” Taking off his blindfold, the woman said, “Son-in-law, 
it's not that my daughters are slippery; it’s just that they are all very modest. Each defers to the other so that she may take you.” 
“If they are unwilling to take me, Mama,” said 8 Rules, “why don’t you take me instead?” 
“Dear son-in-law,” said the woman, “you really have no regard for age or youth, when you even want your mum-in-law! My three daughters are really quite talented, for each one of them has woven a 
silk undershirt studded with pearls. Try them on, and the one whose shirt fits you'll take you in.” 
“Fine! Fine! Fine!” said 8 Rules. “Bring out all three undershirts and let me try them on. If all fit me, they can all have me.” The woman went inside and took out one undershirt that she handed over to 
8 Rules. Taking off his blue silk shirt, Idiot took up the undergarment and draped it over his body at once. Before he had managed to tie the strings however, he suddenly fell to the floor. The undershirt 
had changed into several pieces of rope which had him tightly bound. As he lay there in unbearable pain, the women vanished. 


We now tell you about Tripitaka, Pilgrim, and Sand-monk who woke up when it began to grow light in the East. As they opened their eyes, they discovered that all the noble halls and buildings had 
vanished. There were neither carved beams nor gilded pillars, for the truth of the matter was that they had all been sleeping in a forest of pines and cedars. In a panic, the elder began to shout for 
Pilgrim, and Sand-monk also cried, “Elder Brother, we're finished! We've met some ghosts!” The Great Sage Sun however, realised fully what had happened. Smiling gently, he said, “What are you 
talking about?” 
“Look where we've been sleeping!” cried the elder. 
“It's pleasant enough in this pine forest,” said Pilgrim, “but | wonder where that Idiot is going through his ordeal.” 
“Who is going through an ordeal?” asked the elder. 
Pilgrim answered with a laugh. “The women of that household happened to be some Nuns from somewhere who'd waited for us to teach us a lesson; they must've left during the night but unfortunate- 
ly Bullseye Eight Rules’s to suffer.” When Tripitaka heard this, he quickly raised his hands to make a salute. Then they saw a slip of paper hanging on an old cedar tree, fluttering in the wind. Sand- 
monk quickly took it down for his master to read. On it was written the following 4-line poem: 
Though the old Dame of Li Shan’ had no desire, Guanyin invited her to leave the mount. 
The Beautiful 1 with Glory and Auspiciousness and Auspicious-World, too were guests who took in the woods the form of maidens fair. 
The holy monk’s virtuous and truly chaste but 8 Rules’ profane, loving things mundane. 
Henceforth he must repent with quiet heart for if he’s slothful, the way will be hard. 
As the elder, Pilgrim, and Sand-monk recited this poem aloud, they heard a loud call from deep in the woods: “Master, the ropes are killing me! Save me, please! I'll never dare do this again!” 
“Wukong,” said Tripitaka, “is it Aware of Ability who is calling us?” 
“Yes,” said Sand-monk. “Brother,” said Pilgrim, “don’t bother about him. Let us leave now.” 
“Though Idiot is stupid and mischievous,” said Tripitaka, “he’s at least fairly honest and he’s arms strong enough to carry the luggage. Let's have some regard for the Nun’s earlier intention, let's rescue 
him so that he may continue to follow us. | doubt that he’ll ever dare do this again.” Sand-monk thereupon rolled up the bedding and put the luggage in order, after which Great Sage Sun untied the 
horse to lead the Tang Monk into the woods to see what had happened. Ah! So it is that you must take care in the pursuit of truth to purge desires, and you'll enter the Real. 


024 
At Long Life Mountain the Great Mortal detains his old friend; at 5 Villages Abbey, Pilgrim steals the ginseng fruit 
The 3 of them who on entering the forest, found Idiot tied to a tree. He was screaming continuously because of the unbearable pain. Pilgrim approached and said to him, laughing, “Dear son-in-law! It's 
getting rather late, and you still haven’t got around to performing the proper ceremony of thanking your parents or announcing your marriage to Master. You're still having a grand old time playing 
games here! Hey! Where's your mama? Where's your wife? What a dear son-in-law, all bound and beaten!” When Idiot heard such ridicule, he was so mortified that he clenched his teeth to try to 
endure the pain without making any more noise. Sand-monk however, could not bear to look at him; he put down the luggage and went forward to untie the ropes. After he was freed, Idiot could only 
drop to his knees and respect toward the sky, for he was filled with shame. For him we've as a testimony this lines to the poem of Moon Over West River. 
Eros’s a sword injurious: live by it and you'll be slain. 
The lady so fair and lovely at 16’s more vicious than a Nature spirit! 
You've but one principal sum; you can’t add profit to your purse. 
Guard and keep well your precious capital that you mustn’t squander and waste. 
Scooping up some dirt and scattering it like incense, 8 Rules saluted to the sky. “Did you recognise those Nuns at all?” asked Pilgrim. 
“| was in a stupor, about to faint,” replied 8 Rules. “How’d | recognise anyone?” 
Pilgrim then handed him the slip of paper. When 8 Rules saw the Verse, he was more embarrassed than ever. “Second Brother's all the luck,” said Sand-monk with a laugh, “for you've attracted these 
four nuns here to become your wives!” 
“Brother,” said 8 Rules, “let's not ever mention that again! It's blasphemy! From now on, I'll never dare do such foolish things again. Even if it breaks my bones, I'll carry the pole and luggage to follow 
Master to the West.” 
“You're finally speaking sensibly,” said Tripitaka. 
Pilgrim then led his master up the main road, and after journeying for a long time, they suddenly came upon a tall mountain. Pulling in the reins, Tripitaka said, “Disciples, let's be careful as we travel 
up this mountain before us, for there may be monsters seeking to harm us.” 
“Ahead of your horse you've the three of us,” said Pilgrim. “Why fear the monsters?” 
Reassured by these words, the elder proceeded. That mountain is truly a magnificent mountain: a fall mountain most rugged, its shape both lofty and grand. Its root joins the Kunlun? ranges; top reaches 
to the sky. White cranes come often to perch on junipers; black apes hang frequently on the vines. As the sun lights up the forest, strands upon strands of red mist are circling; as wind rises from dark 
gorges, 10000 pink cloud pieces soar and fly. Hidden birds recite madly in green bamboos; pheasants do battle amidst wildflowers. You see those Millennium, 5-Blessings, and the Hibiscus Peak — 
they all glow and shimmer most awesomely; those Ageless, Tiger-Tooth Rock, and 3-Heaven Rock — where auspicious air rises endlessly. Below the cliff, delicate grass; atop the ridge, fragrant plum. 
The thorns and briars are thick; the orchids are pale and pure. The deep woods’ phoenix musters 1000 fowls; an old cave’s unicorn rules countless beasts. Even the brook seems caring: she twists 
and turns as if looking back. The peaks are continuous: row upon row circling all around. You also see those green locust trees, ‘mottled bamboos, and verdant pines -— rivals ever fresh in their dense 
lushness; those pears milk-white, peaches red, and willows green — all competing in their Triple-Spring hues. Dragons recite and tigers roar; the cranes exercise and the apes wail; the musk deer from 
flowers walk out; the phoenix cries facing the sun. It’s a mount divine, land of true blessings, the same as Penglai, wondrous fairy land. See those flowers blooming and dying — this mountain scene 
where clouds draw near or leave the soaring peaks. With great delight, Tripitaka said as he rode along, “Disciples, since | began this journey to the West, I’ve passed through many regions, all rather 
treacherous and difficult to traverse. None of the other places has scenery like this mountain that's extraordinarily beautiful. Perhaps we're not far from Thunderclap and if so, we'd prepare in a dignified 
and solemn manner to meet the World’s Honoured One.” 
“It's early, much too early!” said Pilgrim, laughing. “We're nowhere near!” 
“Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “how far it’s for us to reach Thunderclap?” 
“A hundred and eight thousand miles,” said Pilgrim, “and we've not even covered one-tenth of the distance.” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “how many years do we've to travel before we get there?” 
“If we're talking about you two, my worthy brothers,” said Pilgrim, “this journey would take some ten days. If we’re talking about me, I'd probably make about fifty round trips in a day and there would 
still be sunlight. But if we’re talking about Master, then don’t even think about it!” 
“Wukong,” said the Tang Monk, “tell us when we'll be able to reach our destination.” 
Pilgrim said, “You can walk from the time of your youth till the time you grow old, and after that, till you become youthful again; and even after going through such a cycle a thousand times, you may 
still find it difficult to reach the place you want to go to. But when you perceive, by the resoluteness of your will, a god-nature in all things, and when every one of your thoughts goes back to its very 
source in your memory, that will be the time you arrive at the Spirit Mountain.” 
“Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “even though this is not the region of Thunderclap, a place of such scenic splendour must be the residence of a good man.” 
“That's an appropriate observation,” said Pilgrim, “for this can hardly be a place for demons or goblins; rather, it must be the home of a holy monk or a mortal. We can walk leisurely and enjoy the 
scenery.” 
The mountain had the name of the Long Life Mountain. In the mountain there was a Daoist Abbey called the 5 Villages Abbey; it was the abode of a mortal whose Daoist style was Master Zhenyuan> 
and whose nickname was Lord, Equal to Earth. There was moreover a strange treasure grown in this temple, a spiritual root that was formed just after chaos had been parted and the nebula had been 
established prior to the division of Heaven and Earth. Throughout the four great continents of the world, it could be found in only the Five Villages Abbey in the West Aparagodantya Continent. This 
treasure was called grass of the reverted cinnabar,* or the ginseng fruit. It took three millennia for the plant to bloom, another three millennia to bear fruit, and still another three millennia before they 
ripened. Overall, it would be nearly ten millennia before they could be eaten, and even after such a long time, there would be only thirty such fruits. The shape of the fruit was exactly that of a new-born 
infant not yet three days old, complete with the four limbs and the five senses. If a man had the good fortune of even smelling the fruit, he would live for three hundred and sixty years; if he ate one, he 
would reach his forty-seven thousandth year. 
That day, the Great Zhenyua mortal happened to have received a card from the Celestial Worthy of Original Commencement who invited him to the Miluo Palace in the Heaven of Highest Clarity to 
listen to the discourse on “The Daoist Fruit of the Chaotic Origin.” That Great Mortal had already trained countless disciples to become mortals; even now he had with him some forty-eight disciples, all 
Daoists of the Quanzhen Order who had acquired the Way. When he went up to the region above to listen to the lecture that day, he took forty-six disciples along with him, leaving behind two of the 
youngest ones to look after the temple. One was called Clear Breeze, and the other was named Bright Moon. Clear Breeze was only one thousand two hundred and twenty years old while Bright Moon 
had just passed his one thousand two hundredth birthday. Before his departure, Master Zhenyuan gave instructions to the two young lads, saying, “I can’t refuse the invitation of the Great Honourable 
Divine, and I’m leaving for the Miluo Palace to attend a lecture. You two must be watchful, for an old friend of mine will be passing by here any day. Don't fail to treat him kindly: you may in fact strike 
down from the tree two of the ginseng fruits for him to eat as a token of our past friendship.” 
“Who is this friend of yours, Master?” asked one of the lads. “Tell us, so that we may take good care of him.” 
“He is a holy monk serving the Great Tang Emperor in the land of the East,” said the Great Mortal, “and his religious name is Tripitaka. He is now on his way to the Western Heaven to acquire scriptures 
from God.” 
“According to Confucius,” said 1 of the lads, laughing, “One doesn’t take counsel with those who follow a different Way.’We belong to the Mysterious Fold of the Great Monad. Why'd we associate with 
a Religious monk?” 
“You'd know,” said the Great Mortal, “that that monk happens to be the incarnate Gold Cicada, the second disciple of Siddhartha, the Aged Sage of the West. Five centuries ago, | became acquainted 
with him during the Feast of the Ullambana Bowl when he presented me tea with his own hands as the various sons of God paid me their respect. That's why | consider him an old friend.” When the 
two mortal lads heard these words, they accepted them as the instruction of their master. As the Great Mortal was about to leave, he cautioned them again, saying, “Those fruits of mine are all 
numbered. You may give him two but no more.” 
“When the garden’s opened to the public,” said Clear Breeze, “we shared and ate two of the fruits; there’d be still twenty-eight of them on the tree. We'd think of using no more than you've told us to.” 
The Great Mortal said, “I fear though Tripitaka Tang’s an old friend, his disciples may be somewhat rowdy. It’s best not to let them know about the fruits.” 
After he had finished giving these instructions to the 2 lads, the Great Mortal ascended to the region of Heaven with all his disciples. The Tang Monk and his 3 companions were making a tour of the 
mountain. Looking up, they suddenly discovered several tall buildings by a cluster of pines and bamboos. “Wukong,” said the Tang Monk, “what sort of place do you think that is over there?” 
After taking a look at it, Pilgrim said, “It’s either a Daoist abbey or a Religious monastery. Let's move along and we'll find out more about it when we get there.” They soon arrived at the gate and saw a 
pine knoll cool and serene; a bamboo path dark and secluded; white cranes coming and leaving with clouds afloat; and apes climbing up and down to hand out fruits. Before the gate, the pond’s wide 
and trees cast long shadows; the rocks crack, breaking the moss’s growth. Palatial halls dark and tall as the purple Heaven; and towers aloft from which bright red mists descend. Truly a blessed 
region, a spiritual place like the cloudy cave of Penglai: quiet, untouched by the affairs of man; tranquil, fit to nurse the mind of Dao. Bluebirds may bring at times a Queen Mum’s note; a phoenix oft 
arrives with a Laozi scroll. There’s no end to the sight of this noble Daoist scene: it's the spacious home of mortals indeed! As the Tang Monk dismounted, he saw on the left a huge stone tablet on 
which the following inscription was written in large letters: 
The Blessed Land of the Long Life Mountain. The Cave Heaven of the 5 Villages Abbey. 
“Disciples,” said the Elder, “it's indeed a Daoist abbey.” 
“Master,” said Sand-monk, “with such splendid scenery, there must be a good man living in this temple. Let us go in and take a look. When we return to the East after completing our merits, this may 
be the place for another visit because of its marvellous scenery.” 
“Well spoken,” said Pilgrim, and they all went inside. On both sides of the 2"4 gate they saw this New Year couplet: 


Long-living and ever young, this mortal house. 

Of the same age as Heaven, this Daoist home. 
Pilgrim said with a snicker, “This Daoist’s mouthing big words just to intimidate people! When I, old monkey, caused disturbance in the Heavenly Palace five centuries ago, | didn’t encounter such words 
even on the door of Laozi!” 
“Never mind him!” said 8 Rules. “Let's go inside! Let’s go inside! You never know, maybe this Daoist does possess some virtuous accomplishment.” 
When they passed through the second gate, they were met by 2 young lads who were hurrying out. Look how they appear: healthy in bone and spirit with visage fair, on their heads were short bundled 
tufts of hair. Their Daoist gowns, free falling, seemed wrapped in mists; feathered robes, more quaint, for the wind-blown sleeves. Dragon-heads had their sashes knotted tight; silk cords laced lightly 
their sandals of straw. Such uncommon looks were of no worldly-born; they were Clear Breeze and Bright Moon, 2 lads divine. The 2 young lads came out to meet them, saluting and saying, “Old 
master, forgive us for not coming to meet you. Please take a seat.” 
Delighted, the elder followed the two lads to the main hall to look around. There were altogether 5 huge chambers facing south separated by floor-length windows that had carved panes and were 
translucent at the top and solid at the bottom. Pushing open 1 of these, the 2 mortal lads invited the Tang Monk into the central chamber with a panel hanging on the middle wall on which 2 large 
characters — “Heaven, Earth” - were embroidered in five colours. Beneath the panel was a cinnabar-red lacquered incense table on which there was an urn of yellow gold. Conveniently placed beside 
the urn were several sticks of incense. 
The Tang Monk went forward and with his left hand, took up some incense to put into the urn. He then saluted himself three times before the table, after which he turned around and said, “Mortal lads, 
your Five Villages Abbey is in truth a godly region of the West. But why’s it that you don’t worship the Three Pure Ones, thearchs of Four Quarters, or the many Lords of High Heaven? Why is it that 
you merely put up these two words of Heaven and Earth to receive the oblation of fire and incense?” Smiling, one of the lads said, “To tell you the truth, Master, putting these two words up is an act of 
flattery on the part of our teacher, for of these two words, the one on top,8may deserve our reverence but the one below is hardly worthy of our fire and incense.” 
“What do you mean by an act of flattery?” asked Tripitaka. The lad replied, “The Three Pure Ones are friends of our teacher; the Four Thearchs, his old acquaintances; the Nine Luminaries, his junior 
colleagues; and a god of the New Year, his unwanted guest!” 
When Pilgrim heard this remark, he laughed so hard that he could barely stand up. “Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “why are you laughing?” 
“Talk about the shenanigans of old monkey!” said Pilgrim. “Just listen to the flimflam of this Daoist kid!” 
“Where is your honourable teacher?” asked Tripitaka. “Our teacher,” said the lad, “had been invited by the Honourable Divine of the Origin to attend a lecture on ‘The Daoist Fruit of the Chaotic Origin’ 
at the Miluo Palace in the Heaven of Highest Clarity. He’s not home.” 
No longer able to restrain himself after hearing these words, Pilgrim shouted: “You stinking young Daoists! You can’t even recognise people! Whom you're trying to hoodwink? What kind of Tara-diddle 
is this? Who is that Heavenly Mortal in the Miluo Palace who wanted to invite this wild bull shank of yours? And what sort of lecture is he going to give?” When Tripitaka saw how aroused Pilgrim was, 
he feared that the lads might give some reply that would lead to real trouble. So he said, “Wukong, stop being quarrelsome. If we leave this place the moment after we arrive, it is hardly a friendly 
gesture. The proverb says, ‘The egrets do not devour the egret’s flesh.’ If their teacher is not here, why bother them? You go to graze the horse outside the temple gate; let Sand-monk look after the 
luggage and 8 Rules fetch some grain from our bags. Let's borrow their pans and stove to prepare a meal for ourselves. When we're done, we can pay them a few pennies for firewood and that will be 
the end of the matter. Attend to your business, each of you, and let me rest here for a while. After the meal, we'll leave.” 
The 3 of them duly went about their business. Clear Breeze and Bright Moon filled with admiration, said softly to each other: “What a monk! Truly the disciple of a lovable sage of the West whose true 
origin is not at all obscured! Well, our master told us to take care of the Tang Monk and to serve him some ginseng fruits as a token of past friendship. He also cautioned us about the rowdiness of his 
disciples and he’d not have been more correct. It’s a good thing that those three so fierce in their looks and so churlish in their manners, were sent away. For had they remained, they would certainly 
have to see the ginseng fruits.” 
Then Clear Breeze said, “Brother, we're still not quite certain whether that monk is really an old acquaintance of Master. We'd better ask him and not make a mistake.” 
The 2 lads therefore went forward again and said, “May we ask the old master whether he is Tripitaka Tang from the Great Tang Empire who is on his way to fetch scriptures from the Western Heaven?” 
Returning their salutes, the elder said, “I’m, indeed. How is it that the mortal youths know my vulgar name?” 
“Before our master’s departure,” said one of them,” he gave us instructions that we'd go some distance to meet you. We didn’t expect your arrival to be so soon, and thus we failed in the proper etiquette 
of greeting you. Please take a seat, Master, and allow us to serve you tea.” 
“I hardly deserve that,” said Tripitaka but Bright Moon went quickly back to his room and brought back a cup of fragrant tea to present to the elder. After Tripitaka had drunk the tea, Clear Breeze said, 
“Brother, we must not disobey our master’s command. Let's go and bring back the fruit.” 
The two lads took leave of Tripitaka and went back to their room where one of them took out a gold mallet and the other a wooden tray for carrying elixir. They also spread out several silk handkerchiefs 
on the tray before going to the Ginseng Garden. Clear Breeze then climbed on the tree to strike at the fruits with the mallet while Bright Moon waited below, holding the tray. In a moment, two of the 
fruits dropped down and fell onto the tray. The young lads returned to the main hall and presented the fruits to the Tang Monk, saying, “Master Tang, our Five Villages Abbey is situated in the midst of 
wild and desolate country. There’s not much that we can offer you except these two fruits, our local products. Please use them to relieve your thirst.” When the elder saw the fruits, he trembled all over 
and backed away three feet, saying, “Goodness! Goodness! The harvest seems to be plentiful this year! But why is this abbey so destitute that they have to practice cannibalism here? These’re new- 
born infants not yet three days old! How could you serve them to me to relieve my thirst?” 
“This monk,” said Clear Breeze quietly to himself, “has been so corrupted by the fields of mouths and tongues, by the sea of strife and envy, that all he possesses are but two fleshly eyes and a worldly 
mind. That's why he can’t recognise the strange treasures of our divine abode!” Bright Moon then drew near and said, “Master, this thing is called ginseng fruit. It’s perfectly all right for you to eat one.” 
“Nonsense! Nonsense!” said Tripitaka. “Their parents went through who knows how much suffering before they brought them to birth! How could you serve them as fruits when they are less than three 
days old?” Clear Breeze said, “Honestly, they were formed on a tree.” 
“Rubbish! Rubbish!” said the elder. “How can people grow on trees? Take them away! This is blasphemy!” When the young lads saw that he absolutely refused to eat them, they had no choice but to 
take the tray back to their own room. The fruit is peculiar: if it is kept too long, it will become stiff and inedible. So, when the two of them reached their room, they each took one of the fruits and began 
to eat them, sitting on the edge of their beds. 
Alas, now this is what has to happen! That chamber of theirs was immediately adjacent to the kitchen; joined in fact by a common wall. Even the whispered words from one room could be heard in the 
other, and 8 Rules was busily cooking rice in the kitchen. All that talk, moments before, about taking the golden mallet and the elixir tray had already caught his attention. Then, when he heard how the 
Tang Monk could not recognise ginseng fruits that were served him, and how they had to be eaten by the young lads in their own room, he could not stop his mouth-watering, and said to himself, “How 
can | try one myself?” Since he himself was reluctant to do anything, he decided to wait for Pilgrim’s arrival so that they could plan something together. Completely distracted by now from tending the 
fire in the stove, he kept sticking his head out of the door to watch for Pilgrim. In a little while, he saw Pilgrim arrive, leading the horse. Having tied the horse to a locust tree, Pilgrim started to walk 
toward the rear, when Idiot waved to him madly with his hands, crying, “Come this way! Come this way!” Pilgrim turned around and went to the door of the kitchen, saying, “Idiot, why are you yelling? 
Not enough rice, perhaps? Let the old monk have his fill first, and we can beg more rice from some big household along our way.” 
“Come in,” said 8 Rules. “This has nothing to do with the amount of rice we’ve. There’s a treasure in this Daoist temple. Did you know that?” 
“What kind of treasure?” asked Pilgrim. 
“I can tell you,” said 8 Rules with a laugh, “but you’ve never seen it; | can put it before you but you'll not recognise it.” 
“You must be joking, Idiot,” said Pilgrim. “Five centuries ago, when I, old monkey, searched for the Way of Mortality, | went all the way to the corner of the ocean and the edge of the sky. What can 
there be that I've never seen?” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “have you ever seen the ginseng fruit?” Somewhat startled, Pilgrim said, “That | really have never seen! But I’ve heard that ginseng fruit is the grass of the reverted 
cinnabar. When a man eats it, his life will be prolonged. But where can one get a-hold of it?” 
“They have it here,” said 8 Rules. “The two lads brought two of these fruits for Master to eat but that old monk could not recognise them for what they were. He said that they were infants not yet three 
days old and dared not eat them. The lads themselves were quite disobliging; if Master would not eat, they should have given them to us. Instead, they hid them from us. Just now in the room next 
door, each had a fruit to himself and finished it with great relish. | got so excited that | was drooling, wondering how I'd have a taste of this fruit. | know you're quite tricky. How about going to their garden 
and stealing a few for us to have a taste of them?” 
“That's easy,” said Pilgrim. “Old monkey will go, and they will be at the reach of his hands!” He turned quickly and began to walk to the front. 8 Rules caught hold of him and said, “Elder Brother, | heard 
them talking in the room, and they mentioned something about using a gold mallet to knock down the fruits. You must do it properly, and without being detected.” 
“| know! | know!” exclaimed Pilgrim. 
Great Sage used the magic of body concealment and stole into the Daoist chamber. The 2 Daoist lads were not in the room, for they had gone back to the main hall to speak to the Tang Monk after 
they had finished eating the fruits. Pilgrim looked everywhere for the gold mallet and discovered a stick of red gold hanging on the window pane: it was about 2 feet long and as thick as a finger. At the 
lower end there was a knob about the size of a clove of garlic while the upper end had a hole through which a green woollen thread was fastened. He said to himself: “This must be the thing called the 
gold mallet.” Taking it down, he left the Daoist chamber, went to the rear, and pushed through a double-leaf door to have a look. Ah, it’s a garden! See vermilion fences and carved railings; artificial hills 
ruggedly built. Strange flowers rival the sun in brightness; bamboos match well the clear sky in blueness. Beyond the flowing-cup pavilion, 1 curved band of willows like mists outspread; before the 
moon-gazing terrace, bands of choice pines like spilled indigo. Shining red, pomegranates with brocade-like sacs; fresh, tender green, grass by the ornamental stools; luxuriant blue, sand-orchids like 
jade; limpid and smooth, the water in the brook. The cassia glows with the Wutong by the golden well; °the locust trees stand near the red fences and marble steps. Some red and some white: peaches 
with 1000 leaves; some fragrant and some yellow: chrysanthemums of late fall. The rush-flower supports complement the peony pavilion; the hibiscus terrace connects with the peony plot. There are 
countless princely bamboos that mock the frost and noble pines that defy the snow. There are moreover crane hamlets and deer homes, the square pool and the round pond. The stream spills chips 
of jade; the ground sprouts mounds of gold. The winter wind cracks and whitens the plum blossoms; a touch of spring breaks open the begonia’s red. Truly it may be called the best fairy land on Earth, 
the finest floral site of the West. Pilgrim could not take his eyes off this marvellous place. He came upon another door that he pushed open and found inside a vegetable garden planted with the herbs 
of all 4 seasons: spinach, celery, mare’s tail,"° beet, ginger, and seaweed; bamboo shoot, melon, squash, and watercress; chive, garlic, coriander, leek, and scallion; hollow water-lotus, young celery, 
and bitter Su; "the gourd and the eggplant that must be trimmed; green turnip, white turnip, and taro deep in the earth; red spinach, green cabbage, and purple mustard plant. ‘Pilgrim smiled to himself 
and said, “So he’s a Daoist who eats his home-grown food!” 
He walked past the vegetable garden and found another door that he pushed open also. Ah! There was a huge tree right in the middle of the garden with long, healthy branches and luxuriant green 
leaves that somewhat resembled those of the plantain. Soaring straight up, the tree was over a thousand feet tall, and its base must have measured sixty or seventy feet around. Leaning on the tree, 
Pilgrim looked up and found one ginseng fruit sticking out on one of the branches pointing southward. It certainly had the appearance of an infant with a tail-like peduncle. Look at it dangling from the 
end of the branch with limbs moving wildly and head bobbing madly! It seemed to make sounds as it swung in the breeze. Filled with admiration and delight, Pilgrim said to himself, “What a marvellous 
thing! It’s rarely seen! It’s rarely seen!” With a swish, he vaulted up the tree. 
The monkey was an expert in climbing trees and stealing fruits. He took the gold mallet and struck lightly at the fruit that dropped at once from the branch. Pilgrim leaped down after it but the fruit was 
nowhere to be seen. Though he searched for it all over the grass, there was not a trace of it. “Strange! Strange!” said Pilgrim. “I suppose it could walk with its legs but even so, it could hardly have 
jumped across the wall. | know! It must be the local spirit of this garden who will not allow me to steal the fruit; he must have taken it.” Making the magic sign and reciting a spell that began with the 
letter om, he summoned the local spirit of the garden who came saluting Pilgrim and said, “Great Sage, what sort of instructions do you've for this humble deity?” 
“Don’t you know,” said Pilgrim, “that old monkey happens to be the world’s most famous thief? When | stole the mortal peaches, the imperial juice, and the efficacious pills that year, there was no one 
brave enough to share the spoils with me. How is it, therefore, when | steal just one of their fruits today, that you've the gall to snatch away the prime portion? Since these fruits are formed on a tree, | 
suppose even the fowls of the air may partake of them. What’s wrong with my eating one of them? How dare you grab it the moment | knock it down?” 
“Great Sage,” said the local spirit, “you’ve made a mistake in blaming me. This treasure’s something that belongs to an earthbound mortal whereas I’m only a ghost mortal. ‘Would | dare take it? | 
don’t even have the good fortune to smell it!” 
“If you hadn't snatched it,” said Pilgrim, “why did it disappear the moment it fell?” 
“You may know only about its power to prolong life, Great Sage,” said the local spirit, “but you don’t know its background.” 


“What do you mean by background?” said Pilgrim. 

“This treasure,” said the local spirit, “will bloom only once in three millennia; it will bear fruit after another three millennia; and the fruit won’t ripen for yet another three millennia. Overall, one must wait 
for almost ten millennia before there are thirty of these fruits. A person lucky enough to smell it once will live for three hundred and sixty years; if he eats one, he will live for forty-seven millennia. 
However, the fruit is resistant to the Five Phases.” 
“What do you mean by resistant to the Five Phases?” asked Pilgrim. The local spirit replied, “This fruit will fall when it encounters gold; it will wither when it encounters wood; it will melt when it encounters 
water; it will dry up if it encounters fire; and it will be assimilated if it encounters earth. That is why one has to use an instrument of gold to knock it down but when it falls, it has to be held by a tray 
cushioned with silk handkerchiefs. The moment it touches wood, it will wither and will not prolong life even if it's eaten. When it is eaten, it should be held in a porcelain container and should be dissolved 
with water. Again, fire will dry it up and it will be useless. Finally, what is meant by its assimilation into earth may be illustrated by what happened just now, for when you knocked it down, it at once 
crawled into the ground. This part of the garden will last for at least forty-seven millennia. Even a steel pick will be unable to bore through it, for it is three or four times harder than raw iron. That is why 
a man will live long if he eats one of the fruits. If you don’t believe me, Great Sage, strike at the ground and see for yourself.” Whipping out his golden-hooped rod, Pilgrim gave the ground a terrific 
blow. The rod rebounded at once but there was not the slightest mark on the ground. “Indeed! Indeed!” said Pilgrim. “This rod of mine can turn a boulder into powder; it will leave its mark even on raw 
iron. How is it that there’s not even a scratch on the ground? Well, in that case, I've made a mistake in blaming you. You may go back.”’4 The local spirit thus went back to his own shrine. 

The Great Sage however, had his own plan: after climbing up on the tree, he held the golden mallet in one hand and with the other, pulled up the front of his silk shirt to make a little sack. Parting the 
leaves and branches, he knocked three of the fruits into the sack. He jumped down from the tree and ran straight to the kitchen. “Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules smiling, “do you’ve them?” 

“Aren't these the ones?” said Pilgrim. “I reached and took, that’s all! But we'd not let Sand-monk pass up the chance of tasting this fruit. You call him.” 8 Rules waved his hands and cried, “Awakened 
to Purity, come!” Setting down the luggage, Sand-monk ran into the kitchen and said, “Elder Brother, why did you call me?” 

Opening the sack, Pilgrim said, “Brother, take a look. What're these?” 

When Sand-monk saw them, he said, “Ginseng fruits.” 

“Fine!” said Pilgrim. “So, you recognise them! Where did you taste them before?” 

“I've never tasted the fruit before,” said Sand-monk. “But when | was the Curtain-Raising Captain, | waited on the Throne to attend the Festival of Mortal Peaches, and | once saw many mortals from 
beyond the sea presenting this fruit to the Lady Queen Mum as a birthday gift. So I’ve seen it but I’ve never tasted it. Elder Brother, will you let me try a little?” 

“No need to say anymore,” said Pilgrim. “There’s one for each of us brothers.” 

The three of them took the fruits and began to enjoy them. That 8 Rules, of course, had a huge appetite and a huge mouth. When he heard the conversation of the young lads earlier, he already felt 
ravenous. The moment he saw the fruit, therefore, he grabbed it and with one gulp, swallowed it whole. Then he rolled up his eyes and said in a roguish manner to Pilgrim and Sand-monk, “What are 
you two eating?” 

“Ginseng fruit,” said Sand-monk. “How does it taste?” asked 8 Rules. “Awakened to Purity,” said Pilgrim, “don’t listen to him. He ate it first. Why all these questions now?” 

“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “I ate it somewhat too hurriedly, not as the two of you're doing, mincing and munching little by little to discover its taste. | swallowed it without even knowing whether it had 
a pit or not! Elder Brother, if you’re helping someone, help him to the end. You've roused the worms in my stomach! Please fetch me another fruit so that | can take time to enjoy it.” 

“Brother,” said Pilgrim, “you really don’t know when to stop! This thing here is not like rice or noodles, food to stuff yourself with. There are only thirty such fruits in ten millennia! It’s our great fortune to 
have eaten one already, and you’d not regard this lightly. Stop now! It's enough.” He stretched himself and threw the gold mallet into the adjacent room through a little hole on the window paper without 
saying anything more to 8 Rules. 

Idiot however, kept muttering and mumbling to himself. When the two Daoist lads unexpectedly came back to the room to fetch some tea for the Tang Monk, they heard 8 Rules complaining about “not 
enjoying my ginseng fruit,” and saying that it would be much better if he could have a taste of another one. Hearing this, Clear Breeze grew suspicious and said, “Bright Moon, listen to that monk with 
the long horn; he said he wanted to eat another ginseng fruit. Before our master’s departure, he told us to be wary of their mischief. Could it be that they have stolen our treasures?” Turning around, 
Bright Moon said, “Elder Brother, it looks bad, very bad! Why has the golden mallet fallen to the ground? Let's go into the garden to take a look.” They ran hastily to the back and found the door to the 
flower garden open. “I closed this door myself,” said Clear Breeze. “Why is it open?” They ran past the flower garden and saw that the door to the vegetable garden was also open. They dashed into 
the ginseng garden; running up to the tree, they started to count, staring upward. Back and forth they counted but they could find only twenty-two of the fruits. “You know how to do accounting?” asked 
Bright Moon. “I do,” said Clear Breeze, “give me the figures!” 

“There were originally thirty fruits,” said Bright Moon. “When Master opened the garden to the public, he divided two of them for all of us, so that twenty-eight fruits were left. Just now we knocked down 
two more for the Tang Monk, leaving twenty-six behind. Now we've only twenty-two left. Doesn't that mean that four are missing? No need for further explanation; they must have been stolen by that 
bunch of rogues. Let's go and chide the Tang Monk.” 

The two of them went out of the garden gate and came directly back to the main hall. Pointing their fingers at the Tang Monk, they berated him with all kinds of foul and abusive language, accusing him 
of being a larcenous baldhead and a thievish rat. They went on like this for a long time, until finally the Tang Monk could not endure it any longer. “Divine lads,” he said, “why’re you making all this fuss? 
Be quiet a moment. If you've something to say, say it slowly but don’t use such nonsensical language.” 

“Are you deaf?” asked Clear Breeze. “Am | speaking in a barbarian tongue that you can’t understand? You stole and ate our ginseng fruits. Do you now forbid me to say so?” 

“What is a ginseng fruit like?” asked the Tang Monk. 
“Like an infant,” said Bright Moon, “as you said when we brought two of them for you to eat just now.” 

“Infinite Light God!” exclaimed the Tang Monk. “I only had to take one look at that thing and | trembled all over! You think I’d dare steal one and eat it? Even if I'd a case of bulimia, I'd not dare indulge 
in such thievery. Don’t blame the wrong person.” 
“You might not have eaten them,” said Clear Breeze, “but your followers wanted to steal them and eat them.” 

“Perhaps you're right,” said Tripitaka, “but there’s no need for you to shout. Let me ask them. If they have stolen them, I'll ask them to repay you.” 

“Repay!” said Bright Moon. “You'd not buy these fruits even if you had the money!” 

“If they can’t buy them with money,” said Tripitaka, “they can at least offer you an apology, for as the proverb says, ‘Righteousness is worth a thousand pieces of gold.’ That should be sufficient. 
Moreover, we’re still not sure whether it is my disciples who took your fruits.” 

“What do you mean, not sure?” said Bright Moon. “They were arguing among themselves, saying something about the portions not being equally divided.” 

“Disciples,” cried Tripitaka, “come, all of you.” When Sand-monk heard this, he said, “It’s terrible! We've been discovered! Old master is calling us, and the Daoist lads are making all this racket. They 
must have found out!” 
“It is extremely embarrassing!” said Pilgrim. “This is just a matter of food and drink. But if we say so, that means we're stealing for our mouths! Let’s not admit it.” 
“Yes! Yes!” said 8 Rules. “Let's deny it!” The 3 of them had no choice however but to leave the kitchen for the main hall. 


025 
The Zhenyua mortal gives chase to catch the scripture monk; Pilgrim Sun greatly disturbs Five Villages Abbey 
The 3 brothers who went to the main hall and said to their master, “The rice’s almost done. Why did you call us?” 
“Disciples,” said Tripitaka, “I didn’t want to ask you about the rice. They have something called the ginseng fruit in this Abbey that looks like a new-born infant. Which one of you stole it and ate it?” 
“Honestly,” said 8 Rules, “I don’t know anything about it, and I’ve not seen it.” 
“It's the one who is laughing! It’s the one who is laughing!” said Clear Breeze. “I was born with a laughing face!” snapped Pilgrim. “Don’t think because you've lost some kind of a fruit that you can keep 
me from laughing!” 
“Disciple, don’t get angry,” said Tripitaka. “Those of us who have left the family should not lie, nor should we enjoy stolen food. If you’ve in truth eaten it, you owe them an apology. Why deny it so 
vehemently?” When Pilgrim perceived how reasonable this advice of his master was, he said truthfully, “Master, it's not my fault. It was 8 Rules who overheard those two Daoist lads eating some sort 
of ginseng fruit. He wanted to try one to see how it tasted and told me to knock down three of the fruits; each of us brothers had one. It’s true that we’ve eaten them. What's to be done about that?” 
“He stole four of the fruits,” said Bright Moon, “and still this monk could claim that he’s not a thiefl” 
“Infinite Light God!” said 8 Rules. “If you stole four of them, why did you only bring out three for us to divide among ourselves? Didn't you skim something off the top already?” 
So saying, Idiot began to make a fuss again. When the mortal lads found out the truth, they became even more abusive in their language; the Great Sage became so enraged that he ground his steel- 
like teeth audibly and opened wide his fiery eyes. He gripped his golden-hooped rod repeatedly, struggling to restrain himself and saying to himself, “These malicious youths! They certainly know how 
to give people a lashing with their tongues! All right, so I’ve to take such abuse from them. Let me offer them in return ‘a plan for eliminating posterity,’ and none of them will have any more fruit to eat!” 
Dear Pilgrim! He pulled off a strand of hair behind his head and blew on it with his magic breath, crying “Change!” It changed at once into a specious Pilgrim, standing by the Tang Monk, Awakened to 
Purity, and Aware of Ability to receive the scolding from the Daoist lads. His true spirit rose into the clouds, and with one leap he arrived at the ginseng garden. Whipping out his golden-hooped rod, he 
gave the tree a terrific blow, after which he used that mountain-moving divine strength of his to give it a mighty shove. Alas, leaves fell, limbs cracked, and roots became exposed; the Daoists lost their 
grass of reverted cinnabar. After the Great Sage had pushed down the tree, he tried to look for the fruits on the branches but he could not find even half a fruit. The treasure would fall when it met with 
gold, and both ends of his rod were wrapped in gold. Moreover, iron is also one of the five metallic elements. The blow of the rod, therefore, shook loose all the fruits from the tree, and when they fell, 
they became assimilated to the earth once they touched the ground, so that there was not a single fruit left on the tree. “Fine! Fine!” he said. “Now all of us can scram!” He put away his iron rod and 
went back to the front. With a shake of his body he retrieved his hair but the rest of the people, like those of fleshly eyes and mortal stock, could not perceive what had taken place. 
We now tell you about the two mortal lads who ranted at the pilgrims for a long time. Clear Breeze said, “Bright Moon, these monks do take our reproach quite well. We've been upbraiding them as if 
they were chickens all this time but not once have they even attempted to answer us. Could it be that they really did not steal the fruits? With the tree so tall and the leaves so dense, we’d have made 
a mistake in our tallying, and we might have chided them unjustly. We'd go and investigate further.” 
“You're right,” said Bright Moon and the 2 of them accordingly went back to the garden. But what they saw was only a tree on the ground with broken boughs and fallen leaves without so much as a 
single fruit on it. Clear Breeze was so aghast that his legs gave way and he fell to the ground; Bright Moon shook so violently that he could hardly stand up. Both of them were scared out of their wits! 
As testimony, this poem says: 
Tripitaka went westward to the Long Life Mount; Wukong cut down the grass of reverted cinnabar. 
Boughs broken and leaves fallen, the divine root exposed: Clear Breeze and Bright Moon were horrified! 
The two of them lay on the ground, hardly able to speak coherently. They could only blurt out, “What’ll we do? What'll we do? The magic root of our Five Villages Abbey's severed! The seed of this 
divine house of ours is cut off! When our master returns, what'll we tell him?” 
Then Bright Moon said, “Elder Brother, stop hollering! Let’s pull ourselves together and not alarm those monks. There’s no one else here; it has to be that fellow with a hairy face and a thunder-god 
beak who used magic unseen to ruin our treasure. If we try to talk to him, he will probably deny it, and further argument may well lead to actual combat. In the event of a fight, how do you suppose the 
two of us could stand up to the four of them? It would be better if we deceived them now by saying that the fruits were not missing, and that since we made a mistake in our counting, we're offering 
them our own apology. Their rice is almost cooked. When they eat, we’ll even present them with a few side dishes. When each of them is holding a bowl, you stand on the left of the door and I'll stand 
on the right, and we'll slam the door shut together. We'll lock it and all the other doors of this Abbey too, so that they will be unable to escape. We can then wait for Master to return and let him do with 
them what he wills. Since the Tang Monk is an old acquaintance of Master, he might decide to forgive them, and that would be his act of kindness. Should he decide not to however, we've at least 
managed to catch the thieves, for which we ourselves might be forgiven.” 
When he heard these words, Clear Breeze said, “You're right! You’re right!” 
The 2 of them forced themselves to look cheerful as they walked back to the main hall from the rear garden. Saluting the Tang Monk, they said, “Master, our coarse and vulgar language just now must 
have offended you. Please pardon us!” 
“What're you saying?” asked Tripitaka. “The fruits were not missing,” said Clear Breeze, “but we'd not see them clearly because of the dense foliage. We went back again to have a second look and 
we found the original number.” 


Hearing this, 8 Rules chimed in at once. “You lads, you’re young and impulsive, quick to condemn before you even know the truth of the matter. You throw out your castigations at random, and you've 
accused us unjustly. It’s blasphemy!” Pilgrim however, understood what was going on; though he did not say anything, he thought to himself, “It’s a lie! It’s a lie! The fruits were done with! Why do they 
say such things? Could it be that they have the magic of revivification?” Meanwhile, Tripitaka said to his disciples, “In that case, bring us some rice. We'll eat and leave,” 

8 Rules went at once to fetch the rice while Sand-monk set the table and chairs. The two lads brought out seven or eight side dishes, including pickles, pickled eggplants, radishes in juice sauce, string 
beans in vinegar, salted lotus roots, and blanched mustard plants for master and disciples to eat with their rice. They also brought out a pot of fine tea and two mugs, and stood on either side of the 
table to wait on them. As soon as the four of them had taken up their bowls however, the lads, one on each side, took hold of the door and slammed it tightly shut. They then bolted it with a double- 
shackle brass lock. “You lads made a mistake,” said 8 Rules with a laugh, “or else your custom here is rather strange. Why do you shut the door before you eat?” 

“Indeed!” said Bright Moon. “For good or ill, we'll not open the door until after we’ve eaten.” Then Clear Breeze lashed out at them, saying, “You bulimic and gluttonous bald thieves! You stole and ate 
our divine fruits, and you're thus already guilty of eating the produce of someone’s garden without permission. Now you've even knocked over our divine tree and destroyed this mortal root of our of 
Five Villages Abbey. And you still dare to speak to us defiantly? If you think you can reach the Western Heaven to behold the face of God, you'll have to ride the Wheel of Transmigration and do it in 
the next disciple!” When Tripitaka heard these words, he threw down his rice bowl and sat there weighed down as if by a huge boulder on his heart. The lads then went to lock both the front gate and 
the second gate before returning to the main hall to revile them once more with the most abusive language. Calling them thieves repeatedly, the two lads assailed them until it was late, when they then 
left to eat. After the meal, the lads went back to their own room. 

The Tang Monk began to complain at Pilgrim, saying, “You mischievous ape! Every time it’s you who cause trouble! If you stole and ate their fruits, you’d have been more forbearing to their reproach. 
Why did you've to knock down even their tree? If you’re brought into court, even if your old man were the judge, you’d be unable to defend yourself when you behave like that!” 

“Don’t scold me, Master,” said Pilgrim. “If those lads have gone to sleep, let them sleep. We'll leave tonight.” 

“Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “all the doors have been locked securely. How can we leave?” Pilgrim said with a laugh, “Never mind! Never mind! Old monkey will find a way!” 

“You've a way, all right!” said 8 Rules. “All you need to do is to change into some sort of an insect, and you can fly out through a hole or a crack in the window. But what about those of us who don't 
know how to change into these tiny things? We've to stay and take the blame for you.” 

“If he does something like that,” said the Tang Monk, “and leaves us behind, I'll recite that Old-Time Thread and see whether he can take it!” When he heard this, 8 Rules did not know whether to laugh 
or not. “Master,” he said, “what are you saying? I’ve only heard the Suirangama Thread, the Lotus Thread, the Peacock Thread, the Guanyin Thread, and the Diamond Thread in Religion but I've never 
heard of anything called the Old-Time Thread.” 

“You don’t know about this, Brother,” said Pilgrim. “This fillet that | wear on my head was given to Master by the Nun Guanyin. Master deceived me into wearing it, and it took root, as it were, on my 
head so that it could never be removed. There is, moreover, the Tight-Fillet Spell or the Tight-Fillet Thread. The moment he recites that, I'll have a terrible headache, for it’s the magic trick designed to 
give me a hard time. Master, don’t recite it. I'll not betray you. No matter what happens, all of us will leave together.” 

As they spoke, it grew dark and the moon rose in the East. Pilgrim said, “When all is quiet and the crystal orb is bright, this is the time for us to steal away.” 

“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “stop this hocus-pocus. The doors are all locked. Where are we going to go?” 

“Watch my power!” said Pilgrim. He seized his golden-hooped rod and exercised the lock-opening magic; he pointed the rod at the door and all the locks fell down with a loud pop as the several doors 
immediately sprung open. “What talent!” said 8 Rules, laughing. “Even if a little smith were to use a lock pick, he wouldn't be able to do this so nimbly.” Pilgrim said, “This door is nothing! Even the 
South Heaven Gate would immediately fly open if | pointed this at it!” They asked their master to go outside and mount the horse; 8 Rules poled the luggage and Sand-monk led the way toward the 
West. “Walk slowly, all of you,” said Pilgrim. “Let me go and see to it that the Daoist lads will sleep for a month.” 

“Disciple,” said Tripitaka, “don’t harm them, or you'll be guilty of murder as well as robbery.” 

“Ill not harm them,” said Pilgrim. 

Going inside again, he went to the door of the room where the lads were sleeping. He still had around his waist a few sleep-inducing insects that he had won from the Deity-King Viripaksa when they 
had played a game of guess-fingers at the East Heaven Gate. Taking out two of these insects, he filliped them through a hole in the window. They headed straight for the faces of the lads who fell at 
once into a sleep so deep that it seemed nothing could arouse them. Then Pilgrim turned around and caught up with the Tang Monk, and all of them fled, following the main road to the West. 
Throughout that whole night, the horse did not pause to rest, and they journeyed until it was almost dawn. “Monkey,” said the Tang Monk, “you've just about killed me! Because of your mouth, I’ve had 
to spend a sleepless night.” 

“Stop this complaining!” said Pilgrim. “It's dawn now, and you may as well take some rest in the forest here by the road. After you've regained a little strength, we'll move on.” All that elder could do was 
to dismount and use a pine root as his couch. As soon as he put down the luggage, Sand-monk dozed off while 8 Rules fell asleep with a rock as his pillow. The Great Sage Sun however, had other 
interests. Just look at him! Climbing the trees and leaping from branch to branch, he had a grand time playing. We'll leave them resting and make no further mention of them now. 

We now tell you about the Great Mortal who left the Tushita Palace with the lesser mortals after the lecture was over. Descending from the Green Jasper Heaven and dropping down from the auspicious 
clouds, they arrived before the Five Villages Abbey at the Long Life Mountain where they found the gates wide open and the grounds neat and clean. “Well,” said the Great Mortal, “Clear Breeze and 
Bright Moon are not that useless after all! Ordinarily, they don’t even bestir themselves when the sun is high but today when we're away, they are willing to rise early to open the gates and sweep the 
grounds.” All the lesser mortals were delighted but when they reached the main hall, they discovered neither fire and incense nor any trace of a human person. Clear Breeze and Bright Moon were 
simply nowhere to be seen! 

“Because of our absence, the two of them must have stolen away with our things,” said the rest of the mortals. “Nonsense!” said the Great Mortal. “How could those who seek the way of mortality dare 
to engage in such wickedness? They must have forgotten to close the gates last night and gone to sleep. They are probably not yet awake this moming.” When they all reached the door of the Daoist 
lads, they found the door tightly shut and heard heavy snoring from within. They pounded on the door and attempted to rouse them but the lads could not be wakened by all that clamour. Finally, the 
mortals managed to pry open the door and pull the lads off their beds; even then they did not wake up. “Dear mortal lads!” said the Great Mortal, laughing. “Those who have attained mortality should 
not be so desirous of sleep, for their spirits are full. Why are they so fatigued? Could it be that someone has played a trick on them? Quickly, bring me some water!” One of the lads brought half a cup 
of water to the Great Mortal who recited a spell before spitting a mouthful of water on the lads’ faces. The Sleep Demon was thus exorcised. 

Both lads woke up, and as they opened their eyes and wiped their faces, they suddenly saw all the familiar faces of their teacher, Lord, Equal to Earth, and the other mortals. Clear Breeze and Bright 
Moon were so startled that they knelt down at once and respected, saying, “Master, your old friends, the monks who came from the East, were a bunch of vicious thieves!” 

“Don't be afraid!” said the Great Mortal, smiling. “Take your time and tell me about them.” 

“Master,” said Clear Breeze, “Shortly after you left that day, a Tang Monk from the Land of the East did indeed arrive with three other monks and a horse. In obedience to your command, your disciples, 
having ascertained their origin, took two of the ginseng fruits and served them. That elder however, had worldly eyes and a foolish mind, for he could not recognise the treasures of our mortal house. 
He insisted that they were new-born infants not yet three days old and absolutely refused to eat them. For this reason, each of us ate one of the fruits instead. We didn’t expect however, that one of his 
three disciples, a fellow whose surmame was Sun and whose given name was Wukong Pilgrim, would steal and eat four of the fruits. When we discovered theft, we tried to reason with him, speaking 
rather forthrightly to that monk. But he refused to listen to us and instead used the magic of the spirit leaving the body to — oh, this is painful!” When the two lads reached this point in their discourse, 
they could not hold back their tears. “Did that monk strike you?” asked the rest of the mortals. “He did not hit us,” said Bright Moon, “but he struck down our ginseng tree.” 

When the Great Mortal heard this, he was not angry. Instead, he said, “Don’t cry! Don’t cry! What you don’t know is that the fellow with the name of Sun is also a minor mortal of the Great Monad; he 
has great magic power and has caused much disturbance in Heaven. If our treasure tree is struck down, all | want to know is whether you'll be able to recognise these monks if you see them again.” 
“Certainly,” said Clear Breeze. “In that case,” said the Great Mortal, “follow me. The rest of you disciples can prepare the instruments of punishment. When | return, they shall be whipped.” 

The various mortals took this instruction while the Great Mortal mounted the auspicious luminosity with Clear Breeze and Bright Moon to give chase to Tripitaka. In a moment they had covered a 
thousand miles but when the Great Mortal looked toward the West at the tip of the cloud, he could not see the Tang Monk anywhere. When he turned around and stared eastward instead, he found 
that he had overtaken the pilgrims by some nine hundred miles, for that elder, even with his horse galloping nonstop all night, had managed to travel only one hundred and twenty miles. Reversing the 
direction of his cloud, the Great Mortal made the trip back in an instant. “Master,” said one of the lads, “that’s the Tang Monk sitting beneath a tree by the road.” 

“| see him,” said the Great Mortal. “You two go back and prepare the ropes. Let me capture them by myself.” Clear Breeze and Bright Moon went back to the Abbey at once. Dropping down from the 
clouds, the Great Mortal changed himself into a mendicant Daoist! with one shake of his body. He was dressed in a priestly robe patched 100 times and a sash in the style of Mr. Lu. 2His hands waved 
a yak’s-tail and lightly tapped a fish-drum. Straw sandals with three loops shod his feet; a sinuous turban wrapped around his head. With wind-filled sleeves all aflutter, he recited of the rising moon. He 
came straight to the tree and said in a loud voice to the Tang Monk, “Elder, this poor Daoist raises his hands!” 

Hastily returning the salutation, the elder said, “Pardon me for not paying respects to you first.” 

“Where did the elder come from,” asked the Great Mortal, “and why is he sitting in meditation here beside the road?” Tripitaka said, “I’m a scripture seeker sent by the Great Tang of the Land of the 
East to the Western Heaven.” Feigning surprise, the Great Mortal said, “When you came from the East, did you pass through my humble mountain abode?” 

“Which precious mountain is the abode of the venerable mortal?” asked the elder. 

The Great Mortal said, “The Five Villages Abbey in the Long Life Mountain’s where | reside.” 

The moment he heard this, Pilgrim having something very much on his mind, replied, “No! No! We came by another route up there.” 

Pointing a finger firmly at him, the Great Mortal said with a laugh, “Brazen ape! Who are you trying to fool? You struck down my ginseng fruit tree in my Abbey, and then you fled here in the night. You 
dare deny this? Why try to cover up? Don’t run away! Go quickly and bring back another tree for me!” 

When Pilgrim heard this, he grew angry and whipped out his iron rod; without waiting for further discussion, he struck at the head of the Great Mortal. Stepping aside to dodge the blow, the Great Mortal 
trod on the auspicious luminosity and rose into the air, closely followed by Pilgrim who also mounted the clouds. The Great Mortal changed back into his true form in mid-air, and this was how he 
appeared: he wore a cap of purple gold and a carefree gown trimmed with crane’s down. He had on his feet a pair of shoes; a silk sash was tied round his waist. His body seemed that of a lad his face, 
that of a lady fair but with flowing moustaches and beard. Some crow feathers adorned his hair. He faced Pilgrim but without a weapon save a jade-yak’s tail that he twirled in his hand. Above and 
below, Pilgrim struck wildly with his rod, only to be parried repeatedly by the Great Mortal wielding his jade yak’s tail. After two or three rounds of fighting, the Great Mortal displayed his magic of the 
cosmos in the sleeve. Standing on the tip of a cloud and facing the wind, he gently flipped open the wide sleeve of his gown and sent it toward the earth in a sweeping motion. All four of the monks and 
the horse were at once scooped up into the sleeve. “This is dreadful!” said 8 Rules. “We've been placed in a clothes bag!” 

“It isn’t a clothes bag, Idiot!” said Pilgrim. “We've been scooped up into his sleeve.” 

“In that case,” said 8 Rules, “it shouldn't be too difficult! Let me use my rake and make a hole in his gown. When we make our escape, we can claim that he was careless and didn’t hold us securely, 
so that we fell out of his sleeve.” 

Idiot started to dig into the garment madly with his rake but all to no avail: although the material was soft to the touch, it was harder than steel when it came into contact with the rake. Tuming around 
the direction of his auspicious cloud, the Great Mortal went back to the Five Villages Abbey and sat down, ordering his disciples to fetch some ropes. As the little mortals went about their business, he 
fished out the pilgrims one by one like puppets from his sleeve: first he brought out the Tang Monk and had him bound to one of the large pillars in the main hall. Then he took out the three disciples 
and had them tied to three other pillars. Finally he took out the horse and had it tied up in the courtyard; it was given some hay while the luggage was thrown into one of the corridors. “Disciples,” said 
the Great Mortal, “these monks are persons who have left home, and they should not be harmed by knives or spears, hatchets or battle-axes. Bring out my leather whip instead and give them a beating 
— as an act of vengeance for my ginseng fruit!” Some of the mortals went quickly to fetch the whip — not the sort made of cow hide, sheep hide, suede, or buffalo hide. It was, rather, a whip of seven 
thongs made of dragon hide. After soaking it in water for a while, one of the more robust little mortals took it up and asked, “Master that one shall be flogged first?” The Great Mortal replied, “Tripitaka 
Tang is the unworthy senior member of his party. Beat him first.” 

When Pilgrim heard what he said, he thought to himself, “That old monk of mine cannot stand such flogging. If he’s destroyed by the whip, wouldn't that be my sin?” Unable to remain silent any longer, 
he said, “Sir, you’re mistaken! It was | who stole the fruits, and it was | who ate the fruits. Moreover, | also pushed down the tree. Why don’t you flog me first? Why do you've to whip him?” 

“This brazen ape,” said the Great Mortal, laughing, “does know how to speak courageously! All right, let’s flog him first.” 

“How many lashes?” asked the little mortal. “As many as the original number of the fruits,” said the Great Mortal. “Thirty lashes.” Lifting high the whip, the little mortal was about to strike. Fearing that 
this weapon of a mortal’s house might be a formidable one, Pilgrim opened his eyes wide to see where he was going to be struck and found that the little mortal was about to flog his legs. With a twist 
of his torso, Pilgrim said, “Change!” and his two legs became hard as steel, all ready to be flogged. With measured strokes, the little mortal gave him thirty lashes before putting down the whip. 


It was already almost noon when the Great Mortal said again, “We'd now give Tripitaka a flogging, since he did not know how to discipline his mischievous disciples and permitted them to indulge in 
unruly behaviour.” As the mortal took up the whip again, Pilgrim said, “You're again mistaken, sir. When the fruits were stolen, my master was conversing in this hall with the two lads; he had no 
knowledge whatever of what we brothers had perpetrated. Though he might be guilty of not being strict enough in his discipline of us, those of us who are his disciples should receive the punishment 
for him. Flog me again.” 
“This lawless ape!” said the Great Mortal. “Though he is sly and devious, he does possess some filial sentiments! In that case, let’s flog him again.” The little mortal again gave him thirty lashes. When 
Pilgrim lowered his head to take a look, he saw that his two legs had been beaten until they were shining like mirrors, though he had no sensation whatever, either of pain or of itching. By this time it 
was getting late, and the Great Mortal said, “Soak the whip in water. Wait until tomorrow, and then we'll punish them again.” 
The little mortals retrieved the whip and placed it in water after which everyone retired to his own chamber. When they had finished their evening meal, all went away to sleep. With tears flowing from 
his eyes, the elder began to complain bitterly to his three disciples saying, “You all have caused this trouble but I’ve to suffer with you in this place. What are you going to do about it?” 
“Stop this complaining,” said Pilgrim. “They flogged me first, and you've not even had a taste of it yet. Why do you’ve to grumble like that?” 
“Though I’ve not been flogged,” said the Tang Monk, “this rope is causing me to ache all over.” 
“Master,” said Sand-monk, “there are others here who are your companions in bondage!” 
“Stop this racket, all of you!” said Pilgrim. “In a little while, we'll all be on our way again.” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “you're fibbing again. We're tightly bound now in hemp ropes sprayed with water. They are not like the locks on those doors that you opened so easily with your magic!” 
“This is no exaggeration,” said Pilgrim, “but I’m not afraid of a three-ply hemp rope sprayed with water. Even if it were a coir cord as thick as a small bowl, I’d consider it as insubstantial as the autumn 
wind!” Hardly had he finished speaking when it became completely quiet everywhere. Dear Pilgrim! He contracted his body and at once freed himself from the ropes, saying, “Let's go, Master!” 
“Elder Brother,” said a startled Sand-monk, “save us, too!” 
“Speak softly! Speak softly!” said Pilgrim. He untied Tripitaka, Sand-monk, and 8 Rules; they put on their clothes, saddled the horse, and picked up the luggage from the corridor. As they walked out of 
the Abbey gate, Pilgrim said to 8 Rules, “Go to the edge of the cliff there and bring back four willow trees.” 
“What do you want them for?” asked 8 Rules. “I’ve use for them. Bring them quickly.” 
Idiot did possess some sort of brutish strength. He did as he was told, and with one shove of his horn he felled one of the willow trees. Knocking down three more, he gathered them up into a bundle 
and hauled them back. Pilgrim stripped the branches off the trunks, and the two of them carried the trunks inside where they fastened them to the pillars with the ropes with which they had earlier been 
tied up themselves. Then the Great Sage recited a spell; biting the tip of his own tongue, he spat some blood on the trees and cried, “Change!” One of them changed into the elder, another changed 
into a figure like himself, and the two other trees changed into Sand-monk and 8 Rules. They all seemed to look exactly alike; when questioned, they knew how to make replies; when their names were 
called, they knew how to answer. Only then did the two of them run back out and catch up with their master. As before, the horse did not pause to rest for that whole night as they fled the Five Villages 
Abbey. When morning arrived however, the elder was nodding on the horse, hardly able to remain in the saddle. When Pilgrim saw him like that, he called out, “Master, you're terribly soft! How is it that 
a person who has left home like yourself has so little endurance? If I, old monkey, went without sleep even for a thousand nights, | still would not feel fatigue. Well, you had better get off the horse, so 
that travellers won't see your condition and laugh at you. Let's find a temporary shelter beneath the mountain slope and rest a while before we move on again.” 
We'll not tell you anymore now about master and disciples resting by the way; the Great Mortal rose at the crack of dawn and went out at once to the main hall after taking his morning meal. He said, 
“Bring out the whip. It’s Tripitaka’s turn today to be flogged.” The little mortal wielded the whip and said to the Tang Monk, “I’m going to beat you.” 
“Go ahead,” said the willow tree, and he was given thirty lashes. Changing the direction of his whip, the little mortal said to 8 Rules, “I’m going to flog you.” 
“Go ahead,” said the other willow tree, and the one that was changed into the form of Sand-monk gave the same reply when it was his turn. By the time they reached Pilgrim, the real Pilgrim, resting 
by the wayside, was suddenly sent into a violent shudder. “Something's wrong!” he exclaimed. “What do you mean?” asked Tripitaka. Pilgrim said, “I transformed four willow trees into the four of us, 
thinking that since they flogged me twice yesterday, they would not beat me again today. But they are giving my transformed body a beating, and that’s why my true body is shivering. I'd better stop 
the magic.” Hastily, Pilgrim recited a spell to suspend the magic. 
Look at those frightened Daoist lads! The one who was doing the flogging threw away the whip and ran to report, saying, “Master, at first | was beating the Great Tang Monk but now I’m only striking at 
some willow roots!” When the Great Mortal heard these words, he laughed bitterly, saying, “Pilgrim Sun! Truly a marvellous Monkey King! It was rumoured that when he caused great disturbance in 
Heaven, even the cosmic nets that the gods set up could not hold him. | suppose there must be some truth to that! So, you escaped! But why did you've to tie up these willow trees here to impersonate 
you and your companions? I’m not going to spare you! I'll pursue you!” Saying this, the Great Mortal at once rose into the clouds; he peered toward the West and saw the monks fleeing, poling the load 
of luggage and riding the horse. The Great Mortal dropped down from the clouds, crying, “Pilgrim Sun! Where are you running to? Give me back my ginseng tree!” Hearing this, 8 Rules said, “We're 
finished! Our foe is here again!” 
“Master,” said Pilgrim, “let's pack up that little word ‘Kindness’ for the moment. Allow us to indulge in a little violence and finish him off so that we can make our escape.” When the Tang Monk heard 
these words, he trembled all over, hardly able to reply. Without even waiting for his answer however, Sand-monk lifted his precious staff, 8 Rules brought out his muck-rake, and the Great Sage wielded 
his iron rod. They all rushed forward to surround the Great Mortal in mid-air and began to strike at him furiously. For this vicious battle, the following poem as testimony says: 
Wukong knew not that Zhen-Yua mortal - Lord Equal to Earth’s - wondrous and strange. 
Though 3 weapons divine showed forth their might, 1 yak’s-tail flew up with natural ease to parry the thrusts on the left and right to block the blows struck at the front and back. 
Night passed, day came, still they'd not escape! 
How long it'd take them to reach the West? 
The three brothers all raised their divine weapons and attacked the mortal together but the Great Mortal had only the fly brush with which to meet his adversaries. The battle however, had not lasted 
for half an hour when the Great Mortal spread open his sleeve and with one scoop, recaptured the four monks, the horse, and their luggage. Reversing the direction of his cloud, he went back to his 
Abbey where he was greeted by the other mortals. The Master Mortal took a seat in the main hall and again took out the pilgrims one by one from his sleeve. The Tang Monk was bound to a short 
locust tree in the courtyard while Sand-monk and 8 Rules were fastened to two other trees, one on each side. Pilgrim however, was tightly bound but left on the ground. “I suppose,” thought Pilgrim to 
himself, “they are going to interrogate me.” After the mortals had finished tying up the captives, they were told to bring out ten large bales of cloth. “Eight Rules,” said Pilgrim with a laugh, “this gentleman 
must have the good intention of making us some clothes! He might as well be more economical and just cut us a few monks’ bells!” After the little mortals had brought out the homespun cloth, the 
Great Mortal said, “Wrap up Tripitaka Tang, Bullseye 8 Rules, and Sand-monk entirely in the cloth.” The little mortals obeyed and wrapped the three of them completely. “Fine! Fine! Fine!” said Pilgrim, 
laughing. “We're prepared to be buried alive!” After they were wrapped, the Daoists brought out some lacquer that they had made themselves, and the Great Mortal gave the order that the wrappings 
of the pilgrims be completely coated with the varnish. Only their faces were left uncovered. “Sir,” said 8 Rules, “I’m all right on top but leave me a hole down below so that | can unburden myselfl” 
The Great Mortal next gave the order that a huge frying pan be brought out. “Eight Rules, we’re lucky!” said Pilgrim, laughing. “If they are hauling out a pan, they must want to cook some rice for us to 
eat.” 
“That's all right with me,” said 8 Rules. “If they let us eat some rice, we'll be well-fed ghosts even if we die!” The various mortals duly brought out a huge pan that they set up before the steps of the 
main hall. After giving the order that a big fire be built with plenty of dry firewood, the Great Mortal said, “Fill the pan with clear oil. When it boils, dump Pilgrim Sun into the pan and fry him! That'll be 
his payment for my ginseng tree!” 
When Pilgrim heard this, he was secretly pleased, saying to himself, “This is exactly what | want! I’ve not had a bath for some time and my skin is so dry that it’s getting itchy. For good or ill, I'll enjoy a 
little scorching and be most grateful for it.” In a moment, the oil was about to boil. The Great Sage however, was quite cautious; fearing that this might be some form of formidable divine magic that 
would be difficult for him to handle once he was in the pan, he looked around quickly. In the east he saw a little terrace with a sundial on top but to the west he discovered a stone lion. With a bound, 
Pilgrim rolled himself toward the west; biting the tip of his tongue, he spat a mouthful of blood on the stone lion, crying, “Change!” It changed into a figure just like himself, all tied up in a bundle. His true 
spirit rose into the clouds, from where he lowered his head to stare at the Daoists. 
Just then, one of the little mortals gave this report, “Master, the oil is sizzling in the pan.” 
“Pick up Pilgrim Sun and throw him in!” said the Great Mortal. Four of the divine lads went to carry him but they could not lift him up; eight more joined them but they had no success either. They added 
four more, and still they could not even budge him. “This monkey loves the earth so much that he can’t be moved!” said one of the mortals. “Though he may be rather small, he’s quite tough!” Finally, 
twenty little mortals managed to lift him up and hurl him into the pan; there was a loud splash, big drops of boiling oil flew out in every direction, and the faces of those little Daoists were covered with 
blisters. Then they heard the lad who was tending the fire crying, “The pan’s leaking! The pan’s leaking!” Hardly had he uttered these words when all the oil was gone. What they saw in the pan with its 
bottom punctured was a stone lion. 
Enraged, the Great Mortal said, “That wretched ape! He’s wicked indeed! And I’ve allowed him to show off right in front of my nose! So, he wanted to escape but why did he have to ruin my pan? | 
suppose it’s exceedingly difficult to catch the wretched ape, and even if one does catch him, trying to hold him is like trying to grasp sand or handle mercury, to catch a shadow or seize the wind! All 
right! All right! Let him go. Untie Tripitaka Tang and bring out a new pan. We'll fry him instead in order to avenge my ginseng tree.” The various little mortals accordingly went to untie the lacquer cloth 
but Pilgrim who heard this clearly in the air, thought to himself, “Master is utterly helpless! If he arrives in the pan, the first boiling bubble will kill him and the second will burn him up; by the time the oil 
sizzles three or four times, he'll be a messy monk! I'd better go and save him!” Dear Great Sage! He lowered the direction of his cloud and went back to the main hall. With his hands at his waist, he 
said, “Don’t untie the lacquer wrapping to fry my master. Let me go into the pan of boiling oil instead.” 
“You wretched ape!” cried a somewhat startled Great Mortal. “How dare you display such tricks to wreck my stove?”5 
“If you've the misfortune of meeting me,” said Pilgrim, laughing, “your stove deserves to be overturned! Why blame me? Just now | was about to receive your kind hospitality in the form of oily soup but 
I'd suddenly the urge to relieve myself. If | opened up right in the pan, | was afraid that | might spoil your hot oil so that it'd not be used for cooking. Now that I’m completely relieved, | feel quite good 
about going into the pan. Don’t fry my master; fry me instead.” When the Great Mortal heard these words, he laughed menacingly and ran out of the hall to catch hold of Pilgrim. 


026 
Amid the Three Islands Sun Wukong seeks a cure; with sweet dew Guanshiyin revives a tree 
Hold fast in life the sword above the heart. ‘Recall the long beside the suffering. 
The proverb says the sword’s the law of life but think thrice to check both anger and pride. 
The noblest? is peaceful — it’s taught long ago; “The sage loves virtue’ — a truth for all times. 
The strong man will meet someone stronger still: come to naught at last he surely will! 
The Zhenyuan Great Mortal who grabbed Pilgrim and said, “I know your abilities and I’ve heard of your reputation. But you've been most deceitful and unscrupulous this time. You may indulge in all 
sorts of wizardry but you can’t escape from my hands. I'll argue with you all the way to the Western Heaven to see that Religious Patriarch of yours but you'll not get away from having to restore to me 
the Ginseng Fruit Tree. So stop playing with your magic!” 
“Dear Sir!” said Pilgrim, laughing. “How petty you're! If you want the tree revived, there’s no problem. If you had said so in the first place, we’d have been spared this conflict.” 
“No conflict!” said the Great Mortal. “You think I’d let you get away with what you've done?” 
“Untie my master,” said Pilgrim, “and I'll give you back a living tree. How’s that?” 
“If you really possess the power,” said the Great Mortal, “to make the tree alive again, I'll go through the proper ceremony of Eight Salutes with you and become your bond-brother.” 
“Relax!” said Pilgrim. “Let them go and you can be certain that old monkey will give you back a living tree.” 
The Great Mortal reckoned that they could not escape; he therefore gave the order to free Tripitaka, 8 Rules, and Sand-monk. “Master,” said Sand-monk, “I wonder what sort of tricks Elder Brother is 
up to this time.” 
“What sort of tricks?” asked 8 Rules. “This is called the trick of ‘Pulling Wool Right over Your Eyes.’ The tree is dead! You think it could be cured and revived? He’s just putting out some empty formula 
for show. On the pretext of going to find medicine to cure the tree, he will flee and take to the road all by himself. You think he has any care for us?” 
“He'll not dare leave us behind,” said Tripitaka. “Let’s ask him where he is going to find the cure.” 
He then called out, “Wukong, how did you manage to deceive the Mortal Master and have us freed?” 


“Old monkey is speaking the truth, only the truth,” said Pilgrim. “What do you mean by deceiving him?” Tripitaka asked. “Where will you go to find the cure?” 
Pilgrim replied, “According to an old proverb, ‘The cure comes from the seas.’ | want to go now to the Great Eastern Ocean and make a complete tour of the Three Islands and the Ten Islets. | want to 
visit all the Mortals and Aged Sages to ask for a method of revivification that will revive the tree for him.” 
“How long do you need to be away before returning?” said Tripitaka. “Only three days.” 
“All right,” said Tripitaka. “As you said, I'll give you three days. If you return by that time, everything will be fine. If you don’t come back after three days, I'll begin reciting that Old-Time Thread!” 
“| hear you! | hear you!” said Pilgrim. 
Look how he quickly straightened his tiger-skin kilt. As he walked out the door, he said to the Great Mortal, “You need not worry, sir. | leave now but I'll be back very soon. But you must take good care 
of my master; see that he lacks none of the three meals and the six teas of the day. If my master’s clothes become soiled or wrinkled, wash and starch them. Should he want anything, old monkey will 
settle the account with you when he returns. I'll finish puncturing all the pans for you! If my master’s face pales even a little, I'll not take him back; and if he becomes a trifle thin, I'll not leave this place.” 
“Go, go,” said the Great Mortal. “I'll see to it that he doesn’t starve!” 
Dear Monkey King! He mounted his cloud somersault quickly and left the Abbey of 5 Villages, heading straight for the Great Eastern Ocean. Moving through the air like lightning and meteor, he soon 
arrived at the mortal region of Penglai.* He lowered his cloud and took a careful look below: it was a lovely place indeed for which a testimonial poem says: 

A great land divine, the sages’ domain, these Penglai islands calm the winds and waves. 

Jasper towers’ cool the heavens with their shades; tall arches’ bright reflections float on the sea. 

Mists of five colours veil the jade-green sky; high on the gold turtle stars and moon shine. 

The Queen of the West would this place frequent for 3 Mortals with peaches as present. 
Before he had finished looking at this divine scenery, Pilgrim was already entering Penglai. As he walked, he saw three old men playing encirclement chess in the shade of some pine trees outside the 
White-Cloud Cave. The one watching the game was the Star of Longevity while the two playing were the Star of Blessing and the Star of Wealth. Pilgrim approached them, crying, “Old brothers, receive 
my salute!” When the Three Stars saw him, they pushed away the chessboard and returned his salutation. “Great Sage, why did you come here?” they asked. “I came especially to have some fun with 
all of you,” said Pilgrim. “I heard that the Great Sage who forsook Daoism to follow Religion,” said the Star of Longevity, “had won back his freedom to protect the Tang Monk on his joumey to seek 
scriptures in the Western Heaven. He must be travelling over rugged roads every day. Where would he find time to have fun with us?” Pilgrim said, “To tell all of you the truth, old monkey has run into 
a little obstacle halfway on the journey to the West. That's why | came to request some assistance but | don’t know whether you're willing to help me or not.” 
“At what place?” asked the Star of Blessing. “What sort of obstacle? Tell us plainly so that we may decide.” 
“We're stopped while passing the Abbey of Five Villages at the Long Life Mountain.” 
“The Abbey of Five Villages is the divine residence of the Zhenyuan Great Mortal,” said one of the 3 old men who were astonished. “Could it be that you stole and ate his ginseng fruits?” 
“So | stole and ate them,” said Pilgrim with a laugh. “How much could they be worth?” 
“You ape!” said one of the three old men. “You're dumb! A man who takes one whiff of that fruit will live to be three hundred and sixty years old; he eats one and he'll last forty-seven millennia. That's 
why it bears the name of ‘The Long-Life Grass of Reverted Cinnabar.’ The level of cultivation in Dao of that Great Mortal far surpasses ours! With such a thing in his possession, he can easily have the 
same age as Heaven whereas we still have to nourish our sperm-essence, cultivate our breaths, fortify our spirits, harmonize the tiger and the dragon, catch the kan to fill up the /i- in short, we've to 
spend a lot of time and effort just to attain mortality. How could you say, ‘How much could they be worth?’ Throughout the whole world, that’s the only kind of spiritual root there is.” 
“Spiritual root! Spiritual root!” said Pilgrim. “I've already uprooted it!” 
“What do you mean by ‘uprooted it?” asked the three old men, greatly alarmed. Pilgrim said, “When we went to the Abbey the other day, the Great Mortal was not home, and only two lads received my 
master. They served him two ginseng fruits but my master did not realise that they were fruits. Thinking that they were infants not yet three days old, he absolutely refused to eat them. The lads took 
them away and ate them without bothering even to share them with us. So, old monkey went and stole three of the fruits for us three brothers to eat but those two lads without any sense of propriety, 
kept on calling us thieves. Old monkey got mad and gave the tree a blow with his rod. When it fell to the ground, the fruits on it disappeared, the branches snapped, the leaves dropped, and it died with 
all its roots exposed. The lads tried to imprison us but old monkey broke their lock and left. Early next morning, their master came back and gave chase; we'd a few rough exchanges with him which 
led eventually to a fight. In a flash, he flipped open that sleeve of his and bagged all of us. We're bound and shackled, interrogated and whipped for a whole day but we managed to escape again that 
night. He caught up with us once more and took us captive. Mind you, there was not an inch of steel on him! He had only that yak’s tail to parry our blows but none of the three weapons of us brothers 
could even touch him. And so he gave us more of the same treatment, wrapping my master and my two younger brothers in cloth coated with varnish but putting me in a pan of boiling oil. | then showed 
him my special talent for escape but not before I'd punctured his pan. When he saw that he could not hold me captive, he became somewhat intimidated, and that was when | sweet-talked him into 
freeing my master and my brothers with the promise that I’d revive his tree for him. That's how we came to a temporary truce. When | remembered the saying, ‘The cure comes from the seas,’ | decided 
to pay you three old Brothers a visit in this lovely place. If you’ve any formula to cure the tree, please pass it on to me at once so that | can rescue the Tang Monk from his ordeal.” 
When the Three Stars heard these words, they became distressed also. One of them said, “Monkey, you're completely ignorant of people! That Master Zhenyuan is the patriarch of earthbound mortals 
while we belong to the lineage of divine mortals. You may have some sort of position in Heaven but you’re only an irregular number in the Great Monad clan, and you've yet to attain an authentic rank. 
How could you possibly expect to escape from him? If you had killed some beast or bird, some insect or scaly creature, all you'd need is one grain of my millet-elixir and it would be revived. The ginseng 
fruit however, is the very root of all divine trees. How could it be healed? There’s no cure for it!” When Pilgrim heard that there was no cure available, his brow became completely furrowed. 
“Great Sage,” said the Star of Blessing, “though there is no cure here, there may be one in another place. Why are you so dejected?” Pilgrim said, “Of course, | don’t mind going to another place to 
seek a cure. It would have been a small matter indeed, even if I'd to journey to the edge of the seas or make a complete tour of the thirty-six Heavens. But that Elder Tang of mine who is neither tolerant 
nor magnanimous, has given me a limit of three days. If | don’t return with something after three days, he'll start re citing the Tight-Fillet Spell.” 
“Good! Good! Good!” said the Three Stars, laughing. “Had it not been for this little means of control, you'd be crawling all over Heaven again!” Then the Star of Longevity said, “Relax, Great Sage. Don’t 
worry. Though that Great Mortal is our senior, he does know us. As we've not visited him for a long time, and as it is for the sake of the Great Sage, we three shall go and call on him right now. We'll 
express your concern to the Tang Monk and tell him not to recite the Tight-Fillet Spell. Three days, four days — what's the difference? We'll not leave them until you come back with the cure.” 
“Thank you! Thank you!” said Pilgrim. “Please get on with your journey, old Brothers. I’m off.” 
So the Great Sage took leave of them. The Stars mounted the auspicious luminosity and went straight to the Abbey of 5 Villages. The crowd at the Abbey was milling about when suddenly the cries of 
cranes could be heard in the sky to announce the arrival of the 3 elders. See a sky lit up by sheens of auspicious light as sweet, unending fragrance filled the air. Coloured mist — 1000 strands — veiled 
the feathered gowns; fleecy clouds in petals held up the Mortals’ feet (as green phoenixes flew and red phoenixes soared). Their sleeves sent a scented breeze to sweep the earth; their staffs like 
hanging dragons, brought laughter happy; beards swayed before them like medals of jade. Their blithe, youthful features showed no grief or care; strong, healthy frames were those of the blessed. 
They held tallies of stars to fill up the sea-mansions; from their waists hung the gourds and precious scrolls. 100 millennia - so grand was their age. On the 3 Islands and 10 Islets they freely lived. They 
came to this world often to grant their boons and increase man’s blessings 100-fold. The whole wide world bright with glory and wealth! To have now endless blessing and endless life! Three elders 
riding on halos saw the Mortal Great: what boundless peace and blessing filled the hall! When a mortal lad saw this, he ran to make the report, “Master, the Three Stars from the sea have arrived.” 
Master Zhenyuan was just chatting with the Tang Monk and his disciples. Hearing the announcement, he went down the steps into the courtyard to receive the visitors. When 8 Rules saw the Star of 
Longevity he grabbed him and said with a laugh, “You blubbery old codger! I’ve not seen you for a long time and you still look so dashing! Why, you didn’t even bring along a hat!” 
Taking off his own monk’s cap, he plopped it on the head of the Star, clapped his hands, and roared with laughter. “Fine! Fine! Fine!” he cried. “As the saying goes, ‘Put on the cap to increase riches!” 
Throwing away the cap, the Star of Longevity snapped back, “You stupid coolie! You’ve absolutely no manners!” 
“Im no coolie,” said 8 Rules, “but you’re all knaves.” 
“You're indeed a stupid coolie,” said the Star of Blessing, “and you even dare to call people knaves?” 
“If you’re not the knaves of some household,” said 8 Rules again, laughing, “how is it that you come bearing the names ‘Increase Age,’ ‘Increase Blessing,’ and ‘Increase Wealth’?” 
At that moment, Tripitaka ordered 8 Rules to step back while he straightened his clothes quickly to greet the Three Stars who in turn saluted the Great Mortal as a senior colleague before they dared 
take a seat. After they were seated, the Star of Wealth said, “We apologise for not coming to pay our respects for such a long time. We came now especially to see you since we learned that the Great 
Sage Sun had caused some disturbance here.” 
“Has Pilgrim Sun been to Penglai already?” asked the Great Mortal. “Yes,” said the Star of Longevity. “As he had damaged the cinnabar tree of the Great Mortal, he came to our place to seek a cure. 
When he found out that we didn’t have any, he went elsewhere in search of it. He was afraid however, that he would exceed the time limit of three days set by the holy monk and provoke him to recite 
the Tight-Fillet Spell. That is the reason why we came to see you and to ask you for an extension of the limit.” When Tripitaka heard this, he said repeatedly, “I'll not recite it! I'll not recite it!” 
As they talked, 8 Rules came running in again to tug at the Star of Blessing. Demanding that he be given some fruits to eat, he began to give the Star a complete search, poking into his sleeves, frisking 
his waist, and even lifting up the hem of his robe. “What sort of bad manners is that, 8 Rules?” asked Tripitaka with a laugh. “I’m not ill-mannered,” said 8 Rules. “This is called ‘Every Turn’s a Blessing.” 
Tripitaka again ordered him to leave. As he slogged toward the door, Idiot turned and stared fiercely at the Star of Blessing. “Stupid coolie!” said the Star. “How have | offended you that you’d be so 
mad at me?” 
“Im not mad at you,” said 8 Rules. “I’m just doing what they call ‘Turning Your Head to Look for Blessing’!” When Idiot went out of the door, he ran into a little lad holding four teaspoons while searching 
in the hall for the cups with which he could present tea. 8 Rules grabbed the spoons and ran into the main hall; picking up a sonorous stone, he began to strike it wildly with the spoons as he pranced 
about. “This monk,” said the Great Mortal, “is becoming more and more undignified!” 
“Im dignified,” said 8 Rules, laughing. “This is called the Joyful Festivities of Four Seasons.” ‘Pilgrim mounted the auspicious clouds to leave Penglai and soon arrived at the Fangzhang Mountain. It 
was a lovely mountain indeed for which the following testimonial poem says: 

The soaring Fangzhang, a Heaven itself, the primal palace where mortals meet: purple towers light up the 3 pure paths; floral scent floats up with f5-coloured mists. 
Gold phoenixes oft pause on the pearly arch. Who floods with jade creamé the agaric fields? 
Pink peaches and purple plums newly ripened announce an aeon’s change among the gods. 

Pilgrim lowered his cloud but he was in no mood to enjoy the scenery. As he proceeded, he was met by a gentle scented breeze and by the sounds of black cranes. Then he saw in the distance a 
mortal, from whom 10000 motley beams lit up the sky; coloured mists soared in endless shafts of light. His red phoenix’s mouth held flowers fresh; green phoenix flew with canorous cries. With luck 
like the sea and age like a mount, he looked like a boy of sound, healthy frame. His vase kept the cave-heaven’s ageless drug; a seal old as the sun hung from his waist. He brought blessings to 
mankind severally and saved the world a few times from distress. King Wu summoned him to add to his age. He always attended the Festival of Peach. He taught the monks to break their worldly ties, 
revealing like lightning a great way to them. He crossed the seas to wish a man long life and saw God often at Spirit Mount. His holy title: Grand Thearch of the East, first of the mortals midst smoke 
and mist. Somewhat shamefacedly, Pilgrim Sun met him and said, “Grand Thearch, I’m raising my hands!” 
The Grand Thearch hastened to return the salutation, saying, “Great Sage, forgive me for not going to meet you. Please come to my place and let me serve you tea.” 
He then took the hands of Pilgrim and led him inside. It was truly a divine palace where there were countless arches studded with pearl-oyster shells, jasper pools, and jade terraces. As they sat down 
to wait for their tea, a little lad stepped out from behind the jade screen. He was dressed like this: his body wore a Daoist robe of lustrous hues; a bright silk sash was tied around his waist; he trod the 
Dipper wearing a silk head wrap; ‘his feet shod straw sandals to tour fairy haunts. Refining the pristinely real he shed his original shell. Merit achieved, he could do as he pleased. He learned the source 
of spirit, sperm, and breath as a master would know without mistake. He fled from fame, now owning ageless life - the months, the seasons had no hold on him. Passing winding corridors to ascend 
royal towers, he palmed from Heaven gods’ peaches 3 times. In coloured mist he left the kingfisher screens, this lowly mortal named Dongfang Shuo. ®When Pilgrim saw him, he laughed and said, “So 
this little crook’s here! But there’s no peach at the Grand Thearch’s place for you to steal and eat.” 
Dongfang Shuo saluted to him and replied, “Old burglar! Why did you come? There’s no divine elixir at my master’s place for you to steal and eat.” 
“Stop blabbering, Mangian,” cried the Grand Thearch. “Bring us some tea.” 
Manqian was the religious name of Dongfang Shuo. He hurried inside to fetch two cups of tea. After they had finished drinking, Pilgrim said, “Old monkey came here to ask of you a favour. Will you 
grant me that?” 
“What favour?” said the Grand Thearch. “Please tell me.” 


“| recently became guardian of the Tang Monk on his westward journey,” said Pilgrim. “We're passing by the Abbey of Five Villages at the Long Life Mountain where we're insulted by two young lads. 
My anger of the moment made me topple their Ginseng Fruit Tree that led to the Tang Monk being detained for the time being. That's why | came to ask you for a cure. | hope you'll be generous about 
the matter.” 
“You ape,” said the Grand Thearch. “You've no care for anything except to cause trouble everywhere. Master Zhenyuan of the Abbey of Five Villages with the holy title of ‘Lord, Equal to Earth,’ happens 
to be the patriarch of earthbound mortals. How did you manage to offend someone like him? That Ginseng Fruit Tree of his, you know, is the grass of the reverted cinnabar. If you had stolen it and 
eaten it, you'd be guilty already. Now you've gone so far as to knock the tree down. You think he'll let you get away with that?” 
“Exactly,” said Pilgrim. “We did escape but he caught up with us and scooped us up in his sleeve as if we're handkerchiefs. It’s a troublesome affair: since I’d not prevail, I'd to promise him that the tree 
would be cured. That's why | came to beg you.” 
The Grand Thearch said, “I’ve one grain of the Great Monad Elixir of Nine Reversions. It can cure all the sentient creatures in the world but it cannot cure trees. For trees are the spirits of earth and 
wood, nourished by Heaven and Earth. Moreover, the Ginseng Fruit Tree is no tree of the mortal world; if it were, you might find a cure for it. But the Long Life Mountain happens to be a Heavenly 
region, and the Abbey of Five Villages is a cave-heaven of the West Aparagodantya Continent. And the Ginseng Fruit Tree produced there is a spiritual root that came into existence at the time of 
creation. How could it be healed? I’ve no cure, none whatever!” 
“If you’ve no cure, old monkey will take his leave,” said Pilgrim. The Grand Thearch would have liked to offer him a cup of jade nectar but Pilgrim said, “This is emergency business; | daren’t linger.” He 
then mounted the clouds to proceed to the island of Yingzhou. This, too, was a lovely place for which a testimonial poem says: 
The elegant pear! tree? aglow in purple mists; Yingzhou’s arches and towers touching the sky; green hills, blue waters, and fair coralline blooms; jade nectar, red steel,"° and the hard iron stone. 
The 5-coloured cock crows at the sea’s sunrise; the red phoenix, ageless, breathes in scarlet mists. 
In vain mortals would seek this gourd-held scene, ‘'an endless spring beyond the world of forms. 
Great Sage arrived at Yingzhou where before the red cliffs and beneath the pearl trees sat several figures with luminous white hair and beards, mortals of youthful complexion. They were playing chess 
and drinking juice, telling jokes and reciting poems. Truly there were hallowed clouds all filled with light; auspicious mists with fragrance afloat; colourful phoenixes calling at the cave’s entrance; dark 
cranes dancing on top of the mountain. Jade-like lotus roots and peaches went well with juice; magic pears and fire dates prolonged the years. None of them had need to heed a royal summons though 
the divine record had each of their names. Wholly at ease, they could wander and play; with no work or care, they could do as they please. The months, the years had no hold on their lives; throughout 
the great world they were completely free. How lovely were the black apes who came in pairs, saluting, to present the fruits! How friendly are the white deer who lay down two by two with flowers in 
their mouths! Those old men were enjoying themselves when our Pilgrim walked up to them and cried, “How about letting me have some fun too?” When the mortals saw him, they quickly rose to greet 
him. A poem as a testimony and the poem says: 
The spirit roots of the Ginseng Fruit Tree snapped; the Great Sage called on the gods for a wondrous cure. 
As scarlet light poured from the divine grove, he’s met by the 9 Elders of Yingzhou. 
Recognising the 9 Elders, Pilgrim said, laughing, “Old Brothers, how content you’re!” 
“If the Great Sage in years past had persevered in the truth,” said the 9 Elders, “and han’t disrupted Heaven, he’d be even more content than we're. But you’re all right now. We heard that you’d returned 
to the truth to seek God in the West. Where do you find such leisure to come here?” Pilgrim then gave a thorough account of his efforts to find a cure for the tree. Astounded, the 9 Elders said, “You 
cause too much trouble! Just too much trouble. Honestly, we’ve no cure.” 
“If you don't,” said Pilgrim, “I'll take leave of you.” 
The 9 Elders asked him to stay and drink some jade nectar and eat some lotus root. Pilgrim would not sit down but, standing, drank a glass of nectar and ate a piece of lotus. He then left Yingzhou 
swiftly and headed straight for the Great Eastern Ocean. Soon the Potalaka Mountain came in sight. Dropping down from the clouds, he went straight to the top of the mountain where he saw the Nun 
Guanyin giving a lecture to the various celestial guardians, dragon-ladies, and Liberation in the purple bamboo grove. As a testimony, a poem says: 
The sea-mistress city’s tall with thick hallowed air. Here you see countless marvellous things. 
Know that the 1000 vague and varied forms are all found in a book’s one soundless leaf. 
4 Noble Truths'3 conferred will bear right fruit: 6 Stages*4 will set you free when listened to. 
This young grove’s's pleasures special and true: trees full of reddened fruits and fragrant flowers. 
The Nun was the first to notice Pilgrim’s arrival, and she asked the Great Mountain Guardian to go meet him. As he came out of the grove, the guardian shouted, “Sun Wukong where are you going?” 
Raising his head, Pilgrim cried, “Bear rascal! Is Wukong the name for you to take in vain? If old monkey hadn’t spared you back then, you’d have been a corpse on the Black Wind Mountain. Today 
you're a follower of the Nun, for you've received the virtuous fruit and you’ve been made a resident of this mortal mountain so that you can listen frequently to the religion teachings. Now with all these 
benefits, can’t you address me as ‘Venerable Dad’?” That Black Bear had indeed attained the right fruit but the fact that he was made a guardian of the Potalaka and given the title “Great Guardian” 
was something that he owed to Pilgrim. So he really could not do anything but smile and say, “Great Sage, the ancients said, ‘The princely man does not dwell on old faults.’ Why mention my past? 
The Nun asked me to come meet you.” Our Pilgrim at once became solemn and earnest as he followed the Great Guardian to salute the Nun in the purple bamboo grove. 
“Wukong,” said the Nun, “where has the Tang Monk reached in his journey?” 
“The Long Life Mountain, in the West Aparagodantya Continent,” said Pilgrim. “In that Long Life Mountain,” said the Nun, “there is an Abbey of Five Villages that is the home of the Zhenyuan Great 
Mortal. Did you come across him?” Banging his head on the ground, Pilgrim said, “It was all because of your disciple who did not know the Zhenyuan Great Mortal at that Abbey of Five Villages. | 
offended him by damaging his tree, and he in turn held up my master, preventing him from making any progress in his journey.” 
“You mischievous monkey!” scolded the Nun who already had knowledge of the whole affair. “You don’t know any better! That Ginseng Fruit Tree of his is the spiritual root planted by Heaven and 
nourished by Earth. Master Zhenyuan himself is also the patriarch of earthbound mortals, and even | must be somewhat deferential to him. Why did you damage his tree?” 
Saluting low again, Pilgrim said, “Your disciple was truly ignorant. The day when we arrived at the Abbey, Master Zhenyuan was not home, and only two mortal lads were there to receive us. It was 
Bullseye Aware of Ability who discovered that they had these fruits, and he wanted to try one. Your disciple stole three such fruits that we three brothers divided up among ourselves. When the lads 
found out, they kept on chiding us until | became so angry that | pushed down the tree. Their master returned the following day and caught up with us; after he had scooped us up with his sleeve, he 
had us bound and whipped, interrogating and torturing us for a whole day. We escaped that night but he caught up with us again and took us captive as before. Two or three times it went on like this, 
and when | became convinced that it was impossible for us to flee, | promised him that I'd heal the tree. I've just made a complete tour of the Three Islands seeking a cure from the sea but none of the 
mortals was able to give me one. That’s why your disciple’s come to salute you in all sincerity. | beg the Nun in her compassion to grant me a cure so that the Tang Monk can soon journey toward the 
West.” 
“Why didn’t you come see me earlier?” asked the Nun. “Why did you go looking instead on the islands?” When Pilgrim heard these words, he was secretly pleased and said to himself, “What luck! What 
luck! The Nun must have a cure!” He went forward again to beg some more, and the Nun said, “The sweet dew in my immaculate vase can heal divine trees or spirit roots.” 
“Have you tried this before?” asked Pilgrim. “Indeed,” said the Nun. “When?” asked Pilgrim. 
The Nun said, “Some years ago Laozi’d a wager with me: he took my willow twig and placed it in his elixir-refining brazier until it was completely dried and charred. Then he gave it back to me, and | 
stuck it in my vase. After one day and one night, I'd my green twig and leaves again, as lovely as before.” Laughing, Pilgrim said, “I’m lucky! Truly lucky! If a scorched willow could be revived, what's so 
difficult about a tree that has been knocked over?” The Nun then gave this order to the rest of her followers: “Maintain your vigilance in the grove. I'll be back soon.” She left, balancing the immaculate 
vase in her hand; the white parrot flew ahead of her while the Great Sage Sun followed from behind. A testimonial poem says: 
The world can’t limn this jade-browed'® golden form: a god who pities and saves us from woes. 
As stainless God she met kalpas past. A self which can do she has now attained.'” 
She calms passion’s billows in many lives; her moral nature’s wholly unsoiled. 
The sweet dew long charged with true wondrous might, will bring the precious tree eternal life. 
The Great Mortal was just having lofty conversations with the 3 Elders when all at once they saw the Great Sage Sun drop down from the clouds and shout, “The Nun’s arrived. Come meet her quickly! 
Come meet her quickly!” 
The 3 Stars, Master Zhenyuan, Tripitaka, and his disciples all hurried out of the main hall. Stopping her sacred cloud, the Nun first exchanged greetings with Master Zhenyuan before saluting the 3 
Stars. After the ceremony, she took the seat of honour as Pilgrim led the Tang monk, 8 Rules, and Sand-monk to salute her. After that, the various mortals in the Abbey also came to greet her. “Great 
Mortal,” said Pilgrim, “there’s no need for further delay. You may as well prepare the table of incense at once and ask the Nun to heal that fruit tree of yours.” Saluting low to thank the Nun, the Great 
Mortal said, “Why should the trivial affair of this plebeian be such a concern to the Nun that she would take the trouble of coming here?” 
“The Tang Monk is my disciple,” said the Nun. “If Sun Wukong has wronged you, it’s only reasonable that he should make recompense and return your precious tree.” 
“In that case,” said the Three Stars, “there’s no further need for polite talk. May we ask the Nun to go to the garden and see what can be done?” 
The Great Mortal gave the order to prepare an incense table and to sweep the grounds in the rear garden. The Nun was asked to lead the way, followed by the Three Elders, Tripitaka, his disciples, 
and the various mortals of the Abbey. When they arrived at the garden, they saw the tree lying on the ground — with the soil around it turned up, its roots exposed, its leaves fallen, and its branches 
dried up. “Wukong,” cried the Nun, “stretch out your hand.” Pilgrim stretched out his left hand. Dipping the willow twig into the sweet dew of her vase, the Nun then used it as a brush and drew on the 
palm of Pilgrim a charm that had revivifying power. She told him to place his hand at the base of the tree and watch for the sign of water spurting out. His hand closed tightly, Pilgrim went to the base 
of the tree and placed his fist on the roots. In a little while, a clear spring welled up from the ground. The Nun said, “That water cannot be touched by any instrument containing any one of the Five 
Phases. It must be scooped up by a jade ladle. Push the tree back up into an upright position; pour the water over it from the top down. The bark and the roots will grow back together again; the leaves 
will come out, the branches will turn green, and the fruits will appear.” 
“Little Daoists,” said Pilgrim, “bring me a jade ladle, quickly.” 
“Your humble Daoist lives in a rural area,” said Master Zhenyuan, “and there is no jade ladle available. We've only jade tea cups and jade juice goblets. Can they be used?” 
“As long as they are made of jade,” said the Nun, “and capable of bailing water, they will be all right. Bring them here.” 
The Great Mortal asked the little lads to take out some 30 jade tea cups and some fifty juice goblets with which they scooped up the clear water. Pilgrim, 8 Rules, and Sand-monk raised the tree into 
an upright position and covered its base with topsoil. They then handed the jade cups one by one to the Nun who sprinkled the sweet liquid onto the tree with her willow branch as she recited a spell. 
Before long, she stopped sprinkling, and the tree turned green all at once with thick leaves and branches. Twenty-three ginseng fruits could be seen on top. Clear Breeze and Bright Moon, the two lads 
said, “When we discovered our loss the day before, we came up with only twenty-two fruits even after we’d counted them over and over. Why's there an extra one today after it’s been revived?” 
“Time will disclose the true intent of man,” said Pilgrim. “Old monkey took only three the other day; the fourth one dropped to the ground and disappeared, for as the local spirit told me, this treasure 
would become assimilated once it touched earth. 8 Rules kept hollering about my skimming something off the top, and that was how my act was discovered. Only today is this whole mess cleared up.” 
The Nun said, “That’s why | didn’t use any instrument containing the Five Phases just now, for | know that this thing and the Five Phases are mutually resistant.” Highly pleased, the Great Mortal asked 
for the gold mallet at once and had ten of the fruits knocked down. He then invited the Nun and the Three Elders to go back to the main hall where a Festival of Ginseng Fruits would be given in their 
honour. The little mortals duly set the tables and took out the cinnabar trays while the Nun was asked to take the seat of honour in the centre. The Three Elders were seated at the table to the left, the 
Tank Monk was placed at the right, and Master Zhenyuan as the host took up the seat down below. A testimonial poem says: 
At Long Life Mountain’s cave-heaven of old, ginseng fruits ripen every 9 millennia. 
The spirit root exposed, hurting twigs and shoots; the sweet dew revives, fruits and leaves made whole. 
3 Elders gladly meet all these old chums; the 4 monks find by luck friends foreordained. 
Now they ‘e leamed to eat the ginseng fruits; they'll all be mortals who never age. 
Presently the Nun and the 3 Elders each ate a fruit. Finally convinced that this was a treasure of the mortals, the Tang Monk also ate 1. Each of the 3 disciples also ate 1 and Master Zhenyuan him- 
self took 1 to keep his guests company. The last 1 of the fruits was divided among the other residents of the Abbey. Pilgrim thanked the Nun and the 3 Stars who went back to the Potalaka Mountain 
and Penglai Island respectively. Master Zhenyuan also prepared some vegetarian juice for a banquet during which he and Pilgrim became bond-brothers. As the proverb says: Without fighting they'd 


not know each other; but now the two parties have become one household. Happily master and disciples spent a restful night there. Thus it was with that Elder who was /ucky to have tasted the grass 
of reverted cinnabar; his long life would endure the ordeals of ogres. 
027 

The cadaver demon three times mocks Tripitaka Tang; the holy monk in spite banishes Handsome Monkey King 
Tripitaka and his disciples made preparations to leave the next morning. Master Zhenyuan however, had become such a fast friend of Pilgrim since the 2 were made bond-brothers that he refused to 
let them leave. He gave orders instead that they should be feted for 5 or 6 days. Ever since he took the grass of the reverted cinnabar, the elder’s spirit had been strengthened and his body made 
healthier; he felt as if his entire physical frame had been renewed. As he was intent on acquiring the scriptures, he refused to stay, and so they departed. After taking their leave, master and disciples 
took to the road and soon came upon a tall mountain. “Disciples,” said Tripitaka, “the mountain ahead appears to be rugged and steep, and | fear that the horse may be unable to proceed so easily. 
Every one of you’d be careful.” 
“Have no fear, Master,” said Pilgrim. “We know how to take care of everything.” Dear Monkey King! 
He led the way; carrying his rod horizontally across both his shoulders, he opened up a mountain path and led them up to a tall cliff. They saw peaks and summits in rows; streams and canyons 
meandering; tigers and wolves running in packs; deer and fallow deer walking in flocks; countless musk and bulls massed together; a mountain swarming with foxes and hares. The huge python of 
1000 feet; the long snake of 10000 feet. The huge python blew out awful mists; the long snake belched dreadful air. By the road thorns and thistles sprawled unending; on the peak pines and cedars 
grew resplendent. Wild hemps and creepers filled their eyes; fragrant plants reached up to the sky. Light descended from the northern pole; clouds parted at the South Polestar. 10000 fathoms of 
mountain holding old, primal breath; 1000 peaks stood august in the cold sunlight. The elder on the horse became fearful but Great Sage Sun was ready to show off his abilities. Wielding the iron rod, 
he let out such a fearful cry that wolves and serpents retreated, that tigers and leopards took flight. Master and disciples thus journeyed into the mountain. As they reached the summit, Tripitaka said, 
“Wukong, we've been travelling for almost a day and I’m getting hungry. Go somewhere and beg some vegetarian food for me.” 
“Master, you’re not very smart!” said Pilgrim, attempting to placate him with a smile. “We're in the middle of a mountain with no village in sight ahead of us nor any inn behind us. Even if we’d money, 
there’s no place for us to buy anything. Where do you want me to go to find vegetarian food?” Irritated, Tripitaka began to berate his disciple. “You ape!” he cried. “Don’t you remember what sort of 
condition you're in at the Mountain of Two Frontiers? Pinned down by Siddhartha in that stone box, you’d move your mouth but not your feet and owed it to me for saving your life. Now that you’ve 
become my disciple by having your head touched and receiving the commandments, why’re you unwilling to exert yourself a bit more? Why’re you always so lazy?” 
“Your disciple’s,” said Pilgrim, “been rather diligent. Since when’ve | been lazy?” 
“If you’re that diligent,” said Tripitaka, “why don’t you go and beg me some vegetarian food? How can | journey if I’m hungry? Moreover, this mountain’s filled with pestilential vapours and if | become 
ill, how can | hope to reach Thunderclap?” 
“Master,” said Pilgrim, “please don’t get upset. No more words. | know that yours is a proud and haughty nature. A little offence and you'll recite that little something spell! Dismount and rest a while. 
Let me find out whether there’s any family for me to beg some vegetarian food.” 
With a bound, Pilgrim leaped up to the edge of the clouds. Using his hand to shade his eyes, he peered all around. Alas! The journey to the West was a lonely journey, one with neither villages nor 
hamlets. There were abundant trees and shrubbery but there was no sign of human habitation. Having looked around for some time, Pilgrim saw toward the south a tall mountain where on the eastern 
slope there seemed to be some tiny specks of red. Lowering his cloud, Pilgrim said, “Master, there’s something to eat.” 
The elder asked, “What's it?” 
Pilgrim said, “There’s no household here for me to beg for rice. But there’s a stretch of red on a mountain south of here and | suppose that must be ripe mountain peaches. Let me go and pick a few 
for you to eat.” 
Delighted, Tripitaka said, “For a person who's left the family to have peaches is already the highest blessing!” 
Pilgrim took the alms bowl and mounted the auspicious luminosity. Look at that brilliant somersault with cold vapour trailing! In an instant, he was heading straight for the peaches on the south mountain. 
The proverb says: a tall mountain will always have monsters; a rugged peak will always produce fiends. 
In this mountain there was indeed a monster-spirit who was disturbed by the Great Sage Sun’s departure. Treading dark wind, she came through the clouds and found the elder sitting on the ground. 
“What luck! What luck!” she said, unable to contain her delight. “For several years my relatives have been talking about a Tang Monk from the Land of the East going to fetch the Great Vehicle. He’s 
actually the disciple of the Gold Cicada and has the original body that’s gone through the process of self-cultivation during ten previous existences. If a man eats a piece of his flesh, his age will be 
immeasurably lengthened. So, this monk’s at last arrived today!” The monster was about to go down to seize Tripitaka when she saw 2 great warriors standing guard on either side of the elder and that 
stopped her from drawing near. These warriors were of course 8 Rules and Sand-monk. 8 Rules and Sand-monk might not have great abilities but after all, 8 Rules was the Marshal of Heavenly Reeds 
and Sand-monk was the Great Curtain-Raising Captain. Their authority had not been completely eroded and that was why the monster dared not approach them. Instead the monster said to herself, 
“Let me make fun of them a bit and see what happens.” Dear monster! 
She lowered her dark wind into the field of the mountain, and with one shake of her body, she changed into a girl with a face like the moon and features like flowers. One cannot begin to describe the 
bright eyes and the elegant brows, the white teeth and the red lips. Holding in her left hand a blue sandstone pot and in her right a green porcelain vase, she walked from west to east, heading straight 
for the Tang Monk. The sage monk resting his horse on the cliff saw all at once a young girl drawing near: slender hands hugged by gently swaying green sleeves; tiny feet exposed beneath a skirt of 
Hunan silk. Perspiring her face seemed flower bedewed; dust grazed her moth-brows like willows held by mist. And as he stared intently with his eyes, she seemed to be walking right up to his side. 
When Tripitaka saw her, he called out, “Eight Rules, Sand-monk, just now Wukong said that this is an uninhabited region. But isn’t that a human being who is walking over there?” 
“Master,” said 8 Rules, “you sit here with Sand-monk. Let Old bull go take a look.” Putting down his muckrake and pulling down his shirt, Idiot tried to affect the airs of a gentleman and went to meet 
her face to face. Well, it was as the proverb says: One can’t determine the truth from afar. One can see clearly when you go near. The girl’s appearance was something to behold! Ice-white skin hides 
jade-like bones; her collar reveals a milk-white bosom. Willow brows gather dark green hues; almond eyes shine like silver stars. Her features like the moon are coy; natural disposition is pure. Her 
body is like the willow-nested swallow; voice’s like the woods’ reciting oriole. A half-opened haitong' caressed by the morning sun. A newly bloomed peony displaying her charm. When Idiot saw how 
pretty she was, his worldly mind was aroused and he could not refrain from babbling. “Nun!” he cried. “Where’re you going? What's that you're holding in your hands?” 
This was clearly a fiend but he could not recognise her! The girl immediately answered him saying, “Elder, what I’ve in the blue pot is fragrant rice made from juice cakes, and there’s fried wheat gluten 
in the green vase. | came here for no other reason than to redeem my vow of feeding monks.” When 8 Rules heard these words, he was very pleased. Spinning around, he ran like a bull maddened by 
plague to report to Tripitaka, crying, “Master! ‘The good man will have Heaven’s reward!’ Because you're hungry, you ask Elder Brother to go beg for some vegetarian food. But we really don’t know 
where that ape has gone to pick his peaches and have his fun! If you eat too many peaches, you're liable to feel a bit stuffed and gaseous anyway! Take a look instead. Isn’t that someone coming to 
feed the monks?” 
“Coolie, you’re just clowning!” said an unbelieving Tang Monk. “We've been travelling all this time and we’ve not even run into a healthy person! Where is this person who's coming to feed the monks?” 
“Master,” said 8 Rules, “isn’t this the one?” 
When Tripitaka saw the girl, he jumped up and folded his hands. “Nun,” he said, “where is your home? What sort of family is yours? What kind of vow have you made that you've to come here to feed 
the monks?” This was clearly a fiend but our elder could not recognise her either! When that monster heard the Tang Monk asking after her background, she at once resorted to falsehood. With clever, 
specious words, she tried to deceive her interrogator, saying, “Master, this mountain that turns back serpents and frightens wild beasts, bears the name of White Tiger. My home is located due west of 
here. My parents, still living, are frequent readers of Threads and keen on doing good works. They have fed liberally the monks who come to us from near and far. Because my parents had no son, 
they prayed to the gods, and | was born. They would have liked to marry me off to a noble family but, wary of helplessness in their old age, they took in a son-in-law instead, so that they would be cared 
for in life and death.” Hearing this, Tripitaka said, “Nun, your speech is rather improper! The sage classic says, ‘While parents are alive, one does not travel abroad; or if one does, goes only to a proper 
destination.’2 If your parents are still living, and if they have taken in a husband for you, then your man should have been the one sent to redeem your vow. Why do you walk about the mountain all by 
yourself? You don’t even have an attendant to accompany you. That’s not very becoming of a woman!” 
Smiling broadly, the girl quickly tried to placate him with more clever words. “Master,” she said, “my husband is at the northern fold of this mountain, leading a few workers to plough the fields. This 
happens to be the lunch | prepared for them to eat. Since now is the busy season of farm work, we've no servants; and as my parents are getting old, I’ve to run the errand myself. Meeting you three 
distant travellers is quite by accident but when | think of my parents’ inclination to do good deeds, I'd like very much to use this rice as food for monks. If you don’t regard this as unworthy of you, please 
accept this modest offering.” 
“My goodness! My goodness!” said Tripitaka. “I’ve a disciple who has gone to pick some fruits, and he’s due back any moment. | dare not eat. For if 1, a monk, were to eat your rice, your husband would 
scold you when he learns of it. Will it then not be the fault of this poor monk?” When that girl saw the Tang Monk refuse to take the food, she smiled even more seductively and said, “O Master! My 
parents who love to feed the monks, are not even as zealous as my husband. For his entire life is devoted to the construction of bridges and the repairing of roads, in reverence for the aged and pity 
for the poor. If he heard that the rice was given to feed Master, his affection for me, his wife, would increase manifold.” Tripitaka however, simply refused to eat, and 8 Rules on one side became utterly 
exasperated. Pouting, Idiot grumbled to himself, “There are countless priests in the world but none is more wishy-washy than this old priest of ours! Here’s ready-made rice, and three portions to boot! 
But he will not eat it. He has to wait for that monkey's retum and the rice divided into four portions before he'll eat.” Without permitting further discussion, he pushed over the pot with one shove of his 
horn and was about to begin. 
Look at our Pilgrim! Having picked several peaches from the mountain peak in the south, he came hurtling back with a single somersault, holding the alms bowl in his hand. When he opened wide his 
fiery eyes and diamond pupils to take a look, he recognised that the girl was a monster. He put down the bowl, pulled out his iron rod, and was about to bring it down hard on the monster's head. The 
elder was so aghast that he pulled his disciple back with his hands. “Wukong,” he cried, “whom have you come back to hit?” 
“Master,” said Pilgrim, “don’t regard this girl in front of you as a good person. She’s a monster, and she has come to deceive you.” 
“Monkey,” said Tripitaka, “you used to possess a measure of true discernment. How is it that you’re talking nonsense today? This Nun is so kind that she wants to feed me with her rice. Why do you 
say that she’s a monster?” 
“Master,” said Pilgrim with a laugh, “how could you know about this? When | was a monster back at the Water-Curtain Cave, I'd act like this if | wanted to eat human flesh. I'd change myself into gold 
or silver, a lonely building, a harmless drunk, or a beautiful woman. Anyone feeble-minded enough to be attracted by me I'd lure back to the cave. There I'd enjoy him as | pleased, by steaming or 
boiling. If I'd not finish him off in one meal, I’d dry the leftovers in the sun to keep for rainy days. Master, if I'd returned a little later, you’d have fallen into her trap and been harmed by her.” That Tang 
Monk however, simply refused to believe these words; he kept saying instead that the woman was a good person. 
“Master,” said Pilgrim, “I think | know what’s happening. Your worldly mind must have been aroused by the sight of this woman’s beauty. If you do have the desire, why not ask 8 Rules to cut some 
timber and Sand-monk to find us some grass. I'll be the carpenter and build you a little hut right here where you can consummate the affair with her. We can each go our own way then. Wouldn't that 
be the thing to do? Why bother to undertake such a long journey to fetch the scriptures?” The elder was a rather tame and gentle person. He was so embarrassed by these few words that his whole 
bald head turned red from ear to ear. 
As Tripitaka was struck dumb by his shame, Pilgrim’s temper flared again. Wielding his iron rod, he aimed it at the monster’s face and delivered a terrific blow. The fiend however, had a few tricks of 
her own. She knew the magic of Releasing the Corpse. When she saw Pilgrim's rod coming at her, she roused her spirit and left, leaving behind the corpse of her body struck dead on the ground. 
Shaking with horror, the elder mumbled, “This ape is so unruly, so obdurate! Despite my repeated pleadings, he still takes human life without cause.” 
“Don’t be offended, Master,” said Pilgrim, “just come see for yourself what kind of things are in the pot.” Sand-monk led the elder near to take a look. The fragrant rice made from juice cakes was 
nowhere to be found; there was instead a potful of large maggots with long tails. There was no fried wheat gluten either but a few frogs and ugly toads were hopping all over the place. The elder was 
about to think that there might be thirty percent truthfulness in Pilgrim’s words but 8 Rules would not let his own resentment subside. He began to cast aspersions on his companion, saying, “Master, 
this woman, come to think of it, happens to be a farm girl of this area. Because she had to take some lunch to the fields, she met us on the way. How could she be deemed a monster? That rod of Elder 
Brother is quite heavy, you know. He came back and wanted to try his hand on her, not anticipating that one blow would kill her. He’s afraid that you might recite that so-called Tight-Fillet Spell, and 
that’s why he’s using some sort of magic to hoodwink you. It's he who has caused these things to appear, just to befuddle you so that you'll not recite the spell.” 
This single speech of 8 Rules, alas, spelled disaster for Tripitaka! Believing the slanderous suasion of Idiot, he made the magic sign with his hand and recited the spell. At once Pilgrim began to scream, 
“My head! My head! Stop reciting! Stop reciting! If you’ve got something to say, say it.” 


“What do I’ve to say?” asked the Tang Monk. “Those who've left the family must defer to people every time, must cherish kindness in every thought. They must keep ants out of harm’s way when they 
sweep the floor, and put shades on lamps for the love of moths. And you, you practice violence with every step! Since you've beaten to death this innocent commoner, what good it'd do even if you're 
to go acquire the scriptures? You might as well go back.” 

“Master,” said Pilgrim, “where do you want me to go back to?” The Tang Monk said, “I don’t want you as my disciple.” 

“If you don’t want me as your disciple,” said Pilgrim, “I fear that you may not make it on your way to the Western Heaven.” 

“My life is in the care of Heaven,” said the Tang Monk. “If it’s ordained that I'd be food for the monster, even if | were to be steamed or boiled, it’s all right with me. Furthermore, do you think really that 
you've the power to deliver me from the great limit? Go back quickly!” 

“Master,” said Pilgrim, “it’s all right for me to go back but I’ve not yet repaid your kindness.” 

“What kindness have | shown you?” asked the Tang Monk. When the Great Sage heard this, he knelt down immediately and respected, saying, “Because old monkey brought great disruption to the 
Celestial Palace, he incurred for himself the fatal ordeal of being clamped by God beneath the Mountain of Two Frontiers. | was indebted to the Nun Guanyin who gave me the commandments, and to 
Master who gave me freedom. If | don’t go up to the Western Heaven with you, it will mean that | knowing kindness without repaying am no princely man. Mine will be forever an infamous name.” 
Now the Tang Monk, after all, is a compassionate holy monk. When he saw Pilgrim pleading so piteously with him, he changed his mind and said, “In that case, I'll forgive you this time. Don’t you dare 
be unruly again. If you work violence again as before, I'll recite this spell over and over twenty times.” 

“You may recite it thirty times,” said Pilgrim, “but I'll not hit anyone again.” Helping the Tang Monk to mount the horse, he then presented the peaches that he picked. The Tang Monk indeed ate a few 
of the peaches on the horse to relieve his hunger shortly. 

We now tell you about the monster who escaped by rising into the sky. That one blow of Pilgrim’s rod did not kill her, for she fled by sending away her spirit. Standing on top of the clouds, she gnashed 
her teeth at Pilgrim, saying spitefully to herself, “The last few years I’ve heard nothing but people talking about his abilities but I've discovered today that his is not a false reputation. Already deceived 
by me, the Tang Monk was about to eat the rice. If he’d just lowered his head and taken one whiff of it, I'd have grabbed him and he'd have been all mine. Little did | anticipate that this other fellow’d 
return and bust up my business. What's more, | almost received a blow from his rod. If I’d let this monk get away, I'd have laboured in vain. I’m going back down there to make fun of him once more.” 
Dear monster! Lowering the direction of her dark cloud, she dropped into the fold of the mountain further ahead and changed with one shake of her body into a woman eighty years old, having in her 
hands a bamboo cane with a curved handle. She headed toward the pilgrims, weeping each step of the way. When 8 Rules saw her, he was horrified. “Master,” he said, “it’s terrible! That old Mum 
approaching us is looking for someone.” 

“Looking for whom?” asked the Tang Monk. 

8 Rules said, “The girl slain by Elder Brother has to be the daughter. This one must be the mum looking for her.” 

“Stop talking nonsense, bro,” said Pilgrim. “That girl’s about eighteen but this woman’s at least eighty. How'd she still bear children when she’s sixty-some years old? She’s a fake! Let old monkey go 
have a look.” Dear Pilgrim! In big strides he walked forward to look at the monster who changed falsely into an old dame with temples white as snow. She walked ever so slowly with steps both small 
and sluggish. Her frail body was most slender; face, a leaf dried and wilted. Her cheek bones jutted upward; lips curled downward and out. Old age is not quite like the time of youth: the whole face is 
wrinkled like lotus leaves. Recognising the monster, Pilgrim did not even bother to wait for any discussion; he lifted up the rod and struck at the head at once. When the monster saw the uplifted rod, 
she again exercised her magic and her spirit rose into the air, leaving behind once more the corpse of her body struck dead beside the road. The sight so frightened the Tang Monk that he fell from his 
horse. Lying on the road, he did not speak another word except to recite the Tight-Fillet Spell back and forth exactly twenty times. Alas, poor Pilgrim’s head was reduced to an hourglass-shaped gourd! 
As the pain was truly unbearable, he had to roll up to the Tang Monk and plead, “Master, please recite no more. Say what you've to say.” 

“What's there to say?” asked the Tang Monk. “Those who've left the family will listen to the words of virtue to avoid falling into Hell. I’ve tried my best to enlighten you with admonition. Why do you 
persist in doing violence? You've beaten to death one commoner after another. How do you explain this?” 

“She’s a monster,” said Pilgrim. The Tang Monk said, “This monkey is babbling nonsense. You tell me that there are that many monsters! You're a person lacking any will to do good, one who is only 
bent on evil. You’d better go.” 

“Master,” said Pilgrim, “are you sending me away again? All right, I'll go back. But there’s something which | find disagreeable.” 

“What do you find disagreeable?” asked the Tang monk. 

“Master,” said 8 Rules, “he wants you to divide up the luggage with him! You think he wants to go back empty-handed after following you as a monk all this time? Why don’t you see whether you've 
any old shirt or tattered hat in your wrap there and give him a couple of pieces.” 

When Pilgrim heard these words, he became so incensed that he jumped up and down, crying, “You loud-mouthed overstuffed coolie! Ever since old monkey embraced the teachings of complete 
poverty, he has never displayed the least bit of envy or greed. What are you talking about, dividing up the luggage?” 

“If you show neither envy nor greed,” said the Tang Monk, “why don’t you leave?” 

“To tell you the truth, Master,” said Pilgrim, “when old monkey lived at the Water-Curtain Cave of the Flower-Fruit Mountain five centuries ago, he was hero enough to receive the submission of the 
demons of seventy-two caves and to command forty-seven thousand little fiends. | was quite a man then - wearing on my head a purple gold cap, putting on my body a red and yellow robe, tying 
around my waist a jade belt, having on my feet a pair of cloud-treading shoes, and holding in my hands the compliant golden-hooped rod. But ever since Extinguishment delivered me from my sins, 
when with my hair shorn | took the vow of complete poverty and followed you as your disciple, I’d this gold fillet clamped on my head. If | go back like this, | can’t face the folks at home. If Master doesn’t 
want me anymore, please recite the Loose-Fillet Spell so that | may get rid of this thing from my head and return it to you. I'll find that most pleasant and agreeable then. After all, I've followed you all 
this time; surely you’d not deny me this bit of human kindness!” 

Greatly startled, the Tang Monk said, “Wukong, | only received the Tight-Fillet Spell in secret from the Nun. There was no Loose-Fillet Spell.” 

“If there was no Loose-Fillet Spell,” said Pilgrim, “then you’d better still take me along.” The elder had no alternative but to say, “You'd better get up. I'll forgive you one more time but you must not do 
violence again.” 

“Ill not dare do so,” said Pilgrim, “I'll not dare do so.” 

He helped his master to mount up once more and then led the way forward. We now tell you about that monster who had not been killed by Pilgrim’s second blow either. In mid-air, the fiend could not 
refrain from praising her opponent, saying, “Marvellous Monkey King! What perception! He could recognise me even when I'd changed into that form! These monks are moving on rather quickly; another 
forty miles westward beyond the mountain and they will leave my domain. If some demons or fiends of another region pick them up, people would laugh till their mouths crack up, and I'd eat my heart 
out! I'll go down and make fun of them one more time.” Dear Monster! Lowering the dark wind again into the fold of the mountain, she shook her body and changed herself into an old man. Truly he 
had flowing white hair like Pengzu’s‘ and beard frostier than the Age Star's. A jade stone’ rang in his ears and gold stars flashed in his eyes. Holding a curved dragon-head cane, he wore a light crane’s- 
down cloak. Grasping in his hands some beads, he recited a Religious Thread. When the Tang Monk on his horse saw this old man, he was very pleased. “Infinite Light!” he cried. “The west’s truly a 
blessed region! This dear old man can hardly walk but he still wants to recite the Threads!” 

“Master,” said 8 Rules, “stop praising him. He’s the root of disaster!” 

“What do you mean the root of disaster?” said the Tang Monk. 8 Rules said, “Elder Brother killed his daughter as well as his wife and now you see this old man groping his way here. If we run smack 
into him, Master, you'll pay with your life since you're guilty of death. Old bull is your follower, so he'll be banished to serve in the army; Sand-monk carries out your orders, so he’ll be sentenced to 
hard labour. But our Elder Brother, of course, will use some kind of escape magic to get away. Now, won't that leave the three of us here to take the blame for him?” 

Hearing this, Pilgrim said, “This root of idiocy! Won't this kind of absurdity alarm our master? Let old monkey go and have another look.” He put away his rod and went forward to meet the fiend. “Aged 
Sir,” he called, “where are you going? Why are you walking and reciting a Thread as well?” Our monster this time somehow misread, as it were, the balance of the steelyard, and she thought that Great 
Sage Sun was after all an ordinary fellow. Hence she said, “Elder, this old man has lived here for generations. My whole life is devoted to doing good and feeding the monks, to reading scriptures and 
reciting Threads. Fate did not give me a boy, and I'd only a girl, for whom | took in a son-in-law. This morning she went off to take rice down to the fields, and we fear that she might have been made 
food for the tiger instead. My old wife went searching for her but she, too, did not return. In fact, I’ve absolutely no idea what has happened to them. That's why this old man came seeking to see if they 
have been harmed in any way. If so, I’ve little alternative but to take back their bones and have them buried properly on our ancestral site.” 

“Im the ancestor in pulling pranks!” said Pilgrim, laughing. “How dare you sneak up on me and try to deceive me with something up your sleeve? You can’t fool me. | can see that you're a monster.” 
The monster was so startled that she could not utter another word. Wielding his rod, Pilgrim was about to strike but he said to himself: “If | don’t hit her, she’s going to pull some trick again but if | hit 
her, | fear that Master will recite that spell again.” He thought to himself some more: “But if | don’t kill her, she can grab Master the moment she has the opportunity, and then I'll have to make all that 
effort to save him. I'd better strike! One blow will kill her but Master will surely recite that spell. Well, the proverb says: ‘Even the vicious tiger will not devour its own.’ I'll have to use my eloquence, my 
dexterous tongue, to convince him, that’s all.” Dear Great Sage! He recited a spell himself and summoned the local spirit and the mountain god, saying to them, “This monster made fun of my master 
three times. This time I’m going to make sure I'll kill her but you must stand guard in the air. Don’t let her get away.” When the deities heard this command, neither dared disobey it, and they both stood 
guard on the edge of the clouds. Great Sage lifted up his rod and struck down the demon whose spiritual light was extinguished only then. 

The Tang Monk on the horse was again so horrified by what he saw that he could not even utter a word but 8 Rules on one side snickered and said, “Dear Pilgrim! His delirium is acting up again! He 
has journeyed for only half a day and he has slaughtered three persons!” The Tang Monk was about to recite the spell when Pilgrim dashed up to the horse, crying, “Master! Don’t recite! Don’t recite! 
Just come and take a look at how she looks now.” There was in front of them a pile of flour-white skeletal bones. “Wukong,” said the Tang Monk, greatly shaken, “this person has just died. How could 
she change all at once into a skeleton?” Pilgrim said, “She’s a demonic and pernicious cadaver, out to seduce and harm people. When she was killed by me, she revealed her true form. You can see 
for yourself that there’s a row of characters on her spine; she’s called ‘Lady White-Bone.” 

When the Tang Monk heard what he said, he was about to believe him but 8 Rules would not desist from slander. “Master,” said he, “his hand’s heavy and his rod’s vicious. He has beaten someone to 
death but, fearing your recital, he deliberately changed her into something like this just to befuddle you.” Indeed a shilly-shally person, the Tang Monk believed 8 Rules once more and started his recital. 
Unable to bear the pain, Pilgrim could only kneel beside the road and cry, “Don’t recite! Don’t recite! If you’ve something to say, say it quickly.” 

“Monkey head!” said the Tang Monk. “What's there to say? The virtuous deeds of those having left the family should be like grass in a garden of spring: though their growth is invisible, they multiply 
daily. But he who practices evil is like a whetstone: though its ruin is invisible, it diminishes daily. You manage to get away even after beating to death altogether three persons only because there’s no 
one here to oppose you, to take you to task in these desolate wilds. But suppose we get to a crowded city and you suddenly start hitting people regardless of good or ill with that mourning staff of yours, 
how would | be able to go free from that kind of great misfortune caused by you? You'd better go back.” 

“Master,” said Pilgrim, “you've really wronged me. This is undeniably a monstrous spirit, bent on hurting you. I’ve helped you to ward off danger by killing her but you can’t see it. You believe instead 
those sarcastic and slanderous remarks of Idiot to such an extent that you try to get rid of me several times. The proverb says, ‘Nothing can occur three times’! If | don’t leave you, I'll be a base and 
shameless fellow. I'll go! I'll go! It's no big deal in fact for me to leave but then you'll have no man to serve you.” Turning angry, the Tang Monk said, “This brazen ape is becoming even more untuly. 
So you think that you're the only man around here? Aware of Ability and Awakened to Purity, they are not men?” 

When the Great Sage heard this statement about the other two disciples, he was so deeply hurt that he could not but say to the Tang Monk, “O misery! Think of the time when Liu Bogin was your 
companion as you left Chang’an. After you delivered me from the Mountain of Two Frontiers and made me your disciple, | penetrated ancient caves and invaded deep forests to capture demons and 
defeat monsters. | was the one who, having experienced countless difficulties, subdued 8 Rules and acquired Sand-monk. Today, ‘banishing Wisdom just to court Folly,’ you want me to go back. That's 
how it is: when the birds vanish, the bow’s hidden; when the hares perish, the hounds are eaten. All right! All right! There’s only one thing left for us to settle and that’s the Tight-Fillet Spell.” 

The Tang Monk said, “I'll not recite that again.” 

“That's hard to say,” said Pilgrim. “For when the time comes for you to face those treacherous demons and bitter ordeals, and when you, because 8 Rules and Sand-monk cannot rescue you, think of 
me and cannot stop yourself from reciting it, I'll have a headache even if I’m one hundred thousand miles away. I'll have to come back to see you, so why don’t you let this matter drop now.” 

When the Tang Monk saw that Pilgrim was so long-winded, he became angrier than ever. Rolling down from his horse, he told Sand-monk to take out paper and brush from one of the wraps. Fetching 
some water from a brook nearby and rubbing out some ink with an ink-slab on a rock, he wrote at once a letter of banishment. Handing it over to Pilgrim, he said, “Monkey head! Take this as a certificate. 
I'll never want you as a disciple. If | ever consent to see you again, let me fall into the Avici Hell!” Taking the letter of banishment, Pilgrim said quickly, “Master, no need to swear. Old monkey will 
leave.” He folded up the letter and put it in his sleeve. Attempting once more to placate the Tang Monk, he said, “Master, after all, I’ve followed you for all this time because of the Nun’s instructions. 
Today I’ve to quit in mid-journey and am not able to attain the meritorious fruit. Please take a seat and let me salute you, so that | can leave in peace.” Tang Monk turned his back and refused to reply, 


mumbling only, “I’m a good priest, and I'll not take the salutation of an evil man like you!” When the Great Sage saw that the Tang Monk refused to answer, he resorted to the magic of the Body beyond 
the Body. Pulling three pieces of hair from the back of his head, he blew on them a magic breath and cried, “Change!” They changed at once into three Pilgrims who along with himself surrounded the 
master on all four sides. The master tried to turn left and right but he was unable to dodge anymore and had to receive a salute from one of them. 

Jumping up, the Great Sage shook his body and retrieved his hair. Then he gave the following instructions to Sand-monk, saying, “Worthy Brother, you’re a good man. Do be careful however, that you 
don't listen to the foolish nonsense of 8 Rules. You must also exercise caution on the journey. If there should be a time when a monster catches hold of Master, you just say that old monkey happens 
to be his senior disciple. When those clumsy fiends of the West get wind of my abilities, they'll not dare to harm my master.” 

“Im a good priest,” said the Tang Monk, “and I'll never mention the name of an evil man like you. Go back.” When the Great Sage saw that the elder simply refused to change his mind, he had no 
alternative but to leave. Look at him: in tears he respected to part with the priest; in grief he took care to instruct Sand-monk. He used his head to dig up the meadow’s grass and both feet to kick up 
the ground’s rattan. Like a wheel spinning he entered Heaven and Earth most able to overleap mountains and seas. All at once he completely disappeared; in no time he left on the way he came. Look 
at him! He suppressed his outrage and took leave of his master by mounting the cloud-somersault to head straight for the Water-Curtain Cave of the Flower-Fruit Mountain. As he was travelling, alone 
and dejected, he suddenly heard the roar of water. The Great Sage paused in mid-air to look and discovered that it was the high tide of the Great Eastern Ocean. The moment he saw this, he thought 
of the Tang Monk and could not restrain the tears from rolling down his cheeks. He stopped his cloud and stayed there for a long time before proceeding. 


028 
At Flower-Fruit Mountain a pack of fiends hold assembly; at the Black Pine Forest Tripitaka meets demons 
The Great Sage though he was banished by the Tang Monk, was nevertheless filled with regret and nostalgia when he saw the Great Eastern Ocean. He said to himself, “I've not come this way for five 
centuries!” This is what he saw as he looked at the ocean: vast, misty currents; huge, far-reaching waves — vast, misty currents that join the Milky Way; huge, far-reaching waves that touch the pulse 
of Earth. The tide rises in salvos; the water engulfs the bays — the tide rises in salvos like the clap of thunder in Triple Spring; the water engulfs the bays as violent gales that blow in late summer. Those 
old, blessed dragon-drivers' would travel no doubt with knitted brows; those young, mortal crane-riders would surely pass by anxious and tense. No village appears near the shore; few fishing boats 
hug the water. Waves roll like a thousand year’s snow; wind howls as if autumn’s in June. Wild birds can come and go at will; water fowls may stay afloat or dive. There is no fisher before one’s eyes; 
one’s ears hear only the seagulls. Deep in the sea fishes frolic; across the sky wild geese languish. With a bound, Pilgrim leaped across the Great Eastern Ocean and soon arrived at the Flower-Fruit 
Mountain. Lowering the direction of his cloud, he stared all around. Alas that mountain had neither flowers nor plants while the mist and smoke seemed completely extinguished: cliffs and plateaus had 
collapsed and the trees had dried and withered. It all had become like this when Pilgrim disrupted Heaven and was taken captive to the Region Above, this mountain was burned to total ruin by the 
Illustrious Sage, Erlang God who was leading the 7 Bond-Brothers of Plum Mountain. Great Sage became more grief stricken than ever and he composed the following long poem in ancient style as a 
testimony. The poem says: 
| view this divine mountain and tears fall; | face it and my sorrows multiply. 
The mountain, | thought then, would not be harmed; today | know this place’s suffered loss. 
Hateful’s that Erlang who vanquished me, that heinous Little Sage who oppressed me. 
In violence he dug up my parental tombs; with no cause he broke up my ancestral graves. 
All Heaven’s mists and fog are now dispersed; the whole land’s wind and clouds both dissipate. 
None can hear a tiger's roar on eastern peaks; who sees a white ape howling on western slopes? 
The northern gorge has no trace of fox or hare; all deer have vanished from the southern glen. 
Green rocks are burned to form 1000 bricks; the bright sand’s changed to a pile of dirt. 
Tall pines outside the cave have fallen down; green cedars before the cliff are thin and scarce. 
Chun, shan, huai, kui, li, and tan? all are scorched; peach, pear, prune, plum, almond, and date are gone. 
How'd silkworms be fed with no mulberry? Midst few bamboos and willows birds can’t live. 
Well-formed rocks on the peak have turned to dust; the brook’s water has dried up — all is grass. 
No orchid grows on parched earth below the cliff; creepers overspread the brown mud by the road. 
To what region have birds of past days flown? To which mountain have the beasts of old retired? 
This gutted spot that snakes and leopards loathe! This blasted place that cranes and serpents shun! 
It must be for evil deeds in former times that I’d this day suffer so much pain. 
As the Great Sage was thus expressing his grief, 7 or 8 small monkeys suddenly leaped out with a cry from among the tall grass and bushes on the slope. They rushed forward to surround him and 
respect, shouting, “Dad Great Sage! You've come home today?” 
“Why aren't you all having a little fun?” asked the Handsome Monkey King. “Why is everyone in hiding? I've been back for quite a while, and I’ve not seen even the shadow of one of you! Why is that?” 
When the several monkeys heard these words, every one of them began to weep. “Since the Great Sage was taken captive to the Region Above,” they said, “we've been suffering from the hands of 
hunters, truly an unbearable affliction. How could we withstand those sharp arrows and strong bows, those yellow hawks and wicked hounds, those ensnaring nets and sickle-shaped spears! To 
preserve our lives, none of us dares come out to play; instead, we conceal ourselves deep in the cave dwelling or take refuge in some distant lairs. Only in hunger do we go steal some grass on the 
meadow for food, and in thirst we drink the clear liquid from downstream. Just now we heard the voice of our Dad Great Sage, and that was why we came to receive you. We beg you to take care of 
us.” 
When the Great Sage heard these words, he became more distressed. He then asked, “How many of you're there still in this mountain?” 
“Young and old,” said the monkeys, “altogether no more than a thousand.” The Great Sage said, “In former times, I’d forty-seven thousand little monsters here. Where did they go?” The monkeys said, 
“When Dad left, this mountain was burned by the Nun Erlang, and more than half of them were killed by the fire. Some of us managed to save our lives by squatting in the wells, diving into the brook, 
or hiding beneath the sheet iron bridge. When the fire was extinguished and the smoke cleared, we came out to find that flowers and fruits were no longer available for food. The difficulty in finding 
sustenance drove another half of the monkeys away, leaving those of us to suffer here in the mountain. These two years saw our number dwindle even further by more than half when hunters came to 
abduct us.” 
“For what purpose?” Pilgrim asked. 
“Talk about those hunters,” said the monkeys, “they're truly abominable! Those of us who were shot by arrows, pierced by spears, or clubbed to death they took away for food to be served with rice. 
The dead monkeys would be skinned and boned, cooked with sauce and steamed with vinegar, fried with oil, and sautéed with salt. Those of us who're caught by the net or the trap would be led away 
live; they'd be taught to skip ropes, act, somersault, and do cartwheels. They'd have to beat the drum, the gong on the streets, and perform every kind of trick to entertain humans.” 
When the Great Sage heard these words, he became terribly angry. “Who's in charge in the cave now?” he asked. “We've still Ma and Liu, the two marshals,” said the little fiends, “Peng and Ba, the 
two generals: they're in charge.” 
“Report to them at once,” said the Great Sage, “and say that I've returned.” 
Those little fiends dashed inside the cave and cried, “Dad Great Sage’s come home!” 
When Ma, Liu, Peng, and Ba heard the report, they rushed out of the door to respect and to receive him inside the cave. The Great Sage took a seat in the middle as the various fiends all lined up 
before him to pay homage. “Dad Great Sage,” they said, “we heard recently that you’d regained your life so that you'd protect the Tang Monk on his journey to the Western Heaven to acquire scriptures. 
Why aren't you heading toward the West? Why do you come back to this mountain?” 
“Little ones,” said the Great Sage, “you've no idea that the Tang Monk is wholly ignorant of who is worthy and who is foolish. For his sake, | caught fiends and overcame demons throughout the journey, 
using all my abilities. Several times | slew a monster but, accusing me of doing evil and violence, he disowned me as his disciple and banished me back here. He even wrote me a formal letter of 
banishment as proof that he would never want to use me again.” 
Clapping their hands and roaring with laughter, the monkeys said, “Lucky! Lucky! What do you want to be a monk for? Come home and you can lead us to have a few years’ fun. Quick! Let's bring out 
the coconut juice for the reception of Dad.” 
“Let's not drink juice just yet,” said the Great Sage. “Let me ask you, how often do those hunters come to our mountain?” 
“Great Sage,” said Ma and Liu, “there’s no telling of time. They are here every day to make trouble.” 
The Great Sage asked, “Why aren't they here today?” 
Ma and Liu replied, “Just wait and you'll see them come.” 
The Great Sage gave this order: “Little ones, go up to the mountain and bring me the rocks that have been burned to small pieces. Pile them up around here in piles of thirty or sixty pieces. I've use for 
them.” Those little monkeys were like a cloud of bees; they swarmed all over the mountain and brought back the rock pieces and piled them together. When the Great Sage saw that, he said, “Little 
ones, go hide in the cave. Let old monkey exercise his magic.” 
Great Sage went straight up to the peak to look around, and he saw over a thousand men and horses approaching from the southern half of the mountain. Beating drums and striking gongs, they were 
holding spears and swords, leading hawks and hounds. When the Monkey King stared carefully at them, they appeared to be most ferocious indeed. Dear men! Truly fierce! He saw fox skins covered 
their heads and backs; silk brocades wrapped around their torsos; quivers full of wolf-teeth arrows; sand carved bows hung on their thighs. The men seemed mountain-prowling tigers; the horses like 
brook-leaping dragons. The whole group of men led their hounds as hawks perched on all their shoulders. They hauled fire cannons‘ in baskets. They had also eagles most fierce, 100s of poles with 
birdlimes, and thousands of forks to catch rabbits; dragnets like those used by bullheads and lassos tossed by King Yama. They yelled and shrieked altogether causing confusion far and near. When 
the Great Sage saw those men swarming up his mountain, he became terribly angry. Making the magic sign with his fingers and reciting a spell, he drew in a breath facing the southwest and blew it 
out. At once a violent wind arose. Marvellous wind! /t threw up dust and scattered dirt; it toppled trees and cut down forests. The ocean waves rose like mountains; they crashed fold upon fold on the 
shore. The cosmos grew dim and darkened; the sun and the moon lost their light. The pine trees, once shaken, roared like tigers; the bamboos hit abruptly, sounded like dragons. All Heaven’s pores 
let loose their angry breaths as rocks and sand flew, hurting 1 and all. The Great Sage called up this mighty wind that blew up and scattered those rock pieces in every direction. Pity those thousand- 
odd hunters and horses! This was what happened to every 1 of them: the rocks broke their dark heads to pieces; ‘flying sand hurt all the winged horses. Lords and nobles confounded before the peak, 
blood stained like cinnabar the earth. Dads and sons could not go home. Could fine men to their houses return? Corpses fell to the dust and lay on the mountain while rouged ladies at home waited. 
The poem says: 
Men killed, horses’ dead — how could they go home? 
Lost, lonely souls floundered like tangled hemp. 
Pity those strong and virile fighting men whose blood, both good and bad, did stain the sand! 
Lowering the direction of his cloud, the Great Sage clapped his hands and roared with laughter, saying, “Lucky! Lucky! Since | made submission to the Tang Monk and became a priest, he has been 
giving me this advice: ‘Do good a thousand days but the good is still insufficient; do evil for one day and that evil is already excessive.’ Some truth indeed! When | followed him and killed a few monsters, 
he would blame me for perpetrating violence. Today | came home and it was the merest trifle to finish off all these hunters.” 
He then shouted, “Little ones, come out!” When those monkeys saw that the violent wind had passed and heard the Great Sage calling, they all jumped out. “Go down to the south side of the mountain,” 
said the Great Sage, “and strip the dead hunters of their clothes. Bring them back home, wash away the bloodstains, and you all can wear them to ward off the cold. The corpses you can push into the 
deep mountain lake over there. Pull back here also the horses that are killed; their hides can be used to make boots, and their meat can be cured for us to enjoy slowly. Gather up the bows and arrows, 
the swords and spears, and you can use them for military drills again. And finally, bring me those banners of miscellaneous colours; I’ve use for them.” 
Every one of the monkeys obeyed these instructions. Pulling down the banners and washing them clean, the Great Sage then patched them together into a large banner of many colours, on which he 
wrote the following words in large letters: The Flower-Fruit Mountain Rebuilt, the Water-Curtain Cave Restored - Great Sage Equal to Heaven. A flagpole was erected outside the cave to hang up the 
banner. Thereafter, he gathered together more fiends and beasts by the day and he stored up all kinds of foodstuff. The word monk was never mentioned again. As he enjoyed wide friendship and 
great power, he had no trouble in borrowing some sweet, divine water from the Dragon Kings of the Four Oceans to wash his mountain and make it green again. He next planted elms and willows in 


front, pines and cedars in the back; peach, pear, date, and plum — he had them all. He then settled down to enjoy life without a care. The Tang Monk listened to Crafty Nature and banished the Monkey 
of the Mind. He mounted his horse to head for the West as 8 Rules led the way in front while Sand-monk poled the luggage in the rear. After they passed the White Tiger Ridge, they came upon a large 
forest, full of vines and creepers, green pines and cedars. “Disciples,” said Tripitaka, “the mountain road is already rough and difficult to negotiate. And now we've a thick and dark pine forest. Do be 
careful. | fear that we may run into some fiends or monstrous beasts.” But look at Idiot! Rousing his energies, he told Sand-monk to take hold of the horse while he himself used his muckrake to open 
up a path in front and led the Tang Monk directly into the pine forest. As they journeyed, the elder stopped the horse and said, “Eight Rules, I’m getting really hungry today. Where can you find me 
some vegetarian food to eat?” 

“Please dismount, Master,” said 8 Rules, “and let Old bull go find some for you.” The elder descended from his horse. Sand-monk put down his load and took out the alms bowl to hand over to 8 Rules. 
8 Rules said, “I’m off!’ 

“Where to?” asked the elder. 

“Never mind,” said 8 Rules. “Once | go, I'll drill ice for fire® to find your maigre and press snow for oil to beg your rice.” Look at him! He left the pine forest and walked toward the West for over ten miles 
but he did not come upon even a single household. It was truly a place more inhabited by tigers and wolves than by humans. When Idiot became tired from walking, he thought to himself, “When 
Pilgrim’s here, whatever that old priest wanted he got. Today, it’s my turn to serve and it’s like what the proverb says: you know the cost of rice and firewood when you run a house; you realise your 
parents’ kindness when you bring up a child! Where in the world can | go to beg for food?” He walked some more and became rather drowsy. He thought to himself, “If | go back now and tell that old 
priest that there’s no place here for me to beg for vegetarian food even after travelling all this distance, he’ll not believe me. | must find some means to while away another hour or so before | go back 
to answer him. Well, well! Let's take a nap here in the grass.” 

Idiot indeed put his head in the grass and lay down. At the time, he thought that he would doze for a while and then get up but little did he realise how fatigued he was from all that walking. Once he lay 
down his head, he fell into a deep, snoring slumber. The elder in the forest grew so restless and anxious that his ears became flushed and his eyes began to tic. He turned quickly and said to Sand- 
monk, “Why's not Aware of Ability returned from his trip to beg for food?” 

“Master,” said Sand-monk, “don’t you understand? When he sees how many families there’re in this region of the West who love to feed monks, he’s not going to worry about you especially when he’s 
so large a stomach! He’s not going to come back until he’s completely filled!” 

“You're right,” said Tripitaka. “But if he’s staying at some place just to satisfy his hankering for food where’re we going to meet him? It’s getting late, and this is no place to live. We better find some 
lodging.” 

“Don’t worry, master,” said Sand-monk, “you sit here and let me find him.” 

“Yes, yes,” said Tripitaka, “it doesn’t matter whether there’s food or not. But it’s important for us to find a place to stay.” Grasping his precious staff, Sand-monk left the pine forest to search for 8 Rules. 
The elder, sitting alone in the forest, became so weary and fatigued that he had to force himself to summon enough energy to get up. Putting the luggage together in a pile and tying the horse to a tree, 
he took off his wide splint hat, stuck his priestly staff into the ground, and straightened his clerical robe in order to take a walk in this secluded forest just to rid himself of his depression. He looked at all 
the wild grass and untended flowers but he did not hear any chattering of birds heading homeward. The forest was a place of tall grass and small paths. Because he was rather confused he soon lost 
his way. He had, to be sure, wanted to dispel his boredom in the first place, and to find 8 Rules and Sand-monk in the second. Little did he realise that they were proceeding westward whereas he 
himself after going in circles for a while was heading south. As he emerged from the pine forest, he raised his head and saw all at once flashes of golden light and colourful mists ahead of him. He 
looked more carefully and found that it was a bejewelled pagoda whose golden dome was gleaming in the rays of the setting sun. “This disciple truly has no affinity!” he said to himself. “When | left the 
Land of the East, | made a vow to bum incense in every temple, to worship God when | saw an image of God, and to sweep a pagoda if | came upon a pagoda. Isn’t that a golden pagoda that is so 
brilliant over there? Why didn’t | take this road before? Beneath the pagoda there must be a temple, inside of which there must also be a monastery. Let me walk over there. It’s all right, | suppose, to 
leave the white horse and the luggage here since there is no one passing by. If there’s any space there, |’ll wait till my disciples return and we can all ask for lodging for the night.” 

Alas, the time of that elder’s misfortune’s indeed arrived! Look at him! He strode forward and went up to the side of the pagoda. There he saw boulders 10000 feet tall; a large bluff reaching the green 
sky: its roots joining the thick earth, its peaks sticking into Heaven. Several thousand trees of all kinds on both sides; 100 miles of snarled creepers front and back. Bright flowers on grass tips, the wind 
had its shadows. In flowing water's parted clouds the moon had no root. ’Fallen logs rested in deep streams; dried tendrils entangled bare summits. Beneath a stone bridge flowed a bubbling clear 
stream; on top of a terrace grew flour-like white blossoms. When seen from afar it seemed the Paradise of 3 Isles; when one drew near it appeared like the lovely Penglai. Purple bamboos and scented 
pines enclosed the mountain brook; crows, magpies, and monkeys cut through the rugged ridge. Outside a cave there were herds of wild beasts coming and going; in the woods there were flocks of 
birds leaving or returning. In lovely green the fragrant plants thrived; radiantly the wild flowers bloomed. This region nonetheless® was an evil place. It was the elder’s bad luck to come barging in! The 
elder strode up to the door of the pagoda and found a mottled bamboo curtain hanging inside. Walking inside the door, he lifted up the curtain to proceed further when suddenly he saw before him a 
monster asleep on a stone couch. He looked with indigo face, long white fangs, and a big gaping mouth! Tousled hair on the head's 2 sides seemed as if it had been dyed red by rouge. A few stubs of 
deep purple beard bore the look of lychee sprouting. A nose curved like a parrot's beak and eyes glowing like the morning stars. His 2 huge fists had the shape of a monk’s alms bowl. 2 blue-veined 
feet forked like branches dangling down a cliff. Half covered by a light yellow robe, better than the silk-brocade cassock, he still grasped a scimitar that gleamed and glittered. He slept on a slab of stone 
both flawless and smooth. He had led young fiends to make formations like ants and old demons to rule with order like bees. Look at his awesome bearing when all his subjects raised the cry, “Sire!” 
He had made the moon his third friend as he sipped his juice; ° felt the wind grow beneath his arms as tea was poured. Look at his vast magic power! In the twinkling of an eye he could tour all the 
Heavens. In his wild woods screeched birds and fowls; in dens slept dragons and snakes. Mortals tilled his fields to grow white jade; Daoists calmed his fire to raise cinnabar. A door of a small cave 
did not of course lead to the Hell, Avici; but such an ugly monster seemed truly a bull-headed Nature spirit! When the elder saw that kind of appearance, he retreated in horror as his body turned numb 
and his legs flabby. He tried to turn and run but just as he got out of the door, the monster who was a rather alert creature, opened his demonic eyes with golden pupils and shouted, “Little ones, go 
see who's outside our door!” 

A\little fiend stuck his head out the door and saw that it was a bald-headed elder. He ran quickly inside and reported, “Great King! It’s a priest outside. He’s a round head and a large face with two ears 
hanging down to his shoulders. He’s a body full of tender flesh and very fine skin. He’s a good-looking priest!” 

When the monster heard these words, he laughed aloud saying, “This is like what the proverb says: flies atop a serpent's head — food by itself presented! You, little ones. Chase him down and bring 
him back here. I’ve great rewards for you.” 

Those little fiends rushed out of the door like a swarm of bees. When Tripitaka saw them, his mind wanted him to move like an arrow and his feet wanted to fly; but he quivered and shook, and his feet 
were numb and flaccid. Moreover, the mountain road was rugged, the forest was dark, and it was getting late. How’d he possibly move fast enough? The little fiends ran him down and hauled him back 
bodily. Truly, it is like the dragon in shallow water teased by shrimps, the tiger on level ground mocked by dogs. A noble venture may have many snags. Who’s like the Tang Monk when he faces the 
West? Look at those little fiends! After having carried the elder back and put him down outside the bamboo curtain, they ran happily to make this report: “Great King, we’ve caught the monk and brought 
him back.” 

The old monster stole a glance at Tripitaka and saw that he had an erect head and a handsome face. He was indeed a good-looking priest. The monster thought to himself, “Such a good-looking priest 
must be someone from a noble nation. | can’t treat him lightly. If | didn’t show him who’s boss here, he’d willingly submit to me?” Like a fox affecting the authority of a tiger, he all at once bristled up his 
red hairs and whiskers while his eyes split wide open. “Bring that monk in!” he bellowed. 

“Yes, sir!” the various fiends shouted in response as they shoved Tripitaka inside. 

As the proverb has it: Standing beneath low-pitched eaves, how’d one not salute? Tripitaka had no choice but to fold his hands and greet him. “From what region are you, monk?” demanded the 
monster. “Where did you come from? Where’re you going? Tell us quickly!” 

“im a monk from the Tang court,” said Tripitaka. “Having received the imperial decree of the Great Tang Emperor to seek scriptures in the West, | passed by your noble mountain and decided to seek 
an audience with the sage beneath this pagoda. I’ve no intention to disturb Your Eminence. Please forgive me. When | return to the Land of the East after acquiring scriptures in the West, your illustrious 
name will be recorded gratefully for posterity.” 

When the monster heard these words, he roared with laughter, saying, “I said to myself that you’re from a noble nation. So you're indeed! You're exactly the person | want to eat! It's marvellous that 
you presented yourself here. Otherwise, | might have missed you. You're ordained to be the food of my mouth. Since you've barged in here all by yourself, I'd not let you go even if | wanted to. And 
you’d not escape even if you wanted to!” He then ordered the little fiends, “Tie up that monk.” The little fiends rushed forward and fastened the elder firmly with ropes to the Spirit-Soothing Pillar.*° 
Grasping his scimitar, the old monster asked again, “Monk, how many persons are there in your entourage? Don't tell me you dare go up to the Western Heaven all by yourself!” When Tripitaka saw 
him picking up the scimitar, he said candidly, “Great King, I’ve two disciples named Bullseye 8 Rules and Sand-monk. They all left the pine forest to go beg for food. I’ve, moreover, one load of luggage 
and a white horse that | left in the forest.” 

“That's luckier yet!” said the old monster. “Two disciples including you make three, and there are really four of you if we count the horse. That's enough for a meal!” 

“Let's go and catch them too,” said the little fiends. “Don’t go out,” said the old monster, “but shut the door instead. After begging the food, those disciples would bring it to their master; when they can’t 
find him, they will surely come seeking right up to our door. The proverb says, ‘Business at one’s own door is easier to do.’ Let’s take our time and catch them then.” The little fiends indeed closed the 
front door. 

Tripitaka met disaster; Sand-monk left the pine forest looking for 8 Rules. He walked for over ten miles but did not see even a village or hamlet. He went up to a knoll to look all around when suddenly 
he heard someone speaking in the grass down below. Pushing the tall grass apart hurriedly with his staff, he found Idiot inside talking in his sleep. Sand-monk gave one of the huge ears a hard tug and 
cried, “Dear Idiot! Master told you to beg for food. Did he give you permission to sleep here?” Idiot woke up with a start, mumbling, “Brother, what time is it?” 

“Get up, quick!” said Sand-monk. “Master said that it didn’t matter whether there was food or not. He told us to try finding a place to stay instead.” 

Picking up the alms bowl and toting his muckrake, Idiot walked back stupidly with Sand-monk. When they reached the forest, their master was nowhere to be seen. Sand-monk began to berate him, 
saying, “It's all because of you, Idiot, for taking such a long time to find some food. Master must have been seized by a monster.” 

“Brother,” said 8 Rules, laughing, “don’t talk nonsense. This forest is a pure, lovely place and it definitely cannot harbour a monster. It must be that that old priest cannot sit still and has gone sightseeing 
somewhere. Let's go find him.” The two of them picked up the hat and the priestly staff before they left the pine forest, leading the horse and poling the luggage as they searched for their master. 

It happened that the Tang Monk at this time was not yet destined to die. Having looked for him for some time to no avail, his two disciples saw beams of golden light coming from the south. “Brother,” 
said 8 Rules, “the blessed will only receive more blessings! Master must have gone to that bejewelled pagoda over there that is giving off that light. Who will dare to be inhospitable at a place like that? 
They must insist on preparing vegetarian food and his staying to enjoy it. Why aren't we moving? We’d get there and have something, too.” 

“Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “you can't tell whether it's a good place or not. Let’s go and have a look first.” The two of them walked boldly up to the door of the edifice and found that it was closed. 
Across the top of the door was a slab of white jade on which were written in large letters the following words: Casserole Mountain, Current-Moon Cave. 

“Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “this is no monastery. It’s a cave-dwelling of a monster. Even if Master were here, | doubt if we’d see him.” 

“Don’t be alarmed, Brother,” said 8 Rules. “Tie up the horse and stand guard over our luggage. Let me question them.” Holding high his muckrake, Idiot went forward and shouted, “Open the door! 
Open the door!” The little fiend who was standing guard inside opened the door. When he saw the two of them, he ran quickly to report, “Great King, business is here.” 

“What sort of business?” asked the old monster. 

“There is a monk with large ears and a long mouth outside our cave,” replied the little fiend, “and there’s also another monk with the gloomiest appearance. They came calling at our door.” 

Greatly pleased, the old monster said, “They've to be Bullseye Eight Rules and Sand-monk! Ho-ho! They know where to look all right! How did they manage to find our door so swiftly? Well, if they 
appear so audacious, let's not treat them casually. Bring me my armour!” 

The little fiend brought it out and helped him put it on. Grasping the scimitar, the old monster walked out of the door. 8 Rules and Sand-monk were waiting outside the door when they saw this savage 
fiend emerge. He had green face, red beard, and floppy scarlet hair. His yellow gold cuirass both sparkled and gleamed. A belt inlaid with ribbed shells wrapped his waist; a silk sash wound tightly 
round his armoured chest. The wind howled when he stood idly on the mount; the waves churned when he glumly roamed the seas. A pair of hands with veins both brown and blue grasped firmly the 
soul-snatching scimitar. If you'd leam this creature’s given name, remember Yellow Robe, 2 famous words. That Old Monster Yellow Robe came out of the door and asked at once, “Where are you 
from, monk, that you dare cause this racket before my door?” 

“My child,” said 8 Rules, “don’t you recognise me? I’m your venerable dad! I’m one sent by the Great Tang to go to the Western Heaven, for my master happens to be the royal brother, Tipitaka. If he’s 
in your house, send him out at once. That'll spare me having to level it with my rake!” 


“Yes, yes,” said the fiend with a laugh, “there’s a Tang Monk in my house, and I’ve not denied him any hospitality either. | was just preparing some buns filled with human flesh for him to enjoy. You two 
can go inside and have one also. How about it?” 

Idiot indeed would have gone inside immediately if Sand-monk had not pulled him back, saying, “Elder Brother, he’s deceiving you. Since when did you start eating human flesh again?” 

Only then did Idiot realise his mistake. Raising his muckrake, he brought it down hard on the monster's face. The monster stepped aside to dodge the blow and then turned to meet him with uplifted 
scimitar. The 2 of them summoning their magic powers, mounted the clouds to fight in mid-air. Sand-monk abandoned the luggage and the white horse; wielding his precious staff, he joined the fray 
also. At this time, two fierce monks and one brazen monster began a savage battle on the edge of the clouds. Thus it was that the staff rose high, met by the scimitar; the muckrake came blocked by 
the scimitar. 1 demon warrior used his power; 2 divine monks displayed their might. The nine-pronged rake, how truly heroic! The fiend-routing staff, ferocious indeed! Their blows fell left and right, in 
front and back but squire Yellow Robe showed no fear at all. See his steel scimitar shining like silver! And in truth, his magic power was great. They fought till all the sky was fogbound and beclouded; 
and in mid-mountain stones cracked and cliff sides collapsed. This one for the sake of his fame, how’d he give up? That one for the sake of his master would surely show no fear. The 3 of them closed 
in repeatedly in mid-air for scores of times but a decision could not be reached. Though each of them cared for his life, none of them was about to be separated. 


029 
Free of his peril, River Float arrives at the kingdom; Receiving favour, 8 Rules invades the forest 
The poem says: 
Vain thoughts cannot be slain by force. 
Why must you seek after Suchness? 
Refine before God your self-existent mind — aren't illusion and enlightenment the same? 
Enlightened, you reach instantly the Right; deluded, you sink in 10000 kalpas. 
If you can cultivate 1 thought with Truth, sins vast as Ganges’ sand are wiped out. 
8 Rules and Sand-monk fought with that monster for over 30 rounds but a decision could not be reached. Because if it were a matter of matching abilities, you needn't speak of two monks. Even if there 
were twenty monks, they would still be unable to withstand that monster. It was only because of the fact that the Tang Monk was not yet fated to die that his followers could count on the help of certain 
deities. 8 Rules and Sand-monk, therefore, were assisted in secret in the air by the Six Gods of Light and Six Gods of Darkness, the Guardians of Five Quarters, the Four Sentinels, and the Eighteen 
Guardian-Spirits of monasteries. The elder was weeping piteously in the cave and thinking about his disciples. As tears fell from his eyes, he said to himself, “Aware of Ability, | don’t know in which 
village you've met a friend of truth and are enjoying being fed. O, Awakened to Purity! Where have you gone to search for him, and how will you be able to meet him? Will you two realise that | met a 
demon that I’m suffering here? When’ll | see you both again? When'll | escape from this great ordeal so that | can reach the Spirit Mountain soon?” As he was giving voice to his grief in this manner, 
he suddenly saw a woman walk out from inside the cave. Holding on to the Spirit-Soothing Pillar, she said, “Elder where did you come from? Why are you bound here by him?” 
When the elder heard this, he turned his teary eyes to steal a glance at her and found that she was about thirty years old. “Nun,” he said, “no need for further questions. | must have been fated to die 
when | entered your door. If you want to devour me, go ahead. Why bother to question me?” The woman said, “I don’t eat people! About three hundred miles west of here is my home, a city by the 
name of the Precious Image Kingdom.? I’m the third princess of its king, and my childhood name is Hundred Flowers’ Shame. Thirteen years ago, on the eve of the fifteenth of the eighth month, | was 
enjoying the sight of the moon when this monster-spirit kidnapped me and brought me here in a violent wind. | was forced to become his wife for all these thirteen years and to bear his children. It was 
impossible, of course, for me to send any news back to the Court, and I'd not see my parents even though | thought of them frequently. But where did you come from, and how did he catch you?” 
“This poor monk,” said the Tang Monk, “is someone sent to acquire scriptures in the Western Heaven. | was taking a walk when | bumped into this place. Now he wants to catch my two disciples also 
so that we'll all be steamed and eaten together.” 
“Elder, please don’t worry,” said the princess with a smile. “If you’re a scripture pilgrim, | can save you, for the Precious Image Kingdom is right on your main path to the West. All | ask of you is to 
deliver a letter for me to my parents and I'll ask my husband to let you go.” 
Nodding his head, the Tang Monk said, “Nun, if you can save the life of this poor monk, I'll be glad to serve as your messenger.” 
Quickly running inside, the princess wrote a letter and had it properly sealed. She then went back out to the pillar and untied him before handing him the letter. After he was freed, the Tang Monk held 
the letter in his hands and said, “Nun, thank you for saving my life. When this poor monk reaches your kingdom, he will certainly deliver the letter to the king. | fear however, that such a lengthy 
separation will make it difficult for your parents to recognise anything from you. What shall | do then? They would not accuse me of lying, would they?” 
“No fear,” said the princess. “My parents have no son; all they have are us three sisters. When they see this letter, they will look after you.” Tucking the letter deep into his sleeve, Tripitaka thanked the 
princess again and started to walk out. “You can’t go out the front door!” said the princess, tugging at him. “Those monster-spirits, great and small, are all outside waving the banners and beating the 
drums and gongs to assist the Great King who is at this very moment fighting with your disciples. You'd better leave by the back door. If the Great King seizes you, he will at least interrogate you. But 
if the little fiends catch hold of you, they may slaughter you on the spot without further ado. Let me go instead to the front and speak a word on your behalf. If the Great King is willing to let you go, your 
disciples can take that as a favour and leave with you.” 
When Tripitaka heard these words, he respected to the princess before taking leave of her. After walking out of the back door, he dared not proceed; instead, he hid himself in some bushes and waited. 
The princess had devised a clever plan. She ran out the front door and pushed her way through the vast throng of monsters. All she could hear was the jangle of weapons, for 8 Rules and Sand-monk 
were still doing battle in mid-air with that fiend. The princess shouted, “Lord Yellow Robe!” 
When the monster king heard the call of the princess, he abandoned 8 Rules and Sand-monk and dropped down from the clouds. Holding his scimitar with 1 hand, he took the hand of the princess with 
the other and said, “Mistress, what do you want?” 
“Husband,” said the princess, “I was sleeping just now within the silk curtains, and | saw in my dream a golden-armoured deity.” 
“That golden-armoured deity,” said the demon, “what does he want at my door?” The princess said, “During my youth when | was living in the palace, | made a secret vow that if | found a good husband, 
I'd ascend the famous mountains, visit the mortal abodes, and feed the monks. Since | married you, ours had been such great happiness that | never had the opportunity to mention this to you. Just 
now that golden-armoured deity came to demand that | fulfil my vow; he was shouting at me so vehemently that | woke up with a start. Even though it was all a dream, | made haste to come to tell you 
about it. Then | saw a monk all tied up on that pillar. | beg you, husband, to be compassionate for my sake and spare that monk. Just regard the matter as if it were my feeding the monks to redeem 
my vow. Are you willing?” 
“Mistress,” said the fiend, “you're so gullible! | thought it was something important! All right! If | wanted to eat humans, | can catch a few anywhere. This one monk, what does he amount to? I'll let him 
go.” 
“Husband,” said the princess, “let him go out the back door.” 
The monster said, “What nuisance! Just let him go. Why bother about the back door or front door?” He gripped his steel scimitar and shouted, “You, Bullseye 8 Rules! Come over here! I’m not afraid of 
you but I'll fight with you no more; for the sake of my wife, I’m going to spare your master. Go quickly to our back door and find him so that you can leave for the West. If you ever trespass our territory 
again, I'll not spare you.” 
When 8 Rules and Sand-monk heard these words, they felt as if they had been released from the gate of Hell! Leading the horse and poling the luggage, they darted like rodents past the Current-Moon 
Cave. When they reached the back door, they cried, “Master!” 
The elder recognised their voices and answered from the thorny bushes. Sand-monk parted the grass and picked up his master who mounted the horse hurriedly. So, almost harmed by the vicious 
blue-faced spirit, he met by luck the zeal of Hundred Flowers’ Shame. The scorpion has escaped from the golden hook: he wags his head and tail to swim with the waves. 8 Rules led the way in front 
while Sand-monk brought up the rear. They left the pine forest and proceeded on the main road. Look at the two of them! Still bickering and grumbling, they were trying to put the blame on each other, 
and Tripitaka had to spend all the time attempting to pacify them. At night they sought a place to rest; when the cock crowed they looked at the sky. Stage by stage, they soon travelled some 299 miles. 
When they raised their heads one day, they saw a beautiful city. It was the Precious Image Kingdom, a marvellous place indeed! How boundless the clouds! How vast the journey! Though the land is 
a thousand miles away, its condition is no less prosperous. *Auspicious mist and smoke surround it; bright moon and clear wind befriend it. Green, towering distant mountains spread out like a painted 
scroll; the flowing stream, surging and bubbling, throws up pieces of white jade. Arable fields, joined by roadways and paths; worthy of food, dense sprouting rice crops; hooked by the angler, three 
winding brooks of a few households; gathered by the woodsman, one load of pepper-wood from 2 hills. Each corridor and each rampart are made strong as if by metal and liquid; *every house and 
every home vies with one another in felicity. Nine-tiered towers rise like palace halls; layered terraces soar like beacons. There are also the Great Ultimate Hall, ®the Bright Cover Hall, the Burn Incense 
Hall, the Text-Viewing Hall, the Policy-Proclaiming Hall, and the Talent-Engaging Hall - every hall lined with jade threshold and gold steps with civil and military officials. There are also the Great Light 
Palace, the Bright Sun Palace, the Long-Lasting Pleasure Palace, the Bright Clear Palace, the Memorial-Establishing Palace, and the Never-Ending Palace — each palace with its chimes, drums, pipes, 
and vertical flutes releases its boudoir sorrows and springtime griefs. There are in the forbidden courtyard young, fresh faces like flowers bedewed; there are on the palace moat slender waists like 
willows dancing in the wind. On the broad boulevard there may be one who is capped and sashed who elaborately dressed, mounts a 5-horse chariot. At a secluded spot there may be one holding bow 
and arrows who pushing through fog and clouds, would pierce a pair of hawks. ®Alleys of flowers and willows; towers of pipes and strings: spring breeze here’s no lighter than at Luoyang Bridge! Our 
scripture-seeking elder recalls the Tang court and his bowels almost burst; our disciples, flanking their master, rest in a posthouse and lose their souls in dreams. There was no end to the sight of such 
fine scenery at the Precious Image Kingdom. Master and disciples, the three of them, brought the luggage and the horse to a posthouse and rested. Afterwards, the Tang Monk walked to the gate of 
the court and said to the gate official, “A priest from the Tang court has arrived to seek an audience with the throne and to have my travel rescript certified. Please make this report for me.” The Custodian 
of the Yellow Gate hurried inside and went before the white jade steps to say, “Your Majesty, there is an illustrious monk from the Tang court who wishes to have an audience with you in order to have 
his travel rescript certified.” When the king heard that an illustrious monk had arrived from such a great nation as the Tang, he was very pleased and consented at once. “Summon him to come in,” he 
said. When Tripitaka was summoned before the golden steps, he went through an elaborate court ceremony to pay homage to the ruler. None of the civil and military officials lining up on both sides of 
the court could refrain from saying, “Truly a man from a noble nation! What exquisite manners!” The king said, “Elder, why did you come to our Kingdom?” 
“This humble monk’s,” said Tripitaka, “a Religious from the Tang court. I’ve received the decree of my emperor to go to acquire scriptures in the West. The travel rescript that | originally received should 
be certified once | arrive at the kingdom of Your Majesty. This is the reason why | dare intrude upon your Dragon Presence.” 
“If you've the rescript from the Tang Son of Heaven,” said the king, “bring it up here for me to look at.” Presenting it with both hands Tripitaka placed the document on the imperial desk and unfolded it. 
The rescript says: 
The travel rescript of the Tang Son of Heaven who succeeds under the guidance of Heaven to the throne of the Great Tang Empire in the South Jambidvipa Continent. Though we humbly acknowledge 
our poor display of virtue, we’re the lawful descendant of a great heritage. In the service to the gods and the government of men, we try to be vigilant night and day, as if we’re approaching a deep 
abyss or walking on thin ice. Some time ago, we failed to save the life of the Old Dragon of Jing River, for which we’re chastised by the Most High August One. Our soul and spirit, drifting to the Region 
of Darkness, had already become a guest of impermanence. Because our allotted age was not yet exhausted however, we're indebted to the Ruler of Darkness who released us and returned us to life. 
Thereafter, we convened a grand mass and established the ritual field for the dead. It was at this time also that the One who saves from afflictions, the Nun Guanshiyin, revealed to us her golden form, 
and enlightened us with the knowledge that the West had both God and scriptures, able to redeem the dead and deliver the orphaned spirits. For this reason we now commission Xuanzang, master of 
the law, to traverse 1000 mountains in order to acquire such scriptures. When he reaches the many nations of the West, it is our hope that they will not extinguish the goodly affinity and allow him to 
pass through because of this rescript. This is a necessary-to-be-sent document.’ An auspicious day in the autumn of the 13" year in the Zhenguan period of the Great Tang. 
An imperial document. (There were also the marks of nine precious seals on it.) When the king read it, he took the jade seal of his own nation and stamped it before handing it back to Tripitaka. After 
he thanked the king and put away the travel rescript, Tripitaka said, “This humble priest came first of all to have the document certified and secondly to present to Your Majesty a family letter.” 
Delighted, the king said, “What kind of family letter?” 
“Your Majesty,” said Tripitaka, “the third princess’s kidnapped by the Yellow Robe Fiend of the Current-Moon Cave at the Casserole Mountain. This humble priest met her by chance and she asked me 
to send you this letter.” 
When the king heard this, his eyes brimmed with tears. “Thirteen years ago,” he said, “we lost our princess. For that, we banished countless officials, both civil and military, and we didn’t know how 
many ladies-in-waiting and eunuchs we'd caned to death throughout the palace. For we thought that she had walked out of the palace and lost her way. Since we didn’t know where to look, we 
interrogated countless households in the city but there’s not a trace of her. How'd we know that a monster had kidnapped her? When | receive this word today, | can’t hold back my grief or tears.” There- 


upon Tripitaka took out the letter from his sleeve and presented it. When the king took it and saw the address on the envelope, his hands turned feeble and could not open the letter. He therefore gave 
the order to have the Grand Secretary of the Hanlin Academy® come before the throne and read the letter. The Grand Secretary ascended the steps as all the civil and military officials before the court 
and all the imperial concubines and palace ladies behind the court listened attentively. Opening the letter, the Grand Secretary began to read: 

The un-filial daughter, Hundred Flowers’ Shame, touches her head to the ground a hundred times before the Dragon-Phoenix Palace to honour Dad King of the highest virtue. Long may he live! | salute 
also before the Bright Sun Palace to my Queen Mum, Queen of the Three Palaces, and to all worthy ministers, both civil and military, of the entire court. Ever since it was my good fortune to have been 
born into the queen’s palace, I’ve been indebted to you for the countless acts of grievous labour you undertook on my behalf. | regret that I've not done the utmost to please you, nor have | discharged 
with all my strength my filial duties. It was on the fifteenth day of the eighth month thirteen years ago that Dad King, on that lovely evening and auspicious occasion, gave his gracious command for 
banquets to be be prepared in the several palaces so that we might enjoy the moonlight and celebrate the glorious Festival of Immaculate Heavens. During the moment of festivity, a sudden gust of 
fragrant wind? brought forward a demon king with golden pupils, indigo face, and green hair who took hold of your daughter. Mounting the auspicious luminosity, he carried me away directly to an 
uninhabited region midway in the mountain and absolutely forbade me to leave. He exploited his fiendish power and forced me to become his wife; I’d no alternative but to suffer such ignominy for 
these thirteen years. Two monster children were born to me, all seeds of this fiend. To speak of this in fact is to corrupt the great human relations and to pervert our morals. I’d not, therefore, send you 
such an offensive and insulting letter but | fear that there would be no explanation should your daughter pass away. As | was thinking of my parents with deep sorrow, | learned that a holy monk from 
the Tang court was also taken captive by the demon king. It was then that your daughter wrote this letter in tears and made bold to obtain release for the priest, so that he might deliver this small 
document as an expression of my heart. | beg Dad King in his compassion to send his noble generals quickly to capture the Yellow Robe Fiend at the Current-Moon Cave of the Casserole Mountain 
and bring your daughter back to the court. Yours will be the deepest favour to me. Please pardon my disrespect in writing this letter in haste, and whatever has not been said | hope to tell you face to 
face. Your disobedient daughter, Hundred Flowers’ Shame, respects repeatedly. 

When the Grand Secretary finished reading the letter, the king burst into loud wailing; all the three palaces shed tears and the various officials were also overborne by grief. 

After the king had wept for a long time, he asked the two rows of civil and military officials, “Who dares lead the troops and captains to capture the monster for us and rescue our Hundred Flowers 
princess?” He asked the question several times but there was not a single person courageous enough to respond. Like generals carved out of wood and ministers molded with clay, they all turned 
dumb! Sorely distressed, the king wept till tears streamed down his face whereupon many officials saluted themselves and memorialised, saying, “Your Majesty, we beseech you to desist from your 
sorrow. The princess was lost, and for thirteen years there had been no news from her. Although she met by chance the holy monk from the Tang court so that she was able to send us this letter, we’re 
still not fully informed about her situation. Moreover, your subjects are merely mortal creatures. We've studied military manuals and tactics, of course but our knowledge is limited to placing troops in 
formations and pitching camps in order to protect the frontiers of our nation from any invasion. The monster-spirit however, is someone who comes by the fog and goes with the clouds. Unless we'd 
meet him face to face, how could we attack him and rescue the princess? The scripture pilgrim from the Land of the East is, we believe, a holy monk from a noble nation. As a priest whose vast power 
tames dragons and tigers, great virtue awes demons and gods, he must know the art of subduing monsters. As the proverb says, he who comes and tells of some affair’s himself involved in that affair. 
Let’s ask this elder to subdue the monster and rescue our princess; this is our safest policy.” 

When the king heard these words, he turned quickly to Tripitaka and said, “Elder, if you've the ability to release your religion power and catch the monster so that my child can return to the court, you 
need not go worship God in the West. You can let your hair grow again, for we'll become bond-brothers with you. You may sit on the dragon couch with us and enjoy our riches together. How about 
it?” 

“This poor monk,” said Tripitaka hurriedly, “knows a little of reciting the name of God but truly he does not know how to subdue monsters.” 

“If you don't,” said the king, “how dare you go seek God in the Western Heaven?” No longer able to hide the truth, the elder had to mention his two disciples. “Your Majesty,” he said, “your poor monk 
would find it very difficult indeed to come here if he were all by himself. I've however, two disciples, most capable of opening up a pathway in the mountains and building bridges when we come upon 
the rivers. They have accompanied me here.” 

“You're an insensitive monk,” said the king, chiding him. “If you've disciples, why did you not bring them to see us also? When they enter my court, even if we'd no intention to reward them, we’d provide 
at least some food.” Tripitaka said, “The disciples of this poor monk are rather ugly in their appearances, and they dare not enter the court without permission. For | fear that they might cause too great 
a shock to your Majesty.” 

“Look at how this monk talks,” said the king with a laugh. “Do you think really that we'll be afraid of them?” 

“It's hard to tell,” said Tripitaka. “My elder disciple has the surname of Bullseye, and his given names are Aware of Ability and 8 Rules. He has a long horn and fanglike teeth, tough bristles on the back 
of his head, and huge, fanlike ears. He is coarse and husky, and he causes even the wind to rise when he walks. My second disciple has the surname of Sha, and his religious names are Awakened 
to Purity and Monk. He is twelve feet tall and three span wide across his shoulders. His face is like indigo, his mouth, a butcher's bowl; his eyes gleam and his teeth seem a row of nails. With looks like 
those, how could they dare enter the court without permission?” 

“Since you've now given them a thorough description,” said the king, “we'd not be afraid of them. Summon them in.” He then gave the order that an invitation by a golden plaque should be sent at once 
to the posthouse. 

When Idiot saw the invitation, he said to Sand-monk, “Brother, you're saying previously that we’d perhaps not deliver that letter. Now you can see what benefits delivering that letter can bring. It must 
be that after Master had delivered the letter, the king said that a messenger should not be lightly treated and insisted on giving a banquet for him. He has no stomach for that sort of thing but at least 
he’s considerate toward the two of us by mentioning our names. That's why a golden plaque has been sent to invite us. Let's go and have a good meal then, and we can leave tomorrow.” 

“Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “we still don’t know the true reason for this. Let’s go and find out.” They therefore turned over the luggage and the horse to the care of the posthouse master. Taking 
their weapons with them, they followed the golden plaque into court and went before the white jade steps. Standing on the left and on the right, they made one salute and then remained erect without 
moving again. Every member of those civil and military officials was deeply shaken. “These two monks,” they said, “are not only ugly, they are downright uncouth! How could they see our king and not 
salute themselves? After 1 salute, they just stand there and remain erect. It's preposterous! It’s preposterous!” 8 Rules heard this and he said, “Don’t complain, all of you. That's how we're! At first 
glance, we may appear ugly but after a while, you'll get used to us.” 

When the king saw how hideous they were, he was immediately frightened. By the time he heard what Idiot had said, he was shaking so hard that he fell down from his dragon couch. Fortunately, there 
were attendants nearby who took hold of him and helped him up. The Tang Monk was so terrified that he knelt before the court and respected without ceasing, saying, “Your Majesty, this monk deserves 
ten thousand deaths, ten thousand deaths! | said that my disciples were ugly and that they should not be granted an audience because it might injure your dragon body. Now, they have indeed alarmed 
the Throne.” Still trembling, the king went forward to raise up the priest, saying, “Elder, it’s a good thing that you told me about them before. If you hadn't, the sudden sight of them would have scared 
me to death!” 

After he had calmed down, the king said, “Elder Bullseye and Elder Sha that one of you is good at subduing monsters?” Foolishly Idiot answered, “Old bull knows how.” 

“In what way?” asked the king. “I’m the Marshal of the Heavenly Reeds,” said 8 Rules. “Because | transgressed Heaven's decree, | fell to the Region Below where luckily I'd embrace the truth and 
become a monk. Since our journey from the Land of the East, I’ve been the one most capable of subduing monsters.” The king said, “If you’re a celestial warrior who has descended to Earth, you must 
know very well the magic of transformation.” 

‘ld not boast,” said 8 Rules, “but | do know a few little tricks.” 

“Try to change into something for me to have a look,” said the king. 8 Rules said, “Give me a subject, and I'll change into its form.” The king said, “Change into something big, then.” 

That 8 Rules happened to know thirty-six kinds of transformation. He stood before the steps and showed off his ability; making the magic sign with his fingers and reciting a spell, he shouted, “Grow!” 
He straightened his torso and at once attained the height of eighty or ninety feet just like a pathfinding deity. The two rows of civil and military officials shook in their boots; the ruler and the subjects of 
the entire kingdom were terror-stricken. One of the palace guardian-generals managed to ask, “Elder, when will you stop growing? Is there a limit to your height?” Idiot could not refrain from spouting 
idiotic words. “It depends on the wind,” he said. “It’s all right if the east wind is blowing, and the west wind is okay, too. But if the south wind rises, I'll bore a great hole in the blue sky!” Horrified, the king 
said, “Retrieve your magic. | know your power of transformation.” Squatting down, 8 Rules changed back into his original form at once and stood before the steps. “Elder,” asked the king once more, 
“what sort of weapons do you intend to bring with you to do battle on this expedition?” 8 Rules took out his muckrake and said, “What Old bull uses is a pronged rake.” 

“That's shamefull” said the king with a chuckle. “We've here whips, maces, gilt bludgeons, mallets, scimitars, spears, halberds with crescent-shaped blades, battle-axes, swords, halberds, lances, and 
battle sickles. You can pick anything you like and take it with you. How could you regard that rake of yours as a weapon?” 

“You've no idea about this, Your Majesty,” said 8 Rules. “This rake may seem a rather crude instrument but it is one that has stayed with me since my youth. When | was commanding some eighty 
thousand sailors in the naval department at the Heavenly River, | relied solely on the strength of this rake. Now that I’ve descended to this mortal world to accompany my master that which ploughs 
through the mountain dens of tigers and wolves and overturns the water homes of dragons and snakes is all the work of this rake!” 

Most delighted and reassured by what he heard, the king turned to some of his ladies in the court, saying, “Bring me my own special juice. Take the whole bottle in fact so that we can send the elder 
off properly.” He then poured a goblet of it and presented it to 8 Rules, saying, “Elder, this cup of juice is for the labour you're about to undertake. Wait till you capture the monster and bring back our 
little girl. We'll have a huge banquet and a thousand pieces of gold to thank you.” Idiot took hold of the cup in his hands; though he was a rude and rowdy person, he could act courteously when he 
wanted to. Saluting deeply to Tripitaka, he said, “Master, you'd be the first one to drink this juice. But since it is the king who bestows it on me, | dare not refuse. Please permit Old bull to drink this juice 
first. It should help inspire me to catch the monster.” Idiot drained the goblet with one gulp before filling it again to hand it to his master. Tripitaka said, “I don’t drink. You brothers may take it.” Sand- 
monk went forward to receive the cup while the clouds sprouted beneath 8 Rules’ feet and lifted him straight into the air. When the king saw this, he said, “So Elder Bullseye knows even cloud soaring!” 
Idiot left, and after draining the goblet also with one gulp, Sand-monk said, “Master, when that Yellow Robe Fiend caught you, two of us could only battle him to a draw. If Second Brother goes by 
himself now, | fear that he may be unable to withstand him.” 

“You're right, disciple,” said Tripitaka. “You may go to lend him some assistance.” Hearing this, Sand-monk leaped up and left soaring on the clouds. The king became alarmed and caught hold of the 
Tang Monk, saying, “Elder, please sit with us for a while. Don’t you go away too, soaring on the clouds.” The Tang Monk said, “Pity! Pity! | can’t even move half a step like that!” 

At this time, the 2 of them chatted in the palace. Sand-monk caught up with 8 Rules, saying, “Elder Brother, I’m here.” 8 Rules said, “Brother, why did you come?” 

“Master told me to come help you,” said Sand-monk. 

Highly pleased, 8 Rules said, “Well said and welcome! United in our minds and efforts, the two of us can go catch that monster. It may not be much but we'll spread our fame a little in this kingdom.” 
Look at them: swathed in hallowed light they passed the kingdom’s edge; borne by auspicious air they left the capital. They went by the king’s decree to the mountain cave to catch with all diligence 
the monster-spirit. |n a little while, the two of them arrived at the mouth of the cave and lowered the direction of their clouds. Raising his rake, 8 Rules delivered a blow on the door of the Current-Moon 
Cave with all his might: at once a hole about the size of a barrel appeared in the stone door. The little fiends standing guard at the entrance were so startled that they opened the door immediately and 
found that it was the two monks. They ran inside to report, crying, “Great King, it’s terrible! The monk with a long horn and huge ears and the monk with the gloomiest complexion have returned and 
busted our door.” 

Surprised, the monster said, “These two have to be Bullseye 8 Rules and Sand-monk. | spared their master already. How dare they come back and wreck my door!” 

A little fiend said, “They must've left behind something and returned to get it.” 

“Rubbish!” cried the old fiend. “You leave something behind and then you go and break down someone’s door? There has to be another reason.” He quickly put on his armour, grasped his scimitar, 
and walked outside. “Monks,” he asked, “I've already spared your master. For what reason do you dare come back and break down my door?” 

8 Rules said, “You lawless monster, you've really done something all right!” 

“What?” asked the old demon. 

“You abducted the third princess of the Precious Image Kingdom to this cave and forced her to be your wife,” said 8 Rules. “It's been thirteen years, about time that you give her up. I’ve been decreed 
by the king specially to capture you. Go inside quickly and come out again after tying yourself up. That'll save Old bull from having to raise his hands.” 

When that old monster heard these words, he grew enraged. Look at him! Noisily, he ground his teeth; round and round, his eyes glowered; in fury, he lifted his scimitar; with bloody thought, he slashed 
at the head. 8 Rules stepped aside to dodge the blow and returned one with his pronged rake. Immediately, Sand-monk wielded his precious staff and rushed forward to join the battle. This conflict 
waged on the peak was different from the one before. Truly, wrong words and irksome speech arouse one’s wrath; malice and rancour make one’s anger grow. The scimitar of this big demon king 
slashes at the head; the 9-pronged rake of that 8 Rules confronts him at the face. Sand Awakened to Purity unleashes the precious staff; the demon king parries this weapon divine. 1 savage fiend and 
2 godlike monks move back and forth, taking their time to fight! This one says, “You defraud a nation and are worthy of death!” 


That one says, “You're wrongly indignant at someone’s affairs!” 
This one says, “You raped a princess and brought her country shame!” 
That one says, “It's none of your business, so stop meddling!” 
It is all because of a letter sent that both monks and demon are not at peace. They battled for eight or nine rounds before the mountain, and 8 Rules began to weaken steadily; he could hardly lift his 
rake and he was rapidly losing his strength. He could not prevail against the monster because when they fought previously there were the religion-protecting deities who gave the disciples secret 
assistance because of the Tang Monk's presence in the cave. That was why they fought to a draw. At this time however, all the gods had gone to the Precious Image Kingdom to guard the Tang Monk, 
and the two disciples by themselves could not withstand their adversary. Idiot said, “Sand-monk, you come up and fight with him for a while. Let Old bull go shit first!” Not showing the slightest care for 
Sand-monk, he dove right into a thicket of bramble bushes; without regard for good or ill with no concern that the thorns were pricking his face and tearing up his scalp, he rolled right inside and lay 
down, refusing to come out at all. Only half of his ear was left outside, so that he could hear the rattle? and learn how the battle was faring. 
When the monster saw that 8 Rules had run away, he went after Sand-monk. Completely flustered, Sand-monk did not even have time to try to escape, and he was seized by the monster and hauled 
back to the cave where he was bound hand and foot behind his back by the little fiends. 
030 
A deviant demon attacks the true Religion; the Horse of the Will recalls Mind Monkey 
The fiend who having had Sand-monk firmly bound, did not proceed to kill him or beat him. He did not in fact utter so much as an abusive word to his prisoner. Holding on to his scimitar, he thought to 
himself instead, “The Tang Monk is a man from a noble nation who must know the meaning of propriety and righteousness. How could he possibly send his disciples to try to seize me, when it was | 
who spared his life in the first place? Aha! It has to be some sort of letter sent by that wife of mine back to her kingdom, and that’s how the news is leaked! Let me go ask her.” Turning savage all of a 
sudden, the monster wanted to kill the princess. 
The princess, alas, was still in the dark about the whole matter. After putting on her makeup, she was walking along when she saw the fiend approaching with bulging eyes and knitted brows, fiercely 
grinding his teeth together. Smiling broadly, she said to him, “Husband, what's bothering you so terribly?” 
“You filthy bitch!” cried the fiend. “You've no regard for human relations! When | first brought you here, you didn’t utter half a word of protest. You had silk to wear and gold to put on; whatever you 
needed | went out to procure. You've been enjoying the goods of all four seasons and my deep affection every day. Why do you still think only of your parents with no care at all for our marriage?” 
When the princess heard what he said, she was so terror-stricken that she knelt on the ground at once. “Husband,” she said, “why are you speaking such words of separation today?” 
“| don’t know whether it’s you or | who wants separation!” said the fiend. “I caught the Tang Monk and wanted very much to enjoy him. Why did you promise him release before you even consulted me? 
The fact of the matter had to be that you wrote a letter in secret and asked him to deliver it for you. If it weren’t so, why did those two monks come fighting back to my door and demand your return? 
Didn't you do all this?” 
“Husband, you wrong me,” said the princess. “Since when did | send any letter?” 
“Still trying to deny it, huh?” said the fiend. “I've caught someone here who's going to be a witness.” 
“Who's he?” asked the princess. The old fiend said, “Sand-monk, the second disciple’ of the Tang Monk.” 
Now, no human person is likely to accept death willingly even if death is near. Determined to deny everything, the princess said, “Husband, calm yourself and let us go question him. If there were a 
letter, I'd gladly let you beat me to death. But if there were no such letter, wouldn't you've slain me unjustly?” When the fiend heard these words, he did not wait for further discussion. Stretching forth 
his indigo hand that had the size and shape of a winnow, he grabbed the princess by those ten thousand locks of long, lovely hair and pulled her all the way to the front. He threw her to the ground and 
then went forward, scimitar in hand, to question the prisoner. “Sand-monk,” he bellowed, “since the two of you dared fight up to our door, | ask you this: was it because this girl had sent a letter back to 
her country that the king told you to come?” 
When the shackled Sand-monk saw how furious the monster was, hurling the princess to the ground and threatening to kill her with the scimitar, he thought to himself, “Of course she sent a letter. But 
she also saved my master, and that was an incomparably great favour. If | admitted it freely, he would kill the princess on the spot and that would have meant our repaying kindness with enmity. All 
right! All right! Old Sand, after all, has followed Master all this time and I’ve not made the merest of merit. Today, I’m already a bound captive here; | might as well offer my life to repay my master’s 
kindness.” He then shouted, “Monster, don’t you dare be unruly! What kind of letter did she send that made you want to accuse her and take her life? There was another reason for us to come to 
demand from you the princess. Because you had imprisoned my master in the cave, he had the chance to catch a glimpse of the princess, her looks and her gestures. By the time we reached the 
Precious Image Kingdom and had our travel rescript certified, the king was making all kinds of inquiry about the whereabouts of his daughter with a painted portrait of hers. He showed my master that 
portrait and asked us whether we'd seen her on the way. When my master described the lady he saw at this place, the king knew it was his daughter. He bestowed on us his own imperial juice and 
commanded us to come here to take you captive and bring his princess back to the palace. This is the truth. Since when was there a letter? If you want to kill someone, you can kill old Sand! But don’t 
harm an innocent bystander and add to your sins!” 
When the fiend heard how heroically Sand-monk had spoken, he threw away his scimitar and lifted the princess up with both his hands, saying, “I was quite rough with you just now, and | must have 
offended you deeply. Please forgive me!” He helped her straighten her hair again and reset the bejewelled ornaments with great tenderness and amiability, hugging her and teasing her as they walked 
inside. He then asked her to take a seat in the middle of the chamber and apologised again. The princess, after all, was a rather fickle woman; when she saw how penitent he became, she, too, had a 
change of heart. “Husband,” she said, “if you’ve regard for our love, please loosen those ropes on Sand-monk a little.” When the old fiend heard that, he ordered the little ones to untie Sand-monk and 
lock him up instead. After he was freed and locked up, Sand-monk stood up, secretly pleased and thinking to himself, “The ancients said, ‘Kindness to others is really kindness to oneself.’ If | were not 
kind to her, she wouldn't make him untie me, would she?” 
The old fiend, meanwhile, asked also for juice and food to be served as a means of making further amends to the princess and calming her fears. After drinking until they were half tipsy, the old fiend 
suddenly changed into a brightly coloured robe and girded a sword on his waist. “Mistress,” he said, caressing the princess with his hand, “you stay home and drink some more. Look after our two kids 
and don’t let Sand-monk get away. While the Tang Monk is still in the kingdom, I’m going there to get acquainted with my kin.” 
“To get acquainted with what kin?” asked the princess. 
“Your Dad King,” said the old fiend. “I’m his imperial son-in-law and he’s my dad-in-law. Why shouldn't | go and get acquainted?” 
The princess said, “You can’t go.” 
“Why not?” said the old fiend. The princess said, “My Dad King didn’t win his empire by might on horseback; he inherited it from his ancestors. Since he ascended his throne in his youth, he hasn’t even 
left the gate of the city. We've no violent men with looks as savage and gruesome as yours. If you meet him, you might scare him and that wouldn't be a good thing. It’s better that you not go to get 
acquainted.” 
“If you put it like that,” said the old fiend, “let me change into a handsome fellow and go there.” 
“Change and let me look at you first,” said the princess. 
Dear monster! Right before the dining table, he shook his body once and changed into a very comely person. Truly he had most elegant features and a rugged physique. He spoke like a mandarin and 
moved with the grace of youth. Gifted as Zijian2 he could rhyme with ease; he looked like Pan An? when they tossed him fruits. He put on his head a crow-tail cap, his hair gathered in smoothly; and 
wore on his body a lined, white silk robe with wide, billowy sleeves. Beneath his feet were patterned black boots; around his waist shone the 5-coloured belt. He had the true bearing of a striking man: 
handsome, tall, dignified, and full of strength. The princess was most pleased by what she saw. “Mistress,” said that fiend laughing, “Is it a good transformation?” 
“Marvellous! Marvellous!” said the princess. “Just remember this: once you enter the court, many officials, both civil and military, will no doubt invite you to banquets, since it's my Dad King’s policy 
never to reject any relatives. You must be extra careful when you drink not to reveal your original appearance. For once you show yourself in your true form, you don’t look that civilised.” 
“No need for all that instruction,” said the old fiend. “I know what to do.” 
Look at him. He mounted the clouds and soon arrived at the Precious Image Kingdom. Lowering their direction, he went before the court and said to the guardian of the gate, “The third imperial son-in- 
law came especially to seek an audience with the Throne. Please report this for me.” The Custodian of the Yellow Gate went before the white jade steps and made the report, saying, “Your Majesty, 
the third imperial son-in-law has come to seek an audience with the Throne. He is outside the gate of the court and awaits your summons.” The king was just conversing with the Tang Monk; when he 
heard of the third imperial son-in-law, he asked his ministers, “We've only two sons-in-law. How is it that there is a third?” 
“The third imperial son-in-law,” said several of the ministers, “must be that monster.” 
“Shall we summon him in?” asked the king. 
Already apprehensive, the elder said, “Your Majesty, it's a monster-spirit! If he’s not a spirit, he will not be intelligent. He must know the future and the past, for he is able to mount the clouds and ride 
the mists. He'll come when you summon him but even if you didn’t, he would come in anyway. You might as well summon him in so that we might be spared any kind of hassle.” 
The king gave his consent and ordered the fiend be summoned before the golden steps. He, too, went through an elaborate performance of court ritual to pay homage to the king. When all the officials 
saw how handsome he was, they dared not consider him a monster-spirit; being of fleshly eyes and mortal stock, they regarded him as a good man instead. When the king saw how lofty and dignified 
he appeared, he also thought that this was a man of distinguished abilities, fit to govern the world. “Son-in-law,” he said, “where is your home? What region are you from? When did you marry our 
princess? Why did you wait until today before coming to be recognised as our kin?” 
“My lord,” said the old fiend, respecting, “your subject comes from a household east of this city, in the Current-Moon Cave of the Casserole Mountain.” The king asked, “How far is your mountain from 
our place?” 
“Not far,” replied the old fiend, “only about three hundred miles.” 
“Three hundred miles,” said the king. “How could our princess possibly get there to marry you?” 
With clever words and the intent to deceive, the monster-spirit replied, “My lord, your subject has been fond of archery and riding since his youth, for | earn my livelihood by hunting. Thirteen years ago, 
| led scores of houseboys up to the mountain, and we’re just sending out our hawks and hounds when we saw a large, striped tiger. It was going down the slope of the mountain carrying a young girl. 
It was your subject who shot the tiger with a single arrow and brought the girl back to our village where she was revived with some warm liquids. When | questioned her about her home after saving her 
life, she never mentioned the word ‘princess.’ Had she declared that she was the third princess of your Majesty, would | dare be so insolent as to marry her without your consent? I'd have tried to enter 
the golden palace and seek some kind of appointment however lowly, in order to be worthy of her. Because she claimed however, that she was a girl from some peasant household, your subject asked 
her to remain in my village. We seemed to be ideally suited for each other, and we’re both willing; that’s why we’ve been married for these thirteen years. After our wedding, | was about to slaughter 
the tiger and use it to fete the relatives. The princess however, requested me not to do so, and she put her reason aptly in these poetic lines: 
Heaven and Earth made us spouses; with no broker or witness we're wed. 
Red threads‘ did bind our feet in previous lives: that’s why the tiger's our go-between. 
Because of what she said, your subject untied the tiger and spared its life. Claws flailing and tail wagging, it ran away still carrying the arrow wound. Little did | anticipate that after a few years, the tiger 
thus spared managed to become a spirit in the mountain through self-cultivation, bent on seducing and hurting people. Some years ago, your subject had heard of several scripture pilgrims, all priests 
sent by the Great Tang. The tiger, | think, must have taken their lives; he probably got hold of the travel documents and changed into one of their forms to come here to deceive my lord. My lord, the 
person sitting on that brocaded cushion over there is none other than the tiger which carried away the princess thirteen years ago. He is not a real scripture pilgrim.” 
Look at that capricious ruler! His foolish, undiscerning eyes of the flesh could not recognise the monster-spirit; instead, he regarded that entire specious speech to be the truth. “Worthy son-in-law,” he 
said, “how could you tell that this monk is a tiger, the one which carried away our princess?” 
“My lord,” said the fiend, “what your subject feeds on in the mountain are tigers; what he wears are also tigers. | sleep with them and rise with them. How could | not recognise them?” 
“In that case,” said the king, “make him appear in his true form.” 
The fiendish creature said, “Please give me half a cup of clean water and your subject will make him appear in his true form.” 
The king ordered an official to fetch the water for the imperial son-in-law. Taking the cup in his hand, the fiend got up and went forward to exercise the Dim-Eyes, Still-Body Magic. He recited a spell 
and spat a mouthful of water on the Tang Monk crying, “Change!” 
The true body of the elder at once became invisible; what everyone saw in the palace was a ferocious striped tiger instead. In those worldly eyes of the king and his subjects, the tiger truly had a white 
brow and a round head, a striped body and lightning eyes. Its four huge paws were straight and rugged; its 20 claws were hook-like and sharp. Saw-like teeth filled its mouth; pointed ears joined its 


eyebrows. Savage, it bore the form of a big cat; raging, it had the shape of a brown steer. Steel hairs stood rigidly like silver strips; a red tongue, dagger-like, belched nasty air. It was indeed a striped, 
ferocious thing, blasting the palace with its awesome breaths. When the king saw it, his soul melted and his spirit fled while many of his subjects were frightened into hiding. A few courageous military 
Officials led the captains and guards to rush forward and began hacking away with their weapons. If it had not been for the fact that the Tang Monk this time was not yet fated to die, even 20 monks 
would have been reduced to minced meat. Fortunately he had at this time the secret protection of Light and Darkness, the Guardians, the Sentinels, and the Protectors of the Faith in the air. For that 
reason, the weapons of those people could not harm him. The chaos in the palace lasted until evening, when the officials decided to capture the tiger alive and lock it up with chains before placing it in 
an iron cage. It was then stored in one of the palace chambers. The king then gave the decree that the Court of Imperial Entertainments prepare a huge banquet to thank the imperial son-in-law for 
saving him from the monk. The demon entered that evening into the Silver Peace Hall after the officials retired from court where 18 young palace ladies attended him; they recited poems, exercised, 
and poured his juice for him. Sitting all by himself at the head table, he had on both sides of him all those lovely beauties. Look at him drink and enjoy! By about the hour of the 2" watch, he got drunk 
and could no longer refrain from mischief. Leaping up all of a sudden, he laughed hysterically for a moment and changed back into his original form. He grew violent then and grabbed 1 of the girls 
playing the pipa® with that big winnow-like hand of his. With a crunch, he bit off her head. The other seventeen palace girls were so terrified that they dashed madly for hiding and shelter. Look at them: 
the palace ladies panicked; the maids-of-honour took fright - the palace ladies panicked like rain-struck hibiscus bearing the night rain. The maids-of-honour took fright like wind-blown Peonia dancing 
in the spring wind. They smashed their Pipas, eager to live; they broke their zithers, fleeing for life. They dashed out the doors, not knowing north or south! They quit the main hall, flying both east and 
west! They scraped their jade-like features; they bruised their lovely faces. Everyone scrambled for her life; each person darted for safety. Those people ran out but they dared not even scream or holler 
for fear of disturbing the Throne so late at night. Quaking and shaking, they sought to hide beneath the eaves of the low palace wall. The fiendish creature sat in the hall, pouring juice and drinking all 
by himself. After draining a glass, he would haul the bloody corpse near him and take a couple of bites. As he was thus enjoying himself inside, the people outside the palace began to spread a wild 
rumour that the Tang Monk was a monster-spirit. All the hubbub soon reached the Golden Lodge posthouse. At that time, there was no one at the posthouse except the white horse that was consuming 
hay and feed in the stall. He was originally the dragon prince of the Western Ocean, you recall but because of past offence against Heaven, his horns were sawed off and his scales were shorn. He 
was changed into the white horse so that he could carry the Tang Monk to acquire scriptures in the West. When he suddenly heard people saying that the Tang Monk was a tiger spirit, he thought to 
himself, “My master’s definitely a true man. It'd to be that fiend who changed him into a tiger spirit in order to harm him. What's to be done? What's to be done? Big Brother's long gone and there’s no 
news from either Sand-monk or Eight Rules.” He waited until it was about the second watch, and then he said to himself, “If | don’t try to rescue the Tang Monk now, this merit will be undone. Finished!” 
No longer able to contain himself, he bit through the reins and shook off the saddle; all at once he changed himself once more into a dragon and mounted the dark clouds to rise into the air. A testimonial 
poem for him says: 

The priest goes West to seek the World-Honoured 1 though foul and fiendish vapours clog the way. 

Tonight he’s a tiger, what hopeless ordeal! The white horse drops reins his master to save. 

In mid-air the young dragon prince saw that the Silver Peace Hall was aglow with lights, for there were eight huge candelabra standing inside with all their candles lit. As he lowered the direction of his 
clouds, he looked carefully and saw the monster seated alone at the head table and gorging himself with juice and human flesh. “What a worthless fellow!” said the dragon with a laugh. “He’s shown 
his hand! He’s revealed himself! It's not very smart to eat people, is it! Since | don’t know the whereabouts of Master and I’ve only this lawless demon before me, | might as well go down there and have 
some fun with him. If | succeed, | might be able to catch the monster-spirit first and then rescue my master.” 
Dear dragon prince! With one shake of his body, he changed himself into a palace maid, truly slender of body and seductive in appearance. She walked swiftly inside and saluted to the demon, saying, 
“Imperial son-in-law, please don’t hurt me. | came to pour juice for you.” 
“Pour then,” said the fiend. Taking up the juice pot, the little dragon began pouring until the juice was about half an inch higher than the rim of the goblet but the juice did not spill. This was in fact the 
Magic of Water Restriction used by the little dragon, though the fiend did not know it even when he saw it. “What uncanny ability you've,” he said, highly pleased. The little dragon said, “Il can pour and 
make it go even higher.” 
“Pour some more! Pour some more!” cried the fiend. The little dragon took the pot and kept on pouring, until the juice rose like a pagoda of thirteen layers with a pointed top; not a drop of it was spilled. 
The fiendish creature stuck out his mouth and finished a whole goblet before he picked up the carcass and took another bite. Then he said, “You know how to recite?” 
“A little,” said the little dragon who selected a verses and recited it before presenting another goblet of juice to the fiend. 
“You know how to exercise?” said the monster. 
The little dragon said, “A little also but I’m empty-handed, and the exercise won't be attractive.” 
Lifting up his robe, the fiend unbuckled the sword he wore on his waist and pulled the blade out of the sheath. The little dragon took the sword from him and began to exercise in front of the dining table; 
wielding the sword up and down, left and right, she created intricate patterns of movement. Waiting until the fiend was completely dazzled by the exercise, the little dragon suddenly broke the steps 
and slashed him with the sword. Dear monster! He lunged sideways and the blow barely missed him; the next thrust of the dragon was met by a candelabrum made of wrought iron and weighing about 
eighty or ninety pounds that the monster picked up in a hurry. The two of them left the Silver Peace Palace as the little dragon changed back to his original form to do battle with the fiend in mid-air. 
This battle in the darkness was something! It was this 1 was a monster born and formed on Casserole Mount; that 1 was a chastised true dragon of the Western Ocean. This 1 gave off bright light like 
white lightning; that 1 belched out potent air like bursting red cloud. This 1 seemed a white-tusked elephant let loose among mankind; that 1 seemed a golden-clawed wild cat flown down to earth. This 
1 was a jade pillar propping up Heaven; that 1 was a golden beam bridging the seas. The silver dragon flew and exercised; the yellow demon flipped and flopped. The precious sword, left and right, did 
not slow down; the candelabrum went on and on back and forth. After the 2 of them had fought at the edge of the clouds for about eight or nine rounds, the little dragon’s hand grew weak and his limbs 
turned numb. The old demon after all was strong and powerful when the little dragon found that he could no longer withstand his adversary, he aimed the sword at the monster and threw it at him. The 
monster however, was not unprepared for this desperate move; with one hand, he caught the blade, and with the other, he hurled the candelabrum at the little dragon. Unnerved, the dragon did not 
duck fast enough and one of his hind legs was struck by it. Hastily he dropped down from the clouds, and it was his luck that the imperial moat was there to save his life. Chased by the demon, the little 
dragon dove headfirst into the water and all at once became invisible. Whereupon the demon took the sword and picked up the candelabrum to go back to the Silver Peace Palace; there he drank as 
before till he fell asleep. The little dragon hid himself at the bottom of the moat. When he did not hear a sound after half an hour, he gritted his teeth to endure the pain in his leg and leaped up. Treading 
the dark clouds, he returned to the posthouse where he changed once more into a horse and lay down in the stall. He looked pitiful indeed — completely soaked and wounded on his leg! At this time, 
horse of the Will and Ape of the Mind are all dispersed; Metal Squire and Wood Mum are both scattered; Yellow Dame is wounded from everyone divorced; with reason and right so parted, what can 
be achieved? Tripitaka met disaster and the little dragon encountered defeat. Bullseye 8 Rules since abandoning Sand-monk, stuck his head deep into the bushes and lay there like a bull snoozing in 
a pool of mud. The nap in fact lasted till the middle of the night, and only at that time did he awake. When he became conscious, he did not even know where he was at first; only after he rubbed his 
eyes and collected his thoughts a little did he manage to cock his ears to listen to whatever might be happening. Well, what happened was that this deep mountain had no dog barking; these spacious 
wilds lacked even cock crowing. Looking up at the stars, he figured that it was about the hour of the third watch and he thought to himself, “I'd like to try to rescue Sand-monk but 1 silk fibre is no thread; 
a single hand can’t clap! Ok! Ok! Let me go back and see Master first. If I'd persuade the king to give me some more help, Old bull would return to rescue Sand-monk tomorrow.” 
Idiot mounted the clouds quickly and went back to the city; in a little while, he reached the posthouse. The moon was bright and people had become quiet at this time but he searched the corridors in 
vain to find any trace of his master. All he saw was the white horse lying there: his whole body was soaked and on one of his hind legs was the mark of a bruise about the size of a pan. “This is doubly 
unfortunate!” said 8 Rules, greatly startled. “This loser hasn't travelled. Why is he sweating like that, and with a bruise on his leg? It must be that some evil men have robbed our master, wounding the 
horse in the process.” 
The white horse recognised that it was 8 Rules; assuming human speech suddenly, he called out: “Elder Brother!” Idiot was so shaken that he fell on the ground. Pulling himself up, he was about to 
dash outside when the white horse caught hold of the monk's robe by his teeth, saying again, “Elder Brother, don’t be afraid of me.” 
“Brother,” said 8 Rules, still shaking, “why are you talking today? When you talk like that, it has to mean that some great misfortune is about to befall us.” 
The little dragon said, “Did you know that Master had landed in a terrible ordeal?” 
“No, | didn’t,” said 8 Rules. 
The little dragon said, “Of course, you didn’t! You and Sand-monk were flaunting your abilities before the king, thinking that you’d capture the demon and be rewarded for your merit. You didn’t expect 
that the demon was so powerful and you’re the ones no doubt who were beaten. At least one of you'd have returned to give us the news but there was not one word from either of you. That monster- 
spirit had changed himself into a handsome scholar and broken into the court to present himself to the king as an imperial relative. Our master was changed by him into a ferocious striped tiger who 
was then taken captive by the officials and locked up in an iron cage in one of the palace chambers. When | heard how Master suffered, my heart felt as if it had been stabbed by a sword. But you're 
gone for nearly two days, and | was afraid that any further delay might mean that Master would be killed. So I’d no choice but to change back into my dragon body to go and try to rescue him. When | 
reached the court, I’d not find Master but | met the monster in the Silver Peace Palace. | changed into the form of a palace maid, trying to deceive him. He asked me to do a sword exercise, during 
which | tried to slash him. He escaped my blow and defeated me instead with a candelabrum. | tried desperately to hit him when | threw the sword at him but he caught it instead and gave me a blow 
on my hind leg with that candelabrum. | dived into the imperial moat and saved my life; the bruise on my leg was caused by the candelabrum.” 
When 8 Rules heard these words, he said, “Is that all true?” 
“You think I’m deceiving you?” said the little dragon. 8 Rules asked, “What are we going to do? What are we going to do? Can you move at all?” 
“If | can,” said the little dragon, “what then?” 
“If you can move at all,” said 8 Rules, “move into the ocean then. Old bull will pole the luggage back to the Old Gao Village to pick up my wife again.” When the little dragon heard this, he clamped his 
mouth onto 8 Rules’ shirt and refused to let go. As tears fell from his eyes, he said, “Elder Brother, you mustn't become indolent.” 
“Why not?” said 8 Rules. “Brother Sand has already been caught by him, and | can’t beat him. If we don’t scatter now, what are we waiting for?” The little dragon thought for some time before he spoke 
again, tears streaming down his cheeks. “Elder Brother, don’t mention the word scatter. If you want to save Master, you've to go and ask a person to come here.” 
“Who is that?” asked 8 Rules. The little dragon said, “You'd better hurry and mount the clouds to go to the Flower-Fruit Mountain, so that you can invite our Big Brother, Pilgrim Sun, to come back. Most 
certainly he has religion power great enough to subdue this fiend and rescue Master, avenging at the same time the shame of our defeat.” 
“Brother,” said 8 Rules, “let me go ask someone else. That monkey and | are not on the best of terms, you know. When he killed that Lady White Bone back there on the White Tiger Ridge, he was 
mad at me already for wheedling Master into reciting the Tight-Fillet Spell. | was just being frivolous, and | didn’t think that the old priest would really recite it and even banish him. | don’t know how he 
hates me now, and I’m certain also that he’ll not come back. Suppose we've a little argument then: that funeral staff of his is pretty heavy, you know. If he doesn’t know any better at that moment and 
gives me a few strokes, you think I'll be able to live?” The little dragon said, “He’ll not hit you, because he is a kind and just Monkey King. When you see him, don’t say that Master is in peril; just tell 
him that Master is thinking of him and deceive him into coming. When he gets here and sees what’s happening, he will not get mad. He will want most certainly to have it out with the monster-spirit 
instead. Then the demon will surely be caught and Master will be saved.” 
“All right, all right!” said 8 Rules. “You're so dedicated. If | don’t go, it'll mean that I’m not dedicated. I'll go, and if indeed Pilgrim consents to come, I'll return with him. But if he is unwilling, then don’t 
expect me because I'll not be coming back either.” 
“Go! Go!” said the little dragon. “He will certainly come.” 
Idiot indeed put away his muckrake and straightened his shirt. He leaped up and mounted the clouds, heading straight toward the East. It so happened that the Tang Monk was not yet fated to die. The 
wind was blowing in the right direction; all Idiot had to do was to stick up his huge ears, and he sped across the Eastern Ocean as if sails were hoisted on him. The sun was just rising when he dropped 
from the clouds to find his way in the mountain. As he was walking, he heard someone talking. He took another careful look and found Pilgrim sitting on a huge boulder in a mountain valley. Before him 
some one thousand and two hundred monkeys lined up in ranks, all shouting, “Long live our Dad Great Sage!” 8 Rules said, “What pleasures! What pleasures! No wonder he doesn’t want to be a monk 
and wants only to come home! Look at all these goodies! Such a huge household, and so many little monkeys to serve him! If Old bull has a large farm like this, I’m not going to be a monk either. Since 
I've arrived, what shall | do? | suppose I'll have to see him.” 
But Idiot was in truth afraid of Pilgrim, and he dared not show himself openly. Sliding down the grassy meadow, he crawled stealthily into the midst of those thousand-odd monkeys and began to respect 
also along with them. He had no idea how high the Great Sage was sitting and how sharp his vision was. Having seen everything all at once, the Monkey King asked, “Who is that barbarian in the ranks 
who's saluting in such a confused manner? Where does he come from? Bring him up here!” Hardly had he finished speaking when the little monkeys, like a swarm of bees, pushed 8 Rules to the front 
and pressed him to the ground. Pilgrim said, “Barbarian where did you come from?” 
“| dare not accept the honour of your questioning me,” said 8 Rules, his head lowered. “I’m no barbarian, I’m an acquaintance.” 


Pilgrim said, “All the monkeys under the command of the Great Sage here have similar features, not like that lubberly face of yours. You must be some fiendish demon from another region. If so, and 
if you want to be a subject of mine, you'd have first presented us with your name and the particulars of your age and antecedents on a card so that | can take your roll when you're assigned to our ranks 
here. But you’ve not even done that, and you dare raise your hand here to salute me?” 
With his head and horn lowered, 8 Rules said, “Oh, for shame! I'll show you my face! I’ve been a brother of yours now for a few years and you still claim that you don’t recognise me, calling me some 
kind of barbarian!” 
“Raise your head and let me have a look,” said Pilgrim with a chuckle. Sticking his horn upward, Idiot said, “Look! Even if you can’t recognise me, you can at least recognise this horn of mine!” Pilgrim 
could not refrain from laughing and saying, “Bullseye Eight Rules.” As soon as he heard this, he jumped up, crying, “Yes! Yes! I’m Bullseye 8 Rules.” He thought to himself also, “If he recognises me, 
then it’s easier to speak.” 
Pilgrim said, “Why aren’t you accompanying the Tang Monk to go fetch scriptures? Why are you here? Could it be that you, too, have offended Master and he banished you also? Do you've any letter 
of banishment? Let me see it.” 
“| didn’t offend him,” said 8 Rules, “and he didn’t give me any letter of banishment. Nor did he dismiss me.” 
“If there’s no letter and he didn’t dismiss you, why are you here?” asked Pilgrim. 8 Rules replied, “Master has been thinking of you; he told me to come and invite you to go back.” 
“He didn’t think of me, nor did he invite me,” said Pilgrim. “He swore to Heaven that day and he wrote the letter of banishment himself. How could he think of me and ask me to go back? | definitely will 
not go back.” 8 Rules lied conveniently, saying, “He really did think of you! He really did think of you!” 
“What made him think of me?” asked Pilgrim. 8 Rules said, “As Master was riding on the horse, he called out at one point, ‘Disciple.’ | didn’t hear him, and Sand-monk claimed that he was somewhat 
deaf! Master at once thought of you, saying that we’re worthless and that only you’re smart and alert enough to answer once you're called, to give ten replies to one question. That’s how he thought of 
you, and he has sent me specially to ask you to go back. Please do so, at least for the sake of his expectation and for the sake of my having travelled all this distance.” 
When Pilgrim heard these words, he jumped down from the boulder. Taking the hand of 8 Rules, he said, “Worthy Brother, sorry that you've to travel such a great distance to come. Let’s you and | go 
and have some fun.” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “this place is quite far away, and | fear that Master might be kept waiting. | don’t want to play.” 
Pilgrim said, “After all, this is your first time here. Take a look at least at my mountain scenery.” 
Idiot dared not persist in his refusal and had to walk away with him. The 2 of them proceeded hand in hand while the little monsters followed behind to go up to the highest spot on the Flower-Fruit 
Mountain. Marvellous Mountain! Ever since the Great Sage’s homecoming, it had been completely made new by his labour these few days. See the mountain green as carved jade, tall like a cloud- 
scraper. All around are tigers crouched and dragons coiled; on 4 sides are frequent calls of apes and cranes. At dawn the clouds blockade the summit; at dusk the sun is poised above the forest. The 
flowing stream murmurs like tingling girdle-jade; the brook sounds drop by drop a psaltery note. Before the mountain are ridges and tall cliffs; behind the mountain are flowers and dense woods. It 
touches the jade-girl’s hair-washing bowl above; joins a branch of Heaven's River down below. This cosmos-formed beauty surpasses Penglai, a true cave-mansion born of primal breaths. Even master 
artists find it hard to sketch, nor can wise mortals depict it all. Like open-works carved finely fantastic rocks in fantastic colours soar up at the top. The sun moves in a thousand purple rays; auspicious 
air forms countless strands of red mist. A cave-heaven, a blessed place among mankind: a mountain full of fresh blossoms and fresh trees. Delighted by the endless splendour of the scenery, 8 Rules 
said, “Elder Brother, what a lovely place! Truly the number one mountain in the whole world!” 
“Worthy Brother,” said Pilgrim, “think you can pass the time here?” 
“Look at the way Elder Brother talks!” chuckled 8 Rules. “This precious mountain is a cave-heaven, a land of blessing. How could you say ‘pass the time’?” The two of them chatted amiably for a long 
time before descending from the peak. They met on the way several litle monkeys, all holding purple grapes, fragrant pears, bright golden loquats, and dark red strawberries. Kneeling by the road, 
they cried, “Dad Great Sage, please have some breakfast.” 
“My Brother Bullseye,” said Pilgrim, laughing, “has a huge appetite, and he doesn’t take fruits for breakfast. Nonetheless, please don’t be offended by such trifles; use them as snacks and take a few.” 
8 Rules said, “Though I’ve a huge appetite, | do as the natives do anywhere. Yes, by all means bring them up here. I'll try a few for taste.” 
The two of them ate the fruits, and the sun was fast rising high. Afraid that there might not be enough time to save the Tang Monk, Idiot tried to urge his companion to leave, saying, “Elder Brother, 
Master is waiting for us. Please hurry and go.” 
“Worthy Brother,” said Pilgrim, “I’m inviting you to have some fun with me at the Water-Curtain Cave.” 8 Rules at once declined, saying, “I appreciate your kind thoughts, Old Brother but Master has 
waited for a long time already. There’s really no need for us to enter the cave.” 
“In that case,” said Pilgrim, “I dare not detain you. I'll say good-bye right here.” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “aren’t you going with me?” 
Pilgrim said, “Go where? This place of mine is neither governed by Heaven nor controlled by Earth. I’m completely free here. Why shouldn't | enjoy this? Why should | become a monk again? I'll not 
go. You've to go back by yourself. And please tell the Tang Monk that once he has dismissed me, don’t ever think of me again.” When Idiot heard these words, he dared not press any further, for he 
was afraid that Pilgrim’s temper might flare and he would then receive a couple of strokes from the rod. He had no alternative but to take leave meekly and find his way back. 
When Pilgrim saw him leave, he ordered two agile little monkeys to follow him and to find out what he was going to say. Indeed, when that Idiot descended the mountain, he did not cover more than 
three or four miles before he turned around and pointed his finger at the direction of Pilgrim. “You ape,” he cried, “You don’t want to be a priest! You choose to be a monster instead. What an ape! | 
came here with good intentions to ask him to go back but he refused. All right! If you don’t want to go, you don’t have to!” He took a few steps and began his castigations again. The two little monkeys 
ran back to report, “Dad Great Sage, that Bullseye 8 Rules is rather sneaky! He’s ranting at you as he walks away.” 
Pilgrim grew angry and shouted, “Seize him!” All the little monkeys rushed after 8 Rules and pushed him to the ground. Clutching at his mane and tugging at his ears, pulling his tail and grabbing his 
hair, they hauled him bodily back to the cave. 
031 
Bullseye 8 Rules provokes the Monkey King to chivalry; Pilgrim Sun with wisdom defeats the monster 
Righteousness joined to fraternal feelings, the religion returning to its own nature: Docile Metal and Gentle Wood will bear right fruit. 
Mind Monkey and Wood Mum fuse with elixir source — ‘both ascending to the world of ultimate bliss and arriving at the gate of undivided truth.2 
Threads are the main path of self-cultivation; God should unite with one’s own spirit. 
Brothers, elder and younger make the kinship of the 3; forms of monsters and demons match the 5 Phases. 
Exterminate the 6-fold Path and you'll reach the Great Thunderclap. 
Idiot was caught by those monkeys; pulling and tugging at him, they ripped open his shirt as they hauled him away. Over and over again, he muttered to himself, “Finished! I’m finished! This time, I’m 
going to be beaten to death!” In no time at all, they reached the entrance of the cave where the Great Sage was sitting again on top of the boulder. “You overstuffed coolie!” he shouted. “You’d have 
just left. Why did you abuse me?” Kneeling on the ground, 8 Rules said, “Elder Brother, | didn’t abuse you. If | did, I’d bite off this tongue! | only said that if you didn’t want to go, I’d go back to tell Master 
and that would have been the end of it. How would | dare abuse you?” 
“How could you possibly deceive me?” asked Pilgrim. “If | pull up this left ear of mine, | can find out who's speaking up in the Thirty-third Heaven; if | pull down this right ear of mine, | can discover how 
the Ten Kings of Hell are sett ling the cases with the judges. You're maligning me as you walked away, and you thought that I'd not hear you?” 
8 Rules said, “Elder Brother, now | know. You're something of a crook and a shakedown artist! You must have changed into some kind of creature and followed me. That’s how you found out.” 
“Little ones,” cried Pilgrim, “select for me a large cane! Give him twenty strokes on his shanks as a greeting; then give him another twenty on his back. Thereafter let me use my iron rod to send him on 
his way!” 8 Rules was so terrified that he respected at once, saying, “Elder Brother, | beg you to spare me for the sake of Master.” 
“O, Master is so just and kind!” said Pilgrim. 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules again, “if not for the sake of Master, at least for the sake of the Nun, please forgive me.” 
When Pilgrim heard him mention the Nun, he relented somewhat, saying, “Brother, if you put it that way, I'll not hit you for the moment. But you must be honest with me and not try to deceive me. Where 
is that Tang Monk facing an ordeal that has caused you to come and call for me?” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “there’s no ordeal. He is truly thinking of you.” 
“Coolie, you must love to be beaten!” shouted Pilgrim. “Why are you still trying to dupe me? Though old monkey's body has returned to the Water-Curtain Cave, his heart follows the scripture monk. 
Our master faces an ordeal with each step of the way; he is fated to suffer at every place. You better tell me quickly, or you'll be whipped!” 
When 8 Rules heard such words, he respected and said, “Elder Brother, | did quite clearly attempt to deceive you into going but I’d no idea how smart you're. Please spare me from a beating and let 
me tell you standing up.” 
“All right,” said Pilgrim, “rise and talk.” The monkeys took away their hands and Idiot, jumping up at once, began to look wildly left and right. Pilgrim said, “What are you doing that for?” 
“To see which road is wide and smooth so that | can run,” said 8 Rules. “To where?” asked Pilgrim. “I'll let you've a three days’ head start, and old monkey still has the ability to chase you back. You'd 
better speak up! If you get me mad again, I'll not spare you this time.” 
8 Rules said, “To tell you the truth, Elder Brother, since you left us, Sand-monk and | accompanied Master to go forward and we arrived at a black pine forest. Master dismounted and told me to go beg 
for vegetarian food. Because | didn’t find even a single household after walking a great distance, | got a bit tired and napped a little in the grass. Sand-monk, | didn’t realise, also left Master to try to find 
me. You know that Master couldn't sit still, and he took a walk by himself in the forest to enjoy the scenery. When he got out of the forest, he saw a luminescent jewelled pagoda of yellow gold that he 
thought was some sort of monastery. He didn’t know that there was a monster-spirit beneath the pagoda who had the name of Yellow Robe, and he was caught by the fiend. Later, when Sand-monk 
and | returned to look for him, we saw only the white horse and the luggage but we didn’t see Master. We searched until we went to the door of the cave where we fought the fiend. Meanwhile, Master 
met a saving star inside who happened to be the third princess of the Precious Image Kingdom, abducted some time ago by that fiend. She wrote a letter to her family and wanted Master to send it for 
her; that was the reason why she persuaded the monster to let Master go. When we arrived at the kingdom, we presented the letter whereupon the king asked Master to subdue the monster. Elder 
Brother, you’d know. How could that old priest subdue any monster? It had to be the two of us again who went back to do battle but the magic power of the fiend was tremendous and he seized Sand- 
monk instead. | managed to escape by hiding in the grass. Thereafter, the monster changed himself into a handsome scholar to gain admittance into the court and imperial recognition. Master, on the 
other hand, was changed by him into a tiger. That evening, it was fortunate that the white dragon-horse revealed himself to go search for Master; he didn’t find him but he saw the fiend drinking in the 
Silver Peace Palace. Changing into a palace maid, the dragon poured juice for him, did a sword exercise, and was about to use that opportunity to try to kill the monster. He was wounded instead by 
him with a candelabrum, and it was the dragon who told me to come get you. He said that Elder Brother was a just and benevolent gentleman, one who would not dwell on old wrongs and would be 
willing to go and save Master. | beg you, Elder Brother, remember the truth of ‘Once a teacher, always a dad,’ and do try to save him.” 
“You Idiot!” said Pilgrim. “At the time of my leaving, | told you repeatedly that if Master were caught by a monstrous demon, you’d tell him that old monkey was his eldest disciple. Why didn’t you say 
so?” 8 Rules thought to himself, “To ask a warrior is not as effective as to provoke a warrior. Let me provoke him a bit.” He said therefore, “Elder Brother, it would have been better had | not mentioned 
you. Once | said something about you, the monster became even more impudent.” 
“What do you mean?” asked Pilgrim. 
8 Rules replied, “I said, ‘Monster, don’t you dare be insolent, and don’t you dare harm my master. | still have an elder brother who is called Pilgrim Sun. His magic power is great and he is especially 
capable of subduing monsters. When he gets here, he’ll make you die without picking a place for burial.’ When that fiend heard my words, he became more aroused, crying, ‘Who's this Pilgrim Sun 
that I'd be afraid of him? If he shows up, I'll skin him alive, I'll pull out his tendons, I'll debone him, and I'll devour his heart. He might be thin, this monkey but I'll still chop him to pieces and fry him in 
oil.” When Pilgrim heard these words, he became so enraged that he jumped up and down, madly scratching his cheeks and pulling at his ears. “Who is this that dares abuse me thus?” he bellowed. 
8 Rules said, “Elder Brother, calm yourself. It’s the Yellow Robe Fiend who is thus abusing you. | was just giving you a rehearsal of what he said.” 
“Worthy Brother,” said Pilgrim, “get up. I've to go. If that monster-spirit dared abuse me so, it would be impossible for me not to subdue him. I'll go with you. When old monkey caused great disturbance 
in the Celestial Palace five centuries ago, all the divine warriors of Heaven would bend their backs and salute him when they saw him. Every one of them addressed me as the Great Sage. This fiend 
is truly impudent. He dares abuse me behind my back! I'll go, I'll catch him, and I'll smash him to pieces to avenge myself for being so insulted. When I've done that, I'll come back.” 
“Exactly, Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules. “You go and catch the monster first, and when you've avenged yourself, you can then decide whether you want to come back or not.” 


Leaping down at once from the boulder, the Great Sage dashed into the cave and took off his monster garment. Tucking in his silk shirt and tightly fastening his tiger-skin kilt, he walked right out of the 
door holding his iron rod. Startled, the various monkeys barred the way and asked, “Dad Great Sage where are you going? Isn't it better that you look after us and have fun with us for a few more 
years?” Pilgrim said, “Little ones, watch what you're saying. My accompaniment of the Tang Monk is no private matter, for Heaven and Earth know that Sun Wukong is his disciple. He didn’t banish me 
back here; he told me to come home and relax a little before joining him again. That's what this whole thing is about. You all must take good care of our property and don’t fail to plant the willows and 
the pines in due seasons. Wait till | finish accompanying the Tang Monk and taking the scriptures back to the Land of the East. After that merit is achieved, I'll return to enjoy the joys of nature with 
you.” Each monkey obeyed the instructions. 

The Great Sage then mounted the clouds with 8 Rules to leave the cave and cross the Great Eastern Ocean. When they reached the western shore, he stopped the cloudy luminosity, saying, “Brother, 
please stop for a moment and let me go down to the ocean to clean up my body.” 

“We're in a hurry,” said 8 Rules. “Why do you need to clean up your body?” 

Pilgrim said, “You've no idea that the few days since | went back there have caused me to pick up some monster odour. Master loves cleanliness and | fear that he might be disgusted with me.” Only 
then did 8 Rules fully realise that Pilgrim was utterly sincere. In a moment the Great Sage finished bathing and mounted the clouds again to proceed westward. Soon they saw the luminescent gold 
pagoda, to which 8 Rules pointed and said, “Isn’t that the house of the Yellow Robe Fiend? Sand-monk’s still inside.” 

“Stay in the air,” said Pilgrim, “and let me go down to his door to see what | can do about fighting with the monster.” 

8 Rules said, “Don’t go, the monster is not at home.” 

“| know,” said Pilgrim. Dear Monkey King! Lowering his auspicious luminosity, he went straight to the entrance of the cave, in front of which he found two young boys playing field hockey. One was 
about eight or nine years of age, and the other was over ten years old. As they were playing, Pilgrim rushed forward and with no regard at all for whichever family they belonged to, grabbed them by 
the tufts of their hair and picked them up. Terrified, the boys began to brawl and scream so loudly that the little fiends in the Current-Moon Cave ran to report to the princess, saying, “Lady, some 
unknown person has carried off the two young princes.” The two boys were the sons of the princess and the monster. 

When the princess heard that, she ran out of the cave where she saw Pilgrim holding the two boys. Standing on top of a cliff, he was about to dash them to the ground below. “Hey, you!” screamed the 
horrified princess. “I’ve no quarrel with you. Why did you take them away? Their old man is rather mean, and if anything happens to them, he'll not let you get away with it.” 

“You don’t recognise me?” said Pilgrim. “I’m Pilgrim Sun Wukong, the eldest disciple of the Tang Monk. My younger brother, Sand-monk, is in your cave. You go and release him, and I'll return these 
boys to you; two for one, you're getting a bargain already.” When the princess heard what he said, she went quickly inside and told the few little monsters guarding the door to step aside. With her own 
hands, she untied Sand-monk. “Princess, you’d better not untie me,” said Sand-monk. “When your fiend comes home and demands the prisoner from you, | fear that you'd take the blame again.” The 
princess said, “Elder, you’re my benefactor; not only did you send a letter to my home in my behalf but you also saved my life. | was trying to think of a way to release you when your eldest brother Sun 
Wukong showed up at the door of our cave. He told me to release you.” Holla! When Sand-monk heard the name of Sun Wukong, he felt as if his head had been anointed with mellow juice, as if his 
heart had been moistened with sweet dew. Joy flooded his countenance; his whole face lit up with spring. He did not behave like someone who heard the announcement of a person’s arrival but rather 
like someone who had just discovered a block of gold or jade. Look at him! Flapping his hands to brush off the dust on his clothes, he ran out the door and saluted to Pilgrim, saying, “Elder Brother, 
you've truly descended from Heaven! Save me, | beseech you.” 

“O, you Sandy Bonze!” said Pilgrim with a chuckle. “When Master recited the Tight-Fillet Spell, were you willing to say a word for me? You’re just as much a braggart! Why aren’t you accompanying 
Master to go to the West? What are you squatting here for?” 

“Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “no need to talk like that anymore. A gentleman forgives and forgets. We’re commanders of a defeated army, hardly worthy to speak of courage. Please save us.” 
Pilgrim said, “Come up,” and Sand-monk leaped up to the cliff. 

When 8 Rules who was standing in mid-air, saw Sand-monk coming out of the cave, he dropped down from the clouds, crying, “Brother Sand! You've had a hard time!” Seeing him, Sand-monk said, 
“Second Elder Brother where did you come from?” 8 Rules said, “After | was defeated yesterday, | went into the city at night where | learned from the white horse that Master was in great difficulty. He 
was changed into a tiger by the magic of Yellow Robe. The white horse suggested to me that I’d go ask Big Brother to come back.” 

“Idiot,” said Pilgrim, “let’s not chitchat. Each of you take one of these boys and go into the Precious Image City to provoke the fiend to come here, so that | can slay him.” 

“Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “how do you want us to provoke him?” Pilgrim said, “The two of you’d mount the clouds and stand above the Palace of the Golden Chimes. Don’t bother about the 
consequence: just hurl the boys down to the ground before the white jade steps. If anyone asks you whose kids they are, just tell them that they are the sons of the Yellow Robe monster caught by the 
two of you. When the fiend hears this, he will certainly want to return here. | don’t want to fight with him inside the city because our battle will scatter cloud and mist, throw up dirt and dust. The officials 
of the court and the city’s whole populace will then be disturbed.” 

“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules with a giggle, “the moment you do anything, you start to bamboozle us.” 

“What do you mean?” asked Pilgrim. 8 Rules replied, “These two kids, after having been seized by you like that, are already shocked beyond cure. Just now they cried till they became voiceless; after 
a while, they will die for sure. If we hurl them to the ground from the air, they'll turn into meat patties. You think the fiend will let us go once he catches up with us? He will surely make us pay with our 
lives while you get away scot free. There’s not even a witness against you! Aren't you bamboozling us?” 

“If he tangles with the two of you,” said Pilgrim, “just lure him here. We've a smooth and wide battlefield at this place, and I'll be waiting for him.” 

“Exactly, exactly,” said Sand-monk. “Big Brother is right. Let’s go.” Riding on the power and assurance of Pilgrim, the two of them picked up the boys and left. 

Pilgrim leaped down from the boulder and went before the door of the pagoda. “Hey, Monk,” said the princess, “you’re completely untrustworthy. You said that you’d give me back my boys once your 
younger brother was released. Now that he is, you’re still detaining my boys. What are you doing here instead?” Pilgrim smiled at her and said, “Don’t be offended, princess. You’ve been here for a 
long time, and | thought that we'd take your sons to present them to their maternal grandpa.” The princess said, “Monk, you’d better behave! My husband, Yellow Robe, is no ordinary person. If you’ve 
frightened my boys, you’d try to comfort them first.” 

“Princess,” said Pilgrim with a chuckle, “do you know what is considered a crime for a human being living in this world?” 

“I do,” said the princess. Pilgrim said, “You're a woman! What do you know?” 

“Since the time of my youth in the palace,” said the princess, “I was taught by my parents. | recall an ancient book said, ‘Set against the Five Punishments are some three thousand crimes but none’s 
greater than an un-filial act.’” 

Pilgrim said, “You're precisely an un-filial person. Remember: O my dad,* who begot me! O my mum who’d nursed me! ... Pity my parents, how hard they toiled to bear me! Therefore, filial piety’s the 
foundation of a hundred virtuous acts, the source of all morality. How'd you entrust your body to be the mate of a monster-spirit and not think of your parents at all? Haven’t you committed the crime of 
an un-filial act?” 

When the princess heard these words of rectitude, she was so embarrassed that she blushed for a long time before blurting out her reply, saying, “The words of the elder are most righteous. How could 
| not think of my parents? But all my troubles began when the monster kidnapped me here. His orders are very strict, and | can’t travel at all. The distance, furthermore, is great and there is no one able 
to send word for me. | wanted to commit suicide but | was afraid that my parents would suspect that I’d eloped with someone, and the whole matter would not be cleared up. I’d, therefore, no alternative 
but to prolong my fragile existence. Indeed, I’m a great criminal in this whole wide world!” When she finished speaking, tears streamed down her face. 

Pilgrim said, “Princess, there’s no need for you to be sorrowful. Bullseye 8 Rules did tell me that you wrote a letter and you saved my master’s life. You did express your thoughts for your parents in the 
letter. Now that old monkey has arrived, you may be assured that he will catch the monster for you and bring him back to court to see the Throne. You can then find a worthy mate and look after your 
parents in their old age. How about it?” 

“Monk,” said the princess, “don’t look for certain death. Those two younger brothers of yours were quite tough but they could not overcome my husband, Yellow Robe, during the fight yesterday. Now 
look at you! You look like a ghost with more tendons than bones! You look like a crab or a walking skeleton! What kind of ability do you’ve that you dare speak of catching the monster?” Laughing, 
Pilgrim said, “You really don’t have much judgement, and you can’t discriminate between persons. As the common saying has it, a urine bladder, though large, has no weight; a steelyard weight, though 
small, licks a thousand pounds. They may look big but they are useless: creating wind resistance as they walk and wasting cloth when they put on clothes. They may be big as a mountain but they are 
hollow inside; their heads may touch door frames but they are slack of torsos; and they may eat a lot but food won't do them any good. I, old monkey, am small, all right but hardy.” 

“You really have the skills?” asked the princess. “Nothing that you've ever seen,” said Pilgrim, “but | specialize in subduing monsters and taming demons.” 

“You'd better not get me into trouble,” said the princess. “Certainly not,” said Pilgrim. “If you’re able to subdue monsters and tame demons,” said the princess, “how will you go about catching him?” 
Pilgrim said, “You'd better be out of sight, or else | can’t really move when he gets here. I’m afraid that you still have a lot of feelings for him and can’t give him up.” 

“What do you mean by not giving him up?” said the princess. “My remaining here is not of my choice!” 

“If you’ve been husband and wife for thirteen years,” said Pilgrim, “you can’t be wholly without affection. But when | see him, I'll not be fooling around: a stroke of the rod will be a stroke, and a punch 
will be a punch. I’ve to slay him before | can take you back to court to see the Throne.” 

The princess indeed followed Pilgrim’s advice and went off to a secluded spot. Her marriage to the monster, moreover, was fated to end, and that was why the Great Sage made his appearance. After 
he had the princess hidden, the Monkey King shook his body once and changed into the form of the princess to enter the cave and wait for the monster. 8 Rules and Sand-monk took the 2 boys to the 
Precious Image Kingdom and dashed them to the ground before the white jade steps. Alas! They were reduced to two meat patties; their bones were all crushed and blood splattered all over. “Terrible! 
Terrible!” cried the officials in court. “Two persons have been thrown down from the sky!” 

“These boys,” shouted 8 Rules from above, “are the sons of the monster, Yellow Robe. They were caught by Old bull and Brother Sand.” 

Still under the effect of juice, the fiend was sleeping in the Silver Peace Palace when he heard someone shouting his name. He turned over and looked up: there were Bullseye 8 Rules and Sand-monk 
standing on the edge of the clouds hollering. The monster thought to himself: “If it were just Bullseye 8 Rules, I'd understand this but Sand-monk was tied up in my house. How could he get here? Why 
would my wife let him go? How could my boys land in their hands? Could it be that Bullseye 8 Rules, fearful of my unwillingness to do battle with him, is using this to trick me? | can take the bait and 
go fight with him. Hey! I’m still hungover. If he gives me a whack with his rake, I'll lose all my credibility. Let me go home first and see if they are indeed my sons or not. Then | can speak to these 
monks.” Dear monster! 

Without taking leave of the king, he headed straight for his cave in the mountain forest to investigate. At this time, people in the court knew full well that he was indeed a monster. For he ate one of the 
palace maids during the night but the seventeen others who escaped made a thorough report to the king after the hour of the fifth watch. Since he left so abruptly, they knew all the more that he was 
without doubt a monster. All the king could do was to order the many officials to guard the specious tiger. The fiend went back to the cave. When Pilgrim saw him arriving, he at once devised a plan of 
deception. He blinked a few times and tears began to fall like rain; stamping his feet, pounding his chest, and calling for the boys all the time, he bawled lustily in the cave. So sudden an encounter 
made it impossible for the fiend to recognise that this was not his wife. He went forward instead and embraced Pilgrim, saying, “Mistress, why are you so upset? 

With artful invention with imaginative fable, the Great Sage said tearfully, “Dear Husband! As the proverb says, ifa man’s no wife, his wealth has no boss; if a girl’s no mate, she’s completely lost! After 
you went into court yesterday to present yourself to the kinfolks, why didn’t you return? This morning Bullseye 8 Rules came back and robbed us of Sand-monk. Furthermore, they took away our two 
boys by force despite my desperate pleadings. They said that they would also bring the boys into court to present them to their maternal grandpa. Half a day has gone by already and there’s no sight 
of our boys or even news of whether they are alive or dead. And you didn’t turn up until just now. How could | part with my babies? That's why I’m so broken up.” When the fiend heard those words, he 
grew very angry, saying, “Did that really happen to my sons?” 

“Yes,” said Pilgrim, “and they were taken away by Bullseye 8 Rules.” 

The demon was so incensed that he jumped about madly, crying, “Undone! Undone! My sons have been dashed to death by him! They can’t be revived! The only thing left is to catch that monk and 
make him pay with his life. Mistress, don’t cry. How do you feel now? Let's take care of you first.” 

“I'm all right,” said Pilgrim, “but | miss my babies so much, and all that weeping has caused my heart to ache.” 

“No need to worry,” said the demon. “Get up first. I’ve a treasure here; all you need to do is to rub it on the painful spot and it will not hurt anymore. But you must be careful not to fillip your thumb onto 
the treasure, for if you do, my true form will reveal itself.” When Pilgrim heard this, he said, smiling, to himself, “This brazen creature! He’s quite honest; even without torture he has made a confession 
already. Wait till he brings out his treasure. I’m going to strike at it with my thumb and see what kind of monster he is.” Leading Pilgrim, the fiend took his companion into the murky depth of the cave 
before spitting out from his mouth a treasure having the size and shape of a chicken egg. It was an internal elixir, formed crystalline white like a Sarira.5 Secretly delighted, Pilgrim said to himself, 


“Marvellous thing! God knows how many sedentary exercises had been performed, how many years of trials and sufferings had elapsed, how many times the union of male and female forces had taken 
place before this Sarira of internal elixir was formed. What great affinity it has today that it should encounter old monkey!” 

The monkey took it over. Of course, he did not have any pain but he rubbed it deliberately on his body somewhere before filliping his thumb at it. Alarmed, the fiend immediately stretched forth his hand 
to try to snatch it away. Think of it! This monkey is just too slick and shifty a character! He popped the treasure in his mouth and with one gulp swallowed it whole. The demon raised his fist and punched 
at him, only to be parried by the arm of Pilgrim. With his other hand, Pilgrim wiped his own face once and changed back to his original appearance, crying, “Monster, don’t be unruly! Take a look! Who 
am |?” 

When the fiend saw what he saw, he was greatly shaken, saying “Gosh, Mistress! How did you manage to bring out a face like that?” 

“You impudent imp!” chided Pilgrim. “Who's your mistress? You can’t even recognise your own ancestor!” Suddenly comprehending, the fiend said, “I think | know you.” Pilgrim said, “I'll not hit you just 
yet, take another look.” The fiend said, “Though you do look familiar, | just can’t think of your name at the moment. Who indeed are you? Where do you come from? Where have you moved my wife? 
How dare you come to my house to cheat me of my treasure? This is most reprehensible!” 

“So you don’t recognise me,” said Pilgrim. “I’m the eldest disciple of the Tang Monk, and my name is Pilgrim Sun Wukong. I’m also your old ancestor of five centuries ago!” The fiend said, “No such 
thing! No such thing! When | caught the Tang Monk, | found out that he had only two disciples named Bullseye 8 Rules and Sand-monk. No one had ever mentioned that there was someone by the 
name of Sun. You must be a fiend from somewhere who came here to deceive me.” 

“The reason why | didn’t accompany the two of them,” said Pilgrim, “was because my habitual slaying of monsters had offended my master. A kind and compassionate person, he dismissed me when 
| slaughtered one too many. That’s why | was not travelling with him. Are you still ignorant of your ancestor's name?” 

“How feckless you're!” said the fiend, “If you’re banished by your master, how could you've the gumption to face people here?” 

Pilgrim said, “You impudent creature! You'd not know about the sentiment of ‘Once a teacher, always a dad,’ nor would you know that ‘Between dad and son, there’s no overnight enmity.’ If you plan 
to harm my master, you think I'd not come to rescue him? And you didn’t stop at that; you even abused me behind my back. What have you got to say to that?” 

“Since when did | abuse you?” asked the fiend. Pilgrim replied, “Bullseye 8 Rules said you did.” 

“Don’t believe him,” said the fiend. “That Bullseye 8 Rules with his pointed horn, has a tongue like an old maid’s! Why do you listen to him?” 

“No need for such idle talk,” said Pilgrim. “I'll just say that during old monkey's visit to your house today, you’ve not shown your distant guest sufficient hospitality. Though you may not have food and 
juice to entertain your visitor, you've a head. Stick it over here quickly and let old monkey beat it once with the rod. I'll consider that my taking tea.” When the fiend heard this, he roared with laughter, 
saying, “Pilgrim Sun, you’ve miscalculated! If you wanted to fight, you’d not have followed me here. The various imps under my command, young and old, number in the hundreds. Though you may 
have arms all over your body, you'll be unable to fight your way out.” 

Pilgrim said, “Don’t talk rot! And don’t mention a few hundred! Even if you've hundreds of thousands, just call them up one by one and I'll slay them. Every stroke of my rod will find its mark. | guarantee 
that they'll be wiped out! Exterminated!” When the monster heard these words, he quickly gave the order and called up all the monsters before and behind the mountain, all the fiends in and out of the 
cave. Each holding weapons, they lined up thickly and completely barricaded the several doors inside the cave. When Pilgrim saw this, he was delighted. Gripping his rod with both hands, he shouted 
“Change!” and changed at once into a person having 3 heads and 6 arms. 1 wave of the golden-hooped rod and it changed into three golden-hooped rods. Look at him! 6 arms wielding the 3 rods, he 
plunged into the crowd — like a tiger mauling a herd of sheep and an eagle alighting on chicken coops. Pity those little fiends! One touch and heads were smashed to pieces! One brush and blood 
flowed like water! 

He charged back and forth as if he had invaded an uninhabited region. When he finished, there was only 1 old monster left who chased him out the door crying, “You brazen ape! You're nasty and 
noxious! You dare oppress people right at their own door!” 

Spinning around, Pilgrim waved at him crying, “Come! Come! It’s no merit until I've struck you down.” Lifting his scimitar, the monster aimed at his opponent’s head and hacked away as dear Pilgrim 
brandished the iron rod to face him. This time they fought on top of the mountain, halfway between mist and cloud. Great Sage had great magic power; the demon had vast abilities. This one struck 
sideways with the raw iron rod; that 1 raised aslant the steel scimitar. The scimitar rose softly, and bright mist glowed; the rod parried lightly, and coloured clouds flew. Back and forth it circled to protect 
the head; round and round it turned to guard the body. 1 followed the wind to change his looks; 1 shook his body standing on the ground. This 1 widened his fiery eyes and stretched his simian arms; 
that 1 flared his golden pupils and bent his tiger-like waist. Coming and going, they fought round and round — rod and scimitar giving blow for blow. The Monkey King’s rod conformed to battle art; the 
fiend’s scimitar followed the rules of war. 1 had always worked his skills to be a demon-lord; 1 had used his vast power to guard the Tang Monk. The fierce Monkey King became fiercer; the violent 
monster grew more violent. Heedless of life or death they fought in the air, all for Tang Monk’s quest for God from afar. The 2 of them fought for over fifty rounds but a decision could not be reached. 
Secretly pleased, Pilgrim thought to himself, “The scimitar of this brazen monster is quite a match for the rod of old monkey! Let me pretend to blunder and see if he can detect it.” Dear Monkey King! 
He raised the rod above his head with both his hands, using the style of Tall-Testing the Horse. The fiend did not perceive that it was a trick. When he saw that there was a chance, he wielded the 
scimitar and slashed at the lower third of Pilgrim’s body. Pilgrim quickly employed the Great Middle Level to fend off the scimitar after which he followed up with the style of Stealing Peaches beneath 
the Leaves and brought the rod down hard on the monster's head. This 1 blow made the monster vanish completely. He retrieved his rod to look around but the monster-spirit was nowhere to be seen. 
Greatly startled, Pilgrim said, “O my child! You can’t take much beating! One stroke and you’re dead! But even if you’re beaten to death, there’d to be some blood or pus left. Why isn’t there a trace of 
you? | suppose you must’ve escaped.” Leaping up quickly to the edge of the clouds, he stared in all 4 directions but there was the faintest movement nowhere. “These two eyes of old monkey,” he 
said, “can see everything anywhere. How’d he vanish just like that? Ah | know! That fiend said that he recognised me somewhat and that meant that he’d not possibly be an ordinary monster of this 
world. Most likely he’s a spirit from Heaven.” 

Unable to suppress his anger, the Great Sage somersaulted all at once and leaped up to the South Heavenly Gate, wielding his iron rod. Pang, Liu, Gou, Bi, Zhang, Tao, Deng, Xin, and the other 
celestial captains, were so startled that they saluted on both sides of the gate and dared not stop him. He fought his way in and arrived before the Hall of Perfect Light. Zhang, Ge, Xu, and Qiu, the 
Celestial Masters, asked him, “Why did the Great Sage come here?” 

“Because | accompanied the Tang Monk until the Precious Image Kingdom,” said Pilgrim, “where there was a demon who had seduced the princess and sought to harm my master. Old monkey waged 
a contest with him but as we're fighting | suddenly lost him. | don’t think he’s an ordinary fiend of Earth; he has to be a spirit from Heaven. | came especially to investigate whether any monster deity 
has left the ranks.” When the Celestial Masters heard this, they entered the Hall of Divine Mists to make the report, and an order immediately was issued to take the roll among the Nine Luminaries, 
the Twelve Branches, the Five Planets of the Five Quarters, the numerous gods of the Milky Way, the gods of the Five Mountains, and the Four Rivers. Every one of the Heavenly deities was present, 
for none dared to leave his post. The investigation was then extended beyond the Big Dipper Palace and the count had turned up only 27 members back and forth among the 28 Constellations. Revatt, 
the Wood-Wolf Star® was missing. The Preceptors returned to report to the Throne, saying “Revati, the Wood-Wolf Star, has left for the Region Below.” 

The Jade Emperor said, “For how long has he been away from Heaven?” 

“He’s absent for four muster-roll calls,” said the Preceptors. “The roll’s taken once every three days so today’s the thirteenth day.” 

“The thirteenth day in Heaven,” said the Jade Emperor, “is the thirteenth year on Earth.” 

He thereupon gave the order for the Star's own department to recall him back to Heaven. After having received the decree, the 38 Constellations went out of the Heavenly Gate and each of them 
recited a spell that aroused Revati. He was hiding. The Star actually had been a celestial warrior who was terror stricken when the Great Sage caused great disturbance in Heaven previously. Just 
now, the Star hid himself in a mountain stream, and the water vapour had covered up his monster-cloud. That was why he could not be seen. Only when he heard his own colleagues reciting their 
spells did he dare emerge and follow the crowd to return to the Region Above. He was met by the Great Sage at the gate who wanted to hit him but fortunately the other Stars managed to put a stop 
to it. He was then taken to see the Jade Emperor. Taking out the golden plaque from his waist, the fiend knelt below the steps of the hall and respected, admitting his guilt. “Revatt, the Wood-Wolf Star,” 
said the Jade Emperor, “there’s boundless beauty in the Region Above. Instead of enjoying this, you chose to visit in secret another region. Why?” 

“Your Majesty,” said Revatt the Star, respecting, “please pardon the mortal offence of your subject. The princess of the Precious Image Kingdom is no ordinary mortal; she is actually the jade girl in 
charge of incense in the Spread Incense Hall. She wanted to have an affair with your subject who was afraid however, that this act would defile the noble region of the Celestial Palace. Longing for the 
world, she went first to the Region Below where she assumed human form in the imperial palace. Your subject, not wanting to disappoint her, changed himself into a demon. After | occupied a famous 
mountain, | abducted her to my cave dwelling where we became husband and wife for thirteen years. Thus ‘not even a sup or a bite is not foreordained,’ and it is fated that Great Sage Sun should 
accomplish his merit at this time.” When the Jade Emperor heard these words, he ordered that the Star’s golden plaque be taken away from him; he was then banished to the Tushita Palace to be a 
paid fire-tender for Laozi with the stipulation that he would be restored to his rank if he made merit, and that he would be punished further if he did not. 

When Pilgrim saw how the Jade Emperor disposed of the matter, he was so pleased that he saluted deeply to the Throne. Then he said to the other deities, “All of you, thanks for taking the trouble.” 
“This ape’s,” said one of the Masters, laughing, “still so uncouth! We've taken captive for him the monster-god, and instead of showing his gratitude to the Heavenly Grace properly, he leaves after only 
taking a salute.” 

The Jade Emperor said, “We count it our good fortune already if he starts no trouble and leaves Heaven in peace.” 

Lowering the direction of his auspicious luminosity, the Great Sage went back directly to the Current-Moon Cave of the Casserole Mountain where he found the princess. As he was just giving her an 
account of all that went before, they heard 8 Rules and Sand-monk shouting in mid-air, “Elder Brother, save a few monster-spirits for us to beat, too.” 

“They're all finished,” said Pilgrim. “In that case,” said Sand-monk, “nothing should detain us here. Let's bring the princess back to court. Brothers, let's do the magic of Shortening the Ground.” 

All the princess heard was the rushing of wind, and in a moment, they were back in the city. The three of them brought the princess up to the Palace of the Golden Chimes where she saluted reverently 
to her parents and met again her sisters. Thereafter, the various officials all came to pay their respects. “We're truly beholden to Elder Sun,” said the princess to the Throne, “whose boundless religion 
power subdued the Yellow Robe Fiend and brought me back to our kingdom.” 

“What kind of monster is that Yellow Robe?” asked the king. Pilgrim said, “The son-in-law of Your Majesty happens to be the Star Revati from the Region Above, and your daughter was the jade girl in 
charge of incense. Because of her longing for the world, they both descended to Earth to assume human forms. It was no small thing that they should consummate a marriage contracted in their 
previous existence. When old monkey went to the Celestial Palace to report to the Jade Emperor, it was discovered that the fiend had not answered the muster-roll for four times. This meant that he 
had left Heaven for thirteen days, and correspondingly thirteen years had passed on Earth, for a day in Heaven is a year down here. The Jade Emperor ordered the Constellations of his department to 
recall him to the Region Above where he was then banished to work for further merit in the Tushita Palace. Old monkey was then able to bring back your daughter.” After the king had thanked Pilgrim 
for his kindness, he said, “Let's go and take a look at your master.” 

The three disciples followed the king and descended from the treasure hall to go into one of the chambers in the court where the officials brought out the iron cage and loosened the chains on the 
specious tiger. Everyone still saw the tiger as a tiger but Pilgrim alone saw him as a man. The master was imprisoned by diabolical magic; though he understood everything, he could neither walk nor 
open his eyes or mouth. “Master,” said Pilgrim, laughing, “You're a good monk. How did you manage to end up with a fearsome look like that? You blamed me for working evil and violence and banished 
me. You claimed that you wanted to practice virtue single-mindedly. How did you acquire such features all at once?” 

“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “please save him. Don't just ridicule him.” 

“You pick on me in everything,” said Pilgrim, “and you're his favourite disciple. Why don’t you save him? Why do you ask old monkey instead? Remember what | said originally, that after I'd subdued 
the monster to avenge myself from his abuse, I'd go back.” Sand-monk drew near and knelt down, saying, “Elder Brother, the ancients said, ‘If you don’t regard the priest, do regard a god.’ If you’re 
here, | beseech you to save him. If we’d do so, we'd not have travelled all that distance to plead with you.” Raising him with his hands, Pilgrim said, “How could | possibly be content not to save him? 
Get me some water, quick!” 

8 Rules rushed back to the posthouse and took out the purple gold alms bowl from the luggage. He returned and handed to Pilgrim the bowl half-filled with water. As he took the water in his hand, 
Pilgrim recited a magic spell and spat a mouthful of water on the tiger. At once the diabolical magic was dispelled and the tiger-like illusion was broken. After the elder had appeared in his original body, 
he recovered sufficiently to open his eyes and recognise Pilgrim whom he took hold of with his hands immediately. “Wukong,” he cried, “where did you come from?” 

Standing to one side, Sand-monk gave a thorough account of what had taken place, and Tripitaka was filled with gratitude, saying, “Worthy disciple, | owe you everything! | owe you everything! Let's 
hope that we'll reach the West soon. When we return to the Land of the East, I'll report to the Tang emperor that yours is the highest merit.” 

“Don’t mention it! Don’t mention it!” said Pilgrim with laughter. “Just don’t recite that little something and your living kindness will be most appreciated.” When the king heard this, he also gave thanks to 
all 4 of them before preparing a huge vegetarian banquet for them in the Eastern Palace. After they had enjoyed these royal favours, master and disciples took leave of the king and headed for the 
West. The king led all his ministers through great distance to send them off. So it was that the king returned to the palace, his empire secured; the monk went to worship God at Thunderclap. 


032 

The sentinel brings a message on Level-Top Mountain; Wood Mum meets disaster at Lotus-Flower Cave 
The Tang Monk who acquired again the service of Pilgrim Sun; master and disciples thereupon embarked on the road to the West, united once more in heart and mind. After they had rescued the 
princess of the Precious Image Kingdom and been sent off by its king and officials, they journeyed without ceasing, taking food and drink when they hungered and thirsted, resting by night and travelling 
by day. Soon it was again the time of Triple Spring, a season when light breezes blow on willow green as silk, a lovely scene fittest for verse. The times hasten bird poems; the warmth kindles flowers, 
fragrant blooms all around. A pair of swallows comes to the apple court, ‘just in time to enjoy spring: red dust on purple paths, strings, pipes, and the silk gowns, games and passing the juice cups. 3 
As master and disciples walked and enjoyed the scenery, they found another mountain barring their way. “Disciples,” said the Tang Monk, “please be careful. We've a tall mountain before us. | fear 
that tigers and wolves might be here to obstruct us.” 
“Master,” said Pilgrim, “a man who’s left the family should not speak as those who remain in the family. Don’t you remember the words of the Heart Thread‘ given to you by that Crow’s Nest Priest: ‘No 
hindrances, and therefore, no terror or fear; he is far removed from error and delusion’? Only you must sweep away the filth of your mind and wash off the dust by your ears. Not tasting the most painful 
of pain, you'll never be a man among men. You mustn’t worry, for if you’ve old monkey, everything will be all right even if the sky collapses. Don’t be afraid of any tiger or wolf!” 
Pulling in the reins of his horse, the elder said, “Since | departed Chang’an that year by decree, my sole thought fixed on God in the West - that bright, golden image in Sari-land, those jade-white 
brows in the pagoda blessed. | searched through this world’s waters without name; | climbed all the mountains unscaled by man. Fold upon fold the mists and waves extend when can | myself attain 
true leisure?” 
When Pilgrim heard what he said, he roared with laughter, saying, “If Master wants true leisure, it’s not that difficult! When you achieve your merit, then all the causesé will cease and all forms will be 
but emptiness. At that time, leisure will come to you most naturally.” 
Hearing these words, the elder had to be content to put aside his anxiety and urge his horse on. Master and disciples began to ascend the mountain that was truly rugged and treacherous. Marvellous 
Mountain! The tall, rugged peak; the sharp, pointed summit. Within the deep, winding brook — beside the lone, rugged cliff - within the deep, winding brook you hear water loudly splashing as a serpent 
turns; beside the lone, rugged cliff see the big mountain tiger wagging its tail. Look above: the jutting peaks stab through the green sky. Turn your eyes: the canyon’s deep and dark as the empyrean. 
Start climbing: it’s like a ladder, a stair. Walk down there: it’s like a moat, a ditch. It’s truly a weird, hillock-ed range; indeed a steep-banked precipice. On top of the hillock-ed range the herb-picker is 
wary of walking; before the precipice the woodsman finds it hard to move an inch! Foreign goats and wild horses madly gallop; wily hares and mountain bulls seem to form in ranks. The mountain’s 
height does hide the sun and stars; 1 often meets strange creatures and white wolves. Through dense grassy path the horse can hardly pass. How’d one see God at Thunderclap? As the elder pulled 
back his horse to survey this mountain that was so difficult to ascend, he saw a woodcutter standing on the green slope above. He was dressed as such: his head wore an old rain hat of blue felt; he 
had on him a monk-robe of black wool. The old rain hat of blue felt: indeed a rare thing to ward off sunlight and mists; the monk-robe of black wool: a sign of utter contentment rarely seen. His hands 
held a steel axe polished highly; he tied his machete-cut firewood firmly. The spring hues at the ends of his pole quietly overflowed in all 4 seasons; his carefree life as a recluse had always been 
blessed by the 3 Stars. °He resigned himself to grow old in his lot. What glory or shame could invade his world? That woodcutter was just chopping firewood before the slope when the elder came 
abruptly from the East. He stopped his axe to go out of the woods and walked with big strides up the rocky ledge. In a severe voice, he cried out to the elder, “The elder who's going toward the West, 
please stop for a moment. I’ve something to tell you. There is a bunch of vicious demons and cruel monsters in this mountain devoted to eating travellers who come from the East and go toward the 
West.” 
When the elder heard what he said, his spirit left him and his soul fled. He shook so violently that he could hardly sit on the saddle. Tuming around quickly, he shouted to his disciples, “Did you hear 
what the wood-cutter said about the vicious demons and cruel monsters? Which of you dare go and ask him in greater detail?” 
“Master, relax!” said Pilgrim. “Old monkey will go and question him thoroughly.” Dear Pilgrim! He strode up the mountain and addressed the woodcutter as “Big Brother” before saluting him with folded 
hands. 
The woodcutter returned his greeting saying, “Elder, why did you people come here?” 
“To tell you the truth, Big Brother,” said Pilgrim, “we're sent from the Land of the East to go acquire scriptures in the Western Heaven. That one on the horse is my master. He is rather timid; when he 
heard just now what you said about vicious demons and cruel monsters, he asked me to question you. For how many years have there been demons and monsters? Are they real professionals, or are 
they just amateurs? Let Big Brother take the trouble to tell me, so that | may order the mountain god and the local spirit to send them away in custody.” When the woodcutter heard these words, he 
faced the sky and roared with laughter, saying, “So, you're really a mad monk!” 
“Im not mad,” said Pilgrim, “and this is the honest truth.” 
“If you’re honest,” said the woodcutter, “how dare you talk about sending them away in custody?” 
Pilgrim said, “The way you're magnifying their power, the way you've stopped us with your foolish announcement and silly report, could it be that you’re somehow related to these monsters? If you're 
not a relative, you must be a neighbour; if not a neighbour, you must be a friend.” 
“You mad, impudent monk!” said the woodcutter, laughing. “You're so unreasonable! My intentions were good and that was why | made a special effort to bring this message to you, so that you'd take 
precaution at all times when you journey. Now you're blaming me instead. Let’s not say just yet that | don’t know anything about the origin of those monsters. But suppose you've found that out, how 
would you dispose of them? Where would you send them away in custody?” 
“If they are demons from Heaven,” said Pilgrim, “I'll send them to see the Jade Emperor. If they are demons of Earth, I'll send them to the Palace of Earth. Those of the West will be returned to God; 
those of the East will be returned to the sages; those of the North will be returned to Zhenwu; ‘those of the South will be returned to Mars. If they’re dragon spirits, they will be sent to the Lords of 
Oceans; if they are ghosts and ogres, they will be sent to King Yama. Every class has its proper place and direction and old monkey is familiar with all of them. All | need to do is to issue a court order, 
and they will be sent off in a hurry. Even at night!” 
The woodcutter could hardly stop his scornful laughter, saying, “You mad, impudent monk! You must have made a pilgrimage to some place and learned some paltry magic of drawing up charms and 
casting spells with water. You may be able to drive away demons and suppress ghosts but you’ve never run into such vicious and cruel monsters.” 
“In what way are they vicious and cruel?” asked Pilgrim. 
The woodcutter said, “The length of this mountain range is about six hundred miles, and it’s called the Level-Top Mountain. In the mountain is a cave by the name of Lotus-Flower Cave. There are two 
old demons in the cave who had portraits made with the intent to catch the priests, and who had names and surnames written down because they insisted on eating the Tang Monk. If you’ve come 
from another region, you might get by but if you’re in any way associated with the word Tang you'll never pass here.” 
“We're exactly those who have come from the Tang court,” said Pilgrim. 
The woodcutter said, “And they specifically want to devour you.” 
“Lucky! Lucky!” said Pilgrim. “How would they like to eat us?” 
“Why do you ask?” said the woodcutter. 
“If they want to eat me headfirst,” said Pilgrim, “it’s still manageable but if they want to eat me feet-first, it'll be more bothersome.” 
The woodcutter asked, “What's the difference between eating you headfirst and feet-first?” 
“You've not experienced this,” replied Pilgrim. “If he eats me headfirst, one bite will kill me, of course. Even if he were to fry, sauté, braise, or boil me thereafter, I'd not know the pain. But if he eats me 
feet-first, he can start by munching on my shanks and then proceed to gnaw on my thighs. He can devour me up to my pelvic bones, and | still might not die in a hurry. Will | not be left to suffer bit by 
bit? That's why it is bothersome.” 
“Monk,” said the woodcutter, “he is not going to spend all that effort on you. All he wants is to catch you and have you bound in a large steamer. Once you're cooked, he'll eat you whole!” 
“That's even better! That's even better!” said Pilgrim, chuckling. “There won't be pain; I’ve to endure a little stuffiness, that’s all.” 
“Don't be so sassy, monk,” said the woodcutter, “for those monsters have with them five treasures which possess tremendous magic powers. Even if you happen to be the jade pillar that holds up the 
sky, or the golden bridge that spans the ocean, if you want to protect the priest of the Tang court and pass this place safely, you'll have to become a little mad.” 
“For how many times?” asked Pilgrim. 
“At least three or four times,” replied the woodcutter. 
Pilgrim said, “That's nothing! Throughout a year, we must’ve become mad for seven or eight hundred times. These three or four — what's that to us? A little madness and we're through.” Dear Great 
Sage! He was not afraid at all. Eager only to accompany the Tang Monk, he abandoned the woodcutter and returned with big strides to where the horse was standing before the mountain slope. 
“Master, it's nothing serious,” he said. “There’re a couple of puny monster-spirits to be sure but people around here’re rather timid and overly concerned. You've me so why worry? Let's get going! Let's 
get going!” 
He had no choice but to proceed when the elder heard what he said. The woodcutter vanished as they walked. The elder said, “Why did that woodcutter who brought us the message disappear all at 
once?” 
“Our luck must be rather poor,” said 8 Rules, “we’ve met a ghost in broad daylight.” 
“He must have crawled back into the forest to find firewood,” said Pilgrim. “Let me take a look.” 
Dear Great Sage! He opened wide his fiery eyes and diamond pupils to scan the mountain far and near but there was no trace of the woodcutter. He raised his head and suddenly saw the Day Sentinel 
on the edge of the clouds. Mounting the clouds, he gave chase immediately, shouting several times, “Clumsy devil!” When he caught up with the deity, he said, “If you had something to say, why didn’t 
you present yourself and speak plainly? Why did you've to put on all that transformation to make fun of old monkey?” The sentinel was so frightened that he saluted before he said, “Great Sage, please 
do not take offence at my tardiness in bringing you the news. Those fiends do have great magic powers, and they know many ways of transformation. It's up to you to use all your cleverness, to exercise 
all your divine intelligence to guard your master carefully. If you’re the slightest bit negligent, you can’t get through this road to reach the Western Heaven.” 
When Pilgrim heard this, he drove away the sentinel, though the words he kept firmly in his mind. Lowering the direction of his cloud, he returned to the mountain. As he saw the elder proceeding with 
8 Rules and Sand-monk, he thought to himself, “If | give an honest account of what the sentinel said to Master, he will weep for sure. He’s so weak! If | don’t tell him the truth, | can put something over 
him and lead him forward. But as the proverb says, ‘Wading suddenly into a swamp, you can’t tell if it's deep or shallow.’ If Master indeed were to be taken by the monsters, won't old monkey be asked 
to expend his energy again? Let me take good care of 8 Rules instead. I’m going to make him go and wage a battle with those monsters first and see what happens; if he wins, we'll consider that to be 
his merit. If his abilities are no good and he is caught by the monsters, there will still be time for old monkey to go rescue him. | can display my powers then and further spread my fame.” 
Using the mind to question the mind, he was thus deliberating with himself: “I fear that 8 Rules is so lazy that he will refuse to volunteer his service. Master, moreover, is so protective toward him. I'll 
have to use some gimmick.” 
Dear Great Sage! Look at the chicanery he’s resorting to! Rubbing his eyes for a while, he managed to squeeze out some tears as he walked back facing his master. When 8 Rules saw that, he cried 
out at once, “Sand-monk, put down your pole. Bring the luggage over here and we two will divide it up.” 
“Second Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “Why divide it up?” 
“Divide it!” said 8 Rules. “You can then go back to the River of Flowing Sand and become a monster again. Old bull will return to the Old Gao Village to see how my wife is doing; we can sell the white 
horse and buy a coffin for Master in preparation for his old age. All of us can scatter. Why bother about going to the Western Heaven?” 
When the elder heard this on the horse, he said, “This coolie! We're still journeying. What's all this babble?” 
“Only your son babbles!” said 8 Rules. “Don’t you see that Pilgrim Sun is weeping over there as he walks toward us? He’s a stalwart warrior who’s not afraid of hacking by the axe, burning by fire, or 
even a pot of boiling oil, one who can penetrate Heaven and pierce the Earth. Now he has put on a cap of sorrow and arrived gushing tears. It has to be that the mountain is rugged, and that the 
monsters are truly vicious. How then do you expect weaklings like us to proceed?” The elder said, “Stop this nonsense! Let me question him and see what he says.” 
He therefore asked, “Wukong, if you’ve something to say, let’s discuss the matter face to face. Why are you so distressed all by yourself? Are you trying to frighten me with that tearful face of yours?” 
“Master,” said Pilgrim, “just now the one who brought us the message happened to be the Day Sentinel. He said that the monster-spirits were most vicious, making this place a difficult one to pass 
through. It is indeed a treacherous road through a tall mountain. | don’t think we can go through it now; we may as well wait for another time.” When the elder heard these words, he was greatly shaken. 
Tugging at Pilgrim's tiger-skin kilt, he said, “Disciple, we’ve covered almost half the journey. Why are you speaking such discouraging words?” 


“Im not un-devoted to our cause,” said Pilgrim, “but | fear that the demons are many and my strength is limited if I've no help. As the saying goes, ‘Even if it’s a piece of iron in the furnace, how many 
nails can you beat out of it?” 

“Disciple,” said the elder, “you've a point there. It is difficult for a single person to handle this matter, for as the military book says, ‘The few cannot withstand the many.’ But I've 8 Rules and Sand-monk 
here, both my disciples. | permit you to command and use them as you wish, so that they can serve as your helpers, someone to protect your flank. Only you’d work together to clear up a path and 
lead me across this mountain. Will we not then be attaining the right fruit?” 

All that legerdemain of Pilgrim was aimed at eliciting from the elder these few words. He wiped away his tears, saying, “Master, if you want to cross this mountain, Bullseye 8 Rules has to agree to do 
two things for me. Only then will we’ve about a third of a chance to get by. If he doesn’t agree to help me, you might as well forget about the whole matter.” 

“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “if we can’t do it, let's scatter. Don’t drag me down.” 

“Disciple,” said the elder, “let's ask your Elder Brother first and see what he wants you to do.” Idiot indeed said to Pilgrim, “Elder Brother, what do you want me to do?” 

“The first thing is to look after Master,” said Pilgrim, “and the second is to go patrol the mountain.” 

8 Rules said, “Looking after Master means sitting right here whereas to patrol the mountain means taking a walk somewhere. Do you want me to sit a while and walk a while? How can | do two things 
at once?” 

“Im not telling you to do two things at once,” said Pilgrim, “but to select one only.” 

“That's easier to decide,” said 8 Rules, chuckling, “but | don’t know what's involved in looking after Master or in patrolling the mountain. Tell me something of my duties and | can then carry them out 
accordingly.” 

“To look after Master,” said Pilgrim, “means that if he wants to move his bowels, you wait on him; if he wants to journey, you assist him; if he wants to eat, you go to beg for vegetarian food. If he suffers 
from hunger even slightly, you'll be beaten; if he pales a little, you'll be beaten; if he loses some weight, you'll be beaten.” 

Horrified, 8 Rules said, “This is terribly difficult! Terribly difficult! To wait on him or to help him to walk — that’s nothing, and even if I've to carry him bodily, it’s still an easy matter. But if he wants to send 
me to beg for food, | fear that there might be those on this road to the West who won't recognise that I’m a monk seeking scriptures. They might think that I’m a healthy bull just reaching maturity and 
then have me surrounded by many people with brooms, rakes, pitchforks, and all. I'll be taken to their homes, slaughtered, and cured for the New Year. Wouldn't that be like meeting the plague?” 
“Then go and patrol the mountain,” said Pilgrim. 

“What does that involve?” asked 8 Rules. 

Pilgrim replied, “Go into the mountain and find out how many monsters there are, what kind of mountain this is, and what kind of cave there is. We can then make plans to pass through.” 

“This is a small thing,” said 8 Rules. “Old bull will go patrol the mountain.” Hitching up his garment at once, Idiot held high his muckrake and strode energetically up the road leading into the mountain. 
As he watched 8 Rules leave, Pilgrim could not suppress his giggles. “You impudent ape!” scolded the elder. “As a brother, you've not shown the least bit of sympathy or kindness. You're constantly 
envious of one another. With all that base cunning, all those ‘clever words and an ingratiating appearance,’? you've managed to trick him already into the so-called patrolling the mountain. Now you're 
even mocking him with your laugh!” 

“Im not mocking him,” said Pilgrim, “because there’s another meaning in my laughter. You see that Eight Rules’s left but he'll not go to patrol the mountain, nor will he dare to face the monsters. He'll 
go instead somewhere to hide for a while and then come back to deceive us with some story that he has made up.” 

“How do you know that about him?” asked the elder. Pilgrim replied, “I suspect that’s how he will behave. If you don’t believe me, let me follow him and find out. | can also lend him some assistance in 
subduing the monsters, and see at the same time whether he is earnest in seeking a god.” 

“Fine! Fine! Fine!” said the elder, “but you must not play tricks on him.” 

Pilgrim agreed and ran up the slope of the mountain. Shaking his body once, he changed into a tiny mole cricket, indeed a delicate and lightsome transformation. See thin wings exercise in the wind 
without effort; a small waist sharp as a pin. He darts through rushes and the floral shades faster than even a comet. Eyes that are shining bright; a voice that’s soft and faint. Of insects he’s one of the 
smallest: slender, shapely, and sly. A few times he rests idle in the secluded woods — his whole body out of sight, lost to 1000 eyes. ‘Spreading his wings, he flew with a buzz up there, caught up with 
8 Rules, and alighted on his neck beneath the bristles behind his ear. Idiot was intent on travelling; how’d | know that someone had landed on my body? After walking for seven or eight miles, he 
dropped his muckrake, turned around, and faced the direction of the Tang Monk. Gesturing vehemently with hands and feet, he began to let loose a string of abuses. “You doddering old priest!” he 
said. “You unscrupulous Ban-Horse-Plague! You sissy Sand-monk! All of you're enjoying yourselves but you trick Old bull into stumping the road. All of us seeking the scriptures hope to attain the right 
fruit but you’ve to make me do this so-called patrolling the mountain. Ha, ha, ha! If there’re monsters known to be in this place, we’d have taken cover and tried to get by undetected. But that’s not 
sufficient for you; you’ve to make me go find them instead! Well, that’s your bad luck! I’m going to find some place and take a nap. When I’m through sleeping, I'll go back and give you a vague story 
about having patrolled the mountain, and that will be that!” 

It was the good fortune of the moment for Idiot. As he walked further along, carrying his muckrake, he discovered a clump of red grass in the fold of the mountain. He crawled inside at once and used 
his muckrake to create for himself some sort of floor mat. Lying down and stretching himself, he said, “O joy! Even that Ban-Horse-Plague isn’t as comfortable as I’m now!” But Pilgrim had stationed 
himself behind his ear, heard every word. No longer able to contain himself, Pilgrim flew up and decided to badger him a little. With one shake of his body he changed again into a small woodpecker. 
See a fine bill iron hard and glossy red and bright, gleaming patterned plumage. Owning a pair of steel claws sharp as nails, famished he fears not quiet woods. He loves best the dried trunks worm- 
rotted; he cares, too, for the lonely old tree. Round-eyed, fan-tailed, he’s very perky — his pecking sounds are worth hearing!"' 

This creature was neither too big nor too small, weighing perhaps only several ounces. Armed with a red bronze-hard bill and black iron claws, he hurtled straight down from the air. 8 Rules was just 
sleeping soundly with head upturned when his horn received a terrific bite. So startled was Idiot that he scampered up at once, madly shouting, “A monster! A monster! He stabbed me with the lance! 
Oh, my mouth is sore!” He rubbed it with his hands and blood spurted out. “That's weird!” he said, “I’m not involved in any happy event. Why has my mouth been painted red?” He stared at his bloody 
hands, muttering to himself confusedly but he could not detect the least trace of movement around him. He said, “There’s no monster. Then why was | stabbed by a lance?” He raised his head to look 
upward and suddenly discovered a small woodpecker flying in the air. Gritting his teeth, Idiot shouted, “You wretched outcast! Isn’t it enough that Ban-Horse-Plague should oppress me? Why must you, 
too, oppress me? Ah, | know! He must not have recognised that I’m a human, thinking instead that my horn is a charred, rotted tree trunk with worms inside. He’s looking for worms to eat and that’s 
why he gives me a bite. Let me hide my horn in my chest.” 

Tumbling on the ground, Idiot again lay down to sleep. Pilgrim flew down once more and gave the base of his ear another bite. Alarmed, Idiot jumped up, saying, “This wretched outcast! He’s really 
harassing me! This must be where his nest is located, and he’s worried that I’ve taken his eggs or offspring. That’s why he’s harassing me. All right! All right! All right! I'm not going to sleep anymore.” 
Poling his rake, he left the red grass meadow and started up the road again. Meanwhile, Pilgrim Sun nearly broke up with amusement, the Handsome Monkey King almost collapsed with laughter. 
“This coolie!” he said. “Even those wide open eyes couldn't recognise one of his own!” 

Dear Great Sage! Shaking his body and changing again into a mole cricket, he attached himself firmly to Idiot's ear once more. After walking four or five miles deep into the mountain, Idiot came upon 
in a valley three square slabs of green rock, each about the size of a table. Putting down his rake, Idiot saluted deeply to the rocks. Laughing silently to himself, Pilgrim said, “This Idiot! The rocks are 
no humans; they know neither how to talk nor how to return his greeting. Why salute them? That's truly blind homage!” But Idiot pretended that the rocks were the Tang Monk, Sand-monk, and Pilgrim. 
Facing the three of them, Idiot was rehearsing what he would say. Said he, “This time when | go back to see Master, I'll say that there are monsters, should they ask me. And if they ask me what kind 
of mountain this is, I'll say that it's moulded of clay, made of mud, wrought of tin, forged by copper, steamed with flour, plastered with paper, and painted with the brush. If they claim that I’m speaking 
idiotic words, I’m going to say some more. I'll say that this is a rocky mountain. If they ask me what sort of a cave there is, I'll say there is a rocky cave. If they ask me what kind of doors there are, I'll 
say there are sheet-iron doors studded with nails. If they ask me how deep the cave inside is, I'll say that there are some three sections in the dwelling. If they persist in trying to learn everything, such 
as how many nails there are on the door, I'll only say that Old bull is too preoccupied to remember the exact number. Well, now that I’ve everything all made up, I’m going to go back to hoodwink that 
Ban-Horse-Plague.” Having fabricated his story, Idiot dragged his rake along to retrace his steps. He did not know however, that Pilgrim heard everything behind his ear. When Pilgrim saw him turning 
back, he stretched his wings and flew back first, changing back to his original form to see his master. “Wukong, so you’ve come back,” said the master. “Why don’t we see Aware of Ability also?” 
“He’s just making up some lies,” said Pilgrim, chuckling. “He'll be here soon.” 

The elder said, “A person like him who has his eyes covered by his ears has to be a stupid fellow. What sort of lies can he make up? It’s got to be some hum-buggery of yours again, trying to put the 
blame on him.” 
“Master,” said Pilgrim, “you're always covering up his faults. What I’ve to tell you however, is based on evidence.” He thereupon gave a complete account of how Idiot crawled into the clump of grass 
to sleep and was bitten by the woodpecker, and how he saluted to the rocks and made up the story on monster-spirits in the rocky mountain, in the rocky cave with the sheet-iron doors. After he 
finished, Idiot came walking back in a little while. As he was afraid that he might forget what he had made up, he was still rehearsing with head saluted when Pilgrim shouted at him, “Idiot, what are you 
reciting?” Sticking up his ears so that he could glance around, 8 Rules said, “I’m back at the old homestead!” He went forward and knelt down but the elder raised him up, saying, “Disciple, you must 
be tired!” 
“Yes,” said 8 Rules, “the person who walks or climbs mountains is the one most tired.” 

“Are there any monsters?” asked the elder. 8 Rules said, “Yes, yes! There is a whole bunch of them!” 

“How did they treat you?” asked the elder. 

8 Rules said, “They called me Ancestor Ox and Grandpa Ox; they also prepared some vegetarian food and soup noodles for me to eat, saying that they’d put on a big parade to take us across this 
mountain.” 

“Could this be your talking in your dreams, after you've fallen asleep in the grass?” asked Pilgrim. 

When Idiot heard the question, he was so astounded that he almost lost 2 inches of his height, saying, “O Dad! How could he know about my sleeping?” 

Pilgrim went forward and caught hold of him, saying, “You come over here! Let me ask you!” Idiot became even more alarmed; trembling all over, he said, “You can ask me anything. Why do you’ve to 
grab me like that?” 

“What kind of a mountain is there?” asked Pilgrim. 8 Rules said, “It's a rocky mountain.” 

“What kind of a cave?” 

“It's a rocky cave,” he said. “What kind of doors are there?” Pilgrim asked. “There are sheet-iron doors studded with nails,” he said. “How deep is the cave inside?” 

“There’re three sections inside,” he said. “Need for you to say no more,” said Pilgrim. “I can remember the last part quite clearly but because | fear that Master still won't believe me, I'll say that for you.” 
“You sneak!” said 8 Rules. “You didn’t even go with me! What do you know that you can say for me?” 

“How many nails are there on the doors?” said Pilgrim, laughing, “Just say that Old bull is too preoccupied to remember clearly. Isn’t that about right?” 

Idiot was so frightened that he fell on his knees at once. Pilgrim said, “You saluted to the rocks and began speaking to them as if they were the three of us. Isn't that right? You also said, ‘Let me make 
up this story so that | can go hoodwink that Ban-Horse-Plague.’ Isn’t that right also?” 

“Elder Brother,” said Idiot, respecting unceasingly, “could it be that you accompanied me when | went to patrol the mountain?” 

“You overstuffed coolie!” scolded Pilgrim. “This is an important area. We asked you to go patrol the mountain, and you went to sleep instead. If the woodpecker hadn't jabbed you up, you'd still be 
sleeping there. After you're roused, you even made up such a big lie. You'd completely ruin our important enterprise, couldn’t you? Stick out your shanks at once, and you'll receive five strokes of the 
rod as a keepsake.” 

Horrified, 8 Rules said, “That funeral staff is very heavy: a little touch and my skin will collapse, a little brush and my tendons will snap. Five strokes mean certain death for me.” 

Pilgrim said, “If you're afraid of being beaten, why do you lie?” 

“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “it’s just this once. I'll never dare do that again.” 

“All right,” said Pilgrim, “I'll give you just three strokes this time.” 

“O Dad!” said 8 Rules. “I can’t even bear half a stroke!” Without any alternative, Idiot caught hold of the master and said, “You must speak for me.” 

The elder said, “When Wukong told me that you’re making up this lie, I’d not believe him. Now that it is really so, you certainly deserve to be beaten. But we're trying to cross this mountain at the 
moment, and we need everyone we can use. So Wukong, you may as well spare him now. Let's cross the mountain first, and then you can beat him.” Pilgrim said, “The ancients said, ‘To obey the 


sentiments of one’s parents is to perform a great filial act.’ If Master tells me not to beat you, I'll spare you for the moment. You must go to patrol the mountain again. If you start lying and botch things 
up once more, I'll not spare you from even one stroke!” 

Idiot had no choice but to scamper up and leave on the main road. Look at him! As he walked along this time, he was haunted by suspicion, supposing with every step of the way that the transformed 
Pilgrim was following him. As soon as he came upon an object or thing, he would immediately suspect that it was Pilgrim. After he had gone for about 7 or 8 miles, he saw a tiger running across the 
slope. Undaunted, he lifted up his muckrake and said, “Elder Brother, did you come again to listen to my fibs? | told you I'd do that no more.” As he walked further, a violent mountain gust toppled a 
dead tree that rolled up to him. Pounding his chest and stamping his feet, he cried, “Elder Brother! Why did you do this? | told you I'd try no more to deceive you. Why did you've to change into a tree 
to strike at me?” He proceeded still further and saw in the air a white-necked old crow that squawked several times overhead. He said again, “Elder Brother, aren’t you ashamed of yourself? | told you 
I'd lie no more. Why did you still change into an old crow? Are you trying to eavesdrop on me again?” 

But this time Pilgrim did not follow him; he was simply ridden with suspicion and surmise. The mountain was named Level-Top Mountain in which there was a cave called the Lotus-Flower Cave. There 
were 2 fiends in the cave: 1 had the name of the Great King Golden Horn and the other, the Great King Silver Horn. As they sat in the cave that day, Golden Horn said to Silver Horn, “Brother, how 
long’s it been since we patrolled the mountain?” 

Silver Horn said, “It’s been half a month.” 

“Brother,” said Golden Horn, “go and patrol it today.” 

Silver Horn said, “Why today?” 

“You don’t know what | heard recently,” said Golden Horn, “that the Tang emperor in the Land of the East had sent his royal brother, the Tang Monk to worship God in the West. He’s three other 
companions by the names of Pilgrim Sun, Bullseye Eight Rules, and Sand-monk; including the horse, there're five of them altogether. Go see where they are and capture them for me.” 

Silver Horn said, “If we want to eat people, we can catch a few anywhere. Where can these monks be? Let them pass.” 

Golden Horn said, “You don’t know about this. The year when | left the Heavenly Region, | heard people say that the Tang Monk’s the disciple of the Elder Gold Cicada, a man who’s practiced religion 
for ten existences, and one who has not allowed any of his yang energy to be dissipated. If anyone can have a taste of his flesh, his age will be vastly lengthened.” 

“If eating his flesh,” said Silver Horn, “can lengthen our age and prolong our lives, what need we to practice sedentary meditation, to arrive at certain attainment, to cultivate the dragon and the tiger, or 
to achieve the union of the male and the female?'? We'd just eat him. Let me go and catch him at once.” 

Golden Horn said, “Brother, you're rather impulsive. Let's not hurry. If you walk out this door and grab any monk that comes along, you'd be breaking the law unnecessarily if he were not the Tang 
Monk. | still recall how the real Tang Monk looks. Let's have portraits made of the master and his disciples that you can take along with you. When you see some monks, you can check whether they 
are the real ones.” He thereupon had portraits drawn up, and the name of each person was written beside the picture. Taking the sketches with him, Silver Horn left the cave after calling up thirty little 
fiends to follow him to patrol the mountain. 

We now tell you about 8 Rules whose fortune was about to take a turn for the worse. As he walked along, he ran right into the various demons who barred his way and asked, “Who is he that’s 
approaching?” Raising his head and pushing his ears aside, Idiot saw that they were demons and he became quite frightened. He said to himself, “If | say that I’m a monk going to seek scriptures, they 
may want to seize me. I’d better say I’m only a traveller.” The little fiends reported back to their master, saying, “Great King, it’s a traveller.” Among those thirty little fiends, there were some who did not 
recognise 8 Rules. There were a few however who found his face somewhat familiar, and pointing at him, they said, “Great King, this monk looks like the portrait of Bullseye 8 Rules.” The old fiend told 
them at once to hang up the picture so that they could examine it more closely. When 8 Rules saw it, he was greatly shaken, muttering to himself, “No wonder | feel somewhat dispirited of late! They 
have caught my spirit in this portrait!” As the little fiends held up the picture with their spears, Silver Horn pointed with his hand, saying, “This one riding the white horse is the Tang Monk, and this one 
with a hairy face is Pilgrim Sun.” 

Hearing this, 8 Rules said, “City Guardian, it’s all right if I'm excluded! I'll present you with three bull’s heads, twenty-four portions of pure libation...” 

Mumbling to himself repeatedly, he kept making all sorts of vows. The fiend, meanwhile, went on to say, “That long dark one is Sand-monk, and this one having a long horn and huge ears is Bullseye 
8 Rules.” When Idiot heard what he said, he was so startled that he lowered his horn toward his chest and tried to conceal it. “Monk, stick out your mouth,” cried the fiend. “It’s a birth defect,” said 8 
Rules. “I can’t stick it out.” The fiend told the imps to pull it out with hooks, and 8 Rules became so alarmed that he stuck out his horn at once, saying, “It’s no more than a homely feature! Here it is! If 
you want to look at it, just look. Why do you want to use hooks?” 

Recognising that it was 8 Rules, the fiend took out his precious blade and hacked away. Idiot parried the blow with his rake, saying, “My child, don’t be brazen! Watch my rake!” The fiend said with a 
chuckle, “This man became a monk in the middle of life.” 

“Dear child!” said 8 Rules. “You do have some intelligence! How do you know right away that your dad became a monk in the middle of life?” 

“If you know how to use the rake,” said the fiend, “you must've stolen it after hoeing the fields or gardens of some household.” 

8 Rules said, “My child, you'll not recognise the rake of your dad for it’s like no ordinary rake for hoeing the ground. We've here huge teeth made in the shape of dragon claws, adorned with gold and 
like a tiger formed. When used in battle it draws down cold wind; when brought to combat it emits bright flames. It can for Tang Monk all barriers remove, catch all monsters on this road to the West. 
When it’s wielded, mists hide the sun and moon; when it’s held high, clouds make dim the pole stars. It knocks down Mount Tai and tigers panic; it overturns oceans and dragons cower. Though you, 
monster, may have many skills, one rake will nine bloody holes produce!” The fiend heard the words but he was not ready to step aside. Wielding his sword of seven stars, he charged 8 Rules and 
they closed in repeatedly in the mountain. Even after some 20 rounds, neither appeared to be the stronger one. Growing more and fiercer, 8 Rules began to fight as if he had no regard whatever for 
his life. When the fiend saw how his opponent flapped his huge ears and spat out saliva whooping and yelling all the time, he became somewhat frightened. He therefore turned around to call up all his 
little fiends to do battle. Now if it were a one-to-one combat, it would have been manageable for 8 Rules. But when he saw all those little fiends approaching, he panicked and turned to flee. The road 
however, was not very smooth and he immediately tripped over some vines and dried creepers along the way. As he was struggling to run, one of the little fiends made a flying tackle at his legs, and 
he hit the ground headfirst like a dog eating shit! The others swarmed all over him, pressing him on the ground, pulling at his mane and his ears, grabbing his legs, and tugging at his tail. They hoisted 
him up bodily to return to the cave. Alas! Thus it is that a whole body bursting with demons is hard to destroy; 10000 ills arise, they are tough to remove. 


033 

Heresy deludes the True Nature; Primal Spirit helps the Native Mind 
That fiend who hauled 8 Rules into the cave, crying, “Elder Brother, we caught one!” Delighted, the old demon said, “Bring him here for a look.” 
“Isn't this the one?” said the 2"4 demon. “Brother,” said the old demon, “you caught the wrong one. This monk’s useless.” 
8 Rules at once jumped at this opportunity and said, “Great King, please release a useless monk and let him go. It's a crime!” 
“Elder Brother,” said the second demon, “don’t release him. Even if he’s useless, he is part of the Tang Monk's company, and he’s called Bullseye 8 Rules. Let's soak him thoroughly in the pure water 
pool in the back; when the bristles are plucked and the hide is peeled after the soaking, we can pickle him with salt and sun him dry. He'll be a good appetizer with juice on a cloudy day.” 
When 8 Rules heard these words, he said, “What rotten luck! I've met up with a monster who traffics in pickled food!” 
The little fiends hauled 8 Rules inside and threw him into the water. Tripitaka was sitting before the slope; his ears became flushed and his heart began to pound. Growing very restless, he called out, 
“Wukong, why’s it that Aware of Ability has taken so long to patrol the mountain this time and hasn't returned?” 
Pilgrim said, “Master still doesn’t know anything of how his mind works!” 
“How does it work?” asked Tripitaka. 
“Master,” said Pilgrim, “if this mountain truly has monsters, he will find it difficult to advance even half a step. Instead, he will run back to report to us with all sorts of exaggerations. | suppose however, 
that there are no monsters, and he must have gone ahead directly when he found the road quiet and safe.” 
“If he’s really gone ahead,” said Tripitaka, “where’ll we meet him? This a wild, mountainous region unlike somewhere in a village or town.” 
Pilgrim said, “Don’t worry, Master, please mount up. That Idiot's rather lazy and without doubt he moves very slowly. Urge your horse a little and we'll certainly catch up with him to proceed together 
again.” 
The Tang Monk indeed climbed on his horse; as Sand-monk poled the luggage, Pilgrim led the way in front to ascend the mountain. The old fiend said to the 2"4 demon, “Brother, if you've caught 8 
Rules, there must also be the Tang Monk somewhere. Go and patrol the mountain again and make certain that you don’t miss him.” 
“At once! At once!” said the second demon who immediately called up some fifty little fiends to go patrol the mountain with him. As they journeyed, they saw auspicious clouds and luminous ether 
circling. The second demon said, “Here comes the Tang Monk!” 
“Where is he?” asked the various little fiends. The second demon said, “Auspicious clouds will alight on the head of a virtuous man whereas the black ether emitted from the head of a wicked man will 
rise up to the sky. That Tang Monk is actually the disciple of the Elder Gold Cicada, a virtuous man who has practiced austerities for ten existences. That’s why he is encircled by these auspicious 
clouds.” Those little fiends however, still could not perceive where the monk was. Pointing with his finger, the second demon said, “Isn’t that he?” Immediately, Tripitaka on the horse shuddered violently; 
the demon pointed again, and Tripitaka shuddered once more. This went on for three times, and Tripitaka grew very anxious, saying, “Disciples, why am | shuddering like this?” 
“You must have an upset stomach,” said Sand-monk, “and that’s why you're feeling the chill.” 
“Nonsense” said Pilgrim. “Going through this Tall Mountain and rugged cliff must have made Master rather apprehensive, that’s all. Don’t be afraid! Don’t be afraid! Let old monkey put on a show for 
you with my rod to calm your fears somewhat.” Dear Pilgrim! Whipping out his rod, he began to go through a sequence of manoeuvres with the rod as he walked before the horse: up and down, left 
and right, the thrusts and parries were made in perfect accord with the manuals of martial arts. What the elder saw from the horse was a sight incomparable anywhere in the world! 
As Pilgrim led the way toward the West, the monster who was watching on top of the mountain, almost fell over with fear. Scared out of his wits, the monster blurted out, “I’ve heard about Pilgrim Sun 
for several years but today | know that this is no false rumour.” Drawing closer to him, the various fiends said, “Great King, why do you ‘magnify the determination of others to diminish your own 
authority’? Of whom are you boasting?” 
“Pilgrim Sun,” said the second demon, “truly possesses vast magical powers. We'll be unable to eat the Tang Monk.” 
“Great King,” said the fiends, “if you don’t have the abilities, let a few of us go and report to the Great, Great King. Ask him to call up all the fighters, young and old, of our cave, and we'll all join to form 
a solid battle front. You fear that he'll be able to escape then?” 
“Can't you all see that iron rod of his?” asked the second demon. “It’s powerful enough to vanquish ten thousand foes. We've but four or five hundred soldiers in the cave, and they'll be unable to take 
even a single stroke of his rod!” 
The fiends said, “If you put it that way, the Tang Monk certainly will not be our food. Doesn’t that mean that we’ve also made a mistake in seizing Bullseye 8 Rules? Let's return him to the monks.” 
“We've not quite made a mistake,” said the second demon, “nor should we send him back so easily. In the end, we're determined to devour the Tang Monk but we can’t do it just yet.” 
“If you put it that way,” said the fiends, “should we wait for a few more years?” 
The 24 demon said, “No need for a few more years. | perceive now that that Tang Monk must be sought for with virtue and not be taken by violence. If we want to use force to catch him, we'll be unable 
to get even a whiff of him. The only way we can move him is to feign virtue so that his mind will be made to fuse with our minds in the process of which we'll plot against him, exploiting the very virtue 
of his.” 
The fiends said, “If the Great King wants to devise a plan to catch him, will you want to use us?” 
“Each of you may return to our camp,” said the 2™4 demon, “but you’re not permitted to report this to the Great King. If you disturb him and leak the news, my plan may be ruined. I’ve my own power of 
transformation and can catch him.” 
The various monsters dispersed; the demon by himself leaped down from the mountain. Shaking his body by the road, he changed into an aged Daoist. He was dressed in a shining star-patterned cap, 
tousled whitish hair; feathered gown wrapped in silk sash, sandals tied with yellow coir; nice features and bright eyes like a man divine, a light, healthy body as the Age Star’s. Why speak of the Blue 
Buffalo Daoist? ‘He’s as strong as White Tablet Master? — a specious form disguised as the true form, falsehood feigning to be the honest truth! By the side of the main road, he masqueraded himself 
as a Daoist with a bloody, broken leg, whimpering constantly and crying, “Save me! Save me!” 
We're telling you about Tripitaka who, relying on the strength of Great Sage Sun and Sand-monk, was proceeding happily when they heard repeatedly the cry, “Master, save me!” When this reached 
the ears of Tripitaka, he said, “My goodness! My goodness! There is all around not a single village in the wilderness of this mountain. Who could it be that’s calling? It must be, | suppose, someone 


terrified by the tiger or the leopard.” Reining in his fine horse, the elder called out, “Who is the person facing this ordeal? Please show yourself.” The fiend crawled out of the bushes and at once banged 
his head on the ground without ceasing, facing the elder’s horse. When Tripitaka saw that it was a Daoist, and an elderly one at that, he felt sorry for him. Dismounting at once, he tried to take hold of 
him with his hands, saying, “Please get up! Please get up!” The fiend said, “It hurts! It hurts!” When Tripitaka released his hold, he discovered that the man’s leg was bleeding. “O Master,” said the 
startled Tripitaka, “where did you come from? How is it that your leg is wounded?” 

With clever speech and specious tongue, the fiend answered falsely, saying, “Master, west of this mountain is a clean and secluded temple, of which I’m a Daoist.” Tripitaka said, “Why are you not 
tending the incense and fires or rehearsing the scriptures and the rituals in the temple? Why are you walking around here?” 

“A patron at the southern part of this mountain,” said the demon, “invited the Daoists to pray to the stars and distribute the blessings day before yesterday. Last night my disciple and | were walking 
home when we ran into a ferocious striped tiger in a deep canyon. It seized my disciple and dragged him away in its mouth while your terrified Daoist, madly attempting to flee, broke his leg when he 
fell on a pile of rocks. I'd not even find my way back. But it must be a great Heavenly affinity that caused me to meet Master today, and | beseech you in your great compassion to save my life. When | 
get to our temple, I'll repay your profound kindness even if it means selling myself into slavery!” 

When Tripitaka heard these words, he thought they were the truth and said to him, “O Master, we two belong to the same calling - I'm a monk and you're a Daoist. Though our attire may differ, the 
principles in cultivation, in the practice of austerities, are the same. If | don’t save you, I'd not be ranked among those who have left the family. But though | intend to save you, | see that you can’t walk.” 
“| can't even stand up,” said the fiend, “so how can | walk?” 

“All right, all right!” said Tripitaka. “I can still walk. I'll let you take my horse for this distance. When you get to your temple, you can return the horse to me.” The fiend said, “Master, I’m grateful for your 
profound kindness but my inner thigh is hurt. | can’t ride.” Tripitaka said, “I see,” and he said to Sand-monk, “Put the luggage on my horse, and you carry him.” 

“Ill carry him,” said Sand-monk. 

Stealing a quick glance at Sand-monk, the fiend said, “O Master, | was so terrified by that ferocious tiger. Now that | see this priest with such a gloomy complexion, I’m even more frightened. | dare not 
let him carry me.” 

“Wukong,” said Tripitaka, “you carry him then.” Pilgrim immediately answered, “I'll carry him. I'll carry him.” Having made certain that it was Pilgrim who would carry him, the monster became very 
amiable and did not speak anymore. “You cockeyed old Daoist!” said Sand-monk, laughing. “You don’t think it's good for me to carry you, and you want him instead. When he is out of Master’s sight, 
he'll smash even your tendons on a sharp, pointed rock!” 

Pilgrim, meanwhile, had agreed to put the monster on his back but he said, chuckling, “You brazen demon, how dare you come to provoke me! You’d have made some inquiry on how many years old 
monkey has been around! Your fib can deceive the Tang Monk but do you really think you’d fool me? | can tell that you're a fiend of this mountain who wants to eat my master, | suppose. But is my 
master an ordinary person, someone for you to eat? And even if you want to devour him, you'd at least have given a larger half to old monkey!” 

When the demon heard Pilgrim muttering like this, he said, “Master, I’m the descendant of a good family who has become a Daoist. It's my misfortune this day to have met this adversity of the tiger. I'm 
no monster.” 

“If you fear the tiger and the wolf,” said Pilgrim, “why don’t you recite the Scripture of the Northern Dipper?” When Tripitaka heard these words just as he was mounting, he chided, “This wanton ape! 
‘Saving one life is better than erecting a seven-tiered pagoda.’ Isn’t it enough that you carry him? Why speak of the Classic of the Northern Dipper or the Classic of the Southern Dipper?” 

When Pilgrim heard him, he said, “Lucky for this fellow! My master happens to be someone who is inclined toward compassion and virtue but also someone who prefers external appearance more than 
inward excellence. If | don’t carry you, he’ll blame me, so I'll carry you, all right. But I’ve to make it clear to you: if you want to piss or shit, tell me first. For if you pour it down my back, | can’t take the 
stink, and there is no one around to wash and starch my clothes when they are soiled.” 

“Look at my age,” said the fiend, “you think | don’t understand what you said?” Only then did Pilgrim pull him up and put him on his back before setting out on the main road to the West with the elder 
and Sand-monk. When they reached a spot in the mountain where the road became bumpy, weaving up and down, Pilgrim took care to walk more slowly, allowing the Tang Monk to proceed first. 
Before they had gone four or five miles, the master and Sand-monk descended into a fold of the mountain and became completely out of sight. More and more annoyed, Pilgrim thought to himself, 
“Master is such a fool even though he’s a grown man! Travelling this great distance, one gets weary even if one were empty-handed — and he tells me instead to carry this monster! | wish I'd throw him 
off! Let's not say he’s a monster; even if he were a good man, he should die without regret for having lived so long. | might as well dash him to the ground and kill him. Why carry him any further?” 

As the Great Sage was about to do this, the monster knew instantly of his plan. Knowing how to summon mountains, he resorted to the magic of Moving Mountains and Pouring out Oceans. On Pilgrim's 
back he made the magic sign with his fingers and recited a spell, sending the Sumeru Mountain into mid-air and causing it to descend directly on Pilgrim’s head. A little startled, the Great Sage bent 
his head to one side and the mountain landed on his left shoulder. Laughing, he said, “My child, what sort of press-body magic are you using to pin down old monkey? This is all right but a lopsided 
pole is rather difficult to carry.” 

The demon said to himself, “One mountain can’t hold him down.” He recited a spell once more and summoned the Emei Mountain‘ into the air. Pilgrim again turned his head and the mountain landed 
on his right shoulder. Look at him! Carrying two mountains, he began to give chase to his master with the speed of a meteor! The sight of him caused the old demon to perspire all over, muttering to 
himself, “He truly knows how to pole mountains!” 

Exerting his spirit even more, he recited another spell and sent up the Tai Mountain to press down on Pilgrim’s head. With this magic of the Tai Mountain Pressing the Head, the Great Sage was 
overpowered as his strength ebbed and his tendons turned numb; the weight was so great that the spirits of the Three Worms: inside his body exploded and blood spouted from his seven apertures.® 
Dear monster! After he used his magic power to pin down Pilgrim, he himself mounted quickly a gust of violent wind to catch up with the Tang Monk. From the edge of the clouds, he stretched down 
his hand to try to seize the rider of the horse. Sand-monk was so startled that he threw away the luggage and whipped out his fiend-routing staff to block the attempt. Wielding the sword of the 7 stars, 
the demon met him head on and it was some battle! The sword of 7 stars, the fiend-routing staff, all flashed golden beams as lightning bright. This one, eyes glowering, seemed the black god of death; 
that one, iron-faced, was the true Curtain-Raising Captain. The fiend before the mountain showed his power, solely bent on catching Tripitaka Tang. This man earnestly guarding the true monk, would 
not let go even at the threat of death. The two belched fog and cloud to reach Heaven’s Palace; they sprayed dirt and dust to cover the stars. They fought till the red sun grew dim and lost its light - the 
great earth, the cosmos, turned dusky all. Back and forth they scuffled for eight, 9 rounds: it was quick defeat for which Sand-monk was bound! The demon was exceedingly ferocious; the thrusts and 
slashes of his sword fell on his opponent like meteor showers. Growing weaker by the moment, Sand-monk could no longer withstand him and turned to flee, when the precious staff was forced aside 
and he was seized by a huge hand. Wedging Sand-monk beneath his left arm, the demon dragged Tripitaka off the horse with his right hand; with the tip of his feet hooked on to the luggage and his 
mouth tugging at the mane of the horse, he used the magic of removal and brought them all to the Lotus-Flower Cave in a gust of wind. Shouting at the top of his voice, he cried, “Elder Brother, all the 
monks are caught and brought here!” 

When the old demon heard these words, he was very pleased, saying, “Bring them here for me to have a look.” 

“Aren't these the ones?” asked the second demon. “Worthy brother,” said the old demon, “you caught the wrong ones again.” 

“But you told me to catch the Tang Monk,” said the second demon. The old demon said, “It was the Tang Monk, all right but you didn’t manage to catch the able Pilgrim Sun. We've to catch him first 
before we can enjoy eating the Tang Monk. If we’ve not caught him, be sure not to touch any of his companions. That Monkey King has vast magic powers and knows many ways of transformation. If 
we devour his master, you think he’ll accept that? He will certainly come to quarrel with us at our door and we'll never be able to live in peace.” 

“Elder Brother,” said the second demon with a laugh, “you know only how to exalt others! According to your words, that monkey is unique on Earth, and rare even in Heaven. But as | see him, he’s so- 
so only with not many abilities.” 
“You caught him, then?” asked the old demon. “He has already been pinned down by three large mountains that | summoned,” said the second demon, “and he can’t move even an inch. That's how | 
managed to transport the Tang Monk, Sand-monk, the white horse, and even the luggage back here.” When the old demon heard these words, he was filled with delight, saying, “What luck! What luck! 
Only after we've caught this fellow can the Tang Monk be food in our mouths.” He thereupon said to the little fiends, “Prepare some juice at once. Let’s present to our Second Great King the goblet of 
merit.” The second demon said, “Elder Brother, let’s not drink juice yet. Let’s order the little ones to scoop Bullseye 8 Rules out of the water and hang him up.” 8 Rules was thus hung up in the east side 
of the cave, Sand-monk in the west side, and the Tang Monk in the middle. The white horse was placed in a stable while the luggage was brought inside the cave. 

Smiling, the old demon said, “Worthy Brother, what marvellous ability! You went out twice and you caught three monks. Though Pilgrim Sun however, has been pressed beneath the mountains, we 
must find a way to bring him here so that he can be steamed together with the others.” 

The 2"4 demon said, “If Elder Brother wants to bring Pilgrim Sun here, there’s no need for us to move. Please take a seat. We need only order two little monsters to put him in two treasures of ours and 
bring him here.” 

“Which treasures should they take along with them?” asked the old demon. 

The 24 demon said, “Take my red gourd of purple gold and your pure mutton-jade vase.” 

Bringing out the treasures, the old demon said, “Whom we’d send?” 

The 2"4 demon said, “Let’s send Sly Devil and Wily Worm, the two of them.” He then gave the instructions to the 2 saying, “Take these treasures and go to the tallest peak of the three mountains. Tum 
one of them upside down so that its mouth will face the ground and its bottom, the sky. Call out the name, Pilgrim Sun and if he answers, he'll be sucked immediately inside. You'll then seal the container 
with the tape bearing the words, ‘May Laozi act quickly according to this command.” He'll be reduced to pus in seventy-five minutes.” 

The 2 little fiends respected before they left to fetch Pilgrim. The Great Sage was pressed beneath the mountains by the magic of the demon. Suffering, he thought of Tripitaka; in adversity, he recalled 
the holy monk. He cried out with a loud voice, “O Master! | remember how you went to the Mountain of Two Frontiers to lift up the tape that’d me pressed down and it’s then that old monkey escaped 
his great ordeal to embrace the vow of complete poverty. Thanks to the Nun, | was given the religion decree so that you and I'd stay together and practice religion together so that we’d be brought 
under the same affinity and attain the same enlightenment and knowledge. How’d | expect that we'd run into such a demonic obstacle here and I'd be pinned down again by his mountains. O pity it all! 
You may be fated to die but pity Sand-monk, 8 Rules, and the little dragon who took all that trouble of changing into a horse. Truly as the saying goes, a fall tree beckons the wind, the wind will rock 
the tree; a man lives for his name, his name will wreck the man.” 

When he finished this lamentation, tears rained down his cheeks. All that noise however, immediately disturbed the mountain god, the local spirit, and the Guardians of 5 Quarters who came together 
with the Golden-Headed Guardian. The last 1 said, “Whose mountains are these?” 

“Ours,” said the local spirit. “Do you know who it’s that you've pinned down beneath the mountains?” 

“No, we don't,” said the local spirit. 

“So, you don’t know,” said the Guardian, “but he happens to be the Great Sage Equal to Heaven, the Pilgrim Sun Wukong who caused tremendous disturbance in Heaven five centuries ago. Now he 
has embraced the right fruit to follow the Tang Monk as his disciple. How could you permit the demon to borrow these mountains to pin him down? You're as good as dead! If he ever finds release and 
comes out, you think he'll spare you? Even if he lets you all go lightly, the local spirit will be demoted to an attendant in a posthouse, the mountain god will be banished to military service, and even 
we'll be placed under a terrible obligation.” Only then did the mountain god and the local spirit become frightened; they said, “We really didn’t know. All we heard was the spell for moving mountains 
recited by the demon and we transferred the mountains here. How could we know that it was the Great Sage Sun?” 

The Guardian said, “Don’t be afraid now. The Law says, ‘The ignorant will not be held culpable.’ You and | can discuss the matter and see how we can release him without making him beat us.” 

“This is becoming rather ridiculous,” said the local spirit. “Will he beat us even after we've released him?” 

“You've no idea,” said the Guardian, “that he possesses a compliant golden-hooped rod, a most powerful weapon indeed. One stroke of it means death; one touch, a bad wound! A small tap and the 
tendons snap, a tiny brush and the skin collapses!” 

Growing more and more alarmed, the mountain god and the local spirit had a discussion with the Guardians of Five Quarters before walking up to the front of the three mountains and crying, “Great 
Sage, the mountain god, the local spirit, and the Guardians of Five Quarters have come to see you.” Dear Pilgrim! Though he might be like a lean tiger at the moment, his prowess remained. When he 
heard the announcement, he replied at once resolutely in a ringing voice, “Why do you want to see me?” The local spirit said, “Allow me to report this to the Great Sage. | ask your permission to move 
the mountains away so that the Great Sage might come out and pardon the crime of disrespect unknowingly committed by this humble deity.” Pilgrim said, “Move the mountains away. I'll not hit you.” 
When he said this, it was as if an official pardon had been announced! The various gods began reciting their spells and the mountains were sent back to their original locations. 

Once released, Pilgrim leaped up; shaking off the dirt and tightening up his skirt, he whipped out his rod from behind his ear and said to the mountain god and the local spirit: “Stick out your shanks. 
Each of you'll receive two strokes so that old monkey may find some relief for his misery!” 

Terrified, the 2 gods said, “Just now the Great Sage promised to pardon us. How could you change your word, now that you’ve come out, and want to hit us?” 


“Dear local spirit! Dear mountain god!” said Pilgrim. “You're not afraid of old monkey, you're afraid of the monsters instead!” The local spirit said, “Those demons have vast magical powers. With their 
incantations and spells, they would summon us into their cave and we'd have to take turns to be on duty.” 

When Pilgrim heard these two words “on duty,” he, too, was quite shaken. Lifting his head to face the sky, he cried in a loud voice, “O Azure Heaven! Since the division of chaos and the creation of 
Heaven and Earth, and since the Flower-Fruit Mountain gave birth to me, | did search all around for the enlightened teacher to transmit to me the secret formula for longevity. Think of it, | can change 
with the wind, tame the tiger, and subdue the dragon; | even caused great disturbance in the Celestial Palace and acquired the name Great Sage. But | never dared to be so insolent as to order a 
mountain god or a local spirit around. These demons today are truly lawless! How could they be so arrogant as to make the mountain god and the local spirit their servants, forcing them to take turns 
to be on duty? O Heaven, if you had given birth to old monkey, why did you give birth to these creatures also?”é 

As the Great Sage was thus sighing, he saw in the distance beams of light rising from a mountain valley. “Mountain god, local spirit,” said Pilgrim, “since you’ve been on duty in the cave, you must know 
what objects are those emitting the light.” 

“They must be the luminescent treasures of the demons,” said the local spirit. “Some monster spirits, | suppose, are coming with the treasures to subdue you.” Pilgrim said, “This is a lot more fun! Let 
me ask you quickly who would socialize with them in the cave?” The local spirit said, “Those they love are persons who heat the cinnabar and refine the herbs; those whom they delight in are the 
Quanzhen Daoists.” 

“No wonder he changed into an old Daoist to lure my master away,” said Pilgrim. “Since this is the case, your beating will be deferred for the moment. You may leave, let old monkey himself catch 
them.” 

The various deities rose into the air and left. This Great Sage shook his body once and changed into an old adept. He was dressed as such: his head had 2 buns of hair; wore a clerical robe; his hand 
struck a bamboo fish; 9a Master Li" sash circled his waist. Reclining by the main road, he waited for the little fiends. In a while the fiends arrived; the Ape King released his tricks. In no time at all, the 
two little fiends came before him and Pilgrim stuck out his golden-hooped rod. Unprepared for this, one of the little fiends tripped on it and fell; only when he scrambled up did he see Pilgrim. “Villainy! 
Villainy!” he began to cry. “If our Great Kings didn’t have a special fondness for your kind of people, I’d scrap with you.” 

“What's there to scrap about?” said Pilgrim, smiling amiably. “A Daoist meeting a Daoist, we're all in the same family!” 

“Why did you lie here,” said the fiend, “and cause me to stumble?” Pilgrim said, “A Daoist youth like you, when you run into an aged Daoist like me, must take a fall — it’s a sort of substitute for presenting 
an introductory gift.” The fiend said, “Our Great Kings only demand a few ounces of silver as introductory gifts. Why do you insist on someone taking a fall? This must be the custom of another region, 
and you can’t possibly be a Daoist from around here.” 

“Indeed, I’m not,” said Pilgrim, “for | came from Penglai Mountain.” 

The fiend said, “But Penglai is an island in the territory of mortals.” 

“If I'm not a mortal,” said Pilgrim, “who's a mortal?” 

Turing all at once from anger to delight, the fiend approached him and said, “Old Mortal, Old Mortal! We're of fleshly eyes and mortal stock, and that’s why we can’t recognise you. Our words have 
offended you. Please pardon us.” 

“Ill not blame you,” said Pilgrim, “for as the saying goes, ‘The mortal frame does not tread on ground profane.’ How could you know? The reason why I’ve landed on your mountain today is that | want 
to enlighten a good man to become a mortal, to understand the Dao. Which of you is willing to follow me?” Sly Devil said, “Master, I'll follow you,” while Wily Worm also said, “Master, I'll follow you.” 
Though he knew the reason already, Pilgrim nonetheless asked, “Where did you two come from?” 

“From the Lotus-Flower Cave,” said one of the fiends. 

“Where are you going?” 

“Our Great Kings have ordered us,” said the fiend, “to go capture Pilgrim Sun.” 

“To capture whom?” asked Pilgrim. “To capture Pilgrim Sun,” said the fiend again. Pilgrim said, “Could it be Pilgrim Sun, the one who's following the Tang Monk to seek scriptures?” 

“Exactly, exactly,” said the fiend. “You know him too?” 

“That monkey is rather rude,” said Pilgrim. “I know him all right, and I’m a little mad at him. I'll go with you to capture him; we'll consider this my assisting you in making merit.” 

“Master,” said the fiend, “no need for you to assist us in making merit. Our Second Great King has considerable magic powers: he summoned three huge mountains and had that monkey pinned down, 
unable to move even an inch. He then told us to come with treasures to store him up.” 

“What kind of treasures?” asked Pilgrim. Sly Devil said, “Mine is a red gourd while his is a pure jade vase.” 

“How do you plan to store him up?” asked Pilgrim. The little fiend replied, “Turn my treasure upside down so that its mouth will face the earth and its bottom the sky. I'll then call him once, and if he 
answers me, he will at once be sucked inside. I'll then seal the treasure with a tape bearing the words, ‘May Laozi Act Quickly According to This Command.’ In one and three-quarter hours, he will be 
reduced to pus.” 

When Pilgrim heard that, he said to himself in secret alarm, “Formidable! Formidable! Previously the Day Sentinel said that they had five treasures, and these must be two of them. | wonder what sort 
of things are the other three?” He smiled and said to the two of them, “Could you two permit me to have a look at the treasures?” Completely unsuspecting, the little fiends took out from their sleeves 
at once the two treasures and presented them to Pilgrim with two hands. When Pilgrim saw them, he was delighted, saying to himself, “Marvellous things! Marvellous things! I'd wag my tail once and 
leap clear of this place, making off with the treasures as if they had been presented to me as gifts.” He then thought to himself, “It’s no good! | can rob them of these things but old monkey's reputation 
will be ruined. This is nothing but committing robbery in broad daylight.” He therefore returned the treasures to the fiends, saying, “You've not seen my treasure yet.” One of the fiends said, “What kind 
of treasure does Master have? Would you permit us profane people to have a look, to ward off calamities, perhaps?” 

Dear Pilgrim! Stretching forth his hand, he pulled off a piece of hair from his tail and gave it a squeeze, crying “Change!” It changed at once into a huge red gourd of purple gold, about seventeen inches 
tall. He took it out from his waist, saying, “You want to see my gourd?” Having received it in his hands and examined it, Wily Worm said, “Master, your gourd is big, and it has nice form. It’s good to look 
at all right but I’m afraid that it's not good to use.” 

“What do you mean by not well to use?” asked Pilgrim. The fiend said, “Each one of our treasures can store up to a thousand people.” 

“So,” said Pilgrim, “yours can store up people. What's so rare about that? This gourd of mine can even store up Heaven!” 

“It can?” said the fiend. “Indeed,” said Pilgrim. “I’m afraid you're lying,” said the fiend. “Store it up for us to see and we'll believe you; otherwise, we'll never believe you.” 

“If Heaven irritates me,” said Pilgrim, “I usually store it up seven or eight times within a single month. If it doesn’t bother me, I'll not store it up for as long as half a year.” 

“Elder Brother,” said Wily Worm, “a treasure that can store up Heaven! Let’s exchange ours with his.” Sly Devil said, “How would he be willing to exchange his with ours that can only store up people?” 
“If he’s unwilling,” said Wily Worm, “we'll make it good with our vase also.” 

Secretly delighted, Pilgrim thought to himself: A gourd repays a gourd, we add a vase of jade. Two things exchanged for one: that’s what | call fair trade! 

He therefore went forward and caught hold of Wily Worm, saying, “If | store up Heaven, you'll trade with me?” 

“If you do, yes,” said the fiend. “If | don’t, I'll be your son!” 

“All right! All right!” said Pilgrim. “I'll store it up for you to see.” 

Dear Great Sage! Saluting his head and making the magic sign, he recited a spell that brought him a god of Day Patrol, a god of Night Patrol, and the Guardians of Five Quarters, to whom he gave the 
following instruction: “Report for me at once to the Jade Emperor and say that old monkey has embraced the right fruit to accompany the Tang Monk to acquire scriptures in the Western Heaven. Our 
path has been blocked at a tall mountain where my master encounters grievous calamity. I’d like to entice certain demons who possess some treasures, into trading with me. | therefore beseech His 
Majesty with due reverence to let old monkey borrow Heaven to be stored up for half an hour so that | may accomplish my task. If he but utters half a ‘No,’ I'll ascend to the Divine Mists Hall and start 
a war!” 

The deities went past the South Heaven Gate and stood below the Hall of Divine Mists to report to the Jade Emperor. “This impudent ape!” said the Jade Emperor. “He still speaks in such an unruly 
manner. Some time ago when Guanyin came to inform us that he had been released to accompany the Tang Monk, we even sent him the Guardians of the Five Quarters and the Four Sentinels to 
take turns ministering to him. Now he even wants to borrow Heaven to be stored up! How could Heaven be stored up?” Hardly had he finished speaking when the Third Prince Nata stepped forward 
from the ranks and memorialised, saying, “Your Majesty, Heaven, too, can be stored up.” 

“How?” inquired the Jade Emperor. 

Nata said, “When Chaos first divided, that which was pure and light became Heaven, and that which was heavy and turbid became Earth. Heaven, then, is a round mass of clear ether that nonetheless 
supports the Jasper Palace and the Heavenly ramparts. In principle, therefore, Heaven cannot be stored up. However, the matter of Pilgrim Sun’s accompaniment of the Tang Monk journeying westward 
to acquire scriptures is itself a source of blessings great as Mount Tai and deep as the sea. Today we'd help him to succeed.” 

The Jade Emperor said, “How would our worthy minister help him?” 

“Let Your Majesty issue a decree,” said Nata, “and ask Zhenwu, the Lord of the North at the North Heaven Gate, to lend us his banner of black feathers that should then be unfurled across the South 
Heaven Gate. The sun, the moon, and the stars will be covered, and it will be so dark on Earth that people cannot see each other even if they are standing face to face. The fiends will be deceived into 
thinking that Heaven has been stored up, and that is how we may help Pilgrim to succeed.” The Jade Emperor gave his consent to this suggestion, and the prince received the command to go to the 
North Heaven Gate where he gave the account to Zhenwu. The patriarch at once handed the banner to the prince. 

Meanwhile, the Day Patrol God swiftly returned to the Great Sage and whispered in his ear, “Prince Nata has come to help you.” Looking up, Pilgrim saw auspicious clouds looming up: indeed a deity 
was approaching. He turned to the little fiends, saying, “I’m going to store up Heaven.” 

“Go ahead,” said one of them. “Why keep dragging your feet?” 

“| was just exercising my spirit and reciting a spell,” said Pilgrim. The 2 little fiends stood there wide-eyed and determined to find out how he was going to store up Heaven. Pilgrim gave the specious 
gourd a mighty heave and tossed it up into the air. Think of it: that gourd was changed from a piece of hair. How heavy it'd be? 

Lifted up by the mountain wind, it drifted here and there for at least 30 minutes before dropping down. Meanwhile Prince Nata at the South Heaven Gate flung wide the black banner and in 1 instant 
covered the sun, the moon, and all the planets. Truly the cosmos seemed dyed by ink, the world was made indigo. Astounded, the little fiends said, “It’s just about noon when we're talking. How’s it that 
it's dusk already?” 

“Heaven has been stored up,” said Pilgrim. “You can’t tell time! How can it not be dusk?” 

“Why is it so dark?” they cried. Pilgrim said, “The sun, the moon, and the stars are all contained inside. There’s no light outside. How can it not be dark?” 

“Master,” said one of the little fiends, “where are you speaking?” 

“Am | not in front of you?” asked Pilgrim. The little fiend stretched out his hand to try to touch him, saying, “I can hear you but | can’t see your face. Master where are we?” To deceive them further, 
Pilgrim said, “Don’t move. This is the shore of the Gulf of Zhili. If you stumble and fall into the sea, you'll not reach bottom even after seven or eight days.” 

“Stop! Stop! Stop!” cried the horrified fiends. “Release Heaven, please! We know now how it is stored up. If we fool around anymore and drop into the sea, we'll not get home.” 

Dear Pilgrim! When he saw that they took the whole thing for the truth, he recited the spell again to alert the prince who rolled up the banner and the sunlight of noon was seen once more. “Marvellous! 
Marvellous!” cried the little fiends, laughing. “Such fantastic treasure, if we don’t exchange for it, we’re certainly no better than bastards!” Sly Devil at once took out the gourd and Wily Worm the pure 
vase; both of them then handed the treasures to Pilgrim. In return, Pilgrim gave them the specious gourd. After the exchange, Pilgrim wanted to make certain that the bargain stuck. Pulling off a piece 
of hair from beneath his belly, he blew on it and it changed into a copper penny. “Young man,” he said, “take this penny and buy us a piece of paper.” 

“What for?” asked the little fiend. “So that | can draw up a contract with you,” said Pilgrim. “The two of you used your human-storing treasures to exchange with me a single piece of Heaven-storing 
treasure. | fear that you may not consider that quite fair and that after a few years you'll come to regret our deal. That’s why | want a contract for all of us.” 

“We don’t even have brush or ink around here,” said one of the fiends. “Why bother about writing a document? Let's exchange vows instead.” 

“What kind of vow?” asked Pilgrim. The two little fiends said, “We gave two human-storing treasures to you in exchange for one Heaven-storing treasure. If we ever regret our decision, may we be 
stricken with plague in all four seasons.” 


“Ill never regret mine,” said Pilgrim, smiling. “If | do, may | also be stricken like you.” After he made this vow, he leaped up and with one wag of his tail arrived before the South Heaven Gate where he 
thanked Prince Nata for unfurling the banner and lending him assistance. The prince then went back to the palace to report to the Jade Emperor and to return the flag to Zhenwu. Pilgrim meanwhile 
stood in the air and looked at those little fiends. 
034 

The demon king’s plotting entraps Mind Monkey; the Great Sage ever adroit, wangles the treasures 
Those 2 little fiends who took the specious gourd in their hands and, for some time, fought to examine it. Raising their heads, they suddenly discovered that Pilgrim had vanished. “Elder Brother,” said 
Wily Worm, “even a mortal would lie. He said that after we’d exchanged our treasures he'd enlighten us to become mortals. Why did he leave without even telling us?” 
Sly Devil said, “When you tally up the score, we’re the ones who have by far the greater gain. Why worry about his leaving? Give me the gourd. Let me store up Heaven just for practice!” 
He indeed tossed the gourd up into the air but it plopped down again immediately. “Why doesn’t it work?” asked a startled Wily Worm. “Could it be that Pilgrim Sun had changed into a false mortal and 
used a specious gourd to trade off our real one?” 
“Don’t talk nonsense!” said Sly Devil. “Pilgrim Sun is pinned down by those three mountains. How could he come out? Give it to me again. Let me recite those few words of the spell he said and see if 
it will store up Heaven.” Again the fiend tossed the gourd up into the air, crying, “If there is but half a ‘No,’ we'll ascend to the Divine Mists Hall and start a war.” Before he had even finished saying that, 
the thing plopped down again. “It doesn’t work! It doesn’t work!” shrieked the little fiends. “It’s got to be a fake!” 
As they were clamouring like this, the Great Sage Sun saw and heard everything in mid-air. Fearing that they might learn the truth if they played with the thing too long, he shook his body and retrieved 
the piece of hair that had been changed into the gourd. The 2 fiends were left with four empty hands. “Brother,” said Sly Devil, “give me the gourd.” 
“You're holding it,” said Wily Worm. “My God! How come it disappeared?” They searched madly on the ground and in the bushes; they stuck their hands into their sleeves and slapped their waists. But 
there was nothing to be found. Stupefied, the two fiends mumbled, “What shall we do? What shall we do? The Great King at the time gave us the treasures and told us to capture Pilgrim Sun. Not only 
have we not caught Pilgrim Sun but we've even lost the treasures now. How dare we go back to give our report? We'll simply be beaten to death. What shall we do? What shall we do?” 
After a while, Wily Worm said, “We'd better go.” 
“Where?” asked Sly Devil. “Never mind where,” said Wily Worm. “If we go back and say that we’ve no treasures, we'll lose our lives for sure.” Sly Devil said, “Don’t run away, let's go back instead. The 
Second Great King is ordinarily quite good to you; I'll put a little blame on you. If he is in the mood to be somewhat lenient, our lives may be spared; if not, we'll at least be beaten to death at home but 
we'll not be left dangling here. Let's go. Let’s go.” After they had discussed the matter, the fiends began their walk back to their mountain. 
When Pilgrim in mid-air saw them leaving, he shook his body again and changed into a fly to follow them. If he changed into a fly, you might ask where did he put those treasures? If he left them by the 
road, or even if he hid them in the grass, people could pick them up if they saw them, and all his efforts would have been in vain. No, he had to take them with him, carrying the treasures on his body. 
But a fly is no bigger than the size of a pea. How could he carry them? The treasures were just like his golden-hooped rod; they were also called compliant God-treasures. They would transform 
according to the size of the body: they could become large or small, and that was why even a tiny body like a fly could hold them. With a buzz, Pilgrim thus flew down and steadfastly followed the fiends 
till in no time they reached the cave. 
The two head demons were sitting there and drinking juice when the little fiends faced them and knelt down. Pilgrim alighted on the door frame and listened. “Great Kings,” said the little fiends. “Have 
you returned?” said the second demon, putting down his cup. “Yes,” said the little fiends. “Have you caught Pilgrim Sun?” he asked again. The little fiends began to respect, not daring to make a sound. 
The old demon asked again but they did not dare reply; all they did was to respect. Questioned repeatedly, they finally saluted themselves on the ground and said, “Please pardon your little ones for 
the crime of ten thousand deaths! Please pardon your little ones for the crime of ten thousand deaths! When we took the treasures and reached the middle of the mountain, we ran into a mortal from 
Penglai Mountain. He inquired where we're going and we told him that we're going to catch Pilgrim Sun. When the mortal heard this, he said that he, too, was mad at Pilgrim Sun and wanted to give 
us assistance. We told him that there was no need for his assistance and explained how our treasures could store up humans. That mortal also had a gourd most capable of storing up Heaven. Moved 
by vain hopes and illicit desires, we thought we'd exchange our treasures that could only store up people with his that could store up Heaven. Originally, we wanted to exchange gourd for gourd but 
Wily Worm decided to make good the deal by adding the pure vase. We'd no idea that his mortal object could not be touched by the hands of the profane. Just as we're experimenting with it, it 
disappeared completely with the man, too. We beseech you to pardon our mortal offence.” 
When the old demon heard this, he was so aroused that he bellowed thunderously, “Undone! Undone! This has to be Pilgrim Sun who masqueraded himself as a mortal to dupe them. That ape has 
great magic powers and vast acquaintances. | don’t know which clumsy deity has let him out, and he has wangled our treasures.” 
The second demon said, “Don’t be so angry, Elder Brother. | didn’t expect that ape head to be so insolent. If he has the ability, he can escape and that’s all right. Why did he have to wangle our 
treasures? If | don’t catch him, I'll never be a monster on this road to the West!” 
“How will you catch him?” asked the old demon. 
The second demon said, “We've five treasures; two are gone but we still have three others. We must make certain that Pilgrim Sun will be caught by one of these.” 
“Which three do we've now?” asked the old demon. 
“| still have with me the sword of the seven stars and the palm-leaf fan,” said the second demon, “but the yellow-gold rope’s kept at the Crush-Dragon Cave of the Crush-Dragon Mountain, the place of 
our aged mum. We'd now send two little fiends to invite mum to come to dine on the Tang Monk’s flesh, and tell her at the same time to bring that yellow-gold rope to capture Pilgrim Sun.” 
The old demon said, “Whom should we send?” 
“Not these useless creatures,” said the second demon and then he shouted to them, “Get up!” 
“Lucky! Lucky!” said the 2 of them. “We're neither beaten nor scolded. We're let go just like that!” 
The demon said, “Ask Hill-Pawing Tiger and Sea-Lolling Dragon who often accompany me to come here.” The two little fiends arrived and knelt down. “You must be careful,” instructed the second 
demon. “We'll be careful,” they replied. “You two must be cautious.” 
“Yes, we'll be cautious,” they replied. “Do you know where the Old Madam’s home is?” asked the second demon again. “Yes, we do,” they replied. “If you do, get there quickly, and when you reach her 
house, inform her reverently that she is invited to come here to dine on the flesh of the Tang Monk. Tell her also to bring along the yellow-gold rope in order that we may catch Pilgrim Sun.” 
The 2 little fiends obeyed and raced out of the cave; they did not know that Pilgrim on one side had heard everything clearly. Stretching his wings, he flew out of the cave, caught up with Hill-Pawing 
Tiger, and landed on his body. After they had gone for 2 or 3 miles, he was about to slay them when he thought to himself, “To kill them is hardly difficult but that Old Madam of theirs has the yellow- 
gold rope and | don’t know where she lives. Let me question them a bit first before | slaughter them.” Dear Pilgrim! He darted away with a buzz and allowed the little fiends to walk ahead for about 100 
steps. Then with one shake of his body he also changed into a little monster wearing a fox-skin cap and a tiger-skin kilt hitched up to the waist. Running up to them, he said, “You on the road, wait for 
me.” 
Turing around, Sea-Lolling Dragon asked, “Where did you come from?” 
“Dear Brother,” said Pilgrim, “you can’t even recognise someone from the same clan?” 
“You're not in our clan,” said the little fiend. 
“What do you mean?” said Pilgrim. “Take another look.” 
“You don’t look familiar at all,” said the little fiend. “We've not met before.” 
“Indeed,” said Pilgrim, “you've never seen me. | belong to the external division.” The little fiend said, “I've not met any officer from the external division at all. Where are you going?” Pilgrim said, “The 
Great King told you two to invite Old Madam to dine on the flesh of the Tang Monk as well as to bring along the yellow-gold rope to capture Pilgrim Sun. But he fears that the two of you’d not walk fast 
enough, and your love of play would delay this important enterprise. That's why he sent me along also to tell you to hurry.” When the little fiends saw that his words went straight to the bottom of the 
truth, they did not suspect anything, thinking instead that Pilgrim indeed was a member of the same clan. Hurriedly, they sprinted forward for eight or nine miles. 
“We've run too fast,” said Pilgrim. “How far have we gone since we left home?” 
“About sixteen miles,” said the little fiend. Pilgrim said, “How much farther do we’ve to go?” Pointing with his finger, Sea-Lolling Dragon said, “Inside the dark forest up ahead — that’s it.” Pilgrim raised 
his head and saw a large dark forest not far away, and he figured that the old fiend had to be within that vicinity. He stood still, allowing the other two little fiends to proceed; then he caught up with them 
and gave them a swiping blow with the iron rod. Alas, they were no match for the rod at all and were reduced instantly to two meat patties! Pilgrim picked them up and hid them inside some bushes by 
the road. Pulling off a piece of hair, he blew on it a magic breath, crying “Change!” It changed at once into Hill-Pawing Tiger while he himself changed into Sea-Lolling Dragon. The 2 specious monsters 
then proceeded directly to the Dragon-Crushing Cave to invite the old madam. This is what we call 72 transformations - what magic might! Ever adroit with things - such great ability! With four, five 
leaps, he bounded right into the forest. As he was looking around, he saw two stone doors half-closed nearby. Not daring to enter abruptly, he had to call out, “Open the door.” A female monster 
standing guard inside opened wide the door and asked, “Where did you come from?” 
Pilgrim said, “l came from the Lotus-Flower Cave of the Level-Top Mountain with an invitation for Old Madam.” 
“Inside,” said the female monster. 
When Pilgrim reached the second door, he stuck his head inside to take a look and found an old woman sitting squarely in the middle. She looked as such: snow-white hair all tousled and star-like eyes 
all aglow. Her face though ruddy has many wrinkles; she’s full of spirit though few teeth remain; charming - like the frosted chrysanthemum; rugged - like an old pine tree after rain. A scarf of fine-spun 
white silk wraps her head and bejewelled gold rings hang from her ears. After he had seen her, the Great Sage Sun did not go inside at once. Instead, he remained crestfallen outside the 2"4 door and 
began to weep silently. Could it be that he was afraid of her? Even if he were, he would hardly weep. Moreover, he was courageous enough to have bilked the monsters of their treasures and slain the 
little fiends. Why then did he weep? In times past, he could have entered a giant tripod of boiling oil, and even if he had been fried for seven or eight days, he would not have shed half a tear. It was 
however, the thought of the misery inflicted on him on account of the Tang Monk’s going to acquire scriptures that moved him to tears. He thought to himself, “If old monkey had displayed his ability 
and changed into a little fiend to invite this aged monster, there’d be absolutely no reason for him to speak standing up. | must respect when | see her! A hero all my life, I’ve only respected to three 
persons: | saluted to God of the Western Heaven, Guanyin of the South Sea, and four times to Master when he saved me at the Mountain of Two Frontiers. For him I've used up even my innards and 
my bowels! Ah, how much could a roll of scripture be worth? Yet, I’m forced to salute myself before this fiend today. If | don’t, I'll be discovered for sure. O misery! In the last analysis, Master’s in sad 
straits and that’s why I’ve to bear such humiliation.” When he came to that point in his thoughts, he had no choice but to race inside and kneel down, facing her. “Madam,” he said, “please receive my 
respect.” 
The fiend said, “My child, stand up.” 
“Fine! Fine! Fine!” said Pilgrim to himself. “That's an honest address!” 
“Where did you come from?” asked the old fiend. “From the Lotus-Flower Cave of the Level-Top Mountain,” said Pilgrim. “I received the order of the two Great Kings to invite Madam to go and dine on 
the flesh of the Tang Monk. You've also been requested to bring along the yellow-gold rope to catch Pilgrim Sun.” Exceedingly pleased, the old fiend said, “What filial sons!” She at once called for her 
sedan chair. “O my child!” said Pilgrim to himself. “Even monsters ride in sedan chairs!” From behind, two female monsters carried out a sedan chair made of fragrant rattan, on which they hung curtains 
of blue silk. The old fiend walked out of the cave and sat in the chair, followed by several little female monsters carrying toilet boxes, mounted mirrors, towels, and a perfume box. “Why did you all have 
to come out?” asked the old fiend. “I’m going to my own home, and you think that there will be no one there to serve me? We don’t need your big mouths there. Go back! Shut the doors and look after 
the house!” Those few little monsters indeed went back, and only two remained to pole the sedan chair. “What are the names of those two who have been sent here?” asked the old fiend. “He’s called 
Hill-Pawing Tiger,” said Pilgrim quickly, “and my name is Sea-Lolling Dragon.” The old fiend said, “Walk in front, the two of you. Shout and clear the way for me.” 
“This had to be my misfortune!” thought Pilgrim. “We've not yet acquired the scriptures but I’ve to be her slave at this moment!” He did not dare refuse; walking ahead, he shouted to clear the way. 
After they had gone for five or six miles, he sat down on a slab of stone to wait for the two carrying the sedan chair. When they arrived, Pilgrim said, “How about resting a while? Your shoulders must 
be getting sore.” The little fiends did not suspect anything, of course, and they put down the sedan chair. Walking behind it, Pilgrim pulled off a piece of hair from his chest and changed it into a huge 
biscuit that he held and began to munch on. “Officer,” said one of the chair carriers, “what are you eating?” 
“Im embarrassed to tell you,” said Pilgrim, “but we’ve walked all this distance to invite Old Madam, and she didn’t give us any reward. I’m getting hungry, and that’s why I’m eating some of our own 
dried goods before we move again.” 
“Please give us some, too,” said the carriers. Pilgrim said, “Come on. We all belong to the same family. Why do you ask?” Not knowing any better, the little fiends both surrounded Pilgrim to divide the 
dried food. Whipping out his iron rod, Pilgrim gave their heads a terrific blow: the one hit directly was reduced at once to pulp while the other who was swiped by the rod did not die immediately and 


was still moaning. When the old fiend heard someone moan and stuck her head out to look, Pilgrim leaped before the sedan chair and slammed the rod down on her head. Brains burst out and blood 
spurted in every direction from the gaping hole. Pilgrim dragged her from the sedan chair and discovered that she was a nine-tailed fox.’ “Cursed beast!” said Pilgrim, laughing. “Who are you that you'd 
be called Old Madam? If you’re addressed as Old Madam, you'd call old monkey as your great, grand ancestor!” Dear Monkey King! He searched and found the yellow-gold rope that he stuffed into 
his own sleeve, saying happily, “Those lawless demons may be powerful but three treasures now belong to him whose name is Sun.” He yanked off two pieces of hair (which he changed into Hill- 
Pawing Tiger and Sea-Lolling Dragon), and two more (which he changed into the fiends who carried the sedan chair). He himself changed into the form of the old woman and sat in the sedan chair. 
They then started out on the main road once more. 

In a little while, they reached the entrance of the Lotus-Flower Cave. Those little fiends which were changed from the hairs cried out in front, “Open the door! Open the door!” The little fiends inside who 
were guarding the door opened it and said, “Hill-Pawing Tiger and Sea-Lolling Dragon, have you two retumed?” 

“Yes,” said the pieces of hair. “Where’s Old Madam whom you're to invite?” 

“Isn't she there inside the sedan chair?” said the pieces of hair, pointing. “Stay here,” said one of the little fiends. “Let me go and report.” 

When the 2 head-demons heard the announcement, “Great King, Old Madam’s arrived,” they gave the order at once that an incense table be prepared to receive her. 

When Pilgrim heard this, he was delighted, saying to himself, “What luck! Now it’s my turn to be someone! When | first changed into a little fiend to go invite that old monster, | respected to her once. 
But now that I’ve changed into the old monster who is supposed to be their mum, they must perform the ceremony of four salutes. It may not be much but I’m reaping the profit of two heads respecting 
to me!” Dear Great Sage! 

He descended from the sedan chair and shaking off the dirt from his clothes, retrieved the four pieces of hair onto his body. The little fiends who stood guard at the door carried the empty sedan chair 
inside, and he followed them slowly from behind, mincing all the while to imitate the gait of the old fiend. When they went inside, the entire flock of monsters, old and young, all came to receive him, as 
drums and flutes were played harmoniously and curls of fragrant smoke rose from the Boshan urn.2 He arrived at the main hall and sat down, facing south; *the 2 head-demons knelt before him and 
respected, saying, “Mum, your children are saluting.” 

“My sons,” said Pilgrim, “please rise.” 

Bullseye 8 Rules hanging there on the beam, suddenly let out a guffaw. “Second Brother,” said Sand-monk, “this is quite marvellous! They hang you till you laugh out loud!” 

“Brother,” said 8 Rules, “I’ve a reason for laughing.” 

Sand-monk asked, “What reason?” 

“We're afraid,” said 8 Rules, “that when Madam arrived, we'd be steamed and eaten. Now | see that it’s not Madam; it’s the dear old thing.” 

“What dear old thing?” asked Sand-monk. 

“Ban-Horse-Plague’s here,” said 8 Rules, chuckling. 

Sand-monk said, “How could you recognise him?” 

“When he bent his back to return their greetings, saying, ‘My sons, please rise,” said 8 Rules, “that monkey tail of his flipped up from behind. I’m hung higher than you, and that’s why | can see more 
Clearly.” 

Sand-monk said, “Let’s not talk, let's hear what he has to say.” 

“Exactly, exactly,” said 8 Rules. 

Sitting in the middle, the Great Sage Sun asked, “My sons, why did you invite me here?” 

“Dear Mum,” said one of the demons, “for days your children have not had the opportunity to fulfil our filial responsibilities. This morning we managed to catch the Tang Monk from the Land of the East 
but we dared not eat him all by ourselves. We therefore invited Mum to come so that he might be presented live to you, and then he will be steamed as your food to prolong your life.” 

“My sons,” said Pilgrim, “I’m not at all keen to dine on the Tang Monk's flesh but | hear that the ears of one Bullseye 8 Rules are quite marvellous. Why don’t you cut them down and fix them up as 
appetizers for my juice?” Startled by what he heard, 8 Rules said, “Plague on you! Did you come here to cut down my ears? If | announce aloud who you're, it won’t sound very good!” 

Alas! This one careless statement of Idiot at once unmasked the transformation of the Monkey King. Just then, a few little fiends who went to patrol the mountain and a few others who stood guard at 
the door all rushed in also, saying, “Great King, disaster! Pilgrim Sun has beaten to death Old Madam, and he disguised himself to come here.” When the head demon heard these words, he did not 
wait for any further report; pulling out his sword of seven stars, he slashed at the face of Pilgrim. Dear Great Sage! He shook his body once, and brilliant red light filled the cave as he made his escape. 
Such abilities made the whole episode fun and games for him. For truly he had mastered this secret: coming together he took on form but dispersing he became ether. So shaken were the inhabitants 
of the cave that the old demon’s spirit left him, and the various monsters bit their fingers and shook their heads. 

“Brother,” said the old demon, “take the Tang Monk, Sand-monk, 8 Rules, the white horse, and the luggage — take them all and return them to Pilgrim Sun. Let's shut the door on conflict.” 

“What are you saying, Elder Brother?” said the second demon. “You've no idea how much effort | spent in devising this plan to bring back all those monks. And now intimidated by Pilgrim Sun’s trickery 
you want to return them to him unconditionally. You've become in fact a person who fears the knife and shuns the sword. Is that manliness? Sit down and don’t be afraid. | heard you say that Pilgrim 
Sun had vast magic powers; though | met him, I’ve yet to wage a contest with him. Bring me my armour. Let me fight three rounds with him: if he can’t defeat me in those three rounds, the Tang Monk 
is still our food. If | can’t prevail against him in those three rounds, there’s still time then for us to return the Tang Monk to him.” The old demon said, “You're right, Worthy Brother.” He ordered at once 
for the armour to be brought out. 

After the various fiends hauled out his armour, the second demon suited up himself properly and walked out the door, holding the treasure sword. “Pilgrim Sun,” he cried, “where have you gone to?” At 
the time the Great Sage had already reached the edge of the clouds. When he heard his name called, he turned quickly and saw that it was the second demon. He was dressed in a phoenix helmet 
whiter than snow and an armour made of bright Persian steel. The belt on his waist is dragon’s tendon. Plum-flower shaped gaiters top his goat-skin boots. He seems the living Lord of Libation Stream; 
4 looks no different from Mighty Spirit. [He holds in his hands the sword of 7 stars, stern and imposing in a towering rage. “Pilgrim Sun,” cried the 2"4 demon, “give us back quickly our mum and treasures. 
I'll let you and the Tang Monk go to acquire scriptures.” 

Unable to contain himself any longer, the Great Sage roared, “This impudent monster! You’ve made a mistake in thinking that your Grandpa Sun will let you go so easily! Return at once my master, my 
younger brothers, the white horse, our luggage, and give us moreover some travel money for us to take on our road to the West. If half a no leaks through your teeth, you might as well hang yourself 
with rope. That'll save your Grandpa from having to raise his hands.” When the second demon heard these words, he leaped up to the clouds swiftly and stabbed with the sword. Pilgrim met him face 
to face with the uplifted iron rod, and it was some battle between the 2 of them in mid-air. The chess master finding his match, the general meeting a good warrior — finding his match the chess master 
can’t suppress his joy; meeting a good warrior the general must apply himself. When those 2 divine fighters come together, they seem like tigers brawling on South Mountain or dragons striving in North 
Sea. As dragons strive, their scales sparkle; when tigers brawl, teeth and claws strike madly. Teeth and claws strike madly like silver hooks and sparkling scales upturn like iron leaves. This 1 overall 
uses 1000 ways to attack; that 1 back and forth does not let up for half a moment. The golden-hooped rod is only 3/10s of an inch from the head. The 7-stars sword poised at the heart, needs only 1 
thrust. The imposing air of this 1 chills the Great Dipper; the angry breaths of that 1 menace like thunder. The 2 of them fought for 30 rounds but no decision was reached. Secretly delighted, Pilgrim 
said to himself, “This lawless monster manages to withstand the iron rod of old monkey. But I’ve already acquired three of his treasures. If | continue to fight bitterly like this with him, won't it just delay 
what | want to do? Perhaps I'd use the gourd or the pure vase to store him up.” He then thought further, “No good! No good! The proverb says, Each thing’s its master. If | call him and he doesn’t 
answer, it'll just defeat my purpose. Let me use the yellow-gold rope to lasso his head.” Dear Great Sage! 

He used 1 hand to wield his iron rod while his other hand whipped out the rope and lassoed the demon’s head. The demon however, knew Tight-Rope and Loose-Rope Spells. If the rope had bound 
another person, he would recite the Tight-Rope Spell and that person would be unable to escape. But if the rope had been fastened on 1 of his own, he would recite the Loose-Rope Spell and no harm 
would come to the person. When he saw, then, that it was his own treasure, he recited at once the Loose-Rope Spell; the rope loosened itself and he came out of the noose. Taking the rope, he threw 
it at Pilgrim instead and it caught hold of the Great Sage instantly. The Great Sage was about to exercise his magic of thinning the body when the demon recited the Tight-Rope Spell and it had him 
firmly bound. It was impossible for him to escape, for when the rope was drawn down to his neck, one end of it changed into a gold ring tightly enclosing him. The fiend then gave the rope a tug and 
pulled Pilgrim down before he gave that bald head seven or eight blows with the sword. The skin on Pilgrim’s head did not even redden at all. “This monkey's,” said the demon, “quite a hard head! I'll 
hack at you no more. Let me take you back to the cave first before | hit you again. But you'd better return my other two treasures right now.” 

“What treasures I’ve taken from you,” asked Pilgrim, “that you’d ask me for them?” 

The demon searched Pilgrim carefully and found both the gourd and the vase. Using the rope as a leash, he brought Pilgrim back to the cave, saying, “Elder brother, I've caught him.” 

The old demon said, “Whom did you catch?” 

“Pilgrim Sun!” said the second demon. “Come and look! Come and look!” 

The old demon took one look and recognised that it was indeed Pilgrim. He smiled happily and said, “It's he! It's he! Tie him up with a long rope to the pillar just for fun.” 

They indeed had Pilgrim tied to a pillar, after which the two demons went to the hall in the back to drink. As the Great Sage was crawling around beneath the pillar, he was seen by 8 Rules. Hanging 
on the beam, Idiot laughed loudly, saying, “Elder Brother, you can’t quite manage to eat my ears!” 

“Idiot,” said Pilgrim, “are you comfortably hung up there? I'll get out right now, and you can be certain that I'll rescue all of you.” 

“Aren't you ashamed of yourself?” asked 8 Rules. “You can’t even escape yourself, and you want to rescue others. O, let it be, let it be! Master and disciples might as well die together so that we’d ask 
for our way in the Region of Darkness.” Pilgrim said, “Stop babbling nonsense! You watch me leave here.” 

“Ill see how you leave here,” said 8 Rules. Though the Great Sage was talking to 8 Rules, his eyes were fixed on those two demons. He saw that they were drinking inside, and there were a few little 
fiends running madly back and forth to bring in the dishes and to pour juice. When their guard lapsed shortly and no one stood near the Great Sage, he at once exercised his divine powers. Slipping 
out his rod, he blew on it, saying, “Change!” and it changed instantly into a file of pure steel. Gripping the gold ring on his neck, he filed it through with four or five strokes and freed himself by pulling 
the ring apart. Yanking off a piece of hair, he commanded it to change into a specious form of himself tied to the pillar; his true self however, changed with one shake of the body into a little monster 
and stood to one side. 

“Bad news! Bad news!” cried 8 Rules once more on the beam. “The one tied up is a false product. The one hanging is genuine.” 

Putting down his cup, the old demon asked, “What's that Bullseye 8 Rules yelling about?” Pilgrim who had changed into a little monster, went forward to say, “Bullseye Eight Rules is trying to persuade 
Pilgrim Sun to escape by transformation but Sun isn’t willing. That's why Bullseye is hollering.” 

“And we say that Bullseye 8 Rules is without guile!” said the second demon. “Now | see what a sneak he is! He should have his mouth caned twenty times.” 

Pilgrim indeed went to get a cane for the beating. “You’d better hit me lightly,” said 8 Rules. “If the strokes are even slightly heavy, I'll yell again that | recognise you.” 

Pilgrim said, “It’s for the sake of all of you that old monkey's undergone the transformation. Why did you’ve to let the truth leak out? All the monster-spirits of this cave can’t recognise me. Why does it 
have to be you who can recognise me?” 

“Though you've changed your features,” said 8 Rules, “your ass hasn’t been changed! Aren't those two patches of red still on your buttocks? That's why | can recognise you.” Pilgrim slipped out to the 
kitchen and wiped some soot off the pots to blacken his buttocks before returning to the front. When 8 Rules saw him, he said, chuckling, “This monkey must've gone somewhere to mess around so 
that he has now come back with a black ass!” 

Pilgrim still remained standing there for he wanted to steal their treasures. Indeed a clever person, he walked up the hall and half-knelt to the fiend, saying, “Great King, look how that Pilgrim Sun is 
crawling all over the pillar. The yellow-gold rope, | fear, may be ruined by all that rubbing and stretching. We'd get something thicker to tie him up.” 

“You're right,” said the old demon. 

He took off a belt with a lion buckle from his own waist to hand to Pilgrim. Taking the belt, Pilgrim fastened his false form to the pillar but the rope he stuffed instantly into his own sleeve. Then he pulled 
off another piece of hair that with one blow of his breath he changed into a fake yellow-gold rope, and which he presented with both hands to the fiend. Eager only for his juice, the fiend did not bother 
to examine it before putting it away. This is what we mean by the Great Sage, ever versatile, displays his skills: the hair is now exchanged for the golden rope. As soon as he had acquired this treasure, 
he leaped out the door and changed back into his true form. “Monster!” he shouted. 

A little fiend guarding the door asked, “Who’'re you that you dare shout here?” 

“Go in quickly,” said Pilgrim, “and report to those lawless demons that a Grimpil Sun is here.” 

The little fiend indeed made the report as he was told. Highly startled, the old demon said, “We've caught Pilgrim Sun already! How is it that there is a Grimpil Sun?” 


“Elder Brother,” said the second demon, “Why fear him? The treasures are all in our hands. Let me take the gourd out and have him stored up.” 

“Brother,” said the old demon, “do be careful.” 

The second demon took out the gourd and walked out the door where he encountered someone who seemed to be an exact image of Pilgrim Sun but only a little shorter. “Where did you come from?” 
he asked. Pilgrim said, “I’m the brother of Pilgrim Sun. When | heard that you caught my elder brother, | came to settle the score with you.” 

“Yes, | caught him all right,” said the second demon, “and he’s locked up in the cave. Now that you’ve arrived, you want to fight with me, | suppose but I'll not cross swords with you. Let me call your 
name once. Do you dare answer me?” 

“Even if you call me a thousand times, I'll not be afraid,” said Pilgrim. “I'll answer you ten thousand times!” 

Leaping into the air with his treasure held upside down, the demon called out, “Grimpil Sun!” 

Pilgrim dared not reply, thinking to himself, “If | answer him, I'll be sucked inside.” 

“Why don’t you answer me?” said the demon. 

“My ears are a little stuffed up,” said Pilgrim, “and | can’t hear you. Call louder.” The fiend indeed shouted, “Grimpil Sun!” 

Squeezing his fingers together to do some calculations down below, Pilgrim thought to himself, “My real name is Pilgrim Sun but this Grimpil Sun is a fake name that I’ve made up. With the real name 
| can be sucked inside but how could it work with a false name?” He could not refrain from answering, and instantly he was sucked into the gourd that was then sealed by the tape. That treasure had 
no regard for whether the name called out was true or false: if one even breathed an answer, one would be sucked inside instantly. 

When the Great Sage arrived inside the gourd, he found only total darkness. He tried to push up with his head but to no avail at all, for whatever was stopping the mouth of the gourd was exceedingly 
tight. Growing anxious, he thought to himself, “Those two little fiends | met on the mountain at the time told me that if a man was sucked into either the gourd or the vase, he would be reduced to pus 
in one and three-quarter hours. Could | be dissolved like that?” He thought further to himself, “It's nothing. | can’t be dissolved! When old monkey caused great disturbance in the Celestial Palace five 
centuries ago and was refined for forty-nine days in the eight-trigram brazier of Laozi, the process in fact gave me a heart strong as gold and viscera hardy as silver, a bronze head and an iron back, 
fiery eyes and diamond pupils. How could | be reduced to pus in one and three-quarter hours? Let me follow him inside and see what he does.” 

The second demon went inside with the gourd, saying, “Elder Brother, I’ve caught him.” 

“Caught whom?” asked the old demon. The second demon said, “Grimpil Sun has been stored up in the gourd by me.” Delighted, the old demon said, “Worthy Brother, please take a seat. Don’t move 
the gourd. We'll shake it after a while and we'll lift the seal only if it swashes.” Hearing this, Pilgrim thought to himself, “If my body remains like this, how could it swash? I’ve to be reduced to liquid 
before the gourd can swash when shaken. Let me leave some urine here; when he shakes it and it swashes, he will certainly lift up the seal and | can then beat it!” But he thought again, “No good! No 
good! The urine can make the noise but my shirt will be soiled. I'll wait until he shakes the gourd, and then I'll spit out a lot of saliva. All that drippy mess will deceive him into lifting the seal, and old 
monkey can then escape.” The Great Sage made this preparation but the fiend was busy drinking and did not try to shake the gourd at all. Devising another plan to deceive them, the Great Sage 
suddenly cried out, “Heavens! My shanks have dissolved!” The demons did not shake the gourd, and the Great Sage cried out again, “O Mum! Even my pelvic bones are gone!” 

“When his waist is gone,” said the old demon, “he’s almost finished. Lift up the seal and take a look.” 

When the Great Sage heard this, he pulled off a piece of hair, crying “Change!” It changed into half a body stuck at the bottom of the gourd while his true self was changed into a tiny insect attached to 
its mouth. As soon as the second demon lifted up the seal, the Great Sage flew out at once and with a roll changed instantly again into the form of Sea-Lolling Dragon, that little fiend who was sent 
formerly to fetch the Old Madam. He stood to one side while the old demon took hold of the gourd and peered inside. Half a body was squirming down below, and he did not wait to determine whether 
it was genuine or not before he shouted, “Brother, cover it up, cover it up! He hasn’t been completely dissolved yet.” The second demon again taped on the seal, not realising that the Great Sage on 
one side was snickering to himself, saying, “You don’t know that old monkey is right over here!” 

Taking the juice pot, the old demon poured a full cup of juice and presented it with both hands to the second demon, saying, “Worthy Brother, let me toast you with this cup.” The second demon said, 
“Elder Brother, we've drunk juice for quite a while already. Why do you've to toast me with the cup now?” 

“It's no big thing perhaps that you caught the Tang Monk, 8 Rules, and Sand-monk,” said the old demon, “but you even managed to tie up Pilgrim Sun and store up Grimpil Sun. For making such great 
merit, you'd be toasted with many cups more.” When the 2™¢ demon saw how his elder brother sought to honour him, he dared not refuse but he dared not accept the cup with 1 hand either for he was 
holding the gourd with the other. Quickly passing the gourd to Sea-Lolling Dragon, he then received the cup with both hands. Little did he realise, of course, that Sea-Lolling Dragon was in fact the 
transformed Pilgrim Sun. Look at him! He waited on the demons with great attentiveness. After the second demon took the juice and drank it, he wanted to return the toast. “No need to toast me,” said 
the old demon. “Here, I'll drink a cup with you.” 

The 2 of them kept exchanging niceties like that for some time while Pilgrim, holding the gourd, fixed his eyes on them. When he saw them passing the juice cup back and forth without the slightest 
regard for what he was doing, he slipped the gourd into his sleeve and used another piece of hair to form a specious gourd exactly the same as the genuine 1. The demon took the gourd out of Pilgrim’s 
hands without bothering to examine it after presenting juice for a while. They sat down at their tables again and continued to drink as before. Having acquired the treasure again, the Great Sage turned 
and left, highly delighted and saying to himself: The goura’s still owned by the Sun family though this demon’s his wizardry! 


035 
Heresy uses power to oppress the proper Nature; Mind Monkey conquers deviate demons, bagging treasures 
His nature’s perfect: thus he knows the Way. Turning, he leaps clear of the net and snare. 
To learn transformation’s no easy thing, nor is it common to achieve long life. 
Luck changes him to things pure and impure; free of fated kalpas he moves at will. 
For countless aeons he is fancy-free — a ray divine fixed always on the void. 
The meaning of this poem subtly corresponds to the wonders of the Dao attained by the Great Sage Sun. Since he had acquired the true treasure from that demon, he concealed it in his sleeve, saying 
happily to himself, “Though that lawless demon tries so hard to capture me, his efforts are no better than the attempt to fish the moon out of water. But when old monkey wants to catch hin, it's as 
simple as melting ice over fire!” Hiding the gourd, he slipped out the door and changed back into his original form. “Monster spirits,” he shouted, “open the door!” A little fiend said, “Who are you that 
you dare make noises here?” Pilgrim answered, “Report at once to those old lawless demons that a Sun Pilgrim has arrived.” 
The little fiend dashed inside to make the report, saying, “Great King, there is a so-called Sun Pilgrim showing up outside our door.” 
“Worthy Brother,” said the old demon, deeply shaken, “that’s bad! We've stirred up a whole nest of pestilence! Look! The yellow-gold rope has caught a Pilgrim Sun while the gourd has stored up a 
Grimpil Sun. How can it be that there is another Sun Pilgrim? It must be that they have several brothers and they have all arrived.” 
“Relax, Elder Brother,” said the second demon. “This gourd of ours can hold up to a thousand people, and we’ve only one Grimpil Sun inside. Why worry about another Sun Pilgrim? Let me go out and 
take a look. I'll store him up also.” 
“Do be careful, Brother,” said the old demon. 
Look at that second demon! Holding the specious gourd, he walked out the door as resolutely and confidently as before. “Who’re you,” he cried, “that you dare make noises around here?” 
Pilgrim said, “So, you don’t recognise me! | lived at Flower-Fruit Mountain. My home: the Water-Curtain Cave. For disturbing Heaven's Palace | ceased to strive for a long time. Lucky to be freed of my 
woes, | left Dao and followed a monk to reach, obedient, Thunderclap, to seek scriptures and right knowledge. When | meet wild, lawless demons, | work with my mighty magic. Return my monk of 
Great Tang that we go West to see God. Our conflict will then be ended and each one can enjoy his peace. Don’t stir up old monkey's ire or your stale life will expire!” 
“You come over here for a moment” said the demon, “but I’m not going to fight with you. I’m about to call your name once. You dare answer me?” 
“If you call me,” said Pilgrim, chuckling, “I'll answer you. But if| call you, will you answer me?” 
“I call you,” said that fiend, “only because I've a treasure gourd which can store up people. What do you've that makes you want to call me?” Pilgrim said, “I, too, have a little gourd.” 
“If you do,” said the fiend, “take it out for me to have a look.” Pilgrim took the gourd out of his sleeve, saying, “Lawless demon, you look!” He waved it once and stuffed it immediately back into his 
sleeve, for he was afraid that the demon might want to snatch it away. 
When the demon caught sight of the gourd, he was greatly shaken, saying, “Where did that gourd of his come from? How is it that it is exactly like mine? Even if it grew from the same branch, there 
ought to be some difference in size or shape. How could they be exactly alike?” With complete seriousness, he said, “Sun Pilgrim where did your gourd come from?” Pilgrim, of course, did not know 
the history of the gourd but he turned the question around and asked instead, “Where did yours come from?” 
Not realising that it was a trick, the demon thought that it was an honest query and he proceeded to give a complete account of its origin, saying, “This gourd of mine came into existence during the 
time when chaos divided and Heaven and Earth were created. There was then a Supreme Primordial Old Patriarch,’ who through death changed himself into Niwa and took on her name. She melted 
stones in order to repair the heavens and save the mundane world. When she reached a crack in the northwest region at the base of the Kunlun Mountain, she discovered a strand of mortal creeper 
on which was formed this red gourd of purple gold. It is, therefore, something handed down by Laozi until now.” When the Great Sage heard this story, he at once used it as a model for his own account, 
saying, “My gourd also came from the same spot.” 
“How so?” asked the demon. “Since the division of the pure and the turbid,” said the Great Sage, “Heaven was incomplete at the northwest corner, and Earth was incomplete in the southeast corner. 
The Supreme Primordial Daoist Patriarch through death changed himself into Nuwa.? After she had repaired the heavens, she journeyed to the base of the Kunlun Mountain where there was a strand 
of mortal creeper on which two gourds had formed. The one I’ve is a male while yours is a female.” The fiend said, “No need to distinguish the genders; if it can store up people, it’s a good treasure.” 
“You're right,” said the Great Sage, “I'll let you try first.” 
Highly pleased, the fiend leaped into the air, held up the gourd, and cried, “Sun Pilgrim!” When he heard the call, the Great Sage replied in one breath eight or nine times without stopping but nothing 
happened to him at all. Dropping down from the air, the demon beat his chest and stamped his feet, crying, “Heavens! And we say that only human life has not changed in the world! Even a treasure 
like this is afraid of her mate: when the female meets the male, it ceases to be effective!” 
“Why don’t you put yours away,” said Pilgrim, laughing, “for it's old monkey's turn to call you.” Swiftly somersaulting into the air, he turned the gourd upside down and took aim at the demon, crying, 
“Great King Silver Horn!” Not daring to close his mouth, the fiend made his reply, and instantly he was sucked into the gourd that was then sealed by Pilgrim with the tape bearing the words, “May Laozi 
Act Quickly According to This Command.” Secretly pleased, Pilgrim said, “My child, you’re going to try something new today!” 
He descended from the cloud, holding the gourd, and headed straight for the Lotus-Flower Cave, every thought of his set on rescuing his master. The road on that mountain was pockmarked with 
holes, and he, moreover, was somewhat bowlegged. As he scurried along, the gourd was shaken repeatedly, and soon there came from within a loud swashing sound continuously. It swashes already 
as the Great Sage had a body which had been so thoroughly refined that he could not be dissolved speedily. On the other hand, the fiend might know some such paltry magic as mounting the clouds 
and riding the fog but he had not been completely delivered from his mortal constitution. The moment he was sucked into the treasure, he was dissolved. Pilgrim however, did not quite believe that that 
had been the case. “O my child,” he said, laughing, “I don’t know whether you're pissing or gargling! But this sort of business is most familiar to old monkey. Not until after seven or eight days, when 
you've become thin liquid, will | lift the cover to look. Why hurry? What's the rush? When | think of how easily | got out, I'd not spy on you for a millennium!” As he held the gourd and talked to himself 
like that, he soon arrived at the entrance of the cave. He gave the gourd a shake and it was swashing even more loudly. “This sounds like the rattle of a fortune-telling tube,” he said. “Old monkey 
should make an inquiry to see when Master can come out of this door.” Look at him! He shook the thing in his hand constantly while reciting, “The Classic of Change of King Wen, Great Sage Confucius, 
Master Zhou of Lady Peach-Blossom,} Master Ghost Valley.” 
When the little fiends in the cave saw that, they cried, “Great King, disaster! Sun Pilgrim has stored up our Second Great King in the gourd and he’s using that for fortune-telling now.” When the old 
fiend heard these words, he was so horrified that his spirit left him and his soul fled, his bones weakened and his tendons turned numb. He fell on the ground and began to wail, crying, “O Worthy 
Brother! When you and | left the Region Above in secret and found our lives in this mortal world, our hope was to enjoy together riches and glory as permanent lords of this mountain cave. How could 
| know that, because of this monk, your life would be taken away and our fraternal bond be broken?” The various fiends of the entire cave all began to wail aloud. 
When Bullseye 8 Rules, hanging there on the beam, heard the wailing of the whole family, he could not refrain from calling out, “Monster, don’t cry! Let Old bull tell you something. The Pilgrim Sun who 
arrived first, the Grimpil Sun who came next, and finally the Sun Pilgrim who came last — all three of them are in fact a single person, my elder brother. He is very versatile, knowing seventy-two ways 
of transformation. It was he who stole your treasure and had your brother stored up. Since your brother is now dead, there is no need for you to mourn like that. You'd clean up your pots and pans 


quickly and fix up some dried mushrooms, fresh button mushrooms, bean sprouts, bamboo shoots, soybean cakes, wheat glutens, wood ears, and vegetables. Invite us master and disciples for a meal, 
and we'll be pleased to recite for you once the Receive Life Thread.” 
Infuriated by what he heard, the old demon said, “I thought Bullseye 8 Rules was a guileless person but he’s actually most sassy. He dares to make fun of me at this moment! Little ones, stop mourning. 
Untie Bullseye 8 Rules and steam him until he’s soft and tender. Let me have a full stomach first, and then I'll go catch Pilgrim Sun to avenge my brother.” Tuming to 8 Rules, Sand-monk chided him, 
saying, “Isn't that nice? | told you not to talk so much! Now your talking means that you'll be steamed and eaten.” Idiot himself became somewhat alarmed but a little fiend then spoke up, saying, “Great 
King, it's not good to steam Bullseye 8 Rules.” 
“Infinite Light God!” said 8 Rules. “Which elder brother is trying to pile up secret merits? I’m indeed no good if I’m steamed.” Another fiend said, “After he’s skinned, he'll then be good to steam.” Horrified, 
8 Rules said, “I’m all right! I’m all right! Though my bones and skins are coarse, I'll be tender the moment the water boils.” 
As they were speaking, another little fiend came from the front door to report, “Sun Pilgrim is reviling us at our door!” 
“This fellow,” said a startled old demon, “abuses us because he thinks there is nobody here.” He then gave the order, “Little ones, hang up Bullseye 8 Rules as before, and find out how many treasures 
there are still in the house.” A little fiend who was the housekeeper, said, “There are three treasures yet in the cave.” 
“Which three?” asked the old demon. 
“The sword of seven stars,” said the housekeeper, “the palm-leaf fan, and the pure-jade vase.” 
“That vase is useless!” said the old demon. “It was supposed to store up anyone who answered when his name was called but the formula was somehow passed on to that Pilgrim Sun and now our 
own brother has been put away. I'll not use the vase; leave it here at home. Bring me the sword and the fan, quickly.” The housekeeper handed over the two treasures to the old demon who stuck the 
fan into his collar behind his neck and held the sword in his hand. He then called up about three hundred monsters, young and old, and told all of them to arm themselves with spears, clubs, ropes, and 
knives. The old demon himself also put on helmet and cuirass, covered with a flaming red silk cape. As the monsters rushed out the door, they lined up in battle formation, intent on catching the Great 
Sage Sun. Knowing by now that the second demon had been dissolved in the gourd, the Great Sage fastened the gourd to the belt around his waist while his hands held high the golden-hooped rod 
to prepare for combat. As red banners unfurled, the old fiend leaped out the door. He was dressed in his helmet’s tassel shimmered on his head and from his belt fresh, radiant colours rose. He wore 
a cuirass knit like dragon scales, topped with a long red cape like crackling flames. His round eyes opened wide and lightning flashed; wiry whiskers flared up like turbid fumes. His hand held lightly the 
seven-star sword, his shoulder half-hidden by the palm-leaf fan. He moved like clouds rushing past the ocean’s peaks; like thunder his voice shook mountains and streams. An awesome Heaven- 
defying warrior, leading many monsters, he stormed out of the cave. After ordering the little fiends to take their battle stations, the old demon shouted, “You ape! You're utterly wretched! You murdered 
my brother and broke up our fraternal bond. You're truly despicable!” 
“Monster, you're the one who’s asking for death!” replied Pilgrim, “Do you mean to tell me that one life of a monster-spirit is worth more than those of four creatures like my master, younger brothers, 
and the white horse? You think that | can bear the thought of their being hung up in the cave at this moment? That I'd agree to that? Bring them out at once and return them to me. You can add also 
some travel expenses and send off old monkey amiably. Then | might spare this cur-like life of yours!” The fiend of course would not permit any further exchanges; lifting his treasure sword, he slashed 
at the head of the Great Sage who met him with uplifted iron rod. This was quite a battle outside the entrance of the cave. Aha! The 7-star sword and the golden-hooped rod clashed, and sparks flared 
up like lightning bright; the spreading cold air brought oppressive chill as vast dark clouds concealed the peaks and cliffs. This one because of his fraternal bond would not let up a bit. That one on 
account of the scripture monk would not slow down one whit. Each one hated with the same kind of hate; both parties cherished such hostility. They fought till Heaven and Earth darkened, scaring gods 
and ghosts; the sun dimmed, the smoke thickened as dragons and tigers quaked. This one ground his teeth like filing down jade nails; that one grew so mad that flames leaped out his eyes! 
Back and forth they showed their heroic might and kept on brandishing both sword and rod. The old demon fought with the Great Sage for 20 rounds but neither could gain the upper hand. Pointing 
with his sword, the old demon shouted, “Little fiends, come up together!” 
Those 300 monster-spirits rushed up together and completely surrounded Pilgrim. Dear Great Sage! Not in the least afraid, he wielded his rod and lunged left and right, attacking with it in front and 
protecting himself in the rear. Those little fiends however, all had some abilities; the longer they fought, the more ferocious they became - like cotton floss sticking to one’s body, they tackled Pilgrim at 
the waist and tugged at his legs, refusing to be beaten back. Alarmed, the Great Sage resorted to the magic of the Body beyond the Body. He plucked off a handful of hairs from under his left arm, 
chewed them to pieces, and spat them out, crying, “Change!” 
Every piece of the hair changed into a Pilgrim. Look at all of them! The tall ones wielded rods, the short ones boxed with their fists, the tiniest ones grabbed the monsters’ shanks, and began to gnaw 
on them. They fought till all the fiends were scattered in every direction crying, “Great King, we're finished! We can fight no more! The mountain’s full of Pilgrim Suns!” 
The magic of the Body beyond the Body thus sent the flock of monsters into a hasty retreat: only an old demon was left in the middle, surrounded on all sides, sorely pressed but with no way to run at 
all. Terribly frightened, the demon switched the treasure sword to his left hand; with his right he reached behind his neck and pulled out the palm-leaf fan. Facing the direction of due south (that is the 
direction of fire) he made a sweeping motion with the fan from the left and fanned at the ground once. Flames leaped up instantly from the ground. The treasure could produce fire just like that. An 
unrelenting person, the fiend fanned at the ground for 7 or 8 more times and a fierce fire raged everywhere. Marvellous fire! The fire was neither the fire of Heaven nor the fire of a brazier; neither the 
wild fire on the meadows nor the fire inside an oven. It was a spark of spiritual light taken naturally from the 5 Phases. The fan also was no common thing in the mortal world, nor was it made by any 
human skill. It was a true treasure formed since the time chaos parted. When the fan was used to start this fire bright and brilliant, it was like the red bolts of lightning; clear and ablaze, it seemed mists 
iridescent. There was not even a strand of blue smoke, only a mountain full of scarlet flames. It burned till the summit pines became fire trees and cedars changed into lanterns before the cliff. The 
beasts of the caves, eager to live, dashed to the east and the west; the birds of the woods, zealous for their feathers, flew high and retreated wide. This divine, air-filling holocaust burned till rocks broke, 
rivers dried up, and all the ground turned red! When the Great Sage saw how ferocious the fire was, he, too became quite shaken crying, “It’s bad! | can stand it myself but my hairs are no good. Once 
they fall into the fire, they'll be burned up.” Shaking his body once, he retrieved all his hairs except one piece that he used to change into a specious form of himself, pretending to flee the fire. His true 
body, making the fire-resisting sign with his fingers, somersaulted into the air and leaped clear of the blaze. He then headed straight for the Lotus-Flower Cave with the intent of rescuing his master. As 
he sped up to the entrance of the cave and lowered the direction of his cloud, he saw a hundred-odd little fiends outside the door, every one of them with head wounds or broken legs with lesions and 
bruises. They were the ones injured by his magic of the Body beyond the Body, all standing there whimpering and in pain. When the Great Sage saw them, he could not suppress the savagery in his 
nature; lifting up the iron rod, he fought all the way inside. How pitiful it was that he should bring at once to nothing the fruits of bitter exercise to acquire human forms! They all became again old pieces 
of hair and hide! After the Great Sage had finished off all the little fiends, he raced into the cave with the intent of untying his master. Just then he saw again a fiery glow inside and he became terribly 
flustered crying, “Undone! Undone! If this fire is starting again even at the back door, old monkey will find it hard to save Master.” As he was thus in alarm, he looked again more carefully. Ah! It was 
not the glow of fire but actually a beam of golden light. Composing himself, he walked inside to have another look and found that the source of the glow was the pure mutton-jade vase. Filled with 
delight, he said to himself, “What a lovely treasure! This vase was glowing also when the little fiends took it up the mountain. Then old monkey got it, only to have it taken away again by the monster. 
It's hidden here and today it’s still glowing.” Look at him! He stole the vase at once and turned quickly to walk out of the cave, not even bothering to try to rescue his master. As soon as he came out 
the door, he ran into the demon returning from the south, holding the treasure sword and the fan. The Great Sage did not have time to hide himself, and the demon lifted his sword instantly to slash at 
his head. Mounting his cloud somersault, the Great Sage leaped up and vanished immediately. When the fiend arrived at his own door, he saw corpses lying everywhere, all the monster-spirits under 
his command. He was so stricken that he lifted his face toward Heaven and sighed loudly before bursting into tears, crying “O misery! O what bitterness!” For him a testimonial poem says: 
Hateful are the sly ape and the forward horse! 
The seeds divine who came to the world of dust for 1 erring thought of leaving Heaven, fell on this mountain and destroyed themselves. 
What bitter grief when flocks of birds break up! 
How tears flow when monster troops are wiped out! 
When'll the scourge end, the chastisement cease that they may return to their primal forms? 
Overborne by grief, the old demon wailed step by step into the cave; he saw that the furniture and other belongings remained but not even a single person was in sight. In this total silence, he became 
sadder than ever: as he sat all by himself in the cave, he placed his head on a stone table, his sword he leaned against the table, and the fan he stuck back into his collar. Soon, he fell into a deep 
sleep, just as the proverb says: Your spirit is full when you're happy; once dejected you tend to be sleepy! The Great Sage Sun turned the direction of his cloud somersault around and stood before the 
mountain, thinking again of trying to rescue his master. Fastening the vase tightly to his belt, he returned to the entrance of the cave to see what was happening. The 2 doors he found wide open but 
not a sound could be heard. With light, stealthy steps he slipped inside and discovered the demon sleeping soundly, leaning on the stone table. The palm-leaf fan was sticking out of his collar, half 
covering the back of his head while the sword of seven stars was placed against the table. He tiptoed near the demon, pulled out the fan, and turned at once to flee outside. The fan however, scraped 
against the hair of the fiend when it was pulled out, rousing him from his sleep. When he lifted his head to look and found that his fan had been stolen by Pilgrim Sun, he gave chase at once with the 
sword. The Great Sage leaped out the door and, having stuck the fan into his waist, met the fiend with both hands wielding the iron rod. This was a marvellous battle! The maddened demon king, his 
cap raised by angry hair wanted to swallow with one gulp his foe - but even that’s no relief! He reviled the monkey thus: “You mock me far too much! You took our many lives. You steal my treasure 
now. This time I'll not spare you, I'll see that you're dead!” 
The Great Sage rapped the demon: “You don’t know what's good for you! A student wants to fight old monkey? How’d an egg smash up a rock?” 
The treasure sword came, the iron rod moved: the 2 would no longer cherish kindness. Repeatedly a contest they waged; over and over they used their martial skill. Because of the scripture monk who 
sought at Spirit Mount a place, Bringing discord to Metal and Fire, the 5 Phases confused, lost their peace. They showed their awe-inspiring, magic power; kicked up dust and stones to flaunt their 
might. They fought till the sun was about to sink: the demon grew weak and retreated first. The demon fought with the Great Sage for more than 30 rounds; when the sky darkened, the demon fled in 
defeat and headed for the southwest in the direction of the Crush-Dragon Cave. Lowering the direction of his cloud, the Great Sage dashed into the Lotus-Flower Cave and untied the Tang Monk, 8 
Rules, and Sand-monk. After they were freed, they thanked Pilgrim while asking, “Where did the demons go?” 
“The second demon’s been stored up in the gourd,” said Pilgrim, “and he must be completely dissolved by now. The old demon’s defeated by me just now and he fled toward the Crush-Dragon Cave 
in the southwest. Over half of the little fiends of the cave have been killed by the body-division magic of old monkey and the rest who were defeated have also been wiped out by me. Only after that'd | 
come in here to rescue and free all of you.” 
Profoundly grateful, the Tang Monk said, “Disciple, you must've worked awfully hard!” 
“Indeed,” said Pilgrim laughing, “though all of you'd to bear the pain of being hung up, old monkey's been unable even to rest his legs! I'd to be on the go even more frequently than the postal messenger: 
coming in and getting out, there was never a moment's pause. Only after having managed to steal his treasures I'd defeat the demons.” 
“Elder Brother,” said Bullseye 8 Rules, “take out the gourd and let us have a look inside. The second demon, | suppose, must have been dissolved by now.” 
The Great Sage first untied the pure vase; he then took out the gold rope and the fan before he held the gourd in his hands. Then he said, “Don’t look! Don’t look! Just now he’d old monkey stored up 
and only after | deceived him into opening the lid by feigning some gargling noise did | escape. We mustn't therefore lift up the lid for he may still pull some tricks and escape.” 
Thereafter master and disciples happily searched the cave and found some of the monsters’ rice, noodles, and vegetables; after heating and washing some of the pots and pans, they prepared a 
vegetarian meal and ate their fill. They rested in the cave for the night and soon it was morning again. The old demon went straight to the Crush-Dragon Mountain and gathered together all the female 
fiends to whom he gave a thorough account of how his mum was beaten to death, how his brother was sucked into the gourd, how his monster soldiers were wiped out, and how his treasures had been 
stolen. The female fiends all burst into tears, wailing for a long time. Then the old demon said, “Stop crying, all of you. | still have with me the sword of seven stars, and | plan to go with all of you, female 
soldiers, to the back of this Crush-Dragon Mountain to borrow some more troops from my maternal relative. I’m determined to capture that Pilgrim Sun to exact vengeance.” 
Before he had even finished speaking, a little fiend came from the door to report, saying, “Great King, your Venerable Maternal Uncle from behind the mountain has led his troops here.” When the old 
demon heard this, he quickly changed into mourning garments of plain white silk and saluted to receive his visitor. The Venerable Maternal Uncle was the younger brother of his mum who went by the 
name, Great King Fox Number Seven. Because he had already received the report from some of his monster soldiers out on patrol that his elder sister was beaten to death by Pilgrim Sun who then 
changed into the form of his sister to swindle treasures from his nephew, and that there had been fighting for several days on the Level-Top Mountain, he called up some two hundred soldiers from his 
own cave to offer his assistance. He stopped first at his sister's home to find out whether indeed she had died. The moment he walked in the door however, he saw the old demon in mourning garments, 
and the two of them burst into loud wailing. After some time, the old demon knelt down to give a complete account of what had taken place. Growing very angry, Number Seven ordered the old demon 
to take off his mourning garments, to pick up his treasure sword, and to call up all the female monsters. Together they mounted the wind and the cloud, speeding toward the northeast. The Great Sage 
just then was telling Sand-monk to prepare breakfast so that they could journey after the meal when suddenly he heard the sound of the wind. Walking out the door, he found a horde of fiendish troops 


approaching from the southwest. Somewhat startled, Pilgrim dashed inside, calling to 8 Rules, “Brother, the monster-spirit has brought fresh troops to help him.” When Tripitaka heard these words, he 
paled with fright, saying, “Disciple, what shall we do?” 

“Relax, relax!” said Pilgrim, chuckling. “Give me all of his treasures.” 

The Great Sage fastened the gourd and the vase to his waist, stuffed the gold rope into his sleeve, and stuck the palm-leaf fan into his collar. Wielding the iron rod with both hands, he told Sand-monk 
to stand and guard their master sitting in the cave while he and 8 Rules holding the muckrake went out to meet their adversaries. The fiendish creatures ranged themselves in battle formation, and the 
one at the very forefront was the Great King Number 7 who had a jade-like face, a long beard, wiry eyebrows, and knifelike ears. He wore a golden helmet on his head and a knitted cuirass on his 
body; his hands held a square-sky halberd. ‘In a loud voice he shouted, “You audacious, lawless ape! How dare you oppress people like that! You stole our treasures, slaughtered our relatives, killed 
our soldiers, and you even had the nerve to take over our cave dwelling. Stick out your neck quickly and accept death, so that | can avenge my sister's murder!” 

“You reckless hairy lump!” cried Pilgrim. “You don’t know what your Grandpa Sun can do! Don’t run away! Take a blow from my rod!” The fiend stepped aside to dodge the blow before turning again to 
meet him with the halberd. The two of them fought back and forth on the mountain for three or four rounds, and the fiend grew weak already. As he fled, Pilgrim gave chase and encountered the old 
demon who also fought with him for three rounds. Then the Number Seven Fox turned around and attacked once more. When 8 Rules on this side saw him, he quickly stopped him with the nine- 
pronged rake; so, each of the pilgrims took on a monster and they fought for a long time without reaching a decision. The old demon shouted for all the monster soldiers to join the battle also. The Tang 
Monk who was seated in the cave when he heard earth-shaking cries coming from outside. “Sand-monk,” he said, “go and see how your brothers are doing in the battle.” 
Lifting high his fiend-routing staff, Sand-monk gave a terrific cry as he raced outside, beating back at once many of the monsters. When Number Seven saw that the tide was turning against them, he 
spun around and ran, only to be caught up by 8 Rules who brought the rake down hard on his back. This one blow caused 9 spots of bright red to spurt out; pity one spirit’s true nature going to the 
world beyond. When 8 Rules dragged him aside and stripped off his clothes, he found that the Great King, too, was a fox spirit. When the old demon saw that his maternal uncle was slain, he abandoned 
Pilgrim and attacked 8 Rules with the sword. 8 Rules blocked the blow with the muckrake; as they fought, Sand-monk charged near and struck with his staff. Unable to withstand the two of them, the 
demon mounted wind and cloud to flee toward the south with 8 Rules and Sand-monk hard on his heels. When the Great Sage saw that, he swiftly leaped into the air, untied the vase, and took aim at 
the old demon, crying, “Great King Golden Horn!” The fiend thought that it was one of his defeated little demons calling him, and he turned to give his reply. Instantly he was sucked also into the vase 
that was then sealed by Pilgrim with the tape bearing the words, “May Laozi Act Quickly According to This Command.” The sword of seven stars dropped to the ground below and it, too, became the 
property of Pilgrim. “Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, coming up to meet Pilgrim, “you've got the sword. But where’s the monster-spirit?” 

“Finished!” said Pilgrim, chuckling, “He’s stored up in this vase of mine.” When they heard this, Sand-monk and 8 Rules were utterly delighted. 

After they had completely wiped out the ogres and monsters, they went back to the cave to present the good news to Tripitaka, saying, “The mountain has been purged of all monsters. Let Master 
mount up so that we may journey again.” Highly pleased, Tripitaka finished the morning meal with his disciples whereupon they put in order the luggage and the horse and found their way to the West. 
As they walked, a blind man suddenly appeared from the side of the road and caught hold of Tripitaka’s horse, saying, “Monk where are you going? Give me back my treasures!” Horrified, 8 Rules 
cried, “We're finished! Here’s another old monster coming to ask for his treasures!” Pilgrim looked at the man carefully and saw that he was actually Laozi. Hurriedly he drew near and saluted saying, 
“Venerable Sir where are you going?” The old patriarch swiftly mounted his jade throne that rose and stopped in mid-air. “Pilgrim Sun,” he said, “return my treasures.” The Great Sage also rose into the 
air saying, “What treasures?” 

“The gourd,” said Laozi, “is what | use to store elixir while the pure vase is my water container. The treasure sword | use to subdue demons, the fan is for tending my fires, and the rope is actually a belt 
of my gown. Those two monsters happen to be two Daoist youths: one looks after my golden brazier while the other my silver brazier. | was just searching for them, for they stole the treasures and left 
the Region Above. Now you've caught them, this will be your merit.” 

The Great Sage said, “Venerable Sir, you’re not very honourable! That you’d permit your kin to become demons should make you guilty of oversight in the governance of your household.” 

“It's really not my affair,” said Laozi, “so don’t blame the wrong person. These youths were requested by the Nun from the sea three times; they were to be sent here and transformed into demons, to 
test all of you and see whether master and disciples are sincere in going to the West.” 

When the Great Sage heard these words, he thought to himself, “What a rogue is this Nun! At the time when she delivered old monkey and told me to accompany the Tang Monk to procure scriptures 
in the West, | said that the journey would be a difficult one. She even promised that she herself would come to rescue us when we encounter grave difficulties but instead, she sent monster-spirits here 
to harass us. The way she double-talks, she deserves to be a spinster for the rest of her life!” He then said to Laozi, “If Venerable Sir didn’t show up personally, I'd never have returned these things to 
you. But since you've made the appearance and told me the truth, you can take them away.” After receiving the five treasures, Laozi lifted the seals of the gourd and the vase and poured out two 
masses of divine ether. With one point of his finger he transformed the ether again into two youths, standing on his left and right. Ten thousand strands of propitious light appeared as they all drifted 
toward the Tushita Palace; freely they went straight up to Heaven’s canopy. 


036 
The Causes cease when Mind Monkey’s rectified; smash through the left side door to view the bright moon 
Pilgrim who lowered the direction of his cloud and presented to his master a thorough account of how the Nun requested for the youths and how Laozi took back his treasures. Tripitaka was deeply 
grateful; he redoubled his efforts and determination to go to the West at all costs. He mounted the horse once more; while Bullseye 8 Rules poled the luggage, Sand-monk took hold of the bridle, and 
Pilgrim Sun took up his iron rod to lead the way down the tall mountain. As they proceeded, we can't tell you in full how they rested by the waters and dined in the wind, how they were covered with 
frost and exposed to the dew. Master and disciples journeyed for a long time and again they found a mountain blocking their path. 
“Disciples,” said Tripitaka loudly on the horse, “Look how tall and rugged is that mountain. We'd be most careful, for | fear that there may be some demonic miasmas coming to attack us.” Pilgrim said, 
“Stop thinking foolish thoughts, Master. Compose yourself and keep your mind from wandering; nothing will happen to you.” 
“O Disciple,” said Tripitaka, “why is it so difficult to reach the Western Heaven? | remember that since leaving the city Chang’an, spring has come and gone on this road several times, autumn has 
arrived to be followed by winter — at least four or five years must have gone by. Why is it that we still haven’t reached our destination?” 
“It's too early! It's too early!” said Pilgrim, roaring with laughter. “We’ve not even left the main door yet!” 
“Stop fibbing, Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules. “There’s no such big mansion in this world.” 
“Brother,” said Pilgrim, “we're just moving around in one of the halls inside.” Laughing, Sand-monk said, “Elder Brother, stop talking so big to scare us. Where could you find such a huge house? Even 
if there were, you'd be unable to find cross beams that were long enough.” 
“Brother,” said Pilgrim, “from the point of view of old monkey, this blue sky is our roof, the sun and moon are our windows, the five sacred mountains our pillars, and the whole Heaven and Earth is but 
one large chamber.” When 8 Rules heard this, he sighed, “We're finished! We're finished! All right, move around some more and we'll go back.” 
“No need for this kind of silly chatter,” said Pilgrim. “Just follow old monkey and move.” Dear Great Sage! 
Placing the iron rod horizontally across his shoulders, he led the Tang Monk firmly up the mountain road and went straight ahead. As the master looked around on the horse, he saw some lovely 
mountain scenery. Truly the rugged summits touch the dipper stars and treetops seem to join the sky and clouds. Within piles of blue mist ape cries often arise from the valley; in the shades of riotous 
green one hears cranes calling beneath the pines. Howling mountain sprites rear up in the streams to mock the woodsman; aged fox spirits sit beside the cliff to frighten the hunter. Marvellous Mountain! 
Look how steep it is on all sides, how precipitous everywhere! Strange knotty pines topped by green canopies; dried, aged trees dangling creepers and vines. The stream surges, its piercing cold chills 
even the hairs of man; the peak shoots up, its eye-smarting clear wind makes one skittish. Frequently you listen to big cats roar; now and then you hear mountain birds call. Flocks of fallow deer cut 
through the brambles, leaping here and there; hordes of river deer seeking food of the wilds stampede back and forth. Standing on the meadow, 1 can see no traveller; walk in the canyons and there 
are wolves on all sides. It’s no place for God to meditate, wholly the domain of darting birds and beasts. With fear and trembling, the master entered deep into the mountain. Growing more melancholy, 
he stopped the horse and said, “O Wukong! Once | was resolved? to make that mountain trip, the king didn’t wait to send me from the city. | met on the way the three-cornered sedge; | pushed hard 
my horse decked with bridle bells. | searched steep slopes and streams to find scriptures; | scaled the peaks to bow to God. If myself! guard to complete my tour when may | go home to salute the 
court?” 
When the Great Sage heard these words, he roared with laughter saying, “Master, don’t be so anxious and impatient. Relax and push forward. In due time, | assure you that ‘success will come naturally 
when merit’s achieved.” 
As master and disciples enjoyed the mountain scenery while they walked along, the red orb soon sank toward the west. Truly no traveller walked by the 10-mile arbour but stars appeared in the 9-fold 
heavens. Boats of 8 rivers returned to their piers; 7000 towns and counties shut their gates. The lords of 6 chambers and 5 bureaus all retired; from 4 seas and 3 rivers fish-lines withdrew. Gongs and 
drums sounded on 2 tall towers; 1 orb of bright moon filled the universe. As he peered into the distance on the back of the horse, the master saw in the fold of the mountain several multi-storied buildings 
“Disciples,” said Tripitaka, “it’s getting late now and we're fortunate to find some buildings over there. | think it must be either a Daoist abbey or a Religious monastery. Let’s go there, ask for lodging for 
the night, and we can resume our journey in the morning.” 
Pilgrim said, “Master, you’re right. Let’s not hurry however; let me examine the place first.” Leaping into the air, the Great Sage stared intently and found that it was indeed a Religious monastery. He 
saw 8-word brick walF painted muddy red; doors on 2 sides studded with nails of gold; rows of tiered-terrace sheltered by the peak; buildings, multi-storeyed, hidden in the mount. Gods Alcove’ faced 
the Siddhartha Hall; the Morning-Sun Tower met the Great Hero’ Gate. Clouds rested on a 7-tiered pagoda and glory shone from 3 honoured gods. *The Beautiful 1 with Glory and Auspiciousness 
Platform faced the monastic house; Maitreya Hall joined the Great Mercy Room. Blue light exercised outside the Mount-Viewing Lodge; purple clouds bloomed above the Void-Treading Tower. Pine 
retreats and bamboo courts — fresh, lovely green. Abbot rooms and Zen commons — clean everywhere. Gracefully, quietly services were held. Solemn but joyful priests walked the grounds. Chan monks 
lectured in the Chan classrooms and instruments blared from poems halls. Udumbara petals dropped from the Wondrous-Height Terrace; Pattra® leaves grew beneath the Law-Expounding Platform. 
So it was that woods sheltered this land of the 3 Jewels and mountains embraced this home of a Sanskrit Prince. Half a wall of lamps with flickering lights and smoke; a row of incense obscured by 
fragrant fog. Descending from his cloud, the Great Sage Sun reported to Tripitaka saying, “Master, it's indeed a Religious monastery. We can go there to ask for lodging.” The master urged his horse 
on and went straight up to the main gate. “Master,” said Pilgrim, “what monastery is this?” 
“The hoofs of my horse have just come to a stop and the tips of my feet have yet to leave the stirrups,” said Tripitaka, “and you ask me what monastery this is? How thoughtless you're!” 
Pilgrim said, “You've, your venerable self been a monk since your youth and must've studied the Confucian classics before you proceeded to lecture on the religion Threads. You must've mastered 
both literature and philosophy before you received such royal favours from the Tang Emperor. There’re big words on the door of this monastery. Why can’t you recognise them?” 
“Impudent ape!” snapped the elder. “You mouth such senseless words! | was facing the west as | rode and my eyes were shortly blinded by the glare of the sun. There might be words on the door but 
they're covered by grime and dirt. That's why | can’t make them out.” 
When Pilgrim heard these words, he stretched his torso and at once grew to over twenty feet tall. Wiping away the dirt, he said, “Master, please take a look.” There were 8 words in large characters: 
Precious Grove Monastery built by the Imperial Command 
After Pilgrim changed back into his normal size, he said, “Master that one of us should go in to ask for lodging?” 
“Ill go inside,” said Tripitaka, “for all of you’re ugly in your appearance, uncouth in your speech, and arrogant in your manner. If you happen to offend the local monks, they may refuse our request and 
that'll not be good.” 
“In that case,” said Pilgrim, “let Master go in at once. No need for words anymore.” 
Abandoning his priestly staff and untying his cloak, the elder straightened out his clothes and walked inside the main gate with folded hands. There he found behind red lacquered railings a pair of 
Lightning-guardians"® whose molten images were fearsome indeed: 7 has an iron face and steel whiskers as if alive; 1 has bushy brows and round eyes that seem real. On the left, the fist bones like 
raw iron jut out; on the right, the palms are cragged like crude bronze. Golden chain armour of splendid lustre; bright helmets and wind-blown sashes of silk. Offerings in the West to God are bounteous: 
in stone tripods the incense fires glow red. When Tripitaka saw this, he nodded and gave a lengthy sigh saying, “If in our Land of the East there’re enough people who'd mould such huge Nuns with 
clay and worship them with fires and incense, this disciple would have no need to go to the Western Heaven.” As he was saying this to himself, he reached the second gate where he discovered inside 
the images of the Four Deity-Kings: The Upholder of the Nation, VaiSravana, Viridhaka, and Viripaksa. Each of them, stationed according to his position in the east, north, south, and west, was also 
symbolic of his powers to make the winds harmonious and the rains seasonal. After he entered the second gate, he saw four tall pines, each of which had a luxuriant top shaped like an umbrella. As 
he raised his head, he discovered that he had arrived before the Precious Hall of the Great Hero. Folding his hands with complete reverence, the elder saluted himself and worshipped; afterwards, he 
arose and went past a god platform to reach the rear gate. There he found the image of the reclining Guanyin who proffered deliverance to the creatures of South Sea.’ On the walls were carvings -— 


all done by skilful artisans — of shrimps, fishes, crabs, and turtles; sticking out their heads and flapping their tails, they were frolicking in the billows and leaping over the waves. The elder again nodded 
his head four or five times, sighing loudly, “What a pity! Even scaly creatures would worship God! Why is it that humans are unwilling to practice religion?” 

As he was thus speaking to himself, a worker emerged from the third gate. When he saw the uncommon and handsome features of Tripitaka, he hurried forward and saluted saying, “Where did the 
master come from?” 

“This disciple,” said Tripitaka, “was sent by the Throne of the Great Tang in the Land of the East to go to the Western Heaven and seek scriptures from God. It was getting late when we arrived at your 
honoured region, and | came to ask for lodging for one night.” 

“Please do not be offended, Master,” said the worker, “but | can’t assume responsibility here. I’m just a manual labourer in charge of sweeping the grounds and tolling the bell. There’s an old master 
inside who is the head of the household. Let me go in and report to him; if he wishes to ask you to stay, I'll come out to give you the invitation; if not, | dare not detain you.” Tripitaka said, “Sorry for all 
that inconvenience.” 

The worker hurried to the abbot chamber and reported, “Venerable Dad, there’s someone outside.” The monk-official arose immediately, changed his clothes, adjusted his Vairocana hat, and put on a 
cassock before he went to open the door to receive his visitor. “What man has arrived?” he asked the worker who pointed with his finger and replied, “Isn’t that a man there behind the main hall?” Bald- 
headed, wearing an Awakening-religion gown that was in shreds and a pair of sandals muddy and wet, Tripitaka was reclining by the door. When the monk-official saw him, he became enraged, saying, 
“Worker, you deserve to be flogged! Don’t you know that a monk-official like I'd come out and receive only the gentlemen from the cities who come here to offer incense? For this sort of a monk, why 
did you give me a phony report and ask me to receive him? Just look at his face! He can’t be an honest man! He has to be some kind of mendicant who wants to sleep here now that it’s getting late. 
You think I’m going to permit him to mess up our abbot chamber? Tell him to squat in the corridor. Why bother me?” 

He turned around and left immediately. When the elder heard these words, tears filled his eyes and he said, “How pitiful! How pitiful! Truly ‘a man away from home is cheap!’ This disciple left home 
from his youth to become a monk. | didn’t do penance while eating meat with wicked glee or read scriptures in wrath to soil the mind of Chan. Nor did | cast tiles and stones to damage God's hall or rip 
down the gold from an Arhat’s face. Alas, how pitiful! | don’t know which disciple it was that I'd offended Heaven and Earth, so that I've to meet unkind people so frequently in this life. Monk, if you don’t 
want to give us lodging, that’s all right. But why must you say such nasty things, telling us to go and squat in the corridors? I'd better not repeat these words to Pilgrim, for if | did, that monkey would 
come in and a few blows of his iron rod would break all your shanks. All right! All right! The proverb says, ‘Man must put propriety and poems first.’ Let me go inside and ask him once more and see 
what he really intends to do with us.” 

Following the tracks of the monk-official, the master went up to the door of the abbot chamber where he found the monk-official who, having taken off his outer garments, was sitting inside, still panting 
with rage. He was not reciting the Threads, nor was he drawing up any service for a family; all the Tang Monk could see was a pile of papers on a table beside him. Not daring to walk inside abruptly 
but standing instead in the courtyard, Tripitaka saluted and cried out, “Old Abbot, this disciple salutes you.” Somewhat annoyed by the fact that Tripitaka followed him inside, the monk only pretended 
to return the greeting, saying, “Where did you come from?” 

“This disciple,” replied Tripitaka, “has been sent by the Throne of the Great Tang in the Land of the East to go to the Western Heaven and seek scriptures from the Living God. | passed through your 
honoured region, it was getting late, and | came to ask for lodging for one night. Tomorrow, I'll leave before daybreak. | beseech the Old Abbot to grant me this request.” Only then did the monk-official 
get up from his seat and say, “Are you that Tripitaka Tang?” 

Tripitaka said, “Yes.” 

“If you’re going to the Western Heaven to acquire scriptures,” said the monk-official, “how is it that you don’t even know your way?” Tripitaka said, “Your disciple has never passed through your honoured 
region and that’s why he doesn’t know the way here.” 

“Due west of here,” he said, “about four or five miles is a Thirty-Mile Inn, in which there is also someone selling food. It will be convenient for you to stay there whereas it’s not convenient here for me 
to entertain a monk like yourself who has come from a great distance.” 

“Abbot,” said Tripitaka with hands folded, “the ancients declared that ‘A Daoist abbey or a Religious monastery all may be considered a lodge for a priest who has a claim for three percent of the food 
the moment he sees the temple gate.’ Why do you refuse me?” 

“You mendicant monk!” shouted the monk-official angrily. “All you know is how to cajole and wheedle!” 

Tripitaka said, “What do you mean by cajole and wheedle?” 

The monk-official said, “Remember what the ancients said? A tiger comes to town; each house will shut the door. Though no one’s bitten, its name’s already poor!” 

“What do you mean by ‘Its name’s already poor’?” asked Tripitaka. 

“A few years ago,” said the monk-official, “there was a group of mendicants who arrived and sat in front of our monastery gate. | took pity on their hardship when | saw how destitute they were, every 
one of them bald-headed and barefooted, shoeless and in rags. So | invited them into the abbot chamber, gave them honoured seats, and fed them a vegetarian meal. Moreover, | even gave each of 
them an old suit of clothes to wear and asked them to stay for a few days. How would | know that they could become so greedy for easy food and clothing that they would remain for seven or eight 
years, never giving a thought to leaving again? | didn’t mind even their staying but they indulged in all sorts of shabby activities.” 

“What kind of shabby activities?” Tripitaka asked. 

The monk-official said, “Just listen to my tale: idle, they threw tiles by the pale; bored, they pulled nails off the wall. In winter they fed fires with ripped window panes, leaving torn doors when hot on the 
road. They pulled banners to make leggings; gluttonous, they stole our turnips. From glass vases they often poured our oil, gaming by grabbing bowls and dishes!”2 

When Tripitaka heard these words, he said to himself, “How pitiful! Is this disciple that kind of spineless monk?” He was about to cry but he feared also that the old monk in the monastery would laugh 
at him. Swallowing his pride and his annoyance while wiping away his tears secretly with his robe, he walked out quickly and met his three disciples. When Pilgrim saw how angry his master looked, 
he went forward to ask, “Master, did the monks in the monastery strike you?” 

“They didn’t,” said the Tang Monk. 

“They must have done so,” said 8 Rules, “for if they haven't, why is your voice cracking?” 

“Have they scolded you?” asked Pilgrim. The Tang Monk said, “They haven't either.” 

“If they haven't struck you,” said Pilgrim, “or scolded you, why are you upset? You must be getting homesick.” 

“Disciples,” said the Tang Monk, “they say that it’s not convenient here.” 

“They must be Daoists here, then?” said Pilgrim, laughing. 

“Only a Daoist abbey has Daoists,” said the Tang Monk, raging. “There’re only monks in a monastery.” 

Pilgrim said, “You're useless! If there're monks here, they're the same as we. The proverb says, gathered in God’s assembly are all men of affinity. You sit here and let me go inside to look around.” 
Dear Pilgrim! Giving the fillet on his head a squeeze and tightening the skirt around his waist, he went straight up to the Precious Hall of the Great Hero, holding his iron rod. There he pointed at the 
statues of the three Gods and said, “You're actually idols moulded with clay and adorned with gold. You don’t possess one whit of efficacy inside! Or do you? Old monkey who is accompanying the 
Tang Monk to go to the Western Heaven and seek the true scriptures from God, has come here tonight specially to ask for lodging. You'd better hurry and announce my arrival. If you don’t put us up, 
my rod will smash the golden bodies and reveal your original forms of mud!” 

As the Great Sage was making his threats and intimidations, a worker in charge of vespers arrived with several sticks of lighted incense to be placed in the urn before the images of God. One snarl of 
Pilgrim sent him tumbling; when he scrambled up and saw the face, he fell down again. Stumbling all over, he fled into the abbot chamber and made the report, saying, “Holy Dad, there’s a monk 
outside.” 

“All of you workers deserve to be flogged!” said the monk-official. “I told you people before that they should be sent to squat in the corridors up front. Why make another announcement? One more word 
and I'll give you twenty lashes!” 

“Holy Dad,” said the worker, “this monk is not the same as the other one; he’s mean and fierce looking.” 

“How does he look?” asked the monk-official. The worker replied, “He’s someone with round eyes, forked ears, a face full of hairs, and a beak like the thunder god’s. He has a rod in his hands, furiously 
grinding his teeth to find someone to beat.” 

“Let me go out and have a look,” said the monk-official. 

The moment he opened the door, he saw Pilgrim barging in. It was a hideous sight indeed! A bumpy, scabrous face, a pair of yellow eyeballs, a sunken forehead, and long, protruding fangs — he 
seemed virtually an overcooked crab with meat inside and cartilage outside! So panic-stricken was the old monk that he slammed shut the door of the abbot chamber at once. Pilgrim however, rushed 
up to it and smashed it to pieces, crying, “Hurry up and clean out one thousand rooms! Old monkey wants to take a nap!” 

As he attempted to hide in the room, the monk-official said to the worker, “No wonder he’s so ugly! Talking big has caused him to end up with a face like that! Our place here, including abbot chambers, 
God halls, bell-and-drum towers, and the two corridors, has barely three hundred rooms. He wants a thousand for him to take a nap. Where are we going to get these rooms?” 

“Master,” said the worker, “I’m a man whose gall’s been busted by fear. I'll let you answer him any way you please.” 

Trembling all over, the monk-official said in a loud voice, “The elder who wants lodging, please hear me. It’s truly inconvenient for this small, humble monastery of ours to entertain you. Please go 
somewhere to stay.” 

Pilgrim transformed his rod until it had the circumference of a basin’s; then he stuck it straight up in the courtyard. “Monk,” he said, “if it’s inconvenient, you move out.” 

The monk-official said, “We've lived here since our youth; our grandmasters passed the place on to our masters and they in turn to us. We want to give it to our heirs. What sort of a person’s he that 
he'd so rashly ask us to move?” 

‘Venerable Dad,” said the worker, “we can’t muddle through like this. Why not move out? That pole of his is going to come smashing in!” 

“Stop babbling!” said the monk-official. “We've altogether five hundred monks here, old and young. Where’re we going to move to? Even if we do move out, we've no other place to stay.” 

Hearing this, Pilgrim said, “Monk, if you’ve no place to move, one of you must come out and be caned.” 

The old monk said to the worker, “You go out and take the caning for me.” 

Horrified, the worker said, “O Dad! With that huge pole, and you ask me to take the caning!” 

The old monk said, “As the proverb says, ‘It may take a thousand days to feed an army but only one day to use it.’ Why don’t you go out?” 

“Don’t speak of being caned by that huge pole,” said the worker. “Even if it just falls on you, you'll be reduced to a meat patty.” 

“Yes,” said the old monk, “let's not speak of falling on someone. If it remains standing in the courtyard, one can crack his head bumping into it at night if one forgets it’s there.” 

“Master,” said the worker, “if you know that’s how heavy it is, why you ask me to go out and take the caning for you?” 

After he asked this question, the 2 of them began to quarrel between themselves. Hearing all that noise, Pilgrim said to himself, “They really can’t take it. If | kill each of them with one blow of my rod, 
Master will accuse me again of working violence. Let me find something to strike at and show them what | can do.” He lifted his head and discovered a stone lion outside the door of the abbot chamber. 
Raising up the rod, he slammed it on the lion and reduced it to powder. The monk caught sight of the blow through a tiny hole in the window and, almost paralysed with fear, began crawling under the 
bed while the worker tried desperately to creep into the opening of the kitchen range, yelling all the time: “Dad! The rod’s too heavy! The rod’s too heavy! | can’t take it! It’s convenient! It's convenient!” 
Pilgrim said, “Monk, I'll not hit you now. I’m asking you, how many monks are there in this monastery?” Shaking all over, the monk-official said, “There are two hundred and eighty-five chambers back 
and front, and we've altogether five hundred certified monks.” 

“Go quickly and call up every one of those five hundred monks,” said Pilgrim. “Tell them to put on their long robes and receive my master in here. Then I'll not hit you.” 

“Dad,” said the monk-official, “if you'll not hit us, we'll be glad even to carry him inside.” 

“Go now!” said Pilgrim. The monk-official said to the worker, “Don’t tell me that your gall has been busted by fear. Even if your heart is busted, you still have to go and call up these people to welcome 
the Holy Dad Tang.” 

With no alternative at all, the worker had to risk his life. He dared not however, walk out the door but crawled out instead in the back through the dog hole from where he went to the main hall in front. 
He began striking the bell on the west and beating the drum on the east. The sounds of these 2 instruments soon aroused all the monks living in their quarters along the two corridors. They arrived at 
the main hall and asked, “It’s still early. Why do you beat the drum and strike the bell?” 


“Change your clothes quickly,” said the worker, “and line yourselves up to follow Old Master to go out of the gate in order to welcome a Holy Dad from the Tang court.” The various monks indeed 
arranged themselves in order to go out of the gate for the reception; some of them put on their cassocks while others put on their togas. Those who had neither wore long, bell-shaped gowns while the 
poorest ones folded up their skirts and draped them over both their shoulders. When Pilgrim saw them, he asked, “Monks, what kind of clothes do you've on?” 
When the monks saw how fierce and ugly he looked, they said, “Dad, don’t hit us. Let's tell you what we've on. The cloth’s donated to us by the families in the city. As we’ve no tailor around here, we've 
to make our own clothes. The style is called A Wrap of Woe.” 
Smiling silently to himself when he heard these words, Pilgrim guarded the monks and saw to it that each one of them walked out of the gate and kneeled down. After he respected, the monk-official 
cried out: “Venerable Dad Tang, please go to the abbot chamber and take a seat.” When 8 Rules saw what was happening, he said, “Master is so incompetent! When you walked inside just now, you 
returned not only with tears but you’re pouting so much that you looked as if two flasks of oil had been hung on your lips. Now, what sort of cunning does Elder Brother have that makes them respect 
to receive us?” 
“You Idiot!” said Tripitaka. “You don’t know what's going on! As the proverb says, ‘Even ghosts are afraid of nasty people.” 
When the Tang Monk saw them respecting, he was very embarrassed and he approached them, saying, “Please rise, all of you.” The various monks continued to respect, saying, “If the Venerable Dad 
could speak on our behalf to your disciple and ask him not to hit us with that pole, we'd be willing to kneel here for a whole month.” 
“Wukong,” cried the Tang Monk, “don’t hit them.” 
“I've not,” said Pilgrim, “for if | did, they would have been exterminated.” 
Only then did those monks get up; some went to lead the horse while others took up the pole of luggage. They lifted up the Tang Monk, carried 8 Rules, and took hold of Sand-monk - all crowded 
inside the monastery gate and headed for the abbot chamber in the back. After the pilgrims took their seats, the monks came again to do obeisance. “Abbot, please rise,” said Tripitaka. “There’s no 
need for you to go through such ceremony anymore, or your poor monk will find it much too burdensome. You and | after all are all disciples within the gate of God.” 
“The Venerable Dad,” said the monk-official, “is an imperial envoy of a noble nation, and this humble monk has not properly welcomed you when you reached our desolate mountain. Our vulgar eyes 
could not recognise your esteemed countenance, though it was our good fortune that we'd meet. Permit me to ask the Venerable Dad to tell me whether he was eating meat or vegetarian food on the 
way. We can then prepare your meal.” 
“Vegetarian food,” said Tripitaka. 
“Disciples,” said the monk-official, “this Holy Dad prefers vegetarian food.” 
Pilgrim said, “We, too, have been eating vegetarian food. We’ve maintained such a diet in fact even before we’re born.” 
“O Dad!” exclaimed that monk. “Such violent men would eat vegetarian food, too?” 
Another monk who was slightly more courageous, drew near and asked again, “If the Venerable Dads prefer vegetarian food, how much rice should we cook?” 
“You cheapskates!” said 8 Rules. “Why ask? For our family, cook a picul of rice.” 
The monks all became frightened; they went at once to scrub and wash the pots and pans and to prepare the meal. Bright lamps were brought in as they set the table to entertain the Tang Monk. After 
master and disciples had eaten the vegetarian dinner, the monks took away the dishes and the furniture. “Old Abbot,” said Tripitaka, thanking him, “we’re greatly indebted to you and your hospitality.” 
“Not at all, not at all,” said the monk-official, “we've not done anything for you.” Tripitaka asked, “Where should we sleep?” 
“Don’t be impatient, Venerable Dad,” said the monk-official. “This humble cleric has everything planned.” He then asked, “Worker, do you've some people there who are free to work?” 
“Yes, Master,” said the worker. The monk-official instructed them, saying, “Two of you’d go and get some hay to feed the horse of Venerable Dad Tang. The rest can go to the front and clean up three 
of the Chan halls; set up bedding and mosquito nets so that the Venerable Dads can take their rest.” 
The workers obeyed and each of them finished the preparation before returning to invite the Tang Monk to go take his rest. Master and disciples led the horse and toted the luggage; they left the abbot 
chamber and went to the door of the Chan halls where they saw inside brightly lit lamps and four rattan beds with bedding all laid out. Pilgrim asked the worker who brought the hay to haul it inside the 
Chan halls where they tied up the white horse also. The workers were then told to leave. As Tripitaka sat down beneath the lamps, two rows of monks - all five hundred of them — stood on both sides 
and waited upon him, not daring to leave. Tripitaka got up and said, “Please go back, all of you. This humble cleric can then rest comfortably.” The monks refused to retire, for the monk-official had 
given them this instruction: “Wait upon the Venerable Dad until he retires. Then you may leave.” Only after Tripitaka said, “I’m all cared for, please go back,” did they dare disperse. The Tang Monk 
stepped outside the door to relieve himself, and he saw a bright moon high in the sky. “Disciples,” he called out, and Pilgrim, 8 Rules, and Sand-monk all came out to wait on him. Moved by the bright, 
pure light of the moon — a round orb loftily hung to illumine the great Earth — and filled with longing for his homeland, Tripitaka composed orally a long poem in the ancient style. The poem said: 
The bright soul, mirror-like, hangs in the sky, her radiance pervades the whole, vast world: pure light fills jasper towers and jade halls; crisp air swaths an ice tray, a silver pan. 
10000 miles are all made luminous; her beams tonight are this year's brightest — like a cake of frost leaving dark blue sea or an ice-wheel hung on the jade-green sky. 
When 1 guest pines by an inn’s cold transoms or an old man sleeps in a mountain lodge, she comes to the Han court to shock grey hair'3 and hastens late makeup, reaching towers of Qin."4 
For her Yu Liang’s'® verse for History of Jin and Yuan Hong" stays up to sail his river skiff. 
Floating on cup rims she’s a cold, weak gleam; lighting the yard, she’s brilliant as god. 
By each window one can recite of white snow’’ and press in every house the icy strings.'® 
Now her pleasure comes to a monastery. 
When'll she join me to return back home? 
When Pilgrim heard these words, he approached him and said, “Master, all you know is that the moonlight fills you with longing for home but you don’t understand that the moon may symbolise the rule 
and regulations of nature’s many modes and forms. **When the moon reaches the thirtieth day, the metal [phase] in its yang spirit is completely dissolved whereas the water [phase] of its yin soul’s 
filled to the brim of the orb. This is the reason for the designation of that day with the term Obscure2° for the moon is completely dark and without light. It is at this moment also that the moon copulates 
with the sun and during the time of the thirtieth day and the first day of the month, it will become pregnant by the light of the sun. By the third day, one [stroke] 2'of the yang will appear, and two [strokes] 
of the yang will be born by the eighth day. At this time, the moon will have half of its yang spirit in the middle of its yin soul, and its lower half is flat like a rope. That is the reason why the time of the 
month is called the Upper Bow. By the fifteenth day, all three [strokes] of the yang will be ready and perfect union will be achieved. That is why this time of the month is called To Face.22 On the sixteenth 
day, one [stroke] of the yin will be born, and the second stroke will make its appearance on the twenty-second day. At that time half of the yin soul will be in the middle of the yang spirit, and its upper 
half is flat like a rope. That is the reason why this time of the month is called the Lower Bow. By the thirtieth day, all three [strokes] of the yin will be ready, and the moon has then reached the state of 
obscurity once more. All this is the symbol of the process of cultivation practiced by nature. If we can nourish the Two Eights?’ until we reach the perfection of Nine Times Nine, ‘then it will be simple 
for us at that moment to see God, and simple also for us to retum to our home. The poem says: 
After the 1 Quarter and before the Last: medicine well-blended, the outlook’s perfect. 
What you acquire from picking, smelt in the stove - determination’s fruit's Western Heaven.’25 
When the elder heard what he said, he was immediately enlightened and understood completely these words of realised mortality. Filled with delight, he thanked Wukong repeatedly. On one side, 
Sand-monk smiled and said, “Though Elder Brother spoke most appropriately concerning how the first quarter of the moon belonged to the yang and the last quarter belonged to the yin, and how in 
the midst of yin and in the middle of yang one could obtain the metal of water, he did not mention water and fire mixed - each to the other drawn — depend on Earth Mum to make this match. Three 
parties thus fused face no war or strife: water's in Long River, the moon’s in the sky.” 
When the elder heard that, his dull mind was again opened up. Thus it was that truth, grasped by the heart’s 1 hole, clears up 1000. Once you solve the riddle of no birth, you’re a god. Then 8 Rules 
walked up to the elder and tugged at him, saying, “Master, don’t listen to all their babblings and delay your sleep. This moon will soon grow round again after it wanes like me it’s born none too perfectly! 
At meals I’m disliked for too large a maw; | drool too much, they say, on bowls | hold. They’ve their blessings earned through cleverness; I’ve affinity stocked by foolishness. | tell you that fetching 
scriptures will end your three karmic paths. Wagging head and tail you'll go up to Heaven!” 
“All right, Disciples,” said Tripitaka, “you must be tired from all this journeying. You may go to sleep first, and let me meditate on this roll of scripture.” 
“Master, you must be mistaken,” said Pilgrim. “You left the family in your youth to become a monk. How could you not be completely familiar with all the scriptures you studied when you’re young? Then 
you received the command from the Tang emperor to go to the Western Heaven and see God for the True Canon of Mahayana. But at this moment, your merit has not been perfected, you've not seen 
a god, and you've not yet acquired the scriptures. Which roll of scripture do you want to meditate on?” Tripitaka said, “Since | left Chang’an, I’ve been travelling day and night, and | fear that the 
scriptures | learned in my youth might slip away from me. Tonight there’s a little time, and | want to do some reviewing.” 
“In that case,” said Pilgrim, “we'll go to sleep first.” The 3 disciples indeed lay down on three of the rattan beds. Closing the door of the Zen hall and turning up the lamp, the elder opened his roll of 
scripture and began to read and meditate in silence. Truly it was that first watch struck from a tower, human bustle ceased when fishing-boat fires by wild banks went out. He left. 


037 

The ghost king visits Tripitaka Tang at night; Wukong leads the child through wondrous transformation 
Tripitaka sitting in the Chan hall of the Precious Grove Monastery. He meditated for a while beneath the lamps on the Water Litany of King Liang’ and he read for a while the True Thread of the Peacock. 
Not until about the hour of the third watch did he wrap up the scriptures again in his bag. He was just about to get up and walk over to his bed when he heard the weird moan of a strong gust outside 
the door. Fearing that it might blow out the lamp, he tried hurriedly to shade it with the sleeve of his gown. When he saw the lamp flicker, he began to tremble but at the same time, he was overcome 
by fatigue and soon dozed off with his head resting on the reading desk. Though his eyes were closed, he still seemed to be half conscious, able to hear all the time the continuous sighing of the dark 
wind outside his window. What a wind! Truly it whistled and whiffled - swayed and scattered - whistled and whiffled as fallen leaves flew; swayed and scattered the floating clouds. Heaven’s stars and 
planets were all darkened; the whole Earth’s dust and sand were strewn afar. For a while it was fierce and mild. When mild, bamboos and pines beat out their pure rhymes; when fierce, waves of lakes 
and rivers heaved and churned. It blew till mountain birds grew restless, their voices choked, sea fishes had no peace as they tossed, and turned. Windows and doors fell off in both east and west halls; 
gods and ghosts glowered in hallways front and back. A god Hall’s flower vase was blown to the ground; the oil chalice tumbled and wisdom-lamp grew faint; the incense urn tumed over and ashes 
spilled out; the candlesticks were tilted as flames changed to smoke. Banners, sacred canopies were all awry. Bell-and-drum towers were shaken to the roots! 
In his dream the elder seemed to hear, after the wind had passed, a faint voice outside the Chan hall crying, “Master!” He raised his head in his dream to look and discovered a man standing outside 
the door who was soaked from head to toe. As tears rolled down from his eyes, he kept calling, “Master!” 
Tripitaka rose up and said, “Could you be a goblin, ghost, fiend, or a demon coming to mock me at the depth of night? I’m neither a rapacious nor a wrathful person but rather an honest and upright 
priest. Having received the imperial decree from the Great Tang in the Land of the East, I’m on my way to the Western Heaven to seek scriptures from God. I’ve three disciples under my command, all 
valiant men able to tame tigers and subdue dragons, heroic warriors capable of repelling demons and extirpating monsters. If they see you, you'll be reduced to powder and dust. Take note, therefore, 
of my compassionate intent and my mind which knows how to use skilful means.? Leave this place, go somewhere far away while there’s still time, and don’t come up to the door of our Chan hall.” 
Reclining firmly by the door of the hall, the man said, “Master, we’re not a demon or monster, nor are we a goblin or bogie.” 
“If you’re not that kind of a creature,” said Tripitaka, “why are you here so late in the night?” 
“Open wide your eyes, Master,” said the man, “and look at us.” 
The elder indeed fixed his gaze on his visitor. Ah! His head had on it a rising-to-Heaven cap; a green-jade belt he tied around his waist. He wore on his body a reddish brown robe with dancing phoenixes 
and flying dragons; his feet trod on a pair of carefree boots of embroidered cloud pattern; hands held a white jade token adorned with planets and stars. His face seemed the mortal King of Tai Mountain; 
form was like the civilised Lord Wenchang. *When Tripitaka saw this figure, he paled with fright and hurriedly saluted low before his visitor shouting, “Which dynasty do you belong to, Your Majesty? 
Please take a seat.” He then tried to take hold of his visitor's hands, only to find that he succeeded in grasping nothing but thin air. Spinning around, he sat down and looked: there was the man again. 
The elder asked once more, “Your Majesty, in what region you’re a king? Of what empire you're a ruler? Could it be that there’s strife in your kingdom and you're so oppressed by treacherous ministers 
that you've to flee for your life and arrive here at night? What do you've to say? Please tell me.” 
Only then did the man as tears rolled down his cheeks, describe events of old; as sorrow knitted his brow, disclose the former cause. 
“Master,” he said, “our home is located due west of here, only about forty miles away where there is a city, the place we founded our kingdom.” 
“What is its name?” asked Tripitaka. “To tell you the truth,” said the man, “when we established our reign, we gave it the name Black Rooster Kingdom.” 


“Why is it that Your Majesty seems so frightened,” said Tripitaka, “and for what reason did you come to this place?” The man replied, “O Master! Five years ago we'd a drought here, so severe that no 
vegetation could grow and the people were all starving to death. It was dreadful.” When Tripitaka heard these words, he nodded and smiled, saying, “Your Majesty, the ancients said, ‘When the kingdom 
is upright, then even the Mind of Heaven is agreeable.’ You must not have been treating your subjects with compassion. If there were drought and famine in the land, how could you forsake your 
domain? You'd have opened up your warehouses in order to bring relief to the people; you’d repent of all the sins you’ve committed and try to do good henceforth. When you’ve freed and pardoned 
those who were unjustly accused and condemned, then the Mind of Heaven will be pacified and the winds and the rains will become timely and auspicious once more.” 

“The warehouses in my kingdom,” said the man, “were all empty and both our revenue and food were exhausted. The salaries for our civil and military officials had to be stopped, and there was not 
meat in our royal diet. | attempted to imitate the way King Yu conquered the flood, by suffering with our people, by ritual cleansing, maintaining a vegetarian diet, and practicing abstinence. Night and 
day we offered prayers and incense to Heaven. This went on for three years but all we'd as a result were parched rivers and dried wells. As we reached our most desperate moment, there came to us 
suddenly from Zhongnan Mountain a Daoist of the Complete Truth Order,* who was able to summon the wind and call for rain, to transform rock into gold.5 He first presented himself to the civil and 
military officials, and then he met with us. We, of course, invited him to ascend the liturgical platform and offer prayers that were indeed efficacious. As he struck aloud his ritual placard, torrential rain 
came down in a moment. We thought that three feet of rain would be quite sufficient but he said that since the drought had been so severe for such a long time, he would ask for an extra two inches. 
When we saw how magnanimous he was, we went through the ceremony of Eight Salutes with him and became bond-brothers.” 

“This,” said Tripitaka, “had to be the greatest joy for Your Majesty.” 

“What joy was there?” asked the man. 

Tripitaka said, “If the Daoist had that kind of abilities, you'd tell him to make rain when you wanted rain, and to make gold when you wanted gold. What need was there that made you leave the city and 
come here now?” 

“Indeed, we became so intimate with him that we shared our food and rest together for two years,” said the man, “when it was the time of spring again. As flowers bloomed seductively on the apricot 
and peach trees, every household in the kingdom was going out to enjoy the lovely scenery. At the time when our officials retired to their residences and our consorts to their chambers, we walked 
hand-in-hand with the Daoist into the imperial garden. When we came near our well with octagonal marble walls, he threw something in it that emitted myriad shafts of golden light and tricked us into 
approaching the side of the well to see what sort of treasure was in it. Moved to treachery all at once, he pushed us into the well that he then covered with a slab of stone. He sealed off the entire well 
with mud and dirt, and he even transplanted a plantain tree on it. Alas, pity us! We’ve been dead now for three years,* a ghost who lost his life in the well and whose wrong has yet to be avenged.” 
When the Tang Monk heard that the man was in fact a ghost, he turned numb with fear as his hairs stood on end. He had however, no choice but to question his visitor further, saying, “Your Majesty, 
there is something unreasonable in what you've just said. If you've indeed been dead for three years, how could those civil and military officials, those consorts of three palaces, not miss you and seek 
you when they had to attend court once every third morning?” 

The man said, “Master, when one speaks of the Daoist’s abilities, they are truly rare in the world. Since he murdered us, he shook his body once in the garden and transformed himself into an exact 
image of us. Then and there he took over our empire and usurped our kingdom. Our two divisions of civil and military officials - some four hundred court ministers — and the consorts and ladies of three 
palaces and six chambers now all belong to him.” 

“Your Majesty,” said Tripitaka, “you're too timid.” 

“Why timid?” asked the man. Tripitaka said, “Your Majesty, that fiend indeed must have some magic powers in order to change into your form and usurp your kingdom. The civil and military officials 
might not recognise him, and the consorts might not realise what has happened. But you understand, even though you've died. Why didn’t you file suit against him before King Yama in the Region of 
Darkness? You can at least give an account of the wrongs perpetrated.” 

“His magic powers are great indeed,” said the man, “and he’s intimate with most of the divine officials. The city’s tutelary guardian drinks with him frequently; the ocean’s dragon kings are his relatives; 
Equal-to-Heaven of the Tai Mountain’ is his dear friend, and the Ten Kings of Hell happen to be his bond-brothers. That’s why we've no place to go even to file suit.” 

Tripitaka said, “Your Majesty, if you can’t bring suit against him in the Region of Darkness, why do you come here to the World of Light?” 

“O Master,” said the man, “you think that this slip of a wronged soul would dare approach your gate? Before this monastery you've the various tutelary deities, the Six Gods of Darkness and the Six 
Gods of Light, the Guardians of Five Quarters, the Four Sentinels, and the Eighteen Guardians of the Faith, all of them closely watching over you and your horse. Just now it was the Night Patrol God 
who brought us in here with a gust of divine wind. He said that our water ordeal of three years is now fulfilled, and that we’d come to seek an audience with you. He told us that you've under your 
command a senior disciple, the Great Sage Equal to Heaven who is able to slay fiends and subdue demons. We've come with all sincerity to plead with you. We beseech you to go to our kingdom and 
seize the demon, so that the true and the deviate can properly be distinguished. To repay the kindness of Master, we'll imitate those who express their gratitude by weaving grass ropes or holding 
bracelets in the mouth.” 

“Your Majesty,” said Tripitaka, “so you came here to ask my disciple to get rid of those monsters for you?” 

“Exactly! Exactly!” said the man. Tripitaka said, “My disciple may not be good in doing something else but if you ask him to subdue demons and catch fiends, the work will suit him to a tee. But Your 
Majesty, though you may order him to seize the monster, | fear that he may find it difficult to carry out.” 

“Why should it be difficult?” asked the man. 

Tripitaka replied, “If that fiend indeed possesses such great magic powers that he has managed to transform himself into an exact image of you, then it will mean also that all the civil and military officials 
of the court and all your consorts have been nothing but friendly and amiable toward him. Though my disciple may be able, he would not engage in warfare recklessly. For if we’re caught by the officials 
who should accuse us of plotting against the kingdom and charge us with the crime of treason, we'd be imprisoned in your city. Wouldn't our efforts then be like the failed attempt of drawing a tiger or 
carving a heron and turning it into another creature?”? 

“I still have someone in the city,” said the man. Tripitaka said, “That's good, that’s good! He must be, | suppose, a hereditary prince of the first order, dispatched to a command post somewhere.” 
“No,” said the man, “I’ve in the palace a prince, an heir apparent of my own begetting.” 

“Has the prince been banished by the demon?” asked Tripitaka. “Not yet,” said the man, “but he has been asked to remain in the Hall of Golden Chimes, either to discuss the classic texts with one of 
the secretaries, or to sit on the throne with the Daoist. For these three years, the prince was forbidden to enter the palace and unable to see his mum.” Tripitaka asked, “For what reason?” The man 
said, “This was a plan of that fiend, for he feared that if mum and son had a chance to meet, their casual conversations might lead them to discover the truth.” 

“Though your ordeal no doubt has been preordained of Heaven,” said Tripitaka, “it is nonetheless similar to what I’d to undergo. Long ago my dad was killed by a pirate who also took my mum by force. 
After three months, she gave birth to me, and | escaped with my life in the waters. It was my good fortune that a gracious master at the Gold Mountain Monastery reared me till | was grown. Come to 
think of it, I'd neither dad nor mum when | was young and the prince at this place’s lost his parents. How pitiful indeed! But let me ask you, though you may have a prince still in court, how can | possibly 
get to meet him?” 

“Why not?” asked the man. Tripitaka said, “He’s now guarded by the demon, and he cannot even see his own mum. I’m only a monk. For what reason would | be able to have an audience with him?” 
The man said, “But he is leaving the court tomorrow.” 

“What for?” asked Tripitaka. The man said, “During the time of the early court tomorrow, the prince plans to lead three thousand men and horses, together with falcons and dogs, to go hunting outside 
the city. Master will certainly have a chance to meet him; when you do and if you're willing to tell him what | told you, he will believe you.” 

“He’s of fleshly eyes and mortal stock,” said Tripitaka. “Having been deceived by the demon into remaining in the hall, was there a day when he did not address the spurious ruler as dad king? How 
could he possibly believe my words?” 

“If you’re afraid that he'll not believe you,” said the man, “we'll leave with you a sign to indicate that you're telling the truth.” 

“What kind of sign?” asked Tripitaka. The man put down the white jade token inlaid with gold he had in his hands and said, “This thing can be a sign.” 

“What's the significance of this thing?” asked Tripitaka. The man said, “After the Daoist had changed into our form, all he lacked was this treasure. When he entered the palace, he claimed that the 
rain-making Daoist had robbed him of this jade token that for three years now he had not been able to recover. If our prince sees it, the sight of the thing will remind him of its true owner, and our wrongs 
will be avenged.” 

“All right,” said Tripitaka, “let me have it, and I'll ask my disciple to take care of you. Will you wait here?” 

“We dare not,” said the man. “We plan to ask the Night Patrol God to use another gust of divine wind and send us into the inner palace where we'll appear in a dream to our true queen of the central 
palace. We want to make certain that mum and son will be of one mind with all of you.” Tripitaka nodded in agreement and said, “Please go.” 

The wronged soul saluted to take leave of Tripitaka who was trying to walk outside to send him off. Somehow he tripped and fell, and when Tripitaka woke up with a start, it was all a dream. As he 
faced the dim, flickering lamp in fear, he cried repeatedly, “Disciples! Disciples!” 

“What's all this hollering for the local spirit?”'? mumbled 8 Rules, beginning to stir. “| used to be a man of might dedicated to passing my days by devouring humans, and | loved the taste of blood and 
meat. What enjoyment! You've to leave the family and ask us to protect you on a journey. | thought | was to be a monk but in fact I’m a slave! During the day I’ve to pole the luggage and lead the horse 
while at night, I’ve to carry the night pot and smell someone’s stinky feet by sharing his bed. And even at this hour, you're not asleep! What are you calling disciples for?” 

“Disciples,” said Tripitaka, “just now | fell asleep on the table and had a weird dream.” Leaping up all at once, Pilgrim said, “Dreams arise from your thoughts. Before you ascended a mountain, you're 
afraid of monsters already. You worried over the distance to Thunderclap that you've yet to reach; you also thought of Chang’an and wondered when you'd be able to return. When your mind is restless, 
you've many dreams. But look at old monkey! With true single-mindedness | seek to see God in the West, and that’s why | don’t have even the tiniest dream!” 

Tripitaka said, “Disciple, this dream of mine is not a homesick dream. When | closed my eyes just now, a violent gust of wind brought into my view a king standing outside the door of our chamber. He 
said that he was the ruler of the Black Rooster Kingdom but his whole body was dripping wet and he was weeping.” He then proceeded to give a thorough account of their conversation in the dream to 
Pilgrim. “No need to say anything more,” said Pilgrim, chuckling. “If he appears in this dream of yours to you, he’s plainly trying to take care of old monkey by giving me some business. There must be 
a fiend there trying to usurp the throne and seize the kingdom. Let me distinguish the true from the false for those people. When my rod reaches that place, success is assured.” 

“But disciple,” said Tripitaka, “he said that the fiend has great magic power.” 

“Don’t be afraid of whatever greatness he has!” said Pilgrim. “Just remember that when old monkey arrives, he'll have no place to run.” 

Tripitaka said, “I also remember that he left us something as a sign.” 

“Master, don’t fool around,” said 8 Rules. “It's just a dream. Why keep up this chit-chat?” 

Sand-monk said, “As the saying goes, don’t believe the honesty of the honest; guard against the unkindness of the kind. Let's fetch some torches and open our door, then we can see what's happened.” 
Pilgrim indeed opened the door, and as they looked together, they saw in the light of the stars and moon there was truly a white jade token inlaid with gold placed on the steps. 8 Rules walked forward 
and picked it up, saying, “Elder Brother, what is this?” 

“This is a treasure usually held by a king,” said Pilgrim, “and it’s called a jade token. Master, since we do have such a thing, the matter of your dream has to be true. You can depend entirely on old 
monkey for catching the fiend tomorrow. But | want you to face three unlucky things.” 

“Fine! Fine! Fine!” said 8 Rules. “It's enough to have a dream. You've to tell him about it, too! Since when has this fellow failed to play tricks on people? Now he wants you to face three unlucky things.” 
As he walked back inside, Tripitaka asked, “What three things?” 

Pilgrim said, “Tomorrow | want you to take the blame, take abuse, and catch the plague.” 

“Just one of these is bad enough,” said 8 Rules, laughing. “How could one bear all three of them?” 

The Tang Monk, after all, was an intelligent elder. He therefore asked, “Disciple, can you tell me more about what these three things involve?” 

“No need to tell you,” said Pilgrim, “but first let me give you these two objects.” 

Dear Great Sage! Pulling off one of his hairs, he blew on it a mouthful of divine breath and cried, “Change!” It changed instantly into a red lacquered box plated in gold. After he placed the white jade 
token inside the box, he said, “Master, in the morning, you'd hold this thing in your hands and put on your brocade cassock. Then go sit in the main hall and recite some Threads. Let me go first to the 
city to have a look; if there is indeed a fiend, I'll slay him so that we can achieve some merit at this place. But if there is no fiend, we ought not to incur calamity on ourselves.” 

“Exactly! Exactly!” said Tripitaka. Pilgrim said, “If the prince doesn’t leave the city, then there may not be much that | can do. But if he indeed comes out of the city in accordance with your dream, I'll 
certainly bring him here to see you.” 


“What shall | say to him when | see him?” asked Tripitaka. Pilgrim replied, “When he arrives, let me first come in and announce him. You can then pull the cover of the box open slightly, and I'll change 
into a tiny monk about two inches tall so that |, too, can be placed inside the box. You can hold the whole thing in your hands. When the prince enters the monastery, he will most certainly want to pay 
homage to God. Let him salute all he wants but you pay him no attention. When he sees that you don’t even rise before him, he will surely order you seized. Let him do that — in fact, let him beat you, 
tie you up, or execute you.” 
“Hey!” said Tripitaka. “He’s capable of issuing a high military order. If he truly wants to have me executed, what'll | do?” 
“No fear, for I’m around,” said Pilgrim. “When you get to the crucial moment, I'll be there to protect you. If he asks who you're, you can identify yourself as a monk sent by imperial decree from the Land 
of the East to present treasures to God and acquire scriptures from him in the Western Heaven. If he asks what sort of treasure you've, you can tell him about the brocade cassock of yours. Say to him 
however, that it’s only a third-class treasure and you've in your possession good things that belong to the first and second classes. When he asks you some more, you can then tell him that there’s a 
treasure in this box that’s knowledge of the past five centuries, the present five centuries, and the future five centuries. Overall, this treasure’s complete knowledge of the events of past and future for 
a period of fifteen centuries. Let old monkey come out then and I'll tell the prince what you heard in your dream. If he believes me, I'll go catch the demon so that his dad king may be avenged and our 
reputation may be established at this place. If he doesn’t believe me, we can then show him the white jade token. | fear that he might be a bit young even to recognise the token.” 
When Tripitaka heard these words, he was very pleased, saying, “O Disciple, this is a most marvellous plan! But talk about these treasures, one will be called brocade cassock and the other white jade 
token. What'll be the name of that treasure you'll change into?” 
“Let's call him King-Making Thing,” said Pilgrim. Tripitaka agreed and kept these words in his heart. That whole night master and disciples did not, of course, have any sleep. Impatiently waiting for the 
dawn, they wish they could by nodding their heads call forth the eastern sun and with 1 breath disperse all Heaven’s stars. |n a little while, the eastern sky paled with light. Pilgrim thereupon gave the 
following instruction to 8 Rules and Sand-monk, “Don’t disturb the monks, so that they'll not be milling about in the monastery. When I’ve accomplished what | must do, then we'll journey again.” He 
took leave of them and somersaulted at once into the air. Opening wide his fiery eyes to look toward the West, he discovered that there was indeed a city. He could see it so readily because the fact of 
the matter was that the city, as we told you before, was only 40 miles away. So, the moment Pilgrim rose into the air, he saw it immediately. As Pilgrim drew near the city and stared at it carefully, he 
saw that it was shrouded by unending layers of eerie mists and battered by constant gusts of demonic wind. Sighing to himself in the air, Pilgrim said, “If a true king ascends his precious throne, 
auspicious light and clouds will this place enfold. Since a fiend has usurped the dragon seat, rising black mist seals up the doors of gold.” He was thus speaking to himself when he heard the loud 
booms of cannons. As the eastern gate swung open, a troop of men and horses appeared, indeed a hunting corps most fearsome in appearance. See them: leaving the capital at dawn, they go to hunt 
on the meadow. Bright banners unfurl in the sun; white stallions race against the wind. The lizard-skin drums keep rolling as tasselled lances strike in pairs. The falconers are ferocious and whippers- 
in both mean and strong. Fire cannons rattle the heavens and birdlime poles glow in the sun. Each one props up his arrows; every man wears his carved bows. Spreading their nets beneath the slope, 
they pull taut the ropes in the paths. At one crack like a thunderclap, 1000 steeds charge leopards and bears. Tricky hares cannot save their lives; wily deer are at their wits’ end; foxes are fated to 
expire; antelopes perish in the midst. If pheasants can’t fly to escape, could wild fowls find refuge from harm? All of them ransack the mountain range to capture wild beasts and cut down the forest to 
shoot at flying things! After those people had come out of the city, they spread out in the countryside toward the east, and in a little while they reached the rice fields on the highland some 20 miles 
away. In the midst of the troops there was a young warrior who wore a helmet and a cuirass; a cummerbund too, of 18 layers. His hands held a treasure sword of blue steel and he rode a brown 
warhorse. A fully strung bow also hung from his waist. Truly he seemed faintly like a king, a ruler with noble looks. His features were not uncouth: like a true dragon he moved. Secretly pleased in the 
air, Pilgrim said to himself, “That one’s to be the crown prince. Let me tease him a little.” Dear Great Sage! He lowered his cloud and darted straight into the army of the prince. Shaking his body once, 
he changed instantly into a little white rabbit, scampering about before the prince’s horse. When the prince saw it, he could not have been more delighted. Pulling out an arrow, he stretched his bow to 
the fullest and shot the rabbit squarely with it. The Great Sage, of course, had made it possible for the prince to hit him; being quick of hand and eye, he actually had caught the arrow. After dropping 
some of the arrow’s feathers on the ground, he turned and sped away. When the prince saw the arrow had found its mark on the rabbit, he urged his horse on to give chase all by himself. He did not 
realise that he was being led away deliberately: when the horse galloped, Pilgrim ran like the wind but when the horse slowed down, Pilgrim also took up a more leisurely pace just to stay slightly ahead 
of him. Mile after mile it went on like this, until the prince was lured right up to the gate of the Precious Grove Monastery. Changing back into his true form (the rabbit thus disappeared and only the 
hawk-feathered arrow was stuck on the doorpost), Pilgrim raced inside yelling to the Tang Monk, “Master, he’s here, he’s here!” 
He changed again, this time into a tiny monk about 2 inches tall and crawled at once into the red box. The prince chased his prey right up to the monastery gate; he could not find the white rabbit but 
he saw an eagle-plumed arrow stuck on the doorpost. Greatly startled and turning pale, the prince said, “Strange! Strange! | clearly shot the white rabbit with my arrow. How could the rabbit disappear, 
and only the arrow be seen here? It must be that after years and months, the rabbit has turned into a spirit.” He pulled out the arrow and raised his head to look: there on top of the gate of the monastery 
were written seven words in large characters, “Precious Grove Monastery Built by Imperial Command.” 
“Now | know,” said the prince. “Years ago my dad king, | recall, did send some officials from the Hall of Golden Chimes to take some gold here so that the monks could redecorate the images and the 
halls. | didn’t expect that I'd be here today. Truly there in a bamboo-shaded walk with a good monk | fell to talk. So in this tedious mortal round one afternoon of peace | found. “Let me go inside for a 
walk.” 
Leaping down from the horse, the prince was about to enter the monastery, when those three thousand men and horses who were accompanying him also arrived. As they crowded into the monastery, 
the resident monks hurriedly came respecting to receive them into the main hall so that they could pay homage to the images of God. Afterwards, they raised their eyes to look about, intending to tour 
the corridors and enjoy the scenery, when they suddenly discovered that there was a monk sitting right in the middle of the hall. Becoming enraged at once, the prince said, “This monk is terribly rude! 
Half a throne of this dynasty has entered this monastery. Though I've issued no decree for this visit so that he has been spared from meeting us at a great distance, he should now at least get up when 
soldiers and horses are at the door. How dare he sit there unmoved? Seize him!” 
He said “Seize,” and the guards on both sides immediately attempted to catch hold of the Tang Monk so that they could bind him with ropes. Sitting in the box, Pilgrim recited in silence a spell, saying, 
“You various Guardians of the Faith, the Six Gods of Darkness and the Six Gods of Light, I’m drawing up a plan to subdue a fiend. This prince, ignorant of the matter, is about to have my master bound 
with ropes. All of you must protect him. If he’s really bound, you all will be found guilty.” When the Great Sage gave such an order in secret who would dare disobey him! The deities indeed gave 
protection to Tripitaka in such a way that those people could not even touch his bald head. It was as if a brick wall had come between them, so that they could not approach him at all. 
“Where did you come from, monk,” said the prince, “that you dare use this magic of body concealment to mock me?” Tripitaka walked up to him instead and saluted him, saying, “This poor monk does 
not know any magic of body concealment. I’m the Tang Monk from the Land of the East, a priest going to present treasures to God and to acquire scriptures from him in the Western Heaven.” The 
prince said, “Though your Land of the East is actually the central plains, it is incomparably poor. What kind of treasures do you’ve? You tell me!” 
“The cassock I’ve on my body's a,” said Tripitaka, “treasure of the third class. But I’ve in addition those of the first and second classes as well and they’re even better things.” 
“That garment of yours,” said the prince, “covers only one side of your body while your arm sticks out on the other side. How much it'd be worth that you dare call it a treasure?” 
Tripitaka said, “Though this cassock doesn’t completely cover the body, I’ve several lines of a poem that'll reveal its excellence. The poem says: 
A god’s gown’s a half robe, there’s no need to say. It hides within the Real, free of worldly dust. 
Countless threads and stitches perfect this right fruit; 8 treasures and 9 pearls fuse with the primal soul. 
Maidens divine did make it reverently to give to a monk to cleanse his sullied frame. 
It’s all right to see but not to greet the Throne. But you've lived in vain, your dad’s wrong unrequited!” 

When the prince heard these words, he grew very angry saying, “This brazen Chan monk’s talking rubbish! Your clever mouth and slippery tongue may boast all you'll of that half a piece of garment. 
But since when’ve | not requited my dad’s wrong? You tell me.” 
Taking a step forward, Tripitaka folded his hands and said, “Your Highness, how many favours does a man receive as he lives in this world?” 
“Four favours,” said the prince. 
“Which four?” Tripitaka asked. 
“The favour of shelter and support provided by Heaven and Earth,” said the prince, “the favour of the luminous presence of the sun and the moon, the favour of provisions from the ruler, his land, and 
the favour of his parents’ breeding and nurture.” 
With a smile, Tripitaka said, “The words of Your Highness aren't quite right. A man’s only the shelter, support of Heaven, Earth, the luminous presence of the sun and the moon, and the provisions from 
the land of his king. Where does he get his parent's breeding and nurture?” 
“This monk’s,” said the prince angrily, “an idle and ungrateful man who shaves his hair only to commit treason! If a man has no parental breeding and nurture where does his body come from?” 
“Your Highness,” said Tripitaka, “this humble monk doesn’t know the answer but inside this red box’s a treasure called the King-Making Thing. He’s knowledge of events of the past five centuries, the 
present five centuries, and the future five centuries. Overall, he knows completely the events of past and future for a period of fifteen centuries and that there’s no such favour of parental breeding and 
nurture. It’s he who’s ordered your poor monk to wait here for you for a long time.” 
Hearing this, the prince gave the order, “Bring him here for me to see.” Tripitaka pulled open the box’s cover; Pilgrim leaped out and began to hobble all over the place. The prince said, “This little 
midget! What can he know?” 
When Pilgrim heard this remark about his size, he at once resorted to magic. Straightening up his torso, he grew about 3.5 feet instantly. “If he can grow that rapidly,” said the soldiers, highly startled, 
“itll only be a few days before he pierces the sky.” 
When Pilgrim reached his normal height however, he stopped growing. Then the prince asked him, “King-Making Thing, this old monk claims that you've the knowledge of past, future, good, and evil. 
Do you divine by the tortoise shell and the stalks of plants or do you use books to determine human fortunes?” 
“None of these,” said Pilgrim, “for | need my three-inch tongue solely when | know all things completely.” 
“This fellow, too, is babbling!” said the prince. “Since the time of antiquity, the book, Classic of Change of the Zhou dynasty, has proved to be supremely marvellous in determining throughout the world 
good and evil for man to seek or avoid. Therefore tortoise shells or plant stalks are used for divination. But if one relies solely on your words, what evidence is there? Your empty words on luck or 
misfortune can only vex the minds of people.” 
Pilgrim said, “Please do not be hasty, Your Highness. You're actually a prince begotten of the King of the Black Rooster Kingdom. Five years ago, you had a severe drought here and all the people 
were in such great suffering that your king and his subjects had to offer fervent prayers. Though not a drop of rain came, a Daoist arrived from the Zhongnan Mountain who was an expert in summoning 
wind and rain and in transforming stone into gold. The king was so fond of him that he became his sworn brother. Is all this true?” 
“Yes, yes, yes!” said the prince. “Say some more.” 
Pilgrim said, “After three years, the Daoist disappeared and who is he now who uses the royal we?” 
The prince said, “There was indeed a Daoist with whom dad king swore to be his brother. In fact, they ate together and rested together. Three years ago when they were enjoying the sights of the 
imperial garden, the Daoist used a gust of magic wind and transported back to Zhongnan Mountain the gold inlaid white jade token that dad king had in his hands. Even now however, dad king still 
misses him, and because of his absence, has closed down the garden for three years. But who is now ruling, if not my dad king?” When Pilgrim heard these words, he began to snicker. The prince 
asked him again but instead of replying, he only continued to snicker some more. “Why don’t you speak when you'd?” said the prince angrily. “Why do you snicker like that?” 
“| still have plenty to say,” said Pilgrim, “but there are so many people around and it's not convenient for me to speak up.” 
When the prince saw that there might be some reason for such a statement, he waved his sleeve once to dismiss the soldiers. The captain of the guards immediately gave the order to have the three 
thousand men and horses stationed outside the monastery gate. The hall was thus nearly emptied of people with only the prince sitting in the middle, the elder standing before him, and Pilgrim to his 
left. After even the resident monks retired, then Pilgrim went forward and said to him soberly, “Your Highness, the one who left with the wind is actually your true dad but the one who occupies the 
throne now is the Daoist who made rain.” 
“Nonsense! Nonsense!” said the prince. “Since the departure of the Daoist, my dad has governed so well that the wind and rain are seasonal, the country is prosperous, and the people are secure. But 
if what you say is true, then the present ruler is not my dad king. It’s a good thing that I’m young and | can be somewhat tolerant. If my dad king hears such treasonous words from you, he will have you 
seized and hewn to pieces.” He dismissed Pilgrim with a snort. Turning to the Tang Monk, Pilgrim said, “You see? | said that he wouldn't believe me, and indeed he does not. Take the treasure now 
and present it to him. After certifying our rescript, we can proceed to the Western Heaven.” Tripitaka handed the red box over to Pilgrim who having received it, shook his body and the box disappeared. 
It was actually the transformation of his hair that was retrieved by him. With both hands, Pilgrim presented the white jade token to the prince. 


When he saw the object, the prince shouted, “What a monk! What a monk! You're the Daoist of five years ago who came to cheat our household of this treasure. Now you're disguised as a monk to 
present it back to us? Seize him!” When he shouted the order like that, the elder was so frightened that he pointed at Pilgrim and said, “You Ban-Horse-Plague! You've a special knack for causing 
trouble and bringing calamity on me!” 
“Don’t shout!” said Pilgrim, walking up to the prince to stop him. “Don’t let this thing leak out. I’m not called King-Making Thing, for I've a real name.” 
“You come up here!” said the prince angrily. “Answer me with your real name so that | can send you to the bureau of justice to sentence you.” 
Pilgrim said, “I’m the senior disciple of this elder, and my name is Wukong Pilgrim Sun. Because my master and | were on our way to acquire scriptures in the Western Heaven, we arrived last night 
and found lodging here. My master was reading the Threads in the night, and at about the hour of the third watch, he dreamed that your dad appeared to him. Your dad claimed that he was harmed by 
that Daoist who pushed him into the octagonal well with the marble wall in the imperial garden. The Daoist changed into the form of your dad, and this was not known to any of the court officials nor to 
you since you're so young. You're forbidden to enter the inner palace, and the garden was shut down so that the truth could not be discovered, | suppose. Your dad king came especially in the night to 
ask me to subdue this demon. At first, | was afraid that the murderer was not a demon but when | surveyed the city in mid-air, I'd see that there was a monster-spirit all right. | was about to seize him 
when you came out of the city to hunt. The white rabbit that you shot with your arrow happened to be this old monkey who led you here to the monastery to see my master. Every word that we've said 
to you is the truth. If you’d recognise this white jade token, how could you possibly not think of your dad’s care and love and seek vengeance for him?” 
When the prince heard these words, he became grief stricken, thinking to himself sorrowfully, “Even if | don’t believe him, his words seem to have at least thirty percent truth. But if | believe him, how 
could | face the dad king now in the palace?” 
This is what is called to advance or retreat is hard so the mind asks the mouth; to think thrice, to have patience - as the mouth asks the mind. When Pilgrim saw how perplexed he was, he said again, 
“Your Highness, there’s no need for perplexity. Let Your Highness return to your kingdom and make inquiry of your queen mum. Ask her whether the feelings between her and her husband are the 
same as three years before. Just this one question will reveal the truth.” 
Persuaded by this, the prince said, “Yes, let me go and inquire of my mum.” 
Leaping up, he took hold of the white jade token and wanted to leave. Pilgrim however, tugged at him, saying, “If all these men and horses of yours return with you, someone’s bound to leak out info 
and it'll be hard for me to succeed. You must therefore go back alone and don’t make a show of yourself. Don’t go through the Central Gate of the Sun but enter the palace through the Rear Gate of 
the Servants. When you get to see your mum in the palace, you must remember not to speak loftily or loudly; you must speak quietly and in a subdued manner. For | fear that the fiend’s great magic 
powers and if he ever gets wind of the news, it'll be difficult to preserve the lives of you and your mum.” 
The prince obeyed this instruction; walking out the door, he gave this order to the officers; “Stay and camp here. Don’t move. I've something to attend to. We'll go back to the city together when | return.” 
Look at him! He gave his troops the order to pitch their camp and sped to his city on flying horse. 
038 
The child queries his mum to learn of deviancy and truth; metal and Wood reaching the deep, see the false and the real 
| meet you to speak just on the cause of birth that'll make you one of God’s assembly. 
1 calm thought sees Him in this realm of dust; the whole world watches a god who subdues. 
If you'd know today’s true, enlightened lord, you must ask your mum of former years. 
There’s another world you've never seen for each step in life may bring something new. 

The prince of the Black Rooster Kingdom who after he took leave of the Great Sage soon returned to his city. Indeed, he did not approach the gate of the court, nor did he dare announce his arrival. 
Going instead to the Rear Gate of the Servants, he found that it was guarded by several eunuchs. When they saw the prince approaching however, they dared not stop him and let him pass. Dear 
prince! Pressing his horse, he galloped inside and went straight up to the Brocade Fragrance Pavilion, in which the queen was seated with scores of palace maidens waving their fans on both sides. 
The queen however, was reclining on the carved railings of the pavilion and shedding tears. Why was she shedding tears, you ask? For at the hour of the fourth watch she too had a dream but she 
could remember only half of it. She was trying very hard to recall the other half when the prince dismounted and knelt beneath the pavilion, saying, “Mum!” Forcing herself to appear delighted, the queen 
cried out, “Son, what joy! What joy! For these two or three years, you've been staying in the front palace to study with your dad king and I’ve not been able to see you. How I’ve thought of you! How is 
it that you've the leisure today to come see me instead? This is truly my greatest joy, my greatest joy! O son, why do you sound so sad? Your dad king, after all, is getting on in his years. There will be 
a day when the dragon returns to the jade-green sea and the phoenix will go back to the scarlet heavens. You'll then inherit the throne. What could there possibly be to make you unhappy?” 
The prince respected before he said, “Mum, permit me to ask you: who is he that is on the throne now? Who is the man who uses the royal ‘we’?” When the queen heard this, she said, “This child has 
gone mad! The one who is ruling is your dad king. Why do you ask such questions?” Again respecting, the prince said, “I beseech my mum to grant her son a pardon first. Only then would | dare present 
a further question. If you don't, I'll dare not ask.” 
“Between mum and son,” said the queen, “how could there be any criminal offence? Of course I'll pardon you. Speak up, quickly!” The prince said, “Let me ask you this: are your relations with your 
husband just as warm and intimate as three years before?” 
When the queen heard this question, her spirit left her and her soul fled. She dashed out of the pavilion and embraced the prince tightly as tears fell from her eyes. “My child,” she said, “I've not seen 
you for such a long time. Why do you come to the palace today and ask this question?” 
“Mum,” said the prince, becoming irritated. “If you’ve something to say, say it. If you don’t speak up, you might jeopardise a very important affair.” 
Only then did the queen dismiss all her attendants and spoke, quietly weeping, “If you didn’t ask me this matter, son, it'd have never come to light even when | reached the Nine Springs! down below. 
Since you've asked me, listen to what I’ve to say: three years ago he’s loving and warm; for three years now he’s been cold as ice. By the pillows I’ve pressed him long and hard; he said, I’m old, frail, 
and can’t make that something rise!” 
When the prince heard these words, he at once struggled free and mounted his horse once more. Clutching at him desperately, the queen said, “Child, what’re you doing? Why do you leave before we 
finish speaking?” Again the prince knelt on the ground and said, “Mum, | dare not speak, though | must! During the time of the early court this morning, | went out by imperial decree to hunt with falcons 
and dogs. By chance | met a holy monk sent by the Throne in the Land of the East to fetch scriptures. He has under him a senior disciple by the name of Pilgrim Sun who is an expert in the subjugation 
of fiends. | was told that my real dad king had been murdered in the imperial garden; he died in fact in the well with the octagonal marble walls. It was the Daoist who falsely changed into the form of 
dad king and usurped his dragon seat. Last night, dad king appeared to the monk in a dream and asked him to send his disciple to the city to catch this fiend. Your child did not dare believe them 
completely and that was why | came specially to question you. Now that mum has spoken like this, | know that there must be a monster-spirit here.” 
“O son,” said the queen, “how could you take the words of some stranger outside as the truth?” The prince said, “I didn’t but dad king left them a sign.” When the queen asked what sort of sign it was, 
the prince took out that white jade token inlaid with gold and handed it to her. Recognising at once it was a treasure that had belonged to the king, the queen could not hold back the torrents of tears. 
“My lord!” she cried. “How could you not come to see me first, if you had been dead for three years? How could you go to see the sage monk first, and then the prince afterwards?” 
“Mum,” said the prince, “what are you saying?” The queen said, “My child, | also had a dream last night at about the hour of the fourth watch. | dreamed that your dad king stood before me dripping 
wet, and he told me himself that he was dead. His spirit, he said, had gone to plead with the Tang Monk to subdue the specious king and to save his former body. | clearly recall these words but there 
is another half of the dream which | just cannot remember. | was speculating just now by myself when you arrived with your questions and this treasure. Let me put away the jade token for the moment. 
You'd go and ask the sage monk to do what he must do quickly, so that the demonic miasma may be dispelled and the perverse and true can be distinguished. That’s the way you can repay your dad 
king’s kindness in rearing you.” 
Swiftly mounting his horse, the prince went out of the Rear Gate of the Servants and slipped away from the city. Truly holding back his tears, he respected to leave the queen; in grief he went to salute 
again to the Tang Monk. In a little while, he was out of the city gate and went straight to the gate of the Precious Grove Monastery where he dismounted. As the soldiers came to receive him, the sun 
began to set. The prince gave the order for the soldiers to remain where they were stationed. Again by himself, he walked inside after straightening out his clothes to solicit Pilgrim’s assistance. 
Just then the Monkey King swaggered out from the main hall, and the prince at once went to his knees, saying, “Master, I’ve returned.” Pilgrim went forward to raise him, saying, “Please rise. Did you 
ask anyone when you reached the city?” 
“| did,” said the prince, and he gave a complete account of the conversation with his mum. Smiling gently, Pilgrim said, “If he is that cold, he must be the transformation of some kind of coldblooded 
creature. Don’t worry! Don’t worry! Let old monkey get rid of him for you. But it’s getting late now, and | can’t move. You go back first, and I'll arrive tomorrow morning.” Respecting repeatedly, the prince 
said, “Master, I'll stay here to wait upon you until tomorrow, and then | can travel with you.” 
“That's no good,” said Pilgrim. “If we enter the city together, the fiend would become suspicious; instead of a chance meeting, he'll think that you’ve gone somewhere especially to fetch me. The whole 
arrangement will make him blame you, will it not?” 
“Even if | go back now,” said the prince, “he will still blame me.” 
“Why?” asked Pilgrim. The prince said, “l was commanded during the early court to lead this number of men and horses, of falcons and dogs, to leave the city. But when | go back today, I’ve no game 
to present to the throne. If he accuses me of being incapable and has me jailed in Youli,? whom would you rely on when you enter the city in the morning? There is no one, after all, in the ranks who 
knows about this.” 
“That's nothing!” said Pilgrim. “You'd have told me earlier about this, and I'd have found some game.” Dear Great Sage! Look at the way he shows off before the prince! With a bound he leaped straight 
up to the clouds, made the magic sign, and recited the spell, Let Om and Ram purify the Religion-realm that summoned a mountain god and a local spirit. They arrived and saluted to him in mid-air, 
saying, “Great Sage, what is your wish when you command these humble deities to appear?” Pilgrim said, “Old monkey arrives here in the company of the Tang Monk, and he now intends to catch a 
wicked demon. Unfortunately, the prince did not catch any game during the hunt and he dared not return to the court. I’m, therefore, going to ask you for a small favour. Please find for us some fallow 
deer, antelopes, wild hares, and fowls — a few pieces of each kind — so that we can send him off.” Not daring to disobey when they heard this instruction, the mountain god and the local spirit inquired 
as to how many heads of wild game were needed. “It doesn’t matter,” said the Great Sage, “just bring us some.” The two deities, leading the demon soldiers under their command, called up a strong 
gust of dark wind to round up the wild animals. They caught some grouse and pheasants; horned deer and fat fallow deer; foxes, badgers, and hares; tigers, leopards, and wolves — overall, several 
hundred of these which they brought before Pilgrim. Pilgrim said, “Old monkey has no need of these. Pull out their leg tendons and place them on both sides of the forty-mile road leading back to the 
city. Those people will then be able to take them back without having to use falcons and dogs, and this will be counted as your merit.” The deities obeyed; calming the dark wind, they placed the game 
beside the road. 
Pilgrim dropped down from the clouds and said to the prince, “Your Highness, please go back. There is game on the road that you may collect.” After having seen the kind of power Pilgrim displayed 
on top of the clouds, the prince had no doubts whatever. He respected to take leave of Pilgrim before walking out of the monastery gate to order the soldiers to return to the city. As they journeyed, 
they found indeed a large number of wild game laid out on both sides of the road. Without releasing falcons and dogs, the soldiers caught them by merely lifting their hands. All of them, therefore, 
shouted bravos and congratulated the prince, saying that it was his great luck that brought them the game but not knowing, of course, that it was the might of old monkey. Listen to their poems of 
triumph as they proceeded back to the city! 
Pilgrim, meanwhile, returned to protect Tripitaka. When those monks in the monastery saw how intimate the pilgrims had become with the prince, how could they dare not be reverent? They again 
prepared a vegetarian meal to serve to the Tang Monk who then rested once more in the Zen hall. By about the hour of the first watch, Pilgrim who had something on his mind, was unable to fall asleep. 
Rolling off his bed, he dashed up to the Tang Monk and cried, “Master.” The elder at this time actually was not yet asleep but knowing that Pilgrim could be rather restless and frenetic, he pretended 
that he was and did not respond. Pilgrim caught hold of his bald head and started to shake it violently, crying, “Master, how is it that you're already asleep?” 
“You rascal!” said the Tang Monk, growing angry. “You're not going to sleep at this hour? What are you clamouring for?” 
“Master,” said Pilgrim, “I’ve a little matter that | want to discuss with you.” 
“What matter?” asked the elder. 
Pilgrim said, “During the day | boasted to the prince that my abilities were higher than a mountain and greater than an ocean. To catch that monster-spirit, | said, was as easy as reaching for something 
in my pocket — all I'd to do was to stretch forth my hand and take it. Now I can’t sleep, and when | think about the matter, | find that there’s some difficulty.” 
“If you say that it’s going to be difficult,” said the Tang Monk, “then let's not try to catch him.” 
“We still have to,” said Pilgrim, “but we can’t justify our action.” The Tang Monk said, “This ape is babbling again! The monster-spirit has usurped the throne of a ruler. What do you mean that we can’t 
justify our action?” 


Pilgrim said, “Your venerable self only knows how to recite Threads and worship God, how to sit and meditate. Since when have you ever seen the legal codes established by Xiao He?3 The proverb 
says, ‘If you arrest a thief, you must seize him with the stolen goods.’ That fiend has been a king for three years but he has not permitted his secret to leak out in any way. He has slept with the ladies 
of the three palaces, and he has ruled amiably with his two rows of civil and military officials. Even if old monkey has the ability to arrest him, it will not be easy to convict him of his crime.” 
“Why not?” asked the Tang Monk. Pilgrim said, “Even if he is a mouth-less gourd, he will have a row with you for a while. Can’t you hear him? ‘I’m the king of the Black Rooster Kingdom. What offence 
against Heaven have | committed that you dare come to arrest me?’ What evidence do I’ve with which | can argue with him?” 
“What do you plan to do, then?” said the Tang Monk. 
With a chuckle, Pilgrim said, “The plan of old monkey is already made but one obstacle I’ve to face right now is that you, Dear Sir, have a tendency to dote on people.” 
“What do you mean?” asked the Tang Monk. Pilgrim said, “Eight Rules is rather stupid but you’re somewhat partial to him.” 
“How am | partial to him?” asked the Tang Monk. “If you're not,” said Pilgrim, “then you’d try to be more courageous and stay here with Sand-monk. Let old monkey and 8 Rules take this opportunity 
now to go into the Black Rooster Kingdom first and find the imperial garden. We'll break open the marble well and fish out the corpse of the true king that we'll wrap in our bags. When we enter the city 
tomorrow, we'll not bother with having our rescript certified; as soon as we see the fiend, I'll attack him with my rod. If he has anything to say, we'll show him the skeleton and tell him, ‘You killed this 
man!’ We can tell the prince to come out and mourn his dad, the queen to give recognition to her husband, and the various officials to see their true lord. Old monkey and the brothers, meanwhile, can 
lift our hands to fight. Now, that’s what | call a worthwhile litigation because there’s something we can go on!” 
Secretly pleased by what he heard, the Tang Monk nevertheless said, “My only fear is that 8 Rules is unwilling to go with you.” 
“You see!” said Pilgrim, laughing. “I told you that you doted on him! How did you know that he would be unwilling to go? Perhaps you think that he'll be like you when | called you just now, and after half 
an hour, I'd give up. But watch me! If you let me go near him, I'll use only my healthy, three-inch tongue to persuade him. Never mind that he is Bullseye 8 Rules; even if he were Bullseye Nine Rules, 
I'd have the ability to make him go with me.” 
“All right,” said the Tang Monk, “you may go and rouse him.” 
Walking away from his master, Pilgrim went straight up to the side of 8 Rules’ bed and shouted, “Eight Rules! 8 Rules!” Idiot, after all, was a man overcome by travel fatigue: once he put his head down, 
he snored so hard that nothing could wake him. Pilgrim finally grabbed his ears and took hold of his bristles; giving a terrific pull, he yanked 8 Rules right up while shouting, “Eight Rules!” Idiot was still 
shuddering when Pilgrim hollered again. Idiot mumbled, “Let's sleep! Don’t play around! We've to travel tomorrow.” 
“Im not playing,” said Pilgrim. “There’s some business that you and | must attend to.” 
“What business?” asked 8 Rules. 
Pilgrim said, “Did you happen to hear what the prince said?” 
“I've not even seen him,” said 8 Rules. “I’ve not heard what he had to say.” 
“The prince told me,” said Pilgrim, “that that monster-spirit had in his possession a treasure that could overwhelm ten thousand warriors. When we enter the city tomorrow, we can’t avoid doing battle 
with him; but if that fiend brings out his treasure and defeats us, that'll not be good. So, | thought that if we’d not vanquish him, we'd do something first. You and | in fact should go and steal his treasure. 
Isn’t that much better?” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “you're trying to persuade me to be a thief! Well, | know this sort of business, so | can be your customer. But let me say this to you clearly first: when we've stolen the 
treasure and subdued the monster-spirit, I'll not put up with this niggardly practice of dividing the loot. I'm going to keep the treasure.” 
“What for?” asked Pilgrim. “I’m not eloquent like all of you,” said 8 Rules, “and it’s not easy for me to beg for food. This body of Old bull is sluggish, and his words are dull. Moreover, | can’t even recite 
Threads. When | get to those wild, uninhabited places, I’ve hopes that | can exchange the treasure for food.” Pilgrim said, “Old monkey is only concerned with acquiring a reputation, not a treasure. Of 
course I'll give it to you.” When Idiot heard that it was to be given to him, he was delighted and scrambled up at once. Climbing into his clothes, he left with Pilgrim. Truly as the saying goes: 

Even clear juice reddens a man’s face, 

And yellow gold moves the mind of Dao. 
The 2 of them opened the door stealthily and slipped away from Tripitaka; mounting the auspicious luminosity, they headed straight for the city. In a little while, they reached their destination; as they 
lowered their clouds, they heard the sound of the second watch struck from a tower. “Brother,” said Pilgrim, “it's the second watch.” 
“Just right!” said 8 Rules. “Everybody is sleeping soundly inside.” Instead of heading for the Central Gate of the Sun, the two of them went to the Rear Gate of the Servants where they heard also the 
sound of the rattle struck by guards on patrol. “Brother,” said Pilgrim, “the front and rear gates are all tightly guarded. How can we get in?” 8 Rules said, “Have you ever seen a thief walking through a 
door? Let's just jump over the wall.” Pilgrim agreed and leaped at once onto the palace wall, followed by 8 Rules. Sneaking inside, the two of them searched for their way to the imperial garden. 
As they walked along, they came upon a towered gate with triple eaves and flying white banners. Painted on top of the gate were three large words that were luminescent in the light of the stars and 
moon: “The Imperial Garden.” When Pilgrim drew near and saw that the gate was locked and sealed with several layers of crossed strips of paper, he told 8 Rules to go to work. Idiot lifted up his iron 
rake and brought it down on the gate as hard as he could: the gate was pulverized at once. Pilgrim led the way to enter the garden but no sooner had he stepped inside when he began to jump up and 
down whooping and howling. 8 Rules was so startled that he ran forward to tug at him, saying, “Elder Brother, you scare me to death! I've never seen a thief bellowing like that! If you wake up the 
people and they catch us and send us to court, even if we’re not executed we'd be banished to our native province for military service.” 
“Brother,” said Pilgrim, “you may wonder why I’m making such a fuss. Just look at those carved and painted railings in ruin; bejewelled sheds and towers crumbling; banks of sedges and smart-weeds 
all buried in dirt; Peonia and tumi* both wilted. The scent of jasmines and roses is slight; tree-peonies and lilies bloom vainly. Hibiscus, a few kinds, give way to bushes and shrubs; rare flowers and 
plants all perish. Artificial Rock Mountains collapse; ponds dry up and fishes decline. Green pines, purple bamboos — they’re like dried firewood; wormwood and artemisia grow rank on the paths. From 
cassia and peach trees twigs break off; roots of pear and plum trees are upturned. There’s green moss on the bridge-head’s winding path: the scene of this garden’s desolate!”> 
“Why waste your breath in this lamentation?” said 8 Rules. “Let’s go finish our business quickly.” 
Though Pilgrim was saddened by what he saw, he also thought of the dream of the Tang Monk, when he was told that the well could be found only beneath a plantain tree. As they walked along, they 
saw indeed such a tree whose luxuriant growth was quite different from the other plants. Truly she is a fine, spiritual root of a kind, her empty selfs’ Heaven-endowed. Every branch is thin like paper; 
every leaf can fold like a petal; 1000 fine strands of green enclose one cinnabar heart within. She grieves when saddened by night rain and droops for fear of autumn’s wind. She grows in the primal 
strength of Heaven; her nurture’s the work of Creation. A parchment forms her wondrous usage; as a fan she makes rare merit. How'd phoenix plumes approximate her? Could even phoenix tails 
resemble her? Bathed in droplets of light dew, swathed in slender wisps of smoke, her green shade shrouds windows and doors; green shadow mounts curtains and screens. Wild geese aren't allowed 
to perch here, nor may horses be tied to her. A frigid sky will make her dejected, a moonlit night her colours faint. She can only dispel high heat and protects from the scorching sun. Bashful for lacking 
the peach and pear’s charm, she stands alone east of the white wall. “Eight Rules,” said Pilgrim, “let's get started. The treasure’s buried beneath the plantain tree.” 
Idiot lifted his rake with both hands and toppled the plantain tree, after which he used his horn to burrow into the ground. After digging up some 3 or 4 feet of dirt, he discovered a slab of stone. Delighted, 
Idiot said, “Elder Brother, we’re lucky! There’s indeed a treasure here covered by a slab of stone. | wonder if it’s contained in a jar or a box.” 
“Lift the stone up and take a look,” said Pilgrim. 
Idiot indeed used his horn to give the slab of stone a shove; immediately, glimmering shafts of light shot up. Laughing, 8 Rules said, “Lucky! Lucky! The treasure’s glowing.” He went forward to take 
another careful look and saw that it was actually the glow of the stars and moon reflected in the water of a well. “Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “when you want to do something, you ought to get to the 
bottom of it.” 
“How so?” asked Pilgrim. 8 Rules said, “This is a well. If you had told me in the monastery that the treasure would be found in a well, I’d have brought along those two ropes we use to tie our bags. 
Then we'd have been able to find a way to lower Old bull down there. Now we’re empty-handed. How could we go down there to fetch the thing up here?” 
“You want to go down there?” asked Pilgrim. “Of course,” said 8 Rules, “but we've no ropes.” 
“Take off your clothes,” said Pilgrim, “and I'll give you the means.” 
8 Rules said, “I don’t have any good clothes! All I've to do is untie this shirt.” 
Dear Great Sage! He took out his golden-hooped rod and gave both its ends a pull, crying, “Grow!” It grew to about seventy or eighty feet long. “Eight Rules,” he said, “you grab hold of one end, and 
I'll let you down the well.” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “you can do that but when we reach the surface of the water, you stop.” 
“I know,” said Pilgrim. 
Idiot then wrapped himself around the rod at one end, and with no effort at all Pilgrim picked him up and lowered him into the well. In a little while, they reached the edge of the water and 8 Rules said, 
“We're touching water.” 
When Pilgrim heard that, he gave the rod a plunge downward and with a loud splash Idiot fell into the water headfirst. Abandoning the iron rod, he began at once to tread water, muttering to himself, 
“Damn him! | told him to stop when we reached water but he gave me a plunge instead.” Pilgrim retrieved his rod and said, laughing, “Brother, is there any treasure?” 
“What treasure?” said 8 Rules, “only a well of water!” 
Pilgrim said, “The treasure has sunk deep into the water. Why don’t you go below and feel around?” Idiot indeed knew well the nature of water; he ducked his head under the surface and dove straight 
down. Ah, the well was extremely deep! He plunged hard a second time before opening his eyes to look around, and he saw all at once a towered edifice, on which were written the three words, “Water 
Crystal Palace.” Highly shaken, 8 Rules said, “Undone! Undone! | got on the wrong way. | must have fallen into the ocean, for only the ocean has a Water Crystal Palace. How could there be one in a 
well?” 8 Rules did not know that this happened to be the palace of the Well Dragon King. 
As 8 Rules was speaking to himself, a Nature spirit on patrol opened the gate of the palace. When he saw what he saw, he ran inside to report, saying, “Great King, disaster! From the well above fell a 
monk with a long horn and huge ears, stark naked and without a stitch of clothing. He isn’t dead yet, and he is talking.” When the Well Dragon King heard this, he was greatly startled. “This must be 
the Marshal of Heavenly Reeds. Last night the Night Patrol God came here by imperial decree from above to take the soul of the king of the Black Rooster Kingdom to see the Tang Monk. They were 
to ask the Great Sage Equal to Heaven, to subdue a fiend. This has to be the Great Sage and the Marshal of Heavenly Reeds. We'd not treat them rudely. Hurry, we must welcome them.” 
Straightening out his clothes, the dragon king led his water kinsmen out the door and cried in a loud voice, “Marshal of Heavenly Reeds, please take a seat inside.” 8 Rules became very pleased and 
said to himself, “So there’s a friend here!” Without regard for etiquette or decency, Idiot walked right into the Water Crystal Palace and, still stark naked, took the honoured seat above. “Marshal,” said 
the dragon king, “I heard recently that your life was spared when you embraced the Religious faith to accompany the Tang Monk to acquire scriptures in the Western Heaven. For what reason have 
you come here?” 
“| was just about to tell you that,” said 8 Rules. “My elder brother, Sun Wukong, wanted to send you his most earnest greetings. He told me to come to ask you for a certain treasure.” 
“That's pitiful!” said the dragon king. “Where do I’ve any treasure around here? I’m not like those other dragon kings of such big rivers as the Yangzi, the Yellow River, the Huai, and the Ji. When they 
can fly and soar through the air most of the time to transform, they will have treasures. I’ve been stuck here for a long time; | can’t even get to see the sun and the moon regularly. Where would | get 
any treasures?” 
“Don’t refuse me,” said 8 Rules. “If you've any, bring them out.” 
“| do have just one treasure,” said the dragon king, “but | can’t bring it out. The Marshal himself will have to go and take a look. How about it?” 
“Wonderful! Wonderful! Wonderfull” said 8 Rules. “I'll go and take a look.” 
The dragon king walked in front while Idiot followed. They passed the Water Crystal Palace and came upon a long corridor, inside of which they found a six-foot corpse. Pointing with his finger, the 
dragon king said, “Marshal, that’s the treasure.” 8 Rules went forward to look at it. Ah, it was actually a dead king; still wearing a rising-to-Heaven cap, a reddish brown robe, a pair of carefree boots, 
and a jade belt, he lay there stiff as a board. “Hard! Hard! Hard!” said 8 Rules, chuckling. “This can’t be considered a treasure! When | recall the time when Old bull was a monster in the mountain, this 
thing was frequently used as food. Don’t ask me how many such things I’ve seen - even as far as eating was concerned, I’ve consumed countless numbers. How could you call this a treasure?” 
“So you don’t know, Marshal,” said the dragon king, “that he is actually the corpse of the king of the Black Rooster Kingdom. Since he reached the well, I've embalmed him with a feature-preserving 
pearl so that he'll not deteriorate. If you’re willing to carry him out of here on your back to see the Great Sage Equal to Heaven who, by the way, may have the wish to revive him, don’t speak of treasures 
- you can have anything you want.” 
“In that case,” said 8 Rules, “I'll carry him out on my back for you. But how much cartage are you going to pay me?” 


The dragon king said, “I’ve no money.” 

“You want to use people free!” said 8 Rules. “If you really don’t have any money, I'll not carry him.” 

“If you don't,” said the dragon king, “please go.” 

8 Rules left at once. The dragon king however, ordered two powerful Nature spirits to haul the corpse out of the Water Crystal Palace’s gate. They threw him down, took off the water-repelling pearl, 
and water began to close in on all sides noisily. Turning around quickly to look, 8 Rules could no longer see the gate of the Water Crystal Palace. When he stretched out his hands, all he could lay hold 
of was the corpse of the king, the touch of which made his legs weaken and his tendons turn numb with fear. He darted up to the surface of the water; with his hands clinging to the wall of the well, he 
shouted, “Elder Brother, stick your rod down here to save me!” 

“Is there any treasure?” asked Pilgrim. 8 Rules said, “There isn’t any! Beneath the water however, there’s a Well Dragon King who told me to carry a dead man on my back. I’d not do it, and he sent 
me out the door; that was when his Water Crystal Palace disappeared also. When | felt that corpse, | was so scared that my hands grew weak and my tendons turned numb; I'd hardly move. Elder 
Brother, for good or ill please save me.” 

“That's precisely the treasure,” said Pilgrim. “Why won't you carry him up here?” 

8 Rules said, “He must have been dead for quite a while. Why'd | carry him on my back?” 

“If you'll not,” said Pilgrim, “I'll go back.” 

“Where?” asked 8 Rules. 

“I'm going back to the monastery,” said Pilgrim, “to get some sleep with Master.” 

“You mean | can’t go with you?” said 8 Rules. 

Pilgrim said, “If you can climb up here, I'll take you back with me; if you can’t, well that’s it!” 8 Rules was horrified, for how could he possibly climb up the well. “Take a look,” he yelled. “Even the city 
wall was hard to scale already whereas this well is large down below with a small mouth on top. All around the circular wall is straight up and down. Moreover, it has been such a long time since anyone 
has bailed water from this well that it's covered with moss everywhere. It’s terribly slippery. How could | possibly climb it? Elder Brother, let’s not upset our fraternal feelings, let me go and carry him up 
on my back.” 

“Exactly,” said Pilgrim. “Do it quickly, and I'll go back with you to sleep.” 

Idiot put his head underwater again and dove straight down; after he found the corpse, he pulled it onto his back and shot back up to the surface. Supporting himself on the wall of the well, he cried, 
“Elder Brother, I’m carrying him.” 

Pilgrim stared into the well and saw that the body was indeed placed on 8 Rules’ back. Only then did he lower the golden-hooped rod into the well. A man who had been sorely tried, Idiot opened his 
mouth and held on to the tip of the iron rod with his teeth; he was then lifted up out of the well by Pilgrim with no effort at all. Putting down the corpse, 8 Rules grabbed his own clothes and put them on. 
When Pilgrim took a look, he found that the features of the dead king had not altered in the slightest — it was as if he were still alive. “Brother,” said Pilgrim, “this man has been dead for three years. 
How could his features not deteriorate?” 

“You've no idea about this,” said 8 Rules. “This Well Dragon said to me that he had embalmed the corpse with a feature-preserving pearl, and that’s why it has not deteriorated.” 

“Lucky! Lucky!” said Pilgrim. “This has to mean that his wrong has yet to be requited, and that we're fated to succeed. Brother, put him on your back again quickly and we'll leave.” 

“Where do you want me to carry him?” asked 8 Rules. 

“To see Master,” said Pilgrim. 

8 Rules began to grumble, saying, “How am | going to live with this? | was sleeping nicely when this monkey fooled me with his clever talk into doing this so-called business with him. It turns out to be 
this sort of enterprise — carrying a dead man on my back! When | carry him, some putrid stinking fluid is bound to drip on me and soil my clothes, and there is no one ready to wash and starch them for 
me. The few patches on my garment may even turn damp again when the sky is grey. How can | wear them?” 

“Look, you just carry him,” said Pilgrim, “and when we get to the monastery, I'll exchange clothes with you.” 

“Aren't you ashamed of yourself?” asked 8 Rules. “You've hardly anything to wear, and you're going to exchange clothes with me?” Pilgrim said, “Oh, you're so smart mouthed! You're not going to carry 
him?” 

“No!” said 8 Rules. “Stick out your shanks then,” said Pilgrim, “and I'll give you twenty strokes of my rod!” Horrified, 8 Rules said, “Elder Brother, that’s a heavy rod! If you give me twenty strokes, I’d be 
like this king!” 

“If you're afraid of being beaten,” said Pilgrim, “then hurry up and put him on your back so that we can leave.” 8 Rules was indeed afraid of being beaten; rather listlessly, he yanked the corpse over 
and put it on his back before tuming to walk out of the garden. 

Dear Great Sage! Making the magic sign with his fingers, he recited a spell and sucked in a mouthful of air facing the ground in the southwest. When he blew it out, a violent gust immediately arose 
and lifted 8 Rules out of the palace. They left the city instantly; as the wind subsided, the two of them dropped to the ground and proceeded slowly on foot. Nursing his rage in silence, Idiot planned to 
repay Pilgrim in kind, saying to himself, “This monkey has pulled a nice prank on me but when | get to the monastery I’m going to pull one on him, too. I’m going to persuade Master to insist on restoring 
the king back to life. If that monkey can’t do it, I'll make Master recite that Tight-Fillet Spell until this monkey's brains burst. That will give me some relief!” He walked along and thought further to himself, 
“No good, no good! If you make him heal the man, all he has to do is to go and ask King Yama for the soul, and the man will live again. | must set the conditions so that he'll not be permitted to go to 
the Region of Darkness; the king has to be restored to life through some means found in the World of Light. Only such a plan is good.” 

Hardly had he finished speaking to himself when they reached the gate of the monastery. 8 Rules walked right through it and went up to the door of the Chan hall where he threw down the corpse and 
cried, “Master, get up and look at this.” Unable to sleep, Tripitaka was just chatting with Sand-monk on how Pilgrim had deceived 8 Rules into going with him, and how they did not return after such a 
long time. When he heard the call, the Tang Monk quickly arose and said, “Disciple, what do you want me to look at?” 

“The grandpa of Pilgrim,” said 8 Rules, “whom Old bull has brought back on his back.” 

“You pie-eyed Idiot!” said Pilgrim. “Where do I’ve a grandpa?” 

“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “if he isn’t your grandpa, why did you ask Old bull to bear him here? You don’t know how much energy I’ve wasted!” 

The Tang Monk and Sand-monk opened the door to look, and they discovered that the countenance of the king had not altered at all. Turning sad all at once, the elder said, “Your Majesty, in which 
previous existence did you incur an enemy who had to catch up with you in this one and cause you to lose your life? Alas, you left your wife and your child, unknown to all the civil and military officials! 
Pity your wife who’s still in the dark! Who will burn incense or pour tea for you?” He was so broken up that he could not speak anymore as tears rained down his cheeks. 

“Master,” said 8 Rules, laughing, “what does his death have to do with you? He isn’t one of your ancestors. Why weep for him?” 

“O disciple!” said the Tang Monk, “the fundamental principle of life for those who have left the family is compassion. How could you be so hard-hearted?” 

“lm not hard-hearted,” said 8 Rules, “for Elder Brother told me that he could restore him to life. If he couldn't, I'd not have carried him back here.” This elder, after all, had a head full of water! Shaken 
by these few words of Idiot, he said at once, “Wukong, if you indeed have the ability to restore this king to life, you’d have accomplished something greater than building a seven-storied heap. And even 
we'd have been benefited as if we’d worshipped God in the Spirit Mountain.” 

Pilgrim said, “Master, how could you believe the nonsense of this Idiot! When a man dies, he can pass through the periods of three times seven or five times seven; at most, he may wait for seven 
hundred days, when after having suffered for all the sins committed in the World of Light, he will then proceed to the next disciple. This man here died three years ago. How could | revive him?” When 
Tripitaka heard these words, he said, “Oh, all right!” 

Still bitterly resentful however, 8 Rules said, “Master, don’t believe him. He’s a little sick in his brain! Just recite that little something of yours and you're certain to get a living man.” The Tang Monk 
indeed began to recite the Tight-Fillet Spell and the monkey had such a headache that his eyes bulged. 


039 

1 pellet of cinnabar elixir found in Heaven; a king dead 3 years, lives again on Earth 
The Great Sage Sun who could hardly bear his headache. “Master,” he pleaded pitifully, “stop reciting! Stop reciting! Let me try to heal him.” 
“How?” asked the elder. Pilgrim said, “All | need to do is to go to the Region of Darkness and find out in which of the Ten Kings’ chambers his soul is residing. I'll fetch it and he'll be saved.” 
“Master, don’t believe him,” said 8 Rules. “He told me originally that he needn't go to the Region of Darkness, that his real ability could not be seen unless a cure was found in the World of Light.” 
Believing in such perverse tattle, the elder began to recite the Tight-Fillet Spell once more. Pilgrim was so horrified that he had to say repeatedly, “I'll find some means in the World of Light! I'll find some 
means in the World of Light!” 
“Don't stop,” said 8 Rules, “just keep reciting!” 
“You idiotic cursed beast!” chided Pilgrim. “You're just trying to coax Master into putting that spell on me!” 
Laughing until he nearly collapsed, 8 Rules said, “O Elder Brother! You only know how to pull tricks on me but you don’t realise that | can do the same on you.” 
“Master, please stop,” said Pilgrim, “and let old monkey find a cure in the World of Light for the king.” 
“Where would you find it in the World of Light?” asked Tripitaka. 
“With a single cloud somersault,” said Pilgrim, “I'll penetrate the South Heaven Gate but I'll not go into the Big Dipper Palace nor into the Divine Mists Hall. Instead, I'll go straight up to the Thirty-third 
Heaven, to the Tushita Palace of the Griefless Heaven. When | see Laozi there, I'll beg him for one pellet of his Soul-Restoring Elixir of Nine Reversions that will certainly make this man live again.” 
When Tripitaka heard these words, he was very pleased and said, “Go quickly and come back.” 
“It's about the hour of the third watch at this moment,” said Pilgrim, “but by the time | get back, it'll be dawn. The trouble with this man sleeping here like this is that the whole atmosphere seems so dull 
and heartless. Someone here should mourn him and that'll be more like it.” 
“It goes without saying,” said 8 Rules, “that this monkey would like me to mourn the king.” 
“Yes but I'm afraid that you'll not,” said Pilgrim. “If you'll not, | can’t heal him either!” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “you may go. I'll mourn him.” Pilgrim said, “There are several ways of mourning: when you merely open your mouth to make noises, that’s called howling; when you 
squeeze out some tears, that’s weeping. When you mourn with both tears and feelings, then we may call that wailing.” 
“Ill give you an example of how | can wail!” said 8 Rules who pulled out a scrap of paper from somewhere and rolled it into a thin strip that he stuck into his nostrils twice. Look at him! After sneezing a 
few times, tears and snivel all came out and he began to wail, mumbling and muttering protests all the time as if someone in his family had actually died. He bawled lustily, and when his passion rose 
to a terrific pitch, even the Tang elder was moved to tears. “That’s the sort of grief | want you to show,” said Pilgrim with a laugh, “and you're not permitted to stop. For if you, Idiot, think that you can 
quit mourning after | leave, you're mistaken, for | can still hear you. You'll be all right if you keep this up but the moment | discover that your voice has stopped, your shanks will be given twenty strokes.” 
“You go!” said 8 Rules, chuckling. “Once | start to mourn, it will take me a couple of days to finish.” When Sand-monk heard how stern Pilgrim’s reprimand of 8 Rules was, he went and lit a few sticks 
of incense to bring to offer to the dead king. “Fine! Fine! Fine!” said Pilgrim, laughing. “When the whole family shows reverence like that, old monkey can then exert his efforts.” 
Dear Great Sage! At this hour of midnight, he took leave of master and disciples, the three of them; mounting the cloud somersault, he entered at once the South Heaven Gate. Indeed, he did not go 
before the Treasure Hall of Divine Mists, nor did he ascend to the Big Dipper Palace. Treading on his cloudy luminosity, he went straight to the Griefless Heaven, the Tushita Palace of the Thirty-third 
Heaven. The moment he walked inside the door, he discovered Laozi sitting in the elixir chamber: in the process of making elixir, he and a few divine youths were tending the fires with plantain fans. 
When he saw Pilgrim approaching, he immediately instructed the youths with these words: “Take care, each of you. The thief who once stole our elixir is here.” 
Saluting him, Pilgrim said with laughter, “Venerable Sir, don’t be so silly! Why take such precaution against me? | do those things no more!” 
“Monkey,” said Laozi, “when you caused great disruption in Heaven five centuries ago, you stole and consumed countless efficacious elixirs of mine. And when we sent the Little Sage Erlang to arrest 
you and bring you to the Region Above, you're sent to be refined in my elixir brazier for forty-nine days and made me squander who knows how much charcoal. You’re lucky to have regained your 
freedom when you embraced the Religious fruit and resolved to accompany the Tang Monk to the Western Heaven to acquire scriptures. But even then, you're still giving me a hard time when | asked 
you for my treasures after you had subdued the demons some time ago on the Level-Top Mountain. What are you doing here today?” 
“| didn’t give you a hard time,” said Pilgrim. “Old monkey at the time gave you back your five treasures without delay. Why are you still so suspicious?” 


“Why aren't you on the road then?” asked Laozi. “Why did you sneak into my palace?” 
Pilgrim said, “After we parted, we proceeded toward the West until we came to the Black Rooster Kingdom. The king there had been murdered by a monster-spirit masquerading as a Daoist able to 
summon wind and rain. The monster then changed himself into the form of the king, and now he sits in the Hall of Golden Chimes. When my master read the Threads during the night before last in the 
Precious Grove Monastery, the king’s spirit appeared to him and requested earnestly for old monkey to subdue the fiend for him. Because old monkey considered the problem of evidence, he went to 
the imperial garden with 8 Rules to look for the burial site. Within a well of octagonal marble walls, we fished out the king’s corpse, so perfectly preserved that neither his colour nor his appearance had 
changed. When we brought him back to my master, he was moved by compassion and wanted me to revive him. The condition was set however, that I’d not go to the Region of Darkness to fetch his 
soul, and that | must find some means to revive him in the World of Light. | concluded that there was no other remedy available, and that was why | came especially to see you. | beseech the Patriarch 
of Tao to be merciful and lend me one thousand tablets of your Soul-Restoring Elixir of Nine Reversions, so that old monkey can save the king.” 
“This ape’s babbling!” said Laozi. “What're you saying — one thousand, two thousand tablets! You eat them like rice? You think they're kneaded with mud? That easy? No! Go quickly! I’ve none!” 
“All right,” said Pilgrim, chuckling, “how about a hundred tablets?” 
“I've none,” said Laozi. 
“Just ten tablets, then,” said Pilgrim. 
“This wretched ape’s an absolute pest!” said Laozi angrily. “I've none. Get out! Get out!” 
“You've really none?” said Pilgrim, laughing. “I'll go somewhere to look for help then.” 
“Go! Go! Go!” shouted Laozi. 
Turning around, the Great Sage strode out at once. Laozi suddenly thought to himself, “This monkey is such a rogue! When | told him to go, he left but | fear that he might sneak back in and start 
stealing.” He ordered a divine youth to call Pilgrim back at once, saying, “You ape, you’ve itchy hands and feet! I'll give you one tablet of my Soul-Restoring Elixir.” 
“Venerable Sir,” said Pilgrim, “if you know the talent of old monkey, you'll bring out your golden elixir at once and divide up what you’ve with me equitably. That'll be your good fortune! Otherwise, I’m 
going to swipe them clean for you.” Taking out his gourd, the patriarch turned it upside down and poured out one pellet of golden elixir. He handed it over to Pilgrim, saying, “That’s all I've. Take it, take 
it! I'm giving it to you, you know, and when that king is revived, it'll be counted as your merit.” Pilgrim took it and said, “Let's not hurry! I’m going to have a taste of it first, for I’m not going to be duped 
by some bogus pill!” He popped it into his mouth at once. The old patriarch was so startled that he dashed forward and grabbed the skin on Pilgrim’s head. Holding high his fist, he shouted, “You 
wretched ape! If you dare swallow it, I'll kill you!” 
“Shame on you!” said Pilgrim, laughing. “Don’t be so petty! Who's going to eat your stuff! How much could it be worth, this flimsy stuff? Isn't it right here?” 
The monkey had a little pouch just beneath his jowl and that was where he kept the golden elixir. After the patriarch had felt it with his fingers, he said, “Go away! Bother me here no more!” 
Then the Great Sage thanked the old patriarch and left the Tushita Heaven Palace. Look at him! In countless hallowed beams he left the arches of jade; on myriad auspicious clouds he went to the 
world of dust. In a moment, he left the South Heaven Gate behind and as the sun came up, he dropped from the clouds and arrived at the gate of the Precious Grove Monastery. 8 Rules’ weeping 
could still be heard when he approached crying, “Master.” 
“Wukong’s returned,” said Tripitaka, delighted. “Do you've any elixir or medicine?” 
“I do,” said Pilgrim. “He couldn't possibly not have it!” said 8 Rules. “He would have brought back something even if he had to steal it!” 
“Brother,” said Pilgrim, chuckling, “you can get out of the way, | don’t need you anymore. Wipe away your tears, or you can go somewhere to weep. Sand-monk, please fetch me some water.” 
Sand-monk hurried to the well in the rear where there was a bucket nearby. He bailed out half an alms bowl of water and brought it to Pilgrim. After he took it, Pilgrim spat out the elixir and placed it 
inside the lips of the king. Then with both hands, he pulled the jaws of the king apart, and using a mouthful of clean water, he flushed the golden elixir down to the king’s stomach. After about half an 
hour, loud gurgling noises came from the belly of the king, although his body remained immobile. “Master,” said Pilgrim, “even my golden elixir seems unable to revive him! Could it be that old monkey's 
going to be finished off by blackmail?” Tripitaka said, “Nonsense! There’s no reason for him not to live. How could he swallow that water if he had been only a corpse dead for a long time? It had to be 
the divine power of that golden elixir that entrance into his stomach now causes the intestines to growl. When that happens, it means that circulation and pulse are in harmonious motion once more. 
His breath however, is still stopped and cannot flow freely. But that’s to be expected when a man has been submerged in a well for three years; after all, even raw iron would be completely rusted. 
That's why his primal breath is all used up, and someone should give him mouth-to-mouth resuscitation.” 
8 Rules walked forward and was about to do this when he was stopped by Tripitaka. “You can’t do it,” he said. “Wukong still should take over.” That elder indeed had presence of mind, for Bullseye 8 
Rules had been a cannibal since his youth, and his breath was unclean. Pilgrim, on the other hand, had practiced self-cultivation since his birth, the food sustaining him being various fruits and nuts, 
and thus his breath was pure. The Great Sage, therefore, went forward and clamped his thunder-god beak to the lips of the king: a mighty breath was blown through his throat to descend the tiered 
towers.! Invading the bright hall, it reached the cinnabar field and the jetting-spring points beyond before it reversed its direction and travelled to the mud-pill chamber of the crown. With a loud swoosh, 
the king’s breath came together and his spirit returned; he turned over and at once flexed his hands and feet crying, “Master!” Going then to his knees, he said, “I remember my soul as a ghost did see 
you last night but | didn’t expect this morning my spirit would return to the World of Light.” 
Tripitaka hurriedly tried to raise him saying, “Your Majesty, | did nothing. You'd thank my disciple.” 
“Master, what’re you saying?” said Pilgrim with laughter. “The proverb says, a household doesn’t have two heads. You'd accept his salute.” 
Greatly embarrassed nonetheless, Tripitaka raised the king up with both hands and they went together into the Chan hall. The king insisted on greeting Pilgrim, 8 Rules, and Sand-monk before he 
would take a seat. The resident monks of the monastery had just finished preparing the morning meal and they were about to present it when they discovered a king with soaking wet garments. 
Everyone became frightened; each of them began to speculate. Pilgrim Sun however, leaped into their midst and said, “Monks, don’t be so alarmed. This is in fact the king of the Black Rooster Kingdom, 
the true ruler of all of you. Three years ago he was murdered by a fiend but old monkey revived him last night. We plan to go with him to the city presently to distinguish the perverse from the true. If 
you've some vegetarian food prepared, bring it here, so that we can start our journey after we eat.” The monks then presented hot water also so that the king could wash up and change his clothes. 
The royal reddish brown robe was discarded, and he put on instead two cloth shirts given to him by the monk-official. They took off the jade belt and tied him up with a yellow silk sash; after the carefree 
boots were removed, he was given a pair of old monk sandals. Then they had their vegetarian breakfast before going to saddle the horse. 
“Eight Rules,” said Pilgrim, “how heavy is your luggage?” 
“I've been toting it every day,” said 8 Rules, “and | really don’t know how heavy it is.” Pilgrim said, “Divide one and let the king take up the other one. We'd get to the city early to do our work.” Delighted, 
8 Rules said, “Lucky! Lucky! When | brought him here on my back, | used up a lot of my strength. I'd no idea that he could be my substitute after he had been healed.” Resorting at once to mischief, 
Idiot divided the luggage; he carried the lighter load with a flat pole that he acquired from the monastery whereas the heavier load he gave to the king to pole. “Your Majesty,” said Pilgrim with a chuckle, 
“| hope you don’t mind our treatment, dressing you in that manner and asking you to pick up a pole to follow us?” Kneeling down immediately, the king said, “Master, you're like parents who have given 
me a new birth. Don’t mention anything about poling some luggage. I’m even willing to pick up the whip and hold the stirrups to look after the Venerable Dad and follow him all the way to the Western 
Heaven.” 
Pilgrim said, “There’s no need for you to do that but I’ve a reason for making you do this at the moment. You can help us carry the luggage for these forty miles until we’ve entered the city and caught 
the monster-spirit. Then you can become a king again and we'll go and fetch our scriptures.” 
Hearing this, 8 Rules said, “In that case, he’s going to pole for only forty miles. After that, Old bull will remain as a long-term labourer!” 
“Brother, no more foolish talk!” said Pilgrim. “Get out there and lead the way.” 8 Rules indeed walked with the king in front to lead the way while Sand-monk helped his master to mount the horse and 
Pilgrim took up the rear. Arranged in an orderly formation, the five hundred monks of that monastery followed them all the way to the gate, beating their drums. Smiling, Pilgrim said, “No need for you 
monks to accompany us any further. | fear that if any of this is leaked to the officials, our enterprise will be ruined. Go back quickly! Go back quickly! Only see to it that the king’s clothing and belt are 
cleaned and prepared. Send them to the city either late tonight or early tomorrow morning. I'll ask for some reward for you.” 
The monks obeyed and retumed to their quarters while Pilgrim in big strides caught up with his master to proceed with him. So it is that the West has mystery, it’s good to seek the truth. Wood and 
Metal in concord, then spirit can be refined. The elixir mum recalls in vain a foolish dream; the child deplores deeply how powerless he is. You must seek at a well’s bottom the enlightened lord and 
then salute Laozi in the Hall of Heaven. Back to one’s own nature once you see form’s emptiness, one is thus truly a god-led man of affinity. It did not take master and disciples even half a day on the 
road when they saw a city approaching. “Wukong,” said Tripitaka, “I suppose that must be the Black Rooster Kingdom ahead of us.” 
“Exactly,” said Pilgrim. “Let's enter the city quickly so that we can do our business.” After they entered the city, master and disciples found the population well-mannered and engaged in a great deal of 
bustling activities. As they walked along, they soon came upon the phoenix bowers and dragon towers, exceedingly grand and ornate edifices for which a testimonial poem says: 
These outland buildings are like the sovereign states; slike those of old Tang, people recite and exercise. 
Flowers greet jewelled fans trailed by roseate clouds; fresh robes, sunlit, glimmer in jade-green fog. 
Peacock screens open and fragrant mist pours out; pearly shades roll up as coloured flags unfurl. 
A picture of peace most worthy of praise: quiet rows of nobles but no memorials. 
“Disciples,” said Tripitaka as he dismounted, “we might as well go right into the court to have our rescript certified and not be bothered by some bureaucratic office.” 
“That's reasonable,” said Pilgrim. “We brothers will go in with you; it’s easier to talk when you’ve more people on your side.” 
The Tang Monk said, “If all of you’re going inside, you mustn't be rowdy. Let’s go through the proper ceremony of greeting a ruler before we do any talking.” 
“If you want to go through that,” said Pilgrim, “it means that you've to salute yourself.” 
“Exactly,” said the Tang Monk, “we've to undertake the grand ceremony of five salutes and three respects.” 
“Master, you're too insipid!” said Pilgrim with a chuckle. “It’s so unwise of you to want to pay homage to that character! Let me go in first, for | know what I’m going to do. If he has anything to say to us, 
let me answer him. If | salute, you all can salute with me; if | crouch, you crouch also.” 
Look at that mischievous Monkey King! He went straight up to the gate of the court and said to the guardian official, “We've been sent by the Throne of the Great Tang in the Land of the East to go 
worship God in the Western Heaven and to acquire scriptures from him. Having arrived in this region, we'd like to have our rescript certified. May we trouble you to report this to the king so that the act 
of virtuous fruit will not be delayed.” 
The Custodian of the Yellow Gate went at once to the gate of the main hall and knelt before the vermilion steps to memorialise, saying, “There’re five monks outside the gate of the court who claim that 
they have been sent by imperial decree from the Tang nation in the Land of the East to go to see God for scriptures in the Western Heaven. They would like to have their rescript certified but they dare 
not enter the court, and they await your summons.” 
The demon king at once gave the order to summon them inside. The Tang Monk then proceeded to walk inside the court followed by the king who had been revived. As they walked, the king could not 
stop the tears from rolling down his cheeks, thinking to himself, “How pitiful indeed! My bronze-guarded empire, my iron-clad domain, had been secretly taken over by him.” 
“Your Majesty,” said Pilgrim softly, “you must not show your sorrow at this moment, for we may reveal everything. The rod in my ear is getting rather restless. In a moment, it will achieve a great merit 
by beating a demon to death and banishing all perversity. Your empire will soon be returned to you.” The king dared not disobey; pulling up his robe to wipe away the tears, he followed them resolutely 
up to the Hall of Golden Chimes. 
The rows of civil and military officials, some four hundred of them, all stood there with great sobriety and noble looks. Pilgrim led the Tang Monk up to the white jade steps; he then stood still and 
remained erect. All those officials beneath the steps became terrified, saying, “This monk is most foolish and base! When he sees our king, why does he not salute himself, nor does he express his 
praise? He doesn’t even give a salute! How audacious and rude!” 
Before they even finished speaking, the demon king asked, “Where did this monk come from?” Pilgrim replied boldly, “I’m from the Great Tang nation in the Land of the East, in the South Jambidvipa 
Continent, someone sent by imperial decree to go seek the living God in the Great Thunderclap Monastery of India in the Western Territories for true scriptures. Having reached this region, | don’t want 
to pass through it without having our travel rescript certified.” 
When the demon king heard what he said, he became angry, saying, “So what if you’re from the Land of the East? We're not paying tribute in your court, nor have we any intercourse with your nation. 
How dare you neglect your etiquette and not salute us?” Laughing, Pilgrim said, “Our celestial court in the Land of the East was established in antiquity, and ours had been called the superior state for 
a long time. Yours is only a state of the hinterlands in an inferior region. Haven't you heard of the ancient saying? The king of the superior state’s dad and ruler; the king of the inferior state’s son and 


subject. You've not even received me properly and dare chide me for not saluting you?” Infuriated, the demon king shouted to the civil and military officials, “Seize this wild monk!” When he said, “Seize,” 
all the officials surged forward. 

Pointing immediately with his finger, Pilgrim cried, “Cease!” That was the magic of immobilisation that made the various officials unable to move at all. Truly the captains before the steps looked like 
idols of wood and marshals in the palace resembled men of clay. When the demon king saw how Pilgrim had rendered immobile all the officials, he leaped up from the dragon couch and was about to 
seize Pilgrim himself. Secretly pleased, the Monkey King thought, “Good! Exactly what old monkey wanted! The moment you come near, your head’s going to have a gaping hole even if it's made of 
raw iron when my rod finds it.” 

He was about to strike, when suddenly a saving star appeared from one side. It was none other than the prince of the Black Rooster Kingdom. Dashing up to tug at the demon king’s garment, the prince 
knelt before him and said, “Let the anger of dad king subside.” 

“What do you want to say, my child?” asked the monster-spirit. 

“Let me report this to dad king,” said the prince. “Three years ago | heard already that there was a sage monk sent by the Throne of the Tang in the Land of the East to seek scriptures from God in the 
Western Heaven but | didn’t expect that he would arrive this day. The honoured nature of dad king is powerful and ferocious, | know. But if you seize this monk and have him executed, the great Tang 
could be greatly angered if ever they should learn of this one day. Remember that Li Shimin* who, since he established his throne, did succeed in uniting his empire. Still not content, he went on various 
expeditions of conquest to foreign lands. If he discovers that our king has murdered the sage monk, his bond-brother, he will most certainly call up troops and horses to war with us. When we realise 
then how small is our army and how weak our generals are, it will be too late for regrets. Let the dad king approve the memorial of his son, let him make a thorough investigation of the background of 
these four monks. We must first establish why they would not pay homage to the Throne before we convict them.” 

This entire speech was motivated by the prince’s caution who feared that the Tang Monk might be hurt and that was why he deliberately stopped the demon. The prince, of course, did not know that 
Pilgrim was about to strike. Consenting indeed to the words of the prince, the demon king stood before the dragon couch and loudly asked, “When did this monk leave the Land of the East? For what 
reason did the Tang emperor ask you to seek scriptures?” 

Again Pilgrim replied boldly, “My master is the bond-brother of the Tang emperor, and his honourific is Tripitaka. There is a prime minister before the Tang throne whose name is Wei Zheng, and who 
has by the decree of Heaven beheaded an old dragon of the Jing River. Because of this, the Great Tang emperor also had to tour the Region of Darkness in his dream, and after he was revived, he 
opened wide the plot of truth by giving a Grand Mass of Land and Water to redeem the wronged souls and damned spirits. As my master recited and performed the Threads to magnify the power of 
compassion, the Nun Guanshiyin of South Sea revealed to him suddenly that he should journey to the West. Making a grand promise, my master accepted the commission freely and gladly to serve 
his nation, and that was when the emperor bestowed on him the rescript. On the third day before the fifteenth, during the ninth month of the thirteenth year in the Zhenguan period of the Great Tang, 
he left the Land of the East. When he reached the Mountain of Two Frontiers, he accepted me as his disciple. My surname is Sun, and my name is Wukong Pilgrim. Next, we arrived at the Gao Family 
Village of the Qoco Kingdom where my master made his second disciple; his surname is Bullseye, and his name is Aware of Ability 8 Rules. At the Flowing Sand River, the third disciple joined the fold; 
his surname is Sha, and his name is Awakened to Purity Monk. The day before yesterday at the Precious Grove Monastery Built by Imperial Command, we newly acquired a mendicant workers who 
now helps us with poling the luggage.” 

After the demon king heard this speech, he found it difficult to turn up an excuse for examining the Tang Monk further, and it was even more difficult for him to try to overwhelm Pilgrim with deceptive 
interrogation. Glowering, he said, “You, monk! When you first left the Land of the East, you're all by yourself but then you accepted all these four persons into your company. Those three monks may 
be all right but this worker looks most suspicious. This mendicant must have been kidnapped from somewhere. What is his name? Does he have a certificate of ordination? Bring him up here and let 
him make a deposition.” Trembling all over, the king said, “O Master! How shall | make this deposition?” Giving him a pinch, Pilgrim said, “Don’t be afraid. Let me do it for you.” 

Dear Great Sage! He strode forward and said to the fiend in a loud voice, “Your Majesty, this old worker is not only dumb but he is also somewhat deaf. We took him on because he knew the way to 
the Western Heaven, having gone there himself in his younger days. | know everything about him — his background, his origin, his rise and fall. | beg your Majesty’s pardon but let me make the 
deposition for him.” 

“Do it quickly and truthfully,” said the demon king, “lest he be convicted of a serious offence.” 

Pilgrim said, “Of this deposition the mendicant’s quite old; deaf, dumb, and dim-witted, he’s also poor! A man whose native home was in this place, he met defeat and ruin five years ago. With no rain 
from the sky, folks turned shrivelled and dry. King and subjects all fasted and abstained; they bathed and burned incense to pray to Heaven but no cloud was seen for ten thousand miles. While people 
starved as though hung upside down, there came from Zhongnan a Complete Truth fiend who called up wind and rain to show his power and then took in secret the king’s own life. The victim was 
pushed down a garden well; the dragon seat was taken unknown to man. Luckily | came. My merit was great: no snag it was to bring life back from death. Willing to submit as a mendicant, he'd follow 
the monk to face the West. That specious king is a Daoist in fact; this worker's in truth the rightful king.” 

When that demon king on the Hall of Golden Chimes heard this speech, he became so frightened that his heart pounded like the feet of a young deer and his face was flushed with red clouds. He 
wanted to run away at once but he did not even have a weapon in his hands. Turning around, he saw one of the captains of palace guards who had a scimitar buckled to his waist and who had been 
rendered a dumb and stupid person standing there by Pilgrim’s magic of immobilization. Dashing up to him, the demon king took this scimitar and then immediately mounted the clouds to escape in 
the air. Sand-monk and Bullseye 8 Rules were so annoyed by this turn of events that they screamed at Pilgrim, “You impatient ape! Why did you've to say all those things at once? You’d have tricked 
him into staying if you had used a slower approach. Now that he has mounted the clouds and escaped where would you go to search for him?” 

“Don’t scream madly like that, brothers,” said Pilgrim with laughter. “Let me ask the prince to come out and salute his dad and the queen to greet her husband first. Let me then recite another spell to 
release those ministers from my magic so that they can learn the truth about what has happened and pay homage to the real king. Then | can go look for him.” Dear Great Sage! After he had disposed 
of everything he said he would do, he told 8 Rules and Sand-monk, “Take care to guard ruler and subjects, dad and son, husband and wife, and our master. I’m off!” Hardly had he finished speaking 
before he was completely out of sight. 

Rising straight up to the clouds of the 9-fold Heaven, Pilgrim opened wide his eyes to stare all around: the demon king, having escaped with his life, was fleeing toward the northeast. Pilgrim caught up 
with him in no time, shouting, “Fiend where are you going? Old monkey's here.” Swiftly turning around, the demon king brought out his scimitar and said with a loud voice, “Pilgrim Sun, what a rogue 
you're! | took the throne of another man but that didn’t concern you. Why did you've to be involved in someone’s affairs and reveal my secret?” 

Roaring with laughter, Pilgrim said, “You audacious, lawless fiend! You think you ought to be permitted to be a king? If you recognised old monkey, you’d have fled at the earliest opportunity to the 
farthest place. How dare you try to give my master a hard time, asking for that so-called deposition? That deposition | gave you just now, was that accurate or not? Don’t run away now! If you’re a man, 
have a taste of old monkey's rod!” The demon king stepped aside to dodge the blow before he wielded the scimitar to meet his opponent. The moment their weapons joined, it was a marvellous battle. 
Truly the Monkey King is fierce, the demon king is strong — rod and scimitar dare each other oppose. This day the 3 Regions are bedimmed by fog, all for a king’s restoration to his court. After the two 
of them fought for a few rounds, the demon king could no longer withstand the Monkey King and fled instead back into the city on the way he came. Hurling himself into the two rows of civil and military 
Officials before the white jade steps, the demon king gave his body a shake and changed into an exact image of Tripitaka Tang, both of them standing hand-in-hand before the steps. The Great Sage 
arrived and was about to strike with the rod when the fiend said, “Disciple, don’t hit me! It’s I!” Pilgrim turned the rod toward the other Tang Monk who also said, “Disciple, don’t hit me! It’s I!” 

There were two Tang Monks exactly alike and most difficult to distinguish. Thinking to himself, “If | kill the monster spirit with one blow of the rod, it would be my merit, all right; but what would | do if 
that blow happens to kill my true master?” Pilgrim had to stop and ask 8 Rules and Sand-monk, “Which is the fiend and which is our master? Point him out to me so that | can strike at him.” 

“You two were yelling and fighting in mid-air,” said 8 Rules, “and when | blinked my eyes, | saw two masters the next moment. | don’t know who is real and who is false.” 

When Pilgrim heard these words, he made the magic sign with his fingers and recited a spell that called together the various demigod guardians, the 6 Gods of Darkness and the 6 Gods of Light, the 
Guardians of 5 Quarters, the 4 Sentinels, the 18 Guardians of the Faith, the local spirit, and the mountain god of that region. He said to them, “Old monkey’s trying to subdue a monster here who’s 
changed himself into the likeness of my master. Both their form and substance seem exactly the same and it’s difficult to tell them apart. But you may be able to distinguish them in secret; if so, make 
my master walk up the steps into the main hall so that | can catch this demon.” 

The fiend was accomplished in magic; when he heard these words of Pilgrim, he quickly bounded into the Hall of Golden Chimes. Pilgrim raised his rod and brought it down hard on the Tang Monk. 
Alas! If it had not been for desperate efforts of those several deities summoned to this place, the blow would have reduced even twenty Tang Monks to meat patties! Fortunately the various deities 
managed to block the blow, saying, “Great Sage, the fiend knows his magic. He has gone up to the hall first.” 

Pilgrim gave chase at once, and the demon king ran outside the hall to catch hold of the Tang Monk once more in the crowd. After this confusion, they again could not be distinguished. Pilgrim was 
highly displeased and when he saw moreover that 8 Rules was snickering on one side, he became enraged, saying, “What's the matter with you, stupid coolie? Now you've two masters whose calls 
you must answer and whom you must serve. Are you overjoyed?” 

Laughing, 8 Rules said, “Elder Brother, you say I’m dumb; well, you’re even dumber! If you can’t recognise who is the real master, why waste all this energy? You try to endure a little pain on your head 
for a moment and ask Master to recite that little something of his. Sand-monk and I'll each hold on to one of them and listen: that person who does not know how to recite the spell must be the monster. 
What's so difficult about that?” 

“Thank you, Brother,” said Pilgrim. “You've got it. That little something indeed is known only to three persons: born of the very mind of our God Siddhartha, it was transmitted to the Nun Guanshiyin 
who then imparted it to my master. There is no other person who has knowledge of it. All right, Master, start your recital.” In truth the Tang Monk began to recite but how could the demon king know 
what to do? All he could do was mumble something, and 8 Rules said, “This one mumbling is the monster!” He let go and raised his muckrake to strike at the demon king who leaped up and tried to 
flee, treading the clouds. 

Dear 8 Rules! With a shout, he mounted the clouds also to give chase. Sand-monk hurriedly abandoned the Tang Monk and brought out his precious staff to do battle. Only then did the Tang Monk 
stop reciting his spell; the Great Sage Sun, enduring his headache, dragged his iron rod up to mid-air. Ah, look at this battle! Three fierce monks have surrounded a brazen demon! 

The demon king was attacked left and right by 8 Rules with his rake and Sand-monk with his staff. Chuckling to himself, Pilgrim said, “If | go attack him face to face, he will try to escape as he is already 
somewhat afraid of me. Let old monkey get up higher and give me a garlic-pounding blow from the top down. That'll finish him off!” 

Mounting the auspicious luminosity, the Great Sage rose to the 9-fold Heaven and was about to show his decisive hand when a loud voice came from a petal of coloured cloud in the northeast: “Sun 
Wukong, don’t do it!” When Pilgrim turned to look, he discovered the Nun the Beautiful 1 with Glory and Auspiciousness. Quickly putting away his rod, he drew near and saluted saying, “Nun, where’re 
you going?” 

“| came,” said The Beautiful one with Glory and Auspiciousness, “to put away this fiend for you.” 

Pilgrim thanked him and said, “I’m greatly obliged.” Taking out an imp-reflecting mirror from his sleeve, the Nun aimed it at the fiend and the image of its original form became visible at once. Pilgrim 
called 8 Rules and Sand-monk to come to greet the Nun and to look into the mirror. Exceedingly ferocious in appearance, that demon king had eyes like large goblets of glass; a head like a cooking 
vat; a body of deep summer green; and 4 paws like autumn’s frost; 2 large ears that flipped downward; a tail as long as a broom; green hair full of fighting ardour; red eyes emitting gold beams; rows 
of flat teeth like jade slabs; round whiskers rearing up like spears. The true form seen in the mirror’s The Beautiful one with Glory and Auspiciousness’s lion-king. “Nun,” said Pilgrim, “so this is the 
green-haired lion who serves as your beast of burden. How was it that he had been turned loose so that he could become a spirit here? Aren’t you going to make him submit to you?” 

“Wukong,” said the Nun, “he was not turned loose. He had been sent by the decree of God to come here.” Pilgrim said, “You mean that this beast’s becoming a spirit to usurp the throne of a king was 
a decree of God? If that’s the case, old monkey who is accompanying the Tang Monk through all his trials, should have been given several imperial documents!” 

The Nun said, “You don’t know that this king of the Black Rooster Kingdom was dedicated to virtue and to the feeding of monks at first. A god sent me to lead him to return to the West so that he could 
attain the golden body of an Arhat. I'd not, of course, reveal myself to him in my true form, and so | changed myself into an ordinary mortal monk to beg some food from him. During our conversation a 
few words of mine put him on the spot; not realising that | was a good man after all, he tied me up with a rope and sent me into the imperial moat. | soaked in there for three days and nights before the 
Six Gods of Darkness rescued me back to the West. Siddhartha therefore sent this creature here to push him down the well and have him submerged for three years, in order to exact vengeance for 
my water adversity of three days. Thus ‘not even a sup or a bite is not foreordained,’ and we'd to wait for all of you to arrive and achieve this merit.” 

“You might have repaid the private grievance of your so-called one sup or one bite,” said Pilgrim, “but who knows how many human beings that fiendish creature has harmed.” 

“He’s not,” said the Nun. “In fact, these three years after his arrival have seen nothing but winds and rains in season, prosperity for the kingdom, and peace for the inhabitants. Since when has he 
harmed anyone?” 


“Even so,” said Pilgrim, “those ladies of the three palaces did sleep with him and rise with him. His body has defiled many and violated the great human relations countless times. And you say that he 
has not harmed anyone?” The Nun said, “He has not defiled anyone, for he’s a gelded lion.” When 8 Rules heard this, he walked near and gave the creature a pat, saying with a chuckle, “This monster- 
spirit is truly a ‘red nose who doesn’t drink’! He bears his name in vain!” 

“All right,” said Pilgrim, “take him away. If the Nun did not come here himself, I’d never have spared his life.” Reciting a spell, the Nun shouted, “Beast, how long are you going to wait before you submit 
to the Right?” The demon king at once changed back to his original form, after which the Nun released the lotus flower seat to be placed on the back of the lion. He then mounted the lion who trod on 
the auspicious luminosity and left. Ana! He went straight to the Wutai Mountain® to hear Threads explained before the lotus seat. 


040 

The playful transformations of the child confuse the Chan Mind; Ape, Horse, Spatula gone, Wood Mum’s lost, too 
The Great Sage Sun and his 2 brothers who lowered their clouds and returned to the court. They were met by the king, the queen, and their subjects — all of them lined up in rows to salute and express 
their thanks. Pilgrim then gave a complete account of how the Nun came to subdue the monster, and all the officials in court touched the top of their heads to the ground in adoration. As they were thus 
rejoicing, the Custodian of the Yellow Gate arrived to announce, “My lord, there are four more monks who have arrived at the gate.” A little apprehensive, 8 Rules said, “Elder Brother, could it be that 
the monster-spirit, having used magic to disguise himself as the Nun The Beautiful one with Glory and Auspiciousness to deceive us, has now changed again into some kind of monk to match wits with 
us?” 
“How could that be?” said Pilgrim who then asked that the monks be summoned inside. 
After the civil and military officials transmitted the order and the visitors entered, Pilgrim saw that they were monks from the Precious Grove Monastery who came bearing the rising-to-Heaven cap, the 
green-jade belt, the brownish yellow robe, and the carefree boots. Highly pleased, Pilgrim said, “It's wonderful that you’ve come!” He asked the mendicant worker to step forward: his head-wrap was 
taken off and the rising-to-Heaven cap was placed on his head; the cloth garment was stripped off and he put on the brownish yellow robe instead; after he untied the silk sash and took off the monk 
sandals, he buckled on the jade-green belt and climbed into the carefree boots. The prince was then told to bring out the white jade token so that the king might hold it in his hands, and he was asked 
to ascend the main hall to be the king once more. As the ancient proverb said, “The court should not be one day without a ruler.” But the king absolutely refused to sit on the throne; weeping profusely, 
he knelt on the steps and said, “I've been dead for three years, and I’m indebted to Master for making me return to life. How could | dare assume such honour again? Let one of these masters be the 
ruler; I'll be perfectly content to go with my wife and child outside the city to live as a commoner.” Tripitaka, of course, would have none of this, for he was intent on going to worship God and to acquire 
the scriptures. The king then turned to Pilgrim who said to him, smiling, “To tell you the truth, if old monkey wanted to be a king, he would have been one throughout the myriad kingdoms in the world. 
But all of us are used to the leisurely and carefree existence of monks. If | become a king, I'll have to let my hair grow again; I'll be unable to retire when it’s dark, nor will | be able to sleep beyond the 
hour of the fifth watch. I'll be anxious when reports from the borders arrive; I'll have endless worries when there are disasters or famines. How could | live with these things? So, you may as well be the 
king, and we'll continue to be monks to cultivate our merit.” After pleading with them bitterly to no avail, the king had no choice but to ascend the treasure hall once more to face south and resume the 
use of the royal “we.” After giving a general pardon throughout his empire, he also bestowed huge rewards on the monks of the Precious Grove Monastery before they left. Then he opened up the 
eastern palace to give a banquet to honour the Tang Monk; at the same time, painters were summoned into the palace to make portraits of the four pilgrims, so that these could be permanently revered 
in the Hall of Golden Chimes. 
After they had securely established the kingdom, master and disciples, reluctant to stay too long, were about to take leave of the throne to face the West. The king, the queen, the prince, and all their 
subjects took out the crown treasures together with gold, silver, and silk to present to the master as tokens of gratitude but Tripitaka refused to accept any of these. All he wanted was to have his travel 
rescript certified so that he could tell Wukong and his brothers to saddle the horse and leave. Feeling very keenly that he had not expressed his gratitude in an adequate manner, the king called for his 
imperial chariot and invited the Tang Monk to sit in it. The two rows of civil and military officials were told to lead the way in front while he, the prince, and the ladies of the three palaces pushed the 
chariot themselves. Only after they had gone out of the city wall was the Tang Monk permitted to descend from the dragon chariot to take leave. “O Master,” said the king, “when you've reached the 
Western Heaven and retrace your steps with your scriptures, you must pay our region a visit.” 
“Your disciple obeys you,” said Tripitaka. 
The king went back to the city tearfully with his subjects. The Tang Monk and his three disciples again took up the labyrinthine path, their minds intent only on saluting at the Spirit Mountain. It was now 
the season of late autumn and early winter, and they saw frost blighting the maples to make each forest sparse and rain-ripened millet, plenty everywhere. Warmed by the sun, summit plums spread 
their moming hues; rocked by the wind, mountain bamboos voice their chilly plaint. After they left the Black Rooster Kingdom, master and disciples journeyed during the day and rested at night; they 
had been on the road for more than half a month when they came upon another tall mountain, truly Heaven-touching and sun-obstructing. Growing alarmed on the horse, Tripitaka quickly pulled in his 
reins to call Pilgrim. “What do you want to say, Master?” asked Pilgrim. 
“Look at that huge mountain with those rugged cliffs before us,” said Tripitaka. “You must take caution and be on your guard, for | fear that some deviate creature all of a sudden will come to attack me 
again.” 
“Just get moving,” said Pilgrim with a chuckle. “Don’t be suspicious. Old monkey's his defence.” 
The elder had to banish his worries and urged his horse to enter the mountain that was truly rugged. See whether tall or not, ‘its top reaches the blue sky; whether deep or not, a stream with depth like 
Hell down there. Before the mountain are often seen rings of white clouds rising and boiling waves of dark fog; red plums and jade-like bamboos; verdant cedars and green pines; behind the mountain 
are soul-rending cliffs ten thousand yards deep behind which are strange, grotesque, demon-hiding caves in which water drips down from rocks drop by drop, leading to a winding, twisting brooklet 
down below. See also fruit-bearing apes prancing, leaping, deer with horns forked, zigzagged; dull and dumbly staring antelopes; tigers climbing the hills to seek their dens at night; dragons churning 
the waves to leave their lairs at dawn. When steps at the cave’s entrance snap and crackle, the fowls dart up with wings loudly beating. Look also at these beasts pawing noisily through the woods. 
When you see this horde of birds and beasts, you'll be stricken with heart-pounding fear. The Due-to-Fall Cave faces the Due-to-Fall Cave; the cave facing the Due-to-Fall Cave faces a god. Green 
rocks are dyed like a thousand pieces of jade; blue-green gauze enshrouds ten thousand piles of mist. As master and disciples became more and more apprehensive, they saw a red cloud rising up 
from the fold of the mountain ahead of them; after it reached mid-air, it condensed and took on the appearance of a fireball. Greatly alarmed, Pilgrim ran forward to catch hold of 1 of the Tang Monk's 
legs and pulled him from the horse, crying, “Brothers, stop! A monster's approaching!” 
8 Rules and Sand-monk quickly took out their muckrake and precious staff and surrounded the Tang Monk. Let us now tell you that there was indeed a monster-spirit inside the ball of red light. Several 
years ago he heard people saying that the Tang Monk sent from the Land of the East to acquire scriptures from the Western Heaven was the disciple of the elder, Gold Cicada, a good man who had 
practiced austerities for ten existences. Any person who could taste a piece of his flesh, they said, would be able to prolong his life until it became the same as Heaven and Earth. Every morning, 
therefore, he waited in the mountain, and suddenly he found that the pilgrim had arrived. As he watched in mid-air, he saw that the Tang Monk beside the horse was surrounded by three disciples, all 
ready to fight. Marvelling to himself, the spirit said, “Dear monk! This white-faced, chubby cleric riding a horse was just coming into my view, when all of a sudden these three ugly monks had him 
surrounded. Look at them! Everyone is rolling up his sleeves, stretching out his fists and wielding his weapon — as if he is about to fight with someone. Aha! One of them with some perception, | suppose, 
must have recognised me. Well, if it’s going to be like this, it'll be difficult for anyone trying to get a taste of the Tang Monk’s flesh.” As he thought to himself, questioning his mind with mind like that, he 
said, “If | try to overpower them, | may not even get near them but if | try to use the good to deceive them, | may succeed. As long as I’m able to beguile their minds, | can trick them even with the good. 
Then I'll catch them for sure. Let me go down and tease them a little.” 
Dear monster! He made the red light disperse and lowered his cloud toward the fold of the mountain. Shaking his body, he changed immediately into a little mischievous boy, about seven years of age 
and completely naked who was bound by a rope and suspended from the top of a pine tree. “Help! Help!” he cried without ceasing. 
We're just telling you about the Great Sage Sun who raised his head and found that the red cloud had completely dissipated and the flames all vanished. He therefore said, “Master, please mount up 
again for the journey.” 
“You just told us that there was a fiend approaching,” said the Tang Monk. “Do we dare proceed now?” 
“A little while ago,” said Pilgrim, “I saw a red cloud rising up from the ground, and by the time it reached mid-air, it condensed into a flaming ball of fire. It had to be a monster-spirit. But now the red 
cloud has dissipated, and so it must be a monster who's a passer-by and who does not dare harm people. Let’s go.” 
“Elder Brother is truly clever with words,” said 8 Rules, chuckling. “Even monster-spirits can be passers-by!” 
“How would you know?” asked Pilgrim. “If some demon king of a certain cave in a certain mountain has sent out invitations to spirits of sundry mountains and caves to attend a festival, monster-spirits 
from all quarters - north, south, east, and west - would respond. Perhaps he’s just interested in going to the festival and not in harming people. That's a monster-spirit who's a passer-by.” 
When Tripitaka heard these words, he was only half-convinced but he had little alternative other than to climb on his saddle to journey into the mountain. As they proceeded, they heard suddenly 
repeated cries of “Help!” Highly startled, the elder said, “O Disciples! Who's calling out in the midst of this mountain?” Pilgrim walked forward and said to him, “Master, keep moving. Don’t harp on such 
things as human carriage, 2donkey carriage, open carriage, or reclining carriage. Even if there were a carriage in a place like this, there'd be no one to carry you.” 
“Im not talking about carriages,” said the Tang Monk. “I’m referring to someone calling us.” 
“| know,” said Pilgrim with laughter, “but mind your own business. Let's move on.” 
Tripitaka agreed and urged his horse forward once more. Before they had travelled a mile, they heard again the call, “Help!” 
“Disciple,” said the elder, “the sound of this call can’t be that of a demon or a goblin, for if it were, there would be no echo. Just listen to it: there was a call a moment ago, and now we’ve another one. 
It must have come from a man in dire difficulty. Let's go and help him.” Pilgrim said, “Master, please put away your compassion just for today! When we've crossed this mountain, you can be 
compassionate then. If you know those stories about strange plants and possessed vegetation, you'd know that everything can become a spirit. In most cases, they may not be too dangerous but if 
you’d run into something like a python that has become an evil spirit after prolonged self-cultivation, you'd be in trouble. A spirit like that can even possess knowledge of a person’s nickname. If he 
should call out, hiding in the bushes or in the fold of the mountain, a person may get by if he does not answer him but if he does answer, the spirit can snatch away his primal soul, or he can follow that 
person and take his life that night. Let’s get away! Let’s get away! As the ancients said, ‘If you escape, just thank the gods.’ Please don't listen to this call.” 
The elder had little alternative but to agree and he whipped his horse to go forward. Pilgrim thought to himself, “| wonder where this brazen fiend is hollering. Let old monkey give him a taste of ‘Cancer 
in opposition to Capricornus’ so that the two will never meet.” Dear Great Sage! He said to Sand-monk, “Hold on to the horse and walk slowly. Old monkey's going to take a leak.” Look at him! He let 
the Tang Monk walk slightly ahead and then recited a spell to exercise the magic of shortening the ground and moving the mountain. He pointed his golden-hooped rod backward once, and master and 
disciples immediately went past the peak of the mountain, leaving behind the fiendish creature. In big strides, the Great Sage caught up with the Tang Monk and they proceeded. Just then Tripitaka 
heard again a call coming from the mountain behind him, crying “Help!” 
The elder said, “O Disciple! That person in adversity truly has no affinity for he’s not run into any of us. We must've passed him for you can hear that he is crying out from the mountain behind us.” 
“Or he may be still ahead of us,” said 8 Rules, “but perhaps the wind’s changed.” 
“Never mind whether the wind has changed or not,” said Pilgrim. “Just keep moving.” 
As a result, everyone fell silent and concentrated on trying to pass the mountain. The monster-spirit in the mountain valley cried out 3 or 4 times but no one appeared. He thought to himself, “When | 
saw the Tang Monk just now, he couldn’t have been more than three miles away. I’ve been waiting for him all this time. Why hasn't he arrived? Could it be that he had taken another road down the 
mountain?” Shaking his body, he loosened the rope at once and mounted the red light once more to rise into the air. Unwittingly the Great Sage Sun was looking back with head upturned, and when 
he saw the light, he knew that it was the fiendish creature. Once more he grabbed the legs of the Tang Monk and pushed him off the horse, crying, “Brothers, take care! Take care! That monster-spirit 
is approaching again!” 
8 Rules and Sand-monk were so alarmed that they wielded their rake and staff to surround the Tang Monk as before. When that spirit saw what happened in mid-air, he could not stop marvelling, 
saying to himself, “Dear monks! | just saw that white-faced priest riding on the horse. How is it that he is now surrounded again by the three of them? Now | realise, after what I’ve seen, that | must 
overthrow the one who has perception before | can seize the Tang Monk. If not, my exertions are vain for | can’t get my thing; my efforts notwithstanding, all is nothing!” 
He lowered his cloud and transforming himself as before, he hung himself high on top of a pine tree. This time however, he positioned himself only about half a mile away. The Great Sage Sun when 
he raised his head and found that the red cloud had dispersed, requested once more that his master mount up and proceed. “You just told us that the monster-spirit was approaching again,” said 
Tripitaka. “Why do you ask me to move on?” Pilgrim said, “This monster-spirit is a passer-by. He doesn’t dare bother us.” The elder grew angry and said, “You brazen ape! You're just playing with me! 
When there is a demon, you say it’s nothing. But when we're in this peaceful region, you're out to frighten me, yelling all the time about a monster-spirit. There’s more falsehood than truth in your words, 


and without regard for good or ill, you grab my legs and throw me off the horse. Now you come up with an explanation about this monster-spirit who’s a so-called passer-by! If | got hurt from the fall, 
would you be able to live with yourself? You, you...” 
“Please don't be offended, Master,” said Pilgrim. “If your hands and feet got hurt from the fall, we'd still take care of you but if you’re abducted by a monster-spirit where would we go to look for you?” 
Enraged, Tripitaka would have recited the Tight-Fillet Spell had not Sand-monk desperately pleaded with him. Finally he mounted his horse and proceeded once more. 
Before he could even sit properly on the saddle he heard another cry: “Master, please help me!” As he looked up, the elder found that it came from a little child, completely naked who was suspended 
on top of a tree. He pulled in the reins and began to berate Pilgrim, saying, “You wretched ape! How villainous you're! You don't have the tiniest bit of kindness in you! Every thought of yours is bent on 
making mischief and working violence! | told you that it was a human voice calling for help but you’ve to spend countless words to claim it was a monster. Look! Isn't that a person hanging on the tree?” 
Seeing how the master was putting the blame on him and also the form before his face, the Great Sage lowered his head and dared not reply, for there was nothing he could do at the moment and he 
was afraid that his master would recite the Tight-Fillet Spell. He had little choice, in fact but to permit the Tang Monk to approach the tree. Pointing with his whip, the elder asked, “Which household do 
you belong to, child? Why are you hung here? Tell me, so that | can rescue you.” 
Alas! Clearly this is a monster-spirit who has transformed himself in this manner but that master is a man of fleshly eyes and mortal stock, completely unable to recognise what he saw. 
When that demon heard the question, he became even bolder in his chicanery. With tears welling up in his eyes, he said, “O Master! West of this mountain there is a Withered Pine Brook, by the side 
of which there is a village where my family is located. My grandpa’s name is Red, and because he has amassed a huge fortune, he was given the name Red Millions. He has however, been dead for 
a long time after having lived to a ripe old age, and his estate was left to my dad. Recent business reversals have gradually fibbed away our possessions, and my dad for that reason has changed his 
name to Red Thousands. He has been befriending many men of valour, to whom he had lent gold and silver with the hope of reaping some profits. Little did he realise that these were all rootless men 
out to swindle him, and he lost both principal and interest. My dad therefore vowed that he would never lend out another penny but those borrowers, after having squandered what they had, banded 
together and plundered our house in broad daylight, holding lit torches and staffs. Not only did they rob us of all our money and possessions but they killed my dad also. And when they saw that my 
mum was somewhat attractive, they decided to abduct her and take her with them to be some kind of camp lady. Unwilling to abandon me, my mum carried me along in her bosom and, weeping, 
followed the thieves to this mountain where they wanted to kill me also. Fortunately, my mum pleaded with them and | was spared the knife; | was tied with ropes and hung here to die of hunger and 
exposure instead. | don’t know what sort of merit I've accumulated in another existence that brings me the luck of meeting Master here. If you’re willing to be compassionate and save my life so that | 
can return home, I'll try to repay your kindness even if I’ve to sell myself. Even when the yellow sand covers my face, I'll not forget your kindness.” 
When Tripitaka heard these words, he thought they were the truth and immediately asked 8 Rules to loosen the ropes and rescue the child. Not knowing any better either, Idiot was about to act when 
Pilgrim on one side could not restrain himself any longer. “You brazen thing!” he shouted. “There’s someone here who recognises you! Don’t think you can use your humbuggery to hoodwink people! 
If your possessions were stolen, if your dad was killed and your mum taken by thieves, to whom would we entrust you once we rescued you? With what would you thank us? Your fables don’t add up!” 
When the fiend heard these words, he became frightened, realising that the Great Sage was an able man to be reckoned with. Trembling all over, the fiend spoke as tears flowed down his face, “Master, 
though my parents are lost and gone, and though the wealth of our family is reduced to nothing, | still have some land and relatives.” 
“What sort of relatives do you've?” asked Pilgrim. The fiend said, “The household of my maternal family lives south of this mountain while my aunties reside north of the peak. Li Four at the head of the 
brook is the husband of my mum’s sister, and Red Three in the forest is a distant uncle. I’ve, moreover, several cousins living here and there in the village. If Venerable Master is willing to save me and 
take me to see these relatives at the village, I'll certainly give them a thorough account of your kindness, and you'll be handsomely rewarded when we sell some of our land.” 
When 8 Rules heard what he said, he pushed Pilgrim aside, saying, “Elder Brother, this is only a child! Why keep on interrogating him? What he told us was that the thieves had robbed them of their 
liquid assets. They couldn't take their houses and land, could they? If he will speak to his relatives, we may have huge appetites but we can’t eat up the price of ten acres of land. Let’s cut him down.” 
Idiot, of course, thought only of food; he had no further regard for good or ill, and using the ritual razor, he ripped open the ropes to free the fiend. Facing the Tang Monk tearfully, the fiend knelt beneath 
the horse and kept on respecting. A compassionate man, the elder called out, “Child, get up on the horse. I'll take you there.” 
“O Master,” said the fiend, “my hands and feet are numb from the hanging, and my torso hurts. Moreover, I’m a rural person and not used to riding horses.” The Tang Monk at once asked 8 Rules to 
carry him but the fiend, after glancing at Idiot, said, “Master, my skin is frostbitten, and | dare not let myself be carried by this master. He has such a long mouth and large ears, and the hard bristles 
behind his head can be frightfully prickly!” 
“Let Sand-monk carry you then,” said the Tang Monk. After glancing at him also, the fiend said, “Master, when those robbers came to plunder our house, each one of them had his face painted; they 
wore false beards and they held knives and staffs. | was terribly frightened by them, and now when | see this master with such a gloomy complexion, I’m even more intimidated. | just don’t dare to ask 
him to carry me.” The Tang Monk therefore told Pilgrim Sun to put the fiend on his back. Laughing uproariously, Pilgrim said, “I'll carry him! I'll carry him!” 
Secretly pleased, the fiendish creature gave himself willingly to Pilgrim to carry. When Pilgrim pulled him up from the side of the road to test his weight, he found that the fiend weighed no more than 3 
catties and ten ounces. “You audacious fiend!” said Pilgrim, laughing. “You deserve to die today! How dare you pull tricks before old monkey? | recognise you to be that something.” 
“Im the offspring of a good family,” said the fiend, “and it’s my misfortune to face this great ordeal. What do you mean by that something?” 
“If you’re an offspring of a good family,” said Pilgrim, “why are your bones so light?” 
“They are small,” said the fiend. “How old are you now?” said Pilgrim, and the fiend said, “I’m seven years old.” 
“Even if you put on only one catty of weight per year,” said Pilgrim, “you’d now weigh seven catties. How is it that you’re not even a full four catties?” 
“| didn’t get enough milk when | was a baby,” said the fiend. 
Pilgrim said, “All right, I'll carry you but if you want to piss, you must tell me.” Tripitaka then walked in front with 8 Rules and Sand-monk while Pilgrim followed behind with the child on his back. As they 
proceeded toward the West, a poem as a testimony says: 
Though virtue’s lofty, demonic blocks are high. Chan promotes stillness but stillness breeds fiends. 
Lord of the Mind’s upright, he takes the middle way; Wood Mum’s3 naughty, he walks a wayward path. 
Horse of the Will’s silent, nursing want and greed; Yellow Dame’s wordless, feeling his unease. 
Guest-Error succeeds but his joys are vain — they'll at last be melted by the Right. 
As the Great Sage Sun carried the demon on his back, he began to brood over his resentment toward the Tang Monk, thinking to himself, “Master truly does not know how difficult it is to traverse this 
rugged mountain; it's hard enough to do so when you're empty-handed but he has to ask old monkey to carry someone else, not to mention a fellow who's a monster no less. Even if he were a good 
man, it would be worthless to carry him along, since he had already lost both parents. To whom would we carry him? | might as well smash him dead!” At once the fiendish creature became aware of 
what Pilgrim was thinking and he, therefore, resorted to magic: taking four deep breaths from the four quarters, he blew them onto the back of Pilgrim, and his bearer immediately felt as if a weight of 
a thousand pounds were on him. “My child,” said Pilgrim, chuckling, “you're using the heavy-body magic to crush your venerable dad?” When the fiend heard those words, he became afraid that the 
Great Sage might harm him. He liberated himself from his corpse and his primal soul rose into the air and stood there while the weight on Pilgrim's back grew heavier. Growing angry, the Monkey King 
grabbed the body on his back and hurled it against some rocks at the side of the road; the body was reduced to a meat patty. Fearing that it would still be resistant, Pilgrim tore off the four limbs and 
smashed them to pieces, also by the road. 
When the fiend saw clearly what happened in mid-air, he could not restrain the fire leaping up in his heart saying to himself, “This monkey monk! How villainous of him! Even if I’m a demon plotting to 
harm your master, I've yet to raise my hand. How'd you seek to inflict on me such injury? It’s a good thing that I’ve enough foresight to leave with my spirit; otherwise, I'd have unwittingly lost my life. | 
might as well make use of this opportunity to seize the Tang Monk for if | delay any further, he might get even smarter.” Dear monster! He at once caused to rise in mid-air a truly fierce whirlwind that 
threw up rocks and kicked up dirt. Marvellous wind! Angrily it whipped up clouds and waters rank as rising black ether blotted out the sun. All summit trees were pulled out by their roots; wild plums 
were wholly levelled with their branches. Yellow sand dimmed the eyes, so men could not walk. Strange rocks battered the road, how could it be smooth? It churned and tossed to darken all the plains 
while birds and beasts howled throughout this whole mount. The wind blew until Tripitaka could hardly stay on the horse, until 8 Rules refused to look up and Sand-monk lowered his head and covered 
his face. Only the Great Sage Sun knew that it was a wind sent up by the fiend but when he ran forward to try to catch up with the others, the fiend riding on the head of the wind had already caught 
hold of the Tang Monk and whisked him away. Instantly they vanished without a trace, so that there was no way for the disciples to know even where to look for them. In a little while, the wind began 
to subside and sunlight appeared once more. Pilgrim walked forward and saw that the white dragon horse was still trembling and neighing uncontrollably. The load of luggage was thrown by the road, 
8 Rules lay sprawled beneath a ledge moaning, and Sand-monk was making noises while crouching on the slope. “Eight Rules!” shouted Pilgrim. 
When Idiot heard the voice of Pilgrim and looked up, the violent wind had calmed. He scrambled up and tugged at Pilgrim saying, “O Elder Brother, what a terrific wind!” 
Sand-monk also came up and said, “Elder Brother, this is a whirlwind.” Then he asked, “Where's Master?” 
8 Rules said, “The wind’s so strong that we all hid our heads and covered our eyes, each trying to find shelter. Master seemed to have put his head down also on the saddle.” 
“But where is he now?” asked Pilgrim. 
“He must have been made of straw,” said Sand-monk, “and got blown away!” 
Pilgrim said, “Brothers, it’s time for us to disband.” 
“Exactly,” said 8 Rules, “while there’s still time. It's better for each of us to find our own way off. The journey to the Western Heaven is endless and limitless! When will we ever get there?” When Sand- 
monk heard these words, he was so shocked that his whole body began to turn numb. “Elder Brother,” he said, “how could you say something like that? Because we committed crimes in our previous 
lives, we’re lucky to be enlightened by the Nun Guanshiyin who touched our heads, gave us the commandments, and changed our names so that we’d embrace the Religious fruit. We willingly accepted 
the commission to protect the Tang Monk and follow him to the Western Heaven to worship God and acquire scriptures, so that our merits would cancel out our sins. Today we’re here and everything 
seems to come to an end abruptly when you can talk about each of us finding our own way off, for then we’d mar the good fruits of the Nun and destroy our virtuous act. Moreover, we'd provoke the 
scorn of others, saying that we know how to start but not how to finish.” 
“Brother,” said Pilgrim, “what you say is right, of course but what are we to do with Master who refuses to listen to people? I, old monkey, can with this pair of fiery eyes and diamond pupils discern 
good and evil. Just now this wind was called up by that child hanging on the tree, for I'd tell that he was a monster-spirit. But you didn’t know, nor did Master; all of you thought that he was an offspring 
of some good family and told me to carry him along instead. Old monkey was planning to take care of him when he tried to crush me with the heavy-body magic. Then | smashed his body to pieces but 
he resorted to the magic of the liberation of the corpse and kidnapped Master with the whirlwind. Because Master so frequently refused to listen to my words, | became terribly discouraged and that 
was why | said we'd disband. Now that you, Worthy Brother, have shown such faithfulness, old monkey finds it difficult to make up his mind. Well, 8 Rules, what exactly do you want to do?” 8 Rules 
said, “l was stupid enough just now to mouth some foolish words but we truly should not disband. We've no choice really, Elder Brother but to listen to Younger Brother Sand and try to find the monster 
and save Master.” Brightening up all at once, Pilgrim said, “Brothers, we'll unite our minds to do what we must; after we've picked up the luggage and the horse, we'll ascend this mountain to find the 
monster and save Master.” 
Pulling at creepers and vines, descending into ravines and crossing streams, the three of them journeyed for some seventy miles without turning up anything. That mountain did not have a single bird 
or beast, though old cedars and pines were often sighted. Growing more and more anxious, the Great Sage Sun leaped up to the summit with a bound and shouted, “Change!” He changed into someone 
with three heads and six arms, just as he did when he caused great disturbance in Heaven. Waving the golden-hooped rod once, he changed it into three rods that he wielded and began to strike out 
madly in both directions of east and west. When 8 Rules saw hin, he said, “Sand-monk, this is bad! Elder Brother is so mad because he can’t find Master that he’s having a fit.” 
After a while, the mock combat of Pilgrim brought out a band of indigent deities, all dressed in rags; their breeches had no seats and their trousers had no cuffs. Kneeling before the mountain, they 
cried, “Great Sage, the mountain gods and the local spirits are here to see you.” Pilgrim said, “How is it that there are so many mountain gods and local spirits?” Respecting, the various deities said, 
“Let us report to the Great Sage, this mountain has the name of Roaring Mountain of the Six-Hundred-Mile Awl-Head Peak.‘ There are one mountain god and one local spirit for each ten-mile distance; 
altogether we've, therefore, thirty mountain gods and thirty local spirits. We heard yesterday already that the Great Sage had arrived but since we'd not assemble all at once, we're tardy in our reception 
and caused the Great Sage to be angry. Please pardon us.” 
“Ill pardon you for the moment,” said Pilgrim, “but let me ask how many monster-spirits there are in this mountain?” 
“O Dad!” said the deities, “there’s only one monster-spirit, and he has just about worn our heads bald! He has been such a plague that we've little incense and no paper money, and we’re completely 
without offerings. Every one of us has hardly enough clothes to wear and food for our mouths. How many more monster-spirits could we stand?” Pilgrim said, “Where is this monster-spirit living, before 
or behind the mountain?” 


“Neither place,” said the deities, “for in this mountain is a stream that has the name of Dried Pine Stream. By the stream is a cave that has the name of Fiery Cloud Cave. In the cave there is a demon 
king of vast magic powers who frequently abducts us local spirits and mountain gods there to do such menial tasks for him as tending fire, guarding the door, beating the rattle, and shouting passwords 
at night. The little fiends under him also ask us frequently for payola.” 

“You're the mortals of the Region of Darkness,” said Pilgrim. “Where would you’ve money?” 

“Exactly,” said the deities. “We don’t have any money to give them, and all we can do is to catch a few mountain antelopes or wild deer to pay off this gang of spirits now and then. If we don’t have any 
presents for them, they will come to wreck our temples and strip our garments, giving us such harassment that we can’t possibly lead a peaceful existence. We beseech the Great Sage to stamp out 
this monster for us and rescue the various living creatures on this mountain.” 

“If all of you’re under his thumb so that you’ve to be in his cave frequently,” said Pilgrim, “you must know the name of this monster-spirit and where he is from.” 

“When we speak of him,” said the deities, “perhaps even the Great Sage knows of his origin. He is the son of the Bull Demon King, reared by Demoness. After he had practiced self-cultivation at the 
Blazing Flame Mountain for three centuries, he perfected the true fire of Fixity and his magic powers were great indeed. The Bull Demon King told him to come and guard this Roaring Mountain; his 
childhood name is Red Boy but his fancy title is Great King Holy Child.” 

Highly pleased by what he heard, Pilgrim dismissed the local spirits and mountain gods and changed back into his original form. Leaping down from the summit, he said to 8 Rules and Sand-monk, 
“Brothers, you may relax. No need to worry anymore. Master won't be harmed, for the monster-spirit is related to old monkey.” 

“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules with a laugh, “don’t lie! You grew up in the East East-Videha Continent but this place here belongs to the West Aparagodantya Continent. The distance is great, separated 
by ten thousand waters and a thousand hills, and by at least two oceans. How could he be related to you?” Pilgrim said, “Just now this bunch of deities that appeared to me happen to be the local 
spirits and mountain gods of this region. When | questioned them on the origin of the monster, they told me that he was the son of the Bull Demon King reared by Demoness. His name is Red Boy, and 
he also has the fancy title of Great King Holy Child. | remember that when old monkey caused great disturbance in Heaven five centuries ago, | made a grand tour at the time of the famous mountains 
in the world to search for the heroes of this great Earth. The Bull Demon King at one time joined old monkey and others to form a fraternal alliance of seven; of the some five or six demon kings in this 
alliance, only old monkey was quite small in size. That was the reason why we addressed the Bull Demon King as big brother. Since this monster-spirit is the son of the Bull Demon King who is an 
acquaintance of mine, I'd be regarded as his old uncle if we begin to talk about relations. How would he dare harm my master? Let's get to his place quickly.” 

With laughter, Sand-monk said, “O Elder Brother! As the proverb says, three years not showing at the door, a relative’s one no more. You're parted from him for five, perhaps six centuries; you've not 
even drunk a cup of juice with him, nor have you exchanged invitations or seasonal gifts. How could he possibly think of himself as your relative?” 

“How could you measure people this way?” said Pilgrim. “As the proverb says, if lotus leaf can to the ocean flow where'd people not meet as they come and go? Even if he doesn’t admit the fact that 
we're relatives, it will still be unlikely that he would harm my Master. If we don’t expect him to give us a banquet, we most certainly may expect him to return to us the Tang Monk whole.” 

So, the three brothers in all earnestness led the horse that carried the luggage on its back, and found the main road to proceed. Without stopping night or day, they came upon a pine forest after having 
travelled for over a hundred miles. Inside the forest was a winding brook in which clear green water swiftly flowed. At the head of the brook there was a stone-slab bridge that led directly up to the 
entrance of a cave dwelling. “Brothers,” said Pilgrim, “look at that craggy cliff over there with all those rocks. It must be the home of the monster-spirit. Let me discuss the matter with you: which of you 
is going to stand and guard the luggage and the horse, and which of you'll follow me to subdue the fiend?” 

8 Rules said, “Elder Brother, Old bull can’t sit still for too long. Let me go with you.” 

“Fine! Fine!” said Pilgrim. “Sand-monk, hide the luggage and the horse deep in the forest, and guard them carefully. The two of us will go up there to search for Master.” Sand-monk agreed; 8 Rules 
then followed Pilgrim to move forward, each of them holding his weapon. Truly the child is not smelted and demonic fire triumphs but Wood-Mum and Mind-Monkey have mutual support. 


041 
Mind-Monkey’s defeated by fire; Wood-Mum’s captured by demons 
Good and evil — a moment's false thoughts; shame and honour, neither concerns you. 
Failure or success, let it come and go; live as you need within your lot. 
Composed, you’ve peace deep and lasting; muddled, you’re besieged by demons. 
5 Phases hobbled wreck the grove of Chan, certain as rising wind’s frigid. 
The Great Sage Sun who took leave of Sand-monk along with 8 Rules. Leaping over the Dried Pine Stream, they went before a cliff full of strange rocks and discovered that there was indeed a cave 
dwelling. The scenery all around was most unusual. See a winding old path silent and remote; even wind and moon heed the black cranes reciting. White clouds part and the river's full of light; water 
flows past a bridge - what a scene divine. Apes and birds call amid rare flowers and plants and rocks entwined by creepers and orchids fair. The cliffs rustling green scatters mist and smoke; verdant 
pines and bamboos the phoenix beckon. Distant summits rise like vertical screens. Fronting stream and mountain’s a true divine cave, its source coming from the Kunlun ranges to be enjoyed only by 
one ordained. When they went up to the entrance of the cave, they found a slab of stone on which an inscription was written in large letters: 
Fiery Cloud Cave, Dried Pine Stream, Roaring Mountain 
Before the entrance was a mob of little imps prancing around with swords and spears. In a loud voice, the Great Sage Sun cried out, “You punks! Go quickly and report this to your cave master. Tell 
him to send out our Tang Monk at once, so that the lives of all these spirits in your cave may be spared. If you whisper but half a ‘No,’ I'll overturn your residence and level your cave!” When those little 
fiends heard these words, they turned and dashed inside the cave, slamming shut the two doors of stone. Then they ran to make this report: “Great King, disaster!” 
We now tell you about that fiend who captured Tripitaka and brought him back to the cave. The monk was stripped of his garments, bull-tied with all four limbs behind his back, and left in the rear yard. 
The little fiends were ordered to scrub him clean with water so that he might be steamed and eaten. When the announcement of disaster was suddenly heard, the demons stopped their activities and 
went to the front to ask, “What disaster is there?” 
“A monk with a hairy face and a thunder-god beak,” said one of the little fiends, “leading another monk with large ears and long horn, is demanding the return of their master, someone by the name of 
the Tang Monk, in front of our cave. If we but whisper half a ‘No,’ they said, they would overturn our residence and level our cave.” Smiling scornfully, the demon king said, “These two happen to be 
Pilgrim Sun and Bullseye 8 Rules. They truly know where to look! From the spot halfway in the mountain where | caught their master to our place is a distance of some one hundred and fifty miles. How 
did they manage to find our door so quickly?” He then gave this order: “Little ones, those of you who look after the carts, push them out!” 
Several of the little fiends opened the door and pushed out five small carts. When he saw them, 8 Rules said, “Elder Brother, these monster-spirits must be afraid of us. They have hauled out their carts 
to move to another place.” 
“No,” said Pilgrim, “look at the way they are placing the carts over there.” 
The little fiends indeed placed the carts at five locations corresponding to the 5 Phases of metal, wood, water, fire, and earth; 5 of the fiends stood guard beside the carts while 5 others went inside 
again to make their report. “Everything set?” asked the demon king. 
“All-set,” they replied. 
“Bring me my lance,” he ordered. 
Those fiends who looked after weapons had two of them carry out an 18-foot fire-tipped lance to hand over to the monster king. With no other armour except a battle kilt of embroidered silk and with 
naked feet, the monster king took up the lance and walked outside. When Pilgrim and 8 Rules raised their heads to look, they found a fiendish creature who had a face as if it had been powdered white 
and lips so ruddy, they seemed brushed with paint. No dye could create such dark, lovely hair; his eyebrows curved like new moons carved with knives. Phoenix and dragon coiled on his battle kilt; 
huskier than Nata’s a frame he had. With air imposing he lifted up his lance and walked out the door, swathed in hallowed light. He roared like thunder in the time of spring; his striking eyes flashed like 
lightning bright. If one would know his true identity, remember Red Boy, a name of lasting fame. After that Red Boy monster had emerged from the door, he shouted, “Who’s here making all these 
noises?” 
Smiling as he drew near, Pilgrim said, “My worthy nephew! Stop fooling around! This morning when you're hung high on top of a pine tree by the mountain road, you presented yourself as a thin, 
frightened boy with jaundice and deceived my master. | carried you on my back with all good intention, you know but you used a little wind to abduct my master here. Even though you appear before 
me now like this, you think | can’t recognise you? You might as well send my master out quickly. Stop behaving like a callow youth and take care not to upset the feelings of kinship. For | fear that if 
your dad gets wind of this, he might blame old monkey for oppressing youth with age, and that wouldn't be quite right.” 
Enraged by the words he heard, the fiend shouted back, “You brazen ape! What feelings of kinship do | share with you? What sort of balderdash are you mouthing around here? Who's your worthy 
nephew?” 
“O brother!” said Pilgrim. “You'd not know, would you? At the time when your dad and | became bond-brothers, we didn’t even know where you're.” 
“This ape is babbling more nonsense!” said the fiend. “Where do you come from, and where do | come from? Think about this! How could my dad and you become bond-brothers?” 
“Of course, you'd not know about this,” said Pilgrim. “I’m Sun Wukong, the Great Sage Equal to Heaven who greatly disturbed the Heavenly Palace five centuries ago. But before | caused such 
disturbance, | made extensive tours of all the Four Great Continents and there’s not a spot on Earth or in Heaven that | didn’t set foot on for | was most eager to befriend all the valiant and heroic 
persons. Your dad, the Bull Monster King called himself the Great Sage, Parallel with Heaven. He and old monkey formed a fraternal alliance of seven and we all made him the big brother.? There’re 
also a Dragon Monster King who called himself the Great Sage covering the Ocean and became the second brother; a Garuda Monster King who called himself Great Sage United with Heaven, and 
became the third brother; a Lion Monster King who called himself the Great Sage Mover of Mountains, and became the fourth brother; a Female Monkey King who called herself the Fair Wind Great 
Sage and became the fifth member; and a Giant Ape Monster King who called himself a god-Routing Great Sage and became the sixth brother. Old monkey, the Great Sage Equal to Heaven’s rather 
small in size and so he’s number seven. At the time when we old brothers were having fun, you’re not even bom!” Refusing to believe a word he heard, the fiend lifted up his fire-tipped lance to stab at 
Pilgrim. An expert would not be exercised as they said and Pilgrim at once stepped aside to dodge the blow before striking out with his iron rod, yelling at the same time, “You little beast! You don’t 
know what's good for you! Watch my rod!” 
The monster-spirit also parried the blow, yelling at the same time, “Brazen ape! You're so ignorant of the ways of the world! Watch my lance!” The 2 of them thus refused to give any consideration for 
kinship relation; changing colours all at once, they used their magic and leaped to the edge of the clouds. What a fight! 
Pilgrim enjoyed great fame; the demon king had vast powers. 1 raised up the golden-hooped rod sideways; 1 lunged forward with the fire-tipped lance. Mist spread out to shroud the 3 Regions; clouds 
spewed forth to hide the four quarters. Violent air and savage noise did fill the sky; the sun, the moon, the stars — all lost their light. Not one kind word was spoken, they felt such hatred and scorn. That 
1’s contempt made him lose all manners; this 1’s wrath killed all regard for relations. The rod struck with increasing might; the lance came with growing fury. 1 was the primordial, true Great Sage; 1 
was Child Sudhana’ of the right fruit. They drove themselves, each trying hard to win, all for the Tang Monk who would greet the religion king. The demon and the Great Sage Sun fought for more than 
20 rounds without reaching a decision. Standing on 1 side, Bullseye 8 Rules saw clearly what was going on: although the monster-spirit was not about to be defeated, he was only parrying the blows 
left and right, and did not attack his opponent at all; and, although Pilgrim did not seem able to prevail all at once, he was after all such an adroit and skilful warrior that the rod back and forth never 
seemed to leave the vicinity of the monster's head. 8 Rules thought to himself, “That's good! Pilgrim’s so tricky! He’d fake something and deceive the demon into drawing closer. One blow of that iron 
rod then would wipe out my chance of making any merit!” Look at him! 
He roused his spirit, lifted up his 9-pronged rake, and brought it down hard on the monster-spirit’s head. Terrified by what he saw, the fiend quickly turned around and fled, dragging his lance behind 
him. “Chase him! Chase him!” shouted Pilgrim to 8 Rules. 
The two of them gave chase up to the entrance of the cave where they saw the monster-spirit standing in one of the five carts, the one set up in the middle. With one hand he held on to his fire-tipped 
lance; with the other fist, he gave his own nose a couple of punches. Laughing, 8 Rules said, “Shame on him! This fellow’s indulging in roguery! He wants to bust his own nose, make himself bleed a 
little, and smear his face red so that he may go somewhere to file suit against us.” After that demon gave himself two punches, he recited a spell and immediately flames shot out from his mouth as 
thick smoke sprouted from his nose. In an instant, flames darted up from all five carts. The demon opened his mouth a few more times and a huge fire shot up to the sky, burning so fiercely that the 
entire Fiery Cloud Cave was hidden from sight by the flames and smoke. Horrified, 8 Rules said, “Elder Brother, it's getting sticky! Once we're caught in that fire, we’re finished. Old bull will be roasted 
and after some spices are added, they can just enjoy me! Quickly! Run!” 
He said he would run, and the next moment he had already crossed the stream without any regard for Pilgrim. Pilgrim however, had vast magic powers; making the fire-repellent sign by kneading 
together his fingers, he hurled himself into the fire to search for the fiend. When the fiend saw him approaching, he spat out a few more mouthfuls of flame and the fire grew even more intense. 


Marvellous fire! Torrid and fierce, a blaze reaching the sky; hot and brilliant, it reddens the whole earth. It’s like a fiery wheel flying up and down and charcoals aglow dancing east and west. This fire is 
not from Suiren‘ drilling wood or from Laozi roasting cinnabar, it is not fire from Heaven, nor is it a wildfire. It’s the realised Fixity fire’ born of the demon’s self-cultivation. The 5 carts conform to the 5 
Phases that grow and transform to beget the flame. The liver’s wood® can make the heart's fire strong; the heart's fire can calm the earth of the spleen; the spleen’s earth begets metal that changes 
into water; water can beget wood, thus the magic’s complete. Growth and transformation, all are caused by fire for all things flourish when fire fills the sky. ’The fiend, long enlightened, summons Fixity. 
He rules the West forever as number 1. Because the fire and smoke were so intense, Pilgrim could not even see the way before the cave’s entrance and therefore he could not search for the fiend. 
Turing quickly, he leaped clear of the blaze at once. Having seen clearly what took place before his own cave, the monster-spirit retrieved his fire equipment after Pilgrim left, and led the various fiends 
back inside. After the stone doors were shut, the little fiends were told to prepare for a joyous victory celebration. Pilgrim vaulted over the Dried Pine Stream. As he dropped from the clouds, he heard 
8 Rules and Sand-monk conversing loudly in the pine forest. “You idiot!” shouted Pilgrim as he approached 8 Rules. “You've not one whit of manliness! You'd be so terrified by the demonic fire that 
you’d abandon old monkey to flee for your own life. It's a good thing that | can still take care of myselfl” 
“Elder Brother,” said Bullseye 8 Rules, chuckling, “what that monster-spirit said of you was certainly correct, for you truly are ignorant of the ways of the world. The ancients said, ‘He who knows the 
ways of the world shall be called a hero.’ The monster-spirit did not want to talk kinship with you but you insisted on presenting yourself as his kin. When he fought with you and let loose that kind of 
ruthless fire, you’d not run but still wanted to tangle with him.” 
“How's the fiend’s ability compared with mine?” asked Pilgrim. “Not as good,” said 8 Rules. 
“How about his skill with the lance?” 
“No good, either,” said 8 Rules. “When Old bull saw that he had a hard time withstanding you, | came to lend you a little assistance with my rake. Little did | expect that he was so puny that he would 
retreat in defeat at once and start the fire in such an unconscionable way.” Pilgrim said, “Indeed you'd not have stepped forward. | was about to find a way to give him a blow with my rod after a few 
more rounds. Wouldn't that have been better?” The two gave themselves entirely to discussing the ability of the monster-spirit and the viciousness of his fire but Sand-monk, leaning on the trunk of a 
pine tree, was laughing so hard that he could barely stand up. 
“Brother,” said Pilgrim, after he noticed him, “why are you laughing? If you had the ability to capture that demon and destroy his fire defence, that would be a benefit to all of us. As the proverb says, a 
few feathers will make a ball. If you’d seize the demon and rescue our master, it would be your great merit.” 
“| don’t have that kind of ability,” said Sand-monk, “nor can | subdue the fiend. But I’m laughing because both of you're so absentminded.” 
“What do you mean?” asked Pilgrim. Sand-monk said, “Neither the ability of that monster-spirit nor his skill with the lance can be a match for you but the only reason why you two cannot prevail against 
him is because of his fire. If I've anything to say about this, I'll say that you’d overcome him by mutual production and mutual conquest.’ What's so difficult about that?” 
When Pilgrim heard these words, he roared with laughter and said, “Brother, you're right! Indeed, we’re absentminded, and we've forgotten about the whole matter. If we consider the principles of 
mutual production and mutual conquest, then it is water that can overcome fire. We must find water somewhere to put out this demonic fire. We'd be able to rescue Master then, wouldn’t we?” 
“Exactly,” said Sand-monk. “No need for further delay.” Pilgrim said, “Stay here, the two of you but don’t fight with him. Let old monkey go to the Great Eastern Ocean and request some dragon soldiers 
to come with water. After we've put out the demonic fire, we'll rescue Master.” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “feel free to go. We can look after ourselves here.” 
Dear Great Sage! Mounting the clouds to leave that place, he arrived at the Eastern Ocean in a moment. He was too busy however, to linger and enjoy the scenery; using the water-division magic, he 
opened up a pathway for himself through the waves. As he proceeded, he ran into a Nature spirit on patrol. When the Nature spirit saw that it was the Great Sage Sun, he went quickly back to the 
Water-Crystal Palace to report to the old Dragon King. Aoguang immediately led the dragon sons and grandsons together with shrimp soldiers and crab lieutenants to meet his visitor outside the gate. 
Pilgrim was invited to take a seat inside and also tea. “No need for tea,” said Pilgrim, “but | do have a matter that will cause you some trouble. My master who's on his way to the Western Heaven to 
seek scriptures from God, happens to be passing through the Fiery Cloud Cave at the Dried Pine Stream of the Roaring Mountain. A Red Boy monster-spirit with the fancy title of the Great King, Holy 
Child, has captured my master. When old monkey made his search up to his door and fought with him, he let out some fire which we’d not put out. Since we thought of the fact that water could prevail 
over fire, | came especially to ask you for some water. You can start a big rainstorm for me to put out that fire so that the Tang Monk will be delivered from this ordeal.” 
“You're mistaken, Great Sage,” said the Dragon King, “for if you want rainwater, you'd not have come to ask me.” 
“You're the Dragon King of Four Oceans, the principal superintendent of rain and dew. If | don’t ask you whom should | ask?” The Dragon King said, “Though I’m in charge of rain, | can’t dispense it as 
I'll. We must have the decree of the Jade Emperor, specifying where and when, the number of feet and inches, and the hour when the rain is to begin. Moreover, three officials have to raise their 
brushes to draft the document that then must be dispatched by the North Star. Thereafter, we must also assemble the Thunder God, the Lightning Mum, the Wind Uncle, and the Cloud Boy, for as the 
proverb says, ‘The dragon can’t move without clouds.” 
“I've no need for wind, cloud, thunder, or lightning,” said Pilgrim, “only some rainwater to put out a fire.” 
“In that case,” said the Dragon King, “I still would be unable to help you all by myself. Let my brothers give you a hand to achieve this merit for you. How about that?” 
“Where are your brothers?” asked Pilgrim. The Dragon King said, “They are Aogin, Dragon King of the Southern Ocean; Aorun, Dragon King of the Western Ocean; and Aoshun, Dragon King of the 
Northern Ocean.” Laughing, Pilgrim said, “If I've to go and tour the three oceans, | might as well go to the Region Above to ask for the Jade Emperor's decree.” The Dragon King said, “There’s no need 
for the Great Sage to go there. All we've to do here is to beat our iron drum and sound the golden bell, and they will arrive shortly.” Hearing this, Pilgrim said, “Old Dragon King, please beat the drum 
and sound the bell.” 
In a moment, the 3 Dragon Kings rushed in and asked, “Big Brother, why did you summon us here?” 
Aoguang said, “The Great Sage Sun’s here asking for our assistance; he needs rain to subdue a fiend.” The 3 brothers were led to greet Pilgrim who then gave an account of why he needed water. 
Each 1 of the deities was willing to oblige. They at once called up the shark so ferocious to lead the troops and the big-mouthed shad to be the vanguard. The carp marshal leaped through the tide and 
waves; the bream viceroy spewed forth wind and fog; the mackerel grand marshal screamed passwords in the east; the cutler-fish commander urged the troops in the west; red-eyed mermaids exercised 
along in the south; black-armoured generals rushed forward from the north; the sturgeon sergeant took command at the centre; soldiers of 5 quarters were all valiant. Astute and clever, the sea-turtle 
lord chancellor; shrewd and subtle, the tortoise counsellor; full of plots and wisdom, the iguana minister; agile and able, the sand-turtle commander. Wielding long swords, crab warriors walked sideways; 
stretching heavy bows, shrimp amazons leaped straight up. The sheet-fish vice-director checked his books with care to call up the dragon soldiers to leave the waves. Also a testimonial line says: 
Dragon Kings of f4 seas are pleased to help at the Great Sage Equal to Heaven’s request; when Tripitaka meets an ordeal on the way, water's sought to put out the fiery red. 
Leading those dragon troops, Pilgrim soon arrived at the Dried Pine Stream on the Roaring Mountain. “Worthy Ao Brothers,” said Pilgrim, “I’m sorry for asking you to traverse such a distance. This is 
the habitat of the demon. Please remain for the moment in the air and don't reveal yourselves. Let old monkey go fight with him; if | win, there’s no need for you to catch him and even if | lose, there’s 
no need for all of you to help me. Only when he starts his fire I'll call on you and then you can send down your rain.” The Dragon Kings all agreed to heed his command. Pilgrim lowered his cloud and 
went straight into the pine forest where he shouted “Brothers,” to 8 Rules and Sand-monk. 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “you've returned very quickly. Have you been able to fetch the Dragon Kings?” 
“They're all here,” said Pilgrim. “You two had better be careful not to let the luggage get wet by the torrential rain. Old monkey will go fight with him.” 
Sand-monk said, “Go right ahead, Elder Brother, we'll take care of everything here.” 
Leaping over the stream, Pilgrim dashed up to the entrance of the cave and shouted, “Open the door!” 
The little fiends went at once to report, “Great King, Pilgrim Sun is here again.” 
Raising his head, Red Boy laughed aloud and said, “I suppose that monkey’s not been burned by the fire and that’s why he’s returned. Well, I'll not spare him this time for I'll not stop until his skin’s 
charred and his flesh’s seared.” As he leaped up to take hold of his lance, he gave the order: “Little ones, push out the carts!” After he rushed out the door, he said to Pilgrim, “Why are you here again?” 
“Return my master,” said Pilgrim. 
“Monkey head,” said the fiend, “you're indeed obtuse! If the Tang Monk can be your master, can’t he also be our hors d’oeuvre for juice? Forget him! Forget him!” 
When Pilgrim heard these words, he was infuriated; pulling out his golden-hooped rod, he struck at the fiend’s head. The monster-spirit quickly raised his fire-tipped lance to parry the blow, and their 
battle this time was not the same as theirs last time. Marvellous battle! The wild demon, greatly enraged; the Monkey King, highly incensed. This 1 just wished to save the scripture monk; that 1 would 
eat Tripitaka Tang. Changed minds quelled all kinship feelings; estranged, they allowed no concession. This 1 wished he could be caught and skinned alive; that 1 wished he could be seized and 
dipped in sauce. Truly so ferocious! Indeed so strong and fierce! The rod blocked by the lance, thus the contest raged; the lance met by the rod, each strove to win. They raised their hands to fight for 
20 rounds, both persons’ abilities were just the same. The demon king fought Pilgrim for some 20 rounds and when he saw that he could not prevail, he made a fake thrust with his lance and turned 
quickly to give his own nose 2 punches with his fist. Fire and smoke poured out at once from his eyes and mouth as a huge blaze leaped up from the carts set before the cave’s entrance. Tuming his 
head skyward, the Great Sage Sun shouted, “Dragon Kings, where’re you?” Leading their aquatic kin, the Dragon King Brothers sent a torrential downpour of rain toward the fire of the monster-spirit. 
Marvellous rain! Truly drizzling and sprinkling like the meteors falling from the sky; pouring and showering like waves churning in a sea upturned. At 1* the raindrops seem the size of a fist; in a while 
they fall by the buckets and pans. The whole earth’s overflowed with duck-head green’ and tall mountains are washed blue like God's head. ‘Water flies down the canyon like sheets of jade; the stream 
swells in a thousand silver strands. Roads forked 3 ways are all filled up; so is a river which has nine bends. The Tang Monk facing an ordeal is helped by dragons divine who overturn Heaven’s river 
and pour it down. The rain descended in torrents but it could not extinguish the fiend’s fire at all. The fact of the matter was that what the Dragon Kings let loose happened to be unauthorized rain, 
capable of putting out worldly fires. How could it extinguish the true fire of Fixity cultivated by that monster-spirit? It was in fact like adding oil to the fire, making the blaze all the more intense. “Let me 
make the magic sign,” said the Great Sage, “and penetrate the flames.” Wielding the iron rod, he searched for the fiend. When the fiend saw him approaching, he blew a mouthful of smoke right at his 
face. Pilgrim tried to turn away swiftly but he was so dazed by the smoke that tears fell from his eyes like rain. This Great Sage could not be hurt by fire but he was afraid of smoke. For during that year 
when he greatly disturbed the Heavenly Palace, he was placed in the eight-trigram brazier of Laozi where he had been smelted for a long time.'t He managed to crawl into the space beneath the 
compartment which corresponded to the Sun trigram and was not burned. The smoke whipped up by the wind however, gave him a pair of fiery eyes and diamond pupils, and that was the reason why 
even now he was afraid of smoke. Once more, the fiend spat out a mouthful of smoke and the Great Sage could no longer withstand it. Mounting the clouds, he fled hurriedly while the demon retrieved 
his fire equipment and returned to his cave. His whole body covered by flame and smoke, the Great Sage found the intense heat unbearable and he dove straight into the mountain stream to try to put 
out the fire. Little did he anticipate that the shock of the cold water was so great that the heat caused by the fire was forced inward into his body and he fainted immediately. Alas! His breath caught in 
his chest, tongue and throat grew cold; spirit fled, soul left, and life’s gone! 
Those Dragon Kings of the 4 Oceans were so terrified that they put a stop to the rain and yelled loudly, “Marshal Heavenly Reeds and Curtain-Raising Captain! Stop hiding in the forest! Start looking 
for your elder brother!” 
When 8 Rules and Sand-monk heard that they were addressed by their holy titles, they quickly untied the horse and poled the luggage to dash out of the forest. With no regard for the mud and slush, 
they began searching along the banks of the stream when the bubbling currents swept down from above the body of a person. When Sand-monk saw it, he leaped into the water fully clothed and 
hauled the body back to shore. It was the body of the Great Sage Sun. Alas, look at him! His 4 limbs were bent and they could not be stretched; whole body up and down was cold as ice. “Elder 
Brother,” said Sand-monk as tears filled his eyes, “what a pity you've to go like that! You're someone who never aged through countless years. Now you’ve died young in the middle of the way.” 
With a chuckle, 8 Rules said, “Brother, stop crying. This ape is pretending to be dead, just to scare us. Feel him a little and see if there’s any warmth left in his chest.” 
“The whole body has turned cold,” said Sand-monk. “Even if there were a little warmth left, how could you revive him?” 8 Rules said, “If he is capable of seventy-two transformations, he has seventy- 
two lives. Listen, you stretch out his legs while | take care of him.” Sand-monk indeed straightened Pilgrim's legs while 8 Rules lifted his head and straightened his upper torso. They then pushed his 
legs up and folded them around the knees before raising him into a sitting position. Rubbing his hands together until they were warm, 8 Rules covered Pilgrim’s seven apertures and began to apply a 
Chan method of massage on him. The cold water had had such a traumatic effect on Pilgrim that his breath was caught in his cinnabar field’? and he could not utter a sound. He was lucky, therefore, 
to have all that rubbing, squeezing, and kneading by 8 Rules, for in a moment his breath went through the three passes, '? invaded the bright hall,!4 and burst through his apertures. “O Master,” he 
began to say. 
Sand-monk said, “Elder Brother, when you're alive, you lived for Master, and his name’s on your lips even when you're dead! Wake up first. We're all here.” Opening his eyes, Pilgrim said, “Are you 
here, Brothers? Old monkey's a loser this time!” 
“You fainted,” said 8 Rules Bullseye chuckling, “and if Old bull hadn’t saved you, you’d have been finished. Aren’t you going to thank me?” 
Pilgrim got up slowly and raised his head saying, “The Ao Brothers, where’re you?” 


The Dragon Kings of 4 Oceans replied in mid-air, “Your little dragons wait upon you here.” 
“Im sorry to have caused you to travel all this distance,” said Pilgrim, “but we’ve not accomplished our merit. Please go back first and I'll thank you again in another day.” The Dragon Kings led their 
large group of followers to return to their residences that need not concern us here. Sand-monk then supported Pilgrim and led him back into the pine forest to sit down. In a little while, Pilgrim felt more 
collected and his breathing became more even but he could not restrain the tears from rolling down his cheeks. Again he cried out, “O Master! Think of your leaving the Great Tang that year when you 
saved me from woe beneath that mount. On waters and hills we face demonic foes; our bowels are torn by ten thousand pains. We eat with an alms bowl whether bare or filled; in houses or woods we 
meditate at night. Our hearts are set on achieving the right fruit. How’d | know I'd be hurt this day?” 
Sand-monk said, “Elder Brother, please do not worry. Let us devise a plan soon and see where we can go to ask for help to rescue Master.” 
“Where'll we go to seek help?” asked Pilgrim. 
Sand-monk said, “I remember when the Nun first gave us the instruction that we’d accompany the Tang Monk, she also gave us the promise that when we called on Heaven, Heaven would respond or 
when we called on Earth, Earth would reply. We've to just decide where we'd go to seek help.” 
“When | caused great disturbance in the Heavenly Palace,” said Pilgrim, “all those divine soldiers were no match for old monkey. This monster-spirit’s however, considerable magic powers and so our 
helper must be someone stronger than even old monkey. Neither the gods in Heaven nor those deities on Earth will be adequate. If we want to catch this demon, we must go to ask the Nun Guanyin. 
But unfortunately my bones and muscles are sore and my torso’s weak. | can’t perform my cloud somersault. How can | go?” 
“If you’ve any instruction,” said 8 Rules, “tell me. I'll go.” 
Smiling, Pilgrim said, “All right! You can go but when you appear before the Nun, don’t stare at her face. You must lower your head, salute with reverence, and when she asks you, you may then tell 
her the names of this place and the fiend and beseech her to come to rescue Master. If she’s willing, the fiendish creature will of course be taken.” 
After 8 Rules heard this, he mounted the clouds and mists at once and headed toward the south. That demon king was celebrating in his cave. Merrily he said to his subjects, “Little ones, Pilgrim Sun’s 
truly suffered loss this time. Though he may not die, he'll be in a big coma! Holla! | fear that they might want to go find help somewhere. Open the doors quickly! Let me see where they're going.” The 
fiends opened the doors and when the monster-spirit rose into the air to look all around, he discovered 8 Rules heading toward the south. The south, the monster-spirit thought to himself, could mean 
only one thing: 8 Rules was going to seek the help of the Nun Guanyin. Dropping quickly from the clouds, the fiend cried, “Little ones, find that leather bag of mine and take it out. It hasn’t been used 
for quite some time and | fear that the rope around its mouth is not strong enough. Change the rope for me and place the bag beneath the second door. Let me go and capture 8 Rules by deception; 
when he is brought back here, we'll store him in the bag. Then he'll be steamed until he’s flaky so that all of you may enjoy him with juice.” 
The monster-spirit had a compliant leather bag that those little fiends took out and fastened a new rope to its mouth. They placed it beneath the second door as they were told. The demon king had 
lived in this place for a long time; the whole region in fact was familiar to him, and he knew which route to South Sea was the shorter one and which the longer. Taking the shorter route, he mounted 
the clouds and at once went past 8 Rules. He then lowered himself onto a tall ridge, sat down solemnly, and changed into a specious form of Guanshiyin to wait for 8 Rules. Treading his clouds, Idiot 
was on his way when he saw suddenly the Nun. He could not, of course, distinguish the true from the false; like foolish men of the world, he regarded all images as real Gods! Stopping his cloud, Idiot 
saluted low and said, “Nun, your disciple Bullseye Aware of Ability respects to you.” The monster-spirit said, “Why aren’t you protecting the Tang Monk on his way to fetch scriptures? Why’ve you come 
to see me?” 
“It was because your disciple and his master met on their way a Red Boy monster-spirit who resided in the Fiery Cloud Cave by the Dried Pine Stream in the Roaring Mountain. He abducted our master 
but your disciples found the way to his door and fought with him. He happened to be someone who knew how to start a fire; during our first battle, we’d not prevail, and during our second one, we'd not 
extinguish the fire even after we asked the Dragon Kings to assist us with rain. Since Elder Brother suffered burns so severe that he could not move, he asked me to come to plead with the Nun. We 
beg you to be merciful and save our master from his ordeal.” 
“That master of the Fiery Cloud Cave,” said the monster-spirit, “is not prone to take human lives. It must be that you’ve offended him.” 
“Not I,” said 8 Rules, “but Elder Brother did offend him. The fiend changed himself at first into a small child hung on a tree to test Master. Our Master, of course, had a most kindly disposition; he told 
me to untie the child and Elder Brother to carry him for a distance. Elder Brother wanted to dash him to the ground, and that was when he abducted Master.” The monster-spirit said, “Get up and follow 
me into the cave to see the cave-master. I'll speak on your behalf, and you can salute him; the two of us will ask him then to release your master.” 
“O Nun,” said 8 Rules. “If he’s willing to return our master, I'll be glad to respect to him.” 
“Follow me then,” said the demon king. 
Idiot, of course, did not know any better; instead of proceeding to the South Sea, he followed the fiend right back to the entrance of the Fiery Cloud Cave. When they reached the cave, the monster- 
spirit proceeded to walk inside, saying, “Don’t be suspicious, for he’s my acquaintance. You come in, too.” Idiot had no choice but to stride inside also. With a terrific shout, the various fiends seized 
him all at once and stuffed him into the leather bag. After the rope around its mouth was pulled tight, the bag was drawn up high to a beam and hung there. Changing back into his true form, the 
monster-spirit took a seat in the middle and said, “Bullseye Eight Rules, what sort of abilities do you've that you dare accompany the Tang Monk to acquire scriptures? That you dare go ask the Nun to 
subdue me? Open your pair of eyes, take a good look, and see if you recognise me, the Great King Holy Child! Now you're caught, you'll be hung for four or five days before you'll be steamed and 
served as hors d’oeuvre to my little fiends for their juice.” 
When 8 Rules heard these words, he began screaming inside the bag saying, “You brazen fiend! Don’t you dare be so insulting! So, you've plotted and planned to deceive me but if you dare eat me, 
every one of you'll be stricken with the Heaven-sent plague of swollen head!” 
Idiot thus persisted in his expostulation for a long time. The Great Sage Sun sat in the forest with Sand-monk. A gust of putrid wind blew past and sneezing immediately, he said, “Bad! Bad! This wind 
betokens misfortune more than good luck! Bullseye 8 Rules, | think, must have taken the wrong way.” 
“If he did,” said Sand-monk, “couldn’t he ask someone?” Pilgrim said, “He must have run into the monster-spirit.” 
“If he ran into the monster-spirit,” said Sand-monk, “couldn't he run back to us?” 
“It's not right,” said Pilgrim. “You sit here and guard our belongings. Let me dash over the stream and find out what's going on over there.” Sand-monk said, “Your body is still sore, Elder Brother, and | 
fear that you'll be hurt even more by him. Let me go.” 
“You'll not do,” said Pilgrim, “let me go instead.” 
Dear Pilgrim! Gritting his teeth to endure the pain, he took up his iron rod and ran across the stream to reach the entrance to the Fiery Cloud Cave. “Brazen monster!” he cried, and those fiends guarding 
the door ran inside to report, “Pilgrim Sun is shouting again at the door!” The demon king gave the order for him to be seized, and all those little fiends, teeming with spears and swords, rushed out the 
door shouting, “Seize him! Seize him!” Pilgrim indeed was too weak to fight and he dared not oppose them. Diving to one side of the road, he recited a spell, crying, “Change!” He changed at once into 
a cloth wrapper adorned with gold. When the little fiends saw it, they took it inside and reported, “Great King, Pilgrim Sun is scared. When he heard the word ‘seize,’ he was so frightened that he 
dropped this wrapper and fled.” Laughing, the demon king said, “That wrapper is not worth much! All it contains must be the torn shirts of those monks and their old hats. Bring it in and wash it clean; 
the piece of material can be used for mending or lining.” One of the little fiends put the wrapper on his back to carry it inside, not knowing that it was the transformation of Pilgrim. Pilgrim said, “That's 
good! That’s how you ought to carry this cloth wrapper adorned with gold!” 
Not thinking much about the thing, the monster-spirit left it inside the door. Dear Pilgrim! Even in the midst of falsehood he knew greater falsehood, and each fakery of his produced more fakery! He 
pulled off one piece of his hair on which he blew a mouthful of divine breath: it changed at once into the wrapper while his true body took on the form of a tiny fly that alighted on the door post. Then he 
heard 8 Rules moaning and muttering somewhere in a muffled voice somewhat like a bull stricken with plague! With a buzz, Pilgrim flew up to look around and saw at once that there was a leather bag 
hung high on the beam. When he alighted on the bag, he heard 8 Rules expostulating the demon in all sorts of vile language. “Wretched fiend,” he said, “How dare you change yourself into a specious 
Nun Guanyin to trick me here? How dare you hang me up and want to eat me? One day when my Elder Brother uses his boundless power equal to Heaven, all monsters of this mountain will then be 
caught. When I'm freed after this leather bag’s untied, I'll rake you a thousand times before | stop!” 
When Pilgrim heard these words, he laughed silently saying to himself, “He’s not dropped his banner or spear yet though the idiot must be suffocating in there! Old monkey must catch hold of this fiend! 
If | don't, I'll be unable to rid myself of my hostility!” 
He was just trying to think of a plan to rescue 8 Rules when he heard the call of the demon king: “Where’re the six mighty commanders?” There were 6 little fiends who became special friends of his 
and these spirits received the appointment of mighty commander. Their names were: Cloud-in-Fog, Fog-in-Cloud, Quick-as-Fire, Swift-as-Wind, Hurly-Burly, and Burly-Hurly. The 6 mighty commanders 
went forward and knelt down. The demon king asked, “Do you all know the way to the house of the Venerable Great King?” 
“We do,” they replied. 
The demon king said, “Go at once and journey in the night if you've to, to give this invitation to the Venerable Great King. Tell him that I've caught the Tang Monk who'll be steamed and served for him 
to eat so that his age may be lengthened a thousand-fold.” Obeying this order, the 6 fiends swarmed out of the door and left. Pilgrim flew away from the bag and followed those fiends to leave the cave 
with a buzz. 
042 

The Great Sage diligently calls at South Sea; Guanyin with compassion binds the Red Boy 
The 6 mighty commanders walked out of the cave entrance and followed the road directly toward the southwest. Pilgrim thought to himself, “They wanted to extend an invitation for the Venerable Old 
King to eat my master, and that Venerable Old King has to be the Bull Demon King. Since old monkey met him that year, our friendship was a deep one, as ours were the most congenial spirits and 
sentiments. Now I’ve returned to the path of rectitude; though he’s still a perverse demon, | can remember his looks despite our lengthy separation. Let old monkey transform himself into the Bull 
Monster King and see if they could be deceived.” Dear Pilgrim! He slipped away from those six little fiends; spreading his wings, he flew to a distance of some ten miles ahead. With one shake of his 
body he changed into the form of Bull Monster King and, pulling off several strands of hair, he cried, “Change!” They changed into several little fiends who were mounting falcons, leading hounds, and 
brandishing bows and arrows as if they were hunting in the fold of the mountain. There they waited for the six mighty commanders. 
As that motley crew shuffled along, they suddenly saw the Bull Monster King seated before them. So startled were Burly-Hurly and Hurly-Burly that they fell to their knees at once, crying, “Venerable 
Great King is here!” Since Cloud-in-Fog, Fog-in-Cloud, Quick-as-Fire, and Swift-as-Wind were all of fleshly eyes and mortal stock, how could they possibly distinguish between the true and the false? 
They all knelt down also and respected, saying, “Dad, these little ones have been sent by the Great King Holy Child from the Fiery Cloud Cave. We're here to invite Dad Venerable Great King to dine 
on the flesh of the Tang Monk, so that your age will be lengthened a thousand-fold.” 
“Children,” rejoined Pilgrim, “get up. Follow me home; I'll go with you after I've changed my clothes.” Respecting again, the little fiends said, “We beg our Dad not to stand on ceremony. There’s no 
need to return to your residence. The distance is great, and we fear that our Great King will chide us for our delay. We beseech you to begin your joumney at once.” Laughing, Pilgrim said, “What nice 
children you're! All right, all right! Clear the way and I'll go with you.” The six fiends roused their spirits and shouted to clear the way while the Great Sage followed them. 
In no time at all they returned to their own place. Swift-as-Wind and Quick-as-Fire dashed into the cave, crying, “Great King, Dad Venerable Great King has arrived.” Delighted, the monster king said, 
“All of you’re quite useful! You've returned so quickly!” He at once gave the order for all his captains to arrange their troops and to unfurl the flags and drums to receive the Venerable Great King. The 
fiends of the entire cave all obeyed this command and they formed an orderly formation all the way out to the entrance. Shaking his body once to retrieve his hairs who were leading dogs and falcons, 
Pilgrim with chest thrust forward walked loftily inside in big strides. After he took a seat in the middle facing south, Red Boy faced him and knelt down to respect to him. “Dad King,” he said, “your child 
gives you obeisance.” Pilgrim said, “My child is exempted from such ceremonies.” Only after he had saluted himself four times did the monster king rise from the ground and stand below the seat of 
Pilgrim. 
“My child,” said Pilgrim, “why did you ask me to come here?” Saluting again, the monster king said, “Though your child is not talented, he has managed to capture a certain person yesterday, a monk 
from the Great Tang in the Land of the East. I’ve often heard people say that he is someone who has practiced self-cultivation for ten disciples. If anyone eats a piece of his flesh, this person will enjoy 
the same age as a mortal from P’éng-lai or Ying-chou. Your foolish boy does not dare eat the Tang Monk by himself. That is why I’ve invited Dad King especially to enjoy with me the flesh of the Tang 
Monk, so that your age may be lengthened a thousand-fold.” When Pilgrim heard these words, he shuddered and said, “My child that Tang Monk is this?” 
“The one journeying to the Western Heaven to acquire scriptures,” said the monster king. “My child,” said Pilgrim, “is he the master of Pilgrim Sun?” 
“Indeed,” said the monster king. Waving his hand and shaking his head, Pilgrim said, “Don’t provoke him! You can provoke others but you don’t know what sort of person that Pilgrim Sun happens to 
be! My worthy boy, you’ve not met him, | suppose? That monkey has vast magic powers and knows many ways of transformation. Once when he caused great disturbance in the Heavenly Palace, the 
Great Jade Emperor sent against him one hundred thousand celestial soldiers but they did not succeed in capturing him even after they had set up the cosmic nets. How dare you want to eat his 


master? Quickly, send him back to his disciple, and don’t provoke that monkey. If he finds out that you've eaten his master, he need not come to fight with you; all he has to do is use that golden- 
hooped rod of his to drill a hole halfway into the mountain and he will shovel it right out of its roots! My child where will you find shelter then? Who will take care of me when | grow old?” 

“Dad King,” said the monster king, “what are you saying? You're magnifying the powers of others to belittle the abilities of your son. Though that Pilgrim Sun and his two brothers — altogether three of 
them — attempted to lead the Tang Monk to cross our mountain, they permitted me to use a transformation to abduct their master back here. Afterwards, he and Bullseye 8 Rules searched their way to 
our door, and he then made some such foolish claim that he was a kin of ours. | grew angry and fought with him, though the several rounds we went through did not indicate that he was such a hot 
shot! Bullseye 8 Rules stepped in from the side to join the fray, and that was when your child spat out his true fire of Fixity and defeated them all at once. They were so frightened in fact that they went 
to ask the Dragon Kings of the Four Oceans to assist them with rain but the rainwater, of course, could not extinguish my true fire of Fixity. Pilgrim Sun was so severely burned this time that he went 
into a little coma! Then he told bullseye 8 Rules to seek help from the Nun Guanyin of the South Sea. | changed into a specious Guanyin and tricked 8 Rules back here; he’s now hung in our compliant 
bag waiting to be steamed and fed to the little ones. This morning, Pilgrim returned to our door to make noises once more; when | gave the order to seize him, he was so frightened that he even 
abandoned a wrap of his and fled. It’s then that | decided to invite Dad King to come here so that you can see him live before he is steamed for food. My hope’s for your age to lengthen so that you'll 
enjoy long life without ever growing old.” 

Chuckling, Pilgrim said, “My worthy boy! You know only that you can overpower him with your true fire of Fixity. You don’t know that he knows seventy-two ways of transformation.” 

“He can change into whatever he wants to,” said the monster king, “but I can still recognise him. | don’t think he dares enter our door.” 

“My child,” said Pilgrim, “you may recognise him when he changes into something big, and that will be difficult indeed for him to get inside your door. But if he changes into something small, it will be 
difficult for you to recognise him.” 

“Let him!” said the monster king. “Every door of mine here has four or five little fiends standing guard over it. How could he possibly enter?” 

Pilgrim said, “So you don’t know about this! He is able to change into a fly, a mosquito, a flea, or a bee, a butterfly, a mole cricket, or some such creature. He can even change into a form like me! How 
could you possibly recognise him?” 

“Don’t worry!” said the monster king. “Even if he had a gall of iron and a heart of bronze, he wouldn't dare approach my door.” 

“According to what you've told me, my worthy boy,” said Pilgrim, “you certainly are more than able to withstand him, and this explains why you're eager to invite me to come and dine on the Tang 
Monk’s flesh. Unfortunately however, | can’t eat it today.” 

“Why not?” asked the monster king. Pilgrim said, “I’m feeling my age these days, and your mum often tells me to do some good deeds. There’s not much | can do, | thought but I’ve decided to keep a 
vegetarian diet.” 

The monster king said, “Is Dad King keeping a permanent one or a monthly diet?” 

“Neither,” said Pilgrim, “but mine is called a ‘Thunder Vegetarian Diet,’ and | keep it for only four days in a month.” 

“Which four?” asked the monster king. Pilgrim said, “During those three days when the celestial stem xin appears in the sexagesimal representations’ and during the sixth day of the month. Today 
happens to be the day of xinyou: I'd maintain a vegetarian diet in the first place, and in the second place, a you day means that | myself should not meet any guests. Therefore, let’s wait until tomorrow; 
I'll personally see to it that the Tang Monk is scrubbed clean to be steamed and enjoyed along with all of you.” 

When the monster king heard these words, he thought to himself, “My Dad King has always fed on humans; that’s been his livelihood in fact for over a millennium. How is it that he has taken up a 
vegetarian diet now? He has, after all, committed many evil acts. How could three or four days of vegetarian diet atone for them? His words make no sense! Something’s fishy!” He turned at once and 
walked out the second door, calling together the 6 mighty commanders to ask them, “Where did you find the Venerable Great King?” 

The little fiends said, “On our way.” 

“| remarked that you all returned so quickly,” said the monster king. “Didn't you reach his house?” 

“No,” said the little fiends, “we didn’t.” 

“That's bad!” said the monster king. “We've been deceived by him! This is no Venerable Great King.” All those little fiends knelt down immediately, saying, “Great King, can’t you even recognise your 
own dad?” 

“The features and the gestures seem genuine,” said the monster king, “but he doesn’t talk like him. | fear that we may be deceived by him and become his victim. Take care, all of you: those who use 
swords unsheath your swords; those who use spears keep your spears sharp; those who use staffs and ropes have them ready. Let me question him some more and see how he talks. If indeed he is 
the Venerable Great King, we can wait even a month until he is pleased to eat the Tang Monk. But if his words are not right, I'll give a yell and all of you'll attack together.” The various demons obeyed. 
This monster king went inside again and saluted once more to Pilgrim. “My child,” said Pilgrim, “there’s no need to stand on ceremony in the family. No need to salute me. If you’ve something to say, 
say it.” Saluting himself on the ground, the monster king said, “Your foolish boy invited you to come here for two reasons: first, | wanted to present to you the flesh of the Tang Monk, and second, I’ve 
a small question to ask you. Some days ago, | was taking a leisure trip; as | mounted the auspicious luminosity to rise to the 9-fold Heaven, | ran suddenly into Master Zhang Daoling, the Daoist 
Patriarch.” “Is he the Celestial Master?” asked Pilgrim. “Yes,” said the monster king. Pilgrim said, “What did he have to say?” 

“When he saw how well formed my features were,” said the monster king, “and how level were my shoulders, he inquired after the hour, date, month, and year of my birth. Your child however, was too 
young to remember the exact time. An expert in astrological divination, the Master wanted to tell my fortune through calculations based on the five planets. That is the reason why I’ve asked Dad King 
to come here. Please tell me the times of my birth, so that | can ask him to tell my fortune the next time | see him.” 

When Pilgrim heard these words, he sat smiling to himself, thinking, “Dear monster! Since old monkey has returned to the Religious fruit, I've caught, as a guardian of Master Tang, several monster- 
spirits on our way but none of them matches this one for jugglery! If he asks me about some trivial matters in the household, | can fabricate an answer with whatever comes into my mind. But now he 
wants to have the date, month, and year of his birth! How could | know?” Dear Monkey King! He was most resourceful indeed! Sitting augustly in the middle, he did not betray the slightest fear; instead, 
his face beaming with pleasure, he said, smiling, “My worthy boy, please rise. Because of my age, I’ve been troubled by all sorts of things of late, and I’ve quite forgotten the exact time of your birth. 
Let me ask your mum when | return home tomorrow.” 

The monster king said to himself, “Dad King has never stopped talking about the eight nativity characters? of my birth, saying that I’ve an age as lengthy as Heaven's. How could he forget them today? 
Nonsense! He has to be false!” He gave a yell, and the various fiends rushed forward to hack at Pilgrim’s head and face with their spears and swords. Using the golden-hooped rod to parry the blows, 
this Great Sage changed back into his original form and said to the monster-spirit, “My worthy child! How unreasonable you’re! How could a son attack his own dad?” Filled with embarrassment, the 
monster king did not even dare look at him, as Pilgrim transformed himself into a beam of golden light and left the cave dwelling. “Great King,” said the little fiends, “Pilgrim Sun has escaped.” The 
monster king said, “All right, all right! Let him go! I'll admit defeat this time! Let’s shut the door and say nothing to him. We'll wash and scrub the Tang Monk so that he can be steamed and eaten.” 

We now tell you about that Pilgrim who held on to his iron rod and walked toward the stream, roaring with laughter. When Sand-monk heard him, he quickly left the woods to meet him, saying, “Elder 
Brother, you've been gone for nearly half a day, and you’ve returned laughing. Could it be that you’ve succeeded in rescuing Master?” 

“Brother,” said Pilgrim, “though I’ve not rescued Master, I've won a round.” 

“What do you mean?” asked Sand-monk. 

Pilgrim said, “Bullseye Eight Rules was tricked by that fiend who changed himself into the form of Guanyin. He is caught and hung now in a leather bag. | was trying to devise a plan to rescue him when 
| heard that these so-called six mighty commanders were sent to invite a Venerable Great King to dine on Master's flesh. Old monkey thought that that Great King had to be the Bull Monster King; so | 
changed into his form, bluffed my way in, and took the seat in the middle. The fiend called me Dad King, and | answered him; he respected to me, and | accepted it. It was a pleasure indeed! That was 
the round | won.” 

“Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “the way you covet small advantages will make it difficult, | fear, for Master's life to be preserved.” 

“Don’t worry,” said Pilgrim. “Let me go and ask the Nun to come here.” 

“But your torso is still sore,” said Sand-monk. “Not anymore!” said Pilgrim. “The ancients said, ‘A happy affair cheers one’s spirit.’ You look after the luggage and the horse; let me go.” 

“You've given that monster a grudge against you,” said Sand-monk, “and | fear that he might harm our master. Go and come back quickly.” Pilgrim said, “I'll come back quickly all right! In the time of a 
meal, I'll be back.” Dear Great Sage! 

As he was speaking, he slipped away from Sand-monk using his cloud somersault, he headed straight for the South Sea. It took him much less than 30 minutes in the air when he saw the scenery of 
the Potalaka Mountain. In a moment, he lowered his cloud and dropped down on the mountain cliff where he was met by a group of 24 deities who asked, “Where’re you going, Great Sage?” 

After Pilgrim saluted to them, he said, “I want to see the Nun.” 

“Wait a moment,” said the deities, “and let's announce you.” 

Then the demigod Hariti4 went before the Cave of Tidal Sound to announce, “Let the Nun know that Sun Wukong is here to have an audience with you.” 

When the Nun heard the announcement, she ordered him to enter. Straightening out his attire, the Great Sage walked inside solemnly and saluted himself before the Nun. “Wukong, why aren’t you 
leading Master Gold Cicada to the west to seek scriptures?” asked the Nun. “Why are you here?” 

Pilgrim said, “Permit me to make this known to the Nun. Your disciple’s accompanying the Tang Monk on his journey, when we reached the Fiery Cloud Cave by the Dried Pine Stream at the Roaring 
Mountain. There is a monster-spirit called Red Boy whose name is also the Great King Holy Child, and who has abducted my master. Your disciple and Bullseye Aware of Ability found our way to his 
door and fought with him. He let loose his Fixity fire and we’d not prevail against him nor could we rescue Master. | went swiftly to the Great Eastern Ocean and managed to return with the Dragon 
Kings of the Four Oceans. They gave us rainwater but we still could not win. In fact, your disciple was burned so badly that he almost lost his life.” The Nun said, “If his is the Fixity fire and if he has 
such magic powers, why did you go seek the aid of the Dragon Kings? Why did you not come see me?” 

“| was about to come,” said Pilgrim, “but your disciple was badly hurt by the smoke, unable to mount the clouds. | therefore told bullseye 8 Rules to come and seek the assistance of the Nun.” 

“But Aware of Ability never appeared,” said the Nun. “Indeed he did not reach your treasure mountain,” said Pilgrim, “for he was deceived by that monster-spirit who changed into your image and has 
taken Aware of Ability into his cave. Right now, Aware of Ability is hanging in a leather bag, about to be steamed and eaten.” 

Hearing this, the Nun grew terribly angry, crying, “How dare that brazen fiend change into my image!” 

As she cried, she flung into the ocean the immaculate porcelain vase set with precious pearls that she held in her hand. Pilgrim was so startled that his hairs stood on end and he stood up at once to 
stand in waiting down below, saying to himself, “This Nun’s still quite a fiery temper! Well, old monkey should've known better than to speak like that and provoke her into ruining her virtue by smashing 
the immaculate vase. What a pity! What a pity! If I'd known it earlier I'd have asked her to give it instead to old monkey. That'd be some gift, wouldn't it?” Hardly had he finished speaking when the vase 
appeared again at the crest of some gigantic waves swelling up in the middle of the ocean. The vase was borne on the back of a strange creature that Pilgrim stared at intently. This creature looks like 
the Helper of Mud’s his primal name, he adds lustre to water to show his might. Reclusive, he knows the laws of Heaven and Earth; retired, he sees yet the mysteries of ghosts and gods. Safely he 
hides once his head and tail withdraw but legs outstretched will make him fly and soar. As King Wen drew trigrams and Zeng Yuan divined, he frequented, too the courtyards of Fu Xi. His nature 
displays 1000 charms when he sports and plays in the rising tide. His armour’s knit by strands of golden cord; spot by spot, that is how his shell has been adorned. His robe shows 8 Trigrams, 9 
Palaces, and richly ornate is his gown of green. Brave when he is living - so he is loved by Dragon Kings; a god’s tablet he bears even after death. If you want to know this strange creature’s name, he 
is the fierce black tortoise making winds and waves. Carrying the vase on his back, the tortoise climbed ashore and nodded his head at the Nun 24 times to indicate that he had given her 24 salutes. 
When Pilgrim saw him, he smiled and thought to himself, “So the guardian of the vase’s here. If the vase ever gets lost, | suppose we can ask him for it.” 

The Nun said, “Wukong, what’re you saying down there?” 

“Nothing,” said Pilgrim. 

“Then bring the vase up here,” commanded the Nun. 

Pilgrim went forward at once to pick up the vase. Alas! | can’t do so at all! It’s as if a dragonfly attempted to rock a stone pillar — how'd | even budge it? Pilgrim approached the Nun and knelt down 
saying, “Your disciple can’t pick it up.” 

“Monkey head,” said the Nun, “all you know is how to brag! If you can’t even pick up a small vase, how can you subdue fiends and capture monsters?” 

“To tell you the truth, Nun,” said Pilgrim, “I might be able to do it ordinarily but today | just can’t pick it up. | must have been hurt by the monster-spirit, and my strength has weakened.” The Nun said, 
“Normally it's an empty vase but once it has been thrown into the ocean, it has travelled through the three rivers, the five lakes, the eight seas, and the four big rivers. It has in fact gathered together 


from all the aquatic bodies in the world an ocean-full of water that is now stored inside it. You may be strong but you don’t possess the strength of upholding the ocean. That’s why you can’t pick up the 
vase.” Pressing his hands together before him, Pilgrim said, “Yes, your disciple is ignorant of this.” 

Walking forward, the Nun used her right hand and picked up the immaculate vase with no effort at all and placed it on the middle of her left palm. The tortoise nodded his head again before he crawled 
back into the water. “So this is a coolie who serves the household and looks after the vase!” said Pilgrim. After the Nun took her seat again, she said, “Wukong, the sweet dew in my vase is not like that 
unauthorized rain of the Dragon Kings; it can extinguish the Fixity fire of the monster-spirit. | want you to take it with you but you’re unable to pick up the vase. | want the Dragon Girl Skilled in Wealth 
to go with you but | fear that you’re not a person of kindly disposition. All you know is how to hoodwink people. When you see how beautiful my Dragon Girl is, and what a treasure is my immaculate 
vase, you'll try to steal it. If you succeed where would | find time to go look for you? You'd better leave something behind as a pledge.” 

“How pitiful!” said Pilgrim. “Nun, you're so suspicious! Since your disciple embraced complete poverty, he has never indulged in such activities. You tell me to leave a pledge, what shall | use? This silk 
shirt on my body is a gift from you. And this tiger-skin skirt, how much can it be worth? The iron rod — well, | need it for protection night and day. Only this little fillet on my head is made of gold but you 
used some tricks to make it grow on my head so that it could not be taken down. If you want a pledge, I’m willing now to give that to you as a pledge. You can recite a Loose-Fillet Spell and remove it 
from me. Otherwise, what shall | use as a pledge?” 

“You're rather smug, aren't you?” said the Nun. “I don’t want your clothes, your iron rod, or your gold fillet. Pull off one strand of that lifesaving hair behind your head and give it to me.” 

Pilgrim said, “These hairs were also your gift; | fear that if | pull one off, they will be broken up in such a way that they will no longer be able to save my life.” 

“You ape!” scolded the Nun. “You're so stingy that you'll not even uproot one hair!® That makes it difficult for me also to dispense my Goodly Wealth!” 

Laughing, Pilgrim said, “Nun, you're truly suspicious! But as the saying goes, if you don’t have regard for the monk, at least have regard for a god. | beg you to save my master from his ordeal.” 

Then the Nun freely and gladly left the lotus seat and walked up the rocky cliff with scented steps. Since the holy monk was threatened with harm, she would subdue the fiend and give him help. Highly 
pleased, the Great Sage Sun followed Guanyin out of the Tidal Sound Cave as the various deities stood at attention on the Potalaka Peak. “Wukong,” said the Nun, “let's cross the ocean.” 

Pilgrim saluted and said, “Let the Nun go first.” 

“You go first,” said the Nun. 

Respecting, Pilgrim said, “Your disciple dares not display his power before the Nun. If | use the cloud somersault, my clothes may flip up, reveal my body, and | fear that the Nun will take offence at my 
irreverence.” 

When the Nun heard these words, she told the Dragon Girl Skilled in Wealth to pick from the lotus pond one petal of lotus flower and drop it into the ocean below the mountain ridge. Then she said to 
Pilgrim, “Get up on that lotus flower petal and I'll send you across the ocean.” 

Seeing the flower, Pilgrim said, “Nun, this petal of flower’s so light and thin. How’d it bear me up? I'll tumble into the water for sure and won't my tiger-skin kilt be soaked? If it loses its tan, how can | 
wear it when the weather turns cold?” 

“Get up there and see what happens!” shouted the Nun. Not daring to disobey, Pilgrim risked his life and jumped onto the flower. At first, it did seem rather light and small but when he alighted on it, he 
found that the flower was actually somewhat larger than a small boat. Delighted, Pilgrim said, “Nun, it should hold me.” 

“In that case,” said the Nun, “why can’t you cross the ocean?” Pilgrim said, “There is neither pole nor oar, neither sail nor mast. How could | cross the ocean?” 

“No need for that,” said the Nun who blew a mouthful of air lightly onto the lotus flower and immediately it drifted away from the shore. Another breath of the Nun sent Pilgrim across the bitter sea of the 
Southern Ocean’ until he reached the other shore. When his feet touched solid ground again, Pilgrim laughed and said, “This Nun truly knows how to display her powers! She’s able to summon old 
monkey hither and thither with no effort at all!” 

The Nun then gave instructions for all the deities each to stand guard in his station, and for the Dragon Girl Skilled in Wealth to shut the gate of the cave. Mounting the auspicious cloud, she departed 
from the Potalaka Peak. When she reached the backside of the mountain, she called out, “Hui’an where are you?” Hui’an whose common name was Liberation, happened to be the second prince of 
the Pagoda Bearer Deity-King Li, and he, as the pupil taught personally by the Nun, never strayed from her side. His name was Disciple Hui’an, the Religion Guardian. Pressing his hands together 
before him, Hui’an saluted to the Nun who said to him, “Go quickly to the Region Above and borrow the Swords of Constellations from your Dad King.” 

“How many swords do you want, Teacher?” asked Hui’an. “The entire set,” said the Nun. 

Obeying her command, Hui’an mounted the clouds and went through the South Heaven Gate to reach the Palace of Cloudy Towers. He respected to his Dad King who asked him, “Why's my son come 
here?” Liberation replied, “Sun Wukong came to ask my teacher to subdue a fiend; she in turn told your child to borrow the Swords of Constellations from Dad King.” The Deity-King at once asked Nata 
to take out the swords, all thirty-six of them, to hand over to Liberation who said to Nata, “Brother, please go and salute mum. I’ve urgent business; when | return the swords, I'll respect to her then.” 
They parted hurriedly; Liberation mounted the auspicious luminosity and returned to South Sea where he presented the swords to the Nun. 

After she received them, the Nun threw them into the air as she recited a spell: the swords were transformed into a thousand-leaf lotus platform. Leaping up, the Nun sat solemnly in the middle. On one 
side, Pilgrim snickered to himself, “This Nun is so prudent and penurious! In that pond of hers she has her own five-coloured treasure lotus platform but she can’t bear to use it. She has to borrow 
someone else’s things!” 

“Wukong,.” said the Nun, “stop talking! Follow me!” 

They all mounted the clouds and left the ocean, the white cockatoo flying ahead while Great Sage Sun and Hui’an followed from behind. In a moment, they reached the peak of a mountain. “This is the 
Roaring Mountain,” said Pilgrim, “and from here to the door of the monster-spirit is a distance of approximately four hundred miles.” 

When the Nun heard this, she lowered her auspicious cloud and recited a spell that began with the letter, Ohm. At once, various deities and demons appeared from the left and right of the mountain, 
all local spirits and mountain deities of the region. They came to respect before the Nun’s treasure lotus seat. “Don’t be alarmed, all of you,” said the Nun. “I’m here to seize this demon king but | want 
you all to sweep this area clean. Not a single living creature’s to remain within three hundred miles around here. Take the small beasts in their lairs, the young creatures in their nests, and send them 
up to the peak so that their lives may be preserved.” The various deities obeyed and left; they returned shortly to report that their work was done. The Nun said, “If the region’s cleared, all of you may 
return to your shrines.” 

She turned her immaculate vase upside down and all at once a torrent of water thundered forth. Truly it surged over the summit and dashed over stone walls. Surging over the summit it seemed the 
swelling sea; dashing over stone walls it seemed the vast ocean. Black mists arose, damping the entire sky; green waves reflecting the sun beamed chilly light. The whole cliff gushed jade-like sprays; 
the whole sea sprouted gold lotus. The Nun let loose her awesome might, her sleeve revealed the Religion-body of Chan. ®This place was changed to Potalaka’s scene, truly a perfect image of South 
Sea. Udumbara bloomed from lovely rushes; fresh Palmyra leaves spread from scented grass. On purple bamboos the cockatoo paused; amid some green pines red partridges called. Waves ten 
thousand fold and lotus all around, hear the wind roar, the water surging up to Heaven. When the Great Sage Sun saw this, he marvelled to himself, “Truly a Nun of great mercy and compassion! If old 
monkey had this kind of religion power, he’d simply pour the little vase on the mountain. Who cares about fowls and beasts, crawling or winged creatures?” 

“Wukong,” cried the Nun, “stretch forth your hand.” Hurriedly rolling up his sleeve, Pilgrim stretched out his left hand. The Nun pulled out a twig of her willow branch after having dipped it in the sweet 
dew of her vase and wrote on his palm the word “Delusion.” She said to him, “Hold your fist and go quickly to provoke battle with the monster-spirit. You're permitted not to win but to lose; let him defeat 
you and chase you back here. I’ve my power to subdue him.” 

Obeying the instruction, Pilgrim turned his cloudy luminosity and headed straight for the entrance of the cave. Holding his left hand in a fist and the iron rod with his right, he shouted, “Fiends, open the 
door!” Those little fiends again went inside to report, “Pilgrim Sun is here again.” 

“Shut the door tightly,” said the monster king, “and don’t mind him.” 

“Dear boy!” shouted Pilgrim. “You chased your old man out the door, and you still wouldn’t open up!” The little fiends reported again: “Pilgrim Sun is using that little something to insult you.” All the 
monster said was, “Don’t listen to him!” After he had shouted for a couple of times and found the door still tightly shut, Pilgrim became enraged. He lifted the iron rod and with one blow punched a big 
hole in the door. The little fiends were so terrified that they ran inside, crying, “Pilgrim Sun has smashed our door!” When the monster king heard these reports and discovered that the front door was 
smashed, he bounded out the door and, holding the lance, yelled at Pilgrim, “You ape! You really don’t know when to stop! | let you take some advantage of me and you're still not content. You dare 
come again to oppress me by smashing my door. What sort of punishment should you receive?” 

“My child,” said Pilgrim, “you dare chase your old man out your door. What sort of punishment should you receive?” 

Embarrassed as well as enraged, the monster king picked up his lance and stabbed at Pilgrim’s chest who also lifted his iron rod to parry and return the blow. They fought for four or five rounds when 
Pilgrim, still making a fist, retreated with his rod trailing behind him. The monster king stood still before the mountain and said, “I’m going to wash and scrub the Tang Monk instead.” 

“My dear boy,” said Pilgrim, “Heaven is watching you! Won't you come?” When the monster-spirit heard these words, he grew even more enraged. With a yell, he dashed before Pilgrim and attempted 
to stab him with the lance once more. Our Pilgrim wielded his iron rod and fought with him for several rounds before retreating again. “Monkey,” scolded the monster king, “you're able to fight before 
for at least twenty or thirty rounds. Why are you running away now when we're just sett ling down to do battle? Why?” 

“Worthy child,” said Pilgrim, chuckling, “your old man is afraid that you'll start a fire!” The monster-spirit said, “I’m not going to start the fire. You come up here.” 

“If you’re not,” said Pilgrim, “step over here. A gallant fellow should not beat up people in front of his own house.” The monster-spirit, of course, did not know that this was a trick; he lifted his lance and 
gave chase once more. Dragging his rod, Pilgrim opened up his left fist and the monster king was completely deluded; all he had in mind was to give chase to his adversary. The one running ahead 
was like a falling meteor; the one chasing from behind was like an arrow leaving the bow. 

In less than a moment, they saw the Nun. Pilgrim said, “Monster-spirit, I'm scared of you. Let me go. You've chased me to the South Sea, the residence of the Nun Guanyin. Why aren't you turning 
back?” The monster king refused to believe it; gritting his teeth, he persisted in his chase. Pilgrim with one shake of his body, slipped into the divine luminosity that surrounded the body of the Nun and 
disappeared. When the monster-spirit suddenly discovered that Pilgrim was gone, he walked up to the Nun with bulging eyes and said to her, “Are you the reinforcement Pilgrim Sun brought here?” 
The Nun did not reply. Rolling the lance in his hands, the monster king bellowed, “Hey! Are you the reinforcement Pilgrim Sun brought here?” Still the Nun did not reply. The monster-spirit lifted his 
lance and jabbed at the heart of the Nun who at once changed herself into a beam of golden light and rose into the air. Pilgrim followed her on her way up and said to her, “Nun, you're trying to take 
advantage of me! The monster-spirit asked you several times. How could you pretend to be deaf and dumb and not make any noise at all? One blow of his lance in fact chased you away, and you've 
even left behind your lotus platform.” 

“Don’t talk,” said the Nun, “let's see what he will do.” At this time, Pilgrim and Liberation both stood in the air shoulder to shoulder and stared down; they found the monster-spirit laughing scornfully and 
saying to himself, “Brazen ape, you're mistaken about me! What sort of person do you think that |, Holy Child, happen to be? For several times you’d not prevail against me, and then you had to go and 
fetch some namby-pamby Nun. One blow of my lance now has made her vanish completely. Moreover, she has even left the treasure lotus platform behind. Well, let me get up there and take a seat.” 
Dear monster-spirit. He imitated the Nun by sitting in the middle of the platform with hands and legs folded. When he saw this, Pilgrim said, “Fine! Fine! Fine! This lotus platform has been given to 
someone else!” 

“Wukong,” said the Nun, “what are you mumbling again?” 

“Mumbling what? Mumbling what?” replied Pilgrim. “I’m saying that the lotus platform has been given to someone else. Look! It’s underneath his thighs. You think he’s going to return it to you?” 

“| wanted him to sit there,” said the Nun. “Well, he’s smaller than you,” said Pilgrim, “and it seems that the seat fits him even better than it fits you.” 

“Stop talking,” said the Nun, “and watch the religion power.” She pointed the willow twig downward and cried, “Withdraw!” All at once, flowers and leaves vanished from the lotus platform and the 
auspicious luminosity dispersed entirely. The monster king was sitting actually on the points of those swords. The Nun then gave this command to Liberation: “Use your demon-routing cudgel and strike 
back and forth at the sword handles.” 

Dropping from the clouds, Liberation wielded his cudgel as if he were demolishing a wall: he struck at the handles hundreds of times. As for that monster-spirit, both his legs were pierced till the points 
stuck out; blood spouted in pools as flesh and skin were torn. Marvellous monster! Look at him! Gritting his teeth to bear the pain, he abandoned the lance so that he could use both hands to try to pull 
the swords out from his body. “O Nun,” said Pilgrim, “that fiendish creature’s undaunted by the pain. He’s still trying to pull out the swords.” 

When the Nun saw this, she said to Liberation, “Don’t harm his life.” 

She then pointed downward again with her willow twig and recited a spell beginning with the letter, Ohm. Those Swords of Constellations all changed into inverted hooks, sharp and curved like the 
teeth of wolves that could not be pulled out at all. Only then was the monster-spirit overcome by fear. Holding onto the points of the swords, he pleaded pitifully in pain, “Nun, your disciple’s eyes but 
no pupils and he’d not perceive your vast religion power. | beseech you to be merciful and spare my life. I'll never dare practice violence again. I’m willing to enter the gate of religion to receive your 
commandments.” 


When the Nun heard these words, she lowered her golden beam and approached the monster-spirit with her 2 disciples and the white cockatoo. “You're willing to receive my commandments?” she 
asked. 

Nodding his head as tears fell, the monster king said, “If you spare my life, I'm willing to receive the commandments.” 

The Nun asked, “You wish to enter my fold?” 

“If you spare my life,” replied the monster king, “I’m willing to enter the religion gate.” 

“In that case,” said the Nun, “I'll touch your head and give you the commandments.” She took out from her sleeve a golden razor and approached the fiend. With a few strokes, she shaved his hair off 
and turned it into the style of the Tai Mountain Crowning the Head: the top was completely bald but three tufts of hair were left around the edge so that they could be knotted together into three tiny 
braids. Grinning broadly on one side, Pilgrim said, “How unfortunate for this monster-spirit! He looks like neither boy nor girl! | don’t know what he looks like!” 

“Since you've received my commandments,” said the Nun, “I'll not treat you lightly. I'll call you the Boy Skilled in Wealth. How’s that?” The fiend nodded his head in agreement, for all he hoped for was 
that his life be spared. The Nun pointed with her finger and called out, “Withdraw!” The Swords of Constellations dropped to the ground, and the boy did not bear even a single scar on his body. 

Then the Nun said, “Hui’an, you take the swords back to Heaven to return them to your Dad King. You needn't return here to meet me but go back to the Potalaka Peak to wait for me with the other 
deities.” Liberation obeyed and sent the swords back to Heaven before returning to the South Sea. The wildness in that boy had not been wholly removed. When he saw that his pains were gone and 
that his thighs had healed and, moreover, that the hair on his head had been made into three tiny braids, he picked up the lance and said to the Nun, “You don’t have any true religion power to subdue 
me! It’s a kind of chicanery, that’s all! I'll not take your commandments! Watch the lance!” He lunged at the face of the Nun, and Pilgrim was so mad that he wielded his iron rod and was about to strike. 
“Don’t hit him,” the Nun cried. “I've my punishment for him.” She took out from her sleeve a golden fillet, saying, “This treasure used to belong to our God who gave it to me when he sent me to search 
for the scripture pilgrim in the Land of the East. There were three fillets altogether: the Golden, the Constrictive, and the Prohibitive. The Constrictive Fillet was given to you first to wear while the 
Prohibitive Fillet was used to make the guardian of my mountain submit.? I’ve been unwilling to part with this Golden Fillet. Now that this fiend is so audacious, I'll give it to him.” 

Dear Nun! She took the fillet and waved it at the wind once, crying, “Change!” It changed into five fillets that she threw at the body of the boy, crying, “Hit!” One fillet enveloped the boy’s head while the 
rest caught his two hands and two feet. “Stand aside, Wukong,” said the Nun, “and let me recite for a while the Golden-Fillet Spell.” Horrified, Pilgrim said, “O Nun, | asked you to come here to subdue 
a fiend. Why do you want to cast that spell on me?” 

“This spell,” said the Nun, “isn’t the Tight-Fillet Spell that’s the spell cast on you. It’s the Golden-Fillet Spell reserved especially for that boy.” Greatly relieved, Pilgrim stood to 1 side of her to listen to 
the Nun’s recital. Making the magic sign with her fingers, she went through her recitation several times, and the monster-spirit scratched his ears and clawed at his cheeks; he curled himself into a ball 
and rolled all over the ground. Truly 1 word could reach the whole region of sand, this religion power so vast, boundless, and deep. 


043 

An evil demon at Black River captures the monk; the dragon prince of the Western Ocean catches the iguana 
The Nun went through her recitation several times before she stopped. As the pain subsided, the monster-spirit collected himself and sat up to discover that there were golden fillets clasped tightly 
around his neck, his wrists, and his ankles. He wanted to take them off but he could not even move them one whit. The treasure had taken root in the flesh, and the more he tried to loosen the fillets, 
the more painfully tight they felt. Laughing, Pilgrim said, “Darling boy! The Nun fears that you can’t be reared. That's why she has made you wear a necklace and some bracelets!” Enraged by this 
remark, the youth picked up the lance once more and stabbed madly at Pilgrim. Dashing immediately behind the back of the Nun, Pilgrim cried, “Recite the spell! Recite the spell!” 
The Nun dipped her willow twig in the sweet dew and sprinkled it at the youth, crying, “Close!” Look at him! He dropped the lance all at once, and his two hands were pressed together so tightly before 
his chest that he could not move them apart at all. This is thus the origin of the “Guanyin Twist,” a posture assumed by the attendant of the Nun which you can see in portraits and paintings to this day. 
When the youth found that he could not use his hands nor could he pick up the lance, he realised at last how deep and mysterious the religion power was. He had no alternative but to salute in 
submission. The Nun then recited some magic words as she tilted the immaculate vase to one side; the ocean-full of water was retrieved entirely and not half a drop was left behind. She said to Pilgrim, 
“Wukong, this monster-spirit is vanquished but his unruliness has not been completely eliminated. Let me make him a salute with each step of the way — all the way back to the Potalaka Mountain — 
before | call off my power. Go quickly now into the cave to rescue your master.” Turning to respect to her, Pilgrim said, “I thank the Nun for taking the trouble of travelling for so great a distance. Your 
disciple should escort you for part of the journey.” 
“No need for that,” said the Nun, “for | don’t want to jeopardize master’s life.” 
When Pilgrim heard these words, he was delighted and respected again to take leave of the Nun. The monster-spirit thus returned to the right fruit; with 53 salutes he made submission to Guanyin. 
Sand-monk sat in the woods for a long time and waited in vain for Pilgrim to appear. At last, he put the luggage on the back of the horse, and with one hand holding the reins and the other the fiend- 
routing treasure staff, he left the pine forest to look toward the south. Shortly, he found a happy Pilgrim approaching. Sand-monk went forward to meet him, saying, “Elder Brother, why did it take you 
until now to return from your trip to seek assistance from the Nun? | almost died from the anxious waiting!” 
“You're still dreaming!” said Pilgrim. “Old monkey's not only brought the Nun here but she has also subdued the fiend already.” 
Then he gave a thorough account of the Nun’s exercise of her religion power and Sand-monk was exceedingly pleased, saying, “Let's go then to rescue Master!” 
The 2 of them leaped across the stream and dashed up to the cave entrance. After tying up the horse, they lifted their weapons together and broke into the cave to exterminate all the fiends. They then 
lowered the leather bag to free 8 Rules. “Elder Brother,” said Idiot after having thanked Pilgrim, “where’s that monster-spirit? Let me rake him a few times just to relieve my feelings!” 
Pilgrim said, “Let's find Master first,” 
The 3 of them went to the rear and found their master bound in the courtyard, all naked and weeping. Sand-monk hurriedly untied the ropes and Pilgrim brought forth clothes for him to wear. The 3 of 
them then knelt down and said, “Master, you've suffered!” 
Tripitaka thanked them, saying, “Worthy disciples, you’ve worked hard! How did you manage to subdue the demon?” 
Pilgrim again gave a thorough account of how the Nun came to make submission of the youth, and when Tripitaka heard this, he quickly raised his hand up to salute toward the south. Pilgrim said, “No 
need to thank her for we’ve also been instrumental in providing her with the blessing of making submission of a young boy.” 
This is thus the basis of what is heard even today about the boy who gave 53 salutes to Guanyin’ and was given the vision of god after 3 salutes. Thereafter, Sand-monk was told to pick up all the 
treasures stored in the cave while the rest of the disciples found some rice to prepare for their master. That elder retained his life all because of the Great Sage Sun; and acquired true scriptures, helped 
by the Handsome Monkey-Spirit. Master and disciples found their way again and headed steadfastly toward the West after leaving the cave. They had travelled for more than a month when all at once 
the sound of flowing water filled their ears. “O disciples!” cried Tripitaka, highly startled, “where’s this sound of water coming from?” 
“You old Master!” said Pilgrim, chuckling, “you’re so full of worries! There are four of us altogether but only you happen to hear some sort of water sound. You've quite forgotten again the Heart Thread.” 
“The Heart Thread,” said the Tang Monk, “was imparted to me orally by the Crow’s Nest Zen Master of the Pagoda Mountain.’ It has fifty-four sentences, overall, two hundred and seventy characters. 
| memorized it at the time and up till now, I’ve recited it often. Which sentence do you think I’ve forgotten?” 
Pilgrim said, “Old Master, you've forgotten the one about ‘no eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, or mind.’ Those of us who've left the family should see no form with our eyes, should hear no sound with our 
ears, smell no smell with our noses, taste no taste with our tongues; bodies should've no knowledge of heat or cold, and minds should gather no vain thoughts. This is called the extermination of the 
Six Robbers.3 But look at you now! Though you may be on your way to seek scriptures, your mind’s full of vain thoughts: fearing the demons you're unwilling to risk your life; desiring vegetarian food 
you arouse your tongue; loving fragrance and sweetness you provoke your nose; listening to sounds you disturb your ears; looking at things and events you fix your eyes. You've in sum, assembled all 
the Six Robbers together. How'd you possibly get to the Western Heaven to see God?” 
When Tripitaka heard these words, he fell into silent thought for a long time before he said, “O disciple! Since | left our sage ruler that year, I’ve moved most diligently night and day: my sandals sweep 
open the mountain mists; coir hat bursts through the summit clouds. At night the apes wail to make me sigh; | grieve to hear in moonlight the bird cries. When'll | end the work of Double Three’ and 
acquire Siddhartha’s wondrous scripts?” 
When Pilgrim heard this, he could not refrain from clapping his hands and roaring with laughter, saying, “So Master just can’t get rid of his homesickness! If you want to complete the work of Double 
Three, there’s no difficulty! The proverb says, ‘Success will come when meritorious service is done.” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “if we've to face all these evil barriers and wicked miasmas, we'll never finish our meritorious service even after a millennium!” 
Sand-monk said, “Second Elder Brother, you and | are very much alike, and we’d not rub Big Brother the wrong way with our foolish tongues and stupid mouths. Just concentrate on carrying the loads 
on our backs; there'll be a day when the service’s completed.” 
As master and disciples conversed, they proceeded steadily when they saw before them all at once a huge body of surging black water blocking the path of the horse. Standing at the shore, the four 
of them stared at the water carefully and they saw tiers of dense billows; layers of turbid waves; tiers of dense billows like dark sap spilling; layers of turbid waves like black oil rolling. No reflection 
appears when you walk near; no trees or woods you can see from afar. Boiling, an earth full of ink! Rippling, a thousand miles of ashes! Like piles of charcoal water bubbles float; like overturned coals 
the breakers undulate. Cattle and sheep will not drink here; crows and magpies cannot fly over. Cattle and sheep won't drink, disdaining the black; crows and magpies can’t fly, fearing the opaque. 
Only the shore’s reeds, rushes know the seasons, the bank’s flowers, and grass display their green. There are lakes, streams, rivers in all the world, many brooks, lagoons both great, and small that 
one in one’s life may come upon. But who’s seen the Black River of the West? Dismounting, the Tang Monk said, “Disciples, why’s the water so black?” 
8 Rules said, “Some families must have overturned their dye barrels!” 
“If not,” said Sand-monk, “it has to be someone washing his brushes and ink-stones.” Pilgrim said, “Stop speculating and babbling, both of you! We've to find a way to get Master across.” 
“If Old bull wants to cross this river,” said 8 Rules, “it’s not difficult: all | need to do is to mount the clouds or tread the waters, and I'll cross it in the time of a meal.” 
“If you ask old Sand,” said Sand-monk, “I, too, need only to mount the clouds or ride the waters, and I'll cross it in no time.” Pilgrim said, “Of course, it’s easy for us but it'll be difficult for Master.” 
“Disciples,” said Tripitaka, “how wide is the river?” 
“Approximately ten miles,” said 8 Rules. Tripitaka said, “You three had better determine which of you'll carry me across.” Pilgrim said, “Eight Rules can do it.” 
“No, | can’t,” said 8 Rules. “For if | carry him on my back and try to mount the clouds, | can’t even rise three feet from the ground. As the proverb says, ‘A mortal is heavier than a mountain!’ If | carry 
him and tread water, he will push me down below with him.” 
While master and disciples were having this discussion by the river, they suddenly saw a man approaching from the upper reach of the river and rowing a small boat. Delighted, the Tang Monk said, 
“Disciples, we've a boat. Ask him to take us across.” Shouting loudly, Sand-monk called, “Boatman, come and ferry us across this river.” The man in the boat said, “I don’t have a ferry boat. How could 
| take you across?” Sand-monk said, “In Heaven or on Earth, the most important thing is to perform deeds of kindness to others. Though yours may not be a ferry boat, we’re not people who will often 
bother you. We're the sons of God sent by imperial command in the land of the East to acquire scriptures. Please be kind to us and take us across the river. You'll have our gratitude.” When the man 
heard these words, he rowed the boat near the shore and, holding his oar, he said, “Master, my boat is small and there are many of you. How could | take you all across?” 
When Tripitaka walked closer and took a look, he saw that the boat was actually a canoe dug out of a log and its hull could at most seat only two persons besides the boatman. “What’ll we do?” said 
Tripitaka. 
“With this boat,” said Sand-monk, “we'll have to take two trips.” 
Always sly and slothful, 8 Rules immediately said, “Awakened to Purity, you and Big Brother can remain here to watch the luggage and the horse. Let me escort Master and cross over first. Then the 
boat can return to take you and the horse. Big Brother can simply leap across.” 
Nodding, Pilgrim said, “You're right.” 
After Idiot had helped the Tang Monk into the boat, the boatman punted the boat away from shore and began rowing it forward. As they approached the middle of the river, a violent gust of wind 
suddenly arose with a roar, whipping up the waves to darken the sky and the sun. Marvellous wind! /n mid-air a band of dark clouds rises up; in midstream black waves surge a thousand tiers tall. At 
both banks flying sand blots out the sun; on all sides trees fall to this Heaven-shaking howl. Seas and rivers overtumed, dragon gods take fright; mud and dirt flown up, plants and flowers fade. The 
wind roars like thunder in times of spring and growls like a famished tiger on and on! Crabs, turtles, shrimps, and fishes salute; fowl and beast have all lost their nests and lairs. The sailors of 5 Lakes 
are victims all; the households of 4 Seas all fear for their lives. If fishers in the stream can’t lower their hooks; how’d the river's boatmen punt their poles? With tiles and bricks upturned the houses fall; 
with Heaven and Earth shaken, Mount Tai quakes. This wind was called up by the man rowing the boat who happened to be a fiendish creature in this Black River. The disciples saw with their own 
eyes that the Tang Monk and Bullseye 8 Rules along with the boat were sinking into the water. In no time at all, they vanished without a trace. Deeply dismayed on the shore, Sand-monk and Pilgrim 


cried, “What'll we do? The old master faces adversity every step of the way. He just escaped from one demonic ordeal and journeyed safely for a little while before he is in the clutches again of these 
black waters.” 

Then Sand-monk said, “Could it be that the boat has capsized? Perhaps we'd search for them downstream.” 

“No,” said Pilgrim, “it couldn't be, for if the boat had capsized, 8 Rules with his aquatic skills could easily have picked up Master and trod water to carry him out. Just now | thought | saw something 
perverse about that boatman. | suppose that fellow must have called up the wind and dragged Master beneath the water.” When Sand-monk heard these words, he said, “Elder Brother, why didn’t you 
speak up earlier? You watch the luggage and the horse. Let me go into the water to search for them.” Pilgrim said, “The colour of this water is hardly normal. | don’t think you'd go in there.” 

“You think this water's more formidable than my Flowing-Sand River?” asked Sand-monk. “I can go! | can go!” 

Dear monk! Taking off his shirt and his socks, he lifted up his fiend-routing treasure staff and dove into the waves with a splash. Opening up the water before him, he went forward in big strides. Just 
as he was walking, he heard the sound of someone speaking. Sand-monk stepped to one side to sneak a glance around and he discovered ahead of him a pavilion; across its front door were written 
these large characters: “Hengyang Ravine, Residence of the Black River God.” Then he heard the fiendish creature, sitting in the pavilion, say, “I've gone through some hard times and only now have 
| found something nice. This monk is a good man who has practiced self-cultivation for ten disciples. If | manage to eat a piece of his flesh, I'll be a man of longevity who never grows old. I’ve waited 
for him long enough, and today I’ve realised my hopes. Little ones, bring out the iron cages quickly. Steam these two monks whole while | prepare an invitation card to be sent to our second uncle. We 
want to celebrate his birthday for him.” 

When Sand-monk heard these words, he could not restrain the fire leaping up in his heart. Lifting his treasure staff, he banged madly at the door, crying, “Brazen creature! Send out quickly my master, 
the Tang Monk, and my brother 8 Rules.” The little demons standing guard at the door were so frightened that they dashed inside to report, “Disaster!” 

“What sort of disaster?” asked the old fiend. 

The little fiends said, “There’s a monk with gloomy complexion outside. He’s banging on our door and demanding the return of some monks.” 

When the fiend heard these words, he at once asked for his armour that was brought out by the little fiends. After the old fiend suited himself up properly, he took up in his hands a steel riding crop with 
bamboo-like joints.> As he walked out the door, he looked mean and vicious indeed! See a square face and round eyes flashing colours bright; curled lips and a mouth like a bloody bowl. A few sparse 
whiskers wave like iron wires; his temple’s flanked by hair like cinnabar. He has the form of Jupiter revealed and the face of a thunder god in rage. He wears a suit of iron flower-adorned, a gold helmet 
with jewels thickly set. He holds the steel crop with bamboo-like joints and violent wind churns as he walks along. At birth he was a creature of the waves; he shed his origin. What fearsome change! 
Ask for this fiend’s true identity: small iguana-dragon is his former name. “Who is beating on my door?” bellowed the fiend. 

Sand-monk said, “You ignorant brazen fiend! How dare you use your paltry magic and change into a ferryman to abduct my master here with your boat? Return him at once and I'll spare your life.” 
The fiend roared with laughter and said, “This monk doesn’t care about his life! Your master’s been caught by me alright and now I’m about to have him steamed to be served to my invited guests. You 
come up here and match strength with me. If you can withstand me for three rounds, I'll return your master. If you can’t withstand me, I'll have you steamed and eaten also. Don’t bother to dream about 
your going to the Western Heaven!” 

Maddened by what he heard, Sand-monk brought the treasure staff down on the fiend’s head but the latter raised his steel crop to parry the blow. The 2 of them thus began a fierce battle at the bottom 
of the river. With fiend-routing staff and crop of bamboo joints 2 men, growing enraged, both strove to win. 1, the Black River's millennium-old fiend; 1, a former mortal of Divine Mists. This one longed 
to eat Tripitaka’s flesh; that 1 would guard the Tang Monk’s piteous life; at the river's bottom they met to fight, each craving success and nothing else. They fought till pairs of shrimp and fish concealed 
themselves, till crabs and turtles in twos withdrew their heads. Hear the water-home’s fiends all beat their drums and monsters shouting madly before their gate. This dear Awakened to Purity — what a 
true Religious priest — did show all alone his prowess and strength! Waves tossed and churned and they fought to a draw as the crop met and tangled with the staff. Think of it! It was all for the monk 
of Tang who would seek scriptures and salute in God’s Heaven. The 2 of them fought for some thirty rounds and neither proved to be the stronger. Sand-monk thought to himself, This fiendish creature’s 
indeed my match. Since | can’t prevail, | may as well entice him out of the waters so that my elder brother can beat him. 

Making one final feeble blow, Sand-monk turned quickly and ran with the staff trailing behind him. The monster-spirit however, did not give chase and said instead, “You may go! I’m going to fight with 
you no more for I’ve to prepare a card to invite a guest.” 

Panting heavily, Sand-monk leaped out of the water and said to Pilgrim, “Elder Brother, this creature’s unruly!” 

“Since you're down there for quite a while, did you find out what sort of monster he’s?” asked Pilgrim. “Have you seen Master?” 

“There's a pavilion down there,” said Sand-monk, “and across the top of the gate outside are written these large characters: Hengyang Ravine, Residence of the Black River God. | sneaked up to it and 
heard him speaking inside, telling his little ones to wash and scrub some iron cages so that Master and 8 Rules can be steamed alive. He also wanted to invite his uncle to come for a birthday celebration. 
| got mad and pounded at the door; that was when the fiendish creature came out with a steel crop with bamboo-like joints. He fought with me for this half a day, about thirty rounds in all, and it was a 
draw. | faked defeat, thinking that I'd lure him out here so that you’d help me. But that fiendish creature was quite smart. He refused to chase me; all he wanted to do was to prepare his card to invite 
his guest. | came back up then.” 

“What sort of a monster is he?” asked Pilgrim. Sand-monk replied, “He looks like a big turtle, or else he has to be an iguana.” 

“| wonder,” said Pilgrim, “who is his uncle?” 

Hardly had he finished speaking when a man emerged from a bend downstream. Kneeling down at a distance, he cried, “Great Sage, the water god of the Black River respects to you.” 

“Could you be that monster who rowed the boat,” said Pilgrim, “returning to deceive me again?” The old man respected and wept, saying, “Great Sage, I’m not a monster. I’m the true god of this river. 
It was the fifth month of last year during high tide that this monster-spirit arrived from the Western Ocean, and he immediately waged a battle against me. An old and feeble person like myself could not 
withstand him, of course, and he therefore took by force my official residence, the Hengyang Ravine. Since he had also taken the lives of many of my water kin, I’d no choice but to file suit against him 
in the ocean. | didn’t expect that the Dragon King of the Western Ocean was his maternal uncle who threw out my plaint and told me instead that I'd allow the monster to stay in my home. | wanted to 
go to Heaven to bring charges but a humble deity and minor official like me would not get an audience with the Jade Emperor. When | heard that the Great Sage had arrived, | came especially to see 
you. | beg the Great Sage to exert his great power on my behalf and avenge my wrongs.” 

When Pilgrim heard these words, he said, “According to what you've said, the Dragon King of the Western Ocean is definitely guilty. Now this monster-spirit has abducted my master and my younger 
brother, boasting that he wants to have them steamed and served to his maternal uncle for his birthday. | was about to try to seize this fiend when luckily you came to inform me. All right, river god, you 
stay here and stand guard with Sand-monk. Let me go into the ocean to bring the Dragon King here so that he can capture the creature.” 

“Im deeply indebted to the Great Sage’s kindness,” said the river god. Pilgrim at once mounted the clouds and went straight to the Western Ocean. He stopped his somersault and, making the water- 
repellent sign with his fingers, he divided the waves and walked right in. As he travelled, he ran into a black fish-spirit, holding a golden box and darting up like an arrow from the depths down below. 
Pilgrim whipped out his iron rod and gave his head a terrific blow: alas, the brains burst out and the jaw bones cracked open. With a swish, the corpse drifted up to the water surface. When Pilgrim 
opened the box, he saw an invitation card inside on which this message was written: 

Your foolish nephew, Clean Iguana, touches his head to the ground a hundred times to inform you, Venerable Mr. Ao, my esteemed Second Uncle. Frequently I’ve enjoyed your goodly gifts, for which 
I'm most grateful. I've recently acquired two creatures who happen to be monks from the Land of the East. Since they are rare treasures in the world, your nephew dares not enjoy them by himself. As 
| recall that Uncle’s sacred birthday is near, I’ve specially prepared a small banquet to wish you the addition of a millennium. It is my earnest hope that you'll honour us with your presence. 

“This fellow,” said Pilgrim chuckling to himself, “has handed over a formal complaint first to old monkey!” He put the card in his sleeve and proceeded. Soon a Nature spirit on patrol saw him and darted 
quickly back to the Water-Crystal Palace to make the report: “Great King, Dad Great Sage Equal to Heaven, has arrived.” The Dragon King Aoshun at once led his water kinsmen out of the palace to 
receive his visitor. “Great Sage,” he said, “please enter this small palace and take a seat, so that we may present you with tea.” 

“I've not yet drunk your tea,” said Pilgrim, “but you've drunk my juice first.” Smiling, the Dragon King said, “Since the Great Sage has made submission in the gate of God, he no longer touches meat 
or juice. Since when have you invited me to drink?” 

“You've not gone to drink juice,” said Pilgrim, “but you’ve committed a crime of drinking nonetheless.” Greatly startled, Aoshun said, “What kind of crime has this small dragon committed?” Taking the 
card out of his sleeve, Pilgrim handed it over to the Dragon King. 

When the Dragon King read it, his spirit left him and his soul fled. Hurriedly going to his knees, he respected and said, “Great Sage, please pardon me! That fellow is the ninth child of my sister. Because 
my brother-in-law had made an error in administering wind and rain by not releasing the prescribed amount, the Heavenly Judge issued a decree and he was beheaded by the human judge, Wei Zheng, 
during a dream.*® My sister had no place to go and it was your little dragon who brought her here and had her cared for. Year before last she died of illness but since her son did not have a home, | told 
him to stay at the Black River where he could nourish his nature and cultivate the arts of realised mortality. | didn’t expect him to commit such wicked crimes. This little dragon will send someone 
immediately to arrest him.” 

“How many sons did your sister have?” asked Pilgrim. “Are they all monsters somewhere?” The Dragon King said, “My sister has nine sons altogether but eight of them are good ones. The first, Little 
Yellow Dragon, lives in the Huai River; the second, Little Black Dragon, lives in the Ji River; the third, Blue-Backed Dragon, lives in the Yangzi River; the fourth, Red-Whiskered Dragon, lives in the 
Yellow River; the fifth, Futile Dragon, strikes the bell for the Religious Patriarch; the sixth, Reclining-Beast Dragon, guards the roof beam in the palace of the Daoist Patriarch; the seventh, Reverent 
Dragon, guards the imperial commemorative arches for the Jade Emperor; and the eighth, Sea-Serpent Dragon, remains at the place of my elder brother and guards the Taiyue Mountain of Shanxi 
Province. The ninth son is the Iguana Dragon; because of his youth and lack of official appointment, he was told last year to live in the Black River to nourish his nature. When he acquired a name, I'd 
have transferred him to another post. | didn’t anticipate that he would disobey my decree and offend the Great Sage.” 

When Pilgrim heard these words, he smiled and said, “How many husbands did your sister have?” 

“Only one,” said Aoshun, “and he was the Dragon King of the Jing River who was beheaded. My sister lived here as a widow and died year before last.” 

“One husband and one wife,” said Pilgrim. “How could they manage to produce so many different kinds of offspring?” Aoshun said, “This is what the proverb means when it says that ‘A dragon will 
produce nine species, and each species is different from the others.” 

Pilgrim said, “Just now | was so vexed that | was about to use the invitation card as evidence and file suit against you at the Heavenly court, charging you with conspiracy with a fiend and kidnapping. 
But according to what you've told me, it’s really the fault of that fellow who disobeys your instructions. I'll pardon you this time — for the sake of my relationship with you and your brothers, and on 
account of the fact that that dragon is young and ignorant after all. And also, you’ve no knowledge of that matter. Quickly dispatch someone to arrest him and rescue my master. We'll then decide what 
to do next.” 
Aoshun at once gave this command to the prince, Moang: “Call up immediately five hundred young soldiers of shrimps and fishes; arrest that iguana and bring him back here for indictment. Meanwhile, 
let us prepare some juice and a banquet as our apology to the Great Sage.” 

“Dragon King,” said Pilgrim, “you needn't be so edgy. | told you just now that I'd pardon you. Why bother to prepare juice and food? | must go now with your son, for | fear that Master may be harmed 
and my brother is waiting for me.” 
Unable to detain his guest with even desperate pleadings, the old dragon asked one of his daughters to present tea. Pilgrim drank one cup of the fragrant tea while standing up and then took leave of 
the old dragon. He and Moang led the troops from the Western Ocean and soon arrived in the Black River. “Worthy Prince,” said Pilgrim, “take care to catch the fiend. I’m going ashore.” 

“Have no worry, Great Sage,” said Moang. “This little dragon will arrest him and take him up here for the Great Sage to convict him of his crime. Only after your master has been sent up also will | dare 
take him back to the ocean to see my dad.” Very pleased, Pilgrim left him and made the water-repellent sign with his fingers to leap out of the waves. As he reached the eastern shore, Sand-monk 
(who led the river god to meet him) said, “Elder Brother, you left by the air but why did you return from the river?” Pilgrim gave a thorough account of how he slew the fish-spirit, acquired the invitation 
card, confronted the Dragon King, and led troops back with the dragon prince. Sand-monk was exceedingly pleased; all of them then stood on the bank to wait to receive their master. Prince Moang 
sent a soldier of his to go before the water residence and make this announcement to the fiend: “Prince Moang has been sent here by the Venerable Dragon King of the Western Ocean.” The fiend 
was sitting inside when he heard this report and thought to himself, “I sent the black fish-spirit to present an invitation card to my second maternal uncle, and I’ve not received any answer since. Why 
is it that my uncle has not come? Why has he sent my elder cousin instead?” As he was thus deliberating with himself, a little fiend sent out to patrol the river also returned to make this report: “Great 
King, there is a regiment of soldiers stationed to the west of our water residence, and one of the banners has these words clearly written: Young Marshal Moang, Crown Prince of the Western Ocean.” 
“This elder cousin’s indeed arrogant,” said the fiend. “I suppose my uncle can’t come and that’s why the prince’s been sent in his place to attend our banquet. But if he’s coming for a banquet, why bring 
along soldiers and warriors? Aha! | fear that there’s another reason behind this. Little ones, bring out my armour and have my steel crop ready for | fear that he may turn violent suddenly. Let me go 
out to receive him and see what's happening.” 


Having received this instruction, all the little fiends rubbed their fists to prepare themselves. When the iguana-dragon walked out of the door, he saw that there was in truth a regiment of marine soldiers 
encamped on the right. He saw banners with sashes aflutter; halberds arranged in bright mists; treasure swords amassing lustre; long lances twirling flower tassels; curved bows like many new moons; 
arrows as wolves’ teeth stuck up; scimitars big and gleaming; short cudgels both rough and hard. Sea serpents, oysters, whales, crabs, turtles, fishes, shrimps — big and small they stood in order, their 
weapons dense and thick like hemp. If the general did not command it, who'd dare step out of line one bit? The iguana fiend went before the gate of the camp and cried out in a loud voice, “Big Cousin, 
your younger brother awaits you respectfully. Please come out.” 

A snail on patrol in the camp went hurriedly to the middle tent to report, “Your Highness, the iguana-dragon is outside calling for you.” 

Pressing down the golden helmet on his head and tightening the treasure belt around his waist, the prince picked up a three-cornered club’ and ran out of the camp in great strides. “Why did you ask 
me to come out?” he asked. 

Saluting, the iguana-dragon said, “Your younger brother sent an invitation card to Uncle this morning. But | suppose he has declined my invitation and sent you instead. If my Big Cousin is here for the 
banquet, why have you called up the troops? You didn’t enter the water residence but you pitched camp here instead. And you even put on armour and held a weapon. Why?” 

“Why did you invite your uncle to come?” asked the prince. 

The fiend replied, “It was his kindness which bestowed this place on me as a residence but I've not seen him for a long time nor have I'd an opportunity to express my filial love for him. Yesterday | 
happened to have caught a monk from the Land of the East who, so I've heard, possesses an original body that has practiced self-cultivation for ten disciples. If a person eats him, his age will be 
lengthened. | was hoping to ask Venerable Uncle to look this monk over before | put him in an iron cage and have him steamed for Venerable Uncle to celebrate his birthday.” 

“You're so dim-witted!” shouted the prince. “Who do you think this monk is?” 
“He is a monk from the Tang court,” said the fiend, “a priest on his way to the Western Heaven to acquire scriptures.” The prince said, “You know only that he is the Tang Monk but you don’t know how 
formidable his disciples are.” The fiend said, “He has under him a monk with a long horn whose name is Bullseye 8 Rules. I’ve caught him also and am about to have him steamed and eaten together 
with the Tang Monk. There is another disciple of his by the name of Sand-monk, a fellow rather dark in colour and gloomy in complexion who uses a treasure staff. Yesterday this monk made a demand 
in front of my door for the return of his master but | called out the river troops to face him. Several blows from my steel crop made him flee for his life. | don’t see how he could be called formidable!” 
“You're ignorant!” said the prince. “The Tang Monk’s still another disciple, his eldest who happens to be the Great Sage Equal to Heaven, a golden mortal of the Great Monad who did cause great 
disturbance in the Celestial Palace five centuries ago. Now he is the guardian of the Tang Monk on his way to acquire scriptures in the Western Heaven, and his name has been changed to Pilgrim 
Sun Wukong at the time of his conversion by the great and merciful Nun Guanyin of the Potalaka Peak. Don’t you've any other thing to do but to cause such a great disaster as this? It was that Pilgrim 
Sun who ran into your messenger in our ocean; he took your invitation card and went straight into the Water-Crystal Palace, charging us dad and son with the crimes of ‘conspiracy and kidnapping.’ 
You'd better send the Tang Monk and 8 Rules back to the shore of the river immediately and return them to the Great Sage Sun. You can then rely on my apologies to him to preserve your life. But if 
you utter only half a ‘No,’ you might as well forget about your life or any further opportunity to live in this place!” 

When the fiend heard this statement, he grew terribly angry, saying, “I’m an intimate first cousin of yours. How could you side with someone else? If | listen to you, I'll have to send out the Tang Monk 
— just like that! You think there’s such an easy thing in this whole wide world? You may be afraid of that Sun Wukong but you think I’m afraid of him, too? If he has any ability, let him come to the front 
of my water residence and fight with me for three rounds. I'll return his master then but if he can’t withstand me, I'll capture him also and have him steamed together with his master. I'll not recognise 
any relative, nor will | invite any more guests! I'll shut my door and ask my little ones to recite and exercise. I'll take the honoured seat above to enjoy myself. You bet I'll eat his mum's!” 

When the prince heard this, he opened his mouth wide and expostulated, “You brazen demon! You're truly audacious! Let’s not ask the Great Sage Sun to face you. Do you dare hold a contest with 
me?” 

“If | want to be a hero,” said the fiend, “you think I'll be afraid of any contest?” He shouted to his little fiends, “Bring me my armour!” 

His cry immediately made those little fiends on his left and right bring up his armour and the steel crop. Changing their colours all at once, the two of them unleashed their strength and gave the order 
for the drums to sound on both sides. This battle was quite different from the previous one in which Sand-monk took part. You saw flags and banners luminous; spears and halberds ablaze. On that 
side the camps were quickly broken; on this side the doors were widely open. Prince Moang held high his golden club met by fiend iguana wielding his crop. The cannon’s one boom made river soldiers 
fierce; 3 strokes of the gong aroused marine troops. Shrimps fought with shrimps; crabs strove with crabs; the whale swallowed the red carp; the bream downed the yellow zhang; the shark devoured 
the mullet and the mackerel fled; the rock oyster caught the clam and the mussel panicked. Hard like an iron rod was the stingray’s whip; sharp like a razor was the swordfish’s jaw. The sturgeon 
chased the white eel; the whitebait seized the black pomfret. A river full of water fiends took up the fight; dragon troops on both sides did join the fray and brawled for a long time as billows churned. 
Mighty as Indra was the prince Moang who with a cry brought down his golden club and caught the king of mischief, the iguana fiend. Holding his 3-cornered club, the prince feigned an opening and 
the monster-spirit, not realising that it was faked, lunged forward to attack. Sidestepping quickly from his opponent's charge, the prince brought the club down hard on the monster-spirit’s right arm and 
knocked him to the ground. The prince rushed up to him and gave him another kick that sent him sprawling. The marine soldiers all surged forward to pin the monster-spirit to the ground; his arms were 
bull-tied behind his back and his chest bone was pierced and bound with an iron chain. He was taken up to the shore to appear before Pilgrim Sun as the prince said, “Great Sage, your little dragon’s 
caught the monster iguana. Let the Great Sage decide what'll be done with him.” 

When Pilgrim saw this, he said to the monster-spirit, “You've been disobedient to what you're told. When your Venerable Uncle gave you permission to live here, he intended for you to nourish your 
nature to preserve your body. At the time when you acquired a name, he would have transferred you to another post. How dare you use force to occupy the residence of the water god and abuse the 
kindness of your elders? How dare you exercise your paltry magic to deceive my master and my younger brother? I’d like to give you a stroke of my rod but this rod of old monkey is quite heavy. One 
slight touch and your life will be finished. Let me ask you instead where have you placed my master?” Respecting without ceasing, the fiend said, “Great Sage, this little iguana has no knowledge of the 
Great Sage’s reputation. Just now, | violated reason and morality to resist my elder cousin who had me arrested. Now that I’ve seen you, I’m eternally grateful to the Great Sage for sparing my life. 
Your master is still tied up in the water residence. | beg the Great Sage to loosen my iron chain and untie my hands. Let me go into the river and escort him out here.” 

On one side Moang said, “Great Sage, this is a rebellious fiend and most devious. If you turn him loose, | fear that he may plot something wicked.” 

“| know his residence,” said Sand-monk, “let me go and find Master.” 

He and the river god at once leaped into the waves and went to the water residence down below where they found the doors wide open but not a single little fiend. When they walked inside to reach 
the pavilion, they found the Tang Monk and 8 Rules still bound there and completely naked. Sand-monk hurriedly untied his master as the river god loosened the ropes on 8 Rules, after which they 
placed the freed prisoners on their backs and darted back to the surface of the water. When 8 Rules discovered the monster-spirit on the shore all tied up with ropes and chains, he lifted his rake and 
wanted to strike him, crying, “You perverse beast! You still want to eat me?” Pilgrim tugged at him, saying, “Brother, let's spare him. Have regard for the feelings of Aoshun and his son.” Saluting, 
Moang said, “Great Sage, your little dragon dares not linger any longer. Since we've succeeded in rescuing your master, | must bring this fellow back to see my dad. Though the Great Sage has spared 
his life, my dad will most certainly not permit him to go unpunished. He will dispose of him in some way, I’m sure, and then we'll report to the Great Sage along with our apologies once more.” 

“In that case,” said Pilgrim, “you may take him and leave. Please salute your Honoured Dad for me and I'll thank him in person another time.” 

The prince at once led the marine soldiers and the monster-spirit into the water where they found their way directly back to the Great Western Ocean. The river god of the Black River gave thanks to 
ilgrim saying, “I'm deeply indebted to the Great Sage for the recovery of my water residence.” The Tang Monk said, “Disciples, we're still stranded on the eastern shore. How shall we cross this river?” 
he river god said, “Venerable Dad, please do not worry and mount your horse. This humble deity will open up a path for Venerable Dad to cross the river.” The master indeed climbed onto the white 
orse while 8 Rules held the reins, Sand-monk poled the luggage, and Pilgrim took up the rear. The river god then exercised his magic of blocking the water; as the upper reaches of the river were 
jammed up, the lower part of the river soon turned dry, and a wide road was thus created. Master and disciples walked safely to the western shore and, after thanking the river god, they proceeded to 
igh ground to set out again on their way. So it was that with help the Chan monk could now face the West; with no waves on earth, they could cross Black River. 


sas 


044 
The religion-body in primal cycle meets the force of the cart; the mind, righting monstrous deviates, crosses the spine-ridge pass 
The poem says: 
To seek scriptures and freedom they go to the west, an endless toil through countless mounts of fame. 
The days fly by like darting hares and crows; as petals fall and birds recite the seasons go. 
A little dust - the eye reveals 3000 worlds; the priestly staff — its head’s seen 400 isles. 
They feed on wind and rest on dew to seek their goal, ‘not knowing which day they may all return. 
Tripitaka Tang and his disciples found the main road to the West. Truly they had to face the wind and brave the snow, to be capped by the moon and cloaked by the stars. They journeyed for a long 
time and soon it was the time of early spring. See the cycled return of triple yang; 2the radiance of all things. The cycled return of triple yang makes all Heavens beguiling like a painted scroll; the 
radiance of all things means flowers spread brocade through all the earth. The plums fade to a few specks of snow; the grains swell with the valley clouds. Ice breaks gradually and mountain streams 
flow; seedlings sprout completely and un-parched. Truly it is that a god of the Year rides forth; a god of the Woods takes a drive. Warm breezes waft floral fragrance; light clouds renew the light of the 
sun. Willows by the wayside spread their curved green; the rains give life; all things bear the looks of spring. As master and disciples travelled slowly along the road, enjoying the scenery as they 
proceeded, they suddenly heard a loud cry that seemed the roar of ten thousand voices. Tripitaka Tang was so startled that he immediately pulled in his reins and refused to go forward. Turning back, 
he said, “Wukong, where did that terrible din come from?” 
“Yes, it sounded as if the earth were splitting apart and the mountains were toppling,” said 8 Rules. 
“More like the crack of thunder I’d say,” said Sand-monk. 
Tripitaka said, “I still think it's men shouting or horses neighing.” 
With a chuckle, Pilgrim Sun said, “None of you has guessed correctly. Stop here and let old monkey go take a look.” Dear Pilgrim! He leaped up at once and rose into mid-air, treading on the cloudy 
luminosity. He peered into the distance and discovered a moated city; when he looked more carefully, he saw that it was veiled by auspicious luminosity after all and not by any baleful vapour. “This is 
anice place,” Pilgrim thought to himself. “Why'd there be such an ear-splitting roar? There’re no banners or spears in sight in the city and what we heard couldn't possibly be the roar of cannons. Why’s 
it then that we hear this hubbub of men and horses?” As he was thus thinking to himself, a large group of monks came into his sight: on a sandy beach outside the city gate they were trying to pull a 
cart up a steep ridge. As they strained and tugged, they cried out in unison to call on the name of the Nun King Powerful for help, and this was the noise that startled the Tang Monk. Pilgrim lowered 
his cloud gradually to take a closer look. Aha! The cart was loaded with bricks, tiles, timber, earth clods, and the like. The ridge was exceedingly tall and leading up to it was a small spine-like path 
flanked by 2 perpendicular passes with walls like 2 giant cliffs. How’d the cart possibly be dragged up there? Though it was such a fine warm day that one would expect people to dress lightly, what the 
monks had on were virtually rags. They looked destitute indeed! Pilgrim thought to himself, “I suppose they must be trying to build or repair a monastery and since a region like this undoubtedly yields 
a bountiful harvest, it must be difficult for them to find part-time labourers. That's why these monks themselves have to work so hard.” 
As he was thus speculating, he saw two young Daoists swagger out of the city gate. They were dressed in star caps crowned their heads; brocades draped their bodies; luminous star caps crowned 
their heads; colourful brocades draped their bodies. Cloud-headed boots? held up their feet; fine silk sashes tied up their waists. Like full moons their faces were handsome and bright; they had the fair 
forms of jade-Heaven gods. When the monks saw the 2 Daoists, they were terrified; every 1 of them redoubled his effort to pull desperately at the cart. “So, that’s it!” said Pilgrim, comprehending the 
situation all at once. “These monks must be awfully afraid of the Daoists, for if not, why'd they be tugging so hard at the carts? I’ve heard someone say that there’s a place on the road to the West 
where Daoism’s revered and Religion’s set for destruction. This must be the place. I'd like to go back and report this to Master but | still don’t know the whole truth and he might blame me for bringing 
him surmises, saying that even a smart person like me can’t be counted on for a reliable report. Let me go down there and question them thoroughly before | give Master an answer.” 
He would question. Dear Great Sage! He lowered his cloud and with a shake of his torso, he changed at the foot of the city into a mendicant Daoist of the Complete Truth order with an exorcist hamper 
hung on his left arm. Striking a hollow wooden fish with his hands and reciting stanzas of Daoist themes, he walked up to the two Daoists near the city gate. “Masters,” he said, saluting, “this humble 
Daoist raises his hand.” 
Returning his salute, one of the Daoists said, “Sir where did you come from?” 
“This disciple,” said Pilgrim, “has wandered to the comers of the sea and to the edges of Heaven. | arrived here this morning with the sole purpose of collecting subscriptions for good works. May | ask 
the two masters which street in this city is favourable toward the Dao, and which alley is inclined toward piety? This humble Daoist would like to go there and beg for some vegetarian food.” Smiling, 
the Daoist said, “O Sir! Why do you speak in such a disgraceful manner?” 


“What do you mean by disgraceful?” asked Pilgrim. 

“If you want to beg for vegetarian food,” said the Daoist, “isn’t that disgraceful?” Pilgrim said, “Those who have left the family live by begging. If | didn’t beg where would I’ve money to buy food?” 
Chuckling, the Daoist said, “You've come from afar, and you don’t know anything about our city. In this city of ours, not only the civil and military officials are fond of the Dao, the rich merchants and 
men of prominence devoted to piety but even the ordinary citizens, young and old will salute to present us once they see us. It is in fact a trivial matter, hardly worth mentioning. What's most important 
about our city is that His Majesty, the king, is also fond of the Dao and devoted to piety.” 

“This humble cleric is first of all quite young,” said Pilgrim, “and second, he is indeed from afar. In truth I’m ignorant of the situation here. May | trouble the two masters to tell me the name of this place 
and give me a thorough account of how the king has come to be so devoted to the cause of Dao — for the sake of fraternal feelings among us Daoists?” The Daoist said, “This city has the name of the 
Cart Slow Kingdom, and the ruler on the precious throne is a relative of ours.” 

When Pilgrim heard these words, he broke into loud guffaws, saying, “I suppose that a Daoist has become king.” 

“No,” said the Daoist. “What happened was that twenty years ago, this region had a drought, so severe that not a single drop of rain fell from the sky and all grains and plants perished. The king and 
his subjects, the rich as well as the poor - every person was burning incense and praying to Heaven for relief. Just when it seemed that nothing else could preserve their lives, three mortals suddenly 
descended from the sky and saved us all.” 

“Who were these mortals?” asked Pilgrim. 

“Our masters,” said the Daoist. 

“What are their names?” asked Pilgrim. The Daoist replied, “The eldest master is called the Tiger-Strength Great Mortal; the second master, the Deer-Strength Great Mortal; and the third master, Goat- 
Strength Great Mortal.” 

“What kinds of magic power do your esteemed teachers possess?” asked Pilgrim. The Daoist said, “Summoning the wind and the rain for my masters would be as easy as flipping over one’s palms; 
they point at water and it will change into oil; they touch stones and change them into gold, as quickly as one turns over in bed. With this kind of magic power, they are thus able to rob the creative 
genius of Heaven and Earth, to alter the mysteries of the stars and constellations. The king and his subjects have such profound respect for them that all of us Daoists are claimed as royal kin.” 
Pilgrim said, “This ruler is lucky, all right. After all, the proverb says, ‘Magic moves ministers!’ He certainly can’t lose to claim kinship with your old masters, if they possess such powers. Alas! | wonder 
if 'd even the tiniest spark of affinity, such that I'd have an audience with the old masters.” Chuckling, the Daoist replied, “If you want to see our masters, it’s not difficult at all. The two of us are their 
bosom disciples. Moreover, our masters are so devoted to the Way and so deferential to the pious that the mere mention of the word ‘Dao’ would bring them out of the door, full of welcome. If we two 
were to introduce you, we'd need to exert ourselves no more vigorously than to blow away some ashes.” 

Saluting deeply, Pilgrim said, “I’m indebted to you for your introduction. Let us go into the city then.” 

“Let's wait a moment,” said one of the Daoists. “You sit here while we two finish our official business first. Then we'll go with you.” Pilgrim said, “Those of us who have left the family are without cares 
or ties; we’re completely free. What do you mean by official business?” The Daoist pointed with his finger at the monks on the beach and said, “Their work happens to be the means of livelihood for us. 
Lest they become indolent, we’ve come to check them off the roll before we go with you.” Smiling, Pilgrim said, “You must be mistaken, Masters. Religious and Daoists are all people who have left the 
family. For what reason are they working for our support? Why are they willing to submit to our roll call?” 

The Daoist said, “You've no idea that in the year when we're all praying for rain, the monks saluted to God on one side while the Daoists petitioned the Pole Star on the other, all for the sake of finding 
some food for the country. The monks however, were useless, their empty recites of Threads wholly without efficacy. As soon as our masters arrived on the scene, they summoned the wind and the 
rain and the bitter affliction was removed from the multitudes. It was then that the court became terribly vexed at the monks, saying that they were completely ineffective and that they deserved to have 
their monasteries wrecked and their God images destroyed. Their travel rescripts were revoked and they were not permitted to return to their native regions. His Majesty gave them to us instead and 
they were to serve as bondsmen: they are the ones who tend the fires in our Abbey who sweep the grounds, and who guard the gates. Since we've some buildings in the rear that are not completely 
finished, we've ordered these monks here to haul bricks, tiles, and timber for the construction. But for fear of their mischief, indolence, and unwillingness to pull the cart, we've come to investigate and 
make the roll call.” 

When Pilgrim heard that, he tugged at the Daoists as tears rolled from his eyes. “I said that | might not have the good affinity to see your old masters,” he said, “and true enough | don't.” 

“Why not?” asked the Daoist. 

“This humble Daoist is making a wide tour of the world,” said Pilgrim, “both for the sake of eking out a living and for finding a relative.” 

“What sort of relative do you've?” asked the Daoist. Pilgrim said, “I've an uncle who since his youth had left the family and shorn his hair to become a monk. Because of famine some years ago he had 
to go abroad to beg for alms and hadn't returned since. As | remembered our ancestral benevolence, | decided that I'd make a special effort to find him along the way. It’s very likely, | suppose, that he 
is detained here and cannot go home. | must find him somehow and get to see him before | can go inside the city with you.” 

“That's easy,” said the Daoist. “The two of us can sit here while you go down to the beach to make the roll call for us. There should be five hundred of them on the roll. Take a look and see if your uncle 
is among them. If he is, we'll let him go for the sake of the fact that you, too, are a fellow Daoist. Then we'll go inside the city with you. How about that?” 

Pilgrim thanked them profusely, and with a long salute he took leave of the Daoists. Striking up his wooden fish, he headed down to the beach, passing the double passes as he walked down the 
narrow path from the steep ridge. All those monks knelt down at once and respected, saying in unison, “Dad, we've not been indolent. Not even half a person from the five hundred is missing — we're 
all here pulling the cart.” Snickering to himself, Pilgrim thought, “These monks must have been awfully abused by the Daoist. They are terrified even when they see a fake Daoist like me. If a real Daoist 
goes near them, they will probably die of fear.” Waving his hand, Pilgrim said, “Get up, and don’t be afraid! I’m not here to inspect your work, I’m here to find a relative.” When those monks heard that 
he was looking for a relative, they surrounded him on all sides, every one of them sticking out his head and coughing, hoping that he would be claimed as kin. “Which of us is his relative?” they asked. 
After he had looked at them for a while, Pilgrim burst into laughter. “Dad,” said the monks, “you don’t seem to have found your relative. Why are you laughing instead?” 

Pilgrim said, “You want to know why I’m laughing? I’m laughing at how immature you monks are! It was because of your having been born under an unlucky star that your parents, for fear of your 
bringing misfortune upon them or for not bringing with you additional brothers and sisters, turned you out of the family and made you priests. How could you then not follow the Three Jewels and not 
revere the law of God? Why aren't you reading the Threads and reciting the litanies? Why do you serve the Daoists and allow them to exploit you as bondsmen and slaves?” 

“Venerable Dad,” said the monks, “are you here to ridicule us? You must have come from abroad, and you've no idea of our plight.” 

“Indeed I’m from abroad,” said Pilgrim, “and | truly have no idea of what sort of plight you’ve.” 

As they began to weep, the monks said, “The ruler of our country is wicked and partial. All he cares for are those persons like you, Venerable Dad, and those whom he hates are us Religious.” 

“Why is that?” asked Pilgrim. “Because the need for wind and rain,” said one of the monks, “caused three mortal elders to come here. They deceived our ruler and persuaded him to tear down our 
monasteries and revoke our travel rescripts, forbidding us to return to our native regions. He would not, moreover, permit us to serve even in any secular capacity except as slaves in the household of 
those mortal elders. Our agony is unbearable! If any Daoist mendicant shows up in this region, they would immediately request the king to grant him an audience and a handsome reward; but if a monk 
appears, regardless of whether he is from nearby or afar, he will be seized and sent to be a servant in the house of the mortals.” 

Pilgrim said, “Could it be that those Daoists are truly in possession of some mighty magic, potent enough to seduce the king? If it's only a matter of summoning the wind and the rain, then it is merely 
a trivial trick of heterodoxy. How could it sway a ruler’s heart?” 

The monks said, “They know how to manipulate cinnabar and refine lead, to sit in meditation in order to nourish their spirits. They point to water and it changes into oil; they touch stones and transform 
them into pieces of gold. Now they are in the process of building a huge abbey for the Three Pure Ones* in which they can perform rites to Heaven and Earth and read scriptures night and day to the 
end that the king will remain youthful for ten millennia. Such enterprise undoubtedly pleases the king.” 

“So that’s how it is!” said Pilgrim. “Why don’t you all run away and be done with it?” 

“Dad, we can’t!” said the monks. “Those mortal elders have obtained permission from the king to have our portraits painted and hung up in all four quarters of the kingdom. Although the territory of this 
Cart Slow Kingdom is quite large, there is a picture of monks displayed in the marketplace of every village, town, county, and province. It bears on top the royal inscription that any official who catches 
a monk will be elevated three grades, and any private citizen who does so will receive a reward of fifty taels of white silver. That's why we can never escape. Let’s not say monks — but even those who 
have cut their hair short or are getting bald will find it difficult to get past the officials. They are everywhere, the detectives and the runners! No matter what you do, you simply can’t flee. We've no 
alternative but to remain here and suffer.” 

“In that case,” said Pilgrim, “you might as well give up and die.” 

“Venerable Dad,” said the monks, “many of us have died. There’re altogether some two thousand monks caught and brought here: some six or seven hundreds of them have perished because they'd 
not bear the suffering and the persecution, endure the cold, nor adjust to the climate. Another seven or eight hundred committed suicide. Only we five hundred failed to die.” 

“What do you mean by that?” asked Pilgrim. 

The monks said, “When we tried to hang ourselves, the ropes snapped; when we tried to cut ourselves, the blades were blunt; when we hurled ourselves into the river, we floated back up instead; and 
when we took poison, nothing happened to us.” Pilgrim said, “You're very lucky! Heaven must be desirous of prolonging your lives!” 

“The last word is not quite right, Venerable Dad,” said the monks, “for surely you mean prolonging our torments! Our daily meals are thin gruel made of the coarsest grains, and at night, we’ve nowhere 
to rest but this exposed piece of sandy beach. When we close our eyes however, there will be deities here to protect us.” 

“You mean the hard work during the day,” said Pilgrim, “causes you to see ghosts at night.” 

“Not ghosts,” said the monks, “but the Six Gods of Darkness and the Six Gods of Light, together with the Guardians of Monasteries. When night falls, they will appear to protect us and in fact prevent 
those who want to die from dying.” 

Pilgrim said, “These gods are rather unreasonable. They should rather let you die early so that you’d reach Heaven at once. Why are they guarding you like that?” The monks said, “They try to comfort 
us in our dreams, telling us not to seek death but to endure our suffering for a while until the arrival of the holy monk from the Great Tang in the Land of the East, the Arhat who is journeying to the 
Western Heaven to acquire scriptures. Under him, we’re told, there is a disciple who is the Great Sage Equal to Heaven, and who has vast magic powers. He is, moreover, a person of rectitude and 
kindness, one who will avenge the injustices of the world, assist those who are needy and oppressed, and comfort the orphans and the widows. We're told to wait for his arrival, for he will reveal his 
power and destroy the Daoists, so that the teaching of Chan and complete poverty will be honoured once more.” 

When Pilgrim heard these words, he said silently to himself, smiling, “Don’t say old monkey has no competence for gods proclaim early his eminence.” 

Turing quickly and striking up again the wooden fish, he left the monks to return to the city gate to meet the Daoists. “Sir,” said the Daoists as they greeted him, “which of them is your relative?” 

“All five hundred of them are relatives of mine,” said Pilgrim. Laughing, the two Daoists said, “How could you’ve that many relatives?” 

“One hundred are neighbours to my left,” said Pilgrim, “and one hundred are neighbours to my right; one hundred belong to my dad’s side, and one hundred belong to my mum’s side. Finally, one 
hundred happen to be my bond-brothers. If you’re willing to let these five hundred persons go, I'll be willing to enter the city with you. If you're not, I'll not go with you.” 

The Daoists said, “You must be a little crazy, for all at once you're babbling! These monks happen to be gifts from the king. If we want to release even one or two of them, we'll have to go first before 
our masters to report that they are ill. Then, we’ve to submit a death certificate before we can consider the matter closed. How could you ask us to release them all? Nonsense! Nonsense! Why, not to 
speak of the fact that we'd be left without servants in our household but even the court might be offended. The king might send some officials to look into the work here or he himself might come to 
investigate. How could we dare let them go?” 

“You'll not release them?” said Pilgrim. 

“No, we'll not!” said the Daoists. Pilgrim asked them 3 times and his anger flared up. Whipping out his iron rod from his ear, he squeezed it once in the wind and it had the thickness of a rice bowl. He 
tested it with his hand before slamming it down on the Daoists’ heads. How pitiful! This 1 blow made their heads crack, blood squirt, bodies sink low, skin split, necks snap, and brains outflow! 

Those monks on the beach when they saw in the distance that he had slain the Daoists, all abandoned the cart and ran toward him, crying, “What disaster! You've just killed royal kin.” 

“What royal kin?” asked Pilgrim. 

The monks had him completely surrounded crying, “Their masters would not salute the king when they walk into court, and when they walk out, they need not take leave of the lord. His Majesty 
addresses them constantly as Messrs. Preceptors of State, Elder Brothers. How could you come here and cause such a terrible disaster? Their disciples came out to this place to supervise our work 
and they did not offend you. How could you beat them to death? If those mortal elders claimed that you’re here only to supervise our labour and that we're the ones who took their lives, what'd happen 
to us? We must go into the city with you and have you confess your guilt first.” 


“Stop hollering, all of you,” said Pilgrim, laughing. “I’m no mendicant Daoist of the Complete Truth order. I’m here to save you.” 

“You've murdered two men,” said the monks, “and we're likely to be blamed for it. Look what you've added to our burdens! How could you be our saviour?” 

Pilgrim said, “I’m Pilgrim Sun Wukong, the disciple of the holy monk of the Great Tang. I've come especially to save your lives.” 

“No! No!” cried the monks. “You can’t be, for we can recognise that venerable dad.” 

“You've not even met him,” said Pilgrim, “so how could you recognise him?” The monks said, “We've met in our dreams an old man who identified himself as the Gold Star Venus. He told us over and 
over again how Pilgrim Sun was supposed to look so that we’d not make a mistake in identifying him.” 

“What did he tell you?” asked Pilgrim. The monks said, “He said that the Great Sage’s a bumpy brow, golden eyes flashing; round head, a hairy face jowl-less; gaping teeth, pointed mouth, a character 
most sly; he looks stranger than thunder god. Using a golden-hooped iron rod, once broke Heaven’s gates apart. He now follows Truth, protecting a monk, and saves humankind from distress.” > 
When Pilgrim heard these words, he was both pleased and annoyed; pleased, because the gods had spread wide his fame but also annoyed, because those old rogues, he thought, had revealed to 
mortals his primal form. He blurted out all at once, “Indeed all of you can see that I’m not Pilgrim Sun but I’m a disciple of his, just learning how to cause some trouble for fun! Look over there! Isn’t that 
Pilgrim Sun who is approaching?” He pointed to the East with his finger and tricked the monks into turning their heads. As they did so, he revealed his true form that the monks recognised immediately. 
Every one of them went to his knees, saying, “Dad, we’re of fleshly eyes and mortal stock, and we failed to know that you appeared to us in transformation. We beg Dad to avenge our wrongs and 
dispel our woes by entering the city quickly and exterminating the demonic ones.” 

“Follow me,” said Pilgrim, and the monks all followed him closely. 

The Great Sage walked to the beach. Exerting his magic power, he yanked the cart through the two passes and up the spine ridge before picking it up and smashing it to pieces. He then tossed all 
those bricks, tiles, and timber down a ravine. “Go away!” he bellowed to the monks. “Don’t crowd around me. Let me see the king tomorrow and destroy those Dacists.” 

“O Dad!” said those monks. “We dare not go very far away, for we fear that we might be caught by the officials. Then we'd be brought back for beatings and for ransom, and there would be no end to 
our woes.” 

“In that case,” said Pilgrim, “let me give you some means of protection.” 

Dear Great Sage! He plucked a handful of hairs that he chewed into small pieces. To each of the monks he gave a piece with the instruction: “Stick it into the nail of your fourth finger and then make a 
fist. You can walk as far as you want. Don’t do anything if no one comes to seize you but if there should be someone trying to arrest you, hold your fist up tightly and cry, ‘Great Sage Equal to Heaven.’ 
I'll come at once to protect you.” 

“Dad,” said the monks, “if we walk too far away and you can’t see or hear us, what good will it do?” 

“Relax,” said Pilgrim, “for even if you're ten thousand miles away, | guarantee that nothing will happen to you.” 

One of the monks who was somewhat courageous indeed held up his fist and whispered, “Great Sage Equal to Heaven.” At once a thunder spirit stood in front of him, holding an iron rod. He looked 
so formidable that not even a thousand cavalry would dare charge near him. Several scores of the monks made the call also, and several scores of Great Sages at once appeared. The monks respected, 
crying, “Dad, truly an efficacious manifestation!” 

“When you want it to disappear,” said Pilgrim, “all you've to say is the word, ‘Cease. 
They cried, “Cease!” 

And the hairs appeared again in their nails. The monks were overjoyed and began to disperse. “Don’t go too far away,” said Pilgrim, “but listen for news of me in the city. If a proclamation requesting 
for monks to return to the city is published, you may then enter the city and give me back my hairs.” 

Those 500 monks then scattered in all directions. The Tang Monk by the wayside while he waited in vain for Pilgrim to come back with a report, he told Bullseye 8 Rules to lead the horse forward toward 
the West. As they proceeded, they met some monks hurrying by, and when they drew near the city, they saw Pilgrim standing there with a dozen or so monks who had not dispersed. Reining in his 
horse, Tripitaka said, “Wukong, you're sent here to find out about the strange noise. Why did it take you so long and still you didn’t return?” 

Leading those monks to salute the Tang Monk’s horse, Pilgrim gave a thorough account of what had happened. Horrified, Tripitaka said, “If this is the situation, what'll we do?” 

“Please have no fear, Venerable Dad,” said those monks. “Dad Great Sage Sun is an disciple of a Heavenly god, and his vast magic powers will no doubt prevent you from coming to any harm. We're 
priests of the Wisdom Depth Monastery of this city, an edifice built by imperial command of the late king, the dad of the present ruler. Since the image of the late king is still inside the monastery, it has 
not been torn down along with all the other monasteries, big and small, of the city. Let us invite the venerable dad to go into the city and rest in our humble dwelling. We're certain that the Great Sage 
Sun will know what to do by the time of the morning court tomorrow.” 

“What you say is quite right,” said Pilgrim. “All right! We might as well enter the city first.” 

The elder dismounted and went up to the city gate. The sun was setting as they walked across the drawbridge and inside the triple gates. When people on the streets saw that priests from the Wisdom 
Depth Monastery were toting luggage and leading a horse, they all drew back and avoided them. Before long they reached the entrance of the monastery where they saw hanging high above the gate 
a huge plaque on which was written in gold letters: “The Wisdom Depth Monastery, Built by Imperial Command.” Pushing open the gates, the monks led them through the Vairocana Hall. They then 
opened the door to the main hall; the Tang Monk draped the cassock over his body and saluted himself before the golden image. Only after he had paid homage to God in this manner did he walk 
inside the main hall. “Hey, you who are looking after the house!” cried the monks, and an old priest emerged. When he saw Pilgrim, he fell on his knees at once and cried, “Dad, have you arrived?” 
“Who am |?” asked Pilgrim. “Why should you address me and honour me in this manner?” 

“| recognise you to be the Great Sage Equal to Heaven, the Dad Sun,” said the priest. “Every night we dream of you for the Gold Star Venus frequently appears to us in our dreams, telling us that we 
can preserve our lives only when you come to us. Today, | can tell immediately that you’re the one whom we saw in our dreams. O Dad, I’m so glad that you’ve arrived in time. After one or two more 
days, we may all become ghosts!” 

“Please rise! Please rise!” said Pilgrim with laughter. “Tomorrow you'll see some results!” The monks all went to prepare for them a vegetarian meal, after which they swept clean the abbot’s residence 
for the pilgrims to rest. Pilgrim however, was so preoccupied that he could not sleep even by the time of the 24 watch. From somewhere nearby also came the sound of pipes and gongs, and he 
became so aroused that he rose quietly and slipped on his clothes. He leaped into mid-air to have a better look and at once discovered that there was the bright glare of lamps and torches due south 
of him. Lowering his cloud, he peered intently and found that the Daoists of the 3 Pure 1s Abbey were making supplications to the stars. He saw the spiritual realm of a tall chamber; the blessed place 
of a magic hall. The spiritual realm of a tall chamber, august like the features of Mount Penglai; the blessed place of a magic hall, immaculate like the Palace of Transformed Joy. Daoists on both sides 
played their strings and pipes; masters at the centre held up their tablets of jade. They expounded the Woe-Dispelling Litany; lectured on the Classic of the Way and Virtue. To raise dust® a few times 
they wrote out their charms; make the supplication they saluted themselves. With spell and water they sent a dispatch as flames of torches shot up to the Region Above. They sought and questioned 
the stars as fragrant incense rose through the azure sky. Before the stands were fresh offerings; on top of tables were victuals sumptuous. On both sides of the hall's entrance was hung a pair of yellow 
silk scrolls on which the following parallel couplet in large characters was embroidered: 

For wind and rain in due season, 


” 


We invoke the Celestial Worthies” boundless power. 

As the empire’s peaceful and prosperous, 
May our lord’s reign exceed 10 millennia 

There were three old Daoists resplendent in their ritual robes, and Pilgrim thought they had to be the Tiger-Strength, Deer-Strength, and Goat-Strength Mortals. Below them there was a motley crew of 
some seven or eight hundred Daoists; lined up on opposite sides, they were beating drums and gongs, offering incense, and saying prayers. Secretly pleased, Pilgrim said to himself, “I'd like to go 
down there and fool with them a bit but as the proverb says, a silk fibre’s no thread; a single hand can’t clap. Let me go back and alert Eight Rules and Sand-monk. Then we can return and have some 
fun.” 
Putting his auspicious cloud on a descending path, he headed straight back to the abbot’s hall where he found 8 Rules and Sand-monk asleep head to foot in 1 bed. Pilgrim tried to wake Awakened to 
Purity first and as he stirred, Sand-monk said, “Elder Brother, you’re not asleep yet?” 
“Get up now,” said Pilgrim, “for you and | are going to enjoy ourselves.” 
“In the dead of night,” said Sand-monk, “how could we enjoy ourselves when our mouths are dried and our eyes won't stay open?” 
Pilgrim said, “There’s indeed in this city an Abbey of the Three Pure Ones. Right now the Daoists in the Abbey are conducting a mass and their main hall is filled with all kinds of offerings. The buns 
are big as barrels, and their cakes must weigh fifty or sixty pounds each. There are also countless rice condiments and fresh fruits. Come with me and we'll go enjoy ourselves!” 
When Bullseye 8 Rules heard in his sleep that there were nice edibles, he immediately woke up, saying, “Elder Brother, aren’t you going to take care of me, too?” 
“Brother,” said Pilgrim, “if you want to eat, don’t make all these noises and wake up Master. Just follow me.” 
The two of them slipped on their clothes and walked quietly out the door. They trod on the cloud with Pilgrim and rose into the air. When Idiot saw the flare of lights, he wanted immediately to go down 
there had not Pilgrim pulled him back. “Don’t be so impatient,” said Pilgrim. “Wait till they disperse. Then we can go down there.” 8 Rules said, “But obviously they are having such a good time praying. 
Why would they want to disperse?” 
“Let me use a little magic,” said Pilgrim, “and they will.” 
Dear Great Sage! He made the magic sign with his fingers and recited a spell before he drew in his breath facing the ground toward the southwest. Then he blew it out and at once a violent whirlwind 
assailed the 3 Pure Ones Hall, smashing flower vases and candle stands and tearing up all the ex-votes hanging on the 4 walls. As lights and torches were all blown out, the Daoists became terrified. 
Tiger-Strength Mortal said, “Disciples, let’s disperse. Since this divine wind has extinguished all our lamps, torches, and incense, each of us should retire. We can rise earlier tomorrow moming to recite 
a few more scrolls of scriptures and make up for what we miss tonight.” 
The various Daoists indeed retired. Our Pilgrim leading 8 Rules and Sand-monk, lowered their clouds and dashed up to the 3 Pure Ones Hall. Without bothering to find out whether it was raw or cooked, 
Idiot grabbed one of the cakes and gave it a fierce bite. Pilgrim whipped out the iron rod and tried to give his hand a whack. Hastily withdrawing his hand to dodge the blow, 8 Rules said, “I’ve not even 
found out the taste yet and you're trying to hit me already?” 
“Don’t be so rude,” said Pilgrim. “Let's sit down with proper manners and then we may treat ourselves.” 
“Aren't you embarrassed?” asked 8 Rules. “You're stealing food, you know, and you still want proper manners! If you’re invited here, what'd you do then?” 
Pilgrim said, “Who are these Nuns sitting up there?” 
“What do you mean by who are these Nuns?” chuckled 8 Rules. “Can’t you recognise the Three Pure Ones?” 
“Which Three Pure Ones?” asked Pilgrim. 
“The one in the middle,” said 8 Rules, “is the Celestial Worthy of Commencement; the one on the left is the Daoist Lord of Numinous Treasures; and the one on the right is the Most High Aged Lord, 
Laozi.” Pilgrim said, “We've to take on their appearances. Only then can we eat safely and comfortably.” When he caught hold of the delicious fragrance coming from the offerings, Idiot could wait no 
longer. Climbing up onto the tall platform, he gave the figure of Laozi a shove with his horn and pushed it to the floor, saying, “Old fellow, you’ve sat here long enough! Now let Old bull take your place 
for a while!” So 8 Rules changed himself into Laozi while Pilgrim took on the appearance of the Celestial Worthy of Commencement and Sand-monk became the Daoist Lord of Numinous Treasures. 
All the original images were pushed down to the floor. The moment they sat down, 8 Rules began to gorge himself with the huge buns. “Could you wait one moment?” said Pilgrim. “Elder Brother,” said 
8 Rules, “we've changed into their forms. Why wait any longer?” 
“Brother,” said Pilgrim, “it’s a small thing to eat but giving ourselves away is no small matter! These holy images we pushed on the floor could be found by those Daoists who had to rise early to strike 
the bell or sweep the grounds. If they stumbled over them, wouldn't our secret be revealed? Why don’t you see if you can hide them somewhere?” 8 Rules said, “This is an unfamiliar place, and | don’t 
even know where to begin to look for a hiding spot.” 
“Just now when we entered the hall,” Pilgrim said, “I chanced to notice a little door on our right. Judging from the foul stench coming through it, | think it must be a Bureau of Five-Grain Transmigration. 
Send them in there.” 
Idiot's in truth rather good at crude labour! He leaped down, threw the 3 images over his shoulder, and carried them out of the hall. When he kicked open the door, he found a huge privy inside. 
Chuckling to himself he said, “This Ban-Horse-Plague’s truly a way with words! He even bestows on a privy a sacred title! The Bureau of Five-Grain Transmigration, what a name!” Still hauling the 
images on his shoulders, Idiot began to mumble this prayer to them: “O Pure Ones Three, I'll confide in thee: from afar we came, staunch foes of bogies. We'd like a treat but nowhere is cosy. We 


borrow your seats for a while only. You've sat too long, now join the privy. In times past you’ve enjoyed countless good things by being pure and clean Daoists. Today you can’t avoid facing something 
dirty when you become Celestial Worthies Most Smelly!” 
After he had made his supplication, he threw them inside with a splash and half of his robe was soiled by the muck. As he walked back into the hall, Pilgrim said, “Did you hide them well?” 
“Well enough,” said 8 Rules, “but some of the filth stained my robe. It still stinks. | hope it won’t make you retch.” 
“Never mind,” said Pilgrim, laughing, “you just come and enjoy yourself. | wonder if we'd all make a clean getaway!” After Idiot changed back into the form of Laozi, the three of them took their seats 
and abandoned themselves to enjoyment. They ate the huge buns fist; then they gobbled down the side dishes, the rice condiments, the dumplings, the baked goods, the cakes, the deep-fried dishes, 
and the steamed pastries — regardless of whether these were hot or cold. Pilgrim Sun however, was not too fond of anything cooked; all he had were a few pieces of fruit, just to keep the other two 
company. Meanwhile 8 Rules and Sand-monk went after the offerings like comets chasing the moon, like wind mopping up the clouds! In no time at all, the food was completely devoured. When there 
was nothing left for them to eat, instead of leaving, they remained seated there to chat and wait for the food to digest. 
Alas! This was what'd to happen! There was in the east corridor a young Daoist who just when he had lain down, scrambled up again all at once when he thought to himself, “I left my hand-bell in the 
hall. If | lost it, the masters would rebuke me tomorrow.” He said to his companion, “You sleep first. I've to go find something.” Without even putting on his undergarments, he threw a shirt on himself 
and went to the main hall to search for his bell. Groping this way and that in the darkness, he finally found it. As he was turning to leave, he suddenly heard sounds of breathing. Terribly frightened, the 
Daoist began to rush out of the hall, and as he did so, he stepped on a lychee seed that sent him crashing to the floor and the bell was smashed to pieces. Unable to restrain himself, Bullseye 8 Rules 
burst into roars of laughter, frightening the little Daoist out of his wits. He scrambled up only to fall down once more; stumbling all over, he managed to reach the master residence. “Grand-Masters,” he 
screamed as he pounded on the door, “It’s terrible! Disaster!” 
The 3 old Daoists had not yet fallen asleep. They opened the door to ask, “What disaster?” 
Trembling all over, the young Daoist said, “Your disciple left behind his hand-bell and went to the main hall to search for it. | heard someone roaring with laughter and it almost frightened me to death.” 
When the old Daoists heard these words, they cried, “Bring some light. Let's see what kind of perverse creature’s around.” The Daoists sleeping along the 2 corridors old, young, were all aroused, and 
at once scrambled up to the main hall with lamps and torches. 
045 

At the 3 Pure 1s Abbey the Great Sage leaves his name; at the Cart Slow Kingdom the Monkey King shows his power 
The Great Sage Sun used his left hand to give Sand-monk a pinch and his right to give Bullseye 8 Rules a pinch. Immediately understanding what he meant, the 2 of them fell silent and sat with lowered 
faces on their high seats. They allowed those Daoists to examine them back and front with uplifted lamps and torches but the 3 of them seemed no more than idols made of clay and adorned with gold. 
“There’re no thieves around,” said the Tiger-Strength Mortal, “but why’re all the offerings eaten then?” 
“It definitely looks as if humans have eaten them,” said the Deer-Strength Mortal. “Look how the fruits are skinned and their stones spat out. Why’s it that we see no human form?” 
“Don’t be too suspicious, Elder Brothers,” said the Goat-Strength Mortal. “I think that our piety and sincerity of reciting scriptures and saying prayers here night and day, all in the name of the court, 
must have aroused the Celestial Worthies. The Venerable Dads of the Three Pure Ones, | suppose, must have descended to earth and consumed these offerings. Why don’t we take advantage of the 
fact that their holy train and crane carriages are still here and make supplication to the Celestial Worthies? We'd beg for some golden elixir and holy water with which we may present His Majesty. 
Wouldn't his long life and perpetual youth be in fact our merit?” 
“You're right,” said the Tiger-Strength Mortal. “Disciples, start the poems and recite the scriptures. Bring us our ritual robes. Let me tread the stars to make our supplication.” 
Those little Daoists all obeyed and lined themselves up on both sides. At the sound of the gong, they all recited in unison the scroll of True Scriptures of the Yellow Court. After having put on his ritual 
robe, the Tiger-Strength Mortal held high his jade tablet and began to kick up the dust with dancing. Intermittently he would fall to the ground and salute himself. Then he intoned this petition: “In fear 
and dread, we salute most humbly. To stir up our faith we seek Purity. Vile priests we quell to honour the Way. This hall we build the king to obey. Dragon flags we raise and offerings display; torches 
by night, incense by day. One thought sincere does Heaven sway. Chariots divine now come to stay. Grant unto us some elixir and holy water that we may give to His Majesty that he may gain 
longevity.” 
When 8 Rules heard these words, he was filled with apprehension. “This is our fault! We've eaten the goods and should be on our way. Now, how shall we answer such supplication?” Pilgrim gave him 
another pinch before suddenly opening his mouth and speaking out loud, “You mortals of a younger generation, please stop your recitation. We've just returned from the Festival of Mortal Peaches, 
and we've not brought along any golden elixir or holy water. In another day we’ll come to bestow them on you.” When those Daoists, old and young, heard that the image had actually spoken, every 
one of them trembled violently till even their garments quaked. “O Dads!” they cried, “the living Celestial Worthies have descended to earth. We must not let them go. We must insist on their giving us 
some sort of magic formula for eternal youth.” 
Then the Deer-Strength Mortal went forward also to salute himself and intone this supplication: “Our heads to the dust, we pray earnestly. Your subjects submit to the Pure Ones Three. Since we came 
here, the Way’s set free. The king’s pleased to seek longevity. This Heavenly Mass recites scriptures nightly. We thank the Celestial Worthies for revealing their presence holy. O hear our prayers! We 
seek your glory! Do leave some holy water behind that your disciples’ long life may find!” 
Sand-monk gave Pilgrim a pinch and whispered fiercely, “Elder Brother! They're at it again! Just listen to the prayer!” 
“All right,” said Pilgrim, “let’s give them something.” 
“Where'd we find it?” muttered 8 Rules. “Just watch me,” said Pilgrim, “and when you see that I’ve it, you'll have it too!” After those Daoists had finished their poems and their prayers, Pilgrim again 
spoke out loud, “You mortals of a younger generation, there’s no need for your saluting and praying any longer. I’m rather reluctant to leave you some holy water but | fear then that our posterity will 
die out. If | gave you some however, it would seem to be too easy a boon.” When those Daoists heard these words, they all saluted themselves and respected. “We beseech the Celestial Worthies to 
have regard for the reverence of your disciples,” they cried, “and we beg you to leave us some. We'll proclaim far and near the Way and Virtue. We'll memorialise to the king to give added honours to 
the Gate of Mystery.” 
“In that case,” said Pilgrim, “bring us some vessels.” The Daoists all touched their heads to the ground to give thanks. Being the greediest, the Tiger-Strength Mortal hauled in a huge cistern and placed 
itin the hall. The Deer-Strength Mortal fetched an earthenware garden vase and put it on top of the offering table. The Goat-Strength Mortal pulled out the flowers from a flowerpot and placed it in the 
middle of the other two vessels. Then Pilgrim said to them, “Now leave the hall and close the shutters so that the Heavenly mysteries will not be seen by profane eyes. We'll leave you some holy water.” 
The Daoists retreated from the hall and closed the doors, after which they all saluted themselves before the vermilion steps. 
Pilgrim stood up at once and, lifting up his tiger-skin kilt, filled the flowerpot with his stinking urine. Delighted by what he saw, Bullseye 8 Rules said, “Elder Brother, you and I’ve been brothers these 
few years but we've never had fun like this before. Since | gorged myself just now, I’ve been feeling the urge to do this.” Lifting up his clothes, Idiot let loose such a torrent that it sounded as if the 
Liuliang Cascade’ had crashed onto some wooden boards! He pissed till he filled the whole garden vase. Sand-monk, too, left behind half a cistern. They then straightened their clothes and resumed 
their seats solemnly before they called out, “Little ones, receive your holy water.” 
Pushing open the shutters, those Daoists respected repeatedly to give thanks. They carried the cistern out first, and then they poured the contents of the vase and the pot into the bigger vessel, mixing 
the liquids together. “Disciples,” said the Tiger-Strength Mortal, “bring me a cup so that | can have a taste.” A young Daoist immediately fetched a teacup and handed it to the old Daoist. After bailing 
out a cup of it and gulping down a huge mouthful, the old Daoist kept wiping his mouth and puckering his lips. “Elder Brother,” said the Deer-Strength Mortal, “is it good?” 
“Not very good,” said the old Daoist, his lips still pouted, “the flavour is quite potent!” 
“Let me try it also,” said the Goat-Strength Mortal, and he, too, downed a mouthful. Immediately he said, “It smells somewhat like bull urine!” Sitting high above them and hearing this remark, Pilgrim 
knew that he could no longer fool them. He thought to himself, “I might as well display my abilities and leave them our names too.” 
He cried out in a loud voice, “O Daoists, Daoists, you're so silly! Which Three Pure Ones would be so worldly? Let our true names be told most clearly. Monks of the Great Tang go West by decree. 
We come to your place this fine night carefree. Your offerings eaten, we sit and play. Your salutes and greetings how'd we repay? That's no holy water you drank. It’s only the urine we pissed that 
stank!” 
The moment the Daoists heard this, they barred the door. Picking up pitchforks, rakes, brooms, tiles, rocks, and whatever else they could put their hands on, and they sent these hurtling inside the 
main hall to attack the impostors. Dear Pilgrim! Using his left hand to catch hold of Sand-monk and his right to take hold of 8 Rules, he crashed out of the door and mounted the cloudy luminosity to go 
straight back to the Wisdom Depth Monastery. When they arrived at the abbot's residence, they dared not disturb their master; each went to bed quietly and slept until the third quarter of the fifth watch. 
At that time, of course, the king began to hold his morning court where two rows of civil and military officials - some four hundred of them — stood at attention. See bright lamps and torches midst purple 
gauze; fragrant clouds rising from treasure tripods. As soon as Tripitaka Tang woke up, he said, “Disciples, help me to go and have our travel rescript certified.” 
Rising quickly, Pilgrim, Sand-monk, and 8 Rules slipped on their clothes and stood to one side to wait on their master. They said, “Let it be known to our master that this king truly believes only the 
Daoists and is eager to exalt the Way and to exterminate the Religious. We fear that any ill-spoken word may cause him to refuse to certify our rescript. Let us therefore accompany Master to enter the 
court.” 
Highly pleased, the Tang Monk draped the brocaded cassock on himself while Pilgrim took out the travel rescript; Awakened to Purity was told to hold the alms bowl and Aware of Ability to take up the 
priestly staff. The luggage and the horse were placed in the care of the monks of the Wisdom Depth Monastery. They went before the Five-Phoenix Tower and saluted the Custodian of the Yellow 
Gate. Having identified themselves, they declared that they were scripture pilgrims from the Great Tang in the Land of the East who wished to have their travel rescript certified and would therefore like 
the custodian to announce their arrival. The official of the gate went at once into court and saluted himself before the golden steps to memorialise to the king, saying, “There are four Religious monks 
outside who claim that they are scripture pilgrims from the Great Tang in the Land of the East. They wish to have their travel rescript certified, and they now await Your Majesty's decree before the 
Five-Phoenix Tower.” 
When the king heard this, he said, “These monks have nowhere to court death and, of all places, they have to do it here! Why didn’t our constables arrest them at once and bring them here?” A Grand 
Preceptor before the throne stepped forward and said, “The Great Tang in the Land of the East is located in the South Jambidvipa Continent; it’s the great nation of China, some ten thousand miles 
from here. As the way is infested with monsters and fiends, these monks must have considerable magic powers or they would not dare undertake this westward journey. | implore Your Majesty to invite 
them in and certify their rescript so that they may proceed, for the sake of the fact that they are the distant monks from China and for the sake of not destroying any goodly affinity.” 
The king gave his consent and summoned the Tang Monk and his followers before the Hall of Golden Chimes. After master and disciples arrived before the steps, they presented the rescript to the 
king. The king opened the document and was about to read it, when the Custodian of the Yellow Gate appeared to announce, “The three Preceptors of State have arrived.” The king was so flustered 
that he put away the rescript hurriedly and left the dragon seat. After having ordered his attendants to set out some embroidered cushions, he bent his body to receive his visitors. When Tripitaka and 
his followers turned around to look, they saw those three great mortals swagger in, followed by a young acolyte with two tousled tails. Not daring even to lift their eyes, the two rows of officials all saluted 
deeply as they walked by. After they ascended the Hall of Golden Chimes, they did not even bother to salute the king. 
“State Preceptors,” said the king, “we've not invited you. How is it that you’re pleased to visit us today?” 
“We've something to tell you,” said one of the old Daoists, “and that’s why we’re here. Those four monks down there where do they come from?” 
The king said, “They were sent by the Great Tang in the Land of the East to fetch scriptures, and they presented themselves here to have their travel rescript certified.” Clapping their hands together, 
the three Daoists burst out laughing and said, “We thought they had fled. So they are still here!” Somewhat startled, the king said, “What do you mean, Preceptors? When we first heard of their arrival, 
we wanted to arrest them and send them to serve you, had not our Grand Preceptor on duty intervened and presented a most reasonable memorial. Since we'd regard for the fact that they had travelled 
a great distance, and since we didn’t wish to destroy our goodly affinity with China, we summoned them in here to verify their rescript. We didn’t expect you to raise any question about them. Could it 
be that they have offended you in some way?” 
“Your Majesty wouldn't know about this,” said one of the Daoists, chuckling. “Hardly had they arrived yesterday when they slew two of our disciples outside the eastern gate. The five hundred Religious 
prisoners were all released and the cart was smashed to pieces. As if that weren’t enough, they sneaked into our temple last night, vandalized the holy images of the Three Pure Ones, and devoured 
all the imperial offerings. We're fooled by them at first, thinking that the Celestial Worthies had descended to Earth. We therefore even asked them to give us some golden elixir and holy water with 
which we might present Your Majesty, so that you’d be blessed with eternal youth. We hardly expected that they would trick us by leaving us their urine. We found out all right, after each of us had 
tasted a mouthful! Just when we're about to seize them, they managed to escape. We didn’t think that they would dare remain here today. As the proverb says, ‘The road for fated enemies is narrow 
indeed’!” 


When the king heard this, he became so irate that he would have had the four priests executed at once. Pressing his palms together, the Great Sage Sun cried out in a loud voice, saying, “Your Majesty, 
let your thunder-like wrath subside for the moment and permit this monk to present his memorial.” 

“You offended the State Preceptors!” said the king. “Do you dare imply that their words might be erroneous?” Pilgrim said, “He claimed that yesterday we slaughtered two of his disciples outside the 
city. But who could be a witness? Even if we're to confess to this crime, and that would be a gross injustice, only two of us need be asked to pay with our lives, and two of us should be released so that 
we might proceed to acquire the scriptures. He claimed further that we wrecked their cart and released their Religious prisoners. Again, there is no witness, and moreover, this is hardly a mortal offence 
and only one of us should be punished for this if it were true. Finally, he charged us with vandalizing the images of the Three Pure Ones and causing disturbance in their temple. This is clearly a trap 
they set for us.” 

“How could you say that it’s a trap?” asked the king. 

“We monks are from the Land of the East,” said Pilgrim, “and we've just arrived in this region. We can't even tell one street from another. How could we know about the affairs of their temple, and at 
night no less? If we’d leave them our urine, they should have been able to arrest us right then and there. Why did they wait until this morning to accuse us? In this whole wide world, there are countless 
people who use false identities. How could they know for certain that we're guilty? | beg Your Majesty to withhold your anger and make a thorough investigation.” The king, after all, had always been 
rather muddle-headed. When he heard this lengthy speech by Pilgrim, he became more confused than ever. 

Just then, the Custodian of the Yellow Gate again came to make this announcement: “Your Majesty, there are outside the gate many village elders who await your summons.” 

“For what reason?” asked the king. He ordered them brought in, and thirty or forty village elders came before the hall. “Your Majesty,” they said as they respected, “there has been no rain this year for 
the entire spring, and we fear that there will be a famine if it remains dry like this through summer. We've come especially to request that one of the Holy Dads, the Preceptors of State, pray for sweet 
rain that will succor the entire population.” The king said, “Let the village elders withdraw. Rain will be forthcoming.” The village elders gave thanks and left. 

Then the king said, “You, priests of the Tang court, why do you think that we honour the Dao and seek to destroy Religion? It was because in years past, the monks of this dynasty attempted to pray 
for rain, and they could not produce even a single drop. It was our good fortune that these Preceptors of State descended from Heaven and saved us from our bitter affliction. Now all of you've offended 
the Preceptors of State no sooner than you arrived from a great distance, and you’d be condemned. We'll pardon you for the moment however, and ask whether you dare to have a rainmaking 
competition with our Preceptors. If your prayers could bring us the rain to assuage the needs of the people, we'd pardon you, certify your rescript, and permit you to journey to the West. If you fail in 
your competition and no rain comes, all of you'll be taken to the block and beheaded publicly.” With a laugh, Pilgrim said, “This little priest has some knowledge of prayers, too!” 

When the king heard this, he at once asked for an altar to be built. Meanwhile, he also gave the command that his carriage be brought out. “We want personally to ascend the Five-Phoenix Tower to 
watch,” he said. Many officials followed the carriage up the tower and the king took his seat. Tripitaka Tang, followed by Pilgrim, Sand-monk, and 8 Rules, stood at attention down below while the three 
Daoists also accompanied the king and took their seats on the tower. In a little while, an official came riding with the report, “The altar is ready. Let one of the Dad Preceptors of State ascend it.” 
Saluting with his hands folded before him, the Tiger-Strength Mortal took leave of the king and walked down the tower. “Sir,” said Pilgrim, barring his way, “where are you going?” 

“To ascend the altar and pray for rain,” said the Great Mortal. “You do have a sense of self-importance,” said Pilgrim, “absolutely unwilling to defer to us monks who have come from a great distance. 
All right! As the proverb says, ‘Even a strong dragon is no match for a local worm!’ But if the master insists on proceeding first, then he must make a statement first before the king.” 

“What statement?” asked the Great Mortal. Pilgrim said, “Both you and | are supposed to ascend the altar to pray for rain. When it comes, how could anyone tell whether it’s your rain or mine? Who 
could tell whose merit it is?” When the king above them heard this, he was secretly pleased and said, “The words of this little priest are quite gutsy!” When Sand-monk heard this, he said to himself, 
smiling, “You don’t know that his stomach’s full of gutsiness! He hasn’t shown much of it yet!” 

The Great Mortal said, “There’s no need for me to make any statement. His Majesty is quite familiar with what I'm about to do.” 

“He may know it,” said Pilgrim, “but I’m a monk who came from a distant region. I’ve never met you and I’m not familiar with what you're about to do. | don’t want us to end up accusing each other later, 
for that wouldn't be good business. We must settle this first before we act.” 

“All right,” said the Great Mortal, “when | ascend the altar, I'll use my ritual tablet as a sign. When | bang it loudly on the table once, wind will come; the second time, clouds will gather; the third time, 
there will be lightning and thunder; the fourth time, rain will come; and finally the fifth time, rain will stop and clouds will disperse.” 

“Marvellous!” said Pilgrim, laughing. “I’ve never seen this before! Please go! Please go!” 

With great strides, the Great Mortal walked forward, followed by Tripitaka and the rest. As they approached the altar, they saw that it was a platform about thirty feet tall. On all sides were flown banners 
with the names of the Twenty-Eight Constellations written on them. There was a table on top of the altar, and on the table was set an urn filled with burning incense. On both sides of the urn were two 
candle stands with huge, brightly lit candles. Leaning against the urn was a tablet made of gold, carved with the names of the thunder deities. Beneath the table were five huge cisterns full of clear 
water and afloat with willow branches. To the branches was attached a thin sheet of iron inscribed with the charms used to summon the agents of the Thunder Bureau. Five huge pillars were also set 
up around the table, and written on these pillars were the names of the barbarian thunder lords of Five Quarters. There were two Daoists standing on both sides of each pillar; each of the Daoists held 
an iron bludgeon used for pounding on the pillar. There were also many Daoists drawing up documents behind the altar. Before them there were set up a brazier for burning papers and several statues, 
all representing the messengers of charms, the local spirits, and patron deities. 

The Great Mortal without affecting the slightest degree of modesty, walked straight up to the altar and stood still. A young Daoist presented him with several charms written on yellow papers and a 
treasure sword. Holding the sword, the Great Mortal recited a spell and then burnt a charm on the flame of a candle. Down below several Dacists picked up a document and a statue holding a charm 
and had these burned also. With a bang the old Daoist high above brought down his ritual tablet on the table and at once a breeze could be felt in the air. “O dear! O dear!” muttered 8 Rules. “This 
Daoist is certainly quite capable! He bangs his tablet once and indeed the wind’s rising.” 

“Be quiet, Brother,” said Pilgrim. “Don’t speak to me anymore. Just stand guard over Master here and let me do my business.” 

Dear Great Sage! He pulled off a piece of hair and blew on it his mortal breath, saying, “Change!” It changed at once into a spurious Pilgrim, standing next to the Tang Monk. His true body rose with 
his primal spirit into mid-air where he shouted, “Who is in charge of the wind here?” He so startled the Old Woman of the Wind that she hugged her bag while the Second Boy of the Wind pulled tight 
the rope at the mouth of the bag. They stepped forward to salute Pilgrim who said, “I’m accompanying the holy monk of the Tang court to go to acquire scriptures in the Western Heaven. We happen 
to pass through the Cart Slow Kingdom and are now waging a rainmaking contest with that deviant Daoist. How could you not help old monkey and assist that Daoist instead? I'll pardon you this time 
but you’d better call in the wind. If there’s just the tiniest breeze to make the whiskers of the Daoist flutter, each of you'll receive twenty strokes of the iron rod!” 

“We dare not! We dare not!” said the Old Woman of the Wind, and so, there was no sign of any wind. Unable to contain himself, 8 Rules began to holler, “You Sir, please step down! You've banged 
aloud the tablet. How is it that there’s no wind? You come down, and let us go up there.” 

Holding high his tablet, the Daoist burned another charm before bringing down his tablet once more. Immediately, clouds and fog began to form in mid-air but the Great Sage Sun shouted again, “Who 
is spreading the clouds?” 

He so startled the Cloud-Pushing Boy and the Fog-Spreading Lad that they hurriedly came forward to salute him. After Pilgrim had given his explanation as before, the Cloud Boy and the Mist Lad 
removed the clouds, so that the sun came out and shone most brilliantly; the sky was cloudless for 10000 miles. Laughing, 8 Rules said, “This master may deceive the king and befool his subjects. But 
he hasn’t any real abilities! Why, the tablet has sounded twice! Why is it that we don’t see any clouds forming?” 

Becoming rather agitated, the Daoist loosened his hair, picked up his sword, and recited another spell as he burned a charm. Once more he brought down his tablet with a bang, and immediately the 
Heavenly Lord Deng arrived from the South Heaven Gate, trailed by the Squire of Thunder and the Mum of Lightning. When they saw Pilgrim in mid-air, they saluted him, and he gave his explanation 
as before. “What powerful summons,” he said “brought you all here so quickly?” The Heavenly Lord said, “The proper magic of Five Thunder exercised by that Daoist was not faked.? He issued the 
summons and burned the document that alerted the Jade Emperor. The Jade Emperor sent his decree to the residence of the Primordial Celestial Worthy of All-Pervading Thunderclap in the 9-fold 
Heaven. We in turn received his command to come here and assist with the rainmaking by providing thunder and lightning.” 

“In that case,” said Pilgrim, “just wait a moment. You can help old monkey instead.” 

There was, therefore, neither the sound of thunder nor the flash of lightning. In sheer desperation now, that Daoist added more incense, burned his charms, recited more spells, and struck his tablet 
more loudly than ever. In mid-air, the Dragon Kings of Four Oceans all arrived together, only to be met by Pilgrim who shouted, “Aoguang where do you think you're going?” Aoguang, Aoshun, Aogin, 
and Aorun all went forward to salute him, and Pilgrim gave his explanation as before. He thanked the Dragon Kings moreover, saying, “I needed your help in times past but we've not yet reached our 
goal. Today, | must rely on your assistance once more to help me achieve this merit right now. That Daoist has struck his tablet four times, and it’s now old monkey’s turn to do business. But | don’t 
know how to burn charms, issue summons, or strike any tablet. So all of you must play along with me.” 

The Heavenly Lord Deng said, “If the Great Sage gives us the order who would dare disobey? You must however, give us a sign so that we may follow your instructions in an orderly manner. Otherwise, 
thunder and rain may be all mixed up, and that will not be to the credit of the Great Sage.” Pilgrim said, “I'll use my rod as the sign.” 

“O Dear Dad!” cried the Squire of Thunder, horrified. “How could we take the rod?” 

“Im not going to strike you,” said Pilgrim. “All | want from you is to watch the rod. If | point it upwards once, you'll make the wind blow.” 

“We'll make the wind blow!” snapped the Old Woman of the Wind and the Second Boy of the Wind in unison. 

“When the rod points upward a second time, you'll spread the clouds.” 

“We'll spread the clouds! We'll spread the clouds!” cried the Cloud-Pushing Boy and the Mist-Spreading Lad. 

“When | point the rod upwards for the third time, | want thunder and lightning.” 

“We'll provide the service! We'll provide the service!” said the Squire of Thunder and the Mum of Lightning. 

“When | point the rod upwards the fourth time, | want rain.” 

“We obey! We obey!” said the Dragon Kings. 

“And when | point the rod upwards the fifth time, | want sunshine and fair weather. Don’t make any mistake!” 

After he had given all these instructions, Pilgrim dropped down from the clouds and retrieved his hair back to his body. Being of fleshly eyes and mortal stock, how could those people know the 
difference? Pilgrim then cried out with a loud voice, “Sir, please stop! You've struck aloud the tablet four times but there’s not the slightest sign of wind, cloud, thunder, or rain. You’d let me take over.” 
The Daoist had no choice but to leave his place and come down the altar for Pilgrim to take his tum. Pouting, he went back to the tower to see the throne. “Let me follow him,” said Pilgrim, “and see 
what he has to say.” He arrived and heard the king asking the Daoist, “We've been listening here most eagerly for the sounds of your tablet. Four times it struck and there was neither wind nor rain. 
Why is that?” The Daoist said, “Today the dragon deities are not home.” Pilgrim shouted with a loud voice, “Your Majesty, the dragon deities are home all right but the magic of your National Preceptor 
is not efficacious enough to bring them here. Allow us priests to summon them here for you to see.” 
“Ascend the altar at once,” said the king, “and we'll wait for the rain here.” 

Having received this decree, Pilgrim dashed back to the altar and tugged at the Tang Monk, saying, “Master, please go up to the altar.” 
“Disciple,” said the Tang Monk, “I don’t know how to pray for rain.” 
“He’s trying to set you up,” said 8 Rules, laughing. “If there’s no rain, they'll put you on the pyre and finish you off with a fire.” 

Pilgrim said, “Though you may not know how to pray for rain, you know how to recite scriptures. Let me help you.” 

The elder indeed ascended the altar and solemnly took a seat on top. With complete concentration, he recited silently the Heart Thread. Suddenly an official came galloping on a horse with the question, 
“Why’re you monks not striking the tablet and burning charms?” 

Pilgrim answered in a loud voice, “No need for that! Ours is the quiet work of fervent prayers.” The official left to give this reply to the king, and we'll mention him no further. Pilgrim took out his rod from 
his ear and 1 wave of it in the wind gave it a length of 12 feet and the thickness of a rice bowl when he heard that his old master had finished reciting the Thread. He pointed it upwards in the air; when 
the Old Woman of the Wind saw it, she immediately shook loose her bag as the 2™ Boy of the Wind untied the rope around its mouth. The roar of the wind could be heard instantly as tiles and bricks 
flew up all over the city and stones and dust hurtled through the air. Just look at it! It was truly marvellous wind, not at all similar to any ordinary breeze. 1 saw snapped willows and cracked flowers; 
fallen trees and toppled woods; 9-layered halls with chipped and broken walls; a 5-Phoenix Tower of shaken pillars and beams; the red sun losing its brightness in Heaven; the yellow sand taking wings 
on Earth; alarmed warriors before the martial hall; frightened ministers in the letters bower; girls of 3 palaces with frowzy locks; beauties of 6 chambers with tousled hair. Tassels dropped from gold 
caps of marquis and earls; the prime minister's black gauze did spread its wings. Attendants had words but they dared not speak; the Yellow Gate held papers that could not be sent. Goldfishes and 
jade belts stood not in rows; ivory tablets and silk gowns had broken ranks. Coloured rooms and turquoise screens were all damaged; green windows and scarlet doors were all destroyed. Tiles of 


Golden Chimes Hall flew off with bricks; carved doors of Brocade-Cloud Hall all fell apart. This violent wind’s violent indeed! It blew till king, subjects, dads, sons could not meet till all streets, markets 
were emptied of men, and doors of 10000 homes were tightly shut. As this violent gust of wind arose, Pilgrim Sun further revealed his magic power. Giving his golden-hooped rod a twirl, he pointed it 
upwards a second time. 1 saw the Cloud-Pushing Boy revealed his godly power and a murky mass dropped down from Heaven; the Fog-Spreading Lad displayed his magic might and dense, soaring 
mists covered the Earth. The 3 markets all grew dim; the 6 avenues all tumed dark. With wind clouds left the seas and Kunlun, trailing the rain. Soon they filled Heaven and Earth and blackened this 
world of dust. It was opaque like chaos of yore; none could see Phoenix Tower's door. As thick fog and dense clouds rolled in, Pilgrim Sun gave his golden-hooped rod another twirl and pointed it 
upwards a third time. 1 saw the Squire of Thunder raging, rode a fiery beast backward to descend from Heaven's pass; the Mum of Lightning irate, wielded gold snakes madly as she left the Dipper 
Hall. Hu-la-la cracked the thunder, shattering the Iron Fork Mountain; Xi-li-li flashed the scarlet sheets, flying out of the Eastern Ocean. Loud rumbles of chariots came on and off, like fires and fames 
the grains and rice shot up. Myriad things sprouted, their spirits revived. Countless insects were from dormancy aroused. *King and subjects both were terrified; traders and merchants were awed by 
the sound. Ping-ping, pang-pang, the thunder flashed and roared so ferociously that it seemed as if mountains were toppling and the earth was splitting apart. So terrified were the city’s inhabitants that 
every house lighted incense, that every home burned paper money. “Old Deng,” shouted Pilgrim. “Take care to look out for those greedy and corrupt officials, those churlish and disobedient sons. 
Strike down many of them for me to warn the public!” The peal of thunder grew louder than ever. Finally Pilgrim pointed to the iron rod once more. 1 saw the dragons gave order and rain filled the world, 
strong as Heavens’ river spilling over the dikes, quick as the clouds rushing through a channel. It pattered on top of towers; splashed outside the windows. The Silver Stream ran down from Heaven 
and whitecaps surged through the streets. It spurted like vases upturned; gushed forth like basins poured out. With houses almost drowned in hamlets, the water rose to rural bridges’ height. Truly 
mulberry fields became vast oceans and billows all too soon raced through the land. Dragon gods came to lend a helping hand by lifting up the Yangzi and throwing it down! 

The torrential rain began in the morning and did not stop even after the noon hour. So great was the downpour that all the streets and gulley of the Cart Slow Kingdom were completely flooded. The 
king therefore issued this decree: “The rain’s enough! If we’d any more, it might damage the crops and that would have made things worse.” 

An official messenger below the 5-Phoenix Tower at once galloped through the rain to make this announcement: “Holy monk, we've enough rain.” 

When Pilgrim heard this, he pointed the golden-hooped rod upwards once more. Instantly the thunder stopped and the wind subsided, the rain ended and the clouds dispersed. The king was filled with 
delight, and not 1 of the various civil and military officials could refrain from marvelling, saying, “Marvellous priest! This is truly that ‘for the strong, there’s someone stronger still!’ Even when our 
Preceptors of State were capable of making the rain, a fine drizzle would go on for virtually half a day before it stopped completely. How it’s that the weather can turn fair the moment the priest wants it 
to be fair? Look, the sun comes out instantly and there’s a speck of cloud nowhere!” 

The king gave the command for the carriage to be retuned to the palace, for he wanted to certify the travel rescript and permit the Tang Monk to pass through. Just as he was about to use his treasure 
seal, the three Daoists all went forward and stopped him, saying, “Your Majesty, this downpour of rain can’t be regarded as the monk’s merit, for it still owes its origin to the strength of the Daoist Gate.” 
The king said, “You just claimed that the Dragon Kings were not home and that was why it didn’t rain. He walked up there, exercised his quiet work of fervent prayers, and rain came down at once. How 
could you strive with him for credit?” 

The Tiger-Strength Mortal said, “I issued my summons, burned my charms, and struck my tablets several times after | ascended the altar. Which Dragon King would dare not show up? It had to be that 
someone else somewhere was also requesting their service, and that was the reason that the Dragon Kings along with the officers of the other four bureaus — of wind, cloud, thunder, and lightning - 
did not appear at first. Once they heard my summons however, they were in a hurry to get here, and by that time it happened that | was leaving the altar already. The priest, of course, made use of the 
opportunity and it rained. But if you thought about the matter from the beginning, the dragons were those which | summoned here and the rain was that which we called for. How could you regard this, 
therefore, as their meritorious fruit?” When that dim-witted king heard these words, he became all confused again. 

Pilgrim walked one step forward, and pressing his palms together he said, “Your Majesty, this trivial magic of heterodoxy is hardly to be considered anything of consequence. Let's not worry about 
whether it’s his merit or ours. Let me tell you instead that there are in mid-air right now the Dragon Kings of the Four Oceans; because I've not dismissed them, they dare not withdraw. If that Preceptor 
of State could order the Dragon Kings to reveal themselves, I'd concede that this was his merit.” Very pleased, the king said, “We've been on the throne for twenty-three years but we've never laid eyes 
on a living dragon. Both of you can exercise your magic power, regardless whether you're a monk or a Daoist. If you’d ask them to reveal themselves, it would be your merit; if you’d not, it would be 
your fault.” 

Those Daoists, of course, had no such power or authority. Even if they were to give the order, the Dragon Kings would never dare show themselves on account of the presence of the Great Sage. 
Thus, the Daoists said, “We can’t do this. Why don’t you try?” 

Lifting his face toward the air, the Great Sage cried out in a loud voice: “Aoguang, where’re you? All of you brothers, show your true selves!” 

When those Dragon Kings heard this call, they at once revealed their original forms — four dragons dancing through clouds and mists toward the Hall of Golden Chimes. See them soaring and 
transforming, encircling clouds and mists. Like white hooks the jade claws hang; bright mirrors the silver scales shine. Whiskers float like white silk, each strand’s distinct; horns rise ruggedly, each 
prong is clear. Those craggy foreheads; brilliant round eyes. They hidden or seen, can’t be fathomed; flying or soaring, cannot be described. Pray for rain and rain comes instantly; ask for fair sky and 
it’s here at once. Only these are the true dragon forms, most potent and holy, their good aura surrounds the court profusely. The king lighted incense in the hall and the various officials saluted down 
before the steps. “It's most kind of you to show us your precious forms,” said the king. “Please go back and we'll say a special mass another day to thank you.” 

“All of you deities may now retire,” said Pilgrim, “for the king’s promised to thank you with a special mass on another day.” The Dragon Kings returned to the oceans while the other deities all went back 
to Heaven. Thus this is the true magic might, so boundless and vast; heresy’s pierced by nature enlightened. 


046 

Heresy flaunts its strength to mock orthodoxy; Mind Monkey slays the deviates in epiphany 
When the king saw Pilgrim Sun’s ability to summon dragons and command sages, he immediately applied his treasure seal to the travel rescript. He was about to hand it back to the Tang Monk and 
permit him to take up the journey once more, when the three Daoists went forward and saluted themselves before the steps of the Hall of Golden Chimes. The king left his dragon throne hurriedly and 
tried to raise them with his hands. “State Preceptors,” he said, “why do you three go through such a great ceremony with us today?” 
“Your Majesty,” said the Daoists, “we've been upholding your reign and providing security for your people here for these two decades. Today this priest's made use of some paltry tricks of magic, robbed 
us of all our credit, and ruined our reputation. Just because of a rainstorm, Your Majesty’s pardoned even their crime of murder. Aren’t we being treated lightly? Let Your Majesty withhold their rescript 
for the moment and allow us brothers to wage another contest with them. We'll see what happens then.” 
That king was in truth a confused man: he would side with the east when they mentioned east, and with the west when they mentioned west. Indeed, putting away the travel rescript, he said, “State 
Preceptors, what sort of contest do you wish to wage with them?” 
“A contest of meditation,” said the Tiger-Strength Great Mortal. 
“That's no good,” said the king, “for the monk’s reared in the religion of meditation. He must be well trained in such mysteries before he dares receive the decree to acquire scriptures. Why do you want 
to wage such a contest with him?” 
“This contest,” said the Great Mortal, “isn’t an ordinary one for it’s the name of the Epiphany of Saintliness by the Cloud Ladder.” 
“What do you mean by that?” asked the king. 
The Great Mortal said, “We need a hundred tables, fifty of which will be made into an altar of meditation by piling one on top of the other. Each contestant must ascend to the top without using his hands 
or a ladder but only with the help of a cloud. We'll also agree on how many hours we'll remain immobile while sitting on the top of the altar.” 
When he learned that it was to be such a difficult contest, the king put the question to the pilgrims saying, “Hey, monks! Our State Preceptor would like to wage with you a contest of meditation called 
the Epiphany of Saintliness by the Cloud Ladder. Can any one of you do it?” 
When Pilgrim heard this, he fell silent and gave no reply. “Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “why’re you saying nothing?” 
“Brother, to tell you the truth,” said Pilgrim, “I’m quite capable of performing such difficult feats as kicking down the sky or overturning wells, stirring up oceans or upending rivers, carrying mountains or 
chasing the moon, and altering the course of stars and planets. I’m not afraid in fact of even having my head split open or cut off or stomach ripped apart or heart gouged out or any such strange 
manipulations. But if you ask me to sit and meditate, I'll lose the contest even before | begin! Tell mewhere’d | acquire the nature to sit still? Even if you’re to chain me to an iron pillar, I'd still try to climb 
up and down. | can never manage to sit still.” 
“But / know how to sit and meditate,” the Tang Monk blurted out suddenly. 
“Marvellous! Just marvellous!” said Pilgrim, highly pleased. “How long can you do this?” 
“| met some lofty Chan masters when | was young,” said Tripitaka, “who expounded to me the absolutely crucial foundation of quiescence and concentration in order to preserve my spirit. Shut up alone 
in the so-called Life-and-Death Meditative Confinement, I'd managed to sit still for two or three years at least.” 
“If you do that, Master,” said Pilgrim, “we'll not need to go acquire scriptures! At most, | don’t think it will be necessary for you to sit for more than three hours here before you'll be able to come down.” 
“But Disciple,” said Tripitaka, “I can’t get up there.” 
“You step forward and accept the challenge,” said Pilgrim. “I'll send you up there.” Indeed, the elder pressed his palms together before his chest and said, “This humble priest knows how to sit in 
meditation.” The king at once gave the order for the altars to be built. Truly, a nation has the strength to topple mountains! In less than half an hour, two altars were built on the left and right of the Hall 
of Golden Chimes. 
Coming down from the hall, the Tiger-Strength Great Mortal went to the middle of the courtyard. He leaped into the air and at once a mat of clouds formed under his feet and took him up to the altar to 
the west where he sat down. Pilgrim meanwhile pulled off one strand of his hair and caused it to change into a spurious form of himself, standing down below to accompany 8 Rules and Sand-monk. 
He himself changed into an auspicious cloud of five colours to carry the Tang Monk into the air and lift him to sit on the altar to the east. He then changed himself into a tiny mole cricket and flew to 
alight on 8 Rules’ ear to whisper to him, “Brother, look up and watch Master with care. Don’t speak to the substitute of old monkey!” Laughing, Idiot said, “I know! | know!” 
The Deer-Strength Great Mortal sitting on the embroidered cushion in the hall where he watched the 2 contestants for a long time and found them quite equally matched. This Daoist decided to give 
his elder brother some help: pulling a stubby piece of hair from the back of his head, he rolled it with his fingers into a tiny ball and filliped it onto the head of the Tang Monk. The piece of hair changed 
into a huge bedbug and began to bite the elder. At first, the elder felt an itch, after which it changed to pain. Now, one of the rules in meditation is that one cannot move one’s hands; when one does, it 
is an immediate admission of defeat. As the elder found the itch and pain to be quite unbearable, he sought to find relief by wriggling his head against the collar of his robe. “Oh dear!” said 8 Rules. 
“Master is going to have a fit!” 
“No,” said Sand-monk, “he might be having a headache.” 
Hearing this, Pilgrim said, “My master’s an honest gentleman. If he said he knew how to practice meditation, he’d be able to do it. A gentleman does not lie! Stop speculating, the two of you and let me 
go up to take a look.” Dear Pilgrim! He buzzed up there and alighted on the head of the Tang Monk where he discovered a bedbug about the size of a bean biting the elder. Hurriedly, he removed it 
with his hand, and then he gave his master a few gentle scratches. His itch and pain relieved, the elder once more sat motionless on the altar. “The bald head of a priest,” thought Pilgrim to himself, 
“can’t even hold a louse! How’d a bedbug get into it? | suppose it must be a stunt of that Daoist trying to harm my master. Ha! Ha! Since they've not quite reached a decision yet in this contest, let old 
monkey give him a taste of his own tricks!” 
Flying up into the air until he reached a height beyond the roof of the palace, he shook his body and changed at once into a centipede at least seven inches in length. It dropped down from the sky and 
landed on the Daoist's upper lip before his nostrils where it gave him a terrific bite. Unable to sit still any longer, the Daoist fell backwards from the altar head over heels and almost lost his life. He was 
fortunate enough to have all the officials rush forward to pull him up. The horrified king at once asked the Grand Preceptor before the Throne to help him go to the Pavilion of Cultural Florescence to 
be washed and combed. Pilgrim, meanwhile, changed himself again into the auspicious cloud to carry his master down to the courtyard before the steps where he was declared the winner. The king 
wanted to let them go but the Deer-Strength Great Mortal again said to him, “Your Majesty, my elder brother’s been suffering from a suppressed chill; when he goes up to a high place, the cold wind 
he’s exposed to will bring on his old sickness. That was why the monk’s able to gain the upper hand. Let me now wage with them a contest of guessing what's behind the boards.” 
“What do you mean by that?” asked the king. 
Deer-Strength said, “This humble Daoist’s the ability to gain knowledge of things even if they’re placed behind boards. Let’s see if those monks are able to do the same. If they'd outguess me, let them 
go; but if not, then let them be punished according to Your Majesty’s wishes so that our fraternal distress may be avenged and services to the kingdom for these two decades may remain untainted.” 


Truly that king is exceedingly confused! Swayed by such fraudulent words, he at once gave the order for a red lacquered chest to be brought to the inner palace. The queen was asked to place a 
treasure in the chest before it was carried out again and set before the white-jade steps. The king said to the monks and the Daoists, “Let both sides wage your contest now and see who can guess 
the treasure inside the chest.” 

“Disciple,” said Tripitaka, “how could we know what's in the chest?” 

Pilgrim changed again into a mole cricket and flew up to the head of the Tang Monk. “Relax, Master,” he said, “let me go take a look.” Dear Great Sage! Unnoticed by anyone, he flew up to the chest 
and found a crack at the base, through which he crept inside. On a red lacquered tray he found a set of palace robes: they were the empire blouse and cosmic skirt. Quickly he picked them up and 
shook them loose; then he bit open the tip of his tongue and spat a mouthful of blood onto the garments, crying, “Change!” They changed instantly into a torn and worn-out cassock; before he left 
however, he soaked it with his bubbly and stinking urine. After crawling out again through the crack, he flew back to a light on the Tang Monk’s ear and said, “Master, you may guess that it is a torn and 
worn-out cassock.” 

“He said that it was some kind of treasure,” said Tripitaka. “How could such a thing be a treasure?” 

“Never mind,” said Pilgrim, “for what’s important is that you guess correctly.” 

As the Tang Monk took a step forward to announce what he guessed was in the chest, the Deer-Strength Great Mortal said, ‘I'll guess first. The chest contains an empire blouse and a cosmic skirt.” 
“No! No!” cried the Tang Monk. “There’s only a torn and worn-out cassock in the chest.” 

“How dare he?” said the king. “This priest thinks that there is no treasure in our kingdom. What's this worn-out cassock that he speaks of? Seize him!” The two rows of palace guards immediately 
wanted to raise their hands, and the Tang Monk became so terrified that he pressed his palms together and shouted, “Your Majesty, please pardon this humble priest for the moment. Open the chest; 
if it were indeed a treasure, this humble priest would accept his punishment. But if it were not, wouldn’t you’ve wrongly accused me?” The king had the chest opened, and when the attendant to the 
throne lifted out the lacquered tray, sitting on it was indeed one torn and worn-out cassock! “Who put this thing here?” cried the king, highly incensed, and from behind the dragon seat the queen of the 
three palaces came forward. “My lord,” she said, “It's | who personally placed the empire blouse and the cosmic skirt inside the chest. How could they change into something like this?” 

“Let my royal wife retire,” said the king, “for we’re well aware of the fact that all the things used in the palace are made of the finest silk and embroidered materials. How could there be such a shabby 
object?” He then said to his attendants, “Bring us the chest. We ourselves will hide something in it and try again.” 

The king went to his imperial garden in the rear and picked from his orchard a huge peach, about the size of a rice bowl that he placed in the chest. The chest was brought out and the two parties were 
told to guess once more. “Disciples,” said the Tang Monk, “he wants us to guess again.” 

“Relax,” said Pilgrim. “Let me go and take another look.” With a buzz, he flew away and crawled inside the chest as before. Nothing could have been more agreeable to him than what he found: a 
peach. Changing back into his original form, he sat in the chest and ate the fruit so heartily that every morsel on both sides of the groove was picked clean. Leaving the stone behind, he changed back 
into the mole cricket and flew back onto the Tang Monk’s ear, saying, “Master, say that it's a peach’s pit.” 

“Disciple,” said the elder, “don’t make a fool of me! If | weren’t so quick with my mouth just now, I'd have been seized and punished. This time we must say it’s some kind of treasure. How could a 
peach’s pit be a treasure?” 

“Have no fear,” said Pilgrim. “You'll win, and that’s all that matters!” 

Tripitaka was just about to speak when the Goat-Strength Great Mortal said, “This humble Daoist will guess first: it is a peach.” 

“Not a peach,” said Tripitaka, “but a fleshless peach’s pit.” 

“It's a peach we put in ourselves,” bellowed the king. “How could it be a pit? Our third Preceptor of State has guessed correctly.” 

“Your Majesty,” said Tripitaka, “please open the chest and see for yourself.” The attendant before the throne went to open the chest and lifted up the tray: it was in truth a pit, entirely without any peel 
or flesh. When the king saw this, he became quite frightened and said, “O State Preceptors, don’t wage any more contests with them. Let them go! The peach was picked by our own hands, and now 
it turns out to be a pit. Who could have eaten it? The spirits and gods must be giving them secret assistance.” When 8 Rules heard the words, he grinned sardonically to Sand-monk, saying, “Little does 
he realise how many years of peach eating are behind this!” 

Just then, the Tiger-Strength Great Mortal walked out from the Pavilion of Cultural Florescence after he had been washed and combed. “Your Majesty,” he said as he walked up the hall, “this monk 
knows the magic of object removal. Give me the chest, and I'll destroy his magic. Then we can have another contest with him.” 

“What do you want to do?” asked the king. Tiger-Strength said, “His magic can remove only lifeless objects but not a human body. Put this Daoist youth in the chest, and he’ll never be able to remove 
him.” The youth indeed was hidden in the chest that was then brought down again from the hall to be placed before the steps. “You, monk,” said the king, “guess again what sort of treasure we've 
inside.” Tripitaka said, “Here it comes again!” 

“Let me go and have another look,” said Pilgrim. With a buzz, he flew off and crawled inside where he found a Daoist lad. Marvellous Great Sage! What readiness of mind! Truly such agility is rare in 
the world! Such cleverness is uncommon indeed! Shaking his body once, he changed himself into the form of 1 of those old Daoists, whispering as he entered the chest, “Disciple.” 

“Master,” said the lad, “how did you come in here?” 

“With the magic of invisibility,” said Pilgrim. The lad said, “Do you’ve some instructions for me?” 

“The priest saw you enter the chest,” said Pilgrim, “and if he made his guess a Daoist lad, wouldn't we lose to him again? That’s why | came here to discuss the matter with you. Let’s shave your head, 
and we'll then make the guess that you’re a monk.” The Daoist lad said, “Do whatever you want, Master, just so that we win. For if we lose to them again, not only our reputation will be ruined but the 
court also may no longer revere us.” 

“Exactly,” said Pilgrim. “Come over here, my child. When we defeat them, I'll reward you handsomely.” He changed his golden-hooped rod into a sharp razor, and hugging the lad, he said, “Darling, try 
to endure the pain for a moment. Don’t make any noise! I'll shave your head.” In a little while, the lad’s hair was completely shorn, rolled into a ball, and stuffed into one of the corners of the chest. He 
put away the razor, and rubbing the lad’s bald head, he said, “My child, your head looks like a monk’s all right but your clothes don’t fit. Take them off and let me change them for you.” What the Daoist 
lad had on was a crane’s-down robe of spring-onion white silk, embroidered with the cloud pattern and trimmed with brocade. When he took it off, Pilgrim blew on it his mortal breath, crying, “Change!” 
It changed instantly into a monk shirt of brown colour that Pilgrim helped him put on. He then pulled off two pieces of hair which he changed into a wooden fish and a tap. “Disciple,” said Pilgrim, as he 
handed over the fish and the tap to the lad, “you must listen carefully. If you hear someone call for the Daoist youth, don’t ever leave this chest. If someone calls ‘Monk,’ then you may push open the 
chest door, strike up the wooden fish, and walk out reciting a Religious Thread. Then it'll be complete success for us.” 

“| only know,” said the lad, “how to recite the Three Officials Scripture, the Northern Dipper Scripture, or the Woe-Dispelling Scripture. | don’t know how to recite any Religious Thread.” Pilgrim said, 
“Can you recite the name of God?” 

“You mean Infinite Light,” said the lad. “Who doesn’t know that?” 

“Good enough! Good enough!” said Pilgrim. “You may recite the name of God. It'll spare me from having to teach you anything new. Remember what I’ve told you. I’m leaving.” He changed back into 
a mole cricket and crawled out, after which he flew back to the ear of the Tang Monk and said, “Master, just guess it's a monk.” Tripitaka said, “This time | know I'll win.” 

“How could you be so sure?” asked Pilgrim, and Tripitaka replied, “The Threads said, ‘A god, the Religion, and the Sangha are the Three Jewels.’ A monk therefore is a treasure.” 

As they were thus talking among themselves, the Tiger-Strength Great Mortal said, “Your Majesty, this third time it is a Daoist youth.” He made the declaration several times but nothing happened nor 
did anyone make an appearance. Pressing his palms together, Tripitaka said, “It's a monk.” With all his might, 8 Rules screamed, “It’s a monk in the chest!” All at once the youth kicked open the chest 
and walked out, striking the wooden fish and reciting the name of God. So delighted were the two rows of civil and military officials that they shouted bravos repeatedly; so astonished were the three 
Daoists that they could not utter a sound. “These priests must have the assistance from spirits and gods,” said the king. “How could a Daoist enter the chest and come out a monk? Even if he had an 
attendant with him, he might have been able to have his head shaved. How could he know how to take up the reciting of God’s name? O Preceptors! Please let them go!” 

“Your Majesty,” said the Tiger-Strength Great Mortal, “as the proverb says, ‘The warrior has found his peer, the chess player his match.’ We might as well make use of some martial arts we learned in 
our youth at Zhongnan Mountain and challenge them to a greater competition.” 

“What sort of martial arts did you learn?” asked the king. Tiger-Strength replied, “We three brothers all have acquired some magic abilities: cut off our heads, and we can put them back on our necks; 
open our chests and gouge out our hearts, and they will grow back again; inside a cauldron of boiling oil, we can take baths.” Highly startled, the king said, “These three things are all roads leading to 
certain death!” 

“Only because we've such magic power,” said Tiger-Strength, “do we dare make so bold a claim. We'll not quit until we've waged this contest with them.” The king said in a loud voice, “You priests from 
the Land of the East, our Preceptor of States are unwilling to let you go. They wish to wage one more contest with you in head cutting, stomach ripping, and going into a cauldron of boiling oil to take a 
bath.” 

Pilgrim was still assuming the form of the mole cricket, flying back and forth to make his secret report. When he heard this, he retrieved his hair that had been changed into his substitute, and he himself 
changed at once back into his true form. “Lucky! Lucky!” he cried with loud guffaws. “Business has come to my door!” 

“These three things,” said 8 Rules, “will certainly make you lose your life. How could you say that business has come to your door?” 

“You still have no idea of my abilities!” said Pilgrim. 

“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “you're quite clever, quite capable in those transformations. Aren't those skills something already? What more abilities do you've?” 

Pilgrim said, “Cut off my head and | still can speak, sever my arms, | still can beat you up! My legs amputated, | still can walk. My belly, ripped open, will heal again, smooth and snug as a wonton 
people make: a tiny pinch and it’s completely formed. To bathe in boiling oil is easier still; like warm liquid cleanse me of dirt it'll.” 

When 8 Rules and Sand-monk heard these words, they roared with laughter. Pilgrim went forward and said, “Your Majesty, this young priest knows how to have his head cut off.” 

“How did you acquire such an ability?” asked the king. “When | was practicing austerities in a monastery some years ago,” said Pilgrim, “I met a mendicant Chan master who taught me the magic of 
head cutting. | don’t know whether it works or not, and that’s why | want to try it out right now.” 

“This priest is so young and ignorant!” said the king, chuckling. “Is head cutting something to try out? The head is, after all, the very fountain of the six kinds of yang energies in one’s body. If you cut it 
off, you'll die.” 

“That's what we want,” said Tiger-Strength. “Only then can our feelings be relieved!” Besotted by the Daoist’s words, the foolish ruler immediately gave the decree for an execution site to be prepared. 
Once the command was given, three thousand imperial guards took up their positions outside the gate of the court. The king said, “Monk, go and cut off your head first.” 

“Ill go first! I'll go first!” said Pilgrim merrily. He folded his hands before his chest and shouted, “State Preceptors, pardon my presumption for taking my turn first!” He turned swiftly and was about to 
dash out. The Tang Monk grabbed him, saying, “O Disciple! Be careful! Where you're going isn’t a playground!” 

“No fear!” said Pilgrim. “Take off your hands! Let me go!” 

The Great Sage went straight to the execution site where he was caught hold of by the executioner and bound with ropes. He was then led to a tall mound and pinned down on top of it. At the cry “Kill,” 
his head came off with a swishing sound. Then the executioner gave the head a kick, and it rolled off like a watermelon to a distance of some forty paces away. No blood however, spurted from the 
neck of Pilgrim. Instead, a voice came from inside his stomach, crying, “Come, head!” So alarmed was the Deer-Strength Great Mortal by the sight of such ability that he at once recited a spell and 
gave this charge to the local spirit and patron deity: “Hold down that head. When I've defeated the monk, I'll persuade the king to turn your little shrines into huge temples, your idols of clay into true 
bodies of gold.” The local spirit and a god had to serve him since he knew the magic of the Five Thunders. Secretly, they indeed held Pilgrim’s head down. Once more Pilgrim cried, “Come, head!” But 
the head stayed on the ground as if it had taken root; it would not move at all. Somewhat anxious, Pilgrim rolled his hands into fists and wrenched his body violently. The ropes all snapped and fell off; 
at the cry “Grow,” a head sprang up instantly from his neck. Every one of the executioners and every member of the imperial guards became terrified while the officer in charge of the execution dashed 
inside the court to make this report: “Your Majesty, that young priest had his head cut off but another head’s grown up.” 

“Sand-monk,” said 8 Rules, giggling, “we truly had no idea that Elder Brother has this kind of talent!” 

“If he knows seventy-two ways of transformation,” said Sand-monk, “he may have altogether seventy-two heads!” 

Hardly had he finished speaking when Pilgrim came walking back, saying, “Master.” Exceedingly pleased, Tripitaka said, “Disciple, did it hurt?” 

“Hardly,” said Pilgrim, “it’s sort of fun!” 

“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “do you need ointment for the scar?” 

“Touch me,” said Pilgrim, “and see if there’s any scar.” Idiot touched him and he was dumbfounded. “Marvellous! Marvellous!” he giggled. “It healed perfectly. You can’t feel even the slightest scar!” 


As the brothers were chatting happily among themselves, they heard the king say, “Receive your rescript. We give you a complete pardon. Go away!” Pilgrim said, “We'll take the rescript all right but 
we want the Preceptor of State to go there and cut his head off too! He should try something new!” 

“Great Preceptor of State,” said the king, “the priest is not willing to pass you up. If you want to compete with him, please try not to frighten us.” 

Tiger-Strength had no choice but to go up to the site where he was bound and pinned to the ground by several executioners. One of them lifted the sword and cut off his head that was then kicked 
some thirty paces away. Blood did not spurt from his trunk either, and he, too, gave a cry, “Come, head!” Hurriedly pulling off a piece of hair, Pilgrim blew on it his mortal breath, crying, “Change!” It 
changed into a yellow hound that dashed into the execution site, picked up the Daoist’s head with its mouth, and ran to drop it into the imperial moat. The Daoist, meanwhile, called for his head three 
times without success. He did not have the ability of Pilgrim, and there was no possibility that he could produce another head. All at once, bright crimson gushed out from his trunk. Alas! Though for 
wind and rain he can send and call, against a right-fruit god he’s no match at all. In a moment, he fell to the dust, and those gathered about him discovered that he was actually a headless tiger with 
yellow fur. The officer in charge of the execution went again to memorialise. “Your Majesty,” he said, “the Great Preceptor of State’s head was cut off but it could not grow back again. He perished in 
the dust and then he became a headless tiger with yellow fur.” On hearing this, the king paled with fright and stared at the remaining two Daoists with unblinking eyes. Rising from his cushion, Deer- 
Strength said, “My Elder Brother must have been fated to die at this particular moment. But how could he be a yellow tiger? This has to be that monk’s roguery. He is using some kind of deceptive 
magic to change my elder brother into a beast. I'll not spare him now. | insist on having a competition of stomach ripping and heart gouging.” 

When the king heard this, he calmed down and said, “Little priest, our Second Preceptor of State wants to wage another contest with you.” 

“This little priest,” said Pilgrim, “has not eaten much prepared food for a long time. The other day when we're journeying to the West, a kind patron kept asking us to eat and | stuffed myself with more 
pieces of steamed bread than I'd have taken. I’ve been having a stomach-ache since, and | fear that | may have worms. This contest, therefore, can’t be more timely, for | want very much to borrow 
Your Majesty's knife to rip open my stomach, so that | may take out my viscera and clean out my stomach and spleen before | dare proceed to see God in the Western Heaven.” When the king heard 
this, he gave the order, “Take him to the execution site.” A throng of captains and guards came forward to pull and tug at Pilgrim who pushed them back, saying, “I don’t need people to hold me. I’m 
going to walk there myself. There’s one thing however. | don’t want my hands tied, for | want to wash and clean out my viscera.” The king at once gave the order, “Don’t tie his hands.” 

With a swagger, Pilgrim walked down to the execution site. Leaning himself on a huge pillar, he untied his robe and revealed his stomach. The executioner used a rope and tied his neck to the pillar; 
down below, another rope strapped his two legs also to the pillar. Then he wielded a sharp dagger and ripped Pilgrim’s chest downward, all the way to his lower abdomen. Pilgrim used both his hands 
to push open his belly, and then he took out his intestines that he examined one by one. After a long pause, he put them back inside, coil for coil exactly as before. Grasping the skins of his belly and 
bringing them together with his hands, he blew his magic breath on his abdomen, crying, “Grow!” At once his belly closed up completely. So astonished was the king that he presented with both his 
hands the rescript to Pilgrim, saying, “Holy monk, please do not delay your westward journey any further. Take your rescript and leave.” 

“The rescript is a small matter,” said Pilgrim, chuckling. “How about asking Second Preceptor of State to go through with the cutting and ripping?” 

“Don’t put the blame on us,” said the king to Deer-Strength. “It's you who wanted to be his opponent. Please go! Please go!” 

“Relax!” said Deer-Strength. “I don’t think I'll ever lose to him!” 

Look at him! He even imitated the swagger of Pilgrim Sun as he headed for the execution site. There he was bound with ropes, and then his stomach was also ripped open by the dagger of the 
executioner. He, too, took out his guts and manipulated them with his hands. Pilgrim at once pulled off a piece of his hair on which he blew a mouthful of his divine breath crying, “Change.” 

It changed into a hungry hawk; spreading its wings and claws, it flew up to the Daoist and snatched him clean of his guts. Then it flew off somewhere to enjoy its catch leisurely while the Daoist was 
reduced to of torn belly and empty trunk a ghost so drippy with less innards and no guts a soul most ditsy! Kicking down the pillar, the executioner dragged the corpse over to have a closer look. Ah! It 
was actually a white-coated deer with horns. The officer in charge of the execution again ran hurriedly to make the report: “Second Preceptor of State’s most unlucky! As his stomach’s ripped open, his 
viscera were snatched away by a hungry hawk. After he perished, his original form’s a white-coated deer with horns.” 

More and more alarmed, the king asked, “How’d he turn into a deer with horns?” 

The Goat-Strength Great Mortal said, “Yes, how'd my elder brother die and turn into the form of a beast? It’s to be the magic of that monk used by him to plot against us. Let me avenge the deaths of 
my elder brothers.” 

“With what magic can you triumph over him?” asked the king. 

Goat-Strength replied, “I’m going to wage with him the contest of bathing in a cauldron of hot oil.” The king indeed sent for a huge cauldron filled with fragrant oil and told them to begin the contest. “I 
thank you for your kindness,” said Pilgrim, “for this young priest has not had a bath for a long time. My skin in fact has been rather dried and itchy these past two days, and | must have it scalded to 
take away the irritation.” 

The attendant before the throne indeed lighted a great fire on a huge pile of wood, and the oil in the cauldron was heated to boiling. When he was asked to step into it, Pilgrim pressed his palms together 
in front of him and asked, “Will it be a civil or a military bath?” 

“What's the difference?” asked the king. Pilgrim said, “A civil bath means that Ill not remove my clothing. With my hands on my hips, I'll jump in and jump out again after one little roll, so swiftly in fact 
that the clothes are not permitted to be soiled. If there’s the tiniest speck of oil on the garments, | lose. A military bath however, will require a clothes rack and a towel. I'll undress before | dive in, and 
I'll be permitted to play in there as | wish, including doing somersaults and cartwheels.” The king said to Goat-Strength, “How do you want to compete with him? A civil or a military bath?” 

“If we take the civil bath,” said Goat-Strength, “I fear that his robes may have been treated so that oil will slide off him. Let’s have the military bath.” Stepping forward instantly, Pilgrim said, “Pardon me 
again for the presumption of taking my turn first.” Look at him! 

He took off his shirt and untied his tiger-skin kilt. With a bound, he leaped straight into the cauldron, splashing and frolicking in the boiling oil as if he were swimming in it. When 8 Rules saw this, he bit 
his finger and said to Sand-monk, “We truly have misjudged this ape! During those sarcastic exchanges and the banter between us all this time, | thought he was simply joking! Little did | realise that 
he really had such ability!” They could hardly refrain from their marvelling but when Pilgrim saw them whispering back and forth to each other, he became highly suspicious and thought to himself, “That 
Idiot must be laughing at me! This is what the proverb means: ‘Intelligence has its work and incompetence its leisure.’ Old monkey has to go through all this, and he’s quite comfortable over there! Let 
me put some ropes on him and see whether he'll be more cautious!” 

As he bathed himself, he suddenly dove toward the bottom of the cauldron with a splash. There he changed himself into a small tack and all but disappeared. The officer in charge of the proceedings 
went forward again to make the report: “Your Majesty, the young priest has been fried to death by the boiling oil.” Delighted, the king gave the order for the bones to be fished out for him to see, and 
the executioner went forward to rake the oil with an iron strainer. The holes in the strainer however, were quite large whereas the tack into which Pilgrim had changed himself was very tiny, and 
repeatedly, it fell through the holes after it had been scooped up. The officer had no choice but to come back with this word: “The priest’s body is tender and his bones are frail. He seems to have melted 
completely!” 

The king at once shouted, “Seize those three monks!” Seeing how savage the looks of 8 Rules were, the palace guards rushed at him first and threw him to the ground, tying both of his hands behind 
his back. Tripitaka was so terrified that he cried out in a loud voice, “Your Majesty, please pardon this humble cleric for the moment. Since that disciple of mine embraced our faith, he has made merit 
repeatedly. Today his affront to the Preceptor of State has led to his death in a cauldron of oil, and this humble cleric certainly has no desire to cling to my own life. Moreover, just as the officials are 
ruling over the people, so are you the ruler above all, and if you as king ask me, your subject, to die, how could | dare not die? But the one who died first has already become a spirit, and this is the 
reason | beg you for a moment's grace. Grant me half a cup of cold water or a bowl of thin gruel; give me also three paper horses and permit me to go before the cauldron to present these offerings 
and to express my regard for him as a disciple. Then I'll accept whatever punishment you've for me.” 

On hearing this, the king said, “All right! The Chinese are a very loyal people indeed!” He asked, “The Tang Monk be given the rice gruel and paper money.” 

The Tang Monk requested that Sand-monk go with him below the steps while a few of the guards dragged 8 Rules by the ears up to the cauldron. Facing it, the Tang Monk offered the following 
invocation: “My dear disciple, Sun Wukong! Since taking precepts at the grove of Chan, what love you showed me on our westward way. We hoped jointly to perfect the Great Dao. How could | know 
you'd perish this day! You lived for finding scriptures when alive; in death your mind from God mustn't stray. Your gallant soul afar should wait to rise to Thunderclap as ghost from Hades’ dark sway.” 
On hearing this prayer, 8 Rules said, “Master, that’s not the proper invocation. Sand-monk, hold up the rice offering for me. Let me pray!” Bound and pinned to the ground, Idiot gasped out these words: 
“You brazen, disaster-courting ape! You ignorant Ban-Horse-Plague. You brazen, death-deserving ape! You deep-fried Ban-Horse-Plague! Monkey's bumped off! Horse-Plague’s uprooted!” 

Pilgrim Sun was, of course, still in the bottom of the cauldron. When he heard these castigations from Idiot, he could no longer restrain himself and at once changed back into his original form. Standing 
up stark naked in the cauldron, he shouted, “You overstuffed coolie! Whom are you castigating?” 

“Disciple,” said the Tang Monk when he saw Pilgrim, “you almost frightened me to death!” Sand-monk said, “Elder Brother simply loves to play dead!” The civil and military officials all rushed up the 
steps to report: “Your Majesty, that priest did not die. He has emerged again from the cauldron.” Fearing that he might be found guilty of making a false report to the throne, the officer in charge of 
execution said, “He is dead all right. But today happens to be a rather inauspicious day and the ghost of that young priest is now manifesting itself.” 

Maddened by what he heard, Pilgrim leaped out of the cauldron, dried himself from the oil, and threw on his clothes. Dragging that officer over, he whipped out his iron rod and one blow on the head 
reduced him to a meat patty. “What ghost is this who’s manifesting itself?” he huffed. Those officials were so terrified that they freed 8 Rules at once and knelt on the ground, pleading, “Pardon us! 
Pardon us!” The king, too, wanted to leave his dragon throne but he was caught by Pilgrim who said, “Your Majesty, don’t walk away. Tell your third Preceptor of State to go into the cauldron also.” 
Trembling all over, the king said, “Third Preceptor of State, save our life. Go into the cauldron quickly so that the monk won't hit us.” Goat-Strength went down the steps from the hall and took off his 
clothes like Pilgrim. Leaping into the cauldron of boiling oil, he began to cavort and bathe himself. 

Letting go of the king, Pilgrim approached the cauldron and told the fire tenders to add more wood while he put his hand into the oil. Aha! That boiling oil felt ice cold. He thought to himself: “It was very 
hot when I took the bath but feel how cold it is now that he’s washing in there. | know. It has to be some dragon king who is giving him protection here.” Leaping into the air, he recited a spell that began 
with the letter Ohm and instantly summoned the Dragon King of the Northern Ocean to his side. “You horn-growing earthworm!” said Pilgrim to him. “You scaly lizard! How dare you assist that Daoist 
by coiling a cold dragon around the bottom of the cauldron? You want him to display his power and gain the upper hand on me?” 

Terribly intimidated, the Dragon King stammered out his answer: “Aoshun dares not do that! Perhaps the Great Sage has no knowledge of this: this cursed beast did go through quite an austere process 
of self-cultivation, to the point where he was able to cast off his original shell. He has acquired the true magic of the Five Thunders while the rest of the magic powers he has are all those developed by 
heterodoxy, none fit to lead him to the true way of the mortals. The performance of this right now is also part of the Great Rip-off that he has learned in the Little Mao Mountain‘ but the magic of his two 
associates had already been destroyed by the Great Sage and they had to reveal their original forms. This cold dragon which he has managed to cultivate by himself may deceive worldly folks but how 
could it ever deceive the Great Sage? I'll arrest that cold dragon at once, and you can be certain that he will be deep-fried — bones, skins, and all!” 

“Take him away,” said Pilgrim, “and you'll be spared a whipping!” 

Changing into a violent gust of wind, the Dragon King swooped down to the cauldron and dragged the cold dragon back to the ocean. Pilgrim dropped down from the air and stood again before the 
steps with Tripitaka, 8 Rules, and Sand-monk. They saw that the Daoist was bobbing up and down in the oil but his desperate efforts to get out were all to no avail. Every time he climbed up the wall of 
the cauldron, he would slip back down; in no time at all, his flesh dissolved, his skin was charred, and his bones left his body. “Your Majesty,” another officer in charge of execution went forward to 
report, “the Third Preceptor of State’s passed away!” 

As tears streamed from his eyes, the king clutched at the imperial table before him and sobbed uncontrollably crying: “The human form’s hard, hard indeed, to get! Make no elixir when there’s no true 
guide. You’ve charms and water to send for gods but not the pill to make your life abide. If perfection’s undone, could Extinguishment be won? Your life’s precarious, your efforts are vain. If you knew 
before such hardships you’d meet, why not stay safely in the mount? Abstain!” truly to touch gold, to smelt lead — of what use they're? To summon wind, to beckon rain — still all is vain! 


047 
The holy monk’s blocked at night at Heaven-Reaching River; Metal and Wood rescue little children in compassion 
The king was leaning on his dragon table, wept without ceasing until night fell, his tears gushing forth like a stream. Finally Pilgrim went up to him and shouted, “How'd you be so dim-witted? Look at 
the corpses of those Daoists: one happens to be that of a tiger and the other, a deer. Goat-Strength was in fact an antelope. If you don’t believe me, let his bones be bailed out for you to see. How 
could humans have skeletons like that? These three Daoists were all mountain beasts which had become spirits, united in their efforts to come here and plot against you. When they saw that your 
nodal fate was still in strong ascendancy, ‘they dared not harm you as yet. After two or more years when your nodal fate declines, they would have taken your life and your entire kingdom would have 
been theirs. It was fortunate that we came in time to exterminate these deviates and save your life. And you're still weeping? What for? Bring us our rescript at once and send us on our way.” Only 


when he had heard this from Pilgrim did the king return to his senses. The civil and military officials also went forward to report to him, saying, “The dead indeed turn out to be a white deer and a yellow 
tiger while bones in the cauldron do belong to an antelope. It is unwise not to listen to the words of the holy monk.” 
“In that case,” said the king, “we're grateful to the holy monk. It’s late already. Let the Grand Preceptor escort the holy monks back to Wisdom Depth Monastery to rest. During early court tomorrow, 
we'll open up the Eastern Pavilion and command the Court of Imperial Entertainments to prepare a huge vegetarian banquet to thank them.” 
The priests were escorted back to the monastery. At the time of the fifth watch the following morning, the king held court for many officials. He at once issued a decree to summon the Religious monks 
to return to the city, and this decree was to be posted on every road and on all four gates. After also giving the order for the preparation of a huge banquet, he sent his imperial chariot to the Wisdom 
Depth Monastery to invite Tripitaka and followers back to the Eastern Pavilion for the feast. The monks succeeded in escaping with their lives. When they heard of the decree that was promulgated, 
every one of them was delighted and began to return to the city to search for the Great Sage Sun, to thank him, and to return his hairs. Meanwhile, the elder, after the banquet was over, obtained the 
rescript from the king who led the queen, the concubines, and two rows of civil and military officials out the gate of the court to see the priests off. As they came out, they found many monks kneeling 
on both sides of the road, saying, “Dad Great Sage Equal to Heaven, we’re the monks who escaped with our lives on the beach. When we heard that Dad had wiped out the demons and rescued us, 
and when we further heard that our king had issued a decree commanding our return, we came here to present to you the hairs and to thank you for your Heavenly grace.” 
“How many of you came back?” asked Pilgrim, chuckling. They replied, “All five hundred. None’s missing.” Pilgrim shook his body once and immediately retrieved his hairs. Then he said to the king 
and the lay people, “These monks indeed were released by old monkey. The cart was smashed after old monkey moved it beyond the double passes and through the interlocking spinal ridge, and it 
was Monkey also who beat to death those two perverse Daoists. After such pestilence has been exterminated this day, you’d realise that the true way belongs to the gate of Chan. Hereafter you'd 
never believe foolishly in any doctrine that comes along. | hope you'll honour the unity of the Three Religions: revere the monks, revere also the Daoists, and take care to nurture the talented. | assure 
you your kingdom will be secure forever.” 
The king gave his assent and thanks repeatedly before he escorted the Tang Monk out of the city. And so, their journey had as its purpose a diligent search for the 3 canons; a strenuous quest for the 
primal light. As they proceeded, they walked by day and rested by night; they drank when they were thirsty and ate when they were hungry. Spring ended, summer waned, and soon it was again the 
time of autumn. One day toward evening, the Tang Monk reined in his horse and said, “Disciples where shall we find shelter for the night?” 
“Master,” said Pilgrim, “a man who has left the family should not speak as one who remains in the family.” Tripitaka said, “How would a man in the family speak? And how would a man who has left the 
family speak?” 
“In this time of the year,” said Pilgrim, “a man who remains in the family will enjoy the benefits of a warm bed and snug blankets; he has his children in his bosom and his wife next to his legs. That's 
how comfortably he will sleep! Now, how could we who have left the family expect to enjoy such things? We must be cloaked by the stars and wrapped by the moon; we must dine on the winds and 
rest by the waters. We move on if there’s a road, and we stop only when we come to its end.” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “you know only one thing but you can't see its implications. Look how treacherous is this road we're walking on! I've such a heavy load on me that | find it difficult even to 
walk. Please find some place where | can have a good night's rest and regain my strength. By morning, | can face the load once more. Otherwise, I'll die of fatigue!” 
“Let's move on a little further then in this moonlight,” said Pilgrim, “and we can stop when we reach some place where there are houses.” 
Master and disciples had no choice but to follow Pilgrim forward. They did not journey long before they heard the sound of rushing water. “Finished!” said 8 Rules. “We've come to the end of the road!” 
“We're blocked by a torrent of water,” said Sand-monk. 
The Tang Monk asked, “How could we get across?” 
“Let me test it to discover how deep it is first,” said 8 Rules. 
Tripitaka said, “Aware of Ability, don’t speak such nonsense! How could you test the depth or shallowness of water?” 
“lll find an egg-shaped pebble,” said 8 Rules, “and throw it in: ifit splashes and foam comes up, it’s shallow; if it sinks down with a gurgling sound, then it’s deep.” 
“Go and test it,” said Pilgrim. Idiot groped on the ground and found a stone that he threw into the water; all they heard was a gurgling sound as if fishes were releasing bubbles as the stone sank down 
to the bottom. “Deep! Deep! Deep!” he said. “We can't cross it!” 
“Though you may have discovered its depth,” said the Tang Monk, “you may not know how wide it is.” 
“Indeed not! Indeed not!” said 8 Rules. 
Pilgrim said, “Let me have a look.” Dear Great Sage! He somersaulted at once into the air and fixed his gaze on the water. He saw the moon soaked in vast sheens of light; the sky’s image drenched 
in the deep; a spirit branch gulping mountains; a long river feeding hundred streams; 1000 foaming layers churn; 10000 folds of mount-like waves; (no fisher-fires lit up the banks but egrets rested by 
the beach.) An ocean-like vast expanse with no boundaries in sight. He dropped down quickly from the clouds to the bank of the river saying, “Master, it’s very wide! Very wide! We can’t get across! 
These fiery eyes, diamond pupils of old monkey can discern good, evil up to a thousand miles during the day, and even at night, they can cover a distance of four or five hundred miles. Just now I'd not 
even see the other shore. How’d | tell the width of the river?” 
Horrified, Tripitaka could not say a word for a long time. Then he sobbed out, “O Disciple! What'll we do?” 
“Master, please don’t cry,” said Sand-monk. “Look over there! Isn’t that a man standing by the water?” 
Pilgrim said, “He’d be an angler lowering his nets, | suppose. Let me go and ask him.” Holding his iron rod, he sprinted forward to have a closer look. Ah! It was not a man but only a stone monument, 
on which were written 3 large words in seal script and a row of smaller words down below. The 3 large words were: 
Heaven-Reaching River 

The row of smaller words read: 

A width of 800 miles that few from days of old have crossed. 
“Master,” Pilgrim called out, “come and look.” When Tripitaka saw the monument, tears rolled down his cheeks, saying, “O Disciple! When | left Chang’an that year, | thought that the way to the Westem 
Heaven was quite easy. How could | know of the obstacles of demons and monsters, the long distance over mountains and waters!” 
“Master,” said 8 Rules, “listen for a moment. Isn’t that the sound of drums and cymbals coming from somewhere? It must be that some family is feasting the monks. Let's go over there and beg for 
some vegetarian food and make inquiry concerning the possibility of finding a boat to take us across tomorrow.” 
Cocking his ears as he rode, Tripitaka indeed heard the sound of drums and cymbals. “These aren't the instruments of Daoists,” he said. “It’s to be some religious service conducted by us Religious. 
Let’s go over there.” Pilgrim led the horse in front and all of them proceeded toward where the poems was coming from. There was actually no road for them to walk on, only a rolling sandy beach. 
Presently, they saw a group of well-built houses, about four or five hundred of them altogether. They saw that these houses were close by the hill and the roads, next to the shores and the stream. 
Everywhere the wooden fences were shut; the bamboo yard of each house was closed. Egrets resting on sand dunes had peaceful dreams; birds nesting on willows voiced their chilly verses. The short 
flutes were silent; the washing flails had no rhythm. Red smartweed twigs quaked in moonlight; yellow rush leaves battled the wind. A village dog barked through sparse field fences; an old fisher slept 
on his ford-moored boat where lights were low and human bustles, quiet. The bright moon seemed a mirror hung in the air, the scent of duckweed blossoms all at once was sent by the west wind from 
the far shore. As Tripitaka dismounted, he saw a house at the head of a path; before the house was erected a pole with a banner flying while the inside was ablaze with lamps and candles and filled 
with fragrant incense. “Wukong,” said Tripitaka, “what we’ve here’s certainly better than either the fold of the mountain or the edge of the river. At least the eaves of the roof can provide some shelter 
from the night mists and we can rest without fears. You’d however, stay behind first and let me go up to that patron’s door to make known our request. If he’s willing to let us stay, I'll call for you but if 
he’s unwilling, all of you're to let loose no mischief. You’re after all quite ugly in your appearances and | fear that you may frighten them. Offending these people may mean that we'll have nowhere at 
all to stay.” 
“What you say is quite right,” said Pilgrim. “Please go first, master and we'll wait for you here.” 
Taking off his broad-brimmed bamboo hat, the elder shook the dirt from his clerical robe and went up to the door of the house, holding the priestly staff in his hands. He found the door half-closed; not 
daring to enter without permission, the elder stood still and waited for a brief moment, when an old man with some beads hanging around his neck, emerged from the house, reciting the name of God 
as he walked. Seeing that the old man was about to shut the door however, the elder hurriedly pressed his palms together and cried out, “Old Benefactor, this humble priest salutes you.” Retuming his 
greeting, the old man said, “You're too late, monk.” 
“What do you mean?” said Tripitaka. “| mean that you'll not get anything because you're late,” said the old man. “If you had come earlier, you'd have found that we’re feasting the monks. After you've 
eaten your fill, you’d then be given an additional three ounces of cooked rice, a bale of white cloth, and ten strings of copper pennies. Why do you come at this hour?” 
“Old Benefactor,” said Tripitaka, saluting, “this humble priest is not here to be feasted.” 
“If you're not,” said the old man, “then why have you come here?” Tripitaka said, “I’m someone sent by imperial decree of the Great Tang in the Land of the East to acquire scriptures in the Western 
Heaven. It was late when we arrived at your region. When we heard the sound of drums and cymbals from your house, we came to ask you for one night's lodging. We'll leave by morning.” 
“Monk,” said the old man, waving his hand gently, “a man who has left the family should not lie. The distance between our place here and your Great Tang in the Land of the East happens to be fifty- 
four thousand miles. A single person like you, how could you come here all by yourself?” 
“That's an exceptionally accurate observation, Old Benefactor,” said Tripitaka, “but I’m not alone. I’ve three disciples who have opened up a path through the mountains and built bridges when we came 
upon the waters. It was because of their being my escorts that I’d arrive here today.” 
“If you've disciples,” said the old man, “why haven't they come with you? Please invite them forth at once! My house has enough room for all of you.” Turning around, Tripitaka said, “Disciples, come 
here.” Now, Pilgrim was by nature rather impulsive, 8 Rules was born without manners, and Sand-monk, too, happened to be very impetuous. The moment the three of them heard their master 
beckoning, they rushed like a cyclone toward the house, dragging the horse and the luggage along. When the old man caught sight of them, he was so terrified that he fell on the ground, crying 
repeatedly, “Monsters are here! Monsters are here!” Raising him with his hands, Tripitaka said, “Don’t be afraid, Benefactor. They are not monsters. They are my disciples.” Trembling all over, the old 
man said, “Such a handsome master! Why did you take such ugly disciples?” 
“Though they are not good to look at,” said Tripitaka, “they are quite knowledgeable in taming tigers and subduing dragons, in seizing monsters and capturing fiends.” 
Not fully believing what he heard, the old man supported himself on the Tang Monk and walked slowly with him inside. Those 3 rogues dashed into the hall where they dropped their luggage and tied 
up the horse. There were at that time several priests in the hall reciting Threads. Sticking out his long horn, 8 Rules shouted at them, “Hey monks! Which Thread you're reciting?” 
On hearing this, those monks raised their heads and all at once they saw a visitor with long horns and huge ears, a thick frame and wide shoulders, a voice that boomed like thunder. but Pilgrim and 
Sand-monk were in looks even uglier. Of those priests in the hall none was not in terror. They tried to keep reciting but were stopped by their leader. They left their stones, bells, and forsook the graven 
gods. The lamps were all blown out and torches all smothered. They scrambled and stumbled, the doorsills falling over. Like gourds when props were down, their heads bumped 1 another. A pure, 
serene plot of ritual became a cause of great laughter! 
When the 3 brothers saw how those priests stumbled and fell all over, they clapped their hands and roared with laughter. More terrified than ever, those priests banged into one another as they fled for 
their lives and deserted the place. Tripitaka led the old man up the hall but the lights and lamps were completely out while the 3e of them were still in guffaws. “You brazen creatures!” scolded the Tang 
Monk. “You're so wicked! Haven't | taught you every day, admonished you every morning? The ancients said, to be virtuous without instruction, isn’t this sagacity? To be virtuous after instruction, isn’t 
this nobility? To be virtue-less even after instruction, isn’t this stupidity? The way you've perpetrated mischief has just shown you to be people of the greatest baseness and stupidity! You barged into 
someone’s door with no manners! You've frightened the old Benefactor and scattered the priests reciting the Threads, completely spoiling the good works of others. Wouldn't | be blamed for all this?” 
He spoke with such vehemence that they dared not utter a word in reply, and only then did the old man become convinced that they were his disciples. He tumed quickly to salute Tripitaka saying, 
“Venerable Dad, it doesn’t matter! It doesn’t matter! They're putting out the lights just now because the ceremony’s almost done anyway.” 
“If it's over,” said 8 Rules, “bring out the end-of-service feast so that we can enjoy it and sleep.” 
“Bring out the lights! Bring out the lights!” cried the old man. Some of the members of his household, when they heard him, began to complain to themselves, “There are enough candles already in the 
hall for the religious service. Why is he calling for lights?” A few houseboys came out to see for themselves and they found the hall in complete darkness. Returning hurriedly with torches and lanterns, 
they suddenly saw the forms of 8 Rules and Sand-monk. So terrified by the sight they were that they dropped their torches and dashed inside, slamming shut the mid-level door and shouting all the 
time, “There are monsters here! There are monsters here!” 
Picking up one of the torches, Pilgrim relit the lamps and the candles before he pulled a chair to the middle of the hall for the Tang Monk to sit on. Then he and his brothers sat down on both sides and 
the old man took a seat in front of all of them. As they sett led into their seats, they heard the inner door open and another old man walked out, supporting himself on a staff. “What kind of perverse 


demons are you,” he said, “that you dare enter the door of a virtuous family in the dark of night?” The old man who was seated, quickly arose and met him behind the screens, saying, “No need to 
clamour, Elder Brother. They are no perverse demons but Arhats sent to acquire scriptures by the Great Tang in the Land of the East. Though they look vicious, they are actually quite gentle.” Only 
then did the other old man put down his staff and salute greet all 4 of the visitors after which he also took a seat in the front of the hall. “Bring out the tea,” he cried, “and prepare us some vegetarian 
food.” He had to call several times before several houseboys, still trembling, emerged, though they still did not dare walk near the visitors. 

Unable to contain himself, 8 Rules said, “Old man, why are your servants milling about on both sides?” 

“| told them to bring out some vegetarian food to serve to the Venerable Dads,” said the old man. 8 Rules asked, “How many are there to serve us?” 

“Eight of them,” said the old man. 

“Which of us are they going to serve?” said 8 Rules. 

“Why, all four of you!” said the old man. 8 Rules said, “That pale-faced master requires only one person to serve him; the one with the hairy face and thunder-god beak needs only two. But the one with 
the gloomy complexion will have to have eight persons, and, as for me, nothing less than twenty attendants will do.” 

“If | understand you correctly,” said the old man, “you're trying to tell me that you've a large appetite.” 

“It's passable, passable,” said 8 Rules. “Well,” said the old man, “there are plenty of people here.” Young and old, he managed to summon thirty servants to come out. 

As the two old men spoke amiably with the monks, the rest of the household felt more at ease. A table was set up in the middle of the hall and the Tang Monk was asked to take the honoured seat. 
Three other tables were set up on both sides for the disciples while the two old men were seated at another table facing all of them. Fruits and vegetables were presented first, after which they brought 
out glutinous rice, plain rice, side dishes, and soup with vermicelli. After the food was laid out properly, the elder Tang lifted his chopsticks and recited the Fast-Breaking Thread. Idiot however, was an 
impulsive eater for one thing, and he was hungry for another. Without waiting for the Tang Monk to finish his recitation, he grabbed one of the red lacquered wooden bowls and hurled a whole bow! full 
of rice into his mouth. Every grain of it immediately vanished! One of the young attendants on the side said, “This Venerable Dad is not very smart! If you want to snatch something and hide it in your 
sleeve, why don’t you take some steamed buns? Why do you snatch a bowl of rice instead? Won't it soil your clothing?” 

“| didn’t put it in my sleeve,” said 8 Rules, chuckling. “I ate it!” 

“You've hardly moved your mouth,” said the young man. “How could you've eaten it?” 

“Only your son would lie!” said 8 Rules. “Of course | ate it! If you don’t believe me, I'll eat some more for you to see!” The young man indeed picked up the bow, filled it with rice once more, and handed 
the bowl to 8 Rules. Idiot took it, and instantly he gulped it all down with a flick of his hand. When the houseboys saw this, they cried, “O Dad! You must have a throat lined with polished bricks! It's so 
level and smooth!” Before the Tang Monk had finished reciting one Thread, Idiot had downed five or six bowls of rice. After that, they raised their chopsticks to enjoy the other kinds of food. Without 
regard for whether they were fruits, rice, glutinous rice, or side dishes, Idiot simply scooped them all up with his hands and stuffed them into his mouth, calling all the time, “More rice! More rice! Where 
are you all disappearing to?” 

“Worthy Brother,” said Pilgrim, “please don’t eat so much! We're already much better off than trying to endure hunger in the fold of the mountain. It’s good enough if you’re half-filled.” 

“Never mind,” said 8 Rules. “As the proverb says, the priest half-fed’s worse than dead!” 

“Take away the housewares,” said Pilgrim. “Don’t mind him!” Saluting, the two old men said, “To tell you the truth, there is no problem whatever if it is during the day, for we can easily feed over a 
hundred priests like our big-bellied elder here. But it's late now. We've put away the leftovers, and we’ve managed to steam only one stone of glutinous rice and five barrels of plain rice together with a 
few tablefuls of vegetarian food. We're about to invite a few neighbours to disperse the blessings with the priests. When all of you arrived, the priests became frightened and left, and we dared not even 
ask our neighbours or kin to come here. Everything that had been prepared was already presented to you. But if you’re not yet filled, we can steam some more. 

“Steam some more! Steam some more!” said 8 Rules. 

After they finished eating, the tables and dishes were put aside. Tripitaka stood up and saluted to the two old men to thank them for the feast. Then he asked, “Old Benefactors, what is your honoured 
name?” One of them said, “Our sumame is Chen.” Pressing his palms together, Tripitaka said, “We share the same illustrious ancestors.” 

“So the Venerable Dad also has the surname of Chen?” asked one of the old men. “Yes,” said Tripitaka, “that is the name of my secular home. May | ask what kind of religious service was held just 
now?” 

“Why do you ask, Master?” said 8 Rules, laughing. “Can’t you guess? It has to be a service for harvest, or for peace, or for the completion of a building. Nothing more!” 

“No, no,” said the old man. “Truly, what was it for then?” asked Tripitaka again. The old man replied, “It's a preparatory mass for the dead.” Laughing so hard that he could hardly remain seated, 8 Rules 
said, “Grandpa, you’re not very perceptive! We're experts in half-truths, masters of humbug! How could you hope to deceive us with that fraudulent title? You think that monks are ignorant of masses 
and religious services? You may hold a preparatory mass for the transference of merit, or for the presentation of a votive offering. Since when was there ever a preparatory mass for the dead? There 
is no one in your house who has died. How could you've a mass for the dead?” 

When Pilgrim heard these words, he was secretly pleased and thought to himself, “This Idiot is getting smarter!” Then he said, “Old Grandpa, you must have been mistaken. What is this preparatory 
mass for the dead?” Instead of replying at once, the two old men saluted and said, “How did all of you turn from the main road to acquire scriptures and arrive at our place?” Pilgrim said, “We're walking 
along the main road but it was barred by a torrent of water and we’d not cross it. Then we heard the sound of cymbals and drums, and that led us here to ask you for a night’s lodging.” 

“When you reached the edge of the water,” said the old man, “did you see anything?” 

“Only a stone monument,” said Pilgrim, “with the three-word inscription: Heaven-Reaching River. Below it, there’re the words: a width of eight hundred miles that few have crossed from days of old. 
There’s no other thing.” 

“If you’d gone about a mile inland from the monument,” said one of the old men, “you’d have come upon a temple of the Great King of Numinous Power. But you didn’t see it?” 

“We didn't,” said Pilgrim. “Tell us, old Grandpa, what is this Numinous Power?” 

At once the two old men began to shed tears as they said, “O Venerable Dad! That Great King’s potent to move one place to build his shrine; numinous to bless people far and near. He sends us sweet 
rains from month to month and auspicious clouds from year to year.” 

Pilgrim said, “Sending sweet rains and auspicious clouds indicate good intentions but you're so sad and dejected. Why?” 

Beating their chests and stamping their feet, the old men sighed deeply and said, “O Venerable Dad! Though favours abound there’s also spite. He’d hurt life even when he’s kind. For his love to eat 
virgin boys and girls, he’s no patent god of righteous mind!” 

“So he likes to devour virgin boys and girls?” asked Pilgrim. 

“Yes,” said the old men. 

Pilgrim said, “I suppose it’s your family’s turn now?” 

“Indeed it is,” said one of the old men. “Our village here consists of over one hundred families, and it belongs to the Yuanhui County of the Cart Slow Kingdom. The name of this village of ours is the 
Chen Village. Every year this Great King requires the sacrifice of a virgin boy and a virgin girl in addition to the offering of various kinds of livestock like bulls and sheep. When he has devoured all of 
these to his satisfaction, he would bless us with wind and rain in due season. If there is no such sacrifice for him, he will inflict upon us all kinds of calamity.” 

“How many esteemed sons do you've in your family?” asked Pilgrim. “Alas! Alas!” said the older of the two men, beating his chest. “Why mention ‘esteemed sons’? The term would only embarrass us 
to death! This is my brother, Chen Qing, and I’m called Chen Cheng.? He is fifty-eight and I’m sixty-three, both badly off for children. Since I’d no children even when | was fifty, friends and relatives 
urged me to take a concubine. I'd no choice but to do so and a girl was born later. Her name is One Load of Gold, and she is barely eight this year.” 

“What an expensive name!” said 8 Rules. “Why was she given it?” The old man said, “Since | was childless for so many years, | persisted in repairing bridges and roads, in erecting temples and heaps, 
and in the feasting of monks. | kept a record of all | spent - a few ounces here and a few ounces there — and by the time my daughter was born, I’d spent exactly thirty pounds of gold. Thirty pounds 
make one load, and that was how she got her name.” 

“And does he have a son?” asked Pilgrim. The old man said, “He has, indeed, a son born also of a concubine. He is only seven years old, and his name is Chen Guanbao.”3 “Why such a name?” asked 
Pilgrim, and the old man said, “Because our family worships the Holy Dad Guan, and the child was conceived after prayers were offered to the Holy Dad. That's why he has such a name. The joint age 
of my brother and me is over one hundred and twenty but we've only these two children to perpetuate our families. How could we ever anticipate that the turn to provide the victims would fall on us! We 
dare not, of course, refuse but it is difficult to give up our precious children. It was for the welfare of their souls that we established this plot of ritual in advance, and that was the reason | named it the 
preparatory mass for the dead.” 

When Tripitaka heard these words, he could not restrain the tears from rolling down his cheeks and he said, “Truly it’s like what the proverb says: instead of yellow plums only green plums drop. Old 
Heaven's doubly harsh to a childless man!” 

Pilgrim however, smiled and said, “Let me question him a bit more. Old Grandpa, how much property do you've?” 

The two old men said together, “Quite a bit. We've at least some seven hundred and fifty acres of paddy fields and over a thousand acres of dry fields. There must be some ninety pasture fields, three 
hundred water buffalos, some thirty horses and mules, and countless numbers of bulls, sheep, chickens, and geese. There is more grain in our warehouses than we can consume and more clothing in 
our houses than we can wear. Our property and our wealth, as you can see, are quite sizable.” 

“If you own so much,” said Pilgrim, “it's pathetic that you're so stingy!” 

“How did you come to that conclusion?” said one of the old men. Pilgrim said, “If you’re so well-off, how could you permit your own children to be sacrificed? Throw away fifty ounces of silver and you 
can buy a virgin boy; throw away another hundred ounces and you can buy a virgin girl. You need spend no more than two hundred ounces of silver for all expenses and you'll preserve posterity for 
you and your family. Isn’t that much better?” 

Shedding copious tears, the two old men said, “Venerable Dad! You're not aware of the fact that the Great King is truly so powerful that he knows everything. Why, he even comes frequently to the 
families here.” Pilgrim said, “When he came through, did you ever discover how he looked or how tall he was?” 

“We've never seen his form,” said the two old men. “But whenever we felt a fragrant breeze, it was a sign that the Dad Great King had arrived. Then we’d to burn hurriedly lots of incense and all of us, 
young and old, had to salute toward the wind. He knows everything there is to know of our families here; he can remember even the birth dates and hours of young and old. He will not consider it a 
treat unless he can devour children who are truly ours. Don’t speak of two or three hundred ounces of silver; even if we're to spend several thousand ounces, we’d nowhere to purchase a boy or a girl 
of exactly the same appearance and age.” 

“So, that’s how itis!” said Pilgrim. “All right, all right! Bring out your son and let me take a look at him.” 

Chen Qing went inside at once and carried his son Guanbao out to the front hall, placing him before the lamps. The child of course was wholly unaware of the disaster that was about to descend on 
him. With two sleeves stuffed with preserved fruits and candies, he exercised about as he munched on the goodies. On seeing him, Pilgrim recited a spell silently and shook his body: at once he 
changed into a boy with the exact appearance of that child Guanbao. Now there were two boys holding hands and dancing before the lamps! The old man was so startled that he fell on his knees, 
causing the Tang Monk to cry out, “Venerable Dad, this is blasphemy! Blasphemy!” 

The old man said, “But this Venerable Dad was just speaking to us. How did he manage to take on the appearance of my child all at once? Look, you give them a call, and both of them answer together! 
We're the ones who are not worthy! Please show your true form! Please show your true form!” With a wipe of his own face Pilgrim changed back into his true form. Remaining on his knees, the old man 
said, “So the Venerable Dad has this kind of ability!” 

“Did | look like your son?” asked Pilgrim, laughing. 

“Very much! Very much!” said the old man. “You had exactly the same features, the same voice, the same clothes, and the same height!” 

“You've not even examined me closely,” said Pilgrim. “Bring out the scale and see if I’m of the same weight as his.” 

“Yes! Yes! Yes!” said the old man. “I'd tell that you're exactly of the same weight.” 

“You think I'd serve as the sacrifice?” asked Pilgrim. 

“It's marvellous! Just marvellous!” said the old man. “Of course, you’d serve as the sacrifice.” 

Pilgrim said, “I'll exchange my life for your boy’s so that your family’s posterity will be preserved. I'll present myself as a sacrifice to that Great King.” Respecting as he knelt on the ground, Chen Qing 
said, “If in your compassion you're willing to present yourself as a substitute, I'll present Dad Tang with a thousand ounces of white silver as his travel expenses to the Western Heaven.” 

“And you're not going to thank old monkey?” said Pilgrim. “If you're a sacrificial substitute,” said the old man, “you'll be finished.” 


“What do you mean finished?” said Pilgrim. “The Great King will devour you,” said the old man. 

Pilgrim said, “Does he dare?” 

“If he doesn’t eat you,” said the old man, “it will only be because you're too smelly for his taste.” 

“May Heaven’s will be done!” said Pilgrim, chuckling. “If he eats me, it'll mean that I’m to die young; if he doesn't, it's my luck. Anyway, I'll be your sacrificial substitute.” 

Chen Qing not only respected to thank him but also promised to give the monks an additional five hundred ounces of silver. Chen Cheng however, neither respected nor gave thanks; leaning on one 
of the screens, he wept profusely. Understanding his plight, Pilgrim went up to tug at him and said, “Number One, you're not promising me anything nor are you thanking me. | suppose you must feel 
terrible about parting with your daughter?” 

Going to his knees at once, Chen Cheng said, “No, | can’t part with her. I’m indebted to you, Venerable Dad, for your kindness, and it should be enough that you've saved our nephew. But this old 
moron has no other children except his daughter. If I'd die, she would weep bitterly, too! How could | ever part with her?” 

“Then go quickly and steam five more barrels of rice,” said Pilgrim. “Prepare some fine vegetarian dishes also and let that long-horn master of ours enjoy himself. Then we can ask him to change into 
the form of your daughter, and we two brothers will be your sacrificial substitutes. By saving the lives of your daughter and son, we'll accrue to ourselves secret merit. How about that?” 

Horrified by what he heard, 8 Rules said, “Elder Brother, you can show off your energy as you please! But don’t drag me into this venture without any regard for my life!” 

“Worthy Brother,” said Pilgrim, “the proverb says, ‘Even chickens can eat only food they work for!’ The moment we entered their house, they feted us with a huge banquet while you're complaining that 
you're only half-filled! How could you be unwilling to assist them in their difficulties?” 

“O Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “I don’t know anything about transformation.” 

“What do you mean?” said Pilgrim. “You know thirty-six modes of transformation.” 

“Aware of Ability,” cried Tripitaka, “what your elder brother has just said is certainly right, and what he has proposed is most appropriate. The proverb says, ‘The saving of one life is better than the 
construction of a seven-tiered pagoda.’ In the first place, we’d repay their great kindness to us; in the second, we'd make merit whenever possible by the performance of good works. Since there is no 
other thing you must attend to in this cool night, you and your brother can go and have some fun.” 

“Look at the way Master talks!” said 8 Rules. “I may know how to change into a mountain, a tree, a rock, a scabby elephant, a water buffalo, or a stout fellow. But it'll be rather difficult for me to change 
into a small young girl!” 

“Don’t believe him, Number One,” said Pilgrim. “Bring out your precious daughter.” Chen Cheng dashed inside and brought out his child, One Load of Gold. At the same time, his whole family, including 
his wife and his concubine, young and old, all came out to the front hall to kneel before the monks and respect, begging them to save the girl's life. The girl was wearing on her head a patterned emerald 
fillet with dangling pearl and precious stone pendants; she had on a coat of red silk shot with yellow, covered by a cape of mandarin green satin with chess-board patterned collar. Around her waist 
was tied a silk skirt with bright red flowers. She also had on a pair of gold-kneed trousers and a pair of light pink toad’s-head patterned shoes made of hemp thread. And she was munching on some 
fruits, too. “Eight Rules,” said Pilgrim, “that’s the girl. Change into her form quickly so that we can be sacrificed.” 

“O Brother!” said 8 Rules. “She’s so delicate and lovely! How could | do it?” 

“Quick!” said Pilgrim. “Don’t ask for a beating!” Alarmed, 8 Rules said, “Elder Brother, don’t beat me! Let me try and see what happens!” 

This Idiot recited a spell and shook his head several times, crying, “Change!” Indeed, his head took on the features of the little girl but his belly remained as big as ever so that his hulking frame bore 
hardly any resemblance to the girl’s. “Change some more!” cried Pilgrim, laughing. 

“You can beat me all you want,” said 8 Rules, “but | can’t change anymore. What am | to do?” 

“You can’t take on the head of a girl,” said Pilgrim, “and the body of a priest! You'd be neither boy nor girl, and that wouldn’t be good, would it? Why don’t you assume the star posture and see what | 
can do for you?” He blew a mouthful of magic breath onto 8 Rules whose body at once took on the form of the little girl. Then Pilgrim said to the two old men, “Please take your relatives, your son and 
daughter inside so that we'll not be confused with them. | fear that after a while, my brother may become slothful and sneak inside, and it’ll be difficult for you to tell them apart. Give your children plenty 
of nice fruits and candies and make certain that they don’t cry. | don’t want that Great King to get wind of our plans. We two will have some fun and be off.” 

Dear Great Sage! He gave instructions for Sand-monk to stand guard over the Tang Monk while he and 8 Rules assumed the exact forms of Chen Guanbao and One Load of Gold. After the two of 
them made all the preparations, Pilgrim asked, “How are we to be presented, trussed up or just bound? Steamed or chopped to pieces?” 

“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “don’t pull any more tricks on me! | don’t have that kind of ability!” 

“No, No!” said one of the old men. “All we need are two red lacquered trays, on which we'll ask both of you to sit. The trays will be placed on top of two tables that will then be carried to the temple by 
some of our houseboys.” 

“Fine! Fine!” said Pilgrim. “Bring out the trays and let us try them.” The old man took out the lacquered trays; Pilgrim and 8 Rules sat in them, after which four houseboys lifted up two tables and walked 
into the courtyard. Delighted, Pilgrim said, “Eight Rules, a couple of turns like this and we'll be priests who have ascended the tray-platform!” 

“If they carry us inside,” said 8 Rules, “and carry us out again, I'll not be afraid even if they go back and forth until tomorrow morning. But once they take us into the temple, we'll be devoured, and that’s 
no game!” 

“Just watch me,” said Pilgrim. “When he seizes me and tries to eat me, you can flee.” 

“But how'd | know whom he will eat first?” asked 8 Rules. “If he eats the virgin boy first, | can flee, of course. But if he wants to eat the virgin girl first, what am | to do?” 

“During one of the sacrifices some years ago,” said the old man, “a few people courageous enough hid themselves behind the temple or beneath the offering tables. They saw that he ate the boy first 
before he devoured the girl.” 

8 Rules said, “That's my luck! That’s my luck!” 

As the brothers were talking, a loud din of gongs and drums could be heard outside the house, now lit up also by the light of many torches and lamps. The people of the same village came to pound at 
the front gate, crying, “Bring out the virgin boy and the virgin girl!” As the old men wept and wailed, the 4 houseboys lifted the tables and carried the 2 of them away. 


048 

The demon raising a cold wind, sends a great snowfall; the monk intent on seeing God, walks on layered ice 
Those worshippers from the Chen Village who carried Pilgrim and 8 Rules along with various offerings of livestock, straight to the Temple of Numinous Power. The virgin boy and girl were placed on 
top of the offerings. Pilgrim tumed his head and saw that there were incense, flowers, and candles on the offering tables, in the middle of which there was also a tablet inscribed in gold letters with the 
title: “God of the Great King of Numinous Power.” There was no other image of any deity. After the worshippers had set out everything properly, they knelt down and respected toward the tablet, saying 
in unison, “Great King Dad, in this year, this month, this day, and this hour, Chen Cheng, the one in charge of the sacrifice and the leader of all the faithful of the Chen Village, young and old, does 
follow our annual custom and offer to you a virgin boy by the name of Chen Guanbao and a virgin girl by the name of One Load of Gold. Bulls and sheep in the same number are presented to you also 
for your enjoyment. We pray that you'll grant us rain and wind in due season and a rich harvest of the five grains.” After they made this invocation, they burned paper money and horses before returning 
to their houses. When 8 Rules saw that the people had dispersed, he said to Pilgrim, “Let's go home, too.” 
“Where’s your home?” asked Pilgrim. 8 Rules said, “I want to go back to old Chen’s house to sleep.” 
“Idiot,” said Pilgrim, “you’re babbling again! If you’ve agreed to do this for him, you've got to finish the job.” 
“You call me an idiot,” said 8 Rules. “Aren't you the real idiot? We’re supposed to have some fun with the Chens and fool with them a bit. You can’t be serious that you want us sacrificed?” 
“If we help someone,” said Pilgrim, “we must help him to the end. We must wait until that Great King arrives and devours us before we can consider a perfect end to our efforts! If he has no sacrifice, 
he will send calamities to the village, and that will not be right.” 
As he spoke, they heard the wind how! outside. “O dear!” said 8 Rules. “When the wind blows like that, it must mean that the thing’s here!” 
“Shut up!” cried Pilgrim. “Let me do the talking!” 
In a moment, a fiend arrived at the door of the temple. Look at the way he appears: gold helmet and cuirass both bright and new; a treasure sash like red clouds wrapped his waist. His eyes seemed 
big stars blazing in the night; teeth resembled those of a heavy saw. Waves of mists did encircle both his legs and steamy fog surrounded all his frame. He walked and a cold wind stirred repeatedly; 
stood and baleful aura rose in tiers. He looked like the Curtain-Raising Captain or the great god of a monastery’s gate. Standing right at the doorway, the fiend asked, “Which family this year’s providing 
the sacrifice?” 
Laughing merrily, Pilgrim said, “Thank you for asking! Those in charge are Chen Cheng and Chen Qing.” 
Puzzled by this answer, the fiend thought to himself, “This virgin boy isn’t only bold but also articulate. Usually the victims in the past couldn’t even reply to the first question and they'd be frightened out 
of their wits at the second one. By the time | seized them with my hands, they'd already be as good as dead. How’s it that this virgin boy today can still respond so intelligently?” Not bold enough to 
seize his prey immediately, the fiend asked once more, “What're the names of the boy and the girl?” 
With a laugh, Pilgrim said, “The virgin boy’s called Chen Guanbao and the virgin girl’s called One Load of Gold.” 
“This sacrifice,” said the fiend, “happens to be an annual custom. Now that you've been offered to me, I’m going to eat you.” 
“| daren’t resist you,” said Pilgrim. “Please feel free to enjoy yourself.” When the fiendish creature heard this, he was even more reluctant to raise his hands. Standing there in the doorway, he shouted, 
“Don’t you dare be impudent! In years past I'd eat the virgin boy first. But this year, I’m going to eat the virgin girl first.” 
“O Great King,” said 8 Rules, horrified, “please follow the old way! Don’t eat by breaking a usual custom!” 
Without permitting further discussion, the fiend stretched out his hands to seize 8 Rules. With a bound Idiot leaped down from the offering table and changed back into his true form. Whipping out his 
rake, he brought it down hard on the hands of the fiend. The fiend retreated hurriedly and tried to flee but not before the blow of 8 Rules sent something to the ground with a clang. “I’ve punctured his 
armour!” shouted 8 Rules. As he changed back into his true form also, Pilgrim stepped forward to have a look and found that there were two fish scales about the size of ice dishes. “Chase him!” he 
yelled, and the two of them leaped into the air. Since that creature thought he was coming to a feast, he brought no weapon along. With bare hands he stood on the edge of the clouds and asked, 
“Monks where did you come from? How dare you come to oppress me here, rob me of my offerings, and ruin my name?” 
“So, you're an ignorant, brazen creature!” said Pilgrim. “We're disciples of the holy monk Tripitaka from the Great Tang in the Land of the East who was sent by royal decree to go to the Westem 
Heaven for scriptures. When we stayed with the Chen family last night, we heard that there was a perverse demon who falsely assumed the title of Numinous Power. Every year he demands a virgin 
boy and a virgin girl as sacrifice. In compassion we wanted to save lives and arrest you, you lawless creature. Confess at once. How many years have you called yourself Great King of this place, and 
how many boys and girls have you devoured? Give us a detailed account and we may spare your life.” 
When that fiend heard these words, he turned and fled immediately. 8 Rules tried to strike at him again with the muck-rake but did not succeed for the fiend changed into a violent gust of wind that 
faded into the Heaven-Reaching River. “No need to chase him anymore,” said Pilgrim. “This fiend has to be a creature of the river. Let’s wait till tomorrow before we try to catch him and ask him to take 
Master across the river.” 8 Rules agreed and both of them returned to the temple and hauled all the offerings and livestock, including the tables on which they were laden, back to the Chen house. At 
that time, the elder, Sand-monk, and the Chen brothers were all waiting for some news of them, when suddenly, they saw the two disciples dumping the sacrificial animals and offerings in the courtyard. 
“Wukong,” said Tripitaka, going forward to meet them, “how did the sacrifice go?” 
Pilgrim gave a thorough account of how they revealed their names and how the fiend disappeared into the river. The two old men were most pleased, and they at once gave the order for rooms to be 
made ready and bedding laid out for master and disciples to rest. The fiend escaped with his life and went back to his water palace. After he sat down, he fell completely silent for such a long time that 
his watery kinsfolk, young and old, all gathered about him to ask, “Great King, you're usually quite happy when you come home after the sacrifice. Why is it that you seem so annoyed this year?” 
“After I’ve satisfied myself in past years,” said the fiend, “l usually managed to bring some leftovers for you to enjoy. Today however, not even | myself got anything to eat. | was so unlucky that | ran 
into an adversary and almost lost my life.” 
“Which adversary was that, Great King?” they asked. 
The fiend said, “A disciple of a holy monk of the Great Tang in the Land of the East who was on his way to seek scriptures from God in the Western Heaven. He took on the form of a virgin girl while 
another disciple became the boy, both sitting in the temple. When they changed back into their original forms, | was nearly killed by the two of them. I've long heard that Tripitaka Tang happened to be 


a good man who had been practicing self-cultivation for ten disciples. To eat even one piece of his flesh would prolong one’s life indefinitely but | didn’t realise that he had such disciples under him. Not 
only has my reputation been ruined by them but also the offerings due me were taken away. I'd like very much to catch hold of that Tang Monk but | fear that | may be unable to.” 

From among the watery kinsfolk stepped a stripe-coated perch-mum who wriggled and saluted toward the fiend, saying with a smile, “Great King, if you want to catch the Tang Monk, it isn’t difficult at 
all. But | wonder if you’d be willing to reward me with some juice and meat once you catch hold of him.” 

“If you’d devise a plan and succeed in capturing the Tang Monk,” said the fiend, “I’d become your bond-brother. We two shall share the same table to feast on him.” After thanking him, the perch-mum 
said, “I’ve known for a long time that the Great King possesses the magic to summon winds and rains and to stir up seas and rivers. May | ask whether you’re able to cause snow to descend?” 

“Of course,” said the fiend. She asked again, “How about making ice and causing things to freeze over?” The fiend said, “Certainly.” 

“In that case,” said the perch-mum, clapping her hands and laughing, “it’s most easy! It's most easy!” 

“Tell me what it is that’s most easy,” said the fiend. 

The perch-mum said, “When it is about the hour of the third watch this night, the Great King should exercise his power without any further delay. Call up a cold wind and send down a great snowfall so 
that the entire Heaven-Reaching River will be solidly frozen. Those of us capable of transformation will assume human forms: carrying luggage, holding umbrellas, and pushing carts, we'll follow the 
direction of the main road to the West and walk continuously on the ice on top of the river. That Tang Monk must be rather impatient to get to the scriptures, and when he sees people walking about 
like that, he too will want to cross the river by walking on the ice. The Great King can sit quietly at the heart of the river; as soon as you hear the sound of their footsteps, crack open the ice so that he 
and his disciples will fall into the water. All of them will be captured then.” When that fiend heard these words, he was exceedingly pleased. “Marvellous! Marvellous!” he cried, and he left his water 
residence at once to rise into the air. There he began to raise up a cold wind to bring snow and to cause everything to freeze up. The Tang elder and his disciples, the 4 of them sleeping in the Chen 
household. Just before dawn, all of them began to feel the chill even inside their blankets and their pillows turning cold. Sneezing and shivering, 8 Rules could no longer sleep, and he called out, “Elder 
Brother, it’s very cold!” 

“Idiot, why don’t you grow up!” said Pilgrim. “Those who have left the family cannot be touched by heat or cold. How could you be afraid of the cold?” 

Tripitaka said, “Disciple, it is indeed cold. Look! Even the heavy quilts provide no warmth and hands in sleeves feel like ice. Presently frost buds dangle from withered leaves and icy bells form on the 
hoary pines. The ground cracks for the severe cold; the pond’s level as the water's frozen. No old fisher is seen on any boat, nor a monk at the mountain temple. Wood's scarce and the woodman’s 
sad; charcoals added and the noble’s glad. The soldier's beard is like iron; the poet’s brush is all hardened. A leather coat still seems too thin; a fur robe feels even too light. On straw mats old priests 
turn stiff; by paper screens no traveller can sleep. Though brocade covers are heavy, your whole body shivers and shakes!” 

Neither master nor disciples could sleep any longer; they scrambled up, and after putting on their clothes they opened the door to look outside. Ah! It was completely white for it was snowing. “No 
wonder you're complaining of the cold,” said Pilgrim. “It's snowing heavily!” The 4 of them stared at it. Marvellous snow! 

See dark clouds densely formed — grey fog thickly gathered — dark clouds densely formed as a frigid wind howls throughout the sky; grey fog densely gathered as a great snowfall covers the earth. 
Truly it is like a flower that blooms 6 times, each petal a precious jasper; or 1000-tree forest, each plant bedecked with jade. In a moment: piles of flour! In an instant: heaps of salt! The white parrot has 
lost its essence; the frosty crane can’t boast of its cost. You add to all rivers of Wu and Chu or press down plum blossoms of the southeast. Now it seems like vanquished jade dragons, some 3000000 
strong — indeed like torn scales and ripped armour flying through the air. Where can one find Dong-Guo’s shoes, ‘Yuan An’s resting place, 2or the glow by which Sun Kang studied? *Nor can one see 
Ziyou’s boat, ‘Wang Gong’s robe, ‘or blankets that fed Su Wu. All you’ve are some village huts of silver bricks and a country side kneaded out of jade. Marvellous snow — willow fleeces overspreading 
bridges; pear blossoms coating houses. Willow fleeces overspreading bridges as a fisher hangs up his coir-coat by the bridge; pear blossoms coating houses as wild codgers burn tree roots in houses. 
The guests find it hard to buy juice; the old servant cannot find the plums. Flitting and fluttering like butterfly wings; drifting and soaring like goose down; churning and rolling it follows the wind; in heaps 
and mounds it hides the roads. In waves the chilly might pierces the screens; soughing, the cold air penetrates the drapes. A good year’s fine omens drop from the sky to wish humans in their affairs 
success. That snow came down fluttering, like flying threads of silk and finely cut chips of jade. After master and disciples gazed at it for a while, admiring its beauty, they saw the elder Chen approaching 
as two houseboys swept open a path. Two more brought along hot water for them to wash their faces after which others presented hot tea and milk cakes. Then they carried charcoal fires into the 
parlour and invited master and disciples to sit inside. “Old Benefactor,” asked the elder, “may | inquire whether the seasons of your region are divided into spring, summer, autumn, and winter?” 

With a smile, the elder Chen said, “Though ours is a rather out-of-the-way region, only our people and customs are different from those of a noble nation. But all the grains and livestock share the 
benefits of the same Heaven and the same sun. How’d the four seasons be lacking?” 

“If so,” said Tripitaka, “how is it that we've such a great snowfall at this time of the year and such a terrible cold?” 

The elder Chen said, “Though this is only the seventh month, we just passed White Dew’ yesterday, and that means that we're approaching the eighth month. In this place of ours, we've frost and snow 
during the eighth month.” 

“That's quite different from our Land of the East,” said Tripitaka, “for we never have snow back there until winter actually arrives.” 

As they conversed, the servants came forward once more to set the tables for them to dine on rice gruel. After the meal, the snow fell even more heavily, and soon it was two feet deep on the ground. 
Growing more and more anxious, Tripitaka began to weep. “Venerable Dad, please do not worry,” said the elder Chen. “Please don’t let the deep snow bother you. We've stored up in our house a 
considerable amount of food, and, | dare say, sufficient to feed all of you for quite a long time.” Tripitaka said, “You don’t understand my sorrow, Old Benefactor. In that past year when | was entrusted 
with the decree to acquire scriptures, His Majesty personally escorted me outside the capital. With his own hand holding the goblet to toast me, the Tang emperor asked me, ‘When can you return?’ 
Not having any idea of the dangers of mountains and waters, this humble priest replied rather casually, ‘After three years I'll be able to return to our nation with the scriptures.’ Since we parted, it has 
been seven or eight years, and I’ve yet to see the face of God. I've great fear that | might have exceeded the imperial limit, and | also am troubled by the viciousness of demons and monsters. Today it 
is my good fortune to live in your great mansion. After the small service rendered you by my foolish disciples last night, I'd hopes that I'd ask you for a boat to cross the river. Little did | expect that 
Heaven would send down this great snowfall to block and cover all the roads. Now | wonder when I'd attain my goal and be able to return home.” 

“Relax, Venerable Dad,” said the elder Chen, “for after all, many days of your journey have passed already. It does not matter if you spend a few more days here. When the weather clears and the ice 
melts, this old moron will see to it that you cross the river, even if I've to exhaust my wealth to do it.” 

Just then, a houseboy came to invite them to breakfast. After they finished that in the front hall, they hardly had time to converse when lunch was served also. Troubled by the sight of the elaborately 
prepared meal, Tripitaka said in great earnestness, “If you’re kind enough to take us in, you must treat us as ordinary members of the family.” 

‘Venerable Dad,” said elder Chen, “we're deeply indebted to you for saving our children’s lives. Even if we're to feast you every day, we’d never repay you sufficiently.” 

Thereafter the snow stopped, and people soon began to come and go once more. When the elder Chen saw how unhappy Tripitaka appeared to be, he asked that the garden be swept out. After a 
huge brazier with fire was sent for, he invited the whole party to spend some time in a snow cave. “This old fellow doesn’t quite use his head!” said 8 Rules, laughing. “One can admire the garden in 
the second or the third month during the time of spring. But after such a big snowfall, and it’s so cold now, what's there for us to admire?” 

Pilgrim said, “Idiot, you’re ignorant! The scenery of snow quite naturally has a mysterious calm, something which not only we can enjoy but which also can console our master.” 

“Exactly! Exactly!” said the elder Chen. Following his beckoning, they went to the garden and they saw a scenery of late autumn when prospects of La® appeared. Jade-like buds formed on hoary pines; 
silver blooms hung on lifeless willows. Jade-moss beneath the steps heaped up powder; bamboos before the window sprouted jasper roots. On artificial mountains — in domestic fish ponds - on artful 
rockeries pointed peaks were ranged like shoots of jade; in garden fish ponds the clear, running water became ice trays. By the banks the colour of hibiscus faded and their tender twigs all drooped 
near the ridge. Begonia plants were completely crushed; winter-plum trees brought forth new branches. The peony, the pomegranate, and the cassia arbours - every arbour was piled high with goose 
down; the place of enjoyment, entertainment, and amusement - each place was covered with butterfly wings. 2 fences of chrysanthemum: white jade framed in gold; a few maple trees: lovely red lined 
with white. Since countless courtyards were too cold to reach, you might admire the snow cave chilly as ice. Inside sat a beast-face brazier with elephant legs in which a hot charcoal fire had just begun. 
All around were some lacquered armchairs draped with tiger skins by the paper windows set so warm and soft. Inside the cave, there were hung on walls several old paintings by famous hands, themes 
of which all had to do with 7 worthies going through the pass, %a cold river's lonely fisher, ‘°the scenes of snow-bound mountain plateaus; Su Wu feeding on his blanket, breaking a plum-twig for the 
mailman, "‘and frigid art wrought by trees and plants of jade. You can’t begin to describe the house by the waters where fishes are easily bought or how scarce is juice when snow buries the roads. 
Truly this is a place most worthy to linger in. Think of it and you needn't visit Penghu. ‘2After they had admired the scenery for a long while, they sat down in the snow cave and chatted with some of 
the aged neighbours on the matter of acquiring scriptures. When they finished drinking some fragrant tea, the elder Chen asked again, “Would the several Venerable Dads take some juice?” 

“This humble cleric does not drink,” said Tripitaka, “but my disciples may drink a few cups of vegetarian juice.” 

Delighted, the elder Chen at once gave the order: “Bring fruits and vegetables, and warm the juice. We'd like to help our guests ward off the chill.” 

The houseboys and servants brought forth tables and small braziers for heating the juice. The pilgrims and the neighbours each drank a few cups before the utensils were taken away. Soon it was 
dusk, and they were taken back to the front hall again for dinner. Just then, someone walking on the street was heard saying, “What chilly weather! Even the Heaven-Reaching River's frozen!” 

On hearing this, Tripitaka said, “Wukong, if the river is frozen, what we'll do?” 

“This sudden cold,” said the elder Chen, “must have frozen only the shallow parts of the river near the bank.” But the man walking on the street was saying, “All eight hundred miles across the river are 
so solidly frozen that its surface is smooth like a mirror. Even people are walking on it.” When Tripitaka heard that there were people walking on the river, he immediately wanted to go and look. “Please 
be patient, Venerable Dad,” said the elder Chen, “for it’s getting late now. We'll go tomorrow.” 

They took leave of the neighbours, and after dinner, they rested in the parlours as they had the night before. When they arose the next moming, 8 Rules said, “Elder Brother, last night’s even colder. 
The river, | suppose, must be solidly frozen.” 

Facing the door, Tripitaka knelt down and saluted toward Heaven, saying, “All you great Guardians of the Faith, your disciple’s with complete sincerity resolved to journey to the West to see God. 
Throughout the bitter experience of traversing mountains and streams, I’ve never once complained. Having reached this place, | thank Heaven for providing assistance by freezing the river. Your 
disciples therefore wish to offer you our thanksgiving first. After we’ve acquired the scriptures, we'll inform the Tang emperor so that he may repay this favour of yours with all due reverence.” After he 
finished praying, he ordered Awakened to Purity immediately to saddle the horse so that they could walk on the ice to cross the river. “Please be patient,” said the elder Chen again. “Wait for a few 
days until the snow and ice melt away. This old moron will prepare a boat to take you across.” 

“| don’t think we'd settle on staying or leaving,” said Sand-monk, “for what we hear isn’t as reliable as what we see. Let me saddle the horse but Master should go personally to the river to have a look.” 
“You're right,” said the elder Chen. “Little ones, go and saddle six horses at once. But don’t saddle Dad Tang’s horse yet.” 

With 6 houseboys following, all of them went to the bank of the river to look. Truly there were snow piles rising up like hills as sunlight broke up the clouds of dawn. The southern border froze to turn 
barren all peaks; ice formed to make lakes and rivers flat and smooth. The wind was cold and biting; the ground was hard and slippery. Pond fishes cuddled dense weeds; wild birds hugged dead 
branches. Travellers abroad all lost their fingers; the river boatman’s teeth madly chattered. Snake bellies split; bird feet snapped. Truly the icebergs rose a thousand feet tall. Cold silver floated in 
countless ravines; the whole river seemed one cold piece of jade. The East might think that they produced silkworms but the North in truth had their caves of rats. Here Wang Xiang lay; ‘Shere Guangwu 
crossed. "In one night even the river bottom all hardened! The winding stream formed jagged layers; the deep river turned frozen blocks. Not a ripple throughout the water's width, it seemed a road on 
land, just bright and smooth. When Tripitaka and the others came up to the river’s edge, they stopped the horses to look, and true enough, there were people walking on to the ice from the main road. 
“Benefactor,” said Tripitaka, “where are those people going on the ice?” The elder Chen said, “On the far side of the river is the Western Kingdom of Women, and these people must be traders. Things 
worth a hundred pennies on our side can fetch a hundred times more over there, and their things worth a hundred pennies can similarly fetch a handsome price over here. In view of such heavy profits, 
itis understandable that people want to make this journey without regard for life or death. Usually, five or seven people, and the number may even swell to more than ten, will crowd into a boat to cross 
the river. When they see that the river is frozen now, they are risking everything to try to cross it on foot.” 

“Profit and fame,” said Tripitaka, “are regarded as most important in the affairs of the world; for profit, men would give up their own lives. But the fact that this disciple strives so hard to fulfil the imperial 
decree may also be taken as his quest for fame. Am | so different really from those people?” He turned around and said, “Wukong, go quickly back to our Benefactor’s home and pack. Saddle up the 
horse, too. Let’s make use of the ice and leave for the West at once.” 

Smiling broadly, Pilgrim obeyed. “O Master,” said Sand-monk, “the proverb says, ‘In a thousand days, you only eat a thousand pecks of rice.’ You're already indebted to the hospitality of Mr. Chen. 
Why not stay a few more days and wait until the weather turns warmer, when we can cross with a boat? Otherwise, | fear that all this hurry may cause us to make mistakes.” 

“Awakened to Purity,” said Tripitaka, “how could you be so unthinking? If this were during the second month of the year, one might well expect the weather to warm up day by day and the snow to melt 
eventually. But this is after all the eighth month, and it will grow colder and colder from now on. How could you expect the ice to break so readily? If we're to wait, wouldn't our trip be delayed, perhaps 
even up to half a year?” 


Leaping down from the horse, 8 Rules said, “Stop arguing, all of you and let Old bull test it to see what the thickness of the ice’s.” 

“Idiot,” said Pilgrim, “you threw a stone the other night and succeeded in testing the depth of the water. But the ice now is solid and heavy. How could you test it?” 

“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “you don’t realise that | can give the ice a blow with my rake. If it breaks open, it will be too thin for us to walk on but if it does not, it will be thick enough. There’s no reason 
for us not to want to walk on it.” 

“Yes,” said Tripitaka, “what you said is quite reasonable.” Hitching up his robe and walking forward in great strides, Idiot went to the edge of the river. He raised the muckrake high with both hands and 
brought it down with all his might. A loud thud could be heard and nine white marks were left on the ice while Idiot's hands were shortly numbed by the impact. “You can walk on it! You can walk on it!” 
said he, laughing. “Even the bottom is solid!” 

When Tripitaka heard this, he was very pleased. He went back hurriedly to the Chen household and all he could say was that they had to leave at once. When those two old men found that all their 
earnest pleas for him to remain fell only on deaf ears, they had no alternative but to prepare some such dried food as baked biscuits and breads to give to the pilgrims. As the whole family came out to 
respect to them, the old men also brought out a tray of gold and silver. Going to their knees, they said, “We thank you again, Venerable Dads, for saving our children. Please take this, just for a meal 
on your way.” Shaking his head and waving his hand, Tripitaka refused to accept it, saying, “This humble monk is a person who has left the family. I've no need of money. Even if | were to keep it, I’d 
not dare use it on our way, for begging is our proper means of livelihood. It is more than enough for us to take the dried goods.” The two old men pleaded with him repeatedly; so Pilgrim stuck his finger 
into the tray and lifted up a tiny piece, approximately as heavy as four or five drams that he handed over to the Tang Monk, saying, “Master, keep it as their offering so that these two won't be too 
disappointed.” 

They thus said farewell and the pilgrims went to the river but when the horse stepped onto the ice, it began to slip and slide and Tripitaka was almost thrown off its back. “Master,” shouted Sand-monk, 
“we can’t go!” 

“Stop for a moment,” said 8 Rules, “and let's ask Mr. Chen for some straw.” 

“What for?” asked Pilgrim. 

8 Rules replied, “You’d not have any idea about this! The straw will be used to wrap up the hoofs of the horse, so that Master won't fall down.” 

When the elder Chen heard on the shore what 8 Rules said, he told someone to fetch the straw at once. After the Tang Monk returned to the bank and dismounted, 8 Rules wrapped all four hoofs of 
the horse with straw and that enabled it to step on the ice without slipping. Having taken leave of the Chen clan at the edge of the river, they proceeded for no more than 3 or 4 miles when 8 Rules 
handed the 9-ringed priestly staff to the Tang Monk, saying, “Master, put this across your saddle.” 

“Idiot,” said Pilgrim, “don’t be so sly! You’re supposed to carry this priestly staff. Why are you asking Master to do it?” 

“Since you've no experience in walking on ice,” said 8 Rules, “you'll not think of this. Even the thickest of ice has holes; step on one of them and you'll plunge into the water. Without something like this 
held crosswise, you'll sink rapidly while the ice above closes in like a huge wok cover. You can never crawl out again unless you've something like this to stop your fall.” Snickering, Pilgrim said to 
himself, “This Idiot must have walked on ice for years!” So, all of them followed what 8 Rules told them to do: the elder held the staff crosswise across his saddle; Pilgrim and Sand-monk each carried 
his iron rod and his fiend-routing treasure staff across his shoulders. 8 Rules who was poling the luggage, tied the rake sideways at his waist. Master and disciples then felt perfectly safe to proceed. 
They journeyed until evening; after eating some dried goods, they dared not stop at all. As the stars and the moon lighted up the ice, turning it into brilliant patches of white, they pressed forward. 
Indeed, the horse never stopped trotting for the entire night; master and disciples never once closed their eyes. By morning, they ate some more of their provisions and again set out toward the West. 
As they journeyed, a rending sound came from the bottom of the ice, so frightening the white horse that it almost fell. Greatly astonished, Tripitaka said, “O Disciples, why was there such a sound?” 
“This river is so solidly frozen,” said 8 Rules, “that the ice formed from top to bottom must be grating the river bed. That may be the sound we heard.” Astonished but pleased by what he was told, 
Tripitaka urged his horse on and they started out once more. 

We now tell you about that fiend who led various spirits from the water residence and sat waiting for a long time beneath the ice. Finally, when the sound of the horse’s hoofs became audible, he at 
once exercised his magic power and caused the ice to break open. The Great Holy Sun managed to leap at once into the air but his three companions and the white horse all plunged into the water. 
After catching hold of Tripitaka, the fiend led the spirits back to the water residence where he shouted aloud, “Where are you, perch-sister?” The old perch-mum met him at the door, saluting, and said, 
“Great King, I’m not worthy of it!” 

“Worthy Sister, why do you say that?” said the fiend. “For ‘Even a team of horses cannot overtake the word that has left my mouth!’ | promised you that if your plan could enable me to catch the Tang 
Monk, I’d become your bond-brother. Today your marvellous plan did materialize, and the Tang Monk had been caught. You think I'd retract my promise?” He then gave the order, “Little ones, bring 
out the tables and the sharp knives. Cut up this monk: take out his heart, skin him, and debone him. Meanwhile, start the poems. I’m going to share him with my worthy Sister, so that both of us will 
gain longevity.” 

“Great King,” said the perch-mum, “let’s not eat him yet, for | fear that his disciples may spoil our party should they come here to search for him. Wait a couple of days and if no one appears, we can 
then cut him up. Great King can take your honoured seat while the watery kinsfolk can surround you with reciting and dancing. His flesh will be presented to you, and you can take your time to enjoy 
your feast. Isn't that much better?” 

The fiend agreed; the Tang Monk was placed in a lidded stone box about 6 feet long thay was then hidden in the rear of the palace. 8 Rules and Sand-monk managed to recover the luggage in the 
water. After they had placed it on the white horse, they opened up a path in the water and trod on the waves to rise to the surface. Pilgrim saw them from mid-air and asked at once, “Where’s Master?” 
“He changed his family name to Sink,”*> said 8 Rules, “and his given name is To-the-Bottom. We don’t know where to look for him. Let’s get to shore before we decide what to do.” 8 Rules happened 
to be the disciple of the Marshal of Heavenly Reeds who in past years was a commander of eighty thousand marines stationed in the Heavenly River. Sand-monk came from the Flowing-Sand River, 
and the white horse, too, was the descendant of Dragon King of the Western Ocean. That was why all of them felt so comfortable in the water. Led by the Great Sage in the air, they soon returned to 
the eastern shore where they brushed down the horse and stripped themselves of their wet garments. After the Great Sage dropped down from the clouds, they went together to the Chen Village. At 
once someone went to make this report to the 2 old men: “Four Dads went to seek the scriptures but only three have come back.” 

The two brothers went quickly out the door to receive them, and they found the clothing of the pilgrims still dripping wet. “Venerable Dads,” they said, “we pleaded with you to stay and you refused. 
You'd stop only when you came to this! Now where’s Monk Tripitaka?” 

8 Rules said, “He’s no longer named Tripitaka, for he’s changed it to Sink-to-the-Bottom.” 

As tears fell, the two old men said, “How pitiful! How pitiful! We said we'd prepare a boat for him to cross the river but he absolutely refused and that cost him his life.” 

“Old fellow,” said Pilgrim, “it's no use worrying for the dead. But I've a hunch that Master is going to live for a long time yet. Old monkey knows! It’s to be that Great King of Numinous Power who's 
planned all this and abducted him. Don’t worry now. Wash our clothes for us and dry our rescript. Make sure our white horse’s fed and let’s brothers go and find that fellow. We'll not only rescue our 
master but we'll root out also this evil for your entire village so that you'll be able to live peacefully forever.” When the 2 brothers heard these words, they were delighted and asked for food for the 
pilgrims at once. After the 3 brothers had a big meal, they gave the horse and the luggage to the Chen family to look after. Each wielding his own weapon, they went straight to the river to search for 
their master and seize the fiend. Truly wrong to walk on thick ice, nature is hurt. What’s perfection when great elixir leaks? 


049 
Tripitaka meets disaster and sinks to a water home; Guanyin reveals a fish basket to bring salvation 
The Great Sage Sun, 8 Rules, and Sand-monk took leave of the elder Chen and went to the edge of the river. “Brothers,” said Pilgrim, “the two of you must decide which one will go first into the water.” 
8 Rules said, “Elder Brother, neither of us is particularly capable. You're the one who should enter the water first.” 
“To tell you the truth, Worthy Brother,” said Pilgrim, “if this were a monster-spirit in a mountain, there would be no need for both of you to exert yourselves. But | can’t quite do business in water. If | 
were to go into the ocean or walk in a river, I'd have to make the water-repelling sign with my fingers, or else I'd have to change into a fish or a crab before I’d go in. Since I'd to make the sign, I'd be 
unable to use my iron rod properly to attack the fiend. But both of you're used to water, and that’s why I’m asking you to go.” 
“Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “we can go in all right but we don’t know what to expect once we reach the river bottom. | think we'd all go in; you can change into some kind of creature, and | can 
carry you along as | open up a path in the water. Once we find the lair of the fiend, you can then go inside and scout the place. If Master is still there unharmed, we can begin our assault at once with 
all our might. But if it were not this fiend who used the magic, or if Master had been drowned or eaten already by him, then there would be no need for us to engage in this bitter quest. We might as well 
go off in another direction as quickly as possible. How about that?” 
“What you said, Worthy Brother,” said Pilgrim, “is most reasonable. Which one of you'll carry me?” 
Secretly pleased, 8 Rules thought to himself, “I don’t know how many times this ape has made a fool of me! So he doesn’t know how to handle himself in water. Let Old bull carry him and give him a 
taste of his tricks!” Laughing amiably, Idiot said, “Elder Brother, I'll carry you.” 
At once perceiving his intentions, Pilgrim nonetheless played along with him, saying, “All right, that’s fine. Your arms might be even a bit stronger than Awakened to Purity’s.” 
Thus 8 Rules carried Pilgrim on his back. As Sand-monk divided the water to make a path, the three brothers all plunged into the Heaven-Reaching River. After journeying for over a hundred miles 
toward the bottom, that Idiot was about to play a trick on Pilgrim who at once pulled off a piece of hair that he changed into a spurious form of himself clinging to the back of 8 Rules. His true self was 
changed into a bull louse securely lodged in one of 8 Rules’ ears. As 8 Rules walked along, he suddenly and deliberately stumbled so that Pilgrim was sent flying over his head. The spurious form 
however, was only a transformed piece of hair; once it left the back of 8 Rules, it drifted away with the current and soon vanished. “Second Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “how would you explain 
this? Why didn’t you walk more carefully? It would have been all right if you had fallen in the mud. Now the jolt has sent Big Brother off to who knows where!” 
8 Rules said, “That monkey can’t even stand a fall: just once and he’s melted already. Brother, don’t worry whether he’s dead or alive. You and | can go search for Master.” 
“It's no good,” said Sand-monk, “for we must have him. Though he may not feel at home in water, he is far more agile than we. If he’s not around, I'll not go with you.” 
Unable to contain himself any longer, Pilgrim inside 8 Rules’ ear shouted with a loud voice, “Awakened to Purity, old monkey's right here!” 
On hearing this, Sand-monk laughed and said, “O dear! This Idiot is as good as dead! How dared you try to play a trick on him? Now you can hear him but you can’t see him. What are you going to 
do?” 8 Rules became so frightened that he went to his knees in the mud and respected, saying, “Elder Brother, it’s my fault! Wait till we rescue Master, and I'll apologise to you once more on the shore. 
Where are you making all this noise from? I’m scared to death! Please reveal your original form. I'll carry you, and I'll never dare offend you again.” 
Pilgrim said, “You're still carrying me, all right! I'll not trick you. Let's get going quickly!” Still muttering his apologies, Idiot scrambled up and proceeded with Sand-monk. They journeyed for another 100 
miles or so when they came upon a towered building all at once, on which there was, in large letters, the inscription: 
Sea-Turtle House 
“This must be the residence of the monster-spirit,” said Sand-monk, “but we don’t know that for sure. How could we go up to the door to provoke battle?” 
“Awakened to Purity,” said Pilgrim, “is there any water around the gate?” Sand-monk said, “No.” 
“In that case,” said Pilgrim, “the two of you go and hide on both sides of the door. Let Old monkey go and scout around.” 
Dear Great Sage! Crawling free of 8 Rules’ ear, he shook his body once and changed again into a shrimp-mum with long legs. With two or three leaps, he bounded right inside the gate. As he looked 
around, he saw the fiend sitting up there while his watery kinsfolk stood in two rows beneath him. There was also a striped-coated perch-mum sitting by his side. They were all having a discussion on 
how to eat the Tang Monk. Pilgrim looked left and right with great care but he could not find his master at all. Just then he saw a large-bellied shrimp-mum come out and stand still in the western 
corridor. Pilgrim leaped up to her and greeted her, saying, “Mama, the Great King is discussing with the others how to eat the Tang Monk. But where is the Tang Monk?” 
“He’s captured yesterday,” said the shrimp-mum, “after the Great King brought down the snow and created the ice. He’s now imprisoned in a stone box at the rear of the palace. If by tomorrow his 
disciples show up to cause no trouble, we'll make poems and feast on him.” 
After he heard this, Pilgrim chatted further with her for a while before moving toward the rear of the palace. He looked and sure enough there was a stone box somewhat like a dung-bucket that people 
use in a cowshed or stone coffin. Measuring it, he found it to be approximately 6 feet in length. He crawled on top of it and soon heard the pitiful sound of Tripitaka’s weeping coming from inside. Not 
uttering a word, Pilgrim cocked his ear to listen. Grinding his teeth in sheer frustration, the master said, “/ loathe River Float, a life plagued by woes! How many water perils bound me at birth! | left my 
mum’s womb to be tossed by waves; | plumbed the deep, seeking God in the West. | met disaster at Black River before; now in this ice-break, my life will expire. | know not if my pupils can come here 
or if with true scriptures | can go home.” 


Pilgrim could not refrain from calling out, “Master, don’t be annoyed. The Water-Calamity Book says, Earth’s the mum of the five Phases; but water's their very source. There’s no life without earth and 
no growth without water. Old monkey's arrived!” 

On hearing this, Tripitaka said, “O Disciple! Please save me!” 

“Try to relax,” said Pilgrim. “Wait till we seize the monster-spirit and you'll be freed from your ordeal.” 

“Get moving quickly!” said Tripitaka. “One more day and I'll suffocate!” 

“That'll not happen! That'll not happen!” said Pilgrim. “I’m off!” Turning around, he leaped right out of the gate and changed back into his original form. “Eight Rules!” he shouted. 

Idiot and Sand-monk drew near, saying, “Elder Brother, what did you find out?” 

“It's this fiend all right,” said Pilgrim, “who captured Master. He is not yet hurt but he is imprisoned in a stone box. The two of you'd provoke battle at once after old monkey has gone back up to the 
surface of the water. If you two can capture him, do so; but if you can’t, feign defeat and entice him out to the surface. I'll attack him then.” 

“Have no worry, Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk. “You leave first and let us size up the situation.” Making the water-repelling sign with his fingers, Pilgrim darted out of the river and stood on the bank 
to wait for them. 

Look how violent that 8 Rules could become! Dashing up to the gate, he shouted in a severe voice, “Brazen fiend! Send my master out!” The little monsters inside the gate were so alarmed that they 
went hurriedly to report, “Great King, someone at the gate is demanding his master.” 

“That must be one of those brazen monks,” said the monster. “Bring out my armour!” The little fiends took it out quickly. After he was properly suited up, the monster picked up his weapon and walked 
out the gate. Facing him on the left and on the right were 8 Rules and Sand-monk who stared intently at him. Dear monster! Look at him! His head wore a gleaming helmet of gold. A gold cuirass he 
had that flashed red light. Pearl- and jade-studded, a belt wrapped his waist. His feet wore strange boots of tobacco brown. The bridge of his nose rose high like a ridge. His forehead seemed like a 
dragon’s, broad and wide. Both round and fierce his blazing eyes would glare. His teeth, like steel swords, were even and sharp. His tousled short hair did shoot up like flames. His long beard was 
groomed like a golden awl. His mouth held a pond weed, tender and green. His hands gripped a nine-grooved red bronze mallet. As the gates swung wide open with a creak, he bellowed like the 
thunder of triple spring. Features like his are rare in human world. Hence he is called Great King of Numinous Power. After the fiend walked out of the gates, about 100 little imps all wielding lances 
and swords, followed him out and stood in 2 columns behind him. “From which monastery you’ve come,” he asked 8 Rules, “and why’re you causing a disturbance here?” 

“You brazen creature!” shouted 8 Rules. “You're almost beaten to death! You argued with me the other night and yet you dare play ignorant and ask me again today? I’m a disciple of a holy monk from 
the Great Tang in the Land of the East and a pilgrim journeying to see God in the Western Heaven for scriptures. Befooling the people with your empty magic, you’re even audacious enough to call 
yourself Great King of Numinous Power and indulge in devouring virgin boys and girls from the Chen village. I’m One Load of Gold from the family of Chen Qing. Can’t you recognise me?” 

“Monk,” said the monster, “you’re quite unreasonable! For taking on the form of One Load of Gold, you’d be charged with the crime of false identity. Not only did | not eat you but the back of my hand 
was also wounded by you. I’ve yielded to you already. How dare you come seeking trouble right up to my door?” 

“If you'd yielded,” said 8 Rules, “then why did you raise up the cold wind and send down the great snowfall? Why did you make the ice to trap my master? Send him out quickly and all will be well. If 
but half a ‘No’ escapes from your teeth, I'll never spare you! Just look at this rake in my hands!” 

On hearing this, the fiend smiled sarcastically and said, “Monk, you’re wagging your tongue and bragging! It was | indeed who brought the snow and froze the river to abduct your master. Now you're 
clamouring at my door and demanding his return but this time | fear isn’t quite the same as the time before. Previously, | brought no weapon with me as | thought | was attending a feast and you took 
advantage of me. Don’t run away now because I’m going to fight with you for three rounds. If you can withstand me, I'll return your master; if you can't, I'll eat you also.” 

“My darling child!” said 8 Rules. “That's the way to talk! Take care, watch my rake!” 

“So you became a monk midway in your life,” said the fiend. 

8 Rules said, “My dear boy, you do have a little numinous power! How did you know that | became a monk midway in my life?” 

“Since you're using a rake,” said the fiend, “you must have been hired as a gardener somewhere, and now you've stolen even your master’s rake!” 

“Son,” said 8 Rules, “this rake of mine is no garden tool. Look! The huge teeth are forged like dragon claws; its handle’s white-gold wrapped, serpent shaped. When it’s used in battle, cold wind swoops 
down; put to combat, bright flames spring up. Able to smite fiends for the holy monk, it catches monsters on the westward way. When | move it, mist hides the sun and moon. When | use it, bright, 
coloured lights will shine. Mount Tai’s toppled and a thousand tigers cringe. The sea’s uptumed, ten thousand dragons fear. Though you may have numinous power, one blow will give you nine big, 
gaping holes!” 

That fiend, of course, would not take such words seriously! He raised his bronze mallet and brought it down on 8 Rules’ head. Using his muckrake to parry the blow, 8 Rules said, “You brazen creature! 
So, you too, became a spirit midway in your life!” 

“How could you tell that | became a spirit midway in my life?” asked the fiend. 

“If you know how to use a bronze mallet,” said 8 Rules, “you must've been Arhats hired by some silversmith to tend the fires. You took advantage of him and stole his mallet!” 

The fiend said, “This is no mallet for forging silver. Look! Nine segments formed like petals of a flower; though hollow the stem’s made of evergreen. It’s nothing of this mortal world, it’s its birth and 
name in the house of gods. Green seeds and cases aged in the jasper pool; pure scent and nature bom of a jade-green pond. Since | toiled to temper and refine it, it’s charged with magic and it’s hard 
as steel. Swords, halberds, and spears — all can’t rival it. Axes and lances — none can withstand it. Though your rake may be like a sharp-edged sword, my mallet will break it as it breaks a nail!” 
When Sand-monk saw how the two of them engaged in such exchanges, he could no longer restrain himself from approaching them and shouting, “Fiend! Stop this boasting! The ancients said, ‘What's 
spoken proves nothing; only deeds are visible!’ Don’t run away. Have a taste of my staff!” Using the mallet to parry the blow, the fiend said, “So, you also are someone who became a monk midway in 
your life!” 

“How did you know?” asked Sand-monk. 

“The way you look,” said the fiend, “you resemble someone who used to work in a pastry shop.” 

Sand-monk said, “How could you tell that | used to work in a pastry shop?” 

“If you didn’t work there,” said the fiend, “how could you learn to use a rolling pin, like the one they made noodles with?” 

“You cursed thing!” scolded Sand-monk. “Of course, you've seen nothing like this before! This kind of weapon’s rare in the world; that’s why you don’t know the treasure staff's name. It came from the 
moon — the shadow-less spot — carved from a piece of divine Sala wood. Outside it’s decked with jewels luminous; within a hub of gold’s most glorious. In bygone days it attended royal feasts; now it 
follows Right and guards the Tang Monk. Few may know it on the way to the West; great fame it’s in the Region Above. It’s called the fiend-routing treasure staff: one blow and it'll surely crack your 
skull!” 

In no mood to talk further, the fiend charged him; the 3 of them turned ferocious all at once and began a fierce battle at the bottom of the river. Bronze mallet, treasure staff, and muckrake: aware of 
Ability and Awakened to Purity both engaged the fiend. 1 was Heavenly Reeds descending to earth; 1 was a divine warrior coming from the sky. Both attacked the water fiend, showing their power. 
This one withstood alone a god-monks — a laudable show! Proper affinity can perfect the great Dao: mutual growth or conquest holds Ganges’ sand. Earth conquers water and the bottom’s seen when 
water dries up; water begets wood that flourishing, will bloom like flowers. Chan and Dao, nurtured, lead to the same essence; elixir, refined and forged, tames the 3 parties. Earth is mum sprouting 
golden shoots; gold begets divine water and the baby’s born. Water's the source to moisten wood. And wood, thriving, brings forth strong, bright fire. The conjoined 5 Phases will all differ: that is why 
they strive, each changing colours. Look! Each petal of that bronze mallet was fine and bright; the treasure staff was wrapped in a thousand strands of silk. The rake, made according to yin-yang and 
the stars dealt sundry blows without style or number. They risked their lives for the monk’s ordeal; courted death for Shakya-Sage’s sake. The bronze mallet was kept busy all the time, blocking staff 
on the left and rake on the right. The 3 of them fought for some 2 hours underneath the water and no decision could be reached. Supposing that they could not prevail against him, 8 Rules winked at 
Sand-monk, and the 2 of them at once feigned defeat. They turned and fled, their weapons trailing behind them. “Little ones,” ordered the fiend, “stay here. Let me catch up with these fellows and bring 
them back for you to eat.” Look at him! 

Like the wind blowing dead leaves and the rain beating down the withered flowers, he pursued them right up to the surface of the water. On the eastern shore, the Great Sage Sun was staring at the 
water with unblinking eyes. Suddenly huge waves arose in the river and there were shouts and roars. 8 Rules was the first to leap ashore, crying, “He’s coming! He’s coming!” Sand-monk, too, rushed 
up to the bank, crying, “He’s coming! He’s coming!” He was pursued by the fiend who yelled, “Where are you running to?” No sooner did he clear the water however, than he was met by Pilgrim, 
shouting, “Watch the rod!” Quickly swerving to dodge the blow, the fiend met him with upraised mallet. One of them churned up the waves near the edge of the river while the other showed forth his 
power on the bank. Before they reached even three rounds after they closed in, the fiend had already weakened. With a splash he plunged back into the river and disappeared; the wind and the waves 
thus subsided. 

Pilgrim went back to high ground and said, “Brothers, you've worked very hard!” 

“Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “this monster-spirit might not do so well on land but he was quite formidable beneath the water. Second Elder Brother and | attacked him left and right and both of us 
could only manage to fight him to a draw. What shall we do to rescue Master?” 

“Let's not dillydally,” said Pilgrim, “for | fear that he may harm Master.” 

“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “we'll go and try to entice him to come out again. You be quiet and wait for him in mid-air. Once his head emerges, you give him one of those garlic-pounding blows 
squarely on the top of his skull. Even if you don’t kill him, you'll knock him dazed. Old bull can then finish him off with one blow of the rake.” 

“Exactly! Exactly!” said Pilgrim. “That's what we call mutual cooperation. Only that can accomplish anything.” 

The 2 of them dove into the water again. Now that fiend fled in defeat and returned to his residence. As the various fiends met him, the perch-mum went up to him and said, “Great King, where did you 
chase those two monks to?” 

The fiend said, “I didn’t realise that those monks have another helper who tried to hit me with an iron rod when they leaped ashore. | dodged the blow and fought with him. God knows how heavy that 
rod of his is! My bronze mallet couldn’t stand up to it at all. Before we finished three rounds, I'd to flee in defeat.” 

“Great King,” said the perch-mum, “can you remember how that helper looked?” 

“He has a hairy face and a thunder-god beak,” said the fiend, “forked ears and broken nose. A monk with fiery eyes and diamond pupils.” When the perch-mum heard this, she shuddered and said, “O 
Great King! It was smart of you to flee, and you escaped with your life! Three more rounds and you'll not live at all! | know who that monk is.” 

“Who is he?” asked the fiend. “Some years back | was living in the Great Eastern Ocean,” said the perch-mum, “and | heard the old Dragon King talking about him and his reputation. This monk is the 
Great Sage Equal to Heaven, the Handsome Monkey King who is a golden mortal of the great monad and of the primal chaos in the Region Above. Five centuries ago, he caused great havoc in the 
Celestial Palace but now he has embraced Religion to accompany the Tang Monk to go to the Western Heaven for scriptures. He has changed his name to Pilgrim Sun Wukong. He has tremendous 
magic powers and knows many ways of transformation. Great King, how could you tangle with him? From now on, you must not fight with him at all.” Hardly had she finished speaking when one of the 
little inps dashed in to report, “Great King, those two monks are here again to provoke battle.” The monster-spirit said, “My worthy sister’s opinion is very sound! I’m not going to face them again. See 
what they can do!” He gave hurriedly this order, “Little ones, shut the gates. As the proverb says, you may call outside the door; your cries I'll wholly ignore! They may even stay here for a couple of 
days but when they get tired of it, they'll leave. Then we can freely and leisurely enjoy the Tang Monk.” All those little fiends started to haul rocks and mud to seal up the entrance to the residence. 
When 8 Rules and Sand-monk shouted repeatedly without receiving any reply, Idiot in perturbation began to batter the gates with his rake. The gates, of course, were tightly shut but a few blows of the 
rake broke them down. Inside the gates however, was a solid wall of mud and rocks piled sky-high. When Sand-monk saw it, he said, “Second Elder Brother, this fiend is terribly afraid, and that’s why 
he shuts himself up and refuses to come out. You and I'd go back up to shore and discuss the matter with Big Brother.” 8 Rules agreed and they retumed to the eastern shore. 

Halfway between cloud and fog, Pilgrim stood waiting and holding his iron rod. When he saw the two of them emerge without the fiend, he lowered his cloud and met them on the bank. “Brothers,” he 
asked, “how is it that that thing has not come up?” Sand-monk said, “The fiend has shut his doors tightly and refused to come out to meet us. When Second Elder Brother broke the doors, we ran into 
a solid wall of mud and rocks inside. That's why we’d not even do battle with him. We decided to return to talk to you and see how we’d make plans to rescue Master.” 

“If that's how he behaves,” said Pilgrim, “it's quite hard to think of anything to overcome him. You two had better patrol the banks to make certain that he doesn’t escape to another place. Let me make 
a trip.” 

“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “where are you going?” 

Pilgrim said, “I’m going to the Potalaka Mountain to make inquiry of the Nun. | want to find out the origin of this monster, his name and how | may search out his ancestral home. After I’ve seized his 
kinsfolk and all his relations, | can return here to rescue Master.” 


With a laugh, 8 Rules said, “Elder Brother, the way you do things will waste a lot of time and energy!” 

“Ill waste no time or energy!” said Pilgrim. “I go, and I'll be back at once!” Dear Great Sage! 

Mounting the auspicious luminosity quickly, he left the river and headed straight for the South Sea. In less than half an hour, the Potalaka Mountain came into sight as he lowered his cloud and went 
up to the summit. The Twenty-four deities, the Great Mountain-Guardian, the disciple Liberation, Child Sudhana, and the Pearl-Bearing Dragon Girl all came forward to greet him. “Why did the Great 
Sage come here?” they asked. 

Pilgrim said, “I must see the Nun.” 

“The Nun left the cave this morning,” said the deities, “and forbade anyone to follow her. She went by herself into the bamboo grove though she left word that you’d arrive today and that we'd be here 
to receive you. She said she'd be unable to see you immediately. She asked you to be seated before the cliff for a while and wait for her to come out.” 

Pilgrim obeyed and before he had even taken a seat, the Child Sudhana approached him saluting and said, “Great Sage Sun, | must thank you for your past kindness. The Nun’s gracious enough to 
take me in and I’ve been her constant companion, waiting upon her beneath her lotus platform. She’s in fact shown me great favours.” 

Recognising that he was formerly the Red Boy, Pilgrim said with a laugh, “In the past you’re gripped by demonic delusions. Now that you’ve attained the right fruit, you must realise that old monkey's a 
good person!” 

After having waited for a long time, Pilgrim grew very anxious, and he said, “Please make the announcement for me, all of you. If there’s further delay, | do fear for my master’s life.” 

“We daren't,” said the deities, “for the Nun gave specific instruction that you'd wait for her to come out.” 

As he had always been impulsive, Pilgrim, of course, could stand it no longer and dashed all at once into the bamboo grove. Aha! This Handsome Monkey King was by nature most impulsive. The 
deities could not detain him when he wished to go inside. Deep into the grove he strode, his open eyes stealing a glance. There the salvific Honoured 1 sat, cross-legged, on bamboo leaves. Carefree 
and without makeup she looked so gentle and mild. Her tresses, undone, flowed down; she had no headgear with fringes. Her blue robe she did not wear but only a small waistcoat. A silk skirt wrapped 
round her waist. Her 2 feet were both naked. Her cloak’s silk sash was untied; her 2 arms were completely bare. Her jade-like hand held up a knife with which she peeled off bamboo skin. When Pilgrim 
saw her, he could not refrain from calling aloud, “Nun, your disciple, Sun Wukong pays you sincere homage.” 

“Wait outside,” commanded the Nun. Pilgrim went to his knees to respect, saying, “Nun, my master is facing a terrible ordeal. | came especially to ask you concerning the origin of the fiend at Heaven- 
Reaching River.” 

“Go out of the grove,” said the Nun, “and wait till | come out.” 

Not daring to force her, Pilgrim had no choice but to walk out of the bamboo grove. He said to the various deities, “The Nun seems to be all wrapped up today in her domestic affairs. Why is she not 
sitting at her lotus platform? Why she is not made up? Why does she look so gloomy, making bamboo slips in the grove?” 

“We don’t know,” said the deities. “When she left the cave this morning, she went at once into the grove before she was even properly dressed. She told us also to wait for the Great Sage, and she 
must be doing something for your affairs.” 

Pilgrim could do nothing but wait. After a while, the Nun emerged from the grove holding a purple-bamboo basket. “Wukong,” she said, “I'll go with you to rescue the Tang Monk.” Kneeling down 
hurriedly, Pilgrim said, “Your disciple dares not press you. Let the Nun dress and ascend her seat first.” 

“No need to dress,” said the Nun. “I can go with you just like this.” 

Abandoning the deities, the Nun mounted the auspicious clouds immediately and rose into the air. Great Sage Sun had to follow her! In a moment, they arrived at the Heaven-Reaching River. On 
seeing them, 8 Rules said to Sand-monk, “Elder Brother is so impulsive! | wonder what sort of wild clamour he made at South Sea that forced an undressed and unadorned Nun to come here!” Hardly 
had he finished speaking when the Nun landed on the bank. Saluting, the two disciples said, “Nun, we've intruded upon you. Please forgive us!” Untying her sash from her vest, the Nun fastened it to 
the basket and rose halfway into the air on the clouds. She held the sash and lowered the basket into the river, pulling it toward the upper reach. Then she recited a spell, saying, “The dead depart; the 
living remain! The dead depart, the living remain!” She repeated this seven times and then lifted up the basket. Inside was a shiny goldfish, still blinking its eyes and tossing about. 

“Wukong,” cried the Nun, “go into the water quickly and rescue your master.” 

“But we've not yet captured the fiend,” said Pilgrim. “How could we rescue Master?” 

“Isn't the fiend in the basket?” asked the Nun. Saluting, 8 Rules and Sand-monk said, “How could the little fish get to be so powerful?” 

“He is a goldfish reared in my lotus pond,” said the Nun. “Every day he’d float with the current to the surface to listen to my lectures, and his powers were acquired from his self-cultivation. That nine- 
petalled bronze mallet is a stalk supporting an unopened lotus bud that the process of his magic cultivation has made into a weapon. | don’t know which day it was when high tide carried him to this 
place. When | watched my flowers leaning on the railing this moming, this fellow did not come out to greet me. | made calculations then by consulting the grooves on my fingers and learned that he had 
become a spirit here, seeking to harm your master. That was why | didn’t even bother to put on my clothes or jewels, for | was exercising my divine powers to fashion this basket to catch him.” 

“Nun,” said Pilgrim, “please remain here fora moment. Let me go and call together the believers in the Chen village so that they may gaze upon your golden visage. This will be your great favour toward 
them, and, moreover, the account of how you've captured the fiend will help these mortal humans to become your devout worshippers.” 

“All right,” said the Nun. “Go and call them together quickly.” 8 Rules and Sand-monk sprinted back to the village, screaming, “Come, all of you, to see the living Nun Guanyin!” The inhabitants of the 
entire village, young and old, all rushed to the edge of the river. Without regard for the mud and water, they all knelt down and respected. Someone skilled in painting among them at once made a 
portrait of a goddess, and that was how the picture of the Guanyin with a fish basket came about. Thereafter, the Nun returned to South Sea. 

Opening a path in the water, 8 Rules and Sand-monk went straight to the Sea-Turtle House to search for their master. The watery fiends and fish spirits inside were all dead. They went to the rear of 
the palace and opened the stone box. Then they carried the Tang Monk to leave the waves and to be reunited with the others on the shore. Chen Qing and his brother in gratitude respected to them, 
saying, “Venerable Dad, you’d have listened to our pleadings and you’d not have had to undergo such suffering.” 

“No need to say that anymore,” said Pilgrim. “You people here will have no need to make any more sacrifices next year, for the Great King has been done away with. He will take no more lives. Mr. 
Chen, now we must count on you to find a boat to take us across the river.” 

“We've one! We've one!” said Chen Qing. He at once gave the order to build a boat; when the villagers heard this, everyone responded with enthusiasm. One of them said that he would purchase the 
mast and another volunteered to get the oars. Some of them wanted to bring the ropes while still others promised to hire the sailors. 

As they were making such clamour by the bank of the river, they suddenly heard this cry coming from the middle of the water: “Great Sage Sun, there’s no need for a boat that'll only be a waste of 
money and materials. I'll take you four across the river.” When the people heard this, they were so frightened that the timid ones fled back to the village while the more courageous among them, 
trembling all over, stole glances at where the voice was coming from. Instantly, out crawled a strange creature from the depths. He is a square-headed divine not of this world; his name: a water god 
most subtle and shrewd. His tail can life prolong a millennium; he hides himself in a hundred rivers deep. Vaulting on waves and currents he comes to shore; facing the sun and wind he lies on the 
beach. Truly enlightened he nourishes his breath, an old turtle scabby headed and white shelled. “Great Sage,” cried the old sea-turtle again, “don’t build the boat. I'll take all of you, master and disciples 
across the river.” 

Raising high his iron rod, Pilgrim said, “Cursed creature! If you dare approach me, I'll kill you with one blow of my rod!” 

“Im grateful to the kindness of the Great Sage,” said the old turtle, “and that’s why | want to help all of you with the best intention. Why do you want to hit me instead?” 

“What kindness have | shown you?” asked Pilgrim. 

The old turtle said, “Great Sage, you don’t realise that the Sea-Turtle House down below happens to be my residence, a place my ancestors handed down to me from generation to generation. Since 
I'd awakened to my source and origin, | succeeded in nourishing my numinous breath to enable me to practice self-cultivation here. The house had been rebuilt by me and named the Sea-Turtle House. 
Nine years ago, that fiend arrived during a huge tidal wave, and at once he let loose his violence and fought with me. He slew many of my children and robbed me of many of my kinsfolk. | was no 
match for him, and my house was taken away by force. Now I’m truly indebted to the Great Sage who in his attempt to rescue his master, has succeeded in bringing the Nun Guanyin here to disperse 
| the fiendish miasma. With the monster seized, the house belongs to me once again. Now | can be reunited with my kin, young and old; | can occupy my old home again without having to rest on 
arth or recline on mud. This favour of yours is indeed great as a mountain and deep as the sea. But it is not just | myself who am indebted to you. The entire village here has been exempted from ever 
having to make the annual sacrifice, and countless children’s lives are spared. This is indeed a case of the double gain with a single move. Dare | not show my gratitude and try to repay you?” 
Secretly pleased by what he heard, Pilgrim put away his iron rod and said, “Are you really sincere about this?” The old turtle said, “I’m a recipient of the Great Sage’s profound kindness. How dare | 
lay false?” 
‘Swear to Heaven that you're telling the truth,” said Pilgrim. Opening wide his huge red mouth toward the sky, the old turtle said, “If | don’t truly intend to send the Tang Monk across the Heaven- 
Reaching River, may my body turn into blood!” 

“You come here then,” said Pilgrim, chuckling. Swimming to the edge of the river, the old turtle then crawled up the bank. When the people gathered about him to take a look, they found a huge white 
globe of a shell, about forty feet in its circumference. “Master,” said Pilgrim, “we can get on him and cross over.” 

Tripitaka said, “Disciple, even that thick ice before gave us difficulty. | wonder if this turtle’s carapace is safe at all.” 

“Please do not worry, Master,” said the old turtle, “I’m much safer than that thick ice! If | make even one slip, I'll not achieve my merit.” 

“O Master!” said Pilgrim. “It is not likely for a creature who has acquired human speech to lie. Brothers, bring us the horse! Quick!” 

As they went to the edge of the river, the entire Chen village, young and old, all came to salute them. After Pilgrim led the horse up onto the back of the old turtle, he asked the Tang Monk to stand to 
the left of the horse’s neck, Sand-monk to the right, and 8 Rules at the back. Pilgrim himself stood in front of the horse. Fearing that the turtle might cause trouble nevertheless, he untied the sash of 
his tiger-skin kilt and fastened it to the nose of the turtle, pulling it up like a rein. He placed one foot on the turtle’s back and the other foot on its head; one hand held the iron rod while the other held 
the rein. “Old Turtle,” said he, “go slowly. One wrong move and I'll give your head a blow!” 

“| daren’t! | daren’t!” said the old turtle. 

Stretching forth his four legs, the turtle trod on the surface of the water as smoothly as if he were walking on level ground. The people on shore all burned incense and respected everyone reciting, “/ 
respect the Infinite Light!” 

It was truly as if real Arhats were descending to earth and living Nuns revealing themselves. The people worshipped until they could no longer see the pilgrims before they dispersed. The master riding 
on the white turtle; in less than a day, they crossed the Heaven-Reaching River of eight hundred miles. With dry hands and feet, they went ashore, As Tripitaka landed, he pressed his palms together 
to give thanks saying, “I’ve troubled you, old Turtle but there is nothing | can give you. Let me acquire the scriptures first and when | come back, I'll thank you then with a gift.” 

The old turtle said, “There’s need for no gift from you, old Master. But I’ve heard that the Religious Patriarch in the Western Heaven's not only transcended the process of birth and death but he’s also 
the knowledge of past and future. I’ve practiced self-cultivation here for a full thirteen centuries. Though I've lengthened my age and lightened my body and I’ve also acquired the knowledge of human 
speech, | find it difficult to shed my original shell. When you get to the Western Heaven, | beg the old Master to inquire of the Religious Patriarch and see when | may cast off my original shell to acquire 
a human body.” 

Tripitaka said, “I promise to ask.” Then the old turtle turned around and plunged back into the water. Pilgrim helped Tang Monk to mount the horse, 8 Rules poled the luggage, and Sand-monk took up 
the rear. Master and disciples found the main road and started out again toward the West. Thus it was that the holy monk sought God by decree through a vast distance and many ordeals. His mind 
was steadfast, undaunted by death; he crossed Heaven River on a turtle’s back. 


a 
e 


Bj 


050 
Nature follows confused feelings through lust & desire; Faint spirit & moved mind meet a demon chief 
The poem says: 
Sweep often the grounds of the mind; wipe clean the dust of affections. 
Let not the pit ensnare your God-self. 
Only when essential selfs clean may you your primal source convene. 
You must lift and trim nature’s wick to breathe thus freely at Caoxi.' 
Keep the horse and the ape from sounding harsh: through night and day a breath serene will let all your technique be seen. 


The stanzas of this poem is called A Southern Branch. \t is meant to describe the Tang Monk and how he escaped from his ordeal of ice in the Heaven-Reaching River and how he ascended the other 
shore by standing on the white turtle. Master and the disciples, the four of them, followed the main road and set out again toward the West. It was the time of midwinter, and they saw faint outlines of 
woodlands in the mists, clear frames of bare mountains in the stream. As master and disciples walked along, they again came upon a huge mountain blocking their way. The road tured exceedingly 
narrow and the cliffs were tall; moreover, there were many rocks and the ridges were so steep that it would be difficult for humans or horses to proceed. Reining in his horse, Tripitaka called out, 
“Disciples.” Pilgrim led Bullseye 8 Rules and Sand-monk forward, saying, “Master, what do you've to say?” 

“Look how tall the mountain is ahead of us,” said Tripitaka. “I fear that tigers and wolves might run rampant up there, or strange beasts might come out to attack us. Be carefull!” 

“Please don’t worry, Master,” said Pilgrim. “We three brothers are united in a single effort to embrace the Right and seek the Real. We'll exercise our power to disperse monsters and subdue fiends. 
You need be afraid of no tigers or wolves!” 

On hearing his words, Tripitaka felt more assured and urged his horse forward to ascend the cliff. As they did so, they glanced around and saw that it was quite a mountain indeed. Rugged and soaring 
— pointed and towering — rugged and soaring it rises to the sky; pointed and towering it blocks the blue heavens. Strange rocks piled high like tigers sitting; hoary pines aslant like dragons flying. Atop 
the peak a bird sings a pretty poem; before the cliff the plums waft a strong, sweet scent. The brook swells and surges, its water cold; the clouds assail the summit, dense and dark. You also feel the 
drifting snow, the biting wind and the mountain’s roaring, famished tiger. Jackdaws pick through the trees but find no nest; wild deer search in vain for a place to rest. Pity the travellers who can hardly 
walk: crestfallen, downcast, they cover their heads! Master and disciples, the 4 of them braved the snow, cold to scale, shivering, and the rugged peak. After they passed it, they saw in the distance a 
towered building in the fold of the mountain and some charming buildings nearby. Delighted, the Tang Monk said on his horse, “O Disciples, | feel so cold and hungry today! It's a good thing that there’re 
in the fold of the mountain that building and the houses. It’s to be either a village, a mansion, an abbey, or a monastery. Let's go and beg for some food. We can move on after we’ve a meal.” 

When Pilgrim heard this, he opened wide his eyes to look and saw that the place was shrouded with baleful clouds and diabolical air. “Master,” he turned to speak to the Tang Monk, “that isn’t a good 
place.” 

“There’re buildings and houses,” said Tripitaka. “Why isn’t it a good place?” 

“O Master,” said Pilgrim with a snicker, “how'd you know? There’re plenty of monsters, demons on the way to the West, and they're most capable of devising? some form of houses or dwellings. It 
doesn’t matter whether it’s a towered building or a pavilion or some such edifice; any one of these can be merely a transformation to deceive people. You've heard of the saying that ‘a dragon can 
beget nine kinds of offspring.’ One of them is the giant clam; *the breath this creature emits is luminous and takes on the appearance of buildings and houses. When a big river's caught in inclement 
weather, that’s when the giant clam produces such a mirage. If some birds or crows happen to fly by and decide to rest their wings on these specious buildings, the clam will swallow them with one 
gulp. It’s a vicious trap. When | see how baleful the aura’s over there, | must tell you not to approach it.” 

“So we can't go over there,” said Tripitaka, “but I’m really hungry!” 

“If you’re, Master, please dismount,” said Pilgrim. “Sit here on level ground and let me go somewhere to beg some vegetarian food for you to eat.” Tripitaka consented and dismounted. After 8 Rules 
took hold of the reins, Sand-monk put down the luggage and untied the wrap to take out the alms bowl to hand over to Pilgrim. Taking it in his hand, Pilgrim gave this instruction to Sand-monk: “Worthy 
Brother, don’t go forward. Just stand guard over Master sitting here. Wait until | come back with the food and we can then set out again to the West.” Sand-monk obeyed, and Pilgrim said once more 
to Tripitaka, “Master, that place in front of us betokens more evil than good. Don’t ever leave here and go elsewhere. Old monkey is off to beg for food.” 

“Talk no more,” said the Tang Monk. “Just go quickly and come back. I'll wait for you here.” 

Pilgrim tumed and was about to leave but he walked back again to say, “Master, | realise you can’t sit still for very long. Let me provide you with some means of safety.” He took out his golden-hooped 
rod and drew on the level ground a large circle. The Tang Monk was asked to sit in its middle while 8 Rules and Sand-monk stood by either side of him. The horse and the luggage were placed near 
them, too. Then Pilgrim pressed his palms together to salute the Tang Monk, saying, “The circle drawn by old monkey here’s as strong as an iron wall. No matter what they're — tigers, wolves, ogres, 
or demons -— they'll daren’t come near you. But you must not step out of the circle. Remain seated inside and no harm will come to you. But if you leave the circle, you'll in all likelihood meet with danger. 
Please take heed of my words! Please take heed of my words!” 

Tripitaka agreed and all three of them sat down solemnly in the circle. Mounting the clouds, Pilgrim went south to search for a place to beg for food. Suddenly he saw some tall, aged trees, near which 
was a village. He lowered his cloud and took a careful look. He saw snow abusing weak willows and ice frozen in the square pond; sparse bamboos waving their blue; dense pine trees holding their 
green; a few thatched huts half decked with silver; a small, slanted bridge powder-dusted; half-bloomed narcissus by the fence; long icicles dangling beneath the eaves. The piercing cold wind wafted 
a rare scent but snow hid the place where plum flowers bloomed. As Pilgrim admired the scenery of the village, he heard one of the wooden gates open with a creak and out walked an old man who 
wore a lamb’s-wool hat, a long robe full of holes, and a pair of grass sandals. Supporting himself with a staff, he looked up to the sky and said, “Ah, the northwest wind is rising. It'll be fair tomorrow.” 
Hardly had he finished speaking when a Pekingese ran out from behind him and barked furiously at Pilgrim. Only then did the old man turn around. Pilgrim stood before him holding the alms bowl and 
saluted saying, “Old Benefactor, this priest happens to be someone sent by imperial decree of the Great Tang in the Land of the East to the Western Heaven to seek scriptures from God. We're passing 
through your region and my master is hungry. I've come to your honourable residence to beg you for some vegetarian food.” When the old man heard this, he shook his head and struck the ground 
several times with his staff, saying, “Elder, you'd not beg for food just yet, for you’ve taken the wrong road.” 

“I've not,” said Pilgrim. The old man said, “The main road to the Western Heaven's due north of here over a thousand miles away. You’d go and find that road at once.” Pilgrim laughed and said, “Yes, 
it is due north of here, and my master right now is sitting beside that road and waiting for me to beg for food.” 

“This monk's babbling!” said the old man. “If your master is indeed waiting at the main road for you to beg for food, a distance of a thousand miles will require six or seven days of travelling one way, 
even if you happen to be an exceptionally adroit traveller. When you go back to him, it will take another week or so. By then, he would be long starved to death, wouldn’t he?” 

Pilgrim laughed again and said, “To tell you the truth, Old Benefactor, | left my master not long ago and it took me no more than the time of drinking a cup of tea to get to this place. Once | succeed in 
begging some food, I'll rush back to serve it to him for lunch.” On hearing this, the old man became terribly frightened, thinking to himself, “This priest is a ghost! A ghost!” He turned around and began 
to dash inside. Pilgrim made a grab at him and said, “Benefactor where are you going? If you've some food, donate it to us.” 

“It's not convenient! It's not convenient!” said the old man. “Go to some other family.” 

“Benefactor,” said Pilgrim, “you're not very considerate! As you said, this place is over a thousand miles away from the main road. If | go to another family, it may take another thousand miles. Wouldn't 
my master be really starved to death then?” 

“To tell you the truth,” said the old man, “there are altogether six or seven people in my family, and we've just washed and placed three pints of rice in the cauldron. It’s not even fully cooked yet. Please 
go somewhere else to look for your food.” Pilgrim said, “As the ancients said, ‘Walking to three other houses is not like sitting in one.’ This humble priest will sit here and wait.” When the old man saw 
how persistent Pilgrim was, he became angry; lifting his staff, he struck out at Pilgrim. Not the least intimidated, Pilgrim allowed the old man to hit his bald head seven or eight times without a flinch - it 
was as if someone were scratching an itch for him! “This is a priest with a collision-proof head!” said the old man. “Venerable Sir,” said Pilgrim, chuckling, “you can hit me all you want. But you’d better 
remember the number of blows you give me: one blow will cost you one pint of rice! You can take your time and measure it!” On hearing this, the old man quickly dropped his staff and ran inside. He 
slammed the door shut, yelling, “A ghost! A ghost!” The entire household was so terrified that both the front and the back doors were at once tightly bolted. 

When Pilgrim saw that the doors were shut, he thought to himself, “This old rogue said that they had just washed the rice and placed it in the cauldron. | wonder if he was telling the truth. As the proverb 
says, ‘The Daoists beg from the worthies but the Religious from the fools.’ Let old monkey go in and take a look.” Dear Great Sage! 

He made the magic sign with his fingers and used the magic of invisibility to walk straight into the kitchen: steam was indeed rising from the cauldron, for there was inside it half a cauldron of dried rice. 
He stuffed the alms bowl into the cauldron and gave it a strong scoop to fill the alms bow! with rice. He then mounted the clouds to go back to his master. The Tang Monk was sitting in the circle. He 
waited for a long time without seeing Pilgrim returning. Half rising, he said dejectedly, “Where did that ape go to beg for food?” 

“Who knows!” said 8 Rules on one side, snickering. “He must have gone somewhere to play around! You think he’s going to beg for food? He just wants us imprisoned here!” 

“What do you mean by imprisoned?” asked Tripitaka. “Don’t you know, Master?” said 8 Rules. “The ancients drew on the ground to establish a jail. That's what he did! He drew a circle with his rod, and 
he claimed that it was stronger than a wall of iron. But if some tigers or ferocious beasts really showed up, how could this circle protect us? We might as well give ourselves to them for food!” 

“Aware of Ability,” said Tripitaka, “what do you propose to do?” 8 Rules said, “This place can’t shelter us from the wind or the cold. If you agree with Old bull, we'd follow this road and start out toward 
the West once more. If Elder Brother manages to get some food, he will no doubt return quickly, riding on his cloud. He should have no difficulty catching up with us and when there is food, we can 
stop and eat first before we move on. Sitting here all this time will only make our feet grow cold!” 

It was the bad luck of Tripitaka to have heard these words! He agreed with Idiot and all of them walked out of the circle. 8 Rules led the horse while Sand-monk poled the luggage; the elder did not 
even climb on the horse. Following the road, he walked right up to the towered building and found that it was an edifice facing south. Outside the door was a brick wall painted white with corners like 
the word eight that connected with a small towered-gate decorated with carvings of lovebirds hung upside down and painted with five colours. The door of the building was half closed. 8 Rules tied the 
horse to one of the stoneware door wedges, and Sand-monk put down his pole. As he was sensitive to the cold wind, Tripitaka sat on the threshold. “Master,” said 8 Rules, “this must be the residence 
of a noble man or an official. If we can’t see anyone near the front door, all the inhabitants must be inside warming themselves by the fire. You two sit here, and let me go inside to take a look.” 

“Take care!” said the Tang Monk. “Don't offend people!” Idiot said, “I know! Since | was converted and entered the gate of Chan, I've acquired some manners! I'm not like one of those village fools!” 
Tying the muckrake to his waist, Idiot straightened out his blue silk shirt and walked inside in a civil manner. He saw three large front halls with all the curtains drawn up; the whole place was quiet and 
without a trace of any human inhabitant. There were neither furniture nor utensils. Passing the screens, he walked further inside and came upon a long corridor, behind which was a tall, two-story 
building. The windows on top were half opened, and one could see parts of a set of yellow silk curtains in the room. “The people must be afraid of the cold,” said Idiot to himself. “They are still sleeping!” 
With no regard for manners, Idiot strode right up to the second story of the building. When he drew the curtains apart to take a look, he was so startled that he stumbled and fell. Inside the curtains and 
lying on top of an ivory bed was a skeleton of sickly white. The skull was big as a jar and the leg bones, straight as poles, were about four or five feet long. After he had calmed down, Idiot could not 
restrain the tears rolling down his cheeks. Shaking his head and sighing, he said to the skeleton, “I wonder you’re the remains of a marshal of which nation or domain or state a great general. Once 
you're a hero striving to win; today how piteously you show your bones. Your children and wife aren’t here to serve you; no soldiers burn incense to honour you. You're truly most lamentable a sight: 
you who used to seek rule by might or right!” 

As 8 Rules thus lamented, he suddenly saw a flare of light behind the curtains. “Someone must be here after all to offer incense to him,” said Idiot. He went behind the curtains hurriedly to look and 
found that rays of light were coming through some screens set up in a side room. Behind the screens was a lacquered table, on which there were several garments made of embroidered silk brocade. 
When Idiot picked them up, he saw that they were three silk vests. Without regard for good or ill, he took the vests and came down the building. He went back through the front halls to walk out the 
door. “Master,” he said, “there’s no trace of anyone living inside. It’s in fact a residence of the deceased. Old bull went inside and walked upstairs to the tall tower where there was a skeleton inside 
some yellow silk curtains. In a side room there were three silk vests that I've brought with me. This has to be our luck, at least a little of it! Since it’s turning cold now, we can make good use of them. 
Master, take off your outer garment and put on one of those vests. Enjoy, so you'll not feel the cold so much.” 

“No! No!” said Tripitaka. “For the Code Book says, ‘To take things, whether in open or in secret, is thievery.’ If someone found out and caught up with us, the officials would undoubtedly charge us with 
the crime of theft. Take them back and put them at the place you found them. We can sit here for a while to escape from the wind, and when Wukong arrives, we'll move on. Those of us who have left 
the family should not be so covetous of small gains!” 8 Rules said, “There’s not a single person around, even dogs or chickens are unaware of our presence. Only we know what we’ve done. Who will 
file charges against me? Who'll be a witness? It was as if I'd picked up these vests from the road. What do you mean by taking in open or in secret?” 

“You act foolishly!” said Tripitaka. “Though man may not know it, will Heaven be ignorant of it? Xuande left this instruction: he may conscience slyly despise but like lightning are a god's eyes. ‘Retum 
them quickly! Don’t be greedy for things which do not belong to you.” 

Idiot, of course, refused to listen. Laughing, he said to the Tang Monk, “O Master! Since | became a human, I’ve worn several vests but none made with such lovely brocade. If you'll not want to put it 
on, let Old bull put it on. I'm going to try something new, and | want to warm my back a bit. When Elder Brother arrives, I'll take it off and we'll move on.” 

“If that’s the way you put it,” said Sand-monk, “I'll try one, too!” 

The 2 of them took off their shirts and put on the vests. They were just trying to tighten the straps when all of sudden they could no longer stand up and tumbled to the ground. The vests somehow 
turned out to be like two straitjackets; in an instant, the two of them had their arms twisted backwards and firmly bound behind their backs. Tripitaka was so taken aback that he stamped his feet and 
chided them; he then went forward to try to untie them but it was all to no avail. As the three of them made continuous clamour over there, a demon was soon alerted. That towered building had indeed 
been devised by a monster-spirit who had spent the days ensnaring people at the place. As he sat in his own cave, he suddenly heard noises of complaint and expostulation. When he hurried out to 
have a look, he found two victims all tied up. The demon called up his little imps quickly and did away with the buildings and towers. The Tang Monk was seized, along with the white horse and the 


luggage. Then they herded all of them, including 8 Rules and Sand-monk, into the cave. After the old demon took his seat high in the middle, the little fiends pushed the Tang Monk forward and forced 
him to kneel down. “Where did you come from, monk?” asked the old demon. “How dare you be so bold as to steal my garments?” 
As tears rolled down, the Tang Monk said, “This poor monk is someone sent by the Great Tang in the Land of the East to acquire scriptures in the Western Heaven. Stricken with hunger just now, | told 
my senior disciple to go to beg for food and he hasn't returned. He told us to remain seated in the mountain, and if we’d listened to him, we'd not have trespassed your mortal court to find shelter from 
the cold wind. It was here that these two young disciples of mine grew covetous of small things after they found your clothes. Your poor monk certainly had no evil intentions, and they were told to 
return the vests to where they were found. Refusing to listen to me, they wanted to wear them just to warm their backs, and that was how they fell into the traps set by the Great King. Since you've 
caught me, | beg you to be merciful and spare my life so that | may proceed to acquire the true scriptures. I'll always be grateful for your grace and kindness that I'll forever proclaim when | return to the 
Land of the East.” 
“I've often heard,” said the demon, chuckling, “that if anyone eats a piece of the Tang Monk's flesh, his white hair will turn black, and his fallen teeth will grow back once more. Today it is my good 
fortune that you've arrived without my beckoning. And you still expect me to spare you? What is the name of your big disciple? Where did he go to beg for food?” On hearing the question, 8 Rules said 
loudly and boastfully, “My Elder Brother's Sun Wukong, the Great Sage Equal to Heaven who caused great havoc in Heaven five centuries ago.” 
When the demon heard that declaration, he became rather apprehensive. Though he did not utter a word, he thought to himself, “I've heard for a long time that that fellow’s vast magic powers. | didn’t 
expect that I'd meet him by chance like this.” Then he gave the order: “Little ones, tie them up also with 2 new ropes. Put them all in the rear. Wait until I've caught their big disciple. Then we can steam 
them all together to eat them.” 
The little fiends obeyed with a shout and tied up all three of them before they were carried to the rear. The white horse was chained in the stable and the luggage was left in the house. Then the various 
monster-spirits began sharpening their weapons to prepare to catch Pilgrim. Pilgrim Sun after he had stolen an alms bowlful of rice from the village in the south, mounted his cloud to return to where 
he began. By the time he reached the slope of the mountain and lowered his cloud, he saw that the Tang Monk was gone. The circle he drew with his rod could be seen on the ground but neither the 
people nor the horse were anywhere in sight. He quickly turned his head to look toward the towered buildings and found that these, too had disappeared. All he saw were strange rocks and mountain 
ridges. Aghast, Pilgrim said, “That's it! They must have fallen into danger!” 
Following the tracks of the horse he hurried along the road toward the West. He journeyed for about five or six miles, and as he became more and more dejected, he heard all at once someone speaking 
on the northern slope. When he looked, he saw that it was an old man who had on a thick woollen robe, and his head was covered by a warm hat. On his feet he had on a pair of half-new leather boots 
which had been nicely waxed. He supported himself with a staff that had a dragon head, and he was followed by a young houseboy. The old man also carried a twig of winter-plum blossoms in his 
hand, and as he walked down the slope, he was reciting some kind of poem. Putting down his alms bowl, Pilgrim faced him and saluted saying, “Old Grandpa, this humble priest salutes you.” 
Returning his salute, the old man said, “Where did you come from, elder?” 
Pilgrim said, “We came from the Land of the East, on our way to seek scriptures from God in the Western Heaven. Master and disciples, there were altogether four of us. Because my master was 
hungry, | was sent to beg for some vegetarian food. | told the three of them to sit on a level spot by the mountain slope back there to wait for me. By the time | came back however, they had disappeared. 
| don’t know which road they took. May | ask, Old Grandpa, whether you've seen them?” When the old man heard this, he snickered and said, “Was there someone with a long horn and huge ears 
among those three?” 
“Yes! Yes! Yes!” said Pilgrim. 
“Was there also someone with a gloomy complexion tugging a white horse and leading a pale-faced stout-ish monk?” 
“Yes! Yes! Yes!” said Pilgrim. 
The old man said, “You've taken the wrong road, all of you! Don’t bother to look for them. Each of you'd flee for your life!” Pilgrim said, “The pale-faced one is my master, and those strange-looking 
priests are my younger brothers. They and | were united in our determination to go to the Western Heaven for scriptures. How could | not go to search for them?” 
“| passed through this region some time ago,” said the old man, “and | saw them taking the wrong road that had to lead them straight into the mouth of demons.” 
“Old Grandpa,” said Pilgrim, “please tell me what kind of a demon there is and where does he live, so that | may demand their return at his door.” 
The old man said, “This Mountain’s named the Golden Helmet Mountain and in it there is a Golden Helmet Cave. The master of the cave’s the Great King One-Horned Buffalo who’s vast magic powers 
and who is most capable in the martial arts. Your three companions this time must have lost their lives, and if you go there to search for them, | fear that you, too, may get yourself killed. Perhaps it’s 
better for you not to go. | don’t want to keep you from going but | certainly am not going to encourage you either. It's your decision.” 
Saluting repeatedly to thank him, Pilgrim said, “I’m grateful to the Old Grandpa for his instructions. But | can’t possibly give up my search!” He was about to pour out the rice that he took from the village 
in the south to give to the old man so that he could put away the empty bowl when the old man lay down his staff and took away the alms bowl. All at once the houseboy and the old man both revealed 
their true forms and went to their knees to respect. “Great Sage,” they cried in unison, “these humble deities dare not hide anything from you. We're the mountain god and the local spirit of this region, 
and we've come to receive you here. Let us keep the bowl and the rice for the moment, so that the Great Sage can exercise his power. When the Tang Monk is rescued, the rice will then be presented 
to him and he will appreciate what reverence and devotion the Great Sage has shown him.” 
“You're asking to be beaten, clumsy ghosts!” bellowed Pilgrim. “If you knew that I'd arrived, why didn’t you show up earlier to meet me? Why must you come in shabby disguises?” 
“The Great Sage is rather impetuous,” said the local spirit, “and this humble deity dares not confront you directly. That's why we camouflage ourselves to report to you.” Calming down more and more, 
Pilgrim said, “I'll only make a note of your beating this time! Take care of that alms bowl for me, and let me go and catch that monster-spirit.” The local spirit and the mountain god obeyed. 
Tightening his sash on his tiger-skin kilt which he hitched up, Great Sage dashed into the mountain to look for the fiend’s cave, holding high his golden-hooped rod. He passed one of the cliffs and saw 
more strange boulders and two stone doors just beneath a green ledge. In front of the doors were many little imps, wielding lances and waving swords. Truly there were mists in auspicious folds; moss 
in bluish clumps; strange rugged rocks stood in array; rough winding paths coiled round and round. Apes cried and birds recited in this lovely scene; phoenixes male and female, exercised as in Peng- 
Ying. 5A few plums, facing the east, began to bloom; warmed by the sun, the bamboos displayed their green. Beneath the steep ridge — within the deep brook — beneath the steep ridge snow piled high 
like powder; within the deep brook water froze as ice. Pines and cedars fresh for a millennium; bunches of mountain tea all glowing red. As he did not go there merely to admire the scenery, Great 
Sage strode up to the doors and cried out in a severe voice, “Little imps! Go inside quickly and tell your cave master that I’m Sun Wukong, the Great Sage Equal to Heaven, and the disciple of the holy 
monk from the Tang court. Tell him to send out my master quickly so that all of your lives may be spared.” 
That group of fiends dashed inside to report, “Great King, there is a hairy-faced priest with a curved beak outside. He calls himself Sun Wukong, the Great Sage Equal to Heaven, and he has come to 
demand the return of his master.” When he heard this announcement, the demon king was delighted. “I wanted him to come!” he said. “Since | left my former palace and descended to earth, I’ve never 
had a chance to practice martial art. Today he’s here and will be a worthy opponent.” He gave the order at once for his weapon to be brought out, and every one of those fiends, young and old, in the 
cave aroused himself. They hurriedly hauled out a twelve-foot-long spotted-steel lance to present to the old fiend. Then the old fiend gave this order: “Little ones, all of you must follow orders. Those 
who advance will be rewarded; those who retreat will be executed.” 
The fiends all obeyed and followed the old demon who when he walked out of the cave, asked aloud, “Who’s Sun Wukong?” 
On one side Pilgrim took a look at that demon king and saw that he was ugly and ferocious indeed: a jagged, single horn; a pair of gleaming eyes; coarse skin swelling up from his head; dark flesh 
glowing beneath his ears. A long tongue oft’ licking his nose; a wide mouth full of yellow teeth. His hide is like indigo blue; tendons are tough as steel. Rhino-like, though he can’t light up the stream; ® 
steer-like though he can’t plough the fields. He has no use at all for tilling the soil though he has the strength to shake Heaven and Earth. His 2 dyed-blue hands with tendons brown grasp firmly the 
long, straight, spotted-steel lance. You'll see why, if you stare at his fierce form, he’s called Great King 1-Horned Buffalo. 
Pilgrim Sun walked up to him and said, “Your Grandpa Sun is here! Give me back my master quickly, and you'll suffer no harm. Utter but half a ‘No,’ and I'll see to it that you die faster than you can 
select your burial ground!” 
“You audacious, brazen monkey-spirit!” shouted the demon. “What abilities do you've that you dare indulge in such tall talk?” 
“You brazen fiend,” said Pilgrim, “it's only you who has never seen the abilities of old monkey!” 
The demon said, “Your master stole some garments of mine and | caught him all right. And now I’m just about to have him steamed and eaten. What kind of a warrior you’re that you dare demand his 
return at my door?” 
“My master’s an honest and upright priest,” said Pilgrim. “It’s impossible that he’d want to steal things from a fiend like you!” 
The demon replied, “I created a mortal village beside the mountain and your master sneaked into one of the buildings. What he saw he coveted, took three of my vests of silk brocade and put them on. 
I'd proof derived from both the stolen goods and witnesses, and that was why | seized him. If you indeed are able, you’d try your hand with me. If you can withstand me for three rounds, I'll spare your 
master’s life. If you can't, I'll send you to the Region of Darkness!” 
With a laugh, Pilgrim said, “Brazen creature! No need for this bravado! If you speak of trying my hand, you’re after old monkey's own heart. Come up here and have a taste of my rod!” 
The fiendish creature of course was in no wise afraid of any combat. Raising his lance, he stabbed at Pilgrim's face. This was quite a marvellous battle! Look at the golden-hooped rod upraised — the 
long-shafted lance going out - the golden-hooped rod upraised is brilliant as the golden snakes of lightning. The long-shafted lance going out is radiant like a dragon leaving the ink-dark sea. The little 
imps beat the drums before the door as they spread in formation to help the fight. Over here Great Sage uses his might to reveal, back and forth, his abilities. On that side there is a lance, alert and 
spirited; on our side there is a rod — such lofty art of combat! Truly a hero has met a hero true; a foe has found another worthy foe. That demon king belches purple breath like lightning coils; this Great 
Sage’s eyes flash forth rays like brocade clouds. Because a Great Tang Monk faces an ordeal, they strive bitterly without forbearance. Closing repeatedly for more than thirty times, they could not reach 
a decision. When that demon king saw how perfect Wukong’s style was in using his rod, how there was not even the slightest false move, he was so pleased that he shouted bravos repeatedly, saying, 
“Marvellous ape! Marvellous ape! Truly abilities like these are worthy to cause havoc in Heaven!” That Great Sage, too, was also pleased by the methodical way in which the demon king wielded his 
lance: as he parried left and right, every blow and every thrust were in perfect form. “Marvellous spirit! Marvellous spirit!” cried the Great Sage also. “Truly a demon capable of stealing elixir!” 
The two of them therefore fought for twenty more rounds. Using the tip of his lance to point at the ground, the demon king shouted for the little imps to attack together. All those brazen fiends, wielding 
swords, scimitars, staffs, and spears, rushed forward at once and surrounded the Great Sage Sun completely. Entirely undaunted, Pilgrim only cried, “Welcome! Welcome! That’s exactly what | want!” 
He used his golden-hooped rod to cover his front and back, to parry blows east and west but that gang of fiends refused to be beaten back. Growing more agitated, Pilgrim tossed his rod up into the 
air, shouting, “Change!” It changed immediately into iron rods by the hundreds and thousands; like flying snakes and soaring serpents, they descended onto the fiends from the air. When those monster- 
spirits saw this, everyone was frightened out of his wits. Covering their heads and necks, they fled toward their cave for their lives. The old demon king however, stood still and, laughing with scorn, 
said, “Monkey, don’t be impertinent! Watch my trick!” He at once took out from his sleeve a white, shiny fillet and tossed it up in the air, crying, “Hit!” With a swish, all the iron rods changed back into a 
single rod that was then sucked up by the fillet. The Great Sage Sun, completely empty-handed, had to use his somersault desperately in order to escape with his life. Thus the demon, in victory, 
returned to his cave but Pilgrim in a daze knew not what to do. Truly it is that the Dao is one foot but demons are 10 feet tall. Nature reels, feelings faint - the wrong home you find. Religion-self, alas, 
has no proper seat: his act that time stems from a faulty mind! 
051 

Mind Monkey in vain uses 1000 tricks; futile water & fire makes it hard to smelt demons 
The Great Sage Equal to Heaven who fled in defeat, empty-handed. He went to the back of the Golden Helmet Mountain, and as he sat down, big drops of tears fell from his eyes. “O Master!” he cried. 
“I'd hopes that you and | since God’s grace had both kindness and peace would find same youth, same life as my lasting wish: to live, work, seek the same release with same will, same mercy to show 
our spirits’ fruit; to reason and think the same, our minds truly one; to know and behold the same open way. | knew not I'd lose the staff of my will. ‘How'd | prosper with empty hands and feet?” 
After lamenting like this for a long time, the Great Sage thought to himself, “That monster-spirit recognised me! When we're fighting just now, | remember him paying me the compliment: ‘Truly someone 
worthy to cause havoc in Heaven!’ Judging from this, | can’t imagine that he is a fiend of this mortal world; he has to be some evil star of Heaven who descended to Earth out of longing for the world. | 
wonder what sort of demon he really is and where he dropped down from. I'll have to go to the Region Above to make an investigation.” 
Thus it was that Pilgrim, using the mind to question the mind, deliberated with himself and thereby gained control of himself. Leaping up, he mounted the auspicious cloud and went straight before the 
South Heaven Gate. As he raised his head, he was suddenly met by the Deity-King Viripaksa who saluted low and said to him, “Where is the Great Sage going?” 
“| must have an audience with the Jade Emperor,” said Pilgrim. 
“What're you doing here?” Viripaksa said, “Today it’s my turn to patrol the South Heaven Gate.” 


Hardly had he finished speaking when Ma, Zhao, Wen, Guan, the 4 grand marshals all appeared, and greeted Pilgrim, saying, “Great Sage, we're sorry that we’ve not come to meet you. Please have 
some tea with us.” 
“But I’m busy,” said Pilgrim whereupon he took leave of Virlpaksa and the four grand marshals and went inside the South Heaven Gate. When he arrived before the Hall of Divine Mists, he ran into 
Zhang Daoling, Mortal Ge, Xu Jingyang, Qiu Hongzhi, the six officers of the Southern Dipper, and the seven heads of the Northern Dipper. Meeting Pilgrim before the hall, they all raised their heads to 
greet him, saying, “Why has the Great Sage come here?” Immediately thereafter, they asked again, “Have you perfected the merit of accompanying the Tang Monk?” 
“It's still too early! It’s still too early!” said Pilgrim. “With so large a distance and so many demons, we’ve managed to accomplish only half the merit. Right now we're stranded in the Golden Helmet 
Cave of the Golden Helmet Mountain where a bovine monster has Master Tang captured in the cave. Old monkey found the way to his door and fought with him but that fellow had such vast magic 
powers that he managed to rob old monkey of his golden-hooped rod. That's why it is so difficult to arrest that demon king. | suspect that he has to be some evil star from the Region Above who has 
descended to Earth out of longing for the world but | really don’t know what sort of demon he is or where he comes from. For this reason old monkey came to seek the Jade Emperor and to charge him 
with the offence of not keeping his household under control.” 
“This ape head,” chuckled Xu Jingyang, “is still so mischievous!” 
“Im not being mischievous,” said Pilgrim. “It’s just that old monkey has been inquisitive all his life, and that’s how he finds things out.” 
“No need to talk further,” said Zhang Daoling, “let's announce his arrival for him.” 
“Thank you! Thank you!” said Pilgrim. 
The four Celestial Masters indeed went into Divine Mists to make the announcement and led Pilgrim to have an audience with the Jade Emperor. Saluting deeply to the throne, Pilgrim said, “Venerable 
Sir, I’m sorry to have troubled you! I’m sorry to have troubled you. Since old monkey began to accompany the Tang Monk to acquire scriptures in the Western Heaven, our journey has encountered 
more misfortune than good luck. But that goes without saying, | suppose! Right now a bovine monster has captured the Tang Monk in the Golden Helmet Cave of the Golden Helmet Mountain, and | 
don’t know whether my master will be steamed, cooked, or sun-dried. Old monkey found the way to his door and fought with the fiend who seemed to recognise old monkey vaguely. His magic powers 
however, are great indeed; he even managed to rob old monkey of his golden-hooped rod, thus making it difficult for me to seize any monster. I’ve a suspicion that this monster is an evil star from 
Heaven who descended to the Region Below out of longing for the world. For this reason old monkey came especially to memorialise to you. | beg the Celestial Worthy in his compassion to grant me 
my request. Please issue a decree to find out the identity of the evil star and to send troops to arrest this demon. Old monkey makes this request with the utmost fear and trembling.” Saluting deeply 
again, he said, “Such is my petition to be made known.” 
On one side, Mortal Ge chuckled and said, “How is it that our ape behaves so haughtily at first and so humbly afterwards?” 
“How should | dare?” asked Pilgrim. “I’m not acting haughtily at first and humbly afterwards but right now I’m a monkey who has no rod to play with.” 
When the Jade Emperor heard this memorial, he at once gave a decree to the Kehan Bureau,® saying, “In accordance with the memorial of Wukong, conduct an investigation among all the stars and 
planets of various Heavens and among all the divine kings of the various galaxies to see if anyone has been led to leave the Region Above out of longing for the world. Return to make your report as 
soon as you've fulfilled the decree. Such is our statement to be made known.” 
The adept Perfected Lord Kehan received the decree and went at once with the Great Sage to conduct this investigation. They first examined the various officials under the command of the Deity-Kings 
of the four Heaven Gates; next, they examined the various realised mortals, young and old, among the Three Forbidden Enclosures;* then they checked through Tao, Zhang, Xin, Deng, Gou, Bi, Pang, 
and Liu, the thunder deities; and finally, they searched through all thirty-three Heavens but no disturbance was found in any of them. They then examined the twenty-eight lunar mansions: the seven 
mansions of the East containing the constellations Citra, Nistya, Visakha, Anuradha, Bahu,° Milabarhani, and East-Asadha; the seven mansions of the West® containing the constellations Uttara- 
Asadha, Abhijit, Sravana, Sravistha, Satabhisa, East -Prosthapada, and North-Prosthapada. What they found was that all of these mansions including those of the North 7 mansions and South 7 
mansions were peaceful and quiet. They then examined the Sun, the Moon, Venus, Jupiter, Mercury, Mars, and Saturn — the Seven Regulators — together with Rahu, Ketu, Qi, and Bo, the four Stars 
of Excesses. Of all the stars and planets in Heaven, there was not a single one who left for the Region Below out of longing for the world. “Since this is the case,” said Pilgrim, “old monkey has no need 
to return to the Hall of Divine Mists. After all, it's not good to disturb the Jade Emperor once again. You may go back to make your report, and I'll wait here to see if there is any further message for me.” 
The adept Perfected Lord Kehan agreed. As Pilgrim Sun waited there, he composed a poem to record his impressions. The poem says: 
Clear wind and fair clouds make felicity; Quiet gods and bright stars show propitious signs. 

The cosmos at peace, Earth and Heaven prosper. At all 5 quarters arms and banners recline. 
After having made a thorough search everywhere, the adept Perfected Lord and Master of the Kehan Bureau returned to report to the Jade Emperor with this memorial: “None’s missing among the 
stars and mansions of Heaven; the divine warriors of all quarters are present. There is no one who has left for the Region Below out of longing for the world.” When the Jade Emperor heard this, he 
gave the order: “Let Wukong select a few celestial warriors to help him to capture the demon in the Region Below.” 
The four Celestial Masters, having received this decree, went out of the Treasure Hall of Divine Mists and said to Pilgrim, “O Great Sage, since there is no god in the Celestial Palace who longs for the 
world, the Jade Emperor in his great mercy has asked you to select a few divine warriors instead to help you capture the demon.” Saluting his head, Pilgrim thought to himself, “Those warriors in 
Heaven whose abilities are not as good as old monkey's are plentiful but those just as good are few. Remember when | caused great havoc in the Celestial Palace: the Jade Emperor sent out one 
hundred thousand Heaven soldiers with cosmic nets but there is not a single person who could stand up to me. They found my match only when they called up the Little Sage Erlang. Now this fiend 
has abilities as strong as old monkey’s. How could we prevail against him?” 
Perceiving the meaning of his silence, Xu Jingyang said, “This time is not quite the same as last time! As the proverb says, ‘One thing will vanquish specifically another.’ You can’t quite disobey the 
decree, can you? Use your judgement and select your celestial warriors. Don’t allow your hesitation to cause unnecessary blunder.” 
“In that case,” said Pilgrim, “I’m grateful for the imperial favour. Indeed, | don’t want to disobey the decree, nor does old monkey wish to make this trip in vain. Let me trouble Jingyang to report to the 
Jade Emperor that I'd like to be accompanied by Deity-King Li, the Pagoda Bearer, and Prince Nata. They have quite a few weapons designed to capture fiends. Let us go down below to do battle 
once with that fiend and see how things stand. If we manage to capture him, it will be the luck of old monkey; if not, we can then decide what to do next.” 
And so that Celestial Master made the report to the Jade Emperor who gave an order at once for Deity-King Li, dad and son, to lead an army of celestial soldiers to assist Pilgrim. The Deity-King 
accepted the order and came to meet Pilgrim who said again to the Celestial Master, “I can’t thank the Jade Emperor enough for sending along the Deity-King. There’s one more request which | must 
trouble you to make known for me: we need the service of two thunder squires. When the Deity-Kings fight with that demon, the thunder squires stationed at the edge of the clouds can aim their 
thunderbolts at the crown of his head. Isn’t that a good plan for killing the monster?” 
“Marvellous! Marvellous! Marvellous!” said the Celestial Master, laughing. 
He indeed presented this plan to the Jade Emperor. The Jade Emperor issued another decree to the Mansion of 9-fold Heaven where Deng flower and Zhang Fan, the two thunder squires, were 
ordered to assist the Deity-King in capturing the monster. They therefore went out of the South Heaven Gate with the Deity-King and the Great Sage Sun. In a moment they arrived at their destination. 
“This mountain’s,” said Pilgrim, “the Golden Helmet Mountain and the Golden Helmet Cave’s right in the middle. Please decide among yourselves which of you'll go there to provoke battle first.” 
Lowering the direction of his cloud, Deity-King Li ordered the celestial soldiers to pitch camp on the south slope of the mountain. “The Great Sage’s,” he said, “always known that my son Nata once 
subdued the demons of ninety-six caves. Most adroit in transformations, he carries with him many weapons for the subjugation of fiends. Let him go into battle first.” 
“In that case,” said Pilgrim, “let old monkey be the prince’s guide.” 
Rousing his heroic powers, that prince leaped with the Great Sage into the tall mountain and arrived at the cave’s entrance. They found the door tightly shut and nota single spirit below the rocky ledge. 
Walking forward, Pilgrim shouted: “Brazen demon, open the door quickly! Return my master!” 
The little fiends standing guard at the doors inside the cave hurriedly made the report: “Great King, Pilgrim Sun’s leading a boy to provoke battle in front of our door.” 
“The iron rod of the monkey's,” said the demon king, “taken by me. Since he can’t fight with empty hands, he must’ve gotten help now. Fetch my weapon!” Gripping the lance in his hands, the demon 
king walked out the door to have a look: he found a little boy with rare and refined features and who had a sturdy build. Truly his coy, jade-like face is like a full moon; ruddy lips and square mouth show 
silver teeth. Protrusive eyeballs give lightning-like gaze; bangs crowd his broad forehead like gathered mists. His sash like flying flames exercises in the wind; sunlit, his brocade robe sheds golden 
blooms. Brilliant straps hold up his heart-guarding disk; lustrous armour matches his battle boots. Though small of body, his voice rings loud and strong: this faith-defender, fierce Nata of 3 Heavens. 
With a laugh the demon king said, “You're the third child of Deity-King Li who bears the name Prince Nata. Why’re you clamouring at my door?” 
“Because of the disorder perpetrated by you, brazen demon!” said the prince. “So you seek to imprison and harm the holy monk from the Land of the East. By the golden decree of the Jade Emperor, 
I've come especially to arrest you.” Growing very angry, the demon king said, “You must have been asked by Sun Wukong to come here. I’m the evil star of that Tang Monk, all right! But what sort of 
martial skill does a small boy like you possess that you dare mouth such arrogant words? Don’t run away! Have a taste of my lance!” 
Wielding his fiend-cutting sword, the prince met him head-on. As the two of them joined hands and began their contest, the Great Sage dashed past the mountain slope and cried out: “Thunder squires, 
where’re you? Get down there quickly and aim your thunderbolts at the demon. Help the prince to subdue him.” Treading on the cloudy luminosity, Deng and Zhang, the two squires, were just about to 
attack when they saw the prince resorting to magic. Shaking his body, he changed himself into someone with 3 heads and 6 arms holding 6 kinds of weapons to attack the demon. The demon king 
also changed himself into someone with 3 heads and 6 arms using 3 long lances to defend himself. Exercising his fiend-routing power even further, the prince tossed his 6 weapons in the air. They are 
a monster-cleaving sword, a monster-slashing scimitar, a monster-binding rope, a monster-taming club, an embroidered ball, and a fiery wheel. “Change!” he roared. 
The weapons changed into hundreds and thousands. Like a thundershower and a sleet storm, these weapons rained down on the head of the demon. Not the least bit daunted, the demon king took 
out with one hand that sombre white fillet. He tossed it into the air, crying, “Hit!” With a loud whoosh, the six weapons were all sucked away by it. In desperation Prince Nata fled for his life with empty 
hands while the demon king turned back in triumph. In mid-air Deng and Zheng, the two thunder squires, smiled nervously to themselves and said, “It’s a good thing that we looked over the situation 
first and didn’t release the thunderbolts immediately. If they'd been sucked away by him, how'd we go back to face the Celestial Worthy?” 
Lowering the direction of their clouds, the two squires went with the prince to the southern slope and said to Deity-King Li, “That demon indeed has vast magic powers!” 
Giggling, Wukong said on one side, “His powers are only so-so but that fillet of his is formidable. | wonder what kind of treasure it’s that can suck away things like that.” 
“This Great Sage isn’t very mature!” grumbled Nata angrily. “We’ve lost our weapons and fled in defeat - we're sorely distressed all because of you. And you're giggling there instead! Why?” 
“You speak of being distressed,” said Pilgrim, “you think old monkey in the last analysis isn’t distressed? But I’ve neither plan nor alternative at the moment. | can’t cry and that’s why I’m giggling!” 
The Deity-King asked, “How’re we going to bring this to an end?” 
“You may discuss the matter some more,” said Pilgrim, “but one thing’s certain: whatever object can’t be sucked away by that fillet will be able to seize that fiend.” 
“Only water and fire can resist being sucked away,” said the Deity-King, “for as the proverb says: water and fire are ruthless.” 
When he heard this, Pilgrim said, “You may be right! Sit and wait here. Let old monkey make another trip to Heaven.” 
“What for?” asked Deng and Zhang, the two squires. Pilgrim said, “When old monkey gets there, he will not memorialise to the Jade Emperor. I'll only go to the Red Aura Palace inside the South 
Heaven Gate and ask Mars, the Star of Fiery Virtue, to come here and start a fire to burn up that fiend. Perhaps the fillet, too, will be reduced to ashes, and then the demon will be arrested. First, we'll 
be able to recover your weapons for you to take back to Heaven, and second, we'll rescue my master from his ordeal.” When the prince heard these words, he was delighted and said, “No need for 
further delay. Let the Great Sage go and come back quickly. All of us will wait for you here.” 
Mounting the auspicious luminosity, Pilgrim again went before the South Heaven Gate. Virlpaksa and the four marshals met him, saying, “Why has the Great Sage come here again?” Pilgrim said, 
“Deity-King Li told the prince to fight but they only did battle once when his weapons were snatched away by that demon king. Now | want to go to the Red Aura Palace and request assistance from the 
Star of Fiery Virtue.” Not daring to detain him, the four marshals permitted him to enter the gate. When he reached the Red Aura Palace, the deities of the Fire Department went inside to make the 
report: “Sun Wukong wishes to see our lord.” The Third Pneuma of the South, the Star of Fiery Virtue, at once straightened his clothes and went out of his gates to meet his visitor. Then he said, 
“Yesterday Kehan Bureau inspected this humble palace but there’s no one here who longs for the world.” 
“| know that,” said Pilgrim, “but Deity-King Li and the prince have lost their first battle and their weapons. | came especially to ask you to give us some help.” The Star said, “Nata happens to be the 
great god presiding over the Grand Assembly of Three Platforms.’ When he embarked on his official career, he once subdued the demons of ninety-six caves. If he with his vast magic powers could 
not do the job, how could this humble deity hope to assist you?” Pilgrim said, “I discussed the matter with Deity-King Li, and both of us thought that the most effective elements between Heaven and 


Earth are water and fire. That fiend has a fillet most capable of sucking away the possessions of others. We've no idea what sort of treasure it is. Since we know however, that fire can destroy virtually 
everything, I've come to ask you to go to the Region Below and start a fire to burn up the demon and save my master from this one ordeal.” 
When he heard this, the Star of Fiery Virtue immediately called up the divine soldiers of his department and went with Pilgrim to the south slope of the Golden Helmet Mountain. After they greeted the 
Deity-King and the thunder squires, the Deity-King said, “Great Sage Sun, you must go again to provoke that fellow to come out. Let me fight with him; when he takes out his fillet, I'll move out of the 
way and ask Fiery Virtue to burn him.” 
“Exactly,” said Pilgrim, chuckling. “I'll go with you.” They left to provoke battle while Fiery Virtue stood on the tall peak with the prince and the two thunder squires. 
When he reached the entrance of the cave, the Great Sage shouted: “Open the door! Return my master quickly!” The little fiends again hurried inside to report: “Sun Wukong is here once more!” The 
demon led his troops out of the cave to say to Pilgrim, “You brazen ape! What sort of help have you acquired this time?” From this side the Pagoda Bearer Deity-King stepped forward, crying, “Lawless 
demon! You recognise me?” 
“Deity-King Li,” said the demon king with a laugh, “you want to exact vengeance for your son, | suppose, and you want to recover your weapons?” 
“For one thing | want to exact vengeance,” said the Deity-King, “and for another | want to arrest you so that we can rescue the Tang Monk. Don’t run away! Have a taste of my scimitar!” 
Stepping aside to dodge the blow, the fiendish creature lifted his long lance and turned to meet his opponent. /n front of the cave the two of them had quite a battle! Look at the Deity-King’s scimitar 
slashing; the fiend’s lance upraised; the scimitar slashes and frosty light emits bright flames; the lance rises and the will to fight pierces doleful clouds. 1 is the fiendish creature reared in the Golden 
Helmet Mountain; 1 is the deity sent from the Divine Mists Hall. That 1 for mocking Chan nature unleashes his power; this 1 shows the great relation to lift the master’s ordeal. Using magic the Deity- 
King lets fly sand and stone; striving to win the fiend sprays mud and dirt. Spraying dirt can darken Heaven and Earth; flying sand may becloud rivers and seas. The 2 work hard to make a merit because 
the Tang Monk salutes the World-Honoured 1. When the Great Sage Sun saw the 2 of them had begun to fight, he turned at once and leaped up to the tall summit and said to the Star of Fiery Virtue, 
“Take care, Third Pneuma!” Look at them! The demon fought the Deity-King for some time and in the heat of the battle, he again took out the fillet. When the Deity-King saw it, he at once turned his 
auspicious luminosity around and fled in defeat. On the tall summit the Star of Fiery Virtue quickly gave the command for the various gods of his department to start the fire. /t’s some fire, all right! 
Marvellous! The classic says: 

The South’s the spirit of fire. 
A few tiny sparks can burn up 10000 acres for the power of the 3 Pneuma can change into 100-point fire. Now there are fire lances, fire scimitars, fire bows, and fire arrows — such the gods of sundry 
bureaus use in different fashions. See in mid-air fire crows flying and cawing; and all over the mount fire steeds swiftly galloping. Red rats in pairs — fire dragons in 2s — red rats in pairs throw out mighty 
flames and 10000 miles are reddened; fire dragons in 2s belch thick smoke and every corner turns black. Fire carts are pushed out; fire gourds are opened. Fire banners wave on a sky full of mists; 
fire rods stir up an earth full of blaze. Why speak of Ning Qi® whipping the ox? 
This is fiercer than Mr. Zhou at Red Cliff. °This is a Heaven, not a worldly fire - truly awesome. Crackling and roaring it's a holocaust. When the demon saw the fire coming, he was not in the least 
afraid. He tossed the fillet in the air and with a loud whoosh, it sucked away all those fire dragons, fire horses, fire crows, fire rats, fire bows, and fire arrows. Then he turned toward his cave and went 
back in triumph. The only thing left in the Star of Fiery Virtue’s clutch was a banner that he used to recall all his warriors to join the Deity-King and his followers. As they sat down in the south slope of 
the mountain, the Star said to Pilgrim, “O Great Sage, truly one seldom sees a vicious demon like this one! Now I’ve lost my fire gear. What'll | do?” 
“No need to grumble,” said Pilgrim with a smile. “All of you, please take a seat for a while. Old monkey will make another trip.” 
“Where are you going this time?” asked the Deity-King, and Pilgrim said, “If that fiendish creature is not afraid of fire, he must be afraid of water. The proverb says, ‘Water can overcome fire.’ Let old 
monkey go to the Northern Heaven Gate and ask the Star of Watery Virtue to let loose his water and flood the cave. When that demon king is drowned, I'll get back your possessions.” 
“Though this is a good plan,” said the Deity-King, “I fear that your master, too, will be drowned.” 
“Don’t worry,” said Pilgrim. “If my master is drowned, I’ve a way to revive him. But if | cause you all any further inconvenience, it'll be improper.” 
“In that case,” said Fiery Virtue, “please go! Please go!” 
Dear Great Sage! Again he mounted the cloud somersault and went before the North Heaven Gate where he ran at once into the Deity-King Vaisravana. “Where is the Great Sage Sun going?” asked 
the Deity-King, saluting. Pilgrim said, “I must enter the Dark Vastness Palace and see the Star of Watery Virtue on a certain matter. What are you doing here?” Vaisravana replied, “Today happens to 
be my turn to patrol the gate.” As they spoke, the four grand marshals — Pang, Liu, Gou, and Bi - all came forward to greet Pilgrim and invited him to have tea with them. “Don't trouble yourselves!” 
said Pilgrim. “My affairs most urgent.” Taking leave of the deities, he went straight up to the Dark Vastness Palace and asked the deities of the water department to announce him. When the Star of 
Watery Virtue heard the announcement that the Great Sage Sun Wukong had arrived, he at once commanded that the four seas, the five lakes, the eight rivers, the four great rivers, the three mighty 
streams, and the nine tributaries be thoroughly searched. The dragon kings at these places were also asked to retire. He then straightened out his clothes to walk out of the palace door to greet his 
visitor. As they walked back into the palace, the Star said, “Yesterday, Kehan Bureau came to inspect our humble palace, for he feared that some god in this department might have longed for the 
world. We're still making a thorough investigation of the gods of rivers and seas, and it’s not finished yet.” 
“That demon king isn’t a god of the rivers,” said Pilgrim, “but a much more powerful spirit. At first the Jade Emperor was kind enough to send Deity-King Li, his son, and two thunder squires to try to 
arrest him down below. He came up with his fillet and six divine weapons were sucked away. Old monkey had no other choice but to go to the Red Aura Palace and ask the Star of Fiery Virtue to start 
a fire with the various gods of his department. Once more, the fillet sucked away the fire dragons, the fire horses, and the like. | thought that if this thing was not afraid of fire, it had to be afraid of water. 
I've come, therefore, especially to ask the Star to unleash your water power, capture that monster-spirit for us, and recover the weapons for the Heaven warriors. The ordeal of my master will also be 
lifted.” 
When Watery Virtue heard this, he at once gave this order to the Divine King Water Lord of the Yellow River: “Follow the Great Sage and give him assistance.” Taking out a small white jade chalice 
from his sleeve, Water Lord said, “I've something here to hold water.” 
“Look at that!” said Pilgrim. “How much can this small chalice hold? How could it drown the demon?” 
“To tell you the truth, Great Sage,” said Water Lord, “this chalice of mine contains the water of the Yellow River. Half a chalice means half a river, and one whole chalice will hold an entire river.” 
Delighted, Pilgrim said, “Half a chalice is quite enough!” He took leave of Watery Virtue at once and slipped away from the Heaven arches with the Yellow River God. 
After he had bailed out half of the Yellow River's water with his chalice, Water Lord followed the Great Sage to the Golden Helmet Mountain where they met the Deity-King, the prince, the thunder 
squires, and Fiery Virtue. “No need for going into the details,” said Pilgrim. “Just let Water Lord follow me there and let me command the fiend to open the door. Don’t wait for him to come out. You just 
pour the water into the cave and the whole nest of that fiend will be drowned. I'll go and fish out the corpse of my master, and there'll be lots of time to revive him.” Water Lord agreed and walked right 
behind Pilgrim who went around the slope to go up to the cave entrance. “Fiend, open the door!” he cried. Those little fiends standing guard at the door recognised that it was the voice of the Great 
Sage Sun and they hurried inside to report: “Sun Wukong’s here again.” 
When the demon heard this, he picked up his treasure and his long lance and began to walk out. The stone door opened with a crash and Water Lord immediately emptied the content of his white jade 
chalice toward the inside of the cave. When he saw the water rushing in, the fiend dropped his long lance and took out the fillet, holding it high at the second door. Not only was the water blocked right 
there but it reversed its course and gushed back out of the cave. So startled was the Great Sage Sun that he somersaulted immediately into the air and, together with Water Lord, leaped up to the 
tallest peak. The other deities also mounted the clouds to follow them; they all stood on the peak to watch the water swelling to tremendous height and force. Marvellous water! Truly 1 spoonful of it will 
make it unfathomable; ‘for when it's propelled by divine force, it benefits all things and flows to swell a hundred streams. You hear its loud splashes rocking the valley; see its giant crest surging up to 
Heaven. Its mighty roar seems like thunder rumbling; violent waves seem like summit-snow swirling. Billows, a thousand feet tall, cover the roadways; ripples, 10000-layered, surge over the peaks. 
Gurgling, like spilled jade; ‘'clanging, like plucked strings. Hitting the rocks, it foams like chips of jade tossed high; rounding the curves, it breaks out in eddies unending. It flows through the lowlands 
and depressions, filling up brooklets and joining both their reaches. Alarmed by what he saw, Pilgrim said, “That's bad! The water's flooding the rice fields of people everywhere but it’s not even touched 
the inside of his cave. What'll we do?” 
He asked Water Lord to retrieve the water at once but Water Lord said, “Your humble deity only knows how to let loose the water but he doesn’t know how to retrieve it.” As the proverb says, “Water 
thrown out can’t be retrieved.” Ah! 
Fortunately, that mountain was rather tall and rugged, so that all the water flowed swiftly downward. In a moment, it drained into all the brooks and ravines and disappeared. A few little fiends leaped 
out of the cave afterwards, and when they saw that the water had receded, they began to play there happily — shouting and hollering, boxing with their fists, and wielding their rods and lances. “So this 
water never reached the inside of the cave,” said the Deity-King, “and all our efforts have been vain!” Pilgrim could not restrain the anger flaring up in his heart; wielding both his fists, he dashed up to 
the door of the demon and shouted: “Don’t run away! Watch out for a beating!” These several little fiends were so terrified that they all dropped their rods and lances to dash into the cave. Trembling 
all over, they made the report: “Great King, it’s terrible! He’s going to give us a beating!” Holding high his long lance, the demon king went out of the door to meet his adversary, saying, “This brazen 
ape’s such a rascal! You've lost to me several times and not even your water or fire can touch me. Why's it that you've still come to give up your life?” 
“My son’s twisting the facts!” said Pilgrim. “I don’t know whether I’m the one who'll give up my life or whether you're the one! Come over here and have a taste of your old Grandpa’s fists!” 
“This monkey's desperately forcing the issue!” said the demon with a chuckle. “I’m using the lance but he’s using only his fists. That pair of hands is nothing but skin and bones and no bigger than 
walnut pits! How’d you call them pounders? All right! All right! I'll put down my lance and box with you.” 
Laughing, Pilgrim replied, “That's the way to speak! Come up here!” 
Hitching up his clothes and walking forward, the fiend assumed a boxing posture; his two fists upraised looked truly like 2 iron sledge hammers. Great Sage also loosened his legs at once and moved 
his body to attack; right before the cave entrance, he began to box with the demon king. This was quite a fight! Aha! The 4 limbs are stretched out; the double-kicking feet fly up. They pound the ribs 
and chests; stab at galls and hearts. “The Mortal Pointing the Way; '?Laozi Riding the Crane; a Hungry Tiger Pouncing on the Prey” is most hurtful; “A Dragon Playing with Water’ is quite vicious. The 
demon king uses a “Serpent Turning Around”; the Great Sage employs a “Deer Letting Loose its Horns.” The dragon plunges to Earth with heels upturned; the wrist twists around to seize Heaven's 
bag. A green lion’s open-mouthed lunge; a carp’s snapped-back flip. Sprinkling flowers over the head; tying a rope around the waist; a fan moving with the wind; the rain driving down the flowers. The 
monster-spirit then uses the “Guanyin Palm,” and Pilgrim counters with the “Arhat Feet.” The long punch, stretching, is slacker, of course. How could it compare with the short, sharp jabs? 
The 2 of them fought for many rounds — none was the stronger for they're evenly matched. As the 2 of them boxed in front of the cave entrance, those standing high on the peak were so thrilled by the 
spectacle that Deity-King Li shouted bravos and the Star of Fiery Virtue clapped his hands in acclaim. Then the two thunder squires and Prince Nata led the other deities in rushing forward and tried to 
help their colleague. On the other side, the little monsters immediately surged forward also to cover their master, waving banners and beating drums, wielding swords and brandishing scimitars. When 
the Great Sage saw that the situation might turn against him, he yanked off a handful of hairs from his own body and tossed them into the air, crying, “Change!” At once they changed into some fifty 
little monkeys who swarmed all over the demon — grabbing his legs, tugging at his torso, gouging his eyes, and pulling at his hair. The fiendish creature became so alarmed that he immediately took 
out his fillet. When the Great Sage and his companions saw that object, they mounted the clouds at once and fled toward the tall summit. Tossing the fillet up into the air, the fiend changed those fifty 
monkeys back into their true forms and then they were sucked away again with a loud whoosh. After he had gained this victory, the fiend led his troops back to his cave, closed the door, and celebrated. 
“The Great Sage Sun is still a marvellous fighter!” said the prince. “The way you box, it’s truly like adding flowers to the embroidery and the way you use your body-division magic is indeed the display 
of nobility before others.” 
“As you watched from afar,” said Pilgrim, smiling, “how did the abilities of the fiend compare with old monkey's?” 
“His punches were slack,” said Deity-King Li, “and his kicks were slow; he certainly could not match the Great Sage for his speed and tightness. He was quite flustered already by the sight of our arrival 
and when he saw your magic of body-division, he grew even more desperate and resorted to his fillet.” 
“It's simple to deal with the demon king,” said Pilgrim, “but it’s difficult to overcome that fillet.” 
Both Fiery Virtue and Water Lord said together, “If we want to win, we must acquire his treasure first before we try to arrest him.” 
“How could we acquire his treasure,” asked Pilgrim, “unless we try to steal it?” 
“If we want to practice the ritual of stealing,” said a thunder squire, chuckling, “there is no one more able than the Great Sage. Remember that year when you caused great havoc in Heaven, how you 
stole imperial juice, mortal peaches, dragon’s liver, phoenix’s marrow, and the elixir of Laozi? What a talent that was! Today is the time to put that to use again.” 
“Thanks for the compliment!” said Pilgrim. “Thanks for the compliment! If that’s what you think we'd do, take a seat here and let old monkey go to make some investigation.” 
Dear Great Sage! He leaped down from the peak and crept up to the cave entrance; with one shake of his body he changed himself into a tiny fly. Truly graceful! Look at him! His wings thin as skin of 
bamboo; a body small like a flower’s heart. His arms and his legs just thicker than hairs; beady eyes both shining and bright. Good at chasing scent and fragrance, he flies swiftly riding the wind. His 


frame barely pulls down the steelyard weight; so cute he’s even of some use. ‘Ever so lightly he flew up to the door and crawled inside through a crack. There he found many fiends, young and old; 
some were reciting and dancing while others stood in rows on both sides. Sitting high on his throne was the old demon king, and before him were placed dishes of serpent meat, venison, bear-paw, 
camel-hump, mountain vegetables, and fruits. There were juice pots made of blue porcelain, from which came fragrant goat's milk and coconut juice. In big bowlfuls he and his other fiends were drinking 
with abandon. Dropping down into the crowd of little fiends, Pilgrim at once changed into a badger-head spirit and inched his way toward the throne of the demon king. He looked everywhere for a long 
time but he could not discover where the treasure was placed. Dashing behind the throne, he found the fire dragons and fire horses hung up high in the rear hall, all whining and neighing. As he raised 
his head, he suddenly saw his own golden-hooped rod leaning against the east wall. So delighted was he by this discovery that he even forgot about changing into his true form before running forward 
to seize his iron rod. Only after he had picked it up did he reveal his original form and fought his way out with his rod. All those fiends were terrified while the old demon king was caught completely off 
guard. Thus Pilgrim was able to push down three monsters on one side and bring down 2 on the other; opening up a bloody path, he went directly out of the cave. So it is that the demon so arrogant, 
lets down his guard; the lordly staff returns to the rightful man. 
052 

Wukong greatly disturbed the Golden Helmet Cave; Siddhartha reveals in secret the true master 
The Great Sage Sun who recovered his golden-hooped rod and fought his way out of the door. He was filled with delight as he leaped up to the tall summit to face the various gods. “How did you do 
this time?” asked the Deity-King Li. 
“By his transformation,” said Pilgrim, “old monkey managed to get inside the cave. That fiend and his subordinates were all reciting and dancing, drinking their victory juice. | didn’t succeed in detecting 
where he put his treasure but when | went to the rear of the cave, | heard horses neighing and dragons whining and | knew that they had to be the belongings of the fire department. The golden-hooped 
rod was leaning against the east wall; old monkey picked it up and fought his way out.” 
“You got your treasure,” said the deities, “but when could we get back ours?” 
“It's easy! It's easy!” said Pilgrim. “When I’ve this iron rod, I'll strike him down and recover your treasures for you, no matter what.” Hardly had he finished speaking when they heard a great din coming 
from below the mountain slope punctuated by the roll of drums and the sounding of gongs. The Bovine Great King was leading the various spirits to give chase to Pilgrim who shouted when he saw the 
throng approaching, “Good! Good! Good! This is exactly my wish! Have a seat, all of you and let old monkey go again to catch him.” Dear Great Sage! Lifting high his iron rod, he met them head-on 
crying, “Brazen demon, where’re you going? Watch my rod!” 
Using his lance to parry the blow, the fiend scolded him: “You thievish ape! You're indeed ill-behaved! How dare you rob me in broad daylight?” 
“You cursed beast!” said Pilgrim. “You don’t know that you're about to die. You're the one who robbed us in broad daylight with your fillet. Which of these things really belongs to you? Don’t run away. 
Have a taste of your Venerable Dad's rod!” 
What a great battle this was! The Great Sage displays his might; the demon’s no longer tame. The 2 wage a fierce contest for neither’s willing to quit. This one’s iron rod seems like a dragon’s tail; that 
1’s long lance resembles a python’s head. From this 1, the strokes of the rod roar like the wind; from that 1, the blows of the lance flow like strong currents. See coloured mists close in to darken the 
peaks and auspicious clouds hover over the woods. The birds in the air all stop their wings; the beasts in the wilds all hide their heads. On the battlefield the little fiends cheer; on this side the Great 
Sage rouses himself. His one iron rod that none can withstand has fought throughout the West’s 10000 miles. But that long lance is truthfully his match ere ruling Golden Helmet with all success. They 
meet this time and they will not leave in peace; till 1 obtains a victory they will never cease. For 3 hours the demon king fought with the Great Sage Sun but no decision could be reached. Soon it was 
getting dark. Using the lance to hold back the rod, the demon said, “Wukong, you stop now. When it’s dark everywhere, it’s no time to fight. Let's each of us take some rest. We'll resume our contest 
tomorrow morning.” 
“Shut up, you lawless beast!” scolded Pilgrim. “Old monkey's just getting inspired! Who cares if it's getting late! I'm determined to find out which of us is better.” With a shout however, the fiend turned 
and fled, leading all those fiends and their arms back into the cave, after which they had the door tightly shut. 
As the Great Sage walked back to the peak with his rod trailing behind him, the Heaven deities all congratulated him with these words: “Truly a mighty power Equal to Heaven! What boundless, what 
limitless powers!” 
“Thanks for the compliments! Thanks for the compliments!” said Pilgrim. “We've not exaggerated in our praise,” said Deity-King Li, drawing near. “You're indeed quite a man! The way you fought just 
now reminded us of the time when you defied the cosmic nets.” 
“Let's not revive old gossip,” said Pilgrim. “After he had fought with old monkey all this while, that fiend must be tired. I'll not complain of fatigue; while all of you sit here and relax, | want to go into the 
cave to find out where he has hidden that fillet of his. I’m determined to steal it and to catch the fiend. Then we can find your weapons so that you all may return to Heaven.” 
“It's getting late,” said the prince. “Why not rest for the night and go there tomorrow morning?” 
Laughing, Pilgrim said, “Our little boy’s still ignorant of the ways of the world! Who's ever seen a thief starting something in daytime? To sneak inside, one must go during the night, undetected; that's 
how this business's done!” 
Both Fiery Virtue and 1 of the thunder squires said, “Talk no more, Third Prince. This sort of thing may be foreign to us but the Great Sage’s an expert. He’s to make use of this time for the demon’s 
tired and his guard may be down during the night. Let the Great Sage go now. Go quickly!” 
Dear Great Sage! Grinning broadly, he put away his iron rod and leaped down from the tall summit to go once more before the cave. He shook his body once and immediately changed into a small 
cricket. Truly he has hard mouth, long whiskers, and black skin with keen eyes and legs forked like branches. Midst bright moon and clear breeze he chirps on the wall like someone speaking in silent 
night. He weeps when dew saddens prospect, a proud voice, though halting and faint. The window's pensive guest dreads hearing him, this lodger beneath the steps or the bed. ‘Stretching forth his 
long legs, he jumped up to the door with three or four leaps and crawled inside through a crack. He squatted near the foot of the wall and, by the light of lamps and torches inside, looked carefully 
around. The various fiends, young and old, were just wolfing down their dinners. Pilgrim creaked and cricked for a while, and soon after, the fiends finished eating and put away their utensils. After 
laying out their bedding, all the fiends retired. Not until the time of the first watch did Pilgrim go to the rear chamber where he heard the old demon give this command: “All the little ones guarding the 
doors should sleep lightly. | fear that Sun Wukong may change into something to come in here to steal again.” 
Those who were taking turns to stand watch began to beat their rattles or ring their bells. Great Sage however, was most eager to do what he came to do! After he crawled into the bedroom, he found 
a stone bed, on both sides of which were several mountain ghosts or tree spirits all powdered and rouged. They were making the bed and helping the old demon to retire; some were unlacing his boots 
while others were untying his robe. After the demon king took off his clothes, at once the fillet — all ghostly white - could be seen. It was attached to his left shoulder like an armlet made of a string of 
pearls. Look at him! Instead of taking the fillet off, he pushed it up a couple of times until it was snugly clamped to his shoulder. Only then did he lie down to sleep. With one shake of his body again, 
Pilgrim changed into a flea with yellow skin. Leaping onto the stone bed and crawling inside his covers, he crept up to the left shoulder of the fiend and gave him a sturdy bite. The fiend was so stung 
by it that he turned over, shouting, “These slaves! They ought to be beaten more often! They didn’t shake the covers, nor did they brush the bedding. Now I’ve been bitten by | don’t know what!” He 
gave his fillet two further shoves before dozing off once more. Crawling above the fillet, Pilgrim gave him another bite. Unable to sleep, the fiend sat up, yelling, “I'm itching to death!” 
When Pilgrim saw how carefully he guarded the fillet, refusing to let it leave his body for even a moment, Pilgrim knew that he would be unable to steal it. He leaped down from the bed, changed once 
more into a cricket, and left the bedroom to go to the rear where he again heard dragons whining and horses neighing. Behind two doors tightly locked fire dragons and fire horses all hung inside. 
Pilgrim changed back to his original form as he walked up to the door to exercise his lock-opening magic. He recited a spell and gave the padlock a wipe: immediately the double patches snapped 
open. Pushing open the doors, he walked into a room so brightly lit by fire equipment that it seemed like daylight. Several weapons were seen leaning against the east and the west walls: they were 
the fiend-slashing scimitar of the prince, the fire bows and fire arrows of Fiery Virtue, and the like. In the glow of the light, Pilgrim looked carefully around and saw on top of a stone table behind the door 
a small basket woven of bamboo. Inside was placed a bunch of hairs. Filled with delight, the Great Sage picked up the hairs and blew on them two mouthfuls of hot air, crying, “Change!” They changed 
at once into forty or fifty little monkeys who were then told to pick up the scimitar, the sword, the club, the wheel, together with the bows, the arrows, the lances, the carts, the gourds, the fire crows, the 
fire rats, and the fire horses — all those things sucked away by the fillet. After they had mounted the fire dragons, they started a huge blaze that burned outward from deep inside the cave. All you’d hear 
were the snapping and cracking — bing-bing, bang-bang — as if thunderbolts or fire cannons were let loose inside. Those monster-spirits, young and old, were utterly terrified; in a stupor, they hugged 
their blankets or covered their heads, some screaming, and some weeping. None of them knew which way to run and more than half of them were burned to death by the fire. The Handsome Monkey 
King thus returned to his camp in triumph at about the hour of the third watch. We now tell you about Deity-King Li and his companions on the tall summit. They suddenly saw a bright flare of lights 
rushing toward them, and then they discovered Pilgrim riding on a dragon and shouting commands to a team of little monkeys as they ascended the mountain. After reaching the peak, he yelled: “Come 
and get your weapons! Come and get your weapons!” 
Fiery Virtue and Nata immediately answered his call while Pilgrim shook his body to retrieve his hairs. Prince Nata took back his six weapons, and Fiery Virtue told his subordinates to put away the fire 
dragons and other equipment. All of them were full of smiles and praises for Pilgrim. The Golden Helmet Cave where flames were still shooting up everywhere. The Bovine Great King was scared out 
of his wits; dashing out of his room, he held his fillet up high with both hands. He pushed it toward the fire this way and that way, and it immediately went out. Though the air was filled with flame and 
smoke, they all subsided after he and his treasure had run through the entire cave. He tried to rescue the other fiends but over half of them had been burned to death. Those who survived, male and 
female, did not number a hundred. Then he went to inspect the place where he had hidden the weapons but not a single item could be found. Finally, he reached the rear of the cave where he saw 8 
Rules, Sand-monk, and the elder still securely bound. The white dragon horse was tied to the stall, and even the load of luggage remained in the room. Angrily, the demon said, “I wonder which of the 
little fiends was so careless that he started the fire and brought all this on us!” 
“Great King,” one of the attendants by his side said, “This fire could not have been started by any one of our own. It had to be the work of someone intent on raiding our camp; after he had released the 
equipment of the fire department, he also stole the divine weapons.” Only then did the old demon realise what had happened. “There is no one else!” he said. “It has to be that thief, Sun Wukong! No 
wonder I'd such a hard time when | tried to sleep just now! That larcenous ape must have gotten in here by means of transformation and gave my shoulder a couple of bites. Undoubtedly he wanted to 
steal my treasure but when he saw how tightly it was attached to my body, he could not do it. That was the reason he stole the other weapons instead and let loose the fire dragons. How vicious of him! 
He wanted to burn me to death! Oh thievish ape! You’ve made vain use of your trickery! When I’ve this treasure on me, | can’t be drowned even when | plunge into the ocean, nor can | be burned if | 
leap into a pool of fire. But when | catch you, thief, this time, I’m going to skin and cut you up alive. Only then will | be satisfied.” 
He spoke sullenly in this manner for a long time, and soon thereafter it was dawn. On the tall summit, the prince, holding his six weapons that had just been recovered, said to Pilgrim, “Great Sage, it’s 
getting bright. Let's not wait any further. We'd make use of this opportunity when that demon’s will to fight has been blunted by you. With the help of the fire department, let us go again to do battle with 
him. Most probably he’ll be captured this time.” 
“You're right,” said Pilgrim, chuckling. “Let us unite and go have some fun!” 
In high spirits and eager to fight, each of them went up to the cave entrance. “Lawless demon, come out!” bellowed Pilgrim. “Come and fight with old monkey!” 
The 2 stone doors of the cave had been reduced to ashes the night before by the intense heat. At the moment, several little fiends by the entrance were just in the process of gathering up the ashes 
and sweeping the ground. When they saw the various sages approach, they were so terrified that they abandoned their brooms and ash forks and dashed inside to report: “Sun Wukong’s led many 
gods to provoke battle outside our door!” 
So astounded was he by this report that the bovine fiend gnashed his teeth and rolled his ring-like eyes. He picked up his lance, treasure, and no sooner had he emerged from the door when he began 
to castigate his adversary saying, “You thievish ape! You camp-raider and arsonist! What skills do you’ve that you dare treat me so contemptuously?” 
Smiling broadly, Pilgrim said, “You brazen fiend! If you want to know my skills, come up here and listen to my recital. My skills were great since the time of my birth as my name’s throughout the universe 
enlightened, | practiced the transcendent way; in days past came the means to eternal youth. | willed to salute at the place of the Heart? to seek with reverence the home of a sage. | learned how to 
change with endless power, taking as my playground the whole cosmos. At leisure | tamed tigers on the mount; when bored | subdued dragons in the sea. | claimed a throne at native Flower-Fruit, 
flaunting my strength in Water-Curtain Cave. A few times | lusted for Heaven’s realm; ignorant, | robbed the Region Above. My royal name: Great Sage Equal to Heaven; | was called also Handso-me 
Monkey King. When the Feast of Peaches was under way, | took offence for no invitation came. In secret | stole jade juice at Jasper Pool and drank it in stealth at the treasure tower. Dragon and 
phoenix organs | did taste; a hundred dainties I'd steal and eat. Millennial peaches | freely enjoyed, stuffing my guts with long-life drugs and pills. Strange things of Heaven | took piece by piece and 
rare goods from sage mansions bit by bit. When Jade Emperor learned what great skills I'd, he sent divine soldiers to the battlefield. | banished those fierce Nine Luminaries; and wounded the Five 
Quarters’ Vicious Stars. All Heaven’s warriors were no match of mine; a hundred thousand troops dared not meet me. Hard pressed, the Jade Emperor gave a decree: libation Stream’s Little Sage 
then raised his sword. Seventy-two transformations we struggled through, each rousing his spirit, showing his might. Guanyin of South Sea came, too at length to lend them her help with willow and 
vase. Laozi then made use of his diamond snare to have me captured and brought up there to see, bound firmly, the Great Emperor Jade as judge and tribunal indicted me. They told God Powerful to 


cut me dead but sparks flew up when knives fell on my head. Since no means was found to put me to death, they sent me all shackled to Laozi’s hall: a brazier watched by the Six Gods of Light, refined 
me till | became hard as steel. With vessel opened on day forty-ninth, | leaped out to work violence yet once more. When gods hid themselves and none withstood me, the sages agreed that God be 
called. Siddhartha’s power’s mighty indeed! His wisdom, truly vast and limitless! A somersault match waged upon his hand made a mountain press me, now no stronger. When the Emperor gave the 
Feast of Heaven's Peace, the West regained its name of Ultimate Bliss. Old monkey jailed for full five centuries didn’t once taste a bit of tea or rice. But when Elder Gold Cicada came to earth, the East 
sent him to go to God’s home to fetch true scriptures for a noble state where the Great Tang ruler might save the dead. Guanyin taught me to submit to the Good and let faith held firmly my wildness 
check. Free of my ordeal at that mountain root, | now go west to fetch the scripture texts. Lawless demon, cease your fox-like cunning! Return my Tang Monk, salute Religion King!” 

When he heard these words, he pointed at Pilgrim and cried, “So, you’re the big thief who robbed Heaven! Don’t run away! Swallow my lance!” The Great Sage met him with the rod and the two of 
them began to fight. On this side Prince Nata became angry and the Star of Fiery Virtue grew vicious: they hurled those six divine weapons together with the fire equipment at the demon. The Great 
Sage Sun fought even more fiercely as the thunder squires took up their thunderbolts and the Deity-King his scimitar to rush at their enemy. Smiling scornfully, the demon calmly took out from his 
sleeve his treasure and tossed it in the air, crying, “Hit!” With a loud whoosh, the six divine weapons, the fire equipment, the thunderbolts, the scimitar of the Deity-King, and the rod of Pilgrim were all 
snatched away. Once again, the deities and the Great Sage Sun were empty-handed. After the demon returned in triumph to his cave, he gave this order: “Little ones, gather rocks and boulders to 
rebuild our doors, and tidy up our rooms and hallways. When we finish our work, we'll slaughter the Tang Monk and his companions to thank the Earth. Then all of us can disperse the blessing and 
enjoy.” 

The little fiends all obeyed. The Deity-King Li led the rest of the gods back to the tall summit. Fiery Virtue then began to rail at Nata for being too impulsive while the thunder squires blamed the Deity- 
King for acting too recklessly. Water Lord however, stood to one side and sulked. When Pilgrim saw how distraught they looked, he had little alternative but to appear cheerful and said to them, forcing 
a smile, “Please don’t be so distressed, all of you. After all, the ancient proverb says, ‘Victory or defeat is a common thing for the soldier.’ If we want to consider the demon’s fighting skill, it's no more 
than so-so. The reason he can cause so much harm is that fillet in his possession that has again sucked away all our weapons. Nonetheless, try to relax. Let old monkey go and see if he can find out 
something more about his pedigree.” 

“When you first presented your memorial to the Jade Emperor,” said the prince, “there’s a thorough search made throughout the celestial realm but not a trace of this monster could be found. Now 
where are you going to make further investigation?” Pilgrim replied, “Come to think of it, the religion power of God is boundless. I'll go now to the Western Heaven to question our God Siddhartha; I'll 
ask him to scan with his eye of wisdom the four great continents of Earth and see where this fiend was born and raised. | want to learn what sort of treasure his fillet is, and no matter what, I’m 
determined to have him arrested. Only then will all of you be avenged and have a happy trip back to Heaven.” 

“If that’s your intention,” said the gods, “don’t delay. Go quickly! Go quickly!” 

Dear Pilgrim! He said he would go and at once he mounted his cloud-somersault. Instantly he arrived at the Spirit Mountain. Lowering his auspicious luminosity, he looked everywhere. Marvellous 
place! The noble Mount Spirit, fine, pure cloud-layers; a divine summit touching jade-green sky. A great town seen in Western Heaven, its form, its air surpassing even China’s. The primal breath flows 
to widen Heaven and Earth; strong wind scatters a platform full of flowers. *Long notes of bells and stones are often heard and clear, loud scripture recitations. See, too, lay-sisters lecturing beneath 
green pines and Arhats walking among jade-like cedars. White cranes with feelings come to Vulture Peak; blue phoenixes wish to stand by quiet arbours. Black apes in pairs hold up mortal fruits; aged 
deer in 2s present purple blooms. Rare birds call often like some tale-telling, flowers too strange, and fair to have names. The ranges turn and circle fold upon fold; the old path meanders though it was 
level. A place where pure void of spirit's the norm - God's solemn and great awakened form. As Pilgrim enjoyed the sight of the mountain scenery, he heard someone calling him: “Sun Wukong, where 
did you come from? Where’re you going?” 

He turned quickly and found that it was the Honoured Lady Beggar. ‘The Great Sage greeted her and said, “I’ve a matter that requires an audience with Siddhartha.” 

“You rascal!” said Lady Beggar, “If you want to see Siddhartha, why don’t you ascend the treasure temple? Why stay here to look at the mountain?” 

“This is the first time I’ve been to this noble region,” replied Pilgrim, “and that’s why I’m acting boldly.” 

“Follow me quickly,” said Lady Beggar, and Pilgrim ran after her up to the gate of the Thunderclap Monastery where their way was barred by the heroic figures of the Eight Great Diamond Guardians.* 
“Wukong,” said Lady Beggar, “wait here for a moment and let me announce your arrival.” Pilgrim had no choice but to wait outside the gate. Going before a god, Lady Beggar pressed her palms before 
her and said, “Sun Wukong needs to have an audience with Siddhartha.” Whereupon Siddhartha commanded him to enter, and only then did the diamond guardians allow him to pass. 

After Pilgrim touched his head to the ground, Siddhartha asked, “Wukong, | heard previously that after the Honoured One Guanyin had freed you, you made submission to Religion and agreed to 
accompany the Tang Monk to seek scriptures here. Why have you come all by yourself? What is the matter?” Again touching his head to the ground, Pilgrim said, “Let me report this to our God. Since 
your disciple embraced the faith, he has followed the master from the Tang court in his journey west. We reached the Golden Helmet Cave of the Golden Helmet Mountain where we ran into an evil 
demon who had the name of Bovine Great King. He had such vast magic powers that he abducted my master and brothers into his cave. Your disciple demanded their return but he had no good will 
at all and we fought it out. My iron rod was snatched away by a ghostly white fillet of his. As | suspected that he might be some celestial warrior who longed for the world, | went to the Region Above to 
investigate. The Jade Emperor was kind enough to lend me the assistance of the dad-and-son team of Deity-King Li, only to have him rob the prince of his six weapons. Then | asked the Star of Fiery 
Virtue to burn him with fire but he took the fire equipment also. Next we asked the Star of Watery Virtue to drown him with water but we'd not even touch a single hair of his. After your disciple spent 
enormous energy to steal back the iron rod and other things, we went again to provoke battle. Once again his fillet sucked away all our weapons, and we're powerless to subdue him. That’s why I’ve 
this special request for our God, in his great compassion, to survey the world and find out what is the true origin of this creature. I'll then be able to capture his kin or neighbour so that it'll facilitate the 
arrest of the demon and the rescue of my master. All of us then will be able to salute with hands pressed to the forehead and utter sincerity to seek the right fruit.” 

After Siddhartha heard this, he trained his eyes of wisdom to peer into the distance and immediately he had knowledge of the whole affair. “Though I’ve learned the identity of that fiendish creature,” 
he said to Pilgrim, “I can’t reveal it to you because you've such a loose, apish tongue. If somehow you pass on the fact that it was | who disclosed his identity, he would not fight with you but he would 
start a quarrel up here in Spirit Mountain. That would cause me a lot of trouble. Let me give you the assistance of my religion power instead to help you capture him.” Saluting deeply again, Pilgrim 
thanked him and said, “What sort of religion power will you bestow on me?” Siddhartha immediately ordered the 18 Arhats to open the treasury and take out eighteen grains of golden cinnabar sand to 
assist Wukong. “What will this golden cinnabar sand do?” asked Pilgrim. “Go before the cave,” said Siddhartha, “and ask the demon for a contest. Entice him to come out and the Arhats will at once 
release the sand that will entrap him. Since he'll be unable to move his body or raise his feet, you can beat him up at will.” 

“Wonderful! Wonderful” cried Pilgrim, laughing. “Bring them out quickly!” 

Not daring to delay, the Arhats at once took out the golden cinnabar sand and walked out of the gate. After Pilgrim thanked Siddhartha again, he ran after the crowd and found there were only sixteen 
Arhats. “What sort of a place’s this,” yelled Pilgrim, “that you’re taking bribes and releasing prisoners? 

“Who is taking bribes and releasing prisoners?” asked the Arhats. 

Pilgrim said, “Originally eighteen of you’re sent. Why's it that there’re only sixteen now?” 

Hardly had he finished speaking when Dragon-Subduer and Tiger-Tamer, the 2 Honoured ‘1s walked out from inside. “Wukong,” they said, “how'd you be so mischievous? The two of us remained 
behind because Siddhartha had further instructions for us.” 

“That's a wretched way to take bribes!” said Pilgrim. “If | waited even a moment in hollering, you’d probably not come out.” 

Laughing uproariously, the Arhats mounted the auspicious clouds. In a moment, they arrived at the Golden Helmet Mountain where they were met by Deity-King Li leading the rest of the deities. “No 
need to go into the details,” said 1 of the Arhats. “Go quickly and ask him to come out.” 

Holding his fists high, the Great Sage went before the cave entrance and shouted, “Blubbery fiend! Come out quickly and try your hands with your Grandpa Sun.” 

Again those little fiends dashed inside to make the report. Infuriated, the demon king said, “This thievish ape! | wonder whom he’s invited to come make a nuisance here!” 

“There’s no other warrior,” said the little fiends, “he’s all by himself.” 

“I've already taken away his rod,” said the demon king. “How’s it that he shows up all by himself again? Could it be that he wants to box some more?” Picking up his treasure and his lance, he ordered 
the little fiends to move away the boulders and leaped out of the cave. “Larcenous ape!” he scolded. “For several times you've not been able to gain the upper hand and that'd make you stay away. 
Why’re you here again making noises?” 

Pilgrim said, “This brazen demon doesn’t know good or evil! If you don’t want your Grandpa to show up at your door, you make submission, apologise, send out my master, and brothers. Then I'll spare 
you.” 

“Those three monks of yours,” said the fiend, “have been scrubbed clean. Soon they'll be slaughtered. And you're still making a fuss? Go away!” When Pilgrim heard the word slaughter, fire leaped up 
to his cheeks. Unable to suppress the anger of his heart, he wielded his fists and attacked the demon with hooks and jabs. Spreading out his long lance, the fiend turned to meet him. Pilgrim jumped 
this way and that to deceive the monster. Not knowing it was a trick, the demon left the entrance of the cave and gave chase toward the south. At once Pilgrim shouted for the Arhats to pour the golden 
cinnabar sand down on the demon. Marvellous sand! Truly like fog and mist, it spreads out at 15"; in great profusion it drops from afar. 1 mass of white blinding vision everywhere. A dark expanse flaring 
up to lead you astray. The working woodsman has lost his partner; the fairy youth picking herbs can’t see his home. It drifts and soars like fine wheat-flour; some grains are coarse like sesame. The 
world seems opaque as the summits darken; the sun’s hidden and the sky disappears. It’s not quite the noise and dust at a horse’s heels, nor the light fluffiness chasing a scented car; is this sand by 
nature a ruthless thing that can blot out the world to seize the fiend. Because a demon assails the right Way, the Arhats by Law release their power. Though your hand may hold a bright shiny pearl, 
soon the blown sand will your eyesight obscure. When the demon saw that the flying sand was clouding up his vision, he lowered his head and discovered that his feet were already standing in three 
feet of the stuff. He was so horrified that he tried to jump upward; before he could even stand up properly the sand grew another foot. In desperation, the fiend tried to pull up his legs while taking out 
his fillet. Throwing it up into the air, he cried, “Hit!” 

With a loud whoosh, the eighteen grains of golden cinnabar sand were sucked away. The demon then strode back to the cave. All of those Arhats with bare hands stopped their clouds while Pilgrim 
drew near and asked, “Why aren't you sending down the sand?” 

“There's a sound just now,” 1 of them said, “and instantly our golden cinnabar sand vanished.” 

“That little something’s sucked them away again!” sighed Pilgrim with a laugh. 

“If he’s so hard to catch,” said Deity-King Li to the rest, “how'd we ever arrest him? When'll we be able to return to Heaven? How'd we face the Emperor?” 

On 1 side, Dragon Subduer and Tiger Tamer, the 2 Arhats, said, “Wukong, did you know why we delayed in coming out of the door just now?” 

“Old monkey only feared that you're trying to find some pretence not to come,” said Pilgrim. “I don’t know any other explanation.” 

1 of the 2 Arhats replied, “Siddhartha told the two of us that the demon had vast magic powers. If we lost the golden cinnabar sand, he said, we'd ask Sun Wukong to search for his origin at the place 
of Laozi, the Tushita Palace of the Griefless Heaven. The demon would be caught with one stroke.” When Pilgrim heard this, he said, “That’s most despicable! Even Siddhartha is trying to hornswoggle 
old monkey! He should have told me right then and there, and there would have been no need for all of you to travel.” 

“If Siddhartha made such a clear revelation,” said Deity-King Li, “let the Great Sage go up there quickly.” 

Dear Pilgrim! “I’m off!” he said, and at once he mounted the cloud somersault to enter the South Heaven Gate. There he was met by the four grand marshals who raised their folded hands to their chins 
to salute him, asking, “How’s the affair of arresting that monster?” Answering them as he walked along, Pilgrim said, “It's unfinished! It's unfinished! But I’m on his trail now!” The four grand marshals 
dared not detain him and permitted him to walk inside the Heaven Gate. Going neither to the Hall of Divine Mists nor to the Dipper Palace, he went instead straight up to the Tushita Palace of the 
Griefless Heaven that was beyond the thirty-third Heaven. Two mortal youths were standing outside the palace. Without announcing who he was however, Pilgrim walked right inside the door, so 
startling the youths that they tugged at him, crying, “Who are you? Where are you going?” Only then did Pilgrim say, “I’m the Great Sage Equal to Heaven. | wish to see Laozi, Mr. Li.” 

“Why are you so rude?” asked one of the youths. “Stand here and let us announce you.” But Pilgrim would have none of that. With a shout, he dashed inside and ran smack into Laozi who was just 
coming out. Saluting low hurriedly, Pilgrim said, “Venerable Sir, haven't seen you for a while.” 

“Why is this ape not going to seek scriptures?” said Laozi, chuckling. “What's he doing here?” 

Pilgrim replied, “Scripture-seeking — toil unending. My way’s blocked: | came shuffling.” 

“If the road to the Western Heaven is blocked,” said Laozi, “what has that got to do with me?” 

Again Pilgrim said, “Ah, Heaven West! Stop your protest! | find my trail: you I'll contest.” 

“This place of mine,” said Laozi, “is an incomparable mortal palace. What sort of trail can you find?” 


Eyes unblinking, Pilgrim went inside and looked left and right. He walked past several corridors and all at once he discovered a boy sound asleep by the corral. The green buffalo however, was not 
inside. “Venerable Sir,” said Pilgrim, “your buffalo has escaped! Your buffalo has escaped!” 

“When did this cursed beast escape?” asked Laozi, highly astonished. 

All that clamour woke up the boy who immediately went to his knees and said, “Dad, your disciple fell asleep. | don’t know when he escaped.” 

“How'd you fall asleep, you rogue?” scolded Laozi. 

The boy respected several times before he answered, “Your disciple picked up one pellet of elixir in the elixir chamber. | fell asleep as soon as | ate it.” 

“It must be the Elixir of Seven Returns to the Fire that we made the other day. One pellet fell out and this rogue picked it up and ate it. Well, anyone who eats one of those pellets will sleep for a week. 
Because you fell asleep, no one looked after that cursed beast, and he took the opportunity to go to the Region Below. Today’s the seventh day.” 

Immediately Laozi wanted to make an investigation to see if any treasure was stolen but Pilgrim said, “He’s no treasure except a fillet and it’s quite formidable.” 

Laozi made a quick inventory; everything was there except the diamond snare. “This cursed beast stole my diamond snare!” said Laozi. 

“So, that’s the treasure!” said Pilgrim. “It’s the same snare that hit me that time!® Now it’s going wild down below, sucking away who knows how many things.” 

“Where's the cursed beast now?” asked Laozi. 

Pilgrim replied, “At the Golden Helmet Cave of the Golden Helmet Mountain. He caught my Tang Monk first and robbed me of my golden-hooped rod. When | asked the celestial soldiers to come help 
me, he also took away the divine weapons of the prince. When the Star of Fiery Virtue arrived, his equipment was also taken. Only Water Lord did not lose anything to him but his water could not drown 
the demon either. Finally, | asked Siddhartha to order the Arhats to use sand but even that golden Cinnabar sand was snatched away. When someone like you, Venerable Sir, lets loose a fiendish 
creature to rob and harm people with what kind of crime should we charge him?” Laozi said, “That diamond snare of mine is a treasure perfected since the time of my youth, and it was also an instrument 
with which | converted the barbarians when | passed through the Hangu Pass.’ Whatever weapons you may have, including fire and water, you can’t touch it. If the demon had stolen my plantain-leaf 
fan also, then even I'd be unable to do anything to him.” 

Thereafter, Laozi took up his plantain-leaf fan and mounted the auspicious cloud, followed by a happy Great Sage. They left the celestial palace, went through the South Heaven Gate, and lowered 
their clouds on the Golden Helmet Mountain. There they were met by the eighteen Arhats, the thunder squires, Water Lord, Fiery Virtue, and Deity-King Li and his son, to whom they gave a thorough 
account of what had taken place. “Sun Wukong,” said Laozi, “may go again to entice him to come out; I'll put him away then.” 

Jumping down from the summit, Pilgrim again shouted, “You cursed blubbery beast! Come out quickly and submit to death!” Once more the little fiends went inside to report, and the old demon said, 
“This larcenous ape has asked someone to come again.” Quickly he took up his lance and treasure and walked out of the door. “You brazen demon!” scolded Pilgrim. “This time you'll die for sure! Don’t 
run away. Have a taste of my palm!” He leaped right onto the chest of the demon and gave him a terrific whack on the ear before turning to flee. Wielding his lance, the demon gave chase, only to hear 
someone calling on the tall summit: “If that little buffalo doesn’t come home now, what's he waiting for?” When the demon raised his head and saw that it was Laozi, his heart shook and his gall quivered. 
“This thievish ape’s,” he said, “truly a devil of the Earth! How did he manage to find my master?” 

Reciting a spell, Laozi fanned the air once with his fan. The fiend threw the fillet at Laozi who caught it immediately and gave him another fan. All at once the fiend’s strength fled him and his tendons 
turned numb; he changed back into his original form that was that of a green buffalo. Blowing a mouthful of divine breath on the diamond snare, Laozi then used it to pierce the nostrils of the fiend. 
Next, he took off the sash around his waist and fastened one end of it to the snare while his hand held the other. Thus the custom of leading the buffalo with a ring in its nose was established, a custom 
in use even now. This is also what we call binlang.’ After he took leave of the various deities, Laozi climbed onto the back of his green buffalo. Mounting coloured clouds, he went back to Tushita Palace; 
having bound the fiend, he ascended to the Griefless Heaven. Then the Great Sage Sun fought his way with the other deities into the cave and slaughtered all the remaining little fiends, some one 
hundred of them. Each of the gods recovered his weapons after which the dad-and-son team of Deity-King Li went back to Heaven; the thunder squires to their mansions; Fiery Virtue to his palace; 
Water Lord to his rivers; and the Arhats to the West. Pilgrim then took back his iron rod and untied the Tang Monk, 8 Rules, and Sand-monk who also gave thanks to him. After they got the horse and 
the luggage ready, master and disciples left the cave and found the main road to journey once more. As they proceeded, they heard someone by the road calling, “Holy Tang Monk, eat the food first 
before you go.” The elder was terribly frightened. 


053 
Imbibing, the Chan Lord conceives a ghostly child; Yellow Dame brings water to end the weird foetus 
Perform 800 virtuous acts; make 3000 unknown merits. 
Treating justly thing and self, kin and foe will fit Western Heaven’s basic vow.' 
Bull-demon fears no knife or sword; in vain water and fire have toiled. 
Laozi subdues it, turns its face to Heaven — laughing, he now leads the green buffalo.2 
Someone by the road was calling the pilgrims. They were actually the mountain god and the local spirit of the Golden Helmet Mountain. Holding up the alms-bowl of purple gold, they cried, “O Holy 
Monk! This bowl of rice’s one that the Great Sage Sun succeeded in begging from a good place. Because all of you didn’t listen to sound advice, you fell by mistake into the hands of a demon. The 
Great Sage had to toil and struggle most pitifully before he managed to rescue you today. Come and eat the rice first before you journey. Don’t abuse the filial reverence of the Great Sage.” 
“Disciple,” said Tripitaka, “I’m deeply indebted to you and can’t thank you enough. If I’d known it before, I’d have never left that circle of yours and there'd have been no such mortal danger.” 
“To tell you the truth, Master,” said Pilgrim, “because you didn’t believe in my circle, you had to be placed in someone else’s circle. What suffering you had to bear! It's lamentable!” 
“What do you mean by someone else’s circle?” asked 8 Rules. Pilgrim replied, “Coolie, it was the doing of your cursed mouth and cursed tongue that landed this great ordeal on Master. What old 
monkey dug up in Heaven and on Earth — the fire, the water, the celestial soldiers, and the cinnabar sand of a god — they were all sucked away by a ghostly white fillet of his. Through two Arhats 
however, Siddhartha secretly revealed to old monkey the origin of that fiend, and only then could we ask Laozi to come here to subdue him. It was his green buffalo that was causing all the trouble.” 
When Tripitaka heard this, he thanked him profusely, saying, “Worthy disciple, after this experience, I'll certainly listen to you next time.” Whereupon the four of them divided up the rice to eat, rice that 
was still steaming hot. “This rice’s been here for a long time,” said Pilgrim. “Why's it still hot?” 
Kneeling down, the local spirit said, “Since this humble deity’s learned that the Great Sage’s achieved his merit, he heated up the rice first before serving it.” 
In a moment, they finished the rice and put away the alms-bowl. Having taken leave of the mountain god and the local spirit, the master mounted his horse to pass the tall mountain. Thus it was that 
mind purged of care, they a god’s wisdom embrace; *they dine on wind and rest by water to journey west. After travelling for a long time, it was again early spring and they heard purple swallows 
murmuring and orioles warbling. Purple swallows murmur, tiring their scented beaks; orioles warble, their artful notes persist. Ground full of fallen blooms like brocade spread out; whole mountain 
birthing green like mounds of moss. On the peak green plums are budding; the cliffs cedars detain the clouds. Faint, misty lights over the meadows; sandbars warmed by bright sunshine. In few 
gardens floral stamens unfold; the sun back to earth tums willow strands gold. As they walked along, they came upon a small river of cool, limpid currents. The elder Tang reined in his horse to look 
around and saw in the distance several thatched huts beneath willows hanging jade-like. Pointing in that direction, Pilgrim said, “There must be someone running a ferryboat in those houses.” 
“It's likely,” said Tripitaka, “but since I’ve not seen a boat, | daren’t open my mouth.” 
Dropping down the luggage, 8 Rules shouted, “Hey, ferryman! Punt your boat over here.” 
He yelled several times and indeed, from beneath the shade of willows a boat emerged, creaking as it was punted. In a little while, it approached the shore while master and disciples stared at it. Truly 
as a paddle parts the foam, a light boat floats on the waves with olive cabins brightly painted and a deck made of flat, level boards. On the bow, iron cords encircle; at the stern, a shining rudder stem. 
Though it may be a reed of a boat, it will sail the lakes and the seas; though without fancy cables and tall masts, it has in fact oars of cedar and pine. It is unlike the divine ship of great distance but it 
can traverse a river's width. It comes and goes only between 2 banks; it moves only in and out of ancient fords. In a moment, the boat touched the bank, and the person punting called out: “If you want 
to cross the river, come over here.” 
Tripitaka urged his horse forward to take a look at the boatman and saw that the person had a woollen wrap on the head and 2 black silk shoes on the feet; an often patched cotton coat on the body; 
1000-stitched, old cloth skirt hugged the waist. The wrists had coarse skin and the tendons, strength; dim eyes, knitted brows showed features of age. The voice like an oriole’s was soft and coy; an 
old woman appeared on closer look. Walking to the side of the boat, Pilgrim said, “You're the one ferrying the boat?” 
“Yes,” said the woman. 
“Why is the ferryman not here?” asked Pilgrim. “Why’s the ferrywoman punting the boat?” 
The woman smiled and did not reply; she pulled out the gangplank instead and set it up. Sand-monk then poled the luggage into the boat, followed by the master holding onto Pilgrim. Then they moved 
the boat sideways so that 8 Rules could lead the horse to step into it. After the gangplank was put away, the woman punted the boat away from shore and, in a moment, rowed it across the river. After 
they reached the western shore, the elder asked Sand-monk to untie one of the wraps and take out a few pennies for the woman. Without disputing the price, the woman tied the boat to a wooden pillar 
by the water and walked into one of the village huts nearby, giggling loudly all the time. When Tripitaka saw how clear the water was, he felt thirsty and told 8 Rules: “Get the alms-bowl and fetch some 
water for me to drink.” 
“| was just about to drink some myself,” said Idiot who took out the alms-bowl and bailed out a full bow! of water to hand over to the master. 
The master drank less than half of the water, and when Idiot took the bowl back, he drank the rest of it in one gulp before he helped his master to mount the horse once more. After master and disciples 
found their way to the West they had hardly travelled half an hour when the elder began to groan as he rode. “Stomach-ache!” he said. 
8 Rules who was behind him also said, “I’ve a stomach-ache, too.” 
Sand-monk said, “It must be the cold water you drank.” But before he even finished speaking, the elder cried out: “The pain’s awful!” 8 Rules also screamed, “The pain’s awfull” As the two of them 
struggled with this unbearable pain, their bellies began to swell in size steadily. Inside their abdomens, there seemed to be a clot of blood or a lump of flesh that could be felt clearly by the hand, kicking 
and jumping wildly about. Tripitaka was in great discomfort when they came upon a small village by the road; two bundles of hay were tied to some branches on a tall tree nearby. “Master, that’s good!” 
said Pilgrim. “The house over there must be an inn. Let me go over there to beg some hot liquid for you. I'll ask them also whether there is an apothecary around, so that | can get some ointment for 
your stomach-ache.” 
Delighted by what he heard, Tripitaka whipped his white horse and soon arrived at the village. As he dismounted, he saw an old woman sitting on a grass mound outside the village gate and knitting 
hemp. Pilgrim went forward and saluted to her with palms pressed together saying, “Popo, ‘this poor monk has come from the Great Tang in the Land of the East. My master is the royal brother of the 
Tang court. Because he drank some water from the river back there after we crossed it, he is having a stomach-ache.” Breaking into loud guffaws, the woman said, “You people drank some water from 
the river?” 
“Yes,” replied Pilgrim, “we drank some of the clean river water east of here.” Giggling loudly, the old woman said, “What fun! What fun! Come in, all of you. I'll tell you something.” 
Pilgrim went to support Tang Monk while Sand-monk held up 8 Rules; moaning with every step, the two sick men walked into the thatched hut to take a seat, their stomachs protruding and their faces 
turning yellow from the pain. “Popo,” Pilgrim kept saying, “please make some hot liquid for my master. We'll thank you.” Instead of boiling water however, the old woman dashed inside, laughing and 
yelling, “Come and look, all of you!” 
With loud clip-clops, several middle-aged women ran out from within to stare at the Tang Monk, grinning stupidly all the time. Enraged, Pilgrim gave a yell and ground his teeth together, so frightening 
| of them that they turned to flee, stumbling all over. Pilgrim darted forward and caught the old woman, crying, “Boil some water quick and I'll spare you!” 
“Sire!” said the old woman, shaking violently, “boiled water is useless to cure their stomach-aches. Let me go, and I'll tell you.” Pilgrim released her, and she said, “This is the Women State of Western 
Liang.5 Not even a single male but only women live in our state. That's why we’re amused when we saw you. That water your master drank is not the best, for the river is called Child-and-Mum River. 
Outside our capital we also have a Male Reception Posthouse, by the side of which there is also a Pregnancy Reflection Stream. Only after reaching her twentieth year would someone from this region 
dare go and drink that river's water, for she would feel the pain of conception soon after she took a drink. After three days, she would go to the Male Reception Posthouse and look at her reflection in 
the stream. If a double reflection appears, it means that she will give birth to a child. Since your master drank some water from the Child-and-Mum River, he, too, has become pregnant and will give 
birth to a child. How could hot water cure him?” 
When Tripitaka heard this, he paled with fright. “O disciple,” he cried, “what shall we do?” 
“O dad!” groaned 8 Rules as he twisted to spread his legs further apart, “we’re men, and we've to give birth to babies? Where can we find a birth canal? How could the foetus come out?” With a chuckle 
Pilgrim said, “According to the ancients, ‘A ripe melon will fall by itself.’ When the time comes, you may have a gaping hole at your armpit and the baby will crawl out.” 
When 8 Rules heard this, he shook with fright, and that made the pain all the more unbearable. “Finished! Finished!” he cried. “I’m dead! I’m dead!” 


fe) 


“Second Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, laughing, “stop writhing! Stop writhing! You may hurt the umbilical cord and end up with some sort of prenatal sickness.” Idiot became more alarmed than 
ever. Tears welling up in his eyes, he tugged at Pilgrim and said, “Elder Brother, please ask the Popo to see if they have some midwives here who are not too heavy-handed. Let's find a few right away. 
The movement inside is becoming more frequent now. It must be labour pain. It’s coming! It’s coming!” Again Sand-monk said, chuckling, “Second Elder Brother, if it's labour pain, you’d better sit still. 
| fear you may puncture the water bag.” 

“O Popo,” said Tripitaka with a moan, “do you've a physician here? I'll ask my disciple to go there and ask for a prescription. We'll take the drug and have an abortion.” 

“Even drugs are useless,” said the old woman, “but due south of here there is a Male-Undoing Mountain. In it there is a Child Destruction Cave, and inside the cave there is an Abortion Stream. You 
must drink a mouthful of water from the stream before the pregnancy can be terminated. But nowadays, it’s not easy to get that water. Last year, a Daoist by the name of True Mortal Compliant came 
on the scene and he changed the name of the Child Destruction Cave to the Abbey of Mortal Assembly. Claiming the water from the Abortion Stream as his possession, he refused to give it out freely. 
Anyone who wants the water must present monetary offerings together with meats, juices, and fruit baskets. After saluting him in complete reverence, you'll receive a tiny bowl of the water. But all of 
you're mendicants. Where could you find the kind of money you need to spend for something like this? You might as well suffer here and wait for the births.” When Pilgrim heard this, he was filled with 
delight. “Popo,” he said, “how far is it from here to the Male-Undoing Mountain?” 

“About three thousand miles,” replied the old woman. 

“Excellent! Excellent!” said Pilgrim. “Relax, Master! Let old monkey go and fetch some of that water for you to drink.” Dear Great Sage! He gave this instruction to Sand-monk: “Take good care of 
Master. If this family ill behaves and tries to hurt him, bring out your old thuggery and scare them a little. Let me go fetch the water.” 

Sand-monk obeyed. The old woman then took out a large porcelain bowl to hand over to Pilgrim saying, “Take this bowl and try to get as much water as possible. We can save some for an emergency.” 
Indeed Pilgrim took over the bowl, left that thatched hut, and mounted the cloud to leave. Only then did the old woman raised her hands, saluting the air, and cried, “O dad! This monk knows how to 
ride the clouds!” 

She went inside and told the other women to come out to respect to the Tang Monk, all addressing him as Arhat or Nun. Then they began to boil water and prepare rice to present to the pilgrims. The 
Great Sage Sun on his cloud somersault; he saw the peak of a mountain blocking his path in a little while. Dropping down from his cloudy luminosity, he opened wide his eyes to look around. Marvellous 
Mountain! He saw rare flowers spreading brocade; wild grass unrolling blue; plunging streams — one after another; brooks and clouds, both leisurely. Canyons, packed together, rank with creepers and 
vines; ranges, stretching afar, dense with forests and trees. Birds call, and wild geese glide by; deer drink, and monkeys clamber. A mountain green like a jade screen; a ridge blue like locks of hair. 
Difficult indeed to reach from this world of dust! Rocks and water splashing, a sight that never tires! 

1 often sees mortal lads leave, picking herbs. 1 often meets woodsmen come, bearing loads. Truly it’s almost the scenery of Mount-Tai surpassing perhaps the 3 peaks of Flower Mount. As the Great 
Sage stared at the scenery, he discovered also a building with its back on the dark side of the mountain and from where the sound of a dog barking could be heard. Going down the mountain, the Great 
Sage went toward the building that was also a rather nice place. Look at the stream piercing a small bridge; thatched huts nestling a green hill. A dog barks near the lonely fence; the recluse comes 
and goes at will. Ina moment he came up to the gate where he found an old Daoist sitting cross-legged on the green lawn. When the Great Sage put down his porcelain bowl to salute him, the Daoist 
rose slightly to return his greeting saying, “Where did you come from? For what purpose you've come to this humble Abbey?” 

Pilgrim replied, “This poor monk is a scripture pilgrim sent by imperial commission of the Great Tang in the Land of the East. Because my master mistakenly drank water from the Child-and-Mum River, 
he is suffering from a swollen belly and unbearable pain. We asked the natives there and learned that the pregnancy thus formed has no cure. We're told however, that there’s an Abortion Stream in 
the Child Destruction Cave of the Male-Undoing Mountain, and its water can eliminate the conception. This is why I've come especially to see the True Mortal Compliant, in order to beg from him some 
water to save my master. May | trouble the old Daoist to lead me to him?” 

“This used to be the Child Destruction Cave,” said the Daoist, chuckling, “but it's now changed to the Abbey of Mortal Assembly. I’m none other than the eldest disciple of the venerable dad, True Mortal 
Compliant. What’s your name? Tell me so | can announce you.” 

“Im the eldest disciple of Tripitaka Tang, master of the Law,” said Pilgrim, “and my humble name is Sun Wukong.” 

“Where are your monetary gifts?” asked the Daoist. “Your offerings of juice?” Pilgrim said, “We're mendicants on a journey, and we've not prepared them.” 

“You're quite mad!” said the Daoist, chuckling again. “My old master is now the protector of this mountain stream, and he has never given its water free to anyone. You go back and bring some gifts, 
and I'll announce you. Otherwise, please leave. Don’t think about the water!” Pilgrim said, “Goodwill can be more powerful than an imperial edict. If you go and announce the name of old monkey, I’m 
sure that he will express his goodwill. Perhaps he will turn over the entire well of water to me.” 

This statement of Pilgrim gave the Daoist little alternative but to go inside to make the announcement. As the True Mortal was just playing the lute, the Daoist had to wait until he finished playing before 
saying, “Master, there is a Religious monk outside who claims to be Sun Wukong, the eldest disciple of Tripitaka Tang. He wants some water from the Abortion Stream to save his master.” 

It would have been better if the True Mortal had not heard the name, for the moment he came upon those words, Wukong, anger flared in his heart, wrath sprouted from his gall. Jumping down quickly 
from his lute couch, he took off his casual garment and put on his Daoist robe. He picked up a compliant hook and leaped out of the door of the Abbey. “Where’s Sun Wukong?” he shouted. 

Pilgrim turned his head to see how that True Mortal was dressed in a star cap of bright colours crowned his head; wore a red magic robe with golden threads. His cloud shoes were topped by patterned 
brocade; an elegant treasure belt wrapped around his waist. A pair of stockings of embroidered silk; half visible, a patterned woollen kilt. His hands held a compliant golden hook: the blade, sharp; the 
handle, dragon-like and long. Phoenix eyes glowed with brows going straight up; sharp, steely teeth within a blood-red mouth. A beard soared like bright flames beneath his chin; like rushes flared his 
temple’s scarlet hair. His form seemed as violent as Marshal Wen’s® although their clothing was not the same. When Pilgrim saw him, he pressed his palms together before him and saluted saying, 
“This poor monk's Sun Wukong.” 

“Are you the real Sun Wukong,” said the master with a laugh, “or are you merely assuming his name and sumame?” 

“Look at the way the master speaks!” said Pilgrim. “As the proverb says, ‘A gentleman changes neither his name when he stands, nor his surname when he sits.’ What would be the reason for me to 
assume someone else’s name?” 

The master asked, “Do you recognise me?” 

“Since | made repentance in the Religious gate and embraced with all sincerity the teaching of the monks,” said Pilgrim, “I’ve only been climbing mountains and fording waters. I’ve lost contact with all 
the friends of my youth. Because I’ve never been able to visit you, I’ve never beheld your honourable countenance before. When we asked for our way in a village household west of the Child-and- 
Mum River, they told me that the master is called the True Mortal Compliant. That’s how | know your name.” 

The master said, “You’re walking on your way, and I’m cultivating my authentic mortality. Why did you come to visit me?” 

“Because my master drank by mistake the water of the Child-and-Mum River,” replied Pilgrim, “and his stomach-ache turned into a pregnancy. | came especially to your mortal mansion to beg you for 
a bowl of water from the Abortion Stream, in order that my master might be freed from this ordeal.” 

“Is your master Tripitaka Tang?” asked the master, his eyes glowering. 

“Yes, indeed!” answered Pilgrim. 

Grinding his teeth together, the master said spitefully, “Have you run into a Great King Holy Child?” 

“That's the nickname of the fiend, Red Boy,” said Pilgrim, “who lived in the Fiery Cloud Cave by the Dried Pine Stream, in the Roaring Mountain. Why does the True Mortal ask after him?” 

“He happens to be my nephew,” replied the master, “and the Bull Demon King is my brother. Some time ago my elder brother told me in a letter that Sun Wukong, the eldest disciple of Tripitaka Tang, 
was such a rascal that he brought his son great harm. | didn’t know where to find you for vengeance but you came instead to seek me out. And you're asking me for water?” 

Trying to placate him with a smile, Pilgrim said, “You're wrong, Sir. Your elder brother used to be my friend, for both of us belonged to a league of seven bond brothers when we're young. | just didn’t 
know about you, and so | didn’t come to pay my respect in your mansion. Your nephew is very well off, for he is now the attendant of the Nun Guanyin. He has become Sudhana, the Boy Skilled in 
Wealth with whom even we can’t compare. Why do you blame me instead?” 

“You brazen monkey!” shouted the master. 

“Still waxing your tongue! Is my nephew better off being a king by himself, or being a slave to someone? Stop this insolence and have a taste of my hook!” Using the iron rod to parry the blow, the Great 
Sage said, “Please don’t use the language of war, Sir. Give me some water and I'll leave.” 

“Brazen monkey!” scolded the master. “You don’t know any better! If you can withstand me for three rounds, I'll give you the water. If not, I'll chop you up as meat sauce to avenge my nephew.” 

“You damned ignorant fool!” scolded Pilgrim. “You don’t know what's good for you! If you want to fight, come up here and watch my rod!” 

The master at once countered with his compliant hook and the 2 of them had quite a fight before the Abbey of Mortal Assembly. The sage monk drinks from this procreant stream and Pilgrim must the 
Mortal Compliant seek. Who knows the True Mortal is a fiend that safeguards by force the Abortion Stream? When these 2 meet, they speak as enemies feuding and resolved not to give 1 whit. The 
words thus traded engender distress; rancour and malice so bent on revenge. This one whose master’s life is threatened, comes seeking water; that 1 for losing his nephew declines to yield the stream. 
Fierce as a scorpion’s the compliant hook; wild like a dragon’s the golden-hooped rod. Madly it stabs the chest, what savagery! Aslant, it hooks the legs, what subtlety! The rod aiming down there’ 
inflicts grave wounds; the hook, passing shoulders, will whip the head. The rod slaps the waist - a hawk holds a bird. The hook swipes the head — a mantis hits its prey. They lunge here and there, 
both striving to win; y turn and close in repeatedly. The hook hooks, the rod strikes without let-up — victory cannot be seen on either side. The master fought the Great Sage for over ten rounds and 
then he began to weaken. The Great Sage however, grew fiercer, the blows of his rod raining on his opponent's head like a meteor shower. His strength all gone, the master fled toward the mountain 
with his compliant hook trailing behind him. Instead of chasing after him, the Great Sage wanted to go into the Abbey to look for the water but the Daoist had long had the door tightly shut. Holding the 
porcelain bowl, the Great Sage dashed up to the door and kicked it down with all his might. He rushed inside and saw the Daoist leaning on the well, covering its mouth with his body. The Great Sage 
lifted high his rod and shouted that he was about to strike, causing the Daoist to flee to the rear. Then he found a bucket but just as he tried to bail some water, the master dashed out from the rear and 
caught hold of one of his legs with the compliant hook. One hard tug sent the Great Sage tumbling beak-first to the ground. Clambering up, the Great Sage at once attacked with his iron rod but the 
master only retreated to 1 side. With hook in hand, he cried, “See if you'd take away my water!” 

“Come up here! Come up here!” yelled the Great Sage. “I'll beat you to death!” 

But the master refused to go forward to fight; he just stood there and refused to permit the Great Sage to bail out the water. When the Great Sage saw that his enemy was motionless, he wielded his 
iron rod with his left hand while his right hand tried to let the rope down the well. Before the pulley had made several turns however, the master again struck with his hook. As the Great Sage could 
hardly protect himself with only one hand, the hook once more caught hold of one of his legs, causing him to stumble and the rope to fall into the well, bucket and all. “This fellow is quite rude!” said the 
Great Sage who clambered up and, holding the iron rod now with both hands, showered his opponent’s body and head with blows. Not daring to face him and fight, the master fled away as before. 
Again the Great Sage wanted to get the water but this time he had no bucket, and moreover, he was afraid that the master would return to attack him. He thought to himself: “I must go and find a 
helper.” 

Dear Great Sage! He mounted the clouds and went straight back to the village hut, crying, “Sand-monk.” Inside Tripitaka was moaning to endure the pain while the groans of 8 Rules were continuous. 
Delighted by the call, they said, “Sand-monk, Wukong’s back.” Sand-monk hurried out the door to ask, “Big Brother, have you brought water?” The Great Sage entered and gave a thorough account to 
the Tang Monk. Shedding tears, Tripitaka said, “O disciple! How is this going to end?” 

“| came back,” said the Great Sage, “to ask Brother Sand to go with me. When we reach the Abbey, old monkey will fight with that fellow and Sand-monk can use the opportunity to get that water to 
save you.” Tripitaka said, “Both of you who are healthy will be gone, leaving behind the two of us who are sick. Who will look after us?” The old woman waiting on them said, “Relax, old Arhat. You 
don’t need your disciples. We'll serve you and take care of you. When you first arrived, we're already fond of you. Then we saw how this Nun travelled by cloud and fog, and we knew that you had to 
be an Arhat or Nun. We'll never dare to harm you again.” 

“You're all women here,” snapped Pilgrim. “Whom do you dare to harm?” 

“O dear dad!” said the old woman, giggling. “You're lucky to have come to my house. If you had gone to another one, none of you'd have remained whole.” 

“What do you mean,” said 8 Rules, still groaning, “by not remaining whole?” The old woman replied, “The four or five of us in this family are all getting on in years. We've given up the activities of love. 
If you go to another family, there may be more youthful members than old ones. You think the young ones will let you go? They will want to have intercourse with you, and if you refuse, they will take 
your lives. Then they will cut you up to use your flesh to make fragrant bags.” 

“In that case,” said 8 Rules, “I'll not be hurt. They all smell nice, and they'll be good for fragrant bags. I’m a stinking bull, and even when I’m cut up, | still stink. That's why | can’t be hurt.” 

“Don't be so talkative!” said Pilgrim, chuckling. “Save your strength, so you can give birth.” The old woman said, “No need for delay. Go quickly to get the water.” 


“Do you've a bucket in your house?” asked Pilgrim. “Please lend us one.” The old woman went to the back to take out a bucket and rope to hand over to Sand-monk who said, “Let’s bring two ropes. 
We may need them if the well is deep.” 
After Sand-monk received the bucket and the ropes, he followed the Great Sage out of the village hut and they left together, mounting the clouds. In less than half an hour, they arrived at the Male- 
Undoing Mountain. As they lowered their clouds to go before the Abbey, the Great Sage gave Sand-monk this instruction: “Take the bucket with the ropes and hide yourself. Old monkey will go and 
provoke battle. When we're in the thick of fighting, you can use the opportunity to go inside, get the water, and leave.” Sand-monk obeyed. 
Wielding his iron rod, the Great Sage Sun approached the door and shouted: “Open the door! Open the door!” The Daoist who stood guard at the door hurried inside to report, “Master, that Sun Wukong 
is here again.” Greatly angered, the master said, “This brazen ape is insolent indeed! I've always heard that he has considerable abilities, and today | know it’s true. That rod of his is quite difficult to 
withstand.” 
“Master,” said the Daoist, “his abilities may be great but yours are not inferior. You're in fact exactly his match.” 
“But twice before,” said the master, “I lost to him.” 
“Only in a contest of sheer violence,” said the Daoist. “Later, when he tried to bail water, your hook made him fall twice. Haven't you equalized the situation? He had little alternative but to leave at first, 
and now he’s back. It must be that Tripitaka’s pregnancy is so advanced and his body so heavy that his complaints have driven this monkey to return, against his better judgement. He must feel rather 
contemptuous toward his master, and I’m sure that you'll win.” 
When the True Mortal heard these words, he became delighted and filled with elation; full of smiles and brimming with power. Holding straight his compliant hook, he walked out of the door and shouted, 
“Brazen simian! Why are you here again?” 
“Only to fetch water,” answered the Great Sage. 
“That water,” said the True Mortal, “happens to be in my well. Even if you’re a king or a prime minister, you must come begging with offerings of meat and juices, and then I'll only give you a little. You're 
my enemy no less, and you dare to ask for it with empty hands?” 
“You really refuse to give it to me?” asked the Great Sage. 
The True Mortal replied, “Yes! Yes!” 
“You damned fool!” scolded the Great Sage. “If you don’t give me the water, watch my rod!” He opened up at once and rushed at the True Mortal, bringing down the rod hard on his head. Stepping 
aside quickly to dodge the blow, the True Mortal met him with the hook and fought back. It was even more ferocious a battle this time than last time. What a fight! 
Golden-hooped rod, compliant hook, 2 angry men so full of enmity. The cosmos darkens as sand and rocks fly up; sun and moon sadden as dirt and dust soar high. The Great Sage seeks water to 
save his master, denied by the fiend for his nephew’s sake. The 2 exert their strength to wage a contest there. Teeth are ground together to strive for a victory. Even more alert, they arouse themselves. 
They belch cloud and fog to sadden ghosts and gods. Bing-bing and bang-bang clash both hook and rod, their cries, shouts shake up the mountain range. The fierce wind, howling, ravages the woods; 
the violent airs surge past the dipper stars. The Great Sage grows happier as he strives; the True Mortal’s gladder as he fights. They do this battle with whole heart and mind; they will not give up until 
someone dies. The 2 of them began their fighting outside the Abbey and as they struggled and exercised together, they gradually moved to the mountain slope below. Sand-monk crashed through the 
door, holding the bucket. He was met by the Daoist who barred the way at the well and said, “Who’re you that you dare come to get our water?” 
Dropping the bucket, Sand-monk took out his fiend-routing treasure staff and without a word, brought it down on the Daoist’s head. The Daoist was unable to dodge fast enough, his left arm and 
shoulder were broken by this 1 blow. Falling to the ground, he lay there struggling for his life. “| wanted to slaughter you, cursed beast,” scolded Sand-monk, “but you're after all a human being. I’ve still 
some pity for you and I'll spare you. Let me bail out the water.” 
Crying for Heaven and Earth to help him, the Daoist crawled slowly to the rear while Sand-monk lowered the bucket into the well and filled it to the brim. He then walked out of the Abbey and mounted 
the cloud and fog before he shouted to Pilgrim, “Big Brother, I’ve gotten the water and I’m leaving. Spare him! Spare him!” 
When the Great Sage heard this, he stopped the hook with his iron rod and said, “| was about to exterminate you but you’ve not committed a crime. Moreover, I’ve still regard for the feelings of your 
brother, the Bull Demon King. When | first came here, | was hooked by you twice and didn’t get my water. When | returned, | came with the trick of enticing the tiger to leave the mountain and deceived 
you into fighting me so that my brother could go inside to get the water. If old monkey’s willing to use his real abilities to fight with you, don’t say there’s only one of you so-called True Mortal Compliant. 
Even if there’re several of you, I'd beat you all to death. But to kill isn’t as good as to let live and so I’m going to spare you and permit you to have a few more years. From now on if anyone wishes to 
obtain the water, you mustn’t blackmail the person.” 
Not knowing anything better, that bogus mortal brandished his hook and once more attempted to catch Pilgrim's legs. The Great Sage evaded the blade of his hook and then rushed forward, crying, 
“Don’t run!” The bogus mortal was caught unprepared and he was pushed head over heels to the ground, unable to get up. Grabbing the compliant hook the Great Sage snapped it in two; then he 
bundled the pieces together and with another bend, broke them into four segments. Throwing them on the ground, he said, “Brazen, cursed beast! Still dare to be unruly?” Trembling all over, the bogus 
mortal took the insult and dared not utter a word. Great Sage, in peals of laughter, mounted the cloud to rise into the air and a testimonial poem says: 
For smelting true lead true water you need; true water well mixed dries true mercury. 
True mercury and lead have no maternal breath; elixir are numinous drugs and grains. 
In vain baby boy has a pregnant form; Earth-Mum’s achieved merit with ease. 
Heresy pushed down, right faith they learn; the Lord of the Mind all smiles, would return. 
Mounting the auspicious luminosity, the Great Sage caught up with Sand-monk. Having acquired the true water, they were filled with delight as they returned to where they belonged. After they lowered 
the clouds and went up to the village hut, they found Bullseye 8 Rules leaning on the door post and groaning, his belly huge and protruding. Walking quietly up to him, Pilgrim said, “Idiot, when did you 
enter the delivery room?” 
Horrified, Idiot said, “Elder Brother, don’t make fun of me. Did you bring the water?” Pilgrim was about to tease him some more when Sand-monk followed him in, laughing as he said, “Water's coming! 
Water's coming!” 
Enduring the pain, Tripitaka rose slightly and said, “O disciples, I’ve caused you a lot of trouble.” That old woman, too, was most delighted, and all of her relatives came out to respect, crying, “O Nun! 
This is our luck! This is our luck!” She took a goblet of flowered porcelain, filled it half full, and handed it to Tripitaka, saying, “Old master, drink it slowly. All you need is a mouthful and the pregnancy 
will dissolve.” 
“| don’t need any goblet,” said 8 Rules. “I'll just finish the bucket.” 
“O venerable dad, don’t scare people to death!” said the old woman. “If you drink this bucket of water, your stomach and your intestines will all be dissolved.” Idiot was so taken aback that he dared not 
misbehave; he drank only half a goblet. 
In less than the time of a meal, the two of them experienced sharp pain and cramps in their bellies, and then their intestines growled four or five times. After that, Idiot could no longer contain himself: 
both waste and urine poured out of him. The Tang Monk, too, felt the urge to relieve himself and wanted to go to a quiet place. “Master,” said Pilgrim, “you mustn't go out to a place where there is a 
draft. If you’re exposed to the wind, | fear that you may catch some postnatal illness.” At once the old woman brought to them two night pots so that the two of them could find relief. After several bowel 
movements, the pain stopped and the swelling of their bellies gradually subsided as the lump of blood and flesh dissolved. The relatives of the old woman also boiled some white rice congee and 
presented it to them to strengthen their postnatal weakness. “Popo,” said 8 Rules, “I’ve a healthy constitution, and I’ve no need to strengthen any postnatal weakness. You go and boil me some water, 
so that | can take a bath before | eat the congee.” 
“Second Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “you can’t take a bath. If water gets inside someone within a month after birth, the person will be sick.” 8 Rules said, “But I've not given proper birth to anything; 
at most, | only have had a miscarriage. What's there to be afraid of? | must wash and clean up.” Indeed, the old woman prepared some hot water for them to clean their hands and feet. The Tang Monk 
then ate about two bowls of congee but 8 Rules consumed over fifteen bowls and he still wanted more. “Coolie,” chuckled Pilgrim, “don’t eat so much. If you get a sand-bag belly, you'll look quite awful.” 
“Don’t worry, don’t worry,” replied 8 Rules. “I’m no female bull. So what's there to be afraid of?” The family members indeed went to prepare some more rice. 
The old woman then said to the Tang Monk, “Old master, please bestow this water on me.” Pilgrim said, “Idiot, you’re not drinking the water anymore?” 
“My stomach-ache is gone,” said 8 Rules, “and the pregnancy, | suppose, must be dissolved. I’m quite fine now. Why should | drink any more water?” 
“Since the two of them have recovered,” said Pilgrim, “we'll give this water to your family.” After thanking Pilgrim, the old woman poured what was left of the water into a porcelain jar that she buried in 
the rear garden. She said to the rest of the family, “This jar of water will take care of my funeral expenses.” Everyone in that family, young and old, was delighted. A vegetarian meal was prepared and 
tables were set out to serve to the Tang Monk. He and his disciples had a leisurely dinner and then rested. At dawn the next day, they thanked the old woman and her family before leaving the village. 
Tripitaka Tang mounted up, Sand-monk toted the luggage, Bullseye 8 Rules held the reins, and the Great Sage Sun led the way in front. So, this is how it should be: the mouth washed of its sins, the 
self is clean; worldly conception dissolved, the body’s fit. 
054 
Religion-nature, going west, reaches the Women State; Mind Monkey makes a plan to flee the fair gender 
Tripitaka and his disciples left the household at the village and followed the road westward. In less than 40 miles, they arrived at the state border of Western Liang. Pointing ahead as he rode along, 
the Tang Monk said, “Wukong, we’re approaching a city, and from the noise and hubbub coming from the markets, | suppose it must be the Women State. All of you must take care to behave properly. 
Keep your desires under control and don’t let them violate the teachings of our gate of Law.” Hearing this, the three disciples obeyed the strict admonition. Soon they reached the head of the street that 
opened to the eastern gate. The people there with long skirts and short blouses, powdered faces and oily heads, were all women regardless of whether they were young or old. Many of them were 
doing business on the streets, and when they saw the four of them walking by, they all clapped their hands in acclaim and laughed aloud, crying happily, “Human seeds are coming! Human seeds are 
coming!”! 
Tripitaka was so startled that he reined in his horse; all at once the street was blocked, completely filled with women, and all you’d hear were laughter and chatter. 8 Rules began to holler wildly: “I’m a 
bull for sale! I’m a bull for sale!” 
“Idiot,” said Pilgrim, “stop this nonsense. Bring out your old features, that’s all!” Indeed 8 Rules shook his head a couple of times and stuck up his 2 rush-leaf fan ears; then he wriggled his lips like 2 
hanging lotus roots and gave a yell, so frightening those women that they all fell and stumbled. A testimonial poem says: 
The sage monk, seeking God, reached Western Liang, a land full of females but without 1 male. 
Farmers, scholars, workers, and those in trade, the anglers and ploughmen were women all. 
Maidens lined the streets crying, “Human seeds!” 
Young girls filled the roads to greet the comely men. 
If Aware of Ability didn’t show his ugly face, the siege by the fair gender would be pain indeed. 
In this way, the people became frightened and none dared go forward; everyone was rubbing her hands and squatting down. They shook their heads, bit their fingers, and crowded both sides of the 
street, trembling all over but still eager to stare at the Tang Monk. The Great Sage Sun had to display his hideous face in order to open up the road while Sand-monk, too, played monster to keep order. 
Leading the horse, 8 Rules stuck out his horn and waved his ears. As the whole entourage proceeded, the pilgrims discovered that the houses in the city were built in orderly rows while the shops had 
lavish displays. There were merchants selling rice and salt; there were juice and teahouses - all bell and drum towers with goods piled high; bannered kiosks and hostels with screens hung low. As 
master and disciples followed the street through its several tums, they came upon a woman official standing in the street and crying, “Visitors from afar should not enter the city gate without permission. 
Please go to the posthouse and enter your names on the register. Allow this humble official to announce you to the throne. After your rescript is certified, you'll be permitted to pass through.” Hearing 
this, Tripitaka dismounted; then he saw a horizontal plaque hung over the gate of an official mansion nearby, and on the plaque were the three words, Male Reception Posthouse. “Wukong,” said the 
elder; “what that family in the village said is true. There is indeed a Male Reception Posthouse.” 
“Second Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, laughing, “go and show yourself at the Pregnancy Reflection Stream and see if there’s a double reflection.” 
8 Rules replied, “Don’t play with me! Since | drank that cup of water from the Abortion Stream, the pregnancy has been dissolved. Why'd | show myself?” 
Turing around, Tripitaka said to him, “Aware of Ability, be careful with your words.” 
He then went forward to greet the woman official who led them inside the posthouse. After they took their seats in the main hall, the official asked for tea to be served. All the servants working here 
combed their hair into three braids, and their garments were worn in two sections. Look at them! Even those serving tea were tittering. In a moment, they finished tea, and the official rose and asked, 


“Where did the visitors come from?” Pilgrim replied, “We're people from the Land of the East, sent by imperial commission of the Great Tang Emperor to worship God in the Western Heaven and to 
seek scriptures. My master, the royal brother of the Tang emperor, bears the title of Tripitaka Tang. I’m Sun Wukong, his eldest disciple, and these two — Bullseye Aware of Ability and Sand Awakened 
to Purity - are my brothers. There are five of us altogether, including the horse. We've with us a travel rescript, and we beg you to certify it so that we may pass through.” After the woman official wrote 
this in the register with a brush, she came forward to respect, saying, “Venerable Dads, please pardon me. This humble official is the clerk at the Male Reception Posthouse. | didn’t know that such 
dignitaries from a noble nation were on their way, and therefore | didn’t go to a distance to meet you.” After she respected, she rose and immediately gave an order to the housekeeper to prepare food 
and drink. “Let the venerable dads sit here for a while,” she said, “and this humble official will enter the capital to present a memorial to our ruler. We'll certify your rescript and use our seals so that you 
can be sent on your way to the West.” 

Delighted, Tripitaka sat down. The clerk of the posthouse after she had put on the proper attire, went to the 5 Phoenix Tower inside the capital and said to the Custodian of the Yellow Gate, “I’m the 
clerk of the Male Reception Posthouse, and | must have an audience with the throne.” The Yellow Gate at once presented the memorial, and the clerk was summoned up to the main palace hall. The 
queen asked, “Why does the Clerk of the posthouse wish to see us?” 

“Your humble subject,” said the clerk, “has just received in the posthouse Tripitaka Tang, the royal brother of the Great Tang Emperor in the Land of the East. He has three disciples by the names of 
Sun Wukong, Bullseye Aware of Ability, and Sand Awakened to Purity; there are altogether five of them, including a horse. They are on their way to seek scriptures from a god in the Western Heaven. 
I've come especially to report this to my queen and to ask whether they may have their travel rescript certified and the permission to pass through.” When the queen heard this report, she was filled 
with delight. “Last night,” she said to the civil and military officials, “we dreamed that luminous hues grew from the screens of gold, refulgent rays spread from the mirrors of jade. That'd to be a good 
omen for today.” 

“Mistress,” said the women officials in unison as they saluted themselves before the vermilion steps, “how could you tell that it was a good omen?” The queen said, “This man from the Land of the East 
is a royal brother of the Tang court. In our country, the rulers of various generations since the time when chaos divided had never seen a man come here. Now the royal brother of the Tang emperor 
has arrived, and he must be a gift from Heaven. We'll use the wealth of an entire nation to ask this royal brother to be king; we're willing to be his queen. Such a sexual union will produce children and 
grandchildren, and the perpetuity of our kingdom will be assured. When you consider this, is not our dream a good omen?” 

The women officials all respected to express their delight and acclaim. Then the clerk of the posthouse said, “What our mistress’s proposed is good for extending the familial line to ten thousand 
generations. But those three disciples of the royal brother are savage men; their appearances are most unsightly.” 

“According to what you've seen, worthy subject, how does that royal brother look?” asked the queen. “And how do his disciples look?” 

“The royal brother,” said the clerk, “has features most dignified and handsome, truly befitting a man who belongs to the Heavenly court of a noble nation, the China of South Jambidvipa. His three 
disciples however, have such savage looks that they appear to be spirits.” 

“In that case,” said the queen, “let’s provide his disciples with some supplies and certify the travel rescript for them. We'll send them off to the Western Heaven, and only the royal brother will remain 
here. Anything wrong with that?” 

Again the officials saluted to say, “The words of our mistress are most appropriate, and your subjects obey your instruction. The affair of marriage however, requires a matchmaker for as the ancients 
have declared, the marriage contract depends on red leaves; 2a couple’s joined by the moon-man’s scarlet threads.” 3 

“We'll follow the counsel of our subjects,” replied the queen. “Let the present Grand Preceptor serve as our marriage go-between, and the clerk of the Male Reception Posthouse as the one who 
Officiates the ceremony. Let them go first to the posthouse to propose to the royal brother. If he consents, we'll take our carriage out of the capital to receive him.” 

The Grand Preceptor and the clerk accepted this decree and left the court. We now tell you about Tripitaka and his disciples who were just enjoying their vegetarian meal at the hall of the posthouse 
when someone came in to report: “The Grand Preceptor and our own governess have arrived.” Tripitaka said, “Why does the Grand Preceptor come here?” 

“Perhaps the queen wants to give us an invitation,” said 8 Rules. “If not that,” said Pilgrim, “then to offer a proposal of marriage.” 

“Wukong,” said Tripitaka, “if they hold us and want to force us to marry them, what shall we do?” 

“Master,” replied Pilgrim, “just say yes to them. Old monkey will take care of the matter.” 

They had hardly finished speaking when the two women officials arrived and saluted deeply to the elder who returned their salutations one by one, saying, “This humble cleric is someone who has left 
the family. What virtue or talent do I’ve that | dare let you salute me?” When the Grand Preceptor saw how impressive the elder looked, she was delighted and thought to herself, “Our nation is truly 
quite lucky! Such a man is most worthy to be the husband of our ruler.” After the officials made their greetings, they stood on either side of the Tang Monk and said, “Dad royal brother, we wish you ten 
thousand happiness!” 

“Im someone who has left the family,” replied Tripitaka. “Where do those happiness come from?” Again bending low, the Grand Preceptor said, “This is the Women State in the Western Liang, and 
since time immemorial, there is not a single male in our country. We're lucky at this time to have the arrival of dad royal brother. Your subject, by the decree of my ruler, has come especially to offer a 
proposal of marriage.” 

“My goodness! My goodness!” said Tripitaka. “This poor monk has arrived at your esteemed region all by himself without the attendance of either son or daughter. I’ve with me only three mischievous 
disciples, and | wonder to which of us is offered this marriage proposal.” 

The posthouse clerk said, “Your lowly official just now went into court to present my report, and my ruler, in great delight, told us of an auspicious dream she had last night. She dreamed that /uminous 
hues grew from the screens of gold, refulgent rays spread from the mirrors of jade. When she learned that the royal brother is a man from the noble nation of China, she was willing to use the wealth 
of her entire nation to ask you to be her live-in husband. You'd take the royal seat facing south to be called the man set apart from others,‘ and our ruler would be the queen. That was why she gave 
the decree for the Grand Preceptor to serve as the marriage go-between and this lowly official to officiate at the wedding. We came especially to offer you this proposal.” 

When Tripitaka heard these words, he saluted his head and fell into complete silence. “When a man finds the time propitious,” said the Grand Preceptor, “he’d not pass up such an opportunity. Though 
there is, to be sure, such a thing in the world as asking a husband to live in the wife’s family, the dowry of a nation’s wealth is rare indeed. May we ask the royal brother to give his quick consent, so 
that we may report to our ruler?” 

The elder however, became more dumb and deaf than ever. 8 Rules shouted sticking out his pestle-like horn, “Grand Preceptor go back and tell your ruler that my master happens to be an Arhat who's 
attained the Way after a long process of cultivation. He'll never fall in love with the dowry of a nation’s wealth, nor will he be enamoured even with beauty that can topple an empire. You may as well 
certify the travel rescript quickly and send them off to the West. Let me stay here to be the live-in husband. How’s that?” 

When the Grand Preceptor heard this, her heart quivered and her gall shook, unable to answer at all. The clerk of the posthouse said, “Though you may be a male, your looks are hideous. Our ruler 
won't find you attractive.” 

“You're much too inflexible,” said 8 Rules, laughing. “As the proverb says, the thick willow’s a basket, the thin, a barrel - who in the world will take a man as an ugly fellow?” 

Pilgrim said, “Idiot, stop this foolish talk. Let master make up his mind: if he wants to leave, let him leave, and if he wants to stay, let him stay. Let’s not waste the time of the marriage go-between.” 
“Wukong,” said Tripitaka, “What do you think | ought to do?” 

“In old monkey's opinion,” replied Pilgrim, “perhaps it's good that you stay here. As the ancients said, ‘One thread can tie up a distant marriage.’ Where will you ever find such a marvellous opportunity?” 
Tripitaka said, “Disciple, if we remain here to dote on riches and glory who'll go to acquire scriptures in the Western Heaven? Won't the waiting kill my emperor of the Great Tang?” 

The Grand Preceptor said, “In the presence of the royal brother, your humble official dares not hide the truth. The wish of our ruler’s only to offer you the proposal of marriage. After your disciples have 
attended the wedding banquet, provisions will be given them and the travel rescript will be certified so that they may proceed to the Westem Heaven to acquire the scriptures.” 

“What the Grand Preceptor said is most reasonable,” said Pilgrim, “and we need not be difficult about this. We're willing to let our master remain here to become the husband of your mistress. Certify 
our rescript quickly and send us off to the West. When we've acquired the scriptures, we'll return here to visit parents and ask for travel expenses so that we may go back to the Great Tang.” Both the 
Grand Preceptor and the clerk of the posthouse saluted to Pilgrim as they said, “We thank this teacher for his kind assistance in concluding this marriage.” 8 Rules said, “Grand Preceptor, don’t use 
only your mouth to set the table! Since we've given our consent, tell your mistress to prepare us a banquet first. Let us have an engagement drink. How about it?” 

“Of course! Of course!” said the Grand Preceptor. “We'll send you a feast at once.” 

In great delight, the Grand Preceptor left with the clerk of the posthouse. Elder Tang caught hold of Pilgrim immediately and berated him, crying, “Monkey head! Your tricks are killing me! How could 
you say such things and ask me to get married here while you people go to the Western Heaven to see God? Even if | were to die, I’d not dare do this.” 

“Relax, Master,” said Pilgrim, “old monkey’s not ignorant of how you feel. But since we've reached this place and met this kind of people, we've no alternative but to meet plot with plot.” 

“What do you mean by that?” asked Tripitaka. 

Pilgrim said, “If you persist in refusing them, they will not certify our travel rescript nor will they permit us to pass through. If they grow vicious and order many people to cut you up and use your flesh to 
make those so-called fragrant bags, do you think that we'll treat them with kindness? We'll, of course, bring out our abilities that are meant to subdue demons and dispel fiends. Our hands and feet are 
quite heavy, you know, and our weapons ferocious. Once we lift our hands, the people of this entire nation will be wiped out. But you must think of this however. Although they are now blocking our 
path, they are no fiendish creatures or monster-spirits; all of them in this country are humans. And you've always been a man committed to kindness and compassion, refusing to hurt even one sentient 
being on our way. If we slaughter all these common folk here, can you bear it? That would be true wickedness.” 

When Tripitaka heard this, he said, “Wukong, what you've just said is most virtuous. But | fear that if the queen asks me to enter the palace, she will want me to perform the conjugal rite with her. How 
could | consent to lose my original yang and destroy the virtue of Religion, to leak my true sperm and fall from the humanity of our faith?” 

“Once we've agreed to the marriage,” said Pilgrim, “she will no doubt follow royal etiquette and send her carriage out of the capital to receive you. Don’t refuse her. Take a ride in her phoenix carriage 
and dragon chariot to go up to the treasure hall, and then sit down on the throne facing south. Ask the queen to take out her imperial seal and summon us brothers to go into court. After you’ve stamped 
the seal on the rescript, tell the queen to sign the document also and give it back to us. Meanwhile, you can tell them to prepare a huge banquet; call it a wedding feast as well as a farewell party for 
us. After the banquet, ask for the chariot once more on the excuse that you want to see us off outside the capital before you return to consummate the marriage with the queen. In this way, both ruler 
and subjects will be duped into false happiness; they will no longer try to block our way, nor will they have any cause to become vicious. Once we reach the outskirts of the capital, you'll come down 
from the dragon chariot and Sand-monk will help you to mount the white horse immediately. Old monkey will then use his magic of immobility to make all of them, ruler and subjects, unable to move. 
We can then follow the main road to the West. After one day and one night, I'll recite a spell to recall the magic and release all of them so that they can wake up and return to the city. For one thing, 
their lives will be preserved, and for another, your primal soul will not be hurt. This is a plot called Fleeing the Net by a False Marriage. Isn't it a doubly advantageous act?” 

When Tripitaka heard these words, he seemed as if he were snapping out of a stupor or waking up from a dream. So delighted was he that he forgot all his worries and thanked Pilgrim profusely, 
saying, “I’m deeply grateful for my worthy disciple’s lofty intelligence.” 

And so the 4 of them were united in their decision. That Grand Preceptor and the clerk of the posthouse who dashed inside the gate of the court without even waiting for summons and went before the 
white-jade steps. “The auspicious dream of our mistress is most accurate,” they cried, “and nuptial bliss will soon be yours.” When the queen heard this report, she had the pearly screen rolled up; 
descending from the dragon couch, she opened her cherry lips to reveal her silvery teeth and asked, full of smiles and in a most seductive voice, “What did the royal brother say after our worthy subjects 
saw him?” 

“After your subjects reached the posthouse,” said the Grand Preceptor, “and saluted to the royal brother, we immediately presented to him our proposal of marriage. The royal brother still expressed 
some reluctance but it was fortunate that his eldest disciple gave his consent for them without hesitation. He was willing to let his master become the husband of our ruler and call himself king, facing 
south. All he wanted was to have their travel rescript certified so that the three of them could leave for the West. On their way back after acquiring the scriptures, they'll come here to salute parents and 
ask for travel expenses to go back to the Great Tang.” 

“Did the royal brother say anything more?” asked the queen, smiling. 

The Grand Preceptor said, “The royal brother did not say anything more but he seemed to be willing to marry our mistress. His second disciple however, wanted to drink to their consent first.” 

When the queen heard this, she at once ordered the Court of Imperial Entertainments to prepare a banquet. She also requested that her imperial cortege be readied so that she might go out of the 
capital to receive her husband. The various women officials, in obedience to the queen’s command, began to sweep and clean the palaces and to prepare the banquet with the utmost haste. Look at 
them! Though this State of Western Liang happens to be a dominion of women, the carriage and chariot are not less opulent than those of China. See 6 dragons belching colours — 2 phoenixes bringing 
luck - 6 dragons, belching colours, support the chariot; 2 phoenixes, bringing luck, and lift up the carriage. Strange fragrance in endless waves; auspicious airs continuously rise. Fish-pendants of gold 
or jade worn by many ministers; rows and rows of lovely locks and bejewelled hair. A royal carriage shielded by mandarin-duck fans; through pearly screens glisten the phoenix hairpins. Melodic pipes, 


harmonious strings. What great sense of joy reaching to the sky! What boundless bliss leaving the Estrada Numina. 53-layered canopies wave above the royal house; 5-coloured banners light up the 
imperial steps. This land has never seen the nuptial cup exchanged; today the queen marries a gifted man. |n a moment, the imperial cortege left the capital and arrived at the Male Reception Posthouse. 
Someone went inside to announce to Tripitaka and his disciples: “The imperial cortege has arrived.” On hearing this, Tripitaka straightened out his clothes and left the main hall with the three disciples 
to meet the carriage. As the queen rolled up the screen to descend from the carriage, she asked, “Which’s the royal brother of the Tang court?” 

Pointing with her ringer, the Grand Preceptor said, “The one in a clerical robe standing behind the incense table outside the posthouse gate.” 

Lifting her moth-brows and opening wide her phoenix-eyes, the queen stared at him and found that this was an uncommon figure indeed. Look at him! What handsome features! What dignified looks! 
Teeth white like silver bricks, ruddy lips and a square mouth. His head's flat-topped, his forehead, wide and full; lovely eyes, neat eyebrows, and a chin that’s long. 2 well-rounded ears betoken someone 
brave. He is all elegance, a gifted man. What a youthful, clever, and comely son of love, worthy to wed Western Liang’s gorgeous girl! Utterly ravished by what she saw, the queen was swept away by 
amorous passion. Opening her tiny, cherry-like mouth, she cried out: “Royal brother of the Great Tang, aren’t you coming to take and ride the phoenix?” When Tripitaka heard these words, his ears 
turned red and his face, scarlet; filled with embarrassment, he dared not lift his head at all. On one side however, Bullseye 8 Rules stuck up his horn and stared with glassy eyes at the queen who was 
quite beguiling herself. Truly she had brows like kingfisher hair and flesh like mutton jade. Peach petals bedeck her face; her bun piles gold-phoenix hair. Her eyes’ cool, liquid gaze - such seductive 
charm. Her hands’ young, tender shoots — such dainty form. Colours flutter from a red sash hung aslant; bright gleams flash forth from jade and pearl pinned high. Don’t speak of the beauty of Zhao- 
Jun, she indeed surpasses even Xi Shi. °The willow waist bends slightly to gold-pendant sounds; the light, lotus steps move the jade-like limbs. The lunar goddess cannot come up to her, nor can the 
maids of Heaven compare with her. Her fair, palace style’s not of a worldly school; she’s like Queen Mum from Jasper Pool. As \diot gazed at this pleasing figure, he could not restrain the saliva from 
drooling out of his mouth and the deer pounding at his heart. Al/ at once, he grew weak and numb and simply melted away like a snow lion faced with fire! The queen went forward and caught hold of 
Tripitaka. In a most seductive voice, she said, “Royal brother darling, please ascend the dragon chariot so that we may go to the Treasure Hall of Golden Chimes and become husband and wife.” 
Shaking so hard that he could barely stand up, our elder behaved as if he were drunk or mesmerized. Pilgrim on one side whispered to him, “Master, don’t be too modest. Please get in the carriage 
with our mistress. Go and have our rescript certified quickly so that we may proceed to fetch the scriptures.” 

The elder dared not reply; he tugged at Pilgrim a couple of times and he could no longer stop the tears from falling down. “Master, you mustn't be distressed,” said Pilgrim. “Look at all these riches! If 
you don’t enjoy them now when’re you going to do it?” Tripitaka had little alternative but to acquiesce. Wiping away his tears, he forced himself to appear happy and joined the queen as they holding 
hands together, rode the dragon carriage. In great delight the queen wanted to get married; in great fear the elder wished only to worship God. 1 desired amorous play in the bridal chamber; 1 sought 
to see the World-Honoured 1 at Mount Spirit. The queen was sincere; the monk pretended, the queen was sincere, hoping to reach old age in harmony. The monk pretended, guarding his feelings to 
nurse his primal spirit. 1 was so glad to see a man that she would couple with him in broad daylight. 1 dreaded to meet a woman and thought only to flee and go to Thunderclap. The 2 mounted jointly 
the chariot. Who knew Tang Monk was of another mind! 

When those civil and military officials saw that their ruler and the Tang Monk had ascended the phoenix carriage and sat side by side together, every one of them beamed with pleasure. The entire 
entourage turned around and went back into the capital. Meanwhile, the Great Sage Sun told Sand-monk to pole the luggage and lead the white horse to follow the imperial cortege. Bullseye 8 Rules 
however, scurried ahead and ran madly up to the Tower of Five Phoenixes first, shouting all the while, “What comfort! What an opportunity! But this can’t be done until we’ve drunk the wedding juice 
and presented ourselves to the kinfolk first.” Those officials who were attending the cortege were so terrified that they went to the chariot and said, “My Lady, that monk who's a long horn and huge 
ears is shouting in front of the Five Phoenix Towers for wedding juice to drink.” When the queen heard this, she leaned her fragrant shoulder over to the elder and put her peach-like cheeks up to his 
face. Opening her scented mouth, she said softly, “Royal brother darling that disciple of yours is that one with a long horn and huge ears?” 

“He’s my second disciple,” said Tripitaka, “and he has a huge appetite. In fact, he loves to indulge his mouth throughout his life. He must be given some food and drink first before we can proceed with 
our business.” The queen asked hurriedly, “Has the Court of Imperial Entertainments finished preparing the banquet?” 

“It has,” reported one of the officials. “There are both meat and vegetarian dishes set up in the East Hall.” 

“Why both?” asked the queen again. “We fear that the royal brother of the Tang court,” said the official, “and his disciples are accustomed to keeping a vegetarian diet. That is why we've both meat and 
vegetarian dishes.” Full of smiles, the queen again snuggled close to the elder and said, “Royal brother darling, do you eat meat, or are you keeping a vegetarian diet?” Tripitaka said, “This humble 
priest observes a vegetarian diet but my disciples have not abstained from juice. My second disciple would like very much to have a few cups of dietary juice.” 

They had not finished speaking when the Grand Preceptor approached them and said, “Please go to the East Hall’ to attend the banquet. Today is an auspicious day, and Your Majesty can marry the 
venerable royal brother. Tomorrow Heaven will reveal the Yellow Road’ and we'll invite the venerable royal brother to ascend the treasure hall and face south. He can then designate the name of his 
reign and assume the throne.” 

Highly pleased, the queen held hands with the elder to descend from the dragon chariot and enter the main palace gate. They were met by poems divine, wind-wafted from the towers as the jade 
carriage moved through palace gates. Phoenix doors flung wide to bright flares of light; the palace now opened with rows of brocade. The unicorn hall was draped over by incense smoke; bright 
corridors wound round the peacock screens. Towers rose rugged like the noble states with jade halls, gold horses more wondrous still. When they reached the East Hall, they heard a choir of melodious 
strings and pipes; they saw 2 rows of winsome, graceful maids. 2 kinds of sumptuous repast were set up in the central hall: on the head table to the left was the vegetarian spread whereas meat dishes 
were placed on the right. Two rows of single tables were also set up toward the front of the hall. Rolling up her sleeves to reveal her dainty, pointed fingers, the queen immediately picked up a jade cup 
to toast her guests. Pilgrim went forward to say, “We're all keeping a vegetarian diet. Let our master be seated at the head table on the left. Then we three brothers may take the single tables on both 
sides of him.” 

“Yes! Yes!” said the Grand Preceptor in delight. “Master and disciples are just like dad and sons. They should not sit side by side.” The various officials hurriedly set up the tables in proper order, after 
which the queen toasted each of them as he took his seat. Thereafter, Pilgrim gave the Tang Monk a look, indicating to his master to return the salutation. Tripitaka, therefore, left his seat and, holding 
the jade goblet, also toasted the queen. The other civil and military officials all knelt to thank the imperial favour before they took the other seats on both sides according to their ranks. The poems 
stopped and they began to drink and eat. 

As 8 Rules was bent on satisfying his stomach, he had little regard for consequence. It did not matter that the food before him was corn, steamed breads, sweet pastries button mushrooms, black 
mushrooms, tender bamboo shoots, wood-ears, Chinese cabbage, seaweed, laver, green turnips, taros, white tumips, yams, or yellow sperms — in big gulps, he finished them all, washing down the 
food with seven or eight cups of juice. “Bring us more food!” he hollered. “Bring some big steins! After we drink a few more steins, each of us will attend to our business.” 

“Such a fine feast and you don’t want to enjoy some more?” asked Sand-monk. “What sort of business do you want to attend to?” 

With a laugh, Idiot said, “As the ancients said, let the bow-maker make his bow, the arrow-maker his arrow. At this time, those of us who want to take a wife may take a wife, and those of us who want 
to marry a husband may marry a husband. Those who want to acquire scriptures need to be on their way to acquire scriptures. We can’t let the coveted cup delay our affairs. Let's have our rescript 
certified quickly. As the saying goes, if the general doesn’t dismount, every man will go his own way.” 

When the queen heard this, she asked for big cups, and the attendants quickly took out several parrot cups, cormorant-shaped ladles, gold beakers, silver chalices, glass goblets, crystal basins, Penglai 
bowls, and amber steins. They filled these with the mellowest of juices and all of the disciples drank a round. 

Tripitaka then rose from the table and saluted to the queen with hands folded, saying, “Your Majesty, thank you for this lavish feast. We've drunk quite enough. Please ascend the treasure hall and 
certify our rescript. While there is still light, let us send the three of them on their way.” The queen agreed. After the banquet had been dismissed, she led the elder by the hand up to the Hall of Golden 
Chimes and immediately wanted the elder to take the throne. “No! No!” said Tripitaka. “Just now the Grand Preceptor said that tomorrow would be the proper auspicious day, and only then would this 
poor monk dare assume the throne and call myself the man set apart. Today you’d use your seal on the rescript so that they may be sent away.” Again the queen agreed and sat down on the dragon 
couch. A golden high-backed chair was placed on the left of the couch for the Tang Monk to sit on. Then the disciples were asked to bring forth the travel rescript. After Sand-monk untied the wrap and 
took it out, the Great Sage presented the rescript with both hands to the queen. When she examined it, she found on the document the marks of nine treasure seals of the Great Tang Emperor, together 
with the seals of the Precious Image Kingdom, the Black Rooster Kingdom, and the Cart Slow Kingdom. After the queen had looked at the document, she said again, smiling seductively, “So royal 
brother darling also bears the name of Chen?” 

“That is the surname of my secular family,” said Tripitaka, “and my religious name is Xuanzang. Because the Tang emperor in his imperial kindness took me as his brother, he bestowed on me the 
name of Tang.” 

“Why is it,” asked the queen, “that the rescript does not contain the names of your disciples?” 

“My three mischievous disciples,” replied Tripitaka, “are not people from the Tang court.” 

“If they are not,” asked the queen once more, “how is it that they are willing to follow you on your journey?” 

“My eldest disciple,” answered Tripitaka, “comes from the Aolai Country in the East East-Videha Continent; the second disciple, from a village in Qoco in the West Aparagodantya Continent; and the 
third, from the River of Flowing Sand. All three of them had transgressed the decrees of Heaven. The Nun Guanshiyin however, liberated them from their sufferings, as a result of which they were 
willing to make submission and hold fast the good. So that their merits might atone for their sins, they resolved to accompany me and protect me on my journey to the Western Heaven to acquire 
scriptures. Since they became my disciples when | was already on my way, their names therefore had not been recorded on the rescript.” 

“Let me add them on for you, all right?” asked the queen. Tripitaka replied, “Your Majesty may do as you please.” The queen asked at once for brush and ink; after the ink had been rubbed out and the 
brush nicely soaked in it, she wrote at the end of the rescript declaration the names of Sun Wukong, Bullseye Aware of Ability, and Sand Awakened to Purity. Then she took out her imperial seal with 
which she neatly stamped the rescript before she signed her own name. The document was passed down again to the Great Sage Sun who gave it to Sand-monk to put into the wrap. Picking up a tray 
of small pieces of gold and silver, the queen left the dragon couch to hand it to Pilgrim, saying, “Take this, the three of you, as travel money, and may you reach the Western Heaven at an early date. 
When you return after you've acquired the scriptures, we'll have greater rewards for you.” Pilgrim said, “We’re those who have left the family, and we can’t accept gold or silver. There will be places on 
our way where we may beg for our living.” When the queen saw that he refused, she took out ten bales of silk brocade and said to Pilgrim, “Since you're rushing away, there’s no time for measurement 
or sewing. Take this and have some clothes made on the way to protect you from the cold.” 

“Those who have left the family,” said Pilgrim, “are not permitted to wear silk brocade. We've cloth garments to cover our bodies.” When the queen saw that he refused again, she gave this order: “Take 
three pints of imperial rice, and you can use it for a meal on the road.” When 8 Rules heard the word “meal,” he at once accepted it and put the rice in the wrap. “Brother,” said Pilgrim, “the luggage is 
getting heavier. You’ve the strength to pole it?” 

“You'd not know,” chuckled 8 Rules, “but what’s good about rice is that it's a product for daily consumption. One meal will finish it off.” They all pressed their palms together to thank the queen. 
Tripitaka said, “Let Your Majesty take the trouble to accompany this poor monk who will send them off outside the capital. Let me give them a few instructions so that they may leave for the West. I'll 
return and then | can enjoy forever with Your Majesty riches and glory. Only without such burdens or cares can we enter into conjugal bliss.” The queen, of course, did not know that this was a trick, 
and she asked at once for the imperial cortege. Leaning her fragrant shoulder on Tripitaka, she ascended the phoenix carriage with him and proceeded to the west of the capital. At that time, all the 
people in the capital lined the streets with containers filled with clean water and urns with the finest incense. Wishing to see the cortege of the queen and the male form of the royal brother were all 
powdered faces and cloudlike hair; old and young, they crowded into the streets. In a moment, the imperial cortege went out of the capital and stopped before the western gate. 

After putting everything in order, Pilgrim, 8 Rules, and Sand-monk faced the imperial carriage and cried out in unison, “The queen need not go any further. We'll take our leave now.” Descending slowly 
from the dragon chariot, the elder raised his hands toward the queen and said, “Please go back, Your Majesty, and let this poor monk go to acquire scriptures.” When the queen heard this, she paled 
with fright and tugged at the Tang Monk. “Royal brother darling,” she cried, “I’m willing to use the wealth of my entire nation to ask you to be my husband. Tomorrow you'll ascend the tall treasure throne 
to call yourself king, and I’m to be your queen. You've even eaten the wedding feast. Why are you changing your mind now?” When 8 Rules heard what she said, he began to act as if he were delirious. 
Pouting his horn and flapping his ears wildly, he charged up to the carriage, shouting, “How could we monks marry a powdered skeleton like you? Let my master go on his journey!” When the queen 
saw that hideous face and ugly behaviour, she was scared out of her wits and fell back into the carriage. Sand-monk pulled Tripitaka out of the crowd and was just helping him to mount the horse when 
another girl dashed out from somewhere and shouted, “Royal brother Tang where’re you going? Let's you and | make some love!” 

“You stupid hussy!” cried Sand-monk and whipping out his treasure staff, brought it down hard on the head of the girl. Suddenly calling up a cyclone, the girl carried away the Tang Monk with a loud 
whoosh and both of them vanished without a trace. Alas! Thus it was that having just left the fair gender net, then the demon of love he met. 


055 
Deviant form makes lustful play for Tripitaka Tang; Upright nature safeguards the untainted self 


The Great Sage Sun and Bullseye 8 Rules were about to use magic to render those women immobile when they heard the shouts of Sand-monk and the howl of the wind. They turned quickly to look, 
only to discover that the Tang Monk had vanished. “Who is it that has abducted Master?” asked Pilgrim, and Sand-monk said, “It's a girl. She called up a cyclone and whizzed Master away.” When 
Pilgrim heard this, he leaped straight up to the edge of the clouds; using his hand to shade his eyes, he peered all around and found a roiling mass of wind and dust hurtling toward the northwest. 
“Brothers,” he shouted to them down below, “mount the clouds quickly to pursue Master with me.” 8 Rules and Sand-monk tied the luggage to the horse, and with a whoosh they all shot up to mid-air 
and left. 

Those women of the State of Western Liang, ruler and subjects, were so terrified that they knelt on the ground, all crying, “So these are Arhats who can ascend to Heaven in broad daylight!” Then the 
Officials said to the queen, “Let not our ruler be frightened or vexed anymore. The royal brother of Tang has to be a Religious monk who has attained the Way. Since none of us possesses true 
discernment, we’d not recognise these Chinese men for what they are and all our scheming have been wasted. Let our mistress ascend the carriage to go back to court.” 

The queen herself became quite embarrassed, and as she went back to the capital with all her officials. The Great Sage Sun with his 2 brothers trod on air and fog to give chase to that cyclone. Ina 
little while, they came upon a tall mountain where they saw the dust had died down and the wind subsided. Not knowing where the fiend had gone to, the three brothers lowered their clouds and began 
to search for the way. It was then that they saw on the side of the mountain a huge slab of stone, all shiny and green, that looked like a screen. The three of them led the horse to the back of the screen 
and discovered two stone doors, on which there was in large letters the following inscription: Toxic Foe Mountain, Cave of the Lute. As he had always been rather stupid, 8 Rules immediately wanted 
to break down the doors with his rake but he was quickly stopped by Pilgrim. “Don’t be so hasty, Brother,” he said. “After we followed the cyclone here, we’d to search for a while before we found these 
doors. We don’t even know the long and short of the matter. Suppose this is the wrong door. Won't your action offend the owner? | think the two of you’d look after the horse and wait in front of that 
stone screen. Let old monkey go inside to do some detection before we start anything.” 

Greatly pleased by what he heard, Sand-monk said, “Very good! This is what | call caution in recklessness, composure in urgency.” So the 2 of them led the horse away. The Great Sage Sun meanwhile 
displayed his divine power: making the magic sign with his fingers, he recited a spell and with 1 shake of his body changed into a bee - truly agile and light. Look at him! His thin wings go soft with 
wind; waist in sunlight is trim. A mouth once sweetened by flowers; a tail that stripe-toads has tamed. What merit in honey-making! How modest his home-returning! 

A smart plan he now conceives to soar past both doors and eaves. Crawling inside through a crack in the door, Pilgrim flew past the second-level door and came upon a flower arbour in the middle of 
which sat a female fiend. Attending her on both sides were several young girls dressed in coloured silk and with parted bangs on their foreheads. All of them appeared to be in a most pleasant mood, 
talking with great animation about something. Ever so lightly our Pilgrim flew up there and alighted on the trellis of the arbour. As he cocked his ear to listen, he saw two other girls with dishevelled hair 
walking up to the arbour, each holding a plate of steaming hot pastries. “Madam,” they said, “on this plate are buns stuffed with human flesh and on the other buns stuffed with red bean paste.” 

“Little ones,” said the female fiend with a giggle, “help the royal brother of Tang to come out.” The girls dressed in coloured silk went to one of the rear chambers and led the Tang Monk out by his 
hands. The master’s face however, had turned yellow and his lips, white; his eyes were red and brimming with tears. “Master has been poisoned!” sighed Pilgrim to himself. 

The fiend walked out of the arbour and extended her dainty, spring-onion-like fingers to catch hold of the elder, saying, “Relax, royal brother! Though our place here is not like the palace of the Western 
Liang State of Women and cannot compare with their wealth and luxury, it is actually less hectic and more comfortable. You'll find it perfect for reciting the name of God and reading scriptures. I'll be 
your companion on the Way, and we'll enjoy a harmonious union until old age.” Tripitaka would not utter a word. “Stop worrying,” said the fiend again. “I know that you didn’t eat much when you attended 
the banquet in the State of Women. Here are two kinds of flour goods, meat and vegetarian, and you may take whatever you want, just to calm your fear.” 

Tripitaka thought to himself, “I can remain silent and refuse to eat anything but this fiend is not like the queen. The queen, after all, is a human being whose action is governed by propriety. This fiend 
is a monster-spirit most capable of hurting me. What shall | do? | wonder if my three disciples know that I’m held in custody here. If she does harm me because of my stubbornness, wouldn't I’ve thrown 
away my life?” As he questioned his mind with mind like that, he had no altemative but to force himself to open his mouth. “What’s the meat made of and what the vegetarian’s made of?” he asked. 
The fiend said, “The meat bun has human flesh stuffing while the vegetarian has red bean paste stuffing.” 

“This poor monk,” said Tripitaka, “keeps a vegetarian diet.” 

“Girls,” said the female fiend, giggling, “bring us some hot tea so that the elder of your household can eat the vegetarian buns.” 

One of the girls brought out a cup of fragrant tea and placed it in front of the elder. Picking up a vegetarian bun, the fiend broke it in half and handed the pieces to Tripitaka who in turn took a meat bun 
and presented it whole to the fiend. “Royal brother,” asked the fiend, laughing, “why didn’t you break it first before you handed it to me?” Tripitaka pressed his palms together before he replied, “As 
someone who has left the family, | dare not break open food made with meat.” 

“If you as someone who has left the family dare not break open food made with meat,” said the fiend, “how is it that you’re willing to eat water pudding’ the other day at the Child-and-Mum Stream? 
Having done that, do you still insist on eating red bean paste stuffing today?” 

Tripitaka replied: “At high tide a boat leaves quickly; in sand traps a horse trots slowly.” 

Pilgrim on the trellis heard everything. Fearing that such banter might confound the real nature of his master, he could no longer contain himself. He revealed his true form at once and whipped out his 
iron rod. “Cursed beast!” he shouted. “You’re so unruly!” When the female fiend saw him, she blew out immediately from her mouth a ray of misty light to cover up the entire arbour. “Little ones,” she 
cried, “take away the royal brother!” Picking up a steel trident, she leaped out of the arbour and yelled, “Lawless simian rascal! How dare you sneak into my house and play Peeping Tom? Don’t run 
away! Have a taste of your mama’s trident!” Using the iron rod to parry her blows, the Great Sage fought back as he retreated. 

The two of them fought their way out of the cave. 8 Rules and Sand-monk were waiting in front of the stone screen; when they saw the combatants emerging, 8 Rules hurriedly pulled the white horse 
out of the way, saying, “Sand-monk, you guard the horse and the luggage. Let Old bull go and help with the fight.” Dear Idiot! Lifting high the rake with both his hands, he rushed forward and shouted, 
“Elder Brother, stay back! Let me beat up this bitch!” When the fiend saw 8 Rules approaching, she summoned up some more of her abilities. With one snort fire spurted out from her nostrils as smoke 
licked out from her mouth. She shook her body once and there were now three tridents dancing and thrusting in the air, wielded by who knows how many hands. As she charged like a cyclone into the 
fray, she was met by Pilgrim and 8 Rules on both sides. 

“Sun Wukong,” cried the fiend, “you've really no judgement! | recognise you but you can’t recognise me. But even your Siddhartha at the Thunderclap Monastery’s afraid of me. Two clumsy oafs like 
you, you think you'll get anywhere! Come on up, both of you and I'll give each of you a beating!” 

This battle was such: the female fiend’s power expanded; the Monkey King’s vigour increased. The Heavenly Reeds Marshal, striving for merit, wielded wildly his rake to show his vim. That one with 
many hands and fast tridents the misty light encircled; from these 2 — impulsive with strong weapons — foggy air rose up. The fiend wished only to seek a mate; the monk refused to leak his primal 
sperm. Yin and yang at odds would do battle now, each flaunting its might in this bitter strife. Quiet yin, to nourish being, quickened in lust; tranquil yang purged desires to guard its health. To these 2 
parties thus came discord; a contest was waged by trident, rake, and rod. This one’s rod was strong, the rake, more potent — nut the fiend’s trident met them blow for blow. 3 unyielding ones before 
Mount Toxic Foe; 2 ruthless sides outside Cave of the Lute. That 1 was pleased to seize the Tang Monk for her spouse; these 2 with the elder resolved to seek true writ. To do battle they stirred up 
Heaven and Earth, fought till sun and moon darkened, and planets moved. The 3 of them fought for a long time and no decision was reached. Leaping suddenly into the air, the female fiend resorted 
to the Horse-Felling Poisoned Stake and, unseen, gave the Great Sage a terrific stab on his head. “Oh, misery!” cried Pilgrim and at once fled in severe pain. When 8 Rules saw that the tide was 
turning, he too retreated with the rake trailing behind him. The fiend thus retrieved her tridents and returned in triumph. Gripping his head with brows contracted and face woe-laden, Pilgrim kept crying, 
“Horror! Horror!” 

8 Rules went up to him and asked, “Elder Brother, how’s it that when you're just enjoying the fight, you suddenly ran away whining up a storm?” 

Pilgrim gripped his head and could only say, “It hurts! It hurts!” 

“It must be your migraine,” said Sand-monk. “No! No!” cried Pilgrim, jumping up and down. “Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “I didn’t see that you’re wounded. But now your head hurts. Why?” 

“Lord, it’s terrible!” said Pilgrim with a groan. “I was just fighting with her. When she saw that | was breaking through her defence with the trident, she suddenly leaped into the air. | don’t know what kind 
of weapon it was that gave my head a stab but the pain is unbearable. That was why | fled.” 

“You've always bragged about that head of yours when things were quiet,” said 8 Rules with a laugh, “saying that it has gone through such a long process of cultivation. How is it now that it can’t even 
take a stab?” 

“Indeed,” replied Pilgrim. “Since | achieved the art of realised mortality, and since | stole and ate the mortal peaches, celestial juice, and the golden elixir of Laozi, this head of mine cannot be harmed. 
When | caused great disturbance in Heaven, the Jade Emperor sent the Demon King Powerful and the Twenty-Eight Constellations to take me outside the Dipper Star Palace and have me executed. 
What those divine warriors used on me were swords, axes, scimitars, bludgeons, thunderbolts, and fire. Thereafter Laozi placed me within his brazier of eight trigrams and smelted me for forty-nine 
days. But there wasn’t even a scratch on my head. | don’t know what sort of weapon this woman used today but she certainly wounded old monkey!” 

“Take away your hands,” said Sand-monk, “and let me see if the skin has been torn.” 

“No, it hasn't,” replied Pilgrim. 

“Ill go to the State of Western Liang and ask for some ointment to tape on you,” said 8 Rules. Pilgrim said, “There’s no swelling, and it's not an open wound. Why should you want to tape ointment on 
it?” 

“Brother,” said 8 Rules, chuckling, “I didn’t come down with any pre- or postnatal illness but you're getting a brain tumour.” 

“Stop joking, Second Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk. “It’s getting late! Big Brother's head’s been hurt and we don’t know whether Master's dead or alive. What'll we do?” 

“Master's all right,” said Pilgrim with a groan. “I changed into a bee to fly inside and found that woman sitting inside a flower arbour. In a little while, two maids brought out two plates of buns: one’d 
human flesh for stuffing and the other red bean paste. Then she asked two other maids to help Master out to eat just to calm his fear. She also said something about her desire to be Master's companion 
on the Way. Master said nothing to the woman at first, nor did he eat the buns. Later perhaps it’s because of all her sweet talk or some other odd reason, he began to speak with her and told her that 
he kept a vegetarian diet. The woman broke one of those vegetarian buns into halves to hand to Master and he presented her with a meat one whole. ‘Why didn’t you break it?’ the woman asked. 
And Master said, ‘Those who've left the family daren’t break into something made with meat.’ 

‘In that case,’ asked the woman, ‘how’s it that you're willing to eat water pudding the other day? And you still insist on eating stuffing made of red bean paste?’ 

Master didn’t quite understand her puns and he replied: ‘At high tide a boat leaves quickly; in sand traps a horse trots slowly.’ | heard everything on the trellis and was afraid that Master’s nature might 
be confounded. That’s when | revealed my true form and attacked her with my iron rod. She, too used her magic power; blowing out some mist or fog to cover the arbour, shouted for the girls to take 
away the ‘royal brother’ before she picked up her steel trident and fought her way out of the cave with old monkey.” 

When Sand-monk heard this, he bit his finger and said, “We've been picked up and followed by this bitch from who knows where but she’s certainly knowledge of what's happened to us recently.” 

“If you put it that way,” said 8 Rules, “it looks as if we’d be unable to rest, doesn't it? Let’s not worry if it’s dusk or midnight. Let’s go up to her door and provoke battle. At least our hubbub will prevent 
them from sleeping, so that she can’t pull a fast one on our master.” 

“My head hurts,” said Pilgrim. “I can’t go!” 

Sand-monk said, “No need to provoke battle. In the first place, Elder Brother's a headache and in the second, our master’s a true monk. He'll not allow either form or emptiness to confound his nature. 
Let’s sit here for the night beneath the mountain slope where there’s no draft and regain our energy. Then we can decide what to do by morning.” 

And so the 3 brothers rested beneath the mountain slope after having tied up the white horse firmly, guarding the luggage. The female fiend banished violence from her mind and once again took on a 
pleasant appearance. “Little ones,” she said, “shut the front and back doors tightly.” 2 little fiends were instructed to stand watch against the intrusion of Pilgrim. If there were any sound at the door at 
all, they were told to report at once. Then she gave this order also: “Maids, fix up the bedroom nicely. After you've lit the candles and the incense, go and invite royal brother Tang to come here. | want 
to make love with him.” They therefore brought out the elder from the rear. Putting on her most seductive charms, she caught hold of the Tang Monk and said, “As the proverb says, our pleasure’s more 
worthwhile though gold may have its price. Let's you and | play spouses and have some fun!” 

Gritting his teeth, our elder would not permit even a sound to escape from his mouth. He was about to refuse her invitation but he was afraid that she might decide to take his life. He had no alternative 
but to follow her into the perfumed room, trembling all the while. Completely in a stupor, he raised neither his eyes nor his head; he did not see what sort of coverlets or bedding there was in the room, 
nor was he eager to find out what kinds of furniture or dresser were placed therein. As for all the amorous declaration and sultry speech of the female fiend, he did not hear a word. Marvellous monk! 
Truly his eyes saw no evil form; ears heard no lustful sound; he regarded as dirt and dung this coy, silken face, this pearl-like beauty as ashes and dust. His 1 love in life was to practice Chan, unwilling 
to step once beyond God-land. How’d | show affection and pity when all | know is religion and truth? 

That fiend, all vibrant with boundless passion; elder most deadpan and filled with Religious zeal. 1 was like soft jade and warm perfume; 1 seemed like cold ashes or dried wood. That person undid her 
collar, her passion overflowing; this person tied up his robe, his resolve unswerving. That 1 wanted to mate, breast to chest with thighs entwined; this 1 wished to face the wall and seek Awakening- 


religion in the mount. The fiend loosened her clothes to display her fine, scented flesh; the Tang Monk bundled up his cloak to hide his coarse and thickset skin. The fiend said, “My sheets and pillows 
are ready, why don’t you sleep!” 

The Tang Monk said, “How'd my bald head and strange clothes join you there!” 

That 1 said, “I’m willing to be the former period’s Liu Cuicui.” 

This 1 said, “This humble monk isn’t a lovesick priest!” 

The fiend said, “I’m pretty as Xi Shi and even more lissom.” 

The Tang Monk said, “Like King Yue I’ve long been mortified!” 

The fiend said, “Royal brother, remember he who dies beneath the flowers; even his ghost’s a happy lover.” 

The Tang Monk said, “My true yang is treasure most precious. How’d | give it to a powdered cadaver?” 

The 2 of them prattled on like that deep into the night but the elder Tang showed no sign whatever that he had been aroused. Though the female fiend tugged and pulled at him and refused to let go, 
master doggedly rejected her advances. All this hassle made the fiend mad by midnight and she shouted, “Little ones, bring me a rope!” Alas! 

The dearly beloved was at once trussed up until he looked like a shaggy ape! After telling her subordinates to drag the monk back to the corridor, she blew out the lamps and all of them retired. 

Soon the cock crowed three times, and beneath the mountain slope Great Sage Sun rose up, saying, “I'd a headache for quite a while but now my head feels neither painful nor numb. In fact, I've a 
little itch.” 

“If you've an itch,” chuckled 8 Rules, “how about asking her to give you another stab?” Pilgrim spat at him and said, “Go! Go! Go!” 8 Rules laughed again and replied, “Go! Go! Go! But it was Master 
last night who went wild! Wild! Wild!” 

“Stop gabbing, the two of you,” said Sand-monk. “It’s light. Go quickly to catch the monster.” 

“Brother,” said Pilgrim, “stay here to guard the horse and don’t move. Bullseye 8 Rules will go with me.” 

Arousing himself, Idiot straightened out his black silk shirt and followed Pilgrim; they took their weapons and leaped up to the mountain ledge to go before the stone screen. “Stand here,” said Pilgrim 
to 8 Rules, “for | fear that the fiend might have harmed Master during the night. Let me go inside to snoop around a bit. If Master truly had lost his primal yang and his virtue because of her deception, 
then all of us could scatter. If he has not been confounded and if his Chan mind has remained unmoved, then we’d in all diligence fight to the end, slaughter the monster-spirit, and rescue Master to go 
to the West.” 

“You're quite numb-skulled!” said 8 Rules. “As the proverb says, ‘Could dried fish be used for a cat's pillows?’ Like it or not, it would receive a few scratches!” 

Pilgrim said, “Stop babbling! I'll go and see.” 

Dear Great Sage! He left 8 Rules in front of the stone screen and shook his body again to change into a bee. After he flew inside, he found two maids sleeping, their heads resting on the watch-rattles. 
He went up to the flower arbour to look around. The monster-spirit had struggled for half the night; she and her attendants were all very tired. Everyone was still fast asleep, not knowing that it was 
dawn already. Flying to the rear, Pilgrim began to hear the faint moans of the Tang Monk, and then he saw that the priest was left bull-tied in the corridor. Pilgrim gently alighted on his head and 
whispered, “Master.” Recognising the voice, the Tang Monk said, “Have you come, Wukong? Save my life, quick!” 

“How were the night's activities?” asked Pilgrim. Tripitaka, clenching his teeth, replied, “I'd rather die than do anything of that sort!” 

“| thought,” said Pilgrim, “I saw her showing you a good deal of tenderness yesterday. How is it that she is putting you through such torment today?” 

“She pestered me for half the night,” answered Tripitaka, “but | didn’t even loosen my clothes or touch her bed. When she saw that | refused to yield to her, she had me tied up like this. Please rescue 
me, so that | can go acquire the scriptures.” As master and disciples spoke to each other like that, they woke up the monster-spirit. Though she was furious at the Tang Monk, she was still very fond of 
him. When she stirred and heard something about going to acquire scriptures, she rolled off the bed at once and shouted: “You mean to tell me that you don’t want to get married and still want to go 
and seek scriptures?” 

Pilgrim was so startled that he abandoned his master, spread his wings, and flew out of the cave. “Eight Rules,” he cried, and Idiot came around the stone screen, saying, “Has that thing been 
concluded?” 

“Not yet! Not yet!” said Pilgrim, laughing. “She worked on the old master for quite some time but he refused. She got mad and had him bull-tied. He was just telling me all this when the fiend woke up, 
and | became so startled that | came back out here.” 8 Rules asked, “What did Master actually say?” 

“He said,” replied Pilgrim, “that he did not even loosen his clothes nor did he touch her bed.” 

“Good! Very good!” chuckled 8 Rules. “He’s still a true monk! Let's go rescue him!” 

As he had always been a roughneck, Idiot did not wait for further discussion. Lifting high his muckrake, he brought it down on the stone doors with all his might, and with a loud crash they broke into 
many pieces. The two maids sleeping on the watch-rattles were so terrified that they ran back to the second-level door and screamed: “Open up! Those two ugly men of yesterday have come again 
and smashed our doors!” The female fiend was just leaving her room. “Little ones,” she cried, “bring some hot water for me to wash my face. Carry the royal brother, all tied up like that, and hide him 
in the rear room. I’m going out to fight them.” 

Dear monster-spirit! She ran out with her trident uplifted and shouted: “Brazen ape! Wild bull! You don’t know when to stop, do you? How dare you break my doors?” 

“You filthy bitch!” scolded 8 Rules. “You've our master imprisoned, and you still dare to talk with such insolence? Our master was only your kidnapped husband! Send him out quickly, and I'll spare you. 
If you dare but utter half a no, the blows of Old bull’s rake will level even your mountain.” 

The monster-spirit, of course, did not permit such words to intimidate her. With enormous energy and using magic as before, she attacked with her steel trident while her nose and mouth belched fire 
and smoke. 8 Rules leaped aside to dodge her blow before striking back with his rake, helped by the Great Sage Sun and his iron rod on the other side. The power of that fiend was tremendous indeed! 
All at once she seemed to have acquired who knows how many hands, waving and parrying left and right. After they fought for several rounds, she again used some kind of weapon and gave the lip of 
8 Rules a stab. His rake trailing behind him and his lips pouting, Idiot fled in pain for his life. Pilgrim also became somewhat envious of him; making one false blow with the rod, he, too, fled in defeat. 
After the fiend returned in triumph, she told her little ones to place rock piles in front of the door. 

We now tell you about Sand-monk who was grazing the horse before the mountain slope when he heard some bull-grunting. As he raised his head, he saw 8 Rules dashing back, lips pouted and 
grunting as he ran. “What in the world...?” asked Sand-monk. 

The Idiot blurted out: “It's awful! It's awful! This pain! This pain!” Hardly had he finished speaking when Pilgrim also arrived. “Dear Idiot!” he chuckled. “Yesterday you said I’d a brain tumour but now 
you're suffering from the plague of the swollen lip!” 

“| can’t bear it!” cried 8 Rules. “The pain’s acute! It’s terrible! It’s terrible!” 

The three of them were thus in sad straits when they saw an old woman approaching from the south on the mountain road, her left hand carrying a little bamboo basket with vegetables in it. “Big 
Brother,” said Sand-monk, “look at that old lady approaching. Let me find out from her what sort of a monster-spirit this is and what kind of weapon she has that can inflict a wound like this.” 

“You stay where you're,” said Pilgrim, “and let old monkey question her.” When Pilgrim stared at the old woman carefully, he saw that there were auspicious clouds covering her head and fragrant mists 
encircling her body. Recognising all at once who she was, Pilgrim shouted, “Brothers, respect quickly! The lady is Nun!” Ignoring his pain, 8 Rules hurriedly went to his knees while Sand-monk bent 
low, still holding the reins of the horse. The Great Sage Sun, too, pressed his palms together and knelt down, all crying, “We submit to the great and compassionate, the efficacious saviour, Nun 
Guanshiyin.” 

When the Nun saw that they recognised her original light, she at once trod on the auspicious clouds and rose to mid-air to reveal her true form, the one which carried the fish basket. Pilgrim rushed up 
there also to say to her, saluting, “Nun, pardon us for not receiving you properly. We're desperately trying to rescue our master and we'd no idea that the Nun was descending to earth. Our present 
demonic ordeal is hard to overcome indeed, and we beg the Nun to help us.” 

“This monster-spirit,” said the Nun, “is most formidable. Those tridents of hers happen to be two front claws, and what gave you such a painful stab is actually a stinger on her tail. It’s called the Horse- 
Felling Poison, for she herself is a scorpion spirit. Once upon a time she happened to be listening to a lecture in the Thunderclap Monastery. When Siddhartha saw her, he wanted to push her away 
with his hand but she turned around and gave the left thumb of a god a stab. Even Siddhartha found the pain unbearable! When he ordered the Arhats to seize her, she fled here. If you want to rescue 
the Tang Monk, you must find a special friend of mine for even | can’t go near her.” 

Saluting again, Pilgrim said, “I beg the Nun to reveal to whom it is that your disciple should go to ask for assistance.” 

“Go to the East Heaven Gate,” replied the Nun, “and ask for help from the Star Lord Orionis’in the Luminescent Palace. He is the one to subdue this monster-spirit.” 

When she finished speaking, she changed into a beam of golden light to return to South Sea. Dropping down from the clouds, the Great Sage Sun said to 8 Rules and Sand-monk, “Relax, Brothers, 
we've found someone to rescue Master.” 

“From where?” asked Sand-monk. 

Pilgrim replied, “Just now the Nun told me to seek the assistance of the Star Lord Orionis. Old monkey will go immediately.” 

With swollen lips, 8 Rules grunted, “Elder Brother, please ask a god for some medicine for the pain.” 

“No need for medicine,” said Pilgrim with a laugh. “After one night, the pain will go away like mine.” 

“Stop talking,” said Sand-monk. “Go quickly!” 

Dear Pilgrim! Mounting his cloud somersault, he arrived instantly at the East Heaven Gate where he was met by the Deity-King Viridhaka. “Great Sage,” said the Deity-King, saluting, “where are you 
going?” 

“On our way to acquire scriptures in the West,” replied Pilgrim, “the Tang Monk ran into another demonic obstacle. | must go to the Luminescent Palace to find the Star God of the Rising Sun.” As he 
spoke, Tao, Zhang, Xin, and Deng, the four Grand Marshals, also approached him to ask where he was going. “I’ve to find the Star Lord Orionis,” said Pilgrim, “and ask him to rescue my master from 
a monster-spirit.” One of the grand marshals said, “By the decree of the Jade Emperor this morning, a god went to patrol the Star-Gazing Terrace.” 

“Is that true?” asked Pilgrim. “All of us humble warriors,” replied Grand Marshal Xin, “left the Dipper Palace with him at the same time. Would we dare speak falsehood?” 

“It has been a long time,” said Grand Marshal Tao, “and he might be back already. The Great Sage should go to the Luminescent Palace first, and if he’s not there, then you can go to the Star-Gazing 
Terrace.” 

Delighted, the Great Sage took leave of them and arrived at the gate of the Luminescent Palace. Indeed there was no one in sight and as he turned to leave, he saw a troop of soldiers approaching, 
followed by a god who still had on his court regalia made of golden threads. Look at his cap of five folds ablaze with gold; court tablet of most lustrous jade. A 7-star sword, cloud patterned, hung from 
his robe; an 8-treasure belt, lucent, wrapped around his waist. His pendant jangled as if striking a verse; it rang like a bell in a strong gust of wind. Kingfisher fans parted and Orionis came as celestial 
fragrance the courtyard filled. Those soldiers walking in front saw Pilgrim standing outside the Luminescent Palace and they turned quickly to report: “My lord, the Great Sage Sun’s here.” 

Stopping his cloud and straightening his court attire, a god ordered the soldiers to stand on both sides in 2 rows while he went forward to salute his visitor, saying, “Why’s the Great Sage come here?” 
“I've come here,” replied Pilgrim, “especially to ask you to save my master from an ordeal.” 

“Which ordeal,” asked a god, “and where?” 

“In the Cave of the Lute at the Toxic Foe Mountain,” Pilgrim answered, “that’s located in the State of Western Liang.” 

“What sort of monster's there in the cave,” asked a god again, “that’s made it necessary for you to call on this humble deity?” 

Pilgrim said, “Just now the Nun Guanyin in her epiphany revealed to us that it was a scorpion spirit. She told us further that only you’d, sir, overcome it. That is why I’ve come to call on you.” 

‘I'd first go back and report to the Jade Emperor,” said a god, “but the Great Sage’s already here, and you’ve moreover the Nun’s recommendation. Since | don’t want to cause you delay, | dare not 
ask you for tea. I'll go with you to subdue the monster-spirit first before | report to the throne.” 

When the Great Sage heard this, he at once went out of the East Heaven Gate with a god and sped to the State of Western Liang. Seeing the mountain ahead, Pilgrim pointed at it and said, “This is 
it.” A god lowered his cloud and walked with Pilgrim up to the stone screen beneath the mountain slope. When Sand-monk saw them, he said, “Second Elder Brother, please rise. Big Brother has 
brought back the star god.” His lips still pouting, Idiot said, “Pardon! Pardon! I’m ill, and | can’t salute you.” 

“You're a man who practices self-cultivation,” said the star god. “What kind of sickness do you've?” 

“Earlier in the morning,” replied 8 Rules, “we fought with the monster-spirit who gave me a stab on my lip. It still hurts.” 


The star god said, “Come up here, and I'll cure it for you.” Taking his hand away from his horn, Idiot said, “I beg you to cure it, and I'll thank you most heartily.” The star god used his hand to give 8 
Rules’ lip a stroke before blowing a mouthful of breath on it. At once, the pain ceased. In great delight, Idiot went to his knees, crying, “Marvellous! Marvellous!” 
“May | trouble the star god to touch the top of my head also?” said Pilgrim with a grin. “You're not poisoned,” said the star god. “Why should | touch you?” Pilgrim replied, “Yesterday, | was poisoned 
but after one night the pain is gone. The spot however, still feels somewhat numb and itchy, and | fear that it may act up when the weather changes. Please cure it for me.” The star god indeed touched 
the top of his head and blew a mouthful of breath on it. The remaining poison was thus eliminated, and Pilgrim no longer felt the numbness or the itch. “Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, growing ferocious, 
“let's go and beat up that bitch!” 
“Exactly!” said the star god. “You provoke her to come out, the two of you, and I'll subdue her.” 
Leaping up the mountain slope, Pilgrim and 8 Rules again went behind the stone screen. With his mouth spewing abuses and his hands working like a pair of fuel-gatherer hooks, Idiot used his rake to 
remove the rocks piled up in front of the cave in no time at all. He then dashed up to the second-level door, and one blow of his rake reduced it to powder. The little fiends inside were so terrified that 
they fled inside to report: “Madam, those two ugly men have destroyed even our second-level door!” The fiend was just about to untie the Tang Monk so that he could be fed some tea and rice. When 
she heard that the door had been broken down, she jumped out of the flower arbour and stabbed 8 Rules with the trident. 8 Rules met her with the rake while Pilgrim assisted him with his iron rod. 
Rushing at her opponents, the fiend wanted to use her poisonous trick again but Pilgrim and 8 Rules perceived her intentions and retreated immediately. 
The fiend chased them beyond the stone screen, and Pilgrim shouted, “Orionis where are you?” Standing erect on the mountain slope, the star god revealed his true form. He was actually a huge, 
double-combed rooster, about seven feet tall when he held up his head. He faced the fiend and crowed once: immediately the fiend revealed her true form that was that of a scorpion about the size of 
a lute. The star god crowed again, and the fiend whose whole body became paralysed, died before the slope. A testimonial poem for you says: 
Like tasselled balls his embroidered neck and comb with long, hard claws and angry, bulging eyes, he perfects the 5 Virtues forcefully; his 3 crows are done heroically. 

No common, clucking fowl about the hut, he’s Heaven's star showing his holy name. 

In vain the scorpion seeks the human ways; she now her true, original form displays. 
8 Rules went forward and placed one foot on the back of the creature saying, “Cursed beast! You can’t use your Horse-Felling Poison this time!” 
Unable to make even a twitch, the fiend was pounded into a paste by the rake of the Idiot. Gathering up again his golden beams, the star god mounted the clouds and left while Pilgrim led 8 Rules and 
Sand-monk to salute the sky saying, “Sorry for all your inconvenience! In another day, we'll go to your palace to thank you in person.” 
After the three of them gave thanks, they took the luggage and the horse into the cave where they were met by those maids who knelt on both sides to receive them. “Dads,” they cried, “we're not 
fiends. We're all women from the State of Western Liang who have been kidnapped by this monster-spirit some time ago. Right now your master is weeping in a scented room in the rear.” On hearing 
this, Pilgrim stared at them and saw that there was indeed no demonic aura about them. He therefore went to the rear, crying, “Master!” When the Tang Monk saw them, he was very pleased. “Worthy 
disciples,” he said, “I've caused you a lot of trouble. What happened to that woman?” 
“She was a huge female scorpion,” replied 8 Rules. “We're fortunate to have received the revelation from the Nun Guanyin whereupon Big Brother went to Heaven to acquire the assistance of the Star 
Lord Orionis. He came here and subdued her, and she has been reduced to mud by Old bull. Only then did we dare walk in here to see your face.” The Tang Monk could not end his thanks to them. 
Then they found some rice and noodles with which they prepared a meal, after which they showed the way home to those girls who had been taken captive. Lighting up a fire, they burned out the entire 
cave-dwelling before they found the main road to the West once more. Thus it was that they cut worldly ties to leave beauty and form; drained the gold sea to know the mind of Chan. 


056 
Wild Spirit slays brutish bandits; Wayward Way sets loose Mind Monkey 
The poem says: 
That mind is called pure when it holds nothing — all quiet with not one thought arising. 

Firmly restrain the monkey and the horse. Guard both spirit and sperm to stay on course. 

Discard the 6 Robbers; awake to the 3 Wains; @causations halted, all things will be plain. 

Depraved forms destroyed, to true realm you rise to sit and enjoy the Western paradise.* 
Tripitaka Tang who would have bitten through an iron nail with such grim determination, had managed to preserve his body from ruin. Moreover, he was fortunate enough to have had Pilgrim and his 
other assistants slaughter the scorpion spirit and rescue him from the Cave of the Lute. As they set out on their journey, it was the season of clear, clement weather again when warm breezes oft wafted 
the wild-orchid scent; young bamboos cooled off as cleansing rain ceased. None picked the moxa leaves all over the hills; rush flowers filled the streams to display their hues. Bright pomegranates 
pleased the wandering bees. Yellow birds bustled in the brook’s willow-shade. Rice-cakes* were not wrapped on a long journey though dragon boats now mourned at Miluo Stream. As master and 
disciples enjoyed this scenery of the Double Fifth Festival season when the sun was high in the sky, they found once more a tall mountain blocking their path. Reining in his horse, the elder turned his 
head to address his disciples: “Wukong, there’s a mountain ahead of us. | fear that it may breed fiends. Please be careful.” 
“Please don’t worry, Master,” replied Pilgrim. “We make submission to the faith in complete obedience. Why worry about fiends?” Delighted by what he heard, the elder urged his horse forward, and in 
a little while they arrived at a tall ledge on the mountain. This was what they saw as they looked around: the peak’s pines and cedars join the clouds in blue; wild creepers hang on the cliffs briars and 
thorns. 10000 feet, lofty -1000 tiers, sheer hanging - 10000 feet of lofty, rugged peak; 1000 tiers of sheer, hanging buff. Jade-green moss and lichen on dark rocks spread; large forests formed by tall 
junipers and elms. Deep in the forest, listen to the birds: their skilful voices make recital poems. The brooklet’s water flows like splashing jade; the roadside’s petals rest as mounds of gold. This wretched 
mount so hard to scale! Walk ten steps and not even one’s flat! Travellers meet in pairs the foxes and deer; they face in 2s both black apes and white fawns. All at once there’s a fearsome tiger-roar or 
the crane-cry that reaches Heaven’s court. Yellow plums, red apricots make worthy fruits; wild grass and flowers are of name unknown. The 4 of them entered the mountain and journeyed slowly for a 
long time. After they passed the summit, they went down the west slope until they came to a piece of level ground. Attempting to show off his energy, Bullseye 8 Rules asked Sand-monk to pole the 
luggage while he raised high his muckrake with both his hands and went forward to drive the horse. The horse however, was not at all afraid of him; though 8 Rules whooped and hollered, he kept on 
trotting slowly. “Brother,” said Pilgrim, “why are you driving him? Let him walk slowly.” 
“It's getting late,” answered 8 Rules, “and we've been walking for a whole day since we ascended this mountain. I’m getting hungry. Let's hurry and see if we can find a house where we can beg some 
food.” When Pilgrim heard this, he said, “In that case, let me make him run.” He waved the golden-hooped rod once and gave a shout: immediately, the horse shot away like an arrow on the level road. 
For what reason, you say, is the horse afraid of Pilgrim and not of 8 Rules? Pilgrim was appointed an official, the title being Ban-Horse-Plague, at the Imperial stable in Heaven by the Jade Emperor 
five centuries ago. Ever since that time, horses have been afraid of apes. Unable to hang on to the reins, our elder at this moment could only cling to the saddle and allow the horse to go in a gallop 
some twenty miles before it slowed again as it came upon some open fields. 
At that moment, a sudden clang of gongs brought out from both sides of the road some thirty men, all armed with spears, scimitars, staffs, and rods. They barred the way and cried, “Monk! Where are 
you off to?” The Tang Monk was so terrified and shaking so violently that he fell down from the horse. Crouching in the bushes by the road, he could only say, “Great kings, spare me! Please spare 
me!” 
2 burly men at the head of the band said, “We'll not hit you but you must leave us your travel money.” 
Only then did the elder realise that these were bandits. As he got up slowly, he stole a glance at them and saw that 7 had a green face with fangs beating Jupiter's; 1 had round and bulging eyes like 
Death himself. Their temples’ red hair seemed like soaring flames; like pins stuck to their chins were their yellow beards. The 2 had striped tiger-skin caps on their heads and sable battle kilts around 
their waists. 1 held in his hands a wolf-teeth club and on 1’s shoulder rested a knotty staff. Indeed, this 1 was no less than a hill-pawing tiger! Truly, that one looked like a dragon darting out of water! 
When he saw how ferocious they were, Tripitaka had no choice but to get up, and pressing his palms together before him, he said, “Great kings, this humble priest is someone sent by the Tang emperor 
in the Land of the East to go to the Western Heaven to acquire scriptures. Since | left our capital, Chang’an, it has been many years; even if I’d any travel money, I’ve long spent it. Those of us who 
have left the family live by begging. Where do I’ve cash? | beg the great kings to be kind and let this humble priest pass through.” 
The 2 bandit chiefs drew near and said, “We've resolved to stand guard by this main road like a tiger with the sole intention of picking up some cash or money. What do you mean by kindness? If you 
don’t have any money, take off your clothes quickly and leave us the white horse, too. We'll let you pass then.” 
“Infinite Light!” replied Tripitaka. “The robe on this poor priest's been made from cloth begged from one family and needles from another. It’s a garment in fact that’s come from patchwork begging! 
Wouldn't it be just like killing me if you stripped me of it? You might be valiant men in this life but you might become beasts in the next.” 
Angered by what he heard, 1 of the bandits wielded a big rod and wanted to hit the elder who did not say a word but thought to himself, “Alas! Now you boast of your rod but you've little idea of my 
disciple’s rod!” The bandit, of course, did not permit any further discussion; lifting his rod, he started to shower the elder with blows. Now, our elder had never lied in his life before but faced with such 
a dilemma, he had no choice but to mouth falsehood. “Please do not raise your hands, great kings, both of you,” he said. “I’ve a young disciple who should arrive any moment. He has on him several 
ounces of silver that I'll be glad to give to you.” 
“This monk,” said the bandit, “can’t take any pain. Let's tie him up.” 
His followers acted at once and bound their victim with a rope, after which he was hung high on a tree. Now about those three rowdy troublemakers who were chasing the horse from behind. Laughing 
uproariously, 8 Rules said, “Master has gone off so quickly! | wonder where he’s waiting for us.” Then he caught sight of the elder hanging on a tree in the distance, and he said, “Look at master! He 
should have just waited for us. But no, he’s so spirited that he has to climb a tree for fun, swinging back and forth on a vine!” When Pilgrim saw that, he said, “Idiot, don’t babble! Isn’t master being hung 
up there? The two of you stay back, and let me go take a look.” Dear Great Sage! He jumped up to a knoll nearby, and when he stared in front of him, he recognised at once that there was a group of 
bandits. Secretly pleased, he thought to himself: “Lucky! Lucky! Business is at the door!” Walking down from the knoll, he changed with one shake of his body into a young priest wearing a clerical robe. 
He was only about sixteen years old, and he had a blue cloth-wrap on his shoulder. In big strides, he came up to where his master was, crying, “Master, what do you've to say for yourself? Who are 
these bad men?” 
“O disciple,” replied Tripitaka, “aren’t you going to rescue me? Why all these questions?” 
“What sort of business are they engaged in?” asked Pilgrim. Tripitaka replied, “They are highwaymen; they barred my way and asked for toll money. As I'd nothing on me, they tied me up and hung me 
here. They are waiting for you to show up to finish the discussion with them. If nothing works, we may have to give them this horse of ours.” 
On hearing this, Pilgrim chuckled and said, “Master, you’re so weak! There are many monks in the world but few are as thin-skinned as you. The Tang emperor, Taizong, sent you to see God in the 
Western Heaven. But who told you to give away this dragon horse?” 
“O disciple!” said Tripitaka. “They've already tied me up like this. If they want to beat me for fun, what shall | do?” 
“What did you say to them anyway?” asked Pilgrim. “They threatened me with beatings,” said Tripitaka, “until I'd no choice but to make a confession about you.” 
“Master,” said Pilgrim, “you’re such a lark! What kind of confession did you make about me?” Tripitaka replied, “I said that you had some travel money, just to make them stop hitting me. It was something 
to get me out of a jam.” 
“Fine! Fine! Fine!” said Pilgrim. “Thanks for doing me this favour! That's exactly the sort of confession about me | want! If you can make it seventy or eighty times a month, old monkey will have lots of 
business.” 
When those bandits saw him chatting with his master like that, they spread out and had them entirely surrounded. “Little monk,” 1 of them said. “Your master told us that you’d some travel money. Take 
it out quickly and your lives will be spared. If you but utter half a no, both of you'll die on the spot!” 
Putting down his cloth wrap, Pilgrim said, “Officers, don’t make a clamour! There is some travel money, not much, in this wrap: about twenty shoes of gold and perhaps thirty ingots of polished silver. 
I've not made a count of the small change. If you want it, take the wrap, too but please don’t hit my master. As an ancient book says: virtue’s fundamental; riches are accidental. What you want is really 
the most peripheral thing. We're those who've left the family and there'll be other places for us to beg. When we run into some aged person who wishes to feed and supply the monks, we'll have 
allowances and we'll have clothing. How much can we use or spend? | just hope that you'll release my master and I'll offer you everything.” 
When those bandits heard these words, they were most pleased, all saying, “That old monk’s so stingy but this young one is quite generous.” 
1 of the chiefs gave this command: “Release him!” 
When that elder got his life again, he leaped on the horse; without another thought for Pilgrim, he took whip in hand and headed straight back on the road from which he came. “You're going the wrong 
way!” shouted Pilgrim hurriedly. 


Picking up his wrap, he gave chase at once only to be barred by the bandits. “Where do you think you’re going?” said the bandit leader. “Put your money down before | start the torture!” 

“As | was saying,” chuckled Pilgrim, “the travel money ought to be divided into three portions.” 

“This young priest,” said a bandit chief, “is pretty cagey! Now he wants to keep a little for himself after his master’s gone. All right! Take it out first and let's have a look. If there’s enough, we'll let you’ve 
a tiny bit- so that you can buy some goodies to eat when you’re by yourself.” 

“Oh, dear elder brother,” said Pilgrim, “that's not what | meant. You think | really have travel money? What | meant was, that gold and silver you robbed from other people you must divide with me.” 
When the thief heard this, he became enraged. “This monk doesn’t know what's good for him!” he hollered. “You’re not willing to give me nothing, and you ask me instead for something? Bah! Watch 
the beating!” He raised up his knotty staff and gave the bald head of Pilgrim seven or eight blows but Pilgrim behaved as if nothing whatever had happened. “Dear elder brother,” he said, full of smiles, 
“if that’s how you hit people, you can hit me until next spring and I'll not consider you doing it for real.” Horrified, the bandit said, “This monk has quite a hard head!” 

“Hardly! Hardly!” said Pilgrim, chuckling. “You praise me too much! It’s just passable!” Without permitting further discussion, two more of the bandits joined their leader and started to shower blows on 
Pilgrim. “Please calm your anger, all of you,” said Pilgrim. “Let me take out something.” 

Dear Great Sage! He gave his ear a rub and brought out a tiny embroidery needle. “Sirs,” he said, “I’m someone who has left the family, and I’ve not any travel money with me. I’ve only this needle that 
I'll be glad to give to you.” 

“What rotten luck!” said the bandit. “We released a wealthy priest and we've caught instead this poor, bald ass! You must be quite good at tailoring, | suppose. What do | need a needle for?” 

When Pilgrim heard that he did not want the needle, he waved it once in his hand and it changed immediately into a rod with the thickness of a rice bowl. Growing fearful, the bandit said, “Though this 
monk appears to be young, he knows magic.” Sticking the rod into the ground, Pilgrim said to them, “If any of you can pick it up, it’s yours.” The two bandit chiefs at once went forward to try to grab it 
but alas, it was as if dragonflies were attempting to shake a stone pillar. They could not even budge it half a whit! This rod happened to be the compliant golden-hooped rod that tipped the scale in 
Heaven at thirteen thousand, five hundred pounds. How could those bandits have knowledge of this? The Great Sage walked forward and picked up the rod with no effort at all. Assuming the style of 
the Python Rearing its Body, he pointed at the bandits and said, “Your luck’s running out, for you’ve met old monkey!” One of the bandit chiefs approached him and gave him another fifty or sixty blows. 
“Your hands must be getting tired!” chuckled Pilgrim. “Let old monkey give you one stroke of the rod. I'll not do it for real either!” Look at him! One wave of the rod and it grew to about seventy feet, its 
circumference almost as big as a well. He banged it on the bandit, and he at once fell to the ground: his lips hugging the earth, he could not make another sound. 

The other bandit chiefs shouted, “This baldy is so audacious! He has no travel money but he has killed one of us instead!” 

“Don't fret! Don't fret!” said Pilgrim, laughing. “I'll hit every one of you, just to make sure that all of you'll be wiped out!” 

With another bang he beat to death the other bandit chief. Those small thieves were so terrified that they abandoned their weapons and fled for their lives in all directions. The Tang Monk rode toward 
the east and was caught by 8 Rules and Sand-monk. “Master,” they said, “where are you going? You're heading in the wrong direction.” 

The elder pulled in his reins, saying, “Oh, disciples, go quickly and tell your elder brother to be merciful with his rod. Tell him not to kill all those bandits.” 

“Master, stay here,” said 8 Rules, “and let me go.” Idiot ran all the way back to the spot, shouting, “Elder Brother, Master tells you not to hit people.” 

“Brother,” said Pilgrim, “since when have | hit any people?” 

“Where did those bandits go?” asked 8 Rules. Pilgrim replied: “All of them have scattered but there are two of them sleeping here.” 

“Plague on you two!” said 8 Rules with a laugh. “You must have been up all night, if you can take hardship like this! Why not go elsewhere? Of all places, you've to sleep here!” 

Idiot walked up to them and took a closer look. “They are just like me,” he said, “sleeping soundly with their mouths open, they are drooling just a little.” 

“One stroke of old monkey's rod,” said Pilgrim, “has brought out their bean curd!” 

“How could there be bean curd in people’s heads?” asked 8 Rules. Pilgrim replied, “I beat their brains out!” 

On hearing this, 8 Rules ran back hurriedly to say to the Tang Monk, “They've disbanded!” 

“My goodness! My goodness!” said Tripitaka. “Which road did they take?” 

8 Rules said, “They have been beaten until their legs are stiff and straight. You think they can walk somewhere?” 

“Why, then, did you say that they have disbanded?” asked Tripitaka. 

“They have been beaten to death!” said 8 Rules. “Isn’t that disbanding?” 

“How do they look now?” asked Tripitaka again. 

8 Rules said, “Two gaping holes in their heads.” 

“Untie the wrap,” said Tripitaka, “and take out a few pennies. Go somewhere quickly and see if you can buy two tapes with ointment to tape them up.” 

“You're not serious,” said 8 Rules, laughing. “Ointment can be taped on living people for their sores or boils. How could you cure the gaping holes of dead men?” 

“Are they really beaten to death?” asked Tripitaka, and he became terribly upset, so much so that he began to berate Pilgrim under his breath, calling him wretched ape and miserable simian as he 
turned around the horse. Soon, he and his two disciples arrived at the spot where they found two bloody corpses lying beneath the mountain slope. 

Unable to bear the sight, the elder at once commanded 8 Rules: “Use your muckrake quickly and dig a hole to bury them. I'll recite for them a scroll of scripture for the dead.” 

“You've asked the wrong man, Master,” said 8 Rules. “It was Pilgrim who killed these people, and he should be asked to bury them. Why do you make Old bull the grave-digger?” Pilgrim however, was 
irritated by his master’s castigations, and therefore he shouted at 8 Rules, “You lazy coolie! Bury them quickly! A little tardiness and you, too, will get the rod!” Horrified, Idiot began digging at once 
beneath the slope. After the hole had reached a depth of about three feet, rocks and boulders in the ground resisted the rake. Abandoning his tool, Idiot resorted to his horn to remove the rocks. When 
he hit the soft element again, one shove of his horn took away about two and a half feet of dirt and two shoves created a hole of about five feet. Thus the two bandits were buried and a mound was 
raised. “Wukong,” Tripitaka called out, “bring me some incense and candles, so that | may say a prayer and recite the scriptures.” 

“What silliness!” said Pilgrim, pouting, “Halfway up this mountain when there’s no village in front and no store behind us where can | ask for incense and candles? There’s no place for us to buy some 
even if we've the money.” 

“Move aside, ape head!” said Tripitaka spitefully. “Let me pinch some dirt to use as incense and then I'll pray.” And so Tripitaka left the saddle to moum at a rustic grave; the sage monk in kindness 
prayed to a lonely mound. This was his supplication: “/ salute you noble ones, listen to all my reasons: have regard for this student from the East a Tang person. The emperor Taizong by his own decree 
to fetch scripture texts from the West sent me. | came to this very place and met you all face to face — natives of some prefecture or some district who’ve formed a gang on this hilly place. With good 
words and kind | begged you earnestly but you’d not change your mind and instead grew so angry. When you met up with Pilgrim, two of you fell by his rod. | pity greatly your corpses exposed and 
cover you with mound full of sod. | break bamboo for candles — though lightless, they mean well. | take stones for offerings; though tasteless, truth they tell. If you'd protest at the Hall of Darkness and 
dig up the past, remember that his name’s Sun and my name’s Chen. A wrong’s its wrongdoer and a debt its creditor. Please don’t accuse this scripture seeker\” 

“Master,” said 8 Rules, chuckling, “you’ve neatly passed the buck! But when he hit these people, we’re not around either.” 

Tripitaka indeed scattered another pinch of dirt and prayed: “Noble ones, when you file suit, file it against Pilgrim only. 8 Rules and Sand-monk have nothing to do with this.” When the Great Sage heard 
these words, he could no longer refrain from snickering. “Master,” he said, “there’s not much kindness in you, is there? Because of your enterprise of seeking scriptures, | don’t know how much energy 
or exertion I've spent. Now I’ve slaughtered these two crummy thieves, and you tell them instead to go file suit against old monkey. Though it was | who raised my hands to kill them, | did it only for 
you. If you hadn't resolved to go to acquire scriptures in the Western Heaven, and if I’d not become your disciple, how could | end up killing people at this place? Now that you've said all those things, 
| might as well give them a little benediction!” He lifted up his iron rod and pounded it three times on the grave mound, saying, “You plague-ridden bandits! Listen to me! You gave me seven whacks 
here and eight whacks there with your rods, beating me until | was sorely annoyed because your blows caused me neither itch nor pain. So, | made the mistake of beating you to death. You may go 
anywhere you like to file suit against me but old monkey is not afraid. The Jade Emperor knows me; the Deity-Kings follow me; the Twenty-Eight Constellations fear me; the Nine Luminaries are afraid 
of me; the prefectural, district, and municipal deities kneel before me; equal to Heaven, the guardian of Mount Tai dreads me; the Ten Kings of Hell once served as my attendants; the Five Grand 
Deities> have been my houseboys; whether they be Five Bureaus of the Three Realms’ or the Sundry Gods of the Ten Quarters, ‘they regard me as an intimate friend. You may go anywhere you like 
to lodge your complaint!” 

When Tripitaka heard him using such strong language, he was quite shocked. “Oh, disciple,” he said, “my prayer was meant to make you appreciate the reverence for life and become a virtuous person. 
Why are you taking it so hard?” 

“Master,” replied Pilgrim, “what you've said is no joke! Anyway, let’s go find shelter for the night.” Still nursing his anger, the elder forced himself to mount the horse. Thus the Great Sage Sun harboured 
feelings of hostility while 8 Rules and Sand-monk, too, were swayed by enmity. In fact, master and disciples, as they followed the main road westward, only appeared to be cordial. Presently a village 
north of the road came into sight, and, pointing with his whip, Tripitaka said, “Let’s go over there to ask for shelter.” 

‘Very good,” replied 8 Rules. 

They went up to the village where the Tang Monk dismounted. As they looked about, they found that it was a rather nice place after all. See on the path wild blooms parade; motley trees the door 
blockade. Mountain streams from distant banks flow; on level fields’ mallow and wheat grow. Sedge and reed dew-moistened, a small gull rests. Willows in gentle breeze, a tired bird nests. Fresh 
cedars, pine-studded, rival in green. Red smartweeds’ bright hues with rushes are seen. Village dogs bark; vesper cocks crow; cattle well-fed, cowboys now homeward go. Yellow millet’s cooked for 
smoke’s in sight from mountain homes at time of fading light. As the elder walked forward, he saw an old man emerging from one of the village huts. The elder immediately greeted him, and the old 
man asked, “Where does the priest come from?” 

“This humble cleric,” replied Tripitaka, “is someone sent by imperial commission to seek scriptures in the Western Heaven. It is getting late as | pass through your honoured region, and that is why I've 
come to ask for a night’s lodging.” With a chuckle, the old man said, “It is an enormous journey from your place to mine. How is it that you've scaled the mountains and forded the waters all by yourself?” 
“This humble cleric,” said Tripitaka, “also has three disciples in my company.” 

“Where are your honoured disciples?” asked the old man, and Tripitaka pointed with his hand to reply, “Those three standing near the main road.” Lifting his head, the old man discovered how hideous 
they looked and he immediately turned to try to flee inside. He was caught by Tripitaka however who said, “Old patron, | beg you to be merciful. Please grant us shelter for one night.” Trembling all 
over, the old man could hardly speak. He waved his head and his hand, saying, “No! No! No! These can’t be human beings! They must be monster-spirits!” 

Attempting to placate him with a smile, Tripitaka said, “Please don’t be afraid, patron. My disciples are born like that. They are not monster-spirits.” 

“Oh, my dad!” cried the old man. “One is a Nature spirit, one is a horse-face, and one is a thunder squire.” On hearing this, Pilgrim shouted back, “The thunder squire is my grandson, the Nature spirit 
is my great-grandson, and the horse-face is my great-great grandson.” When the old man heard this, his spirit left him and his soul fled; his face drained of all colour, he only wanted to go inside. 
Tripitaka took hold of him and entered the thatched hall. Smiling again, he said, “Old Patron, don’t be afraid of them. All of them are quite rude, and they don’t know how to speak properly.” 

As he was thus trying to pacify the old man, an old woman leading a child about five or six years old walked out from the rear. “Papa,” she said, “why are you fretting like that?” Only then did the old 
man say, “Mama, bring us some tea.” The old woman indeed left the child behind to go inside and brought out two cups of tea. After he drank it, Tripitaka turned to salute the old woman, saying, “This 
humble cleric is someone sent by the Great Tang of the Land of the East to go acquire scriptures in the Western Heaven. | just arrived in your region and wanted to beg from you a night's lodging. 
Because my three disciples are rather ugly in their appearances, the elder of your family has been struck with false alarm.” 

“If you’re so intimidated by ugly appearances,” said the old woman, “what would happen if you faced tigers or wolves?” 

“Oh, Mum,” replied the old man, “it’s all right if they look ugly but they are scarier once they open their mouths. | made the remark that they looked like a Nature spirit, a horse-face, and a thunder squire, 
and one of them shouted back saying that the thunder squire’s his grandson, the Nature spirit his great-grandson, and the horse-face his great-great grandson. | was quite terrified by what | heard.” 
“No! No!” said the Tang Monk. “The one who looks like a thunder squire happens to be my eldest disciple, Sun Wukong; the one with the horse-face’s my second disciple, Bullseye Aware of Ability, 
and the one who looks like a Nature spirit’s my third disciple, Sand Awakened to Purity. Though they may be ugly, they've embraced the faith of utter poverty and made submission to the virtuous fruit. 
They're no vicious demons or ferocious fiends. Why fear them?” 

Greatly relieved by what they heard, the old couple said, “Please come in, please come in.” 

The elder walked out of the door to instruct his disciples, saying, “Just now the old man found you three most repulsive. When you go in now to meet him and his family, don’t offend them. All of you’d 
behave more courteously.” 

“Im both handsome and civilised,” said 8 Rules, “and I’m not sassy like elder brother.” 

“Indeed!” chuckled Pilgrim. “You're a fine man, if it weren't for that long horn, those big ears, and that hideous face!” 


“Stop wrangling,” said Sand-monk. “This isn’t the place for you to be smart-alecks. Let's go in! Let's go in!” 
Thereupon they brought the luggage and the horse inside, and after they reached the thatched hall, they made a salute before taking their seats. As she was both good and kind, the old woman took 
the little boy inside and then asked for rice to be cooked and a vegetarian meal to be prepared for master and disciples. After they ate, it grew dark and lamps were brought into the thatched hall so 
that the pilgrims could sit and chat. “Patron,” asked the elder, “what is your noble surname?” 
The elder replied, “My surname is Yang.” 
When asked about his age, the old man replied that he was seventy-four. “How many sons do you've?” asked Tripitaka again. 
The old man said, “Only one. Just now, the one following Mama is our little grandson.” 
‘I'd like to greet your son,” said the elder, “if he’s willing to meet us.” 
“That fellow’s,” replied the elder, “unworthy of your salute. Life’s rather cruel to this old moron because | can’t seem to be able to rear him. He’s no longer staying with us.” 
“Where is he then,” said Tripitaka, “and what sort of profession does he have?” 
“Pity! Pity!” sighed the old man, shaking his head. “If he had a profession somewhere, that would be lucky for me. Unfortunately he is wicked in thought and has no regard for his origin. All he cares for 
is to plunder and rob, to kill and burn. His friends are all rascals and ruffians. He went out about five days ago, and he hasn’t been back since.” 
When Tripitaka heard this, he dared not reply, thinking to himself, “Perhaps he’s one of those beaten to death by Wukong...” As he grew more anxious, the elder rose from his seat and exclaimed, “My 
goodness! My goodness! How could such fine parents give birth to such a rebellious son!” Approaching them, Pilgrim said, “Venerable Sir, such a vile and pernicious offspring can only implicate his 
parents in dire troubles. Why keep him? Let me go find him and slay him for you!” 
“I'd like to send him away, too,” said the old man, “but I’ve no other heir. Though he lacks talents, | must still leave him behind to dig my grave.” 
Smiling, both 8 Rules and Sand-monk said, “Elder Brother, you’d mind your own business. You and | aren't officials. If his family’s unwilling, this affair should no longer concern us. Let us ask the patron 
for a bundle of hay instead so that we may make our bedding somewhere. By morning, we'd be on our way.” 
The old man got up and took Sand-monk to the rear to pick up two bundles of hay. Then they were told to rest in a barn in the rear garden. After Pilgrim led the horse and 8 Rules poled the luggage to 
the barn, they retired. The son of the old man Yang was indeed one of those bandits. After Pilgrim had beaten to death the two chiefs on the mountain slope, the thieves scattered and fled for their 
lives. By about the time of the fourth watch however, they had regrouped and came to knock on the door of the Yang house. When he heard the noise, the old man put on his clothes at once and said, 
“Mama, he’s back.” 
“If he’s here,” said the old woman, “go open the door and let him in.” 
No sooner had he opened the door when those thieves swarmed inside, all crying, “We're hungry! We're hungry!” 
The son of old Yang hurried inside to wake up his wife, so that she could cook some rice. As there was no more firewood in the kitchen, he had to bring back some from the rear garden. Then he asked 
his wife in the kitchen, “Whose white horse’s that in the rear garden?” 
“It belongs to some monks from the Land of the East,” said the wife, “who are on their way to seek scriptures. They came to ask for lodging last night, and Papa and Mama fed them dinner before they 
were sent to sleep in the barn back there.” 
When the fellow heard this, he ran out to the thatched hall in front, laughing and clapping his hands. “Brothers,” he said, “we're very lucky! Our foes are in the house!” 
“Which foes?” asked the thieves. 
The fellow replied, “The monks who killed our chiefs came to our house to ask for shelter. They are sleeping in the haystacks in our bar.” 
“How marvellous!” said the bandits, “Let’s catch these bald asses and we'll chop each of them into minced meat, get the luggage and the horse for one thing, and avenge our leaders for another.” 
“Don’t be hasty,” said the fellow. “All of you’d sharpen your knives right now. Wait until the rice is cooked; after we've a full meal, we can attack them together.” 
The thieves indeed went to sharpen their knives and spears. When the old man heard them talking like that however, he went quietly to the rear garden and woke up the Tang Monk and his three 
disciples. “That fellow has led a band of his friends here,” he said, “and when they discovered that you’re here, they planned to harm you. Mindful of the fact that you've travelled a great distance to 
reach our place, this old moron can’t bear the thought of your getting hurt. Pack your bags quickly, and I'll let you out the back door.” When Tripitaka heard this, he shook all over as he respected to 
thank the old man. Then he called 8 Rules to lead the horse, Sand-monk to pole the luggage, and Pilgrim to pick up the 9-ringed priestly staff. After the old man let them out of the back door, he returned 
to the front and quietly went to bed once more. Now about the fellow and his companions. When they had sharpened their knives and spears and eaten their fill, it was already about the time of the fifth 
watch. They rushed together into the rear garden but no one was to be seen. Quickly lighting torches and lamps, they searched all around for a long time but not a trace could be detected. Then they 
found that the back door was open and they all said, “They've escaped from the back door!” 
With a shout, they gave chase immediately. Every bandit was darting forward like an arrow, and by sunrise, they caught sight of the Tang Monk. When the elder heard shouts behind him, he turned to 
look and discovered a band of some thirty men rushing toward him, all armed with knives and spears. “Oh, disciples,” he cried, “the brigand troops are catching up with us. What shall we do?” 
“Relax, relax!” said Pilgrim. “Old monkey will go finish them off!” 
“Wukong,” said Tripitaka as he stopped his horse, “you must not hurt these people. Just frighten them away.” 
Unwilling, of course, to listen to his master, Pilgrim turned quickly to face his pursuers, saying, “Where are you going, sirs?” 
“You nasty baldy!” cried the thieves. “Give us back the lives of our great kings!” 
As they encircled Pilgrim, the bandits lifted their spears and knives to stab and hack away madly. The Great Sage gave one wave of his rod and it had the thickness of a bowl; with it, he fought until 
those bandits dropped like stars and dispersed like clouds. Those he bumped into died at once, those he caught hold of perished immediately, those he tapped had their bones broken, and those he 
brushed against had their skins torn. The few smart ones managed to escape but the rest of the dumb ones all went to see King Yama! 
When Tripitaka saw that many men had fallen, he was so aghast that he turned and galloped toward the West with Bullseye 8 Rules and Sand-monk hard on the horse’s heels. Pilgrim pulled over one 
of the wounded bandits and asked, “Which is the son of old Yang?” 
“Dad,” groaned the thief, “the one in yellow.” Pilgrim went forward to pick up a knife and beheaded the one in yellow. Holding the bloody head in his hand, he retrieved his iron rod and, in great strides, 
caught up with the Tang Monk. As he arrived before the horse, he raised the head and said, “Master, this is the rebellious son of old Yang, and he’s been beheaded by old monkey.” Paling with fright, 
Tripitaka fell down from the horse, crying, “Wretched ape! You've scared me to death! Take it away! Take it away!” 8 Rules went forward and kicked the head to the side of the road where he used the 
muckrake to bury it. 
Sand-monk, meanwhile, put down the luggage and took hold of the Tang Monk, saying, “Master, please get up.” After he regained composure, the Tang Monk stood on the ground and began to recite 
the Tight-Fillet Spell. The head of Pilgrim was clamped so painfully tight that his entire face turned scarlet, his eyes bulged, and dizziness overtook him. Rolling on the ground, all he could mutter was; 
“Stop that recital! Stop that recital!” The elder however, went on for more than ten times, and still he would not stop. Pilgrim was doing somersaults and handstands, for the pain was truly unbearable. 
“Master, please forgive my sins!” he cried. “If you’ve something to say, say it. Just stop that recital!” Only then did Tripitaka halt his recitation and say, “I’ve nothing to say to you. | don’t want you as my 
follower. Go back.” Respecting despite his pain, Pilgrim said, “Master, how is it that you’re chasing me away?” 
“Brazen ape,” said Tripitaka, “you're just too vicious! You’re no scripture pilgrim. When you slaughtered those two bandit chiefs below the mountain slope yesterday, | took offence already at your lack 
of human kindness. When we reached that old man’s house last night, he was good enough to give us lodging and food, and moreover, it was he who opened his back door to let us escape with our 
lives. Though his son is no good, he has not done anything to us to deserve this kind of execution. As if that’s not enough, you've taken so many lives that you've practically destroyed the sentiment of 
peace in this world. I’ve tried to admonish you so many times but there’s not a single thought of kindness in you. Why should | keep you? Be gone, quickly! Or I'll start reciting the magic words once 
more!” 
“Stop it! Stop it!” cried a horrified Pilgrim. “I’m going!” He said he would go and immediately he vanished without a trace by his cloud somersault. Alas, thus it is that elixir will not ripen with a violent 
mind; when spirit’s unstable, the Way’s hard to find. 
057 

True Pilgrim lays bare his woes at Mount Potalaka; False Monkey King transcribes texts at Water-Curtain Cave 
A dejected Great Sage Sun rose into mid-air. He was about to return to the Water-Curtain Cave of the Flower-Fruit Mountain but he was afraid that those little fiends might laugh at him, for how could 
he be a true hero if he could betray his own word? He thought of seeking shelter in the celestial palace but he feared that he would not be given permission to stay there long. He next thought of the 
islands in the sea but then he was ashamed to face the resident mortals. Finally, he considered the dragon palace but he could not stomach the idea of approaching the dragon kings as a suppliant. 
Truly, he had absolutely no place to go, and he thought sadly to himself, “All right! All right! All right! I'll go to see my master again, for only that will bear the right fruit.” 
He dropped down from the clouds and went before the horse of Tripitaka, saying, “Master, please forgive this disciple one more time! I'll never dare work violence again. | promise I'll accept all your 
admonitions, and | beg you to let me accompany you to the Western Heaven.” When the Tang Monk saw him however, he even refused to reply. As soon as he reined in the horse, he recited the Tight- 
Fillet Spell. Over and over again, he went through it for more than twenty times until the Great Sage fell salute to the ground, the fillet cutting an inch into his flesh. Only then did the elder stop and say, 
“Why don’t you leave? Why have you come to bother me again?” 
Pilgrim could only reply, “Don’t recite anymore! Don’t recite anymore! | can spend my days somewhere but without me | fear that you can’t reach the Western Heaven.” Growing angry, Tripitaka said, 
“You're a murderous ape! Heaven knows how many times you’ve brought troubles on me! | absolutely don’t want you anymore. Whether | can reach there or not, it’s no concern of yours. Leave quickly! 
If you don't, I'll start the magic word again, and this time, I'll not stop — not until your brains are squeezed out!” When the Great Sage saw that his master refused to change his mind, and as the pain 
was truly unbearable, he had no alternative but to mount his cloud somersault once more and rise into the air. Then he was struck by the thought: “If this monk is so ungrateful to me, I'll go to the Nun 
Guanyin at Mount Potalaka and tell on him.” 
Dear Great Sage! He turned his somersault around and in less than an hour reached the Great Southern Ocean. Lowering his auspicious luminosity, he descended on the Potalaka Mountain and sped 
at once into the purple bamboo grove. There he was met by the disciple Liberation who greeted him, saying, “Where is the Great Sage going?” 
“| must see the Nun,” replied Pilgrim. Liberation led him to the entrance of the Tidal Sound Cave where the Boy Skilled in Wealth also greeted him, saying, “Why has the Great Sage come here?” 
“I've something to tell on the Nun,” Pilgrim said. 
When he heard the words “to tell on,” Skilled in Wealth laughed and said, “What a smart-mouthed ape! You think you can oppress people just like the time | caught the Tang Monk. The nun is a holy 
and righteous goddess, one who is of great compassion, great promise, and great conveyance, one who with boundless power saves us from our sufferings. What has she done that you want to bring 
an accusation against her?” Pilgrim was already deeply depressed; what he heard only aroused him to anger and he gave such a snarl that the Boy Skilled in Wealth backed off at once. “You wicked, 
ungrateful little beast!” he shouted. “You're so dim-witted! You're once a fiend, a spirit but it was | who asked the Nun to take you in. Since you’ve made your submission to the Right, you’ve been 
enjoying true liberty and long life - an age as everlasting in fact as Heaven’s. Instead of thanking me, how dare you be so insulting? | said that | was going to tell something on the Nun. How dare you 
say that I’m smart-mouthed?” Trying to placate him with a smile, Skilled in Wealth said, “You're still an impulsive ape! | was just teasing you. Why do you change colour so suddenly?” 
As they were thus conversing, a white cockatoo came into view, flying back and forth before them for a couple of times, and they knew that this was the summons of the Nun. Whereupon Liberation 
and Skilled in Wealth led the way to the treasure lotus platform. As Pilgrim raised his hand to salute to the Nun, he could no longer restrain the tears from gushing forth and he wailed loudly. Asking 
Liberation to lift him up, the Nun said, “Wukong, tell me plainly what's causing you such great sorrow. Stop crying! I'll relieve your suffering and dispel your woe.” 
Pilgrim, still weeping, saluted again before he said, “In previous years, when’s your disciple ever consented to be snubbed by anyone? When however, | was liberated by the Nun from my Heaven-sent 
calamity and took the vow of complete poverty to accompany the Tang Monk on his way to see God for scriptures in the Western Heaven, | was willing to risk my very life. To rescue him from his 
demonic obstacles was like snatching a tender bone from the tiger's mouth, scraping off one scale, live, from a dragon’s back. My only hope’s to be able to return to the Real and attain the right fruit, 
cleanse myself of sins, and destroy the deviates. How’d | know that this elder could be so ungrateful! He can recognise no virtuous cause, nor can he distinguish between black and white.” 
“Tell me,” said the Nun, “a little about the black and white.” Whereupon Pilgrim gave a thorough account of how he had beaten to death the brigands that provoked the misgivings of the Tang Monk; 
how without distinguishing black and white, the Tang Monk had used the Tight-Fillet Spell to banish him several times; and how he had to come to lay bare his woes to the Nun because there was no 
place on Earth or in Heaven where he could find refuge. Then the Nun said to him: “When Tripitaka Tang received the imperial decree to journey to the West, his sole intention was to be a virtuous 
monk, and therefore he most certainly would not lightly take even one human life. With your limitless magic power, why should you beat to death these many bandits? Those brutish bandits are no 
good, to be sure but they are, after all, human beings and they don’t deserve such punishment. They are not like those fiendish fowl or monstrous beasts, those demons or griffins. If you kill or slaughter 


those things, it’s your merit but when you take human lives, then it’s your wickedness. Just frighten them away, and you'd still be able to protect your master. In my opinion, therefore, you’ve not acted 
in a virtuous manner.” 
Still tearful, Pilgrim respected and said, “Though | may not have acted in a virtuous manner, I’d have been given a chance to use my merit to atone for my sins. | don’t deserve to be banished like this. 
| beg now the Nun to have compassion on me and recite the Loose-Fillet Spell. Let me be released from the golden fillet and I'll give it back to you. Let me go back to the Water-Curtain Cave with my 
life.” Smiling at him, the Nun replied, “The Tight-Fillet Spell was imparted to me originally by Siddhartha who sent me in that year to go find a scripture pilgrim in the Land of the East. He gave me three 
kinds of treasure: the brocade cassock, the nine-ringed priestly staff, and three fillets named the golden, the tight, and the prohibitive. | was also taught in secret three different spells but there was no 
such thing as the Loose-Fillet Spell.” 
“In that case,” said Pilgrim, “let me take leave of the Nun.” 
The Nun asked, “Where are you going?” 
“To the Western Heaven,” replied Pilgrim, “where I'll beg Siddhartha to recite the Loose-Fillet Spell.” 
“Wait a moment,” said the Nun, “and let me scan the fortune for you.” 
“No need for that,” said Pilgrim. “This sort of misfortune is all | can take!” 
“Im not scanning yours,” said the Nun, “but the Tang Monk’s.” Dear Nun! 
As she sat solemnly on the lotus platform, her mind penetrated the three realms and her eyes of wisdom surveyed from a distance the entire universe. In a moment, she opened her mouth and said, 
“Wukong, your master will soon encounter a fatal ordeal. Before long, he will be looking for you, and I'll tell him then to take you back so that both of you can acquire the scriptures to attain the right 
fruit.” The Great Sage Sun had no choice but to obey; not daring to misbehave, he stood at attention beneath the lotus platform. The elder Tang after he had banished Pilgrim, told 8 Rules to lead the 
horse and Sand-monk to pole the luggage. All four of them headed toward the West. When they had travelled some fifty miles, Tripitaka stopped the horse and said, “Disciples, we left the village at the 
early hour of the fifth watch, and then that Ban-Horse-Plague made me terribly upset. After this half a day, I’m quite hungry and thirsty. Which of you'll go beg me some food?” 
“Please dismount, Master,” said 8 Rules, “and let me see if there’s a village nearby for me to do so.” On hearing this, Tripitaka climbed down from the horse while Idiot rose on the clouds. As he stared 
all around, he found mountains everywhere but there was not a single house in sight. Dropping down, 8 Rules said to Tripitaka, “There’s no place to beg food. I’d see a village nowhere.” 
“If there’s no place to beg food,” said Tripitaka, “let's get some water for my thirst.” 8 Rules said, “I'll go fetch some water from the brooklet south of the mountain.” Sand-monk therefore handed the 
alms-bowl over to him, and supporting it with his palm, 8 Rules left on the clouds and fog. The elder sat by the road to wait for him but after a long while, he still did not return. The bitter thirst, alas, was 
becoming quite unbearable for which a testimonial poem says: 
To nurse breath and spirit, that’s extraction: feelings and nature are in form the same. 
Ailments arise from spirit and mind distraught; when shape and sperm fail, the Way declines. 
3 flowers fizzle and your labour’s vain; 2all 4 Greats? wither and you strive for naught. 
Earth and wood sterile, metal and water die. When'll true self, so sluggish, be attained? 
When Sand-monk saw how greatly Tripitaka was suffering from his hunger and thirst, and 8 Rules still had not returned with the water, he had no alternative but to put down the wraps and tie up the 
white horse. Then he said, “Master, please sit here for a moment; let me go and see if | can hurry him back with the water.” Tears welling up in his eyes, the elder could only nod his head to give his 
reply. Quickly mounting the cloudy luminosity, Sand-monk also headed for the south of the mountain. 
As he sat there all by himself enduring his agonies, the elder suddenly heard a loud noise near him. He was so startled that he jumped up, and then he saw that Pilgrim Sun was kneeling on one side 
of the road, his two hands holding high a porcelain cup. “Master,” he said, “without old monkey, you don’t even have water. This is a cup of nice, cool water. Drink it to relieve your thirst, and let me 
then go beg some food for you.” 
“lll not drink your water!” replied the elder. “If | die of thirst on the spot, I'll consider this my martyrdom! | don’t want you anymore! Leave me!” 
“Without me,” said Pilgrim, “you can’t go to the Western Heaven.” 
“Whether I can or not,” said Tripitaka, “is no business of yours! Lawless ape! Why are you bothering me again?” Changing his colour all at once, that Pilgrim became incensed and shouted at the elder, 
“You cruel bonze! How you humiliate me!” He threw away the porcelain cup and slammed the iron rod on the back of the elder who fainted immediately on the ground. Picking up the two blue woollen 
wraps, the monkey mounted his cloud somersault and went off to some place. 
We now tell you about 8 Rules who went to the south slope of the mountain with his alms-bowl. As he passed the fold of the mountain, a thatched hut, the sight of which had been blocked previously 
by the mountain, came into view. He walked up to it and discovered that this was some sort of human residence. Idiot thought to himself, “I've such an ugly face. They will no doubt be afraid of me and 
refuse to give me any food. | must use transformation...” 
Dear Idiot! Making the magic sign with his fingers, he recited a spell and shook his body seven or eight times. At last he changed into a yellowish, consumptive monk, still rather stout-ish. Moaning and 
groaning, he staggered up to the door and called out: “Patron, if your kitchen has surplus rice, let it starved wayfarers suffice. This humble cleric is from the Land of the East, on his way to seek scriptures 
in the Western Heaven. My master, now sitting by the road, is hungry and thirsty. If you’ve any cold rice or burnt crusts, | beg you to give us some.” 
Now, the men of the household had all gone to plant the fields, and only two women remained behind. They had just finished cooking lunch and filled two large bowls with rice to be sent to the fields 
while some rice and crusts were still in the pot. When they saw his sickly appearance, and when they heard all that muttering about going to the Western Heaven from the Land of the East, they thought 
that he was babbling because of his illness. Afraid, moreover, that he might fall dead right before their door, the women hurriedly packed the alms-bowl with the leftovers, crust and all that Idiot gladly 
received. After he left on the road from which he came, he changed back into his original form. As he proceeded, he heard someone calling, “Eight Rules!” Raising his head, he found that it was Sand- 
monk, standing on a cliff and shouting, “Come this way! Come this way!” Then he leaped down from the cliff and approached 8 Rules, saying, “There’s lovely, clean water here in the brook. Why didn’t 
you bail some? Where did you run off to?” 
“When | reached here,” said 8 Rules, chuckling, “I saw a house in the fold of the mountain. | went there and succeeded in begging from them this bowl of dried rice.” 
“We can use that,” said Sand-monk, “but Master's terribly thirsty. How can we bring back some water?” 
“That's easy,” replied 8 Rules. “Fold up the hem of your robe, and we'll use that to hold the rice. I'll take the alms-bowl to bail some water.” 
In great spirits, the two of them went back to the spot by the road where they saw Tripitaka lying down with his face hugging the earth. The reins were loosened, and the white horse was rearing up and 
neighing repeatedly by the road. The pole with the luggage however, was nowhere to be seen. 8 Rules was so shaken that he stamped his feet and beat his chest, shouting, “This has to be it! This has 
to be it! The cohorts of those bandits whom Pilgrim Sun beat to death must have returned to kill Master and take the luggage.” 
“Let's tie up the horse first,” said Sand-monk, and then he too began to shout: “What shall we do? What shall we do? This is truly the failure that comes in midway!” As he turned to call but once 
“Master,” tears streamed down his face and he wept bitterly. “Brother,” said 8 Rules, “stop crying. When we've reached this stage of affairs, let's not talk about that scripture business. You watch over 
Master's corpse and let me ride to some village store in whatever county or district nearby and see if | can buy a coffin. Let's bury Master and then we can disperse.” 
Unwilling however, to give up on his master, Sand-monk turned the Tang Monk over on his back and put his own face up to the corpse’s face. “My poor master!” he wailed, and presently, the elder’s 
mouth and nose began to belch hot air as a little warmth could also be felt on his chest. “Eight Rules,” cried Sand-monk hurriedly, “come over here. Master’s not dead!” Idiot approached them and lifted 
up the elder who woke up slowly, groaning all the time. “You lawless ape!” he exclaimed. “You've just about struck me dead!” 
“Which ape is this?” asked both Sand-monk and 8 Rules, and the elder could do nothing more than to sigh. Only after he drank several gulps of water did he say, “Disciples, soon after both of you left, 
that Wukong came to bother me again. Because | adamantly refused to take him back, he gave me a blow with his rod and took away our blue woollen wraps.” 
When 8 Rules heard this, he clenched his teeth as fire leaped up from his heart. “This brazen ape!” he said. “How could he be so insolent? Sand-monk, you look after Master and let me go to his home 
to demand the wraps.” 
“Stop being so angry,” said Sand-monk. “We'd take Master to that house in the fold of the mountain and beg for some hot liquids to warm up the rice we managed to get just now. Let's take care of 
Master first before you go look for him.” 
8 Rules agreed; after having helped their master to mount up, they held the alms-bowl and carried the cold rice up to the house’s door where they found only an old woman inside. Seeing them, she 
quickly wanted to hide. Sand-monk pressed his palms together and said, “Old Mama, we’re those from the Land of the East sent by the Tang court to go to the Western Heaven. Our master is somewhat 
indisposed, and that is why we've come here especially to your house to beg some hot tea or water, so that he may eat some rice.” 
“Just now,” said the old woman, “there was a consumptive monk who claimed to have been sent from the Land of the East. We've already given him some food. How is it that you’re also from the Land 
of the East? There’s no one in the house. Please go to someplace else.” On hearing this, the elder held onto 8 Rules and dismounted. Then he bent low and said, “Old Popo, I’d originally three disciples 
who were united in their efforts to accompany me to see God for scriptures at the Great Thunderclap Monastery in India. My eldest disciple whose name is Sun Wukong, has unfortunately practiced 
violence all his life and refused to follow the virtuous path. For this reason, | banished him. Little did | expect him to return in secret and give my back a blow with his rod. He even took our luggage and 
our clothing. | must now send a disciple to go find him and ask for our things but the open road is no place to sit. Hence we've come to ask your permission to use your house as a temporary resting 
place. As soon as we get back our luggage, we'll leave, for we dare not linger.” 
“But there was a yellowish, consumptive monk just now,” said the old woman, “who received our food. He also claimed to be part of a pilgrimage going to the Western Heaven from the Land of the 
East. How could there be so many of you?” Unable to restrain his giggles, 8 Rules said, “That was |. Because I've this long horn and huge ears, | was afraid that your family might be frightened and 
refuse me food. That was why | changed into the form of that monk. If you don’t believe me, just take a look at what my brother's carrying in the fold of his robe. Isn’t that your rice, crust and all?” 
When the old woman saw that it was indeed the rice that she had given him, she no longer refused them and asked them to go inside and take a seat. She then prepared a pot of hot tea that she gave 
to Sand-monk for him to mix with the rice. After the master had eaten several mouthfuls, he felt calmer and said, “Which of you'll go ask for the luggage?” 
“In that year when Master sent him back there,” said 8 Rules, “I went to look for him. So | know the way to his Flower-Fruit Mountain and the Water-Curtain Cave. Let me go! Let me go!” 
“You can’t go!” replied the elder. “That monkey has never been friendly with you, and you’re so rough with your words. A tiny slip when you talk to him and he may want to attack you. Let Awakened to 
Purity go.” 
“Ill go! I'll go!” said Sand-monk agreeably whereupon the elder gave him this further instruction: “You must size up the situation as soon as you get there. If he’s willing to give you our wraps, just 
pretend to thank him and take them. If he’s unwilling, be sure not to argue or fight with him. Go directly to the Nun’s place at the South Sea and tell her everything. Ask the Nun to demand the luggage 
from him.” After he had listened most attentively, Sand-monk said to 8 Rules, “When I’m gone, you must not be slack in your care of Master. And don’t cause any mischief in this family, for | fear that 
they would not serve you rice then. I'll be back soon.” 
“| know,” said 8 Rules, nodding. “But you must come back quickly whether you succeed or not in getting our things back. | don’t want something to happen like hauling firewood with a pointed pole: you 
lose at both ends!” 
And so Sand-monk made the magic sign and mounted the cloudy luminosity to head for the East East-Videha Continent. Truly body’s here but spirit has flown its lodge. How’d fireless oven heat elixir? 
Yellow Dame leaves her lord to seek Metal Squire; Wood-Mum bids a teacher in sickly looks. This journey’s of unknown returning date, time of coming home hard to surmise. 5 Phases work no smooth 
conquest or growth. Wait till Mind Monkey re-enters the pass. 4Only after he had travelled in the air for three nights and days did Sand-monk finally reach the Great Eastern Ocean. As the sound of 
waves reached his ears, he lowered his head and saw that black fog swelling skyward makes the dark air dense; the brine holds the sun to chill the light of dawn. He was of course too preoccupied to 
enjoy the scenery. Passing the mortal island of Yingzhou, he hurried toward the Flower-Fruit Mountain, riding on the oceanic wind and tide. After a long while, he saw towering peaks jutting up like rows 
of halberds and sheer cliffs like hanging screens. He dropped down on the highest summit and began to search for his way to the Water-Curtain Cave. As he drew near his destination, he began to 
hear a noisy din made by countless monkey spirits living in the mountain. Sand-monk walked closer and found Pilgrim Sun sitting high on a rock terrace, his 2 hands holding up a piece of paper from 
which he was reading aloud the following statement: 
Emperor Li, King of the Great Tang in the Land of the East now commands the sage monk Chen Xuanzang, royal brother before the throne and master of the Law to go to India in the West and ask for 
scriptures in all sincerity from the Religious Patriarch, Siddhartha in the Great Thunderclap Monastery on the Spirit Mountain. Because of grave illness invading our body, our soul departed for the 
region of Hades. It’s our good fortune to have our life span unexpectedly lengthened and the Kings of Darkness kindly returned us to life. Whereupon we convened a vast and goodly assembly to erect 
a Plot of the Way for the redemption of the dead. We're indebted to the salvific and woe-dispelling Nun Guanshiyin who appeared to us in her golden form and revealed that there’re both god and 
scriptures in the West that'd deliver and redeem the lost souls of the dead. We've therefore commissioned Xuanzang, master of the Law to traverse 1000 mountains in order to acquire such scriptures. 


When he reaches the various states of the Western region, we hope that they'll not destroy such goodly affinity and allow him to pass through on the basis of this rescript. This is an imperial document 
promulgated on an auspicious day in the autumn of the 13 year in the Zhenguan reign period of the Great Tang. Since leaving my‘ noble nation, I’ve passed through several countries and in mid- 
journey I’ve made 3 disciples: the eldest being Pilgrim Sun Wukong, the 2"4 being Bullseye Aware of Ability 8 Rules, and the 3% being Sand Awakened to Purity Monk. 
After he read it aloud once, he started again from the beginning. When Sand-monk realised that it was the travel rescript, he could no longer contain himself. Drawing near, he shouted: “Elder Brother, 
this is Master's rescript. Why’re you reading it like that?” 
When that Pilgrim heard this, he raised his head but could not recognise Sand-monk. “Seize him! Seize him!” he yelled. The other monkeys immediately had Sand-monk surrounded; pulling and tugging 
at him, they hauled him before that Pilgrim who bellowed, “Who’re you that you dare approach our mortal cave without permission?” 
When Sand-monk saw how he had changed colour and refused to recognise his own, he had little choice but to salute and say, “Let me inform you, Elder Brother. Our master’s previously rather 
impetuous and wrongly put the blame on you. He even cast the spell on you several times and banished you home. Your brothers didn’t really try to pacify Master for one thing and we’d to look for 
water and beg for food soon for another because of Master’s hunger and thirst. We didn’t expect you to come back with all your good intentions. When you took offence at Master's adamant refusal to 
take you in again, you struck him down, left him fainted on the ground, and took the luggage. After we rescued him, | was sent to plead with you. If you no longer hate Master and can recall his previous 
kindness in giving you freedom, please give us back the luggage and return with me to see master. We can go to the Western Heaven together and accomplish the right fruit. But if your animosity’s 
deep and you're unwilling to leave with me, please give me back the wraps at least. You can enjoy your old age in this mountain and will have done at the same time all of us a very good turn.” 
When he heard these words, that Pilgrim laughed scornfully and said, “Worthy Brother, what you said makes little sense to me. | struck the Tang Monk and took the luggage not because | didn’t want 
to go to the West, nor because | loved to live in this place. I’m studying the rescript at the moment precisely because | want to go to the West all by myself to ask God for the scriptures. When | deliver 
them to the Land of the East, it'll be my success and no one else’s. Those people of the South Jambidvipa Continent will honour me then as their patriarch and my fame will last for all posterity.” 
“You've spoken amiss, Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, smiling, “Why, we've never heard anyone speaking of ‘Pilgrim Sun seeking scriptures’! When our God Siddhartha created the three canons of 
true scriptures, he also told the Nun Guanyin to find a scripture pilgrim in the Land of the East. Then she wanted us to traverse a thousand hills and search through many states as protectors of that 
pilgrim. The Nun once told us that the scripture pilgrim was originally Siddhartha’s disciple whose religious designation was the Elder Gold Cicada. Because he failed to listen attentively to a lecture of 
the Religious Patriarch, he was banished from the Spirit Mountain to be reborn in the Land of the East. He was then instructed to bear the right fruit in the West by cultivating once more the great Way. 
Since it was preordained that he should encounter many demonic obstacles in his journey, we three were liberated so that we might become his guardians. If Elder Brother does not wish to accompany 
the Tang Monk in his quest that Religious Patriarch would be willing to impart to you the scriptures? Haven't you dreamed up all this in vain?” 
“Worthy Brother,” said that Pilgrim, “you’ve always been rather blockish! You know one thing but you fail to perceive another. You claim that you've a Tang Monk who needs both of us to protect him. 
Do you really think that | don’t have a Tang Monk? I’ve already selected here a truly enlightened monk who will go acquire the scriptures and old monkey will only help him. Is there anything wrong with 
that? We've in fact decided that we'll begin the journey tomorrow. If you don’t believe me, let me show you.” He then cried: “Little ones, ask the old master to come out quickly please.” The little fiends 
indeed ran inside and led out a white horse, followed by a Tripitaka Tang, an 8 Rules poling the luggage, and a Sand-monk carrying the priestly staff. 
Enraged by the sight, Sand-monk cried, “Old Sand here changes neither his name when he walks nor his surname when he sits. How could there be another Sand-monk? Don’t be impudent! Have a 
taste of my staffl” 
Dear Sand-monk! Lifting high his fiend-routing staff with both his hands, he killed the specious Sand-monk with one blow on the head. He was actually a monkey spirit. That Pilgrim, too, grew angry; 
wielding his golden-hooped rod, he led the other monkeys and had Sand-monk completely surrounded. Charging left and right, Sand-monk managed to fight his way out of the encirclement. As he fled 
for his life by mounting the cloud and fog, he said to himself: “This brazen ape is such a rogue! I’m going to see the Nun to tell on him!” 
When that Pilgrim saw that the Sand-monk had been forced to flee, he did not give chase. He went back to his cave instead and told his little ones to have the dead monkey skinned. Then his meat 
was taken to be fried and served as food along with coconut and grape juices. After they had their meal, that Pilgrim selected another monkey monster who knew transformation to change into a Sand- 
monk. He again gave them instructions on how to go to the West, and we'll leave them for the moment. Once Sand-monk had left the Eastern Ocean by mounting the clouds, he reached the South 
Sea after journeying for a day and night. As he sped forward, he saw the Potalaka Mountain approaching, and he stopped his cloud to look around. Marvellous place it was! Truly this secret spot of 
Heaven, hidden depth of Earth where 100 springs join to bathe both sun and stars, the wind blows as the moon beams her rippling light. When the tide rises, the great fishes§ change: when the waves 
churn, the huge scorpionfishes swim. Here water joins the northwest sea, its billows the Eastern Ocean fuse. The four seas are linked by the same Earth pulse; each isle mortal has its fairy homes. 
Speak not of Penglai everywhere. Let's look at Cave Potalaka. What fine scenery! The peak’s bright colours show prime essence strong. Auspicious breeze wafts moonlight beneath the ridge. Through 
groves of purple bamboo peacocks fly; on willow-branch a sentient parrot speaks. Jade grass, jasper flowers bloom fair each year: gold lotus, jewelled trees grow annually. A few times the white cranes 
fly up the peak; the phoenix comes often to the mount-kiosk. Even fishes by nature seek authentic Truth, for to hear scriptures they leap through the waves. Descending slowly from the Potalaka 
Mountain as he admired the scenery, he was met by the disciple, Liberation who said to him, “Sand Awakened to Purity, why aren't you accompanying the Tang Monk to procure scriptures? Why’re 
you here?” 
After Sand-monk returned his salute, he said, “I’ve a matter that requires my having an audience with the Nun. Please take the trouble to announce me.” Liberation already knew that it had to do with 
his search for Pilgrim but he did not mention it. He went instead inside first and said to the Nun, “The youngest disciple of the Tang Monk, Sand Awakened to Purity, is outside seeking an audience.” 
When Pilgrim Sun heard that beneath the platform, he chuckled and said, “This has to be that the Tang Monk has met some kind of ordeal, and Sand-monk is here to seek the assistance of the Nun.” 
The Nun at once asked Liberation to call him in, and Sand-monk went to his knees to respect. After his salute, he raised his head and was about to tell the Nun what had happened, when all of a 
sudden he saw Pilgrim Sun standing on one side. Without even a word, Sand-monk whipped out his fiend-routing staff and aimed it at Pilgrim’s face. Pilgrim however, did not fight back; he only stepped 
aside to dodge the blow. “You brazen ape!” screamed Sand-monk. “You rebellious simian guilty of ten evil deeds! So, you're even here to hoodwink the Nun!” 
“Awakened to Purity!” shouted the Nun. “Don’t raise your hands! If you’ve a complaint, tell it to me first.” 
Putting away his treasure staff, Sand-monk knelt down before the platform, and, still huffing, said to the Nun, “This monkey has performed countless violent acts along the way. The day before, he beat 
two highwaymen to death beneath the mountain slope, and Master already found fault with him. Little did we expect that that very night we'd to live right in the bandit camp, and he slaughtered a whole 
band of them. As if that weren't enough, he took a bloody head back to show to Master who was so aghast that he fell down from his horse. It was then that Master gave him a reprimand and banished 
him. After we separated, Master found the hunger and thirst unbearable at one place and told 8 Rules to go find water. When he didn’t return after a long while, | was told to go find him. When Pilgrim 
Sun saw that we both had left, he sneaked back and gave Master a blow with his iron rod, after which he took away our two blue woollen wraps. When we finally returned, we managed to revive Master, 
and then I'd to make a special trip to his Water-Curtain Cave to demand from him the wraps. How could | know that he would change his face and refuse to recognise me? Instead, he was reciting back 
and forth the travel rescript of Master. When | asked him why, he said that he was no longer willing to accompany the Tang Monk. He wanted to go procure scriptures in the Western Heaven and take 
them all by himself to the Land of the East. That, he said, would be his sole merit, and the people would honour him as their patriarch while his fame would be everlasting. | told him, ‘Without the Tang 
Monk who would be willing to give you scriptures?’ He said then that he had already selected a true, enlightened monk, and he brought out a Tang Monk, all right, including a white horse, followed by 
an 8 Rules and a Sand-monk for me to see. ‘I’m the Sand-monk, ’| said, ‘so how could there be another Sand-monk?’ | rushed up to this impostor and gave him a blow with my treasure staff; it turned 
out to be a monkey spirit. Then this ape led his followers to try to capture me, and that was when | fled and decided to come here to inform the Nun. He must have used his cloud somersault and arrived 
first, and | don’t know what sort of balderdash he has mouthed to dupe the Nun.” 
“Awakened to Purity,” said the Nun, “don’t blame another person wrongly. Wukong has been here for four days, and I’ve not let him go anywhere. How could he have gone to find another Tang Monk 
to go fetch scriptures by themselves?” 
“But,” said Sand-monk, “I saw a Pilgrim Sun in the Water-Curtain Cave. You think I’m lying?” 
“In that case,” said the Nun, “don’t get upset. I'll tell Wukong to go with you to take a look at the Flower-Fruit Mountain. Truth is indestructible but falsehood can easily be eliminated. When you get 
there, you'll find out.” On hearing this, Great Sage and Sand-monk took leave at once of the Nun and left. And so the result of their journey will be that before Mount Flower-Fruit black and white will be 
made distinct; by the Water-Curtain Cave the true and perverse will be seen. 
058 

2 Minds cause disorder in the great cosmos; it’s hard for one body to realise true Extinguishment?* 
After Pilgrim and Sand-monk respected to take leave of the Nun, they rose on 2 beams of auspicious light and departed from the South Sea. Now, the cloud somersault of Pilgrim was much faster than 
the mere cloud soaring of Sand-monk. He therefore wanted to speed ahead but Sand-monk pulled him back, saying, “Elder Brother, you needn't try to cover up or hide your tracks by getting there first. 
Let me travel right beside you.” 
The Great Sage of course was full of good intentions whereas Sand-monk at that moment was filled with suspicion. So the 2 of them rode the clouds together and in a little while, they spotted the 
Flower-Fruit Mountain. As they lowered their clouds to glance around, they found indeed outside the cave another Pilgrim sitting high on a stone ledge and drinking merrily with a flock of monkeys. His 
looks were exactly the same as those of the Great Sage: he, too had a gold fillet clamped to his brownish hair, a pair of fiery eyes with diamond pupils, a silk shirt on his body, a tiger kilt tied around his 
waist, a golden-hooped iron rod in one of his hands, and a pair of deerskin boots on his feet. He, too had a hairy face, a thunder god beak, an empty jowl unlike Saturn’s; 2 forked ears on a big, broad 
head, and huge fangs that have outward grown. His ire aroused, Great Sage abandoned Sand-monk and rushed forward, wielding his iron rod and crying, “What sort of a fiend you're that you dare 
change into my appearance, take my descendants captive, occupy my mortal cave, and assume such airs?” When that Pilgrim saw him, he did not utter a word of reply; all he did was meet his opponent 
with the iron rod. The 2 Pilgrims closed in and 1 could not distinguish the true 1 from the false. What a fight! 2 iron rods, 2 monkey sprites, this fight of theirs is truly no light thing! They both want to 
guard the royal brother of Tang, each seeking merit to acquire great fame. The true ape accepts the poverty faith; the specious fiend utters false Religious claims. Their magic gives them transformations 
vast: they're exact equals, that’s the honest truth! 1 is the Equal to Heaven Sage of the unified breath of Composite Prime; 21 is a long-cultivated sentient spirit, able to shorten the ground. This 1 is the 
compliant golden-hooped rod; that 1 is the acquiescent staff of iron. They block and parry and fight to a draw; they buck and resist and neither can win. They join hands at 1st outside the cave; soon 
they rise to do battle in mid-air. Treading on the cloudy luminosity, the 2 of them rose into the sky to fight. On the side, Sand-monk did not have the courage to join the battle for he found it truly difficult 
to distinguish between the 2 of them. He wanted very much to lend his assistance but he feared that he might inadvertently inflict harm on the real Pilgrim. After waiting patiently for a long while, he 
leaped down from the mountain cliff and wielded his fiend-routing staff to disperse the various fiends outside the Water-Curtain Cave. He then overturned the stone benches and smashed to pieces all 
those eating and drinking utensils before searching for his two blue woollen wraps. They were however, nowhere to be seen. The cave was located actually behind a huge waterfall that had the entrance 
neatly hidden as if it were behind a white curtain. That was the reason for the name, Water-Curtain Cave. Sand-monk, of course, had no idea of its history or its layout, and it was therefore difficult for 
him to make his search. Unable to recover his wraps, Sand-monk again mounted the clouds to rush up to mid-air. He held high his treasure staff but he simply dared not strike at either of the combatants. 
“Sand-monk,” said the Great Sage, “if you can’t help me, go back to Master and tell him about our situation. Let old monkey do battle with this fiend all the way to the Potalaka Mountain of South Sea 
so that the Nun can distinguish the true from the false.” When he finished speaking, the other Pilgrim also said the same thing. Since both of them had exactly the same appearance and there was not 
even the slightest difference even in their voices, Sand-monk could not distinguish 1 from the other. He had no choice but to change the direction of his cloud and go back to report to the Tang Monk. 
Look at those 2 Pilgrims instead! 
They fought as they journeyed; soon they arrived at the Potalaka Mountain in the South Sea, trading blows and insults all the time. All the continuous uproar quickly alerted the various guardian deities 
who rushed inside the Tidal Sound Cave to say, “Nun, there’re indeed two Sun Wukongs who've arrived fighting!” 
The Nun immediately descended from her lotus platform to go out of the cave with her disciples Liberation, the Boy Skilled in Wealth, and the Dragon Girl. “Cursed beasts,” she cried, “where do you 
two think you’re going?” 
Still entangled together, 1 of them said, “Nun, this fellow indeed resembles your disciple. We started our battle from the Water-Curtain Cave but haven’t yet reached a decision even after such a long 
bout. The fleshy eyes of Sand Awakened to Purity were too dim and dull to tell us apart and thus he’d not help us even if he had the strength. Your disciple told him to go back to the road to the West 
and report to my master. I’ve fought with this fellow up to your treasure mountain because | want you to lend us your eyes of wisdom. Please help your disciple to distinguish the true from the false, the 
real from the perverse.” 
When he finished speaking, the other Pilgrim also repeated the same words. The various deities and the Nun stared at the 2 for a long time but none could tell them apart. “Stop fighting,” said the Nun, 
“and stand apart. Let me look at both of you once more.” 
They indeed let go of each other and stood on opposite sides. “I’m the real one,” said 1 side. 
“He’s a fake!” said the other. 


Asking Liberation and Goodly Wealth to approach her, the Nun whispered to them this instruction: “Each of you take hold of one of them firmly, and let me start reciting in secret the Tight-Fillet Spell. 
The one whose head hurts is the real monkey; the one who has no pain is specious.” Indeed, the two disciples took hold of the two Pilgrims as the Nun recited in silence the magic words. At once the 
two of them gripped their heads and rolled on the ground, both screaming, “Don’t recite! Don't recite!” The Nun stopped her recital, and the two of them again became entangled together, fighting and 
shouting as before. Unable to think of anything else, the Nun asked the various deities and Liberation to go forward to help but the gods were afraid that they might hurt the real person and they, 
therefore, dared not raise their hands. “Sun Wukong,” called the Nun, and the two of them answered in unison. “When you're appointed Bimawen,” she said, “and when you brought chaos to Heaven, 
all those celestial warriors could certainly recognise you. You go up to the Region Above now and they should be able to distinguish between the two of you.” This Great Sage thanked her and the 
other Pilgrim also thanked her. 

Tugging and pulling at each other, screaming and hollering at each other, the two of them went before the South Heaven Gate. The Deity-King Virpaksa was so startled that he led Ma, Zhao, Wen, 
and Guan, the four great celestial warriors, and the rest of the divine gate attendants to bar the way with their weapons. “Where are you two going?” they cried. “Is this a place for fighting?” 

The Great Sage said, “I was accompanying the Tang Monk on his way to acquire scriptures in the Western Heaven. Because | slayed some thieves on the way, that Tripitaka banished me, and | went 
to tell my troubles to the Nun Guanyin at the Potalaka Mountain. I’ve no idea when this monster-spirit assumed my form, struck down my master, and robbed us of our wraps. Sand-monk went to look 
for our things at the Flower-Fruit Mountain and discovered that this monster-spirit had taken over my lair. Thereafter, he went to seek the assistance of the Nun, and when he saw me standing at 
attention beneath the platform, he falsely accused me of using my cloud somersault in order to cover up my faults. The Nun, fortunately, was righteous and perceptive; she didn’t listen to Sand-monk 
and told me to go with him instead to examine the evidence at the Flower-Fruit Mountain. | discovered there that this monster-spirit indeed resembled old monkey. We fought just now from the Water- 
Curtain Cave to the place of the Nun but even she found it difficult to tell us apart. That’s why we came here. Let all of you deities take the trouble of using your perception and make distinction between 
the two of us.” When he finished speaking, that Pilgrim also gave exactly the same account. Though the various gods stared at them for a long time, they could not tell the difference. “If all of you can’t 
recognise us,” the two of them shouted, “stand aside and let us go see the Jade Emperor!” 

Unable to resist them, the various deities had to let them through the Heaven Gate, and they went straight up to the Treasure Hall of Divine Mists. Marshal Ma dashed inside with Zhang, Ge, Xu, and 
Qiu, the Four Celestial Masters, to memorialise, saying, “There’re two Sun Wukongs from the Region Below who have fought their way into the Heaven Gate. They claim they want to see the Emperor.” 
Hardly had they finished speaking when the two monkeys brawled their way in. The Jade Emperor was so taken aback that he stood up and came down the treasure hall to ask, “For what reason did 
the two of you enter the celestial palace without permission? Are you seeking death with your brawling before us?” 

“Your Majesty! Your Majesty!” cried Great Sage. “Your subject has already made submission and embraced the vow of poverty. I'd never dare be so audacious as to mock your authority again. But 
because this monster-spirit has changed into the form of your subject...” whereupon he gave a thorough account of what had taken place, ending with the words, “I beg you to do this for your subject 
and distinguish between the two of us.” 

That Pilgrim also gave exactly the same account. Issuing a decree at once to summon Deity-King Li, the Pagoda-Bearer, the Jade Emperor commanded: “Let us look at those two fellows through the 
imp-reflecting mirror, so that the false may perish and the true endure.” The Deity-King took out the mirror immediately and asked the Jade Emperor to watch with the various celestial deities. What 
appeared in the mirror were two reflections of Sun Wukong: there was not the slightest difference between their golden fillets, their clothing, and even their hair. Since the Jade Emperor found it 
impossible to distinguish them, he ordered them chased out of the hall. 

Great Sage was laughing scornfully while that Pilgrim also guffawed jovially as they grabbed each other's head and neck once more to fight their way out of the Heaven Gate. Dropping down to the 
road to the West, they shouted at each other, ‘I'll go see Master with you! I'll go see Master with you!” 

We now tell you about that Sand-monk who since leaving them at the Flower-Fruit Mountain, travelled again for three nights and days before he arrived at the mountain hut. After he told the Tang Monk 
all that had taken place, the elder was filled with regret, saying, “I thought at that time that it was Sun Wukong who gave me a blow with his rod and who robbed us of our wraps. How could | know that 
it was a monster-spirit who had assumed the form of Pilgrim?” 

“Not only did that fiend do that,” said Sand-monk, “but he had someone change into an elder, and another into 8 Rules poling our wraps. In addition to a white horse, there was still another fiend who 
changed into the likeness of me. I'd not restrain my anger and killed him with one blow of my staff. He was actually a monkey spirit. | left in a hurry to go to inform the Nun who then asked Elder Brother 
to go with me to see for ourselves back at the Water-Curtain Cave. When we arrived, we discovered that that fiend was indeed an exact copy of Elder Brother. I'd not tell them apart and it was difficult, 
therefore, for me to lend any assistance. That's why | came back first to report to you.” On hearing this, Tripitaka paled with fright but 8 Rules laughed uproariously, saying, “Fine! Fine! Fine! The Popo 
of our patron’s house has spoken true! She said that there had to be several groups of pilgrims going to procure scriptures. Isn’t this another group?” 

The members of that family, old and young, all came to ask Sand-monk, “Where have you been these last few days? Did you go off to seek travel money?” 

“| went to the place of my Big Brother,” said Sand-monk with a laugh, “at the Flower-Fruit Mountain of the East East-Videha Continent to look for our luggage. Next | went to have an audience with the 
Nun Guanyin at the Potalaka Mountain of South Sea. Then I'd to go back to the Flower-Fruit Mountain again before | came back here.” 

“What was the distance that you had to travel?” asked the old man. “Back and forth,” replied Sand-monk, “it had to be about two hundred thousand miles.” 

“Oh, Sire,” said the old man, “you mean to tell me that you've covered all that distance in these few days? You must have soared on the clouds, or you’d never have made it.” 

“If he didn’t soar on the clouds,” said 8 Rules, “how could he cross the sea?” 

“We've not covered any distance,” said Sand-monk. “If it were my Big Brother, it would take only a couple of days for him to get there and return.” When those family members heard what he said, they 
all claimed that their visitors had to be mortals. “We're mortals,” said 8 Rules, “but the mortals are really our juniors!” 

As they were speaking, they suddenly heard a great uproar in the middle of the sky. They were so startled that they came out to look, and they found two Pilgrims locked in battle as they drew near. 
On seeing them, 8 Rules’ hands began to itch, and he said, “Let me see if | can tell them apart.” 

Dear Idiot! He leaped into the air and cried, “Elder Brother, don’t fret! Old bull’s here!” The two Pilgrims cried out at the same time, “Brother, come and beat up this monster-spirit!” The old man was so 
astonished by the sight that he said to himself, “So we've in our house several Arhats who can ride the clouds and mount the fog! Even if I'd made a vow to feed the monks, | might not have been able 
to find this kind of noble people.” Without bothering to think of the cost, he wanted at once to bring out more tea and rice to present to his visitors. Then he muttered to himself, “But | fear that no good 
can come out of these two Pilgrims fighting like that. They will overturn Heaven and Earth and cause terrible calamity who knows where!” 

When Tripitaka saw that the old man was openly pleased, though he was, at the same time, full of secret anxiety, he said to him, “Please do not worry, old Patron, and don’t start any lamentation. When 
this humble cleric succeeds in subduing his disciple and in inducing the wicked to return to virtue, he will most certainly thank you.” 

“Please don’t mention it! Please don’t mention it!” said the old man repeatedly. “Please don’t say anything more, Patron,” said Sand-monk. “Master, you sit here while | go up there with Second Elder 
Brother. Each of us will pull before you one of them, and you can start reciting that little something. We'll be able to tell, for whoever has pain will be the real Pilgrim.” 

“You're absolutely right,” said Tripitaka. 

Sand-monk indeed rose to mid-air and said, “Stop fighting, the two of you, and we'll go with you to Master and let him distinguish the true from the false.” Great Sage desisted, and that Pilgrim also 
dropped his hands. Sand-monk took hold of one of them and said, “Second Elder Brother, you take the other one.” They dropped down from the clouds and went before the thatched hut. As soon as 
he saw them, Tripitaka began reciting the Tight-Fillet Spell, and the two of them immediately screamed, “We've been fighting so bitterly already. How could you still cast that spell on us? Stop it! Stop 
it!’ As his disposition had always been kind, the elder at once stopped his recitation but he could not tell them apart at all. Shrugging off the hold of Sand-monk and 8 Rules, the two of them were again 
locked in battle. “Brothers,” said Great Sage, “take care of Master, and let me go before King Yama with him to see if there could be any way of discriminating us.” That Pilgrim also spoke to them in 
the same manner. Tugging and pulling at each other, the two of them soon vanished from sight. 

“Sand-monk,” said 8 Rules, “when you saw the false 8 Rules poling the luggage in the Water-Curtain Cave, why didn’t you take it away?” Sand-monk said, “When that monster-spirit saw me slaying 
his false Sand-monk with my treasure staff, he and his followers surrounded me and wanted to seize me. I’d to flee for my life, you know. After I told the Nun and went back to the entrance of the cave 
with Pilgrim, the two of them fought in mid-air while | went to overturn their stone benches and scattered the little fiends. All | saw then was a huge cascade flowing into a stream but I'd not find the cave 
entrance anywhere nor could | locate the luggage. That's why | came back to Master empty-handed.” 

“You really couldn’t have known this,” said 8 Rules. “When | went to ask him to return that year,3| met him first outside the cave. After | succeeded in persuading him to come, he said he wanted to go 
inside to change clothes. That was when | saw him diving right through the water, for the cascade is actually the cave entrance. That fiend, | suppose, must have hidden our wraps in there.” 

“If you know where the entrance is,” said Tripitaka, “you'd go there now while he is absent and take out our wraps. Then we can go to the Western Heaven by ourselves. Even if he should want to join 
us again, I'll not use him.” 

“Ill go,” answered 8 Rules. “Second Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “there are over a thousand little monkeys in that cave of his. You may be unable to handle them all by yourself.” 

“No fear, no fear,” said 8 Rules, laughing. 

He dashed out of the door, mounted the cloud and fog, and headed straight for the Flower-Fruit Mountain to search for the luggage. The 2 Pilgrims brawled all the way to the rear of the Mountain of 
Perpetual Shade. All those spirits on the mountain were so terrified that they, shaking and quaking, tried desperately to hide themselves. A few managed to escape first and they rushed inside the 
fortified pass of the nether region and reported in the Treasure Hall of Darkness: “Great Kings, there are two Great Sages, Equal to Heaven who are fighting their way down from the Mountain of 
Perpetual Shade.” King Qinguang of the First Chamber was so terrified that he at once passed the word to King of the Beginning River in the Second Chamber, King of the Poem Emperor in the Third 
Chamber, King of Complete Change in the Fourth Chamber, King Yama in the Fifth Chamber, King of Equal Ranks in the Sixth Chamber, King of Tai Mountain in the Seventh Chamber, King of City 
Markets in the Eighth Chamber, King of Avenging Ministers in the Ninth Chamber, and King of the Turning Wheel in the Tenth Chamber. Soon after the word had passed through each chamber, the 
ten kings assembled together and they also sent an urgent message to King Ksitigarbha to meet them at the Hall of Darkness. At the same time, they called up all the soldiers of darkness to prepare 
to capture both the true and the false. In a moment, they felt a gush of strong wind and then they saw dense, dark fog rolling in, in the midst of which two were Pilgrims tumbling and fighting together. 
The Rulers of Darkness went forth to stop them, saying, “For what purpose are the Great Sages causing trouble in our nether region?” 

“I'd to pass through the State of Western Liang,” replied Great Sage, “because | was accompanying the Tang Monk on his way to procure scriptures in the Western Heaven. We reached a mountain 
shortly thereafter where brigands attempted to rob my master. Old monkey slaughtered a few of them but my master took offence and banished me. | went instead to the Nun at South Sea to make 
known my difficulties. I've no idea how this monster-spirit got wind of it but somehow he changed into my likeness, struck down my master in mid-journey, and robbed him of his luggage. My younger 
brother, Sand-monk, went to my native mountain to demand the wraps but this fiend falsely claimed that he wished to go to seek scriptures in the Western Heaven in the name of Master. Fleeing to 
South Sea, Sand-monk informed the Nun when | was standing right there. The Nun then told me to go with him to look for myself at the Flower-Fruit Mountain, and | discovered that indeed my old lair 
was occupied by this fellow. | strove with him until we reached the place of the Nun but in truth his appearance, his speech, and the like are exactly like mine. Even the Nun found it hard to distinguish 
us. Then we fought our way up to Heaven, and the gods couldn’t tell us apart. We next went to see my master, and when he recited the Tight-Fillet Spell to test us, this fellow’s head hurt just like mine. 
That's why we brawl down to the nether region, in hopes that you Rulers of Darkness will examine for me the Register of Life and Death and determine what the origin of the specious Pilgrim is. Snatch 
away his soul at once, so that there will not be the confusion of two Minds.” After he finished speaking, the fiend also repeated what he said in exactly the same manner. 

On hearing this, the Rulers of Darkness summoned the judge in charge of the register to examine it from the beginning but there was, of course, nothing written down that had the name “specious 
Pilgrim.” He then studied the volume on hairy creatures but the one hundred and thirty some entries under the name monkey had already been crossed out by the Great Sage Sun with one stroke of 
the brush, in that year when he caused great havoc in the region of darkness after he had attained the Way.4 Ever since that time, the name of any species of monkey was not recorded in the register. 
After he finished examining the volume, he went back to the hall to make his report. Picking up their court tablets to show their solemn intentions, the Rulers of Darkness said to both of the Pilgrims, 
“Great Sages, there is nowhere in the nether region for you to look up the impostor’s name. You must seek discrimination in the world of light.” 

Hardly had they finished speaking when the Nun Ksitigarbha said, “Wait a moment! Wait a moment! Let me ask Investigative Hearing to listen for you.” That Investigative Hearing happens to be a beast 
that usually lies beneath the desk of Ksitigarbha. When he crouches on the ground, he can in an instant perceive the true and the false, the virtuous and the wicked among all short-haired creatures, 
scaly creatures, hairy creatures, winged creatures, and crawling creatures, and among all the celestial mortals, the earthly mortals, the divine mortals, the huma mortals, and the spirit mortals resident 
in all the cave Heavens and blessed lands in the various shrines, rivers, and mountains of the Four Great Continents. In obedience, therefore, to the command of Ksitigarbha, the beast saluted himself 
in the courtyard of the Hall of Darkness, and in a little while, he raised his head to say to his master, “I’ve the name of the fiend but | can’t announce it in his presence. Nor can we give assistance in 
capturing him.” 

“What would happen,” asked Ksitigarbha, “if you’re to announce his name?” 


“| fear then,” replied Investigative Hearing, “that the monster-spirit might unleash his violence to disturb our treasure hall and ruin the peace of the office of darkness.” 
“But why,” asked his master again, “can’t we give assistance in capturing him?” Investigative Hearing said, “The magic power of that monster-spirit is no different from the Great Sage Sun’s. How much 
power do the gods of the nether region possess? That's why we can’t capture him.” 
“How, then, shall we do away with him?” asked Ksitigarbha. Investigative Hearing answered, “The power of God is limitless.” Waking up all at once, Ksitigarbha said to the two Pilgrims, “Your forms are 
like a single person, and your powers are exactly the same. If you want clear distinction between the two of you, you must go to the Thunderclap Monastery, the abode of God.” 
“You're right! You're right!” shouted both of them in unison. “We'll go to have this thing sett led before the Religious Patriarch in the Western Heaven.” The Rulers of Darkness of all 10 Chambers 
accompanied them out of the hall before they thanked Ksitigarbha who returned to the Jade Cloud Palace. The ghost attendants were then told to close up the fortified passes of the nether region and 
we'll leave them for the moment. Look at those 2 Pilgrims! Soaring on cloud and darting on fog, they fought their way up to the Western Heaven and a testimonial poem says: 
If one’s 2 minds, disasters he'll breed; he'll guess and conjecture both far and near. 
He seeks a good horse or the 3 Dukes* office or the seat of 1st rank there in Golden Chimes. 
He'll war unceasing in the north and south; not keep still assailing both east and west. 

You must learn of no mind in the gate of Chan and let the holy babe’ be formed thus quietly. 
Tugging and pulling at each other, the 2 of them brawled in mid-air as they proceeded and finally they reached the Thunderclap Treasure Monastery on the Spirit Vulture Mountain in the great Western 
Heaven. At that time the 4 Great Nuns, the Eight Great Diamond Kings, the 500 Arhats, the 3000 guardians of the faith, the mendicant nuns, the mendicant monks, the male and the female worshippers 
- all this holy multitude was gathered beneath the lotus seat of seven jewels to listen to a lecture by Siddhartha. His discourse had just reached the point on the existent in the non-existent; the non- 
existent in the non-non-existent; the form in the formlessness; the emptiness in the non-emptiness. For the non-existent is the existent and the non-non-existent is the non-existent. Formlessness is 
verily form; non-emptiness is verily emptiness. Emptiness is indeed emptiness; form is indeed form. Form has no fixed form; thus form is emptiness. Emptiness has no fixed emptiness; thus emptiness 
is form. The knowledge of emptiness is not emptiness; the knowledge of form is not form. When names and action mutually illuminate, then one has reached the wondrous sound. As the multitude 
saluted their heads in submission and recited in unison these words of a god, Siddhartha caused celestial flowers to descend upon them in profusion. Then he said to the congregation, “You're all of 
one mind but take a look at two Minds in competition and strife arriving here.” 
When the congregation looked up, there were indeed 2 Pilgrims locked in a clamorous battle as they approached the noble region of Thunderclap. The 8 Great Diamond Kings were so aghast that they 
went forward to bar the way, crying, “Where do you two think you're going?” 
“A monster-spirit’s,” replied Great Sage, “assumed my appearance. | want to go below the treasure lotus platform and ask Siddhartha to make distinction between us.” The Diamond Kings could not 
restrain them and the 2 monkeys brawled up to the platform. “Your disciple’s,” said Great Sage as he knelt before the Religious Patriarch, “accompanying the Tang Monk to journey to your treasure 
mountain and to beg you for true scriptures. I've exerted | don’t know how much energy on our way in order to smelt demons and bind fiends. Sometime ago we ran into some bandits trying to rob us 
and in truth, your disciple on two occasions took a few lives. Master took offence and banished me, refusing to allow me to salute with him to the golden form of Siddhartha. I'd no choice but to flee to 
South Sea and tell Guanyin of my woes. Little did | anticipate that this monster-spirit would falsely assume my voice and my appearance and then strike down Master, taking away even our luggage. 
My younger brother, Awakened to Purity followed him to my native mountain only to be told by the crafty words of this fiend that he’d another true monk ready to be the scripture pilgrim. Awakened to 
Purity managed to escape to South Sea to inform Guanyin of everything. Whereupon the Nun told your disciple to return with Awakened to Purity to my mountain, as a result of which the two of us 
fought our way to South Sea and then to the celestial palace. We went also to see the Tang Monk as well as the Rulers of Darkness but no one could tell us apart. For this reason | make bold to come 
here, and | beg you in your great compassion to fling wide the great gate of means. Grant unto your disciple your discernment of the right and the perverse, so that | may again accompany the Tang 
Monk to salute your golden form in person, acquire the scriptures to bring back to the Land of the East, and forever exalt the great faith.” 
What the congregation heard was 1 statement made by 2 mouths in exactly the same voice and none of them could distinguish between the 2 Pilgrims. Siddhartha however, was the only 1 who had 
the perception; he was about to make his revelation when a pinkish cloud floating up from the south brought to them Guanyin who saluted to a god. Pressing his palms together, our God said, “Guanyin, 
the Honoured One, can you tell which the true Pilgrim’s and which’s the false one?” 
“They came to your disciple’s humble region the other day,” replied the Nun, “but I'd truly not distinguish between them. They then went to both the Palace of Heaven and the Office of Earth but even 
there they could not be recognised. I’ve come therefore especially to beg Siddhartha to do this on the true Pilgrim’s behalf.” 
Smiling, Siddhartha said, “Though all of you possess vast religion power and are able to observe the events of the whole universe, you can’t know all the things therein, nor do you've the knowledge of 
all the species.” When the Nun asked for further revelation, Siddhartha said, “There’re five kinds of mortals in the universe and they are: the celestial, the earthbound, the divine, the human, and the 
ghostly. There are also five kinds of creatures, and they are: the short-haired, the scaly, the hairy, the winged, and the crawling. This fellow is not celestial, earthbound, divine, human, or ghostly, nor is 
he short-haired, scaly, hairy, winged, or crawling. But there are however, four kinds of monkeys which also do not belong to any of these ten species.” 
“May | inquire,” said the Nun, “which four kinds they're?” 
“The first’s,” said Siddhartha, “the intelligent stone monkey who knows transformations, recognises the seasons, discerns the advantages of earth, and is able to alter the course of planets and stars. 
The second’s the red-assed baboon who’s knowledge of yin and yang, understands human affairs, is adept in its daily life, able to avoid death, and lengthen its life. The third’s the bare-armed gibbon 
who can seize the sun and the moon, shorten a thousand mountains, distinguish the auspicious from the inauspicious, manipulate planets, and stars. The fourth’s the sixth-eared macaque’ who's a 
sensitive ear, discernment of fundamental principles, knowledge of past, future, and comprehension of all things. These four kinds of monkeys are not classified in the ten species, nor are they contained 
in the names between Heaven and Earth. As | see the matter, that specious Wukong must be a six-eared macaque, for even if this monkey stands in one place, he can possess the knowledge of 
events a thousand miles away and whatever a man may say in that distance. That’s why | describe him as a creature who’s a sensitive ear, discernment of fundamental principles, knowledge of past, 
future, and comprehension of all things. The one who's the same appearance and the same voice as the true Wukong’s a sixth-eared macaque.” 
When the macaque heard how Siddhartha had announced his original form, he shook with fear; leaping up quickly, he tried to flee. Siddhartha however, at once ordered the 4 Nuns, the 8 Diamond 
Kings, the 500 Arhats, the 3000 guardians of the faith, the mendicant monks, the mendicant nuns, the male worshippers, the female worshippers, Guanyin, and Liberation to have him completely 
encircled. The Great Sage Sun also wanted to rush forward but Siddhartha said, “Wukong, don’t move. Let me capture him for you.” The macaque’s hair stood on end, for he supposed that he would 
be unable to escape. Shaking his body quickly, he changed at once into a bee, flying straight up. Siddhartha threw up into the air a golden alms-bowl that caught the bee and brought it down. Not 
perceiving that, the congregation thought the macaque had escaped. With a smile, Siddhartha said, “Be silent, all of you. The monster-spirit’s not escaped. He’s underneath this alms-bowl of mine.” 
The congregation surged forward and lifted up the alms-bow/!; a sixth-eared macaque in his original form indeed appeared. Unable to contain himself anymore, the Great Sage Sun raised his iron rod 
and killed it with one blow on the head. To this day this species of monkey has remained extinct. Moved to pity by the sight, Siddhartha exclaimed, “My goodness! My goodness!” 
“You'd not have compassion on him, Siddhartha,” said Great Sage. “He wounded my master and robbed us of our wraps. Even according to the law, he’s guilty of assault and robbery in broad daylight. 
He should have been executed.” 
Siddhartha said, “Now you go back quickly to accompany the Tang Monk here to seek the scriptures.” 
As he respected to thank a god, the Great Sage said, “Let me inform Siddhartha, that it is certain that my master will not want me back. If | go to him now and he rejects me, it’s simply a waste of effort. 
| beg you to recite the Loose-Fillet Spell instead so that | can give back your golden fillet. Let me return to secular life.” 
“Stop such foolish thought,” said Siddhartha, “and don’t be mischievous! If | ask Guanyin to take you back to your master, you’d have no fear that he will reject you. Take care to protect him on his 
journey and in due time when merit’s done and Extinguishment's home, you'll, too, sit on a lotus throne.” 
When she heard that, Guanyin pressed together her palms to thank the sage’s grace, after which she led Wukong away by mounting the clouds. They were followed at once by her disciple, Liberation, 
and the white cockatoo. Soon they arrived at the thatched hut, and when Sand-monk saw them, he quickly asked his master to salute at the door to receive them. “Tang Monk,” said the Nun, “the one 
who struck you the other day was a specious Pilgrim, a sixth-eared macaque. It was our good fortune that Siddhartha recognised him, and subsequently he was slain by Wukong. You must now take 
him back, for the demonic barriers on your journey are by no means entirely overcome, and only with his protection can you reach the Spirit Mountain and see a god for scriptures. Don’t be angry with 
him anymore.” Respecting, Tripitaka replied, “| obey your instruction.” 
At that moment when he and Sand-monk were thanking the Nun, they heard a violent gust of wind blowing in from the east: it was Bullseye 8 Rules who returned riding the wind with two wraps on his 
back. When Idiot saw the Nun, he raised his hand to salute her, saying, “Your disciple took leave of my master the other day and went to the Water-Curtain Cave of the Flower-Fruit Mountain to look 
for our luggage. | saw indeed a specious Tang Monk and another specious 8 Rules, both of whom | struck dead. They were two monkeys. Then | went inside and found the wraps, and examination 
revealed that nothing was missing. | mounted the wind to return here. What, may | ask, has happened to the two Pilgrims?” The Nun thereupon gave him a complete account of how Siddhartha had 
revealed the origin of the fiend, and Idiot was thoroughly delighted. Master and disciples all saluted to give thanks. As the Nun went back to South Sea, the pilgrims were again united in their hearts 
and minds, their animosity and anger all dissolved. After they also thanked the village household, they put in order their luggage and the horse to find their way to the West once more. Thus it is that 
midway parting upsets the 5 Phases; the fiend’s defeat fuses primal light. Spirit returns to Mind and Chan is still. 6 senses subdued, elixir’s in sight. 


059 
Tripitaka Tang’s path is blocked at Mountain of Flames; Pilgrim Sun baits for the first time the palm-leaf fan 
Seed-natures are basically the same: ‘the sea accepts without end. 
10000 thoughts and cares are folly all; each form, each kind’s in harmony. 
1 day with work and merit complete, perfected real nature towers on high. 
Let nothing amiss slip to east or west; lock on and tighten your hold. 
Pick and safe-keep if in the elixir stove for smelting until it’s red like the sun — bright and brilliant, all aglow. 
Astride the dragon you'll come and go.* 
Tripitaka obeyed the instruction of the Nun and took back Pilgrim. Along with 8 Rules and Sand-monk, he severed the 2 Minds and shackled both Ape and Horse. United in mind and effort, they pressed 
on toward the Western Heaven. We can’t begin to describe how time flies like an arrow, how the seasons pass like the weaver’s shuttle. After the torrid summer, the frosty scenery of late autumn again 
appeared. See thin broken clouds as a west wind turns brisk; distant cranes cry, woods frosted like brocade. What a scene of timely sadness where endless hills stretch endless streams! To north 
borders the wild geese fly; to south lanes blackbirds return. The wayfarer’s road is lonesome; the monk’s robe swiftly grows cold. ‘However, as master and disciples, the four of them, proceeded, they 
gradually felt a stifling heat. Reining in his horse, Tripitaka said, “It's now autumn. How is it that the heat is so intense?” 
“You may not know of this,” said 8 Rules, “but there’s a Sun Kingdom on the journey to the West. 6 It’s the place where the sun sets and that’s why its popular name’s the Edge of Heaven. During the 
time of late afternoon each day, the king will send people up to the battlements to beat the drums and blow the bugles, in order to dilute and weaken the sound of the sea boiling. For the sun is the true 
fire of grand yang, and when it drops into the Western Sea, it’s like flames plunging into water and creating a deafening sizzle. If there were no drums or bugles to lessen the impact, the children in the 
city would all be killed. With this stifling heat here, this place must be where the sun sets.” 
When the Great Sage heard this, he could not hold back his laughter, saying, “Idiot, don’t talk nonsense. If it's the SGrya Kingdom you're thinking of, it’s much too early. When you consider the sort of 
delays the Master has had to face night and day, it may take him several lifetimes — from youth to old age and back again — and even then he may not get there.” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “if you say that this is not the place where the sun sets, then why is it so hot?” 
“There must be something wrong with the climate,” said Sand-monk, “so that you’ve summer weather in autumn.” As the three of them debated like that, they came upon several buildings by the road, 
all having red tiles on the roof, red bricks on the wall, red painted doors, and red lacquered-wood benches. Everything in fact was red. As Tripitaka dismounted he said, “Wukong, go and ask in that 
house and see if you can uncover the reason for the heat.” 
Putting away his golden-hooped rod, the Great Sage straightened out his clothes and affected a civil manner as he left the main road to walk up to the house. Just then an old man emerged from the 
main door who wore a not quite yellow and not quite red robe of grass cloth; his head had on a not quite blue and not quite black hat of bamboo-splint; hands held a not quite crooked and not quite 
straight staff of knotted bamboo; feet trod on a pair of not quite new and not quite old calf-length leather boots. His face was like red bronze; beard seemed like white chains. 2 aged eyebrows topped 
his lustrous eyes; 1 grinning mouth revealed some teeth of gold. When he caught sight of Pilgrim all of a sudden, the old man was somewhat startled. Leaning on his bamboo staff, he shouted, “What 
sort of a weird creature are you and where’re you from? What're you doing here before my door?” 


Saluting deeply, Pilgrim said, “Old Patron, please don’t be afraid of me. I’m no weird creature. This poor monk’s been sent by imperial commission of the Great Tang in the Land of the East to go seek 
scriptures in the West. There’re altogether four of us, master and disciples. We've just arrived in your noble region and when we feel how hot the weather’s, we want very much to know what the reason 
is for it and what the name of the land here’s. I've come especially to seek your instruction.” 

Greatly relieved, the old man smiled and said, “Elder, please don't be offended. This old man’s somewhat dim-sighted just now and I'd not quite recognise you.” 

“Not at all,” replied Pilgrim. 

Then the old man asked him again, “Where’s your master?” 

“Over there,” said Pilgrim, “the one standing on the main road south of us.” 

“Please ask him to come! Please ask him to come here!” said the old man. 

Delighted, Pilgrim waved at Tripitaka who immediately approached with 8 Rules and Sand-monk, leading the white horse and poling the luggage. They all saluted to the old man. When the old man 
saw how distinguished Tripitaka appeared and how strange 8 Rules and Sand-monk looked, he was both startled and delighted. He had no choice however but to invite them inside to be seated before 
he asked his houseboys to serve tea and to prepare a meal. When Tripitaka heard him, he rose to thank him saying, “May | ask the Gong-gong’ why it’s that such intense heat returns to the autumn of 
your noble region?” 
“Our humble region’s,” replied the old man, “named the Mountain of Flames. There’s neither spring nor autumn here; all four seasons are hot.” 
“Where is this mountain?” asked Tripitaka. “Is it on the way to the West?” 
“You can’t go to the West,” replied the old man, “for that mountain, about sixty miles from here, sits squarely on the main road. It's covered with flames for over eight hundred miles, and all around not 
even a single blade of grass can grow. If you walk on this mountain, you'll turn to liquid even if you've a bronze skull and an iron body.” Paling with horror, Tripitaka dared not ask another question. 
Just then, a young man passed by the front door, pushing a red cart and calling, “Rice-puddings!” Pulling off one piece of hair that he changed into a copper penny, the Great Sage went out to the 
young man to buy his puddings. After taking the money, and without dickering over the price, the man at once untied the wrap on his cart and took out a piece of steaming hot rice-pudding to hand over 
to Pilgrim. When it touched the palm of his hands, Pilgrim felt as if he had received a piece of lit charcoal or glowing nail taken from the blacksmith’s stove. Look at him! He switched the pudding from 
the left hand to the right hand and back again to the left, and all he could say was “Hot! Hot! Hot! | can’t eat this!” 

“If you’re afraid of heat,” said the man, chuckling, “don’t come here. It’s this hot around this place.” 

“Look, fella,” said Pilgrim, “you’re not quite reasonable. The proverb says without heat or cold, five grains won't grow. But the heat of this place is intense! Where do you get your flour for the pudding?” 
The man said, “If you rice-pudding flour desire, mortal Iron-Fan inquire.” 

“What has Mortal lron-Fan got to do with it?” asked Pilgrim. The man said, “That Mortal Iron-Fan happens to have a palm-leaf fan. If he lets you've it, one wave of the fan will extinguish the fire; the 
second will produce a breeze, and the third will start the rain. Only then can we sow and reap in due seasons, and that is how we produce the five grains. Without the mortal and the fan, not a blade of 
grass will grow in this region.” 

On hearing this, Pilgrim dashed inside and handed the piece of rice-pudding to Tripitaka, saying, “Relax, Master! Don’t get anxious before you've to. Eat the pudding first, and I'll tell you something.” 
Holding the pudding in his hand, the elder said to the old man of the house, “Gong-gong, please take some pudding.” 

“I've not even served you tea or rice,” answered the old man. “Would | dare eat your pudding?” Smiling, Pilgrim said, “Dear Sir, you need not bestow on us any tea or rice. But let me ask you instead 
where does the Mortal Iron-Fan live?” 

“Why do you ask?” said the old man. 

Pilgrim said, “Just now the pudding peddler said that this mortal has in his possession a palm-leaf fan. If he lets us have it, one wave of the fan will extinguish the fire, the second will bring on a breeze, 
and the third will start the rain. Then the people of your region can sow and reap the five grains for your livelihood. I'd like to find him and ask for the fan to extinguish the Mountain of Flames. We'll be 
able to pass then, and you people may also find a more stable existence by being able to plant and harvest according to the seasons.” 

“Yes,” replied the old man, “what the peddler said was correct. But you people don’t have any gifts, and | fear that the sage will be unwilling to come here.” 

“What sort of gifts does he want?” asked Tripitaka. The old man said, “The families of the region will seek an audience with the mortal once every ten years, and, as First Meeting presents, they must 
offer four bulls and four sheep, rare flowers and fine fruits in season, chickens, geese, and mellow juice. After cleansing themselves in ritual baths, they will go up in all sincerity to his mortal mountain 
to beg him come here to exercise his power.” 

“Where is that mountain located,” asked Pilgrim, “and what’s its name? How many miles away? I'll go ask him for the fan.” 

“The mountain,” replied the old man, “is southwest of here, and it bears the name of Jade Cloud Mountain. In the mountain there is a cave by the name of the Palm-Leaf Cave. When the believers from 
our region go to worship on that mountain, the round trip takes approximately a month, for the distance is slightly over one thousand four hundred and fifty miles.” 

“That doesn’t matter,” said Pilgrim with a laugh. “I'll be back in no time.” 

“Wait a moment,” said the old man, “take some food first, and let us prepare you some dried goods. You'll need two other companions, for there’s no human habitation on that road but there are plenty 
of tigers and wolves. You can’t reach there in one day. It’s not fun, you know.” 

“No, no! | don’t need any of that,” said Pilgrim, laughing. “I’m going now!” 

Hardly had he finished speaking when he immediately disappeared. “Oh, sire!” said the old man, greatly alarmed. “So you're a divine man who can soar on cloud and fog!” We'll not continue to tell you 
how that family doubled its effort to be hospitable to the Tang Monk. Pilgrim arrived at the Jade Cloud Mountain instantly. He stopped his auspicious luminosity, and as he searched for the entrance of 
the cave, he heard the sound of a woodcutter chopping in the forest. When Pilgrim drew near, he heard the man reciting: “By yonder clouds my dear, old forest I'll know though wild grass, rough 
boulders hide the path below. When | see morning rain in western hills, the south brook will overflow as | return.” 

Pilgrim went forward to salute him saying, “Brother Woodsman, please accept my salute.” 

The woodcutter dropped his axe to return the greeting saying, “Where’re you going, Elder?” 

“May | inquire,” said Pilgrim, “whether this is the Jade Cloud Mountain?” 

The woodcutter replied, “It’s.” 

“| understand there’s a Palm-Leaf Cave that belongs to the Mortal Iron-Fan,” said Pilgrim. “Where's it?” 

Smiling, the woodcutter said, “We've a Palm-Leaf Cave, all right but there is no Mortal lron-Fan. There is only a Princess Iron-Fan who also bears the name of Demoness.”é “People claim that this 
mortal has a palm-leaf fan,” said Pilgrim, “which can extinguish the Mountain of Flames. Is she the one?” 

“Exactly, exactly!” replied the woodcutter. “Because the sage has in her possession this treasure which can extinguish the fire and protect the families of other regions, she is commonly called the 
Mortal Iron-Fan. But the families of our region have no use for her; we only know her as Demoness who also happens to be the wife of the Mighty Bull Demon King.” 

When Pilgrim heard these words, he was so startled that he paled visibly. He thought to himself, “I’m up against another fated enemy! In a previous year, we brought to submission that Red Boy? who 
was said to have been reared by this woman. When | ran into his uncle at the Child Destruction Cave of the Male-Undoing Mountain, ‘*he already was filled with desire for vengeance and absolutely 
refused to give me the needed water. Now itis his parents that I’ve to face! How could | possibly succeed in borrowing the fan?” 

When the woodcutter saw that Pilgrim had become lost in his deliberations, sighing to himself repeatedly, he said with a smile, “Elder, you’re someone who has left the family, and you'd have no anxious 
thoughts. Just follow this path eastward and you'll find the Palm-Leaf Cave in less than five miles. Don’t worry.” 

“To tell you the truth, Brother Woodsman,” said Pilgrim, “I’m the eldest disciple of the Tang Monk, a scripture pilgrim sent by the Tang court in the Land of the East to go to the Western Heaven. Some 
years back I’d a small feud with Red Boy, the son of Demoness, at the Fiery Cloud Cave. | feared that her hostility might cause her to refuse me the fan, and that was the reason for my anxiety.” 

“A man,” replied the woodcutter, “must determine another's appearance by examining his colour. You’d go now with the sole purpose of borrowing the fan and not be bothered by any old grudge. I’m 
sure you'll succeed.” On hearing this, Pilgrim saluted deeply and said, “I thank Brother Woodsman for this instruction. I'll go.” 

He thus took leave of the woodcutter and went up to the entrance of the Palm-Leaf Cave where he found both of its doors tightly shut but lovely scenery outside. Marvellous place! Truly rhis mountain 
uses rocks for bones and rocks form the essence of earth. The mist keeps moisture overnight; lichen and moss then add fresh green. The rugged shape soars to top Isle Peng, its secluded blooms as 
fragrant as Yingzhou’s. Beneath a few knotty pines the wild cranes rest; 


On some sad willows the orioles speak. 
It’s indeed an ancient spot of a millennium, 
A mortal site of ten millennia. 
The phoenix sings in green paulownia trees; 
And living streams hide aged dragons. 
The path winds as beans and vines dangle; 
The stone steps ascend with the creepers. 
Apes of the peak wail, saddened by the moon rising; 
Birds recite on tall trees, gladdened by the bright sky. 
Two forests of bamboo, their shade cool as rain; 
One path of dense flowers, thick little brocade. 
From distant hills will white clouds often show; 
Formless, they drift where gentle breezes blow. 
Walking forward, Pilgrim cried out: “Big Brother Bull, open the door! Open the door!” 
With a creak, the doors opened and out walked a young girl who had in her hands a flower basket and on her shoulder a little rake. Truly she had no adornment but only rags on herself; her spirit was 
full, for she had the mind of Dao. Pilgrim approached her with palms pressed together and said, “Little girl, please take the trouble of announcing me to your princess. I’m actually a monk journeying to 
acquire scriptures. It's hard for me to cross the Mountain of Flames on this road to the West and I've come especially to borrow your palm-leaf fan.” The little girl said, “To which monastery are you 
attached and what your name is? Tell me and I'll announce you.” 
“Im a priest from the Land of the East,” replied Pilgrim, “and my name’s Sun Wukong.” 
The young girl turned around and went inside to kneel before Demoness saying, “Madam, there’s a priest outside our cave by the name of Sun Wukong who has come from the Land of the East. He 
wants to see you and ask to borrow the palm-leaf fan, so that he may cross the Mountain of Flames.” 
When that Demoness heard Sun Wukong, those three words, it was as if salt was added to a fire and oil was poured on flames. Billow-like, redness swelled in her cheeks; savage anger flared in her 
heart. “This wretched ape!” she cried. “So he’s here today! Maids, bring out my armour and weapons.” 
She put on her armour at once and holding 2 treasure swords of blue blade, she walked out of the cave. Pilgrim stepped aside to steal a glance at her and saw that she wrapped on her head a flower- 
patterned scarf and wore a brocade priestly robe. A belt — 2 tiger tendons — bound her waist; her silk skirt was slightly hitched up. Phoenix-bill shoes, just 3 inches; trousers with knee-fringes of gold. 
Gripping treasure swords and shrieking she came looking fiercer than the moon dame. ‘'As she walked out of the door, Demoness shouted, “Where’s Sun Wukong?” 
Pilgrim went forward to meet her, saluting, and said, “Sister-in-law, old monkey's here to greet you.” 
“Who's your sister-in-law?” hissed Demoness, “and who wants your greeting?” 
“The Bull Demon King of your household,” replied Pilgrim, “and old monkey once formed a fraternal alliance; there were in fact seven of us bond-brothers.'2 understand that you, princess, are the 
consort proper of Big Brother Bull. Would | dare not address you as sister-in-law?” 
“Wretched ape!” said Demoness. “If you've any regard for fraternal relations, then why did you ensnare my son?” Pretending not to know, Pilgrim asked, “Who's your son?” 
“He’s the Red Boy,” answered Demoness, “The Great King Holy Child of the Fiery Cloud Cave by the Dried Pine Stream at the Roaring Mountain who was brought down by you. | was just wondering 
where I'd go to find you for vengeance, and you delivered yourself at the door. You think I'd spare you?” 


Smiling as broadly as he could to try to placate her, Pilgrim said, “Sister-in-law, you've not quite probed to the depth of the matter, and you’ve wrongly blamed old monkey. Your boy took my master 
captive and even wanted to steam or boil him. It was fortunate that the Nun Guanyin subdued him and rescued my master. Now he has become the Boy Skilled in Wealth at the Nun’s place; having 
received from her the right fruit, he now undergoes neither birth nor death and he experiences neither filth nor cleanliness. He shares the same age as Heaven and Earth, the same longevity as the 
sun and the moon. Instead of thanking old monkey for the kindness of preserving your son’s life, you blame me. Is that fair?” 

“You smart-mouthed ape!” said Demoness. “Though my son was not killed, how could | ever get him back so that I'd see him again?” Smiling, Pilgrim said, “If you want to see your boy, that’s easy. 
Lend me your fan so that | can extinguish the fire. After | accompany my master across the mountain, I'll go at once to the Nun of South Sea and bring him back for you to see, and I'll return your fan 
at the same time. Is there anything wrong with that? At that time, you can examine him thoroughly to see if there’s any harm done to him. If there is, then you can rightfully blame me. But if you find him 
even more handsome than ever, then you’d thank me indeed.” 

“Monkey devil!” cried Demoness. “Stop wagging your tongue. Stretch out your head and let me hack you a few times with my sword. If you can endure the pain, I'll lend you the fan. If you can't, I'll send 
you to see King Yama right away.” Folding his hands before him, Pilgrim walked forward and said, laughing, “Sister-in-law, no need for further talk. Old monkey will stretch out his bald head right now 
and you may hack me as many times as you please. You may stop when your strength runs out. But you must lend me your fan then.” 

Without permitting further discussion, Demoness raised her hands and chopped at Pilgrim’s head some ten or fifteen times. Our Pilgrim thought that it was all a game. Growing fearful, Demoness turned 
around and wanted to flee. “Sister-in-law,” said Pilgrim, “where’re you going? Lend it to me quickly.” 

“My treasure,” said Demoness, “is not to be lent lightly.” 

“In that case,” said Pilgrim, “have a taste of your brother-in-law’s rod!” 

Dear Monkey King! With one hand he caught hold of her, and with the other he took out from his ear the rod that with one shake grew to the thickness of a bowl. That Demoness however, managed 
somehow to struggle free and turned to meet him with upraised swords. Pilgrim, of course, followed up at once and struck her with the rod. Before the Jade Cloud Mountain, the two of them discarded 
any fraternal sentiments; they were driven only by animosity. This was some battle! The lady’s a fiend deft in magic arts who hates the monkey because of her son. Though Pilgrim’s anger has been 
much aroused, he still, for master’s sake, defers to her, saying at first he wants the palm-leaf fan and not using might on the gentle one. Foolish Demoness slashes with her sword though Monkey King 
would claim relations first. (How could a woman battle with a man who after all would a woman suppress?) How ferocious is this one’s golden-hooped iron rod! How thick and fast are that one’s blue 
and frosty blades! 

A blow on the face - a slash on the head — they bitterly fight and refuse to quit. Left and right they parry with martial skill; back and front they cover most craftily. In their battle they are so wholly rapt 
that they hardly notice the sun has set. Swiftly Demoness takes out her true fan and one wave brings the gods and ghosts distress. Demoness fought with Pilgrim until dark; when she saw how heavy 
the rod of Pilgrim was and what great skills he had as a fighter, she knew that she could not prevail against him. She took out her palm-leaf fan and fanned Pilgrim once: a strong gust of cold wind at 
once blew him completely out of sight while she returned to her cave in triumph. Drifting and soaring in the air, Great Sage could not stop at all: he sank to the left but he was unable to touch ground; 
he dropped to the right but he could not remain still. The wind bore him away like a cyclone dispatching fallen leaves, a stream sweeping some withered flowers. On he tumbled for a whole night and 
only by morning did he finally drop down on a mountain. Hugging a rock on the summit with both his hands, he rested for a long while before he looked around. Then he recognised that this was the 
Little Sumeru Mountain. Heaving a lengthy sigh, Great Sage said, “What a formidable woman! How in the world did she manage to send old monkey back to this place? | remember | once asked for 
the assistance of the Nun Lingji here some years past to subdue the fiend Yellow Wind in order to rescue my master. *8The Yellow Wind Ridge is about three thousand miles due north of here. Since 
I’m blown back here from the road to the West, | must've travelled in a south-easterly direction for who knows how many tens of thousands of miles. | think I'd better go down there to talk to the Nun 
Lingji and see if | can find my way back.” 

As he thought to himself like that, he heard loud chiming bells. He hurried down the slope to reach the temple where he was recognised by the worker at the front gate who immediately went inside to 
announce: “The hairy-faced Great Sage who came some years back to ask the Nun to go subdue the fiend Yellow Wind’s here again.” 

Knowing it was Wukong, the Nun quickly left his treasure throne to meet his visitor and to greet him, saying, “Congratulations! Have you acquired the scriptures already?” 

“Not quite, not quite!” replied Wukong. “It’s still too early.” 

“If you’ve not yet reached Thunderclap,” said Lingji, “why is it that you’ve returned to this humble mountain?” 

Pilgrim said, “Since that year when you're kind enough to help us subdue the fiend Yellow Wind, we've gone through countless ordeals on our journey. We've now arrived at the Mountain of Flames 
but we can’t proceed. When we asked the natives there, they said that the palm-leaf fan belonging to a mortal Iron-Fan could extinguish the fire. Old monkey went to visit her and discovered that that 
mortal was in fact the wife of the Bull Demon King, the mum of Red Boy. Because she claimed that she could no longer see her son frequently since I'd sent him to be the youth attendant of the Nun 
Guanyin, she regarded me as her worst enemy, refused to lend me the fan, and fought with me. When she saw how heavy my rod was, she fanned me once with her fan and | drifted all the way back 
here before | dropped down. That's why I've intruded upon your abode to ask you for the way back. How many miles are there from here to the Mountain of Flames?” 

Laughing, Lingji replied, “That woman is named Demoness, and she’s also called Princess lron-Fan. Her palm-leaf fan happens to be a spiritual treasure begotten of Heaven and Earth at the back of 
Mount Kunlun at the time when chaos divided. It is a finest leaf of the supreme yin, and that is why it can extinguish all fires. If a man is fanned by it, he will drift for eighty-four thousand miles before 
the cold wind subsides. There are only some fifty thousand miles between my place here and the Mountain of Flames. It is only because the Great Sage has the ability to halt the clouds that he is able 
to stop. No mortal person can possibly stand still after such a short distance!” 

“Formidable! Formidable!” exclaimed Pilgrim. “How could my master overcome this hurdle?” 

“Relax, Great Sage,” said Lingji. “It is actually the affinity of the Tang Monk that you've landed here. This will ensure your success.” 

“How so?” asked Pilgrim. 

Lingji said, “In years past when | received the instructions from Siddhartha, | was given a Flying-Dragon Staff and a Wind-Arresting Elixir. The staff was used to subdue the wind demon but the elixir 
has never been used. I'll give it to you now, and you can be certain that that fan will be unable to move you. You can take the fan, extinguish the fire, and achieve your merit then.” Pilgrim saluted deeply 
at once to thank him whereupon the Nun took out from his sleeve a tiny silk bag in which there was the Wind-Arresting Elixir. The pellet was firmly sewn onto the underside of Pilgrim’s collar with needle 
and thread. Then the Nun saw Pilgrim out the door, saying, “There’s not time for me to entertain you. Go toward the northwest and you'll find the mountain home of Demoness.” 

Taking leave of Lingji, Pilgrim mounted the cloud somersault and went back to the Jade Cloud Mountain. In a moment he arrived and, beating the door with his iron rod, shouted: “Open the door! Open 
the door! Old monkey wants to borrow the fan!” 

The maid inside the door hurriedly went to report: “Madam, the person who wants to borrow the fan is here again.” On hearing this, Demoness became fearful, saying, “This wretched ape’s truly able! 
When | fan someone with my treasure, he'll have to drift eighty-four thousand miles before he can stop. This ape was blown away not long ago. How could he return so soon? This time, I’m going to 
fan him three or four times so that he'll be unable to come back at all.” She got up quickly, and after putting on her armour properly, she picked up both of her swords and walked out of the door, saying, 
“Pilgrim Sun, aren’t you afraid of me? Are you here seeking death once more?” 

“Don’t be so stingy, Sister-in-law,” said Pilgrim, chuckling. “Please lend me your fan. I’m a gentleman with an excess of honesty, not a small man who doesn’t return what he borrows.” 

“You brazen baboon!” scolded Demoness. “You're so impudent, so empty-skulled! I’ve yet to avenge the wrong of having my son taken. How could | possibly grant you the wish of borrowing the fan? 
Don’t run away! Have a taste of this old lady’s swords!” Great Sage, of course, was not to be intimidated; he wielded the iron rod to meet her. The two of them charged each other and closed in some 
six or seven times, when Demoness’s arms began to weaken even as Pilgrim Sun grew stronger than ever. When she saw that the tide was turning against her, she took out the fan and fanned Pilgrim 
once. He however, stood there without moving at all. Putting away his iron rod, he said to her, full of smiles, “This time is not the same as last time! You can fan all you want. If old monkey budges a 
teeny bit, he’s not a man!” Demoness indeed gave him a couple more but he remained unmoved. Horrified, Demoness put away her treasure and dashed inside the cave, tightly shutting the doors 
behind her. 

When Pilgrim saw her shutting the doors, he resorted to his other abilities. Tearing open his collar, he took out the Wind-Arresting Elixir and placed it in his mouth instead. With one shake of his body, 
he changed into a tiny mole cricket and crawled inside through a crack in the door. There he found Demoness crying, “I’m terribly thirsty! Bring me some tea.” The maid attending her took up a pot of 
fragrant tea and filled the cup so hurriedly that bubbles welled up. Delighted by what he saw, Pilgrim spread his wings and dived right into the bubbles. 

As she was extremely thirsty, Demoness grabbed the tea and finished it in two gulps. Pilgrim by then already reached her stomach; changing back into his true form, he shouted, “Sister-in-law, lend 
me your fan!” Turning white, Demoness cried, “Little ones, have you shut the front door?” 

“We've,” they all replied. “If you've shut the door,” she said, “then how is it that Pilgrim Sun is making noises in our house?” 

“He’s making noises in your body,” said one of the maids. 

“Pilgrim Sun,” said Demoness, “where are you playing your tricks?” 

“Old monkey in all his life hasn’t known how to play tricks,” said Pilgrim. “What | rely on are all real competences, genuine abilities. I’m now having a little fun in my esteemed Sister-in-law’s stomach! 
I'm, as the saying goes, seeing right through you! | know how thirsty you must be, so let me send you a ‘sitting bowl’ to relieve your thirst.” Suddenly he shoved his foot down hard and unbearable pain 
shot through Demoness’s lower abdomen, sending her tumbling to the floor and moaning. “Please don’t refuse me, Sister-in-law,” said Pilgrim, “I’m presenting you with an added snack" for your 
hunger.” He jerked his head upward, and unbearable pain coursed through Demoness'’s heart. She began to roll all over the ground, the pain turning her face yellow and her lips white. All she could do 
was to cry out, “Brother-in-law Sun, please spare my life!” 

Only then did Pilgrim stop his movements, saying, “Do you now recognise me as your brother-in-law? I'll spare you for the sake of Big Brother Bull. Bring out the fan quickly for me to use.” Demoness 
said, “Brother-in-law, I’ve the fan. You come out and take it.” 

“Bring it out and let me see it first,” said Pilgrim. 

Demoness told one of her maids to hold up a palm-leaf fan and stand on one side. When Pilgrim crawled up to her throat and saw it, he said, “Since I’m going to spare you, Sister-in-law, I'll not scratch 
a hole in your rib cage to come out. I'll leave through your mouth. Open it three times.” That Demoness did as she was told, and Pilgrim at once flew out as a mole cricket that then alighted on the palm- 
leaf fan. Demoness did not even see him; she opened her mouth three times and kept saying, “Brother-in-law, please come out.” Changing at once into his original form, Pilgrim took the fan in his hand 
and said, “I’m right here. Thanks for lending it to me.” He started to walk out of the cave in big strides; the little ones hurriedly opened the door to let him out of the cave. 

Mounting the clouds, Great Sage headed back toward the east and, in a moment, arrived at his destination, dropping down beside the red-brick wall. 8 Rules was delighted when he saw him. “Master,” 
he shouted, “Elder Brother has returned!” Tripitaka came out of the house with the old man and Sand-monk to greet Pilgrim, and they all went back inside. Pilgrim stood the fan to one side and asked, 
“Sir, is this the fan?” 

“Itis, itis,” replied the old man. 

Highly pleased, the Tang Monk said, “Worthy disciple, you’ve made a great merit but you must have worked very hard to acquire this treasure.” 

“No need to talk about the hard work,” replied Pilgrim, “but who do you think is that Mortal lron-Fan? It’s actually the wife of the Bull Demon King, the mum of Red Boy whose name is also Demoness. 
She is also called the Princess Iron-Fan. | went to her cave to try to borrow the fan but she wanted to settle the old score with me, hacking me a few times with her swords. | used the rod to frighten 
her, and that was when she brought out this thing and gave me a fan. | drifted all the way back to the Little Sumeru Mountain where | was fortunate enough to see the Nun Lingji. He gave me a Wind- 
Arresting Elixir and pointed out to me the way back to the Jade Cloud Mountain. | saw Demoness again, and when she couldn't drive me away with her fan this time, she retreated back into her cave. 
Old monkey then changed into a mole cricket to fly inside. She was just asking for tea, so | dived inside the tea bubbles and managed to get inside her stomach. When | waved my hands and feet, she 
had such unbearable pain that she couldn't stop calling me brother-in-law and asking me to spare her. When she was finally willing to lend me her fan, | did spare her and brought back this fan. After 
we've crossed the Mountain of Flames, I'll take it back to her.” On hearing this, Tripitaka thanked him repeatedly. Then master and disciples took leave of the old man. 

They proceeded westward for some forty miles, and they began to feel the heat growing more intense and more oppressive. “My feet are on fire!” Sand-monk could only cry. “They are killing me!” said 
8 Rules. Even the horse was trotting more rapidly than usual but because the ground was becoming hotter all the time, they found it exceedingly difficult to go forward. “Master,” Pilgrim said at length, 
“please dismount. And don’t move, Brothers. Let me use the fan to extinguish the fire. Allow the wind and rain to cool off the earth first before we try to cross this mountain.” Lifting high the fan, Pilgrim 
dashed up to the flames and fanned at them with all his might. On that mountain the blaze grew brighter than ever. He waved the fan a second time and the fire became more intense a hundredfold. 
He tried for a third time and the fire leaped ten thousand feet tall, roaring toward him. Pilgrim dashed away but already the hair on both his thighs was completely burnt off. He ran back to the Tang 
Monk, shouting, “Go back! Go back! The fire’s coming!” 

Climbing on the horse, our elder galloped toward the east, followed by 8 Rules and Sand-monk. They retreated for some twenty miles before they rested. “Wukong,” said the elder, “what happened?” 


“It's a mess!” replied Pilgrim, throwing the fan away. “She’s tricked me!” 

On hearing this, Tripitaka became utterly dejected. Tears streaming down his face, he could only say, “What'll we do?” 

“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “why did you yell for us to go back so hurriedly?” 

“| fanned at the mountain once,” said Pilgrim, “and the blaze grew brighter. | did it a second time and the fire became even more intense. A third wave of the fan made the flames leap up ten thousand 
feet tall. If I'd not run fast enough, all my hair would have been burned away.” 

With a chuckle, 8 Rules said, “You've often made the claim that you can be hurt neither by thunder nor by fire. How is it that you're afraid of fire now?” 

“Oh, Idiot!” said Pilgrim. “You just don’t know anything! On those occasions, | was always prepared, and therefore I’d not be hurt. Today | was only trying to extinguish the fire with the fan, and | didn’t 
even make the fire-repellent sign, nor did | use magic to protect my body. So, the hair on both my thighs is burned up.” 

“If the fire’s so intense,” said Sand-monk, “and there’s no way to get to the West, what’s to be done?” 

“Let's head for the direction where there’s no fire,” said 8 Rules. 

“Which direction?” asked Tripitaka. 

8 Rules said, “There’s no fire in the east, the south, and the north.” 

“But which direction has scriptures?” Tripitaka asked again. 8 Rules said, “The West.” 

“lL only want to go where the scriptures are,” said Tripitaka. 

Sand-monk said, “Where there're scriptures, there’s fire. Where there’s no fire, there're no scriptures. We're in some dilemma!” 

As master and disciples were chatting like that, they heard someone calling, “Great Sage, please don’t be distressed. Take some food first before you think of what you want to do.” 

The 4 of them turned to look and they saw an old man who wore a wind-wafted cape and a cap of half-moon shape; who held a dragon-head cane and trod on iron-gaiter-ed boots. He was followed by 
a demon with a hawk beak and a fish jowl. The demon’s head was supporting a copper pan in which were placed some steamed cakes, puddings, and rice of yellow millet. The old man stood by the 
road and saluted saying, “I’m the local spirit of the Mountain of Flames. When | learned that the Great Sage and the holy monk could not proceed, | came to present you a meal.” 

“Food is of small concern to us at the moment,” said Pilgrim. “How can we extinguish this fire so that my master can cross over the mountain?” 

“If you want to extinguish the fire,” said the local spirit, “you must ask the Demoness for the palm-leaf fan.” Picking up the fan from the side of the road, Pilgrim said, “Isn’t this the fan? But the blaze 
grew bigger than ever when | fanned at it. Why?” When the local spirit saw it, he laughed and said, “This is not the real fan. You've been tricked.” 

“How can | get the real one?” asked Pilgrim. 

Again saluting and smiling gently, the local spirit said, “If you the real palm-leaf fan desire, then King Powerful you must inquire.” 


060 

Bull Demon King stops fighting to attend a lavish feast; Pilgrim Sun baits for the second time the palm-leaf fan 
The local spirit said, “King Powerful is in fact the Bull Demon King.” 
“So, this fire of the mountain was set by the Bull Demon King,” said Pilgrim, “and it was erroneously named the Mountain of Flames, right?” 
“No, no,” replied the local spirit, “but | daren’t speak plainly unless the Great Sage’s willing to pardon this humble deity.” 
“What offence is there?” said Pilgrim. “Go ahead and tell us.” 
The local spirit said, “This fire originally was set by the Great Sage.” 
“Where could I've been at the time?” said Pilgrim, his anger growing. “How could you babble like that? Am | an arsonist?” 
“You can’t possibly recognise me now,” said the local spirit. “There was no such mountain in this place originally. Five centuries ago, when the Great Sage caused great disturbance in the Celestial 
Palace, you're caught by Illustrious Sagacity! and taken in custody to Laozi. He placed you inside the brazier of eight trigrams, and after the process of refinement, the reactionary vessel was opened. 
You jumped out, kicking over the elixir oven in the process, and a few bricks still on fire dropped down to this spot. They were transformed into the Mountain of Flames. | was then the Daoist worker 
attending the brazier in the Tushita Palace. Since Laozi blamed me for carelessness, | was banished to become the mountain’s local spirit.” 
“No wonder you’re dressed like this!” said 8 Rules, somewhat annoyed. “You’re actually a Daoist!” 
Only half-believing what he heard, Pilgrim said, “Tell me further, why you said that I'd to fight King Powerful?” 
“King Powerful,” said the local spirit, “happens to be the husband of Demoness but he left her some time ago and is currently residing at the Cloud-Touching Cave of the Hoard-Thunder Mountain. A 
fox king of ten millennia used to be the cave-master there but he passed away, leaving behind a daughter by the name of Princess Jade Countenance and a vast fortune with no one to care for it. Two 
years ago, when she learned that the Bull Demon King had enormous magic powers, she was willing to give up all her wealth as dowry and take him in as her consort. The Bull King thus abandoned 
Demoness and hasn't paid her a visit since. Only if the Great Sage succeeds in finding him can you acquire the real fan. If he is willing to lend it to you, you'll be able to do three good deeds: one, 
enable your master to proceed on his journey; two, eliminate the blight of fire for the people of this region; and three, obtain a pardon for me so that | may return to Laozi in Heaven.” 
“Where is this Hoard-Thunder Mountain,” asked Pilgrim, “and how far away is it?” 
“Due south of here,” said the local spirit, “about three thousand miles.” 
On hearing this, Pilgrim told 8 Rules and Sand-monk to protect their master with care, and he gave instruction as well to the local spirit to remain and keep them company. With a loud whoosh, he at 
once disappeared. In less than half an hour he came upon a tall mountain. He lowered his cloud and stood on the peak to look all around. It was indeed a fine mountain: fall or not, its top touches the 
blue sky; deep or not, its roots reach the yellow spring. Before the mountain the sun’s warm; behind the mountain the wind’s cold; before the mountain the sun’s warm though the winter plants do not 
know of it; behind the mountain the wind’s cold: ice even in late summer, stays un-melted. The dragon lagoon joins a flowing brook; flowers bloom early by the cliffs tiger lair. Water flows like countless 
strands of flying jade and flowers bloom like bunches of brocade. Sinuous trees twist round the sinuous peak; craggy pines grow beyond the craggy rocks. Truly the mountain that’s tall, the cliff that’s 
sheer, the stream that’s deep, the flower that’s fragrant, the fruit that’s pretty, the wisteria that’s red, the pine that’s blue, the willow that’s jade-green — their features in all climes remain the same; hues 
stay vibrant in 10 millennia. After he looked at this scenery for a long time, Great Sage walked down from the pointed summit to search for the way. He did not, in truth, know quite where to turn when 
a lissom young woman emerged from a shady pine forest, her hand holding a twig of fragrant orchid. Hiding himself behind some boulders, the Great Sage stared at her. She looked like a coy, empire- 
toppling beauty in slow, sedate steps she walks. With a face like Wang Qiang’s, ? features like a girl of Chu, she seems like a flower able to speak; resembles a fragrant figure of jade. Her jet black hair- 
bun smartly rises high; eyes, mascara-greened, shine like autumn’s pools. Beneath her silk skirt tiny shoes half-appear; from sleeves, just upturned, extend long, white wrists. How shall we speak of 
such seductive airs? 
Truly she has pearl-like teeth, ruddy lips, and moth-brows soft and smooth like the River Jin; she surpasses even Wenjun and Xue Tao. *Gradually the girl drew near to the boulders. Saluting low to 
salute her, the Great Sage said slowly, “Nun, where’re you going?” 
As the girl did not notice him at first, she raised her head only when she heard his voice, and all at once she discovered how ugly the appearance of the Great Sage was. Terrified, she could neither 
retreat nor advance, and, trembling all over, she forced herself to reply, “Where’ve you come from? To whom are you addressing your question?” 
The Great Sage thought to himself, “If | mention the business of seeking scriptures, | fear that she may be related to the Bull King. I’d better say something like I’m some sort of a relative who has come 
here to invite the demon king to return home. Perhaps that may be acceptable. “When the girl however, saw that he did not reply, her colour changed and she said with anger in her voice, “Who are 
you and how dare you question me?” 
Saluting again and smiling, the Great Sage said, “I’ve come from the Jade Cloud Mountain. As this is my first visit to your noble region, | don’t know my way. May | ask the Nun whether this is the 
Hoard-Thunder Mountain?” 
“Yes,” said the girl. “There is a Cloud-Touching Cave,” said the Great Sage. “Where is it located?” 
“Why do you want to find the cave?” asked the girl. 
The Great Sage said, “I’ve been sent here by the Princess Iron-Fan of the Palm-Leaf Cave at Jade Cloud Mountain to fetch the Bull Demon King.” 
Enraged by this 1 statement, the girl grew red from ear to ear and began to scream, “That filthy slut! She’s a real numbskull! It’s not been two years since the Bull-King arrived in my house and he’s 
sent back to her god knows how many pieces of jewels and precious stones how many bolts of silk and satin during that time. He provides her with firewood by the year and with rice by the month so 
that she can enjoy her life to her heart's content. Doesn’t she know shame at all? Why does she want you to fetch him now?” 
When the Great Sage heard these words, he knew that the girl had to be the Princess Jade Countenance. Deliberately pulling out his golden-hooped rod, he bellowed at her: “You bitch! You used your 
wealth to buy the Bull King. Indeed you got your man by throwing money away. Aren’t you ashamed? And you dare castigate someone else?” 
When that girl saw his savage appearance, she was so terrified that her spirit left her and her soul fled. Shaking all over, she turned and ran while the Great Sage gave chase from behind, still shouting 
and hollering at her. After they went through the pine forest, the entrance of the Cloud-Touching Cave immediately came into view. The girl dashed inside and slammed the door shut. Only then did the 
Great Sage put away his golden-hooped rod and pause to glance about. Lovely place! 
Luxuriant forest; precipitous cliffs; the broken shades of wisteria; the sweet, pure scent of orchids. A stream, gurgling jade, cuts through old bamboos; canny rocks know how to sport fallen blooms. Mist 
enshrouds the distant hills; the sun and moon shine through cloud-screens. Dragons recite and tigers roar; cranes cry and orioles recite. A loveable spot of pure serenity where jade flowers and grass 
are ever bright - no less divine than a Mount-Tai cave, ‘it surpasses even Peng-Ying® of the seas. Pilgrim enjoyed the scenery; the girl ran until she perspired heavily and her heart pounded. She 
dashed into the library where the Bull Demon King was quietly studying some books on elixir. Full of anguish, the girl fell onto his lap and began to wail, pinching her ears and scratching her cheeks. 
The Bull King smiled broadly and tried to placate her, saying, “Pretty Lady, don’t be distressed. What's the matter?” 
“Wretched demon” cried the girl, jumping up and down. “You've just about killed me!” 
“Why’re you scolding me?” said the Bull-King, laughing. 
“Because | lost my parents,” said the girl, “I took you in so that I’d have protection and care. You've the reputation in the world of being a hero but you're actually a henpecked nitwit!” 
On hearing this, the Bull-King embraced her and said, “Pretty Lady where’ve | done wrong? Tell me slowly and I'll apologise.” 
“Just now,” said the girl, “I was taking a leisurely stroll outside the cave beneath the flowers to pick my orchids. | was stunned by a hairy-faced monk with a thunder god beak who suddenly barred my 
way and saluted to me. When | regained my composure and asked for his identity, he claimed that he’s someone sent here by that Princess Iron-Fan to fetch the Bull Demon King. | tried to tell him off 
but he gave me a severe reprimand instead and even chased me with a rod. If I'd not run away so fast, I’d have been struck to death by him. Isn’t this calamity brought on by you? You're killing me!” 
When the Bull-King heard what she said, he apologised to her and treated her with great tenderness. Only after a long time was the girl pacified but then the Demon King became annoyed and said, 
“Pretty Lady, to tell you the truth though that Palm-Leaf Cave’s an out of the way place, it’s an unsullied and comfortable spot. My wife who’s practiced self-cultivation since her youth’s also a mortal 
who’s attained the Way. She presides in fact over a rather strict household and there isn’t a single male within it at the moment, not even a baby boy. How’d she have sent a man with a thunder-god 
beak to make demands here? This has to be a fiend from somewhere who's falsely assumed her name to search for me. Let me go out and have a look.” Dear Demon King! 
He strode out of the library and went up to the main hall to put on his armour. After he was suited up properly, he picked up a cast-iron rod and went out of the door crying, “Who's being so rowdy at 
my place?” 
When Pilgrim caught sight of him, the figure he saw was quite different from that of five centuries ago. He saw that he had had on a wrought-iron helmet, water polished and silver bright; wore a yellow 
gold cuirass lined with silk brocade; his feet were shod in a pair of pointed-toe and powdered-sole buckskin boots; waist was tied with a lion king belt of triple-braided silk. A pair of eyes that shone like 
bright mirrors; 2 thick eyebrows that glowed like red lightning. His mouth seemed like a bloody bowl; teeth stood like slabs of bronze. A roaring snort that made mountain gods cringe; an imposing stride 
that vile spirits feared. Famed in the 4 seas, he was named World-Wrecker, the Powertul of the West called Demon King. Straightening his clothes, Great Sage walked forward and saluted deeply 
saying, “Eldest Brother, do you still recognise me?” 
Returning his salute, the Bull-King said, “Aren’t you Sun Wukong, the Great Sage Equal to Heaven?” 
“Indeed, I’m,” replied the Great Sage. “I've not had the privilege of saluting you for a long time. Just now I'd to ask a girl before | got to see you again. You look better than ever. Congratulations!” 


“Stop this clever talk!” bellowed the Bull King. “I heard that as a result of your causing great disturbance in the Celestial Palace, you’re pinned beneath the Mountain of Five Phases by the Religious 
Patriarch. Recently liberated from your Heaven-sent calamity, you’re accompanying the Tang Monk to see God for scriptures in the Western Heaven. But why did you bring harm to my son, Bull Holy 
Child, the master of Fiery Cloud Cave by the Dried Pine Brook on Roaring Mountain? I’m quite mad at you already. Why are you here also looking for me?” 

Saluting again to him, the Great Sage said, “Don’t wrongly blame me, Eldest Brother. At that time your son caught my master and wanted to eat his flesh. Your youngest brother was not able to get 
near him at all, and it was fortunate that the Nun Guanyin came to rescue my master. She persuaded your son to return to the right. Now he has become the Boy of Goodly Wealth, a rank higher even 
than yours, and he’s enjoying the halls of ultimate bliss and the joys of everlasting life. Is there anything wrong with that? Why blame me instead?” 

“You smart-mouthed ape!” scolded the Bull King. “I'll let you talk yourself free of the charge of hurting my son. But why did you insult my beloved concubine and attack her right at my door?” 

With a laugh, the Great Sage said, “Because I'd a hard time trying to find you, | questioned that girl but I'd no idea that she was my second Sister-in-law. She scolded me a little, and | lost my head 
shortly and treated her rather roughly. | beg Eldest Brother to pardon me, please!” 

“If you put it that way,” said the Bull King, “I'll spare you for old time’s sake. Leave!” 

“| can’t thank you enough,” said the Great Sage, “for your great kindness. But | still have another matter that | must bring to you, and | beg you to be hospitable.” 

“Monkey,” scolded the Bull King, “you don’t know your limits! I've spared you already. Instead of going away, you stay here to pester me. What's this business about being hospitable?” 

“To tell you the truth, Eldest Brother,” said the Great Sage, “I was accompanying the Tang Monk on his westward journey but our path was blocked by the Mountain of Flames and we’d not proceed. 
When we asked the natives of that region, we learned that my esteemed Sister-in-law, Demoness, had in her possession a palm-leaf fan. Since it could be used to extinguish the fire, we went to your 
house and begged her to lend it to us. She adamantly refused. That's why | now come to you and beg you to extend to us the compassion of Heaven and Earth. Go with me to the place of my big 
Sister-in-law and persuade her to lend us the fan. As soon as the Tang Monk has safely crossed the Mountain of Flames, we'll return it to you.” 

When he heard these words, the Bull King could not suppress the fire leaping up in his heart. He gritted his teeth and shouted, “You claimed you're not rowdy but you wanted the fan all along. You 
must have insulted my wife first, and when she refused, you came to find me. What's more, you even chased my beloved concubine around! As the proverb says, you mustn't slight a friend’s wife of 
thine, nor must you snub a friend’s concubine. You've in fact insulted my wife and snubbed my concubine. How insolent can you be? Come up here and have a taste of my rod!” 

“If you mention fight,” said the Great Sage, “you'll not frighten me. But I’ve come to beg you for the fan in all earnestness. Please lend it to me!” 

The Bull King said, “If you can withstand me for three rounds, I'll tell my wife to give it to you. If not, I'll kill you — just to relieve my wrath!” 

“You're right, Eldest Brother,” replied the Great Sage. “I've been rather remiss in visiting you and | don’t know whether your martial skill is as good as previous years. Let's practice a little with our rods.” 
Without permitting further talk, the Bull King wielded his cast-iron rod, brought it down hard on his visitor's head, and it was met by the golden-hooped rod of the Great Sage. The 2 of them thus began 
quite a battle: the golden-hooped rod, the cast-iron rod — their colours change and they speak no more as friends. That one says, ‘I still blame you for hurting my son, Monkey!” 

This one says, “Your son’s attained the Way so don’t get mad!” 

That one says, “How dare you be so brash as to approach my door?” 

This one says, ‘I’ve good reason to give you a request.” 

1 wants the fan to protect the Tang Monk; 1 is too stingy to lend the palm-leaf. Words are exchanged, their old amity’s gone; friendship destroyed, they have but anger left. The Bull King’s rod like a 
dragon rears up; the Great Sage’s rod comes, gods and ghosts take flight. Before the mountain they battle at 1st; then they rise jointly on auspicious clouds to show in mid-air their great magic might, 
to flaunt their powers in 5-coloured lights. 2 rods resound to shake the gates of Heaven — none’s the stronger, they're evenly matched. Great Sage and the Bull King fought for over 100 rounds but no 
decision could be reached. In that moment when it was virtually impossible to separate the two of them, someone suddenly called out from the mountain peak: “Sire Bull, my Great King sends you his 
earnest invitation. Please come early so that the banquet may begin.” 

On hearing this, the Bull King stopped the golden-hooped rod with his cast-iron rod and said, “Monkey, you stop for a moment. I’ve to attend a banquet in a friend’s house first.” 

He dropped down at once from the clouds and went inside the cave to say to Princess Jade Countenance, “Pretty Lady, that man just now with a thunder-god beak happens to be the monkey, Sun 
Wukong’s been driven away by the blows of my rod. He’ll not dare return. I’m off to drink in a friend’s house.” 

He took off his armour and put on instead a duck-green silk jacket. Walking outside, he mounted a water-repellent golden-eyed beast, and, after giving instructions to the little ones to guard the door, 
departed midway between cloud and fog toward the northwest. When the Great Sage standing on the tall summit saw him leave, he thought to himself, / wonder what sort of friend that old bull’s and 
where he’s going to attend a banquet. Let old monkey follow him. Dear Pilgrim! With 1 shake of his body he changed into a gust of wind to catch up with the Bull King and proceed with him. In a little 
while, they arrived at a mountain, and the Bull King soon disappeared. Collecting himself to change back into his true form, the Great Sage entered the mountain to look around, and he came upon a 
deep lagoon with lovely clear water. There was, beside the lagoon, a stone tablet, on which there was in large letters this inscription: Scattered-Rocks Mountain, Green Wave Lagoon. The Great Sage 
thought to himself: That old bull must've gone into the water and an aquatic fiend’s to be some kind of dragon spirit, fish spirit, or turtle spirit. Let old monkey go in also to have a look. Dear Great Sage! 
Making the magic sign with his fingers, he recited a spell and with 1 shake of his body changed into a crab; neither too big nor too small, it weighed about 36 pounds. He leaped into the water with a 
splash and sank quickly to the bottom of the lagoon. There he saw all at once a towered gateway with finely carved openwork. Beneath the arch there was tied the water-repellent golden-eyed beast 
but it was waterless inside the gateway. Crawling through, the Great Sage stared all around and he heard the sound of poems coming from buildings still further in. This is what he saw: scarlet halls 
and shelled arches uncommonly found in this world; roof tiles made of yellow gold; door frames formed by milk-white jade; railings built from coral twigs; spread screens of tortoise-shell inlay. Auspicious 
clouds hang over the lotus throne — the 3 Lights above, ’ the Milky Way below. Though it’s not Heaven or the sea’s treasure chest, this place quite rivals the island of Peng. Guests and hosts gather in 
a tall banquet hall; pearls stud the caps of officials great and small. They beckon jade girls to serve their ivory trays; urge divine maids to make merry verses. Long whales squeal; huge crabs exercise; 
scorpiontishes play flutes; iguanas roll drums. Rare, lustrous pearls light up the food and drink; nature’s patterns are carved on kingfisher screens. Shrimp-whiskered curtains hang over corridors. 8 
instruments’ play in divine harmony, their glorious tones resound throughout the sky. Green-headed perch-cocottes stroke the zithers and red-eyed young boys? blow the flutes of jade. Perch matrons 
present the venison stripes; gold-phoenix hairpins crown the dragon girls. What they have to eat: the 8 treasure dainties'® of Heaven’s kitchen; to drink: the rich mellow brew from the purple mansion." 
Sitting above in the middle honoured seat was the Bull Demon King while several female dragon spirits sat on his immediate left and right. Facing him was an old dragon spirit, attended by scores of 
dragon sons, dragon grandsons, dragon grandmas, and dragon daughters on both sides. They were toasting one another and drinking with abandon when the Great Sage Sun walked right in. The old 
dragon caught sight of him and he at once gave the order: “Seize that wild crab!” 

The various dragon sons and grandsons surged forward and took hold of the Great Sage who assumed human speech, crying, “Spare me! Spare me!” 

The old dragon said, “Where did you come from, wild crab? How dare you barge into our hall and hobble around without permission? Confess quickly and we'll spare your life!” 

Dear Great Sage! With specious words of a lines to the poem of Moon Over West River, he made this confession: “! dwell in a cave by the ridge since birth the lake’s my livelihood. Of late time’s 
passage’s my body freed - my rank, Private Sidewise-Carriage. Treading on grass and trailing mud, I’ve never learned to walk properly. Untaught in law, | offend your kingly might; | beg your Grace to 
pardon me.” 

When those spirits attending the banquet heard what he said, they all rose to salute the old dragon and say, “This is the first time that Private Crab’s entered the royal palace and he’s unfamiliar with 
the proper etiquette. We beg our lord to pardon him.” 

The old dragon expressed his consent and 1 of the spirits gave this command: “Release him. We'll stay the sentence of flogging. Let him go outside and wait on us.” 

The Great Sage dutifully gave his obedient reply before fleeing outside. Once he reached the towered gateway, he thought to himself, “This Bull-King’s so fond of his cup. How’d | wait for him to leave 
here? And even when he leaves, he'll not lend me the fan. Why don’t | steal his golden-eyed beast, change into his appearance, and go deceive that Demoness? | can then wangle her fan and help 
my master cross the mountain. That’s a much better move.” Dear Great Sage! Changing back into his original form all at once, he untied the reins of the golden-eyed beast and mounted the carved 
saddle. He rode it out of the lagoon’s bottom and went up to the surface of the water. He then changed himself into the form of the Bull-King; whipping the beast and mounting the clouds, he reached 
the entrance of the Palm-Leaf Cave on the Jade Cloud Mountain in no time. “Open the door!” he cried. 

2 maids inside immediately opened the door when they heard his call. When they saw moreover that it was the Bull-King, they rushed inside to report: “Madam, our sire’s come home.” 

On hearing this, Demoness quickly straightened her hairdo and walked out of her room to receive him. Great Sage thus dismounted to lead in the golden-eyed beast; in boldness he would deceive the 
fair lady. As Demoness had only eyes of flesh, she could not recognise him. They entered the cave hand in hand, and she told the maids to present tea. When the whole family saw that the master had 
returned, each member treated him with great respect. In no time at all, the couple were exchanging greetings. “Madam,” said the specious Bull King, “it's been a long time!” 

“| wish the Great King ten thousand blessings,” replied Demoness and then said, “the Great King’s so partial toward his newlywed that he’s forsaken this humble maid. Which gust of wind’s today blown 
you back here?” 

Smiling at her, Great Sage said, “I daren’t forsake you. Since | was invited to join Princess Jade Countenance however, | was plagued by all kinds of domestic concerns as well as by the affairs of my 
friends. That's why I’ve stayed away for as long as I'd to take care of another household. Anyway, | heard recently that the fellow Wukong in the company of the Tang Monk’s about to arrive at the 
Mountain of Flames. | fear that he may want to ask you for the fan. | hate him and we've yet to avenge our son’s wrongs. When he comes, send someone to report to me at once so that | can seize 
him and have him chopped to pieces. Only that can bring us satisfaction.” 

On hearing this Demoness fell to weeping and said, “Great King, the proverb says: a man without wife, his wealth’s no boss; a woman with no husband herself has no boss. My life’s nearly taken by 
this monkey!” 

When he heard that, the Great Sage pretended to be outraged. “When did this wretched ape pass through here?” he cried. 

“He hasn't yet,” replied Demoness. “But he came here yesterday to borrow our fan. Because he brought harm to our son, | put on my armour and went outside to hack at him with my swords. Enduring 
the pain, he addressed me even as sister-in-law, saying that he was once your bond-brother.” 

“There were indeed seven of us,” said the Great Sage, “who entered into a fraternal alliance some five centuries ago.” 

“He didn’t dare answer me at first,” said Demoness, “even when | scolded him, nor did he dare raise his hands when | hacked him with the swords. Afterwards, | fanned him once and sent him away. 
But he found some sort of wind-arresting magic somewhere and came to our door again this morning to make noises. | used the fan on him once more but this time I’d not budge him at all. When | 
attacked him then with the swords, he wasn’t so kind anymore. | was intimidated by the weight of his rod and ran inside the cave, tightly shutting the door. | didn’t know where or how he got through but 
he managed to crawl into my stomach and almost took my life. I'd to address him several times as brother-in-law and give him the fan.” 

Again feigning dismay the Great Sage pounded his chest and said, “What a pity! What a pity! You've made a mistake, Madam! How could you give our treasure to that monkey? I’m so upset I'd die!” 
Laughing, Demoness said, “Please don’t get mad, Great King, | gave him a fake fan, just to get him away.” 

“Where did you put the real one?” asked the Great Sage. 

“Relax! Relax!” replied Demoness. “It’s in my possession.” After she ordered the maids to prepare juice to welcome him, she took up the cup herself and presented it saying, “Great King, you may have 
your newfound joy but don’t ever forget your proper wedded wife. Please have a cup of home brew.” 

The Great Sage did not dare refuse it; he had no choice in fact but to raise the cup and say to her, full of smiles, “Madam, please drink first. Because I’d to look after external property, | was away from 
you for a long time. You've been good enough to watch over our home day and night. Please accept my thanks.” 

Demoness took the cup and filled it some more before handing it to the Great King again saying, “As the ancients put it, a wife’s one who manages but the husband's like a dad who provides support. 
What's there to thank me for?” Thus the 2 of them conversed with great courtesy before they sat down to drink and eat in earnest. Not daring to break his vegetarian diet, the Great Sage took only a 
few fruits to keep the conversation going. After drinking a few rounds, Demoness felt somewhat tipsy and her passion was gradually aroused. She began to move closer to the Great Sage Sun, rubbing 
against him and leaning on him. Holding hands with him, she murmured affection; shoulder to shoulder, whispered endearment. She took a mouthful of juice and then he took also a mouthful of juice 
from the same cup. They also traded fruits with their mouths. The Great Sage, of course, was feigning tendemess in all this, although he had no choice but to laugh and dally with her. Truly “The muse’s 
hook — The sorrow’s broom”? - to banish all cares nothing’s better than juice! 

The man resolves to act with less restraint; the girl has slackened and begins to laugh. Her face reddens like a ripe peach; body sways like young willow. They mumble and murmur, thus the prattle 
grows; they pinch and fondle with flirtatious glee. Often she strokes her hair and wields her dainty hands. Her tiny feet she would wiggle frequently and shake her sleeves a few times purposely. She 
would lower her creamy neck; twist her slender waist. Amorous words would never leave her lips; gold buttons loosened, her bosom’s half-revealed. Her reason truly totters for she is drunk. Rubbing 
her glazed eyes, she is almost disgraced. When the Great Sage saw that she was acting with such abandon, he took care to bait her with the words, “Madam, where’ve you put the real fan? You must 
be careful constantly for | fear that Pilgrim Sun with his many ways of transformation will sneak in somehow and wangle it.” 


Giggling, Demoness spat out a tiny fan no bigger than an almond leaf. Handing it over to the Great Sage, she said, “Isn't this the treasure?” 
When he held it in his hand, the Great Sage could not believe what he saw and he thought to himself, “This little thing! How’d it extinguish the flames? Could this be another false one?” 
When Demoness saw him staring at the treasure in complete silence, she could not refrain from putting her powdered face up to Pilgrim’s and calling out, “Dearest, put away the treasure and drink. 
What're you thinking of anyway?” 
Immediately the Great Sage took this opportunity to follow up with the question, “A tiny thing like this, how could it extinguish eight hundred miles of flames?” 
Since the juice had virtually overwhelmed her true nature, Demoness felt no constraint whatever and she at once revealed the truth, saying, “Great King, in these two years of separation, you must 
have given yourself over to pleasures night and day, allowing that Princess Jade Countenance to dissipate even your intelligence! How could you possibly forget how your own treasure works? Use 
your left thumb to press the seventh red thread attached to the fan’s handle and utter the magic words, Hui-xu-he-xi-xi-chui-hu,*3 and it will grow to twelve feet long. This treasure can change in 
boundless ways. You may have eighty thousand miles of flames but one wave of the fan will extinguish them all.” 
Tucking these words firmly in his memory, the Great Sage put the fan inside his mouth before giving his own face a wipe to change back to his original form. “Demoness,” he shouted, “take a good look 
at me to see if I’m your dear husband! How you've pestered me with all your shameful doings! Aren’t you embarrassed?” So astonished was that woman by the sight of Pilgrim that she fell to the 
ground, kicking over the tables and chairs. She was smitten with such terrible shame that she could only cry, “I’m so mad I'd die! I’m so mad I'd die!” 
Great Sage, of course, had no regard for her whether she was dead or alive. Struggling free, he left the Palm-Leaf Cave in big strides; truly with no desire for such beauty, he triumphed in gaiety. 
Leaping up, he mounted the auspicious cloud to rise to the tall summit where he spat out the fan at once to test its magic. Using his left thumb to press on the seventh red thread attached to the fan's 
handle, he recited: “Hui-xu-he-xi-xi-chui-hu.” 
Immediately it grew to twelve feet long. When he examined it carefully in his hand, he found that it was indeed quite different from the one before. The whole fan was shrouded by auspicious light and 
hallowed airs, and it was covered by thirty-six strands of red threads, plaited warp and weft. Pilgrim however, had only acquired the magic of enlarging it, and he had not thought of asking Demoness 
for the oral formula to make it small again. After fussing with the fan for some time without being able to alter its size at all, he had no choice but to carry it on his shoulder and find his way back. The 
Bull Demon King finally ended the banquet with those various spirits at the bottom of the Green Wave Lagoon. When he walked out of the door, he discovered that the water-repellent golden-eyed 
beast had disappeared. Calling the spirits together, the old dragon king asked, “Who stole the golden-eyed beast of Sire Bull?” 
The spirits all knelt down and said, “No one would dare steal the beast. After all, all of us were presenting juices and serving the trays before the banquet while others recited and made poems. There’s 
no one out in front.” 
“No member of this family,” said the old dragon, “would ever dare do such a thing, | know. But did any stranger come in?” 
“Shortly after we took our seats,” said one of the dragon sons, “there was a crab spirit who got in here. He was a stranger, all right.” 
On hearing this, the Bull King at once realised what had happened. “No need to talk anymore,” he said. “At the time when the invitation of my worthy friend arrived, | was just doing battle with one Sun 
Wukong who was accompanying the Tang Monk to seek scriptures. When they could not pass the Mountain of Flames, Sun came to ask me for the palm-leaf fan. | refused and we fought to a draw. 
Then | left him to attend your great banquet but that ape has extraordinary intelligence and vast abilities. He must have taken the form of the crab spirit to spy on us, steal the beast, and then go off to 
my wife’s place to try to wangle that palm-leaf fan.” When they heard this, all those spirits shook with fear. “Is this the Sun Wukong who caused great disturbance in the celestial palace?” they asked. 
The Bull King said, “The very same. All of you’d take care to avoid offending him on the road to the West.” 
“In that case,” said the old dragon, “what will you do about your beast of burden, Great King?” 
“Don’t worry,” said the Bull King, laughing. “Please go away now. Let me chase him down.” 
He opened up a path in the water and leaped out of the lagoon. Mounting a yellow cloud, he soon arrived at the Palm-Leaf Cave in the Jade Cloud Mountain where he heard Demoness wailing loudly, 
beating her breasts and stamping her feet. He pushed open the door and saw the water-repellent golden-eyed beast tied up inside. “Madam,” shouted the Bull King, “where has Sun Wukong gone to?” 
When the maids saw the Bull Demon, they all went to their knees to say, “Sire, have you returned?” Catching hold of the Bull King, Demoness began to ram him with her head as she screamed: “You 
wretched reprobate! How could you be so careless and allow that ape to steal your golden-eyed beast, change into your appearance, and deceive me here?” Gritting his teeth, the Bull King said, 
“Where did that ape go?” Demoness pounded her own chest some more and screamed again. “After he wangled our treasure, that miserable ape changed back into his original form and left. Oh, I’m 
so mad I'd die!” 
“Madam,” said the Bull King, “please take care of yourself and don’t be distressed. Let me catch up with the ape and get back our treasure. I'll skin him, break his bones, and gouge out his heart — just 
to give you satisfaction!” Then he bellowed, “Bring me my weapon!” 
One of the maids said, “But your weapon isn’t here.” 
“Then bring me the weapons of your mistress,” said the Bull King. The maids at once took out the 2 blue-bladed treasure swords. Taking off his duck-green silk jacket that he wore to the banquet, the 
Bull King tightened the belt around his undershirt before he took up the swords with both hands and walked out of the Palm-Leaf Cave to give chase toward the Mountain of Flames. So it was that the 
ungrateful man had the silly wife deceived; the fiery demon now approached the disciple. 
061 

Bullseye 8 Rules assists in defeating the demon king; Pilgrim Sun baits for the third time the palm-leaf fan 
Bull Demon King caught up with the Great Sage Sun. When he saw that the Great Sage was carrying the palm-leaf fan on his shoulder and walking merrily along, he was greatly shaken. “So this 
monkey,” said the Demon King to himself, “has succeeded in swindling even the method of operating the fan! If | ask him for it face to face, he will certainly refuse me. Moreover, if he fans at me once, 
he will send me one hundred and eight thousand miles away. Wouldn't that be to his liking? I’ve heard that the Tang Monk on his journey is also accompanied by a bull spirit and a Flowing-Sand spirit, 
both of whom | met in previous years when they were fiends. Let me change into the appearance of that bull spirit to deceive the monkey instead. | suppose he’s so pleased with his own success that 
he must have thrown caution to the winds.” 
Dear Demon King! He, too, was capable of undergoing seventy-two types of transformation, and his martial skill was about the same as that of the Great Sage, albeit his body was huskier, less agile, 
and not as nimble. Putting away his treasure swords, he recited a spell and with one shake of his body, changed into the exact appearance of 8 Rules. He sneaked up to the road in front and then 
walked back facing the Great Sage, calling out: “Elder Brother, I’m here.” 
Great Sage was indeed quite pleased with himself! As the ancients said, the cat triumphant purrs like a tiger. He was thinking only of his own prowess and hardly paid attention to the design of this 
person drawing near. When he saw a figure resembling 8 Rules, he at once spoke up: “Brother where’re you going?” 
“When Master saw that you didn’t return after such a long time,” replied the Bull Demon King working his ploy, “he’s afraid that the Bull Demon King’s too powerful for you to overcome and it'd be difficult 
for you to get his treasure. He therefore asked me to come to meet you.” 
“Don’t bother,” said Pilgrim, chuckling. “I’ve made it.” 
“How did you make it?” asked the Bull King. 
Pilgrim said, “That old bull tangled with me for over a hundred rounds and we fought to a draw. Then he left me to drink with a bunch of female dragons and dragon spirits at the bottom of the Green 
Wave Lagoon in the Scattered-Rocks Mountain. | followed him secretly by changing into the form of a crab: | stole the water-repellent golden-eyed beast on which he was riding and then changed into 
the form of the old bull to go deceive that Demoness in the Palm-Leaf Cave. That woman and old monkey became a bogus couple for a while, during which time | managed to wangle the treasure from 
her.” 
“You've been sorely taxed, Elder Brother,” said the Bull King, “and you're working too hard. Let me carry the fan for you.” As the Great Sage Sun had no concern to distinguish between the true and 
the false, he handed over the fan immediately. That Bull-King of course knew how to make the fan grow big or small. After he took it in his hands, he recited some kind of a spell and it at once became 
as tiny as an almond leaf. Changing back into his true form, he shouted, “Wretched ape! Can you recognise me?” 
On seeing him, Pilgrim sighed, “It's my fault this time!” then he stamped his feet and bellowed, “Damn! I've been shooting wild geese for years but now a tiny goose’s pecked me blind!” 
He became so enraged that he whipped out his iron rod and slammed it down hard on the Bull King’s head. Stepping aside, the Demon King at once used the fan on him. He did not know however, 
that when the Great Sage changed previously into a tiny mole cricket to enter the stomach of Demoness, he still had in his mouth that Wind-Arresting Elixir that he swallowed unwittingly. All his viscera 
had become firm; his skin and bones were wholly fortified. No matter how hard the Bull King fanned at him, he could not be moved. Horrified, the Bull King tossed the treasure into his own mouth so 
that he could wield the swords with both of his hands to slash at his opponent. It was some battle that the 2 of them waged in mid-air: the Great Sage Sun Equal to Heaven — the world-wrecker, lawless 
Bull King — because of the palm-leaf fan, they met, each flaunting his might. The careless Great Sage had people deceived; the audacious Bull King did swindle the fan. For this 1, the golden-hooped 
rod uplifted could no mercy show, for that 1, the double blue-blades had both power and skill. The Great Sage exerting his vigour belched coloured fog; the Bull King letting loose violence spat out white 
rays. A test of strength by 2 dogged foes; gritting their teeth, they loudly huffed and puffed. Spraying dirt and dust made dim Heaven and Earth; flying rocks and sand awed both ghosts and gods. This 
1 said, “You dare be so foolish as to trick me back?” 
That 1 said, “Would my wife permit you to checkmate her?” their words grew rough; tempers flared. That 1 said, “You cheat someone’s wife, and you deserve to die! You'll be found guilty when | file 
my charge!” The sly Equal to Heaven Sage — the ferocious King Powerful - they wished only to kill and no discussion allowed. The rod struck, the swords came, both working hard. A little slackness 
will make you see Yama King! 
The Tang Monk was sitting by the road racked by heat, thirst, and anxiety. He said to the local spirit of the Mountain of Flames, “May | inquire of the honourable deity, how powerful’s that Bull-Demon 
King?” 
“That Bull-King’s,” replied the local spirit, “vast, boundless magic powers. He’s in fact the real match of the Great Sage Sun.” 
“Wukong’s usually quite able when it comes to travelling,” said Tripitaka. “A couple of thousand miles hardly requires very much time for him to be back. How’s it that he’s gone for a whole day today? 
He must be fighting with the Bull-King.” Then he called out: “Aware of Ability, Awakened to Purity that of you'd like to go meet your elder brother? If you happen to see him fighting our adversary, you 
can lend him assistance so that all of you can acquire the fan to relieve my distress. Once we get across this mountain, we can be on our way again.” 
“It's getting late,” said 8 Rules. “I'd like to go meet him but | don’t know my way to the Hoard-Thunder Mountain.” 
“This humble deity knows the way,” said the local spirit. “Let's ask the Curtain-Raising Captain to keep your master company. I'll go with you.” 
Highly pleased, Tripitaka said, “Thank you for taking the trouble. I'll express my gratitude once more when merit’s achieved.” 
Rousing himself, 8 Rules tightened his black silk shirt and put the rake on his shoulder before rising with the local spirit on cloud and fog to head for the east. As they proceeded, they suddenly heard 
terrific shouts and the howling of wind. When he stopped his cloud to look, 8 Rules discovered that Pilgrim Sun was just doing battle with the Bull King. “Go forward, Heavenly Reeds,” said the local 
spirit. “What're you waiting for?” 
Firmly gripping his muckrake, Idiot shouted, “Elder Brother, I'm here!” 
“Coolie,” said Pilgrim spitefully, “how you've upset my great enterprise!” 
“Master told me to come meet you,” said 8 Rules, “but since | didn’t know the way, I'd to discuss the matter before the local spirit agreed to lead me here. | know I’m late but what do you mean by 
upsetting your great enterprise?” 
“Im not blaming you for your tardiness,” said Pilgrim. “It’s this wretched bull who is most audacious! | got hold of the fan from Demoness but this fellow changed into your appearance, saying that he 
came here to meet me. | was so pleased at that moment that | handed over the fan to him. He then changed back to his true form and strove with old monkey at this place. That’s what | meant by 
upsetting my great enterprise.” 
Infuriated by what he heard, Idiot lifted high his muckrake and screamed, “You bloody plague! How dare you change into the form of your ancestor, deceive my elder brother, and cause enmity to rise 
among us brothers?” Look at him! He charged into the fray and showered blows madly on the Bull King with his rake. The Bull King, after all, had fought with Pilgrim for nearly one whole day; when he 
saw how savagely 8 Rules was attacking him with his rake, he could no longer stand his ground and retreated in defeat. His way was barred however, by the local spirit leading a host of ghost soldiers. 
“King Powerful,” said the local spirit, “you'd better stop! There is no god who would not protect the Tang Monk on his journey to seek scriptures in the Western Heaven, no Heaven who would not grant 
him his blessing. This enterprise is known throughout the Three Regions; it has the support of all ten quarters. Quickly use your fan to extinguish the flames so that he may cross the mountain unharmed 
and unhindered. Otherwise, Heaven will find you guilty and you'll certainly be executed.” 


“Local spirit,” said the Bull King, “you're completely unreasonable! That wretched ape robbed me of my son, insulted my concubine, and deceived my wife. These were his misdeeds time and again. | 
hate him so much | wish I'd swallow him whole and reduce him to dung to feed the dogs! How could | give him my treasure?” 
Hardly had he finished speaking when 8 Rules caught up with him, screaming, “You bezoar-dick bull! Take out the fan quickly and I'll spare your life!” The Bull King had no choice but to tum and fight 
8 Rules again with the treasure swords while the Great Sage Sun raised his rod to help his companion. This was again some battle! A spirit-bull, a fiend-bull, and an ape who stole to Heaven to gain 
the Way. As always Chan nature knows smelting and strife for earth must be used to fuse the primal cause. The rake’s nine prongs are both pointed and sharp; the treasure swords’ 2 blades are quick 
and smooth. The iron rod in use is determination’s staff; ‘Earth god assists to make elixir-head. 3 parties together thus feud and strive, each showing his talents to try to win. Seize the bull to plough 
and gold coins will grow; recall bull to stove, and wood breath’s retrieved. With absent mind, how’d one practice Dao? 
To make spirit guard home’s to bind the ape. They brawl and growl in bitter quest: 3 kinds of weapon thus crackle and clang. The rake rakes, the swords cut with wicked aim and good cause rises the 
gold-hooped rod. They fight till stars lose their brightness and the moon its light till the sky’s full of cold fog dense and dark. Plunging into the battle with fresh courage, the Demon King fought as he 
moved along. They strove for a whole night but no decision could be reached. By morning, they had arrived at the entrance of the Cloud-Touching Cave of the Hoard-Thunder Mountain. The deafening 
din created by the three fighters, the local spirit, and the band of ghost soldiers soon alerted the Princess Jade Countenance who asked the maids to see who was making all the racket. The little fiends 
came back to report: “It's the sire of our family fighting with the fellow who came here yesterday, the one who had a thunder-god beak. Joining the battle are also a monk with long horn and huge ears 
and the local spirit of the Mountain of Flames with his followers.” 
When she heard this, Princess Jade Countenance at once summoned the captains, young and old, of the external guards and ordered them to give armed assistance to her husband. The various 
soldiers, tall and short, that they managed to call up numbered over a hundred, all of them eager to show off their vigour. Gripping lances and waving rods, they swarmed out of the door, shouting, “Sire 
Great King, by the order of Madam, we’ve come to assist you.” Highly pleased, the Bull King said, “Welcome! Welcome!” The fiends rushed forward to attack. Taken completely by surprise, 8 Rules 
could not fend off so many opponents and he fled in defeat, his rake trailing behind him. The Great Sage too mounted his cloud somersault to leap free of the encirclement, and the various ghost 
soldiers immediately scattered. Having thus achieved his victory, the old bull gathered back the various fiends to return to the cave and to shut the door tightly. Pilgrim after getting away, said to 8 Rules 
and the local spirit, “This fellow’s very tough! Since about the hour of shen? yesterday, he fought with old monkey until nightfall and we'd not reach a decision. Then the two of you arrived to relieve me. 
But after we went through the bitter struggle of half a day and one whole night, he still didn’t seem to tire very much. And the band of little fiends who came out just now also appeared to be quite tough. 
Now that he’s shut his door tightly and refused to come out, what'll we do?” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “you left Master yesterday in the morning. How was it that you didn’t start fighting with him until sometime in the afternoon? Where were you during those few hours in 
between?” 
Pilgrim said, “Since | left you people, | was on this mountain in an instant. | ran into a young woman whom | saluted, and she turned out to be the Princess Jade Countenance, his beloved concubine. 
| gave her a scare with my iron rod, and she ran into the cave to bring out the Bull King who harangued old monkey for some time before we began to fight. After about two hours, someone came to 
invite him to a banquet. | followed him to the Green Wave Lagoon at the Scattered-Rocks Mountain where | spied on him and his hosts by changing into a crab. | then succeeded in stealing his water- 
repellent golden-eyed beast and took on the appearance of the Bull King. Returning to the Palm-Leaf Cave on the Jade Cloud Mountain, | fooled Demoness and wangled the fan from her. After leaving 
her door, | tried to work the magic: the fan was enlarged all right but | forgot to ask her for the formula to make it small again. As | journeyed back carrying the fan on my shoulder, the Bull King met me, 
having assumed your features, and wangled the fan back. That's what happened during all that time.” 
8 Rules said, “It’s like what the proverb says, a bean-curd boat capsized in the ocean® — in liquid they come, in water they go! If it’s so difficult to get his fan, how can we help Master cross this mountain? 
Let's go back, find another way, and scat!” 
“Please don’t be anxious, Great Sage,” said the local spirit, “and you'd not slacken, Heavenly Reeds. When you mention finding another way, you're bound to fall into heterodoxy, and you're no longer 
someone concerned with the proper method of cultivation. As the ancients said where can one walk but on the main road? How can you possibly think of finding another way? Remember your master, 
now sitting with bulging eyes by the road and waiting for you to succeed!” 
Growing vehement, Pilgrim said, “Exactly! Exactly! Don’t talk nonsense, Idiot! What the local spirit said is quite right. With that demon we're just about to wage a contest and try our gifts. Let me exploit 
my vast transforming powers. Since coming west I've never met a true foe for Bull King in fact was from Mind Monkey changed. Now’s the best time for us to meet the source. We must fight to borrow 
the treasure fan. With pure and cool to snuff the flames, the stubborn void smashed, we'll see God's face. Merit fulfilled we'll rise to ultimate bliss: we'll all then attend God's Birthday Feast!” 
Greatly inspired by these words he heard, 8 Rules exerted himself even more and replied earnestly: “Yes! Yes! Yes! Go! Go! Go! Who cares if the Bull King says yes or no! Wood's born at Bull, 4the 
cow’s its proper mate who'll lead back the Bull to return to earth. Monkey's the metal born under Shen: peaceful and docile, how harmonious! Use the palm-leaf as water's sign. When flames are extinct, 
Completion’s attained. 5In hard work we persist both night and day and rush, merit done, to Ullambana Feast. Leading the local spirit and the ghost soldiers, the two of them rushed forward and with 
their muckrake and iron rod, smashed to pieces the front door of the Cloud-Touching Cave. The captain of the external guards was so terrified that he dashed inside to make his report, trembling all 
over: “Great King, Sun Wukong has led a crowd to break down our front door!” 
The Bull King was just telling the Princess Jade Countenance all that had taken place and how deeply he hated Pilgrim. When he heard that his front door had been broken down, he became enraged. 
Putting on his armour hurriedly, he took up the iron rod and came out. “Wretched ape!” he expostulated as he emerged. “How big do you think you’re, that you let loose such violence here and break 
down my door?” 8 Rules rushed forward and roared, “You old carcass! What sort of a person are you that you dare measure someone else? Don’t run away! Watch my rake!” 
“An over-gorged coolie like you,” shouted the Bull King, “isn’t that impressive! Tell that monkey to come up here quickly!” 
“You stupid grass-eater!” said Pilgrim. “Yesterday, | was still talking to you as a bond-brother but today you’re my enemy. Take care to taste my rod!” 
Boldly the Bull King met the 2 of them and the conflict this time was even fiercer than the last 1. 3 valiant persons, all tangled together. What a battle! Muckrake and rod exert their godly might. They 
lead ghost soldiers the old bull to fight who displays alone his violent trait and his magic powers vast as Heaven. 1 uses his rake to rake; 1 uses his rod to strike; the heroic iron’s more uncanny still. 3 
kinds of weapon make clangourous sounds: they block, parry, and will yield to none. He claims he’s the first; on top. Ghost soldiers, looking on, can’t separate wood and earth feuding and darting up 
and down. These 2 say, “Why don’t you lend us the palm-leaf fan?” 
That one says, “How dare you be so bold as to trick my wife? I’ve yet to avenge my hunted mistress and my son when you alarm us some more by breaking our door.” 
This one says, “You just watch out for my compliant rod. One tiny brush and it will tear your skin!” 
That one says, “Do try to dodge the rake’s sharp teeth! One wound will make nine bloody holes!” 
Undaunted the Bull Demon lets loose his power; his iron rod held high, he waits for his chance. They churn up rain and cloud, going back and forth. They belch out wind and fog and do as they please. 
For this bitter struggle they risk their lives. They, full of hate with each other strive. The stylised limbs go up and down; they cover the front, the back without let up. 2 brothers together now strain and 
toil; 1 man with one rod performs all alone. From dawn till late morning they fight and fight; at last the Bull Demon will leave with his hands tied. With no thought for life or death, the three of them again 
fought for over 100 rounds when 8 Rules, his idiotic nature aroused and strengthened by the magic power of Pilgrim began to attack madly with his rake. No longer able to ward off the blows, the Bull 
King fled in defeat and headed straight for the cave’s entrance. Leading the ghost soldiers to bar the way, the local spirit shouted, “King Powerful where are you fleeing to? We're here!” Unable to enter 
the cave, the old bull turned swiftly and saw 8 Rules and Pilgrim rushing toward him. He became so flustered that he abandoned his armour and his iron rod; with one shake of his body, he changed 
into a swan and flew into the air. When Pilgrim saw it, he chuckled and said, “Eight Rules, the old bull’s gone!” That Idiot was completely ignorant of the matter, and the local spirit did not perceive either 
what had happened. All of them were staring this way and that, madly searching before and behind the Hoard-Thunder Mountain. “Isn't he up there flying in the air?” said Pilgrim as he pointed with his 
finger. 
“That's a swan,” said 8 Rules. “A transformation of the old bull,” said Pilgrim. 
“In that case,” said the local spirit, “what'll we do?” 
“Fight your way in, the two of you,” said Pilgrim, “and exterminate all those fiends. In short, we'll break up his lair and cut off his retreat. Let old monkey go and wage a contest of transformation with 
him.” 
8 Rules and the local spirit followed his instruction and we'll leave them for the moment. Putting away his golden-hooped rod, the Great Sage shook his body and changed into a Manchurian vulture 
that spread its wings and darted up to a hole in the clouds. It then hurtled down and dropped onto the swan, seeking to seize its neck and peck at the eyes. Knowing also that this was a transformation 
of Pilgrim Sun, the Bull King hurriedly flapped his wings and changed himself into a yellow eagle to attack the vulture. At once Pilgrim changed himself into a black phoenix, the special foe of the yellow 
eagle. Recognising him, the Bull King changed next into a white crane which, after a long cry, flew toward the south. Pilgrim stood still, and shaking his feathers, changed into a scarlet phoenix that 
uttered a resounding call. Since the phoenix was the ruler of all the birds and fowl, the white crane dared not touch him. Spreading wide his wings, he dived instead down the cliff and changed with one 
shake of the body into a musk deer, grazing rather timorously before the slope. Recognising him, Pilgrim flew down also and changed into a hungry tiger which with wagging tail and flying paws, went 
after the deer for food. Greatly flustered, the demon king then changed into a huge spotted leopard to attack the tiger. When Pilgrim saw him, he faced the wind and with one shake of his head, changed 
into a golden-eyed Asian lion with a voice like thunder and a head of bronze that pounced on the huge leopard. Growing even more anxious, the Bull King changed into a large bear that extended his 
paws to try to seize the lion. Rolling on the ground, Pilgrim at once turned himself into a scabby elephant with a trunk like a python and tusks like bamboo shoots. Whipping up his trunk, he tried to 
catch hold of the bear. With a loud guffaw, the Bull King then revealed his original form of a gigantic white bull with a head like a rugged mountain and eyes like bolts of lightning. The 2 horns were like 
two iron pagodas, and his teeth were like rows of sharp daggers. From head to toe, he measured more than 10000 feet while his height from hoof to neck was about 800. “Wretched ape!” he roared at 
Pilgrim. “What'll you do with me now?” 
Pilgrim also changed back to his true form; yanking out his golden-hooped rod, he bent his back and then straightened out, crying, “Grow!” At once he grew to a height of 100000 feet with a head like 
Mount Tai, eyes like the sun and the moon, a mouth like a bloody pond, and teeth like doors. Lifting high his iron rod, he brought it down on the bull’s head and it was met by a pair of flinty horns. This 
battle truly rocked the ridges and the mountains, alarmed both Heaven and Earth. A testimonial poem says: 
Dao’s 1 foot though the demon’s 10000 feet that clever-mind Monkey must toil to beat. 
If 1 wants the mountain flameless to be, the treasure-fan must bring cold purity. 
Yellow Dame’s resolved the elder to uphold; to clear the fiends Wood-Mum makes bold. 
5 Phases peaceful, to right fruit return and ascending West, dirt and demons spurn. 
Releasing their vast magic powers, the 2 of them battled in mid-mountain and it soon alerted all those deities inhabiting the empty void: the Golden-Headed Guardian, the 6 Gods of Darkness and the 
6 Gods of Light, and the 18 Guardians of Monasteries all came to surround the Demon King who was not the least daunted. Look at him! He headed east and west with 2 erect and gleaming iron horns 
charging back and forth; he bunted north, south, his dark, hairy hard tendinous tail whipping left and right. The Great Sage Sun met him head-on while the various deities attacked him from all sides. 
Exasperated, the Bull King rolled on the ground and changed back into his original form to flee to the Palm-Leaf Cave. Changing back to his normal size, Pilgrim also gave chase from behind with the 
deities. Dashing inside the cave, the Demon King shut the door and refused to come out while the gods had the Jade Cloud Mountain tightly surrounded. As they were about to charge the door, they 
heard the noisy arrival of 8 Rules, the local spirit, and his band of ghost soldiers. When Pilgrim saw them, he asked, “What happened at the Cloud-Touching Cave?” 
“The mistress of that old bull,” replied 8 Rules, chuckling, “was killed by one blow of my rake. When | stripped her, she turned out to be a white-faced fox. The rest of the fiends were all donkeys, asses, 
cows, stallions, badgers, foxes, musk deer, goats, tigers, antelopes, and the like - they have all been wiped out. We set fire also to his cave-dwelling. The local spirit then told me that he has another 
household in this mountain, and that’s why we’ve come back here to make a clean sweep of them.” 
“You've achieved great merit, Worthy Brother,” said Pilgrim. “Congratulations! Old monkey has waged in vain a contest of transformation with him, for I’ve not yet achieved a victory. He finally changed 
into the biggest possible white bull, and | therefore assumed the appearance that imitated Heaven and Earth. As | clashed with him, the various deities were kind enough to descend on us and have 
him completely surrounded. He then changed back into his original form and fled inside the cave.” 
“Is this that Palm-Leaf Cave?” asked 8 Rules. Pilgrim said, “Indeed it is. This is where Demoness lives.” 
“In that case,” said 8 Rules, growing more vehement, “why don’t we fight our way in, attack him, and demand from him the fan? Why should we let him wait and get wiser, or let him enjoy the company 
of his wife?” 
Dear Idiot! Rousing his strength, he lifted high his rake and brought it down on the door; with a loud crash, both the door and one side of the ledge collapsed. One of the maids fled into the cave to 
report, “Sire! Someone has wrecked our front door!” The Bull King had just dashed inside; still panting, he was telling Demoness about how he took the fan from Pilgrim and then waged the contest 


with him. When he heard the report, he became enraged. Spitting out the fan, he handed it over to Demoness who, when she received it, began to weep. “Great King,” she said, “let's give that monkey 
the fan so that he’ll withdraw his troops.” 
“Oh Madam,” said the Bull King, “the fan’s a small thing but my hatred is deep. You sit here while | go to contend with them once more.” 

Putting on his armour again, the demon took up the 2 treasure swords and walked out. 8 Rules was still using his rake on the door; when the old bull saw him, he hacked away with his swords without 
another word. 8 Rules retreated a few steps, protecting himself with the upraised rake. After they left the doorway, the Great Sage immediately joined them with his iron rod. Mounting a violent gust of 
wind, the Bull Demon leaped clear of the cave-dwelling, and they began a fresh skirmish above the Jade Cloud Mountain, encircled by the many gods, the local spirit, and the band of ghost soldiers. 
This was again some battle! Clouds conceal the world; mist shrouds the cosmos; dark wind blows soughing, sand and rocks roll; angry breaths rise up and ocean waves churn. Two swords are 
sharpened again; the whole body's armed once more. There’s hatred deep as the sea as anger grows from enmity. Watch the Great Sage Equal to Heaven who, rejects now a friend he has known for 
years for merit’s sake. 8 Rules uses his power to seek the fan; the gods hunt the Bull King to protect the Law. The Bull King’s 2 hands will not stop or pause: with vigour they parry both left and right. 
They fight till the birds fold their wings and cease to fly till fishes stop leaping and submerge their scales, ghosts and gods wail as Heaven and Earth grow faint, tigers and dragons cower as sunlight 
fades. Abandoning any regard for his life or limb, the Bull King fought them for over fifty rounds before he weakened and was forced to retreat in defeat. As he fled toward the north, he was met at once 
by the Diamond Guardian Religion Diffusion of vast magic powers and of the Cliff of Mysterious Demons in the Mountain of 5 Platforms who shouted at him, “Bull Demon where are you going? I’ve 
been sent by the Religious Patriarch God to set up cosmic nets here to capture you.” 

Hardly had he finished speaking when the Great Sage, 8 Rules, and the other deities came rushing toward them, so frightening the demon king that he turned and fled toward the south. He ran right 
into the Diamond Guardian Victorious Ultimate of immeasurable religion-power and of the Pure-Cool Cave in the Emei Mountain who shouted at him, “I received a god’s decree to capture you.” 

His legs turing weak and his heart growing faint, the Bull King hurriedly tried to head toward the east, when he was met by the Diamond Guardian Great Strength, a VaiSramana ascetic from the Ear- 
Touching Ridge of the Sumeru Mountain who shouted at him: “Where are you going, old bull? By the secret command of Siddhartha, I’m here to arrest you.” Backing off in fear, the Bull King fled toward 
the west but he was greeted by the Diamond Guardian Ever Abiding, the indestructible honoured king of the Golden Beam Summit at the Kunlun Mountain who shouted at him, “Where is this fellow 
going? I’m stationed here by the personal order of the aged God in the Great Thunderclap Monastery of the Western Heaven. Who'll let you get away?” 

In fear and trembling, the Bull King did not have time even for regret when he saw Religious warriors and celestial generals approaching from all sides with cosmic nets spread so wide that there was 
virtually no way to escape. In that abject moment, he heard Pilgrim and other pursuers closing in, and he had to mount the clouds to try to flee toward the sky. 

Just then, Deity-King Li, the Pagoda-Bearer, and Prince Nata led Fish-Bellied Lightning Nature spirit and Celestial General Mighty-Spirit to block his path in mid-air. “Slow down! Slow down!” they cried. 
“By the decree of the Jade Emperor, we’re here to arrest you.” In desperation, the Bull King shook his body as before and changed into a huge white bull, wielding his two iron-like homs to try to gore 
the Deity-King who met him with his scimitar. 

Meanwhile, Pilgrim Sun arrived at the scene. “Great Sage,” shouted Prince Nata, “we've our armour on and we can’t salute you properly. Yesterday we dad and son saw Siddhartha who asked us to 
present a memorial to the Jade Emperor and inform him that the journey of the Tang Monk’s been blocked at the Mountain of Flames and it’s difficult for the Great Sage Sun to bring the Bull-Demon 
King to submission. The Jade Emperor therefore issued a decree for my dad king to lead the troops here to lend you assistance.” 

“But this fellow has considerable magic powers,” said Pilgrim. “Now he has changed into such a body. What'll we do?” 

“Great Sage, don’t worry!” said the prince with a laugh. “Watch me capture him!” 

Shouting “Change”, the prince immediately changed into a figure having three heads and six arms. He leaped onto the bull’s back and brought his monster-cleaving sword down on the bull’s neck: the 
bull was beheaded at once. Putting away his scimitar, the Deity-King was about to greet Pilgrim when another head emerged from the torso of the bull, his mouth belching black air and his eyes beaming 
golden rays. Nata lifted his sword once more and cut off the bull’s head; as soon as it dropped to the ground, another head came out. It went on like this more than ten times. At last, Nata took out his 
fiery wheel and hung it on the Bull’s horn. The wheel at once started a great blaze of true mortal fire that burned so fiercely that the bull began to growl and roar madly, shaking his head and wagging 
his tail. He would have liked to use transformation to escape but the Deity-King Pagoda-Bearer trained his imp-reflecting mirror steadfastly on him so that he could not change out of his original form. 
As he had no way to flee, he could only cry, “Don’t take my life! I’m willing to make submission to Religion.” 

“If you do pity your own life,” said Nata, “bring out the fan quickly.” 

The Bull-King said, “The fan is being kept by my wife.” 

On hearing this, Nata took out his monster-tying rope and draped it around the bull’s neck. Then he threaded the rope through his nostrils so that the bull could be pulled with the hand. Pilgrim then 
collected together the 4 Great Diamond Guardians, the 6 Gods of Darkness and the 6 Gods of Light, the Guardians of Monasteries, the Deity-King Pagoda-Bearer, the Celestial General Mighty-Spirit, 
8 Rules, the local spirit, and the ghost soldiers. Surging around the white bull, they all went back to the entrance of the Palm-Leaf Cave. “Madam,” called the old bull, “please bring out the fan to save 
my life.” 

When Demoness heard the call, she took off her jewels and her coloured clothing. Tying up her hair like a Daoist priestess and putting on a plain coloured robe like a Religious nun, she took up with 
both hands the twelve-foot long palm-leaf fan to walk out of the door. When she caught sight of the Diamond Guardians, the Deity-King and his son, and the other sages, she hurriedly went to her 
knees to respect and say, “I beg the Nuns to spare our lives. We're willing to give this fan to Brother-in-law Sun so that he may achieve his merit.” 

Pilgrim drew near and took up the fan; then all of them mounted the auspicious clouds to return toward the east. Tripitaka and Sand-monk were alternately sitting and standing by the main road as they 
waited for Pilgrim. They were indeed full of anxiety because he did not return for such a long time. Then, all of a sudden, auspicious clouds filled the sky and hallowed lights flooded the earth, as the 
various divine officers drifted near. Turning quite apprehensive, the elder said, “Awakened to Purity who're those divine warriors approaching us?” 

Recognising the figures he saw, Sand-monk replied, “Master, those are the Four Great Diamond Guardians, the Golden-Headed Guardian, the Six Gods of Darkness and the Six Gods of Light, the 
Guardians of Monasteries, and other deities of the air. The one leading the bull is Third Prince Nata, and the one holding the mirror is Deity-King Li, the Pagoda-Bearer. Big Brother is carrying the palm- 
leaf fan, followed by Second Elder Brother and the local spirit. All the rest happen to be celestial guards.” On hearing this, Tripitaka put on his Vairocana hat and changed into his cassock before he led 
Awakened to Purity to salute the sages saying, “What virtue does this disciple possess that he should cause all you honoured sages to descend to the mortal world?” 

“You'd be congratulated, sage monk,” said 1 of the 4 Great Diamond Guardians, “for your perfect merit’s nearly achieved. We've come to assist you by the decree of God. You must persist in your 
cultivation with all diligence and not slacken at all.” Tripitaka respected repeatedly to receive this instruction. Holding the fan, the Great Sage Sun walked near the mountain and waved the fan once 
with all his might. Immediately the flames on the mountain subsided and there was only the faintest glow left. He fanned at it a second time and a cool, gentle breeze rustled through the region. He 
fanned at the mountain a 3" time and as hazy clouds filled the sky, a fine rain drizzled down. A testimonial poem says: 
800 miles long, this Mountain of Flames, the light of its fire’s worldwide fame. 
Elixir can’t ripen with 5 senses scorched; when 3 Passes® are burned, the Dao’s impure. 
At times the palm-leaf may bring dew and rain; by luck Heaven’s hosts lend their godly power. 
Lead the bull to God, let it sin no more: nature’s calm when water's joined with fire. 
At this time Tripitaka was liberated from heat and delivered from distress; his mind was purified and will made quiescent. The 4 pilgrims renewed their submission and thanked the Diamond Guardians 
who returned to their treasure mountains. The 6 gods of Darkness and the 6 gods of Light then rose into the air to provide continual protection while the other deities all scattered. The deity-king and 
the prince led the bull to return to see God. Only the local spirit remained to watch Demoness who was still standing at attention on one side. “Demoness,” said Pilgrim, “how is it that you’re not on your 
way? Why’re you still standing here?” 
Going to her knees, Demoness said, “| beg the Great Sage to be merciful and give me back my fan.” 
“You bitch!” shouted 8 Rules. “You don’t know when to stop! Isn’t it enough that we spare your life? You still want your fan? After we’ve taken it across the mountain, you think we'll not trade it for a 
snack? We're not going to give it back to you after we’ve expended all this energy! Look how the rain drizzles! Why don’t you go back!” 
“The Great Sage,” said Demoness, saluting again, “said originally that he would return the fan to me once the fire was extinguished. | didn’t listen to you at first and now it’s too late for regret after such 
a battle. Because of our recalcitrance, an army had to be sent here to toil and fight. I'd however, like to tell you that we've actually attained the way of humanity, though we've not returned to the right 
fruit. Now that I've witnessed the epiphany of the true body returning to the West, I'll never dare misbehave again. | beg you to give me back my fan so that | may start a new life in self-cultivation.” 
“Great Sage,” said the local spirit, “since this woman knows the means by which the flames can forever be extinguished, you'd ask her for it before you return the fan to her. This humble deity will 
remain in this region to care for its populace and beg from them some offering for my livelihood. You'll have done us all an act of grace.” 
“When | spoke to the local people,” said Pilgrim, “they told me that when the fan extinguished the fire on this mountain, they'd only harvest the five grains for one year. Then the fire would start again. 
How'd it be extinguished forever?” 
“If you want it extinguished forever,” replied Demoness, “you must fan at the mountain forty-nine times. It'll never start again.” 
When he heard this, Pilgrim indeed took the fan and fanned with all his strength at the summit forty-nine times: a great torrential rain descended on the mountain. It was truly a treasure for the rain 
came down on only the area where there was fire before; where there was no fire, the sky remained clear. Master and disciples thus stood on the spot where there was no fire and they did not get wet 
at all. After staying there for the night, they put in order the luggage and the horse the next morning and gave the fan back to Demoness. Pilgrim said to her, “If old monkey didn’t do this, | fear that 
people might say that my words are untrustworthy. You go back to a mountain with your fan now and start no trouble. | spare you because you've already attained a human body.” After she received 
the fan, Demoness recited a spell, and it changed again back into an almond leaf that she placed in her mouth. She saluted to thank the pilgrims and went off somewhere to practice self-cultivation as 
a recluse. In the end she, too, attained the right fruit and a lasting reputation in the Threads. As Demoness and the local spirit thanked them and walked to send them off, Pilgrim, 8 Rules, and Sand- 
monk were again accompanying Tripitaka to move forward, truly with their bodies pure and cool and with moisture beneath their feet. This is what we mean by Kan and Li completed, true origin’s fused; 
water and fire balanced, the great Dao is born. 
PART V 
THE DREAM 
062 
As the Peonies Glow Red, the Qing Fish Breathes Out Its Spell Issuing an Elegy for the Wrongly Killed, the Great Sage Tarries 
The myriad things have ever been one body; each body, too, contains a cosmos. | dare open a clear eye on the world and strive to root anew its hills and streams. 
The Qing Fish confuses and bewitches the Mind-Monkey.' 1 sees throughout that the causes of all emotions are floating clouds and phantasms. As the story goes, after the Tang Priest and his three 
disciples left the Flaming Mountain, days turned into months, until they came again to the time of green spring. The Tang Priest sighed, “We four have travelled day in and day out, never knowing when 
we'll see Shakyamuni. Wukong,? you've been over the road to the West several times, how much farther do we’ve to go? And how many more monsters will we meet?” 
Monkey replied, “Don't worry, Master. If we disciples pool our strength, we needn't fear even a monster as big as heaven.” 

He had hardly finished speaking when all at once they spied before them a mountain road. Everywhere flowers old and newly fallen covered the ground like a tapestry. There where tall bamboo leaned 
over the road stood a peony tree: the famous flowers no sooner bloomed than formed this tapestry; clusters of blossoms press together, competing with beauty strange. Like finely tailored brilliant 
clouds they face the sun and smile, tenderly holding fragrant dew and bending with the breeze. Clouds love these famed beauties and come to protect them; butterflies cling to their heavenly fragrance 
and tarry over leaving. Were | to compare their colour with the ladies in the Spring Palace, only Yang Kuei-Fei coquettishly leaning, half-drunk would do. 3 Monkey said, “Master, those peonies are so 
red!” 

The Tang priest responded, “No they're not.” 

“Master,” said Monkey, “Your eyes must be scorched by the hot spring sun if you insist that peonies so red aren't red. Why not dismount and sit down while | send for the Nun Great King of Medicine 
to clear up your eyes. Don't force yourself to go on while your vision is blurred. If you take the wrong road, it will be no one else's fault.” 

The Priest snapped, “Rascal monkey! You're the one who's mixed up. It's backwards to say that my eyes are blurred.” 

Monkey said, “Master, if your eyes aren't blurred, why you say the peonies aren't red?” 

The Priest replied, “I never said the peonies aren't red. | only said that it's not the peonies that are red.” 

Monkey said, “If it's not the peonies that are red, Master, it must be the sunlight shining on them that makes them so red.” 


When the Priest heard Monkey suggest sunlight, he decided that his disciple's thinking was even farther off. “Stupid ape!” he scolded. “It's you who's red! You talk about peonies, then about sunlight - 
you certainly drag in trivialities!” 

Monkey said, “You must be joking, Master. All the hair on my body is mottled yellow, my tiger-skin kilt is striped, and my monk's robe is grey. Where do you see red on me?” 

The Priest said, “I didn't mean that your body’s red. | meant that your heart's red.” Then he said, “Wukong, listen to this Verse of mine.” From his horse he recited: “The peonies aren't red; it's the 
disciple's heart that's red. When all the blossoms have fallen, it's as if they’d not yet bloomed.” 

He finished the Verse and rode on 100 paces.‘ There before them several hundred lasses, each one rosy as a spring bud, suddenly appeared beneath the peony tree. They frolicked, picking flowers, 
weaving grass mats, carrying baby boys and girls, and showing off their loveliness. When they saw the monks coming from the east, they giggled, covering their mouths with their sleeves. The Priest 
was troubled. He called to Wukong, “Let's go by way of some other less travelled route. I'm afraid that in this spring meadow so fresh and green these beautiful children will lead us straight into trouble 
and entanglements.” 

Monkey said, “Master, I've been meaning to say a few words to you but I'm always afraid of offending you, so I've not dared speak. All your life you've suffered from two great ills. One is using your 
mind too much, the other is literary Ch'an.5 What | mean by using your mind too much is that you’re always fretting over this and that. Literary Ch'an means reciting poems and discussing principles, 
bringing up your past to verify the present, and talking about scriptures and verses. Literary Ch'an has nothing to do with our real goal, and using the mind too much actually invites demons. Overcome 
these ills and you'll be well prepared to go to the West.” 

The Priest was displeased. Monkey insisted, “You're mistaken, Master. They are homebodies, we're monks. We share one road but we’ve two kinds of hearts.” 

Hearing this, the Tang Priest sharply urged his horse forward. But suddenly eight or nine children jumped out from the crowd and surrounded him - a wall of boys and girls. They stared at him, then 
began to jump up and down, shouting, “This little boy has grown up but he still wears raggedy beggar-boy clothes!” 

Being by nature a man who loved tranquillity, how could the Priest put up with these children? He tried to talk them nicely into leaving but they would not go. He scolded them, yet still they would not 
go, and only kept up their taunts, “This boy has grown up but he still wears beggar-boy clothes!” 

The Priest could not think of anything to do, so he dismounted, took off his robe, hid it in his bundle, and sat down on the grass. The children would not leave him alone, and taunted again, “Give us 
this one-coloured raggedy beggar's robe. If you don't, we'll go home and ask our mums to make us patched robes of apple green, dark green, willow green, pi-i bird colour,® evening-cloud, swallow 
grey, sauce-brown, sky-blue, peach-pink, jade, lotus stem, lotus-green, silver-green, fish-belly white, ink-wash, pebble-blue, reed-flower green, five-colour weave, lychee, coral, duck's head green, 
colour of the palindrome weave, and love-weave. Then we'll needn't your robe!” 

The Tang Priest closed his eyes and remained silent. Bullseye did not know what was bothering the Master and only wanted to play with the boys and girls. He jokingly called them his adopted children. 
Monkey watching this became restless and upset. He took his iron cudgel from behind his ear’ and brandished it, forcing the crowd back. The children, now frightened, ran away, stumbling over one 
another. But Monkey's temper did not abate. In a flash he overtook them, swung his cudgel, and struck. Those sweet snail-horn tufts and peachy cheeks passed into oblivion, becoming so many 
butterflies and will-o'-the-wisps. When the crowd of beauties under the peonies saw Monkey beating the children to death, they quickly dropped their flower baskets and ran to the edge of a nearby 
stream. Picking up slabs of rock, they came forward to meet Monkey. But Monkey did not hesitate; he knocked them dead to the ground with one sweep of his cudgel. It so happened that Monkey, 
although brave and belligerent, was, nevertheless, compassionate. As he placed the cudgel back behind his ear, tears unconsciously flowed from his eyes, and he said to himself contritely, “Great 
Heaven! Since | became a Religious, I've controlled my emotions and contained my anger. I've never wrongly killed a single man. Today | struck out in sudden anger and killed boys and girls who 
weren't even monsters or thieves — old and young, maybe fifty in all. | completely forgot the heavy price for doing wrong.” 

Monkey took two steps, and was again overcome by fear. He said to himself, “I've been thinking only of hell in the future. I'd completely forgotten the hell that is right in front of me. The day before 
yesterday | killed a monster, and right away the Master wanted to recite the charm.® Once when | killed several thieves, the Master renounced me on the spot. When he sees this pile of corpses today, 
he'll really be angry. If he recites the charm a hundred times, this noble Great Sage Sun? will be one skinned monkey. Will I've any honour left then?” 

But after all, Mind-Monkey was intelligent and resourceful. He came up with another idea. He knew our old monk was a man of culture but he was also overly compassionate, and the bones in his ears 
were soft.’ To himself he said, “Today I'll write a eulogy for these wrongly killed innocents. I'll put on a crying face and read it as | walk. When the Master sees me crying so, he'll surely be suspicious 
and say, ‘Wukong, what's happened to that old pluck of yours?’ I'll say, ‘There are monsters on the Western road.’ The Master's suspicion will increase. He'll ask, ‘Where are these monsters? What are 
they called?’ I'll say, ‘They're called “man-beating monsters.” If you don't believe me, take a look and you'll see that the crowd of boys and girls have become bloody corpses.’ When Master hears how 
terrible the monsters are, his courage will fail and his heart will leap. Bullseye will say, ‘Let's get out of here.’ Sandy will say, ‘Let's go, fast!’ When | see that they're well shaken, I'll comfort them with 
one word: ‘Everything's been taken care of by Kuan-yin. There's not one tile left unbroken in the monster's cave!” Monkey straightaway found a rock to use for an ink-stone and broke a plum branch 
for a brush. He ground mud into ink and stripped bamboo to make paper. Then he wrote out the eulogy. Gathering up his sleeves like a scholar, he swaggered with long strides and loudly recited: 

|, Monkey, first disciple of the Great Religious Master Hstian-tsang who received from the legitimate Emperor of the Great Tang a hundred-pearled cassock, a five-pearled abbot's staff, and the tide 
‘Brother of the Emperor,’ as the Master of Water-curtain Cave, Great Sage Equal of Heaven, Rebel in the Heavenly Palace, and Eminent Guest in the Underworld, Sun Wukong, do reverently offer as 
sacrifice clear juice and simple food and write this message to you, spirits of the boys and girls in the spring wind, against whom | bore no grudge and harboured no enmity: Alas! The willows by the 
gate have turned to gold; orchids in the courtyard are pregnant with jade. Heaven and Earth are unkind; the green-in-years reach no fruition. Oh, why do their waistbands drift among peach blossoms 
this third month on the River Hsiang? Why do the white crane's clouds twine with the endless mist to the Ninth Heaven? Ah, ye spirits, how can | send you off? | bear a secret sorrow for you. And 
furthermore where dragons and snakes are coiled around bronze columns, in the great hall busy with silkworms with her jade lute weeping for the wind and rain, in the tower, crying like a tiger - such 
was the decorum of the White Girl. Oh, why, when spring clothes are ready and spring grasses green, and when spring days grow longer, are spring lives cut short? Ah, Ye spirits! How can | send you 
off? | bear a secret sorrow for you. Alas! A hobbyhorse ride of a mile, a firefly bag half-filled — Little Boy Fate had no call for anger. The money for washing has not been given but little bird shoes have 
flown to the Western Abyss; a pair of pillars, first decked in red, now don white goose-feather robes and play in the Purple Vale. Ah, ye spirits! How can | send you off? | bear a secret sorrow for you. 
And think of Confucius who, as a lad of seven hid in the bed curtains and chirped like a cricket! And think of Tseng Shen who when only two feet tall offered lichees from under the stairs! Oh why do 
you no longer speak of such proprieties? Jade is split in the southern field, a lotus shatters on the eastern lake. The jujubes, floating red, are not gathered; the sap that hangs from the t'ung tree is not 
chewed. Ah, Ye spirits! How can | send you off? | bear a secret sorrow for you. Alas! Not to the South or North or West or East can | write lines to bring back your souls. Are you Chang or Ch'ien or 
Hsti or Chao? How can | tell from these old gravestones? Ah, Ye spirits! How can | send you off? | bear a secret sorrow for you." 

By the time Monkey finished reading, he had come to the peony tree. He saw the Master asleep, his head drooped on his chest while Sandy and Bullseye lay sleeping with their heads on a stone. 
Monkey laughed to himself, “The old monk is usually more vigorous — he's never been so drowsy. My stars are lucky today! I'll not have to suffer from the charm.” 

Then he picked some grass and flowers, and after rolling them into a ball, stuffed them in Bullseye's ear. He yelled in the other ear, “Wu-neng!"2 Don't have upside-down dreams!” 

Bullseye mumbled a reply in his dream, “Master, why are you calling me?” 

Monkey realised that in his dream Bullseye mistook him for the Master, so he imitated the Master's voice and said, “Disciple, Nun Kuan-yin passed here and asked me to give you her regards.” 

With his eyes closed Bullseye mumbled through the grass, “Has the Nun said anything behind my back?” 

Monkey said, “Oh my, yes! The Nun just now evaluated me and you three as well. First she said that I'd not become a god and told me not to go to the Western Paradise. She said Wukong will surely 
become a god, and that he should go on to the Western Paradise alone. Wu-ching'3 can be a monk. She said he should go and cultivate himself in a pure temple along the Western road. After making 
these three comments, the Nun stared at you and said, ‘Wu-neng likes his sleep. He'll never reach the Western Paradise either. Please tell him that | said he should take a loving and faithful wife.” 
Bullseye said, “I don't want the Western Paradise or a lovely wife! | just want half a day in the dark sweet village of sleep.” 

And he snored like a bull. When Monkey saw that he wouldn't wake up, he laughed and said, “Disciple, I'll go on ahead.” Then he went west to beg for food. 


063 
A New Tang Dynasty Appears on the Western Road; the Glorious Emperor Rests in the Green Jade Palace 
From here on, Wukong devises a thousand schemes to fool others but instead only fools himself. Monkey leaped onto his magic cloud and looked east and west for a place to beg for food. Two hours 
later he had yet to see a single house and was growing impatient. Just as he was about to lower his cloud and return to the old road, he spied a great city surrounded by a moat ten miles off. He hurried 
in to take a look, and saw that on the city wall flew a green embroidered banner. In golden seal-style characters the banner announced: “Great Tang's New Son-of-Heaven, the Restoration Emperor, 
Thirty-eighth Successor of T'ai-tsung.”’ 
When Monkey spotted the two words “Great Tang,” he gave a start and broke out in a cold sweat. He thought, “We've been travelling west; how could we've returned to the east? This can't be real. | 
wonder what monster is doing evil here.” Then he had another thought, “I've heard the earth is round and the sky goes around it. Perhaps we passed the Western Paradise and have come around 
again. If that's so, we'd not worry — we'll just have to go around once more, and we'll reach the Western Paradise. Maybe this is real after all.” 
But after reconsideration he rejected that idea, “It's not real. No! If we passed the Western Paradise, why didn't the Compassionate God call out to me? After all, I've seen him several times, and he's 
not an unfeeling or inhospitable person. This has got to be a hoax.” 
Then he recalled, “When | was a demon at Water-curtain Cave, I'd a sworn brother who called himself Messenger-in-Blue. He gave me a book entitled Apocryphal History of the K'un-lun Mountains. 
In one place it said, ‘There was a kingdom called China that wasn't originally called China. Its people envied the name China and consequently adopted it.’ This kingdom must be the place in the West 
that took the name ‘China.’ So it is real.” 
An instant later Monkey blurted out, “False! False! False! False! False! If they were envious of China, they would only have written ‘China.’ Why did they write ‘Great Tang?’ What's more, my Master 
often says that the Great Tang is quite a new empire. How could they already know the name here and change their banner? It can't be real.” After a long time he still hadn't made up his mind, so he 
decided to take a closer look and read the rest of the banner. When he read 
New Son of Heaven, the Restoration Emperor, 38 Successor of T'ai-tsung 
He stamped his feet and shouted into the sky, “Nonsense! Nonsense! It hasn't been twenty years since the Master left the realm of the Great Tang. How could a dynasty already have passed several 
centuries? The Master is only flesh and blood. Even though he's been in and out of the caves of spirits and mortals and visited fairy islands, he still passes his days like any ordinary man. How could 
there be such a difference? It has to be false.” 
But he considered again, “You can't tell - if they changed emperors each month, they could go through thirty-eight emperors in less than four years. Maybe it is real.” 
The fog of doubt had not been dispersed, and all this reasoning was getting him nowhere. So he lowered his cloud and recited an incantation to summon the local deity for information. He repeated it 
ten times but no deity came. Monkey thought, “Usually when | recite just a little of it, they shield their heads and come running like rats. What's going on today? Well, this is for something urgent, so |'ll 
not punish him. I'll call the celestial officials on duty today. They'll know the answer for sure.” 
Trying to locate the celestial officials, he shouted toward the sky several hundred times but couldn't find a trace of them. Monkey was furious. In a twinkling he changed into the form in which he had 
caused an uproar in Heaven,’ and brandished his cudgel till it was as big around as the mouth of a barrel. He sprang into the air, jumping and whirling wildly. He carried on for a long while but not so 
much as a lowly deity answered him. Monkey became even angrier. He rushed headlong to the Palace of Magic Mists to see the Jade Emperor and demand an explanation from him. But when he got 
there he found the gates of Heaven tightly closed. Monkey yelled, “Open the door! Open the door!” 
Someone inside replied, “Listen to this impetuous slave, will you? Someone has stolen our Palace of Magic Mists. There's no Heaven to be entered.” 
He heard someone else laugh and say, “Didn't you know our Palace was stolen, big brother? Five centuries ago there was a Stable Master Sun‘ who caused an uproar in Heaven. He didn't manage to 
steal the Palace of Magic Mists but he carried a grudge and formed a gang, and while pretending he was going to get scriptures, he made friends with all the monsters on the Western road. Then one 
day he summoned those monsters and used several ingenious devices to steal the Palace. That's what's called in military strategy ‘Using others to attack others — an infallible plan.’ That ape is really 
a schemer! He's quite something!” 
When Monkey heard this, he was both amused and annoyed. But being a stubborn and impatient fellow, how could he swallow these false charges? He beat on the gate again with his fists and kicked 
it, shouting “Open the door!” 
The voice inside spoke again. “If you really want to open the gates of Heaven, wait five thousand and forty-six years until the new Palace of Magic Mists is completed. Then we'll open the gates to 
receive you, honoured guest. How's that?” 


Monkey had hoped to see the Jade Emperor and get a divinely worded scroll in purple characters that would state clearly whether the Great Tang he had seen was true or false. Instead he had been 
greatly humiliated. He could do nothing but lower his cloud and return to the domain of the Great Tang, saying, “I'll just go on in and see what happens.” 
Thereupon he forgot his annoyance and walked through the city gate. The guard at the gate said, “The new Emperor’s ordered that anyone who speaks or dresses strangely is to be seized and killed. 
You'd watch out for yourself, little monk with no home or family.” 
Monkey saluted with his clasped hands and said “Your words, sir, are most considerate.” He hurried through the gate, then changed himself into a black and white butterfly and flew along like the 
exercise of a beautiful girl or the notes of a lute. Soon he reached the base of a colourful tower. He fluttered through its jade gate and came to rest in a hall. The jade hinges of the many doors were 
wound around with mist; the green chambers were wrapped in clouds. Even fairies never see such sights - a mortal's cave hardly compares. The heavens revolve, the golden breath unites; the stars 
move until the Dipper's handle becomes level. A cloud forms in the Kingfisher Palace; the sun shines bright in Phoenix City. Monkey looked and looked. He noticed on the door-lintel of the hall three 
large characters which read: 
Green Jade Palace 
Beside this was inscribed a line of small characters: “This palace was built on an auspicious day in the second month of the first year of the Romantic Emperor of the New Tang.” The hall was silent 
but on one wall were two lines of calligraphy: “When the Tang dynasty had held the mandate less than fifty years, that great country was reduced to the size of a peck. Fifty years after the Tang received 
the mandate, the mountains and streams flew about, the stars and the moon left their courses. But the new emperor has held the mandate for a billion years. People everywhere recite the odes written 
for King Hstan of Chou.5 |, the minor official Chang Ch’iu, reverently offer praise.” 
When Monkey read this, he laughed to himself and said: “With insignificant officials like this at court, how could the emperor help but be romantic?” 
At that moment an imperial concubine entered carrying a green bamboo broom. She chuckled to herself, “Oh-ho! The emperor is asleep, the prime minister is, too. This Green Jade Palace is now a 
“Sleeping Mortal Pavilion.” Last night our Romantic Emperor warmed the room of Lady Qing-kuo.* He ordered juice taken to Flying Kingfisher Palace for a merry night of drinking. Early in the evening 
he brought out a Kao-Tang mirror’ and told Lady Qing-Kuo to stand on his left and Lady Hsu to stand on his right. As they stood three abreast gazing into the mirror, the emperor said, ‘You two ladies 
are lovely!" 
Lady Qing-kuo said, ‘Your Majesty is handsome.’ 
The emperor turned his head to ask the opinion of us concubines, and all three hundred of us who are intimate with him replied together, ‘Your Majesty is indeed the world's finest.’ 
“The emperor was delighted. He narrowed his eyes and tossed off a great horn of juice. When he was half-drunk he got up to look at the moon, then opened his mouth and laughed. Pointing at Ch'ang 
O8 in the moon, he said, ‘That's my Lady Hsu.’ Lady Hst pointed at the stars of the Spinning Lady and the Cowherd and said, ‘There’re Your Majesty and Lady Qing-kuo. Although tonight is only the 
fifth of the third month, you've in advance the evening of the seventh month.’? The emperor was greatly pleased and again drank his great horn empty. A drunken emperor — face flushed, head nodding, 
legs staggering, tongue thick; oblivious to the fact that three sevens are twenty-one and two sevens are fourteen — toppled across Lady Hsu's body. Lady Qing-kuo quickly sat down and folded herself 
into a snowflake mat of flesh to pillow the emperor's heels. At Lady Hst's side sat a young maid of rather good taste who straightaway plucked a fragrant sea-tree flower. Giggling, she walked behind 
Lady Hst and lightly placed it on the emperor's head, making him a drunken Flower Emperor. Such a happy time! It was really a fairy island on earth. Still, when you think of it, past generations had 
many emperors, and not a few romantic ones. Today their palaces are gone, the lovely ladies are gone, the emperors, all gone. There's really no need to mention Ch'in and Han and the Six Dynasties 
- even our late emperor in his middle age loved to seek pleasure. He built Pearl-rain Tower — so elegant! It was trellised with white jade, and on all four sides carved green ornaments hung from the 
windows. On the north stood a round frost-cave gate where you'd watch the sun rise and set in the sea. The stairs below were made of red sandalwood edged with gold. Painted lotus-faces, powdered 
plum-petal skin, cicada-wing blouses and unicorn belts, flutes of Shu and strings of Wu’ — no one saw all this without envy or heard all this without being moved. Yesterday the empress told me to go 
and sweep the grounds of the eastern flower garden. | looked over the short wall to see Pearl-rain Tower, and at first | saw only desolate grass. | looked again. There were clouds and mist, and what 
had been three thousand interlocking tiles were a million fragments. Beams carved with whirling dragons and timbers carved with flying insects stood like broken trellises. But there was something still 
more absurd. The sun was only halfway up the sky but several will-o'-the-wisps came from the well by the pines. When | looked closely, there wasn't a single reciting-boy or dancing-girl in sight, only 
two or three cuckoos calling over and over — one high note and one low note in the spring rain. When you see this sort of thing, you realise that emperor and commoner all return to nothing; imperial 
concubine and village girl alike become dust. Last year on the fifteenth of the first month, the Taoist recited Lo spoke a bit of wisdom. He said, ‘Our Romantic Emperor enjoys seeing people in paintings 
and loves the scenery in pictures.’ So he presented a painting called ‘A Portrait of Mt. Li.’ The emperor asked, ‘Is Mt. Li still in existence?’ The Taoist said, ‘Mt. Li has had a short life of only millennia 
years.’ The emperor laughed and said, ‘Two v is enough.’ The Taoist said, ‘I only regret that it has not been two millennia in a row. The Mt. Li of earth and wood lasted only two centuries; people talked 
about it for four centuries; it's been depicted in writings, calligraphic works, and paintings for five centuries, and recorded in history for nine centuries. Adding up these fragments you get two millennia.’ 
That day | was in attendance, standing right in front of the Taoist. | heard every sentence clearly. That was over a year ago, and just the day before yesterday, | visited a learned imperial concubine 
and spoke to her of this. She told me that the Portrait of Mount Li really showed the grave of the First August Emperor of Ch'in who once used the Mountain-removing Bell.” 
The girl swept and talked and talked and swept. When Monkey heard the words, Mountain-removing Bell, he thought, how can a mountain be removed? ... Why, if I’d that bell, whenever | came to a 
high mountain where monsters lived, I'd just remove it in advance and save myself trouble. He was about to change himself into a court attendant and go ask the concubine more about the magical 
bell when suddenly he heard loud strains of flute and drum poems coming from the main palace. 
064 
Hsiian-Tsang’s To Be Commissioned and Given a Peach Flower Battle-Axe; the Mind-Monkey’s Startled by the Axes of Sky Gougers 
When Monkey heard the poems he flew right out through Tiger Gate. After passing many towers and courtyards, he finally came to a carved green portico where the emperor sat surrounded by 
numerous officials. As he drew near, he saw the emperor blanch and say to his officials: “Yesterday | was reading the Precious Instructions of the August Tang. One section related, ‘The Tang priest 
Ch'en Hstian-tsang impersonated a monk and deluded our royal ancestor. His disciples were all Water-curtain Cave and Stony Brook’ types. Abbot's staff and begging bowl became weapons like the 
wooden rake? and metal cudgel. Forty years later, Hstian-tsang led his disciples on an invasion of our territory. He was indeed a great enemy.’ Another section related that ‘five centuries ago Sun 
Wukong rebelled against Heaven. He wanted to drag the Jade Emperor down from his throne and deposit him at the bottom of the stairs. However, the Mandate of Heaven had not expired, and God 
put down the rebellion. If Sun Wukong could rebel against Heaven, how much more could he rebel against mortals? And yet the Tang Priest accepted him as his number-one disciple. Why? He wanted 
to use his journey to the West to establish hegemony over the Southeast. He relied on the awesomeness of the ape and his dragon-horse? to secure his position as a shark among fish.’ When | read 
those words, | became frightened. But if | order Regional Commander Chao Ch'eng to go west to decapitate this priest and bring back his head, then spare his disciples and cause them to disperse, 
that should put an end to the matter.” 
The Vice Director of State Affairs Li K'uang stepped forward and said, “This bald-headed Ch'en Hstian-tsang shouldn't be killed - he should be used. You’d simply use him to kill himself; you'd not have 
someone else kill him.” 
As soon as Li K'uang finished speaking the emperor ordered his generals to go to the arsenal. There they selected a flying dragon sword, a King Wu blade, a stone sickle, a thunder-flower lance, an 
ornately carved five-cloud spear, a black-horse breastplate, silver-fish armour, a flying-tiger jade tent-standard, a great Yao and Shun banner, a peach blossom battle-axe, a ninth-month axe, a glass 
moon-mirror helmet, a red and gold flying-fish cape, a pair of demon-killing crystal-threaded boots, and a Big Dipper fan. All these things were sealed along with an imperial edict on yellow silk and sent 
by express messenger to the West. The proclamation, addressed to “Ch'en Hsiian-tsang, Brother of the Emperor, Supreme Commander for Wiping out Desire,” read: 
O great and trustworthy General, honourable as the tallies of jadeite, straight as the red strings of a lute: Yesterday all the lords from every direction spurred their horses to the Fatherland and competed 
with each other to report your martial valour that has left the mermaids of the western region speechless and the mirages at sea without form. It is difficult to find a man such as you in time of crisis or 
prosperity. We've often admired you and have heard only well about you. We turn our eyes to the western mountains and sigh with grief. Now bandits run amok in the West. Reports come daily from 
the passes. This is because Heaven resents separations, and it is time that you, our mendicant monk return. General, why don't you leap up from your white pool and beat your sword of intelligence, 
take off your dark robe and pour out your bag of wisdom? After you've cleared the green wood of bandits and the beacon fires no longer burn, we'll personally bind the head of your horse with one foot 
of white silk. This day you'll carry a carved spear and wear silver armour. Soon you'll sleep in tents painted with beasts. It would be difficult to inscribe our expressions of tearful thanks for your deeds, 
even on all the pillars of the Kunlun Mountains that support Heaven. Who under the sun that hangs on Heaven's Wall could compose fitting words upon your return? We hope you, General, will mull 
this over once and then again. We've long wearied of resorting to coral bow and green-jade arrows. The emperor ordered a jade tally brought from the palace and gave it to a messenger. Having 
received the imperial order, the messenger took the tally, the seal, and the edict and galloped out of the city. Monkey was shocked and afraid something might happen to entangle his Master. Not daring 
to make a sound, he immediately started in pursuit of the messenger. He fluttered down like a plum blossom, landing outside the city gate. There he resumed his normal appearance and searched for 
the messenger but the messenger had already ridden out of sight. Monkey became even more distressed. Not only had he failed to discover the truth or falsehood of the New Tang, now he had heard 
that, out of the blue, his Master was to be made a general. Monkey was startled, frightened, and seized with melancholy. As he jumped up to go search for his Master, he heard voices high in the air. 
He peered up and saw a great crowd of people swinging axes and using chisels to gouge holes in the sky. Monkey considered, “They don't have the look of celestial workers or ominous or evil stars. 
They are obviously people from earth but why are they doing this sort of work there? They aren't monsters disguised as men because | see no evil aura about them. Could it be that Heaven is infected 
with scabies and needs people to scratch its back? Or maybe Heaven has grown extra bones and has asked a surgeon to remove them? Or maybe Heaven is too old and they are chiselling it away so 
they can put in a new one. Or maybe Heaven has been covered by a screen, and they are removing the false Heaven for the real one. Or maybe the Milky Way has flooded and they are channelling 
away the excess. Or maybe they are rebuilding the Palace of Magic Mists and this is an auspicious day to break ground. Or maybe Heaven likes elaboration and has asked these people to carve a 
myriad lines to make a beautiful scene. Or maybe the Jade Emperor misses this mortal world and they are opening an imperial road so he can visit more often. | wonder if Heaven's blood is red or 
white. Or if Heaven's skin is one or two layers thick. Or if there will be a heart or not when Heaven's chest is opened. Or if Heaven's heart is slanted or straight. Or if Heaven is young or old, if it's male 
or female. Maybe they want to open Heaven and let its mountains hang down and dwarf the earth's mountains. Or maybe they are opening a mouth for Heaven to swallow the Underworld. But even if 
any of these things are true, no one on earth could have such power. I'll just go up and ask them; then I'll know for sure.” 
Monkey shouted, “You officers digging at Heaven! What king's men are you? Why are you doing this strange thing?” 
All of them dropped their axes and chisels and saluted Monkey from the sky. They said, “Your Reverence from the Southeast, we're called Sky-walkers and come from Goldfish Village. Twenty years 
ago a wandering Taoist taught us the method of sky walking. In our village everyone knows how to write and recite charms and ride the clouds, so we changed the name of the village from Goldfish to 
Sky-walking Village. All our children are called Sky-walkers. Everyone in our village can move about in the sky. Who would have thought that when the king of the Emerald Green World — who is called 
Little Moon King — recently took in a monk, that the monk would turn out to be the second master of Sun Wukong, the Eminent Guest of the Underworld, Rebel in Heaven, Great Sage Equal of Heaven, 
and Master of Water-curtain Cave? He was none other than the great Tang priest Hstian-tsang who received from the legitimate emperor of the Great Tang a cassock studded with a hundred jewels, 
a five-coloured abbot's staff, and the title ‘Emperor's Younger Brother.’ This priest whose secular name is Ch'en, was pure and chaste, never eating meat or drinking juice, nor allowing his eye to roam. 
He was more than qualified to go to the Western Paradise. But that Monkey Sun was berserk! He cut people down as if they were grass. The road to the West flowed red with the blood of his victims. 
When people talk about him they grind their teeth in hatred. The ruler of the kingdom called Great Compassion has taken pity on the suffering people and completely blocked the road to the West with 
a bronze wall that reaches to the sky. Knowing that Monkey could transform himself and become tall or short, he spread a closely meshed ‘net of longing’ for sixty thousand miles to go with the bronze 
wall. Since then, the western and eastern heavens have been divided in two. There is no way to cross over — not by boat or cart, water or land. On learning this, the Tang Priest was utterly crushed. 
That Monkey just stamped his feet and ran off. The priest's second disciple, Bullseye, and third disciple, Sandy, could only cry, and the white horse the priest rides wouldn't eat even a mouthful of grass. 
In this moment of crisis, the Tang Priest came up with a plan. He told his second and third disciples not to worry, whipped his horse and galloped into the Emerald Green World. The moment Little 
Moon King saw the priest, he was sure they had been lovers in a previous life and treated him like his own flesh and blood. He insisted on giving his Emerald Green World to the priest but the Tang 
Priest firmly refused, being determined only to go to the Western Paradise. Then Little Moon King tried to press against the priest, and the Tang Priest had to push him off. The king kept making 
advances but the monk just kept pushing him away. “After several days, Little Moon King had thought of nothing that might solve the Priest's problem, so he summoned the worthies of the realm for 
consultation. One of them devised a plan: ‘If you’d find some sky gougers, they could open up Heaven and allow Mr. Ch’en to leap right into the Jade Emperor's palace. There he could ask for a pass 
and proceed directly to the Western Paradise. That seems like a good idea.’ Little Moon King was half pleased and half doubtful but he straightaway called out soldiers and cavalry to search everywhere 
for sky gougers. When they came across a group of us catching wild geese in the air, they moved in on us. One general in golden armour waved his arms, pointed at us excitedly, and shouted, ‘Here 
are the sky gougers! Surround them for me, little soldiers. Get them all, everyone. Put them in cangues and chains and we'll take them to the king.’ Little Moon King was delighted. He ordered his men 
to remove the cangues and take off the chains and immediately had fine red juice brought and given to us. Then he forced us to chip away at the sky. As the saying goes, ‘The skilful don't seem busy, 
and the busy aren't skilful. We do all sorts of other things but we're not used to digging into the sky with axes. Today we’re treated so nicely by the king that we'd no choice but to sharpen our tools and 


force ourselves to learn to dig at the firmament. We've been looking up for so long that our necks are stiff, and standing in the air so long that our legs ache. Around noon we pooled our strength and 
with one thrust cracked into Heaven. How were we to know we hit right at the foundation of the Palace of Magic Mists and caused it, all shiny and bright, to come tumbling down? There was a great 
commotion in Heaven and people yelled, ‘Catch the thieves!’ The panic didn't ease up for a long time. But the stars must be with us, because someone else will take the blame for what we did. After 
the commotion died down we're pretty scared. But when we bent our ears to listen, we heard Lao-tzu tell the Jade Emperor, ‘Don't be angry. Don't get upset. This couldn't be the work of anyone but 
that little slave-dog of a Stable Groom, Monkey Sun. If you send out Heavenly soldiers now, I'm afraid there'll be trouble. It would be better to ask God to crush him beneath Five Phases Mountain. We 
must tell a god that Monkey's never again to be set free.’ When we heard this, we knew we're in the clear, or at least we figured someone would take the blame, so we began to dig here again. There 
won't be another Palace of Magic Mists to tumble down. But it's too bad about Monkey Sun. In the world below he's hated all along the road to the West, and in the world above they rage at him. They've 
also sent word to God, and when Kuan-yin sees that God puts the blame on the ape, she'll not dare welcome him with her usual graces. Then we'll see where he can go!” 

Someone else said, “Bah! Why feel sorry for that ape Sun? If it weren't for that slave-dog ape, we'd not be working here.” 

All the people wielding axes cried, “You're right! Curse that ape!” 

A great roar went up with everyone shouting different things at the same time. “Stable Boy!” 

“Juice Thief!” 

“Elixir Stealer!” 

“Ginseng Robber!” 

“Monkey Monster Tramp!” they cursed Monkey till his golden eyes blurred and his copper bones went numb. 


065 
A Crack Reveals a Myriad of Bewildering Mirrors; their Original Form’s Lost where the Shapes of Things Appear 
Subjected to these groundless accusations and cursed in such a humiliating way, Monkey became furious. He wanted to go up and kill them all but he thought, “When | left him, the Master’s peacefully 
resting on the grass. What's he doing here in the Emerald Green World? This Little Moon King must be a demon.” Dear Monkey wasted no words but left in a bound. Coming around a tum, he was 
confronted by a city wall with a moat. Above the city gate hung a flecked moss-green jade placard with three words inscribed in the seal style: 
Emerald Green World 

The 2 halves of the gate were ajar and Monkey, quite pleased, walked briskly in. Inside the gate however, he ran into another sheer wall towering before him. He ran along its entire length and back 
again but he could not find a single crack through which he might pass. Monkey laughed and said, “What kind of city is this? Could it be that there isn't a single person here? But if there weren't people, 
why'd a wall have been built? Let me take a closer look.” 

He searched for a long time but there was indeed no way through. Again his anger mounted. He pounded to the east and pounded to the west, pounded high and low — pounded until he knocked down 
a piece of green stone. Monkey tripped on the stone and fell into a brilliant place. Recovering, he blinked and looked about. He was in a tower made entirely of costly stones. Above, a great sheet of 
agate formed the roof, and the floor was a huge bright slab. A couch of amethyst, ten chairs of green marble, and a glistening pink table, on which stood an onyx teapot and two turquoise bells, furnished 
the place. Facing him were eight sapphire blue windows, all closed. Monkey could not see where he had come in and felt bewildered. He looked up and saw that the four walls were made of precious 
mirrors placed one above another. In all there must have been a million mirrors — large, small, and odd-shaped; square ones, round ones, and others. He couldn't count them all but a few of the ones 
he recognised included a Heavenly Emperor mirror with an animal-shaped hook; a white jade heart mirror; a self-doubt mirror; a blossom mirror; a wind mirror; a pair of bird mirrors, male and female; 
a mirror that looked like a purple cotton lotus; a water mirror; an ice-terrace mirror; an iron-faced lotus mirror; a “me” mirror; a man mirror; a moon mirror; a Hai-nan mirror; a mirror in the shape of 
Emperor Wu of Han’ pining for his lady; a green lock mirror; a stillness mirror; a nothing mirror; a bronze mirror with seal-style characters in the hand of Li Ssu of the Ch'in dynasty; a parrot mirror; a 
mute mirror; a mirror that retains reflections; a mirror shaped like the first concubine of Emperor Hstian-ylan;? a 1-smile; a pillow; a reflection-less; and a flying mirror. Monkey thought, “This will be fun. 
Let me reflect a hundred, a thousand, ten thousand, and a hundred million of me.” 

He went to start mirroring himself but instead of his own image, what he saw was that every mirror contained other heavens and earths, suns and moons, mountains and forests. Amazed, he could do 
nothing but let his eyes wander. All at once he heard someone calling in a loud voice, “Reverend Sun, how’ve you been these many years since we parted?” 

Monkey looked all around but there was no one and no ghostly aura in the tower. But the voice he heard could have come from nowhere else. Thoroughly confused, he suddenly spied a man holding 
a steel trident and standing by the inside face of a square mirror with an animal-shaped hook. Again he called loudly, “Reverend Sun, you needn't look surprised. I'm an old friend.” 

Monkey moved closer. “You do look familiar,” he said, “but | can't place you.” 

The figure responded, “My name is Liu Po-ch'in. When you came out from under Five Phases Mountain | lent you a hand. But you've forgotten so soon! That's how it is with people's feelings.” 
Monkey quickly saluted most politely and said, “Ten thousand pardons, great benefactor. What are you doing now? How is it that we're here in the same place?” 

Po-ch'in said, “Why do you say ‘in the same place?’ You're in somebody else's world and I'm in your world. It's not the same place at all!” 

Monkey said, “Since it's not the same, how can we see each other?” 

Po-ch'in said, “No, no, you don't understand. Little Moon King built this tower of myriad mirrors. Every mirror takes care of one world; and each blade of grass, each tree, everything moving and still, is 
contained in these mirrors. Anything one might want to see comes before one's eyes. So this tower was named the Three-thousand Major Chiliocosms!"4 

Monkey had another thought. He was about to ask something about the Tang emperor in order to decide whether the New Tang was real, when suddenly he saw an old lady dart out from the dark 
forest and push Liu Po-ch'in head over heels into the woods. They didn't come out again. Monkey was disappointed and stepped back. Seeing that the daylight had already faded to evening he mused, 
“It will soon be dark and I’ve not found the Master. | might as well take a good look into these mirrors. Then I'll decide what to do.” So he began at the first of the mirrors that hung beneath the word 
Heaven. He saw there a man posting the results of the civil service examination. On the placard was written: 

Palace Examination for the Cultivated Talent Degree 
18T PLACE - LIU CH'UN 
2ND PLACE — WU YU 
3RD PLACE — KAO WEI-MING 

Soon a crowd of thousands had gathered, shouting and excited to read the placard. At first, Monkey could make out only a general clamour but then came sounds of crying and cursing. Finally the 
crowd broke up and people walked away one by one. Monkey watched as one of them sat vacantly on a stone; one smashed his inkstand; one with his hair hanging like wilted weeds was being chased 
and swatted by his parents and teachers; one opened the case he clutched to his side, took out his jade lute, burned it, then cried bitterly; one who took a sword from the headboard of his bed and tried 
to kill himself was stopped by a girl: one, his head saluted absentmindedly, took out his own essay and read it repeatedly; 1 laughed loudly and pounded the table shouting, “It's damned fate!” 1 hung 
his head and vomited blood; several elders bought spring juice to help ease the depression of another; one reciting poems alone wildly kicked a stone at the end of each line of verse; one wouldn't 
allow his boy-servants to report that his name had not appeared on the list; one seemed angry and depressed but smiled frostily to himself as if to say, | got what | deserved. 

1 was truly angry and unhappy but forced a smile. Of the group whose names appeared on the list, one of them put on new clothes and shoes; one forced himself not to smile; one wrote on a wall; one 
read his own examination paper a thousand times, then carefully put it in his sleeve and went out; 1 sighed in sympathy for the others; one made a point of saying that the examining officials were not 
up to par; one made some companions read the placard, and, though unwilling, they forced themselves to read it to the end; one said pompously that this year's list was quite fair; one said that his 
dream on New Year's Eve had come true; and another one said that he hadn't been satisfied with his essay. Later, someone who had made a clean copy of the first-place essay sat in the balcony of a 
juice shop reading it, his head swaying back and forth. A young man beside him asked, “Why is it so short?” 

The one who was reading said, “The essay is long — | chose only his best phrases to copy. Come here and we'll read it together. You can learn some of his methods and pass next year.” The two of 
them began to read in a clear voice: 

The revitalised lost vocation, re-established human relations, the true vista in learning, the perfect spirit in government — what are these? This sphere is, like Hun-tun,° irretrievable. This principle is, 
like breathing, indispensable. Therefore, the sperm of original nature has never issued forth; even the ashes of written books maintain spirituality. In a word, the primal act of creation should not be 
seen as below the mean, and the secret motivations of the spirits can easily be pinched between 2 fingers. 

Monkey burst out laughing and said, “Five centuries ago when | was in the Eight Trigrams Cauldron, §! overheard Lao-tzu talking with the Jade-history Mortal about the destiny of literature. He said, 
‘From the time of Yao and Shun to Confucius’ was the Cycle of Pure Heaven. That may be called great abundance. From Mencius to Li Ssu® was the Pure Earth Cycle and can be called middle 
abundance. The five centuries since has been the Water and Thunder Cycle. The body of literature has been vast but its vitality has fallen short. This may be called the small decline. Eight centuries 
hence it will turn to the Mountain-water Cycle. Things will be rotten! Rotten!’ The Jade-history Mortal asked why it would be so bad. Lao-tzu replied, ‘Alas, a bunch of earless, eyeless, tongue-less, 
nose-less, handless, legless, heartless, lungless, boneless, muscle-less, bloodless, and spiritless people will be called “outstanding scholars.” In the century of their lives, they will only use up one sheet 
of paper, and after their coffin lids are nailed shut, no two lines they wrote will be remembered. Their writings will be far from the truth. Though Hun-tun will have been dead for several myriad years, 
they'll not let him lie. Rather than letting Yao and Shun sit in their Yellow Palace in peace, they'll insist on dragging them in. Breathing is a pure and empty thing but instead of nourishing the breath 
they'll hinder it. The spirit is the treasure of the body but instead of calming it they'll stir it up. What do you think this kind of literature is called? It's called gauze-hat? writing. If they happen to write a few 
sentences, it will be their good fortune, because then others will support them, flatter them, and fear them.’ By the time Lao-tzu had finished speaking, the Jade-history Mortal was in tears and left. 
When | remember this exchange, it's clear that the number one essay belongs to the Mountain-water Cycle. But what do | care, anyway? Let me take a look at the second mirror under Heaven.” 


066 

Through the Cast Bronze Mirror the Mind-Monkey Enters the Past; In Green Pearl's Tower the Wayward Disciple Knits His Brows 
Monkey turned to gaze into the second mirror under the character Heaven, an antique cast bronze mirror. There under a great cypress tree stood a stone tablet on which twelve characters were carved 
in seal script saying: “The World of the Ancients was originally neighbour to the Headache World.” 
Monkey said, “Since it's the World of the Ancients, the First Emperor of Ch'in must be in there. The other day that concubine sweeping in the New Tang palace said he possessed a Mountain-removing 
Bell. I'll grab him and take his bell, then I'll sweep away the thousand mountains and ten thousand gorges from the road to the Western Paradise. The monsters and robbers will have no place to hide.” 
He thereupon changed himself into a bronze-drilling insect, climbed onto the face of the mirror, and got ready. He bit out one mouthful, then bored through the mirror. All at once he fell into a high 
pavilion. Hearing several people below, he didn't dare show his real self but remained in the form of a drilling insect and hid in the crack of a window covered in green flowers. It so happened that in the 
World of the Ancients there was a beautiful lady called Green Pearl. Day in and day out she treated her guests to banquets with drinking games and the reciting of poems. After planning for a long 
while she had a hundred-foot-tall pavilion built and called it the Fragrance-gripping Pavilion. Just that day Lady Hsi-shih? and Miss Silk? had come together to congratulate Green Pearl on the new 
pavilion. Green Pearl was delighted. She immediately had a banquet spread in the pavilion for them to join her in sisterly affection. Miss Silk sat in the middle; Green Pearl sat to her right and Lady Hsi- 
shih to her left. A number of maid servants attended the ladies: some served juice, some picked flowers, and some held the dice bowls. Monkey, still in the window, decided to play a prank. He changed 
into a maid-servant and sneaked inconspicuously into their midst. He looked as such: Top-knot like a goddess of the River Lo, 4eyebrows of Chu Hsiao-chi. The king of Ch'u loved a waist like that the 
emperor of Han, a robe. Above, autumn-wind earrings, below, lotus-flower cups. ®Then the maids-in-waiting began to giggle and said, “Our Fragrance-gripping Pavilion truly snatches up fragrance. 
Even though this beautiful girl doesn't live here, she came right in.” 
Another maid said to Monkey, “Have you seen Lady Green Pearl, sister?” 
Monkey said, “Elder sister, I'm new here. Could you take me to meet her?” 
The maid giggled and led Monkey to meet Lady Green Pearl. Green Pearl looked shocked. With tears in her eyes she said to Monkey, “Beautiful Lady Yu,’ I've not seen you for so long! But why is 
your fair face so sad?” 
Monkey was surprised to hear this and thought, “Since | was born from a stone egg, I've never been reincarnated by way of any parents, and I've never chased the mists and flowers. When did | know 
this Lady Green Pearl? Since when am | Beautiful Lady Mud, Beautiful Lady Copper, Beautiful Lady Iron, or Beautiful Lady Grass? But that's what she calls me. Well, what do | care if I'm Beautiful Lady 
Yu or not? I'll play the role for a little while — it should be amusing. This is called meeting one error with another. Just one thing — since I've become Beautiful Lady YU, | must have a husband somewhere. 


If she asks about him and my answer turns out to be a case of ‘a horse's jaw not matching an ass's head, it'll show my true colours. I'll sound her out a bit and find out about my ‘husband,’ then | can 
join in the banquet.” 

Green Pearl called again, “Beautiful Lady! Quick, have a seat! Although what's in the cup is weak, it will chase away your gloom.” 

Monkey put on a long face and said to Green Pearl, “Sister, people say juice cheers the joyful heart but my husband and | can't see each other. The silken strands of rain and gusts of wind have long 
pierced and broken my heart. How can | swallow juice?” 

Green Pearl started and said, “But my dear lady, what are you saying? Your husband is Hsiang Yu, Hegemon of Ch'u. You live together - why can't you see each other?” 

Catching the 5 words “Hsiang Yu, Hegemon of Ch'u,” Monkey answered off the top of his head, “Sister, you don't know that the Hegemon of Ch'u of today is not the same man as before. There is a 
concubine named Sorrow of Ch'u who uses her many charms to entice my husband and separate the two of us. Once we're walking in the moonlight and, when | didn't look at the water weeds in the 
pond, she purposely leaned on the railing as if lost in thought. My husband said, ‘The way she gazes is so lovely.’ Another time we’re looking at flowers and | didn't call for juice. She went to her room 
and got a pot with a cracked ice design containing Purple Flower Jade Dew juice. She offered it and said, ‘Long life to my gracious lord,’ and just as she left, she winked at him seductively. My husband 
saw her off with a twinkle in his eye. I’ve nothing but love for him — my only wish is that we’d always be a pair of mandarin ducks. When | saw those two putting me on a closet shelf, how could | be 
anything but sad and resentful? Then my husband complained that | didn't pay any attention to him and, what's more, that Sorrow of Ch'u had been trying hard to please. He took his sword and scabbard 
from under the bed, and slung them across his back. He didn't even call for any of his men but just left looking straight ahead. | don't know where he went. That was twenty days ago — more than half 
a month and not a word from him.” 

And Monkey began to wail. When Green Pearl saw this, her tears soaked half her silken sleeve. Hsi-shih and Miss Silk sighed together. Even the maids carrying the juice pots felt tears fill their throats 
and sympathetic pains in their hearts. It's a fact that a sad person shouldn't talk to other sad people — if they do, they only become sadder. The four of them sat down and Hsi-shih said, “Our Beautiful 
Lady isn't happy tonight and we three should try to cheer her up. We mustn't add to her sadness.” So saying, she produced six dice and held them in her hands. She called out, “Sisters of this banquet, 
hear my command! If the first throw doesn't show a one, each of us will recite a line of old-style verse. If the second throw doesn't throw a two, we must all confess our sexual fancies. If the third throw 
doesn't show a three, I'll punish myself with one big cup, then pass it to one of you.” 

Hsi-shih looked up and threw the dice and shouted, “There's no one on the first throw!” 

Green Pear! trilled a line of poetry in a sweet voice: “When my husband doesn't come, the cold night is long.” 

Miss Silk laughed in great admiration and said, “The double-meaning in this line is magnificent.” She also recited a line: “The Jade Lady's earrings dangle in the autumn wind.” 

Monkey thought, “Now it's my turn. | can remember several lines of other kinds of writing but thinking of poetry makes my head ache. What's more, | don't know if Beautiful Lady YU knows poetry or 
not. If she doesn't, I'll be all right; if she does, I'll give myself away.” 

Green Pearl said, “A line, please, Beautiful Lady.” Monkey answered evasively, “I can't write poetry.” 

Hsi-shih laughed and said, “The Selected Poems of the Beautiful Lady has circulated throughout the Central Plain. Even tiny children know that Beautiful Lady Yu is talented in composing z’u- and fu- 
style poetry. And here today you're acting coy!” 

Monkey had no choice but to raise his face and seek inspiration. He was lost in thought a long while, then asked the group, “Is it all right if | don't use a line from an ancient poet?” 

Green Pearl said, “You'll have to ask our leader.” 

Monkey asked Hsi-shih and she said, “What difference does it make? Once you compose a line, it'll be the same as one from the ancients!” 

Everyone inclined her ear to listen and Monkey recited a line: “I regret my heart follows clouds and rain in flight.” 

Green Pearl asked Miss Silk, “What do you think of the Beautiful Lady's line?” 

Miss Silk replied, “Who would dare say the Beautiful Lady's poetry is not good? Only this line somehow smacks of monkish-ness.” 

Hsi-shih laughed and said, “The Beautiful Lady was once a nun for half a month.” 

Monkey said, “Oh, don't tease. Would you please pass the dice bowl on?” 

Hsi-shih quickly handed the dice bowl to Green Pearl who lifted her hand and tossed the dice. She shouted, “The second throw doesn't show a two!” 

Hsi-shih said, “It's easy for you to confess but hard for me.” 

Green Pearl asked, “But sister, what's so hard for you to confess?” 

Hsi-shih exclaimed, “Humph! You're trying to embarrass me! You must know I've had two husbands!” 

Green Pearl persisted, “Even though we've different names, we're all your flesh and blood. What harm’s there in it? I've an idea — why don't you give us a line about King Wu and then one about young 
Fan?” 

Hsi-shih heard this and straightaway confessed: “Young Fan: Green years on Willow Stream. King Wu: Rosy cheeks in a jade palace. Young Fan: Vowed to the sun on Kunlun Mountains. King Wu: 
Slept the night beneath a Wutong tree. Young Fan: Lamented the moon on Five Lakes. King Wu: Grieved day-long once drunk.” 

After hearing this, Green Pearl tipped her cup and made her own confession: £/’ve a peak of pearls; ten-thousand piculs of tears. Tonight in Fragrance-gripping Pavilion; another year in Snow-spread 
Hall.” 

Green Pearl sighed with each word. Hsi-shih said in a loud voice, “Penalty! | wanted you to tell about delights but instead you tell about sorrows!” 

Green Pearl admitted her guilt and accepted a juice penalty. Meanwhile Miss Silk tried to get Monkey to go next while Monkey deferred to her. They bandied back and forth but neither would confess. 
Finally Green Pearl said, “I've got another idea. Sister Silk, you say one line, and then you say one, Beautiful Lady.” 

Hsi-shih said, “That can't be done. Hegemon Ch'u has a valiant and heroic air. Young Shen is fair of face, gentle and warm. How could they be put together?” 

Miss Silk laughed and said, “It's all right. She is she and I’m |. Let me confess first.” And she said, “Weep for the moon in South Tower.” 

Without thinking, Monkey said, “Worship God in the Western Paradise.” 

Green Pearl pointed at Monkey and said, “I think you must be confused, Beautiful Lady. Why do you bring up worshipping God in the Western Paradise?” 

Monkey said, “My words are profound and want explication. Paradise means husband; Western stands for Western Ch'u; worship means return and God means heart. So what it means is, ‘My heart 
returns to my husband in Western Ch'u.’ Although he dislikes me, | think only of him.” 

Green Pearl breathed a long sigh of admiration. Monkey feared that if he stayed too long at the banquet it would delay his journey, so he pretended he was drunk and about to throw up. Hsi-shih said, 
“Let's not have a third throw. Let's go look at the moon.” 

The 4 of them left the banquet and walked downstairs. They stepped aimlessly over some wild flowers and disported themselves with some water weeds. Monkey, wanting only to find the First Emperor 
of Ch'in, thought up a plan to get away. “I’ve a pain in my heart. | can't bear it...can't bear it - please let me go home,” he moaned. 

Green Pearl said, “Heart pains are ordinary things for us. Don't you worry, I'll have someone ask Dr. Ch'i Po to come and take your pulse.” 

Monkey said, “No, that won't do. These days doctors are the last people | want around. All they can do is make a live man dead and small ills big. When it comes to healing, they only want quick results 
— they don't care about your body. And if your humours are unbalanced, they make you take ginseng, and then you suffer for it the rest of your life. | still want to go home.” 

Green Pearl said, “If you go home and don't see Hegemon Ch’, you'll get depressed again, and if you see Sorrow of Ch'u, your hatred will start all over again. People with heart pain should avoid 
depression and hatred.” 

The “sisters” all tried to persuade Monkey to stay but Monkey insisted that he wouldn't. Seeing that the illness was serious and that she couldn't make her stay, Green Pearl could only ask four of her 
personal maids to escort Beautiful Lady YU home. Monkey put on a sleepy face, clasped his hands over his chest, and took leave of the sisters. Supported by the four maids, he descended the hundred- 
foot Fragrance-gripping Pavilion. As they walked toward the main road, Monkey said, “You four go on back. Be sure to say thanks for me, and tell your mistress and my little sister’ we'll get together 
again tomorrow.” 

The maids said, “Just a moment ago when we left, Lady Green Pearl instructed us to accompany you all the way to Hegemon Ch'u's estate.” 

Monkey said, “So you don't want to return, eh? See my cudgel!” 

No sooner had he spoken than the cudgel was in his hand. With one full-power sweep, the four maids were beaten to red powder. Monkey retumed to his real form. He raised his head to look around 
and found himself directly in front of NU-kua's® gate. He was pleased and said, “Heaven was chopped open by Little Moon King's sky-gougers, and yesterday they put the blame on me. Although Lao- 
tzu is obnoxious and the Jade Emperor stupid, | made a mistake, too. I’d not have done something five centuries ago to start tongues wagging. Still, I'm not going to surrender myself now. I've heard 
that NU-kua has had long experience in patching heaven. I'll ask her to fix it for me today and then go crying up to the Palace of Magic Mists and wash myself clean. This is really a great opportunity.” 
He walked up to the gate for a better look but all he saw were 2 black doors shut tight. The doors were sealed with a piece of paper that said: “Went to the Yellow Emperor's for a chat on the twentieth. 
Back in ten days. Sorry, honourable visitor. | extend my apologies here in advance.” Monkey read this and turned to go. He heard the cock crow 3 times. It was nearly dawn. He had travelled several 
million miles and still hadn't seen the First Emperor of Ch'in. 

067 
The True Beauty Dies for a Face Half Covered with Tears; the General of Chu’s Grieved at the Mention of Ping-hsiang 

All of a sudden Monkey noticed a dark man sitting in a high pavilion. Monkey laughed and said, “So there are rebels in the World of the Ancients, too! His whole face has been blackened with coal and 
he's on public exhibit here.” 

He advanced a few steps, then said, “No, he's no rebel; it's a temple for Chang Fei.” But after thinking it over he said, “If it were Chang Fei's temple, he'd wear a turban. Even if there's a new style, at 
most he'd be wearing a general's helmet - an emperor's crown can't be worn by just anyone. Since he's wearing a crown and his face is dark, this must be Great YU,? the Dark Emperor. I'll go see him 
and ask his secret method for controlling monsters and killing demons. Then I'll not have to bother looking for the First Emperor of Ch'in.” 
As he neared the front of the pavilion, he saw that below the platform stood a stone column, from the top of which flew a white banner. The banner had seven words written in purple saying, “The 
Famous Pre-Han Knight, Hsiang Yu.” 
When Monkey read this he laughed aloud and said, “That just goes to show you'd not think about things that haven't happened —- when you think about them, they'll not turn out the way you expect. 
Here | speculated this way and that, saying he was Great Yu, the Dark Emperor, or Chang Fei, or a rebel - who'd have thought he'd be none other than my ‘husband’ from Green Pearl's tower.” 

He thought a bit more and said, “Wait a minute — | drilled into this World of the Ancients to find the First Emperor of Ch'in and borrow his Mountain-removing Bell. The Hegemon of Ch'u whom | just 
saw, lived after him. Why haven't | seen the First Emperor? I've got an idea — I'll climb the pavilion to see Hsiang YU and ask him for information about the First Emperor. Then | can figure out where 
he's.” 

Monkey jumped up for a closer look. He saw that below the pavilion there was an area with green grass, red railings, flowers here and there, and bird-call everywhere. There sat a beautiful lady. Monkey 
heard someone call, “Beautiful Lady YU! Beautiful Lady Yu!” 

Monkey laughed and said, “Well, well. Old monkey from Green Pearl's tower is here now. What's it to me if this Lady Yu is dead or alive?” 

Monkey gave his body a shake and, as before, changed himself into a likeness of the beautiful lady. He climbed the pavilion, took out a long white handkerchief, and began to daub at tears. With only 
half his face showing, he looked at Hsiang YU as if resentful and angry. Hsiang YU was startled and fell to his knees. Monkey turned his back. Hsiang YU flew over to kneel in front of Monkey and said, 
“Beautiful Lady, have pity on your bedfellow! Please, a little smile!” 
When Monkey didn't respond, Hsiang Yu could do nothing but tear up in sympathy. Then Monkey's face became red as a peach blossom. He pointed at Hsiang Yu and said, “Stupid thief! A feared 
general like you can't even protect a girl! How can you've the face to sit on this high platform?” 

Hsiang Yu only blubbered and didn't dare reply. Monkey put on a look of pity. He helped him up and said, “It's often said there's yellow gold on a man's knees. After this you really mustn't kneel without 
call.” 

Hsiang YU said, “What are you saying, Beautiful Lady? When | saw you knit your sorrowful brows, my heart and lungs were crushed. What do | care about my body? What did you mean by what you 
said?” 

Monkey said, “I can't keep it from you, Your Majesty. | was feeling a bit ill, and slept on the rattan couch for half an hour. But then | saw a monkey spirit jump out of the magnolia tree outside the window. 
He claimed to be the Great Sage Equal to Heaven and the Nun Sun Wukong, the one who caused a ruckus in the Heavenly Palace five centuries ago.” 


When Hsiang Yu heard this he leapt to his feet and shouted “Get my sword from the headboard of the jade bed! Get my sword! If you can't find the sword bring the tiger-head spear.” 

Then he scratched his head, stamped his feet, and bellowed, “Where is he now?” 

Monkey leaned over and said, “You needn't get so excited, Your Majesty. Don't get so angry that you hurt yourself. Let me tell you slowly. That ape was disgusting. He came up beside the couch and 
flirted lewdly with me. Though I'm not bright, how could | be as stupid as to mistake adultery for chastity? | shouted for the maids but didn't know the ape had said a charm to freeze them in their tracks. 
| knew something was wrong when I'd not get a single maid to come. | flung down my round fan and straightened my gown. The ape glared at me. Then he grabbed me and threw me into the Blossom 
Rain Tower, then turned and jumped away. | was terrified in the Blossom Rain Tower but | stole a glance to see where he'd gone. What do you think he did, Your Majesty? He went and sat on my 
flower-shaded rattan couch, changed into my likeness, and called for the maids. I'm afraid that in a little while he'll try to delude Your Majesty. I'm not worth troubling over — I'm just afraid that Your 
Majesty won't be able to tell the true from the false and will fall into poisonous hands. My crying was only for you, Your Majesty.” 

When Hsiang Yu heard this, he took the sword in his right hand and the spear in his left and screamed “Kill him!” 

He leapt from the pavilion and charged to the flower-shaded couch. There he cut off Beautiful Lady Yu's head and threw it, dripping with blood, into the lotus pond. He told all the maids, “Don't cry. This 
was a false lady, so | killed her. The real lady is in my pavilion.” 

Holding back their tears, the maids quickly followed King Hsiang to the pavilion. When they saw Monkey they changed from sad to happy and said, “Our true lady is indeed here. It nearly scared us 
maids to death.” 
King Hsiang was very happy. To the maids he said, “Sweep the Blossom Rain Tower. And carefully prepare some juice: first to calm the lady's nerves and second to celebrate my joy over killing the 
monster and dispelling doubt.” The maids below the pavilion answered, “Yes, Your Majesty,” in one voice. Meanwhile the maids in the pavilion came to soothe Monkey's breast and stroke his back. 
They offered tea and water, and some asked, “Were you afraid, Madam? Is your heart still thumping?” 

Monkey said, “A little.” 

1 asked, “You didn't fall and hurt your lower body, did you?” 

Monkey said, “No, | didn't. It's just that this gasping for breath is hard to bear.” 

King Hsiang said, “Gasping for breath isn't serious. Just calm down and sit for a while - you'll be all right.” 

Suddenly a couple of maids knelt before the king and the lady and said, “Your Majesty, My Lady, please come to the feast.” 

Monkey said to himself, “I'd not do everything he says yet.” He pretended to be seized by an evil spirit, and with his two eyes staring blankly at the king he said, “Give me back my head!” 

King Hsiang was alarmed and said repeatedly, “Beautiful Lady! Beautiful Lady!” Monkey did not respond but rolled his eyes back till only the whites showed. King Hsiang said, “This has to be Sun 
Wukong's ghost — it’s not dispersed yet and taken possession of Beautiful Lady's body. Quick! Get the yellow-robed Taoist priest to exorcise the spirit. Then she'll be all right.” 

A little while later 2 maids and the Taoist priest mounted the pavilion. The Taoist carried a bell and spat magic water from his mouth. He recited a spell: “In the time of the Three Emperors, there're the 
Yellow Emperor, Hstan Yuan, and the Divine Lord, Great Shun. Great Shun's name’s YU. Hstian-yuan's family name’s Kung-sun. Sun Yu and Yu Sun were originally related through marriage but today 
there's been a feud — when'll it be settled? | respect to your valiant spirit, Honourable Monk and Great Sage, Sir Sun. Fly quickly to the upper regions and start another row in the Heavenly Palace. 

Release Beautiful Lady YU and seek the Tang Priest. Quick! Quick! Follow my orders. Otherwise this Taoist priest will gain no merit and a Religious monk will have to come.” 

Monkey called out, “Taoist Priest! Do you know who I’m?” 

The priest knelt and said, “A millennium to you, my lady.” 

Monkey scolded, “Taoist Priest! Really! You can't get rid of me! I'm the Great Sage Equal of Heaven! I’ve a score to settle and | possessed her body to do it. Today’s an auspicious day. I'm determined 
to marry Beautiful Lady YU. Why don't you act as go-between? It'll be worth your while — you'll get the go-between's fee.” 

After that he yelled some more gibberish. The Taoist priest's limbs went numb. He could only hold his sword before him and wave it feebly back and forth. He meekly spat half a mouthful of magic water 
and recited in a low voice, “Make haste to follow the order of the Supreme Lord Lao-tzu.” 

But there was no response. Monkey was secretly sorry for the priest, so after a while he made his eyes look alive again. He called out, “Your Majesty ... dear Husband ... where’re you?” 

King Hsiang was greatly pleased. He immediately gave the priest a hundred taels of white gold and sent him back to the temple. Then he hurried over to help Monkey to his feet and said, “Beautiful 
Lady, why did you frighten me so?” 

Monkey said, “I don't know. | only saw that Monkey coming near my couch again, and then | felt dizzy. When he took that mouthful of magic water from the Taoist priest, he couldn't stand steady, then 
he ran off in the direction of the southwest. But now my head is very clear — let's go and drink some juice.” 

King Hsiang took Monkey's hand. They walked down from the pavilion and went to sit in the Blossom Rain Tower. There phoenix-lamps cast their brilliance, cinnamon candles flickered, and the maids 
all stood in rows. After several rounds of juice, Monkey suddenly stood up and said to Hsiang YU, “Your Majesty, | want to sleep.” 

Hsiang YU quickly called, “Maid P'ing-hsiang! Light the candles.” The two of them went into the bedroom holding hands. They had a cup of tea from Mount Chieh and sat side-by-side on the couch. 
Monkey thought, “If | leave now, I'll not get any information about the First August Emperor of Ch'in. But what if | go inside the bed curtains with him and he makes some move? Should | let him or not? 
I'd be better off finding a way to escape.” And he said to Hsiang Yu, “Your Majesty, there's something I've been meaning to say to you but there's been so much going on that every time | see you | 
forget. Ever since I've been with you, I've hoped to have children to carry on after us forever. Who would have thought that these several years there'd be no results? And also, Your Majesty, you love 
only me and haven't had to look around for concubines. Now the snow drifts in your locks and your body's grown plump. Although I'm not clever | secretly fear you'll become a lonely man, and that 
when you die you'll be a ghost without an heir. The maid P'ing-hsiang has natural beauty and supple grace; her eyes embrace a man like mist. I've sounded out her literary taste several times and find 
her quite sensitive. Why doesn't Your Majesty call her to serve you tonight?” 

The colour drained from King Hsiang's face and he said, “Beautiful Lady, | think today's shock must have tipped your heart. Why should such a jealous person as you say such an unjealous thing?” 

Monkey smiled and said, “Your Majesty, it's only for your own good that I'm not usually so tolerant. Now | give you my leave for the sake of your sons and grandsons. My heart isn't tipped. | only hope 
that in the future your heart won't become slanted.” 

King Hsiang said, “Beautiful Lady, even if you asked me ten thousand times, I'd not dare to take P'ing-hsiang. Have you forgotten so soon that five years ago on the fifteenth of the first month, the time 
of the Lantern Festival, we vowed to share life and death together? Now you're teasing me.” 

Monkey saw that it would not work. He smiled again and said, “Your Majesty, | only fear you might forsake me. How’d | ever forsake you? But now there’s something else that might upset you.” 


068 

4 Drumbeats between Ch'in and Ch'u; Beautiful Ladies True and False, Appear in the Same Mirror 
Hsiang YU asked Beautiful Lady YU, “What's it?” 
Monkey said, “The shock I'd from that ape today upset my heart and blood. Perhaps Your Majesty would enter the silk curtain of mutual happiness first? I'll stay here on the couch and rest a while. I'd 
also like to have some green tea and wait till the depression in my heart eases. Then I'll come to bed.” 
Hsiang YU embraced Monkey and said, “How'd | leave you and go to sleep alone? I'll stay up till the first watch if you don't go to bed till the first watch. I'll stay up all night if you don't go to bed all night. 
Beautiful Lady,” he continued, “I've had too many cups of juice tonight. My insides are knotted in a World of Grief. Let me tell you some stories to keep you company and calm myself too.” 
Monkey giggled and said, “I hope Your Majesty will control your temper and talk slowly.” 
King Hsiang assumed an air of forbearance and impassioned indignation to deliver his story, grasping his scabbard with one hand and placing his left foot forward. He began: “Beautiful Lady, Beautiful 
Lady, my life is complete! This Hsiang Yu is a true man. Until | was twenty I'd not studied calligraphy or swordsmanship. When | saw how stupid the Ch'in Emperor was, | led eight thousand men and 
took along the seventy-two year old Fan Tseng! with the one intention of replacing the Ch'in Emperor. At that time there was a Taoist in a feathered robe who knew the workings of the cosmos. Several 
times | sent men to see him, and each time he said Ch'in's mandate had not run out. Beautiful Lady, do you think Ch'in's mandate had really expired or not? Later my power waxed strong and my 
ambition was fierce. Even good old Heaven was no longer in control. Ch'in shouldn't have ended but it did; Ch'u shouldn't have risen but it did. One morning | hung up recited I's”? head, reeking of 
blood. The courage of all the generals took flight and they stood with their tongues hanging and knees shaking. Those days it was great fun being Hsiang YU. When Chang Han came to do battle, | 
went out to meet him. The strength of the Ch'in army was still great then. A general rode in front of my horse and | shouted at him, ‘What's your name?’ When he saw my dark face and heard my 
rumbling voice, he fell from his silver dappled horse with a thud. | spared that one. Then came another general. On his fluttering red banner was clearly written, ‘Great Ch'in General Huang Chang.’ | 
thought, ‘If Ch'in has come to this, it's no longer great,’ and let out a laugh, ‘Ha! Ha! Hal’ on the battlefield. I'd not have guessed that the sight of my laughing face would crush his bones to powder. His 
spear hung limp and half his body sagged; frantic, he waved a signal banner and beat a green metal gong. Then | saw a general in gold armour rushing away toward his own camp. By then | was on 
the edge of the Ch'in encampment. | lost my temper and taunted Chang Han: ‘Little Ch'in general, you don't dare stick your own head out! Instead you send out these three- or four-inch high babies 
carrying wooden sticks to offer themselves to my sword.’ Then the blade of my precious sword said to me, ‘I don't want to drink the blood of those little lackeys - | want Chang Han's blood!’ | heeded 
the words of my precious sword and let Huang Chang go. Beautiful Lady, what kind of man do you think Chang Han was? It was already sunset and that lackey Chang Han was leading ten thousand 
crack troops. He didn't open his mouth, didn't say a word. He picked up a jade-handled mountain-cleaving axe and swung it at my head. My whole body was aflame and my precious blade began to 
hum. One of my aides, Kao San-ch'u, seemed to me a man of ambitious mettle. He said, ‘Chang Han must not be killed. He should be made to surrender. | need a cook in my camp — give the job to 
Chang Han.’ | listened to Kao San-ch'u's suggestion and lightly swung the tip of my sword, killed the dappled dragon-horse he rode, and sent him away with Kao. Was Chang Han ever scared!” 
Monkey said in a low voice, “Have some tea, Your Majesty, then you can slowly tell me more.” 
No sooner had Hsiang Yu stopped speaking than they heard a “thump...thump...” sound from the guard tower. It was the second watch. Hsiang YU said, “Beautiful Lady, don't you want to sleep?” 
Monkey said, “My heart is still depressed.” 
Hsiang YU said, “Since you'll not sleep, I'll go on with the story. Next morning at daybreak | was still snoring in my tiger-head tent when | heard a million men shouting from the south, ‘Ten millennia! 
Ten millennia!’ From the north a million shouted ‘Ten millennia! Ten millennia!’ From the west a million shouted, ‘Ten millennia!’ and from the east another million shouted, ‘Ten millennia!’ | rolled over 
in bed and asked the orderly, ‘I suppose that's the Emperor of Ch'in who's led his soldiers out to fight me? Since he's also an emperor I'll put on a new suit of armour today.’ Beautiful Lady, what do you 
think the orderly said? He knelt beside my tent and said with a stutter, ‘Y-Your M-M-Majesty is mistaken; are you still using the word Ch'in today? The lords from the eight directions stand before Your 
Majesty's jade tent and shout ten millennia!” 
“Hearing him say this | quickly combed my hair and put on my helmet, washed my feet and put on my shoes but | didn't bother to put on new armour. | gave orders at once calling all the lords under 
Heaven to come through the gate and hear me speak. My order was given at 9:00 a.m. Twelve o'clock passed. One o'clock passed. But the lords outside the gate had not yet come in. | began to have 
doubts. | told the orderly to go out and ask the lords, ‘Since you want to see me, come in on the double! Do you expect me to come out and see you?’ | was going to say something more when the 
gates of the camp were suddenly thrown wide open. | saw all the world's kings and lords all shortened by one half! | was shocked and the colour left my face. | thought to myself, ‘Why do these heroes 
have only half a body each?’ When | looked closely, | saw they were using their knees as feet and crawling step-by-step up the stairs. Before my tent and to the right, several people wearing crowns 
and pearled robes knelt face down, and to the left knelt still others. | was just about to reproach them and say, ‘Why did it take you so long to come in after | called?’ when my aides reported, ‘Your 
Majesty, when all the lords now at the foot of the steps received Your Majesty's orders, they assembled for a conference in front of your tent. They didn't dare walk through the gate standing up. They 
didn't dare merely salute with folded hands, nor did they dare appear disorderly. They discussed it among themselves, then fell salute on the ground and didn't move. They talked it over — they were 
sad and anxious, worried and depressed, frantic and bewildered. Finally they decided on a knee-walking method; only then did they dare come to meet you.’ When | heard this I'd a bit of compassion 
and called out, ‘You lords of all the earth, raise up your heads!’ Who do you think dared to move his head or legs? | only heard a rumbling from the ground. It wasn't the sound of a bell or drum or gold- 
ringed reed whistle. When | listened carefully, it turned out that the lords were still saying, ‘Ten millennia!’ They continued to respect and did not dare lift their heads. Thinking back on it, that was a 
great year for Hsiang Yu.” 
Monkey made a sound like a flower falling on an empty stairway and said, “Your Majesty, you must be exhausted, have a little green bean broth. Wait a bit and then go on with the story.” Just as Hsiang 
Yu stopped speaking, the drum in the guard tower was sounded 3 times. Monkey said, “It's the third watch.” 
Hsiang Yu said, “Beautiful Lady, your heartsickness hasn't yet passed. Allow me to continue the story. After this, the Lord of P'ei4 was disrespectful and put me off a bit but | ignored him and entered 
the Land-within-the-Passes. | saw a man ten miles off, conspicuous in a crown studded with pearls and jade, like the sun, moon, and stars. He wore an elegant robe with mountains, dragons and water 
weeds embroidered upon it and rode a rich chariot painted green and blue and carved with phoenixes among coiled dragons. His retinue of officials carrying silver and gold seals and draped in yellow 


robes with purple sashes numbered several thousand. They marched in a serpentine column that stretched into the far distance. When they saw me through the pines, the man in front quickly removed 
his sun-moon-star jade and pearl crown and put on a commoner’s hempen cap. He took off his mountain-dragon-water weed embroidered robe and put on a sombre green and white robe. He got down 
from the green and blue dragon and phoenix chariot and clasped his hands behind his back. The officials carrying silver and gold seals and wearing yellow robes and purple sashes all changed into 
grass sandals and wooden belts and painted their faces red. They fell to their knees and saluted themselves on the ground, wishing they could go several thousand or ten thousand feet into the ground. 
When they were thus properly dressed, | galloped up to them on my dark dappled horse. On all sides | heard ‘Ten millennia to our Lord! Ten millennia to our Lord!’ | glanced out of the corner of my 
eyes and the leader again said, ‘Ten millennia to our Lord — I'm King Tzu-ying of Ch'in and am come to surrender to you.’ In those days | was quick-tempered and my arm was swift. One swipe of my 
sword — ‘whoosh! — made them all, king and official, young and old, headless ghosts. Those were good times. | shouted, ‘Ghost of the First Emperor of Ch'in, you’d have expected this day!” 

As it happened that Monkey's mind was intent on seeking the First Emperor of Ch'in, he pretended to collapse when Hsiang YU came out with the name and said, “Your Majesty, don't say any more. | 
want to sleep.” 
When Hsiang Yu heard Beautiful Lady YU say she wished to sleep, what could he do but agree? He forthwith shut his mouth. They heard the guard tower drum beat 

“thump...thump...thump...thump...thump” — in the fifth watch. Monkey said, “Your Majesty, the last part of the story was really long. We missed the drum for the fourth watch.” 

Monkey laid down on the couch, and Hsiang YU, too, laid down and shared the pillow. Monkey said to Hsiang Yu, “I can't sleep, Your Majesty.” 

Hsiang Yu said, “Since Beautiful Lady can't sleep, I'll tell more of the story.” 

Monkey said, “It's all right for you to tell stories but this time don't say such shameless words.” 

Hsiang Yu said, “What do you mean by shameless words?” 

Monkey said, “There's no shame in talking about others but talking about oneself is shameless. Let me ask you where the First Emperor of Chin’s now?” 

Hsiang Yu said, “Ah, the First Emperor was also quite a man. Except for one thing — where other men were complacent, he was foolish.” 

Monkey said, “He conquered six states and built the Great Wall. He must have been an intelligent man.” 

Hsiang YU said, “Beautiful Lady, one must distinguish intelligent foolishness from foolish intelligence. The First Emperor's intelligence is foolish intelligence. His Primal Celestial Excellency saw that 
the Emperor was intensely oblivious and didn't belong in the World of the Ancients, so he sent him to the World of Oblivion.” 

lonkey caught the words “World of Oblivion” but they didn't mean anything to him. He quickly asked, “How far is the World of Oblivion from here?” 

Hsiang Yu said, “The World of the Future lies in between.” 

Monkey said, “Since it's a World of Oblivion separated from us by a World of the Future who knows that he's in the World of Oblivion?” 

Hsiang Yu said, “Beautiful Lady, you don't understand. In a place called Fish-mist Village stands the Jade Gate with two doors. Inside the gate is a hidden path that leads to the World of the Future. In 
the World of the Future there is another hidden path that leads to the World of Oblivion. Some time ago there was a man called New Being, also known as Newly Retired Scholar. He was really brave! 
One day he pushed open the Jade Gate and went to the World of Oblivion, found his dad, and returned home. When he came back his hair and beard were completely white. After one visit, that Newly 
Retired Scholar shouldn't have made a second one but he wasn't satisfied. So three years later he again went through the Jade Gate, this time to look for his dad-in-law. Great YU, the Dark Emperor, 
was furious. He didn't wait for him to return but ordered someone to put seals on the Jade Gate. When the Newly Retired Scholar came back from the World of Oblivion, and found the Jade Gate 
sealed, he shouted the whole day but no one answered. To the east no one received him, to the west no one cared about him. It's hard to be a man in the middle. Happily, the Newly Retired Scholar 
was good-natured. He's lived in the World of the Future for more than ten years now and still hasn't come home.” 

Monkey exclaimed, “Your Majesty, this Jade Gate is truly a wonder. | want to go see it tomorrow!” 

King Hsiang said, “That's no trouble. It's only a few steps from here to Fish-mist Village.” 

As he was speaking, they heard the cock crow three times. Eight green silk windows turned fish-belly white as the sun slowly rose above the eastern mountains — the dawn was exhilarating. Four of 
Beautiful Lady YU's maids were walking outside the window. Footsteps could be heard but no voices. Monkey yelled, “P'ing-hsiang! | want to get up.” 

A maid answered from outside the window, ‘I'll send her in.” Shortly, P'ing-hsiang pushed the door and entered the room. Hsiang Yu helped Monkey up, and they sat together. Another maid rushed in 
and asked, “Would Your Ladyship come to Heaven's Poem Cottage to wash?” 

Monkey was about to move when he had another thought and said to himself, “If I'm too hasty, I'll lose Beautiful Lady's grace.” 

He gently pushed open the two panels of a green silk window and picked a pomegranate flower and leaf. He fondled it in his hand, then dropped it to the mosaic pavement. Monkey turned and left, and 
not long afterward came to Heaven's Poem Cottage. There he saw a silver lacquer box and a box of fragrant powder on a long, exquisitely carved desk. Beside the boxes sat a jade-green crystal cup 
holding a peach powder puff. To the left of the silver lacquer box was a basin painted with purple flowers, in which there was a hairband. A delicate vase contained dark eyebrow paint. On the right side 
lay a large comb for oiling the hair and three small ones. On the left lay a set of green jade combs: five medium green jade oil combs, and five small ones. Below them were four large striped rhinoceros 
horn combs and four small red-stone combs. Above right was placed a delicate ice-jade bottle holding hundred-fragrance cologne. There was also 100-nippled cloud-striped jar nearly two-thirds full of 
alcohol for moistening the fingernails. A stone basin shaped like a square jade seal was placed above left. The basin contained clear water over several curious stones, and across the stones lay a 
little bamboo bristle brush. Below on the right lay four large and ten small dark and soft brushes and six human-hair brushes. Beside these last brushes lay a half-water and half-oil comb, and two 
combs with blunt teeth. A pair of gold tweezers, jade-inlaid scissors, a face-cleaning blade, a glass of pure rose-dew, a goblet of green rice-powder for washing hands, and a glass of jade-green fragrant 
oil were arranged beside an ancient bronze mirror. When Monkey saw the mirror he quickly took a look to compare himself with the real Beautiful Lady, and saw that the face in the mirror was prettier. 
Several maids hovered around Monkey: some fixed his hair, some changed his clothes. When the morning toilet was completed, Hsiang YU bounded into the lodge and shouted, “Beautiful Lady! Let's 
go to the Jade Gate!” 

Monkey was delighted. Hsiang YU called for the sedan chair. Monkey said, “You're such a bore, Your Majesty! It's only a short walk in the shade of pines and cedars. It would be so vulgar to take a 
sedan chair.” 

Hsiang YU bellowed, “Forget the sedan chair!” 

The two of them went out hand-in-hand and before long arrived at the gate. There were no seals to be seen on it and Monkey pushed it halfway open. He thought, “If | don't go now, when will |?” 

And he lunged through. Hsiang Yu was dumbfounded. He sputtered helplessly and grasped at Monkey's skirt but caught only the air and toppled forward with a thud. Monkey paid him no mind, and 
went on by himself. After plunging headlong through the gate, Monkey rolled on and on for several miles. In his ears he heard the cries of the King of Ch'u and the wailing of the maids. After rolling a 
few more miles, he could no longer hear them but he still hadn't come to the World of the Future. Monkey grew anxious and shouted, “Oh no! No! All along I've been fooling other people but now it's 
me who's been tricked into this bottomless well by Hsiang YU!” 

Suddenly he heard a voice beside him say, “Great Sage, don't worry. You've already come better than half way. It's only a little farther to the World of the Future.” 

Monkey said, “Big brother where are you?” 

The voice said, “I'm right next door to you, Great Sage.” 

Monkey said, “Then why don't you open the door and let me come in for tea?” 

The voice said, “This is No-man's World. There's no tea to drink.” 

Monkey said, “If it's No-man's who's that talking about No-man?” 

The voice said, “Great Sage, you're so intelligent - why so dense now? I'm disembodied; in fact, I've never even been joined with a body.” 

When Monkey saw that no door would be opened, he grew so angry that he put all his strength into rolling, and rolled all the way down to the World of the Future. He had just stood up and taken a few 
steps when he encountered the Six Thieves he had first met years ago.® He snorted and said, “Bah! Time is out of joint - I'm seeing ghosts in broad daylight.” 

The Six Thieves yelled, “Don't run away, pretty lady. Wait ‘til we strip off your clothes and take your jewels to pay for your safe conduct.” 


069 
In the World of the Future, Monkey Exterminates the 6 Thieves; As Yama’ for Half a Day Monkey Judges Good and Evil 

As Monkey, in the person of Beautiful Lady YU, plunged helter-skelter through the Jade Gate, he was concentrating on reaching the World of the Future and hadn't returned to his own form. When he 
heard the threats of the Six Thieves, he realised this and quickly stroked his face to effect the transformation. “Take a good look at my cudgel, you thieves!” he growled. 

The courage of the Six Thieves was immediately shattered. They knelt by the side of the road and wailed to Monkey for pity, “Great Sage, Nun of Mercy, we’d not have molested your Master that time 
under the ivy-covered tree and brought down your noble wrath. We six brothers all lay dead at once. When our spirits went into the World of the Ancients, because of our reputations as thieves, we'd 
not stay there. We'd only come here and rob in broad daylight to make a living. We've not done anything even half bad. We respect to you, and hope that you'll spare us.” 

Monkey said, “I’d spare you but you'd not have spared me.” 
And he brought down his cudgel and pounded the thieves into meat cakes. Then he walked away, intent on finding the hidden path. All at once a pair of boys wearing black grabbed Monkey and said, 
“You've come just in time, my lord Great Sage. Our King Yama took ill and died. The Jade Emperor is busy with some kind of construction work and didn't have time to send anyone — he doesn't care 
that the Underworld has no master. If my lord Great Sage could take charge for us for only half a day, we’d be most grateful.” 

Monkey thought it out. “If | waste half a day I'll be unable to see the First Emperor of Ch'in until tomorrow morning. If the Master should be killed by some monster what would | do? What could | do? I'd 
better send them away.” 
And he said, “I can do many other things but | certainly can't be a King Yama. Although I'm a very straightforward person, | can be quick-tempered at times and hurt people. If there were a charge 
brought to the court of the Underworld and the plaintiff tumed out to be right, | might suddenly become angry and take out my cudgel and beat the defendant to pieces. In a case that wasn't clear-cut, 
it would be all right if there were a firm witness. But if a witness knelt forward and said, ‘The plaintiff isn't quite right, and the defendant is so pitiful,’ then what would | do?” 

The boys wearing black said, “You're mistaken, Great Sage. The question of life and death would be in your hands. What's there to be afraid of?” Disregarding Monkey's protests, they dragged him 
through the Gate of Ghosts, and called out, “Let all palaces empty to welcome the true King Yama we've found!” 

Monkey had no choice but to ascend the main hall. An attendant bailiff presented Monkey with the jade seal and asked him to take charge. At the foot of the stairs stood red-haired devils, green-toothed 
devils, and a motley group of master-less, homeless devils, numbering in all eighty million four thousand and six hundred. In the front of the hall stood seven-foot-tall bailiffs, tattooed bailiffs, chief-circuit 
bailiffs, fate-arbiter bailiffs, sun bailiffs, moon bailiffs, lotus bailiffs, water bailiffs, iron-faced bailiffs, white-faced bailiffs, life-suspending bailiffs, sudden-death bailiffs, treachery-penetrating bailiffs, bailiffs 
who help people onto the correct way, and women bailiffs, in all five million sixteen people. They presented a ledger that listed their names and saluted with, “A millennium!” 

Denizens of the 9 other Halls of Hell also came to pay their respects. Monkey sent all of them from the hall. Then Bailiff Ts'ao, responsible for the Life and Death Register, knelt at the foot of the stairs 
and sent up the register. Monkey took it and leafed through the pages, thinking, “The other day | killed a lot of boys and girls. | wonder if they're listed here?” He turned a page and thought, “If it says 
that Sun Wukong beat to death several thousand boys and girls, should | cover it up or must | send a summons?” 

He hadn't yet decided when it occurred to him, “Oh, that's right - when | came here before, | just crossed out the names of everyone named Sun,? and all those little monkeys still depend on my 
influence to keep them free from the judgement of merit and demerit. Anyway, what little devil would dare report what | do? And what little bailiff would dare write it down?” 

He flipped over the pages and threw the book down the stairs. Bailiff Ts'ao held it as before and stood beside the left pillar. Monkey shouted, “Bailiff Ts'ao! Bring me a novel to help me pass the time!” 
The bailiff said, “Your Honour, we're extremely busy here. You've not time to read a novel.” He presented a calendar with a yellow binding and said, “Your Honour, your predecessor always followed 
a calendar.” 

Monkey opened the calendar and looked it over. Right at the beginning there was the 12' month and the first month came at the very end. Each month began with the 30" or 29% and ended with the 
first. Monkey was startled and said, “How strange! In the World of the Future the calendar runs backwards. | can't figure it out!” 

He was about to summon the calendar-maker and ask him about it when a bailiff entered the hall and said, “Your Honour, tonight at court we must interrogate the recited prime minister Ch'in Kuei.” 
Monkey thought, “This Ch'in Kuei must have been an evil man. If he sees me looking like a compassionate monk, why should he be afraid?” He told the bailiffs “Bring the judicial robes,” and he put on 
the nine-tasselled mortarboard, the robe embroidered with scaly dragons and a pair of iron emotion-repelling shoes. 

A tin ink-well containing vermilion ink and a copper brush-stand against which leaned two bright red brushes were placed on the table. On the left were arranged a bamboo tube holding slips on which 
were written the names of minor Underworld clerks, a tube containing slips with the names of all circuit bailiffs, one with the names of bailiffs presiding over courts, and three enumerating the nameless 


attending devils. Monkey summoned five kinds of devil-bailiffs. First came the green-robed bailiff leading five hundred green-faced, green-skinned, green-toothed, green-fingered, green-haired devils 
known as “crack Ch'in-hacking devils.” Then came the yellow-turbaned bailiff leading five hundred gold-faced, gold-armoured, gold-armed, gold-headed, gold-eyed, gold-toothed “fierce Ch'in- 
extinguishing devils.” The red-bearded bailiff led five hundred crimson-faced, crimson-bodied, crimson-clothed, crimson-boned, crimson-biled, crimson-hearted “crack Ch'in-shaming devils.” The white- 
bellied bailiffled five hundred white-livered, white-lunged, white-eyed, white-bowelled, white-bodied, white-mouthed “small Ch'in-killing devils.” And finally came the dark-faced bailiff leading five hundred 
black-clothed, black-skirted, black-boned, black-headed, black-footed (in fact only their hearts weren't black) devils called “good Ch'in-flogging devils.” 

The devil brigades corresponded to the five colours, and, in accord with the five phases,‘ they stood in the five directions. They stood in five orderly groups before the Court of Fearful Ambition. Monkey 
also called for patrolling messengers who wore snow-white turbans and had protruding bones and sinews and black faces with coppery eyes, to guard the area beyond the screen on the east side of 
the hall. Another squad of patrolling messengers wearing blood-spotted turbans and having protruding bones and sinews, powder-coloured faces and trunks like elephants guarded the area beyond 
the western screen. Monkey placed a certain Bailiff Hsu in charge of these messengers. Then he summoned a unit of 600 grassy-haired, tattoo-faced, insect-throated, windy-eyed, iron-handed, copper- 
headed marshals and put Bailiff Ts'ui in charge of them. One hundred dragon-coloured devils, wearing fish clothes and having the heads and mouths of tigers and the horns and hooves of cattle, carried 
letters and official documents. Some male shamans wearing onion-flower hats received guests and saw them off. Two hundred devils with weedy hair rolled up the screens and swept the grounds. 
Also at hand there were seven hundred poets, each with nine dragon-feet and the head of a phoenix. Monkey ordered, “Little devils, raise the iron-wind flagpole.” The bailiffs passed on his command 
and everyone outside the screens assented in one voice. The iron pole was raised to the thundering cadence of three hundred and thirty-three drumbeats. Two great white banners flashed and showed 
eight characters clearly written in pure gold: “Revenge Evil, Purify Hatred, Honour the Upright, Exterminate Deviants.” Monkey watched as the flagpole was raised and had a notice issued saying: 
From Sun, presiding in the main hall: The way of Heaven is vast; the law is beyond all emotion. A bailiff who adjudicates good and evil must be beyond selfishness. Whoever transgresses the law 
draws himself into its inexorable net. Proclaimed in this third month. 

After the notice was displayed, those outside the screens shouted in unison and beat the drum another round. Monkey issued a summons tablet that read: “Ch'in Kuei.” 

A bailiff knelt, received the tablet, and flew past the screen. When he hung it on the eastern pillar, there was a great commotion beyond the screen and another thundering drum round was sounded. 
Monkey shouted, “Roll up the screens!” Several devils rushed in and rolled up the fighting-tiger screens. All the bailiffs stood facing each other from either side of the hall in flying-goose formation and 
glared like eagles. From outside there came another round of drumbeats. A conch-shell was blown and cloud chimes struck. A white paper banner was brought in to the chaotic clatter of stones, and 
on it was written: 

The recited thief, Ch'in Kuei 

The devil-attendants at the first gate shouted, “Bring in the recited thief, Ch'in Kueil” 

Assent came in unison from outside the screen and the drum again thundered. The conch was again blown and the cloud chimes struck. In the hall a green-toothed bailiff began to sound the Deviant- 
eliminating Bell. There were drum rolls from the outer gate, drum rolls from the inner gate, and drum rolls from beyond the screen. Smoke billowed and the stars of the Dipper were scattered. The devils 
at the outer gate shouted, “Ch'in Kuei enters!” The five classes of devil bailiffs within the screen and all the devil attendants beyond the screen roared in one voice; the noise was thunderous. When the 
drumming ceased, Monkey gave the command, “Loosen Ch'in Kuei's bonds! Let me question him carefully.” 

1000 jobless devils of heroic spirit quickly released the ropes, dragged Ch'in Kuei down from the stone slab to which he was tied, and kicked him a few times. Ch'in Kuei crouched on the ground, not 
daring to make a sound. Monkey called out, “Welcome, Prime Minister Ch'in.” 

070 
How Ch'in Kuel’d Not Redeem himself Even with 100 Bodies; the Great Sage Wholeheartedly Takes Refuge in Yiieh Fei 

The bailiff in charge of the register again presented his book of merits and demerits. Monkey looked through it and said, “Bailiff, why doesn't the name Ch'in Kuei appear in the record?” 

The bailiff answered, “Your Honour, Ch'in Kuei's guilt is great, his evil monstrous. | didn't dare to mix him in with the other ghosts, so | prepared a special record on him and inserted it at the back.” 
Monkey flipped back the pages and took out the record of Ch'in Kuei's evils. At the beginning it read: 

The ruler of Chin, Wu-ch'i-mai, gave Ch'in Kuei to his brother Ta-lan as a hostage. When Ta-lan attacked Shan-yang, Ch'in Kuei advocated negotiations. Ta-lan thereupon released Ch'in to return 
home. He was accompanied by his wife nee Wang. 

Monkey said, “Ch'in Kuei, after you became a minister to your emperor, you didn't seek to elevate yourself or spread your fame. Why did you enter into collusion with Chin?” 

Ch'in Kuei said, “This is nothing but the slander of the Chin people. It doesn't have a thing to do with me.” Monkey asked a silver-faced, jade-toothed bailiff to bring a treachery-reflecting water mirror. 
In the mirror Ch'in Kuei was plainly seen salute before the Chin king saying, “Ten millennia.” The Chin king whispered in Kuei's ear, and Kuei nodded his head. Ch'in Kuei whispered into the king's ear, 
and the king smiled. When Ch'in Kuei was about to leave, the Chin king again whispered in his ear, and Ch'in Kuei responded, “It goes without saying! Indeed.” 

Monkey was enraged. He said, “Ch'in Kuei, do you see the Ch'in Kuei in the mirror?” 

Ch'in Kuei said, “But Your Honour, the Ch'in Kuei in the mirror doesn't know the suffering of the one outside the mirror.” 

Monkey said, “Soon he will know suffering.” He ordered iron-faced devils to inflict the “body covered with brambles” punishment. One hundred and fifty devils assented immediately and produced six 
million embroidery needles, pushing them everywhere into Ch'in Kuei's body. Monkey continued reading: 

In the first year of the Shao-hsing reign (1131), he was appointed vice-civil councillor of state. Kuei concealed his malicious intent, waiting only to attain the prime minister's office. 

Monkey threw back his head and roared with laughter. He said, “What were you waiting to do with the prime minister's office?” 

Chief Bailiff Kao said, “Today there are two kinds of people who wait for the prime ministership. One kind, the malodorous who only know how to eat and wear clothes and play with their wives and 
children, wait until they get the prime ministership and use it to make themselves elegant, to impress people in their home town, and to enslave and cheat others. The second is the kind who sells his 
country and topples the court, secretly wearing the emperor's mortarboard crown and handing down proclamations under the royal seal. He waits until he gets the prime ministership and uses it to 
monopolise political power, to control the emperor, and to reward or punish as he wills. Ch'in Kuei was the latter sort.” 

Monkey ordered small devils to slap Ch'in Kuei's face. A group of red-hearted, red-haired devils all grabbed hold of Ch'in and beat him from nine in the morning till one in the afternoon. Even then they 
did not want to stop. Monkey shouted, “You red-hearted devils, that's enough! There'll be time for more beating later.” He read on: 

In the eighth month he was appointed vice director of state affairs. In the ninth month LU I-Hao again became prime minister; he and Ch'in Kuei shared power. Kuei berated Lt’s faction. Promoting 
internal strength and non-resistance in external affairs, he banished I-Hao to Chen-chiang. The emperor told Academician Ch'i Ch'ung-li, “Kuei wants to hand the people of Hopei over to Chin, and the 
people of the Central Plain to Liu Yu. If Southerners thus return to the South and Northerners to the North and I’m a Northerner - where shall | go? 

Monkey said, “The recited emperor was right. In times like this, when common folk in the mountains and valleys receive their draft notices one day and see the imperial announcement the next that of 
them doesn't have a loyal heart? And you - to whom did you owe your noble rank among the Three Dukes, your ten-thousand-picul emolument, your official seal with its bright ribbons and your six- 
willow gate?’ To whom do you owe your huge courtyard and fancy embroidery? You never thought about your emperor or repaying your country's kindness but all the time nurtured treachery and 
poison. You put the emperor, high as the ninth heaven, in a position where he couldn't protect one foot of the crossbeam in his house. Do you call this loyalty? Or treachery!” 

Ch'in Kuei answered, “Although I’m stupid, | tried to protect the emperor and pacify the realm. ‘Southerners return south, and Northerners return north’ was nothing but a current joke at the time! Your 
Honour, you'd not take it into account.” 

Monkey said, “This is no joke!” He ordered the “little dagger-mountain” brought in. 

2 fierce weedy-haired devils brought out a hill-shaped device bristling with knife blades. They threw Ch'in onto it, and his body dripped with blood. Monkey said, “This is just for fun, Prime Minister Ch'in. 
You’d not take it into account.” And he laughed loudly. He again read: 

During the eighth year (1138) he was appointed vice director of state affairs. An envoy of Chin came to negotiate peace with Wang Lun. Kuei went with the prime minister to see the emperor. Kuei 
alone lingered and said, “Bureaucrats are afraid of this and that. They are of no help in deciding an important matter. If Your Majesty decides to negotiate peace, | beg you to consult with me.” The 
emperor said, “I'll give authority to you alone.” Kuei said, “I hope Your Majesty will consider it for three more days.” 

Monkey said, “Let me ask you — if you wanted to be successful in the negotiations, a matter as urgent as wind and fire, why you wanted to wait three days? If there had been an official who was willing 
to spit blood and swear an oath to form a party of loyalists willing to sacrifice their lives, your plans would have been destroyed.” 

Ch'in Kuei said, “Your Honour, at that time there was only Emperor Ch'in Kuei. How could there have been an Emperor Chao?2 This ghostly prisoner of yours had a list of court officials that | always 
kept in my sleeve. If any pro-Chao official should be disrespectful and oppose me, his head would immediately disappear. Tell me, Your Honour, from the time P’an-ku created the world until it returns 
to Hun-tun, how many such loyalists, willing to sacrifice their lives, might there be? Even if there had been a loyalist at court then, was he going to form a party all by himself? Since no party was formed, 
| enjoyed peace and luxury.” 

Monkey said, “Since it was like that, how did the recited emperor's palace look to you?” 

Ch'in Kuei said, “In the eyes of your ghostly prisoner, that day the hundred officials in the palace were all ants.” 

Monkey ordered, “White-faced devils! Pound Ch'in Kuei into fine powder and change him into a million ants to avenge the grievance of those court officials.” 

100 white-faced devils looked sharp on receiving their command. In a flash they had brought out a pestle fifty feet long and one hundred feet wide and proceeded to crush Ch'in Kuei into a peach- 
blossom-pink paste. As it spread on the ground, the paste transformed into tiny ants, scurrying hither and thither. Monkey ordered King Puffer's bailiff to come and blow Ch'in Kuei back together again. 
He asked Ch'in Kuei, “Well, are those hundred officials ants? Or is the prime minister an ant?” 

The skin on Ch'in Kuei's face was like dirt. He only sighed. Monkey said, “Now you tell me, Ch'in Kuei, how the emperor looked to you that day?” 

Ch'in replied, “When your ghostly prisoner stood in the ranks at court, | looked at the silk five-clawed dragon robe as if it were some old rag in my trunk. | looked at the mortarboard crown as if it were 
my frayed square cap. | saw the sun-moon fan as if it were my banana leaf, the gold imperial palace as if it were my study. | looked at the gate to the Forbidden City as if it were my bedroom door. As 
for His Majesty, | saw only a grass-green dragonfly dancing in a circle.” 

Monkey said, “Enough! I'll trouble you to become an emperor.” 

He ordered the Barons of Light and Dark from the Board of Baleful Heaven to wash Ch'in Kuei in the Sea of Boiling Oil. They tore open his ribs and made them into 4 wings, changing him into a 
dragonfly. Monkey again ordered him blown back to his original form and asked, “Ch'in Kuei, may | further ask how you passed those three days of leisure?” 

Ch'in Kuei replied, “How'd Ch'in Kuei have any spare time?” 

Monkey said, “You're a traitor and a thief. You didn't have to kill barbarians in the West or beat back the Northern Tribes. You didn't have to establish constant principles or rectify names — why didn't 
you've any spare time?” 

Ch'in Kuei said, “Your Honour, during those three days | was busy watching the officials. When | saw one with a heart that had the name ‘Ch'in’ written on it, | put a vermilion dot above his name. Large 
dots meant a heart on which Ch'in was large; small dots, a heart on which Ch'in was small. Later on I'd appoint the large Ch'in hearts to high posts while the small Ch'in hearts would suffer a slight 
reversal. Some could have been either pro-Ch'in or pro-Chao. | left their names unmarked since | planned to banish them later. If | found anyone who tended to be pro-Chao, | drew a circle by his name 
in thick ink. A large circle meant his guilt was great; a small circle meant little guilt. Whether an entire household was wiped out or guilt was shared only by wives and children, whether only one's 
parents’ and wives' families were exterminated or everyone within the nine degrees of relationship were cut down, all depended upon my whim.” 

Monkey was furious. He shouted, “Brother Chang! Brother Teng! Why didn't you strike him down before? You let him remain in the world to carry on like that? All right - though Lord Teng didn't use his 
thunderbolts, there's still the thunder of Lord Sun.”3 He ordered ten thousand devils who were imitation thunder gods, each carrying an iron whip, to beat Ch'in Kuei till no trace of him remained. Then 
he again had the bailiff blow him back to his true form and once more read from the record: 

Three days passed. Ch'in Kuei lingered and reported to the emperor as before. Though the emperor was beginning to agree, Kuei was afraid he would change his mind, so he said, “I wish Your Majesty 
would think it over three more days.” After three days the emperor decided in favour of the peace negotiations. 

Monkey said, “And how did you pass those three days of leisure?” 

Ch'in Kuei said, “I’d no leisure those three days either. When | went to court and saw that the recited emperor had decided in favour of peace negotiations, it was an accomplishment sweet as honey. 
When | left the court gates, | went directly to have a feast arranged at Copper Bird Tower to celebrate having conquered recited, bolstered Chin, and secured my own career. | was drunk the whole 
day, and the next day | held a great feast for the officials with ‘Ch'in hearts.’ The poems of Chin was performed, along with the ‘flying-flower sabre exercise.’ We didn't use any recited things or say so 
much as half a word about it. | got good and drunk that day, too. The third day | sat alone in my Sweep-away Loyalty Study and laughed heartily all day. By night | was drunk.” 


Monkey said, “You really had a fancy for juice those three days, didn't you? Well, today I’ve several cups of good juice to offer you, Mr. Prime Minister.” 
He ordered 200 drill devils to carry out a vat of human pus and pour it into Ch'in Kuei's mouth. Monkey threw back his head and roared with laughter. He said, “The first emperor of recited, T'ai-tsu, 
suffered to win the empire. Ch'in Kuei gladly gave it away.” 
Ch'in Kuei said, “I'm not glad about this human pus juice today. Ah, Your Honour, there will be many Ch'in Kueis in the future — even today their number is not small. Why is it only | who must suffer?” 
Monkey said, “Who asked you to be the teacher of today's Ch'in Kueis and the model for future ones?” He ordered the crack gold-clawed devils to bring a saw, tie Ch'in Kuei down, and saw him into 
ten thousand pieces. From the side, King Puffer's bailiff quickly blew him back together. Monkey again read the ledger: 
After peace negotiations were decided upon, Ch'in Kuel’d the Chin people in his power and made himself formidable. 
Monkey said, “When you had the Chin people in your power, how many hundred catties did they weigh?” 
Ch'in Kuei said, “When I'd them in my power they were as heavy as an iron Mount T'ai.” 
Monkey said, “Do you know how many catties Mount T'ai weighs?” 
Ch'in Kuei said, “Probably ten million catties.” 
Monkey said, “Your guess is off - you can weigh it yourself.” He ordered five thousand copper-boned devils to bring out an iron Mount T'ai and press it on Ch'in Kuei's back. 2 hours later, they pushed 
it aside for a look. They saw a flat Ch'in Kuei, changed into flakes of mud. Monkey ordered him blown back together so he could continue the interrogation. He read: 
The recited generals reported victories in every campaign but Kuei demanded retreat. In the ninth month he ordered the recall of generals from all fronts. 
Monkey asked, “Did those generals return on flying horses or did they walk back to court?” 
A bailiff reported, “They naturally returned on flying steeds, Your Honour.” Monkey ordered the bailiff in charge of transformations to change Ch'in Kuei into a dappled dragon horse. Several hundred 
fierce devils rode him and beat him. After an hour Monkey ordered him blown back to his original form and went on reading: 
1 day he managed to get twelve gold imperial tablets ordering the retreat of Yueh Fei. After Fei returned, all the territory he had recovered was soon lost again. Fei repeatedly requested to be put in 
command of the army but was refused. The Chin general Wu-chu sent Kuei a letter and he agreed to its contents. Because Grand Master of Remonstrance Mo-ch'i Hsieh bore a grudge against Fei, 
Ch'in Kuei goaded Hsieh into impeaching him. Ch'in further instructed Chang Chun to impeach Wang Kuei and lured Wang Chin into bringing false charges against Chang Hsien, saying that the latter 
plotted for the recall of Fei's army. Kuei ordered a messenger to arrest Yueh Fei and his son as witnesses against Chang Hsien. Ch'in Kuei ordered Ho Chu to interrogate Yueh Fei. Fei's robe at one 
moment fell open, showing the words “perfect loyalty to repay one's country” etched deep into the skin of his back. 
Ho Chu saw no evidence to support the charge and declared him innocent. Ch'in Kuei then shifted the commission to Mo-ch'i Hsieh. After Hsieh had held the office for a little over a month, Yueh Fei 
was sentenced to prison. Thus, due to many false testimonies, YUeh Fei was executed. He was 39 at that time. Monkey called out, “Ch'in Kuei, how did you feel about General Yieh's case?” He hardly 
finished speaking when he saw a hundred Ch'in Kueis salute at the foot of the steps, wailing and weeping. Monkey shouted, “Ch'in Kuei, one body is enough for you. Where would the house of recited 
get a hundred empires?” 
Ch'in Kuei said, “Your Honour, the other things were all right. But when you bring up the case of Lord Yueh, your ghostly prisoner hasn't enough skin to bear the punishment. If I'm asked about it, I'll 
not have enough words with which to answer. I'm afraid a hundred bodies are too few.” 
Monkey ordered each bailiff from all the lower courts to take away one Ch'in Kuei and interrogate and torture him. At once ninety-nine Prime Minister Ch'ins were dispersed to various places. From this 
side came the cry, “The case of Lord Yueh has nothing to do with me!” From that side came, “Your Honour, be good. Spare your ghostly prisoner one stroke.” 
Monkey was pleased. He turned to the bailiffs before his bench and remarked dryly, “I suppose that no criminal law was applied to this case here before?” Bailiff Ts'ao didn't dare reply but presented a 
number of documents for Monkey to look through. He opened them and found they were files from the lower courts of the Underworld. On the first sheet was written: 
Court of Yen: Ch'in Kuel’d the nature of “Blue Flies.”4 He plotted the execution of a whole family. Yueh Fel’d moral principles white as snow and enhanced the brilliance of the Yellow Banner.5 Kuel’d 
be called “stupid thief,” and Fei, “perfect patriot.” 
Monkey said, “This is too lenient. The word ‘stupid’ is not adequate for Ch'in Kuei.” The second file read: 
Court of Li: Ch'in Kuei's accusation reached an impasse; the “Sorrow of Ch'u” makes one sad.® 
Monkey said, “This is ridiculous! The crimes of the thief Ch'in are beyond counting and this bailiff takes the time to polish his lines. That proves that ‘literary men have difficulty judging a case.’ No need 
to finish it.” And he opened the 3" file: 
Court of Tang: An Elegy to General Yueh who issued the 3-word condemnation (there’s no need for proof) that shattered this Great Wall of ten thousand miles? 
Gaze northward: True, it’s worthy of tears; on southern branches in vain the magpies linger. 
The country followed him in destruction: prime minister and enemies rose at once. 
As the sun sets, the pine-wind rises; still heard, the clash of sword and spear. 
Monkey said, “Here's a poem that cuts through iron and nails.” And he called out, “Ch'in Kuei, in Lord Tang's poem the five-character line ‘Prime minister and enemies arose at once’ can be called a 
‘five-word condemnation.’ How would it be if | make it match your three-word condemnation? Just now however, | don't care about your three-word condemnation, nor will | use Lord Tang's five-word 
condemnation. | myself have a one-word condemnation.” 
A bailiff said, “What is the one-word condemnation, Your Honour?” 
Monkey said, “Hack!” 
He immediately ordered a hundred weedy-haired devils to bring out a furnace and forge twelve golden tablets. Outside the screen the drum was beaten three hundred and thirty-three strokes. Countless 
green-faced long-fanged devils charged in and grabbed hold of Ch'in Kuei. First they hacked him into sections like fish scales, then cut them off piece by piece and threw them in the furnace. When the 
fish-scale chopping was finished, Monkey shouted, “Principal Bailiff of Orthodox Records, destroy the first gold tablet!” 
Having done this, the bailiff reported in a loud voice, “Your Honour, the first gold tablet ordering the recall of General Yueh has been destroyed!” 
The drum was beaten another thunderous round. From the left fierce red-bodied devils jumped out, each carrying a knife with which to hack Ch'in Kuei. The slices they made looked like lines in ice. 
Monkey again shouted, “Principal Bailiff of Orthodox Records, destroy the second gold tablet!” 
The bailiff followed the order and reported loudly, “The second gold tablet ordering the recall of General Yueh is destroyed!” 
With another round of drumbeats, ten eyeless, mouthless, blood-faced crimson devils emerged from the east, each carrying a knife with which to hack at Ch'in Kuei. They slashed him into snowflakes. 
When the bailiff had destroyed the next tablet he reported, “The third gold tablet ordering the recall of General Yueh is destroyed.” 
The drum was beaten another round. Suddenly a drum sounded from the outer gate. A little fish-clothed devil carried in a large red card which he presented to Monkey who opened it and read it over. 
Five words were written on the card saying, “Salutations from recited General Fei.” 
When Bailiff Ts'ao saw this he immediately produced a scroll containing facts about all the officials in history. Monkey looked through it carefully, and noted the information on YUeh Fei. The drum was 
again beaten at the outer gate and gold reed-pipes blew outside the screen. Both were played loudly for an hour. A general strode forward and Monkey quickly descended from the main hall. He saluted 
with hands clasped and said, “Welcome, General.” After they had climbed the stairs he again saluted deeply with hands clasped. They had just entered within the screens when dear Monkey again did 
obeisance and said, “Master YUeh, your disciple’s had two masters. The first was the Patriarch SuAwakening;8 the second was the Tang Priest. Today I’ve met you, General, my third master, and the 
Three Teachings? are complete within me.” 
General YUeh demurred repeatedly but Monkey was insistent. He continued to salute and said, “General YUeh, today your disciple’s a cup of juice to set your heart at ease.” 
General Yueh said, “Thank you very much, disciple but | fear I'll be unable to drink it.” 
Then Monkey wrote a letter and looked around, saying “Where are the little devils who carry letters?” A group of ox-headed tiger-horned devils knelt all at once and said, “What is Your Honour's order?” 
Monkey said, “I want you to go up to Heaven.” 
An ox-head replied, “Your Honour, how can a bunch of sunken devils go up to Heaven?” 
Monkey said, “It's just that you don't have a way of getting there. Going to Heaven is really no problem.” Taking out a piece of paper he changed it into a lucky cloud and gave the letter to the ox-head. 
Then he remembered, “The day before yesterday the door to Heaven was closed tight. | wonder if it's open today?” He said, “Ox-head, go on this lucky cloud. If you find the door to Heaven closed just 
say you've a letter from the Underworld for Tushita Palace.”"° 
After Monkey had sent the ox-head off, he said, “Master Yueh, your disciple is most happy. I'll complete a verse for you.” 
General Ytieh said, “Disciple, I've spent years on horseback. I've never read a single line of scripture or spoken Ch'an words. How can | give you a verse to complete?” 
Monkey said, “Listen, Master, and I'll complete one anyway: for your ruler, perfect your loyalty; as an official, repay your country. Everyone is the King of Heaven; ‘everyone's a god.” 
Monkey had just finished reciting when he saw the ox-headed devil carrying a return letter. Ox-head landed on the stairs with a gold and purple calabash on his head. Monkey asked, “Was the gate of 
Heaven closed?” 
The ox-head replied, “Heaven's gate was wide open.” He presented Lao-tzu's reply. It read: 
The Jade Emperor is overjoyed at the Great Sage's interrogation of Ch'in Kuei: every word was true, every beating appropriate. | present you with this gold calabash — avoid using a drill on it! | hope 
the Great Sage will be careful. As for the business of sky gouging, it's a very long story. I'll tell you about it when we meet. 
Monkey read the letter and laughed loudly. He said, “The time | was in Lotus Flower Cave, I'd not have drilled open his treasure.'? Now the old man’s being sarcastic.” He saluted toward General Yueh 
with hands clasped and said, “Please sit a little while, Master, and allow me to prepare the blood juice.” 


071 

Monkey Returns to the Tower of Myriad Mirrors; in the Palace of Creeping Vines Wukong Saves Himself 
Monkey took the calabash in his hand and asked a bailiff to stand beside him. He whispered something into the bailiffs ear - we don't know what - and handed him the calabash. The bailiff went to the 
foot of the stairs, then jumped into the air shouting, “Ch'in Kuei! Ch'in Kueil” 
By then Kuei's heart was dead and his breath alone remained. This gave forth a sound of acknowledgment and was instantaneously sucked into the calabash. Monkey saw this and shouted, “Bring it 
here! Bring it here!” 
The bailiff hurried inside the screen and gave the calabash to Monkey. Monkey pasted a seal reading “Quickly follow the orders of most high Lao-tzu,” on the mouth of the calabash. An hour and forty- 
five minutes later, Ch'in Kuei was transformed into a bloody fluid. Monkey ordered a bailiff to bring out a gold-claw cup. He tipped the calabash and poured out the blood; then, kneeling, he offered the 
cup with both hands to General Yeh saying, “Master, drink of Ch'in Kuei's blood juice.” 
General YUeh waved it away and wouldn't drink. Monkey said, “Don't be silly, Master Yueh. You'd only hate the thief who stole recited — you needn't pity him.” 
General Yeh said, “I don't pity him.” 
Monkey said, “If you don't pity him, why not have a mouthful of juice?” 
General Yueh said, “You don't realise, disciple, that if a man on earth were to drink even half a mouthful of that thief and traitor's blood and flesh, his stomach would stink for ten millennia.” 
Seeing Master Yueh steadfastly refuse to drink, Monkey called a red-hearted devil and gave it to him. The red-hearted devil drank it and went to the back of the hall. An hour later there was suddenly 
a great commotion in front of the gate. The gate-keeper beat the cry-treachery drum. At the foot of the stairs the devils of five colours standing in rank in the five directions and the bailiffs of all courts 
of the five directions braced for action. Monkey was about to ask a bailiff what was going on when he saw that three hundred weedy-haired devils were already huddled at the foot of the white jade 
stairs holding the head of a blue-toothed, green-eyed, crimson-haired, red-bearded bailiff. They reported, “Your Honour, as soon as the red-hearted devil drank Ch'in Kuei's blood juice, his face changed. 
He ran into the Purple Palace of Destiny, pulled a dagger from his belt, and stabbed to death his benevolent master, the Arbiter of Destiny. Then he ran through the Gate of Ghosts and was reincarnated.” 
Monkey shouted for the devils to go away. Then General Yeh arose. From beyond the screen came three hundred and thirty-three beats of the drum and gentle strains of poems. Lances and blades 
cracked; swords and spears were thick as a forest. Fifty thousand chief bailiffs respected to send off Lord Yeh. Monkey said to them, “Arise and leave us.” The chief bailiffs responded to the order and 
retired to their own courts. Then countless fierce green-blooded, red-muscled devils saluted themselves to send off Lord Yueh. Monkey told them, “Arise and leave us.” 


300 upholding-righteousness yellow-toothed devils raised precious spears and shouted, “Farewell, Lord Yueh!” Monkey commanded, “Yellow-toothed devils, you'll escort Lord YUeh to his residence!” 
Monkey and Yueh Fei walked to the outer gate. Another round of drumbeats was sounded and the poems of the gold reed-pipes trilled. Monkey saluted with clasped hands and accompanied General 
Yueh to the Gate of Ghosts. The drum thundered another round. Ten thousand devils shouted with one voice and Monkey saluted deeply with hands clasped to see General Ytieh through the gate. He 
said loudly, “When you've some free time, Master, I'll come to receive instruction.” Saluting with hands clasped once more, he finally saw Master Yueh off. Immediately he leapt into the air and threw 
the mortarboard, the entwining-dragon robe, the pair of iron emotion-repelling shoes, and the square jade seal of King Yama down onto the Gate of Ghosts and left. 

Itis said that in Shantung Province there was a restaurant whose manager had lost all his hair and teeth. No one knew how many hundreds of years old he might be. All day long he sat in his shop and 
sold food. His sign said, “This is the Restaurant of the New Ancient.” Beneath this a line of small characters read, “Original name: Newly Retired Scholar.” 

When the Newly Retired Scholar returned from the World of Oblivion, he had found the Jade Gate tightly closed and couldn't pass through to the World of the Ancients. Consequently, he stayed in the 
World of the Future and opened a restaurant to pass his days. But he was a man unwilling to forget his roots, so he changed his name to the New Ancient. That particular day he was sitting in his shop 
drinking tea when he saw Monkey running heavily from the east, shouting, “What a stench! What a terrible stench!” 

The New Ancient said, “Good day, Sir.” 

Monkey stopped. “And who are you that you dare to call me Sir?” 

The New Ancient said, “I'm an ancient contemporary and a contemporary ancient. If | told you who I’m you'd just laugh at me.” 

Monkey said, “Go ahead and tell me, I'll not laugh.” 

The New Ancient said, “I'm the Newly Retired Scholar who used to live in the World of the Ancients.” 

When he heard this, Monkey made a quick salute with clasped hands and said, “My new benefactor! If it hadn't been for your help, I'd have had a hard time getting through the Jade Gate.” 

The New Ancient was startled, so Monkey told him his name and recounted the whole story. The New Ancient laughed and said, “Well, Mr. Sun, you still owe me a respect then.” 

Monkey said, “Don't joke about it. I've something important to ask you. What's causing this stench? It's not quite dead fish; then again it's not the smell of sheep either.” 

The New Ancient said, “If you want rankness, this is the place to come; if not, stay away. We're right next to the Tartars here. If you walk around for a while, your whole body will become rank, too.” 
When Monkey heard this, he thought, “I'm covered all over with hair. If | become polluted with this smell, I'll be a rank ape. What's more, | was just King Yama and interrogated a certain Ch'in Kuei into 
one thousand bits and ten thousand pieces. Come to think of it, the First Emperor of Ch'in was a Ch'in, and Ch'in Kuei was a Chiin. If Kuei wasn't his descendant, he was surely of the same clan — so 
the First Emperor will surely hold a grudge against me, and won't easily let go of the Mountain-removing Bell. If | were to get rough and steal it, I'm afraid I'd ruin my reputation. Better to ask the Newly 
Retired Scholar a question, then leap out of this mirror.” He said, “New Benefactor, do you know how | can get to the Emerald Green World?” 

The New Ancient said, “The way you came is the way to go.” 

Monkey said, “What slippery Ch’an talk! | know the way | came — rolling from the World of the Ancients down to the World of the Future was easy. But rolling up from the World of the Future to the 
World of the Ancients will be tough.” 

The New Ancient said, “If that's your problem, follow me. Come on!” 

He took Monkey with one hand and dragged him along until they came to a pool of blue water. Without uttering a word the New Ancient pushed Monkey and splash! He fell right back into the Tower of 
Myriad Mirrors. Monkey looked around wondering which mirror to leap into. Afraid of wasting time and delaying his master, he turned about, hoping to descend from the tower but a long search for 
stairs proved futile. He became anxious and pushed open a pair of sapphire windows. Outside the windows was a maze of exquisite crimson railings arrayed like cracks in ice. Luckily the spaces 
between supports were rather wide, and Monkey hunched up and scurried through one. Who'd have thought fate was against him, that the time was wrong, or that railings could catch one up? What 
were clearly railings arranged like cracks in ice suddenly became hundreds of red threads that tangled about Monkey so he couldn't move an inch. Monkey changed into a pearl and the red threads 
became a pearl-net. When Monkey couldn't roll through he instantly changed into a blue-bladed sword. The red threads became a scabbard. Monkey had no choice but to return to his own form. He 
cried, “Master where are you? Don't you know your disciple is in a lot of trouble?” 

And his tears fell like water from a spring. Suddenly there was a flash before his eyes and an old man appeared in the air. Saluting Monkey with his clasped hands he asked, “What're you doing here, 
Great Sage?” 

After Monkey had moaned the reasons, the old man said, “You don't realise that this is the palace of Little Moon King in the Emerald Green World. Once he was a student of mine. Later when he 
became a king, he spent his days in dissipation. He built thirteen palaces, corresponding to the thirteen classics. This is the Sixty-four Hexagram Palace.' When you became confused, you walked 
directly into the Palace of Entangling Vines of the hexagram Oppression? and were bound tight. I'll loosen the red threads for you and let you go search for your Master.” 

With tears in his eyes Monkey said, “If you can do this, Elder, I'll never be able to thank you enough.” 

The old man straightaway snapped the red threads one by one with his hands. Monkey, at last free, saluted very low and asked, “What is your name, Elder? When | see God, I'll register a great merit 
for you.” 

The old man said, “Great Sage, I'm called Sun Wukong.” 

Monkey said, “I'm called Sun Wukong, and you're called Sun Wukong, too. How can one Ledger of Merit have two Sun Wukongs? Why con't you tell me what you usually do for a living so | can 
remember a few facts about you?” 

The old man said, “You ask me what | do? I'm afraid it's enough to scare a person to death! Five centuries ago | wanted to seize the Heavenly Palace and situate myself there. The Jade Emperor made 
me Groom of the Heavenly Stables. Great Sage Equal to Heaven — that's me. | suffered a bit beneath Five Phases Mountain — suffered a bit until the Tang Priest came. | followed him seeking the ‘true 
fruit.’ There was danger and misfortune along the road to the Western Paradise. | chanced upon the Emerald Green World and have been hiding here ever since.” 

Monkey was furious and said, “You rascally six-eared ape!3 Have you come to trick me again? Take a look at my cudgel!” 

He pulled his cudgel from his ear and swung it down in front of him. The old man drew in his sleeves and left. He called back, “This is what's called saving oneself! Too bad you're unreal! Unreal! ... 
Unreal! ...” A beam of gold light struck Monkey's eyes, and the old man's form vanished. Only then did Monkey realise that the apparition had been his own true spirit. He quickly made a big salute 
thank himself. 


072 
Reading Accounts Before the Palace of the Hexagram of Limitation; Collecting Hairs on the Crest of the Hill of Grief 

When Monkey had finished thanking himself, he jumped down from the tower and walked to a gate. Above the gate hung a stone tablet inscribed with three large characters: “Limitation Hexagram 
Palace.” A purple and gold rope with a limitation hexagram carved from green jade dangling at its end hung from the door-post. The gate had two doors. Water ripples were painted on one and the 
other was painted with rivers and marshes. On either side of the doors were pasted spring couplet written on cloud-swirl paper. The couplet said: 
Don't leave the gate, do not leave the door: danger on earth, danger in heaven. 

For the youngest daughter, mouth, and tongue: limit sweet and bitter.‘ 
After Monkey had finished reading, he made to go right in but stopped in his tracks and thought, “Since this Emerald Green World has things like red threads that entangle people, | can't go just 
anywhere. First I'll take a look around this gate and see what | can find out. Then | can look for the old monk.” He turned and walked through the gate's east side-door. Inside, a notice was pasted on a 
slanting wall. It said: 
Grand Total of Wages for the Carpenters, Masons, and Miscellaneous Workers Who Built Limitation Hexagram Palace Limitation’s Halls: 
Hexagram Main Palace — 64 large and small halls. Carpenters: 16000 ounces silver. Masons: 18001 ounces silver. Miscellaneous: 54060 ounces silver and 7 cash only. 
Creative? - 64 chambers. The day before yesterday a sworn brother of Little Moon King who, though 30 or 40 years of age, had neither been capped? nor married, acquired a wife named Lady Green- 
twine through Little Moon King. The ceremony was held in the third palace. Having been married only one night, they suddenly started a row. Little Moon King was enraged. He ordered me to come in 
for punishment — fifty strokes of the board. This came about because all the workmen got me into trouble. Just for that I'm cutting their salary to one-sixth. Carpenters only deserve 50000 ounces silver. 
Masons only deserve 40000 ounces silver. Miscellaneous only deserve 200000 ounces silver. 
Receptive - 64 chambers. Carpenters, masons, and miscellaneous paid as above. 
Peace - 406 White Crane Chambers. Little Moon King especially praised the Little Lotus Lodge. Each labourer receives an increase of 500 ounces that brings the total to: Carpenters: 7000000 ounces 
silver. Masons: 664 ounces silver. Miscellaneous: 2008000 ounces silver only. 
Stagnation (Little Moon King's sleeping quarters) 15000 Sky-blue Chambers. Little Moon King wanted to add a mirror tower but recently several additional worlds have emerged: a small 1, the World 
of Current Literature, broke off from the Headache World; a Red Garment World broke off from the World of Wild Herbs; and a Book-burning World broke off from the Lotus Flower World. There are 
countless other new split-off worlds as well. The oppressive Tower of Myriad Mirrors of the hexagram Oppression cannot contain them all. Therefore, he had no choice but to build a second Tower of 
Myriad Mirrors here. Tomorrow all workers will come and begin construction. Everyone must be diligent but not overly hasty or he will find himself in trouble. First however, payment for the last job will 
be made as follows: Carpenters: 5005000 ounces silver. Masons: 40000000 ounces silver. Miscellaneous: 1800000 ounces silver and 8 cash, 5 and 1/10 cents only. 
Monkey read until his eyes grew tired, though a list of sixty other palaces followed after. So adopting a Huai-su4 method, he took in the rest at a single glance. When he had finished he was afraid and 
said, “I've seen the Heavenly Palace and the Isle of P'eng,®* too. But I've never seen anything like this Sixty-four Hexagram Palace. Now sixty-four hexagrams are not a great number but each hexagram 
also contains sixty-four palaces. Sixty-four times sixty-four is still a small number but each of those again has sixty-four palaces. And this place is not the only one — there are twelve more besides. It's 
hard to imagine seeing it all with my eyes - it's weird enough to be a dream.” 
He thought of a plan right away. He plucked a handful of hairs from his body, chewed them into tiny pieces, and commanded, “Change!” The hairs became countless little monkeys who stood huddled 
together. Monkey barked orders at them: “If you come upon something worth looking at, stop and look it over. Then report to me at once. Don't dawdle!” 
The little monkeys ran east, west, south, and north, jumping and dancing. After Monkey sent them off, he went for a leisurely stroll, and came to the crest of the Hill of Grief. He raised his head and saw 
alittle boy carrying a letter. As the boy walked he grumbled, “Man! You're ridiculous, Boss! What's so special about you that you can cause so many problems? Now I've got to carry another letter to 
that old official Wang the Fourth. The other day it didn't matter but this afternoon Mr. Ch'en is drinking and watching a play in our Drinking Rainbow Pavilion, and I'll be unable to stick around because 
of your little matter!” 
When Monkey heard that the Master was in Drinking Rainbow Pavilion he wanted to turn around and go looking for him. But he thought better about it and said, “If | just walk to the east or west, | might 
blunder onto the wrong road. It'd be better to ask that boy.” And he said, “Young Master...” 
The boy was walking along, talking to himself, and hadn't raised his head or noticed Monkey. Who would have thought that when he suddenly saw Monkey, blood would flow from the seven apertures 
of his head. He dropped to the ground unconscious. Monkey laughed and said, “Good boy, you know how to play dead. Let me see about this letter you're carrying.” He quickly took the letter, and when 
he opened it he saw written on 2 sheets of coarse yellow paper: 

Head Foreman in Charge of the 13 Palaces, Shen Ching-nan offers these words for the information of Your Honour, Old Official Wang the 4¢: 

Though I’m worthless, Your Honour’s looked with favour upon me and promoted me to head foreman. | didn't know that a thief of thieves had caused Your Honour worry. Even | wish to cultivate the 
purity of my worthless name. Hasn't all my behaviour for the past several years been virtuous? Yesterday however, Foreman Yiu suddenly reported that items totalling over 100 have disappeared from 
the Sixty-four Hexagram Palace, the Palace of Three Hundred Odes, and the Palace of the 18 Poems. His Majesty Little Moon King was very angry. Tomorrow he will commission you, Old Official 
Wang the Fourth, to inspect and take an inventory of the palaces one by one. | believe Your Honour is kind-hearted. Even if | didn't tell you, you’d take care of everything. Yet | still fear my heart won't 
be clean but will suffer from this grievance for a century. If your Honour can make a good beginning and end of this matter, I’d be grateful for the rest of my life. |, Shen Ching-nan, your student, attendant 
to your intimate instructions, and head foreman of 13 palaces, salute 100 salutes. To the Old Official, Old Dad, Old Master and Lord, Wang the 4". 
Monkey was determined to find his Master. When he had finished reading he shook his body to call back his hairs. A little monkey came flying up the hill and shouted, “Great Sage! Great Sage! So 
you've come here! I've been looking for you a long time.” 
Monkey said, “What have you seen?” 
The little monkey said, “I came to a fairy cave where | saw a white deer speaking.” 


Meanwhile, two little monkeys were fighting their way up the hill, yanking each other's fur and tugging each other's ears. They knelt down together in front of Monkey. One of them said that the other 
little monkey ate one more double-flowering peach than he had. The other said the first plucked one more plum than he had. Monkey let out a roar and the three of them jumped back onto his body at 
once. A while later another group of little monkeys came from the northeast. Some said what they had seen was interesting, some said what they had seen was not. 1 reported having seen 2 lines 
written on a wall: 
The mind follows flowing water; it stops at the blue hills. 

When | see the fallen flowers are gone, | know that spring’s departed. 
Another said that a mortal stood on each leaf of a spiral bush. Each mortal held a pair of fish-shaped castanets and recited loudly to himself: “Return to me the thing-less self, the self-less things. The 
Void’s host; things and | are all guests.” 
A little monkey said, “The clouds in a fairy cave all formed a tapestry of palindromes.” 
Another little monkey reported, “I saw a high pavilion made of garu-wood.” 
A third said, “There was an ancient fairy cave with its door shut tight. They wouldn't let me in.” 
A fourth said, “I found a green bamboo fairy cave but it was very dark and deep and | was scared to go in.” 
Monkey didn't have the patience to listen. He gave his body a shake and the hundred million monkeys jumped onto his body with the sound “ting-tung, ting-tung.” Monkey picked up his feet to walk 
away but he heard the hairs on his body say, “Don't go, Great Sage. We've a friend who hasn't returned yet.” 
Monkey stopped. He saw one last little monkey drunkenly climbing the hill from the southwest. Monkey asked him, “Where did you go?” 
The monkey replied, “I was walking close to a tower where there was a girl of just sixteen with a face like peach blossoms. When she saw me outside her window she grabbed me and pulled me in. 
We sat shoulder-to-shoulder and she poured juice in my mouth till | was drunk as mud.” 
Monkey was enraged. He clenched his fist in front of the little monkey and beat and scolded him wildly. He said, “You dog! | let you go for a minute and you get tangled up with the Demon of Desire!” 
That monkey wailed, wept, and could do nothing but jump onto Monkey's body. Having then gathered all his hairs, Monkey descended the Hill of Grief. 


073 
The Tears of the Tang Priest Fall in the Palace of Crying Ospreys’; a Young Girl Plucks the Pipa? & tells a Tale 
Monkey picked up his feet and walked to a tower pavilion that clearly seemed to be the Drinking Rainbow Pavilion. But he didn't see his Master, and his heart became anxious. He turned to look out 
over an expanse of blue water, in the middle of which stood a water palace. Two men wearing square cloth caps sat in the palace. Monkey was suspicious and quickly scampered up a hill near the 
tower. He hid in a fold of the hill and looking carefully, spied four elegantly done green characters on the building that read: 
Crying Ospreys Water Palace 
The bright walls were colourful as tapestries; the ornamented grounds followed a design. There were cinnamon timbers and orchid rafters, plum-wood beams and orchid chambers. The railings that 
surrounded the palace were randomly decked with coral. Because they had been there many years, blue-green water weeds had grown around them to make patterns like the spidery characters on 
an old bronze. As for the two men in the palace, one wore a nine-flowered T'ai-flower cap, and the other man wore a fashionable Tung-t'ing* cap. The one wearing a nine-flowered cap had a fair 
complexion, red lips, fine eyebrows, and white teeth. Except for his cap he looked just like the Tang Priest. Monkey was at once startled and pleased. He thought, “The man in the nine-flowered cap is 
obviously my Master but why is he wearing a cap? Little Moon King doesn't /ook like a monster.” 
He was confused, his mind tied in knots. Just as he was about to present himself and drag his Master away, he thought, “Suppose the Master's heart has been turned. There'll be no use in going to the 
West.” 
He remained hidden in the fold of the hill, and fixed his eyes for another look, hoping to find out whether this really was his Master. Below he saw the man in the Tung-tling cap say to the other, “The 
evening clouds are magnificent. Get up, Mr. Ch'en — we'll take a walk.” 
The capped Tang Priest said, “Please, you first, Little Moon-King.” The 2 of them walked hand-in-hand to the Pavilion of Dripping Desire. In the pavilion were several scrolls, all of them paintings and 
calligraphy by famous artists. On the side hung a small scroll with characters written in green: 
Green mountains encircle the neck; a white stream pierces the heart. 
Where’s the jade lady? In the empty sky, a white cloud. 
The 2 of them strolled a short way and heard muffled voices from a bamboo grove. The Tang Priest leaned on a railing and listened. A gust of wind in the pines carried the words of a poem: 
The crescent moon illumines several regions; many families are happy, many are sad. 
Some dwell behind jade-tasselled, gold-hooked bed-curtains; some float in rainy-night boats on the rivers Hsiao and Hsiang. 
Midnight — a girl beats her coverlet; “Why did you leave me? Why didn't you stay? If by the third watch tomorrow I've not seen you, I'll cut up this quilt embroidered with love birds.” 
When the Tang Priest heard this, he nodded his head and his tears fell. Little Moon King said, “I think you've been away from home too long, Mr. Ch'en. Hearing this poem’s made you sad. Let's go to 
the Tower that Punctures Blue Heaven to hear a story recited.” 
The two of them chatted for a while, then left the Pavilion of Dripping Desire and disappeared. Why do you think they disappeared? It happened that the Tower that Punctures Blue Heaven was 
separated from the Water Palace of Crying Ospreys by a thousand chambers. Everywhere the eye could see trails of flowers encircled the eaves. Green trees arched over crisscrossed paths - a 
thousand drooping willows and t'ung trees a hundred feet tall. The two men made their way along the paths, and, as Monkey sat hidden in the fold of a hill opposite how could he see them? 
2 hours later he suddenly made out the same nine-flower-capped Tang Priest and Tung-t'ing-capped Little Moon King sitting across from each other in two armchairs in the tower. Before them was a 
green striped pot filled with tea and two square Han dynasty-style tea mugs. Three blind girls sat on a low couch. One was called Ko-ch'iang-flower, another Mo-tan-lang, and the third Pei-chuan-p'ing- 
ting. Though blind, they were very pretty. Each held a Pipa pressed against her jade-white breast. Little Moon King said, “Ko-ch'iang-flower, how many stories can you recite?” 
Ko-ch'iang-flower said, “Your Majesty, there was much suffering in the past but there will be less in the future. There are many, many stories. All that matters is which one Mr. Ch'en would like to hear.” 
Little Moon King said, “Mr. Ch’en is actually familiar with many stories. Why don't you name the ones you know?” 
Ko-ch'iang-flower said, “There's no need to mention the old stories, I'll only name the new ones. There are ‘Warm Chats in Jade Hall,’ ‘The Sad Story of Following the Ways of Heaven,’ and ‘The Tale 
of the Western Journey.” 
Little Moon King said, “The Tale of the Western Journey's new. That's the one! Recite that one!” The girls agreed. They strummed their Pipas and recited in full voice. A poem says: 
Don't drink while flutes and poems overflow the painted hall: only in old age can 1 believe that life’s a long dream. 
Now I've made a secret compact with my heart as | peacefully gaze at a stick of incense in my hushed study. 
Ko-ch'iang-flower plucked 27 verses of the sad Pipa poem. She recited in a remote and penetrating voice: 
The day Heaven's emperor spread out the stars, 59 constellations and 5 regions, he set up the cosmos. 
Shooting the sun and pursuing clouds were marks of an earlier era; ®fish-scale clouds, pearl-drop rain arrayed in a hundred forms. 
Wu-Huai's silver bamboo had many fantastic joints; King Ko-t'ien’s auspicious leaves were congealed fragrance.’ 
Dragon and snake® — mind-pictures handed down on green tablets; crow and rabbit — signatures inscribed on jade ice. 
Don't mention the mountains’ mien or words on stone or talk about the old men on Sung-feng road." 
A jade sank in the Western Sea wrapped in a flowered tapestry. 
Upright officials were rewarded in the Palace of Precious jade. 
Hsiti Yu fled the emperor's dragon robe"' and the empire was proffered to Lord Yti Shun.'2 
In the 14 year, the calamity of bells and stone chimes and in time the elder from Tung-t'ing Lake ruled the people.'* 
Tang the Successful prayed at Mulberry Grove; "4tears sprinkled pearled sleeves on Deer Terrace." 
Rain banner and wind axe opened a pure world; on Kou-Chen Rampart's King Wu's Chou’s founded. 
For the Wu King stones of spring and autumn times, lament'’ for she who sharpened a clasp in the Warring States, grieve.'® 
White their robes and hats for Yen's champion; red in the sky the bold heart of the prince." 
Ting, ting the dulcimer, mode changed from Chih to Yu; flying clouds on River | 10000 layers deep. 
6 states died when the plot against Chin failed; 2°then for the first time emperor's carved upon a stone.?' 
Who'd have thought there'd be only 3 Chin emperors? Mermaid candles burned away, the Eastern Sea grew dim. 
Sad the lament for the stallion and the beautiful lady” having just lifted mountains, he wept in the autumn wind. 
The 4 White-hairs of firm resolve?3 sat on the empty mountain; the tireless Chang Liang kept company with Master Red Pine.”4 
When the spirit of that true man?5 soared 30000 feet the 5 Mountains? in unison shouted, “Ten-thousand springs!” 
It’s fate that grass should yellow and leaves should fall; the swords of Tung and Ts'ao?’ carved up the House of Han. 
Then came a succession of powder-puff emperors — the 6 Dynasties? — coloured frost and jade dew woven in patterns of ice. 
It ended, the pulsing of 6s and 9s?9 with the choice of an emperor; the wise, intelligent Tang Tai-tsung’s pushed to the fore. 
His family affairs were dark, difficult to plumb; don't imitate poets who satirize sand-flies and centipedes. 
Only because in years past beacon fires signalled the alarm by day did peach blossoms in the 3% month shine upon a jade horse.*° 
Before the horse the full moon cast a bow-shaped shadow; a pair of stars in heaven above entered sword-shaped rainbows.*' 
Soldiers had no heart to grieve for jade and stones; the Dragon's troops paid no heed to anguished souls on the River Hsiang. 
In 1 night, sand- and wind-aggrieved ghosts were entombed; in mountain valleys year by year were offered tracks of tears.*2 
A voice, a voice spoke only hatred for the emperor of Tang; what mattered the lavish newness of your plum blossoms? 
As the story goes, the Tang emperor had just returned from the court. He was drinking juice, enjoying the blossoms when all at once he fell asleep, and dreamed he saw a dragon king crying, “Emperor! 
Save my life! Save my life!” 33 
The girl recited the Pipa poem: Sobbing in the Moonlight and continued to tell her story: The emperor's river of pity flowed in the palace; *4he sent out gold tablets instructing all his officials: “Be quick 
and summon the dragon-killing officer; you Generals Black and White must both be diligent.” 
The stout cord of the emperor's words soon snapped; the butterfly soared aloft and killed the old dragon. 
Could the Dragon King want to go anywhere without his head? In the bright moonlight he rattled the gate of the silver palace. 
Next day, too weary to mount his dragon horse and go to court, the sage ruler summoned a doctor to his palace. 
Devils came and took the emperor away for 5 days; in 9 hells, gloomy and dark, he stood before the dead.*6 
A dark official, cheating, gave him extra days and months.3” 
The jade phoenix sounded again, life glimmered faintly. 
Back and forth twixt life and death, then the Tang Emperor again as before gazed over his realm. 
He sighed and said, “How sad, how very sad — “A century of life on earth are but ephemeral. Dismal souls below the welt?’ — when’ll they be saved?” 
Thus, the emperor asked the monk Chen Hstian-tsang to call to wayward, sunken souls with golden bell and jade chimes and recite with inky sleeves and banner black for souls to be reborn. 
The Nun°? herself appeared to speak the Law and find a priest who'd seek the Western Sage. 
The priest rode to the border of China; in the Tiger House” he grieved that Heaven so moulds men. 
He climbed the Mountain of 2 Frontiers, removed a god seal, and took a disciple“ at the foot of Five Phases Mountain. 
At Stone Brook the yellow dragon swallowed his purple deer; 42in fragrant wood white walls became red will-o'-the wisps.‘ 


Wind blew into fiery eyes, the road to the West's obscured; but Ling Chi came a-flying and 100 troubles vanished. 
The wise monkey cast line five of the hexagram Opposition; “defeated along the way, Bullseye saluted to the old priest. 
Sunset at the River of Flowing Sand, hissing’s heard 1000 miles; he of mixed consciousness joined the return to pure awareness.‘® 
The globefish’s after all a thing in the pond; slowly morning bells gave way to the dulcimer of desire.*’ 
When the ginseng tree was uprooted, the mournful monkey screamed; “*the White-boned Lady*? stood in a lush forest. 
When Monkey left, the priest was changed to tiger; then Bull became the 2" 1 to mourn. 
A long night hung over Lotus-flower Jade Cave; 5‘ before White Deer Mountain he saluted the Star of Longevity.*? 
The Tang Priest whirled and exercised in the mad wind; *3the Brother of the Emperor sank in the Black Water.*4 
Taoism and Religion needn't always be at odds; poisoned blood’s empty, black and yellow all alike. 
Metal couldn't conquer metal, heart and spirit were blocked; ‘water met water, the old monk was exhausted.‘’ 
Two hearts darkened heaven and earth; a pair of Sage Monkeys deceived Kuan-yin.°® 
A banana leaf put out the fire on the mountain slope; *8horse loosed from willow green, slowly on they went. 
Delayed days and nights at the Tower of Myriad Mirrors, who knows when they'll see the Most Reverend of Heaven? 
Ko-chiang-flower's poem had ended. She leaned over her Pipa and breathed a long sigh that floated off into the distance. When Monkey in the fold of the hill heard the Tower of Myriad Mirrors 
mentioned, suspicion arose in his mind. He thought: The Tower of Myriad Mirrors business happened to me just yesterday. How’d she possibly know? His temper flared and anger grew. All he wanted 
was to strike Little Moon King dead so he could find out what was going on. 
074 
Monkey Meets an Old Man in Green Bamboo Cave; By the Reed Flowers Monkey Seeks the Emperor of Ch'in 
When Monkey heard the words Tower of Myriad Mirrors from the fold in the hill, a flame arose in his heart. He pulled his cudgel from behind his ear and jumped onto the tower, swinging wildly but 
struck only air. He cursed Little Moon King and said, “What country's king are you that you dare to trap my Master here?” 
Little Moon King looked as if he hadn't heard and went on smiling and chatting. Monkey cursed again, “You stinking blind women! What are you doing reciting here with this hairy monk?” 
Itseemed as if the three reciting girls hadn't heard either, so he shouted, “Master, let's get out of here!” But like the others, the Tang Priest did not hear. Monkey was astounded. He said, “Am | dreaming? 
Or is everyone in the Emerald Green World eyeless, earless, and tongue-less? Ridiculous! Ridiculous! I'll try again to see if this is really the Master or not.” 
He assumed the form he had used to raise havoc in Heaven.' This time however, it wouldn't do to be so brash, so he jumped to the opposite hill and took another good look. He saw that the Tang 
Priest looked hopelessly depressed. Little Moon King was saying, “Don't think only of sad things, Mr. Ch'en. | ask you, what about that business of digging through to Heaven? If you've decided not to 
continue your journey, I'll dismiss the Sky-walkers and send them home.” 
The Tang Priest said, “I’d not made up my mind yesterday but today I've decided not to go on.” 
Little Moon King was delighted. He at once sent someone to tell the Sky-walkers there was no more need to dig at the sky, sent word for the reciting girls to put on their makeup, and give a performance. 
The reciting girls knelt together and said, “Your Majesty, we can’t do an opera today.” 
Little Moon King said, “The calendar only says whether or not a day is favourable for sacrifices, for planting, for beginning school, for a capping ceremony, or for travelling. I've never seen an unfavourable 
day for giving a performance.” 
The girls replied, “It's not unfavourable, Your Majesty, it's impossible. Mr. Ch'en has ten thousand sorrows and a thousand knots of sadness. If we give a successful performance, he will be moved to 
ears.” 
Little Moon King cried, “What shall we do? Why don't you put on a modern play instead of an ancient play?” 
The girls responded, “If you want an ancient play we'll do it but we'll not do a modern play.” 
Li 
Pp 


o> 


ttle Moon King snapped, “Rubbish! Today we're celebrating Mr. Ch'en's happy decision by having a great tea-banquet. How can we not have a performance? It would be lovely if you'd just do any 
jays you please.” 
The girls agreed and left. Two maids attending brought fresh tea from one side. The Tang Priest sat down. From the back of the hall came a rolling of drums, a beating of gongs, a blast of horns, and 
much shouting. A clamour arose from the stage and the announcement came: “Today we'll perform a ‘romantic’ story called Dream of Mist and Rain on Kao-Tang Terrace.’ First we'll do the five scenes 
about Prime Minister Sun. It'll be terrific! Just terrific!” 
Monkey, still hiding in the fold of the hill, heard this quite clearly. He thought, “There's a Prime Minister Sun and a Dream on Kao-Tang Terrace. | suppose they'll not leave till all the scenes have been 
played one by one. | might as well go find something to drink, then I'll come back and see my old monk.” 
Suddenly he heard footsteps behind him. He turned and saw a Taoist acolyte of about thirteen hissing at him, “Little Priest! Little Priest! I've come to watch the play with you.” 
Monkey laughed and said, “Hey little fellow, so you knew | was here and came to find me.” 
The acolyte said, “Don't tease me. My master is no one for you to make fun of.” 
Monkey said, “And what's your master called?” 
The Taoist lad said, “He is the Master of Green Grove Cave who loves guests and sightseeing jaunts.” 
Monkey laughed and said, “Wonderful! | must go and get some tea from him. You can sit here in my place for a while and watch the play and see if the party breaks up. I'll go to your honourable 
master's place and get something to quench my thirst. If they do break up, would you mind coming at once to tell me?” 
The acolyte chuckled and said, “That's no trouble. There's nothing blocking the way into the cave — just let yourself in. I'll wait for you here.” 
Monkey was delighted. He entered the pitch-black cave and skipped along till he came to a bright stone grotto. There he ran smack into an old man who asked, “Where do you come from, Priest? 
Please come in for some tea.” 
Monkey said, “If there were no tea, I'd not have come.” 
The old man smiled and said, “There's not necessarily tea, Priest. Why don't you go?” 
Monkey said, “If there's no tea, I'll not leave.” 
The two were like old friends. They walked, laughing as they went, till they had passed a stone stairway. There they came all at once to a fairy cave at the edge of a stream. Monkey said, “Have we 
reached your residence?” 
The old man said, “Not yet. This place is called ‘Imitation of an Ancient Evening Landscape. 
Monkey gazed at the scene. It was indeed a pleasant spot. On the left there stretched a field where random stones and about ten loquat trees with riotous branches and leaves surrounded a straw 
cottage. At its front door stood a great red pine and several maples entwined with mist. Their trunks and branches were woven into a stormy mountain forest. A bit of bamboo fence could be seen 
peeking through the trees, and two or three kinds of wildflowers poked out from the bottom of the fence. A middle-aged man strolled by the stream, leaning on a moss-covered staff. Abruptly he sat 
down, and cupping the clear water in his hands, took it into his mouth and swished it around and around. He did this for a long while and then stood up. He looked toward the southwest and laughed 
casually. When Monkey saw him laugh, he looked to the southwest himself. But he saw neither high tower nor green pavilion, dangerous cliffs or weird peaks. He saw only two splashes of mountain- 
colour that looked like something between clouds and mist, between being and non-being. All Monkey wanted was to have a drink of tea. How could he have any feeling for mountains and water? He 
and the old man walked right on and came upon another fairy cave. The old man said, “This isn't my cottage either. It's called ‘Imitation of the Ancient T'ai-k'un Pond.” 
They were surrounded on all four sides by green peaks. Some of them lifted their faces as if looking at Heaven; some bent forward as if drinking the water; some seemed to be running, some sleeping; 
some looked as if they were whistling; some were sitting face-to-face like Confucian scholars; some looked like they were flying; some looked possessed by spirits; and some were like cows, horses, 
and sheep. Monkey laughed and said, “All these stone people and stone horses are already carved but no one’s put up any tombstones. | guess there’s no one to write the inscriptions.” 
The old man said, “Don't try to be funny, Little Priest. Take a look in the water.” Monkey bent his head to look carefully at the water and saw therein 100 encircling green peaks. On the water's rippling 
surface they were as beautiful as a painting of mountains and forests. While Monkey was engrossed in looking, several fishing boats darted out from behind 1 or 2 reeds. The people sitting in the bows 
of those boats were mostly old men with scraggly hair and dirty faces. It was hard to tell what they were reciting — it was not the Angler's Poem or the Picking the Lotus. They recited: 
Right nor wrong ever came to fishing spots; glory and shame follow men on horseback. 
You, honoured guest, seek the World of Oblivion? 
Push the oars forward, pull slightly back look to the south, flutter the oars, push, push, and then pull! 
When Monkey heard the words World of Oblivion, he asked the old man, “Where’s this World of Oblivion?” 
The old man said, “Who might you be looking for?” 
Monkey said, “My relative, the First Emperor of Ch'in, recently moved to the World of Oblivion. I'd like to see him and have a word with him.” 
The old man said, “Well, if you want to go, just cross here. You'll come to a belt of green mountains. They are his back door.” 
Monkey said, “But if | go off in a world as big as this one, I'll be unable to find him. I'll not go.” 
The old man said, “The First Emperor of Ch'in is also an old friend of mine. If you're afraid to go, leave a message with me, and I'll give it to him when | see him tomorrow.” 
Monkey said, “I’ve another relative, the Tang emperor who wants to borrow a Mountain-removing Bell from my relative the First Emperor of Ch'in.” 
The old man said, “Oh, what rotten luck! Someone just borrowed it yesterday.” 
Monkey said, “Who borrowed it?” 
The old man said, “It was loaned to Han Kao-tsu.” 
Monkey laughed and said, “So, an old man like you lies like a youngster, eh? Han Kao-tsu was the First Emperor of Ch'in's mortal enemy. How could he borrow the bell?” 
The old man said, “Don't you know, Little Priest, that by now the old enmity between Ch'in and Han has disappeared?” 
Monkey said, “If that's so, when you see the First Emperor, tell him for me that in two days when Han Kao-tsu finishes using the bell I'll come to borrow it.” 
The old man said, “That'll be fine.” 
After chatting for a while, Monkey became even thirstier. He cried out, “I want tea! Give me some tea!” 
The old man smiled and said, “Since you're a relative of the First Emperor of Ch'in, and I'm an old friend of his, we're, after all, flesh and blood. If you want tea, I'll give you tea. If you want food, I'll give 
you food. Please come to my cottage.” 
The two of them passed beyond the green encircling peaks and, taking another path, arrived at the Fairy Cave of Green Bamboo. Green moss covered the ground; bamboo stalks stretched to the sky. 
In their midst stood four cottages of purple bamboo, and the two entered one of them straightaway. The main room's cross-beam was made of Hsiang River Goddess bamboo and its pillars of mud- 
green bamboo. The doors of the gate were of wind-man bamboo, flattened and stitched together. There was a square bamboo bed whose curtain was bamboo paper. The old man went to the back of 
the room and brought out two bowls of magnolia-flower tea. Monkey took one in his hand, drank a few sips, and quenched his thirst. The old man prepared an oil-bamboo table and four green bamboo 
chairs, and they sat down facing each other. The old man asked about Monkey's eight characters. ‘Monkey laughed and said, “You and | met by chance. We’re not sworn brothers and we don't want 
to match a marriage. Why do you want to know my eight characters?” 
The old man said, “I tell fortunes by horoscope and I've never been wrong. Since you're a relative of my good friend the First Emperor of Ch'in, | want to tell your fortune and see what good luck you'll 
have in the future. This will be a favour to my friend.” 
Monkey lifted his head and thought. He said, “My eight characters are extremely good.” 
The old man said, “I’ve not even worked it out yet. How can you already know they're good?” 
Monkey said, “I've often asked people to tell my fortune. The year before last a black-robed fortune teller was going to tell my fortune, and when he heard my eight characters, he was startled. He stood 
up and saluted to me with his hands clasped, saying over and over, ‘I beg your pardon! | beg your pardon!’ 


” 


“Then he called me ‘little official,’ and said, ‘These eight characters of yours are exactly those of the Great Sage Equal of Heaven.’ | remember that the Great Sage Equal of Heaven went on a rampage 
in the Heavenly Palace and displayed his awesome spirit. Now he is soon to become a god. Since my eight characters are the same as his, how can they be bad?” 

The old man said, “The Great Sage Equal of Heaven was born on the first day of the first month in the first year of a sixty-year cycle.” 

Monkey said, “That's me. | was born on the first day of the first month in the first year of a sixty-year cycle.” 

The old man laughed and said, “They say if your appearance is good, your fate is good; if your fate is good, your appearance is good — this is indeed no mistake. There's no need to tell me your eight 
characters. Even your face is a monkey's.” 

Monkey said, “This Great Sage Equal of Heaven — could it be that he has a monkey face too?” 

The old man laughed and said, “You're not the real Great Sage Equal of Heaven — you've only a monkey face. If you're really the Great Sage Equal of Heaven, you'd be a monkey spirit!” 

Monkey lowered his head and chuckled. He said, “Be quick, old man, and tell my fortune.” 

In fact, since Monkey was born from a stone egg he had never found out his own eight characters. His birth date was kept in a jade box in the Upper Palace, and was passed on only in the deep 
mountains and secret valleys. Now he was using this trick to bring it out. The old man wasn't wise to Monkey's scheme and began to relate his fortune. “Little Priest,” he said, “don't blame me if | don't 
flatter you to your face.” 

Monkey laughed and said, “It's better not to flatter me.” 

The old man said, “Your life was established in the key of D, enmity for you lies in G. Favour is found in the key of C, you dwell in the key of E, and difficulty comes in the key of A.5 This month is re, 
and it clashes with the Star of Difficulty. Therefore, certain things will go wrong to make you angry. The Star of Augmented Fa also enters into your fate. Augmented Fa is a goddess of the Moon. A 
scripture says, ‘When one comes upon Augmented Fa, there will be a bizarre encounter. A beautiful girl will meet a handsome young man.’ 

“As for you, Little Priest, since you're a monk we’d not talk about matters of husband and wife — but in terms of your fate, you ought to get married.” 

Monkey responded, “How about that dry marriage | was involved in?”6 

The old man said, “Marriage is marriage, dry or wet. It's all in your horoscope. Now, you'll encounter the Star of La in the key of E. This is a beneficial star. Suddenly the Water Star of the Southern 
Palace becomes involved. This is another star of difficulty. A scripture says, ‘When one meets both favour and difficulty at once, it's called “The Sea of Evil.” A stone man or iron horse will find it difficult 
to bear.’ Judging from this, you’d have both the blessing of acquiring new family members and the sorrow of a relative's departure.” 

Monkey asked, “I added one master and left one master. Does that count?” 

The old man said, “For a monk that will do. However, when this day is past, there will be more strange occurrences. Tomorrow you enter the Stars of So/ and La. You must kill people.” 

Monkey thought, “Killing people is a small matter...nothing to worry about.” 

The old man again said, “Three days from now you'll come into the Star of Augmented Do. A scripture says, ‘Augmented Do is otherwise called the Star of Brightness. It will make even a weary, 
muddled old man clear and intelligent.’ This is a case of benevolence in hardship and hardship in benevolence. The four great stars of change - Sun, Moon, Water, and Earth — will also enter your fate. 
I'm afraid, Little Priest, you must die once in order to live again.” 

Monkey laughed and said, “Life and death are nothing serious. If | must die, I'll be dead for a few years. If | must live, then I'll live for a year or two.” 

The two of them were thus entranced in conversation when the acolyte rushed in and shouted, “Little Priest! The play is almost finished. The Kao-Tang dream is already over. Hurry! Hurry!” 

Monkey quickly took leave of the old man, thanked the acolyte, and returned the same way he had come. When he got to the fold in the hill, he peered into the tower and heard, “There's still one part 
of Dream on Kao-Tang Terrace to go.” He strained his eyes to watch the play. On the stage he saw a Taoist and five mortals. The Taoist said, “A Taoist who wished to save the ignorant fully explained 
men's desires and the ways of the world. Keep this in your hearts when you wake from your dreams, you people of the world.” 

Then Monkey heard the people on stage rumble, “The Dream of South Branch’s’ tedious. Only Prime Minister Sun’s ever played well. Prime Minister Sun’s no other than Sun Wukong. Look! His wife’s 
so beautiful, his five sons so dashing. He started out as a monk but came to such a good end! Such a very good end!” 


075 

Young Lord Tang Accepts an Order to Lead the Troops; Lady Green-twine Becomes a Broken Jade by the Pool 
Monkey heard all this clearly from the fold of the hill. He said, “I've been single and chaste since | was born from the stone egg. When was | married to any woman? When did | ever have five children? 
It must be that Little Moon King really likes my Master and can't get him to stay here. Since he was afraid the Master was thinking about me, what he did was to slander me and write this play saying 
I'd become a high official, husband, and dad. He's trying to get the Master to change his mind and forget about the West. But | mustn't be too hasty - I'll watch and see what happens.” 
At that moment he heard the Tang Priest say, “I don't want to see any more plays. Ask Lady Green-twine to come here.” 
A maid immediately brought in a jade flying-cloud teapot and a teacup painted with scenes from the Hsiao and Hsiang Rivers. Shortly, Lady Green-twine entered. She was indeed an exotic beauty who 
could not be matched in a millennium whose fragrance wafted for ten miles. In his fold of the hill Monkey thought, “When people on earth speak of beauty, they speak in comparison to Nun Kuan-yin. 
Now, I’ve not seen the Nun often - maybe ten or twenty times — but seeing this lady, it almost seems the Nun could be her disciple. | wonder what the Master will do when he sees her.” 
Lady Green-twine had just been seated when Bullseye and Sandy appeared behind her. The Tang Priest said angrily, “Chu Wu-neng! Last night you peeped from the Little Animal Palace and startled 
my beloved lady. I've dismissed you. What are you doing here?” 
Bullseye said, “The ancients said, ‘Great anger doesn't last the night.’ Young Lord Ch’en, please forgive me this time.” 
The Tang Priest said, “Well, if you don't go, I'll write a bill of separation to send you away.” 
Sandy said, “Young Lord Ch’'en, if you want to drive us off, we'll leave. When a husband wants to get rid of his wife, he has to write a bill of divorce. But when a master wants to dismiss disciples there's 
no need for that.” 
Bullseye said, “There's no harm in it - these days there are many masters and disciples who are husband and wife. But where does Young Lord Ch'en expect us two to go?” 
The Tang Priest said, “You return to your wife. Sandy can go back to the River of Flowing Sand.” 
Sandy said, “I'm not going to the River of Flowing Sand. I'll go to the Mountain of Flowers and Fruit to be a Counterfeit Monkey.” 
The Tang Priest said, “Wukong has been made a prime minister. Where is he now?” 
Sandy said, “He's not a prime minister anymore. He's following another master and continuing toward the West.” 
The Tang Priest said, “If that's so, you two will surely run into him on the road. By all means stop him from coming to bother me here.” He asked for a brush and ink-stone and began to write the bill of 
separation: 
Wu-neng is my thief; were | to keep a thief, I'd be sheltering a thief. If | don't shelter the thief, he’ll not have a home. If the thief doesn't cling to me, I'll be clean. If the thief and | remain together, we'll 
both become thieves. If the thief and | separate, we'd both benefit. | don't love you, Wu-neng — leave quickly. 
Bullseye took the bill of separation mournfully. The Tang Priest again wrote: 
The writer of this bill of separation is Ch'en Hstian-tsang, beloved brother of Little Moon King. The appearance of the Monster-monk Sandy is very grim. He has not cast off his mixed consciousness so 
he is not my disciple. Today | dismiss him. I'll not see him again till we go to the Yellow Spring. Witnessed by Little Moon King and Lady Green-twine. 
Sand, too was very sad as be accepted his bill of separation. The 2 of them went out of the tower together and left. The Tang Priest was unconcerned. He laughed and said to Little Moon-King, “I'm 
rather a nuisance, am | not?” then he asked, “Lady Green-twine, what has happened since this moming?” 
Lady Green-twine replied, “I was feeling depressed so | wrote a poem to the verses of Crow's Nest. I'd like to recite it for you.” She gathered up her sleeves and knitted her eyebrows. In a lilting voice 
she recited: 


3, 5 stars in the bright moon of the 16"; Ding, ding, chimes the water clock, thrum, thrum, sounds the drum. 
No bridge over the Milky Way’ for our mutual love; this pitiful girl passes a pitiful night. 
Her poem ended, she was overcome by sorrow. “My Young Lord,” she cried, “our relationship’s finished.” 
She embraced the Tang Priest miserably. The Tang Priest was alarmed and tried to comfort her with pleasant words. Lady Green-twine sobbed and said, “How can you be like this when separation is 
at hand?” She pointed with one finger and said, “Look to the south, Young Lord, and you'll know what | mean.” 
The Tang Priest turned his head to see a band of mounted soldiers galloping toward them carrying a yellow banner. He began to feel uneasy. Before long the tower was filled with soldiers on horseback. 
One officer in a purple robe carried an imperial decree. He saluted the Tang Priest and said, “I’m a messenger from New Tang.” He ordered, “Soldiers, help the Supreme Commander into uniform.”2 


They quickly set up an incense table. The Tang Priest knelt facing northward, and the purple-robed officer, facing south, read the decree. After he finished reading, the officer took out a five-coloured 
tally and gave it to the Tang Priest, saying, “There can be no delay, General. The enemy from the West is at hand. Bring out your troops immediately.” 

The Tang Priest said, “You've no tact, officer. You may wait until I've taken leave of my family.” He turned and went to the back of the hall to look for Lady Green-twine. She had watched him being 
made a general, and now, prepared to depart on his journey, he seemed pressed for time. Embracing him with both arms she wept and collapsed to the floor. She said, “How can | let you go, Young 
Lord? Your body is sick and feeble. A general spends his days on windy mountains and sleeps in damp valleys. There will be no relative to look after you and tell you when to put on an extra unlined 
robe or take off one of your white sashes. You'll have to take care of yourself and adjust for the cold. Young Lord, always remember what | say at our parting: don't use harsh punishment on your 
soldiers and officers for fear they might do you evil; be careful in accepting surrendered soldiers for fear they might rob your camp; don't rush heedlessly into dark forests. If the horses whinny at sunset, 
don't keep going. If in spring there are flowers on the riverbank, don't step on them. If there are cool nights in summer, don't stay out in the breeze. When you're depressed, don't think about today; but 
when you're happy, don't forget me. Alas, my Lord, how can | let you go? Were | to go with you, | fear it would violate your orders. But if | let you go alone, my Lord, don't you know how long the sad 
windy nights will be? It's better my fragile soul should join you in your jade general's tent.” 

The Tang Priest and Lady Green-twine joined in a tight embrace and wailed. They swayed in each other's arms till they fell beside the Pool of Broken Jade. Lady Green-twine threw herself into the 
water. The Tang Priest wept bitterly and called, “Lady! Lady! Come back to me!” The purple-robed officer galloped in, whisked the Tang Priest away, and the whole army hurried toward the west. 


076 

The Tang Priest Musters His Troops under the Midnight Moon; the Great Sage's Spirit Falters Before the Banners of 5 Colours 
It was already evening when from the fold of the hill Monkey saw that his Master had indeed become a general. The matter of getting the scriptures had been shelved, and Monkey was left quite 
bewildered. He could think of nothing to do but take on the guise of a soldier and mingle with the troops. He passed a troubled night. At dawn the next morning, the Tang Priest sat in his tent and 
ordered soldiers to raise the banner saying, “Enlisting Soldiers. Buying Horses.” 
A soldier carried out the order, and by noon the new recruits and officers numbered 2000000. Another troubled day passed for Monkey. The Tang Priest appointed a minor general of the White Banner 
also called his minor personal general who gave orders to build a gold-chained commander's platform and compile a register of soldiers’ names that night. He then ordered a roll call to be made from 
the platform on the next evening. The next night at the third watch the moon shone bright as day. The Tang Priest ascended the platform and issued orders for all his generals, saying: “Tonight my roll 
call of officers and soldiers won't be the same as in the past. When one toll of the bell’s heard, all soldiers will prepare their meals. When the bell’s tolled twice, armour must be put on. When the bell 
tolls thrice, all should resolve their wills and rouse their spirits. At four tolls of the bell, the men should assemble beneath the platform for muster.” 
The minor general of the White Banner received the order and told the other officers, “Pay heed and spread the order, officers. Tonight's roll call will be unusual. When one toll of the bell is heard, all 
soldiers are to prepare their meals. When the bell is sounded twice, armour must be put on. When the bell sounds thrice, resolve your wills and rouse your spirits. At four tolls of the bell, assemble 
beneath the platform for muster. There is to be no delay.” 
To which every officer and soldier in the whole camp responded, “If the commander gives an order, who dares disobey?” 
The Tang Priest again commanded, “White Banner, this is an order: The officers and men are not to call me Commander, they're to call me Reverend Commander.” The Minor General of the White 
Banner relayed the order throughout the camp. The bell on the platform was sounded once. When the officers and soldiers heard it, they quickly prepared their food. The Tang Priest again commanded, 
“Little General of the White Banner, relay this order to all my officers: When | give the roll call, bring all your training to bear. Don't be lackadaisical about falling in and don't wander aimlessly.” The bell 


on the platform rang twice. The officers and soldiers hurriedly strapped on their armour. The Tang Priest commanded, “White Banner, raise the banner for the roll call. Send the order to all regiments 
that waterways and mountain gorges are to be strictly controlled. Anyone allowing a freelance strategist who speaks or dresses irregularly into the camp will be beheaded.” White Banner followed the 
command and relayed the order across the camp. The Tang Priest again commanded, “White Banner, give this order to the officers and the men: If anyone’s absent at the roll call, he’ll lose his head. 
The same for anyone passing in front of the commander's gate. Anyone who pretends to be sick or looks to the left or right will lose his head. Anyone who recommends himself will lose his head. 
Anyone who goes ahead of his turn will lose his head. Anyone jumping or shouting will lose his head. So will anyone who hides something from his superiors or takes someone else's place. Anyone 
whispering into another's ear will lose his head. Anyone who brings a girl or lets his thoughts wander or daydreams will lose his head. The same for anyone who lacks fierce determination or loses his 
temper and starts a quarrel.” When these orders had been given, the bell on the platform rang out 3 times. Every man in the regiments focused his resolve and stirred his fighting spirit. The Tang Priest, 
too closed his eyes and sat quietly on the platform beneath the bright moon. An hour later four rings of the bell sounded. From all camps the officers and men assembled before the platform for muster. 
1 could see: banners and flags in perfect formation, swords and spears formed a forest, arrayed like the 28 constellations - dipper banner on the left, cowherd on the right - every constellation distinct, 
arranged like the 64 hexagrams — heaven's axes in odd-numbered lines, axes of earth in the even - every line in place. At the 1s roar of the precious swords, fierce tigers on 10000 mountains fell silent. 
Scales on armour of rhinoceros-hide made the 5 Seas' gold dragons seem pale. Each 1 of them a malevolent star; every voice, the crashing of thunder. The Tang Priest followed the roll-book and 
called each name in order. He shouted, “You officers and men now that I'm in the army, | can have no compassion. Every one of you must pay attention to avoid the axe.” He immediately waved a flag 
to signal the order, and shouted the names of 6605 of his troops in a row. Then he came to “Great General Bullseye Aware of Ability.” The moment the Tang Priest saw the name, he knew it was 
Bullseye. But in the army one must be quite serious; it doesn't do to show you know someone. He shouted, “You, General — so ugly and fierce. You must be a monster trying to deceive me. White 
Banner, push that fellow out and cut off his head.” 
Bullseye respected repeatedly while saying, “Reverend Commander, cool your anger! Allow me one word before | die.” And he said: “My surname’s Bull born eighth in my clan. | followed the Tang 
Priest to the Wester Land but midway he wrote a bitter bill of separation. | went to seek refuge in my dad-in-law's village but | found that my wife had returned to Dry Ditch so | turned once more and 
walked toward the West and blundered into the Commander's camp. | kneel in hope that the Commander will spare me to work as a scullery in his camp.” 
A tiny smile crossed the Tang Priest's face and he ordered White Banner to release the bonds. Bullseye respected a hundred times, thanking the Tang Priest. The name “Lady-General Flower Kuei” 
was called. A woman officer carrying a sword galloped out of formation. Indeed she was: a beautiful girl of 16, body smooth as cheese, she will breathe essence of Heaven and Earth till both go dry. A 
flying dragon sword hangs from her waist only for killing those handsome, lustful men. The name “Great General Sun Wukong’ was called. 
The Tang Priest blanched and gazed below his platform. It happened that Monkey had mixed amongst the army for the past three days in the form of a 6-eared monkey soldier. When he heard the 
name Sun Wukong, he leaped out of formation and knelt on the ground, saying, “Little General Sun Wukong’s transporting supplies and couldn't be present. I'm his brother Sun Wuhuan and wish to 
take his place in battle. In this | dare disobey the Commander's order.” 
The Tang Priest said, “Sun Wuhuan, what's your origin? Tell me quickly and I'll spare your life.” 
Hopping and dancing, Monkey said: “In the old days | was a monster who took the name of monkey. After the Great Sage left the Tang Priest, | became his close relation by way of marriage. There's 
no need to ask my name, I'm the Six-eared Monkey, Great General Sun Wuhuan. 
The Tang Priest said, “The six-eared ape used to be monkey's enemy. Now he's forgotten the old grudge and become generous. He must be a good man.” He ordered White Banner to give Sun 
Wuhuan a suit of the iron armour of the vanguard and appointed him “Vanguard General to Destroy Entrenchment.” 
When the roll of officers and soldiers was concluded, the Tang Priest quickly handed down an order. The troops were to form the beautiful-lady-seeking-her-husband formation to take advantage of the 
bright moon for their attack on the Western Barbarians. Once the troops had crossed the border into the land of the Western Barbarians, the Tang Priest ordered officers and soldiers alike to display a 
small yellow banner as an identifying mark so they wouldn't become confused. The banners were fixed in place and the march continued. Just as they came around a mountain, they confronted a band 
of horsemen carrying green banners. Since Monkey was general of the vanguard, he immediately jumped to the front of the ranks. From the midst of the green banner horsemen emerged a general in 
a purple helmet, carrying a sword to meet his enemy. Monkey demanded, “Who comes?” 
The general said, “I'm King Paramita. ‘Who’re you that dares to challenge me?” 
Monkey said, “I'm Sun Wuhuan, in the vanguard of he who carries the seal ‘Great Tang's Supreme Commander for Wiping out Desire.” 
King Paramita said, “I’m the great honey king2 who would dethrone your great sugar king.” 
He whipped out his sword and struck. Monkey said, “So - such a pitiful, nameless little general as you wants to soil my cudgel?” 
He raised his cudgel to meet the blow. They fought several rounds. No one could tell who was winning when King Paramita said, “Hold it! If | don't tell you about my family when | kill you and you 
become a ghost, you'll still think I'm just a nameless little general. Allow me to explain: |, King Paramita, am none other than a direct descendant of Monkey Sun, the Great Sage Equal of Heaven who 
caused a great uproar in Heaven.” 
Monkey heard this and thought, “Strange...Is it possible that the play given the other day was real? Here is the evidence before my eyes. How can it be false? But | don't know where my other four 
sons are and if my wife is still alive. If she's not dead, | wonder what she's doing now. And | don't know if this is my youngest son or the eldest. I'd like to ask him for details but the Master's orders are 
very strict and | dare not disobey. I'll sound him out a bit more.” 
So he shouted, “Monkey’s my sworn brother and he never told me he had any children. How can he suddenly have a son?” 
King Paramita said, “I see you still don't understand. |, King Paramita and my dad, Monkey are a dad and son who've never met. My dad, Monkey’s originally a monster who lived in the Water-curtain 
Cave. He’d a sworn brother, my uncle called Demon Bull-King. My uncle doesn't sleep with his first wife, Demoness. That woman who lives in Banana Cave’s my mum. When a Tang Priest from the 
southeast wanted to go to the Western Paradise and meet a god, he asked my dad, Monkey to be his disciple. They'd encountered numberless hardships on the road to the West when one day they 
came upon Flaming Mountain. The Master and his several disciples fretted and grieved to no end. Then my dad had a good idea. He said, ‘A Master for one day’s a dad for life. I'll temporarily forget 
my vows of loyalty to my sworn brother in order to repay my Master's kindness.’ He went at once to the Banana Cave. First he changed himself into the Demon Bull-King and deceived my mum. Later 
he changed into a tiny insect and entered my mum's belly. He stayed there a while and caused her no end of agony. When my mum could no longer bear the pain, she’d no choice but to give the 
Banana-leaf Fan to my dad, Monkey. When my dad, Monkey got the Banana-leaf Fan, he cooled the inferno at Flaming Mountain and left. ‘In the fifth month of the next year, my mum suddenly gave 
birth to me, King Paramita. Day by day | grew older and more intelligent. If you think about it since my uncle and mum had never been together and | was born after my dad, Monkey had been inside 
my mum's belly, the fact that I’m his direct descendant’s beyond dispute.” Monkey was between tears and laughter after this story. Just then thoroughly confused, he saw to the northwest Little Moon 
King bringing a column of soldiers, distinguishable by their purple battle dress, to relieve the Tang Priest. From the southwest came a column of devil soldiers under a black banner to assist King 
Paramita. King Paramita's troops were fierce. They charged headlong into the Tang Priest's lines and killed Little Moon King. Then tuming, they cut off the head of the Tang Priest. Confusion reigned. 
There was much killing amongst the 4 armies and Monkey did not know what to do. He could only watch, spellbound. He saw the black banners fall in amongst the ranks of the purple banners. Purple 
banners lay across green banners. 1 green banner flew into the purple banners. Purple banners marched into the ranks of the yellow banners. Yellow banners angled into the black banners. A large 
black banner‘ fell from the sky onto the yellow banners, killing yellow banner-men. Yellow banner-men rushed into the ranks of the green banners and seized several green banners that were snatched 
away in turn by purple banner-men. Purple banner-men killed their own men. Several hundred purple banners fell into the blood and were dyed lychee-red. These were gathered by yellow banner-men 
into their ranks. Green banner-men marched into the troops under black banners and killed a number of them. Several small black banners flew into the air and fell onto a pine tree while a million men 
in the ranks of yellow banners fell into a pit. 100 small yellow command banners flew in amongst the small green command banners and they blended into the colour of duck's-head green. 16 or 17 
small purple command banners fell in with the green banners and the green banner troops threw them into the air. They fell onto the troops of the black banners and disappeared. Now Monkey was 
enraged. He could not control himself. 
077 
The Elder of the Void Rouses Monkey from His Dream; When the Great Sage Returns, the Sun Is Half Hidden in the Mountains 
Unable to control himself, Monkey changed into the 3-headed, 6-armed form in which he had rebelled in the Heavenly Palace. He struck out wildly in the air. From behind someone called loudly, “Is 
Wukong no longer aware of vacuity? Is Wuhan no longer aware of illusion?” 
Monkey turned his head and asked, “What country's general are you, that you dare to address me?” 
Looking up he saw an elder sitting on a lotus platform. The elder called again, “Sun Wukong, aren't you awake yet?” 
Monkey stopped swinging his cudgel and asked, “Who are you?” 
The elder replied, “I'm the Master of the Void. I've watched you living in this false universe for quite some time, and I've come specially to rouse you. At this moment your real Master is hungry.” 
Monkey began to wake up a bit. It seemed that what had happened was all an illusion. He concentrated his whole mind, shutting out what had gone before, and begged the Master for instruction. The 
Master of the Void said, “You've been snared in the aura of the Qing Fish.” 
Monkey asked, “What kind of demon is this Qing Fish that he can create a universe?” 
The Master of the Void said, “When Heaven and Earth first split apart, the pure essence ascended, and the turbid sank. The half-pure and half-turbid remained in the middle, and that is man. What was 
mostly pure and only in small measure turbid gravitated to the Mountain of Flowers and Fruit, giving birth to Wukong. That which was mostly turbid and only in small measure pure gravitated to Little 
Moon Cave, giving birth to the Qing Fish. The Qing Fish and Wukong were born in the same hour, the only difference was that Wukong belonged to goodness while the Qing Fish belonged to evil. But 
the Qing Fish's supernatural powers are ten times greater than Wukong's, and his body is extremely large. When he takes Kunlun Mountains as a pillow for his head, his feet rest in the Kingdom of 
Dark Oblivion. Now he finds the World of Reality too small for him, so he dwells in the World of Illusion that he calls the Emerald Green World.” 
Monkey said, “What are illusion and reality?” 
The Master said, “There’re three parts to creation: one part’s No-lllusion, one part's Illusion and one’s Reality.” Then he recited this poem: 
No springtime lads and lasses played; they're the root of the Qing Fish. 
No New Emperor ever lived; he’s the energy of the Qing Fish. 
No green bamboo broom ever swept the hall; that’s the name of the Qing Fish. 
No general's commission was ever issued; it’s the pattern of the Qing Fish. 
No sky-gouging axes ever struck through; they're the form of the Qing Fish. 
No Little Moon-King ever lived; he’s the spirit of the Qing Fish. 
No Tower of Myriad Mirrors stood tall; it's the creation of the Qing Fish. 
No man in the mirror ever beckoned; that's the body of the Qing Fish. 
No Headache World ever existed; it's the construction of the Qing Fish. 
No Green Pearl's tower's ever erected; it's the heart of the Qing Fish. 
No Hsiang Yui of Bull ever strode forth; he’s the soul of the Qing Fish. 
No Beautiful Lady Yi ever died; she’s a delusion of the Qing Fish. 
King Yama’s never absent from Hell; his was the world of the Qing Fish. 
The World of the Ancients never existed; it’s a fabrication of the Qing Fish. 
Nor did the World of the Future exist; it's the congealing of the Qing Fish. 
No Limitation Hexagram Palace stood firm; it’s the place of the Qing Fish. 
No Young Lord of Tang ever went to war; he’s the sport of the Qing Fish. 
Reciting and exercising were never indulged in; that’s the nature of the Qing Fish. 
No Lady Green-twine ever wept; she’s the exhaustion of the Qing Fish. 
No roll call platform’s ever built; it’s the movement of the Qing Fish. 
No battle with Paramita ever ensued; that’s the brawling of the Qing Fish. 
For there’s no Qing Fish; there’s simply Monkey's desire. 


When he finished, a great gust of wind arose and blew Monkey back to the mountain path. And he saw that the sun above the peony tree had barely moved. It happened that when the real Tang Priest 
awoke from his spring nap he found the boys and girls had already gone away. He was quite pleased, except that he didn't see Monkey. He woke Bullseye and Sandy and asked where Monkey had 
gone. Sandy said, “I don't know.” Bullseye said, “I don't know.” 

All at once they saw Mu-ch’a, an attendant of Nun Kuan-yin, and a fair-faced monk riding an auspicious cloud and coming from the southwest. It fluttered down, and Mu-ch’'a said, “Tang Priest, take 
this new disciple. The Great Sage will return in a little while.” 

The Tang Priest jumped to his feet and respected. Mu-ch’'a said, “Nun Kuan-yin is concemed about your hardship on the Western Road and sends this little disciple to join you here. However he's very 
young so the Nun urges your reverence to watch after him. The Nun has already given him the religious name Wu-Qing (Aware-of-Desire). She says that although Wu-Qing is your reverence's fourth 
disciple, he should be placed second only to Wukong and above Wu-neng in order to complete the phrase, “make empty of desire and be purified.” 2 

The Tang Priest accepted the Nun's order and took in the disciple, then saw Mu-ch’a off. The Qing Fish demon had in fact distracted the Mind-Monkey with the sole intention of devouring the Tang 
Priest. Thus while he entangled the Great Sage, he also changed his shape to that of a little monk to ensnare the Priest. How was he to know that the Great Sage had been awakened by the Elder of 
the Void? This shows that though evil demons use a thousand schemes, one whose mind is straight need fear no demon. When Monkey returned through the air, he spied the little monk sitting by his 
Master. The monk's evil aura rose ten thousand feet, and Monkey knew right off that he was a transformation of the Qing Fish. He took his cudgel from behind his ear and struck without a second 
thought. In an instant the little monk had turned into the corpse of a mackerel. 4A beam of red light issued from the corpse's mouth. Monkey followed it with his eyes, and he saw a tower appear within 
the red beam. In the tower stood the Hegemon of Ch'u. He shouted, “I beg your leave, Beautiful Lady Yu!” 

Then the beam of red light passed to the southeast and disappeared. The Tang Priest said, “Wukong, I'm famished!” 

When Monkey heard this, he quickly turned and with his hands clasped made a great salute toward his Master. He repeated what had just happened from beginning to end. Now when the Tang Priest 
had found Monkey missing, he was at first quite anxious. But when Monkey returned and straight off killed his new disciple, he grew angry and was about to reprimand him. Then he saw that the new 
disciple had become a mackerel corpse. He quickly realised that Monkey's intentions were good while the new disciple had been a demon. And when he heard Monkey describe the fierceness of the 
demon, his anger changed to joy. He said, “You've been through a lot of trouble, Disciple.” 

Bullseye said, “Wukong just went to play. If that's trouble, then when we really meet trouble the Master will call it play.” 

The Tang Priest made Bullseye be quiet and asked Monkey, “Wukong, you say you passed several days in the Emerald Green World. Why's it not even been an hour here?” 

Monkey said, “Though the mind is deluded, time is not.” 

The Tang Priest said, “I wonder which is longer — mind or time?” 

Monkey said, “When mind is short, it is God. When time is short, it is a demon.” 

Sandy said, “The demon has been destroyed. The world is pure and empty. Brother, why don't you go to the village again and beg for some food? Let the Master sit for a while with a quiet mind, then 
we'll start again on the Western road.” 

Monkey said, “All right,” and walked on ahead. He had gone just a short way when he ran into the local mountain deity. Monkey cursed him, “How insolent you’re! | was looking for you the other day to 
ask you something but when | said the magic words you never came. What kind of great local deity are you anyway? Quick! Stick out your leg and I'll give ita hundred whacks. Then we'll sort it out.” 
The deity begged him. “Lord Great Sage, just then you're dragged beyond Heaven by the Demon of Desire. My powers are limited. How could | go beyond Heaven to respect to you? Please, Great 
Sage, weigh my merit against this guilt.” 

Monkey said, “What merit do you claim?” 

The deity replied, “I took your flower ball from Lord Bullseye's ear.” 

Monkey dismissed him. Then intent on begging for food, he leaped into the air. To 1 side he saw a path covered with peach blossoms. A wisp of smoke rose indistinctly from amidst the wood. 
Immediately he lowered his cloud to take a look. Finding it to be a nice house, Monkey went inside and was looking for someone he could ask for food when he came upon a quiet room. There sat a 
master who had gathered several disciples around him and was explicating a text. He was explaining and discussing none other than: “It encompasses Heaven, Earth, and nothing escapes it.” 


PART VI 
THE JOURNEY RESUMES 
078 
Bathe mind just sweep a pagoda to wash off filth; bind demons & return to the self-cultivation of the lord 
In all 12 hours" you must never forget to reap the fruit of night and day. 
For 5 years — 108000 rounds - let not spirit water run dry, nor let fire-light cause you distress. 
There’s no harm where fire and water blend well; 5 Phases would join as if enchained. 
Yin and yang at peace raise you up cloudy tower: ride the phoenix to reach Heaven; mount the crane to head for Yingzhou. 
The poem of this stanza is Mortal by the River that we use solely to depict Tripitaka and his 3 disciples. Since they attained the condition wherein water and fire were in perfect equilibrium, their own 
natures became pure and cool. Successful in their endeavour to borrow the treasure fan of pure yin, they managed to extinguish the large mountain of torrid flames; and in less than a day, they traversed 
the distance of eight hundred. Leisurely and carefree, master and disciples proceeded toward the West. As it was the time of late autumn and early winter, this was what they saw: wild chrysanthemum 
drop their blooms; tender buds emerge from new plums. At each village they harvest grains; everywhere they eat fragrant fare. The woods shed their leaves and distant hills are seen; by Brookside 
frost thickens, cleansing the ravine. Moved by the wintry breeze, the insects stop their work. Pure yin now becomes yang, the month’s ruled by Yuan-Ming. ‘Water virtue’s strong for peace reigns in 
bright, clear days. Earth’s aura descends; heaven’s aura rises; the rainbow leaves without a trace; ice slowly forms in pools and ponds. Dangling by the ridges, wisteria flowers fade; absorbing cold, 
pines and bamboos grow greener. After they travelled for quite a while, the 4 of them again found themselves approaching a moated city. Reining in his horse, the Tang Monk called out to his disciple: 
“Wukong, look at those tall, towering buildings over there. What kind of a place do you think it is?” Pilgrim raised his head to look and saw that it was indeed a moated city. Truly it has the shape of a 
coiled dragon, this crouched-tiger-like strong city. On all sides bright canopies overhang it with many turns royal plains level out. Beasts of jade and stone form the bridges’ railings; statues of worthies 
stand on golden mounts. Truly it seems like a capital of China, a metropolis of Heaven; a secure domain of 10000 miles, a prosperous empire of a millennium. Barbarians yield to the ruler’s far-reaching 
grace; mountains and seas pay tribute to the sages’ court. The royal steps are clean; the royal path’s serene; the taverns bustle with poems; flowered towers are full of joy. Evergreens outside the 
Weiyang Palace® should let the phoenix recite to greet the dawn. “Master,” said Pilgrim, “that moated city’s to be the domain of a ruler or king.” 
“In this world,” said 8 Rules with a laugh, “there’re cities that belong to a prefecture and cities that belong to a district. How do you know that this is the domain of a ruler or a king?” 
“Don’t you know,” said Pilgrim, “that the domain of a king or a ruler is quite different from a prefecture or a district? Just look at those gates on all four sides of the city: there must be over ten of them. 
The circumference around it has to be over a hundred miles. The buildings are so tall that there are clouds and fog hovering over them. If this is not a royal capital of some sort, how could it have so 
grand and noble an appearance?” 
“You've good eyes, Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “and may recognise that it's a royal city. Do you know it’s name?” 
Pilgrim replied, “There are neither banners nor plaques. How could | know its name? We've to make inquiries inside the city, and then we'll know.” 
Urging his horse on, the elder soon arrived at the gate where he dismounted to walk across the moat-bridge. As he looked around after he entered the gate, he discovered flourishing trades in all three 
markets and the six boulevards; and he saw moreover that in their elegant attire, the people looked most distinguished. As they walked along, they suddenly caught sight of a score of monks begging 
from door to door, everyone carrying the cangue and wearing a lock. They looked most destitute indeed! 
“When the hare dies,” sighed Tripitaka, “the fox will grieve, for a creature will mourn its kind.” Then he called out: 
“Wukong, go up there and question them. Why are they so condemned?” Obeying his master’s words, Pilgrim said, “Hey, monks! Which monastery do you belong to? Why are you carrying the cangue 
and wearing the lock?” Going to their knees, the monks said, “Dad, we’re monks of the Golden Light Monastery who have been grievously wronged.” 
“Where is this Golden Light Monastery?” asked Pilgrim. 
“Just around the corner there,” said one of the monks. 
Pilgrim brought them before the Tang Monk before he asked them again, “What do you mean by grievously wronged? Tell me.” 
“Dad,” said the monks, “we don’t know where you came from, though you seem quite familiar to us. We dare not tell you here. Please come to our humble residence, and we'll disclose our woes.” 
“That’s more appropriate,” said the elder. “Let's go to their monastery and we can then question them carefully.” They went together up to the monastery gate where they found in gold letters this 
horizontal inscription: 
Golden Light Monastery Built by Imperial Command 
As master and disciples entered the gate, they saw cold scented lamps in aged halls; windswept leaves in vacant corridors. Atop the clouds, 1000-foot pagoda; to nourish one’s nature, a few pine trees. 
The ground’s flower-strewn but no guests pass by; the eaves are amply screened by spider webs. Drums mounted in vain; bells hung up unused; the walls are dust-covered, the murals blurred. The 
lectern’s so quiet for no monk is seen; the Chan Hall’s silent, only birds you'll meet. Such lamentable plight! Such endless, lonely pain! Though incense urns are before the gods placed, the ashes cool, 
the petals wilt, and all are vain. Grief-stricken, Tripitaka could not restrain the tears welling up in his eyes. Wearing the cangues and locks, the monks pushed open the door to the main hall and invited 
our elder to worship a god. After he entered the hall, the elder could only offer the incense of his heart, though he touched his face to the ground three times. Then they went to the back where they 
found another six or seven young priests chained to the pillar before the abbot’s hall, an intolerable sight for Tripitaka. When they reached the abbot’s hall, the monks leading the way all came to 
respect, and 1 of them asked, “The features of our Venerable Dads aren't all the same. Do you happen to be those who've come from the Great Tang in the Land of the East?” 
“You monks must know the magic of foreknowledge without divination,” said Pilgrim, laughing. “We're indeed such persons. But how did you recognise us?” 
“Dad,” said the monk, “what sort of foreknowledge without divination do you think we really possess? It’s just that we’ve been grievously wronged and there’s nowhere for us to turn for justice except to 
call on Heaven and Earth day in and day out. | suppose we must've disturbed the gods for each of us had a dream last night where we're told that a holy monk arriving from the Great Tang in the Land 
of the East would be able to save our lives. Our grievances, too would be rectified. When we came upon the strange appearances of you Venerable Dads today, we're thus able to recognise you.” 
Highly pleased by these words, Tripitaka said, “What's the name of your region here? What sort of grievances do you've?” 
The monks all knelt down again and 1 of them said, “Holy Dad, this city’s called the Sacrifice Kingdom and it’s a major city in the Western Territories. In years past, barbaric tribes of all four quarters 
came to pay us tribute: the Yuetuo Kingdom to the south, the Qoco Kingdom to the north, the State of Wester Liang to the east, and the Bimbo Kingdom to the west. They brought annually fine jade 
and lustrous pearls, beautiful girls, and spirited horses. Without our use of arms or expeditionary forces, all of them would of their own accord venerate us as the superior state.” 
“If they do that,” said Tripitaka, “it must be because you've an upright king, worthy civil officers, and noble military officers.” 
“Holy Dad,” said the monk, “neither our civil officers are worthy, nor our military officers noble and the king isn’t upright either. It’s to do with this Golden Light Monastery of ours that'd from the beginning 
auspicious clouds covering our treasure pagoda and hallowed mists rising from our whole edifice. At night beams of light flashed from the building and people as far away as ten thousand miles had 
seen them; by day, coloured airs sprouted and all four of our surrounding nations had witnessed them. This is why we've been regarded as the divine capital of a Heavenly prefecture, and why we've 
enjoyed the tributes of the four barbaric tribes. But three years ago, during the first day of the first month of winter, a rainstorm of blood descended upon us at the hour of midnight. By morning every 
household was fearful; every home was grief-stricken. The various ministers made haste to memorialise to the king with all sorts of speculation on why such chastisement was sent by the Heavenly 
Lord. At the time, Daoists were summoned to say their mass and Religious their scriptures in order to pacify Heaven and Earth. Who would have suspected however, that, since our treasure pagoda 
of gold had been defiled by that rainstorm, the foreign nations would stop coming to pay tribute these last two years? Our king wanted to send out expeditionary forces but he was restrained by the 
ministers who accused the monks of this monastery of stealing the treasure in the pagoda. That was the reason they gave for the disappearance of the auspicious clouds and hallowed mists and for 
the cessation of tribute on the part of the foreign nations. The dim-witted ruler never gave the matter another thought; at once those venal officials had us monks arrested and inflicted on us endless 
tortures and interrogations. There were altogether three generations of monks in this monastery; two of them, unable to withstand such terrible treatments, died. The rest of us are now locked up in 
cangues and locks, still accused of this crime. Think of it, Venerable Dad — how could we dare be so bold as to steal the treasure in the pagoda? We beg you in your great compassion to have regard 
for the special affinity of our kind. Vouchsafe your great mercy and exercise your mighty religion power to save our lives.” 


When Tripitaka heard this, he nodded his head and sighed, saying, “There are certainly hidden aspects to this matter that have not yet come to light. For one thing, the court has been remiss in its rule, 
and for another, all of you may be faced with a fated calamity. But if it was the shower of blood sent by Heaven that had defiled the treasure pagoda, why didn’t you people at the time prepare a memorial 
to present to your ruler, so that you’d be spared such affliction?” 

“Holy Dad,” said the monk, “we're only common folks. How could we know the will of Heaven? Moreover, if our senior colleagues could not determine what to do, how would we be able to settle the 
matter?” 

“Wukong,” said Tripitaka, “what time is it now?” 

“About the hour of shen,”’ replied Pilgrim. “I'd like to have an audience with the ruler,” said Tripitaka, “so that our travel rescript may be certified. But we’ve not yet fully understood what has happened 
to the monks here, and it’s hard for me to speak to the ruler about this matter. After | left Chang’an, | made a vow in the Temple of the Law Gate that on my journey to the West, I'd burn incense in 
every temple, I’d bow to God everywhere and sweep a pagoda whenever | came across a pagoda.’ Today we’ve met you monks who've been grievously wronged because of a treasure pagoda. Why 
don’t you people fetch me a new broom? Let me bathe first, and then I'll go up there to sweep it clean. Let me see if | can discover exactly what has caused the defilement and the loss of the pagoda’s 
brilliance. Once we determine that, we can memorialise to their ruler and deliver them from this affliction.” 

When they heard this, some of those monks carrying the cangues and locks dashed into the kitchen and picked up a kitchen knife to hand over to 8 Rules, saying, “Dad, please take the knife and see 
if you can sever the chains on the pillar over there, so that those young priests can be freed. They can then go to prepare a meal and a scented bath for the holy dads here. We'll go to the streets to 
beg a new broom for him to use to sweep the pagoda.” 

“It's so easy to open locks!” said 8 Rules, chuckling. “There’s no need for a knife or an axe. Ask that hairy-faced dad. He’s a seasoned lock-picker.” 

Pilgrim indeed went forward and, using the lock-opening magic, gave the shackles a wipe with his hand. Immediately, all the chains and locks fell to the ground. Those young priests ran into the kitchen 
to scrub the pots and pans and prepare a meal. After Tripitaka and his disciples ate, it was gradually turning dark when some of these monks still cangue and locked came in with two brooms. Tripitaka 
was very pleased. As he spoke with them, another young priest came in with a lamp to invite him to go take his bath. By then the moon and the stars were shining brilliantly outside as the sound of 
bamboo drums started from the watchtowers. Truly at 4 walls the cold wind arose; in every house the lamps burned bright. Shutters in all six lanes went up; doors of 3 markets were shut tight. Fishing 
boats retired to the woods; ploughmen their short ropes forsook. The woodcutter’s axe now rested; a student recited his book. After he finished bathing, Tripitaka put on a short-sleeve undershirt that 
he tied with a sash. He changed into a pair of soft-soled shoes and picked up a new broom. “You’d all go to sleep,” he said to the monks, “and let me go sweep the pagoda.” 

“If the pagoda had been defiled by a bloody rainstorm,” said Pilgrim, “and if it had grown dark for such a long time already, some vicious things might have been bred up there. If you go up all by yourself 
in this cold, windy night, you may run into something unexpected. How about letting old monkey be your companion?” 

“Very good! Very good!” replied Tripitaka. Each of them thus took up a broom. They went first to the main hall and lit the glass chalice and burned fresh incense. Tripitaka went to his knees before a 
god image and prayed saying, “Your disciple, Chen Xuanzang’s sent to worship god who's thus come and gone in the Spirit Mountain and ask for scriptures by the decree of the Great Tang in the Land 
of the East. Arriving here at the Golden Light Monastery of the Sacrifice Kingdom, | was told by the monks of this monastery that the treasure pagoda had been defiled. The king suspected that the 
monks had stolen the treasure and were wrongly charged with a crime, the cause of which no one in fact had knowledge. In all earnestness therefore, your disciple’s decided to sweep this pagoda. | 
beg our God to reveal quickly by his mighty spirit the true source of the pagoda’s defilement so that the innocence of these mortal men can be established.” 

After his prayer, he and Pilgrim opened the door of the pagoda and began to sweep it, beginning with the lowest tier. Truly this pagoda leans ruggedly toward the sky and rises, towering, in the air. It's 
justly called a pagoda of 5-coloured glass, a Sari-peak of 1000 gold; its stairs winding like a tunnel; an open cage when its doors unfold. Its treasure vase reflects the moon in the sky; golden bells ring 
with the wind of the sea. 1 can see the empty eave saluting the stars and the lofty top detaining the clouds. The empty eave saluting the stars creates a phoenix piercing strange rocks and flowers; the 
lofty top detaining the clouds brings forth a pagoda-dragon fog-entwined. 1’s gaze on top will reach 1000 miles; up there it will feel like the 9-fold Heaven. In glass lamp at the door of each tier, there is 
dust but no fire; on white-jade railings before every eave gather dirt and flying insects. Inside the pagoda above the votive tables, smoke and incense all extinguished; outside the windows or before 
the images, cobwebs opaque and widespread. There is more rat-dung in the urns than oil in the chalice. Because a treasure was in secret lost, priests have been killed, their lot made bitter and vain. 
Since Tripitaka wills to sweep it clean, the pagoda’s old form will of course be seen. The Tang Monk used his broom to sweep clean one tier before going up to another tier. By the time he reached the 
seventh tier, it was already the hour of the 2" watch and the elder began to tire. “You're getting tired,” said Pilgrim. “Sit down and let old monkey do the sweeping for you.” 

“How many tiers there’re on this pagoda?” asked Tripitaka. 

Pilgrim replied, “I’m afraid there're at least thirteen tiers.” 

Attempting to endure his fatigue, the elder said, “I must finish sweeping it to fulfil my vow.” He swept 3 more tiers and his torso and legs ached so badly that he had to sit down on the tenth tier. “Wukong,” 
he said, “you sweep clean the rest of the three tiers for me and then come back down.” 

Rousing his energy, Pilgrim went up to the eleventh tier, and in a moment, he ascended to the twelfth tier. As he swept the floor, he heard someone speaking on the top of the pagoda. “That's strange! 
That's strange!” said Pilgrim. “It has to be about the hour of the third watch now. How could there be anyone speaking on the pagoda top? This has to be some sort of deviant creature. Let me go and 
have a look.” 

Dear Monkey King! Stealthily he picked up the broom and put it under his arm; hitching up his clothes, he crawled out of the door and rose into the clouds to look around. There in the middle of the 
thirteenth tier of the pagoda were seated two monster-spirits, and before them were placed a basin of coarse rice, a bowl, and a juice pot. They were drinking and playing the finger-guessing game.2 
Using his magic, Pilgrim abandoned the broom and whipped out the golden-hooped rod. He stood at the doorway and shouted, “Dear fiends! So you stole the treasure on the pagoda!” Terrified, the 
two fiendish creatures quickly got up and pelted Pilgrim with the pot and the bow! but he blocked the blows with his iron rod and said, “If | slay you, there'll be no one to make the confession.” With the 
rod, he backed them against the wall until they could not move at all, and all they could say was, “Spare us! Spare us! It has nothing to do with us. Someone else took the treasure.” 

Using the magic of seizure, Pilgrim grabbed them with one hand and went back to the tenth tier. “Master,” he announced, “I’ve caught the thieves who stole the treasure.” Tripitaka was just dozing: 
when he heard this, he was both startled and pleased. “Where did you catch them?” he asked. Pilgrim pulled the two fiends forward and made them kneel down. “They were having fun on top of the 
pagoda,” he said, “drinking and playing the finger-guessing game. When old monkey heard all that noise, | mounted the cloud to leap up there and block their escape with no effort at all. But | feared 
that if | killed them with one blow of the rod, no one would make the confession. That’s why | brought them here. Master, you can take their testimony and see where they came from and where they 
have stashed the treasure.” 
Trembling all over, the two fiends could only utter, “Spare us!” Then one of them made this honest confession: “We've been sent here to patrol the pagoda by the All Saints Dragon King of the Green 
Wave Lagoon in the Scattered-Rock Mountain. He is called Busy Bubble, and I’m called Bubble Busy. He’s a sheet-fish spirit, and I’m a black fish spirit. This all came about because our All Saints Old 
Dragon once gave birth to a daughter by the name of Princess All Saints who was blessed with the loveliest features and the most extraordinary talents. She took in a husband by the name of Nine- 
Heads who also had vast magic powers. Year before last, he came here with the Dragon King and, exerting great divine strength, sent down a rainstorm of blood to have the treasure pagoda defiled. 
Then he stole the Sarira Religious treasure’ from the building. Thereafter the princess also went up to the great Heaven where she stole the nine-leaved agaric that the Lady Queen Mum planted 
before the Hall of Divine Mists. The plant and the Religious treasure are both kept now at the bottom of the lagoon, lighting up the place with their golden beams and coloured hues night and day. 
Recently we received the news that there was one Sun Wukong on his way to the Western Heaven to acquire scriptures. We're told not only that he has vast magic powers but also that he loves to 
meddle with the faults of others. That's why we've been sent here frequently to patrol the area, so that we'll be prepared when that Sun Wukong arrives.” 

Laughing scornfully at what he heard, Pilgrim said, “How audacious are these cursed beasts! No wonder he sent for the Bull Demon King the other day to attend their banquet! So, he was in league 
with this bunch of brazen demons who specialize in evil deeds!” 

Hardly had he finished speaking when 8 Rules and a few young priests holding 2 lanterns walked up from below. “Master,” he said, “why haven't you gone to bed after you finished sweeping the 
pagoda? Why’re you still sitting here and talking?” 

“Brother,” said Pilgrim, “it's a good thing you've come, the treasure on the pagoda was stolen by the All Saints Old Dragon. He’s the one who sent two little fiends to patrol the pagoda here and spy on 
our movements but they were caught by me just now.” 

“What're their names,” asked 8 Rules, “and what sort of monster-spirits are they?” 

“They just gave us a confession,” said Pilgrim. “One of them is called Busy Bubble, and the other is called Bubble Busy. One is a sheet fish spirit, and the other is a black fish spirit.” Whipping out his 
rake, 8 Rules wanted to strike at them, saying, “If they are monster-spirits who have made their confession, why not beat them to death? What are we waiting for?” Pilgrim said, “You've not thought 
about this. If we keep them alive, it'll be easier for us to go speak to the king about this matter, and they can be used as informants too, for catching the thieves and recovering the treasure.” 

Dear Idiot! He indeed put away the rake; he and Pilgrim then each picked up a fiend and pulled him down the pagoda. All the fiends could say was “Spare us!” 8 Rules said to them, “We're just looking 
for some sheet fish and black fish like you, so that we’d make some soup for those wronged priests.” 

The several young priests, in great delight, held their lanterns high to lead the elder down the pagoda. One of them ran ahead to report to the other monks, crying, “It’s great! It's great! We've finally 
seen the day! The fiends who stole our treasure have been caught by the dads.” Pilgrim gave this order: “Bring us some iron chains, pierce their lute bones, and lock them up here. You people stand 
guard over them and we'll go to sleep. We'll dispose of them tomorrow.” Those monks indeed watched over the fiends with great care while Tripitaka and his disciples rested. 

Soon it was dawn, and the elder said, “I'll go into the court with Wukong to have our travel rescript certified.” Whereupon he changed into his brocaded cassock and put on his Vairocana hat. In full 
clerical attire, he strode forward, accompanied by Pilgrim who also tightened his tiger-skin kilt and straightened out his silk shirt after he took out the travel rescript. “Why aren’t you bringing along the 
two fiendish thieves?” asked 8 Rules. “Let us inform the king first,” said Pilgrim, “and there will be royal summoners sent here to fetch them.” 

They walked before the gate of the court, and there were endless scenes of scarlet birds and yellow dragons, of divine capitals and celestial arches. Approaching the East Flower Gate, Tripitaka saluted 
the grand official of the gate and said, “I beg Your Honour to make this announcement for us: this humble cleric has been sent by the Great Tang in the Land of the East to go acquire scriptures in the 
Western Heaven. We seek an audience with your ruler in order to have our travel rescript certified.” Willing, indeed, to grant this request, the Custodian of the Yellow Gate went before the steps to 
memorialise: “There are two monks of strange features and attire outside who claim to have been sent by the Tang court in the Land of the East of the South Jambidvipa Continent to go seek scriptures 
from God in the West. They wish to have an audience with our king in order to have their travel rescript certified.” 

On hearing this, the king gave the order to have the visitors summoned, and the elder thus led Pilgrim to walk into court. When the civil and military officials caught sight of Pilgrim, they all became 
frightened, some saying that this was a monkey priest while others observing that he was a monk with a thunder-god beak. All of them were so alarmed that they dared not stare at him for long. While 
the elder went through elaborate ritual before the steps to salute the throne, Pilgrim stood with hands folded before him and remained unmoved. Then the elder spoke: “Your priestly subject has been 
sent as a scripture pilgrim by the Great Tang nation in the Land of the East of the South Jambidvipa Continent to worship God at the Great Thunderclap Monastery in the India of the West. Our journey 
takes us to your noble region, and we dare not pass through without permission. We've with us a travel rescript that we beg you to certify before we leave.” 

Greatly pleased by what he heard, the king gave the order for the sage monk of the Tang court to ascend the Hall of Golden Chimes. A cushion of embroidered silk was granted him as his seat. Going 
up the hall by himself, the elder first presented the rescript before he took the seat. After the king had read carefully the rescript from beginning to end, he was delighted. He said to Tripitaka, “Though 
the Great Tang Emperor was indisposed, he was fortunate to have been able to select a noble priest who was willing to seek scriptures from God without any fear of the lengthy distance. But the priests 
of our region are good only for stealing, for bringing ruin upon our nation and ruler.” When he heard this, Tripitaka folded his hands before his chest and said, “In what way do they bring ruin upon your 
nation and ruler?” 

“This kingdom of ours,” said the king, “is a superior state of the Western Territories. In the past, the four barbaric tribes frequently came to us to pay tribute, all on account of the Golden Light Monastery 
within our kingdom. In that monastery was a treasure pagoda of yellow gold, the lustre and brilliance of which filled the sky. Recently however, the larcenous monks of the monastery secretly have 
stolen the treasure, and for the last three years, there was no brilliance at all. The foreign nations during this time also stopped their tributes, and this matter has aroused our deepest hatred.” 

“Your Majesty,” said Tripitaka with a smile, his hands still folded, “To err by a hair's breadth’s to miss by a thousand miles! When this humble priest arrived at your Heavenly domain last evening, | 
caught sight of some ten priests, all carrying cangues and wearing locks, the moment | entered the city gate. | questioned them on their crime, and they told me that they were innocent victims from the 
Golden Light Monastery. An even more thorough investigation | made after my arrival at their monastery disclosed that the priests there had nothing to do with this, for when | swept the pagoda at night, 
| caught the fiendish thieves who stole the treasure.” 

“Where are these fiendish thieves?” asked the king, highly pleased. Tripitaka said, “They have been locked up by my humble disciple in the Golden Light Monastery.” 

Hurriedly issuing a golden tablet the king gave this decree: “Let the Embroidered-Uniform Guard bring back the fiendish thieves from the Golden Light monastery. We'll ourselves then interrogate them.” 
“Your Majesty,” said Tripitaka, “though you may want to send the Imperial Guard, it is better that my humble disciple accompany him.” 


“Where is your noble disciple?” asked the king. 

Pointing with his finger, Tripitaka said, “He’s the one standing by the jade steps.” When the king saw Pilgrim, he was astounded, saying, “The sage monk has such elegant features! How is it that your 
noble disciple has that sort of appearance?” When the Great Sage Sun heard this, he spoke up in a loud voice, “Your Majesty, don’t judge a man by his face, nor measure the sea by a vase. If you only 
cared for men of good appearance, how could you seize the fiendish thieves?” These words of Pilgrim turned the king’s astonishment to delight, and he said, “What the sage monk says is true indeed. 
We'll not select talents according to their appearances. All we want is to catch the thieves and return the treasure back to the pagoda.” He then gave the order for the court attendant to prepare a 
canopied carriage, and for the Imperial Guard to wait on the sage monk in all diligence when he went to fetch the fiendish thieves. 

The court attendant at once sent for a huge carriage and a yellow umbrella. The Embroidered-Uniform Guard also summoned the guardsmen; Pilgrim was placed in the carriage that was borne by four 
people in front and four behind while four outriders shouted to clear the way as they headed toward the Golden Light Monastery. This entourage soon disturbed the populace of the whole city, and not 
one failed to show up to try to see the sage monk and the fiendish thieves. 

When 8 Rules and Sand-monk heard the shouts for clearing the way, they thought that some official sent by the king had arrived, and they hurried out of the monastery to receive him. Pilgrim, they 
discovered, was the one sitting in the carriage. Facing him, Idiot said, giggling, “Elder Brother, you’ve acquired your true form!” 

Pilgrim descended from the carriage and took hold of 8 Rules asking, “What do you mean?” 

8 Rules replied, “You've a yellow umbrella above you and your carriage’s borne by eight carriers. Don’t these betoken the office of Monkey King? That’s why | said you’ve acquired your true form.” 
“Don’t make fun of me!” said Pilgrim. 

He untied the two fiendish creatures so that they could be taken to see the king. “Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “please take us along.” 

“But you'd stay here to guard the luggage and the horse,” said Pilgrim. One of the priests who were still cangued and locked said, “Let the dads go to enjoy imperial favour. We'll remain here to watch 
your things.” 

“In that case,” said Pilgrim, “let us go report to the king first. Then we'll come to free you.” 

8 Rules grabbed 1 of the fiendish thieves while Sand-monk took hold of the other; the Great Sage Sun climbed into the carriage as before. The entire entourage returned to court with the fiendish 
thieves in custody. In a moment, they arrived before the white jade steps to address the king: “We've brought the fiendish thieves here.” 

Coming down from his dragon couch, the king led the Tang Monk and the various officials, both civil and military, to look at the fiends: one had pouch-jowls and black scales, a pointed mouth and sharp 
teeth while the other had smooth skin and a huge belly, a large mouth and long whiskers. Though they had legs that could walk, they barely looked human. “Where are you from, monster-spirits,” asked 
the king, “and in what year did you invade our domain to steal our treasure? How many thieves are there altogether, and what are their names? Make your confession in truth and detail.” 

The 2 fiends went to their knees before him (they did not seem to mind the pain though their necks were dripping with blood) and made this confession: “Three years ago on the first of the seventh 
month, there’s one All Saints Dragon King who led many of his kindred to settle southeast of this state from here miles some one hundred. His lagoon’s called Green Wave; mountain, Scattered-Rock. 
To him was born a daughter most pretty and seductive who took a husband named Nine-Heads of magic powers matchless. Learning of your pagoda’s treasure, he joined the Dragon King as bandits. 
First they sent down a bloody rainstorm; then the pagoda’s sari they lifted. Now it lights up the dragon palace making bright days out of darkness. As well the princess plotted in deep and silent secret; 
she stole the Queen Mum’s agaric with which the lagoon’s treasure she nourished. We two are no bandit leaders: the Dragon King sent only privates. Tonight we've been captured; our confession’s 
most honest.” 

“If you’ve made your confession,” said the king, “why don’t you reveal your names?” One of the fiends said, “I’m called Busy Bubble, and he’s called Bubble Busy. I’m a sheet fish spirit, and he’s a black 
fish spirit.” The king instructed the Embroidered-Uniform Guard to jail them, after which he issued this decree: “The monks of the Golden Light Monastery will be freed at once from their cangues and 
locks. Let the Court of Imperial Entertainments prepare a banquet quickly, and we'll thank the sage monks in the Unicorn Hall for capturing these thieves. We'll also discuss the matter of asking the 
sage monks to arrest the bandit chief.” 

The Court of Imperial Entertainments at once prepared a banquet composed of both vegetarian and meat dishes. After the king invited the Tang Monk and his three disciples to take their seats in the 
Unicorn Hall, he asked, “Sage Monk, what is your honoured style?” 

“The secular family of this humble cleric,” replied the Tang Monk with folded hands, “goes by the name of Chen, and my religious name is Xuanzang. | also had bestowed on me the surname of Tang 
by my emperor, and my humble style is Tripitaka.” 

“And what are the honoured styles of your noble disciples?” asked the king. 

“My disciples are without styles,” said Tripitaka. “The first one is called Sun Wukong; the second, Bullseye Aware of Ability; and the third, Sand Awakened to Purity. These names were given by the 
Nun Guanshiyin of the South Sea. Since they made submission to this humble cleric and addressed me as master, I’ve also named Wukong Pilgrim. Aware of Ability I've named 8 Rules, and Awakened 
to Purity is now called Monk.” When he finished speaking, the king asked Tripitaka to take the head table, Pilgrim Sun to take the side table to his left, and Bullseye 8 Rules with Sand-monk to take the 
side table to his right. Spread upon the tables were all vegetarian foods, fruits, teas, and rice. Facing them, the king took the table that had on it meat dishes while the rest of the civil and military officials 
occupied over a hundred tables down below, all with meat dishes. After the officials thanked the king and the disciples excused themselves to their master, they were all seated. The king lifted his cup 
but Tripitaka dared not drink; only the three disciples accepted the seat-taking toast. From down below came the harmonious strains of pipes and strings provided by the Office of Poems. Look at the 
appetite of 8 Rules! It did not matter whether fruits or vegetables were set on the table; he wolfed them down and finished them all. A little while later, additional soup and rice were brought to him, and 
these he also cleaned up completely. When the juice stewards came by, he never once refused the cup. And so, this banquet lasted well past the hour of noon before it ended. 

As Tripitaka gave thanks for this lavish banquet, the king tugged at him to say, “This is merely to thank you for capturing the fiends. Let's change the banquet quickly to Jianzhang Palace ‘where we'll 
ask the sage monk for the plan to arrest the bandit chief and return the treasure to the pagoda.” 

“If you want us to do that,” said Tripitaka, “there is no need for another banquet. All of us humble clerics will take leave of you, Your Majesty, and we'll go to capture the fiends.” 

The king however, would have none of it, and he insisted that they proceed to the Jianzhang Palace where they were féted once more. Raising a cup of juice, the king said, “Which one of you sage 
monks will lead the troops to go arrest the fiends?” 

“We'll send Sun Wukong our eldest disciple,” said Tripitaka, and the Great Sage saluted him with folded hands to signify his obedience. “If Elder Sun is willing to go,” said the king, “how many men and 
horses do you need? When do you want to leave the city?” 

No longer able to restrain himself, 8 Rules said in a loud voice, “Who needs men and horses! Who cares what time it is! While we're still full of juice and rice, let me go with Elder Brother. We'll just 
stretch our hands and bring them back at once.” 

Highly pleased, Tripitaka said, “You're quite diligent nowadays, 8 Rules!” 

“In that case,” said Pilgrim, “let Brother Sand-monk protect Master. We two will go.” 

“If the two elders do not need men or horses,” said the king, “do you want any weapons?” 

“The weapons that you've,” said 8 Rules, chuckling, “are of no use to us. We brothers have our own weapons that accompany us wherever we go.” 

On hearing this, the king asked for a large goblet of juice with which he wanted to send them off. “We'll not drink juice now,” said the Great Sage Sun, “but ask the Embroidered-Uniform Guard to bring 
out the two little fiends. We'll take them along as informants.” The king ordered them brought out at once; taking hold of the 2 fiends and mounting the wind, the 2 disciples employed the magic of 
traction to head for the southeast. Lo! When Ruler and subjects saw them mounting wind and fog, they knew master and disciples to be sage monks. 


079 

2 monks, quelling fiends, disturb the dragon palace; the sages, destroying deviates, acquire the treasures. 
The king of the Sacrifice Kingdom and the various officials both great and small when they saw how the Great Sage Sun and 8 Rules mounted the wind and fog and glided away, each holding 1 of the 
little fiends, all those dukes and marquises saluted toward the sky, saying, “It’s indeed the truth! Not until today did we realise that there are such mortals, such living Gods!” When the two disciples 
vanished from sight, the king then turned to thank Tripitaka and Sand-monk, saying, “This Solitary One is of fleshly eyes and mortal stock. We only thought that your worthy disciples had sufficient 
power to capture the fiendish thieves. Little did we realise that they are actually superior mortals who can ride the fog and mount the clouds!” 
“This humble cleric,” said Tripitaka, “has hardly any magic power, and he’s dependent on these three lowly disciples throughout the journey.” Sand-monk said, “To tell you the truth, Your Majesty, my 
Big Brother happens to be the converted Great Sage Equal to Heaven. Once he caused great havoc in Heaven, using a golden-hooped rod, and among one hundred celestial warriors there was none 
who could withstand him. Even the Jade Emperor and Laozi were intimidated by him. My Second Elder Brother is none other than the Marshal of Heavenly Reeds who has embraced the right fruit. He 
used to command a mighty force of eighty thousand marines of the Celestial River. Compared with them, this disciple has very little magic power but I, too, happen to be the Curtain-Raising Captain 
who has received the commandments. We brothers may not be very good at doing other things but if you want something like catching fiends and binding monsters, seizing thieves and arresting 
fugitives, taming tigers and subduing dragons, kicking down Heaven and pulling up wells — including even stirring up seas and overturning rivers — we know a little of these. As for activities such as 
mounting the cloud and riding the fog, calling up rain and summoning wind, moving the stars and changing the dipper, poling the mountains to chase after the moon, they are simple matters, hardly 
worth mentioning.” 
When the king heard this, he became even more respectful toward them; asking the Tang Monk to take the honoured seat, he addressed him as “Venerable God,” while Sand-monk and his companions 
were given the title, “Nun.” The civil and military officials of the entire court were all delighted while the people of the whole kingdom paid them homage, and we'll leave them for the moment. 
We now tell you about the Great Sage Sun and 8 Rules who astride the violent wind, brought the 2 young fiends to the Green Wave Lagoon at the Scattered-Rock Mountain. After they stopped their 
clouds, the Great Sage blew a mouthful of divine breath onto his golden-hooped rod, crying, “Change!” It changed at once into a ritual razor with which he cut off the ears of the black fish spirit and the 
lower lip of the sheet fish spirit. After casting the fiends into the water, Pilgrim shouted to them, “Go quickly and make a report to that All Saints Dragon King. Tell him that his Venerable Dad Sun the 
Great Sage Equal to Heaven, has arrived. Tell him to bring out immediately the original treasure taken from the top of the Golden Light Monastery in the Sacrifice Kingdom, and the lives of his whole 
family will be spared. If he but utters half a no, I'll clean out this lagoon, and everyone in his household, both old and young, will be executed!” 
Those two little fiends were only too glad to have their lives back. Enduring their pain and dragging along their iron chains, they fled by darting into the water. The spirits of fishes, shrimps, crabs, sea 
turtles, iguanas, and huge tortoises were so startled that they swarmed around them and asked, “Why’re you two draped with ropes and chains?” 
1 of the 2 hands still hugging the sides of his head, kept wagging his tail and shaking his head; the other 1 holding his mouth, stamped his feet and beat his chest. In a noisy throng, they went up to the 
palace of the Dragon King and the 2 made this report: “Great King, disaster!” 
The All Saints Dragon King was just drinking juice with Nine-Heads, his son-in-law. When he saw them dashing in, he put down his glass and inquired about the disaster. “We're on patrol last night,” 
said 1 of the 2 fiends, “when we're caught by the Tang Monk and Pilgrim Sun who happened to be sweeping the pagoda. We're in fact bound by iron chains. This morning we're taken to see the king 
after which that Pilgrim and Bullseye Eight Rules hauled the two of us back here; one of us had his ears cut off and the other, his lower lip. They then threw us into the water and told us to make this 
report. They're demanding from us the treasure taken from the pagoda top.” 
When they gave a thorough account of what had happened and the old dragon heard the name Pilgrim Sun, the Great Sage Equal to Heaven, he was so terrified that his spirit fled his body and soul 
floated up to the 9-fold Heaven. Shaking all over, he said to 9-Heads, “Oh, worthy son-in-law! It may be all right if another person shows up but if it’s he, then we're in a bad situation!” 
“Relax, great dad-in-law!” said the son-in-law with a laugh. “Since his youth your foolish son-in-law’s mastered the rudiments of the martial arts. Within the four seas he’s moreover met quite a few 
stalwart warriors. Why fear him? Let me go out now and fight three rounds with him. | promise you that that fellow will salute in submission, not daring even to look up!” Dear fiend! He leaped up at once 
and put on his armour, picking up a weapon which had the name of crescent-tooth spade. ‘Striding out of the palace, he opened a path in the water and rose to the surface crying, “What sort of Great 
Sage Equal to Heaven’s here? Come over quickly and yield your life!” Standing on the shore, Pilgrim and 8 Rules stared at the monster-spirit to see how he was attired. He wore a bright silver helmet, 
its lustre whiter than snow; he had on a cuirass of steel luminous as autumn’s frost that topped a damask martial robe patterned like coloured clouds enfolding jade. His waist had a belt of rhinoceros 
grain that seemed like a python spotted with gold. His hands held the crescent-tooth spade flashing with beams of light; feet wore 2 crocodile-skin boots that parted water and waves. Seen from afar 
he had a head and a face; drawing near, he seemed human all around. Eyes in front, behind, he could see all 8 quarters. Two mouths on the left and right, nine mouths talking at once! One shout he 
gave and it shook the distant void as if a crane’s cry had punctured the stars. When the monster-spirit found no reply, he shouted once more: “Who's the Great Sage Equal to Heaven?” 
Giving his golden fillet a pinch and his iron rod a bounce, Pilgrim replied, “Old monkey's the person.” 


The fiend asked, “Where do you live? Where did you come from originally? How did you get to the Sacrifice Kingdom to become the guard of the pagoda for that king? How dare you capture my 
captains and work further violence by provoking battle on my treasure mountain?” 
“You thievish fiend!” scolded Pilgrim. “So you don’t recognise your Grandpa Sun! Come up here and listen to my recital. Mount Flower-Fruit’s where old monkey once had lived at the great ocean’s 
Water-Curtain Cave. I’ve wrought a perfect body since my youth; Emperor Jade made me Sage Equal-to-Heaven. When | caused great havoc in the Dipper Hall, the gods in Heaven found me hard to 
beat. A god asked to lend his wondrous might, used his boundless wisdom transcendently. In a somersault wager — a test of might — his hand formed a mountain to have me pressed beneath it till now 
a full five centuries. My life’s spared when Guanyin intervened: Great Tang’s Tripitaka would go to the West to seek on Spirit Mountain the Religious verse. To give him protection | found release and 
cultivation purging imps and fiends. At Sacrifice Kingdom of the West we met priests wrongly blamed, three generations all. In mercy we inquired about the cause and learned the pagoda had lost its 
light. My master swept it to get to the truth: the night reached third watch when all sounds had ceased, we caught two monsters who at once confessed. They claimed, you'd all the treasure stolen; the 
gang of thieves even had a dragon king to which a princess added her name, All Saints. By raining blood on the pagoda’s beams, she took someone’s treasure for her own use. That true statement 
before the court obtained, we sped to this place by the king’s command that we might find you and provoke a fight. There’s no need to ask for Dad Sun’s name. Return the treasure quickly to the king 
and we'll spare your kin’s lives both old and young. If you're so foolish as to want to strive, Ill drain your water, topple your mountain, and stamp you out!” 
When the son-in-law heard these words, he smiled scornfully and said, “So, you’re a monk on your way to fetch scriptures. Don’t you’ve anything more important to do than to meddle in someone’s 
affairs? You're to seek your scriptures from God, and I’m the one who steals treasures. What has that to do with you? Why must you come here to fight with me?” 
“This thievish fiend,” said Pilgrim, “has very little understanding! Of course, I’m not a recipient of the king’s favour, nor do | feed on his water or rice, and thus I’m not obliged to serve him. But you stole 
not only his treasure and defiled his pagoda, you also brought suffering to the priests of the Golden Light Monastery. They belong, after all, to the same community as we. How could | not exert my 
strength on their behalf and bring their injustice to light?” 
“In that case,” said the son-in-law, “you must want to do battle. As the proverb says, ‘War's an unkindly act.’ When | raise my hands, | fear I'll not spare you. | may take your life all of a sudden and that 
may upset your scripture enterprise!” 
Enraged, Pilgrim shouted, “You brazen thievish fiend! What power do you've that you dare mouth such big words? Come up here and have a taste of your dad’s rod!” 
Not in the least intimidated, the son-in-law parried the blow with his crescent-tooth spade; a marvellous battle thus broke out on top of that Scattered-Rock Mountain. Monsters stole treasures and the 
heap grew dark. Pilgrim caught fiends and informed the king. Into the water 2 little fiends fled; the old dragon took counsel, all in dread. His son-in-law, 9-Heads would flaunt his might; he armed himself 
to go to show his power and roused the Great Sage Equal to Heaven’s ire whose iron rod, upraised, was hard and strong. That fiend had on 9 heads 18 eyes all ablaze both back and front; this Pilgrim 
whose steely arms could raise 1000 pounds did spread auspicious rays around. The spade looked like the moon at the first stroke of yang; 2the rod seemed like frost flying over 10000 miles. The rod 
met the spade as both strove to win but none had yet won on this battlefield. Charging back and forth, the 2 of them fought for more than thirty rounds but no decision could be reached. Bullseye 8 
Rules was standing all this time before the mountain slope; he waited until the battle had reached its sweetest moment before he lifted high his muckrake and brought it down hard on the back of the 
monster-spirit. The fiend possessed nine heads, and on each one of them he had eyes that could see clearly. When he saw 8 Rules coming at him at the back, he immediately used the lower part of 
the spade to block the rake while the upper part parried the iron rod. They fought thus for another six or seven rounds when the monster could no longer withstand the double offensive, front and back. 
He somersaulted at once into the air and changed into his original form: it was a 9-headed insect, exceedingly ugly and ferocious. Look at his appearance! You'd be scared to death! He had feathers 
like brocade spread out, a stout-ish body with curly fleece. His size at least 12 feet in length -— a shape like the turtle’s or iguana’s. His 2 feet were pointed and sharp like hooks; 9 heads joined together 
to form a ring. He could fly so well when he spread his wings that even the roc was no match for his strength. Crying out he could shake the Heaven’s edge, able to call louder than a mythic crane. With 
eyes flashing beams of golden light, his was a proud sight unlike the common bird. Horrified by what he saw, 8 Rules cried, “Elder Brother! I've never seen such a vicious thing in all my life! Which 
creature of blood and breath would bring forth a beast like this?” 
“It's rare! It's rare, all right!” replied Pilgrim. “Let me get up there to strike him.” 
Dear Great Sage! Quickly mounting the auspicious cloud, he leaped into the air and aimed a blow of his iron rod at the creature’s heads. To display his abilities, that fiendish creature spread his wings 
and flew to one side. Rolling over, he suddenly darted down the side of the mountain as another head popped out from the middle of his torso. A huge, gaping mouth like a butcher bowl caught hold of 
8 Rules’ bristles with one bite. Tugging and pulling his victim, he hauled him into the water of the Green Wave Lagoon. When he reached the dragon palace, he changed back into his previous form 
and threw 8 Rules on the ground. “Little ones, where’re you?” he cried. 
Those spirits of mackerels, cutlers, carps, and perches along with the turtle, iguana, and sea turtle-fiends all surged forward, shouting, “We're here!” 
“Take this priest,” said the son-in-law, “and tie him up over there. | want to avenge our soldiers who were sent on patrol.” 
The raucous mob of spirits carried 8 Rules inside as a delighted old dragon king came out saying, “Worthy son-in-law, you’ve made great merit! How did you manage to capture him?” 
After the son-in-law gave a thorough account of what took place, the old dragon immediately ordered a banquet to celebrate this victory. Pilgrim Sun was quite dismayed when he saw how 8 Rules had 
been captured by the monster-spirit. “This is a formidable fellow!” he thought to himself. “I'd like to go back to see Master in the court but I’m afraid the king would laugh at me. If | make noises to 
provoke battle again, I'll have to face them single-handedly. Moreover, I’m not used to doing business in water. I'd better transform myself to go inside and see what that fiend is going to do to Idiot. If 
there’s a chance, I'll snuggle him out again so that we may proceed with our business.” Dear Great Sage! Making the magic sign with his fingers, he shook his body, changed into a crab to splash into 
the water, and went before the towered gateway. This was a familiar way to him for he had travelled it before when he spied on the Bull Demon King and stole his golden-eye beast. After he crawled 
sideways through the arch, Pilgrim saw inside the old Dragon King drinking merrily with the nine-headed insect and other members of their family. Not daring to go near them, Pilgrim crawled over to 
the east corridor where there were several shrimp and crab spirits frolicking. After he had listened to their chatter for a while, Pilgrim imitated their manner of speech and asked, “That priest with a long 
horn caught by our venerable son-in-law, has he died?” 
“Not yet,” the spirits replied. “The one tied up in the west corridor and moaning, isn’t he the one?” 
On hearing this, Pilgrim crawled silently over to the west corridor, and indeed he discovered Idiot bound to a pillar and moaning. “Eight Rules,” whispered Pilgrim as he approached him, “you recognise 
me?” When 8 Rules heard the voice, he knew it was Pilgrim and said, “Elder Brother, what shall we do? I’ve been caught by this fellow instead!” When Pilgrim glanced around and saw no one, he 
snapped the ropes with his claws and told 8 Rules to leave. After he was freed, Idiot said, “Elder Brother, my weapon was taken by him. What are we to do?” 
“Do you know where he has put it?” asked Pilgrim, and 8 Rules replied, “It must have been taken up to the main hall by that fiend.” 
Pilgrim said to him, “Go beneath the towered gateway and wait for me.” Fleeing for his life, 8 Rules slipped out quietly while Pilgrim turned and crawled up to the main hall once more. A luminous object 
he saw on the left side was actually the rake of 8 Rules. Using the magic of Body Concealment, he stole it and went to the towered gateway. “Eight Rules, take your weapon,” he said. After Idiot took 
the rake, he said, “Elder Brother, you leave first and let Old bull fight his way into the palace. If | win, I'll seize their entire family. If I'm defeated, I'll flee outside and you can come to my assistance by 
the edge of the lagoon.” Highly pleased, Pilgrim told him to be careful. “No fear,” said 8 Rules, “for | do have some abilities in water.” Pilgrim left him and swam back to the surface of the water. 
Straightening out his black cotton shirt and gripping his rake with both hands, our 8 Rules gave a shout and fought his way into the palace. Those aquatic relatives, both young and old, were so startled 
that they dashed up to the main hall, screaming, “It’s terrible! That long-horn priest has broken out of the ropes and he’s attacking us!” The old dragon, the nine-headed insect, and their family members 
were hardly prepared for this; jumping up, they scattered in every direction and tried to hide themselves. Idiot however, had no regard for life or death; crashing into the main hall, he wielded his rake 
to fracture doors, demolish tables and chairs, and shatter all those drinking utensils. A testimonial poem for him says: 
Wood-Mum’s caught by a water fiend; Mind Monkey unyielding, searched hard for him and used a clever trick to pick the lock. 
They then displayed their power and deepest ire. 
The son-in-law with his princess quickly hid; the Dragon King fell silent in fear and dread. 
As palatial arches and windows broke up, dragon sons and grandsons all lost their wits. 
This time the tortoise-shelled screens were pulverized by 8 Rules and the coral plants were smashed to pieces. After he had safely hidden the princess inside, the nine-headed insect grabbed his 
crescent-tooth spade to rush back to the front palace, shouting, “Lawless ape! How dare you be so insolent as to frighten my kin?” 
“You thievish fiend!” scolded 8 Rules. “How dare you capture me? It’s not my fault now! It’s you who have invited me to bust up your household. Return the treasures quickly so that | can go back to 
see the king. That'll be the end of it. Otherwise, I'll definitely not spare the lives of your entire family!” The fiend of course was not about to yield. Clenching his teeth, he plunged into battle with 8 Rules. 
Only then did the old dragon manage to collect himself sufficiently to lead his son and grandson, armed with scimitars and spears, to mount an attack also. When 8 Rules saw that the tide was turning 
against him, he dealt a weak blow with his rake before turning to flee, followed by the old dragon and his companions. In a moment, they all darted out of the water, bobbing up and down on the surface 
of the lagoon. Pilgrim Sun stood waiting on the shore. When all at once he saw 8 Rules leaving the water, chased by his opponents, he quickly rose on cloud and fog and wielded his iron rod, crying, 
“Don’t run away!” 1 blow and the old dragon's head was all smashed up. Alas! As blood spilled in the lagoon, red water swelled. The corpse floated on the waves with dying scales. The dragon son and 
grandson were so terrified that they all fled for their lives. Only the son-in-law, Nine-Heads, retrieved the corpse and retreated to the palace. Pilgrim and 8 Rules however, did not give chase immediately; 
they went back to the shore instead to talk about what had happened. “This fellow’s will to fight’s been blunted now,” said 8 Rules. “With my rake, | fought my way in and caused tremendous wreckage. 
They were frightened out of their wits. | was just fighting with that son-in-law when the old dragon chased me out. It’s a good thing that you beat him to death. When they get back inside, they'll 
undoubtedly prepare for mourning and the funeral and certainly not come out again. It’s getting late also. What'll we do?” 
“Why worry about the time?” said Pilgrim. “You’d make use of this opportunity and go down to attack them once more. We must recover the treasure before we can return to the court.” Idiot however, 
had turned slothful and indolent, refusing to go with all sorts of excuses. “Brother,” urged Pilgrim, “there’s no need for all your deliberations. Just entice them to come as before and I'll attack them.” 
As the two were conversing like that, they suddenly saw a vast expanse of dark fog moved by a churning, violent gale from the east toward the south. When Pilgrim took a more careful look, he found 
that it was Erlang of Illustrious Sagacity travelling with the Six Brothers of Plum Mountain.3 Leading hawks and hounds, they were also poling foxes, hares, deer, and antelopes. Each of them had a 
curved bow dangling from his waist and a sharp blade in his hand as they sped forward astride the wind and fog. “Eight Rules,” said Pilgrim, “those seven sages happen to be my bond-brothers. We'd 
detain them and ask them to help us do battle. If we succeed, it'll be a wonderful opportunity for us.” 
“If they’re your brothers,” replied 8 Rules, “we'd indeed ask them to stay.” 
“But they have in their midst Big Brother Illustrious Sagacity,” said Pilgrim, “who once defeated me. I’m a little embarrassed about showing myself abruptly to him. Why don’t you block the path of their 
clouds and say, ‘Lord Mortal, please stop for a moment. The Great Sage Equal to Heaven, is here to pay you respect.’ When he hears that I’m here, he will certainly stop. When he settles down, it'll be 
easier for me to see him.” 
Idiot indeed mounted the clouds and rose quickly to the peak of the mountain. “Lord Mortal,” he cried with a loud voice, “please slow your horses and chariots. The Great Sage Equal to Heaven, wishes 
to see you.” On hearing this, that Holy Dad gave the order for the six brothers to stop. After they met 8 Rules, he asked, “Where is the Great Sage Equal to Heaven?” 
8 Rules said, “He awaits your summons below there in the mountain.” 
“Brothers,” said Erlang, “please invite him to come here.” 
The 6 brothers, being Kang, Zhang, Rao, Li, Guo, and Zhi, all ran out of the camp and cried, “Elder Brother Sun Wukong, Big Brother requests your presence.” 
Pilgrim went forward and, after he greeted each of them, they went up the mountain together. He was met by the Holy Dad Erlang who extended his hands to him and said, “Great Sage, you're delivered 
from the great ordeal and received the commandments in the Gate of Sand. The days may be counted when your merit will be achieved and you'll ascend your lotus throne. You're to be congratulated!” 
“Hardly,” said Pilgrim. “I received great kindness from you in the past, and I’ve yet to repay you. Though I’ve been delivered from my ordeal and am now journeying toward the West, I've no idea what 
sort of merit I'll accomplish. We're passing through at this moment the Sacrifice Kingdom, and in order to rescue some priests from their calamity, we've come here to capture fiends and demand the 
return of a treasure. By accident we saw the noble entourage of Elder Brother, and we make bold to request your assistance. We've no knowledge as to where you've come from or whether you'll be 
pleased to grant us our wish.” 
“Because I'd nothing to do,” said Erlang with a smile, “| went hunting with the brothers, from which we're just returning. The Great Sage is most kind in asking us to stop that is ample proof of how 
greatly he cherishes an old friend. If you want me to help you defeat some fiends, dare | not obey you? But what fiendish thieves are occupying this region?” 
“You must have quite forgotten, Big Brother,” said one of the six sages. “This is the Scattered-Rock Mountain, and below it is the Green Wave Lagoon, the dragon palace of All Saints.” Somewhat 
startled, Erlang said, “But the old dragon All Saints doesn’t cause any trouble. How would he dare steal a pagoda treasure?” 
“He recently took in a son-in-law,” said Pilgrim, “a nine-headed insect who'd become a spirit. The two of them conspired together as thieves and brought down a rain shower of blood on the Sacrifice 
Kingdom after which they took away the Sarira Religious treasure on top of the Golden Light Monastery. Not perceiving the truth of the matter, the king bitterly persecuted and tortured the priests of 


that monastery instead. My master in mercy was moved to sweep the pagoda during the night, during which | caught two small fiends on the top. They were sent there on patrol, and when we took 
them into court this morning, they made an honest confession. The king therefore asked our master to subdue the fiends, and that was how we're sent here. During our first encounter, 8 Rules was 
hauled away by that nine-headed insect when an additional head popped out of his torso. | went into the water by means of transformation and managed to rescue 8 Rules. We'd another fierce battle 
when | slew the old dragon whose corpse was taken away by that fellow and his cohorts. We're just in the midst of discussing how to provoke battle again when you and your noble companions arrived. 
Hence our imposition on you.” 
“If you did smite the old dragon,” said Erlang, “this is the best time to attack them. They'll not be prepared, and we can exterminate the whole nest of them.” 
“That may be so,” said 8 Rules, “but after all, it's getting late now.” 
Erlang replied, “As the military theorist says, ‘an army doesn’t wait for the times.’ Why worry about how late it's?” 
1 of the brothers, Kang spoke up: “There’s no hurry, big brother. Since his family members live here, that fellow isn’t about to run away. Now since Second Elder Brother Sun’s our honoured guest and 
Stiff Bristles Bull’s4 also returned to the right fruit, we’d have a party right now, especially when we’ve brought juice and food along to our camp. The little ones can start a fire and we can set it up right 
at this place. We may toast the two of them and enjoy a nice visit together this evening. By morning, we can then provoke battle and there'll be still plenty of time.” 
Exceedingly pleased, Erlang said, “Our worthy brother’s spoken well!” 
And he gave the order at once for the little ones to prepare the banquet. “We daren’t decline the noble sentiments of all of you,” said Pilgrim, “but since becoming priests, we’ve been observing the 
dietary laws. | hope we'll cause no inconvenience.” 
“But we've fruits and the like,” replied Erlang, “and even our juices are dietary.” 
And so by the light of the moon and the stars, the brothers lifted their cups in friendship, using Heaven as their tent and Earth as their mat. Truly the lonely watches are long but a happy night is all too 
short. Soon the east turned pale with light. A few goblets of juice had given 8 Rules enormous inspiration, and rousing himself, he said, “It's about dawn. Let Old bull go into the water to provoke battle.” 
“Do be careful, Marshal,” said Erlang. “Just trick him into coming out and we brothers will do our part.” 
“| know! | know!” said 8 Rules, laughing. Look at him! Tightening his clothes and gripping the rake, he used the water-division magic and leaped down there. The moment he arrived before the towered 
gateway, he gave a shout and fought into the palace hall. 
At the time, the dragon son, having draped himself with a mourning gown of hemp, was standing guard over his dad’s corpse and weeping. The dragon grandson and that son-in-law were busily 
preparing a coffin in the back. Shouting abuses, our 8 Rules rushed forward and his upraised hands delivered a heavy blow with his rake. Nine gaping holes at once appeared on the head of that 
dragon son. The dragon dame was so aghast that she ran madly inside, wailing, “That long-horn monk has killed my son also!” When he heard this, the son-in-law immediately took up his crescent- 
tooth spade and led the dragon grandson out to do battle. Lifting his rake to oppose them, our 8 Rules fought as he retreated, and soon they arrived on the surface of the water. All at once, the Great 
Sage Equal to Heaven and the seven brothers swarmed all over them, and in no time at all, the showering blows of swords and spears reduced the dragon grandson to a few meat patties. 
When that son-in-law saw that things were going badly, he rolled on the ground immediately and changed back into his original form. Spreading his wings, he soared into the air. Erlang took out his 
golden bow, affixed a silver pellet, and sent it hurtling toward the insect. The fiend quickly flapped his wings and darted down, wanting to bite Erlang. Just when another head popped out from the middle 
of his torso however, the small hound of Erlang leaped into the air with a terrific bark and bit it clean off. In great pain, the fiend fled toward the North Sea. 8 Rules was about to give chase but he was 
stopped by Pilgrim who said, “Let’s not follow him. As the proverb has it, ‘The desperate fugitive should not be chased.’ One of his heads has been bitten off by the small hound, and it’s unlikely that 
he'll survive. Let me change into his appearance instead, and you open up a path in the water. Chase me into his palace. After we find the princess, we can wangle back the treasure.” Erlang said, “I 
suppose it’s all right that we don’t track him down. But if this kind of creature remains in the world, it will undoubtedly bring great harm to people in posterity.” Thus we've even today the blood-dripping 
nine-headed insect that is in fact the descendant of that creature. 
8 Rules, meanwhile, agreed to what Pilgrim told him and opened up a path in the water. Pilgrim, having changed into the appearance of the fiend, ran ahead while 8 Rules followed behind, shouting 
and hollering. As they drew near the dragon palace, they were met by the princess All Saints who asked, “Son-in-law, why are you in such a panic?” 
“That 8 Rules has defeated me,” replied Pilgrim, “and is chasing me here. | don’t think | can resist him anymore. You'd better hide the treasures quickly.” In such a hurry the princess, of course, could 
not distinguish truth from falsehood. She immediately took out from the rear hall a golden box to hand over to Pilgrim, saying, “This is the Religious treasure.” After that, she took out also a white jade 
box and gave it to Pilgrim, saying, “This is the nine-leaf divine agaric. You take these treasures and hide them. Let me battle Bullseye 8 Rules for a few rounds just to slow him down. After you've put 
away the treasures, you can come out and fight with him again.” 
Having taken over the boxes, Pilgrim gave his face a wipe and changed back into his original form, saying, “Princess, take a good look and see if I’m the son-in-law!” Thoroughly shaken, the princess 
tried to make a grab for the boxes but 8 Rules rushed in and one blow of the rake on her shoulder sent her to the ground. 
There was only an old dragon dame left; she turned and tried to flee, only to be caught hold of by 8 Rules. He was about to hit her with the rake, too but was stopped by Pilgrim who said, “Wait a 
moment. Let's not kill her. We'd take a live one back to the capital so that we may announce our merit.” 8 Rules, therefore, dragged her up to the surface of the water, followed by Pilgrim holding the 
two boxes. He said to Erlang, “We're indebted to the authority and power of Elder Brother. We've recovered the treasures and wiped out the fiendish thieves.” Erlang said, “We owe this rather to the 
excellent luck of the king in the first place, and to the boundless magic power of you two worthy brothers in the second. What have | done?” His brothers also said, “Since Second Elder Brother Sun 
has accomplished his merit, we'd leave at once.” 
Pilgrim could not stop thanking them; he would have liked to get them to go see the king but they steadfastly refused. The sages thus left and returned to the River of Libation. Pilgrim took up the boxes 
while 8 Rules dragged along the dragon dame; moving midway between cloud and fog, they reached the kingdom in an instant. Those priests who had been freed in the Golden Light Monastery were 
waiting outside the city. When they saw the two of them stopping their cloud and fog, they went forward, saluting, to receive them into the city. At that time, the king and the Tang Monk were conversing. 
Forcing himself to be bold, one of the monks ran ahead and went into the gate of the court to memorialise: “Your Majesty, the two venerable dads, Sun and Bullseye, have returned, bringing with them 
the treasures and the thief.” On hearing this, the king left the hall quickly with the Tang Monk and Sand-monk. As he met the two disciples and praised them repeatedly for their divine merit, he also 
gave the command that a thanksgiving banquet be prepared. “There's no need for you to bestow on us food and drink as yet,” said Tripitaka. “Let my humble disciples restore the treasure to the pagoda 
first. Then we may drink and feast.” He then turned to Pilgrim to ask, “You two left the kingdom yesterday. How was it that you didn’t return until today?” Whereupon Pilgrim gave a detailed account of 
how they fought with the son-in-law and the Dragon King, how they met the lord mortal, how they defeated the monster-spirits, and how they finally wangled the treasures. Tripitaka, the king, and all 
his civil and military officials could not have been more pleased. 
“Does the dragon dame know human speech?” asked the king. 8 Rules said, “She’s the wife of the Dragon King who has given birth to many sons and grandsons. How'd she not know human speech?” 
“If she does,” said the king, “let her give us a complete account of the robbery.” 
The dragon dame said, “I know nothing of stealing the Religious treasure. It was entirely the work of my deceased husband and our son-in-law, Nine-Heads. When they discovered that the radiance 
on top of your pagoda was emitted by a Religious relic, they brought down a rain shower of blood three years ago and therewith stole the treasure.” 
“How did you steal the divine agaric plant?” asked the king. 
The dragon dame said, “That’s the work of my daughter, Princess All Saints who sneaked into Heaven and stole from before the Hall of Divine Mists the nine-leaf divine agaric planted by the Lady 
Queen Mum of the West. Nourished by the divine breath of this plant, the Sarira would remain indestructible for a millennium and luminous in all ages. Even if you just wave it slightly on the ground or 
in the fields, it will emit myriad shafts of coloured rays and a thousand strands of auspicious beams. Now you've seized these things, and moreover, you've slaughtered my husband and my sons, 
you've done away with my son-in-law and my daughter. | beg you to spare my life.” 
“We're not about to spare you, of all persons!” said 8 Rules. 
Pilgrim said, “Guilt cannot be borne by an entire family. We'll spare you. But you're required to be the perpetual guardian of the pagoda for us.” 
“Even a good death is not as good as a wretched existence!” replied the dragon dame. “If you spare my life, you can do whatever you please with me.” Pilgrim at once asked for an iron chain. After the 
attendant before the throne brought it out, Pilgrim pierced the lute bone of the dragon dame with the chain before saying to Sand-monk, “Invite the king to witness how we secure the pagoda.” 
Hurriedly asking for his carriage, the king left the court hand in hand with Tripitaka. Accompanied by many civil and military officials, they went to the Golden Light Monastery and ascended the pagoda. 
The Sarira was placed carefully inside a treasure vase on the thirteenth floor of the pagoda while the dragon dame was chained to a pillar in the centre. Pilgrim recited the magic words to summon 
together the local spirit of the capital, the city deity, and the guardian spirits of that monastery. Food and drink were to be brought to the dragon dame once every three days, they were told but if she 
ever dared misbehave, she would be executed at once. The various gods obeyed in silence. The Pilgrim used the agaric plant as a broom and swept each of the thirteen layers of the pagoda clean 
before returning it to the vase to nourish the Sarira. Thus it was the old had become the new once more with myriad shafts of coloured beams and a thousand strands of auspicious air. Once more the 
eight quarters could witness the radiance, and the four surrounding nations could wonder at the treasure. After they walked out of the pagoda’s door, the king said, “If the old God and the three Nuns 
had not come this way, how could we ever get to the bottom of this affair?” 
“Your Majesty,” said Pilgrim, “the two words: Golden Light aren’t the best for neither of these is a thing of permanence. Gold’s after all an unstable substance and light’s air that flickers. Since this 
humble priest's already exerted such efforts for you, he’d suggest that you change the monastery’s name to Dragon-Subduing Monastery. It'll last forever, | assure you.” At once the king ordered the 
name be changed and a new plaque bearing the words Dragon-Subduing Monastery Built by Imperial Command was hung across the main gate in front. He asked for an imperial banquet also and the 
painter to make portraits of the 4 pilgrims. Their names, too were recorded in the 5-Phoenix Tower. Thereafter, the king took the pilgrims personally in his own carriage out of the city to see them off. 
When they were offered gold and jade as a reward, master and disciples refused to take even a penny. Truly it was that fiends extirpated, all realms are cleansed; the pagoda light’s restored, the great 
earth is bright. 
080 
At Bramble Ridge Aware of Ability exerted great effort; at Shrine of Sylva mortals Tripitaka discusses poetry 
The king of the Sacrifice Kingdom who expressed his thanks to Tripitaka Tang and his disciples for recovering the treasure and capturing the fiends by offerings of jade and gold to them that they 
refused to accept. The king therefore ordered the attendant before the throne to have two suits of clothing made for each of the pilgrims, according to the style that they had been wearing. Two pairs of 
shoes and socks and two silk sashes were also made for each person. In addition to these, dried goods — both baked and roasted foods — were also prepared. After their travel rescript had been 
certified, the king called for the imperial cortege; many civil and military officials, the people of the entire capital, and the monks of the Dragon-Subduing Monastery followed him to send the four out of 
the city, accompanied by the sonorous sounds of pipes and drums. When they had gone for some twenty miles, they took leave of the king first while the rest of the officials and people retired after 
another twenty miles. Those priests from the Dragon-Subduing Monastery however, refused to turn back even after walking with the pilgrims for some fifty or sixty miles, a few insisting that they would 
travel with the pilgrims to the Western Heaven, and a few others saying that they would practice austerities while serving the pilgrims on their way. When Pilgrim saw that none of them was willing to 
turn back, he had to use his magic. Pulling off some thirty strands of his hair, he blew a mouthful of divine breath on them, crying, “Change!” They changed at once into a herd of ferocious striped tigers, 
prowling and growling that had the main road completely blocked. Only then did these monks become frightened and dared not proceed, so that the Great Sage could tell his master to urge his horse 
forward. In a little while, they faded in the distance, and the monks burst into loud wailing, all crying, “Most gracious and kind dads! You're unwilling to save us because we've no affinity!” 
Leaving those monks behind, the master and his 3 disciples headed toward the West. Only after they had gone for quite a distance did Pilgrim retrieve his hairs. Truly the seasons were quick to change, 
and soon it was the end of winter and the beginning of spring. It was a pleasant time to travel, neither too hot nor too cold. As they walked along, they came upon a long ridge over which the main road 
had to pass. When Tripitaka reined in his horse to look at the place, he saw that the ridge was covered with brambles and clogged with creepers and vines. Though there was a faint trace of the road, 
it was flanked by the prickly thorns of brambles crowding in from left and right. “Disciples,” the Tang Monk called out, “how could we walk through this road?” 
“Why not?” asked Pilgrim. 
“Oh, disciples!” said the Tang Monk. “Below is the faded path; above are the brambles. Only reptiles or insects creeping on the ground can get through. Even for you it means walking while bending 
double. How'd | possibly stay on horseback?” 
“Don’t worry,” said 8 Rules. “Let me show you my ability to rake firewood and spread open the brambles for you. Don’t speak of riding a horse. Even if you're to ride a carriage, you'd be able to get 
through.” 
“Though you may’ve the strength,” said Tripitaka, “you can’t last over a long distance. | wonder how wide this ridge is. Where can we find the energy?” 
Pilgrim replied, “No need to discuss this anymore. Let me go and have a look.” He leaped into the air and what he saw was an endless stretch. Truly they cloak the earth and fade into the sky, gather 
mist and hold up rain - these soft, dishevelled mats flanking the road, jade-green tops shading the mount. Dense and luxuriant the newly sprouted leaves; rank and prolific they thrive and bloom. They 


seem from a distance to have no end; close up they look like a vast green cloud. Furry and lush, in fresh dark green, they rustle loudly in the wind as the bright sun makes them glow. In their midst are 
pines, cedars, and bamboos; many plums, willows, and mulberries even more. Creepers wind around old trees and wisteria, the drooping willows. Laced together like a prop, they seem like a matted 
cot. There are flowers blooming like brocade and wild buds send fragrance far away. Which man’s not met some brambles during his life? Who's ever seen such vast thickets of the West? After he had 
stared at the region for a long time, Pilgrim lowered his cloud and said, “Master, this ridge’s enormous!” 
“How enormous is it?” asked Tripitaka. 
“| can't see the end of it,” replied Pilgrim. “It seems to be at least a thousand miles long.” 
Horrified, Tripitaka said, “What'll we do?” 
“Please don’t worry, Master,” said Sand-monk with a laugh. “Let’s follow the example of those who burn off the land and set fire to the brambles so that you may pass through.” 
“Stop babbling!” said 8 Rules. “To burn off the land, you must do it around the time of the tenth month when the vegetation has dried up and is readily ignitable. Right now it is growing luxuriantly. How 
could it be burned?” 
“Even if you'd,” added Pilgrim, “the flame would be quite terrifying.” 
“How are we to get across then?” asked Tripitaka. “If you want to get across,” said 8 Rules with a laugh, “you'll have to do as | say!” 
Dear Idiot! Making the magic sign with his fingers, he recited a spell and gave his torso a stretch, crying, “Grow!” At once he reached the height of some two hundred feet. Shaking his muckrake, he 
cried, “Change!” and the handle of the rake attained the length of some three hundred feet. In big strides, he walked forward and, his two hands wielding the rake, pushed away the brambles left and 
right. “Let Master follow me!” he said, and a highly pleased Tripitaka quickly urged his horse forward, followed by Sand-monk poling the luggage and Pilgrim, also using his iron rod to clear up the path. 
That whole day they did not rest at all and journeyed for some one hundred miles. By evening they arrived at a small clearing where they came upon a stone monument. On top were inscribed in large 
letters the words, Bramble Ridge. Down below there was a row of smaller characters that read: 
800 miles of brambles intertwined, a road that few since days of old have trod. 

When 8 Rules saw the monument, he said, laughing, “Let Old bull add one more lines to the inscription: 

But now 8 Rules’ able to clear a path straight to the West that’s level and broad.” 
Delighted, Tripitaka dismounted and said, “Oh, disciple! We've tired you out! Let's spend the night here, and we'll journey again when it’s light tomorrow.” 
“Don’t stop now, Master,” said 8 Rules. “While the sky is still fair and we’re inspired, we'd clear the path right through the night and get on with it!” 
The elder had to comply. 8 Rules went forward and again made a great effort; with the rider not resting his hands and the horse not stopping its trotting, master and disciples journeyed for one whole 
night and another day. Once more it was getting late but what lay before them was a bosky sight. They also heard the poem of wind-whipped bamboos and the sound of rustling pines as they came 
upon another stretch of clearing, in the centre of which was an old shrine. There, outside the door, were pines and cedars arrested in green, peaches and plums vying to display their beauty. After he 
dismounted, Tripitaka and his three disciples looked around. What they saw was an old shrine atop a cool stream before the cliff and desolate grounds, mist-wrapped, met 1’s eye. For clumps of sala 
trees long years had passed; a mossed-terrace stood there as seasons went by. Like swaying jade the bamboos seemed to speak and grief was told by a bird’s fading cry. Scant traces of man, or of 
beast and fowl; just wild blooms and creepers on walls most high. After he had surveyed the region, Pilgrim said, “This place portends more evil than good. We'd not stay here long.” 
“Elder Brother, aren’t you overly suspicious?” asked Sand-monk. “There’s not even a trace of humans here, let alone of a weird beast or a fiendish bird. What's there to be afraid of?” He had hardly 
finished speaking when a gust of cold wind brought out from behind the shrine door an old man. He had on his head a square turban, a simple robe on his body, a cane in his hand, and a pair of straw 
sandals on his feet. He was followed by a demon attendant who had a red beard and a scarlet body, a green face with jutting tusks, and who had on his head a platter of wheat cakes. Going to his 
knees, the old man said, “Great Sage, this humble deity is the local spirit of the Bramble Ridge. Having learned of your arrival, I’ve little to offer you except this platter of specially prepared steamed 
cakes. | present this to all of you venerable masters and ask you to have a meal. Throughout this region of eight hundred miles, there is no human household. So, please take some cakes for the relief 
of your hunger.” 
Delighted, 8 Rules walked forward with outstretched hands and was about to take one of the cakes. Pilgrim however who had had the old man under scrutiny for some time shouted immediately, “Stop! 
This isn’t a good fellow! Don’t you dare be impudent! What sort of a local spirit are you that you dare come to deceive old monkey? Watch my rod!” 
When the old man saw him attacking, he spun around and at once changed into a gust of cold wind. With a loud whoosh, it swept the elder high into the air. Tumbling over and over, he soon vanished 
from sight. The Great Sage was so taken aback that he did not know how to begin to search for his master while 8 Rules and Sand-monk stared at each other, paling with consternation. Even the white 
horse neighed in fear. The four of them, three brothers and the horse, seemed to be in a trance; they looked far and near but there was not a trace of their master. They were busily searching there. 
That old man and his demon attendant hauled the elder before a mist-shrouded stone house and then lowered him gently. Taking the hand of the elder, the old man said, “Holy monk, please don’t be 
afraid. We’re not bad people. I’m actually the Squire Eighteen’ of Bramble Ridge. Since ours happens to be a night of clear breeze and bright moonlight, I've brought you here especially to meet a few 
friends and to talk about poetry just to spend a pleasant moment of leisure.” Only then did the elder manage to collect himself. As he glanced about carefully, this was truly what he found: a haunt of 
misty clouds obscure, a house in scenes divinely pure, good for keeping the self-pure in training for flower and bamboo planting. Cranes on verdant cliffs will be seen; frogs croak from ponds lovely and 
green. Mount-Tai’s magic hearth it surpasses brighter than Flower Mount’s air masses. Fishing and ploughing need we mention? 
Worthy is this place of reclusion. Sit still and your thoughts turn serene as faint moonlight ascends the screen. As Tripitaka enjoyed the scenery, he felt that the moon and the stars grew even brighter. 
Then he heard voices, all saying, “Squire Eighteen’s succeeded in inviting the holy monk here.” 
When the elder raised his head, he saw three old men: the 1* bore frostlike features, the 2" had flowing green hair and beard, and the third was meek-mannered and dark coloured. They each had 
different looks and different garments, and they all came to salute Tripitaka. Returning their salutes, the elder said, “What merit or virtue does this disciple possess that he’d win such kind attention from 
these aged mortals?” 
“We've always heard,” replied Squire Eighteen with a smile, “that the holy monk is possessed of the Way. Having waited for you for a long time, we’re fortunate indeed to be able to meet you now. If 
you're willing to share with us the pearl and jade of your wisdom, we beg you to sit and chat with us, as we long to know the true teachings, the mysteries of Chan.” 
Again bending low, Tripitaka said, “May | ask the honourable styles of the aged mortals?” 
“The one with the frostlike features,” replied Squire Eighteen, “is called Squire Lonesome Rectitude. The green-haired one has the name of Master Void-Surmounting, and the humble one goes by the 
title of Cloud-Brushing Dean. This old moron bears the name of Knotty Virtue.” 
“And what is the honourable age of the mortals?” asked Tripitaka. 
Squire Lonesome Rectitude said, “My age’s a millennium attained: dense leaves, ever young, reach toward the sky. Thick, fragrant boughs shaped like dragons and snakes; a frame of luscious shade 
frost and snow did try. Hardy since childhood and not worn by time, ever upright, | on magic arts rely. The phoenix, no common bird, finds shelter here - lush and lofty, from this world’s dust raised 
high.” 
Smiling, Master of Void-Surmounting said, “A millennium old, I’ve braved wind and frost with tall, spiritual stems by nature strong. My sounds hum like rain in a quiet night; my shade spreads cloudlike 
all autumn day long. My roots are coiled for endless life I've known; I’ve been taught of eternal youth the poem. My guests are cranes and dragons, no worldly life. Vibrantly green with gods | dwell 
along.” 
Smiling, Cloud-Brushing Dean said, “A thousand cold winters I, too, have passed: old but cheerful, my form’s both pure and quaint. Aloof, | shun mixing with worldly dust and noise, still romantic though 
by frost and snow un-taint. Seven Worthies? are my friends of the Way; six Hermits? would join me in verse to paint. Not ditties or jingles, we make noble rhymes. I’m by nature friend of long-life saints.” 
Smiling, Knotty Virtue, Squire 18 said, “/, too, am over a millennium old. Still fair and true, I'm naturally green. My strength’s lovely, born of dew and rain; the world’s creative mystery | did glean. Only | 
thrive in all gorges’ mist and wind; in all four climes none’s more than | serene. | spread a hood of jade to shade my guests, discussing Dao or with lute and chess are seen.” 
Thanking them, Tripitaka said, “All four of you mortals are enjoying long life. Why, Master Knotty Virtue’s more than a millennium old! Having attained the Way at such an advanced age, and blessed 
with such extraordinary and refined features, could you be the Four White-Haired Ones‘ of the Han?” 
“You praise us far too much!” replied the 4 old men together. “We’re not the Four White-Haired Ones but only the Four Disciplined Ones deep in the mountain. May we ask in turn the holy monk for his 
age?” 
With hands folded before his chest and saluting, Tripitaka replied: “/ left mum’s womb forty years ago: Seven before my fate on earth’s woe! Fleeing for life, | tossed on waves manifold; | cast my shell, 
meeting by luck Mount Gold. Myself | trained and Threads read with zeal; God’s true worship was my sole ideal. Now my King sends me to go to the West. Your divine presence thus favours my quest.” 
The four old men all joined in praising him, and one of them said, “From the moment he left his mum’s womb, the holy monk has followed the teachings of God. He has indeed practiced austerities from 
childhood, and thus he is in truth a superior monk who possesses the Way. Now that we've this good fortune of receiving your honourable presence, we make bold to seek from you your great doctrine. 
We beg you to instruct us on the rudiments of the law of Chan, and that would gratify our lifelong desire.” 
When he heard these words, the elder was not in the least daunted. He began to speak to the 4 of them saying, “Chan’s quiescence and the Law’s salvation. But the salvation of quiescence won't be 
accomplished without enlightenment. The cleansing of the mind and the purgation of desires, the abandonment of the worldly and departure from the dust — that’s enlightenment. Now it’s a rare 
opportunity to attain a human body, be born in Middle Land, ®and encounter the correct doctrine of God. There’s no greater blessing than the possession of these three things. The wondrous ways of 
ultimate virtue, vast and boundless, can neither be seen nor heard. It can however, extinguish the six organs of sense and the six kinds of perception. Thus, perfect wisdom’s neither birth nor death, 
neither want nor excess; it encompasses both form, emptiness, and it reveals the unreality of both saints and commoners. To contact the truth, you must know the mallet and tong of Primal Origin; 7 to 
intuit the Real, you must realise the technique of God. Exercise the power of mindlessness; tread and shatter Extinguishment. By means of the awakening of awakening, you must comprehend the 
enlightenment of enlightenment. One spark of spirit light would protect all. Let the fierce flame shine like an exercisers robe, sweeping the religion realm as one thing seen. Pierce the dark and tenuous; 
fortify also the strong. This mysterious pass, thus mentioned who can go through? Mine’s the originally practiced Chan of great awakening, retained and known just by those of affinity and will.” 
The 4 elders showed boundless delight when they received this instruction. With hands folded and saluting in submission, all of them said, “The holy monk's indeed the very source of enlightenment in 
the principle of Chan!” 
Then Cloud-Brushing Dean said, “Though Chan is quiescence and the Law, salvation, it is still required of us to be firm in our nature and sincere in our mind. Even if we became the true mortal of great 
awakening, itis, in the end, the way of no birth. The mystery we live by is greatly different from yours.” 
“The Way is indeed extraordinary,” said Tripitaka, “but while substance and function are one, how could there be any difference?” 
Smiling, Cloud-Brushing Dean said, “Since we’re born hardy and strong, our substance and function differ from yours. Indebted to Heaven and Earth for giving us a body, we're beholden to rain and 
dew for our colours’ nourishment. Smiling, we disdain the wind and frost and pass the days and months. Not one leaf of ours would wither; all our branches hold firm to virtue. Our words are unlike 
yours which, instead of consulting the Liezi, cling to those of Sanskrit. Now, the Dao’ was originally established in China. Instead, you seek its illumination in the West. You’re squandering your straw 
sandals! | wonder what it’s that you're after. A stone lion must have gouged out your heart! Your bones must have been pumped full of wild foxes’ saliva! You forget your origin to practice Chan, vainly 
seeking a god’s fruit. Yours are like the prickly riddles of my Bramble Ridge, like its tangled enigmas. This sort of superior man, how could he teach and lead? With this kind of model, how could he 
transmit truth’s imprint? You must examine the appearances before you for there’s life by itself in quiescence. The bottomless bamboo basket will draw water; the rootless iron tree will bring forth 
flowers. Plant your feet firmly on the Lingbao summit; Maitreya’s fine congress you'll attend back home.” 
When Tripitaka heard these words, he respected to thank the speaker but he was raised by Squire 18. As Squire Lonesome Rectitude also came forward to pull him up, Master Void-Surmounting let 
out a loud guffaw and said, “The words of Cloud-Brushing are obviously shot full of holes. Please rise, holy monk, and don’t believe all he says. In this moonlight we never intended at all to discuss 
theories of self-cultivation. Let's indulge rather in the composing and reciting of poetry.” 
“If you want to do that,” said Cloud-Brushing with a smile, “Let's go inside our little shrine for a cup of tea. How about it?” 
The elder leaned forward to stare at the stone house that had on top of its entrance an inscription of four words written in large characters: Shrine of Sylva mortals. They walked together inside and 
took their proper seats. Then the scarlet-bodied demon attendant came to serve them with a platter of China Root pudding and five goblets of fragrant liquid. The four old men invited the Tang Monk to 
eat first but he was so suspicious that he dared not take it right away. Only after the four old men partook of the food did Tripitaka also eat 2 pieces of the pudding. Each of them then drained the 
fragrant liquid and the goblets were taken away. As he glanced cautiously around, Tripitaka saw that it was so bright and luminous inside the shrine that they seemed to be sitting directly beneath the 
moon. From rock edges water flowed out and from flowers came forth fragrance. Unsoiled by half a speck of dust, this place of grace and elegance. Gladdened and comforted by such heavenly scenery, 
the elder could not refrain from reciting the following line: “The mind of Chan seems like the dustless moon.” 


With a broad grin, the elder Knotty Virtue immediately followed the lead and recited: “On us our muse shines as the cloudless noon. Squire Lonesome Rectitude said, “Fine phrases are cut like rolled- 
out brocade.” 
Master Void-Surmounting said, “Like rare gems good lines are fashioned and made.” 
Cloud-Brushing Dean said, “Six Periods"' are purged of their vain conceits; the Book of Odes a new compiler meets.” ' 
“This disciple’s,” said Tripitaka, “in an unguarded moment blurted out a few words. It’s like wielding the axe before the Carpenter God! When | heard just now the fresh and elegant lines of you mortals, 
| knew I'd met poetic masters.” 
The elder Knotty Virtue said, “No need for idle chatter, holy monk. Those who've left the family must finish the work they started. If you begin a poem, you can’t avoid finishing it, can you? We hope 
you'll complete it.” 
“This disciple can hardly do that,” replied Tripitaka. “May | trouble Squire Eighteen to find the concluding lines and render the poem whole? That'll be wonderfull” 
“How cruel you're!” said Knotty Virtue. “You'd the first line, after all. How could you refuse the last two? To withhold your talents is hardly reasonable.” 
Tripitaka had no choice but to finish the last line by reciting: “Ere the tea darkens as pine breezes recite, this happy mood of poems fills my heart with spring.” 
“Bravo!” said Squire 18. “What a magnificent line - this happy mood of poems fills my heart with spring!” 
“Knotty Virtue,” said Squire Lonesome Rectitude, “since you’re verily addicted to poetry, you love to mull over every line. Why not start another poem?” 
Without hesitation, Squire 18 said, “I'll begin in the manner of Pushing the Needle: ‘Sspring quickens me not, nor does winter dry; for me they are nothing, though clouds float by.” 
Master Void-Surmounting said, “I'll follow you in that manner also. By me, though windless, is formed a dancing shade. One loves such blessing and long life displayed.” 
Then Cloud-Brushing Dean said, “Displayed like West Mountain’s noble sire, I'm pure as southland’s empty-hearted squire.” 
Finally, Squire Lonesome Rectitude said, “Squired by slanting growth of highest grade, | yield the crossbeams of the king’s estrade.”"4 
On hearing this, the elder was full of praise for them, saying, “This is truly the most sublime poetry, its nobility reaches up to Heaven! Though this disciple’s without talents, he’d make bold to begin 
another two lines.” 
“Holy monk,” said Squire Lonesome Rectitude, “you’re someone accomplished in the Way, someone who's received profound nurture. There’s no need for you to do another linking verse. Please grant 
us an entire poem by yourself and we'll make the utmost effort to reply in kind.”*> Tripitaka had no alternative but to compose, smiling, a poem in the style of the regulated verse: 
A priest goes West to seek the religion king: to farthest shores some wondrous scripts he'd bring. 
“Thrice-blooming plants the poet’s luck augment; jewel-tree blossoms waft a god scent.”® 
To reach beyond the highest heights he'll strive and try in all the worlds his office to live. 
When he the noble jade form captivates, the field of rites lies before Extinguishment’s gates. 
When the 4 old men heard this, they paid him the highest compliments. Then Squire 18 said, “This old moron’s no other abilities except audacity. I'll force myself to answer your poem with this one of 
mine: 
Knotty Virtue’s aloof, | scorn the sylvan king. My fame spreads wider than this long-lived thing!'” 
Tall, serpentine shade over the mount'’s bent; the stream drinks my millennial, amber scent. 
| reach out to enhance the universe though wind and rain will my act and aim reverse. 
Declining | lack those mortal bones with naught but fungi as my own gravestones.” 
“This poem,” said Squire Lonesome Rectitude, “begins with a heroic line and the middle parallel couplets show tremendous strength, too. But the concluding lines are far too modest. How admirable! 
How admirable! This old moron will also reply with this poem: 
My frosty face often pleases the avian kings. My talents thrive by the Hall of Four Great Things."® 
Pearl drops of dew adorn my jade-green tent; a gentle breeze will spread my chilly scent. 
My murmurs at night the long porches attend; an old shrine in autumn my shadows befriend. 
To spring | give birthday gifts on new year's day; I’m the old master of the mountain way.” 
“Marvellous poem! Marvellous poem!” said Master Void-Surmounting, laughing. “Truly it’s as if the moon is putting the centre of Heaven under duress. How could this old moron reply in kind? But | sup- 
pose I'd not allow this opportunity to pass by and so, I'll have to throw together a few lines: 
Of towering talents close to lords and king, my fame by Grand Pure Palace"? once did spring. 
On kiosks are seen green ether’s descent; by darkened walls passes my faint, crisp scent. 
Upright forever | retain my mirth for these roots are formed deep within the earth. 
Above the clouds my dancing shadow soars beyond those vainglorious, floral corps.” 
“The poems of the three squires,” said Cloud-Brushing Dean, “are most noble and elegant; they show the finest purity and simplicity. Truly they can be said to have come from a brocaded pouch. My 
body’s little strength and bowels have little talents but the instruction | received from the three squires has opened up my mind. So !'ll offer this doggerel, too. Please don’t laugh at me! 
In Qi-Yu?° gardens | delight a sage king. Through fields of Wei?" I’m free to sway and swing. 
No Naiad’s tears my jade-like skin had stained but mottled sheaths had Han histories contained. 22 
By frost my leaves their true beauty reveal. Could mist henceforth my stems’ lustre conceal? 
With Ziyou’s®3 passing my true friends are few though scholars’ praise my fame ever renews.”24 
“The poems of the various mortal elders,” said Tripitaka, “truly resemble pearls emitted by phoenixes. Not even Ziyou and Zixia, those two disciples of Confucius could surpass you. Moreover, I’m 
extremely grateful for your kindness and hospitality. It is however, deep in the night, and | fear that my three humble disciples are waiting for me somewhere. Your student, therefore, cannot remain 
here long. By your boundless love, let me leave now and go find them. | beg you to point out to me the way back.” 
“Please don’t worry, holy monk,” said the four old men, laughing. “Ours is an opportunity that comes but once in a millennium. Though the night is deep, the sky is fair and the moon is very bright. 
Please sit here for a while longer. By morning we'll escort you across the ridge, and you'll without fail meet up with your disciples.” 
As they were thus speaking, there walked in from outside the stone house two blue-robed maidens, holding a pair of red-gauze lanterns and followed by a mortal girl. She was twirling in her hand a 
sprig of apricot blossoms, and smiling broadly, she walked in to greet them. She had a young face kingfisher adorned and colours better than rouge; luminous star-like eyes; moth brows neat and 
refined. Down below: a light pink skirt patterned with 5-coloured plums; up above; a maroon blouse without collar or sleeves. Small slippers pointed like phoenix beaks and slender stockings of silk bro- 
cade. Seductive and coy like a Mount-Tai goddess, she seems to be the fair Daji * of old. “To what do we owe this visit, Apricot Mortal?” asked the 4 old men as they rose to greet her. 
After the girl had saluted to all of them, she said, “I learned that a charming guest's being entertained here and I’ve come especially to make his acquaintance. May | meet him?” 
“The charming guest’s right here,” said Squire 18 pointing at the Tang Monk. “There’s no need for you to ask to see him.” 
Bending low, Tripitaka dared not utter a word. “Bring us some tea, quickly!” cried the girl. 
2 more yellow-robed maidens walked in with a red-lacquered tray on which there were six small porcelain tea cups, several kinds of exotic fruits, and a spoon for stirring placed in the middle. One of 
the maidens also carried a tea pot of white iron set in yellow copper, from which arose the overpowering aroma of fine tea. After tea had been poured, the girl revealed ever so slightly her slender 
fingers and presented a cup of it to Tripitaka first. Then she gave the drink to the four old men before taking one herself. “Why doesn’t the Apricot Mortal take a seat?” asked Master Void-Surmounting. 
Only then did she take a seat. When they finished their tea, the girl saluted again and said, “You mortals are revelling in great pleasures this evening. May | be instructed a little by your excellent 
verses?” 
“Ours are all crude and vulgar utterances,” said Cloud-Brushing Dean, “but the compositions of the Holy Monk can truly be considered a product of the high Tang. They're most admirable.” 
“If it's not too great an imposition,” said the girl, “I'd like to hear them.” 
Whereupon the 4 old men gave a thorough rehearsal of the elder’s poems and his discourse on Chan. Smiling broadly, the girl said to them, “I’m so untalented and I’d really not air my incompetence 
but since I’ve had the privilege of hearing such magnificent poetry, I’d not allow myself to go uninspired. I'll exert myself to the utmost to respond in kind to the second poem of the holy monk with a 
regulated verse of my own. How about that?” 
She thus recited loudly: “My fame’s made lasting by Han-Wu King; 28to me his pupils did Confucius bring. 27Dong Xian’s®® affection would my growth foment; Sun Chu?? once loved my Feast-of-Cold- 
Food scent. How tender and coy is this rain-moistened bloom! What fresh verdant hues half veiled in misty gloom! Ripeness makes me a little tart, | know. Banished each year to wheat fields, that’s my 
woe.” 
When those 4 men heard this poem, they all congratulated her saying, “It's most elegant and sublime! And the lines are so full of vernal longings. Such a marvellous line — ‘How tender and coy is this 
rain-moistened bloom!” 
Smiling in a coquettish manner, the girl said, “I’m in fear and trepidation! The composition of the holy monk just now was something that could be said to have come from a mind of silk and a mouth of 
brocade. Let me say to him: if you can be persuaded to show us your talent, how about granting me another of your poems?” The Tang Monk however, dared not reply. As the girl gradually became 
amorous, she began to sidle closer to where he was seated. “What's the matter with you, charming guest?” she asked softly. “If you don’t have some fun on such a beautiful night, what else are you 
waiting for? The span of a life time, how long could that be?” 
“If the Apricot Mortal,” said Squire Eighteen, “entertained such genial feelings, how could the holy monk not reciprocate by giving his consent? If he withholds his favours, then he doesn’t know how 
lucky he is.” 
“But the holy monk,” said Squire Lonesome Rectitude, “is a gentleman of fame and accomplishment in the Way who certainly will not indulge in anything improper. If we insist on such activities, it is we 
who are guilty of impropriety: we'd be soiling a man’s fame and spoiling his virtue. That's hardly the proper thing to do! If Apricot Mortal is indeed so inclined, let Cloud-Brushing Dean and Squire 
Eighteen serve as go-betweens. Master Void-Surmounting and | can be the witnesses. They can then seal this marital contract. Wouldn't that be nice?” 
On hearing this, Tripitaka turned red in anger. Leaping up all at once, he shouted, “You're all fiendish creatures! How you’ve tried to tempt me! At first, | allowed your platitudes to goad me into discussing 
the mysteries of Dao, and that was still all right. But how could you use this ‘beauty trap’ now to try to seduce me? What have you to say to this?” When the four elders saw how enraged Tripitaka had 
become, they became so startled that every one of them bit his fingers and fell completely silent. The scarlet-bodied demon attendant however, grew very angry and bellowed, “Monk, you can’t even 
tell when someone’s trying to do you a favour! Is there anything bad about this dear sis of mine? Look at her refinement and talents, her lovely jade-like features. Let’s not talk about her skills in the 
feminine arts. Just a single poem of hers has already demonstrated that she is a worthy match for you. Why do you so brusquely refuse her? You'd better not let this opportunity slip by. What Squire 
Lonesome Rectitude says is most appropriate. If you refuse to do anything improper, let me serve as your marriage official.” 
Tripitaka turned pale with fright but he refused to give his assent no matter how urgently they pleaded with him. “You foolish priest!” said the demon attendant again. “We speak to you in a kindly 
manner, and you refuse us. If you arouse our wild and unruly passions and make us abduct you to another region where you neither can pursue your priestly life nor take a wife, won’t you've lived in 
vain?” With a mind like metal or stone, that elder adamantly refused to comply. He thought to himself, “I wonder where my disciples are looking for me...” So speaking to himself, he could not restrain 
the tears from rolling down his cheeks. Trying to placate him with a smile, the girl sat down close to him and took out from her sleeve a honey-scented handkerchief to wipe away his tears. “Charming 
guest,” she said, “don’t be so upset! Let's you and | nestle in jade and perfume and have some fun!” Uttering a loud cry, the elder bounded up and tried to dash out of the door, only to be grabbed by 
all those people. They brawled and struggled like that until dawn. 
Suddenly another cry could be heard: “Master, Master where are you speaking?” The Great Pilgrim Sun together with 8 Rules and Sand-monk, had been leading the horse and poling the luggage for 
a whole night without stopping. Going through brambles and thorns, searching this way and that, they managed to cover the entire eight hundred miles of the Bramble Ridge halfway between cloud 
and fog. By morning they reached the western edge of the ridge, and that was when they came upon the noises made by the Tang Monk. They responded with the cry, and the elder somehow managed 
to struggle out of the door, yelling, “Wukong, I’m here! Come and save me, quick!” In a flash, those four old men, the demon attendant, the girl, and her maidens all disappeared. 
Soon 8 Rules and Sand-monk arrived, saying, “Master, how did you get here?” Tugging at Pilgrim, Tripitaka said, “Oh, disciples! I’ve been a great burden on you. That old man we saw last night who 
claimed to be the local spirit coming to offer us food, was the person who hauled me to this place when with a shout you're about to hit him. He led me inside the door by the hand and introduced me 
to three other old men, all addressing me as the holy monk. Every one of them was quite refined in speech and manner, and they were all able poets. We spent our time in the exchange of verses until 


about midnight, when a beautiful girl accompanied by lanterns also arrived to meet me. She, too, composed a poem and addressed me as the charming guest. Then because of my looks she wanted 
to marry me. | woke up to their scheme all at once and refused. They began to put pressure on me, one wanting to be the go-between, another the marriage official, and still another the witness. | swore 
I'd not comply, arguing with them and desperately trying to struggle free. Out of the blue you people arrived. | suppose partly because it was getting light already, and partly because they seemed to 
be afraid of you, they all vanished suddenly, though they were still pulling and tugging at me just a moment ago.” 

“If you talked and discussed poetry with them,” said Pilgrim, “did you not ask them for their names?” 

“| did ask them for their styles,” replied Tripitaka. “The first old man called himself Squire Eighteen, and his style was Knotty Virtue. The second was styled Squire Lonesome Rectitude; the third, Master 
Void-Surmounting; and the fourth, Cloud-Brushing Dean. They addressed the girl as Apricot Mortal.” 

“Where are these creatures located?” asked 8 Rules. “Where did they go?” Tripitaka said, “I don’t know where they went but the place where we discussed poetry was not far from here.” 

As the three disciples looked around with their master, they discovered a cliff nearby, and on the cliff was a plaque bearing the words, Shrine of Sylva mortals. “It was right here,” said Tripitaka. When 
Pilgrim examined the place more carefully, he saw nearby a huge juniper tree, an old cypress tree, an old pine tree, and an old bamboo. Behind the bamboo was a scarlet maple tree. As he looked 
toward the far side of the cliff, he saw also an old apricot tree, flanked by two stalks of winter plum and two cassia plants. 

“Have you people found the fiends?” said Pilgrim with a laugh. “Not yet,” replied 8 Rules. “Don’t you know,” said Pilgrim, “it is these several trees right here that have become spirits?” 

“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “how do you know that?” 

“Squire Eighteen,” replied Pilgrim, “is the pine; Squire Lonesome Rectitude is the cypress; Master Void-Surmounting is the juniper; Cloud-Brushing Dean is the bamboo; the scarlet-bodied demon is 
the maple; Apricot Mortal is, of course, the apricot tree while the maids are the cassia and the winter plum.” When 8 Rules heard this, he rushed forward without further ado: using his rake along with 
several shoves of his horn, he brought to the ground those winter plum, cassia, old apricot, and maple. From beneath the roots of these trees, fresh blood indeed spurted out. Tripitaka walked forward 
to pull at him, saying, “Aware of Ability, don’t hurt them. Though they have reached the stage of becoming spirits, they have done me no harm. Let’s find our way and leave.” 

“Master, you’d not pity them,” said Pilgrim. “For | fear that they may become great fiends later and then they'll bring much harm to humans.” Idiot thus decided to work his rake some more and toppled 
the pine, cypress, juniper, and bamboo as well. Only after that did they help their master to mount up and all proceeded along the main road to the West once more. 


081 
Fiends set up falsely the Small Thunderclap; the 4 pilgrims all meet a great ordeal 
This chapter's karmic import’s to persuade man to do good and shun all evil works. 
Even a single thought's known to all the gods, do whatever you'll. 
Folly or cleverness, how’d you lea? 
No-mina’s still the cure for both of these. 
While yet alive, the Way you'd cultivate; don’t drift or roam. 
Recognise your source and cast your shell. 
To seek long life, you must catch it. 
Be ever enlightened; let ghee anoint you. 
Pump through 3 Passes? to fill the dark sea will make the virtuous ride the phoenix and crane. 
Then compassion will with mercy unite as you reach ecstasy. 
Tripitaka was most single-minded in his piety and sincerity. He was protected by the gods above; even such spirits as those of grass and wood also came to keep him company. After 1 night of elegant 
conversation on the arts, he was delivered from the thorns and thistles, no longer encumbered by vines or creepers. As he and his 3 disciples journeyed westward, they travelled for a long time and it 
was again the end of winter. This was in truth a day of spring: all things thrive and flourish for the Dipper’s handle returns to yin. ?Young grasses cover the earth with green and verdant willows line the 
banks. A ridge of peach blossoms red like brocade; half a stream of silky water like green jade. How rain and wind persist to one’s endless feelings! The sun enhances the flowers’ grace; the swallows 
fetch light mossy buds. Like Wang Wei painting’s‘ the mountain’s dark and light; birds chatter with the sharp tongue of Jizi. °No one’s here to joy in such fancy fineries save dancing butterflies and 
reciting bees. Master and his disciples proceeded with the slow trotting of the horse, enjoying themselves all the while by searching out the fragrant flowers and treading on the green meadows. As 
they walked along, they came upon a tall mountain which seemed to touch the sky from a distance. “Wukong,” said Tripitaka pointing with his whip, “I wonder how tall that mountain’s. It seems that it’s 
actually touching the blue sky or it may have even punctured the azure heavens!” 
Pilgrim said, “I remember a line of an ancient poem that say: only the sky remains high above; no mountain can equal its height. This line’s trying to describe the extreme height of one particular 
mountain such that no other mountain could be compared with it. But how’d a mountain actually touch the sky?” 
“If it didn’t,” said 8 Rules, “then why did people call Mount Kunlun the pillar of Heaven?” 
Pilgrim replied, “Don’t you know the old adage, Heaven was not filled in the northwest. Now Mount Kunlun is located in the northwest, at the position of qian, and that’s why it is commonly thought to 
be a mountain that can hold up the sky by filling the void. Hence the name, Pillar of Heaven.” 
“Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, laughing, “don’t give him all these nice explanations! When he hears them, he'll try to outsmart someone else. Let’s get moving. When we’ve climbed the mountain, 
then we'll know how tall it’s.” 
Idiot tried to lunge at Sand-monk to smack him, and as the 2 of them tangled while proceeding, the old master urged the horse into a gallop. In a moment, they drew near to the mountain cliff. As they 
ascended the mountain step by step what they saw was a forest where the wind was howling, a brook where the water was gurgling. No crow or bird flew over this mountain; even mortals might say, 
‘It’s hard!” 
10000 cliffs and ravines, 1000000 twists and turns. No man reaching this place of churning dust; no end the sight of strange, ghostly rocks. Clouds at some spots seemed like shimmering pools; trees 
everywhere filled with birds’ raucous calls. Deer left, holding agaric; apes returned, bearing peaches. Foxes and badgers jumped about the ledge; antelopes played on the mountain peak. A sudden 
roar of the tiger made one cringe as striped leopards and grey wolves barred the road. The moment that Tripitaka caught sight of this, he was terrified but Pilgrim Sun displayed his vast magic powers. 
Look at him with his golden-hooped rod! He gave one shout and all those wolves, tigers, and leopards scattered. Opening up a path, he led his master straight up the tall mountain. After they passed 
the summit, they descended westward until they reached a plateau where they suddenly came upon rays of divine light and strands of coloured mists. There was in the distance a magnificent building, 
from which the faint, harmonious sounds of bells and sonorous stones could be heard. “Disciples,” said Tripitaka, “take a look and see what kind of place that’s.” 
Shading his eyes with his hand, Pilgrim lifted his head to stare at the building. /t’s a good place indeed! Truly a bejewelled edifice, a noble monastery. An empty valley that augments the poems of earth; 
a quiet place that diffuses nature’s fragrance, verdant pines, rain-soaked, shroud the tall towers; green bamboos, cloud-wrapped, guard the lecture hall. Lights radiate from this distinctive dragon palace; 
colours flutter around this Religious domain. Scarlet rails and jade portals; painted pillars and carved beams. Threads explained, incense fills the seats. Mysteries exposed, the moon lights up the 
screens. Birds recite within the scarlet trees; cranes drink at the pebbled brook. Flowers bloom everywhere in this Jetavana Park; on 3 sides Sravasti light spills through open doors. Doors of rugged 
buildings face the mountain range. Hollow bells and stones strike languidly and long. The opened windows in a gentle breeze, the rolled up screen in curls of smoke. With monks here the life’s ascetic, 
a peace not marred by things profane. Truly a place divine which the world can’t touch: a quiet monastery, a good field of rites. After Pilgrim had looked over the place, he turned to Tripitaka saying, 
“Master, that’s a monastery over there. | don’t know why however within the aura of Chan and the auspicious lights there seems to be an air of violence as well. When | look at this scenery, it reminds 
me greatly of Thunderclap but the road just does not seem right. When we reach the building, don’t walk in immediately for | fear that some sinister hand may bring us harm.” 
“If this place reminds you of Thunderclap,” said the Tang Monk, “could it be verily the Spirit Mountain? You'd better not slight my sincerity and delay the very purpose of my journey.” 
“No! No!” said Pilgrim. “I’ve travelled on the way to the Spirit Mountain several times before. How’d it be this one?” 
“Even if it isn’t,” said 8 Rules, “there must be a good person staying here.” 
Sand-monk said, “We don’t have to be so suspicious. This road’s to take us right past that door. Whether it’s Thunderclap or not, one look will tell us.” 
“What Awakened to Purity says,” said Pilgrim, “is quite reasonable.” Urging his horse with the whip, the elder soon arrived before the monastery gate, on top of which he saw the 3 words: 
The Thunderclap Monastery 
He was so astonished that he rolled off the horse and fell to the ground. “You wretched ape!” he scolded. “You've just about killed me! It’s the Thunderclap Monastery and you still want to deceive me!” 
Attempting to placate him with a smile, Pilgrim said, “Don’t get upset, Master. Take another look. There’re four words on the gate of the monastery and you've only seen three of them. And you still 
blame me?” Trembling all over, the elder scrambled up and took another look. There were indeed these 4 words: 
The Small Thunderclap Monastery 
“If it's only The Small Thunderclap Monastery,” said Tripitaka, “there must be a Religious patriarch inside. The Threads mentioned some three thousand Gods but | suppose they can’t be all in one 
place. Guanyin’s after all in South Sea, Auspicious-World’s located at Mount Emei and The Beautiful one with Glory and Auspiciousness lives on the Mountain of Five Platforms. | wonder which 
Religious patriarch presides over this field of rites. The ancients said: with Gods there’re scriptures; without temples there're no treasures. We'd go inside.” 
“You'd not,” said Pilgrim. “This place portends more evil than good. If you run into calamity, don’t blame me.” 
“Even if there’s no God,” said Tripitaka, “there must be his image. This disciple’s made a vow that I'll bow to God whenever | encounter him. How'd | blame you?” 
Whereupon he ordered 8 Rules to take out his cassock. After he changed into his clerical cap and tidied his clothing, Tripitaka strode forward. As they walked inside the monastery gate, they heard a 
loud voice saying, “Tang Monk, you came all the way from the Land of the East to seek an audience with our God. How dare you be so insolent now?” On hearing this, Tripitaka at once saluted himself; 
8 Rules, too, respected as Sand-monk went to his knees. Only the Great Sage however, led the horse and remained behind, picking up the luggage. When they went inside the second door, they came 
upon the great hall of Siddhartha. Outside the great hall door and beneath the treasure throne stood in rows the five hundred Arhats, the three thousand guardians of the faith, the Four Great Diamond 
Kings, the mendicant nuns, the worshippers along with countless sage monks, and workers. Truly, there were also glamorous fragrant flowers and auspicious rays in abundance. The elder, 8 Rules, 
and Sand-monk were so overcome that they touched their heads to the ground with each step they took, inching their way toward the spirit platform. Only Pilgrim remained boldly erect. Then they heard 
another loud voice coming from the top of the lotus throne saying, “You, Sun Wukong! How daren’t you salute before Siddhartha?” 
Little did anyone expect that Pilgrim would look up and carefully scrutinise the one who spoke. When he recognised that it was a specious god, he at once abandoned the horse and the luggage. 
Gripping the rod in his hands, he shouted, “You bunch of accursed beasts! You're audacious! How dare you take in vain a god’s name and soil the pure virtue of Siddhartha! Don’t run away!” Wielding 
the rod with both his hands, he attacked at once. With a loud clang a pair of golden cymbals dropped from mid-air; falling on Pilgrim, they had him enclosed completely from head to foot. Bullseye 8 
Rules and Sand-monk were so aghast that they reached for their rake and staff but they were overwhelmed at once by those Arhats, guardians, sage monks, and workers who surged forward to 
surround the 3 pilgrims. Tripitaka, too, was thus caught, and all three of them were then firmly bound by ropes. The one who appeared as the Religious patriarch sitting on the lotus throne was actually 
a monster-king and those Arhats were all little fiends. After they put away their God appearances, they revealed again their fiendish forms and hauled the elder and his 2 disciples to the rear so that 
they could be locked up. Pilgrim was to remain sealed in the golden cymbals and never to be released. With the cymbals placed on the jewelled platform, he was expected to be reduced to pus and 
blood in the period of three days and nights. Thereafter the other pilgrims were to be steamed in an iron cage and eaten. Truly green-eyed Monkey knew the false from the real. Chan Mind saluted low 
on gold form’s appeal. Yellow Dame paid homage like a blind mule and Wood-Mum conversed like a fool, too. A fiend, growing strong, oppressed one’s true self — the natural man duped by a wicked 
elf. Dao had little but the demon, big gain. A wrong turn to Side Door, *their work’s vain! At the time, the various fiends shut up the Tang Monk and his 2 disciples in the rear, and there they tied the 
horse also. After they placed his cassock and his clerical cap inside the luggage wrap, they hid these also in a guarded place. Now about that Pilgrim who had been enclosed within the golden cymbals. 
It was pitch black inside and he became so exasperated that he perspired all over. He tried pushing left and shoving right but he could not get out. Then he struck madly at the cymbals with his iron rod 
but he could not dent them even one whit. With no further alternative, he wanted to break the cymbals by sheer brute force. Making a magic sign with his fingers, he at once grew to thousands of feet 
tall but the cymbals also grew with him. There was not even the slightest crack to let in a ray of light. He made the magic sign again and at once his body diminished in size until he became as small 
as a mustard seed. The cymbals grew smaller, too with his body, so that there was not the tiniest hole. Gripping the iron rod, Pilgrim blew on it a divine breath, crying, “Change!” It changed into a 
flagpole that he used to hold up the cymbals. Then he selected two of his longer hairs behind his head and pulled them off, crying, “Change!” They changed immediately into a plum-flower-like, five- 
pointed drill; along the base of the rod, he drilled away for over a thousand times. There were loud scraping noises from the drill but he could not puncture the cymbals at all. In sheer desperation, 
Pilgrim made the magic sign again and recited the spell: “Let Ohm and ram purify the religion realm. Key: Primary Reception Beneficial for Determination.” ” 


He summoned the Guardian of 5 Quarters, the 6 Gods of Light and the 6 Gods of Darkness, and the 18 Guardians of Monasteries with this who gathered outside the golden cymbals saying, “Great 
Sage, we're all giving protection to your master so that the demons could not harm him. Why did you summon us?” 

“That master of mine,” said Pilgrim, “refused to listen to me! It’s no big loss even if he were put to death! But what | want you to do is think of some way quickly to pry open these cymbals and let me 
out. Then we can take care of other matters. Right now, there’s not a bit of light inside, and I’m so hot that I’m about to suffocate.” 

The various deities indeed tried to pry open the cymbals but they were so tightly closed up that they seemed to have grown together. The gods could not even budge them. “Great Sage,” said the 
Golden-Headed Guardian, “we don’t know what sort of treasure this pair of cymbals is but from top to bottom, they've become one whole piece now. Your humble deities are too weak to pry them 
loose.” 

“| don’t know how much magic power I’ve used inside,” said Pilgrim, “but | can’t budge them either.” 

On hearing this, the Guardian told the Six Gods of Light to protect the Tang Monk and the Six Gods of Darkness to watch over the golden cymbals. As the various other Guardians of Monasteries took 
up positions of patrol front and back, he mounted the auspicious luminosity and, in a moment, went straight through the South Heaven Gate. Without waiting for further summons, he went up to the 
Hall of Divine Mists and saluted himself before the Jade Emperor. “My lord,” he said, “your subject is the Guardian of Five Quarters. | commend to you the Great Sage Equal to Heaven who is 
accompanying the Tang Monk to acquire scriptures. Passing through a mountain, they came upon The Small Thunderclap Monastery. By mistake the Tang Monk thought it was the Spirit Mountain and 
he entered the monastery to worship. It was actually an edifice set up by a fiendish monster to ensnare the master and his disciples. At this moment, the Great Sage is imprisoned within a pair of golden 
cymbals, from which he cannot be extracted at all. He is about to die, and that’s why I’ve come here especially to memorialise to you.” The Jade Emperor at once gave this decree: “Let the Twenty- 
Eight Constellations go quickly to subdue the fiends and bring deliverance to the pilgrims.” 

Not daring to linger, the Constellations followed the Guardian to leave the Heaven gate and arrived inside the monastery. It was about the time of the second watch at night; those monster-spirits, both 
great and small, having been rewarded by the old fiend for capturing the Tang Monk, had all gone to sleep. Without disturbing them, the Constellations gathered outside the cymbals and reported: 
“Great Sage, we're the Twenty-Eight Constellations sent here by the Jade Emperor to rescue you.” 

Exceedingly pleased by what he heard, Pilgrim said immediately, “Use your weapons and break the thing. Old monkey will be out at once.” 

“We daren’t do so,” replied the stars. “This thing is of metallic substance. If we strike at it, there'll be noises and the demon will be awakened. Then it'll be hard for us to rescue you. Let us use our 
weapons instead and see if we can puncture it. Wherever you detect even the faintest speck of light, you'll be able to escape.” 

“Exactly,” said Pilgrim. Look at them! 

Wielding spears, swords, scimitars, and axes, they began to pry at the pair of cymbals and stab at them, hauling them back and forth. They did this until about the time of the third watch but the cymbals 
could not be loosened at all. The pair seemed to be like a wonton that had been forged together. Pilgrim inside was looking this way and that; he crawled over here and rolled to the other side but he 
could not detect even the faintest speck of light. “Oh, Great Sage,” said Gullet the Gold Dragon, 8 “please be more patient. As | see it, this treasure must be a compliant thing that knows transformation 
also. Try to feel with your hands inside along the edges where the cymbals come together. I’m going to use the tip of my horn and see if | can wedge it inside. Then you can use some kind of 
transformation and escape through the spot where it comes apart.” 

Pilgrim agreed and started to use his hands to feel along the edges. Meanwhile, this Constellation made his body smaller until his horn became like a pointed needle. At the top of the cymbals where 
they were joined, he tried to stick the horn through. Alas, he had to use every ounce of his strength before he managed to reach inside. Then he caused his body and his horn to take on the religion 
form, crying, “Grow! Grow! Grow!” The horn grew to the thickness of a rice bowl. The edge of the cymbals however, did not behave like any metallic object at all; instead, they seemed to have been 
made of skin and flesh that had the horn of Gullet the Gold Dragon in a vice-like grip. There was not the slightest crack anywhere around the horn. When Pilgrim felt the horn with his hands, he said, 
“It's no use! There’s no crack above or below! I’ve no choice. You must bear a little pain and take me out.” Marvellous Great Sage! He changed the golden-hooped rod into a steel drill and drilled a hole 
on the tip of the horn. Transforming his body into the size of a mustard seed, he stuck himself inside the hole and yelled, “Pull the horn out! Pull the horn out!” 

Again the Constellation exerted who knows how much strength before he yanked it out and fell exhausted to the ground. As soon as Pilgrim crawled out from the hole he drilled in the tip of the 
Constellation’s horn and changed back into his true form, he whipped out the iron rod and slammed it down with a crash on the cymbals. It was as if a copper mountain had been toppled, a gold mine 
blown open. What a pity! An instrument belonging to a goa’s instantly reduced to a thousand fragments of gold! The 28 Constellations were terrified and the Guardian of 5 Quarters’ hair stood on end. 
All those various fiends, old and young were roused from their dreams and even the old monster-king was startled in his sleep. He scrambled up, and as he put on his clothes, he ordered a roll of drums 
to assemble the rest of the fiends and arm them. It was about dawn at this time when they rushed beneath the treasure throne. There they saw Pilgrim Sun and the various Constellations hovering over 
the pieces of the golden cymbals. Paling with fright, the monster-king gave this order: “Little ones! Shut the front door quickly and let no one out.” On hearing this, Pilgrim led the star spirits to mount 
the clouds and rose into the air. After the monster-king had put away the gold fragments, he ordered his troops to line up in formation outside the monastery gate. Nursing his anger, the monster-king 
hurriedly put on his armour and picked up a short, pliant wolf-teeth club® to walk out of his camp crying, “Pilgrim Sun, a brave man shouldn't run away! Step forward quickly and fight three rounds with 
me!” 

Unable to contain himself, Pilgrim led the star spirits to lower their clouds and to take a good look at that monster-spirit. They saw he had dishevelled hair strapped down by a thin and flat gold band; 
glowering eyes topped by thick, bushy yellow brows; a gall-like nose with nostrils flaring; a 4-square mouth with sharp, pointed teeth. He wore a cuirass of chain mail. Tied with a sash spun with raw 
silk. His feet were shod in calfskin boots; hands held up a wolf-teeth club. His form was beastlike though he was no beast; with looks nonhuman, still he seemed like man. Sticking out his iron rod, 
Pilgrim shouted, “What kind of fiendish creature are you that you dare play the Religious patriarch, occupy this mountain, and falsely set up the Small Thunderclap Monastery?” 

“So the little monkey doesn’t know my name!” replied the monster-king, “and that’s why you've transgressed the territory of this divine mountain! This place is called the Little Western Heaven. By my 
self-cultivation I've attained the right fruit, and thus Heaven bestowed on me these treasure bowers and precious towers. My name is the Old God of Yellow Brows but the people of this region, ignorant 
of that, address me as the Great King Yellow Brows or Holy Dad Yellow Brows. I’ve known all the while that you’re on your way to the West, and that you've some abilities. That's why | displayed my 
powers and set up the image to lure your master to enter. | want to make a wager with you. If you can withstand me, I'll spare you all, master and disciples, so that you, too, can perfect the right fruit. If 
you can't, I'll slay all of you and I'll go myself to see Siddhartha for the scriptures, so that / can attain the right fruit for China.” 

“Monster-spirit,” said Pilgrim with a laugh, “no need to brag! If you want this wager, come up quickly and receive the rod!” 

Very amiably the monster-king met him with the wolf-teeth club and this was some battle! The club and rod are not the same. To speak of them, they have their own form and shape! 1 is a short and 
pliant Religious arm; 1 is a deep-sea treasure stiff and hard. Both can transform according to 1’s wish; they join this time and each strives to be strong. The short, pliant wolf-teeth’s jewel bedecked; the 
sturdy golden-hooped is dragon-like. They can turn thick or thin, how marvellous! They can grow long or short with perfect ease. Demon and ape together fight a hot, furious battle — that’s not a lie! The 
ape tamed by faith Mind Monkey becomes; the fiend mocks Heaven in his image false. Raging and fuming, they both turn cruel; vicious and violent they both look the same. This one aims at the head 
and refuses to quit; that 1 stabs at the face with no let up. Spat-out clouds darken the sun; belched-out fog cover the mount. Rod and club swing back and forth as they join; for Tripitaka they slight life 
or death. Look at the two of them! They closed in for more than 50 times but no decision could be reached. Before the gate of the monastery, those various monster-spirits began to shout their 
encouragements, beating their drums and gongs at the same time and waving their banners. On this side, the 28 Constellations, the Guardian of 5 Quarters, and the other sages immediately uttered a 
cry and each wielding his weapon, had the demon surrounded. The fiends before the monastery were so terrified that they could no longer beat the drums; trembling all over, they could hardly sound 
the gongs. The old fiendish demon however, was not in the least afraid. With 1 hand he used his wolf-teeth club to fence off all those weapons; with his other hand he untied from his waist a little wrap 
made of old white cloth. He flung the wrap skyward and with a loud whoosh, the Great Sage Sun, the 28 Constellations, and the Guardian of 5 Quarters were all wrapped up inside it. Retrieving the 
wrap, the monster swung it on his shoulder and turned to stride back to his camp while all those little fiends were elated by this sudden triumph. Asking his little ones to fetch him several dozen ropes, 
the old fiend told them to untie the wrap: as each of the prisoners was fished out, he was immediately bound. All of the deities were weak and numb, and even their skin seemed to be wrinkled and 
their appearance emaciated. After they were bound, they were hauled to the rear of the monastery and thrown to the ground. Then the monster-king ordered a large banquet for himself and his subjects, 
and they drank until dusk before scattering to retire. The Great Sage Sun was tied up along with the other deities. By about midnight there suddenly came to them the sound of someone weeping. 
When the Great Sage listened closely, he discovered that it was the voice of Tripitaka who wailed, “Oh, Wukong! / loathe myself for giving you heed, thus landing us all in such dire need! Now you're 
hurt in the cymbals of gold. I’m rope bound that person had been told? Most bitter fate caused what we four had met; merits, three thousand, have been all upset. What will grant us from this bondage 
reprieve that we may reach smoothly the West and leave?” 

On hearing this, Pilgrim was moved to compassion, saying to himself, “Though that master refused to believe my words and landed in this calamity, he nonetheless does think of old monkey when he 
is in such straits. Since the night is quiet and the fiend is sleeping, | may as well make use of this unguarded moment and go free the rest of them.” 

Dear Great Sage! Using the Magic of Body-Vanishing, he caused his body to shrink and immediately became free of the ropes. He approached the Tang Monk and whispered, “Master!” Recognising 
his voice, the elder said, “How did you get here?” 

Softly Pilgrim gave him a thorough account of what had happened, and the elder was exceedingly pleased. “Disciple,” he said, “please rescue me quickly! Whatever happens hereafter I'll listen to you. 
I'll not ever overrule you again.” Then Pilgrim raised his hands and freed his master, after which he untied 8 Rules, Sand-monk, the Twenty-Eight Constellations, and the Guardian of Five Quarters. 
Dragging the horse over, he told them to hurry out the door. Just as they stepped outside however, he remembered the luggage and wanted to go back inside to search for it. 

“You really value things more than the person!” said Gullet the Gold Dragon. “Isn’t it enough that you’ve saved your master? Why must you look anymore for luggage?” 

“The person’s important, of course,” said Pilgrim, “but the cassock and the bowl are even more important. In our wrap are the imperial travel rescript, the brocaded cassock, and the alms-bowl of purple 
gold, all superior Religious treasures. How could we not want them?” 

“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “you go look for them, and we'll wait for you by the road.” 

Look at those star spirits who had the Tang Monk surrounded! Using the Magic of Displacement, they called up a gust of wind and had themselves taken clear out of the high walls. After they reached 
the main road, they headed straight down the mountain slope until they arrived at a level region. There they waited. It was about the hour of the third watch that the Great Sage Sun walked slowly and 
stealthily inside. The doors at every level were tightly shut. When he climbed to the tallest tower to take a look, he found that even the windows and casements were completely closed. He wanted, of 
course, to go inside down below but afraid that windows or the shutters might make a noise, he dared not push at them. Making the magic sign with his fingers, therefore, he shook his body once and 
changed into a divine mouse, commonly called the bat. It looks like a pointed head like a rat’s, his eyes shine, too. With wings he comes out at dusk; sightless he sleeps in the day. He hides in hollow 
tiles to find mosquitoes for food. He loves most the bright, fair moon and knows when to fly and soar. Through the space that was not sealed up between the rafters and the roof tiles, he crawled inside. 
Passing through several doors, he reached the very centre of the building where under the third-level casement he came upon something glowing. It was not the light of lamps or fireflies, neither the 
glow of twilight nor the blaze of lightning. Half leaping and flying, he went near there to have another look and found that it was the wrap of their luggage that was emitting the glow. That monster-spirit 
had stripped the Tang Monk of his cassock, and instead of folding it properly, he merely stuffed it inside the wrap again. The cassock was, after all, a Religious treasure which had on it compliant pearls, 
Mani pearls, red cornelian beads, purple coral, relics, and the night-luminescent pearls. That was why it glowed. Exceedingly pleased by this discovery, Pilgrim changed back into his own form and 
picked up the luggage. Without even bothering to check whether the ropes were properly attached to the pole or not, he threw the load on his shoulder and began to walk out. One end of the luggage 
unexpectedly slipped off the pole and fell with a thud to the floor. Alas! This was what had to happen! The old monster-spirit was sleeping on the floor immediately down below, and he was wakened 
by that loud thud. Jumping up, he screamed, “Someone’s here! Someone's here!” 

Those various fiends, old and young, all arose and lit torches and lamps. In a noisy throng, they rushed about to inspect the front and rear. One of them arrived to say, “The Tang Monk's escaped!” 
Another came to report: “Pilgrim and the rest are gone, too!” The old fiend immediately gave this order: “Guard all the doors!” When he heard this, Pilgrim feared that he might fall into their net again. 
Abandoning his load of luggage, he mounted the cloud somersault and leaped clear of the building through a window. 

The monster-spirit led a thorough search for the Tang Monk at the front and back of the monastery but they failed to turn up anyone. When he saw that it was almost light, he took his club and led his 
troops to give chase. Beneath the mountain slope, still shrouded by cloud and fog, were the Twenty-Eight Constellations, the Guardian of Five Quarters, and the other deities. “Where do you think 
you're going?” shouted the monster-king. “Here I’m!” 

“Brothers!” cried Horn the Wood Dragon, “the fiendish creature’s here!” 

Whereupon Gullet the Gold Dragon, Woman the Earth Bat, Chamber the Sun Hare, Heart the Moon Fox, Tail the Fire Tiger, Winnower the Water Leopard, Dipper the Wood Unicorn, Ox the Gold bull, 
Base the Earth Badger, Barrens the Sun Rat, Roof the Moon Swallow, House the Fire bull, Wall the Water Porcupine, Straddler the Wood Wolf, Harvester the Gold Hound, Stomach the Earth bull, 
Mane the Sun Rooster, Net the Moon Crow, Beak the Fire Monkey, Triaster the Water Ape, Well the Wood Hound, Ghost the Gold Ram, Willow the Earth Antelope, Star the Sun Horse, Spread the 
Moon Deer, Wing the Fire Serpent, and Axel-tree the Water Earthworm led the Golden-Headed Guardian, the Silver-Headed Guardian, the Six Gods of Light and Darkness, the Guardians of Monasteries, 


8 Rules, and Sand-monk to meet their pursuers. Abandoning the Tripitaka Tang and forsaking the white dragon horse, they rushed into battle, each with weapon in hand. When this monster-king saw 
them, he laughed scornfully and gave a loud whistle. Immediately some four or five thousand monster-spirits, old and young, surged forward, all strong, sturdy, and they began a terrific battle on the 
west mountain slope. Marvellous fight! The vile, vicious demon mocks the true Self. The true Self's so gentle what'd it do? 100 plans used up, they can’t escape their pain. 1000 schemes cannot achieve 
their peace. The gods lend their protection; the sages help with their arms. Wood-Mum may still be kind but Yellow Dame has made up its mind. Their brawl stirs Heaven and shakes the Earth; their 
fight expands like a net spread out. On this side, banners wave and soldiers shout; on that side, they roll drums and beat gongs. A mass of swords and spears coldly gleaming; thick rows of halberds 
veiled in deathly pall. The fiendish troops are so fierce and brave, what'd those divine fighters do? Wretched clouds hide both sun and moon; grievous fog shroud mountains and streams. They strain 
and struggle in a bitter row, all for to God Tang Monk’s faulty salute. Growing fiercer all the time, the monster-spirit led his troops to charge repeatedly. Just at that moment when neither side proved to 
be the stronger, they heard the roar of Pilgrim: “Old monkey's arrived!” 

8 Rules met him and asked, “Where’s the luggage?” 

“Old monkey almost lost his life already,” answered Pilgrim. “Don’t mention any luggage!” 

Gripping his precious staff, Sand-monk said, “Stop talking now! We must go fight the monster-spirit!” 

The star spirits and those Gods of Darkness and Light by now were encircled completely by the various fiends, and the old fiend wielded his club to attack the three of them. Pilgrim, 8 Rules, and Sand- 
monk opened up their rod, staff, and rake to meet him head-on. They fought till truly the Heaven grew dim and the Earth darkened but they could not prevail against the demon. They fought some more 
until the sun sank down in the west and the moon arose in the east. When the fiend saw that it was getting late, he signalled his subjects to be on guard by whistling loudly; then he took out his treasure. 
When Pilgrim saw clearly that the fiend had untied his wrap and held it in his hand, he cried, “Look out! Let’s run!” 

Without further regard for 8 Rules, Sand-monk, and the other gods, he somersaulted all the way up to the 9-fold Heaven. The gods and his companions however, were not quick enough to understand 
why he fled, and they were all captured once more inside the wrap after the monster-spirit had thrown it in the air. Only Pilgrim thus managed to escape. After the monster-king and his troops returned 
to the monastery, he asked for ropes again and ordered the prisoners to be tied up as before. The Tang Monk, 8 Rules, and Sand-monk were to be hung up high on the rafters while the white horse 
was to be tied up in the back. After the deities had been trussed up, they were to be thrown into the cellar and the entrance would be covered and sealed. The little fiends obeyed each of his instructions. 
Pilgrim had leaped up to the 9-fold Heaven and succeeded in preserving his life. When he saw the withdrawal of the fiendish troops with banners lowered, he knew that his companions had been 
captured. Lowering his auspicious luminosity onto the eastern slope of the mountain, he hated, teeth grinding, the fiend; he thought of the monk, shedding tears. Lifting his face to stare skyward, he 
sighed sadly and voiced his fears. “O, Master!” he cried. “In which previous disciple did you incur such ordeals of bondage, that you must in this life face monster-spirits every step of the way! It's so 
hard now to rid you of your sufferings. What'll we do?” He lamented like that all by himself for a long time, and then he began to calm himself and think, allowing the mind to question the mind. / wonder 
what sort of wrap this fiendish demon’s, he thought to himself, that can hold so many things. Now he’s even hauled away all those celestial warriors! I'd go seek the Jade Emperor for assistance but | 
fear he might take offence. | recall however, that there’s a True Warrior of the North’? whose style is the Demon-Conquering Celestial Worthy, and who lives in the Wudang Mountain" of the South 
Jambtidvipa Continent. Let me go fetch him here to rescue Master from this ordeal. Truly it is that, the mortal way undone, ape and horse disperse; 5 Phases dry up when mind and spirit are lost. 


082 

Many gods meet injury; Maitreya binds a fiend 
The Great Sage Sun had no alternative but to mount an auspicious cloud by means of his somersault to head directly for the Wudang Mountain on the South Jambidvipa Continent where he hoped to 
solicit the help of the Demon-Conquering Celestial Worthy to rescue Tripitaka, 8 Rules, and Sand-monk, and the various celestial warriors from their ordeal. Without a moment's pause in mid-air, he 
soon caught sight of the patriarch’s mortal realm. Gently lowering his cloud, he stared around. It's a marvellous place! Grandly it guards the southeast, this towering divine mountain. The soaring 
Hibiscus Peak: the rugged Purple-Canopy Summit. 9 Streams’ flow from it to distant Jing and Yang. 2It joins the Yue Mountains reaching the state of Chu. On top are the treasure cave of Grand-Void, 
the numinous Estrada of Bullseye and Lu. *Golden stones resound in 36 halls where to offer incense 10000 pilgrims come. King Shun visits it and King Yu prays at this place adorned with jade tablets 
and letters of gold. Bluebirds fly about the towers; banners flap like scarlet skirts. A land set on a mountain famed in all the world, a Heaven-born region touching the spacious void. A few sprigs of plum 
trees just now in bloom; a mountain of rare grasses spreading their verdure. Dragons lie beneath the brooks; tigers crouch by the cliffs. The birds sound as if they're talking; by people tame deer are 
walking. White cranes perch with clouds on old junipers; facing the sun, blue and red phoenixes recite. This has the looks of a true, mortal realm where portals of gold and mercy rule the world. The 
august patriarch was the off spring of King Pure Joy and Queen Triumphant Virtue who was conceived with child after she dreamed that she had swallowed the sun. After carrying the child for fourteen 
months, she gave birth to him in the palace at noon on the 1: day of the 3 month in the Jiachen year that was the 1* year of the Kaihuang reign period. This Holy Dad was fierce and bold in his youth, 
astute and keen when he grew up. Declining the throne of kingship, he sought only austerities. His parents could not stop him from leaving the royal palace. The mysteries and meditation he embraced 
on this mountain. Merit and work accomplished, he rose in daylight to Heaven. The Jade Emperor forthwith decreed that he be titled Zhenwu. Above, the dark void blessed him; below, the snake and 
turtles joined him; the entire Heaven and Earth addressed him as All-Efficacious from whom no secret was hidden for whom no act ever met failure. He routed the demon-spirits from start to end of each 
kalpa. As he was enjoying the sight of this mortal scenery, the Great Sage Sun soon arrived before the Palace of Grand Harmony, having passed through the 1s, the 2", and the 3% Heaven gates. 
There in the midst of hallowed light and auspicious air he found a group of 500 spirit-ministers who met him and said, “Who’re you?” 
“Im Sun Wukong, the Great Sage Equal to Heaven,” replied the Great Sage, “and I'd like to have an audience with the patriarch.” After the spirit-ministers went inside to make the report, the patriarch 
left the main hall to escort his visitor into the Palace of Grand Harmony. Pilgrim saluted the patriarch and said, “I must trouble you with a matter.” 
“What's it?” the patriarch asked. 
“| was accompanying the Tang Monk on his way to the Western Heaven to acquire scriptures,” said Pilgrim, “and our path has landed us in a dangerous ordeal. At the West Aparagodantya Continent, 
there is a mountain by the name of the Little Western Heaven, in which a demonic fiend has set up a Little Thunderclap Monastery. When my master entered the monastery gate and laid eyes on rows 
of Arhats, guardians, beggars, and sage monks, he thought that he had come upon the real God. Just as he bent low to salute them, he was seized and bound. I, too was caught off guard and was 
clamped within a pair of gold cymbals that the fiend threw up into the air. Those cymbals had me completely sealed inside, and there was not even the slightest crack for me to escape. It was a good 
thing that the Golden-Headed Guardian went to memorialise to the Jade Emperor who commanded the Twenty-Eight Constellations to descend to earth that very night. Even they however, could not 
pry the cymbals open. Luckily, Gullet the Gold Dragon managed to pierce the cymbals with his horn and took me out with him. | smashed the cymbals afterwards and aroused the fiendish creature. 
When he gave chase and fought with us, he threw up a white cloth wrap which had all of us, including the Twenty-Eight Constellations, stored away. We're tied up with ropes once more but that evening 
| managed to escape and free the Constellations and our Tang Monk. Thereafter, my search for our robe and alms-bowl again disturbed the fiend who chased us down once more to do battle with the 
celestial warriors. When that fiend took out his white cloth wrap and fiddled with it, | recognised his verses and fled at once. The rest of my companions were stored up by him as before. I'd no other 
alternative but to come here to beg assistance from the patriarch.” 
The patriarch said, “In years past, | ruled over the north and that was the reason I’d assumed the position of Zhenwu to extirpate the fiends and deviates of the world by the decree of the Jade Emperor. 
Thereafter, by the command of the Celestial Worthy of Original Commencement | led with loosened hair and naked feet and with the soaring serpent and divine turtle under my feet, the Five Thunder 
Deities, the huge-maned lion, and various ferocious beasts and poisonous dragons to subjugate the dark and fiendish miasmas of the northeast. Today I’m enjoying the peace of Wudang Mountain 
and the serenity of the Palace of Grand Harmony, the calm seas and clear universe, only because the fiendish demons and devious spirits have all been exterminated in our South Jambidvipa 
Continent and in our North Uttarakuru Continent. Now that the Great Sage has come to make this request, it is difficult for me not to respond but without the decree from the Region Above, it is also 
difficult for me to respond in arms. If | were to send forth the gods with my formal command, | fear that the Jade Emperor would be offended. But if | refuse the Great Sage, I’d go utterly against human 
sentiments. | suppose however, that those fiends on the road to the West could not be too terribly formidable. I'll ask Turtle and Serpent, the two generals, and the Five Divine Dragons to assist you. 
I'm certain they will capture the monster-spirit and rescue your master from this ordeal.” 
After he saluted to thank the patriarch, Pilgrim went back to the region of the West accompanied by Serpent, Turtle, and the dragon deities, all wielding their powerful weapons. In less than a day they 
arrived at the Little Thunderclap Monastery where they dropped from the clouds and began to provoke battle before the monastery gate. The Great King Yellow Brow gathered the various fiends below 
his treasure tower and said, “These two days Pilgrim Sun’s not even shown up. | wonder where he’s gone to seek help.” Hardly had he finished speaking when the little fiend guarding the gate came 
in to report: “Pilgrim is leading several persons with the looks of dragon, serpent, and turtle to provoke battle outside our gate.” 
“How did this little monkey,” said the demon, “manage to acquire people with looks like that? Where did such people come from?” 
He put on his armour immediately and walked out of the monastery gate, crying, “What dragon deities are you that you dare transgress our mortal territory?” With looks most rugged and spirited, the 
five dragons and the two generals shouted, “You brazen fiend! We're the Five Dragon Deities and Turtle and Serpent, the two generals, before the Demon-Conquering Celestial Worthy who is the 
Pontiff of Composite Prime in the Palace of Grand Harmony, located on Wudang Mountain. By the invitation of the Great Sage Equal to Heaven, and the amulet summons of the Celestial Worthy, we 
came here to arrest you. You, monster-spirit, send out the Tang Monk and the Constellations quickly and we'll spare your life. If not, we'll hew to pieces the fiends of this entire mountain, and we'll burn 
to ashes your several buildings!” 
On hearing this, the fiend grew enraged. “You beasts!” he cried. “What great magic power do you've that you dare mouth big words like that? Don’t run away! Have a taste of my club!” 
Whereupon these 5 dragons churned up cloud and rain and those 2 generals sprayed dust and dirt as they rushed forward together to attack with spears, scimitars, swords, and halberds. The Great 
Sage Sun, too followed them, wielding his iron rod. This was another terrific battle: the vicious demon used force — Pilgrim sought armed assistance — the vicious demon used force as he took a precious 
tower to set up a god’s form; Pilgrim sought armed assistance, going far to a treasure region for the dragon gods. Turtle and Serpent started water and fire; the fiend raised weapons and arms. 5 
dragons were ordered to the Westward way followed by Pilgrim for his master’s sake. Swords and halberds flashed like electric bolts; spears and knives glowed like lightning bright. The wolf-teeth club 
of this 1 strong but short and pliant; the golden-hooped rod of that 1, both yielding and compliant. 1 hears loud bangs, booms like firecrackers, and clanging chords like gold being struck. Water and fire 
came to conquer the fiend; arms and weapons encircled a monster-spirit. Their cries startled tigers and wolves; brawl alarmed spirits and gods. This raucous battle had just reached a draw when the 
demon seized the treasures once more. Leading the five dragons and the two generals, Pilgrim battled the demon for half an hour. Then the fiend untied his wrap and held it in his hand. Alarmed by 
what he saw, Pilgrim shouted, “Be careful, all of you!” Not realising why they had to be careful, the dragon deities, the turtle, and the serpent all lowered their weapons and stepped forward to look. With 
a loud whoosh, the monster-spirit threw up the wrap again. Unable to care for the five dragons and the two generals any longer, the Great Sage Sun leaped up to the 9-fold Heaven with his somersault 
and fled. Those dragon deities along with the turtle and the serpent were stored up also in the wrap and taken captive. After the monster-spirit returned to the monastery in triumph, he had his prisoners 
bound with ropes and locked in the underground cellar. Look at the Great Sage who dropped down from the clouds! Reclining listlessly on the mountain slope, he said spitefully to himself, “This fiendish 
creature’s most formidable!” 
Unwittingly his eyes became shut and he looked as if he had fallen asleep. Suddenly he heard someone crying, “Great Sage, don’t sleep! Go get help quickly! Your master’s life won't last very long!” 
Opening wide his eyes and leaping up, Pilgrim saw that it was the Day Sentinel. “You clumsy deity!” shouted Pilgrim. “Where have you been all this time lusting after your bloody offerings? You've not 
shown up to answer your roll call, and yet you dare come to disturb me today! Stick out your shanks, and let old monkey give you a couple of strokes of my rod — just to relieve my boredom!” 
Saluting hurriedly, the sentinel said, “Great Sage, you're the joyous mortal among men. How could you be bored? By the decree of the Nun, all of us are to give secret protection to the Tang Monk. We 
thus work with the local spirits and the like, not daring to leave him at all. That’s why we've not come to see you. How could you blame us instead?” 
“If you’re giving him protection,” said Pilgrim, “tell me where has that monster-spirit imprisoned my master, the Constellations, the guardians, the protectors of monasteries, and the rest of them? What 
sort of suffering are they enduring now?” 
“Your master and brothers,” replied the sentinel, “are all hanging in the corridor by the side of the treasure hall while the Constellations have been herded into the underground cellar to suffer there. 
We've had no news from you for these two days. Only when we saw just now that the monster-spirit had captured some divine dragons, a turtle, and a snake, and sent these, too, into the cellar did we 
realise that they were warriors fetched here by the Great Sage. Your humble deity came especially to find you. The Great Sage mustn’t grow weary. You must go again quickly to seek help.” 
When he heard these words, Pilgrim began to shed tears as he said to the sentinel, “At this moment, /’m ashamed to go up to Heaven, embarrassed to go down to the seas. | dread the Nun’s queries; 
I'm sad to see a god's jade mien. Those who'd been taken captive just now were Turtle, Snake, and the Five Dragon sages of Patriarch Zhenwu. I’ve no other place to go for help. What I’m to do?” 
Smiling, the sentinel said, “Please don’t worry, Great Sage. Your humble deity can think of another powerful army that'll certainly subdue this monster if you succeed in bringing it here. Just now the 
great sage went to Wudang of the South Jambidvipa Continent. Well, this army’s also stationed at the same continent in the city of Bincheng on the Xuyi Mountain, what's now called Sizhou. Located 
there is the Preceptor of State-King Nun who has vast magic powers. Under his tutelage is a disciple of his by the name of Prince Little Zhang. He has in his service also four great divine warriors who 
brought to submission in years past the Lady Water Mum. If you go there now in person and ask for his kind assistance, I’m certain that the fiend will be captured and your master rescued.” 


Delighted, Pilgrim said, “You go back to protect my master and don’t let him be harmed. Let old monkey go for help.” Mounting his cloud somersault, Pilgrim left the fiend’s place and headed straight 
for the Xuyi Mountain. He arrived there in less than a day. /t’s a marvellous place indeed as he stared at it carefully! To the south it’s near river fords; to the north, it presses on the River Huai; to the 
east it reaches the sea coast; to the west it connects with Fengfou. On the peak there are towering edifices; in its fold there are surging streams. Strange, craggy boulders; handsome, knotty pines; 100 
kinds of fruits all in season and fresh; 1000 sprigs of flowers blooming in the sun. People teeming like ants, go back and forth; like rows of wild geese the boats come and leave. On top there are the 
Temple of Auspicious Cliff, the Palace of Eastern Mountain, the Shrine of 5 Miracles, and the Monastery of Turtle Mountain where bell-tones and incense rise toward the sky. There are also the Crystal 
Stream, the 5 Pagoda Valley, the Mortals Terrace, and the Apricot Garden - all lighting up the city with their pastoral hues. Languid white clouds stretch overhead; birds, though tired, serenely recite. 
Why mention the charm of Tai, Song, Heng, and Flower? *Here’s mortal beauty like Peng and Ying! The Great Sage could hardly make an end of enjoying this scenery. After he passed the River Huai, 
he went through the city of Bincheng and went up to the gate of the Great Sage Chan Monastery where he found magnificent halls and elegant long corridors. There was moreover a towering pagoda, 
truly 1000 cubits tall, jabbing clouds and sky, a golden flask piercing the jade-green void. Up and down its halo holds the universe; not 1 shade darkens its screens both east and west. Treasure bells 
windblown, will make celestial chimes; shell-bark pines, sun-drenched, face this Sanskrit hall. Spirit birds speak frequently in flight or rest when you gaze on the Huai’s endless eddy. Enjoying the 
scenery as he walked along, Pilgrim went straight up to the second-level door. By then the Preceptor of State-King Nun had already learned of his arrival and he went out of the door with Prince Little 
Zhang to meet his visitor. After they saluted each other, Pilgrim said, “I’m accompanying the Tang Monk to go to the Western Heaven for scriptures. On our way we ran into The Little Thunderclap 
Monastery where a Yellow Brow Fiend disguised himself as the Religious patriarch. Unable to distinguish the true from the false, my master immediately saluted before him and was caught. The fiend 
then had me sealed inside a pair of cymbals but fortunately | was rescued by the Constellations descending from Heaven. | smashed his cymbals and fought with him but he used a cloth wrap and took 
captive all of the gods, the guardians, my master, and brothers. | went just now to the Wudang Mountain to seek the help of the August One of the Mysterious Heaven who ordered the Five Dragons, 
Turtle, and Serpent to capture the fiend. But they, too were caught by his wrap. Your disciple’s now neither refuge nor home and that’s why he’s come especially to see the Nun. | beg you to exercise 
your mighty power — the magic that brought the Water-Mum to submission and the wondrous potency that redeemed the multitudes — and go with your disciple to rescue his master from this ordeal. 
When we succeed in acquiring the scriptures so that they may be forever implanted in China, we'll proclaim the wisdom of our God and his everlasting perfection.” 

“Your affair today,” said the Preceptor of State-King, “indeed concerns the prosperity of our Religious religion, and I’d go with you in person. But this is early summer, a time when the River Huai 
threatens to overflow. It was only recently that | brought to submission the Great Sage Water Ape.’ That fellow however, tends to grow restless whenever he comes into contact with water. | fear that 
my departure from this place will lure him into mischief, and there’s no other god who can bring him under control. Let me ask my young disciple and four other warriors under his command to go with 
you. They'll assist you in capturing this demon.” Pilgrim gave thanks before mounting the clouds with Prince Little Zhang and the four warriors to return to the Little Thunderclap Monastery. 

Prince Little Zhang used a mulberry-white lance while the four warriors all wielded red-steel swords. When they went forward with the Great Sage Sun to provoke battle, the little fiends again went 
inside to report. Leading the rest of the monsters, the fiendish king came roaring out and cried, “Monkey! What other persons have you brought here this time?” Ordering the four warriors forward, 
Prince Little Zhang shouted, “You lawless monster-spirit! You've no flesh on your face and no pupils in your eyes, and that’s why you can’t recognise us.” 

“Where are you from, little warrior,” said the fiendish king, “that you dare come here to give him assistance?” 

“Im the disciple of the Preceptor of State-King Nun,” replied the prince, “the Great Sage of Sizhou. These’re the four divine warriors under my command who've been ordered here to arrest you.” 

With a laugh, the fiendish king said, “What sort of martial prowess does a little boy like you possess that you dare to be so insulting?” 

“If you want to know about my martial prowess,” said the prince, “listen to my recital: The state, Flowing Sand, was my ancestral home. My dad’s Flowing Sand Kingdom’s king. IlIness plagued me at 
the time of youth, a victim of a baleful natal star. For long life | sought a teacher far away; | was lucky to meet him and be given a cure. Half a pellet and my ailments dispelled, | left my prince-ship to 
follow his way and acquired the art of never growing old. My features are those of eternal youth! I’ve attended God's Birthday Feast. I’ve trod the clouds to reach his great hall. I've caught a water fiend 
with the wind and fog; I've tamed tigers and dragons on the mount. The grateful race built me a pagoda tall and sari light illumed the deep, calm sea. My mulberry lance’s quick to bind a fiend; cleric 
sleeve can a monster subdue. In Bincheng now a peaceful life | lead; the earth resounds with fame of Little Zhang.” 

When the fiendish king heard what was said, he smiled scornfully saying, “Prince, what method of longevity did you manage to cultivate when you left your own country and followed that Preceptor of 
State-King Nun? | suppose good enough to capture a water fiend of the River Huai! How’d you allow those false and specious words of Pilgrim Sun to goad you across a thousand hills and ten thousand 
waters and into surrendering your life here? You think you still have long life without growing old when you look me up!” 

Enraged by what he heard, Little Zhang picked up the lance and stabbed at his opponent's face while the 4 great warriors also joined in the attack at once. The Great Sage Sun, too struck with his iron 
rod. Dear monster-spirit! Not the least daunted, he wielded his short, pliant, wolf-teeth club and parried the blows left and right, charging forward and sideways. This was another fierce battle! The 
youthful prince, his mulberry-white lance, and 4 even stronger red-steel swords. Wukong, too used his golden-hooped rod to encircle together the fiendish king who possessed vast magic powers in 
truth. Not daunted at all, he charged left and right. The wolf-teeth club being a Religious prize could not be harmed by blows of spear and sword. 1 could only hear the howl of violent gale; 1 could only 
see the dark, baleful air. That 1 in worldly lust would show his ability; that 1 steadfastly sought God for the holy writ. They dashed about a few times; battled now and again. Belched out cloud and fog 
concealed the 3 Lights. 8Their anger and wrath would do each other ill. All for the 3 Vehicles® perfect law 100 arts engaged in bitter strife. The multitude fought for a long time but no decision could be 
reached. Once more the monster-spirit untied his wrap and again Pilgrim cried out, “Be careful, all of you!” The prince and the rest of the warriors however, did not comprehend what Pilgrim meant by 
be careful! With a loud whoosh, the fiend also wrapped up the prince and the four great warriors. Only the prescience of Pilgrim enabled him to escape. Returning in triumph to the monastery, the 
fiendish king again had his prisoners bound with ropes and sent to be locked up in the underground cellar. Mounting his cloud somersault, Pilgrim rose to mid-air, and he lowered his auspicious 
luminosity only after he saw the fiend had withdrawn his troops and shut the gates. As he stood on the west mountain slope, he wept dejectedly saying, “Oh, Master! Since | entered by faith the grove 
of Chan when from my ordeal Guanyin set me free, | squired you westward to seek the great Way and by mutual help, hoped Thunderclap to see. We thought our twisted path would smooth out at last, 
not knowing such fiendish siege there would be. A thousand plans seem hard to have you saved. Vain efforts east and west had stalked my plea.” 

As the Great Sage was thus grieving, he suddenly saw toward the southwest a coloured cloud descending to earth as torrential rain fell on the mountain. “Wukong,” someone called out, “do you 
recognise me?” 

Running forward to have a look, Pilgrim came upon a person with huge ears, jutting jaw, and a square-like face; broad shoulders, large belly, and stout-ish grace. His complexion was filled with joys of 
spring; 2 autumnal pools were his eyes sparkling. His wide sleeves flapped and fluttered with good luck; in smart straw sandals he looked full of pluck. The first among the blissful ones of worth, all hail 
to Maitreya, the monk of mirth! On seeing him, Pilgrim quickly respected saying, “Religious Patriarch coming from the East, where’re you going? Your disciple’s improperly barred your way! I’m guilty 
of ten thousand crimes!” 

“lcame,” replied the Religious patriarch, “especially on account of the fiend in the Little Thunderclap.” 

“Im grateful for the profound grace and virtue of the holy dad,” said Pilgrim. “May | ask from what region did that fiend originate? What sort of treasure is that wrap of his? | beg the holy dad to reveal it 
to me.” 

The patriarch said, “He happens to be a yellow-browed youth in charge of striking the sonorous stone before me. On the third day of the third month, | went to attend a festival of Original Commencement 
and left him to guard my palace. He stole several treasures of mine and, disguising himself as God, became a spirit. That wrap is my fertility bag, its common name being ‘The Bag of Human Seed.’ 
That wolf-teeth club is the mallet for striking the sonorous stone.” 

On hearing this, Pilgrim raised his voice to a shout: “Dear laughing monk! You let this boy escape to give himself the false name of Religious patriarch and to ensnare old monkey. Aren't you guilty of 
negligence in domestic governance?” 

“It is my negligence in the first place,” said Maitreya, “but it is also because you and your master have yet to pass through all your mara hindrances. That is why a hundred deities must descend to earth 
to inflict upon you your fated ordeals. I’ve come now to bring this fiend to submission for you.” 

“But the monster-spirit,” said Pilgrim, “has vast magic powers. You don’t even have a weapon. How could you bring him to submission?” 

Laughing, Maitreya said, “I'll set up below this mountain slope a grass hut and a huge melon field. You go to provoke battle but you’re not permitted to win when you fight with him. Lure him to my melon 
field. All my melons however, will be raw but you yourself will change into a large, ripe melon. When he arrives, he will certainly want to eat some melon, and I'll present you for him to eat. When he 
swallows you into his stomach, you may do whatever you please with him. By then, I'd be able to retrieve that wrap from him and take him back inside it.” 

“Although this is a marvellous plan,” said Pilgrim, “I wonder how you'd be able to recognise the ripe melon that will be my transformation. Moreover, how would he be willing to follow me here?” Laughing 
again, Maitreya replied, “I’m the Worthy who governs the world. How could my percipient eyes of wisdom not recognise you? You may change into whatever you like and I'll recognise you. But fearing 
that the fiend might not want to pursue you, I'll teach you some magic.” 

“What he most certainly wants to do,” said Pilgrim, “is to catch me with that wrap of his. He’ll not chase me here! What sort of magic do you've that will make him come here?” Smiling, Maitreya said, 
“Stretch forth your hand.” 

Pilgrim stretched out his left palm; dipping his right index finger into his mouth, Maitreya wrote on his palm the word, restrain with the divine saliva. Pilgrim was told to hold his left hand in a fist and open 
it only toward the face of the monster-spirit. Then the monster-spirit would certainly follow him. 

Holding fast his fist and obeying amiably these instructions, Pilgrim wielded his iron rod with a single hand and went before the monastery gate. “Fiendish demon,” he cried, “your Holy Dad Sun’s here 
again! Come out quickly so that we may decide who's the stronger!” 

Those little fiends again dashed inside to make the report. “How many warriors has he brought with him this time?” asked the fiendish king. “There are no other warriors,” replied one of the little fiends. 
“He’s the only one.” 

“That little monkey has used up all his plans and exhausted his strength,” said the fiendish king, laughing. “He has nowhere to go to ask for help, and he has just come to give up his life for sure.” 
After he had put on his armour properly, the fiend took his treasure and held up his light and soft wolf-teeth club to walk out of the door. “Sun Wukong,” he cried, “you can’t struggle anymore this time!” 
“Brazen fiend!” scolded Pilgrim. “What do you mean that | can’t struggle anymore?” 

“| see that you've used up all your plans and exhausted your strength,” said the fiendish king. “You’ve nowhere to go for help, and you've forced yourself here to do battle. There won't be any divine 
warriors to assist you this time, and that’s why | say you can’t struggle anymore.” 

Pilgrim said, “This fiend doesn’t know what's good for him! Stop bragging! Have a taste of my rod!” When the fiendish king saw that he was wielding the rod with only one hand, he could not refrain 
from laughing. “This little ape!” he said. “Look how mischievous he is! Why are you fooling around with only one hand?” 

“My son,” said Pilgrim, “you can’t stand up to the attack of both my hands! If you don’t use your wrap, even if there are three or five of you, you'll be unable to overcome this one hand of old monkey.” 
On hearing this, the fiendish king said, “All right, all right! I'll not use my treasure. I'll fight in earnest with you this time, and we'll see who’s the stronger.” Thereupon he raised his wolf-teeth club to rush 
into battle. Aiming directly at his face, Pilgrim let loose his fist before gripping the iron rod with both his hands. The monster-spirit was immediately bound by the spell; with no thought at all for retreat 
or for using the wrap, he only had in mind using the club to attack his opponent. After delivering a weak blow with his rod, Pilgrim immediately retreated, and the monster-spirit chased him all the way 
to the west mountain slope. 

When Pilgrim saw the melon field, he rolled right into it and changed at once into a huge melon, both ripe and sweet. The monster-spirit stood still and glanced everywhere but he did not know where 
Pilgrim had gone to. When he ran up to the grass hut, he cried, “Who's the planter of these melons?” Having changed himself into a melon farmer, Maitreya walked out of the hut, saying, “Great King, 
I'm the one who has planted them.” 

“You've any ripe ones?” asked the fiendish king. “Yes,” replied Maitreya. “Pick a ripe one for me to relieve my thirst,” cried the fiendish king. 

Maitreya at once presented with both hands the melon into which Pilgrim had changed himself. Without even examining it, the fiendish king took it and began to bite at it. Using this opportunity, Pilgrim 
somersaulted at once down his throat, and without waiting for another moment, he began to flex his limbs. He grabbed the intestines and bent the stomach; he did handstands, cartwheels, and whatever 
he felt like doing at the time. The pain was so intense that the monster-spirit clenched his teeth and opened wide his mouth as big drops of tears welled up in his eyes. He rolled so hard on the ground 
that the patch of melon field was completely flattened like a plot of land for pounding grain. “Finished! Finished!” he could only mutter. “Who will save me?” 

Changing into his original form, Maitreya giggled loudly and said, “Cursed beast! You recognise me?” When the fiend raised his head and saw the figure before him, he went hurriedly to his knees. 
Hugging his stomach with both hands and pounding his head on the ground, he cried, “My lord! Please spare my life! Please spare my life! I'll never dare do this again!” Maitreya strode forward and 
grabbed the fiend. After he had untied the bag of fertility and taken away the mallet for striking the sonorous stone, he cried, “Sun Wukong, for my sake, please spare him.” Pilgrim however, was so 
bitter that he started punching and kicking left and right, madly pounding and scratching inside. Unable to bear the terrible pain, the fiend slumped to the ground. 

“Wukong,” cried Maitreya again, “he’s had enough! Spare him!” 


Only then did Pilgrim cry, “Open wide your mouth, and let old monkey come out.” 

Though that fiend had been racked by sharp pains in his stomach, his heart had not yet been hurt. As the proverb says: Before the heart breaks a person can’t die; flowers fade and leaves drop when 
roots are dry. When he heard that he should open wide his mouth, he did so at once, trying desperately to endure the pain. Pilgrim leaped out, and, as he changed back into his original form, he wanted 
immediately to strike with his rod. The monster-spirit however, had already been stuffed into the wrap by the Religious patriarch and fastened to his waist. Picking up the sonorous stone mallet, the 
patriarch said, “Cursed beast! Where’re the stolen cymbals?” 

Having only concern for his life, the fiend in the bag of fertility moaned, “The gold cymbals were smashed by Sun Wukong.” 

“If they have been smashed,” said the Religious patriarch, “return my gold.” The fiend said, “The gold fragments are piled on the lotus throne in the hall.” 

Holding the bag and the mallet, the Religious patriarch said giggling, “Wukong, I'll go look for my gold with you.” 

When Pilgrim saw this kind of religion power, he did not dare tarry another moment. He had no other alternative in fact than to lead a god up the mountain to return to the monastery where they found 
the gates tightly shut. The Religious patriarch pointed his mallet at them and at once the gates flew open. When they went inside, all the little fiends were just in the process of packing and fleeing, 
having leamed already that the old fiend had been captured. When Pilgrim ran into them, he struck them down one by one until some 700 of them were slain. As they revealed their original forms, they 
were all spirits of mountains and trees, the monsters of beasts and fowl. After the Religious patriarch had gathered the gold fragments together, he blew at them a mouthful of divine breath and recited 
a spell. Immediately they changed back into their original form of a pair of gold cymbals. He then took leave of Pilgrim and mounted the auspicious clouds to return to the world of ultimate bliss. There- 
after Great Sage untied the Tang Monk, 8 Rules, and Sand-monk from the rafters. Having been hung for several days, Idiot was so hungry that he did not even bother to thank the Great Sage. His 
torso bent low, he dashed into the kitchen to try to find rice to eat. The fiend was just preparing lunch but he was interrupted when Pilgrim came to provoke battle. When Idiot saw the rice, he ate half a 
pot first before taking two large bowls to his master and brother. Then they thanked Pilgrim and asked about the defeat of the fiend. Pilgrim gave a thorough account of how he went first to solicit the 
help of the Taoist patriarch and his 2 warriors, turtle and serpent how he went next to see the Great Sage and the prince and finally how Maitreya brought the fiend to submission. When Tripitaka heard 
this, he could not make an end of his thanksgiving for all the gods. “Disciple,” he said afterwards, “where’re these gods and sages imprisoned?” 

“The Day-Sentinel told me yesterday that they'd all been sent to an underground cellar,” replied Pilgrim. “Eight Rules, you and | must go and free them.” After he had had some food, Idiot had grown 
strong once more. Picking up his muckrake, he went to the rear with the Great Sage and broke open the cellar door to untie all the prisoners. When they came back out to the jewelled tower, Tripitaka 
put on his cassock to salute each one of the deities to thank them. Thereafter the Great Sage sent the 5 dragons and 2 warriors back to Wudang, Prince Little Zhang and the 4 warriors back to Bincheng, 
and finally the 28 Constellations back to Heaven. The guardians and the protectors of monasteries, too were released to return to their stations. Master and disciples then rested for half a day at the 
monastery where they also fed the white horse and tidied up the luggage before starting out again in the morning. As they left, they lit a fire and had all those jewelled towers, treasure thrones, tall 
turrets, and lecture halls reduced to ashes. So it was that without care or hindrance, they escaped their ordeal; their calamity dispelled, they were free to leave. 


083 

Having rescued Tuoluo, Chan Nature’s secure; escaping filthiness, the Mind of Dao’s pure 
Tripitaka and his 3 disciples who set out on the road once more, glad to have left the Little Western Heaven. They spent about a month travelling and now it was the time of late spring when flowers 
blossomed. They saw the green fading at various gardens and groves, and a sudden squall of wind and rain brought the evening near. Reining in his horse, Tripitaka said, “O disciples, it’s getting late! 
Which road shall we take to find lodging?” 
“Master, relax!” said Pilgrim, laughing. “Even if there’s no place for us to ask for lodging, the three of us at least have some abilities. You may ask 8 Rules to chop some grass and Sand-monk to cut 
down a few pine trees. Old monkey knows how to play carpenter. | can build for you right by the road a little thatched hut in which you can live for at least a year. Why are you so anxious?” 
“Oh, Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “a place like this is not fit to be lived in! The whole mountain is full of tigers and wolves, and there are spirits and goblins everywhere. Even in daylight it’s difficult 
enough to get through. How dare you rest here at night?” 
“Idiot,” said Pilgrim, “you’re regressing more and more! Old monkey isn’t bragging but this rod | hold in my hands can even hold up the sky - if it collapses!” As master and disciples were conversing 
like that, they suddenly caught sight of a mountain village not far away. “Marvellous!” said Pilgrim. “We've a place for the night.” 
“Where?” asked the elder. Pointing with his finger, Pilgrim replied, “Isn’t that a household over there beneath the trees? We can go over there to ask for one night’s lodging. Tomorrow we'll leave.” 
Delighted, the elder urged on his horse and went up to the entrance of the village before he dismounted. As the wooden gates were tightly shut, the elder knocked on them, saying, “Open the door! 
Open the door!” From within a house an old man emerged: he had a staff in his hands, rush sandals on his feet, a black cloth wrap on his head, and a plain white robe on his body. As he opened the 
door, he asked immediately, “Who's making all these noises here?” 
Folding his hands before his chest, Tripitaka saluted deeply and said, “Old patron, this humble priest is one sent from the Land of the East to seek scriptures in the Western Heaven. It was getting late 
when we arrived at your honoured region. We've come, therefore, especially to ask you for one night's lodging. | beg you to grant us this boon.” 
“Monk,” said the old man, “you may want to go to the West but you can’t get there. This is only the Little Western Heaven. If you want to go to the Great Western Heaven, the distance is exceedingly 
great, not to mention all the difficulties ahead of you. Even this region here will be hard for you to pass through.” 
“What do you mean by hard to pass through?” asked Tripitaka. Pointing with his hand, the old man said, “Approximately thirty miles west of our village there is a Pulpy Persimmon Alley, located in a 
mountain by the name of Seven Extremes.” 
“Why do you call it Seven Extremes?” asked Tripitaka again. 
The old man said, “The mountain is about eight hundred miles across, and the whole mountain is full of persimmon fruit. According to the ancients, ‘There are seven types of extreme characteristics of 
the persimmon tree. They are: long-lasting, shady without birds’ nests, wormless, lovely leaves when frosted, hardy fruits, and large, luxuriant branches.’' Hence it is called the Mountain of Seven 
Extremes. Our humble region here however, is large but sparsely inhabited, and since the time of antiquity, hardly anyone has ever journeyed deep into the mountain. Every year the persimmons, 
ripened and rotted, would fall on the ground and completely fill up the mountain path that is shaped like an alley flanked by boulders on both sides. After the frost and snow of the winter and the heat 
of the summer, the road would become one of such horrid filth that the families of this region nicknamed it Slimy Shit Alley. Whenever the west wind rises, a terrible stench would drift here, fouler than 
any privy you may want to clean. Right now it happens to be late spring and we've this brisk southeast wind. That's why you can’t smell it yet.” On hearing this, Tripitaka fell silent, utterly dejected. 
Unable to contain himself, Pilgrim shouted, “Oldie, you're rather block-headed! We've come from great distance to ask you for lodging, and you've to tell us all these things to frighten us! If your house 
is so crowded that there’s no room for us to sleep in, we can just squat here beneath the trees to spend the night. Why must you be so windy?” 
Greatly startled by the hideous figure before him, the old man stopped talking for a moment. Then he gathered up enough courage to point his staff at Pilgrim and say in a loud voice, “You! Look at 
your skeleton face, flattened brow, collapsed nose, jutting jowl, and hairy eyes. A consumptive ghost, no doubt, and yet without any manners at all, you dare use your pointed mouth to offend an elderly 
person like me!” Trying to placate him with a smile, Pilgrim said, “Venerable Sir, so you've eyes but no pupils, and thus you can’t recognise the worth of this consumptive ghost! As the books on 
physiognomy would say, ‘The features may be strange and bizarre but it is a piece of fine jade hidden in the stone.’ If you judge people only by their looks, you’re completely wrong. | may be ugly but 
I've some abilities!” 
“Where are you from?” asked the old man. “What are your name and surname? What sort of abilities do you've?” 
With a smile, Pilgrim said, “East-Videha’s my ancestral home, | did cultivation on Mount Flower-Fruit. | saluted to the Patriarch of Heart, Mind, and perfected with him the martial arts. | can tame dragons, 
stirring up the seas; tote mountains to chase down the sun. In binding fiends and demons I'm the best; moving stars and planets, | scare ghosts and gods. Stealing from Heaven and Earth gives me 
great fame, Of boundless change, Handsome Stone Monkey's my name.” 
On hearing these words, the old man’s displeasure turned to delight. He saluted saying, “Please, please come inside to rest in our humble dwelling.” 
The 4 pilgrims thus led the horse and toted their luggage inside where they saw thorny bushes on both sides of the yard. The second-level door was flanked by stone walls that were covered also by 
briars and thistles. Finally, they reached three tiled houses in the centre. The old man at once pulled some chairs over for them to be seated and asked for tea to be served. He also gave an order for 
rice to be prepared. In a little while, some tables were brought out on which were placed dishes of fried wheat gluten, bean curds, taro sprouts, white radishes, mustard greens, green turnips, fragrant 
rice, and mallow soup made with vinegar. Master and disciples thus enjoyed a full meal. After they finished eating, 8 Rules tugged at Pilgrim and whispered to him, “Elder Brother, this oldie at first didn’t 
want to give us lodging. Now he gives a sumptuous feast. Why?” 
“How much could a meal like this be worth?” Pilgrim replied, “Just wait till tomorrow. He’s going to send us off with ten kinds of fruit and ten different dishes!” 
“You've no shame?” said 8 Rules. “So, you managed to wangle a meal from him with those few big words of yours. Tomorrow you'll be leaving. Why'd he entertain you some more?” 
“Don’t worry,” replied Pilgrim, “I'll take care of this.” 
In a little while, it was almost completely dark, and the old man asked for lamps to be brought out. “Gong-gong,” said Pilgrim, saluting, “what's your noble surname?” 
“It's Li,” replied the old man. 
“| suppose this must be Li Village then,” said Pilgrim. 
“No,” replied the old man, “for this is called the Tuoluo Village. There are over five hundred families living here with many other surnames. Only | go by the name of Li.” 
“Patron Li,” said Pilgrim, “what particular good intention has moved you and your family to bestow on us this rich vegetarian feast?” 
Rising from his seat, the old man said, “I heard you say just now that you’re an expert in catching fiends. We've one here and I'd like to ask you to catch him for us. You'll have a handsome reward.” 
Saluting immediately to him, Pilgrim said, “Thanks for giving me some business!” 
“Look how he causes trouble!” exclaimed 8 Rules. “When someone asks him to catch fiends, that person is dearer to him than his maternal grandpa! Without further ado, he salutes already.” 
“Worthy Brother,” said Pilgrim, “you don’t know about this. My salute’s actually like a down-payment. He’s going to ask no one else.” 
On hearing this, Tripitaka said, “This little monkey is so egocentric in everything. Suppose that monster-spirit has such vast magic powers that you can’t succeed in catching him. Wouldn’t that make 
you, someone who has left the family, guilty of falsehood?” 
“Master, don’t be offended,” said Pilgrim, laughing. “Let me question him further.” 
“On what?” asked the old man. Pilgrim said, “Your noble region here seems to be a clean and peaceful piece of land. There are, moreover, many families living together, hardly a remote area. What 
sort of monster-spirit is there who dares approach your high and noble gates?” 
“To tell you the truth,” said the old man, “our region has enjoyed peace and prosperity for a long time. But three years ago, a violent gust of wind arose during the time of the sixth month. At the time, 
all the people of our village were out in the fields busily planting rice or beating grain. Quite alarmed by the wind, they thought that the weather had changed. Little did they expect that after the wind a 
monster-spirit would descend on us and devour all the cattle and livestock left grazing outside. He ate chickens and geese whole, and he swallowed men and women alive. Since that time, he has 
returned frequently during these past three years to harass us. O elder! If you indeed have the abilities to catch this fiend and cleanse our land, all of us will most surely give you a big reward. We'll not 
treat you lightly!” 
“This kind of monster’s,” Pilgrim said, “quite difficult to catch.” 
“Difficult indeed!” exclaimed 8 Rules. “We're only mendicants — we want a night’s lodging from you, and tomorrow we'll leave. Why should we catch any monster-spirit?” 
“So, you're actually priests out to swindle a meal!” said the old man. “When we first met, you’re boasting of how you'd move planets and stars, how you'd bind fiends and monsters. But when | tell you 
now about the matter, you pass it off as something very difficult.” 
“Oldie,” said Pilgrim, “the monster-spirit is not hard to catch. It is hard only because the families in this region are not of one mind in their efforts.” 
“In what way are they not of one mind?” asked the old man. 
“For three years,” Pilgrim replied, “this monster-spirit has been a menace, taking the lives of countless creatures. If each family here were to donate an ounce of silver, I’d think that five hundred families 
would yield at least five hundred ounces. With that amount of money, you’d hire an exorcist anywhere who would be able to catch the fiend for you. Why did you permit him to torture you for these three 
years?” 
“If you bring up the subject of spending money,” said the old man, “I’m embarrassed to death! Which one of our families did not indeed disburse three or four ounces of silver? The year before last we 
found a monk from the south side of this mountain and invited him to come. But he didn’t succeed.” 
“How did that monk go about catching the fiend?” asked Pilgrim. 


The old man said, “That man of the Association, He’d on a kasaya. He first quoted the Peacock; then recited the Lotus; burned incense in his urn; grasped with his hand a bell. As he thus recited repeat- 
edly, he aroused the very fiend. Astride the clouds and wind, he came to this village. The monk fought with the fiend in truth some tall tale to tell! One stroke delivered a punch, one stroke delivered a 
scratch. The monk tried to respond: 2in response his hair was gone! In a while the fiend triumphed and went back to mist and smoke. (Mere dried scabs being sunned!) We draw near to take a look: 
the bald head’s beaten like a rotten watermelon!” 

“When you put it like that,” said Pilgrim, laughing, “he really lost out!” 

The old man said, “He only paid with his life; we're the true victims. We'd to buy the coffin for his funeral and give some money to his disciple. That disciple’s however, yet to be satisfied and wants to 
bring litigation against us even now. What a mess!” 

“Did you try to find someone else to catch the monster?” asked Pilgrim again. 

The old man replied, “We found a Daoist last year.” 

“How did that Daoist go about catching him?” asked Pilgrim. 

“That Daoist,” said the old man, “Wore on his head a gold cap and on himself, a ritual robe. He banged aloud his placard; he waved his charms and water. He sent for gods and spirits but summoned 
only the ogre. A violent gale blew and churned and black fog dimmed everywhere. The monster and the Daoist, the two went forth to battle. They fought till dusk had set in when the fiend left with the 
clouds. The cosmos’s bright, fair, and we're all assembled. Going to search for the Daoist, we found him drowned in a brook, fished him out for a better look: he seemed like a chicken poached in soup!” 
“The way you put it,” said Pilgrim, laughing, “he lost out, too!” 

“He only paid with his life, too,” said the old man, “but we'd again to spend all sorts of unnecessary money.” 

“Don’t worry! Don’t worry!” said Pilgrim. “Let me catch him for you.” 

“If you really have the ability to seize him,” said the old man, “I'll ask several elders of our village to sign a contract with you. If you win, you may ask whatever amount of money you wish, and we'll not 
withhold from you even half a penny. But if you get hurt, don’t accuse us of anything. Let all of us obey the will of Heaven.” 

“This oldie is weary of being wrongly accused!” said Pilgrim, laughing. “I’m not that kind of person. Go and fetch the elders quickly.” 

Filled with delight, the old man immediately asked a few houseboys to go and invite eight or nine elders to his house — all neighbours, cousins, and in-laws of his. After they met the Tang Monk and 
had been told of the matter of catching the fiend, they were all very pleased. “Which noble disciple will go forth to catch him?” one elder asked. 

With his hands folded before his chest to salute them, Pilgrim said, “This little priest will.” Astonished, the elder said, “That'll not do! That'll not do! The monster-spirit has vast magic powers and a 
hulking body. A lean and tiny priest like you probably won't even fill the cracks of his teeth!” 

“Venerable Sir,” said Pilgrim, laughing, “you've not guessed correctly about me! | may be tiny but I’m quite hardy. ‘Having drunk a few drops off the whetstone, I’ve been sharpened up!” On hearing 
this, those elders had no alternative but to give their consent. “Elder,” they said, “how much reward do you want after you've caught the monster-spirit?” 

“Why mention reward?” replied Pilgrim. “As the saying goes, gold dazzles your eyes; silver is not shiny; copper pennies are stinky! We're priests trying to accumulate merit and certainly don’t desire 
cash rewards.” 

“The way you speak,” said one of the elders, “indicates that you're all noble priests who take your commandments seriously. You may not want cash rewards but we can’t allow you to work for us for 
free. Now all of us either farm or fish for our livelihood. If you truly can rid us of this cursed fiend and purify our region, each family will donate two acres of the finest land — a thousand acres in all - 
which will be set aside at one place. All of you, master and disciples, can then build on the land a nice temple or monastery, in which you can meditate and practice Chan. That's much better than 
wandering with the clouds all over the world.” 

Laughing again, Pilgrim said, “That's even messier! If you give us land, we'll have to graze and groom horses, to find feed and make hay. At dusk, we can’t go to bed and by dawn, we still can’t rest. 
That sort of a life will kill us!” 

“If you don’t want all these,” said the elder, “just what do you want as your reward?” 

“We're people who have left the family,” replied Pilgrim. “Give us some tea and rice, and that’s sufficient reward.” 

The elders were very pleased. “That sort of reward is easy,” said one of them, “but we'd like to know your plan to catch him?” 

“When he comes,” said Pilgrim, “I'll do it.” 

“But that fiend is huge,” said another elder. “He touches Heaven above and Earth beneath. He comes with the wind and departs with the fog. How can you even get near him?” 

“If he’s a monster-spirit able to summon the wind and ride the fog,” said Pilgrim with a laugh, “I'll just treat him as my grandson. If he’s big in size, | still can hit him.” 

As they chatted, they suddenly heard the howling of the wind that so terrified those eight or nine elders that they all quaked and quivered. “This priest has such a bad luck mouth!” they cried. “He speaks 
of the monster-spirit, and at once the monster-spirit shows up!” Flinging wide the side door, that Old Li herded the Tang Monk and his relatives inside, crying, “Come in! Come in! the fiend’s here.” 8 
Rules and Sand-monk were so intimidated that they, too, wanted to follow them in entering the house. Pilgrim however, yanked them back with both hands, saying, “Have you lost your senses? Priests 
like you, how could you behave like that? Stand still! Stay with me in the courtyard so that we can find out what kind of a monster-spirit this is.” 

“Oh, Elder Brother!” cried 8 Rules. “These’re all savvy people! When the wind howls, it means the fiend’s coming and that’s why they’re hiding. We're neither kinfolk nor acquaintances of theirs, neither 
bond relatives nor old friends. What’s the point of looking at this monster?” 

Pilgrim however, was so strong that he was able to hold them down right there in the courtyard as the wind grew even fiercer. Marvellous wind! It felled woods and trees, daunting tigers and wolves; 
stirred seas and rivers, alarming gods and ghosts; toppled rocks of Flower Mount'’s triple peaks; * upturned the world’s 4 great continents. Rustic homes and households all shut their doors; the whole 
village’s children all hid their heads. Massive black clouds covered the starry sky. Lamps and lights faded as the whole earth grew dark. 8 Rules was so terrified that he fell on the ground; digging a 
hole with his horn, he buried his head in it and lay prone as if he had been nailed to the Earth. Sand-monk, too, covered up his head and face, for he found it difficult even to open his eyes. Only Pilgrim 
sniffed at the wind to try to determine what sort of fiend that was. In a little while the wind subsided and the faint glow of what seemed to be 2 lanterns appeared in mid-air. Lowering his head, Pilgrim 
said, “Brothers, the wind’s gone! Get up and take a look!” 

Pulling out his horn, Idiot shook off the dirt and raised his head skyward. When he saw the two lights, he burst out laughing, crying, “What fun! What fun! So, this monster-spirit is someone who knows 
properly when to move or rest! We'd befriend him.” 

“In a dark night like this,” said Sand-monk, “you've not even seen his face yet. How could you know what sort of a person he is?” 

8 Rules replied, “The ancient said, to move by lights at night is best; when there’re no torches, we rest. ‘Look at him now! He has a pair of lanterns leading the way. He must be a good man.” 

“You're wrong!” said Sand-monk. “Those aren't lanterns. They're the glimmering eyes of the monster-spirit!” Idiot was so appalled that he lost three inches of his height. “Holy Dad!” he cried. “If those 
are his eyes, how big is his mouth?” 

“Don’t be afraid, Worthy Brothers,” said Pilgrim. “Stay here and guard our master. Let old monkey go up there and demand a confession. We'll see what kind of monster-spirit he is.” 

“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “don’t confess that we’re here.” 

Dear Pilgrim! He whistled loudly and leaped into the air. Gripping his iron rod, he cried out in a loud voice, “Slow down! Slow down! I’m here!” When the fiend saw Pilgrim, he stood erect and began to 
wave a long lance back and forth in the air. Holding high his rod to assume a position of combat, Pilgrim asked, “From what region a fiend are you? Of what place a spirit are you?” The fiend gave no 
reply whatever; all he did was to wave his lance. Pilgrim asked again but still there was no reply from the fiend who only persisted in waving the lance. Smiling to himself, Pilgrim said, “You've got to be 
both deaf and dumb! Don’t run away! Watch my rod!” 

The fiend however, was not frightened in the least; brandishing his lance, he parried Pilgrim’s blows, and the two of them charged back and forth, up and down, in mid-air. They fought till it was about 
the hour of the third watch and no decision was reached. Standing down below in the courtyard, 8 Rules and Sand-monk saw everything clearly. The fiend only wielded the lance to parry the blows but 
he did not attack his opponent at all. Pilgrim’s rod, therefore, hardly ever left the head of the fiend. “Sand-monk,” said 8 Rules with a laugh, “you stand guard here, and let Old bull go and help with the 
fight. We can’t allow that monkey to make this merit all by himself, or he'll be rewarded with the first goblet of juice.” 

Dear Idiot! He leaped up to the edge of the clouds and attacked at once with his rake that was met by another lance of the fiendish creature. The two lances exercised in the air like flying serpents and 
flashing thunderbolts. Praising him, 8 Rules said, “This monster-spirit shows great technique with the lance! He’s not using the style of the ‘Mountain-Back Lance,’ but it's more like the ‘Winding-Silk 
Lance.’ It’s not the ‘Ma-Family Lance,’ but it probably has the name of the ‘Flabby-Handle Lance.” 

“Stop babbling, Idiot!” said Pilgrim. “There’s no such thing as the ‘Flabby-Handle Lance!” 8 Rules said, “Just look at how he uses the pointed ends of the lances to parry our blows but the handles of 
the lances are nowhere to be seen. Where has he hidden them, | wonder?” 

“Maybe it is the ‘Flabby-Handle Lance,” said Pilgrim, “but what's important is that this fiendish creature does not know how to speak, because he has not yet attained the way of humans. He is still 
heavily under the influence of the yin aura. In the morning when the yang aura grows stronger, he will certainly want to flee. We must give chase and not let him get away.” 

“Exactly! Exactly!” said 8 Rules. 

They fought for a long time and then the east paled with light. Not daring to linger, the fiend turned and fled while 8 Rules and Pilgrim gave chase together. As they sped along, they suddenly encountered 
an oppressively foul stench rising from the Pulpy Persimmon Alley of the Seven Extremes Mountain. “Which family is cleaning its privy?” cried 8 Rules. “Wow! The smell's horrible!” 

Clamping a hand over his nose, Pilgrim could only mutter, “Chase the monster-spirit! Chase the monster-spirit!” 

Darting past the mountain, the fiend at once changed back into his original form: a huge, red-scaled python. Look at him! His eyes flashed forth the stars of dawn; his nose belched out the morning fog. 
His teeth like dense rows of steel swords; claws curved like golden hooks. From the brow rose a horn of flesh that seemed to be formed by 1000 pieces of carnelian; his whole body was draped in red 
scales that resembled a million flakes of rouge. Coiled up on earth, he could be confused with a brocade quilt; flying in the air, he could be mistaken for a rainbow. Where he rested, putrid fumes rose 
to the sky; when he moved, scarlet clouds covered his body. Big enough? People on his east end couldn't see the west. Long enough? He was like a mountain stretching from pole to pole. “So, it’s 
such a long snake!” said 8 Rules. “If it wants to devour people, one meal will probably take five hundred persons, and it'll still not be filled.” 

Pilgrim said, “That ‘Flabby-Handle Lance’ has to be his forked tongue. He has been weakened by our chase. Let's hit him from behind!” 

Bounding forward, 8 Rules brought his rake down hard on the fiendish creature who darted swiftly into a hole. Only 7 or 8 feet of the tail remained outside when it was grabbed by 8 Rules abandoning 
his rake. “I got him! | got him!” he cried as he used all his might to try to pull the fiend out of the hole but he could not even budge him. 

“Idiot,” said Pilgrim, laughing, “leave him inside. | know what to do. Don’t try to pull a snake backward like that!” 8 Rules indeed let go and the fiend slithered inside the hole. “Before | let go just now,” 
complained 8 Rules, “half of him was already ours. Now he has slithered inside. How could we make him come out again? Isn’t this what you call no more snake to play with?” 

Pilgrim said, “This fellow has quite a hefty body. The hole is so small that he can never turn around inside. He has to move in a straightforward manner, and there has to be also a rear entrance. Go 
find it quickly and bar the hole. I'll attack him from the front entrance here.” Idiot dashed past the mountain where he indeed discovered another hole. He paused but he had hardly stood still when 
Pilgrim at the front entrance sent a terrific jab with his rod into the hole. In great pain, the fiendish creature darted out of the rear entrance. Caught off guard, 8 Rules was struck down by his tail and, 
unable to get up again, he lay on the ground to nurse his pain. When Pilgrim saw that the hole was empty, he picked up his rod and ran over to the rear, shouting for 8 Rules to chase the fiend. On 
hearing Pilgrim's voice, 8 Rules became so embarrassed that, regardless of his pain, he scrambled up and began to beat the ground madly with his rake. When he saw him, Pilgrim laughed and said, 
“The fiend’s gone! What are you doing that for?” 8 Rules said, “Old bull’s here ‘Beating the Bush to Stir the Snake.” 

“What a living Idiot!” said Pilgrim. “Let’s chase him!” 

The two of them ran past a brook, when they found the fiend had coiled himself into a mound on the ground. Rearing his head, he opened wide his huge mouth and wanted to devour 8 Rules. Terrified, 
8 Rules turned and fled but our Pilgrim went forward to meet him and was swallowed by the fiend in one gulp. Pounding his chest and stamping his feet, 8 Rules screamed, “Alas, Elder Brother! You're 
dead!” Inside the stomach of the monster-spirit, Pilgrim held up his iron rod and said, “Don’t worry, 8 Rules. Let me ask him to build a bridge for you to see!” 

He stuck his rod up a bit more and the fiendish creature had to raise his torso until he resembled a bow-shaped bridge. “He looks like a bridge, alright,” said 8 Rules, “but no one’d dare walk on it.” 
“Let me ask him again to change into a boat for you to see,” said Pilgrim. 

He plunged the iron rod downward; with the stomach hugging the ground and the head upraised, the fiendish creature looked like a sloop from the Kan River district. “He may look like a boat,” said 8 
Rules, “but there’s no top mast for him to use the wind.” 

“Get out of the way,” said Pilgrim, “and I'll make him use the wind for you to see.” Using all his strength, Pilgrim pushed his iron rod upward from the spine of the fiendish creature until it reached a 
height of some seventy feet and the shape of a mast. In desperate pain and struggling for his life, the fiend shot forward, faster than any windblown vessel, and made for the road on which he came. 


Some twenty miles down the mountain, he finally fell motionless to the dust and expired. 8 Rules caught up with him from behind and attacked him madly once more with his rake. Meanwhile, Pilgrim 
ripped a big hole in the creature’s body and crawled out, saying, “Idiot, he’s dead already. Why use your rake on him?” 

“Oh, Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “don’t you know that Old bull all his life has loved to strike at dead snakes?” 

They thus put away their weapons and dragged the creature back by his tail. The Old Li in the Tuoluo Village and the rest of the people said to the Tang Monk, “Your two disciples haven't returned for 
a whole night. They must've lost their lives.” 

“| don’t think it’s that serious,” said Tripitaka. “Let us go out to have a look first.” Soon they caught sight of Pilgrim and 8 Rules approaching, dragging a huge python behind them and shouting to clear 
the way. Only then did the people become delighted; the old and young, the men and women of the entire village all came to respect and say, “Holy Dads, this is the very monster-spirit that has taken 
many lives here. We're fortunate to have you exercise your power today and extirpate the fiendish deviate, for now our lives are secure.” 

All the households were filled with gratitude, so much so that each one of them insisted on thanking the pilgrims with gifts and feasting. Master and disciples were detained for nearly a week, and only 
after much pleading on their part were they permitted to leave. When the people saw that the pilgrims refused to accept any kind of monetary rewards, they all prepared some dried goods and fruits. 
With laden horses and mules, coloured banners and red ribbons, they came to say farewell. There were only five hundred families in the region but those who came to send them off numbered more 
than seven hundred. 

They journeyed amiably, and in a little while they arrived at the entrance of the Pulpy Persimmon Alley in the Mountain of Seven Extremes. When Tripitaka smelled the wretched odour and saw how 
clogged the road was, he said, “Wukong, how could we pass through?” Clamping his hand over his nose, Pilgrim said, “This is rather difficult!” When Tripitaka heard him say “difficult,” tears dropped 
from his eyes. Old Li and others went forward and said, “Dad, please do not be anxious. When we accompanied you here, we’d already made up our minds. Since your noble disciples subdued the 
monster-spirit for us and delivered the entire village from such calamity, we're all determined to open up a road for you to pass through.” 

“Oldie,” said Pilgrim, smiling, “your words aren’t very reasonable! You told us earlier that the distance across this mountain is some eight hundred miles. You're no celestial engineers under the command 
of the Great Yu, Conqueror of the Flood. How could you blast open mountains and build roads? If you want my master to get across the ridge, it’s up to us again to exert ourselves. None of you can do 
something like this.” 

As he dismounted, Tripitaka said, “Wukong, how are you going to exert yourself?” 

“If you want to cross this mountain in the twinkling of an eye,” said Pilgrim, smiling, “that's difficult. If you want to build another road, that's difficult, too. We've to push through, using the old alley but 
right now, | fear that no one will take care of our meals.” 

“Don’t talk like that, Elder!” said Old Li. “No matter how long you four are delayed here, we can support you. How could you say that no one would take care of your meals!” 

“In that case,” said Pilgrim, “go and prepare two piculs of dried rice, and make some steamed buns and breads also. Let that priest of ours with a long horn eat to his fill. He'll then change into a huge 
bull to shovel out the old road. Our master will ride the horse and we'll accompany him. We'll get across.” 

On hearing this, 8 Rules said, “Elder Brother, all of you want to be clean. How could you ask Old bull alone to become stinky?” 

“Aware of Ability,” said Tripitaka, “if you truly have the ability to shovel out the alley and lead me across the mountain, I'll have it recorded that you're ranked first in merit on this occasion.” With a laugh, 
8 Rules said, “Master, you and the rest of our venerable patrons here should not tease me. I, Old bull, after all, am capable of thirty-six kinds of transformation. If you want me to change into something 
delicate, elegant, and agile, | simply can’t do it. But if it’s a mountain, a tree, a boulder, an earth mound, a scabby elephant, a graded bull, a water buffalo, or a camel, | can change into all these things. 
The only thing is that if | change into something big, my appetite is going to be even bigger. | must be satisfactorily fed before | can work.” 

“We've the stuff! We've the stuff!” cried the people. “We've all brought along dried goods, fruits, baked biscuits, and assorted pastries. We're planning to present them to you after you had crossed the 
mountain. We'll take them out now for you to enjoy. When you've assumed your transformation and begun your work, we'll send people back to the village to prepare more rice for you.” 

Filled with delight, 8 Rules took off his black cloth shirt and dropped his 9-pronged rake. “Don’t tease me!” he said to the people. “Watch Old bull achieve this stinky merit!” Dear Idiot! Making the magic 
sign with his fingers, he shook his body once and changed indeed into a huge bull. Truly he had a long horn and short hair — all rather plump. He fed on herbs of the mountain since his youth. A black 
face with round eyes like the sun and moon; a round head with huge ears like plantain leaves. His bones were made lasting as Heaven's age; tougher than iron was his thick skin refined. In deep nasal 
tones he made his moo-moo cry. What guttural grunts when he puffed and huffed! 4 white hoofs standing 1000 feet tall; sword-like bristles topped a hundred-yard frame. Mankind had long seen fatted 
cows and apes but never till today this Old bull elf. The Tang Monk and the people all gave praise; at such high magic power they were amazed. When Pilgrim Sun saw this transformation of 8 Rules, 
he ordered those people who accompanied them to put their dried goods into a huge pile so that 8 Rules could enjoy the foodstuff. Without regard for whether it was cooked or raw, 8 Rules went 
forward and gulped down all of it. Then he proceeded to shovel out a path. Pilgrim asked Sand-monk to take off his shoes and to pole the luggage with care. He told his master to sit firmly on the carved 
saddle while he himself also took off his boots. Then he gave this instruction to the people: “If you’re grateful, go and prepare some rice quickly for my brother's sustenance.” 

Over half of those seven hundred people who accompanied the pilgrims to send them off came along with horses and mules; they, therefore, dashed back to the village like shooting stars to prepare 
the rice. The rest of the people, some three hundred of them, had come on foot, and these stood below the mountain and watched the pilgrims depart. The distance between the village and the mountain 
was some thirty miles. By the time the people went back to the village and returned with the rice, master and disciples were almost a hundred miles away. Not willing to let them go however, the people 
urged their horses and mules into the alley and spent the night travelling. Only by morning did they succeed in catching up with the pilgrims. “Holy Dads who are going to acquire scriptures,” they cried, 
“please slow down! Please slow down! We're bringing you rice!” 

On hearing these words, the elder was filled with gratitude. “Truly they’re kind and faithful people!” he said. Then he asked 8 Rules to stop so that he could take some rice for strength. Idiot had been 
shovelling for one whole day and night and he was beginning to feel keenly his hunger. Though there were more than 7 or 8 piculs of rice brought by those people, he gulped it all down, regardless of 
whether it was rice or other types of grain. After a hearty meal, he proceeded again to shovel out the road. Tripitaka, Pilgrim, and Sand-monk thanked the people and took leave of them. So it is that 
the Tuoluo villagers return to their homes while 8 Rules opens up a mountain path. Divine might upholds devout Tripitaka; Wukong shows magic and the demon fails. An aeon’s Pulp Persimmons this 
day are cleansed; henceforth the Seven Extremes’ Alley is unclogged. 6 forms of desires having all been purged. In peace, unhindered, they will salute lotus seats. 


084 
At Scarlet-Purple Kingdom the Tang Monk speaks of past eras; Pilgrim Sun performs on an arm broken in 3 places‘ 
Virtue attained, all causations dead, 1’s fame through 4 great continents will spread. 
Wise and enlightened you ascend yonder shore. 
The wind will sigh as hazy cirrus rises in the sky. 
Those Gods will all greet you; forever at Jade Terrace one will live thereto. 
Break up the human dream of butterfly. 
Let it all end! Where dust’s cleansed no worries attend.? 
Tripitaka and his disciples having washed out an alley of sullage, now walked on the path of freedom. Time went by swiftly and again it was torrid summer when pomegranates spread omate fruits, and 
lotus leaves split like green pans. In two rows of willow young swallows hide, to flee the heat the travellers wave their fans. As they proceeded, they suddenly saw a moated city looming up. Reining in 
his horse, Tripitaka called out, “Disciples, take a look. What kind of a place is that?” 
“Master,” said Pilgrim, “so you're actually illiterate! How could you've accepted the decree of the Tang emperor to leave the court?” 
“| became a priest when | was still a child,” replied Tripitaka. “I've mastered thousands of Threads. How could you say I’m illiterate?” 
“If you're literate,” said Pilgrim, “why couldn't you recognise those three big words written plainly on the apricot-yellow banner? Why did you've to ask what sort of a place this is?” 
“Brazen ape!” bellowed the Tang Monk. “You’re babbling! That banner’s whipped by the wind. There might be words on it but | can’t see them clearly!” 
“Of all persons,” said Pilgrim, “why is it that old monkey's able to see them?” 
“Master,” both 8 Rules and Sand-monk said, “don’t listen to Elder Brother's jabbering! From this distance, we can hardly see the moated city clearly. Who could see any words?” 
“Aren't those words, the Scarlet-Purple Kingdom?” asked Pilgrim. 
Tripitaka said, “The Scarlet-Purple Kingdom must be a state in the Western domain. That means we must've our rescript certified.” 
“That goes without saying,” said Pilgrim. 
In a little while, they arrived before the gate of the city where Tripitaka dismounted. As they strolled through the triple-layered gates, they found that it was a marvellous national capital indeed. What 
they saw were soaring towered gates, orderly parapets. Around the city running water flowed freely; north and south, it fronted on tall mountains. Cargoes heaped up in its streets and markets; business 
flourished in every house and home. Truly it was a meeting place of royalty, a great capital, a Heavenly residence. Towered boats came from distant shores. Laden with foreign jades and gems. Its 
noble form joined distant hills; palaces reached the clear void. Its 3 passes firmly secured, therein peace forever prospered. As master and disciples walked through the main boulevards, they found 
the looks of the people distinguished and imposing, their attire orderly, neat, language clear, and resonant. Truly it was no different from the world of the Great Tang. Now, when those people on both 
sides busily engaged in buying and selling suddenly discovered the ugly visage of 8 Rules, the dark face and tall frame of Sand-monk, and the hairy features of Pilgrim Sun, they all abandoned their 
businesses and crowded around the pilgrims to stare at them Tripitaka felt compelled to call out, “Start no trouble! Lower your heads and walk on!” Obeying his master 8 Rules stuffed his lotus root-like 
mouth inside his bosom, and Sand-monk dared not raise his head. Only Pilgrim kept staring left and right as he walked closely beside the Tang Monk. After they had looked at the pilgrims for a while, 
those people who were more sensible went back to their own activities. The loiterers and the mischievous youths however, all surged around 8 Rules; laughing and clamouring, they threw tiles and 
bricks at 8 Rules to tease him. The Tang Monk became so nervous that he was perspiring. All he could say was, “Start nothing!” Idiot dared not lift his head. In a moment, they turned the corner and 
came upon a large residence surrounded by an outer wall. On top of its entrance were the words, College of Interpreters.* “Disciples,” said the Tang Monk, “let's go inside this official mansion.” 
“What for?” asked Pilgrim. 
“The College of Interpreters,” said the Tang Monk, “is a meeting place for people from all parts of the world. Even we can make use of it. Let’s go in and rest ourselves. After I’ve seen the throne and 
had our rescript certified, we can then leave the city and be on our way once more.” 
On hearing this, 8 Rules brought out his horn and frightened off several scores of those people following them. “What Master says is quite right,” he said as he walked forward. “Let’s hide inside so that 
we'll not be bothered by the cackling of these bird-brains!” 
They thus entered the college, and the people gradually dispersed. There were 2 officials inside the college, a minister proper and a vice-minister. They were both taking the roll in the great hall and 
preparing to meet other officials arriving. Startled by the sight of the Tang Monk walking in, they both said, “Who are you? Who are you? Where do you think you’re going?” 
Folding his hands before his chest, Tripitaka said, “This humble cleric has been sent by the Throne of the Great Tang in the Land of the East to go seek scriptures in the Western Heaven. We came 
upon your treasure region, and we dared not pass through without permission. We'd like to have our travel rescript certified, and we'd like to ask for temporary lodging in your noble mansion.” When 
those two college ministers heard what he said, they asked their attendants on both sides to step back. Fixing up their caps and tightening their belts, the ministers left the main hall to greet the Tang 
Monk. At once they asked that guest rooms be cleaned out for the pilgrims to rest, and they also ordered the preparation of vegetarian meals. After Tripitaka thanked them, the two officials departed 
with their staff, leaving only a few attendants to look after the priest. As Tripitaka began to walk out, Pilgrim said spitefully, “These rogues! Why didn’t they allow old monkey to stay in the main suite?” 
The Tang Monk said, “Their territory here is not governed by our Great Tang, nor do we've any formal diplomatic relations. Moreover, the college is frequently visited by distinguished guests or high 
rank officials. That’s probably why they find it difficult to entertain us here.” 
“If you put it that way,” said Pilgrim, “I’d want them all the more to entertain us here.” 
As they were speaking, a steward came in with some supplies: a large bowl of white rice, a large bow! of wheat flour, two bunches of green vegetables, four cakes of bean curd, two fried wheat gluten, 
one dish of dried bamboo shoots, and one dish of wood-ears. Tripitaka told his disciples to accept these and thanked the steward. The steward said, “In the west rooms there are clean pots and pans. 
The fires and stoves are ready. Please go there and cook the meal yourselves.” 
“Let me ask you this,” said Tripitaka. “Is the king still in the main hall?” 
“His Majesty has not held court for a long time,” replied the steward. “Today happens to be an auspicious day, and at this very moment he is discussing with many civil and military officials the publication 
of a special proclamation. If you want to have your travel rescript certified, you’d hurry there for you may still catch him. By tomorrow, you'll be unable to have an audience with him, and | don’t know 
how long you'll have to wait for another opportunity.” 


“Wukong,” said Tripitaka, “all of you stay here and prepare our meal. Let me hurry there to have our rescript certified. I'll then come back, eat, and we'll leave.” Quickly 8 Rules took out the cassock and 
the travel rescript: after Tripitaka put on the proper attire, he told his disciples not to leave the college and cause trouble outside before he went into court. 

In a moment, he arrived before the Five Phoenix Tower, and we can’t begin to tell you how magnificent were those palatial halls and buildings. He went before the front gate proper and requested the 
imperial messenger to make known to the Heavenly Court his desire to have the rescript certified. The Custodian of the Yellow Gate indeed went before the white jade steps to memorialise: “Outside 
the gate of the court, there’s a priest from the Great Tang in the Land of the East who's journeying to the Thunderclap Monastery in the Wester Heaven to seek scriptures from God by imperial commis- 
sion. Desirous of having his travel rescript certified, he awaits our royal summons.” 

On hearing this, the king said in delight, “We've been ill for a long time and we've not ascended our throne. What a happy coincidence this is that the moment we appear in the main hall with the intent 
to find a good physician through the promulgation of a special proclamation, a noble priest immediately appears.” He at once had the priest summoned to the hall where Tripitaka saluted himself to pay 
the king homage. The king then asked him to take a seat in the golden hall, after which the Court of Imperial Entertainments was asked to prepare a vegetarian banquet. Having thanked the king for 
his royal favours, Tripitaka presented the travel rescript. After he read the document, the king was very pleased. “Master of the Law,” he said, “through how many successions of rulers and how many 
generations of ministers has your Great Tang passed? As for the Tang emperor, how did he return to life from his illness so that he could ask you to traverse mountains and rivers to seek scriptures?” 
Faced with these questions, the elder saluted with hands folded to make his reply saying, “In the native land of your humble cleric, three August ones ruled our world; five Thearchs set relations. Yao 
and Shun defined kingship; Yu and Tang‘ gave the people peace. But descendants of Cheng and Zhou® all desired independence. Using might to oppress the weak, they laid claim to sundry kingdoms. 
They totalled eighteen rulers, dividing land and borders. They decreased to twelve later, and the world became tranquil. For want of chariots and horses, they again devoured each other. Seven powers 
strove together and six states all saluted to Qin. But Heaven gave birth to Pei of Lu, °each envious of the other. The empire then became Han’s that fixed laws for all to obey. Then Han succumbed to 
Sima’ and Jin became unruly, too. North and South twelve states in all — such as Song, Qi, Liang, and Chen — lasted in close succession till Great Sui became the true heir. Then came a lecher and 
despot who made the people suffer. Our king with Li as his surname took Tang as his empire’s title. After emperor Gaozu departed, Shimin became our present ruler. Our rivers are clean, seas tranquil 
for great’s his kindness and virtue. Now north of the capital Chang’an lived a water sprite, a dragon god who reduced some sweet rain and thus deserved to perish. Through a dream at night however, 
he begged our king for assistance. The king promised him pardon and summoned a worthy subject who’s kept within the palace to play chess slowly with the king. When the time reached the noon 
hour, that worthy subject slew the dragon in a dream.” 

On hearing what Tripitaka said, the king suddenly groaned a few times and said, “Master of the Law, from which country did that subject come?” 

“He was the prime minister before the throne of our emperor,” replied Tripitaka. “His surname is Wei and his given name is Zheng. He knows astronomy and geography, and he can distinguish between 
yin and yang. He is truly a great minister and helper, one who knows how to secure the empire and establish the state. Because he executed the Dragon King of the Jing River in his dream, the dragon 
king filed suit in the region of darkness, accusing our emperor of reneging on his promise to spare his life. That was why our emperor became mortally ill. Then Wei Zheng wrote a letter for our emperor 
to take to the region of darkness and give to Cui Jue, a judge in the Capital of Death. When the Tang emperor indeed expired after a little while, he came back to life three days later all because of Wei 
Zheng who moved Judge Cui to alter a document and add twenty more years to the emperor's age. Thereafter when the emperor gave a Grand Mass of Land and Water, he commissioned this humble 
Cleric to traverse a great distance through many nations in order that | may seek from the Religious Patriarch the three baskets of Mahayana scriptures that will help redeem the cursed and wretched 
souls to Heaven.” 

Groaning some more, the king sighed, “Truly yours is a nation and a Heavenly Court! Your ruler is righteous, and your ministers are upright! Look at us! We've been ill for a long time but not one minister 
is able to assist us.” When he heard this, the elder stole a glance at the king and saw that his face looked yellow and his body seemed emaciated. His whole appearance in fact was weary and spiritless. 
The elder was about to question him further when the official from the Court of Imperial Entertainments approached to invite the Tang Monk to dine. The king at once gave this command: “Set out our 
meal at the Hall of Unfurling Fragrance. We'll dine with the Master of the Law.” 

Tripitaka thanked him. Pilgrim in the College of Interpreters asked Sand-monk to make tea and rice and to prepare some vegetarian dishes. Sand-monk said, “It’s easy to make the tea and the rice but 
it'll not be easy to prepare the vegetarian dishes.” 

“Why?” asked Pilgrim. 

“Oil, salt, soy sauce, and vinegar,” replied Sand-monk, “none of these can be found here.” 

Pilgrim said, “I've a few pennies of small change. Tell 8 Rules to go buy some on the streets.” 

At once turning lazy, Idiot said, “I dare not go. My features aren't that nice looking, and | fear that Master will blame me if | cause any trouble.” 

“We're doing business fair and square!” said Pilgrim. “We're not begging, and we're not robbing. How could you cause any trouble?” 

“Haven't you seen what I’d do just now?” said 8 Rules. “I yanked out my horn before the door and scared off over ten persons. If | go to the bustling market, | don’t know how many persons will be 
frightened to death.” 

“All you know is the bustling market,” said Pilgrim, “but have you seen what they are selling in this market?” 

“Master told me to walk with my head saluted,” replied 8 Rules, “to cause no trouble. In truth I've seen nothing.” 

Pilgrim said, “There are juice shops, rice dealers, mills, and fabric stores that we need not mention in detail. There are truly fine teahouses, noodle shops, huge biscuits, and gigantic buns. Moreover, 
the restaurants display nice soups and rice, fine spices, and excellent vegetables. | saw also exotic puddings, steamed goods, pastries, rolls, fried goods, and honey cakes — in fact, countless goodies. 
I'll go buy some of these to treat you. How’s that?” 

When Idiot heard this, saliva drooled from his mouth and his throat gurgled as he swallowed hard a few times. “Elder Brother,” he said, leaping up. “I'll let you treat me this time. I'll save some money 
so that next time | can return your favour.” Smiling to himself, Pilgrim said, “Sand-monk, be careful in cooking the rice. We'll go and buy some seasoning.” Knowing that he was making fun of Idiot, 
Sand-monk played along and replied, “Go ahead, both of you. After you've fed yourself, bring back a lot of seasoning.” 

Picking up a container, Idiot followed Pilgrim out the door. Two officials asked, “Where are the elders going?” 

“To buy seasoning,” replied Pilgrim. “Go west on this street,” said one of them, “and make a turn at the corner watchtower. You'll find the Zheng family grocery where you can buy however much you 
like. Oil, salt, soy sauce, vinegar, ginger, pepper, and tea — they have them all.” 

The two of them, arm in arm, followed the street to the west. Pilgrim walked right past several teahouses and restaurants, refusing to buy what ought to be bought, to eat what ought to be eaten. “Elder 
Brother,” 8 Rules called out, “let's not be so choosy. Just buy something here and we'll enjoy it.” Pilgrim who had wanted to sport with him, refused, of course, to buy anything. “Worthy Brother,” he 
said, “don’t be such a spendthrift! Let's walk a bit further, and we'll buy something big to eat.” As the two of them chatted, they again caused many people to follow them, staring. In a little while, they 
reached the watchtower, beneath which they found a large, noisy crowd blocking the street. On seeing them, 8 Rules said, “Elder Brother, I’m not going over there. Look at the mob. | fear that they may 
want to arrest monks, especially those who are strangers. If they seize me, what'll happen to me?” 

“Nonsense” said Pilgrim. “Monks haven't broken the law. Why should they want to arrest us? Let's walk past them so that we can buy some seasoning from the Zheng family store.” 

“All right! All right! All right!” said 8 Rules. “I'll not cause any trouble. I'll just squeeze into the crowd, flap my ears a couple of times, and frighten them into falling down. Let a few of them fall to their 
deaths, and I'll just pay with my life!” 

“If you put it that way,” said Pilgrim, “why don’t you stand still here at the base of the wall. Let me go to the store and get the seasoning. Then I'll buy some vegetarian noodles and biscuits for you to 
eat.” Handing the container over to Pilgrim, Idiot faced the wall, stuck his horn against it, and stood absolutely still. 

Pilgrim walked up to the tower, and it was crowded indeed. As he pushed his way through the throng, he learned that a special royal proclamation had been mounted beneath the tower, and that was 
why so many people fought to look at it. When he finally squeezed through to where the document was, Pilgrim opened wide his fiery eyes and diamond pupils to stare at it, and this was what he read: 
Since we, the king of the Scarlet-Purple Kingdom in the West Aparagodantya Continent, assumed our throne, the four quarters have remained submissive and the populace have enjoyed leisure and 
peace. Recently however, the affairs of state have turned inauspicious, for we've been gravely ill, and recovery has been most difficult even after a long time. The college of imperial medicine of our 
nation has administered repeatedly its excellent prescriptions but these have not given us cure. Therefore, we publish now this proclamation for all the worthy scholars throughout the world, regardless 
of whether they are going to the North, coming from the East, or are even natives of China, the foreign state. If there is anyone skilful in medicine and therapeutic arts, let him ascend the treasure hall 
and restore our health. We most solemnly pledge that the moment we’re healed, we'll divide the kingdom with him. For this reason we've mounted this necessary proclamation. 

When he finished reading it, Pilgrim was filled with delight, saying to himself, “The ancients said, ‘Moving about may bring us riches!’ We certainly shouldn’t have sat idly in the college, nor is there any 
need now to buy seasoning. Let's delay for one day this business of fetching scriptures and allow old monkey to play physician for a bit.” 

Dear Great Sage! He stooped low and left the container on the ground; picking up a pinch of dirt, he flung it up into the air and recited a spell. Immediately, the Magic of Body-Concealment rendered 
him invisible, so that he could walk up to the proclamation and gently peel it off. Then he faced the ground toward the southwest and sucked in a deep breath before blowing the air out again. At once 
a strong whirlwind arose and scattered the multitude. He turned around and went back to where 8 Rules was standing. There he found 8 Rules leaning on the base of the wall with the support of his 
horn and appearing as if he had fallen asleep. Without disturbing him, Pilgrim folded up the proclamation and gently stuck it in 8 Rules’ bosom. In big strides he then went back first to the College of 
Interpreters. Those people beneath the watchtower when the wind arose, all of them covered their heads and shut their eyes. Little did they anticipate that after the wind had passed, the royal 
proclamation would be nowhere to be seen, and each one of them was terrified. Originally the proclamation was accompanied by twelve eunuchs and twelve palace guards as it left the court that 
morning. It had not been hung up for more than three hours when it was blown away by the wind. Trembling all over, those eunuchs and guards searched for it left and right, and that was when they 
suddenly caught sight of a slip of paper sticking out from the bosom of Bullseye 8 Rules. “Did you peel off the proclamation?” shouted the officials as they ran up to him. 

All at once that Idiot raised his head and stuck out his horn, so frightening those several palace guards that they stumbled backwards and fell down. He turned around and wanted to flee but he was 
pulled back by several of the braver ones. “You took down the royal proclamation for the recruitment of physicians,” they cried. “Where do you think you're going if you’re not going into court to heal His 
Majesty?” 

More and more flustered, Idiot said, “Your son is the one who peeled off the royal proclamation! Your grandson is the one who knows anything about healing!” One of the palace guards spoke up: 
“What's that you’ve in your bosom?” Only then did Idiot lower his head and find that there was indeed a piece of paper there. When he spread it open and took one look, he clenched his teeth and 
cried, “That wretched ape has killed me!” He became so furious that he would have ripped up the document if the people had not stopped him. 

“You're dead!” they shouted. “This is a proclamation of our reigning monarch. Who dares to tear it up? If you’ve taken it down and stuffed it into your bosom, you must be a physician able to heal him. 
Go with us, quickly!” 

“You've no idea,” shouted 8 Rules, “that | didn’t take down this proclamation. It was taken down by my elder brother, Sun Wukong. After he stuck it secretly in my bosom, he abandoned me and left. If 
you want to get to the bottom of this matter, I’ve to go find him for you.” 

“What sort of wild talk is that?” said the people. “You think ‘We'd forsake a ready-made bell to strike one about to be forged’? You took down the proclamation! And you tell us now to find someone 
else! Never mind you! We'll haul you back to see our lord!” 

Without further investigation of the matter, that group of people began to push and shove Idiot. Idiot however, stood perfectly still, and he seemed to have taken root in the earth. Not even a dozen 
people could budge him. “All of you don’t know any better!” said 8 Rules. “If you pull at me some more, you'll pull out my idiotic ire! Don’t blame me then!” 

Soon the entire neighbourhood was aroused by all that hubbub to come and have 8 Rules surrounded. Among the people were two elderly eunuchs who said to him, “Your looks are strange and your 
voice sounds unfamiliar. Where have you come from, and why are you so headstrong?” 

“We're those from the Land of the East sent to seek scriptures in the Western Heaven,” replied 8 Rules. “My master’s a Master of the Law and the bond-brother of the Tang emperor. Just now he has 
gone into court to have his travel rescript certified. My elder brother and | came here to buy seasoning. When | saw the crowd beneath the watchtower, | dared not go forward, and my elder brother told 
me to wait for him here. When he saw the proclamation, he called up a whirlwind and had it taken off and stuck secretly in my bosom. Then he left me.” 

“Just now,” said one of the eunuchs, “I saw a stout-ish priest with a white face heading straight for the gate of the court. | suppose he must be your master.” 

“He’s indeed,” said 8 Rules. 

“Where has your elder brother gone to?” asked the eunuch. 

8 Rules said, “There’re altogether four of us. Our master’s gone to have our travel rescript certified but the rest of us — three disciples, a horse, and our luggage — are all resting at the College of 
Interpreters. After my elder brother had played this trick on me, he must have returned to the college.” 

“Palace guards,” said the eunuch, “stop tugging at this man. Let us go with him to the college, and we'll know the whole truth of the matter.” 


“These two mamas are far more sensible!” said 8 Rules. 

“This priest is truly uninformed!” said one of the palace guards. “How could you address the papas as mamas?” 

“Aren't you ashamed of yourself?” said 8 Rules, laughing. “You're the one who’s switching the genders! These two old mamas should be addressed as popos or madams. And you want to call them 
papas?” 

“Stop your saucy tongue!” the people said. “Go find your elder brother quickly.” 

By that time the noisy crowd had grown to over five hundred people, all surging up to the entrance of the college. “Stop here, all of you,” said 8 Rules. “My elder brother is not like me who allows you 
this spoofing. He is rather hot-tempered, and terribly serious. When you meet him, you must extend to him a grand salutation and address him as Venerable Dad Sun. Then he'll do business with you. 
Otherwise, he may change his colours and you'll not succeed with your enterprise.” 

“If your elder brother truly has the ability to heal our king,” said the eunuchs and the palace guards, “he will inherit half the kingdom. He certainly deserves our salute.” 

While the idlers milled about noisily before the college, 8 Rules led the troop of eunuchs and palace guards inside where they heard Pilgrim laughing and telling Sand-monk the trick he had played on 
8 Rules. 8 Rules dashed forward and grabbed him, screaming, “Some person you're! You tricked me out there and promised to buy vegetarian noodles, biscuits, and buns for me to eat. They’re all 
fibs! Then you brought on the whirlwind and took down this so-called royal proclamation to have it stuck secretly in my bosom. You're playing me for a fatso! Is that how you treat your brother?” 
Laughing, Pilgrim said, “Idiot, you must have taken the wrong road and gone off to someplace else! | passed the watchtower, bought the seasoning, and came back quickly to where you're but I'd not 
find you. So, | returned here first. Where did | peel off any royal proclamation?” 

“The officials guarding the proclamation are right here,” said 8 Rules. Hardly had he finished speaking when those several eunuchs and palace guards went forward to salute Pilgrim long. “Venerable 
Dad Sun,” they said, “today our king must be exceedingly fortunate, for Heaven has sent you to descend to us. We beseech you to exercise your great talents in healing and your profound knowledge 
in therapeutic arts. If you succeed in curing our king, you'll have claim to half the kingdom.” 

On hearing these words, Pilgrim became more sober. He took the proclamation and asked the people, “Are you the officials guarding the proclamation?” Respecting, the eunuchs said, “Your slaves 
are palace officials belonging to the Directorate of Ceremonials. These are the Embroidered-Uniform Guards.” 

“This proclamation for recruitment of physicians,” said Pilgrim, “was indeed taken down by me. | purposely arranged for my brother to lead you to see me. Your lord’s indisposed but as the proverb 
says, medicines aren't lightly bought; a doctor isn’t casually sought. You go back and ask the king to come here in person to invite me. | guarantee that when | stretch forth my hand, his illness will at 
once disappear.” 

When they heard these words, all of the eunuchs were astonished. “A stupendous claim like this can be made only by someone in the know,” said one of the palace guards. “Half of us will remain here 
to continue our silent entreaty. Half of us will return to memorialise to the throne.” Whereupon four eunuchs and six palace guards without waiting for any summons, went inside the court and 
memorialised before the steps, saying, “My lord, ten thousand happiness have come upon you!” Having finished his meal, the king was just having a quiet chat with Tripitaka. When he heard this, he 
asked, “Where has this happiness come from?” One of the eunuchs said, “This morning your slaves took the royal proclamation for the recruitment of physicians to have it mounted beneath the 
watchtower. It was taken down by Elder Sun, a sage monk sent from the distant Land of the East to acquire scriptures. He is now residing in the College of Interpreters and desires the personal 
appearance of the king to invite him. He has promised us that when he stretches forth his hand, the illness will disappear. That is why we've come to memorialise to you.” 

On hearing this, the king was filled with delight. He turned to ask the Tang Monk, “Master of the Law, how many noble disciples do you've?” 

“This humble cleric,” replied Tripitaka with hands folded before him, “has three mischievous disciples.” 

“Which of them is conversant with therapeutic arts?” asked the king. 

“To tell you the truth, Your Majesty,” said Tripitaka, “my mischievous disciples are all ordinary men of the wilds. Their knowledge is confined to pulling the horse and toting the luggage, to fording streams 
and leading your poor monk across the mountains. When we pass through the more dangerous regions, they may even be able to subjugate demons and fiends, to tame tigers and dragons. But that’s 
all! None of them knows anything about the nature of medicine.” 

“Why must you be so modest, Master of the Law?” said the king. “It is truly a Heavenly affinity that you'd arrive on this very day when we ascend the main hall. If your noble disciple were not an able 
physician, how would he be willing to take down our proclamation and demand our going there in person to invite him? He must have the ability to heal the highest ruler of the state.” Then the king gave 
this order: “Let our civil and military subjects represent us, for our body is weakened and our strength depleted, and we dare not ride the imperial chariot. You must therefore proceed beyond the court 
to extend our most eamest invitation to Elder Sun to come and examine our illness. When you see him, you must be careful not to treat him discourteously. You must address him as Elder Sun, the 
divine monk, and you must greet him as if he were your ruler.” 

Having received this decree, the various officials went with the eunuchs and the palace guards to the College of Interpreters. Standing in rows according to their ranks, they paid homage to Pilgrim. 8 
Rules was so taken aback that he dashed inside a side room while Sand-monk ran out to stand beneath the wall. Look at Great Sage! He sat firmly in the middle of the room and remained unmoved. 
“This wretched ape’s,” grumbled 8 Rules to himself, “hanging himself alive with all these undeserved honours! How'd he not return the salute of these many officials? Why, he'll not even stand up!” 
Soon the ceremony was over, and the officials separated into two files before they presented this memorial, saying, “Let us inform Elder Sun, the divine monk, that we’re the subjects of the king of the 
Scarlet-Purple Kingdom. By royal decree, we come to honour the divine monk with due reverence and ceremony. We beseech you to enter the court and examine a patient.” Only then did Pilgrim stand 
up and say to them, “Why didn’t your king come here?” 

“Because his body is weakened and his strength depleted,” replied the officials, “our king dares not ride the chariot. He has commanded us subjects to observe this ceremony on his behalf and invite 
you, the divine monk.” 

“In that case,” said Pilgrim, “please lead the way, all of you, and I'll follow.” 

The various officials departed in groups, in accordance with their ranks while Pilgrim walked behind them after having tidied his clothes. “Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “don’t you put us up to anything 
now!” 

“lll not,” said Pilgrim, “but | want you two to accept the medicines for me.” 

“What medicines?” asked Sand-monk. 

“There will be some medicines sent to us,” said Pilgrim. “Accept them in the quantities that they are delivered. I'll make use of them when | return.” 

The two of them agreed, and we'll leave them for the moment. Our Pilgrim soon arrived at court with the many officials who walked ahead to report to the king. As the pearly screen was rolled up, the 
king opened his phoenix eyes and dragon pupils to look at his visitor and his golden mouth to say, “Who is the divine monk, Elder Sun?” Taking a big step forward, Pilgrim said in a loud voice, “Old 
monkey's the one!” When the king heard this savage voice and encountered the bizarre countenance, he shook so violently that he fell back onto the dragon couch. Those harem girls and palace 
attendants hurriedly had him borne inside the palace, and all the king could say was, “We’re scared to death!” All the officials began to chide Pilgrim, saying, “How could this monk be so rude and 
impetuous? How could you be so audacious as to take down the proclamation?” 

Hearing these words, Pilgrim smiled and said, “All of you’ve wrongly taken umbrage at me! If that’s how you treat people, the illness of your king won't be cured for another millennium!” 

“How long can a man live,” asked the officials, “that he should be ill for a millennium?” 

Pilgrim said, “That man at the moment is a sick ruler. After he dies, he'll be a sick ghost. Even in the next disciple, he'll still be a sick man. Isn't it true then that he'll not be cured for a millennium?” 
Growing angry, the officials said, “Monk, you've absolutely no manners! How dare you mouth such nonsense?” 

“That's no nonsense!” replied Pilgrim with a laugh. “Listen to what I’ve to say: most mysterious is the physician’s art; his mind must ever be alert and keen. To look, listen, ask, and take — these four 
things — if one’s missing, his craft's incomplete. One, we look at the patient’s complexion: Is it moist, dry, fat, or thin in waking or sleep? Two, we listen for clear or turbid voice when he speaks lucid or 
frenetic words. Three, we ask for the ailment’s cause and length. For how he eats, drinks, and eliminates. Four, we scan the conduits’ by taking the pulse to learn how submerged or floating in and out. 
101f we don’t look, listen, ask, and take, in this life his ailment will never forsake him!” 

Amid those two rows of military and civil officials standing in attendance, there was the royal physician who, when he heard these words, spoke up with great approbation. “What this monk says,” he 
said, “is most reasonable. Even a mortal examining a patient must look, listen, ask, and take - these very activities accord well with the efficacy of gods and sages.” Persuaded by this statement, the 
Officials asked a palace attendant to send in the message: “The elder would like to exercise the principles of looking, listening, asking, and taking, before he could diagnose the illness and prescribe 
the medicine.” 

Lying on his dragon bed, the king gasped out his answer: “Tell him to go away! We can’t bear to see an unfamiliar face!” The attendant walked out of the palace and said, “Monk, our king decrees you 
to leave, for he can’t bear to see an unfamiliar face.” 

“If he can’t do so,” replied Pilgrim, “I know that art of ‘Dangling a Thread to take the Pulse.” 

The various officials were secretly pleased, saying to themselves, “We've heard of this rare technique but we've never seen it.” They said to the attendant, “Go and memorialise once more.” Again the 
attendant went inside the palace to say, “My lord, if that elder isn’t permitted to see your face, he can dangle a thread to take the pulse.” 

The king thought to himself, We've been sick for three years but we’ve never tried this. He therefore gave the reply, “Summon him in.” 

Immediately the attendant transmitted the message: “Our lord’s given him the permission to take the pulse by dangling a thread. Summon Elder Sun quickly into the palace.” 

Pilgrim at once started to ascend the treasure hall, only to be met by the scolding of Tang Monk. “Wretched ape!” he cried. “You've injured me!” Smiling, Pilgrim said, “Dear Master, I’ve put you in the 
limelight! How could you say that I’ve injured you?” 

“Which person did you manage to cure,” shouted Tripitaka, “during these few years you've been following me? You don’t even know the nature of medicines, nor have you read any medical texts. How 
could you be so audacious as to rush into this big calamity?” Laughing, Pilgrim said, “Master, you didn’t know about this. | know a few herbal prescriptions which can cure even grave illnesses. All they 
care is that | heal him. But even if | kill him, all I'll be guilty of is merely manslaughter because of medical incompetence. I'll not be executed. Why are you so worried? Relax! Relax! Take a seat and 
see if I'm any good at taking the pulse.” 

The elder again said, “Have you ever seen what sort of sentences there are in the Candid Questions, The Classic of Medical Problems, the pharmacopoeias, and the Formulas of the Pulse?'' Do you 
know their proper gloss and exegesis? How could you babble like this about some dangling the thread to take the pulse?” 

Laughing, Pilgrim said, “I carry with me some threads of gold that you've never seen.” He reached back with his hand and pulled off 3 strands of hair from his tail. Giving them a pinch, he cried, “Change!” 
They changed at once into 3 threads, each 24 feet long and thus corresponding to the 24 Solar Terms. Holding them in his hands, he said to the Tang Monk, “Aren't these my golden threads?” 

The attending eunuch spoke up from the side, “Let the elders refrain from further conversation. Please enter the palace to examine the patient.” Taking leave of the Tang Monk, Pilgrim followed the 
attendant to walk inside the palace. Truly it was that the mind’s secret prescription can heal a state; its wondrous formula will assure long life. He went inside. 


085 
At night the Lord of the Mind refines medicines; at a banquet the king speaks of the perverse fiend 

The Great Sage Sun went with the palace attendant to the interior division of the royal palace. He stood still only after he had reached the door of the royal bedchamber. Then he told the attendant to 
take the three golden threads inside along with the instruction: “Ask one of the palace ladies or eunuchs to tie these three threads to the inch,’ the pass, and the foot sections of His Majesty’s left hand 
where the radial pulse are felt. Then pass the other ends of the threads out to me through the window shutters.” 

The attendant followed his instruction. The king was asked to sit up on the dragon bed while the three sections of his pulse were tied by the golden threads, and their other ends were then passed out 
to Pilgrim. Using the thumb and the index finger of his right hand to pick up one of the threads, Pilgrim first examined the pulse of the inch section; next, he used his middle finger and his thumb to pick 
up the second thread and examine the pulse of the pass section; finally, he used the thumb and his fourth finger to pick up the third thread and examine the pulse of the foot section. Thereafter Pilgrim 
made his own breathing regular? and proceeded to determine which of the 4 Heteropathic Pneumatics,’ the 5 Stases,‘ the 7 External Images‘ of the Pulse, the 8 Internal Images of the Pulse, and the 9 
Pulse Indications® were present. His pressure on the threads went from light to medium to heavy, and from heavy to medium to light,’ until he could clearly perceive whether the condition of the patient 
was repletion or depletion of energy and its cause. Then he made the request that the threads be untied from the king’s left wrist and be attached as before to the positions on his right wrist. Using now 
the fingers on his left hand, he then examined the pulse on the right wrist section by section. When he had completed his examination, he shook his body once and retrieved his hairs. “Your Majesty,” 
he cried in a loud voice, “on your left wrist the pulse of your inch section feels strong and tense, the pulse of your pass section feels rough and languid, and the pulse of your foot section feels hollow 
and sunken. On your right wrist the pulse of your inch section feels floating and smooth, the pulse of your pass section feels retarded and hesitant, and the pulse of your foot section feels accelerated 


and firm. Now, when the pulse of your left inch section feels strong and tense, it indicates an internal energetic depletion with pain in the cardiac system of functions. When the pulse of your left pass 
section feels rough and languid, it indicates sweating that has led to numbness in the flesh. When the pulse of your left foot section feels hollow and sunken, it indicates a pink tinge to your urine and 
blood in your stool. When the pulse of the inch section on your right wrist feels floating and smooth, it indicates a congestion blocking the pneumatic energy circulation and leading to cessation of 
menses.® When the pulse of your right pass section feels retarded and hesitant, it indicates a stasis of alimentary matter in the stomach system with retention of fluids. When the pulse of your right foot 
section feels accelerated and firm, it indicates discomfort caused by sensations of stuffiness and chills caused by energetic depletion. To sum up, your illness has been caused by fear and anxiety, and 
it may be the manifestation type of an illness called the ‘Paired Birds in Severance.” 

On hearing these words, the king was so delighted that he roused himself to answer loudly: “Your fingers have brought out the truth! Your fingers have brought out the truth! This is indeed our illness. 
Please go outside and prescribe us some medicines.” 

Only then did the Great Sage walk slowly out of the palace while the eunuchs who saw everything clearly from the side had already reported the result to the rest of the people. In a moment, Pilgrim 
walked out and he was questioned by the Tang Monk. “I’ve examined the pulse,” said Pilgrim, “and now I’ve to prescribe some medicines for the illness.” Approaching him, the officials said, “Just now 
the divine monk said that this might be the manifestation type of an illness called the ‘Paired Birds in Severance.’ What does that mean?” 

Smiling, Pilgrim said, “There are two birds flying together, one male and one female. Suddenly they are separated by violent wind and rain, so that the female cannot see the male, nor can the male 
see the female. The female longs for the male and the male longs for the female. Is this not the ‘Paired Birds in Severance’?” 

On hearing this, all the officials cried in unison, “Bravo! Truly a divine monk! Truly a divine physician!” 

Then the imperial physician said, “You've already diagnosed the illness. What medicines would you use to cure it?” 

“No need to write a prescription,” said Pilgrim. “I'll take all the medicines you can give me.” 

“But according to a classic,” said the physician, “There are eight hundred and eight flavours of medicine, and a human may have four hundred and four kinds of illness.’ All of those illnesses cannot be 
found in a single person. How could all the medicines be used? Why do you want everything?” 

Pilgrim replied, “The ancients said, ‘Medicines are not confined to prescriptions; they are to be used as one sees fit.’ That is why | must have all the medicines so that | can add or subtract as | see fit.” 
Not daring to argue any further, the physician went out of the gate of the court and sent those on duty in his bureau to go to all the pharmaceutical stores of the city and purchase three pounds of each 
kind of medicine, both raw and cooked, for Pilgrim to use. Pilgrim said, “This is not the place to prepare the proper drug. Take the medicines and the necessary drug-making utensils and send them all 
to the College of Interpreters. Let my brothers receive them for me.” 

The physician obeyed. 3 pounds each of the 808 flavours of medicine, along with grinders, rollers, drug mortars, pestles, and the like were sent to the college where they were received item by item. 
Pilgrim went back up the hall to ask his master to go with him to the college so that they might prepare the drug. As the elder rose from his seat, a decree was issued from the internal palace, requesting 
that the Master of the Law remain behind to spend the night at the Wenhua Palace Hall.? After the king had taken the drug in the morning and had been restored to health, all of them would be rewarded 
and the rescript would be certified to permit their departure. Greatly alarmed, Tripitaka said, “O disciple! This means that he wants me kept here as security. If he is cured, he'll send us off with delight. 
If he is not, my life will be finished. You’d better take extra caution and prepare a specially effective drug!” 

“No need to worry, Master,” said Pilgrim, smiling. “Enjoy yourself here. Old monkey has the ability to bring healing to the state.” 

Dear Great Sage! He took leave of Tripitaka and the various officials and went straight to the college. When 8 Rules met him, he smiled and said, “Elder Brother, now | know you!” 

“What do you know about me?” asked Pilgrim. 

“You must have realised,” said 8 Rules, “that this scripture-seeking enterprise will not succeed but you don’t have any capital to start a business. When you see today how prosperous this region is, 
you're drawing up plans to open a pharmacy.” 

“Stop babbling!” snapped Pilgrim. “When we've cured the king, we'll be content to leave the court and journey once more. What are you talking about, opening up a pharmacy?” 

“If you’re not,” said 8 Rules, “what do you want to do with all these medicines? There are eight hundred and eight different kinds, and you ordered three pounds for each variety. Altogether, there are 
two thousand four hundred and twenty-four pounds. How many pounds can you use just to cure one person? | wonder how many years it'll take him to finish your prescription?” 

“You think | really need that much?” said Pilgrim. “But those imperial physicians are all stupid and blind. | asked for such a huge amount of medicines only to prevent them from ever guessing what are 
the exact flavours I’ve used. It'll be difficult for them to learn my ingenious prescription.” 

As they were speaking, the two college officials came in, knelt before them, and said, “We invite the Holy Dads, the divine monks, to dinner.” Pilgrim said, “You treated us rather casually in the morning. 
Now you kneel to inform us of a meal. Why?” Respecting again, the officials said, “When the Venerable Dads arrived, these lowly officials had eyes but no pupils, and we didn’t recognise your esteemed 
countenances. Now we've heard that you're exercising your profound knowledge in therapeutic arts to bring healing to the ruler of our state. If your lord is indeed cured, the Venerable Dad will share in 
his empire, and we'll all be your subjects. Proper etiquette, therefore, requires us to kneel to address you.” 

On hearing this, Pilgrim ascended the main hall in delight and took the middle seat while 8 Rules and Sand-monk sat on both sides of him. As they were served the vegetarian meal, Sand-monk asked, 
“Elder Brother where is Master?” 

“He is being kept by the king as security,” replied Pilgrim, laughing. “Only after the king has been cured will he be thanked and permitted to leave.” 

“Does he get to enjoy anything?” asked Sand-monk again. Pilgrim said, “How could anyone in the company of the king be without enjoyment? When | left, Master already had three Senior Secretaries 
hovering about him as they proceeded toward the Wenhua Palace Hall.” 

“Listening to what you've said,” said 8 Rules, “I think Master is certainly more exalted than we're. He has the company of three Senior Secretaries while we're being served by only two college officials. 
But never mind, let Old bull enjoy a full meal!” The three brothers thus ate to their hearts’ content. 

It was getting late, and Pilgrim said to the officials, “Take away the bowls and dishes, and bring us plenty of oil and candles. We must wait until late at night before we can prepare the drug.” The officials 
indeed brought in a great deal of oil and candles before they retired. By midnight, human traffic had ceased and the whole place was quiet. 8 Rules said, “Elder Brother, what kind of drug do you want 
to prepare? Let's do it now, for I’m getting drowsy.” 

“Bring me an ounce of dahuang,”"° said Pilgrim, “and grind that into powder.” 

Sand-monk spoke up: “Dahuang is bitter in flavour; its disposition is cold and non-poisonous. Its nature is sinking and not rising, and its function concerns movement and not fortification. It can take 
away various kinds of pent-up feelings and unclog congestion; it can conquer chaos and bring about peace. Hence its name is ‘General,’ for it is a laxative. | fear however, that prolonged illness has 
weakened the person, and perhaps you'd not use it.” 

Smiling, Pilgrim said, “Worthy Brother, you don’t realise that this medicine will loosen phlegm and facilitate respiration; it will also sweep out the chill and heat congealed in one’s stomach. Don’t mind 
me. You go also and fetch me an ounce of badou." Shell it and strip away the membranes. Pound away also the oil, and then grind it to powder.” 

“The flavour of badou’s,” said 8 Rules, “slightly acrid; its nature’s hot and poisonous. Able to pare down the hard and the accumulated, it will therefore sweep out the submerged chills of one’s internal 
cavities. Able to bore through clotting and impediments, it will therefore facilitate the paths of water and grain. This is a warrior who can break down doors and passes, and it should be used lightly.” 
“Worthy Brother,” said Pilgrim, “you, too, don’t realise that this medicine can break up congestion and drain the intestines. It can also take care of swellings at the heart and dropsy in the abdomen. 
Prepare it quickly, for | still must use an auxiliary flavour to lend the medicines further assistance.” After the two of them had ground the medicines into powder, they said, “Elder Brother, what other 
flavours will you use?” 

“None,” replied Pilgrim. 

8 Rules said, “There are eight hundred and eight flavours, each of which you've three pounds but you use only these two ounces. You're truly playing tricks on someone!” Picking up a flowered porcelain 
flask, Pilgrim said, “Worthy Brother, don’t talk so much. Take this flask and scrape me half a flask of soot from the bottom of the frying pan.” 

“What do you want it for?” asked 8 Rules. “For the drug,” replied Pilgrim. “This little brother,” said Sand-monk, “has never seen the use of soot for a drug.” 

Pilgrim said, “The proper name for this kind of soot is ‘Hundred-Grass Frost,’ and you've no idea that it can soothe a hundred ailments.” Idiot indeed brought him half a flask of the soot that was also 
ground into powder. Then Pilgrim gave him the flask once more and said, “Go and fetch me half a flask of urine from our horse.” 

“What for?” asked 8 Rules. 

“| want it to make some pills,” replied Pilgrim. 

Laughing, Sand-monk said, “Elder Brother, this is no joking matter! Horse urine is both pungent and stinky. How could you put that into the medicines? I’ve seen pills made from vinegar, aged rice 
soups, Clarified honey, or pure water but never from horse urine. That stuff is so foul and pungent, the moment a person with a weakened stomach smells it, he will vomit. If you feed him further with 
badou and dahuang, he'll be throwing up on top and purging down below. You think that’s funny?” 

“But you don’t realise,” said Pilgrim, “that our horse is no mortal horse of this world. Remember he was originally a dragon from the Western Ocean. If he is willing to urinate, it will cure any kind of 
disease a human may have when it is ingested. The only problem is that you can’t get it in a hurry.” On hearing this, 8 Rules ran out to the stable where he found the horse lying prone on the ground 
and asleep. A few swift kicks by Idiot however, roused him immediately whereupon Idiot positioned the flask below his abdomen and waited for a long time. When he saw that the horse did not urinate 
at all, he ran back and said to Pilgrim, “O Elder Brother, let's not try to heal the king. Go quickly to heal the horse first. That outcast has dried up! He hasn't even pissed a drop!” 

“Ill go with you,” said Pilgrim, smiling. Sand-monk said, “I, too, will go and take a look.” 

As the three of them approached the horse, he leapt up and assumed human speech, saying to them in a loud voice, “Elder Brother, don’t you know? | was originally a flying dragon of the Western 
Ocean. The Nun Guanyin rescued me after I’d disobeyed Heaven; she sawed off my horns, stripped off my scales, and changed me into a horse to carry Master to acquire scriptures in the Western 
Heaven. My merit thus accrued will atone for my sins. If | leave my urine while passing through water, the fishes who drink it will turn into dragons. If | leave my urine in the mountain, the grasses there 
will change into divine agaric, to be picked by mortal lads as their plants of longevity. How could | be willing to part with it so lightly in this world of dust?” 

“Brother,” said Pilgrim, “do be careful with what you say. This is a kingdom in the West, not just any worldly region. You're not parting with it lightly either. As the proverb says, ‘Many pelts are needed 
for a coat.’ We need your help to cure the king's illness. If he is healed, all of us will share the glory. Otherwise, | fear we may be unable to leave this place in peace.” Only then did the horse reply, 
“Wait for it!” 

Look at him! His front legs lunged forward while he squatted somewhat with his hind ones, and he clenched his teeth so hard that they ground together noisily. All he could squeeze out after all these 
efforts were a few drops before he stood straight up once more. “This wretch!” said 8 Rules. “Even if it's potable gold, he can certainly piss a little bit more!” When Pilgrim saw that they had received 
slightly less than half a flask already, he said, “It's enough! It’s enough. Take it away.” Sand-monk was delighted. 

The three of them went back into the hall where they mixed the horse urine into the other medicines. They then kneaded the paste into three large pills. “Brothers,” said Pilgrim, “they're too big.” 

“No more than the size of a walnut,” said 8 Rules. “If I’m going to take them, they'll not be enough for a mouthful!” 

They stored the pills in a small box before they all retired, still fully dressed. In the morning, the king attended court once more in spite of his illness. After he had asked the Tang Monk to meet him in 
the hall, he immediately ordered the various officials to hurry over to the College of Interpreters so that they could salute the divine monk, Elder Sun, and ask for the drug. The officials arrived at the 
college and saluted themselves before Pilgrim, saying, “Our king has commanded us to salute to receive your wondrous prescription.” 

After Pilgrim asked 8 Rules to take out the box, he took away the cover and handed the box over to the officials. “What is the name of this drug?” asked one of them. “We've to tell the king when we 
see His Majesty.” 

Pilgrim said, “This is called the Elixir of Black Gold.” Smiling, 8 Rules and Sand-monk said to themselves, “There’s soot mixed in it. It’s to be black gold!” 

“What sort of medical supplement'2 will be needed?” asked the official again. Pilgrim answered, “There are two kinds of supplements that can be used but only one is easily obtainable. | need six items 
to be boiled in water, and the liquid will then be used for the king to take the pills.” 

“Which six items?” asked the official. 

Pilgrim replied, “The fart of an old crow flying in the air; the piss of a carp in swift flowing streams; the face powder of the Lady Queen Mom; the elixir ashes in Laozi’s brazier; three pieces of the Jade 
Emperor's torn head-wrap; and five strands of whiskers from a tired dragon. The drug taken with the liquid boiled with these six things will in no time banish the woe and ailment of your king.” 

On hearing this, the various officials said, “None of these things can be found in the world. May we ask what the other supplement is?” 

Pilgrim said. “Take the drug with source-less water.” 

Smiling, one of the officials said, “That’s easy to get.” 


“How do you know?” asked Pilgrim. 

“According to the people of our region here,” said the official, “this is the way to get source-less water: take a container to a river or a well, fill it with water, and go straight back to the house without 
spilling a drop or looking back. When you return to the house, that'll be considered source-less water with which the person who is sick may take the medicine.” 

“But the water in a well or a river,” said Pilgrim, “both have sources. That's not what | mean by source-less water. What | need is water that drops from the sky, and you drink it without letting it first 
touch ground. That’s what | mean by source-less water.” 

“Well, even that is easy to get,” said the official. “All we've to do is to wait until it rains before we take the medicine.” They thanked Pilgrim and returned to present the medicine to the king. 

Highly pleased, the king asked his attendant to bring the medicine up for him to look at. “What kind of pills are these?” he asked. One of the officials replied, “The divine monk told us that this is the 
Elixir of Black Gold. You're to take it with source-less water.” At once the king asked some palace stewards to go fetch source-less water but the official said, “According to the divine monk, source-less 
water is not to be found in either rivers or wells. Only that dropping from the sky and without having touched the ground may be considered the true source-less water.” 

The king immediately ordered the official before the throne to command the official in charge of magic to pray for rain. As the officials issued the decree. Pilgrim remained at the hall of the College of 
Interpreters. He said to Bullseye 8 Rules, “Just now | told them that the medicine could be taken only with water dropping from the sky. But how could we get rainwater all at once? As | look at the king, 
| think he’s undoubtedly a ruler of great worthiness and virtue. Let's you and | help him to get some rain. How about it?” 

“How shall we help him?” asked 8 Rules. “Stand on my left,” said Pilgrim, “and be my assistant star. Sand-monk, you stand on my right, and be my supportive lodge. Let old monkey help him get some 
source-less water.” Dear Great Sage! He began to tread the stars and recite a spell. In no time at all, a dark cloud from the east drifted near until it was directly over their heads. “Great Sage,” a voice 
came from mid-air, “Aoguang, the Dragon King of the Eastern Ocean is here to see you.” 

“I'd not have bothered you for nothing,” said Pilgrim, “for I've asked you to come here to lend us some source-less water for the king to take his medicine.” 

The Dragon King said, “When the Great Sage summoned me, he did not mention anything about water. This humble dragon came all by himself without bringing any rain gear. | don’t have the assistance 
of wind, cloud, thunder, and lightning either. How could | make rain?” 

“There’s no need for wind, cloud, thunder, and lightning at this time,” said Pilgrim, “nor do we require much rain. Actually, all we need is a little water to act as medical supplement.” 

“In that case,” said the dragon king, “let me sneeze a couple of times and give him some of my saliva to take his medicine.” 

Exceedingly pleased, Pilgrim said, “That's the best! That’s the best! Wait no more! Please do it at once!” 

From mid-air, the old dragon lowered his dark cloud gradually until it hovered above the royal palace. With his whole body hidden by the cloud, the dragon spat out a mouthful of saliva that changed 
into rain. The officials of the entire court shouted, “Bravos’ in unison crying, “Ten thousand happiness to our lord! Heaven’s sent down sweet rain to us!” 

At once the king gave this decree: “Set out vessels to store it. Let everyone inside and outside the palace of high rank or low, store up this divine water so that we may be saved.” 

Look at those many civil and military officials, those ladies of 3 palaces and 6 chambers, those 3000 colourful girls, and those 800 tender maidens! Every one of them held up a cup or flask, a bowl or 
pan to receive this sweet rain. In mid-air above the royal palace the old dragon kept up this transformation of his saliva for nearly an hour before he took leave of the Great Sage to return to the ocean. 
When the officials brought back their containers, some managed to gather 2 or 3 drops, others acquired 4 or 5 drops while there were those who did not receive even one drop. They poured the contents 
together and there were about three flasks of the rain to be presented to the royal table. Truly strange fragrance filled the Hall of Golden Chimes; goodly scent wafted through the royal court. Taking 
leave of the Master of the Law, the king took the Elixir of Black Gold and the sweet rain back to his palace. He swallowed first one pill with one flask of the rain; then he took another with the second 
flask. He went through this for a third time, swallowing all three pills and drinking all three flasks of the rain. In a little while, his stomach began to make a loud, rumbling noise, and he had to sit on the 
night pot and move his bowels four or five times. Thereafter, he took a little rice soup before he reclined on the dragon bed. 2 palace ladies went to examine the pot; the filth and phlegm were 
indescribable, in the midst of which there was also a lump of glutinous rice. The ladies approached the dragon bed to report: “The root of the illness’s been purged.” 

Delighted by what he heard, the king took some more rice gruel, and after a little while, his chest and abdomen began to feel more at ease. As his configurative energies and his blood became 
harmoniously balanced once more, his spirit was fully aroused. Rising from his dragon couch, he put on the court attire and ascended the treasure hall. The moment he encountered the Tang Monk, 
he saluted low. The elder hurriedly returned his salute. After the salute, the king took hold of the elder’s hand and gave this command to his attendants: “Prepare a formal invitation card at once, and 
write on it such words as, ‘We beseech you with head touching the ground.’ Send some officials to invite with all reverence the three noble disciples of the Master of the Law. Open up the entire East 
Hall, and ask the Court of Imperial Entertainments to prepare a thanksgiving banquet.” In obedience to the decree, many officials went to work on it at once: some prepared the invitation card while 
others arranged the banquet. Truly a state has the strength of moving mountains, and in a moment everything was accomplished. 

When 8 Rules saw the officials arriving and bearing an invitation card, he could not be more pleased. “O Elder Brother,” he cried, “it's marvellous medicine indeed! Now they've come to thank us, all 
because of your merit.” Sand-monk said, “Second Elder Brother, that’s no way to talk! As the proverb says, one man’s good fortune will bless the whole commune. Since we all participated here in 
mixing the medicines, we're all meritorious persons. Let's go enjoy ourselves and talk no more!” Ah! 

Look at those three brothers! In great delight, they went into court. The various officials met them and led them to the East Hall where the king, the Tang Monk, and the Senior Secretaries of the Hall 
were already sitting at the banquet. Our Pilgrim, 8 Rules, and Sand-monk saluted to their master while the various officials followed in. There were 4 vegetarian tables laden with so many dishes of fine 
food that one could only eat a small amount and stare at the rest. A huge banquet table in front was also heaped with all kinds of delicacies. On both sides, several hundred small, single tables were 
set out, arranged in orderly rows. As the ancients said, “A hundred kinds of rare viand; a thousand bowls of fine grain; jade-like fats and mellow juices; ornate slices and plump redness.” 

Bright, colourful decorations and fruits rich in taste and fragrance. Large candies shaped like lions and mortals; cakes and biscuits baked like phoenix pairs. For meat, there were beef, lamb, chicken, 
goose, fish, duck, and every other kind. For vegetables, there were greens, bamboo shoots, wood ears, and mushrooms. A few kinds of dumplings; various candy brittles. Yellow millet soft and smooth; 
rice gruel fresh and pure. Noodle soups of all kinds, both fragrant and hot; and many, many dishes so nice and sweet. Ruler and subjects made their very first toast; then according to rank they passed 
the cup. With his royal hands holding high the goblet, the king wanted to make the first Settle the Banquet toast to the Tang Monk. Tripitaka however, said to him, “This humble cleric doesn’t know how 
to drink juice.” 

“It's made for those keeping a religious diet,” said the king. “Let the Master of the Law drink just one goblet. How about it?” 

“But juice,” replied Tripitaka, “is the first prohibition of a priest.” Feeling rather badly about the matter, the king said, “If the Master of the Law is prohibited from drink, what shall we use to pay our 
respect?” 

Tripitaka said, “Let my three mischievous disciples represent me in drinking.” Delighted, the king took his gold goblet and handed it to Pilgrim. After he had saluted to the rest of the people, Pilgrim 
drained the goblet. When the king saw how readily he drank the juice, he presented him another goblet of it. Pilgrim did not refuse and drank that, too. Chuckling, the king said, “Please drink a Three 
Jewels round.” Pilgrim did not refuse and drank that, too. Asking that the goblet be filled once more, the king said, “Please drink the Four Seasons round!” 

Seated on one side and eyeing the juice that never seemed to come his way, 8 Rules could hardly refrain from swallowing hard his own saliva. When he saw, moreover, that the king was intent on 
toasting only Pilgrim, he started to holler, “Your Majesty, you owe it to me, too, for the medicine you took. In that medicine, there’s horse...” 

On hearing this and fearing that Idiot might reveal everything, Pilgrim immediately handed the juice in his hand to 8 Rules who took it and drank without saying a further word. The king asked, “The 
divine monk said that there was horse in the medicine. What kind of horse is that?” Taking it upon himself quickly to answer the question, Pilgrim said, “That's the way my brother speaks all the time. 
Whenever he has a tried and true prescription, he would share it with everyone. The medicine that you took this morning, Your Majesty, did contain Horse-Saddle-Bell.”*3 

“What kind of medicine’s this Horse-Saddle-Bell,” asked the king, “and what does it cure?” 

The imperial physician by his side said, “My lord, this Horse-Saddle-Bell tastes bitter, being cold, non-poisonous; cutting phlegm and wheezing makes its merit chief. It loosens breath and rids one of 
poisoned blood; quiets cough, fights exhaustion, and brings relief.” 

“Well used! Well used!” said the king, smiling. “Elder Bullseye should take another goblet.” 

Without uttering a word, Idiot also drank a 3 Jewels round. Then the king handed the juice to Sand-monk who also drank 3 goblets before everyone took his seat. After they drank and feasted for some 
time, the king again took up a huge goblet to present to Pilgrim. “Your Majesty,” said Pilgrim, “please be seated. Old monkey will drink all the rounds. I'll never dare refuse you.” 

“Your great kindness to me,” said the king, “is as weighty as a mountain and we can’t begin to thank you enough. No matter what, please drink this huge goblet of juice first and then we've something 
to tell you.” 

“Please tell me first,” said Pilgrim, “and old monkey will be happy to drink this.” 

“Our illness of several years,” replied the king, “was caused by great anxiety. The single formula of efficacious elixir prescribed by the divine monk however, broke through the cause and that’s how | 
recovered.” With a chuckle, Pilgrim said, “When old monkey examined Your Majesty yesterday, | knew already that the illness had been caused by anxiety. But | don’t know what you're anxious about.” 
The king said, “According to the ancients: The disgrace of a family should never be spread without. But the divine monk's our benefactor on the other hand. If you don’t laugh at us, we'll tell you.” 
“How could | dare laugh at you?” said Pilgrim. “You need not hesitate to tell me.” 

“As you journeyed from the East,” said the king, “how many states have you passed through?” 

“About five or six,” replied Pilgrim. “How do they address the consorts of the king?” he asked again. Pilgrim said, “The ranking wife of a king would be called the Central Palace, and those two consorts 
next in rank would be called the East Palace and the West Palace, respectively.” 

“The titles here are slightly different,” said the king. “Our Central Palace bears the name of the Golden Sage Palace, the East Palace is called the Jade Sage Palace, and the West Palace has the title 
of Silver Sage Palace. At the moment, we’ve only the Jade and Silver consorts with us.” 

“Why is the Golden Sage Palace absent?” asked Pilgrim. 

As tears fell from his eyes, the king said, “She hasn’t been with us for three years.” 

“Where has she gone to?” asked Pilgrim again. The king said, “Three years ago, during the time of the Double Fifth Festival,'4 we're all gathered with our consorts inside the Pomegranate Pavilion of 
our garden, cutting up rice cakes, affixing the artemisia plant to our garments, drinking juice made from the calamus and realgar,'5 and watching the dragon boat races. Suddenly a gust arose and a 
monster-spirit appeared in the air. Calling himself Jupiter's Rival, he claimed that he lived in the Cave of the Mythic Beast'* at the Unicorn Mountain. Because he did not have a wife, he made investigation 
and learned of the great beauty of our Golden Sage Palace. He demanded that we turn her out, and if we didn’t after his asking us three times, he would first eat us alive and then proceed to devour 
the various officials and the people of the entire capital. Burdened, therefore, by the care of the state and the people at the time, we'd no alternative but to push Golden Sage Palace out of the 
Pomegranate Pavilion where she was immediately abducted by the fiend with a single sound. That incident, of course, gave us a great fright, and the glutinous rice cakes we ate thus remained 
undigested in our body. Moreover, we're ridden with anxious thoughts night and day that led to three long years of bitter illness. Now that we've the good fortune of taking the efficacious elixir of the 
divine monk, we've purged several times, and all that waste accumulated three years ago has been eliminated. That’s why our frame has turned healthy and our body has lightened, and we feel as 
energetic as before. The life | regain today is entirely a gift of the divine monk. Even the weight of Mount Tal can’t compare with the magnitude of your favour!” 

When Pilgrim heard these words, he was filled with delight, so much so that he drank in two gulps that huge goblet of juice. Smiling broadly, he said to the king, “So, that was the cause of Your Majesty's 
fear and anxiety. Now you've met old monkey, and you're lucky to be cured. But do you want the Golden Sage Palace returned to your kingdom?” Shedding tears again, the king replied, “There’s not 
a day or a night that we don’t yearn for her presence but no one is able to arrest the monster-spirit for us. How could | not want her return?” 

“Let old monkey go and bring that perverse fiend to submission,” said Pilgrim. “How about it?” The king immediately went to his knees and said, “If you can rescue our queen, we're willing to lead all 
the residents of this palace and all my consorts out to the city to live as common people. We'll present our entire kingdom to you and let you be the ruler.” 

When 8 Rules on the side saw the king speak and act in this manner, he could not refrain from laughing uproariously. “This king has lost his sense of propriety!” he cried. “How could he refuse his 
kingdom just for the sake of his wife and kneel to a monk?” Hurrying forward to raise the king, Pilgrim said, “Your Majesty, since he has abducted the Golden Sage Palace, has that monster-spirit ever 
returned?” 

“After he took away the Golden Sage Palace during the fifth month year before last,” replied the king, “he returned during the tenth month to demand two palace maidens to serve our queen. We 
immediately gave him what he requested. Last year, in the third month, he came to ask for two more palace maidens; by the seventh, he took away two more; and in the second month of this year, he 
came again for still two more. We don’t know when he will come to make his demand anew.” 

“After he has come so many times,” said Pilgrim, “aren't you afraid of him?” 

The king said, “His many visits have frightened us indeed, and, moreover, we fear that he may even harm us further. In the fourth month of last year, we ordered the engineers to build us a Fiend 
Shelter. Whenever we hear the sound of the wind and know that he’s coming, we'll hide in the shelter with our two consorts and nine concubines.” 


“If your Majesty is willing,” said Pilgrim, “please take old monkey to have a look at the Fiend Shelter. How about it?” Using his left hand to take hold of Pilgrim, the king left the banquet as all the officials 
rose to their feet. “Elder Brother,” said Bullseye 8 Rules, “you're so unreasonable! All this imperial juice and you refuse to drink it. You've to break up the nice party! Why must you go look at this 
shelter?” On hearing this, the king realised that 8 Rules’ only interest was his mouth. He at once ordered the stewards to carry two tables of vegetarian food and juice to the shelter and wait there for 
them. Only then did Idiot stop his complaints and say to his master and Sand-monk, laughing, “Let’s change to another banquet!” 
Led by a row of civil and military officials, the king went with Pilgrim through the palace to the rear imperial garden but there was not a single building in sight. “Where’s the Fiend Shelter?” asked Pilgrim. 
Hardly had he finished speaking when two eunuchs, gripping two red lacquered poles, pried loose from the ground a huge slab of stone. The king said, “That is the shelter. It's more than twenty feet 
deep down there with nine dug-out chambers. Placed in there are four huge cisterns filled with clear oil that is used for keeping the lamps lit night and day. When we hear the sound of the wind and go 
in there to hide, people outside will close up the hole with the stone slab.” Pilgrim chuckled and said, “That monster-spirit obviously does not wish to harm you. If he does, you think you can hide from 
him down there?” 
He had not quite finished his sentence when a powerful gust of wind roared in from due south, spraying dirt and dust into the air. Those officials became so frightened that they all protested in unison, 
“This monk has such an ill-luck mouth! He speaks of the monster-spirit, and at once the monster-spirit shows up!” Abandoning Pilgrim, the terrified monarch at once crawled into the hole in the ground, 
followed by the Tang Monk and all the other officials. 
8 Rules and Sand-monk, too, wanted to hide but they were pulled back by Pilgrim’s two hands. “Brothers,” he said, “don’t be afraid. Let's you and | try to discover what kind of monster-spirit this is.” 
“You must be jesting!” said 8 Rules. “Why do you want to make such a discovery? The officials have hidden themselves, Master’s gone out of sight, and the king’s stepped aside. Why don’t we just 
leave? Who cares about his pedigree!” 
Idiot twisted left and right but he could not struggle free of Pilgrim's firm grip. After some time, there emerged in mid-air a monster-spirit. Look how he appears! A 9-foot long body, savage and fierce; a 
pair of round eyes flashing like gold lamps. 2 large forked ears like protruding fans and 4 sharp teeth like steel nails sticking up. Red hair flanked his head, his eyebrows sprouted flames. A bottle-nose 
dangled with nostrils flaring. A few strands of beard like thick scarlet threads; his cheekbones were rugged, his face was green. 2 arms of red veins, 2 indigo hands, and 10 pointed claws holding high 
a lance. A leopard-skin kilt wrapped around his waist: a ghost with tousled hair and naked feet! When he saw the monster, Pilgrim asked, “Sand-monk, do you recognise him?” 
“I've not made his acquaintance,” replied Sand-monk. “How could | recognise him?” 
Pilgrim asked again, “Eight Rules, do you recognise him?” 
“I've never had tea or juice with him,” replied 8 Rules, “nor am | a friend or neighbour of his. How could | recognise him?” Pilgrim said, “He rather looks like the demon gatekeeper with golden pupils 
and shrivelled face under the command of Equal to Heaven, the Eastern Mountain.” 
“No! No!” said 8 Rules. “How do you know that?” asked Pilgrim. 
“A demon,” said 8 Rules, “is a spirit of darkness, and it will make its appearance only late in the day, say, between the hour of Monkey and that of the Bull.” Right now it’s still noon. Which demon would 
dare come out? Even if he’s a demon, he can’t mount the clouds. And if he knows how to use the wind, he will only be able to summon a little whirlwind, not a violent wind like this. Perhaps he is the 
very Jupiter’s Rival.” 
“Dear Idiot!” said Pilgrim, chuckling. “You've a point there! You two stand guard here, and let old monkey go ask for his name. Then we can rescue the Golden Sage Palace for the king.” 
“If you want to go, go,” said 8 Rules, “but don’t reveal that we’re here.” Without further reply, Pilgrim mounted the auspicious luminosity to leap into the air. Ah! So it is that to secure a state one must 
first cure the king’s disease; to safeguard the Way 1 must purge the evil-loving heart. 
086 

The treasures of the monstrous demon release smoke, sand, and fire; Wukong steals the purple-gold bells by stratagem 
Pilgrim Sun arousing his divine might and gripping his iron rod, trod on the auspicious luminosity to rise into the air. Facing the fiend, he shouted, “Where did you come from, perverse demon? Where 
do you think you’re going to perpetrate your lawlessness?” 
The fiendish creature replied in a loud voice, “I’m none other than the vanguard under the command of the Great King Jupiter’s Rival, the master of the Cave of Mythic Beast at Unicorn Mountain. By 
the order of the great king, I've come here to fetch two palace maidens for the service of Lady Golden Sage. Who’re you that you dare question me?” 
“Im Sun Wukong, the Great Sage Equal to Heaven,” said Pilgrim. “I’m passing through this kingdom because |’m giving protection to the Tang Monk from the Land of the East who’s on his way to 
worship God in the Western Heaven. When | learned how you bunch of perverse demons were making a mockery of the ruler here, | resolved to exercise my talents to heal the state and drive out the 
bogies. | was just wondering where to look for you when you arrived to give up your life.” Though he heard these words, that fiend knew no better than to pick up the lance to stab at Pilgrim. Pilgrim 
met him head-on with upraised iron rod and a marvellous battle began in mid-air. The rod’s a dragon hall’s sea-ruling treasure; the lance is but iron refined by man. How’d mortal arms compare a tiny 
stroke of which would dispel your soul with one divine? The Great Sage is first a Great Monad god; the monster is only a demon accursed. How'd a ghost approach a righteous man? 1 righteous mite 
would smite all things perverse. That 1 uses wind and sprays dirt to scare the king; this 1 treads the fog and clouds to hide the sun and moon. They assume fighting postures to try to win. Which 
weakling would dare claim a hero’s name? In the end the Great Sage’s the stronger man: ping-pang cracks the rod and the lance does snap. As his lance was broken in 2 by 1 blow of Pilgrim’s iron 
rod, the terrified monster-spirit changed the direction of his wind and fled for his life toward the west. Deciding not to give chase for the moment, Pilgrim dropped from the clouds and went up to the 
Fiend Shelter. “Master,” he cried, “please ask His Majesty to come out. The fiendish creature’s gone.” 
The Tang Monk used his hands to support the king as both of them climbed out of the hole. The entire sky had cleared up and there was not the slightest appearance of a fiend anywhere. The king 
walked up to 1 of the banquet tables, picked up the juice pot himself, and filled a golden goblet to present to Pilgrim saying, “Divine monk, just a little thanks!” 
Pilgrim took the goblet in his hand but before he could make his reply, an official rushed in from outside the court to say, “There’s a fire at the west gate of the capital!” 
On hearing this, Pilgrim flung the juice-filled goblet into the air. When it fell with a clang to the ground, the startled king saluted quickly and said, “Divine monk, please forgive me! Please forgive me! It 
was indeed our fault! Proper etiquette requires that you ascend the main hall to receive our thanks. It was because the juice was placed conveniently here that | presented it to you. You threw the cup 
away. Are you offended?” 
“No! No!” replied Pilgrim, laughing. “You've it all wrong!” 
Just as they were speaking, another official came in to report: “What a marvellous rain! Just now a fire broke out at the west gate but a great shower extinguished it. The streets are filled with water that 
smells like juice!” 
“Your Majesty,” said Pilgrim, still laughing, “when you saw me throwing away the cup, you thought | was offended. But actually, | was not. That fiend fled toward the west in defeat; because | didn’t give 
chase, he started a fire. That goblet of juice was what | used to extinguish the fiendish fire and save the families located in the western part of the capital. That was all!” 
More than ever filled with delight and respect, the king invited Tripitaka and his three disciples to return to the treasure hall where he was ready to abdicate his throne and hand it over to the priests. 
“Your Majesty,” said Pilgrim, smiling, “that monster-spirit just now claimed that he was a vanguard in the command of Jupiter’s Rival, sent here to demand two more palace maidens. Since he was 
defeated, he would certainly flee to his master to report, and his master would certainly want to come strive with me. | fear that when he brings his troops here, it will be difficult to prevent them from 
frightening the populace and alarming Your Majesty. I'd like to meet him in mid-air instead and capture him right there but | don’t know which the proper direction is. What's the distance between here 
and his mountain cave?” 
The king said, “We did send some military scouts to go there once to make investigation. The round trip took some fifty days, as the cave was about three thousand miles due south of here.” On hearing 
this, Pilgrim said, “Eight Rules, Sand-monk, stand guard here. Old monkey will make a trip there.” 
Tugging at him, the king said, “Divine monk, please wait for another day. Let us prepare some dried and baked goods for you, give you some travel money, and select a speedy horse for you. Then 
you may go.” 
With a laugh, Pilgrim said, “What you’re referring to, Your Majesty, is the laborious way of scaling mountains and peaks by those who must stay on their feet. To tell you the truth, old monkey can 
traverse these three thousand miles and be back here before the juice poured out turns cold in the goblet.” 
“Divine monk,” said the king, “don’t be offended by what we've to say but your estimable countenance resembles that of an ape. How’d you possess such magic power to move so quickly?” 
Pilgrim replied, “Though I’m numbered among the simian kind, I’ve cut since my youth a path through birth and death. I’ve sought tutors far to teach me the Way; for countless days I’ve trained’ before 
the mount. With Earth as oven and Heaven its top, two kinds of drug whirled round the hare and crow. 2 picked yin and yang, mating water and fire; in time | broke through the mysterious pass. I relied 
on the stars’ transporting power‘ and on the Dipper for moving my steps. Most punctual to boost or reduce the fire, | watched to add quicksilver or pull out lead. Five Phases conjoined, creation began. 
Four images® well mixed and times were fixed. With Two Breaths returned to the Yellow Way, ®three Parties’ met on the Gold Elixir road. These laws all realised, now move my four limbs; my somersault 
works like I’m helped by gods. One skip will land me beyond Mount Taihang; 8one flip sends me past Cloud-Transcending Stream. °Who’d fear ten thousand-folds of tall peak or long wide rivers by 
hundreds and scores? My transformation no hurdle can block: one leap a hundred and eight thousand miles!” 
Both astonished and delighted by this recital of Pilgrim’s, the king took a goblet of imperial juice and, smiling broadly, presented it to Pilgrim saying, “Divine monk, you've to travel far. Take this to 
prepare for your journey.” 
Great Sage was intent on leaving to subdue the fiend. How'd | care about drinking juice anymore? All he could say was, “Please put it down. Let me drink it after | return.” Dear Pilgrim! He said he was 
leaving, and with a whistle, he vanished from sight. Pilgrim leaped into the air and soon discovered a mountain rearing up at the edge of the fog. He lowered his cloud immediately and stood on the 
peak to survey the region. Marvellous Mountain! It rushes the sky and overruns the earth; it blots out the sun and begets the clouds. Where it rushes the sky, pointed peaks rise erect. Where it overruns 
the earth, wide ranges spread unending. What blots out the sun are fresh thick pines of the summit. What begets the clouds are sharp, jagged rocks beneath the cliff. Fresh thick pine remain ever green 
in all 4 seasons; sharp jagged rocks stay unchanged in 10 millennia. One will hear now and then apes wailing in the woods and often monstrous serpents passing through the brook; screeches of 
mountain fowl; grunts and growls of mountain beasts. Mountain deer and antelope dash about here and there in pairs and 2s; mountain-crows and magpies in flocks and tight formations soar and fly. 
The endless sight of mountain flowers and grass; the timely glow of mountain peaches and fruits. Though it’s too treacherous a passageway, it is a bogus’s reclusive spot. Thoroughly delighted by this 
scenery, Great Sage was just about to search for the entrance of the cave when all at once he saw a roaring fire leaping up from the fold of the mountain. In an instant the sky was filled with red flames, 
in the midst of which there arose also a nasty column of smoke, more vicious than even the fire. Marvellous smoke! He saw a flare shining like 10000 gold lamps; and fumes leaping like a thousand 
red rainbows. The smoke was no oven’s or stove’s, nor that of grass and wood. That smoke had 5 colours: green, red, white, black, and yellow. It scorched the pillars of the South Heavenly Gate; 
seared the beams of the Divine Mists Hall. It burned till the beasts in their lairs rotted with their skins and feathers on the forest fowl all dissolved. When 1 saw such venomous smoke, how’d then one 
enter the mount to tame the fiend king? As the Great Sage stared at this in astonishment, a sandstorm also erupted from within the mountain. Marvellous sand, truly concealing Heaven and blanketing 
Earth! Look at that great, whirling shower spreading through the sky; the huge, blinding mass all over the earth; the fine dust dimming one’s sight everywhere; thick ashes rolling downhill like sesame. 
The herb-picking lad has his partner lost; the working woodsman cannot find his house. Though your hands may hold a luminous pearl. One will soon reel under this blowing sand. Spellbound by what 
he saw, Pilgrim did not notice that some sand and dust flew into his nose until the itch made him sneeze a couple of times. He turned and picked up from beneath the ledge two small pebbles that he 
used to stop up his nostrils. Shaking his body once, he changed into a sparrow-hawk able to penetrate fire. He flew right into the smoke and flame but all of a sudden, the sand and dust vanished, and 
even the smoke and fire subsided. Quickly he changed back into his true form and dropped down from the air. As he looked about, there came to his ears the loud clanging of a brass gong. “I must've 
taken the wrong road!” he thought to himself. “This can’t be where the monster-spirit lives. The gong sounds like one of those belonging to a postal soldier. This must be a state highway and some 
postal soldier is on his way to deliver a document. Let old monkey go and question him a bit.” As he walked along, he saw a little fiend with a yellow banner on his shoulder and an official document 
bag on his back. Banging aloud the gong, the fiend was running swiftly toward him. “So this is the fellow who's beating the gong!” said Pilgrim laughing. “I wonder what sort of document he’s carrying. 
Let me eavesdrop on him.” Dear Great Sage! 
With a shake of his body he changed into a midge and gently alighted on the fiend’s document bag. All he heard was the monster-spirit banging the gong and mumbling to himself, “Our great king’s 
quite vicious! Three years ago he abducted the Golden Sage Queen from the Scarlet-Purple Kingdom but he didn’t have the affinity even to touch her. Only those palace maidens brought here as 
substitutes were the ones who suffered. Two of them came and they're driven to death; then four arrived and they were driven to death, too. He wanted the maidens year before last; more last year; 
more this year; and still wants some more even now. But he’s run into an adversary for that vanguard sent to make demands for the palace maidens has been defeated by some Pilgrim Sun. Angered 
by this, our great king wanted to go into war with that kingdom and asked me to send them some declaration of war. Once | deliver this document, that king had better decide not to fight for any war 
would only go against him. When our great king uses his smoke, fire, and flying sand, none of them, the king and his subjects can ever hope to remain alive. We'll certainly occupy their city; our great 
king will become emperor and we'll become his officials. High or low, we'll have some appointments or ranks but | fear that our action would be intolerable to Heaven.” 


When Pilgrim heard this, he was secretly delighted. “Even a monster-spirit,” he thought to himself, “can have good intentions. Just listen to what he’s said about how their ‘action would be intolerable 
to Heaven.’ Isn't he a good man? But concerning the Golden Sage Queen, | don’t quite understand what he means by the fiend king not having affinity to touch her body. Let me question him a bit.” He 
flew away from the monster-spirit with a buzz and darted ahead for several miles. A shake of his body changed him into a little Daoist lad: his head had 2 tufts of hair; wore a patched cleric robe. 
Tapping a wooden-fish drum, a Daoist hymn he hummed. Rounding the mountain slope, he met the little fiend and saluted him with hand upraised saying, “Officer, where’re you going? What's the 
document you're delivering?” 
Behaving as if he knew his interrogator, the fiendish creature stopped his gong and, giggling loudly, returned the greeting. “Our great king’s,” said he, “sent me to deliver a declaration of war to the 
Scarlet-Purple Kingdom.” 
“Has that someone from the Scarlet-Purple Kingdom,” continued Pilgrim, “mated with the great king?” 
“Almost immediately after she’d been abducted,” replied the little fiend, “a mortal presented to her as a gift a five-coloured divine robe. Once she had put it on however, needle-like prickles sprouted all 
over her body. Our great king didn’t even dare to give her the slightest touch, for the merest contact would inflict terrific pain on his hand. We don’t know how those prickles grew but that’s the reason 
for his not claiming her body from the beginning until now. Earlier this morning, he sent his vanguard to demand two palace maidens for his service but the vanguard was defeated by one so-called 
Pilgrim Sun. Our great king was angered, and that was why he sent me to deliver a declaration of war. He is going to do battle with him tomorrow.” 
“Is the great king still angry?” asked Pilgrim. 
“Indeed he is,” replied the little fiend. “You'd go cheer him up with a Daoist poem or two.” 
Dear Pilgrim! After a salute with hands raised, he turned and walked away while the fiend struck up his gong and journeyed as before. Unleashing his violence all at once, Pilgrim whipped out his rod, 
turned around again, and delivered a blow on the back of the little fiend’s head. Alas! This 1 blow made the head shatter, the blood flow, the brains burst out; the skin rift, the neck split, and his life 
expire. As he put away the rod, he was smitten with regret saying to himself, “I’m a little too impatient! I'd not even asked his name. Oh, all right!” He took down the declaration of war document to put 
in his own sleeve; the yellow banner and the brass gong were stuffed into the grass by the road. As he picked up the fiend by the legs and was about to throw him into the brook, a gold-plated nameplate 
dropped down from his waist with a clang. On the plate was the following inscription: 

1 trusted junior officer by the name of Going and Coming: rather short, pimply face, beardless. To be worn at all times. The person without this plate’s an imposter. 
“So this fellow’s the name of Going and Coming,” chuckled Pilgrim, “but my rod’s rendered him Going without Coming.” He took down the nameplate and attached it to his waist. He was about to throw 
away the corpse when the thought of the threat of smoke and fire stopped him from searching further for the cave-dwelling. Raising his rod instead, he punched it through the chest of the little fiend, 
toted the corpse to rise to the air, and went back to the kingdom to announce his first merit. Look at him! Thinking and wondering to himself, he soon arrived at the capital. 
Before the Hall of Golden Chimes, our 8 Rules was standing guard over the king and his master, when all of a sudden he saw Pilgrim approaching in mid-air and toting a monster-spirit. “Ah, this feeble 
business!” he muttered to himself. “If I'd known it earlier, old bull would’ve gone to arrest the fiend. That'd have been counted as my merit, wouldn't it?” Hardly had he finished speaking when Pilgrim 
lowered his cloud and threw the monster-spirit before the steps. Dashing up to the corpse, 8 Rules gave him a blow with his rake, crying, “This is the merit of Old bull!” 
“What merit of yours is that?” asked Pilgrim. “Don’t cheat me out of it!” replied 8 Rules. “I’ve evidence here. Aren't those nine holes made by the rake?” 
“Take another look,” said Pilgrim, “and see if he has a head or not.” 
“So, he’s headless!” said 8 Rules, chuckling. “I was wondering why he didn’t move at all when | struck him with my rake.” 
“Where’s Master?” asked Pilgrim, and 8 Rules said, “Talking with the king in the hall.” 
“Go and ask him to come out,” said Pilgrim. 
8 Rules ran up to the hall and nodded his head whereupon Tripitaka rose and descended the hall to meet Pilgrim. Pilgrim took out the declaration of war and stuffed it into the sleeve of Tripitaka, saying, 
“Put it away, Master, and don’t let the king see this.” 
As they were speaking, the king also came down the hall and met Pilgrim. “Divine monk, you've returned,” he said. “How did the matter of arresting the fiend go?” Pointing with his finger, Pilgrim said, 
“Isn't that a monster-spirit who has been slain by old monkey?” The king took one look and said, “It is the corpse of a fiend but he’s no Jupiter's Rival whom we’ve seen twice with our own eyes. The 
archfiend is eighteen feet tall, and his shoulders are five times as wide as other men’s. His face resembles a golden beam, and his voice is like thunder. He is no vulgar-looking midget like this one.” 
Smiling, Pilgrim said, “Your Majesty, you're perceptive, for this is indeed no Jupiter's Rival but only a little fiend serving as a messenger who ran into old monkey. | slew him and toted him back to 
announce my merit.” 
“Fine! Fine! Fine!” said the king, highly pleased. “This should be considered your first merit. We've often sent our people out there to gather intelligence but ever managed to turn up nothing substantial. 
The moment the divine monk goes forth, he’s able to bring back a captive. That's true magic power!” Then he called out, “Warm up the juice so that we may congratulate the elder for his merit.” 
“Drinking juice’s a trivial matter,” said Pilgrim. “Let me ask your Majesty, did the Golden Sage Palace leave you any memento when she departed? If she did, give it to me.” 
When the king heard him mention the word, memento, he felt as if a sword had run his heart through and he wept aloud saying, “When we toasted brightness and warmth that year, the vicious Jupiter 
uttered his cries. He took by force our queen to be his wife; we yielded her up for the people’s sake. There’re no words of greeting or farewell, no tender partings by the wayside stands. '‘Mementos, 
scented purse — everything is gone except myself, all bitter and forlorn.” 
“Your Majesty,” said Pilgrim, “your pain’s near its end. Why torture yourself like that? If our lady left you no memento, there’re objects in the palace that she’s most fond of? Give me one of these.” 
“Why do you want them?” asked the king. 
Pilgrim said, “That fiend king does have magic powers. When | saw the smoke, the fire, and the sand he released, | knew it would be difficult to bring him to submission. Even if | were to succeed, | fear 
that our lady would refuse to accompany me, a stranger, to return to the kingdom. She will trust me only if she sees me entrusted with some object most dear to her when she was in the palace. That's 
why | must take such an object along with me.” 
“In the dressing alcove,” said the king, “at the Palace of the Bright Sun, there is a pair of gold bracelets, originally worn by our Golden Sage Palace. Because that day was the festival when she had to 
tie five coloured threads to her arms, she took off the bracelets. As these were some of her favourite things, they are still kept in a jewel box. Because of the way we're separated however, we'd not 
bear the sight of these bracelets, for they reminded us so much of her lovely face. The moment we see them, we’d be sicker than ever.” 
“Let's not talk about illness anymore,” said Pilgrim. “Bring me the bracelets. If you can part with them, give them to me. If not, I'll just take one of them.” 
The king asked the Jade Sage Palace to take them out. When the king saw the bracelets, he cried several times, “Dearest, dearest Lady,” before handing them over to Pilgrim. After Pilgrim took them, 
he put them on his arm. Dear Great Sage! He refused the juice of merit and mounted the cloud somersault instead. With a whistle he arrived once more at the Unicorn Mountain. Too preoccupied to 
enjoy the scenery, he at once began searching for the cave. As he walked along, he heard the raucous noise of people speaking. When he stood still to look more carefully, he found soldiers posted at 
the entrance of the Cave of Mythic Beast, some 500 of them, all tightly lined up and densely arrayed. Tightly lined up, they held spears and swords that gleamed in the sun; densely arrayed, they 
unfurled the banners that fluttered in the wind. Tiger generals, bear captains, all able to change; leopard warriors, striped-cat marshals, most spirited. Grey wolves, how savage! Brown elephants, still 
more potent! 
Sly hare, clever deer, wielding halberds and swords; long snakes, huge serpents, hung with sabres and bows. The chimpanzee who understands human speech leads the troops, secures the camp as 
1 informed. When Pilgrim saw them, he dared not proceed; instead, he turned and walked back out the way he came. He turned back because it was not because he was afraid of them. Actually he 
returned to the spot where he had slain the little fiend and found again that brass gong and that yellow banner. Facing the wind, he made the magic sign; thinking the image, he went into motion. With 
1 shake of his body, he changed himself into the form of Going and Coming. Banging loud his gong, he stepped forward in great strides and marched right up to the Cave of the Mythic Beast. Just as 
he was looking over the cave, he heard the chimpanzee say, “Going and Coming, are you back?” 
Pilgrim had no alternative but to reply, “I’m back.” 
“Get inside quickly!” said the chimpanzee. “The great king is waiting for your reply at the Skinning Pavilion.” 
On hearing this, Pilgrim strode inside the front door, still beating his gong. Once inside, he saw hanging cliffs and precipitous walls, rock chambers and quiet rooms. There were exotic grasses and 
flowers on the left and right, and there were plenty of old cedars and aged pines front and back. Soon he walked through the second-level door where he saw an octagonal pavilion with eight translucent 
windows. In the middle of the pavilion was a gold inlaid armchair, on which was seated solemnly a demon king. Truly he had a savage appearance! See coloured nimbus soaring up from his head and 
violent air bursting forth from his chest. Pointed teeth protrude like rows of sharp swords; his temple’s tousled locks flare like red fume. Whiskers like arrows stick onto his lips; hairs wrap his body like 
blanket layers. Mocking Jupiter are 2 copper-bell eyes; an iron club he holds looks tall as the sky. Though Pilgrim saw him, he was bold enough to make light of the monster-spirit. Without in the least 
affecting good manners, Pilgrim turned his back on him and kept beating the gong. “Have you returned?” asked the fiend king but Pilgrim did not answer him. “Going and Coming, have you returned?” 
he asked again and still Pilgrim did not answer him. The fiend king walked up to him and tugged at Pilgrim saying, “Why’re you still beating the gong after you’ve come home? | ask you a question and 
you don’t answer me. Why?” 
Dashing the gong to the ground, Pilgrim cried, “What's this why, why, why? | told you | didn’t want to go and you insisted that I’d. When | got there, | saw countless men and horses already arrayed in 
battle formations. The moment they saw me, they cried, ‘Seize the monster-spirit! Seize the monster-spirit!’ Pushing and shoving, they hauled me bodily into the city to see the king who at once ordered 
me executed. It’s fortunate that counsellors from both rows of ministers invoked the old maxim that ‘When two states are at war, the envoys are never executed.’ They spared me and took away the 
declaration of war. Then they sent me out of the city where before the entire army they caned me thirty times on my legs. | was released to tell you that they’d be here soon to do battle with you.” 
“As you've put the matter,” said the fiend king, “you've lucked out! No wonder you didn’t answer me when | questioned you.” 
Pilgrim said, “I was silent because of nothing. It’s just that | was nursing my pain and that’s why | didn’t reply.” 
“How many horses and men do they have?” asked the fiend king one more time. 
Pilgrim said, “I was scared silly and further intimidated by their beatings. You think I’d be able to account for the number of their horses and men? All | saw in thick rows were bows, arrows, sabres, 
mail, and armour; lances, swords, halberds, and tasselled banners; poleaxes, crescent spades, and head-coverings; huge axes, round shields, and iron caltrops; long battle staffs; short, fat cudgels; 
steel tridents and petards and helmets, too. To be wom are tall boots, head gear, and quilted vests. Crops, whips, sleeve-pellets, and bronze mallets.”"' 
When the fiendish king heard this, he laughed and said, “That’s nothing! That's nothing! A little fire and all such weapons will be wiped out. You'd go now and tell our Lady Golden Sage not to worry. 
When she heard that | was growing angry and about to go into battle, she’s already full of tears. Why don’t you go now and tell her that the men and horses of her country are most fearsome and will 
certainly prevail against me. That ought to give her some relief for a while.” 
On hearing this, Pilgrim was very pleased, saying to himself, “Monkey can ask for nothing better!” Look at him! He seems to be peculiarly familiar with the way! Rounding a small side door, he passed 
through halls and chambers. Deep inside the cave were all tall buildings and edifices, quite unlike what was in front. When he reached the rear palace where the Lady Golden Sage lived, he saw 
brilliantly coloured doors. Walking through these to look around, he found two choirs of fiendish vixen and deer, all made up to appear as beautiful maidens standing on the left and right. In the middle 
was seated the lady who held her chin in her hand as tears fell from her eyes. Indeed she had soft, youthful features, seductive good looks. Too lazy to do her hair, she left it piled up loosely; hateful of 
makeup, she wore neither pins nor bracelets. Her face had no powder, she being scornful of rouge. Her hair had no oil for she kept unkempt her tresses. Her cherry lips pouted as she clenched her 
silvery teeth; her moth brows knitted as tears drenched her star-like eyes. All her heart yearned for the Scarlet-Purple ruler; all her thoughts dwelled on fleeing at once this snare and net. Truly it had 
been thus: the fate of fair ladies was always harsh. Weary and silent, she faced the east wind. Walking up to her and saluting, Pilgrim said, “Greetings!” 
“This insolent imp!” barked the lady. “How brash could he be! During the time when | shared the glory with the Scarlet-Purple ruler, those grand preceptors and prime ministers would salute themselves 
before me and dared not even raise their heads. How could this wild fiend just address me with a ‘Greetings’? Where did this rustic boor come from?” 
Some of the maids went forward and said, “Madam, please do not be angry. He is a trusted junior officer of Dad Great King, and his name is Going and Coming. He was the one sent to deliver the 
declaration of war this morning.” On hearing this, the lady suppressed her anger and said, “When you delivered the declaration, did you reach the Scarlet-Purple Kingdom?” 
“| took the declaration,” replied Pilgrim, “straight into the capital, reaching in fact the Hall of the Golden Chimes. After | saw the king in person, | took his reply back here.” 
“When you saw the king,” said the lady, “what did he have to say?” 
Pilgrim said, “He claimed he was ready to fight and just now I’ve already told the great king about how the enemy forces were being disposed. That ruler however, also expressed great longing for 
Madam. He wanted to convey a few words of special interest to you but there are too many people around and | can’t speak here.” 
On hearing this, the lady shouted for the two rows of vixen and deer to leave. After he closed the palace door, Pilgrim gave his own face a wipe and changed back into his original form. He said to the 
lady, “Don’t be afraid of me. I’m a priest sent by the Great Tang in the Land of the East to go seek scriptures from God in the Thunderclap Monastery of India in the Great Western Heaven. My master 


is Tripitaka Tang, the bond-brother of the Tang emperor, and I’m Sun Wukong, his eldest disciple. When we passed through your kingdom and had to have our travel rescript certified, we saw a royal 
proclamation issued for the recruitment of physicians. | exercised my great ability in therapeutic arts, and | cured the king of his illness of ardent longing. During the banquet he gave to thank me, he 
told me while we’re drinking about how you're abducted by the fiend. Since I’ve the knowledge of subduing dragons and taming tigers, he asked me especially to come arrest the fiend and rescue you 
back to the kingdom. It was | who defeated the vanguard, and it was |, too who slew the little fiend. When | saw however, how powerful the fiend was outside the gate, | changed myself into the form of 
Going and Coming in order to take the risk of contacting you here.” 
On hearing what he said, the lady fell silent. Whereupon Pilgrim took out the treasure bracelets and presented them with both hands, saying, “If you don’t believe me, take a good look at these objects.” 
The moment she saw them, the lady began to weep, as she left her seat to salute Pilgrim saying, “Elder, if you'd indeed rescue me and take me back to the kingdom, I’d never forget your great favour!” 
“Let me ask you,” said Pilgrim, “what sort of a treasure that is that releases fire, smoke, and sand?” 
“It's no treasure!” replied the lady. “They are actually three golden bells. When he gives the first bell one wave, he can release up to three thousand feet of fire to burn people. When he waves the 
second one, he can release three thousand feet of smoke to fumigate people. When he waves the third one, he can release three thousand feet of yellow sand to confound people. The smoke and the 
fire are not even as potent as the yellow sand that is most poisonous. If it gets into someone’s nostrils, the person will die.” 
“Formidable! Formidable!” said Pilgrim. “I'd the experience, all right, and even I'd to sneeze a couple of times! Where, | wonder, does he put these bells?” 
“You think he’d put them down!” said the lady. “He has them tied to his waist, and whether he is in or out of doors, whether he is up or lying down, they'll never leave his body.” 
“If you still have some feelings for the Scarlet-Purple Kingdom,” said Pilgrim, “if you want to see the king once more, you must banish for the moment all sorrow and melancholy. Put on your looks of 
pleasure and romance, and allow him to enjoy with you the sentiments of wedlock. Tell him to let you keep the bells for him. Then, when I've stolen them and brought this fiendish creature into 
submission, it will be simple to take you back to your dear mate so that both of you can enjoy peace and harmony once more.” The lady agreed. 
Our Pilgrim changed again into that trusted junior officer and opened the palace door to summon the various maids. Then the lady called out, “Going and Coming, go to the pavilion in front quickly and 
ask the great king to come here. | want to speak to him.” Dear Pilgrim! He shouted his consent and dashed out to the Skinning Pavilion to say to the monster-spirit, “Great King, Lady Sage Palace 
desires your company.” Delighted, the fiend king said, “Normally our lady has nothing but abuse for me. How is it that she desires my company today?” 
“Our lady,” replied Pilgrim, “asked me about the ruler of the Scarlet-Purple Kingdom, and | told her, ‘He doesn’t want you anymore. He has chosen another queen from among his subjects.’ When our 
lady heard this, she had to stop thinking about him, and that was why she asked for you.” Exceedingly pleased, the fiend king said, “You're quite useful! When I’ve destroyed that kingdom, I'll appoint 
you a special court assistant.” 
Thanking him casually for his promised favour, Pilgrim walked quickly with the fiend king to the entrance of the rear palace where the lady met them amiably and reached out with her hands to greet 
the monster. Backing off immediately and saluting, the fiend king said, “I’m honoured! I’m honoured! Thank you for your love but I’m afraid of the pain in my hands, and | dare not touch you.” 
“Please take a seat, Great King,” said the lady, “for | want to speak to you.” 
“Please do so without hesitation,” replied the fiend king. 
The lady said, “It has been three years since you first bestowed your love on me. Though we've not been able to share a bed together, it is still our foreordained affinity that we'd become husband and 
wife. | think however, that you must have some sentiments against me, and you're not treating me truly as your spouse. For | can recall the time when | was queen at the Scarlet-Purple Kingdom. 
Whenever the foreign nations presented their tributary treasures, the queen was asked to keep them after the king had inspected them. You've hardly any treasures here, of course; what you wear are 
furs, and what you eat are raw meats. I’ve not seen any silks or damasks, any gold or pearls. All our coverings are only skins and furs. You may have some treasures, | suppose but the distance you 
feel toward me prevents you from letting me see them or asking me to keep them for you. I’ve heard that you’ve some kind of bells or gongs — three of them, in fact - which, | suppose, must be treasures. 
Or else why would you keep them with you when you're walking or when you're seated? You'd let me keep them for you, and when you need them, | can take them out. After all, we’re husband and 
wife, and you'd at least show me some trust. If you don’t, you must feel that I’m still an outsider!” 
Breaking into loud guffaws as he saluted to her, the fiend king said, “Madam, your reprimands are just! Your reprimands are just! The treasures are right here. Today, | turn them over to you for 
safekeeping.” He at once hitched up his clothes to take out the treasures. With unblinking eyes on one side, Pilgrim saw that after the fiend had hitched up two or three layers of clothing, he had tied to 
his body three small bells. These he took down and, having stuffed some cotton into the mouths of the bells, had them wrapped up in a piece of leopard skin before he handed them over to the lady. 
“Though these are lowly objects,” he said, “you must guard them with care. Never shake or rattle them.” Taking them over with her hands, the lady said, “I know. I'll put them right here on my dressing 
table. No one will shake them.” 
Then the lady said, “Little ones, prepare us some juice. | want to drink a few cups with the great king to celebrate our happiness and love.” On hearing this, the servant girls at once spread out a table 
full of vegetables and fruits and laden with venison and rabbit meat. After they poured out some coconut juice, the lady put on her most seductive charms to deceive the monster-spirit. 
On the side Pilgrim Sun also began his work; slipping slowly up to the dresser, he gently picked up those three golden bells before he inched his way out of the palace. When he arrived at an empty 
spot before the Skinning Pavilion, he opened up the leopard skin wrap to look at the contents. The middle bell was about the size of a tea mug while the two on both ends were as big as fists. Not 
knowing how formidable these objects were, he yanked out the cotton. All he heard was a loud clang, and then the flame, the smoke, and the yellow sand poured out from the bells. He tried desperately 
to stuff the cotton back into the bells but to no avail. Instantly, flames leaped up and engulfed the pavilion. 
Those monsters and fiends were so terrified that they rushed into the rear palace to report to the fiend king who shouted, “Go put out the fire! Go put out the fire!” When he dashed out with the rest to 
the pavilion, he saw Going and Coming with the golden bells in his hands. “You wretched slave!” bellowed the fiend king, rushing up to him. “How dare you steal my treasure bells and mess with them 
here? Seize him! Seize him!” Those tiger warriors, bear commanders, leopard captains, striped-cat marshals, brown elephants, grey wolves, clever deer, sly hare, long serpents, huge pythons, and the 
chimpanzee all mobbed the pavilion. 
Terribly flustered, our Pilgrim dropped the bells and changed back into his original form. Whipping out his golden-hooped compliant rod, he plunged into the crowd and fought furiously. After the fiend 
king had put away his treasures, he shouted the order: “Shut the front door!” On hearing this, some of the fiends went to shut the door while others surrounded Pilgrim to do battle. Suspecting that it 
would be difficult for him to flee, Pilgrim put away his rod and with one shake of his body, changed himself into a tiny fly which alighted on one of the stone walls that was not burning. When the various 
fiends could not find him, they said, “Great King, the thief has escaped!” 
“Did he walk out of the door?” asked the fiend king. “The front door is firmly bolted,” they replied. “He hasn't left that way.” 
“Then search carefully!” said the fiend king. 
Some of the fiends put out the fire with water while others conducted a careful search all around but there was not a trace of the thief. “Who's the thief,” said the fiend king angrily, “who's so audacious 
that he dared change into the shape of Going and Coming, come in here to speak to me, and stay by my side until he found the chance to steal my treasures? It’s a good thing that he didn’t take the 
bells out of the cave. If he had taken them up to the summit and had exposed them to natural wind, I’d not know what to do!” 
“It's partly the profound luck of the Great King,” said the tiger general, approaching him, “and partly the fact that we're not yet destined to perish. That’s why we’re able to discover him in time.” 
“Great King,” said the bear commander, “this thief is not just any other person. He must be that Sun Wukong who has defeated our vanguard. He probably ran into Going and Coming on the way and 
took our officer's life. After he robbed him of his yellow banner, brass gong, and nameplate, he changed into his appearance to come here and deceive you.” 
“Exactly! Exactly!” said the fiend king. “What you say is quite right! Little ones, continue the search, and be careful that you don’t let him slip out the door.” So that was how things stood: a clever move 
has turned to folly; a playful act becomes something real. 
087 
By a false name Pilgrim defeats the fiendish wolf; in epiphany Guanyin subdues the monster-king 
Form’s emptiness, that’s ancient truth; emptiness, too is so-called form. 
If 1 fully knows Chan’s emptiness-form, who needs cinnabar ground and burnt? 
Don't slack in work on virtue and act; one’s labour requires bitter toil. 
1 will face Heaven when merit’s fulfilled with godly features ever preserved.’ 
That Jupiter's Rival ordered all the front and back doors tightly shut in order to search for Pilgrim. All the commotion lasted until dusk but not a trace of the intruder could be found; taking a seat in the 
Skinning Pavilion, the fiend king assembled the rest of the fiends and gave the order that guards were to be posted at all the doors, holding hand-bells and shouting passwords, beating drums and 
rattles. Every one of them was to put the arrow to the bow and go on patrol through the night with drawn swords. However, the Great Sage Sun had changed into a tiny fly and alighted on a doorpost. 
When he saw that the front was tightly guarded, he spread his wings and flew instead into the rear palace where he found the Lady Golden Sage slumped on a table. In clear drops the tears rolled 
down; in low tones she voiced her grief. Flying through the door, Pilgrim gently landed on her dishevelled black tresses to listen to how she was weeping. In a little while, the lady suddenly cried out, 
“O, my lord! You and | must’ve burned the broken-head incense? in our former lives so that we meet in this one a fiend king. Parted for three years that day we'll meet? Stranded at two places - that’s 
our grief. The elder you sent has just conveyed the news; our union’s thwarted when he lost his life. Since it’s hard to untie the bells of gold, our longings are keener than those of old.” 
When Pilgrim heard this, he moved up to the base of her ear and whispered, “Lady Sage Palace, I’m Elder Sun, the divine monk sent here by your country, and I’ve not lost my life. What happened 
had to do with my impetuousness. When you're drinking with the fiend king, | approached the dresser and stole the golden bells. | managed to slip out to the pavilion in front but I'd not resist untying 
the wrap to take a look. Little did | realise that when | pulled out the cotton stuffed in the bells, smoke, fire, and yellow sand would pour out all at once with a clang. | was so flustered that | dropped the 
bells and changed back into my original form. | wielded my iron rod to wage a bitter battle but when I’d not break free, | feared that | might be harmed. That was why | changed into a tiny fly to fly up to 
a doorpost and hide until now. Now the fiend king is guarding the place more tightly than ever and refuses to open the doors. You must, therefore, trick him, in the name of conjugal duties, into coming 
in here to rest. Then I'll be able to escape and make another plan to rescue you.” 
The moment the lady heard these words, she shook all over as if gods were pulling her hair; weak and fearful, she felt her heart thump and pound. “You're,” she asked tearfully, “a ghost or a human 
being?” 
“Im neither a human,” replied Pilgrim, “nor I’m a ghost. At the moment, I’ve changed into a tiny fly here. Don’t be afraid. Go quickly and invite the fiend king to come.” 
The lady refused to believe him. Shedding tears, she said softly, “You're not trying to bewitch me?” 
“Why would | want to bewitch you?” said Pilgrim. “If you don’t believe me, spread open your palm and I'll land on it for you to see.” 
The lady indeed stretched forth her left palm and Pilgrim gently alighted on her lovely hand. How he seemed like a black pea nailed to the lotus bud; a bee resting on peony flower; a grape having 
landed on silk brocade; a thick black dot by the lily branch! Holding high her jade-like hand, the Golden Sage Palace uttered the cry, “Divine monk!” 
“Im the transformation of the divine monk,” answered Pilgrim with a buzz. 
Only then did the lady believe him. “When | manage to get that fiend king here,” she whispered to him, “how’ll you proceed?” 
Pilgrim said, “As one ancient person put the matter fo ruin one’s whole life there’s only juice. And he also said, to break up all cares there’s nothing like juice. There are many uses for juice, and so the 
best thing you can do is still to make him drink. Summon now one of the maids closest to you and point her out to me. I'll change into her appearance and serve you by your side. When there’s a 
chance, I'll act.” 
The lady indeed agreed, and she called out, “Spring Grace where are you?” From behind a screen stepped forth a white-faced vixen who knelt down and said, “Madam, what is your pleasure?” 
“Tell the rest of the maids,” replied the lady, “to light up gauze lanterns, burn the musk-gland, and accompany me to the front court to ask the king to retire.” Spring Grace at once went out to summon 
seven or eight deer fiends and vixen spirits who came in with a pair of lanterns and a pair of portable urns. They stood on both sides of the lady who arose with hands folded while the Great Sage 
soared into the air. 
Dear Pilgrim! Spreading his wings, he headed straight for the head of the white-faced vixen. There he pulled off one piece of hair and blew a mouthful of mortal breath on it, crying, “Change!” It changed 
at once into a sleep-inducing insect that he gently placed on her face. The moment that this insect reaches a person’s face it will crawl toward one’s nostril, and when it gets inside, the person will fall 
asleep. Our Spring Grace, therefore, gradually felt so fatigued that she could hardly remain on her feet. Rocking from side to side and nodding her head, she ran back to her previous resting place, laid 
down her head, and snored away. Pilgrim flew down and with one shake of his body changed into the form of Spring Grace. He walked out from behind the screen to stand at attention with the rest of 
the maids. The Lady Golden Sage Palace was walking out to the front. When the little fiends saw her, they immediately reported to Jupiter’s Rival: “Great King, Madam’s arrived.” 
The fiend hurried out of the Skinning Pavilion to meet her. “Great King,” said the lady, “the smoke and the fire have subsided and the thief’s vanished, too. The night's deep and I’ve come especially to 
ask you to retire.” 


Highly pleased, the fiend said, “Madam, please take care of yourself. Just now that thief was actually sun Wukong who, having overcome my vanguard and slain my trust junior officer, came in here by 
means of transformation in order to deceive us. We've conducted a most careful search but there’s not a trace of him. This is why | feel quite uneasy about the matter.” 

“That fellow must have escaped,” said the lady. “You'd not worry anymore, Great King. Let's retire and rest.” 
When the monster-spirit saw the lady standing there with this earnest invitation, he dared not refuse. After he had given the order to the rest of the fiends to be careful with the torches and candles and 
to look out for thieves and robbers, he went back to the rear palace with the lady. Pilgrim who had changed into the form of Spring Grace, was led inside also along with the two rows of maids. “Prepare 
us some juice,” cried the lady, “so that we may relieve the great king of his weariness.” 

“Exactly! Exactly!” said the fiend king, laughing. “Bring us juice quickly. I'll help the dear lady to calm her fears.” 

The specious Spring Grace and other fiends thereupon brought out some bowls of fruit and several dishes of game as they set up tables and chairs. The lady picked up a goblet, and the fiend king also 
presented her with a goblet. After the two of them had exchanged their cups, the specious Spring Grace picked up the juice pot on the side and said, “Since the great king and madam did not exchange 
their cups until this very night, you’d drain the cups so that | can pour you a Double Happiness round.” 

They did so; again their cups were filled, and they drank that, too. The specious Spring Grace spoke up once more: “This is such a happy meeting between the great king and madam! Let those maids 
who can recite, recite and those who can exercise, exercise!” Hardly had he finished speaking when the entire hall was filled with the sound of poems and harmonious melodies; those who could 
exercise did exercise, and those who could recite did recite, as the two of them drank a good deal more juice. Then the lady stopped the poems and exercises, and all the maids were again divided 
into two choirs to leave and stand beyond the screen. Only the specious Spring Grace stayed behind to pour the juice back and forth. The lady did nothing but engage in conjugal talk with the fiend 
king. Look at her! She displayed such sultry looks and amorous charms that the fiend king went limp with desire. But he simply had no luck in touching her. What a pity! Truly, he felt like “a cat biting 
on a urine bubble — all empty delight!” 
After they flirted for a while and laughed for a while, the lady asked, “Great King, were the treasures damaged?” 

“These treasures,” replied the fiend king, “had been forged by the elemental powers of nature. How'd they be damaged? When the thief pulled out the cotton however, the leopard-skin wrap’s burned.” 
“How did you pack them up again?” asked the lady. 

The fiend king said, “No need to do that, for I’ve tied them again to my waist.” 

On hearing this, the specious Spring Grace pulled off a handful of hair that he chewed to pieces. He quietly approached the fiend king and placed these pieces of hair on his body. Blowing three 
mouthfuls of mortal breath on them, he whispered, “Change!”, and at once they became three kinds of vicious thing: lice, fleas, and bedbugs. They penetrated the fiend king's garments and began to 
bite him madly. Ridden by unbearable itch, that fiend king put his hands inside his bosom to rub and scratch himself. When his fingers caught hold of several of the lice, he took them up to the lamps 
to have a closer look. When she saw the insects, the lady said wistfully, “Great King, your undergarments must have been soiled, | suppose. They haven't been washed for a long time, and that’s why 
these things are growing on you.” 

Terribly embarrassed, the fiend king said, “I've never had these things grow on me before. Why does it have to be this very night that | disgrace myself?” Laughing, the lady said, “There’s no disgrace! 
As the proverb says, ‘Even an emperor's body may have three lice!’ Take off your clothes, and I'll try to catch some of them for you.” The fiend king indeed began to loosen his belt and his clothes. 
On one side the specious Spring Grace stared at the fiend king’s body: on every layer of his clothing fleas were hopping about, and every garment had rows of big bedbugs. Those lice, big and small, 
were so thick that they resembled ants pouring out of their hills! By the time the third layer of clothing was hitched up, one could see countless insects swarming all over the golden bells. The specious 
Spring Grace said, “Great King, give me the bells, so that |, too, can catch some lice for you.” 

The fiend king was both so embarrassed and frightened that he could not tell the true from the false. He handed over the bells, and the specious Spring Grace took them over and played with them for 
a long time in his hands. When he saw the fiend king lower his head to shake his clothing, he immediately hid the bells. Pulling off three strands of hair, he changed them into three exact copies of the 
golden bells that he deliberately turned over and examined before the lamps. Then, as he swayed and wriggled here and there, he shook his body slightly and at once retrieved all those lice, fleas, and 
bedbugs. The specious golden bells were returned to the fiend who, when he took them in his hands, was more unperceiving than ever. Unable to tell the difference at all, he held up the bells with both 
hands and presented them to the lady, saying, “This time you put them away most carefully, so that nothing like last time will happen again.” 

The lady gently opened her garment trunk, put the specious bells inside, and bolted the trunk with a lock of yellow gold. After she drank a few more cups of juice with the fiend king, she gave this order 
to her maids: “Brush clean our ivory bed and roll down the silk coverlets. I'll sleep with the great king.” 

“| don’t have the luck! | don’t have the luck!” said the fiend king repeatedly. “I dare not join you. Let me take a palace maiden and go to the west palace instead. Madam, please rest by yourself.” 

They all retired. The specious Spring Grace succeeded in stealing the treasures. These he tied to his own waist before he changed into his original form. With a shake of his body he retrieved also the 
sleep-inducing insect. As he walked along, he heard the sound of rattle and gong announcing the hour of the third watch. Dear Pilgrim! Making the magic sign with his fingers, he recited a spell and 
exercised the Magic of Body Concealment to reach the front door. When he saw however, that it was tightly bolted, he took out his golden-hooped rod and pointed it at the door; this Lock-Opening 
Magic immediately flung wide the door and he strode out quickly. “Jupiter's Rival,” he cried with a loud voice as he stood before the door, “return my Lady Golden Sage!” 

He yelled for two or three times, and all the fiends, old and young, were aroused. They dashed out to look around and found the front door ajar. As some of them brought the lamps over to have the 
door locked up once more, a few of the fiends ran inside to report, “Great King, someone outside our main door is addressing you by name and demanding the return of Lady Golden Sage!” The maids 
inside slipped out of the palace door and whispered, “Don’t shout! The great king has just fallen asleep.” Meanwhile, Pilgrim yelled some more in front of the main door but those little fiends dared not 
go disturb the fiend king. Three or four times it went on like this but they did not report the disturbance. Outside the cave-dwelling, the Great Sage brawled until dawn, and he was unable to control 
himself any longer. Wielding the iron rod with both hands, he went forward and smote the door. Those various fiends were terrified; while some of them pushed against the door, others ran inside to 
report. Having just awakened, the fiend king heard a raucous tumult. He dressed hurriedly and emerged from the silk curtains to ask, “What's all this noise?” The maids knelt down and said, “Dad, we 
don’t know who it was who shouted abuses at us for half the night outside. Now he is even striking at the door.” 
As the fiend king walked out of the palace door, he ran into several little fiends who respected rather timidly and said, “Someone outside is shouting abuses and demanding the Lady Golden Sage 
Palace! When we said ‘No’ to him, he spewed out countless insults, simply awful stuff. When he saw that the great king did not go out even at daybreak, he began to strike at our door.” 

“Don’t open it yet,” said the fiend. “Go and ask for his name and where he came from. Hurry back to report to me.” 

1 of the little fiends ran out and asked through the door, “Who's here striking at our door?” 

Pilgrim replied, “I’m External Grandpa‘ sent here by the Scarlet-Purple Kingdom to take Lady Sage Palace back to her own country!” 

When the little fiend heard this, he returned with these words as his report and the fiend king set out for the rear palace to make further investigation of his intruder. The lady had just risen, and she had 
not yet washed or had her hair combed when her maid said, “Dad’s here.” 

Tidying her clothes hurriedly but leaving her hair unpinned, the lady met him outside the palace. After they took their seats and before she could even ask why the fiend king had come in, another little 
fiend dashed in to report: “That External Grandpa’s smashed our door!” 

With a laugh, the fiend said, “Madam, how many generals and commanders do you've at court?” The lady said, “We've forty-eight Brigades® and a thousand fine generals. At the various borders, there 
are countless marshals and commanders.” 

“Is there someone with the surname of External?” asked the fiend king. 

“Inside the palace,” replied the lady, “all | knew was how to assist the ruler by giving admonitions and supervision to the palace ladies night and day. The external affairs are endless. How could | 
remember any name or surname?” 

The fiend king said, “Our visitor calls himself External Grandpa but no such surname, I’m sure, appears in the Hundred Family Names. Since you've come from an aristocratic family and you're so 
intelligent by nature, you must have read all kinds of books and chronicles when you're at the royal palace. Do you remember whether this surname has appeared in any text at all?” 

“Only in the Thousand-Character Treatise” replied the lady, “there is the phrase, ‘Externally one learns from the tutor’s instruction.’” | suppose that must be it.” 

Delighted, the fiend king said, “Indeed, it is! Indeed, itis!” He rose and took leave of the lady to go to the Skinning Pavilion. After he had suited up his armour properly, he summoned his fiendish troops 
and went straight out the front door, his hands holding a spreading-flower axe. “Who is the External Grandpa who comes from the Scarlet-Purple Kingdom?” he cried in a loud voice. 

Gripping the golden-hooped rod with his right hand, Pilgrim pointed with his left hand at the fiend king and said, “Worthy nephew, why are you addressing me?” 

When the fiend king saw him, he was filled with anger. “Look at you!” he bellowed, “Your features are an ape’s; looks are a monkey’s. Seven percent a ghost and yet you dare mock me?” 

“Lawless fiend,” replied Pilgrim with a laugh, “you're the one insulting Heaven and making a mockery of the ruler! And you've no eyes either! When | caused great disturbance in the Celestial Palace 
five centuries ago, all those divine warriors of the 9-fold Heaven wouldn’t have dared address me without the word ‘Venerable’ when they saw me. Now you call me your grandpa. Is that too much ofa 
loss for you?” 
“Tell me quickly your name and surname,” snapped the fiend king, “and what sort of martial art you’ve learned that you dare act with such insolence around here. 

Pilgrim said, “You’d have been better if you’d not asked about that. For when | announce my name and surname, | fear that you’d not know where to stand! Step closer, stand firmly, and listen to my 
recital: my parents who begot me were Heaven and Earth; the sun and moon’s essence had me conceived and carried in a stone for countless years. A spirit root formed and nursed me — O, how 
strange! As spring quickened nature, | was born that year. Today I’m a mortal for all times. Once a captain of many gathered fiends, | made monsters salute the red cliffs. A summons issued the Great 
Emperor Jade; the Gold Star Venus with a decree came to ask me to hold an office in Heaven but | wasn’t pleased with Ban-Horse, the rank. | plotted at first rebellion at my cave; then | disturbed with 
arms the royal court. God Pagoda-Bearer and his prince both shrank back in terror after our fight. Gold Star addressed the Cosmic King again who sent next a pacifying decree to make me Equal to 
Heaven, true Great Sage - a proper name for fine talent of the state. Because | disturbed, too, the Peaches Feast, wrath | incurred when | stole pills, half-drunk, Laozi himself before the throne appeared; 
the West Queen Mum at Jade Terrace saluted. Learning that I'd mocked the laws of kings, soldiers they called up and dispatches sent — a hundred thousand savage planetoids, dense rows of halberds, 
lances, and swords. As cosmic nets were spread throughout the mount, we raised up our arms for a mighty meet. The fight’s fierce but neither side could win and Erlang arrived on Guanyin’s advice. 
To find out who was stronger we two fought though he had the Plum Mountain Brothers’ aid. As we transformed ourselves to show our strength, three sages in Heaven pushed the clouds aside: Laozi 
at once threw his diamond snare down, the gods caught and brought me to the steps of gold. A lengthy confession | needn't make; I'd be hacked to pieces for my crimes; axes, mallets couldn't take 
my life, nor was | harmed by scimitars and swords. Fire and thunder could only do so much — they’d not hurt longevity’s offspring. They sent the captive to Tushita then to be refined in all ways as they 
wished. Not till the right time was the tripod opened but | from the centre at once leaped out; my hands holding high the compliant rod, | fought my way to Jade Dragon Terrace. Into hiding went each 
planet and star; | was free to havoc through Heaven’s halls. Lord Inspector quickly sought a god’s help; with me God a contest waged. |, somersaulting from within his palm did tour all Heavens before 
turning back. A god deceived me, foreknowing this; | was pinned down by him at Heaven’s edge till now afterwards some five centuries. My lowly self-freed, | frolic once more. To guard the Tang Monk 
going to the West - this, Wukong the Pilgrim well understands. He must on the western path the fiends subdue. Which monster wouldn't dare to fear him?” 

When the fiend king heard the announcement of Wukong, the Pilgrim, he said, “So you’re that fellow who caused great disturbance at the Celestial Palace! If you’ve been released to accompany the 
Tang Monk to the West, you’d simply stay on your journey. Why must you mind someone’s business? Why must you serve the Scarlet-Purple Kingdom as a slave and come here to look for death?” 
“You thief! You lawless fiend!” shouted Pilgrim. “You mouth such words of ignorance! | receive the most reverent invitation from the Scarlet-Purple Kingdom and I’m beholden to the king’s most gracious 
hospitality. Old monkey’s regarded there as being a thousand times more exalted than the throne who honours me as his parents and reveres me as a god. How dare you mention the word slave? 
You're but a fiend who lies to Heaven and makes a mockery of the ruler! Don’t run away! Have a taste of your grandpa’s rod!” A little flustered, the fiend jumped aside to dodge the blow before wielding 
the spreading-flower axe to strike at his opponent's face. This was a marvellous battle! Take a look! The golden-hooped compliant rod, the sharp spreading-flower axe. 1 clenched his teeth as he turned 
violent; 1 gritted them as he showed his strength. This 1 was the Great Sage Equal to Heaven, descending to Earth; that 1 was a mischievous fiend king coming to the world. The 2 of them belched 
out cloud and fog to darken Heaven; they kicked up rocks and sand to hide the dipper halls. Back and forth they went through many styles; up and down they emitted golden lights. Together they used 
their power, each testing his magic might. This 1 wanted to take the lady to the capital; that 1 enjoyed staying with the queen at the mount. This whole battle truly had no other cause: for a king each 
had life and death forgot! 

The 2 of them battled for 50 rounds but no decision could be reached. When the fiend king saw how powerful Pilgrim was, he knew that he could not prevail against him. Using the axe to stop the iron 
rod, he said, “Pilgrim Sun, let's pause for a moment. I’ve not had my breakfast today. Let me take my meal first and then I'll come to fight to the finish with you.” 

Pilgrim realised that he wanted to get the bells but he put away his iron rod and said, “A good hunter doesn’t run down a tired hare! Go! Go! Eat heartily and return to receive your death!” 

Turing around, the fiend dashed inside and said to the lady, “Take out the treasures quickly.” 

“What for?” she asked. 


“The person who's shouting to provoke battle this morning,” replied the fiend king, “happened to be the disciple of a priest on his way to acquire scriptures. His name’s Sun Wukong the Pilgrim and 
External Grandpa's only a false name. | fought with him for a long time but I'd not prevail against him. Let me take my treasures out there so | can start a fire to burn this ape.” 

The lady was quite dismayed by what she heard. She did not want to take out the bells but she was afraid to offend him; if she took them out however, she feared that Pilgrim might lose his life. As she 
hesitated, the fiend king again urged her, saying, “Take them out quickly!” The lady had no alternative but to open the lock and hand the three bells over to the fiend king who grabbed them and ran 
outside the cave. As tears poured down her face, the lady sat down in the palace, wondering whether Pilgrim could escape with his life. Neither she nor the fiend king knew that these were specious 
bells. As soon as he got outside, the fiend king stood at the upper hand spot of the wind. “Pilgrim Sun,” he cried out, “don’t run away! Watch me shake my bells a little!” 

With a laugh, Pilgrim replied, “If you've bells, you think I've none? If you can shake them, you think | can’t shake them?” 

“What sort of bells do you've?” said the fiend king. “Take them out for me to see.” Pilgrim gave his iron rod a pinch to reduce it to the size of an embroidery needle that he stored in his ear. Then he 
untied from his waist those three true treasures and said to the fiend king, “Aren't these my purple-gold bells?” 

Greatly startled by what he saw, the fiend king said to himself, “Odd! Very odd! How’d his bells be exactly like mine? Even if they're cast in the same mould, there ought to be some mark here or blemish 
there. How could they be exactly alike?” He therefore asked, “Where did your bells come from?” 

“Worthy nephew,” said Pilgrim, “where did yours come from?” 

An honest person, the fiend king said right away, “My bells belonged originally to lord Grand Purity, most steeped in the Way. In eight-trigram stove gold with a long stay did forge these bells now called 
perfected gems and left behind by Laozi till this day.” 

Laughing, Pilgrim said, “Well, the bells of old monkey also come from that time.” 

“Where did they come from?” asked the fiend king. 

Pilgrim said, “In Tushita Hall the Dao Patriarch hale had his stove forged these gold bells without fail. Two threes are six — cyclic treasures they are: my bells are female whereas yours are male.” 
“These bells,” said the fiend king, “are treasures forged in the same process as that of the golden elixir. They are not fowl or beasts. How could you use gender to distinguish them? If you can shake 
something valuable out of them, then they are good treasures.” 

“It's useless to talk,” replied Pilgrim, “when only action’s the proof. I'll let you shake them first.” 

The fiend king indeed shook the first bell three times but no fire came out; he shook the second bell three times but no smoke came out; and he shook the third bell three times but no sand came out. 
Terribly flustered, the fiend king said, “How strange! How strange! The ways of the world have changed! These must be hen-pecked bells! The male sees the female and that’s why nothing comes out!” 
“Stop shaking, worthy nephew!” said Pilgrim. “Let me shake mine for you to see.” Marvellous monkey! He grasped the three bells in his hand and shook them altogether. Just look at the red fire, green 
smoke, and yellow sand! They poured out together and began at once to engulf the mountain and trees. The Great Sage also recited a spell and shouted facing the ground toward the southwest, 
“Come, wind!” 

Indeed, a strong gust whipped up the fire, and the fire exploited the power of the wind. In flaming red and massive black, the sky was full of fire and smoke and the earth full of yellow sand. Scared out 
of his wits, that Jupiter’s Rival wanted to flee but could not find a way out. For in the midst of that kind of fire, how’d he possibly escape with his life? 

Suddenly a loud voice came from mid-air: “Sun Wukong, I’ve arrived!” As he turned his head upward quickly, Pilgrim saw that it was the Nun Guanyin; her left hand was supporting the immaculate vase 
while her right hand was sprinkling sweet dew with her willow twig to put out the fire. Pilgrim was so startled that he quickly tucked the bells in his waist, folded his hands before his chest, and saluted 
low. After the Nun had sprinkled a few drops of the sweet dew, the smoke and fire all vanished in an instant and there was not a trace of the yellow sand. Respecting, Pilgrim said, “I didn’t know the 
Great Compassion had descended to Earth, and I’ve caused offence by not avoiding your sacred presence. May | ask where the Nun is going?” 

“I've come,” replied the Nun, “especially to bring this fiend to submission.” 

“What was this fiend’s origin,” said Pilgrim, “that it should necessitate your golden form revealing itself in order to bring him to submission?” The Nun said, “He is actually the golden-haired wolf that | 
ride on. Because the lad who looks after him fell asleep, this cursed beast managed to bite through the iron chains and come here to dispel calamity for the king of the Scarlet-Purple Kingdom.” 

On hearing this, Pilgrim quickly saluted and said, “The Nun is twisting the truth! The fiend has mocked the ruler and cheated him of his queen here; he has corrupted the customs and violated the 
mores. He has in fact brought calamity to the ruler. How could you say that he has helped the king to dispel calamity?” 

The Nun replied, “You've no idea that when the deceased king of the Scarlet-Purple Kingdom was still on the throne, the present king, then the crown-prince, was exceedingly fond of hunting when he 
was still young. Leading men and horses, mounting hawks and hounds, he once came before the Phoenix-Down Slope where two young birds, one male and another female, were perching. These 
happened to be the off springs of the Nun Great King Peacock.’ When the young prince stretched his bow, he wounded the male peacock, and the female one too, returned to the West with an arrow 
stuck in her body. After a god Mum had pardoned him, she decreed that he should be punished by being separated from his mate for three years and that his body should be inflicted with the illness of 
yearning. At the time, | was riding this wolf when | heard the sentence pronounced. Little did | realise that this cursed beast would remember it and come here to abduct the queen and dispel calamity 
for the king. It's been three years now and his preordained chastisement has been fulfilled. You're to be thanked for arriving to heal the king and I’ve come especially to bring the fiend to submission.” 
“Nun,” said Pilgrim, “the story may go like this but he has also defiled the queen, corrupted the customs, upset the relations, and perverted the law. He is worthy of death. Now that you’ve arrived in 
person, I'll spare his life but not his living punishment. Let me give him twenty strokes of my rod, and then you may take him away.” 

“Wukong,” said the Nun, “if you appreciate my epiphany, then you must, for my sake, grant him a plenary pardon. This will be considered entirely your merit, that of bringing the fiend to submission. If 
you raise your rod, he will be dead!” As he dared not disobey, Pilgrim had no choice but to salute and say, “After the Nun has taken him back to South Sea, he mustn't be permitted to return in secret 
to the human world again, for he can cause a lot of harm.” 

Only then did the Nun cry out, “Cursed beast! If you don’t return to your origin now, when'll you do so?” Rolling once on the ground, the fiend immediately appeared in his original form. As he shook out 
his furry coat, the Nun mounted his back only to discover with one look that the three bells beneath his collar were nowhere to be seen. “Wukong,” said the Nun, “return my bells.” 

“Old monkey knows nothing about bells!” replied Pilgrim. 

“You thievish ape!” snapped the Nun. “If you’d failed in stealing the bells, even ten of you’d be unable to approach him. Bring them out quickly!” 

“But really, I've not seen them!” chuckled Pilgrim. 

“In that case,” said the Nun, “allow me to recite the Tight-Fillet Spell a little.” 

At once alarmed, Pilgrim could only mutter, “Don’t recite! Don’t recite! The bells are here!” 

Thus it is that from the wolf's collar who'll untie the bells? The 1 untying asks the 1 who ties. After the Nun had slipped the bells back onto the collar of the wolf, she mounted his back again. Look at 
him! Beneath his 4 legs lotus blossoms grow; over all his body thick golden threads glow. The Great Compassion went back to South Sea. The Great Sage Sun having tightened his kilt, wielded the 
iron rod to fight his way into the Cave of the Mythic Beast and slew all the rest of the fiends. Then he went into the palace to beckon the Lady Golden Sage Palace to return to her country. The lady 
could not have been more grateful after Pilgrim gave her a thorough account of how the Nun had brought the fiend to submission and why she had to be separated from her mate. Then Pilgrim found 
some grass that he tied together to make a straw dragon. “Madam,” he said, “climb on this and close your eyes. Don’t be afraid. I’m taking you back to court to see your lord.” 

The lady followed his instruction as Pilgrim began to exercise his magic power: all she heard was the sound of the wind. In the period of half an hour they arrived at the capital. As they dropped from 
the clouds, he said, “Madam, please open your eyes.” 

The queen opened her eyes and at once those dragon towers and phoenix bowers that she readily recognised, gave her immense delight. She abandoned the straw dragon to ascend the treasure hall 
with Pilgrim. When the king saw her, he hurried down from the dragon couch. Taking the hand of the lady, he wanted to tell her how much he missed her when all of a sudden, he fell to the ground 
crying, “Oh my hand! It hurts! It hurts!” 

8 Rules broke out in loud guffaws, saying, “O dear! You just don’t have the luck to enjoy her. The moment you see her you're smitten to death!” 

“Idiot,” said Pilgrim, “you dare give her a tug?” 

“‘What'll happen if | do?” asked 8 Rules. 

Pilgrim said, “The lady’s body’s covered with poisonous prickles, and her hands are full of vicious stings. Since she reached the Unicorn Mountain these three years, that fiend Jupiter’s Rival has never 
claimed her body. For the moment he touched her, his body or his hands would be pained.” 

On hearing this, the various officials exclaimed, “What'll we do?” 

So the officials outside the court became vexed and the ladies of the palace, too were alarmed. Meanwhile, Jade Sage and Silver Sage, the 2 other consorts helped the ruler to his feet. As they stood 
there in confusion, they heard someone calling out in mid-air, “Great Sage, I’ve arrived!” 

Pilgrim raised his head to look and he heard majestic crane cries in the sky as someone drifted down to court. Auspicious radiance encircling; creative auras tremulous. A coir and grass coat wrapped 
in cloud and mist, he trod straw sandals rarely seen. He held a fly-swat of rushes; a silk sash wound around his waist. Throughout the world he had formed human ties; footloose, he roamed all the 
great earth. This was the Great Heaven’s Mortal Purple Cloud, bringing salvation this day to earth. 9Going forward to meet him, Pilgrim said, “Zhang Ziyang, ‘°where’re you going?” 

The Realised Mortal Ziyang went before the court and saluted saying, “Great Sage, this humble mortal Zhang Boduan raises my hand to salute you.” 

Returning his salute, Pilgrim said, “Where’ve you come from?” 

The realised mortal said, “Three years ago, | was on my way to a god festival when | passed through this region. When | saw that the king was destined to be separated from his mate, | feared that the 
fiend might defile the queen and upset the human relations, so that afterwards it would be difficult for the king and queen to be reunited.''| therefore changed an old coir coat of mine into a new shining 
robe, radiant in five colours, to present to the fiend king as an addition to the queen’s wardrobe. The moment when she put it on, poisonous prickles sprouted on her body but actually those prickles 
were the transformation of the coir coat. Now that I’ve learned of the Great Sage’s success, I’ve come to bring deliverance.” 

“In that case,” said Pilgrim, “we're indebted to you for coming from such a great distance. Please deliver her, quickly.” The realised mortal walked forward and pointed at the lady with his finger; 
immediately, the coir coat came off and the lady’s entire body was smooth as before. Shaking out the coat, the realised mortal draped it over himself and said to Pilgrim, “I beg your pardon, Great Sage, 
for this humble mortal must take leave of you.” 

“Please wait for a moment,” replied Pilgrim, “and allow the ruler to thank you.” 

“No need, no need,” said the mortal, laughing. 

He gave a long salute and rose into the air. The king, the queen, and all the officials were so astonished that they all saluted toward the sky. Thereafter, the king gave the order for the Eastern Hall to 
be opened in order that the four priests might be thanked with a huge banquet. After the king led his subjects to respect to the pilgrims, he was reunited with his wife. As they drank merrily, Pilgrim said, 
“Master, take out that declaration of war.” 

The elder took it out from his sleeve to hand over to Pilgrim who passed it to the king and said, “This document's to be sent here by a junior officer of the fiend. The officer had been beaten to death by 
me at first and | took him here to announce my merit. When | went back to the mountain afterwards, | changed into the form of the officer to get inside the cave. That's how | got to see the lady. After | 
succeeded in stealing the golden bells, | was almost caught by the fiend. Then I’d to undergo transformation to steal the bells again. When he fought with me, it’s my fortune that the Nun Guanyin 
arrived and brought him to submission. She also told me of the reason why you and your queen had to be separated.” After he gave a thorough account of what had taken place, the king and all his 
subjects were full of gratitude and praise. “It’s the great good fortune of a worthy ruler in the first place,” said the Tang Monk, “and it’s also the merit of our humble disciple. This lavish banquet you've 
given us is perfection indeed! We must salute to take leave of you now. Don't delay this humble cleric’s journey to the West.” Having failed to persuade the priests to stay longer even with earnest 
pleading, the king had the rescript certified. Then he asked the Tang Monk to take a seat in the imperial chariot while he and his consorts pushed it with their own hands to send the pilgrim out of the 
capital before they parted. Truly 1’s anxious ailment’s purged with affinity; 1’s mind is at peace without thought or desire. 


088 
At Cobweb Cave Seven Passions delude the Origin; at Purgation Spring 8 Rules forgets all manners 
Tripitaka took leave of the king of the Scarlet-Purple Kingdom and proceeded westward on his horse. He passed over numerous mountains and forded countless waterways. Soon, autumn departed 
and even winter faded, and it was again the bright, attractive season of spring. As master and disciples stepped on the green and enjoyed the scenery, they came upon some houses shaded by trees. 
Rolling over on his saddle, Tripitaka dismounted and stood by the main road. “Master,” asked Pilgrim, “why aren't you moving on when this road’s so level and smooth?” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “you're quite insensitive! Master must be rather tired of sitting on the horse. You can let him get down to catch his breath a little.” 


“Im not trying to catch my breath,” said Tripitaka, “but | see that there’s a household over there. I'd like to go and beg some maigre for us to eat.” 
“Look at the way Master speaks!” said Pilgrim, smiling. “If you want to eat, I'll go and do the begging. As the proverb says, ‘Once a teacher, always a dad.’ How could the disciples remain seated while 
the master goes to beg for food?” 
“It's not like that,” replied Tripitaka. “Usually we look out into the endless horizon, and regardless of how far you've to travel, you go to beg for food. Today, there’s a household nearby, close enough 
for me to call you if | need help. You’d therefore let me go and do the begging.” 
“But Master,” said 8 Rules, “you're not thinking properly. As the proverb says, ‘When three persons go out, the youngest child suffers.’ You belong to the paternal generation, and all of us are your 
disciples. As an ancient text says, ‘When there’s any hard work to be undertaken, the young must do it.’ Let Old bull go.” 
“O disciples,” said Tripitaka, “today the weather's fair and bright, unlike the times of wind and rain. In those days, you'll, of course, do it, even if you've to cover great distances. Let me go now to this 
household; when | find out whether there’s food or not, we'll leave.” 
“Elder Brothers,” said Sand-monk, smiling on one side, “no need to talk further. Master's temperament’s like that and you need not contradict him. If you offend him, he’ll not eat the food even if you 
succeed in begging it.” 
8 Rules agreed and took out the alms-bowl for him. After Tripitaka changed his hat and cloak, he strode up to the village to look around. It was quite a nice dwelling. See a stone bridge arching up; 
aged trees thick and neat. Where the stone bridge arches up, gurgling water flows to meet a long brook; where aged trees are thick and neat, the chirps of hidden birds reach distant hills. On the 
bridge’s other side are a few thatched huts, quaint and elegant like a mortal shrine; there is also a window overlaid with reeds that make it seem clearly a Daoist home. Before the window four lovelies 
appear, all stitching phoenixes and doing needlework. When the elder saw that there was no man but only 4 young women in the house, he dared not enter. He stood still beneath the trees and found 
that each one of them seemed to have an orchid nature fine like spring, a womanly mind firm as stone. Pink hues adorned her lovely face; her rouged lips were most smoothly done. Her moth brows 
were slanted crescents; her hair piled up a cobweb bun. If she stood among the flowers, the bees would mistake her for 1. He waited there for at least half an hour but the whole place was quiet without 
even a sound from chickens or dogs. He thought to himself: /f | truly don’t have the ability to beg a meal, I'll make my disciples laugh at me. They'll dare say, if the master couldn’t even succeed in 
begging food, how'd the disciples go and worship God? 
The elder could not think of a better alternative; though he knew perhaps he should not proceed, he nonetheless walked up the bridge. After he had taken several steps, he could see that there was 
within the courtyard of the thatched hut a small pavilion made of sandalwood. Inside the pavilion, there were 3 other young women kicking a ball filled with air. Look at these 3 girls who were quite differ- 
ent from the other 4. See halcyon blue sleeves fluttering; light yellow skirts swaying. Halcyon blue sleeves fluttering enshroud dainty, jade-white fingers. Light yellow skirts swaying half reveal shoes 
slender and shapely. Their postures and styles are perfection all; moving or still, their heels take many forms. To pass overhead they must gauge the height; the long pass must be accurate and true. 
A turning kick is Flower beyond the Wall; backing up becomes Traversing the Sea. Trapping gently a lump of dirt; charging alone to tackle legs. When A Pearl Ascends God’s Head, *they seize and 
separate with the toe. They can pick up a slender brick; kick, bending back, their feet arched. They squat with a straight torso; twist and kick with their heels. Knees bent they can call for a pass, ‘their 
shoulders swing like donning capes. Through the legs the ball freely goes or it loops and swings round the neck. They kick like the Yellow River flowing upstream or like gold fishes beached on the 
sand. ‘That one by mistake thinks it is the head; this one whirling bumps at once the waist. Firmly the ball’s held by the calf; squarely they slam with their toes. Heels lifted, straw sandals fall; scissor 
kicks send backward the prize. Step back for the shoulder-pass style; the hairpin only once goes awry. As the hamper-like net hangs low, they will then kick toward the gate. 'When the ball hits squarely 
the goal, all the fair ladies shout, “Bravo!” So, each one’s silk gowns is sweat-soaked and her makeup’s messy; only when zeal’s all spent will they cry enough. We can't end the description; therefore 
we offer also another testimonial poem. The poem says: 7 
34 month’s the time they kick ball in a field, these fair ones blown down by mortal wind. 
Their faces perspire like flowers bedewed; dusty moth brows are willows in mist. 
Shrouding their fingers, the blue sleeves hang low,; light yellow skirts awhirl, they show their feet. 

They finish their kicking all faint and fair with jewels askew and dishevelled hair. 
Tripitaka watched them until he could no longer tarry. He had to walk up to the arch of the bridge and call out in a loud voice, “Nuns, this humble cleric has come here to beg for whatever amount of 
food you care to give me.” When they heard his voice, all the girls abandoned their needlework and their ball. Smiling broadly, they came out of the door to say, “Elder, pardon us for not coming to meet 
you first when you arrived at our rustic village. Since we dare not feed a priest by the wayside, please take a seat inside.” 
On hearing this, Tripitaka thought to himself, “My goodness! My goodness! The West is truly the land of a god. If women are concerned to feed the priests, how could men not revere a god?” The elder 
walked forward and saluted before he followed the girls into the thatched hut. After they passed the pavilion made of sandalwood, he looked around. Ah! There were actually neither rooms nor corridors, 
only towering summits, extensive ranges. Towering summits that touch the cloud and mist; extensive ranges that Reach Sea and isle. The door’s near a stone bridge, borne by flowing water of nine 
twists and turns; the yard’s planted with plums and peaches, vying for splendour with a thousand stalks and fruits. Vines and creepers dangle from several trees; orchid spreads its scent through ten 
thousand flowers. From afar the cave seems better than Isle Peng; up close the mountain and woods surpass Mount Flower’s. It’s the bogus mortals’ reclusive place; no other household takes its 
neighbouring space. 1 of the girls walked forward, pushed open 2 stone doors, and asked the Tang Monk to take a seat inside. The elder had little alternative but to walk inside where he discovered no 
other furniture but stone tables and benches. It was dark, and the air seemed to have turned very chilly all of a sudden. Becoming alarmed, the elder thought to himself, “This place betokens more evil 
than good. It’s not a nice place at all.” 
Still all smiles, the girls said, “Please be seated, elder.” 
The elder had no choice but to sit down and after a while, he was so cold that he began to shiver. “From which monastery did you come, elder?” asked 1 of the girls. “What sort of alms are you seeking? 
To repair bridges, roads, build a monastery, a pagoda, or fund a festival and print scriptures? Please take out your alms-book for us to see.” 
“Im not a priest begging for alms,” replied the elder. 
“If you’re not,” said the girl, “why’ve you come here?” 
The elder said, “I’m someone sent by the Great Tang in the Land of the East to go to the Great Thunderclap in the Western Heaven to acquire scriptures. Passing through your honoured region, | beca- 
me hungry and that’s the reason for my approaching your lovely mansion. After I've begged a meal from you, I'll leave.” 
“Fine! Fine! Fine!” said the girls. “As the proverb says, Monks coming from afar can read Threads better. Sisters, we mustn't slight our guest. Let’s prepare a vegetarian meal quickly.” 
At that time, 3 of the girls kept the elder company by speaking with him rather animatedly on the subject of karma. 4 of the girls however, rolled up their sleeves and dashed into the kitchen where they 
added fire and scrubbed the pans. They prepared human flesh sautéed and fried in human lard until black enough that it could pass for pieces of fried wheat gluten. They also pan-fried some freshly 
gouged human brains that they then cut up to look like pieces of bean curd. 2 dishes of these they took out to set on the stone table and said to the elder, “Please eat. We've been unable to prepare a 
good vegetarian meal for you in such a hurry. But do eat some food to relieve your hunger; there’s more of it in the back.” 
Taking a whiff of the dishes, the elder clamped his mouth shut when he found the food to be so stinky and putrid. He rose and saluted with hands folded, saying, “Nuns, this humble cleric’s kept a 
vegetarian diet since his birth.” 
“Elder,” replied one of the girls, laughing, “These ’re vegetarian dishes.” 
“Infinite Light!” cried the elder. “If |, a priest partake of such vegetarian dishes, I'll never get to see the World-Honoured One or acquire the scriptures.” 
“Elder,” said the girl, “you're someone who’s left the home. You’d never be choosy with your patrons!” 
“Would | dare? Would | dare?” said the elder. “Since this priest received the decree of the Great Tang to go west, he’s not destroyed even the tiniest creature and tried to relieve suffering wherever he 
sees it. | feed myself, picking up grain by grain; | clothe myself, knitting threads one by one. How'd | dare be choosy with my patrons?” 
“Though you may not be choosy with your patrons, elder,” said another girl, laughing, “you're not afraid to put the blame on people after walking in the door. Don’t despise the coarse and the unseasoned. 
Eat a little, please!” 
“Indeed, | daren’t,” replied the elder, “for | fear | may break the commandment. To nourish a life is not as good as delivering a life, nuns. Please let me go.” 
The elder tried to struggle out of the door but the girls barred the way, refusing, of course, to let him go. “A business right at our door,” they cried, “and you expect us not to do it? ‘You want to cover up 
a fart with your hand?’ Where do you think you're going?” All of them knew a little martial art, and they were also quite dexterous with their hands and feet. Grabbing the elder, they yanked him forward 
like a sheep and flung him to the ground. He was pinned down by all of them, trussed up with ropes, and pulled over a crossbeam to be hung up high. The way in which he was hung in fact had a name 
to it: it was called “Mortal Pointing the Way.” One of his arms was stretched forward and suspended by a rope; the other arm was tied up alongside the body, and the rope was then used to hang up 
the midsection. His two legs were bound together and hung up by a third rope. The elder thus dangled face-down from the crossbeam, held by three ropes. Racked by pain, his eyes brimming with 
tears, the elder thought morosely to himself, “How bitter is the fate of this priest! | thought that I’d beg a meal from a good family but | landed in a fiery pit instead! O disciples, come quickly to save me, 
and we'll be able still to see each other again. Two more hours and my life will be finished!” 
Though the elder was sorely distressed, he nonetheless was also observing the girls carefully. After they had tied and hung him up properly, they began to take off their clothes. Greatly alarmed, the 
elder thought to himself, “They're disrobing because they want to beat me or may want to devour me.” But the girls were only taking off their upper garments. After they had their bellies exposed, they 
began to exercise their magic power. Out from their navels poured coils of thread with the thickness of a duck egg; like bursting jade and flying silver, the threads had the entire village gate covered up 
inamoment. Pilgrim, 8 Rules, and Sand-monk, all waiting by the wayside. 2 of them were watching the luggage and grazing the horse but Pilgrim, always the mischievous one, was leaping from branch 
to branch as he picked the leaves and searched for fruits. He chanced to turn his head toward the direction his master had gone and saw all at once a mass of light. So alarmed was he that he leaped 
down from the tree shouting, “It’s bad! It's bad! Master's luck’s turning rotten!” Then he pointed with his fingers and said to his companions, “Look what happened to that village!” 8 Rules and Sand- 
monk stared at the place and saw the mass of light bright as snow and shiny as silver. “Finished! Finished!” cried 8 Rules. “Master must have run into monster-spirits! Let's go rescue him, quickly!” 
“Don’t shout, Worthy Brother,” said Pilgrim, “for you've not seen the truth of the matter. Let old monkey go up there.” 
“Be careful, Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, and Pilgrim replied, “I know what to do.” 
Dear Great Sage! Tightening up his tiger-skin skirt and whipping out his golden-hooped rod, he bounded up there in two or three leaps. There he discovered a dense mass of cords that had to be a 
thousand layers thick, weaving up and down in a web-like pattern. He touched the cords with his hand, and they felt soft and sticky. Not knowing quite what it was, Pilgrim lifted his iron rod and said to 
himself, “One blow of my rod can surely snap ten thousand layers of this thing, let alone a thousand layers!” He was about to strike when he stopped and thought to himself some more: “I can snap 
something hard but this is quite soft. All | can do probably is to flatten it a little. But if | disturb whatever it is, it may have Old monkey all tangled up, and that'll not be good. Let me ask a few questions 
first before | strike.” 
He would question. He made the magic sign and recited a spell that had the immediate effect of causing an old local spirit to walk round and round in his shrine as if he were turning a millstone. His 
wife said to him, “Oldie, why are you spinning round and round? Is your epilepsy acting up?” 
“You'd not know about this! You’d not know about this!” cried the local spirit. “There’s here a Great Sage Equal to Heaven. I’ve not gone to meet him, and now he’s summoning me.” 
“Go and see him then,” said his wife. “What are you spinning around here for?” 
“If | go see him,” replied the local spirit, “I'll have to see his heavy rod also. Without regard for good or ill, he’ll strike at me.” 
His wife said, “When he sees how old you're, he'll not strike you.” 
The local spirit said, “All his life, he loves to drink juice free and beat old folks specially!” 
The two of them thus chatted for a while but he could find no other alternative than to walk out of the shrine. Trembling all over, he went to his knees by the road and called out, “Great Sage, the local 
spirit of this region respects to you.” 
“Get up,” said Pilgrim, “and don't look so harried without a reason. I’m not going to beat you, I'll just leave it standing on your account. Let me ask you, what is this place?” 
“Where did the Great Sage come from?” asked the local spirit. 
“We're going to the West from the Land of the East,” replied Pilgrim. 
The local spirit said, “Did the Great Sage pass through a mountain ridge?” 
“We're still up there,” said Pilgrim. “Can’t you see our horse and luggage over there?” 
“That,” said the local spirit, “is the Cobweb Ridge, beneath which is a Cobweb Cave. There are seven monster-spirits inside the cave.” 
“Are they male or female fiends?” asked Pilgrim. 


The local spirit said, “Female.” 
“What sort of magic powers do they possess?” asked Pilgrim again. 
The local spirit said, “This humble deity has little strength or authority, and he can’t determine what sort of abilities they may have. | only know that three miles due south of here, there’s a Purgation 
Spring that is a natural hot spring. Originally, it was the bathing place for the Seven Mortal Dames of the Region Above. Since the monster-spirits arrived, they took over the Purgation Spring, and the 
Mortal Dames did not even bother to contend with them. They simply let the monster-spirits have the place. If then even heaven’s gods did not pick with these fiends a fight, such spirits had to have 
great magic might.” 
“Why did the monster-spirits want the spring?” asked Pilgrim. 
The local spirit said, “After these fiends took it over, they bathed in it three times a day. They did once already today during the Hour of the Serpent’ and they would come back again by noon.” 
On hearing this, Pilgrim said, “Local spirit, you may go back. Let me catch them by myself.” After respecting 1 more time, the local spirit still trembling, went back to his own shrine. Great Sage all alone 
now exercised his magic power; with a shake of his body he changed into a tiny fly, alighted on a blade of grass by the road, and waited. In a moment, all he heard was loud breathing noises like 
silkworms devouring leaves and tide rising from the sea. In approximately the time it took to drink half a glass of tea, all the threads disappeared and the village came into sight once more as before. 
Then he heard the wooden gates open with a creak, and loud, laughing chatter brought out seven young women. As Pilgrim stared at them secretly, he saw that all of them walked side by side and 
hand in hand. Laughing and joking, they proceeded to cross the bridge. Some beauties indeed! They appeared to be jade-like but far more fragrant; flower-like but their words were real. Willow brows 
arched like distant hills; scented mouths framed by cherry lips. Kingfisher plumes rose on hair pins; small feet gleamed beneath crimson skirts. They seemed like Change coasting to the world below 
and mortals going down to earth. “No wonder my master wanted to beg a meal at this place!” chuckled Pilgrim to himself. “So there’re such lovely creatures around here. If my master’s kept by these 
seven beauties, he'll not even make one meal for them, nor be able to last for two days if they use him. If they take turns to handle him, he'll die on the spot. Let me eavesdrop on them and see what 
they plan to do.” Dear Great Sage! 
With a buzz, he flew off and alighted on one of the hair buns. After they crossed the bridge, 1 of the girls walking behind called out to those up front, “Elder Sisters, let's go back and have that fat monk 
steamed for food after we take our bath.” 
“This fiendish creature’s,” chuckled Pilgrim to himself, “so headless! Boiling will save them some firewood. Why does she want him steamed?” Picking flowers and fencing with blades of grass as they 
headed south, those girls soon arrived at the bathing pool that was enclosed by a magnificent wall. Wildflowers lushly fragrant covered the ground; on all sides were orchids both fresh and dense. The 
girl in the back walked forward and pushed open 2 doors with a loud crack; inside there was indeed a large pool of hot water. At the time of creation, the original number of suns was set at 10. °Later 
Hou Yi, the archer stretched his salute and shot down 9 of these suns, leaving only 1 sun behind, the true fire of supreme yang. There are 9 hot springs in the world, all transformations of the former 
suns. These magic springs of yang are: Fragrant-Cold, Mountain-Mate, Hot, Eastern-Fusion, Mountain-Flooding, Filial-Peace, Wide-Whirling, and Torrid. This is the Purgation Spring. Also a testimonial 
poem says: 
1 climate without heat or cold even in autumn it’s ever spring. 
Hot ripples like a boiling cauldron’s; snowy waves like newly made soup. 
Spilling out it warms the crops; still body washes our dust. 
Its bubbles seem like swelling tears; it churns like jade liquefied. 
Such moisture’s never brewed; self-heated, it’s clear and smooth. 
A good sign of auspicious land, truly it's Heaven’s creation where beauties wash their smooth and ice-white skins: all dirt removed, their jade-like frames renewed. 
This bathing pool was about fifty feet wide and over one hundred feet long. Inside, it was about four feet deep, the water being so clear that one could see to the bottom. A jet of water like rolling pearls 
and swelling jade continued to bubble up from the base and there were on all 4 sides some 6 or 7 outlets for the water to drain. By the time it reached some rice paddies 2 or 3 miles away, the water 
would still be warm. Adjacent to the pool were 3 small pavilions; behind the middle 1 was placed a 5-legged bench on both ends of which there were also colour lacquered garment racks. Secretly 
delighted by what he saw, Pilgrim spread his wings and landed with a buzz on 1 of those racks. Seeing how warm and clear the water was, the girls immediately wanted to bathe in it. They took off 
their clothes, put them on the racks, and leaped into the pool together. Pilgrim saw them undoing their buttons and clasps, untying their sashes of silk. Their bosoms were white like silver; bodies all 
resembled snow. Their limbs appeared gilded in ice; shoulders seemed kneaded with dough. Their bellies looked soft and yielding; backs were both shiny and smooth. Their knees and wrists were 
round and small; feet, no wider than 3 inches. Desire ringed their midsections showing their apertures of love. After jumping into the pool, the girls began to leap and bounce on the water as they swam 
and frolicked. /f / want to hit them, thought Pilgrim to himself, all I’ve to do is to stick my rod in the pool and give it a stir. That’s called: pouring hot water on the rats, you wipe out the entire nest. Pity! 
Pity! | can kill them all right but old monkey’s fame will diminish somewhat. As the proverb says, a man doesn’t fight with a woman. A fellow like me would look rather feckless if | beat to death a few of 
these scullions. No, I'll not strike at them. I'll devise a plan that'll make them unable to move. That ought to do some good. Dear Great Sage! Making the magic sign and reciting a spell, he changed 
with 1 shake of his body into an old, hungry hawk. See feathers like snow, frost, and eyes bright as the stars. Seeing him, the fiendish fox loses its wits; meeting him, the wily hare’s terrified. Steel-like 
claws gleaming and quick make his looks fierce and heroic. He uses his old fists to serve his mouth, ready to chase himself all things that fly. He soars through vast stretches of frigid air, boring clouds, 
grasping things without a care. With a flap of his wings, the hawk flew up to the pavilion, stretched out his sharp claws, and picked the racks clean of the 7 suits of clothing left draping there before 
darting back to the ridge where he changed into his original form to meet 8 Rules and Sand-monk. Look at Idiot now! 
He met Pilgrim and said, laughing, “So Master’s been imprisoned in a pawn shop!” 
“How do you know?” asked Sand-monk. 
“Don’t you see,” said 8 Rules, “that Elder Brother has robbed it of all its clothing?” 
Putting them down, Pilgrim said, “These are things worn by monster-spirits.” 
“How could there be so many?” asked 8 Rules. 
Pilgrim said, “There are seven suits altogether.” 
“How could you strip them so easily,” asked 8 Rules, “and so well?” 
“| didn’t need to,” replied Pilgrim. “This place’s called the Cobweb Ridge and that village actually bears the name of Cobweb Cave. Inside the cave are seven girls who having captured our master and 
hung him up, went to take a bath in the Purgation Spring. That spring’s actually a hot spring formed by Heaven and Earth. After they took their baths, the monster-spirits were planning to steam Master 
for food. | followed them there and when | saw them disrobing and getting into the water, | wanted to strike at them. But | feared that | might soil my rod and lower my reputation and that’s why | didn’t 
move my rod. Instead, | changed into a hungry, old hawk and grabbed all of their clothing. Too embarrassed to leave the pool, they just squatted in the water. Let's go quickly to untie Master and we 
can be on our way.” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules with a chuckle, “whenever you do anything, you always leave something behind. If you’ve seen monster-spirits, how'd you not kill them and want instead to go untie Master? 
Though they’re too embarrassed to leave the pool now, they'll come out once it’s night. They must've some old clothes at home that they can put on and then chase us down. Even if they don’t chase 
us, they can remain here and after we’ve acquired the scriptures, we'll have to take this road back. As the proverb says, rather give up your travel expenses; never lack what your fist dispenses. If they 
bar our way and give us trouble by the time we return from the West, we'll meet up with enemies, won't we?” 
“What do you want to do then?” asked Pilgrim. 
“As | see it,” said 8 Rules, “we must first slay the monster-spirits before we go untie Master. This is the plan of mowing the grass by rooting it out.” 
“| don’t want to strike at them,” said Pilgrim. “If you do, you go ahead.” 
Elated with delight, 8 Rules held high his muckrake and ran up to the pool with big strides. After he pushed open the doors to look, he found those seven girls all squatting in the water and casting 
abusive profanities at the hawk, shouting, “That flattened-hair beast! That wretched outcast! May a big cat gnaw on his head! He seized our clothes! How’d we move?” 
“Nuns,” said 8 Rules, hardly able to contain his giggles, “so you're taking a bath here. How about asking a priest like me to join you?” 
When they saw him, the fiends became angry. “You're a very rude priest!” they cried. “We're women in a home and you're a man who’s left the home. The ancient book said: By the seventh year, a 
man and a woman aren't to sit on the same mat. '° How'd you bathe in the same pool with us?” 
“It's so hot now,” said 8 Rules, “that there’s no alternative. Don’t be so fussy and let me wash with you. Stop throwing the book at me! What's all this about sitting and not sitting on the same mat!” 
Refusing to permit any further discussion, Idiot abandoned his rake, took off his black silk shirt, and leaped into the water with a splash. More incensed than ever, the fiends rushed forward and wanted 
to hit him. Little did they know that 8 Rules could be extremely agile once he landed in water. With a shake of his body he changed at once into a sheet fish spirit. All the fiends reached for him with 
their hands and tried to catch the fish; but as they dove toward him in the east, he darted to the west with a swoosh, and when they plunged their hands down in the west, he spurted to the east once 
more. All slimy and slippery, he darted madly between their legs. The water was about chest deep; after 8 Rules swam around on top of the water for a while, he dove straight for the bottom, so tiring 
the fiends that they all collapsed, panting, in the pool. Only then did 8 Rules leap out of the pool, change back into his original form, put on his shirt, and take up his muckrake once more. “Who do you 
think I’m?” he bellowed. “Just a sheet fish spirit?” 
When they saw him, the fiends were terrified. “You're the priest who came in just now,” said 1 of them. “You changed into a sheet fish when you leaped into the water and we’d not catch hold of you. 
Now you look like this again. Where in fact did you come from? You must give us your name.” 
“So you bunch of lawless fiends really don’t recognise me!” said 8 Rules. “I’m the disciple of the Tang elder, someone from the Great Tang in the Land of the East who’s on his way to acquire scriptures. 
I'm Bullseye Aware of Abilities Eight Rules, the Marshal of Heavenly Reeds. You've my master hung up in a cave and are planning to have him steamed for food. My master! Steamed for food? Stretch 
out your heads at once and receive a blow, each of you. | want to finish you off!” 
When they heard these words, the fiends were frightened out of their wits. Going to their knees in the water, they cried, “We beg the Venerable Dad to forgive us. We've eyes but no pupils and caught 
your master by mistake. Though he’s hanging there now, he’s not been tortured. Please spare our lives in your mercy. We're willing to give you some travel money instead to send your master to the 
Western Heaven.” 
Waving his hand, 8 Rules replied, “Don’t talk like that! The proverb’s put the matter very well: once the candy salesman did me deceive, I’d never the sweet talker believe. No matter what, I’m going to 
give you a blow of my rake. Then each of us can be on our way!” 
As he had always been rather crude and rough, more intent on displaying his power than on showing pity and tenderness to women, Idiot lifted up his rake and without further regard for good or ill, 
rushed forward to attack them. Terribly flustered, the fiends were no longer concerned with embarrassment than with the far more important matter of preserving their lives. Shielding their private parts 
with their hands, they leaped out of the water and stood by the pavilions to exercise their magic. All at once the threads began to pour out of their navels, and in no time at all, 8 Rules was enclosed 
inside what appeared to be a huge silk tent. Discovering, when he raised his head, that the sky and the sun had suddenly disappeared, Idiot wanted to run away but alas, he could hardly even take a 
step! All over the ground ropes and cords were strewn to trip him up. The moment he moved his legs, he began to stumble: he headed to the left and his face hugged the ground; he went to the right 
and he fell head over heels; he turned around and his horn kissed the earth; he scrambled up only to do a handstand. He tumbled over countless times until his body turned numb and his legs flaccid, 
until his head swam and his eyes could not see straight. Unable even to crawl, all he could do was lie on the ground and moan. After the fiends had him trapped like that, they did not beat him or harm 
him in any way. Leaping out of the door of the pool, they ran back to the cave instead, using the cobweb as a shelter. Having passed the stone bridge, they stood still and recited the magic spell again 
to retrieve the web. Then they darted into the caves, all naked, and ran past the Tang Monk, giggling and still covering their private parts with their hands. After they took out some old clothes to put on 
from 1 of the stone chambers, they went to the rear door and cried, “Children, where’re you?” Each of the monster-spirits had an adopted son, their names being Bee, Hornet, Cockroach, Cantharis, 
Grasshopper, Maggot, and Dragonfly. Those monster-spirits once set up a huge web to have these 7 insects captured and were about to devour them. But as the ancients said: Fow/ have fowl talk, 
and beasts have beast language. The insects pleaded for their lives, declaring their willingness to honour their captors as mums. From that time since, they picked 100 spring flowers to serve the fiends 
and searched out summer plants to feed monster-spirits. When the insects now heard the summons, they immediately gathered before the monster-spirits to say, “Mums, why did you send for us?” 
“Sons,” replied the fiends, “earlier this morning we provoked by mistake a priest who came from the Tang court. His disciple just now had us trapped in the pool; not only were we put to dreadful shame 
but we almost lost our lives also. You must exert your strength and go out to make him turn back. If you prevail, you may then go to your uncle’s house to meet us.” And so, having escaped with their 
lives, the fiends went to their elder brother's house where their damnable mouths would stir up greater calamity, and where we'll leave them for the moment. Look at those insects! Rubbing their hands 
and fists eagerly, they all went forth to battle their enemy. 8 Rules grew faint and dizzy from all those falls. After a while however, he managed to raise his head a little and found that all the cords and 


threads had disappeared. He scrambled up rather cautiously; taking a step at a time and nursing his pain, he found his way back. When he saw Pilgrim, he tugged at him and said, “Elder Brother, is 
my face swollen and bruised?” 

“What happened to you?” asked Pilgrim. 

8 Rules replied, “l was completely covered up by cords and threads that those fiends let out. They even had tripping tethers set up on the ground. | don’t know how many times | fell but my torso went 
limp and my back was about to break, unable to move even a single step. | got my life back and returned here only because the ropes and cords disappeared after a while.” When he heard that, Sand- 
monk cried, “Finished! Finished! You've caused a disaster! Those fiends must have gone to the cave to harm Master. Let’s go quickly to rescue him!” 

On hearing this, Pilgrim began to run toward the village, followed by 8 Rules pulling the horse. When they arrived at the stone bridge, their way was barred by seven little fiends who cried, “Slow down! 
Slow down! We're here!” Taking a look at them, Pilgrim said to himself, “How laughable! They’re all so tiny! Even the tallest is no more than two and a half feet, and the heaviest can’t be more than ten 
pounds.” He then bellowed at them, “Who are you?” 

The fiends replied, “We're the sons of the seven mortal dames. You've insulted our mums and now dare even fight up to our door. Don’t run away! Look out for yourself!” Dear fiendish creatures! 
They rushed forward and mounted a wild attack. 8 Rules was already sorely annoyed by his falls; when he saw how tiny those insects were, he grew vicious and began to strike out with his rake. When 
those fiends saw how savage 8 Rules was, each of them changed back into his original form and flew up into the air crying, “Change!” 

Instantly 1 changed into 10, 10 into 100, 100 into 1000, and 1000 into 10000 — there were in no time at all countless insects. See the sky full of flying maggots, the ground covered by dragonflies; bees, 
hornets, diving at your heads; cockroaches going for your eyes. Cantharides bite your front, back, grasshoppers your crown, and feet. A huge, black mass striking your face, its chirr would gods and 
spirits faze. Alarmed, 8 Rules said, “O Elder Brother, they may say that scriptures are easy to get but on the road to the West, even insects bully people!” 

“Brother,” said Pilgrim, “don’t be afraid. Go and attack them quickly!” 

“My face, my head,” cried 8 Rules, “all over my body, there must be over ten layers of them! How am | going to attack them?” 

“It's nothing! It's nothing!” cried Pilgrim. “I’ve my abilities!” 

“O Elder Brother,” cried Sand-monk, “whatever ability you've, bring it out! My bald head’s swollen from their bites!” 

Dear Great Sage! He pulled off a bunch of hair and chewed them to pieces before spitting them, crying, “Change! Yellow, spar...” 

“Elder Brother,” interrupted 8 Rules, “what sort of street talk are you using again? Yellow? Spar?” 

“You don’t realise,” replied Pilgrim, “that yellow means yellow hawk and spar is the sparrow-hawk. We've also the kite, the gerfalcon, the eagle, the fish-hawk, and the harrier. Those sons of the monster- 
spirits are seven kinds of insect, and my hairs have changed into seven kinds of hawk.” The hawks, of course, were most able to peck at insects; one peck of their bills and a whole insect was devoured. 
They attacked also with their claws, and they knocked the insects down with their wings. Soon the insects were eliminated; not a trace of them could be found in the air but there was over a foot of their 
corpses on the ground. 

The three brothers then raced past the bridge to go into the cave where they found their old master suspended from the beam and weeping. “Master,” said 8 Rules, walking up to him, “because you 
wanted to be hung for fun in here, you’ve made me fall who knows how many times!” Sand-monk said, “Let's untie Master first before we say anything more.” Pilgrim at once had the rope cut and 
lowered his master. “Where did the monster-spirits go?” he asked. The Tang Monk said, “They ran to the back, all naked, to call for their sons.” 

“Brothers,” said Pilgrim, “come with me to go look for them.” 

Holding their weapons, the three of them searched in vain for the fiends in the rear garden, even after they had climbed some of the peach and pear trees. “They are gone! They are gone!” said 8 
Rules. Sand-monk said, “No need to look for them anymore. We'd go and wait on Master.” The brothers returned to the front to ask the Tang Monk to mount up. “You two take Master out first,” said 8 
Rules. “Let Old bull use my rake on their residence so that they'll have no place to live if they return.” 

“Using your rake is a waste of strength,” chuckled Pilgrim. “Why don’t you find some firewood and you'll finish everything off for them.” Dear Idiot! He indeed located some rotted pine, broken bamboo, 
dried willow, and dead creepers; he started a fire and soon the entire cave-dwelling was burned to the ground. Master and disciples then felt more at ease to proceed. Aha! 


089 
Passions, because of old enmity, beget calamity; demon-trapped, the Mind Lord with luck breaks the light 
The Great Sage Sun supported the Tang Monk to proceed on the main road to the West with 8 Rules and Sand-monk. In a little while however, they came upon some towered buildings with palatial 
features and ornaments. Reining in his horse, the Tang Monk said, “Disciples, can you tell what sort of a place that’s?” 
Raising his head to look, Pilgrim saw mountains ringing the buildings; a brook rounding the arbours; a dense variety of trees before the door; most fragrant wild flowers outside the house. An egret 
resting in the willows seemed like jade immaculate in the mist; an oriole reciting amidst the peach appeared as brilliant gold within the flames. Wild deer in pairs trod on green grass without a thought 
or care; mountain fowl by 2s flew and chattered high above the red wood tips. Truly it seemed like Liu and Ruan’s Mount-Tai cave, ‘a fairy haunt, a mortal’s house no less. “Master,” said Pilgrim, “that’s 
neither the residence of kings or dukes nor a house of the noble or the rich. It looks rather like a Daoist Abbey or a Religious monastery, and we'll know for sure when we get there.” On hearing this, 
Tripitaka whipped his horse forward. As they arrived before the door, master and disciples discovered a stone plaque mounted on the door that had on it the inscription: 
Yellow Flower Abbey 

Tripitaka dismounted. 8 Rules said, “A Yellow Flower Abbey’s to be the home of a Daoist. It might be good for us to go in and meet him. Our attire may be different but we follow the same practices of 
austerity.” 
“You're right,” said Sand-monk. “We can go in and enjoy the scenery a bit in the first place and can also graze and feed the horse in the second. If it's convenient, we can ask them to prepare some 
food for Master to eat.” The elder agreed and the four of them went inside. On both sides of the 2"2-level door was mounted the following new year couplet: 
Yellow sprout, white snow? - a mortal’s house; 

Jasper grass, jade flowers — a feathered one’s * home. 
“This,” said Pilgrim, chuckling, “is a can-carrying Daoist who burns rushes, refines herbs, and works the fire in the reaction vessels.” 
Giving him a pinch, Tripitaka said, “Be careful with your words! Be careful with your words! We're not acquaintances or relatives of his and staying here temporarily. Why’d we mind what he’s doing?” 
He had not quite finished the sentence when they went through the second-level door. The main hall was entirely closed up but in the east corridor they saw a Daoist sitting there and making drugs 
and pills. He was attired as such: He wore a lacquered gold cap of scintillating red and a dark, long robe of luminous black. He trod on cloud-patterned shoes of spreading green; he knotted a Master 
Lti sash of swaying yellow. His face seemed like an iron gourd; his eyes shone like bright stars. His nose loomed up like a Muslim’s; his lips curled outward like a Tartar’s. Thunderbolts lay hidden in 
his Daoist mind, taming tigers and dragons, a true feathered 1. Seeing him, Tripitaka said in a loud voice, “Old mortal, this humble cleric salutes you.” Jerking up his head and startled by the sight, the 
Daoist abandoned the drugs in his hands, pressed down his hair pin hurriedly, tidied his clothes, and walked down the steps to say, “Old master, forgive me for not coming to meet you. Please be 
seated inside.” 
Delighted, the elder went up to the main hall; pushing open the door, he saw the sacred images of the Three Pure Ones, before which were urns and incense laid out on a long sacrificial table. The 
elder took up several sticks of incense and stuck them into the urns. Only after he had saluted three times to the images did he greet the Daoist once more and took the guest seats with his disciples. 
The Daoist called for tea to be served at once whereupon two young lads rushed inside to look for the tea tray, to wash out the tea cups, to scrub the tea spoons, and to prepare tea fruits. All their 
scurrying about soon disturbed those several fated enemies. 
The seven female fiends of the Cobweb Cave were once schoolmates of this Daoist when they studied the magic arts together. After they had put on the old clothes and given instruction to their 
adopted sons, they came to this place. At this moment, they were cutting up cloth for clothes when they saw the lads busily preparing tea. “Lads,” they asked, “who are the guests who have arrived that 
send you into such a frenzy?” 
“Four monks walked in just now,” replied the lads, “and Master asked for tea to be served at once.” 
“Was there a white, stout-ish priest?” asked one of the female fiends. “Yes,” they replied. “Another one with long horn and huge ears?” she asked again. “Yes,” they replied. “Go take the tea outside 
quickly,” said the female fiend, “and wink to your master as you do so. Ask him to come in, for I've something important to tell him.” 
The divine lads indeed took five cups of tea out to the main hall; smoothing out his clothes, the Daoist picked up a cup and presented it with both hands to Tripitaka. Then he served 8 Rules, Sand- 
monk, and Pilgrim. After tea, the cups were collected, and as they did so, one of the lads winked at the Daoist. At once he arose and said, “Please be seated all of you. Lads, put away the trays and 
keep our guests company. I'll be back soon.” 
The master and his disciples went outside of the hall with one lad to enjoy the scenery. The Daoist went back to the abbot chamber where he found those seven girls all going to their knees and saying, 
“Elder Brother! Elder Brother! Listen to what your sisters have to say.” Raising them with his hands, the Daoist said, “When you first came, you told me already that you wanted to speak to me. It just 
so happened that the drugs | was preparing today had to avoid being exposed to females, and that was why | didn’t respond. Now there are guests outside. Can we talk later?” 
The fiends said, “What we've to tell you, Elder Brother, can be told only with the arrival of your guests. When they leave, there'll be no need for us to tell you anymore.” 
“Look at the way my worthy sisters speak!” said the Daoist with a chuckle. “What do you mean that it can be told only when the guests are here? Are you mad? Let’s not say that I’m one of those who 
cultivates the art of mortality in purity and quiescence. Even if | were a profane person burdened with the care of wife, children, and other domestic affairs, I'd still have to wait for the guests to leave 
before | took care of my own business. How could you be so ill-behaved and cause me such embarrassment? Let me go out.” All tugging at him, the fiends said, “Elder Brother, please don’t be angry. 
Let us ask you where did those guests come from?” Red in the face, the Daoist did not answer them. 
One of the fiends said, “Just now the lads came in to fetch tea, and | heard that they were four monks.” 
“So what if they are monks?” said the Daoist angrily. “Among these four monks,” said the fiend, “there is a rather plump one with a white face, and there is also one who has a long horn and huge ears. 
Have you asked them where they came from?” 
“There are indeed two monks like that,” replied the Daoist, “but how did you know? Have you seen these two somewhere before?” 
“Elder Brother,” said one of the girls, “you really don’t know all the intricacies behind the matter. That monk with the white face happens to be someone sent by the Tang court to seek scriptures in the 
Western Heaven. This morning he came to our cave to beg for food. Since your sisters have long heard of the reputation of the Tang Monk, we seized him.” 
“Why did you want to do that?” asked the Daoist. 
The girl said, “We've long heard people say that the Tang Monk possesses a true body that has practiced self-cultivation for ten disciples. Anyone who eats a piece of his flesh will attain longevity. 
That's why we seized him. Later, we're trapped in the Purgation Stream by that priest with a long hom and huge ears. First he robbed us of our clothing; then he grew even bolder and wanted to bathe 
with us in the same pool. We'd not stop him, of course. After he jumped into the water, he changed into a sheet fish spirit and darted back and forth between our legs. He was such a rogue that we 
thought he would surely assault us. Then he leaped out of the water and changed back into his original appearance. When he saw that we’d not yield to him, he took up a nine-pronged muckrake and 
tried to kill us all. If we’d not used a little of our intelligence, we’d have been slain by him. We managed to flee, though terror-stricken with our lives, and then we told your nephews to go fight with the 
monk. We didn’t tarry however, to learn whether they remained dead or alive, for we came straight here to find refuge. We beg you for the sake of our friendship as schoolmates once to exact vengeance 
this day for us.” 
When he heard these words, the Daoist became so angry that his colour changed and his voice quivered. “So, these monks are so insolent, so villainous!” he said. “Relax, all of you. Let me take care 
of them!” 
Thanking him, the girls said, “If Elder Brother wants to fight, we'll help you.” 
“No need to fight! No need to fight!” said the Daoist. “As the proverb says: you suffer three percent loss already once you fight! Follow me instead, all of you.” 
The girls followed him into his room; placing a ladder behind his bed, he climbed up to the crossbeam and took down a small leather case, approximately eight inches high, a foot long, 4 inches wide, 
and bolted by a small copper lock. From his sleeve the Daoist also took out a goose-yellow handkerchief, tied to the fringes of which was a tiny key. He opened the lock and took out a small package 
of medicine that was the dung of all mountain birds collected to 1000 pounds. When cooked in a copper pot, the time and heat were both even. A thousand pounds made just 1 cup that was reduced 
to 3 pinches. 3 pinches were then pan-fried, cooked, and refined still some more. This poison was produced at last, rare as previous jewels and gems. Any person who took one taste would behold 
King Yama in haste! “Sisters,” said the Daoist to the girls, “if | want to feed this treasure of mine to an ordinary mortal, all | need’s a thousandth part of a tael and the person will die when it reaches his 


stomach. Even a mortal will perish if he ingests three-thousandth parts of a tael. | suppose these monks might be fairly accomplished in the Way and they'll need the larger dosage. Bring me a scale 
quickly.” 

One of the girls quickly took up a small scale and weighed in twelve-thousandth parts of a tael of this poison that she then divided into four portions. The Daoist then took twelve red dates, into each of 
which he added about a thousandth part of the drug after he had crushed the date slightly with his fingers. The twelve dates were then placed inside four tea mugs while two black dates were placed 
in another tea mug. After the mugs were filled with tea and put on a tray, he said to the girls, “Let me go question them. We'll let them go if they are not from the Tang court. But if they indeed came 
from the court, I'll ask for a change of tea, and you'll send the lads out with this tea. The moment they drink this, every one of them will perish. You'll be avenged, and your anguish will be relieved.” The 
girls could not have been more grateful. 

Putting on a new robe to affect a show of courtesy, the Daoist walked out and asked the Tang Monk and his disciples to take the guest seats once more. “Please forgive me for my absence, old master,” 
he said. “Just now I'd to go inside to give instruction for my young students to pick green vegetables and white turnips, so that they could prepare a meal for you.” 

“This humble cleric,” replied Tripitaka “came to see you with empty hands. How could | dare accept a meal from you?” 

Chuckling, the Daoist said, “You and | are both persons who have left the home. The moment we see an Abbey's gate, we can count on receiving a little emolument. How could you mention empty 
hands? May | ask the old master that monastery do you belong to? Why are you here?” 

“This humble cleric” said Tripitaka, “has been sent by the Throne of the Great Tang in the Land of the East to go acquire scriptures from the Great Thunderclap Monastery in the Western Heaven. We're 
just passing through your mortal residence and we came in to see you in all sincerity.” 

On hearing this, the Daoist beamed and said, “The master is a god of great virtue and great piety. This humble Daoist was ignorant of this, and he was remiss in going the proper distance to wait for 
you. Pardon me! Pardon me!” He then called out, “Lad, go and change the tea quickly, and tell them to hurry up with the food.” The little lad ran inside, and he was met by the girls who said to him, 
“There’s fine tea here, all prepared. Take it out.” 

The lad indeed took out the five tea mugs. Immediately the Daoist presented with both hands one of the mugs containing the red dates to the Tang Monk. When he saw how huge a person 8 Rules 
was, he took him for the senior disciple while Sand-monk he regarded as the second disciple. Pilgrim, being the smallest, was taken to be the youngest disciple, and only the fourth mug was given to 
him. Pilgrim was exceedingly perceptive. The moment he accepted the tea mug, he saw that the 1 left on the tray had 2 black dates in it. “Sir,” he said at once, “let me exchange my mug with yours.” 
“To tell you the truth, elder,” said the Daoist, smiling, “a poor Daoist in the mountains doesn’t always have on hand the proper tea condiments. Just now | personally searched in the back for fruits and 
found only these twelve red dates with which | made four mugs of tea to serve to you. Your humble Daoist did not want to fail to bear you company, and that was why | made a fifth cup of tea with dates 
of less desirable colour. It's an expression of respect from this poor Daoist.” 

“How could you say that?” replied Pilgrim with a chuckle. “As the ancients said, he who’s at home is never poor; it’s real poverty when he’s on tour. You live here. How could you claim to be poor? Only 
mendicants like us are really poor! Let me exchange with you. Let me exchange with you.” 

On hearing this, Tripitaka said, “Wukong, this is truly the hospitality of our mortal. Drink it. Why do you want to exchange it?” 

Pilgrim had no choice but to hold the mug in his left hand; he covered it with his right and stared at the rest of his companions. 8 Rules was both hungry, thirsty, and had always had a huge appetite. 
When he saw that there were 3 red dates in the tea, he picked them up and swallowed them in 2 gulps. His master ate them, and Sand-monk, too, ate them. In a moment however, 8 Rules’ face turned 
pale, tears rolled down from Sand-monk’s eyes, and the Tang Monk foamed at the mouth. Unable to remain in their seats, all 3 of them fainted and fell to the ground. Realising that they had been 
poisoned, Great Sage hurled the tea mug in his hand at the face of the Daoist. The Daoist shielded himself with upraised hand, his sleeve stopping the mug and sending it crashing to the floor. “How 
boorish can you be, priest!” snapped the Daoist angrily, “How dare you smash my tea mug?” 

“You beast!” scolded Pilgrim. “What do you've to say about those three persons of mine? What have we done to you that you'd want to use poisoned tea on us?” 

“Yokel,” said the Daoist, “you've caused great calamity! Don’t you know?” 

“We've just entered your door,” replied Pilgrim, “and we've barely announced where we came from. We've not even engaged in any lofty debate. How could we cause any calamity?” 

“Didn't you beg for food at the Cobweb Cave? Didn't you bathe at the Purgation Spring?” asked the Daoist. Pilgrim said, “Those bathing in the Purgation Spring were seven female fiends. If you mention 
them, you must know them, and that means you, too, have to be a monster-spirit. Don’t run away! Have a taste of my rod!” Dear Great Sage! He pulled out the golden-hooped rod from his ear and 
gave it a wave; immediately it grew to have the thickness of a rice bowl. He struck at the face of the Daoist who stepped aside quickly to dodge the blow before meeting his opponent with a treasure 
sword. 

As the two of them brawled and fought, the noise aroused the female fiends inside who surged out, crying, “Spare your efforts, Elder Brother. Let your sisters capture him.” When Pilgrim saw them, he 
became angrier than ever. Wielding the iron rod with both hands, he hurled himself into their midst and attacked them wildly. All seven of the fiends at once loosened their clothes and exposed their 
snow-white bellies to exercise their magic. From their navels threads and cords poured out that became, in no time at all, a huge awning that had Pilgrim entirely covered down below. 

Sensing that the tide was turning against him, Pilgrim at once recited a spell and somersaulted right through the top of the awning to escape. He suppressed his anger to stand still in mid-air to look at 
those bright shiny cords produced by the fiends: weaving back and forth, up and down, as if guided by a shuttle, they formed a huge web that in an instant had the entire Yellow Flower Abbey enshrouded 
and removed it clean out of sight. “Formidable! Formidable!” said Pilgrim to himself. “It was a good thing that | didn’t fall into their hands! No wonder Bullseye 8 Rules fell so many times! But what shall 
| do now? My master and my brothers have been poisoned, and I've no idea even of the background of these fiends who have banded themselves together. I'd better go and question that local spirit 
once more.” 

Dear Great Sage! He lowered his cloud, made the magic sign with his fingers, and recited a spell beginning with the letter Ohm to summon once more the local spirit. Trembling all over, the aged god 
knelt by the road and respected, saying, “Great Sage, you're going to rescue your master. Why did you turn back here?” 

“We did manage to rescue my master earlier,” said Pilgrim, “but we ran into a Yellow Flower Abbey not far from where we left you. We went inside with our master to have a look, and we're met by the 
Abbey master. As we visited with him, my master and my brothers were poisoned by his tea. Luckily, | didn’t drink it and | attacked him with my rod. He began to talk about begging food at the Cobweb 
Cave and bathing in the Purgation Spring, and | knew that that fellow was also a fiend. Just as we’re fighting, the seven girls came out and emitted their silk cords but old monkey was smart enough to 
escape. Since you've been a god here for some time, | thought you must know their background. What kind of monster-spirits are they? Tell me the truth, and I'll spare you a beating.” 

Respecting, the local spirit said, “The monster-spirits haven't quite lived here for a decade. This humble deity made some investigation three years ago and uncovered their original form: they are seven 
spider spirits. Those silk cords they produce happen to be cobwebs.” Delighted by what he heard, Pilgrim said, “If what you say is true, it's nothing unmanageable. You go back, and let me exercise my 
magic to bring them to submission.” After one more respect the local spirit left. 

Pilgrim went up to the Yellow Flower Abbey and pulled off from his tail seventy pieces of hair. Blowing a mouthful of mortal breath on them, he cried, “Change!” They changed into seventy small Pilgrims. 
Then he blew also on the golden-hooped rod, crying, “Change!” and it changed into seventy rods forked at one end. To each of the small Pilgrims he gave one of these rods while he himself took up 
one also. They stood by the mass of silk cords and plunged the rods into the web; at a given signal, they all snapped the cords and then rolled them up with their rods. After each of them had rolled up 
over ten pounds of the cords, they dragged out from inside seven huge spiders, each about the size of a barrel. With arms and legs flailing with their heads bobbing up and down, the spiders cried, 
“Spare our lives! Spare our lives!” 
But those 70 small Pilgrims had them completely pinned down and refused to let go. “Let's not hit them yet,” said Pilgrim. “Let's tell them to return our master and our brothers.” 
“Elder Brother,” screamed the fiends, “return the Tang Monk to him and save our lives!” 
Dashing out, the Daoist said, “Sisters, | wanted to eat the Tang Monk. | can’t save you.” 
Infuriated by what he heard, Pilgrim cried, “If you don’t return my master, take a good look at what your sisters will become!” Dear Great Sage! 1 wave of the forked staff and it changed back into his 
original iron rod that he raised with both hands to smash to pulp those 7 spider spirits. After he had retrieved all his hairs with 2 shakes of his tail, he wielded the iron rod and sped inside all by himself 
to search for the Daoist. When the Daoist saw his sisters being beaten to death, he was struck by remorse and immediately met his opponent with upraised sword. In this battle each of them was full 
of hate as he unleashed his magic powers. What a marvellous fight! The fiend wielded his treasure sword; the Great Sage raised his golden-hooped rod. Because of the Tang court's Tripitaka, all 7 
girls were first sent to their deaths. Now the hands of rectitude showed their might to work with magic the golden-tipped rod. The Great Sage was strong in spirit, the bogus mortal, audacious. Their 
bodies went through the most florid moves; 2 hands like a windlass spun and turned. The sword and the rod banged aloud; low-hung and grey were the clouds. With cutting words and clever schemes 
as in a picture they charged back and forth. They fought till the wind howled and sand flew to scare tigers and wolves; till Heaven and Earth darkened, and the stars themselves removed. That Daoist 
withstood the Great Sage for some fifty rounds when he gradually felt his hands weakening. All at once he seemed to have been completely drained of his strength. He therefore quickly untied his sash 
and took off his black robe with a loud flap. “My son!” said Pilgrim with a chuckle. “If you’re no match for someone, stripping isn’t going to help you!” But after the Daoist took off his clothes he raised up 
both of his hands and exposed 1000 eyes grown on both ribs. Emitting golden beams, they’re terrifying indeed! Dense yellow fog, bright golden beams. Dense yellow fog spurted out from his 2 armpits 
like clouds; bright golden beams jetted from these thousand eyes like flames - like barrels of gold left and right, copper bells both east and west. This was a bogus mortal’s magic, the divine might of a 
Daoist. Blinding the eyes, the sky, and the sun and moon this dried hot air descended like a coop and had the Great Sage Sun, Equal to Heaven confined in golden beams and yellow fog. Terribly 
flustered, Pilgrim spun around and around in the golden beams, unable even to take a step forward or backward. It was as if he had been imprisoned inside a barrel. As the blast of heat became 
unbearable, he got desperate and leaped straight up into the air to try to pierce the golden beams. The beams were too strong however, and he was sent hurtling back to the ground head over heels. 
Then he felt pain and when he touched quickly that part of his head where it had rammed the golden beams, he could feel that the skin had softened somewhat. Sorely annoyed, he thought to himself, 
“What rotten luck! What rotten luck! Even this head of mine today’s become useless! In former times, the blows of scimitars and axes couldn't harm it one whit. How'd slamming into the golden beams 
now soften the skin? It may fester afterwards and | may end up with a permanent sore even if it heals.” After a while, the blast of heat was again becoming unbearable, and he thought to himself further, 
“| can’t go forward or backward or move left or right. | can’t even crash out of here by going upward. What'll | do? Alll right, I'd better take the low road and get the mum out of here!” Dear Great Sage! 
Reciting a spell, he changed with 1 shake of his body into a pangolin also named scaly anteater. Truly his 4 iron claws could bore through hills and rocks like sifting flour; scaly frame could pierce cliffs 
and ridges like cutting scallions, 2 luminous eyes seemed like a pair of refulgent stars; a sharp, pointed beak, stronger than any steel chisel or diamond drill. This was pangolin of medical fame; scaly 
anteater was his vulgar name. Look at him! Hardening his head he burrowed right into the ground and did not emerge again until he was some 20 miles away. The golden beams had managed to cover 
a distance of only some 10 or 12 miles. After he changed back to his original form, he was overcome by fatigue and his whole body ached. Bursting into tears, he wailed: “O Master! Since | left by faith 
the mountain that year, we came west together in unceasing toil. We'd no fear for billows of the sea. How'd we capsize in a small gully?” As the Handsome Monkey King vented his grief, he suddenly 
heard someone weeping also behind the mountain. He rose, wiped away his tears, and tumed to look; a woman in garb of heavy mourning with a bowl of cold rice soup in her left hand and a few pieces 
of yellow paper money in her right, came toward him, sobbing every step of the way. Nodding his head, Pilgrim sighed to himself, “Truly as they say, the person shedding tears meets the tearful one; 
he whose heart's broken sees the broken heart. | wonder why this woman is crying. Let me question her a bit.” In a short while, the woman came up to where he was standing and Pilgrim saluted to 
say, “Nun, for whom you’re weeping?” 

“My husband,” said the woman, blinking back her tears, “had a dispute with the master of the Yellow Flower Abbey when he tried to buy some bamboos from him, and he was poisoned to death by that 
master with poisoned tea. I’m taking some money to his grave to be burned, in order to repay his kindness as a spouse.” When Pilgrim heard these words, tears rolled down his cheeks. On seeing that, 
the woman said to him angrily, “You're so senseless! | grieve on account of my husband. How dare you mock me with your tears and your sorrowful countenance?” 

Bending low, Pilgrim said, “Nun, please don’t be angry. I’m Pilgrim Sun Wukong, the senior disciple of Tripitaka Tang, the bond-brother and royal envoy of the Great Tang in the Land of the East. We're 
journeying to the Wester Heaven when we’d to rest the horse in the Yellow Flower Abbey. We ran into a Daoist in that Abbey, some kind of a monster-spirit who had made a fraternal alliance with 
seven spider spirits. Those spider spirits wanted to harm my master in the Cobweb Cave but 8 Rules, Sand-monk, my two brothers, and | succeeded in having him rescued. The spider spirits however, 
went to the Abbey to tattle on us, claiming instead that we intended to assault them. My master and my brothers were poisoned by the tea offered by the Daoist, and all three of them, including our 
horse, are now trapped in the Abbey. Only | didn’t drink his tea. When | smashed his tea mug, he fought with me, and those seven spider spirits also came out to let loose their silk cords to try to 
ensnare me. When | escaped through my magic power, | questioned the local spirit and learned of their original form. Then | used my Magic of Body-Division and pulled out the fiends by rolling up their 
webs. After | beat them all to death with my rod, the Daoist wanted to avenge them and fought once more with me. When he was about to be defeated after some sixty rounds, he took off his clothes 
to expose a thousand eyes on his two ribs. They emitted countless golden beams to have me completely enclosed, and | found it practically impossible to move at all. That was when I'd to change into 
a scaly anteater to escape by boring through the ground. | was grieving just now when | heard you weeping, and that was why | questioned you. When | saw that you had at least paper money to repay 
your husband but I’d nothing at all to thank my late master, | grieved even more. How could | dare mock you?” 


Putting down her rice soup and paper money, the woman saluted to Pilgrim and said, “Don’t be offended. I'd no idea that you, too, are a victim. According to what you've told me, | can tell that you don’t 
recognise that Daoist. He is actually the Demon Lord of a Hundred Eyes, and he is also called the Many-Eyed Fiend. But if you’re capable of such a transformation that you'd do battle with him for so 
long and still escape his golden beams, you must have great magic powers. Nevertheless, you still can’t get near that fellow. Let me recommend a holy worthy to you; with her assistance, you'll surely 
be able to overcome those golden beams and bring the Daoist to submission.” 

On hearing this, Pilgrim saluted hurriedly and said, “Nun, if you’ve such information, please instruct me. Tell me who the holy worthy is so that | can go and solicit her assistance. If | succeed in getting 
her here, I'll be able to rescue my master and avenge your husband's death.” 

“Even if | tell you however,” said the woman, “and even if you manage to get her here to subdue the Daoist, | fear that you'll be able only to exact vengeance. You'll be unable to rescue your master.” 
“Why not?” asked Pilgrim. 

The woman said, “That fellow’s poison is most potent. After a person has been poisoned by the drug, even his bones and marrow will deteriorate after three days. Your journey to find her may prevent 
you from saving your master in time.” 

“| know how to move fast on the road,” replied Pilgrim. “No matter how great the distance is, half a day is all | need.” 

The woman said, “In that case, listen to me. About a thousand miles from here there is a mountain by the name of the Purple Cloud Mountain. At the Thousand Flowers Cave in the mountain, there is 
a holy worthy by the name of Pralamba.‘ She is able to subdue this fiend.” 

“Where is this mountain?” asked Pilgrim. “Which direction should | take?” Pointing with her finger, the woman answered, “Due south of here.” 

When Pilgrim turned to look, the woman immediately vanished. Pilgrim was so startled that he saluted hurriedly saying, “Which one of the Nuns are you? Your disciple’s been somewhat dazed from all 
that burrowing in the ground and he can’t recognise you. | beg you to leave me your name so that | can thank you properly.” 

From mid-air came the announcement: “Great Sage, it’s I.” 

Pilgrim looked up quickly and found that it was the Old Dame of Li Mountain. He rushed up to mid-air to thank her saying, “Old Dame, where did you come from to enlighten me?” 

The Old Dame said, “I was just going home from the Festival of the Dragon-Flower Tree. When | learned of your master’s ordeal, | revealed myself under the guise of a mourning wife in order to deliver 
him from death. You must go to Pralamba quickly but you mustn't reveal that it's | who gave you the instruction. That sage tends to put blame on people.” 

After Pilgrim thanked her, they parted. Mounting his cloud somersault, Pilgrim at once arrived at the Purple Cloud Mountain. As he stopped his cloud, he saw the 1000 Flowers Cave, outside of which 
fresh pines enshroud the lovely scene; jade cedars surround a home divine; green willows fill the mountain paths; strange blossoms clog the brook and rill; fragrant orchids ring a stone house; scented 
grass on the ridges glistens. The flowing stream’s jade-green throughout; clouds seal up aged hollow trunks. Wild fowl recite melodiously; quiet deer walk leisurely. Each bamboo’s refined, stalk by 
stalk; each red plum unturls, leaf by leaf. A cold crow rests on an old tree; a spring bird squeals on a tall bough. Summer wheat grows wide as the fields; autumn grain aplenty on the ground. No leaf 
would fall in 4 seasons; all flowers bloom in eight periods. Auspicious air will rise often to the sky and hallowed clouds will reach the great grand void. In great delight, Great Sage walked inside, level 
by level, and there was no end to the sight of this gorgeous scenery. But there was not a person in view; the place was completely silent with not even the sound of a chicken or a dog. “It'd be,” he 
thought to himself, “that the sage isn’t home?” He walked further in for another few miles when he came upon a Daoist nun sitting on a couch. She looked as such: she wore a 5-flower patterned silk 
cap; had on a robe of knitted gold threads. She trod on cloud-patterned phoenix-beak shoes; a double-tassel silk sash wrapped her waist. Her face had age like autumn after frost; voice cooed like 
spring swallows before the shrine. She had long known the 3 Vehicles Law, mind often fixed on the 4 Great Truths. 7The void intuited bore true right fruit; intelligence formed gave freedom complete. 
This was a god of 1000 Flowers Cave who was called Pralamba, a noble name. Without stopping, Pilgrim walked right up to her and called out: “Nun Pralamba, | salute you.” 

Descending from her couch, the Nun folded her hands to return his greeting and said, “Great Sage, sorry for not coming to meet you. Where did you come from?” 

“How could you recognise me as the Great Sage all at once?” asked Pilgrim. 

Pralamba said, “When you brought great disturbance to the Celestial Palace that year, your image was spread throughout the universe. Which person would not know and recognise you?” 

“Indeed,” replied Pilgrim, “as the proverb says, the good thing will not leave the door; the evil deed will go a thousand miles. | bet you didn’t know that I’ve repented and entered the Religious gate.” 
“When did you do that?” said Pralamba. “Congratulations! Congratulations!” 

“l escaped with my life recently,” said Pilgrim, “in order to give protection to the Tang Monk who had been commissioned to go seek scriptures in the Western Heaven. My master ran into the Daoist of 
the Yellow Flower Abbey and was poisoned by his poisoned tea. When | fought with that fellow, he had me enclosed in his golden beams, though | escaped through my magic power. When | heard 
that the Nun could extinguish his golden beams, | came here especially to solicit your assistance.” 

“Who told you that?” asked the Nun. “Since attending the Feast of Ullambana Bowl, I’ve not left my door for over three centuries. With my name completely hidden, no one knows me. How did you 
know?” 

“Im a devil in the earth!” replied Pilgrim. “No matter where you're, | can find you.” 

“All right! All right!” said the Nun. “I'd not leave but if the Great Sage comes here in person, I'll not destroy the good deed of scripture seeking. I'll go with you.” 

After he thanked her, Pilgrim said, “Pardon my ignorance and my urging. But what sort of weapon do you need to take along?” The Nun said, “I’ve a little embroidery needle which can undo that fellow.” 
Pilgrim could not resist saying, “Old Dame has misled me! If I'd known that only an embroidery needle was needed, I'd not have troubled you. Old monkey himself can supply a whole load of such 
needles!” Pralamba said, “That needle of yours is only made of steel or metal, and it can’t be used. This treasure of mine is not made of steel, iron, or gold. It is rather a product cultivated in the eyes 
of my son.” 

“Who is your son?” asked Pilgrim. “The Star Lord Orionis,” replied Pralamba. Pilgrim was quite astonished. Soon, they saw the bright, golden beams, and Pilgrim said to her, “That's where the Yellow 
Flower Abbey is.” Whereupon Pralamba took out from underneath her collar an embroidery needle, not more than half an inch long and as slim as a piece of eyebrow hair. Holding it in her hand, she 
threw it into the air, and after a little while, a loud crack at once dissipated the golden beams. 

“Nun,” cried Pilgrim, exceedingly pleased, “it's marvellous! Just marvellous! Let’s find the needle! Let’s find the needle!” 

“Isn't this it?” asked Pralamba as she held out her palm. Pilgrim dropped down from the clouds with her and walked inside the Abbey where they found that Daoist sitting there with tightly shut eyes and 
unable to move. “You brazen fiend!” scolded Pilgrim. “You're pretending to be blind!” He whipped out the rod from his ear and wanted to strike but Pralamba tugged at him, saying, “Don’t hit him, Great 
Sage. Let’s go see your master first.” 

Pilgrim went directly back to the guest chambers where the three pilgrims were still lying on the ground and foaming at their mouths. “What'll | do? What'll | do?” cried Pilgrim, shedding tears. 

“Please don't grieve, Great Sage,” said Pralamba. “Since | came out the door today, | might as well accumulate some secret merit. I’m going to give you three tablets which will serve as an antidote to 
the poison.” As Pilgrim saluted quickly to receive them, the Nun took out from her sleeve a small, punctured paper wrap. Inside were three red pills that she handed over to Pilgrim, telling him to put 
one in each of the pilgrim’s mouths. Prying open their teeth, Pilgrim stuffed the pills into their mouths; in a little while, as the medicine reached their stomachs, they began to retch. After the poisonous 
substance had been thrown up, they regained consciousness. Our 8 Rules was the first to scramble up, crying, “This nausea’s killing me!” Tripitaka and Sand-monk also woke up, both crying, “I’m so 
dizzy!” 

“You've all been poisoned by the tea,” said Pilgrim, “and you’d now thank the Nun Pralamba for rescuing you.” Tripitaka arose and tidied his clothes to thank her. 

8 Rules said, “Elder Brother where is that Daoist? Let me question him why he wants to harm us in this manner.” Pilgrim at once gave a thorough account of what the spider spirits had done. More and 
more incensed, 8 Rules said, “If this fellow has formed a fraternal alliance with spider spirits, he, too, must be a monster-spirit.” 

“There he is now,” said Pilgrim, pointing with his finger, “standing outside the Abbey and pretending to be blind.” 8 Rules took up his rake and tried to rush out but he was stopped by Pralamba who 
said to him, “Heavenly Reeds, please calm yourself. The Great Sage knows that there’s no other person at my cave. I’d like to take the Daoist back and make him guard my door.” 

Pilgrim said, “We're all indebted to your great kindness. How could we not comply? But please make him change back into his original form for us to see.” 

“That's easy,” replied Pralamba who went forward and pointed at the Daoist. 

Immediately he fell to the dust and appeared in his true form: a huge centipede some seven feet long. Lifting him up with her small finger, Pralamba at once mounted the auspicious clouds to head for 
the Thousand Flowers Cave. Raising his head to stare after her, 8 Rules said, “This Mum’s quite formidable! How’d she overpower such a vicious creature just like that?” 

Smiling, Pilgrim said, “| asked her whether she needed any weapon to break up the golden beams and she told me that she had a tiny embroidery needle, a product cultivated in the eyes of her son. 
When | asked for his identity, she said that it was Star Lord Orionis. Now the Star Lord is a rooster; so | suppose this Mum must be a hen. Chickens are the deadliest foes of centipedes and that’s why 
she’d bring him to submission.” 

On hearing this, Tripitaka respected some more before saying, “Disciples, let's pack up and leave.” Sand-monk found some rice and grain inside with which he prepared a meal. After master and 
disciples ate their fill, they led the horse and poled the luggage out. Once his master walked out the door, Pilgrim started a fire in the kitchen that reduced the entire Abbey to ashes in no time at all. 
Truly thanks to Pralamba, the Tang Monk came to life; enlightened nature destroyed the Many-Eyed Fiend. 


090 
Long Life reports how vicious the demons are; Pilgrim displays his transformation power 
Desires and feelings come from the same cause; it’s natural to have feelings and desires. 
For all ascetics in the Gate of Sand, Chan’s desires gone and feelings severed. 
You must take care to persevere like the bright moon, spotless, high in the sky. 
Make no mistake as work and merit advance; perfection yields a great enlightened god.' 
Tripitaka and his disciples broke through the web of desires and leaped clear of the stronghold of passions. Urging the horse, they journeyed to the West. Soon it was the end of summer and the 
beginning of autumn when the fresh cool permeated their bodies. See the rains the waning heat assail as one Paulownia leaf turns pale. Fireflies dot the sedge-path at night; crickets chirp in the moon’s 
bright light. The mallows unfurl in the dew; red smartweeds the sandbars endue. Rushes are first to decline when cicadas sadly repine. As they walked along, Tripitaka suddenly saw a tall mountain 
whose summit pierced the green void, truly touching the stars and blocking the sun. Alarmed, the elder called out to Wukong, “Look at the mountain ahead of us! It’s so tall, | wonder if there’s a road to 
take us through it.” 
“What're you talking about, Master?” asked Pilgrim, chuckling. “As the proverb says, the tall mountains will have their passageways; the deep waters will have their ferry boats. How'd there be no road 
to take us through! You may proceed without worry.” 
On hearing this, the elder smiled in delight and urged his horse to go straight up the tall ridge. They had not travelled more than a few miles when they came upon an old man with flowing white hair all 
tousled and sparse whiskers like swaying silver threads. He had a string of beads around his neck and held a dragon-headed staff. Standing far up the mountain slope, he cried out in a loud voice, 
“The elder going to the West, you must stop your horse and pull back the reins. There is a group of fiendish demons in this mountain who have devoured all the mortals in the world. You can’t proceed!” 
On hearing these words, Tripitaka paled with fright. The road was already none too level, and the announcement made him even more insecure on the saddle, so much so that he fell down at once 
from the horse with a thud and lay moaning in the grass, hardly able to move. Pilgrim went over to raise him up, saying, “Don’t be afraid! Don’t be afraid! I’m here.” 
“Just listen to that old man on the tall cliff,” said the elder. “He said that there is a group of fiendish demons in this mountain who have devoured all the mortals of the world. Who is courageous 
enough to go question him and learn the truth of the matter?” 
“You sit on the ground first,” said Pilgrim, “and let me go question him.” 
Tripitaka said, “But your looks are hideous and your words, vulgar. If you offend him, | fear that you'll be unable to get to the truth.” 
Laughing, Pilgrim said, “I'll change into someone more attractive to go question him.” 
“You change first for me to see,” said Tripitaka. 
Dear Great Sage! Making the magic sign with his fingers, he shook his body and changed at once into a neat young priest, truly with lovely eyes and clear brow, a round head and a square face. When 
he moved, he acted like a gentleman; when he spoke, he used no vulgar language. Shaking loose his silk shirt, he ran up to the Tang Monk and said, “Master, is this a good transformation?” 
“Itis, indeed!” said Tripitaka, exceedingly pleased. “How could it not be!” remarked 8 Rules. “But he has put all of us down! Even if Old bull rolled around for two, three years, he couldn't change into 
someone this attractive!” 


Dear Great Sage! Slipping away from them, he walked right up to the old man and saluted, saying, “Dear Gong-gong, this humble cleric salutes you.” When the old man saw how young the priest was, 
though most attractive in looks, he hesitated a little before returning his salute half-heartedly. Patting the head of Pilgrim with his hand, the old man giggled and said, “Little priest where you came from?” 
“We came from the Great Tang in the Land of the East,” replied Pilgrim, “on our way especially to the Western Heaven to seek scriptures from God. When we arrived here, we heard your announcement 
about the fiends. My master was quite frightened, and he asked me to come question you to learn exactly who these monster-spirits are who dare cut short our way. May | trouble you to tell me in 
detail, so that | can send them into exile.” 

With a laugh, the old man said, “You’re so young a priest that you don’t know any better. That's why you mouth these inappropriate words. The magic powers of those demons are enormous. How dare 
you say that you’d send them into exile?” 

“The way you put the matter,” said Pilgrim, laughing also, “seems to indicate that you feel rather protective toward them. You must be a relative of theirs, or at least an intimate neighbour. Otherwise, 
why would you exalt their intelligence, magnify their virtues, and refuse to disclose thoroughly their background?” Nodding his head, the old man smiled and said, “You're a priest who knows how to 
wag your tongue! You must have followed your master as a mendicant into the world and picked up a little magic here and there. You can summon a ghost or bind a spirit, | suppose, and exorcise a 
few houses for someone. But you've not run into those truly vicious fiends!” 

“How vicious?” asked Pilgrim. The old man said, “One letter of those monster-spirits to the Spirit Mountain, and all five hundred of those Arhats will come to meet them. One tiny card sent to the Celestial 
Palace, and each of the Eleven Great Luminaries will honour it. The dragons of the Four Oceans have been their friends, and the mortals of the Eight Caves have met with them frequently. The Ten 
Kings of Hell address them as brothers, and all the deities of major shrines and cities regard them as friends.” 

When he heard this, the Great Sage could not restrain his loud guffaws. Tugging at the old man with his hand, he said, “Stop talking! Stop talking! If those monster-spirits were the servants and 
houseboys, the brothers and friends of mine, then what they are about to do would not be so significant. Let me tell you this: when they see this young priest coming, they'll move to someplace else 
this very night. They'll not even wait for the morning!” 

“Little priest, you’re babbling!” said the old man. “That's blasphemy! Which gods or sages are your servants and houseboys?” 

Laughing, Pilgrim said, “To tell you the truth, the ancestral home of this young priest used to be the Water-Curtain Cave of the Flower-Fruit Mountain, located in the Aolai Country. My surname is Sun, 
and my name is Wukong. Some years ago, | was also a monster-spirit who performed great deeds. During a party with some other demons, | drank a few cups of juice too many and fell asleep. In my 
dream two men took me to the Region of Darkness with a summons, and | was so riled that | used my golden-hooped rod to beat up the spirit judge and terrify King Yama. | almost overturned in fact 
the entire Hall of Darkness. Those presiding judges were so frightened that they brought out papers, on which the Ten Kings of Hell affixed their signatures, declaring that if | spared them a beating, 
they would serve me as my servants and houseboys.” 

“Infinite Light!” cried the old man, on hearing this. “This monk has told such a tall tale that he will never grow any taller!” 

“Sir,” replied Pilgrim, “I’m tall enough now!” 

“How old are you?” asked the old man. “Give it a guess,” said Pilgrim. 

The old man said, “Seven or eight perhaps.” 

With a chuckle, Pilgrim said, “I’m about ten thousand times seven or eight years old! Let me bring out my old features for you to see. But you must not be offended.” 

“How could you've some other features?” said the old man. 

“This young priest,” said Pilgrim, “has in truth seventy-two features.” 

As that old man was somewhat dim-witted, he kept urging the Great Sage who gave his own face a wipe and changed back into his original form. With protruding fangs and a gaping mouth with two 
bright red buttocks half-covered by a tiger skin kilt, and with a golden-hooped rod in his hands, he stood verily like a living thunder god below the ledge. When the old man saw him, he paled with fright 
as his legs turned numb. Unable to stand up, he fell down with a thud, and when he scrambled up, he stumbled once more. “Venerable Sir,” said the Great Sage, approaching him, “don’t be afraid of 
nothing. I’m ugly but kindly disposed. Don’t be afraid! Don’t be afraid! I'm grateful to you for informing us of the demons. Just how many are there, tell me the whole truth so that | can thank you properly.” 
Trembling all over, the old man could not utter a word; pretending also to be deaf, he refused to reply. When Pilgrim saw that he would not talk, he turned and went back down the slope. “Wukong,” 
said the elder, “have you returned? Did you find out anything?” 

“It's nothing! It's nothing!” answered Pilgrim, laughing. “There is, to be sure, a handful of monster-spirits near the Western Heaven. The people here however, are quite timid, and they worry about them. 
It's nothing! It's nothing. /’m here!” 

“Have you asked him,” said the elder, “what mountain this is, what kind of a cave there is in it, how many fiends there are, and which road can take us to Thunderclap?” 

8 Rules spoke up, saying, “Master, don’t be offended by what I’ve to say. If we're interested in waging a contest in transformations in playing hide-and-seek and in pulling pranks on people even five of 
us are no match for Elder Brother. But if you consider honesty, then even a column of him cannot rival me.” 

“Exactly! Exactly!” said the Tang Monk. “You're more honest.” 

“| don’t know,” said 8 Rules, “why it is that he always takes care of the head but disregards the tail. He has only asked a couple of questions, and then he runs back lamely. Let Old bull go now and find 
out the truth.” 

“Aware of Ability,” said the Tang Monk, “do be careful.” 

Dear Idiot! He stuffed the muckrake into his belt and tidied his shirt before swaggering up the mountain slope and calling out to the old man, “Gong-gong, I’m saluting you.” After the old man had seen 
Pilgrim walking off, he managed to struggle up with the help of his staff and, still trembling all over, was about to leave. When he caught sight of 8 Rules however, he became more terrified than ever. 
“Holy Dad!” he cried. “What sort of nightmare is this that I've to meet up with this bunch of nasty people? That monk who left just now’s hideous all right but he had at least three percent human looks. 
But just look at the pestle mouth, the rush-leaf fan ears, the sheet iron face, and the bristled neck of this monk! He doesn’t even look one percent human!” 

“This old Gong-gong,” said 8 Rules, chuckling, “is not too pleasant, for he loves to criticise people. How do you regard me really? | may be ugly but | can stand scrutiny. Just wait a moment and I'll look 
more attractive.” When the old man heard him speaking at least in a human fashion, he had no choice but to ask him, “Where did you come from?” 

8 Rules said, “I’m the second disciple of the Tang Monk, and my religious name is Aware of Ability 8 Rules. Just now the priest who questioned you was called Wukong Pilgrim, my Elder Brother. 
Because my master blamed him for offending you and for not being able to obtain the truth, he sent me specially to question you again. We'd like to know what mountain this is, what's the name of the 
cave in the mountain, how many fiends there are in the cave, and which is the main road to the West. May we trouble you to point these out to us?” 

“Are you being truthful with me?” asked the old man. 8 Rules said, “There has never been the teeniest fakery in my whole life.” 

“You're not,” said the old man, “putting on a highfalutin show like the priest before.” 

“No, I’m not like him,” said 8 Rules. 

Leaning on his staff, the old man said to 8 Rules, “The mountain’s called the Lion-Camel Ridge of eight hundred miles and in it there’s a Lion-Camel Cave where you'll find three arch-demons.” 
“Pshaw!” cried 8 Rules. “You're too fussy an old man! Only three demons, and you've to take all that trouble to announce them to us!” 

“Aren't you afraid?” asked the old man. “To tell you the truth,” replied 8 Rules, “one blow of my Elder Brother’s rod will kill one of them, and one blow of my rake will kill another; I've a younger brother, 
too, and one blow of his fiend-routing staff will kill the third one. When all three of the demons are slain, my master will cross this ridge. What's so difficult about that?” 

Smiling, the old man said, “This monk is completely ignorant! The magic powers of those 3 arch-demons are vast indeed! Moreover, those small fiends under their command number five thousand on 
the south summit, and five thousand also on the north summit. Those stationed to guard the road leading east number ten thousand, and another ten thousand are guarding the road leading west. 
There must be five thousand on the patrol teams, and those guarding the cave entrance must run to another ten thousand. There are countless fiends tending the fires and gathering firewood. Overall, 
they must have some forty-seven or forty-eight thousand troops, each equipped with a nameplate. They devote themselves to devouring humans in this place.” 

When Idiot heard these words, he ran back, trembling all over. As he approached the Tang Monk, he dropped his rake and, instead of giving his report, began to evacuate his bowels. “Why aren't you 
giving us a report?” snapped Pilgrim. “Why are you squatting there?” 

“Im so scared,” replied 8 Rules, “that even my shit has come out! There’s no further need for me to talk. Let’s scatter while there’s still time to save our lives!” 

“This root of idiocy!” said Pilgrim. “I never was frightened when | asked the questions. How is it that when you go, you lose your mind?” 

“What's in fact the matter?” asked the elder. 

8 Rules replied, “The old man told me that this mountain is named the Lion-Camel! Mountain. In it there’s a Lion-Camel Cave where three old fiends and forty-eight thousand little fiends reside and 
devote themselves to devouring humans. The moment we put one step on the side of their mountain, we'll become food in their mouths. We can’t ever proceed!” On hearing this, Tripitaka began to 
shake all over as his hairs stood on end, saying, “Wukong, what shall we do?” 

“Master, relax,” said Pilgrim, laughing. “It’s no big thing! There may be a few monster-spirits here, | suppose but the people of this region are very timid. They frighten themselves with all this rumour 
about how many fiends there are and how big they are. Look, you’ve me!” 

“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “you'd not talk that way! I’m not like you, and what | learn is the truth. It's not a rumour. The whole mountain and the whole valley are filled with fiendish demons. How'd 
we go forward?” 

“The mouth and face of an idiot!” said Pilgrim, chuckling. “Allow nothing to scare you! If the whole mountain and the whole valley are full of fiendish demons, old monkey will use his rod. Half a night 
and they'll all be exterminated!” 

“Shame on you! Shame on you!” said 8 Rules. “Stop the big talk! It'll take seven or eight days for those monster-spirits just to take their roll call. How could you exterminate them so readily?” 

“How do you think I’m going to slay them?” asked Pilgrim. “Suppose they let you grab them,” replied 8 Rules, “bind them, or stop them dead with the Magic of Immobilization. Even then, you can’t kill 
all of them so quickly.” 

With a laugh, Pilgrim said, “No need for grabbing or binding. | give this rod of mine a yank on both ends, crying, ‘Grow!’, and it'll be four hundred feet long. Next, | wave it once, crying, ‘Thicken!’ and it'll 
have an eighty-foot circumference. | roll it toward the south of the mountain once, and five thousand fiends will be crushed to death; | roll it toward the north of the mountain once, and another five 
thousand will be crushed to death. Then | roll it once from east to west, and forty or fifty thousand who cares how many, will be reduced to meat patties.” 

“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “if you roll them down like you roll out dough for noodles, you might finish them off by the second watch.” 

“Master,” said Sand-monk, laughing on one side, “what are you afraid of when Big Brother has such vast magic powers? Mount up and get going!” 

When the Tang Monk heard them debating about their abilities, he had no choice but to calm himself and climb up on the horse. As they proceeded, they discovered that the old man who came to 
inform them had vanished. “He must be a fiend,” said Sand-monk, “who exploited deliberately the reputation and power of the demons to come and frighten us.” 

“Don’t jump to any conclusion,” said Pilgrim. “Let me go have a look.” 

Dear Great Sage! Leaping up to the peak, he looked all around without spotting anyone. As he turned his face however, he saw coloured mists flickering in the air. He immediately leaped upon the 
clouds to give chase and soon he caught sight of the Gold Star Venus. Rushing up to a god, Pilgrim tugged at him with his hands and used his vernacular name to address him, saying, “Long Life Li! 
Long Life Li! You're such a rogue! If you've anything to say, you’d have said it to my face. Why did you assume the appearance of an old country bumpkin to beguile me?” 

The Gold Star saluted him hurriedly and said, “Great Sage, I’m sorry for not informing you sooner. Please forgive me! Please forgive me! These arch-demons, possessive of vast magic powers, indeed 
make for a rugged hurdle. If you exercise all your powers in transformation and all your cleverness, you may pass through. If you but slacken a little, it'll be difficult for you to proceed.” Thanking him, 
Pilgrim said, “I'm gratefull If this is such a difficult place to traverse, please go to the Region Above and request from the Jade Emperor some celestial soldiers to assist old monkey.” 

“We've plenty of those for you,” replied the Gold Star. “Once | bring your message up there, we can round up even one hundred thousand celestial soldiers if you need them.” 

Pilgrim took leave of the Gold Star and dropped from the clouds to face Tripitaka. “That old man,” he said, “who came to bring us the information happened to be the Star Venus.” Folding his hands 
before him, the elder said, “Disciple, catch up with him quickly, and ask him whether there is another road we can take.” 

“There's no detour,” said Pilgrim, “for this mountain as it is is eight hundred miles across. | don’t even know how wide it is on both sides. How could we take a detour?” 

On hearing this, Tripitaka could not restrain the tears flowing from his eyes. “Disciple,” he said, “if it’s so difficult, how could | ever hope to worship God?” 

“Stop crying! Stop crying!” Pilgrim said, “Once you cry, you become completely feeble. This information of his can’t be all true, for his main purpose is to arouse our vigilance. As the saying goes, ‘To 
tell is to exaggerate.’ Please dismount and sit here for the moment.” 

“What sort of discussion are we having now?” asked 8 Rules. 


“No discussion,” replied Pilgrim. “You just stand here and guard Master with all diligence while Sand-monk can watch the horse and the luggage. Let old monkey go up the ridge to do a little detection 
to see just how many fiends there are. I'll catch one of them and question him thoroughly; if need be, I'll even make him write up a confession and list in detail the names of all their old and young. Then 
I'll order them to close up their cave and forbid them from barring our way, so that Master will be able to go through this place peacefully and quietly. Only then will you perceive the ability of old monkey!” 
All Sand-monk could say to him however, was, “Be careful! Be careful!” 

“No need for all your instructions!” said Pilgrim with a laugh. “Once | get up there, /’l open a pathway even if it's the Great Eastern Sea; I'll punch an opening if it's an ironclad mountain.” 

Dear Great Sage! Whistling, he mounted the cloud somersault to leap up to the tall summit where he pushed aside the creepers and vines to look all around. There was however, not a sound or a trace 
of human beings. He spoke aloud to himself, “I’ve made a mistake! I've made a mistake! I'd never have let the oldie Gold Star go. He was actually trying to frighten me. If there’s any monster-spirit 
around here, he would have jumped out and played in the wind, or he would fool with his lance or rod to practice his martial art. How is it that there is no one...” As he was thus talking to himself, he 
heard the loud bangs of a rattle behind the mountain. Turning hurriedly to look, he discovered a little fiend, hauling a banner on his shoulder which had on it the inscribed word, command. He had a bell 
tied to his waist, and he was beating a rattle with his hand as he walked from north to south. Pilgrim stared at him and thought that he was about twelve feet in height. Smiling to himself, Pilgrim said, 
“He must be a postal soldier on his way to deliver a document. Let me eavesdrop on him to see what he has to say.” 

Dear Great Sage! Making the magic sign with his fingers, he recited a spell and changed with one shake of his body, into a fly. He flew up to his cap and alighted gently on it to eavesdrop on the fiend. 
After he had turned onto the main road, the little fiend kept beating his rattle and shaking his bell while he mumbled to himself, “Those of us patrolling the mountain should all be on guard against that 
Pilgrim Sun. He knows how to change into a fly.” Astounded by what he heard, Pilgrim said to himself, “He must have seen me! How could he know my name and how could he know | might change 
into a fly, if he hadn’t?” 

But that little fiend had not seen him. It was actually those arch-demons who somehow managed to give this instruction to the little fiends and this one was just repeating what he heard. Pilgrim of 
course did not know this; suspecting that he had been seen, he was about to slay the fiend with the rod when he thought to himself, “I recall that the Gold Star told Eight Rules that there’re three old 
fiends and some forty-seven or forty-eight thousand little fiends. If those little fiends are like this one, another forty thousand won't make a bit of difference. But | wonder how powerful those three old 
demons are. Let me go question him, then | can raise my hands.” Dear Great Sage! He was going to question him. He leaped down from his cap and alighted instead on a tree to allow the little fiend 
to walk a few steps ahead. Quickly he changed into another little fiend having in fact the same clothes and like him, beating the rattle, shaking the bell, hauling the banner, and mumbling the same 
words. The only difference was that he was several inches taller than the other fiend. He ran up to the other little fiend and called out, “You on the road, wait for me.” 

Turing around, the little fiend said, “Where did you come from?” 

“My good man!” said Pilgrim with a giggle. “Can’t you recognise someone from the same family?” 

“You're not in our family,” said the little fiend. “What do you mean?” said Pilgrim. “Take a good look.” 

“But you look unfamiliar,” said the little fiend. “I don’t recognise you! | don’t recognise you!” 

“| know | look unfamiliar,” replied Pilgrim. “I’m one of those who tend the fires, and you’ve seldom met me.” 

Shaking his head, the little fiend said, “Never! Never! Even among those brothers in our cave who tend the fires, there’s no one with a pointed mouth like yours.” Pilgrim thought to himself, “I've made 
my mouth a little too pointed.” He lowered his head at once and gave his mouth a rub, saying, “My mouth’s not pointed!” Immediately, his mouth was not pointed anymore. 

“Just now,” said the little fiend, “your mouth was pointed. How could it change like that after you gave it a rub? How baffling! You can’t very well belong to our family! I've never seen you before! It’s too 
suspicious! Moreover, the domestic laws of our great kings are very strict: those who tend the fires always tend the fires, and those who patrol the mountain will patrol the mountain. They couldn’t have 
asked you to tend the fires, and then asked you also to patrol the mountain, could they?” Exceedingly clever with his mouth, Pilgrim at once replied, “You've no idea that our great kings had promoted 
me, when they saw how good | was at tending the fires, and asked me to patrol the mountain.” 

The little fiend said, “All right. There are forty of us who patrol the mountain to one platoon, and we've altogether ten platoons. Each of us is different in age, and each has a different name. To prevent 
confusion among the ranks and to facilitate taking the roll, our great kings gave us each a nameplate. Do you've one?” 

Now Pilgrim had changed into a semblance of only what he could see of the little fiend; namely, how he was dressed and what he was doing. Since he had not seen the plate, he, of course, did not 
have it on him. Dear Great Sage! Refusing to admit that he had none, he followed the drift of the question instead and said, “How could | not have a plate? | just received a brand new one. But you take 
out yours first for me to have a look.” 

Completely unaware that this was a trick, that little fiend hitched up his clothes and pulled out for Pilgrim to see a gold-lacquered plate that was tied to his body with a small cotton thread. On the back 
of the plate Pilgrim saw the inscription, In Command of All Demons. In front there were three printed words: Little Wind Cutter. He thought to himself, “It goes without saying that those who patrol the 
mountain will be named some sort of Wind Cutters.” He therefore said to the little fiend, “Lower your clothes now, and let me show you my plate.” Turning to one side, Pilgrim yanked off a small piece 
of hair from the tip of his tail and gave it a pinch, whispering, “Change!” It changed at once into another gold-lacquered plate that had a small cotton thread attached to it. On it were the three printed 
words: Chief Wind Cutter. When he took it out and showed it to him, the little fiend was greatly taken aback. “We're all named Little Wind Cutters,” he cried, “but how could you've the name of Chief 
Wind-Cutter?” 

As he had always acted with the greatest calculation and spoken with the utmost shrewdness, Pilgrim immediately said, “You really have no idea that our great kings promoted me to be a patrol 
commander when they saw how well | tended the fires. They also gave me a new plate with the name, Chief Wind Cutter, and the charge that I'd lead the forty of you in this platoon.” On hearing this, 
the fiend saluted hurriedly, saying, “Captain, Captain, you’ve just been commissioned, and that’s why you look unfamiliar. Please forgive me for offending you with my words.” 

“Ill not blame you,” chuckled Pilgrim as he returned his salute. “But | do have a request: an introductory gift of five ounces of silver per person.” 

“Don’t be too impatient, Captain,” said the little fiend. “Let me join up with my platoon at the south of the ridge, and we'll all chip in.” 

“In that case,” said Pilgrim, “I'll go with you.” 

Indeed the little fiend walked ahead while the Great Sage followed him. In less than a few miles, they came upon a pen peak. It was called a pen peak because on that mountain the peak rose straight 
up for some forty or fifty feet, as a pen sticking up from its rack. Hence the name. After Pilgrim went up there, he gave his tail a wag and leaped to the tallest point to sit down. “Wind Cutters,” he cried, 
“gather around!” All those Little Wind Cutters saluted to him down below, saying, “Captain, we wait on you.” 

“Do you know,” asked Pilgrim, “why the great kings sent me out here?” 

“No, we don't,” replied the little fiends. 

Pilgrim said, “The great kings want to devour the Tang Monk but their only fear’s that Pilgrim Sun’s vast magic powers. He is capable of many transformations, they claim and they're afraid that he may 
change into a Little Wind-Cutter to walk on this road to spy on us. They therefore have promoted me to Chief Wind Cutter and asked me to make an investigation to see whether there is any specious 
one among your platoon.” 

“Captain,” all those Little Wind Cutters said in unison, “we're all genuine.” 

“If you're,” said Pilgrim, “do you happen to know what sort of abilities our great kings possess?” 

One of the Little Wind Cutters said, “I do.” 

“If you do,” said Pilgrim, “tell me quickly. If | agree with you, you’re genuine but if you make the slightest error, you’re a specious one. I'll certainly arrest you and take you to see the great kings.” When 
that Little Wind Cutter saw him sitting loftily on the peak and wielding his authority left and right, he had little choice but to speak the truth, saying, “Our great-great king has vast magic powers and 
enormous abilities. With one gulp, he once swallowed one hundred thousand celestial warriors.” 

On hearing this, Pilgrim bellowed, “You're false!” Horrified, the Little Wind Cutter said, “Dad Captain, I’m real. How could you say that I’m false?” 

“If you're,” said Pilgrim, “why did you babble? How big is the great-great king that he can swallow with one gulp one hundred thousand celestial warriors?” 

The Little Wind Cutter said, “Perhaps the captain does not know that our great-great king is capable of such transformation that he can be big enough to reach the celestial hall when he wants to, or he 
can become as small as a vegetable seed. When the Lady Queen Mum convened the Festival of Mortal Peaches in a former year and did not send an invitation to our great-great king, he wanted to 
strive with Heaven. The Jade Emperor sent one hundred thousand celestial warriors to bring him to submission but our great king exercised his magic body of transformation and opened his mouth big 
and wide as a city gate. He charged at the celestial warriors, so terrifying them that they dared not do battle and closed up the South Heaven Gate instead. That's what | meant when | said that he once 
swallowed one hundred thousand celestial warriors with one gulp.” 

On hearing this, Pilgrim smiled silently to himself, saying, “If it's this kind of ability, old monkey is quite capable of it.” He spoke out loud again, saying, “What sort of abilities does second great king 
possess?” 

Another Little Wind Cutter replied, “Our second great king is about thirty feet tall; he has silkworm-like eyebrows, phoenix eyes, a lovely lady’s voice, and teeth like long flat poles. His nose, moreover, 
resembles a dragon. When he fights with someone, all he needs to do is to wrap his nose around his enemy. Though that person may have an iron back and a bronze body, his spirit will expire and his 
soul will perish!” 

“A monster-spirit,” said Pilgrim to himself, “with a trunk like that is not difficult to catch.” 

He spoke out loud once more, saying, “What sort of abilities does the third great king possess?” Another Little Wind Cutter said, “Our third great king is no fiendish creature of the mortal world, for he 
has the name of the Roc of Ten Thousand Cloudy Miles. When he moves, he whips up the wind and transports the seas; he reaches the north and rules the south. On his person he also carries a 
treasure, called the yin-yang double-force vase. If a person is placed inside it, he will turn to liquid within one and three-quarter hours.” 

When he heard this, Pilgrim became alarmed, saying to himself, “I’m not scared of the demon but I’d better be careful about his vase.” He spoke out loud again, saying, “You've all spoken quite 
accurately about the abilities of our three great kings as accurately as I've known them to be. But do you know which of the great kings would like to devour the Tang Monk?” 

“Captain,” said another Little Wind Cutter, “do you mean that you don’t know?” 

“Don’t | know more than you?” snapped Pilgrim. “You're the ones who may not know the truth of the matter, and that’s why | was sent to give you a thorough interrogation.” 

The Little Wind Cutter said, “Our great-great king and the second great king have long resided in the Lion-Camel Cave of the Lion-Camel Ridge. Our third great king however, did not live here, for his 
original residence was located about four hundred miles west of here, in a city by the name of the Lion-Camel State. Five centuries ago, he devoured the entire city - the king, the civil and military 
Officials, the populace, male and female, old and young — and took over the kingdom. All the inhabitants of that city now are fiends. | don’t know which year it was that he learned that the Tang court in 
the Land of the East had commissioned a monk to go seek scriptures in the Western Heaven. That Tang Monk, so the saying goes, is a good man who has practiced austerities for ten disciples. If 
anyone eats a single piece of his flesh, he will gain longevity and never grow old. But fearing his disciple, Pilgrim Sun who is said to be exceedingly formidable, our third great king was afraid that he 
couldn't quite handle the situation all by himself. He came, therefore, to become a bond-brother with the two great kings at this place. The three of them are thus united in their determination and efforts 
to catch that Tang Monk.” 

When Pilgrim heard this, he was filled with anger. “These brazen fiends are so audacious! I’m protecting the Tang Monk so that he may attain the right fruit. How could they plan to devour my man?” 
He was so mad that he clenched his teeth, whipped out his iron rod, and leaped down from the tall peak. All he had to do was to slam the rod down on the heads of the little fiends, and they were 
immediately reduced to meat patties! When he saw them like that however, he was moved somewhat to pity. “Alas,” he said to himself, “they were kind enough after all to have spilled everything about 
their family to me. How could | finish them off just like that? All right! All right! What's done is done!” 

Dear Great Sage! Because of the impediment in his master’s way, he had no choice but to do something like this. He took down one of the nameplates and tied it to his own waist. The banner with the 
word, “command,” he hauled on his shoulder, the bell he hung on his belt, and he took up the rattle. Facing the wind, he made the magic sign and recited a spell to change with one shake of his body 
into the appearance of that Little Wind Cutter whom he first met on the road. In big strides, he followed the road back to search for the cave and to do some more detection on those three old fiendish 
demons. Truly, these were the Handsome Monkey King’s 10000 ways to change! 10000 permutations, what real abilities! He dashed deeply into the mountain, following the path on which he came. As 
he ran along, he suddenly heard people shouting and horses neighing. When he raised his eyes to look, he saw that the noise was coming from a huge mob of little fiends in front of the Lion-Camel 
Cave, all equipped with columns of scimitars, lances, spears, and halberds with flags and banners. Delighted, Great Sage said to himself, “Long Life Li’s words are not far off the mark!” The way that 
those little fiends were arrayed had an order to it: two hundred and fifty of them made up one huge column, to which was assigned a tall coloured flag. When he spotted some forty such flags, he knew 
that there had to be at least ten thousand troops right there before the cave. Thereupon he thought further to himself, “Old monkey has already changed into a Little Wind Cutter. Once | step inside, I'd 
have to give some answers should those old demons question me on patrolling the mountain. If I'm recognised because of some slip-up in my words, how am | going to get away? Even if | want to run 
out the door, how could | get out with so many of them barring the door? If | want to seize the fiendish kings inside the cave, | must get rid of these fiends before the door first.” 


How'd | get rid of the fiends? Marvellous Great Sage! He thought some more to himself: “Though those old demons have never met my face, they’ve already known the reputation of old monkey. Let 
me rely on that reputation, then, and exploit its power; let me give some big talk to frighten them a bit, and see whether those creatures of Middle Land? indeed have sufficient affinity to be rewarded by 
us taking the scriptures back to them. If they do, a few bravado sentences of mine will frighten the fiends enough to scatter them. If those creatures however, do not have sufficient affinity so that we 
can’t acquire the true scriptures, then even if | preach till the lotus flowers appear, I'll not dispel the spirits before the cave.” 

His mind thus questioning his mouth, and his mouth thus questioning the mind, he beat his rattle and shook his bell as he marched up to the entrance of the Lion-Camel Cave. He was immediately met 
by the little fiends of the forward camp who said, “Little Wind Cutter, have you returned?” Instead of answering them, Pilgrim lowered his head and walked on. 

At the 2"4-level camp, he was stopped again by some more little fiends who said, “Little Wind-Cutter, have you retumed?” 

“I've,” replied Pilgrim. “When you went on patrol this morning,” said the fiends, “did you run into Pilgrim Sun?” 

“I've,” replied Pilgrim, “he’s polishing his pole at the moment.” 

Allittle frightened, those little fiends said, “What does he look like? What sort of a pole is he polishing?” Pilgrim said, “He was squatting there by the side of a brook, and he still seemed like a trailblazing 
deity. If he stood up, he would have to be over a hundred feet tall! He had in his hands an iron rod that resembled a huge pole, so thick it was that it had to have the thickness of a rice bowl. As he 
sprinkled some water on the stone ledge, he rubbed his rod on it while he mumbled to himself, ‘O dear pole! I’ve not taken you out for a while to show your magic powers. Now that you've been taken 
out, may you beat to death for me all those monster-spirits, even if there are one hundred thousand of them! Then let me slay also those three arch-demons and offer them as sacrifices to you!’ Once 
he has polished his rod so that it shines, he will no doubt slaughter first those ten thousand of you before the door.” 

When those little fiends heard these words, every one of their hearts quivered and their galls shook, as their souls melted and their spirits dispersed. “Think on this, all of you,” said Pilgrim again. “The 
flesh of that Tang Monk doesn’t amount to many pounds, you know, and | doubt if we'll ever get to receive our portions even if he were divided up. Why should we withstand that pole for them? Why 
don’t we ourselves just scatter?” 

“You're right,” said the various fiends. “Let's look after our own lives and leave.” 

All of these fiends were no more than wolves, tigers, leopards, and the like. With a roar, all these beasts and fowl simply dispersed in every direction. And so, those few subversive sentences of the 
Great Sage Sun worked like the poems of Chu’ when they scattered some 8000 troops. Secretly delighted, Pilgrim said to himself, “Marvellous! Those old fiends are good as dead! If words will make 
them run, how'd they dare meet me face to face? When | get inside however, I'd better repeat what | said. For if | miss saying something, a couple of those little fiends who've run inside just now may 
reveal my secret.” Look at him! He was set to approach the ancient cave; with boldness he walked deep inside the door. 


091 

Mind Monkey drills through the yin-yang body; demon lords return to the true great Way 
That Great Sage Sun walked inside the cave to look left and right. He saw a mound of skeletons, a forest of dead bones; human hair packed together as blankets and flesh trodden as dirt and dust; 
human tendons knotted on the trees were dried, parched, and shiny like silver. In truth there were mountains of corpses and seas of blood; indeed the putrid stench was terrible! The little fiends on the 
east gouged out flesh from living persons; the brazen demons on the west boiled and cooked fresh human meat. Only Handsome Monkey King had such heroic gall; no other mortal would dare enter 
this door. After a little while, he walked through the second-level door to look around inside. Ah! What he saw in here was quite different from the outside; it was a place both quiet and elegant, both 
handsome and spacious. On the left and right were exotic grass and rare flowers; there were old pines and aged bamboos front and back. He had to walk however, for another seven or eight miles 
before he reached the third-level door, through which he stole a glance. Inside the door and sitting loftily on three high seats were three old fiends who appeared most savage and hideous. The middle 
one had teeth like files and saws, a round head and a square face. He had a voice like thunder and flashing eyes like lightning. His nose curled skyward; his brows sprouted flames. When he moved, 
all other beasts trembled; when he sat, all demons shook and quivered. This was the king of beasts, the green-haired lion fiend. The one to his left had phoenix eyes and golden pupils, yellow tusks 
and stubby legs, long nose and silver hair, a head that seemed tail-like; knotted brows beneath his round forehead and a huge, rugged torso. He had a soft voice like a lissom beauty but his white face 
was a bull-head demon’s. A brute of prolonged self-cultivation, this was the yellow-tusked old elephant. The one to his right had golden wings and leviathan head, ‘star-like pupils and leopard eyes. He 
ruled the north, governed the south — fierce, strong, and courageous. Coming alive he could fly and soar while quails quaked and dragons dreaded. When he shook his feathers, all the birds went into 
hiding; when he stretched his sharp claws, all the fowl cowered in terror. Able to reach a cloudy distance of 90000 miles, this was the great eagle-roc. Below them stood some one hundred captains, 
all in complete armour and military regalia, and looking most truculent and fierce. When Pilgrim saw them however, he was filled with delight. Not the least bit frightened, he marched through the door 
in big strides, and after he dropped his rattle, he lifted his head and said, “Great Kings.” Smiling broadly, the three old demons said, “Little Wind Cutter, have you retumed?” 
“I've indeed,” replied Pilgrim in a ringing voice. 
“Have you found out anything about Pilgrim Sun when you're on patrol in the mountain?” 
“In the presence of the great kings,” replied Pilgrim, “I dare not speak.” 
“Why not?” asked the first old demon. 
“By the command of the great kings,” said Pilgrim, “I went forward, beating my rattle and shaking my bell. As | walked along, | suddenly caught sight of a person squatting by a brook. Even then he 
looked like a trailblazing deity, and if he had stood up, he would have been undoubtedly over a hundred feet tall. Bailing some water from the brook, he was polishing with it a huge pole on a rock. As 
he did so, he kept mumbling to himself that up till now, he hadn’t been able to show off the magic power of his pole. Once he had polished the pole enough to make it glow, he said he would come and 
use it on the great kings. | knew he had to be that Pilgrim Sun, and that’s why I’ve returned to make my report.” 
When that old demon heard these words, he perspired profusely. Shaking all over, he said, “Brothers, | told you not to bother the Tang Monk. His disciple has such vast magic powers that he has 
already made plans for us. Now he is polishing his rod to beat us up. What shall we do?” Then he gave this order: “Little ones, summon all the soldiers outside the cave to come in. Shut the door, and 
let those priests pass.” 
One of the captains who knew what had happened said immediately, “Great King, the little fiends guarding the door outside have all scattered.” 
“How could they have all scattered?” asked the old demon. “They must have heard the bad news, too. Shut the door quickly! Shut the door quickly!” 
The various fiends hurriedly banged the front and back doors shut and bolted them. Becoming somewhat alarmed, Pilgrim thought to himself, “After they close the doors, they might question me on 
some other business in their house. If | can’t answer them, I'll give myself away. Won't | be caught then? Let me scare them a little bit more, so that they'll open the doors again for me to flee if | need 
to.” He therefore went forward again and said, “Great Kings, that Pilgrim Sun said something that’s even more dreadful.” 
“What else did he say?” asked the old demon. 
Pilgrim said, “He said that when he had caught hold of the three of you, he would skin the great-great king, he would debone the second great king, and he would pull out the tendons of the third great 
king. If you shut your doors and refuse to go out, he is capable of transformations, you know. He may well change into a tiny fly, come in through a crack in the door, and seize all of us. What shall we 
do then?” 
“Brothers,” said the old demon, “be careful. There is hardly a fly in our cave. If you see a fly coming in here, it has to be that Pilgrim Sun.” Smiling to himself, Pilgrim thought, “I'll give him a fly to scare 
him a bit. Then he'll open the doors.” 
The Great Sage stepped to one side and pulled off a piece of hair behind his head. Blowing a mouthful of mortal breath on it, he whispered, “Change!” and it at once changed into a gold-headed fly that 
darted up and flew smack into the face of the old demon. “Brothers, this is awful!” cried a horrified old demon. “That little something has entered our door!” Those fiends, young and old, were so terrified 
that they took up pitchforks and brooms to swat madly at the fly. 
Unable to contain himself, Great Sage broke into loud giggles that, alas, he should have never permitted himself to do. For once he laughed, his original features also appeared. When the third old 
demon saw him, he leaped forward and grabbed him, crying, “Elder Brothers, we're almost fooled by him!” 
“Who is fooling whom?” asked the first old demon. 
“The one who was speaking to us just now,” replied the third fiend, “was no Little Wind Cutter. He is Pilgrim Sun. He must have run into Little Wind Cutter, slain him somehow, and changed into his 
appearance to deceive us here.” Greatly shaken, Pilgrim said to himself, “He has recognised me!” Rubbing his face hurriedly with his hand to correct his features, he said to those fiends, “How could | 
be Pilgrim Sun! I’m the Little Wind Cutter. The great king has made a mistake.” 
“Brother,” said the old demon, smiling, “he is Little Wind Cutter. For three times every day he answers my roll call. | know him.” Then he asked Pilgrim, “Do you've your nameplate?” 
“I do,” replied Pilgrim, and he took it out at once from inside his clothes. More convinced than ever, the old fiend said, “Brother, don’t falsely accuse him.” 
“Elder Brother,” said the third fiend, “didn’t you see him? He was giggling just now with his face half turned, and | saw for a moment a thunder god beak on him. When | grabbed him, he changed back 
immediately into his present looks.” He then called out: “Little ones, bring me some ropes.” The captains took out ropes immediately. Wrestling Pilgrim to the ground, the third fiend had him bull-tied 
before they hitched up his clothes to examine him. It became apparent at once that he was the Ban-Horse-Plague all right! Pilgrim was capable of seventy-two kinds of transformation. If it was a matter 
of changing into a fowl, a beast, a plant, a utensil, or an insect, his entire body could be transformed. But when he had to change into another person, only his face but not his body could be transformed. 
When they lifted up his clothes, therefore, they saw a body full of brown fur, two red buttocks, and a tail. 
When he saw this, the first old fiend said, “Though he may have the face of Little Wind Cutter, it’s the body of Pilgrim Sun. It’s he. Little ones, bring us some juice first, so that | may present to the third 
great king a cup of merit. Since we've caught Pilgrim Sun, there is no doubt that the Tang Monk will be the food of our mouths.” 
“Let's not drink juice just yet,” said the third fiend. “Pilgrim Sun is an exceedingly slippery character, for he knows many ways of escape. | fear we may lose him. Tell the little ones to haul out our vase 
and put Pilgrim Sun inside it. Then we can drink.” 
“Exactly! Exactly!” said the old demon, laughing loudly. 
He at once summoned 36 little fiends to go to their weapons chamber and haul out the vase. The vase was big. It would need 36 persons to carry it. Though it was no more than 24 inches tall, that 
vase was a treasure governed by the double primal forces of yin and yang. Its magic reactions inside were activated by the seven jewels, the eight trigrams, and the twenty-four solar terms. Only thirty- 
six persons, a number which corresponded to the number of constellations in the Heavenly Ladle group, would have sufficient strength to lift it up. In a little while, the little fiends had the treasure vase 
hauled out and set before the third-level door. After they had unpacked it from its wrappings and removed the stopper, they untied Pilgrim and stripped him naked. Then they carried him up to the mouth 
of the vase, and immediately he was sucked inside with a loud whoosh by the mortal breath of the vase. It was then covered again with its stopper, on top of which they added a tape to seal it. Beckoning 
his companions to join him to drink, the old fiend said, “Now that this little ape’s entered my treasure vase, he’d better not think of the road to the West anymore. If he ever wanted to worship God and 
acquire scriptures, he might as well turn his back, take up the wheel of transmigration, and seek Religious treasure in the next disciple!” 
Great Sage found the vase to be quite small for his body once he reached the inside. He decided therefore to transform himself into someone smaller and squat in the middle of the vase. Finding it to 
be quite cool after some time, he could not refrain from chuckling to himself and saying out loud, “These monster-spirits are banking on their false reputation! How’d they tell people that once someone’s 
placed inside the vase, he’d change into pus and blood after one and three-quarter hours? If it’s cool like this, | can live here for seven or eight years with no trouble!” Alas! The Great Sage had no idea 
of how that treasure worked: if someone who had been placed within it remained silent for a whole year, then it would remain cool for all that time. But the moment that person spoke, fire would appear 
to burn him. Hardly had the Great Sage spoken, therefore, when he saw that the entire vase was engulfed in flames. Fortunately, he was not without abilities; sitting in the middle, he made the fire- 
repellent magic sign with his fingers and faced the flames calmly. After about half an hour, some forty snakes crawled out from every side and began to bite him. Pilgrim stretched forth his hands, picked 
up the snakes, and with a violent wrench tore them into eighty pieces. In a little while however, three fire dragons emerged and had him encircled top and bottom. As the situation was fast becoming 
unbearable, Pilgrim was rather flustered saying to himself, “I can take care of other things but these fire dragons are hard to deal with. If | don’t get out of here, the fire and the heat may overwhelm me 
after a while. What then? | think I'd better push my way out by making my body bigger.” Dear Great Sage! Making the magic sign with his fingers and reciting a spell, he cried, “Grow!” 
At once his body reached the height of over a hundred feet but the vase also grew in size with him. Reversing his magic, he reduced the size of his body but the vase, too, grew smaller with him. Greatly 
alarmed, Pilgrim said, “Hard! Hard! Hard! How could it grow big or small with me like that? What shall | do?” He had hardly finished speaking when he felt some pain on his shanks. Rubbing them 
hurriedly with his hand, he found his shanks were turning flaccid because of the fire. More and more anxious, he thought to himself, “What's to become of me? Even my shanks are weakened by the 
fire. I'll be reduced to a cripple!” 
He was hardly able to hold back his tears. Thus it was that he thought of Tripitaka, having met demons and woes; missed the sage monk when beset by fatal ordeals. “O Master!” he cried. “Since that 
year when | embraced the truth because of the Nun Guanyin’s persuasion and was delivered from my Heaven-sent calamity, | suffered with you the trek through various mountains and subdued many 


fiends, including the bringing to submission of 8 Rules and Sand-monk. All my labour, all my bitter toil were done with the hope that we'd reach the West together and attain the right fruit. Little did | 
realise that I’d meet such vicious demons today! Having been thrown in here by my mistake, old monkey will lose his life, and you'll be stranded halfway up the mountain, unable to proceed. Could it 
be that my past misdeeds were what brought on my present ordeal?” 

As he grieved like that, he suddenly thought to himself, “On the Serpent Coil Mountain? that year, the Nun gave me as a gift three life-saving hairs. | wonder if | still have them. Let me search for them.” 
He touched his whole body with his hands and found three hairs on the back of his neck to be especially stiff. Delighted, he said to himself, “All my hairs are quite soft, and only these three happen to 
be stiff. They must be my lifesavers!” 

Clenching his teeth to endure the pain, he pulled off the hairs and blew on them a mouthful of mortal breath, crying, “Change!” One of the hairs changed into a diamond drill, the second one into a strip 
of bamboo, and the third into a piece of cotton rope. Bending the strip into the shape of a bow, he tied the rope to both ends and used it to guide the drill to drill away at the bottom of the vase. After a 
while, light filtered in through a small hole. “Lucky! Lucky!” he said, highly pleased. “I can get out now!” 

As he was about to use transformation to escape, the vase suddenly turned cool once more. Once he drilled through the vase’s bottom the 2 forces of yin and yang leaked out. Dear Great Sage! He 
retrieved his hairs and, shrinking the size of his body, changed into a mole cricket, so delicate that it was no thicker than a strand of whisker and no longer than a piece of eyebrow hair. He crawled out 
of the hole but instead of leaving, he flew directly up to the old demon’s head and alighted on it. The old demon was drinking merrily when all of a sudden, he put down his cup and said, “Third Younger 
Brother, has Pilgrim Sun melted?” 

“It's about time, isn’t it?” said the third demon, smiling. 

The old demon gave the order for the vase to be brought up to the table, and those 36 little fiends immediately went to haul it. When they discovered however, that the vase had become very light, the 
terrified fiends cried, “Great Kings, the vase has turned light.” 

“Nonsense!” snapped the old demon. “Our treasure is the perfect product of the double forces of yin and yang. How could it have turned light?” One of the more courageous little fiends picked up the 
vase all by himself and brought it near the table, saying, “See for yourself whether it’s lighter or not.” 

Removing the stopper, the old demon peered inside and, when he saw a speck of light coming from the bottom, he burst out, “The vase is empty!” Unable to contain himself, the Great Sage shouted 
on his head, “My dear child! I’m gone!” 

“He’s gone! He’s gone!” cried the other fiends. “Close the doors! Close the doors!” 

Pilgrim retrieved the clothes they took from him with 1 shake of his body and changing back into his original form, bounded out of the cave. “Monster-spirits, don’t you dare be unruly!” he shouted back 
at them as he left. “The vase’s been punctured and it can be used on humans no more. It’s only good for a night pot!” 

Merrily and noisily he trod the clouds and went back to the place where he left the Tang Monk. The elder at the time was just saying a prayer toward the sky, using pinches of dirt as incense. Pilgrim 
stopped his cloud to hear what he was saying. With his hands folded before his chest, the elder saluted to the sky and said, “/ pray to all mortals of cloud and mist, all deities, and gods of Darkness and 
Light: may they my good pupil, Pilgrim, assist and grant him vast and boundless magic might.” 

When the Great Sage heard such words, he was moved to even greater diligence. Causing the cloudy luminosity to subside, he drew near and said, “Master, I’ve returned.” The elder took him by the 
hand and said, “Wukong, you've worked very hard! When you didn’t come back after having gone deep into the mountain, | was very worried. Tell me truly what sort of good or evil may we expect in 
this mountain.” 

With a smile, Pilgrim replied, “My trip was a successful one this time only because the creatures of the Land in the East are blessed with goodly affinity; and secondly, because the merit and virtue of 
my master are boundless and limitless; and thirdly, because your disciple has some magic powers.” Whereupon he gave a thorough account of how he disguised himself as the Little Wind Cutter, how 
he was trapped inside the vase, and how he escaped. “Now that | can behold the countenance of my master once more,” he said, “I feel like I've gone through another disciple.” 

Thanking him profusely, the elder asked, “You didn’t fight with the monster-spirits this time?” 

“No, | didn’t,” replied Pilgrim. “You can’t therefore, escort me across the mountain, can you?” asked the elder. 

As he had always been a person who loved to win, Pilgrim began to shout, “What do you mean that | can’t escort you across this mountain?” 

“You've not quite proven that you can prevail against them,” said the elder. “Everything seems so muddled at the moment. How could | dare proceed?” 

“Master,” replied Pilgrim with a laugh, “you’re not very perceptive! As the proverb says, a little yarn is no thread; a single hand cannot clap. There are three old demons, thousands and thousands of 
little fiends, and only one old monkey. How could | possibly fight with them?” 

“The few cannot withstand the many,” replied the elder. “I quite understand that you can’t cope with them all by yourself. But 8 Rules and Sand-monk both have abilities. I'll tell them to go with you, so 
that your united efforts will sweep clean the mountain path and escort me through it.” 

“What you say is quite right,” said Pilgrim, turning somewhat pensive. “Sand-monk however, should stay here to guard you. Let 8 Rules go with me.” 

Terribly alarmed, Idiot said, “Elder Brother, you’re the one who is imperceptive! I’m rather crude, and | don’t have much ability. Even when | walk along, | resist the wind. Of what use am | to you?” 
“Brother,” said Pilgrim, “even though you may not have great abilities, you’re still another person. As the common folks say, ‘Even a fart is additional air!’ You can at the very least build up my courage.” 
“All right! All right!” said 8 Rules. “I hope you'll look after me a bit. When things become tight, don’t play tricks on me.” 

“Do be careful, 8 Rules,” said the elder. “Sand-monk and I'll remain here.” 

Arousing his spirit, Idiot mounted a gust of violent wind with Pilgrim and rode on the fog and the cloud to go up the tall mountain. When they arrived before the door of the cave, they found the door 
tightly shut and no one in sight. Pilgrim walked forward and, holding his iron rod, cried out in a loud voice, “Fiends, open your door! Come out quickly to fight with old monkey!” When the little fiends in 
the cave reported this, the old demon was deeply shaken. “The rumour spreading for years about how powerful that ape is,” he said, “has been proven true today!” 

“Elder Brother, what do you mean?” asked the 2" fiend on 1 side. 

The old demon replied, “When that Pilgrim changed into Little Wind Cutter earlier this morning to sneak in here we'd not recognise him. It’s fortunate that our third worthy brother spotted him at last and 
we managed to put him inside the vase. But he’d the ability to drill through the vase and he escaped after he retrieved his clothes. Now he’s provoking battle outside. Who’s enough courage to face 
him in the first fight?” To this question of his however, no one made a reply. He asked again but still there was no answer, for everyone inside the cave was playing deaf and dumb. His anger rising, 
the old demon said, “We're eaming ourselves an ugly reputation on the main road to the West. When Pilgrim Sun today can mock us like this and we don’t go out to face him in battle, our fame will 
surely diminish. Let me risk this old life of mine to go have three rounds with him. If | can withstand him for three rounds, the Tang Monk will be the food of our mouths. If | can’t, let’s close up our door 
and let them pass.” He put on his armour and opened the door to walk out. Pilgrim and 8 Rules stood by the door to stare at him. He’s some fiendish creature indeed! A jewelled helmet topped his iron- 
hard head with dangling tassels colourful and bright. Like flashing lightning his 2 eyes did glow; shining mist hair on both temples flowed. His claws were like silver, both quick and sharp; saw-like teeth 
were even and thickset. The armour he wore was one solid gold piece; a smart dragon-head sash wrapped round his waist. His hands held a shiny scimitar of steel: the world rarely saw such heroic 
might. With 1 bellow loud as a thunderclap he asked, “Who on our door would dare to rap?” 

Turing around, the Great Sage said, “It’s your Venerable Dad Sun, the Great Sage Equal to Heaven.” 

“Are you Pilgrim Sun?” asked the old demon with a laugh. “You audacious ape! I’m not bothering you. Why are you provoking battle here?” 

Pilgrim replied, “As the proverb says, the waves will only rise with the wind; water will subside without the tide. If you didn’t bother me, you think I’d come looking for you? It’s because you bunch of 
thugs and hoodlums have banded together to plot against my master, planning to devour him. That's why I’ve come to do this.” 

“You show up at our door in such a menacing manner,” said the old demon. “Does that mean that you want to fight?” 

“Exactly,” replied Pilgrim. “Stop acting with such insolence!” said the old demon. “If | ordered out my fiend troops, placed them in formation, raised the flags, and beat the drums to fight with you, all I'd 
be doing is to show simply that I’m the local tiger trying to take advantage of you. I'll face you alone, one to one, and no other helper will be permitted.” On hearing this, Pilgrim said, “Bullseye Eight 
Rules, step aside. Let's see what he'll do with old monkey.” Idiot indeed walked away to one side. 

“You come over here,” said the old demon, “and act as my chopping block first. If your bald head can withstand three blows of my scimitar, I'll let you and your Tang Monk go past. But if you can’t, you'd 
better turn him over quickly to me as a meal.” 

When he heard this, Pilgrim smiled and said, “Fiend! If you've brush and paper in your cave, take them out and I'll sign a contract with you. You can start delivering your blows from today until next year 
and I'll not regard you seriously!” 

Arousing his spirit, the old demon stood firmly with one foot placed in front of the other. He lifted up his scimitar with both hands and brought it down hard on the head of the Great Sage. Great Sage 
however, jerked his head upward to meet the blow. All they heard was a loud crack but the skin on the head did not even redden. Greatly astonished, the old demon said, “What a hard head this 
monkey's!” 

Chuckling, the Great Sage said, “You don't realise that old monkey's born with a bronze head and a crown of steel that no one possessed in Heaven or on Earth. Unbreakable by the mallet or the axe, 
it's gone in my youth into Laozi’s stove. Its making Four Dipper Stars had overseen and Twenty-Eight Lodges applied their work. It'd not be wrecked though drowned a few times for tough sinews 
circled it all around. Fearing still that it was not strong enough, the Tang Monk added a fillet of gold!” 

“Stop bragging, ape!” said the old demon. “Watch the second blow of my scimitar! It'll not spare your life!” 

“Why talk like that?” replied Pilgrim. “Isn’t it enough that you hack away?” 

“Monkey,” said the old demon, “you've no idea that my scimitar’s metal in the furnace forged, wrought by the gods’ drawn out work. The fine blade and its mighty power conform to military science. It 
looks like the tail of a fly and also a white serpent’s waist. In the mountain clouds would gather; in the ocean waves would pile high. Pounded and polished countless times, it's been a hundred ways 
refined. Though it’s kept in an ancient cave, it'll win once in battle it’s placed. I'll grab that nice, bald, priestly head of yours and make two gourd halves with one mighty whack!” 

“This monster-spirit is so blind!” chuckled the Great Sage. “So, you think that old monkey's head is a gourd! All right. I'll not delay you. You can give me another blow.” 

The old demon lifted his blade to hack away once more, and again the Great Sage met it with his head. With a loud crack, the head was split in two but the Great Sage also rolled on the ground 
immediately and changed into two bodies. Terrified by what he saw, the fiend lowered his scimitar. From a distance, 8 Rules saw everything and said, laughing, “The old demon should strike again, 
and there'll be four persons!” Pointing at Pilgrim, the old demon said, “I’ve heard that you’re capable of the Magic of Body-Division. But why’re you exercising it in my presence?” 

“What do you mean by the Magic of Body-Division?” asked the Great Sage. 

“Why didn’t you move when | gave you the first blow?” asked the old demon. “Why did you become two persons after the second one?” 

“Fiend, don’t be afraid,” said the Great Sage, laughing. “If you cut me ten thousand times, I’ll give you twenty thousand persons!” 

“Monkey,” said the old demon, “you may be able to divide your body but | doubt whether you can retrieve your bodies. If you've the ability to become one again, you may give me a blow with your rod.” 
“No lying, now,” said the Great Sage. “You said you wanted to hack me three times with your scimitar, and you've only done it twice. Now you want me to give you a blow with my rod. If | strike you 
even half a blow more, I'll give up my surname Sun!” 

“Well said,” replied the old demon. 

Dear Great Sage! He embraced the other half of himself and with a roll, became one person again. Picking up his rod, he slammed it down on the old demon who parried the blow with his scimitar and 
said, “Brazen ape, don’t you dare be unruly! What sort of a funeral staff is that that you dare use it to hit someone right before his door?” 

“If you ask me about this rod of mine,” snapped the Great Sage, “you'd know that it has a reputation both in Heaven and on Earth.” 

“What kind of reputation?” asked the old demon. 

The Great Sage said, “The rod of steel nine cyclic times refined was forged in the stove by Laozi himself. King Yu took it, named it Treasure Divine to fix the Eight Rivers and Four Seas’ depth. In it 
were spread out tracks of planets and stars, its two ends were clamped in pieces of gold. Its dense patterns would frighten gods and ghosts; on it dragon and phoenix scripts were drawn. Its name was 
one Rod of Numinous Yang, stored deep in the sea, hardly seen by men. Well-formed and transformed it wanted to fly, emitting bright strands of five-coloured mist. Enlightened Monkey took it back to 
the mount to experience its power for boundless change. At times I’d make it thick as a drum or small and tiny as an iron wire. Huge like South Mountain or fine as a pin, it lengthened or shortened after 
my desire. Move it gently and coloured clouds would rise. Like flashing lightning it would soar and fly. Its cold air, far-reaching, would bring you chills; its deadly aura could imbue the sky. To tame tigers 
and dragons it | kept; with me it toured all four comers of earth. | once disturbed with this rod the Hall of Heaven; its might broke up the Festival of Peach. Fighting it the Deity-King had no chance; 
against it Nata found the task most hard. Struck by the rod, the gods had no place to hide; a hundred thousand soldiers ran and fled. With thunder gods guarding Divine Mists Hall | leaped and fought 
to Hall of Perfect Light. All flustered were the ministers at court and all divine officers were most confused. | raised my rod to topple the Dipper Hall and turning, smashed the South Pole Palace. When 


Emperor Jade saw how fierce my rod’s, Siddhartha’s asked to face my wrath. It’s natural for a fighter to win or lose but harsh confinement’s my certain lot that lasted for five full centuries; then came 
kind counsels from South Sea’s Guanyin. There was, she told me, a priest of Great Tang who offered to Heaven a stupendous vow: to save the souls from the City of Death, he’d seek scriptures from 
the Spirit Mount. But demons infested the westward way; the journey’s thus no convenient trek. Knowing the rod had in the world no match, she begged me to be his guardian on the way. Perverts 
touched by it'd go to Hades, their bones turning to flour, flesh to dust. Everywhere fiends had died beneath the rod in hundreds and thousands and countless scores. Above, it busted the Dipper Palace; 
below, it smashed up all of Darkness Hall. In Heaven it chased the Nine Planetoids and wounded on Earth the summoner-judge. It dropped from mid-air to rule mountains and stream s much stronger 
than Jupiter's New Year sword. To guard the Tang Monk | bank on this rod, having beaten this world’s all monster-gods!” 
When he heard these words, the demon trembled and shook, though he risked his life and raised the scimitar to strike. Beaming broadly, the Monkey King met him with the iron rod. At first the two of 
them fought before the cave; after a while, they leaped up to do battle in mid-air. What a marvellous battle it was! A treasure that fixed Heaven River's depth was the rod, named Compliant, this world’s 
prize. Such vaunting talents the demon displeased who raised his scimitar with magic might. A conflict before the door might one resolve. How any could be spared in a mid-air fight? 
After his own feelings 1 changed his looks; 1’s torso grew taller without delay. They fought till clouds thickened in the sky and fog drifted up from the ground. That 1 made plans a few times to 
devTripitaka; that 1 exercised his vast power to guard the Tang Monk. Because a god wished the scriptures to impart, evil and good became clear, locked in bitter strife. The old demon and the Great 
Sage fought for over 20 rounds but no decision could be reached. When 8 Rules down below saw however, how intense a battle the two of them were waging, he could no longer stand idly by. Mounting 
the wind, he leaped into the air and delivered a terrific blow with his rake, aiming it at the monster’s face. The demon was horrified, for he did not know that 8 Rules was a blunderer, someone without 
any real stamina. When he saw that long horn and those huge ears, the demon thought that the hands would also be heavy and the rake vicious. Abandoning his scimitar therefore, he turned and fled 
in defeat. “Chase him! Chase him!” shouted the Great Sage. 
Relying on his companion’s authority, Idiot raised high the muckrake and went after the fiend. When the old demon saw him approaching, he stood still before the mountain slope and, facing the wind, 
changed back into his original form. Opening wide his huge mouth, he wanted to swallow 8 Rules who was so terrified by the sight that he dove quickly into the bushes by the wayside. He crawled in 
there without regard for thorns or prickles and with no thought of the pain of the scratches on his head; trembling all over, he stayed in the bushes to see what would develop. In a moment, Pilgrim 
arrived, and the old fiend also opened wide his mouth to try to devour him, little knowing that this was exactly what Pilgrim desired. Putting away his iron rod, Pilgrim ran up to the fiend who swallowed 
him in one gulp. Idiot in the bushes was so shaken that he muttered to himself, “How stupid’s this Ban-Horse-Plague! When you saw the fiend coming to devour you, why didn’t you run away? Why did 
you go up to him instead? You might still be a priest today inside his stomach but tomorrow you'd be a big pile of droppings!” 
Only after the demon left in triumph did Idiot crawl out from the bushes and slip away on the road he came. Tripitaka waited with Sand-monk beneath the mountain slope. All of a sudden they saw 8 
Rules running back and panting heavily. Horrified, Tripitaka said, “Eight Rules, how is it that you look so desperate? Where’s Wukong?” 
“Elder Brother's,” sobbed Idiot, “been swallowed by the monster-spirit in one gulp.” When he heard this, Tripitaka collapsed on the ground, and only after a long time could he stamp his feet and pound 
his chest. “O disciple!” he cried. “I thought that you’re so adept in subduing the fiends that you'd lead me to see God in the Western Heaven. How could | know that you’d perish in the hands of this 
fiend? Alas! Alas! The merit of this disciple and others have all turned to dust now!” 
The master was beside himself with grief. But look at Idiot! Instead of trying to comfort his master he called out, “Sand-monk, bring me the luggage. The two of us will divide it up.” 
“Second Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “why do you want to divide it?” 
“When we've divided it,” replied 8 Rules, “each of us can go our own way; you can return to Flowing Sand River to be a cannibal, and I'll go back to the Old Gao Village to see my wife. We'll sell the 
white horse, and that should enable us to buy a coffin for our master in his old age!” 
The elder was already heaving in anguish. When he heard these words, he began to wail, calling on Heaven to help him all the time and we'll leave him there for the moment. That old demon who 
thought it a smart thing to have swallowed Pilgrim. When he reached his own cave, the various fiends came to greet him and asked him about the battle. “I caught one,” said the old demon. 
Delighted, the second demon asked, “Which one did you catch, Big Brother?” 
“It's Pilgrim Sun,” replied the old demon. 
“Where’ve you caught him?” asked the second demon. The old demon said, “He has been swallowed into my stomach in one gulp.” 
Horrified, the third demon said, “O Big Brother, I’m sorry I’ve not told you but Pilgrim Sun is inedible!” 
“Im very edible!” said the Great Sage in the belly. “Moreover, | satisfy! You'll never be hungry again!” 
The little fiends were so frightened that one of them said, “Great King, it’s terrible! Pilgrim Sun is talking inside your stomach!” 
“Im not afraid of his talking!” said the old demon. “If I've the ability to devour him, you think I’ve no ability to handle him? Go and boil me some salt water quickly. Let me pour it down my stomach and 
throw him up. Then we can have him slowly fried and eaten with juice.” 
The little fiends indeed went and brought back half a pan of hot salt water that the old demon immediately drained. Opening wide his mouth, he retched in earnest but Great Sage seemed to have taken 
roots in the stomach. He did not even budge. The old demon pressed his own throat and retched repeatedly until he became dizzy and dim of sight. Even his gall seemed to have been busted! But 
Pilgrim remained unmoveable as ever. After he panted for a while, the old demon cried, “Pilgrim Sun, aren’t you coming out?” 
“It's too early!” replied Pilgrim. “I don’t feel like coming out!” 
“Why not?” asked the old demon. 
“You're not a very smart monster-spirit!” said Pilgrim. “Since | became a monk, I’ve led a rather penurious life. It's the cool autumn now and all I've on is an unlined shirt. This belly of yours is quite warm 
and it’s no draft. This is exactly where I'd spend my winter.” 
On hearing this, all the fiends said, “Great King, Pilgrim Sun wants to spend the winter in your belly.” 
“If he wants to do that,” said the old demon, “I'll practice meditation. With my magic of hibernation, I'll not eat for a whole winter and starve that Ban-Horse-Plague.” 
“My son,” said the Great Sage, “you're so dumb! On this journey in which old monkey is accompanying the Tang Monk to go seek scriptures, we passed through Canton and | picked up a portable 
frying pan, excellent for cooking chop-suey. “If | take time to enjoy your liver, chitterlings, stomach, and lungs, | think | can last easily till spring!” 
“O Elder Brother,” cried a horrified second demon, “this ape is capable of doing this!” 
“O Elder Brother,” said the third demon, “it’s all right to let him eat the chop-suey but | wonder where he is going to set up the frying pan.” 
“On the fork of his chest bone, of course!” replied Pilgrim. 
“That's bad!” cried the third demon. “If he sets up the pan there and starts a fire, you'll sneeze if the smoke rises to your nostrils, won’t you?” 
“Don’t worry,” said Pilgrim, chuckling. “Let old monkey punch a hole through his head with my golden-hooped rod. That will serve both as a skylight and a chimney.” 
On hearing this, the old demon became quite frightened even though he pretended to be brave and said, “Brothers, don’t be afraid. Bring me our medicinal juice. I'll drink a few goblets and kill that ape 
with the drug.” 
Smiling to himself, Pilgrim said, “When old monkey caused great disturbance in Heaven five centuries ago, he devoured the elixir of Laozi, the juice of the Jade Emperor, the peaches of the Lady Queen 
Mum, and all kinds of dainties like phoenix marrow and dragon liver. What in fact I’ve not tasted before? What kind of medicinal juice’s this that he dares use to drug me?” After the little fiends went and 
bailed two pots of the medicinal juice, they filled a large goblet and handed it to the old demon. The moment he took it in his hands however, Great Sage could smell the juice’s fragrance even inside 
the belly of the demon. “I'll not allow him to drink it!” he said to himself. Dear Great Sage! 
With a twist of his head, he turned his mouth into the shape of a trumpet that he placed immediately below the throat of the old demon. When the old demon drank in one gulp the goblet of juice, it was 
immediately swallowed by Pilgrim. When he drank the second goblet, too was swallowed by Pilgrim and in this way 7 or 8 goblets went down the throat of the demon. Putting down the goblet, the old 
demon said, “I’m drinking no more. It used to be that two goblets of this juice would make my stomach feel like fire. | drank seven or eight goblets just now and my face’s not even reddened!” But Great 
Sage could not take too much juice. After he had swallowed 7 or 8 goblet-full from the old demon, he became so delirious that he began to do calisthenics without pause inside the demon’s belly. He 
did jumping jacks and cartwheels; he let loose high kicks; grabbing the liver he used it for a swing and went through handstands and somersaults, prancing madly here and there. So unbearable was 
the pain that the fiend slumped to the ground. 

092 

Mind-Spirit dwells at home & demons revert to nature; Wood-Mum together subdues the true self of the fiend 

The Great Sage Sun dallied inside the belly of the old demon for quite a while until the latter dropped to the ground, hardly breathing or speaking a word. Thinking that the demon might be dead, the 
Great Sage released his hold somewhat on the demon’s innards and having caught his breath once more, the demon-chief called out, “Most compassionate and merciful Nun, Great Sage Equal to 
Heaven!” 
When he heard that, Pilgrim said, “Son, don’t waste your energy! Spare a few words and just address me as Grandpa Sun!” As he had great regard for his own life, that fiendish demon did indeed cry 
out, “Grandpa, grandpa! It’s my fault! | made a terrible mistake in swallowing you, and now you're in a position to harm me. | beg the Great Sage to be merciful and have regard for the life-seeking wish 
of an ant. If you spare my life, I’m willing to send your master across this mountain.” 
Now, though the Great Sage was a warrior, he thought only of the Tang Monk's progress. When he, a person not unreceptive to compliments, heard how pitifully the fiendish demon was begging him, 
he became kind-hearted again. “Fiend,” he cried, “I'll spare you. But how will you send my master off?” 
“We've no silver or gold, pearl or jade, cornelian, coral, crystal, amber, tortoiseshell, or any such precious treasure to give to you,” said the old demon. “But we three brothers will carry your master on 
a palanquin made of scented vines, and that’s how we'll send your master across this mountain.” 
“If you’re going to take him across in a palanquin,” said Pilgrim, laughing, “that’s better than giving us treasures. Open your mouth wide and I'll come out.” 
The demon chief did open his mouth wide but the third demon walked up to him and whispered, “Big Brother, when he’s about to get out, bite down hard. Chew that little monkey to pieces and swallow 
him. Then he'll be able to torture you no more.” 
Pilgrim however, heard everything. Instead of crawling out himself, he stuck out his golden-hooped rod ahead of him to see if the way was clear. The fiend gave it a terrific bite; with a loud crack, one 
of his front teeth broke to pieces. Withdrawing his rod, Pilgrim said, “Dear fiend! I've already spared your life but you want to bite me and kill me instead! I’m not coming out! I’m going to torture you until 
you drop! No, I’m not coming out!” 
“Brother,” complained the old demon to the third demon, “you've victimized your own kin! It would have been better if we'd invited him to come out. You told me to bite him instead. He has not been 
bitten but my teeth have been sorely hurt. What shall we do now?” 
When that third demon saw that the blame was put on him, he resorted to the method of “Piquing the General.” 
“Pilgrim Sun,” he cried in a loud voice, “Your fame has been so loudly proclaimed that it strikes the ear like a crack of thunder! I've been told how you displayed your power before the South Heavenly 
Gate, how you showed your form beneath the Hall of Divine Mists, and how you’ve subdued monsters and bound demons on the way to the Western Heaven. But you’re really nothing but an apish 
small-timer!” 
“In what way am | a small-timer?” asked Pilgrim. 
The third fiend said, “As the proverb says, the valiant stays in the clear; his fame spreads both far and near. lf you come out and let me fight with you, then you may consider yourself a hero. How can 
you be satisfied with fooling about in someone's stomach? If you're not a small-timer, what're you?” 
When Pilgrim heard these words, he thought to himself, “Yes, yes, yes! If | pull his intestines apart and bust up his bladder, | can finish off this fiend right now. What's so difficult about that? Yet that will 
truly ruin my reputation. All right! All right! You open your mouth wide, and I'll come out to wage a contest with you. But the entrance to your cave is too narrow for us to use our arms. You must get out 
to a more spacious area.” On hearing this, the third demon called up at once all the fiends; young and old, there were more than thirty thousand of those monster-spirits. Each grasping a sharp weapon, 
they went out of the cave to arrange themselves in the formation of the Three Forces and do battle with Pilgrim once he came out. The second fiend supported the old demon as he walked out of the 
door, crying, “Pilgrim Sun, if you’re a hero, come out! There’s a fine battlefield right here for you to fight on.” 
Even inside the demon’s stomach the Great Sage could hear the din and hubbub outside, and he knew that they had arrived at a spacious region. He thought to himself, “If | don’t go out, it'll mean that 
I've gone back on my word. If | do however, | don’t know what this monster-spirit with his human face but bestial heart is capable of doing. He said at first that he would send my master across the 
mountain but actually he was trying to deceive me and bite me. Now he has even ordered his troops here ... All right! All right! I’m going to take care of two things at once for him. I'll go out but I'll plant 
a root firmly in his stomach.” He reached behind him and pulled off a piece of hair from his tail, blew his mortal breath on it, and cried, “Change!” It changed at once into a rope no thicker than a piece 


of hair but some four hundred feet long. (The rope would grow thicker once it was exposed to wind.) He fastened one end of the rope to the heart of the monstrous fiend but he left the knot loose enough 
so as not to hurt the fiend for the moment. Taking hold of the other end, he smiled and said to himself, “Even after | get out, he will have to send my master across the mountain. If he refuses and raises 
arms against me, I'll not even bother to fight with him. All | need to do is to tug at this little rope, and it'll be as if I’m still in his belly.” 

He then reduced the size of his own body and began to crawl out; when he reached the lower part of the fiend’s throat, he saw that the monster-spirit had opened wide his square mouth with fine teeth 
standing above and below like rows of sharp swords. Quickly he thought to himself, “That’s not good! That’s not good! If | leave through his mouth and then try to tug at this rope, he'll bite through it 
once he begins to hurt. | must get out through some place where he has no teeth.” Dear Great Sage! 

Dragging the rope along, he crawled further up the throat of the fiend until he entered one of the nasal passages. A sudden itch in the old demon’s nose caused him to sneeze loudly and Pilgrim was 
sneezed right out. The moment Pilgrim was exposed to the wind, he stretched his waist once and immediately grew to some thirty feet tall with one hand holding the rope and the other grasping the 
iron rod. Not knowing any better, the demon chief, as soon as he saw Pilgrim, lifted up his steel scimitar and hacked away at his opponent's face. Pilgrim parried the blow with one hand holding the iron 
rod. At the same time, the second fiend, using a lance, and the third fiend, using a halberd, both rushed forward and rained blows on him. Putting away his iron rod and letting the rope hang loose, the 
Great Sage leaped up to the clouds and dashed away. He was afraid that once the little fiends had surrounded him, he would be unable to carry out his plan. He therefore jumped clear of their camp 
to reach a spacious spot on the peak of the mountain. Dropping down from the clouds, he grabbed the rope with both hands and tugged with all his strength, and immediately a sharp pain shot through 
the heart of the old demon. To lessen the pain, the demon clawed his way into the air also but the Great Sage gave his rope another yank. When the little fiends saw what was happening out there, 
they all cried out: “O Great King! Don’t provoke him anymore! Let him go! This little monkey has no sense of the seasons! Clear Brightness? hasn't arrived yet but he’s flying a kite over there already!” 
When he heard this, the Great Sage gave the rope yet another mighty tug: hurtling through the air like a spinning wheel, the old demon fell to the ground with a thud, making a crater about two feet 
deep in the hardened loess beneath the mountain slope. 

The second and the third fiends were so terrified that they both dropped down from the clouds and went forward to take hold of the rope. “Great Sage,” they pleaded as they both knelt down, “we 
thought you're a lenient and magnanimous mortal but you’re no better than a slippery sneak. We wanted to lure you out to fight with you, and that’s the honest truth. How could we know that you'd 
fasten this rope onto the heart of our elder brother?” 

“You bunch of lawless demons,” said Pilgrim with a laugh, “you've a lot of nerve! Last time you tried to bite me when you tricked me to come out, and this time you bring up all these troops against me. 
Look at those thousands of fiend soldiers confronting me, and I’m single-handed! That's not quite reasonable, is it? No, I’m yanking you along! I’m yanking you along to see my master!” 

Respecting along with his brothers, the old demon said, “Be merciful, Great Sage. Spare my life, and I'll be willing to send the Venerable Master across this mountain.” 

“If you want your life,” said Pilgrim with another laugh, “all you need to do is to cut the rope with a knife.” 

“Holy Dad!” said the old demon. “I may be able to cut off the rope but there’s still another strip of it fastened to my heart. It’s sticking to my throat and making me retch. What shall | do?” 

“In that case,” said Pilgrim, “open wide your mouth and I'll go in again to untie the rope.” 

Greatly alarmed, the old demon said, “Once you go in, you might refuse to come out again. That's too hard! That's too hard!” Pilgrim said, “I’ve the ability to untie the rope from the outside. After I've 
done so, are you really planning to escort my master across this mountain?” 

“The moment you untie it,” replied the old demon, “we'll escort him at once. | dare not lie.” When he ascertained that the old demon was speaking the truth, the Great Sage shook his body once and 
retrieved his hair; immediately the fiend felt no pain in his heart. (That was the deceptive magic of the Great Sage Sun when he fastened the demon’s heart with a piece of hair. When the hair was 
retrieved, the fiend’s heart no longer ached.) 

Leaping up together, the three fiends thanked the Great Sage, saying, “Please go back first, Great Sage, and tell the Tang Monk to pack up his things. We'll bring a palanquin along to escort him.” The 
various fiends all put away their weapons and went back to their cave. 

After the Great Sage had put away his rope, he went straight back to the east side of the mountain where from a great distance he could already see the Tang Monk rolling all over the ground and 
wailing loudly. Bullseye 8 Rules and Sand-monk had the wrap untied and were just in the process of dividing up the contents. “I needn't be told whose doing this is!” sighed Pilgrim to himself. “Eight 
Rules must have informed Master that | was devoured by the monster-spirit. Master is wailing because he can’t bear to part with me but that Idiot is dividing things up so he can run off. Alas, | wonder 
if 've got the right interpretation! I'll call Master and see what happens.” He dropped down from the clouds and cried, “Master!” 

On hearing this, Sand-monk at once began to berate 8 Rules, saying, “You're a sure coffin-maker who does in every taker! Elder Brother's still alive but you said he’s dead so you'd engage in your 
shoddy business here. Isn’t he the one calling now?” 

“I clearly saw him being swallowed by the monster-spirit with one gulp,” said 8 Rules. “This must be an unlucky day, | suppose, and his spirit has returned to haunt us.” Going straight up to him, Pilgrim 
gave 8 Rules’ face a whack that sent him stumbling. “Coolie,” he shouted, “am | haunting you?” 

Rubbing his face, 8 Rules said, “Elder Brother, you’re devoured by that fiend. You ... how could you come alive again?” 

“Im no useless moron like you!” replied Pilgrim. “So he ate me but | scratched his guts and pinched his lungs. | also put a rope through his heart and pulled at him until the pain was unbearable. Every 
one of them respected and pleaded with me. Only then did | spare their lives. They are now preparing a palanquin to take our master across this mountain.” 

When he heard these words, Tripitaka scrambled up at once and saluted to Pilgrim saying, “O disciple! I've caused you great inconvenience! If I'd believed Aware of Ability’s words completely, I'd have 
been finished.” 
Raising his fists to punch at 8 Rules, Pilgrim scolded him saying, “This overstuffed coolie! He’s so slothful and so callow! Master, please worry no more. Those fiends are coming to take you across the 
mountain.” 
Even Sand-monk felt embarrassed by these words so much so that he hurriedly offered a few excuses for 8 Rules. They then gathered up the luggage and loaded it once more onto the horse’s back, 
waiting by the wayside. The 3 demon chiefs led the flock of spirits to return to their cave. “Elder Brother,” said the 2"4 fiend, “I thought Pilgrim Sun was someone endowed with nine heads and eight tails 
but | can see what he actually is — a puny little ape! Nevertheless, you’d not have swallowed him. If we'd just fought with him, he could never have withstood you and me. With these thousands of 
monster-spirits in our cave, we’d have drowned him just by spitting. But you had to swallow him into your stomach where he could exercise his magic to make you suffer. We certainly didn’t dare wage 
any contest with him then. Just now we said we’re planning to escort the Tang Monk. That was all pretence of course because your life was more important than anything else. Once we tricked him 
into coming out, we'd never escort that monk.” 

“Worthy brother,” said the old demon, “what is your reason for reneging?” 

“Give me three thousand little fiends,” replied the second fiend, “and put them in battle formation. I’ve ability enough to capture that ape-head!” 

“Don’t ask for a mere three thousand,” said the old demon. “You've my permission to call up the whole camp! Just catch him, and everyone will have made merit.” 

The second demon at once called up three thousand little fiends and had them spread out by the side of the main road. A blue banner-carrier was sent to convey this message: “Pilgrim Sun, come out 
quickly and fight with our Second Dad Great King.” 

When 8 Rules heard this, he laughed and said, “O Elder Brother! As the proverb says, a liar can’t fool his fellow villager. What sort of skulduggery and hanky-panky is this when you tell us that you’ve 
subdued the monster-spirits, that they are fetching a palanquin to escort Master? Now they are here to provoke battle. Why?” 

“The old fiend,” said Pilgrim, “was subdued by me. He wouldn't dare show himself, for if he had caught even a whiff of the name Sun, he would have a headache now! This has to be the second fiendish 
demon who can't stand the thought of escorting us. That's the reason for this challenge to battle. Let me tell you something, Brother. Those monster-spirits happen to be three brothers, and they all 
behave gallantly toward each other. We're also three brothers but there’s no gallantry at all among ourselves. I've already subdued the eldest demon. Now that the second demon has shown himself, 
the least you can do is to fight with him a bit. Is that too much to ask of you?” 

“Im not scared of him,” replied 8 Rules. “Let me go and wage a battle with him.” 

“If you want to go,” said Pilgrim, “go!” 

Laughing, 8 Rules said, “O Elder Brother, I'll go. But lend me that little rope of yours.” 

“What for?” asked Pilgrim. “You don’t have the ability to crawl inside his stomach, nor are you capable of fastening it to his heart. Why do you want it?” 

“| want it fastened around my waist,” said 8 Rules, “as a lifeline! You and Sand-monk should take hold of it at the other end and then let me go out there to do battle. If you see that I’m winning, loosen 
the rope and I'll be able to capture the monster. If | lose however, you must pull me back, so that he’ll be unable to grab me.” Pilgrim smiled to himself, saying, “This will be some trick on Idiot!” 

He did indeed tie the rope around 8 Rules’ waist and urged him to do battle. Lifting high his muckrake, Idiot ran up to the ledge of the mountain and cried, “Monster-spirit, come out and fight with your 
ancestor Bullseye!” 

The blue banner-carrier went quickly to report: “Great King, a priest with a long horn and big ears has arrived.” 

The second fiend left the camp at once; when he saw 8 Rules, he did not utter a word but lifted his lance to stab at his opponent's face. Idiot went forward to face him with upraised rake, and the two 
of them joined in battle before the mountain slope. Hardly had they gone for more than seven or eight rounds however, when Idiot's hands grew weak and could no longer withstand the demon. Turning 
his head quickly, he shouted, “Elder Brother, it’s getting bad! Pull the lifeline! Pull the lifeline!” 

When the Great Sage on this side heard those words, he slackened the rope instead and let go of it. Idiot was already fleeing in defeat. The rope tied to his waist was no hindrance when he was going 
forward. But when he turned back, because it was hanging loose it quickly became a stumbling-block and tripped him up. He scrambled up only to fall down again. At first he only stumbled but thereafter 
he fell horn-first to the ground. Catching up with him, the monster-spirit stretched out his dragon-like trunk and wrapped it around 8 Rules. Then he went back to the cave in triumph, surrounded by the 
little fiends all reciting victory poems. When Tripitaka below the mountain slope saw what happened, he berated Pilgrim, saying, “Wukong, | can’t blame Aware of Ability for cursing you to death. | see 
that there’s no love or amity between you brothers at all, only mutual hatred and envy! He was yelling for you to pull the lifeline. How could you not do that and let go of the rope instead? Now he’s been 
harmed. What shall we do?” 

“Master,” replied Pilgrim, laughing, “You're always so protective, so partial! All right, when old monkey was taken captive, you didn’t show much concer. | was quite dispensable! But no sooner had 
this Idiot been taken captive than you began to blame me. | want him to suffer a little, for only then will he realise how difficult it is to fetch the scriptures.” 

“O disciple,” said Tripitaka, “you think | wasn’t concerned about you when you’re captured? But you, after all, are most capable of transforming yourself, and | thought that surely you'd not be harmed. 
That Idiot however, has a rather cumbersome build, and he’s not agile at all. When’s he’s taken like this, he’ll meet more ill than good. You must go rescue him.” 

“Master,” said Pilgrim, “don’t complain anymore. Let me go rescue him.” 

He bounded quickly up the mountain but he said spitefully to himself, “Since Idiot wanted to curse me to death, I’m not about to gratify him so easily. I'll follow the monster-spirits and see how they plan 
to treat him. Let him suffer a little first, and then I'll rescue him.” Thereupon he recited a magic spell; with one shake of his body, he changed into a tiny mole cricket. Darting away, he alighted on the 
base of one of 8 Rules’ ears and went back to the cave with the monster-spirits. The second demon led the three thousand little fiends, all blowing bugles and beating drums, up to the entrance of the 
cave where they were to be stationed. He himself took 8 Rules inside and said, “Elder Brother, I’ve caught one.” 

The old fiend said, “Bring him here and let me have a look.” 

The second demon loosened his trunk and flung 8 Rules on the ground, saying, “Isn’t this the one?” 

“This one,” said the old fiend, “is quite useless!” 

On hearing this, 8 Rules spoke up: “Great King, let the useless one go. Find the useful one instead and catch him.” 

“Though he may be useless,” said the third fiend, “he is still Bullseye 8 Rules, a disciple of the Tang Monk. Let's tie him up and send him to soak in the pond in the back. When his hairs are soaked off, 
we'll rip open his belly, cure him with salt, and sundry him. He'll be good with juice when it turns cloudy.” 

Horrified, 8 Rules said, “Finished! Finished! I’ve run into a fiend who's a pickle merchant.” 

The various fiends all joined in and had Idiot bull-tied before hauling him to the edge of the pond. After shoving him out toward the centre of the pond, they turned and left. The Great Sage flew up into 
the air to have a look, and he found Idiot half floating and half submerged in the pond with his four legs turned upward and his horn downward, snorting and blowing water constantly. He was a laughable 
sight indeed, like one of those huge black lotus roots of late autumn that has cast its seeds after frost. When the Great Sage saw those features, he was moved to both anger and pity. “What am | to 
do?” he thought to himself. “He is, after all, a member of God’s Birthday Feast. But I’m so mad at him, for at the slightest excuse he will divide up the luggage and try to run off. And he’s always egging 
Master on to cast that Tight-Fillet Spell on me. | heard from Sand-monk the other day that he had managed to put away some private savings. | wonder if it’s true. Let me give him a scare!” 

Dear Great Sage! Flying near 8 Rules’ ear, he assumed a different voice and called out: “Bullseye Aware of Ability! Bullseye Aware of Ability!” 


“Of all the rotten luck!” mumbled an apprehensive 8 Rules. “Aware of Ability happens to be a name given to me by the Nun Guanshiyin. Since | followed the Tang Monk, I’ve also been called 8 Rules. 
How is it that someone at this place should know me as Aware of Ability?” Unable to restrain himself, Idiot asked, “Who is calling me by my religious name?” 

“Itis I,” replied Pilgrim. “Who are you?” asked Idiot, and Pilgrim said, “I’m a summoner.” 

“Officer,” said Idiot, growing more and more alarmed, “where did you come from?” 

Pilgrim said, “I've been sent by the Fifth Yama King to summon you.” 

“Officer,” said Idiot, “please go back. Inform the Fifth Yama King that, for the excellent friendship he enjoys with my elder brother, Sun Wukong, I’d be spared one more day. Have me summoned 
tomorrow.” 

“Rubbish!” replied Pilgrim. “As the proverb says, when Yama at third watch wants you to die who dares detain you till fourth watch goes by? Hurry up and follow me, so | don’t have to put the rope on 
you and pull you along.” 

“Officer,” said Idiot, “I’m asking no big favour of you. Just look at my face. You think | can live? | know I’m going to die but | want to wait one more day — until those monster-spirits have my master and 
the rest of them captured and brought here. We can then enjoy a last reunion before we all expire.” 

“All right,” said Pilgrim, smiling to himself, “I've about thirty other people here to be rounded up. Let me go get them first, and that'll give you another day. You've any travel money? Give me some.” 
Idiot said, “How pitiable! Where does a person who has left home have any travel money?” 

“If not,” said Pilgrim, “I'll rope you up and you can follow me!” 

“Officer,” cried 8 Rules, horrified, “please don’t rope me! | know that little rope of yours has the name of the Life-Dispatching Cord. Once you put it on me, I'll breathe my last. Yes! Yes! Yes! | do have 
a little but not much.” 

“Where's it?” demanded Pilgrim. “Take it out quickly!” 

“Pity! Pity!” replied 8 Rules. “Since | became a priest, I’ve bumped into a few philanthropic families who wanted to feed the monks. When they saw that I'd a large appetite, they handed me a few 
pennies more than they gave my companions. Altogether I've managed to save about five maces? of silver but all that loose cash is hard to carry. When | last visited a city, | asked a silversmith to have 
it forged into a single piece. He turned out to be most unscrupulous, for he stole a few candareens and | was left with a piece of silver weighing but four maces and six candareens. You may take it.” 
“This Idiot,” said Pilgrim to himself, smiling, “doesn’t even have a pair of pants on him. Where can he be hiding it?” He asked, “Hey where’s your silver?” 

“It's stuffed inside my left ear,” replied 8 Rules. “I’m all tied up, and | can’t get it for you. Take it out yourself.” 

On hearing this, Pilgrim reached into the ear and found the piece of silver: shaped like a saddle, it did in fact weigh about four mace and six candareen. When he took hold of it, he could no longer 
refrain from letting out a loud guffaw. Recognising at once that it was the voice of Pilgrim, Idiot, floating in the water, began to let loose a string of abuses. “You damned Ban-Horse-Plague!” he cried. 
“Im in such straits already, and you've to come extort money from me!” 

“You overstuffed bull!” said Pilgrim, laughing. “In his attempt to protect master, old monkey's undergone who knows how much affliction. But you even manage to stash away private savings!” 

“Shame on you!” replied 8 Rules. “What sort of private savings is this? It's something that has been shaved off my teeth! I’d not bring myself to spend it on my mouth. | was hoping to save it for one 
garment on my back but you’ve to scare it out of me. Give me back a little of that silver!” 

“Not even half a candareen,” answered Pilgrim. 

“Ill give it to you as ransom money then,” scolded 8 Rules, “but you’d better rescue me.” 

“Don’t be impatient,” said Pilgrim. “I'll rescue you.” 

He put away the silver and changed back into his original form; with the iron rod he teased and guided Idiot in and then hauled him out of the pond by his feet. After he was untied, 8 Rules leaped up 
and took off his shirt to wring out the water. Shaking it a couple of times, he draped it on his body again, still dripping wet. “Elder Brother,” he said, “open the back door and let’s scram!” 

“Escaping through the back door,” said Pilgrim, “is that manly behaviour? Let’s fight our way out through the front door.” 8 Rules said, “But my feet are numb from being tied up. | can’t move.” 

“Just be quick and follow me,” said Pilgrim. 

Dear Great Sage! He opened up with his iron rod and fought his way out; 8 Rules, though still feeling the numbness, had no choice but to follow him. When they reached the second-level door, they 
found the muckrake standing there. Pushing the little fiends aside, 8 Rules grabbed his weapon and began to rain blows left and right. After he and Pilgrim went through those three or four levels of 
door in this manner, they managed to slaughter countless little fiends. When the old demon heard of it, he said to the second demon, “That's some fine person you've caught! Now look at what Pilgrim 
Sun has done! He has robbed us of Bullseye 8 Rules and they have struck down the little fiends at our door!” 

Leaping up hurriedly, the second demon grasped the lance and ran out of the main gate. “Brazen ape!” he shouted in a loud voice. “You insolent creature! How dare you insult us like this!” 

On hearing this, the Great Sage stood still while the fiendish creature without another word, attacked at once with the lance. Pilgrim, the expert (as it were) was not exercised; wielding his iron rod, he 
faced his opponent head on. Thus the 2 of them began a magnificent battle outside the cave: an old, yellow-tusked elephant became a man and sworn bond-brother to a lion king. Because the big 
demon prodded and urged, they all plotted to eat the priest of Tang. Great Sage Equal to Heaven, of vast magic powers would help the Right to quell spirits perverse. Inept 8 Rules fell to malicious 
hands but Wukong saved him, got him out the door. When the fiend king gave chase, flaunting his strength, rod and lance joined up, each showing its might. The lance of that one came like a python 
slicing through the woods; the rod of this one soared like a dragon rising from the sea. The dragon, cloud-shrouded, rose from the sea; the python, mist-enwrapped, sliced through the woods. Come to 
think of it, it was for the Tang Monk that they strove bitterly without restraint. Though that 8 Rules saw the Great Sage fighting with the monster-spirit, he did not step forward to help his companion at 
all. Standing the muckrake on the ground at the mouth of the mountain, he merely stood there and stared dumbly at them. When the monster-spirit saw how heavy Pilgrim’s rod was, how tautly executed 
were his thrusts and parries without the slightest hint of weakness or mistake, he blocked the rod with his lance and stretched out his trunk to seize his opponent. Pilgrim however, knew exactly what 
was happening; raising the golden-hooped rod horizontally high above his own head with both hands, he permitted the monster-spirit to wrap his trunk around his waist but his hands remained free. 
Look at him! His two hands played with the rod on top of the monster-spirit’s trunk like a drum majorette twirling a baton! 

When he saw that, 8 Rules beat his chest and cried, “Alas, that monster-spirit’s so unfortunate! When he caught hold of a ruffian like me, he had even my hands wrapped up so that I’d not move at all. 
But when he caught hold of a slippery creature, he didn’t bother to wrap up his hands. All those two hands need to do is to jab the rod into his trunk. There'll be pain and snivel in that nostril. How could 
he hold on to his prisoner?” 

Now Pilgrim actually had not thought of doing that but this time 8 Rules managed to give him an idea. Waving the rod once to turn it into a staff over ten feet long and having the thickness of a chicken 
egg, he jabbed it into the monster's trunk. Horrified, the monster-spirit loosened his hold at once with a loud snort. Pilgrim changed hands and, grabbing hold of the trunk, gave it a mighty tug. To lessen 
his pain, the monster-spirit walked forward in the direction he was pulled. Only then did 8 Rules have the courage to approach them and rain blows onto the monster-spirit’s side with his muckrake. 
“No! No!” cried Pilgrim. “You've sharp teeth on your rake. If you puncture his skin and make him bleed, Master will blame us again for hurting life when he sees this. Just hit him with your rake handle.” 
Accordingly, Idiot lifted the rake handle and gave the monster a blow with each step he took while Pilgrim pulled him in front by the trunk. Like two elephant tenders, they herded the monster down the 
slope where Tripitaka stood waiting with unblinking eyes. When he caught sight of them approaching noisily, he called out, “Awakened to Purity, can you see what it is that Wukong is dragging along?” 
Sand-monk took one look and said, smiling, “Master, Big Brother is pulling a monster-spirit by his trunk. What a lovely sight!” 

“My goodness! My goodness!” said Tripitaka. “Such a huge monster-spirit! And what a long nose he has! Go and tell him, if he is gracious enough to escort us across this mountain, we'll spare him. 
We’d not hurt his life.” 

Hurrying forward to meet them, Sand-monk said in a loud voice, “Master says not to hurt him if that fiend is willing to escort us across this mountain.” On hearing this the fiend immediately went to his 
knees and made a sort of wheezing reply. Since his trunk was gripped by Pilgrim he sounded as if he had a severe cold. “Venerable Dad Tang,” he huffed, “if you're willing to spare my life, we'll fetch 
a palanquin to escort you.” 

Pilgrim said, “We master and disciples are all gracious winners. We believe you, and we'll spare your life. Go fetch the palanquin quickly. If you change your mind again, we'll certainly not spare you 
once we capture you.” After he had been freed, the fiend respected and left while Pilgrim and 8 Rules gave a full report to the Tang Monk. Overcome by embarrassment, 8 Rules began sunning his 
clothes in front of the slope to dry them, and we'll leave them for the moment. 

The second demon, trembling all over, went back to the cave. Before he arrived, the little fiends had already made the report that he was taken captive and led away by the trunk. In dismay, the old 
demon and the third demon were just in the process of leading the troops out when they saw the second demon returning alone. After they had welcomed him back and asked him what had happened, 
the second demon gave them a complete account of the Tang Monk's kind words and the claim of being a gracious winner. As they stared at each other, no one dared speak up for a long time. Then 
the second demon said, “Elder Brother, are we ready to escort the Tang Monk?” 

“What are you saying, Brother?” asked the old demon. “Pilgrim Sun is in truth a kind and benevolent ape. When he was first in my belly, he could have finished me off a thousand times if he wanted to 
harm me. Just now, when he caught hold of your trunk, he could have given you a lot of trouble if he had refused to set you free and squeezed the tip of your trunk until it was punctured. Let's make 
the necessary preparations quickly and go escort them.” 

“Yes, let's escort them! Let's escort them!” said the third demon with a laugh. 

“Worthy Brother,” said the old demon, “you sound as if you’re miffed. If you don’t want to escort them, the two of us will go instead.” 

“Let me inform my two elder brothers,” said the third demon, laughing some more. “If those priests did not want us to escort them and simply chose to sneak across this mountain, they would have 
been lucky. But since they insisted on our escorting them, they would certainly fall into my ploy of ‘Seducing the Tiger to Leave Its Mountain.” 

“What do you mean by ‘Seducing the Tiger to Leave Its Mountain?” asked the old fiend. 

“Call up all the fiends in our cave,” replied the third fiend. “We'll select one thousand from ten thousand of them, one hundred from that thousand, and then sixteen from that hundred. In addition, we 
want to select thirty more.” 

“Why is it,” asked the old fiend, “that you want to select sixteen little fiends and then thirty more?” 

“The thirty little fiends,” replied the third demon, “will be selected for their culinary skills. We'll give them some fine rice, thin noodles, bamboo shoots, tea sprouts, fragrant mushrooms, straw mushrooms, 
bean curds, and wheat glutens, along with the order that they should set up camp at every twenty- or thirty-mile interval to prepare meals for the Tang Monk.” 

“And what do you want the sixteen fiends for?” asked the old fiend. 

“Eight of them will haul the palanquin,” said the third fiend, “and eight will shout to clear the way. We three brothers will accompany all of them for a distance. Some four hundred miles west of here will 
be my city where I'll have my men and horses to relieve us. Once we get near the city, all we need do is this, this, and this, so that those master and disciples will have no chance at all to look after 
each other. If we want to seize the Tang Monk, we'll have to rely on those sixteen demons to bring us success.” 

When he heard these words, the old fiend could not have been more pleased; it was as if he indeed had snapped out of a hangover or awakened from a dream. “Marvellous! Marvellous! Marvellous!” 
he cried, and he at once called together all the fiends. He first selected the thirty members to whom he gave the foodstuff. Then he selected sixteen of them and they were told to haul out a palanquin 
made of fragrant vines. As they walked out the door, he gave them this instruction also: “You're not permitted to wander off somewhere in the mountain. Pilgrim Sun happens to be a monkey full of 
suspicions. If he sees all of you milling about, he may suspect something and see through our plot.” 

Leading the throng up to the side of the main road, the old fiend cried out in a loud voice: “Venerable Dad Tang, today does not clash with the dread day of Red Sand.4 We're here to invite the Venerable 
Dad to cross this mountain.” 

On hearing this, Tripitaka said, “Wukong, who're those people that're calling me?” 

Pointing with his finger, Pilgrim said, “That's the monster-spirit old monkey subdued. He’s brought a palanquin to escort you.” 

“My goodness! My goodness!” said Tripitaka, his palms pressed together as he saluted to Heaven. “If it'd not been for the ability of my worthy disciple, how'd | be able to proceed?” He then went forward 
to salute the various fiends, saying, “I’m greatly beholden to your love. When this disciple returns eastward with the scriptures, he’ll proclaim your virtuous fruits to the multitudes of Chang’an.” 

As they respected, the fiends said, “Let the Venerable Dad ascend the carriage.” Being of fleshly eyes and mortal stock, that Tripitaka did not perceive that this was a trick. The Great Sage Sun, too 
was a golden mortal of the Great Monad who was by nature honest and upright. Since he thought that the experience of captivity and release had truly subdued the fiend, he did not expect any intrigue 
nor did he examine the situation carefully before he complied with his master’s wishes. After telling 8 Rules to load the luggage onto the horse and Sand-monk to follow the rear, he himself took up the 
lead, his iron rod resting across his shoulders. Eight of the little fiends lifted up the palanquin while eight others shouted to clear the way. With the fiend chiefs supporting the carrying-poles of the 
palanquin on both sides, the master sat amiably in the middle of the carriage as they took the main road up to the tall mountain. Little did they realise however, that once they were under way, sorrow 


would arrive in the midst of gladness. As a Classic says: At prosperity’s end reversal’s born. They'll meet Jupiter in their fated hour and baleful spirits of those hung to death! That group of fiendish 
demons of course were most united in their efforts to gather around Tripitaka and most diligent in their service to him night and day. Hardly had they travelled 30 miles before they presented him with 
a vegetarian meal, and when they reached fifty miles, they fed him again. They even stopped before it was quite dark so that the master could rest. Throughout this leg of the journey, the fiends behaved 
most properly, and the pilgrims in their daily meals were fed to their hearts’ content. When they paused to rest, they found a nice place where they could sleep soundly. They proceeded in this manner 
toward the West for some four hundred miles, and they suddenly found themselves approaching a city. The Great Sage, his iron rod uplifted, was walking about a mile ahead of the entourage, when 
the sight of that city gave him such a fright that he fell to the ground, hardly able to get up. Since he had always been so bold, what was it about the sight of that city that so terrified him? He discovered 
that the city was full of vicious miasmas. It was crowded with fiends and monstrous demons; at 4 gates were all rapacious spirits. Their commander was an old striped tiger; captain, a white-faced, 
ferocious cat. Deer with jagged horns did carry their mail and wily foxes walked along the roads. Circling the city were 1000-foot snakes and huge, long serpents blocked the thoroughfares. Grey wolves 
barked orders beneath the towers; leopards guarding arbours roared like humans. Those waving flags and beating drums were fiends all; watchmen and patrol, all mountain spirits. Cunning hares 
opened doors to ply their trade; wild bulls toted their loads to do commerce. This in years past was a great and noble court. Now it’s a city of tigers and wolves. As the Great Sage lay there nursing his 
fear, he suddenly heard the sound of wind behind his ears. He spun around to discover the third demon with both hands aiming a square-sky halberd directly at his head. Leaping up, the Great Sage 
wielded his golden-hooped rod to face his adversary. The 2 of them both thoroughly aroused, huffed and puffed without exchanging a word; clenched their teeth as each wanted to fight. Then the old 
demon chief appeared and, after shouting an order, lifted up his steel scimitar to hack at 8 Rules. Hurriedly abandoning the horse, 8 Rules attacked with his muckrake. The second demon also grasped 
his lance to stab at Sand-monk who parried the blow at once with his fiend-routing staff. Thus three demon chiefs and three monks, each engaging the other, began a most bitter battle right on top of 
that mountain. Those sixteen little fiends, all obeying the command, immediately went into action: they grabbed the white horse and the luggage before they overpowered Tripitaka in his palanquin, 
hauling him forward until they reached the edge of the city. “By the scheme of our Dad Great Kings,” they shouted, “we’ve caught the Tang Monk here!” Those monster-spirits in the city, old and young 
all ran down and opened wide the city gate. At the same time, they immediately gave the order that all the banners should be rolled up and the drums stopped; there were to be no battle cries or the 
beating of gongs. “The Great King had told us before,” they said, “that we're not to frighten the Tang Monk. The Tang Monk couldn't withstand fear for once he’s frightened, his flesh would turn sour, 
and he’d not be good to eat.” All those fiends beckoned Tripitaka in great delight; each saluting, they received the master priest. They took the Tang Monk and his palanquin and carried him right up to 
the Hall of Golden Chimes where they invited him to take a seat in the centre and presented him with tea and rice. As they swarmed all over him, the elder was in a daze for not a single person familiar 
to him met his sight. 
093 

A horde of demons affront native Nature; the 1 Body salutes True Suchness' 
For the moment, the affliction of the Elder Tang. Instead, those 3 demon chiefs, all united in their minds and efforts who were engaged in a strenuous conflict with the Great Sage and his brothers 
halfway up the mountain east of the city, a battle that was something like an iron brush scrubbing a copper pan: each party's tough and hard. What a fight! 6 substances and forms, 26 weapons; 6 body 
features and six sentiments; 6 evils of 6 organs from 6 desires; 3a contest waged on 6 paths — 6 forms of birth. 4In the comforts of spring of 36 Halls, °each of 6 forms or features® had a name. This 
one’s golden-hooped rod had thousands of styles; that one’s square-sky halberd was fierce in a hundred ways. 8 Rules’ muckrake was savage and strong; the 2" fiend’s lance, able and in good form. 
Young Sand-monk’s treasure staff, no common thing had intent to kill; old demon chief's steel scimitar, fine and sharp would spare none, once upraised. These 3 were a true monk’s guardians whom 
none could face; those 3 were brazen wild spirits who mocked both lord and law. At first it was so-so, then the battle turned fierce; when 6 persons all used the magic of flight they each tumbled and 
turned on the edge of clouds. In a moment the belched out mist and fog darkened Heaven and Earth and all you heard were the growls and roars. The 6 of them fought for a long time until gradually 
dusk sett led in; since the sky was already misty and a strong gust was blowing, it became completely dark in no time at all. Now 8 Rules already had huge ears that hovered over his eyes, making the 
world seem more opaque than ever to him. His arms and legs slackened, and he no longer was able to parry the blows. As he turned to flee in defeat, his muckrake trailing behind him, the old demon 
gave him a blow with the scimitar that almost took his life. It was fortunate that he missed 8 Rules’ head but a few bristles on his neck were shaved off. He was however, chased down by the old demon 
who opened wide his mouth and caught 8 Rules by the collar. The demon took his prisoner into the city, threw him to the little fiends to have him bound in the Hall of Golden Chimes, and then mounted 
the clouds once more to join in the battle. When Sand-monk saw that things were going badly, he turned to flee after one last half-hearted blow with his treasure staff. The second fiend flung out his 
trunk with a snort and wrapped him up, hands and all. He was brought into the city where the little fiends were instructed to have him bound beneath the steps of the hall also. Then the second fiend 
rose into the air to try to capture Pilgrim. When Pilgrim saw that his two brothers had fallen into captivity, he realised he was unable to oppose three adversaries. As the saying goes, even a good hand 
can’t withstand 2 fists; and 2 fists can’t oppose 4 hands. With a cry, he broke through the weapons of those three fiendish demons and fled by mounting the cloud somersault. When the third fiend saw 
Pilgrim somersaulting away, he shook himself and revealed his original form. Flapping both his wings, he immediately caught up with the Great Sage. He could do this so readily. When Pilgrim caused 
great disturbance in the Celestial Palace, even one hundred thousand warriors from Heaven could not catch hold of him, for a single cloud somersault of his would traverse the distance of one hundred 
and eight thousand miles. But one flap of this monster-spirit’s wing however, could cover ninety thousand miles, and thus two flaps in fact would send him past the Great Sage. That was how the Great 
Sage fell into his clutches. The grip of the fiend was so firm that he could not move left or right at all, nor could he even exercise his magic power to escape; for when he enlarged himself, the fiend’s 
clutch would loosen somewhat, and when he reduced his size, the fiend tightened his grip accordingly. He was thus taken back to the city, dropped to the ground, and he too was bound and placed 
together with 8 Rules and Sand-monk. As the old demon and the second demon came forward to meet him, the third demon joined them to ascend the treasure hall. Ah! Little did they realise that they 
had not bound Pilgrim; it was more like sending him off! 
It was about the hour of the second watch, when all those fiends, after they had greeted each other, pushed the Tang Monk down the steps of the hall. When the lamplight revealed to the elder his 3 
disciples all bound up and lying on the ground, he fell down at Pilgrim's side. “O disciple!” he sobbed. “When we met with an ordeal, it’s customary for you to exercise your magic powers outside so that 
you'd seek assistance when necessary to subdue the demons. This time even you've been taken. How’d this poor monk lay claim to his life?” 
When 8 Rules and Sand-monk heard these words of anguish from their master, they, too began to wail. Pilgrim however, replied with a smile, “Master, relax! And stop crying, brothers! Let them do 
what they'll but you'll not be harmed. Let the old demons quiet down first and we'll be on our way.” 
“O Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “you're fibbing again! Look at the way I’m tied up! When the ropes are just the least bit loosened, they immediately spit some water on them to make them tighter. A 
skinny fellow like you probably doesn’t feel a thing but that’s a plague on a fatso like me! If you don’t believe me, just look at my shoulders. The ropes have cut at least two inches into my flesh. How'd 
we escape?” 
“Not to mention the fact that we're bound by hemp ropes,” said Pilgrim with a laugh. “Even if they use coir cables as thick as a rice bowl, I'll treat the matter as lightly as an autumn breeze blowing past 
my ears! You needn't wonder about that!” 
As the three brothers were conversing, they also heard the old demon say, “Our Third Worthy Brother is most capable and most intelligent! His marvellous plan did indeed succeed in capturing the 
Tang Monk! Little ones, five of you'll go bail water; seven of you'll scrub the pots; ten of you'll start the fire; and twenty of you'll go fetch the iron steamer. Let's have those four monks steamed for us 
brothers to enjoy. We'll give each of you a small piece of their flesh so that you can all attain long life too.” 
On hearing this, 8 Rules shook all over and said, “Elder Brother, listen to that! That monster-spirit’s planning to have us steamed and eaten!” 
“Don’t be afraid,” said Pilgrim. “Let me see if he’s a rookie or an old pro of a monster-spirit.” 
“O Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “stop this idle chitchat! We’re about to become neighbours of King Yama, and you're still talking about rookie or old pro!” He had barely finished speaking when they 
heard the second fiend say, “It’s not easy to steam Bullseye 8 Rules.” 
Delighted, 8 Rules said, “Infinite Light! Who's accumulating secret merit by saying it’s not easy to steam me?” 
“If it isn’t,” said the third fiend, “let's skin him first before we steam him.” Horrified, 8 Rules yelled, “Don’t skin me! | may be coarse but the moment the water gurgles, I'll turn soft!” The old fiend said, 
“The one not easily steamed should be placed in the bottom layer.” 
“Don’t be afraid, 8 Rules,” said Pilgrim, laughing. “He’s a rookie, not an old pro.” 
“How do you know?” asked Sand-monk. 
Pilgrim said, “Whenever you steam anything, the stuff placed on top always gets done first. That's why you always put the toughest foodstuff in the top layer of the steamer; build up the fire until the 
hottest steam gets up there, and everything will be fine. But if it is placed in the bottom layer where the steam doesn’t get through that easily, you can steam the stuff for half a year and it still may not 
be cooked. He said just now that 8 Rules was not easy to steam but he still wanted to put him in the bottom layer. Isn’t he a rookie?” 
“O Elder Brother!” said 8 Rules. “The way you talk, you sound as if you wanted me to be tortured alive! When they are hard-pressed and see that I’m not fully steamed, they'll pull off the steamer, flip 
me over, and build up the fire again. I'll then be cooked on both sides but still raw inside, won't |?” 
As they were thus conversing, one of the little fiends went up to report: “The water’s boiling.” 
The old fiend gave the order at once for the various fiends to haul 8 Rules into the bottom layer and Sand-monk into the second. Suspecting that he would be next, Pilgrim decided it was time to leave, 
saying to himself, “I'd be able to do something by this lamplight!” He pulled off a piece of hair and blew his mortal breath onto it, crying, “Change!” It changed at once into a Pilgrim bound by the hemp 
ropes. His true body rose with his spirit into the air where he stood still and peered downward. Those fiends, of course, could not tell the true from the false: the moment they came upon the false 
Pilgrim, they lifted him up and placed him inside the 3% layer. Only then did they push the Tang Monk to the ground, bull-tie him, and place him in the fourth layer. Fuelled by dried wood, a terrific blaze 
soon flared up. Perched on the edge of the clouds, the Great Sage sighed to himself, “That Eight Rules and Sand-monk of mine can still manage to withstand perhaps two seconds of boiling. But my 
master, all it takes is one second and he'll turn soft! If | don’t use magic to save him, he'll perish this instant!” Dear Pilgrim! Making the magic sign in mid-air, he recited: “Let Ohm and Ram purify the 
religion realm; Key: Primary Reception Beneficial for Determination.” 7 
This spell at once caused the Dragon King of North Sea to arrive in the midst of a dark cloud, crying, “Aoshun, the little dragon from North Sea respects you.” 
“Please rise! Please rise!” said Pilgrim. “I’d not have bothered you without cause. | came here with Master Tang who was caught by these vicious demons. He has been placed inside that iron steamer 
to be steamed. Please go and give him some protection so that he’ll not be destroyed.” The dragon king immediately changed himself into a cold gust of wind that blew toward the large pan. As it circled 
and coiled around the bottom of the pan, the three inside the steamer felt no heat at all, and that was how their lives were preserved. 
Toward the end of the hour of the third watch, the old demon was heard saying, “Subordinates, we plotted and strained ourselves in order to catch the Tang Monk and his three companions but that 
effort in escorting them cost us four sleepless days and nights. Now that they are bound inside the steamer, | doubt that they will be able to escape. All of you however, should take good care in guarding 
them, and ten of you little fiends should take turns in tending the fire. Let us retire to our bedchambers and rest a little. By the fifth watch, when it’s about dawn, they will certainly be soft ened. You may 
prepare minced garlic, salt, and vinegar and awake us for the feast.” The fiends all obeyed this instruction while the three demon chiefs went to their bedrooms. 
Standing on the edge of the clouds, Pilgrim heard everything clearly. He then lowered the direction of his cloud slightly but he could hear no voices coming from the steamer. “When the fire is built up,” 
he thought to himself, “there must be heat. Why aren’t they afraid of it? And there’s not a word from them? Ha, could they be dead already? I'll go nearer and listen again.” Dear Great Sage! As he trod 
the clouds, he shook his body and changed immediately into a little black fly to alight on the trellised frame of the steamer. 
“What rotten luck! What rotten luck!” he heard 8 Rules mumbling inside. “I wonder if we’re being steamed the stuffy or the airy way.” 
“What do you mean by that, Second Elder Brother?” asked Sand-monk. 
“The stuffy way,” replied 8 Rules, “the cover of the steamer will be put on. The airy way, the cover won't be used.” 
“Disciples,” answered Tripitaka from the very top layer, “the steamer hasn’t been covered.” 
“How lucky!” exclaimed 8 Rules. “We're not going to die yet tonight. This is steaming the airy way.” 
When Pilgrim heard them speaking like that, he knew that they had not been harmed. Flying up, he picked up the cover of the iron steamer and gently put it on. “Disciples,” said a horrified Tripitaka, 
“it's covered now!” 
‘We're finished!” said 8 Rules. “This is steaming the stuffy way. This night we'll die for sure!” 
Whereupon Sand-monk and the elder began to weep. “Let's not cry just yet,” said 8 Rules. “I think a fresh batch of fiends have come to tend the fire.” 
“How do you know?” asked Sand-monk. “When we're first placed in the steamer,” said 8 Rules, “it was an ideal situation for me. I’m suffering from a little arthritis, and | want that hot steam. Right now 
however, there seems to be cold air coming up from the pan instead. Hey, you officers tending the fire! Why don’t you add some wood? What are you good for?” 
“This coolie!” said Pilgrim to himself, unable to restrain a giggle. “Doesn't he know that he can withstand the chill but heat will kill him? If he talks any more like that, everything will be revealed. | must 
hurry and rescue him. But wait! To rescue him | must change back into my true form. When those ten fiends tending the fire see me, they will certainly make a raucous noise and disturb the old fiends. 


Wouldn't that be a nuisance? Let me send them a little of my magic; | remember that when I was a Great Sage in Heaven, | once had a game of finger-guessing with The Upholder of the Nation at the 
North Heaven Gate. | won some sleep-inducing insects from him, and | still have a few of them here. Let me give them to the fiends.” He felt around his waist and found that he had a dozen of those 
insects left. “I'm going to send them ten of these,” he said to himself, “and I'll keep two for breeding.” 

He flung the insects on the faces of those little fiends; as soon as they crawled into their nostrils, the fiends began to snore and fell asleep. One of them however, was in charge of the fire fork and could 
not be induced to sleep soundly. Rubbing his head and face, this little fiend pinched and tweaked his own nose left and right, sneezing constantly. “This fellow,” said Pilgrim, “seems to know the 
business! I'll give him a ‘Double-Handled Lamp.” He threw 1 more insect on the fiend’s face, thinking to himself: “With two insects running in and out of his nostrils at least one should pacify him!” After 
2 or 3 huge yawns, that little fiend stretched, abandoned his fire tong, and fell fast asleep without moving again. “This little magic’s,” said Pilgrim to himself, “truly both marvellous and efficacious!” He 
changed back into his original form to walk near the steamer, crying, “Master!” 

On hearing this, the Tang Monk said, “Wukong, save me!” 

“Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “are you calling from the outside?” 

“If I'm not outside,” said Pilgrim, “you think I'm suffering with you inside?” 

“O Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “it’s always the same! The slippery one will slip away but we're left behind to suffocate in here!” 

“Don’t make so much noise, Idiot,” said Pilgrim, laughing. “I’m here to rescue you.” 

“If you want to rescue me, Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “you must do a thorough job of it. Don’t let them put me back in the steamer!” 

Pilgrim then lifted up the cover and untied his master. After shaking himself to retrieve his hair that had changed into the specious Pilgrim, he went through the other 2 layers to free Sand-monk and 8 
Rules. The moment he was untied, Idiot wanted to flee. “Don’t be in such a hurry! Don’t be in such a hurry!” said Pilgrim and recited a spell to dismiss the dragon god. Finally he said to 8 Rules, “There’re 
still tall mountains and rugged peaks in the rest of our journey to the Western Heaven. Without a beast of burden, Master will find it exceedingly difficult to proceed. | must still go get our horse.” Look 
at him! With nimble hands and feet, he dashed inside the Hall of Golden Chimes where he saw that the various fiends, old and young, were all asleep. Without disturbing any of them, he managed to 
untie the reins. Now, that animal was originally a dragon horse; if someone unfamiliar had untied him, he would have let fly both his hind legs and neighed. But Pilgrim had been a stableman; in fact, 
he had received the rank of Pi-ma-wén. Moreover, the horse recognised him; so he neither kicked nor neighed. Quietly leading him forward, Pilgrim tightened the girth and fixed up the saddle properly 
before asking his master to mount. After the elder, still trembling all over, had climbed onto the horse, he too wanted to leave at once. “Let's not hurry,” said Pilgrim. “There are kings out there on the 
road to the west. We must have our travel rescript before we can proceed. Otherwise, what sort of passport do we've? Let me go find the luggage.” 

“I recall,” the Tang Monk said, “that after we entered the door, these fiends placed our luggage to the left of the main hall. Even the pole is standing there below the steps.” 

“| know,” replied Pilgrim. 

He bounded into the treasure hall to look, and all at once he caught sight of flashes of light that made him realise that the luggage was there. He knew because the Tang Monk's brocaded cassock had 
on it the luminescent pearl? that glowed at night. As Pilgrim drew near, he saw that both the luggage and the pole were untouched. He brought them out quickly and told Sand-monk to pick up the pole. 
With 8 Rules leading the horse and Pilgrim the way, they headed straight for the Central Gate of the Sun in front. Soon however, the loud rattle of sentinel bells could be heard, and they saw that the 
door had a lock, and a seal was taped over the lock. “How could we penetrate this kind of defence?” asked Pilgrim. “Let's go to the back door instead,” said 8 Rules. 

Pilgrim led the way toward the back door, only to return with this observation: “I can hear sentinel bells outside the Rear Gate of the Servants as well, and that door too is locked and sealed. What shall 
we do? In such a situation, if it hadn't been for the mortal frame of the Tang Monk, the three of us could certainly escape by mounting the clouds and wind, regardless of where we're. But the Tang 
Monk has yet to transcend the three realms, for he still appears within the world of the five phases. His whole body has nothing but carnal bones bequeathed by his parents. He can’t rise into the air. 
It'll be hard for us to escape.” 

“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “there’s no need for further talk. Let’s find some place where there are no sentinel bells or guards. We'll lift Master up the wall and let him climb over it.” 

“That's not so good,” replied Pilgrim, laughing. “Right now we may be forced to drag him over the wall like that but when we return with the scriptures, I’m afraid that your loose idiotic mouth will be 
spreading word everywhere that we’re wall-climbing priests!”"° “But you can’t worry about behaviour now!” said 8 Rules. “We've got to flee for our lives!” Pilgrim had little choice but to agree with him; 
they located a section of the wall that was unguarded and began to scale it. 

Alas, this was what had to happen! The star of calamity, as it were, had refused to release Tripitaka. As those three demon chiefs slept in their chambers, they were suddenly awakened by some 
commotion about the Tang Monk having escaped. Dressing hurriedly, they all ascended to the treasure hall and shouted the question, “How many times has the water boiled?” 

Those little fiends tending the fire who had been put out by the sleep-inducing insects were sleeping so soundly that they could not be awakened even when beaten. Several others who had no particular 
responsibilities, started up and answered confusedly, “Se-se-se-seven times!” As they ran up to the pan however, they saw that the several layers of the steamer were all thrown on the ground while 
those supposed to tend the fire were still fast asleep. Horrified, the little fiends ran back to report, “Great King, they ... they ... they've escaped!” 

Hurrying down the hall, the three demon chiefs went forward to take a careful look at the pan: indeed they discovered that the layers of the steamer were strewn on the ground while both water and 
pan had turned cold because the fire was about to die out. Those tending the fire however, were still snoring away. So astonished were the various fiends that they all shouted: “Seize the Tang Monk 
quickly! Seize the Tang Monk quickly!” 

All that hubbub immediately aroused the rest of the monster-spirits, old and young. Clutching cutlasses and lances, they swarmed from front and back up to the Central Gate of the Sun where they 
found that neither lock nor seal had been touched, and heard the continuous rattle of the sentinel bells. They asked those on night patrol outside the door, “Where did the Tang Monk escape?” The 
reply was that no one had come through the door. When they then rushed to the Rear Gate of the Servants, again they found that the seal, the lock, and the sentinel bells were like those out in front. 
The entire throng then spread out with torches and lanterns, lighting up the whole place until it was bright as day, and then they caught clear sight of the four pilgrims attempting to scale the wall. 
“Where are you running?” roared the old demon as he dashed up to them. His legs weakened and his tendons numbed by fear, the elder fell down at once from the wall and was caught by the old 
demon. While the second demon seized Sand-monk and the third demon pinned down 8 Rules, the rest of the fiends took the luggage and the white horse. Only Pilgrim managed to escape. “Damn 
him! Damn him!” muttered 8 Rules as he was caught. “I told him to do a thorough job of rescuing us. Now it’s back to the steamer for us!” 

The various demons took the pilgrims back to the main hall but they did not want to steam them anymore. Instead, 8 Rules was tied to a pillar in front of the hall, and Sand-monk was taken to be bound 
to a pillar at the rear of the hall. The old demon however, held on to the Tang Monk and refused to let go. “Big Brother,” said the third fiend, “why are you holding him like that? Are you going to swallow 
him alive? But that'll take all the pleasure out of eating, for this creature can’t be compared with those foolish, common mortals that you can devour as a meal. He’s a rare creature from a superior state. 
You must take time, when you've the leisure, to prepare him like a gourmet dish. And you eat him to the accompaniment of good game, fine juices, and soft poems.” 

“What you say is quite right, of course, Worthy Brother,” said the old demon, smiling, “but in the meantime Pilgrim Sun will sneak back in here to steal him.” 

“In this palace of mine,” said the third demon, “there is a pavilion of brocade-fragrance,"' inside which there is also an iron chest. Listen to me: hide the Tang Monk in the chest and close up the pavilion. 
Spread the rumour — so that the little fiends all over our city will be talking about it - that the Tang Monk has been devoured alive by us. Undoubtedly that Pilgrim will come back to snoop around; when 
he hears the news, he will lose all hope and leave. After four or five days, when he’s stopped coming back to harass us, we can then take out the Tang Monk and enjoy him at our leisure. How about 
that?” 

Highly pleased, both the old and second fiends said, “Yes! Yes! Yes! What our brother said makes perfect sense!” 

And so they put the poor Tang Monk that very night into the iron chest after which the pavilion was closed. The rumour that he had been eaten alive soon spread through the entire city. Instead Pilgrim 
who had to abandon the Tang Monk in the middle of the night and mount the clouds to escape. He went straight to the Lion-Camel Cave instead, attacked persistently with his rod, and succeeded in 
killing all ten thousand plus of those little fiends. Then he hurried back; when he reached the edge of the city, the sun was just rising in the east. He dared not however, provoke battle. For 7 silk fibre is 
no thread; a single hand cannot clap. As he descended from the clouds, he shook his body once and changed into a little fiend to steal into the city. Through large boulevards and small alleys he tried 
to learn what was happening, and all he heard was: “The Tang Monk has been devoured live by the great kings during the night.” Wherever he went in the city, that was the news he was told. Becoming 
more anxious, Pilgrim strode to the Hall of Golden Chimes to look around, and he saw many spirits in front of the hall, all wearing leather caps dusted with gold, and yellow cloth jackets. With red- 
lacquered wooden staffs in their hands and ivory plaques dangling from their waists, they were marching back and forth. Pilgrim thought to himself, “These must be monster-spirits authorized to work 
in the palace. I'll change into one of them to snoop around inside.” 

Dear Great Sage! He really did change into an exact version of one of those fiends and sneaked inside. As he walked about, he caught sight of 8 Rules tied to one of the pillars in front of the hall and 
moaning. Pilgrim drew near and whispered, “Aware of Ability.” Recognising his voice, Idiot said, “Elder Brother, are you here? Please rescue me.” 

“Il,” replied Pilgrim, “but do you know where Master is?” 

“Master's gone!” said 8 Rules. “Last night he was eaten alive by those monster-spirits.” When he heard these words, Pilgrim let out a sob, and tears poured from his eyes. 

“Elder Brother, don’t cry,” said 8 Rules. “I only heard the wild talk of the little fiends but | didn’t see it with my own eyes. Don't let yourself be fooled. You’d do some more investigating.” Only then did 
Pilgrim stop weeping and walk further inside to investigate. There he saw Sand-monk tied to one of the pillars in the rear of the hall. He approached him at once, rubbed Sand-monk’s chest with his 
hand, and said “Awakened to Purity.” 

Sand-monk, too, recognised his voice and said, “Elder Brother, did you come in through transformation? Please save me! Save me!” 

“Saving you is easy,” replied Pilgrim. “But do you know where Master is?” 

As tears dripped from his eyes, Sand-monk said, “O Elder Brother! The monster-spirits couldn’t wait to steam Master. He’s eaten alive!” 

When the Great Sage heard that the words of both his brothers were the same, he felt as if a knife had run through his heart. Not even bothering to rescue 8 Rules and Sand-monk, he leaped at once 
into the air and went back to the mountain east of the city. As he dropped down from the clouds, he broke into loud wailing crying, “O Master! When mocking Heaven, | landed in the snare, you came 
to free me from my great despair. To seek a god we set our heart and mind; ourselves we trained and demons we refined. | didn’t know this day you'd meet with harm. Now | can’t take you to the 
wondrous palm. ‘It's not your lot to reach the blessed West. What can | do when spirit leaves your chest?” 

As Pilgrim was grieving in this manner, he thought to himself, questioning mind with mind: “This has to be all the fault of our God Siddhartha! Sitting idly in that region of ultimate bliss, he had nothing 
better to do than to dream up those three baskets of scriptures! If he truly cared about the proclamation of virtue, he should have sent the scriptures to the Land of the East. Wouldn’t his name then be 
an everlasting glory? But he wouldn't part with them so readily, and all he knew was to ask us to go seek them. Who would expect that Master, after the painful experience of a thousand mountains, 
would lose his life at this miserable place? All right! All right! All right! Let old monkey mount his cloud somersault to visit Siddhartha and tell him about this. If he’s willing to let me send the scriptures 
to the Land of the East, it'll still mean the proclamation of the virtuous fruit in the first place and the fulfilment of our vow in the second. But if he’s unwilling, I'll ask him to recite the Loose-Fillet Spell to 
release me from this band. Old monkey will hand it back to him, go back to his own cave, and play king once more.” Dear Great Sage! Leaping up at once, he mounted his cloud somersault to head 
straight for India. It was hardly an hour before the Spirit Mountain came into view. In a moment, he dropped down from the clouds to land on the Vulture Peak where he was immediately met by the 4 
Great Diamond Guardians crying, “Where’re you going?” Saluting them, Pilgrim said, “I must see Siddhartha on some business.” 

“This ape’s,” snapped the Diamond Guardian Ever Abiding, the indestructible king of the Golden Beam Summit on Kunlun Mountain, “a lot of gall! You've yet to thank us for exerting ourselves on your 
behalf some time ago when we restrained the Bull-Demon. ‘But there’s hardly even any show of courtesy when you see us today. If you’ve some business, we must make the report first and may 
enter only when you’re summoned. This isn’t the same as the South Heavenly Gate where you can rush in and out at will. Bah! Aren’t you going to step aside?” 

Now the Great Sage was already sorely distressed. When he received this affront, he became so incensed that he thundered forth his protests that soon reached the ears of Siddhartha. Our Religious 
Patriarch was sitting solemnly on the lotus throne of nine grades and discussing the Threads with the Arhats of Eighteen Heavens. He said to them, “Sun Wukong’s arrived. All of you go out and usher 
him in here.” 

Obeying this decree of God, the Arhats with 2 rows of sacred banners and treasure canopies went outside and intoned: “Great Sage Sun, our Siddhartha has issued a summons for you.” 

Only then did those 4 Great Diamond Guardians step aside to allow Pilgrim to enter the monastery. After being led by the Arhats up to the treasure lotus platform, he saluted himself before Siddhartha 
as 2 streams of tears coursed down his cheeks. “Wukong,” said Siddhartha, “why’re you weeping so sadly?” 

“By the grace of your teachings vouchsafed repeatedly to him,” replied Pilgrim, “this disciple has entered the gate of Holy Dad God. Since | returned to the right fruit, | became the protector of the Tang 
Monk, honouring him as my teacher and sustaining unspeakable hardships on our journey. The moment we arrived at the Lion-Camel City of the Lion-Camel Mountain, three vicious demons — they're 
alion king, an elephant king, and a great roc —- had my master captured. Even your disciple became their prisoner, and we're all bound inside a steamer to suffer the affliction of water and fire. Fortunately 
your disciple managed to escape and call up the dragon king for assistance. That night we stole out with Master but, unable to shake loose from the star of calamity, we’re taken prisoners again. By 


morning, when | stole into the city to try to get some news, | learned that these vicious demons had devoured my master alive during the night. Not a single piece of his flesh or bone was left behind! | 
saw only my younger brothers Aware of Ability and Awakened to Purity who were bound there also. They too will soon lose their lives, | suppose. Your disciple had no choice but to come here to plead 
with Siddhartha. | beg you in your great compassion to recite the Loose-Fillet Spell and take off this band from my head. It will be returned to Siddhartha, and your disciple will be released once more 
to frolic on the Flower-Fruit Mountain.” Hardly had he finished speaking when his tears streamed forth, as he sobbed uncontrollably. 
“Wukong,” said Siddhartha with a smile, “don’t be so sad. You're hurting because one of those monster-spirits has vast magic powers and you can’t prevail against him.” Kneeling beneath God’s throne 
and pounding his chest, Pilgrim said, “To tell you the truth, this disciple in years past brought great disturbance to the Celestial Palace and assumed the name of Great Sage. Since | acquired the way 
of humanity, I've never suffered loss but this time I’m the victim of this vicious demon!” 
On hearing this Siddhartha said, “Cease your anguish. | do recognise that monster-spirit.” 
All at once Pilgrim blurted out, “Siddhartha! I've heard people say that that monster-spirit is related to you!” 
“This insolent ape!” said Siddhartha. “How could a monster-spirit be related to me?” 
“If not,” replied Pilgrim with a laugh, “how could you recognise him?” 
“By my eyes of wisdom,” said Siddhartha, “that’s how | recognise all three of them. The old fiend and the second fiend both have their proper masters. Ananda and Kasyapa, come! The two of you'll 
mount the clouds and go your separate ways to Mount Five-Platforms and Mount Emei. Summon the Beautiful one with Glory and Auspiciousness and Auspicious-World to come for an audience.” 
The 2 honoured ones departed at once with the decree. “The Beautiful one with Glory and Auspiciousness and Auspicious-World,” said Siddhartha, “are the proper masters of those two fiends. But 
now that you mention it, the third fiend’s indeed somewhat related to me.” 
“On the paternal party,” asked Pilgrim, “or the maternal one?” 
Siddhartha said, “At the time when Chaos parted, Heaven opened at the epoch of Zi, Earth developed at the epoch of Chou, and Man came into existence at the epoch of Yin. When Heaven and Earth 
mated, then myriad things were born. The myriad things consisted of beasts and fowl: of the beasts, the unicorn’s the head and the phoenix’s the head of the fowl. After having been fertilised by the 
aura of procreation, the phoenix also gave birth to the peacock and the great roc. When the peacock first came into the world, it’s a most savage creature, able to devour humans. In fact, it'd suck in a 
human being with one breath from a distance of some forty miles. | was on top of the Snow Mountain having just perfected my sixteen-foot diamond body when the peacock sucked me into his stomach. 
I'd have escaped through his anal passage but fearing that my body might be defiled, | cut my way out through his back and rode him back to the Spirit Mountain. | was about to take his life but the 
various Gods stopped me with the observation that to hurt the peacock would be like hurting my own mum. That’s why | detained him at the mountain instead and appointed him God-Mum, the Nun 
Great-Queen Mayira."* Since the great roc had the same parent as the peacock, it'd be said that he’s somewhat related to me.” 
On hearing this, Pilgrim said with a smile, “Siddhartha, according to what you've told me, you'd be regarded as the nephew of that monster-spirit!” 
“Only my presence, | fear, will bring that fiend to submission,” said Siddhartha. Touching his head to the ground, Pilgrim said, “I beg you to make this journey at once.” 
Siddhartha left the lotus throne and went out of the monastery gate with the rest of the gods. There they saw Ananda and Kasyapa leading The Beautiful one with Glory and Auspiciousness and 
Auspicious-World on their way to the monastery also. As the two Nuns saluted to him, Siddhartha asked, “How long have your beasts of burden been gone from your mountains?” 
“A week,” replied The Beautiful one with Glory and Auspiciousness. 
“A week in the mountain,” said Siddhartha, “are equivalent to several millennia on earth. | wonder how many lives they've taken down there. You must follow me quickly if we’re to retrieve them.” 
With 1 Nun standing on each side of him, a god and his followers rose into the air. See auspicious clouds adrift in all the sky as God in mercy his wisdom’s doth ply: he shows forth Heaven's law of 
procreation, explaining Earth’s patterned transformation. Before his face 500 Arhats stand; behind 3000 guardians form a band. Ananda, Kasyapa follow left and right; Mafi and Visva the monstrous 
fiends will smite. It was as a peculiar favour granted him that the Great Sage succeeded in eliciting the assistance of the Religious Patriarch and his followers. In a little while, they caught sight of the 
city. “Siddhartha,” said Pilgrim, “the spot releasing black vapours over there is the Lion-Camel Kingdom.” 
“Go down first,” said Siddhartha, “and provoke battle with those monster-spirits. You’re permitted to lose but not to win. When you retreat back here, I'll bring them to submission.” 
The Great Sage lowered his cloud and landed on the city wall; his feet planted on the melons of the battlement, he shouted, “Damned lawless beasts! Come out quickly to fight with old monkey!” Those 
little fiends standing on the rampart were so terrified that they dashed down to report: “Great Kings, Pilgrim Sun is provoking battle on the battlement!” 
“This ape hasn’t shown himself for about two days,” said the old fiend. “If he returns to provoke battle this morning, could it be that he has succeeded in getting some help?” 
“We're not afraid of whatever help he has gotten, are we?” said the third demon. “Let’s all go and have a look.” Each grasping his weapon, the three demon chiefs rushed up to the battlement. When 
they saw Pilgrim, they raised their arms without a word and attacked. Pilgrim wielded his iron rod to meet them; after seven or eight rounds however, he feigned defeat and fled with the fiend kings all 
roaring, “Where are you going?” 
The Great Sage shot up to mid-air with one somersault but those three spirits all mounted the clouds to give chase. Immediately Pilgrim hurled himself into the golden radiance of Dad God and vanished 
from sight. What did appear were the three images of God — Past, Present, and Future — together with five hundred Arhats and three thousand guardians who fanned out on all sides. They had the 
three fiend kings surrounded so tightly that not even water could have seeped through! 
“Brothers, it's bad!” cried the old demon, completely unnerved. “This monkey is truly a devil in the earth! How did he manage to bring our masters here?” 
“Don’t be frightened, Big Brother,” said the third demon. “We'll all go forward together and use our weapons to cut down that Siddhartha and take over his Thunderclap Treasure Monastery.” 
Not knowing any better, our demon chief accordingly charged forward and tried to attack madly with his scimitar. The Beautiful one with Glory and Auspiciousness and Visabhadra, after quickly reciting 
a magic spell, shouted in unison, “If these cursed beasts do not submit now, are they waiting for another disciple?” The old fiend and the second fiend were so terror-stricken that they dared not struggle 
any longer. Dropping their weapons, they rolled over once and changed back into their original forms. The two Nuns tossed two lotus thrones onto their backs and then leaped up to take their seats on 
top. In this way, the two fiends lowered their ears and submitted. 
Since the two Nuns had thus subdued the green lion and the white elephant, only the third demon refused to surrender. Throwing away his halberd, the fiend spread out his wings and soared into the 
air, his sharp claws seeking to strike at the Monkey King. The Great Sage was still hiding in the luminosity around a god, and the fiend actually had no way of getting near him, though he would have 
liked very much to do so. Perceiving the roc’s intentions, Siddhartha faced the wind and gave his head (which had once supported the nests of magpies)'® a shake. The head changed at once into a 
piece of meat dripping with fresh blood. Stretching out his claws, the monster-spirit drew near and tried to clutch at the piece of meat. Our Dad God pointed at him with his finger and immediately the 
monster-spirit felt such cramps throughout his huge wings that he could not fly away. All he could do was to hover over a god’s head in his true form: a golden-winged great roc. 
“Siddhartha,” he cried, “why did you exercise your mighty religion power to constrain me?” 
“Your wickedness,” replied Siddhartha, “has incurred for you a heavy debt of retribution in this place. Follow me, and you may acquire merit beneficial to you.” 
“But your place allows for only a strict vegetarian diet,” said the monster-spirit. “It’s a condition of extreme poverty and hardship. | can enjoy human flesh here to my endless delight. If you starve and 
destroy me, you'll have sinned, too.” 
“In the four great continents of my domain,” said Siddhartha, “there are countless worshippers. I'll ask those who wish to do good to sacrifice first to your mouth.” Since that great roc could neither flee 
nor escape, though he sorely wished to do so, he had no choice but to make submission. 
Only then did Pilgrim step out of the golden radiance to respect to Siddhartha saying, “Dad God, you've put away the monster-spirits and eliminated great evils. But my master’s gone.” 
“Wretched ape!” said the great roc through clenched teeth, “You'd to find such a cruel fellow to constrain me! Since when did we devour that old priest of yours? He’s still hidden in an iron chest at the 
pavilion of brocade-fragrance.” 
When Pilgrim heard these words, he respected hurriedly to thank the Religious Patriarch who had the roc firmly detained on top of his halo as a guardian. Then the entire entourage left on the clouds 
to return to the treasure monastery. Pilgrim lowered himself from the clouds and entered the city where he could find not a single little fiend. So it was that a snake without head would not crawl; a bird 
without wings could not fly. When they saw that the fiend kings had made submission to the Religious Patriarch, each of them fled for his life. Pilgrim released 8 Rules and Sand-monk and also found 
the luggage and the horse. “Master’s not been eaten,” he said to the 2 of them. “Follow me!” 
He led his 2 brothers to the interior court and found the pavilion of brocade-fragrance. Opening the door, they located the iron chest inside of which they could hear the sound of Tripitaka weeping. 
Wedging open the chest with his fiend-routing staff, Sand-monk called out: “Master!” 
When he saw them, Tripitaka wailed aloud: “O disciples! How did you manage to subdue the demons? How did you find me here?” Thereupon Pilgrim gave a thorough rehearsal of what had taken 
place, from beginning to end, and Tripitaka was filled with gratitude. Master and disciples found some rice and foodstuff in the palace with which they prepared a meal for themselves. After they had 
eaten their fill, they packed up and set out once more on the main road toward the West. Thus it was that true scriptures must be by true people sought; restless minds and raging wills will come to 
naught. 
094 
At Beggar he pities the infants and summons the night gods; in the golden hall he knows the demon speaking on the way and virtue 
1 thought will stir up a demonic crew! So bitter’s training though what can you do? 
Rely on washing to remove the dust; the body harness and refine you must. 
Sweep clean all causations,' to stillness return; stamp out every fiend without concern. 
Of shackle and snare 1 will surely leap free and rise when work is done, to Great Canopy.? 
The Great Sage Sun having exerted every effort, succeeded in eliciting the assistance of Siddhartha to subdue the fiends. When the ordeal finally ended, Tripitaka and his disciples left the Lion-Camel 
Kingdom and journeyed westward. After several months, it was again the time of winter. See the peak’s jade-like plums half-blooming, the pond’s water slowly icing. The red leaves have all dropped 
away and pines turn more verdant and happy. The pale clouds are about to snow; dried grass on the mountain lies low. What frigid scene now fills the eyes as bone-piercing chill multiplies! Braving the 
cold and plunging through the chill, resting in the rain and feeding on the wind, master and disciples proceeded until they saw another city. “Wukong,” asked Tripitaka, “what sort of a place’s that over 
there?” 
“When you get there,” replied Pilgrim, “you'll know. If it’s a kingdom of the West, we'll have to have our rescript certified. If it’s merely a district, county, or prefecture seat, we'll just pass through.” 
Hardly had master and disciples finished speaking than they arrived at the foot of the city gate. Tripitaka dismounted, and the four of them entered the outer wall of the city where almost immediately 
they found an old soldier huddled against the wind and sleeping beneath a wall exposed to sunlight. Pilgrim walked up to him and shook him gently, saying, “Officer.” 
Waking with a start and blinking several times, the old soldier finally caught sight of Pilgrim. Immediately he went to his knees and respected, crying, “Holy Dad!” 
“Stop making all this fuss!” said Pilgrim. “I’m no evil spirit! Why should you address me as Holy Dad?” 
“Aren't you Holy Dad Thunder-god?” asked the old soldier, still respecting. 
“Certainly not!” said Pilgrim. “I’m a priest from the Land of the East on his way to seek scriptures in the Western Heaven. | just arrived, and | came to ask you for the name of your region.” Only when 
he heard those words did the old soldier calm down; with a big yawn he scrambled up to stretch himself and say, “Elder, Elder, pardon me! This place was originally the Beggar Kingdom but now the 
name has been changed to the Young Masters’ City.” 
“Is there a king in the city?” asked Pilgrim. 
“Yes! Yes! Yes!” replied the old soldier. Pilgrim turned back to say to the Tang Monk, “Master, this place originally was called the Beggar Kingdom but it has been changed now to the Young Masters’ 
City. | don’t know why they changed the name.” 
“If it was Beggar,” said a perplexed Tang Monk, “why then should it be called Young Masters?” 8 Rules said, “It must be that the Beggar king had died. The one newly occupying the throne is a young 
master, and that’s why it’s called the Young Masters’ city.” 
“Nonsense! Nonsense!” said the Tang Monk. “Let's go inside the city first. We may make further inquiry on the streets.” 
“Exactly,” said Sand-monk. “That old soldier's probably ignorant, or he may have been frightened into babbling by Big Brother. Let’s go into the city to make inquiry.” 
They walked through three levels of city gates before they reached the big thoroughfares. As they paused to look around, they found that the people here all seemed to be good-looking and handsomely 
dressed. What they came upon were juice-shops and poems full of raucous din. Tall colours adorned a teahouse or inn. Business was good at every gate and door; abundant wealth packed both mart 
and store. People, like ants, traded brocade and gold; for fame and for profit they bought and sold. What solemn manners! Such prosperous scene of calm seas and rivers — a year serene! Toting the 


luggage and leading the horse, master and disciples walked for a long time on the main boulevards where the sight of prosperity seemed endless. Then they began to notice that in front of each 
household was a geese coop. “O Disciples!” said Tripitaka. “All the people here put a geese coop in front of their house. Why's that?” 
On hearing this, 8 Rules looked left, right, and he saw that indeed there were these geese coops lined with silk curtains of 5 colours. “Master,” said Idiot with a giggle, “this must be an auspicious day 
for marriage or for meeting friends. The people must all be performing some rituals.” 
“Rubbish!” snapped Pilgrim. “How could every household be performing a ritual? There must be a reason for this. Let me go and take a look.” 
“You'd better not go,” said Tripitaka, tugging at him. “Your hideous features will offend people.” 
“Ill go in transformation then,” replied Pilgrim. Dear Great Sage! Making the magic sign, he recited a spell and changed with one shake of his body into a little bee. Wings outstretched, he flew up to 
one of the coops and crawled inside the curtains. There he discovered a little child sitting in the middle. When he went to another coop, he found another child also. In fact, he discovered the same 
thing in front of eight or nine households: they were all little boys, and there were no girls at all. Some of them were playing in the coops; others merely sat and cried; still others were eating fruit or 
sleeping. After seeing that, Pilgrim changed back into his original form to report to the Tang Monk: “There’re little boys in the coops; the older ones cannot be more than seven years old and some of 
the younger ones are barely five | don’t know why they’re in there.” His words made Tripitaka more perplexed than ever. A turn on the street brought them all at once up to the gate of an official mansion, 
the Golden Pavilion Postal Station. “Disciples,” said Tripitaka, highly pleased, “let's go inside this postal station. We can ask them about the place, feed our horse, and request lodging for the night.” 
“Exactly! Exactly!” said Sand-monk. “Let’s get inside quickly!” 
As the 4 of them entered amiably, the officers on duty at once announced their arrival to the station master who ushered them inside. After they had exchanged greetings and taken their seats, the 
station master asked, “Elder, where did you come from?” 
“Your humble cleric’s,” replied Tripitaka, “been sent by the Great Tang in the Land of the East to go seek scriptures in the Western Heaven. Having arrived in your noble region, we'd like to have our 
travel rescript certified and to beg you to grant us one night’s lodging in your lofty mansion.” 
The station master immediately requested tea and asked those on duty to prepare the tokens of hospitality. Having thanked him, Tripitaka asked again, “Is it possible for me to enter the court today 
and have an audience with the throne and get my rescript certified?” 
“You can’t do it tonight,” said the station master. “Wait until early court tomorrow. Please spend the night and rest here in our humble dwelling.” In a little while, when the preparation had been finished, 
the station master invited the four pilgrims to partake of a vegetarian meal. His subordinates were ordered to sweep clean the guest room for the pilgrims to rest. After thanking him repeatedly, Tripitaka 
sat down and said to the station master, “There is something that this humble cleric must ask you to explain. How do the people of your noble region rear young children?” 
The station master said, “As there are no two suns in Heaven, so there are no two rational principles on Earth. The rearing of children begins with the sperm of the dad and the blood of the mum. After 
the tenth month of conception, the child will be born in due time; and after birth, the child will be fed with milk for at least three years, until the bodily features are fully formed. You think we don’t know 
about this?” 
“According to what you've just told me,” replied Tripitaka, “the people here are no different from those of my humble nation. But when | entered the city just now, | saw that there was placed in front of 
each household a geese coop, inside of which was placed a little boy. | don’t understand this, and that’s why | dare request an explanation.” 
“Elder, don’t mind that!” said the station master, at once lowering his voice and whispering into Tripitaka’s ear. “Don’t ask about that, and don’t be concerned with that! Don’t speak of it, even! Please 
rest now, and you can be on your way tomorrow.” 
On hearing this however, the elder tugged at the station master and persisted in his request for an explanation. As he shook his head and wagged his finger, all the station master could mutter was, 
“Be careful with what you say!” Refusing to let go, Tripitaka insisted that he be told the reason. The station master had little choice but to send away all his official attendants, after which he said quietly, 
alone, by the light of the lamps, “The matter of the geese coops that you mentioned just now happens to be instigated by the unruliness of our lord. Why do you persist in asking about it?” 
“What do you mean by unruliness?” asked Tripitaka. “You must help me understand before | can rest.” 
“This country,” said the station master, “used to be called the Beggar Kingdom but recent folk poems have changed the name to the Young Masters’ City. Three years ago, an old man disguised as a 
Daoist arrived with a young girl, barely sixteen and with a face as beautiful as Guanyin’s. He presented her as a tribute to our Majesty who became so infatuated with her that he gave her the title of 
Queen Beauty. In recent times he would not even look at any of the royal consorts dwelling in the six chambers and three palaces. Night and day he cares only to indulge in amorous dalliance with this 
one girl until he is reduced to a physical wreck. Constantly fatigued, emaciated, and unable to eat or drink, he has not long to live. The royal hospital has tried all its best prescriptions but no cure has 
been found. However, that Daoist who has been appointed the royal dad-in-law, claims to possess a secret formula from beyond the ocean which can lengthen our lord’s life. Some time ago he went 
in fact to the Ten Islets and the Three Isles to gather herbs. After his return and the preparation of all the medications, he still requires the terrible medical supplement‘ of one thousand one hundred 
and eleven hearts of young boys. When the medicine is taken with soup made from boiling these boys’ hearts, the king, so the Daoist claims, will live to a millennium without aging. Those little boys 
you saw in the geese coops are the selected ones who are being fed and nurtured before they are slaughtered. Fearing the law of the king, the parents dare not even weep. They can only express 
their outrage by nicknaming this place the Young Masters’ City. When you go to court tomorrow, please confine your business to certifying your travel rescript. You mustn’t mention this matter at all.” 
He ended his speech and immediately withdrew. Elder was so horrified by what he heard that his bones weakened and his tendons turned numb. Unable to restrain the tears rolling down his cheeks, 
he blurted out: “Ah, befuddled king! So you grew ill because of your incontinence and debauchery. But how'd you take the lives of so many innocent boys? O misery! O misery! This pain kills me!” For 
this, a testimonial poem says: 
1 foolish tyrant who misses the truth’s harmed himself with the pleasure he craves. 
He seeks long life by taking lives of boys; kills the plebs to lighten Heaven’s scourge. 
Steadfast in compassion the monk remains; unheard-of horror the master reveals. 
As he sighs and sheds tears in the lamplight, demigod’s disciple’s overcome by pain. 
Drawing near to Tripitaka, 8 Rules said, “Master, what's the matter with you? ‘You're always picking up someone’s coffin and crying over it in your own house!’ Don’t be so sad! Remember the adage: 
the ruler wants the subject to die and the subject who doesn't is disloyal; the dad wants the son to perish and the son who doesn't is un-filial. He is hurting his own people but what does that have to do 
with you? Come, let’s shed our robes and sleep. ‘Let’s not worry on behalf of the ancients!” 
Still shedding tears, Tripitaka said, “O disciple, you're so hard-hearted! Those of us who have left the family must accumulate merit by multiplying our virtuous acts; our very first obligation must be the 
practice of appropriate means. How could this befuddled king indulge in such a lawless act? I’ve never heard of such nonsense that eating people’s hearts can lengthen one’s life. How could | not 
grieve over something like this?” 
“Please do not grieve just yet, Master,” said Sand-monk. “Wait till tomorrow when we've our rescript certified. We can boldly discuss the matter with the king and if he doesn’t listen to us, we can also 
ascertain what kind of person this royal dad-in-law is. Perhaps it is a monster-spirit, desirous of devouring human hearts that’s devised such a plan. That may well be the case.” 
“Awakened to Purity is perfectly right,” said Pilgrim. “Master, you'd sleep now. Let old monkey enter court with you tomorrow and scrutinize the royal dad-in-law. If he is a man, he may have embarked 
on the path of heterodoxy, being ignorant of the proper Way and thinking that only herbs and medicines will achieve realised mortality. Let old monkey disclose to him the essential themes of cultivation 
by means of one’s natural endowments and enlighten him into embracing the truth. If he’s a monster or a fiend, I'll arrest him for the king to see, so that he may learn continence and find out how to 
nourish his own body. | most certainly will not allow the king to take the lives of those boys.” 
When Tripitaka heard these words, he quickly saluted to Pilgrim and said, “O disciple, what you’ve proposed is most marvellous! Most marvellous! When you see that befuddled king however, you’d 
not ask about this matter right away. For | fear that the befuddled king without looking properly into the matter, would immediately find us guilty of listening to false rumours. What would we do then?” 
“Old monkey has his own magic power,” said Pilgrim, smiling. “First, I'll remove these boys in the geese coops from the city, so that tomorrow he will have no one from whom he can take out the hearts. 
The officials of the land will undoubtedly report to the throne, and that befuddled king will surely respond by discussing the matter with the royal dad-in-law or by asking for more boys to be selected. At 
that point we'll memorialise to him also. Then he will not blame us.” 
Highly pleased, Tripitaka said again, “How can you make those boys leave the city? If you can, the virtue of my worthy disciple is great as Heaven! You'd do this quickly. If you delay, you may be too 
late.” Arousing his spiritual powers, Pilgrim rose at once and gave this instruction to 8 Rules and Sand-monk: “Sit here with Master and let me act. When you see a gust of cold wind blowing, you'll 
know that the boys are leaving the city.” Whereupon the three of them, Tripitaka and his two disciples, began reciting: “We submit to the Life-Saving God of Medicine!5 We submit to the Life-Saving 
God of Medicine!” 
Once Great Sage had gone out the door, he rose with a whistle to mid-air where he made the magic sign and recited the magic words: “Let Ohm purify the religion realm!” With this he summoned a 
god of the city, the local spirit, a god of the soil, and various mortal officials together with the Guardians of 5 Quarters, the 4 Sentinels, the 6 Gods of Darkness and 6 Gods of Light, and the Guardians 
of Monasteries who arrived in the air to salute him saying, “Great Sage, for what urgent business have you summoned us in the thick of night?” 
“Because we came upon an unruly king in the Beggar kingdom,” replied Pilgrim, “who's listened to some monstrous pervert's tale that the hearts of little boys, when taken as a medical supplement 
would grant him longevity. My master’s so disturbed that he’s resolved to save lives and exterminate the fiend. That’s why old monkey has asked each one of you to come here; | want you to use your 
magic powers and move all these boys including the geese coops out of the city. Take them into a mountain valley or deep into a forest and supply them with fruit to eat so that they'll not starve. You 
must also provide them with secret protection and prevent them from crying or being frightened. When I’ve eliminated the perversity and restored the king to the proper rule of his state, you may then 
return the boys just as we're about to leave.” When the various gods heard this command, each of them exercised his magic power as they dropped down from the clouds. The city immediately was 
filled with churning cold wind and spreading fog. The cold wind darkened a sky full of stars; the fog spreading bedimmed the radiant moon. At the very first they drifted and floated down; but thereafter 
they roared and rumbled through — drifting and floating down, they sought to save the boys from every house; roaring and rumbling through, they found the geese coops to help flesh and blood. People 
stayed home for the invading chill and piercing cold turned garments iron-hard. Parents fretted in vain and kinfolk were aggrieved as cold wind churned the earth to remove the boys in coops. This night 
they may be lonely; by dawn they will all be pleased. Also a poem as a testimonial says: 
Since mercy ever abounds in God’s gate, goodness perfected is what's called the Great.§ 
All saints and sages must virtue increase; the sum of Triratna’ and 5 laws? is peace. 
Hadn't a king at Beggar state gone bad, 1000 youngsters’ fate would still be sad. 
When Pilgrim saves them merit above salvation he'll make for his master’s sake. 
It was about the hour of the third watch during that night when the various deities transported those geese coops to be hidden at another place. Lowering his auspicious luminosity, Pilgrim went to the 
courtyard of the posthouse where he could hear his 3 companions still reciting, “We submit to the Life-Saving God of Medicine!” 
In great delight, he drew near and called out, “Master, I've returned! What do you think of the cold wind?” 
“That's some cold wind!” replied 8 Rules. 
“But what about rescuing the boys?” asked Tripitaka. 
“They've already been taken out one by one,” replied Pilgrim, “and will be escorted back to the city by the time we're ready to leave.” 
Tripitaka thanked him repeatedly before retiring. By dawn, Tripitaka began to dress the moment he awoke, saying, “Wukong, | want to attend the morning court so that our travel rescript maybe certified.” 
“Master,” said Pilgrim, “if you go by yourself, | fear that you may be unable to accomplish much. Let old monkey go with you to ascertain whether the kingdom is governed by rectitude or perversity.” 
“But you usually refuse to perform the proper ceremony when you greet a king,” said Tripitaka, “and | fear he may be offended.” 
“Ill not show myself,” said Pilgrim. “I'll follow you in secret and can protect you at the same time.” 
Highly pleased, Tripitaka instructed 8 Rules and Sand-monk to watch the luggage, the horse, and then departed. When the station master saw them off, he noticed that the attire of the elder was quite 
different from that of the day before: wore a brocade cassock lined with strange treasures. A gold-tipped Vairocana hat topped his head. His hands held up a nine-ringed priestly staff; chest enclosed 
one wondrous, godly spark. The travel rescript he had on himself, packed in a silk purse placed inside the wrap. He walked like an Arhat come down to earth with a genuine, living God’s blessing. After 
greeting Tripitaka, the station master whispered in his ear and told him to mind his own business. As Tripitaka nodded and murmured his assent, the Great Sage stepped to one side of the door and 
recited a spell; with one shake of his body he changed into a mole cricket and flew up to light on top of Tripitaka’s hat. The elder left the postal station and headed straight for the court. On arriving, he 
ran into the Custodian of the Yellow Gate to whom he saluted and said, “This humble priest's someone sent by the Great Tang of the Land of the East to seek scriptures in the Western Heaven. It’s 
proper for me to have my travel rescript certified after arriving in your noble region. | therefore wish to have an audience with the throne. | beg you to make this known for me.” 
Upon which, that Custodian of the Yellow Gate made his report. In delight, the king said, “A priest from a distant land must be most accomplished in the Way. Show him in quickly.” 


The Custodian thus summoned the elder to enter the court; after going through the ceremonial greetings beneath the steps, he was granted permission to take a seat in the royal hall. As he thanked 
the king and sat down, the elder noticed that the king had emaciated features and a listless spirit. He raised his hands but could barely salute; his voice started and stopped when he spoke. When the 
elder presented him with the rescript, the king stared at it with unseeing eyes for a long time before he was able to affix his treasure seal on the document and hand it back to the elder. The king was 
just about to question our elder further on the reason for seeking scriptures when the official attending the throne reported, “The royal dad-in-law’s arrived.” 

At once supporting himself on a young palace eunuch, the king struggled down from the dragon couch in order to receive the visitor. Elder was so taken aback that he too leaped up and stood to one 
side. As he turned to look, he discovered an old Daoist swaggering up from the jade steps. The man Tripitaka saw had on his head a cloud-patterned, priestly wrap of pale yellow damask, and he wore 
a crane-feathered gown of brown silk fretted with plum designs. A blue sash, braided with 3 silk and woollen cords wrapped his waist; feet trod cloud-patterned slippers woven of grass-linen and hemp. 
His hand held a 9-jointed staff of dried vine carved like a coiling dragon. Down his chest hung a silk purse embroidered with raised dragon-and-phoenix patterns. His jade-like face was shiny and 
smooth; a white beard flowed down his chin; pupils blazed golden flames; eyes were longer than his brows. Clouds moved with each step he took and fragrant mists encircled him. Hands folded, all 
officials beneath the steps shouted: “The royal dad-in-law’s entered court!” 

When that royal dad-in-law arrived at the front of the treasure hall, he did not even bother to pay homage to the king. His head held high, he walked boldly up the steps while the king saluted and said, 
“We're delighted that the royal dad-in-law’s honoured us with his divine presence this morning.” 

He was at once asked to be seated on the cushioned couch on the left. Taking a step forward, Tripitaka also bent low to greet him, saying, “Sir royal dad-in-law, this humble cleric salutes you.” 

Sitting loftily on his couch, the royal dad-in-law did not return the greetings at all; instead, he turned to say to the king, “Where did this monk come from?” 

“He happens to be someone sent by the Tang court in the Land of the East to seek scriptures in the Western Heaven,” replied the king. “He’s here to have his travel rescript certified.” 

“The journey leading to the West's,” said the royal dad-in-law with a laugh, “shrouded in darkness!? What's so good about that?” 

Tripitaka said, “Since ancient times the West's been the noble region of ultimate bliss. How’d it not be good?” 

The king asked, “We've heard from the ancients too that monks are the disciples of God. We'd like to know in truth whether a monk is able to transcend death whether submission to God can bring a 
person longevity.” 

On hearing this, Tripitaka quickly pressed his palms together in front of his chest to give his reply: “For the person who’s a monk, all causal relations have been abolished and to him who understands 
reality, all things are but emptiness. He of great knowledge, both wide and comprehensive, ‘exists placidly in the realm of no birth; the true mysteries perceived in silence, he roams freely in peace 
and tranquillity. With no attachments in the Three Realms, all elementary principles are known; he’s insights into all causes since his six senses are purged. He who'd strengthen knowledge and consci- 
ousness must perforce know the mind; for a mind purified shines in solitary enlightenment and a mind preserved pierces all mental projections. The face of truth can be seen even in a previous life 
without want or excess; but shapes of delusion though formed, decline at last. Why seek them beyond bounds? Sedentary meditation’s the very source of concentration; almsgiving and charity are the 
foundation of austerity. He who’s great wisdom will appear foolish for he knows how not to act in every affair; he who’s good at planning won't scheme for he needs must let go in every instant. Once 
the mind’s made immovable, all your actions are perfected. But if you dwell on picking the yin to nourish the yang, you speak but foolish words; to bait the eye with long life amounts to an empty promise. 
You must abandon all particles of defilement, regard all phenomena as emptiness. When you, plain and simple, reduce your desire, you'll with ease an endless life acquire.” "' 

When that royal dad-in-law heard these words, he smiled sarcastically and pointed his finger at the Tang Monk. “Ha! Ha! Ha!” he cried. “Your mouth’s, monk, full of balderdash! Those within the fold of 
Extinguishment all talk about the knowledge of reality. But you don’t even know how reality’s to be extinguished! Sedentary meditation — why, that’s nothing but the practice of blind cultivation! As the 
proverb says: Sit, sit, sit! Your bottom will split! Play with fire and you'll land in the pit! You've no idea that | who seek mortality possess the hardiest of bones, comprehend the Way, I’m most intelligent 
in spirit. | carry basket and gourd to visit friends in the mountain; | gather a hundred herbs to help people in the world. Divine flowers | pick to make a hat; fragrant orchids | pluck to form a mat. | recite 
to clapping of hands and rest on clouds after | exercise. Explaining the principles of Dao, | exalt the true teachings of Laozi; dispensing amulets and water, | rid the human world of monstrous miasmas. 
| rob Heaven and Earth of their energies and pluck from sun and moon their essences. Yin and yang activated, the elixir gels; fire and Water harmonised, the embryo’s formed. When the yin of Two 
Eights’? recedes, it's both dim and blurry; when the yang of Three Nines‘? expands, it’s both dark and obscure. In accord with the four seasons | gather herbs; by nine cylindrical tums my elixir's 
perfected. Astride the blue phoenix, | ascend the purple mansion; mounting the white crane, | reach the capital of jade where | join all Heaven’s luminaries in zealous display of the wondrous Way. 
Could this be compared with the quiescence of your religion, the dark divinity of your tranquillity? The stinking corpse bequeathed by Extinguishment that can never leave the mortal dust? Of the Three 
Religions mine’s the highest mystery, Dao’s alone noble since the dawn of history!”"4 

On hearing this, the king was filled with delight while the officials of the entire court shouted, “Bravo! Indeed, Dao alone is noble since the dawn of history! Dao alone is noble since the dawn of history!” 
When the elder saw that everyone had praise for the Daoist, he was terribly embarrassed. The king, nevertheless, asked the Court of Imperial Entertainments to prepare a vegetarian meal so that the 
priest from distant lands could eat before he departed again for the West. 

Tripitaka gave thanks as he withdrew; he descended from the main hall and was just about to walk out when Pilgrim flew down from his hat and whispered in his ear: “Master, this royal dad-in-law is a 
perverse fiend, and the king is under his influence. You go back first to the postal station to wait for the meal. Let old monkey remain here to learn something more of him.” Tripitaka understood and 
left, and we'll leave him for the moment. 

Look at our Pilgrim! He soared up and alighted on one of the kingfisher screens in the Hall of Golden Chimes, when the Commander of Five Military Commissions stepped from the ranks to say, “My 
lord, there was a gust of cold wind last night which swept away without a trace, all the little boys lodged in the geese coops in front of the houses.” 

When the king heard this memorial, he was both frightened and angered. “This means,” said he to the royal dad-in-law, “that Heaven wants to destroy us! We've been sick for months, and the imperial 
physician has been wholly ineffectual. It was fortunate that the royal dad-in-law has bestowed on us a divine prescription. We're just waiting for the noon hour today to lift the knife and take out these 
boys’ hearts and use them as our medical supplement. How could they all be swept away by a gust of cold wind? What explanation could there be other than that Heaven wanted to destroy us?” 

With a smile, the royal dad-in-law said, “Your Majesty, please do not worry. The fact that these boys have been swept away means quite the contrary; this is precisely a gift of long life that Heaven is 
sending to Your Majesty.” 

“How could you say that,” asked the king, “when those boys in the coops have all been blown away?” 

“When | entered court just now,” replied the royal dad-in-law, “I noticed an absolutely marvellous medical supplement, far surpassing those one thousand one hundred and eleven young boys’ hearts. 
Those hearts could only lengthen your life for about a millennium. But taken with the newfound supplement, my divine medicine will lengthen your Majesty's life for thousands and thousands of years.” 
Since the king however, did not understand at all what medical supplement the Daoist was referring to, he pressed for an explanation. Then the royal dad-in-law said, “I’ve noticed that the monk who 
has been sent by the Land of the East to seek scriptures is possessed of pure and orderly features. They reveal that he has in fact a true body which has practiced religion for at least ten disciples, and 
that he has been a monk since childhood. He is, in truth, someone who has never dissipated his original yang, someone ten thousand times better than all those little boys put together. If you can get 
his heart to make soup and take my divine medicine, you'll certainly acquire the age of ten millennia.” 

Believing completely what he had heard, the befuddled ruler said, “Why didn’t you tell us sooner? If it had that kind of efficacy, I'd have detained him just now and not let him go.” 

“But that’s not difficult!” said the royal dad-in-law. “Just now the Court of Imperial Entertainments was told to prepare a vegetarian meal for him. He will undoubtedly eat first before leaving the city. Issue 
an edict right now for all the city gates to be closed. Call up the troops, have the Golden Pavilion Postal Station surrounded, and tell them to bring back the monk. First, ask for his heart politely. If he 
agrees, cut him up and take it out at once. You may promise him an imperial burial and a shrine erected in his honour, so that he may enjoy perpetual sacrifice. If he does not comply with your request, 
we'll show him the ugly power of force. Tie him up at once, and then cut out his heart. Isn’t that easy?” The befuddled ruler indeed followed his suggestion; he gave the decree at once that the city 
gates should be shut. The imperial guards and their captains were sent to have the postal station surrounded. 

When Pilgrim heard this, he spread his wings and darted back to the postal station and changed back to his true form to say to the Tang Monk, “Master, disaster! Disaster!” Tripitaka was just enjoying 
the imperial banquet with 8 Rules and Sand-monk. These sudden words so terrified him that the spirits of Three Cadavers left him and smoke poured out of his seven apertures. He fell to the ground 
at once, his body covered with sweat. All he could do was roll his eyeballs; he could not utter a word. Sand-monk hurried forward to take hold of him, crying, “Master, wake up! Master, wake up!” 
“What disaster? What disaster?” asked 8 Rules. “Speak slowly, will you please! Must you frighten Master like that?” 

“Since Master left the court,” replied Pilgrim, “old monkey stayed behind and ascertained that that royal dad-in-law was indeed a monster-spirit. Soon afterward, the Commander of Five Military 
Commissions reported that the cold wind had blown away the little boys. The king was frustrated but the Daoist told him to be happy instead, saying that it was actually Heaven’s gift of long life to him. 
He wanted to ask for Master's heart to be the medical supplement, something he claimed would grant the king an age of ten millennia. Believing such a perverse suggestion, the befuddled ruler called 
up his troops to come and surround the postal station. Moreover, the Embroidered-uniform Guards have been sent here to ask for Master's heart.” 

“You've exercised marvellous compassion!” said 8 Rules with a laugh. “You've saved marvellous boys! You've called up marvellous cold wind! But this time you've also brought disaster on us!” 
Trembling all over, Tripitaka scrambled up to tug at Pilgrim and plead with him, “O worthy disciple! How will we face this?” 

“If you want to face this,” said Pilgrim, “the old must become the young.” 

“What do you mean by that?” asked Sand-monk. Pilgrim said, “If you want to preserve your life, the master will have to become the disciple, and the disciple will have to become the master.” 

“If you can save my life,” said Tripitaka, “I’m willing to be your disciple and grand disciple.” 

“In that case,” said Pilgrim, “no need to hesitate any longer. 8 Rules, hurry and get me some mud.” Idiot immediately used his muckrake to rake up some dirt; not daring however, to go outside to fetch 
water, he hitched up his clothes instead and pissed on the ground. With the urine he managed to mix a lump of stinking mud that he handed to Pilgrim. Pilgrim, too, had little alternative but to flatten 
the mud and press it on his own face and, after a little while, succeeded in making an apelike mask. Asking the Tang Monk to stand up but without uttering another word, Pilgrim pasted the mask on 
his master’s face and recited a magic spell. He then blew his mortal breath onto the mask, crying, “Change!” 

At once the elder took on the appearance of Pilgrim. He was told to take off his own garments and switch clothes with Pilgrim who made the magic sign and then recited another spell to change into 
the form of the Tang Monk. The 2 of them looked so alike their own true selves that even 8 Rules and Sand-monk could not distinguish them. As soon as they finished dressing, they heard the sounds 
of gongs and drums and saw a forest of scimitars and lances approaching. The captains of the imperial guards had arrived with three thousand troops to have the postal station surrounded. Then an 
Embroidered-uniform guard walked into the courtyard to ask, “Where is the elder from the Tang court in the Land of the East?” 

Shaking and quaking, the station master went to his knees and said, pointing with his finger, “In one of those guest rooms down there.” 

The guard walked to the guest room and said, “Elder Tang, my king invites you to the palace.” 

While 8 Rules and Sand-monk stood on two sides to guard the false Pilgrim, the false Tang Monk came out the door and saluted saying, “Sir Embroidered-uniform, what does His Majesty have to say 
when he asks for this poor cleric?” 

Rushing forward to grab him, the guard replied, “I'll go with you into court. He must've some use for you.” Also so it is that fiendish lies triumph over compassion; compassion’s met instead with violence. 


095 

He meets Long Life, searching the cave for the fiend; the proper lord of the court sees the babies' 
The Embroidered-uniform Guard yanked the spurious Tang Monk out of the postal station. At once the imperial guards had them surrounded before they all headed for the gate of the court. There they 
said to the Custodian of the Yellow Gate: “We've brought the Tang Monk here. Please report this for us.” 
The custodian sent in the memorial hurriedly, and the befuddled king sent for the guest at once. While all the officials knelt down at the foot of the steps to salute the king, the spurious Tang Monk stood 
erect at the centre of the steps and shouted, “King Beggar, why did you ask this humble cleric to come?” 
With a smile, the king said, “An illness has afflicted us for many days and no cure has been found. Fortunately, our royal dad-in-law has bestowed on us a prescription for which all the medicines have 
been prepared. All we need now is one particular supplement that we must seek from you. If we're cured of our illness, we promise that we'll build a shrine for the elder. You'll enjoy sacrifices in all four 
seasons and perpetual incense fires of the state.” 
“Im a person who has left the family,” replied the spurious Tang Monk. “I came here with hardly any possessions on me. Would Your Majesty please ask the royal dad-in-law what sort of thing he wants 
of me for the medical supplement?” 
“What we need,” said the befuddled king, “is the heart of the elder.” 
The spurious Tang Monk said, “To tell you the truth, Your Majesty, I’ve quite a few hearts. Which colour or shape would you like?” 
“Priest,” said the royal dad-in-law who was standing on one side, pointing with his finger, “we want your black heart.” 


“In that case,” said the spurious Tang Monk, “bring me the knife quickly, so that | may cut open my chest. If I've a black heart, I'll be pleased to present it to you.” Delighted, the befuddled king thanked 
him and asked the attendant to the throne to hand the spurious monk a curved dagger. Taking the dagger, the monk untied his robe and stuck out his chest. As he rubbed his belly with his left hand, 
he plunged the dagger into himself with his right hand and with a loud ripping noise, tore open his own chest. A mass of hearts rolled out, so terrifying the onlookers that the civil officials paled in fright 
and the military officers turned numb. When he saw that, the royal dad-in-law said in the hall, “This is a monk of many hearts!”2 

The spurious monk took those bloody hearts and manipulated them one by one for all to see: a red heart, a white heart, a yellow heart, an avaricious heart, a greedy heart, an envious heart, a petty 
heart, a competitive heart, an ambitious heart, a scornful heart, a murderous heart, a vicious heart, a fearful heart, a cautious heart, a perverse heart, a nameless obscure heart, and all kinds of wicked 
hearts. There was however, not one single black heart! 

That befuddled king was so stupefied that he could hardly utter a word. Trembling all over, he could only mutter: “Take them away! Take them away!” Unable to hold back any longer, the spurious Tang 
Monk retrieved his magic. As he changed back into his original form, he said to the befuddled ruler, “Your Majesty, you've no perception whatever. In priests like us there are only good hearts but your 
dad-in-law is the one who has a black heart that can be used as the medical supplement. If you don’t believe me, let me take it out for you to see.” 

On hearing this, that royal dad-in-law opened his eyes wide to take a careful look, and he saw that the monk had quite changed his appearance. He no longer looked the same. Aha! He recognised the 
Great Sage Sun of old who had great fame 5 centuries ago. Swirling around, he mounted the clouds to rise up, only to be blocked by Pilgrim who bounded into the air with one somersault. “Where’re 
you running to?” he bellowed. “Have a taste of my rod!” 

The royal dad-in-law wielded his coiled-dragon staff to meet his adversary, and the two of them began a marvellous battle in mid-air. The compliant rod, the coiled-dragon staff spread out the clouds to 
fill the airy void. The dad-in-law, a monster-spirit claimed for his fiendish daughter beauteous looks. The ruler’s indulgence brought him disease; the monster wanted to slaughter young boys. The Great 
Sage came to show his magic might: he seized the fiend and saved the populace. The iron rod aimed fiercely at the head was met by a praiseworthy crooked staff. They fought till a sky full of mist 
darkened the city, each member of the households paled with fright; till souls of all officials left in flight, all palace girls and consorts changed their looks. They frightened Beggar's muddled ruler into 
frantic hiding and violent trembling, not knowing what to do. The rod rose like a tiger springing from the mount; the staff soared like a dragon breaking from the sea. Now this great disturbance at Beggar 
state would make distinct the righteous and perverse. That monster-spirit fought bitterly with Pilgrim for some twenty rounds but the coiled-dragon staff was no match for the golden-hooped rod. After 
one half-hearted blow, the royal dad-in-law changed into a cold beam of light and sped into the inner chamber of the palace to pick up the fiendish queen whom he had presented as a tribute to the 
king. Both of them changed into cold beams of light and vanished at once. Dropping down from the clouds, Pilgrim went to the palace to say to the various officials, “You people have some royal dad- 
in-law!” The officials all began to salute to give thanks to the divine monk. “Stop saluting,” said Pilgrim. “See where your befuddled lord’s gone.” 

“When our lord saw the fight,” one of the officials replied, “he was driven by fear into hiding. We've no idea which palace he has gone to.” 

“Search for him quickly!” commanded Pilgrim. “Don’t let Queen Beauty abduct him.” When they heard these words, the officials did not care whether they were permitted to enter the inner chambers or 
not. Together with Pilgrim they headed straight for the room of Queen Beauty but not a trace of the king could be found. Even Queen Beauty herself had disappeared. Meanwhile, the queen, the girl’s 
consort of the Eastern Palace, the consort of the Western Palace, and the concubines of the Six Chambers all came to salute to give thanks to the Great Sage. 

“Please rise, all of you,” said the Great Sage. “It’s not time for you to thank me yet. Let’s go find your lord first.” In a little while they saw four or five eunuchs support the befuddled ruler walking out from 
behind the Hall of Careful Conduct.* Saluting themselves on the ground, the various officials said in unison, “Our lord! Our lord! We're indebted to the divine monk who came to distinguish for us the 
true from the false. That royal dad-in-law is a perverse fiend. Even Queen Beauty has disappeared.” When the king heard that, he immediately asked Pilgrim to leave the inner palace and go to the 
treasure hall with him. “Elder,” he said, as he saluted to Pilgrim to thank him, “when you arrived this morning, you looked so handsome. How is it that you’ve changed your appearance now?” 

“To tell you the truth, Your Majesty, the person who came here this morning was my master,” replied Pilgrim, laughing. “He is Tripitaka, the bond-brother of the Tang court, and I’m Sun Wukong, his 
disciple. I've two other younger brothers - Bullseye Aware of Ability and Sand Awakened to Purity - who are now at the Golden Pavilion Postal Station. Because we knew that you believed in the 
monstrous suggestion and wanted my master’s heart for medical supplement, old monkey changed into his appearance to come here especially to subdue the fiend.” On hearing this, the king at once 
commanded one of the chief ministers of the Grand Secretariat to go to the postal station and fetch the master and his disciples. 

By this time Tripitaka had learned that Pilgrim who had changed back to his original form, was trying to subdue the fiend in mid-air. The elder was frightened out of his wits, and it was fortunate that 8 
Rules and Sand-monk were by his sides to support him. But he was still depressed by that lump of stinking mud that he had to wear on his face. It was then that he heard someone calling, “Master of 
the Law, we're the chief ministers of the Grand Secretariat sent by the king of the Beggar state. We're here especially to invite you to court so that you may receive our thanks.” 

“Master, don’t be afraid! Don’t be afraid!” said 8 Rules, grinning. “They are not inviting you so that they can demand your heart. | think Elder Brother must have won, and they want to thank you.” 

“That may well be the case,” replied Tripitaka, “but how can | face people with this stinking face?” 

“You've no choice,” said 8 Rules. “Let’s go see Elder Brother first, and we'll find a solution.” That elder indeed had little choice but to follow 8 Rules and Sand-monk who toted the luggage and led the 
horse out into the courtyard. When the chief minister caught sight of them, he was aghast, crying, “Holy Dad! What a bunch of goblins and monsters!” 

“Minister, please don’t be offended by our ugliness,” said Sand-monk. “We're born this way. But when my master sees my elder brother, he'll become handsome.” 

When the three of them arrived at court, they did not wait for the summons but walked right up to the hall. The moment Pilgrim saw them, he ran down the steps and pulled the lump of mud from his 
master’s face. Blowing his mortal breath on him, Pilgrim cried “Change!” and the Tang Monk at once assumed his original form, feeling more energetic and spirited than before. Meanwhile, the king 
himself descended the steps to meet them, addressing the Tang Monk as “Venerable God, Master of the Law.” After master and disciples had tethered the horse, they all went up to the hall to exchange 
greetings. 

“Your Majesty,” said Pilgrim, “do you happen to know where that fiend came from? Let old monkey go there and seize him, so that any evil consequence will be eliminated.” When all those palace 
ladies and concubines standing behind the kingfisher screens heard Pilgrim speaking of eliminating any evil consequence, they ignored the observance of proper etiquette between men and women 
and all walked out together to salute him saying, “We beg the divine monk, the venerable God, to exercise his mighty magic power. Please pull the grass up by the root and exterminate him thoroughly. 
For this profound act of kindness we'll repay you handsomely.” 

Returning their salutes hurriedly, Pilgrim pressed the king for the address of the Daoist. Somewhat abashed, the king spoke up: “When he arrived three years ago, we did question him, and he told us 
that he lived not too far from here, in Pure Florescence Village on the Willow Slope south of the city some seventy miles away. Though the royal dad-in-law was aged, he had no son, only a daughter 
by his second wife. Having just turned sixteen, she had not been betrothed to anyone, and he was willing to present her as a tribute to us. Since we loved the girl, we accepted her and took her in as a 
palace consort. Then we're afflicted by illness that the repeated efforts of the imperial physician could not alleviate. The royal dad-in-law told us that he had a divine formula that required the hearts of 
young boys to make soup for supplement. It was our folly to have believed in his words so readily. The boys were selected, and the noon hour today in fact was to be the appointed time for their hearts 
to be gouged out. Little did we anticipate that the divine monk would descend to our realm. When we discovered that the boys in the coops had disappeared, he convinced us that the divine monk who 
had practiced the cultivation of realised mortality for ten disciples, had never permitted his original yang to dissipate. If we'd acquire his heart, he said, it would be ten thousand times better than the 
hearts of the little boys. That was the reason for our misguided affront offered to you. We didn’t know that the divine monk would recognise the fiendish demon. We beseech you to exercise your vast 
magic power and eliminate all evil consequences, for which we'll thank you with the wealth of a nation.” 

“To tell you the honest truth,” said Pilgrim smiling, “those boys in the coops were hidden by me on the merciful request of my master. Don’t speak of repaying us with any wealth or riches. When I’ve 
caught the fiend, that'll be my merit.” He then called out: “Eight Rules, follow me quickly!” 

“Im glad to obey you, Elder Brother,” replied 8 Rules, “but my stomach’s so empty | can hardly exert myself.” 

The king immediately asked the Court of Imperial Entertainments to prepare a vegetarian meal that soon arrived. After he had eaten his fill, 8 Rules roused himself and mounted the clouds to rise into 
the air with Pilgrim. The king, the queens, and all those civil and military officials were so taken aback that they fell to their knees and respected to the sky, all crying, “True mortals, true Gods have 
descended to earth!” The Great Sage took 8 Rules straight to a place some seventy miles south of the city where they stopped the wind and cloud to look for the fiend’s dwelling. All they could see 
however, was a clear brook flanked by thousands of willows on both sides but the Pure Florescence Village was nowhere to be found. Truly acres of wild paddies, an endless sight; banks of misty 
willows but no human trace. After the Great Sage Sun had searched in vain for the fiend, he made the magic sign and recited the mortal word Ohm with which he at once summoned into his presence 
the local spirit. Trembling all over, the deity drew near to kneel down, saying, “Great Sage, the local spirit of Willow Slope respects to you.” 

“Don’t be frightened,” said Pilgrim, “for I’m not going to beat you. I've a question for you instead. This Pure Florescence Village of Willow Slope where is it?” 

“There is here a Pure Florescence Cave,” replied the local spirit, “but no Pure Florescence Village. This humble deity now perceives that the Great Sage perhaps has come here from the Beggar 
Kingdom?” 

“Yes, yes!” said Pilgrim. “The Beggar king had been duped by a monster-spirit but old monkey recognised the fiend when | reached the city. When that fiend was defeated by me in battle, he changed 
into a cold beam of light and vanished. | asked the Beggar king who told us that he did inquire after the fiend’s residence three years ago when he presented a beautiful girl as tribute. The fiend claimed 
then that he used to live in the Pure Florescence Village on Willow Slope, some seventy miles south of the city. Just now | searched my way here and all | saw was the slope. Since | didn’t find any 
village, | thought I'd ask you.” 

“May the Great Sage pardon me!” said the local spirit, respecting. “Since the Beggar king’s after all also the lord of this land, it’s the proper duty of this humble deity to take note of his plight. But the 
monster-spirit’s vast magic powers; once | betray his secret, he'll come and oppress me. That's why he’s not been brought to justice. Now that the Great Sage has arrived, all you need do is to go up 
to a willow tree with nine branches at the south bank of the brook. Circle around the trunk three times from left to right and then three more times from right to left. Lean on the trunk with both hands 
and call three times: Open the door. The Pure Florescence Cave will appear.” 

On hearing this, the Great Sage dismissed the local spirit before leaping over the brook with 8 Rules to continue their search. Soon they found the tree that had indeed nine stems forking out from a 
single trunk. Pilgrim gave this instruction to 8 Rules: “Stand still at a distance and let me call the door open. When | find the fiend and chase him out here, you may back me up.” 

8 Rules agreed and stood about a quarter mile away. Following the words of the local spirit, Great Sage circled the trunk three times from left to right and 3 times right to left; leaning with both hands 
on the tree, he cried, “Open the door! Open the door! Open the door!” 

Instantly 2 leaves of a door opened with a loud creak while the tree vanished entirely from sight. The inside was lit up by bright, luminous mists but again there was no hint of any human inhabitant. 
Rousing his magic powers, Pilgrim dashed into the cave, and he discovered a nice place indeed: mist and smoke luminous; oblique rays of the sun and moon; white clouds that often leave the cave; 
green moss that densely coats the yard. A path full of strange blossoms vying for glamour; a step full of rare grasses most luxuriant. Warm, temperate air makes perpetual spring. The place seems like 
Lang-Yuan; ‘it’s no worse than Peng and Ying. ‘Long creepers spread over smooth benches; tousled vines dangle from a flat bridge. Bees, red stamens in their mouths, come to the cave; butterflies, 
playing with orchids, pass a rock screen. With big strides, Pilgrim dashed forward to take a careful look, and he saw four big words etched on the rock screen: Pure Florescence Mortal Residence. 
Unable to restrain himself, he leaped around the screen to look further, and there he saw the old fiend hugging a beautiful girl to his bosom. Both panting hard, they were in the midst of discussing the 
affairs of the Beggar Kingdom. “What a marvellous opportunity!” they said together. “Something we've been planning for three years and it'd have been completed today but it’s ruined by that ape-head 
now!” 

Darting up to them, Pilgrim whipped out his rod and cried, “You bunch of hairy lumps! What marvellous opportunity? Have a taste of my rod!” 

Abandoning his beauty, the old fiend picked up his coiled-dragon staff hurriedly to meet him. The two of them began another fierce battle in front of the cave that was quite different from the one before. 
The upraised rod beamed golden light; the wielded staff belched viciousness. The fiend said, “You fool! How dare you barge inside my door?” 

Pilgrim said, “I intend to subdue a fiend!” 

The fiend said, “My tie to the king’s not your concern. For what reason must you come oppress me?” 

Pilgrim said, “The priest's vocation is on mercy based. We can’t bear seeing young boys put to death.” 

Their words went back and forth, each full of hate. The staff met the rod, they aimed at the heart. They snapped strange flowers, watching for their lives; kicked up lichens as they slipped and slid. They 
fought till the cave’s bright mists had lost their glow, the ledge’s fine blossoms all collapsed. The big-bangs grounded the birds in fear; their shouting scared the beauty into flight. Only the old fiend and 
the Monkey King remained as violent gusts of wind howled through the earth. They fought on and on till they left the cave when Aware of Ability aroused his moronic might. 8 Rules was standing 
outside; when he heard them brawling inside, he became so excited that he could hardly contain himself. Whipping out his muckrake, he knocked down the willow tree with 9 branches with 1 terrific 
blow. As he raked the fallen trunk some more, fresh blood sprouted from the root and it emitted a sort of moaning sound. “This tree's become a spirit!” said 8 Rules. “This tree’s become a spirit!” 

He lifted his rake and was about to bring it down again when he saw Pilgrim emerging with the fiend. Without a word Idiot rushed forward and attacked with the rake. The old fiend was already finding 
it difficult to withstand Pilgrim; the sight of 8 Rules’ rake therefore completely unnerved him. Turning to flee, he shook his body once and changed into a cold beam of light to head for the east. Unwilling 


to let up at all, the 2 of them instantly gave chase. As they shouted to close in for the kill, they suddenly heard the calls of phoenix and crane and saw the glow of auspicious luminosity. Then they 
caught sight of the Aged Star of South Pole who had held down the cold beam of light. “Slow down, Great Sage,” he cried, “and stop chasing Heavenly Reeds. This old Daoist salutes you!” 

“Brother Aged Star,” said Pilgrim, returning his greeting, “where’ve you come from?” 

With a chuckle, 8 Rules said, “You blubbery codger! Since you've held down the cold beam of light, you must've caught the fiend.” 

“He’s here, he’s here,” replied the Aged Star, smiling back at him. “I hope the two of you'll spare his life.” 

“That old fiend’s unrelated to you, old Brother,” said Pilgrim. “Why are you speaking up for him?” 

“He happens to be my beast of burden,” replied the Aged Star with a smile, “and sneaked here to turn into a fiend.” 

“If he’s a creature of yours,” said Pilgrim, “ask him to change back to his true form for us to see.” 

When he heard this, the Aged Star released the cold beam of light and shouted, “Cursed beast! Show your true form quickly and we'll pardon your mortal offence!” Rolling over, the fiend at once 
revealed himself as a white deer. “This cursed beast!” said the Aged Star as he picked up the staff. “He’s even managed to steal my staffl” 

Salute on the ground, the white deer could not utter a word; all he did was respect and shed tears. See his whole body striped like a token of jade, 2 up-thrust horns like 7 jagged blades. In hunger he 
would the herb garden seek and drink in thirst from the cloud-swollen creek. Aged, he had the power of flight attained, and over the years a face that changed he gained. When he at this time hears 
his master’s call, he will show his form and in submission fall. After the Aged Star had thanked Pilgrim, he mounted the deer to leave, only to be grabbed by Pilgrim. “Old Brother,” he said, “please don’t 
leave yet. There are two unfinished matters.” 

“What sort of unfinished matters?” asked the Aged Star. 

Pilgrim said, “We've yet to catch the beautiful girl who must be some kind of fiendish creature and must return together to report to that befuddled ruler of the Beggar kingdom.” 

“If you put it that way,” said the Aged Star, “I'll be patient and wait a while. You and Heavenly Reeds go inside the cave and capture the beautiful girl. Then we can go together to let the king see these 
creatures in their true forms.” 

“Just wait a moment, old Brother,” said Pilgrim, “we’ll be back soon.” 

Arousing his spirit, 8 Rules followed Pilgrim into the Pure Florescence Divine Residence, both shouting, “Catch the monster-spirit! Catch the monster-spirit!” 

The beautiful girl was still shaking so violently that she could hardly think of fleeing; when she heard the shouts, she dashed behind the rock screen but there was no back door for her to leave through. 
“Where’re you going?” roared 8 Rules. “Watch my rake, you stinking, man-deceiving spirit!” 

As the beautiful girl did not even have a weapon in her hand, she could only step aside and change at once into a cold beam of light to try to flee. She was however, met by the Great Sage who 
slammed his rod down hard on the beam. Immediately the fiend tumbled to the ground and revealed her true form: that of a white-faced vixen. Unable to hold back his hands, Idiot raised his rake and 
gave her head a terrific blow. Alas! The smile that shakes a city and a state into a hairy, lumpish fox is made! “Don’t mash her up!” cried Pilgrim. “Leave her body for that befuddled ruler to see.” 

Not bothered by the filth, Idiot took her by the tail and yanked her body along to follow Pilgrim out the door. The Aged Star at that moment was just rubbing the deer’s head and scolding him. “Dear 
cursed beast!” he cried. “How could you turn your back on your master and come here to be a spirit? If I'd not arrived, you’d have been struck to death by the Great Sage Sun.” 

“What are you saying, old Brother?” asked Pilgrim as he bounded out. “Just instructing the deer! Just instructing the deer!” replied the Aged Star. Throwing the dead vixen in front of the deer, 8 Rules 
asked, “Is this your daughter?” Nodding his head a few times, the deer stretched out his muzzle to sniff her and bleated several times, as if he could not bear parting with the vixen. He was given a 
whack on the head by the Aged Star who said, “Cursed beast! Isn’t it enough that you got your life? Why smell her?” He then untied the sash of his robe and fastened it around the neck of the deer to 
drag him along. “Great Sage,” he said, “I'll go see the Beggar king with you.” 

“Just a moment!” replied Pilgrim. “We might as well clean out the inside first, so that this place will not breed any more monstrosity in the years to come.” When he heard this, 8 Rules lifted up his rake 
and showered blows on the willow trunk. Pilgrim recited again the magic word Ohm to summon the local spirit, to whom he gave this instruction: “Find me some dried wood and make a good fire. I’m 
trying to rid this place of monstrous calamity, so that you may be spared from any further oppression.” Turning round, the local spirit mounted gusts of cold winds with his ghostly troops to gather some 
frost-receiving grass, autumn-green grass, smartweeds, mountain-bud grass, dried southernwood, dried dragon-bones, and dried rushes — all withered plants that had been parched for more than a 
year and that could feed a fire like oil or fat. “Eight Rules,” Pilgrim cried, “no need to take the tree. Just stuff these things into the cave and light the fire. We'll destroy the place.” As soon as the fire 
started, it did indeed turn the Pure Florescence monster residence into a flaming pit. 

He then dismissed the local spirit before returning to face the king in the royal hall, accompanied by the Aged Star leading the deer and 8 Rules dragging the dead vixen. Pilgrim said to the king, “Here’s 
your Queen Beauty! You want to dally with her some more?” The bladder of the king quivered and his heart shook, and then his queens and consorts were all frightened into saluting by the sight of the 
Aged Star leading the white deer. Pilgrim went forward to raise up the king, saying to him with a chuckle, “Don’t salute me. Here’s your dad-in-law. You’d salute him!” 

Terribly embarrassed, the king could only murmur, “I thank the divine monk’s Heavenly grace for saving the boys of my nation.” He at once ordered the Court of Imperial Entertainments to prepare a 
huge vegetarian banquet. The East Hall was opened wide so that the Old Man of South Pole, the Tang Monk, and his three disciples could be seated to receive proper thanks. After Tripitaka and Sand- 
monk saluted to greet the Aged Star, they both asked, “If the white deer belonged to the Venerable Aged Star, how could it get here to harm people?” 

The Aged Star answered, smiling, “Sometime ago the Supreme Ruler of the East”? passed by my mountain and | asked him to stay for chess. Hardly we’d finished 1 game when this cursed beast ran 
away. When we’d not find him after the guest’s departure, | calculated by bending my fingers and realised that he’d come to this place. | came to search for him and ran into the Great Sage just in the 
process of demonstrating his power. If I'd come a little later, this beast would've been finished.” Hardly had he spoken when the report came that the banquet was ready. Marvellous vegetarian banquet! 
The doorways decked with 5 colours; the seats full of strange fragrance; tables draped with glowing brocade damask; floors spread with luminous red carpets. From duck-shaped urns curled smoke of 
sandalwood incense; before the royal table came the fresh scent of vegetables. Look at the fruit crouque-en-bouche on the dish, the sweet pastries shaped like dragons or beasts. Mandarin-duck cakes 
and lion candies all looked so real; the parrot goblet and the egret handle all seemed lifelike. Every fruit item on display was rich; every maigre dish on the table was fine. Robustly round chestnuts, 
fresh lychees and peaches; dates and persimmons with the sweetest flavour; pine-seed and grape juices of the mellowest scent. Several kinds of honey-glazed food and a few steamed pastries. Viands 
deep-fried or sugar-coated made like blossoms or brocade. Huge buns piled high on golden trays; fragrant rice filled many silver bowls. Hot and spicy - the long rice noodles cooked in soup; potently 
scented — one bowl or dish after another. 1 could not describe all the mushrooms, yhe wood ears, the tender shoots, the Yellow Sperms; vegetables of 10 varieties and 100 rare delicacies. Presented 
back and forth without a pause were all kinds, all species of rich fare. At the time, they took their seats according to rank: the Aged Star occupied the head table while the elder remained next to him. 
The king went to the table in front. Pilgrim, 8 Rules, and Sand-monk sat on one side. There were 3 other chief ministers on both sides to keep them company. As the Office of Poems was told to begin 
the serenade, the king held up his purple-mist cup to toast each person in turn though the Tang Monk was the only one who did not drink. 8 Rules then said to Pilgrim, “Elder Brother, I'll leave the fruits 
to you but you must let us enjoy rice, soup, and the rest.” 

Without regard for good or ill, that Idiot attacked the foodstuff madly and ate it up in no time at all. After the banquet was over, the Aged Star got up to leave but the king went forward to kneel to him to 
beg for a method that would eliminate illness and lengthen his years. With a smile the Aged Star said, “I was looking for my deer and brought along no elixir or herbs. I'd have liked to impart to you the 
formula for cultivation but your tendons have so deteriorated and spirit’s been so impaired that it'd be impossible for you to accomplish the reversion of the elixir.6 In my sleeve here’re however, three 
fire dates that’re the presents of the Supreme Ruler of the East for my tea. I've not eaten them yet and I'd like to give them to you now.” 

After the king had swallowed the dates, he felt as if a great weight had been lifted gradually from his body as his illness receded. In fact, the longevity those descendants of his later attained might be 
traced to this. When 8 Rules saw that the king had received such a gift, he cried out, “Old Age, if you’ve anymore fire dates, give me some, too.” 

“I've brought no more along,” replied the Aged Star. “Another day I'll send you a few pounds.” 

He walked out of the East Hall, and having thanked his host once more, he ordered the white deer to stand up and leaped onto its back. They both rose immediately into the air and left treading on the 
clouds. The ruler, his consorts, and the populace of the city all saluted to the ground and burned incense. Then Tripitaka said, “Disciples, start packing so that we may take leave of the king.” The king 
however, begged them to stay and instruct him. “Your Majesty,” said Pilgrim, “from now on you must lessen your sensual pursuits and increase instead your unpublicized good deeds. In all affairs you'd 
allow your strength to compensate for your weakness, and you'll find that this is quite sufficient to stave off sickness and lengthen your life. Such is the instruction I’ve for you.” 

Thereafter the king also presented them with two trays of gold and silver pieces as travel money but the Tang Monk refused to accept even a penny. The king had no alternative but to send for his 
imperial cortege and asked the Tang Monk to be seated on the phoenix carriage in the dragon chariot. He and his consorts all put their hands on the carriage and pushed it out of the court. At the same 
time, all the main boulevards were lined with citizens who added pure water to their sacrificial vases and true incense in the urns to send the pilgrims out of the city. Just then a roar of the wind from 
mid-air brought down to both sides of the road one thousand, one hundred and eleven geese coops with some crying young boys inside. The local spirit, city god, god of the soil, mortal officials, the 
Guardians of 5 Quarters, the 4 Sentinels, the 6 Gods of Darkness, 6 Gods of Light, and the guardians of monasteries who gave secret protection to the children all announced in a loud voice: “Great 
Sage, you told us previously to take away these boys in the geese coops. Now that your merit’s been achieved and you're about to leave, we’ve brought them back one by one.” 

The king, the queens, and all the citizens saluted down as Pilgrim said to the air, “I thank you all for your help. Please return to your shrines and I'll ask the people to offer you their thanksgiving sacrifice.” 
Sighing and soughing, the gust of cold wind rose once more and then quickly subsided. When Pilgrim then asked the households of the city to come retrieve their children, the news was spread abroad 
at once and all the people came to identify and claim the boys in the coops. In great delight they were lifted out of the cages, hugged, and addressed as darling and precious. Jumping about and 
laughing, the people all shouted, “We must take hold of the Holy Dads of the Tang court and bring them back to our homes. We must thank them for this profound act of kindness!” And so the people 
went forward, young and old, male and female without the slightest fear of how ugly the pilgrims might look: they hauled Bullseye 8 Rules up bodily, they put Sand-monk on their shoulders, they 
supported the Great Sage Sun with their heads, and they lifted up Tripitaka with their hands. Leading the horse and toting the luggage, they surged back to the city; not even the king could restrain 
them. While one family gave a banquet, another prepared a feast; those who did not have time to take their turns made priestly caps and sandals, clerical robes and cloth stockings, and all manner of 
inner and outer garments to be presented as gifts. Indeed the pilgrims had to linger for nearly a month in that city before they could leave. Before their departure, the people also made portraits of them 
with their names inscribed on plaques below the pictures so that perpetual sacrifices and incense could be offered. Truly it was that this secret good deed weighty as a mount has saved 1100 lives. 


096 

The fair girl nursing the yang, seeks a mate; Mind Monkey guarding his master, knows a monster 
We're telling you about the Beggar king escorted the Tang Monk and his disciples out of the city along with his subjects; they journeyed for some 20 miles and still the king refused to turn back. At last 
Tripitaka insisted on leaving the imperial chariot and mounted the horse to take leave of the escorts who waited until the pilgrims were out of sight before returning to their own city. The 4 pilgrims 
travelled for some time until both winter and spring faded; there was no end to the sight of wildflowers and mountain trees, of lovely and luxuriant scenery. Then they saw in front of them a tall, rugged 
mountain. Growing alarmed, Tripitaka asked, “Disciples, there’s any road on that tall mountain ahead? We must be carefull” 
“Your words, Master,” said Pilgrim with a laugh, “hardly sound like those of a seasoned traveller! They seem more like those of a prince or nobleman who sits in a well and stares at the sky. As the 
ancient proverb says, a mountain doesn’t block a road for a road passes through a mountain. Why ask about whether there is any road or not?” 
“Perhaps the mountain does not block the road,” replied Tripitaka, “but | fear that such a treacherous region will breed some fiends or that monster-spirits will emerge from the depth of the mountain.” 
“Relax! Relax!” said 8 Rules. “This place probably isn’t too far from the region of ultimate bliss and it’s bound to be peaceful and safe.” 
As master and disciples were thus conversing, they soon reached the base of the mountain. Taking out his golden-hooped rod, Pilgrim went up a rocky ledge and called out: “Master, this is the way to 
go around the mountain. It’s quite walkable. Come quickly! Come quickly!” 
The elder had little choice but to banish his worry and urge the horse forward. “Second Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “you tote the luggage for a while.” 
8 Rules accordingly took over the pole while Sand-monk held on to the reins so that the old master could sit firmly on the carved saddle and follow Pilgrim on the main road as they headed for the 
mountain. What they saw on the mountain were cloud and mist shrouding the summit and rushing torrent in the brook; fragrant flowers clogging the road; 10000 trees both thick and dense; blue plums 
and white pears; green willows and red peaches. The cuckoo weeps for spring’s about to leave and swallows murmur to end the seedtime rites. ‘Rugged rocks; jade-top pines; a rough mountain path, 
bumpy and jagged; precipitous hanging cliffs with thickets of creepers and plants. 1000 peaks noble like halberd rows; through countless ravines a grand river flows. As the old master looked leisurely 
at this mountain scenery, the sound of a bird reciting filled him again with longing for home. He pulled the horse to a stop and called out, “Disciples! Since Heaven’s plaque? conveyed the royal decree, 
the rescript | took beneath brocaded screens. At Lantern Feast, the fifteenth, | left the East from Emperor Tang parted as Heaven from Earth. Just when dragons, tigers met with wind and cloud, master 
and pupils fell to horses and men. On all twelve summits of Mount Wu I’ve walked. When can | face my lord and see my king?” 


“Master,” said Pilgrim, “you're always so full of longing for home that you’re hardly like someone who’s left home. Just relax and keep moving! Stop worrying so much! As the ancients said: If wealth in 
life you wish to see, deadly eamest your work must be.” 

Tripitaka said, “What you say is quite right, disciple but | wonder how much more there’s of this road that leads to the Western Heaven!” 

“Master,” 8 Rules said, “it must be that our Siddhartha is unwilling to part with those three baskets of scriptures. Knowing that we want to acquire them, he must’ve moved. If not, why’s it that we just 
can’t reach our destination?” 

“Stop that foolish talk!” said Sand-monk. “Just follow Big Brother. Exert yourself and endure it. There'll be a day when we all arrive at our destination.” 

As master and disciples chatted in this manner, they came upon a huge, dark pine forest. Becoming frightened, the Tang Monk called out once more, “Wukong, we've just passed through a rugged 
mountain path. Why’s it that we must face this deep, dark pine forest? We must be on guard.” 

“What's there to be afraid of?” asked Pilgrim. 

Tripitaka replied, “Stop talking like that! As the proverb says, you don’t believe the honesty of the honest; you guard against the unkindness of the kind. You and I've gone through several pine forests 
but none was as deep and wide as this one. Just look at it! Densely spread out east and west — in thick columns north and south - densely spread out east and west it pierces the clouds; in thick 
columns north and south it invades the sky. Lush thistles and thorns are growing on all sides; creepers and weeds wind up and down the trunks. The vines entwine the tendrils — the tendrils entwine 
the vines — the vines entwine the tendrils to impede the east-west traveller; the tendrils entwine the vines to block the north-south trader. In this forest one may spend six months not knowing the 
seasons or walk a few miles without seeing the stars. Look at those thousand kinds of scenery on the shady side and ten thousand bouquets in the sunny part. There’re also the millennial locust tree, 
the mortal juniper, the cold-enduring pine, the mountain peach, the wild peony, the dry-land hibiscus — in layers and clumps they pile together so riotous that even gods can’t portray them. You hear 
also a hundred birds: the parrot's squeal; the cuckoo’s wail; the magpie darting through the branches; the crow feeding her parents; the oriole soaring and dancing; a hundred tongues making melody; 
a call of red partridges and the speech of purple swallows. The Mynah learns to speak like a human; even the grey thrush can read a Thread. You see a big creature? wagging its tail and a tiger grinding 
its teeth, too; an aged fox disguised as a lady, an old grey wolf growling through the woods. Even if the Deity-King Pagoda-Bearer comes here, he'll lose his wits though he can subdue a monster!” Not 
daunted in the least however, Great Sage Sun used his iron rod to open up a wide path and led the Tang Monk deep into the forest. Footloose and carefree, they proceeded for half a day but they had 
yet to reach the road leading out of the forest. The Tang Monk called out: “Disciples, our journey to the West's taken us through countless mountains and forests, all rather treacherous. This particular 
spot, I’m glad to say is quite nice and the road seems safe enough. The strange flowers and rare plants of this forest are certainly pleasing to behold. | want to sit for a while here — rest the horse and 
relieve my hunger — if you can go somewhere to beg us a vegetarian meal.” 

“Please dismount, Master,” said Pilgrim, “and I'll go beg the meal.” 

That elder indeed dismounted; as 8 Rules tethered the horse to a tree, Sand-monk put down his load of luggage and took out the alms-bowl to hand to Pilgrim. “Master,” said Pilgrim, “you may feel 
quite safe sitting here. Don’t be frightened. Old monkey will return shortly.” While Tripitaka sat solemnly in the pine shade, 8 Rules and Sand-monk amused themselves by going off to search for flowers 
and fruits. Great Sage somersaulted into mid-air. As he paused in his cloudy luminosity to look back, he saw that the pine forest was veiled by hallowed clouds and auspicious mists. So moved was he 
by the sight that he unwittingly blurted out, “Marvellous! Marvellous!” He said that because he was giving praise to the Tang Monk and recalling to himself the fact that his master was verily the disciple 
of the Elder Gold Cicada, a good man who has practiced austerities for 10 disciples. That was why his head was surrounded by such an auspicious halo. “Consider old monkey,” he thought to himself. 
“At the time when | brought great disturbance to the Celestial Palace five centuries ago, | toured with the clouds the four corners of the sea and roamed freely the edges of Heaven. | assembled various 
monster-spirits to call myself the Great Sage Equal to Heaven; taming the tiger and subduing the dragon, | even removed our names from the register of death. My head wore a triple-decker gold crown 
and my body a yellow gold cuirass; my hands held the golden-hooped rod and my feet were shod in cloud-treading shoes. Some forty-seven thousand fiends under my command all addressed me as 
Venerable Dad Great Sage and that’s some life | led. Now that I’m delivered from my Heaven-sent calamity, | must humble myself and serve this man as his disciple. But if my master’s head’s the 
protection of such hallowed clouds and auspicious mists, | suppose he'll end up with something good once he returns to the Land of the East and old monkey undoubtedly will also attain the right fruit.” 
As he thought to himself in this manner and gave praise to his master, he caught sight of a mass of black fumes boiling up from south of the forest. Greatly startled, Pilgrim said, “There must be 
something perverse in those black fumes! Our Eight Rules and Sand-monk can’t release black fumes like that...” 

In mid-air Great Sage at once tried to determine where those black fumes came from. Tripitaka was sitting in the forest with mind enlightened by the vision of a god-nature in all things. As he recited 
the Great Perfection of Transcendental Wisdom and Compassion Thread with utmost concentration, he suddenly heard a faint cry, “Save me! Save me!” 

“My goodness! My goodness!” said Tripitaka, highly astonished. “Who'd be crying out like that deep in the forest? It must be someone scared by tigers or wolves. Let me take a look.” Rising and striding 
forward, the elder went by the millennial cedars and the mortal pines; he climbed over creepers and vines to take a clear look. Tied to the trunk of a huge tree was a girl: the upper half of her body was 
bound by vines while the lower half of her body was buried in the ground. Stopping before her, the elder asked, “Nun, for what reason are you bound here?” Alas! She was clearly a monster but the 
elder, being of fleshly eyes and mortal stock, could not recognise her. When the fiend heard the question, she released a torrent of tears. Look at her! As tears dripped from her peach-like cheeks, she 
had features that would sink fishes and drop wild geese; as grief flashed from her star-like eyes, she had looks that would daunt the moon and shame the flowers. |n truth not daring to approach her, 
our elder asked again, “Nun, what possible crime could you've committed? Speak up so that this humble cleric may rescue you.” 

With clever, deceptive words, false, and specious sentiments, the monster-spirit replied hurriedly, “Master, my home’s located in the Bimbana Kingdom‘ some two hundred miles from here. My parents 
still living and exceedingly devoted to virtue, have in all their lives been kind to friends and peaceable toward relatives. As this is the time of Clear Brightness, they invited various kinfolk and the young 
and old of our family to sweep clean our ancestral graves and offer sacrifices to the dead. A whole row of carriages and horses went out into the desolate wilds. We'd just set up the sacrifices and 
finished burning paper money and horses when the sound of gongs and drums brought out a band of strong men wielding knives, waving staffs, and screaming to kill as they fell on us. We're scared 
out of our wits. My parents and my relatives managed to escape on horseback or in the carriages. Being so young and unable to run, | fell in terror to the ground and was abducted by these brigands. 
The Big Great King wanted me to be his mistress; the Second Great King desired me for his wife; the Third and the Fourth, too, admired my beauty. A heated quarrel thus began among some seventy 
or eighty of them, and when they could not resolve their anger, they had me tied up in the forest before they scattered. I’ve been here like this for five whole days and nights, and | expect my life will 
expire any moment. | don’t know which generation of my ancestors accumulated sufficient merit to acquire for me the good fortune this day of meeting the venerable master at this place. | beseech you 
in your great mercy to save my life. I'll never forget your kindness, even when | reach the Nine Springs of Hades!” 

When she finished speaking, her tears fell like rain. Always a merciful person, Tripitaka could not refrain from shedding tears himself. In a choking voice, he called out, “Disciples!” 

Our 8 Rules and Sand-monk were just searching for flowers and fruits in the forest when they suddenly heard the melancholy cry of their master. “Sand-monk,” said Idiot, “Master must've recognised 
one of his relatives here.” 

“You're drivelling, second elder brother!” said Sand-monk, laughing. “We've not met one good man after walking all this time. Where’d this relative come from?” 

“If it weren't a relative,” replied 8 Rules, “you think Master would be weeping with someone else? Let’s you and | go take a look.” 

Sand-monk agreed to go back to the original spot with him. As they drew near, leading the horse and toting the luggage, they said, “Master, what's up?” 

Pointing to the tree, the Tang Monk said, “Eight Rules, untie that nun over there so that we may save her life.” 

Without regard for good or ill, Idiot immediately proceeded to do so. The Great Sage in mid-air saw that the black fumes were growing thicker all the time until they had the auspicious luminosity 
completely covered. “That's bad! That’s bad!” he exclaimed. “When the black fumes have covered the auspicious luminosity, it may mean that some monstrous perversity’s harmed master. Begging for 
vegetarian food’s a small matter now. I'd better go see my master first.” 

Reversing the direction of his cloud, he dropped down into the forest where he found 8 Rules busily trying to untie the ropes. Pilgrim went forward, grabbed one of his ears, and flung him with a thud to 
the ground. As he raised his head to look and scramble up, Idiot said, “Master told me to rescue this person. Why did you've to strong-arm and give me this tumble?” 

“Brother, don’t untie her,” said Pilgrim with a laugh. “She’s a monster-spirit who’s using some jugglery to deceive us.” 

“You brazen ape!” snapped Tripitaka. “You’re babbling again! How'd you tell that this girl is a fiend?” 

“Master, you may have no idea about this,” replied Pilgrim, “but it’s the kind of business old monkey's done before. This is the way monster-spirits try to get human flesh to eat. How'd you know about 
that?” 

Pouting with his horn stuck out, 8 Rules said, “Master, don’t believe the lies of this Ban-Horse-Plague. This girl belongs to a family here whereas we came from the distant Land of the East. We're no 
acquaintances or kinfolk of hers. How could we say that she is a monster-spirit? He wants us to abandon her and go on our way so that he can use his magic and somersault back here to have a nice 
time with her. He wants to sneak in through the back door!” 

“Coolie, don’t you dare mouth such nonsense!” snapped Pilgrim. “During this journey to the West, since when has old monkey ever been slothful or unruly? I’m no miserable bum like you who loves 
sex more than life, and who will sell out his friends for a price. Remember how dumb you're when you’re deceived by that household's offer to take you in as a son-in-law and ended up being tied to a 
tree?” 

“All right! All right!” said Tripitaka. “Eight Rules, your elder brother has always been quite right in his perception. If he puts it that way, let’s not mind her. Let's leave.” 

“Marvellous!” said Pilgrim, highly pleased. “Master will be able to preserve his life. Please mount up. After we get out of the pine forest, I'll go to some household to beg you a vegetarian meal.” 

The four of them indeed abandoned the fiend and proceeded. Still bound to the tree, the fiend said to herself through clenched teeth, “I’ve heard people say for several years that Sun Wukong’s vast 
magic powers. What | can see of him today certainly confirms the rumour. Since that Tang Monk has begun practicing austerities in his youth, he has never allowed his original yang to leak out. | was 
hoping that I'd seize him and mate with him so that | might become a golden mortal of the Grand Monad. Hardly did | anticipate that this ape would see through my disguise and take him away instead. 
If he had untied me and let me down, the Tang Monk would have fallen right into my hands. He would have indeed been mine, wouldn't he? If | let him get away now just because of a few casual 
remarks, it means I’ve planned and worked in vain. Let me call him a couple more times and see what happens. Still tied up in the ropes, the monster-spirit instead employed a gentle breeze to waft 
some virtuous sentences faintly into the ears of the Tang Monk. This was how she called out to him: “O Master! /f you a living human passed by and refused to free, what God or scriptures could such 
blindness hope to see?” 

Hearing a summons like that as he rode along, the Tang Monk immediately reined in the horse and called out, “Wukong, let’s go and free the girl.” 

“Master, you're moving along just fine,” said Pilgrim. “What makes you think of her again?” 

“She’s calling after me!” replied the Tang Monk. 

“Did you hear anything, 8 Rules?” asked Pilgrim. 8 Rules said, “My oversized ears must have blocked it. | didn’t hear a thing.” 

“Sand-monk, did you hear anything?” asked Pilgrim again. Sand-monk said, “I was walking ahead, toting the luggage, and | didn’t pay any attention. | didn’t hear anything either.” 

“Nor did old monkey,” said Pilgrim. “Master, what did she say? Why are you the only one who heard the call?” 

The Tang Monk replied, “The way she called me makes a lot of sense. She said, if you a living human passed by and refused to free, what God or scriptures could such blindness hope to see? As the 
proverb also puts the matter, saving one life’s better than building a seven-tiered heap. Let’s go quickly and rescue her. It'll be as good as fetching scriptures and worshipping God.” 

“Master,” said Pilgrim with a laugh, “when you want to do well, there’s no drug in the world that can cure you! Think how many mountains you've crossed since you left the Land of the East and how 
many monsters you've encountered since you began your journey to the West. Without fail they managed to have you captured and brought into their caves. When old monkey came to rescue you, 
the iron rod he used had beaten thousands upon thousands to death. Today there’s only one life of a monster-spirit, and you can’t leave her. Do you've to rescue her?” 

“O disciple!” said the Tang Monk. “As the ancients said, don’t fail to do good even if it’s small; don’t engage in evil even if it’s small. Let's go rescue her.” 

“If you put it that way, Master,” said Pilgrim, “you must assume the responsibility, because old monkey can’t bear it. If you’ve made up your mind to rescue her, | dare not admonish you too much. For 
if | do, you'll get mad after a while. You may go and rescue her as you please.” 

“Don’t talk so much, ape-head!” said the Tang Monk. “You sit here while 8 Rules and | go rescue her.” 

Returning to the pine forest, the Tang Monk asked 8 Rules to untie the ropes that had the girl bound to the tree from the waist up, and to use his rake to dig the lower half of her body out from the 
ground. Stamping her feet and straightening out her skirt, the fiend followed the Tang Monk out of the forest most amiably. When they met up with Pilgrim, he began to snicker uncontrollably. 

“Brazen ape!” scolded the Tang Monk. “Why are you laughing?” 

“Im laughing,” replied Pilgrim, “because when times are right, good friends you'll hail; a fair lady will greet you'd fortune fail!” 

“Wretched ape!” scolded the Tang Monk again. “What rubbish! The moment | left my mum’s belly, | became a priest. Now I’m journeying westward by imperial decree and trying to worship God in all 
sincerity. I’m no seeker of profit or status. How could there be a time when my fortune fails?” 


“Master,” replied Pilgrim with a laugh, “though you may have been a monk since your youth, all you know is how to read Threads and recite the name of God. You’re not familiar with the codes and 
laws of a state. This girl is both young and pretty, and we're after all persons who have left the family. If we travel with her, we may run into wicked people who will send us to court. Regardless of how 
we profess to be scripture seekers and God worshippers, they may accuse us of fornication. Even if we're cleared of that charge, they may still have us convicted of kidnapping. You'll be expelled from 
your priesthood and beaten till you're half-dead; 8 Rules will be sent into the army and Sand-monk will be sentenced to hard labour. Even old monkey will find it hard to extricate himself from such a 
messy affair. | may be smart-mouthed but no amount of haggling on my part will clear us of indiscretion.” 
“Stop this nonsense!” snapped Tripitaka. “I’m determined to save her life. How could she involve us in any trouble? We’re taking her with us. If anything arises, I'll assume the responsibility myself.” 
“You may talk like that, Master,” said Pilgrim, “but you don’t realise that what you're doing won’t save her but will only harm her.” Tripitaka said, “I rescued her out of the forest so that she might live. 
How could she be harmed instead?” 
“When she was tied up in the forest,” replied Pilgrim, “she might have lasted five to seven days, possibly up to half a month but without rice to eat, she would have starved to death. Even in that situation 
however, she would have died with her body preserved intact. Now you've freed her and brought her with you without realising, of course, that you happen to be riding a horse swift as the wind. We 
may be able to follow you on our feet, not having really any choice in the matter but the girl has such tiny feet that she moves with great difficulty. How could she possibly keep up with you? If by chance 
she drops behind, she may well run into a tiger or a leopard that will swallow her with one gulp. In that case, haven't you harmed her life?” 
“Indeed!” said Tripitaka. “It's a good thing you saw things this way. What shall we do?” 
“Lift her up and let her ride with you,” said Pilgrim. “How can | ride with her?” asked Tripitaka, and he fell into silent thought. 
“How can she proceed?” pressed Pilgrim. “Let 8 Rules carry her on his back,” said Tripitaka. Laughing, Pilgrim said, “Idiot’s getting lucky!” 
“A long distance has no light load!” said 8 Rules. “How can | be getting lucky if I’m asked to carry someone on my back?” 
“But you've such a long horn,” said Pilgrim, “long enough in fact to stick it behind you to flirt with her once she is on your back. Don’t you’ve an advantage there?” When 8 Rules heard this, he pounded 
his chest and jumped up and down. “That's no good! That’s no good!” he bellowed. “If Master wants to beat me a few times, I’m willing to take the pain but it'll be quite messy for me if | put her on my 
back. All his life, Elder Brother has loved to set people up by planting false evidence. | can’t carry her!” 
“All right, all right!” said Tripitaka. “I can still manage to walk a few steps. Let me get down and walk slowly with her. 8 Rules can lead the horse.” Breaking into loud guffaws, Pilgrim said, “Idiot is really 
getting the business. Master's looking after you by asking you to lead the horse!”> 
“This ape-head is mouthing absurdity again!” said Tripitaka. “The ancients said, ‘Though a horse can travel a thousand miles, it can’t get there without human guidance.’ If | walk slowly on the road, 
would you like to leave me behind, too? If! move slowly, you must also move slowly; we can certainly walk down the mountain with this nun. When we arrive at some human household, we can leave 
her there, and that will have completed our task of rescuing her.” 
“What Master says is quite reasonable,” said Pilgrim. “Please proceed quickly.” As Tripitaka walked forward, Sand-monk toted the luggage, 8 Rules led the horse and the girl, and Pilgrim held up his 
iron rod. They had not covered more than twenty or thirty miles when it was getting late, and there came into their view again a towered building with ornate roof carvings. “Disciples,” said Tripitaka, 
“that must be either a monastery or temple. Let’s ask for one night's lodging, and we can proceed tomorrow.” 
“You spoke well, Master,” said Pilgrim. “Let's move along, all of us.” 
As soon as they reached the gate, Tripitaka gave them this instruction: “Stand away from the door, all of you and let me go ask for lodging. If it's convenient, someone will come to call you.” All of them 
stood beneath the shade of some willow trees but Pilgrim gripping his iron rod, stood guard over the girl. The elder strode forward and saw that the temple gate was so badly rotted that it was all crooked 
and bent. When he pushed it open to have another look, he was filled with grief, for he found the long corridors quiet, an old temple desolate. Mosses filled the courtyard and weeds choked the path. 
Only the fireflies served as lanterns and frog-croaks acted for water clocks. All at once the elder could not hold back his tears. Truly the walls were unused and collapsing; the chambers, forlorn and 
crumbling. Over 10 piles of broken bricks and tiles there all bent pillars and snapped beams. Green grasses grew both front and back; dust buried the incense alcove. The bell tower stood in ruin, the 
drum had no skin; the crystal chalice was cracked and chipped. God's gold frame lacked lustre; Arhats lay prone east and west. Guanyin rain-soaked, was reduced to clay, her willow vase fallen to 
earth. No priests would enter during the day; only foxes rested here by night. You heard only the wind’s thunderous roar in this hiding place of all tigers and leopards. Walls on all 4 sides had collapsed 
without doors to fence in the house. ®Also a testimonial poem says: 
A very old temple in disrepair: decayed, declining — no one seems to care. 
The fierce wind fractures the guardians’ faces and heavy rain a god-heads defaces. 
The Arhats have fallen, they're strewn about; homeless, a local spirit sleeps without. 
2 sorry sights for 1 to look upon: the bronze bell’s grounded for the belfry’s gone. 
Forcing himself to be bold, Tripitaka walked through the second-level door and found that the belfry and the drum tower had both collapsed. All there was left was a huge bronze bell standing on the 
ground: the upper half was white as snow and the lower half was blue-green like indigo. It had been there for many years, see: rain had whitened the upper part of the bell and the dampness of the 
earth had coated the lower part with copperas. Rubbing the bell with his hand, Tripitaka cried out: “O bell! You used to make thunderous peal, on a tower hung high or boom carved-beam tones to the 
distant sky or ring in the dawn when the roosters crow or send off the twilight when the sun dropped low. The bronze-melting, | wonder where he’s and whether the smith who forged you still exists. 
These two, | think, are now for Hades bound: they’ve no traces and you’ve no sound!” 
As the elder loudly lamented in this manner, he unwittingly disturbed a temple worker who was in charge of incense and fire. When he heard someone speaking, he scrambled up, picked up a piece of 
broken brick, and tossed it at the bell. The loud clang so scared the elder that he fell to the ground; he struggled up and tried to flee, only to trip over the root of a tree and stumble a second time. Lying 
on the ground, the elder said, “O bell! While this humble cleric laments your state, a loud clang suddenly reaches my ears. No one takes the road to Western Heaven, | fear, and thus you’ve become a 
spirit over the years.” 
The temple worker rushed forward and raised him up, saying, “Please rise, Venerable Dad. The bell has not turned into a spirit. | struck it, and that is why it clanged.” 
When he raised his head and saw how ugly and dark the worker looked, he said, “You'd be some sort of goblin or fiend? I’m no ordinary human but someone from the Great Tang. Under my command 
are disciples who can subdue the dragon and tame the tiger. It'll not be easy to preserve your life if you run into them!” 
Going to his knees, the temple-worker said, “Don’t be afraid, Venerable Dad. I’m no fiend, only a temple worker in care of the fire and incense in this monastery. When | heard your virtuous lament just 
now, | was about to step out and receive you. Then | was afraid you might be some kind of perverse demon knocking at our door so | picked up a piece of brick to toss at the bell — just to calm my own 
fears before | dared come out. Venerable Dad, please rise.” 
Only then did the Tang Monk collect his wits and say, “Keeper, you nearly frightened me to death! Please take me in.” 
The worker led the Tang Monk straight through the third-level door, the inside of which he found to be quite different from the outside. He saw walls of cloud-patterns built by bluish bricks and a main 
hall roofed in green glazed tiles. Yellow gold trimmed the saintly forms; white jade slabs made up the steps. Green light exercised on the Great Hero Hall; zealous airs rose from the Pure Alcove. On 
The Beautiful one with Glory and Auspiciousness Hall colourful designs soared like clouds; on the Transmigration Hall painted flowers heaped up elegance. A pointed vase tipped the triple-layered 
eave; a brocade top lined the 5-Blessings Tower. 1000 bamboos rocked the priestly beds; 10000 green pines lit up the Religious gate. Golden light shone within the Jade-Cloud Palace; auspicious 
hues fluttered in the purple mists. With dawn a fragrant breeze blew to all 4 quarters; by dusk the painted drum rolled from a tall mountain. If one’d face the sun to mend a cloak, wouldn’t he finish the 
Book by moonlight? 
They saw, too lamplight glowing on half the backyard wall and scented mists flooding the whole of central mall. When Tripitaka saw all this, he dared not enter. “Worker,” he called out, “from the front, 
your place looks so run down but it’s so nicely maintained back here. How can this be?” 
With a laugh the worker said, “Venerable Dad, there are many perverse fiends and bandits in this mountain. In fair weather they used to rob and plunder all over the region but they would seek shelter 
in this monastery when the skies were grey. They took down holy images and used them for seat cushions, and they pulled up shrubbery and plants for starting fires. As the monks in our monastery 
are too weak to contend with them, the ruined buildings up front have been turned over to the bandits as their resting place. New patrons were found to build another monastery in the back, so that the 
pure and the profane could remain distinct. That’s how things are in the West!” 
“I see!” replied Tripitaka. As they walked inside, Tripitaka saw on top of the monastery gate these 5 words written large: 
Sea-Pacifying Chan Grove Monastery 
Hardly had they crossed the threshold when they saw a monk approaching. He looked as such: wore a cap of wool-silk pinned to the left; a pair of copper rings dangled from his ears. He had on himself 
a robe of Persian wool; like silver his 2 eyes were white and clear. His hand waving a rattle from Pamirs, he recited some scripture barbaric and queer. Tripitaka could in no way recognise this lama 
cleric of the Western sphere. Coming through the door, the lama priest saw what lovely, refined features Tripitaka possessed: broad forehead and a flat top, shoulder-length ears, hands that reached 
beyond the knees - so handsome in fact that he seemed verily an incarnate Arhat. Walking forward to take hold of him, the lama priest, full of smiles, gave Tripitaka’s hand and leg a couple of pinches; 
he also rubbed Tripitaka’s nose and pulled at his ear to express his cordial sentiments. After taking Tripitaka into the abbot’s chamber and greeting him, he asked, “Where did the venerable master 
come from?” 
“This disciple’s,” replied Tripitaka, “someone sent by imperial commission of the Great Tang in the Land of the East to go to the Great Thunderclap Monastery of India in the West to seek scriptures 
from a god. As we arrive in your precious region at this late hour of the day, | come especially to ask for one night’s lodging in your noble temple. Tomorrow we'll set out once more. | beg you to grant 
us this request.” 
“Blasphemy! Blasphemy!” said the priest, laughing. “People like you and me didn’t leave the family with noble intentions. It’s usually because the times of our births happened to have offended the 
Floriated Canopy.’ Our families were too poor to rear us, and that gave us the resolve to leave home. Since we’ve all become the followers of God, we’d never speak fraudulent words.” 
“But mine were honest words!” replied Tripitaka. 
“What a distance it is to travel from the Land of the East to the Western Heaven!” said the priest. “There are mountains on the road, there are caves in the mountains, and there are monsters in the 
caves. You're all by yourself and you seem so young and gentle. You don’t look like a scripture seeker!” 
“The abbot's perception is quite correct,” said Tripitaka. “How could this poor cleric reach this place all by himself? I’ve three other disciples who are able to open up a road in the mountains and build 
a bridge across the waters. It is their protection that has enabled me to reach your noble temple.” 
“Where are your three worthy disciples?” asked the priest. 
“Waiting outside the monastery gate,” replied Tripitaka. 
“Master,” said the priest, growing alarmed, “you probably have no idea that there are tigers and wolves, fiendish thieves, and weird goblins out to harm people in this region. Even in daytime we dare 
not travel very far, and we shut our doors before it gets dark. How could you leave people outside at this hour? Disciples, ask them to come in quickly!” 
Two young lamas ran out but at the sight of Pilgrim they immediately fell down in fright; when they saw 8 Rules, they stumbled again. Scrambling to their feet, they dashed to the rear, crying, “Holy Dad, 
you've rotten luck! Your disciples have disappeared. There are just three or four fiends standing outside the gate.” 
“What do they look like?” asked Tripitaka. One of the young priests said, “One had a thunder-god beak, another a pestle-like horn, and a third had a blue-green face with fangs. By their side there was 
a girl, rather heavily made up.” 
“You'd not possibly know that those three ugly creatures happen to be my disciples,” said Tripitaka, smiling. “The girl however, is someone whose life | saved back in a pine forest.” 
“O Holy Dad!” cried the young priest. “Such a handsome master like yourself, why did you find such ugly disciples?” 
“They may be ugly,” replied Tripitaka, “but they are all useful. You’d better hurry and invite them inside. If you wait a while longer, that one with the thunder-god beak, being no human offspring, loves 
to cause trouble and he may want to fight his way in.” 
The young priest hurried out, trembling all over, fell to his knees, and said, “Venerable Dads, Dad Tang asks you to enter.” 
“O Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, giggling, “all he has to do is to invite us to enter. Why is he shaking so hard?” 
“Because he’s afraid,” replied Pilgrim, “seeing how ugly we're.” 
“How absurd!” said 8 Rules. “We’re born like this! We don’t look ugly just for the fun of it!” 
“Let's try to fix up the ugliness somewhat,” said Pilgrim. Idiot indeed lowered his head to hide his horn in his bosom; while he led the horse and Sand-monk toted the luggage, Pilgrim herded the girl 
with his rod in the rear as all of them walked inside. Going through the ruined buildings and 3 levels of doors, they reached the inside where they tethered the horse and set the luggage on the ground 


before entering the abbot’s chamber to greet the lama priest. When they had taken their proper seats, the priest led out some seventy young lamas who also greeted the pilgrims. Then they began 
preparing a vegetarian meal to entertain the guests. Truly merit must start with a merciful thought; a priest lauds a monk when Religion thrives. 


097 

At Sea-Pacifying Monastery Mind Monkey knows the fiend; in the black pine forest 3 pupils search for their master 
Tripitaka and his disciples arrived at the Sea-Pacifying Chan Grove Monastery where they had a vegetarian meal prepared by the local monks. After the 4 had eaten and the girl too had received some 
nourishment, it was getting late and lamps were lit in the abbot’s chamber. Because they wanted to ask the Tang Monk the reason for seeking scriptures, and because they coveted a glimpse of the 
girl, the various monks all crowded into the chamber and stood in rows beneath the lamps. Tripitaka said to the lama he had met earlier, “Abbot, when we leave your treasure temple tomorrow, what's 
the rest of the journey to the West like?” 
At once the priest went to his knees, so startling the elder that he hurriedly tried to raise him, saying, “Please rise, abbot. I’m asking you about the journey. Why are you performing ceremony instead?” 
“Your journey tomorrow, Master,” replied the priest, “should proceed along a smooth and level path, and you need not worry. But at this very moment there is a small but rather embarrassing matter. | 
wanted to tell you the moment you entered our gate but | feared that | might offend you. Only after we’ve served you a meal do | make so bold as to tell you. Since the venerable master has come from 
such a long way in the East, you must be tired, and it is perfectly all right that you’d rest tonight in the room of this humble cleric. But it will not be convenient for this nun, and | wonder where I’d send 
her to sleep.” 
“Abbot,” said Tripitaka, “you needn't suspect that we master and disciples are harbouring some perverse intentions. We passed through a black pine forest earlier and found this girl bound to a tree. 
Sun Wukong, my disciple, refused to rescue her but | was moved by my Religious compassion to have her released and brought here. Wherever the abbot now wishes to send her to sleep is all right 
with me.” 
“Since the master is so kind and generous,” said the priest gratefully, “I'll just ask her to go to the Deity-King Hall. I'll make a bed of straw behind Holy Dad Deity-King, and she can sleep there.” 
‘Very good! Very good!” said Tripitaka. Thereupon the young priests led the girl to go to sleep at the back of the hall. 
After the elder had bidden the other priests good night, everyone left. “You all must be tired,” said Tripitaka to Wukong. “Let's rest now so that we may rise early.” 
All of them thus slept in the same place, for they wanted to guard their master and dared not leave his side. Gradually the night deepened. Truly all sounds had ceased as the moon rose high; the 
temple’ grew silent for no one walked by. The silver stream glistened with astral showers when tower-drums hastened the change of hours. Leaving them to rest through the night, now Pilgrim rose by 
dawn and at once told 8 Rules and Sand-monk to pack and ready the horse so that they might ask their master to set out again. The elder however, was still sleeping at that moment. Pilgrim walked 
up to him and called out, “Master.” 
The master raised his head slightly but did not answer. “Master,” asked Pilgrim, “what's the matter with you?” 
“| don’t know why,” replied the elder with a groan, “but my head seems light, eyes feel puffy, and | ache all over!” 
On hearing this, 8 Rules touched him and found him feverish. “I know,” said Idiot, giggling. “You saw last night that the rice’s free, ate a bowl too many, and then went to sleep with a blanket over your 
head. You've indigestion!” 
“Rubbish!” snapped Pilgrim. “Let me find out from master what the true reason’s.” 
“I got up in the middle of the night to relieve myself, and | forgot to put on my cap,” said Tripitaka. “I must have been chilled by the wind.” 
“That's more like it,” replied Pilgrim. “Can you travel at all?” 
“| can’t even sit up,” said Tripitaka. “How could | mount the horse? But then | don’t want to delay our journey either!” 
“You'd not speak like that, master!” said Pilgrim. “As the proverb says, once a teacher, always a dad; since we've become your disciples, we're like your sons. The proverb also says: you needn't rear 
your children with silver and gold; that they treat you kindly is good to behold. If you don’t feel well, you needn’t mention anything about delaying our journey. Stay here for a few days. What's wrong 
with that?” 
Thus the brothers all ministered to their master, hardly realising that the dawn passed, the noon came, and dusk set in; the good night withdrew at the break of day. Time went by swiftly and 2 days 
had passed before the master sat up on the third day and called out, “Wukong, | was so sick these last two days that | didn’t think of asking you: that nun who got back her life, did anyone send her 
some rice to eat?” 
“Why worry about her?” said Pilgrim with a laugh. “You’d be concerned with your own illness.” 
“Indeed! Indeed!” said Tripitaka. “Please help me get up, and bring out my paper, brush, and ink. Go and borrow an inkstand from the monastery.” 
“What for?” asked Pilgrim. 
“| want to write a letter,” said the elder, “in which I'll also enclose the travel rescript. You may take that up to Chang’an and ask for an audience with Emperor Taizong.” 
“That's easy,” said Pilgrim. “Old monkey may not be very able in other matters but I’m the best postman in the whole wide world. When you finish your letter, I'll send it to Chang'an and hand-deliver it 
to the Tang emperor with a somersault. Then I'll come back here with another somersault - before your brush and inkstand are dry! But why do you want to send a letter? Tell me a little of its contents 
and then you may write.” 
Shedding tears, the elder said, “This is what | intend to write: Three times your priestly subject raises his hands to greet my sage ruler, long may he live! By lords civil and martial let this be read, let 
four hundred nobles hear what's said: when | left the East that year by decree, god on Spirit Mount I'd hoped to see. | didn’t anticipate such ordeals or in midway such afflictions foresee. This monk 
now gravely ill, can’t proceed, and God’s gate seems far as Heaven’s gate. I’ve no life for scriptures, my toil’s vain; some other seeker | beg you ordain.” 
When Pilgrim heard these words, he could not refrain from breaking into uproarious laughter. “Master,” he said, “you're just too weak! A little illness and you already entertain such thoughts! If you get 
any worse, if it truly becomes a matter of life and death, all you need is to ask me. Old monkey's ability enough to pose the following questions: ‘Which Yama king dares make this decision? Which 
judge of Hell’s the gall to issue the summons? And which ghostly summoner would come near to take you away?’ If I’m the least bit annoyed, | may well bring out that temperament that greatly disturbed 
the Celestial Palace and with my rod flying, fight my way into the Region of Darkness. Once | catch hold of the Ten Yama Kings, I'll pull their tendons one by one and even then I'll not spare them!” 
“O Disciple!” said Tripitaka. “I’m gravely ill! Please don’t talk so big!” 
Walking up to them, 8 Rules said, “Elder Brother, Master says the situation is not good, and you insist that it is. That’s awfully embarrassing! We'd make plans early to sell the horse and hock the 
luggage so that we can buy a coffin for his funeral before we scatter.” 
“You're babbling again, Idiot!” said Pilgrim. “You don’t realise that Master was the second disciple of our God Siddhartha, and originally he was called Elder Gold Cicada. Because he slighted the Law, 
he was fated to experience this great ordeal.” 
“O Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “even if Master did slight the Law, he had already been banished back to the Land of the East where he took on human form in the field of slander and the sea of strife. 
After he made his vow to worship God and seek scriptures in the Western Heaven, he was bound whenever he ran into monster-spirits and he was hung high whenever he met up with demons. Hasn't 
he suffered enough? Why must he endure sickness as well?” 
“You'd not know about this,” replied Pilgrim. “Our old master fell asleep while listening to God expounding the Law. As he slumped to one side, his left foot kicked down one grain of rice. That is why 
he is fated to suffer three days’ illness after he has arrived at the Region Below.” 
Horrified, 8 Rules said, “The way Old bull sprays and splatters things all over when he eats, | wonder how many years of illness I'd have to go through!” 
“Brother,” said Pilgrim, “you've no idea either that a god isn’t that concerned with you and other creatures. But as people say: rice stalks planted in noonday sun take root as perspiration runs. Who 
knows of this food from the soil each grain requires bitterest toil? Master's still a more day to go but he'll be better by tomorrow.” 
Tripitaka said, “I feel quite different from yesterday, for I’m terribly thirsty. Could you find me some cool water to drink?” 
“That's good!” remarked Pilgrim. “When Master wants to drink, it’s a sign that he’s getting better. Let me go fetch some water.” 
Taking out the alms-bowl, he went immediately to the incense kitchen at the rear of the monastery to fetch water. There however, he came upon many priests who were sobbing, their eyes all red- 
rimmed, though they dared not weep aloud. “How could you priests be so petty?” asked Pilgrim. “We stay here for a few days but we fully intend to thank you and pay you back for the rice and firewood 
when we leave. Why do you behave in such a low-class manner?” 
Greatly flustered, the priests knelt down to say, “We dare not! We dare not!” 
“What do you mean by you dare not?” said Pilgrim. “I suppose the big appetite of the priest with a long horn has hurt your assets.” 
“Venerable Dad,” replied one of the priests. “Even in this desolate temple of ours, there are altogether over a hundred monks, old and young. If one of us were to feed one of you for one day, we’d still 
manage to take care of all of you for over a hundred days. Would we dare be so niggardly and particular about your upkeep?” 
“If not,” asked Pilgrim, “why are you crying?” 
“Venerable Dad,” said another priest, “we don’t know what sort of perverse fiend has invaded this monastery of ours. Two nights ago two young priests were sent to toll the bell and beat the drum but 
they never came back. When we searched for them in the morning, we found their caps and sandals abandoned in the rear garden; their skeletons remained but their flesh was eaten. You've all stayed 
in our monastery for three days and we've lost six priests. That is why we brothers cannot help fretting and grieving. Since your venerable master is indisposed however, we dare not make this known 
to you, though we can’t refrain from shedding tears in secret.” 
On hearing this, Pilgrim was both startled and delighted, saying, “No need to say any more. There must be a fiendish demon here causing harm to people. Let me exterminate it for you.” 
“Venerable Dad,” said a priest, “the monster who isn’t a spirit won't possess spiritual powers but those who're, will undoubtedly have the ability to soar on the cloud, fog, penetrate, and leave the Region 
of Darkness. The ancients have put the matter quite well: don’t believe the honesty of the honest; be wary of the unkindness of the kind. Venerable Dad, please forgive me for what I’m about to say: if 
you'd catch this monster for us and rid our desolate temple of this root of calamity, it would indeed be our greatest fortune. But if you can’t catch him, there'll be quite a few inconveniences.” 
“What do you mean by quite a few inconveniences?” asked Pilgrim. 
“To tell you the truth, venerable dad,” replied the priest, “though there’re some one hundred monks in our rustic temple they all left their homes in childhood, find knives to cut hair grown long, and patch 
often their unlined garments. Once they rise at dawn and wash their faces, they salute with pressed palms to embrace the Great Way; at night take pains to burn incense, sincere and earnest to recite 
god’s name. Raising their heads to gaze at god’s form on the ninth-grade lotus, The Triyana means? and the vessel of mercy afloat on the religion-mega, *the world-honoured Sakya of Jetavana they 
vow to see. Lowering their heads to search their hearts. Having received the five prohibitions having transcended the world amid the myriad creatures and phenomena the stubborn void and formless 
form they'd perceive. When the danapatis‘ are present, the old and the young, the tall and the short, the fat and the thin - each one will beat the wooden fish and strike the golden stone, hustling and 
bustling to recite two scrolls of the Lotus Thread or a book of the Water Litany of King Liang. 5When the lords of alms are absent, the new, the old, the unfamiliar, the familiar, the rustic, and the urbane 
- each one will press his palms together and close his eyes in silence and darkness to meditate on the rush mat and bolt the gate beneath the moon. ®We leave those orioles and birds to chatter and 
bicker by themselves: they don’t belong in our convenient, merciful Mahayana. That's why we’re unable to tame tigers and subdue dragons; we’ve no knowledge of fiends, nor can we recognise spirits. 
If you manage to annoy that fiendish demon, Venerable Dad, he may find a hundred of us priests barely sufficient for one meal. Then we'll all fall upon the Wheel of Transmigration; second, our Chan 
grove and old temple will be destroyed; and third, at Siddhartha’s assembly we'll not enjoy even half a mite of glory. These are some of those inconveniences!” 
When Pilgrim heard the priest delivering a speech like that anger flared up from his heart and wrath sprouted by his bladder. “How stupid can you monks be?” he shouted. “All you know is about the 
monster-spirit. You've no idea of old monkey’s exploits?” 
“In truth we don't,” replied the priests softly. 
“Ill give you only a brief summary today,” said Pilgrim. “Listen to me, all of you! / did tame tigers and subdue dragons on Mount Flower-Fruit; | did ascend to Heaven’s Palace to cause great havoc. In 
hunger | picked up Lord Lao’s elixir and chewed up — not many — just two or three pellets! In thirst | took up the Jade Emperor's juice and drank — so lightly — six or seven cups! When my gold-pupil 
eyes, not black or white, flare wide open, the sky will pale and the moon darken; when | hold up one golden-hooped rod, not too long or short, I'll come and go without a trace. Why mention big spirits 
or small fiends! Who’s afraid of their hex or devilry! The moment when | give chase, the fleeing will flee, the shaking will shake, the hiding will hide, and the fearful will fear; the moment when | catch 
them, they'll be sawed, burned, ground, and pounded. Something like Eight Mortals crossing the sea, each revealing magic ability. Monks and priests, I'll seize this monster-spirit for you to see. Only 
then you'll realise I’m old monkey!” 
When those various monks heard this, they all nodded and said to themselves, “There’s to be some basis for this burglar bonze to open his big mouth and utter these big words!” 


Each of them, therefore, responded to Pilgrim agreeably but the lama priest spoke up: “Wait a moment! Since your master’s indisposed, you'd not feel so eager to catch this monster-spirit. As the 
proverb says, a prince at a banquet will either be drunk or fed; a hero on the field will either be hurt or dead. If the two of you engage in battle, you may well involve your master in some difficulty and 
that’s not too appropriate.” 

“Right you're!” replied Pilgrim. “Let me take some cold water to my master first and then I'll return.” Picking up the alms-bowl and filling it with water, he left the incense kitchen and went directly back 
to the abbot’s chamber. “Master,” he cried, “drink some cold water.” 

Racked by thirst, Tripitaka raised his head, held the water to his mouth, and took a mighty draught. Truly in thirst one drop of liquid’s like sweet dew; the true cure arrives and the illness heals. When 
Pilgrim saw that the elder was gradually regaining his strength and that his features seemed to brighten, he asked, “Master, can you take some rice soup?” 

“This cold water,” replied Tripitaka, “is so much like an efficacious elixir that at least half of my illness is gone. If there is any rice soup, | can eat some.” At once Pilgrim shouted repeatedly, “My master’s 
well. He wants some soup and rice.” His cries sent those monks scampering to wash the rice, cook it, make noodles, bake biscuits, steam breads, and make rice-noodle soup. They brought in in fact 
four or five tables of food but the Tang Monk could take only half a bowl of rice soup. Pilgrim and Sand-monk managed to finish one tableful while the rest all went into 8 Rules’ stomach. After they had 
cleared away the utensils and lighted the lamps, the monks retired. 

“How many days have we stayed here?” asked Tripitaka. 

Pilgrim said, “Three whole days. By dusk tomorrow, it'll be the fourth day.” 

“How much have we fallen behind in our journey?” Tripitaka asked again. 

“Master,” said Pilgrim, “you can’t make that sort of calculation. Let’s leave tomorrow.” 

“Exactly,” said Tripitaka. “Even if I’m still not quite well, I'd better get going.” 

“In that case,” said Pilgrim, “I'd better catch a monster-spirit tonight.” 

“What sort of monster-spirit do you want to catch this time?” asked Tripitaka, growing alarmed. 

“There’s a monster-spirit in this monastery,” said Pilgrim. “Let old monkey catch it for them.” 

“O Disciple!” said the Tang Monk. “I’m not even recovered yet and you want to start something like this already! Suppose that fiend’s great magic powers and you can’t catch it. Wouldn’t you put me in 
jeopardy?” 

“You do love to put me down!” said Pilgrim. “As old monkey goes about subduing fiends everywhere, have you ever seen him an underdog? | may not move my hands but the moment | do, I'll win.” 
Tugging at him, Tripitaka said, “Disciple, the proverb puts the matter well: do someone a favour when you’ve that favour; spare a person when you can afford to spare. Can restiveness compare with 
contentedness? Is tolerance nobler than belligerence?” 

When the Great Sage Sun heard his master pleading so passionately with him, refusing to let him subdue a fiend, he had little choice but to tell the truth, saying, “Master, | don’t want to hide this from 
you but the fiend has devoured humans at this place.” 

Horrified, the Tang Monk asked, “What humans has the fiend devoured?” 

“We've stayed in this monastery for three days,” replied Pilgrim, “and six young priests of the monastery have been devoured.” 

The elder said, “When a hare dies, the fox grieves; for a creature will mourn its own kind. If a fiend’s devoured the priests of this monastery, I’m a priest, too. I'll let you go but you must be careful.” 
“No need to tell me that,” said Pilgrim. “Old monkey will eliminate it the moment he raises his hands.” Look at him! In the lamplight he gave instructions for 8 Rules and Sand-monk to guard their master 
and then leaped out of the abbot’s chamber jubilantly. When he reached the main God hall to look around, he found that there were stars in the sky though the moon had not yet risen. The hall was 
completely dark, so he exhaled some mortal fire from within himself to light the crystal chalice; then he went to strike the bell on the east and toll the bell on the west. Thereafter with one shake of his 
body he changed into a young priest no more than twelve or thirteen years of age. Draped in a clerical robe of yellow silk and wearing a white cloth shirt, he recited scriptures as his hand struck a 
wooden fish. He waited there in the hall till about the hour of the first watch and nothing happened. By the hour of the second watch, when the waning moon had just risen, he heard all at once a loud 
roar of the wind. Marvellous wind! Its black fog blotted out the sky; sombre clouds bedimmed the earth. All 4 quarters seemed splashed with ink or coated with some indigo paint. At first it lifted up dust 
and sprayed dirt; afterwards it toppled trees and felled forests. Though stars glistened through lifted dust and sprayed dirt, the moon paled as trees toppled and forests fell. It blew till Chang’e tightly 
hugged the Suoluo tree, ’the jade hare spinning searched for its dish of herbs; 9 Star Officials all shut their doors, Dragon-Kings of 4 Seas all closed their gates; city gods looked for young demons in 
their shrines but mid-air divines could not soar on clouds. Yama of Hades sought to find horse-faces as judges dashed madly to run down their wraps. It rocked the boulders on Kunlun summit and 
churned up the waves in rivers and lakes. When the wind subsided, he immediately felt the fragrance of orchids and perfumes and he heard the tinkling of girdle jade. He rose slightly and raised his 
head to look. Ah! It was a beautiful young girl, walking straight up the hall. “Oo-li, oo-la!” recited Pilgrim, pretending to recite scriptures. 

The girl walked up to him and hugged him saying, “Little elder, what sort of scriptures you're reciting?” 

“What | vowed to recite!” replied Pilgrim. 

“Everyone’s enjoying his sleep,” said the girl. “Why are you still reciting?” 

“| made a vow!’ replied Pilgrim. “How could | not do so?” 

Hugging him once more, the girl kissed him and said, “Let’s go out back and play.” Turning his face aside deliberately, Pilgrim said, “You're kind of dumb!” 

“Do you know physiognomy?” asked the girl. 

“A little,” replied Pilgrim. “Read my face,” said the girl, “and see what sort of a person I’m.” 

“lcan see,” said Pilgrim, “that you’re somewhat of a slut or debauchee driven out by your in-laws!” 

“You've not seen a thing!” exclaimed the girl. “You've not seen a thing! /’m no slut or debauchee whom my in-laws compelled to flee. By my former life’s poor fate | was given too young a mate who 
knew nothing of marriage rite and drove me to leave him this night. But the stars and the moon so luminous this evening have created the affinity for you and me to meet. Let's go into the rear garden 
and make love.” 

On hearing this, Pilgrim nodded and said to himself, “So those several stupid monks all succumbed to lust and that was how they lost their lives. Now she’s trying to fool even me!” He said to her, “Lady, 
this priest is still very young, and he doesn’t know much about lovemaking.” 

“Follow me,” said the girl, “and I'll teach you.” Pilgrim smiled and said to himself, “All right! I'll follow her and see what she wants to do with me.” 

They put their arms around each other's shoulders, and, hand in hand, the two of them left the hall to walk to the rear garden. Immediately tripping Pilgrim up with her leg so that he fell to the ground, 
the fiend began crying “Sweetheart” madly as she tried to pinch his stinky root.® 

“My dear child!” exclaimed Pilgrim. “You do want to devour old monkey!” He caught her hand and, using a little tumbling technique, flipped the fiend on to the ground. Even then, the fiend cried out, 
“Sweetheart, you certainly know how to make your old lady fall!” 

Pilgrim thought to himself, “If | don’t move against her now, what am | waiting for? As the saying goes, strike first and you're the stronger; delay and you'll not live longer!” 

Hands on his hips, he snapped his torso erect and leaped up to change into the magic appearance of his true form. Wielding his golden-hooped iron rod, he struck at the girl’s head. The fiend, too was 
somewhat startled, thinking to herself, “This young priest’s quite formidable!” She opened her eyes wide to take a careful look and found that her opponent was in fact the disciple of Elder Tang, the 
one with the surname of Sun. She was however, not the least intimidated. She was a spirit who has a nose of gold and fur like snow. She dwells in tunnels underground where every part’s both safe 
and sound. A breath she nourished three centuries before had sent her a few times to Mount Spirit's shore. Of candles and flowers once she ate her fill, she was banished by Siddhartha’s will to be 
Pagoda-Bearer’s cherished child; Prince Nata took her as his sister mild. She’s no mythic, sea-filling bird® of the air nor a turtle’® that a sacred mountain bears. Of Lei Huan’s magic sword" she has no 
fear; to her, Li Qian’s cutlass’? cannot go near. Scurrying here and there, she defies the River Han or Yangzi’s breadth and length; scampering up and down the heights of Mount Tai or Heng is her 
special strength. When you behold her looks seductive and sweet, who'd think that she’s a rodent-spirit in heat? Proud of her own vast magic powers, she casually picked up a pair of swords and began 
to parry left and right, to slash east and west, causing loud jangling and clanging. Though Pilgrim was somewhat stronger, he could not quite overtake her. A cold gust rose everywhere, and the waning 
moon had now lost its light. Look at the two of them engaged in this marvellous battle in the rear garden! A cold wind rose from the ground; the waning moon released faint light. Quiet was the Religious 
palace and forlorn the spirit porch. But the rear garden was some battlefield! Great Master Sun, a sage from Heaven and the furry girl, a queen of women, they took up a contest in magic powers. One 
hardened a woman’s heart to scold this black bonze; 1 widened his eyes of wisdom to glower at a girl. When the swords in both hands flew, who'd recognise a nun? 

When the single rod attacked, he was more vicious than a live Lightning-guardian. The golden-hooped crackled like thunderbolts; the white steel flashed forth like luminous stars. Kingfishers dropped 
from jade towers; Mandarin ducks broke on the golden hall. Apes wailed as the Szechwan moon dimmed; wild geese called from the vast southern sky. The 18 Arhats all shouted bravos in secret; the 
32 deities all became terror-stricken. As the Great Sage Sun became more and more energetic, the blows of his rod hardly ever slackening, the monster-spirit suspected that she would be unable to 
withstand him much longer. All at once her knitted brows gave her a plan, and she turned to flee. “Lawless wench!” shouted Pilgrim. “Where are you going? Surrender instantly!” 

But the monster-spirit refused to answer and kept retreating. She waited until Pilgrim was about to catch up with her and then ripped off her flower slipper from her left foot. Reciting a spell and blowing 
a mouthful of magic breath on it, she cried, “Change!” and it changed into her appearance, both hands wielding the swords to attack. Her true self in a flash turned into a clear gust and disappeared. 
Alas! Isn't she once more the star of calamity for Tripitaka? 

She swept into the abbot’s chamber and immediately abducted Tripitaka Tang. Silently and invisibly they rose straight to the clouds, and in a twinkling of an eye they reached Mount Void-Entrapping. 
After they entered the Bottomless Cave, she asked her little ones to prepare a vegetarian wedding feast. Pilgrim fought on anxiously till he found an opening and struck down the monster-spirit with 
one blow of the rod. Only then did he discover that it was merely a flower slipper. Realising that he had been duped, Pilgrim rushed back to see his master but he was nowhere to be found. Only Idiot 
and Sand-monk were there, chattering noisily about something. Maddened, Pilgrim lost all regard for good or ill as he raised high his rod and screamed, “I’m going to slaughter both of you! I’m going to 
slaughter both of you!” 

Idiot was so terrified that he did not know where to flee. Sand-monk however, was a general from Mount Spirit after all. When he saw that things had become complicated, he turned gentle and mild as 
he walked forward and went to his knees. “Elder Brother,” he said, “I think | know what the matter is. You want to strike both of us dead so that you can go home and not go rescue Master.” 

“Ill slaughter both of you,” replied Pilgrim, “and then I'll go rescue him by myself.” 

“Elder Brother, how can you speak like that?” said Sand-monk with a smile. “Without the two of us, you'll be reduced to the condition of the proverb: one silk fibre is no thread; a single hand cannot 
clap. O Elder Brother! Who's going to look after the luggage and the horse for you? Better that we emulate Guan and Bao’ dividing their gold than to imitate Sun and Pang" in their matching of wits. 
As the ancients said, fo fight the tiger you need brothers of the same blood; to go to war requires a troop of dads and sons. | beg you to spare us from this beating. By morning we'll unite with you in 
mind and effort to go search for Master.” 

Though Pilgrim had vast magic powers, he was also a most sensible person. When he saw Sand-monk pleading like that, he at once relented, saying, “Eight Rules, Sand-monk, get up, both of you. 
We've to exert ourselves tomorrow to find Master.” When Idiot learned that he was spared, he was ready to promise Pilgrim half of the sky! “O Elder Brother,” he said, “let Old bull take care of everything!” 
With so much on their minds the three brothers, of course, could hardly sleep. How they wished that one nod of their heads would bring forth the rising sun, one blow of their breaths would scatter all 
the stars! 

Sitting up till dawn, the 3 of them immediately prepared to leave. Some of the monks in the monastery soon appeared, asking, “Where’re the venerable dads going?” 

“It's hard for me to say this!” replied Pilgrim, chuckling. “I boasted yesterday that'd catch the monster-spirit for you. I've not succeeded but lost our master instead. We're about to go find him.” 
Growing fearful, the monks said, “Venerable Dad, such a small matter of ours has now caused your master trouble. Where do you plan to go to look for him?” 

“There'll be a place for us to look,” replied Pilgrim. 

“In that case,” said one of the monks quickly, “there’s no need to hurry. Please have some breakfast first.” Thereupon they brought in several bowls of rice soup, and 8 Rules finished them all. “Good 
monks!” he cried. “After we've found our master, we'll return for some more fun!” 

“So you still want to come back here to eat!” said Pilgrim. “Why don’t you go to the Deity-King Hall instead and see if that girl is still around?” 

“No, she isn't, she isn’t!” said another priest hurriedly. “She stayed there for one night but she vanished the next day.” 

In great delight Pilgrim at once took leave of the monks and asked 8 Rules and Sand-monk to tote the luggage and lead the horse to head for the east. “You've made a mistake, Elder Brother,” said 8 
Rules. “Why do you want to head for the east instead?” 


“How could you know?” asked Pilgrim. “That girl who was tied up in the black pine forest the other day — these fiery eyes and diamond pupils of old monkey have long seen through her. All of you 
thought that she was such a fine person! It was she who devoured the monks, and it was she who abducted Master. You rescued a fine nun indeed! Now that Master is taken, we've to search for him 
on the road we came from.” 

‘Very good! Very good!” said the 2 of them sighing with admiration. “Truly there’s finesse in your roughness! Let's go! Let’s go!” 

The 3 of them hurried back to the forest, and all they saw were endless clouds, boundless fog, layered rocks, winding path; criss-crossing tracks of foxes and hare; tigers, wolves, and leopards crowding 
there. Of the fiend in the woods there was no trace where Tripitaka was they knew not the place. Growing more anxious, Pilgrim whipped out his rod and with one shake of his body, changed into that 
appearance that had greatly disturbed the Celestial Palace: with three heads and six arms wielding three rods, he delivered blows madly all over the forest. When he saw that, 8 Rules said, “Sand- 
monk, Elder Brother has gone berserk. Unable to locate Master, he’s having a fit of anger!” Pilgrim’s rampage however, managed to turn up two old men; one was the mountain god, and the other the 
local spirit. “Great Sage,” they said as they went to their knees, “the mountain god and the local spirit have come to see you.” 

“What a miraculous stick!” exclaimed 8 Rules, “He waved it around and beat out both this mountain god and this local spirit. If he beat it around some more, he might even get himself Jupiter!” 
“Mountain god, local spirit,” said Pilgrim as he began his interrogation. “How ill-behaved you're! You've persisted in making bandits your allies in this place, and when they succeed, they undoubtedly 
sacrifice livestock in your honour. Now you even band together with a monster-spirit and join her in abducting my master. Where have you hidden him? Confess at once, and I'll spare you a beating!” 
Horrified, the two deities said, “The Great Sage has wrongly blamed us. That monster-spirit is not in this mountain, nor is she subject to our dominion. But these minor deities do happen to know a little 
about the source of the wind last night.” 

“If you know,” said Pilgrim, “tell it all!” 

The local spirit said, “That monster-spirit has abducted your master to a place about one thousand miles due south of here. There is a mountain there by the name of Void-Entrapping, in which there is 
a cave called Bottomless. The mistress of the cave is the monster-spirit who took your master.” 

Startled by what he heard, Pilgrim dismissed the deities and retrieved his magic appearance. In his true form he said to 8 Rules and Sand-monk, “Master’s very far away.” 

“If he’s very far,” said 8 Rules, “let's soar on the clouds to get there.” Dear Idiot! He mounted a violent gust to rise first, followed by Sand-monk astride the clouds. Since the white horse was originally a 
dragon prince, he too trod on the wind and fog with the luggage on his back. Then the Great Sage also mounted his cloud somersault, and they all headed straight for the south. In a little while they 
saw a huge mountain blocking their path. Pulling back the horse, the three of them stopped their clouds to find that the mountain had a peak rubbing the blue sky, a top joining the green void. Divers 
trees by the thousands grew all around; birds and fowl, cacophonous, flew here and there. Tigers, leopards walked in bands; deer, antelope moved in herds. Where it faced the sun, rare flowers and 
plants grew fragrant; on the shady parts the ice and snow stayed stubborn. The rugged summits; steep precipices; a tall peak erect; a deep winding brook. Dark pine trees and scaly rocks - a sight that 
struck fear in a traveller's heart! No shadow of one woodsman was ever seen, nor a trace of an herb-gathering youth. Wild beasts before you'd raise the fog as foxes all around called up the wind. 8 
Rules said, “O Elder Brother! Such a rugged mountain must harbour fiends!” 

“That goes without saying!” replied Pilgrim. “For as the proverb puts it, a fall mountain will always have fiends. Could rugged peaks be without spirits? Sand-monk, you and I'll remain here and Eight 
Rules can go down to the mountain fold to see which the better road to take is. He’d also find out whether there’s in fact a cave, whether its doors are open, and after he’s made a thorough investigation, 
we can then go find Master and rescue him.” 

“Old bull’s so unlucky!” said 8 Rules. “You always put me up to something first!” 

Pilgrim said, “You said last night that you’d take care of everything. How could you go back on your word now?” 

“No need to start a quarrel!” said 8 Rules. “I'll go.” Putting down his muckrake, Idiot shook loose his clothes and leaped down the mountain empty-handed. He left. 


098 

The fair girl seeks the yang; Primal spirit guards the Way 
8 Rules having bounded down the mountain, discovered a narrow path that he followed for some 5 or 6 miles. Suddenly he caught sight of 2 female fiends bailing water from a well. How did he know 
so readily that they were female fiends? Because he saw that each of them had a chignon on her head about fifteen inches tall and adorned with tiny bamboo strips. It was a most unfashionable style! 
Idiot walked up to them and cried, “Monstrous fiends!” 
Infuriated by what they heard, the fiends said to each other, “This monk is such a rogue! We don’t know him, nor have we ever tittle-tattled with him. How can he address us as monstrous fiends just 
like that?” Greatly annoyed, the fiends picked up the poles they had brought along for carrying water and brought them down on 8 Rules’ head. 
Since Idiot had no weapons to ward off the blows, they succeeded in whacking him quite a few times. Holding his head, he ran back up the mountain, crying, “O Elder Brother, let's go back! Those 
fiends are fierce!” 
“How fierce?” asked Pilgrim. 8 Rules replied, “In the mountain valley there were two female monster-spirits bailing water from a well. | called them once and they beat me several times with poles.” 
“What did you call them?” asked Pilgrim. “I called them monstrous fiends,” answered 8 Rules. 
“That,” said Pilgrim, chuckling, “was too small a beating!” 
“Thanks for looking after me!” said 8 Rules. “My head’s swollen, and you claim that it’s too small a beating!” 
Pilgrim said, “Haven't you heard of the proverb? Gentility gets through the world; obduracy takes you nowhere. They're monsters of this region but we're monks who came from afar. Even if you 
possessed arms all over your body, you’d still have to be more tactful. You walk up to them and immediately call them monstrous fiends! Would they overlook you and want to hit me instead? A human 
person must put propriety and poems first.” 
“Im even more ignorant of that!” said 8 Rules. 
Pilgrim said, “When you're devouring humans in the mountain during your youth, did you’ve any knowledge of two kinds of wood?” 
“No, what are they?” asked 8 Rules. 
“One is poplar, and the other's rosewood,” said Pilgrim. “Poplar’s quite pliant by nature, and it is used by craftsmen for carving holy images or making Siddharthas. The wood’s dressed in gold and 
painted; it is decorated with jade and other ornaments. Tens of thousands of people burn incense before it in their worship, and it enjoys countless blessings. Rosewood on the other hand is hardy and 
tough by nature. Oil factories therefore harvest it to make caskets: they bind the planks with iron rings and then they hammer them with mallets. The wood’s toughness is what causes it to suffer like 
that.” 
“O Elder Brother!” said 8 Rules. “If you'd told me a story like that a bit sooner, I'd have been spared their beating.” 
“You must go back and question them further,” said Pilgrim. 
“But they'll recognise me,” protested 8 Rules. 
“You may go in transformation,” Pilgrim answered. 
8 Rules asked, “Even if | go in transformation, Elder Brother, how should | question them?” 
Pilgrim replied, “After you've transformed yourself, walk up to them and give them a proper greeting. See how old they are. If they’re about the same age as we're, address them as Ladies. If they are 
somewhat older, then call them Mesdames.” 
“What poppycock!” said 8 Rules, chuckling, “This place is so far from home. Why bother to be so intimate?” 
“It's not a matter of intimacy,” said Pilgrim, “but of getting information from them. If they had indeed abducted Master, we'd move against them immediately. If not, we certainly don’t want to be delayed 
from going elsewhere to finish our business, do we?” 
“You're right,” said 8 Rules, “I'll go back.” 
Dear Idiot! Stuffing the rake inside the sash around his waist, he walked down to the mountain valley where with one shake of his body he changed into a dark, stout-ish priest. He swaggered up to the 
fiends and saluted deeply, saying, “Mesdames, this humble cleric salutes you.” 
Delighted, the 2 of them said to each other, “Now this priest's quite nice! He knows how to salute and greet people properly.” 
“Elder,” asked one of them, “Where did you come from?” 
“Where did | come from,” said 8 Rules. 
“Where are you going to?” she asked again. 
“Where am | going to,” he replied again. 
“What is your name?” she asked a third time. 
“What is my name,” he replied a third time. 
Laughing, the fiend said, “This priest's nice all right but he doesn’t seem to know anything, not even his own history, except to repeat what people say.” 
“Mesdames,” asked 8 Rules, “why are you bailing water?” 
The fiend said, “You may not know this, priest but last night the mistress of our house abducted a Tang Monk into our cave whom she wanted to entertain. Since the water in our cave is not clean 
enough, she sent the two of us here to fetch fine water that is a product of yin-yang copulation.’ She is also having a vegetarian banquet prepared for the Tang Monk, for she wants to marry him this 
evening.” 
When he heard this, Idiot turned quickly to race up the mountain, crying, “Sand-monk, bring out the luggage quickly and let's divide it up!” 
“Second Elder Brother,” asked Sand-monk, “why do you want to divide it up again?” 
“After we've divided it up,” replied 8 Rules, “you may return to the River of Flowing Sand to devour humans, and I'll go back to the Gao Village to see my in-laws. Big Brother can go to Mount Flower- 
Fruit to call himself a sage while the white horse can retum to the ocean to become a dragon. Master has already married the monster-spirit in the cave. We'd all scatter to pursue our own livelihood.” 
Pilgrim said, “This Idiot is babbling again!” 
“Only your son’s babbling!” replied 8 Rules. “Just now, those two monster-spirits bailing water told me that they were preparing a vegetarian banquet for the Tang Monk. After he has been fed, they will 
be married.” 
“That monster-spirit may have Master imprisoned in the cave,” said Pilgrim, “but he must be waiting with bulging eyes for us to go rescue him. And you're speaking in this manner!” 
“How are we going to rescue him?” asked 8 Rules. Pilgrim said, “The two of you can lead the horse and pole the luggage while we follow those two female fiends. We'll let them lead us up to their door, 
and then we'll begin the attack together.” 
Idiot had little choice but to comply. From a great distance Pilgrim trained his eyes on those two fiends who walked deep into the mountain for some twenty miles and then vanished from sight. “Master 
must have been seized by daytime ghosts!” exclaimed a startled 8 Rules. 
“What fine perception!” said Pilgrim. “How could you tell their true forms so readily?” 8 Rules said, “Those fiends were carrying their water as they walked along, and then they suddenly disappeared. 
Aren't they daytime ghosts?” 
“| think they have crawled inside a cave instead,” said Pilgrim. “Let me take a look.” 
Dear Great Sage! He opened wide his fiery eyes and diamond pupils to scan the entire mountain but he saw no movement whatsoever. Below a sheer cliff however, there was a small terrace with 
elegant openwork carvings decorated with floral patterns of five colours and a towered gate with triple eaves and white banners. When he walked up to the terrace with 8 Rules and Sand-monk to look, 
he saw these large words inscribed on the gate: Mount Void-Entrapping, Bottomless Cave. 
“Brothers,” said Pilgrim, “that monster-spirit has erected this edifice here but | wonder where she has put the door.” 
“It can’t be very far,” said Sand-monk. “Let's make a careful search.” As they turned to look around, they discovered a huge boulder, the surface area of which had to be over ten square miles, beneath 
the towered gate at the foot of the mountain. In the centre of this boulder there was an opening to a cave, roughly the size of a large earthen vat that had been crawled over so frequently that the 
surface of the entrance had grown shiny and smooth. 
“O Elder Brother!” said 8 Rules. “This is the entrance through which the monster-spirit goes in and out.” 


When he looked at it, Pilgrim said, “How strange! Both of you know that old monkey has captured quite a few monster-spirits since he became a guardian of the Tang Monk. But I’ve never seen a cave- 
dwelling quite like this. 8 Rules, you go down first and see how deep it is. Then | can go in and try to rescue Master.” 

Shaking his head, 8 Rules said, “This is hard! Very hard! Old bull is quite ponderous. If | trip and fall in, | wonder if | can reach bottom after two or three years!” 

“Is it that deep?” asked Pilgrim. “Just look!” said 8 Rules. 

The Great Sage saluted himself at the rim of the cave opening and peered downward. Egads! It was deep! All around it had to be more than three hundred miles. “Brothers,” he said, turning around, 
“it's very deep indeed!” 

“You may as well go back!” said 8 Rules. “You can’t rescue Master!” 

“How can you talk like that!” replied Pilgrim. “You mustn’t be lazy, nor you’d be slothful. Let's put the luggage down and tether the horse to the pillar of the towered gate. Use your rake and Sand-monk 
can use his staff to bar the entrance. I'll go in to investigate. If Master's indeed inside, I'll use my iron rod to attack the monster-spirit and chase her out. When she reaches the entrance up here, you 
two can cut off her escape route. That’s cooperation from within and without. Only after we’ve slaughtered the spirits in this way can we hope to rescue Master.” The 2 of them obeyed. With a bound, 
Pilgrim leaped into the cave as 10000 coloured clouds rose beneath his feet; auspicious air veiled his side in layers. In a little while, he reached the depths of the cave that however, he found to be 
bright and clear. Like the outside world, this place had sunlight, the rustle of wind, flowers, fruits, and trees. Delighted, Pilgrim said to himself, “What a marvellous place! It makes me think of the Water- 
Curtain Cave that Heaven bestowed on old monkey when he came into the world. But this place’s also a cave-Heaven, a blessed region!” 2as he looked about, he saw also a double-eaved towered 
gate surrounded by pines and bamboos. Inside the gate there were many buildings and he thought to himself again, “This has to be the residence of the monster-spirit. Let me go in and do a little 
detection. But wait! If | enter like this, she’d recognise me. I'll go in transformation.” 

Making the magic sign and shaking himself, he changed at once into a fly and flew silently up to the towered gate to spy on the monster-spirit. There he could see that the fiend was sitting in the centre 
of a thatched pavilion. She appeared vastly different from the way she looked at the time when she was rescued in the pine forest or when Pilgrim fought with her in the monastery. Her makeup was 
lovelier than ever: her tresses piled high in a crow-nest bun, she wore a flowery jacket of green wool. A pair of tiny feet like lily hooks; her 10 fingers looked like spring’s tender shoots. Her round, 
powdered face was a silver disc; smooth like a cherry were her lips of rouge. Solemn and proper seemed her beauteous form, more delightful than Chang’e’s of the moon. This day she caught the 
scripture-seeking monk with whom at once she would share her bed. Pilgrim made no noise so that he could hear what she had to say. After a little while, she parted her cherry lips and called out in a 
most amiable manner: “Little ones, prepare the vegetarian feast quickly! After Brother Tang Monk’s been fed, he and I'll be married.” 

“So, she means business!” said Pilgrim, smiling to himself. “I thought that 8 Rules was talking nonsense, just for fun. I'll fly in there and search around for Master. | wonder how stable his mind is at this 
time. If he has been moved by this fiend, I'll leave him here.” He spread his wings at once and flew in; there beyond the east corridor, in a room shuttered with red, translucent paper on top and opaque 
ones at the bottom, the Tang Monk was seated. 

Crashing headfirst right through the papered trellis, Pilgrim darted onto the bald head of the Tang Monk and cried, “Master!” Tripitaka recognised his voice immediately and said, “Disciple, save me!” 
“| can't do that, Master!” replied Pilgrim. “That monster-spirit is preparing a banquet for you, after which she plans to marry you. If she bears you a boy or a girl, that will be your priestly posterity. Why 
are you so sad?” 

On hearing this, the elder spoke through clenched teeth: “Disciple, after | left Chang’an, | took you in at the Mountain of the Two Frontiers. Since we began our journey westward, when did | ever use 
meat? On which day did | ever harbour a perverse thought? Now I’m caught by this monster-spirit who wants me as her mate. If | lose my true yang, let me fall upon the Wheel of Transmigration and 
be banished to the rear of the Mountain of Darkness! Let me never find release!” 

“Don’t swear!” said Pilgrim, chuckling. “If you truly desire to seek scriptures in the Western Heaven, old monkey will take you there.” 

“But I’ve quite forgotten the way we came in,” said Tripitaka. 

Pilgrim said, “Don’t tell me that you've quite forgotten the way! This cave of hers is not a place where you can walk in and out casually. It's a cave you crawl in from above; after | rescue you, we must 
crawl back out from below. If we're lucky, we'll find the mouth of the cave and get out. If we’re unlucky, we may not find the entrance and we may suffocate.” 

“If it's so difficult, what are we going to do?” asked Tripitaka, his eyes brimming with tears. 

“That's nothing! That's nothing!” said Pilgrim. “The monster-spirit wants to drink with you, and you've no choice but to comply. But when you pour for her, do it rather quickly so that there will be bubbles. 
I'll change into a mole cricket and fly into the juice bubbles. When she swallows me inside her stomach, I'll squeeze through her heart and tear her guts apart. After | kill the monster-spirit like that, you'll 
be able to get out.” 

“Disciple,” said Tripitaka, “what you tell me is rather inhuman.” 

“If all you want to practice is virtue,” said Pilgrim, “your life will be finished. A monster spirit is the very cause of harm for humans. How can you pity her?” 

“All right! All right!” said Tripitaka. “But you must stay close to me.” 

Truly that Great Sage Sun firmly guarded Tripitaka Tang; the scripture monk relied solely on Handsome Monkey King. Hardly had the master and disciple finished their discussion than the monster- 
spirit, having completed her preparations, walked near the east corridor and opened the locked door. “Elder.” 

She called out but the Tang Monk dared not reply. She called him again but he still did not dare reply. Because he thought of the proverb: The mouth parts and energy disperses; the tongue moves 
and strife comes to birth. 

Then he reflected further on the fact that if he absolutely refused to open his mouth, she might grow violent and instantly end his life. Truly it was that caught between 2 ills, his mind asked his mouth; 
patient, thinking hard, his mouth asked his mind. As he pondered his dilemma, she called out to him once more, “Elder!” 

The Tang Monk had little choice but to answer her, saying, “Lady, I’m here.” When the elder gave a reply like that, he felt as if his flesh had been drawn down to Hell by the weight of 1000 pounds. Now 
everyone has been saying that the Tang Monk was a priest wholly sincere in his determination to go worship God and seek scriptures in the Western Heaven. How’d | answer a monster like that? 
This was a moment of the gravest danger, a time of life and death for him. He did this because he simply had no alternative. Though he gave such a reply on the outside, he was not in any way swayed 
by lust within. When the monster-spirit heard such a reply from the elder however, she pushed open the door and raised up the Tang Monk with her hands. She then held his hand and put her arm 
around his back, nuzzling him with her head and whispering into his ear. Look at her! She put on a thousand kinds of coy looks and romantic airs, hardly realising that Tripitaka was filled up to his neck 
with annoyance! Smiling secretly to himself, Pilgrim said, “I wonder if Master will be swayed by such seductive behaviour of hers!” Truly the true monk meets beauty for he’s demon-chased. This lissom 
fiend’s most worthily praised! 

Like willow leaves part her faintly drawn brows; her pink cheeks match peach-blossoms on the boughs. 2 tiny feet her embroidered shoes half show; chignons on both sides rise like nests of crow. 
When she, all smiles, takes up the master’s hand, the cassock’s perfumed by sweet orchid-gland. The monster-spirit led Tripitaka near the thatched pavilion and said, “Elder, I've prepared a cup of 
juice which I'd like to drink with you.” 

“Lady,” replied the Tang Monk, “this humble cleric keeps a special diet.” 

“| know that,” said the monster-spirit. “I've sent specially for the pure water from the summit since the water in our cave’s unclean, a product of the copulation of yin and yang, also ordered a vegetarian 
banquet for your enjoyment.” The Tang Monk stepped inside the pavilion with her to look around. Indeed he saw beneath the door drapes of colourful silk and filling the court incense from golden 
beasts. Laid out there were black enamelled tables and black lacquered bamboo trays. On the black enamelled tables were many fine dainties; the bamboo trays had rare vegetarian goods. Crab- 
apples, olives, lotus meat, grapes; musk-berries, hazelnuts, lychees, longans; chestnuts, water chestnuts, dates, persimmons; walnuts, almonds, kumquats, oranges; the fruits of 1 whole mountain, 
vegetables most in season: bean curds, wheat glutens, wood ears, fresh bamboo shoots button mushrooms, flat mushrooms, mountain herbs, yellow Sperms, white and yellow-flowered vegetables 
sautéed in clear oil; flat and round string beans mixed in mellow sauces; cucumbers, calabashes, gingko nuts, and ripe-turnips. Skinned eggplants made like partridges and winter melons carved like 
fangdan. 4Taros cooked till soft, sugar-coated, and white turnips boiled with vinegar. Hot peppers and gingers, best of every kind; the salty and plain well balanced 1 will find. Revealing her slender, 
jade-like fingers and holding high a shiny gold cup, she filled it with fine juice and handed it to the Tang Monk, saying, “Brother Elder, you wonderful man, please drink this cup of love!” 

Terribly embarrassed, Tripitaka took the juice, sprayed a few drops of it toward the air with his fingers, and said this silent prayer: “Those various guardian deities, the Guardians of Five Quarters, the 
Four Sentinels, hear me. This disciple, Chen Xuanzang’s been indebted to the Nun Guanshiyin since leaving the Land of the East for sending you deities to give me secret protection so that | may 
salute at Thunderclap and seek scriptures from a god. Now I’m caught on the way by a monster-spirit who wants to force me to marry her. She’s handing me this cup of juice to drink. If this juice’s 
indeed fit to drink by someone keeping a vegetarian diet, your disciple will make an effort to drink it in hopes that he'll still be able to see God and achieve his merit. If it's unfit to drink, if the juice indeed 
causes this disciple to transgress his commandment, may he fall into eternal perdition!” 

The Great Sage Sun however, had taken on a delicate transformation, and at that critical moment he was whispering into his master’s ear. His words, of course, could be heard only by Tripitaka and 
no one else. Since he knew that his master was rather fond of dietary juice made of grapes, he told him now to drink it. Having no choice but to follow his disciple’s prompting, the master drank it and 
hurriedly poured another cup to present to the fiend. Indeed, he poured it so quickly that there were some bubbles. Pilgrim changed at once into a tiny mole cricket and flew right into the bubbles. The 
monster-spirit however, took the cup in her hand and, instead of drinking immediately, saluted a couple of times to the Tang Monk. Only after she had bashfully said a few words of love to him did she 
raise the cup. By now the bubbles had already dissipated and the insect was fully visible. Not able to recognise that it was a transformation of Pilgrim, the monster-spirit thought that it was a mere insect 
and immediately scooped it up with her little finger and tried to throw it away. When Pilgrim saw that things were not turning out as he had hoped, he knew that it would be difficult to get inside her 
stomach. At once he changed into a hungry old hawk. Truly he has jade claws, golden eyes, and iron quills; a brave, fierce form for battling the clouds. The sly fox, the wily hare on seeing him will 
swiftly flee to farthest land. Hungry, he hunts birds in the wind; sated, he soars to Heaven’s gate. His old fists, most deadly, are hard as steel; even the sky he finds too low in flight. ‘He darted up and 
stretched out his jade-like claws; with a loud crash he overturned the banquet tables and smashed to pieces all those fruits and vegetables, all those saucers and cups. Then he flew out of the place, 
abandoning the Tang Monk. The heart, bladder of the monster-spirit almost burst with fear, the bones, and flesh of the Tang Monk too turned numb. Trembling all over, the monster-spirit embraced him 
and said, “Brother Elder, where did this creature come from?” 

“Your poor monk’s no idea,” replied Tripitaka. 

“I've taken great pains,” said the fiend, “to prepare this vegetarian banquet for your enjoyment. But | wonder where this wretched hairy beast came from to smash up all my utensils?” 

“Mistress,” said the various little fiends, “smashing the utensils is not half as bad as spilling all those dietary foods on the ground. How can they be used now that they are defiled?” 

Tripitaka of course knew that this was the power of Pilgrim but he dared not reveal it. That monster-spirit said, “Little ones, | know. It must be that Heaven and Earth are displeased by my seizure of the 
Tang Monk and they send down this creature. Take away the broken utensils and prepare some other juice and food. It doesn’t matter whether they are dietary or not. I'll ask Heaven to be the marriage 
go-between and Earth to be the witness. Then the Tang Monk and I'll be married.” 

Thereupon they sent the elder back to the room in the east corridor. Pilgrim flew up out of the place and changed into his true form as he reached the entrance of the cave. “Open up,” he cried. 

8 Rules laughed and said, “Sand-monk, Elder Brother's here.” The 2 of them lowered their weapons for Pilgrim to jump out. 8 Rules walked forward to tug at him saying, “There’s a monster-spirit? Our 
master’s there?” 

“Yes! Yes! Yes!” replied Pilgrim. 

“Master must be suffering in there,” said 8 Rules. “Is he tied up or is he trussed up? Do they want to steam him or boil him?” 

“Nothing of that sort,” said Pilgrim. “She only wants to prepare a vegetarian banquet so that she can do that thing with him.” 

“Lucky you! Lucky you!” said 8 Rules. “You must have drunk some wedding juice!” 

“O Idiot!” said Pilgrim. “Master's life is in danger! What wedding juice have | drunk?” 

“Why did you come back then?” asked 8 Rules. 

Pilgrim gave a thorough account of how he found the Tang Monk and how he went into transformation. Then he said, “Brothers, no more of these foolish thoughts. Master is here. When old monkey 
goes back this time, he will certainly rescue him.” 

At once he entered the cave again and changed into a fly to alight on the towered gate. There he heard the fiend panting hard and giving the following instruction: “Little ones, just bring me some food 
for the offering. | don’t care whether it’s vegetarian or not. I'll entreat Heaven and Earth to be my go-between and witness, for I’m determined to marry that priest.” 

On hearing this, Pilgrim smiled and said to himself, “This monster-spirit’s completely shameless! She’s a priest locked up at home in broad daylight for fun and games! But let's not rush things. Let old 
monkey go inside to have a look first.” 


With a buzz he flew to the east corridor where he saw his master sitting in the room with clear teardrops rolling down his cheeks. Pilgrim crawled in there and landed on his bald head, crying, “Master!” 
Recognising his voice, the elder jumped up all at once and said spitefully through clenched teeth, “Wretched ape! Any other person who has the gall to do something, at least the gall is wrapped inside 
the person’s body. But in your case, it’s your gall that has you wrapped inside! How much could those utensils that you smashed by flaunting your magic transformation be worth? But if you provoke 
the monster-spirit and arouse her lechery, she'll not bother about dietary laws and will insist on copulating with me. What am | to do then?” 

“Master,” said Pilgrim softly, trying to placate him, “please don’t be offended. I’ve a plan to rescue you.” 

“How will you rescue me?” asked the Tang Monk. 

“When | flew up just now,” replied Pilgrim, “I noticed that she has a garden in the rear. Trick her to go play with you in the garden. I'll rescue you then.” 

“How will you rescue me in the garden?” asked the Tang Monk once more. 

Pilgrim said, “When you get to the garden with her, you'd stop walking once you reach the peach trees. Let me fly up to one of the branches and change into a red peach. You pretend that you want to 
eat a fruit and pluck off the red one that | change into. Undoubtedly she will want to pluck one off also. Insist on giving yours to her. The moment she takes a bite, I'll enter her stomach. Then I'll punch 
through her belly and tear her guts apart. When she’s dead, you'll be free.” 

“If you’ve the ability,” said Tripitaka, “all you need is to fight with her. Why must you want to get inside her belly?” 

“Master, you're just not too sensible!” said Pilgrim. “If this cave of hers were easy to get into and out of, then I’d fight with her. But it is not; in fact, the crooked paths here are exceedingly hard to 
negotiate. If! move against her, the whole nest of them, old and young, may have me bogged down. What shall | do then? I’ve to use this underhanded method to mop things up!” 

Nodding his head in belief, Tripitaka said only, “You must stay close to me.” 

“| know! | know!” said Pilgrim. “I’m on your head!” 

After master and disciple had formulated their plan, Tripitaka got up and, supporting himself on the shutters, called out: “Lady! Lady!” When the monster-spirit heard him, she ran near to him and said, 
giggling, “Dears Wonderful Man, what do you want?” 

“Lady,” said Tripitaka, “Since | left Chang’an to journey westward, there’s not a day when | didn’t have to climb a mountain or ford a river. When | stayed at the Sea-Pacifying Monastery the other day, 
| caught a bad cold. Only today’s my condition improved somewhat for I've been perspiring. I’m grateful to you for bringing me to your mortal residence but having sat here all day | feel sickly again. 
There’s a place where you can take me for some relaxation?” 

Highly pleased, the fiend said, “If dear wonderful man shows this kind of interest, I'll be delighted to take you strolling in the garden,” she then cried out, ‘little ones, bring me the key to open the garden. 
Sweep out the path.” Pushing open the shutters, this monster-spirit led the Tang Monk out by the hand. Look at those many little fiends of hers, all with oiled hair and powdered faces, all sinuous and 
lissom! They surged around the Tang Monk and headed straight for the garden. Marvellous monk! He found no ease in this troop of satin and silk; played deaf and dumb in such brocaded grove. He 
only could face God who had an iron mind and heart; no mortal fond of juice and sex would succeed in scripture-fetching. When they reached the entrance of the garden, the monster-spirit whispered 
lovingly to him saying, “Dear wonderful man, enjoy yourself here. You may truly relax and unwind.” 

Walking hand in hand with her into the garden, the Tang Monk raised his head to look around. It was indeed a lovely place. What he saw were paths twisting and turning, profusely coated with specks 
of green moss; handsome silk-gauze windows, each faintly enclosed by embroidered screens. When a gentle breeze rises, western silk and eastern damask spread out fluttering; when a fine rain 
recedes, ice-flesh and jade-substance appear seductive. The sun warms fresh apricots, red like the skirts that mortals hang out to dry; the moon illumes the plantain, green like feathered fans whirled 
by a goddess. By the painted walls on 4 sides orioles recite amid 10000 willows; around the leisure cottage butterflies swirl through the yard’s cherry-apples. Look further at the fragrance-holding, the 
green-moth, the juice-dispelling, and the romance alcoves 1 on top of the other where the rolled-up red curtains are drawn by hooks like shrimp-whiskers. Look also at the grief-relieving, the purity- 
draped, the brow-painting, and the 4-rains kiosks, each a noble edifice with floriated plaques inscribed with seal scripts. Look at the crane-bathing, the goblet-washing, the moon-pleasing, and the 
tassel-cleansing pools where golden scales glisten among green lilies and reeds; there are, too the ink-flower, the strange-chest, the proper-weal, and the cloud-adoring arbours where mellow juice 
floats within jade flasks and cups. Beyond and before the pools and kiosks there are rocks from Lake Tai, purple-blooming, parrot-falling, and rocks of Sichuan Rivers around which the green tiger- 
whisker rush are planted. East and west of the alcoves and arbours, there are false wooden, kingfisher-screen, wind-whistling, jade-agaric hills, on each grow thickets of phoenix-tail bamboos. The 
tumi’ and the cinnamon rose props near the stand of swing all seem like brocade curtains and silk drapes. The pine-and-cypress, the magnolia facing the rosebush kiosks both resemble a green city’s 
embroidered veils. The shaoyao! rails, the peony groves, their flowers vie for denseness in purple and red; the yehe® terrace, the white jasmine fence both bring forth grace and glamour year after year. 
The magnolia adorned with drops of dew should be sketched or drawn; the hibiscus blazing red toward the sky should be hymned or recited. Speaking of scenery, let’s not boast of Langyuan or Penglai; 
to compare such beauty 1 need not count Yao’s yellow or Wei’s purple. '°In late spring when 1 fences with grass, this garden lacks only divine blooms of jade. The elder walking hand in hand with the 
fiend to enjoy the garden, could hardly look at all the rare flowers and exotic plants. After going past many arbours and kiosks and entering gradually as it were, the lovely scenery, he saw all at once 
that they had arrived in front of the peach orchard. Pilgrim gave his master’s head a pinch and the elder knew immediately what he meant. Flying up to one of the branches, Pilgrim with one shake of 
his body changed into a peach, a lovely red one. The elder said to the monster-spirit, “Lady, you've here fragrant blooms in the yard, ripened fruits on the boughs — fragrant blooms in the yard that bees 
vie to sip; ripened fruits on the boughs that birds fight to pluck. But why’s it that on this particular peach tree the peaches are both red and green?” 

With a giggle the monster-spirit said, “When Heaven’s lacking in yin and yang, the sun and the moon won't shine; when the Earth’s lacking in yin and yang, male and female can’t be distinguished. The 
same principle applies to the fruits of this peach tree. Those on the sunny side are ripened first by the warmth and that’s why they're red; those on the shady side will grow but without the benefit of the 
sun and that’s why they're still green. This is the principle of yin and yang.” 

“| thank my lady for the instruction,” said Tripitaka, “for this humble cleric indeed had no idea this was so.” He immediately reached forward and plucked a red peach, and the monster-spirit too went 
and plucked a green one. Saluting, Tripitaka presented the red peach to the fiend, saying, “Lady, you're fond of colours, so please take this red peach. Give me the green one to eat.” 

The monster-spirit indeed exchanged it with him, saying in secret delight to herself, “Dear monk! A true man! indeed! We're not husband and wife even for one day, and he’s already so affectionate!” 
Her delight in fact caused her to behave more cordially than ever to the Tang Monk. When he took the green peach and began eating it at once, the monster-spirit was only too pleased to keep him 
company. Opening her cherry lips to reveal her silvery teeth, she was about to take a bite. But Pilgrim Sun had always been impetuous. Before she could sink her teeth into the fruit, he immediately 
rolled inside her mouth and somersaulted through her throat down to her stomach. Terribly frightened, the monster-spirit said to Tripitaka, “O Elder, this fruit is really something! How could it roll down 
there before | even bit it?” 

“Lady,” said Tripitaka, “a newly ripened fruit is most edible. That’s why it goes quickly.” 

“But I’ve not even spat out the pit,” said the monster-spirit, “and it has gone down already.” 

“When you're in such an excellent mood, Lady,” replied Tripitaka, “you've a good appetite. That's why it goes down even before you manage to spit out the pit.” 

In her stomach, Pilgrim changed back to his true form and cried, “Master, don’t banter with her. Old monkey has already scored!” 

“Disciple, do try not to be too harsh,” replied Tripitaka. Hearing that, the monster-spirit said, “Whom are you talking to?” 

“To my disciple, Sun Wukong,” replied Tripitaka. 

“Where is Sun Wukong?” asked the monster-spirit. 

“In your stomach, of course!” replied Tripitaka. “Isn’t he the red peach you just ate?” 

Horrified, the monster-spirit said, “Finished! Finished! If this ape-head has crawled inside my belly, I’m as good as dead! Pilgrim Sun, what do you plan to do after using all your schemes and plots to 
get inside my belly?” 

“Not much!” replied Pilgrim spitefully inside her. “I'll just devour your six loaves of liver and lung, ‘your triple-haired and seven-holed heart. All five viscera I'll clean out, one rattling spirit you'll become!” 
On hearing this, the monster-spirit was scared out of her wits. Trembling all over, she embraced the Tang Monk to say, “O Elder! | thought we’re fated to be by one scarlet thread’? bound, two hearts 
as one like fish in water found. Who knows birds of love will thus be parted that spouses will sever broken-hearted? Our affair fails for Blue Bridge tide'4 is high; our meeting’s vain as temple incense‘ 
dies. Drawn to each other we must now disperse. Which year will | once more with you converse?” 

Inside her belly Pilgrim heard her speaking in this manner, and he was afraid that the compassionate elder might be deceived again. At once he began to wave his fists and stamp his feet, to assume 
boxing postures and do gymnastic exercises with his four limbs, nearly punching through her leather bag in the process. Unable to endure the pain, the monster-spirit dropped to the ground and dared 
not speak for a long time. When Pilgrim found that she was silent, he thought that she might be dead and decided to ease up somewhat. Catching her breath, she cried, “Little ones where are you?” 
When those little fiends entered the garden, they all knew how to behave. Instead of congregating in one place, they scattered to play — plucking flowers or fencing with grasses — so as to allow the 
monster-spirit to flirt freely with the Tang Monk. When they suddenly heard the summons, they ran to the spot and found the monster-spirit fallen to the ground, pale and groaning, hardly able even to 
crawl. Hurriedly they tried to raise her as they crowded around, all asking, “Mistress, what's wrong? Are you having a heart attack?” 

“No! No!” replied the monster-spirit. “Don’t ask but I’ve someone in my stomach! Just get this monk out, quickly, so that my life may be preserved.” Those little fiends indeed went forward and tried to 
pull the elder out. 
“Don’t any of you dare raise your hand!” yelled Pilgrim inside her belly. “If you want to, you yourself must present my master to the outside world. When we get there, I'll spare you.” 

The monster-spirit, of course, had no other motivation than pity for her own life. Struggling to her feet, she swiftly placed the Tang Monk on her back and strode toward the outside. Running after her, 
the little fiends asked, “Mistress where are you going?” The monster-spirit said, “Let's get this fellow outside! If we the moon above the five lakes retain, there’s always a spot to drop the hook again! 
Let me find someone else instead.” 

Dear monster-spirit! She mounted the cloudy luminosity and immediately reached the entrance of the cave where a loud clangour of arms could be heard. “Disciple,” said Tripitaka, “I can hear the 
sound of weapons outside.” 

Pilgrim said, “It has to be 8 Rules wielding his muckrake. Call him.” Tripitaka at once called out: “Eight Rules!” 

8 Rules heard him and said, “Sand-monk, Master's come out!” The 2 of them removed the rake and the staff and the monster-spirit carried the Tang Monk outside. Aha! Truly it is that mind Monkey, 
responding within, subdues a fiend; wood and Earth guarding the door receive a sage monk. 


099 

Mind Monkey knows the elixir source; fair girl returns to her true nature 
Tripitaka was escorted out of the cave by the monster-spirit. Sand-monk drew near and asked, “Master, you’ve come out but where’s Elder Brother?” 
“He’s calculating enough,” said 8 Rules, “so he must have accompanied Master out here somehow.” 
Pointing at the monster-spirit, Tripitaka said, “Your Elder Brother is in her belly.” 
“How dirty and smelly!” said 8 Rules with a giggle, “What's he doing in her belly? Come out!” 
Pilgrim cried out from within: “Open wide your mouth and let me come out!” The fiend opened her mouth as bidden. Pilgrim reduced his size and crawled up to her throat; he was about to go out but 
fearing that she might bite him, he took out the iron rod and blew his mortal breath onto it crying, “Change!” 
It changed into a small nail that propped up the roof of her mouth. With a bound he leaped clear of her mouth, taking along with him the iron rod as he jumped. One stretch of his torso helped him to 
assume his characteristic appearance, as he struck with uplifted rod. The monster-spirit also picked up her pair of treasure swords and blocked his blow with a loud clang. The 2 of them thus began a 
fierce battle on the top of the mountain: double swords flying that slash at the face; a golden-hooped rod that aims at the head. 1 is a Heaven-born ape with a mind-monkey frame; 1 is an Earth-born 
spirit with a fair-girl form. The 2 of them are full of hate; gladness breeds rancour, causing a mighty bout. That 1 desires primal yang to be her mate; this 1 fights pure yin to form the holy babe. ‘The 
upraised rod fills the sky with chilly fog; the sword goes forth, the land roils with black dirt. Because the elder’s in quest of God, they strive bitterly showing great power. Water wars with fire to hurt the 
basic way; 2yin-yang cannot unite, each drifting free. The 2 engage in such a lengthy brawl that mountain and earth quake as forests sprawl. When 8 Rules saw them battling in this manner, he began 
to murmur against Pilgrim. Turning to Sand-monk, he said, “Brother, Elder Brother's twiddling! When he’s in her just now, he’d have sent her a belly-full-of-red with his fists and crawled out by punching 
through her stomach. That way he’d have had done with her, wouldn’t he? Why did he have to come out through her mouth and fight with her, allowing her to be so insolent?” 
“You're quite right,” replied Sand-monk, “but Elder Brother, after all, has worked very hard to have Master rescued from a deep cave. Now that he has to fight some more with the monster-spirit, | think 
Master should sit by himself while you and | go with our weapons to lend some assistance to Elder Brother. Let’s go and knock down that monster-spirit.” 
“No! No! No!” said 8 Rules, waving his hand. “He has magic powers but we’re quite useless.” 


“What are you saying?” asked Sand-monk. “That's something that will benefit everyone. We may be useless but even our fart can add to the wind!” That Idiot did become aroused for the moment; 
whipping out his rake, he cried, “Let’s go then!” 

Abandoning their master, they both mounted the wind and rushed forward to battle, madly delivering blows to the monster-spirit with their rake and staff. The monster-spirit was already having difficulty 
withstanding Pilgrim by herself; when she saw the two of them, she knew that defeat was certain. Twirling around, she tried to flee. 

“Brothers, catch her!” snapped Pilgrim. When the monster-spirit saw that they were pressing, she yanked off the flower slipper from her right foot and blew her mortal breath on it, crying, “Change!” It 
at once took on her appearance, attacking her pursuers with two swords. She herself with one shake of her body, changed into a clear gust of wind and sped away. Now, you may think that we’re only 
speaking of her defeat and of her retreat out of regard for her own life. How could you know that this had to be the turn of events? It must be that the star of calamity had not withdrawn its influence 
over Tripitaka. As the monster-spirit sped by the cave entrance, she saw Tripitaka sitting all alone beneath the towered gate. Rushing up to him, she snatched him and the luggage as well and bit 
through the reins; she succeeded in abducting both person and horse into the cave. 8 Rules found an opening and struck down the monster-spirit with one blow of his rake. Then he discovered that it 
was only a flower slipper. “You two idiots!” said Pilgrim. “It's enough for you to look after Master. Who asked you to come and help?” 

“There you're, Sand-monk!” said 8 Rules. “Didn't | tell you not to come? This monkey's sick in his brains! We help him to subdue the fiend but he blames us instead!” 

“Where on earth did you subdue a fiend?” Pilgrim said. “When she fought with me yesterday, that fiend tricked me by this ploy of dropping her slipper. | wonder how Master is faring now that you two 
have left his side. Let's hurry back and look!” 

The three of them hurried back but their master indeed had vanished. There was not even a trace of the luggage or the white horse. So astonished was 8 Rules that he dashed back and forth in 
confusion while Sand-monk searched hither and yon. The Great Sage Sun too was racked by anxiety as he looked everywhere, and then he saw half a rein lying by the side of the road. Picking it up, 
he could not stop the tears flowing from his eyes. “O Master!” he cried aloud. “When | left | took leave of both man and horse; when | returned I'd see only this rope!” Thus it was that seeing the saddle 
he recalled the horse; shedding tears he thought of his kin. When 8 Rules saw him shedding tears however, he broke into loud guffaws with face raised toward the sky. “You coolie!” scolded Pilgrim. 
“You want to disband again!” 

“O Elder Brother!” said 8 Rules, still laughing. “It’s not like that. Master must have been abducted into the cave once more by the monster-spirit. As the proverb says, ‘Success comes only with a third 
try.’ You've entered the cave twice. Now go in a third time, and I’m sure that you'll be able to bring out Master.” 

Wiping away his tears, Pilgrim replied, “All right! Since things are this way, I’ve little choice but to go in again. Now that you don’t even have to worry about the luggage and the horse, you must take 
care to guard the entrance.” Dear Great Sage! He turned and leaped into the cave; not undergoing transformation, he merely retained his characteristic appearance. Truly of strange-looking cheeks 
and a valiant mind, he grew up a fiend with great magic strength. His face like a saddle curved up and down; eyes flashed gold beams that blazed like fire. Hard like needles were his whole body’s furs; 
tiger-skin kilt jingled with loud floral bells. In Heaven he crashed through 10000 clouds; his rod in the sea lifted mountainous waves. That day his might beat up the Deity-Kings and repelled 108000 
foes. Appointed Great Sage, the Handsome Monkey Sprite used a golden-hooped rod by custom. In the West today displaying his might to save Tripitaka he enters the cave. Look at him! He stopped 
the cloudy luminosity after he reached the residence of the monster-spirit where he found the towered gates were all shut. Without regard for good or ill, he broke through with one blow of his rod and 
barged in. It was completely quiet and not a trace of the inhabitants could be found. The Tang Monk was no longer seen by the east corridor; the furniture in the pavilion and the various utensils had all 
disappeared. There were some three hundred miles of living space inside the cave, and the monster-spirit had many residences. When she had brought the Tang Monk to this particular spot the time 
before, Pilgrim had found them. Now that she had abducted the Tang Monk again, she feared that Pilgrim would return to the same place, and so she immediately moved somewhere else. Our Pilgrim 
was so exasperated that he pounded his chest and stamped his feet, crying, “O Master! You're a misfortune-begotten Tripitaka Tang, a scripture monk forged by calamity! Alas! This road’s familiar 
enough to me. Why aren't you here? Where'd old monkey look for you?” 

As he was shouting like this in great annoyance, his nose suddenly caught a whiff of scented breeze. Calming down all at once, he said to himself, “This incense drifted out from the rear. They must be 
back there.” Gripping the iron rod, he strode in but found no movement whatever — only three small chambers. At the back of one of these chambers was a lacquered sacrificial table with open-mouthed 
dragons carved on both sides. On the table was a huge incense um of melted gold from which fragrant incense smoke curled upward. Above the urn was hung a large plaque with the following 
inscription in gold letters: The Tablet of Honoured Dad, Deity-King Li. Slightly below it to one side was another inscription: The Tablet of Honoured Brother Nata, the Third Prince. Filled with delight by 
what he saw, Pilgrim immediately abandoned his search for the fiend or the Tang Monk. He gave his iron rod a squeeze to change it back into an embroidery needle that he could store in his ear. 
Stretching forth his hands, he took the plaque and the urn and trod on his cloudy luminosity to go back out to the entrance of the cave, hee-hawing in continuous laughter on the way. 

When 8 Rules and Sand-monk heard him, they stepped aside to meet him, saying, “Elder Brother, you must have succeeded in rescuing Master, and that’s why you're so happy.” 

“No need for us to go rescue Master,” said Pilgrim, still guffawing, “just make our demand known to this plaque.” O Elder Brother!” said 8 Rules. “This plaque is no monster-spirit, nor does it know how 
to speak. Why should we make our demand known to it?” 

“Take a look, both of you,” said Pilgrim as he placed the plaque on the ground. Sand-monk approached and saw the inscriptions: The Tablet of Honoured Dad Deity-King Li, and The Tablet of Honoured 
Brother Nata, the Third Prince. “What's the meaning of this?” he asked. 

“It's something to which the monster-spirit makes offerings,” replied Pilgrim. “When | broke into her residence, | found that both persons and things had disappeared. There was only this plaque. She 
has to be the daughter of Deity-King Li, the younger sister of the third prince who has descended to the Region Below out of profane longings. Disguised as a fiend, she has abducted our master. If we 
don’t demand of the persons whose names appear on this plaque whom should we ask? While the two of you stand guard here, let old monkey take the plaque and go up to Heaven to file charges 
before the Jade Emperor. That'll make Deity-King Li and his son return our master.” 

“O Elder Brother!” said 8 Rules. “As the proverb says, ‘To charge someone with a mortal offence is itself a mortal offence.’ You can't do it unless your cause is just. Besides, do you think that filing 
charges before the throne is an easy thing? You'd better tell me how you plan to go about it.” 

“I've my way,” said Pilgrim with a laugh. “This plaque and this urn I'll use as evidence. In addition, I'll file a formal, written complaint.” 

‘What are you going to put in that complaint?” asked 8 Rules. “Let’s hear it.” 

Pilgrim said, “This is what | plan to say: 

The plaintiff Sun Wukong whose age and birthday are recorded here in the document, is the disciple of the priest, Tripitaka Tang who has been sent by the Tang Court in the Land of the East to seek 
scriptures in the Western Heaven. The complaint | lodge concerns the crime of abetting a monster in kidnapping a human. | hereby accuse Li Jing, the Pagoda-Bearer Deity-King, along with Prince 
Nata, his son, of gross negligence in domestic affairs that caused his own daughter to become a runaway. At the Region Below she had assumed the form of monstrous perversity in the Bottomless 
Cave of Mount Void-Entrapping, bringing vexation and harm to countless humans. She has, at the moment, abducted my master into the crooked recesses of her habitation where he cannot be found 
at all. I've no choice but to charge dad and son with an act of great atrocity, for allowing the daughter to become a spirit and to harm people. | beg you, therefore, to sustain in your great mercy my 
complaint and arrest the culprits, so that perversity may be brought to submission, my master may be rescued, and the guilt of the offenders may be clearly established. In anticipation of your kind 
assistance, | hereby submit my complaint. 

On hearing these words, 8 Rules and Sand-monk were terribly pleased, both saying, “O Elder Brother, your complaint is most reasonable! You'll undoubtedly win the case. You’d better go there at 
once, for we fear that a little delay may result in the monster-spirit’s taking our master’s life.” 

“lll hurry! I'll hurry!” said Pilgrim. “It'll take me no more than the time needed for boiling tea, or at most for rice to be cooked, to get back here.” 

Dear Great Sage! Holding the plaque and the urn, he leaped up to mount the auspicious cloud and went straight before the South Heaven Gate. When Deity-Kings Powerful and The Upholder of the 
Nation who were standing guard at the gate, saw him, both bent low to salute him and dared not bar his way. He was permitted to go straight up to the Hall of Perfect Light where he was greeted by 
Zhang, Ge, Xu, and Qiu, the four Celestial Masters. “Why has the Great Sage come?” they asked. 

“I've a document here,” replied Pilgrim, “which | intend to file as a formal complaint.” 

“This caster of blame!” said one of the astonished masters. “I wonder whom he plans to accuse.” They had no choice but to lead him into the Hall of Divine Mists to announce his arrival. He was then 
summoned into the presence of the Jade Emperor. 

After putting down the plaque and the um and paying homage to the throne, he presented his plaint that the Mortal Ge received and spread out on the imperial desk. When the Jade Emperor had read 
its content from beginning to end, he signed the document and endorsed it as an imperial decree. Then he commanded Gold Star Venus, Longevity of the West, to take the decree and go to the Cloud- 
Tower Palace to summon Deity-King Li, the Pagoda-Bearer, to appear before the throne. 

“| beg the Heaven Lord to punish him properly,” said Pilgrim, walking forward, “or else he may start some other trouble.” 

The Jade Emperor gave this order also: “Let the plaintiff go along.” 

“Should old monkey really go along?” asked Pilgrim. 

“Since His Majesty has already issued the decree,” said one of the Celestial Masters, “you may go with the Gold Star.” 

Pilgrim indeed mounted the clouds with the Gold Star to reach the Cloud-Tower Palace that was the residence of the Deity-King. There was a divine youth standing in front of the gate who recognised 
the Gold Star. He went inside at once and announced, “The Holy Dad Gold Star Venus’s arrived.” 

The Deity-King went out to meet his guest; when he saw that the Gold Star was bearing an imperial decree, he asked immediately for incense to be lighted. Then he caught sight of Pilgrim following 
the Gold Star in, and the Deity-King stirred with anger. Because during the time when Pilgrim caused great disturbance at the Celestial Palace, the Jade Emperor once appointed the Deity-King as the 
Demon-Subduing Grand Marshal and Prince Nata as a god of the Three Charities Grand Assembly. They were to lead the Heaven hosts against Pilgrim but they could not prevail even after several 
engagements. The defeat of five centuries ago still rankled him, and that was why he became angry. Unable to restrain himself, he asked, “Old Longevity, what's that decree you're bearing?” 

“It happens to be a complaint,” replied the Gold Star, “lodged against you by the Great Sage Sun.” 

The Deity-King was already sorely annoyed; when he heard this, he became enraged, saying, “What's he accusing me of?” 

“The crime of abetting a monster in kidnapping a human,” replied the Gold Star. “After you've lit the incense, you may read it for yourself.” 

Panting hard, the Deity-King hurriedly set out the incense table; after he had expressed his gratitude toward the sky and respected, he spread out the decree. A careful reading of the document however, 
sent him into such a rage that he gripped the table with both hands and said, “This ape-head! He has so wrongly accused me!” 

The Gold Star said, “Don’t get so mad! He happens to have a plaque and an ur for evidence before the throne, and he claims that all those objects point to your own daughter.” 

“But I've only three sons and a daughter,” said the Deity-King. “The eldest is Suvarnata who serves Siddhartha as the vanguard of the Law. My second son is Liberation who is the disciple of Guanshiyin 
at South Sea. My third son Nata is with me and attends court night and day as an imperial guardsman. My only daughter, named Zhenying, happens to be only seven years old. She doesn’t even know 
much of human affairs. How could she be a monster-spirit? If you don’t believe me, let me carry her out for you to see. This ape-head is mighty insolent! Let's not say that I’m a marshal in Heaven who 
has received such a high appointment that I’m permitted to execute someone first before memorialising to the throne. Even if | were one of the common people in the Region Below, I’d not be falsely 
accused. The Law says, ‘A false accusation should receive a thrice-heavy penalty.” He turned to his subordinates with the order: “Tie up this ape-head with the fiend-binding rope!” 

The Mighty-Spirit God, General Fish-Belly, and Marshal Lightning-Nature spirit who were standing in a row down at the courtyard, immediately surged forward and tied up Pilgrim. “Deity-King Li,” said 
the Gold Star, “you'd better not start any trouble! He is one of the two persons decreed by the throne to come here to summon you. That rope of yours is quite heavy. If you hurt him in any way, you'll 
be the loser!” 

“O Gold Star!” said the Deity-King. “How could you allow him to file false charges and disturb the peace like that? Please be seated while | cut off this ape-head with the fiend-hacking scimitar. Then I'll 
return with you to see the throne.” 

When the Gold Star learned that he was about to raise the scimitar, his heart quivered and his bladder shook as he said to Pilgrim, “You’ve made a mistake! Filing charges before the throne is no light 
thing! Why didn’t you try to ascertain the truth first? All your foolish doings now may cause you to lose your life. What'll you do?” 

Not frightened in the least, Pilgrim said, full of smiles, “Relax, old Minister, it's nothing! Old monkey has to do his own business this way: he must lose first, and then he'll win.” 

Hardly had he finished speaking when the Deity-King wielded his scimitar and brought it down hard on Pilgrim’s head. All at once the 3” prince rushed forward and parried the blow with the fiend- 
hacking sword crying, “Dad King, please calm your anger!” 

The Deity-King turned pale with alarm. Ah! When the dad saw the son parrying the scimitar with his own sword, he should have commanded the son to turn back. This is the reason: when this child 
was born to the Deity-King, she had on his left hand the word Na, and on his right the word Ta, and that was why he was named Nata. On the third morning after he was born, this prince already decided 


to bathe in the ocean and caused a great disaster. He overturned the water-crystal palace and wanted to pull out the tendons of one of the dragons to use them for a belt. When the Deity-King learned 
of the incident, he feared that his son might prove to be a calamity afterward and sought to have him killed. Nata became enraged; knife in hand, he cut off his own flesh to give it back to his mum and 
carved up his bones to give them back to his dad. After he had, as it were, repaid his dad’s sperm and his mum’s blood, his soul went to the region of ultimate bliss in the West to complain to God. God 
at the time was lecturing to the various Nuns when he heard someone on the sacred banners and parasol calling, “Save me!” 

1 look with his eyes of wisdom and God knew it was the soul of Nata. Using the root of the lotus for bones and its leaves for garment, he recited the magic words of revivification and restored Nata to 
life. With his newfound divine strength, Nata succeeded in subduing the fiendish demons of ninety-six caves. His magic powers were so great that he later wanted to kill the Deity-King in order to exact 
vengeance for self-immolation. The Deity-King had little choice but to plead with Siddhartha who of course was an advocate of peace. He therefore bestowed on the Deity-King a compliant, yellow-gold 
treasure pagoda of the finest openwork carving and filled with sari-relics; the pagoda in fact symbolised God on each level, and the entire edifice was bathed in luminosity. The sight of the pagoda thus 
would remind Nata of God who was to be revered as the prince’s true dad, and that is how the enmity was dissolved. This is the reason also for Li Jing to be named the Deity-King Pagoda-Bearer. 
Since he was at home today, at leisure, the Deity-King had not been carrying his pagoda, and he thought that Nata had been seized by the desire for vengeance again. That was the reason he paled 
with fear. Immediately reaching for the gold treasure pagoda on the stand and holding it high, he asked Nata, “Son, you've parried my scimitar with your sword. What do you want to say to me?” 
Abandoning his sword and respecting, Nata replied, “Dad King, you do have a daughter at the Region Below.” 

“Son,” said the Deity-King, “I've had only the four of you. What other daughter do I’ve?” 

“You've quite forgotten, Dad King,” said Nata. “That other daughter's originally a monster-spirit. Some three centuries ago she became a fiend who stole and devoured the fragrant flowers and treasure 
candles of Siddhartha at Spirit Mountain. Siddhartha sent us, dad and son to lead an expedition against her. When she’s caught, she’d have been beaten to death but Siddhartha gave us this instruction: 
for fishes reared in the ponds you never fish; for deer fed in the mountains long life’s your wish. At that time therefore, we spared her life and in gratitude she took you as her dad and your child as her 
elder brother. She’s to set up our tablets down below to which she’d offer perpetual incense fires. Who'd have expected her to become a spirit again and conspire to harm the Tang Monk? When Pilgrim 
Sun searched through her lair, the tablets were found and charges were thus filed before the throne. This is your daughter by the bond of grace, not a sister of mine by blood.” 

Astounded by what he heard, the Deity-King said, “My child, I’ve indeed forgotten the whole matter. What's her name?” 

“She's three of them,” replied the prince. “At her birthplace she’s originally called the Golden-Nosed White-Haired Rodent-Spirit. Because she’d stolen the fragrant flowers and treasure candles, her 
name's changed to Bisected Guanyin. When she’s spared and sent to the Region Below, she changed her name again to Mistress Ground-Rushing.” 

Only then did the Deity-King realise what had happened. Immediately he wanted to untie Pilgrim with his own hands but Pilgrim had turned rowdy. “Who dares untie me?” he cried. “You can take me 
in ropes to see the throne! Old monkey will then win his litigation!” 

The hands of the Deity-King turned numb with fear, the prince became speechless, and the various subordinate officers retreated shamefacedly. Rolling all over the place in a tantrum, the Great Sage 
insisted that the Deity-King appear before the throne with him. Having no alternative, the Deity-King could only plead pitifully with the Gold Star to speak on his behalf. The Gold Star said, “As the 
ancients put the matter, one’d be lenient in all things. The way you do things however, is rather hasty! You’ve bound him and even wanted to kill him. This monkey happens to be notorious in casting 
blame. Now what do you want me to do? According to what your son’s told us, she isn’t your daughter by blood but only by bond. Nonetheless, that’s still an important tie of kinship. No matter how you 
dispute the matter, you’re somewhat guilty.” 

The Deity-King said, “If the venerable Star would speak on my behalf, then my guilt will be absolved.” 

“I'd like indeed to pacify you both,” said the Gold Star, “but | don’t quite know how to plead for you.” 

“Why don’t you,” said the Deity-King, “just mention the former incident, when you went to him on your mission of pacification and gave him his appointment?” The Gold Star did indeed go forward to 
touch Pilgrim and said, “Great Sage, for my sake let us untie you so that we may all go see the throne.” 

“Old Minister,” said Pilgrim, “you needn't untie me. | know how to roll, and I'll roll my way there!” 

“Monkey, you're quite unfeeling!” said the Gold Star, chuckling. “I was, after all, rather kind to you in times past. Now you refuse me even in a trivial matter like this.” 

“What sort of kindness have you shown me?” asked Pilgrim. 

The Gold Star said, “In those years when you're a fiend in Mount Flower-Fruit, when you tamed tigers and subdued dragons, when you abolished the register of death by force, and when you assembled 
various monsters to perpetrate your delinquency, Heaven above wanted to arrest you. It was this old man who boldly memorialised to the throne to issue a decree of pacification and have you summoned 
to the Celestial Palace and appointed you a Ban-Horse-Plague. After you had drunk the mortal juice of the Jade Emperor and needed pacification once more, it was this old man’s bold memorial also 
that got you the appointment of Great Sage Equal to Heaven. But you didn’t behave and went on to steal peaches, filch juice, and rifle elixir from Lord Lao. Only after this and that did you attain a state 
of birth-less-ness and deathlessness. But if it hadn't been for me, would you've reached this day?” 

Pilgrim said, “The ancients truly had put the matter well: even in death you’d not share a grave with an old man! Like it or not, he knows how to carp! What's so big that | did? | merely disturbed the 
Celestial Palace as Ban-Horse-Plague. All right! All right! For your sake, Venerable Sir, I'll relent but he himself must untie me.” Only then did the Deity-King dare approach and untie the rope. Pilgrim 
was then invited to tidy his clothes and take the honoured seat, after which the various deities went forward one by one to pay their respects. 

Facing the Gold Star, Pilgrim said, “Old Minister, how about it? Didn’t | tell you that I'd lose first, and then win? That's how one should do business! Let’s urge him to go see the throne quickly, lest my 
master is harmed.” 

“Let's not rush things,” said the Gold Star. “Having squandered all this time already, let's have a cup of tea first.” 

“If you drink his tea,” said Pilgrim, “you're in fact accepting his bribe. What sort of crime should you be charged with, when you free the felon on a bribe and slight the imperial decree?” 

“Ill not drink his tea! I'll not drink his tea!” exclaimed the Gold Star. “Now you're even casting blame on me! Deity-King Li, go quickly! Go quickly!” But the Deity-King, of course, dared not go with Pilgrim 
to see the Throne, for he was terribly afraid that the ape might turn rowdy once more. If he were to mouth all kinds of accusations before the Jade Emperor, how could the Deity-King hope to refute 
them? He had no choice but again to plead with the Gold Star to speak up for him. 

At length the Gold Star said to Pilgrim, “I’ve just one word for you! Will you agree to it?” 

“I've already overlooked for your sake the affront of being bound and hacked by the scimitar,” said Pilgrim. “Do you’ve anything more to say? Speak up! Speak up! If it’s good, I'll listen; if not, don’t 
blame me!” 

The Gold Star said, “Remember the proverb, ‘One day's litigation will take ten days to settle.’ You file a charge before the throne, claiming that the monster-spirit is the daughter of the Deity-King, and 
he denies it. The two of you can argue this matter back and forth before the Jade Emperor. Meanwhile, let me remind you that one day in Heaven is equivalent to one year in the Region Below. For 
this whole year the monster-spirit has had your master imprisoned in the cave. Let’s not mention a wedding ceremony. Even if it’s a makeshift affair, by now she must have produced a little monk for 
him! Hasn't your delay upset the great enterprise?” 

Lowering his head, Pilgrim thought to himself, “Yes, indeed! When | left 8 Rules and Sand-monk, | told them that I'd return after a time no longer than it takes tea to boil, or at most for rice to be cooked. 
I've messed around here all this while. Am | too late?” He said thereby to the Gold Star, “Old Minister, how should we return this imperial decree?” 

“Let's ask Deity-King Li to summon his troops to go down with you to subdue the fiend,” replied the Gold Star. “I'll return the decree.” 

“What will you say as your report?” asked Pilgrim. 

“That the plaintiff has fled,” said the Gold Star, “and that the defendant has been dismissed from the case.” 

“How nice!” said Pilgrim with a laugh. “For your sake I’m dropping my charges, and you claim instead that /’ve fled! Tell him to call up the troops and wait for me outside the South Heaven Gate. I'll go 
with you to return the decree.” 

Growing alarmed once more, the Deity-King said, “If he starts talking once he gets inside the palace, | may end up with the crime of treason.” 

“What sort of person do you take old monkey for?” said Pilgrim. “I, too, am a true man! ‘Once my word is given, horses can’t retrieve it.’ You think I'd smear you with slander?” 

The Deity-King then thanked Pilgrim who left with the Gold Star to return the decree. The Deity-King at once called up the troops under his command and had them stationed outside the South Heaven 
Gate. Going before the throne with Pilgrim, the Gold Star said to the Jade Emperor, “The person who has imprisoned the Tang Monk happens to be a gold-nosed, white-furred rodent that’s become a 
spirit. She’s also the one who’s set up the tablets of Deity-King Li and his son. Since learning of this, the Deity-King’s already called up his troops for an expedition against the fiend. | beg the Celestial- 
Honoured One to pardon him.” 

Since the Jade Emperor had already known of this, he at once extended his Heaven grace and pardon. Pilgrim turned back his cloudy luminosity to go out of the South Heaven Gate where he found 
the Deity-King, the prince, and the Heaven hosts waiting in smart formation. Behold! Those divine warriors, in churning wind and fog, received the Great Sage and then lowered their clouds to descend 
to Mount Void-Entrapping. 8 Rules and Sand-monk with bulging eyes, were waiting on the mountain when they saw Pilgrim arriving with the Heaven hosts. Saluting the Deity-King, Idiot said to him, 
“We've troubled you!” 

“Marshal Heaven Reeds,” said the Deity-King, “we've something to tell you: we, dad and son, may have enjoyed one stick of her incense but the monster-spirit has thereby grown audacious enough to 
have your master imprisoned. Please don’t blame us for this tardy arrival. Is this Mount Void-Entrapping? | wonder which direction the entrance of her cave faces.” 

“Im familiar enough with the way in,” said Pilgrim. “Her cave here is named the Bottomless Cave, and its inside is about three hundred miles in circumference. The monster-spirit actually must have 
many lairs. Previously she had my master detained within a double-eaved towered gate. Now it’s so quiet there that you'll not see even the shadow of a ghost! I've no idea where she has moved to.” 
The Deity-King said, “No matter. Let her manoeuvre in a thousand ways; she'll never escape the net of Heaven and Earth. Let’s approach the entrance first, and then we'll decide what to do.” 

All of them immediately proceeded. Ah! After some ten miles they reached the big boulder. Pointing to the entrance about the size of a huge barrel, Pilgrim said, “That's it.” 

“Without entering the tiger’s lair,” said the Deity-King, “how'd one capture the tiger cubs?’ Who dares lead the way?” 

“I do,” said Pilgrim. 

“Since I’m to subdue a fiend by imperial decree,” said the prince, “I'll lead the way.” 

At that moment Idiot became even more impetuous. “Old bull will be the one to lead the way!” he shouted. 

“No need to make so much noise!” said the Deity-King. “Let me give the order: the Great Sage Sun and the prince will lead the troops down there. We three will stand guard up here at the entrance. 
We'll coordinate our efforts within and without so that she'll have no route to flee to Heaven and no door to enter Earth. Only then we'll truly show our power.” 

All of them responded with a resounding “Yes!” 

Look at Pilgrim and the prince! Leading the captains and troops, they slid inside the cave and immediately mounted the cloudy luminosity. As they looked about, it’s a fine cave indeed! 

The sun and moon’s familiar orbs shine on the same mountains and streams; pearly deeps, jade wells warmed, sheathed in mist, and even many more lovely sights. Red painted towers in layers, 
scarlet walls and green fields endless. Late autumn lotus and willows of spring - such a cave-heaven’s rarely seen. ‘In a moment, they stopped their cloudy luminosity right before the old residence of 
the monster-spirit. Noisily the celestial warriors began a door-to-door search; they looked everywhere, spreading out through all those 300 miles but neither a single monster-spirit nor a Tripitaka could 
be seen at all. “This cursed beast,” said the warriors, “must've left the cave and removed herself far away.” 

Little did they know that there was another small cave at the dark southeast corner; there was a tiny door in the cave and a house built rather low, surrounded by a few pots of flowers and several stalks 
of bamboo. It was a place shrouded in darkness and faint fragrance. Here the old fiend had brought Tripitaka and wanted to force him to marry her, thinking that Pilgrim would never be able to find 
them. She did not realise, of course, that her fate was about to overtake her. As those little fiends crowded together inside one of the more courageous ones stuck out his head to take a peek outside, 
and he ran directly into the celestial warriors. “They're here!” they cried and Pilgrim became so aroused that he went crashing in, his hand gripping the golden-hooped rod. The whole nest of monster- 
spirits was packed in that small and narrow place. When the prince and his troops surged forward, where'd any of the fiends run to hide? Pilgrim soon located the Tang Monk, the luggage, and the 
dragon-horse. When the old fiend realised that there was no way for her to flee, she faced Prince Nata and respected repeatedly, begging for her life. The prince said, “Our expedition here to arrest 
you is decreed by the Jade Emperor and it’s no small thing. We, dad and son nearly brought on ourselves colossal calamity by enjoying one stick of your incense!” Thereupon he bellowed: “Celestial 
soldiers, take out the fiend-binding ropes and tie up all those monster-spirits!” 

The old fiend could not avoid a little suffering. The company then turned around their cloudy luminosity and went outside the cave with Pilgrim chortling loudly all the way. The Deity-King left his post at 
the entrance to meet Pilgrim saying, “This time you’ve seen your master!” 

“Thank you! Thank you!” replied Pilgrim. 


He at once led Tripitaka to salute to thank the Deity-King and the prince. Sand-monk and 8 Rules would have liked very much to hack the old spirit into tiny pieces but the Deity-King said, “Since she’s 
arrested by imperial decree, she'd not be easily disposed of. We've yet to return to make a report to the throne.” So the Deity-King and the third prince led the divine warriors and celestial soldiers to 
guard the monster-spirit and take her back to face judgement before Heaven’s tribunal. Meanwhile Pilgrim and Sand-monk scurried around the Tang Monk to pack as 8 Rules steadied the horse for 
him to mount. They headed for the main road together. Thus it is that the silk threads are sundered to dry the golden sea; the jade lock’s broken and he leaves the birdcage. 


100 

Priests’ are hard to destroy completes great awakening; the Religion-king attains the right, his body’s naturalised 
Tripitaka Tang had safeguarded his primal yang and escaped the bitter ordeal of the fair gender. As he followed Pilgrim to head for the West, it was soon again the time of summer, when warm breezes 
freshly stirred, and rain of the plum season drizzled down in fine strands. Marvellous scenery, it is: lush and dense is the green shade; in light breeze young swallows parade. New lilies unfold on the 
ponds; old bamboos spread slowly their fronds. The sky joins the meadows in green; mountain blooms over the ground are seen. Sword-like, rushes stand by the brook; pomegranates redden this 
sketchbook. Master and disciples, the 4 of them had to endure the heat, of course. As they proceeded, they came upon 2 rows of tall willows flanking the road; from within the willow shade an old 
woman suddenly walked out, leading a young child by the hand. “Priest,” she cried aloud to the Tang Monk, “you must stop right now! Turn your horse around and return to the East quickly! The road 
to the West leads only to death!” 
So startled was Tripitaka that he leaped down from the horse and saluted to her saying, “Old Nun as the ancients have said: the ocean’s wide so fishes may leap; the sky’s empty so birds may fly. 
How'd it be that a road to the West's lacking?” 
Pointing westward with her finger, the old woman said, “About five or six miles from here’s the Religion-Destroying Kingdom. In some previous disciple somewhere the king must have contracted evil 
karma so that in this life he sins without cause. Two years ago he made a stupendous vow that he would kill ten thousand Religious priests. Until now he has succeeded in slaughtering nine thousand, 
nine hundred, and ninety-six nameless monks. All he is waiting for now are four more monks, preferably with names, and the perfect score of ten thousand will be reached. If you people arrive at his 
city, you'll all become life-giving king Nuns!” 
Terror-stricken by these words, Tripitaka said, trembling all over, “Old Nun, I’m profoundly grateful for your kindness, and | can’t thank you enough. May | ask whether there is another road that 
conveniently bypasses the city? This poor monk will gladly take such a road and proceed.” 
With a giggle, the old woman replied, “You can’t bypass the city! You simply can’t! You might do so only if you'd fly!” 
At once 8 Rules began to wag his tongue and said, “Mama, don’t speak such scary words! We're all able to fly!” With his fiery eyes and diamond pupils however, Pilgrim was the only one who could 
discern the truth: the old woman and the child were actually the Nun Guanyin and the Boy Skilled in Wealth. So alarmed was he that he went to his knees immediately and cried, “Nun, pardon your 
disciples for failing to meet you!” 
Gently the Nun rose on a petal of pink cloud, so astounding the elder Tang that he did not quite know where to stand. All he could do was to fall on his knees to respect, and 8 Rules and Sand-monk 
too went hurriedly to their knees to salute the sky. In a moment, the auspicious cloud drifted away to return to South Sea. Pilgrim got up and raised his master, saying, “Please rise, the Nun has returned 
to her treasure mountain.” 
As he got up, Tripitaka said, “Wukong, if you had recognised the Nun, why didn’t you tell us sooner?” 
“You'd not stop asking questions,” replied Pilgrim, laughing, “whereas | immediately went to my knees. Wasn't that soon enough?” 8 Rules and Sand-monk then said to Pilgrim, “Thanks to the Nun’s 
revelation, what lies before us has to be the Religion-Destroying Kingdom. What are we all going to do when there’s this determination to kill monks?” 
“Idiot, don’t be afraid!” said Pilgrim. “We've met quite a few vicious demons and savage fiends, and we’ve gone through tiger lairs and dragon lagoons but we’ve never been hurt. What we've to face 
here is a kingdom of common people. Why should we fear them? Our only trouble right now is that this is no place to stay. Besides, it’s getting late, and if any villagers returning from business in the 
city catch sight of us priests and begin to spread the news, that'll not be very convenient. Let's lead Master away from the main road and find a more secluded spot. We can then make further plans.” 
Tripitaka indeed followed his suggestion; all of them left the main road and went over to a small ditch, in which they sat down. “Brothers,” said Pilgrim, “the two of you stay here and guard Master. Let 
old monkey go in transformation to look over the city. Perhaps | can find a road that's out of the way that will take us through the region this very night.” 
“O Disciple!” urged the Tang Monk. “Don’t take this lightly, for you’re going against the law of a king. Do be carefull” 
“Relax! Relax!” replied Pilgrim with a smile. “Old monkey will manage!” Dear Great Sage! When he finished speaking, he leaped into the air with a loud whistle. How fantastic! Neither pulled from above 
by strings, nor supported below by cranes, like us all, 2 parents he owns but only he has lighter bones. Standing at the edge of the clouds, he peered below and saw that the city was flooded by airs of 
gladness and auspicious luminosity. “What a lovely place!” Pilgrim said. “Why does it want to destroy the religion?” As he stared at the place, it gradually grew dark. He saw that at letter-10 crossings? 
lamps flared brightly; at 9-tiered halls incense rose and bells tolled. In 8 quarters travellers dropped their gear. 7 glowing stars lit up the blue sky; from the 6-corps camps the painted bugles just faintly 
sounded; in the 5-watch tower, by drop the copper pot began dripping. On 4 sides night fog thickened; at 3 marts chilly mist spread out. Spouses in 2s entered the silken drapes when 1 bright moon 
ascended the east. He thought to himself: “I’d like to go down to the business districts to look over the roadways but with a face like mine, people will undoubtedly holler that I’m a priest if they see me. 
I'll transform myself.” Making the magic sign and reciting a spell, he changed with 1 shake of his body into a moth: a small shape with light, agile wings, he dives to snuff candles and lamps. By 
metamorphosis he gains his true form, most active midst rotted grasses. He strikes flames for love of hot light, flying, circling without ceasing. Purple-robed, fragrant-winged, chasing the fireflies, he 
likes most the deep windless night. 3See him soaring and turning as he flew toward those six boulevards and three marts, passing eaves and rafters. As he proceeded, he suddenly caught sight of a 
row of houses at the corner of the street ahead, each house having a lantern hung above its door. “These families,” he thought to himself, “must be celebrating the annual Lantern Feast. Why'd they've 
lighted lanterns by the row?” Stiffening his wings, he flew near and looked carefully. The house in the very middle had a square lantern, on which these words were written: Rest for the Travelling 
Merchant. Below there were also the words: Steward Wang's Inn. Pilgrim knew therefore that it was a hotel. When he stretched out his neck to look further, he saw that there were some 8 or 9 people 
who had all finished their dinner. Having loosened their clothes, taken off their head wraps, and washed their hands and feet, they had taken to their beds to sleep. Secretly pleased, Pilgrim said, 
“Master may pass through after all!” 
He knew because he was about to follow a wicked scheme: waiting until those people were asleep, he would steal their clothes and wraps so that master and disciples could disguise themselves as 
secular folks to enter the city. Alas! There had to be this disagreeable development! As he was deliberating by himself, the steward went forward and gave this instruction to his guests: “Sirs, do be 
careful, for our place caters to both gentlemen and rogues. I'd like to ask each of you to take care of your clothing and luggage.” Think of it! People doing business abroad, wouldn't they be careful with 
everything? 
When they heard such instruction from the innkeeper, they became more cautious than ever. Hastening to their feet, they said, “The proprietor’s quite right. Those of us fatigued by travel may not easily 
wake up once we're asleep. If we lose our things, what’re we going to do? Please take our clothes, head wraps, and moneybags inside. When we get up in the morning, you may return them to us.” 
Steward Wang accordingly took all of their clothes and belongings into his own residence. By nature impulsive, Pilgrim at once spread his wings to fly there also and alighted on one of the head-wrap 
stands. Then he saw Steward Wang going to the front door to take down the lantern, lower the cloth curtain, and close the door and windows. Only then did Wang return to his room to take off his own 
clothes and lie down. The steward however, also had a wife sleeping with two children, and they were still making so much noise that none of them could go to sleep right away. The wife, too, was 
patching some garment and refused to retire. “If | wait until this woman sleeps,” thought Pilgrim to himself, “won't Master be delayed?” 
Fearing also that the city gates might be closed later in the night, he could no longer refrain from flying down there and threw himself on the taper. Truly he risked his life to dive into flames; scorched 
his brow to tempt his fate. The taper immediately went out. With one shake of his body he changed again into a rat. After a squeak or two he leaped down, took the garments and head wraps, and 
began to drag them out. Panic-stricken, the woman said, “Old man, things are bad! A rat has turned into a spirit!” 
On hearing this, Pilgrim flaunted his abilities some more. Stopping at the door, he cried out in a loud voice, “Steward Wang, don’t listen to the babblings of your woman. I’m no rodent-spirit. Since a 
man of light does not engage in shady dealings, | must tell you that I’m the Great Sage Equal to Heaven who has descended to earth to accompany the Tang Monk on his way to seek scriptures in the 
Western Heaven. Because your king is without principles, I've come especially to borrow these caps and gowns to adorn my master. Once we’ve passed through the city, I'll return them.” 
Hearing that, Steward Wang scrambled up at once. It was, of course, pitch black, and he was in a hurry besides. He grabbed his pants, thinking he had his shirt; but no matter how hard he tried, slipping 
them on this way and that, he could not put them on. Using his magic of abduction, the Great Sage had already mounted the clouds to leave the city and return to the ditch by the road. In the bright 
light of the stars and moon, Tripitaka was standing there staring when he saw Pilgrim approaching. “Disciple,” he asked, “can we go through the Religion-Destroying Kingdom?” 
Walking forward and putting down the garments, Pilgrim said, “Master, if you want to go through the Religion-Destroying Kingdom, you can’t remain a priest.” 
“Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “whom are you trying to fool? It’s easy not to remain a priest: just don’t shave your head for half a year, and you hair will grow.” 
“We can’t wait for half a year!” said Pilgrim. “We must become laymen right now!” 
Horrified, Idiot said, “The way you talk is most unreasonable, as always! We're all priests, and you want us to become laymen this instant! How could we even wear a head wrap? Even if we tighten the 
edges, we’ve nothing on our heads to tie the strings with!” 
“Stop the wisecracks!” snapped Tripitaka. “Let’s do what's proper! Wukong, what’s your plan?” 
“Master,” said Pilgrim, “I've inspected the city here. Though the king’s unprincipled enough to slaughter monks, he is nevertheless a genuine son of Heaven, for his city is filled with joyful and auspicious 
air. | can recognise the streets in the city and can converse in the local dialect. A moment ago | borrowed several garments and head wraps from a hotel. We must disguise ourselves as laymen and 
enter the city to ask for lodging. At the fourth watch we'd rise and ask the innkeeper to prepare us a meal — vegetarian, of course. By about the hour of the fifth watch, we'll walk close to the wall of the 
city-gate and find the main road to the West. If we run into anyone who tries to detain us, we can still give the explanation that we've been commissioned by the court of a superior state. The Religion- 
Destroying King would not dare hinder us. He'll let us go.” Sand-monk said, “Elder Brother's plan is most proper. Let’s do as he tells us.” 
Indeed, the elder had little choice but to shed his monk’s robe and his clerical cap and to put on the garment and head wrap of a layman. Sand-monk too changed his clothes. 8 Rules however, had 
such a huge head that he could not wear the wrap as it was. Pilgrim had to rip open two wraps and sew them together with needle and thread to make one wrap and drape it over his head. A larger 
garment was selected for him to put on after which Pilgrim himself also changed into a different set of clothing. “Once we get moving,” he said, “you all must put away the words master and disciples.” 
“Without these terms,” said 8 Rules, “how’'ll we address ourselves?” 
Pilgrim said, “We'd do so as if we’re in a fraternal order: Master Sand will be called Grand Master Tang, you'll be Third Master Bullseye, Sand-monk shall be called Fourth Master Sand and I'll be called 
Second Master Sun. When we reach the hotel however, none of you'd talk; let me do all the talking. If they ask us what sort of business we're in, I'll say that we’re horse traders, using this white horse 
of ours as a sample. I'll tell them that there are altogether ten of us in this fraternal order but the four of us have come first to rent a room in the hotel and sell our horse. The innkeeper will certainly take 
care of us. If we receive his hospitality, I'll pick up by the time we leave some bits or pieces of broken tiles and change them into silver to thank him. Then we'll get on with our journey.” The elder had 
no alternative but to comply reluctantly. 
The four of them, leading the horse and toting the luggage, hurried into the city. It was fortunate that this happened to be a peaceful region, so that the city gates had not yet been closed even as the 
time of the night watch began. When they reached the door of the Steward Wang's Hotel, they heard noises from inside, crying, “I’ve lost my head wrap!” Another person cried, “I’ve lost my clothes.” 
Feigning ignorance, Pilgrim led them to another hotel, cater-corner from this one. Since that hotel had not yet even taken down its lantern, Pilgrim walked up to the door and called out: “Innkeeper, do 
you've a room for us to stay in?” 
Some woman inside replied at once, “Yes! Yes! Yes! Let the masters go up to the second floor.” She had hardly finished speaking when a man arrived to take the horse that Pilgrim handed over to 
him. He himself led his master behind the lamplight and up to the door of the second floor where lounge tables and chairs had been placed. He pushed open the shutters, and moonlight streamed in 
as they took their seats. Someone came up with lighted lamps but Pilgrim barred the door and blew out the lamps with one breath. “We don’t need lamps when the moon’s so bright,” he said. 
After the person with the lamps had been sent away, another maid brought up four bowls of pure tea that Pilgrim accepted. From below, a woman about fifty-seven or fifty-eight years old came straight 
up to the second floor. Standing to one side, she asked, “Gentlemen where have you come from? What treasure merchandise do you've?” 
“We came from the north,” replied Pilgrim, “and we've a few ordinary horses to sell.” 
“Well,” said the woman, “we've not seen many guests who sell horses.” 
“This one is Grand Master Tang,” said Pilgrim, “this one is Third Master Bullseye, and this one is Fourth Master Sand. Your humble student here is Second Master Sun.” 
“All different surnames,” said the woman with a giggle. 


“Indeed, all different surnames but living together,” said Pilgrim. “There are altogether ten of us in our fraternal order; we four have come first to seek lodging at your hotel, and the six others are resting 
outside the city. With a herd of horses, they don’t dare enter the city at such an hour. When we've located the proper place for them to stay, they'll come in tomorrow morning. Once we've sold the 
horses, we'll leave.” 

“How many horses are there in your herd?” asked the woman. 

“Big and small, there are over a hundred,” said Pilgrim, “all very much like the horse we’ve here. Only their colours vary.” 

Giggling some more, the woman said, “Second Master Sun is indeed a merchant in every way! It's a good thing that you’ve come to our place, for any other household would not dare receive you. We 
happen to have a large courtyard here, complete with stalls and stocked with feed. Even if you had several hundred horses, we can take care of them. You'd be aware, too, that our hotel has been here 
for years and has gained quite a reputation. My late husband who unfortunately died long ago, had the surname of Zhao, and that’s why this hotel is named Widow Zhao’s Inn. We've three classes of 
accommodation here. If you'll kindly allow impoliteness to precede courtesy, I'll discuss the room rates with you, so I'll know what to charge you.” 

“What you say is quite right,” said Pilgrim. “What three classes of accommodation do you've in your hotel? As the saying goes, high, medium, and low are three prices of goods, guests, far and near 
aren't treated the same. Tell me a little of your three classes of accommodation.” 

Widow Zhao said, “What we've here are the superior, moderate, and inferior classes of accommodation. For the superior, we'll prepare a banquet of five kinds of fruits and five courses, topped by lion- 
head puddings and peck-candies. There will be two persons per table, and young hostesses will be invited to drink and rest with you. The charge per person is five coins of silver, and this includes the 
room.” 

“What a bargain!” said Pilgrim, chuckling. “Where | came from, five coins of silver won't even pay for the young ladies!” 

“For the moderate,” said the widow again, “all of you'll share one table, and you'll get only fruits and hot juice. You yourselves may establish your drinking rules and play your finger-guessing games 
but no young hostesses will be present. For this, we charge two coins of silver per person.” 

“That's even more of a bargain,” said Pilgrim. “What's the inferior class like?” 

“| dare not describe that in front of honoured guests,” replied the woman. 

“You may tell us,” said Pilgrim. “We'll find our bargain and do our thing.” 

The woman said, “In the inferior class there’s no one to serve you. You may eat whatever rice there is in the pot, and when you've had your fill, you can get some straw and make yourself a bed on the 
ground. Find yourself a place to sleep, and in the morning you may give us a few pennies for the rice. We'll not haggle with you.” 

On hearing this, 8 Rules said, “Lucky! Lucky! That's Old bull's kind of bargain! Let me stand in front of the pot and stuff myself with rice. Then I'll have a nice damn snooze in front of the hearth!” 
“Brother,” said Pilgrim, “what are you saying? You and |, after all, have managed to earn a few ounces of silver here and there in the world, haven't we? Give us the superior class!” 

Filled with delight, the woman cried, “Bring some fine tea! Tell the chefs to start their preparations.” She dashed downstairs and shouted some more: “Slaughter some chickens and geese. Have them 
cooked or cured to go with the rice. Slaughter a bull and a lamb too; even if we can’t use them today, we may use them tomorrow. Get the good juice. Cook white-grain rice and take bleached flour to 
make biscuits.” 

When he heard her from upstairs, Tripitaka said, “Second Master Sun, what shall we do? She is planning to slaughter chickens, geese, a bull, and a lamb. When she brings these things up that one of 
us, keepers of a perpetual vegetarian diet that we're, dare take one bite?” 

“| know what to do,” replied Pilgrim, and he went to the head of the stairs and tapped the floor with his foot. “Mama Zhao, please come up here,” he said. The mama came up and said, “What instructions 
do you've for me, Second Master?” 

“Don’t slaughter anything today,” said Pilgrim, “for we’re keeping a vegetarian diet.” 

Astonished, the widow asked, “Do the masters keep a perpetual diet or a monthly diet?” 

“Neither,” replied Pilgrim, “for ours is named the gengshen diet. Since the cyclical combination for today is in fact gengshen, we must keep the diet. Once the hour of the third watch is past, it will be the 
day of xinyou, and we'll be able to eat meat. You may do the slaughtering tomorrow. Please go now and prepare us some vegetarian dishes. We'll pay you the price of the superior class just the same.” 
The woman was more delighted than ever. She dashed downstairs to say, “Don’t slaughter anything! Don’t slaughter anything! Take some wood ears, Fujian bamboo-shoots, bean curds, wheat glutens, 
and pull some greens from our garden to make vermicelli soup. Let the dough rise so that we can steam some rolls. We can cook the white-grain rice and brew fragrant tea also.” Aha! Those chefs in 
the kitchen, accustomed to do this every day, finished their preparations in no time at all. The food was brought upstairs, along with ready-made lion-puddings and candied fruits, so that the four could 
enjoy themselves to their hearts’ content. 

“Do you take dietary juice?” the woman asked again. 

Pilgrim said, “Only Grand Master Tang doesn’t drink but the rest of us can use a few cups.” The widow then brought up a bottle of hot juice. Hardly had the three of them finished pouring when they 
heard loud hangings on the floor down below. “Mama,” said Pilgrim, “did something fall downstairs?” 

“No,” replied the widow. “A few hired hands from our humble village who arrived rather late tonight with their monthly payment of rice were told to sleep downstairs. Since you masters have come and 
we've not enough help right now, I’ve asked them to take the carriages to go fetch the young hostesses here to keep you company. The poles on the carriages must have accidentally backed into the 
boards of the staircase.” 

“It's a good thing that you mention this,” said Pilgrim. “Quickly tell them not to go. For one thing we're still keeping the diet, and for another our brothers have not yet arrived. Wait till they come in 
tomorrow, then we'll invite some call girls for the whole order to have some fun right here. After we’ve sold our horses, we'll leave.” 

“Good man! Good man” said the widow. “You've not destroyed the peace but you've saved your own energy at the same time!” she called out, “Bring back the carriages. No need to fetch the girls.” 
After the four had finished the juice and rice, the utensils were taken away, and the attendants left. Tripitaka whispered behind Pilgrim’s ear, “Where’ll we sleep?” 

“Up here,” replied Pilgrim. “It's not quite safe,” said Tripitaka. “All of us are rather tired. When we're asleep, if someone from this household chances to come by to fix things up and notices our bald 
heads if our caps roll off, they will see that we're monks. What shall we do if they begin yelling?” 

“Indeed!” replied Pilgrim. He went again to the head of the stairs to tap his foot, and the widow came up once more to ask, “What does Master Sun want?” 

“Where shall we sleep?” asked Pilgrim. 

“Why, up here, of course!” said the woman. “There’re no mosquitoes. You may open wide the windows, and with a nice southerly breeze, it’s perfect for you to sleep.” 

“No, we can't,” said Pilgrim. “Our Third Master Bullseye here’s somewhat allergic to dampness and Fourth Master Sand’s arthritic shoulders. Big Brother Tang can only sleep in the dark and I’m, too 
rather sensitive to light. This is no place to sleep.” The mama walked downstairs and, leaning on the counter, began to sigh. A daughter of hers, carrying a child, approached and said, “Mum as the 
proverb says, for ten days you sit on the shore; in one day you may pass nine beaches. Since this is the hot season, we’ve not much business but by the time of the fall business may increase so much 
that we can’t even cope with it. Why are you sighing?” 

“Child,” replied the woman, “I’m not worrying about lack of business, for at dusk today | was ready to close shop. But at the hour when the night watch began, four horse traders came to rent a room. 
Since they wanted the superior-class accommodation, | was hoping to make a few pennies’ profit from them. But they keep a vegetarian diet, and that completely dashes my hopes. That’s why I’m 
sighing.” 

Her daughter said, “If they have eaten our rice, they can’t leave and go to another household. Tomorrow we can prepare meat and juice for them. Why can’t we make our profit then?” 

“But they are all sick,” said the woman again, “afraid of draft, sensitive to light; they all want to sleep in a dark place. Come to think of it, all the buildings in our household are covered by single-tiered 
transparent tiles. Where are we going to find a dark enough place for them? | think we’d better consider donating the meal to them and ask them to go someplace else.” 

“Mum,” said her daughter, “there’s a dark place in my building, and it has no draft. It’s perfect!” 

“Where is that?” asked the woman. The daughter said, “When dad was alive, he made a huge wardrobe trunk about four feet wide, seven feet long, and at least three feet deep. Six or seven people 
can probably sleep in it. Tell them to go inside the wardrobe and sleep there.” 

“| wonder if it's acceptable,” said the woman. “Let me ask them. Hey, Master Sun, our humble dwelling is terribly small, and there is no dark place. We've only a huge wardrobe trunk which neither wind 
nor light can get through. How about sleeping in that?” 

“Fine! Fine! Fine!” replied Pilgrim. Several of the hired hands were asked at once to haul out the wardrobe and remove the door before they were told to go downstairs. With Pilgrim leading his master 
and Sand-monk picking up the pole of luggage, they walked behind the lamplight to the wardrobe. Without regard for good or ill, 8 Rules immediately crawled in. After handing him the luggage, Sand- 
monk helped the Tang Monk in before entering himself. 

“Where’s our horse?” asked Pilgrim. One of the attendants on the side replied, “It's tethered at the rear of the house and feeding.” 

“Bring it, along with the feed,” said Pilgrim, “and tether it tightly beside the wardrobe.” Only then did he himself enter the wardrobe. He cried, “Mama Zhao, put on the door, stick in the bolt and lock it 
up. Then take a look for us and see whether there are any holes anywhere that light may get through. Paste them up with paper. Tomorrow, come early and open the wardrobe.” 

“You're much too carefull” said the widow. 

Thereafter everyone left to close the doors and sleep. The 4 of them inside the wardrobe. How pitiful! For one thing, it was the first time they had ever worn head wraps; for another, the weather was 
hot. Moreover, it was very stuffy because no breeze could get in. They all took off their wraps and their clothes but without fans they could only wave their monk caps a little. Crowding and leaning on 
one another, they all began to doze by about the hour of the second watch. Pilgrim however, was determined to be mischievous! As he was the only one who could not sleep, he stretched out his hand 
and gave 8 Rules’ leg a pinch. Pulling back his leg, Idiot mumbled, “Go to sleep! Look how miserable we’re! And you still find it interesting to pinch people’s arms and legs for fun?” 

As a lark, Pilgrim began to say, “We'd originally five thousand taels of silver. We sold some horses previously for three thousand taels and right now, there’re still four thousand taels left in the money 
bags. We can also sell our present herd of horses for three thousand taels and will have both capital and profit. That's enough! That's enough!” 

8 Rules of course was a man intent on sleeping and he refused to answer him. Little did they know that the waiters, the water haulers, and the fire tenders of this hotel had always been part of a band 
of thieves. When they heard Pilgrim speaking of so much silver, some of them slipped out at once and called up some twenty other thieves who arrived with torches and staffs to rob the horse traders. 
As they rushed in, Widow Zhao and her daughter were so terrified that they slammed shut the door of their own building and let the thieves do what they pleased. Those bandits did not want anything 
from the hotel; all they desired was to find the guests. When they saw no trace of them upstairs, they searched everywhere with torches and came upon the huge wardrobe in the courtyard. To one of 
the legs a white horse was tethered. The wardrobe was tightly locked, and they could not pry open the door. 

The thieves said, “Worldly people like us have to be observant! If this wardrobe is so heavy, there must be luggage and riches locked inside. What if we steal the horse, haul the wardrobe outside the 
city, break it up, and divide the contents among ourselves — wouldn't that be nice?” Indeed, those thieves did find some ropes and poles with which they proceeded to haul the wardrobe out of the hotel. 
As they walked, the load swayed from side to side. 

Waking up with a start, 8 Rules said, “O Elder Brother, please go to sleep! Why are you shaking us?” 

“Don’t talk!” said Pilgrim. “No one’s shaking you.” Tripitaka and Sand-monk also woke up and cried, “Who is carrying us?” 

“Don’t shout! Don’t shout!” said Pilgrim. “Let them carry us. If they haul us all the way to the Western Heaven, it'll save us some walking!” 

When those thieves succeeded in getting away from the hotel, they did not head for the West; instead, they hauled the chest toward the east of the city where they broke out after killing some of the 
guards at the city gate. That disturbance, of course, alerted people in the six boulevards and three marts, the firemen and guards living in various stations. The reports went quickly to the Regional 
Patrol Commander and the East City Warden's office. Since this was an affair for which they had to assume responsibility, the commander and the warden at once summoned the cavalry and archers 
to pursue the thieves out of the city. When the thieves saw how strong the government troops were, they dared not contend with them. Putting down the huge wardrobe and abandoning the white horse, 
they fled in every direction. The government troops did not manage even to catch half a thief but they did take the wardrobe and caught the horse, and they returned in triumph. As he looked at the 
horse beneath the lights, the commander saw that it was a fine creature indeed: its mane parts like silver threads; tail dangles as strips of jade. Why mention the Eight Noble Dragon Steeds? *This 1 
surpasses Suxiang’s® slow trotting. Its bones would fetch a thousand gold, this wind-chaser through 10000 miles. He climbs mountains oft to join the green clouds, neighs at the moon, and fuses with 
white snow. Truly a dragon that has left the isles, a jade unicorn that man loves to own! The commander, instead of riding his own horse, mounted this white horse to lead his troops back into the city. 
The wardrobe was hauled into his official residence where it was then sealed with an official tape issued jointly by him and the warden. Soldiers were to guard it until dawn, when they could memorialise 
to the king to see about its disposal. As the other troops retired. The elder Tang inside the wardrobe complained to Pilgrim saying, “You ape-head! You've just about put me to death! If we’d stayed 


outside, been caught, and sent before the king of the Religion-Destroying Kingdom, we’d still argue with him. Now we're locked up in a wardrobe abducted by thieves and then recovered by government 
troops. When we see the king tomorrow, we'll be readymade victims for him to complete his number of ten thousand!” 

Pilgrim said, “There’re people outside right now! If they open the wardrobe and take us out, we'll either be bound or hanged! Do try to be more patient so that we don’t have to face the ropes. When we 
see that befuddled king tomorrow, old monkey's his own way of answering him. | promise you that you'll not be harmed one whit. Now relax and sleep.” By about the hour of the third watch, Pilgrim 
exercised his ability and eased his rod out. Blowing his mortal breath on it, he cried, “Change!” and it changed into a 3-pointed drill. He drilled along the bottom edge of the wardrobe two or three times 
and made a small hole. Retrieving the drill, he changed with one shake of his body into an ant and crawled out. Then he changed back into his original form to soar on the clouds into the royal palace. 
The king at that moment was sleeping soundly. Using the Grand Magic of Body-Division in the Assembly of Gods, Pilgrim ripped off all the hairs on his left arm. He blew his mortal breath on them, 
crying, “Change!” They all changed into tiny Pilgrims. From his right arm he pulled off all the hairs, too, and blew his mortal breath on them, crying, “Change!” They changed into sleep-inducing insects. 
Then he recited another magic spell that began with the letter Ohm to summon the local spirits of the region into his presence. They were told to lead the small Pilgrims so that they could scatter 
throughout the royal palace, the 5 Military Commissions, the 6 Ministries, and the residences of officials high and low. Anyone with rank and appointment would be given a sleep-inducing insect, so that 
he would sleep soundly without even turning over. Pilgrim also took up his golden-hooped rod; with a squeeze and a wave, he cried, “Treasure, change!” 

It changed at once into hundreds and thousands of razor blades. He took 1 of them. He told the tiny Pilgrims each to take 1 so that they could go into the palace, the commissions, and the ministries to 
shave heads. Ah! This is how it was: Religion-king would the boundless dhartna destroy that fills the world and reaches the great Way. All religion-causes are of substance 1; Trlyana’s wondrous forms 
are all the same. The jade cupboara’s drilled through, the truth is known; ®gold hairs are scattered and blindness is removed. Religion-king will surely the right fruit attain: birth-less and deathless, in the 
void he'll remain. The shaving activities that went on for half the night were completely successful. Thereafter Pilgrim recited his spell to dismiss the local spirits. With one shake of his body he retrieved 
the hairs of both his arms. The razor blades he squeezed back into their true and original form — one golden-hooped rod — which he then reduced in size to store in his ear once more. He next assumed 
the form of an ant to crawl back into the wardrobe before changing into his original appearance to accompany the Tang Monk in his confinement. The palace maidens and harem girls in the inner 
chambers of the royal palace rose before dawn to wash and do their hair. Every one of them had lost her hair. The hair of all the palace eunuchs, young and old, had also vanished. They crowded 
outside the palatial bedchambers to start the poems for waking the royal couple, all fighting hard to hold back their tears and not daring to report their mishap. In a little while, the queen of the three 
palaces awoke, and she too found that her hair was gone. Hurriedly she moved a lamp to glance at the dragon bed: there in the midst of the silk coverlets a monk was sleeping!’ Unable to contain 
herself, the queen began to speak and her words awoke the king. When the king opened his eyes, all he saw was the bald head of the queen. Sitting bolt upright, he said, “My queen, why do you look 
like this?” 

“But my lord’s also like this!” replied the queen. 

1 touch of his own head sent the king into sheer panic, crying, “What’s become of us?” 

In that moment of desperation, the consorts of 6 halls, the palace maidens, the eunuchs young, and old all entered with bald heads. They knelt down and said, “Our lord, we've all become Religious 
priests!” 

When the king saw them, tears fell from his eyes. “It must be the result of our slaughtering the monks,” he said. Whereupon he gave this decree: “You're forbidden, all of you to mention your loss of 
hair for we fear that the civil and military officials would criticise the unrighteousness of the state. Let’s prepare to hold court at the main hall.” All those officials high and low in the 5 Commissions and 
6 Ministries who were about to have an audience with the throne at dawn. As each 1 of them had also lost his hair during the night, they were all busily preparing memorials to report the incident. Thus 
one could hear that 3 times the whip struck as they faced the king: the cause of their shorn hair they would make known. 


101 

Mind Monkey envies Wood Mum; the demon lord plots to devour Chan 
The morning court of the king during which many civil and military officials presented their memorials saying, “Our Lord, please pardon your subjects for being remiss in their manners.” 
“Our worthy ministers have not departed from their customary good deportment,” replied the king. “What is remiss in your manners?” 
“O Our Lord!” said the various ministers; “we don’t know the reason but during the night all your subjects lost their hair.” Clutching those memorials that complained of loss of hair, the king descended 
from his dragon couch to say to his subjects, “Indeed we don’t know the reason either but we and the other members of the royal palace, high and low, also lost all our hair.” As tears gushed from their 
eyes, ruler and subjects said to one another, “From now on, we’d not dare slaughter monks!” 
Then the king ascended his dragon couch once more as the officials returned to standing in ranks. The king said, “Let those who have any business leave their ranks to present their memorials; if there 
is no further business, let the screen be rolled up so that the court may retire.” From the ranks of military officials the city patrol commander stepped out, and from the ranks of the civil officials the east 
city warden walked forward. Both came up to the steps to respect and say, “By your sage decree your subjects were on patrol last night, and we succeeded in recovering the stolen goods of one 
cupboard and one white horse. Your lowly subjects dare not dispose of these by our own authority, and we beg you to render a decision.” Highly pleased, the king said, “Bring us both horse and 
cupboard.” 
As soon as the two officials went back to their offices, they immediately summoned their troops to haul out the cupboard. Locked inside, Tripitaka became so terrified that his soul was about to leave 
his body. “Disciples,” he said, “what do we say once we appear before the king?” 
Laughing, Pilgrim said, “Stop fussing! I've made the proper arrangements! When they open the cupboard, they'll salute us as their teachers. Just tell 8 Rules not to wrangle over seniority!” 
“To be spared from execution,” said 8 Rules, “is already boundless blessing! You think | dare wrangle?” Hardly had they finished talking when the cupboard was hauled to the court; the soldiers carried 
it inside the Five-Phoenix Tower and placed it before the vermilion steps. 
When the subjects asked the king to inspect the cupboard, he immediately commanded that it be opened. The moment the cover was lifted however, Bullseye 8 Rules could not refrain from leaping 
out, so terrifying the various officials that they were all struck dumb. Then they saw the Tang Monk emerging, supported by Pilgrim Sun while Sand-monk brought out the luggage. When 8 Rules caught 
sight of the commander holding the horse, he rushed forward and bellowed, “The horse is ours! Give it to me!” The commander was so scared that he fell backward head over heels. 
As the four of them stood on the steps, the king noticed that they were all Religious priests. Hurrying down from his dragon couch, the king asked all his consorts of the three palaces to join his subjects 
in descending from the Treasure Hall of Golden Chimes and saluting with him to the clerics. “Where did the elders come from?” the king asked. 
Tripitaka said, “We’re those sent by the Throne of the Great Tang in the Land of the East to go to India’s Great Thunderclap Monastery in the West to seek true scriptures from the living God.” 
“If the Venerable Master had come from such a great distance,” said the king, “for what reason did you choose to rest in a cupboard?” 
“Your humble cleric,” replied Tripitaka, “had leamed of Your Majesty's vow to slaughter monks. We therefore dared not approach your superior state openly. Disguising ourselves as laymen, we came 
by night to an inn in your treasure region to ask for lodging. As we're afraid that people might still recognise our true identity, we chose to sleep in the cupboard that unfortunately was stolen by thieves. 
It was then recovered by the commander and brought here. Now that I’m privileged to behold the dragon countenance of Your Majesty, | feel as if I'd caught sight of the sun after the clouds had parted. 
| beg Your Majesty to extend your grace and favour wide as the sea to pardon and release this humble cleric.” 
“The Venerable Master is a noble priest from the heavenly court of a superior state,” replied the king, “and it is we who have been remiss in our welcome. The reason for our vow to slaughter monks 
stems from the fact that we're slandered by certain priests in years past. We therefore vowed to Heaven to kill ten thousand-monks as a figure of perfection. Little did we anticipate that we'd be forced 
to become monks instead, for all of us - ruler and subjects, king and consorts — now have had our hair shorn off. We, in turn, beg the Venerable Master not to be sparing in your great virtue and accept 
us as your disciples.” 
When 8 Rules heard these words, he roared with laughter, saying, “If you want to be our disciples, what sort of presentation gifts do you've for us?” 
“If the Master is willing,” said the king, “we'd be prepared to offer you the treasures and wealth of the state.” 
“Don’t mention treasures and wealth,” said Pilgrim, “for we’re the sort of monks who keep to our principles. Only certify our travel rescript and escort us out of the city. We promise you that your kingdom 
will be secure forever, and you'll be endowed with blessings and long life in abundance.” 
When the king heard that, he at once ordered the Court of Imperial Entertainments to prepare a huge banquet. Ruler and subjects, meanwhile, saluted themselves to return to the One. The travel 
rescript was certified immediately, and then the king requested the masters to change the name of his kingdom. “Your Majesty,” said Pilgrim, “the name of Religion Kingdom is an excellent one; it’s 
only the word ‘Destroying’ that’s inadequate. Since we've passed through this region, you may change its name to Religion-Honouring Kingdom. | promise that you'll prosper a millennium in calm rivers 
and seas with rain and wind in season and in all quarters peace.” 
After thanking Pilgrim, the king asked for the imperial cortege and the entire court to escort master and disciples out of the city so they could leave for the West. Then ruler and subjects held fast to 
virtue to return to the truth. The elder took leave of the king of the Religion-Honouring Kingdom. As he rode along, he said in great delight, “Wukong, you’ve employed an excellent method this time and 
achieved a great merit.” 
“O Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “where did you find so many barbers to shave off so many heads during the night?” Thereupon Pilgrim gave a thorough account of how he underwent transformations 
and exercised magic powers. Master and disciples laughed so hard they could hardly get their mouths shut. In that very moment of gaiety, they suddenly saw a tall mountain blocking their path. Reining 
in his horse, the Tang Monk said, “Disciples, look how rugged that mountain is. We must be careful!” 
“Relax! Relax!” said Pilgrim with a laugh. “I guarantee you there’s nothing to be afraid of!” 
“Stop saying there’s nothing!” replied Tripitaka. “I can see how precipitous the mountain peak is, and even from a great distance there appear to be violent vapours and savage clouds soaring up from 
it. I'm getting more and more apprehensive; my whole body's turning numb, and I’m filled with troubled thoughts.” 
Still laughing, Pilgrim said, “And you've long forgotten the Heart Thread of the Crow’s Nest Zen Master.” 
“| do remember it,” said Tripitaka. 
“You may remember the Thread,” said Pilgrim, “but there’re two sentences of Verse that you've forgotten.” 
“Which two sentences?” Tripitaka asked. 
Pilgrim said, “Seek not afar for God on Spirit Mount; mount Spirit lives only inside your mind. There’s in each man a Spirit Mount heap; beneath this heap you must be refined.” ' 
“Disciple,” said Tripitaka, “you think | don’t know this? According to these two sentences, the lesson of all scriptures concems only the cultivation of the mind.” 
“Of course that goes without saying,” said Pilgrim. “For when the mind’s pure, it shines forth as a solitary lamp and when the mind’s secure, the entire phenomenal world becomes clarified. The tiniest 
error however, makes for the way to slothfulness and then you'll never succeed even in ten millennia. Maintain your vigilance with the utmost sincerity and Thunderclap will be right before your eyes. 
But when you afflict yourself like that with fears and troubled thoughts, then the Great Way and Thunderclap seem far away indeed. Let’s stop all these wild guesses. Follow me.” 
When the elder heard these words, his mind and spirit immediately cheered up as all worries subsided. The 4 of them proceeded and a few steps brought them into the mountain. This was what met 
their eyes: the mountain’s truly a good mountain. Look closely, its mixed colours show! On top the clouds wander and drift; tree shades are cool before the cliff. Birds screechy and shrill; beasts savage 
and fierce. 1000 pines in the forest; a few bamboos on the summit. Those snarling are grey wolves fighting for food; growling are tigers struggling for feed. Wild apes wail long as they search for fresh 
fruits; the deer climb over flowers to reach the peak. A soughing breeze and gurgling stream where oft one hears the coos of birds unseen. In a few places creepers pull and tug; by the brook orchids 
mix with fine grasses. Strange rocks sharply etched; hanging cliffs sheer and straight. Foxes and raccoons dash by in packs; badgers and gibbons frolic in bands. The traveller troubled by such 
ruggedness, can do little with an old path’s curviness! Wary and cautious, master and disciples walked along, and all at once they heard the howling of a strong gust. Becoming fearful, Tripitaka said, 
“A wind’s risen!” 
Pilgrim said, “Spring has a temperate wind, summer a warm one. Autumn has a west wind, and winter has a north wind. There are winds in all four seasons. Why fear a gust of wind now?” 
“But this wind’s blown up so quickly,” replied Tripitaka, “that it can’t possibly be a natural wind.” 
“From ancient times,” said Pilgrim, “wind’s risen from the ground and clouds have emerged from mountains. How’d there be such a thing as a natural wind?” 
Hardly had he finished speaking when they also saw fog rising. That fog truly spreads out to make the sky opaque as darkness the earth overtakes. The sun wholly loses its light; all reciting birds vanish 
from sight. It seems like Chaos returning, dust both flying, and churning. When summit trees all disappear, could a herb-picker go near? Becoming more alarmed than ever, Tripitaka said, “Wukong the 
wind’s hardly subsided. Why's there such fog rising?” 
“Let's jump to no conclusion,” replied Pilgrim. “Let our master dismount and the two brothers can stand guard here. I'll go see whether the situation’s evil or auspicious.” Dear Great Sage! 1 snap of his 
torso shot him up to mid-air: shading his brows with his hand, he opened wide his fiery eyes to peer downward and at once discovered that there was indeed a monster-spirit sitting by a hanging cliff. 


Look how he appears: a burly body swathed in coloured hues, stalwart and tall, he seems most spirited. His fangs push through his mouth like drills of steel; nose in the centre’s a hook of jade. His 
golden eyes flaring, fowl and beasts take fright. His silver beard bristling, god and ghosts grow sad. Perched firmly by the ledge he flaunts his might by belching wind and fog he plies his wiles. Standing 
in rows to the left and right of him were some thirty or forty little fiends, all watching his magic exercise as he belched out wind and spat out fog. Chuckling to himself, Pilgrim said, “My master’s a little 
prescience! He said it’s no natural wind and indeed a stunt of this monster's that brought it forth. If old monkey uses his iron rod now to deliver a blow downward, it'll be nothing but a Garlic Pounder. 
I'll strike him dead but it'll also ruin old monkey's reputation.” Valiant all his life, Pilgrim never quite knew how to stab people in the back. He said to himself instead, “I'll go back and give some business 
to Bullseye Eight Rules. Let him come first to do battle with this monster-spirit. If Eight Rules is capable of defeating this monster, it'll be his good fortune. If he’s not strong enough and gets himself 
captured, then I'll go rescue him. That’s the proper way to enlarge my fame. But wait! Usually he’s quite lazy and refuses to take the initiative in anything. Nonetheless he’s bull-like and loves to eat. 
Let me trick him a little and see what he'll say.” 

Instantly dropping down from the clouds, he went before Tripitaka who asked, “Wukong, how’s the situation in the wind and fog?” 

“It seems to have cleared up right now,” replied Pilgrim, “for there’s hardly any wind or fog.” 

“Yes,” said Tripitaka, “they do seem to have subsided.” 

“Master,” said Pilgrim with a chuckle, “my eyesight is usually quite good but this time I’ve made a mistake. I'd thought that there might be a monster in the wind and fog but there wasn't.” 

“What is it then?” asked Tripitaka. 

“There's a village not too far ahead,” said Pilgrim, “and the families there are quite devoted to good works. They are steaming white-grain rice and bleached-flour buns to feed the monks. The fog, | 
suppose, could have been the steam coming from their steamers, a sure sign of their good works.” 

When 8 Rules heard this, he thought it was the truth. Pulling Pilgrim aside, he said softly, “Elder Brother, did you take a meal with them before you came back?” 

“| didn’t eat much,” said Pilgrim, “for the vegetable dishes were a bit too salty for my taste.” 

“Bah!” exclaimed 8 Rules. “No matter how salty they might be, I'd have eaten until my stomach was filled. If I’m too thirsty, I'll come back and drink water.” 

“Do you want to eat?” asked Pilgrim. 

“Of course,” replied 8 Rules, “because |’m just feeling a little hungry! I’d like very much to go and eat something. What do you think?” 

“Brother,” said Pilgrim, “you’d not mention this. An ancient book said, ‘When the dad is present, the son should not act on his own.’2 If Master remains here who dares go there first?” 

“If you don’t speak up,” said 8 Rules, giggling, “I'll be able to go.” 

“Ill not,” said Pilgrim. ‘I'd like to see how you manage to get away.” That Idiot was peculiarly endowed with glutton-ish intelligence. Walking forward, he saluted deeply and said, “Master, just now Elder 
Brother told us that there are families in the village ahead who are feeding the monks. Our horse here however, is bound to bother people once we get there. Won't it be a nuisance when we've to find 
feed or hay for him? It’s a good thing that the sky is now cleared of wind and fog. Why don't you sit here for a while and let me go find some nice, tender grass to feed the horse? Then we may proceed 
to beg for our meal from those households.” 

“Marvellous!” said a delighted Tang Monk. “How is it that you're so industrious today? Go, and return quickly!” Chuckling to himself, that Idiot left at once, only to be pulled back by Pilgrim, saying, 
“Brother, those families there will feed only handsome monks, not ugly ones.” 

“If you put it that way,” said 8 Rules, “it means I’ve to undergo transformation again.” 

“Exactly,” said Pilgrim, “you'd better change a little.” 

Dear Idiot! He too had the ability of thirty-six transformations. After he walked into the fold of the mountain, he made the magic sign and recited a spell; with one shake of his body he changed into a 
rather thin and short priest. His hand striking a wooden fish, he began to mutter something as he walked. He knew nothing of reciting scriptures of course and all he could mumble was “Noble Eminence!” 
The fiend ordered the various fiends to form a circle at the entrance of the main road after he had retrieved the wind and fog and wait for the travellers. Idiot had the misfortune to walk right into the 
circle. The various fiends at once had him surrounded; some tugged at his clothes while others pulled at his sash. As they surged around him, 8 Rules said, “Stop pulling! I'll eat from you house by 
house!” 

“Monk,” said the fiends, “what do you want to eat?” 

“You people want to feed the monks,” said 8 Rules, “and I’ve come to take my meal.” 

“So, you think we're feeding the monks,” said one of the monsters. “You don’t know that we specialize in eating monks here. Since we’re monstrous mortals who have attained the Way in the mountain, 
we're particularly fond of catching monks and bringing them into our house to have them steamed in steamers. And you want to eat our meals instead!” 

On hearing this, 8 Rules was so horrified that he began to castigate Pilgrim, saying, “This Ban-Horse-Plague is such a rogue! He lied to me about the feeding of monks in this village. What village is 
there, and what feeding of monks? These are monster-spirits!” Exasperated by their pulling, Idiot at once changed back into his original form and took out his muckrake from his waist. A few wild blows 
sent those little monsters retreating. They dashed back in fact to report to the old fiend: “Great King, disaster!” 

“What sort of disaster?” asked the old fiend. One of the little monsters said, “From the front of the mountain arrived a monk who looked quite neat. | said that we'd take him home to be steamed, and if 
we'd not finish him immediately, we'd have parts of him cured and left for bad weather. | didn’t expect him to know how to change.” 

“What did he change into?” asked the old monster. 

“Nothing that looks human” said the little monster. “Long horn, huge ears, and a tuft of hair behind his head. Wielding a muckrake with both his hands, he delivered blows madly at us. We’re so scared 
that we ran back to report to the great king.” 

“Don’t be afraid,” said the old fiend. “Let me go look.” 

He held up an iron club and walked forward only to discover that Idiot was ugly indeed. This was how he appeared: a horn, pestle-like, over 3 feet long and teeth protruding like silver prongs. Bright like 
lightning a pair of eyeballs round, 2 ears that whip the wind in hu-hu sound. Arrow-like hairs behind his head are seen; his whole body’s skin is both coarse and green. His hands hold up a thing bizarre 
and queer: a muckrake of 9 prongs which all men fear. Forcing himself to be bold, the monster-spirit shouted: “Where did you come from? What’s your name? Tell me quickly and I'll spare your life!” 
With a chuckle 8 Rules said, “My child, so you don’t recognise your Ancestor Bullseye! Come up here and I'll recite for you: with huge mouth and fangs I’ve great magic might. Emperor Jade made me 
Marshal Heavenly Reeds. The boss of Heaven’s eighty-thousand marines comforts and joys Id in the halls of light. Because | mocked Change when | was drunk and flaunted my strength at a wrongful 
hour - one shove of my horn toppled Tushita; Queen-Mum’s divine herbs | then devoured -Emperor Jade pounded me two thousand times and banished me from the Three Heavens’ realm. Though 
told to nourish my primal spirit, | became again a monster down below. About to marry at the Village Gao, | met Brother Sun - it's my wretched fate! Quite defeated by his golden-hooped rod, I’d to 
salute and take the Religious vow: a coolie who bears luggage and leads the horse, owes the Tang Monk a debt in former life! This iron-legged Heavenly Reed’s name’s Bullseye; and my religious 
name’s Eight Rules.” 

On hearing these words, the monster-spirit snapped, “So you're the disciple of the Tang Monk. I've always heard that the flesh of the Tang Monk’s most edible. Now that you've barged in here, you 
think I'll spare you? Don’t run away! Watch my club!” 

“Cursed beast!” said 8 Rules. “So you used to be a Doctor in Dyeing!” 

“Why was | a Doctor in Dyeing?” asked the monster-spirit. 

“If you’re not,” replied 8 Rules, “how'd you know the use of a stirring club?” 

The fiend of course permitted no further chatter; he drew near and struck madly. The 2 of them thus began quite a furious battle in the fold of the mountain: the 9-pronged muckrake, 1 single iron club 
— the rake in motion churned like violent wind; the club used deftly flew like sudden rain. One was a nameless, vile fiend blocking the mountain path; 1 was sinful Heavenly Reeds helping Nature’s lord. 
With Nature righted, why fear demons or fiends? On tall mountains, earth would not beget gold. That 1’s club parried like a serpent bolting from the deep; this 1’s rake came like a dragon breaking from 
the banks. Their shouts, thunderous, rocked mountains and streams; cries, heroic, stirred the depths of earth. 2 valiant fighters each showing his power to wage a life-risking contest of might. Summoning 
his own powers, 8 Rules engaged the monster-spirit who also shouted for the little fiends to have his opponent encircled. Pilgrim standing behind the Tang Monk, burst out laughing all of a sudden. 
“Elder Brother,” asked Sand-monk, “why’re you snickering?” 

“Bullseye Eight Rules is truly idiotic!” said Pilgrim. “When he heard that people were feeding monks, he was deceived into leaving immediately and still hasn’t returned after all this time. If his rake 
managed to beat back a monster-spirit, you'd be able to watch him come back in triumph and clamour for merit. But if he could not withstand him and got himself captured, then that would be my 
misfortune also, for | don’t know how many times, backward and forward, he would castigate me as Ban-Horse-Plague. Awakened to Purity, stop talking to me for a while. Let me go see what’s 
happening.” 

Dear Great Sage! Without letting the elder know, he quietly pulled a hair from the back of his head and blew his mortal breath on it, crying, “Change!” It changed into his appearance to accompany both 
Sand-monk and the elder. His true body left with his spirit to shoot up into the air and look: he soon discovered that Idiot, surrounded by the fiends, was gradually losing ground, the movements of his 
muckrake slackening. 

Pilgrim could no longer restrain himself; lowering his cloud, he cried out in a loud voice, “Don’t worry 8 Rules! Old monkey's here!” When that Idiot heard Pilgrim’s voice, he was stirred to greater strength 
than ever as he attacked madly with his rake. Unable to withstand him, the monster-spirit said, “A moment ago this monk was beginning to weaken. Why is it that he has turned more ferocious all at 
once?” 

“My child,” said 8 Rules, “you'd not try to oppress me! A family member of mine has arrived!” Ever more fiercely he delivered blows at his opponent's head and face, until the monster-spirit could hardly 
parry his blows and led the other monsters to retreat in defeat. When Pilgrim saw the monster-spirit flee however, he did not draw near. Turning his cloud around, he went back to where he had been, 
and with one shake retrieved his hair. Being of fleshly eyes and mortal stock, the elder did not perceive what had taken place. 

In a little while, Idiot also returned; though he was the winner he had been so exercised that he was snivelling from the nose and foaming at the mouth. Panting hard, he walked near to call out, “Master!” 
Astonished by the sight of him, the elder said, “Eight Rules, you went to cut some grass for the horse. How’s it that you’re returning in such terrible shape? Could it be that people on the mountain are 
guarding the grass and refuse to let you cut it?” 

Putting down his rake, Idiot began to slap his head and stamp his feet, saying, “Master, don’t ask! If | told you, I’d be embarrassed to death!” 

“Why?” asked the elder. 

8 Rules said, “Elder Brother tricked me! He said at first that there was no monster-spirit in the wind and fog, that there was no evil omen. It was, he said, a village, and its families were devoted to virtue. 
They were steaming white-grain rice and bleached-flour buns to feed the monks. Since | thought it was the truth and was feeling so hungry, | wanted to get there and beg some first, on the excuse that 
| was cutting grass for the horse. Little did | expect that there would be quite a few fiends who had me surrounded. I’ve been fighting bitterly with them all this time. If it hadn’t been for the assistance 
lent by Elder Brother's mourning staff, I'd have never escaped the net and come back here.” 

On one side Pilgrim began to laugh, saying, “This Idiot's babbling! The moment you become a thief, you like to shift the blame on a whole bunch of people. | was watching Master right here. Since 
when did | leave his side?” 

“That's right!” said the elder. “Wukong hasn’t left me at all.” 

Jumping up and down, 8 Rules screamed, “Master, you just don’t know. He has an alibi!” 

The elder said, “Wukong, are there really fiends?” Knowing that he could no longer fool him, Pilgrim saluted and said, chuckling, “There are a few small ones but they don’t dare bother us. 8 Rules, 
come over here. | want to entrust you with something truly worthwhile. When we escort Master through this rugged mountain road, we’d act as if we’re on military maneuvers.” 

“What would we do if we're?” asked 8 Rules. 

“You can be the path-finding general and open up the road in front,” replied Pilgrim. “You needn't do anything if the monster-spirit doesn’t show up but if he appears, you fight with him. If you prevail, it 
will be regarded as your meritorious fruit.” 8 Rules calculated that the monster-spirit’s abilities were about the same as his, and so he said, “I don’t mind dying at his hands! Let me lead the way!” 

“This Idiot!” said Pilgrim with a chuckle, “If he mouths such unlucky words first, how can he make any progress?” 8 Rules said, “Elder Brother, do you know the proverb? A prince at a banquet will either 
be drunk or fed; a fighter on the field will either be hurt or dead. | want to say something amiss first, and then | may prove to be the stronger afterward.” 

Delighted, Pilgrim saddled the horse at once and asked the master to mount. With Sand-monk toting the luggage, they all followed 8 Rules into the mountain. The monster-spirit led those several 
defeated little fiends back to their own cave. Taking a seat high on a rocky edge, he fell completely silent. Many of the little fiends who had remained behind as household guards crowded around him 
to ask, “Great King, when you go out, you frequently return in a happy mood. Why are you so troubled today?” 


“Little ones,” replied the old monster, “normally when | go out to patrol the mountain, | grab a few humans or beasts — regardless of where they are from — to take back home for you to feast on. Today 
my luck’s rather poor, for | ran into an adversary.” 

“What adversary?” asked the little monsters. 

“He happens to be a monk,” replied the old monster, “a disciple of the scripture-seeker Tang Monk from the Land of the East whose name is Bullseye 8 Rules. | was defeated by blows from his 
muckrake. I’m damn mad! For years I’ve heard people say that the Tang Monk is an Arhat who has practiced austerities in ten disciples. If someone eats a piece of his flesh, his age will be lengthened, 
and he'll attain longevity. Little did | expect him to arrive this day at our mountain. | wanted so badly to seize him and have him steamed for food but | didn’t know he had a disciple like that under him.” 
He had hardly finished speaking when a little monster stepped forward from the ranks. Facing the old monster above, he sobbed three times aloud and then he laughed three times. “Why are you 
weeping and crying?” snapped the old monster. The little monster knelt down to say, “Just now the great king says that he wants to eat the Tang Monk but I’d like to tell you that this monk’s flesh is 
impossible to eat.” 

The old monster said, “People everywhere claim that one piece of his flesh will enable one to live long without growing old, to acquire an age as lasting as Heaven’s. Why do you say that it’s impossible 
to eat?” 

“If it were possible,” replied the little monster, “he wouldn’t have made it here, for he would have been devoured by monster-spirits elsewhere. He’s three disciples under him, you see.” 

“Do you know which three?” asked the old monster. “His eldest disciple is Pilgrim Sun,” said the little monster, “and his third disciple is Sand-monk. This Bullseye 8 Rules is his second disciple.” 

“How strong’s Sand-monk when compared with Bullseye 8 Rules?” asked the old monster. 

“About the same,” replied the little monster. 

“What about that Pilgrim Sun? How does he compare with Bullseye?” 

Sticking out his tongue, the little monster said, “I daren’t speak! That Pilgrim Sun’s vast magic powers and knows many ways of transformation! Five centuries ago, he caused great disturbance at the 
Celestial Palace. Those Twenty-eight Constellations? from the Region Above, the Nine Luminaries, the Twelve Horary Branches, the Five Nobles and Four Ministers, the Stars of East and West, the 
gods of North and South, the Deities of the Five Mountains and the Four Rivers, and the divine warriors of entire Heaven couldn’t tangle successfully with him. How’d you've the nerve to want to eat 
the Tang Monk?” 

“How do you know so much about him?” asked the old monster. 

The little monster said, “I used to live with the great kings of the Lion-Camel Cave at the Lion-Camel Ridge.4 Those great kings, not knowing anything better, wanted to devour the Tang Monk. When 
Pilgrim Sun used his golden-hooped rod to fight inside our door, alas, he reduced us to the condition like the title of a domino combination: Minus One, Abolish Six! | was intelligent enough, fortunately, 
to slip out the back door and come here to be received by the great king. That's how | found out about his abilities!” When the old monster heard these words, he paled with fright, for as the saying 
goes, “Even a great general is afraid of augury.” When he heard a member of his own household speaking like that, how could he not be frightened? 

At that anxious moment, another little monster went forward to say, “Great King, don’t be upset, and don’t be frightened. The proverb tells us that ‘Success comes step-by-step.’ If you desire to devour 
the Tang Monk, let me offer you a plan to seize him.” 

“What sort of plan do you've?” asked the old monster. 

“One called ‘The Plan of Plum Blossoms with Parted Petals,” answered the little monster. “What do you mean by that?” asked the old monster. 

The little monster said, “Take a roll call of all the monsters in the cave, young and old; select a hundred out of the thousands, ten out of the hundred, and finally three out of those ten. These three must 
all have abilities and the capacity for transformation. They will all change into the great king's appearance, wearing his armour and holding his club, and then be placed in ambush. The first one will 
engage Bullseye 8 Rules in battle; the next, Pilgrim Sun; and the third, Sand-monk. We'll risk these three little monsters to induce those three brothers to leave their master. Then the great king will be 
able to stretch forth his hand from mid-air to seize the Tang Monk like ‘Fetching Things from One’s Pocket,’ like ‘squeezing a Fly in the Fish Bowl.’ That’s not too difficult, is it?” 

On hearing this the old monster was filled with delight. “This is a most marvellous plan!” said he. “When we set out, I'll not do anything if we can’t catch the Tang Monk. But if we do catch him, I'll not 
treat you lightly. I'll appoint you as our vanguard officer.” 

The little monster respected to thank him before giving the order for the roll call. When all the monster-spirits of the cave, young and old, were summoned into their presence, three able little monsters 
were indeed selected. All of them were told to change into the form of the old monster; each holding the iron club, they were placed in ambuscade to wait for the Tang Monk. Elder Tang free of cares 
and worries, followed 8 Rules up the main road. After they had proceeded for a long time, a loud pop from the side of the road suddenly brought out a little monster who rushed forward and attempted 
to seize the elder. “Eight Rules,” cried Pilgrim Sun, “the monster-spirit is here! Why don’t you do something?” 

Without bothering to distinguish one from the other, Idiot whipped out his muckrake and dashed forward to attack madly the monster-spirit who met his blows with an iron club. Back and forth, the two 
of them fought beneath the mountain slope, when another fiend leaped out from some bushes with a pop and headed straight for the Tang Monk. 

“Master, things are going wrong!” cried Pilgrim. “Eight Rules is so blind that he has allowed the monster-spirit to slip by him to come here to grab you. Let old monkey go beat him off!” Hurriedly he 
wielded his rod and rushed forward, bellowing, “Where are you going? Watch my rod!” Without uttering a word, the monster-spirit lifted his club to meet him. Beneath the grassy knoll the two of them 
thus rushed together, and as they fought, another monster-spirit leaped out from behind the mountain to the howling of a strong gust and headed straight for the Tang Monk. 

When Sand-monk saw him, he was horrified. “Master!” he cried. “Both Big Brother and Second Elder Brother must be so dim of sight that they allowed the monster-spirit to slip past them and come to 
grab you! Sit here on the horse, and let old Sand go capture him!” 

This monk without distinguishing between good and ill either, immediately wielded the staff to block the iron club of the monster-spirit. They strove together most bitterly, shouting and screaming at 
each other as they gradually drifted away. When the old fiend, flying through the air, discovered the Tang Monk sitting all alone on the horse, he reached down with his five steel-like claws; with one 
grasp he lifted the master away from the horse and stirrup. The monster-spirit then took him away in a gust of wind. How pitiful! This is why it’s hard for Chan-nature, demon-plagued, can’t bear right 
fruit. River Float meets again his Ill-luck Star! Lowering the wind, the old monster brought the Tang Monk into the cave, shouting, “Vanguard!” The little fiend who planned all this ran forward to kneel 
down, saying, “I dare not accept the title! | dare not accept the title!” 

“Why do you say this?” asked the old monster. “When a great general gives his word, it’s as if the white has been dyed black! Just now | told you that I'd not do anything if we’d not catch the Tang Monk 
but if we did, you'd be appointed vanguard of our forces. Today your marvellous plan indeed succeeded. How could | betray you? You may bring the Tang Monk over here, and ask the little ones to 
fetch water and scrub the pan, to haul in the wood and start a fire. Steam him a bit, so you and | can eat a piece of his flesh to lengthen our age.” 

“Great King,” said the vanguard, “let’s not eat him just yet.” 

The old fiend said, “We've captured him. Why shouldn’t we eat him?” The vanguard replied, “Of course the great king may eat him, and if you do, both Bullseye 8 Rules and Sand-monk even may be 
persuaded that they should overlook the matter. But that bossy Pilgrim Sun, | fear, may let loose his viciousness once he learns that we've devoured his master. He doesn’t even have to come fight 
with us. All he needs do is plunge that golden-hooped rod of his into the midriff of our mountain; it'll create such a gaping hole that the mountain itself will topple over. Then we'll not even have a place 
to stay.” 

“Vanguard,” said the old fiend, “what sort of noble opinion do you’ve?” 

“As | see the matter,” replied the vanguard, “you'd send the Tang Monk into the back garden and tie him to a tree. Don’t feed him any rice for two or three days. That'll clean up his inside, for one thing, 
and for another, it should give us the time we need until his three disciples stop searching for him at our door. When we know for certain that they have left, we'll then take him out and enjoy him at our 
leisure. Isn’t that better?” 

“It is, it is!” said the old fiend, laughing. “What the vanguard says makes perfect sense!” The order was immediately given that the Tang Monk would be brought into the back garden where he was 
bound to a tree with a rope. Then the little fiends all went back to the front to wait on the old monster. 

Look at that elder! Enduring most bitterly the tight fetter and the restraint of ropes, he could not stop the tears from rolling down his cheeks. “O disciples!” he cried. “In which mountain are you trying to 
capture fiends, and on what road are you chasing monsters? I’ve been brought by a brazen demon to suffer here. When will we ever meet again? The pain’s killing me!” As tears streamed from both 
his eyes, he heard someone calling from a tree opposite him, saying, “Elder, so you, too, have entered here!” 

Calming down, the elder said, “Who are you?” 

The man said, “I’m a woodcutter from this mountain who was captured by that mountain lord and brought here. I’ve been bound for three days, and | imagine that they want to eat me.” 

“O woodcutter!” said the elder, as tears began to flow once more. “If you die, you’re all by yourself and you don’t have any worries. | however, cannot die in such a carefree manner.” 

“Elder,” said the woodcutter, “you're someone who has left home. You've neither parents above you nor wife and children below you. If you die, you die. What cares or concerns do you've?” 

The elder said, “I’m someone sent by the Land of the East to seek scriptures in the Western Heaven. By the decree of Emperor Taizong of the Tang court, I’m to bow to the living God and acquire from 
him the true scriptures that will be used for the redemption of those orphaned lost souls in the Region of Darkness. If | lose my life here, would that not have dashed the expectation of the emperor and 
the high hopes of his ministers? Would that not grievously disappoint those countless mistreated souls in the City of Wrongful Death? They'd never be redeemed and all this attempt at meritorious fruit 
would be reduced to wind and dust! How'd | die carefree and without concern?” 

When the woodcutter heard these words, he too began to shed tears as he said, “Elder, if you must die in this manner, then my death’s even more grievous. | lost my dad in childhood and I’ve lived all 
my life with my widowed mum. We've no other livelihood except my gathering firewood. My old mum’s now eighty-three and I’m her sole support. If | lose my life, who'll take care of her or bury her? O 
misery! O misery! This pain’s killing me.” 

On hearing this, the elder wailed aloud, crying, “How pitiful! How pitiful! /f mountain rustics still long for their kin, this poor monk’s been trained to recite Threads in vain. To serve the ruler or one’s 
parents follows the same principle. You live by the kindness of your parents and | do by the kindness of my ruler.” Truly it is that the tearful eye beholds a tearful eye; a broken heart escorts a broken 
heart! We'll leave for the moment Tripitaka in suffering and confinement. Pilgrim Sun having defeated the little monster beneath the grassy knoll, hurried back to the side of the main road. His master 
had vanished; only the white horse and the luggage remained. He was so horrified that he began searching toward the summit at once, leading the horse and poling the luggage. Alas! This is how woe- 
beset River Float keeps meeting more woes! The demon-routing Great Sage’s by demons plagued! 


102 

Wood Mum lending power, conquers the fiendish creature; Metal Squire extirpates the deviates using his magic 
The Great Sage Sun was searching and calling for his master all over the summit as he led the horse and toted the luggage. It was then that he saw Bullseye 8 Rules run up to him panting hard and 
saying, “Elder Brother, why’re you hollering?” 
“Master's disappeared,” replied Pilgrim. “Have you seen him?” 
“Originally,” said 8 Rules, “I followed the Tang Monk to be a priest. But you’ve to make fun of me again, telling me to play the general! | took enormous risk to fight with that monster-spirit for quite some 
time before | came back here with my life. You and Sand-monk however, were supposed to be guarding Master. How is it that you’re asking me instead?” 
Pilgrim said, “Brother, I'm not blaming you. Perhaps you're a little dazed and didn’t realise that you had allowed the monster-spirit to slip back here to seize Master. | went to strike at the monster-spirit, 
relying on Sand-monk to guard Master. Now even Sand-monk has disappeared!” 
“Sand-monk,” said 8 Rules with a giggle, “must have taken Master somewhere to drop his load!” Hardly had he finished speaking when Sand-monk appeared. “Sand-monk,” asked Pilgrim, “where has 
Master gone?” 
“Both of you must have been seeing double,” said Sand-monk, “and that’s why you allowed the monster-spirit to slip back here to try to seize Master. Old Sand took off to fight with him but Master 
should be sitting by himself on the horse.” All at once Pilgrim became so enraged that he jumped up and down as he cried, “We've fallen for their plan! We've fallen for their plan!” 
“What sort of a plan?” asked Sand-monk. 
“This,” replied Pilgrim, “is called ‘The Plan of Plum Blossoms with Parted Petals,’ that they used to split us brothers apart before they dashed right into our midst to haul Master away. Heavens! Heavens! 
Heavens! What'll we do?” 
As he spoke, he could hardly hold back the tears rolling down his cheeks. “Don’t cry!” said 8 Rules. “Once you cry, you turn into a namby-pamby! He can’t be very far for he’s to be somewhere in this 
mountain. Let’s go search for him.” With no better alternative, the 3 of them had to enter the mountain to begin their search. After they had journeyed some twenty miles, they reached a cave-dwelling 
beneath a hanging cliff with steep summits half appearing and strange rocks so rugged; rare blossoms and plants most fragrant, red apricots, green peaches most luscious. The old tree before the 


ledge, its skin 40 spans is frost-white and rain-resistant; the hoary pine beyond the door; its jade-green hues rise skyward 2000 feet. Wild cranes in pairs come often before the cave to exercise in the 
breeze; mountain fowl in 2s would perch on the boughs to recite in the sun. Clusters of yellow vines like hanging ropes; rows of misty willows like dripping gold. A square pond storing up water conceals 
an aged dragon which has yet to change; in a deep cave close to the mountain lives a man-eating old fiend of many years. In truth no less than a mortal’s lair, this place that gathers in the wind and 
air. On seeing the cave-dwelling, Pilgrim in two or three steps bounded right up to the door to examine it more closely. The stone door was tightly closed but across the top of the door was a slab of 
stone bearing this inscription in large letters: 

The Mist-Concealing Mountain; the Broken-Peak, Joined-Ring Cave 
“Eight Rules,” said Pilgrim, “let's move! This is where the monster-spirit lives and Master's to be in the house.” Strengthened by the presence of his companions, Idiot unleashed his violence and 
delivered as hard a blow as he could on the stone door, making a huge, gaping hole in it. “Fiend,” he cried, “send my master out quickly lest this muckrake tear down the door and finish off your entire 
household!” 
Those little monsters guarding the door hurried inside to report: “Great King, we've brought on a disaster!” 
“What disaster?” asked the old fiend. 
“Someone has broken through our front door,” replied one of the little monsters, “yelling for his master.” Astounded, the old fiend said, “I wonder whoever could have found his way here.” 
“Don’t be afraid!” said the vanguard. “Let me go out and have a look.” This little fiend dashed up to the front door and stuck his head out sideways through the hole to look around. When he saw the 
huge horn and large ears, he at once turned back and called out, “Great King, don’t be afraid of him! This is Bullseye 8 Rules who has not much ability and won't dare be unruly. If he does, we'll open 
our door and take him in here to be prepared and steamed. The only person we need fear is the monk with a hairy face and a thunder-god beak.” 
When he heard this through the door, 8 Rules said, “O Elder Brother! He’s not afraid of me but only of you. Master has to be in his house. You go forward quickly.” 
“Lawless cursed beast!” shouted Pilgrim. “Your Grandpa Sun is here! Send out my master and I'll spare your life!” 
“Great King,” said the vanguard, “it's bad! Pilgrim Sun has found his way here!” The old fiend began to reprehend him, saying, “It's all because of that so-called ‘Parted Petals’ plan of yours that disaster 
has descended on our door! How will this end?” 
“Please relax, Great King,” said the vanguard, “and don’t find fault with me. | recall that Pilgrim Sun happens to be a kind and forbearing ape. Though he may possess vast magic powers, he also loves 
flattery. Let us take out a fake human head to deceive him a little, and flatter him a little, too with a few words. Just tell him that we’ve devoured his master. If we can deceive him, the Tang Monk will 
be ours for enjoyment. If we can’t, we'll try something else.” 
“Where shall we find a fake human head?” asked the old fiend. The vanguard said, “Let’s see if I'd make one.” 
Marvellous fiend! Using a steel axe, he cut off a lump of willow root, shaped it into a skull, and threw some human blood on it. In this gory fashion the head was taken out to the door on a lacquered 
tray by a small fiend who called out: “Holy Dad Great Sage, please calm your anger and allow me to report to you.” 
Pilgrim Sun was indeed susceptible to flattery; when he heard the ‘Holy Dad Great Sage,’ he stopped 8 Rules, saying, “Let's not move yet and see what they have to say.” 
“After your master had been taken into the cave by our Great King,” said the little fiend holding the tray, “those uncouth young fiends of ours did not know any better than to try to swallow him at once. 
Some tore at him while others gnawed at him. Your master was thus devoured, and all we've left here is his head.” 
“It's all right if he’s been devoured,” said Pilgrim, “but show me the head and let me see if it’s real.” The little fiend threw out the head through the hole in the door. The moment Bullseye 8 Rules saw it, 
he began to weep, saying, “How pitiful! We'd one kind of master entering through this door but now we've this kind of master coming out.” 
“Idiot,” said Pilgrim, “why don’t you try to determine whether this is a real human head before you start weeping?” 
“Aren't you ashamed of yourself?” said 8 Rules. “Could there be a false human head?” 
“This happens to be a false one,” replied Pilgrim. “How can you tell?” asked 8 Rules. “If you threw down a real human head,” said Pilgrim, “it would fall on the ground with a dull thud whereas a false 
head would make a loud rattle. If you don’t believe me, let me throw it down for you to hear.” He took it up and hurled it against a boulder, and it produced a loud clang. 
“Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “it rattles, all right.” 
“If it rattles,” said Pilgrim, “it’s a false one. Let me bring out its true form.” Whipping out his golden-hooped rod, he cracked it open with one blow. 8 Rules looked more closely and discovered that it was 
only a lump of willow root. Unable to contain himself, 8 Rules began to utter a string of abuses, crying, “You bunch of hairy clods! You've already hidden my master in the cave, and yet you dare use a 
lump of willow root to deceive your Ancestor Bull! Could my master have been a willow spirit?” 
The little fiend who held the tray was so horrified that he shook all over as he ran back to report: “Hard! Hard! Hard! Hard! Hard! Hard!” 
“Why so many hard?” asked the old fiend. 
The little fiend said, “Both Bullseye 8 Rules and Sand-monk were deceived but Pilgrim Sun happens to be an antique dealer who knows his stuff! He recognised the fact that it was a false human head. 
If you'd find a real head for him, you might be able to send him away.” 
“Where could | find one?” said the old fiend. “Ah, | know! In our skinning pavilion we still have several human heads that haven't been eaten yet. Go pick one out for us.” A few of the fiends went 
immediately to the pavilion and selected a fresh head that they then gnawed at until it was slick and smooth. The little fiend carried it out to the front again on a tray, crying, “Holy Dad Great Sage, the 
previous one was indeed a false head. This one however, is the true head of Dad Tang. Our Great King has kept it as a talisman for the house but we're presenting it to you now.” With a thud, the head 
was thrown out through the hole in the door, and it rolled all over, still dripping blood. 
When Pilgrim Sun saw that it was a real human head, he had no choice but to weep. 8 Rules and Sand-monk, too, joined in the loud wailing. As he tried to hold back his tears, 8 Rules said, “Elder 
Brother, let’s not cry just yet. The weather isn’t so good right now, and | fear that it may stink. Let me take it somewhere to have it buried while it’s still fresh. Then we can cry some more.” 
“You're quite right,” replied Pilgrim. 
Not revolted, Idiot hugged the head to his bosom and ran up the mountain ledge. Having found a spot facing the sun where the wind and air would be collected, he used his rake to dig a hole to try to 
bury the head. Then he built a grave mound, and called out to Sand-monk, “You and Elder Brother can stay here and weep. Let me go find something to use for offering.” Going over to the side of the 
brook, he selected several large twigs of willow and picked up some egg-shaped pebbles that he brought back to the graveside. The willow twigs were planted on both sides, and the pebbles were 
placed in a pile in front. 
“What do you mean by this?” asked Pilgrim. 
“We can pretend that these twigs are pines and cypresses,” replied 8 Rules, “so that Master will have a bit of shade on top. The pebbles may be taken as pastries, so that Master will enjoy a small 
Offering.” 
“Coolie!” snapped Pilgrim. “The man’s dead! And you still want to offer him pebbles?” 
8 Rules said, “Mere sentiment of the living to show our filial feeling.” 
“Let's stop this horseplay!” said Pilgrim. “Sand-monk can remain here to guard the grave, the horse, and the luggage. You and I'll go and tear down the cave-dwelling. When we capture the fiendish 
demon, we'll cut him into ten thousand pieces to avenge our master.” 
“What Elder Brother says is perfectly right,” said Sand-monk, still shedding tears. “The two of you’d put your hearts to this. I'll stand guard here.” 
Marvellous 8 Rules! He took off his black silk shirt and tightened his undergarment before lifting his rake high to follow Pilgrim. Striding forward, the two of them without waiting for further discussion, 
smashed down the stone door. “Give us back a living Tang Monk!” they thundered so loudly that the heavens shook. 
Those various fiends inside the cave, old and young were so terrified that they all cast their blame on the vanguard as the old fiend asked him, “These monks have smashed their way inside our door. 
What'll we do?” 
The vanguard replied, “The ancients have put the matter well: put your hand in the fish basket and you can’t avoid the stink! Never retreat once you start something! Let's call up the left and right 
commanders to lead our soldiers out to slaughter those monks!” 
As he had no better plan than what he heard, the old fiend thereupon gave the order: “Little ones, be of one mind and pick up your best weapons. Follow me out to battle.” 
With a roar, they stormed out of the cave. Great Sage and 8 Rules quickly retreated a few steps down to a level spot in the mountain. As they faced the various fiends, they shouted, “Who is the leader 
who has a name? Who is the fiend who has captured our master?” 
The various fiends pitched camp immediately and unfurled an embroidered floral banner. Grasping an iron club, the old fiend answered the call in a loud voice, saying, “Brazen monk, don’t you recognise 
me? I’m the Great King of South Mountain, and I’ve held this place in my sway for several centuries. I’ve captured and devoured your Tang Monk. What do you propose to do about that?” 
“You audacious hairy clod!” scolded Pilgrim. “How many years have you lived that you dare assume the title, South Mountain? Old Lord Li happens to be the patriarch of creation but he still sits to the 
right of Supreme Purity. A god Siddhartha is the honoured one who governs the world, and yet he still sits beneath the great roc. Kong the Sage is the founder of Confucianism but he assumes the 
mere title of Master. And you, a cursed beast, dare call yourself some Great King of South Mountain, holding this place in your sway! Don’t try to escape! Have a taste of your Grandpa’s rod!” 
Stepping aside to dodge the blow, the monster-spirit wielded his club to parry the iron rod and said, his eyes glowering, “Your features are those of an ape and yet you dare insult me with so many 
words! What abilities do you've that you dare behave in such a rowdy manner in front of my door?” 
“You nameless cursed beast!” said Pilgrim laughing. “Of course you know nothing of old monkey! Stand still, be brave, and listen to my recital: At East-Videha, my ancestral home through millennia 
conceived of Heaven and Earth a stone egg mortal on Mount Flower-Fruit did break and beget me, its progeny. By birth | thus was not of mortal stock for sun and moon did this sage body forge. Myself 
cultivated was no small thing - alert and keen, a great elixir source. Named the Great Sage, | lived among the clouds and fought the stars, relying on my power. Ten thousand gods couldn't approach 
me even; it’s easy to beat all planets of Heaven. My fame’s known in the world’s every part; wiles left a trail through the universe. By luck I’ve now embraced the religious faith to help an elder on his 
westward way. No one blocks the path | open on the mount though fiends worry when | build a bridge. I'll seize the forest tigers with my might; my hands will tame leopards before the cliff. The East’s 
Right Fruit is coming to the West: that monstrous deviate dares show his head? Since you, cursed beast dare my master devour, your life will surely perish within this hour.” Alarmed and angered by 
these words, the fiend clenched his teeth, leaped forward, and struck out at Pilgrim with his iron club. Casually parrying the blow with his rod, Pilgrim wanted to talk some more with him but our 8 Rules 
could not hold back any longer. He lifted his rake and madly attacked the vanguard of the fiend who met him head-on with the other monsters. This was some brawl on the mountain meadow, truly a 
marvellous battle: a priest from an eastern superior state went seeking true scriptures from the blissful West. The South Mount’s great leopard belched wind, mist, blocked the path; showing alone his 
might with a clever plan, and a wily scheme, he bagged in ignorance the Great Tang Monk. He met then the Pilgrim of vast magic power and 8 Rules also of great renown. When fiends on the mountain 
meadow fought, dust and dirt flew up to bedim the sky. Little fiends shouted over there, madly raising their swords and spears; divine monks bellowed over here, lifting up both rake and rod. The Great 
Sage was a hero without match; Aware of Ability was both stalwart and strong in years. The South Mountain old fiend and his subject, the vanguard all because of the Tang Monk’s 1 piece of flesh had 
quite forgotten the fear of life or death. These 2 turned hostile for their master’s sake; those 2 grew violent desiring the Tang Monk. Back and forth they battled for quite a while; clashing and bumping, 
they fought to a draw. When the Great Sage Sun saw how ferocious those little fiends were, how they refused to step back even when they were repeatedly attacked, he resorted to his Magic of Body- 
Division. Ripping out a bunch of his own hairs, he chewed them to pieces before spitting them out crying, “Change!” 
At once they all assumed his appearance, each wielding a golden-hooped rod, and began to push in from the front line of the battle. Those 100 or 200 little fiends found it difficult of course to look after 
both their front and their rear. Parrying the blows from the left, they could not attend to those coming from their right and so all of them fled for their lives and retreated to the cave. As Pilgrim and 8 
Rules also fought their way out from the centre of the battle, pity those monster-spirits who knew no better: those running into the rake received nine bleeding holes while those hugged by the rod had 
their bones and flesh turned into putt y. That Great King of South Mountain was so terrified that he fled for his life by mounting fog and wind. The vanguard however, could not transform, and he was 
struck down by one blow of Pilgrim’s rod. His original form emerged as an iron-backed grey wolf. Dragging him closer and flipping him over for another look, 8 Rules said, “I wonder how many calves 
and lambkins this fellow’s stolen from people and eaten since his youth!” 
With 1 shake of his body Pilgrim retrieved his hair saying, “Idiot, we mustn't delay! Let’s chase down the old fiend quickly and ask him to pay for Master's life.” 
When he turned his head and did not see those little Pilgrims, 8 Rules said, “The magic forms of Elder Brother have all disappeared?” 
“I've retrieved them,” said Pilgrim. 
“Marvellous! Marvellous!” said 8 Rules and the 2 of them returned in delight and triumph. 


The old fiend when he fled back into his cave with his life, ordered the little fiends to move boulders and pole mud to the front door. Trembling all over, those fiends who managed to save their lives did 
indeed barricade the door and dared not show their heads at all. When our Pilgrim led 8 Rules to chase up to the front door, their shouts brought no answer from within, and when 8 Rules used his 
rake to strike at the barrier of mud, he could not budge it one whit. Realising what had happened, Pilgrim said, “Eight Rules, don’t waste your strength. They have barricaded the door.” 

“In that case,” said 8 Rules, “how shall we avenge our master?” 

“Let's go back to the grave to see how Sand-monk’s doing,” said Pilgrim. 

The two of them went back to the site and found Sand-monk still weeping. Ever more grief-stricken, 8 Rules abandoned his rake and flung himself on the grave. As he pounded the dirt with his hands, 
he wailed, “O ill-fated Master! O far-removed Master! Where shall | ever get to see you again?” 

“Brother, please calm your sorrow,” said Pilgrim. “If this monster-spirit has his front door stopped up, there must be a back door for him to go in and out. The two of you remain here, and let me go back 
to have another look around.” 

“O Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, shedding tears. “Do be careful! If they manage to grab even you, it'll be difficult for us to weep. A sob for Master and a sob for Elder Brother — we'll be all confused!” 
“Don’t worry!” replied Pilgrim. “I'll be able to take care of myself.” Dear Great Sage! Putting away his rod and tightening his skirt, he went past the mountain slope and immediately heard the sound of 
gurgling water. He saw turning his head that it came from a brook tumbling down from the peak. Then he discovered a little entrance on the other side of the brook to the left of which there seemed to 
be a drainage sewer. “It goes without saying,” he thought to himself, “that this must be the backdoor. If | present my face like this, some little fiends opening the door might recognise me. I'll change 
into a little water snake to get through — but wait! If the ghost of Master knew that I'd changed into a snake, he’d blame me because a serpentine creature would ill become a priest. Why nota little crab 
then? That’s no good either for Master will blame me for being a busybody priest.” Finally he changed into a water rat and with a whoosh, darted across the brook. Through the drainage sewer he 
crawled into the courtyard and looked around: at the spot facing the sun were several little fiends hanging up, piece by piece, slabs of human flesh to be dried. “O my dear children!” said Pilgrim to 
himself. “That’s to be Master's flesh! They'd not finish all of him and so want to cure some strips for inclement weather. I'd like to reveal my true form, rush up there, and slaughter them all with one 
stroke of my rod but that'll only show that I’ve courage but little wisdom. I'll change again and go inside to find the old fiend to see what's happening.” 

He leaped out of the sewer and with 1 shake of his body changed into a tiny, winged ant. Truly his name’s Dark Horse, ‘a small and feeble thing but long cultivation has formed his wings. In idle 
moments by a bridge he’d flit or roam beneath a bed to test his wit. He seals his hole, knowing when rain would come; weighed down by dust he would ashes become. So airy and agile he can quickly 
soar a few times, unknown, past the firewood door. Stretching his wings without a shadow or sound, he flew directly into the centre hall where he found the old fiend sitting dejectedly. From behind him 
a small monster leaped out to say, “Great King, ten thousand delights attend you!” 

“Where do these delights come from?” asked the old monster. 

The little monster said, “Just now | was doing a bit of intelligence work by the brook at our rear entrance, and | heard someone wailing. When | climbed up the peak to take a further look, | found that it 
was Bullseye 8 Rules, Pilgrim Sun, and Sand-monk who were mourning before a grave. They must have believed that human head was the Tang Monk’s and buried it. Now they are weeping beside 
the grave they dug.” 

When Pilgrim heard this, he was secretly pleased, saying to himself, “If he could say this, my master must still be hidden here somewhere. He hasn't been devoured. Let me go search further to find 
out indeed whether Master is dead or alive before | discuss the matter with these monsters.” 

Dear Great Sage! Soaring high in the centre hall, he looked this way and that and discovered to one side a little door that was tightly shut. Crawling through a crack in the door, he found a large garden 
inside, from the centre of which faint sounds of grief could be heard. When he flew deep into the garden, he came upon a clump of tall trees, beneath which two persons were tied: one of them was 
none other than the Tang Monk. Pilgrim was so excited by the sight that he could not refrain from changing back into his original form and approaching to say, “Master.” 

Recognising him, the elder said, as his tears fell, “Wukong, so you’ve come! Save me quickly! Wukong! Wukong!” 

“Stop calling my name, Master!” said Pilgrim. “There are still people up front, and | fear that they may get wind of this. As long as you're still alive, | can save you. That fiend told us that you had been 
devoured, using a false human head to deceive us. We've already fought bitterly with him. Please relax, Master. Just bear with me a bit longer. When I’ve knocked down that monster-spirit, I'll be able 
to come back here to free you.” 

Reciting a spell, the Great Sage at once changed back into an ant to return to the centre hall and alight on the main beam. A crowd of those little monsters who had not lost their lives were milling about 
noisily. From their midst one little monster suddenly dashed out to say, “Great King, when they see that the door is barricaded and that they cannot break it open, they must also give up all hopes of 
recovering the Tang Monk. After all, the false human head has been turned into a grave. They'll mourn for a day today and for another tomorrow. By the day after tomorrow, they should have fulfilled 
the obligation of three-day mourning and they will leave. When we've made sure that they have scattered, we can then bring out the Tang Monk and have him finely diced. Pan-fry him with some star 
anise and Sichuan pepper, and we can enjoy a nice fragrant piece to lengthen our lives.” 

“Stop talking like that!” said another little monster, clapping his hands. “He'll taste much better if we steam him.” 

“But not as economical as plain boiling,” said another. “At least we can save some firewood that way.” 

“He is, after all, a rare thing,” another spoke up. “We really should cure him with salt, so that we may enjoy him much longer.” 

When he heard this, perched on the beam, Pilgrim was filled with rage, saying to himself, “What sort of enmity do you’ve against my master that you’d make such elaborate plans to devour him?” Pulling 
out a bunch of his own hairs and chewing them to pieces, he spat them out lightly and recited in silence a magic spell. The hairs all changed into sleep-inducing insects that he threw onto the faces of 
the monsters. As the insects crawled into their noses one by one, the little monsters gradually dropped off until, in no time at all, they had all fallen fast asleep. Only the old monster however, remained 
restless as he continued to scratch his head and rub his face with both hands. He was sneezing repeatedly so that he kept pinching his nose. 

“Could it be that he has found out something?” said Pilgrim. “Let's give him a double-wick lamp!” Pulling off another piece of hair, he fashioned another creature like the ones before and threw it onto 
his face. Now he had two insects, one entering through his left nostril and the other through his right. Struggling up fora moment, the old monster stretched and yawned a couple of times, and then he 
too fell into a snoring slumber. Delighted, Pilgrim leaped down and changed back into his original form. Taking out his rod from his ear, he waved it once and it attained the thickness of a duck egg. 
With a loud clang he smashed the side door to pieces and ran into the rear garden, shouting, “Master!” 

“Disciple, untie me quickly,” said the elder, “for I'm about to be ruined!” 

“Don’t hurry, Master,” Pilgrim said. “Let me slay the monster-spirit first before | come rescue you.” He turned and dashed back into the centre hall. As he was about to strike with upraised rod, he 
stopped and said, “No good! Let me untie Master first before | strike at him.” 

He rushed back into the garden, only to think to himself, “I'll slay him first before the rescue.” He went back and forth like this two or three times before finally dancing his way into the garden. This sight 
of him gave the elder some delight even in his sorrow. “Monkey,” he said, “it must be that you’re overjoyed by the sight of my being still alive, and that is why you’re dancing in this manner.” 

Pilgrim then walked up to him to untie his ropes. As he led his master away, they heard the person tied to another tree facing them call out, “Venerable Dad, please exercise your great mercy and save 
my life, too!” 

Standing still, the elder said, “Wukong, please untie that person also.” 

“Who is he?” asked Pilgrim. “He’s a woodcutter,” replied the elder, “who had been captured a day before | was seized. He told me that he has an aged mum whom he thinks of constantly. He’s a most 
filial person, and we might as well rescue him, too.” 

Pilgrim agreed and untied the man’s ropes also; they went out through the rear entrance together and ascended the cliff to cross the swift-flowing brook. “Worthy disciple,” said the elder, “I thank you 
for saving his life and mine! Aware of Ability and Awakened to Purity where are they?” 

“The two of them are mourning you,” replied Pilgrim. “You may call out to them now.” And the elder cried out in a loud voice: “Eight Rules! 8 Rules!” 

As he had been weeping till he was half dazed, Idiot wiped his horn and eyes and said, “Sand-monk, Master must have come home to reveal his soul! Isn’t it he who's calling us from somewhere?” 
Rushing forward, Pilgrim shouted, “Coolie! Who's revealing his soul? Isn’t this Master who has returned?” When Sand-monk lifted his head and saw them, he fell to his knees and said, “Master, how 
you must have suffered! How did Elder Brother manage to rescue you?” Whereupon Pilgrim gave a thorough account of what had taken place. 

When he heard this, 8 Rules grew so infuriated that he raised his rake, clenched his teeth, and hacked away the grave mound. Digging out the head, he pounded it to pieces. “Why did you beat it up?” 
asked the Tang Monk. 

“O Master!” said 8 Rules. “I don’t know which family this outcast belongs to but he has caused me to weep for him for a long time.” 

“You'd thank him instead for saving my life,” said the Tang Monk. “When you brothers fought your way to their door and demanded my return, the monsters used him as a substitute to ward you off. If 
it hadn't been for him, I’d have been killed. You’d have him buried, simply as an expression of our priestly gratitude.” When he heard these words of the elder, Idiot indeed packed up the mess of flesh 
and bones and buried it again by digging another grave. 

With a chuckle Pilgrim said, “Master, please sit here for a moment, and let me go and finish them off.” He leaped down from the cliff and crossed the brook to return to the cave. Taking into the centre 
hall the ropes that had been used to tie the Tang Monk and the woodcutter, he found the old monster still sleeping. After having bull-tied him, Pilgrim used his golden-hooped rod to lift the bundle up 
and carried it on his shoulder to leave by the rear entrance. When 8 Rules caught sight of them from a distance, he said, “Elder Brother just loves this lopsided business! Wouldn't it be better if he had 
found another monster to give him a balanced load?” 

Pilgrim drew near and dropped down the old monster, and 8 Rules was about to strike with his rake. “Wait a moment!” said Pilgrim. “We've not seized the little monsters in the cave yet.” 

“O Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “lead me to them so | can hit them!” 

“Hitting them is such a waste of energy,” said Pilgrim. “It’s better to find some firewood and finish them off that way.” On hearing this, the wood-cutter immediately led 8 Rules to the eastern valley to 
find some broken bamboos, leafless pines, hollow willows, snapped-off vines, yellow artemisia, old reeds, rushes, and parched mulberry. After they had hauled bundles of these into the rear entrance, 
Pilgrim lit a fire while 8 Rules fanned up a breeze with his ears. As he leaped out of the cave, Great Sage shook his body once to retrieve his hairs. By the time those little monsters awoke, both smoke 
and fire were pouring out. Alas! Not even half a monster managed to escape, for the cave-dwelling was completely burned out. 

When the disciples returned to their master, the elder saw that the old monster was stirring, and he called out: “Disciples, the monster-spirit is awake.” Going forward, 8 Rules slew the old fiend with 
one blow of his rake; its original form appeared to be that of a spotted leopard. “This sort of spotted leopard,” said Pilgrim, “can even devour a tiger. Now it has managed to assume human form. Putting 
it to death will prevent it from causing any further trouble.” The elder thanked them over and over again before climbing once more into the saddle. 

“Venerable Dad,” said the woodcutter, “toward the southwest not far from here is my humble abode. |’d like to invite you there to meet my mum, so that she may salute to thank you all for saving my 
life. Then we'll escort you to the main road.” 

Delighted, the elder dismounted and headed southwest with the woodcutter and the 3 disciples. After a short distance they came upon a path of flagstones moss-lined and wood gates wisteria-entwined. 
On 4 sides are mountains lambent and trees filled with bird-call strident. Pines and bamboos join in thick green; profuse rare blossoms are seen. Deep in the clouds and out of the way is a bamboo- 
fenced thatched hut to stay. From a long way away they caught sight of an old woman, leaning on the wooden gate and weeping bitterly, crying out for her son all the while. When the woodcutter saw 
his own mum, he abandoned the elder and rushed up to the wooden gate. As he went to his knees, he cried, “Mum, your son’s here!” 

Embracing him, the old woman said, “O my child! When you didn’t return home these last few days, | supposed that you’re seized by the mountain lord and killed, and the very thought of it gave me 
unbearable pain. If you’re not harmed, why did you wait till today before returning? Where are your ropes, your pole, and your axe?” 

The woodcutter respected before replying, “Mum, your son indeed was taken away by the mountain lord and tied to a tree. It would have been truly difficult to preserve my life if it hadn’t been for these 
several venerable dads. That one happens to be an Arhat sent by the Tang court of the Land of the East to go seek scriptures in the Western Heaven. He too was captured by the mountain lord and 
bound to a tree. His three disciples however, possess vast magic powers. They succeeded in slaying the mountain lord who turned out to be the spirit of a spotted leopard. Then they burned to death 
a great number of the little monsters. When they freed and rescued that old venerable dad, they rescued your child as well. Their kindness to me is high as Heaven and thick as Earth! If it hadn’t been 
for them, your child would certainly have perished. Now the mountain is quite safe, and even if your child journeys through the night, there’ll be no danger.” 

When the old woman heard these words, she saluted with each step she took to receive the elder and the three disciples into her thatched cottage. After they were seated, mum and son respected 
repeatedly to thank them before rushing into the kitchen to prepare a vegetarian meal. 

“Brother woodcutter,” said 8 Rules, “I realise that yours is a humble livelihood. You may feed us a simple meal but please don’t go to the trouble of making any elaborate preparation.” 

“To tell you the truth, Venerable Dad,” replied the woodcutter, “ours indeed is a lowly abode in the mountains. There are no large black mushrooms button mushrooms, Szechwan peppers, or star 
anise. We've only a few items of wild vegetation to present to you all as a mere token of our gratitude.” 


“Sorry to have caused you such inconvenience!” said 8 Rules, chuckling. “Just make it snappy, for we're getting awfully hungry!” 

“In a moment! In a moment!” said the woodcutter. 

Indeed in a moment the tables and chairs were spread out, wiped clean, and several dishes of wild vegetation were brought out. What can be seen? are the yellow cabbage lightly blanched and white 
beans pickled and minced. Water polygon-um and purslane, shepherd’s purse and Wild-goose-intestine. >The Swallow-not-coming‘ both fragrant and tender; bean sprouts with small buds both crisp 
and green. Horse-blue® roots cooked till soft; dog-footprints® plainly toasted. Cat’s-ears’ and bi® dropped in the wilds. The Ashen-stalk® cooked very soft, is esculent. The Scissors’-handle"® and Cows’- 
pool-profit, the Hollow-snail'2 upturned and filled, the broom-like shepherd’s purse. The broken-rice-qi, ‘*the Wocaiqi"4 — these few items are both fragrant and smooth. Niaoying’> flowers fried in oil 
and most praiseworthy water-chestnuts. Rushes’ stems and tender watercress - 4 aqueous plants truly rich and pure. The Wheat-wearing-lady'* is coy and good; the Torn-worn-cassock, ‘’no need to 
wear it; below the bitter hemp are bamboo props. The Little-bird’s-cotton-coat'* and the Monkey’s-footprints'? are so oily when fried that you've to eat them. The Slanted hao, the Green hao, and the 
Mum-hugging-hao; some tiny moths have flown atop the flat buckwheat. To bare Goat-ears*' and Gouqi?2 roots add but Black-blue® and there’s no need for oil. These wild vegetation and a meal of 
rice the woodman truly offers as gifts of thanks. After master and disciples had eaten their fill, they at once made preparation to leave. Not daring to detain them for long, the woodcutter asked his mum 
to come out to thank and salute their visitors once more while he respected repeatedly. Having tidied his clothes, the woodcutter then took up a staff made from the trunk of a date tree to escort the 
pilgrims out the door. While Sand-monk led the horse, 8 Rules toted the luggage, and Pilgrim followed closely to 1 side, the elder riding the horse, folded his hands before his chest and said, “Brother 
Woodcutter, please lead the way. We'll take proper leave of you when we reach the main road.” 

They then descended from the heights and headed for the slope, following the turns of the brook. Musing as he rode, the elder said, “O disciples! Since leaving my lord to go to the West, I’ve walked 
the path of an unending quest. In mountains and streams disasters await; my life’s been the fiends’ and monsters’ bait. Tripitaka’s the sole thought on my mind; the nine-fold Heaven’s all | hope to find. 
When'll | from such toil my respite earn and return to the Tang court, merit done?” 

On hearing this, the woodcutter said, “Venerable Dad, please cast aside your worries. In less than a thousand miles on this main road to the West will be the Kingdom of India, the home of ultimate 
bliss.” 

When he heard this, the elder at once dismounted and said, “We've caused you inconvenience to come this far. If that’s the main road before us, let me urge you to return to your house, brother wood- 
cutter and thank your honoured mum for us for that sumptuous vegetarian repast. This humble cleric’s few tokens of gratitude to offer except the promise of reciting scriptures morning and evening on 
your behalf so that both of you, mum and son will be blessed with peace and long life of a century.” The woodcutter respectfully agreed and walked back while master and disciples headed straight for 
the West. Truly the fiend subdued, they leave their hard ordeal; the kindness received, they journey with zeal. 


103 

The Phoenix-Mortal Prefecture offends Heaven and suffers drought; the Great Sage Sun advocates virtue and provides rain 
The Great Way’s hidden and deep — once told how it waxes and wanes will astonish both gods and spirits: enfolding the universe, cutting through one’s native light, ‘it grants the world true, matchless 
bliss. Before the Spirit Vulture Peak, the treasure pear! will blaze forth 5 kinds of radiance to illumine all life in the cosmos when taken out; those who know live long as mountains and seas. @Tripitaka 
and his 3 disciples took leave of the woodcutter and descended the Mist-Concealing Mountain to proceed on the main road. After travelling for several days, they found themselves approaching a city. 
“Wukong,” said Tripitaka, “can you see whether the city ahead of us is the Kingdom of India?” 
“No! No!” replied Pilgrim, waving his hands. “Though the place of Siddhartha is named Ultimate Bliss, there is no city as such, only a large mountain in which there are terraces and towered buildings. 
The name there is the Great Thunderclap Monastery of the Spirit Mountain. Even if we’ve arrived at the Kingdom of India, it doesn’t mean that that’s where Siddhartha lives. Heaven knows how great 
a distance there is between the kingdom and the Spirit Mountain! The city over there, | suppose, must be some sort of outer prefecture of India but we'll know more once we get near it.” 
In a little while they reached the outside of the city. Dismounting, Tripitaka and his disciples walked through the triple gates. Inside they found little human activity, and the streets seemed rather desolate. 
When they reached the edge of the market, they saw many people wearing blue robes standing in rows left and right; a few who had on official caps and belts were standing beneath the eaves of a 
building. The four pilgrims proceeded along the street but the people would not step aside for them at all. As Bullseye 8 Rules had always been a country bumpkin, he stuck out his long horn and yelled, 
“Get out of the way! Get out of the way!” 
When those people raised their heads and caught sight of a shape like that, they turned numb with fear and fell all over the place. “A monster-spirit’s here! A monster-spirit’s here!” they yelled. Trembling 
all over, those with official caps and belts saluted and said, “Where are you people from?” 
Fearing that his disciples might cause trouble, Tripitaka immediately went to the front to answer the question. “This humble priest,” he said, “is the subject of the Great Tang in the Land of the East and 
has been sent to the Great Thunderclap Monastery in the Kingdom of India to seek scriptures from the Religious Patriarch. As we pass through your treasure region, we've yet to learn of your country’s 
name and seek shelter from a household. Having just entered the city, we fail to give right of way to others, and | beg you various officials to pardon us.” 
One of the officials returned the greetings and said, “This is the outer prefecture of India, and the name of the region is Phoenix-Mortal. Because we've had a severe drought for several years, the 
prefect ordered us to put up here a public notice seeking a priest to pray for rain and save the people.” 
On hearing this, Pilgrim said, “Where’s your notice?” 
“Right here,” replied the officials. “We've been sweeping clean the wall and the eave just now, and we've yet to hang it up.” 
“Bring it here and let me have a look,” said Pilgrim, and the various officials rolled out the notice at once and hung it beneath the eave. As Pilgrim and his companions drew near, this was the notice 
they found: 
The Prefect Shangguan of the Phoenix-Mortal Prefecture in the Great Kingdom of India hereby promulgates a public notice to seek an enlightened master for the performance of a mighty religious 
deed. Though the territory of our prefecture is spacious, and though both our military and civilians have been affluent, we’ve suffered drought and famine for several consecutive years. The fields of the 
people are unploughed, and the military lands are infertile; the rivers have receded and the ditches have dried out. There is neither water in the wells nor liquid in the streams. The wealthy can barely 
subsist but the poor can hardly remain alive. A bushel of grain costs a hundred gold while five ounces of silver is the price of one bundle of wood. A ten-year-old girl is given in exchange for three pints 
of rice while a five-year-old boy is taken away at will. Those fearful of the law in the city would pawn their clothes and possessions to preserve themselves but those abusing the public in the countryside 
will rob and plunder to save their lives. For this reason we've promulgated this notice to plead with the worthy and wise of all quarters to pray for rain and save the people. Such kindness will be heavily 
rewarded with the payment of a thousand gold, and this is a sure promise. 
After he had read it, Pilgrim asked the various officials, “What does the Prefect Shangguan’ mean?” 
“Shangguan happens to be his surname, and it’s also the name of our prefecture,” they replied. “But that’s quite a rare name,” said Pilgrim, chuckling. 
“So Elder Brother hasn’t gone to school, after all!” 8 Rules said. “Don’t you know that toward the end of The Book of a Hundred Family Names there is the phrase, Shangguan Ouyang?” 
“Disciples,” Tripitaka said, “let’s stop this idle chatter. Whichever one of you knows how to pray for rain should do so on their behalf in order to bring relief to the populace. This is a most virtuous deed. 
If you can’t, we’d leave and not delay our journey.” 
“What's so difficult about praying for rain?” said Pilgrim. “Old monkey can overturn rivers and seas, alter the course of the planets, topple Heaven and upturn a well, belch out fog and cloud, chase 
down the moon while carrying a mountain, call up the wind and the rain. Which one of these things in fact has not been the sport of my youth? There’s nothing to marvel at!” 
When the various officials heard what he said, two of them quickly went to the prefectural office to report, “Venerable Dad, ten thousand happiness have arrived!” 
The prefect was just in the midst of uttering a silent prayer before stalks of lighted incense. When he heard the announcement, he asked, “What happiness?” One of the officials replied, “Having received 
the public notice today, we’re about to mount it at the entrance of the market when four monks arrived. They claimed to be pilgrims sent by the Great Tang in the Land of the East to seek scriptures 
from God in the Great Thunderclap Monastery of the Kingdom of India. When they saw the notice, they also told us of their ability to pray for rain, and that is why we came especially to report to you.” 
The prefect immediately tidied his clothing and began walking toward the market, not even waiting for carriage or horses to be summoned, in order that he might solicit with great courtesy the help of 
these priests. When someone on the street announced, “The Venerable Dad Prefect has arrived,” the crowd stepped aside. As soon as he caught sight of the Tang Monk, the prefect started saluting 
low in the middle of the street, not intimidated at all by the hideous appearances of the monk’s disciples. “Your lowly official named Shangguan,” he said, “is the prefect of the Phoenix-Mortal Prefecture. 
With burned incense, and having ritually cleansed myself, | salute to implore the master to pray for rain and save the people. | beg the master to dispense widely his mercy, exercise his magic potency, 
and answer our needs!” 
Returning his salutation, Tripitaka said, “This is hardly the place for conversation. Allow this humble cleric to reach a monastery or temple where it'll be easier for us to do what we must do.” 
“Let the master come to our humble residence,” said the prefect. “There will be an unsullied area for you to stay.” 
Master and disciples thereupon led the horse and toted the luggage to the official residence. After he had greeted each one of them, the prefect at once ordered tea and a vegetarian meal to be served. 
When the food arrived in a little while, our 8 Rules ate with abandon like a hungry tiger, so terrifying those holding dishes and trays that their hearts quivered and their gallbladders shook. Back and 
forth they scurried about to fetch more soup and rice, moving like revolving lanterns. They could barely keep up with the demand but they did not stop until the pilgrims had satisfied themselves. After 
the meal, the Tang Monk expressed his thanks and then asked, “Sir Prefect, for how long has your noble region been afflicted with drought?” 
The prefect said, “At India’s Kingdom, this, our nation great, of Phoenix-Mortal I’m the magistrate. For three long years a drought has laid us low: the five grains perished — not even grass would grow! 
Commerce is hard for households big and small; ten doors or nine portals are tearful all. Two-thirds of us have been by hunger slain while one-third like a wind-blown torch remains. When | this public 
notice promulgate, it’s our luck that true monks have reached our state. If you with one inch of rain the people bless, a thousand gold I'll give for such kindness.” 
On hearing this, Pilgrim showed great delight and said with a roar of laughter, “Don’t say that! Don’t say that! If you mention a thousand gold as repayment, you'll not receive even half a drop of rain. 
But if you wish to accumulate merit and virtue, old monkey will present you with a torrential shower.” 
That prefect was indeed an upright and honest official who had great love for his people. He immediately asked Pilgrim to take the honoured seat; he saluted low and said, “Master, if you'd indeed 
extend your mercy, this lowly official will never dare tum my back on virtue.” 
“Let's not talk anymore,” said Pilgrim, “and please rise. May | trouble you to take good care of my master, so that old monkey can act?” 
“Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “how will you act?” 
“You and 8 Rules come over here,” replied Pilgrim. “Stand at the foot of the steps of the hall there and serve as my ritual assistants. Let old monkey summon the dragon here to make rain.” 8 Rules 
and Sand-monk obeyed; when the three of them all stood at the foot of the steps of the hall, the prefect burned incense and worshipped while Tripitaka sat and recited a Thread. 
As Pilgrim recited a magic spell, immediately a dark cloud arose from the east and gradually drifted down to the courtyard in front of the hall; it was actually Aoguang, the old Dragon King of the Eastern 
Ocean. After the cloud had been retrieved, Aoguang took on human form and walked forward to salute Pilgrim saying, “In what capacity may this humble dragon serve the Great Sage who has 
summoned me?” 
“Please rise,” said Pilgrim. “I've troubled you to come from a great distance only for one purpose, and that is to ask you why you've not provided rain to relieve a drought of several years here at the 
Prefecture of Phoenix-Mortal.” 
“Let me humbly inform the Great Sage,” said the old dragon. “Though | may be able to make rain, I’m subject to the will of Heaven. If Heaven above has not authorized me, how could | dare come here 
to make rain?” 
Pilgrim said, “Because | passed through this region and saw how the people suffered from such a prolonged drought, | asked you especially to come and bring relief. Why are you making excuses?” 
“Would | dare do that?” said the dragon king. “When the Great Sage recited his magic spell, I'd never dare not show up. But I've not been authorized by Heaven in the first place, and, second, I've not 
brought along the divine warriors in charge of making rain. How could | start anything? If the Great Sage indeed has such eleemosynary intentions, allow this little dragon to return to the sea and 
summon his troops. Meanwhile, let the Great Sage make a memorial at the Celestial Palace and ask for an imperial decree authorizing the descent of rain. Request the aquatic officials to let loose the 
dragons, and then I'll be able to make rain according to the amount specified by the decree.” 
As Pilgrim could not quite controvert this proper argument that the old dragon offered, he had to let him return to the sea. He himself then jumped out of the star-treading pattern to give the Tang Monk 
a thorough account of what had happened. “In that case,” said the Tang Monk, “you may go and do your duty but you must not utter even a word of falsehood.” Pilgrim at once gave this injunction to 8 
Rules and Sand-monk: “Guard the master, for I’m going up to the Celestial Palace.” 
Dear Great Sage! He said he was leaving and at once vanished from sight. Quaking with fear, the prefect asked, “Where has Venerable Dad Sun gone to?” 


“He mounted the clouds to ascend to Heaven,” said 8 Rules, chuckling. The prefect became more respectful than ever. An order was hurriedly dispatched to the broad boulevards and narrow alleys, 
asking all the people - whether they be nobles or plebeians, civilian or military - to set up a placard for the dragon king in front of each household. Clean water jars with willow twigs stuck inside were 
to be placed by the doors, and incense was to be burned so that all could worship Heaven. Pilgrim reached the West Heaven Gate with a single cloud somersault. The Deity-King the Upholder of the 
Nation led a group of celestial soldiers and vira to greet him with the question: “Great Sage, have you completed the enterprise of scripture seeking?” 
“The end can't be too far off,” replied Pilgrim. “We've reached the border of the Kingdom of India where there is an outer prefecture by the name of Phoenix-Mortal. That place has not had rain for three 
years, and the people are in terrible straits. Old monkey wanted to pray for rain to bring relief but when | summoned the dragon king there, he claimed that he dared not do it on his own authority. I've 
come here, therefore, to request a decree from the Jade Emperor.” 
“Im quite sure that rain is forbidden at that particular place,” said the Deity-King, “For I’ve heard that the prefect’s offended Heaven and Earth because of some mischief. As a punishment, the Jade 
Emperor established a rice mountain, a noodle mountain, and a huge square lock of gold. Until these three things are overtumed, there will be no rain for the region.” 
Not knowing however, what the Deity-King was speaking of, Pilgrim insisted on an audience with the Jade Emperor. The Deity-King dared not bar his way, and he was permitted to go inside till he 
reached the Hall of Perfect Light. He was then met by the 4r Celestial Masters who asked, “What's the Great Sage doing here?” 
“While escorting the Tang Monk,” said Pilgrim, “I arrived at the border of the Kingdom of India. Because of a severe drought at the Prefecture of Phoenix-Mortal, the prefect sought magicians to make 
rain. When old monkey managed to summon the dragon king and ask him to make rain, he said that he dared not do it without the explicit decree of the Jade Emperor. Hence I’ve come to request a 
decree to relieve the people’s suffering.” 
“But it should not rain at that region,” said the Celestial Masters. 
With a laugh, Pilgrim said, “Whether it should or not, please announce my presence and see whether old monkey can win this favour.” 
The Mortal Ge said, “As the proverb has it, ‘A fly wraps around a net — what a large countenance!” “Stop this babbling!” said Xu Jingyang. “Let’s take him inside.” Thereupon Qiu Hongzhi, Zhang 
Daoling, Ge, and Xu — these four realised mortals — led the visitor into the Hall of Divine Mists to memorialise, saying, “Your Majesty, we've here Sun Wukong who is passing through the Phoenix- 
Mortal Prefecture of the Kingdom of India. Wishing rain for the people, he has come especially to seek your decree.” 
“On the twenty-fifth day of the twelfth month three years ago,” said the Jade Emperor, “we’re out on tour to inspect the myriad heavens and float through the Three Realms. When we arrived at that 
particular region, we’d occasion to witness that Shangguan right in the midst of his wickedness. He pushed over the sacrificial maigre intended for offering to Heaven and fed it to dogs instead. 
Furthermore, he even made obscene utterances and committed the sin of blasphemy. For this reason, we established three things in the Fragrance-Draping Hall, to which all of you’d lead Sun Wukong 
to see. If these things have been overturned, we'll grant him a decree; if not, he should be told to mind his own business.” 
The four Celestial Masters at once led Pilgrim to the hall to look around. There they came upon a mountain of rice, about one hundred feet tall, and a mountain of noodles, about two hundred feet in 
height. At the side of the rice mountain was a chicken no larger than a human fist that was pecking at the rice at a rather irregular pace — now speeding up, now slowing down. Over at the noodle 
mountain was a golden-haired puppy, a Peking pug that with an occasional flick of his tongue, was lapping up some of the noodles. On the left side of the hall, moreover, there was an iron rack with a 
large square lock, at least fifteen inches in length, hanging from it. Beneath the key of the lock, no thicker than a human finger, was a small lamp, its tiny flame barely touching the key. 
Not knowing what to make of the sight, Pilgrim turned to ask the Celestial Masters, “What does this mean?” 
1 of them replied, “Because that fellow’s offended Heaven, the Jade Emperor established these three things. Not until the chicken’s finished pecking the rice, the dog’s lapped up all the noodles, and 
the lamp’s burned through the key of the lock there'll be rain in that region.” 
When he heard these words, Pilgrim was so taken aback that he paled with fright. Not daring to present another memorial to the Emperor, he walked out of the hall, visibly embarrassed. “The Great 
Sage needn't be overly perplexed,” said 1 of the preceptors. “This affair can only be resolved by virtue for if there is a single thought of kindness and mercy to stir up Heaven above, the rice and noodle 
mountains will topple immediately and the lock key too will snap at once. You must go and persuade that prefect to do good and blessing will be on its way.” 
Pilgrim agreed. Not taking leave of the Jade Emperor at Divine Mists, he went straightaway below to answer a mortal man. In a moment he arrived at the West Heaven Gate where he saw Deity-King 
the Upholder of the Nation again. “Did you succeed in getting a decree?” asked the Deity-King. 
Having given an account of the matter of the rice mountain, the noodle mountain, and the golden lock, Pilgrim said, “He did refuse to grant me a decree, as you told me he would. But when the Celestial 
Masters sent me off just now, they also instructed me to persuade that fellow to return to virtue, and blessing would come to him as before.” Thus they parted, and Pilgrim descended on a cloud to the 
Region Below. 
When he arrived, the prefect, Tripitaka, 8 Rules, Sand-monk, and all the officials, great and small, crowded around him to question him about his journey. Pilgrim singled out the prefect and bellowed 
at him, “Because you offended Heaven and Earth three years ago, on the twenty-fifth day of the twelfth month, you brought a great ordeal on your people, for Heaven now refuses to grant you rain.” 
These words so astonished the prefect that he fell salute on the ground, asking, “How did the master learn of the incident three years ago?” 
“How could you,” said Pilgrim, “push down sacrificial maigre intended for offering to Heaven and feed it to dogs? You'd better give us an honest account!” 
Not daring to conceal anything, the prefect said, “On the twenty-fifth day of the twelfth month three years ago, we indeed offered sacrificial maigre to Heaven in our residence. Because of my wife’s ill 
behaviour — she taunted me, in fact with some nasty words - | was shortly blinded by anger and pushed down the votive table, spilling all the vegetarian food. At that point | did in fact get the dogs to 
come and eat it up. Since then this incident has lingered in my memory and often driven me to distraction but | know of no way to present an explanation. I'd not realised that Heaven above took offence 
and brought harm to the people on my account. Now that the master has descended again to this region, | beg you to reveal to me how Heaven intends to reckon with me.” 
Pilgrim said, “That day happened to be the epiphany of the Jade Emperor to the Region Below. When he saw you feeding the sacrificial maigre to dogs and mouthing obscene words, he at once set 
up three things as reminders of your transgression.” 
“What three things?” asked 8 Rules. 
“At the Fragrance-Draping Hall,” replied Pilgrim, “a rice mountain approximately one hundred feet tall and a noodle mountain about two hundred feet in height were set up. By the rice mountain there 
was a chicken no larger than a fist, pecking away rather leisurely at the rice. At the noodle mountain there was a golden-haired Peking pug, lapping up some of the noodles with an occasional flick of 
his tongue. On the left side of the hall, moreover, there was an iron rack with a huge lock made of yellow gold hanging from it, its key as thick as a finger. Below the key is a lamp but the flame is barely 
touching the key. Not until the chicken has finished pecking the rice, the dog lapping up the noodles, and the lamp burning through the key is there to be rain in this region.” 
Chuckling, 8 Rules said, “No problem! No problem! If Elder Brother is willing to take me there, I'll undergo magical transformation and finish off all that rice and noodle in a single meal. We'll break the 
key, too, and there'll be rain.” 
“Stop babbling, Idiot!” said Pilgrim. “This happens to be a device of Heaven. How could you undo it?” 
“In that case,” said Tripitaka, “what shall we do?” 
“It's not too difficult! It's not too difficult!” said Pilgrim. “When | was about to come back, the Four Celestial Masters told me that this matter could be resolved only by doing good.” 
Saluting himself on the ground, the prefect pleaded, “I beg the master to inform me. This lowly official will obey all your instructions.” 
“If you indeed repent and return to virtue,” said Pilgrim, “and make it your early practice to worship God and read scriptures, I'll see what | can do for you. But if you refuse to change, even | can’t undo 
your miseries. Before long Heaven will decree your execution, and your life will not be spared.” 
Touching his head to the ground, the prefect vowed that he would submit to religion. At once he gave the order for Religious and Daoist clerics of his region to begin performing services for three days, 
about which they had to write up detailed documents, burn them, and send them to Heaven above. The prefect himself personally led his subjects in worship and in the presentation of incense in order 
to appease Heaven and Earth and do penance. Tripitaka, too, also recited Threads for him. In the meantime, another order was dispatched with all speed to every household within and without the 
city: each man and woman was to burn incense and recite the name of God. From that moment on the sound of good works could be heard everywhere. 
Highly pleased by what he saw and heard, Pilgrim said to 8 Rules and Sand-monk, “The two of you'd take care to guard our master. Let old monkey make another trip for him.” 
“Elder Brother,” asked 8 Rules, “where do you want to go this time?” 
“Since this prefect has believed the words of old monkey,” replied Pilgrim, “and has received indeed our teachings, and since he is now reciting the name of God with due reverence, compassion, and 
sincerity, I'll go again to memorialise to the Jade Emperor and beg some rain for him.” 
“If you wish to go, Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “you need not hesitate so that our journey will not be delayed. Do finish this rain service for them in order that our right fruit, too, may be perfected.” 
Dear Great Sage! Mounting the clouds, he reached the Heaven Gate where he was greeted by the question of Deity-King The Upholder of the Nation, “Why are you here again?” 
“That prefect,” replied Pilgrim, “has already returned to virtue.” The Deity-King, too, was delighted. As they conversed, they saw the Messenger of Direct Talismans arrive, holding Daoist documents 
and Religious rescripts to be sent through the Heaven Gate. When the messenger saw Pilgrim, he saluted him, saying, “This is the merit of the Great Sage in his evangelical work.” 
“Where are you sending these documents?” asked Pilgrim. 
“To the Hall of Perfect Light,” replied the messenger, “so that the Celestial Masters may present them before the Jade Emperor, the Great Celestial Honoured One.” 
“In that case,” Pilgrim said, “you walk ahead, and I'll follow you.” 
As the talismans messenger entered the gate, Deity-King the Upholder of the Nation said, “Great Sage, there’s no need for you to have an audience with the Jade Emperor. You need only to go to the 
Bureau of Appointed Seasons of the 9-fold Heaven and ask for the thunder deities. When you've started the thunder and lightning, rain will be on its way.” 
Indeed Pilgrim followed his advice; after entering the Heaven Gate, he did not proceed to seek another decree at the Hall of Divine Mists. Instead, turning his step on the clouds, he went straight to the 
Bureau of Appointed Seasons of the 9-fold Heaven. He was met by the Thunder Gate Messenger, the Recorder of Collective Registry, and the Recorder of the Provincial Judicial Commission who 
saluted him and asked, “To what do we owe this visit, Great Sage?” 
“There's something,” replied Pilgrim, “for which | must have an audience with the Celestial Worthy.” The three messengers at once went in to make the announcement, and the Celestial Worthy walked 
out from behind the royal cinnabar screen adorned with nine phoenixes. After having tidied his attire, he met his visitor. When they had finished their exchange of greetings, Pilgrim said, “I've come with 
a special request.” 
“What is it?” asked the Celestial Worthy. Pilgrim said, “l escorted the Tang Monk to the Prefecture of Phoenix-Mortal. When he saw how severe a drought they have been having, | promised the people 
that I'd seek rain on their behalf. Now I’ve come specially to request the assistance of your officers to go there and provide thunder.” 
“| happen to know that the prefect’s offended Heaven,” said the Celestial Worthy, “as a result of which three conditions have been established. | wonder if it'd rain in that region.” 
Pilgrim said, “Yesterday | went to request a decree from the Jade Emperor and he told the Celestial Masters to lead me to the Fragrance-Draping Hall to look at those three conditions. They’re actually 
a rice mountain, a noodle mountain, and a golden lock. The condition’s that only when the mountains topple and the key snaps would there be rain. | was deeply troubled by the difficulty of meeting 
these conditions but the Celestial Masters instructed me to go and persuade the prefect and his subjects to do good. Their idea was that when man has a virtuous thought, heaven will grant him support. 
They assured me in fact that the works of virtue would alter the Mind of Heaven and bring deliverance to the people's suffering. Now that a virtuous thought’s indeed sprung up in the prefect and the 
sound of virtue can be heard everywhere in that region, the Messenger of Direct Talismans has already reported to the Jade Emperor with documents recording such deeds of repentance and penance. 
That is the reason old monkey has come to your honoured residence to request the assistance of your thunder officials.” 
“In that case,” said the Celestial Worthy, “I'll send the Squires of Thunder — Deng, Xin, Zhang, and Tao — who'll lead the Mum of Lightning to follow the Great Sage to the Prefecture of Phoenix-Mortal 
to sound the thunder.” 
In a little while, the four warriors, on arriving at the region of Phoenix-Mortal with the Great Sage, immediately began to exercise their magic in mid-air. All you’d hear were powerful peals of thunder, 
and all you'd see were blinding flashes of lightning. Truly electric flash like purple-gold snake and thunder like all creatures aroused. Ablaze are the flying flames; the cracks topple mountain caves. The 
lightning lights up the heavens; the tumult unhinges the earth. 1 scarlet gold flash the seedlings quickens; a whole, large empire is rocked and shaken. For 3 full years, the people at the Prefecture of 
Phoenix-Mortal, regardless of whether they were civilians or military personnel, or whether they lived inside or outside of the city, had not heard the sound of thunder. When they encountered both 
thunder and lightning this day, all of them fell to their knees. Some of them held up incense braziers on their heads while others picked up willow twigs; all of them recited, “I submit to the Infinite Light! 
| submit to the Infinite Light!” Such a cry of virtue indeed alerted Heaven above just as the ancient poem said: 

One wish born in the heart of man’s known throughout Heaven and Earth. 

If vice or virtue lacks reward, unjust must be the universe. 


The Great Sage directed the deities who were producing thunder and lightning at the Prefecture of Phoenix-Mortal. The Messenger of Direct Talismans in the Region Above escorted the documents of 
both Religious and Daoists up to the Hall of Perfect Light. They were then taken by the 4 Celestial Masters to present to the Jade Emperor. The Emperor said, “If those fellows down there’ve turned 
their thoughts to good, we'd take a look at the three conditions.” 
Even as he was speaking, a guard from the Fragrance-Draping Hall arrived to make this report: “Not only have the rice and noodle mountains toppled but all have vanished in an instant. The key to the 
lock’s also broken.” 
No sooner had he finished this memorial when a celestial court attendant arrived, leading the local spirit, the city deity, and the spirits of land and grain at the Prefecture of Phoenix-Mortal. All the gods 
saluted to the Jade Emperor and memorialised, “The prefect and the entire population of our region have repented. There isn’t a single household, indeed not a single person that’s not embraced the 
fruit of virtue by worshipping God and revering Heaven. We beg you now therefore to extend your mercy and let the sweet dew descend to succour the people.” 
Filled with delight by what he heard, the Jade Emperor at once issued this decree: “Let the Bureau of Wind, the Bureau of Clouds, and the Bureau of Rain follow our instruction to go to the Region 
Below. Within the territory of the Prefecture of Phoenix-Mortal at this day and hour, let them sound the thunder, deploy the clouds, and lower three feet and forty-two drops of rain.” 
The 4 Celestial Masters transmitted this decree to the various bureaus, the deities of which all roused themselves to exercise their divine power in the world below. Pilgrim and the thunder gods mean- 
while were telling the Mum of Lightning to ply her tricks in mid-air when they were joined by the other arriving deities. In no time at all, clouds and wind came together and sweet rain descended in 
torrents. Marvellous rain! Endless dense clouds, boundless black fog, thunder cracking, lightning flashing, violent wind churning, sudden rain pouring. This is how 1 thought could move Heaven and all 
people realise their hopes. Since the Great Sage has caused decisive change, the empire grows dark for 10000 miles — a good rain likes seas and rivers upturned, obscuring land and sky. A cascade 
hangs before the eaves and chimes resound beyond the screens. In every door people recite a god’s name and water runs wild through 6 streets and marts. Rivers are filled to the brim east and west; 
streams are flowing freely both north and south. Shrivelled sprouts are moistened; withered woods now revive. In the fields hemp and wheat flourish; in the village grains and beans increase. The 
traders find joy in commerce; the farmers once more love their ploughing. From henceforth millet and grain will prosper, their tillage yield naturally rich harvests. With rain and wind in season the people 
rest and in calm seas and rivers enjoy peace. In a single day there descended the full measure of 3 feet and 42 drops of rain. As the various deities gradually halted their activities, the Great Sage cried 
out in a loud voice: “Let the deities of the Four Bureaus temporarily stay their cloudy attendants. Allow old monkey to go ask the prefect to make his proper expression of thanks. All of you can then 
sweep aside the mist and cloud to reveal your true forms. When these common mortals have seen you with their own eyes, they'll then believe and sacrifice to you with constancy.” On hearing this, the 
gods had no choice but to remain in mid-air. Lowering the direction of his cloud, Pilgrim went to the prefecture where he was met by Tripitaka, 8 Rules, and Sand-monk. The prefect made a salute with 
each step he took to express his gratitude. “You’d not thank me,” said Pilgrim, “but I've managed to detain the deities of the Four Bureaus here for the moment. Assemble many of your people quickly 
and thank them so that they'll return in the future to grant you rain.” The prefect accordingly sent out an immediate dispatch to all the people that they should hold lighted incense and salute the sky. 
When the mist and clouds moved apart, what the people saw were the revealed true forms of the deities of the Four Bureaus, these being the Rain Bureau, the Thunder Bureau, the Cloud Bureau, and 
the Wind Bureau. This was what they saw: the dragon king’s revealed form, the thunder-god’s exposed body. The Cloud-Boy’s appearance, the Earl of Wind’s true image. The dragon king’s revealed 
form: such silver beard and hoary face matchless in the world. The thunder-god’s exposed body: such incomparable hooked mouth and forceful mien. The Cloud-Boy’s appearance: who'd rival his 
jade-like face and head of gold? The Earl of Wind's true image: who resembles his round eyes and bushy brows? Jointly they emerge in the blue heavens, each showing in turn his holy presence. 
Phoenix-Mortal people then believe; worship with incense, and their evils leave. Once they have seen Heaven’s warriors this day, they cleanse their hearts and virtue now obey. The various deities 
lingered for an hour, and the people did not cease in their worship. Pilgrim Sun rose again into the air to salute them saying, “We've troubled you! We've troubled you! Please return to your bureaus, all 
of you. Old monkey will make certain that the households in this prefecture are faithful in their offerings and make oblation in due season to thank you. From now on, please return every fifth day to give 
the people wind and every tenth day to give them rain. Do come back, all of you and vouchsafe your salvation to them.” The deities agreed and all returned to their bureaus. The Great Sage dropped 
down from the clouds and said to Tripitaka, “Our affairs concluded and the people are safe. We can pack and move on.” 
On hearing this, the prefect quickly saluted them saying, “How'd you say that, Venerable Dad Sun? What you've accomplished here’re kindness and merit without limits. This lowly official’s already 
asked for a small banquet to be prepared as a token of our gratitude for your great kindness. We intend also to buy some land from the people so that we may build a monastery in truth to establish a 
living shrine to you. Your names will be inscribed on steles so that you may enjoy our offerings in all four seasons. But even if | were to engrave your deed on my bones and carve it on my heart, I'd not 
repay a fraction of your kindness. How can you say then that you want to leave?” 
“Though you may find it appropriate to say what you said, Your Excellency,” said Tripitaka, “you must realise also that we're but mendicants journeying to the West. We daren’t stay long. In a day or 
two we'll certainly leave.” The prefect of course would not let them go. He gave the order that preparations for the banquet be made immediately and also that work begin that very night for the building 
of the shrine. The next day a grand banquet was given in which the Tang Monk was asked to take the honoured seat. The Great Sage Sun, 8 Rules, and Sand-monk all had their own tables while the 
prefect and his subordinates, high and low officials, all took turns to present food and drinks to the accompaniment of fine poems. The entertainment lasted one whole day, and it was a delightful 
occasion indeed for which a testimonial poem says: 
After a long drought the fields meet sweet rain. Commerce and rivers freely flow again. 
We’ve to thank the divine monks’ advent and the Great Sage who to Heaven’s Palace went. 
3 things of former evil now undone, 1 thought’s contrite fruits of virtue won. 
Henceforth may it ever be like Yao-Shun times: rich harvests and rains due in all four climes. 
There was a party 1 day and banquet the next — it went on like that for almost half a month during which time they were also waiting for the monastery to be built and the living shrine to be finished. 1 
day the prefect asked the four pilgrims to go look at the building. “It’s an enormous labour,” said an astonished Tang Monk. “How can you get it finished so quickly?” 
“This lowly official's,” replied the prefect, “ordered the labourers to work night and day in order that they might complete their task speedily. Now I’m inviting the Venerable Dads especially to go see it.” 
“You're indeed a worthy prefect,” said Pilgrim with a smile, “one who’s not only virtue but ability as well!” They thus went to the new monastery. When they saw the towering edifices and the magnificent 
gates, they were full of praise. Pilgrim then requested his master, “Name the monastery, please, master.” 
Tripitaka said, “Yes, let's call it the Monastery of Salvific Rain.” 
“Very good! Very good!” exclaimed the prefect. Brushed gold notices were then set up to recruit qualified priests to attend the fires and incense. On the left of the main hall, living shrines were erected 
to the 4 pilgrims at which offerings would be made in all four seasons. There were plans also to build shrines to the thunder deities and dragon deities as tokens of gratitude for their divine works. After 
witnessing all of this, the pilgrims decided to leave. Knowing that their benefactors could no longer be detained, the populace of the entire prefecture came with gifts and cash but not even a penny was 
accepted. Thereupon the officials and the civilians of the entire region formed a huge entourage with the waving of banners and the beating of drums, to escort the pilgrims out of the city. Even after 
some 30 miles they could not quite bring themselves to part with the pilgrims whom they escorted yet another distance with tearful eyes. Only when the pilgrims disappeared from sight did the people 
turn back. Thus it is that a virtuous divine monk leaves Salvation behind; the Great Sage Equal to Heaven spreads his kindness wide. 


104 
Chan convenes an assembly reaching Jade-Flower; Mind Monkey, Wood, and Earth instruct disciples 
The Tang Monk took leave of the prefect. Riding along, he spoke most amiably to Pilgrim: “Worthy disciple, your virtuous fruit this time far surpasses even that of the occasion when you rescued the 
children of the Beggar Kingdom. This is entirely your merit!” 
“At the Beggar Kingdom,” said Sand-monk, “eleven hundred and eleven young boys were saved. How can that compare with this torrential rain that provided moisture everywhere and revived hundreds 
and thousands of lives? This disciple’s been secretly admiring Elder Brother, too for his great magic strength that can move Heaven and compassion that covers the Earth.” 
With a giggle, 8 Rules said, “Yes, Elder Brother’s kindness and virtue! Unfortunately he practices benevolence and righteousness only on the outside and harbours malicious designs within. Whenever 
he walks with old bull, he steps on people!” 
“When did | ever step on you?” asked Pilgrim. 
“Enough! Enough!” said 8 Rules. “Frequently you took care to see that | was bound, that | was hung up, that | was cooked, that | was steamed! Since you've extended your kindness and mercy to 
hundreds and thousands of people at the Phoenix-Mortal Prefecture, you’d have stayed there at least half a year. That way I’d have been able to enjoy a few leisurely meals, eating my fill. But all you 
did was hurry us on our way!” 
On hearing this, the elder snapped at him, “This Idiot! All you can think of is something to stuff down your throat! Get moving quickly and don’t you dare talk back!” 
Not daring to utter a word, 8 Rules pouted a little; he toted the luggage and guffawed a few times as master and disciples headed down the main road. Time went by like a weaver’s shuttle and soon it 
was late autumn. See water lines recede, mountain rocks turn bare. Red leaves flutter about, a time of yellow blossoms. The frost glows, one feels the night lengthen; the white moon pierces the paper 
screens. Fire and smoke in all households, the twilight's long; the lake surfaces a cold gleam everywhere. Fragrant white duckweeds and dense red smartweeds. Yellow, green oranges, droopy willows 
and handsome grains. The wild geese drop by a hamlet midst rush like snow; soybeans are reaped as the inn’s roosters crow. After the 4 of them had journeyed for a long time, they again saw the 
shadow of city walls looming. Lifting his crop to point toward the distance, the elder called out: “Wukong, look! There’s another city over there. | wonder what sort of a place it’s?” 
“You and I’ve not even reached it,” said Pilgrim. “How'd we know? Let’s go up there and ask some people.” 
Just as he finished speaking, an old man walked out from a clump of trees. Holding a bamboo staff in his hands, he wore a light garment on his body, a pair of coir sandals on his feet, and a thin belt 
around his waist. The Tang Monk was so startled that he rolled down from his saddle at once, walked up to him, and saluted him. Leaning on his staff, the old man returned his greetings and asked, 
“Where’ve you come from, Elder?” 
Pressing his palms together in front of him, the Tang Monk said, “This humble cleric is someone sent by the Tang court in the Land of the East to Thunderclap to seek scriptures from God. Arriving at 
your treasure region, | see a rampart ahead of us. Since | don’t know what place it is, | ask the old patron especially for instruction.” 
On hearing this, the old man exclaimed, “A Chan Master who possesses the Way! Our humble region here happens to be the lower prefecture of the Kingdom of India. The name of this place is the 
Jade-Flower District. As the county magistrate is a member of the royal household of the King of India, he has been appointed the Jade-Flower Prince. He is a most virtuous ruler, one who pays special 
reverence to Religious and Daoists and loves the common people dearly. If the old Chan Master goes to have an audience with him, he will undoubtedly grant you special honour.” Tripitaka thanked 
him, and the old man left by walking through the forest. 
Then Tripitaka turned to give a thorough account to his three disciples who were all delighted and tried to help their master to mount. “It’s not too far,” said Tripitaka. “I need not ride the horse.” The four 
of them, therefore, walked up to the city streets to look around. Most of the households over there were busily engaged in buying and selling. The place seemed to be densely populated, and business 
too seemed to be flourishing. Listen to their voices and look at their features: they seem no different from those of China. “Disciples,” admonished Tripitaka, “do be careful and don’t be rowdy.” 
8 Rules at once lowered his head and Sand-monk put a hand over his face. Pilgrim however, took his master’s arm to give him support, and soon people on both sides began to crowd them, vying to 
take a look at these strange travellers. “We've here noble priests who can tame dragons and subdue tigers,” they cried, “but we've never seen such bull-taming and monkey-subduing monks!” 
Unable to contain himself, 8 Rules stuck out his horn and said, “Have you ever seen a bull-taming king of a priest?” He so frightened those people on the street that they stumbled and fell, scattering 
right and left. “Idiot,” said Pilgrim, laughing, “hide your horn quickly. Stop being so histrionic, and watch your steps. You're about to cross a bridge.” Lowering his head, Idiot kept giggling as they crossed 
the drawbridge to enter the city gates. On the big boulevards they could see many juice shops and poem-houses, all prospering and bustling in activities. It was indeed a capital city right out of China 
for which a testimonial poem says: 
A royal city and fortress ever strong where all things seem fresh near hills and rivers long. 
The marts with 100 goods the lake-boats ply; to sell juice 1000 shops their banners fly. 
On each tower and terrace the people bustle; in every street and lane the traders hustle. 
This scene’s as lovely as that of Chang’an’s fame: roosters crow, dogs bark — they all sound the same. 
Secretly delighted, Tripitaka thought to himself, “I've heard people speaking of the various barbarians in the Western Territories but I've never been here. When | look carefully at the place however, | 
find that it's no different from our Great Tang. It certainly lives up to its name of Ultimate Bliss!” 
He overheard moreover that a picul of white rice cost no more than 4 mace of silver and a mere penny would fetch a catty of sesame oil. It was truly a region blessed with bountiful harvests of the 5 
grains. They walked for a long time before they reached the residence of the Jade-Flower Prince. On both sides of the residence, there were also the residence of the Administrator of a Princely 


Establishment, the Investigative Hall, the Refectory, and the Guest Hostel. “Disciples,” said Tripitaka, “this is the royal residence. Let me go in to have an audience with the prince and have our rescript 
certified.” 

“If Master is going inside,” said 8 Rules, “should we stand in front of this official residence?” 

“Don’t you see the sign on the door here?” replied Tripitaka. “It says ‘Guest Hostel.’ You may enter and take a seat inside. Find some hay to feed our horse. After I've seen the prince, and if he bestows 
some food on us, I'll call you to share it with me.” 

“You may go in without worry, Master,” said Pilgrim. “Old monkey will take care of things.” 

Sand-monk then toted the luggage into the hostel. When the attendants inside saw how hideous they looked, they dared not question the visitors, nor were they bold enough to ask them to leave. They 
had in fact to permit the pilgrims to sit down. The old master changed his attire, took up the travel rescript, and went to the royal residence. He was met by a protocol officer who asked, “Where's the 
elder come from?” 

Tripitaka answered, “I’m a priest sent by the Great Tang in the Land of the East to seek scriptures from the Religious Patriarch at the Great Thunderclap. Having arrived at your treasure region, I'd like 
to have my travel rescript certified, and that is why I’ve come especially to have an audience with His Highness.” The protocol officer immediately announced his arrival. 

The prince who was indeed an upright and knowledgeable person, at once asked his visitor to enter. After Tripitaka had saluted him at the foot of the steps to the main hall, the prince invited him to 
take a seat inside. Tripitaka then presented the rescript. When the prince read it and noticed the seals of various kingdoms and their rulers’ signatures, he too applied the treasure seal amiably and 
affixed his own signature. Folding it up again and placing it on the desk, the prince asked, “Elder National Preceptor, | see you’ve gone through many nations. Exactly how far is it from your Great Tang 
to this place?” 

“This humble cleric does not quite remember the exact distance,” replied Tripitaka. “Years ago however, the Nun Guanyin revealed herself to our emperor and left his line of the verse: ‘The way: a 
hundred and eight thousand miles.’ On his journey, this humble cleric has already gone through fourteen summers and winters.” 

“That means fourteen years!” said the prince with a smile. “You must have had some delays on the way, | suppose.” 

“| can’t even give you a brief account of them — those ten thousand beasts and a thousand demons!” replied Tripitaka. “You've no idea, Your Highness, how much I've suffered before reaching your 
treasure region.” Highly pleased, the prince immediately asked the royal chef to prepare a vegetarian meal for his visitor. 

“Your Highness,” said Tripitaka again. “This humble cleric has three disciples waiting outside. | dare not receive the maigre, for | fear that our journey might be delayed.” The prince said to the court 
attendant, “Go quickly to invite the three disciples of the elder to come in and have a meal.” 

The officer went out with the invitation but he was greeted by the remark: “We've not see them! We've not seen them!” Then one of the followers said, “There are three ugly priests sitting in the Guest 
Hostel. They must be the ones.” The court attendant went with his followers to the hostel and asked the official in charge, “Which ones are the noble disciples of the scripture-seeking priest of the Great 
Tang? Our lord has commanded that they be invited for a meal.” 

8 Rules was just seated there, dozing. The moment he heard the word meal he could not refrain from leaping up and replying, “We're the ones! We're the ones!” The sight of him so terrified the court 
attendant that he screamed, shaking all over, “It's a bull-demon! A bull-demon!” 

When Pilgrim heard the commotion, he tugged at 8 Rules and said, “Brother, try to be a little more civilised, and stop being such a village brute!” When those officials saw Pilgrim, they cried, “It's a 
monkey-spirit! A monkey-spirit!” 

Folding his hands in his sleeve before his chest, Sand-monk said, “Please do not be frightened, all of you! We three are all disciples of the Tang Monk.” On seeing him, the various officials all cried, “A 
god of the hearth! A god of the hearth!” Pilgrim Sun then asked 8 Rules to lead the horse and Sand-monk to tote the luggage so that they could all enter the Jade-Flower Royal Residence. The court 
attendant meanwhile went ahead to announce their arrival. When the prince’s eyes beheld such ugliness, he, too, became quite frightened. Pressing his palms together, Tripitaka said, “Please have 
no fear, Your Highness. Though my disciples look ugly, they are all goodhearted.” 8 Rules walked forward and salute, saying, “This humble cleric salutes you!” The prince grew even more apprehensive. 
“My disciples,” Tripitaka said again, “were all recruited from the wilds. They are untutored in proper etiquette, and | beg you to forgive them.” Suppressing his fear, the prince told the royal chef to take 
the monks to the Gauze-Drying Pavilion for the vegetarian meal. After thanking him, Tripitaka left the prince and went with his disciples to the pavilion where he immediately scolded 8 Rules. “You 
coolie!” he said. “You’ve no manners at all! You’d have kept your mouth shut, and that would have been all right. How could you be so rude! One word, and you nearly knocked down the T’ai Mountain!” 
“It's a good thing | neither spoke nor saluted,” said Pilgrim, chuckling. “I've managed to save some energy!” 

“He’d have waited for us to salute together,” said Sand-monk. “Instead, he went ahead and started hollering with his horn jutting!” 

“What a fuss! What a fuss!” said 8 Rules. “You told me some days ago, Master that I'd salute and make a salutation when | met someone. | did that today and you say now that it's no good. What I’m 
supposed to do?” 

“I told you to salute and greet people,” said Tripitaka, “but | didn’t tell you to fool with the prince! As the proverb says, there're different kinds of things and different grades of people. How'd you not 
distinguish between the noble and the lowly?” 

As they spoke, the royal chef led the servants to spread out tables and chairs and serve the maigre. Master and disciples stopped talking as each ate his meal. Instead about the prince who left the 
main hall and went inside the palace. When his 3 young princes saw how pale he looked, they asked, “Why does Dad King seem so frightened today?” 

The prince said, “Just now there was a priest sent by the Great Tang in the Land of the East to seek scriptures from God. He came to have his travel rescript certified, and he seemed a rather comely 
person. When | asked him to stay for a meal, he told me that he had disciples waiting in front of our residence. | ordered them invited also but when they came in after a little while, they did not pay me 
the respect of performing the grand ceremony. All they did was salute and | was already displeased. But when | managed to take a look at them, each one was ugly as a monstrous demon. | grew quite 
frightened, and that’s why | look pale.” Now those three young princes were quite different from other people, for each of them was fond of martial arts. So they rolled up their sleeves at once and 
clenched their fists, saying, “Could these be monster-spirits from the mountain who have assumed human forms? Let us take our weapons out and have a look!” 

Dear princes! The eldest took up a rod tall as his eyebrows; the second wielded a nine-pronged rake; and the third picked up a staff coated with black enamel. In big heroic strides, they walked out of 
the palace and shouted, “Who are the monks seeking scriptures? Where are they?” The chef and other officials all went to their knees and said, “Young princes, they are having their vegetarian meal 
at the Gauze-Drying Pavilion.” 

Without regard for good or ill, the young princes barged right in and bellowed: “Are you fiends or humans? Speak up quickly, and we'll spare your lives.” Tripitaka was so terrified that he paled with 
fright. Abandoning his rice bowl, he stood saluting and said, “Your humble cleric is someone sent by the Tang court to seek scriptures. I’m a human, not a fiend.” 

“You seem like a human all right,” said one of the princes, “but those three hideous ones have to be fiends!” 8 Rules kept right on gorging himself with rice and refused to pay them any attention. Sand- 
monk and Pilgrim however, rose slightly and said, “We too are humans. Our features may seem ugly but our hearts are good; our bodies may seem cumbersome but our natures are kind. Where have 
you three come from? Why are you so brash with your words?” 

The royal chef, standing at their side, said, “These three are our prince’s heirs.” Dropping down his bowl, 8 Rules said, “Your Highnesses, why are you each holding your weapon? Could it be that you 
want to fight with us?” 

The second prince strode forward and raised his rake with both hands, about to strike 8 Rules. “That rake of yours,” said 8 Rules, giggling loudly, “only deserves to be the grandson of my rake!” He at 
once lifted up his garment and took out his own rake from his waist. One wave of it and there were ten thousand shafts of golden light; he moved it a few times and there were a thousand strands of 
auspicious air. The prince was so terrified that his hands weakened and his tendons turned numb; he did not dare wield his own weapon any further. 

When Pilgrim saw the eldest using a rod and hopping about, he took out from his ear the golden-hooped rod. One wave of it and it had the thickness of a rice bowl and the length of about thirteen feet. 
He gave the ground a stab with it and it went in about three feet. As it stood there, Pilgrim said with a chuckle, “Allow me to present you with this rod of mine!” When he heard that, the prince threw 
away his own rod and went to take hold of the other. He used all his strength to try to pull it out of the ground but he could not move it one whit. He then tried to give it a shove and a shake but it 
remained there as if it had taken root. 

Growing impatient, the third prince attacked with his black-enameled staff, only to be brushed aside with one hand by Sand-monk. With his other, Sand-monk took out his fiend-routing staff, and with a 
little twirl it created luminous colours and radiant mists. The royal chef and other officials were struck dumb and numb with fright while the three young princes all knelt down and said, “Divine masters! 
Divine masters! Being mortals we didn’t recognise you. We beg you to show us your abilities, so that we may honour you as our teachers.” Walking forward, Pilgrim lifted up his own rod with no effort 
at all and said, “It's too cramped here. | can’t stretch my hands. Let me leap into the air and show you a little of how the rod should be used.” 

Marvellous Great Sage! With a loud whistle he somersaulted right up into mid-air, his two feet treading the auspicious cloud of five colours. At about three hundred paces above ground, he let loose his 
rod to make Sprinkling Flowers over the Top2 and the Yellow Dragon Entwining the Body. Up and down he moved, circling left and right. In the beginning his person and the rod so complemented each 
other that they seemed, as the adage had it, like flowers added to brocade. By and by even the person disappeared, and all one could see was a sky full of twirling rods! 

Shouting a “Bravo!” down below, 8 Rules could not contain himself any longer. “Let Old bull go and sport a little too!” he cried. Dear Idiot! Mounting on a gust of wind, he rose also to mid-air and let 
loose his rake: three strokes up and four down, five strokes left and six strokes right, seven strokes in front and eight behind. All these bodily movements made one hear only a loud continuous swish. 
When the performance reached its most exciting moment, Sand-monk said to the elder, “Master, let old Sand go also and exercise!” 

Dear Monk! With one leap he, too, rose into the air and wielded his staff. Now an ardent fighter swathed in golden radiance, he used both hands to make with his staff the Scarlet Phoenix Facing the 
Sun and the Hungry Tiger Leaping on its Prey. A tight parry and a slow block were followed by swift turns and quick lunges. The three brothers thus made a tremendous display of their magic potency, 
showing off their prowess and martial ability in mid-air. Thus it is that the image of true Chan’s no common view: the Great Way’s causes’ the cosmos imbue. In power Gold and Wood fill the religion- 
sphere; tossing Spatula and Ubiquity * cohere. At all times divine arms can their might lay bare; elixir vessels are honoured everywhere. Though India’s lofty, one must nature coerce; Jade-Flower 
princes all to the Mean reverse. *So astounded were the 3 young princes that they went to their knees in the dust. Those officials, of high rank or low, around the Gauze-Drying Pavilion, the old prince 
in the royal residence, and the entire population of the city - whether military or civilian, male or female, Religious monks or nuns, Daoist clergy or laymen — all began reciting the name of God and 
respecting. Each household, moreover, took up lighted incense and worshipped. Truly images seen redeem monks to the real to bless the human world with peace and weal. Henceforth the fruit ripens 
on Complete Liberation’s way where all honour Chan and God obey. After the three disciples had made a thorough display of their heroic ability, they lowered their auspicious clouds and put away their 
weapons. Going before the Tang Monk, they saluted and thanked their master for permission before taking their seats again. Those 3 young princes hurried back to the palace to report to the old 
prince, saying, “Dad King, ten thousand happiness have come upon you! Unsurpassable merit may be ours this very moment! You've seen the display in mid-air?” 

“l only saw colourful mists in the sky,” replied the old prince, “and immediately your mum and | burned incense to worship along with the rest of the residents of the palace. We've no idea what mortals 
have come down and congregated at this place.” 

“They weren't mortals from anywhere,” said one of the young princes. “They were just those very ugly disciples of the scripture-seeking priest. One of them used a golden-hooped iron rod, one a nine- 
pronged muckrake, and the third a fiend-routing treasure staff. Though the weapons we three use may resemble theirs, ours can in no way be compared with those three weapons. We asked them to 
exercise for us, and they told us that it was too cramped for them to perform on the ground. They wanted to rise to the air to give us an exhibition. When they mounted the clouds, the sky was filled with 
auspicious clouds meandering and hallowed air circling. They finally dropped down only a moment ago to take their seats once more in the Gauze-Drying Pavilion. Your sons are so delighted that they 
would like very much to honour them as teachers. If we’d learn their ability to protect our nation, this would be indeed our unsurpassable merit. We wonder what our Dad King thinks of this?” The aged 
prince at once gave his consent to what he heard. 

And so dad and sons, the four of them, did not ask for the royal carriage or the imperial panoply. Instead, they walked to the Gauze-Drying Pavilion where they found the four pilgrims packing their 
belongings and just about to enter the royal palace to give thanks for the meal. No sooner had the Jade-Flower and his sons entered the pavilion than they all saluted low, so startling the elder that he, 
too, hugged the earth to return the salutation. Pilgrim and his two brothers however, stepped to one side and only gave a slight smile. After the salutes, the prince invited the 4 priests to enter the main 
hall to take a seat, and the four amiably agreed. Then the old prince stood up and said, “Old Master Tang, we've a request to make. Do you think that your noble disciples will grant it?” 

“Please tell us, Your Highness,” said Tripitaka. “My humble disciples would not dare refuse you.” 

“When we first met you,” said the old prince, “we thought that you’re merely mendicants from the distant Tang court. In fact, our eyes of flesh and our mortal disposition prevented us from recognising 
you and might've greatly offended you. Just now when we beheld how Masters Sun, Bullseye, and Sand performed in the air, we realised that you’re mortals and Gods. As our three unworthy sons 
have always been fond of martial arts, they're now most eager to become disciples in order to learn the art well. We therefore beg the masters to open their hearts wide as Heaven and Earth. Spread 
afar your vessels of mercy and transmit your mysteries to our humble offspring. We'll thank you with the wealth of our entire city.” 


On hearing this, Pilgrim could not refrain from laughing uproariously. “Your Highness!” he said. “You're so benighted! We're people who've left the family and only too anxious to take on a few disciple. 
If your sons have the desire to follow virtue, you think we'd turn them down? Just don’t bother with even the merest hint of payment or profit. Treat us with kindness - that'll be our sufficient reward.” 
The prince was delighted by Pilgrim’s words and immediately gave the order for a huge banquet to be laid out right there in the main hall of his residence. Behold! No sooner had the decree been 
issued than it was carried out. See colours aflutter, curls of fragrant smoke, and gold inlaid tables festooned in bright silk to dazzle one’s eyes. Happy lacquered chairs with brocade spread out add 
stylishness to the seats. Fresh fruits from the trees and aromatic teas. 4 or 5 dishes of pastries so light and sweet; 1 or 2 pans-full of bread both rich and neat. More marvellous are those steamed 
crisps and honey-glazed; the oily-dips and sugar-roasted are truly great! A few bottles of fragrant glutinous rice-water that surpasses the juice of jade when poured; several cups of Yangxian divine tea® 
offered once held in hand, its scent overpowers the cassia. There’s food of every variety - each item’s extraordinary! During this time the court entertainers were ordered to recite, to exercise, and to 
play their woodwind and string instruments. Master and disciples spent a happy day together with the prince and his princes. When night fell, the food and juice were taken away and bedding was laid 
out at the Gauze-Drying Pavilion for the pilgrims to rest. By morning, the prince said, the young princes would burn incense and return with all sincerity to receive instruction in martial arts. As each 
person obeyed the royal command, scented liquid was prepared for the masters to bathe in before retiring. At this time the birds rest aloft and all seems at peace; he leaves the couch, the poet's reciting 
ceases. The Milky Way shines as the heavens brighten; the wild path’s forlorn where grasses heighten. Washing flails jangle in a yard nearby; dark, distant hills where homeward longings lie. To know 
one’s feelings the cold cricket seems: its loud plaint by bedside would pierce one’s dreams! 

The night went by and early in the morning, the old prince and his sons arrived once more to visit. When they were received by the elder, they greeted the priests as their teachers, even though they 
themselves had been honoured as royalty the day before. Thus the young princes respected Pilgrim, 8 Rules, and Sand-monk as they made this request: “We beg the honourable teachers to take out 
their weapons and allow their disciples to look at them once more.” 

On hearing this, 8 Rules took out amiably his muckrake and laid it on the ground while Sand-monk leaned his treasure staff against a wall. The second and third princes leaped up at once and tried to 
pick up the weapons. It was however, as if dragonflies were pummelling pillars of rock! Though both princes struggled till their heads reddened and their faces turned scarlet, they could not budge the 
weapons one whit. When the eldest prince saw this, he called out: “Brothers, stop wasting your energy! You’d know that the masters’ are all divine weapons but | wonder how heavy they are.” 

With a chuckle, 8 Rules said, “My rake’s not too heavy! No more in fact than the weight of a single canon.’ Including the handle, it weighs five thousand and forty-eight pounds.” 

Turing to Sand-monk, the third prince asked, “Master, how heavy is your treasure staff?” 

“It's also five thousand and forty-eight pounds,” replied Sand-monk. The eldest prince then asked Pilgrim to show him his golden-hooped rod. Pilgrim at once took out a tiny needle from his ear; one 
wave of it in the wind and it acquired the thickness of a rice bowl. As it stood there erect before their eyes, all the princes were frightened and all the officials grew apprehensive. Saluting, the three 
young princes said, “The weapons of Master Bullseye and Master Sand are all carried on their persons and are taken out from beneath their clothes. Why’s it that only Master Sun takes out his from 
his ear? Why does it grow the moment it’s exposed to the wind?” 

Smiling, Pilgrim said, “You don’t seem to realise that my rod’s just something you can pick up nowhere in this mortal world. This happens to be an iron rod forged at Creation’s dawn by Great Yu himself, 
a god-man of old. The depths of all oceans, rivers, and lakes were fathomed and fixed by this very rod. Having bored through mountains and conquered floods, it stayed in East Ocean and ruled the 
seas where after long years it turned luminous, able to grow or shrink or radiate. To call it my own was old monkey's fate, make it change in any way | wish. | want it big, it'll fill the universe; | want it 
small, it'll be a tiny pin. Its name’s Compliant, its style, Golden-hooped — in Heaven and Earth something quite unique! Its weight, thirteen thousand and five hundred pounds, can grow thick or thin, and 
wane or wax. It helped me to havoc the House of Heaven; followed me to crush the halls of Earth. It tames tigers and dragons everywhere; smelts at all places demons and fiends. One jab upward willl 
make the sun grow dim and daunt the gods and ghosts of Heaven and Earth. A treasure handed down from Chaos’ time: no worldly iron’s this rod sublime!” When those princes heard this declaration, 
all of them saluted repeatedly and begged with all sincerity for instruction. “What sort of martial arts do you three want to learn?” asked Pilgrim. 

1 of the princes said, “The one used to wielding a rod will study the rod. The one accustomed to using a rake will study the rake, and the one fond of using the staff will study the staff.” 

“It's easy enough to give instruction,” said Pilgrim with a smile, “but none of you has any strength and can’t wield our weapons. | fear that you'll be unable to attain mastery and then the result will be 
something like poorly drawn tiger that looks like a dog! As the ancients aptly put it, instruction lacking sternness is the teacher's sloth; learning without accomplishment is the student's fault. If the three 
of you’re indeed sincere about the matter, you may burn some incense to worship Heaven and Earth. Let me then transmit some divine strength to you first and only thereafter can we teach you the 
martial arts.” 

Filled with delight by these words, the three young princes went to find an incense table and carried it back themselves. Having purified their hands and lighted sticks of incense, they saluted deeply to 
Heaven. After the ceremony, they then asked for instruction from their masters. Turning around, Pilgrim saluted the Tang Monk in turn and said, “Let me inform the honoured master and ask for his 
pardon. Since | was delivered by your great virtue that year in the Mountain of Two Frontiers, and since | embraced the faith of Religion, I’ve followed you in your westward journey. Though I’ve yet to 
repay all the kindness of my master, I’ve nonetheless served you with all my heart and all my strength. Now that we've arrived at a region in God’s kingdom, we've the good fortune of meeting three 
worthy princes who have made submission to us and are desirous of learning the martial arts. If they become our disciples, they will be the grand-disciples of my master. | want to make this special 
report to you before | begin instruction.” Tripitaka was exceedingly pleased. 

When 8 Rules and Sand-monk saw Pilgrim saluting their master, they, too, went to their knees and respected to Tripitaka, saying, “Master, we're foolish persons, slow of speech and dull-witted, and 
we don’t know how to speak. We simply beg you to take the lofty seat of religion and allow also the two of us the pleasure of taking disciples. They'll add to our remembrance of the journey to the West.” 
In delight Tripitaka gave his consent. 

In a secluded room behind the Gauze-Drying Pavilion, Pilgrim traced out on the ground a diagram of the Big Dipper. Then he asked the three princes to salute themselves inside the diagram and with 
eyes closed, exercise the utmost concentration. Behind them he himself recited in silence the true sayings of realised mortality and intoned the words of Dharani as he blew divine breaths into their 
visceral cavities. Their primordial spirits were thus restored to their original abodes.’ Then he transmitted secret oral formulas to them so that each of the princes received the strength of a thousand 
arms. He next helped them to circulate and build up the fire-phases,? as if they themselves were carrying out the technique for shedding the mortal embryo and changing the bones. Only when the 
circulation of the vital force had gone through all the circuits of their bodies (modelled on planetary movements) did the young princes regain consciousness. When they jumped to their feet and gave 
their own faces a wipe, they felt more energetic than ever. Each of them in fact had become so sturdy in his bones and so strong in his ligaments that the eldest prince could handle the golden-hooped 
rod, the second prince could wield the nine-pronged muckrake, and the third prince could lift the fiend-routing staff. 

When the old prince saw this, he could not have been more pleased, and another vegetarian banquet was laid out to thank the master and his three disciples. Right before the banquet tables however, 
they began their instruction. The one studying the rod performed with the rod; the one studying the rake performed with the rake; and the one studying the staff performed with the staff. The princes 
thus succeeded in making a few turns and several movements but they were, after all, mortals, and they found the goings rather strenuous. After exercising for a while, they began to pant heavily. 
Indeed, they could not last long, though their weapons might have the ability to undergo transformation. In their advances and retreats, their attacks and offences, the princes simply could not attain 
the wonder of natural transformation. Later that day the banquet came to an end. 

The next day the three princes came again to thank their masters and to say: “We thank the divine master for endowing us with strength in our arms. Though we're now able to hold the weapons of our 
masters however, we find it difficult to wield and turn them. We propose, therefore, that artisans be asked to duplicate the three weapons. They will use your weapons as models but take some of the 
weight off. Would the masters grant us permission?” 

“Fine! Fine! Fine!” said 8 Rules. “That's a remarkable proposal! You really can’t use our weapons in the first place, and besides, we need them for the protection of the Law and the subjugation of 
demons. You'd indeed make three other weapons.” The young princes immediately ordered the ironsmiths to purchase ten thousand pounds of raw iron. A tent was pitched in the front courtyard of the 
royal residence to serve as a temporary factory, and furnace and forge were set up. First, the iron was refined into steel in one day; the next day they asked Pilgrim and his two brothers to place the 
golden-hooped rod, the nine-pronged rake, and the fiend-routing staff in the tent so that the smiths could make copies of them. The weapons were thus left there day and night. 

Alas! These weapons originally were treasures meant to be carried by the pilgrims on their persons and inseparable from them for one moment. Even when concealed by the pilgrims’ bodies, they 
would exude great radiance to protect their owners. Now that they had been placed in the tent factory for several days, the myriad shafts of luminous mist and auspicious air emitted by these weapons 
flooded the sky and covered the earth. One night, a monster-spirit sat up in his abode that happened to be some seventy miles away from the city, in a mountain called Leopard’s-Head and a cave 
named Tiger’s-Mouth. When he suddenly caught sight of the luminous mist and auspicious air, he mounted the clouds to investigate and found that the radiance was coming from the royal palace. 
Lowering his cloud to draw near, the monster-spirit discovered the three weapons and was moved to delight and desire. “Marvellous treasures! Marvellous treasures!” he exclaimed. “I wonder who uses 
them, and why they are placed here? Hmm! This has to be my affinity! Let's take them away! Let's take them away!” As his affection grew, he at once summoned a powerful gust and swept away all 
three weapons and returned to his own cave. Thus it is that Dao can’t be left for a moment; what can be left is not the Dao. ‘When weapons divine are stolen, the seekers have laboured in vain. 


105 

The yellow lion-spirit in vain gives the Muckrake Feast; Gold, Wood, and Earth disturb with a scheme Head of the Mount Leopard 
Several ironsmiths had been hard at work for several days and therefore slept soundly at night. By morning, when they rose to resume their heating and hammering, they discovered that the 3 weapons 
in the tent had vanished. Dumbfounded and panic-stricken, they searched all over the place and ran into the 3 young princes who were walking out from the palace to inspect the work. The ironsmiths 
all respected and said, “O young lords! We don’t know where the weapons of the divine masters have gone!” 
Shaken by the words, the young princes said, “Perhaps the masters themselves put the weapons away at night.” They dashed over to the Gauze-Drying Pavilion and saw that the white horse was still 
tethered at the corridor. Unable to contain themselves, they cried, “Masters, are you still sleeping?” 
“We're up,” replied Sand-monk as he opened the door to let the princes in. 
When they looked around and did not see the weapons, 1 of them asked nervously, “Did the masters take back their weapons?” 
“No, we didn’t!” said Pilgrim, jumping up. 
“Those three weapons of yours,” said another prince, “all vanished during the night.” 
Scrambling up hurriedly, 8 Rules asked, “Is my rake there?” 
Another young prince said, “When we three came out just now, we saw people searching all over but they couldn't find them. Your disciples suspect that the weapons may already have been taken 
back by the masters, and that’s why we've come to ask you. Since the treasures of our teachers can grow or shrink, | wonder if you’ve not concealed them on your bodies again, just to make fun of 
your disciples.” 
“Really, we've not taken them back,” said Pilgrim. “Let's all go look for them.” They all went to the tent in the courtyard but there was no trace of the weapons. 
“Those ironsmiths must have stolen them!” said 8 Rules. “Bring out the weapons quickly! A moment's delay and you'll be beaten to death! Beaten to death!” 
Horrified, the ironsmiths respected and shed tears, saying, “Holy Dads! We've been working so hard these last few days that we all slept through the night. By morning when we got up, the weapons 
were gone. We're all mortal men. How could we even have moved them? We beg you, Holy Dad, to spare our lives! Please spare our lives!” 
Pilgrim said nothing in reply. Greatly annoyed, he muttered to himself, “This is our fault! Once they had copied the forms, we’d have taken the weapons back. Why did we leave them here like that? 
Those treasures generate tremendous radiance and luminous colours. That must have disturbed some wicked person who came and stole them during the night.” 
“What are you saying, Elder Brother?” asked 8 Rules, refusing to believe him. “It's such a peaceful region here! This is no hollow mountain on the rustic countryside! How could there be any wicked 
people? It has to be the greed of those ironsmiths. When they saw the radiance of our weapons, they knew that these were treasures. They must have left the palace during the night and banded 
together with others. They must have dragged and hauled our weapons away. Let's seize them now! Let's beat them!” The ironsmiths could only respect and swear their denial. 
In the midst of all this commotion the old prince came out. When he learned what had taken place, his face, too, was drained of colour. He brooded for a long time and then said, “The weapons of the 
divine masters are not like those of common mortals. Scores or even hundreds of men could not un-lodge them or move them. Moreover, we've governed this city for almost five generations already. 
Not that we wish to brag or boast but we do enjoy quite a virtuous reputation beyond these palace walls. The people of this city, be they civilians, soldiers, or artisans, do have respect for the laws of 
ours. They'd never dare be so unscrupulous. | beg the divine masters to re-examine the matter.” 
“There’s no need to re-examine anything!” replied Pilgrim, laughing. “Nor need we persist in putting the blame on the ironsmiths. Let me ask Your Highness there’re any mountain forests and monstrous 
fiends around this city of yours?” 
“This question of the divine master is most reasonable,” said the prince. “There is a Leopard’s-Head Mountain north of our city, and there is also a Tiger’s-Mouth Cave in it. People have frequently 
claimed that there are mortals in the cave but some say also that tigers, wolves, and monstrous fiends live there. We've not been able to determine exactly what creatures there're.” 


“Need to say no more,” said Pilgrim, chuckling. “It must be some wicked creatures there who having discovered our treasures, stole them during the night.” He then called out: “Eight Rules, Sand-monk, 
stay here to guard Master and protect the city. Let old monkey go and look for our weapons.” He also instructed the ironsmiths not to put out the fire in the furnace so that they could continue to forge 
the princes’ weapons. Dear Monkey King! 

After taking leave of Tripitaka, he vanished completely from sight. Instantly he was standing on the Leopard’s-Head Mountain for it was no more than 30 miles from the city. When he looked around on 
the peak, he saw that indeed there was a certain aura of monsters. Truly a lengthy dragon pulse, ‘a region vast and wide; pointed peaks, erect, that puncture the sky; sloping streams, dark and deep 
that swiftly flow. Before the mount’s a carpet of jade grass; behind the mount’s the brocade of rare blooms. Aged pines and cypresses; ancient trees and bamboos. Crows and magpies in confusion fly 
and cry; wild apes and cranes all screech and squall. Below the hanging ledge, pairs of many deer; before the sheer cliff, badgers and foxes in 2s. The dragon approaching rises and falls; with 9 turns 
and 9 bends comes the earth pulse. Jade-Flower District is where the ranges meet, a place that prospers in 10 millennia. As Pilgrim stared at the scenery, he suddenly heard someone speaking from 
behind the mountain. Turning quickly to look, he found 2 wolf-headed fiends walking toward the northwest, chatting loudly. “These’ve to be fiendish creatures out patrolling the mountain,” mused Pilgrim. 
“Let old monkey follow them and hear what they have to say.” Making the magic sign with his fingers, he recited a spell and with 1 shake of his torso, changed into a little butterfly. With outstretched 
wings he soared and turned to catch up with them. /n truth it was quite a model of transformation! 

2 wings gossamer-like, twin feelers silvery. Aloft the wind he darts away or exercises slowly through the day. The waters and walls so nimbly he'll skirt; with fragrant catkins his delight’s to flirt. Scents 
of fresh flowers his airy self-most please; his graceful form unfolds with greatest ease. Wings aflutter, he alighted on the head of 1 of the monster-spirits to eavesdrop on them. All of a sudden, the 
monster said, “Second Elder Brother, our Great King’s had several pieces of good luck. Last month he got himself a beautiful lady who’s been giving him a good time in the cave. Then last night he 
acquired these three weapons and they're truly priceless treasures. Tomorrow he plans to give a banquet at this so-called Muckrake Festival. All of us are going to enjoy ourselves.” 

“We're quite lucky, too!” said the other 1. “We’ve these twenty taels of silver to take to buy bulls and sheep. When we reach the Northwest Market, let’s have a few bottles of juice first. Let's skim two 
or three taels off the top so that we can buy a cotton jacket for winter. Won't that be nice?” The two fiends thus chatted and giggled as they sped along the main road. 

When Pilgrim heard that there was to be a Muckrake Festival, he was secretly pleased. He would have slain the fiends but he had no weapon, and in any case he felt that they were not responsible for 
theft. Flying ahead of them, therefore, he resumed his original form and stood still by the road. He waited until those two fiends had almost reached him and then suddenly spat a mouthful of magic 
saliva onto them crying, “Om Him Ta Lil” 

At once this magic of immobilization rendered those 2 wolf-headed spirits completely motionless: eyes unblinking, they could not even open the mouths; body upright, their 2 legs stood absolutely still. 
Then Pilgrim pushed both of them over, searched through their clothes, and did indeed find the twenty taels of silver wrapped in a little bag tied to the belt around one of their waists. Each of them also 
had a white lacquered tablet hanging on his belt; on one was the inscription Shifty-and-Freaky, and on the other, Freaky-and-Shifty. Dear Great Sage! He took their silver and untied their tablets, then 
strode back to the city. When he arrived at the royal residence, he gave a thorough account to the prince, the Tang Monk, the various officials, and the artisans. “It must be,” said 8 Rules, chuckling, 
“Old bull’s treasure that is emitting such great radiance that they have to buy bulls and sheep to feast and celebrate. Now how are we going to get it back?” 

Pilgrim said, “All three of us brothers ought to go there. The silver should be given to our own artisans as a reward. Let’s ask His Highness for a few sheep and bulls. 8 Rules, you change into the form 
of Shifty-and-Freaky, and I'll change into the form of Freaky-and-Shifty. Sand-monk can disguise himself as a trader of sheep and bulls. We'll enter the Tiger’s-Mouth Cave that way. When we've the 
chance, each of us will grab our own weapon and finish off those monstrous deviates. Then we can be on our way.” 

“Marvellous! Marvellous! Marvellous!” laughed Sand-monk. “We'd not delay! Let's go!” 

The old prince indeed agreed to his scheme and asked 1 of his stewards to purchase about 7 bulls and 4 or 5 sheep. The 3 brothers took leave of their master and went out of the city to exercise their 
magic powers. “Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules, “since I’ve never laid eyes on that Shifty-and-Freaky, how'd | change into his form?” 

“That fiend’s been rendered motionless by old monkey's magic of immobilisation,” said Pilgrim, “and he'll not come out of it until this time tomorrow. But | remember how he looks. Stand still and let me 
show you what to change into. Like this ... this ... and you'll look like him.” 

Instantly he was transformed into an exact image of Shifty-and-Freaky. The fiend’s tablet was then hung on his waist. Pilgrim also changed into the form of Freaky-and-Shifty with the proper tablet 
hanging on his waist. Sand-monk then disguised himself as a trader; herding the bulls and sheep, the 3 of them took the main road heading straight for the mountain. In a little while they entered the 
fold of the mountain and again ran into a little monster. He’d some vicious features indeed! Look at those 2 round, rolling eyes like lamps aglow; and red, bristling hair like flames ablaze. Bottled nose, 
gaping mouth, and sharp teeth protruding; bi-forked ears, caved-in brow, and puffed up blue face. He wore a light yellow garment and trod a pair of rush sandals — strong and sturdy like a savage god, 
brash and hasty like a wicked demon. With a coloured lacquered box for invitations tucked under his left arm, the fiend yelled at Pilgrim, “Freaky-and-Shifty, have you two retumed? How many animals 
did you buy?” 

“Just look at what we’re herding,” replied Pilgrim. 

“And who's this?” asked the fiend, facing Sand-monk. 

“He’s an animal trader,” said Pilgrim. “We still owe him a few taels of silver, and we’re taking him home so that he can be paid. Where’re you going?” 

The fiend said, “I’m heading for the Bamboo-Knot Mountain to invite the venerable great king to attend a festival tomorrow.” Following the drift of the conversation, Pilgrim immediately asked him, “How 
many people are invited altogether?” 

“The venerable great king will head the table, of course,” said the fiend. “Including our great king and the captains of our mountain, there'll be some forty persons.” They were conversing like that when 
8 Rules spoke up, “Let’s get going! The animals have scattered!” 

“You round them up,” said Pilgrim, “While | ask him for the invitation so | can have a look.” Because he thought that Pilgrim was a member of their own family, the fiend opened the box and took out the 
invitation card to hand over to Pilgrim. Pilgrim unfolded it and found this message written on it: 

Tomorrow morning a banquet will be reverently prepared for you so that we may celebrate the Fine Festival of the Muckrake. | pray that you'll visit our mountain with your chariot and attendants. It will 
be our good fortune if you don’t refuse. With profound gratitude | submit this invitation to my Venerable Grandmaster, the 9-fold-Numina Primal Sage. Your grand-disciple, Yellow Lion, respects 100 
times. 

After reading it, Pilgrim handed the card back to the fiend who put it back in the box and took off toward the southeast. 

“Elder Brother,” asked Sand-monk, “what does the card say?” 

“It's an invitation to celebrate a festival of the muckrake. The sender identifies himself as such: ‘Your grand-disciple, Yellow Lion, respects a hundred times.’ The one to whom the invitation is addressed 
happens to be the grandmaster, one ‘9-fold Numina Primal Sage.” On hearing this, 8 Rules laughed and said, “This has to be Old bull’s property!” 

“How can you tell that it’s your property?” asked Pilgrim. 

8 Rules said, “The ancients have a saying that ‘A scabby sow is the special foe of the golden-haired lion.’ That's why | say that this is Old bull’s property.” 

As the 3 of them chatted and laughed, they herded the bulls and sheep along. Soon they caught sight of the Tiger’s-Mouth Cave. Outside the door this was the scenery they saw: emerald mountains 
all around like cities in 1 row bound. Green creepers the crags entwine; from tall cliffs hang purple vines. Bird-chirps the woods invade; flowers the cave’s entrance shade. A Peach-Blossom Cave? no 
less, such that hermits would possess. When they approached the cave, they found a motley crew of monster-spirits, old and young, cavorting beneath the blossoms and trees. The “Ho! Ho!” snorting 
of 8 Rules as he herded the animals caught their attention, and they all came forward to meet members of their own household. As they went after the bulls and sheep and began trussing them, the 
commotion alerted the monster-king inside who led a dozen little monsters to come out and asked, “So, you two have returned? How many bulls and sheep did you buy?” 

“Eight bulls and seven sheep,” replied Pilgrim, “altogether fifteen animals. The price of bulls should be sixteen taels of silver, the price of sheep, nine taels. We received twenty taels before. Now we 
still owe five taels. This is the trader who came along to get his money.” 

On hearing this, the monster-king gave the order: “Little ones, fetch five taels of silver and send the man off.” 

Pilgrim said, “This trader didn’t just come for his money. He wanted to observe the festival too.” 

Enraged, the monster-king rebuked him, saying, “What a rogue you're, Freaky Child! You're supposed just to make the purchase. Why did you've to mention the festival to anyone?” 8 Rules drew near 
and said, “My lord, the treasures you acquired are indeed rare in the world. What’s wrong with letting him take a look at them?” 

“You're a pest, too, Shifty Child!” snapped the monster. “I got my treasures from the city in the Jade-Flower District. If this trader sees them and spreads the news in the district, the prince may hear 
about it. If he then comes here to look, what am | going to do?” 

“My Lord,” said Pilgrim, “this trader comes from behind the Northwest Market. He’s not a resident of the city. How could he go there and spread the word? Besides, he’s a little hungry, and neither of 
us has eaten. If there’s any juice and food in the house, please give him some, and then send him off.” He had hardly finished speaking when a little monster handed over five taels of silver to him. 
Passing the silver to Sand-monk, Pilgrim said, “Trader, take the silver. I'll take you to the back to have some food.” 

Forcing himself to be bold, Sand-monk went inside the cave with 8 Rules and Pilgrim. When they reached the second-level hall, they found a votive table set up in the centre on which the nine-pronged 
muckrake was laid, its colourful radiance truly blinding. Leaning on the east wall was the golden-hooped rod, and on the west a fiend-routing staff. The monster-king who had followed them in said, 
“Trader, the luminous thing in the centre’s the muckrake. You may look at it but ever mention this to no one after you leave.” Sand-monk nodded and thanked him. Alas! When someone sees his 
property, he will go for it certainly. For his entire life that 8 Rules had been an impetuous person. When he saw the muckrake, he was not about to engage in anymore small talk. Running up to the table 
and seizing it with both hands, he changed back into his true form and struck at the face of the monster-spirit. Pilgrim and Sand-monk, too dashed to both walls to grab their own weapons and change 
back into their true forms. As the 3 brothers began to attack madly, the fiendish king retreated hastily to the back where he picked up a 4-light shovel with a long handle and a sharp blade. Rushing 
back out into the courtyard, he blocked the 3 weapons and shouted, “Who’re you that you dare use a trick to wangle my treasures from me?” 

“You larcenous hairy lump!” scolded Pilgrim. “So you don’t recognise us! We're the disciples of Tripitaka Tang, a sage monk from the Land of the East. When we’d our travel rescripts certified at the 
Jade-Flower District, the noble prince there asked his three sons to submit to us as teachers and learn martial arts from us. Because our treasures were to serve as models for their weapons that're 
being forged, we left them in the yard and they’re stolen by you larcenous hairy lump during the night. And you say instead that we use a trick to wangle your treasures! Don’t run away! Have a taste of 
what our three weapons can dish up for you!” The monster-spirit immediately raised his shovel to oppose him. Thus began a battle that moved from the courtyard to beyond the front door. Look at those 
3 monks crowding 1 fiend. A marvellous fight it's! The rod swishes like the wind; the rake descends like the rain. The staff lifts up to fill the sky with mist; the shovel extends to colour the clouds. Like 
three gods refining great cinnabar — the flames, the colours would awe ghosts and gods. Pilgrim’s most able to exert his power. The monster stole treasures, how insolent! 

8 Rules, Heavenly Reeds, now shows his might; Sand-monk the great warrior is good and strong. Brothers united, use their smart device and stir up a fight in Tiger's-Mouth Cave. That fiend is tough 
and he exploits his wiles: 4 sturdy heroes thus have quite a match. They brawl this time till the sun’s heading west when the monster grows weak and fails to stand. After they fought for a long time on 
the Leopard’s-Head Mountain, the monster-spirit could no longer withstand his opponents. He shouted at Sand-monk, “Watch my shovell” 

As Sand-monk stepped aside to dodge the blow, he escaped through the hole thus created. Mounting the wind, he sped toward the southeast. 8 Rules was about to give chase when Pilgrim said, “Let 
him go. As the ancient proverb has it, ‘The desperate bandit shouldn't be pursued.’ Let’s cut off his way of retreat instead.” 

8 Rules agreed. Going up to the entrance of the cave, the three of them slaughtered all of those hundred-odd monster-spirits, old and young alike. They were actually tigers, wolves, leopards, horses, 
deer, and mountain goats. Then the Great Sage used his magic to haul up all the valuable belongings from the cave, the carcasses of the slain monsters, and the bulls and sheep that had been herded 
there. With dried wood Sand-monk started a fire, and 8 Rules wagged his ears to fan up a strong gust. The entire lair was thus gutted; after which, they took the stuff brought out of the cave and 
returned to the city. At that time the city gates had not been closed for people had not yet retired. The old prince and his sons were waiting with the Tang Monk at the Gauze-Drying Pavilion when they 
suddenly found the courtyard littered with dead beasts, live bulls and sheep, and some fine jewels and clothing thrown down from mid-air. Then they heard the cry, “Master, we've returned in triumph!” 
The prince gave thanks immediately, and Elder Tang was filled with delight. When the three young princes went to their knees, Sand-monk raised them and said, “Don’t thank us yet. Let’s take a look 
at what we've here.” 

“Where do they all come from?” asked the old prince. 

“Those tigers, wolves, leopards, horses, deer, and mountain goats,” said Pilgrim with a smile, “happen to be spirits who have become fiends. We succeeded in recovering our weapons and fought our 
way out of their door. The old monster’s actually a golden-haired lion. Using a four-lights shovel, he fought with us till dusk before fleeing for his life toward the southeast. Instead of giving him pursuit, 
we eliminated his way of retreat by slaughtering all the rest of the fiends and bringing back these valuable belongings of his.” 

The old prince was both delighted and alarmed by what he heard: he was delighted by the victory but he was also alarmed by the possibility that the monster might return to exact vengeance. 


“Please do not worry, Your Highness,” said Pilgrim. “I've considered the matter also, and I'll take appropriate action. We'll certainly clean up the whole affair for you before we depart, so that no harm 
will come to you afterward. When we went there this noon, we ran into a red-haired, blue-faced little monster on his way to deliver an invitation. This was what | saw written on the card: 
Tomorrow morning a banquet will be reverently prepared for you so that we may celebrate the Fine Festival of the Muckrake. | pray that you'll visit our mountain with your chariot and attendants. It'll be 
our good fortune if you don’t refuse. With profound gratitude | submit this invitation to my Venerable Grandmaster, the 9-fold Numina Primal Sage. 
Your grand-disciple, Yellow Lion 
The sender was identified. When that monster-spirit fled in defeat just now, he must have gone to his grandpa’s place to talk. Tomorrow they will certainly come looking for us to exact vengeance. We'll 
then make a clean sweep of these monsters for you.” The old prince thanked him and asked for the evening maigre to be served. After master and disciples had eaten, they retired. The monster-spirit 
headed southeast and did indeed flee to the Bamboo-Knot Mountain. In that mountain was a cave-dwelling with the name of 9-Bends Curved Cave. The 9-fold-Numina Primal Sage living there was the 
grandpa of the monster-spirit whose legs that night never descended from the wind. By the time of the fifth watch, he arrived at the entrance of the cave and was admitted after knocking on the door. 
One little monster said to him, “Great King, Little Blue Face arrived last night to deliver your invitation, and Venerable Dad asked him to stay till this morning, so that he could go with him to attend your 
muckrake festival. How’s it that you also have come at such an early hour to deliver another invitation in person?” 
“| don’t know what to say,” replied the monster-spirit, “but there isn’t going to be any festival!” 
As he spoke, Little Blue Face came out and said, “Great King, why are you here? Once Venerable Dad Great King gets up, he'll go with me to attend your festival.” The monster-spirit however, could 
only wave his hand nervously without uttering a word. 
In a little while, the old monster arose and summoned his visitor in. As the monster-spirit abandoned his weapon and went to his knees, he could not stop the tears rolling down his cheeks. 
“Worthy grandchild,” said the old monster, “you sent me an invitation yesterday, and | was about to go attend your festival this morning. Now you've even come in person. But why are you so sad and 
troubled?” 
Respecting, the monster-spirit said, “Your grand-disciple was taking a leisurely stroll the other night in the moonlight when he saw radiance flooding the sky over the Jade-Flower District. When | 
hastened to investigate, | found three luminous weapons in the courtyard of the royal residence: a muckrake with nine prongs dipped in gold, a treasure staff, and a golden-hooped rod. After your grand- 
disciple brought them back with magic, he wanted to have a Fine Festival of the Muckrake. The little ones were told to purchase bulls, sheep, and various fruits to prepare a banquet for celebration and 
for the enjoyment of our grandpa. After | sent off Blue Face yesterday to deliver the invitation to you, Child Freaky whom | asked to go buy the bulls and sheep, returned herding a few animals. He 
brought a trader along who came to collect some money we owed him and insisted on being an observer of the festival. At first your grand-disciple refused, for | feared that he might spread the news 
to the wrong person outside. Then he claimed he was hungry and asked for food. So | told him to go inside to eat. When they walked in and saw the weapons, they claimed they were theirs. Each of 
them in fact seized one of the weapons and then changed into his original form: one was a priest with a hairy face and a thunder-god beak, one was a priest with a long horn and huge ears, and one 
was a priest with dark, gloomy complexion. Without regard for good or ill, they all shouted madly that they wanted to fight. Your humble grandson took up the four-lights shovel quickly to oppose them, 
trying at the same time to find out who they were that they dared used such deception. They claimed that they were disciples of the Tang Monk who had been sent by the Great Tang in the Land of the 
East to go to the Western Heaven. They were passing through the city and having their rescript certified when they were detained by the young princes who wanted to learn martial arts from them. 
Their three weapons were placed in the yard as models to be copied, and | stole them. That was the explanation for their angry attack on me. But | don’t know the names of those three priests who all 
seem very able. Your grandson alone could not withstand the three of them. So | fled in defeat to my grandpa, in hopes that you’d take up arms to assist me and seize those monks to exact vengeance. 
That would be a great token of your love for your grandson.” 
On hearing these words, the old monster reflected in silence for a while. With a chuckle, he said, “So, it's they! My worthy grandchild, you made a mistake when you got them involved!” 
“Do you know who they are, grandmaster?” asked the monster-spirit. 
“The one with a long horn and huge ears,” said the old monster, “happens to be Bullseye 8 Rules, and the one with dark, gloomy complexion is Sand-monk. These two are still all right. But the one who 
has a hairy face and a thunder-god beak goes by the name of Pilgrim Sun. This person truly has vast magic powers. When he caused great disturbance in the Celestial Palace five centuries ago, not 
even a hundred thousand warriors from Heaven could capture him. Moreover, he devotes himself to mischief-making. Whether it’s ransacking a mountain or overturning an ocean, breaking down a 
cave or besieging a city, he’s a real champion at creating troubles! How could you provoke him? All right, I'll go with you. I'll capture that fellow and those princes of Jade-Flower as well, just to relieve 
your feelings.” The monster-spirit respected to give thanks. 
Immediately the old monster summoned into his presence his various grandsons: Gibbon-Lion,4 Snow Lion, Suanyi,5 Baize,° Wildcat, and Elephant-Baiter. Led by Yellow Lion, each of them took up a 
sharp weapon and mounted a gust of violent wind to reach the Leopard’s-Head Mountain. There they encountered the powerful odour of fire and smoke and heard the sound of weeping. When they 
looked more carefully, they found Freaky and Shifty sobbing and crying for their lord. 
“Are you the real Freaky Child or the false Freaky Child?” snapped the monster-spirit as he walked up to them. 
The two fiends fell on their knees. As they respected and tried to hold back their tears, the two fiends said, “How could we be false? Yesterday we took the money to go purchase bulls and sheep. 
When we got to the main road west of the mountain, we ran into a priest with a hairy face and a thunder-god beak. He spat on us once and immediately our legs grew weak and our mouths clamped 
shut. We'd neither talk nor walk. He pushed us over and searched out our silver. He took our tablets, too. Neither of us snapped out of our stupor until just now. When we got home, the smoke and fire 
had not yet died but all our buildings had been burned out. Because we'd not see our lord or any of the captains and officers, we stayed here and wept. How did this fire start anyway?” 
When he heard this, the monster-spirit could not stop the tears gushing from his eyes. As he stamped the ground with both feet, he railed spitefully, “Baldy! You're so wicked! How'd you do such a 
vicious thing? You've gutted my cave-dwelling, burned my pretty lady to death, and robbed me of all my family and belongings! I’m so mad I'd die! I’m so mad I'd die!” 
The old monster asked Gibbon-Lion to drag him over and said to him, “Worthy grandchild, when things have reached this stage, getting mad won't do you any good. Let’s conserve our vitality instead 
so that we may go seize those monks in the prefectural city.” 
Refusing to stop his wailing, the monster-spirit said, “Venerable Dad! That mountain home of mine wasn’t built in a day! Now it's completely wrecked by that baldpate! What do I've to live for?” He 
struggled up and would have rammed his head against a boulder to kill himself had not Snow Lion and Gibbon-Lion stopped him with their earnest pleadings. After a while, they left the mountain and 
headed for the city. 
When their churning wind and looming fog drew near, the people outside all parts of the capital were so terrified that men and women alike fled into the city with scant regard for their homes or 
possessions. After they had entered, the gates were shut tightly; meanwhile, someone had sped to the palace to cry, “Disaster! Disaster!” The princes and the Tang Monk were just enjoying breakfast 
in the Gauze-Drying Pavilion when they heard this report. When they stepped out to inquire, the people said, “A large band of monster-spirits are approaching the city, kicking up sand and stone and 
belching wind and fog.” 
“What shall we do?” exclaimed the old prince, horrified. 
“Relax, all of you!” said Pilgrim, chuckling. “This must be the monster-spirit from the Tiger’s-Mouth Cave who fled in defeat yesterday toward the southeast. Now he has banded together with that so- 
called Nine-fold-Numina Primal Sage to come here. Let us brothers go out to meet them. Order the four gates closed and call up men to guard the city.” The prince indeed gave the order for the city 
gates to be closed and armed men were summoned to ascend the rampart. On the city tower the prince, together with his three sons and the Tang Monk, made the roll call. Amid fluttering banners that 
blotted out the sun and cannon fire that filled the sky, Pilgrim and his two brothers left the city midway between cloud and fog to face their enemies. Thus it was that affinity’s lack had caused wise 
weapons’ loss and stirred up the demons, their perverse foes. 
106 

Masters, lions, ‘ teachers, and pupils, all return to the 1; Thieves, the Dao, snares, and Religion, quiet 9-fold-Numina 
We're telling you about the Great Sage Sun who went out of the city with 8 Rules and Sand-monk. When they met the monster-spirits face to face, they found them to be a bunch of lions of various 
colours: Yellow Lion Spirit led in front with Suanyi Lion and Elephant-Baiter on his left, Baize Lion and Wildcat on his right, and Gibbon-Lion and Snow Lion at the back. In the middle of the group was 
a nine-headed lion, and by his side was the fiend, Child Blue Face, holding a brocade pennant with raised floral patterns. Child Shifty-and-Freaky and Child Freaky-and-Shifty held high two red banners 
as they all stood in an orderly fashion to the north. 8 Rules, always foolhardy, walked up to them and began to abuse them, saying, “You larcenous fiend! Where did you go to collect these several hairy 
lumps to come here?” 
“You lawless and vicious bonze!” cried the Yellow Lion Spirit, baring his teeth. “Yesterday three of you attacked one of me and | was defeated. Wasn't that enough that you’d the upper hand? Why did 
you've to be so cruel as to burn down my cave-dwelling, ruin my mountain home, and harm all my relatives? My animosity toward you is deep as the sea! Don’t run away! Have a taste of your venerable 
dad’s shovel.” 
Dear 8 Rules! He met the lion with upraised rake. The 2 of them had just come together and no decision could yet be reached when the Gibbon-Lion wielding an iron caltrop and the Snow Lion Spirit 
using a 3-cornered club2 also advanced to attack. “Welcome!” shouted 8 Rules. 
On his side, Sand-monk quickly took out his fiend-routing staff to lend his assistance. Then Suanyi Spirit, Baize Spirit, Elephant-Baiter, and Wildcat all surged forward, and they were met by the Great 
Sage Sun grasping his golden-hooped rod. Suanyi used a cudgel, Baize a bronze mallet, Elephant-Baiter a steel lance, and Wildcat a battle-axe. Those seven lion-spirits and these three savage priests 
thus had quite a battle! Mallet, cudgel, lance, and 3-cornered club, 4-lights shovel, iron caltrop, and an axe: — 7 lions with 7 weapons sharp encircle 3 priests as they roar and shout. Vicious is the Great 
Sage’s iron rod and rare among men, Sand-monk’s treasure staff. 8 Rules sallies forth as if plague-ridden with a radiant muckrake that terrifies. Back and front they parry as they ply their might; left 
and right they charge for they're fearless all. Princes on the rampart now lend their strength by beating gongs and drums to rouse their hearts. Pressing back and forth they use magic power and fight 
till Heaven and Earth grow obscure. Those monster-spirits fought for half a day with the Great Sage and his two companions, and it became late. 8 Rules was foaming at the mouth and his legs were 
gradually weakening. With a last half-hearted wave of his rake, he turned to flee. “Where’re you off to? Watch out!” cried Snow-Lion and Gibbon-Lion. 
Idiot did not dodge quickly enough and received a blow to his spine from the club. As he lay flat on the ground, all he could mumble was “Finished! Finished!” 
Seizing him by the bristles and the tail, the 2 spirits hauled 8 Rules away to show him to the 9-headed lion saying, “Grandmaster, we've caught one.” 
They had hardly finished speaking when Sand-monk and Pilgrim, too, were defeated. As the various monster-spirits gave chase together however, Pilgrim pulled off a bunch of hairs, chewed them to 
pieces, and spat them out, crying, “Change!” They changed at once to hundreds of little Pilgrims who had Baize, Suanyi, Elephant-Baiter, Wildcat, and the golden-haired lion-fiend completely surrounded. 
Sand-monk and Pilgrim then returned and also plunged into the fray. When night fell, they captured Suanyi and Baize, though Wildcat, Elephant-Baiter, and Golden Hair managed to escape. When the 
old fiend learned from his grandsons that two lions were lost, he gave this instruction: “Tie up Bullseye 8 Rules but don’t take his life. Wait till they return our two lions, and we'll give 8 Rules back to 
them. If they’re foolish enough to harm our two lions, we'll make 8 Rules pay with his life.” 
That night the various monsters rested outside the city. The Great Sage Sun had the 2 lion-spirits hauled near the city. When the old prince saw them, he ordered the city gates open and sent out some 
thirty guards with ropes to truss up the lion-spirits and take them inside. After he had retrieved his magic hairs, the Great Sage Sun went with Sand-monk up to the city tower to see the Tang Monk. 
“That's quite a fierce battle!” said the Tang Monk. “You think Aware of Ability will live?” 
“Relax!” replied Pilgrim. “Since we’ve caught these two monster-spirits, they'll never dare harm him. Let's have these two spirits firmly bound so that they may be exchanged for 8 Rules tomorrow.” 
Respecting to Pilgrim, the 3 young princes said, “When our master first went into battle, we saw only one of you. But when you feigned defeat later, over a hundred of you suddenly appeared. By the 
time you'd the monster-spirits captured and returned to the side of the city, you became a single person once more. What sort of magic’s that?” 
“On my body,” replied Pilgrim with a chuckle, “there're eighty-four thousand hairs. One of them can change into ten of me and the ten can also change into a hundred. In fact, the transformation can 
grow to millions and billions. This is the magic of the body beyond the body.” 1 after another, the princes touched their heads to the ground to show their reverence after which food was brought up to 
the tower for them to dine right there. At each crenel on the battlement were set up lanterns and flags, watch rattles, gongs, and drums. The soldiers were told to be diligent in announcing the watches, 
sending communication arrows, firing cannons, and shouting battle cries. Soon it was dawn. The old fiend summoned the Yellow Lion Spirit into his presence to give him this plan: “All of you’d today 
exert yourselves to try to capture Pilgrim and Sand-monk. Let me secretly soar through the air to ascend the city and seize their master along with the old prince and his sons. After that, I'll go back first 
to the Nine-bends Curved Cave to wait for your triumphal return.” 
Accepting the plan, Yellow Lion led Gibbon-Lion, Snow Lion, Elephant-Baiter, and Wildcat, each grasping his weapon, and approached the city to provoke battle, in the midst of churning wind and 
roiling mist. On this side Pilgrim and Sand-monk leaped down from the parapet and shouted, “Lawless fiends! Return our brother Eight Rules quickly and we'll spare your lives! Otherwise, we'll pulverise 
you!” 


Those monster-spirits of course did not permit further conversation. As they rushed forward, Great Sage and his companion both exercised their intelligence to oppose those 5 lions. This battle was 
quite different from that of yesterday: a vicious, howling wind that scrubs the earth, a dark, heavy fog that blots out the sky. Flying dirt and stone dismay ghosts and gods; toppling trees and woods 
alarm tigers and wolves. The lance is cruel, the axe, luminous; caltrop, club, and shovel are all ruthless. How they wish they'd swallow Pilgrim whole or capture alive that puny Sand-monk! This 1 
compliant rod of Great Sage can thrust, turn, toss, and twist most cleverly. That fiend-routing staff of bold Sand-monk has great fame beyond the Divine Mists Hall. Their action this time has great magic 
powers to sweep away the spirits of the West. When that battle between those five lion-spirits with coats of more than 1 colour and Sand-monk and Pilgrim reached its most feverish moment, the old 
fiend mounted a dark cloud to ascend the city tower. All he had to do was to give his heads a shake, and those on the rampart — the various officials and the guards - became so terrified that they all 
tumbled down from the battlement. He sped inside the tower, and with wide-open mouths, caught hold of Tripitaka, the old prince, and his sons. He then went back to the spot at the north and seized 
8 Rules with another mouth. He had altogether nine heads, and he therefore had nine mouths. 1 mouth held the Tang Monk, the 2"4 1 8 Rules, the 3¢ 1 the old prince, the 4" 1 the eldest young prince, 
the 5'" 1 the 2.4 young prince, and the 6" 1 the 3 young prince. With six persons in six mouths, I’ve still three empty ones! “I’m leaving first!” he roared. 
When these 5 young lion-spirits saw the triumph of their grandmaster, they became more aggressive than ever. Pilgrim, too, heard the commotion on the rampart, and he knew at once that he had 
fallen for their scheme. Quickly admonishing Sand-monk to be careful, he ripped off all his hairs from both arms and chewed them to pieces before spitting them out: they changed instantly into hundreds 
and thousands of little Pilgrims. As they surged forward to attack, they dragged down the Gibbon-Lion, captured live Snow Lion, caught hold of Elephant-Baiter, overturned Wildcat, and beat to death 
Yellow Lion. From this wild melee however, Child Blue Face, Shifty-and-Freaky, and Freaky-and-Shifty managed to escape. 
When the officials on the rampart saw what was happening, they opened the city gates once more and brought out ropes to tie up the five lion-spirits. After they had been dragged inside and before 
they had even been disposed of, a tearful queen came to salute Pilgrim saying, “O divine master! Our Royal Highness, his sons, and your master may have lost their lives! What’s to become of this 
deserted city?” 
“Worthy Queen, please do not grieve,” said the Great Sage saluting her as he retrieved his magic hairs. “Because I’ve caught these seven lion-spirits, | don’t think that my master or His Highness and 
his heirs will be harmed, even though they've been abducted by the magic of the old monster. Early next morning, we two brothers will go to that mountain. We promise you that we'll capture the old 
monster and return four princes to you.” 
When the queen and other court ladies heard this, all of them respected to Pilgrim and said, “We pray earnestly that the lives of His Highness and his heirs be preserved and that his royal dominion be 
established forever!” 
After their salutes, each of them returned to the palace, struggling to hold back her tears. Pilgrim gave this instruction to the various officials: “Skin that Yellow Lion Spirit that we’ve beaten to death and 
lock up the rest of the 6 living ones. Bring us some vegetarian food so that we may take a rest after the meal. You can all relax for | promise you nothing serious will occur.” On the following day, the 
Great Sage led Sand-monk to mount the auspicious cloud, and in a little while, they arrived at the summit of the Bamboo-Knot Mountain. As they lowered the direction of their cloud to look around, they 
saw a marvellous tall mountain indeed with a row of peaks rugged and summits most jagged. Deep in the stream flows a gurgling torrent; below the cliff blooms the ornate fragrance. Winding ranges 1 
after another and ancient paths encircling. Truly the cranes arrive to squire the pines but the clouds depart to make the rocks forlorn. The apes face the sunlight to search for fruits and deer enjoy the 
warmth to find their flowers. The bluebird’s reedy poems, the oriole’s murmuring notes. Spring peaches and plums vie for glamour; summer elms and willows both prosper; autumn spreads brocades 
of yellow flowers; winter comes with white snow aflutter. A splendid scene in all 4 seasons as good as the mortal Isle Yingzhou. As they enjoyed the scenery on the summit, they suddenly caught sight 
of that Child Blue Face dashing out of a little valley down below, his hand gripping a small cudgel. “Where do you think you're going?” bellowed Pilgrim. “Old monkey's here!” The little monster was so 
terrified that he tumbled down the slope while the 2 brothers eagerly gave chase. In a moment however, Blue Face disappeared. A few steps more brought them to the front of a cave-dwelling where 
they found tightly shut two doors of veined rocks. Across the top of the door was a stone placard with the following inscription in clerkly script: 

Myriad-Numina Bamboo-Knot Mountain, 9-Bends Curved Cave 
The little monster had dashed in and closed the doors, and had gone to the centre of the cave to say to the old monster, “Venerable Dad, there’re two monks outside again.” 
The old monster said, “Did your great king and the rest return - Gibbon-Lion, Snow Lion, Elephant-Baiter, and Wildcat?” 
“I've seen none of them! I’ve not seen any of them!” replied the little monster. “Only two monks high on the peak scanning the region. | turned and ran when | saw them. They chased me back here and 
| quickly bolted the door.” 
On hearing this, the old monster fell silent for a long time; then all at once he shed a few tears. “Woe!” he cried. “My Yellow Lion grand-disciple’s dead and the others have all been taken captive into 
the city by those priests. How I’m to avenge myself?” 
Lying on one side, a melancholy 8 Rules who had been trussed up along with the Tang Monk, the old prince, and his sons and left there to suffer, was gladdened by this statement of the old monster 
about his grandsons. “Master, don’t be afraid!” he whispered. “And Your Highness, don’t worry! My elder brother has won a victory and caught several monsters. He'll soon find his way here to rescue 
us.” He finished speaking, and then he heard the old monster say, “Little ones, stand guard here. Let me go out and capture those two monks and bring them in here also for punishment.” 
Look at him! With neither armour on his body nor weapons in his hands, he walked in big strides up to the front where he could hear the shouting of Pilgrim Sun. Flinging wide the doors, he did not wait 
for the exchange of even one word before heading straight for Pilgrim. As Pilgrim wielded his iron rod to meet him, Sand-monk brandished his treasure staff and struck. All the old monster did was to 
give his head one shake, and eight other heads with open mouths appeared, four on each side. Ever so gently they caught Pilgrim and Sand-monk and brought them inside the cave. “Bring me some 
ropes!” he cried. 
Shifty-and-Freaky, Freaky-and-Shifty, and Child Blue Face were the three who had escaped with their lives the night before. Taking out two ropes, they bound up the priests firmly. 
“You wretched ape!” said the old monster. “You've taken my seven grandsons but I’ve caught four of you priests and four princes. That should be a fair exchange for my grandsons’ lives! Little ones, 
select some thorny willow canes. Let's give this monkey-head a flogging, so that my Yellow Lion grand-disciple may be avenged.” 
Each picking up a willow cane, those three little monsters began to rain blows on Pilgrim. Pilgrim’s body however, was one that had undergone prolonged cultivation and refinement. The effect of those 
willow canes on him was no more severe than scratching an itch! No matter how hard they flogged him, he neither showed concern nor made a sound. 8 Rules, the Tang Monk, and the princes however, 
were petrified at the sight. After a little while, even the canes broke from the flogging and had to be replaced. 
It went on like this until evening. The blows Pilgrim received were numberless. When Sand-monk saw how long Pilgrim had been beaten, he felt guilty and said, “Let me take a hundred strokes or so 
for him!” 
“Don’t be so impatient!” said the old monster. “You'll be beaten tomorrow! Each of you'll have your turn!” Horrified, 8 Rules said, “Then the day after tomorrow will be Old bull’s turn!” 
The flogging continued for yet another while until it grew dark. “Little ones, let’s stop!” cried the old monster. “Light the lamps, and take some food and drink, all of you. I’m going to my brocade den to 
take a nap. All three of you've suffered before in the hands of these monks, and you'd therefore guard them carefully. Wait till tomorrow before we flog them some more.” 
Moving the lamps over, the three little monsters took up the willow canes and began beating Pilgrim’s skull: tick-tick-tuck, tuck-tuck-tick, now fast, now slow, it sounded as if they were beating a rattle. 
As the night deepened however, the monsters all fell sound asleep. 
Immediately Pilgrim exercised his magic of Passage. He shrank his body and climbed out of the ropes. Having shaken loose his fur and straightened out his clothes, he whipped out his rod from his 
ear. One wave of it and it acquired the thickness of a bucket and the length of twenty feet. “You cursed beasts!” he said to the three little monsters. “You've beaten your Venerable Dad umpteen times 
but he hasn’t changed a bit. Let your Venerable Dad drop this rod on you a little, and see what happens!” Ever so lightly he dropped the rod on those three little fiends, and at once they turned into 
three meat patties. 
Then Pilgrim pulled up the wick in a lamp and began to untie Sand-monk. As he had been hurting from the ropes, 8 Rules could not refrain from saying in a loud voice, “Elder Brother, my hands and 
feet are swollen! Why can’t you untie me first?” This one yell of Idiot's aroused the old monster who scrambled up immediately saying, “Who's untying...?” 
When he heard that, Pilgrim blew out the lamp immediately and abandoned Sand-monk. With his iron rod he punched through several doors and escaped. The old monster went out to the centre hall 
and called out: “Little ones, why are the lights out? Has someone escaped?” 
He shouted like that once but no one answered him. He cried again but still there was no answer. By the time he lit a lamp himself, the first thing he saw were 3 bloody meat patties on the ground. Then 
he saw that the old prince, his sons, the Tang Monk and 8 Rules were still there; only Pilgrim and Sand-monk had disappeared. With a lighted torch, he rushed to the back and front to search for them, 
and he found Sand-monk sidling along a wall in one of the porches. The old monster grabbed him, threw him on the ground, and tied him up as before. Then he continued to search for Pilgrim. When 
he saw that several of the doors had been smashed, he knew that Pilgrim had managed to escape. Instead of giving chase, he tried to patch up and repair the doors to guard his property. The Great 
Sage Sun having emerged from the 9-Bends Curved Cave, went straight back to the Jade-Flower County astride the auspicious cloud. In the air above the city he was met by several local spirits of the 
region and the tutelary deities of the city, all saluting. “Why did you all wait until now to come to see me?” asked Pilgrim. 
“These humble deities,” replied the city god, “knew already that the Great Sage had descended upon the Jade-Flower County. Since you've been entertained by a worthy prince, we dared not intrude 
upon you. Now we've learned that the princes encountered fiends and that the Great Sage is in the process of subduing demons. We've therefore come especially to salute to receive you.” 
Pilgrim was still annoyed and was beginning to berate them when the Golden-Headed Guardian, the 6 Gods of Darkness, and the 6 Gods of Light appeared with another local spirit in their custody. As 
they knelt down, they said, “Great Sage, we've captured this devil-in-the-earth and brought him here.” 
“Why aren’t you all protecting my master at the Bamboo-Knot Mountain?” snapped Pilgrim. “Why are you milling about at this place?” 
One of the gods of Darkness and Light said, “Great Sage, after you had escaped, the monster-spirit captured again the Curtain-Raising General and had him tied up once more. When we saw how 
powerful his magic was, we rounded up the local spirit of the Bamboo-Knot Mountain and marched him here. He should know the origin of this monster-spirit. Let the Great Sage question him, so that 
he may devise the proper means to rescue the sage monk and deliver the worthy prince from his suffering.” 
Pilgrim was delighted by what he heard. Trembling all over, the local spirit respected and said, “The year before last that old monster descended upon the Bamboo-Knot Mountain. The Nine-Bends 
Curved Cave was originally a den for six lions. Since the old monster's arrival however, the six lions all honoured him as their grandsire who is actually a nine-headed lion. He styles himself the Nine- 
Numina Primal Sage. If you want to vanquish him, you must go to the Wondrous-Cliff Palace at the East Pole and fetch his master. Only that person and no one else has the power to subdue him.” 
When he heard this, Pilgrim thought for quite some time, musing to himself: “The Wondrous-Cliff Palace at the East Pole, that’s the Salvific Celestial Worthy of the Great Monad. His beast of burden is 
precisely a nine-headed lion. In that case...” He at once gave this instruction: “Let the Guardian and the gods of Darkness and Light return with the local spirit to their proper stations to provide secret 
protection for my master, my brothers, and the princes of the district. The city deities should take up their post to guard the city.” The various deities obeyed and left. 
Mounting the cloud somersault, Great Sage journeyed through the night. By about the hour of the Tiger,‘ he arrived at the East Heaven Gate where he ran into Deity-King Viripaksa and an entourage 
of celestial guards and vira. They all stopped and, folding their hands in their sleeves to salute him, asked, “Where are you going, Great Sage?” 
After returning their salutation, Pilgrim said, “Making a trip to Wondrous-Cliff Palace.” 
“Why aren’t you on your way to the Western Heaven?” asked the Deity-King. “Why have you come to the Eastern Heaven?” 
“When we arrived at the Jade-Flower County,” replied Pilgrim, “we're royally entertained by the prince. His three sons in fact took us three brothers in and honoured us as teachers of martial arts. Little 
did we expect that we'd end up with a bunch of lion-fiends. I've just found out that the Salvific Celestial Worthy of the Great Monad at the Wondrous-Cliff Palace is the lion master, and I'd like to ask 
him to subdue the fiend and rescue my master.” 
“It's precisely because you desired to act as someone’s teacher,” said the Deity-King, “that you got into trouble with a den of lions.” 
“No doubt that's the reason! No doubt that’s the reason!” chuckled Pilgrim. 
All the soldiers and vira saluted him again with folded hands and stepped aside to let him pass. After the Great Sage entered the East Heavenly Gate, he reached in a little while the Wondrous-Cliff 
Palace. He saw coloured clouds in tiers, billows of purple mist, tiles shimmering in golden flames, doors guarded by rows of jade-beasts. Flowers fill a double arch swathed in red mist; tall trees, sun- 
drenched, are encased in green dew. Truly myriad gods surround the place where all sages flourish. The buildings are layers of brocade, all joined through windows and porches, watched by an old 
dragon circling in light divine and charged with thick, auspicious air. This is the realm of everlasting bliss, the Palace of Wondrous-Cliff. Inside the gate of the palace stood a divine lad wearing a garment 
of rainbow hues. When he caught sight of the Great Sage Sun, he went inside to announce, “Holy Dad, the Great Sage Equal to Heaven who caused great havoc in the Celestial Palace’s arrived.” 
The Salvific Celestial Worthy of the Great Monad at once asked his guards and attendants to usher his visitor in. When they entered the palace, the Celestial Worthy left his lofty lotus throne of nine 
colours enshrouded in countless beams of auspicious radiance to greet them. Pilgrim saluted low, and the Celestial Worthy returned his salutation, saying, “Great Sage, we've not seen you these few 
years. | heard some time ago that you left the Dao to embrace God in order to escort the Tang Monk to acquire scriptures in the Western Heaven. Your merit and work must have been accomplished.” 


“Not quite,” replied Pilgrim, “but they're near completion. At this moment however, my accompaniment of the Tang Monk has taken us to the Jade-Flower County where the local prince was kind enough 
to have his three sons take old monkey and his brothers as teachers of martial arts. New weapons were being forged, using ours as models but they were stolen by a thief at night. When we looked for 
them in the morning, we learned that the thief was a golden-haired lion-spirit residing in the Tiger’s-Mouth Cave on the Leopard’s-Head Mountain north of the city. A ploy of old monkey got back our 
weapons but that spirit banded together with a considerable number of other lion-spirits to brawl with me. In their midst was a nine-headed lion who possessed vast magic powers. He caught with his 
mouths my master, 8 Rules, and the four princes and took them to the Nine-Bends Curved Cave of the Bamboo-Knot Mountain. The next day old monkey and Sand-monk followed them there, and we 
too were captured. Old monkey was bound and beaten by him countless times but | was fortunate enough to have escaped, using my magic. They are still suffering at that place. Not until | questioned 
the local spirit of the region did | find out that the Celestial Worthy happens to be his master. I’ve come especially to ask you to subdue the monster and grant deliverance.” 
On hearing this, the Celestial Worthy immediately ordered his subordinates to fetch the lion page from the lion den and bring him forward for interrogation. The page however, was sleeping soundly 
and did not wake up until some of the gods had given him a few shakes. They dragged him up to the centre hall, and the Celestial Worthy asked, “Where's the lion?” 
Shedding tears and respecting, the page boy could only mutter, “Spare me! Spare me!” 
“In the Great Sage Sun’s presence you'll not be beaten,” said the Celestial Worthy. “But you’d better confess quickly how you carelessly allowed the nine-headed lion to run away.” 
“Holy Dad,” said the page, “the day before yesterday | came upon a bottle of juice in the Hall of Universal Sweet Dew. Not knowing any better, | stole it and drank it, and | fell fast asleep. | must not 
have locked up the beast properly, and that’s why he escaped.” 
The Celestial Worthy said, “That juice happened to be a gift of Laozi called Jade Liquid of Transmigration. If you drank it, you’d stay drunk for three whole days. How many days has it been since the 
lion ran away?” 
“According to the local spirit,” said the Great Sage, “he descended to earth the year before last. By now it’s almost three years.” 
“Yes! Yes!” said the Celestial Worthy with a smile. “A day in Heaven is a year in the mortal world.” Then he said to the lion page, “Get up. We'll spare you for the moment. Follow me and the Great 
Sage to the Region Below to retrieve him. The rest of the mortals may go back. There’s no need for all of you to accompany us.” 
The Celestial Worthy trod the clouds with the lion page and the Great Sage to reach the Bamboo-Knot Mountain where they were met by the Guardians of Five Quarters, the Six Gods of Darkness and 
the Six Gods of Light, and the local spirit of the mountain. “You who are supposed to be guardians, has my master been harmed?” asked Pilgrim. 
“The monster-spirit,” replied the deities, “has been rather upset and has gone to sleep. He has not inflicted punishment on anyone.” 
“After all,” said the Celestial Worthy, “that Child Primal Sage of mine is a true spirit who has attained the Way through prolonged cultivation. One roar of his can reach the Three Sages above and 
penetrate the Nine Springs down below. He will not take a life casually. Great Sage Sun, please go and provoke battle at his door. Entice him to come out so that | may subdue him.” 
Hearing this, Pilgrim indeed whipped out his rod and leaped toward the cave’s entrance, shouting, “Brazen monster-spirit! Return my people! Brazen monster-spirit! Return my people!” He shouted 
several times but there was no answer at all, for the old monster had fallen fast asleep. Growing impatient, Pilgrim wielded his iron rod and fought his way inside, shouting abuses as he moved along. 
Only then was the old monster roused from his sleep. Startled and enraged, he scrambled up and roared, “To battle!” At once he shook his head and attacked with open mouths. 
Pilgrim turned back and leaped out of the cave. The monster-spirit followed him out, crying, “Monkey thief! Where are you going?” 
Standing on a cliff, Pilgrim said, chuckling, “You still dare be so audacious and unruly! You've no idea what's coming to you ina moment! Don’t you realise that your Venerable Dad Master is here?” 
The monster-spirit rushed up to the cliff, only to find a Celestial Worthy reciting a spell and shouting, “Child Primal Sage, I’m here!” The monster recognised his master, and he dared not struggle at all. 
Falling salute on all fours, he could only respect repeatedly. From one side the lion page dashed out and, seizing his hair on the neck with one hand, rained blows on his head with the other. “You 
beast!” he scolded him. “Why did you run away and make me suffer?” 
The lion dared neither move nor utter a word. Only when his fist grew tired did the lion page stop punching and put the brocade saddle on. The Celestial Worthy mounted him, gave the order to leave, 
and the lion rode the coloured clouds to return to the Wondrous-Cliff Palace. 
After giving thanks toward the sky, the Great Sage entered the cave. He untied the Jade-Flower prince first, then Tripitaka Tang, and finally, 8 Rules, Sand-monk, and the three princes. Together they 
looted the cave’s valuables before stepping outside. 8 Rules piled up dried wood front and back and started a blaze. The entire Nine-Bends Curved Cave was reduced to a charred and gutted kiln! 
Then the Great Sage dismissed the other deities, though he ordered the local spirit to remain there and guard the region. 8 Rules and Sand-monk were told to exercise their magic and carry the princes 
back to the prefectural city on their backs while Pilgrim himself took hold of the Tang Monk by the hands to transport him. In a short while, when the sky darkened, they all arrived at the capital and 
were met by the queen, the palace ladies, and various officials. Evening maigre was served at once, and they all sat down to enjoy the fare. The elder and his disciples again rested in the Gauze-Drying 
Pavilion while the prince retired to the palace. They all had a peaceful night. 
The next day the prince ordered another huge vegetarian banquet, for which all the officials of the palace, high and low, gave thanks. Pilgrim also asked the butchers to slaughter the six lions and skin 
them, as they had done to the yellow lion. Their meat was to be prepared for the people’s enjoyment. Delighted by this suggestion, the prince at once gave this command: the meat of one lion was to 
be saved for the residents of the palace, and that of another would be given to the Administrator of a Princely Establishment and other district officials. The rest of the five lions would be cut into small 
pieces, about two to three ounces each, and distributed by palace guards to the civilian and military populace in and out of the city, so that they might have a taste of lion meat to calm their fears. All 
the households thus acknowledged the gift with gratitude. 
In the meantime, the ironsmiths had finished forging the three weapons. As they respected to Pilgrim, they said, “Holy Dad, our work is done.” 
“What's the weight of each of the weapons?” asked Pilgrim. 
“The golden-hooped rod weighs a thousand pounds,” replied one of the ironsmiths. “The nine-pronged rake and the fiend-routing staff both weigh eight hundred pounds.” 
“All right,” said Pilgrim and he asked the three princes to come out and pick up their weapons. 
“Dad Prince,” said the three princes to the old prince, “today the weapons are perfected.” 
“Because of them,” said the old prince, “my sons and | almost lost our lives.” 
“It was fortunate that the divine master did exercise his magic to have us rescued,” said the young princes, “and to have the monstrous deviates dispersed. With all evil consequences removed, we 
may truly expect a peaceful world of calm seas and clear rivers.” At once the old prince rewarded the ironsmiths; then dad and sons went to the Gauze-Drying Pavilion to thank the masters. 
In order that their journey would not be delayed, Tripitaka urged Pilgrim and his companions to hasten in giving lessons in martial arts to the princes. Right in the palace courtyard, therefore, each of 
the brothers wielded his weapon and began instructing the princes one by one. In a few days those three princes became thoroughly familiar with their drills and exercises. All the methods of offence 
and defence, fast and slow, indeed all seventy-two styles of movement that belonged to each weapon were mastered. The three princes, after all, were most determined to learn, and, moreover, the 
Great Sage Sun had endowed them with divine strength. For this reason they could now raise and move a thousand-pound rod or an eight-hundred-pound muckrake. Compared with the martial arts 
they formerly practiced by themselves, this was something else indeed! A testimonial poem says: 
Good luck for them has 3 teachers convened. Why'd martial arts bestir a lion fiend? 
The empire’s safe when perverts are wiped out; they yield to 1 Body and pariahs® rout. 
9’ fits the principle of primal yang; from all perfection the Dao truly sprang. 
A mind informed these teachings ever release, grant Jade-Flower lasting joy, and peace. 
Once more the princes gave a huge banquet to thank their teachers for the instruction. A large platter of silver and gold was also presented as token of their gratitude. “Take it away! Quickly!” said 
Pilgrim, laughing. “We're people who have left home. What do we need it for?” 
8 Rules sitting to one side, said, “We really can’t take the gold and silver. But this robe of mine’s been torn almost to shreds by those lion-spirits. If you’d provide us with a change of clothing, it’d be 
received as a token of your great love for us.” 
The princes at once asked the tailors, “Take several bales of blue, red, brown silk following the styles, and colours of what the priests were wearing make 3 suits of clothing.” The 3 pilgrims received 
their gifts gladly and put on their new cassocks of silk before packing to leave. At this time there was not a single person in and out of the city who did not address them as incarnate Arhats or living 
gods. All the streets were filled with the sounds of drums and poems and clogged with the colours of banners and pennants. Truly outside each household the incense fires burned; before each door 
colourful lantems turned. Only after escorting the pilgrims a long distance would the people permit the 4 of them to resume their journey toward the West. Their departure signalled their escape from 
the various lions and their devotion to attaining the right fruit. Truly without a worry they'd reach God's realm and with hearts unfeigned, ascend Thunderclap. 


107 
At Gold-Level Prefecture they watch lanterns on the 15t night; in Mysterious Flower Cave the Tang Monk makes a deposition 
How'd 1 strive in the practice of Chan? Cut off quickly the wily horse and ape. 
5 colours grow when they are firmly bound; a moment's stop will land you on 3 Ways." 
If the sovereign elixir's caused to leak, jade nature dries up for such sloth and slack. 
Joy, wrath, care, and thought must be swept clean: wondrous mystery is gained like nothing seen.2 
We're just telling you about the Tang Monk and his 3 disciples who left the Jade-Flower City and proceeded along a path safe and sound. In truth the region befitted the name of Ultimate Bliss. After 
five or six days, they again caught sight of a city. “What sort of a place is this again?” the Tang Monk asked Pilgrim. 
“It's a city,” replied Pilgrim, “but the flagpole on the rampart has no pennant. We can't tell the name of this region. Let’s wait till we get near, and ask.” 
When they reached the suburb outside the eastern gate, they saw bustling teahouses and juice shops on both sides of the street, and flourishing rice markets and oil stores. On the streets there were 
a few vagabonds; when they saw the long horn of Bullseye 8 Rules, the gloomy countenance of Sand-monk, and the red-rimmed eyes of Pilgrim Sun, they had the travellers surrounded. Struggling to 
get a closer look at these strange visitors, they nonetheless did not have the courage to question them. The Tang Monk was so nervous that he was, as it were, clinging onto his own sweat, for he 
feared that his disciples might cause trouble. They walked past several more alley entrances but still they had not reached the city. It was then that they came upon the gate of a monastery with this 
inscription: Mercy Cloud Temple. “How about going in there to rest the horse,” said the Tang Monk, “and beg for a meal?” 
“Good! Good!” replied Pilgrim and the 4 of them all walked in. They saw noble treasure towers, soaring bejewelled thrones, a god alcove above the clouds, and priestly chambers within the moon. 
3Misty red swirls about tall pagodas; dark green trees enshroud clean praying-wheels. A true pure land, a false dragon palace, a Great Hero Hall encased in purple cloud. Along 2 porches endless 
visitors play; guests climb a heap that’s often open. Incense in the censers is ever ablaze; fragrant lamps nightly on the platforms glow. When the golden bell’s heard from the abbot hall, monks in 
service to God will Threads recite. As the 4 of them looked at the place, they caught sight of a priest walking out from 1 of the corridors. “Master where did you come from?” 
He saluted the Tang Monk. “This disciple happens to be someone who came from the Tang court of China,” replied the Tang Monk. 
At once the monk raised his hand to make a salute so startling the Tang Monk that he hurriedly tried to raise him with his hands. “Abbot,” he asked, “why do you honour me with such a grand ceremony?” 
Pressing his palms together in front of him, the monk said, “When those people inclined to virtue at our region study the Threads and recite the name of God, their ardent hope’s invariably to find disciple 
at your land of China. Just now when | beheld the bearing and clothing of the venerable master, | realised at once that only the cultivation of a previous life could provide you with such noble endowment. 
It’s fitting therefore for me to raise my hand to salute you.” 
“I'm terribly embarrassed!” said the Tang Monk with a smile. “This disciple is but a mendicant. What endowment could he claim? The abbot here is able to enjoy a quiet and comfortable existence. 
That's true blessing!” 
The monk thereupon led the Tang Monk to the main hall to worship the images of God. Only after that did the Tang Monk summon his disciples to enter. Pilgrim and his two companions had been 
standing with their faces turned away to watch the horse and luggage since their master had begun conversing with the priest. The priest thus did not pay them much attention. Not until they heard 
their master calling, “Disciples!” did they turn around. When the priest saw them, he was so aghast that he cried, “O Holy Dad! Why is it that your noble disciples are so ugly?” 
“Though they may be ugly,” replied the Tang Monk, “they do possess considerable magic power. Throughout our journey I’ve been quite dependent on their protection.” 
As they chatted, several more priests walked out to salute them. The one who appeared previously said to the ones who just arrived, “This master is a person who came from the Great Tang of China. 
These three are his noble disciples.” Both pleased and alarmed, the monks said, “Master, why did you come here from your great nation of China?” 
“By the sage decree of our Tang emperor,” declared the Tang Monk, “I’m seeking scriptures from a god at Spirit Mountain. Passing through your treasure region, I've come especially to your superior 
temple, merely to inquire about the place and to beg for a meal. Thereafter we'll leave.” 


Each one of those monks was delighted. They invited the pilgrims into the abbot’s quarters where there were several more priests conducting business with some donors of a vegetarian feast. One of 
those monks who walked in first cried, “All of you come and look at people from China. Now we know there are both handsome people and ugly people in China. The handsome is too handsome to be 
sketched or painted but the ugly ones are exceedingly bizarre.” 
Many of those monks and feast donors came to greet them. They then took their seats, and, after tea, the Tang Monk asked, “What is the name of your honoured region?” 
“Our is the outer prefecture of the Kingdom of India,” replied one of the monks, “the Gold-Level Prefecture.” 
“How far is it from your honoured prefecture to the Spirit Mountain?” asked the Tang Monk. 
“It is about two thousand miles from here to the capital,” said the monk, “and this is a journey we ourselves have taken before. But we’ve never gone westward to the Spirit Mountain, and, not knowing 
the distance, we dare not offer you a fraudulent reply.” The Tang Monk thanked him. 
In a little while, they brought out a vegetarian meal, after which, the Tang Monk wanted to leave. He was however, detained by the donors and the monks who said to him, “Please feel free to stay for 
a couple of days, Venerable Master. Enjoy yourself till we've passed the Lantern Festival. Then you may go.” 
Somewhat taken aback, the Tang Monk said, “All this disciple knows on the road’s that there’re mountains and waters. What | fear most is running into fiends and demons. I’ve quite lost track of time. 
When is the fine Lantern Festival?” 
Smiling, 1 of the monks said, “The venerable master’s preoccupied with the worship of God and the realisation of Chan and that’s why you've no concept of time. Today happens to be the thirteenth of 
the first month. By night the people will be trying out the lanterns. The day after tomorrow’s the fifteenth proper. We don’t put away the lanterns until the eighteenth or nineteenth. The households of our 
region here’re quite active and fond of excitement. Moreover, our prefect holds the people in great affection. So lanterns and lights will be set up high all over the place and there'll be poems all night 
long. We've also a Golden-Lamp Bridge, a relic of antiquity but still a prosperous site. Let the venerable dads stay here for a few days. Our humble monastery can certainly take care of you.” 
The Tang Monk had no choice but to remain. That night a great salvo of drums and bells could be heard coming from the main hall of God when the faithful and the local residents arrived with their 
gifts and votive lanterns for God. The Tang Monk and his companions all left the abbot’s quarters to watch these lanterns before retiring. The next day temple priests brought in more food. When they 
had finished eating, they took a stroll together through the rear garden. A fine place indeed! The time is the first month; the season, a new spring. A fine, wooded garden of charms luxuriant. Rare 
blooms and plants of four seasons; rows upon rows of summits. “Before the steps lovely grasses stir; on old plum boughs fragrance rises. The red enters young peach blossoms; the green returns to 
fresh willows. Boast not of Gold-Valley’s> opulence speak not of Felloe-Spring’s® soft breezes. Here’s one flowing stream where wild ducks appear now and then; 1000 bamboos planted on which the 
writers make no end of verses. The peony, the tree-peony, the crape flower, the magnolia — their natures have just awakened. The camellia, the red plum, the jasmine, the most fragrant plant’ they first 
display their glamour. Though snow left on shady ledges retains its chill, distant trees with mist afloat are brushed with spring. See, too deer glancing at their pond-reflections and cranes listening to 
strings beneath the pines. A few buildings to the east and west where guests may come to stay; a few halls to the south, a few heaps to the north where monks in silence meditate. In the midst of 
flowers there are a couple of towers for cultivation, their double eaves curving high up; amid hills and streams are 3 or 4 demon-smelting rooms with neat tables and bright lattices. Truly a natural place 
of reclusion, there’s no need to look elsewhere for Peng and Ying. After enjoying the garden for a day, master and disciples also looked at the lanterns in the halls before going to watch the lantern 
shows. What they saw were comelian floral cities, glass mortal-caves, palaces of crystal and mum-of-pearl like layers of brocade and tiers of openwork carvings. As the star-bridge sways and the 
cosmos moves, see how a few flaming trees waver. Pipes and drums along the 6 streets, a bright moon atop 1000 doors, and scented breeze from all households. Here and there scorpionfish humps 
rear up; there are dragons leaving the ocean and phoenixes soaring. Admire both lamplight and moonlight — what harmonious blend! 
Those troops of satin and silk all enjoy the sounds of pipe and poem; atop both chariots, horses there is no end of flower, and jade-like faces, gallant knights, or lovely scenes. After Tripitaka and the 
monks had watched the lanterns in the monastery, they also took to the streets of the suburb by the east gate to see the sights. Not until the time of the second watch did they turn back to retire. The 
next day the Tang Monk said to the priests, “This disciple once made a vow® to sweep a pagoda whenever | came upon a pagoda. Since this day is the fine festival of the first full moon, let me request 
the abbot to open the pagoda for me to fulfil my vow.” The priests accordingly opened the door, as Sand-monk took out the cassock to attend to the Tang Monk. When they reached the first level, the 
elder put on the cassock to worship God and say prayers. Thereafter he swept out that level with a broom before taking off the cassock to hand back to Sand-monk. He then swept clean the second 
level and went through each one in that manner until he reached the very top. On each level of that pagoda there were images of God and open windows. When one level was swept clean, the Tang 
Monk and his companions would remain a while to enjoy and commend the scenery. By the time the work was done, and they descended from the pagoda, it was already late, and lamps had to be lit. 
This was the night of the fifteenth, the first full moon. “Venerable Master,” said the priests, “we’ve been watching the lanterns with you these last two nights in our monastery and in the suburb. Tonight's 
the festival proper. How about going into the city with us to watch the lanterns there?” In delight the Tang Monk agreed. With the monks of the monastery, he and his 3 disciples all entered the city. 
Truly itis 15, a lovely night and feast; spring hues blend with the first full moon. Floral lights overhang busy shops as people recite the poems of peace. You see only bright lights in the 6 streets and 
3 marts when a mirror rises in mid-air. The moon seems like a silver dish the River-God pushed up; the lights look like brocade carpets woven by divine maidens. The lights in moonlight add 1 measure 
of light; the moon shines on the lights, enhancing their brilliance. There are countless iron chains, star-bridges to see, and endless lamp wicks and flaming torches to watch. The snowflake lantern and 
the plum-flower lantern seem to be chiselled from spring ice. The silk-screen lantern and the painted-screen lantern are constructed with 5 colours. The walnut lantern and the lily lantern hang high on 
the tower. The green-lion lantern and the white-elephant lantern frolic high by the awnings. The little-lamb lantern and the rabbit lantern sparkle beneath the eaves. The hawk lantern and the phoenix 
lanter are joined side by side. The tiger lantern and the horse lantern walk and run together. The divine-crane lantern and the white-deer lantern, these Longevity Star rides on. The goldfish lantern 
and the long-whale lantern, these Li Bo will siton. The scorpionfish-hump lantern-a congregation of mortals. A revolving-horse lantern — where generals do battle. 1000 households of glittering towers; 
many miles of a world of cloud and smoke. Over there clip-petty-clop come the jade saddles flying; over here the rumbling wheels of scented chariots pass by. Look at those in red-trimmed towers: 
leaning on the rails behind the screens shoulder to shoulder pairs and pairs of beauties eager for pleasure. Or those by the bridge over green waters: noisily cavorting all bundled in silk besotted and 
soused in loud guffaws 2 by 2 the tourists play in happy garments. Flutes and drums resound in the whole city; pipes and poems rend the air throughout the night. Also a testimonial poem says: 

From fields of brocade comes the lotus poem to this peaceful region flocks a great throng. 

With bright lights and moon on this 15 eve, timely rain and wind the year will receive. 

Since this was precisely the time the nocturnal curfew was to be lifted, countless people mingled and milled about the place. Some were dancing; some were walking on stilts; there were people 
disguised as ghosts and others riding on elephants — a bunch here and a cluster there. You’d hardly watch them all. When the Tang Monk and the other priests finally made their way to the Golden- 
Lamp Bridge, they came upon three lamps with bases the size of cisterns. The coverings on top were actually two artificial towered edifices knit in the most elegant and delicate fashion with fine gold 
threads. Suspended inside the edifices were thin pieces of glass. The light of these lamps could rival the moon’s while their oil emitted powerful aromas. The Tang Monk turned to ask the priests, “What 
sort of oil do these lamps use? Why does it have such a powerful, strange fragrance?” 
“I'd tell you, Venerable Master,” replied one of the priests, “about the district behind our prefecture that is called Compassionate-Heaven. This district covers some two hundred and forty square miles. 
Supporting the annual land taxes of this district are two hundred and forty so-called oil families. Mind you, the other taxes of the district are manageable but the ones levied on these families are quite 
burdensome. Each household in fact must spend over two hundred taels of silver on the oil for these lamps that is no ordinary oil. It is a specially blended fragrant oil, and each tael is worth two taels 
of silver. Each catty of oil thus would cost thirty-six taels of silver. The cistern of each of those three lamps holds up to five hundred catties, so three lamps would require fifteen hundred catties of oil. 
The fuel itself therefore would cost forty-eight thousand taels of silver. Other miscellaneous expenses would push the total sum to over fifty thousand. The lamps however, can only last three nights.” 
“How'd you burn up so much oil in just three nights?” asked Pilgrim. 
The priest answered, “There are forty-nine large wicks in each of the cisterns. They are made of wick-straw tied together and wrapped in fine cotton. Each wick is actually about as thick as a chicken 
egg but they can last only through this night. After Dad God has revealed himself, the oil will have disappeared by tomorrow evening and the lamps will go dim.” 
“It must be,” giggled 8 Rules, from the side, “that Dad God takes away even the oil!” 
“Exactly!” replied the priest. “This has been the belief handed down from antiquity by the people of the entire city. Because the oil dries up, people all say that the Religious Patriarch himself has put 
away the lamps, and that ensures a rich harvest of the five grains. If however, there is a year when the oil does not dry up, then there will be droughts or poor harvests or wind and rain out of season. 
That is the reason why all the families feel compelled to make these sacrifices.” 
As they spoke, the howl of wind could suddenly be heard up in the sky, so terrifying the lamp spectators that they all scattered. The priests, too, found it difficult to stand on their feet. “Venerable Master,” 
they said, “let's go back. The wind has arrived. It must be Dad God’s auspicious descent, coming here to watch the lamps.” 
“How do you know it's God coming to watch the lamps?” asked the Tang Monk. 
“It's like this every year,” replied one of the monks. “Hardly past the hour of the third watch, the wind arrived. Knowing that it’s the auspicious descent of the various Gods, people all get out of the way.” 
“This disciple,” said the Tang Monk, “happens to be a person who thinks of God who recites the name of God, and who worships God. If there are indeed Gods making their descent on this fine 
occasion, I'll certainly pay them homage. Even a small gesture is desirable.” 
The priests begged in vain for him to leave. In a little while, three figures of God indeed appeared in the wind, coming toward the lamps. The Tang Monk was so astonished that he rushed up to the top 
of the bridge and raised his hand to salute them. Hurrying forward to try to pull him up, Pilgrim shouted, “Master, these aren’t good people! They've to be monstrous deviates!” Hardly had he finished 
speaking than the lamp light suddenly grew dim. With a loud whoosh, they scooped up the Tang Monk and left astride the wind. Alas! Of which mountain or cave are these real fiends, false gods who 
for years have watched the gold lamps is unknown. So terrified were 8 Rules and Sand-monk that they searched and hollered left and right. “Brothers!” Pilgrim cried. “No need to call for Master at this 
place. His extreme pleasure’s turned to grief and Master's been abducted by monster-spirits.” 
“Holy Dad!” said those few frightened monks. “How’d you tell that monster-spirits abducted him?” 
With a chuckle, Pilgrim said, “All of you’re a bunch of mortals. You've no perception all these years, for you’re deluded by those monstrous deviates. All you thought of were true Gods making their 
auspicious descent to enjoy these offerings of the lamps. Just now when the wind passed by, those apparitions of God were actually three monster-spirits. Unable to recognise them either, my master 
dashed to the top of the bridge and immediately saluted down. They managed to dim the lights, took away the oil with some vessels, and even abducted our master. | was a bit slow in getting up there, 
and that’s why the three of them could escape by changing into the wind.” 
“Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “what are we going to do, then?” 
“No need for hesitation,” replied Pilgrim. “The two of you go back to the temple with the rest of them to guard our horse and luggage. Let old monkey make use of this wind and track them down.” Dear 
Great Sage! Swiftly mounting the cloud somersault, he rose to mid-air and, catching a whiff of putrid odour from that wind, sped toward the northeast. He chased it till dawn and all at once the wind 
died down. Then he came upon a huge mountain that appeared most treacherous and truly rugged. Marvellous mountain! Canyons in layers and torrents tortuous. From sheer cliffs hang vines and 
creepers; on hollow heights stand cypress and pine. The cranes cackle in morning mist and geese call from the clouds of dawn. Tall and erect like halberds are the peaks; jagged and rough huge 
boulders pile up. The summit soars 10000 feet; the peak rises in 1000 turns. Conscious of spring, wild woods and flowers bloom; moved by the sights, nightjars and orioles recite. It may seem lofty and 
grand, it’s in truth a precipice that's bizarre, rugged, treacherous, and hard. Stop and enjoy it but no man’s in sight: heard are only tigers and leopards growl. Musk and white deer will wander as they 
please; jade hare and green wolves will come and go. A deep brook flows out to 1000 miles, its eddies gurgling as they strike the rocks. On the mountain ledge the Great Sage was searching for his 
way when he caught sight of four persons herding 3 goats down the western slope and shouting, “Begins Prosperity!” Blinking his fiery eyes with diamond pupils, the Great Sage stared more carefully 
and perceived that they were the 4 Sentinels of Year, Month, Day, and Hour approaching in disguises. Immediately whipping out his iron rod that attained the thickness of a rice bowl and a length of 
about 12 feet with 1 wave, the Great Sage leaped down from the ledge and shouted, “Where do you dirty sneaks think you’re going?” 
When the 4 Sentinels saw that he had penetrated their disguises, they were so terrified that they shooed away the goats and changed back into their true forms. Stepping to the side of the road to give 
their salutes, they said, “Great Sage, please forgive us!” 
“Because I've not asked for your services for a long time,” said Pilgrim, “you think Old monkey's become indulgent. Every one of you in fact’s turned slothful since you've not shown up once to present 
yourself to me. What do you've to say to that? Why aren't you all giving secret protection to my master? Where’re you off to?” 
“Your master’s backslid a little,” replied one of the Sentinels. “Because he’s been indulging in pleasures at the Mercy Cloud Temple of the Gold-Level Prefecture, his extreme prosperity’s produced 
negativity and the fullness of his happiness’s become grief. Now he’s been captured by some monstrous deviates but at least he has the Guardians of Monastery at his side to give him protection. We 
know that the Great Sage’s been giving chase all through the night. Fearing that the Great Sage might not know his way in this mountain forest, we've come especially to make it known to you.” 
“If you wanted to do that,” said Pilgrim, “why did you do it in such a secretive manner? Herding three goats and shouting this and that - what for?” 
The Sentinel said, “We brought along these three goats in order to symbolize the saying, ‘With three yang begins prosperity.’? That symbol should break up and dispel your master’s misfortune.” 


Pilgrim was angrily threatening to beat them but when he heard their intention, his anger turned to delight, and he decided to spare them. Putting away his rod, he said, “Is this the mountain where the 
monster-spirit lives?” 

“Indeed, it is,” replied the Sentinel. “This is the Green Dragon Mountain, in which there is a Mysterious Flower Cave. Inside the cave are three monster-spirits: the eldest is named Great King Cold- 
Deterrent; the second, Great King Heat-Deterrent; and the third, Great King Dust-Deterrent. They have lived here for a millennium. Since their youth they have been fond of eating that specially blended 
fragrant oil. When they became spirits in years past, they came here disguised as the images of God to dupe the officials and people of the Gold-Level Prefecture into setting up these golden lamps 
and using that specially blended fragrant oil as fuel. By mid-month of the first month every year, they would assume the forms of God to collect oil. When they saw your master this year, they recognised 
that he had the body of a sage monk and they abducted him into their cave. In no time they will want to cut off your master’s flesh and sauté it with that fragrant oil for food. You must work quickly to 
rescue him.” 

On hearing this, Pilgrim dismissed the Four Sentinels and went past the mountain ledge to search for the cave. He had not gone more than a few miles when he came upon a huge boulder, beneath 
which a stone house with two was half-closed stone doors. By the side of the door was a stone tablet with these six words: Green Dragon Mountain, Mysterious Flower Cave. Not daring to walk straight 
in, Pilgrim stood still and called out, “Monstrous fiend, send my master out quickly!” 

With a loud creak the doors were flung open and out ran several bull-headed spirits. Rather glumly and stupidly, they asked, “Who are you that you dare make all these noises here?” 

“I'm the senior disciple of the sage monk, Tripitaka Tang,” replied Pilgrim, “who was sent by the Great Tang in the Land of the East to seek scriptures. We passed through the Gold-Level Prefecture, 
and while we’re watching the lanterns, my master was kidnapped by your household’s demon chieftains. Return him early, and I'll spare your lives! If you don’t, I'll overturn your den and reduce you 
spirits to pus and blood!” 

On hearing this, those little monsters hurried inside to say, “Great Kings, disaster! Disaster!” The three old monsters had brought the Tang Monk deep into the cave where without any further interrogation 
they were ordering their subordinates to have him stripped and scrubbed clean by water pumped from the well. They were making plans, too, to cut him or dice him so that his flesh could be sautéed 
for food with that specially blended fragrant oil. When they suddenly heard this announcement of disaster, Number One was astonished enough to ask why. 

“In front of our main door,” replied one of the little monsters, “there is a monk with a hairy face and a thunder-god beak. He claims that our Great Kings have abducted his master to this place and 
demands that he be sent out at once. Then he'll spare our lives. But if we don’t do that, he will overturn our den and reduce us all to pus and blood.” 

All alarmed by what they heard, the older monsters said, “We just caught this fellow, and we've not yet had a chance to question him about his name or where he came from. Little ones, put his clothes 
back on him and bring him over here for us to interrogate him. Who is he anyway, and where does he come from?” 

The monsters rushed forward and untied the Tang Monk. After they had dressed him, they pushed him before the seats of the old monsters. Trembling all over, the Tang Monk knelt down and could 
only cry, “Great Kings, spare me! Please spare me!” 

“Where did you come from, monk?” asked the three monster-spirits in unison. “When you saw the forms of God, why did you not step aside? Why did you impede our cloudy path?” 

As he respected, the Tang Monk said, “This humble cleric is someone sent by the Throne of the Great Tang in the Land of the East, someone on his way to seek scriptures from the Religious Patriarch 
at the Great Thunderclap Monastery in the Kingdom of India. Because | went to the Mercy Cloud Temple at the Gold-Level Prefecture to beg for a meal, | was asked by the priests of that temple to stay 
through the Lantern Festival and enjoy the lights. When the Great Kings revealed themselves in the forms of God on the Golden-Lamp Bridge, this humble cleric who has only fleshly eyes and mortal 
frame, nonetheless has the desire to worship God whenever he beholds his image. That is the reason why | impeded your cloudy path.” 

“It is a long way from your Land of the East to this place,” said those monster-spirits. “How many people are there altogether in your entourage? Tell us quickly, and we'll spare your life.” 

“My secular name is Chen Xuanzang,” replied the Tang Monk, “and I’ve been raised a monk in the Gold Mountain Monastery since my youth. Later | was appointed a monk official by the Tang emperor 
at the Temple of Great Blessing. On account of Prime Minister Wei Zheng’s execution of an old dragon of the Jing River in his dream, the Tang emperor made a tour of Hades and then retumed to life. 
To provide redemption for the lost souls of darkness, he convened the Grand Mass of Land and Water and graciously selected me as the chief priest in charge of the ceremony and the exposition of 
scriptures. It was at that time that the Nun Guanshiyin revealed herself to enlighten this humble cleric, announcing to us that there were three canons of true scriptures at the Great Thunderclap 
Monastery in the Western Heaven. These scriptures, she said, could provide deliverance for the deceased and enable them to ascend to Heaven. The Tang emperor therefore sent this humble cleric 
to fetch the scriptures. He bestowed on me the style, Tripitaka, and the surname of Tang. That's why people all address me as Tripitaka Tang. I’ve three disciples. The first one’s surname is Sun, and 
his names are Wukong and Pilgrim. He is actually the converted Great Sage Equal to Heaven.” 

Greatly startled by the last name they heard, the monsters said, “Is this Great Sage Equal to Heaven, the person who caused great disturbance in the Celestial Palace five centuries ago?” 

“Indeed, he is,” said the Tang Monk. “My second disciple has the surname of Bullseye, and his given names are Aware of Ability and 8 Rules. He is the disciple of the Marshal of Heavenly Reeds. My 
third disciple has the surname of Sha, and his given names are Awakened to Purity and Monk. He is the Curtain-Raising General who has descended to Earth.” 

When they heard this, all three of those monster-kings were alarmed. “It's a good thing we've not eaten him yet,” they said. “Little ones, let's chain the Tang Monk in the rear. Let's wait till we capture 
his three disciples so that we can eat them together.” Then they called up a herd of spirits, all mountain buffaloes, water buffaloes, and yellow buffaloes. Each grasping a weapon, they walked out of 
the front door where with a trumpet signal, they waved their banners and rolled the drums. 

In full battle dress, the 3 monsters went out the door also and cried, “What person is bold enough to shout and yell in front of our door?” 

Half concealed upon the boulder, Pilgrim stared at them. The monster-spirits all had coloured faces, round eyes, 2 rugged horns, 4 ears‘? most pointed, and sparkling intelligence; a body full of patterns 
like a coloured painting or a large piece of brocade with floral designs. The 1s 1 wears on his head a cap of warm fox fur; his face is steamy and covered with hair. The 24 1 has draped on himself thin 
gauze flaming red, his 4 patterned hooves resemble chunks of jade. The 3" 1 has a mighty roar like a thunderclap, his jutting teeth seem sharper than silver picks. Each 1 bold and fierce, they hold 3 
kinds of arms: 1 uses a battle-axe and a huge cutlass. But the 3° 1: Look again! 

Across his shoulders rests a knotty cane. He saw moreover many monster-spirits: tall, short, fat, thin, old, young, they were all bull-heads or demonic fiends holding spears, and clubs. There were 3 
huge banners on which these titles were clearly inscribed: Great King Cold-Deterrent, Great King Heat-Deterrent, and Great King Dust-Deterrent. After he had stared for a while, Pilgrim could wait no 
longer. He went forward and shouted: “You lawless thieves and fiends! Do you recognise old monkey?” 

“So you're the Sun Wukong who disturbed Heaven!” snapped 1 of the monsters. “Truly though your face’s preceded by your fame, god who sees you'd die with shame! You're nothing but a puny ape!” 
“You oil-stealing thieves!” scolded Pilgrim, enraged. “You greasy-mouthed fiends! Stop babbling! Return my master instantly!” He rushed forward and struck out with his iron rod. Those 3 old monsters 
met him swiftly with 3 kinds of weapon. That’s some battle in the fold of the mountain! Battle-axe, cutlass, and a knotty cane the Monkey King dares oppose with 1 rod. The fiends - Cold, Heat, and 
Dust-Deterrent - now recognise the Great Sage Equal to Heaven’s name. The rod rises to frighten gods and ghosts; the axe and cutlass madly fly and slash. What an image of true void magically fused 
that resists three monstrous, false-god-forms! Those 3 felons of this year who wet their noses with stolen oil are eager to seize the priest commissioned by a king. This 1 for his master fears not 
mountains or distance; those 3 for their mouths’ sake want annual offerings. Bing-bang: only axe and cutlass are heard. Pi-po: now only the rod makes the sounds. Charging and bumping, three go 
against 1; each parries and blocks to display his might. From morning they fight till the time of night. Who knows who will suffer and who'll win? 

With that single rod of his Pilgrim Sun fought the 3 demons for some 150 rounds but no decision had been reached when the sky began to darken. After a rather feeble blow of his knotty cane, the 
Great King Dust-Deterrent leaped across the battle line to wave his banner. Immediately that band of bull-headed fiends surged forward and had Pilgrim surrounded in the middle. All wielding weapons, 
they madly attacked him. Seeing that the tide was turning against him, Pilgrim mounted the cloud somersault and fled in defeat. Those monsters did not pursue him; calling back their subordinates, 
they prepared dinner instead and ate it. A little monster was ordered to give a bow/ful to the Tang Monk who would not be prepared for cooking until Pilgrim was captured also. Because he had always 
kept a vegetarian diet and because he was racked by sorrow, the master did not even allow the food to touch his lips weeping. Pilgrim mounted the clouds to return to the Mercy Cloud Temple. 
“Brothers!” he called out. 

8 Rules and Sand-monk were waiting for him. When they heard the call they came out together to meet him, saying, “Elder Brother, why did you go for a whole day before you came back? What actually 
happened to Master?” 

“| followed the scent of the wind to give chase last night,” replied Pilgrim with a smile, “and by morning, | arrived at a mountain. The wind vanished but luckily the Four Sentinels reported to me that the 
mountain was called the Green Dragon Mountain. In the mountain was a cave with the name of Mysterious Flower with three monster-spirits living inside it. They had the names of Great King Cold- 
Deterrent, Great King Heat-Deterrent, and Great King Dust-Deterrent. They had been stealing oil from this place for years, falsely assuming the form of God to deceive the officials and people of the 
Gold-Level Prefecture. This year they happened to bump into us, and, not knowing any better, went so far as to abduct Master. After old monkey had acquired this information, | ordered the Sentinels 
to give secret protection to Master while | provoked battle before the door. Those three fiends came out together, and they all seemed like bull-headed demons. One used a battle-axe, one a huge 
cutlass, and the third a cane. Behind them came a whole den of bull-headed demons, waving their banners and rolling their drums. Old monkey battled the three chieftains for an entire day, and we 
fought to a draw. Then one of the monster-kings waved his banner, and the little monsters all came at me. When | saw that it was getting late, | feared that I’d not prevail and | somersaulted back here.” 
“It must be demon kings from the Capital of Darkness causing trouble,” said 8 Rules. 

“What led you to make such a guess?” asked Sand-monk. 

Chuckling, 8 Rules said, “Elder Brother told us that these were all bull-headed demons. That's how | know.” 

“No! No!” said Pilgrim. “As old monkey sees the matter, they are spirits of three rhinoceroses.” 

“If they are,” said 8 Rules, “let's capture them and saw off their horns. They are worth quite a few taels of silver!” 

As they were speaking, the monks of the temple came to ask whether Dad Sun would like dinner. “If it's convenient, I'll have some,” replied Pilgrim. “If not, | can pass.” 

“Dad Sun has fought for an entire day,” said a priest. “Aren’t you hungry?” 

“Just a day or so, how could | be hungry?” said Pilgrim, chuckling. “Old monkey once had no taste of food or drink for five centuries!” Those priests however, thought he was only joking and presently 
they brought him food. After he had eaten, Pilgrim said, “Let's get ready to retire. Tomorrow we can all go together to do battle. When we capture the monster-kings, we can rescue Master.” 

“What are you saying, Elder Brother?” asked Sand-monk. “As the proverb has it, ‘A pause makes one smarter!’ If that monster-spirit could not sleep tonight and brought harm to Master, what would we 
do then? | think it’s better for us to try to rescue Master now, and catch them off their guard. Further delay may prove to be a mistake.” 

When he heard that, 8 Rules became more spirited. “Brother Sand’s quite right!” he said. “We'd take advantage of this moonlight to go subdue the demons.” 

Pilgrim agreed and gave this instruction to the temple priests: “Guard our luggage and our horse. Wait till we capture the monster-spirits and bring them back here. We'll prove to the magistrate of this 
prefecture that they're specious Gods. The levy of oil can then be eliminated to bring relief to all the common folk of the region. Won't that be nice?” The priests obeyed. The 3 pilgrims at once mounted 
their auspicious clouds to leave the city. Truly shiftless and slothful, Chan nature’s confused; fated for dangers, the mind of Dao’s obscured. 


108 

3 priests fight fiercely at Green Dragon Mountain; 4 Stars help to capture rhinoceros fiends 
The Great Sage Sun trod the wind and mounted the clouds with his 2 brothers and headed toward the northeast. Soon they arrived at the entrance to the Mysterious Flower Cave in the Green Dragon 
Mountain. As soon as they had dropped down from the clouds, 8 Rules wanted to tear down the doors with his rake. “Wait a moment!” said Pilgrim. “Let me go in and find out whether Master is dead 
or alive. Then we can do battle with them.” 
“These doors are tightly shut,” said Sand-monk. “How can you get in?” 
“With my magic power, of course,” replied Pilgrim. 
Dear Great Sage! Putting away his rod, he made the magic sign with his fingers and recited a spell, crying, “Change!” 
At once he changed into a little firefly, truly quick and agile. Look at him! Wings stretched he soars like a comet. Grasses decayed become fireflies. ‘One should not take lightly such magic change: his 
is a nature that endures. Flying near the stone door to look through the draft-like crack on one side with one leap he reaches the quiet yard to spy on the demons’ conduct. 2He flew inside and 
immediately found several buffalo sprawling all over the place. Snoring thunderously, they were all fast asleep. Even when he reached the centre hall, he did not come across any activity. The doors 
on all sides were closed, and he had no idea where the three monster-spirits were sleeping. Passing through the hall, he headed for the rear, his tail glowing, and he heard the sound of weeping. There 
he discovered the Tang Monk who had been chained to a pillar in a back room. As Pilgrim flew quietly up to him, he heard his master sob out: “Since leaving Chang’an over a decade ago, mountains 
and streams I’ve passed in bitter woe. Happy to find one gala in the West, to reach at Gold-Level the Lantern-fest, | can’t discern the lamps’ false God-forms, for tribulations are my poor life’s norms. If 
my good pupils come in strong pursuit, let their heroic powers soon bear fruit!” 


On hearing this, Pilgrim was filled with delight and at once spread his wings to fly in front of his master. “Ah!” said the Tang Monk, wiping away his tears. “The West's truly different! This is only the first 
month, a time when most insects are just beginning to stir. How can there be fireflies already?” 

Unable to contain himself, Pilgrim called out, “Master, I'm here!” 

“Wukong,” said the Tang Monk, delighted, “I was just saying, how can there be fireflies in the first month? So, it's you!” 

“O Master!” said Pilgrim as he changed back to his original form. “Because you’d not distinguish the true from the specious, you've caused such delay in your journey and wasted so much effort. | 
shouted at you repeatedly, trying to tell you that these were not good people but you're already giving salutes. Those fiends were allowed to dim the lamps, steal the specially blended fragrant oil, and 
even kidnap you. | instructed 8 Rules and Sand-monk to remain in the monastery to guard our belongings. | myself followed the scent of the wind here. | didn’t know, of course, the name of this region 
but luckily the Sentinels came to report that this was the Mysterious Flower Cave of the Green Dragon Mountain. Yesterday | fought with those fiends until nightfall and then went back to tell my younger 
brothers what had happened. We didn’t sleep but we all came here instead. Fearing that it's not easy to do battle deep in the night, and not knowing either how Master is faring, | used transformation 
to get in here to do a bit of detection.” 

Highly pleased, the Tang Monk said, “So, 8 Rules and Sand-monk are outside?” 

“Yes, they are,” replied Pilgrim. “Just now old monkey saw that all the monster-spirits had fallen asleep. Let me open the lock, bash down the door, and lead you out.” The Tang Monk nodded his head 
to thank him. 

Using his lock-opening magic, Pilgrim brushed the instrument with his hand, and the lock snapped open at once by itself. As he led his master out, he suddenly heard one of the monster-kings calling 
out from one of the chambers by the side of the main hall, “Little ones, shut the doors tightly, and be careful with the candles and torches. How is it that there is no patrol or watch announcement? Why 
aren't the rattles sounded?” 

That bunch of little fiends had been fighting strenuously all day and had therefore all fallen asleep. They were awakened only by these words of the old monster. When the rattle sounded, some of them 
picked up their weapons, struck up a gong, and headed for the rear. They ran smack into both master and disciple. 

“My good monk!” shouted the little monsters in unison. “You may have twisted open the lock but where do you think you’re going?” 

Without permitting further explanation, Pilgrim whipped out his rod that with one sweep, attained the thickness of a rice bowl. He struck, and immediately slew two of them with one blow. The rest of 
the little monsters abandoned their weapons and dashed back to the centre hall. Hammering on the door of the bedroom, they shouted: “Great Kings! It’s bad! It's bad! The hairy-faced monk has killed 
right in our house!” 

Scrambling to their feet when they heard this, the three fiends cried, “Seize him! Seize him!” So terrified was the Tang Monk that his arms and legs turned numb. 

Unable to care for his master any longer, Pilgrim wielded his rod and charged ahead. Those little monsters were in no way able to block him or stop him; he struck down a few here, pushed over several 
there, and escaped after smashing through several doors. “Brothers where are you?” he cried as he emerged. 

With upraised rake and staff, 8 Rules and Sand-monk were waiting. “Elder Brother,” they said, “how are things?” Thereupon Pilgrim gave a thorough account of what had taken place after he had 
entered the cave through transformation — how he had freed his master and begun to slip out when the monsters discovered them, and how he had to leave his master behind and fight his way out. 
We'll leave them for the moment. 

The monster-kings, having captured again the Tang Monk, had him chained as before. Gripping their cutlass and axe with torches ablaze, they asked, “How did you open the lock? How did that monkey 
get in here? Confess at once, and we'll spare your life! If you don’t, we'll carve you in two!” 

Trembling all over, the Tang Monk fell on his knees and said, “Dad Great Kings, my disciple Sun Wukong knows seventy-two ways of transformation. Just now he changed into a little firefly and flew in 
here to try to rescue me. We didn’t expect to wake up the Great Kings or to run into the little Great Kings. Not knowing any better, my disciple wounded two of them. When they all shouted with upraised 
weapons and lighted torches, he abandoned me and ran out.” 

Laughing uproariously, the three monster-kings said, “It's a good thing we woke up! We've not let you escape!” They ordered their little ones to shut the doors tightly front and back, and they were to 
do this in complete silence. 

“If they shut the doors tightly without making a noise,” said Sand-monk, “they might secretly be plotting against our master. We'd get moving!” 

“You're right,” said Pilgrim. “Let’s knock down the door quickly!” Idiot at once sought to display his magic powers. Raising his rake, he delivered a blow with all his strength and smashed the stone doors 
to pieces. “You oil-stealing fiends!” he cried in a loud voice. “Send out my master instantly!” 

Those little monsters were so terrified that they rolled back inside to report, “Great Kings, it’s bad! It’s bad! Our front doors have been smashed by those priests.” 

Greatly annoyed, those 3 monster-kings said, “These fellows are impudent indeed!” 

They immediately sent for their armour and, grasping their weapons, led the little monsters out the door to battle. It was then about the hour of the third watch, and a radiant moon in the sky made it 
almost bright as day. Once outside, they wielded their weapons without exchanging one word. On this side, Pilgrim went for the battle-axe, 8 Rules opposed the huge cutlass, and Sand-monk met the 
large cane. This was a magnificent battle! 3 Religious priests with rod, staff, and rake, and 3 monstrous demons with added spunk. From battle-axe, cutlass, and knotty cane 1 hears only the sound of 
wind and dust. The first few rounds stir up such grievous fog; coloured mists soar and scatter thereafter. Around the body the rake’s movements churn; still more praise-worthy’s the brave iron rod. A 
world’s rarity is the treasure staff to which the fiends are too stubborn to yield. The blade of the axe is both bright and sharp; the cane is knotty and covered with dots. The cutlass shimmers like a single- 
leaf door, opposed no less by priestly magic might. On this side they strike fiercely for their master’s life; on that side they claw at faces to keep the Tang Monk. The axe and the rod both strive hard to 
win; the rake and the cutlass both clash and meet. The knotty cane and the fiend-routing staff go back and forth to display their power. 3 priests and 3 fiends fought for a long time and neither side 
proved to be the stronger. Then that Great King Cold-Deterrent shouted, “Little ones, come up here!” The various spirits rushed up with their weapons, and almost immediately 8 Rules tripped and fell 
to the ground. Tugging and pulling, several water-buffalo spirits hauled him inside the cave and tied him up. When Sand-monk saw that they had lost 8 Rules to a bellowing herd of bulls, he struck 
weakly at the Great King Dust-Deterrent and then turned to flee. He was however, thrown face first to the ground by the spirits swarming over him. Struggling in vain to get up, he too was taken captive 
and tied up. Pilgrim knew then that it would be difficult for him to continue fighting by himself; mounting the cloud somersault, he managed to escape. 

At the sight of 8 Rules and Sand-monk who were brought before him, the eyes of the Tang Monk brimmed with tears. “What a pity,” he said, “that you two have also fallen into the clutches of these 
vicious hands! Where’s Wukong?” 

“When Elder Brother saw that we’re captured,” replied Sand-monk, “he fled.” 

“If he escaped,” said the Tang Monk, “he most certainly went somewhere to seek help. But | wonder when we might go free.” 

Master and disciples were overcome by sadness. Pilgrim mounted his cloud somersault to return to the Mercy Cloud Temple. As the priests there met him, they asked, “Have you rescued Dad Tang?” 
“It's hard to do that!” said Pilgrim. “Very hard indeed! Those monster-spirits had vast magic powers. We three brothers fought those three for a long time. Then they summoned the little monsters to 
capture 8 Rules first and seize Sand-monk afterward. Old monkey's lucky enough to escape.” 

Greatly frightened, the priests said, “If someone like you, Holy Dad who could mount the clouds and ride the fog, still could not arrest them, the old master will certainly be harmed.” 

“Not necessarily!” replied Pilgrim. “My master himself enjoys the secret protection of the Guardians of Monastery, the Guardians of Five Quarters, and the Six Gods of Darkness and Light. Then, too, 
he once tasted the Grass of the Reverted Cinnabar. | doubt that his life will be harmed. It’s just that the monster-spirits are quite able that makes it necessary for old monkey to seek help in Heaven. 
You all must take good care to guard the horse and the luggage.” 

Even more intimidated, the priests said, “Can Holy Dad go up to Heaven?” 

With a chuckle, Pilgrim said, “The Celestial Palace used to be my homestead, in those years when | was the Great Sage Equal to Heaven. Because | disrupted the Festival of Mortal Peaches, | was 
subjugated by our God. I’d no choice but to escort the Tang Monk in his quest for scriptures, using my merit to atone for my sins. Throughout the journey, I’ve been assisting the right by dispelling the 
deviates. It is my master’s lot however, that he should suffer this ordeal, something none of you know anything about.” These words moved the priests to respect and worship. Stepping out, Pilgrim 
gave a loud whistle and at once vanished. 

Marvellous Great Sage! He soon arrived at the West Heaven Gate where he ran into the Gold Star Venus conversing with the Deity-King Viridhaka and the Four Spirit Officers Yin, Bullseye, Tao, and 
Xu. When they saw Pilgrim arrive, they hurriedly saluted him and asked, “Where’s the Great Sage going?” 

“As the guardian of the Tang Monk,” replied Pilgrim, “I've reached the Compassionate Heaven District of the Gold-Level Prefecture that is located on the eastern border of the Kingdom of India. My 
master was asked by the priests of the Mercy Cloud Temple to stay and enjoy the Lantern Festival. When we went to see the Golden-Lamp Bridge, we saw three golden lamps, in fact that used as fuel 
a specially blended fragrant oil. Though that oil has the worth of some fifty thousand taels of white gold, it is nonetheless presented for the enjoyment of some Gods who make an auspicious descent 
every year. As we're looking at those lamps, three images of God indeed appeared. Not knowing good or ill, my master immediately rushed up to the top of the bridge to make his salute while | was 
trying to tell him they were no good. But they had already dimmed the lamps and abducted both the oil and my master in a gust of wind. | set off in pursuit of the wind and by dawn came upon a 
mountain. The Four Sentinels reported to me that it was the Green Dragon Mountain. The Mysterious Flower Cave of that mountain had three fiends with the names of Great King Cold-Deterrent, Great 
King Heat-Deterrent, and Great King Dust-Deterrent. Old monkey quickly demanded my master’s return at their door, fought with the monster-spirits but did not gain the upper hand. Then | used 
transformation to gain entrance. When | saw that my master was chained but unharmed, | freed him and tried to lead him out. But we’re detected, and I’d to flee. Thereafter, 8 Rules and Sand-monk 
joined me to wage a bitter battle with them that ended with the capture of my two brothers. For this reason, old monkey has come to request the Jade Emperor's assistance in locating their origin and 
in bringing them to submission.” 

“If the Great Sage had already fought with them,” said the Gold Star, chuckling sardonically, “couldn't he tell where they came from?” 

“Of course! Of course!” replied Pilgrim. “I'd tell they were a herd of bovine spirits. But because of their great magic powers, they are difficult to subdue quickly.” 

The Gold Star said, “Those are indeed three rhinoceros spirits. Because their bodily designs bear the patterns of Heaven, long years of cultivation have wrought mortality for them, so that they too, are 
able to soar on the clouds and tread on the fog. Those fiends also have a penrecite for cleanliness. Invariably offended by their own reflection, they would want to leap into water to take a bath. They 
have various names, too: like female rhinoceros, male rhinoceros, bull rhinoceros, striped rhinoceros, barbarian-hat rhinoceros,> duoluo rhinoceros,§ and Heaven-reaching patterned rhinoceros. They 
are all endowed with a single aperture, triple hair, and two horns. When they move through rivers and seas, they are able to open a path in the water. As for your Cold-Deterrent, Heat-Deterrent, and 
Dust-Deterrent, they are so named because of certain precious vital forces stored in their horns. That’s why they have given themselves such titles as Great King so-and-so. If you want to catch them, 
you must seek help from the Four Wood-Creature Stars. Their mere presence will bring these beasts to submission.” 

Saluting hurriedly, Pilgrim asked, “And who are the Four Wood-Creature Stars? | beg Longevity to tell me plainly.” 

“These stars,” replied the Gold Star with a smile, “are stationed at that part of the universe just outside the Dipper Palace. When you’ve memorialised to the Jade Emperor, you'll learn the truth.” After 
folding his hands in front of him to indicate his gratitude, Pilgrim went inside the Heaven Gate. In a moment, he reached the lower level of the Hall of Perfect Light where he met first with Ge, Qiu, Zhang, 
and Xu, the Four Celestial Masters. “Where are you heading?” they asked. 

“Recently we arrived at Gold-Level Prefecture,” replied Pilgrim. “Because my master has loosened slightly his hold on the nature of Zen, he was abducted by monstrous demons while watching the 
lights during the Lantern Festival. Old monkey cannot bring them to submission, and I’ve come especially to make this known to the Jade Emperor and request assistance.” 

The Four Celestial Masters led Pilgrim immediately into the Hall of Divine Mists to present his memorial. After the exchange of greetings and a complete rehearsal of what took place, the Jade Emperor 
was about to issue a decree to call up some celestial warriors. Pilgrim went forward and said, “Just now when old monkey arrived at the West Heaven Gate, Star Longevity told me that those fiends 
were rhinoceroses who had become spirits. Only the Four Wood-Creature Stars are able to bring them to submission.” The Jade Emperor at once ordered Celestial Master Xu to go to the Dipper 
Palace and summon the Four Wood-Creature Stars to descend with Pilgrim to the Region Below. 

When they arrived outside the palace, the Twenty-Eight Constellations were there to meet them. “By the sage decree,” said the Heaven Preceptor, “I’m to command the Four Wood-Creature Stars to 
descend to the Region Below with the Great Sage Sun in order to subdue certain monsters.” Immediately Horn the Wood Dragon, Dipper the Wood Unicorn, Straddler the Wood Wolf, and Well the 
Wood Hound stepped forward to answer the call. “Great Sage Sun,” they said, “where do you want us to go to subdue monsters?” 

“So, it’s you four!” said Pilgrim, laughing. “That old Longevity is so cryptic that | can’t understand him! If he had told me that I'd see the Four Woods of the Twenty-Eight Constellations, I'd have come 
directly to issue the invitation. There would have been no need for any imperial decree.” 

“How can you say that, Great Sage?” said the Four Woods. “Without the decree that one of us dares leave his station? Where is this place you want us to go to? Let’s get there quickly.” 

“It's a spot northeast of the Gold-Level Prefecture,” replied Pilgrim, “at the Mysterious Flower Cave in the Green Dragon Mountain. We've some rhinoceroses there who have become spirits.” 


“If rhinoceroses have become spirits,” said Dipper the Wood Unicorn, Straddler the Wood Wolf, and Horn the Wood Dragon together, “you don’t need all of us. Just ask Constellation Well to go with 
you. He can climb mountains to devour tigers, and go down to the seas to catch rhinoceroses.” 

“These are no moon-gazing rhinoceroses!” said Pilgrim. “They are ones who have attained the Way through prolonged cultivation, all enjoying the age of a millennium. We've to have the four of you, 
and please do not refuse. If only one of you went along with me, you might be unable to catch them. Wouldn’t that be a waste of our efforts again?” 

“Look at the way you people talk!” said the Celestial Master. “The decree orders all four of you to go. How could you not go? Let's start flying at once, so | can go back to make my report.” Thereupon 
the Celestial Master took leave of Pilgrim and left. 

“There’s no need for you to wait any longer,” said the Four Woods. “You go provoke battle first and entice them to come out. We'll then attack.” Rushing forward, Pilgrim shouted, “You oil-stealing 
fiends! Return my master!” The doors had been smashed by 8 Rules but now they had been boarded up with planks by the little monsters. When they heard Pilgrim reviling them outside, they dashed 
in to report, “Great Kings, the monk Sun is reviling us outside!” 

“He has already fled in defeat,” said Dust-Deterrent. “Why is he returning a day later? Could it be that he has found some help somewhere?” 

“Who’s afraid of any help he might get?” asked Cold-Deterrent. “Bring our armour quickly. Little ones, make sure that you surround him this time and don’t let him get away.” 

Not knowing any better, that herd of spirits all walked out of the cave, all holding spears and knives, waving banners, and rolling drums. “Aren't you afraid of a beating, ape? You dare show up again?” 
they snapped at him. 

Now the word “ape” was most irksome to Pilgrim. Clenching his teeth in fury, he raised the iron rod to strike. The three monster-kings ordered the little monsters to fan out and had Pilgrim entirely 
surrounded. On this side however, the Four Wood-Creature Stars all brandished their weapons and shouted, “Cursed beasts, don’t you dare move!” 

When those three monster-kings saw the Four Stars, they naturally became frightened. “It’s bad! It's bad!” they all cried. “He has found our conquerors! Little ones, run for your lives!” With loud snorts 
and bellows, all the little monsters changed back into their original forms: they were all mountain-buffalo spirits, water-buffalo spirits, and yellow-buffalo spirits, madly stampeding all over the mountain. 
The three monster-kings, too, revealed their true forms. When they lowered their two hands, they had four legs once more. Their hooves thundering like iron cannons, they fled toward the northeast, 
closely pursued by the Great Sage leading Well the Wood Hound and Horn the Wood Dragon. Dipper the Wood Unicorn and Straddler the Wood Wolf however, remained on the eastern slope where 
they succeeded in either beating to death or capturing live all the rest of the buffalo spirits stranded on the summit, in the stream, or in the valley. Then they proceeded to the Mysterious Flower Cave 
and freed the Tang Monk, 8 Rules, and Sand-monk. 

Recognising the two Stars, Sand-monk saluted with his companions to thank them. “How did the two of you manage to come and rescue us?” he asked. 

“We're ordered here by the Jade Emperor's decree to bring those fiends to submission and rescue you,” replied the two Stars, “after the Great Sage Sun presented a memorial.” 

“Why, then,” asked the Tang Monk, shedding tears again, “didn’t my disciple Wukong come here?” 

“Those three old fiends happen to be three rhinoceroses,” said the Star. “When they saw us, they fled for their lives toward the northeast. The Great Sage Sun led Well the Wood Hound and Horn the 
Wood Dragon to give chase. Having mopped up the herd of buffalo, we two came here especially to free the sage monk.” The Tang Monk again touched his forehead to thank them. Then he saluted 
himself once more to thank Heaven. 

Raising him, 8 Rules said, “Master, excessive ceremony becomes insincerity. There’s no need for you to keep on saluting. The Four Star Officers have done this partly because of the imperial decree 
of the Jade Emperor, and partly because of their regard for Elder Brother. We may have done away with the various fiends but we've yet to find out whether those old monsters have been brought to 
submission. Let us take out some of the valuables in this place and then tear down the cave so that they will be permanently uprooted. Afterward we'd return to the temple to wait for Elder Brother.” 
“Marshal Heaven Reeds is quite right,” said Straddler the Wood Wolf. “You and the Curtain-Raising General should protect your master and return to rest in the temple. Let’s go to the northeast to 
fight.” 

“Exactly! Exactly!” said 8 Rules. “You two must join them in pursuit. You must exterminate all of the monsters before you go back to report to the throne.” 

The 2 star officers at once left in pursuit. Ransacking the cave, 8 Rules and Sand-monk took out a pile of valuables — all coral, cornelian, pearls, amber, ornamental gems, precious stones, fine jade, 
and gold. They asked their master to sit on the mountain ledge before starting a fire that had the entire cave reduced to ashes. Only then did they help the Tang Monk find their way back to the Mercy 
Cloud Temple. Truly “Good’s limit begets evil,”’ the classics say. 

Fair fortune ends in mishap? Well it may! 

Chan nature’s confused for love of floral lights; pretty scenes have led the mind of Dao astray. The great elixir you must always guard; 1 slip and you're rewarded with dismay. Never slacken your firm 
and tight control. A little indolence brings on disarray. Those 3 returned to the temple with their lives. Dipper the Wood Unicorn and Straddler the Wood Wolf, those 2-star officers mounted the clouds 
and pursued the fiends toward the northeast. They looked this way and that in mid-air but could see no one. Then they looked toward the great Western Ocean and caught sight of the Great Sage Sun 
in the distance, hollering above the water. Lowering the direction of their clouds, the two of them said, “Great Sage where’ve the fiends gone?” 

“Why didn’t the two of you join us in pursuit?” asked Pilgrim angrily. “Why do you wait till now to ask your addle-headed questions?” 

“When | saw that the Great Sage with Well and Horn had defeated the fiendish demons,” said Dipper the Wood Unicorn, “I thought that you’d surely capture them. We therefore made a clean sweep of 
the other monster-spirits and then entered the Mysterious Flower Cave to rescue your master and brothers. We ransacked the mountain, burned down the cave, and entrusted your master to the care 
of your two brothers who're going to bring him back to the Mercy Cloud Temple in the city. When we saw however, that you didn’t return after all this while, we found our way here.” 

Moved to delight and gratitude by these words, Pilgrim said, “In that case, you’ve achieved merit. Thanks for all your trouble! Thanks for all your trouble! Those three monstrous demons however, 
crawled into the ocean after we chased them here. Well and Horn went after them but they told old monkey to remain by the shore to stand guard. Since the two of you’ve arrived, you can head them 
off here. Let old monkey go in too.” Dear Great Sage! Gripping his iron rod and making the magic sign with his fingers, he opened up a pathway in the water and went into the depths of the ocean. 
There he found those 3 monstrous demons waging the bitterest battle with Well the Wood Hound and Horn the Wood Dragon. Leaping near, he shouted, “Old monkey's here!” 

Those monster-spirits were already hard pressed when they had to confront the 2 star officers. When they heard Pilgrim’s cry, they turned immediately and fled for their lives toward the centre of the 
ocean. The horns on the fiends’ heads were excellent instruments for dividing the water. All you’d hear were a loud splatter as they knifed through the billows with the Great Sage Sun and the 2 star 
officers hard on their heels. In the Western Ocean, there were a Nature spirit and a seaman out on patrol. When they saw from a distance the rhinoceroses opening up the water and moreover when 
they caught sight of the Great Sage Sun and the 2 celestial constellations whom they recognised, they hurried to the Water Crystal Palace to report to the dragon king. “Great King,” they said somewhat 
apprehensively, “there’re three rhinoceroses being chased by the Great Sage Equal to Heaven and two celestial constellations!” 

On hearing this, the old dragon king, Aoshun, summoned Prince Moang and said to him, “Call up the aquatic soldiers at once! It must be that Cold-Deterrent, Heat-Deterrent, and Dust-Deterrent, those 
three rhinoceros spirits have offended Pilgrim Sun. Since they've now arrived in our ocean, we'd give Sun some armed assistance.” 

This order immediately made Ao Moang call up the troops. In an instant, tortoises, sea-turtles, sea-dragons, breams, carps, shrimp soldiers, crab privates all gave their battle cries, and rushed out of 
the Water Crystal Palace, each wielding spear or sword to block the path of the rhinoceros spirits. Unable to advance, the spirits retreated hurriedly only to find the Great Sage closing in with Well and 
Horn, the 2 stars. They became so flustered that they were no longer able to stay together as a herd. Scattering in three directions, each tried to flee for his life. Soon Dust-Deterrent was surrounded 
by the old dragon king and his troops. Delighted by what he saw, the Great Sage Sun cried, “Hold it! Hold it! We want him alive! We don’t want to catch a carcass!” 

Hearing this, Moang led his troops to rush forward and pull Dust-Deterrent down. An iron hook was thrust through his nose and then he was bull-tied. Then the old dragon king gave the command for 
his troops to track down the other 2 spirits and lend assistance to the star officers for their capture. When the young prince led his troops forward, they saw Well the Wood Hound had changed into his 
original form. He had Cold-Deterrent pinned down and was in fact devouring him with great bites. “Constellation Well! Constellation Well!” cried Moang. “Don't bite him! The Great Sage Sun wants him 
alive, not dead!” 

He shouted several times but the monster’s neck had already been bitten through. Moang ordered the shrimp soldiers and crab privates to haul the dead rhinoceros back to the Water Crystal Palace 
while he and other soldiers set off in pursuit again with Well the Wood Hound. They ran right into Horn the Wood Dragon who was chasing Heat-Deterrent back toward them. Ordering the tortoises and 
turtles to fan out, Moang led his troops to encircle the spirit completely. “Spare my life! Spare my life!” the fiend could only say. Well the Wood Hound walked forward and grabbed one of his ears. 
Taking away his cutlass, the star officer said, “We’re not going to kill you. We'll turn you over to the Great Sage Sun for his disposal.” 

They all lowered their weapons and went back to the Water Crystal Palace crying, “We’ve caught them all!” 

Pilgrim saw that one of the spirits had been beheaded; still dripping blood, the corpse lay on the ground. Another was pushed to his knees, his ear still grasped by Well the Wood Hound. As he walked 
forward to look more carefully, Pilgrim said, “It wasn’t a blade that cut this head off!” 

“If I'd not yelled out,” said Moang, chuckling, “Star Officer Well would’ve devoured the body as well!” 

“It's all right,” said Pilgrim. “Let’s saw off his two horns and skin him. We'll take those things along but the meat will be left here for the enjoyment of the worthy dragon king and his prince.” 

A rope was threaded through the iron hook in the nose of Dust-Deterrent, so that Horn the Wood Dragon could lead him. The same treatment was given Heat-Deterrent, and Well the Wood Hound held 
onto the rope. “Let's bring them up to see the chief of the Gold-Level Prefecture so that he can make a thorough investigation of how they've impersonated God to hurt the people all these years. Then 
we'll decide what to do with them.” 

All of them agreed. They took leave of the dragon king and his prince and left the Western Ocean, leading the 2 rhinoceroses. After rejoining Straddler and Dipper, the 2 stars, they mounted the cloud 
and fog to return to the Gold-Level Prefecture. Treading the auspicious luminosity, Pilgrim cried aloud in mid-air: “Chief of the Gold-Level Prefecture, subordinate officials, and all you people of this 
region, hear me! We’re sage monks sent by the Great Tang in the Land of the East to seek scriptures in the Western Heaven. The creatures who pretended to be various Gods making their auspicious 
descent and who demanded sacrifices of the golden lamps each year from the households of this district and prefecture are actually these rhinoceros fiends. When we passed through here and went 
to look at the lamps on the night of the fifteenth, these fiends abducted both my master and the lamp oil. | therefore asked the gods of Heaven to bring them to submission. We've now cleaned up their 
mountain cave and all the monstrous demons have been exterminated. From now on your district and prefecture should make no sacrifice of the golden lamps, for it only taxes the people and drains 
their wealth.” 

Inside the Mercy Cloud Temple, 8 Rules and Sand-monk had just escorted the Tang Monk through the gate. When they heard Pilgrim speaking up in mid-air, they abandoned their master and their 
luggage to mount the wind and cloud and rise to the sky. When they questioned him, Pilgrim said, “One has been bitten to death by Constellation Well but we've taken along its skin and the sawed-off 
hors. The two captured alive are here.” 

“We might as well push these two down to the city for the officials and the people to see,” said 8 Rules, “so that they'll know that we’re sages and deities. Moreover, we must trouble the four star officers 
to lower their clouds to the ground and go with us to the prefectural hall for the disposal of these fiends. The truth and their guilt have been firmly established. There’s nothing more we'd discuss!” 

“Of late,” said one of the four stars, “Marshal Heaven Reeds seems to be quite knowledgeable about principles and shows good understanding of the law. That's marvellous!” 

“Being a priest for some years has taught me a few things!” replied 8 Rules. 

So the various deities pushed the rhinoceroses toward the earth. When they all descended to the prefectural residence on a bouquet of coloured clouds, the officials of this district and prefecture along 
with the populace in and out of the city were so terrified that each household set up incense tables and saluted to receive the gods from Heaven. In a little while, the priests of the Mercy Cloud Temple 
could be seen entering the prefectural residence also, carrying the elder in a palanquin. When he met Pilgrim, he thanked him profusely. 

“| was beholden to the noble Constellation officers,” said the Tang Monk, “for having us rescued. But not having seen my worthy disciple has caused me unending concern. Now | truly rejoice in your 
return in triumph. I'd like to know however where you chased these fiends before they were captured.” 

“Since | took leave of my honoured master day before yesterday,” replied Pilgrim, “old monkey ascended to Heaven to make his investigation. The Gold Star Venus was kind enough to reveal to me 
that these monstrous demons were actually rhinoceroses, and that I'd solicit the help of the Four Wood Creature Stars. Immediately | memorialised to the Jade Emperor who gave his permission and 
his decree for the stars to descend to the cave. We fought there and they fled. Dipper and Straddler, the two Constellations, kindly rescued you while old monkey joined Well and Horn, the two other 
Constellations, to pursue the monsters. When we reached the Great Western Ocean, we're also indebted to the assistance of the dragon king who sent his son to help us with his troops. That's why 
we're able to capture them and bring them back for trial.” The elder could not stop his thanksgiving and commendation. They also saw the magistrate of the district and his various subordinate officials 
who were all burning tall precious candles and filling their braziers with incense as they saluted to the sky. 

After a little while, 8 Rules became so aroused that he whipped out the ritual razor. With one stroke he cut off the head of Dust-Deterrent and with another, the head of Heat-Deterrent. Then he took up 
a saw to saw off their four horns. The Great Sage Sun was even more resolute. He at once gave this order: “Let the four star officers take these four rhinoceros horns up to the Region Above and 
present them as tribute to the Jade Emperor when you hand back the imperial decree. As for the two horns we brought along, we'll deposit one at the prefectural hall, so that it may be used as a 


perpetual witness to posterity that the lamp-oil levy has been eliminated. We ourselves will take along one horn to present to the Religious Patriarch at the Spirit Mountain.” The four stars were 
enormously pleased. Saluting immediately to take leave of the Great Sage, they mounted the coloured clouds to go back. 

The chief official however, would not permit the master and his three disciples to leave. He ordered a huge vegetarian banquet, and asked various village officials to bear the visitors company. 
Meanwhile, he issued a public proclamation informing the civil and military population that no golden lamps are permitted for the following year, and that the necessity for oil purchases levied on the big 
households was forever removed. The butchers, too, were told to slaughter the two rhinoceroses; their hides were to be treated and dried so that they could be used to make armour while their meat 
was distributed to both officials and the common people. In addition, he appropriated some of the funds already collected for oil purchases to buy land from the people. A temple commemorating the 
four stars subjugating the monsters was to be erected, along with living shrines to the Tang Monk and his three disciples. Placards with proper inscriptions were set up, so that their good deeds could 
forever be transmitted and gratefully acknowledged. 

Since they could not leave at once, master and disciples made up their mind to enjoy themselves. Each of those two hundred and forty lamp-oil households took tums to entertain them; after a banquet 
was given by one family, another would be offered by a different household without pause. 8 Rules was determined to have complete satisfaction. Stuffing up his sleeve a few of those treasures that 
he had looted from the monsters’ cave, he used them as tips for each of the vegetarian banquets. They lived there thus for over a month, and still they could not set out on their journey. Finally, the 
elder gave this instruction: “Wukong, take the rest of the precious jewels and give them all to the priests of the Mercy Cloud Temple as a token of our thanks. Let's not tell those big households but let's 
slip away tomorrow before dawn. If we indulge in pleasure like this, our enterprise of scripture-seeking will be delayed, and | fear that we'll offend the Religious Patriarch and bring on further calamities. 
That will be most inconvenient.” Pilgrim carried out his master’s instructions one by one. 

By the hour of the fifth watch next moming he was already up, and at once asked 8 Rules to prepare the horse. Having enjoyed his food and drink in great comfort, Idiot slept so soundly that he was 
still half-dazed when he said, “Why prepare the horse so early in the morning?” 

“Master tells us to get moving!” snapped Pilgrim. 

Rubbing his face, Idiot said, “That elder should behave himself! All two hundred and forty of those big households have sent us invitations but we've managed to enjoy a full meal barely thirty times. 
Why does he want to make Old bull endure hunger so soon?” On hearing this, the elder scolded him, saying, “Overstuffed coolie! Stop babbling! Get up quickly! If you keep up this ruckus, I'll ask 
Wukong to knock out your teeth with his golden-hooped rod!” 

When Idiot heard that, he became completely flustered. “This time Master has changed!” he cried. “Usually he cares for me, loves me, and, knowing that I’m stupid, protects me. Whenever Elder Brother 
wants to hit me, he pleads for me. Why should he turn so vicious today as to want to beat me?” 

“Because Master's offended by your gluttony,” said Pilgrim, “which has delayed our journey. Hurry up! Pack the luggage and get the horse ready. You'll be spared a beating!” As Idiot was truly fearful 
of being beaten, he leaped up and put on his clothes. Then he shouted at Sand-monk: “Get up quickly! A beating’s on its way!” 

Sand-monk, too leaped up and each of them finished his preparation. Waving his hand, the elder said, “Quiet! Let’s not disturb the temple priests.” He mounted the horse hurriedly. After opening the 
gate, they found their way and left. As they went forth this time, it was truly like opening the jade cage to let the phoenix out or breaking the gold lock to set the dragon free. 


109 
At Jetavana Park he asks the aged about the cause; at the Kingdom of India he sees the king and meets his mate 
Memory has to start with love; leniency will beget mishap. 
Why does discernment sort out 3 estrades?' Merit done you'll end in primal sea. 
Whether you'll be a god or God, you must prepare yourself within: be clean, pure, and wholly removed from dust. 

Fruit borne you fly to Realm Above.? 
The priests in the temple discovered by dawn that Tripitaka and his disciples had vanished. “We didn’t detain them,” they all said, “we didn’t take leave of them and we didn’t beg them! And that’s how 
we allowed a living Nun to walk clean away!” 
As they were saying this, a few members of the wealthy households in the south suburb arrived to deliver their invitations. Clapping their hands, the various priests said, “We're caught off-guard last 
evening, and they all mounted the clouds and left in the night.” 
The people all saluted to the sky to express their gratitude. Because of what the monks had said however, the entire population of the city — officials and commons - all learned of it. They at once 
requested the wealthy households to purchase the five beasts, flowers, and fruits to sacrifice at the living shrine as an expression of their gratitude. The Tang Monk and his disciples fed on the wind 
and slept by the waters as they journeyed peacefully for over half a month. One day they found themselves again before a tall mountain. Growing apprehensive, the Tang Monk said, “Disciples with 
that tall rugged mountain before us, we must be carefull” 
Laughing, Pilgrim said, “This road taking us near the land of God surely does not harbour any monster or deviate. Master, you'd relax and not worry.” 
“Disciple,” said the Tang Monk, “it may be true that the land of God is not far away. But remember what the temple priests told us the other day: the distance to the capital of the Kingdom of India is still 
some two thousand miles. | wonder how far we've gone already.” 
“Master,” said Pilgrim, “could it be that you've quite forgotten again the Heart Thread of the Crow’s Nest Chan Master?” 
Tripitaka said, “That Prajfia-Paramita is like a cassock or an alms bowl that accompanies my very body. Since it was taught me by that Crow’s Nest Chan Master, has there been a day that | didn’t 
recite it? Indeed, has there been a single hour that | didn’t have it in mind? I’d recite the piece backward! How could I’ve forgotten it?” 
“Master, you may be able to recite it,” said Pilgrim, “but you’ve not begged that Chan Master for its proper interpretation.” 
“Ape-head!” snapped Tripitaka. “How dare you say that | don’t know its interpretation! Do you?” 
“Yes, | know its interpretation!” replied Pilgrim. After that exchange, neither Tripitaka nor Pilgrim uttered another word. 
At their sides, 8 Rules nearly collapsed with giggles and Sand-monk almost broke up with amusement. “What brassiness!” said 8 Rules. “Like me, he began his career as a monster-spirit. He wasn’t 
an acolyte who had heard lectures on the Threads, nor was he a seminarian who had seen the law expounded. It’s sheer flimflam and pettifoggery to say that he knows how to interpret the Thread! 
Hey, why is he silent now? Let's hear the lecture! Please give us the interpretation!” 
“Second Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “do you believe him? Big Brother is giving us a nice tall tale, just to egg Master on his journey. He may know how to play with a rod. He doesn’t know anything 
about explaining a Thread!” 
“Aware of Ability and Awakened to Purity,” said Tripitaka, “stop this claptrap! Wukong’s interpretation is made in a speechless language. That’s true interpretation.” 
As master and disciples conversed like that, they managed to cover quite a distance and walk past several mountain ridges. Then they came upon a huge monastery by the side of the road. “Wukong, 
that’s a monastery ahead of us,” said Tripitaka. “Look at it. Though not overly big or small, it’s the roof of glazed green tiles; half old and half new. It’s enclosed with red eight-word brick walls. 3Vaguely 
one can see the canopies of green pines, aged things of who knows how many centuries or millennia that’ve lived till now; and one can hear a stream’s soft murmur, a waterway dug out in some distant 
dynasty that has still remained. On the gates is inscribed in large letters: 

The Gold-Spreading Monastery 
On a hanging plaque 
The Ruins of Antiquity.” 

Pilgrim replied that indeed he too saw that it was the Gold-Spreading Monastery, and 8 Rules said the same thing. “Gold-Spreading, Gold-Spreading,” mused Tripitaka as he rode, “could this be the 
territory of the Kingdom of Sravasti?” 
“This is quite strange, master!” said 8 Rules. “I've followed you now for several years and never known you to recognise the way before. Today you seem to know where you're.” 
“It’s not quite like that,” replied Tripitaka. “It’s just that in studying the Threads I’ve frequently read this account that tells of a god’s experience in the Jetavana Park of the city, Sravastt. The park's said 
to be something that the Elder Anathapindika wanted to purchase from Prince Jeta so that it'd be used as the place for God to lecture on the Threads. The prince said however, ‘My park isn’t for sale. 
The only way you can buy it’s for you to cover the whole park with gold.’ When Elder Anathapindika heard this, he took gold bricks and spread them throughout the park. Only then did he succeed in 
purchasing the Jetavana Park from the prince and inviting the World-Honoured one to expound the Law. When | saw the Gold-Spreading Monastery just now, | thought this could be the one described 
in the story.”4 
“How fortunate!” said 8 Rules, chuckling, “If indeed it’s the one in the story, we’d go and dig up a few bricks to give to people.” 
They all laughed at this for a while before Tripitaka dismounted. When they entered the monastery, they discovered sitting by the main gates a few cart-full of people —- some luggage totters, some cart 
pushers, and some with bags on their backs. Some were sleeping and others were chatting when they caught sight of master and disciples. The handsome features of the elder along with the hideous 
ones of his disciples made the people somewhat fearful, and they all stepped aside for the pilgrims to pass through. Fearing that they might stir up trouble, Tripitaka kept calling out, “Gently! Gently!” 
And all his disciples seemed to be behaving themselves. After passing through the Lightning Hall, they were met by a priest whose whole bearing seemed quite devout. Truly his face like a full moon 
shone; body was the wisdom-tree. His windswept sleeves hugged his staff and sandals trod the pebbled path. Tripitaka saluted the moment he caught sight of him, and the priest hurriedly returned his 
greeting, saying, “Master where do you come from?” 
“This disciple’s Chen Xuanzang,” replied Tripitaka, “who’s been sent by the decree of the Great Tang emperor to go worship God in the Western Heaven and seek scriptures. Our journey takes us past 
your treasure monastery, and I’ve taken the liberty of visiting you to ask for one night’s lodging. We'll leave tomorrow.” 
“Our humble monastery’s,” said the priest, “inhabited frequently by visitors from all over the world for as long as they please. The elder’s moreover a divine monk from the Land of the East and it'll be 
our very good fortune to serve you.” 
Tripitaka thanked him and then asked his three companions to follow him. They went past the winding corridor and the donation boxes to reach the abbot’s quarters. After exchanging greetings with 
the abbot, they took their seats proper to hosts and guests. Pilgrim and his two brothers, too, sat down with hands lowered at their sides. When the monastery had heard the news of scripture priests 
sent by the Great Tang in the Land of the East, all the monks — whether they were old or young, long-term residents or temporary guests, elders or altar boys - came to present themselves. After tea 
had been offered, a vegetarian meal was served. Our elder presently was still reciting his grace but 8 Rules was impatient enough to send the buns, vegetarian foods, and vermicelli soups tumbling 
down his throat. The abbot’s quarters by now were filled with people; the more intelligent ones were admiring the features of Tripitaka but the sportier persons were all staring at the way 8 Rules ate. 
As Sand-monk was rather observant, he saw immediately what was happening and furtively gave 8 Rules a pinch saying, “Gently!” 
8 Rules became so exasperated that he yelled, “Gently! Gently! But my stomach’s empty!” 
Chuckling, Sand-monk said, “Second Elder Brother, you may not realise this. There are many so-called gentlemen in the world but when it concerns the stomach, they are no different from you and 
me.” These words quieted 8 Rules while Tripitaka said a short grace to end the meal. After the eating utensils had been removed, Tripitaka thanked his hosts. 
One of the priests of the monastery inquired about the history of the Land of the East. When Tripitaka spoke of certain historical ruins, he in turn asked for the reason for the name of the Gold-Spreading 
Monastery. That priest replied, “This originally was the Monastery of the Anathapindika Garden in the Kingdom of Sravasti. It also goes by the name of the Jetavana Park. Because the Elder 
Anathapindika spread gold bricks on the ground to enable a god to expound the Threads, the name was changed again to the present one. About a generation ago, this whole region was the Kingdom 
of Sravasti, and Elder Anathapindika was living here at the time. Our monastery originally was the elder’s Jetavana Park, and that is why the full name should be Benefactor-of-Orphans Gold-Spreading 
Monastery. Behind our monastery we still have the foundation of the Jetavana Park. In recent years, a great rainstorm would on occasion wash out some gold or silver or pearls. Those lucky enough 
would be able to pick them up.” 
“So it's not a false rumour but the truth!” said Tripitaka. Then he asked again, “When | entered your treasured monastery just now, | saw inside the twin corridors by the gate many merchants with their 
mules and horses, their luggage and carts. Why are they staying here?” 
“Our mountain here is named the Hundred-Legs Mountain,” replied the priest. “In previous years it had been quite safe. Recently however, we don’t quite know what has taken place but it may be that 
the seasonal cycles have produced a few centipede spirits that have frequently injured people on the road. Though the wounds they inflict may not be lethal, they have certainly inhibited the travellers’ 
movement. Beneath our mountain is a pass by the name of Cock-Crow. People dare not walk through it until the cock has crowed. Because it’s getting late now, those merchants you saw don’t want 
to take an unnecessary risk. So they use our humble monastery for lodging, and they'll leave after the cock has crowed.” 


“We, too, will wait till the cock crows before we leave,” said Tripitaka. As they chatted, more vegetarian food was brought in, so that the Tang Monk and his disciples dined again. Afterwards, Tripitaka 
and Pilgrim went out for a leisurely stroll to enjoy a bright moon in her first quarter. A workman approached them and said, “Our venerable dad teacher would like to meet the visitors from China.” 
Turning quickly, Tripitaka saw an old monk, a bamboo staff in his hand who saluted him, saying, “Is this the master who has come from China?” 

“| dare not accept such honour,” replied Tripitaka, returning his salutation, as the old monk began to compliment him effusively. 

“What is the old master’s lofty age?” he asked. 

“I've passed my forty-fifth year in vain,” said Tripitaka, “and may | ask what is the honourable age of the old abbot?” 

With a chuckle, the old monk said, “Rather fruitlessly I've exceeded the venerable master’s age by a sexagenarian cycle.” 

“You're a hundred and five years old now,” said Pilgrim. “Can you tell how old I'm?” 

“Though the countenance of this master is aged,” said the old priest, “your spirit is most clear. My eyes are quite dim in the moonlight, and it’s hard for me to tell your age right away.” After talking for a 
while, they went to look at the rear corridor. “Just now the old foundation of the Jetavana Park was mentioned,” said Tripitaka. “Where exactly is it?” 

“Just beyond our rear gate,” replied the old monk and asked that it be opened immediately. 

All they saw was a vacant lot with a few piles of rubble remaining as the foundation of the walls. Pressing his palms together, Tripitaka sighed and said, “The good giver, Sudatta, | call to mind; with 
jewels and gold he relieved poor mankind. For all times Jetavana has its fame. With which Arhat can we the elder find?” 

They all walked slowly, enjoying the sight of the moon. Having gone out of the rear gate, they reached a terrace where they sat for a while. Suddenly they heard the sound of weeping. Tripitaka listened 
attentively, and found that the person weeping was also making protest, something about her parents not comprehending her pain. So moved was he by the words that he himself began to shed tears 
also. 

“Who is this person grieving here?” he turned to ask the other monks. On hearing this question, the old monk ordered the other priests to go back first to make tea. After everyone had left, he at once 
saluted low to Tripitaka and Pilgrim. Raising him, Tripitaka said, “Old abbot, why are you doing this?” 

“Since this disciple has now exceeded a century of age,” replied the old monk, “he is somewhat knowledgeable in human affairs. In the quiet hours of meditation, moreover, he has seen a few visions. 
And that is why this disciple can perceive that the venerable master and his disciple are quite different from other people. For only this young master here can bring to light this grievous matter.” 

“Let's hear you tell us what the problem is,” said Pilgrim. 

The old monk said, “Exactly on this day a year ago, your disciple was just in the midst of meditation on the dialectical relation between our nature and the moon$ when a soft breeze brought to me the 
sounds of grief and protest. | descended from my couch to go to the foundation of the Jetavana Park to look around. There | found a pretty, comely girl. | asked her, ‘What family do you belong to? Why 
are you here?’ The girl replied, ‘I’m the princess of the King of India. | was enjoying the sight of flowers beneath the moon when | was blown here by a strong gust.’ Immediately I'd her locked up in an 
empty room that | sealed with bricks until it looked like a prison. There was only a small hole left in the door, through which one could pass a rice bowl. The next day | told this story to the other priests 
— that I'd imprisoned a monstrous deviate. Since we priests were men of mercy, | said, I'd not take its life, and I'd give the prisoner two meals of coarse rice and tea daily for sustenance. The girl was 
clever enough to understand my intentions. Fearing that she might be violated by the priests, she pretends to be mad, sleeping in her own piss and lying in her own shit. During the day she babbles all 
the time and puts on a dumb, stupid look. In the quiet of the night however, she weeps and yearns for her parents. Several times | myself have tried to enter the city to make inquiry about the princess 
but I’ve had no success whatever. For this reason I've kept her tightly locked up and dare not release her. Now that we've the good fortune of seeing the venerable master’s arrival at our kingdom, | 
beg you enter the capital and exercise your vast religion power to shed light on this matter. Not only will you thus be able to rescue the virtuous but you'll also make manifest your divine potency.” 
Pilgrim and Tripitaka firmly committed to their memory what they had heard. As they spoke however, two young priests came to invite them to tea before retiring, and so they all returned to the 
monastery. 

In the abbot’s quarters 8 Rules was grumbling to Sand-monk, saying, “We've to be on our way by dawn when the cock crows. And they still won't come to bed!” 

“Idiot,” said Pilgrim, “what are you mumbling?” 

“Go to sleep!” said 8 Rules. “It's so late already. What's there to look at?” 

Thereupon the old monk walked away and the Tang Monk retired. This is precisely the time when the moon fades, the flowers dream, and all sounds cease. The window screens let in a soft, warm 
breeze. Thrice has the clepsydra dropped low in sight; 8the Milky Way glows like the brightest light. 7They had not slept for very long that night when they heard the cock crow. In the front the travelling 
merchants all rose in a clamour as they lit their lamps and began to cook their rice. Our elder, too, woke up 8 Rules and Sand-monk so that they could saddle the horse and pack. When Pilgrim asked 
for lights, the priests of the monastery had already risen earlier to prepare tea and breakfast that they waited to serve in the rear. Delighted, 8 Rules ate an entire platter of buns. Thereafter he and 
Sand-monk brought out the horse and the luggage while Pilgrim and Tripitaka thanked their hosts. Again the old monk said to Pilgrim, “Don’t forget that matter of the weeping girl!” 

“Indeed, I'll not!” laughed Pilgrim. “When | get to the city, I'll be able to establish the fundamental principles by listening to sounds and determine the emotions by scrutinising countenances.” 

Those travelling merchants, noisy and boisterous, also followed them to the main road. By about the hour of the Tiger they passed the Cock-Crow Pass but not until the hour of the Serpent® did they 
catch sight of the city rampart. The city itself was truly like an iron cistern or a citadel of metal, a divine islet and a Heavenly prefecture. It has the noble form of a dragon coiled or a tiger sitting with 
colours from phoenix towers emitting. The royal moat flows like a circling band; mountains, flag-like, surround this blessed land. Banners at dawn light up the imperial way; pipes and drums of springtime 
by bridges play. The people prosper for the king is good: 5 grains in abundance they have for food. As they moved along the street of the eastern suburb, the various merchants went off one by one to 
their hotels and inns. Master and disciples walked inside the city where they came upon a College of Interpreters and its posthouse. When Tripitaka and his companions walked in, the steward at once 
made this report to the clerk of the posthouse: “There’re four strange-looking priests leading a white horse in here.” 

When the posthouse clerk heard that there was a horse, he knew that these visitors had to be on some sort of official business. He therefore went out to the main hall to greet them. Saluting him, 
Tripitaka said, “This humble cleric has been sent by imperial decree of the Great Tang to go see God at the Great Thunderclap of the Spirit Mountain and seek scriptures. | carry with me a travel rescript 
that I’d like to have certified at your court. I'd like also to borrow your noble residence for a short rest. We'll leave the moment our affairs concluded.” Returning his salute, the clerk of the posthouse 
said, “This official residence was established precisely for the entertainment of honoured guests and messengers. It is my responsibility to extend our hospitality to you. Please come in. Please come 
in.” 

A highly pleased Tripitaka at once asked his disciples to come and present their greetings. When the posthouse clerk encountered their hideous visages, he was secretly horrified, not knowing whether 
these beings were human or demonic. Trembling all over, he forced himself to oversee the service of tea and maigre. Tripitaka, seeing how frightened he was, said to him, “Sir, please don't be afraid! 
Though my three disciples look ugly, they all have good hearts. As the saying goes, ‘A savage face but a kindly person.’ Nothing to be afraid of!” 

Calmed by these words, the posthouse clerk asked, “National Master where is the Tang court?” 

“In the land of China,” replied Tripitaka, “at the South Jambidvipa Continent.” 

“When did you leave?” the clerk asked again. 

“In the thirteenth year of the reign period, Zhenguan,” said Tripitaka. “I've gone through fourteen years and the bitter experience of ten thousand waters and a thousand mountains before arriving at this 
region.” 

“Truly a divine monk, a divine monk!” exclaimed the posthouse clerk. 

Then Tripitaka asked, “And what is the Heaven-allotted age of your noble state?” 

“Ours is the Great Kingdom of India,” replied the posthouse clerk. “Since the time of the founder of our kingdom, Taizong,’ it has been some five centuries already. The dad who occupies the throne at 
present is a person who has peculiar fondness for mountains and streams, flowers and plants. His dynastic name is Emperor Yizong, and the title of his reign period is Jingyan.'° He has been ruling 
for twenty-eight years.” 

“This humble cleric,” said Tripitaka, “would like to have an audience with him today to have our travel rescript certified. Do you know whether court is still being held?” 

“Good! Good! This is precisely a good time!” said the posthouse clerk. “Our princess, the daughter of the king, has recently celebrated her twentieth birthday. At the intersection of the major thoroughfares, 
a festooned tower has been erected from which she will throw down an embroidered ball in order to determine which person she will take for her husband, the man ordained of Heaven. Today happens 
to be the very day of that exciting event, and | believe our dad the king has yet to retire from court. If you wish to have your rescript certified, this would be a good time to go do so.” 

Tripitaka was pleased, and he would have left at once had not he seen that a vegetarian meal was being served. He stayed, therefore, and ate it with the posthouse clerk and his three disciples. 

It was past noon, and Tripitaka said, “I'd go now.” 

“Ill escort you, Master,” said Pilgrim. 

“Ill go too,” said 8 Rules. Sand-monk said, “Second Elder Brother, you'd not. Your features aren't the most attractive. What will you do when you arrive at the court gate? Pretend that you're fat? Let 
Big Brother go.” 

“Awakened to Purity is quite right,” said Tripitaka. “Idiot is rough and coarse but Wukong still has a little refinement.” Pouting his horn, that Idiot said, “With the exception of Master, there’s not that much 
difference in the way the three of us look!” Tripitaka put on his cassock, and Pilgrim picked up the document satchel to go with him. On the street they saw all the people — scholars, farmers, labourers, 
merchants, writers, the learned and the ignorant — saying to one another, “Let's go see the tossing of the embroidered ball!” 

Standing by the side of the road, Tripitaka said to Pilgrim, “The people in this place — their clothing, their buildings, their utensils, their manner of speech and behaviour — are all the same as those of 
our Great Tang. I’m thinking now about the deceased mum of my secular home who met the man s he was destined to marry by throwing an embroidered ball, and they became man and wife. To think 
that they should have this custom here also!” 

“Let us go, too, to have a look! How about it?” said Pilgrim. 

“No! No!” said Tripitaka. “You and | are dressed improperly, as priests. People may get suspicious.” 

“Master,” said Pilgrim, “have you quite forgotten the words of that old monk at the Benefactor-of-Orphans Gold-Spreading Monastery? We'd go see the festooned tower because at the same time we 
can distinguish truth from falsehood. In the midst of all this hurly-burly, that king must be concerned with the happy doings of his daughter. How'd he be bothered with the affairs of the court at this time? 
There’s no harm in you and me going to the crossroads.” On hearing this, Tripitaka did indeed follow Pilgrim to go watch the various people waiting for the embroidered ball to be tossed. Ah! Little did 
they realise that their going there was like the fisher, casting down both hook and thread would henceforth haul up some intrigues instead! 

That King of India because of his love for mountains, streams, flowers, and plants led his queen and princess into the imperial garden last year 1 night to enjoy the moonlight. Their outing aroused a 
monstrous deviate who abducted the true princess while she herself falsely assumed the princess's form. Knowing that the Tang Monk would reach this region at that particular hour, day, month, and 
year, she wangled the wealth of the state to erect a festooned tower in order to take him as her mate. She was desirous of picking the vital energy of his true yang so that she would become a superior 
mortal of the Great Monad. It was now the third quarter past the hour of noon. Pilgrim and Tripitaka pushed through the crowd and approached the tower. Just then the princess, flanked by some 
seventy maidens all colourfully attired, held up high the lighted stalks of incense to pray to Heaven and Earth while an attendant stood by her holding the embroidered ball. That tower had eight exquisite 
windows; through one of them, the princess gazed at the crowd. When she saw the Tang Monk draw near, she picked up the ball with her own hands and tossed it at him. The ball landed on his head, 
knocking his Vairocana hat to one side. The Tang Monk was so startled that he tried to hold on to the ball with his hands. All at once the ball rolled into one of his sleeves. “It hit a priest! It hit a priest!” 
Those standing on the tower all began to shout. Aha! Those merchants and tradesmen at the crossroads all pressed forward to try to take the embroidered ball away. With a thunderous roar, Pilgrim 
gave his torso a stretch, teeth clenched, and immediately became an imposing figure some thirty feet tall and with a most ugly face. Those people became so terrified that they tumbled and fell, not 
daring at all to come near. In a moment they dispersed, and Pilgrim changed back into his original form. Meanwhile, the palace maidens and eunuchs, young and old, all descended from the tower to 
salute the Tang Monk saying, “Honourable man! Honourable man! Please enter the hall of the court to be congratulated!” 

Tripitaka hurriedly returned their salutations and tried to raise them with his hands before turing to grumble at Pilgrim. “You ape-head!” he said. “You're making a fool of me again!” 

“The embroidered ball hit your head,” said Pilgrim, chuckling, “and it rolled into your sleeve. What has that to do with me? Why blame me?” 

“What am | supposed to do now?” asked Tripitaka. 

“Master, please relax,” said Pilgrim. “Go into the court to have an audience with the throne while | return to the posthouse to tell 8 Rules and Sand-monk. We'll wait for your news. If the princess does 
not desire to take you for a husband, you'll simply have your travel rescript certified and leave. If she insists on taking you, you say to the king, ‘Summon my disciples so that | may give them some 
instructions.’ When we three are summoned into the court, I'll be able to distinguish the true from the false. This is my plot of Subduing the Fiend through Marriage.” The Tang Monk had no choice but 
to agree, and Pilgrim turned to go back to the posthouse. 


That elder, surrounded by the various palace maidens, was brought to the tower. The princess came down and led him by the hand to the imperial chariot that they then rode together. The entire 
entourage departed for the gate of the court. The Custodian of the Yellow Gate proceeded first to memorialise to the king, saying, “Your Majesty, the princess is leading back a monk who probably has 
been hit by the ball. They are now outside the gate awaiting your summons.” 
The king was not pleased by what he heard. He would have liked to send the priest away but not knowing the wishes of the princess, he felt obliged to summon them inside. The princess and the Tang 
Monk thus went up to the Hall of Golden Chimes. Truly, this was what happened: husband and wife both cried, “Your Majesty!” 
Both Good and Evil saluted most solemnly. After the ceremony, the king asked them to ascend the hall as he posed this question, “Where did you come from, priest, and how’re you hit by our daughter's 
ball?” 
Saluting himself on the ground, the Tang Monk said, “This humble cleric is someone sent by the Great Tang emperor in the South Jambidvipa Continent to go worship God and seek scriptures from 
the Great Thunderclap in the Western Heaven. Since | carry with me a rescript for this lengthy journey, I’ve come especially to have an audience with the king to have it certified. My path took me past 
the crossing beneath the festooned tower, and | didn’t expect that I'd be hit on the head by the ball that the princess tossed. This humble cleric is someone who has left the family and who belongs to 
a strange religion. How could | dare become the spouse of royalty? | beg you, therefore, to pardon the mortal offence of this humble cleric, certify my rescript, and send me off quickly to the Spirit 
Mountain. When I’ve faced God and succeeded in acquiring scriptures to return to my homeland, I'll establish a perpetual memorial to Your Majesty’s Heavenly kindness.” 
The king said, “If you're a sage monk from the Land of the East, you must have been, as it were, ‘Drawn through a thousand miles to marriage by a thread.’ Our princess has just celebrated her twentieth 
birthday and not yet married. Because it was determined that the year, month, day, and hour of this very day are all auspicious, we erected that festooned tower for tossing the ball to seek a good 
match for her. It just happened that you’re hit. We're not pleased but we don’t know how our princess feels.” 
“Dad King,” said the princess as she respected, “there’s a proverb that says, if you wed a chicken, you follow a chicken; if you marry a dog, you follow a dog. Your daughter after all made a vow earlier, 
when this embroidered ball was knitted. | made known to the deities of Heaven and Earth that I'd marry whomever the ball struck, for that would be the foreordained person. Today the ball struck the 
sage monk. This has to be the affinity of a past life which makes possible our meeting in this one. Dare | alter fate? I’m willing to take him as our royal son-in-law.” 
Only then did the king show pleasure. At once he commanded the president of the Imperial Board of Astronomy to select the proper day for the wedding. He also asked for the preparation of the dowry 
and issued a proclamation to notify the entire kingdom. When he heard this however, Tripitaka did not express his gratitude. All he could say instead was, “Release me and pardon me!” 
“This monk is most unreasonable!” said the king. “We're using the wealth of an entire nation to take him in as a royal son-in-law. Why doesn’t he want to stay here and enjoy it? Why must every thought 
of his dwell on seeking scriptures? If he persists in his refusal, let the Embroidered-Uniform Guards push him out and have him beheaded!” 
Scared out of his wits, the elder shook all over as he knelt down to respect and said, “I thank Your Majesty for your Heavenly kindness! But there are four of us altogether in our company, for this humble 
cleric has three disciples outside. | know I'd accept your gracious proposal but I've not yet had a chance to give them a word of instruction. | beg you, therefore, to summon them to court and certify this 
travel rescript, so that they may leave early and not be delayed in their journey to the West.” 
The king consented and asked, “Where are your disciples?” 
“They are all in the posthouse of the College of Interpreters,” replied Tripitaka. Immediately the king ordered the officials to summon the disciples to court so that they could pick up the travel rescript 
and leave for the West. The sage monk however, was to remain and become the royal son-in-law. The elder had little choice but to rise and stand in waiting to one side. For this situation we've the 
following testimonial poem: 
The no-leak"' great elixir needs three perfections.'2 
Austere works aren't built on hateful relations. 
A sage must teach the Dao, you the self-cultivate; 
Blessings are Heaven’s, man must virtue aggregate. 
Let not the six organs’ take their indulgent course. 
Nature, suddenly enlightened, reveals your source. 
Without love without thought, you're naturally pure - transcendence you'll gain for deliverance’s sure. 
At that time, officials were sent at once to the posthouse of the College of Interpreters to summon the disciples of the Tang Monk. Pilgrim took leave of the Tang Monk beneath the festooned tower and 
walked back to the posthouse, giggling happily with each step he took. He was met by 8 Rules and Sand-monk who asked him, “Elder Brother, why’re you laughing so happily? Where’s Master?” 
“Master has met great happiness!” replied Pilgrim. 
“We've not reached our destination yet,” said 8 Rules, “nor have we seen a god and acquired scriptures. Where does this happiness come from?” 
Giggling some more, Pilgrim said, “Master and | walked to the crossroads where the festooned tower was erected. Right there he was hit directly by the embroidered ball tossed down by the princess 
of this dynasty. He was then taken by the palace maidens and eunuchs to meet the princess who rode the imperial chariot with him to court. He will be taken in as the royal son-in-law. Isn’t that 
happiness?” 
On hearing this, 8 Rules stamped his feet and thumped his chest, saying, “I knew I'd have gone there myself! It was all because of Sand-monk’s roguery! If you hadn't stopped me, I’d have headed 
straight for the festooned tower. When the embroidered ball struck Old bull, the princess would have had to take me in. Wouldn't that be nice? Wouldn't that be marvellous? What a handsome, comely, 
and proper arrangement! We'd play and play! What fun!” 
Sand-monk walked forward and scratched 8 Rules’ face with his finger, saying, “Aren't you ashamed of yourself? What a magniloquent mouth! With three coins you buy an old donkey and brag about 
its ridability! \f that embroidered ball struck you, a letter of annulment sent overnight wouldn’t be fast enough! Would anyone dare take a catastrophe like you inside the door?” 
“A blackguard like you has no feeling for anything!” said 8 Rules. “I may be ugly but my person still exudes a certain flavour! As the ancients said, ‘Though the flesh and bones are coarse, the constitution 
is sturdy. Each characteristic in fact has its own desirability.” 
“Stop babbling like that, Idiot!” said Pilgrim. “Let's get our luggage together. | fear that Master may be so harried that he will soon be summoning us to the court to protect him.” 
“You're wrong again, Elder Brother,” said 8 Rules. “If Master has become the royal son-in-law, he will go into the palace to make love to the king’s daughter. He is not going to climb mountains or traipse 
along the roads where he could meet fiends or encounter demons. Who needs your protection? At his age, you think he’s so ignorant of what goes on in bed that he requires your assistance?” 
Grabbing him by the ears, Pilgrim shook his fist at 8 Rules and scolded him, saying, “You lecherous coolie! What sort of bunk is this?” 
As they were thus quarrelling, the clerk of the posthouse arrived and said, “His Majesty has issued a decree and sent an official with an invitation for you three divine monks.” 
“For what specific purpose?” asked 8 Rules. The posthouse clerk replied, “The old divine monk was fortunate enough to be struck by the princess’s embroidered ball and to have been taken in as the 
royal son-in-law. That is why an official has come with an invitation.” 
“Where is this official?” asked Pilgrim. “Tell him to come in.” 
The official, when he saw Pilgrim, at once saluted him. After the ceremony however, he dared not raise his eyes to look at him. All he could say to himself was, “Is this a demon or a fiend? A thunder 
squire or a Nature spirit?” 
“Official,” said Pilgrim, “why don’t you speak up? What are you thinking of?” Trembling all over, the official held up the imperial decree with both hands and blurted out, “My princess invites you to meet 
her kin! My princess's kin invite you to meet her!” 
“We've no instruments of torture here,” said 8 Rules, “and we've no intention to beat you. Speak slowly. Don’t be afraid.” 
“You think he’s afraid of a beating?” said Pilgrim. “It’s your face he’s afraid of. Pick up the pole and the luggage quickly and lead the horse along. We must go into court to discuss this affair.” Truly it’s 
hard to sidestep for the way is straight; love will certainly be turned into hate. 
110 
4 priests are feted at the royal garden; 1 fiend vainly longs for sensual joys 
Pilgrim Sun and his 2 companions followed the summons official to the gate of the court. The custodian of the Yellow Gate immediately notified them to enter. The 3 of them walked in together and 
stood still without however, even saluting. “Which three are the noble disciples of the sage monk, our royal son-in-law?” asked the king. “What're your names? Where do you live? For what reason did 
you become priests? What scriptures you're seeking?” 
Pilgrim strode forward and wanted to ascend to the main hall. The guardians of the throne at once shouted, “Stop! If you’ve anything to say, speak up at once!” 
“We people who have left the family,” said Pilgrim, smiling, “will advance one step when we've the chance to take one step.” After him 8 Rules and Sand-monk also drew near. Fearing that their vulgarity 
might upset the throne, the elder, standing on one side, stepped forward and said, “Disciples, His Majesty is asking for your origins. You'd present a proper reply.” 
When Pilgrim saw that his master was standing in waiting on one side, he could not refrain from yelling, “Your Majesty, you slight others and you slight yourself! If you’ve taken in my master as the royal 
son-in-law, why do you make him stand? The world addresses your daughter’s husband as ‘Honoured Man.’ How can an honoured man not be allowed to sit?” 
When he heard that, the king paled with fright. He would have withdrawn himself immediately from the hall had he not feared impropriety. Forcing himself to be bold, he asked his attendants to bring 
out an embroidered cushion for the Tang Monk to sit on. Only then did Pilgrim memorialise to him, saying, “Old monkey's ancestral home is located at the Water Curtain cave of the Flower-Fruit 
Mountain in the Aolai Kingdom of the East Videha Continent. My dad’s Heaven, my mum Earth: | was born when a stone burst. Once a perfected man’s pupil, | mastered the Great Way ere returning 
to my divine home to congregate with my kind in the cave-heaven of a blessed land. In the ocean | subdued dragons; on the mountains | captured beasts. Having wiped out the register of death and 
placed our names in the book of life, | was appointed the Great Sage Equal to Heaven, to enjoy the towers of jade and roam the treasure lofts. | joined the celestial mortals to recite and revel every 
day; living in the sages’ realm, I'd great pleasures each morning. For disrupting the Peaches Festival and causing great havoc in Heaven, | was subjugated by God and pinned beneath the Mountain 
of Five Phases with but iron pellets for my hunger and copper juice for my thirst and not a drop of tea or rice for five centuries. Fortunately my master left the Land of the East; as he headed for the 
West, Guanyin delivered me from Heaven's calamity. Free of my great ordeal, | made submission as a student of Yoga. My old name’s Wukong but people address me as Pilgrim.” 
When the king heard such an important pedigree, he was so impressed that he left the dragon couch immediately to walk forward and take the elder’s arm. “Royal son-in-law,” he said, “this must be 
our affinity ordained of Heaven that we may have you as a divine kinsman.” 
Tripitaka thanked him profusely and asked him to ascend his throne once more. Then the king asked, “Who is your second noble disciple?” 
Sticking out his horn to display his authority, 8 Rules said, “In his previous disciple Old bull’s most fond of pleasure and sloth; my whole life’s chaotic, my nature confused and my mind deluded. | never 
knew Heaven's height or Earth’s thickness, nor could | perceive this world’s breadth and length. In that leisurely existence | met suddenly a realised mortal who untied my net of retribution with half a 
sentence and with two or three words punched through my door of calamity. Immediately coming to myself, | took him at once as a teacher. With care | cultivated the work of two-eights' and smelted 
fore and after the time of three times three. 2My work done | ascended into the palace of Heaven. By the great kindness of the Jade Emperor | was appointed Marshal of Heavenly Reeds, in command 
of the troops of Heaven’s river, roaming freely throughout the cosmos. For getting drunk at the Peaches Festival and dallying with Change, | was stripped of my rank and exiled to this mortal world. An 
erroneous disciple made me born in the form of a bull. A resident of Mount Fulling, | committed boundless evils when | met Guanyin who pointed out the way of virtue. | submitted to the Religious faith 
to give the Tang Monk protection on his way to the Western Heaven to salute and seek the wondrous texts. My religious name’s Aware of Ability but they call me Eight Rules.” 
These words made the king’s spleen shake and his heart quiver, and he hardly dared look at the speaker. Idiot however, became more energetic than ever; shaking his head, sticking out his horn, and 
raising both ears, he laughed uproariously. Fearing again that the throne might be terrified, Tripitaka snapped, “Eight Rules, behave!” 
Only then did 8 Rules lower his hands, putting one over the other, and stand there pretending to be a gentleman. Then the king asked once more, “For what reason did the third noble disciple become 
a priest?” 
Pressing his palms together, Sand-monk said, “Old Sand’s originally a mortal man. Fear of the karmic wheel made me seek the Way, roaming cloudlike the edges of the sea and wandering at the 
shores of Heaven. As always my frock and alms-bow! followed me; long | taught my mind and spirit to stay put. For such sincerity | found a mortal mate; | nurtured the Baby’ and married the Fair Girl. 
When my merit reached three thousand, my work harmonised the Four Signs, 4! went beyond Heaven's bound to salute at the mysterious height. Made the Great Curtain-Raising Warrior, | attended 
the phoenix-and-dragon chariot with appointed rank of general. At the Peaches Festival also | dropped and broke a crystal chalice for which | was exiled to the Flowing-Sand River. My head and 
features transformed, | sinned by taking lives. Fortunately the Nun going far to the Land of the East persuaded me to repent and wait for a Religious son of the Tang court who would go seek scriptures 
at the Western Heaven. Henceforth | stood in this renewal and sought once more the great awakening. | use the river as my surname; my religious name’s Awakened to Purity and they address me as 
Monk.” 


When the king heard that, he was filled with great joy but also great terror. What brought him joy was the fact that his daughter had taken a living God in for a husband but what brought him terror was 
that the man’s disciples were actually three monstrous deities. In that very moment, the chief imperial astronomer arrived to say, “The date of the wedding has been set for the fine day of renzi, the 
twelfth day of this month in this year. That day ought to be felicitous for the entire family, and it is thus fitting for a marriage to take place.” 
“What day is today?” asked the king. 
“Today is the eighth,” replied the astronomer, “the day of moushen, when the gibbons come to present fruits. It is thus a day appropriate for receiving the worthies and setting appointments.” 
Exceedingly pleased, the king immediately asked the attendants to sweep out some towered buildings in the imperial garden, so that the royal son-in-law and his three disciples could use them for 
lodging. Thereafter he asked for the preparation of the wedding banquet so that the princess could get married. All his subjects reverently obeyed. After the king had retired from court, the various 
Officials dispersed. Tripitaka and his disciples went together to the imperial garden. As it was getting late, a vegetarian meal was set out. Delighted, 8 Rules said, “It’s about time we eat after one whole 
day!” Those in charge toted in whole loads of rice and noodles. 8 Rules ate and ate; the more they brought, the more he ate. He did not stop till his guts were stuffed and his stomach was bloated. In a 
little while, lights were brought in and bedding spread out for each of them, so that they could sleep. When the elder saw that they were by themselves, he shouted angrily at Pilgrim, “Wukong! You 
wretched ape! You put me in a bind every time! | told you that all | wanted was to have the rescript certified and | told you not to go near the festooned tower. Why did you insist on taking me there to 
look? Now, have you seen anything good? We've ended up in this pickle. What are we going to do now?” 
Trying to placate him with a smile, Pilgrim said, “The master’s statement that his deceased mum who also met the person destined for her by the tossing of an embroidered ball whereupon the two of 
them became man and wife, seems to indicate a longing for the past. Only because of that did old monkey lead you to the tower. Moreover, | thought of the words of that abbot from the Benefactor-of- 
Orphans Gold-Spreading Monastery, and | wanted to use this occasion to examine the true and the false. Just now when | looked at the king, | noticed that his complexion was somewhat dark and 
swarthy. But I’ve not been able to look at the princess to determine what she was like.” 
“What would you be able to do if you saw the princess?” asked the elder. Pilgrim said, “The moment these fiery eyes and diamond pupils of old monkey see her face, they will be able to discern truth 
and falsehood, good and evil, wealth and poverty. Then I'll be able to act to distinguish the right from the deviant.” 
With loud giggles, both 8 Rules and Sand-monk said, “Elder Brother must have recently learned the art of physiognomy!” 
“Those physiognomist,” said Pilgrim, “ought to be regarded only as my grandsons!” 
“Stop gabbing!” snapped Tripitaka. “It appears now that they're bent on taking me in. What'd we do really?” 
Pilgrim said, “Let’s wait till the twelfth, the day of the wedding ceremony, when the princess undoubtedly will appear to pay homage to her parents. Let old monkey take a look at her from the side. If 
she were a real woman, it wouldn't be too bad for you to become the royal son-in-law and enjoy the glory of a nation.” 
These words sent Tripitaka into greater fury. “You wretched ape!” he cried. “You still want to injure me! As Aware of Ability puts it, nine-tenths of our journey has been covered already, and you still stab 
me with your hot tongue! Stop wagging it, and don’t you dare open that stinking mouth of yours! If you behave with such insolence just one more time, I'll recite that spell to make life intolerable for 
you!” 
When Pilgrim heard that he wanted to recite the spell, he was so horrified that he immediately went to his knees and said, “Don't do that! Don’t do that! If she were a real woman, we’d wait till the time 
of the mutual salutes and then create havoc in the palace and get you out.” As master and disciples conversed, the announcement of the night watches began. Truly the palace clock drips slowly; the 
floral scent spreads softly. The boudoir drops its pearly screen; in empty yards no lights are seen. The swings stand idle, showing only their shades; all is quiet as a Tangut flute fades. The moon on 
the blossoms confers her grace; the stars seem brighter in a treeless space. The nightjar ends her poem; the butterfly-dream is long. The Milky Way crosses the sky as white clouds to one’s homeland 
fly: a time when travellers feel the keenest pain, saddened by the wind-swept young willow-skein. “Master,” said 8 Rules, “it’s late. If there’s anything important, discuss it tomorrow. Let’s go to sleep! 
Let's go to sleep.” Master and disciples indeed enjoyed a restful night. Soon the golden rooster announced the arrival of dawn, and the king ascended the main hall for his early audience. See the 
palace open, the purple aura high; wind-blown, royal poems rends the blue sky. Clouds move the leopard’s-tails> and banners shake; the sun hits carved dragons® and girdle-jades quake. Fragrant 
mist heightens the palace willow green; dew drops moisten the flowers’ imperial sheen. Midst shouts and exercises the ministers’ stand for peace and harmony reign over the land. After the hundred 
Officials, both civil and military, had paid their homage, the king gave this order: “Let the Court of Imperial Entertainments prepare the wedding banquet for the twelfth. For today however, let us make 
ready some spring juice and entertain our royal son-in-law in the imperial garden.” He also instructed the Director of the Bureau of Ceremonies to take the three worthy kinsmen back to the College of 
Interpreters. There they would be served a vegetarian feast by the Court of Imperial Entertainments. The staff from the Office of Poems would be asked to play at both the college and the garden so 
that all could be entertained while they spent time enjoying the sight of spring. When 8 Rules heard all this, he at once spoke up and said, “Your Majesty, since we, master and disciples made each 
other’s acquaintance, we’ve not been separated for a single moment. Today if you plan to eat and drink in the imperial garden, take us along and let’s play for a couple of days. That's the way for you 
to make my master your royal son-in-law. Otherwise, | fear that you may find it hard to carry out this scheme.” 
The king had already noticed 8 Rules’ hideous appearance and vulgar manner of speech. And when he saw him sticking out his horn and wagging his ears, constantly twisting his head and kneading 
his neck, he thought the speaker was showing signs of madness. Fearing that the marriage might be ruined, the king had no choice but to agree to the demands. “Prepare two tables,” said the king, “in 
the Eternal Pacification of the Chinese and Barbarian Loft where we'll sit with our royal son-in-law. Three other tables are to be set up in the Spring-Detaining Arbour for those three guests. Master and 
disciples, we fear, may not find it convenient to sit together.” 
Only then did Idiot salute and say, “Thank you!” before each person withdrew. The king also issued this order that the official in charge of the inner palace prepare another banquet, so that the queen 
and the consorts of three palaces and six chambers could assist the princess in putting on her headgear and present her with her dowry in anticipation of the fine match set for the 12". By about the 
hour of the Serpent, ’ the king called for his carriage and invited the Tang Monk and his companions to go to the imperial garden. As they looked around, they saw a marvellous place indeed. The 
path’s made of coloured stones — the railings bear carved patterns — the path’s made of coloured stones by the side of which rare blossoms grow. The railings bear carved patterns within and beyond 
which strange flora flourish. Lush peaches bewitch the kingfishers; young willows display the orioles. A walk brings quiet fragrance to fill your sleeves; a stroll makes much pure scent cling to your robe. 
A phoenix terrace and a dragon pool; a bamboo garret and a pine arbour. On the phoenix terrace, a flute bids phoenixes to come courteously; 8in the dragon pool, fishes raised there change into 
dragons to leave. The bamboo garret has poems, all lofty rhymes composed with utmost skill; the pine arbour has essays, a noble collection of pearl and jade; green rocks form artificial hills; the winding 
stream’s azure and deep. The true-peony arbour, the cinnamon rose props, seem like thick damask and brocade spread out; the moli9 fence, the Pyrus patch appear as mist or jade piled up. The peony 
has exotic scent; the Sichuan mallow shows rare glamour; white pears vie with red apricots for fragrance; purple orchids strive with gold daylilies for brilliance. The lichun flower, the wood-brush flower, 
and the azalea are all fresh and fiery; the crape-flower, the fengxian flower, and the jade-pin flower are all tall and trembling. Each spot of red ripeness seems like moistened rouge; each clump of 
dense fragrance is a brocade round. A joy’s the east wind recalling the warm sun; the whole garden’s lit up and with charms overrun. The king and his several guests viewed this scenery for a long 
time. Then the Director of Ceremonies came to invite Pilgrim and his 2 brothers to go to the Spring-Detaining Arbour while the king took the Tang Monk to the Chinese and Barbarian Loft, each party 
being served separately. The poems and exercise, the decorations and appointments, were quite extraordinary. Truly the Heaven-gate’s'® rugged in the morning light. On dragon towers auspicious 
mists alight. The soft hues of spring the flora adorn; silk robes shimmer, struck by the rays of dawn. Like feastings of gods pipes and poems resound; with juices of jade the cups make their rounds. 
Joined in their fun are both subjects and king; a world at peace must prosperity bring. When the elder saw what great esteem the king showed him, he had little choice but to force himself to participate 
in the revelry. Truly he showed delight without but harboured anxiety within. At the place where they were sitting, there were four gilded screens hanging on the wall, on which were painted the scenes 
of the four seasons. Inscribed on these paintings were poems, all compositions by noted scholars of the Hanlin Academy. ''The Poem of Spring says: 
The cycle of nature has made its turn. 
The great earth quickens and all things seem new. 
Plums vie with peaches in their beauteous blooms; swallows pile on carved beams their scented dust. 


The Poem of Summer says: 
The south wind blows to cause our thoughts delay; the sun beams on k'uei'2 and pomegranate. 
A jade flute’s soft notes stir our midday dream when scent of water lily spreads to the drapes. 
The Poem of Autumn says: 
Of golden wells’ paulownia one leaf’s yellow." 
Draw not the pearl screen for the night has frost. 
The swallows know it’s time to leave their nests as wild geese depart for another land. 
The Poem of Winter says: 
The rain clouds make the sky both dark, cold, and wind blows the snow to build 1000 hills. 
The palace’s a warm, red stove of course when plum blossoms overlay with jade the rails. 
When the king saw how intently the Tang Monk was staring at the poems, he said, “If the royal son-in-law finds the flavour of poetry so attractive, he too must be skilled in the art of reciting and 
composition. If you’re not parsimonious with your pearl and jade, please give a reply in kind to each of the poems, using the same rhymes. Will you do that?” 
Now the elder was someone who could lose himself in such scenery, for his mind was enlightened by the vision of seeing a god-nature in all things. When he heard the king favouring him with such a 
request, he blurted out the sentence, “The sun melts the ice as the great earth turns.” Exceedingly pleased, the king said to one of the palace attendants, “Bring out the library's four treasures.'4 Record 
the poetic replies of our royal son-in-law, so that we may slowly savour them.” The elder did not refuse. In delight he took up the brush to write a Reply to the Poem of Spring: 
The sun melts the ice as the great earth turns. 
This day the king’s garden blossoms anew. 
The people’re blessed with such clement clime for rivers and seas are rid of worldly dust. 
A Reply to the Poem of Summer: 
The dipper points south to cause the day's delay. 
Ablaze are the huai’> and pomegranate. 
Orioles and swallows midst the willow sing and send their lovely duet through the drapes. 
A Reply to the Poem of Autumn: 
Fragrant is the orange - green and yellow. 
The verdant pine and cypress love their frost. 
Brocade-like, the chrysanthemum’s half in bloom. 
Our poems resound through cloud and water land. 
A Reply to the Poem of Winter: 
The snow’s stopped but still the air’s cold when jagged rocks like jade surround the hills. 
The stove’s beast-shaped charcoals have warmed the milk. 1° 
We recite and lean on the rails, hands in sleeves. 
The king read the poems and he could not have been more pleased. “What a marvellous line!” he recited. “We recite and lean on the rails, hands in sleeves!” 
At once he asked the Office of Poems to set the poems to poems and perform them. They spent the day that way before dispersing. Meanwhile, Pilgrim and his two companions also abandoned 
themselves to enjoyment at the Spring-Detaining Arbour. Growing somewhat tipsy from the several cups of juice they each consumed, they were about to leave to look for the elder when they spotted 
him in a distant room with the king. His silly nature aroused, 8 Rules shouted, “What great fun! What comfort! Today I’ve had my enjoyment! As long as I’m full, it's time to take a snooze!” 
“Second Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, chuckling, “that’s not very dignified of you! With such a full stomach, how can you sleep?” 
8 Rules said, “You’d not know about this. The proverb says, if after a meal you don’t lie flat, your belly won't get fat!” 
The Tang Monk took leave of the king and went to the arbour where he rebuked 8 Rules, saying, “You coolie! You're getting rowdier! What sort of a place is this that you dare to shout and holler? If the 
king takes offence, you may lose your life!” 


“It's nothing! It's nothing!” replied 8 Rules. “After all, we’re related to him as in-laws, properly speaking, and he can’t be offended by us. As the saying goes, you can’t cut off your kin with beating, nor 
can you your neighbour with scolding. We're all having some fun. Why worry about him?” 
“Bring that Idiot over here!” snapped the elder. “Let me give him twenty strokes with my priestly staff!” So Pilgrim pulled him over and bent him down while the elder raised his staff to strike. 
“Dad royal son-in-law!” cried Idiot. “Please pardon me! Please pardon me!” 
Those officials who had borne them company during the party persuaded the Tang Monk to stop. Scrambling up, Idiot could be heard muttering, “Dear honoured man! Dear royal son-in-law. The 
wedding hasn't even taken place, and you're administering royal law already!” Putting his hand over 8 Rules’ mouth, Pilgrim said, “Stop jabbering! Stop jabbering! Hurry and go to sleep!” 
They spent another night in the Spring-Detaining Arbour, and by dawn, they feasted once more. They passed 3 or 4 days in such pleasure, and the auspicious day of the twelfth arrived. The officials 
from the three departments of the Court of Imperial Entertainments came to say, “Since receiving your decree on the eighth, your subjects have now finished building the royal son-in-law’s residence, 
though we're still waiting for the dowry to furnish the place. The wedding banquet, too, is prepared. Altogether, both vegetarian and non-dietary, there’re some five hundred tables.” Delighted, the king 
wanted to ask his son-in-law at once to attend the banquet, when an official of the inner palace suddenly appeared and said, “Your Majesty, the queen wishes to have an audience.” The king went 
inside, and found the queens of the three palaces and the ladies of six chambers chatting merrily with the princess at the Zhaoyang Palace. Truly they were like bouquets of flowers and rounds of 
brocade! All that opulence could rival even that of the lunar palace in Heaven, and it certainly was not inferior to the divine jasper residence. As a testimonial, we've four new poems based on the words 
of Joy, Meet, Fine, and Mate. The Poem of Joy says: 
Joy! Joy! Joy! 
This happiness enjoy. 
A matrimony of love most seemly. 
Such smart palace fashion would rouse Change’s passion. 
Those dragon and phoenix hairpins of luminous gold threads thin; those lustrous teeth and cherry lips, a body light as flower-slips. 
Layers of silk within the 5-coloured groves; lovely fragrance rising from beauties in droves. 
The Poem of Meet says: 
Meet! Meet! Meet! 
One seductive and sweet. 
Mao Qiang"’ she rivals and Chu'® maids equals. 
A wrecker of city and state, fair like flower and jade. 
Her makeup is fresh and charming; jewels are more disarming. 
An orchid mind, nature lofty, ice-white flesh, and face most stately. 
Like distant hills her dark brows are painted thin; the regiment of silk she’s fairest therein. 
The Poem of Fine says: 
Fine! Fine! Fine! 
A maiden divine. 
Profoundly lovely, truly praiseworthy. 
Rare fragrances combine with powder and carmine. 
The blessed Tientai off somewhere. 
Could it with a royal house compare? 
She speaks and smiles in form as fair as pipes and poems both rend the air. 
Pretty are 1000 forms of flower and silk. 
Scan the whole world but none’s in her ilk. 
The Poem of Mate says: 
Mate! Mate! Mate! 
The orchid scents dilate. 
Mortal crowd and beauties proud. 
The maidens’ colours fresh-born. 
The princess newly adorned: her coiffure rises like a crow’s nest; 
Phoenix skirt beneath a rainbow vest. 
Celestial sonorities ahead; 2 rows of lovely purple and red. 
In years past she’d fixed a nuptial date; this day she’s happy to meet her fine mate. 
The king arrived in his carriage. The queen led the princess along with the consorts and palace maidens to meet him. Cheerfully the king entered the Zhaoyang Palace to take his seat. After the ladies 
had saluted to him, the king said, “Princess, our worthy daughter, we trust that the happy meeting with the sage monk when you tossed the ball from the festooned tower on the eighth has given you 
great satisfaction. The officials of various bureaus and departments, moreover, have been so considerate of our interests that all the preparations are now completed. Today is the auspicious day. You 
must make haste to attend the wedding feast, so that the goodly hour will not be forfeited.” 
Stepping forward, the princess raised her hand to salute and said, “Dad King, please pardon your daughter's ten thousand offences! There is a matter about which | must speak to you. For several 
days I’ve heard the palace officials say that the Tang Monk has three disciples who are exceedingly ugly. Your daughter dares not face them, for they will surely cause me great fear and dread. | beg 
the Dad King to send them out of the city so that my feeble body will not be harmed by fright nor our happiness ruined.” 
“If our child hadn't spoken of this matter,” replied the king, “we'd have overlooked it. They are indeed quite hideous and wild. These past few days we’ve entertained them at the Spring-Detaining Arbour 
in the royal garden. We'll take this opportunity today to go up to the hall and certify their rescript. After they have been sent out of the city, we'll then hold our banquet.” The princess respected to express 
her thanks. The king at once rode his carriage to the main hall where he issued a summons for the royal son-in-law and his three disciples. 
Now the Tang Monk too had been counting the days with his fingers. When he reached the twelfth, he began even before dawn to discuss the matter with his disciples, saying, “Today's the twelfth. 
How are we to settle this affair?” 
‘I'd tell,” said Pilgrim, “that the king has a certain gloomy aura about him. It has not however, penetrated his body yet, and | don’t think it will cause him any great harm. But | still haven’t had a chance 
to see the princess. If only she would come out! With one glance old monkey can tell us whether she is real or not, and only then can we do anything. You’d not worry, though. Today they will certainly 
call for us in order to send us three out of the city. You’d accept the summons without fear. In the twinkling of an eye I'll be back at your side to give you protection.” 
As master and disciples talked, the attendant to the throne and the Director of Ceremonies indeed arrived with a summons. Chuckling, Pilgrim said, “Let's go! Let's go! We're about to be sent off while 
Master will remain for the marriage.” 
“To send us off,” said 8 Rules, “they must present some thousand taels of gold or silver. That'll be enough for me to get some gifts to go back to my in-laws. We'll have another wedding and a little fun!” 
“Clamp your mouth, Second Elder Brother, and stop blabbering!” said Sand-monk. “Just let Big Brother make the decision.” 
They took the luggage and the horse to follow the various officials to the vermilion steps. When he saw them, the king asked the three disciples to approach him, saying, “Bring us your travel rescript. 
We'll use our treasure seal on it. In addition, we'll increase your travel allowance and wish you a speedy arrival at the Spirit Mountain to see God. When you return with the scriptures, there will be 
further reward. The royal son-in-law will remain here, and you need not worry about him.” 
Thanking him, Pilgrim asked Sand-monk to take out the rescript to hand over to the king. The king read it before applying his seal and affixing his signature. Then he presented them with ten ingots of 
yellow gold and twenty ingots of white gold as wedding gifts. As he had always been both lecherous and greedy, 8 Rules immediately took them while Pilgrim gave a salute and said, “Much obliged! 
Much obliged!” 
He turned and began to walk out. Tripitaka was so startled that he scrambled up and caught hold of Pilgrim. Teeth grinding audibly, he said, “Are you all abandoning me?” 
Squeezing Tripitaka’s palm with his hand, Pilgrim winked at him and said, “Relax and enjoy your union here. When we've acquired the scriptures, we'll return to see you.” The elder seemed not to 
believe him and refused to let go. The other officials however, thought that master and disciples were indeed bidding each other farewell. Then the king asked the royal son-in-law to ascend to the hall 
once more while the other officials were to see the disciples off outside the city. The elder had to loosen his grip and went back to the hall. 
Pilgrim and his two companions went out of the gate of the court and took leave of the officials. “Are we really leaving?” asked 8 Rules. 
Without saying a word, Pilgrim walked back to the posthouse where they were received by the posthouse clerk. As he went to prepare rice and tea, Pilgrim said to 8 Rules and Sand-monk, “You two 
stay here and don’t show yourselves. If the posthouse clerk questions you, just muddle through with some answer. Don’t speak to me at all for I’m leaving to go protect Master.” Dear Great Sage! He 
pulled off a piece of hair, blew his mortal breath on it, and cried, “Change!” It changed at once into a form of himself that remained with 8 Rules and Sand-monk in the posthouse. His true self leaped 
into mid-air and changed into a bee. See his yellow wings, sweet mouth, and sharp tail - a mad exerciser lost in the gale, most able to pick the buds and steal their scent to make through willows his 
descent. He submits to both stains and dyes; hither and yon vainly he flies, never tasting that sweetness he helps distil. He has but his name for a will. *8Look at him! Ever so lightly he flew into the 
court where he found the Tang Monk sitting most dejectedly and with furrowed brow on a brocade cushion to the left of the king. Alighting on his Vairocana hat, he crawled near his ear to whisper, 
“Master, I’m here. Please don’t worry.” 
Those few words of course were audible only to the Tang Monk and to none of those other mortals. When the Tang Monk heard them, he felt more reassured. In a little while, a palace official came to 
say, “Your Majesty, the wedding banquet’s been laid out in the Magpie Palace. The queen and the princess are waiting there for the presence of Your Majesty and the honourable man.” The king could 
not have been more pleased. At once he took the royal son-in-law inside the palace. Thus it is that the deviant lord loves flowers, though flowers bring woe; the Chan-mind stirs to thought but thought 
begets sorrow. 
111 
Falsely assuming true form, the jade hare’s caught; True Yin returns to the right to join Numinous Source’ 
That Tang Monk dolefully followed the king into the inner palace where he heard the loud noise of poems and drums and encountered strong whiffs of rare perfume. Lowering his head, he dared not 
look up at all. Pilgrim however, was secretly delighted. Perched on his master’s Vairocana hat, he exercised his magic perception and stared everywhere with his fiery eyes and diamond pupils. Two 
rows of palace maidens, colourfully dressed, stood in waiting, so enhancing the place that it seemed like a flower palace or divine residence and more attractive than the silken drapes in the breeze of 
spring. Truly they are both graceful and lissom with substance like jade and flesh like ice. Pairs and pairs, more charming than Chu maidens; 2 by 2 they rival Xi Shi in beauty. Phoenixes rear up from 
coiffures piled high; like distant hills are moth brows faintly drawn. That graceful playing of reeds, frequent blowing of flutes - the tones - gong, shang, jue, zhi, and yu - 2high and low make their lines 
flow. Wondrous poems and exercises ever lovable; silk and floral clusters all agreeable. When Pilgrim saw that his master was completely unmoved, he said to himself in silent praise, “Marvellous 
monk! Marvellous monk! Living midst silk and satin he’s not enticed; walking through opulence he’s not beguiled.” 
In a little while, the princess with the queen and the concubines thronging around her, walked out of the Magpie Palace to receive the king, all crying, “Long live Your Majesty! Long live Your Majesty!” 
The elder became so flustered that he shook all over, not knowing what to do at all. Pilgrim, on the other hand, at once perceived that there was a slight manifestation of monstrous aura on top of the 
princess’s head, although it did not seem too virulent. He quickly crawled near his master’s ear to whisper: “Master, that princess is a false one.” 
“If she is not a true princess,” said the elder, “how can we make her reveal her true form?” 
“By showing my religion body,” replied Pilgrim, “I'll capture her immediately.” 
“No! No!” said the elder. “You might frighten the throne. Let the monarch and the queen retire first. Then you may exercise your magic power.” 
That Pilgrim however, had been impetuous all his life. How'd | permit this? With a roar he revealed his original form and dashed forward. Grabbing the princess, he cried, “You cursed beast! You make 
the false become real here! Isn’t it enough for you to enjoy yourself at this place? Why must you be so greedy as to want to deceive my master and ruin his true yang to satisfy your lust?” 


These words rendered the king dumb and stupid with fear and sent the queen and concubines tumbling all over. Every 1 of those gaily attired girls and palace maidens darted east and west, fleeing for 
her life. This was what their condition was like: a spring wind breezy — autumn air blustery - the breezy spring wind passes garden and wood and 100 blossoms quiver; the blustery autumn air comes 
to the courts and myriad leaves flutter. The blasted peony falls beneath the fence and blown-up peony lies beside the rails. The shore’s hibiscus trembles; the steps’ chrysanthemum heaps up. The 
Pyrus turns feeble and sinks to the dust; the rose, still fragrant, lies in the wilds. The spring wind severs the lotus stalks; the winter snow crushes the plum’s young buds. Pomegranate petals scatter 
east and west in the inner palace; willow twigs by the shore dangle north and south of the royal mansion. In one night a wild storm of wind and rain does with dying redness the landscape stain. More 
flustered than ever and shaking all over, Tripitaka embraced the king and said only, “Your Majesty, please don’t be afraid. Please don’t be afraid! This is how my mischievous disciple must work his 
magic power to distinguish truth and falsehood.” 

That monster-spirit saw that things were going badly. She struggled free, ripped off her clothes, and flung away her earrings, bracelets, and jewels. Dashing into the shrine of the local spirit at the 
imperial garden, she took out a short, pestle-like club, turned and struck madly at Pilgrim. Pilgrim caught up with her and faced her with the iron rod. The 2 of them screaming and shouting, started a 
battle in the garden that continued in mid-air when both of them displayed their magic powers and mounted cloud and fog. In this very conflict, the golden-hooped rod has both name and fame but a 
club like a pestle no one knows. 1 seeking true scriptures has reached this place; 1 for love of strange blossoms has come to stay. The fiend long knowing of the Tang sage monk, desires to unite with 
his primal sperm. Abducting the true princess the year before, she took human form as the king’s beloved. The Great Sage now perceives her monstrous air; he would save life by making known the 
truth. The short club works violence, bashing the head; the iron rod with power hits the face. Loud and boisterous the 2 of them fight as mist and cloud remove the sun from sight. As the 2 of them 
waged a fierce battle in mid-air, they filled the populace of the whole city with horror and terrified the officials of the entire court. Supporting the king with his hands, the elder could only say, “Please 
don’t be afraid! Please tell our lady the queen and the rest not to fear. Your princess’s actually someone specious who’s taken on the true princess’ form. When my disciple captures her, you'll know 
the difference.” 

Several of the more courageous palace ladies took the clothing and jewels to show to the queen saying, “These’re worn by the princess. Now she’s abandoned everything. Stark naked, she’s fighting 
that monk in the sky. She must be a monstrous deviate.” 

By then the king, the queen, and the royal concubines had grown calmer and began to stare at the sky. That monster-spirit battled the Great Sage for half a day, and they fought to a draw. Tossing the 
rod up into the air, Pilgrim cried, “Change!” The single rod changed into ten rods; the ten became a hundred, and the hundred turned into thousands. Like slithering snakes and gliding dragons in mid- 
air, these rods madly attacked the monstrous deviate. Completely flustered, the monstrous deviate transformed herself into a clear breeze and fled toward the region above the blue sky. Pilgrim recited 
a spell that reduced the iron rods to a single piece, before mounting the auspicious luminosity to give chase. When they approached the West Heaven Gate, they could see gleaming banners fluttering. 
“Those guarding the Heaven Gate,” shouted Pilgrim, “block the monster-spirit! Don’t let her escape!” The Deity-King DhOtarastra indeed led the 4 Grand Marshals Pang, Liu, Gou, and Bi to bar the way 
each wielding his weapon. Unable to proceed, the monstrous deviate spun around and began to battle with Pilgrim once more, brandishing her short club. As he wielded his iron rod to meet her, the 
Great Sage stared at the club and saw that it was thick on one end and thin on the other. It resembled a pestle used for hulling grain in fact. “Cursed beast!” he cried. “What sort of weapon’s that you've 
there that you dare oppose old monkey? Submit at once lest one blow of my rod smash your skull!” 

Clenching her teeth, the monstrous deviate said, “So you don’t know about this weapon of mine! Listen to my recital! This divine root’s a piece of mutton-jade, its form cut and polished for countless 
years. | owned it already when Chaos parted; it's my possession when the world began. No mortal thing could with its source compare for its nature came from Heaven above. Its golden-light frame 
with Four Signs accords with Three Primes? fused with Five Phases’ breaths. In Toad Palace’ it has long stayed with me, a frequent companion by Cassia Hall. For love of flowers | came down to Earth 
and went to India, posing as a girl. | shared the king’s joys with no other wish than wedding the Tang Monk to seal my fate. How wicked you're that you wreck our match! So savage that you hunt me 
down to fight! This weapon of mine’s tremendous fame, surpassing greatly your golden-hooped rod. A pestle for herbs in Vast-Cold Palace, ‘its one blow will send one to Yellow Spring.” 

On hearing this, Pilgrim laughed scornfully and said, “Dear cursed beast! If you had lived in the Toad Palace, you'd not be ignorant of old monkey’s abilities, could you? And you still dare take a stand 
here? Reveal your form and surrender at once, and I'll spare your life!” 

“| recognise that you’re the Ban-Horse-Plague,” said the fiend, “who greatly disturbed the Celestial Palace five centuries ago. I'd defer to you, | suppose. But ruining one’s marriage’s an act of bitter 
enmity like murdering one’s parents. Neither reason nor sentiment would allow me to give in. That's why I’m going to fight you, Heaven-defying Ban-Horse-Plague!” 

Now that word: Ban-Horse-Plague was most irksome to the Great Sage. When he heard them, he became enraged and immediately raised his iron rod to strike at her face. The monstrous deviate 
wielded her club to meet him, and right before the West Heaven Gate they locked in savage combat once more. In this battle, the golden-hooped rod, the pestle for herbs, 2 weapons divine formed a 
worthy match that 1 for marriage descended to Earth; this 1 protecting the Tang Monk arrived here. The king actually was not quite upright — his love of flowers won a fiend’s delight and brought on this 
moment a bitter fight, both parties stirred to stubbornness and hate. They charged and sallied to see who would win; with taunts and slurs they waged a war of words. The mighty pestle was rare in the 
world; the rod’s divine strength had even more appeal. Golden beams flashing lit up Heaven’s gate; cold mists lambent spread throughout the Earth. They fought back and forth for over 10 rounds. The 
monster growing weak, now lost her ground. That monster-spirit fought more than ten rounds with Pilgrim. When she saw how taut and fast the style of the rod was, she realised that it would be difficult 
for her to prevail. After one feeble blow with her club, she shook her body and changed into myriad shafts of golden light to flee toward the south. The Great Sage gave chase, and they suddenly 
reached a huge mountain. The monster's golden light lowered and entered a mountain cave, completely disappearing from sight. Fearing that she might sneak back to the kingdom to harm the Tang 
Monk, Pilgrim took careful note of the shape of that mountain before reversing the direction of his cloud to return to the kingdom himself. This was about the hour of the Monkey. The king, tugging at 
Tripitaka, was still shaking all over. “Sage monk, please save me!” was all he could say. Those concubines and the queen, too were quite apprehensive when they saw the Great Sage dropping down 
from the edge of the clouds. “Master,” he cried, “I’m back!” 

“Stand still, Wukong,” said Tripitaka, “and don’t alarm His Majesty. Let me ask you what's in fact become of the princess?” 

Standing outside the gate to the Magpie Palace with hands folded across his chest, Pilgrim said, “The false princess's a monstrous deviate. At first | fought with her for half a day. When she found that 
she’d not prevail, she changed into a clear breeze and fled toward the gate of Heaven. | shouted for the celestial deities to bar her way. She changed back to her form and again fought over ten rounds 
with me. Once more she changed into shafts of golden light to flee to a mountain due south of here. | chased her there but couldn't find her. Fearing that she may come back here to harm you, | came 
back to look after you.” 

When the king heard this, he tugged at the Tang Monk to ask, “If the false princess's a monstrous deviate, where’s our real princess?” 

“Let me catch the false princess first,” Pilgrim responded at once, “and your real princess will naturally return to you.” 

When the queen and palace ladies heard this declaration, their fears were lifted. Each one of them went forward, saluted low, and said, “I beg the sage monk to rescue our real princess and bring her 
back. When this whole affair has been cleared up, you'll be amply rewarded.” 

“This is no place for us to talk,” said Pilgrim. “Let His Majesty go to the main hall with my master. And let the queen and her companions return to their palaces. Have my brothers 8 Rules and Sand- 
monk summoned to the palace so that they may give my master protection. | can then leave to subdue the monster. In that way, proper etiquette for what is public and private will be observed, and I'll 
be spared from worry. Please take note of what I’ve said, for it betokens a great deal of energy expended.” 

The king was most grateful to follow his suggestion. Hand in hand, he walked with the Tang Monk to the main hall while the queen and the ladies returned to their own palaces. The king then asked for 
the preparation of a vegetarian meal and sent for 8 Rules and Sand-monk. In a little while the two of them arrived, and Pilgrim gave them a thorough account of what had taken place and enjoined them 
to protect their master with all diligence. Mounting the cloud somersault, Great Sage hurtled through the air and left. All those officials before the main hall saluted low to the sky, and we'll leave them 
there for the moment. 

The Great Sage Sun headed straight for the mountain to the south of the kingdom to begin his search. The monstrous deviate had fled there in defeat; on reaching the mountain, she crawled inside 
her lair and used pieces of rock to stop up its entrance. Terribly dismayed, she hid herself and kept totally out of sight. Pilgrim searched for a while but he could detect no movement whatever. Growing 
anxious, he made the magic sign with his fingers and recited a spell to summon into his presence the local spirit and the mountain deity for interrogation. The two gods arrived and immediately respected, 
both crying, “We didn’t know! We didn’t know! If we’d known, we’d have gone far to receive you. We beg you to pardon us.” 

“lll not hit you just yet,” said Pilgrim. “Let me question you instead. What's the name of this mountain? How many monster-spirits are to be found here? Tell me the truth and I'll pardon you.” 

“Great Sage,” those two deities said, “this mountain is named Mount Hairbrush. It has three rabbit lairs in it.6 From antiquity till now there has never been any monster-spirit, for it is a blessed land of 
complete circularity. If the Great Sage wishes to find monster-spirits, he’d better stick to the road to the Western Heaven.” 

Pilgrim said, “When old monkey arrived at the Kingdom of India in the Western Heaven, he discovered that the princess, the daughter of the king, had been abducted by a monster-spirit and left in the 
wilds. The monster-spirit assumed the form of the princess to deceive the king into erecting a festooned tower, from which she would toss an embroidered ball to select her husband. When | escorted 
my master beneath the tower, she purposely threw the ball on the Tang Monk, for she wanted to become his mate so that she could steal his primal yang through temptation. | saw through all that and 
revealed myself in the palace to capture her. Stripping off her human clothes and jewellery, she fought with me for half a day, wielding a short club called a pestle for herbs. Then she changed into a 
clear breeze to flee but old monkey caught up with her before the West Heavenly Gate, and we fought for another ten rounds or more. Realising that she could not prevail, she changed into beams of 
golden light and fled here. Why is it that she can’t be seen now?” 

When the two deities heard this, they led Pilgrim at once to search the three rabbit lairs. They began with the one at the foot of the mountain; looking there, they could see only a few wild rabbits that 
were frightened away. When they searched their way up to the hole on the peak however, they at once spotted two huge slabs of stone blocking its entrance. “This has to be where the monstrous 
deviate is,” said the local spirit. “She must have crawled in there to evade your pursuit.” 

Pilgrim lifted away the stones with his iron rod. The monstrous deviate was indeed hiding in there. With a loud whoosh, she leaped out and attacked with upraised pestle. Pilgrim wielded his iron rod to 
parry the blow, so terrifying the two deities that the mountain god backed up and the local spirit darted away. “Who asked you two,” whined the monster to the two of them, “to bring him here to look for 
me?” Barely able to withstand the iron rod, she fought as she retreated, rising to mid-air. 

It was getting late, and the situation became more precarious. Growing more and more violent, Pilgrim was about to give her the coup de grace. Suddenly a voice rang out from the azure air of the 9- 
fold Heaven: “Great Sage, don’t raise your hand! Don’t raise your hand! Be lenient with your rod!” 

Pilgrim turned to look and discovered the Star Lord of Supreme Yin, followed by the mortal Chang’e and other lunar goddesses, all descending in front of him on a pink cloud. Pilgrim was so startled 
that he quickly put away his iron rod and saluted to receive them, saying, “Old Supreme Yin where are you going? Pardon old monkey for not stepping out of the way!” 

“The monstrous deviate opposing you,” said Supreme Yin, “happens to be the jade hare of my Vast-Cold Palace, the one who helps me pound the mortal drug of mysterious frost. On her own she 
picked open the gold lock and jade bolt and fled the palace for a year. | calculated that she might be in mortal danger at this moment, and that’s why I’ve come to save her life. | beg the Great Sage to 
spare her for this old man’s sake.” 

“Yes! Yes! Yes!” said Pilgrim. “I dare not refuse you, of course! No wonder she knows how to use a pestle for herbs! So, she is the little jade hare! But | wonder whether the old Supreme Yin knows of 
her kidnapping the princess of the Kingdom of India. She speciously assumed the form of the princess in order to ruin the primal yang of a sage monk, my master. Her desire and her offence are really 
intolerable. How could she be spared so lightly?” 

“You've no knowledge of this either,” said Supreme Yin. “The daughter of the king is no ordinary mortal. Originally she was the Lady White’ of the Toad Palace. Eighteen years ago, after giving a slap 
to the little jade hare, she was overcome by mortal longings and went to the Region Below. The light of her soul found conception in the belly of the queen, and she was born to the royal family. Nursing 
the grudge of that single slap, this little jade hare ran away from our palace last year so that she could send Lady White into the wilds. But she should not have wanted to marry the Tang Monk, and 
this offence is certainly unforgivable. Fortunately you're alert enough to discern the true and the false, so that she did not have a chance to ruin your master. | beg you, therefore, to pardon her for my 
sake. I'll take her back now.” 

“When you present me with this sort of karma,” said Pilgrim, chuckling, “old monkey dares not go against your wishes. But if you take away the little jade hare now, | fear that the king may not believe 
me. | hope, therefore, that Lord Supreme Yin and my mortal sisters will take the trouble of bringing the little jade hare to the kingdom and giving a clear testimony. In that way, not only the ability of old 
monkey will be made known but the reason for the descent of Lady White can also be told. Then we may ask the king to send for Princess Lady White, so that the purpose of manifest retribution may 
be clearly established.” 

Consenting to what he said, Lord Supreme Yin pointed at the monstrous deviate and snapped, “Cursed beast! Aren't you returning to what's right?” 

Rolling over on the ground, the little jade hare revealed her true form. Truly she has sharp teeth and divided lips, long ears with little hair. Her body is a ball of fur-like jade; she can fly through mountains 
with paws outstretched. The creamy straight nose seems brightly frosted or thickly powdered; the shining red eyes can rival even white snow dotted with rouge. Hugging the ground, she is all fleecy 
like a bundle of silk; torso stretched out, she is argent like a silver-threaded frame. A number of times she drinks at dawn the clear dew of Heaven’s air and pounds long-life drug with a jade pestle rare. 


Delighted by the sight, the Great Sage trod the cloudy luminosity, leading the way followed by Lord Supreme Yin, Change and other lunar goddesses, and the jade hare. They arrived at the Kingdom 
of India about dusk, and the moon was just rising. When they neared the city, they could hear the roll of drums on the watchtower. The king and the Tang Monk were still in the main hall while 8 Rules 
and Sand-monk, along with many officials at the foot of the steps, were discussing the cessation of court. They saw a glowing sheen of coloured mists approaching from due south, its luminosity making 
the whole place bright as day. As they stared into the sky, they heard the Great Sage Sun crying out in a loud voice: “Your Majesty of India, please ask your queen and concubines to come out and 
look. Beneath this treasure canopy’s the Star Lord of Supreme Yin and the mortal sisters on both sides of him are the lunar goddesses and Change. This little jade hare’s the false princess of your 
household; she’s now revealed her true form.” 
The king hurriedly assembled the queen, his concubines, the palace maidens, and gaily-attired girls to salute the sky and worship. He himself and the Tang Monk also expressed their thanks toward 
the sky by saluting low. All the households in the city also set up incense tables and respected, reciting the name of god. As they looked up into the air, Bullseye 8 Rules was moved to lust. Unable to 
contain himself, he leaped into the air and embraced a rainbow-skirted mortal, crying, “Sister, you and | are old acquaintances! Let's go play!” 
Walking forward to grab hold of him, Pilgrim gave him a couple of slaps on the face and a scolding. “You vulgar Idiot!” he said. “Where do you think you're, that you dare vent your lust?” 
“It's just a bit of slapstick,” replied 8 Rules, “to dispel my boredom and have some fun! That's all!” That Lord Supreme Yin ordered the entourage to turn. With a goddesses, they took the jade hare back 
to the Lunar Palace while Pilgrim yanked 8 Rules back to the ground. 
After thanking Pilgrim in the main hall, the king asked, “Since the false princess has been captured by the mighty magic power of the divine monk where is our true princess to be found?” 
“That true princess of yours,” replied Pilgrim, “did not come from mortal stock either. She was actually the mortal Lady White of the Lunar Palace. Because she slapped the jade hare once eighteen 
years ago, she thought of this world and descended to the Region Below where she was conceived in your queen who gave birth to her. Nursing this former enmity, the little jade hare last year picked 
open the jade bolt and gold lock and escaped to this place also. She kidnapped the Lady White and left her in the wilds before assuming her form to deceive you. This entire karmic process was told 
to me personally by Lord Supreme Yin himself. Today the false one has been removed; tomorrow you'll be asked to go search for the real one.” 
On hearing this, the king became both embarrassed and alarmed, hardly able to hold back the tears flowing down his cheeks. “Child!” he said. “Since | was enthroned in my youth, I’ve never even left 
the gate of the city. Where should | go look for you?” 
With a smile, Pilgrim said, “No need to be upset. Right now your princess's feigning madness at the Benefactor-of-Orphans Gold-Spreading Monastery. Let's retire. By morning | promise you I'll return 
your true princess.” 
The other officials, too saluted themselves and said, “Let our king put his worries to rest. These several divine monks are Gods who're able to soar on the clouds and ride the fog. Most certainly they 
possess the knowledge of past and future. Let the divine monks go make a search tomorrow and undoubtedly they'll get to the end of the matter.” 
The king agreed and ordered the pilgrims again taken to the Spring-Detaining Arbour for their meals and lodging. By then it was almost the hour of the second watch. Truly the moon is fair, the copper 
pots mark their times as wind wafts the tinkling of golden chimes. Spring has half faded and the nightjars weep; petals shroud the path for the night is deep. An idle swing the royal garden shades; the 
silver stream a jade-blue sky invades. None walks the streets or visits the bazaars when night's aglow with a sky full of stars. They all rested that night, and we'll leave them for the moment. Because 
his demonic aura had been dispelled, the king's energy revived during the night. By the third quarter of the fifth watch, he appeared again to hold his morning court, after which he asked for the Tang 
Monk and his three disciples to come and discuss the matter of finding his daughter. The elder arrived and greeted him while the Great Sage and his 2 brothers also saluted. Returning their salutes, 
the king said, “We spoke of our child, the princess, yesterday. May | trouble the divine monks to look for her?” 
The elder said, “The day before your humble cleric came from the East, by nightfall we’d entered a Benefactor-of-Orphans Gold-Spreading Monastery to ask for lodging. The priests there were good 
enough to accommodate our request. After dinner we took a stroll in the moonlight to go to look at the foundation of the old Gold-Spreading garden. Suddenly we heard the sound of lament. When we 
inquired into the matter, a priest of the monastery who was already over a century of age, sent away his attendants and told us, ‘This is the source of that lament: Late spring last year, | was just 
meditating on the dialectical relation of the moon and our nature when a breeze brought to me the sounds of weeping and lament. When | arose from my mat and went down to the foundation of the 
Jetavana garden to look, | found a girl. On being questioned, she told me that she was the daughter of the King of India, blown to that place by a strong gust when she was enjoying the sight of flowers 
in the moonlight.’ Since that old priest was quite knowledgeable in human propriety, he locked the princess in a quiet room. Fearing that she might be defiled by other priests in the monastery, he only 
told them that a monster-spirit had been locked up by him. The princess, too, understood his intentions; during the day she would babble absurdities just to win some sustenance of tea and rice for 
herself. During the night however with no one present, she would think of her parents and weep. That old priest had journeyed to the capital several times to try to ascertain the truth. When he learned 
that the princess, to all appearance, was in the palace and unharmed, he dared not present a memorial on the matter. When he learned however, that my disciple had some magic powers, he urged 
us repeatedly to make a thorough investigation. Little did we expect that the jade hare of the Toad Palace had become a monster and, falsely fused with the true form, had taken on the appearance of 
the princess. The monster, moreover, was hoping to ruin my primal yang, and it was fortunate that my disciple exercised his magic power to distinguish the true from the specious. Now the hare has 
been taken back by the Star of Supreme Yin but your worthy daughter may still be seen feigning madness at the Gold-Spreading Monastery.” 
When the king heard this meticulous account, he gave voice to loud weeping, so disturbing those in three palaces and six chambers that they arrived to make inquiry. When they learned of the cause, 
everyone wept profusely. After a long while, the king asked again, “How far is the Gold-Spreading Monastery from the city?” 
“No more than sixty miles,” replied Tripitaka. 
The king at once issued this decree: “Let the consorts of the East and the West Palaces guard the main hall while the court's Grand Preceptor will defend the kingdom. We and the queen herself will 
take the many officials and the four divine monks to the monastery and bring our princess home.” 
Immediately carriages were lined up and they all went out of the court. Look at that Pilgrim! He leaped into the air and with one twist of his torso, arrived at the monastery before them. The priests there 
hurriedly knelt down to receive him, saying, “When the Venerable Dad left, he walked with the rest of his companions. Why did you descend from the sky today?” 
“Where is that old master of yours?” asked Pilgrim, laughing. “Ask him to come out quickly, so that you may set up incense tables to receive the royal carriage. The king and queen of India are about 
to arrive along with many officials and my master.” 
The various monks could not quite comprehend what he was saying, and they asked the old priest to come out. When the old priest caught sight of Pilgrim, he bent low and said, “Venerable Dad, 
what’ve you found out about the princess?” 
Thereupon Pilgrim gave a thorough rehearsal of how the false princess tossed an embroidered ball to try to wed the Tang Monk, he fought and chased her, and Lord Supreme Yin appeared to take 
away the jade hare. The old priest again respected to express his thanks. Raising him with his hands, Pilgrim said, “Stop saluting! Stop saluting! Prepare quickly to receive the imperial carriage.” 
Only then did those priests discover that a girl had been locked up in the back room. In amazement, they all went to help set up incense tables beyond the monastery gate. After putting on the cassocks, 
they began to toll the bells and roll the drums as they waited. In a little while the imperial carriage did indeed arrive. Truly auspicious mists and fragrance fill the sky when to this rustic temple Grace 
draws nigh — like a timeless rainbow cleansing streams and seas, springtime lightning of sage kings’ dynasties. Such kindness the sylvan beauty advances; moisture the wild floral scent enhances. For 
relics left by an ancient elder, this precious hall receives a wise ruler. The king reached the monastery gate and was met outside by those monks in orderly rows. They all saluted themselves to receive 
him. Then he saw Pilgrim standing in their midst. “How did the divine monk manage to get here first?” asked the king. 
“Old monkey arrived here with a mere twist of his torso!” said Pilgrim, chuckling. “Why did you people take half a day to do it?” 
Thereafter the Tang Monk and the others arrived. With the elder leading the way, they went to the room at the back of the monastery where they found the princess still babbling and feigning madness. 
Going to his knees, the old priest pointed to the room and said, “Inside this room’s the lady princess who's blown here last year by the wind.” 
The king at once ordered the door opened, and they removed the iron lock from the door. When the king and queen caught sight of the princess and recognised her face, they rushed forward to 
embrace her, not at all bothered by the filth. “Our poor child!” they cried. “What bitter fate has caused you to suffer like this here!” Truly the reunion of parents and child is not the same as any other kind 
of reunion. The three of them hugged each other and wailed. After they had cried for a while and had given expression to how greatly they missed each other, the king ordered scented liquid to be sent 
in for the princess so that she could bathe and change her clothing. They then climbed onto the imperial chariot together to return to the capital. 
Afterward Pilgrim greeted the king once more with hands folded in front of him and said, “Old monkey has another matter to bring to your attention.” 
Returning his greeting, the king said, “We'll obey whatever instruction the divine monk’s for us.” 
Pilgrim said, “They told me that in your mountain here, the one named Hundred-Legs, there’re centipedes that've become spirits recently and harmed people during the night. The travellers and merch- 
ants have found that a great inconvenience. Since roosters are the natural foes of centipedes, | think you’d select a thousand huge roosters and scatter them throughout the mountain so that these 
poisonous insects will be eliminated. You’d change the name of this mountain also and bestow a building decree to this monastery as a token of your gratitude for this monk’s care for the princess.” 
Exceedingly pleased, the king immediately sent officials into the city to fetch the roosters. The name of the mountain was changed to Precious Flower. The Bureau of Labour was told to provide the 
necessary materials for the repair, renovation of the monastery, and its name was changed to the Royal Benefactor-of-Orphans Gold-Spreading Monastery of the Precious Flower Mountain. The priest 
was appointed a monk-official with the perpetual title of Patriotic and an official salary of 36 stones. The monks saw the imperial carriage return to court after giving thanks where the princess entered 
the various palaces to be reunited with her kinfolk. Large banquets were prepared for celebrating her homecoming and reunion with her family. The king and his subjects also joined in the revelry, 
drinking and feasting all evening. The next morning the king issued the decree for portraits to be made of the 4 sage monks and mounted in the Chinese and Barbarian Loft. The princess was asked to 
come out to thank the Tang Monk and his 3 disciples once more for her deliverance with fresh clothing and makeup. The Tang Monk wanted to take leave of the king to journey westward after that but 
the king of course refused to let them go. Again they were feted for 5 or 6 days, thus providing excellent opportunities for Idiot to stuff himself repeatedly. When the king saw however, how eager they 
were in their desire to worship God, rejecting all entreaties for them to stay, he presented them with two hundred ingots of gold and silver and a platter of treasures. Master and disciples refused to take 
even a penny. The king then ordered the imperial carriage for the old master to ride in and many officials to escort him to a great distance. The queen, the concubines, the officials, and the people all 
respected without ceasing to express their thanks. When they reached the outskirts of the city, they saw the priests of the temple, too had come to salute and see them off, reluctant to take leave of the 
pilgrims. When Pilgrim saw that all the people were unwilling to turn back, he had no choice but to make the magic sign with his fingers and blew a mouthful of mortal breath toward the ground on the 
southwest. Immediately a gust of dark wind blinded the people’s eyes and only then could the pilgrims proceed. Truly cleansed by gracious waves to return to revealing cause, ®they left the sea of gold? 
to awake to the true void. 
112 
Squire Kou gladly receives a noble priest; the elder Tang doesn’t covet riches 
The form of forms was first formless; the void of void’s not void, too. 
Hush, noise, speech, and silence the same we deem: why speak of dream within a dream?" 
The useful is in use useless; no power empowers power like ripened fruits that redden on their own. 
Ask not how they are trimmed and grown! 

The disciple of the Tang Monk used his magic power to stop those priests from the Gold-Spreading Monastery. The priests thought that they had witnessed the descent of living gods after the dark 
wind subsided, no longer able to see the master pilgrim and his disciples. They therefore respected and returned to their own monastery. Master and disciples proceeded toward the West and once 
more it was the time of late spring and early summer. The weather is pleasant and bright with pond-lotus coming in sight. Plums ripen after the rains; wheat in the wind its height attains. With their 
young river swallows fly; to feed their offspring pheasants cry. The Dipper’s south, the day’s at its longest; fair and happy all things seem strongest. Countless times they rested at night and dined at 
dawn, fording the streams and climbing the slopes. On a peaceful road they journeyed for half a month and then they saw again a city ahead of them. “Disciples,” asked Tripitaka, “what sort of place’s 
this again?” 
“| don’t know! | don’t know!” replied Pilgrim. 
“You've taken this road before,” said 8 Rules, giggling. “How could you say you don’t know? There must be something uncanny about this place. You're deliberately pretending to be ignorant just to 
play a trick on us.” 
“This Idiot is completely unreasonable!” said Pilgrim. “Though I’ve travelled several times on this road, | did it in the air. | mounted the clouds to go back and forth. Since when did | ever make a stop on 
the ground? There was no reason for me to investigate what was of no concern to me. That’s why I’m ignorant. There’s nothing uncanny here. Who wants to play a trick on you?” 
As they talked, they came up to the edge of the city. Tripitaka dismounted to walk over the drawbridge and enter the gate. In a corridor by a long street, two old men were seated and conversing. 
“Disciples,” said Tripitaka, “stand out in the middle of the road. Lower your heads and behave yourselves. Let me go up to the corridor to ask what place this is.” Pilgrim and the rest indeed obeyed him 
and stood still. 


The elder drew near, pressed his palms together, and called out, “Old patrons, this humble cleric salutes you.” 
Those two old men were just having a leisurely discussion — about the rise and fall, the gains and losses of past dynasties, about who were the sages and worthies, and about the great, lamentable 
fact that what had once been a heroic enterprise was now reduced to nothing - when they suddenly heard this salutation. They at once returned the greeting and said, “What does the elder wish to 
say?” 
“This humble cleric came from afar to worship God,” said Tripitaka. “Having just reached your treasure region, | don’t know its name. I'd like to know also where | might find a family inclined to charity, 
so that | might beg a meal there.” 
1 of the old men said, “This is the Bronze Estrada Prefecture behind which is the Numinous Earth District. If the elder wishes to have vegetarian meal, there’s no need for you to beg. Go past this 
archway and on the street running north and south, you'll come to a towered-gate facing east guarded by figures of sitting tigers. This is the home of Squire Kou; before his door there’s also a plaque 
with the inscription: 
10000 Monks Won't Be Barred 

A distant traveller like you can enjoy all you want. Go! Go! Go! And don’t interrupt our conversation!” 
Having thanked them, Tripitaka turned and said to Pilgrim, “This is the Numinous Earth District of the Bronze Estrada Prefecture. The two old men told me that beyond the archway on the street running 
north and south, there is a tiger-guarded towered gate facing east. That's the home of Squire Kou where before the door there is a plaque bearing the inscription: 

10000 Monks Won't Be Barred. They told us to go to that household to have a meal. 
“The region of the West,” said Sand-monk, “is the land of God, so there must be people who wish to feed the monks. If this is only a district or a prefecture, there’s no need for us to have our rescript 
certified. Let's go beg some food, and we can leave after the meal.” 
As the elder walked slowly through the long street with his three followers, they aroused again such alarm and suspicion of those people in the markets that they all crowded around the pilgrims to stare 
at their features. Telling his disciples to remain silent, the elder kept saying, “Behave yourselves! Behave yourselves!” The three of them indeed lowered their heads and dared not look up. After they 
turned a corner, they came upon a broad street running north and south. 
As they walked along, they saw a tiger-guarded towered-gate, on the other side of which there was hung on the wall a huge plaque with the inscription, Ten Thousand-monks Will Not Be Barred. “In 
this God land of the West,” said Tripitaka, “there’s no deception in either the foolish or the wise. | was not prepared to believe what the two aged men told me but what | see here confirms their story.” 
Always rude and impulsive, 8 Rules wanted to go in at once. Pilgrim said, “Idiot, let's stop a moment. Wait till someone comes out. When we've obtained permission, then you may enter.” 
“What Big Brother says is quite right,” said Sand-monk. “If we don’t observe proper etiquette, we may offend the patron.” 
They rested the horse and the luggage before the gate. In a little while, an old retainer appeared, carrying in his hands a scale and a basket. When he suddenly caught sight of the 4, he was so startled 
that he abandoned his possessions and ran inside to report, “My lord, there’re four strange-looking priests outside!” 
The squire leaning on his staff, was just taking a leisurely stroll in the courtyard, reciting repeatedly the name of God. The moment he heard this report, he threw away his staff and hurried out to receive 
his visitors. When he saw the 4 pilgrims, he was not intimidated by their ugliness. All he said was, “Please come in! Please come in!” 
With modesty Tripitaka entered with his disciples. After going through a little alley, the squire led them to a building and said, “This building houses a god hall, the Thread hall, and the dining hall that'll 
entertain the Venerable Dads. The building to the left’s where this disciple and his family live.” 
Tripitaka was full of compliments as he put on his cassock to worship God. They ascended the hall to look around and they saw fragrant clouds of incense and bright flames of candles; a hall filled with 
bundles of silk and flowers, 4 comers festooned with gilt and colours. On a vermilion prop a bell of purple gold hangs high; on coloured lacquered frames a pair of patterned drums are mounted. A few 
pairs of banners all embroidered with the eight jewels; 1000 gods all gilded in gold. An old bronze censer and an old bronze vase; a carved lacquered table and a carved lacquered box. From the old 
bronze censer arise unending curls of smoky fragrance; within the old bronze vase now and then the lotus displays its colours. 5-coloured clouds? fresh on the carved lacquered table; mounds of 
scented petals in the carved lacquered box. In a crystal chalice, the holy water's clear and clean; in a lamp of glass, the fragrant oil buns brightly. The gold stone-chime’s 1 note lingers and resonates. 
Truly unsoiled by red dust in this precious tower a household God-hall nobler than a temple. Having purified his hands, the elder took up incense to respect and worship. Then he turned to go through 
the proper ceremony of greeting the squire who said however, “Just a moment! We'll do that in the Thread room.” 
There they saw square and erect cases — jade and gold boxes — in square and erect cases countless volumes of Thread pile up; in jade and gold boxes many notes and letters are collected. On the 
coloured lacquered table are paper, ink, brush, and ink-stone — all exquisite items of the study. Before the pepper-dusted screens are books, paintings, a psaltery, and chess — all marvellous objects of 
real pleasure. A divine stone-chime of jade overlaid with gold is placed there; a grapevine mat that shields the moon and wind is hung there. The pure air makes one don a cheertul air; a chaste mind 
sets free the mind of Dao. Having reached the place, the elder was about to go through the ceremony when he was stopped again by the squire saying, “Please take off your Divine robe.” 
Tripitaka doffed his cassock and only then was he allowed to give his host the proper greeting. Then the squire also exchanged greetings with Pilgrim and his 2 brothers. He asked his servants to feed 
the horse and to place the luggage in the corridor. Only then did he inquire about the pilgrims’ origin. Tripitaka said, “Your humble cleric’s been sent by royal decree of the Great Tang in the Land of the 
East to visit the Spirit Mountain of your treasure region in order to seek true scriptures from the Religious Patriarch. | heard that your honoured household reveres the monks and that’s why | came 
saluting. I'd like to beg for a meal and then we'll leave.” 
His face beaming with pleasure, the squire smiled broadly and said, “Your disciple’s surname’s Kou. My given name’s Hong (Great) and style’s Dakuan (Liberality). I'm sixty-four years old. At the age 
of forty, | made a vow that'd not be fulfilled until I'd fed ten thousand-monks. This’s been going on for twenty-four years. I've kept a record of all those I’ve fed. Recently in my leisure hours | went through 
the names of the monks and discovered that I’ve fed nine thousand, nine hundred, and ninety-six persons. Only four more remain before | reach the number of perfection. It’s indeed my good fortune 
that Heaven’s sent me today you four old masters to complete this number. Please leave me your honoured titles and you must stay here for a month also. Please wait until we’ve performed the 
ceremony of the completion of a vow. Your disciple will then escort you all to the mountain with horses and carriages. Our region’s only some eight hundred miles from the Spirit Mountain. It’s not very 
far.” 
Exceedingly pleased by what he heard, Tripitaka agreed to what he proposed. Several houseboys, old and young went into the squire’s residence to haul firewood and bail water. They also took out 
rice, noodles, and vegetables in order to prepare the dietary meal. All these activities led the aged wife of the squire to ask, “Where do these monks come from that they've to receive such special 
treatment?” 
“When our master asked these four noble priests about their origin,” replied the houseboys, “one of them said that they’re sent by the Great Tang emperor to worship our Holy Dad in the Spirit Mountain. 
Who knows how great a distance they've covered to reach our place but our master said that they came from Heaven. He told us to prepare a vegetarian meal quickly to entertain them.” 
Delighted also by what she heard, the old woman said to her maid, “Get me some clothes. | want to go meet them also.” 
“Madam,” said 1 of the houseboys, “you want to meet only one of them, not the other three. Their features are extremely ugly!” 
“You people’re just ignorant,” said the old woman. “When the features are ugly, strange, or extraordinary, they must belong to celestial beings descending to the Region Below. Run along now and 
announce my presence to your master.” 
The houseboys dashed out to the Thread hall to say to the squire, “Madam’s here. She wishes to meet the venerable dads of the Land of the East.” 
On hearing this, Tripitaka rose from his seat as the old woman arrived at the hall. She raised her eyes and scrutinized the dignified and handsome features of the Tang Monk. Then she turned to look 
at Pilgrim and his two companions whose appearances were extraordinary indeed! 
Though she thought that they were celestial beings descended to Earth, she did feel a little nervous as she went to her knees to salute them. Tripitaka said hurriedly returning her salutation, “The nun’s 
erroneously paid us great homage.” 
The old woman asked the squire, “Why aren't these four masters sitting together?” 
Sticking out his horn, 8 Rules said, “We three are only disciples!” Ee! That one declaration of his seemed like a tiger's roar deep in the mountain! 
The old woman became more frightened than ever. As they spoke, another houseboy came to say, “The two uncles have arrived.” 
Turning quickly to look, Tripitaka found 2 young scholars? who walked up the Thread hall and bent low toward the elder. Tripitaka hastily returned their greetings while the squire tugged at him and said, 
“These are my two sons, named Kou Liang (Beam) and Kou Dong (Pillar). They have just returned from school and haven't had their lunch yet. Learning of the master’s arrival, they have come to 
salute you.” Delighted, Tripitaka said, “Excellent! Excellent! Truly to exalt your house doing good’s the rule. To have good sons you must send them to school.” 
“Where did this Venerable Dad come from?” the 2 young men asked their dad. 
“From a great distance,” replied the squire, laughing. “He is someone sent by the Great Tang emperor in the Land of the East, at the South Jambidvipa Continent, to go see the Holy Dad God at Spirit 
Mountain and acquire scriptures.” 
One scholar said, “I read in A Guide through the Forest of Affairs‘ that the world is divided into four continents. Our region here belongs to the West Aparagodantya Continent, and there is also an East 
East-Videha Continent. | wonder how many years it took him to travel from South Jambddvipa to this place?” 
With a smile, Tripitaka said, “This humble cleric on his journey has spent more days in being delayed than in travelling. Frequently | fell to poisonous demons and savage fiends, to thousands of bitter 
ordeals. I’m fortunate to have the protection of my three disciples. Altogether I’ve experienced fourteen summers and winters before arriving at your treasure region.” 
When they heard this, the 2 scholars paid him effusive compliments saying, “Truly a divine monk! Truly a divine monk!” 
Hardly had they finished speaking when a young boy came to say, “The maigre’s been spread out. We invite the Venerable Dads to partake.” 
The squire asked his wife to return to their residence with his sons. He himself accompanied the four pilgrims to the dining hall for the meal. The appointments in the hall were arranged in a most orderly 
manner with gilded lacquered table-tops and black-lacquered armchairs. The front row of food consisted of a crouque-en-bouche of 5 colours, created in the latest fashion by the most skilful and artistic 
hands. In the second row there were five platters of little dishes while the third row had five plates of fruits. The fourth row had five big platters of snacks, every item delicious and fragrant. The vegetarian 
soups, the rice, the steamed dumplings and buns were all steaming hot and most appetizing. Seven or eight houseboys dashed back and forth to serve them and 4 or 5 chefs never stopped working. 
Look at them! Some brought in soup while others added rice; coming and going, they were like meteors chasing the moon. Bullseye 8 Rules swallowed a bowlful with 1 gulp and he went after the food 
like wind sweeping away the clouds. Master and disciples thus enjoyed a full meal. The elder rose and was about to leave immediately having thanked the squire for the maigre. Stopping him, the 
squire said, “Old teacher, please relax and stay for a few days. As the proverb says: Beginning’s easy but the end’s hard. Please wait till I've performed the rite of completion. Only then I’d dare escort 
you on your way.” When Tripitaka saw how sincere and eamest he was, he had no choice but to remain. Not until a week or so had gone by did the squire invite some 24 local Religious priests to 
conduct a service of the completion of a vow. The priests spent 3 or 4 days to compose the service and began the sacrifice having selected an auspicious date. Their manner of course was no different 
from that of the Great Tang. They unfurled the huge banners and set up the gilded images, too; lifted high the tall candles and burned incense to worship. They rolled drums and tapped cymbals; blew 
on reeds and kneaded pipes. The little gongs and the flute’s pure tones all followed the Gongche notations. They struck up the poems and played for a while before beginning to recite the Threads 
aloud. 1S they pacified the local spirits; next called on divine warriors. They burned, sent off the documents, and saluted to God’s images. They recited the Peacock Thread, each sentence woe- 
dispelling; lighted the Bhaisajya Lamp, its flame both bright and blazing. They did the Water Penitential to dissolve guilt and enmity; proclaimed the Garland Thread to remove slander and strife. 
Triyana’s wondrous law had the finest aim; 1 or 2 Sramana were all the same. For 3 days and nights it went on like that and at last the service was over. Thinking of Thunderclap, the Tang Monk 
wanted to leave. As he tried to thank his host, the squire said, “The old teacher’s so eager to leave! It must be that my preoccupation with the service these last few days has caused me to slight you 
in some manner and you're offended.” 
“I've greatly disturbed your noble residence,” replied Tripitaka, “and | don’t know how | can repay you. Dare | even speak of offence? It’s just that when my sage ruler escorted me out of the imperial 
pass, he asked me when I'd return. By mistake | replied that I'd be back in three years. Little did | expect that I'd be on the road for fourteen years! And | still don’t know whether I'd be able to acquire 
the scriptures! By the time I’ve taken them back, it will probably be another twelve or thirteen years. Would | not have violated the sage decree? What unbearable crime would that be? | beg the old 
squire to let this humble cleric proceed. Wait till I've acquired the scriptures; then I'll come back to stay a little longer at your mansion. That should be permissible.” 
Unable to contain himself, 8 Rules shouted, “Master, you're too insensitive to human wishes! You've no regard for human sentiments! The old squire must be a very rich man if he has been able to 
make such a vow to feed priests. Now that it is completed, and now that he is urging us so earnestly to stay, there’s no harm in our remaining a year or so. Why must you insist on leaving? Why should 
we abandon such ready-made provisions and resume begging from someone else? What old dad or mum’s family do you've ahead of you?” 
“You coolie!” snapped the elder. “All you know is eating! You’ve never a thought for returning to your origin. Truly you’re a beast who cares only for eating in the trough to ease your belly’s itch! Since 
you crave so much to indulge in this deluded passion, I'll leave tomorrow by myself.” 


When Pilgrim saw that even the colour of his master’s face had changed, he grabbed 8 Rules and pounded him with his fists. “This Idiot’s,” he cried, “knowing no better, caused Master to blame even 
us!” 
“That's a good beating! That’s a good beating!” said Sand-monk, chuckling. “Even when he’s silent as he is now, he annoys people! Wait till he butts in again with his mouth!” In a huff, Idiot stood to 
one side and dared not utter another word. When the squire saw that master and disciples had become agitated, he tried to placate them with a broad smile, saying, “Please calm yourself, old teacher, 
and bear with us for one more day. Tomorrow I'll prepare some banners and drums and invite a few relatives and neighbours to see you off.” 
As they conversed, the old woman appeared and said, “Old Master, if you’ve come to our house, there’s no need for you to rush off so eagerly. How many days you've been staying anyway?” 
“Already half a month,” replied Tripitaka. 
“Let that half-month be counted as the meritorious service of the squire,” said the old woman. “I’ve accumulated a little cash from sewing too and hopes also of feeding the old master for half a month.” 
She had barely finished speaking when Kou Dong and his brother also came out and said, “Please hear us, you four Venerable Masters. Our dad fed the monks for over 20 years but he had never 
come upon a good person. Now he is lucky enough to reach the number of perfection only because of your arrival that has as it were, brought radiance to a thatched hut. Your students are too young 
to know much about karma but we do know the proverb: What pa sows pa reaps; what ma sows ma reaps; one who sows not, reaps not. The reason our parents wish to extend their hospitality’s just 
so that they may each attain certain karmic reward. Why must you refuse them so bitterly? Even we foolish brothers have saved up a small sum from our school allowances with which we, too, would 
like to entertain the Venerable Masters for half a month before we see you off.” 
“Already | dare not accept the great kindness of your mum, the old Nun,” said Tripitaka. “How could | presume upon the affection of you worthy brothers? | truly dare not. | must leave this day, and | 
implore all of you to pardon me. If | remained, I'd have exceeded the imperial limit, and my crime would be even greater than one punishable by execution.” 
When the old woman and her two sons saw that he was adamant, they grew angry and said, “Out of good intentions we wanted him to stay but he’s bent on leaving. All right! He wants to go, let him 
go! No need to chatter anymore!” 
Mum and sons thereupon got up and went inside. Unable to restrain himself, 8 Rules spoke again to the Tang Monk, “Master, don’t overdo your playacting! As the proverb says, to stay’s appropriate. 
Loitering irritates! Let us stay here for one more month, just to satisfy the wishes of mum and sons. What's the hurry?” 
“Oh?” snapped the Tang Monk, and immediately Idiot gave his own mouth a couple of slaps, saying, “Shh! Shh! don’t talk! You're making noises again!” On one side Pilgrim and Sand-monk began to 
giggle uncontrollably. 
“What are you laughing at?” said the Tang Monk to Pilgrim, sorely annoyed. 
Making the magic sign with his fingers, he was about to recite the Tight-Fillet Spell. So horrified was Pilgrim that he at once went to his knees to say, “Master, | wasn’t laughing! | wasn’t laughing! Don’t 
recite that spell, | beg you!” 
When the squire saw that master and disciples were becoming even more rancorous, he dared not insist on their staying any longer. All he said was, “The Venerable Masters needn't quarrel. | promise 
you that I'll escort you on your way tomorrow.” He went out of the Thread hall and told his secretary to send over 100 invitations to his relatives and neighbours to join him in sending off in the morning 
the old master from the Tang court in his westward journey. In the meantime, he ordered the chefs to prepare a farewell banquet, his steward to have 20 pairs of coloured banners made up, find a band 
of poets, and drummers. A group of monks from the South Advent Monastery and a group of Dacists from the East Summit Abbey were to be ready to join the party by the hour of the Serpent in the 
morning. His domestic staff obeyed and left. In a little while, it was nightfall. After the evening meal, they all retired. See a few crows to the village homeward fly. Drums and bells toll from distant towers 
high. Human traffic ceases in the street and mart; from all households lights and fires now depart. In moonlight and wind blossoms show their shade; the stars the obscure silver stream pervade. The 
night has deepened for the nightjars weep; the heavens grow silent when the earth’s asleep. At the time it was no more than the hour between the third and fourth watch when those houseboys in 
charge of various affairs all rose early in order to complete their tasks. Look at them! Those preparing the banquet rushed about in the kitchen; those making the coloured banners clamoured before 
the hall; those beckoning monks and priests sprinted on their 2 legs; those calling for poets hurled themselves forward; those sending out invitations darted east and west; those readying horse and 
carriage shouted back and forth. From the hour of midnight, the tumult lasted till dawn. By about the hour of the Serpent, every business was concluded — with money of course! The Tang Monk and 
his disciples also rose early, attended by all those people. The elder at once gave the instruction to pack and to hitch up the horse. When Idiot heard that they were truly about to leave, he pouted his 
fat lips some more and grumbled incessantly but he had no choice other than to pack up the cassock and alms-bowl and pick up the pole and its load. Having brushed and scrubbed down the horse, 
Sand-monk saddled it and waited. Pilgrim handed the nine-ringed priestly staff to his master and hung the satchel containing his travel rescript on his own chest. They were about to walk out together 
when the squire came to invite them to a large sitting room in the rear where a huge banquet was spread out. The hospitality they encountered here was quite different from what they received in the 
dining hall in front. They saw curtains loftily hung and screens on all 4 sides. Hung in the centre was a painting with the Aged Mountain and blessed sea motif; displayed on 2 walls were the scenes of 
spring, summer, autumn, and winter. From dragon-veined tripods rose incense smoke; auspicious air grew in crow-tortoise urns. The display-plates’ many colours showed vivid bejewelled floral patterns; 
the side tables’ mounds of gold held orderly rows of lion-god candies. Drums and exercises followed the graceful notes; brocade-like food and fruits were placed in the hall. Such refined vegetarian 
soup and rice! Such attractive fragrant tea and juice! Though this was a home of a commoner, it was not different from a noble’s house. Only a joyous hubbub could be heard that truly disturbed Heaven 
and Earth. The elder was just greeting the squire when a houseboy appeared and said, “The guests have all arrived.” 
These were all neighbours left and right, the wife’s brothers, the cousins, and the sisters’ husbands. There were also squires who had jointly pledged to keep a diet, and Religious believers. After all of 
them saluted ceremoniously to the elder, they took their proper seats as pipes and strings played below the steps and the feasting went on inside the hall. This sumptuous spread had the undivided 
attention of 8 Rules who said to Sand-monk, “Brother, let yourself go and eat! When we leave the Kou home, there'll be no more rich fare like this!” 
“What are you saying, Second Elder Brother!” said Sand-monk, chuckling. “As the proverb puts the matter the hundred flavours of rare dainties are no more once you've eaten your fill. You may 
accumulate private savings but not in your stomach private hoardings!” 
“You're much too feeble! Too feeble!” replied 8 Rules. “When I’ve eaten to the limits in one meal, I'll not be hungry again even after three days!” 
Hearing him, Pilgrim said, “Idiot, don’t puncture your belly! We've to be on the road!” 
Hardly had they finished speaking when it was almost noon. The elder lifted his chopsticks to recite the Thread for the End of Maigre in his seat of honour. So alarmed was 8 Rules that he took up the 
rice, downed 1 bow! with a gulp, and put away 5 or 6 more bowls. Next he picked up those buns, rolls, cakes, baked goods, and stuffed both his sleeves full of them regardless of whether they were 
good or bad. Only then did he leave the table, following his master. Having thanked the squire and the other guests, the elder walked out of the door, encountering many colourful banners and treasure 
canopies, drummers and poets, on the other side. The 2 bands of Daoist priests and Religious monks were just arriving. With a smile the squire said to them, “All of you're late and the old master’s 
eager to leave. There’s no time for me to present you with the maigre. Allow me to thank you when we come back.” Those pulling the carriages, riding horses, or walking all stepped aside for the four 
pilgrims to proceed. As they went forward, loud strains of poems and the roll of drums drifted skyward while banners and flags blotted out the sun. The whole place was clogged by people, chariots, 
and horses, as everyone came to see Squire Kou sending off the Tang Monk. The wealth and riches so displayed surpassed the enclosures of pearl, jade, and rivalled those silken drapes of love. 
Those monks played a Religious poem after which the priests struck up a Taoist melody, as they all escorted the pilgrims out of the prefectural city. When they reached the tenth-mile wayside station, 
food and drink were served, and they toasted each other once more as they bade farewell. The squire however, still could not bear to part with his guests. Blinking back his tears, he said, “When the 
Venerable Master returns after acquiring the scriptures, he must come to our house to stay for a few days. That'll be the fulfilment of Kou Hong’s wish.” 
Deeply moved, Tripitaka thanked him repeatedly saying, “If | reach the Spirit Mountain and get to see the Religious Patriarch, your great virtue will be the first to be told. On my return, I'll surely stop at 
your door to express my thanks!” 
Speaking in this manner, they went on for 2 or 3 more miles. The elder earnestly saluted to take leave of his host and the squire had to turn back, wailing loudly. Truly vowing to feed monks, he'd return 
to wondrous knowledge; but with no affinity he could not see Siddhartha. Squire Kou escorted the pilgrims to the tenth-mile wayside station and then returned with his other companions to his house. 
The master and his 3 disciples journeyed for some forty or fifty miles, when the sky darkened. “It's getting late,” said the elder. “Where’ll we ask for lodging?” 
Toting the luggage, 8 Rules pouted and said, “There’s ready-made rice but you'll not eat it! There’s a house built with cool tiles but you'll not live in it! All you want is to hurry on some journey like a lost 
soul going to a funeral! Now it’s getting late. If it rains, what’re we going to do then?” 
“You brazen cursed beast!” scolded the Tang Monk. “You're complaining again! As the proverb says, Chang’an may be fine but it’s no place to linger in. Wait till we reach the affinity of seeing the 
Religious Patriarch and acquire the true scriptures. When we return to the Great Tang and report to our lord, we'll let you eat the rice from the imperial kitchen for several years. | hope you'll become 
so bloated that you'll die and become an overstuffed ghost, you cursed beast!” 
Idiot giggled silently and dared not utter another word. Pilgrim peered into the distance and discovered several buildings by the main road. He said quickly to his master, “Let's rest over there! Let's rest 
over there!” The elder drew near and saw that it was a shrine that had collapsed. On top of the shrine was an old plaque on which there was an inscription written in 4 dust-covered, faded words: 
Bright Light Travel Court 
Dismounting, the elder said, “The Nun Bright Light was the disciple of a god of Flames and Five Lights. Because of his expedition against the Demon King of Poisonous Fire, he’s demoted and changed 
into the Spirit Officer of Five Manifestations. They must've a shrine keeper here.” They all went inside but they discovered that both rooms and corridors had toppled and there was no sign of any human 
person. They would have turned and gone back out were it not for the fact that dark clouds suddenly had gathered above and a torrential rain descended. They had little choice but to find whatever 
shelter they could in that dilapidated building and remain there in stealthy silence, fearing that they might otherwise disturb some monstrous deviates. Either sitting or standing, they endured a sleepless 
night. Ah! Truly prosperity’s end breeds negativity; in pleasure you'd meet calamity, too. 


113 

Gold-dispensing external aid‘ meets demonic harm; the sage reveals his soul to bring restoration 
Let us not speak for the moment of the Tang Monk and his disciples who spent a night of discomfort in the dilapidated shrine of Bright Light to seek shelter from the rain. Instead, a group of violent men 
in the city located at the Numinous Earth District of the Bronze Estrada Prefecture who had squandered away their possessions through sleeping with prostitutes, drinking, and gambling. Without any 
other means of livelihood, those men — more than a dozen of them — banded together to become thieves. As they deliberated on which family in the city might be considered the richest and the 2" 
richest for them to rob, 1 of them said, “There’s no need for investigation or calculation. There’s only one man here who is very rich and he’s that Squire Kou who sent off today the priest from the Tang 
court. In this rainstorm tonight, people won't be out in the streets and the police won't make their rounds. We'd strike now and take some capital from him. Then we can go and have some more fun 
whoring and gambling. Won't that be nice?” 
Delighted, the thieves all agreed. Taking up daggers, caltrops, staffs, clubs, ropes, and torches, they set out in the rain. Having broken through the gates of the Kou home, they rushed in with a shout. 
The members of his family, young and old, male and female, were so terrified that they all fled. The squire’s wife cowered under their bed while the old man hid behind a door. Kou Liang, Kou Dong, 
and his other children all scattered in every direction. Grasping weapons and torches, the thieves broke open the chests and trunks in the house and ransacked them for gold, silver, treasures, jewels, 
clothing, utensils, and other household goods. Agonized at parting with all his possessions, the squire risked his life to walk outside his house and plead with the robbers, saying, “Great Kings, please 
take what you need. But leave this old man a few things and some garments for his remaining years.” 
Those robbers of course would not permit such discussion. They rushed forward and 1 kick at the groin sent Squire Kou tumbling to the ground. Alas! His 3 spirits? gloomily drifted back to Hades; his 
7 souls slowly took leave of mankind. After their success, the thieves left the Kou residence and climbed out of the city by means of rope ladders they set up along the rampart walls. They then fled 
toward the west through the night rain. Only when they saw that the thieves had left did the houseboys and servants of the Kou household dare show themselves. They immediately discovered the old 
squire lying dead on the ground. “O Heavens! Our master has been slain!” they cried, bursting into tears as they fell on the corpse to mourn him. 
By about the hour of the fourth watch, the old woman began to think spitefully of the Tang Monk. Because of his refusal to stay and enjoy their hospitality, she thought, they had to make such lavish 
arrangements to send him off and brought on themselves instead this terrible calamity. Her rancour thus aroused her desire to plot against the 4 pilgrims. As she leaned on Kou Liang for support, she 
said, “Child, there’s no need for you to weep anymore. Your old man used to be so eager to feed monks. He wanted to do it one day after another. Little did he know that when he achieved perfection, 
he would run into a bunch of murderous monks!” 
“Mum,” said the two brothers, “what do you mean by murderous monks?” 
“When those savage robbers broke into our room,” replied their mum, “I hid under our bed. Though | was shaking all over, | managed to take a good look at them under the glare of torches and lights. 
Do you know who they were? The one holding a torch was the Tang Monk. Bullseye 8 Rules was holding a knife and Sand-monk was dragging out our silver and gold. The one who slew your old man 
was Pilgrim Sun.” 


Thinking that what they heard was the truth, her two sons said, “If mom caught a clear glimpse of them, they’d to be the robbers. After all, the four of them spent over half a month here and they must 
be completely familiar with the layout of our house — with the entrances, the walls, the casements, and the alleys. Wealth is a big temptation. That's why they have taken advantage of this night's rain 
to return here. Not only have they robbed us of our possessions but they have also slain our dad. How vicious can they be? In the moming we must go to the prefecture to file charges against them.” 
“How'll we word the complaint?” asked Kou Dong. 
“Exactly as mum told us,” replied Kou Liang and this was what he wrote: 
8 Rules cried for slaughter; the Tang Monk held the fire. Sand-monk removed our silver and gold while Pilgrim Sun beat to death our sire. 
The whole family was in uproar, and soon it was dawn. They sent word immediately to their relatives to prepare for the funeral and purchase the coffin. Meanwhile, Kou Liang and his brother went to 
the prefectural hall to file their plaint. Now, the magistrate of this Bronze Estrada Prefecture was upright all his life and his nature, virtuous. In his youth he had studied studiously and been examined at 
Golden Chimes. At all times, he had been a patriot, a man full of mercy and kindness. His fame would spread in history for a millennium as if Gong and Huang? reappeared; his name would resound 
forever in the halls of justice as if Zhuo and Lu‘ were reborn. After he had ascended the prefectural hall and disposed of routine affairs, he ordered the display of the placard which announced that he 
was ready to hear and decide cases. The Kou brothers placed the placard in one of their bosoms and entered the hall. Falling to their knees, they cried, “Venerable Dad, these little ones wish to file a 
complaint on the weighty matter of robbery and murder.” 
The complaint was handed over to the magistrate who, having read its content, said, “People said yesterday that your family, by feeding four noble priests, had fulfilled a vow. Those four, we're told, 
happened to be Arhats from the Tang court, and they were sent off by you with a lavish band of drummers and poets clogging the streets. How could such a thing happen to you last night?” 
Respecting, the two brothers said, “Venerable Dad, Kou Hong, our dad, had been feeding monks for some twenty-four years. It happened that these four monks coming from a great distance would 
just make up the number of ten thousand. That was why we’d a ceremony of perfection and asked them to stay for half a month. They thereby became thoroughly acquainted with the layout of our 
house. After we'd sent them off yesterday however, they returned during the night, taking advantage of the darkness and the rainstorm. With lighted torches and weapons, they broke into our home 
and took away our silver and gold, our treasures and jewels, and our clothing. Moreover, they slew our dad and left him on the ground. We beg the Venerable Dad to grant us humble folks justice!” 
When the magistrate heard these words, he at once called up both cavalry and foot soldiers. Including other recruits and conscripts, they formed a posse of some hundred and fifty men. Each wielding 
sharp weapons, they went out of the western gate to pursue the Tang Monk and his 3 companions. Master and disciples waited patiently till dawn in the dilapidated building of the Bright Light Travel 
Court before emerging and setting out again toward the West. It so happened that those thieves who had robbed the Kou family the night before also took this same road after getting out of the city. By 
morning they had walked some twenty miles past the shrine. Hiding in a valley, they were dividing up their booty and had not quite finished when they saw the four pilgrims moving up the road. Still 
unsatisfied, the thieves pointed at the Tang Monk and said, “Isn’t that the monk who’s sent off yesterday?” 
Then they laughed and said, “Welcome! Welcome! After all we’re engaged in this ruthless business! These monks have travelled quite a distance. And then they stayed for a long time in the Kou house. 
We wonder how much stuff they have on them. We might as well cut them off and take their belongings and the white horse. We'll split the heist, too. Won't that be a satisfying thing?” 
Picking up their arms, the thieves ran up the main road with a shout. They stood in a single file across the road and cried, “Monks, don’t run away! Quickly give us some toll money, and your lives will 
be spared! If only half a no escapes from your mouth, each of you'll face the cutlass. None will be spared!” 
The Tang Monk, riding the horse, shook violently while Sand-monk and 8 Rules were filled with fear. “What shall we do? What shall we do?” they said to Pilgrim. “After half a night’s misery through the 
rain, we now face bandits blocking our path. Truly, ‘Calamity always knocks twice!” 
“Master, don’t be afraid!” said Pilgrim with laughter. “And don’t worry, Brothers! Let old monkey question them a bit.” 
Dear Great Sage! Tightening his tiger-skin skirt and giving his silk shirt a shake, he walked up there with folded arms and said, “What do you all do?” 
“This fellow has no idea of life or death!” bellowed one of the bandits. “How dare you question me? Don’t you've eyes beneath your skull? Can’t you recognise that we're all Dad Great Kings? Hand us 
the toll money quickly, and we'll let you through!” 
On hearing this, Pilgrim smiled broadly and said, “So you're bandits who pillage on the road!” 
“Kill him!” shouted the bandits, turning savage. 
Pretending to be frightened, Pilgrim said, “Great Kings! Great Kings! I’m a village priest, and | don’t know how to talk. If I've offended you, please pardon me. If you want toll money, you needn't ask 
those three. All you need is to ask me for it, for I'm the bookkeeper. Whatever cash we've collected from reciting Threads or holding services, whatever we've acquired through begging or charity, 
they're all in the wrap. I’m in charge of all incomes and expenditures. Though he’s my master, the one riding the horse only knows how to recite Threads. He has no other concern, for he has quite 
forgotten about wealth or sex and he doesn’t own a penny. The one with the black face is a labourer | took in halfway in our journey, and he only knows how to care for the horse. The one with a long 
horn is a long-term labourer | hired, and all he knows is how to tote the luggage. If you let those three past, I'll give you all our possessions, including the cassock and the alms-bowl.” 
When they heard this, the thieves said, “This monk is quite honest after all. Tell those three to drop the luggage, and we'll let them go by.” 
Pilgrim turned and winked at his companions. Immediately, Sand-monk dropped the pole and the luggage. He and 8 Rules led the horse and proceeded westward with their master. As Pilgrim lowered 
his head to untie the luggage, he managed quickly to scoop up a fistful of dirt that he tossed into the air. Reciting a spell, he exercised the magic of immobilisation. “Stop!” he cried and those bandits - 
altogether some thirty of them — all stood erect. Each of them with teeth clenched, eyes wide open, and hands lowered, they could neither talk nor move. Leaping clear from them into the road, Pilgrim 
shouted, “Master, come back! Come back!” 
“That's bad! Bad!” said 8 Rules, horrified. “Elder Brother is sacrificing us! He has no money on him, and there is neither silver nor gold in the wrap. He must be calling back Master for the horse. And 
he may be asking us to strip.” 
“Second Elder Brother, stop that nonsense!” said Sand-monk, laughing. “Big Brother is an able person. Previously he could subdue even vicious demons and fierce fiends. You think he’s afraid of these 
few clumsy bandits? When he calls, he must have something to say. Let’s go back quick to have a look.” 
The elder agreed; turning around the horse, he went back amiably and said, “Wukong, why do you call me back?” 
“All of you see what these bandits have to say,” said Pilgrim. 8 Rules walked up to one of them and gave him a shove, saying, “Bandit, why can’t you move?” That man however, was completely 
oblivious and speechless. “He must be numb and dumb!” said 8 Rules. Chuckling, Pilgrim said, “They have been stopped by the magic of Immobilization of old monkey.” 
“You might have stopped their bodies but not their mouths,” said 8 Rules. “Why can’t they make even a noise?” 
Pilgrim said, “Master, please dismount and take a seat. As the proverb says, there’s erroneous arrest but no mistaken release. Brothers, push these bandits over and tie them up. We'll tell them to 
confess, to see if they are new thieves or experienced bandits.” 
“But we've no ropes!” said Sand-monk. 
Pilgrim pulled off some hairs and blew his mortal breath on them. At once they changed into some thirty ropes. All the brothers worked together: they pushed over the bandits and bull-tied them. Then 
Pilgrim recited the spell of release, and the bandits gradually regained consciousness. Pilgrim asked the Tang Monk to take a seat above them before the three brothers, each holding his weapon, and 
shouted at the thieves, “Clumsy thieves, how many of you're there altogether? For how many years have you engaged in this business? How much stuff have you plundered? Have you killed anyone? 
Is this the first transgression? The second? Or the third?” 
“Dads, please spare our lives,” the thieves cried. 
“Don’t yell!” said Pilgrim. “Make an honest confession.” 
“Venerable Dad,” said the thieves, “we're not accustomed to thievery, for we’re all sons of good families. Because we’re stupid enough to drink, gamble, and sleep with prostitutes, we’ve completely 
squandered our inheritances and properties. We've neither abilities nor money for our livelihood. Since we learned that Squire Kou in the prefectural city of Bronze Estrada had vast possessions, we 
banded together yesterday and went to pillage his household last night, taking advantage of the rain and darkness. We took silver, gold, clothing, and jewels. Just now, we’re dividing the loot in the 
valley north of the road here when we saw you coming. Someone among us recognised that you're those priests whom Squire Kou sent off, and we thought that you must have great possessions also. 
When we saw, moreover, how heavy the luggage was and how swiftly the white horse trotted, we grew so greedy that we're going to try to hold you up. We didn’t know that Venerable Dad had such 
tremendous magic power to imprison us. We beg you to be merciful. Please take away the things we stole but spare our lives.” 
When Tripitaka heard that the Kou family had been robbed, he was so taken aback that he stood up immediately. “Wukong,” he said, “the old Squire Kou is so kind and virtuous. How could he bring on 
himself such a terrible calamity?” 
“All because of his desire to see us on our way,” replied Pilgrim, chuckling. “Those colour drapes and floral banners, that extravagant display of drums and poems, all attracted people’s attention. That's 
why these scoundrels moved against his house. It’s fortunate that they ran into us, so that we'd rob them of this great amount of silver, gold, clothing, and jewellery.” 
“Since we've bothered the Kous for half a month but have nothing to repay their great kindness with,” said Tripitaka, “we'd take these belongings back to their house. Wouldn't that be a good deed?” 
Pilgrim agreed. With 8 Rules and Sand-monk, he went to the mountain valley and having packed up the stolen goods, put them on the horse. 8 Rules was asked to tote another load of gold and silver 
while Sand-monk toted their own luggage. Pilgrim would have liked to slaughter all those bandits with one blow of his rod but fearing that the Tang Monk would blame him for taking human lives, he 
had no choice but to shake his body once to retrieve his hairs. With their hands and legs freed, those bandits scrambled up and fled for their lives. Our Tang Monk then retraced his steps to escort the 
stolen property back to the squire. This act of his however, was like a moth darting into fire, a self-induced disaster! A testimonial poem for him says: 
Kindness repaying kindness’s a rarity for kindness can change into enmity. 
To save the drowning you may go amiss. Think thrice before acting, you'll live in bliss. 
As Tripitaka and his disciples proceeded to take back the stolen goods, they suddenly caught sight of a forest of swords and spears approaching them. Greatly alarmed, Tripitaka said, “Disciples, look 
at those weapons coming at us! What do they mean?” 
“Disaster’s here! Disaster’s here!” 8 Rules said. “These must be the bandits we let go. They have taken up arms and banded together with more people so that they could return to contend with us.” 
“Second Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “they do not look like bandits. Big Brother, take a careful look.” 
“The evil star's descended once more on Master,” whispered Pilgrim to Sand-monk. “These’re government troops out to catch bandits.” 
Hardly had he finished speaking when the soldiers rushed up to them and had master and disciples completely surrounded. “Dear monks!” they cried. “After you’ve robbed and plundered, you’re still 
swaggering around here!” They surged forward and yanked the Tang Monk off the horse. He was immediately tied up with ropes, after which Pilgrim and his two companions were also bound and bull- 
tied. Poles were inserted through the loops so that 2 soldiers could carry one prisoner on their shoulders. As the entire troop went back to the prefectural city, hauling the luggage and herding the horse, 
this was the condition of the pilgrims: Tripitaka Tang shook all over, speechless and shedding tears; Bullseye 8 Rules mumbled and grumbled, his feelings grievous and sour; Sand-Monk muttered and 
murmured, uncertain what to do; Pilgrim Sun giggled and tittered, about to show his power. In a little while, the throng of government troops hauled their prisoners and recovered booty back into the 
city. They then proceeded to the yellow hall to make this report: “Venerable Dad, the recruits have captured the bandits.” 
Sitting solemnly in the hall, the magistrate first rewarded his troops. Then he examined the recovered property before he sent for members of the Kou family to take it back. Finally he ordered Tripitaka 
and his companions brought before the hall for interrogation. “You priests,” he said, “you claim that you’ve come from the distant Land of the East and that you’re on your way to the Western Heaven 
to worship God. Actually however, you're thieves who resort to clever devices to get to know the layout of a place in order to plunder and pillage!” 
“Your Excellency, allow me to speak,” said Tripitaka. “This humble cleric is in truth not a thief. This is no lie, for I've with me a travel rescript which you may look at. All this came about because of our 
regard for the great kindness of Squire Kou who fed us for half a month. When we ran into the bandits on our way who had robbed the squire’s household, we took the stolen property and were about 
to return it to the Kou family as a gesture of our gratitude. Little did we expect that the soldiers would arrest us, thinking that we're the thieves. Truly we’re not thieves, and | beg Your Excellency to 
exercise careful discernment.” 
“Now that you're caught by government troops,” said the magistrate, “you resort to this clever talk of your gesture of gratitude. If you met the bandits on the way, why didn’t you seize them also, so that 
you’d report to the proper official and repay the squire’s kindness? Why were there only four of you? Look! This is the plaint filed by Kou Liang who named you specifically as the accused. You still dare 
to struggle?” 
When he heard these words, Tripitaka was scared out of his wits, like someone on a boat in a boiling sea. “Wukong,” he cried, “why don’t you come up here to defend us?” 
“The booty is real,” replied Pilgrim. “What's the use of defence?” 
“Exactly!” said the magistrate. “With such evidence before you, you still dare to deny the charge?” He said to his subordinates, “Bring the head clamp. We'll give this thiefs bald head a taste of the 
clamp before we flog him.” 


Terribly flustered, Pilgrim thought to himself, “Though my master is fated to meet this ordeal, he should not be allowed to suffer too much.” When he saw, therefore, that the bailiffs were preparing the 
ropes to make the head clamp, he said, “Your Excellency, please don’t clamp that monk. During the robbery of the Kou home last night, it was | who held the light and the knife, and it was | who robbed 
and murdered. I’m the chieftain of the thieves. If you want flogging, flog me. They have nothing to do with this. Just don’t release me.” 

On hearing this, the magistrate gave the order: “Let’s clamp the head of this one first.” Together the bailiffs looped the head clamp onto Pilgrim. When they suddenly tightened the rope, it snapped with 
a loud crack. They joined the rope and clamped again, and once more it snapped with a loud crack. After three or four times of clamping like this, the skin on Pilgrim’s head did not even show a wrinkle. 
When they wanted to change ropes and make another clamp, someone came in to report, “Venerable Dad, Dad Junior Guardian Chen from the capital has arrived. Please go out of the city to meet 
him.” 

The magistrate immediately gave this order to the clerk of justice: “Take the thieves into the jail and guard them carefully. Wait until I've received my superior. We'll interrogate them some more.” The 
clerk pushed the Tang Monk and his three disciples into the jailhouse. 8 Rules and Sand-monk however, had to carry their own luggage in. “Disciples,” said Tripitaka, “how did this thing come to be?” 
“Master, get in! Get in!” said Pilgrim, laughing. “There’re no dogs barking here. It’s rather good fun!” Alas! 

The 4 of them were taken inside and they were all pushed onto the rack. Then belly compressors, head prongs, and chest straps were fastened to each of them. The prison guards then arrived and 
began a severe flogging. Hardly able to endure the pain, Tripitaka could only cry, “Wukong, what'll we do? What'll we do?” 

Pilgrim said, “They want to beat some money out of us! As the saying goes: settle down if you a nice place find; spend money when you're in a bind. They'll probably ease up on us if we give them 
some money.” 

“Where do I've any money?” asked Tripitaka. 

“If we’ve no money,” said Pilgrim, “even clothing is all right. Give him that cassock of yours.” On hearing this, Tripitaka felt as if a dagger had stabbed his heart. Since however, he could not endure the 
flogging any longer, he had little choice but to say, “Wukong, do as you wish.” 

Immediately Pilgrim cried out, “Officers, no need for you to beat us anymore. Inside of one of those two wraps we carried in, there is a brocade cassock worth a thousand gold. Untie the wrap and take 
it. Please leave us.” 

When those prison guards heard this, they all went to untie the two wraps. There were indeed several cloth garments and a satchel that were of no value at all. Then they came upon an object wrapped 
in several layers of oiled paper with shafts of luminous radiance coming through. They knew it had to be a good thing. When they shook it loose to examine it, they saw a garment of bright, wonderful 
pearl appliques, sequins of rare Religious treasures; with coiled-dragon knots of brocade, and silk piping of phoenix made. As they fought to have a look at such a marvel, they disturbed the prison 
warden who came to say, “Why are you all making such noises here?” 

Going to their knees, the guards said, “Just now the old sire indicted these four priests who all belonged to a large group of bandits. When we gave them a little flogging, they offered us these two 
wraps. We found this object after we untied the wraps, and we didn’t know what to do with it. To tear up the robe and divide it would be a great pity but if only one of us owned it, the others would 
receive no benefit. Fortunately the old sire has come along. We'll leave it up to you to decide for us.” 

The warden recognised that it was a cassock. He then examined the other items of clothing and the satchel. Next, he unfolded the travel rescript to have a look. When he saw the signatures and 
treasure seals of various nations, he said, “I’m glad | saw this in time! Otherwise you people might have brought a terrible disaster on yourselves. These monks are no bandits. Don’t you dare touch 
their clothing! Wait till the grand sire interrogates them tomorrow, and we'll probably learn the real truth.” When the guards heard this, they handed the wraps over to him. The warden tied them up as 
before and put them away for safe-keeping. 

Gradually the night deepened; the drum-roll began on the towers as the night patrol shouted the watches. By about the third quarter of the fourth watch, Pilgrim saw that his companions had stopped 
moaning and had all fallen asleep. He thought to himself, “It was fated that Master should have this one night of prison ordeal. That's the reason why old monkey did not bother to dispute the judge or 
use magic power. Now that the fourth watch is almost over and the calamity is nearly completed, | must leave to make some plans so that we can get out of prison in the morning.” 

Look at the way he exercises his abilities! Reducing the size of his body, he at once got out of the rack and with one shake, changed into a midge to fly out through a crack between the roof tiles. It was 
a fair and quiet night of stars and a bright moon in the sky. Having determined the direction of the Kou house, he flew toward it. Soon he saw the bright flares of light coming from a house to the west. 
When he flew near it to look more closely, he discovered that it belonged to a family of bean-curd makers. An old man was tending fire while his aged wife was squeezing out the soybean milk. 
Presently he heard the old man say, “Mum, Mr. Kou might have sons and wealth but he had no age. He was, you know, a schoolmate of mine when we’re young. I’m five years his senior. His dad’s 
name was Kou Ming, and at that time, they had no more than a thousand acres of farmland that they had leased out but they couldn’t even collect the proper rental. By the time the son was twenty 
years old, the dad died and it was up to him to manage their property. It was a stroke of luck that he took for his wife the daughter of Zhang Wang (Prosperity). Her nickname was Needle-Pusher but 
she certainly brought prosperity to her husband. Since her entrance into his family, their lands yielded rich harvests and their rentals excellent returns. What they bought accrued value and what they 
sold made profits. Their assets by now must be worth a hundred thousand cash. When he reached his fortieth year, he began to devote himself to good deeds and managed to feed ten thousand- 
monks. Who would have thought that he would be kicked to death by bandits last night! How pitiable! He was only sixty-four years old and had reached just the right age to enjoy himself. Who would 
expect a person of such virtuous inclination to be rewarded by such a violent death? It's most lamentable! Most lamentable!” Every word of this statement was heard by Pilgrim. 

By then it was the first quarter of the fifth watch, and Pilgrim flew right into the house of the Kou family. The squire’s coffin had been placed in the main hall so that the family could hold a wake over the 
dead man. Lamps were lit at the head of the coffin, flowers and fruit arranged around it. On one side his weeping wife kept vigil, and his two sons also were kneeling there and weeping. Two of his 
daughters-in-law were bringing in two bowls of rice for offering. 

Pilgrim landed on the head of the coffin and gave a cough. The two daughters-in-law were so terrified that they ran outside, their arms and legs flailing the air. Saluting themselves on the floor, the Kou 
brothers dared not move at all. All they could mutter was, “Dad! Looooo! Loooo!...” 

The old woman however, was courageous enough to give the head of the coffin a tap and said, “Old Squire, have you come back to life?” 

Imitating the voice of the squire, Pilgrim replied, “No, I’ve not!” More frightened than ever, the two sons continued to respect and shed tears. All they could mutter was, “Dad! Looo! Looo!...” Forcing 
herself to be bold, the woman asked again, “Squire, if you’ve not come back to life, why are you speaking?” 

“I've been sent back by King Yama in the custody of a ghost guardian,” said Pilgrim, “so that | can speak to all of you. I’m supposed to tell you that Needle-Pusher Zhang has used her foul mouth and 
slanderous tongue to injure the innocent.” 

When the old woman heard her own nickname, she became so flustered that she fell to her knees and respected saying, “Dear old man! You’re so old already and still want to address me by my nick- 
name! What do you mean by my foul mouth and slanderous tongue? Which innocent person I've injured?” 

Pilgrim bellowed, “Didn’t you say something like this? Eight Rules cried for slaughter; the Tang Monk held the fire. Sand-monk removed our silver and gold while Pilgrim Sun beat to death our sire. Be- 
cause of your slanderous words, good people have been made to suffer. Those four masters of the Tang court when they ran into the brigands on the road, took back our stolen property. They wanted 
to return that to us as a token of their gratitude. What an expression of goodwill! You however, drew up this specious plaint and asked your sons to file it with the official. Without carefully examining 
the case either, he sent them to prison. Now a god of the jailhouse, the local spirit, and the city deity are all so overwrought that they have reported the matter to King Yama. He in turn sent his ghost 
guardian to take me back home to tell you this: that you’d work for the monks’ release at once. Otherwise, I’ve been authorized to cause trouble for a solid month here in the house. The entire household, 
old and young, including chickens and dogs, will not be spared!” 

Again respecting, the Kou brothers pleaded with him, saying, “Daddy, please go back. Please don’t ever harm the old and the young of this house. We'll hasten to the prefecture in the morning and file 
a petition for release and make our confession. All we want is peace for both the living and the deceased.” On hearing this, Pilgrim cried, “Burn paper money! I’m going!” The whole family gathered at 
once to burn paper money. 

With outstretched wings Pilgrim flew up and soared straight to the magistrate’s house. As he looked down, he perceived light, for the magistrate had already risen. When he flew into the central hall to 
look around, he saw a painting hanging in the middle, the subject of which was an official riding a horse with black spots. Behind him were several attendants, one carrying a blue umbrella and another 
an armchair. Pilgrim, of course, could not tell what the story behind the painting was but he flew up to it and sett led in the middle of the scroll. Presently the magistrate emerged from his room and bent 
low to wash his face. 

Suddenly Pilgrim made a loud cough, so scaring the magistrate that he dashed back into his room. After finishing his washing and combing his hair, he donned a long coat and came out once more to 
burn incense before the painting and intone this petition: “To the divine tablet of my deceased uncle, Duke Jiang Qianyi. Blessed by ancestral virtue, your filial nephew, Jiang Kunsan, succeeded in 
passing the second and third degrees. He is now favoured with the appointment to the magistrate of the Bronze Estrada Prefecture. To you we've offered night and day without ceasing incense and 
fires. Why, therefore, do you make a sound this day? | beg you not to work the work of a monster or evil spirit, lest the family members be terrified.” 

Chuckling secretly to himself, Pilgrim said, “So, this is the picture of his dad’s elder brother!” He made use of the opportunity however, to say to the magistrate, “Kunsan, my worthy nephew, you've 
honoured your ancestral inheritance by ever being a clean and upright official. How could you, therefore, be so foolish yesterday as to have regarded four sage monks as bandits? Without making a 
thorough investigation, you sent them to jail. Now a god of the jailhouse, the local spirit, and the city deity are highly disturbed. They have reported the matter to King Yama who sent me in the custody 
of a ghost guardian to inform you that you’d examine every aspect of the case and quickly release them. If you don’t do this, you'll be asked to go and answer for yourself in the Region of Darkness.” 
Alarmed by what he heard, the magistrate said, “Let my uncle withdraw his presence. When your humble nephew ascends the hall, he will immediately release them.” 

“In that case,” said Pilgrim, “go burn paper money. I'll go back to report to King Yama.” The magistrate thus added incense and burned paper money to offer his thanks. 

Pilgrim flew out of the hall, and he found that it was beginning to grow light in the east. By the time he reached the Numinous Earth District, he saw that the district magistrate had already seated himself 
in the official hall. “If a midge speaks,” thought Pilgrim to himself, “and someone sees it, my identity maybe revealed. That’s no good.” He changed therefore into the huge magic body: from mid-air he 
lowered a giant leg that completely filled the district hall. “Hear me, you officials,” he cried, “I’m the Wandering Spirit sent by the Jade Emperor. | charge you that a worshipper of God’s been wrongfully 
beaten in the jail of your prefecture, thus greatly disturbing the peace of the deities in the Three Regions. I’m told to impart this message to you, that you'd give him an early release. If there is any 
delay, my other leg will descend. It will first kick to death all the district officials of this prefecture. Then it will stamp to death the entire population of the region. Your cities finally will be trodden into dust 
and ashes!” 

All the officials of the district were so terrified that they knelt down together to respect and worship, saying, “Let the noble sage withdraw his presence. We'll go into the prefecture at once and report 
this to the magistrate. The prisoner will be released immediately. We beg you not to move your leg, for it will frighten these humble officials to death.” Only then did Pilgrim retrieve his magic body. 
Changing once more into a midge, he flew back inside the jail through the crack between the roof tiles and crawled back to sleep in the rack. 

We now tell you about the magistrate who went up to the hall. No sooner had he displayed the placard announcing his readiness to hear a case than the Kou brothers took it in one of their bosoms and 
cried aloud on bended knees. The magistrate summoned them inside where they submitted their petition for release. When the magistrate saw it, he grew angry and said, “It was only yesterday that 
you filed a complaint of loss. We caught the thieves for you and the stolen property was returned to you. Why did you come today to submit petition for release?” 

Shedding tears, the two of them said, “Venerable Dad, the spirit of your humble subjects’ dad manifested itself last night to say to us, ‘The sage monks from the Tang court were the ones who had 
originally captured the bandits. It was they who recovered our possessions and released the bandits. Out of goodwill they decided to send back in person the stolen goods in order to repay our 
hospitality. How could you turn them into thieves and send them to jail to suffer? So overwrought were the local spirit and the city deity that they reported the matter to King Yama. King Yama told me 
to come in the custody of a ghost guardian to tell you to file another petition with the prefecture for the release of the Tang Monk. Only that will avert further disasters. If you don’t do this, both the old 
and the young of the family will perish.’ For this reason, we’ve come to submit our petition for release. We beg the Venerable Dad to grant us our request.” 

When the magistrate heard this, he thought to himself, “Their dad happens to be a corpse that’s still warm. A newly departed showing itself is not an unusual phenomenon. But my uncle has been dead 
five or six years. Why did he too show his spirit last night and ask me to release the prisoners? Hmmm ... ! They must be wrongfully accused.” 

As he deliberated with himself, the district magistrate of the Numinous Earth District came running up the hall, yelling, “Your Honour! It’s bad! It’s bad! Just now the Jade Emperor sent the Wandering 
Spirit down here to order you to release quickly some good people from prison. Those monks you caught yesterday were not bandits. They are all sons of God on their way to acquire scriptures. If there 
is any further delay, all of us officials will be kicked to death. Our cities, including the entire population, will be trodden to dust and ashes.” Paling with fright, the magistrate at once commanded the clerk 
of justice to issue a placard for the prisoners to be brought out. When this was done immediately, 8 Rules said sadly, “I wonder what sort of beating they'll give us today!” 

With a laugh, Pilgrim said, “I promise that you'll not receive a single stroke. Old monkey's settled everything. When you go up to the hall, don’t you kneel for he'll step down to ask us to take the seats 
of honour. Let me demand from him the return of our horse and luggage. If anything’s missing, I'll beat him up for you to see.” 


Just as they finished speaking, they arrived at the entrance to the hall. The magistrate, the district magistrate, and the officials of the prefecture and district all descended the hall to meet them, saying, 
“When the sage monks arrived yesterday, we didn’t manage to question you carefully partly because of the urgent necessity to go meet our superiors and partly because we're distracted by the sight 
of the stolen booty.” 
Pressing his palms together in front of him and saluting, the Tang Monk gave another thorough account of what had happened. The various officials all confessed, saying, “We’ve made a mistake! 
We've made a mistake! Please do not blame us! Please do not blame us!” Then they asked the Tang Monk whether he had lost anything in jail. Pilgrim now walked forward, glowering, and declared in 
a loud voice, “Our white horse was taken away by someone in this hall. Our luggage was snatched by the people in jail. Return them to us quickly! It’s our turn today to interrogate you all. You've 
wrongly seized common folks and accused them of thievery! What sort of crime should you be charged with?” 
When the officials saw how violent he had become, there was not a single one of them that was not scared. They immediately told those who had taken the horse to bring it back, and those who had 
taken the luggage to return it. Even after all these items were turned over piece by piece, the three disciples continued to display their pique. Look at them! The various officials could only use the Kou 
family as their excuse. Trying to be the peacemaker, the Tang Monk said, “Disciples, we'll not get to the bottom of this here. Let’s go to the Kou household. There we can confront and interrogate any 
witness. Let's find out who it was who saw me as a robber.” 
“You're right,” said Pilgrim. “Let old monkey call up the dead and ask him to identify his murderer.” Sand-monk at once helped the Tang Monk to mount the horse right there in the prefectural hall. In a 
body, they rushed out, shouting and bellowing. The various officials of the prefecture and the district all went to the Kou house also. Kou Liang and his brother were so terrified that they went to their 
front door and respected without ceasing. When the visitors were received into the living room, they could see that inside the mourning parlour members of the family were still weeping behind the 
funeral drapes. Pilgrim called out: “That old woman who used slander to injure common people, stop crying! Let old monkey summon your husband here. Let him tell us who the real person was who 
slew him. That ought to put a little shame in you!” Those officials thought that Pilgrim Sun was only jesting but he said to them, “Sirs, please keep my master company by sitting here for a moment. 
Eight Rules, Sand-monk, take care to stand guard. I'll be back soon.” Dear Great Sage! He vaulted through the door and rose immediately into the air. All that the people could see were coloured mists 
everywhere shrouding the house; the sky’s hallowed air shielding primal spirit. When they finally realised that this was a mortal who could mount the clouds and ride the fog, a sage who could bring life 
out of death, they all burned incense to worship. With a series of cloud somersaults, that Great Sage went to the Region Below and crashed right into the Hall of Darkness. So startled were they that 
10 Yama Kings hands joined, saluted him; 5 Quarters ghost judges respected to him. Sword-trees, a thousand stalks, were all askew; dagger-hills 10000-fold, were all made plain. Goblins were saved 
in the Wrongful-Dead City; ghosts were redeemed by the No-Option Bridge. ‘Truly like Heaven’s reprieve was 1 beam of divine light: the whole Region of Darkness now turned bright. The 10 Yama 
Kings received the Great Sage; after having exchanged greetings, they asked the reason for his visit. Pilgrim said, “Which one of you took away the soul of Kou Hong, the person who fed the monks in 
the Numinous Earth District of the Bronze Estrada Prefecture? Find out instantly and bring him to me.” 
“Kou Hong's a virtuous person,” said the 10 Yama Kings. “We didn’t have to use a ghost guardian to summon him. He came by himself but when the Golden-Robed Youth of King Ksitigarbha met him, 
he led him to see the king.” 
Pilgrim at once took leave of them to head for the Jade Cloud palace where he greeted the Nun King Ksitigarbha and gave thorough account of what took place. In delight the Nun said, “It’s foreordained 
that Kou Hong should leave the world without touching a bed or a mat when his allotted age reached its end. Because he’d been a person of virtue who fed the monks, | took him in and made him the 
secretary in charge of the records of good karma. Since the Great Sage’s come to ask for him, I'll lengthen his age by another dozen years. He may leave with you.” 
The Golden-Robed Youth led out Kou Hong who, on seeing Pilgrim, cried out, “Master! Master! Save me!” 
“You're kicked to death by a robber,” said Pilgrim. “This is the place of the Nun King Ksitigarbha in the Region of Darkness. Old monkey has come especially to take you back to the world of light so 
that you may give your testimony. The Nun is kind enough to release you and lengthen your age for another dozen years. Thereafter you'll return here.” The squire saluted repeatedly. 
Having thanked the Nun, Pilgrim changed the soul of the squire into ether by blowing on him. The ether was stored in his sleeve so that they could leave the house of darkness and go back to the world 
of light together. Astride the clouds, he soon arrived at the Kou house. 8 Rules was told to pry open the lid of the coffin, and the soul of the squire was pushed into his body. In a moment, he began to 
breathe once more and revived. Scrambling out of the coffin, the squire respected to the Tang Monk and his three disciples, saying, “Masters! Masters! Having suffered a violent death, I’m much obliged 
for this master’s arrival at the Region of Darkness and returning me to life. His is the kindness of a new creation!” After thanking them repeatedly, he turned and saw all the officials standing there. 
Touching his head to the ground once more, he asked, “Why are all the Venerable Dads in the house?” 
“Your sons at first filed a complaint of loss,” replied the magistrate, “that accused the sage monks by name. | sent people to arrest them, not realising that the sage monks on their journey had run into 
those bandits who murdered you and robbed your house. They took back your possessions and were about to send them back to your home in person. My subordinates arrested them by mistake and 
| sent them to jail without careful examination. Last night your soul made an appearance and my deceased uncle also revealed himself at our home. The Wandering Spirit, too made a descent into the 
district. All these epiphanies at one time led us to release the sage monks after which that particular one went to bring you back to life.” 
Remaining on his knees, the squire said, “Venerable Dad, you've truly wronged these four sage monks. There’re some thirty bandits that night who broke into our house with torches and rods. When 
they took away our belongings, I'd not bear it and tried to reason with the thieves. One of them killed me with a kick at my lower parts. These four had absolutely nothing to do with the crime!” Then he 
summoned his wife and sons into his presence to say, “Didn’t you know who kicked me to death? How dare you file false charges? I’m going to ask the Venerable Dad to convict you.” All the family 
members, old and young could only respect at that time but the magistrate was magnanimous enough to pardon all of them. Kou Hong then ordered a banquet to thank this great kindness of the 
prefecture and the district but each of the officials returned to his official residence without lingering. The next day the squire once more displayed his plaque announcing his desire to feed monks and 
wanted to entertain Tripitaka some more. Tripitaka however, steadfastly refused to stay whereupon the squire invited his relatives and friends and prepared banners and canopies to send off the pilgrims 
as he had done before. Lo! Truly the wide earth may harbour vicious affairs but high Heaven will a good man vindicate. Footloose they're safe on Siddhartha’s way, certain to reach Mount Spirit's 
paradise gate. 
PART VII 
THE END OF THE JOURNEY 
114 
Only when ape and horse are tamed will shells be cast; with merit and work perfected, they see the Real 
Since Squire Kou was able to return to life, he again prepared banners and canopies, drums and poems, and invited relatives and friends, Religious and Daoists, to escort the pilgrims on their way. 
We'll now leave them and tell you instead about the Tang Monk and his three disciples who set out on the main road. In truth the land of God in the West was quite different from other regions. What 
they saw everywhere were gemlike flowers and jasper-like grasses, aged cypresses and hoary pines. In the regions they passed through, every family was devoted to good works, and every household 
would feed the monks. They met people in cultivation beneath the hills and saw travellers reciting Threads in the woods. Resting at night and journeying at dawn, master and disciples proceeded for 
some six or seven days when they suddenly caught sight of a row of tall buildings and noble lofts. Truly they soar skyward 100 feet, tall and towering in the air. You look down to see the setting sun 
and reach out to pluck the shooting stars. Spacious windows engulf the universe; lofty pillars join with the cloudy screens. Yellow cranes bring letters as autumn trees age; ‘phoenix-sheets come with 
the cool evening breeze. These are the treasure arches of a spirit palace, the pearly courts and jewelled edifices, the mortal hall where the Way is preached, the cosmos where Threads are taught. 
The flowers bloom in the spring; pines grow green after the rain. Purple agaric and divine fruits, fresh every year. Phoenixes gambol, potent in every manner. Lifting his whip to point ahead, Tripitaka 
said, “Wukong, what a lovely place!” 
“Master,” said Pilgrim, “you insisted on saluting down even in a specious region, before false images of God. Today you've arrived at a true region with real images of God, and you still haven't 
dismounted. What's your excuse?” 
So taken aback was Tripitaka when he heard these words that he leaped down from the horse. Soon they arrived at the entrance to the buildings. A Daoist lad, standing before the gate, called out, 
“Are you the scripture seeker from the Land of the East?” 
Hurriedly tidying his clothes, the elder raised his head and looked at his interrogator. He wore a robe of silk and held a jade duster. He wore a robe of silk often to feast at treasure lofts and jasper pools; 
he held a jade yak’s-tail to wave and dust in the purple mansions. From his arm hangs a sacred register and his feet are shod in sandals. He floats - a true feathered-one; 2he’s winsome — indeed 
uncanny! Long life attained, he lives in this fine place; mortal, he can leave the world of dust. The sage monk knows not our Mount Spirit guest: the Mortal Golden Head of former years. >The Great 
Sage however, recognised the person. “Master,” he cried, “this is the Great Mortal of the Golden Head who resides in the Jade Perfection Daoist Abbey at the foot of the Spirit Mountain.” 
Only then did Tripitaka realise the truth and he walked forward to make his salute. With laughter, the great mortal said, “So the sage monk’s finally arrived this year. I've been deceived by the Nun 
Guanyin. When she received the gold decree from God over a decade ago to find a scripture seeker in the Land of the East, she told me that he’d be here after two or three years. | waited year after 
year for you but no news came at all. Hardly I've anticipated that I'd meet you this year!” 
Pressing his palms together, Tripitaka said, “I’m greatly indebted to the great mortal’s kindness. Thank you! Thank you!” The four pilgrims, leading the horse and toting the luggage, all went inside the 
temple before each of them greeted the great mortal once more. Tea and a vegetarian meal were ordered. The mortal also asked the lads to heat some scented liquid for the sage monk to bathe, so 
that he could ascend the land of God. Truly, it’s good to bathe when merit and work are done when nature’s tamed and the natural state is won. All toils and labours are now at rest; law and obedience 
have renewed their zest. At Mara’s end they reach indeed God-land; their woes dispelled, before Sramana they stand. Unstained, they are washed of all filth and dust. To a diamond body return they 
must. After master and disciples had bathed, it became late and they rested in the Jade Perfection Abbey. 
The next morning the Tang Monk changed his clothing and put on his brocade cassock and his Vairocana hat. Holding the priestly staff, he ascended the main hall to take leave of the great mortal. 
“Yesterday you seemed rather dowdy,” said the great mortal, chuckling, “but today everything’s fresh and bright. As | look at you now, you’re a true of worshipper of God!” 
Tripitaka wanted to set out at once after a salute. “Wait a moment,” said the great mortal. “Allow me to escort you.” 
“There’s no need for that,” said Pilgrim. “Old monkey knows the way.” 
“What you know happens to be the way in the clouds,” said the great mortal, “a means of travel to which the sage monk has not yet been elevated. You must still stick to the main road.” 
“What you say is quite right,” replied Pilgrim. “Though old monkey’s been to this place several times, he’s always come and gone on the clouds and never stepped on the ground. If we must stick to the 
main road, we must trouble you to escort us a distance. My master’s most eager to bow to God. Let’s not dally.” 
Smiling broadly, the great mortal held the Tang Monk’s hand to lead Candana up the gate of Law. The way that they had to go did not lead back to the front gate. Instead, they had to go through the 
central hall of the temple to go out the rear door. Immediately behind the abbey in fact was the Spirit Mountain, to which the great mortal pointed and said, “Sage Monk, look at the spot halfway up the 
sky, shrouded by auspicious luminosity of five colours and a thousand folds of hallowed mists. That's the tall Spirit Vulture Peak, the holy region of the Religious Patriarch.” 
The moment the Tang Monk saw it, he began to bend low. With a chuckle, Pilgrim said, “Master, you’ve not reached that place where you'd salute. As the proverb says, ‘Even within sight of a mountain 
you can ride a horse to death!’ You're still quite far from that principality. Why do you want to salute now? How many times does your head need to touch the ground if you respect all the way to the 
summit?” 
“Sage Monk,” said the great mortal, “you, along with the Great Sage, Heavenly Reeds, and Curtain-Raising, have arrived at the blessed land when you can see Mount Spirit. I’m going back.” 
Thereupon Tripitaka saluted to take leave of him. The Great Sage led the Tang Monk and his disciples slowly up the mountain. They had not gone for more than five or six miles when they came upon 
a torrent of water, eight or nine miles wide. There was no trace of human activity all around. Alarmed by the sight, Tripitaka said, “Wukong, this must be the wrong way! Could the great mortal have 
made a mistake? Look how wide and swift this river is! Without a boat, how’d we get across?” 
“There's no mistake!” said Pilgrim, chuckling. “Look over there! Isn’t that a large bridge? You've to walk across that bridge before you can perfect the right fruit.” The elder walked up to the bridge and 
saw beside it a tablet, on which was the inscription: 
Cloud-Transcending Ferry 
The bridge was actually a single log. Truly afar off, it’s like a jade beam in the sky; near, a dried stump that over the water lies. To bind up oceans it would easier seem. How could one cross a single 
log or beam shrouded by rainbows often thousand feet by a thousand layers of silk-white sheet? Too slippery and small for all to cross its spread except those who on coloured mists can tread. Quivering 
all over, Tripitaka said, “Wukong, this bridge is not for human beings to cross. Let's find some other way.” 
“This is the way! This is the way!” said Pilgrim, laughing. 
“If this is the way,” said 8 Rules, horrified, “who dares walk on it? The water’s so wide and rough. There’s only a single log here, and it’s so narrow and slippery. How could | move my legs?” 
“Stand still, all of you,” said Pilgrim. “Let old monkey take a walk for you to see.” Dear Great Sage! In big strides he bounded on to the single-log bridge. Swaying from side to side, he ran across it in 
no time at all. On the other side he shouted: “Come across! Come across!” 


The Tang Monk waved his hands while 8 Rules and Sand-monk bit their fingers, all crying, “Hard! Hard! Hard!” 
Pilgrim dashed back from the other side and pulled at 8 Rules, saying, “Idiot! Follow me! Follow me!” Lying flat on the ground, 8 Rules said, “It's much too slippery! Much too slippery! Let me go, please! 
Let me mount the wind and fog to get over there.” Pushing him down, Pilgrim said, “What sort of a place do you think this is that you’re permitted to mount wind and fog? Unless you walk across this 
bridge, you'll never become a god.” 
“O Elder Brother!” said 8 Rules. “It’s okay with me if | don’t become a god. But I’m not going on that bridge!” 
Right beside the bridge, the two of them started a tug-of-war. Only Sand-monk’s admonitions managed to separate them. Tripitaka happened to turn his head, and he suddenly caught sight of someone 
punting a boat upstream toward the ferry and crying, “Ahoy! Ahoy!” 
Highly pleased, the elder said, “Disciples, stop your frivolity! There’s a boat coming.” The three of them leaped up and stood still to stare at the boat. When it drew near, they found that it was a small 
bottomless one. With his fiery eyes and diamond pupils, Pilgrim at once recognised that the ferryman was in fact the Conductor God, also named the Light of Ratnadhvaja. Without revealing a god’s 
identity however, Pilgrim simply said, “Over here! Punt it this way!” 
Immediately the boatman punted it up to the shore. “Ahoy! Ahoy!” he cried. Terrified by what he saw, Tripitaka said, “How could this bottom-less boat of yours carry anybody?” The Religious Patriarch 
said, “This boat of mine since creation’s dawn has achieved great fame; punted by me, it has ever been the same. Upon the wind and wave it’s still secure: with no end or beginning its joy is sure. It 
can return to One, completely clean through ten thousand kalpas a sail serene. Though bottomless boats may never cross the sea, this ferries all souls through eternity.” 
Pressing his palms together to thank him, the Great Sage Sun said, “I thank you for your great kindness in coming to receive and lead my master. Master, get on the boat. Though it is bottomless, it’s 
safe. Even if there are wind and waves, it will not capsize.” 
The elder still hesitated but Pilgrim took him by the shoulder and gave him a shove. With nothing to stand on, that master tumbled straight into the water but the boatman swiftly pulled him out. As he 
stood on the side of the boat, the master kept shaking out his clothes and stamping his feet as he grumbled at Pilgrim. Pilgrim however, helped Sand-monk and 8 Rules to lead the horse and tote the 
luggage into the boat. As they all stood on the gunwale, the Religious Patriarch gently punted the vessel away from shore. All at once they saw a corpse floating down upstream, the sight of which filled 
the elder with terror. 
“Don't be afraid, Master,” said Pilgrim, laughing. “It's actually you!” 
“It's you! It’s you!” said 8 Rules also. 
Clapping his hands, Sand-monk also said, “It’s you! It’s you!” 
Adding his voice to the chorus, the boatman also said, “That’s you! Congratulations! Congratulations!” Then the three disciples repeated this reciting in unison as the boat was punted across the water. 
In no time at all, they crossed the Divine Cloud-Transcending Ferry all safe and sound. Only then did Tripitaka turn and skip lightly onto the other shore. Here a testimonial poem says: 
Delivered from their mortal flesh and bone, a primal spirit of mutual love’s grown. 

Their work done, they become Gods this day, free of their former 6-6 senses” sway. 
Truly this is what is meant by the profound wisdom and the boundless religion that enable a person to reach the other shore. The moment the 4 pilgrims went ashore and turned around, the boatman 
and even the bottomless boat had disappeared. Only then did Pilgrim point out that it was the Conductor God, and immediately Tripitaka awoke to the truth. Turning quickly, he thanked his three 
disciples instead. Pilgrim said, “We two parties need not thank each other for we’re meant to support each other. We're indebted to our master for our liberation through which we've found the gateway 
to merit making and fortunately we've achieved the right fruit. Our master’s also to rely on our protection so that he may be firm in keeping both law and faith to find the happy deliverance from this 
mortal stock. Master, look at this superb scenery of flowers, grass, pines, bamboos, phoenixes, cranes, and deer. Compared with those places of illusory transformation by monsters and deviates which 
ones do you think are pleasant and which ones bad? Which ones are good and which evil?” 
Tripitaka expressed his thanks repeatedly as every one of them with lightness and agility walked up the Spirit Mountain. Soon this was the aged Thunderclap Monastery that came into view: its top 
touches the firmament; root joins the Sumeru range. Wondrous peaks in rows; strange boulders rugged. Beneath the cliffs, jade-grass and jasper-flowers; by the path, purple agaric and scented orchid. 
Divine apes plucking fruits in the peach orchard seem like fire-burnished gold; white cranes perching on the tips of pine branches resemble mist-shrouded jade. Male phoenixes in pairs — female 
phoenixes in 2s - male phoenixes in pairs make one call facing the sun to bless the world; female phoenixes in 2s whose radiant exercise in the wind is rarely seen. See too those mandarin duck tiles 
of lustrous gold and luminous, patterned bricks cornelian-gilt. In the east and the west stand rows of scented halls and pearly arches; to the north and the south, an endless sight of treasure lofts and 
precious towers. The Deity-King Hall emits lambent mists; the Religion-guarding Hall sends forth purple flames. The heap’s clear form; the Utpala’s fragrance. Truly a fine place similar to Heaven with 
lazy clouds to make the day long. The causes cease, red dust can’t come at all: safe from all kalpas is this great Religion Hall. Footloose and carefree, master and disciples walked to the summit of 
Mount Spirit where under a forest of green pines they saw a group of female worshippers and rows of worshippers in the midst of verdant cypresses. Immediately the elder saluted to them, so startling 
the worshippers and female worshippers, the monks and the nuns, that they all pressed their palms together, saying, “Sage Monk, you'd not render us such homage. Wait till you see God and then you 
may come to exchange greetings with us.” 
“He is always in such a hurry!” said Pilgrim, laughing. “Let’s go to salute those seated at the top!” 
His arms and legs dancing with excitement, the elder followed Pilgrim straight up to the gate of the Thunderclap Monastery. There they were met by the 4 Great Lightning Guardians who said, “Has the 
sage monk arrived?” 
Bending low, Tripitaka said, “Yes, your disciple Xuanzang’s arrived.” 
No sooner had he given this reply than he wanted to go inside. “Please wait a moment, Sage Monk,” said the Lightning Guardians. “Allow us to announce your arrival first before you enter.” 
1 of the Lightning Guardians was asked to report to the other 4 Great Lightning Guardians stationed at the 2™ gate and 1 of those porters passed the news of the Tang Monk’s arrival to the 3° gate. 
Those guarding the 3 gate happened to be divine monks who served at the great altar. When they heard the news, they quickly went to the Great Hero Hall to announce to Siddhartha, the Most 
Honoured 1 also named God: “The sage monk from the Tang court's arrived in this treasure monastery. He’s come to fetch the scriptures.” 
Highly pleased, Holy Dad God at once asked the 8 Nuns, the 4 Lightning Guardians, the 500 Arhats, the 3000 Guardians, the 11 Great Orbs, and the 18 Guardians of Monasteries to form 2 rows for 
the reception. Then he issued the golden decree to summon in the Tang Monk. Again the word was passed from section to section from gate to gate: “Let the sage monk enter.” 
Meticulously observing the rules of ritual propriety, our Tang Monk walked through the monastery gate with Wukong, Aware of Ability, and Awakened to Purity, still leading the horse and toting the 
luggage. Thus it was that commissioned that year, a resolve he made to leave with rescript the royal steps of jade. The hills he’d climb to face the morning dew or rest on a boulder when the twilight 
fades. He totes his faith to ford 3000 streams, his staff trailing over endless palisades. His every thought’s bent on seeking right fruit. Homage to God will this day be paid. The 4 pilgrims on reaching 
the Great Hero Treasure Hall saluted themselves before Siddhartha. Thereafter, they saluted to all the attendants of God on the left and right. This they repeated 3 times before kneeling again before 
the Religious Patriarch to present their travelling rescript to him. After reading it carefully, Siddhartha handed it back to Tripitaka who touched his head to the ground once more to say, “By the decree 
of the Great Tang Emperor in the Land of the East, your disciple Xuanzang’s come to this treasure monastery to beg you for the true scriptures for the redemption of the multitude. | implore the Religious 
Patriarch to vouchsafe his grace and grant me my wish, so that | may soon retum to my country.” 
To express the compassion of his heart, Siddhartha opened his mouth of mercy and said to Tripitaka, “Your Land of the East belongs to the South Jambidvipa Continent. Because of your size and 
your fertile land, your prosperity and population, there is a great deal of greed and killing, lust and lying, oppression and deceit. People neither honour the teachings of God nor cultivate virtuous karma; 
they neither revere the three lights nor respect the five grains. They are disloyal and un-filial, unrighteous and unkind, unscrupulous and self-deceiving. Through all manners of injustice and taking of 
lives, they have committed boundless transgressions. The fullness of their iniquities therefore has brought on them the ordeal of hell and sent them into eternal darkness and perdition to suffer the 
pains of pounding and grinding and of being transformed into beasts. Many of them will assume the forms of creatures with fur and horns; in this manner they will repay their debts by having their flesh 
made for food for mankind. These are the reasons for their eternal perdition in Avici without deliverance. Though Confucius had promoted his teachings of benevolence, righteousness, ritual, and 
wisdom, and though a succession of kings and emperors had established such penalties as transportation, banishment, hanging, and beheading, these institutions had little effect on the foolish and 
the blind, the reckless and the antinomian. “Now, I’ve here three baskets of scriptures which can deliver humanity from its afflictions and dispel its calamities. There is one basket of vinaya that speak 
of Heaven; a basket of treatises that tell of the Earth; and a basket of Threads that redeem the damned. Altogether these three baskets of scriptures contain thirty-five volumes written in fifteen thousand 
one hundred and forty-four scrolls. They are truly the pathway to the realisation of mortality and the gate to ultimate virtue. Every concern of astronomy, geography, biography, flora and fauna, utensils, 
and human affairs within the Four Great Continents of this world is recorded therein. Since all of you've travelled such a great distance to come here, I’d have liked to give the entire set to you. 
Unfortunately, the people of your region are both stupid and headstrong. Mocking the true words, they refuse to recognise the profound significance of our teachings of Sramana.” Then God turned to 
call out: “Ananda and Kasyapa, take the four of them to the space beneath the precious tower. Give them a vegetarian meal first. After the maigre, open our treasure loft for them and select a few 
scrolls from each of the thirty-five divisions of our three canons, so that they may take them back to the Land of the East as a perpetual token of grace.” The 2 Honoured Ones obeyed and took the 4 
pilgrims to the space beneath the tower where countless rare dainties and exotic treasures were laid out in a seemingly endless spread. Those deities in charge of offerings and sacrifices began to 
serve a magnificent feast of divine food, tea, and fruit - viands of 100 flavours completely different from those of the mortal world. After master and disciples had saluted to give thanks to God, they 
abandoned themselves to enjoyment. In truth treasure flames, gold beams on their eyes have shined; strange fragrance and feed even more refined. Boundlessly fair the tower of gold appears; there 
are mortal poems that clears the ears. Such divine fare and flower humans rarely see; long life’s attained through strange food and fragrant tea. Long have they endured a thousand forms of pain. This 
day in glory the Way they're glad to gain. This time it was 8 Rules who was in luck and Sand-monk who had the advantage, for what the Religious Patriarch had provided for their complete enjoyment 
was nothing less than such viands as could grant them longevity and health and enable them to transform their mortal substance into mortal flesh and bones. When the four pilgrims had finished their 
meal, the two Honoured Ones who had kept them company led them up to the treasure loft. The moment the door was opened, they found the room enveloped in a thousand layers of auspicious air 
and magic beams, in ten thousand folds of coloured fog and hallowed clouds. On the Thread cases and jewelled chests red labels were attached, on which the volumes of the books were written in 
Clerkly script as follows: ® 
1. The Extinguishment Thread, 1 volume 748 scrolls 
2. The Akasagarbha-Nun-religious Thread, 1 volume 400 scrolls 
3. The Gracious Will Thread, Major Collection, 1 volume 50 scrolls 
4. The Prajfiaparamita-sarnkaya verse Thread, 1 volume 46 scrolls 
5. The Homage to Bhitatathata Thread, 1 volume 90 scrolls 
6. The Anaksara-granthaka-rocana-garbha Thread, 1 volume 300 scrolls 
7. The Vimalakirti-nirdesa Thread, 1 volume 170 scrolls 
8. The Lightningcchedika-prajfiaparamita Thread, 1 volume 100 scrolls 
9. A god-carita-kavya Thread, 1 volume 800 scrolls 
10. The Nun-pitaka Thread, 1 volume 1021 scrolls 
1. The Sirangama-Fixity Thread, 1 volume 110 scrolls 
2. The Arthaviniscaya-religionparyaya Thread, 1 volume 140 scrolls 
3. The Avatarnsaka Thread, 1 volume 500 scrolls 
4. The Mahaprajfia-paramita Thread, 1 volume 916 scrolls 
5. The Abita-religion Thread, 1 volume 1110 scrolls 
16. The Other Madhyamika Thread, 1 volume 270 scrolls 
17. The Kasyapa-parivarta Thread, 1 volume 120 scrolls 
8. The Pafica-naga Thread, 1 volume 32 scrolls 
9. The Nun-carya-nirdesa Thread, 1 volume 116 scrolls 
20. The Magadha Thread, 1 volume 350 scrolls 
21. The Maya-dalamahatantra mahayana-gambhira nayaguhya-parasi Thread, 1 volume 100 scrolls 


4 


4 


4 


4 


4 


4 


4 


22. The Western Heaven Treatise, 1 volume 130 scrolls 
23. A god-ksetra Thread, 1 volume 1950 scrolls 
24. The Mahaprajfiaparamita Treatise, 1 volume 1080 scrolls 
25. The Original Loft Thread, 1 volume 850 scrolls 
26. The Mahamaydri-vidyarajfit Thread, 1 volume 220 scrolls 
27. The Abhireligion-koSa Treatise, 1 volume 200 scrolls 
28. The Mahasamghata Thread, 1 volume 130 scrolls 
29. The Sadreligion-pundarika Thread, 1 volume 100 scrolls 
30. The Precious Permanence Thread, 1 volume 220 scrolls 
31. The Sanghika-vinaya Thread, 1 volume 157 scrolls 
32. The Mahayana-Sraddhotpada Treatise, 1 volume 1000 scrolls 
33. The Precious Authority Thread, 1 volume 1280 scrolls 
34. The Correct Commandment Thread, 1 volume 200 scrolls 
35. The Vidya-matra-siddhi Treatise, 1 volume 100 scrolls 
After Ananda and Kagyapa had shown all the volumes to the Tang Monk, they said to him, “Sage Monk, having come all this distance from the Land of the East, what sort of small gifts have you brought 
for us? Take them out quickly! We'll be pleased to hand over the scriptures to you.” 
On hearing this, Tripitaka said, “Because of the great distance, your disciple, Xuanzang, has not been able to make such preparation.” 
“How nice! How nice!” said the two Honoured Ones, snickering, “If we imparted the scriptures to you gratis, our posterity would starve to death!” 
When Pilgrim saw them fidgeting and fussing, refusing to hand over the scriptures, he could not refrain from yelling, “Master, let’s go tell Siddhartha about this! Let's make him come himself and hand 
over the scriptures to old monkey!” 
“Stop shouting!” said Ananda. “Where do you think you're that you dare indulge in such mischief and wiggery? Get over here and receive the scriptures!” 
Controlling their annoyance, 8 Rules and Sand-monk managed to restrain Pilgrim before they turned to receive the books. Scroll after scroll were wrapped and laid on the horse. 4 additional luggage 
wraps were bundled up for 8 Rules and Sand-monk to tote after which the pilgrims went before the jewelled throne again to respect and thank Siddhartha. As they walked out the gates of the monastery, 
they saluted twice whenever they came upon a Religious Patriarch or a Nun. When they reached the main gate, they also saluted to take leave of the priests and nuns, the worshippers and female 
worshippers, before descending the mountain. There was up in the treasure loft the aged Diparkara also named a god of the Past who overheard everything and understood immediately that Ananda 
and Kasyapa had handed over scrolls of scriptures that were actually wordless to the pilgrims. Chuckling to himself, he said, “Most of the priests in the Land of the East are so stupid and blind that 
they'll not recognise the value of these wordless scriptures. When that happens, won't it have made this long trek of our sage monk completely worthless?” Then he asked, “Who’s here beside my 
throne?” 
The White Heroic Honoured1e at once stepped forth and the aged God gave him this instruction: “You must exercise your magic powers and catch up with the Tang Monk immediately. Take away 
those wordless scriptures from him so that he will be forced to return for the true scriptures with words.” 
Mounting a violent gust of wind, the White Heroic Honoured 1 swept out of the gate of the Thunderclap Monastery. He called up his vast magic powers. The wind’s strong indeed! Truly a stalwart 
Servant of God is like no common wind-god; the wrathful cries of a mortal far surpass a young girl’s whistle! This mighty gust causes fishes and dragons to lose their lairs and angry waves in the rivers 
and seas. Black apes find it hard to present their fruits; yellow cranes turn around to seek their nests. The phoenix’s pure cries have lost their poems; the pheasant’s callings turn most boisterous. Green 
pine-branches snap; blue lotus-blossoms soar. Stalk by stalk, verdant bamboos fall; petal by petal, gold lotus quakes. Bell tones drift away to 3000 miles; the scripture recites over countless gorges fly. 
Beneath the cliff rare flowers’ colours fade; fresh, jade-like grasses lie down by the road. Phoenixes can’t stretch their wings; white deer hide on the ledge. Vast waves of strange fragrance now fill the 
world as cool, clear breezes penetrate the Heavens. The elder Tang was walking along when he encountered this churning fragrant wind. Thinking that this was only an auspicious portent sent by the 
Religious Patriarch, he was completely off guard when with a loud crack in mid-air, a hand descended. The scriptures that were loaded on the horse were lifted away with no effort at all. The sight left 
Tripitaka yelling in terror and beating his chest while 8 Rules rolled off in pursuit on the ground and Sand-monk stood rigid to guard the empty pannier. Pilgrim Sun vaulted into the air. When that White 
Heroic Honoured One saw him closing in rapidly, he feared that Pilgrim’s rod might strike out blindly without regard for good or ill to cause him injury. He therefore ripped the scriptures open and threw 
them toward the ground. When Pilgrim saw that the scripture wrappers were torn and their contents scattered all over by the fragrant wind, he lowered the direction of his cloud to go after the books 
instead and stopped his pursuit. The White Heroic Honoured 1 retrieved the wind and fog and returned to report to a god of the Past. As 8 Rules sped along, he saw the holy books dropping down from 
the sky. Soon he was joined by Pilgrim, and the two of them gathered up the scrolls to go back to the Tang Monk. His eyes brimming with tears, the Tang Monk said, “O Disciples! We're bullied by 
vicious demons even in this land of ultimate bliss!” When Sand-monk opened up a scroll of scripture that the other two disciples were clutching, his eyes perceived only snow-white paper without a 
trace of so much as half a letter on it. Hurriedly he presented it to Tripitaka, saying, “Master, this scroll is wordless!” Pilgrim also opened a scroll and it, too, was wordless. Then 8 Rules opened still 
another scroll and it was also wordless. “Open all of them!” cried Tripitaka. Every scroll had only blank paper. Heaving big sighs, the elder said, “Our people in the Land of the East simply have no luck! 
What good’s it to take back a wordless, empty volume like this? How’d | possibly face the Tang emperor? The crime of mocking one’s ruler’s greater than one punishable by execution!” 
Already perceiving the truth of the matter, Pilgrim said to the Tang Monk, “Master, there’s no need for further talk. This has all come about because we’d no gifts for these fellows, Ananda and Kaéyapa. 
That's why we're given these wordless texts. Let’s go back quickly to Siddhartha and charge them with fraud and solicitation for a bribe.” 
“Exactly! Exactly!” yelled 8 Rules. “Let’s go and charge them!” 
The 4 pilgrims turned and with painful steps, once more ascended Thunderclap. In a little while they reached the temple gates where they were met by the multitude with hands folded in their sleeves. 
“Has the sage monk returned to ask for an exchange of scriptures?” they asked, laughing. Tripitaka nodded his affirmation, and the Lightning Guardians permitted them to go straight inside. When they 
arrived before the Great Hero Hall, Pilgrim shouted, “Siddhartha, we master and disciples had to experience ten thousand stings and a thousand demons in order to come saluting from the Land of the 
East. After you had specifically ordered the scriptures to be given to us, Ananda and Kaéyapa sought a bribe from us; when they didn’t succeed, they conspired in fraud and deliberately handed over 
wordless texts to us. Even if we took them, what good would they do? Pardon me, Siddhartha but you must deal with this matter!” 
“Stop shouting!” said the Religious Patriarch with a chuckle. “I knew already that the two of them would ask you for a little present. After all, the holy scriptures are not to be given lightly, nor are they to 
be received gratis. Some time ago in fact a few of our sage priests went down the mountain and recited these scriptures in the house of one Elder Zhao in the Kingdom of Sravasti, so that the living in 
his family would all be protected from harm and the deceased redeemed from perdition. For all that service they managed to charge him only three pecks and three pints of rice. | told them that they 
had made far too cheap a sale and that their posterity would have no money to spend. Since you people came with empty hands to acquire scriptures, blank texts were handed over to you. But these 
blank texts are actually true, wordless scriptures, and they are just as good as those with words. However, those creatures in your Land of the East are so foolish and unenlightened that I’ve no choice 
but to impart to you now the texts with words.” 
“Ananda and Kasyapa,” he then called out, “quickly select for them a few scrolls from each of the volumes of true scriptures with words, and then come back to me to report the total number.” 
The two Honoured Ones again led the four pilgrims to the treasure loft where they once more demanded a gift from the Tang Monk. Since he had virtually nothing to offer, Tripitaka told Sand-monk to 
take out the alms-bowl of purple gold. With both hands he presented it to the Honoured Ones, saying, “Your disciple in truth has not brought with him any gift, owing to the great distance and my own 
poverty. This alms-bowl however, was bestowed by the Tang emperor in person, in order that I'd use it to beg for my maigre throughout the journey. As the humblest token of my gratitude, I’m presenting 
it to you now, and | beg the Honoured Ones to accept it. When | return to the court and make my report to the Tang emperor, a generous reward will certainly be forthcoming. Only grant us the true 
scriptures with words, so that His Majesty's goodwill will not be thwarted nor the labour of this lengthy journey be wasted.” With a gentle smile, Ananda took the alms-bowl. All those vira who guarded 
the precious towers, the kitchen helpers in charge of sacrifices and incense, and the Honoured Ones who worked in the treasure loft began to clap one another on the back and tickle one another on 
the face. Snapping their fingers and curling their lips, every 1 of them said, “How shameless! How shameless! Asking the scripture seeker for a present!” 
After a while, the two Honoured Ones became rather embarrassed, though Ananda continued to clutch firmly at the alms-bowl. KaSyapa however, went into the loft to select the scrolls and handed 
them item by item to Tripitaka. “Disciples,” said Tripitaka, “take a good look at these and make sure that they’re unlike the earlier ones.” 
The 3 disciples examined each scroll as they received it and this time all the scrolls had words written on them. Altogether they were given 5048 scrolls, making up the number of a single canon. After 
being properly packed, the scriptures were loaded onto the horse. An additional load was made for 8 Rules to tote while their own luggage was toted by Sand-monk. As Pilgrim led the horse, the Tang 
Monk took up his priestly staff and gave his Vairocana hat a press and his brocade cassock a shake. In delight they once more went before our God Siddhartha. Thus it is that sweet is the taste of the 
Great Pitaka, product most refined of Siddhartha. Note how Xuanzang has climbed the mount with pain. Pity Ananda who has but love of gain. Their blindness removed by God of the Past, the truth 
now received they have peace at last — glad to bring scriptures back to the East where all may partake of this gracious feast. Ananda and Kasyapa led the Tang Monk before Siddhartha who ascended 
the lofty lotus throne. He ordered Dragon-Tamer and Tiger-Subduer, the 2 Arhats, to strike up the cloudy stone-chime to assemble all the divinities including the 3000 gods, the 3000 guardians, the 8 
Lightning Guardians, the 500 Arhats, the 800 nuns and priests, the male and female worshippers, the Honoured 1s from every Heaven and cave-dwelling from every blessed land and spirit mountain. 
Those who ought to be seated were asked to ascend their treasure thrones while those who should stand were told to make 2 columns on both sides. In a moment celestial poems filled the air as layers 
of auspicious luminosity and hallowed mist loomed up in the sky. After all the gods had assembled, they saluted to greet Siddhartha. Then Siddhartha asked, “Ananda and Kasyapa, how many scrolls 
of scriptures you've passed on to him? Give me an itemised report.” 
The 2 Honoured 1s said, “We've turned over to the Tang court the following scrolls of Threads: 
1. The Extinguishment 400 
2. The Akasagarbha-Nun-religious 20 
3. The Gracious Will, Major Collection 40 
4. The Prajfiaparamita-sammkaya verse 20 
5. The Homage to Bhitatathata 20 
6. The Anaksara-granthaka-rocana-garbha 50 
7. The Vimalakirti-nirdesa 30 
8. The Lightningcchedika-prajfiaparamita 1 scroll 
9. A god-carita-kavya 116 
10. The Nun-pitaka 360 
11. The Strangama-Fixity 30 
12. The ArthaviniScaya-religionparyaya 40 
13. The Avatarnsaka 81 
14. The Mahaprajfia-paramita 600 
15. The Abita-religion 550 
16. The Other Madhyamika 42 
17. The Kasyapa-parivarta 20 
18. The Pafica-Serpent 20 
19. The Nun-carya-nirdesa 60 
20. The Magadha 140 
21. The Maya-dalamahatantra mahayana-gambhira nayaguhya-parasi 30 
22. The Western Heaven Treatise 30 


23. A god-ksetra 1,638 
24. The Mahaprajfiaparamita Treatise 90 
25. The Original Loft 56 
26. The Mahamayiri-vidyarajft 14 
27. The Abhireligion-koSa Treatise 10 
28. The Mahasamghata 30 
29. The Sadreligion-pundarika 10 
30. The Precious Permanence 170 
31. The Sanghika-vinaya no 
32. The Mahayana-Sraddhotpada Treatise 50 
33. The Precious Authority 140 
34. The Correct Commandment 10 
35. The Vidya-matra-siddhi Treatise 10 

From the thirty-five volumes of scriptures that are in the treasury, we've selected altogether five thousand and forty-eight scrolls? for the sage monk to take back to the Tang in the Land of the East. 
Most of these’ve been properly packed, loaded on the horse, and a few have also been arranged in a pannier. The pilgrims now wish to express their thanks to you.” 
Having tethered the horse and set down the poles, Tripitaka led his 3 disciples to bow to God, each pressing his palms together in front of him. Siddhartha said to the Tang Monk, “The efficacy of these 
scriptures can’t be measured. Not only are they the mirror of our faith but they are also the source of the Three Religions. They mustn't be lightly handled, especially when you return to your South 
Jambidvipa Continent and display them to the multitude. No one should open a scroll without fasting and bathing first. Treasure them! Honour them! Therein will be found the mysteries of gaining 
mortality and comprehending the Way, the wondrous formulas for the execution of ten thousand transformations.” 
Tripitaka respected to thank him and to express his faith and obedience. As before, he saluted himself in homage three times to the Religious Patriarch with all earnestness and sincerity before he took 
the scriptures and left. As he went through the three monastery gates, he again thanked each of the sages. After he had sent away the Tang Monk, Siddhartha dismissed the assembly for the 
transmission of scriptures. From one side stepped forth the Nun Guanshiyin who pressed her palms together to say to the Religious Patriarch, “This disciple received your golden decree that year to 
search for someone in the Land of the East to be a scripture seeker. Today he has succeeded. Altogether, his journey took fourteen years, or five thousand and forty days. Eight more days and the 
perfect canonical number will be attained. Would you permit me to surrender in return your golden decree?” 
Highly pleased, Siddhartha said, “What you said is most appropriate. You're certainly permitted to surrender my golden decree.” He then gave this instruction to the Eight Lightning Guardians: “Quickly 
exercise your magic powers to lift the sage monk back to the East. As soon as he has imparted the true scriptures to the people there, bring him back here to the West. You must accomplish all this 
within eight days, so as to fulfil the perfect canonical number of five thousand and forty-eight. Do not delay.” The Lightning Guardians at once caught up with the Tang Monk, crying, “Scripture seekers, 
follow us!” The Tang Monk and his companions, all with healthy frames and buoyant bodies, followed the Lightning Guardians to rise in the air astride the clouds. Truly their minds enlightened, they 
saluted to God; merit perfected, they ascended on high. 


115 
9 times 9 ends the count & Killing’s all destroyed; the work of 3 times 3‘ done, the Dao reverts to its root 
We'll not speak of the 8 Lightning Guardians escorting the Tang Monk back to his nation. We turn instead to those Guardians of the 5 Quarters, the 4 Sentinels, the 6 Gods of Darkness and the 6 Gods 
of Light, and the Guardians of Monasteries who appeared before the triple gates and said to the Nun Guanyin, “Your disciples had received the Nun’s religion decree to give secret protection to the 
sage monk. Now that the work of the sage monk’s completed and the Nun’s returned the Religious Patriarch’s golden decree to him, we too request permission from the Nun to return your religion 
decree to you.” 
Highly pleased also, the Nun said, “Yes, yes! You've my permission.” 
Then she asked, “What's the disposition of the four pilgrims during their journey?” 
“They showed genuine devotion and determination,” replied the various deities, “that'd hardly have escaped the penetrating observation of the Nun. The Tang Monk after all had endured unspeakable 
sufferings. Indeed, all the ordeals that he’d to undergo throughout his journey have been recorded by your disciples. Here’s the complete account.” The Nun started to read the registry from its beginning 
and this was the content: “The Guardians in obedience to your decree record with care the Tang Monk’s calamities. 
Gold Cicada banished is the first ordeal [8]; 
Being almost killed after birth is the second ordeal [9]; 
Being thrown in the river hardly a month old is the third ordeal [9]; 
Seeking parents and their vengeance is the fourth ordeal [9]; 
Meeting a tiger after leaving the city is the fifth ordeal [13]; 
Falling into a pit and losing followers is the sixth ordeal [13]; 
The Double-Fork Ridge is the seventh ordeal [13]; 
The Mountain of Two Frontiers is the eighth ordeal [13]; 
Changing horse at a steep brook is the ninth ordeal 15]; 
Burning by fire at night is the tenth ordeal [16]; 
Losing the cassock is the eleventh ordeal [16]; 
Bringing 8 Rules to submission is the twelfth ordeal [18-19]; 
Being blocked by the Yellow Wind Fiend is the thirteenth ordeal [20]; 
Seeking aid with Lingji is the fourteenth ordeal [21]; 
Hard to cross Flowing-Sand is the fifteenth ordeal [22]; 
Taking in Sand-monk is the sixteenth ordeal [22]; 
The Four Sages’ epiphany is the seventeenth ordeal [23]; 
The Five Villages Temple is the eighteenth ordeal [24]; 
The ginseng hard to revive is the nineteenth ordeal [26]; 
Banishing the Mind Monkey is the twentieth ordeal [27]; 
Getting lost at Black Pine Forest is the twenty-first ordeal [28]; 
Sending a letter to Precious Image Kingdom is the twenty-second ordeal [29]; 
Changing into a tiger at the Golden Chimes Hall is the twenty-third ordeal [30]; 
Meeting demons at Level-Top Mountain is the twenty-fourth ordeal [32]; 
Being hung high at Lotus-Flower Cave is the twenty-fifth ordeal [33]; 
Saving the ruler of Black Rooster Kingdom is the twenty-sixth ordeal [37]; 
Running into a demon’s transformed body is the twenty-seventh ordeal [37]; 
Meeting a fiend in Roaring Mountain is the twenty-eighth ordeal [40]; 
The sage monk abducted by wind is the twenty-ninth ordeal [40]; 
The Mind Monkey being injured is the thirtieth ordeal [41]; 
Asking the sage to subdue monsters is the thirty-first ordeal [42]; 
Sinking in the Black River is the thirty-second ordeal [43]; 
Hauling at Cart Slow Kingdom is the thirty-third ordeal [44]; 
A mighty contest is the thirty-fourth ordeal [chaps. [45-46]; 
Expelling Daoists to prosper Religious is the thirty-fifth ordeal [47]; 
Meeting a great water on the road is the thirty-sixth ordeal [47]; 
Falling into the Heaven-Reaching River is the thirty-seventh ordeal [48]; 
The Fish-Basket revealing her body is the thirty-eighth ordeal [49]; 
Meeting a fiend at Golden Helmet Mountain is the thirty-ninth ordeal [50]; 
Heaven's gods find it hard to win is the fortieth ordeal [chaps. [51-52]; 
Asking a god for the source is the forty-first ordeal [52]; 
Being poisoned after drinking water is the forty-second ordeal [53]; 
Detained for marriage at Western Liang Kingdom is the forty-third ordeal [54]; 
Suffering at the Cave of the Lute is the forty-fourth ordeal [55]; 
Banishing again the Mind Monkey is the forty-fifth ordeal [56]; 
The macaque hard to distinguish is the forty-sixth ordeal [chaps. [57-58]; 
The road blocked at the Mountain of Flames is the forty-seventh ordeal [59]; 
Seeking the palm-leaf fan is the forty-eighth ordeal [chaps. [59-60]; 
Binding the demon king is the forty-ninth ordeal [61]; 
Sweeping the pagoda at Sacrifice Kingdom is the fiftieth ordeal [62]; 
Recovering the treasure to save the monks is the fifty-first ordeal [63]; 
Reciting poetry at the Brambled Forest is the fifty-second ordeal [64]; 
Meeting disaster at Little Thunderclap is the fifty-third ordeal [65]; 
The celestial gods being imprisoned is the fifty-fourth ordeal [66]; 
Being blocked by filth at Pulpy Persimmon Alley is the fifty-fifth ordeal [67]; 
Applying medication at the Scarlet-Purple Kingdom is the fifty-sixth ordeal [68-69]; 
Healing fatigue and infirmity is the fifty-seventh ordeal [68-69]; 
Subduing monster to recover a queen is the fifty-eighth ordeal [69-71]; 
Delusion by the seven passions is the fifty-ninth ordeal [72]; 
Being wounded by Many Eyes is the sixtieth ordeal [73]; 
The way blocked at the Lion-Camel Kingdom is the sixty-first ordeal [74-75]; 
The fiends divided into three colours is the sixty-second ordeal [74-77]; 
Meeting calamity in the city is the sixty-third ordeal [76-77]; 
Requesting God to subdue the demons is the sixty-fourth ordeal [77]; 


Rescuing the lads at Beggar is the sixty-fifth ordeal [78]; 
Distinguishing the true from the deviate is the sixty-sixth ordeal [79]; 
Saving a fiend at a pine forest is the sixty-seventh ordeal [80}: 
Falling sick in a priestly chamber is the sixty-eighth ordeal [81]; 
Being imprisoned at the Bottomless Cave is the sixty-ninth ordeal [81-83]; 
Difficulty in going through Religion-Destroying Kingdom is the seventieth ordeal [84]; 
Meeting demons at Mist-Concealing Mountain is the seventy-first ordeal [85-86]; 
Seeking rain at Phoenix-Mortal Prefecture is the seventy-second ordeal [87]; 
Losing their weapons is the seventy-third ordeal [88]; 
The festival of the rake is the seventy-fourth ordeal [89]; 
Meeting disaster at Bamboo-Knot Mountain is the seventy-fifth ordeal [90]; 
Suffering at Mysterious Flower Cave is the seventy-sixth ordeal [91]; 
Capturing the rhinoceroses is the seventy-seventh ordeal [92]; 
Being forced to marry at India is the seventy-eighth ordeal [chaps. [93-95]; 
Jailed at Bronze Estrada Prefecture is the seventy-ninth ordeal [97]; 
Delivered of mortal stock at Cloud-Transcending Ferry is the eightieth ordeal [98]; 
The journey: 108000 miles. The sage monk’s ordeals are clearly on file. 
After the Nun had read through the entire registry of ordeals, she said hurriedly, “Within our gate of Religion, nine times nine’s the crucial means by which one returns to perfection. The sage monk's 
undergone eighty ordeals. Because one ordeal’s therefore, still lacking, the sacred number isn’t yet complete.” At once she gave this order to 1 of the Guardians: “Catch the Lightning Guardians and 
create one more ordeal.” 
Having received this command, the Guardian soared toward the east astride the clouds. After a night and a day he caught the Lightning Guardians and whispered in their ears, “Do this and this...! 
Don't fail to obey the religion decree of the Nun.” 
On hearing these words, the 8 Lightning Guardians immediately retrieved the wind that had borne aloft the four pilgrims, dropping them and the horse bearing the scriptures to the ground. Alas! Truly 
such is nine times nine, hard task of mortality! Firmness of will yields the mysterious key. By bitter toil you must the demons spurn; cultivation will the proper way return. Regard not the scriptures as 
easy things. So many are the sage monk’s sufferings! Learn of the old, wondrous Kinship of the 3: elixir won't gel if there’s slight errancy. When his feet touched profane ground, Tripitaka became 
terribly frightened. 8 Rules however, roared with laughter, saying, “Good! Good! Good! This is exactly a case of ‘More haste, less speed’!” 
“Good! Good! Good!” said Sand-monk. “Because we've speeded up too much, they want us to take a little rest here.” 
“Have no worry,” said the Great Sage. “As the proverb says, for ten days you sit on the shore; in one day you may pass nine beaches.” 
“Stop matching your wits, you three!” said Tripitaka. “Let's see if we can tell where we’re.” Looking all around, Sand-monk said, “I know the place! | know the place! Master, listen to the sound of water!” 
Pilgrim said, “The sound of water, | suppose, reminds you of your ancestral home.” 
“Which is the Flowing-Sand River,” said 8 Rules. “No! No!” said Sand-monk. “This happens to be the Heaven-Reaching River.” Tripitaka said, “O Disciples! Take a careful look and see which side of 
the river we're on.” 
Vaulting into the air, Pilgrim shielded his eyes with his hand and took a careful survey of the place before dropping down once more. “Master,” he said, “this is the west bank of the Heaven-Reaching 
River.” 
“Now | remember,” said Tripitaka. “There was a Chen Village on the east bank. When we arrived here that year, you rescued their son and daughter. In their gratitude to us, they wanted to make a 
boat to take us across. Eventually we're fortunate enough to get across on the back of a white turtle. | recall, too, that there was no human habitation whatever on the west bank. What shall we do this 
time?” 
“| thought that only profane people would practice this sort of fraud,” said 8 Rules. “Now | know that even the Lightning Guardians before the face of God can practice fraud! God commanded them to 
take us back east. How could they just abandon us in mid-journey? Now we're in quite a bind! How are we going to get across?” 
“Stop grumbling, Second Elder Brother!” said Sand-monk. “Our master has already attained the Way, for he had already been delivered from his mortal frame previously at the Cloud-Transcending 
Ferry. This time he can’t possibly sink in water. Let’s all of us exercise our magic of Displacement and take Master across.” 
“You can’t take him over! You can’t take him over!” said Pilgrim, chuckling to himself. Now, why did he say that? If he were willing to exercise his magic powers and reveal the mystery of flight, master 
and disciples could cross even a thousand rivers. He knew however, that the Tang Monk had not yet perfected the sacred number of nine times nine. That one remaining ordeal made it necessary for 
them to be detained at the spot. 
As master and disciples conversed and walked slowly up to the edge of the water, they suddenly heard someone calling, “Tang Sage Monk! Tang Sage Monk! Come this way! Come this way!” Startled, 
the four of them looked all around but could not see any sign of a human being or a boat. Then they caught sight of a huge, white, scabby-headed turtle at the shoreline. “Old Master,” he cried with 
outstretched neck, “I’ve waited for you for so many years! Have you returned only at this time?” 
“Old Turtle,” replied Pilgrim, smiling, “we troubled you in a year past and today we meet again.” Tripitaka, 8 Rules, and Sand-monk could not have been more pleased. “If indeed you want to serve us,” 
said Pilgrim, “come up on the shore.” The turtle crawled up the bank. Pilgrim told his companions to guide the horse onto the turtle’s back. As before, 8 Rules squatted at the rear of the horse while the 
Tang Monk and Sand-monk took up positions to the left and to the right of the horse. With one foot on the turtle’s head and another on his neck, Pilgrim said, “Old Turtle, go steadily.” 
His 4 legs outstretched, the old turtle moved through the water as if he were on dry level ground carrying all 5 of them — master, disciples, and the horse — straight toward the eastern shore. Thus it is 
that in Advaya’s® gate will Religion profound reveal Heaven and Earth and demons confound. The original visage now they see; causes find perfection in 1 body. Freely they move when Triyana’s won 
and when the elixirs nine turns are done. The luggage and the staff there’s no need to tote, glad to return on old turtle afloat. Carrying the pilgrims on his back, the old turtle trod on the waves and 
proceeded for more than half a day. Late in the afternoon they were near the eastern shore when he suddenly asked this question: “Old Master, in that year when | took you across, | begged you to 
question Siddhartha, once you got to see him when I'd find my sought-after refuge and how much longer I'd live. Did you do that?” 
Now that elder since his arrival at the Western Heaven had been preoccupied with bathing in the Jade Perfection Abbey, being renewed at Cloud-Transcending Ferry, and saluting the various sage 
monks, Nuns, and Gods. When he walked up the Spirit Mountain, he fixed his thought on the worship of God and on the acquisition of scriptures, completely banishing from his mind all other concerns. 
He did not, of course, ask about the allotted age of the old turtle. Not daring to lie however, he fell silent and did not answer the question for a long time. Perceiving that Tripitaka had not asked a god 
for him, the old turtle shook his body once and dove with a splash into the depths. The 4 pilgrims, the horse, and the scriptures all fell into the water as well. Ah! It was fortunate that the Tang Monk had 
cast off his mortal frame and attained the Way. If he were like the person he had been before, he would have sunk straight to the bottom. The white horse moreover was originally a dragon while 8 
Rules and Sand-monk both were quite at home in the water. Smiling broadly, Pilgrim made a great display of his magic powers by hauling the Tang Monk right out of the water and onto the eastern 
shore. But the scriptures, the clothing, and the saddle were completely soaked. Master and disciples had just climbed up the riverbank when suddenly a violent gale arose; the sky darkened immediately 
and both thunder and lightning began as rocks and grit flew everywhere. What they felt was 1 gust of wind and the whole world teetered; 1 clap of thunder and both mountains and streams shuddered. 
1 flash of lightning shot flames through the clouds; 1 sky of fog enveloped this great Earth. The wind’s mighty howl; the thunder’s violent roar; the lightning’s scarlet streaks; the fog blanking moon and 
stars. The wind hurtled dust and dirt at their faces; the thunder sent tigers and leopards into hiding; the lightning raised among the fowl a ruckus; the fog made the woods and trees disappear. That 
wind caused waves in the Heaven-Reaching River to toss and churn; that lightning lit up the Heaven-Reaching River down to its bottom; that thunder terrified the Heaven-Reaching River's dragons and 
fishes; that fog covered the shores of Heaven-Reaching River with a shroud of darkness. Marvellous wind! Mountains cracked as pines and bamboos toppled. Marvellous thunder! Its power stirred 
insects and injured humans. Marvellous lightning! Like a gold snake it brightened both land and sky. Marvellous fog! It surged through the air to screen the 9-fold Heaven. So terrified were the pilgrims 
that Tripitaka held firmly to the scripture wraps and Sand-monk threw himself on the poles. While 8 Rules clung to the white horse, Pilgrim wielded his iron rod with both hands to give protection left 
and right. That wind, fog, thunder, and lightning had been a storm brought on by invisible demons who wanted to snatch away the scriptures the pilgrims had acquired. The commotion lasted all night, 
and only by morning did the storm subside. Soaked from top to bottom and shaking all over, the elder said, “Wukong, how did this storm come about?” 
“Master, you don’t seem to understand,” said Pilgrim panting heavily, “that when we escorted you to acquire these scriptures, we'd in fact robbed Heaven and Earth of their creative powers. For our 
success meant that we’d share the age of the universe; like the light of the sun and moon, we'd enjoy life everlasting for we’d put on an incorruptible body. Our success however, had also incurred the 
envy of Heaven and Earth, the jealousy of both demons and gods who wanted to snatch away the scriptures from us. They'd not do so only because the scriptures were thoroughly wet and because 
they'd been shielded by your rectified religion-body that could not be harmed by thunder, lightning, or fog. Moreover, old monkey's brandishing his iron rod to exercise the nature of pure yang and give 
you protection. Now that it’s morning, the forces of yang are evermore in ascendancy and the demons can’t prevail.” 
Only then did Tripitaka, 8 Rules, and Sand-monk realise what had taken place, and they all thanked Pilgrim repeatedly. In a little while, the sun was way up in the sky; they moved the scriptures to high 
ground so that the wraps could be opened and their contents dried. To this day the boulders have remained on which the scriptures were spread out and sunned. By the side of the boulders they also 
spread out their own clothing and shoes. As they stood, sat, or jumped about, truly this was their situation: the 1 pure yang body facing the light has put invisible demons all to flight. Know that true 
scriptures will over water prevail. They fear not the thunder-and-lightning assail. Henceforth to Sam-Awakening they will go in peace and to fairy land they will return with ease. Rocks for sunning 
scriptures are still found here though no demon would ever dare come near. The 4 of them were examining the scriptures scroll by scroll to see if they had completely dried when some anglers arrived 
at the shore. When they saw the pilgrims, 1 of the anglers recognised them and said, “Old Masters, aren't you the ones who crossed this river some years ago on your way to the Western Heaven to 
seek scriptures?” 
“Indeed, we're!” replied 8 Rules. “Where are you from? How is it that you recognise us?” 
“We're from the Chen Village,” said the angler. “How far is the village from here?” asked 8 Rules. The angler said, “Due south of this canal, about twenty miles.” 
“Master,” said 8 Rules, “let's move the scriptures to the Chen Village and dry them there. They have a place for us to sit and food for us to eat. We can even ask their family to starch our clothing. Isn’t 
that better than staying here?” 
“Let's not go there,” replied Tripitaka. “As soon as the scriptures are dried here, we can collect them and be on our way.” 
The anglers however, went back south of the canal and ran right into Chen Cheng. “Number Two,” they cried, “the masters who offered themselves as sacrifice-substitutes for your children years ago 
have returned.” 
“Where did you see them?” asked Chen Cheng. Pointing with their hands, the anglers said, “Near the boulders over there where they're sunning scrolls of scriptures.” 
Chen Cheng took some of his farmhands and ran past the canal. When he caught sight of the pilgrims, he hurriedly went to his knees and said, “Venerable Dads, now that you've returned, having 
accomplished your work and merit of acquiring scriptures, why you not came straight to our home? Why are you loitering here instead? Please, please come to our home!” 
“Wait till we’ve dried the scriptures in the sun,” said Pilgrim, “and we'll go with you.” 
“How is it,” asked Chen Cheng again, “that the clothing and scriptures of the venerable dads are soaking wet?” 
“In that previous year,” replied Tripitaka, “we’re indebted to a white turtle for taking us on his back to the western shore. This time he again offered to carry us back to the eastern shore. When we’re 
about to reach the bank, he asked me whether I'd remembered to inquire of God for him about how much longer it would take for him to achieve human form. I’d actually forgotten about the matter, 
and he dove into the water. That was how we got wet.” 
After Tripitaka had thus given a thorough account of what had taken place, Chen Cheng respected and urged them to go back to the house. At length Tripitaka gave in, and they began to collect the 
scriptures together. They did not expect however, that several scrolls of the Poem of the Deeds of God Thread would be stuck to the rocks and a part of the Thread's ending was torn off. This is why 
the Thread today is not a complete text, and the top of that particular boulder on which the Thread had dried still retains some traces of writing. “We've been very careless!” said Tripitaka sorrowfully. 
“We'd have been more vigilant.” 
“Hardly! Hardly!” said Pilgrim, laughing. “After all, even Heaven and Earth are not perfect. This Thread may have been perfect but a part of it has been torn off precisely because only in that condition 
will it correspond to the profound mystery of non-perfection. What happened isn’t something human power could anticipate or change!” After master and disciples had finished packing up the scriptures, 


they headed for the village with Chen Cheng. The news of the pilgrims’ arrival was passed from 1 person to 10, 10 to 100, and 100 to 1000 till all the people, old and young came to receive them. When 
Chen Qing got the news, he immediately set up an incense altar in front of his door and called for drummers and poets to play. The moment they arrived, Chen led his entire household to respect to 
the pilgrims so as to thank them once more for their previous kindness of saving their children. Then he ordered tea and maigre for them. Since Tripitaka had partaken of the mortal victuals prepared 
for him by the Religious Patriarch, and since he had been delivered from his mortal frame to become a god, he had no desire at all for profane food. The 2 old men begged, begged, and only to please 
them did he pick up the merest morsel. The Great Sage Sun who never ate much cooked food anyway, said almost immediately, “Enough!” Sand-monk did not show much appetite either. As for 8 
Rules, even he did not resemble his former self, for he soon put down his bowl. “Idiot, aren’t you eating anymore?” asked Pilgrim. 

“| don’t know why,” said 8 Rules, “but my stomach seems to have weakened all at once!” 

They therefore put away the food and the 2 old men asked about the enterprise of scripture seeking. Tripitaka gave a thorough account of how they bathed at the Jade Perfection Abbey first, how their 
bodies turned light and agile at the Cloud-Transcending Ferry, how they saluted to Siddhartha at Thunderclap, and how they were feted beneath the precious tower and received scriptures at the 
treasure loft. He then went on to tell how the 2 Honoured 1s, failing to obtain a gift at first, gave them wordless scriptures instead, how the second audience with Siddhartha had resulted in acquiring a 
canonical sum of scriptures, how the white turtle dove into the water, and how invisible demons tried to rob them. After this detailed rehearsal, he immediately wanted to leave. The entire household of 
the two old men, of course, absolutely refused to let them go. “We'd never have repaid,” they said, “your profound kindness in saving the lives of our son and daughter except by building a temple to 
your memory. We've named it the Life-Saving Monastery so that we might offer you the perpetual sacrifice of incense.” 

Then they called Chen Guanbao and One Load of Gold, the son and daughter for whom Pilgrim and 8 Rules originally served as substitutes on that occasion of child-sacrifice, to come out to respect 
again to their benefactors before they invited the pilgrims to view the monastery. Leaving the scripture-wraps in front of their family hall, Tripitaka recited a scroll of the Precious Permanence Thread for 
their entire household. When they reached the monastery, food had already been laid out there by the Chen family. Hardly had they been seated than another banquet was sent in by another family. 
Before they could even raise their chopsticks, still another banquet was brought in. There seemed in fact to be an unending stream of visitors and food vying for the pilgrims’ attention. Not wishing to 
decline such sincere display of the people’s hospitality, Tripitaka forced himself to make some show of tasting what was set before him. That monastery was a handsome building indeed by the way. 
The temple’s bright red-painted doors reflect the work of all donors. From that moment one edifice would rise with 2 porticoes adding to its size. Screens and casements scarlet; 7 treasures exquisite. 
Incense and clouds interlace as pure light floods the airy space. A few young cypresses need water still: pines have yet to form clusters on the hill. A living stream in front reaches Heaven with its 
tossing billows; a tall ridge behind, the mountain range through which the earth pulse flows. After he had looked at the monastery from the outside, Tripitaka then went up to the tall tower where he 
found the four statues of himself and his disciples. When 8 Rules saw these, he gave Pilgrim a tug and said, “Your statue looks very much like you!” 

“Second Elder Brother,” said Sand-monk, “yours has great resemblance, too. But Master's seems to look even more handsome.” 

“It's about right! It's about right!” said Tripitaka, and they descended the tower. In the front hall and the rear corridor, more vegetarian dishes were laid out for them. 

Pilgrim asked the Chens, “Whatever happened to the shrine of that Great King?” 

“It was pulled down that very year,” replied the two old men. “Since this monastery was built, Venerable Dad, we’ve been enjoying a rich harvest every year. This has to be the blessing you bestowed 
on us.” 

“It's actually the gift of Heaven!” said Pilgrim, chuckling. “We've nothing to do with it. But after we leave this time, we'll try to give you all the protection we can, so that the families of your entire village 
may enjoy abundant posterity, the peaceful births of the six beasts, and annually wind and rain in due season.” All the people respected again to express their thanks. 

Before and behind the monastery, there seemed to have gathered a numberless crowd all wanting to offer fruits and meagre to their benefactors. With a giggle 8 Rules said, “It’s just my lousy luck! At 
the time when I'd eat, there wasn’t a single household that would give me ten meals. Today I’ve no appetite but one family after another is pressing me with invitations.” Though he felt stuffed, he raised 
his hands slightly and once more devoured eight or nine platters of vegetarian food. Though he claimed his stomach had weakened, he nonetheless put away twenty or thirty buns. The pilgrims all ate 
to their fullest capacity but still there were other households waiting to invite them. “What contribution have these disciples made,” said Tripitaka, “that we’d receive such great outpouring of your 
affection? | beg you all to call a halt tonight. Wait till tomorrow and we'll be glad to be the recipients again.” 

It was already deep in the night. As he wanted to guard the true scriptures, Tripitaka dared not leave. He remained seated below the tower and meditated, so as to watch his possessions. By about the 
hour of the third watch, Tripitaka whispered, “Wukong, the people here have already perceived that we've finished our enterprise and attained the Way. As the ancients put it, the adept doesn’t show 
himself; he who shows himself is no adept. If they detain us too long, | fear that we may lose out in our main enterprise.” 

“What you say is quite right, Master,” replied Pilgrim. “While it is still deep in the night and people are all sound asleep, let us leave quietly.” 

8 Rules now had become quite alert and Sand-monk was most understanding. Even the white horse seemed to know their thoughts. They all arose, silently loaded the packs on the saddle, took up the 
poles, and toted their belongings through the corridor. When they reached the monastery gate, they found it padlocked. Using his magic, Pilgrim opened the locks on both the second-level gate and 
the main gate. As they were searching for the way toward the East, a voice rang out in mid-air. “You who're fleeing,” cried the Eight Lightning Guardians, “follow us!” As the elder smelled a strange 
fragrance, he rose with the others into the wind. Truly elixir formed, he knows the original face; ®his healthy frame, natural and free, salutes his lord. 


116 

They return to the Land of the East; 5 sages become perfected 
The 4 pilgrims departed by mounting the wind with the Lightning Guardians. The multitude in the Life-Saving Monastery at the Chen Village rose at dawn and went at once to offer fruits and other food 
to their benefactors. When they arrived at the space beneath the tower however, they found that the Tang Monk had disappeared. Thereupon all of them hunted everywhere but without success. They 
were so upset that they did not quite know what to do except to wail aloud, “We've allowed a living god to walk away!” 
After a while, the entire household realised that they had no better alternative than to pile all the food and gifts on the altar up in the tower and offer them as sacrifices along with the burning of paper 
cash. Thereafter they made four great sacrifices and twenty-four smaller ones each year. Moreover, those who wanted to pray for healing, for safety on a journey, for the gift of a spouse, for wealth or 
children, and to make a vow appeared daily at every hour to present their offerings and incense. Truly, the gold-censer continued a millennium’s fire; the jade-chalice brightened with an eternal lamp. 
The 8 Lightning Guardians employed the second gust of fragrant wind to carry the 4 pilgrims back to the Land of the East. In less than a day, the capital, Chang’an, gradually came into view. That 
Emperor Taizong had escorted the Tang Monk out of the city 3 days before the full moon in the 9k month of the 13 year of the Zhenguan reign period. By the 16 year, he had already asked the 
Bureau of Labour to erect a Scripture-Watch Tower outside the Western-Peace Pass to receive the holy books. Each year Taizong would go personally to that place for a visit. It so happened that he 
had gone again to the tower that day when he caught sight of a sky full of auspicious mists drifting near from the West, and he noticed at the same time strong gusts of fragrant wind. Halting in mid-air, 
the Lightning Guardians cried, “Sage Monk, this is the city Chang'an. It’s not convenient for us to go down there for the people of this region are quite intelligent and our true identity may become known 
to them. Even the Great Sage Sun and his two companions needn't go; you yourself may go, hand over the scriptures, and return at once. We'll wait for you in the air so that we may all go back to 
report to God.” 
“What the Honoured Ones say may be most appropriate,” said the great sage, “but how'd my master tote all those scriptures? How'd he lead the horse at the same time? We'll have to escort him down 
there. May we trouble you to wait a while in the air? We daren’t tarry.” 
“When the Nun Guanyin spoke to Siddhartha the other day,” said the Lightning Guardians, “she assured him that the whole trip should take only eight days, so that the canonical number would be 
fulfilled. It's already more than four days now. We fear that 8 Rules might become so enamoured of the riches down below that we'll be unable to meet our appointed schedule.” 
“When Master attains Godhood,” said 8 Rules, chuckling, “I, too, will attain Godhood. How could | become enamoured of riches down below? Stupid old ruffians! Wait for me here, all of you! As soon 
as we've handed over the scriptures, I'll return with you and be canonized.” 
Idiot took up the pole, Sand-monk led the horse, and Pilgrim supported the sage monk. Lowering their cloud, they dropped down beside the Scripture-Watchtower. When Taizong and his officials saw 
them, they all descended the tower to receive them. “Has the royal brother returned?” asked the emperor. The Tang Monk immediately saluted himself but he was raised by the emperor’s own hands. 
“Who are these three persons?” asked the emperor once more. 
“They are my disciples made during our journey,” replied the Tang Monk. Highly pleased, Taizong at once ordered his attendants, “Saddle one of our chariot horses for our royal brother to ride. We'll 
go back to the court together.” 
The Tang Monk thanked him and mounted the horse, closely followed by the Great Sage wielding his golden-hooped rod and by 8 Rules and Sand-monk toting the luggage and supporting the other 
horse. The entire entourage thus entered together the city of Chang'an. Truly a banquet of peace was held years ago. When lords, civil and martial, made a grand show. A priest preached the law in a 
great event; ‘from Golden chimes the king his subject sent. Tripitaka was given a royal rescript for 5 Phases matched the cause of holy script. Through bitter smelting all demons were purged. Merit 
done, they now on the court converged. The Tang Monk and his three disciples followed the throne into the court and soon there was not a single person in the city of Chang'an who had not learned of 
the scripture seekers’ return. The Temple of Great Blessing was also the old residence of the Tang Monk in Chang’an. That day the young and old priests suddenly discovered that the branches of a 
few pine trees within the temple gate were pointing eastward. Astonished, they cried, “Strange! Strange! There’s no strong wind to speak of last night. Why’re all the tops of these trees twisted in this 
manner?” 
One of the former disciples of Tripitaka said, “Quickly, let’s get our proper clerical garb. The old master who went away to acquire scriptures must have returned.” 
“How do you know that?” asked the other priests. 
“At the time of his departure,” the old disciple said, “he made the remark that he might be away for two or three years, or for six or seven years. Whenever we noticed that these pine-tree tops were 
pointing to the east, it would mean that he has returned. Since my master spoke the holy words of a true God, | know that the truth has been confirmed this day.” 
They put on their clothing hurriedly and left; by the time they reached the street to the west, people were already saying that the scripture seeker had just arrived and been received into the city by His 
Majesty. When they heard the news, the various monks dashed forward and ran right into the imperial chariot. Not daring to approach the emperor, they followed the entourage instead to the gate of 
the court. The Tang Monk dismounted and entered the court with the emperor. The dragon horse, the scripture packs, Pilgrim, 8 Rules, and Sand-monk were all placed beneath the steps of jade while 
Taizong commanded the royal brother to ascend the hall and take a seat. 
After thanking the emperor and taking his seat, the Tang Monk asked that the scripture scrolls be brought up. Pilgrim and his companions handed them over to the imperial attendants who presented 
them in turn to the emperor for inspection. “How many scrolls of scriptures are there,” asked Taizong, “and how did you acquire them?” 
“When your subject arrived at the Spirit Mountain and saluted to the Religious Patriarch,” replied Tripitaka, “he was kind enough to ask Ananda and Kagyapa, the two Honoured Ones, to lead us to the 
precious tower first for a meal. Then we're brought to the treasure loft where the scriptures were bestowed on us. Those Honoured Ones asked for a gift but we’re not prepared and did not give them 
any. They gave us some scriptures anyway, and after thanking the Religious Patriarch, we headed east but a monstrous wind snatched away the scriptures. My humble disciple fortunately had a little 
magic power; he gave chase at once, and the scriptures were thrown and scattered all over. When we unrolled the scrolls, we saw that they were all wordless, blank texts. Your subjects in great fear 
went again to bow and plead before God. The Religious Patriarch said, ‘When these scriptures were created, some Beggar sage monks left the monastery and recited some scrolls for one Elder Zhao 
in the Sravasti Kingdom. As a result, the living members of that family were granted safety and protection while the deceased attained redemption. For such great service they only managed to ask the 
elder for three pecks and three pints of rice and a little gold. | told them that it was too cheap a sale, and that their descendants would have no money to spend.’ Since we learned that even the Religious 
Patriarch anticipated that the two Honoured Ones would demand a gift, we’d little choice but to offer them that alms-bowl of purple gold that Your Majesty had bestowed on me. Only then did they 
willingly turn over the true scriptures with writing to us. There’re thirty-five titles of these scriptures and several scrolls were selected from each title. Altogether there’re now five thousand and forty-eight 
scrolls, the number of which makes up one canonical sum.” 
More delighted than ever, Taizong gave this command: “Let the Court of Imperial Entertainments prepare a banquet in the East Hall so that we may thank our royal brother.” Then he happened to 
notice Tripitaka’s three disciples standing beneath the steps, all with extraordinary looks, and he therefore asked, “Are your noble disciples foreigners?” 
Saluting himself, the elder said, “My eldest disciple has the surname of Sun, and his religious name is Wukong. Your subject also addresses him as Pilgrim Sun. He comes from the Water Curtain Cave 
of the Flower-Fruit Mountain, located in the Aolai Country in the East East-Videha Continent. Because he caused great disturbance in the Celestial Palace, he was imprisoned in a stone box by the 
Religious Patriarch and pressed beneath the Mountain of Two Frontiers in the region of the Western barbarians. Thanks to the admonitions of the Nun Guanyin, he was converted to Religion and 
became my disciple when | freed him. Throughout my journey | relied heavily on his protection. 
“My second disciple has the surname of Bullseye, and his religious name is Aware of Ability. Your subject also addresses him as Bullseye 8 Rules. He comes from the Cloudy Paths Cave of Fulling 
Mountain. He was playing the fiend at the Old Gao Village of Qoco when the admonitions of the Nun and the power of the Pilgrim caused him to become my disciple. He made his merit on our journey 


by toting the luggage and helping us to ford the waters. “My third disciple has the surname of Sha, and his religious name’s Awakened to Purity. Your subject also addresses him as Sand-monk. 
Originally he was a fiend at the Flowing-Sand River. Again the admonitions of the Nun persuaded him to take the vows of Religion. By the way, the horse is not the one my Lord bestowed on me.” 
Taizong said, “The colour and the coat seem all the same. Why isn’t it the same horse?” 

“When your subject reached the Eagle Grief Stream in the Serpent Coil Mountain and tried to cross it,” replied Tripitaka, “the original horse was devoured by this horse. Pilgrim managed to learn from 
the Nun that this horse was originally the prince of the Dragon King of the Western Ocean. Convicted of a crime, he would have been executed had it not been for the intervention of the Nun who 
ordered him to be the steed of your subject. It was then that he changed into a horse with exactly the same coat as that of my original mount. I’m greatly indebted to him for taking me over mountains 
and summits and through the most treacherous passages. Whether it be carrying me on my way there or bearing the scriptures upon our return, we’re much beholden to his strength.” 

On hearing these words, Taizong complimented him profusely before asking again, “This long trek to the Western Region, exactly how far is it?” 

Tripitaka said, “I recall that the Nun told us that the distance was a hundred and eight thousand miles. | didn’t make a careful record on the way. All | know is that we've experienced fourteen seasons 
of heat and cold. We encountered mountains and ridges daily; the forests we came upon were not small, and the waters we met were wide and swift. We also went through many kingdoms whose 
rulers had affixed their seals and signatures on our document.” Then he called out: “Disciples, bring up the travel rescript and present it to our Lord.” 

It was handed over immediately. Taizong took a look and realised that the document had been issued on the third day before the full moon, in the ninth month of the thirteenth year during the Zhenguan 
reign period. Smiling, Taizong said, “We've caused you the trouble of taking a long journey. This is now the twenty-seventh year of the Zhenguan period!” The travel rescript bore the seals of the 
Precious Image Kingdom, the Black Rooster Kingdom, the Cart Slow Kingdom, the Kingdom of Women in Western Liang, the Sacrifice Kingdom, the Scarlet-Purple Kingdom, the Beggar Kingdom, the 
Religion-Destroying Kingdom. There were also the seals of the Phoenix-Mortal Prefecture, the Jade-Flower County, and the Gold-Level Prefecture. After reading through the document, Taizong put it 
away. 

Soon the officer in attendance to the throne arrived to invite them to the banquet. As the emperor took the hand of Tripitaka and walked down the steps of the hall, he asked once more, “Are your noble 
disciples familiar with the etiquette of the court?” 

“My humble disciples,” replied Tripitaka, “all began their careers as monsters deep in the wilds or a mountain village, and they have never been instructed in the etiquette of China’s sage court. | beg 
my Lord to pardon them.” 

Smiling, Taizong said, “We'll not blame them! We'll not blame them! Let's all go to the feast set up in the East Hall.” 

Tripitaka thanked him once more before calling for his three disciples to join them. Upon their arrival at the hall, they saw that the opulence of the great nation of China was indeed different from all 
ordinary kingdoms. See the doorway overhung with brocade. The floor adorned with red carpets, the whirls of exotic incense, and fresh victuals most rare. The amber cups and crystal goblets are gold- 
trimmed and jade-set; the gold platters and white-jade bowls are patterned and silver-rimmed. The tubers thoroughly cooked, the taros sugar-coated; sweet, lovely button mushrooms, unusual, pure 
seaweeds. Bamboo shoots, ginger-spiced, are served a few times; Malva leafs, honey-drenched, are mixed several ways. Wheat-glutens fried with Xiang-Chun leaves: 2wood-ears cooked with bean- 
curd skins. Rock ferns and fairy plants; fern flour and dried Wei-leaves. Radishes cooked with Sichuan peppercorns; melon strands stirred with mustard powder. These few vegetarian dishes are so- 
so but the many rare fruits quite steal the show! Walnuts, persimmons, longans and lychees. The chestnuts of Yizhou and Shandong’s dates; the South’s Ginko fruits and hare-head pears. Pine-seeds, 
lotus-seeds, giant grapes; Fei-nuts, ‘melon seeds, and water chestnuts. Chinese olives, ‘wild apples; crab-apples, Pyrus-pears; tender stalks, ®°young lotus roots; crisp plums, and Chinese strawberries. 
Not 1 species is missing or wanting. There are moreover the steamed 1000-sheet vanilla slice, honeyed pastries, fine viands; and there are also the lovely juices, fragrant teas, and strange dainties. 
An endless spread of one hundred flavours, true noble fare. Western barbarians with great China can never compare! Master and three disciples were grouped together with the officials, both civil and 
military, on both sides of the emperor Taizong who took the seat in the middle. The dancing and the poems proceeded in an orderly and solemn manner, and in this way they enjoyed themselves 
thoroughly for one whole day. Truly the royal banquet rivals the sage kings’: true scriptures acquired bring excess blessings. Forever these will prosper and remain as goa’s light shines on the king’s 
domain. When it became late, the officials thanked the emperor; while Taizong withdrew into his palace, the various officials returned to their residences. The Tang Monk and his disciples however, 
went to the Temple of Great Blessing where they were met by the resident priests respecting. As they entered the temple gate, the priests said, “Master, the top of these trees were all suddenly pointing 
eastward this morning. We remembered your words and hurried out to the city to meet you. Indeed, you did arrive!” 

The elder could not have been more pleased as they were ushered into the abbot’s quarters. By then, 8 Rules was not clamouring at all for food or tea, nor did he indulge in any mischief. Both Pilgrim 
and Sand-monk behaved most properly, for they had become naturally quiet and reserved since the Dao in them had come to fruition. They rested that night. Taizong held court next moming and said 
to the officials, “We didn’t sleep the whole night when we reflected on how great and profound has been the merit of our brother, such that no compensation is quite adequate. We finally composed in 
our head several homely sentences as a mere token of our gratitude but they have not yet been written down.” Calling for one of the secretaries from the Central Drafting Office, he said, “Come, let us 
recite our composition for you, and you write it down sentence by sentence.” The composition’ was as follows: 

We've heard how the Dyadic Models® which manifest themselves in Heaven and Earth in the production of life are represented by images whereas the invisible powers of the four seasons bring about 
transformation of things through the hidden action of heat and cold. By scanning Heaven and Earth, therefore, even the most ignorant may perceive their rudimentary laws. Even the thorough 
understanding of yin and yang however, has seldom enabled the worthy and wise to comprehend fully their ultimate principle. It is easy to recognise that Heaven and Earth do contain yin and yang 
because there are images. It is difficult to comprehend fully how yin and yang pervade Heaven and Earth because the forces themselves are invisible. That images may manifest the minute is a fact 
that does not perplex even the foolish whereas forms hidden in what is invisible are what confuses even the learned. 

How much more difficult it is, therefore, to understand the way of Religion that exalts the void, uses the dark, and exploits the silent in order to succour the myriad grades of living things and exercise 
control over the entire world. Its spiritual authority is the highest, and its divine potency has no equal. Its magnitude impregnates the entire cosmos; there is no space so tiny that it does not permeate 
it. Birth-less and deathless, it does not age after a thousand kalpas; half-hidden and half-manifest, it brings one hundred blessings even now. A wondrous way most mysterious, those who follow it 
cannot know its limit. A law flowing silent and deep, those who draw on it cannot fathom its source. How, therefore, could those benighted ordinary mortals not be perplexed if they tried to plumb its 
depths? Now, this great Religion arose in the Land of the West. It soared to the court of the Han period in the form of a radiant dream,? which flowed with its mercy to enlighten the Eastern territory. In 
antiquity, during the time when form and abstraction were clearly distinguished, the words of a god, even before spreading, had already established their goodly influence. In a generation when he was 
both frequently active in and withdrawn from the world, the people beheld his virtue and honoured it. But when he returned to Extinguishment and generations passed by, the golden images concealed 
his true form and did not reflect the light of the universe. The beautiful paintings though unfolding lovely portraits, vainly held up the figure of 32 marks. *°Nonetheless his subtle doctrines spread far and 
wide to save men and beasts from the three unhappy paths, and his traditions were widely proclaimed to lead all creatures through the ten stages toward God-hood." Moreover, a god made scriptures 
that could be divided into the Great and the Small Vehicles. He also possessed the Law that could be transmitted either in the correct or in the deviant method. Our priest Xuanzang, a Master of the 
Law, is a leader within the Gate of Law. Devoted and intelligent since his youth, he realised early the merit of the three forms of emptiness.'2 When grown he comprehended the principles of the spiritual, 
including first the practice of the four forms of patience.*3 Neither the pine in the wind nor the moon mirrored in water can compare with his purity and radiance. Even the dew of Heaven and luminous 
gems cannot surpass the clarity and refinement of his person. His intelligence encompassed even those elements which seemingly had no relations, and his spirit could perceive that which had yet to 
take visible forms. Having transcended the lure of the six senses, he was such an outstanding figure that in all the past he had no rival. He concentrated his mind on the internal verities, mourning all 
the time the mutilation of the correct doctrines. Worrying over the mysteries, he lamented that even the most profound treatises had errors. He thought of revising the teachings and reviving certain 
arguments, so as to disseminate what he had received to a wider audience. He would, moreover, strike out the erroneous and preserve the true to enlighten the students. For this reason he longed for 
the Pure Land and a pilgrimage to the Western Territories. Risking dangers he set out on a long journey with only his staff for his companion on this solitary expedition. Snow drifts in the morning would 
blanket his roadway; sand storms at dusk would blot out the horizon. Over ten thousand miles of mountains and streams he proceeded, pushing aside mist and smoke. Through a thousand alternations 
of heat and cold he advanced amidst frost and rain. As his zeal was great, he considered his task a light one, for he was determined to succeed. He toured throughout the Western World for fourteen 
years, “going to all the foreign nations in quest of the proper doctrines. He led the life of an ascetic beneath twin Sala trees‘® and by the 8 rivers of India. *SAt the Deer Park and on the Vulture Peak he 
beheld the strange and searched out the different. He received ultimate truths from the senior sages and was taught the true doctrines by the highest worthies. Penetrating into the mysteries, he 
mastered the most profound lessons. The way of the Triyana and 6 Commandments he learned by heart; 100 cases of scriptures forming the canon flowed like waves from his lips. Though the countries 
he visited were innumerable, the scriptures he succeeded in acquiring had a definite number. Of those important texts of the Mahayana he received there are 35 titles’” in altogether 5048 scrolls. When 
they are translated and spread through China, they will proclaim’8 the surpassing merit of Religion, drawing the cloud of mercy from the Western extremity to shower the religion-rain on the Eastern 
region. The Holy Religion, once incomplete, is now returned to perfection. The multitudes, once full of sins, are now brought back to blessing. Like that which quenches the fire in a burning house, 
‘9Religion works to save humanity lost on its way to perdition. Like a golden beam shining on darkened waters, 2°it leads the voyagers to ascend safely the other shore. Thus we know that the wicked 
will fall because of their iniquities but the virtuous will rise because of their karmic affinities. The root causes of such rise and fall are all self-made by man. Consider the cinnamon flourishing high on 
the mountain, its flowers nourished by cloud and mist, or the lotus growing atop the green waves, its leaves unsoiled by dust. This is not because the lotus is by nature clean or because the cinnamon 
itself is chaste but because what the cinnamon depends on for its existence is lofty, and thus it will not be weighed down by trivia; and because what the lotus relies on is pure, and thus impurity cannot 
stain it. Since even the vegetable kingdom that is itself without intelligence, knows that excellence comes from an environment of excellence, how can humans who understand the great relations not 
search for well-being by following well-being? May these scriptures abide forever as the sun and moon and may the blessings they confer spread throughout the universe! 

After the secretary had finished writing this treatise, the sage monk was summoned. At the time, the elder was already waiting outside the gate of the court. When he heard the summons, he hurried 
inside and saluted himself to pay homage to the emperor. Taizong asked him to ascend the hall and handed him the document. When he had finished reading it, the priest went to his knees again to 
express his gratitude. “The style and rhetoric of my Lord,” said the priest, “are lofty and classical while the reasoning in the treatise is both profound and subtle. I'd like to know however, whether a title 
has been chosen for this composition.” 

“We composed it orally last night,”2" replied Taizong, “as a token of thanks to our royal brother. Will it be acceptable if | title this ‘Preface to the Holy Religion’?” The elder respected and thanked him 
profusely. Once more Taizong said, “Our talents pale before the imperial tablets and our words cannot match the bronze and stone inscriptions. 72As for the esoteric texts, our ignorance thereof is even 
greater. Our treatise orally composed is actually quite unpolished — like mere spilled ink on tablets of gold. Or broken tiles in a forest of pearls. Writing it in self-interest, we've quite ignored even 
embarrassment. It is not worth your notice and you'd not thank us.” 

All the officials present however, congratulated the emperor and made arrangements immediately to promulgate the royal essay on Holy Religion inside and outside the capital. Taizong said, “We'd 
like to ask the royal brother to recite the true scriptures for us. How about it?” 

“My Lord,” said the elder, “if you want me to recite the true scriptures, we must find the proper religious site. The treasure palace is no place for recitation.” Exceedingly pleased, Taizong asked his 
attendants, “Among the monasteries of Chang’an that is the purest one?” 

From among the ranks stepped forth the Grand Secretary, Xiao Yu who said, “The Wild-Goose Pagoda Temple? in the city is purest of all.” At once Taizong gave this command to the various officials: 
“Each of you take several scrolls of these true scriptures and go reverently with us to the Wild-Goose Pagoda Temple. We want to ask our royal brother to expound the scriptures to us.” Each of the 
Officials indeed took up several scrolls and followed the emperor's carriage to the temple. A lofty platform with proper appointments was then erected. As before, the elder told 8 Rules and Sand-monk 
to hold the dragon horse and mind the luggage while Pilgrim was to serve him by his side. Then he said to Taizong, “If my Lord would like to circulate the true scriptures throughout his empire, copies 
should be made before they are dispersed. We'd treasure the originals and not handle them lightly.” 

Smiling, Taizong said, “The words of our royal brother are most appropriate! Most appropriate!” 

He thereupon ordered the officials in the Hanlin Academy and the Central Drafting Office to make copies of the true scriptures. For them he also erected another temple east of the capital and named 
it the Temple for Imperial Transcription. The elder had already taken several scrolls of scriptures and mounted the platform. He was just about to recite them when he felt a gust of fragrant wind. In mid- 
air the Eight Lightning Guardians revealed themselves and cried, “Reciters, drop your scripture scrolls and follow us back to the West.” 

From below, Pilgrim and his two companions together with the white horse immediately rose into the air. The elder, too abandoned the scriptures and rose from the platform. They all left soaring through 
the air. So startled were Taizong and the many officials that they all saluted down toward the sky. Thus it was that since scriptures were the sage monk’s ardent quest, he went on 14 years throughout 
the West a bitter journey full of trials and woes with many streams and mountains as his foes. Nine merits more were added to 8 times 9; his 3000 works did on the great world shine. The wondrous 
texts brought back to the noble state would in the East until now circulate. After Taizong and many officials had finished their worship, they immediately set about the selection of high priests so that a 
Grand Mass of Land and Water could be held right in that Wild-Goose Pagoda Temple. Furthermore, they were to read and recite the true scriptures from the Great Canon in order that the damned 
spirits would be delivered from nether darkness and the celebration of good works be multiplied. The copies of transcribed scriptures would also be promulgated throughout the empire. The 8 Great 
Lightning-Guardians mounted the fragrant wind to lead the elder, his 3 disciples, and the white horse back to Spirit Mountain. The round trip was made precisely within a period of eight days. At that 


time the various divinities of Spirit Mountain were all assembled before God to listen to his lecture. Ushering master and disciples before his presence, the Eight Lightning Guardians said, “Your disciples 
by your golden decree have escorted the sage monk and his companions back to the Tang nation. The scriptures have been handed over. We now return to surrender your decree.” 
The Tang Monk and his disciples were then told to approach the throne of God to receive their appointments. “Sage Monk,” said Siddhartha, “in your previous disciple you're originally my second 
disciple named Master Gold Cicada. Because you failed to listen to my exposition of the law and slighted my great teaching, your true spirit was banished to find another disciple in the Land of the East. 
Happily you submitted and, by remaining faithful to our teaching, succeeded in acquiring the true scriptures. For such magnificent merit, you'll receive a great promotion to become a god of Candana 
Merit. Sun Wukong, when you caused great disturbance at the Celestial Palace, I'd to exercise enormous religion power to have you pressed beneath the Mountain of Five Phases. Fortunately your 
Heaven-sent calamity came to an end and you embraced the Religious religion. I’m pleased even more by the fact that you're devoted to the scourging of evil and the exaltation of good. Throughout 
your journey you made great merit by smelting the demons and defeating the fiends. For being faithful in the end as you're in the beginning, | hereby give you the grand promotion and appoint you a 
god Victorious in Strife. Bullseye Aware of Ability, you're originally an aquatic deity of the Heavenly River, the Marshal of Heavenly Reeds. For getting drunk during the Festival of Mortal Peaches and 
insulting the divine maiden, you're banished to a disciple in the Region Below that would give you the body of a beast. Fortunately you still cherished and loved the human form so that even when you 
sinned at the Cloudy Paths Cave in Fulling Mountain, you eventually submitted to our great religion and embraced our vows. Although you protected the sage monk on his way, you're still quite 
mischievous, for greed and lust were never wholly extinguished in you. For the merit of toting the luggage however, | hereby grant you promotion and appoint you Janitor of the Altars.” 
“They've all become Gods!” shouted 8 Rules. “Why I’m alone made Janitor of the Altars?” 
“Because you're still talkative, lazy,” replied Siddhartha, “and you retain an enormous appetite. Within the four great continents of the world, there’re many people who observe our religion. Whenever 
there're Religious services, you'll be asked to clear the altars. That's an appointment that offers you plenty of enjoyment. How'd it be bad? Sand Awakened to Purity, you're originally the Great Curtain- 
Raising Captain. Because you broke a crystal chalice during the Festival of Mortal Peaches, you're banished to the Region below where at the River of Flowing-Sand you sinned by devouring humans. 
Fortunately you submitted to our religion and remained firm in your faith. As you escorted the sage monk, you made merit by leading his horse over all those mountains. | hereby grant you promotion 
and appoint you the Golden-Bodied Arhat.” Then he said to the white horse, “You're originally the prince of Dragon King Guangjin of the Western Ocean. Because you disobeyed your dad’s command 
and committed the crime of unfiliality, you're to be executed. Fortunately you made submission to the Law and accepted our vows. Because you carried the sage monk daily on your back during his 
journey to the West and took the Holy Scriptures back to the East also, you’ve made merit, too. | hereby grant you promotion and appoint you one of the dragons belonging to the Eight Classes of 
Supernatural Beings.”24 
The elder, his 3 disciples, and the horse all respected to thank a god who ordered some of the guardians to take the horse to the Dragon-Transforming Pool at the back of the Spirit Mountain. After 
being pushed into the pool, the horse stretched himself, and in a little while he shed his coat, horns began to grow on his head, golden scales appeared all over his body, and silver whiskers emerged 
on his cheeks. His whole body shrouded in auspicious air and his four paws wrapped in hallowed clouds, he soared out of the pool and circled inside the monastery gate on top of 1 of the Pillars that 
Support Heaven. As the various Gods gave praise to the great religion of Siddhartha, Pilgrim Sun said also to the Tang Monk, “Master, I've become a god now just like you. It can’t be that | still must 
wear a golden fillet! And you'd not want to clamp my head still by reciting that so-called Tight-Fillet Spell, would you? Recite the Loose-Fillet Spell quickly and get it off my head. I’m going to smash it 
to pieces so that that so-called Nun can use it no more to play tricks on other people.” 
“Because you're difficult to control previously,” said the Tang Monk, “this method had to be used to restrain you. Now that you’ve become a god, naturally it'll be gone. How'd it be still on your head? 
Try touching your head and see.” Pilgrim raised his hand and felt along his head, and indeed the fillet had vanished. So at that time, Candana, Victorious in Strife, Janitor of the Altars, and Golden- 
Bodied Arhat all assumed the position of their own rightful fruition. The Heavenly dragon-horse too returned to mortality and a testimonial poem for them says: 
1 Real Body dropped to the dusty plain fuses with 4 Signs to tend the self again. 
In 5 Phases terms forms are dead and void; the fiends’ vain names 1 should all avoid. 
Great Complete Liberation’s the right Candana fruition; appointments crown this rise from perdition. 
Gracious light of scriptures now worldwide dilates as 5 sages live within Advaya’s gates. 
At the time when these 5 sages assumed their positions, the various Religious Patriarchs, Nuns, sage priests, Arhats, guardians, Beggars, and worshippers, the mortals of various mountains and 
caves, the grand divinities, the gods of Darkness and Light, the Sentinels, the Guardians of Monasteries, and all the mortals and preceptors who had attained the Way all came to listen to the 
proclamation before retiring to their proper stations. Look now at coloured mists crowding the Spirit Vulture Peak and hallowed clouds gathered in the world of bliss. Gold dragons safely sleeping, Jade 
tigers resting in peace; black hares scampering freely, Snakes and turtles circling at will. Phoenixes, red and blue, gambol pleasantly; black apes and white deer saunter happily. Strange flowers of 8 
periods, divine fruits of 4 seasons, hoary pines, old junipers, jade cypresses, and aged bamboos. 5-coloured plums often blossoming and bearing fruit; millennial peaches frequently ripening and fresh. 
1000 flowers and fruits vying for beauty; a whole sky full of auspicious mists. Pressing their palms together to indicate their devotion, the holy congregation all recited: “I submit to Diparnkara, a god of 
Antiquity. Bhaisajya-vaidirya-prabhasa, the Physician and Crystal Lights. A god. The Past, Present, and Future. The Pure Joy. The Vairocana. The King of the Precious Banner. The Maitreya, the 
honoured one. The Infinite Light. Sukhavativydha, the Infinite Life who receives and Leads to Mortality. The Diamond Indestructibility. Sun, the Precious Light. The Beautiful one with Glory and 
Auspiciousness, the Race of Honourable Dragon Kings. The Zealous Progress and Virtue. Moon-Prabha, the Precious Moonlight. The Presence without Ignorance. Varuna, the Sky and Water, the 
Narayana. The Radiant Meritorious Works. The Talented Meritorious Works. Welcoming, the Well-Departed. The Candana Light. The Jewelled Banner. The Light of Wisdom Torch. The Light of Sea- 
Virtue. The Great Mercy Light. The King of Compassion-Power. The Leader of the Sages. The Vast Solemnity. The Golden Radiance. The Luminous Gifts. The Victorious in Wisdom. The Quiescent 
Light of the World. The Light of the Sun and Moon. The Light of the Sun-and-Moon Pearl. The King of the Victorious Banner. The Wondrous Tone and Sound. The Banner of Permanent Light. The 
Lamp that Scans the World. The King of Surpassing Religion. The Sumeru Light. The King of Great Wisdom. The Golden Sea Light. The Great Perfect Light. The Gift of Light. The Candana Merit. The 
Victorious in Strife. The Guanshiyin. The Great Power-Coming. The Beautiful one with Glory and Auspiciousness. The Auspicious World and other Nuns. The various ones of the Great Pure Ocean. 
The Lotus Pool and Ocean Assembly. The various in the Western Heaven of Ultimate Bliss. The Great the three thousand guardians. The Great the five hundred Arhats. The Beggar Lady. The 
Boundless and Limitless Religion. The Diamond Great Scholar-Sage. The Janitor of the Altars. The Golden-Bodied Arhat of eight Jewels. The Vast Strength, the Heavenly Dragon of the eight Divisions 
of Supematural Beings. Such are these various Gods in all the worlds. / wish to use these merits to adorn God's pure land — repay fourfold grace above and save those on three paths below. If there're 
those who see and hear, their minds will find enlightenment. Their births with us in paradise will be this body’s recompense. All the gods of past, present, future in all the world, the various Honoured 
Nuns and Greater Good, Great Perfection of Transcendental Wisdom!” 
APPENDIX 
The Great Sage Monkey devised a scheme to obtain the Banana-leaf Fan and cool the flames. In this he merely uses his physical strength. The 48 millennia (the Tang and the Song dynasties) are the 
amassed roots of desire. To become enlightened and open to the Great Way, 1 must 1*t empty and destroy the roots of desire. To empty and destroy the roots of desire 1 must 1* go inside desire. 
After going inside desire and seeing its emptiness, 1 can then go outside it and realise the reality of the root of the Way. The Tower of Myriad Mirrors deals with the Demon of Desire and the Demon of 
Desire’s the Qing Fish. Mencius said, “There’s no better way of learning than to seek your own strayed heart.” This is the main point of departure. For men, desire’s a demon without form or sound — a 
man may not be conscious of it or know about it. It may enter by way of grief, indulgence, a single doubtful or vacillating thought, or sensory perceptions. It seems as if the desire that enters the sphere 
of 1’s thoughts can’t be stopped or changed or ignored; as if once it enters it can in no way be expelled. But to recognise desire as a demon is to achieve success. Therefore when the Great Sage’s in 
the belly of the Qing Fish, he didn't know it. Moreover, he didn't know when he leapt out of the Qing Fish that he’d shortly kill it. The deluded man and the enlightened 1 weren't 2 different people. The 
Tower of Myriad Mirrors is a dream of desire. If for example, on the 3" of the 1st month, you see in a dream that you'll be in a fight and receive wounds to your hands and feet on the 3" of the 3% month 
and when the 3" of the 3 month arrives and you're in fact in a fight, what your eyes see is no different from what you dreamed. The 3" of the 1st month is not the 3° of the 3% month. Rather, what you 
dreamed and saw is an indication that there’s no place the heart can’t reach. And since there’s no place the heart can’t reach, it can’t really be left to stray. When the heart goes into the future, it’s ina 
most precarious situation. If 1 doesn’t fortify his spirit, he’s sure to be utterly defeated. By exterminating the 6 Thieves, Monkey expelled evil. Punishing Qin Kuei established his direction. In paying 
respect to YUeh Fei he returned to the right. This is basically how the Great Sage broke out of the Demon Desire. The Supreme and Venerable Commander for Wiping out Desire. The roots of desire 
in this world can be summed up in 1 word: sorrow. Dream thoughts are upside-down. The Purity Sutra says that when chaos runs its course, there’s a return to the root. When desire reaches its 
extremity, you see your own nature. In killing desire, 1 must be prepared to cut it in half with a single stroke. Here is the author's intention: If the Great Sage hadn't encountered the men who dug holes 
in heaven, he'd never have entered the Demon of Desire. 4 words — young, delicate, almost human — precisely describe the shape this foremost demon’s assumed since the beginning of time. 

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE BOY WHO LIVED Mr and Mrs Dursley of number four Privet Drive were proud to say that they were perfectly normal thank you very much .They were the last people youd expect to be involved in anything strange or mysterious because they just didnt hold with such nonsense .Mr Dursley was the director of a firm called Grunnings which made drills .He was a big beefy man with hardly any neck although he did have a very large mustache .Mrs Dursley was thin and blonde and had nearly twice the usual amount of neck which came in very useful as she spent so much of her time craning over garden fences spying on the neighbors .The Dursley s had a small son called Dudley and in their opinion there was no finer boy anywhere .The Dursleys had everything they wanted but they also had a secret and their greatest fear was that somebody would discover it .They didnt think they could bear it if anyone found out about the Potters .Mrs Potter was Mrs Dursleys sister but they hadnt met for several years in fact Mrs Dursley pretended she didnt have a sister because her sister and her goodfornothing husband were as unDursleyish as it was possible to be .The Dursleys shuddered to think what the neighbors would say if the Potters arrived in the street .The Dursleys knew that the Potters had a small son too but they had never even seen him .This boy was another good reason for keeping the Potters away they didnt want Dudley mixing with a child like that .When Mr and Mrs Dursley woke up on the dull gray Tuesday our story starts there was nothing about the cloudy sky outside to suggest that strange and mysterious things would soon be happening all over the country .Mr Dursley hummed as he picked out his most boring tie for work and Mrs Dursley gossiped away happily as she wrestled a screaming Dudley into his high chair .None of them noticed a large tawny owl flutter past the window .At half past eight Mr Dursley picked up his briefcase pecked Mrs Dursley on the cheek and tried to kiss Dudley goodbye but missed because Dudley was now having a tantrum and throwing his cereal at the walls .Little tyke chortled Mr Dursley as he left the house .He got into his car and backed out of number fours drive .It was on the corner of the street that he noticed the first sign of something peculiar a cat reading a map .For a second Mr Dursley didnt realize what he had seen then he jerked his head around to look again .There was a tabby cat standing on the corner of Privet Drive but there wasnt a map in sight .What could he have been thinking of ?It must have been a trick of the light .Mr Dursley blinked and stared at the cat .It stared back .As Mr Dursley drove around the corner and up the road he watched the cat in his mirror .It was now reading the sign that said Privet Drive no looking at the sign cats couldnt read maps or signs .Mr Dursley gave himself a little shake and put the cat out of his mind .As he drove toward town he thought of nothing except a large order of drills he was hoping to get that day .But on the edge of town drills were driven out of his mind by something else .As he sat in the usual morning traffic jam he couldnt help noticing that there seemed to be a lot of strangely dressed people about .People in cloaks .Mr Dursley couldnt bear people who dressed in funny clothes the getups you saw on young people !He supposed this was some stupid new fashion .He drummed his fingers on the steering wheel and his eyes fell on a huddle of these weirdos standing quite close by .They were whispering excitedly together .Mr Dursley was enraged to see that a couple of them werent young at all why that man had to be older than he was and wearing an emeraldgreen cloak !The nerve of him !But then it struck Mr Dursley that this was probably some silly stunt these people were obviously collecting for something .yes that would be it .The traffic moved on and a few minutes later Mr Dursley arrived in the Grunnings parking lot his mind back on drills .Mr Dursley always sat with his back to the window in his office on the ninth floor .If he hadnt he might have found it harder to concentrate on drills that morning .He didnt see the owls swooping past in broad daylight though people down in the street did they pointed and gazed openmouthed as owl after owl sped overhead .Most of them had never seen an owl even at nighttime .Mr Dursley however had a perfectly normal owlfree morning .He yelled at five different people .He made several important telephone calls and shouted a bit more .He was in a very good mood until lunchtime when he thought hed stretch his legs and walk across the road to buy himself a bun from the bakery .Hed forgotten all about the people in cloaks until he passed a group of them next to the bakers .He eyed them angrily as he passed .He didnt know why but they made him uneasy .This bunch were whispering excitedly too and he couldnt see a single collecting tin .It was on his way back past them clutching a large doughnut in a bag that he caught a few words of what they were saying .The Potters thats right thats what I heard yes their son Harry Mr Dursley stopped dead .Fear flooded him .He looked back at the whisperers as if he wanted to say something to them but thought better of it .He dashed back across the road hurried up to his office snapped at his secretary not to disturb him seized his telephone and had almost finished dialing his home number when he changed his mind .He put the receiver back down and stroked his mustache thinking .no he was being stupid .Potter wasnt such an unusual name .He was sure there were lots of people called Potter who had a son called Harry .Come to think of it he wasnt even sure his nephew was called Harry .Hed never even seen the boy .It might have been Harvey .Or Harold .There was no point in worrying Mrs Dursley she always got so upset at any mention of her sister .He didnt blame her if hed had a sister like that .but all the same those people in cloaks .He found it a lot harder to concentrate on drills that afternoon and when he left the building at five oclock he was still so worried that he walked straight into someone just outside the door .Sorry he grunted as the tiny old man stumbled and almost fell .It was a few seconds before Mr Dursley realized that the man was wearing a violet cloak .He didnt seem at all upset at being almost knocked to the ground .On the contrary his face split into a wide smile and he said in a squeaky voice that made passersby stare Dont be sorry my dear sir for nothing could upset me today !Rejoice for You KnowWho has gone at last !Even Muggles like yourself should be celebrating this happy happy day !And the old man hugged Mr Dursley around the middle and walked off .Mr Dursley stood rooted to the spot .He had been hugged by a complete stranger .He also thought he had been called a Muggle whatever that was .He was rattled .He hurried to his car and set off for home hoping he was imagining things which he had never hoped before because he didnt approve of imagination .As he pulled into the driveway of number four the first thing he saw and it didnt improve his mood was the tabby cat hed spotted that morning .It was now sitting on his garden wall .He was sure it was the same one it had the same markings around its eyes .Shoo !said Mr Dursley loudly .The cat didnt move .It just gave him a stern look .Was this normal cat behavior ?Mr Dursley wondered .Trying to pull himself together he let himself into the house .He was still determined not to mention anything to his wife .Mrs Dursley had had a nice normal day .She told him over dinner all about Mrs Next Doors problems with her daughter and how Dudley had learned a new word Wont .Mr Dursley tried to act normally .When Dudley had been put to bed he went into the living room in time to catch the last report on the evening news And finally birdwatchers everywhere have reported that the nations owls have been behaving very unusually today .Although owls normally hunt at night and are hardly ever seen in daylight there have been hundreds of sightings of these birds flying in every direction since sunrise .Experts are unable to explain why the owls have suddenly changed their sleeping pattern .The newscaster allowed himself a grin .Most mysterious .And now over to Jim McGuffin with the weather .Going to be any more showers of owls tonight Jim ?Well Ted said the weatherman I dont know about that but its not only the owls that have been acting oddly today .Viewers as far apart as Kent Yorkshire and Dundee have been phoning in to tell me that instead of the rain I promised yesterday theyve had a downpour of shooting stars !Perhaps people have been celebrating Bonfire Night early its not until next week folks !But I can promise a wet night tonight .Mr Dursley sat frozen in his armchair .Shooting stars all over Britain ?Owls flying by daylight ?Mysterious people in cloaks all over the place ?And a whisper a whisper about the Potters .Mrs Dursley came into the living room carrying two cups of tea .It was no good .Hed have to say something to her .He cleared his throat nervously .Er Petunia dear you havent heard from your sister lately have you ?As he had expected Mrs Dursley looked shocked and angry .After all they normally pretended she didnt have a sister .No she said sharply .Why ?Funny stuff on the news Mr Dursley mumbled .Owls .shooting stars .and there were a lot of funnylooking people in town today .So ?snapped Mrs Dursley .Well I just thought .maybe .it was something to do with .you know .her crowd .Mrs Dursley sipped her tea through pursed lips .Mr Dursley wondered whether he dared tell her hed heard the name Potter .He decided he didnt dare .Instead he said as casually as he could Their son hed be about Dudleys age now wouldnt he ?I suppose so said Mrs Dursley stiffly .Whats his name again ?Howard isnt it ?Harry .Nasty common name if you ask me .Oh yes said Mr Dursley his heart sinking horribly .Yes I quite agree .He didnt say another word on the subject as they went upstairs to bed .While Mrs Dursley was in the bathroom Mr Dursley crept to the bedroom window and peered down into the front garden .The cat was still there .It was staring down Privet Drive as though it were waiting for something .Was he imagining things ?Could all this have anything to do with the Potters ?If it did .if it got out that they were related to a pair of well he didnt think he could bear it .The Dursleys got into bed .Mrs Dursley fell asleep quickly but Mr Dursley lay awake turning it all over in his mind .His last comforting thought before he fell asleep was that even if the Potters were involved there was no reason for them to come near him and Mrs Dursley .The Potters knew very well what he and Petunia thought about them and their kind .He couldnt see how he and Petunia could get mixed up in anything that might be going on he yawned and turned over it couldnt affect them .How very wrong he was .Mr Dursley might have been drifting into an uneasy sleep but the cat on the wall outside was showing no sign of sleepiness .It was sitting as still as a statue its eyes fixed unblinkingly on the far corner of Privet Drive .It didnt so much as quiver when a car door slammed on the next street nor when two owls swooped overhead .In fact it was nearly midnight before the cat moved at all .A man appeared on the corner the cat had been watching appeared so suddenly and silently youd have thought hed just popped out of the ground .The cats tail twitched and its eyes narrowed .Nothing like this man had ever been seen on Privet Drive .He was tall thin and very old judging by the silver of his hair and beard which were both long enough to tuck into his belt .He was wearing long robes a purple cloak that swept the ground and highheeled buckled boots .His blue eyes were light bright and sparkling behind halfmoon spectacles and his nose was very long and crooked as though it had been broken at least twice .This mans name was Albus Dumbledore .Albus Dumbledore didnt seem to realize that he had just arrived in a street where everything from his name to his boots was unwelcome .He was busy rummaging in his cloak looking for something .But he did seem to realize he was being watched because he looked up suddenly at the cat which was still staring at him from the other end of the street .For some reason the sight of the cat seemed to amuse him .He chuckled and muttered I should have known .He found what he was looking for in his inside pocket .It seemed to be a silver cigarette lighter .He flicked it open held it up in the air and clicked it .The nearest street lamp went out with a little pop .He clicked it again the next lamp flickered into darkness .Twelve times he clicked the PutOuter until the only lights left on the whole street were two tiny pinpricks in the distance which were the eyes of the cat watching him .If anyone looked out of their window now even beadyeyed Mrs Dursley they wouldnt be able to see anything that was happening down on the pavement .Dumbledore slipped the Put Outer back inside his cloak and set off down the street toward number four where he sat down on the wall next to the cat .He didnt look at it but after a moment he spoke to it .Fancy seeing you here Professor McGonagall .He turned to smile at the tabby but it had gone .Instead he was smiling at a rather severelooking woman who was wearing square glasses exactly the shape of the markings the cat had had around its eyes .She too was wearing a cloak an emerald one .Her black hair was drawn into a tight bun .She looked distinctly ruffled .How did you know it was me ?she asked .My dear Professor Ive never seen a cat sit so stiffly .Youd be stiff if youd been sitting on a brick wall all day said Professor McGonagall .All day ?When you could have been celebrating ?I must have passed a dozen feasts and parties on my way here .Professor McGonagall sniffed angrily .Oh yes everyones celebrating all right she said impatiently .Youd think theyd be a bit more careful but no even the Muggles have noticed somethings going on .It was on their news .She jerked her head back at the Dursleys dark livingroom window .I heard it .Flocks of owls .shooting stars .Well theyre not completely stupid .They were bound to notice something .Shooting stars down in Kent Ill bet that was Dedalus Diggle .He never had much sense .You cant blame them said Dumbledore gently .Weve had precious little to celebrate for eleven years .I know that said Professor McGonagall irritably .But thats no reason to lose our heads .People are being downright careless out on the streets in broad daylight not even dressed in Muggle clothes swapping rumors .She threw a sharp sideways glance at Dumbledore here as though hoping he was going to tell her something but he didnt so she went on .A fine thing it would be if on the very day YouKnowWho seems to have disappeared at last the Muggles found out about us all .I suppose he really has gone Dumbledore ?It certainly seems so said Dumbledore .We have much to be thankful for .Would you care for a lemon drop ?A what ?A lemon drop .Theyre a kind of Muggle sweet Im rather fond of .No thank you said Professor McGonagall coldly as though she didnt think this was the moment for lemon drops .As I say even if YouKnowWho has gone My dear Professor surely a sensible person like yourself can call him by his name ?All this You KnowWho nonsense for eleven years I have been trying to persuade people to call him by his proper name Voldemort .Professor McGonagall flinched but Dumbledore who was unsticking two lemon drops seemed not to notice .It all gets so confusing if we keep saying YouKnowWho .I have never seen any reason to be frightened of saying Voldemorts name .I know you havent said Professor McGonagall sounding half exasperated half admiring .But youre different .Everyone knows youre the only one You Know oh all right Voldemort was frightened of .You flatter me said Dumbledore calmly .Voldemort had powers I will never have .Only because youre too well noble to use them .Its lucky its dark .I havent blushed so much since Madam Pomfrey told me she liked my new earmuffs .Professor McGonagall shot a sharp look at Dumbledore and said The owls are nothing next to the rumors that are flying around .You know what everyones saying ?About why hes disappeared ?About what finally stopped him ?It seemed that Professor McGonagall had reached the point she was most anxious to discuss the real reason she had been waiting on a cold hard wall all day for neither as a cat nor as a woman had she fixed Dumbledore with such a piercing stare as she did now .It was plain that whatever everyone was saying she was not going to believe it until Dumbledore told her it was true .Dumbledore however was choosing another lemon drop and did not answer .What theyre saying she pressed on is that last night Voldemort turned up in Godrics Hollow .He went to find the Potters .The rumor is that Lily and James Potter are are that theyre dead .Dumbledore bowed his head .Professor McGonagall gasped .Lily and James .I cant believe it .I didnt want to believe it .Oh Albus .Dumbledore reached out and patted her on the shoulder .I know .I know .he said heavily .Professor McGonagalls voice trembled as she went on .Thats not all .Theyre saying he tried to kill the Potters son Harry .But he couldnt .He couldnt kill that little boy .No one knows why or how but theyre saying that when he couldnt kill Harry Potter Voldemorts power somehow broke and thats why hes gone .Dumbledore nodded glumly .Its its true ?faltered Professor McGonagall .After all hes done .all the people hes killed .he couldnt kill a little boy ?Its just astounding .of all the things to stop him .but how in the name of heaven did Harry survive ?We can only guess said Dumbledore .We may never know .Professor McGonagall pulled out a lace handkerchief and dabbed at her eyes beneath her spectacles .Dumbledore gave a great sniff as he took a golden watch from his pocket and examined it .It was a very odd watch .It had twelve hands but no numbers instead little planets were moving around the edge .It must have made sense to Dumbledore though because he put it back in his pocket and said Hagrids late .I suppose it was he who told you Id be here by the way ?Yes said Professor McGonagall .And I dont suppose youre going to tell me why youre here of all places ?Ive come to bring Harry to his aunt and uncle .Theyre the only family he has left now .You dont mean you cant mean the people who live here ?cried Professor McGonagall jumping to her feet and pointing at number four .Dumbledore you cant .Ive been watching them all day .You couldnt find two people who are less like us .And theyve got this son I saw him kicking his mother all the way up the street screaming for sweets .Harry Potter come and live here !Its the best place for him said Dumbledore firmly .His aunt and uncle will be able to explain everything to him when hes older .Ive written them a letter .A letter ?repeated Professor McGonagall faintly sitting back down on the wall .Really Dumbledore you think you can explain all this in a letter ?These people will never understand him !Hell be famous a legend I wouldnt be surprised if today was known as Harry Potter Day in the future there will be books written about Harry every child in our world will know his name !Exactly said Dumbledore looking very seriously over the top of his halfmoon glasses .It would be enough to turn any boys head .Famous before he can walk and talk !Famous for something he wont even remember !Cant you see how much better off hell be growing up away from all that until hes ready to take it ?Professor McGonagall opened her mouth changed her mind swallowed and then said Yes yes youre right of course .But how is the boy getting here Dumbledore ?She eyed his cloak suddenly as though she thought he might be hiding Harry underneath it .Hagrids bringing him .You think it wise to trust Hagrid with something as important as this ?I would trust Hagrid with my life said Dumbledore .Im not saying his heart isnt in the right place said Professor McGonagall grudgingly but you cant pretend hes not careless .He does tend to what was that ?A low rumbling sound had broken the silence around them .It grew steadily louder as they looked up and down the street for some sign of a headlight it swelled to a roar as they both looked up at the sky and a huge motorcycle fell out of the air and landed on the road in front of them .If the motorcycle was huge it was nothing to the man sitting astride it .He was almost twice as tall as a normal man and at least five times as wide .He looked simply too big to be allowed and so wild long tangles of bushy black hair and beard hid most of his face he had hands the size of trash can lids and his feet in their leather boots were like baby dolphins .In his vast muscular arms he was holding a bundle of blankets .Hagrid said Dumbledore sounding relieved .At last .And where did you get that motorcycle ?Borrowed it Professor Dumbledore sir said the giant climbing carefully off the motorcycle as he spoke .Young Sirius Black lent it to me .Ive got him sir .No problems were there ?No sir house was almost destroyed but I got him out all right before the Muggles started swarmin around .He fell asleep as we was flyin over Bristol .Dumbledore and Professor McGonagall bent forward over the bundle of blankets .Inside just visible was a baby boy fast asleep .Under a tuft of jetblack hair over his forehead they could see a curiously shaped cut like a bolt of lightning .Is that where ?whispered Professor McGonagall .Yes said Dumbledore .Hell have that scar forever .Couldnt you do something about it Dumbledore ?Even if I could I wouldnt .Scars can come in handy .I have one myself above my left knee that is a perfect map of the London Underground .Well give him here Hagrid wed better get this over with .Dumbledore took Harry in his arms and turned toward the Dursleys house .Could I could I say goodbye to him sir ?asked Hagrid .He bent his great shaggy head over Harry and gave him what must have been a very scratchy whiskery kiss .Then suddenly Hagrid let out a howl like a wounded dog .Shhh !hissed Professor McGonagall youll wake the Muggles !Sssorry sobbed Hagrid taking out a large spotted handkerchief and burying his face in it .But I cc cant stand it Lily an James dead an poor little Harry off ter live with Muggles Yes yes its all very sad but get a grip on yourself Hagrid or well be found Professor McGonagall whispered patting Hagrid gingerly on the arm as Dumbledore stepped over the low garden wall and walked to the front door .He laid Harry gently on the doorstep took a letter out of his cloak tucked it inside Harrys blankets and then came back to the other two .For a full minute the three of them stood and looked at the little bundle Hagrids shoulders shook Professor McGonagall blinked furiously and the twinkling light that usually shone from Dumbledores eyes seemed to have gone out .Well said Dumbledore finally thats that .Weve no business staying here .We may as well go and join the celebrations .Yeah said Hagrid in a very muffled voice Id best get this bike away .G night Professor McGonagall Professor Dumbledore sir .Wiping his streaming eyes on his jacket sleeve Hagrid swung himself onto the motorcycle and kicked the engine into life with a roar it rose into the air and off into the night .I shall see you soon I expect Professor McGonagall said Dumbledore nodding to her .Professor McGonagall blew her nose in reply .Dumbledore turned and walked back down the street .On the corner he stopped and took out the silver Put Outer .He clicked it once and twelve balls of light sped back to their street lamps so that Privet Drive glowed suddenly orange and he could make out a tabby cat slinking around the corner at the other end of the street .He could just see the bundle of blankets on the step of number four .Good luck Harry he murmured .He turned on his heel and with a swish of his cloak he was gone .A breeze ruffled the neat hedges of Privet Drive which lay silent and tidy under the inky sky the very last place you would expect astonishing things to happen .Harry Potter rolled over inside his blankets without waking up .One small hand closed on the letter beside him and he slept on not knowing he was special not knowing he was famous not knowing he would be woken in a few hours time by Mrs Dursleys scream as she opened the front door to put out the milk bottles nor that he would spend the next few weeks being prodded and pinched by his cousin Dudley .He couldnt know that at this very moment people meeting in secret all over the country were holding up their glasses and saying in hushed voices To Harry Potter the boy who lived !THE VANASHIG GLASS Nearly ten years had passed since the Dursleys had woken up to find their nephew on the front step but Privet Drive had hardly changed at all .The sun rose on the same tidy front gardens and lit up the brass number four on the Dursleys front door it crept into their living room which was almost exactly the same as it had been on the night when Mr Dursley had seen that fateful news report about the owls .Only the photographs on the mantelpiece really showed how much time had passed .Ten years ago there had been lots of pictures of what looked like a large pink beach ball wearing differentcolored bonnets but Dudley Dursley was no longer a baby and now the photographs showed a large blond boy riding his first bicycle on a carousel at the fair playing a computer game with his father being hugged and kissed by his mother .The room held no sign at all that another boy lived in the house too .Yet Harry Potter was still there asleep at the moment but not for long .His Aunt Petunia was awake and it was her shrill voice that made the first noise of the day .Up !Get up !Now !Harry woke with a start .His aunt rapped on the door again .Up !she screeched .Harry heard her walking toward the kitchen and then the sound of the frying pan being put on the stove .He rolled onto his back and tried to remember the dream he had been having .It had been a good one .There had been a flying motorcycle in it .He had a funny feeling hed had the same dream before .His aunt was back outside the door .Are you up yet ?she demanded .Nearly said Harry .Well get a move on I want you to look after the bacon .And dont you dare let it burn I want everything perfect on Duddys birthday .Harry groaned .What did you say ?his aunt snapped through the door .Nothing nothing .Dudleys birthday how could he have forgotten ?Harry got slowly out of bed and started looking for socks .He found a pair under his bed and after pulling a spider off one of them put them on .Harry was used to spiders because the cupboard under the stairs was full of them and that was where he slept .When he was dressed he went down the hall into the kitchen .The table was almost hidden beneath all Dudleys birthday presents .It looked as though Dudley had gotten the new computer he wanted not to mention the second television and the racing bike .Exactly why Dudley wanted a racing bike was a mystery to Harry as Dudley was very fat and hated exercise unless of course it involved punching somebody .Dudleys favorite punching bag was Harry but he couldnt often catch him .Harry didnt look it but he was very fast .Perhaps it had something to do with living in a dark cupboard but Harry had always been small and skinny for his age .He looked even smaller and skinnier than he really was because all he had to wear were old clothes of Dudleys and Dudley was about four times bigger than he was .Harry had a thin face knobbly knees black hair and bright green eyes .He wore round glasses held together with a lot of Scotch tape because of all the times Dudley had punched him on the nose .The only thing Harry liked about his own appearance was a very thin scar on his forehead that was shaped like a bolt of lightning .He had had it as long as he could remember and the first question he could ever remember asking his Aunt Petunia was how he had gotten it .In the car crash when your parents died she had said .And dont ask questions .Dont ask questions that was the first rule for a quiet life with the Dursleys .Uncle Vernon entered the kitchen as Harry was turning over the bacon .Comb your hair !he barked by way of a morning greeting .About once a week Uncle Vernon looked over the top of his newspaper and shouted that Harry needed a haircut .Harry must have had more haircuts than the rest of the boys in his class put together but it made no difference his hair simply grew that way all over the place .Harry was frying eggs by the time Dudley arrived in the kitchen with his mother .Dudley looked a lot like Uncle Vernon .He had a large pink face not much neck small watery blue eyes and thick blond hair that lay smoothly on his thick fat head .Aunt Petunia often said that Dudley looked like a baby angel Harry often said that Dudley looked like a pig in a wig .Harry put the plates of egg and bacon on the table which was difficult as there wasnt much room .Dudley meanwhile was counting his presents .His face fell .Thirtysix he said looking up at his mother and father .Thats two less than last year .Darling you havent counted Auntie Marges present see its here under this big one from Mommy and Daddy .All right thirtyseven then said Dudley going red in the face .Harry who could see a huge Dudley tantrum coming on began wolfing down his bacon as fast as possible in case Dudley turned the table over .Aunt Petunia obviously scented danger too because she said quickly And well buy you another two presents while were out today .Hows that popkin ?Two more presents .Is that all right ?Dudley thought for a moment .It looked like hard work .Finally he said slowly So Ill have thirty .thirty .Thirtynine sweetums said Aunt Petunia .Oh .Dudley sat down heavily and grabbed the nearest parcel .All right then .Uncle Vernon chuckled .Little tyke wants his moneys worth just like his father .Atta boy Dudley !He ruffled Dudleys hair .At that moment the telephone rang and Aunt Petunia went to answer it while Harry and Uncle Vernon watched Dudley unwrap the racing bike a video camera a remote control airplane sixteen new computer games and a VCR .He was ripping the paper off a gold wristwatch when Aunt Petunia came back from the telephone looking both angry and worried .Bad news Vernon she said .Mrs Figgs broken her leg .She cant take him .She jerked her head in Harrys direction .Dudleys mouth fell open in horror but Harrys heart gave a leap .Every year on Dudleys birthday his parents took him and a friend out for the day to adventure parks hamburger restaurants or the movies .Every year Harry was left behind with Mrs Figg a mad old lady who lived two streets away .Harry hated it there .The whole house smelled of cabbage and Mrs Figg made him look at photographs of all the cats shed ever owned .Now what ?said Aunt Petunia looking furiously at Harry as though hed planned this .Harry knew he ought to feel sorry that Mrs Figg had broken her leg but it wasnt easy when he reminded himself it would be a whole year before he had to look at Tibbies Snowy Mr Paws and Tufty again .We could phone Marge Uncle Vernon suggested .Dont be silly Vernon she hates the boy .The Dursleys often spoke about Harry like this as though he wasnt there or rather as though he was something very nasty that couldnt understand them like a slug .What about whatshername your friend Yvonne ?On vacation in Majorca snapped Aunt Petunia .You could just leave me here Harry put in hopefully hed be able to watch what he wanted on television for a change and maybe even have a go on Dudleys computer .Aunt Petunia looked as though shed just swallowed a lemon .And come back and find the house in ruins ?she snarled .I wont blow up the house said Harry but they werent listening .I suppose we could take him to the zoo said Aunt Petunia slowly .and leave him in the car .That cars new hes not sitting in it alone .Dudley began to cry loudly .In fact he wasnt really crying it had been years since hed really cried but he knew that if he screwed up his face and wailed his mother would give him anything he wanted .Dinky Duddydums dont cry Mummy wont let him spoil your special day !she cried flinging her arms around him .I .dont .want .him .ttto come !Dudley yelled between huge pretend sobs .He always sp spoils everything !He shot Harry a nasty grin through the gap in his mothers arms .Just then the doorbell rang Oh good Lord theyre here !said Aunt Petunia frantically and a moment later Dudleys best friend Piers Polkiss walked in with his mother .Piers was a scrawny boy with a face like a rat .He was usually the one who held peoples arms behind their backs while Dudley hit them .Dudley stopped pretending to cry at once .Half an hour later Harry who couldnt believe his luck was sitting in the back of the Dursleys car with Piers and Dudley on the way to the zoo for the first time in his life .His aunt and uncle hadnt been able to think of anything else to do with him but before theyd left Uncle Vernon had taken Harry aside .Im warning you he had said putting his large purple face right up close to Harrys Im warning you now boy any funny business anything at all and youll be in that cupboard from now until Christmas .Im not going to do anything said Harry honestly But Uncle Vernon didnt believe him .No one ever did .The problem was strange things often happened around Harry and it was just no good telling the Dursleys he didnt make them happen .Once Aunt Petunia tired of Harry coming back from the barbers looking as though he hadnt been at all had taken a pair of kitchen scissors and cut his hair so short he was almost bald except for his bangs which she left to hide that horrible scar .Dudley had laughed himself silly at Harry who spent a sleepless night imagining school the next day where he was already laughed at for his baggy clothes and taped glasses .Next morning however he had gotten up to find his hair exactly as it had been before Aunt Petunia had sheared it off .He had been given a week in his cupboard for this even though he had tried to explain that he couldnt explain how it had grown back so quickly .Another time Aunt Petunia had been trying to force him into a revolting old sweater of Dudleys brown with orange puff balls .The harder she tried to pull it over his head the smaller it seemed to become until finally it might have fitted a hand puppet but certainly wouldnt fit Harry .Aunt Petunia had decided it must have shrunk in the wash and to his great relief Harry wasnt punished .On the other hand hed gotten into terrible trouble for being found on the roof of the school kitchens .Dudleys gang had been chasing him as usual when as much to Harrys surprise as anyone elses there he was sitting on the chimney .The Dursleys had received a very angry letter from Harrys headmistress telling them Harry had been climbing school buildings .But all hed tried to do as he shouted at Uncle Vernon through the locked door of his cupboard was jump behind the big trash cans outside the kitchen doors .Harry supposed that the wind must have caught him in midjump .But today nothing was going to go wrong .It was even worth being with Dudley and Piers to be spending the day somewhere that wasnt school his cupboard or Mrs Figgs cabbagesmelling living room .While he drove Uncle Vernon complained to Aunt Petunia .He liked to complain about things people at work Harry the council Harry the bank and Harry were just a few of his favorite subjects .This morning it was motorcycles . .roaring along like maniacs the young hoodlums he said as a motorcycle overtook them .I had a dream about a motorcycle said Harry remembering suddenly .It was flying .Uncle Vernon nearly crashed into the car in front .He turned right around in his seat and yelled at Harry his face like a gigantic beet with a mustache MOTORCYCLES DONT FLY !Dudley and Piers sniggered .I know they dont said Harry .It was only a dream .But he wished he hadnt said anything .If there was one thing the Dursleys hated even more than his asking questions it was his talking about anything acting in a way it shouldnt no matter if it was in a dream or even a cartoon they seemed to think he might get dangerous ideas .It was a very sunny Saturday and the zoo was crowded with families .The Dursleys bought Dudley and Piers large chocolate ice creams at the entrance and then because the smiling lady in the van had asked Harry what he wanted before they could hurry him away they bought him a cheap lemon ice pop .It wasnt bad either Harry thought licking it as they watched a gorilla scratching its head who looked remarkably like Dudley except that it wasnt blond .Harry had the best morning hed had in a long time .He was careful to walk a little way apart from the Dursleys so that Dudley and Piers who were starting to get bored with the animals by lunchtime wouldnt fall back on their favorite hobby of hitting him .They ate in the zoo restaurant and when Dudley had a tantrum because his knickerbocker glory didnt have enough ice cream on top Uncle Vernon bought him another one and Harry was allowed to finish the first .Harry felt afterward that he should have known it was all too good to last .After lunch they went to the reptile house .It was cool and dark in there with lit windows all along the walls .Behind the glass all sorts of lizards and snakes were crawling and slithering over bits of wood and stone .Dudley and Piers wanted to see huge poisonous cobras and thick mancrushing pythons .Dudley quickly found the largest snake in the place .It could have wrapped its body twice around Uncle Vernons car and crushed it into a trash can but at the moment it didnt look in the mood .In fact it was fast asleep .Dudley stood with his nose pressed against the glass staring at the glistening brown coils .Make it move he whined at his father .Uncle Vernon tapped on the glass but the snake didnt budge .Do it again Dudley ordered .Uncle Vernon rapped the glass smartly with his knuckles but the snake just snoozed on .This is boring Dudley moaned .He shuffled away .Harry moved in front of the tank and looked intently at the snake .He wouldnt have been surprised if it had died of boredom itself no company except stupid people drumming their fingers on the glass trying to disturb it all day long .It was worse than having a cupboard as a bedroom where the only visitor was Aunt Petunia hammering on the door to wake you up at least he got to visit the rest of the house .The snake suddenly opened its beady eyes .Slowly very slowly it raised its head until its eyes were on a level with Harrys .It winked .Harry stared .Then he looked quickly around to see if anyone was watching .They werent .He looked back at the snake and winked too .The snake jerked its head toward Uncle Vernon and Dudley then raised its eyes to the ceiling .It gave Harry a look that said quite plainly I get that all the time .I know Harry murmured through the glass though he wasnt sure the snake could hear him .It must be really annoying .The snake nodded vigorously .Where do you come from anyway ?Harry asked .The snake jabbed its tail at a little sign next to the glass .Harry peered at it .Boa Constrictor Brazil .Was it nice there ?The boa constrictor jabbed its tail at the sign again and Harry read on This specimen was bred in the zoo .Oh I see so youve never been to Brazil ?As the snake shook its head a deafening shout behind Harry made both of them jump .DUDLEY !MR Dursley !COME AND LOOK AT THIS SNAKE !YOU WONT BELIEVE WHAT ITS DOING !Dudley came waddling toward them as fast as he could .Out of the way you he said punching Harry in the ribs .Caught by surprise Harry fell hard on the concrete floor .What came next happened so fast no one saw how it happened one second Piers and Dudley were leaning right up close to the glass the next they had leapt back with howls of horror .Harry sat up and gasped the glass front of the boa constrictors tank had vanished .The great snake was uncoiling itself rapidly slithering out onto the floor .People throughout the reptile house screamed and started running for the exits .As the snake slid swiftly past him Harry could have sworn a low hissing voice said Brazil here I come . .Thanksss amigo .The keeper of the reptile house was in shock .But the glass he kept saying where did the glass go ?The zoo director himself made Aunt Petunia a cup of strong sweet tea while he apologized over and over again .Piers and Dudley could only gibber .As far as Harry had seen the snake hadnt done anything except snap playfully at their heels as it passed but by the time they were all back in Uncle Vernons car Dudley was telling them how it had nearly bitten off his leg while Piers was swearing it had tried to squeeze him to death .But worst of all for Harry at least was Piers calming down enough to say Harry was talking to it werent you Harry ?Uncle Vernon waited until Piers was safely out of the house before starting on Harry .He was so angry he could hardly speak .He managed to say Go cupboard stay no meals before he collapsed into a chair and Aunt Petunia had to run and get him a large brandy .Harry lay in his dark cupboard much later wishing he had a watch .He didnt know what time it was and he couldnt be sure the Dursleys were asleep yet .Until they were he couldnt risk sneaking to the kitchen for some food .Hed lived with the Dursleys almost ten years ten miserable years as long as he could remember ever since hed been a baby and his parents had died in that car crash .He couldnt remember being in the car when his parents had died .Sometimes when he strained his memory during long hours in his cupboard he came up with a strange vision a blinding flash of green light and a burning pain on his forehead .This he supposed was the crash though he couldnt imagine where all the green light came from .He couldnt remember his parents at all .His aunt and uncle never spoke about them and of course he was forbidden to ask questions .There were no photographs of them in the house .When he had been younger Harry had dreamed and dreamed of some unknown relation coming to take him away but it had never happened the Dursleys were his only family .Yet sometimes he thought or maybe hoped that strangers in the street seemed to know him .Very strange strangers they were too .A tiny man in a violet top hat had bowed to him once while out shopping with Aunt Petunia and Dudley .After asking Harry furiously if he knew the man Aunt Petunia had rushed them out of the shop without buying anything .A wildlooking old woman dressed all in green had waved merrily at him once on a bus .A bald man in a very long purple coat had actually shaken his hand in the street the other day and then walked away without a word .The weirdest thing about all these people was the way they seemed to vanish the second Harry tried to get a closer look .At school Harry had no one .Everybody knew that Dudleys gang hated that odd Harry Potter in his baggy old clothes and broken glasses and nobody liked to disagree with Dudleys gang .3 THE LETTERS FROM NO ONE The escape of the Brazilian boa constrictor earned Harry his longestever punishment .By the time he was allowed out of his cupboard again the summer holidays had started and Dudley had already broken his new video camera crashed his remote control airplane and first time out on his racing bike knocked down old Mrs Figg as she crossed Privet Drive on her crutches .Harry was glad school was over but there was no escaping Dudleys gang who visited the house every single day .Piers Dennis Malcolm and Gordon were all big and stupid but as Dudley was the biggest and stupidest of the lot he was the leader .The rest of them were all quite happy to join in Dudleys favorite sport Harry Hunting .This was why Harry spent as much time as possible out of the house wandering around and thinking about the end of the holidays where he could see a tiny ray of hope .When September came he would be going off to secondary school and for the first time in his life he wouldnt be with Dudley .Dudley had been accepted at Uncle Vernons old private school Smeltings .Piers Polkiss was going there too .Harry on the other hand was going to Stonewall High the local public school .Dudley thought this was very funny .They stuff peoples heads down the toilet the first day at Stonewall he told Harry .Want to come upstairs and practice ?No thanks said Harry .The poor toilets never had anything as horrible as your head down it it might be sick .Then he ran before Dudley could work out what hed said .One day in July Aunt Petunia took Dudley to London to buy his Smeltings uniform leaving Harry at Mrs Figgs .Mrs Figg wasnt as bad as usual .It turned out shed broken her leg tripping over one of her cats and she didnt seem quite as fond of them as before .She let Harry watch television and gave him a bit of chocolate cake that tasted as though shed had it for several years .That evening Dudley paraded around the living room for the family in his brandnew uniform .Smeltings boys wore maroon tailcoats orange knickerbockers and flat straw hats called boaters .They also carried knobbly sticks used for hitting each other while the teachers werent looking .This was supposed to be good training for later life .As he looked at Dudley in his new knickerbockers Uncle Vernon said gruffly that it was the proudest moment of his life .Aunt Petunia burst into tears and said she couldnt believe it was her Ickle Dudleykins he looked so handsome and grownup .Harry didnt trust himself to speak .He thought two of his ribs might already have cracked from trying not to laugh .k k k There was a horrible smell in the kitchen the next morning when Harry went in for breakfast .It seemed to be coming from a large metal tub in the sink .He went to have a look .The tub was full of what looked like dirty rags swimming in gray water .Whats this ?he asked Aunt Petunia .Her lips tightened as they always did if he dared to ask a question .Your new school uniform she said .Harry looked in the bowl again .Oh he said I didnt realize it had to be so wet .Dont be stupid snapped Aunt Petunia .Im dyeing some of Dudleys old things gray for you .Itll look just like everyone elses when Ive finished .Harry seriously doubted this but thought it best not to argue .He sat down at the table and tried not to think about how he was going to look on his first day at Stonewall High like he was wearing bits of old elephant skin probably .Dudley and Uncle Vernon came in both with wrinkled noses because of the smell from Harrys new uniform .Uncle Vernon opened his newspaper as usual and Dudley banged his Smelting stick which he carried everywhere on the table .They heard the click of the mail slot and flop of letters on the doormat .Get the mail Dudley said Uncle Vernon from behind his paper .Make Harry get it .Get the mail Harry .Make Dudley get it .Poke him with your Smelting stick Dudley .Harry dodged the Smelting stick and went to get the mail .Three things lay on the doormat a postcard from Uncle Vernons sister Marge who was vacationing on the Isle of Wight a brown envelope that looked like a bill and a letter for Harry .Harry picked it up and stared at it his heart twanging like a giant elastic band .No one ever in his whole life had written to him .Who would ?He had no friends no other relatives he didnt belong to the library so hed never even got rude notes asking for books back .Yet here it was a letter addressed so plainly there could be no mistake Mr H .Potter The Cupboard under the Stairs 4 Privet Drive Little Whinging Surrey The envelope was thick and heavy made of yellowish parchment and the address was written in emerald green ink .There was no stamp .Turning the envelope over his hand trembling Harry saw a purple wax seal bearing a coat of arms a lion an eagle a badger and a snake surrounding a large letter H .Hurry up boy !shouted Uncle Vernon from the kitchen .What are you doing checking for letter bombs ?He chuckled at his own joke .Harry went back to the kitchen still staring at his letter .He handed Uncle Vernon the bill and the postcard sat down and slowly began to open the yellow envelope .Uncle Vernon ripped open the bill snorted in disgust and flipped over the postcard .Marges ill he informed Aunt Petunia .Ate a funny whelk .Dad !said Dudley suddenly .Dad Harrys got something !Harry was on the point of unfolding his letter which was written on the same heavy parchment as the envelope when it was jerked sharply out of his hand by Uncle Vernon .Thats mine said Harry trying to snatch it back .Whod be writing to you ?sneered Uncle Vernon shaking the letter open with one hand and glancing at it .His face went from red to green faster than a set of traffic lights .And it didnt stop there .Within seconds it was the grayish white of old porridge .PPPetunia !he gasped .Dudley tried to grab the letter to read it but Uncle Vernon held it high out of his reach .Aunt Petunia took it curiously and read the first line .For a moment it looked as though she might faint .She clutched her throat and made a choking noise .Vernon !Oh my goodness Vernon !They stared at each other seeming to have forgotten that Harry and Dudley were still in the room .Dudley wasnt used to being ignored .He gave his father a sharp tap on the head with his Smelting stick .I want to read that letter he said loudly .I want to read it said Harry furiously as its mine .Get out both of you croaked Uncle Vernon stuffing the letter back inside its envelope .Harry didnt move .I WANT MY LETTER !he shouted .Let me see it !demanded Dudley .OUT !roared Uncle Vernon and he took both Harry and Dudley by the scruffs of their necks and threw them into the hall slamming the kitchen door behind them .Harry and Dudley promptly had a furious but silent fight over who would listen at the keyhole Dudley won so Harry his glasses dangling from one ear lay flat on his stomach to listen at the crack between door and floor .Vernon Aunt Petunia was saying in a quivering voice look at the address how could they possibly know where he sleeps ?You dont think theyre watching the house ?Watching spying might be following us muttered Uncle Vernon wildly .But what should we do Vernon ?Should we write back ?Tell them we dont want Harry could see Uncle Vernons shiny black shoes pacing up and down the kitchen .No he said finally .No well ignore it .If they dont get an answer .Yes thats best .we wont do anything .But Im not having one in the house Petunia !Didnt we swear when we took him in wed stamp out that dangerous nonsense ?That evening when he got back from work Uncle Vernon did something hed never done before he visited Harry in his cupboard .Wheres my letter ?said Harry the moment Uncle Vernon had squeezed through the door .Whos writing to me ?No one .It was addressed to you by mistake said Uncle Vernon shortly .I have burned it .It was not a mistake said Harry angrily it had my cupboard on it .SILENCE !yelled Uncle Vernon and a couple of spiders fell from the ceiling .He took a few deep breaths and then forced his face into a smile which looked quite painful .Er yes Harry about this cupboard .Your aunt and I have been thinking .youre really getting a bit big for it .we think it might be nice if you moved into Dudleys second bedroom .Why ?said Harry .Dont ask questions !snapped his uncle .Take this stuff upstairs now .The Dursleys house had four bedrooms one for Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia one for visitors usually Uncle Vernons sister Marge one where Dudley slept and one where Dudley kept all the toys and things that wouldnt fit into his first bedroom .It only took Harry one trip upstairs to move everything he owned from the cupboard to this room .He sat down on the bed and stared around him .Nearly everything in here was broken .The monthold video camera was lying on top of a small working tank Dudley had once driven over the next door neighbors dog in the corner was Dudleys firstever television set which hed put his foot through when his favorite program had been canceled there was a large birdcage which had once held a parrot that Dudley had swapped at school for a real air rifle which was up on a shelf with the end all bent because Dudley had sat on it .Other shelves were full of books .They were the only things in the room that looked as though theyd never been touched .From downstairs came the sound of Dudley bawling at his mother I dont want him in there .I need that room .make him get out .Harry sighed and stretched out on the bed .Yesterday hed have given anything to be up here .Today hed rather be back in his cupboard with that letter than up here without it .Next morning at breakfast everyone was rather quiet .Dudley was in shock .Hed screamed whacked his father with his Smelting stick been sick on purpose kicked his mother and thrown his tortoise through the greenhouse roof and he still didnt have his room back .Harry was thinking about this time yesterday and bitterly wishing hed opened the letter in the hall .Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia kept looking at each other darkly .When the mail arrived Uncle Vernon who seemed to be trying to be nice to Harry made Dudley go and get it .They heard him banging things with his Smelting stick all the way down the hall .Then he shouted Theres another one ! ‘Mr H .Potter The Smallest Bedroom 4 Privet Drive With a strangled cry Uncle Vernon leapt from his seat and ran down the hall Harry right behind him .Uncle Vernon had to wrestle Dudley to the ground to get the letter from him which was made difficult by the fact that Harry had grabbed Uncle Vernon around the neck from behind .After a minute of confused fighting in which everyone got hit a lot by the Smelting stick Uncle Vernon straightened up gasping for breath with Harrys letter clutched in his hand .Go to your cupboard I mean your bedroom he wheezed at Harry .Dudley go just go .Harry walked round and round his new room .Someone knew he had moved out of his cupboard and they seemed to know he hadnt received his first letter .Surely that meant theyd try again ?And this time hed make sure they didnt fail .He had a plan .The repaired alarm clock rang at six oclock the next morning .Harry turned it off quickly and dressed silently .He mustnt wake the Dursleys .He stole downstairs without turning on any of the lights .He was going to wait for the postman on the corner of Privet Drive and get the letters for number four first .His heart hammered as he crept across the dark hall toward the front door aaRRRGH !Harry leapt into the air hed trodden on something big and squashy on the doormat something alive Lights clicked on upstairs and to his horror Harry realized that the big squashy something had been his uncles face .Uncle Vernon had been lying at the foot of the front door in a sleeping bag clearly making sure that Harry didnt do exactly what hed been trying to do .He shouted at Harry for about half an hour and then told him to go and make a cup of tea .Harry shuffled miserably off into the kitchen and by the time he got back the mail had arrived right into Uncle Vernons lap .Harry could see three letters addressed in green ink .I want he began but Uncle Vernon was tearing the letters into pieces before his eyes .Uncle Vernon didnt go to work that day .He stayed at home and nailed up the mail slot .See he explained to Aunt Petunia through a mouthful of nails if they cant deliver them theyll just give up .Im not sure thatll work Vernon .Oh these peoples minds work in strange ways Petunia theyre not like you and me said Uncle Vernon trying to knock in a nail with the piece of fruitcake Aunt Petunia had just brought him .On Friday no less than twelve letters arrived for Harry .As they couldnt go through the mail slot they had been pushed under the door slotted through the sides and a few even forced through the small window in the downstairs bathroom .Uncle Vernon stayed at home again .After burning all the letters he got out a hammer and nails and boarded up the cracks around the front and back doors so no one could go out .He hummed Tiptoe Through the Tulips as he worked and jumped at small noises .On Saturday things began to get out of hand .Twentyfour letters to Harry found their way into the house rolled up and hidden inside each of the two dozen eggs that their very confused milkman had handed Aunt Petunia through the living room window .While Uncle Vernon made furious telephone calls to the post office and the dairy trying to find someone to complain to Aunt Petunia shredded the letters in her food processor .Who on earth wants to talk to you this badly ?Dudley asked Harry in amazement . •k k k On Sunday morning Uncle Vernon sat down at the breakfast table looking tired and rather ill but happy .No post on Sundays he reminded them cheerfully as he spread marmalade on his newspapers no damn letters today Something came whizzing down the kitchen chimney as he spoke and caught him sharply on the back of the head .Next moment thirty or forty letters came pelting out of the fireplace like bullets .The Dursleys ducked but Harry leapt into the air trying to catch one Out !OUT !Uncle Vernon seized Harry around the waist and threw him into the hall .When Aunt Petunia and Dudley had run out with their arms over their faces Uncle Vernon slammed the door shut .They could hear the letters still streaming into the room bouncing off the walls and floor .That does it said Uncle Vernon trying to speak calmly but pulling great tufts out of his mustache at the same time .I want you all back here in five minutes ready to leave .Were going away .Just pack some clothes .No arguments !He looked so dangerous with half his mustache missing that no one dared argue .Ten minutes later they had wrenched their way through the boardedup doors and were in the car speeding toward the highway .Dudley was sniffling in the back seat his father had hit him round the head for holding them up while he tried to pack his television VCR and computer in his sports bag .They drove .And they drove .Even Aunt Petunia didnt dare ask where they were going .Every now and then Uncle Vernon would take a sharp turn and drive in the opposite direction for a while .Shake em off .shake em off he would mutter whenever he did this .They didnt stop to eat or drink all day .By nightfall Dudley was howling .Hed never had such a bad day in his life .He was hungry hed missed five television programs hed wanted to see and hed never gone so long without blowing up an alien on his computer .Uncle Vernon stopped at last outside a gloomy looking hotel on the outskirts of a big city .Dudley and Harry shared a room with twin beds and damp musty sheets .Dudley snored but Harry stayed awake sitting on the windowsill staring down at the lights of passing cars and wondering .They ate stale cornflakes and cold tinned tomatoes on toast for breakfast the next day .They had just finished when the owner of the hotel came over to their table .Scuse me but is one of you Mr H .Potter ?Only I got about an undred of these at the front desk .She held up a letter so they could read the green ink address Mr H .Potter Room 1 7 Railview Hotel Cokeworth Harry made a grab for the letter but Uncle Vernon knocked his hand out of the way .The woman stared .Ill take them said Uncle Vernon standing up quickly and following her from the dining room . •k k k Wouldnt it be better just to go home dear ?Aunt Petunia suggested timidly hours later but Uncle Vernon didnt seem to hear her .Exactly what he was looking for none of them knew .He drove them into the middle of a forest got out looked around shook his head got back in the car and off they went again .The same thing happened in the middle of a plowed field halfway across a suspension bridge and at the top of a multilevel parking garage .Daddys gone mad hasnt he ?Dudley asked Aunt Petunia dully late that afternoon .Uncle Vernon had parked at the coast locked them all inside the car and disappeared .It started to rain .Great drops beat on the roof of the car .Dudley sniveled .Its Monday he told his mother .The Great Humbertos on tonight .I want to stay somewhere with a television .Monday .This reminded Harry of something .If it was Monday and you could usually count on Dudley to know the days of the week because of television then tomorrow Tuesday was Harrys eleventh birthday .Of course his birthdays were never exactly fun last year the Dursleys had given him a coat hanger and a pair of Uncle Vernons old socks .Still you werent eleven every day .Uncle Vernon was back and he was smiling .He was also carrying a long thin package and didnt answer Aunt Petunia when she asked what hed bought .Found the perfect place !he said .Come on !Everyone out !It was very cold outside the car .Uncle Vernon was pointing at what looked like a large rock way out at sea .Perched on top of the rock was the most miserable little shack you could imagine .One thing was certain there was no television in there .Storm forecast for tonight !said Uncle Vernon gleefully clapping his hands together .And this gentlemans kindly agreed to lend us his boat !A toothless old man came ambling up to them pointing with a rather wicked grin at an old rowboat bobbing in the irongray water below them .Ive already got us some rations said Uncle Vernon so all aboard !It was freezing in the boat .Icy sea spray and rain crept down their necks and a chilly wind whipped their faces .After what seemed like hours they reached the rock where Uncle Vernon slipping and sliding led the way to the brokendown house .The inside was horrible it smelled strongly of seaweed the wind whistled through the gaps in the wooden walls and the fireplace was damp and empty .There were only two rooms .Uncle Vernons rations turned out to be a bag of chips each and four bananas .He tried to start a fire but the empty chip bags just smoked and shriveled up .Could do with some of those letters now eh ?he said cheerfully .He was in a very good mood .Obviously he thought nobody stood a chance of reaching them here in a storm to deliver mail .Harry privately agreed though the thought didnt cheer him up at all .As night fell the promised storm blew up around them .Spray from the high waves splattered the walls of the hut and a fierce wind rattled the filthy windows .Aunt Petunia found a few moldy blankets in the second room and made up a bed for Dudley on the motheaten sofa .She and Uncle Vernon went off to the lumpy bed next door and Harry was left to find the softest bit of floor he could and to curl up under the thinnest most ragged blanket .The storm raged more and more ferociously as the night went on .Harry couldnt sleep .He shivered and turned over trying to get comfortable his stomach rumbling with hunger .Dudleys snores were drowned by the low rolls of thunder that started near midnight .The lighted dial of Dudleys watch which was dangling over the edge of the sofa on his fat wrist told Harry hed be eleven in ten minutes time .He lay and watched his birthday tick nearer wondering if the Dursleys would remember at all wondering where the letter writer was now .Five minutes to go .Harry heard something creak outside .He hoped the roof wasnt going to fall in although he might be warmer if it did .Four minutes to go .Maybe the house in Privet Drive would be so full of letters when they got back that hed be able to steal one somehow .Three minutes to go .Was that the sea slapping hard on the rock like that ?And two minutes to go what was that funny crunching noise ?Was the rock crumbling into the sea ?One minute to go and hed be eleven .Thirty seconds .twenty .ten .nine maybe hed wake Dudley up just to annoy him three .two .one .BOOM .The whole shack shivered and Harry sat bolt upright staring at the door .Someone was outside knocking to come in .THE KEEPER OF THE KEYS BOOM .They knocked again .Dudley jerked awake .Wheres the cannon ?he said stupidly .There was a crash behind them and Uncle Vernon came skidding into the room .He was holding a rifle in his hands now they knew what had been in the long thin package he had brought with them .Whos there ?he shouted .I warn you Im armed !There was a pause .Then SMASH !The door was hit with such force that it swung clean off its hinges and with a deafening crash landed flat on the floor .A giant of a man was standing in the doorway .His face was almost completely hidden by a long shaggy mane of hair and a wild tangled beard but you could make out his eyes glinting like black beetles under all the hair .The giant squeezed his way into the hut stooping so that his head just brushed the ceiling .He bent down picked up the door and fitted it easily back into its frame .The noise of the storm outside dropped a little .He turned to look at them all .Couldnt make us a cup o tea could yeh ?Its not been an easy journey .He strode over to the sofa where Dudley sat frozen with fear .Budge up yeh great lump said the stranger .Dudley squeaked and ran to hide behind his mother who was crouching terrified behind Uncle Vernon .An heres Harry !said the giant .Harry looked up into the fierce wild shadowy face and saw that the beetle eyes were crinkled in a smile .Las time I saw you you was only a baby said the giant .Yeh look a lot like yer dad but yehve got yer moms eyes .Uncle Vernon made a funny rasping noise .I demand that you leave at once sir !he said .You are breaking and entering !Ah shut up Dursley yeh great prune said the giant he reached over the back of the sofa jerked the gun out of Uncle Vernons hands bent it into a knot as easily as if it had been made of rubber and threw it into a corner of the room .Uncle Vernon made another funny noise like a mouse being trodden on .Anyway Harry said the giant turning his back on the Dursleys a very happy birthday to yeh .Got summat fer yeh here I mighta sat on it at some point but itll taste all right .From an inside pocket of his black overcoat he pulled a slightly squashed box .Harry opened it with trembling fingers .Inside was a large sticky chocolate cake with Happy Birthday Harry written on it in green icing .Harry looked up at the giant .He meant to say thank you but the words got lost on the way to his mouth and what he said instead was Who are you ?The giant chuckled .True I havent introduced meself .Rubeus Hagrid Keeper of Keys and Grounds at Hogwarts .He held out an enormous hand and shook Harrys whole arm .What about that tea then eh ?he said rubbing his hands together .Id not say no ter summat stronger if yehve got it mind .His eyes fell on the empty grate with the shriveled chip bags in it and he snorted .He bent down over the fireplace they couldnt see what he was doing but when he drew back a second later there was a roaring fire there .It filled the whole damp hut with flickering light and Harry felt the warmth wash over him as though hed sunk into a hot bath .The giant sat back down on the sofa which sagged under his weight and began taking all sorts of things out of the pockets of his coat a copper kettle a squashy package of sausages a poker a teapot several chipped mugs and a bottle of some amber liquid that he took a swig from before starting to make tea .Soon the hut was full of the sound and smell of sizzling sausage .Nobody said a thing while the giant was working but as he slid the first six fat juicy slightly burnt sausages from the poker Dudley fidgeted a little .Uncle Vernon said sharply Dont touch anything he gives you Dudley .The giant chuckled darkly .Yer great puddin of a son don need fattenin anymore Dursley don worry .He passed the sausages to Harry who was so hungry he had never tasted anything so wonderful but he still couldnt take his eyes off the giant .Finally as nobody seemed about to explain anything he said Im sorry but I still dont really know who you are .The giant took a gulp of tea and wiped his mouth with the back of his hand .Call me Hagrid he said everyone does .An like I told yeh Im Keeper of Keys at Hogwarts yehll know all about Hogwarts o course .Er no said Harry .Hagrid looked shocked .Sorry Harry said quickly .Sorry ?barked Hagrid turning to stare at the Dursleys who shrank back into the shadows .Its them as should be sorry !I knew yeh werent gettin yer letters but I never thought yeh wouldnt even know abou Hogwarts fer cryin out loud !Did yeh never wonder where yer parents learned it all ?All what ?asked Harry .ALL WHAT ?Hagrid thundered .Now wait jus one second !He had leapt to his feet .In his anger he seemed to fill the whole hut .The Dursleys were cowering against the wall .Do you mean ter tell me he growled at the Dursleys that this boy this boy !knows nothin abou about ANYTHING ?Harry thought this was going a bit far .He had been to school after all and his marks werent bad .I know some things he said .I can you know do math and stuff .But Hagrid simply waved his hand and said About our world I mean .Your world .My world .Yer parents world .What world ?Hagrid looked as if he was about to explode .DURSLEY !he boomed .Uncle Vernon who had gone very pale whispered something that sounded like Mimblewimble .Hagrid stared wildly at Harry .But yeh must know about yer mom and dad he said .I mean theyre famous .Youre famous .What ?My my mom and dad werent famous were they ?Yeh don know .yeh don know .Hagrid ran his fingers through his hair fixing Harry with a bewildered stare .Yeh don know what yeh are ?he said finally .Uncle Vernon suddenly found his voice .Stop !he commanded .Stop right there sir !I forbid you to tell the boy anything !A braver man than Vernon Dursley would have quailed under the furious look Hagrid now gave him when Hagrid spoke his every syllable trembled with rage .You never told him ?Never told him what was in the letter Dumbledore left fer him ?I was there !I saw Dumbledore leave it Dursley !An youve kept it from him all these years ?Kept what from me ?said Harry eagerly .STOP !I FORBID YOU !yelled Uncle Vernon in panic .Aunt Petunia gave a gasp of horror .Ah go boil yer heads both of yeh said Hagrid .Harry yer a wizard .There was silence inside the hut .Only the sea and the whistling wind could be heard .Im a what ?gasped Harry .A wizard o course said Hagrid sitting back down on the sofa which groaned and sank even lower an a thumpin goodun Id say once yehve been trained up a bit .With a mum an dad like yours what else would yeh be ?An I reckon its abou time yeh read yer letter .Harry stretched out his hand at last to take the yellowish envelope addressed in emerald green to Mr H .Potter The Floor HutontheRock The Sea .He pulled out the letter and read HOGWARTS SCHOOL oWITCHCRAFT and WIZARDRY Headmaster ALBUS DUMBLEDORE Order of Merlin First Class Grand Sore .Chf .Warlock Supreme Mugwump International Confed .of Wizards Dear Mr Potter We are pleased to inform you that you have been accepted at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry .Please find enclosed a list of all necessary books and equipment .Term begins on September 1 .We await your owl by no later than July 31 .Yours sincerely Minerva McGonagall Deputy Headmistress Questions exploded inside Harrys head like fireworks and he couldnt decide which to ask first .After a few minutes he stammered What does it mean they await my owl ?Gallopin Gorgons that reminds me said Hagrid clapping a hand to his forehead with enough force to knock over a cart horse and from yet another pocket inside his overcoat he pulled an owl a real live rather ruffledlooking owl a long quill and a roll of parchment .With his tongue between his teeth he scribbled a note that Harry could read upside down Dear Professor Dumbledore Given Harry his letter .Taking him to buy his things tomorrow .Weathers horrible .Hope youre well .Hagrid Hagrid rolled up the note gave it to the owl which clamped it in its beak went to the door and threw the owl out into the storm .Then he came back and sat down as though this was as normal as talking on the telephone .Harry realized his mouth was open and closed it quickly .Where was I ?said Hagrid but at that moment Uncle Vernon still ashenfaced but looking very angry moved into the firelight .Hes not going he said .Hagrid grunted .Id like ter see a great Muggle like you stop him he said .A what ?said Harry interested .A Muggle said Hagrid its what we call nonmagic folk like them .An its your bad luck you grew up in a family o the biggest Muggles I ever laid eyes on .We swore when we took him in wed put a stop to that rubbish said Uncle Vernon swore wed stamp it out of him !Wizard indeed !You knew ?said Harry .You knew Im a a wizard ?Knew !shrieked Aunt Petunia suddenly .Knew Of course we knew !How could you not be my dratted sister being what she was ?Oh she got a letter just like that and disappeared off to that that school and came home every vacation with her pockets full of frog spawn turning teacups into rats .I was the only one who saw her for what she was a freak !But for my mother and father oh no it was Lily this and Lily that they were proud of having a witch in the family !She stopped to draw a deep breath and then went ranting on .It seemed she had been wanting to say all this for years .Then she met that Potter at school and they left and got married and had you and of course I knew youd be just the same just as strange just as as abnormal and then if you please she went and got herself blown up and we got landed with you !Harry had gone very white .As soon as he found his voice he said Blown up ?You told me they died in a car crash !CAR CRASH !roared Hagrid jumping up so angrily that the Dursleys scuttled back to their corner .How could a car crash kill Lily an James Potter ?Its an outrage !A scandal !Harry Potter not knowin his own story when every kid in our world knows his name !But why ?What happened ?Harry asked urgently .The anger faded from Hagrids face .He looked suddenly anxious .I never expected this he said in a low worried voice .I had no idea when Dumbledore told me there might be trouble gettin hold of yeh how much yeh didnt know .Ah Harry I don know if Im the right person ter tell yeh but someones gotta yeh cant go off ter Hogwarts not knowin .He threw a dirty look at the Dursleys .Well its best yeh know as much as I can tell yeh mind I cant tell yeh everythin its a great mystry parts of it .He sat down stared into the fire for a few seconds and then said It begins I suppose with with a person called but its incredible yeh dont know his name everyone in our world knows Who ?Well I don like sayin the name if I can help it .No one does .Why not ?Gulpin gargoyles Harry people are still scared .Blimey this is difficult .See there was this wizard who went .bad .As bad as you could go .Worse .Worse than worse .His name was .Hagrid gulped but no words came out .Could you write it down ?Harry suggested .Nah cant spell it .All right Voldemort .Hagrid shuddered .Don make me say it again .Anyway this this wizard about twenty years ago now started lookin fer followers .Got em too some were afraid some just wanted a bit o his power cause he was gettin himself power all right .Dark days Harry .Didnt know who ter trust didnt dare get friendly with strange wizards or witches .terrible things happened .He was takin over .Course some stood up to him an he killed em .Horribly .One o the only safe places left was Hogwarts .Reckon Dumbledores the only one YouKnowWho was afraid of .Didnt dare try takin the school not jus then anyway .Now yer mum an dad were as good a witch an wizard as I ever knew .Head boy an girl at Hogwarts in their day !Suppose the mystry is why YouKnow Who never tried to get em on his side before .probably knew they were too close ter Dumbledore ter want anythin ter do with the Dark Side .Maybe he thought he could persuade em .maybe he just wanted em outta the way .All anyone knows is he turned up in the village where you was all living on Halloween ten years ago .You was just a year old .He came ter yer house an an Hagrid suddenly pulled out a very dirty spotted handkerchief and blew his nose with a sound like a foghorn .Sorry he said .But its that sad knew yer mum an dad an nicer people yeh couldnt find anyway YouKnowWho killed em .An then an this is the real mystry of the thing he tried to kill you too .Wanted ter make a clean job of it I suppose or maybe he just liked killin by then .But he couldnt do it .Never wondered how you got that mark on yer forehead ?That was no ordinary cut .Thats what yeh get when a powerful evil curse touches yeh took care of yer mum an dad an yer house even but it didnt work on you an thats why yer famous Harry .No one ever lived after he decided ter kill em no one except you an hed killed some o the best witches an wizards of the age the McKinnons the Bones the Prewetts an you was only a baby an you lived .Something very painful was going on in Harrys mind .As Hagrids story came to a close he saw again the blinding flash of green light more clearly than he had ever remembered it before and he remembered something else for the first time in his life a high cold cruel laugh .Hagrid was watching him sadly .Took yeh from the ruined house myself on Dumbledores orders .Brought yeh ter this lot .Load of old tosh said Uncle Vernon .Harry jumped he had almost forgotten that the Dursleys were there .Uncle Vernon certainly seemed to have got back his courage .He was glaring at Hagrid and his fists were clenched .Now you listen here boy he snarled I accept theres something strange about you probably nothing a good beating wouldnt have cured and as for all this about your parents well they were weirdos no denying it and the worlds better off without them in my opinion asked for all they got getting mixed up with these wizarding types just what I expected always knew theyd come to a sticky end But at that moment Hagrid leapt from the sofa and drew a battered pink umbrella from inside his coat .Pointing this at Uncle Vernon like a sword he said Im warning you Dursley Im warning you one more word .In danger of being speared on the end of an umbrella by a bearded giant Uncle Vernons courage failed again he flattened himself against the wall and fell silent .Thats better said Hagrid breathing heavily and sitting back down on the sofa which this time sagged right down to the floor .Harry meanwhile still had questions to ask hundreds of them .But what happened to Vol sorry I mean You KnowWho ?Good question Harry .Disappeared .Vanished .Same night he tried ter kill you .Makes yeh even more famous .Thats the biggest mystry see .he was gettin more an more powerful whyd he go ?Some say he died .Codswallop in my opinion .Dunno if he had enough human left in him to die .Some say hes still out there bidin his time like but I don believe it .People who was on his side came back ter ours .Some of em came outta kinda trances .Don reckon they couldve done if he was cornin back .Most of us reckon hes still out there somewhere but lost his powers .Too weak to carry on .Cause somethin about you finished him Harry .There was somethin goin on that night he hadnt counted on dunno what it was no one does but somethin about you stumped him all right .Hagrid looked at Harry with warmth and respect blazing in his eyes but Harry instead of feeling pleased and proud felt quite sure there had been a horrible mistake .A wizard ?Him ?How could he possibly be ?Hed spent his life being clouted by Dudley and bullied by Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon if he was really a wizard why hadnt they been turned into warty toads every time theyd tried to lock him in his cupboard ?If hed once defeated the greatest sorcerer in the world how come Dudley had always been able to kick him around like a football ?Hagrid he said quietly I think you must have made a mistake .I dont think I can be a wizard .To his surprise Hagrid chuckled .Not a wizard eh ?Never made things happen when you was scared or angry ?Harry looked into the fire .Now he came to think about it .every odd thing that had ever made his aunt and uncle furious with him had happened when he Harry had been upset or angry .chased by Dudleys gang he had somehow found himself out of their reach .dreading going to school with that ridiculous haircut hed managed to make it grow back .and the very last time Dudley had hit him hadnt he got his revenge without even realizing he was doing it ?Hadnt he set a boa constrictor on him ?Harry looked back at Hagrid smiling and saw that Hagrid was positively beaming at him .See ?said Hagrid .Harry Potter not a wizard you wait youll be right famous at Hogwarts .But Uncle Vernon wasnt going to give in without a fight .Havent I told you hes not going ?he hissed .Hes going to Stonewall High and hell be grateful for it .Ive read those letters and he needs all sorts of rubbish spell books and wands and If he wants ter go a great Muggle like you wont stop him growled Hagrid .Stop Lily an James Potters son goin ter Hogwarts !Yer mad .His names been down ever since he was born .Hes off ter the finest school of witchcraft and wizardry in the world .Seven years there and he wont know himself .Hell be with youngsters of his own sort fer a change an hell be under the greatest headmaster Hogwarts ever had Albus Dumbled I AM NOT PAYING FOR SOME CRACKPOT OLD FOOL TO TEACH HIM MAGIC TRICKS !yelled Uncle Vernon .But he had finally gone too far .Hagrid seized his umbrella and whirled it over his head NEVER he thundered INSULT ALBUS DUMBLEDORE IN FRONT OF ME !He brought the umbrella swishing down through the air to point at Dudley there was a flash of violet light a sound like a firecracker a sharp squeal and the next second Dudley was dancing on the spot with his hands clasped over his fat bottom howling in pain .When he turned his back on them Harry saw a curly pigs tail poking through a hole in his trousers .Uncle Vernon roared .Pulling Aunt Petunia and Dudley into the other room he cast one last terrified look at Hagrid and slammed the door behind them .Hagrid looked down at his umbrella and stroked his beard .Shouldnta lost me temper he said ruefully but it didnt work anyway .Meant ter turn him into a pig but I suppose he was so much like a pig anyway there wasnt much left ter do .He cast a sideways look at Harry under his bushy eyebrows .Be grateful if yeh didnt mention that ter anyone at Hogwarts he said .Im er not supposed ter do magic strictly speakin .I was allowed ter do a bit ter follow yeh an get yer letters to yeh an stuff one o the reasons I was so keen ter take on the job Why arent you supposed to do magic ?asked Harry .Oh well I was at Hogwarts meself but I er got expelled ter tell yeh the truth .In me third year .They snapped me wand in half an everything .But Dumbledore let me stay on as gamekeeper .Great man Dumbledore .Why were you expelled ?Its gettin late and weve got lots ter do tomorrow said Hagrid loudly .Gotta get up ter town get all yer books an that .He took off his thick black coat and threw it to Harry .You can kip under that he said .Don mind if it wriggles a bit I think I still got a couple o dormice in one o the pockets .DIAGON ALLY Harry woke early the next morning .Although he could tell it was daylight he kept his eyes shut tight .It was a dream he told himself firmly .I dreamed a giant called Hagrid came to tell me I was going to a school for wizards .When I open my eyes Ill be at home in my cupboard .There was suddenly a loud tapping noise .And theres Aunt Petunia knocking on the door Harry thought his heart sinking .But he still didnt open his eyes .It had been such a good dream .Tap .Tap .Tap .All right Harry mumbled Im getting up .He sat up and Hagrid s heavy coat fell off him .The hut was full of sunlight the storm was over Hagrid himself was asleep on the collapsed sofa and there was an owl rapping its claw on the window a newspaper held in its beak .Harry scrambled to his feet so happy he felt as though a large balloon was swelling inside him .He went straight to the window and jerked it open .The owl swooped in and dropped the newspaper on top of Hagrid who didnt wake up .The owl then fluttered onto the floor and began to attack Hagrid s coat .Dont do that .Harry tried to wave the owl out of the way but it snapped its beak fiercely at him and carried on savaging the coat .Hagrid !said Harry loudly .Theres an owl Pay him Hagrid grunted into the sofa .What ?He wants payin fer deliverin the paper .Look in the pockets .Hagrid s coat seemed to be made of nothing but pockets bunches of keys slug pellets balls of string peppermint humbugs teabags .finally Harry pulled out a handful of strangelooking coins .Give him five Knuts said Hagrid sleepily .Knuts ?The little bronze ones .Harry counted out five little bronze coins and the owl held out his leg so Harry could put the money into a small leather pouch tied to it .Then he flew off through the open window .Hagrid yawned loudly sat up and stretched .Best be off Harry lots ter do today gotta get up ter London an buy all yer stuff fer school .Harry was turning over the wizard coins and looking at them .He had just thought of something that made him feel as though the happy balloon inside him had got a puncture .Urn Hagrid ?Mm ?said Hagrid who was pulling on his huge boots .I havent got any money and you heard Uncle Vernon last night .he wont pay for me to go and learn magic .Dont worry about that said Hagrid standing up and scratching his head .Dyeh think yer parents didnt leave yeh anything ?But if their house was destroyed They didn keep their gold in the house boy !Nah first stop fer us is Gringotts .Wizards bank .Have a sausage theyre not bad cold an I wouldn say no teh a bit o yer birthday cake neither .Wizards have banks ?Just the one .Gringotts .Run by goblins .Harry dropped the bit of sausage he was holding .Goblins ?Yeah so yehd be mad ter try an rob it Ill tell yeh that .Never mess with goblins Harry .Gringotts is the safest place in the world fer anything yeh want ter keep safe cept maybe Hogwarts .As a matter o fact I gotta visit Gringotts anyway Fer Dumbledore .Hogwarts business .Hagrid drew himself up proudly .He usually gets me ter do important stuff fer him .Fetchin you gettin things from Gringotts knows he can trust me see .Got everythin ?Come on then .Harry followed Hagrid out onto the rock .The sky was quite clear now and the sea gleamed in the sunlight .The boat Uncle Vernon had hired was still there with a lot of water in the bottom after the storm .How did you get here ?Harry asked looking around for another boat .Flew said Hagrid .Flew ?Yeah but well go back in this .Not spposed ter use magic now Ive got yeh .They settled down in the boat Harry still staring at Hagrid trying to imagine him flying .Seems a shame ter row though said Hagrid giving Harry another of his sideways looks .If I was ter er speed things up a bit would yeh mind not mentionin it at Hogwarts ?Of course not said Harry eager to see more magic .Hagrid pulled out the pink umbrella again tapped it twice on the side of the boat and they sped off toward land .Why would you be mad to try and rob Gringotts ?Harry asked .Spells enchantments said Hagrid unfolding his newspaper as he spoke .They say theres dragons guardin the highsecurity vaults .And then yeh gotta find yer way Gringotts is hundreds of miles under London see .Deep under the Underground .Yehd die of hunger tryin ter get out even if yeh did manage ter get yer hands on summat .Harry sat and thought about this while Hagrid read his newspaper the Daily Prophet Harry had learned from Uncle Vernon that people liked to be left alone while they did this but it was very difficult hed never had so many questions in his life .Ministry o Magic messin things up as usual Hagrid muttered turning the page .Theres a Ministry of Magic ?Harry asked before he could stop himself .Course said Hagrid .They wanted Dumbledore fer Minister o course but hed never leave Hogwarts so old Cornelius Fudge got the job .Bungler if ever there was one .So he pelts Dumbledore with owls every morning askin fer advice .But what does a Ministry of Magic do ?Well their main job is to keep it from the Muggles that theres still witches an wizards up an down the country .Why ?Why ?Blimey Harry everyone d be wantin magic solutions to their problems .Nah were best left alone .At this moment the boat bumped gently into the harbor wall .Hagrid folded up his newspaper and they clambered up the stone steps onto the street .Passersby stared a lot at Hagrid as they walked through the little town to the station .Harry couldnt blame them .Not only was Hagrid twice as tall as anyone else he kept pointing at perfectly ordinary things like parking meters and saying loudly See that Harry ?Things these Muggles dream up eh ?Hagrid said Harry panting a bit as he ran to keep up did you say there are dragons at Gringotts ?Well so they say said Hagrid .Crikey Id like a dragon .Youd like one ?Wanted one ever since I was a kid here we go .They had reached the station .There was a train to London in five minutes time .Hagrid who didnt understand Muggle money as he called it gave the bills to Harry so he could buy their tickets .People stared more than ever on the train .Hagrid took up two seats and sat knitting what looked like a canaryyellow circus tent .Still got yer letter Harry ?he asked as he counted stitches .Harry took the parchment envelope out of his pocket .Good said Hagrid .Theres a list there of everything yeh need .Harry unfolded a second piece of paper he hadnt noticed the night before and read HOGWARTS SCHOOL oWITCHCRAFT and WIZARDRY UNIFORM Firstyear students will require 1 .Three sets of plain work robes black 2 .One plain pointed hat black for day wear 3 .One pair of protective gloves dragon hide or similar 4 .One winter cloak black silver fastenings Please note that all pupils clothes should carry name tags COURSE BOOKS All students should have a copy of each of the following The Standard Book of Spells Grade 1 by Miranda Goshawk A History of Magic by Bathilda Bagshot Magical Theory by Adalbert Waffling A Beginners Guide to Transfiguration by Emeric Switch One Thousand Magical Herbs and Fungi by Phyllida Spore Magical Drafts and Potions by Arsenius Jigger Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them by Newt Scamander The Dark Forces A Guide to SelfProtection by Quentin Trimble OTHER EQUIPMENT 1 wand 1 cauldron pewter standard size 2 1 set glass or crystal phials 1 telescope 1 set brass scales Students may also bring an owl OR a cat OR a toad PARENTS ARE REMINDED THAT FIRST YEARS ARE NOT ALLOWED THEIR OWN BROOMSTICKS Can we buy all this in London ?Harry wondered aloud .If yeh know where to go said Hagrid .Harry had never been to London before .Although Hagrid seemed to know where he was going he was obviously not used to getting there in an ordinary way .He got stuck in the ticket barrier on the Underground and complained loudly that the seats were too small and the trains too slow .I dont know how the Muggles manage without magic he said as they climbed a brokendown escalator that led up to a bustling road lined with shops .Hagrid was so huge that he parted the crowd easily all Harry had to do was keep close behind him .They passed book shops and music stores hamburger restaurants and cinemas but nowhere that looked as if it could sell you a magic wand .This was just an ordinary street full of ordinary people .Could there really be piles of wizard gold buried miles beneath them ?Were there really shops that sold spell books and broomsticks ?Might this not all be some huge joke that the Dursleys had cooked up ?If Harry hadnt known that the Dursleys had no sense of humor he might have thought so yet somehow even though everything Hagrid had told him so far was unbelievable Harry couldnt help trusting him .This is it said Hagrid coming to a halt the Leaky Cauldron .Its a famous place .It was a tiny grubbylooking pub .If Hagrid hadnt pointed it out Harry wouldnt have noticed it was there .The people hurrying by didnt glance at it .Their eyes slid from the big book shop on one side to the record shop on the other as if they couldnt see the Leaky Cauldron at all .In fact Harry had the most peculiar feeling that only he and Hagrid could see it .Before he could mention this Hagrid had steered him inside .For a famous place it was very dark and shabby .A few old women were sitting in a corner drinking tiny glasses of sherry .One of them was smoking a long pipe .A little man in a top hat was talking to the old bartender who was quite bald and looked like a toothless walnut .The low buzz of chatter stopped when they walked in .Everyone seemed to know Hagrid they waved and smiled at him and the bartender reached for a glass saying The usual Hagrid ?Cant Tom Im on Hogwarts business said Hagrid clapping his great hand on Harrys shoulder and making Harrys knees buckle .Good Lord said the bartender peering at Harry is this can this be ?The Leaky Cauldron had suddenly gone completely still and silent .Bless my soul whispered the old bartender Harry Potter .what an honor .He hurried out from behind the bar rushed toward Harry and seized his hand tears in his eyes .Welcome back Mr Potter welcome back .Harry didnt know what to say .Everyone was looking at him .The old woman with the pipe was puffing on it without realizing it had gone out .Hagrid was beaming .Then there was a great scraping of chairs and the next moment Harry found himself shaking hands with everyone in the Leaky Cauldron .Doris Crockford Mr Potter cant believe Im meeting you at last .So proud Mr Potter Im just so proud .Always wanted to shake your hand Im all of a flutter .Delighted Mr Potter just cant tell you Diggles the name Dedalus Diggle .Ive seen you before !said Harry as Dedalus Diggles top hat fell off in his excitement .You bowed to me once in a shop .He remembers !cried Dedalus Diggle looking around at everyone .Did you hear that ?He remembers me !Harry shook hands again and again Doris Crockford kept coming back for more .A pale young man made his way forward very nervously .One of his eyes was twitching .Professor Quirrell !said Hagrid .Harry Professor Quirrell will be one of your teachers at Hogwarts .PPPotter stammered Professor Quirrell grasping Harrys hand ccant ttell you how ppleased I am to meet you .What sort of magic do you teach Professor Quirrell ?DDefense Against the DDDark Arts muttered Professor Quirrell as though hed rather not think about it .Nnot that you nneed it eh PPPotter ?He laughed nervously .Youll be ggetting all your equipment I suppose ?Ive ggot to ppick up a new b book on vampires mmyself .He looked terrified at the very thought .But the others wouldnt let Professor Quirrell keep Harry to himself .It took almost ten minutes to get away from them all .At last Hagrid managed to make himself heard over the babble .Must get on lots ter buy .Come on Harry .Doris Crockford shook Harrys hand one last time and Hagrid led them through the bar and out into a small walled courtyard where there was nothing but a trash can and a few weeds .Hagrid grinned at Harry .Told yeh didnt I ?Told yeh you was famous .Even Professor Quirrell was tremblin ter meet yeh mind you hes usually tremblin .Is he always that nervous ?Oh yeah .Poor bloke .Brilliant mind .He was fine while he was studyin outta books but then he took a year off ter get some firsthand experience .They say he met vampires in the Black Forest and there was a nasty bit o trouble with a hag never been the same since .Scared of the students scared of his own subject now wheres me umbrella ?Vampires ?Hags ?Harrys head was swimming .Hagrid meanwhile was counting bricks in the wall above the trash can .Three up .two across .he muttered .Right stand back Harry .He tapped the wall three times with the point of his umbrella .The brick he had touched quivered it wriggled in the middle a small hole appeared it grew wider and wider a second later they were facing an archway large enough even for Hagrid an archway onto a cobbled street that twisted and turned out of sight .Welcome said Hagrid to Diagon Alley .He grinned at Harrys amazement .They stepped through the archway .Harry looked quickly over his shoulder and saw the archway shrink instantly back into solid wall .The sun shone brightly on a stack of cauldrons outside the nearest shop .Cauldrons All Sizes Copper Brass Pewter Silver SelfStirring Collapsible said a sign hanging over them .Yeah youll be needin one said Hagrid but we gotta get yer money first .Harry wished he had about eight more eyes .He turned his head in every direction as they walked up the street trying to look at everything at once the shops the things outside them the people doing their shopping .A plump woman outside an Apothecary was shaking her head as they passed saying Dragon liver sixteen Sickles an ounce theyre mad .A low soft hooting came from a dark shop with a sign saying Eeylops Owl Emporium Tawny Screech Barn Brown and Snowy .Several boys of about Harrys age had their noses pressed against a window with broomsticks in it .Look Harry heard one of them say the new Nimbus Two Thousand fastest ever There were shops selling robes shops selling telescopes and strange silver instruments Harry had never seen before windows stacked with barrels of bat spleens and eels eyes tottering piles of spell books quills and rolls of parchment potion bottles globes of the moon .Gringotts said Hagrid .They had reached a snowy white building that towered over the other little shops .Standing beside its burnished bronze doors wearing a uniform of scarlet and gold was Yeah thats a goblin said Hagrid quietly as they walked up the white stone steps toward him .The goblin was about a head shorter than Harry .He had a swarthy clever face a pointed beard and Harry noticed very long fingers and feet .He bowed as they walked inside .Now they were facing a second pair of doors silver this time with words engraved upon them Enter stranger but take heed Of what awaits the sin of greed For those who take but do not earn Must pay most dearly in their turn .So if you seek beneath our floors A treasure that was never yours Thief you have been warned beware Of finding more than treasure there .Like I said yehd be mad ter try an rob it said Hagrid .A pair of goblins bowed them through the silver doors and they were in a vast marble hall .About a hundred more goblins were sitting on high stools behind a long counter scribbling in large ledgers weighing coins in brass scales examining precious stones through eyeglasses .There were too many doors to count leading off the hall and yet more goblins were showing people in and out of these .Hagrid and Harry made for the counter .Morning said Hagrid to a free goblin .Weve come ter take some money outta Mr Harry Potters safe .You have his key sir ?Got it here somewhere said Hagrid and he started emptying his pockets onto the counter scattering a handful of moldy dog biscuits over the goblins book of numbers .The goblin wrinkled his nose .Harry watched the goblin on their right weighing a pile of rubies as big as glowing coals .Got it said Hagrid at last holding up a tiny golden key .The goblin looked at it closely .That seems to be in order .An Ive also got a letter here from Professor Dumbledore said Hagrid importantly throwing out his chest .Its about the YouKnowWhat in vault seven hundred and thirteen .The goblin read the letter carefully .Very well he said handing it back to Hagrid I will have someone take you down to both vaults .Griphook !Griphook was yet another goblin .Once Hagrid had crammed all the dog biscuits back inside his pockets he and Harry followed Griphook toward one of the doors leading off the hall .Whats the YouKnowWhat in vault seven hundred and thirteen ?Harry asked .Cant tell yeh that said Hagrid mysteriously .Very secret .Hogwarts business .Dumbledores trusted me .Moren my jobs worth ter tell yeh that .Griphook held the door open for them .Harry who had expected more marble was surprised .They were in a narrow stone passageway lit with flaming torches .It sloped steeply downward and there were little railway tracks on the floor .Griphook whistled and a small cart came hurtling up the tracks toward them .They climbed in Hagrid with some difficulty and were off .At first they just hurtled through a maze of twisting passages .Harry tried to remember left right right left middle fork right left but it was impossible .The rattling cart seemed to know its own way because Griphook wasnt steering .Harrys eyes stung as the cold air rushed past them but he kept them wide open .Once he thought he saw a burst of fire at the end of a passage and twisted around to see if it was a dragon but too late they plunged even deeper passing an underground lake where huge stalactites and stalagmites grew from the ceiling and floor .I never know Harry called to Hagrid over the noise of the cart whats the difference between a stalagmite and a stalactite ?Stalagmites got an ‘m in it said Hagrid .An don ask me questions just now I think Im gonna be sick .He did look very green and when the cart stopped at last beside a small door in the passage wall Hagrid got out and had to lean against the wall to stop his knees from trembling .Griphook unlocked the door .A lot of green smoke came billowing out and as it cleared Harry gasped .Inside were mounds of gold coins .Columns of silver .Heaps of little bronze Knuts .All yours smiled Hagrid .All Harrys it was incredible .The Dursleys couldnt have known about this or theyd have had it from him faster than blinking .How often had they complained how much Harry cost them to keep ?And all the time there had been a small fortune belonging to him buried deep under London .Hagrid helped Harry pile some of it into a bag .The gold ones are Galleons he explained .Seventeen silver Sickles to a Galleon and twentynine Knuts to a Sickle its easy enough .Right that should be enough fer a couple o terms well keep the rest safe for yeh .He turned to Griphook .Vault seven hundred and thirteen now please and can we go more slowly ?One speed only said Griphook .They were going even deeper now and gathering speed .The air became colder and colder as they hurtled round tight corners .They went rattling over an underground ravine and Harry leaned over the side to try to see what was down at the dark bottom but Hagrid groaned and pulled him back by the scruff of his neck .Vault seven hundred and thirteen had no keyhole .Stand back said Griphook importantly .He stroked the door gently with one of his long fingers and it simply melted away .If anyone but a Gringotts goblin tried that theyd be sucked through the door and trapped in there said Griphook .How often do you check to see if anyones inside ?Harry asked .About once every ten years said Griphook with a rather nasty grin .Something really extraordinary had to be inside this top security vault Harry was sure and he leaned forward eagerly expecting to see fabulous jewels at the very least but at first he thought it was empty .Then he noticed a grubby little package wrapped up in brown paper lying on the floor .Hagrid picked it up and tucked it deep inside his coat .Harry longed to know what it was but knew better than to ask .Come on back in this infernal cart and dont talk to me on the way back its best if I keep me mouth shut said Hagrid .One wild cart ride later they stood blinking in the sunlight outside Gringotts .Harry didnt know where to run first now that he had a bag full of money .He didnt have to know how many Galleons there were to a pound to know that he was holding more money than hed had in his whole life more money than even Dudley had ever had .Might as well get yer uniform said Hagrid nodding toward Madam Malkins Robes for All Occasions .Listen Harry would yeh mind if I slipped off fer a pickmeup in the Leaky Cauldron ?I hate them Gringotts carts .He did still look a bit sick so Harry entered Madam Malkins shop alone feeling nervous .Madam Malkin was a squat smiling witch dressed all in mauve .Hogwarts dear ?she said when Harry started to speak .Got the lot here another young man being fitted up just now in fact .In the back of the shop a boy with a pale pointed face was standing on a footstool while a second witch pinned up his long black robes .Madam Malkin stood Harry on a stool next to him slipped a long robe over his head and began to pin it to the right length .Hello said the boy Hogwarts too ?Yes said Harry .My fathers next door buying my books and mothers up the street looking at wands said the boy .He had a bored drawling voice .Then Im going to drag them off to look at racing brooms .I dont see why first years cant have their own .I think Ill bully father into getting me one and Ill smuggle it in somehow .Harry was strongly reminded of Dudley .Have you got your own broom ?the boy went on .No said Harry .Play Quidditch at all ?No Harry said again wondering what on earth Quidditch could be .I do Father says its a crime if Im not picked to play for my House and I must say I agree .Know what House you 11 be in yet ?No said Harry feeling more stupid by the minute .Well no one really knows until they get there do they but I know Ill be in Slytherin all our family have been imagine being in Hufflepuff I think Id leave wouldnt you ?Mmm said Harry wishing he could say something a bit more interesting .I say look at that man !said the boy suddenly nodding toward the front window .Hagrid was standing there grinning at Harry and pointing at two large ice creams to show he couldnt come in .Thats Hagrid said Harry pleased to know something the boy didnt .He works at Hogwarts .Oh said the boy Ive heard of him .Hes a sort of servant isnt he ?Hes the gamekeeper said Harry .He was liking the boy less and less every second .Yes exactly .I heard hes a sort of savage lives in a hut on the school grounds and every now and then he gets drunk tries to do magic and ends up setting fire to his bed .I think hes brilliant said Harry coldly .Do you ?said the boy with a slight sneer .Why is he with you ?Where are your parents ?Theyre dead said Harry shortly .He didnt feel much like going into the matter with this boy .Oh sorry said the other not sounding sorry at all .But they were our kind werent they ?They were a witch and wizard if thats what you mean .I really dont think they should let the other sort in do you ?Theyre just not the same theyve never been brought up to know our ways .Some of them have never even heard of Hogwarts until they get the letter imagine .I think they should keep it in the old wizarding families .Whats your surname anyway ?But before Harry could answer Madam Malkin said Thats you done my dear and Harry not sorry for an excuse to stop talking to the boy hopped down from the footstool .Well Ill see you at Hogwarts I suppose said the drawling boy .Harry was rather quiet as he ate the ice cream Hagrid had bought him chocolate and raspberry with chopped nuts .Whats up ?said Hagrid .Nothing Harry lied .They stopped to buy parchment and quills .Harry cheered up a bit when he found a bottle of ink that changed color as you wrote .When they had left the shop he said Hagrid whats Quidditch ?Blimey Harry I keep forgettin how little yeh know not knowin about Quidditch !Dont make me feel worse said Harry .He told Hagrid about the pale boy in Madam Malkins .and he said people from Muggle families shouldnt even be allowed in Yer not from a Muggle family .If hed known who yeh were hes grown up knowin yer name if his parents are wizardin folk .You saw what everyone in the Leaky Cauldron was like when they saw yeh .Anyway what does he know about it some o the best I ever saw were the only ones with magic in em in a long line o Muggles look at yer mum !Look what she had fer a sister !So what is Quidditch ?Its our sport .Wizard sport .Its like like soccer in the Muggle world everyone follows Quidditch played up in the air on broomsticks and theres four balls sorta hard ter explain the rules .And what are Slytherin and Hufflepuff ?School Houses .Theres four .Everyone says Hufflepuff are a lot o duffers but I bet Im in Hufflepuff said Harry gloomily .Better Hufflepuff than Slytherin said Hagrid darkly .Theres not a single witch or wizard who went bad who wasnt in Slytherin .YouKnowWho was one .Vol sorry YouKnowWho was at Hogwarts ?Years an years ago said Hagrid .They bought Harrys school books in a shop called Flourish and Blotts where the shelves were stacked to the ceiling with books as large as paving stones bound in leather books the size of postage stamps in covers of silk books full of peculiar symbols and a few books with nothing in them at all .Even Dudley who never read anything would have been wild to get his hands on some of these .Hagrid almost had to drag Harry away from Curses and Countercurses Bewitch Your Friends and Befuddle Your Enemies with the Latest Revenges Hair Loss JellyLegs TongueTying and Much Much More by Professor Vindictus Viridian .I was trying to find out how to curse Dudley .Im not sayin thats not a good idea but yer not ter use magic in the Muggle world except in very special circumstances said Hagrid .An anyway yeh couldn work any of them curses yet yehll need a lot more study before yeh get ter that level .Hagrid wouldnt let Harry buy a solid gold cauldron either It says pewter on yer list but they got a nice set of scales for weighing potion ingredients and a collapsible brass telescope .Then they visited the Apothecary which was fascinating enough to make up for its horrible smell a mixture of bad eggs and rotted cabbages .Barrels of slimy stuff stood on the floor jars of herbs dried roots and bright powders lined the walls bundles of feathers strings of fangs and snarled claws hung from the ceiling .While Hagrid asked the man behind the counter for a supply of some basic potion ingredients for Harry Harry himself examined silver unicorn horns at twentyone Galleons each and minuscule glittery black beetle eyes five Knuts a scoop .Outside the Apothecary Hagrid checked Harrys list again .Just yer wand left oh yeah an I still havent got yeh a birthday present .Harry felt himself go red .You dont have to I know I dont have to .Tell yeh what Ill get yer animal .Not a toad toads went outta fashion years ago yehd be laughed at an I don like cats they make me sneeze .Ill get yer an owl .All the kids want owls theyre dead useful carry yer mail an everythin .Twenty minutes later they left Eeylops Owl Emporium which had been dark and full of rustling and flickering jewelbright eyes .Harry now carried a large cage that held a beautiful snowy owl fast asleep with her head under her wing .He couldnt stop stammering his thanks sounding just like Professor Quirrell .Don mention it said Hagrid gruffly .Don expect youve had a lotta presents from them Dursleys .Just Ollivanders left now only place fer wands Ollivanders and yeh gotta have the best wand .A magic wand .this was what Harry had been really looking forward to .The last shop was narrow and shabby .Peeling gold letters over the door read Ollivanders Makers of Fine Wands since 382b .c .A single wand lay on a faded purple cushion in the dusty window .A tinkling bell rang somewhere in the depths of the shop as they stepped inside .It was a tiny place empty except for a single spindly chair that Hagrid sat on to wait .Harry felt strangely as though he had entered a very strict library he swallowed a lot of new questions that had just occurred to him and looked instead at the thousands of narrow boxes piled neatly right up to the ceiling .For some reason the back of his neck prickled .The very dust and silence in here seemed to tingle with some secret magic .Good afternoon said a soft voice .Harry jumped .Hagrid must have jumped too because there was a loud crunching noise and he got quickly off the spindly chair .An old man was standing before them his wide pale eyes shining like moons through the gloom of the shop .Hello said Harry awkwardly .Ah yes said the man .Yes yes .I thought Id be seeing you soon .Harry Potter .It wasnt a question .You have your mothers eyes .It seems only yesterday she was in here herself buying her first wand .Ten and a quarter inches long swishy made of willow .Nice wand for charm work .Mr Ollivander moved closer to Harry .Harry wished he would blink .Those silvery eyes were a bit creepy .Your father on the other hand favored a mahogany wand .Eleven inches .Pliable .A little more power and excellent for transfiguration .Well I say your father favored it its really the wand that chooses the wizard of course .Mr Ollivander had come so close that he and Harry were almost nose to nose .Harry could see himself reflected in those misty eyes .And thats where .Mr Ollivander touched the lightning scar on Harrys forehead with a long white finger .Im sorry to say I sold the wand that did it he said softly .Thirteenandahalf inches .Yew .Powerful wand very powerful and in the wrong hands .well if Id known what that wand was going out into the world to do .He shook his head and then to Harrys relief spotted Hagrid .Rubeus !Rubeus Hagrid !How nice to see you again . .Oak sixteen inches rather bendy wasnt it ?It was sir yes said Hagrid .Good wand that one .But I suppose they snapped it in half when you got expelled ?said Mr Ollivander suddenly stern .Er yes they did yes said Hagrid shuffling his feet .Ive still got the pieces though he added brightly .But you dont use them ?said Mr Ollivander sharply .Oh no sir said Hagrid quickly .Harry noticed he gripped his pink umbrella very tightly as he spoke .Hmmm said Mr Ollivander giving Hagrid a piercing look .Well now Mr Potter .Let me see .He pulled a long tape measure with silver markings out of his pocket .Which is your wand arm ?Er well Im righthanded said Harry .Hold out your arm .Thats it .He measured Harry from shoulder to finger then wrist to elbow shoulder to floor knee to armpit and round his head .As he measured he said Every Ollivander wand has a core of a powerful magical substance Mr Potter .We use unicorn hairs phoenix tail feathers and the heartstrings of dragons .No two Ollivander wands are the same just as no two unicorns dragons or phoenixes are quite the same .And of course you will never get such good results with another wizards wand .Harry suddenly realized that the tape measure which was measuring between his nostrils was doing this on its own .Mr Ollivander was flitting around the shelves taking down boxes .That will do he said and the tape measure crumpled into a heap on the floor .Right then Mr Potter .Try this one .Beechwood and dragon heartstring .Nine inches .Nice and flexible .Just take it and give it a wave .Harry took the wand and feeling foolish waved it around a bit but Mr Ollivander snatched it out of his hand almost at once .Maple and phoenix feather .Seven inches .Quite whippy .Try Harry tried but he had hardly raised the wand when it too was snatched back by Mr Ollivander .No no here ebony and unicorn hair eight and a half inches springy .Go on go on try it out .Harry tried .And tried .He had no idea what Mr Ollivander was waiting for .The pile of tried wands was mounting higher and higher on the spindly chair but the more wands Mr Ollivander pulled from the shelves the happier he seemed to become .Tricky customer eh ?Not to worry well find the perfect match here somewhere I wonder now yes why not unusual combination holly and phoenix feather eleven inches nice and supple .Harry took the wand .He felt a sudden warmth in his fingers .He raised the wand above his head brought it swishing down through the dusty air and a stream of red and gold sparks shot from the end like a firework throwing dancing spots of light on to the walls .Hagrid whooped and clapped and Mr Ollivander cried Oh bravo !Yes indeed oh very good .Well well well .how curious .how very curious .He put Harrys wand back into its box and wrapped it in brown paper still muttering Curious .curious Sorry said Harry but whats curious ?Mr Ollivander fixed Harry with his pale stare .I remember every wand Ive ever sold Mr Potter .Every single wand .It so happens that the phoenix whose tail feather is in your wand gave another feather just one other .It is very curious indeed that you should be destined for this wand when its brother why its brother gave you that scar .Harry swallowed .Yes thirteenandahalf inches .Yew .Curious indeed how these things happen .The wand chooses the wizard remember .I think we must expect great things from you Mr Potter .After all HeWho MustNotBeNamed did great things terrible yes but great .Harry shivered .He wasnt sure he liked Mr Ollivander too much .He paid seven gold Galleons for his wand and Mr Ollivander bowed them from his shop .The late afternoon sun hung low in the sky as Harry and Hagrid made their way back down Diagon Alley back through the wall back through the Leaky Cauldron now empty .Harry didnt speak at all as they walked down the road he didnt even notice how much people were gawking at them on the Underground laden as they were with all their funny shaped packages with the snowy owl asleep in its cage on Harrys lap .Up another escalator out into Paddington station Harry only realized where they were when Hagrid tapped him on the shoulder .Got time fer a bite to eat before yer train leaves he said .He bought Harry a hamburger and they sat down on plastic seats to eat them .Harry kept looking around .Everything looked so strange somehow .You all right Harry ?Yer very quiet said Hagrid .Harry wasnt sure he could explain .Hed just had the best birthday of his life and yet he chewed his hamburger trying to find the words .Everyone thinks Im special he said at last .All those people in the Leaky Cauldron Professor Quirrell Mr Ollivander .but I dont know anything about magic at all .How can they expect great things ?Im famous and I cant even remember what Im famous for .I dont know what happened when Vol sorry I mean the night my parents died .Hagrid leaned across the table .Behind the wild beard and eyebrows he wore a very kind smile .Don you worry Harry .Youll learn fast enough .Everyone starts at the beginning at Hogwarts youll be just fine .Just be yerself .I know its hard .Yehve been singled out an thats always hard .But yehll have a great time at Hogwarts I did still do smatter of fact .Hagrid helped Harry on to the train that would take him back to the Dursleys then handed him an envelope .Yer ticket fer Hogwarts he said .First o September Kings Cross its all on yer ticket .Any problems with the Dursleys send me a letter with yer owl shell know where to find me .See yeh soon Harry .The train pulled out of the station .Harry wanted to watch Hagrid until he was out of sight he rose in his seat and pressed his nose against the window but he blinked and Hagrid had gone .THE JOURNEY FROM PLATFORM NINE AND THREEQUARTERS Harrys last month with the Dursleys wasnt fun .True Dudley was now so scared of Harry he wouldnt stay in the same room while Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon didnt shut Harry in his cupboard force him to do anything or shout at him in fact they didnt speak to him at all .Half terrified half furious they acted as though any chair with Harry in it were empty .Although this was an improvement in many ways it did become a bit depressing after a while .Harry kept to his room with his new owl for company .He had decided to call her Hedwig a name he had found in A History of Magic .His school books were very interesting .He lay on his bed reading late into the night Hedwig swooping in and out of the open window as she pleased .It was lucky that Aunt Petunia didnt come in to vacuum anymore because Hedwig kept bringing back dead mice .Every night before he went to sleep Harry ticked off another day on the piece of paper he had pinned to the wall counting down to September the first .On the last day of August he thought hed better speak to his aunt and uncle about getting to Kings Cross station the next day so he went down to the living room where they were watching a quiz show on television .He cleared his throat to let them know he was there and Dudley screamed and ran from the room .Er Uncle Vernon ?Uncle Vernon grunted to show he was listening .Er I need to be at Kings Cross tomorrow to to go to Hogwarts .Uncle Vernon grunted again .Would it be all right if you gave me a lift ?Grunt .Harry supposed that meant yes .Thank you .He was about to go back upstairs when Uncle Vernon actually spoke .Funny way to get to a wizards school the train .Magic carpets all got punctures have they ?Harry didnt say anything .Where is this school anyway ?I dont know said Harry realizing this for the first time .He pulled the ticket Hagrid had given him out of his pocket .I just take the train from platform nine and three quarters at eleven oclock he read .His aunt and uncle stared .Platform what ?Nine and threequarters .Dont talk rubbish said Uncle Vernon .There is no platform nine and threequarters .Its on my ticket .Barking said Uncle Vernon howling mad the lot of them .You 11 see .You just wait .All right well take you to Kings Cross .Were going up to London tomorrow anyway or I wouldnt bother .Why are you going to London ?Harry asked trying to keep things friendly .Taking Dudley to the hospital growled Uncle Vernon .Got to have that ruddy tail removed before he goes to Smeltings .Harry woke at five oclock the next morning and was too excited and nervous to go back to sleep .He got up and pulled on his jeans because he didnt want to walk into the station in his wizards robes hed change on the train .He checked his Hogwarts list yet again to make sure he had everything he needed saw that Hedwig was shut safely in her cage and then paced the room waiting for the Dursleys to get up .Two hours later Harrys huge heavy trunk had been loaded into the Dursleys car Aunt Petunia had talked Dudley into sitting next to Harry and they had set off .They reached Kings Cross at half past ten .Uncle Vernon dumped Harrys trunk onto a cart and wheeled it into the station for him .Harry thought this was strangely kind until Uncle Vernon stopped dead facing the platforms with a nasty grin on his face .Well there you are boy .Platform nine platform ten .Your platform should be somewhere in the middle but they dont seem to have built it yet do they ?He was quite right of course .There was a big plastic number nine over one platform and a big plastic number ten over the one next to it and in the middle nothing at all .Have a good term said Uncle Vernon with an even nastier smile .He left without another word .Harry turned and saw the Dursleys drive away .All three of them were laughing .Harrys mouth went rather dry .What on earth was he going to do ?He was starting to attract a lot of funny looks because of Hedwig .Hed have to ask someone .He stopped a passing guard but didnt dare mention platform nine and threequarters .The guard had never heard of Hogwarts and when Harry couldnt even tell him what part of the country it was in he started to get annoyed as though Harry was being stupid on purpose .Getting desperate Harry asked for the train that left at eleven oclock but the guard said there wasnt one .In the end the guard strode away muttering about time wasters .Harry was now trying hard not to panic .According to the large clock over the arrivals board he had ten minutes left to get on the train to Hogwarts and he had no idea how to do it he was stranded in the middle of a station with a trunk he could hardly lift a pocket full of wizard money and a large owl .Hagrid must have forgotten to tell him something you had to do like tapping the third brick on the left to get into Diagon Alley .He wondered if he should get out his wand and start tapping the ticket inspectors stand between platforms nine and ten .At that moment a group of people passed just behind him and he caught a few words of what they were saying .packed with Muggles of course Harry swung round .The speaker was a plump woman who was talking to four boys all with flaming red hair .Each of them was pushing a trunk like Harrys in front of him and they had an owl .Heart hammering Harry pushed his cart after them .They stopped and so did he just near enough to hear what they were saying .Now whats the platform number ?said the boys mother .Nine and threequarters !piped a small girl also red headed who was holding her hand Mom cant I go Youre not old enough Ginny now be quiet .All right Percy you go first .What looked like the oldest boy marched toward platforms nine and ten .Harry watched careful not to blink in case he missed it but just as the boy reached the dividing barrier between the two platforms a large crowd of tourists came swarming in front of him and by the time the last backpack had cleared away the boy had vanished .Fred you next the plump woman said .Im not Fred Im George said the boy .Honestly woman you call yourself our mother ?Cant you tell Im George ?Sorry George dear .Only joking I am Fred said the boy and off he went .His twin called after him to hurry up and he must have done so because a second later he had gone but how had he done it ?Now the third brother was walking briskly toward the barrier he was almost there and then quite suddenly he wasnt anywhere .There was nothing else for it .Excuse me Harry said to the plump woman .Hello dear she said .First time at Hogwarts ?Rons new too .She pointed at the last and youngest of her sons .He was tall thin and gangling with freckles big hands and feet and a long nose .Yes said Harry .The thing is the thing is I dont know how to How to get onto the platform ?she said kindly and Harry nodded .Not to worry she said .All you have to do is walk straight at the barrier between platforms nine and ten .Dont stop and dont be scared youll crash into it thats very important .Best do it at a bit of a run if youre nervous .Go on go now before Ron .Er okay said Harry .He pushed his trolley around and stared at the barrier .It looked very solid .He started to walk toward it .People jostled him on their way to platforms nine and ten .Harry walked more quickly .He was going to smash right into that barrier and then hed be in trouble leaning forward on his cart he broke into a heavy run the barrier was coming nearer and nearer he wouldnt be able to stop the cart was out of control he was a foot away he closed his eyes ready for the crash It didnt come .he kept on running .he opened his eyes .A scarlet steam engine was waiting next to a platform packed with people .A sign overhead said Hogwarts Express eleven oclock .Harry looked behind him and saw a wroughtiron archway where the barrier had been with the words Platform Nine and Three Quarters on it .He had done it .Smoke from the engine drifted over the heads of the chattering crowd while cats of every color wound here and there between their legs .Owls hooted to one another in a disgruntled sort of way over the babble and the scraping of heavy trunks .The first few carriages were already packed with students some hanging out of the window to talk to their families some fighting over seats .Harry pushed his cart off down the platform in search of an empty seat .He passed a roundfaced boy who was saying Gran Ive lost my toad again .Oh Neville he heard the old woman sigh .A boy with dreadlocks was surrounded by a small crowd .Give us a look Lee go on .The boy lifted the lid of a box in his arms and the people around him shrieked and yelled as something inside poked out a long hairy leg .Harry pressed on through the crowd until he found an empty compartment near the end of the train .He put Hedwig inside first and then started to shove and heave his trunk toward the train door .He tried to lift it up the steps but could hardly raise one end and twice he dropped it painfully on his foot .Want a hand ?It was one of the redhaired twins hed followed through the barrier .Yes please Harry panted .Oy Fred !Cmere and help !With the twins help Harrys trunk was at last tucked away in a corner of the compartment .Thanks said Harry pushing his sweaty hair out of his eyes .Whats that ?said one of the twins suddenly pointing at Harrys lightning scar .Blimey said the other twin .Are you ?He is said the first twin .Arent you ?he added to Harry .What ?said Harry .Harry Potter chorused the twins .Oh him said Harry .I mean yes I am .The two boys gawked at him and Harry felt himself turning red .Then to his relief a voice came floating in through the trains open door .Fred ?George ?Are you there ?Coming Mom .With a last look at Harry the twins hopped off the train .Harry sat down next to the window where half hidden he could watch the redhaired family on the platform and hear what they were saying .Their mother had just taken out her handkerchief .Ron youve got something on your nose .The youngest boy tried to jerk out of the way but she grabbed him and began rubbing the end of his nose .Mom geroff .He wriggled free .aah has ickle Ronnie got somefink on his nosie ?said one of the twins .Shut up said Ron .Wheres Percy ?said their mother .Hes coming now .The oldest boy came striding into sight .He had already changed into his billowing black Hogwarts robes and Harry noticed a shiny red and gold badge on his chest with the letter P on it .Cant stay long Mother he said .Im up front the prefects have got two compartments to themselves Oh are you a prefect Percy ?said one of the twins with an air of great surprise .You should have said something we had no idea .Hang on I think I remember him saying something about it said the other twin .Once Or twice A minute All summer Oh shut up said Percy the Prefect .How come Percy gets new robes anyway ?said one of the twins .Because hes a prefect said their mother fondly .All right dear well have a good term send me an owl when you get there .She kissed Percy on the cheek and he left .Then she turned to the twins .Now you two this year you behave yourselves .If I get one more owl telling me youve youve blown up a toilet or Blown up a toilet ?Weve never blown up a toilet .Great idea though thanks Mom .Its not funny .And look after Ron .Dont worry ickle Ronniekins is safe with us .Shut up said Ron again .He was almost as tall as the twins already and his nose was still pink where his mother had rubbed it .Hey Mom guess what ?Guess who we just met on the train ?Harry leaned back quickly so they couldnt see him looking .You know that blackhaired boy who was near us in the station ?Know who he is ?Who ?Harry Potted Harry heard the little girls voice .Oh Mom can I go on the train and see him Mom oh please .Youve already seen him Ginny and the poor boy isnt something you goggle at in a zoo .Is he really Fred ?How do you know ?Asked him .Saw his scar .Its really there like lightning .Poor dear no wonder he was alone I wondered .He was ever so polite when he asked how to get onto the platform .Never mind that do you think he remembers what YouKnowWho looks like ?Their mother suddenly became very stern .I forbid you to ask him Fred .No dont you dare .As though he needs reminding of that on his first day at school .All right keep your hair on .A whistle sounded .Hurry up !their mother said and the three boys clambered onto the train .They leaned out of the window for her to kiss them goodbye and their younger sister began to cry .Dont Ginny well send you loads of owls .Well send you a Hogwarts toilet seat .Georg e Only joking Mom .The train began to move .Harry saw the boys mother waving and their sister half laughing half crying running to keep up with the train until it gathered too much speed then she fell back and waved .Harry watched the girl and her mother disappear as the train rounded the corner .Houses flashed past the window .Harry felt a great leap of excitement .He didnt know what he was going to but it had to be better than what he was leaving behind .The door of the compartment slid open and the youngest redheaded boy came in .Anyone sitting there ?he asked pointing at the seat opposite Harry .Everywhere else is full .Harry shook his head and the boy sat down .He glanced at Harry and then looked quickly out of the window pretending he hadnt looked .Harry saw he still had a black mark on his nose .Hey Ron .The twins were back .Listen were going down the middle of the train Lee Jordans got a giant tarantula down there .Right mumbled Ron .Harry said the other twin did we introduce ourselves ?Fred and George Weasley .And this is Ron our brother .See you later then .Bye said Harry and Ron .The twins slid the compartment door shut behind them .Are you really Harry Potter ?Ron blurted out .Harry nodded .Oh well I thought it might be one of Fred and Georges jokes said Ron .And have you really got you know .He pointed at Harrys forehead .Harry pulled back his bangs to show the lightning scar .Ron stared .So thats where YouKnowWho ?Yes said Harry but I cant remember it .Nothing ?said Ron eagerly .Well I remember a lot of green light but nothing else .Wow said Ron .He sat and stared at Harry for a few moments then as though he had suddenly realized what he was doing he looked quickly out of the window again .Are all your family wizards ?asked Harry who found Ron just as interesting as Ron found him .Er yes I think so said Ron .I think Moms got a second cousin whos an accountant but we never talk about him .So you must know loads of magic already .The Weasleys were clearly one of those old wizarding families the pale boy in Diagon Alley had talked about .I heard you went to live with Muggles said Ron .What are they like ?Horrible well not all of them .My aunt and uncle and cousin are though .Wish Id had three wizard brothers .Five said Ron .For some reason he was looking gloomy .Im the sixth in our family to go to Hogwarts .You could say Ive got a lot to live up to .Bill and Charlie have already left Bill was head boy and Charlie was captain of Quidditch .Now Percys a prefect .Fred and George mess around a lot but they still get really good marks and everyone thinks theyre really funny .Everyone expects me to do as well as the others but if I do its no big deal because they did it first .You never get anything new either with five brothers .Ive got Bills old robes Charlies old wand and Percys old rat .Ron reached inside his jacket and pulled out a fat gray rat which was asleep .His names Scabbers and hes useless he hardly ever wakes up .Percy got an owl from my dad for being made a prefect but they couldnt aff I mean I got Scabbers instead .Rons ears went pink .He seemed to think hed said too much because he went back to staring out of the window .Harry didnt think there was anything wrong with not being able to afford an owl .After all hed never had any money in his life until a month ago and he told Ron so all about having to wear Dudleys old clothes and never getting proper birthday presents .This seemed to cheer Ron up . .and until Hagrid told me I didnt know anything about being a wizard or about my parents or Voldemort Ron gasped .What ?said Harry .You said YouKnowWhos name said Ron sounding both shocked and impressed .Id have thought you of all people Im not trying to be brave or anything saying the name said Harry I just never knew you shouldnt .See what I mean ?Ive got loads to learn .I bet he added voicing for the first time something that had been worrying him a lot lately I bet Im the worst in the class .You wont be .Theres loads of people who come from Muggle families and they learn quick enough .While they had been talking the train had carried them out of London .Now they were speeding past fields full of cows and sheep .They were quiet for a time watching the fields and lanes flick past .Around half past twelve there was a great clattering outside in the corridor and a smiling dimpled woman slid back their door and said Anything off the cart dears ?Harry who hadnt had any breakfast leapt to his feet but Rons ears went pink again and he muttered that hed brought sandwiches .Harry went out into the corridor .He had never had any money for candy with the Dursleys and now that he had pockets rattling with gold and silver he was ready to buy as many Mars Bars as he could carry but the woman didnt have Mars Bars .What she did have were Bertie Botts Every Flavor Beans Droobles Best Blowing Gum Chocolate Frogs Pumpkin Pasties Cauldron Cakes Licorice Wands and a number of other strange things Harry had never seen in his life .Not wanting to miss anything he got some of everything and paid the woman eleven silver Sickles and seven bronze Knuts .Ron stared as Harry brought it all back in to the compartment and tipped it onto an empty seat .Hungry are you ?Starving said Harry taking a large bite out of a pumpkin pasty .Ron had taken out a lumpy package and unwrapped it .There were four sandwiches inside .He pulled one of them apart and said She always forgets I dont like corned beef .Swap you for one of these said Harry holding up a pasty .Go on You dont want this its all dry said Ron .She hasnt got much time he added quickly you know with five of us .Go on have a pasty said Harry who had never had anything to share before or indeed anyone to share it with .It was a nice feeling sitting there with Ron eating their way through all Harrys pasties cakes and candies the sandwiches lay forgotten .What are these ?Harry asked Ron holding up a pack of Chocolate Frogs .Theyre not really frogs are they ?He was starting to feel that nothing would surprise him .No said Ron .But see what the card is .Im missing Agrippa .What ?Oh of course you wouldnt know Chocolate Frogs have cards inside them you know to collect famous witches and wizards .Ive got about five hundred but I havent got Agrippa or Ptolemy .Harry unwrapped his Chocolate Frog and picked up the card .It showed a mans face .He wore halfmoon glasses had a long crooked nose and flowing silver hair beard and mustache .Underneath the picture was the name Albus Dumbledore .So this is Dumbledore !said Harry .Dont tell me youd never heard of Dumbledore !said Ron .Can I have a frog ?I might get Agrippa thanks Harry turned over his card and read ALBUS DUMBLEDORE CURRENTLY HEADMASTER OF HOGWARTS Considered by many the greatest wizard of modern times Dumbledore is particularly famous for his defeat of the Dark wizard Grindelwald in 1945 for the discovery of the twelve uses of dragons blood and his work on alchemy with his partner Nicolas Flamel .Professor Dumbledore enjoys chamber music and ten pin bowling .Harry turned the card back over and saw to his astonishment that Dumbledore s face had disappeared .Hes gone !Well you cant expect him to hang around all day said Ron .Hell be back .No Ive got Morgana again and Ive got about six of her .do you want it ?You can start collecting .Rons eyes strayed to the pile of Chocolate Frogs waiting to be unwrapped .Help yourself said Harry .But in you know the Muggle world people just stay put in photos .Do they ?What they dont move at all ?Ron sounded amazed .Weird .Harry stared as Dumbledore sidled back into the picture on his card and gave him a small smile .Ron was more interested in eating the frogs than looking at the Famous Witches and Wizards cards but Harry couldnt keep his eyes off them .Soon he had not only Dumbledore and Morgana but Hengist of Woodcraft Alberic Grunnion Circe Paracelsus and Merlin .He finally tore his eyes away from the druidess Cliodna who was scratching her nose to open a bag of Bertie Botts Every Flavor Beans .You want to be careful with those Ron warned Harry .When they say every flavor they mean every flavor you know you get all the ordinary ones like chocolate and peppermint and marmalade but then you can get spinach and liver and tripe .George reckons he had a boogerflavored one once .Ron picked up a green bean looked at it carefully and bit into a corner .Bleaargh see ?Sprouts .They had a good time eating the Every Flavor Beans .Harry got toast coconut baked bean strawberry curry grass coffee sardine and was even brave enough to nibble the end off a funny gray one Ron wouldnt touch which turned out to be pepper .The countryside now flying past the window was becoming wilder .The neat fields had gone .Now there were woods twisting rivers and dark green hills .There was a knock on the door of their compartment and the roundfaced boy Harry had passed on platform nine and threequarters came in .He looked tearful .Sorry he said but have you seen a toad at all ?When they shook their heads he wailed Ive lost him !He keeps getting away from me !Hell turn up said Harry .Yes said the boy miserably .Well if you see him .He left .Dont know why hes so bothered said Ron .If Id brought a toad Id lose it as quick as I could .Mind you I brought Scabbers so I cant talk .The rat was still snoozing on Rons lap .He might have died and you wouldnt know the difference said Ron in disgust .I tried to turn him yellow yesterday to make him more interesting but the spell didnt work .Ill show you look .He rummaged around in his trunk and pulled out a very batteredlooking wand .It was chipped in places and something white was glinting at the end .Unicorn hairs nearly poking out .Anyway He had just raised his wand when the compartment door slid open again .The toadless boy was back but this time he had a girl with him .She was already wearing her new Hogwarts robes .Has anyone seen a toad ?Nevilles lost one she said .She had a bossy sort of voice lots of bushy brown hair and rather large front teeth .Weve already told him we havent seen it said Ron but the girl wasnt listening she was looking at the wand in his hand .Oh are you doing magic ?Lets see it then .She sat down .Ron looked taken aback .Er all right .He cleared his throat .Sunshine daisies butter mellow Turn this stupid fat rat yellow .He waved his wand but nothing happened .Scabbers stayed gray and fast asleep .Are you sure thats a real spell ?said the girl .Well its not very good is it ?Ive tried a few simple spells just for practice and its all worked for me .Nobody in my familys magic at all it was ever such a surprise when I got my letter but I was ever so pleased of course I mean its the very best school of witchcraft there is Ive heard Ive learned all our course books by heart of course I just hope it will be enough Im Hermione Granger by the way who are you ?She said all this very fast .Harry looked at Ron and was relieved to see by his stunned face that he hadnt learned all the course books by heart either .Im Ron Weasley Ron muttered .Harry Potter said Harry .Are you really ?said Hermione .I know all about you of course I got a few extra books for background reading and youre in Modern Magical History and The Rise and Fall of the Dark Arts and Great Wizarding Events of the Twentieth Century .Am I ?said Harry feeling dazed .Goodness didnt you know Id have found out everything I could if it was me said Hermione .Do either of you know what House youll be in ?Ive been asking around and I hope Im in Gryffindor it sounds by far the best I hear Dumbledore himself was in it but I suppose Ravenclaw wouldnt be too bad .Anyway wed better go and look for Nevilles toad .You two had better change you know I expect well be there soon .And she left taking the toadless boy with her .Whatever House Im in I hope shes not in it said Ron .He threw his wand back into his trunk .Stupid spell George gave it to me bet he knew it was a dud .What House are your brothers in ?asked Harry .Gryffindor said Ron .Gloom seemed to be settling on him again .Mom and Dad were in it too .I dont know what theyll say if Im not .I dont suppose Ravenclaw would be too bad but imagine if they put me in Slytherin .Thats the House Vol I mean YouKnowWho was in ?Yeah said Ron .He flopped back into his seat looking depressed .You know I think the ends of Scabbers whiskers are a bit lighter said Harry trying to take Rons mind off Houses .So what do your oldest brothers do now that theyve left anyway ?Harry was wondering what a wizard did once hed finished school .Charlies in Romania studying dragons and Bills in Africa doing something for Gringotts said Ron .Did you hear about Gringotts ?Its been all over the Daily Prophet but I dont suppose you get that with the Muggles someone tried to rob a high security vault .Harry stared .Really ?What happened to them ?Nothing thats why its such big news .They havent been caught .My dad says it mustve been a powerful Dark wizard to get round Gringotts but they dont think they took anything thats whats odd .Course everyone gets scared when something like this happens in case YouKnowWhos behind it .Harry turned this news over in his mind .He was starting to get a prickle of fear every time YouKnow Who was mentioned .He supposed this was all part of entering the magical world but it had been a lot more comfortable saying Voldemort without worrying .Whats your Quidditch team ?Ron asked .Er I dont know any Harry confessed .What !Ron looked dumbfounded .Oh you wait its the best game in the world And he was off explaining all about the four balls and the positions of the seven players describing famous games hed been to with his brothers and the broomstick hed like to get if he had the money .He was just taking Harry through the finer points of the game when the compartment door slid open yet again but it wasnt Neville the toadless boy or Hermione Granger this time .Three boys entered and Harry recognized the middle one at once It was the pale boy from Madam Malkins robe shop .He was looking at Harry with a lot more interest than hed shown back in Diagon Alley .Is it true ?he said .Theyre saying all down the train that Harry Potters in this compartment .So its you is it ?Yes said Harry .He was looking at the other boys .Both of them were thickset and looked extremely mean .Standing on either side of the pale boy they looked like bodyguards .Oh this is Crabbe and this is Goyle said the pale boy carelessly noticing where Harry was looking .And my names Malfoy Draco Malfoy .Ron gave a slight cough which might have been hiding a snigger .Draco Malfoy looked at him .Think my names funny do you ?No need to ask who you are .My father told me all the Weasleys have red hair freckles and more children than they can afford .He turned back to Harry .Youll soon find out some wizarding families are much better than others Potter .You dont want to go making friends with the wrong sort .I can help you there .He held out his hand to shake Harrys but Harry didnt take it .I think I can tell who the wrong sort are for myself thanks he said coolly .Draco Malfoy didnt go red but a pink tinge appeared in his pale cheeks .Id be careful if I were you Potter he said slowly .Unless youre a bit politer youll go the same way as your parents .They didnt know what was good for them either .You hang around with riffraff like the Weasleys and that Hagrid and itll rub off on you .Both Harry and Ron stood up .Say that again Ron said his face as red as his hair .Oh youre going to fight us are you ?Malfoy sneered .Unless you get out now said Harry more bravely than he felt because Crabbe and Goyle were a lot bigger than him or Ron .But we dont feel like leaving do we boys ?Weve eaten all our food and you still seem to have some .Goyle reached toward the Chocolate Frogs next to Ron Ron leapt forward but before hed so much as touched Goyle Goyle let out a horrible yell .Scabbers the rat was hanging off his finger sharp little teeth sunk deep into Goyle s knuckle Crabbe and Malfoy backed away as Goyle swung Scabbers round and round howling and when Scabbers finally flew off and hit the window all three of them disappeared at once .Perhaps they thought there were more rats lurking among the sweets or perhaps theyd heard footsteps because a second later Hermione Granger had come in .What has been going on ?she said looking at the sweets all over the floor and Ron picking up Scabbers by his tail .I think hes been knocked out Ron said to Harry .He looked closer at Scabbers .No I dont believe it hes gone back to sleep .And so he had .Youve met Malfoy before ?Harry explained about their meeting in Diagon Alley .Ive heard of his family said Ron darkly .They were some of the first to come back to our side after You KnowWho disappeared .Said theyd been bewitched .My dad doesnt believe it .He says Malfoys father didnt need an excuse to go over to the Dark Side .He turned to Hermione .Can we help you with something ?Youd better hurry up and put your robes on Ive just been up to the front to ask the conductor and he says were nearly there .You havent been fighting have you ?Youll be in trouble before we even get there !Scabbers has been fighting not us said Ron scowling at her .Would you mind leaving while we change ?All right I only came in here because people outside are behaving very childishly racing up and down the corridors said Hermione in a sniffy voice .And youve got dirt on your nose by the way did you know ?Ron glared at her as she left .Harry peered out of the window .It was getting dark .He could see mountains and forests under a deep purple sky .The train did seem to be slowing down .He and Ron took off their jackets and pulled on their long black robes .Rons were a bit short for him you could see his sneakers underneath them .A voice echoed through the train We will be reaching Hogwarts in five minutes time .Please leave your luggage on the train it will be taken to the school separately .Harrys stomach lurched with nerves and Ron he saw looked pale under his freckles .They crammed their pockets with the last of the sweets and joined the crowd thronging the corridor .The train slowed right down and finally stopped .People pushed their way toward the door and out on to a tiny dark platform .Harry shivered in the cold night air .Then a lamp came bobbing over the heads of the students and Harry heard a familiar voice Firs years !Firs years over here !All right there Harry ?Hagrids big hairy face beamed over the sea of heads .Cmon follow me any more firs years ?Mind yer step now !Firs years follow me !Slipping and stumbling they followed Hagrid down what seemed to be a steep narrow path .It was so dark on either side of them that Harry thought there must be thick trees there .Nobody spoke much .Neville the boy who kept losing his toad sniffed once or twice .Yehll get yer firs sight o Hogwarts in a sec Hagrid called over his shoulder jus round this bend here .There was a loud Oooooh !The narrow path had opened suddenly onto the edge of a great black lake .Perched atop a high mountain on the other side its windows sparkling in the starry sky was a vast castle with many turrets and towers .No moren four to a boat !Hagrid called pointing to a fleet of little boats sitting in the water by the shore .Harry and Ron were followed into their boat by Neville and Hermione .Everyone in ?shouted Hagrid who had a boat to himself .Right then FORWARD !And the fleet of little boats moved off all at once gliding across the lake which was as smooth as glass .Everyone was silent staring up at the great castle overhead .It towered over them as they sailed nearer and nearer to the cliff on which it stood .Heads down !yelled Hagrid as the first boats reached the cliff they all bent their heads and the little boats carried them through a curtain of ivy that hid a wide opening in the cliff face .They were carried along a dark tunnel which seemed to be taking them right underneath the castle until they reached a kind of underground harbor where they clambered out onto rocks and pebbles .Oy you there !Is this your toad ?said Hagrid who was checking the boats as people climbed out of them .Trevor !cried Neville blissfully holding out his hands .Then they clambered up a passageway in the rock after Hagrids lamp coming out at last onto smooth damp grass right in the shadow of the castle .They walked up a flight of stone steps and crowded around the huge oak front door .Everyone here ?You there still got yer toad ?Hagrid raised a gigantic fist and knocked three times on the castle door .7 THE SORTING HAT The door swung open at once .A tall blackhaired witch in emeraldgreen robes stood there .She had a very stern face and Harrys first thought was that this was not someone to cross .The firs years Professor McGonagall said Hagrid .Thank you Hagrid .I will take them from here .She pulled the door wide .The entrance hall was so big you could have fit the whole of the Dursleys house in it .The stone walls were lit with flaming torches like the ones at Gringotts the ceiling was too high to make out and a magnificent marble staircase facing them led to the upper floors .They followed Professor McGonagall across the flagged stone floor .Harry could hear the drone of hundreds of voices from a doorway to the right the rest of the school must already be here but Professor McGonagall showed the first years into a small empty chamber off the hall .They crowded in standing rather closer together than they would usually have done peering about nervously .Welcome to Hogwarts said Professor McGonagall .The startofterm banquet will begin shortly but before you take your seats in the Great Hall you will be sorted into your Houses .The Sorting is a very important ceremony because while you are here your House will be something like your family within Hogwarts .You will have classes with the rest of your House sleep in your House dormitory and spend free time in your House common room .The four Houses are called Gryffindor Hufflepuff Ravenclaw and Slytherin .Each House has its own noble history and each has produced outstanding witches and wizards .While you are at Hogwarts your triumphs will earn your House points while any rule breaking will lose House points .At the end of the year the House with the most points is awarded the House cup a great honor .I hope each of you will be a credit to whichever House becomes yours .The Sorting Ceremony will take place in a few minutes in front of the rest of the school .I suggest you all smarten yourselves up as much as you can while you are waiting .Her eyes lingered for a moment on Nevilles cloak which was fastened under his left ear and on Rons smudged nose .Harry nervously tried to flatten his hair .I shall return when we are ready for you said Professor McGonagall .Please wait quietly .She left the chamber .Harry swallowed .How exactly do they sort us into Houses ?he asked Ron .Some sort of test I think .Fred said it hurts a lot but I think he was joking .Harrys heart gave a horrible jolt .A test ?In front of the whole school ?But he didnt know any magic yet what on earth would he have to do ?He hadnt expected something like this the moment they arrived .He looked around anxiously and saw that everyone else looked terrified too .No one was talking much except Hermione Granger who was whispering very fast about all the spells shed learned and wondering which one shed need .Harry tried hard not to listen to her .Hed never been more nervous never not even when hed had to take a school report home to the Dursleys saying that hed somehow turned his teachers wig blue .He kept his eyes fixed on the door .Any second now Professor McGonagall would come back and lead him to his doom .Then something happened that made him jump about a foot in the air several people behind him screamed .What the ?He gasped .So did the people around him .About twenty ghosts had just streamed through the back wall .Pearlywhite and slightly transparent they glided across the room talking to one another and hardly glancing at the first years .They seemed to be arguing .What looked like a fat little monk was saying Forgive and forget I say we ought to give him a second chance My dear Friar havent we given Peeves all the chances he deserves ?He gives us all a bad name and you know hes not really even a ghost I say what are you all doing here ?A ghost wearing a ruff and tights had suddenly noticed the first years .Nobody answered .New students !said the Fat Friar smiling around at them .About to be Sorted I suppose ?A few people nodded mutely .Hope to see you in Hufflepuff !said the Friar .My old House you know .Move along now said a sharp voice .The Sorting Ceremonys about to start .Professor McGonagall had returned .One by one the ghosts floated away through the opposite wall .Now form a line Professor McGonagall told the first years and follow me .Feeling oddly as though his legs had turned to lead Harry got into line behind a boy with sandy hair with Ron behind him and they walked out of the chamber back across the hall and through a pair of double doors into the Great Hall .Harry had never even imagined such a strange and splendid place .It was lit by thousands and thousands of candles that were floating in midair over four long tables where the rest of the students were sitting .These tables were laid with glittering golden plates and goblets .At the top of the hall was another long table where the teachers were sitting .Professor McGonagall led the first years up here so that they came to a halt in a line facing the other students with the teachers behind them .The hundreds of faces staring at them looked like pale lanterns in the flickering candlelight .Dotted here and there among the students the ghosts shone misty silver .Mainly to avoid all the staring eyes Harry looked upward and saw a velvety black ceiling dotted with stars .He heard Hermione whisper Its bewitched to look like the sky outside .I read about it in Hogwarts A History .It was hard to believe there was a ceiling there at all and that the Great Hall didnt simply open on to the heavens .Harry quickly looked down again as Professor McGonagall silently placed a fourlegged stool in front of the first years .On top of the stool she put a pointed wizards hat .This hat was patched and frayed and extremely dirty .Aunt Petunia wouldnt have let it in the house .Maybe they had to try and get a rabbit out of it Harry thought wildly that seemed the sort of thing noticing that everyone in the hall was now staring at the hat he stared at it too .For a few seconds there was complete silence .Then the hat twitched .A rip near the brim opened wide like a mouth and the hat began to sing Oh you may not think Im pretty But dont judge on what you see Ill eat myself if you can find A smarter hat than me .You can keep your bowlers black Your top hats sleek and tall For Im the Hogwarts Sorting Hat And I can cap them all .Theres nothing hidden in your head The Sorting Hat cant see So try me on and I will tell you Where you ought to be .You might belong in Gryffindor Where dwell the brave at heart Their daring nerve and chivalry Set Gryffindors apart You might belong in Hufflepuff Where they are just and loyal Those patient Hufflepuffs are true And unafraid of toil Or yet in wise old Ravenclaw If youve a ready mind Where those of wit and learning Will always find their kind Or perhaps in Slytherin Youll make your real friends Those cunning folk use any means To achieve their ends .So put me on !Dont be afraid l And dont get in a flap Youre in safe hands though I have none For Im a Thinking Cap The whole hall burst into applause as the hat finished its song .It bowed to each of the four tables and then became quite still again .So weve just got to try on the hat !Ron whispered to Harry .Ill kill Fred he was going on about wrestling a troll .Harry smiled weakly .Yes trying on the hat was a lot better than having to do a spell but he did wish they could have tried it on without everyone watching .The hat seemed to be asking rather a lot Harry didnt feel brave or quickwitted or any of it at the moment .If only the hat had mentioned a House for people who felt a bit queasy that would have been the one for him .Professor McGonagall now stepped forward holding a long roll of parchment .When I call your name you will put on the hat and sit on the stool to be sorted she said .Abbott Hannah !A pinkfaced girl with blonde pigtails stumbled out of line put on the hat which fell right down over her eyes and sat down .A moments pause HUFFLEPUFF !shouted the hat .The table on the right cheered and clapped as Hannah went to sit down at the Hufflepuff table .Harry saw the ghost of the Fat Friar waving merrily at her .Bones Susan !HUFFLEPUFF !shouted the hat again and Susan scuttled off to sit next to Hannah .Boot Terry !RAVENCLAW !The table second from the left clapped this time several Ravenclaws stood up to shake hands with Terry as he joined them .Brocklehurst Mandy went to Ravenclaw too but Brown Lavender became the first new Gryffindor and the table on the far left exploded with cheers Harry could see Rons twin brothers catcalling .Bulstrode Millicent then became a Slytherin .Perhaps it was Harrys imagination after all hed heard about Slytherin but he thought they looked like an unpleasant lot .He was starting to feel definitely sick now .He remembered being picked for teams during gym at his old school .He had always been last to be chosen not because he was no good but because no one wanted Dudley to think they liked him .FinchFletchley Justin !HUFFLEPUFF !Sometimes Harry noticed the hat shouted out the House at once but at others it took a little while to decide .Finnigan Seamus the sandyhaired boy next to Harry in the line sat on the stool for almost a whole minute before the hat declared him a Gryffindor .Granger Hermione !Hermione almost ran to the stool and jammed the hat eagerly on her head .GRYFFINDOR !shouted the hat .Ron groaned .A horrible thought struck Harry as horrible thoughts always do when youre very nervous .What if he wasnt chosen at all ?What if he just sat there with the hat over his eyes for ages until Professor McGonagall jerked it off his head and said there had obviously been a mistake and hed better get back on the train ?When Neville Longbottom the boy who kept losing his toad was called he fell over on his way to the stool .The hat took a long time to decide with Neville .When it finally shouted GRYFFINDOR Neville ran off still wearing it and had to jog back amid gales of laughter to give it to MacDougal Morag .Malfoy swaggered forward when his name was called and got his wish at once the hat had barely touched his head when it screamed SLYTHERIN !Malfoy went to join his friends Crabbe and Goyle looking pleased with himself .There werent many people left now .Moon Nott .Parkinson .then a pair of twin girls Path and Path .then Perks Sally Anne .and then at last Potter Harry !As Harry stepped forward whispers suddenly broke out like little hissing fires all over the hall .Potter did she say ?The Harry Potter ?The last thing Harry saw before the hat dropped over his eyes was the hall full of people craning to get a good look at him .Next second he was looking at the black inside of the hat .He waited .Hmm said a small voice in his ear .Difficult .Very difficult .Plenty of courage I see .Not a bad mind either .Theres talent oh my goodness yes and a nice thirst to prove yourself now thats interesting .So where shall I put you ?Harry gripped the edges of the stool and thought Not Slytherin not Slytherin .Not Slytherin eh ?said the small voice .Are you sure ?You could be great you know its all here in your head and Slytherin will help you on the way to greatness no doubt about that no ?Well if youre sure better be GRYFFINDOR !Harry heard the hat shout the last word to the whole hall .He took off the hat and walked shakily toward the Gryffindor table .He was so relieved to have been chosen and not put in Slytherin he hardly noticed that he was getting the loudest cheer yet .Percy the Prefect got up and shook his hand vigorously while the Weasley twins yelled We got Potter !We got Potter !Harry sat down opposite the ghost in the ruff hed seen earlier .The ghost patted his arm giving Harry the sudden horrible feeling hed just plunged it into a bucket of icecold water .He could see the High Table properly now .At the end nearest him sat Hagrid who caught his eye and gave him the thumbs up .Harry grinned back .And there in the center of the High Table in a large gold chair sat Albus Dumbledore .Harry recognized him at once from the card hed gotten out of the Chocolate Frog on the train .Dumbledores silver hair was the only thing in the whole hall that shone as brightly as the ghosts .Harry spotted Professor Quirrell too the nervous young man from the Leaky Cauldron .He was looking very peculiar in a large purple turban .And now there were only four people left to be sorted .Thomas Dean a Black boy even taller than Ron joined Harry at the Gryffindor table .Turpin Lisa became a Ravenclaw and then it was Rons turn .He was pale green by now .Harry crossed his fingers under the table and a second later the hat had shouted GRYFFINDOR !Harry clapped loudly with the rest as Ron collapsed into the chair next to him .Well done Ron excellent said Percy Weasley pompously across Harry as Zabini Blaise was made a Slytherin .Professor McGonagall rolled up her scroll and took the Sorting Hat away .Harry looked down at his empty gold plate .He had only just realized how hungry he was .The pumpkin pasties seemed ages ago .Albus Dumbledore had gotten to his feet .He was beaming at the students his arms opened wide as if nothing could have pleased him more than to see them all there .Welcome !he said .Welcome to a new year at Hogwarts !Before we begin our banquet I would like to say a few words .And here they are Nitwit !Blubber !Oddment !Tweak !Thank you !He sat back down .Everybody clapped and cheered .Harry didnt know whether to laugh or not .Is he a bit mad ?he asked Percy uncertainly .Mad ?said Percy airily .Hes a genius !Best wizard in the world !But he is a bit mad yes .Potatoes Harry ?Harrys mouth fell open .The dishes in front of him were now piled with food .He had never seen so many things he liked to eat on one table roast beef roast chicken pork chops and lamb chops sausages bacon and steak boiled potatoes roast potatoes fries Yorkshire pudding peas carrots gravy ketchup and for some strange reason peppermint humbugs .The Dursleys had never exactly starved Harry but hed never been allowed to eat as much as he liked .Dudley had always taken anything that Harry really wanted even if it made him sick .Harry piled his plate with a bit of everything except the peppermints and began to eat .It was all delicious .That does look good said the ghost in the ruff sadly watching Harry cut up his steak .Cant you ?I havent eaten for nearly five hundred years said the ghost .I dont need to of course but one does miss it .I dont think Ive introduced myself ?Sir Nicholas de MimsyPorpington at your service .Resident ghost of Gryffindor Tower .I know who you are !said Ron suddenly .My brothers told me about you youre Nearly Headless Nick !I would prefer you to call me Sir Nicholas de Mimsy the ghost began stiffly but sandyhaired Seamus Finnigan interrupted .Nearly Headless ?How can you be nearly headless ?Sir Nicholas looked extremely miffed as if their little chat wasnt going at all the way he wanted .Like this he said irritably .He seized his left ear and pulled .His whole head swung off his neck and fell onto his shoulder as if it was on a hinge .Someone had obviously tried to behead him but not done it properly .Looking pleased at the stunned looks on their faces Nearly Headless Nick flipped his head back onto his neck coughed and said So new Gryffindors !I hope youre going to help us win the House Championship this year ?Gryffindors have never gone so long without winning .Slytherins have got the cup six years in a row !The Bloody Barons becoming almost unbearable hes the Slytherin ghost .Harry looked over at the Slytherin table and saw a horrible ghost sitting there with blank staring eyes a gaunt face and robes stained with silver blood .He was right next to Malfoy who Harry was pleased to see didnt look too pleased with the seating arrangements .How did he get covered in blood ?asked Seamus with great interest .Ive never asked said Nearly Headless Nick delicately .When everyone had eaten as much as they could the remains of the food faded from the plates leaving them sparkling clean as before .A moment later the desserts appeared .Blocks of ice cream in every flavor you could think of apple pies treacle tarts chocolate eclairs and jam doughnuts trifle strawberries Jell 0 rice pudding .As Harry helped himself to a treacle tart the talk turned to their families .Im halfandhalf said Seamus .Me dads a Muggle .Mom didnt tell him she was a witch til after they were married .Bit of a nasty shock for him .The others laughed .What about you Neville ?said Ron .Well my gran brought me up and shes a witch said Neville but the family thought I was all Muggle for ages .My Great Uncle Algie kept trying to catch me off my guard and force some magic out of me he pushed me off the end of Blackpool pier once I nearly drowned but nothing happened until I was eight .Great Uncle Algie came round for dinner and he was hanging me out of an upstairs window by the ankles when my Great Auntie Enid offered him a meringue and he accidentally let go .But I bounced all the way down the garden and into the road .They were all really pleased Gran was crying she was so happy .And you should have seen their faces when I got in here they thought I might not be magic enough to come you see .Great Uncle Algie was so pleased he bought me my toad .On Harrys other side Percy Weasley and Hermione were talking about lessons I do hope they start right away theres so much to learn Im particularly interested in Transfiguration you know turning something into something else of course its supposed to be very difficult Youll be starting small just matches into needles and that sort of thing .Harry who was starting to feel warm and sleepy looked up at the High Table again .Hagrid was drinking deeply from his goblet .Professor McGonagall was talking to Professor Dumbledore .Professor Quirrell in his absurd turban was talking to a teacher with greasy black hair a hooked nose and sallow skin .It happened very suddenly .The hooknosed teacher looked past Quirrells turban straight into Harrys eyes and a sharp hot pain shot across the scar on Harrys forehead .Ouch !Harry clapped a hand to his head .What is it ?asked Percy .Nnothing .The pain had gone as quickly as it had come .Harder to shake off was the feeling Harry had gotten from the teachers look a feeling that he didnt like Harry at all .Whos that teacher talking to Professor Quirrell ?he asked Percy .Oh you know Quirrell already do you ?No wonder hes looking so nervous thats Professor Snape .He teaches Potions but he doesnt want to everyone knows hes after Quirrells job .Knows an awful lot about the Dark Arts Snape .Harry watched Snape for a while but Snape didnt look at him again .At last the desserts too disappeared and Professor Dumbledore got to his feet again .The hall fell silent .Ahem just a few more words now that we are all fed and watered .I have a few startofterm notices to give you .First years should note that the forest on the grounds is forbidden to all pupils .And a few of our older students would do well to remember that as well .Dumbledore s twinkling eyes flashed in the direction of the Weasley twins .I have also been asked by Mr Filch the caretaker to remind you all that no magic should be used between classes in the corridors .Quidditch trials will be held in the second week of the term .Anyone interested in playing for their House teams should contact Madam Hooch .And finally I must tell you that this year the third floor corridor on the righthand side is out of bounds to everyone who does not wish to die a very painful death .Harry laughed but he was one of the few who did .Hes not serious ?he muttered to Percy .Must be said Percy frowning at Dumbledore .Its odd because he usually gives us a reason why were not allowed to go somewhere the forests full of dangerous beasts everyone knows that .I do think he might have told us prefects at least .And now before we go to bed let us sing the school song !cried Dumbledore .Harry noticed that the other teachers smiles had become rather fixed .Dumbledore gave his wand a little flick as if he was trying to get a fly off the end and a long golden ribbon flew out of it which rose high above the tables and twisted itself snakelike into words .Everyone pick their favorite tune said Dumbledore and off we go !And the school bellowed Hogwarts Hogwarts Hoggy Warty Hogwarts Teach us something please Whether we be old and bald Or young with scabby knees Our heads could do with filling With some interesting stuff For now theyre bare and full of air Dead flies and bits of fluff So teach us things worth knowing Bring back what weve forgot Just do your best well do the rest And learn until our brains all rot .Everybody finished the song at different times .At last only the Weasley twins were left singing along to a very slow funeral march .Dumbledore conducted their last few lines with his wand and when they had finished he was one of those who clapped loudest .Ah music he said wiping his eyes .A magic beyond all we do here !And now bedtime .Off you trot !The Gryffindor first years followed Percy through the chattering crowds out of the Great Hall and up the marble staircase .Harrys legs were like lead again but only because he was so tired and full of food .He was too sleepy even to be surprised that the people in the portraits along the corridors whispered and pointed as they passed or that twice Percy led them through doorways hidden behind sliding panels and hanging tapestries .They climbed more staircases yawning and dragging their feet and Harry was just wondering how much farther they had to go when they came to a sudden halt .A bundle of walking sticks was floating in midair ahead of them and as Percy took a step toward them they started throwing themselves at him .Peeves Percy whispered to the first years .A poltergeist .He raised his voice Peeves show yourself .A loud rude sound like the air being let out of a balloon answered .Do you want me to go to the Bloody Baron ?There was a pop and a little man with wicked dark eyes and a wide mouth appeared floating cross legged in the air clutching the walking sticks .Oooooooh !he said with an evil cackle .Ickle Firsties !What fun !He swooped suddenly at them .They all ducked .Go away Peeves or the Baronll hear about this I mean it !barked Percy .Peeves stuck out his tongue and vanished dropping the walking sticks on Nevilles head .They heard him zooming away rattling coats of armor as he passed .You want to watch out for Peeves said Percy as they set off again .The Bloody Barons the only one who can control him he wont even listen to us prefects .Here we are .At the very end of the corridor hung a portrait of a very fat woman in a pink silk dress .Password ?she said .Caput Draconis said Percy and the portrait swung forward to reveal a round hole in the wall .They all scrambled through it Neville needed a leg up and found themselves in the Gryffindor common room a cozy round room full of squashy armchairs .Percy directed the girls through one door to their dormitory and the boys through another .At the top of a spiral staircase they were obviously in one of the towers they found their beds at last five four posters hung with deep red velvet curtains .Their trunks had already been brought up .Too tired to talk much they pulled on their pajamas and fell into bed .Great food isnt it ?Ron muttered to Harry through the hangings .Get off Scabbers !Hes chewing my sheets .Harry was going to ask Ron if hed had any of the treacle tart but he fell asleep almost at once .Perhaps Harry had eaten a bit too much because he had a very strange dream .He was wearing Professor Quirrells turban which kept talking to him telling him he must transfer to Slytherin at once because it was his destiny .Harry told the turban he didnt want to be in Slytherin it got heavier and heavier he tried to pull it off but it tightened painfully and there was Malfoy laughing at him as he struggled with it then Malfoy turned into the hooknosed teacher Snape whose laugh became high and cold there was a burst of green light and Harry woke sweating and shaking .He rolled over and fell asleep again and when he woke next day he didnt remember the dream at all .THE POTIONS MASTER There look .Where ?Next to the tall kid with the red hair .Wearing the glasses ?Did you see his face ?Did you see his scar ?Whispers followed Harry from the moment he left his dormitory the next day .People lining up outside classrooms stood on tiptoe to get a look at him or doubled back to pass him in the corridors again staring .Harry wished they wouldnt because he was trying to concentrate on finding his way to classes .There were a hundred and fortytwo staircases at Hogwarts wide sweeping ones narrow rickety ones some that led somewhere different on a Friday some with a vanishing step halfway up that you had to remember to jump .Then there were doors that wouldnt open unless you asked politely or tickled them in exactly the right place and doors that werent really doors at all but solid walls just pretending .It was also very hard to remember where anything was because it all seemed to move around a lot .The people in the portraits kept going to visit each other and Harry was sure the coats of armor could walk .The ghosts didnt help either .It was always a nasty shock when one of them glided suddenly through a door you were trying to open .Nearly Headless Nick was always happy to point new Gryffindors in the right direction but Peeves the Poltergeist was worth two locked doors and a trick staircase if you met him when you were late for class .He would drop wastepaper baskets on your head pull rugs from under your feet pelt you with bits of chalk or sneak up behind you invisible grab your nose and screech GOT YOUR CONK !Even worse than Peeves if that was possible was the caretaker Argus Filch .Harry and Ron managed to get on the wrong side of him on their very first morning .Filch found them trying to force their way through a door that unluckily turned out to be the entrance to the outofbounds corridor on the third floor .He wouldnt believe they were lost was sure they were trying to break into it on purpose and was threatening to lock them in the dungeons when they were rescued by Professor Quirrell who was passing .Filch owned a cat called Mrs Norris a scrawny dust colored creature with bulging lamplike eyes just like Filchs .She patrolled the corridors alone .Break a rule in front of her put just one toe out of line and shed whisk off for Filch whod appear wheezing two seconds later .Filch knew the secret passageways of the school better than anyone except perhaps the Weasley twins and could pop up as suddenly as any of the ghosts .The students all hated him and it was the dearest ambition of many to give Mrs Norris a good kick .And then once you had managed to find them there were the classes themselves .There was a lot more to magic as Harry quickly found out than waving your wand and saying a few funny words .They had to study the night skies through their telescopes every Wednesday at midnight and learn the names of different stars and the movements of the planets .Three times a week they went out to the greenhouses behind the castle to study Herbology with a dumpy little witch called Professor Sprout where they learned how to take care of all the strange plants and fungi and found out what they were used for .Easily the most boring class was History of Magic which was the only one taught by a ghost .Professor Binns had been very old indeed when he had fallen asleep in front of the staff room fire and got up next morning to teach leaving his body behind him .Binns droned on and on while they scribbled down names and dates and got Emeric the Evil and Uric the Oddball mixed up .Professor Flitwick the Charms teacher was a tiny little wizard who had to stand on a pile of books to see over his desk .At the start of their first class he took the roll call and when he reached Harrys name he gave an excited squeak and toppled out of sight .Professor McGonagall was again different .Harry had been quite right to think she wasnt a teacher to cross .Strict and clever she gave them a talking to the moment they sat down in her first class .Transfiguration is some of the most complex and dangerous magic you will learn at Hogwarts she said .Anyone messing around in my class will leave and not come back .You have been warned .Then she changed her desk into a pig and back again .They were all very impressed and couldnt wait to get started but soon realized they werent going to be changing the furniture into animals for a long time .After taking a lot of complicated notes they were each given a match and started trying to turn it into a needle .By the end of the lesson only Hermione Granger had made any difference to her match Professor McGonagall showed the class how it had gone all silver and pointy and gave Hermione a rare smile .The class everyone had really been looking forward to was Defense Against the Dark Arts but Quirrells lessons turned out to be a bit of a joke .His classroom smelled strongly of garlic which everyone said was to ward off a vampire hed met in Romania and was afraid would be coming back to get him one of these days .His turban he told them had been given to him by an African prince as a thankyou for getting rid of a troublesome zombie but they werent sure they believed this story .For one thing when Seamus Finnigan asked eagerly to hear how Quirrell had fought off the zombie Quirrell went pink and started talking about the weather for another they had noticed that a funny smell hung around the turban and the Weasley twins insisted that it was stuffed full of garlic as well so that Quirrell was protected wherever he went .Harry was very relieved to find out that he wasnt miles behind everyone else .Lots of people had come from Muggle families and like him hadnt had any idea that they were witches and wizards .There was so much to learn that even people like Ron didnt have much of a head start .Friday was an important day for Harry and Ron .They finally managed to find their way down to the Great Hall for breakfast without getting lost once .What have we got today ?Harry asked Ron as he poured sugar on his porridge .Double Potions with the Slytherins said Ron .Snapes Head of Slytherin House .They say he always favors them well be able to see if its true .Wish McGonagall favored us said Harry .Professor McGonagall was head of Gryffindor House but it hadnt stopped her from giving them a huge pile of homework the day before .Just then the mail arrived .Harry had gotten used to this by now but it had given him a bit of a shock on the first morning when about a hundred owls had suddenly streamed into the Great Hall during breakfast circling the tables until they saw their owners and dropping letters and packages onto their laps .Hedwig hadnt brought Harry anything so far .She sometimes flew in to nibble his ear and have a bit of toast before going off to sleep in the owlery with the other school owls .This morning however she fluttered down between the marmalade and the sugar bowl and dropped a note onto Harrys plate .Harry tore it open at once .It said in a very untidy scrawl Dear Harry I know you get Friday afternoons off so would you like to come and have a cup of tea with me around three ?I want to hear all about your first week .Send us an answer back with Hedwig .Hagrid Harry borrowed Rons quill scribbled Yes please see you later on the back of the note and sent Hedwig off again .It was lucky that Harry had tea with Hagrid to look forward to because the Potions lesson turned out to be the worst thing that had happened to him so far .At the startofterm banquet Harry had gotten the idea that Professor Snape disliked him .By the end of the first Potions lesson he knew hed been wrong .Snape didnt dislike Harry he hated him .Potions lessons took place down in one of the dungeons .It was colder here than up in the main castle and would have been quite creepy enough without the pickled animals floating in glass jars all around the walls .Snape like Flitwick started the class by taking the roll call and like Flitwick he paused at Harrys name .Ah yes he said softly Harry Potter .Our new celebrity .Draco Malfoy and his friends Crabbe and Goyle sniggered behind their hands .Snape finished calling the names and looked up at the class .His eyes were black like Hagrid s but they had none of Hagrid s warmth .They were cold and empty and made you think of dark tunnels .You are here to learn the subtle science and exact art of potionmaking he began .He spoke in barely more than a whisper but they caught every word like Professor McGonagall Snape had the gift of keeping a class silent without effort .As there is little foolish wand waving here many of you will hardly believe this is magic .I dont expect you will really understand the beauty of the softly simmering cauldron with its shimmering fumes the delicate power of liquids that creep through human veins bewitching the mind ensnaring the senses .I can teach you how to bottle fame brew glory even stopper death if you arent as big a bunch of dunderheads as I usually have to teach .More silence followed this little speech .Harry and Ron exchanged looks with raised eyebrows .Hermione Granger was on the edge of her seat and looked desperate to start proving that she wasnt a dunderhead .Potter !said Snape suddenly .What would I get if I added powdered root of asphodel to an infusion of wormwood ?Powdered root of what to an infusion of what ?Harry glanced at Ron who looked as stumped as he was Hermione s hand had shot into the air .I dont know sir said Harry .Snape s lips curled into a sneer .Tut tut fame clearly isnt everything .He ignored Hermione s hand .Lets try again .Potter where would you look if I told you to find me a bezoar ?Hermione stretched her hand as high into the air as it would go without her leaving her seat but Harry didnt have the faintest idea what a bezoar was .He tried not to look at Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle who were shaking with laughter .I dont know sir .Thought you wouldnt open a book before coming eh Potter ?Harry forced himself to keep looking straight into those cold eyes .He had looked through his books at the Dursleys but did Snape expect him to remember everything in One Thousand Magical Herbs and Fungi ?Snape was still ignoring Hermiones quivering hand .What is the difference Potter between monkshood and wolfsbane ?At this Hermione stood up her hand stretching toward the dungeon ceiling .I dont know said Harry quietly .I think Hermione does though why dont you try her ?A few people laughed Harry caught Seamuss eye and Seamus winked .Snape however was not pleased .Sit down he snapped at Hermione .For your information Potter asphodel and wormwood make a sleeping potion so powerful it is known as the Draught of Living Death .A bezoar is a stone taken from the stomach of a goat and it will save you from most poisons .As for monkshood and wolfsbane they are the same plant which also goes by the name of aconite .Well ?Why arent you all copying that down ?There was a sudden rummaging for quills and parchment .Over the noise Snape said And a point will be taken from Gryffindor House for your cheek Potter .Things didnt improve for the Gryffindors as the Potions lesson continued .Snape put them all into pairs and set them to mixing up a simple potion to cure boils .He swept around in his long black cloak watching them weigh dried nettles and crush snake fangs criticizing almost everyone except Malfoy whom he seemed to like .He was just telling everyone to look at the perfect way Malfoy had stewed his horned slugs when clouds of acid green smoke and a loud hissing filled the dungeon .Neville had somehow managed to melt Seamuss cauldron into a twisted blob and their potion was seeping across the stone floor burning holes in peoples shoes .Within seconds the whole class was standing on their stools while Neville who had been drenched in the potion when the cauldron collapsed moaned in pain as angry red boils sprang up all over his arms and legs .Idiot boy !snarled Snape clearing the spilled potion away with one wave of his wand .I suppose you added the porcupine quills before taking the cauldron off the fire ?Neville whimpered as boils started to pop up all over his nose .Take him up to the hospital wing Snape spat at Seamus .Then he rounded on Harry and Ron who had been working next to Neville .You Potter why didnt you tell him not to add the quills ?Thought hed make you look good if he got it wrong did you ?Thats another point youve lost for Gryffindor .This was so unfair that Harry opened his mouth to argue but Ron kicked him behind their cauldron .Dont push it he muttered Ive heard Snape can turn very nasty .As they climbed the steps out of the dungeon an hour later Harrys mind was racing and his spirits were low .Hed lost two points for Gryffindor in his very first week why did Snape hate him so much ?Cheer up said Ron Snapes always taking points off Fred and George .Can I come and meet Hagrid with you ?At five to three they left the castle and made their way across the grounds .Hagrid lived in a small wooden house on the edge of the forbidden forest .A crossbow and a pair of galoshes were outside the front door .When Harry knocked they heard a frantic scrabbling from inside and several booming barks .Then Hagrid s voice rang out saying Back Fang back .Hagrid s big hairy face appeared in the crack as he pulled the door open .Hang on he said .Back Fang .He let them in struggling to keep a hold on the collar of an enormous black boarhound .There was only one room inside .Hams and pheasants were hanging from the ceiling a copper kettle was boiling on the open fire and in the corner stood a massive bed with a patchwork quilt over it .Make yerselves at home said Hagrid letting go of Fang who bounded straight at Ron and started licking his ears .Like Hagrid Fang was clearly not as fierce as he looked .This is Ron Harry told Hagrid who was pouring boiling water into a large teapot and putting rock cakes onto a plate .Another Weasley eh ?said Hagrid glancing at Rons freckles .I spent half me life chasin yer twin brothers away from the forest .The rock cakes were shapeless lumps with raisins that almost broke their teeth but Harry and Ron pretended to be enjoying them as they told Hagrid all about their first lessons .Fang rested his head on Harrys knee and drooled all over his robes .Harry and Ron were delighted to hear Hagrid call Filch that old git .An as fer that cat Mrs Norris Id like ter introduce her to Fang sometime .Dyeh know every time I go up ter the school she follows me everywhere ?Cant get rid of her Filch puts her up to it .Harry told Hagrid about Snapes lesson .Hagrid like Ron told Harry not to worry about it that Snape liked hardly any of the students .But he seemed to really hate me .Rubbish !said Hagrid .Why should he ?Yet Harry couldnt help thinking that Hagrid didnt quite meet his eyes when he said that .Hows yer brother Charlie ?Hagrid asked Ron .I liked him a lot great with animals .Harry wondered if Hagrid had changed the subject on purpose .While Ron told Hagrid all about Charlies work with dragons Harry picked up a piece of paper that was lying on the table under the tea cozy .It was a cutting from the Daily Prophet GRINGOTTS BREAKIN LATEST Investigations continue into the breakin at Gringotts on 3 1 July widely believed to be the work of Dark wizards or witches unknown .Gringotts goblins today insisted that nothing had been taken .The vault that was searched had in fact been emptied the same day .But were not telling you what was in there so keep your noses out if you know whats good for you said a Gringotts spokesgoblin this afternoon .Harry remembered Ron telling him on the train that someone had tried to rob Gringotts but Ron hadnt mentioned the date .Hagrid !said Harry that Gringotts breakin happened on my birthday !It mightve been happening while we were there !There was no doubt about it Hagrid definitely didnt meet Harrys eyes this time .He grunted and offered him another rock cake .Harry read the story again .The vault that was searched had in fact been emptied earlier that same day .Hagrid had emptied vault seven hundred and thirteen if you could call it emptying taking out that grubby little package .Had that been what the thieves were looking for ?As Harry and Ron walked back to the castle for dinner their pockets weighed down with rock cakes theyd been too polite to refuse Harry thought that none of the lessons hed had so far had given him as much to think about as tea with Hagrid .Had Hagrid collected that package just in time ?Where was it now ?And did Hagrid know something about Snape that he didnt want to tell Harry ?9 THE MIDNIGHT DUEL Harry had never believed he would meet a boy he hated more than Dudley but that was before he met Draco Malfoy .Still firstyear Gryffindors only had Potions with the Slytherins so they didnt have to put up with Malfoy much .Or at least they didnt until they spotted a notice pinned up in the Gryffindor common room that made them all groan .Flying lessons would be starting on Thursday and Gryffindor and Slytherin would be learning together .Typical said Harry darkly .Just what I always wanted .To make a fool of myself on a broomstick in front of Malfoy .He had been looking forward to learning to fly more than anything else .You dont know that youll make a fool of yourself said Ron reasonably .Anyway I know Malfoys always going on about how good he is at Quidditch but I bet thats all talk .Malfoy certainly did talk about flying a lot .He complained loudly about first years never getting on the House Quidditch teams and told long boastful stories that always seemed to end with him narrowly escaping Muggles in helicopters .He wasnt the only one though the way Seamus Finnigan told it hed spent most of his childhood zooming around the countryside on his broomstick .Even Ron would tell anyone whod listen about the time hed almost hit a hang glider on Charlies old broom .Everyone from wizarding families talked about Quidditch constantly .Ron had already had a big argument with Dean Thomas who shared their dormitory about soccer .Ron couldnt see what was exciting about a game with only one ball where no one was allowed to fly .Harry had caught Ron prodding Deans poster of West Ham soccer team trying to make the players move .Neville had never been on a broomstick in his life because his grandmother had never let him near one .Privately Harry felt shed had good reason because Neville managed to have an extraordinary number of accidents even with both feet on the ground .Hermione Granger was almost as nervous about flying as Neville was .This was something you couldnt learn by heart out of a book not that she hadnt tried .At breakfast on Thursday she bored them all stupid with flying tips shed gotten out of a library book called Quidditch Through the Ages .Neville was hanging on to her every word desperate for anything that might help him hang on to his broomstick later but everybody else was very pleased when Hermione s lecture was interrupted by the arrival of the mail .Harry hadnt had a single letter since Hagrids note something that Malfoy had been quick to notice of course .Malfoy s eagle owl was always bringing him packages of sweets from home which he opened gloatingly at the Slytherin table .A barn owl brought Neville a small package from his grandmother .He opened it excitedly and showed them a glass ball the size of a large marble which seemed to be full of white smoke .Its a Remembrall !he explained .Gran knows I forget things this tells you if theres something youve forgotten to do .Look you hold it tight like this and if it turns red oh .His face fell because the Remembrall had suddenly glowed scarlet .youve forgotten something .Neville was trying to remember what hed forgotten when Draco Malfoy who was passing the Gryffindor table snatched the Remembrall out of his hand .Harry and Ron jumped to their feet .They were half hoping for a reason to fight Malfoy but Professor McGonagall who could spot trouble quicker than any teacher in the school was there in a flash .Whats going on ?Malfoys got my Remembrall Professor .Scowling Malfoy quickly dropped the Remembrall back on the table .Just looking he said and he sloped away with Crabbe and Goyle behind him .At threethirty that afternoon Harry Ron and the other Gryffindors hurried down the front steps onto the grounds for their first flying lesson .It was a clear breezy day and the grass rippled under their feet as they marched down the sloping lawns toward a smooth flat lawn on the opposite side of the grounds to the forbidden forest whose trees were swaying darkly in the distance .The Slytherins were already there and so were twenty broomsticks lying in neat lines on the ground .Harry had heard Fred and George Weasley complain about the school brooms saying that some of them started to vibrate if you flew too high or always flew slightly to the left .Their teacher Madam Hooch arrived .She had short gray hair and yellow eyes like a hawk .Well what are you all waiting for ?she barked .Everyone stand by a broomstick .Come on hurry up .Harry glanced down at his broom .It was old and some of the twigs stuck out at odd angles .Stick out your right hand over your broom called Madam Hooch at the front and say ‘Up !UP !everyone shouted .Harrys broom jumped into his hand at once but it was one of the few that did .Hermione Grangers had simply rolled over on the ground and Nevilles hadnt moved at all .Perhaps brooms like horses could tell when you were afraid thought Harry there was a quaver in Nevilles voice that said only too clearly that he wanted to keep his feet on the ground .Madam Hooch then showed them how to mount their brooms without sliding off the end and walked up and down the rows correcting their grips .Harry and Ron were delighted when she told Malfoy hed been doing it wrong for years .Now when I blow my whistle you kick off from the ground hard said Madam Hooch .Keep your brooms steady rise a few feet and then come straight back down by leaning forward slightly .On my whistle three two But Neville nervous and jumpy and frightened of being left on the ground pushed off hard before the whistle had touched Madam Hoochs lips .Come back boy !she shouted but Neville was rising straight up like a cork shot out of a bottle twelve feet twenty feet .Harry saw his scared white face look down at the ground falling away saw him gasp slip sideways off the broom and WHAM a thud and a nasty crack and Neville lay facedown on the grass in a heap .His broomstick was still rising higher and higher and started to drift lazily toward the forbidden forest and out of sight .Madam Hooch was bending over Neville her face as white as his .Broken wrist Harry heard her mutter .Come on boy its all right up you get .She turned to the rest of the class .None of you is to move while I take this boy to the hospital wing !You leave those brooms where they are or youll be out of Hogwarts before you can say ‘Quidditch .Come on dear .Neville his face tearstreaked clutching his wrist hobbled off with Madam Hooch who had her arm around him .No sooner were they out of earshot than Malfoy burst into laughter .Did you see his face the great lump ?The other Slytherins joined in .Shut up Malfoy snapped Parvati Patil .Ooh sticking up for Longbottom ?said Pansy Parkinson a hardfaced Slytherin girl .Never thought youd like fat little crybabies Parvati .Look !said Malfoy darting forward and snatching something out of the grass .Its that stupid thing Longbottoms gran sent him .The Remembrall glittered in the sun as he held it up .Give that here Malfoy said Harry quietly .Everyone stopped talking to watch .Malfoy smiled nastily .I think Ill leave it somewhere for Longbottom to find how about up a tree ?Give it here !Harry yelled but Malfoy had leapt onto his broomstick and taken off .He hadnt been lying he could fly well .Hovering level with the topmost branches of an oak he called Come and get it Potter !Harry grabbed his broom .iVo !shouted Hermione Granger .Madam Hooch told us not to move youll get us all into trouble .Harry ignored her .Blood was pounding in his ears .He mounted the broom and kicked hard against the ground and up up he soared air rushed through his hair and his robes whipped out behind him and in a rush of fierce joy he realized hed found something he could do without being taught this was easy this was wonderful .He pulled his broomstick up a little to take it even higher and heard screams and gasps of girls back on the ground and an admiring whoop from Ron .He turned his broomstick sharply to face Malfoy in midair .Malfoy looked stunned .Give it here Harry called or Ill knock you off that broom !Oh yeah ?said Malfoy trying to sneer but looking worried .Harry knew somehow what to do .He leaned forward and grasped the broom tightly in both hands and it shot toward Malfoy like a javelin .Malfoy only just got out of the way in time Harry made a sharp about face and held the broom steady .A few people below were clapping .No Crabbe and Goyle up here to save your neck Malfoy Harry called .The same thought seemed to have struck Malfoy .Catch it if you can then !he shouted and he threw the glass ball high into the air and streaked back toward the ground .Harry saw as though in slow motion the ball rise up in the air and then start to fall .He leaned forward and pointed his broom handle down next second he was gathering speed in a steep dive racing the ball wind whistled in his ears mingled with the screams of people watching he stretched out his hand a foot from the ground he caught it just in time to pull his broom straight and he toppled gently onto the grass with the Remembrall clutched safely in his fist .HARRY POTTER !His heart sank faster than hed just dived .Professor McGonagall was running toward them .He got to his feet trembling .Never in all my time at Hogwarts Professor McGonagall was almost speechless with shock and her glasses flashed furiously how dare you might have broken your neck It wasnt his fault Professor Be quiet Miss Patil But Malfoy Thats enough Mr Weasley .Potter follow me now .Harry caught sight of Malfoy Crabbe and Goyles triumphant faces as he left walking numbly in Professor McGonagalls wake as she strode toward the castle .He was going to be expelled he just knew it .He wanted to say something to defend himself but there seemed to be something wrong with his voice .Professor McGonagall was sweeping along without even looking at him he had to jog to keep up .Now hed done it .He hadnt even lasted two weeks .Hed be packing his bags in ten minutes .What would the Dursleys say when he turned up on the doorstep ?Up the front steps up the marble staircase inside and still Professor McGonagall didnt say a word to him .She wrenched open doors and marched along corridors with Harry trotting miserably behind her .Maybe she was taking him to Dumbledore .He thought of Hagrid expelled but allowed to stay on as gamekeeper .Perhaps he could be Hagrids assistant .His stomach twisted as he imagined it watching Ron and the others becoming wizards while he stumped around the grounds carrying Hagrids bag .Professor McGonagall stopped outside a classroom .She opened the door and poked her head inside .Excuse me Professor Flitwick could I borrow Wood for a moment ?Wood ?thought Harry bewildered was Wood a cane she was going to use on him ?But Wood turned out to be a person a burly fifthyear boy who came out of Flitwicks class looking confused .Follow me you two said Professor McGonagall and they marched on up the corridor Wood looking curiously at Harry .In here .Professor McGonagall pointed them into a classroom that was empty except for Peeves who was busy writing rude words on the blackboard .Out Peeves !she barked .Peeves threw the chalk into a bin which clanged loudly and he swooped out cursing .Professor McGonagall slammed the door behind him and turned to face the two boys .Potter this is Oliver Wood .Wood Ive found you a Seeker .Woods expression changed from puzzlement to delight .Are you serious Professor ?Absolutely said Professor McGonagall crisply .The boys a natural .Ive never seen anything like it .Was that your first time on a broomstick Potter ?Harry nodded silently .He didnt have a clue what was going on but he didnt seem to be being expelled and some of the feeling started coming back to his legs .He caught that thing in his hand after a fiftyfoot dive Professor McGonagall told Wood .Didnt even scratch himself .Charlie Weasley couldnt have done it .Wood was now looking as though all his dreams had come true at once .Ever seen a game of Quidditch Potter ?he asked excitedly .Woods captain of the Gryffindor team Professor McGonagall explained .Hes just the build for a Seeker too said Wood now walking around Harry and staring at him .Light speedy well have to get him a decent broom Professor a Nimbus Two Thousand or a Cleansweep Seven Id say .I shall speak to Professor Dumbledore and see if we cant bend the firstyear rule .Heaven knows we need a better team than last year .Flattened in that last match by Slytherin I couldnt look Severus Snape in the face for weeks .Professor McGonagall peered sternly over her glasses at Harry .I want to hear youre training hard Potter or I may change my mind about punishing you .Then she suddenly smiled .Your father would have been proud she said .He was an excellent Quidditch player himself .Youre joking .It was dinnertime .Harry had just finished telling Ron what had happened when hed left the grounds with Professor McGonagall .Ron had a piece of steak and kidney pie halfway to his mouth but hed forgotten all about it .Seeker ?he said .But first years never you must be the youngest House player in about a century said Harry shoveling pie into his mouth .He felt particularly hungry after the excitement of the afternoon .Wood told me .Ron was so amazed so impressed he just sat and gaped at Harry .I start training next week said Harry .Only dont tell anyone Wood wants to keep it a secret .Fred and George Weasley now came into the hall spotted Harry and hurried over .Well done said George in a low voice .Wood told us .Were on the team too Beaters .I tell you were going to win that Quidditch Cup for sure this year said Fred .We havent won since Charlie left but this years team is going to be brilliant .You must be good Harry Wood was almost skipping when he told us .Anyway weve got to go Lee Jordan reckons hes found a new secret passageway out of the school .Bet its that one behind the statue of Gregory the Smarmy that we found in our first week .See you .Fred and George had hardly disappeared when someone far less welcome turned up Malfoy flanked by Crabbe and Goyle .Having a last meal Potter ?When are you getting the train back to the Muggles ?Youre a lot braver now that youre back on the ground and youve got your little friends with you said Harry coolly .There was of course nothing at all little about Crabbe and Goyle but as the High Table was full of teachers neither of them could do more than crack their knuckles and scowl .Id take you on anytime on my own said Malfoy .Tonight if you want .Wizards duel .Wands only no contact .Whats the matter ?Never heard of a wizards duel before I suppose ?Of course he has said Ron wheeling around .Im his second whos yours ?Malfoy looked at Crabbe and Goyle sizing them up .Crabbe he said .Midnight all right ?Well meet you in the trophy room thats always unlocked .When Malfoy had gone Ron and Harry looked at each other .What is a wizards duel ?said Harry .And what do you mean youre my second ?Well a seconds there to take over if you die said Ron casually getting started at last on his cold pie .Catching the look on Harrys face he added quickly But people only die in proper duels you know with real wizards .The most you and Malfoyll be able to do is send sparks at each other .Neither of you knows enough magic to do any real damage .I bet he expected you to refuse anyway .And what if I wave my wand and nothing happens ?Throw it away and punch him on the nose Ron suggested .Excuse me .They both looked up .It was Hermione Granger .Cant a person eat in peace in this place ?said Ron .Hermione ignored him and spoke to Harry .I couldnt help overhearing what you and Malfoy were saying Bet you could Ron muttered .and you mustnt go wandering around the school at night think of the points youll lose Gryffindor if youre caught and youre bound to be .Its really very selfish of you .And its really none of your business said Harry .Goodbye said Ron .All the same it wasnt what youd call the perfect end to the day Harry thought as he lay awake much later listening to Dean and Seamus falling asleep Neville wasnt back from the hospital wing .Ron had spent all evening giving him advice such as If he tries to curse you youd better dodge it because I cant remember how to block them .There was a very good chance they were going to get caught by Filch or Mrs Norris and Harry felt he was pushing his luck breaking another school rule today .On the other hand Malfoys sneering face kept looming up out of the darkness this was his big chance to beat Malfoy facetoface .He couldnt miss it .Halfpast eleven Ron muttered at last wed better go .They pulled on their bathrobes picked up their wands and crept across the tower room down the spiral staircase and into the Gryffindor common room .A few embers were still glowing in the fireplace turning all the armchairs into hunched black shadows .They had almost reached the portrait hole when a voice spoke from the chair nearest them I cant believe youre going to do this Harry .A lamp flickered on .It was Hermione Granger wearing a pink bathrobe and a frown .You !said Ron furiously .Go back to bed !I almost told your brother Hermione snapped Percy hes a prefect hed put a stop to this .Harry couldnt believe anyone could be so interfering .Come on he said to Ron .He pushed open the portrait of the Fat Lady and climbed through the hole .Hermione wasnt going to give up that easily .She followed Ron through the portrait hole hissing at them like an angry goose .Dont you care about Gryffindor do you only care about yourselves dont want Slytherin to win the House Cup and youll lose all the points I got from Professor McGonagall for knowing about Switching Spells .Go away .All right but I warned you you just remember what I said when youre on the train home tomorrow youre so But what they were they didnt find out .Hermione had turned to the portrait of the Fat Lady to get back inside and found herself facing an empty painting .The Fat Lady had gone on a nighttime visit and Hermione was locked out of Gryffindor Tower .Now what am I going to do ?she asked shrilly .Thats your problem said Ron .Weve got to go were going to be late .They hadnt even reached the end of the corridor when Hermione caught up with them .Im coming with you she said .You are not .Dyou think Im going to stand out here and wait for Filch to catch me ?If he finds all three of us Ill tell him the truth that I was trying to stop you and you can back me up .Youve got some nerve said Ron loudly .Shut up both of you !said Harry sharply .I heard something .It was a sort of snuffling .Mrs Norris ?breathed Ron squinting through the dark .It wasnt Mrs Norris .It was Neville .He was curled up on the floor fast asleep but jerked suddenly awake as they crept nearer .Thank goodness you found me !Ive been out here for hours I couldnt remember the new password to get in to bed .Keep your voice down Neville .The passwords ‘Pig snout but it wont help you now the Fat Ladys gone off somewhere .Hows your arm ?said Harry .Fine said Neville showing them .Madam Pomfrey mended it in about a minute .Good well look Neville weve got to be somewhere well see you later Dont leave me !said Neville scrambling to his feet I dont want to stay here alone the Bloody Barons been past twice already .Ron looked at his watch and then glared furiously at Hermione and Neville .If either of you get us caught Ill never rest until Ive learned that Curse of the Bogies Quirrell told us about and used it on you .Hermione opened her mouth perhaps to tell Ron exactly how to use the Curse of the Bogies but Harry hissed at her to be quiet and beckoned them all forward .They flitted along corridors striped with bars of moonlight from the high windows .At every turn Harry expected to run into Filch or Mrs Norris but they were lucky .They sped up a staircase to the third floor and tiptoed toward the trophy room .Malfoy and Crabbe werent there yet .The crystal trophy cases glimmered where the moonlight caught them .Cups shields plates and statues winked silver and gold in the darkness .They edged along the walls keeping their eyes on the doors at either end of the room .Harry took out his wand in case Malfoy leapt in and started at once .The minutes crept by .Hes late maybe hes chickened out Ron whispered .Then a noise in the next room made them jump .Harry had only just raised his wand when they heard someone speak and it wasnt Malfoy .Sniff around my sweet they might be lurking in a corner .It was Filch speaking to Mrs Norris .Horrorstruck Harry waved madly at the other three to follow him as quickly as possible they scurried silently toward the door away from Filchs voice .Nevilles robes had barely whipped round the corner when they heard Filch enter the trophy room .Theyre in here somewhere they heard him mutter probably hiding .This way !Harry mouthed to the others and petrified they began to creep down a long gallery full of suits of armor .They could hear Filch getting nearer .Neville suddenly let out a frightened squeak and broke into a run he tripped grabbed Ron around the waist and the pair of them toppled right into a suit of armor .The clanging and crashing were enough to wake the whole castle .RUN !Harry yelled and the four of them sprinted down the gallery not looking back to see whether Filch was following they swung around the doorpost and galloped down one corridor then another Harry in the lead without any idea where they were or where they were going they ripped through a tapestry and found themselves in a hidden passageway hurtled along it and came out near their Charms classroom which they knew was miles from the trophy room .I think weve lost him Harry panted leaning against the cold wall and wiping his forehead .Neville was bent double wheezing and spluttering .I told you Hermione gasped clutching at the stitch in her chest I told you .Weve got to get back to Gryffindor Tower said Ron quickly as possible .Malfoy tricked you Hermione said to Harry .You realize that dont you ?He was never going to meet you Filch knew someone was going to be in the trophy room Malfoy must have tipped him off .Harry thought she was probably right but he wasnt going to tell her that .Lets go .It wasnt going to be that simple .They hadnt gone more than a dozen paces when a doorknob rattled and something came shooting out of a classroom in front of them .It was Peeves .He caught sight of them and gave a squeal of delight .Shut up Peeves please youll get us thrown out .Peeves cackled .Wandering around at midnight Ickle Firsties ?Tut tut tut .Naughty naughty youll get caughty .Not if you dont give us away Peeves please .Should tell Filch I should said Peeves in a sanity voice but his eyes glittered wickedly .Its for your own good you know .Get out of the way snapped Ron taking a swipe at Peeves this was a big mistake .STUDENTS OUT OF BED !Peeves bellowed STUDENTS OUT OF BED DOWN THE CHARMS CORRIDOR !Ducking under Peeves they ran for their lives right to the end of the corridor where they slammed into a door and it was locked .This is it !Ron moaned as they pushed helplessly at the door Were done for !This is the end !They could hear footsteps Filch running as fast as he could toward Peeves s shouts .Oh move over Hermione snarled .She grabbed Harrys wand tapped the lock and whispered Alohomora The lock clicked and the door swung open they piled through it shut it quickly and pressed their ears against it listening .Which way did they go Peeves ?Filch was saying .Quick tell me .Say ‘please .Dont mess with me Peeves now where did they go ?Shant say nothing if you dont say please said Peeves in his annoying singsong voice .All right please .NOTHING !Ha haa !Told you I wouldnt say nothing if you didnt say please !Ha ha !Haa !And they heard the sound of Peeves whooshing away and Filch cursing in rage .He thinks this door is locked Harry whispered .I think well be okay get off Neville !For Neville had been tugging on the sleeve of Harrys bathrobe for the last minute .What ?Harry turned around and saw quite clearly what .For a moment he was sure hed walked into a nightmare this was too much on top of everything that had happened so far .They werent in a room as he had supposed .They were in a corridor .The forbidden corridor on the third floor .And now they knew why it was forbidden .They were looking straight into the eyes of a monstrous dog a dog that filled the whole space between ceiling and floor .It had three heads .Three pairs of rolling mad eyes three noses twitching and quivering in their direction three drooling mouths saliva hanging in slippery ropes from yellowish fangs .It was standing quite still all six eyes staring at them and Harry knew that the only reason they werent already dead was that their sudden appearance had taken it by surprise but it was quickly getting over that there was no mistaking what those thunderous growls meant .Harry groped for the doorknob between Filch and death hed take Filch .They fell backward Harry slammed the door shut and they ran they almost flew back down the corridor .Filch must have hurried off to look for them somewhere else because they didnt see him anywhere but they hardly cared all they wanted to do was put as much space as possible between them and that monster .They didnt stop running until they reached the portrait of the Fat Lady on the seventh floor .Where on earth have you all been ?she asked looking at their bathrobes hanging off their shoulders and their flushed sweaty faces .Never mind that pig snout pig snout panted Harry and the portrait swung forward .They scrambled into the common room and collapsed trembling into armchairs .It was a while before any of them said anything .Neville indeed looked as if hed never speak again .What do they think theyre doing keeping a thing like that locked up in a school ?said Ron finally .If any dog needs exercise that one does .Hermione had got both her breath and her bad temper back again .You dont use your eyes any of you do you ?she snapped .Didnt you see what it was standing on ?The floor ?Harry suggested .I wasnt looking at its feet I was too busy with its heads .No not the floor .It was standing on a trapdoor .Its obviously guarding something .She stood up glaring at them .I hope youre pleased with yourselves .We could all have been killed or worse expelled .Now if you dont mind Im going to bed .Ron stared after her his mouth open .No we dont mind he said .Youd think we dragged her along wouldnt you ?But Hermione had given Harry something else to think about as he climbed back into bed .The dog was guarding something .What had Hagrid said ?Gringotts was the safest place in the world for something you wanted to hide except perhaps Hogwarts .It looked as though Harry had found out where the grubby little package from vault seven hundred and thirteen was .10 HALLOWEEN Malfoy couldnt believe his eyes when he saw that Harry and Ron were still at Hogwarts the next day looking tired but perfectly cheerful .Indeed by the next morning Harry and Ron thought that meeting the threeheaded dog had been an excellent adventure and they were quite keen to have another one .In the meantime Harry filled Ron in about the package that seemed to have been moved from Gringotts to Hogwarts and they spent a lot of time wondering what could possibly need such heavy protection .Its either really valuable or really dangerous said Ron .Or both said Harry .But as all they knew for sure about the mysterious object was that it was about two inches long they didnt have much chance of guessing what it was without further clues .Neither Neville nor Hermione showed the slightest interest in what lay underneath the dog and the trapdoor .All Neville cared about was never going near the dog again .Hermione was now refusing to speak to Harry and Ron but she was such a bossy knowitall that they saw this as an added bonus .All they really wanted now was a way of getting back at Malfoy and to their great delight just such a thing arrived in the mail about a week later .As the owls flooded into the Great Hall as usual everyones attention was caught at once by a long thin package carried by six large screech owls .Harry was just as interested as everyone else to see what was in this large parcel and was amazed when the owls soared down and dropped it right in front of him knocking his bacon to the floor .They had hardly fluttered out of the way when another owl dropped a letter on top of the parcel .Harry ripped open the letter first which was lucky because it said DO NOT OPEN THE PARCEL AT THE TABLE .It contains your new Nimbus Two Thousand but I dont want everybody knowing youve got a broomstick or theyll all want one .Oliver Wood will meet you tonight on the Quidditch field at seven oclock for your first training session .Professor M .McGonagall Harry had difficulty hiding his glee as he handed the note to Ron to read .A Nimbus Two Thousand !Ron moaned enviously .Ive never even touched one .They left the hall quickly wanting to unwrap the broomstick in private before their first class but halfway across the entrance hall they found the way upstairs barred by Crabbe and Goyle .Malfoy seized the package from Harry and felt it .Thats a broomstick he said throwing it back to Harry with a mixture of jealousy and spite on his face .Youll be in for it this time Potter first years arent allowed them .Ron couldnt resist it .Its not any old broomstick he said its a Nimbus Two Thousand .What did you say youve got at home Malfoy a Comet Two Sixty ?Ron grinned at Harry .Comets look flashy but theyre not in the same league as the Nimbus .What would you know about it Weasley you couldnt afford half the handle Malfoy snapped back .I suppose you and your brothers have to save up twig by twig .Before Ron could answer Professor Flitwick appeared at Malfoys elbow .Not arguing I hope boys ?he squeaked .Potters been sent a broomstick Professor said Malfoy quickly .Yes yes thats right said Professor Flitwick beaming at Harry .Professor McGonagall told me all about the special circumstances Potter .And what model is it ?A Nimbus Two Thousand sir said Harry fighting not to laugh at the look of horror on Malfoys face .And its really thanks to Malfoy here that Ive got it he added .Harry and Ron headed upstairs smothering their laughter at Malfoys obvious rage and confusion .Well its true Harry chortled as they reached the top of the marble staircase If he hadnt stolen Nevilles Remembrall I wouldnt be on the team .So I suppose you think thats a reward for breaking rules ?came an angry voice from just behind them .Hermione was stomping up the stairs looking disapprovingly at the package in Harrys hand .I thought you werent speaking to us ?said Harry .Yes dont stop now said Ron its doing us so much good .Hermione marched away with her nose in the air .Harry had a lot of trouble keeping his mind on his lessons that day .It kept wandering up to the dormitory where his new broomstick was lying under his bed or straying off to the Quidditch field where hed be learning to play that night .He bolted his dinner that evening without noticing what he was eating and then rushed upstairs with Ron to unwrap the Nimbus Two Thousand at last .Wow Ron sighed as the broomstick rolled onto Harrys bedspread .Even Harry who knew nothing about the different brooms thought it looked wonderful .Sleek and shiny with a mahogany handle it had a long tail of neat straight twigs and Nimbus Two Thousand written in gold near the top .As seven oclock drew nearer Harry left the castle and set off in the dusk toward the Quidditch field .Hed never been inside the stadium before .Hundreds of seats were raised in stands around the field so that the spectators were high enough to see what was going on .At either end of the field were three golden poles with hoops on the end .They reminded Harry of the little plastic sticks Muggle children blew bubbles through except that they were fifty feet high .Too eager to fly again to wait for Wood Harry mounted his broomstick and kicked off from the ground .What a feeling he swooped in and out of the goal posts and then sped up and down the field .The Nimbus Two Thousand turned wherever he wanted at his lightest touch .Hey Potter come down !Oliver Wood had arrived .He was carrying a large wooden crate under his arm .Harry landed next to him .Very nice said Wood his eyes glinting .I see what McGonagall meant .you really are a natural .Im just going to teach you the rules this evening then youll be joining team practice three times a week .He opened the crate .Inside were four differentsized balls .Right said Wood .Now Quidditch is easy enough to understand even if its not too easy to play .There are seven players on each side .Three of them are called Chasers .Three Chasers Harry repeated as Wood took out a bright red ball about the size of a soccer ball .This balls called the Quaffle said Wood .The Chasers throw the Quaffle to each other and try and get it through one of the hoops to score a goal .Ten points every time the Quaffle goes through one of the hoops .Follow me ?The Chasers throw the Quaffle and put it through the hoops to score Harry recited .So thats sort of like basketball on broomsticks with six hoops isnt it ?Whats basketball ?said Wood curiously .Never mind said Harry quickly .Now theres another player on each side whos called the Keeper Im Keeper for Gryffindor .I have to fly around our hoops and stop the other team from scoring .Three Chasers one Keeper said Harry who was determined to remember it all .And they play with the Quaffle .Okay got that .So what are they for ?He pointed at the three balls left inside the box .Ill show you now said Wood .Take this .He handed Harry a small club a bit like a short baseball bat .Im going to show you what the Bludgers do Wood said .These two are the Bludgers .He showed Harry two identical balls jet black and slightly smaller than the red Quaffle .Harry noticed that they seemed to be straining to escape the straps holding them inside the box .Stand back Wood warned Harry .He bent down and freed one of the Bludgers .At once the black ball rose high in the air and then pelted straight at Harrys face .Harry swung at it with the bat to stop it from breaking his nose and sent it zigzagging away into the air it zoomed around their heads and then shot at Wood who dived on top of it and managed to pin it to the ground .See ?Wood panted forcing the struggling Bludger back into the crate and strapping it down safely .The Bludgers rocket around trying to knock players off their brooms .Thats why you have two Beaters on each team the Weasley twins are ours its their job to protect their side from the Bludgers and try and knock them toward the other team .So think youve got all that ?Three Chasers try and score with the Quaffle the Keeper guards the goal posts the Beaters keep the Bludgers away from their team Harry reeled off .Very good said Wood .Er have the Bludgers ever killed anyone ?Harry asked hoping he sounded offhand .Never at Hogwarts .Weve had a couple of broken jaws but nothing worse than that .Now the last member of the team is the Seeker .Thats you .And you dont have to worry about the Quaffle or the Bludgers unless they crack my head open .Dont worry the Weasleys are more than a match for the Bludgers I mean theyre like a pair of human Bludgers themselves .Wood reached into the crate and took out the fourth and last ball .Compared with the Quaffle and the Bludgers it was tiny about the size of a large walnut .It was bright gold and had little fluttering silver wings .This said Wood is the Golden Snitch and its the most important ball of the lot .Its very hard to catch because its so fast and difficult to see .Its the Seekers job to catch it .Youve got to weave in and out of the Chasers Beaters Bludgers and Quaffle to get it before the other teams Seeker because whichever Seeker catches the Snitch wins his team an extra hundred and fifty points so they nearly always win .Thats why Seekers get fouled so much .A game of Quidditch only ends when the Snitch is caught so it can go on for ages I think the record is three months they had to keep bringing on substitutes so the players could get some sleep .Well thats it any questions ?Harry shook his head .He understood what he had to do all right it was doing it that was going to be the problem .We wont practice with the Snitch yet said Wood carefully shutting it back inside the crate its too dark we might lose it .Lets try you out with a few of these .He pulled a bag of ordinary golf balls out of his pocket and a few minutes later he and Harry were up in the air Wood throwing the golf balls as hard as he could in every direction for Harry to catch .Harry didnt miss a single one and Wood was delighted .After half an hour night had really fallen and they couldnt carry on .That Quidditch Cupll have our name on it this year said Wood happily as they trudged back up to the castle .I wouldnt be surprised if you turn out better than Charlie Weasley and he could have played for England if he hadnt gone off chasing dragons .Perhaps it was because he was now so busy what with Quidditch practice three evenings a week on top of all his homework but Harry could hardly believe it when he realized that hed already been at Hogwarts two months .The castle felt more like home than Privet Drive ever had .His lessons too were becoming more and more interesting now that they had mastered the basics .On Halloween morning they woke to the delicious smell of baking pumpkin wafting through the corridors .Even better Professor Flitwick announced in Charms that he thought they were ready to start making objects fly something they had all been dying to try since theyd seen him make Nevilles toad zoom around the classroom .Professor Flitwick put the class into pairs to practice .Harrys partner was Seamus Finnigan which was a relief because Neville had been trying to catch his eye .Ron however was to be working with Hermione Granger .It was hard to tell whether Ron or Hermione was angrier about this .She hadnt spoken to either of them since the day Harrys broomstick had arrived .Now dont forget that nice wrist movement weve been practicing !squeaked Professor Flitwick perched on top of his pile of books as usual .Swish and flick remember swish and flick .And saying the magic words properly is very important too never forget Wizard Baruffio who said ‘s instead of ‘f and found himself on the floor with a buffalo on his chest .It was very difficult .Harry and Seamus swished and flicked but the feather they were supposed to be sending skyward just lay on the desktop .Seamus got so impatient that he prodded it with his wand and set fire to it Harry had to put it out with his hat .Ron at the next table wasnt having much more luck .Wingardium Leviosal he shouted waving his long arms like a windmill .Youre saying it wrong Harry heard Hermione snap .Its Winggardium Leviosa make the ‘gar nice and long .You do it then if youre so clever Ron snarled .Hermione rolled up the sleeves of her gown flicked her wand and said Wingardium LeviosaV Their feather rose off the desk and hovered about four feet above their heads .Oh well done !cried Professor Flitwick clapping .Everyone see here Miss Grangers done it !Ron was in a very bad mood by the end of the class .Its no wonder no one can stand her he said to Harry as they pushed their way into the crowded corridor shes a nightmare honestly .Someone knocked into Harry as they hurried past him .It was Hermione .Harry caught a glimpse of her face and was startled to see that she was in tears .I think she heard you .So ?said Ron but he looked a bit uncomfortable .She mustve noticed shes got no friends .Hermione didnt turn up for the next class and wasnt seen all afternoon .On their way down to the Great Hall for the Halloween feast Harry and Ron overheard Parvati Patil telling her friend Lavender that Hermione was crying in the girls bathroom and wanted to be left alone .Ron looked still more awkward at this but a moment later they had entered the Great Hall where the Halloween decorations put Hermione out of their minds .A thousand live bats fluttered from the walls and ceiling while a thousand more swooped over the tables in low black clouds making the candles in the pumpkins stutter .The feast appeared suddenly on the golden plates as it had at the startofterm banquet .Harry was just helping himself to a baked potato when Professor Quirrell came sprinting into the hall his turban askew and terror on his face .Everyone stared as he reached Professor Dumbledores chair slumped against the table and gasped Troll in the dungeons thought you ought to know .He then sank to the floor in a dead faint .There was an uproar .It took several purple firecrackers exploding from the end of Professor Dumbledores wand to bring silence .Prefects he rumbled lead your Houses back to the dormitories immediately !Percy was in his element .Follow me !Stick together first years !No need to fear the troll if you follow my orders !Stay close behind me now .Make way first years coming through !Excuse me Im a prefect !How could a troll get in ?Harry asked as they climbed the stairs .Dont ask me theyre supposed to be really stupid said Ron .Maybe Peeves let it in for a Halloween joke .They passed different groups of people hurrying in different directions .As they jostled their way through a crowd of confused Hufflepuffs Harry suddenly grabbed Rons arm .Ive just thought Hermione .What about her ?She doesnt know about the troll .Ron bit his lip .Oh all right he snapped .But Percyd better not see us .Ducking down they joined the Hufflepuffs going the other way slipped down a deserted side corridor and hurried off toward the girls bathroom .They had just turned the corner when they heard quick footsteps behind them .Percy !hissed Ron pulling Harry behind a large stone griffin .Peering around it however they saw not Percy but Snape .He crossed the corridor and disappeared from view .Whats he doing ?Harry whispered .Why isnt he down in the dungeons with the rest of the teachers ?Search me .Quietly as possible they crept along the next corridor after Snape s fading footsteps .Hes heading for the third floor Harry said but Ron held up his hand .Can you smell something ?Harry sniffed and a foul stench reached his nostrils a mixture of old socks and the kind of public toilet no one seems to clean .And then they heard it a low grunting and the shuffling footfalls of gigantic feet .Ron pointed at the end of a passage to the left something huge was moving toward them .They shrank into the shadows and watched as it emerged into a patch of moonlight .It was a horrible sight .Twelve feet tall its skin was a dull granite gray its great lumpy body like a boulder with its small bald head perched on top like a coconut .It had short legs thick as tree trunks with flat horny feet .The smell coming from it was incredible .It was holding a huge wooden club which dragged along the floor because its arms were so long .The troll stopped next to a doorway and peered inside .It waggled its long ears making up its tiny mind then slouched slowly into the room .The keys in the lock Harry muttered .We could lock it in .Good idea said Ron nervously .They edged toward the open door mouths dry praying the troll wasnt about to come out of it .With one great leap Harry managed to grab the key slam the door and lock it .Yes !Flushed with their victory they started to run back up the passage but as they reached the corner they heard something that made their hearts stop a high petrified scream and it was coming from the chamber theyd just chained up .Oh no said Ron pale as the Bloody Baron .Its the girls bathroom !Harry gasped .Hermionel they said together .It was the last thing they wanted to do but what choice did they have ?Wheeling around they sprinted back to the door and turned the key fumbling in their panic .Harry pulled the door open and they ran inside .Hermione Granger was shrinking against the wall opposite looking as if she was about to faint .The troll was advancing on her knocking the sinks off the walls as it went .Confuse it !Harry said desperately to Ron and seizing a tap he threw it as hard as he could against the wall .The troll stopped a few feet from Hermione .It lumbered around blinking stupidly to see what had made the noise .Its mean little eyes saw Harry .It hesitated then made for him instead lifting its club as it went .Oy peabrain !yelled Ron from the other side of the chamber and he threw a metal pipe at it .The troll didnt even seem to notice the pipe hitting its shoulder but it heard the yell and paused again turning its ugly snout toward Ron instead giving Harry time to run around it .Come on run run Harry yelled at Hermione trying to pull her toward the door but she couldnt move she was still flat against the wall her mouth open with terror .The shouting and the echoes seemed to be driving the troll berserk .It roared again and started toward Ron who was nearest and had no way to escape .Harry then did something that was both very brave and very stupid He took a great running jump and managed to fasten his arms around the trolls neck from behind .The troll couldnt feel Harry hanging there but even a troll will notice if you stick a long bit of wood up its nose and Harrys wand had still been in his hand when hed jumped it had gone straight up one of the trolls nostrils .Howling with pain the troll twisted and flailed its club with Harry clinging on for dear life any second the troll was going to rip him off or catch him a terrible blow with the club .Hermione had sunk to the floor in fright Ron pulled out his own wand not knowing what he was going to do he heard himself cry the first spell that came into his head Wingardium Leviosal The club flew suddenly out of the trolls hand rose high high up into the air turned slowly over and dropped with a sickening crack onto its owners head .The troll swayed on the spot and then fell flat on its face with a thud that made the whole room tremble .Harry got to his feet .He was shaking and out of breath .Ron was standing there with his wand still raised staring at what he had done .It was Hermione who spoke first .Is it dead ?I dont think so said Harry I think its just been knocked out .He bent down and pulled his wand out of the trolls nose .It was covered in what looked like lumpy gray glue .Urgh troll boogers .He wiped it on the trolls trousers .A sudden slamming and loud footsteps made the three of them look up .They hadnt realized what a racket they had been making but of course someone downstairs must have heard the crashes and the trolls roars .A moment later Professor McGonagall had come bursting into the room closely followed by Snape with Quirrell bringing up the rear .Quirrell took one look at the troll let out a faint whimper and sat quickly down on a toilet clutching his heart .Snape bent over the troll .Professor McGonagall was looking at Ron and Harry .Harry had never seen her look so angry .Her lips were white .Hopes of winning fifty points for Gryffindor faded quickly from Harrys mind .What on earth were you thinking of ?said Professor McGonagall with cold fury in her voice .Harry looked at Ron who was still standing with his wand in the air .Youre lucky you werent killed .Why arent you in your dormitory ?Snape gave Harry a swift piercing look .Harry looked at the floor .He wished Ron would put his wand down .Then a small voice came out of the shadows .Please Professor McGonagall they were looking for me .Miss Granger !Hermione had managed to get to her feet at last .I went looking for the troll because I I thought I could deal with it on my own you know because Ive read all about them .Ron dropped his wand .Hermione Granger telling a downright lie to a teacher ?If they hadnt found me Id be dead now .Harry stuck his wand up its nose and Ron knocked it out with its own club .They didnt have time to come and fetch anyone .It was about to finish me off when they arrived .Harry and Ron tried to look as though this story wasnt new to them .Well in that case .said Professor McGonagall staring at the three of them Miss Granger you foolish girl how could you think of tackling a mountain troll on your own ?Hermione hung her head .Harry was speechless .Hermione was the last person to do anything against the rules and here she was pretending she had to get them out of trouble .It was as if Snape had started handing out sweets .Miss Granger five points will be taken from Gryffindor for this said Professor McGonagall .Im very disappointed in you .If youre not hurt at all youd better get off to Gryffindor Tower .Students are finishing the feast in their Houses .Hermione left .Professor McGonagall turned to Harry and Ron .Well I still say you were lucky but not many first years could have taken on a fullgrown mountain troll .You each win Gryffindor five points .Professor Dumbledore will be informed of this .You may go .They hurried out of the chamber and didnt speak at all until they had climbed two floors up .It was a relief to be away from the smell of the troll quite apart from anything else .We should have gotten more than ten points Ron grumbled .Five you mean once shes taken off Hermione s .Good of her to get us out of trouble like that Ron admitted .Mind you we did save her .She might not have needed saving if we hadnt locked the thing in with her Harry reminded him .They had reached the portrait of the Fat Lady .Pig snout they said and entered .The common room was packed and noisy .Everyone was eating the food that had been sent up .Hermione however stood alone by the door waiting for them .There was a very embarrassed pause .Then none of them looking at each other they all said Thanks and hurried off to get plates .But from that moment on Hermione Granger became their friend .There are some things you cant share without ending up liking each other and knocking out a twelvefoot mountain troll is one of them .QUIDDITCH As they entered November the weather turned very cold .The mountains around the school became icy gray and the lake like chilled steel .Every morning the ground was covered in frost .Hagrid could be seen from the upstairs windows defrosting broomsticks on the Quidditch field bundled up in a long moleskin overcoat rabbit fur gloves and enormous beaverskin boots .The Quidditch season had begun .On Saturday Harry would be playing in his first match after weeks of training Gryffindor versus Slytherin .If Gryffindor won they would move up into second place in the House Championship .Hardly anyone had seen Harry play because Wood had decided that as their secret weapon Harry should be kept well secret .But the news that he was playing Seeker had leaked out somehow and Harry didnt know which was worse people telling him hed be brilliant or people telling him theyd be running around underneath him holding a mattress .It was really lucky that Harry now had Hermione as a friend .He didnt know how hed have gotten through all his homework without her what with all the last minute Quidditch practice Wood was making them do .She had also lent him Quidditch Through the Ages which turned out to be a very interesting read .Harry learned that there were seven hundred ways of committing a Quidditch foul and that all of them had happened during a World Cup match in 1473 that Seekers were usually the smallest and fastest players and that most serious Quidditch accidents seemed to happen to them that although people rarely died playing Quidditch referees had been known to vanish and turn up months later in the Sahara Desert .Hermione had become a bit more relaxed about breaking rules since Harry and Ron had saved her from the mountain troll and she was much nicer for it .The day before Harrys first Quidditch match the three of them were out in the freezing courtyard during break and she had conjured them up a bright blue fire that could be carried around in a jam jar .They were standing with their backs to it getting warm when Snape crossed the yard .Harry noticed at once that Snape was limping .Harry Ron and Hermione moved closer together to block the fire from view they were sure it wouldnt be allowed .Unfortunately something about their guilty faces caught Snapes eye .He limped over .He hadnt seen the fire but he seemed to be looking for a reason to tell them off anyway .Whats that youve got there Potter ?It was Quidditch Through the Ages .Harry showed him .Library books are not to be taken outside the school said Snape .Give it to me .Five points from Gryffindor .Hes just made that rule up Harry muttered angrily as Snape limped away .Wonder whats wrong with his leg ?Dunno but I hope its really hurting him said Ron bitterly .The Gryffindor common room was very noisy that evening .Harry Ron and Hermione sat together next to a window .Hermione was checking Harry and Rons Charms homework for them .She would never let them copy How will you learn ?but by asking her to read it through they got the right answers anyway .Harry felt restless .He wanted Quidditch Through the Ages back to take his mind off his nerves about tomorrow .Why should he be afraid of Snape ?Getting up he told Ron and Hermione he was going to ask Snape if he could have it .Better you than me they said together but Harry had an idea that Snape wouldnt refuse if there were other teachers listening .He made his way down to the staffroom and knocked .There was no answer .He knocked again .Nothing .Perhaps Snape had left the book in there ?It was worth a try .He pushed the door ajar and peered inside and a horrible scene met his eyes .Snape and Filch were inside alone .Snape was holding his robes above his knees .One of his legs was bloody and mangled .Filch was handing Snape bandages .Blasted thing Snape was saying .How are you supposed to keep your eyes on all three heads at once ?Harry tried to shut the door quietly but POTTER !Snape s face was twisted with fury as he dropped his robes quickly to hide his leg .Harry gulped .I just wondered if I could have my book back .GET OUT !OUT !Harry left before Snape could take any more points from Gryffindor .He sprinted back upstairs .Did you get it ?Ron asked as Harry joined them .Whats the matter ?In a low whisper Harry told them what hed seen .You know what this means ?he finished breathlessly .He tried to get past that threeheaded dog at Halloween !Thats where he was going when we saw him hes after whatever its guarding !And Id bet my broomstick he let that troll in to make a diversion !Hermiones eyes were wide .No he wouldnt she said .I know hes not very nice but he wouldnt try and steal something Dumbledore was keeping safe .Honestly Hermione you think all teachers are saints or something snapped Ron .Im with Harry .I wouldnt put anything past Snape .But whats he after ?Whats that dog guarding ?Harry went to bed with his head buzzing with the same question .Neville was snoring loudly but Harry couldnt sleep .He tried to empty his mind he needed to sleep he had to he had his first Quidditch match in a few hours but the expression on Snapes face when Harry had seen his leg wasnt easy to forget .The next morning dawned very bright and cold .The Great Hall was full of the delicious smell of fried sausages and the cheerful chatter of everyone looking forward to a good Quidditch match .Youve got to eat some breakfast .I dont want anything .Just a bit of toast wheedled Hermione .Im not hungry .Harry felt terrible .In an hours time hed be walking onto the field .Harry you need your strength said Seamus Finnigan .Seekers are always the ones who get clobbered by the other team .Thanks Seamus said Harry watching Seamus pile ketchup on his sausages .By eleven oclock the whole school seemed to be out in the stands around the Quidditch pitch .Many students had binoculars .The seats might be raised high in the air but it was still difficult to see what was going on sometimes .Ron and Hermione joined Neville Seamus and Dean the West Ham fan up in the top row .As a surprise for Harry they had painted a large banner on one of the sheets Scabbers had ruined .It said Potter for President and Dean who was good at drawing had done a large Gryffindor lion underneath .Then Hermione had performed a tricky little charm so that the paint flashed different colors .Meanwhile in the locker room Harry and the rest of the team were changing into their scarlet Quidditch robes Slytherin would be playing in green .Wood cleared his throat for silence .Okay men he said .And women said Chaser Angelina Johnson .And women Wood agreed .This is it .The big one said Fred Weasley .The one weve all been waiting for said George .We know Olivers speech by heart Fred told Harry we were on the team last year .Shut up you two said Wood .This is the best team Gryffindors had in years .Were going to win .I know it .He glared at them all as if to say Or else .Right .Its time .Good luck all of you .Harry followed Fred and George out of the locker room and hoping his knees werent going to give way walked onto the field to loud cheers .Madam Hooch was refereeing .She stood in the middle of the field waiting for the two teams her broom in her hand .Now I want a nice fair game all of you she said once they were all gathered around her .Harry noticed that she seemed to be speaking particularly to the Slytherin Captain Marcus Flint a fifth year .Harry thought Flint looked as if he had some troll blood in him .Out of the corner of his eye he saw the fluttering banner high above flashing Potter for President over the crowd .His heart skipped .He felt braver .Mount your brooms please .Harry clambered onto his Nimbus Two Thousand .Madam Hooch gave a loud blast on her silver whistle .Fifteen brooms rose up high high into the air .They were off .And the Quaffle is taken immediately by Angelina Johnson of Gryffindor what an excellent Chaser that girl is and rather attractive too JORDAN !Sorry Professor .The Weasley twins friend Lee Jordan was doing the commentary for the match closely watched by Professor McGonagall .And shes really belting along up there a neat pass to Alicia Spinnet a good find of Oliver Woods last year only a reserve back to Johnson and no the Slytherins have taken the Quaffle Slytherin Captain Marcus Flint gains the Quaffle and off he goes Flint flying like an eagle up there hes going to sc no stopped by an excellent move by Gryffindor Keeper Wood and the Gryffindors take the Quaffle thats Chaser Katie Bell of Gryffindor there nice dive around Flint off up the field and OUCH that must have hurt hit in the back of the head by a Bludger Quaffle taken by the Slytherins thats Adrian Pucey speeding off toward the goal posts but hes blocked by a second Bludger sent his way by Fred or George Weasley cant tell which nice play by the Gryffindor Beater anyway and Johnson back in possession of the Quaffle a clear field ahead and off she goes shes really flying dodges a speeding Bludger the goal posts are ahead come on now Angelina Keeper Bletchley dives misses GRYFFINDORS SCORE !Gryffindor cheers filled the cold air with howls and moans from the Slytherins .Budge up there move along .Hagrid !Ron and Hermione squeezed together to give Hagrid enough space to join them .Bin watchin from me hut said Hagrid patting a large pair of binoculars around his neck But it isnt the same as bein in the crowd .No sign of the Snitch yet eh ?Nope said Ron .Harry hasnt had much to do yet .Kept outta trouble though thats somethin said Hagrid raising his binoculars and peering skyward at the speck that was Harry .Way up above them Harry was gliding over the game squinting about for some sign of the Snitch .This was part of his and Woods game plan .Keep out of the way until you catch sight of the Snitch Wood had said .We dont want you attacked before you have to be .When Angelina had scored Harry had done a couple of looptheloops to let off his feelings .Now he was back to staring around for the Snitch .Once he caught sight of a flash of gold but it was just a reflection from one of the Weasleys wristwatches and once a Bludger decided to come pelting his way more like a cannonball than anything but Harry dodged it and Fred Weasley came chasing after it .All right there Harry ?he had time to yell as he beat the Bludger furiously toward Marcus Flint .Slytherin in possession Lee Jordan was saying Chaser Pucey ducks two Bludgers two Weasleys and Chaser Bell and speeds toward the wait a moment was that the Snitch ?A murmur ran through the crowd as Adrian Pucey dropped the Quaffle too busy looking over his shoulder at the flash of gold that had passed his left ear .Harry saw it .In a great rush of excitement he dived downward after the streak of gold .Slytherin Seeker Terence Higgs had seen it too .Neck and neck they hurtled toward the Snitch all the Chasers seemed to have forgotten what they were supposed to be doing as they hung in midair to watch .Harry was faster than Higgs he could see the little round ball wings fluttering darting up ahead he put on an extra spurt of speed WHAM !A roar of rage echoed from the Gryffindors below Marcus Flint had blocked Harry on purpose and Harrys broom spun off course Harry holding on for dear life .Foul !screamed the Gryffindors .Madam Hooch spoke angrily to Flint and then ordered a free shot at the goal posts for Gryffindor .But in all the confusion of course the Golden Snitch had disappeared from sight again .Down in the stands Dean Thomas was yelling Send him off ref !Red card !What are you talking about Dean ?said Ron .Red card !said Dean furiously .In soccer you get shown the red card and youre out of the game !But this isnt soccer Dean Ron reminded him .Hagrid however was on Deans side .They oughta change the rules .Flint coulda knocked Harry outta the air .Lee Jordan was finding it difficult not to take sides .So after that obvious and disgusting bit of cheating Jordan !growled Professor McGonagall .I mean after that open and revolting foul Jordan Im warning you All right all right .Flint nearly kills the Gryffindor Seeker which could happen to anyone Im sure so a penalty to Gryffindor taken by Spinnet who puts it away no trouble and we continue play Gryffindor still in possession .It was as Harry dodged another Bludger which went spinning dangerously past his head that it happened .His broom gave a sudden frightening lurch .For a split second he thought he was going to fall .He gripped the broom tightly with both his hands and knees .Hed never felt anything like that .It happened again .It was as though the broom was trying to buck him off .But Nimbus Two Thousands did not suddenly decide to buck their riders off .Harry tried to turn back toward the Gryffindor goal posts he had half a mind to ask Wood to call timeout and then he realized that his broom was completely out of his control .He couldnt turn it .He couldnt direct it at all .It was zigzagging through the air and every now and then making violent swishing movements that almost unseated him .Lee was still commentating .Slytherin in possession Flint with the Quaffle passes Spinnet passes Bell hit hard in the face by a Bludger hope it broke his nose only joking Professor Slytherins score oh no .The Slytherins were cheering .No one seemed to have noticed that Harrys broom was behaving strangely It was carrying him slowly higher away from the game jerking and twitching as it went .Dunno what Harry thinks hes doing Hagrid mumbled .He stared through his binoculars .If I didn know better Id say hed lost control of his broom .but he cant have .Suddenly people were pointing up at Harry all over the stands .His broom had started to roll over and over with him only just managing to hold on .Then the whole crowd gasped .Harrys broom had given a wild jerk and Harry swung off it .He was now dangling from it holding on with only one hand .Did something happen to it when Flint blocked him ?Seamus whispered .Cant have Hagrid said his voice shaking .Cant nothing interfere with a broomstick except powerful Dark magic no kid could do that to a Nimbus Two Thousand .At these words Hermione seized Hagrid s binoculars but instead of looking up at Harry she started looking frantically at the crowd .What are you doing ?moaned Ron grayfaced .I knew it Hermione gasped Snape look .Ron grabbed the binoculars .Snape was in the middle of the stands opposite them .He had his eyes fixed on Harry and was muttering nonstop under his breath .Hes doing something jinxing the broom said Hermione .What should we do ?Leave it to me .Before Ron could say another word Hermione had disappeared .Ron turned the binoculars back on Harry .His broom was vibrating so hard it was almost impossible for him to hang on much longer .The whole crowd was on its feet watching terrified as the Weasleys flew up to try and pull Harry safely onto one of their brooms but it was no good every time they got near him the broom would jump higher still .They dropped lower and circled beneath him obviously hoping to catch him if he fell .Marcus Flint seized the Quaffle and scored five times without anyone noticing .Come on Hermione Ron muttered desperately .Hermione had fought her way across to the stand where Snape stood and was now racing along the row behind him she didnt even stop to say sorry as she knocked Professor Quirrell headfirst into the row in front .Reaching Snape she crouched down pulled out her wand and whispered a few wellchosen words .Bright blue flames shot from her wand onto the hem of Snape s robes .It took perhaps thirty seconds for Snape to realize that he was on fire .A sudden yelp told her she had done her job .Scooping the fire off him into a little jar in her pocket she scrambled back along the row Snape would never know what had happened .It was enough .Up in the air Harry was suddenly able to clamber back on to his broom .Neville you can look !Ron said .Neville had been sobbing into Hagrids jacket for the last five minutes .Harry was speeding toward the ground when the crowd saw him clap his hand to his mouth as though he was about to be sick he hit the field on all fours coughed and something gold fell into his hand .Ive got the Snitch !he shouted waving it above his head and the game ended in complete confusion .He didnt catch it he nearly swallowed it Flint was still howling twenty minutes later but it made no difference Harry hadnt broken any rules and Lee Jordan was still happily shouting the results Gryffindor had won by one hundred and seventy points to sixty .Harry heard none of this though .He was being made a cup of strong tea back in Hagrids hut with Ron and Hermione .It was Snape Ron was explaining Hermione and I saw him .He was cursing your broomstick muttering he wouldnt take his eyes off you .Rubbish said Hagrid who hadnt heard a word of what had gone on next to him in the stands .Why would Snape do somethin like that ?Harry Ron and Hermione looked at one another wondering what to tell him .Harry decided on the truth .I found out something about him he told Hagrid .He tried to get past that threeheaded dog on Halloween .It bit him .We think he was trying to steal whatever its guarding .Hagrid dropped the teapot .How do you know about Fluffy ?he said .Fluffy ?Yeah hes mine bought him off a Greek chappie I met in the pub las year I lent him to Dumbledore to guard the Yes ?said Harry eagerly .Now dont ask me anymore said Hagrid gruffly .Thats top secret that is .But Snapes trying to steal it .Rubbish said Hagrid again .Snapes a Hogwarts teacher hed do nothin of the sort .So why did he just try and kill Harry ?cried Hermione .The afternoons events certainly seemed to have changed her mind about Snape .I know a jinx when I see one Hagrid Ive read all about them !Youve got to keep eye contact and Snape wasnt blinking at all I saw him !Im tellin yeh yer wrong !said Hagrid hotly .I don know why Harrys broom acted like that but Snape wouldn try an kill a student !Now listen to me all three of yeh yer meddlin in things that don concern yeh .Its dangerous .You forget that dog an you forget what its guardin thats between Professor Dumbledore an Nicolas Flamel ■ Aha !said Harry so theres someone called Nicolas Flamel involved is there ?Hagrid looked furious with himself .THE MIRROR OF ERISED Christmas was coming .One morning in mid December Hogwarts woke to find itself covered in several feet of snow .The lake froze solid and the Weasley twins were punished for bewitching several snowballs so that they followed Quirrell around bouncing off the back of his turban .The few owls that managed to battle their way through the stormy sky to deliver mail had to be nursed back to health by Hagrid before they could fly off again .No one could wait for the holidays to start .While the Gryffindor common room and the Great Hall had roaring fires the drafty corridors had become icy and a bitter wind rattled the windows in the classrooms .Worst of all were Professor Snapes classes down in the dungeons where their breath rose in a mist before them and they kept as close as possible to their hot cauldrons .I do feel so sorry said Draco Malfoy one Potions class for all those people who have to stay at Hogwarts for Christmas because theyre not wanted at home .He was looking over at Harry as he spoke .Crabbe and Goyle chuckled .Harry who was measuring out powdered spine of lionfish ignored them .Malfoy had been even more unpleasant than usual since the Quidditch match .Disgusted that the Slytherins had lost he had tried to get everyone laughing at how a widemouthed tree frog would be replacing Harry as Seeker next .Then hed realized that nobody found this funny because they were all so impressed at the way Harry had managed to stay on his bucking broomstick .So Malfoy jealous and angry had gone back to taunting Harry about having no proper family .It was true that Harry wasnt going back to Privet Drive for Christmas .Professor McGonagall had come around the week before making a list of students who would be staying for the holidays and Harry had signed up at once .He didnt feel sorry for himself at all this would probably be the best Christmas hed ever had .Ron and his brothers were staying too because Mr and Mrs Weasley were going to Romania to visit Charlie .When they left the dungeons at the end of Potions they found a large fir tree blocking the corridor ahead .Two enormous feet sticking out at the bottom and a loud puffing sound told them that Hagrid was behind it .Hi Hagrid want any help ?Ron asked sticking his head through the branches .Nah Im all right thanks Ron .Would you mind moving out of the way ?came Malfoys cold drawl from behind them .Are you trying to earn some extra money Weasley ?Hoping to be gamekeeper yourself when you leave Hogwarts I suppose that hut of Hagrids must seem like a palace compared to what your familys used to .Ron dived at Malfoy just as Snape came up the stairs .WEASLEY !Ron let go of the front of Malfoys robes .He was provoked Professor Snape said Hagrid sticking his huge hairy face out from behind the tree .Malfoy was insultin his family .Be that as it may fighting is against Hogwarts rules Hagrid said Snape silkily .Five points from Gryffindor Weasley and be grateful it isnt more .Move along all of you .Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle pushed roughly past the tree scattering needles everywhere and smirking .Ill get him said Ron grinding his teeth at Malfoys back one of these days Ill get him I hate them both said Harry Malfoy and Snape .Come on cheer up its nearly Christmas said Hagrid .Tell yeh what come with me an see the Great Hall looks a treat .So the three of them followed Hagrid and his tree off to the Great Hall where Professor McGonagall and Professor Flitwick were busy with the Christmas decorations .Ah Hagrid the last tree put it in the far corner would you ?The hall looked spectacular .Festoons of holly and mistletoe hung all around the walls and no less than twelve towering Christmas trees stood around the room some sparkling with tiny icicles some glittering with hundreds of candles .How many days you got left until yer holidays ?Hagrid asked .Just one said Hermione .And that reminds me Harry Ron weve got half an hour before lunch we should be in the library .Oh yeah youre right said Ron tearing his eyes away from Professor Flitwick who had golden bubbles blossoming out of his wand and was trailing them over the branches of the new tree .The library ?said Hagrid following them out of the hall .Just before the holidays ?Bit keen arent yeh ?Oh were not working Harry told him brightly .Ever since you mentioned Nicolas Flamel weve been trying to find out who he is .You what ?Hagrid looked shocked .Listen here Ive told yeh drop it .Its nothin to you what that dogs guardin .We just want to know who Nicolas Flamel is thats all said Hermione .Unless youd like to tell us and save us the trouble ?Harry added .We mustve been through hundreds of books already and we cant find him anywhere just give us a hint I know Ive read his name somewhere .Im sayin nothin said Hagrid flatly .Just have to find out for ourselves then said Ron and they left Hagrid looking disgruntled and hurried off to the library .They had indeed been searching books for Flamels name ever since Hagrid had let it slip because how else were they going to find out what Snape was trying to steal ?The trouble was it was very hard to know where to begin not knowing what Flamel might have done to get himself into a book .He wasnt in Great Wizards of the Twentieth Century or Notable Magical Names of Our Time he was missing too from Important Modern Magical Discoveries and A Study of Recent Developments in Wizardry .And then of course there was the sheer size of the library tens of thousands of books thousands of shelves hundreds of narrow rows .Hermione took out a list of subjects and titles she had decided to search while Ron strode off down a row of books and started pulling them off the shelves at random .Harry wandered over to the Restricted Section .He had been wondering for a while if Flamel wasnt somewhere in there .Unfortunately you needed a specially signed note from one of the teachers to look in any of the restricted books and he knew hed never get one .These were the books containing powerful Dark Magic never taught at Hogwarts and only read by older students studying advanced Defense Against the Dark Arts .What are you looking for boy ?Nothing said Harry .Madam Pince the librarian brandished a feather duster at him .Youd better get out then .Go on out !Wishing hed been a bit quicker at thinking up some story Harry left the library .He Ron and Hermione had already agreed theyd better not ask Madam Pince where they could find Flamel .They were sure shed be able to tell them but they couldnt risk Snape hearing what they were up to .Harry waited outside in the corridor to see if the other two had found anything but he wasnt very hopeful .They had been looking for two weeks after all but as they only had odd moments between lessons it wasnt surprising theyd found nothing .What they really needed was a nice long search without Madam Pince breathing down their necks .Five minutes later Ron and Hermione joined him shaking their heads .They went off to lunch .You will keep looking while Im away wont you ?said Hermione .And send me an owl if you find anything .And you could ask your parents if they know who Flamel is said Ron .Itd be safe to ask them .Very safe as theyre both dentists said Hermione .Once the holidays had started Ron and Harry were having too good a time to think much about Flamel .They had the dormitory to themselves and the common room was far emptier than usual so they were able to get the good armchairs by the fire .They sat by the hour eating anything they could spear on a toasting fork bread English muffins marshmallows and plotting ways of getting Malfoy expelled which were fun to talk about even if they wouldnt work .Ron also started teaching Harry wizard chess .This was exactly like Muggle chess except that the figures were alive which made it a lot like directing troops in battle .Rons set was very old and battered .Like everything else he owned it had once belonged to someone else in his family in this case his grandfather .However old chessmen werent a drawback at all .Ron knew them so well he never had trouble getting them to do what he wanted .Harry played with chessmen Seamus Finnigan had lent him and they didnt trust him at all .He wasnt a very good player yet and they kept shouting different bits of advice at him which was confusing .Dont send me there cant you see his knight ?Send him we can afford to lose him .On Christmas Eve Harry went to bed looking forward to the next day for the food and the fun but not expecting any presents at all .When he woke early in the morning however the first thing he saw was a small pile of packages at the foot of his bed .Merry Christmas said Ron sleepily as Harry scrambled out of bed and pulled on his bathrobe .You too said Harry .Will you look at this ?Ive got some presents !What did you expect turnips ?said Ron turning to his own pile which was a lot bigger than Harrys .Harry picked up the top parcel .It was wrapped in thick brown paper and scrawled across it was To Harry from Hagrid .Inside was a roughly cut wooden flute .Hagrid had obviously whittled it himself .Harry blew it it sounded a bit like an owl .A second very small parcel contained a note .We received your message and enclose your Christmas present .From Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia .Taped to the note was a fiftypence piece .Thats friendly said Harry .Ron was fascinated by the fifty pence .Weird he said What a shape !This is money ?You can keep it said Harry laughing at how pleased Ron was .Hagrid and my aunt and uncle so who sent these ?I think I know who that ones from said Ron turning a bit pink and pointing to a very lumpy parcel .My mom .I told her you didnt expect any presents and oh no he groaned shes made you a Weasley sweater .Harry had torn open the parcel to find a thick hand knitted sweater in emerald green and a large box of homemade fudge .Every year she makes us a sweater said Ron unwrapping his own and mines always maroon .Thats really nice of her said Harry trying the fudge which was very tasty .His next present also contained candy a large box of Chocolate Frogs from Hermione .This only left one parcel .Harry picked it up and felt it .It was very light .He unwrapped it .Something fluid and silvery gray went slithering to the floor where it lay in gleaming folds .Ron gasped .Ive heard of those he said in a hushed voice dropping the box of Every Flavor Beans hed gotten from Hermione .If thats what I think it is theyre really rare and really valuable .What is it ?Harry picked the shining silvery cloth off the floor .It was strange to the touch like water woven into material .Its an Invisibility Cloak said Ron a look of awe on his face .Im sure it is try it on .Harry threw the cloak around his shoulders and Ron gave a yell .It is !Look down !Harry looked down at his feet but they were gone .He dashed to the mirror .Sure enough his reflection looked back at him just his head suspended in midair his body completely invisible .He pulled the cloak over his head and his reflection vanished completely .Theres a note !said Ron suddenly .A note fell out of it !Harry pulled off the cloak and seized the letter .Written in narrow loopy writing he had never seen before were the following words Your father left this in my possession before he died .It is time it was returned to you .Use it well .A Very Merry Christmas to you .There was no signature .Harry stared at the note .Ron was admiring the cloak .Id give anuthinq for one of these he said .Anuthinq .Whats the matter ?Nothing said Harry .He felt very strange .Who had sent the cloak ?Had it really once belonged to his father ?Before he could say or think anything else the dormitory door was flung open and Fred and George Weasley bounded in .Harry stuffed the cloak quickly out of sight .He didnt feel like sharing it with anyone else yet .Merry Christmas !Hey look Harrys got a Weasley sweater too !Fred and George were wearing blue sweaters one with a large yellow F on it the other a G .Harrys is better than ours though said Fred holding up Harrys sweater .She obviously makes more of an effort if youre not family .Why arent you wearing yours Ron ?George demanded .Come on get it on theyre lovely and warm .I hate maroon Ron moaned halfheartedly as he pulled it over his head .You havent got a letter on yours George observed .I suppose she thinks you dont forget your name .But were not stupid we know were called Gred and Forge .Whats all this noise ?Percy Weasley stuck his head through the door looking disapproving .He had clearly gotten halfway through unwrapping his presents as he too carried a lumpy sweater over his arm which Fred seized .P for prefect !Get it on Percy come on were all wearing ours even Harry got one .I dont want said Percy thickly as the twins forced the sweater over his head knocking his glasses askew .And youre not sitting with the prefects today either said George .Christmas is a time for family .They frogmarched Percy from the room his arms pinned to his side by his sweater .Harry had never in all his life had such a Christmas dinner .A hundred fat roast turkeys mountains of roast and boiled potatoes platters of chipolatas tureens of buttered peas silver boats of thick rich gravy and cranberry sauce and stacks of wizard crackers every few feet along the table .These fantastic party favors were nothing like the feeble Muggle ones the Dursleys usually bought with their little plastic toys and their flimsy paper hats inside .Harry pulled a wizard cracker with Fred and it didnt just bang it went off with a blast like a cannon and engulfed them all in a cloud of blue smoke while from the inside exploded a rear admirals hat and several live white mice .Up at the High Table Dumbledore had swapped his pointed wizards hat for a flowered bonnet and was chuckling merrily at a joke Professor Flitwick had just read him .Flaming Christmas puddings followed the turkey .Percy nearly broke his teeth on a silver Sickle embedded in his slice .Harry watched Hagrid getting redder and redder in the face as he called for more wine finally kissing Professor McGonagall on the cheek who to Harrys amazement giggled and blushed her top hat lopsided .When Harry finally left the table he was laden down with a stack of things out of the crackers including a pack of nonexplodable luminous balloons a Grow YourOwnWarts kit and his own new wizard chess set .The white mice had disappeared and Harry had a nasty feeling they were going to end up as Mrs Norriss Christmas dinner .Harry and the Weasleys spent a happy afternoon having a furious snowball fight on the grounds .Then cold wet and gasping for breath they returned to the fire in the Gryffindor common room where Harry broke in his new chess set by losing spectacularly to Ron .He suspected he wouldnt have lost so badly if Percy hadnt tried to help him so much .After a meal of turkey sandwiches crumpets trifle and Christmas cake everyone felt too full and sleepy to do much before bed except sit and watch Percy chase Fred and George all over Gryffindor Tower because theyd stolen his prefect badge .It had been Harrys best Christmas day ever .Yet something had been nagging at the back of his mind all day .Not until he climbed into bed was he free to think about it the Invisibility Cloak and whoever had sent it .Ron full of turkey and cake and with nothing mysterious to bother him fell asleep almost as soon as hed drawn the curtains of his fourposter .Harry leaned over the side of his own bed and pulled the cloak out from under it .His fathers .this had been his fathers .He let the material flow over his hands smoother than silk light as air .Use it well the note had said .He had to try it now .He slipped out of bed and wrapped the cloak around himself .Looking down at his legs he saw only moonlight and shadows .It was a very funny feeling .Use it well .Suddenly Harry felt wideawake .The whole of Hogwarts was open to him in this cloak .Excitement flooded through him as he stood there in the dark and silence .He could go anywhere in this anywhere and Filch would never know .Ron grunted in his sleep .Should Harry wake him ?Something held him back his fathers cloak he felt that this time the first time he wanted to use it alone .He crept out of the dormitory down the stairs across the common room and climbed through the portrait hole .Whos there ?squawked the Fat Lady .Harry said nothing .He walked quickly down the corridor .Where should he go ?He stopped his heart racing and thought .And then it came to him .The Restricted Section in the library .Hed be able to read as long as he liked as long as it took to find out who Flamel was .He set off drawing the Invisibility Cloak tight around him as he walked .The library was pitchblack and very eerie .Harry lit a lamp to see his way along the rows of books .The lamp looked as if it was floating along in midair and even though Harry could feel his arm supporting it the sight gave him the creeps .The Restricted Section was right at the back of the library .Stepping carefully over the rope that separated these books from the rest of the library he held up his lamp to read the titles .They didnt tell him much .Their peeling faded gold letters spelled words in languages Harry couldnt understand .Some had no title at all .One book had a dark stain on it that looked horribly like blood .The hairs on the back of Harrys neck prickled .Maybe he was imagining it maybe not but he thought a faint whispering was coming from the books as though they knew someone was there who shouldnt be .He had to start somewhere .Setting the lamp down carefully on the floor he looked along the bottom shelf for an interestinglooking book .A large black and silver volume caught his eye .He pulled it out with difficulty because it was very heavy and balancing it on his knee let it fall open .A piercing bloodcurdling shriek split the silence the book was screaming !Harry snapped it shut but the shriek went on and on one high unbroken earsplitting note .He stumbled backward and knocked over his lamp which went out at once .Panicking he heard footsteps coming down the corridor outside stuffing the shrieking book back on the shelf he ran for it .He passed Filch in the doorway Filchs pale wild eyes looked straight through him and Harry slipped under Filchs outstretched arm and streaked off up the corridor the books shrieks still ringing in his ears .He came to a sudden halt in front of a tall suit of armor .He had been so busy getting away from the library he hadnt paid attention to where he was going .Perhaps because it was dark he didnt recognize where he was at all .There was a suit of armor near the kitchens he knew but he must be five floors above there .You asked me to come directly to you Professor if anyone was wandering around at night and somebodys been in the library Restricted Section .Harry felt the blood drain out of his face .Wherever he was Filch must know a shortcut because his soft greasy voice was getting nearer and to his horror it was Snape who replied The Restricted Section ?Well they cant be far well catch them .Harry stood rooted to the spot as Filch and Snape came around the corner ahead .They couldnt see him of course but it was a narrow corridor and if they came much nearer theyd knock right into him the cloak didnt stop him from being solid .He backed away as quietly as he could .A door stood ajar to his left .It was his only hope .He squeezed through it holding his breath trying not to move it and to his relief he managed to get inside the room without their noticing anything .They walked straight past and Harry leaned against the wall breathing deeply listening to their footsteps dying away .That had been close very close .It was a few seconds before he noticed anything about the room he had hidden in .It looked like an unused classroom .The dark shapes of desks and chairs were piled against the walls and there was an upturned wastepaper basket but propped against the wall facing him was something that didnt look as if it belonged there something that looked as if someone had just put it there to keep it out of the way .It was a magnificent mirror as high as the ceiling with an ornate gold frame standing on two clawed feet .There was an inscription carved around the top Erised stra ehru oyt ube cafru oyt on wohsi .His panic fading now that there was no sound of Filch and Snape Harry moved nearer to the mirror wanting to look at himself but see no reflection again .He stepped in front of it .He had to clap his hands to his mouth to stop himself from screaming .He whirled around .His heart was pounding far more furiously than when the book had screamed for he had seen not only himself in the mirror but a whole crowd of people standing right behind him .But the room was empty .Breathing very fast he turned slowly back to the mirror .There he was reflected in it white and scared looking and there reflected behind him were at least ten others .Harry looked over his shoulder but still no one was there .Or were they all invisible too ?Was he in fact in a room full of invisible people and this mirrors trick was that it reflected them invisible or not ?He looked in the mirror again .A woman standing right behind his reflection was smiling at him and waving .He reached out a hand and felt the air behind him .If she was really there hed touch her their reflections were so close together but he felt only air she and the others existed only in the mirror .She was a very pretty woman .She had dark red hair and her eyes her eyes are just like mine Harry thought edging a little closer to the glass .Bright green exactly the same shape but then he noticed that she was crying smiling but crying at the same time .The tall thin blackhaired man standing next to her put his arm around her .He wore glasses and his hair was very untidy .It stuck up at the back just as Harrys did .Harry was so close to the mirror now that his nose was nearly touching that of his reflection .Mom ?he whispered .Dad ?They just looked at him smiling .And slowly Harry looked into the faces of the other people in the mirror and saw other pairs of green eyes like his other noses like his even a little old man who looked as though he had Harrys knobbly knees Harry was looking at his family for the first time in his life .The Potters smiled and waved at Harry and he stared hungrily back at them his hands pressed flat against the glass as though he was hoping to fall right through it and reach them .He had a powerful kind of ache inside him half joy half terrible sadness .How long he stood there he didnt know .The reflections did not fade and he looked and looked until a distant noise brought him back to his senses .He couldnt stay here he had to find his way back to bed .He tore his eyes away from his mothers face whispered Ill come back and hurried from the room .You could have woken me up said Ron crossly .You can come tonight Im going back I want to show you the mirror .Id like to see your mom and dad Ron said eagerly .And I want to see all your family all the Weasleys youll be able to show me your other brothers and everyone .You can see them any old time said Ron .Just come round my house this summer .Anyway maybe it only shows dead people .Shame about not finding Flamel though .Have some bacon or something why arent you eating anything ?Harry couldnt eat .He had seen his parents and would be seeing them again tonight .He had almost forgotten about Flamel .It didnt seem very important anymore .Who cared what the threeheaded dog was guarding ?What did it matter if Snape stole it really ?Are you all right ?said Ron .You look odd .What Harry feared most was that he might not be able to find the mirror room again .With Ron covered in the cloak too they had to walk much more slowly the next night .They tried retracing Harrys route from the library wandering around the dark passageways for nearly an hour .Im freezing said Ron .Lets forget it and go back .IVo !Harry hissed .I know its here somewhere .They passed the ghost of a tall witch gliding in the opposite direction but saw no one else .Just as Ron started moaning that his feet were dead with cold Harry spotted the suit of armor .Its here just here yes !They pushed the door open .Harry dropped the cloak from around his shoulders and ran to the mirror .There they were .His mother and father beamed at the sight of him .See ?Harry whispered .I cant see anything .Look !Look at them all .there are loads of them .I can only see you .Look in it properly go on stand where I am .Harry stepped aside but with Ron in front of the mirror he couldnt see his family anymore just Ron in his paisley pajamas .Ron though was staring transfixed at his image .Look at me !he said .Can you see all your family standing around you ?No Im alone but Im different I look older and Im Head Boy !What ?I am Im wearing the badge like Bill used to and Im holding the House Cup and the Quidditch Cup Im Quidditch captain too !Ron tore his eyes away from this splendid sight to look excitedly at Harry .Do you think this mirror shows the future ?How can it ?All my family are dead let me have another look You had it to yourself all last night give me a bit more time .Youre only holding the Quidditch Cup whats interesting about that ?I want to see my parents .Dont push me A sudden noise outside in the corridor put an end to their discussion .They hadnt realized how loudly they had been talking .Quick !Ron threw the cloak back over them as the luminous eyes of Mrs Norris came round the door .Ron and Harry stood quite still both thinking the same thing did the cloak work on cats ?After what seemed an age she turned and left .This isnt safe she might have gone for Filch I bet she heard us .Come on .And Ron pulled Harry out of the room .The snow still hadnt melted the next morning .Want to play chess Harry ?said Ron .No .Why dont we go down and visit Hagrid ?No .you go .I know what youre thinking about Harry that mirror .Dont go back tonight .Why not ?I dunno Ive just got a bad feeling about it and anyway youve had too many close shaves already .Filch Snape and Mrs Norris are wandering around .So what if they cant see you ?What if they walk into you ?What if you knock something over ?You sound like Hermione .Im serious Harry dont go .But Harry only had one thought in his head which was to get back in front of the mirror and Ron wasnt going to stop him .That third night he found his way more quickly than before .He was walking so fast he knew he was making more noise than was wise but he didnt meet anyone .And there were his mother and father smiling at him again and one of his grandfathers nodding happily .Harry sank down to sit on the floor in front of the mirror .There was nothing to stop him from staying here all night with his family .Nothing at all .Except So back again Harry ?Harry felt as though his insides had turned to ice .He looked behind him .Sitting on one of the desks by the wall was none other than Albus Dumbledore .Harry must have walked straight past him so desperate to get to the mirror he hadnt noticed him .I I didnt see you sir .Strange how nearsighted being invisible can make you said Dumbledore and Harry was relieved to see that he was smiling .So said Dumbledore slipping off the desk to sit on the floor with Harry you like hundreds before you have discovered the delights of the Mirror of Erised .I didnt know it was called that sir .But I expect youve realized by now what it does ?It well it shows me my family And it showed your friend Ron himself as Head Boy .How did you know ?I dont need a cloak to become invisible said Dumbledore gently .Now can you think what the Mirror of Erised shows us all ?Harry shook his head .Let me explain .The happiest man on earth would be able to use the Mirror of Erised like a normal mirror that is he would look into it and see himself exactly as he is .Does that help ?Harry thought .Then he said slowly It shows us what we want .whatever we want .Yes and no said Dumbledore quietly .It shows us nothing more or less than the deepest most desperate desire of our hearts .You who have never known your family see them standing around you .Ronald Weasley who has always been overshadowed by his brothers sees himself standing alone the best of all of them .However this mirror will give us neither knowledge or truth .Men have wasted away before it entranced by what they have seen or been driven mad not knowing if what it shows is real or even possible .The Mirror will be moved to a new home tomorrow Harry and I ask you not to go looking for it again .If you ever do run across it you will now be prepared .It does not do to dwell on dreams and forget to live remember that .Now why dont you put that admirable cloak back on and get off to bed ?Harry stood up .Sir Professor Dumbledore ?Can I ask you something ?Obviously youve just done so Dumbledore smiled .You may ask me one more thing however .What do you see when you look in the mirror ?I ?I see myself holding a pair of thick woolen socks .Harry stared .One can never have enough socks said Dumbledore .Another Christmas has come and gone and I didnt get a single pair .People will insist on giving me books .It was only when he was back in bed that it struck Harry that Dumbledore might not have been quite truthful .But then he thought as he shoved Scabbers off his pillow it had been quite a personal question .NICHOLAS FLAMBL Dumbledore had convinced Harry not to go looking for the Mirror of Erised again and for the rest of the Christmas holidays the Invisibility Cloak stayed folded at the bottom of his trunk .Harry wished he could forget what hed seen in the mirror as easily but he couldnt .He started having nightmares .Over and over again he dreamed about his parents disappearing in a flash of green light while a high voice cackled with laughter .You see Dumbledore was right that mirror could drive you mad said Ron when Harry told him about these dreams .Hermione who came back the day before term started took a different view of things .She was torn between horror at the idea of Harry being out of bed roaming the school three nights in a row If Filch had caught you !and disappointment that he hadnt at least found out who Nicolas Flamel was .They had almost given up hope of ever finding Flamel in a library book even though Harry was still sure hed read the name somewhere .Once term had started they were back to skimming through books for ten minutes during their breaks .Harry had even less time than the other two because Quidditch practice had started again .Wood was working the team harder than ever .Even the endless rain that had replaced the snow couldnt dampen his spirits .The Weasleys complained that Wood was becoming a fanatic but Harry was on Woods side .If they won their next match against Hufflepuff they would overtake Slytherin in the House Championship for the first time in seven years .Quite apart from wanting to win Harry found that he had fewer nightmares when he was tired out after training .Then during one particularly wet and muddy practice session Wood gave the team a bit of bad news .Hed just gotten very angry with the Weasleys who kept divebombing each other and pretending to fall off their brooms .Will you stop messing around !he yelled .Thats exactly the sort of thing thatll lose us the match !Snapes refereeing this time and hell be looking for any excuse to knock points off Gryffindor !George Weasley really did fall off his broom at these words .Snapes refereeing ?he spluttered through a mouthful of mud .Whens he ever refereed a Quidditch match ?Hes not going to be fair if we might overtake Slytherin .The rest of the team landed next to George to complain too .Its not my fault said Wood .Weve just got to make sure we play a clean game so Snape hasnt got an excuse to pick on us .Which was all very well thought Harry but he had another reason for not wanting Snape near him while he was playing Quidditch .The rest of the team hung back to talk to one another as usual at the end of practice but Harry headed straight back to the Gryffindor common room where he found Ron and Hermione playing chess .Chess was the only thing Hermione ever lost at something Harry and Ron thought was very good for her .Dont talk to me for a moment said Ron when Harry sat down next to him I need to concern He caught sight of Harrys face .Whats the matter with you ?You look terrible .Speaking quietly so that no one else would hear Harry told the other two about Snape s sudden sinister desire to be a Quidditch referee .Dont play said Hermione at once .Say youre ill said Ron .Pretend to break your leg Hermione suggested .Really break your leg said Ron .I cant said Harry .There isnt a reserve Seeker .If I back out Gryffindor cant play at all .At that moment Neville toppled into the common room .How he had managed to climb through the portrait hole was anyones guess because his legs had been stuck together with what they recognized at once as the LegLocker Curse .He must have had to bunny hop all the way up to Gryffindor Tower .Everyone fell over laughing except Hermione who leapt up and performed the countercurse .Nevilles legs sprang apart and he got to his feet trembling .What happened ?Hermione asked him leading him over to sit with Harry and Ron .Malfoy said Neville shakily .I met him outside the library .He said hed been looking for someone to practice that on .Go to Professor McGonagall !Hermione urged Neville .Report him !Neville shook his head .I dont want more trouble he mumbled .Youve got to stand up to him Neville !said Ron .Hes used to walking all over people but thats no reason to lie down in front of him and make it easier .Theres no need to tell me Im not brave enough to be in Gryffindor Malfoys already done that Neville choked out .Harry felt in the pocket of his robes and pulled out a Chocolate Frog the very last one from the box Hermione had given him for Christmas .He gave it to Neville who looked as though he might cry .Youre worth twelve of Malfoy Harry said .The Sorting Hat chose you for Gryffindor didnt it ?And wheres Malfoy ?In stinking Slytherin .Nevilles lips twitched in a weak smile as he unwrapped the frog .Thanks Harry .I think Ill go to bed .Dyou want the card you collect them dont you ?As Neville walked away Harry looked at the Famous Wizard card .Dumbledore again he said He was the first one I ever He gasped .He stared at the back of the card .Then he looked up at Ron and Hermione .Ive found him he whispered .Ive found Flamel !I told you Id read the name somewhere before I read it on the train coming here listen to this ‘Dumbledore is particularly famous for his defeat of the Dark wizard Grindelwald in 1945 for the discovery of the twelve uses of dragons blood and his work on alchemy with his partner Nicolas FlamelV Hermione jumped to her feet .She hadnt looked so excited since theyd gotten back the marks for their very first piece of homework .Stay there !she said and she sprinted up the stairs to the girls dormitories .Harry and Ron barely had time to exchange mystified looks before she was dashing back an enormous old book in her arms .I never thought to look in here !she whispered excitedly .I got this out of the library weeks ago for a bit of light reading .Light ?said Ron but Hermione told him to be quiet until shed looked something up and started flicking frantically through the pages muttering to herself .At last she found what she was looking for .I knew it !I knew it !Are we allowed to speak yet ?said Ron grumpily .Hermione ignored him .Nicolas Flamel she whispered dramatically is the only known maker of the Sorcerers Stone This didnt have quite the effect shed expected .The what ?said Harry and Ron .Oh honestly dont you two read ?Look read that there .She pushed the book toward them and Harry and Ron read The ancient study of alchemy is concerned with making the Sorcerers Stone a legendary substance with astonishing powers .The Stone will transform any metal into pure gold .It also produces the Elixir of Life which will make the drinker immortal .There have been many reports of the Sorcerers Stone over the centuries but the only Stone currently in existence belongs to Mr Nicolas Flamel the noted alchemist and opera lover .Mr Flamel who celebrated his six hundred and sixtyfifth birthday last year enjoys a quiet life in Devon with his wife Perenelle six hundred and fiftyeight .See ?said Hermione when Harry and Ron had finished .The dog must be guarding Flamels Sorcerers Stone !I bet he asked Dumbledore to keep it safe for him because theyre friends and he knew someone was after it thats why he wanted the Stone moved out of Gringotts !A stone that makes gold and stops you from ever dying !said Harry .No wonder Snapes after it !Anyone would want it .And no wonder we couldnt find Flamel in that Study of Recent Developments in Wizardry said Ron .Hes not exactly recent if hes six hundred and sixtyfive is he ?The next morning in Defense Against the Dark Arts while copying down different ways of treating werewolf bites Harry and Ron were still discussing what theyd do with a Sorcerers Stone if they had one .It wasnt until Ron said hed buy his own Quidditch team that Harry remembered about Snape and the coming match .Im going to play he told Ron and Hermione .If I dont all the Slytherins will think Im just too scared to face Snape .Ill show them .itll really wipe the smiles off their faces if we win .Just as long as were not wiping you off the field said Hermione .As the match drew nearer however Harry became more and more nervous whatever he told Ron and Hermione .The rest of the team wasnt too calm either .The idea of overtaking Slytherin in the House Championship was wonderful no one had done it for seven years but would they be allowed to with such a biased referee ?Harry didnt know whether he was imagining it or not but he seemed to keep running into Snape wherever he went .At times he even wondered whether Snape was following him trying to catch him on his own .Potions lessons were turning into a sort of weekly torture Snape was so horrible to Harry .Could Snape possibly know theyd found out about the Sorcerers Stone ?Harry didnt see how he could yet he sometimes had the horrible feeling that Snape could read minds .Harry knew when they wished him good luck outside the locker rooms the next afternoon that Ron and Hermione were wondering whether theyd ever see him alive again .This wasnt what youd call comforting .Harry hardly heard a word of Woods pep talk as he pulled on his Quidditch robes and picked up his Nimbus Two Thousand .Ron and Hermione meanwhile had found a place in the stands next to Neville who couldnt understand why they looked so grim and worried or why they had both brought their wands to the match .Little did Harry know that Ron and Hermione had been secretly practicing the LegLocker Curse .Theyd gotten the idea from Malfoy using it on Neville and were ready to use it on Snape if he showed any sign of wanting to hurt Harry .Now dont forget its Locomotor Mortis Hermione muttered as Ron slipped his wand up his sleeve .I know Ron snapped .Dont nag .Back in the locker room Wood had taken Harry aside .Dont want to pressure you Potter but if we ever need an early capture of the Snitch its now .Finish the game before Snape can favor Hufflepuff too much .The whole schools out there !said Fred Weasley peering out of the door .Even blimey Dumbledores come to watch !Harrys heart did a somersault .Dumbledore ?he said dashing to the door to make sure .Fred was right .There was no mistaking that silver beard .Harry could have laughed out loud with relief .He was safe .There was simply no way that Snape would dare to try to hurt him if Dumbledore was watching .Perhaps that was why Snape was looking so angry as the teams marched onto the field something that Ron noticed too .Ive never seen Snape look so mean he told Hermione .Look theyre off .Ouch !Someone had poked Ron in the back of the head .It was Malfoy .Oh sorry Weasley didnt see you there .Malfoy grinned broadly at Crabbe and Goyle .Wonder how long Potters going to stay on his broom this time ?Anyone want a bet ?What about you Weasley ?Ron didnt answer Snape had just awarded Hufflepuff a penalty because George Weasley had hit a Bludger at him .Hermione who had all her fingers crossed in her lap was squinting fixedly at Harry who was circling the game like a hawk looking for the Snitch .You know how I think they choose people for the Gryffindor team ?said Malfoy loudly a few minutes later as Snape awarded Hufflepuff another penalty for no reason at all .Its people they feel sorry for .See theres Potter whos got no parents then theres the Weasleys whove got no money you should be on the team Longbottom youve got no brains .Neville went bright red but turned in his seat to face Malfoy .Im worth twelve of you Malfoy he stammered .Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle howled with laughter but Ron still not daring to take his eyes from the game said You tell him Neville .Longbottom if brains were gold youd be poorer than Weasley and thats saying something .Rons nerves were already stretched to the breaking point with anxiety about Harry .Im warning you Malfoy one more word Ron !said Hermione suddenly Harry !What ?Where ?Harry had suddenly gone into a spectacular dive which drew gasps and cheers from the crowd .Hermione stood up her crossed fingers in her mouth as Harry streaked toward the ground like a bullet .Youre in luck Weasley Potters obviously spotted some money on the ground !said Malfoy .Ron snapped .Before Malfoy knew what was happening Ron was on top of him wrestling him to the ground .Neville hesitated then clambered over the back of his seat to help .Come on Harry !Hermione screamed leaping onto her seat to watch as Harry sped straight at Snape she didnt even notice Malfoy and Ron rolling around under her seat or the scuffles and yelps coming from the whirl of fists that was Neville Crabbe and Goyle .Up in the air Snape turned on his broomstick just in time to see something scarlet shoot past him missing him by inches the next second Harry had pulled out of the dive his arm raised in triumph the Snitch clasped in his hand .The stands erupted it had to be a record no one could ever remember the Snitch being caught so quickly .Ron !Ron !Where are you ?The games over !Harrys won !Weve won !Gryffindor is in the lead !shrieked Hermione dancing up and down on her seat and hugging Parvati Patil in the row in front .Harry jumped off his broom a foot from the ground .He couldnt believe it .Hed done it the game was over it had barely lasted five minutes .As Gryffindors came spilling onto the field he saw Snape land nearby whitefaced and tightlipped then Harry felt a hand on his shoulder and looked up into Dumbledores smiling face .Well done said Dumbledore quietly so that only Harry could hear .Nice to see you havent been brooding about that mirror .been keeping busy .excellent .Snape spat bitterly on the ground .Jc Jc Jc Harry left the locker room alone some time later to take his Nimbus Two Thousand back to the broomshed .He couldnt ever remember feeling happier .Hed really done something to be proud of now no one could say he was just a famous name any more .The evening air had never smelled so sweet .He walked over the damp grass reliving the last hour in his head which was a happy blur Gryffindors running to lift him onto their shoulders Ron and Hermione in the distance jumping up and down Ron cheering through a heavy nosebleed .Harry had reached the shed .He leaned against the wooden door and looked up at Hogwarts with its windows glowing red in the setting sun .Gryffindor in the lead .Hed done it hed shown Snape .And speaking of Snape .A hooded figure came swiftly down the front steps of the castle .Clearly not wanting to be seen it walked as fast as possible toward the forbidden forest .Harrys victory faded from his mind as he watched .He recognized the figures pwalk .Snape sneaking into the forest while everyone else was at dinner what was going on ?Harry jumped back on his Nimbus Two Thousand and took off .Gliding silently over the castle he saw Snape enter the forest at a run .He followed .The trees were so thick he couldnt see where Snape had gone .He flew in circles lower and lower brushing the top branches of trees until he heard voices .He glided toward them and landed noiselessly in a towering beech tree .He climbed carefully along one of the branches holding tight to his broomstick trying to see through the leaves .Below in a shadowy clearing stood Snape but he wasnt alone .Quirrell was there too .Harry couldnt make out the look on his face but he was stuttering worse than ever .Harry strained to catch what they were saying . .ddont know why you wanted ttto meet here of all pplaces Severus .Oh I thought wed keep this private said Snape his voice icy .Students arent supposed to know about the Sorcerers Stone after all .Harry leaned forward .Quirrell was mumbling something .Snape interrupted him .Have you found out how to get past that beast of Hagrids yet ?Bbbut Severus I You dont want me as your enemy Quirrell said Snape taking a step toward him .II dont know what you You know perfectly well what I mean .An owl hooted loudly and Harry nearly fell out of the tree .He steadied himself in time to hear Snape say your little bit of hocuspocus .Im waiting .Bbut I dddont Very well Snape cut in .Well have another little chat soon when youve had time to think things over and decided where your loyalties lie .He threw his cloak over his head and strode out of the clearing .It was almost dark now but Harry could see Quirrell standing quite still as though he was petrified .Jc Jc Jc Harry where have you been ?Hermione squeaked .We won !You won !We won !shouted Ron thumping Harry on the back .And I gave Malfoy a black eye and Neville tried to take on Crabbe and Goyle single handed !Hes still out cold but Madam Pomfrey says hell be all right talk about showing Slytherin !Everyones waiting for you in the common room were having a party Fred and George stole some cakes and stuff from the kitchens .Never mind that now said Harry breathlessly .Lets find an empty room you wait til you hear this .He made sure Peeves wasnt inside before shutting the door behind them then he told them what hed seen and heard .So we were right it is the Sorcerers Stone and Snapes trying to force Quirrell to help him get it .He asked if he knew how to get past Fluffy and he said something about Quirrells ‘hocuspocus I reckon there are other things guarding the stone apart from Fluffy loads of enchantments probably and Quirrell would have done some antiDark Arts spell that Snape needs to break through So you mean the Stones only safe as long as Quirrell stands up to Snape ?said Hermione in alarm .Itll be gone by next Tuesday said Ron .NORBERT THE NORWEGIAN RIDGEBACK Quirrell however must have been braver than theyd thought .In the weeks that followed he did seem to be getting paler and thinner but it didnt look as though hed cracked yet .Every time they passed the thirdfloor corridor Harry Ron and Hermione would press their ears to the door to check that Fluffy was still ginside .Snape was sweeping about in his usual bad temper which surely meant that the Stone was still safe .Whenever Harry passed Quirrell these days he gave him an encouraging sort of smile and Ron had started telling people off for laughing at Quirrells stutter .Hermione however had more on her mind than the Sorcerers Stone .She had started drawing up study schedules and colorcoding all her notes .Harry and Ron wouldnt have minded but she kept nagging them to do the same .Hermione the exams are ages away .Ten weeks Hermione snapped .Thats not ages thats like a second to Nicolas Flamel .But were not six hundred years old Ron reminded her .Anyway what are you studying for you already know it all .What am I studying for ?Are you crazy ?You realize we need to pass these exams to get into the second year ?Theyre very important I should have started studying a month ago I dont know whats gotten into me .Unfortunately the teachers seemed to be thinking along the same lines as Hermione .They piled so much homework on them that the Easter holidays werent nearly as much fun as the Christmas ones .It was hard to relax with Hermione next to you reciting the twelve uses of dragons blood or practicing wand movements .Moaning and yawning Harry and Ron spent most of their free time in the library with her trying to get through all their extra work .Ill never remember this Ron burst out one afternoon throwing down his quill and looking longingly out of the library window .It was the first really fine day theyd had in months .The sky was a clear forgetmenot blue and there was a feeling in the air of summer coming .Harry who was looking up Dittany in One Thousand Magical Herbs and Fungi didnt look up until he heard Ron say Hagrid !What are you doing in the library ?Hagrid shuffled into view hiding something behind his back .He looked very out of place in his moleskin overcoat .Jus lookin he said in a shifty voice that got their interest at once .An whatre you lot up ter ?He looked suddenly suspicious .Yer not still lookin fer Nicolas Flamel are yeh ?Oh we found out who he is ages ago said Ron impressively .And we know what that dogs guarding its a Sorcerers St Shhhh Hagrid looked around quickly to see if anyone was listening .Don go shoutin about it whats the matter with yeh ?There are a few things we wanted to ask you as a matter of fact said Harry about whats guarding the Stone apart from Fluffy SHHHH !said Hagrid again .Listen come an see me later Im not promisin Ill tell yeh anythin mind but don go rabbitin about it in here students aren spposed ter know .Theyll think Ive told yeh See you later then said Harry .Hagrid shuffled off .What was he hiding behind his back ?said Hermione thoughtfully .Do you think it had anything to do with the Stone ?Im going to see what section he was in said Ron whod had enough of working .He came back a minute later with a pile of books in his arms and slammed them down on the table .Dragons .he whispered .Hagrid was looking up stuff about dragons !Look at these Dragon Species of Great Britain and Ireland From Egg to Inferno A Dragon Keepers Guide .Hagrid s always wanted a dragon he told me so the first time I ever met him said Harry .But its against our laws said Ron .Dragon breeding was outlawed by the Warlocks Convention of 1709 everyone knows that .Its hard to stop Muggles from noticing us if were keeping dragons in the back garden anyway you cant tame dragons its dangerous .You should see the burns Charlies got off wild ones in Romania .But there arent wild dragons in Britain ?said Harry .Of course there are said Ron .Common Welsh Green and Hebridean Blacks .The Ministry of Magic has a job hushing them up I can tell you .Our kind have to keep putting spells on Muggles whove spotted them to make them forget .So what on earths Hagrid up to ?said Hermione .When they knocked on the door of the gamekeepers hut an hour later they were surprised to see that all the curtains were closed .Hagrid called Who is it ?before he let them in and then shut the door quickly behind them .It was stifling hot inside .Even though it was such a warm day there was a blazing fire in the grate .Hagrid made them tea and offered them stoat sandwiches which they refused .So yeh wanted to ask me somethin ?Yes said Harry .There was no point beating around the bush .We were wondering if you could tell us whats guarding the Sorcerers Stone apart from Fluffy .Hagrid frowned at him .O course I cant he said .Number one I don know meself .Number two yeh know too much already so I wouldn tell yeh if I could .That Stones here fer a good reason .It was almost stolen outta Gringotts I sppose yehve worked that out an all ?Beats me how yeh even know abou Fluffy .Oh come on Hagrid you might not want to tell us but you do know you know everything that goes on round here said Hermione in a warm flattering voice .Hagrid s beard twitched and they could tell he was smiling .We only wondered who had done the guarding really .Hermione went on .We wondered who Dumbledore had trusted enough to help him apart from you .Hagrid s chest swelled at these last words .Harry and Ron beamed at Hermione .Well I don spose it could hurt ter tell yeh that .lets see .he borrowed Fluffy from me .then some o the teachers did enchantments .Professor Sprout Professor Flitwick Professor McGonagall he ticked them off on his fingers Professor Quirrell an Dumbledore himself did somethin o course .Hang on Ive forgotten someone .Oh yeah Professor Snape .Snape ?Yeah yer not still on abou that are yeh ?Look Snape helped protect the Stone hes not about ter steal it .Harry knew Ron and Hermione were thinking the same as he was .If Snape had been in on protecting the Stone it must have been easy to find out how the other teachers had guarded it .He probably knew everything except it seemed Quirrells spell and how to get past Fluffy .Youre the only one who knows how to get past Fluffy arent you Hagrid ?said Harry anxiously .And you wouldnt tell anyone would you ?Not even one of the teachers ?Not a soul knows except me an Dumbledore said Hagrid proudly .Well thats something Harry muttered to the others .Hagrid can we have a window open ?Im boiling .Cant Harry sorry said Hagrid .Harry noticed him glance at the fire .Harry looked at it too .Hagrid whats that ?But he already knew what it was .In the very heart of the fire underneath the kettle was a huge black egg .Ah said Hagrid fiddling nervously with his beard Thats er .Where did you get it Hagrid ?said Ron crouching over the fire to get a closer look at the egg .It mustve cost you a fortune .Won it said Hagrid .Las night .I was down in the village havin a few drinks an got into a game o cards with a stranger .Think he was quite glad ter get rid of it ter be honest .But what are you going to do with it when its hatched ?said Hermione .Well Ive bin doin some readin said Hagrid pulling a large book from under his pillow .Got this outta the library Dragon Breeding for Pleasure and Profit its a bit outta date o course but its all in here .Keep the egg in the fire cause their mothers breathe on em see an when it hatches feed it on a bucket o brandy mixed with chicken blood every half hour .An see here how ter recognize diffrent eggs what I got theres a Norwegian Ridgeback .Theyre rare them .He looked very pleased with himself but Hermione didnt .Hagrid you live in a wooden house she said .But Hagrid wasnt listening .He was humming merrily as he stoked the fire .So now they had something else to worry about what might happen to Hagrid if anyone found out he was hiding an illegal dragon in his hut .Wonder what its like to have a peaceful life Ron sighed as evening after evening they struggled through all the extra homework they were getting .Hermione had now started making study schedules for Harry and Ron too .It was driving them nuts .Then one breakfast time Hedwig brought Harry another note from Hagrid .He had written only two words Its hatching .Ron wanted to skip Herbology and go straight down to the hut .Hermione wouldnt hear of it .Hermione how many times in our lives are we going to see a dragon hatching ?Weve got lessons well get into trouble and thats nothing to what Hagrid s going to be in when someone finds out what hes doing Shut up !Harry whispered .Malfoy was only a few feet away and he had stopped dead to listen .How much had he heard ?Harry didnt like the look on Malfoys face at all .Ron and Hermione argued all the way to Herbology and in the end Hermione agreed to run down to Hagrids with the other two during morning break .When the bell sounded from the castle at the end of their lesson the three of them dropped their trowels at once and hurried through the grounds to the edge of the forest .Hagrid greeted them looking flushed and excited .Its nearly out .He ushered them inside .The egg was lying on the table .There were deep cracks in it .Something was moving inside a funny clicking noise was coming from it .They all drew their chairs up to the table and watched with bated breath .All at once there was a scraping noise and the egg split open .The baby dragon flopped onto the table .It wasnt exactly pretty Harry thought it looked like a crumpled black umbrella .Its spiny wings were huge compared to its skinny jet body it had a long snout with wide nostrils the stubs of horns and bulging orange eyes .It sneezed .A couple of sparks flew out of its snout .Isnt he beautiful ?Hagrid murmured .He reached out a hand to stroke the dragons head .It snapped at his fingers showing pointed fangs .Bless him look he knows his mommy !said Hagrid .Hagrid said Hermione how fast do Norwegian Ridgebacks grow exactly ?Hagrid was about to answer when the color suddenly drained from his face he leapt to his feet and ran to the window .Whats the matter ?Someone was lookin through the gap in the curtains its a kid hes runnin back up ter the school .Harry bolted to the door and looked out .Even at a distance there was no mistaking him .Malfoy had seen the dragon .Something about the smile lurking on Malfoys face during the next week made Harry Ron and Hermione very nervous .They spent most of their free time in Hagrid s darkened hut trying to reason with him .Just let him go Harry urged .Set him free .I cant said Hagrid .Hes too little .Hed die .They looked at the dragon .It had grown three times in length in just a week .Smoke kept furling out of its nostrils .Hagrid hadnt been doing his gamekeeping duties because the dragon was keeping him so busy .There were empty brandy bottles and chicken feathers all over the floor .Ive decided to call him Norbert said Hagrid looking at the dragon with misty eyes .He really knows me now watch .Norbert !Norbert !Wheres Mommy ?Hes lost his marbles Ron muttered in Harrys ear .Hagrid said Harry loudly give it two weeks and Norberts going to be as long as your house .Malfoy could go to Dumbledore at any moment .Hagrid bit his lip .I I know I cant keep him forever but I cant jus dump him cant .Harry suddenly turned to Ron .Charlie he said .Youre losing it too said Ron .Im Ron remember ?No Charlie your brother Charlie .In Romania .Studying dragons .We could send Norbert to him .Charlie can take care of him and then put him back in the wild !Brilliant !said Ron .How about it Hagrid ?And in the end Hagrid agreed that they could send an owl to Charlie to ask him .The following week dragged by .Wednesday night found Hermione and Harry sitting alone in the common room long after everyone else had gone to bed .The clock on the wall had just chimed midnight when the portrait hole burst open .Ron appeared out of nowhere as he pulled off Harrys Invisibility Cloak .He had been down at Hagrids hut helping him feed Norbert who was now eating dead rats by the crate .It bit me !he said showing them his hand which was wrapped in a bloody handkerchief .Im not going to be able to hold a quill for a week .I tell you that dragons the most horrible animal Ive ever met but the way Hagrid goes on about it youd think it was a fluffy little bunny rabbit .When it bit me he told me off for frightening it .And when I left he was singing it a lullaby .There was a tap on the dark window .Its Hedwig !said Harry hurrying to let her in .Shell have Charlies answer !The three of them put their heads together to read the note .Dear Ron How are you ?Thanks for the letter Id be glad to take the Norwegian Ridgeback but it wont be easy getting him here .I think the best thing will be to send him over with some friends of mine who are coming to visit me next week .Trouble is they mustnt be seen carrying an illegal dragon .Could you get the Ridgeback up the tallest tower at midnight on Saturday ?They can meet you there and take him away while its still dark .Send me an answer as soon as possible .Love Charlie They looked at one another .Weve got the Invisibility Cloak said Harry .It shouldnt be too difficult I think the cloaks big enough to cover two of us and Norbert .It was a mark of how bad the last week had been that the other two agreed with him .Anything to get rid of Norbert and Malfoy .There was a hitch .By the next morning Rons bitten hand had swollen to twice its usual size .He didnt know whether it was safe to go to Madam Pomfrey would she recognize a dragon bite ?By the afternoon though he had no choice .The cut had turned a nasty shade of green .It looked as if Norberts fangs were poisonous .Harry and Hermione rushed up to the hospital wing at the end of the day to find Ron in a terrible state in bed .Its not just my hand he whispered although that feels like its about to fall off .Malfoy told Madam Pomfrey he wanted to borrow one of my books so he could come and have a good laugh at me .He kept threatening to tell her what really bit me Ive told her it was a dog but I dont think she believes me I shouldnt have hit him at the Quidditch match thats why hes doing this .Harry and Hermione tried to calm Ron down .Itll all be over at midnight on Saturday said Hermione but this didnt soothe Ron at all .On the contrary he sat bolt upright and broke into a sweat .Midnight on Saturday !he said in a hoarse voice .Oh no oh no Ive just remembered Charlies letter was in that book Malfoy took hes going to know were getting rid of Norbert .Harry and Hermione didnt get a chance to answer .Madam Pomfrey came over at that moment and made them leave saying Ron needed sleep .Its too late to change the plan now Harry told Hermione .We havent got time to send Charlie another owl and this could be our only chance to get rid of Norbert .Well have to risk it .And we have got the Invisibility Cloak Malfoy doesnt know about that .They found Fang the boarhound sitting outside with a bandaged tail when they went to tell Hagrid who opened a window to talk to them .I wont let you in he puffed .Norberts at a tricky stage nothin I cant handle .When they told him about Charlies letter his eyes filled with tears although that might have been because Norbert had just bitten him on the leg .Aargh !Its all right he only got my boot jus playin hes only a baby after all .The baby banged its tail on the wall making the windows rattle .Harry and Hermione walked back to the castle feeling Saturday couldnt come quickly enough .They would have felt sorry for Hagrid when the time came for him to say goodbye to Norbert if they hadnt been so worried about what they had to do .It was a very dark cloudy night and they were a bit late arriving at Hagrid s hut because theyd had to wait for Peeves to get out of their way in the entrance hall where hed been playing tennis against the wall .Hagrid had Norbert packed and ready in a large crate .Hes got lots o rats an some brandy fer the journey said Hagrid in a muffled voice .An Ive packed his teddy bear in case he gets lonely .From inside the crate came ripping noises that sounded to Harry as though the teddy was having his head torn off .Byebye Norbert !Hagrid sobbed as Harry and Hermione covered the crate with the Invisibility Cloak and stepped underneath it themselves .Mommy will never forget you !How they managed to get the crate back up to the castle they never knew .Midnight ticked nearer as they heaved Norbert up the marble staircase in the entrance hall and along the dark corridors .Up another staircase then another even one of Harrys shortcuts didnt make the work much easier .Nearly there !Harry panted as they reached the corridor beneath the tallest tower .Then a sudden movement ahead of them made them almost drop the crate .Forgetting that they were already invisible they shrank into the shadows staring at the dark outlines of two people grappling with each other ten feet away .A lamp flared .Professor McGonagall in a tartan bathrobe and a hair net had Malfoy by the ear .Detention !she shouted .And twenty points from Slytherin !Wandering around in the middle of the night how dare you You dont understand Professor .Harry Potters coming hes got a dragon !What utter rubbish !How dare you tell such lies !Come on I shall see Professor Snape about you Malfoy !The steep spiral staircase up to the top of the tower seemed the easiest thing in the world after that .Not until theyd stepped out into the cold night air did they throw off the cloak glad to be able to breathe properly again .Hermione did a sort of jig .Malfoys got detention !I could sing !Dont Harry advised her .Chuckling about Malfoy they waited Norbert thrashing about in his crate .About ten minutes later four broomsticks came swooping down out of the darkness .Charlies friends were a cheery lot .They showed Harry and Hermione the harness theyd rigged up so they could suspend Norbert between them .They all helped buckle Norbert safely into it and then Harry and Hermione shook hands with the others and thanked them very much .At last Norbert was going .going .gone .They slipped back down the spiral staircase their hearts as light as their hands now that Norbert was off them .No more dragon Malfoy in detention what could spoil their happiness ?The answer to that was waiting at the foot of the stairs .As they stepped into the corridor Filchs face loomed suddenly out of the darkness .Well well well he whispered we are in trouble .Theyd left the Invisibility Cloak on top of the tower .THE FORBIDDEN FOREST Things couldnt have been worse .Filch took them down to Professor McGonagalls study on the first floor where they sat and waited without saying a word to each other .Hermione was trembling .Excuses alibis and wild coverup stories chased each other around Harrys brain each more feeble than the last .He couldnt see how they were going to get out of trouble this time .They were cornered .How could they have been so stupid as to forget the cloak ?There was no reason on earth that Professor McGonagall would accept for their being out of bed and creeping around the school in the dead of night let alone being up the tallest Astronomy Tower which was outofbounds except for classes .Add Norbert and the Invisibility Cloak and they might as well be packing their bags already .Had Harry thought that things couldnt have been worse ?He was wrong .When Professor McGonagall appeared she was leading Neville .Harry !Neville burst out the moment he saw the other two .I was trying to find you to warn you I heard Malfoy saying he was going to catch you he said you had a drag Harry shook his head violently to shut Neville up but Professor McGonagall had seen .She looked more likely to breathe fire than Norbert as she towered over the three of them .I would never have believed it of any of you .Mr Filch says you were up in the Astronomy Tower .Its one oclock in the morning .Explain yourselves .It was the first time Hermione had ever failed to answer a teachers question .She was staring at her slippers as still as a statue .I think Ive got a good idea of whats been going on said Professor McGonagall .It doesnt take a genius to work it out .You fed Draco Malfoy some cockand bull story about a dragon trying to get him out of bed and into trouble .Ive already caught him .I suppose you think its funny that Longbottom here heard the story and believed it too ?Harry caught Nevilles eye and tried to tell him without words that this wasnt true because Neville was looking stunned and hurt .Poor blundering Neville Harry knew what it must have cost him to try and find them in the dark to warn them .Im disgusted said Professor McGonagall .Four students out of bed in one night !Ive never heard of such a thing before !You Miss Granger I thought you had more sense .As for you Mr Potter I thought Gryffindor meant more to you than this .All three of you will receive detentions yes you too Mr Longbottom nothing gives you the right to walk around school at night especially these days its very dangerous and fifty points will be taken from Gryffindor .Fifty ?Harry gasped they would lose the lead the lead hed won in the last Quidditch match .Fifty points each said Professor McGonagall breathing heavily through her long pointed nose .Professor please You cant Dont tell me what I can and cant do Potter .Now get back to bed all of you .Ive never been more ashamed of Gryffindor students .A hundred and fifty points lost .That put Gryffindor in last place .In one night theyd ruined any chance Gryffindor had had for the House Cup .Harry felt as though the bottom had dropped out of his stomach .How could they ever make up for this ?Harry didnt sleep all night .He could hear Neville sobbing into his pillow for what seemed like hours .Harry couldnt think of anything to say to comfort him .He knew Neville like himself was dreading the dawn .What would happen when the rest of Gryffindor found out what theyd done ?At first Gryffindors passing the giant hourglasses that recorded the House points the next day thought there d been a mistake .How could they suddenly have a hundred and fifty points fewer than yesterday ?And then the story started to spread Harry Potter the famous Harry Potter their hero of two Quidditch matches had lost them all those points him and a couple of other stupid first years .From being one of the most popular and admired people at the school Harry was suddenly the most hated .Even Ravenclaws and Hufflepuffs turned on him because everyone had been longing to see Slytherin lose the House Cup .Everywhere Harry went people pointed and didnt trouble to lower their voices as they insulted him .Slytherins on the other hand clapped as he walked past them whistling and cheering Thanks Potter we owe you one !Only Ron stood by him .Theyll all forget this in a few weeks .Fred and George have lost loads of points in all the time theyve been here and people still like them .Theyve never lost a hundred and fifty points in one go though have they ?said Harry miserably .Well no Ron admitted .It was a bit late to repair the damage but Harry swore to himself not to meddle in things that werent his business from now on .Hed had it with sneaking around and spying .He felt so ashamed of himself that he went to Wood and offered to resign from the Quidditch team .Resign ?Wood thundered .What goodll that do ?How are we going to get any points back if we cant win at Quidditch ?But even Quidditch had lost its fun .The rest of the team wouldnt speak to Harry during practice and if they had to speak about him they called him the Seeker .Hermione and Neville were suffering too .They didnt have as bad a time as Harry because they werent as wellknown but nobody would speak to them either .Hermione had stopped drawing attention to herself in class keeping her head down and working in silence .Harry was almost glad that the exams werent far away .All the studying he had to do kept his mind off his misery .He Ron and Hermione kept to themselves working late into the night trying to remember the ingredients in complicated potions learn charms and spells by heart memorize the dates of magical discoveries and goblin rebellions .Then about a week before the exams were due to start Harrys new resolution not to interfere in anything that didnt concern him was put to an unexpected test .Walking back from the library on his own one afternoon he heard somebody whimpering from a classroom up ahead .As he drew closer he heard Quirrells voice .No no not again please It sounded as though someone was threatening him .Harry moved closer .All right all right he heard Quirrell sob .Next second Quirrell came hurrying out of the classroom straightening his turban .He was pale and looked as though he was about to cry .He strode out of sight Harry didnt think Quirrell had even noticed him .He waited until Quirrells footsteps had disappeared then peered into the classroom .It was empty but a door stood ajar at the other end .Harry was halfway toward it before he remembered what hed promised himself about not meddling .All the same hed have gambled twelve Sorcerers Stones that Snape had just left the room and from what Harry had just heard Snape would be walking with a new spring in his step Quirrell seemed to have given in at last .Harry went back to the library where Hermione was testing Ron on Astronomy .Harry told them what hed heard .Snapes done it then !said Ron .If Quirrells told him how to break his AntiDark Force spell Theres still Fluffy though said Hermione .Maybe Snapes found out how to get past him without asking Hagrid said Ron looking up at the thousands of books surrounding them .I bet theres a book somewhere in here telling you how to get past a giant threeheaded dog .So what do we do Harry ?The light of adventure was kindling again in Rons eyes but Hermione answered before Harry could .Go to Dumbledore .Thats what we should have done ages ago .If we try anything ourselves well be thrown out for sure .But weve got no proof .said Harry .Quirrells too scared to back us up .Snapes only got to say he doesnt know how the troll got in at Halloween and that he was nowhere near the third floor who do you think theyll believe him or us ?Its not exactly a secret we hate him Dumbledore ll think we made it up to get him sacked .Filch wouldnt help us if his life depended on it hes too friendly with Snape and the more students get thrown out the better hell think .And dont forget were not supposed to know about the Stone or Fluffy .Thatll take a lot of explaining .Hermione looked convinced but Ron didnt .If we just do a bit of poking around No said Harry flatly weve done enough poking around .He pulled a map of Jupiter toward him and started to learn the names of its moons .The following morning notes were delivered to Harry Hermione and Neville at the breakfast table .They were all the same Your detention will take place at eleven oclock tonight .Meet Mr Filch in the entrance hall .Professor M .McGonagall Harry had forgotten they still had detentions to do in the furor over the points theyd lost .He half expected Hermione to complain that this was a whole night of studying lost but she didnt say a word .Like Harry she felt they deserved what theyd got .At eleven oclock that night they said goodbye to Ron in the common room and went down to the entrance hall with Neville .Filch was already there and so was Malfoy .Harry had also forgotten that Malfoy had gotten a detention too .Follow me said Filch lighting a lamp and leading them outside .I bet youll think twice about breaking a school rule again wont you eh ?he said leering at them .Oh yes .hard work and pain are the best teachers if you ask me .Its just a pity they let the old punishments die out .hang you by your wrists from the ceiling for a few days Ive got the chains still in my office keep em well oiled in case theyre ever needed .Right off we go and dont think of running off now itll be worse for you if you do .They marched off across the dark grounds .Neville kept sniffing .Harry wondered what their punishment was going to be .It must be something really horrible or Filch wouldnt be sounding so delighted .The moon was bright but clouds scudding across it kept throwing them into darkness .Ahead Harry could see the lighted windows of Hagrids hut .Then they heard a distant shout .Is that you Filch ?Hurry up I want ter get started .Harrys heart rose if they were going to be working with Hagrid it wouldnt be so bad .His relief must have showed in his face because Filch said I suppose you think youll be enjoying yourself with that oaf ?Well think again boy its into the forest youre going and Im much mistaken if youll all come out in one piece .At this Neville let out a little moan and Malfoy stopped dead in his tracks .The forest ?he repeated and he didnt sound quite as cool as usual .We cant go in there at night theres all sorts of things in there werewolves I heard .Neville clutched the sleeve of Harrys robe and made a choking noise .Thats your problem isnt it ?said Filch his voice cracking with glee .Shouldve thought of them werewolves before you got in trouble shouldnt you ?Hagrid came striding toward them out of the dark Fang at his heel .He was carrying his large crossbow and a quiver of arrows hung over his shoulder .Abou time he said .I bin waitin fer half an hour already .All right Harry Hermione ?I shouldnt be too friendly to them Hagrid said Filch coldly theyre here to be punished after all .Thats why yer late is it ?said Hagrid frowning at Filch .Bin lecturin them eh ?Snot your place ter do that .Yehve done yer bit Ill take over from here .Ill be back at dawn said Filch for whats left of them he added nastily and he turned and started back toward the castle his lamp bobbing away in the darkness .Malfoy now turned to Hagrid .Im not going in that forest he said and Harry was pleased to hear the note of panic in his voice .Yeh are if yeh want ter stay at Hogwarts said Hagrid fiercely .Yehve done wrong an now yehve got ter pay fer it .But this is servant stuff its not for students to do .I thought wed be copying lines or something if my father knew I was doing this hed tell yer thats how it is at Hogwarts Hagrid growled .Copyin lines !What goods that ter anyone ?Yehll do summat useful or yehll get out .If yeh think yer fatherd rather you were expelled then get back off ter the castle an pack .Go on !Malfoy didnt move .He looked at Hagrid furiously but then dropped his gaze .Right then said Hagrid now listen carefully cause its dangerous what were gonna do tonight an I don want no one takin risks .Follow me over here a moment .He led them to the very edge of the forest .Holding his lamp up high he pointed down a narrow winding earth track that disappeared into the thick black trees .A light breeze lifted their hair as they looked into the forest .Look there said Hagrid see that stuff shinin on the ground ?Silvery stuff ?Thats unicorn blood .Theres a unicorn in there bin hurt badly by summat .This is the second time in a week .I found one dead last Wednesday .Were gonna try an find the poor thing .We might have ter put it out of its misery .And what if whatever hurt the unicorn finds us first ?said Malfoy unable to keep the fear out of his voice .Theres nothin that lives in the forest thatll hurt yeh if yer with me or Fang said Hagrid .An keep ter the path .Right now were gonna split inter two parties an follow the trail in diffrent directions .Theres blood all over the place it mustve bin staggerin around since last night at least .I want Fang said Malfoy quickly looking at Fangs long teeth .All right but I warn yeh hes a coward said Hagrid .So me Harry an Hermionell go one way an Draco Neville an Fangll go the other .Now if any of us finds the unicorn well send up green sparks right ?Get yer wands out an practice now thats it an if anyone gets in trouble send up red sparks an well all come an find yeh so be careful lets go .The forest was black and silent .A little way into it they reached a fork in the earth path and Harry Hermione and Hagrid took the left path while Malfoy Neville and Fang took the right .They walked in silence their eyes on the ground .Every now and then a ray of moonlight through the branches above lit a spot of silverblue blood on the fallen leaves .Harry saw that Hagrid looked very worried .Could a werewolf be killing the unicorns ?Harry asked .Not fast enough said Hagrid .Its not easy ter catch a unicorn theyre powerful magic creatures .I never knew one ter be hurt before .They walked past a mossy tree stump .Harry could hear running water there must be a stream somewhere close by .There were still spots of unicorn blood here and there along the winding path .You all right Hermione ?Hagrid whispered .Don worry it cantve gone far if its this badly hurt an then well be able ter GET BEHIND THAT TREE !Hagrid seized Harry and Hermione and hoisted them off the path behind a towering oak .He pulled out an arrow and fitted it into his crossbow raising it ready to fire .The three of them listened .Something was slithering over dead leaves nearby it sounded like a cloak trailing along the ground .Hagrid was squinting up the dark path but after a few seconds the sound faded away .I knew it he murmured .Theres summat in here that shouldn be .A werewolf ?Harry suggested .That wasn no werewolf an it wasn no unicorn neither said Hagrid grimly .Right follow me but careful now .They walked more slowly ears straining for the faintest sound .Suddenly in a clearing ahead something definitely moved .Whos there ?Hagrid called .Show yerself Im armed !And into the clearing came was it a man or a horse ?To the waist a man with red hair and beard but below that was a horses gleaming chestnut body with a long reddish tail .Harry and Hermiones jaws dropped .Oh its you Ronan said Hagrid in relief .How are yeh ?He walked forward and shook the centaurs hand .Good evening to you Hagrid said Ronan .He had a deep sorrowful voice .Were you going to shoot me ?Cant be too careful Ronan said Hagrid patting his crossbow .Theres summat bad loose in this forest .This is Harry Potter an Hermione Granger by the way .Students up at the school .An this is Ronan you two .Hes a centaur .Wed noticed said Hermione faintly .Good evening said Ronan .Students are you ?And do you learn much up at the school ?Erm A bit said Hermione timidly .A bit .Well thats something .Ronan sighed .He flung back his head and stared at the sky .Mars is bright tonight .Yeah said Hagrid glancing up too .Listen Im glad weve run inter yeh Ronan cause theres a unicorn bin hurt you seen anythin ?Ronan didnt answer immediately .He stared unblinkingly upward then sighed again .Always the innocent are the first victims he said .So it has been for ages past so it is now .Yeah said Hagrid but have yeh seen anythin Ronan ?Anythin unusual ?Mars is bright tonight Ronan repeated while Hagrid watched him impatiently .Unusually bright .Yeah but I was meanin anythin unusual a bit nearer home said Hagrid .So yeh havent noticed anythin strange ?Yet again Ronan took a while to answer .At last he said The forest hides many secrets .A movement in the trees behind Ronan made Hagrid raise his bow again but it was only a second centaur blackhaired and bodied and wilderlooking than Ronan .Hullo Bane said Hagrid .All right ?Good evening Hagrid I hope you are well ?Well enough .Look Ive jus bin askin Ronan you seen anythin odd in here lately ?Theres a unicorn bin injured would yeh know anythin about it ?Bane walked over to stand next to Ronan .He looked skyward .Mars is bright tonight he said simply .Weve heard said Hagrid grumpily .Well if either of you do see anythin let me know wont yeh ?Well be off then .Harry and Hermione followed him out of the clearing staring over their shoulders at Ronan and Bane until the trees blocked their view .Never said Hagrid irritably try an get a straight answer out of a centaur .Ruddy stargazers .Not interested in anythin closern the moon .Are there many of them in here ?asked Hermione .Oh a fair few .Keep themselves to themselves mostly but theyre good enough about turnin up if ever I want a word .Theyre deep mind centaurs .they know things .jus don let on much .Dyou think that was a centaur we heard earlier ?said Harry .Did that sound like hooves to you ?Nah if yeh ask me that was whats bin killin the unicorns never heard anythin like it before .They walked on through the dense dark trees .Harry kept looking nervously over his shoulder .He had the nasty feeling they were being watched .He was very glad they had Hagrid and his crossbow with them .They had just passed a bend in the path when Hermione grabbed Hagrid s arm .Hagrid !Look !Red sparks the others are in trouble !You two wait here !Hagrid shouted .Stay on the path Ill come back for yeh !They heard him crashing away through the undergrowth and stood looking at each other very scared until they couldnt hear anything but the rustling of leaves around them .You dont think theyve been hurt do you ?whispered Hermione .I dont care if Malfoy has but if somethings got Neville .its our fault hes here in the first place .The minutes dragged by .Their ears seemed sharper than usual .Harrys seemed to be picking up every sigh of the wind every cracking twig .What was going on ?Where were the others ?At last a great crunching noise announced Hagrids return .Malfoy Neville and Fang were with him .Hagrid was fuming .Malfoy it seemed had sneaked up behind Neville and grabbed him as a joke .Neville had panicked and sent up the sparks .Well be lucky ter catch anythin now with the racket you two were makin .Right were changin groups Neville you stay with me an Hermione Harry you go with Fang an this idiot .Im sorry Hagrid added in a whisper to Harry but hell have a harder time frightenin you an weve gotta get this done .So Harry set off into the heart of the forest with Malfoy and Fang .They walked for nearly half an hour deeper and deeper into the forest until the path became almost impossible to follow because the trees were so thick .Harry thought the blood seemed to be getting thicker .There were splashes on the roots of a tree as though the poor creature had been thrashing around in pain close by .Harry could see a clearing ahead through the tangled branches of an ancient oak .Look he murmured holding out his arm to stop Malfoy .Something bright white was gleaming on the ground .They inched closer .It was the unicorn all right and it was dead .Harry had never seen anything so beautiful and sad .Its long slender legs were stuck out at odd angles where it had fallen and its mane was spread pearlywhite on the dark leaves .Harry had taken one step toward it when a slithering sound made him freeze where he stood .A bush on the edge of the clearing quivered .Then out of the shadows a hooded figure came crawling across the ground like some stalking beast .Harry Malfoy and Fang stood transfixed .The cloaked figure reached the unicorn lowered its head over the wound in the animals side and began to drink its blood .aaRGH !Malfoy let out a terrible scream and bolted so did Fang .The hooded figure raised its head and looked right at Harry unicorn blood was dribbling down its front .It got to its feet and came swiftly toward Harry he couldnt move for fear .Then a pain like hed never felt before pierced his head it was as though his scar were on fire .Half blinded he staggered backward .He heard hooves behind him galloping and something jumped clean over Harry charging at the figure .The pain in Harrys head was so bad he fell to his knees .It took a minute or two to pass .When he looked up the figure had gone .A centaur was standing over him not Ronan or Bane this one looked younger he had whiteblond hair and a palomino body .Are you all right ?said the centaur pulling Harry to his feet .Yes thank you what was that ?The centaur didnt answer .He had astonishingly blue eyes like pale sapphires .He looked carefully at Harry his eyes lingering on the scar that stood out livid on Harrys forehead .You are the Potter boy he said .You had better get back to Hagrid .The forest is not safe at this time especially for you .Can you ride ?It will be quicker this way .My name is Firenze he added as he lowered himself on to his front legs so that Harry could clamber onto his back .There was suddenly a sound of more galloping from the other side of the clearing .Ronan and Bane came bursting through the trees their flanks heaving and sweaty .Firenze !Bane thundered .What are you doing ?You have a human on your back !Have you no shame ?Are you a common mule ?Do you realize who this is ?said Firenze .This is the Potter boy .The quicker he leaves this forest the better .What have you been telling him ?growled Bane .Remember Firenze we are sworn not to set ourselves against the heavens .Have we not read what is to come in the movements of the planets ?Ronan pawed the ground nervously .Im sure Firenze thought he was acting for the best he said in his gloomy voice .Bane kicked his back legs in anger .For the best !What is that to do with us ?Centaurs are concerned with what has been foretold !It is not our business to run around like donkeys after stray humans in our forest !Firenze suddenly reared on to his hind legs in anger so that Harry had to grab his shoulders to stay on .Do you not see that unicorn ?Firenze bellowed at Bane .Do you not understand why it was killed ?Or have the planets not let you in on that secret ?I set myself against what is lurking in this forest Bane yes with humans alongside me if I must .And Firenze whisked around with Harry clutching on as best he could they plunged off into the trees leaving Ronan and Bane behind them .Harry didnt have a clue what was going on .Whys Bane so angry ?he asked .What was that thing you saved me from anyway ?Firenze slowed to a walk warned Harry to keep his head bowed in case of lowhanging branches but did not answer Harrys question .They made their way through the trees in silence for so long that Harry thought Firenze didnt want to talk to him anymore .They were passing through a particularly dense patch of trees however when Firenze suddenly stopped .Harry Potter do you know what unicorn blood is used for ?No said Harry startled by the odd question .Weve only used the horn and tail hair in Potions .That is because it is a monstrous thing to slay a unicorn said Firenze .Only one who has nothing to lose and everything to gain would commit such a crime .The blood of a unicorn will keep you alive even if you are an inch from death but at a terrible price .You have slain something pure and defenseless to save yourself and you will have but a halflife a cursed life from the moment the blood touches your lips .Harry stared at the back of Firenzes head which was dappled silver in the moonlight .But whod be that desperate ?he wondered aloud .If youre going to be cursed forever deaths better isnt it ?It is Firenze agreed unless all you need is to stay alive long enough to drink something else something that will bring you back to full strength and power something that will mean you can never die .Mr Potter do you know what is hidden in the school at this very moment ?The Sorcerers Stone !Of course the Elixir of Life !But I dont understand who Can you think of nobody who has waited many years to return to power who has clung to life awaiting their chance ?It was as though an iron fist had clenched suddenly around Harrys heart .Over the rustling of the trees he seemed to hear once more what Hagrid had told him on the night they had met Some say he died .Codswallop in my opinion .Dunno if he had enough human left in him to die .Do you mean Harry croaked that was VoZ Harry !Harry are you all right ?Hermione was running toward them down the path Hagrid puffing along behind her .Im fine said Harry hardly knowing what he was saying .The unicorns dead Hagrid its in that clearing back there .This is where I leave you Firenze murmured as Hagrid hurried off to examine the unicorn .You are safe now .Harry slid off his back .Good luck Harry Potter said Firenze .The planets have been read wrongly before now even by centaurs .I hope this is one of those times .He turned and cantered back into the depths of the forest leaving Harry shivering behind him .Ron had fallen asleep in the dark common room waiting for them to return .He shouted something about Quidditch fouls when Harry roughly shook him awake .In a matter of seconds though he was wide eyed as Harry began to tell him and Hermione what had happened in the forest .Harry couldnt sit down .He paced up and down in front of the fire .He was still shaking .Snape wants the Stone for Voldemort .and Voldemorts waiting in the forest .and all this time we thought Snape just wanted to get rich .Stop saying the name !said Ron in a terrified whisper as if he thought Voldemort could hear them .Harry wasnt listening .Firenze saved me but he shouldnt have done so .Bane was furious .he was talking about interfering with what the planets say is going to happen .They must show that Voldemorts coming back .Bane thinks Firenze should have let Voldemort kill me .I suppose thats written in the stars as well .Will you stop saying the name Ron hissed .So all Ive got to wait for now is Snape to steal the Stone Harry went on feverishly then Voldemort will be able to come and finish me off .Well I suppose Bane 11 be happy .Hermione looked very frightened but she had a word of comfort .Harry everyone says Dumbledores the only one YouKnowWho was ever afraid of .With Dumbledore around YouKnowWho wont touch you .Anyway who says the centaurs are right ?It sounds like fortunetelling to me and Professor McGonagall says thats a very imprecise branch of magic .The sky had turned light before they stopped talking .They went to bed exhausted their throats sore .But the nights surprises werent over .When Harry pulled back his sheets he found his Invisibility Cloak folded neatly underneath them .There was a note pinned to it Just in case .THROUGH THE TRAPDOOR In years to come Harry would never quite remember how he had managed to get through his exams when he half expected Voldemort to come bursting through the door at any moment .Yet the days crept by and there could be no doubt that Fluffy was still alive and well behind the locked door .It was sweltering hot especially in the large classroom where they did their written papers .They had been given special new quills for the exams which had been bewitched with an AntiCheating spell .They had practical exams as well .Professor Flitwick called them one by one into his class to see if they could make a pineapple tapdance across a desk .Professor McGonagall watched them turn a mouse into a snuffbox points were given for how pretty the snuffbox was but taken away if it had whiskers .Snape made them all nervous breathing down their necks while they tried to remember how to make a Forgetfulness potion .Harry did the best he could trying to ignore the stabbing pains in his forehead which had been bothering him ever since his trip into the forest .Neville thought Harry had a bad case of exam nerves because Harry couldnt sleep but the truth was that Harry kept being woken by his old nightmare except that it was now worse than ever because there was a hooded figure dripping blood in it .Maybe it was because they hadnt seen what Harry had seen in the forest or because they didnt have scars burning on their foreheads but Ron and Hermione didnt seem as worried about the Stone as Harry .The idea of Voldemort certainly scared them but he didnt keep visiting them in dreams and they were so busy with their studying they didnt have much time to fret about what Snape or anyone else might be up to .Their very last exam was History of Magic .One hour of answering questions about batty old wizards whod invented selfstirring cauldrons and theyd be free free for a whole wonderful week until their exam results came out .When the ghost of Professor Binns told them to put down their quills and roll up their parchment Harry couldnt help cheering with the rest .That was far easier than I thought it would be said Hermione as they joined the crowds flocking out onto the sunny grounds .I neednt have learned about the 1637 Werewolf Code of Conduct or the uprising of Elfric the Eager .Hermione always liked to go through their exam papers afterward but Ron said this made him feel ill so they wandered down to the lake and flopped under a tree .The Weasley twins and Lee Jordan were tickling the tentacles of a giant squid which was basking in the warm shallows .No more studying Ron sighed happily stretching out on the grass .You could look more cheerful Harry weve got a week before we find out how badly weve done theres no need to worry yet .Harry was rubbing his forehead .I wish I knew what this means he burst out angrily .My scar keeps hurting its happened before but never as often as this .Go to Madam Pomfrey Hermione suggested .Im not ill said Harry .I think its a warning .it means dangers coming .Ron couldnt get worked up it was too hot .Harry relax Hermione s right the Stones safe as long as Dumbledores around .Anyway weve never had any proof Snape found out how to get past Fluffy .He nearly had his leg ripped off once hes not going to try it again in a hurry .And Neville will play Quidditch for England before Hagrid lets Dumbledore down .Harry nodded but he couldnt shake off a lurking feeling that there was something hed forgotten to do something important .When he tried to explain this Hermione said Thats just the exams .I woke up last night and was halfway through my Transfiguration notes before I remembered wed done that one .Harry was quite sure the unsettled feeling didnt have anything to do with work though .He watched an owl flutter toward the school across the bright blue sky a note clamped in its mouth .Hagrid was the only one who ever sent him letters .Hagrid would never betray Dumbledore .Hagrid would never tell anyone how to get past Fluffy .never .but Harry suddenly jumped to his feet .Where re you going ?said Ron sleepily .Ive just thought of something said Harry .He had turned white .Weve got to go and see Hagrid now .Why ?panted Hermione hurrying to keep up .Dont you think its a bit odd said Harry scrambling up the grassy slope that what Hagrid wants more than anything else is a dragon and a stranger turns up who just happens to have an egg in his pocket ?How many people wander around with dragon eggs if its against wizard law ?Lucky they found Hagrid dont you think ?Why didnt I see it before ?What are you talking about ?said Ron but Harry sprinting across the grounds toward the forest didnt answer .Hagrid was sitting in an armchair outside his house his trousers and sleeves were rolled up and he was shelling peas into a large bowl .Hullo he said smiling .Finished yer exams ?Got time fer a drink ?Yes please said Ron but Harry cut him off .No were in a hurry .Hagrid Ive got to ask you something .You know that night you won Norbert ?What did the stranger you were playing cards with look like ?Dunno said Hagrid casually he wouldn take his cloak off .He saw the three of them look stunned and raised his eyebrows .Its not that unusual yeh get a lot o funny folk in the Hogs Head thats one o the pubs down in the village .Mighta bin a dragon dealer mightn he ?I never saw his face he kept his hood up .Harry sank down next to the bowl of peas .What did you talk to him about Hagrid ?Did you mention Hogwarts at all ?Mighta come up said Hagrid frowning as he tried to remember .Yeah .he asked what I did an I told him I was gamekeeper here .He asked a bit about the sorta creatures I look after .so I told him .an I said what Id always really wanted was a dragon .an then .I can remember too well cause he kept buyin me drinks .Lets see .yeah then he said he had the dragon egg an we could play cards fer it if I wanted .but he had ter be sure I could handle it he didn want it ter go ter any old home .So I told him after Fluffy a dragon would be easy .And did he did he seem interested in Fluffy ?Harry asked trying to keep his voice calm .Well yeah how many threeheaded dogs dyeh meet even around Hogwarts ?So I told him Fluffys a piece o cake if yeh know how to calm him down jus play him a bit o music an hell go straight off ter sleep Hagrid suddenly looked horrified .I shouldnta told yeh that !he blurted out .Forget I said it !Hey wherere yeh goin ?Harry Ron and Hermione didnt speak to each other at all until they came to a halt in the entrance hall which seemed very cold and gloomy after the grounds .Weve got to go to Dumbledore said Harry .Hagrid told that stranger how to get past Fluffy and it was either Snape or Voldemort under that cloak it mustve been easy once hed got Hagrid drunk .I just hope Dumbledore believes us .Firenze might back us up if Bane doesnt stop him .Wheres Dumbledores office ?They looked around as if hoping to see a sign pointing them in the right direction .They had never been told where Dumbledore lived nor did they know anyone who had been sent to see him .Well just have to Harry began but a voice suddenly rang across the hall .What are you three doing inside ?It was Professor McGonagall carrying a large pile of books .We want to see Professor Dumbledore said Hermione rather bravely Harry and Ron thought .See Professor Dumbledore ?Professor McGonagall repeated as though this was a very fishy thing to want to do .Why ?Harry swallowed now what ?Its sort of secret he said but he wished at once he hadnt because Professor McGonagalls nostrils flared .Professor Dumbledore left ten minutes ago she said coldly .He received an urgent owl from the Ministry of Magic and flew off for London at once .Hes gone ?said Harry frantically .Now ?Professor Dumbledore is a very great wizard Potter he has many demands on his time But this is important .Something you have to say is more important than the Ministry of Magic Potter ?Look said Harry throwing caution to the winds Professor its about the Sorcerers Stone Whatever Professor McGonagall had expected it wasnt that .The books she was carrying tumbled out of her arms but she didnt pick them up .How do you know ?she spluttered .Professor I think I know that Sn that someones going to try and steal the Stone .Ive got to talk to Professor Dumbledore .She eyed him with a mixture of shock and suspicion .Professor Dumbledore will be back tomorrow she said finally .I dont know how you found out about the Stone but rest assured no one can possibly steal it its too well protected .But Professor Potter I know what Im talking about she said shortly .She bent down and gathered up the fallen books .I suggest you all go back outside and enjoy the sunshine .But they didnt .Its tonight said Harry once he was sure Professor McGonagall was out of earshot .Snapes going through the trapdoor tonight .Hes found out everything he needs and now hes got Dumbledore out of the way .He sent that note I bet the Ministry of Magic will get a real shock when Dumbledore turns up .But what can we Hermione gasped .Harry and Ron wheeled round .Snape was standing there .Good afternoon he said smoothly .They stared at him .You shouldnt be inside on a day like this he said with an odd twisted smile .We were Harry began without any idea what he was going to say .You want to be more careful said Snape .Hanging around like this people will think youre up to something .And Gryffindor really cant afford to lose any more points can it ?Harry flushed .They turned to go outside but Snape called them back .Be warned Potter any more nighttime wanderings and I will personally make sure you are expelled .Good day to you .He strode off in the direction of the staffroom .Out on the stone steps Harry turned to the others .Right heres what weve got to do he whispered urgently .One of us has got to keep an eye on Snape wait outside the staffroom and follow him if he leaves it .Hermione youd better do that .Why me ?Its obvious said Ron .You can pretend to be waiting for Professor Flitwick you know .He put on a high voice ‘Oh Professor Flitwick Im so worried I think I got question fourteen b wrong .Oh shut up said Hermione but she agreed to go and watch out for Snape .And wed better stay outside the thirdfloor corridor Harry told Ron .Come on .But that part of the plan didnt work .No sooner had they reached the door separating Fluffy from the rest of the school than Professor McGonagall turned up again and this time she lost her temper .I suppose you think youre harder to get past than a pack of enchantments !she stormed .Enough of this nonsense !If I hear youve come anywhere near here again Ill take another fifty points from Gryffindor !Yes Weasley from my own House !Harry and Ron went back to the common room .Harry had just said At least Hermiones on Snapes tail when the portrait of the Fat Lady swung open and Hermione came in .Im sorry Harry !she wailed .Snape came out and asked me what I was doing so I said I was waiting for Flitwick and Snape went to get him and Ive only just got away I dont know where Snape went .Well thats it then isnt it ?Harry said .The other two stared at him .He was pale and his eyes were glittering .Im going out of here tonight and Im going to try and get to the Stone first .Youre mad !said Ron .You cant !said Hermione .After what McGonagall and Snape have said ?Youll be expelled !SO WHAT ?Harry shouted .Dont you understand ?If Snape gets hold of the Stone Voldemorts coming back !Havent you heard what it was like when he was trying to take over ?There wont be any Hogwarts to get expelled from !Hell flatten it or turn it into a school for the Dark Arts !Losing points doesnt matter anymore cant you see ?Dyou think hell leave you and your families alone if Gryffindor wins the House Cup ?If I get caught before I can get to the Stone well Ill have to go back to the Dursleys and wait for Voldemort to find me there its only dying a bit later than I would have because Im never going over to the Dark Side !Im going through that trapdoor tonight and nothing you two say is going to stop me !Voldemort killed my parents remember ?He glared at them .Youre right Harry said Hermione in a small voice .Ill use the Invisibility Cloak said Harry .Its just lucky I got it back .But will it cover all three of us ?said Ron .All all three of us ?Oh come off it you dont think wed let you go alone ?Of course not said Hermione briskly .How do you think youd get to the Stone without us ?Id better go and look through my books there might be something useful .But if we get caught you two will be expelled too .Not if I can help it said Hermione grimly .Flitwick told me in secret that I got a hundred and twelve percent on his exam .Theyre not throwing me out after that .After dinner the three of them sat nervously apart in the common room .Nobody bothered them none of the Gryffindors had anything to say to Harry any more after all .This was the first night he hadnt been upset by it .Hermione was skimming through all her notes hoping to come across one of the enchantments they were about to try to break .Harry and Ron didnt talk much .Both of them were thinking about what they were about to do .Slowly the room emptied as people drifted off to bed .Better get the cloak Ron muttered as Lee Jordan finally left stretching and yawning .Harry ran upstairs to their dark dormitory .He pulled out the cloak and then his eyes fell on the flute Hagrid had given him for Christmas .He pocketed it to use on Fluffy he didnt feel much like singing .He ran back down to the common room .Wed better put the cloak on here and make sure it covers all three of us if Filch spots one of our feet wandering along on its own What are you doing ?said a voice from the corner of the room .Neville appeared from behind an armchair clutching Trevor the toad who looked as though hed been making another bid for freedom .Nothing Neville nothing said Harry hurriedly putting the cloak behind his back .Neville stared at their guilty faces .Youre going out again he said .No no no said Hermione .No were not .Why dont you go to bed Neville ?Harry looked at the grandfather clock by the door .They couldnt afford to waste any more time Snape might even now be playing Fluffy to sleep .You cant go out said Neville youll be caught again .Gryffindor will be in even more trouble .You dont understand said Harry this is important .But Neville was clearly steeling himself to do something desperate .I wont let you do it he said hurrying to stand in front of the portrait hole .Ill Ill fight you !Neville Ron exploded get away from that hole and dont be an idiot Dont you call me an idiot !said Neville .I dont think you should be breaking any more rules !And you were the one who told me to stand up to people !Yes but not to us said Ron in exasperation .Neville you dont know what youre doing .He took a step forward and Neville dropped Trevor the toad who leapt out of sight .Go on then try and hit me !said Neville raising his fists .Im ready !Harry turned to Hermione .Do something he said desperately .Hermione stepped forward .Neville she said Im really really sorry about this .She raised her wand .Petrificus Totalusl she cried pointing it at Neville .Nevilles arms snapped to his sides .His legs sprang together .His whole body rigid he swayed where he stood and then fell flat on his face stiff as a board .Hermione ran to turn him over .Nevilles jaws were jammed together so he couldnt speak .Only his eyes were moving looking at them in horror .Whatve you done to him ?Harry whispered .Its the full BodyBind said Hermione miserably .Oh Neville Im so sorry .We had to Neville no time to explain said Harry .Youll understand later Neville said Ron as they stepped over him and pulled on the Invisibility Cloak .But leaving Neville lying motionless on the floor didnt feel like a very good omen .In their nervous state every statues shadow looked like Filch every distant breath of wind sounded like Peeves swooping down on them .At the foot of the first set of stairs they spotted Mrs Norris skulking near the top .Oh lets kick her just this once Ron whispered in Harrys ear but Harry shook his head .As they climbed carefully around her Mrs Norris turned her lamplike eyes on them but didnt do anything .They didnt meet anyone else until they reached the staircase up to the third floor .Peeves was bobbing halfway up loosening the carpet so that people would trip .Whos there ?he said suddenly as they climbed toward him .He narrowed his wicked black eyes .Know youre there even if I cant see you .Are you ghoulie or ghostie or wee student beastie ?He rose up in the air and floated there squinting at them .Should call Filch I should if somethings acreeping around unseen .Harry had a sudden idea .Peeves he said in a hoarse whisper the Bloody Baron has his own reasons for being invisible .Peeves almost fell out of the air in shock .He caught himself in time and hovered about a foot off the stairs .So sorry your bloodiness Mr Baron sir he said greasily .My mistake my mistake I didnt see you of course I didnt youre invisible forgive old Peevsie his little joke sir .I have business here Peeves croaked Harry .Stay away from this place tonight .I will sir I most certainly will said Peeves rising up in the air again .Hope your business goes well Baron Ill not bother you .And he scooted off .Brilliant Harry !whispered Ron .A few seconds later they were there outside the thirdfloor corridor and the door was already ajar .Well there you are Harry said quietly Snapes already got past Fluffy .Seeing the open door somehow seemed to impress upon all three of them what was facing them .Underneath the cloak Harry turned to the other two .If you want to go back I wont blame you he said .You can take the cloak I wont need it now .Dont be stupid said Ron .Were coming said Hermione .Harry pushed the door open .As the door creaked low rumbling growls met their ears .All three of the dogs noses sniffed madly in their direction even though it couldnt see them .Whats that at its feet ?Hermione whispered .Looks like a harp said Ron .Snape must have left it there .It must wake up the moment you stop playing said Harry .Well here goes .He put Hagrids flute to his lips and blew .It wasnt really a tune but from the first note the beasts eyes began to droop .Harry hardly drew breath .Slowly the dogs growls ceased it tottered on its paws and fell to its knees then it slumped to the ground fast asleep .Keep playing Ron warned Harry as they slipped out of the cloak and crept toward the trapdoor .They could feel the dogs hot smelly breath as they approached the giant heads .I think well be able to pull the door open said Ron peering over the dogs back .Want to go first Hermione ?No I dont !All right .Ron gritted his teeth and stepped carefully over the dogs legs .He bent and pulled the ring of the trapdoor which swung up and open .What can you see ?Hermione said anxiously .Nothing just black theres no way of climbing down well just have to drop .Harry who was still playing the flute waved at Ron to get his attention and pointed at himself .You want to go first ?Are you sure ?said Ron .I dont know how deep this thing goes .Give the flute to Hermione so she can keep him asleep .Harry handed the flute over .In the few seconds silence the dog growled and twitched but the moment Hermione began to play it fell back into its deep sleep .Harry climbed over it and looked down through the trapdoor .There was no sign of the bottom .He lowered himself through the hole until he was hanging on by his fingertips .Then he looked up at Ron and said If anything happens to me dont follow .Go straight to the owlery and send Hedwig to Dumbledore right ?Right said Ron .See you in a minute I hope .And Harry let go .Cold damp air rushed past him as he fell down down down and FLUMP .With a funny muffled sort of thump he landed on something soft .He sat up and felt around his eyes not used to the gloom .It felt as though he was sitting on some sort of plant .Its okay !he called up to the light the size of a postage stamp which was the open trapdoor its a soft landing you can jump !Ron followed right away .He landed sprawled next to Harry .Whats this stuff ?were his first words .Dunno some sort of plant thing .I suppose its here to break the fall .Come on Hermione !The distant music stopped .There was a loud bark from the dog but Hermione had already jumped .She landed on Harrys other side .We must be miles under the school she said .Lucky this plant things here really said Ron .Lucky shrieked Hermione .Look at you both !She leapt up and struggled toward a damp wall .She had to struggle because the moment she had landed the plant had started to twist snakelike tendrils around her ankles .As for Harry and Ron their legs had already been bound tightly in long creepers without their noticing .Hermione had managed to free herself before the plant got a firm grip on her .Now she watched in horror as the two boys fought to pull the plant off them but the more they strained against it the tighter and faster the plant wound around them .Stop moving !Hermione ordered them .I know what this is its Devils Snare !Oh Im so glad we know what its called thats a great help snarled Ron leaning back trying to stop the plant from curling around his neck .Shut up Im trying to remember how to kill it !said Hermione .Well hurry up I cant breathe !Harry gasped wrestling with it as it curled around his chest .Devils Snare Devils Snare .what did Professor Sprout say ?it likes the dark and the damp So light a fire !Harry choked .Yes of course but theres no wood !Hermione cried wringing her hands .HAVE YOU GONE MAD ?Ron bellowed .ARE YOU A WITCH OR NOT ?Oh right !said Hermione and she whipped out her wand waved it muttered something and sent a jet of the same bluebell flames she had used on Snape at the plant .In a matter of seconds the two boys felt it loosening its grip as it cringed away from the light and warmth .Wriggling and flailing it unraveled itself from their bodies and they were able to pull free .Lucky you pay attention in Herbology Hermione said Harry as he joined her by the wall wiping sweat off his face .Yeah said Ron and lucky Harry doesnt lose his head in a crisis ‘theres no wood honestly .This way said Harry pointing down a stone passageway which was the only way forward .All they could hear apart from their footsteps was the gentle drip of water trickling down the walls .The passageway sloped downward and Harry was reminded of Gringotts .With an unpleasant jolt of the heart he remembered the dragons said to be guarding vaults in the wizards bank .If they met a dragon a fullygrown dragon Norbert had been bad enough .Can you hear something ?Ron whispered .Harry listened .A soft rustling and clinking seemed to be coming from up ahead .Do you think its a ghost ?I dont know .sounds like wings to me .Theres light ahead I can see something moving .They reached the end of the passageway and saw before them a brilliantly lit chamber its ceiling arching high above them .It was full of small jewel bright birds fluttering and tumbling all around the room .On the opposite side of the chamber was a heavy wooden door .Do you think theyll attack us if we cross the room ?said Ron .Probably said Harry .They dont look very vicious but I suppose if they all swooped down at once .well theres no other choice .Ill run .He took a deep breath covered his face with his arms and sprinted across the room .He expected to feel sharp beaks and claws tearing at him any second but nothing happened .He reached the door untouched .He pulled the handle but it was locked .The other two followed him .They tugged and heaved at the door but it wouldnt budge not even when Hermione tried her Alohomora Charm .Now what ?said Ron .These birds .they cant be here just for decoration said Hermione .They watched the birds soaring overhead glittering glittering ?Theyre not birds !Harry said suddenly .Theyre keys Winged keys look carefully .So that must mean .he looked around the chamber while the other two squinted up at the flock of keys .yes look !Broomsticks !Weve got to catch the key to the door !But there are hundreds of them !Ron examined the lock on the door .Were looking for a big oldfashioned one probably silver like the handle .They each seized a broomstick and kicked off into the air soaring into the midst of the cloud of keys .They grabbed and snatched but the bewitched keys darted and dived so quickly it was almost impossible to catch one .Not for nothing though was Harry the youngest Seeker in a century .He had a knack for spotting things other people didnt .After a minutes weaving about through the whirl of rainbow feathers he noticed a large silver key that had a bent wing as if it had already been caught and stuffed roughly into the keyhole .That one !he called to the others .That big one there no there with bright blue wings the feathers are all crumpled on one side .Ron went speeding in the direction that Harry was pointing crashed into the ceiling and nearly fell off his broom .Weve got to close in on it !Harry called not taking his eyes off the key with the damaged wing .Ron you come at it from above Hermione stay below and stop it from going down and Ill try and catch it .Right NOW !Ron dived Hermione rocketed upward the key dodged them both and Harry streaked after it it sped toward the wall Harry leaned forward and with a nasty crunching noise pinned it against the stone with one hand .Ron and Hermione s cheers echoed around the high chamber .They landed quickly and Harry ran to the door the key struggling in his hand .He rammed it into the lock and turned it worked .The moment the lock had clicked open the key took flight again looking very battered now that it had been caught twice .Ready ?Harry asked the other two his hand on the door handle .They nodded .He pulled the door open .The next chamber was so dark they couldnt see anything at all .But as they stepped into it light suddenly flooded the room to reveal an astonishing sight .They were standing on the edge of a huge chessboard behind the black chessmen which were all taller than they were and carved from what looked like black stone .Facing them way across the chamber were the white pieces .Harry Ron and Hermione shivered slightly the towering white chessmen had no faces .Now what do we do ?Harry whispered .Its obvious isnt it ?said Ron .Weve got to play our way across the room .Behind the white pieces they could see another door .How ?said Hermione nervously .I think said Ron were going to have to be chessmen .He walked up to a black knight and put his hand out to touch the knights horse .At once the stone sprang to life .The horse pawed the ground and the knight turned his helmeted head to look down at Ron .Do we er have to join you to get across ?The black knight nodded .Ron turned to the other two .This needs thinking about .he said .I suppose weve got to take the place of three of the black pieces .Harry and Hermione stayed quiet watching Ron think .Finally he said Now dont be offended or anything but neither of you are that good at chess Were not offended said Harry quickly .Just tell us what to do .Well Harry you take the place of that bishop and Hermione you go there instead of that castle .What about you ?Im going to be a knight said Ron .The chessmen seemed to have been listening because at these words a knight a bishop and a castle turned their backs on the white pieces and walked off the board leaving three empty squares that Harry Ron and Hermione took .White always plays first in chess said Ron peering across the board .Yes .look .A white pawn had moved forward two squares .Ron started to direct the black pieces .They moved silently wherever he sent them .Harrys knees were trembling .What if they lost ?Harry move diagonally four squares to the right .Their first real shock came when their other knight was taken .The white queen smashed him to the floor and dragged him off the board where he lay quite still facedown .Had to let that happen said Ron looking shaken .Leaves you free to take that bishop Hermione go on .Every time one of their men was lost the white pieces showed no mercy .Soon there was a huddle of limp black players slumped along the wall .Twice Ron only just noticed in time that Harry and Hermione were in danger .He himself darted around the board taking almost as many white pieces as they had lost black ones .Were nearly there he muttered suddenly .Let me think let me think .The white queen turned her blank face toward him .Yes .said Ron softly its the only way .Ive got to be taken .NO !Harry and Hermione shouted .Thats chess !snapped Ron .Youve got to make some sacrifices !I make my move and shell take me that leaves you free to checkmate the king Harry !But Do you want to stop Snape or not ?Ron Look if you dont hurry up hell already have the Stone !There was no alternative .Ready ?Ron called his face pale but determined .Here I go now dont hang around once youve won .He stepped forward and the white queen pounced .She struck Ron hard across the head with her stone arm and he crashed to the floor Hermione screamed but stayed on her square the white queen dragged Ron to one side .He looked as if hed been knocked out .Shaking Harry moved three spaces to the left .The white king took off his crown and threw it at Harrys feet .They had won .The chessmen parted and bowed leaving the door ahead clear .With one last desperate look back at Ron Harry and Hermione charged through the door and up the next passageway .What if hes ?Hell be all right said Harry trying to convince himself .What do you reckons next ?Weve had Sprouts that was the Devils Snare Flitwick mustve put charms on the keys McGonagall transfigured the chessmen to make them alive that leaves Quirrells spell and Snapes .They had reached another door .All right ?Harry whispered .Go on .Harry pushed it open .A disgusting smell filled their nostrils making both of them pull their robes up over their noses .Eyes watering they saw flat on the floor in front of them a troll even larger than the one they had tackled out cold with a bloody lump on its head .Im glad we didnt have to fight that one Harry whispered as they stepped carefully over one of its massive legs .Come on I cant breathe .He pulled open the next door both of them hardly daring to look at what came next but there was nothing very frightening in here just a table with seven differently shaped bottles standing on it in a line .Snapes said Harry .What do we have to do ?They stepped over the threshold and immediately a fire sprang up behind them in the doorway .It wasnt ordinary fire either it was purple .At the same instant black flames shot up in the doorway leading onward .They were trapped .Look !Hermione seized a roll of paper lying next to the bottles .Harry looked over her shoulder to read it Danger lies before you while safety lies behind Two of us will help you whichever you would find One among us seven will let you move ahead Another will transport the drinker back instead Two among our number hold only nettle wine Three of us are killers waiting hidden in line .Choose unless you wish to stay here forevermore To help you in your choice we give you these clues four First however slyly the poison tries to hide You will always find some on nettle wines left side Second different are those who stand at either end But if you would move onward neither is your friend Third as you see clearly all are different size Neither dwarf nor giant holds death in their insides Fourth the second left and the second on the right Are twins once you taste them though different at first sight Hermione let out a great sigh and Harry amazed saw that she was smiling the very last thing he felt like doing .Brilliant said Hermione .This isnt magic its logic a puzzle .A lot of the greatest wizards havent got an ounce of logic theyd be stuck in here forever .But so will we wont we ?Of course not said Hermione .Everything we need is here on this paper .Seven bottles three are poison two are wine one will get us safely through the black fire and one will get us back through the purple .But how do we know which to drink ?Give me a minute .Hermione read the paper several times .Then she walked up and down the line of bottles muttering to herself and pointing at them .At last she clapped her hands .Got it she said .The smallest bottle will get us through the black fire toward the Stone .Harry looked at the tiny bottle .Theres only enough there for one of us he said .Thats hardly one swallow .They looked at each other .Which one will get you back through the purple flames ?Hermione pointed at a rounded bottle at the right end of the line .You drink that said Harry .No listen get back and get Ron .Grab brooms from the flyingkey room theyll get you out of the trapdoor and past Fluffy go straight to the owlery and send Hedwig to Dumbledore we need him .I might be able to hold Snape off for a while but Im no match for him really .But Harry what if YouKnow Whos with him ?Well I was lucky once wasnt I ?said Harry pointing at his scar .I might get lucky again .Hermiones lip trembled and she suddenly dashed at Harry and threw her arms around him .Hermionel Harry youre a great wizard you know .Im not as good as you said Harry very embarrassed as she let go of him .Me !said Hermione .Books !And cleverness !There are more important things friendship and bravery and oh Harry be carefull You drink first said Harry .You are sure which is which arent you ?Positive said Hermione .She took a long drink from the round bottle at the end and shuddered .Its not poison ?said Harry anxiously .No but its like ice .Quick go before it wears off .Good luck take care GO !Hermione turned and walked straight through the purple fire .Harry took a deep breath and picked up the smallest bottle .He turned to face the black flames .Here I come he said and he drained the little bottle in one gulp .It was indeed as though ice was flooding his body .He put the bottle down and walked forward he braced himself saw the black flames licking his body but couldnt feel them for a moment he could see nothing but dark fire then he was on the other side in the last chamber .There was already someone there but it wasnt Snape .It wasnt even Voldemort .THE MAN WITH TWO FACES It was Quirrell .You gasped Harry .Quirrell smiled .His face wasnt twitching at all .Me he said calmly .I wondered whether Id be meeting you here Potter .But I thought Snape Severus ?Quirrell laughed and it wasnt his usual quivering treble either but cold and sharp .Yes Severus does seem the type doesnt he ?So useful to have him swooping around like an overgrown bat .Next to him who would suspect pppoor st stuttering PProfessor Quirrell ?Harry couldnt take it in .This couldnt be true it couldnt .But Snape tried to kill me !No no no .tried to kill you .Your friend Miss Granger accidentally knocked me over as she rushed to set fire to Snape at that Quidditch match .She broke my eye contact with you .Another few seconds and Id have got you off that broom .Id have managed it before then if Snape hadnt been muttering a countercurse trying to save you .Snape was trying to save me ?Of course said Quirrell coolly .Why do you think he wanted to referee your next match ?He was trying to make sure I didnt do it again .Funny really .he neednt have bothered .I couldnt do anything with Dumbledore watching .All the other teachers thought Snape was trying to stop Gryffindor from winning he did make himself unpopular .and what a waste of time when after all that Im going to kill you tonight .Quirrell snapped his fingers .Ropes sprang out of thin air and wrapped themselves tightly around Harry .Youre too nosy to live Potter .Scurrying around the school on Halloween like that for all I knew youd seen me coming to look at what was guarding the Stone .You let the troll in ?Certainly .I have a special gift with trolls you must have seen what I did to the one in the chamber back there ?Unfortunately while everyone else was running around looking for it Snape who already suspected me went straight to the third floor to head me off and not only did my troll fail to beat you to death that threeheaded dog didnt even manage to bite Snape s leg off properly .Now wait quietly Potter .I need to examine this interesting mirror .It was only then that Harry realized what was standing behind Quirrell .It was the Mirror of Erised .This mirror is the key to finding the Stone Quirrell murmured tapping his way around the frame .Trust Dumbledore to come up with something like this .but hes in London .Ill be far away by the time he gets back .All Harry could think of doing was to keep Quirrell talking and stop him from concentrating on the mirror .I saw you and Snape in the forest he blurted out .Yes said Quirrell idly walking around the mirror to look at the back .He was on to me by that time trying to find out how far Id got .He suspected me all along .Tried to frighten me as though he could when I had Lord Voldemort on my side .Quirrell came back out from behind the mirror and stared hungrily into it .I see the Stone .Im presenting it to my master .but where is it ?Harry struggled against the ropes binding him but they didnt give .He had to keep Quirrell from giving his whole attention to the mirror .But Snape always seemed to hate me so much .Oh he does said Quirrell casually heavens yes .He was at Hogwarts with your father didnt you know ?They loathed each other .But he never wanted you dead .But I heard you a few days ago sobbing I thought Snape was threatening you .For the first time a spasm of fear flitted across Quirrells face .Sometimes he said I find it hard to follow my masters instructions he is a great wizard and I am weak You mean he was there in the classroom with you ?Harry gasped .He is with me wherever I go said Quirrell quietly .I met him when I traveled around the world .A foolish young man I was then full of ridiculous ideas about good and evil .Lord Voldemort showed me how wrong I was .There is no good and evil there is only power and those too weak to seek it .Since then I have served him faithfully although I have let him down many times .He has had to be very hard on me .Quirrell shivered suddenly .He does not forgive mistakes easily .When I failed to steal the Stone from Gringotts he was most displeased .He punished me .decided he would have to keep a closer watch on me .Quirrells voice trailed away .Harry was remembering his trip to Diagon Alley how could he have been so stupid ?Hed seen Quirrell there that very day shaken hands with him in the Leaky Cauldron .Quirrell cursed under his breath .I dont understand .is the Stone inside the mirror ?Should I break it ?Harrys mind was racing .What I want more than anything else in the world at the moment he thought is to find the Stone before Quirrell does .So if I look in the mirror I should see my self finding it which means Ill see where its hidden !But how can I look without Quirrell realizing what Im up to ?He tried to edge to the left to get in front of the glass without Quirrell noticing but the ropes around his ankles were too tight he tripped and fell over .Quirrell ignored him .He was still talking to himself .What does this mirror do ?How does it work ?Help me Master !And to Harrys horror a voice answered and the voice seemed to come from Quirrell himself .Use the boy .Use the boy .Quirrell rounded on Harry .Yes Potter come here .He clapped his hands once and the ropes binding Harry fell off .Harry got slowly to his feet .Come here Quirrell repeated .Look in the mirror and tell me what you see .Harry walked toward him .I must lie he thought desperately .I must look and lie about what I see thats all .Quirrell moved close behind him .Harry breathed in the funny smell that seemed to come from Quirrells turban .He closed his eyes stepped in front of the mirror and opened them again .He saw his reflection pale and scaredlooking at first .But a moment later the reflection smiled at him .It put its hand into its pocket and pulled out a blood red stone .It winked and put the Stone back in its pocket and as it did so Harry felt something heavy drop into his real pocket .Somehow incredibly hed gotten the Stone .Well ?said Quirrell impatiently .What do you see ?Harry screwed up his courage .I see myself shaking hands with Dumbledore he invented .I Ive won the House Cup for Gryffindor .Quirrell cursed again .Get out of the way he said .As Harry moved aside he felt the Sorcerers Stone against his leg .Dare he make a break for it ?But he hadnt walked five paces before a high voice spoke though Quirrell wasnt moving his lips .He lies .He lies .Potter come back here !Quirrell shouted .Tell me the truth !What did you just see ?The high voice spoke again .Let me speak to him .facetoface .Master you are not strong enough !I have strength enough .for this .Harry felt as if Devils Snare was rooting him to the spot .He couldnt move a muscle .Petrified he watched as Quirrell reached up and began to unwrap his turban .What was going on ?The turban fell away .Quirrells head looked strangely small without it .Then he turned slowly on the spot .Harry would have screamed but he couldnt make a sound .Where there should have been a back to Quirrells head there was a face the most terrible face Harry had ever seen .It was chalk white with glaring red eyes and slits for nostrils like a snake .Harry Potter .it whispered .Harry tried to take a step backward but his legs wouldnt move .See what I have become ?the face said .Mere shadow and vapor .I have form only when I can share anothers body .but there have always been those willing to let me into their hearts and minds .Unicorn blood has strengthened me these past weeks .you saw faithful Quirrell drinking it for me in the forest .and once I have the Elixir of Life I will be able to create a body of my own .Now .why dont you give me that Stone in your pocket ?So he knew .The feeling suddenly surged back into Harrys legs .He stumbled backward .Dont be a fool snarled the face .Better save your own life and join me .or youll meet the same end as your parents .They died begging me for mercy .LIAR !Harry shouted suddenly .Quirrell was walking backward at him so that Voldemort could still see him .The evil face was now smiling .How touching .it hissed .I always value bravery . .Yes boy your parents were brave .I killed your father first and he put up a courageous fight .but your mother neednt have died .she was trying to protect you .Now give me the Stone unless you want her to have died in vain .NEVER !Harry sprang toward the flame door but Voldemort screamed SEIZE HIM !and the next second Harry felt Quirrells hand close on his wrist .At once a needlesharp pain seared across Harrys scar his head felt as though it was about to split in two he yelled struggling with all his might and to his surprise Quirrell let go of him .The pain in his head lessened he looked around wildly to see where Quirrell had gone and saw him hunched in pain looking at his fingers they were blistering before his eyes .Seize him !SEIZE HIM !shrieked Voldemort again and Quirrell lunged knocking Harry clean off his feet landing on top of him both hands around Harrys neck Harrys scar was almost blinding him with pain yet he could see Quirrell howling in agony .Master I cannot hold him my hands my hands !And Quirrell though pinning Harry to the ground with his knees let go of his neck and stared bewildered at his own palms Harry could see they looked burned raw red and shiny .Then kill him fool and be done !screeched Voldemort .Quirrell raised his hand to perform a deadly curse but Harry by instinct reached up and grabbed Quirrells face aaRGH !Quirrell rolled off him his face blistering too and then Harry knew Quirrell couldnt touch his bare skin not without suffering terrible pain his only chance was to keep hold of Quirrell keep him in enough pain to stop him from doing a curse .Harry jumped to his feet caught Quirrell by the arm and hung on as tight as he could .Quirrell screamed and tried to throw Harry off the pain in Harrys head was building he couldnt see he could only hear Quirrells terrible shrieks and Voldemorts yells of KILL HIM !KILL HIM !and other voices maybe in Harrys own head crying Harry !Harry !He felt Quirrells arm wrenched from his grasp knew all was lost and fell into blackness down .down .down .Something gold was glinting just above him .The Snitch !He tried to catch it but his arms were too heavy .He blinked .It wasnt the Snitch at all .It was a pair of glasses .How strange .He blinked again .The smiling face of Albus Dumbledore swam into view above him .Good afternoon Harry said Dumbledore .Harry stared at him .Then he remembered Sir !The Stone !It was Quirrell !Hes got the Stone !Sir quick Calm yourself dear boy you are a little behind the times said Dumbledore .Quirrell does not have the Stone .Then who does ?Sir I Harry please relax or Madam Pomfrey will have me thrown out .Harry swallowed and looked around him .He realized he must be in the hospital wing .He was lying in a bed with white linen sheets and next to him was a table piled high with what looked like half the candy shop .Tokens from your friends and admirers said Dumbledore beaming .What happened down in the dungeons between you and Professor Quirrell is a complete secret so naturally the whole school knows .I believe your friends Misters Fred and George Weasley were responsible for trying to send you a toilet seat .No doubt they thought it would amuse you .Madam Pomfrey however felt it might not be very hygienic and confiscated it .How long have I been in here ?Three days .Mr Ronald Weasley and Miss Granger will be most relieved you have come round they have been extremely worried .But sir the Stone I see you are not to be distracted .Very well the Stone .Professor Quirrell did not manage to take it from you .I arrived in time to prevent that although you were doing very well on your own I must say .You got there ?You got Hermiones owl ?We must have crossed in midair .No sooner had I reached London than it became clear to me that the place I should be was the one I had just left .I arrived just in time to pull Quirrell off you It was you .I feared I might be too late .You nearly were I couldnt have kept him off the Stone much longer Not the Stone boy you the effort involved nearly killed you .For one terrible moment there I was afraid it had .As for the Stone it has been destroyed .Destroyed ?said Harry blankly .But your friend Nicolas Flamel Oh you know about Nicolas ?said Dumbledore sounding quite delighted .You did do the thing properly didnt you ?Well Nicolas and I have had a little chat and agreed its all for the best .But that means he and his wife will die wont they ?They have enough Elixir stored to set their affairs in order and then yes they will die .Dumbledore smiled at the look of amazement on Harrys face .To one as young as you Im sure it seems incredible but to Nicolas and Perenelle it really is like going to bed after a very very long day .After all to the well organized mind death is but the next great adventure .You know the Stone was really not such a wonderful thing .As much money and life as you could want !The two things most human beings would choose above all the trouble is humans do have a knack of choosing precisely those things that are worst for them .Harry lay there lost for words .Dumbledore hummed a little and smiled at the ceiling .Sir ?said Harry .Ive been thinking .Sir even if the Stones gone Vol I mean YouKnowWho Call him Voldemort Harry .Always use the proper name for things .Fear of a name increases fear of the thing itself .Yes sir .Well Voldemorts going to try other ways of coming back isnt he ?I mean he hasnt gone has he ?No Harry he has not .He is still out there somewhere perhaps looking for another body to share .not being truly alive he cannot be killed .He left Quirrell to die he shows just as little mercy to his followers as his enemies .Nevertheless Harry while you may only have delayed his return to power it will merely take someone else who is prepared to fight what seems a losing battle next time and if he is delayed again and again why he may never return to power .Harry nodded but stopped quickly because it made his head hurt .Then he said Sir there are some other things Id like to know if you can tell me .things I want to know the truth about .The truth .Dumbledore sighed .It is a beautiful and terrible thing and should therefore be treated with great caution .However I shall answer your questions unless I have a very good reason not to in which case I beg you 11 forgive me .I shall not of course lie .Well .Voldemort said that he only killed my mother because she tried to stop him from killing me .But why would he want to kill me in the first place ?Dumbledore sighed very deeply this time .Alas the first thing you ask me I cannot tell you .Not today .Not now .You will know one day .put it from your mind for now Harry .When you are older .I know you hate to hear this .when you are ready you will know .And Harry knew it would be no good to argue .But why couldnt Quirrell touch me ?Your mother died to save you .If there is one thing Voldemort cannot understand it is love .He didnt realize that love as powerful as your mothers for you leaves its own mark .Not a scar no visible sign .to have been loved so deeply even though the person who loved us is gone will give us some protection forever .It is in your very skin .Quirrell full of hatred greed and ambition sharing his soul with Voldemort could not touch you for this reason .It was agony to touch a person marked by something so good .Dumbledore now became very interested in a bird out on the windowsill which gave Harry time to dry his eyes on the sheet .When he had found his voice again Harry said And the Invisibility Cloak do you know who sent it to me ?Ah your father happened to leave it in my possession and I thought you might like it .Dumbledores eyes twinkled .Useful things .your father used it mainly for sneaking off to the kitchens to steal food when he was here .And theres something else .Fire away .Quirrell said Snape Professor Snape Harry .Yes him Quirrell said he hates me because he hated my father .Is that true ?Well they did rather detest each other .Not unlike yourself and Mr Malfoy .And then your father did something Snape could never forgive .What ?He saved his life .What ?Yes .said Dumbledore dreamily .Funny the way peoples minds work isnt it ?Professor Snape couldnt bear being in your fathers debt .I do believe he worked so hard to protect you this year because he felt that would make him and your father even .Then he could go back to hating your fathers memory in peace .Harry tried to understand this but it made his head pound so he stopped .And sir theres one more thing .Just the one ?How did I get the Stone out of the mirror ?Ah now Im glad you asked me that .It was one of my more brilliant ideas and between you and me thats saying something .You see only one who wanted to find the Stone find it but not use it would be able to get it otherwise theyd just see themselves making gold or drinking Elixir of Life .My brain surprises even me sometimes .Now enough questions .I suggest you make a start on these sweets .Ah !Bertie Botts Every Flavor Beans !I was unfortunate enough in my youth to come across a vomitflavored one and since then Im afraid Ive rather lost my liking for them but I think Ill be safe with a nice toffee dont you ?He smiled and popped the goldenbrown bean into his mouth .Then he choked and said Alas !Ear wax !Madam Pomfrey the nurse was a nice woman but very strict .Just five minutes Harry pleaded .Absolutely not .You let Professor Dumbledore in .Well of course that was the headmaster quite different .You need rest .I am resting look lying down and everything .Oh go on Madam Pomfrey .Oh very well she said .But five minutes only .And she let Ron and Hermione in .Harryl Hermione looked ready to fling her arms around him again but Harry was glad she held herself in as his head was still very sore .Oh Harry we were sure you were going to Dumbledore was so worried The whole schools talking about it said Ron .What really happened ?It was one of those rare occasions when the true story is even more strange and exciting than the wild rumors .Harry told them everything Quirrell the mirror the Stone and Voldemort .Ron and Hermione were a very good audience they gasped in all the right places and when Harry told them what was under Quirrells turban Hermione screamed out loud .So the Stones gone ?said Ron finally .Flamels just going to die ?Thats what I said but Dumbledore thinks that what was it ? ‘to the wellorganized mind death is but the next great adventure .I always said he was off his rocker said Ron looking quite impressed at how crazy his hero was .So what happened to you two ?said Harry .Well I got back all right said Hermione .I brought Ron round that took a while and we were dashing up to the owlery to contact Dumbledore when we met him in the entrance hall he already knew he just said ‘Harrys gone after him hasnt he ?and hurtled off to the third floor .Dyou think he meant you to do it ?said Ron .Sending you your fathers cloak and everything ?Well Hermione exploded if he did I mean to say thats terrible you could have been killed .No it isnt said Harry thoughtfully .Hes a funny man Dumbledore .I think he sort of wanted to give me a chance .I think he knows more or less everything that goes on here you know .I reckon he had a pretty good idea we were going to try and instead of stopping us he just taught us enough to help .I dont think it was an accident he let me find out how the mirror worked .Its almost like he thought I had the right to face Voldemort if I could .Yeah Dumbledores off his rocker all right said Ron proudly .Listen youve got to be up for the end ofyear feast tomorrow .The points are all in and Slytherin won of course you missed the last Quidditch match we were steamrollered by Ravenclaw without you but the foodll be good .At that moment Madam Pomfrey bustled over .Youve had nearly fifteen minutes now OUT she said firmly . •k k k After a good nights sleep Harry felt nearly back to normal .I want to go to the feast he told Madam Pomfrey as she straightened his many candy boxes .I can cant I ?Professor Dumbledore says you are to be allowed to go she said sniffily as though in her opinion Professor Dumbledore didnt realize how risky feasts could be .And you have another visitor .Oh good said Harry .Who is it ?Hagrid sidled through the door as he spoke .As usual when he was indoors Hagrid looked too big to be allowed .He sat down next to Harry took one look at him and burst into tears .Its all my ruddy fault !he sobbed his face in his hands .I told the evil git how ter get past Fluffy !I told him !It was the only thing he didnt know an I told him !Yeh couldve died !All fer a dragon egg !Ill never drink again !I should be chucked out an made ter live as a Muggle !Hagrid !said Harry shocked to see Hagrid shaking with grief and remorse great tears leaking down into his beard .Hagrid hed have found out somehow this is Voldemort were talking about hed have found out even if you hadnt told him .Yeh couldve died !sobbed Hagrid .An don say the name !VOLDEMORT !Harry bellowed and Hagrid was so shocked he stopped crying .Ive met him and Im calling him by his name .Please cheer up Hagrid we saved the Stone its gone he cant use it .Have a Chocolate Frog Ive got loads .Hagrid wiped his nose on the back of his hand and said That reminds me .Ive got yeh a present .Its not a stoat sandwich is it ?said Harry anxiously and at last Hagrid gave a weak chuckle .Nah .Dumbledore gave me the day off yesterday ter fix it .Course he shoulda sacked me instead anyway got y eh this .It seemed to be a handsome leathercovered book .Harry opened it curiously .It was full of wizard photographs .Smiling and waving at him from every page were his mother and father .Sent owls off ter all yer parents old school friends askin fer photos .knew yeh didn have any .dyeh like it ?Harry couldnt speak but Hagrid understood .Harry made his way down to the endofyear feast alone that night .He had been held up by Madam Pomfreys fussing about insisting on giving him one last checkup so the Great Hall was already full .It was decked out in the Slytherin colors of green and silver to celebrate Slytherin s winning the House Cup for the seventh year in a row .A huge banner showing the Slytherin serpent covered the wall behind the High Table .When Harry walked in there was a sudden hush and then everybody started talking loudly at once .He slipped into a seat between Ron and Hermione at the Gryffindor table and tried to ignore the fact that people were standing up to look at him .Fortunately Dumbledore arrived moments later .The babble died away .Another year gone !Dumbledore said cheerfully .And I must trouble you with an old mans wheezing waffle before we sink our teeth into our delicious feast .What a year it has been !Hopefully your heads are all a little fuller than they were .you have the whole summer ahead to get them nice and empty before next year starts .Now as I understand it the House Cup here needs awarding and the points stand thus In fourth place Gryffindor with three hundred and twelve points in third Hufflepuff with three hundred and fiftytwo Ravenclaw has four hundred and twentysix and Slytherin four hundred and seventy two .A storm of cheering and stamping broke out from the Slytherin table .Harry could see Draco Malfoy banging his goblet on the table .It was a sickening sight .Yes yes well done Slytherin said Dumbledore .However recent events must be taken into account .The room went very still .The Slytherins smiles faded a little .Ahem said Dumbledore .I have a few lastminute points to dish out .Let me see .Yes .First to Mr Ronald Weasley .Ron went purple in the face he looked like a radish with a bad sunburn . .for the bestplayed game of chess Hogwarts has seen in many years I award Gryffindor House fifty points .Gryffindor cheers nearly raised the bewitched ceiling the stars overhead seemed to quiver .Percy could be heard telling the other prefects My brother you know !My youngest brother !Got past McGonagalls giant chess set !At last there was silence again .Second to Miss Hermione Granger .for the use of cool logic in the face of fire I award Gryffindor House fifty points .Hermione buried her face in her arms Harry strongly suspected she had burst into tears .Gryffindors up and down the table were beside themselves they were a hundred points up .Third to Mr Harry Potter .said Dumbledore .The room went deadly quiet .for pure nerve and outstanding courage I award Gryffindor House sixty points .The din was deafening .Those who could add up while yelling themselves hoarse knew that Gryffindor now had four hundred and seventytwo points exactly the same as Slytherin .They had tied for the House Cup if only Dumbledore had given Harry just one more point .Dumbledore raised his hand .The room gradually fell silent .There are all kinds of courage said Dumbledore smiling .It takes a great deal of bravery to stand up to our enemies but just as much to stand up to our friends .I therefore award ten points to Mr Neville Longbottom .Someone standing outside the Great Hall might well have thought some sort of explosion had taken place so loud was the noise that erupted from the Gryffindor table .Harry Ron and Hermione stood up to yell and cheer as Neville white with shock disappeared under a pile of people hugging him .He had never won so much as a point for Gryffindor before .Harry still cheering nudged Ron in the ribs and pointed at Malfoy who couldnt have looked more stunned and horrified if hed just had the BodyBind Curse put on him .Which means Dumbledore called over the storm of applause for even Ravenclaw and Hufflepuff were celebrating the downfall of Slytherin we need a little change of decoration .He clapped his hands .In an instant the green hangings became scarlet and the silver became gold the huge Slytherin serpent vanished and a towering Gryffindor lion took its place .Snape was shaking Professor McGonagalls hand with a horrible forced smile .He caught Harrys eye and Harry knew at once that Snape s feelings toward him hadnt changed one jot .This didnt worry Harry .It seemed as though life would be back to normal next year or as normal as it ever was at Hogwarts .It was the best evening of Harrys life better than winning at Quidditch or Christmas or knocking out mountain trolls .he would never ever forget tonight .Harry had almost forgotten that the exam results were still to come but come they did .To their great surprise both he and Ron passed with good marks Hermione of course had the best grades of the first years .Even Neville scraped through his good Herbology mark making up for his abysmal Potions one .They had hoped that Goyle who was almost as stupid as he was mean might be thrown out but he had passed too .It was a shame but as Ron said you couldnt have everything in life .And suddenly their wardrobes were empty their trunks were packed Nevilles toad was found lurking in a corner of the toilets notes were handed out to all students warning them not to use magic over the holidays I always hope theyll forget to give us these said Fred Weasley sadly Hagrid was there to take them down to the fleet of boats that sailed across the lake they were boarding the Hogwarts Express talking and laughing as the countryside became greener and tidier eating Bertie Botts Every Flavor Beans as they sped past Muggle towns pulling off their wizard robes and putting on jackets and coats pulling into platform nine and threequarters at Kings Cross station .It took quite a while for them all to get off the platform .A wizened old guard was up by the ticket barrier letting them go through the gate in twos and threes so they didnt attract attention by all bursting out of a solid wall at once and alarming the Muggles .You must come and stay this summer said Ron both of you Ill send you an owl .Thanks said Harry Ill need something to look forward to .People jostled them as they moved forward toward the gateway back to the Muggle world .Some of them called Bye Harry !See you Potter !Still famous said Ron grinning at him .Not where Im going I promise you said Harry .He Ron and Hermione passed through the gateway together .There he is Mom there he is look !It was Ginny Weasley Rons younger sister but she wasnt pointing at Ron .Harry Potter !she squealed .Look Mom !I can see Be quiet Ginny and its rude to point .Mrs Weasley smiled down at them .Busy year ?she said .Very said Harry .Thanks for the fudge and the sweater Mrs Weasley .Oh it was nothing dear .Ready are you ?It was Uncle Vernon still purplefaced still mustached still looking furious at the nerve of Harry carrying an owl in a cage in a station full of ordinary people .Behind him stood Aunt Petunia and Dudley looking terrified at the very sight of Harry .You must be Harrys family !said Mrs Weasley .In a manner of speaking said Uncle Vernon .Hurry up boy we havent got all day .He walked away .Harry hung back for a last word with Ron and Hermione .See you over the summer then .Hope you have er a good holiday said Hermione looking uncertainly after Uncle Vernon shocked that anyone could be so unpleasant .Oh I will said Harry and they were surprised at the grin that was spreading over his face .They dont know were not allowed to use magic at home .Im going to have a lot of fun with Dudley this summer .THE WORST BIRTHDAY Not for the first time an argument had broken out over breakfast at number four Privet Drive .Mr Vernon Dursley had been woken in the early hours of the morning by a loud hooting noise from his nephew Harrys room .Third time this week !he roared across the table .If you cant control that owl itll have to go !Harry tried yet again to explain .Shes bored he said .Shes used to flying around outside .If I could just let her out at night Do I look stupid ?snarled Uncle Vernon a bit of fried egg dangling from his bushy mustache .I know what 11 happen if that owls let out .He exchanged dark looks with his wife Petunia .Harry tried to argue back but his words were drowned by a long loud belch from the Dursleys son Dudley .I want more bacon .Theres more in the frying pan sweetums said Aunt Petunia turning misty eyes on her massive son .We must build you up while weve got the chance .I dont like the sound of that school food .Nonsense Petunia I never went hungry when was at Smeltings said Uncle Vernon heartily .Dudley gets enough dont you son ?Dudley who was so large his bottom drooped over either side of the kitchen chair grinned and turned to Harry .Pass the frying pan .Youve forgotten the magic word said Harry irritably .The effect of this simple sentence on the rest of the family was incredible Dudley gasped and fell off his chair with a crash that shook the whole kitchen Mrs Dursley gave a small scream and clapped her hands to her mouth Mr Dursley jumped to his feet veins throbbing in his temples .I meant ‘please !said Harry quickly .I didnt mean WHAT HAVE I TOLD YOU thundered his uncle spraying spit over the table ABOUT SAYING THE ‘M WORD IN OUR HOUSE ?But I HOW DARE YOU THREATEN DUDLEY !roared Uncle Vernon pounding the table with his fist .I just I WARNED YOU !I WILL NOT TOLERATE MENTION OF YOUR ABNORMALITY UNDER THIS ROOF !Harry stared from his purplefaced uncle to his pale aunt who was trying to heave Dudley to his feet .All right said Harry all right .Uncle Vernon sat back down breathing like a winded rhinoceros and watching Harry closely out of the corners of his small sharp eyes .Ever since Harry had come home for the summer holidays Uncle Vernon had been treating him like a bomb that might go off at any moment because Harry Potter wasnt a normal boy .As a matter of fact he was as not normal as it is possible to be .Harry Potter was a wizard a wizard fresh from his first year at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry .And if the Dursleys were unhappy to have him back for the holidays it was nothing to how Harry felt .He missed Hogwarts so much it was like having a constant stomachache .He missed the castle with its secret passageways and ghosts his classes though perhaps not Snape the Potions master the mail arriving by owl eating banquets in the Great Hall sleeping in his fourposter bed in the tower dormitory visiting the gamekeeper Hagrid in his cabin next to the Forbidden Forest in the grounds and especially Quidditch the most popular sport in the wizarding world six tall goal posts four flying balls and fourteen players on broomsticks .All Harrys spellbooks his wand robes cauldron and topoftheline Nimbus Two Thousand broomstick had been locked in a cupboard under the stairs by Uncle Vernon the instant Harry had come home .What did the Dursleys care if Harry lost his place on the House Quidditch team because he hadnt practiced all summer ?What was it to the Dursleys if Harry went back to school without any of his homework done ?The Dursleys were what wizards called Muggles not a drop of magical blood in their veins and as far as they were concerned having a wizard in the family was a matter of deepest shame .Uncle Vernon had even padlocked Harrys owl Hedwig inside her cage to stop her from carrying messages to anyone in the wizarding world .Harry looked nothing like the rest of the family .Uncle Vernon was large and neckless with an enormous black mustache Aunt Petunia was horsefaced and bony Dudley was blond pink and porky .Harry on the other hand was small and skinny with brilliant green eyes and jetblack hair that was always untidy .He wore round glasses and on his forehead was a thin lightningshaped scar .It was this scar that made Harry so particularly unusual even for a wizard .This scar was the only hint of Harrys very mysterious past of the reason he had been left on the Dursleys doorstep eleven years before .At the age of one year old Harry had somehow survived a curse from the greatest Dark sorcerer of all time Lord Voldemort whose name most witches and wizards still feared to speak .Harrys parents had died in Voldemorts attack but Harry had escaped with his lightning scar and somehow nobody understood why Voldemorts powers had been destroyed the instant he had failed to kill Harry .So Harry had been brought up by his dead mothers sister and her husband .He had spent ten years with the Dursleys never understanding why he kept making odd things happen without meaning to believing the Dursleys story that he had got his scar in the car crash that had killed his parents .And then exactly a year ago Hogwarts had written to Harry and the whole story had come out .Harry had taken up his place at wizard school where he and his scar were famous .but now the school year was over and he was back with the Dursleys for the summer back to being treated like a dog that had rolled in something smelly .The Dursleys hadnt even remembered that today happened to be Harrys twelfth birthday .Of course his hopes hadnt been high theyd never given him a real present let alone a cake but to ignore it completely .At that moment Uncle Vernon cleared his throat importantly and said Now as we all know today is a very important day .Harry looked up hardly daring to believe it .This could well be the day I make the biggest deal of my career said Uncle Vernon .Harry went back to his toast .Of course he thought bitterly Uncle Vernon was talking about the stupid dinner party .Hed been talking of nothing else for two weeks .Some rich builder and his wife were coming to dinner and Uncle Vernon was hoping to get a huge order from him Uncle Vernons company made drills .I think we should run through the schedule one more time said Uncle Vernon .We should all be in position at eight oclock .Petunia you will be ?In the lounge said Aunt Petunia promptly waiting to welcome them graciously to our home .Good good .And Dudley ?Ill be waiting to open the door .Dudley put on a foul simpering smile .May I take your coats Mr and Mrs Mason ?Theyll love him !cried Aunt Petunia rapturously .Excellent Dudley said Uncle Vernon .Then he rounded on Harry .And you ?Ill be in my bedroom making no noise and pretending Im not there said Harry tonelessly .Exactly said Uncle Vernon nastily .I will lead them into the lounge introduce you Petunia and pour them drinks .At eightfifteen Ill announce dinner said Aunt Petunia .And Dudley you 11 say May I take you through to the dining room Mrs Mason ?said Dudley offering his fat arm to an invisible woman .My perfect little gentleman !sniffed Aunt Petunia .And you ?said Uncle Vernon viciously to Harry .Ill be in my room making no noise and pretending Im not there said Harry dully .Precisely .Now we should aim to get in a few good compliments at dinner .Petunia any ideas ?Vernon tells me youre a wonderful golfer Mr Mason .Do tell me where you bought your dress Mrs Mason .Perfect .Dudley ?How about ‘We had to write an essay about our hero at school Mr Mason and I wrote about you .This was too much for both Aunt Petunia and Harry .Aunt Petunia burst into tears and hugged her son while Harry ducked under the table so they wouldnt see him laughing .And you boy ?Harry fought to keep his face straight as he emerged .Ill be in my room making no noise and pretending Im not there he said .Too right you will said Uncle Vernon forcefully .The Masons dont know anything about you and its going to stay that way .When dinners over you take Mrs Mason back to the lounge for coffee Petunia and Ill bring the subject around to drills .With any luck Ill have the deal signed and sealed before the news at ten .Well be shopping for a vacation home in Majorca this time tomorrow .Harry couldnt feel too excited about this .He didnt think the Dursleys would like him any better in Majorca than they did on Privet Drive .Right Im off into town to pick up the dinner jackets for Dudley and me .And you he snarled at Harry .You stay out of your aunts way while shes cleaning .Harry left through the back door .It was a brilliant sunny day .He crossed the lawn slumped down on the garden bench and sang under his breath Happy birthday to me .happy birthday to me .No cards no presents and he would be spending the evening pretending not to exist .He gazed miserably into the hedge .He had never felt so lonely .More than anything else at Hogwarts more even than playing Quidditch Harry missed his best friends Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger .They however didnt seem to be missing him at all .Neither of them had written to him all summer even though Ron had said he was going to ask Harry to come and stay .Countless times Harry had been on the point of unlocking Hedwigs cage by magic and sending her to Ron and Hermione with a letter but it wasnt worth the risk .Underage wizards werent allowed to use magic outside of school .Harry hadnt told the Dursleys this he knew it was only their terror that he might turn them all into dung beetles that stopped them from locking him in the cupboard under the stairs with his wand and broomstick .For the first couple of weeks back Harry had enjoyed muttering nonsense words under his breath and watching Dudley tearing out of the room as fast as his fat legs would carry him .But the long silence from Ron and Hermione had made Harry feel so cut off from the magical world that even taunting Dudley had lost its appeal and now Ron and Hermione had forgotten his birthday .What wouldnt he give now for a message from Hogwarts ?From any witch or wizard ?Hed almost be glad of a sight of his archenemy Draco Malfoy just to be sure it hadnt all been a dream .Not that his whole year at Hogwarts had been fun .At the very end of last term Harry had come facetoface with none other than Lord Voldemort himself .Voldemort might be a ruin of his former self but he was still terrifying still cunning still determined to regain power .Harry had slipped through Voldemorts clutches for a second time but it had been a narrow escape and even now weeks later Harry kept waking in the night drenched in cold sweat wondering where Voldemort was now remembering his livid face his wide mad eyes Harry suddenly sat bolt upright on the garden bench .He had been staring absentmindedly into the hedge and the hedge was staring back .Two enormous green eyes had appeared among the leaves .Harry jumped to his feet just as a jeering voice floated across the lawn .I know what day it is sang Dudley waddling toward him .The huge eyes blinked and vanished .What ?said Harry not taking his eyes off the spot where they had been .I know what day it is Dudley repeated coming right up to him .Well done said Harry .So youve finally learned the days of the week .Todays your birthday sneered Dudley .How come you havent got any cards ?Havent you even got friends at that freak place ?Better not let your mum hear you talking about my school said Harry coolly .Dudley hitched up his trousers which were slipping down his fat bottom .Whyre you staring at the hedge ?he said suspiciously .Im trying to decide what would be the best spell to set it on fire said Harry .Dudley stumbled backward at once a look of panic on his fat face .You ccant Dad told you youre not to do mmagic he said hell chuck you out of the house and you havent got anywhere else to go you havent got any friends to take you Jiggery pokeryV said Harry in a fierce voice .Hocus pocus squiggly wiggly MUUUUUUM !howled Dudley tripping over his feet as he dashed back toward the house .MUUUUM !Hes doing you know what !Harry paid dearly for his moment of fun .As neither Dudley nor the hedge was in any way hurt Aunt Petunia knew he hadnt really done magic but he still had to duck as she aimed a heavy blow at his head with the soapy frying pan .Then she gave him work to do with the promise he wouldnt eat again until hed finished .While Dudley lolled around watching and eating ice cream Harry cleaned the windows washed the car mowed the lawn trimmed the flowerbeds pruned and watered the roses and repainted the garden bench .The sun blazed overhead burning the back of his neck .Harry knew he shouldnt have risen to Dudleys bait but Dudley had said the very thing Harry had been thinking himself .maybe he didnt have any friends at Hogwarts .Wish they could see famous Harry Potter now he thought savagely as he spread manure on the flower beds his back aching sweat running down his face .It was half past seven in the evening when at last exhausted he heard Aunt Petunia calling him .Get in here !And walk on the newspaper !Harry moved gladly into the shade of the gleaming kitchen .On top of the fridge stood tonights pudding a huge mound of whipped cream and sugared violets .A loin of roast pork was sizzling in the oven .Eat quickly !The Masons will be here soon !snapped Aunt Petunia pointing to two slices of bread and a lump of cheese on the kitchen table .She was already wearing a salmonpink cocktail dress .Harry washed his hands and bolted down his pitiful supper .The moment he had finished Aunt Petunia whisked away his plate .Upstairs !Hurry !As he passed the door to the living room Harry caught a glimpse of Uncle Vernon and Dudley in bow ties and dinner jackets .He had only just reached the upstairs landing when the doorbell rang and Uncle Vernons furious face appeared at the foot of the stairs .Remember boy one sound Harry crossed to his bedroom on tiptoe slipped inside closed the door and turned to collapse on his bed .The trouble was there was already someone sitting on it .DOBBYS WARNING Harry managed not to shout out but it was a close thing .The little creature on the bed had large bat like ears and bulging green eyes the size of tennis balls .Harry knew instantly that this was what had been watching him out of the garden hedge that morning .As they stared at each other Harry heard Dudleys voice from the hall .May I take your coats Mr and Mrs Mason ?The creature slipped off the bed and bowed so low that the end of its long thin nose touched the carpet .Harry noticed that it was wearing what looked like an old pillowcase with rips for arm and legholes .Er hello said Harry nervously .Harry Potter !said the creature in a highpitched voice Harry was sure would carry down the stairs .So long has Dobby wanted to meet you sir .Such an honor it is .Ththank you said Harry edging along the wall and sinking into his desk chair next to Hedwig who was asleep in her large cage .He wanted to ask What are you ?but thought it would sound too rude so instead he said Who are you ?Dobby sir .Just Dobby .Dobby the houseelf said the creature .Oh really ?said Harry .Er I dont want to be rude or anything but this isnt a great time for me to have a houseelf in my bedroom .Aunt Petunias high false laugh sounded from the living room .The elf hung his head .Not that Im not pleased to meet you said Harry quickly but er is there any particular reason youre here ?Oh yes sir said Dobby earnestly .Dobby has come to tell you sir .it is difficult sir .Dobby wonders where to begin .Sit down said Harry politely pointing at the bed .To his horror the elf burst into tears very noisy tears .Ssit down .he wailed .Never .never ever .Harry thought he heard the voices downstairs falter .Im sorry he whispered I didnt mean to offend you or anything Offend Dobby !choked the elf .Dobby has never been asked to sit down by a wizard like an equal Harry trying to say Shh !and look comforting at the same time ushered Dobby back onto the bed where he sat hiccoughing looking like a large and very ugly doll .At last he managed to control himself and sat with his great eyes fixed on Harry in an expression of watery adoration .You cant have met many decent wizards said Harry trying to cheer him up .Dobby shook his head .Then without warning he leapt up and started banging his head furiously on the window shouting Bad Dobby !Bad Dobby !Dont what are you doing ?Harry hissed springing up and pulling Dobby back onto the bed Hedwig had woken up with a particularly loud screech and was beating her wings wildly against the bars of her cage .Dobby had to punish himself sir said the elf who had gone slightly crosseyed .Dobby almost spoke ill of his family sir .Your family ?The wizard family Dobby serves sir .Dobby is a houseelf bound to serve one house and one family forever .Do they know youre here ?asked Harry curiously .Dobby shuddered .Oh no sir no .Dobby will have to punish himself most grievously for coming to see you sir .Dobby will have to shut his ears in the oven door for this .If they ever knew sir But wont they notice if you shut your ears in the oven door ?Dobby doubts it sir .Dobby is always having to punish himself for something sir .They lets Dobby get on with it sir .Sometimes they reminds me to do extra punishments .But why dont you leave ?Escape ?A houseelf must be set free sir .And the family will never set Dobby free .Dobby will serve the family until he dies sir .Harry stared .And I thought I had it bad staying here for another four weeks he said .This makes the Dursleys sound almost human .Cant anyone help you ?Cant I ?Almost at once Harry wished he hadnt spoken .Dobby dissolved again into wails of gratitude .Please Harry whispered frantically please be quiet .If the Dursleys hear anything if they know youre here Harry Potter asks if he can help Dobby .Dobby has heard of your greatness sir but of your goodness Dobby never knew .Harry who was feeling distinctly hot in the face said Whatever youve heard about my greatness is a load of rubbish .Im not even top of my year at Hogwarts thats Hermione she But he stopped quickly because thinking about Hermione was painful .Harry Potter is humble and modest said Dobby reverently his orblike eyes aglow .Harry Potter speaks not of his triumph over HeWhoMustNotBe Named Voldemort ?said Harry .Dobby clapped his hands over his bat ears and moaned Ah speak not the name sir !Speak not the name !Sorry said Harry quickly .I know lots of people dont like it .My friend Ron He stopped again .Thinking about Ron was painful too .Dobby leaned toward Harry his eyes wide as headlights .Dobby heard tell he said hoarsely that Harry Potter met the Dark Lord for a second time just weeks ago .that Harry Potter escaped yet again .Harry nodded and Dobbys eyes suddenly shone with tears .Ah sir he gasped dabbing his face with a corner of the grubby pillowcase he was wearing .Harry Potter is valiant and bold !He has braved so many dangers already !But Dobby has come to protect Harry Potter to warn him even if he does have to shut his ears in the oven door later .Harry Potter must not go back to Hogwarts .There was a silence broken only by the chink of knives and forks from downstairs and the distant rumble of Uncle Vernons voice .Wwhat ?Harry stammered .But Ive got to go back term starts on September first .Its all thats keeping me going .You dont know what its like here .I dont belong here .I belong in your world at Hogwarts .No no no squeaked Dobby shaking his head so hard his ears flapped .Harry Potter must stay where he is safe .He is too great too good to lose .If Harry Potter goes back to Hogwarts he will be in mortal danger .Why ?said Harry in surprise .There is a plot Harry Potter .A plot to make most terrible things happen at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry this year whispered Dobby suddenly trembling all over .Dobby has known it for months sir .Harry Potter must not put himself in peril .He is too important sir !What terrible things ?said Harry at once .Whos plotting them ?Dobby made a funny choking noise and then banged his head frantically against the wall .All right !cried Harry grabbing the elfs arm to stop him .You cant tell me .I understand .But why are you warning me ?A sudden unpleasant thought struck him .Hang on this hasnt got anything to do with Vol sorry with YouKnowWho has it ?You could just shake or nod he added hastily as Dobbys head tilted worryingly close to the wall again .Slowly Dobby shook his head .Not not HeWhoMustNotBeNamed sir But Dobbys eyes were wide and he seemed to be trying to give Harry a hint .Harry however was completely lost .He hasnt got a brother has he ?Dobby shook his head his eyes wider than ever .Well then I cant think who else would have a chance of making horrible things happen at Hogwarts said Harry .I mean theres Dumbledore for one thing you know who Dumbledore is dont you ?Dobby bowed his head .Albus Dumbledore is the greatest headmaster Hogwarts has ever had .Dobby knows it sir .Dobby has heard Dumbledores powers rival those of He WhoMustNotBeNamed at the height of his strength .But sir Dobbys voice dropped to an urgent whisper there are powers Dumbledore doesnt .powers no decent wizard .And before Harry could stop him Dobby bounded off the bed seized Harrys desk lamp and started beating himself around the head with earsplitting yelps .A sudden silence fell downstairs .Two seconds later Harry heart thudding madly heard Uncle Vernon coming into the hall calling Dudley must have left his television on again the little tyke !Quick !In the closet !hissed Harry stuffing Dobby in shutting the door and flinging himself onto the bed just as the door handle turned .What the devil are you doing ?said Uncle Vernon through gritted teeth his face horribly close to Harrys .Youve just ruined the punch line of my Japanese golfer joke .One more sound and youll wish youd never been born boy !He stomped flatfooted from the room .Shaking Harry let Dobby out of the closet .See what its like here ?he said .See why Ive got to go back to Hogwarts ?Its the only place Ive got well I think Ive got friends .Friends who dont even write to Harry Potter ?said Dobby slyly .I expect theyve just been wait a minute said Harry frowning .How do you know my friends havent been writing to me ?Dobby shuffled his feet .Harry Potter mustnt be angry with Dobby .Dobby did it for the best Have you been stopping my letters ?Dobby has them here sir said the elf .Stepping nimbly out of Harrys reach he pulled a thick wad of envelopes from the inside of the pillowcase he was wearing .Harry could make out Hermiones neat writing Rons untidy scrawl and even a scribble that looked as though it was from the Hogwarts gamekeeper Hagrid .Dobby blinked anxiously up at Harry .Harry Potter mustnt be angry .Dobby hoped .if Harry Potter thought his friends had forgotten him .Harry Potter might not want to go back to school sir .Harry wasnt listening .He made a grab for the letters but Dobby jumped out of reach .Harry Potter will have them sir if he gives Dobby his word that he will not return to Hogwarts .Ah sir this is a danger you must not face !Say you wont go back sir !No said Harry angrily .Give me my friends letters !Then Harry Potter leaves Dobby no choice said the elf sadly .Before Harry could move Dobby had darted to the bedroom door pulled it open and sprinted down the stairs .Mouth dry stomach lurching Harry sprang after him trying not to make a sound .He jumped the last six steps landing catlike on the hall carpet looking around for Dobby .From the dining room he heard Uncle Vernon saying .tell Petunia that very funny story about those American plumbers Mr Mason .Shes been dying to hear .Harry ran up the hall into the kitchen and felt his stomach disappear .Aunt Petunias masterpiece of a pudding the mountain of cream and sugared violets was floating up near the ceiling .On top of a cupboard in the corner crouched Dobby .No croaked Harry .Please .theyll kill me .Harry Potter must say hes not going back to school Dobby .please .Say it sir I cant Dobby gave him a tragic look .Then Dobby must do it sir for Harry Potters own good .The pudding fell to the floor with a heartstopping crash .Cream splattered the windows and walls as the dish shattered .With a crack like a whip Dobby vanished .There were screams from the dining room and Uncle Vernon burst into the kitchen to find Harry rigid with shock covered from head to foot in Aunt Petunias pudding .At first it looked as though Uncle Vernon would manage to gloss the whole thing over .Just our nephew very disturbed meeting strangers upsets him so we kept him upstairs .He shooed the shocked Masons back into the dining room promised Harry he would flay him to within an inch of his life when the Masons had left and handed him a mop .Aunt Petunia dug some ice cream out of the freezer and Harry still shaking started scrubbing the kitchen clean .Uncle Vernon might still have been able to make his deal if it hadnt been for the owl .Aunt Petunia was just passing around a box of after dinner mints when a huge barn owl swooped through the dining room window dropped a letter on Mrs Masons head and swooped out again .Mrs Mason screamed like a banshee and ran from the house shouting about lunatics .Mr Mason stayed just long enough to tell the Dursleys that his wife was mortally afraid of birds of all shapes and sizes and to ask whether this was their idea of a joke .Harry stood in the kitchen clutching the mop for support as Uncle Vernon advanced on him a demonic glint in his tiny eyes .Read it !he hissed evilly brandishing the letter the owl had delivered .Go on read it !Harry took it .It did not contain birthday greetings .Dear Mr Potter We have received intelligence that a Hover Charm was used at your place of residence this evening at twelve minutes past nine .As you know underage wizards are not permitted to perform spells outside school and further spellwork on your part may lead to expulsion from said school Decree for the Reasonable Restriction of Underage Sorcery 1875 Paragraph C .We would also ask you to remember that any magical activity that risks notice by members of the non  magical community Muggles is a serious offense under section 13 of the International Confederation of Warlocks Statute of Secrecy .Enjoy your holidays !Yours sincerely Mafalda Hopkirk IMPROPER USE OF MAGIC OFFICE Ministry of Magic Harry looked up from the letter and gulped .You didnt tell us you werent allowed to use magic outside school said Uncle Vernon a mad gleam dancing in his eyes .Forgot to mention it .Slipped your mind I daresay .He was bearing down on Harry like a great bulldog all his teeth bared .Well Ive got news for you boy .Im locking you up .Youre never going back to that school .never .and if you try and magic yourself out they 11 expel you !And laughing like a maniac he dragged Harry back upstairs .Uncle Vernon was as bad as his word .The following morning he paid a man to fit bars on Harrys window .He himself fitted a catflap in the bedroom door so that small amounts of food could be pushed inside three times a day .They let Harry out to use the bathroom morning and evening .Otherwise he was locked in his room around the clock .Three days later the Dursleys were showing no sign of relenting and Harry couldnt see any way out of his situation .He lay on his bed watching the sun sinking behind the bars on the window and wondered miserably what was going to happen to him .What was the good of magicking himself out of his room if Hogwarts would expel him for doing it ?Yet life at Privet Drive had reached an alltime low .Now that the Dursleys knew they werent going to wake up as fruit bats he had lost his only weapon .Dobby might have saved Harry from horrible happenings at Hogwarts but the way things were going hed probably starve to death anyway .The catflap rattled and Aunt Petunias hand appeared pushing a bowl of canned soup into the room .Harry whose insides were aching with hunger jumped off his bed and seized it .The soup was stone cold but he drank half of it in one gulp .Then he crossed the room to Hedwigs cage and tipped the soggy vegetables at the bottom of the bowl into her empty food tray .She ruffled her feathers and gave him a look of deep disgust .Its no good turning your beak up at it thats all weve got said Harry grimly .He put the empty bowl back on the floor next to the catflap and lay back down on the bed somehow even hungrier than he had been before the soup .Supposing he was still alive in another four weeks what would happen if he didnt turn up at Hogwarts ?Would someone be sent to see why he hadnt come back ?Would they be able to make the Dursleys let him go ?The room was growing dark .Exhausted stomach rumbling mind spinning over the same unanswerable questions Harry fell into an uneasy sleep .He dreamed that he was on show in a zoo with a card reading UNDERAGE WIZARD attached to his cage .People goggled through the bars at him as he lay starving and weak on a bed of straw .He saw Dobbys face in the crowd and shouted out asking for help but Dobby called Harry Potter is safe there sir !and vanished .Then the Dursleys appeared and Dudley rattled the bars of the cage laughing at him .Stop it Harry muttered as the rattling pounded in his sore head .Leave me alone .cut it out .Im trying to sleep .He opened his eyes .Moonlight was shining through the bars on the window .And someone was goggling through the bars at him a frecklefaced redhaired longnosed someone .Ron Weasley was outside Harrys window .3 THE BURROW Ron breathed Harry creeping to the window and pushing it up so they could talk through the bars .Ron how did you What the ?Harrys mouth fell open as the full impact of what he was seeing hit him .Ron was leaning out of the back window of an old turquoise car which was parked in midair .Grinning at Harry from the front seats were Fred and George Rons elder twin brothers .All right Harry ?asked George .Whats been going on ?said Ron .Why havent you been answering my letters ?Ive asked you to stay about twelve times and then Dad came home and said youd got an official warning for using magic in front of Muggles It wasnt me and how did he know ?He works for the Ministry said Ron .You know were not supposed to do spells outside school You should talk said Harry staring at the floating car .Oh this doesnt count said Ron .Were only borrowing this .Its Dads we didnt enchant it .But doing magic in front of those Muggles you live with I told you I didnt but itll take too long to explain now look can you tell them at Hogwarts that the Dursleys have locked me up and wont let me come back and obviously I cant magic myself out because the Ministryll think thats the second spell Ive done in three days so Stop gibbering said Ron .Weve come to take you home with us .But you cant magic me out either We dont need to said Ron jerking his head toward the front seat and grinning .You forget who Ive got with me .Tie that around the bars said Fred throwing the end of a rope to Harry .If the Dursleys wake up Im dead said Harry as he tied the rope tightly around a bar and Fred revved up the car .Dont worry said Fred and stand back .Harry moved back into the shadows next to Hedwig who seemed to have realized how important this was and kept still and silent .The car revved louder and louder and suddenly with a crunching noise the bars were pulled clean out of the window as Fred drove straight up in the air .Harry ran back to the window to see the bars dangling a few feet above the ground .Panting Ron hoisted them up into the car .Harry listened anxiously but there was no sound from the Dursleys bedroom .When the bars were safely in the back seat with Ron Fred reversed as close as possible to Harrys window .Get in Ron said .But all my Hogwarts stuff my wand my broomstick Where is it ?Locked in the cupboard under the stairs and I cant get out of this room No problem said George from the front passenger seat .Out of the way Harry .Fred and George climbed catlike through the window into Harrys room .You had to hand it to them thought Harry as George took an ordinary hairpin from his pocket and started to pick the lock .A lot of wizards think its a waste of time knowing this sort of Muggle trick said Fred but we feel theyre skills worth learning even if they are a bit slow .There was a small click and the door swung open .So well get your trunk you grab anything you need from your room and hand it out to Ron whispered George .Watch out for the bottom stair it creaks Harry whispered back as the twins disappeared onto the dark landing .Harry dashed around his room collecting his things and passing them out of the window to Ron .Then he went to help Fred and George heave his trunk up the stairs .Harry heard Uncle Vernon cough .At last panting they reached the landing then carried the trunk through Harrys room to the open window .Fred climbed back into the car to pull with Ron and Harry and George pushed from the bedroom side .Inch by inch the trunk slid through the window .Uncle Vernon coughed again .A bit more panted Fred who was pulling from inside the car .One good push Harry and George threw their shoulders against the trunk and it slid out of the window into the back seat of the car .Okay lets go George whispered .But as Harry climbed onto the windowsill there came a sudden loud screech from behind him followed immediately by the thunder of Uncle Vernons voice .THAT RUDDY OWL !Ive forgotten Hedwig !Harry tore back across the room as the landing light clicked on he snatched up Hedwigs cage dashed to the window and passed it out to Ron .He was scrambling back onto the chest of drawers when Uncle Vernon hammered on the unlocked door and it crashed open .For a split second Uncle Vernon stood framed in the doorway then he let out a bellow like an angry bull and dived at Harry grabbing him by the ankle .Ron Fred and George seized Harrys arms and pulled as hard as they could .Petunia !roared Uncle Vernon .Hes getting away !HES GETTING AWAY !But the Weasleys gave a gigantic tug and Harrys leg slid out of Uncle Vernons grasp Harry was in the car hed slammed the door shut Put your foot down Fred !yelled Ron and the car shot suddenly toward the moon .Harry couldnt believe it he was free .He rolled down the window the night air whipping his hair and looked back at the shrinking rooftops of Privet Drive .Uncle Vernon Aunt Petunia and Dudley were all hanging dumbstruck out of Harrys window .See you next summer !Harry yelled .The Weasleys roared with laughter and Harry settled back in his seat grinning from ear to ear .Let Hedwig out he told Ron .She can fly behind us .She hasnt had a chance to stretch her wings for ages .George handed the hairpin to Ron and a moment later Hedwig soared joyfully out of the window to glide alongside them like a ghost .So whats the story Harry ?said Ron impatiently .Whats been happening ?Harry told them all about Dobby the warning hed given Harry and the fiasco of the violet pudding .There was a long shocked silence when he had finished .Very fishy said Fred finally .Definitely dodgy agreed George .So he wouldnt even tell you whos supposed to be plotting all this stuff ?I dont think he could said Harry .I told you every time he got close to letting something slip he started banging his head against the wall .He saw Fred and George look at each other .What you think he was lying to me ?said Harry .Well said Fred put it this way houseelves have got powerful magic of their own but they cant usually use it without their masters permission .I reckon old Dobby was sent to stop you coming back to Hogwarts .Someones idea of a joke .Can you think of anyone at school with a grudge against you ?Yes said Harry and Ron together instantly .Draco Malfoy Harry explained .He hates me .Draco Malfoy ?said George turning around .Not Lucius Malfoys son ?Must be its not a very common name is it ?said Harry .Why ?Ive heard Dad talking about him said George .He was a big supporter of YouKnowWho .And when YouKnowWho disappeared said Fred craning around to look at Harry Lucius Malfoy came back saying hed never meant any of it .Load of dung Dad reckons he was right in YouKnow Whos inner circle .Harry had heard these rumors about Malfoys family before and they didnt surprise him at all .Malfoy made Dudley Dursley look like a kind thoughtful and sensitive boy .I dont know whether the Malfoys own a houseelf . .said Harry .Well whoever owns him will be an old wizarding family and theyll be rich said Fred .Yeah Mums always wishing we had a houseelf to do the ironing said George .But all weve got is a lousy old ghoul in the attic and gnomes all over the garden .Houseelves come with big old manors and castles and places like that you wouldnt catch one in our house .Harry was silent .Judging by the fact that Draco Malfoy usually had the best of everything his family was rolling in wizard gold he could just see Malfoy strutting around a large manor house .Sending the family servant to stop Harry from going back to Hogwarts also sounded exactly like the sort of thing Malfoy would do .Had Harry been stupid to take Dobby seriously ?Im glad we came to get you anyway said Ron .I was getting really worried when you didnt answer any of my letters .I thought it was Errols fault at first Whos Errol ?Our owl .Hes ancient .It wouldnt be the first time hed collapsed on a delivery .So then I tried to borrow Hermes Who ?The owl Mum and Dad bought Percy when he was made prefect said Fred from the front .But Percy wouldnt lend him to me said Ron .Said he needed him .Percys been acting very oddly this summer said George frowning .And he has been sending a lot of letters and spending a load of time shut up in his room .I mean theres only so many times you can polish a prefect badge .Youre driving too far west Fred he added pointing at a compass on the dashboard .Fred twiddled the steering wheel .So does your dad know youve got the car ?said Harry guessing the answer .Er no said Ron he had to work tonight .Hopefully well be able to get it back in the garage without Mum noticing we flew it .What does your dad do at the Ministry of Magic anyway ?He works in the most boring department said Ron .The Misuse of Muggle Artifacts Office .The what ?Its all to do with bewitching things that are Muggle made you know in case they end up back in a Muggle shop or house .Like last year some old witch died and her tea set was sold to an antiques shop .This Muggle woman bought it took it home and tried to serve her friends tea in it .It was a nightmare Dad was working overtime for weeks .What happened ?The teapot went berserk and squirted boiling tea all over the place and one man ended up in the hospital with the sugar tongs clamped to his nose .Dad was going frantic its only him and an old warlock called Perkins in the office and they had to do Memory Charms and all sorts of stuff to cover it up But your dad this car Fred laughed .Yeah Dads crazy about everything to do with Muggles our sheds full of Muggle stuff .He takes it apart puts spells on it and puts it back together again .If he raided our house hed have to put himself under arrest .It drives Mum mad .Thats the main road said George peering down through the windshield .Well be there in ten minutes .Just as well its getting light .A faint pinkish glow was visible along the horizon to the east .Fred brought the car lower and Harry saw a dark patchwork of fields and clumps of trees .Were a little way outside the village said George .Ottery St .Catchpole .Lower and lower went the flying car .The edge of a brilliant red sun was now gleaming through the trees .Touchdown !said Fred as with a slight bump they hit the ground .They had landed next to a tumbledown garage in a small yard and Harry looked out for the first time at Rons house .It looked as though it had once been a large stone pigpen but extra rooms had been added here and there until it was several stories high and so crooked it looked as though it were held up by magic which Harry reminded himself it probably was .Four or five chimneys were perched on top of the red roof .A lopsided sign stuck in the ground near the entrance read THE BURROW .Around the front door lay a jumble of rubber boots and a very rusty cauldron .Several fat brown chickens were pecking their way around the yard .Its not much said Ron .Its wonderful said Harry happily thinking of Privet Drive .They got out of the car .Now well go upstairs really quietly said Fred and wait for Mum to call us for breakfast .Then Ron you come bounding downstairs going ‘Mum look who turned up in the night !and shell be all pleased to see Harry and no one need ever know we flew the car .Right said Ron .Come on Harry I sleep at the at the top Ron had gone a nasty greenish color his eyes fixed on the house .The other three wheeled around .Mrs Weasley was marching across the yard scattering chickens and for a short plump kind  faced woman it was remarkable how much she looked like a sabertoothed tiger .Ah said Fred .Oh dear said George .Mrs Weasley came to a halt in front of them her hands on her hips staring from one guilty face to the next .She was wearing a flowered apron with a wand sticking out of the pocket .So she said .Morning Mum said George in what he clearly thought was a jaunty winning voice .Have you any idea how worried Ive been ?said Mrs Weasley in a deadly whisper .Sorry Mum but see we had to All three of Mrs Weasleys sons were taller than she was but they cowered as her rage broke over them .Beds empty No note Car gone could have crashed out of my mind with worry did you care ?never as long as Ive lived you wait until your father gets home we never had trouble like this from Bill or Charlie or Percy Perfect Percy muttered Fred .YOU COULD DO WITH TAKING A LEAF OUT OF PERCYS BOOK !yelled Mrs Weasley prodding a finger in Freds chest .You could havedied you could have been seen you could have lost your father his job It seemed to go on for hours .Mrs Weasley had shouted herself hoarse before she turned on Harry who backed away .Im very pleased to see you Harry dear she said .Come in and have some breakfast .She turned and walked back into the house and Harry after a nervous glance at Ron who nodded encouragingly followed her .The kitchen was small and rather cramped .There was a scrubbed wooden table and chairs in the middle and Harry sat down on the edge of his seat looking around .He had never been in a wizard house before .The clock on the wall opposite him had only one hand and no numbers at all .Written around the edge were things like Time to make tea Time to feed the chickens and Youre late .Books were stacked three deep on the mantelpiece books with titles like Charm Your Own Cheese Enchantment in Baking and One Minute Feasts Its Magid And unless Harrys ears were deceiving him the old radio next to the sink had just announced that coming up was Witching Hour with the popular singing sorceress Celestina Warbeck .Mrs Weasley was clattering around cooking breakfast a little haphazardly throwing dirty looks at her sons as she threw sausages into the frying pan .Every now and then she muttered things like dont know what you were thinking of and never would have believed it .I dont blame you dear she assured Harry tipping eight or nine sausages onto his plate .Arthur and I have been worried about you too .Just last night we were saying wed come and get you ourselves if you hadnt written back to Ron by Friday .But really she was now adding three fried eggs to his plate flying an illegal car halfway across the country anyone could have seen you She flicked her wand casually at the dishes in the sink which began to clean themselves clinking gently in the background .It was cloudy Mum !said Fred .You keep your mouth closed while youre eating !Mrs Weasley snapped .They were starving him Mum !said George .And you !said Mrs Weasley but it was with a slightly softened expression that she started cutting Harry bread and buttering it for him .At that moment there was a diversion in the form of a small redheaded figure in a long nightdress who appeared in the kitchen gave a small squeal and ran out again .Ginny said Ron in an undertone to Harry .My sister .Shes been talking about you all summer .Yeah shell be wanting your autograph Harry Fred said with a grin but he caught his mothers eye and bent his face over his plate without another word .Nothing more was said until all four plates were clean which took a surprisingly short time .Blimey Im tired yawned Fred setting down his knife and fork at last .I think Ill go to bed and You will not snapped Mrs Weasley .Its your own fault youve been up all night .Youre going to de gnome the garden for me theyre getting completely out of hand again Oh Mum And you two she said glaring at Ron and Fred .You can go up to bed dear she added to Harry .You didnt ask them to fly that wretched car But Harry who felt wide awake said quickly Ill help Ron .Ive never seen a degnoming Thats very sweet of you dear but its dull work said Mrs Weasley .Now lets see what Lockharts got to say on the subject And she pulled a heavy book from the stack on the mantelpiece .George groaned .Mum we know how to degnome a garden Harry looked at the cover of Mrs Weasleys book .Written across it in fancy gold letters were the words Gilderoy Lockharts Guide to Household Pests .There was a big photograph on the front of a very good looking wizard with wavy blond hair and bright blue eyes .As always in the wizarding world the photograph was moving the wizard who Harry supposed was Gilderoy Lockhart kept winking cheekily up at them all .Mrs Weasley beamed down at him .Oh he is marvelous she said .He knows his household pests all right its a wonderful book .Mum fancies him said Fred in a very audible whisper .Dont be so ridiculous Fred said Mrs Weasley her cheeks rather pink .All right if you think you know better than Lockhart you can go and get on with it and woe betide you if theres a single gnome in that garden when I come out to inspect it .Yawning and grumbling the Weasleys slouched outside with Harry behind them .The garden was large and in Harrys eyes exactly what a garden should be .The Dursleys wouldnt have liked it there were plenty of weeds and the grass needed cutting but there were gnarled trees all around the walls plants Harry had never seen spilling from every flower bed and a big green pond full of frogs .Muggles have garden gnomes too you know Harry told Ron as they crossed the lawn .Yeah Ive seen those things they think are gnomes said Ron bent double with his head in a peony bush like fat little Santa Clauses with fishing rods .There was a violent scuffling noise the peony bush shuddered and Ron straightened up .This is a gnome he said grimly .Gerroff me !Gerroff me !squealed the gnome .It was certainly nothing like Santa Claus .It was small and leathery looking with a large knobby bald head exactly like a potato .Ron held it at arms length as it kicked out at him with its horny little feet he grasped it around the ankles and turned it upside down .This is what you have to do he said .He raised the gnome above his head Gerroff me !and started to swing it in great circles like a lasso .Seeing the shocked look on Harrys face Ron added It doesnt hurt them youve just got to make them really dizzy so they cant find their way back to the gnomeholes .He let go of the gnomes ankles It flew twenty feet into the air and landed with a thud in the field over the hedge .Pitiful said Fred .I bet I can get mine beyond that stump .Harry learned quickly not to feel too sorry for the gnomes .He decided just to drop the first one he caught over the hedge but the gnome sensing weakness sank its razorsharp teeth into Harrys finger and he had a hard job shaking it off until Wow Harry that mustve been fifty feet .The air was soon thick with flying gnomes .See theyre not too bright said George seizing five or six gnomes at once .The moment they know the degnomings going on they storm up to have a look .Youd think theyd have learned by now just to stay put .Soon the crowd of gnomes in the field started walking away in a straggling line their little shoulders hunched .Theyll be back said Ron as they watched the gnomes disappear into the hedge on the other side of the field .They love it here .Dads too soft with them he thinks theyre funny .Just then the front door slammed .Hes back !said George .Dads home !They hurried through the garden and back into the house .Mr Weasley was slumped in a kitchen chair with his glasses off and his eyes closed .He was a thin man going bald but the little hair he had was as red as any of his childrens .He was wearing long green robes which were dusty and travelworn .What a night he mumbled groping for the teapot as they all sat down around him .Nine raids .Nine !And old Mundungus Fletcher tried to put a hex on me when I had my back turned .Mr Weasley took a long gulp of tea and sighed .Find anything Dad ?said Fred eagerly .All I got were a few shrinking door keys and a biting kettle yawned Mr Weasley .There was some pretty nasty stuff that wasnt my department though .Mortlake was taken away for questioning about some extremely odd ferrets but thats the Committee on Experimental Charms thank goodness .Why would anyone bother making door keys shrink ?said George .Just Mugglebaiting sighed Mr Weasley .Sell them a key that keeps shrinking to nothing so they can never find it when they need it .Of course its very hard to convict anyone because no Muggle would admit their key keeps shrinking theyll insist they just keep losing it .Bless them theyll go to any lengths to ignore magic even if its staring them in the face .But the things our lot have taken to enchanting you wouldnt believe LIKE CARS FOR INSTANCE ?Mrs Weasley had appeared holding a long poker like a sword .Mr Weasleys eyes jerked open .He stared guiltily at his wife .Ccars Molly dear ?Yes Arthur cars said Mrs Weasley her eyes flashing .Imagine a wizard buying a rusty old car and telling his wife all he wanted to do with it was take it apart to see how it worked while really he was enchanting it to make it fly .Mr Weasley blinked .Well dear I think youll find that he would be quite within the law to do that even if er he maybe would have done better to um tell his wife the truth . .Theres a loophole in the law youll find .As long as he wasnt intending to fly the car the fact that the car could fly wouldnt Arthur Weasley you made sure there was a loophole when you wrote that law !shouted Mrs Weasley .Just so you could carry on tinkering with all that Muggle rubbish in your shed !And for your information Harry arrived this morning in the car you werent intending to fly !Harry ?said Mr Weasley blankly .Harry who ?He looked around saw Harry and jumped .Good lord is it Harry Potter ?Very pleased to meet you Rons told us so much about Your sons flew that car to Harrys house and back last nighti shouted Mrs Weasley .What have you got to say about that eh ?Did you really ?said Mr Weasley eagerly .Did it go all right ?I I mean he faltered as sparks flew from Mrs Weasleys eyes that that was very wrong boys very wrong indeed .Lets leave them to it Ron muttered to Harry as Mrs Weasley swelled like a bullfrog .Come on Ill show you my bedroom .They slipped out of the kitchen and down a narrow passageway to an uneven staircase which wound its way zigzagging up through the house .On the third landing a door stood ajar .Harry just caught sight of a pair of bright brown eyes staring at him before it closed with a snap .Ginny said Ron .You dont know how weird it is for her to be this shy .She never shuts up normally They climbed two more flights until they reached a door with peeling paint and a small plaque on it saying RONALDS ROOM .Harry stepped in his head almost touching the sloping ceiling and blinked .It was like walking into a furnace Nearly everything in Rons room seemed to be a violent shade of orange the bedspread the walls even the ceiling .Then Harry realized that Ron had covered nearly every inch of the shabby wallpaper with posters of the same seven witches and wizards all wearing bright orange robes carrying broomsticks and waving energetically .Your Quidditch team ?said Harry .The Chudley Cannons said Ron pointing at the orange bedspread which was emblazoned with two giant black Cs and a speeding cannonball .Ninth in the league .Rons school spellbooks were stacked untidily in a corner next to a pile of comics that all seemed to feature The Adventures of Martin Miggs the Mad Muggle .Rons magic wand was lying on top of a fish tank full of frog spawn on the windowsill next to his fat gray rat Scabbers who was snoozing in a patch of sun .Harry stepped over a pack of Self Shuffling playing cards on the floor and looked out of the tiny window .In the field far below he could see a gang of gnomes sneaking one by one back through the Weasleys hedge .Then he turned to look at Ron who was watching him almost nervously as though waiting for his opinion .Its a bit small said Ron quickly .Not like that room you had with the Muggles .And Im right underneath the ghoul in the attic hes always banging on the pipes and groaning .But Harry grinning widely said This is the best house Ive ever been in .Rons ears went pink .AT FLOURISH AND BLOTTS Life at the Burrow was as different as possible from life on Privet Drive .The Dursleys liked everything neat and ordered the Weasleys house burst with the strange and unexpected .Harry got a shock the first time he looked in the mirror over the kitchen mantelpiece and it shouted Tuck your shirt in scruff yV The ghoul in the attic howled and dropped pipes whenever he felt things were getting too quiet and small explosions from Fred and Georges bedroom were considered perfectly normal .What Harry found most unusual about life at Rons however wasnt the talking mirror or the clanking ghoul It was the fact that everybody there seemed to like him .Mrs Weasley fussed over the state of his socks and tried to force him to eat fourth helpings at every meal .Mr Weasley liked Harry to sit next to him at the dinner table so that he could bombard him with questions about life with Muggles asking him to explain how things like plugs and the postal service worked .Fascinating !he would say as Harry talked him through using a telephone .Ingenious really how many ways Muggles have found of getting along without magic .Harry heard from Hogwarts one sunny morning about a week after he had arrived at the Burrow .He and Ron went down to breakfast to find Mr and Mrs Weasley and Ginny already sitting at the kitchen table .The moment she saw Harry Ginny accidentally knocked her porridge bowl to the floor with a loud clatter .Ginny seemed very prone to knocking things over whenever Harry entered a room .She dived under the table to retrieve the bowl and emerged with her face glowing like the setting sun .Pretending he hadnt noticed this Harry sat down and took the toast Mrs Weasley offered him .Letters from school said Mr Weasley passing Harry and Ron identical envelopes of yellowish parchment addressed in green ink .Dumbledore already knows youre here Harry doesnt miss a trick that man .You twove got them too he added as Fred and George ambled in still in their pajamas .For a few minutes there was silence as they all read their letters .Harrys told him to catch the Hogwarts Express as usual from Kings Cross station on September first .There was also a list of the new books hed need for the coming year .SECONDYEAR STUDENTS WILL REQUIRE The Standard Book of Spells Grade 2 by Miranda Goshawk Break with a Banshee by Gilderoy Lockhart Gadding with Ghouls by Gilderoy Lockhart Holidays with Hags by Gilderoy Lockhart Travels with Trolls by Gilderoy Lockhart Voyages with Vampires by Gilderoy Lockhart Wanderings with Werewolves by Gilderoy Lockhart Year with the Yeti by Gilderoy Lockhart Fred who had finished his own list peered over at Harrys .Youve been told to get all Lockharts books too !he said .The new Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher must be a fan bet its a witch .At this point Fred caught his mothers eye and quickly busied himself with the marmalade .That lot wont come cheap said George with a quick look at his parents .Lockharts books are really expensive .Well well manage said Mrs Weasley but she looked worried .I expect well be able to pick up a lot of Ginnys things secondhand .Oh are you starting at Hogwarts this year ?Harry asked Ginny .She nodded blushing to the roots of her flaming hair and put her elbow in the butter dish .Fortunately no one saw this except Harry because just then Rons elder brother Percy walked in .He was already dressed his Hogwarts prefect badge pinned to his sweater vest .Morning all said Percy briskly .Lovely day .He sat down in the only remaining chair but leapt up again almost immediately pulling from underneath him a molting gray feather duster at least that was what Harry thought it was until he saw that it was breathing .Errol !said Ron taking the limp owl from Percy and extracting a letter from under its wing .Finally hes got Hermiones answer .I wrote to her saying we were going to try and rescue you from the Dursleys .He carried Errol to a perch just inside the back door and tried to stand him on it but Errol flopped straight off again so Ron laid him on the draining board instead muttering Pathetic .Then he ripped open Hermiones letter and read it out loud ‘Dear Ron and Harry if youre there ‘I hope everything went all right and that Harry is okay and that you didnt do anything illegal to get him out Ron because that would get Harry into trouble too .Ive been really worried and if Harry is all right will you please let me know at once but perhaps it would be better if you used a different owl because I think another delivery might finish your one off ‘Im very busy with schoolwork of course How can she be ?said Ron in horror .Were on vacation ! ‘and were going to London next Wednesday to buy my new books .Why dont we meet in Diagon Alley ? ‘Let me know whats happening as soon as you can .Love from Hermione .Well that fits in nicely we can go and get all your things then too said Mrs Weasley starting to clear the table .What re you all up to today ?Harry Ron Fred and George were planning to go up the hill to a small paddock the Weasleys owned .It was surrounded by trees that blocked it from view of the village below meaning that they could practice Quidditch there as long as they didnt fly too high .They couldnt use real Quidditch balls which would have been hard to explain if they had escaped and flown away over the village instead they threw apples for one another to catch .They took turns riding Harrys Nimbus Two Thousand which was easily the best broom Rons old Shooting Star was often outstripped by passing butterflies .Five minutes later they were marching up the hill broomsticks over their shoulders .They had asked Percy if he wanted to join them but he had said he was busy .Harry had only seen Percy at mealtimes so far he stayed shut in his room the rest of the time .Wish I knew what he was up to said Fred frowning .Hes not himself .His exam results came the day before you did twelve O .W .L .s and he hardly gloated at all .Ordinary Wizarding Levels George explained seeing Harrys puzzled look .Bill got twelve too .If were not careful well have another Head Boy in the family .I dont think I could stand the shame .Bill was the oldest Weasley brother .He and the next brother Charlie had already left Hogwarts .Harry had never met either of them but knew that Charlie was in Romania studying dragons and Bill in Egypt working for the wizards bank Gringotts .Dunno how Mum and Dad are going to afford all our school stuff this year said George after a while .Five sets of Lockhart books !And Ginny needs robes and a wand and everything .Harry said nothing .He felt a bit awkward .Stored in an underground vault at Gringotts in London was a small fortune that his parents had left him .Of course it was only in the wizarding world that he had money you couldnt use Galleons Sickles and Knuts in Muggle shops .He had never mentioned his Gringotts bank account to the Dursleys he didnt think their horror of anything connected with magic would stretch to a large pile of gold .Mrs Weasley woke them all early the following Wednesday .After a quick half a dozen bacon sandwiches each they pulled on their coats and Mrs Weasley took a flowerpot off the kitchen mantelpiece and peered inside .Were running low Arthur she sighed .Well have to buy some more today .Ah well guests first !After you Harry dear !And she offered him the flowerpot .Harry stared at them all watching him .Wwhat am I supposed to do ?he stammered .Hes never traveled by Floo powder said Ron suddenly .Sorry Harry I forgot .Never ?said Mr Weasley .But how did you get to Diagon Alley to buy your school things last year ?I went on the Underground Really ?said Mr Weasley eagerly .Were there escapators ?How exactly Not now Arthur said Mrs Weasley .Floo powders a lot quicker dear but goodness me if youve never used it before Hell be all right Mum said Fred .Harry watch us first .He took a pinch of glittering powder out of the flowerpot stepped up to the fire and threw the powder into the flames .With a roar the fire turned emerald green and rose higher than Fred who stepped right into it shouted Diagon Alley !and vanished .You must speak clearly dear Mrs Weasley told Harry as George dipped his hand into the flowerpot .And be sure to get out at the right grate .The right what ?said Harry nervously as the fire roared and whipped George out of sight too .Well there are an awful lot of wizard fires to choose from you know but as long as youve spoken clearly Hell be fine Molly dont fuss said Mr Weasley helping himself to Floo powder too .But dear if he got lost how would we ever explain to his aunt and uncle ?They wouldnt mind Harry reassured her .Dudley would think it was a brilliant joke if I got lost up a chimney dont worry about that Well .all right .you go after Arthur said Mrs Weasley .Now when you get into the fire say where youre going And keep your elbows tucked in Ron advised .And your eyes shut said Mrs Weasley .The soot Dont fidget said Ron .Or you might well fall out of the wrong fireplace But dont panic and get out too early wait until you see Fred and George .Trying hard to bear all this in mind Harry took a pinch of Floo powder and walked to the edge of the fire .He took a deep breath scattered the powder into the flames and stepped forward the fire felt like a warm breeze he opened his mouth and immediately swallowed a lot of hot ash .DDiagon Alley he coughed .It felt as though he were being sucked down a giant drain .He seemed to be spinning very fast the roaring in his ears was deafening he tried to keep his eyes open but the whirl of green flames made him feel sick something hard knocked his elbow and he tucked it in tightly still spinning and spinning now it felt as though cold hands were slapping his face squinting through his glasses he saw a blurred stream of fireplaces and snatched glimpses of the rooms beyond his bacon sandwiches were churning inside him he closed his eyes again wishing it would stop and then He fell face forward onto cold stone and felt the bridge of his glasses snap .Dizzy and bruised covered in soot he got gingerly to his feet holding his broken glasses up to his eyes .He was quite alone but where he was he had no idea .All he could tell was that he was standing in the stone fireplace of what looked like a large dimly lit wizards shop but nothing in here was ever likely to be on a Hogwarts school list .A glass case nearby held a withered hand on a cushion a bloodstained pack of cards and a staring glass eye .Evillooking masks stared down from the walls an assortment of human bones lay upon the counter and rusty spiked instruments hung from the ceiling .Even worse the dark narrow street Harry could see through the dusty shop window was definitely not Diagon Alley .The sooner he got out of here the better .Nose still stinging where it had hit the hearth Harry made his way swiftly and silently toward the door but before hed got halfway toward it two people appeared on the other side of the glass and one of them was the very last person Harry wanted to meet when he was lost covered in soot and wearing broken glasses Draco Malfoy .Harry looked quickly around and spotted a large black cabinet to his left he shot inside it and pulled the doors closed leaving a small crack to peer through .Seconds later a bell clanged and Malfoy stepped into the shop .The man who followed could only be Dracos father .He had the same pale pointed face and identical cold gray eyes .Mr Malfoy crossed the shop looking lazily at the items on display and rang a bell on the counter before turning to his son and saying Touch nothing Draco .Malfoy who had reached for the glass eye said I thought you were going to buy me a present .I said I would buy you a racing broom said his father drumming his fingers on the counter .Whats the good of that if Im not on the House team ?said Malfoy looking sulky and badtempered .Harry Potter got a Nimbus Two Thousand last year .Special permission from Dumbledore so he could play for Gryffindor .Hes not even that good its just because hes famous .famous for having a stupid scar on his forehead .Malfoy bent down to examine a shelf full of skulls . .everyone thinks hes so smart wonderful Potter with his scar and his broomstick You have told me this at least a dozen times already said Mr Malfoy with a quelling look at his son .And I would remind you that it is not prudent to appear less than fond of Harry Potter not when most of our kind regard him as the hero who made the Dark Lord disappear ah Mr Borgin .A stooping man had appeared behind the counter smoothing his greasy hair back from his face .Mr Malfoy what a pleasure to see you again said Mr Borgin in a voice as oily as his hair .Delighted and young Master Malfoy too charmed .How may I be of assistance ?I must show you just in today and very reasonably priced Im not buying today Mr Borgin but selling said Mr Malfoy .Selling ?The smile faded slightly from Mr Borgin s face .You have heard of course that the Ministry is conducting more raids said Mr Malfoy taking a roll of parchment from his inside pocket and unraveling it for Mr Borgin to read .I have a few ah items at home that might embarrass me if the Ministry were to call .Mr Borgin fixed a pair of pincenez to his nose and looked down the list .The Ministry wouldnt presume to trouble you sir surely ?Mr Malfoys lip curled .I have not been visited yet .The name Malfoy still commands a certain respect yet the Ministry grows ever more meddlesome .There are rumors about a new Muggle Protection Act no doubt that flea bitten Muggleloving fool Arthur Weasley is behind it Harry felt a hot surge of anger .and as you see certain of these poisons might make it appear I understand sir of course said Mr Borgin .Let me see .Can I have that ?interrupted Draco pointing at the withered hand on its cushion .Ah the Hand of Glory !said Mr Borgin abandoning Mr Malfoys list and scurrying over to Draco .Insert a candle and it gives light only to the holder !Best friend of thieves and plunderers !Your son has fine taste sir .I hope my son will amount to more than a thief or a plunderer Borgin said Mr Malfoy coldly and Mr Borgin said quickly No offense sir no offense meant Though if his grades dont pick up said Mr Malfoy more coldly still that may indeed be all he is fit for Its not my fault retorted Draco .The teachers all have favorites that Hermione Granger I would have thought youd be ashamed that a girl of no wizard family beat you in every exam snapped Mr Malfoy .Ha !said Harry under his breath pleased to see Draco looking both abashed and angry .Its the same all over said Mr Borgin in his oily voice .Wizard blood is counting for less everywhere Not with me said Mr Malfoy his long nostrils flaring .No sir nor with me sir said Mr Borgin with a deep bow .In that case perhaps we can return to my list said Mr Malfoy shortly .I am in something of a hurry Borgin I have important business elsewhere today They started to haggle .Harry watched nervously as Draco drew nearer and nearer to his hiding place examining the objects for sale .Draco paused to examine a long coil of hangmans rope and to read smirking the card propped on a magnificent necklace of opals Caution Do Not Touch .Cursed Has Claimed the Lives of Nineteen Muggle Owners to Date .Draco turned away and saw the cabinet right in front of him .He walked forward he stretched out his hand for the handle Done said Mr Malfoy at the counter .Come Draco Harry wiped his forehead on his sleeve as Draco turned away .Good day to you Mr Borgin .Ill expect you at the manor tomorrow to pick up the goods .The moment the door had closed Mr Borgin dropped his oily manner .Good day yourself Mister Malfoy and if the stories are true you havent sold me half of whats hidden in your manor .Muttering darkly Mr Borgin disappeared into a back room .Harry waited for a minute in case he came back then quietly as he could slipped out of the cabinet past the glass cases and out of the shop door .Clutching his broken glasses to his face Harry stared around .He had emerged into a dingy alleyway that seemed to be made up entirely of shops devoted to the Dark Arts .The one hed just left Borgin and Burkes looked like the largest but opposite was a nasty window display of shrunken heads and two doors down a large cage was alive with gigantic black spiders .Two shab bylooking wizards were watching him from the shadow of a doorway muttering to each other .Feeling jumpy Harry set off trying to hold his glasses on straight and hoping against hope hed be able to find a way out of here .An old wooden street sign hanging over a shop selling poisonous candles told him he was in Knockturn Alley .This didnt help as Harry had never heard of such a place .He supposed he hadnt spoken clearly enough through his mouthful of ashes back in the Weasleys fire .Trying to stay calm he wondered what to do .Not lost are you my dear ?said a voice in his ear making him jump .An aged witch stood in front of him holding a tray of what looked horribly like whole human fingernails .She leered at him showing mossy teeth .Harry backed away .Im fine thanks he said .Im just HARRY !What dyeh think yer doin down there ?Harrys heart leapt .So did the witch a load of fingernails cascaded down over her feet and she cursed as the massive form of Hagrid the Hogwarts gamekeeper came striding toward them beetleblack eyes flashing over his great bristling beard .Hagrid !Harry croaked in relief .I was lost Floo powder Hagrid seized Harry by the scruff of the neck and pulled him away from the witch knocking the tray right out of her hands .Her shrieks followed them all the way along the twisting alleyway out into bright sunlight .Harry saw a familiar snowwhite marble building in the distance Gringotts Bank .Hagrid had steered him right into Diagon Alley .Yer a mess !said Hagrid gruffly brushing soot off Harry so forcefully he nearly knocked him into a barrel of dragon dung outside an apothecary .Skulkin around Knockturn Alley I dunno dodgy place Harry don want no one ter see yeh down there I realized that said Harry ducking as Hagrid made to brush him off again .I told you I was lost what were you doing down there anyway ?I was lookin fer a FleshEatin Slug Repellent growled Hagrid .Theyre ruinin the school cabbages .Yer not on yer own ?Im staying with the Weasleys but we got separated Harry explained .Ive got to go and find them .They set off together down the street .How come yeh never wrote back ter me ?said Hagrid as Harry jogged alongside him he had to take three steps to every stride of Hagrid s enormous boots .Harry explained all about Dobby and the Dursleys .Lousy Muggles growled Hagrid .If Idve known Harry !Harry !Over here !Harry looked up and saw Hermione Granger standing at the top of the white flight of steps to Gringotts .She ran down to meet them her bushy brown hair flying behind her .What happened to your glasses ?Hello Hagrid Oh its wonderful to see you two again Are you coming into Gringotts Harry ?As soon as Ive found the Weasleys said Harry .Yeh wont have long ter wait Hagrid said with a grin .Harry and Hermione looked around Sprinting up the crowded street were Ron Fred George Percy and Mr Weasley .Harry Mr Weasley panted .We hoped youd only gone one grate too far .He mopped his glistening bald patch .Mollys frantic shes coming now Where did you come out ?Ron asked .Knockturn Alley said Hagrid grimly .Excellent .said Fred and George together .Weve never been allowed in said Ron enviously .I should ruddy well think not growled Hagrid .Mrs Weasley now came galloping into view her handbag swinging wildly in one hand Ginny just clinging onto the other .Oh Harry oh my dear you could have been anywhere Gasping for breath she pulled a large clothes brush out of her bag and began sweeping off the soot Hagrid hadnt managed to beat away .Mr Weasley took Harrys glasses gave them a tap of his wand and returned them good as new .Well gotta be off said Hagrid who was having his hand wrung by Mrs Weasley Knockturn Alley !If you hadnt found him Hagrid .See yer at Hogwarts !And he strode away head and shoulders taller than anyone else in the packed street .Guess who I saw in Borgin and Burkes ?Harry asked Ron and Hermione as they climbed the Gringotts steps .Malfoy and his father .Did Lucius Malfoy buy anything ?said Mr Weasley sharply behind them .No he was selling So hes worried said Mr Weasley with grim satisfaction .Oh Id love to get Lucius Malfoy for something .You be careful Arthur said Mrs Weasley sharply as they were bowed into the bank by a goblin at the door .That familys trouble .Dont go biting off more than you can chew So you dont think Im a match for Lucius Malfoy ?said Mr Weasley indignantly but he was distracted almost at once by the sight of Hermiones parents who were standing nervously at the counter that ran all along the great marble hall waiting for Hermione to introduce them .But youre Mugglesl said Mr Weasley delightedly .We must have a drink !Whats that youve got there ?Oh youre changing Muggle money .Molly look !He pointed excitedly at the tenpound notes in Mr Grangers hand .Meet you back here Ron said to Hermione as the Weasleys and Harry were led off to their underground vaults by another Gringotts goblin .The vaults were reached by means of small goblin driven carts that sped along minature train tracks through the banks underground tunnels .Harry enjoyed the breakneck journey down to the Weasleys vault but felt dreadful far worse than he had in Knock turn Alley when it was opened .There was a very small pile of silver Sickles inside and just one gold Galleon .Mrs Weasley felt right into the corners before sweeping the whole lot into her bag .Harry felt even worse when they reached his vault .He tried to block the contents from view as he hastily shoved handfuls of coins into a leather bag .Back outside on the marble steps they all separated .Percy muttered vaguely about needing a new quill .Fred and George had spotted their friend from Hogwarts Lee Jordan .Mrs Weasley and Ginny were going to a secondhand robe shop .Mr Weasley was insisting on taking the Grangers off to the Leaky Cauldron for a drink .Well all meet at Flourish and Blotts in an hour to buy your schoolbooks said Mrs Weasley setting off with Ginny .And not one step down Knockturn Alley !she shouted at the twins retreating backs .Harry Ron and Hermione strolled off along the winding cobbled street .The bag of gold silver and bronze jangling cheerfully in Harrys pocket was clamoring to be spent so he bought three large strawberryandpeanutbutter ice creams which they slurped happily as they wandered up the alley examining the fascinating shop windows .Ron gazed longingly at a full set of Chudley Cannon robes in the windows of Quality Quidditch Supplies until Hermione dragged them off to buy ink and parchment next door .In Gambol and Japes Wizarding Joke Shop they met Fred George and Lee Jordan who were stocking up on Dr .Filibusters Fabulous Wet Start NoHeat Fireworks and in a tiny junk shop full of broken wands lopsided brass scales and old cloaks covered in potion stains they found Percy deeply immersed in a small and deeply boring book called Prefects Who Gained Power .A study of Hogwarts prefects and their later careers Ron read aloud off the back cover .That sounds fascinating .Go away Percy snapped .Course hes very ambitious Percy hes got it all planned out .He wants to be Minister of Magic .Ron told Harry and Hermione in an undertone as they left Percy to it .An hour later they headed for Flourish and Blotts .They were by no means the only ones making their way to the bookshop .As they approached it they saw to their surprise a large crowd jostling outside the doors trying to get in .The reason for this was proclaimed by a large banner stretched across the upper windows GILDEROY LOCKHART will be signing copies of his autobiography MAGICAL ME today 1230 p .m .to 430 p .m .We can actually meet him !Hermione squealed .I mean hes written almost the whole booklist !The crowd seemed to be made up mostly of witches around Mrs Weasleys age .A harassedlooking wizard stood at the door saying Calmly please ladies .Dont push there .mind the books now .Harry Ron and Hermione squeezed inside .A long line wound right to the back of the shop where Gilderoy Lockhart was signing his books .They each grabbed a copy of The Standard Book of Spells Grade 2 and sneaked up the line to where the rest of the Weasleys were standing with Mr and Mrs Granger .Oh there you are good said Mrs Weasley .She sounded breathless and kept patting her hair .Well be able to see him in a minute .Gilderoy Lockhart came slowly into view seated at a table surrounded by large pictures of his own face all winking and flashing dazzlingly white teeth at the crowd .The real Lockhart was wearing robes of forget menot blue that exactly matched his eyes his pointed wizards hat was set at a jaunty angle on his wavy hair .A short irritablelooking man was dancing around taking photographs with a large black camera that emitted puffs of purple smoke with every blinding flash .Out of the way there he snarled at Ron moving back to get a better shot .This is for the Daily Prophet Big deal said Ron rubbing his foot where the photographer had stepped on it .Gilderoy Lockhart heard him .He looked up .He saw Ron and then he saw Harry .He stared .Then he leapt to his feet and positively shouted It cant be Harry Potter ?The crowd parted whispering excitedly Lockhart dived forward seized Harrys arm and pulled him to the front .The crowd burst into applause .Harrys face burned as Lockhart shook his hand for the photographer who was clicking away madly wafting thick smoke over the Weasleys .Nice big smile Harry said Lockhart through his own gleaming teeth .Together you and I are worth the front page .When he finally let go of Harrys hand Harry could hardly feel his fingers .He tried to sidle back over to the Weasleys but Lockhart threw an arm around his shoulders and clamped him tightly to his side .Ladies and gentlemen he said loudly waving for quiet .What an extraordinary moment this is !The perfect moment for me to make a little announcement Ive been sitting on for some time !When young Harry here stepped into Flourish and Blotts today he only wanted to buy my autobiography which I shall be happy to present him now free of charge The crowd applauded again .He had no idea Lockhart continued giving Harry a little shake that made his glasses slip to the end of his nose that he would shortly be getting much much more than my book Magical Me .He and his schoolmates will in fact be getting the real magical me .Yes ladies and gentlemen I have great pleasure and pride in announcing that this September I will be taking up the post of Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry !The crowd cheered and clapped and Harry found himself being presented with the entire works of Gilderoy Lockhart .Staggering slightly under their weight he managed to make his way out of the limelight to the edge of the room where Ginny was standing next to her new cauldron .You have these Harry mumbled to her tipping the books into the cauldron .Ill buy my own Bet you loved that didnt you Potter ?said a voice Harry had no trouble recognizing .He straightened up and found himself facetoface with Draco Malfoy who was wearing his usual sneer .Famous Harry Potter said Malfoy .Cant even go into a bookshop without making the front page .Leave him alone he didnt want all that !said Ginny .It was the first time she had spoken in front of Harry .She was glaring at Malfoy .Potter youve got yourself a girlfriend .drawled Malfoy .Ginny went scarlet as Ron and Hermione fought their way over both clutching stacks of Lockharts books .Oh its you said Ron looking at Malfoy as if he were something unpleasant on the sole of his shoe .Bet youre surprised to see Harry here eh ?Not as surprised as I am to see you in a shop Weasley retorted Malfoy .I suppose your parents will go hungry for a month to pay for all those .Ron went as red as Ginny .He dropped his books into the cauldron too and started toward Malfoy but Harry and Hermione grabbed the back of his jacket .Ron !said Mr Weasley struggling over with Fred and George .What are you doing ?Its too crowded in here lets go outside .Well well well Arthur Weasley .It was Mr Malfoy .He stood with his hand on Dracos shoulder sneering in just the same way .Lucius said Mr Weasley nodding coldly .Busy time at the Ministry I hear said Mr Malfoy .All those raids .I hope theyre paying you overtime ?He reached into Ginnys cauldron and extracted from amid the glossy Lockhart books a very old very battered copy of A Beginners Guide to Transfiguration .Obviously not Mr Malfoy said .Dear me whats the use of being a disgrace to the name of wizard if they dont even pay you well for it ?Mr Weasley flushed darker than either Ron or Ginny .We have a very different idea of what disgraces the name of wizard Malfoy he said .Clearly said Mr Malfoy his pale eyes straying to Mr and Mrs Granger who were watching apprehensively .The company you keep Weasley .and I thought your family could sink no lower There was a thud of metal as Ginnys cauldron went flying Mr Weasley had thrown himself at Mr Malfoy knocking him backward into a bookshelf .Dozens of heavy spellbooks came thundering down on all their heads there was a yell of Get him Dad !from Fred or George Mrs Weasley was shrieking No Arthur no !the crowd stampeded backward knocking more shelves over Gentlemen please please !cried the assistant and then louder than all Break it up there gents break it up Hagrid was wading toward them through the sea of books .In an instant he had pulled Mr Weasley and Mr Malfoy apart .Mr Weasley had a cut lip and Mr Malfoy had been hit in the eye by an Encyclopedia of Toadstools .He was still holding Ginnys old Transfiguration book .He thrust it at her his eyes glittering with malice .Here girl take your book its the best your father can give you Pulling himself out of Hagrids grip he beckoned to Draco and swept from the shop .Yeh shouldve ignored him Arthur said Hagrid almost lifting Mr Weasley off his feet as he straightened his robes .Rotten ter the core the whole family everyone knows that no Malfoys worth listenin ter bad blood thats what it is come on now lets get outta here .The assistant looked as though he wanted to stop them from leaving but he barely came up to Hagrids waist and seemed to think better of it .They hurried up the street the Grangers shaking with fright and Mrs Weasley beside herself with fury .A fine example to set for your children .brawling in public .what Gilderoy Lockhart mustve thought He was pleased said Fred .Didnt you hear him as we were leaving ?He was asking that bloke from the Daily Prophet if hed be able to work the fight into his report said it was all publicity But it was a subdued group that headed back to the fireside in the Leaky Cauldron where Harry the Weasleys and all their shopping would be traveling back to the Burrow using Floo powder .They said goodbye to the Grangers who were leaving the pub for the Muggle street on the other side Mr Weasley started to ask them how bus stops worked but stopped quickly at the look on Mrs Weasleys face .Harry took off his glasses and put them safely in his pocket before helping himself to Floo powder .It definitely wasnt his favorite way to travel .5 THE WHOMPING WILLOW The end of the summer vacation came too quickly for Harrys liking .He was looking forward to getting back to Hogwarts but his month at the Burrow had been the happiest of his life .It was difficult not to feel jealous of Ron when he thought of the Dursleys and the sort of welcome he could expect next time he turned up on Privet Drive .On their last evening Mrs Weasley conjured up a sumptuous dinner that included all of Harrys favorite things ending with a mouthwatering treacle pudding .Fred and George rounded off the evening with a display of Filibuster fireworks they filled the kitchen with red and blue stars that bounced from ceiling to wall for at least half an hour .Then it was time for a last mug of hot chocolate and bed .It took a long while to get started next morning .They were up at dawn but somehow they still seemed to have a great deal to do .Mrs Weasley dashed about in a bad mood looking for spare socks and quills people kept colliding on the stairs halfdressed with bits of toast in their hands and Mr Weasley nearly broke his neck tripping over a stray chicken as he crossed the yard carrying Ginnys trunk to the car .Harry couldnt see how eight people six large trunks two owls and a rat were going to fit into one small Ford Anglia .He had reckoned of course without the special features that Mr Weasley had added .Not a word to Molly he whispered to Harry as he opened the trunk and showed him how it had been magically expanded so that the luggage fitted easily .When at last they were all in the car Mrs Weasley glanced into the back seat where Harry Ron Fred George and Percy were all sitting comfortably side by side and said Muggles do know more than we give them credit for dont they ?She and Ginny got into the front seat which had been stretched so that it resembled a park bench .I mean youd never know it was this roomy from the outside would you ?Mr Weasley started up the engine and they trundled out of the yard Harry turning back for a last look at the house .He barely had time to wonder when hed see it again when they were back George had forgotten his box of Filibuster fireworks .Five minutes after that they skidded to a halt in the yard so that Fred could run in for his broomstick .They had almost reached the highway when Ginny shrieked that shed left her diary .By the time she had clambered back into the car they were running very late and tempers were running high .Mr Weasley glanced at his watch and then at his wife .Molly dear No Arthur No one would see this little button here is an Invisibility Booster I installed thatd get us up in the air then we fly above the clouds .Wed be there in ten minutes and no one would be any the wiser I said no Arthur not in broad daylight They reached Kings Cross at a quarter to eleven .Mr Weasley dashed across the road to get trolleys for their trunks and they all hurried into the station .Harry had caught the Hogwarts Express the previous year .The tricky part was getting onto platform nine and threequarters which wasnt visible to the Muggle eye .What you had to do was walk through the solid barrier dividing platforms nine and ten .It didnt hurt but it had to be done carefully so that none of the Muggles noticed you vanishing .Percy first said Mrs Weasley looking nervously at the clock overhead which showed they had only five minutes to disappear casually through the barrier .Percy strode briskly forward and vanished .Mr Weasley went next Fred and George followed .Ill take Ginny and you two come right after us Mrs Weasley told Harry and Ron grabbing Ginnys hand and setting off .In the blink of an eye they were gone .Lets go together weve only got a minute Ron said to Harry .Harry made sure that Hedwigs cage was safely wedged on top of his trunk and wheeled his trolley around to face the barrier .He felt perfectly confident this wasnt nearly as uncomfortable as using Floo powder .Both of them bent low over the handles of their trolleys and walked purposefully toward the barrier gathering speed .A few feet away from it they broke into a run and CRASH .Both trolleys hit the barrier and bounced backward Rons trunk fell off with a loud thump Harry was knocked off his feet and Hedwigs cage bounced onto the shiny floor and she rolled away shrieking indignantly people all around them stared and a guard nearby yelled What in blazes dyou think youre doing ?Lost control of the trolley Harry gasped clutching his ribs as he got up .Ron ran to pick up Hedwig who was causing such a scene that there was a lot of muttering about cruelty to animals from the surrounding crowd .Why cant we get through ?Harry hissed to Ron .I dunno Ron looked wildly around .A dozen curious people were still watching them .Were going to miss the train Ron whispered .I dont understand why the gateways sealed itself Harry looked up at the giant clock with a sickening feeling in the pit of his stomach .Ten seconds .nine seconds .He wheeled his trolley forward cautiously until it was right against the barrier and pushed with all his might .The metal remained solid .Three seconds .two seconds .one second .Its gone said Ron sounding stunned .The trains left .What if Mum and Dad cant get back through to us ?Have you got any Muggle money ?Harry gave a hollow laugh .The Dursleys havent given me pocket money for about six years .Ron pressed his ear to the cold barrier .Cant hear a thing he said tensely .Whatre we going to do ?I dont know how long itll take Mum and Dad to get back to us .They looked around .People were still watching them mainly because of Hedwigs continuing screeches .I think wed better go and wait by the car said Harry .Were attracting too much atten Harry !said Ron his eyes gleaming .The car !What about it ?We can fly the car to Hogwarts !But I thought Were stuck right ?And weve got to get to school havent we ?And even underage wizards are allowed to use magic if its a real emergency section nineteen or something of the Restriction of Thingy But your mum and dad .said Harry pushing against the barrier again in the vain hope that it would give way .How will they get home ?They dont need the car !said Ron impatiently .They know how to Apparate !You know just vanish and reappear at home !They only bother with Floo powder and the car because were all underage and were not allowed to Apparate yet .Harrys feeling of panic turned suddenly to excitement .Can you fly it ?No problem said Ron wheeling his trolley around to face the exit .Cmon lets go .If we hurry well be able to follow the Hogwarts Express And they marched off through the crowd of curious Muggles out of the station and back onto the side road where the old Ford Anglia was parked .Ron unlocked the cavernous trunk with a series of taps from his wand .They heaved their luggage back in put Hedwig on the back seat and got into the front .Check that no ones watching said Ron starting the ignition with another tap of his wand .Harry stuck his head out of the window Traffic was rumbling along the main road ahead but their street was empty .Okay he said .Ron pressed a tiny silver button on the dashboard .The car around them vanished and so did they .Harry could feel the seat vibrating beneath him hear the engine feel his hands on his knees and his glasses on his nose but for all he could see he had become a pair of eyeballs floating a few feet above the ground in a dingy street full of parked cars .Lets go said Rons voice from his right .And the ground and the dirty buildings on either side fell away dropping out of sight as the car rose in seconds the whole of London lay smoky and glittering below them .Then there was a popping noise and the car Harry and Ron reappeared .Uhoh said Ron jabbing at the Invisibility Booster .Its faulty Both of them pummeled it .The car vanished .Then it flickered back again .Hold on !Ron yelled and he slammed his foot on the accelerator they shot straight into the low woolly clouds and everything turned dull and foggy .Now what ?said Harry blinking at the solid mass of cloud pressing in on them from all sides .We need to see the train to know what direction to go in said Ron .Dip back down again quickly They dropped back beneath the clouds and twisted around in their seats squinting at the ground .I can see it !Harry yelled .Right ahead there !The Hogwarts Express was streaking along below them like a scarlet snake .Due north said Ron checking the compass on the dashboard .Okay well just have to check on it every half hour or so hold on And they shot up through the clouds .A minute later they burst out into a blaze of sunlight .It was a different world .The wheels of the car skimmed the sea of fluffy cloud the sky a bright endless blue under the blinding white sun .All weve got to worry about now are airplanes said Ron .They looked at each other and started to laugh for a long time they couldnt stop .It was as though they had been plunged into a fabulous dream .This thought Harry was surely the only way to travel past swirls and turrets of snowy cloud in a car full of hot bright sunlight with a fat pack of toffees in the glove compartment and the prospect of seeing Freds and Georges jealous faces when they landed smoothly and spectacularly on the sweeping lawn in front of Hogwarts castle .They made regular checks on the train as they flew farther and farther north each dip beneath the clouds showing them a different view .London was soon far behind them replaced by neat green fields that gave way in turn to wide purplish moors a great city alive with cars like multicolored ants villages with tiny toy churches .Several uneventful hours later however Harry had to admit that some of the fun was wearing off .The toffees had made them extremely thirsty and they had nothing to drink .He and Ron had pulled off their sweaters but Harrys Tshirt was sticking to the back of his seat and his glasses kept sliding down to the end of his sweaty nose .He had stopped noticing the fantastic cloud shapes now and was thinking longingly of the train miles below where you could buy icecold pumpkin juice from a trolley pushed by a plump witch .Why hadnt they been able to get onto platform nine and threequarters ?Cant be much further can it ?croaked Ron hours later still as the sun started to sink into their floor of cloud staining it a deep pink .Ready for another check on the train ?It was still right below them winding its way past a snowcapped mountain .It was much darker beneath the canopy of clouds .Ron put his foot on the accelerator and drove them upward again but as he did so the engine began to whine .Harry and Ron exchanged nervous glances .Its probably just tired said Ron .Its never been this far before .And they both pretended not to notice the whining growing louder and louder as the sky became steadily darker .Stars were blossoming in the blackness .Harry pulled his sweater back on trying to ignore the way the windshield wipers were now waving feebly as though in protest .Not far said Ron more to the car than to Harry not far now and he patted the dashboard nervously .When they flew back beneath the clouds a little while later they had to squint through the darkness for a landmark they knew .There !Harry shouted making Ron and Hedwig jump .Straight ahead !Silhouetted on the dark horizon high on the cliff over the lake stood the many turrets and towers of Hogwarts castle .But the car had begun to shudder and was losing speed .Come on Ron said cajolingly giving the steering wheel a little shake nearly there come on The engine groaned .Narrow jets of steam were issuing from under the hood .Harry found himself gripping the edges of his seat very hard as they flew toward the lake .The car gave a nasty wobble .Glancing out of his window Harry saw the smooth black glassy surface of the water a mile below .Rons knuckles were white on the steering wheel .The car wobbled again .Come on Ron muttered .They were over the lake the castle was right ahead Ron put his foot down .There was a loud clunk a splutter and the engine died completely .Uhoh said Ron into the silence .The nose of the car dropped .They were falling gathering speed heading straight for the solid castle wall .IVoooooo !Ron yelled swinging the steering wheel around they missed the dark stone wall by inches as the car turned in a great arc soaring over the dark greenhouses then the vegetable patch and then out over the black lawns losing altitude all the time .Ron let go of the steering wheel completely and pulled his wand out of his back pocket STOP !STOP !he yelled whacking the dashboard and the windshield but they were still plummeting the ground flying up toward them WATCH OUT FOR THAT TREE !Harry bellowed lunging for the steering wheel but too late CRUNCH .With an earsplitting bang of metal on wood they hit the thick tree trunk and dropped to the ground with a heavy jolt .Steam was billowing from under the crumpled hood Hedwig was shrieking in terror a golfballsized lump was throbbing on Harrys head where he had hit the windshield and to his right Ron let out a low despairing groan .Are you okay ?Harry said urgently .My wand said Ron in a shaky voice .Look at my wand It had snapped almost in two the tip was dangling limply held on by a few splinters .Harry opened his mouth to say he was sure theyd be able to mend it up at the school but he never even got started .At that very moment something hit his side of the car with the force of a charging bull sending him lurching sideways into Ron just as an equally heavy blow hit the roof .Whats happen ?Ron gasped staring through the windshield and Harry looked around just in time to see a branch as thick as a python smash into it .The tree they had hit was attacking them .Its trunk was bent almost double and its gnarled boughs were pummeling every inch of the car it could reach .aargh !said Ron as another twisted limb punched a large dent into his door the windshield was now trembling under a hail of blows from knucklelike twigs and a branch as thick as a battering ram was pounding furiously on the roof which seemed to be caving Run for it !Ron shouted throwing his full weight against his door but next second he had been knocked backward into Harrys lap by a vicious uppercut from another branch .Were done for !he moaned as the ceiling sagged but suddenly the floor of the car was vibrating the engine had restarted .Reverse !Harry yelled and the car shot backward the tree was still trying to hit them they could hear its roots creaking as it almost ripped itself up lashing out at them as they sped out of reach .That panted Ron was close .Well done car The car however had reached the end of its tether .With two sharp clunks the doors flew open and Harry felt his seat tip sideways Next thing he knew he was sprawled on the damp ground .Loud thuds told him that the car was ejecting their luggage from the trunk Hedwigs cage flew through the air and burst open she rose out of it with an angry screech and sped off toward the castle without a backward look .Then dented scratched and steaming the car rumbled off into the darkness its rear lights blazing angrily .Come back !Ron yelled after it brandishing his broken wand .Dadll kill me !But the car disappeared from view with one last snort from its exhaust .Can you believe our luck ?said Ron miserably bending down to pick up Scabbers .Of all the trees we couldve hit we had to get one that hits back .He glanced over his shoulder at the ancient tree which was still flailing its branches threateningly .Come on said Harry wearily wed better get up to the school .It wasnt at all the triumphant arrival they had pictured .Stiff cold and bruised they seized the ends of their trunks and began dragging them up the grassy slope toward the great oak front doors .I think the feasts already started said Ron dropping his trunk at the foot of the front steps and crossing quietly to look through a brightly lit window .Hey Harry come and look its the Sorting !Harry hurried over and together he and Ron peered in at the Great Hall .Innumerable candles were hovering in midair over four long crowded tables making the golden plates and goblets sparkle .Overhead the bewitched ceiling which always mirrored the sky outside sparkled with stars .Through the forest of pointed black Hogwarts hats Harry saw a long line of scaredlooking first years filing into the Hall .Ginny was among them easily visible because of her vivid Weasley hair .Meanwhile Professor McGonagall a bespectacled witch with her hair in a tight bun was placing the famous Hogwarts Sorting Hat on a stool before the newcomers .Every year this aged old hat patched frayed and dirty sorted new students into the four Hogwarts houses Gryffindor Hufflepuff Ravenclaw and Slytherin .Harry well remembered putting it on exactly one year ago and waiting petrified for its decision as it muttered aloud in his ear .For a few horrible seconds he had feared that the hat was going to put him in Slytherin the House that had turned out more Dark witches and wizards than any other but he had ended up in Gryffindor along with Ron Hermione and the rest of the Weasleys .Last term Harry and Ron had helped Gryffindor win the House Championship beating Slytherin for the first time in seven years .A very small mousyhaired boy had been called forward to place the hat on his head .Harrys eyes wandered past him to where Professor Dumbledore the headmaster sat watching the Sorting from the staff table his long silver beard and halfmoon glasses shining brightly in the candlelight .Several seats along Harry saw Gilderoy Lockhart dressed in robes of aquamarine .And there at the end was Hagrid huge and hairy drinking deeply from his goblet .Hang on .Harry muttered to Ron .Theres an empty chair at the staff table .Wheres Snape ?Professor Severus Snape was Harrys least favorite teacher .Harry also happened to be Snape s least favorite student .Cruel sarcastic and disliked by everybody except the students from his own House Slytherin Snape taught Potions .Maybe hes ill !said Ron hopefully .Maybe hes left said Harry because he missed out on the Defense Against the Dark Arts job again .Or he might have been sacked .said Ron enthusiastically .I mean everyone hates him Or maybe said a very cold voice right behind them hes waiting to hear why you two didnt arrive on the school train .Harry spun around .There his black robes rippling in a cold breeze stood Severus Snape .He was a thin man with sallow skin a hooked nose and greasy shoulderlength black hair and at this moment he was smiling in a way that told Harry he and Ron were in very deep trouble .Follow me said Snape .Not daring even to look at each other Harry and Ron followed Snape up the steps into the vast echoing entrance hall which was lit with flaming torches .A delicious smell of food was wafting from the Great Hall but Snape led them away from the warmth and light down a narrow stone staircase that led into the dungeons .In !he said opening a door halfway down the cold passageway and pointing .They entered Snapes office shivering .The shadowy walls were lined with shelves of large glass jars in which floated all manner of revolting things Harry didnt really want to know the name of at the moment .The fireplace was dark and empty .Snape closed the door and turned to look at them .So he said softly the train isnt good enough for the famous Harry Potter and his faithful sidekick Weasley .Wanted to arrive with a bang did we boys ?No sir it was the barrier at Kings Cross it Silence !said Snape coldly .What have you done with the car ?Ron gulped .This wasnt the first time Snape had given Harry the impression of being able to read minds .But a moment later he understood as Snape unrolled todays issue of the Evening Prophet You were seen he hissed showing them the headline FLYING FORD ANGLIA MYSTIFIES MUGGLES .He began to read aloud Two Muggles in London convinced they saw an old car flying over the Post Office tower .at noon in Norfolk Mrs Hetty Bayliss while hanging out her washing .Mr Angus Fleet of Peebles reported to police .Six or seven Muggles in all .I believe your father works in the Misuse of Muggle Artifacts Office ?he said looking up at Ron and smiling still more nastily .Dear dear .his own son .Harry felt as though hed just been walloped in the stomach by one of the mad trees larger branches .If anyone found out Mr Weasley had bewitched the car .he hadnt thought of that .I noticed in my search of the park that considerable damage seems to have been done to a very valuable Whomping Willow Snape went on .That tree did more damage to us than we Ron blurted out .Silence !snapped Snape again .Most unfortunately you are not in my House and the decision to expel you does not rest with me .I shall go and fetch the people who do have that happy power .You will wait here .Harry and Ron stared at each other whitefaced .Harry didnt feel hungry anymore .He now felt extremely sick .He tried not to look at a large slimy something suspended in green liquid on a shelf behind Snape s desk .If Snape had gone to fetch Professor McGonagall head of Gryffindor House they were hardly any better off .She might be fairer than Snape but she was still extremely strict .Ten minutes later Snape returned and sure enough it was Professor McGonagall who accompanied him .Harry had seen Professor McGonagall angry on several occasions but either he had forgotten just how thin her mouth could go or he had never seen her this angry before .She raised her wand the moment she entered Harry and Ron both flinched but she merely pointed it at the empty fireplace where flames suddenly erupted .Sit she said and they both backed into chairs by the fire .Explain she said her glasses glinting ominously .Ron launched into the story starting with the barrier at the station refusing to let them through .so we had no choice Professor we couldnt get on the train .Why didnt you send us a letter by owl ?I believe you have an owl ?Professor McGonagall said coldly to Harry .Harry gaped at her .Now shed said it that seemed the obvious thing to have done .I I didnt think That said Professor McGonagall is obvious .There was a knock on the office door and Snape now looking happier than ever opened it .There stood the headmaster Professor Dumbledore .Harrys whole body went numb .Dumbledore was looking unusually grave .He stared down his very crooked nose at them and Harry suddenly found himself wishing he and Ron were still being beaten up by the Whomping Willow .There was a long silence .Then Dumbledore said Please explain why you did this .It would have been better if he had shouted .Harry hated the disappointment in his voice .For some reason he was unable to look Dumbledore in the eyes and spoke instead to his knees .He told Dumbledore everything except that Mr Weasley owned the bewitched car making it sound as though he and Ron had happened to find a flying car parked outside the station .He knew Dumbledore would see through this at once but Dumbledore asked no questions about the car .When Harry had finished he merely continued to peer at them through his spectacles .Well go and get our stuff said Ron in a hopeless sort of voice .What are you talking about Weasley ?barked Professor McGonagall .Well youre expelling us arent you ?said Ron .Harry looked quickly at Dumbledore .Not today Mr Weasley said Dumbledore .But I must impress upon both of you the seriousness of what you have done .I will be writing to both your families tonight .I must also warn you that if you do anything like this again I will have no choice but to expel you .Snape looked as though Christmas had been canceled .He cleared his throat and said Professor Dumbledore these boys have flouted the Decree for the Restriction of Underage Wizardry caused serious damage to an old and valuable tree surely acts of this nature It will be for Professor McGonagall to decide on these boys punishments Severus said Dumbledore calmly .They are in her House and are therefore her responsibility .He turned to Professor McGonagall .I must go back to the feast Minerva Ive got to give out a few notices .Come Severus theres a delicious looking custard tart I want to sample Snape shot a look of pure venom at Harry and Ron as he allowed himself to be swept out of his office leaving them alone with Professor McGonagall who was still eyeing them like a wrathful eagle .Youd better get along to the hospital wing Weasley youre bleeding .Not much said Ron hastily wiping the cut over his eye with his sleeve .Professor I wanted to watch my sister being Sorted The Sorting Ceremony is over said Professor McGonagall .Your sister is also in Gryffindor .Oh good said Ron .And speaking of Gryffindor Professor McGonagall said sharply but Harry cut in Professor when we took the car term hadnt started so so Gryffindor shouldnt really have points taken from it should it ?he finished watching her anxiously .Professor McGonagall gave him a piercing look but he was sure she had almost smiled .Her mouth looked less thin anyway .I will not take any points from Gryffindor she said and Harrys heart lightened considerably .But you will both get a detention .It was better than Harry had expected .As for Dumbledores writing to the Dursleys that was nothing .Harry knew perfectly well theyd just be disappointed that the Whomping Willow hadnt squashed him flat .Professor McGonagall raised her wand again and pointed it at Snapes desk .A large plate of sandwiches two silver goblets and a jug of iced pumpkin juice appeared with a pop .You will eat in here and then go straight up to your dormitory she said .I must also return to the feast .When the door had closed behind her Ron let out a long low whistle .I thought wed had it he said grabbing a sandwich .So did I said Harry taking one too .Can you believe our luck though ?said Ron thickly through a mouthful of chicken and ham .Fred and George mustve flown that car five or six times and no Muggle ever saw them .He swallowed and took another huge bite .Why couldnt we get through the barrier ?Harry shrugged .Well have to watch our step from now on though he said taking a grateful swig of pumpkin juice .Wish we couldve gone up to the feast .She didnt want us showing off said Ron sagely .Doesnt want people to think its clever arriving by flying car .When they had eaten as many sandwiches as they could the plate kept refilling itself they rose and left the office treading the familiar path to Gryffindor Tower .The castle was quiet it seemed that the feast was over .They walked past muttering portraits and creaking suits of armor and climbed narrow flights of stone stairs until at last they reached the passage where the secret entrance to Gryffindor Tower was hidden behind an oil painting of a very fat woman in a pink silk dress .Password ?she said as they approached .Er said Harry .They didnt know the new years password not having met a Gryffindor prefect yet but help came almost immediately they heard hurrying feet behind them and turned to see Hermione dashing toward them .There you are !Where have you been ?The most ridiculous rumors someone said youd been expelled for crashing a flying car Well we havent been expelled Harry assured her .Youre not telling me you did fly here ?said Hermione sounding almost as severe as Professor McGonagall .Skip the lecture said Ron impatiently and tell us the new password .Its ‘wattlebird said Hermione impatiently but thats not the point Her words were cut short however as the portrait of the fat lady swung open and there was a sudden storm of clapping .It looked as though the whole of Gryffindor House was still awake packed into the circular common room standing on the lopsided tables and squashy armchairs waiting for them to arrive .Arms reached through the portrait hole to pull Harry and Ron inside leaving Hermione to scramble in after them .Brilliant !yelled Lee Jordan .Inspired !What an entrance !Flying a car right into the Whomping Willow peoplell be talking about that one for years Good for you said a fifth year Harry had never spoken to someone was patting him on the back as though hed just won a marathon Fred and George pushed their way to the front of the crowd and said together Why couldnt weve come in the car eh ?Ron was scarlet in the face grinning embarrassedly but Harry could see one person who didnt look happy at all .Percy was visible over the heads of some excited first years and he seemed to be trying to get near enough to start telling them off .Harry nudged Ron in the ribs and nodded in Percys direction .Ron got the point at once .Got to get upstairs bit tired he said and the two of them started pushing their way toward the door on the other side of the room which led to a spiral staircase and the dormitories .Night Harry called back to Hermione who was wearing a scowl just like Percys .They managed to get to the other side of the common room still having their backs slapped and gained the peace of the staircase .They hurried up it right to the top and at last reached the door of their old dormitory which now had a sign on it saying SECOND YEARS .They entered the familiar circular room with its five fourposters hung with red velvet and its high narrow windows .Their trunks had been brought up for them and stood at the ends of their beds .Ron grinned guiltily at Harry .I know I shouldnt ve enjoyed that or anything but The dormitory door flew open and in came the other second year Gryffindor boys Seamus Finnigan Dean Thomas and Neville Longbottom .Unbelievablel beamed Seamus .Cool said Dean .Amazing said Neville awestruck .Harry couldnt help it .He grinned too .6 GILDEROY LOCKHART The next day however Harry barely grinned once .Things started to go downhill from breakfast in the Great Hall .The four long House tables were laden with tureens of porridge plates of kippers mountains of toast and dishes of eggs and bacon beneath the enchanted ceiling today a dull cloudy gray .Harry and Ron sat down at the Gryffindor table next to Hermione who had her copy of Voyages with Vampires propped open against a milk jug .There was a slight stiffness in the way she said Morning which told Harry that she was still disapproving of the way they had arrived .Neville Longbottom on the other hand greeted them cheerfully .Neville was a roundfaced and accidentprone boy with the worst memory of anyone Harry had ever met .Mails due any minute I think Grans sending a few things I forgot .Harry had only just started his porridge when sure enough there was a rushing sound overhead and a hundred or so owls streamed in circling the hall and dropping letters and packages into the chattering crowd .A big lumpy package bounced off Nevilles head and a second later something large and gray fell into Hermiones jug spraying them all with milk and feathers .Errol said Ron pulling the bedraggled owl out by the feet .Errol slumped unconscious onto the table his legs in the air and a damp red envelope in his beak .Oh no Ron gasped .Its all right hes still alive said Hermione prodding Errol gently with the tip of her finger .Its not that its that .Ron was pointing at the red envelope .It looked quite ordinary to Harry but Ron and Neville were both looking at it as though they expected it to explode .Whats the matter ?said Harry .Shes shes sent me a Howler said Ron faintly .Youd better open it Ron said Neville in a timid whisper .Itll be worse if you dont .My gran sent me one once and I ignored it and he gulped it was horrible .Harry looked from their petrified faces to the red envelope .Whats a Howler ?he said .But Rons whole attention was fixed on the letter which had begun to smoke at the corners .Open it Neville urged .Itll all be over in a few minutes Ron stretched out a shaking hand eased the envelope from Errols beak and slit it open .Neville stuffed his fingers in his ears .A split second later Harry knew why .He thought for a moment it had exploded a roar of sound filled the huge hall shaking dust from the ceiling .STEALING THE CAR I WOULDNT HAVE BEEN SURPRISED IF THEYD EXPELLED YOU YOU WAIT TILL I GET HOLD OF YOU I DONT SUPPOSE YOU STOPPED TO THINK WHAT YOUR FATHER AND I WENT THROUGH WHEN WE SAW IT WAS GONE Mrs Weasleys yells a hundred times louder than usual made the plates and spoons rattle on the table and echoed deafeningly off the stone walls .People throughout the hall were swiveling around to see who had received the Howler and Ron sank so low in his chair that only his crimson forehead could be seen .LETTER FROM DUMBLEDORE LAST NIGHT I THOUGHT YOUR FATHER WOULD DIE OF SHAME WE DIDNT BRING YOU UP TO BEHAVE LIKE THIS YOU AND HARRY COULD BOTH HAVE DIED Harry had been wondering when his name was going to crop up .He tried very hard to look as though he couldnt hear the voice that was making his eardrums throb .ABSOLUTELY DISGUSTED YOUR FATHERS FACING AN INQUIRY AT WORK ITS ENTIRELY YOUR FAULT AND IF YOU PUT ANOTHER TOE OUT OF LINE WELL BRING YOU STRAIGHT BACK HOME .A ringing silence fell .The red envelope which had dropped from Rons hand burst into flames and curled into ashes .Harry and Ron sat stunned as though a tidal wave had just passed over them .A few people laughed and gradually a babble of talk broke out again .Hermione closed Voyages with Vampires and looked down at the top of Rons head .Well I dont know what you expected Ron but you Dont tell me I deserved it snapped Ron .Harry pushed his porridge away .His insides were burning with guilt .Mr Weasley was facing an inquiry at work .After all Mr and Mrs Weasley had done for him over the summer .But he had no time to dwell on this Professor McGonagall was moving along the Gryffindor table handing out course schedules .Harry took his and saw that they had double Herbology with the Hufflepuffs first .Harry Ron and Hermione left the castle together crossed the vegetable patch and made for the greenhouses where the magical plants were kept .At least the Howler had done one good thing Hermione seemed to think they had now been punished enough and was being perfectly friendly again .As they neared the greenhouses they saw the rest of the class standing outside waiting for Professor Sprout .Harry Ron and Hermione had only just joined them when she came striding into view across the lawn accompanied by Gilderoy Lockhart .Professor Sprouts arms were full of bandages and with another twinge of guilt Harry spotted the Whomping Willow in the distance several of its branches now in slings .Professor Sprout was a squat little witch who wore a patched hat over her flyaway hair there was usually a large amount of earth on her clothes and her fingernails would have made Aunt Petunia faint .Gilderoy Lockhart however was immaculate in sweeping robes of turquoise his golden hair shining under a perfectly positioned turquoise hat with gold trimming .Oh hello there !he called beaming around at the assembled students .Just been showing Professor Sprout the right way to doctor a Whomping Willow !But I dont want you running away with the idea that Im better at Herbology than she is !I just happen to have met several of these exotic plants on my travels ?Greenhouse three today chaps !said Professor Sprout who was looking distinctly disgruntled not at all her usual cheerful self .There was a murmur of interest .They had only ever worked in greenhouse one before greenhouse three housed far more interesting and dangerous plants .Professor Sprout took a large key from her belt and unlocked the door .Harry caught a whiff of damp earth and fertilizer mingling with the heavy perfume of some giant umbrellasized flowers dangling from the ceiling .He was about to follow Ron and Hermione inside when Lockharts hand shot out .Harry !Ive been wanting a word you dont mind if hes a couple of minutes late do you Professor Sprout ?Judging by Professor Sprouts scowl she did mind but Lockhart said Thats the ticket and closed the greenhouse door in her face .Harry said Lockhart his large white teeth gleaming in the sunlight as he shook his head .Harry Harry Harry .Completely nonplussed Harry said nothing .When I heard well of course it was all my fault .Could have kicked myself .Harry had no idea what he was talking about .He was about to say so when Lockhart went on Dont know when Ive been more shocked .Flying a car to Hogwarts !Well of course I knew at once why youd done it .Stood out a mile .Harry Harry Harry .It was remarkable how he could show every one of those brilliant teeth even when he wasnt talking .Gave you a taste for publicity didnt I ?said Lockhart .Gave you the bug .You got onto the front page of the paper with me and you couldnt wait to do it again .Oh no Professor see Harry Harry Harry said Lockhart reaching out and grasping his shoulder .I understand .Natural to want a bit more once youve had that first taste and I blame myself for giving you that because it was bound to go to your head but see here young man you cant start flying cars to try and get yourself noticed .Just calm down all right ?Plenty of time for all that when youre older .Yes yes I know what youre thinking ! ‘Its all right for him hes an internationally famous wizard already !But when I was twelve I was just as much of a nobody as you are now .In fact Id say I was even more of a nobody !I mean a few people have heard of you havent they ?All that business with HeWhoMustNotBeNamed !He glanced at the lightning scar on Harrys forehead .I know I know its not quite as good as winning Witch Weeklys MostCharmingSmile Award five times in a row as I have but its a start Harry its a start He gave Harry a hearty wink and strode off .Harry stood stunned for a few seconds then remembering he was supposed to be in the greenhouse he opened the door and slid inside .Professor Sprout was standing behind a trestle bench in the center of the greenhouse .About twenty pairs of differentcolored earmuffs were lying on the bench .When Harry had taken his place between Ron and Hermione she said Well be repotting Mandrakes today .Now who can tell me the properties of the Mandrake ?To nobodys surprise Hermiones hand was first into the air .Mandrake or Mandragora is a powerful restorative said Hermione sounding as usual as though she had swallowed the textbook .It is used to return people who have been transfigured or cursed to their original state .Excellent .Ten points to Gryffindor said Professor Sprout .The Mandrake forms an essential part of most antidotes .It is also however dangerous .Who can tell me why ?Hermiones hand narrowly missed Harrys glasses as it shot up again .The cry of the Mandrake is fatal to anyone who hears it she said promptly .Precisely .Take another ten points said Professor Sprout .Now the Mandrakes we have here are still very young .She pointed to a row of deep trays as she spoke and everyone shuffled forward for a better look .A hundred or so tufty little plants purplish green in color were growing there in rows .They looked quite unremarkable to Harry who didnt have the slightest idea what Hermione meant by the cry of the Mandrake .Everyone take a pair of earmuffs said Professor Sprout .There was a scramble as everyone tried to seize a pair that wasnt pink and fluffy .When I tell you to put them on make sure your ears are completely covered said Professor Sprout .When it is safe to remove them I will give you the thumbs up .Right earmuffs on .Harry snapped the earmuffs over his ears .They shut out sound completely .Professor Sprout put the pink fluffy pair over her own ears rolled up the sleeves of her robes grasped one of the tufty plants firmly and pulled hard .Harry let out a gasp of surprise that no one could hear .Instead of roots a small muddy and extremely ugly baby popped out of the earth .The leaves were growing right out of his head .He had pale green mottled skin and was clearly bawling at the top of his lungs .Professor Sprout took a large plant pot from under the table and plunged the Mandrake into it burying him in dark damp compost until only the tufted leaves were visible .Professor Sprout dusted off her hands gave them all the thumbsup and removed her own earmuffs .As our Mandrakes are only seedlings their cries wont kill yet she said calmly as though shed just done nothing more exciting than water a begonia .However they will knock you out for several hours and as Im sure none of you want to miss your first day back make sure your earmuffs are securely in place while you work .I will attract your attention when it is time to pack up .Four to a tray there is a large supply of pots here compost in the sacks over there and be careful of the Venomous Tentacula its teething .She gave a sharp slap to a spiky dark red plant as she spoke making it draw in the long feelers that had been inching sneakily over her shoulder .Harry Ron and Hermione were joined at their tray by a curlyhaired Hufflepuff boy Harry knew by sight but had never spoken to .Justin FinchFletchley he said brightly shaking Harry by the hand .Know who you are of course the famous Harry Potter .And youre Hermione Granger always top in everything Hermione beamed as she had her hand shaken too and Ron Weasley .Wasnt that your flying car ?Ron didnt smile .The Howler was obviously still on his mind .That Lockharts something isnt he ?said Justin happily as they began filling their plant pots with dragon dung compost .Awfully brave chap .Have you read his books ?Id have died of fear if Id been cornered in a telephone booth by a werewolf but he stayed cool and zap just fantastic .My name was down for Eton you know .I cant tell you how glad I am I came here instead .Of course Mother was slightly disappointed but since I made her read Lockharts books I think shes begun to see how useful itll be to have a fully trained wizard in the family .After that they didnt have much chance to talk .Their earmuffs were back on and they needed to concentrate on the Mandrakes .Professor Sprout had made it look extremely easy but it wasnt .The Mandrakes didnt like coming out of the earth but didnt seem to want to go back into it either .They squirmed kicked flailed their sharp little fists and gnashed their teeth Harry spent ten whole minutes trying to squash a particularly fat one into a pot .By the end of the class Harry like everyone else was sweaty aching and covered in earth .Everyone traipsed back to the castle for a quick wash and then the Gryffindors hurried off to Transfiguration .Professor McGonagalls classes were always hard work but today was especially difficult .Everything Harry had learned last year seemed to have leaked out of his head during the summer .He was supposed to be turning a beetle into a button but all he managed to do was give his beetle a lot of exercise as it scuttled over the desktop avoiding his wand .Ron was having far worse problems .He had patched up his wand with some borrowed Spellotape but it seemed to be damaged beyond repair .It kept crackling and sparking at odd moments and every time Ron tried to transfigure his beetle it engulfed him in thick gray smoke that smelled of rotten eggs .Unable to see what he was doing Ron accidentally squashed his beetle with his elbow and had to ask for a new one .Professor McGonagall wasnt pleased .Harry was relieved to hear the lunch bell .His brain felt like a wrung sponge .Everyone filed out of the classroom except him and Ron who was whacking his wand furiously on the desk .Stupid useless thing Write home for another one Harry suggested as the wand let off a volley of bangs like a firecracker .Oh yeah and get another Howler back said Ron stuffing the now hissing wand into his bag . ‘Its your own fault your wand got snapped They went down to lunch where Rons mood was not improved by Hermiones showing them the handful of perfect coat buttons she had produced in T ransfiguration .Whatve we got this afternoon ?said Harry hastily changing the subject .Defense Against the Dark Arts said Hermione at once .Why demanded Ron seizing her schedule have you outlined all Lockharts lessons in little hearts ?Hermione snatched the schedule back blushing furiously .They finished lunch and went outside into the overcast courtyard .Hermione sat down on a stone step and buried her nose in Voyages with Vampires again .Harry and Ron stood talking about Quidditch for several minutes before Harry became aware that he was being closely watched .Looking up he saw the very small mousyhaired boy hed seen trying on the Sorting Hat last night staring at Harry as though transfixed .He was clutching what looked like an ordinary Muggle camera and the moment Harry looked at him he went bright red .All right Harry ?Im Im Colin Creevey he said breathlessly taking a tentative step forward .Im in Gryffindor too .Dyou think would it be all right if can I have a picture ?he said raising the camera hopefully .A picture ?Harry repeated blankly .So I can prove Ive met you said Colin Creevey eagerly edging further forward .I know all about you .Everyones told me .About how you survived when YouKnowWho tried to kill you and how he disappeared and everything and how youve still got a lightning scar on your forehead his eyes raked Harrys hairline and a boy in my dormitory said if I develop the film in the right potion the picturesll move .Colin drew a great shuddering breath of excitement and said Its amazing here isnt it ?I never knew all the odd stuff I could do was magic till I got the letter from Hogwarts .My dads a milkman he couldnt believe it either .So Im taking loads of pictures to send home to him .And itd be really good if I had one of you he looked imploringly at Harry maybe your friend could take it and I could stand next to you ?And then could you sign it ?Signed photos ?Youre giving out signed photos Potter ?Loud and scathing Draco Malfoys voice echoed around the courtyard .He had stopped right behind Colin flanked as he always was at Hogwarts by his large and thuggish cronies Crabbe and Goyle .Everyone line up !Malfoy roared to the crowd .Harry Potters giving out signed photos !No Im not said Harry angrily his fists clenching .Shut up Malfoy .Youre just jealous piped up Colin whose entire body was about as thick as Crabbe s neck .Jealous ?said Malfoy who didnt need to shout anymore Half the courtyard was listening in .Of what ?I dont want a foul scar right across my head thanks .I dont think getting your head cut open makes you that special myself .Crabbe and Goyle were sniggering stupidly .Eat slugs Malfoy said Ron angrily .Crabbe stopped laughing and started rubbing his knuckles in a menacing way .Be careful Weasley sneered Malfoy .You dont want to start any trouble or your mommyll have to come and take you away from school .He put on a shrill piercing voice .If you put another toe out of line A knot of Slytherin fifth years nearby laughed loudly at this .Weasley would like a signed photo Potter smirked Malfoy .Itd be worth more than his familys whole house Ron whipped out his Spellotaped wand but Hermione shut Voyages with Vampires with a snap and whispered Look out !Whats all this whats all this ?Gilderoy Lockhart was striding toward them his turquoise robes swirling behind him .Whos giving out signed photos ?Harry started to speak but he was cut short as Lockhart flung an arm around his shoulders and thundered jovially Shouldnt have asked !We meet again Harry !Pinned to Lockharts side and burning with humiliation Harry saw Malfoy slide smirking back into the crowd .Come on then Mr Creevey said Lockhart beaming at Colin .A double portrait cant do better than that and well both sign it for you .Colin fumbled for his camera and took the picture as the bell rang behind them signaling the start of afternoon classes .Off you go move along there Lockhart called to the crowd and he set off back to the castle with Harry who was wishing he knew a good Vanishing Spell still clasped to his side .A word to the wise Harry said Lockhart paternally as they entered the building through a side door .I covered up for you back there with young Creevey if he was photographing me too your schoolmates wont think youre setting yourself up so much .Deaf to Harrys stammers Lockhart swept him down a corridor lined with staring students and up a staircase .Let me just say that handing out signed pictures at this stage of your career isnt sensible looks a tad bigheaded Harry to be frank .There may well come a time when like me youll need to keep a stack handy wherever you go but he gave a little chortle I dont think youre quite there yet .They had reached Lockharts classroom and he let Harry go at last .Harry yanked his robes straight and headed for a seat at the very back of the class where he busied himself with piling all seven of Lockharts books in front of him so that he could avoid looking at the real thing .The rest of the class came clattering in and Ron and Hermione sat down on either side of Harry .You couldve fried an egg on your face said Ron .Youd better hope Creevey doesnt meet Ginny or theyll be starting a Harry Potter fan club .Shut up snapped Harry .The last thing he needed was for Lockhart to hear the phrase Harry Potter fan club .When the whole class was seated Lockhart cleared his throat loudly and silence fell .He reached forward picked up Neville Longbottoms copy of Travels with Trolls and held it up to show his own winking portrait on the front .Me he said pointing at it and winking as well .Gilderoy Lockhart Order of Merlin Third Class Honorary Member of the Dark Force Defense League and fivetime winner of Witch Weeklys Most Charming Smile Award but I dont talk about that .I didnt get rid of the Bandon Banshee by smiling at her !He waited for them to laugh a few people smiled weakly .I see youve all bought a complete set of my books well done .I thought wed start today with a little quiz .Nothing to worry about just to check how well youve read them how much youve taken in When he had handed out the test papers he returned to the front of the class and said You have thirty minutes start now Harry looked down at his paper and read 1 .What is Gilderoy Lockharts favorite color ?2 .What is Gilderoy Lockharts secret ambition ?3 .What in your opinion is Gilderoy Lockharts greatest achievement to date ?On and on it went over three sides of paper right down to 54 .When is Gilderoy Lockharts birthday and what would his ideal gift be ?Half an hour later Lockhart collected the papers and rifled through them in front of the class .Tut tut hardly any of you remembered that my favorite color is lilac .I say so in Year with the Yeti .And a few of you need to read Wanderings with Werewolves more carefully I clearly state in chapter twelve that my ideal birthday gift would be harmony between all magic and nonmagic peoples though I wouldnt say no to a large bottle of Ogdens Old Firewhisky !He gave them another roguish wink .Ron was now staring at Lockhart with an expression of disbelief on his face Seamus Finnigan and Dean Thomas who were sitting in front were shaking with silent laughter .Hermione on the other hand was listening to Lockhart with rapt attention and gave a start when he mentioned her name . .but Miss Hermione Granger knew my secret ambition is to rid the world of evil and market my own range of haircare potions good girl !In fact he flipped her paper over full marks !Where is Miss Hermione Granger ?Hermione raised a trembling hand .Excellent !beamed Lockhart .Quite excellent !Take ten points for Gryffindor !And so to business He bent down behind his desk and lifted a large covered cage onto it .Now be warned !It is my job to arm you against the foulest creatures known to wizardkind !You may find yourselves facing your worst fears in this room .Know only that no harm can befall you whilst I am here .All I ask is that you remain calm .In spite of himself Harry leaned around his pile of books for a better look at the cage .Lockhart placed a hand on the cover .Dean and Seamus had stopped laughing now .Neville was cowering in his front row seat .I must ask you not to scream said Lockhart in a low voice .It might provoke them .As the whole class held its breath Lockhart whipped off the cover .Yes he said dramatically .Freshly caught Cornish pixies .Seamus Finnigan couldnt control himself .He let out a snort of laughter that even Lockhart couldnt mistake for a scream of terror .Yes ?He smiled at Seamus .Well theyre not theyre not very dangerous are they ?Seamus choked .Dont be so sure !said Lockhart waggling a finger annoyingly at Seamus .Devilish tricky little blighters they can be !The pixies were electric blue and about eight inches high with pointed faces and voices so shrill it was like listening to a lot of budgies arguing .The moment the cover had been removed they had started jabbering and rocketing around rattling the bars and making bizarre faces at the people nearest them .Right then Lockhart said loudly .Lets see what you make of them !And he opened the cage .It was pandemonium .The pixies shot in every direction like rockets .Two of them seized Neville by the ears and lifted him into the air .Several shot straight through the window showering the back row with broken glass .The rest proceeded to wreck the classroom more effectively than a rampaging rhino .They grabbed ink bottles and sprayed the class with them shredded books and papers tore pictures from the walls upended the waste basket grabbed bags and books and threw them out of the smashed window within minutes half the class was sheltering under desks and Neville was swinging from the iron chandelier in the ceiling .Come on now round them up round them up theyre only pixies Lockhart shouted .He rolled up his sleeves brandished his wand and bellowed Peskipiksi Pesternomti It had absolutely no effect one of the pixies seized his wand and threw it out of the window too .Lockhart gulped and dived under his own desk narrowly avoiding being squashed by Neville who fell a second later as the chandelier gave way .The bell rang and there was a mad rush toward the exit .In the relative calm that followed Lockhart straightened up caught sight of Harry Ron and Hermione who were almost at the door and said Well Ill ask you three to just nip the rest of them back into their cage .He swept past them and shut the door quickly behind him .Can you believe him ?roared Ron as one of the remaining pixies bit him painfully on the ear .He just wants to give us some handson experience said Hermione immobilizing two pixies at once with a clever Freezing Charm and stuffing them back into their cage .Hands on ?said Harry who was trying to grab a pixie dancing out of reach with its tongue out .Hermione he didnt have a clue what he was doing Rubbish said Hermione .Youve read his books look at all those amazing things hes done He says hes done Ron muttered .7 MUDBLOODS AND MURMURS Harry spent a lot of time over the next few days dodging out of sight whenever he saw Gilderoy Lockhart coming down a corridor .Harder to avoid was Colin Creevey who seemed to have memorized Harrys schedule .Nothing seemed to give Colin a bigger thrill than to say All right Harry ?six or seven times a day and hear Hello Colin back however exasperated Harry sounded when he said it .Hedwig was still angry with Harry about the disasterous car journey and Rons wand was still malfunctioning surpassing itself on Friday morning by shooting out of Rons hand in Charms and hitting tiny old Professor Flitwick squarely between the eyes creating a large throbbing green boil where it had struck .So with one thing and another Harry was quite glad to reach the weekend .He Ron and Hermione were planning to visit Hagrid on Saturday morning .Harry however was shaken awake several hours earlier than he would have liked by Oliver Wood Captain of the Gryffindor Quidditch team .Whassamatter ?said Harry groggily .Quidditch practice !said Wood .Come on !Harry squinted at the window .There was a thin mist hanging across the pinkandgold sky .Now that he was awake he couldnt understand how he could have slept through the racket the birds were making .Oliver Harry croaked .Its the crack of dawn .Exactly said Wood .He was a tall and burly sixth year and at the moment his eyes were gleaming with a crazed enthusiasm .Its part of our new training program .Come on grab your broom and lets go said Wood heartily .None of the other teams have started training yet were going to be first off the mark this year Yawning and shivering slightly Harry climbed out of bed and tried to find his Quidditch robes .Good man said Wood .Meet you on the field in fifteen minutes .When hed found his scarlet team robes and pulled on his cloak for warmth Harry scribbled a note to Ron explaining where hed gone and went down the spiral staircase to the common room his Nimbus Two Thousand on his shoulder .He had just reached the portrait hole when there was a clatter behind him and Colin Creevey came dashing down the spiral staircase his camera swinging madly around his neck and something clutched in his hand .I heard someone saying your name on the stairs Harry !Look what Ive got here !Ive had it developed I wanted to show you Harry looked bemusedly at the photograph Colin was brandishing under his nose .A moving blackandwhite Lockhart was tugging hard on an arm Harry recognized as his own .He was pleased to see that his photographic self was putting up a good fight and refusing to be dragged into view .As Harry watched Lockhart gave up and slumped panting against the white edge of the picture .Will you sign it ?said Colin eagerly .No said Harry flatly glancing around to check that the room was really deserted .Sorry Colin Im in a hurry Quidditch practice He climbed through the portrait hole .Oh wow !Wait for me !Ive never watched a Quidditch game before !Colin scrambled through the hole after him .Itll be really boring Harry said quickly but Colin ignored him his face shining with excitement .You were the youngest House player in a hundred years werent you Harry ?Werent you ?said Colin trotting alongside him .You must be brilliant .Ive never flown .Is it easy ?Is that your own broom ?Is that the best one there is ?Harry didnt know how to get rid of him .It was like having an extremely talkative shadow .I dont really understand Quidditch said Colin breathlessly .Is it true there are four balls ?And two of them fly around trying to knock people off their brooms ?Yes said Harry heavily resigned to explaining the complicated rules of Quidditch .Theyre called Bludgers .There are two Beaters on each team who carry clubs to beat the Bludgers away from their side .Fred and George Weasley are the Gryffindor Beaters .And what are the other balls for ?Colin asked tripping down a couple of steps because he was gazing openmouthed at Harry .Well the Quaffle thats the biggish red one is the one that scores goals .Three Chasers on each team throw the Quaffle to each other and try and get it through the goal posts at the end of the pitch theyre three long poles with hoops on the end .And the fourth ball is the Golden Snitch said Harry and its very small very fast and difficult to catch .But thats what the Seekers got to do because a game of Quidditch doesnt end until the Snitch has been caught .And whichever teams Seeker gets the Snitch earns his team an extra hundred and fifty points .And youre the Gryffindor Seeker arent you ?said Colin in awe .Yes said Harry as they left the castle and started across the dewdrenched grass .And theres the Keeper too .He guards the goal posts .Thats it really .But Colin didnt stop questioning Harry all the way down the sloping lawns to the Quidditch field and Harry only shook him off when he reached the changing rooms Colin called after him in a piping voice Ill go and get a good seat Harry !and hurried off to the stands .The rest of the Gryffindor team were already in the changing room .Wood was the only person who looked truly awake .Fred and George Weasley were sitting puffyeyed and touslehaired next to fourth year Alicia Spinnet who seemed to be nodding off against the wall behind her .Her fellow Chasers Katie Bell and Angelina Johnson were yawning side by side opposite them .There you are Harry what kept you ?said Wood briskly .Now I wanted a quick talk with you all before we actually get onto the field because I spent the summer devising a whole new training program which I really think will make all the difference .Wood was holding up a large diagram of a Quidditch field on which were drawn many lines arrows and crosses in differentcolored inks .He took out his wand tapped the board and the arrows began to wiggle over the diagram like caterpillars .As Wood launched into a speech about his new tactics Fred Weasleys head drooped right onto Alicia Spinnets shoulder and he began to snore .The first board took nearly twenty minutes to explain but there was another board under that and a third under that one .Harry sank into a stupor as Wood droned on and on .So said Wood at long last jerking Harry from a wistful fantasy about what he could be eating for breakfast at this very moment up at the castle .Is that clear ?Any questions ?Ive got a question Oliver said George who had woken with a start .Why couldnt you have told us all this yesterday when we were awake ?Wood wasnt pleased .Now listen here you lot he said glowering at them all .We should have won the Quidditch Cup last year .Were easily the best team .But unfortunately owing to circumstances beyond our control Harry shifted guiltily in his seat .He had been unconscious in the hospital wing for the final match of the previous year meaning that Gryffindor had been a player short and had suffered their worst defeat in three hundred years .Wood took a moment to regain control of himself .Their last defeat was clearly still torturing him .So this year we train harder than ever before .Okay lets go and put our new theories into practice !Wood shouted seizing his broomstick and leading the way out of the locker rooms .Stifflegged and still yawning his team followed .They had been in the locker room so long that the sun was up completely now although remnants of mist hung over the grass in the stadium .As Harry walked onto the field he saw Ron and Hermione sitting in the stands .Arent you finished yet ?called Ron incredulously .Havent even started said Harry looking jealously at the toast and marmalade Ron and Hermione had brought out of the Great Hall .Woods been teaching us new moves .He mounted his broomstick and kicked at the ground soaring up into the air .The cool morning air whipped his face waking him far more effectively than Woods long talk .It felt wonderful to be back on the Quidditch field .He soared right around the stadium at full speed racing Fred and George .Whats that funny clicking noise ?called Fred as they hurtled around the corner .Harry looked into the stands .Colin was sitting in one of the highest seats his camera raised taking picture after picture the sound strangely magnified in the deserted stadium .Look this way Harry !This way !he cried shrilly .Whos that ?said Fred .No idea Harry lied putting on a spurt of speed that took him as far away as possible from Colin .Whats going on ?said Wood frowning as he skimmed through the air toward them .Whys that first year taking pictures ?I dont like it .He could be a Slytherin spy trying to find out about our new training program .Hes in Gryffindor said Harry quickly .And the Slytherins dont need a spy Oliver said George .What makes you say that ?said Wood testily .Because theyre here in person said George pointing .Several people in green robes were walking onto the field broomsticks in their hands .I dont believe it !Wood hissed in outrage .I booked the field for today !Well see about this !Wood shot toward the ground landing rather harder than he meant to in his anger staggering slightly as he dismounted .Harry Fred and George followed .Flint !Wood bellowed at the Slytherin Captain .This is our practice time !We got up specially !You can clear off now !Marcus Flint was even larger than Wood .He had a look of trollish cunning on his face as he replied Plenty of room for all of us Wood .Angelina Alicia and Katie had come over too .There were no girls on the Slytherin team who stood shoulder to shoulder facing the Gryffindors leering to a man .But I booked the field !said Wood positively spitting with rage .I booked it !Ah said Flint .But Tve got a specially signed note here from Professor Snape .Professor S .Snape give the Slytherin team permission to practice today on the Quidditch field owinq to the need to train their new Seeker .Youve got a new Seeker ?said Wood distracted .Where ?And from behind the six large figures before them came a seventh smaller boy smirking all over his pale pointed face .It was Draco Malfoy .Arent you Lucius Malfoys son ?said Fred looking at Malfoy with dislike .Funny you should mention Dracos father said Flint as the whole Slytherin team smiled still more broadly .Let me show you the generous gift hes made to the Slytherin team .All seven of them held out their broomsticks .Seven highly polished brandnew handles and seven sets of fine gold lettering spelling the words Nimbus Two Thousand and One gleamed under the Gryffindors noses in the early morning sun .Very latest model .Only came out last month said Flint carelessly flicking a speck of dust from the end of his own .I believe it outstrips the old Two Thousand series by a considerable amount .As for the old Cleansweeps he smiled nastily at Fred and George who were both clutching Cleansweep Fives sweeps the board with them .None of the Gryffindor team could think of anything to say for a moment .Malfoy was smirking so broadly his cold eyes were reduced to slits .Oh look said Flint .A field invasion .Ron and Hermione were crossing the grass to see what was going on .Whats happening ?Ron asked Harry .Why arent you playing ?And whats he doing here ?He was looking at Malfoy taking in his Slytherin Quidditch robes .Im the new Slytherin Seeker Weasley said Malfoy smugly .Everyones just been admiring the brooms my fathers bought our team .Ron gaped openmouthed at the seven superb broomsticks in front of him .Good arent they ?said Malfoy smoothly .But perhaps the Gryffindor team will be able to raise some gold and get new brooms too .You could raffle off those Cleansweep Fives I expect a museum would bid for them .The Slytherin team howled with laughter .At least no one on the Gryffindor team had to buy their way in said Hermione sharply .They got in on pure talent .The smug look on Malfoys face flickered .No one asked your opinion you filthy little Mudblood he spat .Harry knew at once that Malfoy had said something really bad because there was an instant uproar at his words .Flint had to dive in front of Malfoy to stop Fred and George jumping on him Alicia shrieked How dare you and Ron plunged his hand into his robes pulled out his wand yelling Youll pay for that one Malfoy !and pointed it furiously under Flints arm at Malfoys face .A loud bang echoed around the stadium and a jet of green light shot out of the wrong end of Rons wand hitting him in the stomach and sending him reeling backward onto the grass .Ron !Ron !Are you all right ?squealed Hermione .Ron opened his mouth to speak but no words came out .Instead he gave an almighty belch and several slugs dribbled out of his mouth onto his lap .The Slytherin team were paralyzed with laughter .Flint was doubled up hanging onto his new broomstick for support .Malfoy was on all fours banging the ground with his fist .The Gryffindors were gathered around Ron who kept belching large glistening slugs .Nobody seemed to want to touch him .Wed better get him to Hagrids its nearest said Harry to Hermione who nodded bravely and the pair of them pulled Ron up by the arms .What happened Harry ?What happened ?Is he ill ?But you can cure him cant you ?Colin had run down from his seat and was now dancing alongside them as they left the field .Ron gave a huge heave and more slugs dribbled down his front .Oooh said Colin fascinated and raising his camera .Can you hold him still Harry ?Get out of the way Colin !said Harry angrily .He and Hermione supported Ron out of the stadium and across the grounds toward the edge of the forest .Nearly there Ron said Hermione as the gamekeepers cabin came into view .Youll be all right in a minute almost there They were within twenty feet of Hagrids house when the front door opened but it wasnt Hagrid who emerged .Gilderoy Lockhart wearing robes of palest mauve today came striding out .Quick behind here Harry hissed dragging Ron behind a nearby bush .Hermione followed somewhat reluctantly .Its a simple matter if you know what youre doing !Lockhart was saying loudly to Hagrid .If you need help you know where I am !Ill let you have a copy of my book .Im surprised you havent already got one Ill sign one tonight and send it over .Well goodbye !And he strode away toward the castle .Harry waited until Lockhart was out of sight then pulled Ron out of the bush and up to Hagrids front door .They knocked urgently .Hagrid appeared at once looking very grumpy but his expression brightened when he saw who it was .Bin wonderin when youd come ter see me come in come in thought you mighta bin Professor Lockhart back again Harry and Hermione supported Ron over the threshold into the oneroomed cabin which had an enormous bed in one corner a fire crackling merrily in the other .Hagrid didnt seem perturbed by Rons slug problem which Harry hastily explained as he lowered Ron into a chair .Better out than in he said cheerfully plunking a large copper basin in front of him .Get em all up Ron .I dont think theres anything to do except wait for it to stop said Hermione anxiously watching Ron bend over the basin .Thats a difficult curse to work at the best of times but with a broken wand Hagrid was bustling around making them tea .His boarhound Fang was slobbering over Harry .What did Lockhart want with you Hagrid ?Harry asked scratching Fangs ears .Givin me advice on gettin kelpies out of a well growled Hagrid moving a halfplucked rooster off his scrubbed table and setting down the teapot .Like I don know .An bangin on about some banshee he banished .If one word of it was true Ill eat my kettle .It was most unlike Hagrid to criticize a Hogwarts teacher and Harry looked at him in surprise .Hermione however said in a voice somewhat higher than usual I think youre being a bit unfair .Professor Dumbledore obviously thought he was the best man for the job He was the ony man for the job said Hagrid offering them a plate of treacle toffee while Ron coughed squelchily into his basin .An I mean the ony one .Gettin very difficult ter find anyone fer the Dark Arts job .People arent too keen ter take it on see .Theyre startin ter think its jinxed .No ones lasted long fer a while now .So tell me said Hagrid jerking his head at Ron .Who was he tryin ter curse ?Malfoy called Hermione something it mustve been really bad because everyone went wild .It was bad said Ron hoarsely emerging over the tabletop looking pale and sweaty .Malfoy called her ‘Mudblood Hagrid Ron dived out of sight again as a fresh wave of slugs made their appearance .Hagrid looked outraged .He didn !he growled at Hermione .He did she said .But I dont know what it means .I could tell it was really rude of course Its about the most insulting thing he could think of gasped Ron coming back up .Mudbloods a really foul name for someone who is Muggleborn you know nonmagic parents .There are some wizards like Malfoys family who think theyre better than everyone else because theyre what people call pure blood .He gave a small burp and a single slug fell into his outstretched hand .He threw it into the basin and continued I mean the rest of us know it doesnt make any difference at all .Look at Neville Longbottom hes pureblood and he can hardly stand a cauldron the right way up .An they havent invented a spell our Hermione can do said Hagrid proudly making Hermione go a brilliant shade of magenta .Its a disgusting thing to call someone said Ron wiping his sweaty brow with a shaking hand .Dirty blood see .Common blood .Its ridiculous .Most wizards these days are halfblood anyway .If we hadnt married Muggles wedve died out .He retched and ducked out of sight again .Well I don blame yeh fer tryin ter curse him Ron said Hagrid loudly over the thuds of more slugs hitting the basin .Bu maybe it was a good thing yer wand backfired .Spect Lucius Malfoy wouldve come marchin up ter school if yehd cursed his son .Least yer not in trouble .Harry would have pointed out that trouble didnt come much worse than having slugs pouring out of your mouth but he couldnt Hagrids treacle toffee had cemented his jaws together .Harry said Hagrid abruptly as though struck by a sudden thought .Gotta bone ter pick with yeh .Ive heard youve bin givin out signed photos .How come I havent got one ?Furious Harry wrenched his teeth apart .I have not been giving out signed photos he said hotly .If Lockharts still spreading that around But then he saw that Hagrid was laughing .Im ony jokin he said patting Harry genially on the back and sending him face first into the table .I knew yeh hadnt really .I told Lockhart yeh didn need teh .Yer more famous than him without tryin .Bet he didnt like that said Harry sitting up and rubbing his chin .Don think he did said Hagrid his eyes twinkling .An then I told him Id never read one o his books an he decided ter go .Treacle toffee Ron ?he added as Ron reappeared .No thanks said Ron weakly .Better not risk it .Come an see what Ive bin growin said Hagrid as Harry and Hermione finished the last of their tea .In the small vegetable patch behind Hagrid s house were a dozen of the largest pumpkins Harry had ever seen .Each was the size of a large boulder .Gettin on well arent they ?said Hagrid happily .Fer the Halloween feast .should be big enough by then .Whatve you been feeding them ?said Harry .Hagrid looked over his shoulder to check that they were alone .Well Ive bin givin them you know a bit o help Harry noticed Hagrids flowery pink umbrella leaning against the back wall of the cabin .Harry had had reason to believe before now that this umbrella was not all it looked in fact he had the strong impression that Hagrids old school wand was concealed inside it .Hagrid wasnt supposed to use magic .He had been expelled from Hogwarts in his third year but Harry had never found out why any mention of the matter and Hagrid would clear his throat loudly and become mysteriously deaf until the subject was changed .An Engorgement Charm I suppose ?said Hermione halfway between disapproval and amusement .Well youve done a good job on them .Thats what yer little sister said said Hagrid nodding at Ron .Met her jus yesterday .Hagrid looked sideways at Harry his beard twitching .Said she was jus lookin round the grounds but I reckon she was hopin she might run inter someone else at my house .He winked at Harry .If yeh ask me she wouldn say no ter a signed Oh shut up said Harry .Ron snorted with laughter and the ground was sprayed with slugs .Watch it !Hagrid roared pulling Ron away from his precious pumpkins .It was nearly lunchtime and as Harry had only had one bit of treacle toffee since dawn he was keen to go back to school to eat .They said goodbye to Hagrid and walked back up to the castle Ron hiccoughing occasionally but only bringing up two very small slugs .They had barely set foot in the cool entrance hall when a voice rang out There you are Potter Weasley .Professor McGonagall was walking toward them looking stern .You will both do your detentions this evening .Whatre we doing Professor ?said Ron nervously suppressing a burp .You will be polishing the silver in the trophy room with Mr Filch said Professor McGonagall .And no magic Weasley elbow grease .Ron gulped .Argus Filch the caretaker was loathed by every student in the school .And you Potter will be helping Professor Lockhart answer his fan mail said Professor McGonagall .Oh n Professor cant I go and do the trophy room too ?said Harry desperately .Certainly not said Professor McGonagall raising her eyebrows .Professor Lockhart requested you particularly .Eight oclock sharp both of you .Harry and Ron slouched into the Great Hall in states of deepest gloom Hermione behind them wearing a wellyoudidbreakschoolrules sort of expression .Harry didnt enjoy his shepherds pie as much as hed thought .Both he and Ron felt theyd got the worse deal .Filch ll have me there all night said Ron heavily .No magic !There must be about a hundred cups in that room .Im no good at Muggle cleaning .Id swap anytime said Harry hollowly .Ive had loads of practice with the Dursleys .Answering Lockharts fan mail .hell be a nightmare .Saturday afternoon seemed to melt away and in what seemed like no time it was five minutes to eight and Harry was dragging his feet along the secondfloor corridor to Lockharts office .He gritted his teeth and knocked .The door flew open at once .Lockhart beamed down at him .Ah heres the scalawag !he said .Come in Harry come in Shining brightly on the walls by the light of many candles were countless framed photographs of Lockhart .He had even signed a few of them .Another large pile lay on his desk .You can address the envelopes !Lockhart told Harry as though this was a huge treat .This first ones to Gladys Gudgeon bless her huge fan of mine The minutes snailed by .Harry let Lockharts voice wash over him occasionally saying Mmm and Right and Yeah .Now and then he caught a phrase like Fames a fickle friend Harry or Celebrity is as celebrity does remember that .The candles burned lower and lower making the light dance over the many moving faces of Lockhart watching him .Harry moved his aching hand over what felt like the thousandth envelope writing out Veronica Smethleys address .It must be nearly time to leave Harry thought miserably please let it be nearly time .And then he heard something something quite apart from the spitting of the dying candles and Lockharts prattle about his fans .It was a voice a voice to chill the bone marrow a voice of breathtaking icecold venom .Come .come to me .Let me rip you .Let me tear you .Let me kill you .Harry gave a huge jump and a large lilac blot appeared on Veronica Smethleys street .What ?he said loudly .I know !said Lockhart .Six solid months at the top of the bestseller list !Broke all records !No said Harry frantically .That voice !Sorry ?said Lockhart looking puzzled .What voice ?That that voice that said didnt you hear it ?Lockhart was looking at Harry in high astonishment .What are you talking about Harry ?Perhaps youre getting a little drowsy ?Great Scott look at the time !Weve been here nearly four hours !Id never have believed it the times flown hasnt it ?Harry didnt answer .He was straining his ears to hear the voice again but there was no sound now except for Lockhart telling him he mustnt expect a treat like this every time he got detention .Feeling dazed Harry left .It was so late that the Gryffindor common room was almost empty .Harry went straight up to the dormitory .Ron wasnt back yet .Harry pulled on his pajamas got into bed and waited .Half an hour later Ron arrived nursing his right arm and bringing a strong smell of polish into the darkened room .My muscles have all seized up he groaned sinking on his bed .Fourteen times he made me buff up that Quidditch Cup before he was satisfied .And then I had another slug attack all over a Special Award for Services to the School .Took ages to get the slime off . .How was it with Lockhart ?Keeping his voice low so as not to wake Neville Dean and Seamus Harry told Ron exactly what he had heard .And Lockhart said he couldnt hear it ?said Ron .Harry could see him frowning in the moonlight .Dyou think he was lying ?But I dont get it even someone invisible wouldve had to open the door .I know said Harry lying back in his fourposter and staring at the canopy above him .I dont get it either .d THE DEATHDAY PARTY October arrived spreading a damp chill over the grounds and into the castle .Madam Pomfrey the nurse was kept busy by a sudden spate of colds among the staff and students .Her Pepperup Potion worked instantly though it left the drinker smoking at the ears for several hours afterward .Ginny Weasley who had been looking pale was bullied into taking some by Percy .The steam pouring from under her vivid hair gave the impression that her whole head was on fire .Raindrops the size of bullets thundered on the castle windows for days on end the lake rose the flower beds turned into muddy streams and Hagrids pumpkins swelled to the size of garden sheds .Oliver Woods enthusiasm for regular training sessions however was not dampened which was why Harry was to be found late one stormy Saturday afternoon a few days before Halloween returning to Gryffindor Tower drenched to the skin and splattered with mud .Even aside from the rain and wind it hadnt been a happy practice session .Fred and George who had been spying on the Slytherin team had seen for themselves the speed of those new Nimbus Two Thousand and Ones .They reported that the Slytherin team was no more than seven greenish blurs shooting through the air like missiles .As Harry squelched along the deserted corridor he came across somebody who looked just as preoccupied as he was .Nearly Headless Nick the ghost of Gryffindor Tower was staring morosely out of a window muttering under his breath .dont fulfill their requirements .half an inch if that .Hello Nick said Harry .Hello hello said Nearly Headless Nick starting and looking round .He wore a dashing plumed hat on his long curly hair and a tunic with a ruff which concealed the fact that his neck was almost completely severed .He was pale as smoke and Harry could see right through him to the dark sky and torrential rain outside .You look troubled young Potter said Nick folding a transparent letter as he spoke and tucking it inside his doublet .So do you said Harry .Ah Nearly Headless Nick waved an elegant hand a matter of no importance .Its not as though I really wanted to join .Thought Id apply but apparently I ‘dont fulfill requirements In spite of his airy tone there was a look of great bitterness on his face .But you would think wouldnt you he erupted suddenly pulling the letter back out of his pocket that getting hit fortyfive times in the neck with a blunt axe would qualify you to join the Headless Hunt ?Oh yes said Harry who was obviously supposed to agree .I mean nobody wishes more than I do that it had all been quick and clean and my head had come off properly I mean it would have saved me a great deal of pain and ridicule .However Nearly Headless Nick shook his letter open and read furiously ‘We can only accept huntsmen whose heads have parted company with their bodies .You will appreciate that it would be impossible otherwise for members to participate in hunt activities such as Horseback Head Juggling and Head Polo .It is with the greatest regret therefore that I must inform you that you do not fulfill our requirements .With very best wishes Sir Patrick Delaney Podmore .Fuming Nearly Headless Nick stuffed the letter away .Half an inch of skin and sinew holding my neck on Harry !Most people would think thats good and beheaded but oh no its not enough for Sir Properly DecapitatedPodmore .Nearly Headless Nick took several deep breaths and then said in a far calmer tone So whats bothering you ?Anything I can do ?No said Harry .Not unless you know where we can get seven free Nimbus Two Thousand and Ones for our match against Sly The rest of Harrys sentence was drowned out by a highpitched mewling from somewhere near his ankles .He looked down and found himself gazing into a pair of lamplike yellow eyes .It was Mrs Norris the skeletal gray cat who was used by the caretaker Argus Filch as a sort of deputy in his endless battle against students .Youd better get out of here Harry said Nick quickly .Filch isnt in a good mood hes got the flu and some third years accidentally plastered frog brains all over the ceiling in dungeon five .Hes been cleaning all morning and if he sees you dripping mud all over the place Right said Harry backing away from the accusing stare of Mrs Norris but not quickly enough .Drawn to the spot by the mysterious power that seemed to connect him with his foul cat Argus Filch burst suddenly through a tapestry to Harrys right wheezing and looking wildly about for the rule breaker .There was a thick tartan scarf bound around his head and his nose was unusually purple .Filth !he shouted his jowls aquiver his eyes popping alarmingly as he pointed at the muddy puddle that had dripped from Harrys Quidditch robes .Mess and muck everywhere !Ive had enough of it I tell you !Follow me Potter !So Harry waved a gloomy goodbye to Nearly Headless Nick and followed Filch back downstairs doubling the number of muddy footprints on the floor .Harry had never been inside Filchs office before it was a place most students avoided .The room was dingy and windowless lit by a single oil lamp dangling from the low ceiling .A faint smell of fried fish lingered about the place .Wooden filing cabinets stood around the walls from their labels Harry could see that they contained details of every pupil Filch had ever punished .Fred and George Weasley had an entire drawer to themselves .A highly polished collection of chains and manacles hung on the wall behind Filchs desk .It was common knowledge that he was always begging Dumbledore to let him suspend students by their ankles from the ceiling .Filch grabbed a quill from a pot on his desk and began shuffling around looking for parchment .Dung he muttered furiously great sizzling dragon bogies .frog brains .rat intestines .Ive had enough of it .make an example .wheres the form .yes .He retrieved a large roll of parchment from his desk drawer and stretched it out in front of him dipping his long black quill into the ink pot .Name .Harry Potter .Crime .It was only a bit of mud !said Harry .Its only a bit of mud to you boy but to me its an extra hour scrubbing !shouted Filch a drip shivering unpleasantly at the end of his bulbous nose .Crime .befouling the castle .suggested sentence .Dabbing at his streaming nose Filch squinted unpleasantly at Harry who waited with bated breath for his sentence to fall .But as Filch lowered his quill there was a great BANG !on the ceiling of the office which made the oil lamp rattle .PEEVES !Filch roared flinging down his quill in a transport of rage .Ill have you this time Ill have you !And without a backward glance at Harry Filch ran flatfooted from the office Mrs Norris streaking alongside him .Peeves was the school poltergeist a grinning airborne menace who lived to cause havoc and distress .Harry didnt much like Peeves but couldnt help feeling grateful for his timing .Hopefully whatever Peeves had done and it sounded as though hed wrecked something very big this time would distract Filch from Harry .Thinking that he should probably wait for Filch to come back Harry sank into a motheaten chair next to the desk .There was only one thing on it apart from his halfcompleted form a large glossy purple envelope with silver lettering on the front .With a quick glance at the door to check that Filch wasnt on his way back Harry picked up the envelope and read KWIKSPELL A Correspondence Course in Beginners Magic Intrigued Harry flicked the envelope open and pulled out the sheaf of parchment inside .More curly silver writing on the front page said Feel out of step in the world of modern magic ?Find yourself making excuses not to perform simple spells ?Ever been taunted for your woeful wandwork ?There is an answer !Kwikspell is an allnew failsafe quickresult easy learn course .Hundreds of witches and wizards have benefited from the Kwikspell method !Madam Z .Nettles of Topsham writes I had no memory for incantations and my potions were a family joke !Now after a Kwikspell course I am the center of attention at parties and friends beg for the recipe of my Scintillation Solution !Warlock D .J .Prod of Didsbury says My wife used to sneer at my feeble charms but one month into your fabulous Kwikspell course and I succeeded in turning her into a yak !Thank you Kwikspell !Fascinated Harry thumbed through the rest of the envelopes contents .Why on earth did Filch want a Kwikspell course ?Did this mean he wasnt a proper wizard ?Harry was just reading Lesson One Holding Your Wand Some Useful Tips when shuffling footsteps outside told him Filch was coming back .Stuffing the parchment back into the envelope Harry threw it back onto the desk just as the door opened .Filch was looking triumphant .That vanishing cabinet was extremely valuable !he was saying gleefully to Mrs Norris .Well have Peeves out this time my sweet His eyes fell on Harry and then darted to the Kwikspell envelope which Harry realized too late was lying two feet away from where it had started .Filch s pasty face went brick red .Harry braced himself for a tidal wave of fury .Filch hobbled across to his desk snatched up the envelope and threw it into a drawer .Have you did you read ?he sputtered .No Harry lied quickly .Filch s knobbly hands were twisting together .If I thought youd read my private not that its mine for a friend be that as it may however Harry was staring at him alarmed Filch had never looked madder .His eyes were popping a tic was going in one of his pouchy cheeks and the tartan scarf didnt help .Very well go and dont breathe a word not that however if you didnt read go now I have to write up Peeves report go Amazed at his luck Harry sped out of the office up the corridor and back upstairs .To escape from Filch s office without punishment was probably some kind of school record .Harry !Harry !Did it work ?Nearly Headless Nick came gliding out of a classroom .Behind him Harry could see the wreckage of a large blackandgold cabinet that appeared to have been dropped from a great height .I persuaded Peeves to crash it right over Filchs office said Nick eagerly .Thought it might distract him Was that you ?said Harry gratefully .Yeah it worked I didnt even get detention .Thanks Nick !They set off up the corridor together .Nearly Headless Nick Harry noticed was still holding Sir Patricks rejection letter .I wish there was something I could do for you about the Headless Hunt Harry said .Nearly Headless Nick stopped in his tracks and Harry walked right through him .He wished he hadnt it was like stepping through an icy shower .But there is something you could do for me said Nick excitedly .Harry would I be asking too much but no you wouldnt want What is it ?said Harry .Well this Halloween will be my five hundredth deathday said Nearly Headless Nick drawing himself up and looking dignified .Oh said Harry not sure whether he should look sorry or happy about this .Right .Im holding a party down in one of the roomier dungeons .Friends will be coming from all over the country .It would be such an honor if you would attend .Mr Weasley and Miss Granger would be most welcome too of course but I daresay youd rather go to the school feast ?He watched Harry on tenterhooks .No said Harry quickly Ill come My dear boy !Harry Potter at my deathday party !And he hesitated looking excited do you think you could possibly mention to Sir Patrick how very frightening and impressive you find me ?Of of course said Harry .Nearly Headless Nick beamed at him .A deathday party ?said Hermione keenly when Harry had changed at last and joined her and Ron in the common room .I bet there arent many living people who can say theyve been to one of those itll be fascinating !Why would anyone want to celebrate the day they died ?said Ron who was halfway through his Potions homework and grumpy .Sounds dead depressing to me ..Rain was still lashing the windows which were now inky black but inside all looked bright and cheerful .The firelight glowed over the countless squashy armchairs where people sat reading talking doing homework or in the case of Fred and George Weasley trying to find out what would happen if you fed a Filibuster firework to a salamander .Fred had rescued the brilliant orange firedwelling lizard from a Care of Magical Creatures class and it was now smoldering gently on a table surrounded by a knot of curious people .Harry was at the point of telling Ron and Hermione about Filch and the Kwikspell course when the salamander suddenly whizzed into the air emitting loud sparks and bangs as it whirled wildly round the room .The sight of Percy bellowing himself hoarse at Fred and George the spectacular display of tangerine stars showering from the salamanders mouth and its escape into the fire with accompanying explosions drove both Filch and the Kwikspell envelope from Harrys mind .By the time Halloween arrived Harry was regretting his rash promise to go to the deathday party .The rest of the school was happily anticipating their Halloween feast the Great Hall had been decorated with the usual live bats Hagrids vast pumpkins had been carved into lanterns large enough for three men to sit in and there were rumors that Dumbledore had booked a troupe of dancing skeletons for the entertainment .A promise is a promise Hermione reminded Harry bossily .You said youd go to the deathday party .So at seven oclock Harry Ron and Hermione walked straight past the doorway to the packed Great Hall which was glittering invitingly with gold plates and candles and directed their steps instead toward the dungeons .The passageway leading to Nearly Headless Nicks party had been lined with candles too though the effect was far from cheerful These were long thin jetblack tapers all burning bright blue casting a dim ghostly light even over their own living faces .The temperature dropped with every step they took .As Harry shivered and drew his robes tightly around him he heard what sounded like a thousand fingernails scraping an enormous blackboard .Is that supposed to be music ?Ron whispered .They turned a corner and saw Nearly Headless Nick standing at a doorway hung with black velvet drapes .My dear friends he said mournfully .Welcome welcome .so pleased you could come .He swept off his plumed hat and bowed them inside .It was an incredible sight .The dungeon was full of hundreds of pearlywhite translucent people mostly drifting around a crowded dance floor waltzing to the dreadful quavering sound of thirty musical saws played by an orchestra on a raised blackdraped platform .A chandelier overhead blazed midnightblue with a thousand more black candles .Their breath rose in a mist before them it was like stepping into a freezer .Shall we have a look around ?Harry suggested wanting to warm up his feet .Careful not to walk through anyone said Ron nervously and they set off around the edge of the dance floor .They passed a group of gloomy nuns a ragged man wearing chains and the Fat Friar a cheerful Hufflepuff ghost who was talking to a knight with an arrow sticking out of his forehead .Harry wasnt surprised to see that the Bloody Baron a gaunt staring Slytherin ghost covered in silver bloodstains was being given a wide berth by the other ghosts .Oh no said Hermione stopping abruptly .Turn back turn back I dont want to talk to Moaning Myrtle Who ?said Harry as they backtracked quickly .She haunts one of the toilets in the girls bathroom on the first floor said Hermione .She haunts a toilet ?Yes .Its been outoforder all year because she keeps having tantrums and flooding the place .I never went in there anyway if I could avoid it its awful trying to have a pee with her wailing at you Look food !said Ron .On the other side of the dungeon was a long table also covered in black velvet .They approached it eagerly but next moment had stopped in their tracks horrified .The smell was quite disgusting .Large rotten fish were laid on handsome silver platters cakes burned charcoalblack were heaped on salvers there was a great maggoty haggis a slab of cheese covered in furry green mold and in pride of place an enormous gray cake in the shape of a tombstone with tarlike icing forming the words SIR NICHOLAS DE MIMSYPORPINGTON DIED 3 1 ST OCTOBER 1 492 Harry watched amazed as a portly ghost approached the table crouched low and walked through it his mouth held wide so that it passed through one of the stinking salmon .Can you taste it if you walk through it ?Harry asked him .Almost said the ghost sadly and he drifted away .I expect theyve let it rot to give it a stronger flavor said Hermione knowledgeably pinching her nose and leaning closer to look at the putrid haggis .Can we move ?I feel sick said Ron .They had barely turned around however when a little man swooped suddenly from under the table and came to a halt in midair before them .Hello Peeves said Harry cautiously .Unlike the ghosts around them Peeves the Poltergeist was the very reverse of pale and transparent .He was wearing a bright orange party hat a revolving bow tie and a broad grin on his wide wicked face .Nibbles ?he said sweetly offering them a bowl of peanuts covered in fungus .No thanks said Hermione .Heard you talking about poor Myrtle said Peeves his eyes dancing .Rude you was about poor Myrtle .He took a deep breath and bellowed OY !MYRTLE !Oh no Peeves dont tell her what I said shell be really upset Hermione whispered frantically .I didnt mean it I dont mind her er hello Myrtle .The squat ghost of a girl had glided over .She had the glummest face Harry had ever seen halfhidden behind lank hair and thick pearly spectacles .What ?she said sulkily .How are you Myrtle ?said Hermione in a falsely bright voice .Its nice to see you out of the toilet .Myrtle sniffed .Miss Granger was just talking about you said Peeves slyly in Myrtles ear .Just saying saying how nice you look tonight said Hermione glaring at Peeves .Myrtle eyed Hermione suspiciously .Youre making fun of me she said silver tears welling rapidly in her small seethrough eyes .No honestly didnt I just say how nice Myrtles looking ?said Hermione nudging Harry and Ron painfully in the ribs .Oh yeah She did Dont lie to me Myrtle gasped tears now flooding down her face while Peeves chuckled happily over her shoulder .Dyou think I dont know what people call me behind my back ?Fat Myrtle !Ugly Myrtle !Miserable moaning moping Myrtle !Youve forgotten pimply Peeves hissed in her ear .Moaning Myrtle burst into anguished sobs and fled from the dungeon .Peeves shot after her pelting her with moldy peanuts yelling Pimply Pimplyl Oh dear said Hermione sadly .Nearly Headless Nick now drifted toward them through the crowd .Enjoying yourselves ?Oh yes they lied .Not a bad turnout said Nearly Headless Nick proudly .The Wailing Widow came all the way up from Kent .Its nearly time for my speech Id better go and warn the orchestra .The orchestra however stopped playing at that very moment .They and everyone else in the dungeon fell silent looking around in excitement as a hunting horn sounded .Oh here we go said Nearly Headless Nick bitterly .Through the dungeon wall burst a dozen ghost horses each ridden by a headless horseman .The assembly clapped wildly Harry started to clap too but stopped quickly at the sight of Nicks face .The horses galloped into the middle of the dance floor and halted rearing and plunging .At the front of the pack was a large ghost who held his bearded head under his arm from which position he was blowing the horn .The ghost leapt down lifted his head high in the air so he could see over the crowd everyone laughed and strode over to Nearly Headless Nick squashing his head back onto his neck .Nick !he roared .How are you ?Head still hanging in there ?He gave a hearty guffaw and clapped Nearly Headless Nick on the shoulder .Welcome Patrick said Nick stiffly .Live uns !said Sir Patrick spotting Harry Ron and Hermione and giving a huge fake jump of astonishment so that his head fell off again the crowd howled with laughter .Very amusing said Nearly Headless Nick darkly .Dont mind Nick !shouted Sir Patricks head from the floor .Still upset we wont let him join the Hunt !But I mean to say look at the fellow I think said Harry hurriedly at a meaningful look from Nick Nicks very frightening and er Ha !yelled Sir Patricks head .Bet he asked you to say that !If I could have everyones attention its time for my speech !said Nearly Headless Nick loudly striding toward the podium and climbing into an icy blue spotlight .My late lamented lords ladies and gentlemen it is my great sorrow .But nobody heard much more .Sir Patrick and the rest of the Headless Hunt had just started a game of Head Hockey and the crowd were turning to watch .Nearly Headless Nick tried vainly to recapture his audience but gave up as Sir Patricks head went sailing past him to loud cheers .Harry was very cold by now not to mention hungry .I cant stand much more of this Ron muttered his teeth chattering as the orchestra ground back into action and the ghosts swept back onto the dance floor .Lets go Harry agreed .They backed toward the door nodding and beaming at anyone who looked at them and a minute later were hurrying back up the passageway full of black candles .Pudding might not be finished yet said Ron hopefully leading the way toward the steps to the entrance hall .And then Harry heard it . .rip .tear .kill .It was the same voice the same cold murderous voice he had heard in Lockharts office .He stumbled to a halt clutching at the stone wall listening with all his might looking around squinting up and down the dimly lit passageway .Harry whatre you ?Its that voice again shut up a minute soo hungry .for so long .Listen !said Harry urgently and Ron and Hermione froze watching him . .kill .time to kill .The voice was growing fainter .Harry was sure it was moving away moving upward .A mixture of fear and excitement gripped him as he stared at the dark ceiling how could it be moving upward ?Was it a phantom to whom stone ceilings didnt matter ?This way he shouted and he began to run up the stairs into the entrance hall .It was no good hoping to hear anything here the babble of talk from the Halloween feast was echoing out of the Great Hall .Harry sprinted up the marble staircase to the first floor Ron and Hermione clattering behind him .Harry whatre we SHH !Harry strained his ears .Distantly from the floor above and growing fainter still he heard the voice .I smell blood .I SMELL BLOOD His stomach lurched Its going to kill someone !he shouted and ignoring Rons and Hermiones bewildered faces he ran up the next flight of steps three at a time trying to listen over his own pounding footsteps Harry hurtled around the whole of the second floor Ron and Hermione panting behind him not stopping until they turned a corner into the last deserted passage .Harry what was that all about ?said Ron wiping sweat off his face .I couldnt hear anything .But Hermione gave a sudden gasp pointing down the corridor .Looc !Something was shining on the wall ahead .They approached slowly squinting through the darkness .Foothigh words had been daubed on the wall between two windows shimmering in the light cast by the flaming torches .THE CHAMBER OF SECRETS HAS BEEN OPENED .ENEMIES OF THE HEIR BEWARE .Whats that thing hanging underneath ?said Ron a slight quiver in his voice .As they edged nearer Harry almost slipped there was a large puddle of water on the floor Ron and Hermione grabbed him and they inched toward the message eyes fixed on a dark shadow beneath it .All three of them realized what it was at once and leapt backward with a splash .Mrs Norris the caretakers cat was hanging by her tail from the torch bracket .She was stiff as a board her eyes wide and staring .For a few seconds they didnt move .Then Ron said Lets get out of here .Shouldnt we try and help Harry began awkwardly .Trust me said Ron .We dont want to be found here .But it was too late .A rumble as though of distant thunder told them that the feast had just ended .From either end of the corridor where they stood came the sound of hundreds of feet climbing the stairs and the loud happy talk of wellfed people next moment students were crashing into the passage from both ends .The chatter the bustle the noise died suddenly as the people in front spotted the hanging cat .Harry Ron and Hermione stood alone in the middle of the corridor as silence fell among the mass of students pressing forward to see the grisly sight .Then someone shouted through the quiet .Enemies of the Heir beware !Youll be next Mudbloods !It was Draco Malfoy .He had pushed to the front of the crowd his cold eyes alive his usually bloodless face flushed as he grinned at the sight of the hanging immobile cat .9 THE WRITING ON THE WALL Whats going on here ?Whats going on ?Attracted no doubt by Malfoys shout Argus Filch came shouldering his way through the crowd .Then he saw Mrs Norris and fell back clutching his face in horror .My cat !My cat !Whats happened to Mrs Norris ?he shrieked .And his popping eyes fell on Harry .You !he screeched .You !Youve murdered my cat !Youve killed her !Ill kill you !Ill Argus .Dumbledore had arrived on the scene followed by a number of other teachers .In seconds he had swept past Harry Ron and Hermione and detached Mrs Norris from the torch bracket .Come with me Argus he said to Filch .You too Mr Potter Mr Weasley Miss Granger .Lockhart stepped forward eagerly .My office is nearest Headmaster just upstairs please feel free Thank you Gilderoy said Dumbledore .The silent crowd parted to let them pass .Lockhart looking excited and important hurried after Dumbledore so did Professors McGonagall and Snape .As they entered Lockharts darkened office there was a flurry of movement across the walls Harry saw several of the Lockharts in the pictures dodging out of sight their hair in rollers .The real Lockhart lit the candles on his desk and stood back .Dumbledore laid Mrs Norris on the polished surface and began to examine her .Harry Ron and Hermione exchanged tense looks and sank into chairs outside the pool of candlelight watching .The tip of Dumbledore s long crooked nose was barely an inch from Mrs Norriss fur .He was looking at her closely through his halfmoon spectacles his long fingers gently prodding and poking .Professor McGonagall was bent almost as close her eyes narrowed .Snape loomed behind them half in shadow wearing a most peculiar expression It was as though he was trying hard not to smile .And Lockhart was hovering around all of them making suggestions .It was definitely a curse that killed her probably the Transmogrifian Torture Ive seen it used many times so unlucky I wasnt there I know the very countercurse that would have saved her .Lockharts comments were punctuated by Filch s dry racking sobs .He was slumped in a chair by the desk unable to look at Mrs Norris his face in his hands .Much as he detested Filch Harry couldnt help feeling a bit sorry for him though not nearly as sorry as he felt for himself .If Dumbledore believed Filch he would be expelled for sure .Dumbledore was now muttering strange words under his breath and tapping Mrs Norris with his wand but nothing happened She continued to look as though she had been recently stuffed . .I remember something very similar happening in Ouagadougou said Lockhart a series of attacks the full storys in my autobiography I was able to provide the townsfolk with various amulets which cleared the matter up at once .The photographs of Lockhart on the walls were all nodding in agreement as he talked .One of them had forgotten to remove his hair net .At last Dumbledore straightened up .Shes not dead Argus he said softly .Lockhart stopped abruptly in the middle of counting the number of murders he had prevented .Not dead ?choked Filch looking through his fingers at Mrs Norris .But whys she all all stiff and frozen ?She has been Petrified said Dumbledore Ah !I thought so !said Lockhart .But how I cannot say .Ask him shrieked Filch turning his blotched and tearstained face to Harry .No second year could have done this said Dumbledore firmly .It would take Dark Magic of the most advanced He did it he did it !Filch spat his pouchy face purpling .You saw what he wrote on the wall !He found in my office he knows Im a Im a Filch s face worked horribly .He knows Im a Squib !he finished .I never touched Mrs Norris !Harry said loudly uncomfortably aware of everyone looking at him including all the Lockharts on the walls .And I dont even know what a Squib is .Rubbish !snarled Filch .He saw my Kwikspell letter !If I might speak Headmaster said Snape from the shadows and Harrys sense of foreboding increased he was sure nothing Snape had to say was going to do him any good .Potter and his friends may have simply been in the wrong place at the wrong time he said a slight sneer curling his mouth as though he doubted it .But we do have a set of suspicious circumstances here .Why was he in the upstairs corridor at all ?Why wasnt he at the Halloween feast ?Harry Ron and Hermione all launched into an explanation about the deathday party .there were hundreds of ghosts theyll tell you we were there But why not join the feast afterward ?said Snape his black eyes glittering in the candlelight .Why go up to that corridor ?Ron and Hermione looked at Harry .Because because Harry said his heart thumping very fast something told him it would sound very farfetched if he told them he had been led there by a bodiless voice no one but he could hear because we were tired and wanted to go to bed he said .Without any supper ?said Snape a triumphant smile flickering across his gaunt face .I didnt think ghosts provided food fit for living people at their parties .We werent hungry said Ron loudly as his stomach gave a huge rumble .Snapes nasty smile widened .I suggest Headmaster that Potter is not being entirely truthful he said .It might be a good idea if he were deprived of certain privileges until he is ready to tell us the whole story .I personally feel he should be taken off the Gryffindor Quidditch team until he is ready to be honest .Really Severus said Professor McGonagall sharply I see no reason to stop the boy playing Quidditch .This cat wasnt hit over the head with a broomstick .There is no evidence at all that Potter has done anything wrong .Dumbledore was giving Harry a searching look .His twinkling lightblue gaze made Harry feel as though he were being Xrayed .Innocent until proven guilty Severus he said firmly .Snape looked furious .So did Filch .My cat has been Petrified !he shrieked his eyes popping .I want to see some punishmenti We will be able to cure her Argus said Dumbledore patiently .Professer Sprout recently managed to procure some Mandrakes .As soon as they have reached their full size I will have a potion made that will revive Mrs Norris .Ill make it Lockhart butted in .I must have done it a hundred times .I could whip up a Mandrake Restorative Draught in my sleep Excuse me said Snape icily .But I believe I am the Potions master at this school .There was a very awkward pause .You may go Dumbledore said to Harry Ron and Hermione .They went as quickly as they could without actually running .When they were a floor up from Lockharts office they turned into an empty classroom and closed the door quietly behind them .Harry squinted at his friends darkened faces .Dyou think I should have told them about that voice I heard ?No said Ron without hesitation .Hearing voices no one else can hear isnt a good sign even in the wizarding world .Something in Rons voice made Harry ask You do believe me dont you ?Course I do said Ron quickly .But you must admit its weird .I know its weird said Harry .The whole things weird .What was that writing on the wall about ?The Chamber Has Been Opened .Whats that supposed to mean ?You know it rings a sort of bell said Ron slowly .I think someone told me a story about a secret chamber at Hogwarts once .mightve been Bill .And what on earths a Squib ?said Harry .To his surprise Ron stifled a snigger .Well its not funny really but as its Filch he said .A Squib is someone who was born into a wizarding family but hasnt got any magic powers .Kind of the opposite of Muggleborn wizards but Squibs are quite unusual .If Filch s trying to learn magic from a Kwikspell course I reckon he must be a Squib .It would explain a lot .Like why he hates students so much .Ron gave a satisfied smile .Hes bitter .A clock chimed somewhere .Midnight said Harry .Wed better get to bed before Snape comes along and tries to frame us for something else .For a few days the school could talk of little else but the attack on Mrs Norris .Filch kept it fresh in everyones minds by pacing the spot where she had been attacked as though he thought the attacker might come back .Harry had seen him scrubbing the message on the wall with Mrs Skowers AllPurpose Magical Mess Remover but to no effect the words still gleamed as brightly as ever on the stone .When Filch wasnt guarding the scene of the crime he was skulking redeyed through the corridors lunging out at unsuspecting students and trying to put them in detention for things like breathing loudly and looking happy .Ginny Weasley seemed very disturbed by Mrs Norriss fate .According to Ron she was a great cat lover .But you havent really got to know Mrs Norris Ron told her bracingly .Honestly were much better off without her .Ginny s lip trembled .Stuff like this doesnt often happen at Hogwarts Ron assured her .Theyll catch the maniac who did it and have him out of here in no time .I just hope hes got time to Petrify Filch before hes expelled .Im only joking Ron added hastily as Ginny blanched .The attack had also had an effect on Hermione .It was quite usual for Hermione to spend a lot of time reading but she was now doing almost nothing else .Nor could Harry and Ron get much response from her when they asked what she was up to and not until the following Wednesday did they find out .Harry had been held back in Potions where Snape had made him stay behind to scrape tubeworms off the desks .After a hurried lunch he went upstairs to meet Ron in the library and saw Justin Finch Fletchley the Hufflepuff boy from Herbology coming toward him .Harry had just opened his mouth to say hello when Justin caught sight of him turned abruptly and sped off in the opposite direction .Harry found Ron at the back of the library measuring his History of Magic homework .Professor Binns had asked for a threefootlong composition on The Medieval Assembly of European Wizards .I dont believe it Im still eight inches short .said Ron furiously letting go of his parchment which sprang back into a roll .And Hermiones done four feet seven inches and her writings tiny .Where is she ?asked Harry grabbing the tape measure and unrolling his own homework .Somewhere over there said Ron pointing along the shelves .Looking for another book .I think shes trying to read the whole library before Christmas .Harry told Ron about Justin FinchFletchley running away from him .Dunno why you care .I thought he was a bit of an idiot said Ron scribbling away making his writing as large as possible .All that junk about Lockhart being so great Hermione emerged from between the bookshelves .She looked irritable and at last seemed ready to talk to them .All the copies of Hogwarts A History have been taken out she said sitting down next to Harry and Ron .And theres a twoweek waiting list .I wish I hadnt left my copy at home but I couldnt fit it in my trunk with all the Lockhart books .Why do you want it ?said Harry .The same reason everyone else wants it said Hermione to read up on the legend of the Chamber of Secrets .Whats that ?said Harry quickly .Thats just it .I cant remember said Hermione biting her lip .And I cant find the story anywhere else Hermione let me read your composition said Ron desperately checking his watch .No I wont said Hermione suddenly severe .Youve had ten days to finish it I only need another two inches come on The bell rang .Ron and Hermione led the way to History of Magic bickering .History of Magic was the dullest subject on their schedule .Professor Binns who taught it was their only ghost teacher and the most exciting thing that ever happened in his classes was his entering the room through the blackboard .Ancient and shriveled many people said he hadnt noticed he was dead .He had simply got up to teach one day and left his body behind him in an armchair in front of the staffroom fire his routine had not varied in the slightest since .Today was as boring as ever .Professor Binns opened his notes and began to read in a flat drone like an old vacuum cleaner until nearly everyone in the class was in a deep stupor occasionally coming to long enough to copy down a name or date then falling asleep again .He had been speaking for half an hour when something happened that had never happened before .Hermione put up her hand .Professor Binns glancing up in the middle of a deadly dull lecture on the International Warlock Convention of 1289 looked amazed .Miss er ?Granger Professor .I was wondering if you could tell us anything about the Chamber of Secrets said Hermione in a clear voice .Dean Thomas who had been sitting with his mouth hanging open gazing out of the window jerked out of his trance Lavender Browns head came up off her arms and Neville Longbottoms elbow slipped off his desk .Professor Binns blinked .My subject is History of Magic he said in his dry wheezy voice .I deal with facts Miss Granger not myths and legends .He cleared his throat with a small noise like chalk snapping and continued In September of that year a subcommittee of Sardinian sorcerers He stuttered to a halt .Hermiones hand was waving in the air again .Miss Grant ?Please sir dont legends always have a basis in fact ?Professor Binns was looking at her in such amazement Harry was sure no student had ever interrupted him before alive or dead .Well said Professor Binns slowly yes one could argue that I suppose .He peered at Hermione as though he had never seen a student properly before .However the legend of which you speak is such a very sensational even ludicrous tale But the whole class was now hanging on Professor Binns s every word .He looked dimly at them all every face turned to his .Harry could tell he was completely thrown by such an unusual show of interest .Oh very well he said slowly .Let me see .the Chamber of Secrets .You all know of course that Hogwarts was founded over a thousand years ago the precise date is uncertain by the four greatest witches and wizards of the age .The four school Houses are named after them Godric Gryffindor Helga Hufflepuff Rowena Ravenclaw and Salazar Slytherin .They built this castle together far from prying Muggle eyes for it was an age when magic was feared by common people and witches and wizards suffered much persecution .He paused gazed blearily around the room and continued .For a few years the founders worked in harmony together seeking out youngsters who showed signs of magic and bringing them to the castle to be educated .But then disagreements sprang up between them .A rift began to grow between Slytherin and the others .Slytherin wished to be more selective about the students admitted to Hogwarts .He believed that magical learning should be kept within allmagic families .He disliked taking students of Muggle parentage believing them to be untrustworthy .After a while there was a serious argument on the subject between Slytherin and Gryffindor and Slytherin left the school .Professor Binns paused again pursing his lips looking like a wrinkled old tortoise .Reliable historical sources tell us this much he said .But these honest facts have been obscured by the fanciful legend of the Chamber of Secrets .The story goes that Slytherin had built a hidden chamber in the castle of which the other founders knew nothing .Slytherin according to the legend sealed the Chamber of Secrets so that none would be able to open it until his own true heir arrived at the school .The heir alone would be able to unseal the Chamber of Secrets unleash the horror within and use it to purge the school of all who were unworthy to study magic .There was silence as he finished telling the story but it wasnt the usual sleepy silence that filled Professor Binns s classes .There was unease in the air as everyone continued to watch him hoping for more .Professor Binns looked faintly annoyed .The whole thing is arrant nonsense of course he said .Naturally the school has been searched for evidence of such a chamber many times by the most learned witches and wizards .It does not exist .A tale told to frighten the gullible .Hermiones hand was back in the air .Sir what exactly do you mean by the ‘horror within the Chamber ?That is believed to be some sort of monster which the Heir of Slytherin alone can control said Professor Binns in his dry reedy voice .The class exchanged nervous looks .I tell you the thing does not exist said Professor Binns shuffling his notes .There is no Chamber and no monster .But sir said Seamus Finnigan if the Chamber can only be opened by Slytherins true heir no one else would be able to find it would they ?Nonsense OFlaherty said Professor Binns in an aggravated tone .If a long succession of Hogwarts headmasters and headmistresses havent found the thing But Professor piped up Parvati Patil youd probably have to use Dark Magic to open it Just because a wizard doesnt use Dark Magic doesnt mean he cant Miss Pennyfeather snapped Professor Binns .I repeat if the likes of Dumbledore But maybe youve got to be related to Slytherin so Dumbledore couldnt began Dean Thomas but Professor Binns had had enough .That will do he said sharply .It is a myth !It does not exist !There is not a shred of evidence that Slytherin ever built so much as a secret broom cupboard !I regret telling you such a foolish story !We will return if you please to history to solid believable verifiable facti And within five minutes the class had sunk back into its usual torpor .I always knew Salazar Slytherin was a twisted old loony Ron told Harry and Hermione as they fought their way through the teeming corridors at the end of the lesson to drop off their bags before dinner .But I never knew he started all this pureblood stuff .I wouldnt be in his House if you paid me .Honestly if the Sorting Hat had tried to put me in Slytherin Idve got the train straight back home .Hermione nodded fervently but Harry didnt say anything .His stomach had just dropped unpleasantly .Harry had never told Ron and Hermione that the Sorting Hat had seriously considered putting him in Slytherin .He could remember as though it were yesterday the small voice that had spoken in his ear when hed placed the hat on his head a year before You could be great you know its all here in your head and Slytherin would help you on the way to greatness no doubt about that .But Harry who had already heard of Slytherin Houses reputation for turning out Dark wizards had thought desperately Not Slytherin !and the hat had said Oh well if youre sure .better be Gryffindor .As they were shunted along in the throng Colin Creevey went past .Hiya Harry !Hullo Colin said Harry automatically .Harry Harry a boy in my class has been saying youre But Colin was so small he couldnt fight against the tide of people bearing him toward the Great Hall they heard him squeak See you Harry !and he was gone .Whats a boy in his class saying about you ?Hermione wondered .That Im Slytherins heir I expect said Harry his stomach dropping another inch or so as he suddenly remembered the way Justin FinchFletchley had run away from him at lunchtime .People herell believe anything said Ron in disgust .The crowd thinned and they were able to climb the next staircase without difficulty .Dyou really think theres a Chamber of Secrets ?Ron asked Hermione .I dont know she said frowning .Dumbledore couldnt cure Mrs Norris and that makes me think that whatever attacked her might not be well human .As she spoke they turned a corner and found themselves at the end of the very corridor where the attack had happened .They stopped and looked .The scene was just as it had been that night except that there was no stiff cat hanging from the torch bracket and an empty chair stood against the wall bearing the message The Chamber of Secrets Has Been Opened .Thats where Filch has been keeping guard Ron muttered .They looked at each other .The corridor was deserted .Cant hurt to have a poke around said Harry dropping his bag and getting to his hands and knees so that he could crawl along searching for clues .Scorch marks !he said .Here and here Come and look at this !said Hermione .This is funny .Harry got up and crossed to the window next to the message on the wall .Hermione was pointing at the topmost pane where around twenty spiders were scuttling apparently fighting to get through a small crack .A long silvery thread was dangling like a rope as though they had all climbed it in their hurry to get outside .Have you ever seen spiders act like that ?said Hermione wonderingly .No said Harry have you Ron ?Ron ?He looked over his shoulder .Ron was standing well back and seemed to be fighting the impulse to run .Whats up ?said Harry .I dont like spiders said Ron tensely .I never knew that said Hermione looking at Ron in surprise .Youve used spiders in Potions loads of times .I dont mind them dead said Ron who was carefully looking anywhere but at the window .I just dont like the way they move .Hermione giggled .Its not funny said Ron fiercely .If you must know when I was three Fred turned my my teddy bear into a great big filthy spider because I broke his toy broomstick .You wouldnt like them either if youd been holding your bear and suddenly it had too many legs and .He broke off shuddering .Hermione was obviously still trying not to laugh .Feeling they had better get off the subject Harry said Remember all that water on the floor ?Where did that come from ?Someones mopped it up .It was about here said Ron recovering himself to walk a few paces past Filchs chair and pointing .Level with this door .He reached for the brass doorknob but suddenly withdrew his hand as though hed been burned .Whats the matter ?said Harry .Cant go in there said Ron gruffly .Thats a girls toilet .Oh Ron there wont be anyone in there said Hermione standing up and coming over .Thats Moaning Myrtles place .Come on lets have a look .And ignoring the large OUT OF ORDER sign she opened the door .It was the gloomiest most depressing bathroom Harry had ever set foot in .Under a large cracked and spotted mirror were a row of chipped sinks .The floor was damp and reflected the dull light given off by the stubs of a few candles burning low in their holders the wooden doors to the stalls were flaking and scratched and one of them was dangling off its hinges .Hermione put her fingers to her lips and set off toward the end stall .When she reached it she said Hello Myrtle how are you ?Harry and Ron went to look .Moaning Myrtle was floating above the tank of the toilet picking a spot on her chin .This is a girls bathroom she said eyeing Ron and Harry suspiciously .Theyre not girls .No Hermione agreed .I just wanted to show them how er nice it is in here .She waved vaguely at the dirty old mirror and the damp floor .Ask her if she saw anything Harry mouthed at Hermione .What are you whispering ?said Myrtle staring at him .Nothing said Harry quickly .We wanted to ask I wish people would stop talking behind my back !said Myrtle in a voice choked with tears .I do have feelings you know even if I am dead Myrtle no one wants to upset you said Hermione .Harry only No one wants to upset me !Thats a good one !howled Myrtle .My life was nothing but misery at this place and now people come along ruining my death !We wanted to ask you if youve seen anything funny lately said Hermione quickly .Because a cat was attacked right outside your front door on Halloween .Did you see anyone near here that night ?said Harry .I wasnt paying attention said Myrtle dramatically .Peeves upset me so much I came in here and tried to kill myself .Then of course I remembered that Im that Im Already dead said Ron helpfully .Myrtle gave a tragic sob rose up in the air turned over and dived headfirst into the toilet splashing water all over them and vanishing from sight although from the direction of her muffled sobs she had come to rest somewhere in the Ubend .Harry and Ron stood with their mouths open but Hermione shrugged wearily and said Honestly that was almost cheerful for Myrtle .Come on lets go .Harry had barely closed the door on Myrtles gurgling sobs when a loud voice made all three of them jump .RON !Percy Weasley had stopped dead at the head of the stairs prefect badge agleam an expression of complete shock on his face .Thats a girls bathroom !he gasped .What were you ?Just having a look around Ron shrugged .Clues you know Percy swelled in a manner that reminded Harry forcefully of Mrs Weasley .Get away from there Percy said striding toward them and starting to bustle them along flapping his arms .Dont you care what this looks like ?Coming back here while everyones at dinner Why shouldnt we be here ?said Ron hotly stopping short and glaring at Percy .Listen we never laid a finger on that cat !Thats what I told Ginny said Percy fiercely but she still seems to think youre going to be expelled Ive never seen her so upset crying her eyes out you might think of her all the first years are thoroughly overexcited by this business You dont care about Ginny said Ron whose ears were now reddening .Youre just worried Im going to mess up your chances of being Head Boy Five points from Gryffindor !Percy said tersely fingering his prefect badge .And I hope it teaches you a lesson !No more detective work or Ill write to Mum !And he strode off the back of his neck as red as Rons ears .Harry Ron and Hermione chose seats as far as possible from Percy in the common room that night .Ron was still in a very bad temper and kept blotting his Charms homework .When he reached absently for his wand to remove the smudges it ignited the parchment .Fuming almost as much as his homework Ron slammed The Standard Book of Spells Grade 2 shut .To Harrys surprise Hermione followed suit .Who can it be though ?she said in a quiet voice as though continuing a conversation they had just been having .Whod want to frighten all the Squibs and Muggleborns out of Hogwarts ?Lets think said Ron in mock puzzlement .Who do we know who thinks Muggleborns are scum ?He looked at Hermione .Hermione looked back unconvinced .If youre talking about Malfoy Of course I am !said Ron .You heard him ‘Youll be next MudbloodsV come on youve only got to look at his foul rat face to know its him Malfoy the Heir of Slytherin ?said Hermione skeptically .Look at his family said Harry closing his books too .The whole lot of them have been in Slytherin hes always boasting about it .They could easily be Slytherins descendants .His fathers definitely evil enough .They couldve had the key to the Chamber of Secrets for centuries !said Ron .Handing it down father to son .Well said Hermione cautiously I suppose its possible .But how do we prove it ?said Harry darkly .There might be a way said Hermione slowly dropping her voice still further with a quick glance across the room at Percy .Of course it would be difficult .And dangerous very dangerous .Wed be breaking about fifty school rules I expect If in a month or so you feel like explaining you will let us know wont you ?said Ron irritably .All right said Hermione coldly .What wed need to do is to get inside the Slytherin common room and ask Malfoy a few questions without him realizing its us .But thats impossible Harry said as Ron laughed .No its not said Hermione .All wed need would be some Polyjuice Potion .Whats that ?said Ron and Harry together .Snape mentioned it in class a few weeks ago Dyou think weve got nothing better to do in Potions than listen to Snape ?muttered Ron .It transforms you into somebody else .Think about it !We could change into three of the Slytherins .No one would know it was us .Malfoy would probably tell us anything .Hes probably boasting about it in the Slytherin common room right now if only we could hear him .This Polyjuice stuff sounds a bit dodgy to me said Ron frowning .What if we were stuck looking like three of the Slytherins forever ?It wears off after a while said Hermione waving her hand impatiently .But getting hold of the recipe will be very difficult .Snape said it was in a book called Moste Potente Potions and its bound to be in the Restricted Section of the library .There was only one way to get out a book from the Restricted Section You needed a signed note of permission from a teacher .Hard to see why wed want the book really said Ron if we werent going to try and make one of the potions .I think said Hermione that if we made it sound as though we were just interested in the theory we might stand a chance .Oh come on no teachers going to fall for that said Ron .Theyd have to be really thick .10 THE ROGUE BLUDGER Since the disastrous episode of the pixies Professor Lockhart had not brought live creatures to class .Instead he read passages from his books to them and sometimes reenacted some of the more dramatic bits .He usually picked Harry to help him with these reconstructions so far Harry had been forced to play a simple Transylvanian villager whom Lockhart had cured of a Babbling Curse a yeti with a head cold and a vampire who had been unable to eat anything except lettuce since Lockhart had dealt with him .Harry was hauled to the front of the class during their very next Defense Against the Dark Arts lesson this time acting a werewolf .If he hadnt had a very good reason for keeping Lockhart in a good mood he would have refused to do it .Nice loud howl Harry exactly and then if youll believe it I pounced like this slammed him to the floor thus with one hand I managed to hold him down with my other I put my wand to his throat I then screwed up my remaining strength and performed the immensely complex Homorphus Charm he let out a piteous moan go on Harry higher than that good the fur vanished the fangs shrank and he turned back into a man .Simple yet effective and another village will remember me forever as the hero who delivered them from the monthly terror of werewolf attacks .The bell rang and Lockhart got to his feet .Homework compose a poem about my defeat of the Wagga Wagga Werewolf !Signed copies of Magical Me to the author of the best one !The class began to leave .Harry returned to the back of the room where Ron and Hermione were waiting .Ready ?Harry muttered .Wait till everyones gone said Hermione nervously .All right .She approached Lockharts desk a piece of paper clutched tightly in her hand Harry and Ron right behind her .Er Professor Lockhart ?Hermione stammered .I wanted to to get this book out of the library .Just for background reading .She held out the piece of paper her hand shaking slightly .But the thing is its in the Restricted Section of the library so I need a teacher to sign for it Im sure it would help me understand what you say in Gadding with Ghouls about slowacting venoms Ah Gadding with GhoulsV said Lockhart taking the note from Hermione and smiling widely at her .Possibly my very favorite book .You enjoyed it ?Oh yes said Hermione eagerly .So clever the way you trapped that last one with the teastrainer Well Im sure no one will mind me giving the best student of the year a little extra help said Lockhart warmly and he pulled out an enormous peacock quill .Yes nice isnt it ?he said misreading the revolted look on Rons face .I usually save it for book signings .He scrawled an enormous loopy signature on the note and handed it back to Hermione .So Harry said Lockhart while Hermione folded the note with fumbling fingers and slipped it into her bag .Tomorrows the first Quidditch match of the season I believe ?Gryffindor against Slytherin is it not ?I hear youre a useful player .I was a Seeker too .I was asked to try for the National Squad but preferred to dedicate my life to the eradication of the Dark Forces .Still if ever you feel the need for a little private training dont hesitate to ask .Always happy to pass on my expertise to less able players .Harry made an indistinct noise in his throat and then hurried off after Ron and Hermione .I dont believe it he said as the three of them examined the signature on the note .He didnt even look at the book we wanted .Thats because hes a brainless git said Ron .But who cares weve got what we needed He is not a brainless git said Hermione shrilly as they half ran toward the library .Just because he said you were the best student of the year They dropped their voices as they entered the muffled stillness of the library .Madam Pince the librarian was a thin irritable woman who looked like an underfed vulture .Moste Potente Potions ?she repeated suspiciously trying to take the note from Hermione but Hermione wouldnt let go .I was wondering if I could keep it she said breathlessly .Oh come on said Ron wrenching it from her grasp and thrusting it at Madam Pince .Well get you another autograph .Lockhart ll sign anything if it stands still long enough .Madam Pince held the note up to the light as though determined to detect a forgery but it passed the test .She stalked away between the lofty shelves and returned several minutes later carrying a large and moldylooking book .Hermione put it carefully into her bag and they left trying not to walk too quickly or look too guilty .Five minutes later they were barricaded in Moaning Myrtles outoforder bathroom once again .Hermione had overridden Rons objections by pointing out that it was the last place anyone in their right minds would go so they were guaranteed some privacy .Moaning Myrtle was crying noisily in her stall but they were ignoring her and she them .Hermione opened Moste Potente Potions carefully and the three of them bent over the dampspotted pages .It was clear from a glance why it belonged in the Restricted Section .Some of the potions had effects almost too gruesome to think about and there were some very unpleasant illustrations which included a man who seemed to have been turned inside out and a witch sprouting several extra pairs of arms out of her head .Here it is said Hermione excitedly as she found the page headed The Polyjuice Potion .It was decorated with drawings of people halfway through transforming into other people .Harry sincerely hoped the artist had imagined the looks of intense pain on their faces .This is the most complicated potion Ive ever seen said Hermione as they scanned the recipe .Lacewing flies leeches fluxweed and knotgrass she murmured running her finger down the list of ingredients .Well theyre easy enough theyre in the student storecupboard we can help ourselves .Oooh look powdered horn of a bicorn dont know where were going to get that shredded skin of a boomslang thatll be tricky too and of course a bit of whoever we want to change into .Excuse me ?said Ron sharply .What dyou mean a bit of whoever were changing into ?Im drinking nothing with Crabbes toenails in it Hermione continued as though she hadnt heard him .We dont have to worry about that yet though because we add those bits last .Ron turned speechless to Harry who had another worry .Dyou realize how much were going to have to steal Hermione ?Shredded skin of a boomslang thats definitely not in the students cupboard .Whatre we going to do break into Snapes private stores ?I dont know if this is a good idea .Hermione shut the book with a snap .Well if you two are going to chicken out fine she said .There were bright pink patches on her cheeks and her eyes were brighter than usual .I dont want to break rules you know .think threatening Muggle borns is far worse than brewing up a difficult potion .But if you dont want to find out if its Malfoy Ill go straight to Madam Pince now and hand the book back in I never thought Id see the day when youd be persuading us to break rules said Ron .All right well do it .But not toenails okay ?How long will it take to make anyway ?said Harry as Hermione looking happier opened the book again .Well since the fluxweed has got to be picked at the full moon and the lacewings have got to be stewed for twentyone days .Id say itd be ready in about a month if we can get all the ingredients .A month ?said Ron .Malfoy could have attacked half the Muggleborns in the school by then !But Hermione s eyes narrowed dangerously again and he added swiftly But its the best plan weve got so full steam ahead I say .However while Hermione was checking that the coast was clear for them to leave the bathroom Ron muttered to Harry Itll be a lot less hassle if you can just knock Malfoy off his broom tomorrow .Harry woke early on Saturday morning and lay for a while thinking about the coming Quidditch match .He was nervous mainly at the thought of what Wood would say if Gryffindor lost but also at the idea of facing a team mounted on the fastest racing brooms gold could buy .He had never wanted to beat Slytherin so badly .After half an hour of lying there with his insides churning he got up dressed and went down to breakfast early where he found the rest of the Gryffindor team huddled at the long empty table all looking uptight and not speaking much .As eleven oclock approached the whole school started to make its way down to the Quidditch stadium .It was a muggy sort of day with a hint of thunder in the air .Ron and Hermione came hurrying over to wish Harry good luck as he entered the locker rooms .The team pulled on their scarlet Gryffindor robes then sat down to listen to Woods usual pre match pep talk .Slytherin has better brooms than us he began .No point denying it .But weve got better people on our brooms .Weve trained harder than they have weve been flying in all weathers Too true muttered George Weasley .I havent been properly dry since August and were going to make them rue the day they let that little bit of slime Malfoy buy his way onto their team .Chest heaving with emotion Wood turned to Harry .Itll be down to you Harry to show them that a Seeker has to have something more than a rich father .Get to that Snitch before Malfoy or die trying Harry because weve got to win today weve got to .So no pressure Harry said Fred winking at him .As they walked out onto the field a roar of noise greeted them mainly cheers because Ravenclaw and Hufflepuff were anxious to see Slytherin beaten but the Slytherins in the crowd made their boos and hisses heard too .Madam Hooch the Quidditch teacher asked Flint and Wood to shake hands which they did giving each other threatening stares and gripping rather harder than was necessary .On my whistle said Madam Hooch .Three .two .one .With a roar from the crowd to speed them upward the fourteen players rose toward the leaden sky .Harry flew higher than any of them squinting around for the Snitch .All right there Scarhead ?yelled Malfoy shooting underneath him as though to show off the speed of his broom .Harry had no time to reply .At that very moment a heavy black Bludger came pelting toward him he avoided it so narrowly that he felt it ruffle his hair as it passed .Close one Harry !said George streaking past him with his club in his hand ready to knock the Bludger back toward a Slytherin .Harry saw George give the Bludger a powerful whack in the direction of Adrian Pucey but the Bludger changed direction in midair and shot straight for Harry again .Harry dropped quickly to avoid it and George managed to hit it hard toward Malfoy .Once again the Bludger swerved like a boomerang and shot at Harrys head .Harry put on a burst of speed and zoomed toward the other end of the field .He could hear the Bludger whistling along behind him .What was going on ?Bludgers never concentrated on one player like this it was their job to try and unseat as many people as possible .Fred Weasley was waiting for the Bludger at the other end .Harry ducked as Fred swung at the Bludger with all his might the Bludger was knocked off course .Gotcha !Fred yelled happily but he was wrong as though it was magnetically attracted to Harry the Bludger pelted after him once more and Harry was forced to fly off at full speed .It had started to rain Harry felt heavy drops fall onto his face splattering onto his glasses .He didnt have a clue what was going on in the rest of the game until he heard Lee Jordan who was commentating say Slytherin lead sixty points to zero The Slytherins superior brooms were clearly doing their jobs and meanwhile the mad Bludger was doing all it could to knock Harry out of the air .Fred and George were now flying so close to him on either side that Harry could see nothing at all except their flailing arms and had no chance to look for the Snitch let alone catch it .Someones tampered with this Bludger Fred grunted swinging his bat with all his might at it as it launched a new attack on Harry .We need time out said George trying to signal to Wood and stop the Bludger breaking Harrys nose at the same time .Wood had obviously got the message .Madam Hoochs whistle rang out and Harry Fred and George dived for the ground still trying to avoid the mad Bludger .Whats going on ?said Wood as the Gryffindor team huddled together while Slytherins in the crowd jeered .Were being flattened .Fred George where were you when that Bludger stopped Angelina scoring ?We were twenty feet above her stopping the other Bludger from murdering Harry Oliver said George angrily .Someones fixed it it wont leave Harry alone .It hasnt gone for anyone else all game .The Slytherins must have done something to it .But the Bludgers have been locked in Madam Hoochs office since our last practice and there was nothing wrong with them then .said Wood anxiously .Madam Hooch was walking toward them .Over her shoulder Harry could see the Slytherin team jeering and pointing in his direction .Listen said Harry as she came nearer and nearer with you two flying around me all the time the only way Im going to catch the Snitch is if it flies up my sleeve .Go back to the rest of the team and let me deal with the rogue one .Dont be thick said Fred .Itll take your head off .Wood was looking from Harry to the Weasleys .Oliver this is insane said Alicia Spinnet angrily .You cant let Harry deal with that thing on his own .Lets ask for an inquiry If we stop now well have to forfeit the match !said Harry .And were not losing to Slytherin just because of a crazy Bludger !Come on Oliver tell them to leave me alone !This is all your fault George said angrily to Wood . ‘Get the Snitch or die trying what a stupid thing to tell him Madam Hooch had joined them .Ready to resume play ?she asked Wood .Wood looked at the determined look on Harrys face .All right he said .Fred George you heard Harry leave him alone and let him deal with the Bludger on his own .The rain was falling more heavily now .On Madam Hoochs whistle Harry kicked hard into the air and heard the telltale whoosh of the Bludger behind him .Higher and higher Harry climbed he looped and swooped spiraled zigzagged and rolled .Slightly dizzy he nevertheless kept his eyes wide open rain was speckling his glasses and ran up his nostrils as he hung upside down avoiding another fierce dive from the Bludger .He could hear laughter from the crowd he knew he must look very stupid but the rogue Bludger was heavy and couldnt change direction as quickly as Harry could he began a kind of rollercoaster ride around the edges of the stadium squinting through the silver sheets of rain to the Gryffindor goal posts where Adrian Pucey was trying to get past Wood A whistling in Harrys ear told him the Bludger had just missed him again he turned right over and sped in the opposite direction .Training for the ballet Potter ?yelled Malfoy as Harry was forced to do a stupid kind of twirl in midair to dodge the Bludger and he fled the Bludger trailing a few feet behind him and then glaring back at Malfoy in hatred he saw it the Golden Snitch .It was hovering inches above Malfoys left ear and Malfoy busy laughing at Harry hadnt seen it .For an agonizing moment Harry hung in midair not daring to speed toward Malfoy in case he looked up and saw the Snitch .WHAM .He had stayed still a second too long .The Bludger had hit him at last smashed into his elbow and Harry felt his arm break .Dimly dazed by the searing pain in his arm he slid sideways on his rain drenched broom one knee still crooked over it his right arm dangling useless at his side the Bludger came pelting back for a second attack this time aiming at his face Harry swerved out of the way one idea firmly lodged in his numb brain get to Malfoy .Through a haze of rain and pain he dived for the shimmering sneering face below him and saw its eyes widen with fear Malfoy thought Harry was attacking him .What the he gasped careening out of Harrys way .Harry took his remaining hand off his broom and made a wild snatch he felt his fingers close on the cold Snitch but was now only gripping the broom with his legs and there was a yell from the crowd below as he headed straight for the ground trying hard not to pass out .With a splattering thud he hit the mud and rolled off his broom .His arm was hanging at a very strange angle riddled with pain he heard as though from a distance a good deal of whistling and shouting .He focused on the Snitch clutched in his good hand .Aha he said vaguely .Weve won .And he fainted .He came around rain falling on his face still lying on the field with someone leaning over him .He saw a glitter of teeth .Oh no not you he moaned .Doesnt know what hes saying said Lockhart loudly to the anxious crowd of Gryffindors pressing around them .Not to worry Harry .Im about to fix your arm .iVo !said Harry .Ill keep it like this thanks .He tried to sit up but the pain was terrible .He heard a familiar clicking noise nearby .I dont want a photo of this Colin he said loudly .Lie back Harry said Lockhart soothingly .Its a simple charm Ive used countless times Why cant I just go to the hospital wing ?said Harry through clenched teeth .He should really Professor said a muddy Wood who couldnt help grinning even though his Seeker was injured .Great capture Harry really spectacular your best yet Id say Through the thicket of legs around him Harry spotted Fred and George Weasley wrestling the rogue Bludger into a box .It was still putting up a terrific fight .Stand back said Lockhart who was rolling up his jadegreen sleeves .No dont said Harry weakly but Lockhart was twirling his wand and a second later had directed it straight at Harrys arm .A strange and unpleasant sensation started at Harrys shoulder and spread all the way down to his fingertips .It felt as though his arm was being deflated .He didnt dare look at what was happening .He had shut his eyes his face turned away from his arm but his worst fears were realized as the people above him gasped and Colin Creevey began clicking away madly .His arm didnt hurt anymore nor did it feel remotely like an arm .Ah said Lockhart .Yes .Well that can sometimes happen .But the point is the bones are no longer broken .Thats the thing to bear in mind .So Harry just toddle up to the hospital wing ah Mr Weasley Miss Granger would you escort him ?and Madam Pomfrey will be able to er tidy you up a bit .As Harry got to his feet he felt strangely lopsided .Taking a deep breath he looked down at his right side .What he saw nearly made him pass out again .Poking out of the end of his robes was what looked like a thick fleshcolored rubber glove .He tried to move his fingers .Nothing happened .Lockhart hadnt mended Harrys bones .He had removed them .Madam Pomfrey wasnt at all pleased .You should have come straight to me !she raged holding up the sad limp remainder of what half an hour before had been a working arm .I can mend bones in a second but growing them back You will be able to wont you ?said Harry desperately .Ill be able to certainly but it will be painful said Madam Pomfrey grimly throwing Harry a pair of pajamas .Youll have to stay the night .Hermione waited outside the curtain drawn around Harrys bed while Ron helped him into his pajamas .It took a while to stuff the rubbery boneless arm into a sleeve .How can you stick up for Lockhart now Hermione eh ?Ron called through the curtain as he pulled Harrys limp fingers through the cuff .If Harry had wanted deboning he would have asked .Anyone can make a mistake said Hermione .And it doesnt hurt anymore does it Harry ?No said Harry getting into bed .But it doesnt do anything else either .As he swung himself onto the bed his arm flapped pointlessly .Hermione and Madam Pomfrey came around the curtain .Madam Pomfrey was holding a large bottle of something labeled SkeleGro .Youre in for a rough night she said pouring out a steaming beakerful and handing it to him .Regrowing bones is a nasty business .So was taking the SkeleGro .It burned Harrys mouth and throat as it went down making him cough and splutter .Still tuttutting about dangerous sports and inept teachers Madam Pomfrey retreated leaving Ron and Hermione to help Harry gulp down some water .We won though said Ron a grin breaking across his face .That was some catch you made .Malfoys face .he looked ready to kill .I want to know how he fixed that Bludger said Hermione darkly .We can add that to the list of questions well ask him when weve taken the Polyjuice Potion said Harry sinking back onto his pillows .I hope it tastes better than this stuff .If its got bits of Slytherins in it ?Youve got to be joking said Ron .The door of the hospital wing burst open at that moment .Filthy and soaking wet the rest of the Gryffindor team had arrived to see Harry .Unbelievable flying Harry said George .Ive just seen Marcus Flint yelling at Malfoy .Something about having the Snitch on top of his head and not noticing .Malfoy didnt seem too happy .They had brought cakes sweets and bottles of pumpkin juice they gathered around Harrys bed and were just getting started on what promised to be a good party when Madam Pomfrey came storming over shouting This boy needs rest hes got thirty three bones to regrow !Out !OUT !And Harry was left alone with nothing to distract him from the stabbing pains in his limp arm .Hours and hours later Harry woke quite suddenly in the pitch blackness and gave a small yelp of pain His arm now felt full of large splinters .For a second he thought that was what had woken him .Then with a thrill of horror he realized that someone was sponging his forehead in the dark .Get off !he said loudly and then Dobby The houseelfs goggling tennis ball eyes were peering at Harry through the darkness .A single tear was running down his long pointed nose .Harry Potter came back to school he whispered miserably .Dobby warned and warned Harry Potter .Ah sir why didnt you heed Dobby ?Why didnt Harry Potter go back home when he missed the train ?Harry heaved himself up on his pillows and pushed Dobbys sponge away .Whatre you doing here ?he said .And how did you know I missed the train ?Dobbys lip trembled and Harry was seized by a sudden suspicion .It was you !he said slowly .You stopped the barrier from letting us through !Indeed yes sir said Dobby nodding his head vigorously ears flapping .Dobby hid and watched for Harry Potter and sealed the gateway and Dobby had to iron his hands afterward he showed Harry ten long bandaged fingers but Dobby didnt care sir for he thought Harry Potter was safe and never did Dobby dream that Harry Potter would get to school another way !He was rocking backward and forward shaking his ugly head .Dobby was so shocked when he heard Harry Potter was back at Hogwarts he let his masters dinner burn !Such a flogging Dobby never had sir .Harry slumped back onto his pillows .You nearly got Ron and me expelled he said fiercely .Youd better get lost before my bones come back Dobby or I might strangle you .Dobby smiled weakly .Dobby is used to death threats sir .Dobby gets them five times a day at home .He blew his nose on a corner of the filthy pillowcase he wore looking so pathetic that Harry felt his anger ebb away in spite of himself .Why dyou wear that thing Dobby ?he asked curiously .This sir ?said Dobby plucking at the pillowcase .Tis a mark of the houseelfs enslavement sir .Dobby can only be freed if his masters present him with clothes sir .The family is careful not to pass Dobby even a sock sir for then he would be free to leave their house forever .Dobby mopped his bulging eyes and said suddenly Harry Potter must go home !Dobby thought his Bludger would be enough to make Your Bludger ?said Harry anger rising once more .What dyou mean your Bludger ?You made that Bludger try and kill me ?Not kill you sir never kill you !said Dobby shocked .Dobby wants to save Harry Potters life !Better sent home grievously injured than remain here sir !Dobby only wanted Harry Potter hurt enough to be sent home !Oh is that all ?said Harry angrily .I dont suppose youre going to tell me why you wanted me sent home in pieces ?Ah if Harry Potter only knew !Dobby groaned more tears dripping onto his ragged pillowcase .If he knew what he means to us to the lowly the enslaved we dregs of the magical world !Dobby remembers how it was when HeWhoMustNotBeNamed was at the height of his powers sir !We houseelves were treated like vermin sir !Of course Dobby is still treated like that sir he admitted drying his face on the pillowcase .But mostly sir life has improved for my kind since you triumphed over HeWhoMustNotBe Named .Harry Potter survived and the Dark Lords power was broken and it was a new dawn sir and Harry Potter shone like a beacon of hope for those of us who thought the Dark days would never end sir . .And now at Hogwarts terrible things are to happen are perhaps happening already and Dobby cannot let Harry Potter stay here now that history is to repeat itself now that the Chamber of Secrets is open once more Dobby froze horrors truck then grabbed Harrys water jug from his bedside table and cracked it over his own head toppling out of sight .A second later he crawled back onto the bed crosseyed muttering Bad Dobby very bad Dobby .So there is a Chamber of Secrets ?Harry whispered .And did you say its been opened before ?Tell me Dobby !He seized the elfs bony wrist as Dobbys hand inched toward the water jug .But Im not Muggleborn how can I be in danger from the Chamber ?Ah sir ask no more ask no more of poor Dobby stammered the elf his eyes huge in the dark .Dark deeds are planned in this place but Harry Potter must not be here when they happen go home Harry Potter go home .Harry Potter must not meddle in this sir tis too dangerous Who is it Dobby ?Harry said keeping a firm hold on Dobbys wrist to stop him from hitting himself with the water jug again .Whos opened it ?Who opened it last time ?Dobby cant sir Dobby cant Dobby mustnt tell !squealed the elf .Go home Harry Potter go home !Im not going anywhere !said Harry fiercely .One of my best friends is Muggleborn shell be first in line if the Chamber really has been opened Harry Potter risks his own life for his friends !moaned Dobby in a kind of miserable ecstasy .So noble !So valiant !But he must save himself he must Harry Potter must not Dobby suddenly froze his bat ears quivering .Harry heard it too .There were footsteps coming down the passageway outside .Dobby must go !breathed the elf terrified .There was a loud crack and Harrys fist was suddenly clenched on thin air .He slumped back into bed his eyes on the dark doorway to the hospital wing as the footsteps drew nearer .Next moment Dumbledore was backing into the dormitory wearing a long woolly dressing gown and a nightcap .He was carrying one end of what looked like a statue .Professor McGonagall appeared a second later carrying its feet .Together they heaved it onto a bed .Get Madam Pomfrey whispered Dumbledore and Professor McGonagall hurried past the end of Harrys bed out of sight .Harry lay quite still pretending to be asleep .He heard urgent voices and then Professor McGonagall swept back into view closely followed by Madam Pomfrey who was pulling a cardigan on over her nightdress .He heard a sharp intake of breath .What happened ?Madam Pomfrey whispered to Dumbledore bending over the statue on the bed .Another attack said Dumbledore .Minerva found him on the stairs .There was a bunch of grapes next to him said Professor McGonagall .We think he was trying to sneak up here to visit Potter .Harrys stomach gave a horrible lurch .Slowly and carefully he raised himself a few inches so he could look at the statue on the bed .A ray of moonlight lay across its staring face .It was Colin Creevey .His eyes were wide and his hands were stuck up in front of him holding his camera .Petrified ?whispered Madam Pomfrey .Yes said Professor McGonagall .But I shudder to think .If Albus hadnt been on the way downstairs for hot chocolate who knows what might have The three of them stared down at Colin .Then Dumbledore leaned forward and wrenched the camera out of Colins rigid grip .You dont think he managed to get a picture of his attacker ?said Professor McGonagall eagerly .Dumbledore didnt answer .He opened the back of the camera .Good gracious !said Madam Pomfrey .A jet of steam had hissed out of the camera .Harry three beds away caught the acrid smell of burnt plastic .Melted said Madam Pomfrey wonderingly .All melted .What does this mean Albus ?Professor McGonagall asked urgently .It means said Dumbledore that the Chamber of Secrets is indeed open again .Madam Pomfrey clapped a hand to her mouth .Professor McGonagall stared at Dumbledore .But Albus .surely .who ?The question is not who said Dumbledore his eyes on Colin .The question is how .And from what Harry could see of Professor McGonagalls shadowy face she didnt understand this any better than he did .THE DUELING CLUB Harry woke up on Sunday morning to find the dormitory blazing with winter sunlight and his arm reboned but very stiff .He sat up quickly and looked over at Colins bed but it had been blocked from view by the high curtains Harry had changed behind yesterday .Seeing that he was awake Madam Pomfrey came bustling over with a breakfast tray and then began bending and stretching his arm and fingers .All in order she said as he clumsily fed himself porridge lefthanded .When youve finished eating you may leave .Harry dressed as quickly as he could and hurried off to Gryffindor Tower desperate to tell Ron and Hermione about Colin and Dobby but they werent there .Harry left to look for them wondering where they could have got to and feeling slightly hurt that they werent interested in whether he had his bones back or not .As Harry passed the library Percy Weasley strolled out of it looking in far better spirits than last time theyd met .Oh hello Harry he said .Excellent flying yesterday really excellent .Gryffindor has just taken the lead for the House Cup you earned fifty points !You havent seen Ron or Hermione have you ?said Harry .No I havent said Percy his smile fading .I hope Rons not in another girls toilet .Harry forced a laugh watched Percy walk out of sight and then headed straight for Moaning Myrtles bathroom .He couldnt see why Ron and Hermione would be in there again but after making sure that neither Filch nor any prefects were around he opened the door and heard their voices coming from a locked stall .Its me he said closing the door behind him .There was a clunk a splash and a gasp from within the stall and he saw Hermione s eye peering through the keyhole .Harry she said .You gave us such a fright come in hows your arm ?Fine said Harry squeezing into the stall .An old cauldron was perched on the toilet and a crackling from under the rim told Harry they had lit a fire beneath it .Conjuring up portable waterproof fires was a speciality of Hermione s .We dve come to meet you but we decided to get started on the Polyjuice Potion Ron explained as Harry with difficulty locked the stall again .Weve decided this is the safest place to hide it .Harry started to tell them about Colin but Hermione interrupted .We already know we heard Professor McGonagall telling Professor Flitwick this morning .Thats why we decided wed better get going The sooner we get a confession out of Malfoy the better snarled Ron .Dyou know what I think ?He was in such a foul temper after the Quidditch match he took it out on Colin .Theres something else said Harry watching Hermione tearing bundles of knotgrass and throwing them into the potion .Dobby came to visit me in the middle of the night .Ron and Hermione looked up amazed .Harry told them everything Dobby had told him or hadnt told him .Hermione and Ron listened with their mouths open .The Chamber of Secrets has been opened before ?Hermione said .This settles it said Ron in a triumphant voice .Lucius Malfoy mustve opened the Chamber when he was at school here and now hes told dear old Draco how to do it .Its obvious .Wish Dobby d told you what kind of monsters in there though .I want to know how come nobodys noticed it sneaking around the school .Maybe it can make itself invisible said Hermione prodding leeches to the bottom of the cauldron .Or maybe it can disguise itself pretend to be a suit of armor or something Ive read about Chameleon Ghouls You read too much Hermione said Ron pouring dead lacewings on top of the leeches .He crumpled up the empty lacewing bag and looked at Harry .So Dobby stopped us from getting on the train and broke your arm .He shook his head .You know what Harry ?If he doesnt stop trying to save your life hes going to kill you .k k k The news that Colin Creevey had been attacked and was now lying as though dead in the hospital wing had spread through the entire school by Monday morning .The air was suddenly thick with rumor and suspicion .The first years were now moving around the castle in tightknit groups as though scared they would be attacked if they ventured forth alone .Ginny Weasley who sat next to Colin Creevey in Charms was distraught but Harry felt that Fred and George were going the wrong way about cheering her up .They were taking turns covering themselves with fur or boils and jumping out at her from behind statues .They only stopped when Percy apoplectic with rage told them he was going to write to Mrs Weasley and tell her Ginny was having nightmares .Meanwhile hidden from the teachers a roaring trade in talismans amulets and other protective devices was sweeping the school .Neville Longbottom bought a large evilsmelling green onion a pointed purple crystal and a rotting newt tail before the other Gryffindor boys pointed out that he was in no danger he was a pureblood and therefore unlikely to be attacked .They went for Filch first Neville said his round face fearful .And everyone knows Im almost a Squib .In the second week of December Professor McGonagall came around as usual collecting names of those who would be staying at school for Christmas .Harry Ron and Hermione signed her list they had heard that Malfoy was staying which struck them as very suspicious .The holidays would be the perfect time to use the Polyjuice Potion and try to worm a confession out of him .Unfortunately the potion was only half finished .They still needed the bicorn horn and the boomslang skin and the only place they were going to get them was from Snapes private stores .Harry privately felt hed rather face Slytherins legendary monster than let Snape catch him robbing his office .What we need said Hermione briskly as Thursday afternoons double Potions lesson loomed nearer is a diversion .Then one of us can sneak into Snapes office and take what we need .Harry and Ron looked at her nervously .I think Id better do the actual stealing Hermione continued in a matteroffact tone .You two will be expelled if you get into any more trouble and Ive got a clean record .So all you need to do is cause enough mayhem to keep Snape busy for five minutes or so .Harry smiled feebly .Deliberately causing mayhem in Snapes Potions class was about as safe as poking a sleeping dragon in the eye .Potions lessons took place in one of the large dungeons .Thursday afternoons lesson proceeded in the usual way .Twenty cauldrons stood steaming between the wooden desks on which stood brass scales and jars of ingredients .Snape prowled through the fumes making waspish remarks about the Gryffindors work while the Slytherins sniggered appreciatively .Draco Malfoy who was Snapes favorite student kept flicking pufferfish eyes at Ron and Harry who knew that if they retaliated they would get detention faster than you could say Unfair .Harrys Swelling Solution was far too runny but he had his mind on more important things .He was waiting for Hermiones signal and he hardly listened as Snape paused to sneer at his watery potion .When Snape turned and walked off to bully Neville Hermione caught Harrys eye and nodded .Harry ducked swiftly down behind his cauldron pulled one of Freds Filibuster fireworks out of his pocket and gave it a quick prod with his wand .The firework began to fizz and sputter .Knowing he had only seconds Harry straightened up took aim and lobbed it into the air it landed right on target in Goyles cauldron .Goyles potion exploded showering the whole class .People shrieked as splashes of the Swelling Solution hit them .Malfoy got a faceful and his nose began to swell like a balloon Goyle blundered around his hands over his eyes which had expanded to the size of a dinner plate Snape was trying to restore calm and find out what had happened .Through the confusion Harry saw Hermione slip quietly into Snapes office .Silence !SILENCE !Snape roared .Anyone who has been splashed come here for a Deflating Draught when I find out who did this Harry tried not to laugh as he watched Malfoy hurry forward his head drooping with the weight of a nose like a small melon .As half the class lumbered up to Snape s desk some weighted down with arms like clubs others unable to talk through gigantic puffed up lips Harry saw Hermione slide back into the dungeon the front of her robes bulging .When everyone had taken a swig of antidote and the various swellings had subsided Snape swept over to Goyles cauldron and scooped out the twisted black remains of the firework .There was a sudden hush .If I ever find out who threw this Snape whispered I shall make sure that person is expelled .Harry arranged his face into what he hoped was a puzzled expression .Snape was looking right at him and the bell that rang ten minutes later could not have been more welcome .He knew it was me Harry told Ron and Hermione as they hurried back to Moaning Myrtles bathroom .I could tell .Hermione threw the new ingredients into the cauldron and began to stir feverishly .Itll be ready in two weeks she said happily .Snape cant prove it was you said Ron reassuringly to Harry .What can he do ?Knowing Snape something foul said Harry as the potion frothed and bubbled .A week later Harry Ron and Hermione were walking across the entrance hall when they saw a small knot of people gathered around the notice board reading a piece of parchment that had just been pinned up .Seamus Finnigan and Dean Thomas beckoned them over looking excited .Theyre starting a Dueling Club !said Seamus .First meeting tonight !I wouldnt mind dueling lessons they might come in handy one of these days .What you reckon Slytherins monster can duel ?said Ron but he too read the sign with interest .Could be useful he said to Harry and Hermione as they went into dinner .Shall we go ?Harry and Hermione were all for it so at eight oclock that evening they hurried back to the Great Hall .The long dining tables had vanished and a golden stage had appeared along one wall lit by thousands of candles floating overhead .The ceiling was velvety black once more and most of the school seemed to be packed beneath it all carrying their wands and looking excited .I wonder wholl be teaching us ?said Hermione as they edged into the chattering crowd .Someone told me Flitwick was a dueling champion when he was young maybe itll be him .As long as its not Harry began but he ended on a groan Gilderoy Lockhart was walking onto the stage resplendent in robes of deep plum and accompanied by none other than Snape wearing his usual black .Lockhart waved an arm for silence and called Gather round gather round !Can everyone see me ?Can you all hear me ?Excellent !Now Professor Dumbledore has granted me permission to start this little dueling club to train you all in case you ever need to defend yourselves as I myself have done on countless occasions for full details see my published works .Let me introduce my assistant Professor Snape said Lockhart flashing a wide smile .He tells me he knows a tiny little bit about dueling himself and has sportingly agreed to help me with a short demonstration before we begin .Now I dont want any of you youngsters to worry youll still have your Potions master when Im through with him never fear !Wouldnt it be good if they finished each other off ?Ron muttered in Harrys ear .Snape s upper lip was curling .Harry wondered why Lockhart was still smiling if Snape had been looking at him like that hed have been running as fast as he could in the opposite direction .Lockhart and Snape turned to face each other and bowed at least Lockhart did with much twirling of his hands whereas Snape jerked his head irritably .Then they raised their wands like swords in front of them .As you see we are holding our wands in the accepted combative position Lockhart told the silent crowd .On the count of three we will cast our first spells .Neither of us will be aiming to kill of course .I wouldnt bet on that Harry murmured watching Snape baring his teeth .One two three Both of them swung their wands above their heads and pointed them at their opponent Snape cried ExpelliarmusV There was a dazzling flash of scarlet light and Lockhart was blasted off his feet He flew backward off the stage smashed into the wall and slid down it to sprawl on the floor .Malfoy and some of the other Slytherins cheered .Hermione was dancing on tiptoes .Do you think hes all right ?she squealed through her fingers .Who cares ?said Harry and Ron together .Lockhart was getting unsteadily to his feet .His hat had fallen off and his wavy hair was standing on end .Well there you have it !he said tottering back onto the platform .That was a Disarming Charm as you see Ive lost my wand ah thank you Miss Brown yes an excellent idea to show them that Professor Snape but if you dont mind my saying so it was very obvious what you were about to do .If I had wanted to stop you it would have been only too easy however I felt it would be instructive to let them see .Snape was looking murderous .Possibly Lockhart had noticed because he said Enough demonstrating !Im going to come amongst you now and put you all into pairs .Professor Snape if youd like to help me They moved through the crowd matching up partners .Lockhart teamed Neville with Justin Finch Fletchley but Snape reached Harry and Ron first .Time to split up the dream team I think he sneered .Weasley you can partner Finnigan .Potter Harry moved automatically toward Hermione .I dont think so said Snape smiling coldly .Mr Malfoy come over here .Lets see what you make of the famous Potter .And you Miss Granger you can partner Miss Bulstrode .Malfoy strutted over smirking .Behind him walked a Slytherin girl who reminded Harry of a picture hed seen in Holidays with Hags .She was large and square and her heavy jaw jutted aggressively .Hermione gave her a weak smile that she did not return .Face your partners !called Lockhart back on the platform .And bow !Harry and Malfoy barely inclined their heads not taking their eyes off each other .Wands at the ready !shouted Lockhart .When I count to three cast your charms to disarm your opponents only to disarm them we dont want any accidents one .two .three Harry swung his wand high but Malfoy had already started on two His spell hit Harry so hard he felt as though hed been hit over the head with a saucepan .He stumbled but everything still seemed to be working and wasting no more time Harry pointed his wand straight at Malfoy and shouted Rictusempral A jet of silver light hit Malfoy in the stomach and he doubled up wheezing .I said disarm only Lockhart shouted in alarm over the heads of the battling crowd as Malfoy sank to his knees Harry had hit him with a Tickling Charm and he could barely move for laughing .Harry hung back with a vague feeling it would be unsporting to bewitch Malfoy while he was on the floor but this was a mistake gasping for breath Malfoy pointed his wand at Harrys knees choked Tarantallegral and the next second Harrys legs began to jerk around out of his control in a kind of quickstep .Stop !Stop !screamed Lockhart but Snape took charge .Finite Incantatem he shouted Harrys feet stopped dancing Malfoy stopped laughing and they were able to look up .A haze of greenish smoke was hovering over the scene .Both Neville and Justin were lying on the floor panting Ron was holding up an ashenfaced Seamus apologizing for whatever his broken wand had done but Hermione and Millicent Bulstrode were still moving Millicent had Hermione in a headlock and Hermione was whimpering in pain both their wands lay forgotten on the floor .Harry leapt forward and pulled Millicent off .It was difficult She was a lot bigger than he was .Dear dear said Lockhart skittering through the crowd looking at the aftermath of the duels .Up you go Macmillan .Careful there Miss Fawcett .Pinch it hard itll stop bleeding in a second Boot I think Id better teach you how to block unfriendly spells said Lockhart standing flustered in the midst of the hall .He glanced at Snape whose black eyes glinted and looked quickly away .Lets have a volunteer pair Longbottom and FinchFletchley how about you A bad idea Professor Lockhart said Snape gliding over like a large and malevolent bat .Longbottom causes devastation with the simplest spells .Well be sending whats left of FinchFletchley up to the hospital wing in a matchbox .Nevilles round pink face went pinker .How about Malfoy and Potter ?said Snape with a twisted smile .Excellent idea !said Lockhart gesturing Harry and Malfoy into the middle of the hall as the crowd backed away to give them room .Now Harry said Lockhart .When Draco points his wand at you you do this .He raised his own wand attempted a complicated sort of wiggling action and dropped it .Snape smirked as Lockhart quickly picked it up saying Whoops my wand is a little overexcited Snape moved closer to Malfoy bent down and whispered something in his ear .Malfoy smirked too .Harry looked up nervously at Lockhart and said Professor could you show me that blocking thing again ?Scared ?muttered Malfoy so that Lockhart couldnt hear him .You wish said Harry out of the corner of his mouth .Lockhart cuffed Harry merrily on the shoulder .Just do what I did Harry !What drop my wand ?But Lockhart wasnt listening .Three two one go !he shouted .Malfoy raised his wand quickly and bellowed Serpensortial The end of his wand exploded .Harry watched aghast as a long black snake shot out of it fell heavily onto the floor between them and raised itself ready to strike .There were screams as the crowd backed swiftly away clearing the floor .Dont move Potter said Snape lazily clearly enjoying the sight of Harry standing motionless eye to eye with the angry snake .Ill get rid of it .Allow me !shouted Lockhart .He brandished his wand at the snake and there was a loud bang the snake instead of vanishing flew ten feet into the air and fell back to the floor with a loud smack .Enraged hissing furiously it slithered straight toward Justin FinchFletchley and raised itself again fangs exposed poised to strike .Harry wasnt sure what made him do it .He wasnt even aware of deciding to do it .All he knew was that his legs were carrying him forward as though he was on casters and that he had shouted stupidly at the snake Leave him alone !And miraculously inexplicably the snake slumped to the floor docile as a thick black garden hose its eyes now on Harry .Harry felt the fear drain out of him .He knew the snake wouldnt attack anyone now though how he knew it he couldnt have explained .He looked up at Justin grinning expecting to see Justin looking relieved or puzzled or even grateful but certainly not angry and scared .What do you think youre playing at ?he shouted and before Harry could say anything Justin had turned and stormed out of the hall .Snape stepped forward waved his wand and the snake vanished in a small puff of black smoke .Snape too was looking at Harry in an unexpected way It was a shrewd and calculating look and Harry didnt like it .He was also dimly aware of an ominous muttering all around the walls .Then he felt a tugging on the back of his robes .Come on said Rons voice in his ear .Move come on Ron steered him out of the hall Hermione hurrying alongside them .As they went through the doors the people on either side drew away as though they were frightened of catching something .Harry didnt have a clue what was going on and neither Ron nor Hermione explained anything until they had dragged him all the way up to the empty Gryffindor common room .Then Ron pushed Harry into an armchair and said Youre a Parselmouth .Why didnt you tell us ?Im a what ?said Harry .A Parselmouth .said Ron .You can talk to snakes !I know said Harry .I mean thats only the second time Ive ever done it .I accidentally set a boa constrictor on my cousin Dudley at the zoo once long story but it was telling me it had never seen Brazil and I sort of set it free without meaning to that was before I knew I was a wizard A boa constrictor told you it had never seen Brazil ?Ron repeated faintly .So ?said Harry .I bet loads of people here can do it .Oh no they cant said Ron .Its not a very common gift .Harry this is bad .Whats bad ?said Harry starting to feel quite angry .Whats wrong with everyone ?Listen if I hadnt told that snake not to attack Justin Oh thats what you said to it ?What dyou mean ?You were there you heard me I heard you speaking Parseltongue said Ron .Snake language .You could have been saying anything no wonder Justin panicked you sounded like you were egging the snake on or something it was creepy you know Harry gaped at him .I spoke a different language ?But I didnt realize how can I speak a language without knowing I can speak it ?Ron shook his head .Both he and Hermione were looking as though someone had died .Harry couldnt see what was so terrible .Dyou want to tell me whats wrong with stopping a massive snake biting off Justins head ?he said .What does it matter how I did it as long as Justin doesnt have to join the Headless Hunt ?It matters said Hermione speaking at last in a hushed voice because being able to talk to snakes was what Salazar Slytherin was famous for .Thats why the symbol of Slytherin House is a serpent .Harrys mouth fell open .Exactly said Ron .And now the whole schools going to think youre his greatgreatgreatgreat grandson or something But Im not said Harry with a panic he couldnt quite explain .Youll find that hard to prove said Hermione .He lived about a thousand years ago for all we know you could be . •k k k Harry lay awake for hours that night .Through a gap in the curtains around his fourposter he watched snow starting to drift past the tower window and wondered .Could he be a descendant of Salazar Slytherin ?He didnt know anything about his fathers family after all .The Dursleys had always forbidden questions about his wizarding relatives .Quietly Harry tried to say something in Parseltongue .The words wouldnt come .It seemed he had to be facetoface with a snake to do it .But Im in Gryffindor Harry thought .The Sorting Hat wouldnt have put me in here if I had Slytherin blood .Ah said a nasty little voice in his brain but the Sorting Hat wanted to put you in Slytherin dont you remember ?Harry turned over .Hed see Justin the next day in Herbology and hed explain that hed been calling the snake off not egging it on which he thought angrily pummeling his pillow any fool should have realized .By next morning however the snow that had begun in the night had turned into a blizzard so thick that the last Herbology lesson of the term was canceled Professor Sprout wanted to fit socks and scarves on the Mandrakes a tricky operation she would entrust to no one else now that it was so important for the Mandrakes to grow quickly and revive Mrs Norris and Colin Creevey .Harry fretted about this next to the fire in the Gryffindor common room while Ron and Hermione used their time off to play a game of wizard chess .For heavens sake Harry said Hermione exasperated as one of Rons bishops wrestled her knight off his horse and dragged him off the board .Go and find Justin if its so important to you .So Harry got up and left through the portrait hole wondering where Justin might be .The castle was darker than it usually was in daytime because of the thick swirling gray snow at every window .Shivering Harry walked past classrooms where lessons were taking place catching snatches of what was happening within .Professor McGonagall was shouting at someone who by the sound of it had turned his friend into a badger .Resisting the urge to take a look Harry walked on by thinking that Justin might be using his free time to catch up on some work and deciding to check the library first .A group of the Hufflepuffs who should have been in Herbology were indeed sitting at the back of the library but they didnt seem to be working .Between the long lines of high bookshelves Harry could see that their heads were close together and they were having what looked like an absorbing conversation .He couldnt see whether Justin was among them .He was walking toward them when something of what they were saying met his ears and he paused to listen hidden in the Invisibility section .So anyway a stout boy was saying I told Justin to hide up in our dormitory .I mean to say if Potters marked him down as his next victim its best if he keeps a low profile for a while .Of course Justins been waiting for something like this to happen ever since he let slip to Potter he was Muggleborn .Justin actually told him hed been down for Eton .Thats not the kind of thing you bandy about with Slytherins heir on the loose is it ?You definitely think it is Potter then Ernie ?said a girl with blonde pigtails anxiously .Hannah said the stout boy solemnly hes a Parselmouth .Everyone knows thats the mark of a Dark wizard .Have you ever heard of a decent one who could talk to snakes ?They called Slytherin himself Serpenttongue .There was some heavy murmuring at this and Ernie went on Remember what was written on the wall ?Enemies of the Heir Beware .Potter had some sort of runin with Filch .Next thing we know Filch s cats attacked .That first year Creevey was annoying Potter at the Quidditch match taking pictures of him while he was lying in the mud .Next thing we know Creevey s been attacked .He always seems so nice though said Hannah uncertainly and well hes the one who made You KnowWho disappear .He cant be all bad can he ?Ernie lowered his voice mysteriously the Hufflepuffs bent closer and Harry edged nearer so that he could catch Ernies words .No one knows how he survived that attack by You KnowWho .I mean to say he was only a baby when it happened .He should have been blasted into smithereens .Only a really powerful Dark wizard could have survived a curse like that .He dropped his voice until it was barely more than a whisper and said Thats probably why YouKnowWho wanted to kill him in the first place .Didnt want another Dark Lord competing with him .I wonder what other powers Potters been hiding ?Harry couldnt take anymore .Clearing his throat loudly he stepped out from behind the bookshelves .If he hadnt been feeling so angry he would have found the sight that greeted him funny Every one of the Hufflepuffs looked as though they had been Petrified by the sight of him and the color was draining out of Ernies face .Hello said Harry .Im looking for Justin Finch Fletchley .The Hufflepuffs worst fears had clearly been confirmed .They all looked fearfully at Ernie .What do you want with him ?said Ernie in a quavering voice .I wanted to tell him what really happened with that snake at the Dueling Club said Harry .Ernie bit his white lips and then taking a deep breath said We were all there .We saw what happened .Then you noticed that after I spoke to it the snake backed off ?said Harry .All I saw said Ernie stubbornly though he was trembling as he spoke was you speaking Parseltongue and chasing the snake toward Justin .I didnt chase it at him !Harry said his voice shaking with anger .It didnt even touch him !It was a very near miss said Ernie .And in case youre getting ideas he added hastily I might tell you that you can trace my family back through nine generations of witches and warlocks and my bloods as pure as anyones so I dont care what sort of blood youve got !said Harry fiercely .Why would I want to attack Muggleborns ?Ive heard you hate those Muggles you live with said Ernie swiftly .Its not possible to live with the Dursleys and not hate them said Harry .Id like to see you try it .He turned on his heel and stormed out of the library earning himself a reproving glare from Madam Pince who was polishing the gilded cover of a large spellbook .Harry blundered up the corridor barely noticing where he was going he was in such a fury .The result was that he walked into something very large and solid which knocked him backward onto the floor .Oh hello Hagrid Harry said looking up .Hagrids face was entirely hidden by a woolly snow covered balaclava but it couldnt possibly be anyone else as he filled most of the corridor in his moleskin overcoat .A dead rooster was hanging from one of his massive gloved hands .All righ Harry ?he said pulling up the balaclava so he could speak .Why arent yeh in class ?Canceled said Harry getting up .Whatre you doing in here ?Hagrid held up the limp rooster .Second one killed this term he explained .Its either foxes or a BloodSuckin Bugbear an I need the headmasters permission ter put a charm around the hen coop .He peered more closely at Harry from under his thick snowflecked eyebrows .Yeh sure yehre all righ ?Yeh look all hot an bothered Harry couldnt bring himself to repeat what Ernie and the rest of the Hufflepuffs had been saying about him .Its nothing he said .Id better get going Hagrid its Transfiguration next and Ive got to pick up my books .He walked off his mind still full of what Ernie had said about him .Justins been waiting for something like this to happen ever since he let slip to Potter he was Muggle born .Harry stamped up the stairs and turned along another corridor which was particularly dark the torches had been extinguished by a strong icy draft that was blowing through a loose windowpane .He was halfway down the passage when he tripped headlong over something lying on the floor .He turned to squint at what hed fallen over and felt as though his stomach had dissolved .Justin FinchFletchley was lying on the floor rigid and cold a look of shock frozen on his face his eyes staring blankly at the ceiling .And that wasnt all .Next to him was another figure the strangest sight Harry had ever seen .It was Nearly Headless Nick no longer pearlywhite and transparent but black and smoky floating immobile and horizontal six inches off the floor .His head was half off and his face wore an expression of shock identical to Justins .Harry got to his feet his breathing fast and shallow his heart doing a kind of drumroll against his ribs .He looked wildly up and down the deserted corridor and saw a line of spiders scuttling as fast as they could away from the bodies .The only sounds were the muffled voices of teachers from the classes on either side .He could run and no one would ever know he had been there .But he couldnt just leave them lying here .He had to get help .Would anyone believe he hadnt had anything to do with this ?As he stood there panicking a door right next to him opened with a bang .Peeves the Poltergeist came shooting out .Why its potty wee Potter !cackled Peeves knocking Harrys glasses askew as he bounced past him .Whats Potter up to ?Whys Potter lurking Peeves stopped halfway through a midair somersault .Upside down he spotted Justin and Nearly Headless Nick .He flipped the right way up filled his lungs and before Harry could stop him screamed ATTACK !ATTACK !ANOTHER ATTACK !NO MORTAL OR GHOST IS SAFE !RUN FOR YOUR LIVES !ATTaaCK !Crash crash crash door after door flew open along the corridor and people flooded out .For several long minutes there was a scene of such confusion that Justin was in danger of being squashed and people kept standing in Nearly Headless Nick .Harry found himself pinned against the wall as the teachers shouted for quiet .Professor McGonagall came running followed by her own class one of whom still had blackandwhite striped hair .She used her wand to set off a loud bang which restored silence and ordered everyone back into their classes .No sooner had the scene cleared somewhat than Ernie the Hufflepuff arrived panting on the scene .Caught in the act !Ernie yelled his face stark white pointing his finger dramatically at Harry .That will do Macmillan !said Professor McGonagall sharply .Peeves was bobbing overhead now grinning wickedly surveying the scene Peeves always loved chaos .As the teachers bent over Justin and Nearly Headless Nick examining them Peeves broke into song Oh Potter you rotter oh what have you done Youre killing off students you think its good fun Thats enough Peeves !barked Professor McGonagall and Peeves zoomed away backward with his tongue out at Harry .Justin was carried up to the hospital wing by Professor Flitwick and Professor Sinistra of the Astronomy department but nobody seemed to know what to do for Nearly Headless Nick .In the end Professor McGonagall conjured a large fan out of thin air which she gave to Ernie with instructions to waft Nearly Headless Nick up the stairs .This Ernie did fanning Nick along like a silent black hovercraft .This left Harry and Professor McGonagall alone together .This way Potter she said .Professor said Harry at once I swear I didnt This is out of my hands Potter said Professor McGonagall curtly .They marched in silence around a corner and she stopped before a large and extremely ugly stone gargoyle .Lemon drop !she said .This was evidently a password because the gargoyle sprang suddenly to life and hopped aside as the wall behind him split in two .Even full of dread for what was coming Harry couldnt fail to be amazed .Behind the wall was a spiral staircase that was moving smoothly upward like an escalator .As he and Professor McGonagall stepped onto it Harry heard the wall thud closed behind them .They rose upward in circles higher and higher until at last slightly dizzy Harry saw a gleaming oak door ahead with a brass knocker in the shape of a griffin .He knew now where he was being taken .This must be where Dumbledore lived .THE POLY JUICE POTION They stepped off the stone staircase at the top and Professor McGonagall rapped on the door .It opened silently and they entered .Professor McGonagall told Harry to wait and left him there alone .Harry looked around .One thing was certain of all the teachers offices Harry had visited so far this year Dumbledores was by far the most interesting .If he hadnt been scared out of his wits that he was about to be thrown out of school he would have been very pleased to have a chance to look around it .It was a large and beautiful circular room full of funny little noises .A number of curious silver instruments stood on spindlelegged tables whirring and emitting little puffs of smoke .The walls were covered with portraits of old headmasters and headmistresses all of whom were snoozing gently in their frames .There was also an enormous claw footed desk and sitting on a shelf behind it a shabby tattered wizards hat the Sorting Hat Harry hesitated .He cast a wary eye around the sleeping witches and wizards on the walls .Surely it couldnt hurt if he took the hat down and tried it on again ?Just to see .just to make sure it had put him in the right House He walked quietly around the desk lifted the hat from its shelf and lowered it slowly onto his head .It was much too large and slipped down over his eyes just as it had done the last time hed put it on .Harry stared at the black inside of the hat waiting .Then a small voice said in his ear Bee in your bonnet Harry Potter ?Er yes Harry muttered .Er sorry to bother you I wanted to ask Youve been wondering whether I put you in the right House said the hat smartly .Yes .you were particularly difficult to place .But I stand by what I said before Harrys heart leapt you would have done well in Slytherin Harrys stomach plummeted .He grabbed the point of the hat and pulled it off .It hung limply in his hand grubby and faded .Harry pushed it back onto its shelf feeling sick .Youre wrong he said aloud to the still and silent hat .It didnt move .Harry backed away watching it .Then a strange gagging noise behind him made him wheel around .He wasnt alone after all .Standing on a golden perch behind the door was a decrepitlooking bird that resembled a halfplucked turkey .Harry stared at it and the bird looked balefully back making its gagging noise again .Harry thought it looked very ill .Its eyes were dull and even as Harry watched a couple more feathers fell out of its tail .Harry was just thinking that all he needed was for Dumbledore s pet bird to die while he was alone in the office with it when the bird burst into flames .Harry yelled in shock and backed away into the desk .He looked feverishly around in case there was a glass of water somewhere but couldnt see one the bird meanwhile had become a fireball it gave one loud shriek and next second there was nothing but a smoldering pile of ash on the floor .The office door opened .Dumbledore came in looking very somber .Professor Harry gasped .Your bird I couldnt do anything he just caught fire To Harrys astonishment Dumbledore smiled .About time too he said .Hes been looking dreadful for days Ive been telling him to get a move on .He chuckled at the stunned look on Harrys face .Fawkes is a phoenix Harry .Phoenixes burst into flame when it is time for them to die and are reborn from the ashes .Watch him .Harry looked down in time to see a tiny wrinkled newborn bird poke its head out of the ashes .It was quite as ugly as the old one .Its a shame you had to see him on a Burning Day said Dumbledore seating himself behind his desk .Hes really very handsome most of the time wonderful red and gold plumage .Fascinating creatures phoenixes .They can carry immensely heavy loads their tears have healing powers and they make highly faithful pets .In the shock of Fawkes catching fire Harry had forgotten what he was there for but it all came back to him as Dumbledore settled himself in the high chair behind the desk and fixed Harry with his penetrating lightblue stare .Before Dumbledore could speak another word however the door of the office flew open with an almighty bang and Hagrid burst in a wild look in his eyes his balaclava perched on top of his shaggy black head and the dead rooster still swinging from his hand .It wasn Harry Professor Dumbledore !said Hagrid urgently .I was talkin ter him seconds before that kid was found he never had time sir Dumbledore tried to say something but Hagrid went ranting on waving the rooster around in his agitation sending feathers everywhere .it cantve bin him Ill swear it in front o the Ministry o Magic if I have to Hagrid I yehve got the wrong boy sir I know Harry never Hagridl said Dumbledore loudly .I do not think that Harry attacked those people .Oh said Hagrid the rooster falling limply at his side .Right .Ill wait outside then Headmaster .And he stomped out looking embarrassed .You dont think it was me Professor ?Harry repeated hopefully as Dumbledore brushed rooster feathers off his desk .No Harry I dont said Dumbledore though his face was somber again .But I still want to talk to you .Harry waited nervously while Dumbledore considered him the tips of his long fingers together .I must ask you Harry whether there is anything youd like to tell me he said gently .Anything at all .Harry didnt know what to say .He thought of Malfoy shouting Youll be next Mudbloods !and of the Polyjuice Potion simmering away in Moaning Myrtles bathroom .Then he thought of the disembodied voice he had heard twice and remembered what Ron had said Hearing voices no one else can hear isnt a good sign even in the wizarding world .He thought too about what everyone was saying about him and his growing dread that he was somehow connected with Salazar Slytherin .No said Harry .There isnt anything Professor .The double attack on Justin and Nearly Headless Nick turned what had hitherto been nervousness into real panic .Curiously it was Nearly Headless Nicks fate that seemed to worry people most .What could possibly do that to a ghost ?people asked each other what terrible power could harm someone who was already dead ?There was almost a stampede to book seats on the Hogwarts Express so that students could go home for Christmas .At this rate well be the only ones left Ron told Harry and Hermione .Us Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle .What a jolly holiday its going to be .Crabbe and Goyle who always did whatever Malfoy did had signed up to stay over the holidays too .But Harry was glad that most people were leaving .He was tired of people skirting around him in the corridors as though he were about to sprout fangs or spit poison tired of all the muttering pointing and hissing as he passed .Fred and George however found all this very funny .They went out of their way to march ahead of Harry down the corridors shouting Make way for the Heir of Slytherin seriously evil wizard coming through .Percy was deeply disapproving of this behavior .It is not a laughing matter he said coldly .Oh get out of the way Percy said Fred .Harrys in a hurry .Yeah hes off to the Chamber of Secrets for a cup of tea with his fanged servant said George chortling .Ginny didnt find it amusing either .Oh dont she wailed every time Fred asked Harry loudly who he was planning to attack next or when George pretended to ward Harry off with a large clove of garlic when they met .Harry didnt mind it made him feel better that Fred and George at least thought the idea of his being Slytherin s heir was quite ludicrous .But their antics seemed to be aggravating Draco Malfoy who looked increasingly sour each time he saw them at it .Its because hes bursting to say its really him said Ron knowingly .You know how he hates anyone beating him at anything and youre getting all the credit for his dirty work .Not for long said Hermione in a satisfied tone .The Polyjuice Potions nearly ready .Well be getting the truth out of him any day now .At last the term ended and a silence deep as the snow on the grounds descended on the castle .Harry found it peaceful rather than gloomy and enjoyed the fact that he Hermione and the Weasleys had the run of Gryffindor Tower which meant they could play Exploding Snap loudly without bothering anyone and practice dueling in private .Fred George and Ginny had chosen to stay at school rather than visit Bill in Egypt with Mr and Mrs Weasley .Percy who disapproved of what he termed their childish behavior didnt spend much time in the Gryffindor common room .He had already told them pompously that he was only staying over Christmas because it was his duty as a prefect to support the teachers during this troubled time .Christmas morning dawned cold and white .Harry and Ron the only ones left in their dormitory were woken very early by Hermione who burst in fully dressed and carrying presents for them both .Wake up she said loudly pulling back the curtains at the window .Hermione youre not supposed to be in here said Ron shielding his eyes against the light .Merry Christmas to you too said Hermione throwing him his present .Ive been up for nearly an hour adding more lacewings to the potion .Its ready .Harry sat up suddenly wide awake .Are you sure ?Positive said Hermione shirting Scabbers the rat so that she could sit down on the end of Rons four poster .If were going to do it I say it should be tonight .At that moment Hedwig swooped into the room carrying a very small package in her beak .Hello said Harry happily as she landed on his bed .Are you speaking to me again ?She nibbled his ear in an affectionate sort of way which was a far better present than the one that she had brought him which turned out to be from the Dursleys .They had sent Harry a toothpick and a note telling him to find out whether hed be able to stay at Hogwarts for the summer vacation too .The rest of Harrys Christmas presents were far more satisfactory .Hagrid had sent him a large tin of treacle toffee which Harry decided to soften by the fire before eating Ron had given him a book called Flying with the Cannons a book of interesting facts about his favorite Quidditch team and Hermione had bought him a luxury eaglefeather quill .Harry opened the last present to find a new handknitted sweater from Mrs Weasley and a large plum cake .He read her card with a fresh surge of guilt thinking about Mr Weasleys car which hadnt been seen since its crash with the Whomping Willow and the bout of rule breaking he and Ron were planning next .No one not even someone dreading taking Polyjuice Potion later could fail to enjoy Christmas dinner at Hogwarts .The Great Hall looked magnificent .Not only were there a dozen frostcovered Christmas trees and thick streamers of holly and mistletoe crisscrossing the ceiling but enchanted snow was falling warm and dry from the ceiling .Dumbledore led them in a few of his favorite carols Hagrid booming more and more loudly with every goblet of eggnog he consumed .Percy who hadnt noticed that Fred had bewitched his prefect badge so that it now read Pinhead kept asking them all what they were sniggering at .Harry didnt even care that Draco Malfoy was making loud snide remarks about his new sweater from the Slytherin table .With a bit of luck Malfoy would be getting his comeuppance in a few hours time .Harry and Ron had barely finished their third helpings of Christmas pudding when Hermione ushered them out of the hall to finalize their plans for the evening .We still need a bit of the people youre changing into said Hermione matteroffactly as though she were sending them to the supermarket for laundry detergent .And obviously itll be best if you can get something of Crabbes and Goyles theyre Malfoys best friends hell tell them anything .And we also need to make sure the real Crabbe and Goyle cant burst in on us while were interrogating him .Ive got it all worked out she went on smoothly ignoring Harrys and Rons stupefied faces .She held up two plump chocolate cakes .Ive filled these with a simple Sleeping Draught .All you have to do is make sure Crabbe and Goyle find them .You know how greedy they are theyre bound to eat them .Once theyre asleep pull out a few of their hairs and hide them in a broom closet .Harry and Ron looked incredulously at each other .Hermione I dont think That could go seriously wrong But Hermione had a steely glint in her eye not unlike the one Professor McGonagall sometimes had .The potion will be useless without Crabbes and Goyles hair she said sternly .You do want to investigate Malfoy dont you ?Oh all right all right said Harry .But what about you ?Whose hair are you ripping out ?Ive already got mine !said Hermione brightly pulling a tiny bottle out of her pocket and showing them the single hair inside it .Remember Millicent Bulstrode wrestling with me at the Dueling Club ?She left this on my robes when she was trying to strangle me !And shes gone home for Christmas so Ill just have to tell the Slytherins Ive decided to come back .When Hermione had bustled off to check on the Polyjuice Potion again Ron turned to Harry with a doomladen expression .Have you ever heard of a plan where so many things could go wrong ?But to Harrys and Rons utter amazement stage one of the operation went just as smoothly as Hermione had said .They lurked in the deserted entrance hall after Christmas tea waiting for Crabbe and Goyle who had remained alone at the Slytherin table shoveling down fourth helpings of trifle .Harry had perched the chocolate cakes on the end of the banisters .When they spotted Crabbe and Goyle coming out of the Great Hall Harry and Ron hid quickly behind a suit of armor next to the front door .How thick can you get ?Ron whispered ecstatically as Crabbe gleefully pointed out the cakes to Goyle and grabbed them .Grinning stupidly they stuffed the cakes whole into their large mouths .For a moment both of them chewed greedily looks of triumph on their faces .Then without the smallest change of expression they both keeled over backward onto the floor .By far the hardest part was hiding them in the closet across the hall .Once they were safely stowed among the buckets and mops Harry yanked out a couple of the bristles that covered Goyle s forehead and Ron pulled out several of Crabbe s hairs .They also stole their shoes because their own were far too small for Crabbe and Goylesize feet .Then still stunned at what they had just done they sprinted up to Moaning Myrtles bathroom .They could hardly see for the thick black smoke issuing from the stall in which Hermione was stirring the cauldron .Pulling their robes up over their faces Harry and Ron knocked softly on the door .Hermione ?They heard the scrape of the lock and Hermione emerged shinyfaced and looking anxious .Behind her they heard the gloop gloop of the bubbling glutinous potion .Three glass tumblers stood ready on the toilet seat .Did you get them ?Hermione asked breathlessly .Harry showed her Goyles hair .Good .And I sneaked these spare robes out of the laundry Hermione said holding up a small sack .Youll need bigger sizes once youre Crabbe and Goyle .The three of them stared into the cauldron .Close up the potion looked like thick dark mud bubbling sluggishly .Im sure Ive done everything right said Hermione nervously rereading the splotched page of Moste Potente Potions .It looks like the book says it should .once weve drunk it well have exactly an hour before we change back into ourselves .Now what ?Ron whispered .We separate it into three glasses and add the hairs .Hermione ladled large dollops of the potion into each of the glasses .Then her hand trembling she shook Millicent Bulstrodes hair out of its bottle into the first glass .The potion hissed loudly like a boiling kettle and frothed madly .A second later it had turned a sick sort of yellow .Urgh essence of Millicent Bulstrode said Ron eyeing it with loathing .Bet it tastes disgusting .Add yours then said Hermione .Harry dropped Goyles hair into the middle glass and Ron put Crabbes into the last one .Both glasses hissed and frothed Goyles turned the khaki color of a booger Crabbes a dark murky brown .Hang on said Harry as Ron and Hermione reached for their glasses .Wed better not all drink them in here .Once we turn into Crabbe and Goyle we wont fit .And Millicent Bulstrodes no pixie .Good thinking said Ron unlocking the door .Well take separate stalls .Careful not to spill a drop of his Polyjuice Potion Harry slipped into the middle stall .Ready ?he called .Ready came Rons and Hermiones voices .One two three Pinching his nose Harry drank the potion down in two large gulps .It tasted like overcooked cabbage .Immediately his insides started writhing as though hed just swallowed live snakes doubled up he wondered whether he was going to be sick then a burning sensation spread rapidly from his stomach to the very ends of his fingers and toes next bringing him gasping to all fours came a horrible melting feeling as the skin all over his body bubbled like hot wax and before his eyes his hands began to grow the fingers thickened the nails broadened the knuckles were bulging like bolts his shoulders stretched painfully and a prickling on his forehead told him that hair was creeping down toward his eyebrows his robes ripped as his chest expanded like a barrel bursting its hoops his feet were agony in shoes four sizes too small As suddenly as it had started everything stopped .Harry lay facedown on the stonecold floor listening to Myrtle gurgling morosely in the end toilet .With difficulty he kicked off his shoes and stood up .So this was what it felt like being Goyle .His large hand trembling he pulled off his old robes which were hanging a foot above his ankles pulled on the spare ones and laced up Goyles boatlike shoes .He reached up to brush his hair out of his eyes and met only the short growth of wiry bristles low on his forehead .Then he realized that his glasses were clouding his eyes because Goyle obviously didnt need them he took them off and called Are you two okay ?Goyles low rasp of a voice issued from his mouth .Yeah came the deep grunt of Crabbe from his right .Harry unlocked his door and stepped in front of the cracked mirror .Goyle stared back at him out of dull deepset eyes .Harry scratched his ear .So did Goyle .Rons door opened .They stared at each other .Except that he looked pale and shocked Ron was indistinguishable from Crabbe from the pudding bowl haircut to the long gorilla arms .This is unbelievable said Ron approaching the mirror and prodding Crabbe s flat nose .Unbelievable .Wed better get going said Harry loosening the watch that was cutting into Goyles thick wrist .Weve still got to find out where the Slytherin common room is .I only hope we can find someone to follow .Ron who had been gazing at Harry said You dont know how bizarre it is to see Goyle thinking .He banged on Hermiones door .Cmon we need to go A highpitched voice answered him .I I dont think Im going to come after all .You go on without me .Hermione we know Millicent Bulstrodes ugly no ones going to know its you No really I dont think Ill come .You two hurry up youre wasting time Harry looked at Ron bewildered .That looks more like Goyle said Ron .Thats how he looks every time a teacher asks him a question .Hermione are you okay ?said Harry through the door .Fine Im fine go on Harry looked at his watch .Five of their precious sixty minutes had already passed .Well meet you back here all right ?he said .Harry and Ron opened the door of the bathroom carefully checked that the coast was clear and set off .Dont swing your arms like that Harry muttered to Ron .Eh ?Crabbe holds them sort of stiff .Hows this ?Yeah thats better .They went down the marble staircase .All they needed now was a Slytherin that they could follow to the Slytherin common room but there was nobody around .Any ideas ?muttered Harry .The Slytherins always come up to breakfast from over there said Ron nodding at the entrance to the dungeons .The words had barely left his mouth when a girl with long curly hair emerged from the entrance .Excuse me said Ron hurrying up to her .Weve forgotten the way to our common room .I beg your pardon ?said the girl stiffly .Our common room ?Im a Ravenclaw .She walked away looking suspiciously back at them .Harry and Ron hurried down the stone steps into the darkness their footsteps echoing particularly loudly as Crabbes and Goyles huge feet hit the floor feeling that this wasnt going to be as easy as they had hoped .The labyrinthine passages were deserted .They walked deeper and deeper under the school constantly checking their watches to see how much time they had left .After a quarter of an hour just when they were getting desperate they heard a sudden movement ahead .Ha !said Ron excitedly .Theres one of them now !The figure was emerging from a side room .As they hurried nearer however their hearts sank .It wasnt a Slytherin it was Percy .Whatre you doing down here ?said Ron in surprise .Percy looked affronted .That he said stiffly is none of your business .Its Crabbe isnt it ?Wh oh yeah said Ron .Well get off to your dormitories said Percy sternly .Its not safe to go wandering around dark corridors these days .You are Ron pointed out .I said Percy drawing himself up am a prefect .Nothings about to attack me .A voice suddenly echoed behind Harry and Ron .Draco Malfoy was strolling toward them and for the first time in his life Harry was pleased to see him .There you are he drawled looking at them .Have you two been pigging out in the Great Hall all this time ?Ive been looking for you I want to show you something really funny .Malfoy glanced witheringly at Percy .And whatre you doing down here Weasley ?he sneered .Percy looked outraged .You want to show a bit more respect to a school prefect !he said .I dont like your attitude !Malfoy sneered and motioned for Harry and Ron to follow him .Harry almost said something apologetic to Percy but caught himself just in time .He and Ron hurried after Malfoy who said as they turned into the next passage That Peter Weasley Percy Ron corrected him automatically .Whatever said Malfoy .Ive noticed him sneaking around a lot lately .And I bet I know what hes up to .He thinks hes going to catch Slytherins heir single handed .He gave a short derisive laugh .Harry and Ron exchanged excited looks .Malfoy paused by a stretch of bare damp stone wall .Whats the new password again ?he said to Harry .Er said Harry .Oh yeah pureblood said Malfoy not listening and a stone door concealed in the wall slid open .Malfoy marched through it and Harry and Ron followed him .The Slytherin common room was a long low underground room with rough stone walls and ceiling from which round greenish lamps were hanging on chains .A fire was crackling under an elaborately carved mantelpiece ahead of them and several Slytherins were silhouetted around it in highbacked chairs .Wait here said Malfoy to Harry and Ron motioning them to a pair of empty chairs set back from the fire .Ill go and get it my fathers just sent it to me Wondering what Malfoy was going to show them Harry and Ron sat down doing their best to look at home .Malfoy came back a minute later holding what looked like a newspaper clipping .He thrust it under Rons nose .Thatll give you a laugh he said .Harry saw Rons eyes widen in shock .He read the clipping quickly gave a very forced laugh and handed it to Harry .It had been clipped out of the Daily Prophet and it said INQUIRY AT THE MINISTRY OF MAGIC Arthur Weasley Head of the Misuse of Muggle Artifacts Office was today fined fifty Galleons for bewitching a Muggle car .Mr Lucius Malfoy a governor of Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry where the enchanted car crashed earlier this year called today for Mr Weasleys resignation .Weasley has brought the Ministry into disrepute Mr Malfoy told our reporter .He is clearly unfit to draw up our laws and his ridiculous Muggle Protection Act should be scrapped immediately .Mr Weasley was unavailable for comment although his wife told reporters to clear off or shed set the family ghoul on them .Well ?said Malfoy impatiently as Harry handed the clipping back to him .Dont you think its funny ?Ha ha said Harry bleakly .Arthur Weasley loves Muggles so much he should snap his wand in half and go and join them said Malfoy scornfully .Youd never know the Weasleys were purebloods the way they behave .Rons or rather Crabbes face was contorted with fury .Whats up with you Crabbe ?snapped Malfoy .Stomachache Ron grunted .Well go up to the hospital wing and give all those Mudbloods a kick from me said Malfoy snickering .You know Im surprised the Daily Prophet hasnt reported all these attacks yet he went on thoughtfully .I suppose Dumbledores trying to hush it all up .Hell be sacked if it doesnt stop soon .Fathers always said old Dumbledores the worst thing thats ever happened to this place .He loves Muggle borns .A decent headmaster would never ve let slime like that Creevey in .Malfoy started taking pictures with an imaginary camera and did a cruel but accurate impression of Colin ‘Potter can I have your picture Potter ?Can I have your autograph ?Can I lick your shoes please Potter ?He dropped his hands and looked at Harry and Ron .Whats the matter with you two ?Far too late Harry and Ron forced themselves to laugh but Malfoy seemed satisfied perhaps Crabbe and Goyle were always slow on the uptake .Saint Potter the Mudbloods friend said Malfoy slowly .Hes another one with no proper wizard feeling or he wouldnt go around with that jumpedup Granger Mudblood .And people think hes Slytherins heir !Harry and Ron waited with bated breath Malfoy was surely seconds away from telling them it was him but then I wish I knew who it is said Malfoy petulantly .I could help them .Rons jaw dropped so that Crabbe looked even more clueless than usual .Fortunately Malfoy didnt notice and Harry thinking fast said You must have some idea whos behind it all .You know I havent Goyle how many times do I have to tell you ?snapped Malfoy .And Father wont tell me anything about the last time the Chamber was opened either .Of course it was fifty years ago so it was before his time but he knows all about it and he says that it was all kept quiet and itll look suspicious if I know too much about it .But I know one thing last time the Chamber of Secrets was opened a Mudblood died .So I bet its a matter of time before one of thems killed this time .I hope its Granger he said with relish .Ron was clenching Crabbe s gigantic fists .Feeling that it would be a bit of a giveaway if Ron punched Malfoy Harry shot him a warning look and said Dyou know if the person who opened the Chamber last time was caught ?Oh yeah .whoever it was was expelled said Malfoy .Theyre probably still in Azkaban .Azkaban ?said Harry puzzled .Azkaban the wizard prison Goyle said Malfoy looking at him in disbelief .Honestly if you were any slower youd be going backward .He shifted restlessly in his chair and said Father says to keep my head down and let the Heir of Slytherin get on with it .He says the school needs ridding of all the Mudblood filth but not to get mixed up in it .Of course hes got a lot on his plate at the moment .You know the Ministry of Magic raided our manor last week ?Harry tried to force Goyle s dull face into a look of concern .Yeah .said Malfoy .Luckily they didnt find much .Fathers got some very valuable Dark Arts stuff .But luckily weve got our own secret chamber under the drawingroom floor Ho !said Ron .Malfoy looked at him .So did Harry .Ron blushed .Even his hair was turning red .His nose was also slowly lengthening their hour was up Ron was turning back into himself and from the look of horror he was suddenly giving Harry he must be too .They both jumped to their feet .Medicine for my stomach Ron grunted and without further ado they sprinted the length of the Slytherin common room hurled themselves at the stone wall and dashed up the passage hoping against hope that Malfoy hadnt noticed anything .Harry could feel his feet slipping around in Goyles huge shoes and had to hoist up his robes as he shrank they crashed up the steps into the dark entrance hall which was full of a muffled pounding coming from the closet where theyd locked Crabbe and Goyle .Leaving their shoes outside the closet door they sprinted in their socks up the marble staircase toward Moaning Myrtles bathroom .Well it wasnt a complete waste of time Ron panted closing the bathroom door behind them .I know we still havent found out whos doing the attacks but Im going to write to Dad tomorrow and tell him to check under the Malfoys drawing room .Harry checked his face in the cracked mirror .He was back to normal .He put his glasses on as Ron hammered on the door of Hermiones stall .Hermione come out weve got loads to tell you Go away !Hermione squeaked .Harry and Ron looked at each other .Whats the matter ?said Ron .You must be back to normal by now we are But Moaning Myrtle glided suddenly through the stall door .Harry had never seen her looking so happy .Ooooooh wait till you see she said .Its awful They heard the lock slide back and Hermione emerged sobbing her robes pulled up over her head .Whats up ?said Ron uncertainly .Have you still got Millicents nose or something ?Hermione let her robes fall and Ron backed into the sink .Her face was covered in black fur .Her eyes had turned yellow and there were long pointed ears poking through her hair .It was a ccat hair !she howled .MMillicent Bulstrode mmust have a cat !And the ppotion isnt supposed to be used for animal transformations !Uhoh said Ron .Youll be teased something dreadful said Myrtle happily .Its okay Hermione said Harry quickly .Well take you up to the hospital wing .Madam Pomfrey never asks too many questions .It took a long time to persuade Hermione to leave the bathroom .Moaning Myrtle sped them on their way with a hearty guffaw .Wait till everyone finds out youve got a tail V THE VERY SECRET DIARY Hermione remained in the hospital wing for several weeks .There was a flurry of rumor about her disappearance when the rest of the school arrived back from their Christmas holidays because of course everyone thought that she had been attacked .So many students filed past the hospital wing trying to catch a glimpse of her that Madam Pomfrey took out her curtains again and placed them around Hermiones bed to spare her the shame of being seen with a furry face .Harry and Ron went to visit her every evening .When the new term started they brought her each days homework .If Id sprouted whiskers Id take a break from work said Ron tipping a stack of books onto Hermiones bedside table one evening .Dont be silly Ron Ive got to keep up said Hermione briskly .Her spirits were greatly improved by the fact that all the hair had gone from her face and her eyes were turning slowly back to brown .I dont suppose youve got any new leads ?she added in a whisper so that Madam Pomfrey couldnt hear her .Nothing said Harry gloomily .I was so sure it was Malfoy said Ron for about the hundredth time .Whats that ?asked Harry pointing to something gold sticking out from under Hermiones pillow .Just a get well card said Hermione hastily trying to poke it out of sight but Ron was too quick for her .He pulled it out flicked it open and read aloud To Miss Granger wishing you a speedy recovery from your concerned teacher Professor Gilderoy Lockhart Order of Merlin Third Class Honorary Member of the Dark Force Defense League and fivetime winner of Witch Weeklys MostCharmingSmile Award .Ron looked up at Hermione disgusted .You sleep with this under your pillow ?But Hermione was spared answering by Madam Pomfrey sweeping over with her evening dose of medicine .Is Lockhart the smarmiest bloke youve ever met or what ?Ron said to Harry as they left the infirmary and started up the stairs toward Gryffindor Tower .Snape had given them so much homework Harry thought he was likely to be in the sixth year before he finished it .Ron was just saying he wished he had asked Hermione how many rat tails you were supposed to add to a HairRaising Potion when an angry outburst from the floor above reached their ears .Thats Filch Harry muttered as they hurried up the stairs and paused out of sight listening hard .You dont think someone elses been attacked ?said Ron tensely .They stood still their heads inclined toward Filchs voice which sounded quite hysterical .even more work for me !Mopping all night like I havent got enough to do !No this is the final straw Im going to Dumbledore His footsteps receded along the outofsight corridor and they heard a distant door slam .They poked their heads around the corner .Filch had clearly been manning his usual lookout post They were once again on the spot where Mrs Norris had been attacked .They saw at a glance what Filch had been shouting about .A great flood of water stretched over half the corridor and it looked as though it was still seeping from under the door of Moaning Myrtles bathroom .Now that Filch had stopped shouting they could hear Myrtles wails echoing off the bathroom walls .Now whats up with her ?said Ron .Lets go and see said Harry and holding their robes over their ankles they stepped through the great wash of water to the door bearing its OUT OF ORDER sign ignored it as always and entered .Moaning Myrtle was crying if possible louder and harder than ever before .She seemed to be hiding down her usual toilet .It was dark in the bathroom because the candles had been extinguished in the great rush of water that had left both walls and floor soaking wet .Whats up Myrtle ?said Harry .Whos that ?glugged Myrtle miserably .Come to throw something else at me ?Harry waded across to her stall and said Why would I throw something at you ?Dont ask me Myrtle shouted emerging with a wave of yet more water which splashed onto the already sopping floor .Here I am minding my own business and someone thinks its funny to throw a book at me .But it cant hurt you if someone throws something at you said Harry reasonably .I mean itd just go right through you wouldnt it ?He had said the wrong thing .Myrtle puffed herself up and shrieked Lets all throw books at Myrtle because she cant feel it !Ten points if you can get it through her stomach !Fifty points if it goes through her head !Well ha ha ha !What a lovely game I dont think !Who threw it at you anyway ?asked Harry .I dont know .I was just sitting in the Ubend thinking about death and it fell right through the top of my head said Myrtle glaring at them .Its over there it got washed out .Harry and Ron looked under the sink where Myrtle was pointing .A small thin book lay there .It had a shabby black cover and was as wet as everything else in the bathroom .Harry stepped forward to pick it up but Ron suddenly flung out an arm to hold him back .What ?said Harry .Are you cra2y ?said Ron .It could be dangerous .Dangerous ?said Harry laughing .Come off it how could it be dangerous ?Youd be surprised said Ron who was looking apprehensively at the book .Some of the books the Ministrys confiscated Dads told me there was one that burned your eyes out .And everyone who read Sonnets of a Sorcerer spoke in limericks for the rest of their lives .And some old witch in Bath had a book that you could never stop reading !You just had to wander around with your nose in it trying to do everything onehanded .And All right Ive got the point said Harry .The little book lay on the floor nondescript and soggy .Well we wont find out unless we look at it he said and he ducked around Ron and picked it up off the floor .Harry saw at once that it was a diary and the faded year on the cover told him it was fifty years old .He opened it eagerly .On the first page he could just make out the name T .M .Riddle in smudged ink .Hang on said Ron who had approached cautiously and was looking over Harrys shoulder .I know that name .T .M .Riddle got an award for special services to the school fifty years ago .How on earth dyou know that ?said Harry in amazement .Because Filch made me polish his shield about fifty times in detention said Ron resentfully .That was the one I burped slugs all over .If youd wiped slime off a name for an hour youd remember it too .Harry peeled the wet pages apart .They were completely blank .There wasnt the faintest trace of writing on any of them not even Auntie Mabels birthday or dentist halfpast three .He never wrote in it said Harry disappointed .I wonder why someone wanted to flush it away ?said Ron curiously .Harry turned to the back cover of the book and saw the printed name of a variety store on Vauxhall Road London .He mustve been Muggleborn said Harry thoughtfully .To have bought a diary from Vauxhall Road .Well its not much use to you said Ron .He dropped his voice .Fifty points if you can get it through Myrtles nose .Harry however pocketed it .Hermione left the hospital wing dewhiskered tail less and furfree at the beginning of February .On her first evening back in Gryffindor Tower Harry showed her T .M .Riddles diary and told her the story of how they had found it .Oooh it might have hidden powers said Hermione enthusiastically taking the diary and looking at it closely .If it has its hiding them very well said Ron .Maybe its shy .I dont know why you dont chuck it Harry .I wish I knew why someone did try to chuck it said Harry .I wouldnt mind knowing how Riddle got an award for special services to Hogwarts either .Couldve been anything said Ron .Maybe he got thirty O .W .L .s or saved a teacher from the giant squid .Maybe he murdered Myrtle that wouldve done everyone a favor .But Harry could tell from the arrested look on Hermione s face that she was thinking what he was thinking .What ?said Ron looking from one to the other .Well the Chamber of Secrets was opened fifty years ago wasnt it ?he said .Thats what Malfoy said .Yeah .said Ron slowly .And this diary is fifty years old said Hermione tapping it excitedly .So ?Oh Ron wake up snapped Hermione .We know the person who opened the Chamber last time was expelled fifty years ago .We know T .M .Riddle got an award for special services to the school fifty years ago .Well what if Riddle got his special award for catching the Heir of Slytherin ?His diary would probably tell us everything where the Chamber is and how to open it and what sort of creature lives in it the person whos behind the attacks this time wouldnt want that lying around would they ?Thats a brilliant theory Hermione said Ron with just one tiny little flaw .Theres nothing written in his diary .But Hermione was pulling her wand out of her bag .It might be invisible ink !she whispered .She tapped the diary three times and said Aparecium Nothing happened .Undaunted Hermione shoved her hand back into her bag and pulled out what appeared to be a bright red eraser .Its a Revealer I got it in Diagon Alley she said .She rubbed hard on January first .Nothing happened .Im telling you theres nothing to find in there said Ron .Riddle just got a diary for Christmas and couldnt be bothered filling it in .Harry couldnt explain even to himself why he didnt just throw Riddles diary away .The fact was that even though he knew the diary was blank he kept absentmindedly picking it up and turning the pages as though it were a story he wanted to finish .And while Harry was sure he had never heard the name T .M .Riddle before it still seemed to mean something to him almost as though Riddle was a friend hed had when he was very small and had halfforgotten .But this was absurd .Hed never had friends before Hogwarts Dudley had made sure of that .Nevertheless Harry was determined to find out more about Riddle so next day at break he headed for the trophy room to examine Riddles special award accompanied by an interested Hermione and a thoroughly unconvinced Ron who told them hed seen enough of the trophy room to last him a lifetime .Riddles burnished gold shield was tucked away in a corner cabinet .It didnt carry details of why it had been given to him Good thing too or itd be even bigger and Id still be polishing it said Ron .However they did find Riddles name on an old Medal for Magical Merit and on a list of old Head Boys .He sounds like Percy said Ron wrinkling his nose in disgust .Prefect Head Boy .probably top of every class You say that like its a bad thing said Hermione in a slightly hurt voice .The sun had now begun to shine weakly on Hogwarts again .Inside the castle the mood had grown more hopeful .There had been no more attacks since those on Justin and Nearly Headless Nick and Madam Pomfrey was pleased to report that the Mandrakes were becoming moody and secretive meaning that they were fast leaving childhood .The moment their acne clears up theyll be ready for repotting again Harry heard her telling Filch kindly one afternoon .And after that it wont be long until were cutting them up and stewing them .Youll have Mrs Norris back in no time .Perhaps the Heir of Slytherin had lost his or her nerve thought Harry .It must be getting riskier and riskier to open the Chamber of Secrets with the school so alert and suspicious .Perhaps the monster whatever it was was even now settling itself down to hibernate for another fifty years .Ernie Macmillan of Hufflepuff didnt take this cheerful view .He was still convinced that Harry was the guilty one that he had given himself away at the Dueling Club .Peeves wasnt helping matters he kept popping up in the crowded corridors singing Oh Potter you rotter .now with a dance routine to match .Gilderoy Lockhart seemed to think he himself had made the attacks stop .Harry overheard him telling Professor McGonagall so while the Gryffindors were lining up for Transfiguration .I dont think therell be any more trouble Minerva he said tapping his nose knowingly and winking .I think the Chamber has been locked for good this time .The culprit must have known it was only a matter of time before I caught him .Rather sensible to stop now before I came down hard on him .You know what the school needs now is a morale booster .Wash away the memories of last term !I wont say any more just now but I think I know just the thing .He tapped his nose again and strode off .Lockharts idea of a moralebooster became clear at breakfast time on February fourteenth .Harry hadnt had much sleep because of a laterunning Quidditch practice the night before and he hurried down to the Great Hall slightly late .He thought for a moment that hed walked through the wrong doors .The walls were all covered with large lurid pink flowers .Worse still heartshaped confetti was falling from the pale blue ceiling .Harry went over to the Gryffindor table where Ron was sitting looking sickened and Hermione seemed to have been overcome with giggles .Whats going on ?Harry asked them sitting down and wiping confetti off his bacon .Ron pointed to the teachers table apparently too disgusted to speak .Lockhart wearing lurid pink robes to match the decorations was waving for silence .The teachers on either side of him were looking stonyfaced .From where he sat Harry could see a muscle going in Professor McGonagalls cheek .Snape looked as though someone had just fed him a large beaker of SkeleGro .Happy Valentines Day !Lockhart shouted .And may I thank the fortysix people who have so far sent me cards !Yes I have taken the liberty of arranging this little surprise for you all and it doesnt end here !Lockhart clapped his hands and through the doors to the entrance hall marched a dozen surlylooking dwarfs .Not just any dwarfs however .Lockhart had them all wearing golden wings and carrying harps .My friendly cardcarrying cupids !beamed Lockhart .They will be roving around the school today delivering your valentines !And the fun doesnt stop here !Im sure my colleagues will want to enter into the spirit of the occasion !Why not ask Professor Snape to show you how to whip up a Love Potion !And while youre at it Professor Flitwick knows more about Entrancing Enchantments than any wizard Ive ever met the sly old dog !Professor Flitwick buried his face in his hands .Snape was looking as though the first person to ask him for a Love Potion would be forcefed poison .Please Hermione tell me you werent one of the fortysix said Ron as they left the Great Hall for their first lesson .Hermione suddenly became very interested in searching her bag for her schedule and didnt answer .All day long the dwarfs kept barging into their classes to deliver valentines to the annoyance of the teachers and late that afternoon as the Gryffindors were walking upstairs for Charms one of the dwarfs caught up with Harry .Oy you !Arry Potter !shouted a particularly grim looking dwarf elbowing people out of the way to get to Harry .Hot all over at the thought of being given a valentine in front of a line of first years which happened to include Ginny Weasley Harry tried to escape .The dwarf however cut his way through the crowd by kicking peoples shins and reached him before hed gone two paces .Ive got a musical message to deliver to Arry Potter in person he said twanging his harp in a threatening sort of way .Not here Harry hissed trying to escape .Stay stilll grunted the dwarf grabbing hold of Harrys bag and pulling him back .Let me go !Harry snarled tugging .With a loud ripping noise his bag split in two .His books wand parchment and quill spilled onto the floor and his ink bottle smashed over everything .Harry scrambled around trying to pick it all up before the dwarf started singing causing something of a holdup in the corridor .Whats going on here ?came the cold drawling voice of Draco Malfoy .Harry started stuffing everything feverishly into his ripped bag desperate to get away before Malfoy could hear his musical valentine .Whats all this commotion ?said another familiar voice as Percy Weasley arrived .Losing his head Harry tried to make a run for it but the dwarf seized him around the knees and brought him crashing to the floor .Right he said sitting on Harrys ankles .Here is your singing valentine His eyes are as green as a fresh pickled toad His hair is as dark as a blackboard .I wish he was mine hes really divine The hero who conquered the Dark Lord .Harry would have given all the gold in Gringotts to evaporate on the spot .Trying valiantly to laugh along with everyone else he got up his feet numb from the weight of the dwarf as Percy Weasley did his best to disperse the crowd some of whom were crying with mirth .Off you go off you go the bell rang five minutes ago off to class now he said shooing some of the younger students away .And you Malfoy Harry glancing over saw Malfoy stoop and snatch up something .Leering he showed it to Crabbe and Goyle and Harry realized that hed got Riddles diary .Give that back said Harry quietly .Wonder what Potters written in this ?said Malfoy who obviously hadnt noticed the year on the cover and thought he had Harrys own diary .A hush fell over the onlookers .Ginny was staring from the diary to Harry looking terrified .Hand it over Malfoy said Percy sternly .When Ive had a look said Malfoy waving the diary tauntingly at Harry .Percy said As a school prefect but Harry had lost his temper .He pulled out his wand and shouted ExpelliarmusV and just as Snape had disarmed Lockhart so Malfoy found the diary shooting out of his hand into the air .Ron grinning broadly caught it .Harry !said Percy loudly .No magic in the corridors .Ill have to report this you know !But Harry didnt care he was oneup on Malfoy and that was worth five points from Gryffindor any day .Malfoy was looking furious and as Ginny passed him to enter her classroom he yelled spitefully after her I dont think Potter liked your valentine much !Ginny covered her face with her hands and ran into class .Snarling Ron pulled out his wand too but Harry pulled him away .Ron didnt need to spend the whole of Charms belching slugs .It wasnt until they had reached Professor Flitwicks class that Harry noticed something rather odd about Riddles diary .All his other books were drenched in scarlet ink .The diary however was as clean as it had been before the ink bottle had smashed all over it .He tried to point this out to Ron but Ron was having trouble with his wand again large purple bubbles were blossoming out of the end and he wasnt much interested in anything else .Jc Jc Jc Harry went to bed before anyone else in his dormitory that night .This was partly because he didnt think he could stand Fred and George singing His eyes are as green as a fresh pickled toad one more time and partly because he wanted to examine Riddles diary again and knew that Ron thought he was wasting his time .Harry sat on his fourposter and flicked through the blank pages not one of which had a trace of scarlet ink on it .Then he pulled a new bottle out of his bedside cabinet dipped his quill into it and dropped a blot onto the first page of the diary .The ink shone brightly on the paper for a second and then as though it was being sucked into the page vanished .Excited Harry loaded up his quill a second time and wrote My name is Harry Potter .The words shone momentarily on the page and they too sank without trace .Then at last something happened .Oozing back out of the page in his very own ink came words Harry had never written .Hello Harry Potter .My name is Tom Riddle .How did you come by my diary ?These words too faded away but not before Harry had started to scribble back .Someone tried to flush it down a toilet .He waited eagerly for Riddles reply .Lucky that I recorded my memories in some more lasting way than ink .But I always knew that there would be those who would not want this diary read .What do you mean ?Harry scrawled blotting the page in his excitement .I mean that this diary holds memories of terrible things .Things that were covered up .Things that happened at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry .Thats where I am now Harry wrote quickly .Im at Hogwarts and horrible stuffs been happening .Do you know anything about the Chamber of Secrets ?His heart was hammering .Riddles reply came quickly his writing becoming untidier as though he was hurrying to tell all he knew .Of course I know about the Chamber of Secrets .In my day they told us it was a legend that it did not exist .But this was a lie .In my fifth year the Chamber was opened and the monster attacked several students finally killing one .I caught the person whod opened the Chamber and he was expelled .But the headmaster Professor Dippet ashamed that such a thing had happened at Hogwarts forbade me to tell the truth .A story was given out that the girl had died in a freak accident They gave me a nice shiny engraved trophy for my trouble and warned me to keep my mouth shut But I knew it could happen again .The monster lived on and the one who had the power to release it was not imprisoned .Harry nearly upset his ink bottle in his hurry to write back .Its happening again now .There have been three attacks and no one seems to know whos behind them .Who was it last time ?I can show you if you like came Riddles reply .You dont have to take my word for it .I can take you inside my memory of the night when I caught him .Harry hesitated his quill suspended over the diary .What did Riddle mean ?How could he be taken inside somebody elses memory ?He glanced nervously at the door to the dormitory which was growing dark .When he looked back at the diary he saw fresh words forming .Let me show you .Harry paused for a fraction of a second and then wrote two letters .OK .The pages of the diary began to blow as though caught in a high wind stopping halfway through the month of June .Mouth hanging open Harry saw that the little square for June thirteenth seemed to have turned into a minuscule television screen .His hands trembling slightly he raised the book to press his eye against the little window and before he knew what was happening he was tilting forward the window was widening he felt his body leave his bed and he was pitched headfirst through the opening in the page into a whirl of color and shadow .He felt his feet hit solid ground and stood shaking as the blurred shapes around him came suddenly into focus .He knew immediately where he was .This circular room with the sleeping portraits was Dumbledores office but it wasnt Dumbledore who was sitting behind the desk .A wizened fraillooking wizard bald except for a few wisps of white hair was reading a letter by candlelight .Harry had never seen this man before .Im sorry he said shakily .I didnt mean to butt in But the wizard didnt look up .He continued to read frowning slightly .Harry drew nearer to his desk and stammered Er Ill just go shall I ?Still the wizard ignored him .He didnt seem even to have heard him .Thinking that the wizard might be deaf Harry raised his voice .Sorry I disturbed you .Ill go now he halfshouted .The wizard folded up the letter with a sigh stood up walked past Harry without glancing at him and went to draw the curtains at his window .The sky outside the window was rubyred it seemed to be sunset .The wizard went back to the desk sat down and twiddled his thumbs watching the door .Harry looked around the office .No Fawkes the phoenix no whirring silver contraptions .This was Hogwarts as Riddle had known it meaning that this unknown wizard was headmaster not Dumbledore and he Harry was little more than a phantom completely invisible to the people of fifty years ago .There was a knock on the office door .Enter said the old wizard in a feeble voice .A boy of about sixteen entered taking off his pointed hat .A silver prefects badge was glinting on his chest .He was much taller than Harry but he too had jet black hair .Ah Riddle said the headmaster .You wanted to see me Professor Dippet ?said Riddle .He looked nervous .Sit down said Dippet .Ive just been reading the letter you sent me .Oh said Riddle .He sat down gripping his hands together very tightly .My dear boy said Dippet kindly I cannot possibly let you stay at school over the summer .Surely you want to go home for the holidays ?No said Riddle at once .Id much rather stay at Hogwarts than go back to that to that You live in a Muggle orphanage during the holidays I believe ?said Dippet curiously .Yes sir said Riddle reddening slightly .You are Muggleborn ?Halfblood sir said Riddle .Muggle father witch mother .And are both your parents ?My mother died just after I was born sir .They told me at the orphanage she lived just long enough to name me Tom after my father Marvolo after my grandfather .Dippet clucked his tongue sympathetically .The thing is Tom he sighed special arrangements might have been made for you but in the current circumstances .You mean all these attacks sir ?said Riddle and Harrys heart leapt and he moved closer scared of missing anything .Precisely said the headmaster .My dear boy you must see how foolish it would be of me to allow you to remain at the castle when term ends .Particularly in light of the recent tragedy .the death of that poor little girl .You will be safer by far at your orphanage .As a matter of fact the Ministry of Magic is even now talking about closing the school .We are no nearer locating the er source of all this unpleasantness .Riddles eyes had widened .Sir if the person was caught if it all stopped What do you mean ?said Dippet with a squeak in his voice sitting up in his chair .Riddle do you mean you know something about these attacks ?No sir said Riddle quickly .But Harry was sure it was the same sort of no that he himself had given Dumbledore .Dippet sank back looking faintly disappointed .You may go Tom .Riddle slid off his chair and slouched out of the room .Harry followed him .Down the moving spiral staircase they went emerging next to the gargoyle in the darkening corridor .Riddle stopped and so did Harry watching him .Harry could tell that Riddle was doing some serious thinking .He was biting his lip his forehead furrowed .Then as though he had suddenly reached a decision he hurried off Harry gliding noiselessly behind him .They didnt see another person until they reached the entrance hall when a tall wizard with long sweeping auburn hair and a beard called to Riddle from the marble staircase .What are you doing wandering around this late Tom ?Harry gaped at the wizard .He was none other than a fiftyyearyounger Dumbledore .I had to see the headmaster sir said Riddle .Well hurry off to bed said Dumbledore giving Riddle exactly the kind of penetrating stare Harry knew so well .Best not to roam the corridors these days .Not since .He sighed heavily bade Riddle good night and strode off .Riddle watched him walk out of sight and then moving quickly headed straight down the stone steps to the dungeons with Harry in hot pursuit .But to Harrys disappointment Riddle led him not into a hidden passageway or a secret tunnel but to the very dungeon in which Harry had Potions with Snape .The torches hadnt been lit and when Riddle pushed the door almost closed Harry could only just see him standing stockstill by the door watching the passage outside .It felt to Harry that they were there for at least an hour .All he could see was the figure of Riddle at the door staring through the crack waiting like a statue .And just when Harry had stopped feeling expectant and tense and started wishing he could return to the present he heard something move beyond the door .Someone was creeping along the passage .He heard whoever it was pass the dungeon where he and Riddle were hidden .Riddle quiet as a shadow edged through the door and followed Harry tiptoeing behind him forgetting that he couldnt be heard .For perhaps five minutes they followed the footsteps until Riddle stopped suddenly his head inclined in the direction of new noises .Harry heard a door creak open and then someone speaking in a hoarse whisper .Cmon .gotta get yeh outta here .Cmon now .in the box .There was something familiar about that voice .Riddle suddenly jumped around the corner .Harry stepped out behind him .He could see the dark outline of a huge boy who was crouching in front of an open door a very large box next to it .Evening Rubeus said Riddle sharply .The boy slammed the door shut and stood up .What yer doin down here Tom ?Riddle stepped closer .Its all over he said .Im going to have to turn you in Rubeus .Theyre talking about closing Hogwarts if the attacks dont stop .What dyeh I dont think you meant to kill anyone .But monsters dont make good pets .I suppose you just let it out for exercise and It never killed no one !said the large boy backing against the closed door .From behind him Harry could hear a funny rustling and clicking .Come on Rubeus said Riddle moving yet closer .The dead girls parents will be here tomorrow .The least Hogwarts can do is make sure that the thing that killed their daughter is slaughtered .It wasnt him !roared the boy his voice echoing in the dark passage .He wouldn !He never !Stand aside said Riddle drawing out his wand .His spell lit the corridor with a sudden flaming light .The door behind the large boy flew open with such force it knocked him into the wall opposite .And out of it came something that made Harry let out a long piercing scream unheard by anyone A vast lowslung hairy body and a tangle of black legs a gleam of many eyes and a pair of razorsharp pincers Riddle raised his wand again but he was too late .The thing bowled him over as it scuttled away tearing up the corridor and out of sight .Riddle scrambled to his feet looking after it he raised his wand but the huge boy leapt on him seized his wand and threw him back down yelling NOOOOOOO !The scene whirled the darkness became complete Harry felt himself falling and with a crash he landed spreadeagled on his fourposter in the Gryffindor dormitory Riddles diary lying open on his stomach .Before he had had time to regain his breath the dormitory door opened and Ron came in .There you are he said .Harry sat up .He was sweating and shaking .Whats up ?said Ron looking at him with concern .It was Hagrid Ron .Hagrid opened the Chamber of Secrets fifty years ago .CORNELIUS FUDGE Harry Ron and Hermione had always known that Hagrid had an unfortunate liking for large and monstrous creatures .During their first year at Hogwarts he had tried to raise a dragon in his little wooden house and it would be a long time before they forgot the giant threeheaded dog hed christened Fluffy .And if as a boy Hagrid had heard that a monster was hidden somewhere in the castle Harry was sure hed have gone to any lengths for a glimpse of it .Hed probably thought it was a shame that the monster had been cooped up so long and thought it deserved the chance to stretch its many legs Harry could just imagine the thirteenyearold Hagrid trying to fit a leash and collar on it .But he was equally certain that Hagrid would never have meant to kill anybody .Harry half wished he hadnt found out how to work Riddles diary .Again and again Ron and Hermione made him recount what hed seen until he was heartily sick of telling them and sick of the long circular conversations that followed .Riddle might have got the wrong person said Hermione .Maybe it was some other monster that was attacking people .How many monsters dyou think this place can hold ?Ron asked dully .We always knew Hagrid had been expelled said Harry miserably .And the attacks mustve stopped after Hagrid was kicked out .Otherwise Riddle wouldnt have got his award .Ron tried a different tack .Riddle does sound like Percy who asked him to squeal on Hagrid anyway ?But the monster had killed someone Ron said Hermione .And Riddle was going to go back to some Muggle orphanage if they closed Hogwarts said Harry .I dont blame him for wanting to stay here .You met Hagrid down Knockturn Alley didnt you Harry ?He was buying a FleshEating Slug Repellent said Harry quickly .The three of them fell silent .After a long pause Hermione voiced the knottiest question of all in a hesitant voice .Do you think we should go and ask Hagrid about it all ?Thatd be a cheerful visit said Ron . ‘Hello Hagrid .Tell us have you been setting anything mad and hairy loose in the castle lately ?In the end they decided that they would not say anything to Hagrid unless there was another attack and as more and more days went by with no whisper from the disembodied voice they became hopeful that they would never need to talk to him about why he had been expelled .It was now nearly four months since Justin and Nearly Headless Nick had been Petrified and nearly everybody seemed to think that the attacker whoever it was had retired for good .Peeves had finally got bored of his Oh Potter you rotter song Ernie Macmillan asked Harry quite politely to pass a bucket of leaping toadstools in Herbology one day and in March several of the Mandrakes threw a loud and raucous party in greenhouse three .This made Professor Sprout very happy .The moment they start trying to move into each others pots well know theyre fully mature she told Harry .Then well be able to revive those poor people in the hospital wing .The second years were given something new to think about during their Easter holidays .The time had come to choose their subjects for the third year a matter that Hermione at least took very seriously .It could affect our whole future she told Harry and Ron as they pored over lists of new subjects marking them with checks .I just want to give up Potions said Harry .We cant said Ron gloomily .We keep all our old subjects or Idve ditched Defense Against the Dark Arts .But thats very important !said Hermione shocked .Not the way Lockhart teaches it said Ron .I havent learned anything from him except not to set pixies loose .Neville Longbottom had been sent letters from all the witches and wizards in his family all giving him different advice on what to choose .Confused and worried he sat reading the subject lists with his tongue poking out asking people whether they thought Arithmancy sounded more difficult than the study of Ancient Runes .Dean Thomas who like Harry had grown up with Muggles ended up closing his eyes and jabbing his wand at the list then picking the subjects it landed on .Hermione took nobodys advice but signed up for everything .Harry smiled grimly to himself at the thought of what Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia would say if he tried to discuss his career in wizardry with them .Not that he didnt get any guidance Percy Weasley was eager to share his experience .Depends where you want to go Harry he said .Its never too early to think about the future so Id recommend Divination .People say Muggle Studies is a soft option but I personally think wizards should have a thorough understanding of the nonmagical community particularly if theyre thinking of working in close contact with them look at my father he has to deal with Muggle business all the time .My brother Charlie was always more of an outdoor type so he went for Care of Magical Creatures .Play to your strengths Harry .But the only thing Harry felt he was really good at was Quidditch .In the end he chose the same new subjects as Ron feeling that if he was lousy at them at least hed have someone friendly to help him .Gryffindors next Quidditch match would be against Hufflepuff .Wood was insisting on team practices every night after dinner so that Harry barely had time for anything but Quidditch and homework .However the training sessions were getting better or at least drier and the evening before Saturdays match he went up to his dormitory to drop off his broomstick feeling Gryffindors chances for the Quidditch Cup had never been better .But his cheerful mood didnt last long .At the top of the stairs to the dormitory he met Neville Longbottom who was looking frantic .Harry I dont know who did it I just found Watching Harry fearfully Neville pushed open the door .The contents of Harrys trunk had been thrown everywhere .His cloak lay ripped on the floor .The bedclothes had been pulled off his fourposter and the drawer had been pulled out of his bedside cabinet the contents strewn over the mattress .Harry walked over to the bed openmouthed treading on a few loose pages of Travels with Trolls .As he and Neville pulled the blankets back onto his bed Ron Dean and Seamus came in .Dean swore loudly .What happened Harry ?No idea said Harry .But Ron was examining Harrys robes .All the pockets were hanging out .Someones been looking for something said Ron .Is there anything missing ?Harry started to pick up all his things and throw them into his trunk .It was only as he threw the last of the Lockhart books back into it that he realized what wasnt there .Riddles diarys gone he said in an undertone to Ron .What ?Harry jerked his head toward the dormitory door and Ron followed him out .They hurried down to the Gryffindor common room which was halfempty and joined Hermione who was sitting alone reading a book called Ancient Runes Made Easy .Hermione looked aghast at the news .But only a Gryffindor could have stolen nobody else knows our password Exactly said Harry .They woke the next day to brilliant sunshine and a light refreshing breeze .Perfect Quidditch conditions !said Wood enthusiastically at the Gryffindor table loading the teams plates with scrambled eggs .Harry buck up there you need a decent breakfast .Harry had been staring down the packed Gryffindor table wondering if the new owner of Riddles diary was right in front of his eyes .Hermione had been urging him to report the robbery but Harry didnt like the idea .Hed have to tell a teacher all about the diary and how many people knew why Hagrid had been expelled fifty years ago ?He didnt want to be the one who brought it all up again .As he left the Great Hall with Ron and Hermione to go and collect his Quidditch things another very serious worry was added to Harrys growing list .He had just set foot on the marble staircase when he heard it yet again Kill this time .let me rip .tear .He shouted aloud and Ron and Hermione both jumped away from him in alarm .The voice !said Harry looking over his shoulder .I just heard it again didnt you ?Ron shook his head wideeyed .Hermione however clapped a hand to her forehead .Harry I think Ive just understood something !Ive got to go to the library !And she sprinted away up the stairs .What does she understand ?said Harry distractedly still looking around trying to tell where the voice had come from .Loads more than I do said Ron shaking his head .But whys she got to go to the library ?Because thats what Hermione does said Ron shrugging .When in doubt go to the library .Harry stood irresolute trying to catch the voice again but people were now emerging from the Great Hall behind him talking loudly exiting through the front doors on their way to the Quidditch pitch .Youd better get moving said Ron .Its nearly eleven the match Harry raced up to Gryffindor Tower collected his Nimbus Two Thousand and joined the large crowd swarming across the grounds but his mind was still in the castle along with the bodiless voice and as he pulled on his scarlet robes in the locker room his only comfort was that everyone was now outside to watch the game .The teams walked onto the field to tumultuous applause .Oliver Wood took off for a warmup flight around the goal posts Madam Hooch released the balls .The Hufflepuffs who played in canary yellow were standing in a huddle having a lastminute discussion of tactics .Harry was just mounting his broom when Professor McGonagall came half marching half running across the pitch carrying an enormous purple megaphone .Harrys heart dropped like a stone .This match has been canceled Professor McGonagall called through the megaphone addressing the packed stadium .There were boos and shouts .Oliver Wood looking devastated landed and ran toward Professor McGonagall without getting off his broomstick .But Professor !he shouted .Weve got to play the Cup Gryffindor Professor McGonagall ignored him and continued to shout through her megaphone All students are to make their way back to the House common rooms where their Heads of Houses will give them further information .As quickly as you can please !Then she lowered the megaphone and beckoned Harry over to her .Potter I think youd better come with me .Wondering how she could possibly suspect him this time Harry saw Ron detach himself from the complaining crowd he came running up to them as they set off toward the castle .To Harrys surprise Professor McGonagall didnt object .Yes perhaps youd better come too Weasley .Some of the students swarming around them were grumbling about the match being canceled others looked worried .Harry and Ron followed Professor McGonagall back into the school and up the marble staircase .But they werent taken to anybodys office this time .This will be a bit of a shock said Professor McGonagall in a surprisingly gentle voice as they approached the infirmary .There has been another attack .another double attack .Harrys insides did a horrible somersault .Professor McGonagall pushed the door open and he and Ron entered .Madam Pomfrey was bending over a sixthyear girl with long curly hair .Harry recognized her as the Ravenclaw theyd accidentally asked for directions to the Slytherin common room .And on the bed next to her was HermioneY Ron groaned .Hermione lay utterly still her eyes open and glassy .They were found near the library said Professor McGonagall .I dont suppose either of you can explain this ?It was on the floor next to them .She was holding up a small circular mirror .Harry and Ron shook their heads both staring at Hermione .I will escort you back to Gryffindor Tower said Professor McGonagall heavily .I need to address the students in any case .All students will return to their House common rooms by six oclock in the evening .No student is to leave the dormitories after that time .You will be escorted to each lesson by a teacher .No student is to use the bathroom unaccompanied by a teacher .All further Quidditch training and matches are to be postponed .There will be no more evening activities .The Gryffindors packed inside the common room listened to Professor McGonagall in silence .She rolled up the parchment from which she had been reading and said in a somewhat choked voice I need hardly add that I have rarely been so distressed .It is likely that the school will be closed unless the culprit behind these attacks is caught .I would urge anyone who thinks they might know anything about them to come forward .She climbed somewhat awkwardly out of the portrait hole and the Gryffindors began talking immediately .Thats two Gryffindors down not counting a Gryffindor ghost one Ravenclaw and one Hufflepuff said the Weasley twins friend Lee Jordan counting on his fingers .Havent any of the teachers noticed that the Slytherins are all safe ?Isnt it obvious all this stuffs coming from Slytherin ?The Heir of Slytherin the monster of Slytherin why dont they just chuck all the Slytherins out ?he roared to nods and scattered applause .Percy Weasley was sitting in a chair behind Lee but for once he didnt seem keen to make his views heard .He was looking pale and stunned .Percys in shock George told Harry quietly .That Ravenclaw girl Penelope Clearwater shes a prefect .I dont think he thought the monster would dare attack a prefect .But Harry was only halflistening .He didnt seem to be able to get rid of the picture of Hermione lying on the hospital bed as though carved out of stone .And if the culprit wasnt caught soon he was looking at a lifetime back with the Dursleys .Tom Riddle had turned Hagrid in because he was faced with the prospect of a Muggle orphanage if the school closed .Harry now knew exactly how he had felt .Whatre we going to do ?said Ron quietly in Harrys ear .Dyou think they suspect Hagrid ?Weve got to go and talk to him said Harry making up his mind .I cant believe its him this time but if he set the monster loose last time hell know how to get inside the Chamber of Secrets and thats a start .But McGonagall said weve got to stay in our tower unless were in class I think said Harry more quietly still its time to get my dads old cloak out again .Harry had inherited just one thing from his father a long and silvery Invisibility Cloak .It was their only chance of sneaking out of the school to visit Hagrid without anyone knowing about it .They went to bed at the usual time waited until Neville Dean and Seamus had stopped discussing the Chamber of Secrets and finally fallen asleep then got up dressed again and threw the cloak over themselves .The journey through the dark and deserted castle corridors wasnt enjoyable .Harry who had wandered the castle at night several times before had never seen it so crowded after sunset .Teachers prefects and ghosts were marching the corridors in pairs staring around for any unusual activity .Their Invisibility Cloak didnt stop them making any noise and there was a particularly tense moment when Ron stubbed his toe only yards from the spot where Snape stood standing guard .Thankfully Snape sneezed at almost exactly the moment Ron swore .It was with relief that they reached the oak front doors and eased them open .It was a clear starry night .They hurried toward the lit windows of Hagrid s house and pulled off the cloak only when they were right outside his front door .Seconds after they had knocked Hagrid flung it open .They found themselves facetoface with him aiming a crossbow at them .Fang the boarhound barked loudly behind him .Oh he said lowering the weapon and staring at them .What re you two doin here ?Whats that for ?said Harry pointing at the crossbow as they stepped inside .Nothin nothin Hagrid muttered .Ive bin expectin doesn matter Sit down Ill make tea He hardly seemed to know what he was doing .He nearly extinguished the fire spilling water from the kettle on it and then smashed the teapot with a nervous jerk of his massive hand .Are you okay Hagrid ?said Harry .Did you hear about Hermione ?Oh I heard all righ said Hagrid a slight break in his voice .He kept glancing nervously at the windows .He poured them both large mugs of boiling water he had forgotten to add tea bags and was just putting a slab of fruitcake on a plate when there was a loud knock on the door .Hagrid dropped the fruitcake .Harry and Ron exchanged panicstricken looks then threw the Invisibility Cloak back over themselves and retreated into a corner .Hagrid checked that they were hidden seized his crossbow and flung open his door once more .Good evening Hagrid .It was Dumbledore .He entered looking deadly serious and was followed by a second very odd looking man .The stranger had rumpled gray hair and an anxious expression and was wearing a strange mixture of clothes a pinstriped suit a scarlet tie a long black cloak and pointed purple boots .Under his arm he carried a limegreen bowler .Thats Dads boss !Ron breathed .Cornelius Fudge the Minister of Magic !Harry elbowed Ron hard to make him shut up .Hagrid had gone pale and sweaty .He dropped into one of his chairs and looked from Dumbledore to Cornelius Fudge .Bad business Hagrid said Fudge in rather clipped tones .Very bad business .Had to come .Four attacks on Muggleborns .Thingsve gone far enough .Ministrys got to act .I never said Hagrid looking imploringly at Dumbledore .You know I never Professor Dumbledore sir I want it understood Cornelius that Hagrid has my full confidence said Dumbledore frowning at Fudge .Look Albus said Fudge uncomfortably .Hagrids records against him .Ministrys got to do something the school governors have been in touch Yet again Cornelius I tell you that taking Hagrid away will not help in the slightest said Dumbledore .His blue eyes were full of a fire Harry had never seen before .Look at it from my point of view said Fudge fidgeting with his bowler .Im under a lot of pressure .Got to be seen to be doing something .If it turns out it wasnt Hagrid hell be back and no more said .But Ive got to take him .Got to .Wouldnt be doing my duty Take me ?said Hagrid who was trembling .Take me where ?For a short stretch only said Fudge not meeting Hagrid s eyes .Not a punishment Hagrid more a precaution .If someone else is caught youll be let out with a full apology Not Azkaban ?croaked Hagrid .Before Fudge could answer there was another loud rap on the door .Dumbledore answered it .It was Harrys turn for an elbow in the ribs hed let out an audible gasp .Mr Lucius Malfoy strode into Hagrids hut swathed in a long black traveling cloak smiling a cold and satisfied smile .Fang started to growl .Already here Fudge he said approvingly .Good good .Whatre you doin here ?said Hagrid furiously .Get outta my house !My dear man please believe me I have no pleasure at all in being inside your er dyou call this a house ?said Lucius Malfoy sneering as he looked around the small cabin .I simply called at the school and was told that the headmaster was here .And what exactly did you want with me Lucius ?said Dumbledore .He spoke politely but the fire was still blazing in his blue eyes .Dreadful thing Dumbledore said Malfoy lazily taking out a long roll of parchment but the governors feel its time for you to step aside .This is an Order of Suspension youll find all twelve signatures on it .Im afraid we feel youre losing your touch .How many attacks have there been now ?Two more this afternoon wasnt it ?At this rate therell be no Muggleborns left at Hogwarts and we all know what an awful loss that would be to the school .Oh now see here Lucius said Fudge looking alarmed Dumbledore suspended no no last thing we want just now The appointment or suspension of the headmaster is a matter for the governors Fudge said Mr Malfoy smoothly .And as Dumbledore has failed to stop these attacks See here Malfoy if Dumbledore cant stop them said Fudge whose upper lip was sweating now I mean to say who can ?That remains to be seen said Mr Malfoy with a nasty smile .But as all twelve of us have voted Hagrid leapt to his feet his shaggy black head grazing the ceiling .An how many did yeh have ter threaten an blackmail before they agreed Malfoy eh ?he roared .Dear dear you know that temper of yours will lead you into trouble one of these days Hagrid said Mr Malfoy .I would advise you not to shout at the Azkaban guards like that .They wont like it at all .Yeh can take Dumbledore !yelled Hagrid making Fang the boarhound cower and whimper in his basket .Take him away an the Muggleborns won stand a chance !Therell be killin next !Calm yourself Hagrid said Dumbledore sharply .He looked at Lucius Malfoy .If the governors want my removal Lucius I shall of course step aside But stuttered Fudge .iVo !growled Hagrid .Dumbledore had not taken his bright blue eyes off Lucius Malfoys cold gray ones .However said Dumbledore speaking very slowly and clearly so that none of them could miss a word you will find that I will only truly have left this school when none here are loyal to me .You will also find that help will always be given at Hogwarts to those who ask for it .For a second Harry was almost sure Dumbledores eyes flickered toward the corner where he and Ron stood hidden .Admirable sentiments said Malfoy bowing .We shall all miss your er highly individual way of running things Albus and only hope that your successor will manage to prevent any ah killins .He strode to the cabin door opened it and bowed Dumbledore out .Fudge fiddling with his bowler waited for Hagrid to go ahead of him but Hagrid stood his ground took a deep breath and said carefully If anyone wanted ter find out some stuff all theyd have ter do would be ter follow the spiders .Thatd lead em right !Thats all Im sayin .Fudge stared at him in amazement .All right Im cornin said Hagrid pulling on his moleskin overcoat .But as he was about to follow Fudge through the door he stopped again and said loudly An someonell need ter feed Fang while Im away .The door banged shut and Ron pulled off the Invisibility Cloak .Were in trouble now he said hoarsely .No Dumbledore .They might as well close the school tonight .Therell be an attack a day with him gone .Fang started howling scratching at the closed door .ARAGOG Summer was creeping over the grounds around the castle sky and lake alike turned periwinkle blue and flowers large as cabbages burst into bloom in the greenhouses .But with no Hagrid visible from the castle windows striding the grounds with Fang at his heels the scene didnt look right to Harry no better in fact than the inside of the castle where things were so horribly wrong .Harry and Ron had tried to visit Hermione but visitors were now barred from the hospital wing .Were taking no more chances Madam Pomfrey told them severely through a crack in the infirmary door .No Im sorry theres every chance the attacker might come back to finish these people off .With Dumbledore gone fear had spread as never before so that the sun warming the castle walls outside seemed to stop at the mullioned windows .There was barely a face to be seen in the school that didnt look worried and tense and any laughter that rang through the corridors sounded shrill and unnatural and was quickly stifled .Harry constantly repeated Dumbledores final words to himself .I will only truly have left this school when none here are loyal to me .Help will always be given at Hog warts to those who ask for it .But what good were these words ?Who exactly were they supposed to ask for help when everyone was just as confused and scared as they were ?Hagrids hint about the spiders was far easier to understand the trouble was there didnt seem to be a single spider left in the castle to follow .Harry looked everywhere he went helped rather reluctantly by Ron .They were hampered of course by the fact that they werent allowed to wander off on their own but had to move around the castle in a pack with the other Gryffindors .Most of their fellow students seemed glad that they were being shepherded from class to class by teachers but Harry found it very irksome .One person however seemed to be thoroughly enjoying the atmosphere of terror and suspicion .Draco Malfoy was strutting around the school as though he had just been appointed Head Boy .Harry didnt realize what he was so pleased about until the Potions lesson about two weeks after Dumbledore and Hagrid had left when sitting right behind Malfoy Harry overheard him gloating to Crabbe and Goyle .I always thought Father might be the one who got rid of Dumbledore he said not troubling to keep his voice down .I told you he thinks Dumbledores the worst headmaster the schools ever had .Maybe well get a decent headmaster now .Someone who wont want the Chamber of Secrets closed .McGonagall wont last long shes only filling in .Snape swept past Harry making no comment about Hermiones empty seat and cauldron .Sir said Malfoy loudly .Sir why dont you apply for the headmasters job ?Now now Malfoy said Snape though he couldnt suppress a thinlipped smile .Professor Dumbledore has only been suspended by the governors .I daresay hell be back with us soon enough .Yeah right said Malfoy smirking .I expect youd have Fathers vote sir if you wanted to apply for the job Ill tell Father youre the best teacher here sir Snape smirked as he swept off around the dungeon fortunately not spotting Seamus Finnigan who was pretending to vomit into his cauldron .Im quite surprised the Mudbloods havent all packed their bags by now Malfoy went on .Bet you five Galleons the next one dies .Pity it wasnt Granger The bell rang at that moment which was lucky at Malfoys last words Ron had leapt off his stool and in the scramble to collect bags and books his attempts to reach Malfoy went unnoticed .Let me at him Ron growled as Harry and Dean hung onto his arms .I dont care I dont need my wand Im going to kill him with my bare hands Hurry up Ive got to take you all to Herbology barked Snape over the classs heads and off they marched with Harry Ron and Dean bringing up the rear Ron still trying to get loose .It was only safe to let go of him when Snape had seen them out of the castle and they were making their way across the vegetable patch toward the greenhouses .The Herbology class was very subdued there were now two missing from their number Justin and Hermione .Professor Sprout set them all to work pruning the Abyssinian Shrivelfigs .Harry went to tip an armful of withered stalks onto the compost heap and found himself facetoface with Ernie Macmillan .Ernie took a deep breath and said very formally I just want to say Harry that Im sorry I ever suspected you .I know youd never attack Hermione Granger and I apologize for all the stuff I said .Were all in the same boat now and well He held out a pudgy hand and Harry shook it .Ernie and his friend Hannah came to work at the same Shrivelfig as Harry and Ron .That Draco Malfoy character said Ernie breaking off dead twigs he seems very pleased about all this doesnt he ?Dyou know I think he might be Slytherins heir .Thats clever of you said Ron who didnt seem to have forgiven Ernie as readily as Harry .Do you think its Malfoy Harry ?Ernie asked .No said Harry so firmly that Ernie and Hannah stared .A second later Harry spotted something .Several large spiders were scuttling over the ground on the other side of the glass moving in an unnaturally straight line as though taking the shortest route to a prearranged meeting .Harry hit Ron over the hand with his pruning shears .Ouch What re you Harry pointed out the spiders following their progress with his eyes screwed up against the sun .Oh yeah said Ron trying and failing to look pleased .But we cant follow them now Ernie and Hannah were listening curiously .Harrys eyes narrowed as he focused on the spiders .If they pursued their fixed course there could be no doubt about where they would end up .Looks like theyre heading for the Forbidden Forest .And Ron looked even unhappier about that .At the end of the lesson Professor Sprout escorted the class to their Defense Against the Dark Arts lesson .Harry and Ron lagged behind the others so they could talk out of earshot .Well have to use the Invisibility Cloak again Harry told Ron .We can take Fang with us .Hes used to going into the forest with Hagrid he might be some help .Right said Ron who was twirling his wand nervously in his fingers .Er arent there arent there supposed to be werewolves in the forest ?he added as they took their usual places at the back of Lockharts classroom .Preferring not to answer that question Harry said There are good things in there too .The centaurs are all right and the unicorns .Ron had never been into the Forbidden Forest before .Harry had entered it only once and had hoped never to do so again .Lockhart bounded into the room and the class stared at him .Every other teacher in the place was looking grimmer than usual but Lockhart appeared nothing short of buoyant .Come now he cried beaming around him .Why all these long faces ?People swapped exasperated looks but nobody answered .Dont you people realize said Lockhart speaking slowly as though they were all a bit dim the danger has passed !The culprit has been taken away Says who ?said Dean Thomas loudly .My dear young man the Minister of Magic wouldnt have taken Hagrid if he hadnt been one hundred percent sure that he was guilty said Lockhart in the tone of someone explaining that one and one made two .Oh yes he would said Ron even more loudly than Dean .I flatter myself I know a touch more about Hagrid s arrest than you do Mr Weasley said Lockhart in a selfsatisfied tone .Ron started to say that he didnt think so somehow but stopped in midsentence when Harry kicked him hard under the desk .We werent there remember ?Harry muttered .But Lockharts disgusting cheeriness his hints that he had always thought Hagrid was no good his confidence that the whole business was now at an end irritated Harry so much that he yearned to throw Gadding with Ghouls right in Lockharts stupid face .Instead he contented himself with scrawling a note to Ron Lets do it tonight Ron read the message swallowed hard and looked sideways at the empty seat usually filled by Hermione .The sight seemed to stiffen his resolve and he nodded .The Gryffindor common room was always very crowded these days because from six oclock onward the Gryffindors had nowhere else to go .They also had plenty to talk about with the result that the common room often didnt empty until past midnight .Harry went to get the Invisibility Cloak out of his trunk right after dinner and spent the evening sitting on it waiting for the room to clear .Fred and George challenged Harry and Ron to a few games of Exploding Snap and Ginny sat watching them very subdued in Hermione s usual chair .Harry and Ron kept losing on purpose trying to finish the games quickly but even so it was well past midnight when Fred George and Ginny finally went to bed .Harry and Ron waited for the distant sounds of two dormitory doors closing before seizing the cloak throwing it over themselves and climbing through the portrait hole .It was another difficult journey through the castle dodging all the teachers .At last they reached the entrance hall slid back the lock on the oak front doors squeezed between them trying to stop any creaking and stepped out into the moonlit grounds .Course said Ron abruptly as they strode across the black grass we might get to the forest and find theres nothing to follow .Those spiders might notve been going there at all .I know it looked like they were moving in that sort of general direction but .His voice trailed away hopefully .They reached Hagrids house sad and sorrylooking with its blank windows .When Harry pushed the door open Fang went mad with joy at the sight of them .Worried he might wake everyone at the castle with his deep booming barks they hastily fed him treacle toffee from a tin on the mantelpiece which glued his teeth together .Harry left the Invisibility Cloak on Hagrids table .There would be no need for it in the pitchdark forest .Cmon Fang were going for a walk said Harry patting his leg and Fang bounded happily out of the house behind them dashed to the edge of the forest and lifted his leg against a large sycamore tree .Harry took out his wand murmured Lumos and a tiny light appeared at the end of it just enough to let them watch the path for signs of spiders .Good thinking said Ron .Id light mine too but you know itd probably blow up or something .Harry tapped Ron on the shoulder pointing at the grass .Two solitary spiders were hurrying away from the wandlight into the shade of the trees .Okay Ron sighed as though resigned to the worst Im ready .Lets go .So with Fang scampering around them sniffing tree roots and leaves they entered the forest .By the glow of Harrys wand they followed the steady trickle of spiders moving along the path .They walked behind them for about twenty minutes not speaking listening hard for noises other than breaking twigs and rustling leaves .Then when the trees had become thicker than ever so that the stars overhead were no longer visible and Harrys wand shone alone in the sea of dark they saw their spider guides leaving the path .Harry paused trying to see where the spiders were going but everything outside his little sphere of light was pitchblack .He had never been this deep into the forest before .He could vividly remember Hagrid advising him not to leave the forest path last time hed been in here .But Hagrid was miles away now probably sitting in a cell in Azkaban and he had also said to follow the spiders .Something wet touched Harrys hand and he jumped backward crushing Rons foot but it was only Fangs nose .What dyou reckon ?Harry said to Ron whose eyes he could just make out reflecting the light from his wand .Weve come this far said Ron .So they followed the darting shadows of the spiders into the trees .They couldnt move very quickly now there were tree roots and stumps in their way barely visible in the near blackness .Harry could feel Fangs hot breath on his hand .More than once they had to stop so that Harry could crouch down and find the spiders in the wandlight .They walked for what seemed like at least half an hour their robes snagging on lowslung branches and brambles .After a while they noticed that the ground seemed to be sloping downward though the trees were as thick as ever .Then Fang suddenly let loose a great echoing bark making both Harry and Ron jump out of their skins .What ?said Ron loudly looking around into the pitchdark and gripping Harrys elbow very hard .Theres something moving over there Harry breathed .Listen .sounds like something big .They listened .Some distance to their right the something big was snapping branches as it carved a path through the trees .Oh no said Ron .Oh no oh no oh Shut up said Harry frantically .Itll hear you .Hear me ?said Ron in an unnaturally high voice .Its already heard Fang !The darkness seemed to be pressing on their eyeballs as they stood terrified waiting .There was a strange rumbling noise and then silence .What dyou think its doing ?said Harry .Probably getting ready to pounce said Ron .They waited shivering hardly daring to move .Dyou think its gone ?Harry whispered .Dunno Then to their right came a sudden blaze of light so bright in the darkness that both of them flung up their hands to shield their eyes .Fang yelped and tried to run but got lodged in a tangle of thorns and yelped even louder .Harry !Ron shouted his voice breaking with relief .Harry its our car !What ?Come on !Harry blundered after Ron toward the light stumbling and tripping and a moment later they had emerged into a clearing .Mr Weasleys car was standing empty in the middle of a circle of thick trees under a roof of dense branches its headlights ablaze .As Ron walked openmouthed toward it it moved slowly toward him exactly like a large turquoise dog greeting its owner .Its been here all the time !said Ron delightedly walking around the car .Look at it .The forests turned it wild .The sides of the car were scratched and smeared with mud .Apparently it had taken to trundling around the forest on its own .Fang didnt seem at all keen on it he kept close to Harry who could feel him quivering .His breathing slowing down again Harry stuffed his wand back into his robes .And we thought it was going to attack us !said Ron leaning against the car and patting it .I wondered where it had gone !Harry squinted around on the floodlit ground for signs of more spiders but they had all scuttled away from the glare of the headlights .Weve lost the trail he said .Cmon lets go and find them .Ron didnt speak .He didnt move .His eyes were fixed on a point some ten feet above the forest floor right behind Harry .His face was livid with terror .Harry didnt even have time to turn around .There was a loud clicking noise and suddenly he felt something long and hairy seize him around the middle and lift him off the ground so that he was hanging facedown .Struggling terrified he heard more clicking and saw Rons legs leave the ground too heard Fang whimpering and howling next moment he was being swept away into the dark trees .Head hanging Harry saw that what had hold of him was marching on six immensely long hairy legs the front two clutching him tightly below a pair of shining black pincers .Behind him he could hear another of the creatures no doubt carrying Ron .They were moving into the very heart of the forest .Harry could hear Fang fighting to free himself from a third monster whining loudly but Harry couldnt have yelled even if he had wanted to he seemed to have left his voice back with the car in the clearing .He never knew how long he was in the creatures clutches he only knew that the darkness suddenly lifted enough for him to see that the leafstrewn ground was now swarming with spiders .Craning his neck sideways he realized that they had reached the ridge of a vast hollow a hollow that had been cleared of trees so that the stars shone brightly onto the worst scene he had ever laid eyes on .Spiders .Not tiny spiders like those surging over the leaves below .Spiders the size of carthorses eight eyed eightlegged black hairy gigantic .The massive specimen that was carrying Harry made its way down the steep slope toward a misty domed web in the very center of the hollow while its fellows closed in all around it clicking their pincers excitedly at the sight of its load .Harry fell to the ground on all fours as the spider released him .Ron and Fang thudded down next to him .Fang wasnt howling anymore but cowering silently on the spot .Ron looked exactly like Harry felt .His mouth was stretched wide in a kind of silent scream and his eyes were popping .Harry suddenly realized that the spider that had dropped him was saying something .It had been hard to tell because he clicked his pincers with every word he spoke .Aragog !it called .Aragog !And from the middle of the misty domed web a spider the size of a small elephant emerged very slowly .There was gray in the black of his body and legs and each of the eyes on his ugly pincered head was milky white .He was blind .What is it ?he said clicking his pincers rapidly .Men clicked the spider who had caught Harry .Is it Hagrid ?said Aragog moving closer his eight milky eyes wandering vaguely .Strangers clicked the spider who had brought Ron .Kill them clicked Aragog fretfully .I was sleeping .Were friends of Hagrid s Harry shouted .His heart seemed to have left his chest to pound in his throat .Click click click went the pincers of the spiders all around the hollow .Aragog paused .Hagrid has never sent men into our hollow before he said slowly .Hagrids in trouble said Harry breathing very fast .Thats why weve come .In trouble ?said the aged spider and Harry thought he heard concern beneath the clicking pincers .But why has he sent you ?Harry thought of getting to his feet but decided against it he didnt think his legs would support him .So he spoke from the ground as calmly as he could .They think up at the school that Hagrids been setting a a something on students .Theyve taken him to Azkaban .Aragog clicked his pincers furiously and all around the hollow the sound was echoed by the crowd of spiders it was like applause except applause didnt usually make Harry feel sick with fear .But that was years ago said Aragog fretfully .Years and years ago .I remember it well .Thats why they made him leave the school .They believed that I was the monster that dwells in what they call the Chamber of Secrets .They thought that Hagrid had opened the Chamber and set me free .And you .you didnt come from the Chamber of Secrets ?said Harry who could feel cold sweat on his forehead .I !said Aragog clicking angrily .I was not born in the castle .I come from a distant land .A traveler gave me to Hagrid when I was an egg .Hagrid was only a boy but he cared for me hidden in a cupboard in the castle feeding me on scraps from the table .Hagrid is my good friend and a good man .When I was discovered and blamed for the death of a girl he protected me .I have lived here in the forest ever since where Hagrid still visits me .He even found me a wife Mosag and you see how our family has grown all through Hagrid s goodness .Harry summoned what remained of his courage .So you never never attacked anyone ?Never croaked the old spider .It would have been my instinct but out of respect for Hagrid I never harmed a human .The body of the girl who was killed was discovered in a bathroom .I never saw any part of the castle but the cupboard in which I grew up .Our kind like the dark and the quiet .But then .Do you know what did kill that girl ?said Harry .Because whatever it is its back and attacking people again His words were drowned by a loud outbreak of clicking and the rustling of many long legs shifting angrily large black shapes shifted all around him .The thing that lives in the castle said Aragog is an ancient creature we spiders fear above all others .Well do I remember how I pleaded with Hagrid to let me go when I sensed the beast moving about the school .What is it ?said Harry urgently .More loud clicking more rustling the spiders seemed to be closing in .We do not speak of it !said Aragog fiercely .We do not name it !I never even told Hagrid the name of that dread creature though he asked me many times .Harry didnt want to press the subject not with the spiders pressing closer on all sides .Aragog seemed to be tired of talking .He was backing slowly into his domed web but his fellow spiders continued to inch slowly toward Harry and Ron .Well just go then Harry called desperately to Aragog hearing leaves rustling behind him .Go ?said Aragog slowly .I think not .But but My sons and daughters do not harm Hagrid on my command .But I cannot deny them fresh meat when it wanders so willingly into our midst .Goodbye friend of Hagrid .Harry spun around .Feet away towering above him was a solid wall of spiders clicking their many eyes gleaming in their ugly black heads .Even as he reached for his wand Harry knew it was no good there were too many of them but as he tried to stand ready to die fighting a loud long note sounded and a blaze of light flamed through the hollow .Mr Weasleys car was thundering down the slope headlights glaring its horn screeching knocking spiders aside several were thrown onto their backs their endless legs waving in the air .The car screeched to a halt in front of Harry and Ron and the doors flew open .Get Fang !Harry yelled diving into the front seat Ron seized the boarhound around the middle and threw him yelping into the back of the car the doors slammed shut Ron didnt touch the accelerator but the car didnt need him the engine roared and they were off hitting more spiders .They sped up the slope out of the hollow and they were soon crashing through the forest branches whipping the windows as the car wound its way cleverly through the widest gaps following a path it obviously knew .Harry looked sideways at Ron .His mouth was still open in the silent scream but his eyes werent popping anymore .Are you okay ?Ron stared straight ahead unable to speak .They smashed their way through the undergrowth Fang howling loudly in the back seat and Harry saw the side mirror snap off as they squeezed past a large oak .After ten noisy rocky minutes the trees thinned and Harry could again see patches of sky .The car stopped so suddenly that they were nearly thrown into the windshield .They had reached the edge of the forest .Fang flung himself at the window in his anxiety to get out and when Harry opened the door he shot off through the trees to Hagrids house tail between his legs .Harry got out too and after a minute or so Ron seemed to regain the feeling in his limbs and followed still stiffnecked and staring .Harry gave the car a grateful pat as it reversed back into the forest and disappeared from view .Harry went back into Hagrids cabin to get the Invisibility Cloak .Fang was trembling under a blanket in his basket .When Harry got outside again he found Ron being violently sick in the pumpkin patch .Follow the spiders said Ron weakly wiping his mouth on his sleeve .Ill never forgive Hagrid .Were lucky to be alive .I bet he thought Aragog wouldnt hurt friends of his said Harry .Thats exactly Hagrids problem !said Ron thumping the wall of the cabin .He always thinks monsters arent as bad as theyre made out and look where its got him !A cell in Azkaban !He was shivering uncontrollably now .What was the point of sending us in there ?What have we found out Id like to know ?That Hagrid never opened the Chamber of Secrets said Harry throwing the cloak over Ron and prodding him in the arm to make him walk .He was innocent .Ron gave a loud snort .Evidently hatching Aragog in a cupboard wasnt his idea of being innocent .As the castle loomed nearer Harry twitched the cloak to make sure their feet were hidden then pushed the creaking front doors ajar .They walked carefully back across the entrance hall and up the marble staircase holding their breath as they passed corridors where watchful sentries were walking .At last they reached the safety of the Gryffindor common room where the fire had burned itself into glowing ash .They took off the cloak and climbed the winding stair to their dormitory .Ron fell onto his bed without bothering to get undressed .Harry however didnt feel very sleepy .He sat on the edge of his fourposter thinking hard about everything Aragog had said .The creature that was lurking somewhere in the castle he thought sounded like a sort of monster Voldemort even other monsters didnt want to name it .But he and Ron were no closer to finding out what it was or how it Petrified its victims .Even Hagrid had never known what was in the Chamber of Secrets .Harry swung his legs up onto his bed and leaned back against his pillows watching the moon glinting at him through the tower window .He couldnt see what else they could do .They had hit dead ends everywhere .Riddle had caught the wrong person the Heir of Slytherin had got off and no one could tell whether it was the same person or a different one who had opened the Chamber this time .There was nobody else to ask .Harry lay down still thinking about what Aragog had said .He was becoming drowsy when what seemed like their very last hope occurred to him and he suddenly sat bolt upright .Ron he hissed through the dark Ron Ron woke with a yelp like Fangs stared wildly around and saw Harry .Ron that girl who died .Aragog said she was found in a bathroom said Harry ignoring Nevilles snuffling snores from the corner .What if she never left the bathroom ?What if shes still there ?Ron rubbed his eyes frowning through the moonlight .And then he understood too .You dont think not Moaning Myrtle ?THE CHAMBER OF SECRETS All those times we were in that bathroom and she was just three toilets away said Ron bitterly at breakfast next day and we couldve asked her and now .It had been hard enough trying to look for spiders .Escaping their teachers long enough to sneak into a girls bathroom the girls bathroom moreover right next to the scene of the first attack was going to be almost impossible .But something happened in their first lesson Transfiguration that drove the Chamber of Secrets out of their minds for the first time in weeks .Ten minutes into the class Professor McGonagall told them that their exams would start on the first of June one week from today .Exams ?howled Seamus Finnigan .Were still getting exams ?There was a loud bang behind Harry as Neville Longbottoms wand slipped vanishing one of the legs on his desk .Professor McGonagall restored it with a wave of her own wand and turned frowning to Seamus .The whole point of keeping the school open at this time is for you to receive your education she said sternly .The exams will therefore take place as usual and I trust you are all studying hard .Studying hard !It had never occurred to Harry that there would be exams with the castle in this state .There was a great deal of mutinous muttering around the room which made Professor McGonagall scowl even more darkly .Professor Dumbledores instructions were to keep the school running as normally as possible she said .And that I need hardly point out means finding out how much you have learned this year .Harry looked down at the pair of white rabbits he was supposed to be turning into slippers .What had he learned so far this year ?He couldnt seem to think of anything that would be useful in an exam .Ron looked as though hed just been told he had to go and live in the Forbidden Forest .Can you imagine me taking exams with this ?he asked Harry holding up his wand which had just started whistling loudly .Three days before their first exam Professor McGonagall made another announcement at breakfast .I have good news she said and the Great Hall instead of falling silent erupted .Dumbledores coming back !several people yelled joyfully .Youve caught the Heir of Slytherin !squealed a girl at the Ravenclaw table .Quidditch matches are back on !roared Wood excitedly .When the hubbub had subsided Professor McGonagall said Professor Sprout has informed me that the Mandrakes are ready for cutting at last .Tonight we will be able to revive those people who have been Petrified .I need hardly remind you all that one of them may well be able to tell us who or what attacked them .I am hopeful that this dreadful year will end with our catching the culprit .There was an explosion of cheering .Harry looked over at the Slytherin table and wasnt at all surprised to see that Draco Malfoy hadnt joined in .Ron however was looking happier than hed looked in days .It wont matter that we never asked Myrtle then !he said to Harry .Hermionell probably have all the answers when they wake her up !Mind you shell go crazy when she finds out weve got exams in three days time .She hasnt studied .It might be kinder to leave her where she is till theyre over .Just then Ginny Weasley came over and sat down next to Ron .She looked tense and nervous and Harry noticed that her hands were twisting in her lap .Whats up ?said Ron helping himself to more porridge .Ginny didnt say anything but glanced up and down the Gryffindor table with a scared look on her face that reminded Harry of someone though he couldnt think who .Spit it out said Ron watching her .Harry suddenly realized who Ginny looked like .She was rocking backward and forward slightly in her chair exactly like Dobby did when he was teetering on the edge of revealing forbidden information .Ive got to tell you something Ginny mumbled carefully not looking at Harry .What is it ?said Harry .Ginny looked as though she couldnt find the right words .What ?said Ron .Ginny opened her mouth but no sound came out .Harry leaned forward and spoke quietly so that only Ginny and Ron could hear him .Is it something about the Chamber of Secrets ?Have you seen something ?Someone acting oddly ?Ginny drew a deep breath and at that precise moment Percy Weasley appeared looking tired and wan .If youve finished eating Ill take that seat Ginny .Im starving Ive only just come off patrol duty .Ginny jumped up as though her chair had just been electrified gave Percy a fleeting frightened look and scampered away .Percy sat down and grabbed a mug from the center of the table .Percy !said Ron angrily .She was just about to tell us something important !Halfway through a gulp of tea Percy choked .What sort of thing ?he said coughing .I just asked her if shed seen anything odd and she started to say Oh that thats nothing to do with the Chamber of Secrets said Percy at once .How do you know ?said Ron his eyebrows raised .Well er if you must know Ginny er walked in on me the other day when I was well never mind the point is she spotted me doing something and I um I asked her not to mention it to anybody .I must say I did think shed keep her word .Its nothing really Id just rather Harry had never seen Percy look so uncomfortable .What were you doing Percy ?said Ron grinning .Go on tell us we wont laugh .Percy didnt smile back .Pass me those rolls Harry Im starving .Harry knew the whole mystery might be solved tomorrow without their help but he wasnt about to pass up a chance to speak to Myrtle if it turned up and to his delight it did midmorning when they were being led to History of Magic by Gilderoy Lockhart .Lockhart who had so often assured them that all danger had passed only to be proved wrong right away was now wholeheartedly convinced that it was hardly worth the trouble to see them safely down the corridors .His hair wasnt as sleek as usual it seemed he had been up most of the night patrolling the fourth floor .Mark my words he said ushering them around a corner .The first words out of those poor Petrified peoples mouths will be ‘It was Hagrid .Frankly Im astounded Professor McGonagall thinks all these security measures are necessary .I agree sir said Harry making Ron drop his books in surprise .Thank you Harry said Lockhart graciously while they waited for a long line of Hufflepuffs to pass .I mean we teachers have quite enough to be getting on with without walking students to classes and standing guard all night .Thats right said Ron catching on .Why dont you leave us here sir weve only got one more corridor to go You know Weasley I think I will said Lockhart .I really should go and prepare my next class And he hurried off .Prepare his class Ron sneered after him .Gone to curl his hair more like .They let the rest of the Gryffindors draw ahead of them then darted down a side passage and hurried off toward Moaning Myrtles bathroom .But just as they were congratulating each other on their brilliant scheme Potter !Weasley !What are you doing ?It was Professor McGonagall and her mouth was the thinnest of thin lines .We were we were Ron stammered .We were going to to go and see Hermione said Harry .Ron and Professor McGonagall both looked at him .We havent seen her for ages Professor Harry went on hurriedly treading on Rons foot and we thought wed sneak into the hospital wing you know and tell her the Mandrakes are nearly ready and er not to worry Professor McGonagall was still staring at him and for a moment Harry thought she was going to explode but when she spoke it was in a strangely croaky voice .Of course she said and Harry amazed saw a tear glistening in her beady eye .Of course I realize this has all been hardest on the friends of those who have been .I quite understand .Yes Potter of course you may visit Miss Granger .I will inform Professor Binns where youve gone .Tell Madam Pomfrey I have given my permission .Harry and Ron walked away hardly daring to believe that theyd avoided detention .As they turned the corner they distinctly heard Professor McGonagall blow her nose .That said Ron fervently was the best story youve ever come up with .They had no choice now but to go to the hospital wing and tell Madam Pomfrey that they had Professor McGonagalls permission to visit Hermione .Madam Pomfrey let them in but reluctantly .Theres just no point talking to a Petrified person she said and they had to admit she had a point when theyd taken their seats next to Hermione .It was plain that Hermione didnt have the faintest inkling that she had visitors and that they might just as well tell her bedside cabinet not to worry for all the good it would do .Wonder if she did see the attacker though ?said Ron looking sadly at Hermione s rigid face .Because if he sneaked up on them all no onell ever know .But Harry wasnt looking at Hermiones face .He was more interested in her right hand .It lay clenched on top of her blankets and bending closer he saw that a piece of paper was scrunched inside her fist .Making sure that Madam Pomfrey was nowhere near he pointed this out to Ron .Try and get it out Ron whispered shifting his chair so that he blocked Harry from Madam Pomfreys view .It was no easy task .Hermiones hand was clamped so tightly around the paper that Harry was sure he was going to tear it .While Ron kept watch he tugged and twisted and at last after several tense minutes the paper came free .It was a page torn from a very old library book .Harry smoothed it out eagerly and Ron leaned close to read it too .Of the many fearsome beasts and monsters that roam our land there is none more curious or more deadly than the Basilisk known also as the King of Serpents .This snake which may reach gigantic size and live many hundreds of years is born from a chickens egg hatched beneath a toad .Its methods of killing are most wondrous for aside from its deadly and venomous fangs the Basilisk has a murderous stare and all who are fixed with the beam of its eye shall suffer instant death .Spiders flee before the Basilisk for it is their mortal enemy and the Basilisk flees only from the crowing of the rooster which is fatal to it .And beneath this a single word had been written in a hand Harry recognized as Hermiones .Pipes .It was as though somebody had just flicked a light on in his brain .Ron he breathed .This is it .This is the answer .The monster in the Chambers a basilisk a giant serpent !Thats why Ive been hearing that voice all over the place and nobody else has heard it .Its because I understand Parseltongue .Harry looked up at the beds around him .The basilisk kills people by looking at them .But no ones died because no one looked it straight in the eye .Colin saw it through his camera .The basilisk burned up all the film inside it but Colin just got Petrified .Justin .Justin mustve seen the basilisk through Nearly Headless Nick !Nick got the full blast of it but he couldnt die again .and Hermione and that Ravenclaw prefect were found with a mirror next to them .Hermione had just realized the monster was a basilisk .I bet you anything she warned the first person she met to look around corners with a mirror first !And that girl pulled out her mirror and Rons jaw had dropped .And Mrs Norris ?he whispered eagerly .Harry thought hard picturing the scene on the night of Halloween .The water .he said slowly .The flood from Moaning Myrtles bathroom .I bet you Mrs Norris only saw the reflection .He scanned the page in his hand eagerly .The more he looked at it the more it made sense . .The crowing of the rooster .is fatal to if !he read aloud .Hagrids roosters were killed !The Heir of Slytherin didnt want one anywhere near the castle once the Chamber was opened !Spiders flee before it It all fits !But hows the basilisk been getting around the place ?said Ron .A giant snake .Someone wouldve seen .Harry however pointed at the word Hermione had scribbled at the foot of the page .Pipes he said .Pipes .Ron its been using the plumbing .Ive been hearing that voice inside the walls .Ron suddenly grabbed Harrys arm .The entrance to the Chamber of Secrets !he said hoarsely .What if its a bathroom ?What if its in Moaning Myrtles bathroom said Harry .They sat there excitement coursing through them hardly able to believe it .This means said Harry I cant be the only Parselmouth in the school .The Heir of Slytherins one too .Thats how hes been controlling the basilisk .Whatre we going to do ?said Ron whose eyes were flashing .Should we go straight to McGonagall ?Lets go to the staffroom said Harry jumping up .Shell be there in ten minutes .Its nearly break .They ran downstairs .Not wanting to be discovered hanging around in another corridor they went straight into the deserted staffroom .It was a large paneled room full of dark wooden chairs .Harry and Ron paced around it too excited to sit down .But the bell to signal break never came .Instead echoing through the corridors came Professor McGonagalls voice magically magnified .All students to return to their House dormitories at once .All teachers return to the staffroom .Immediately please .Harry wheeled around to stare at Ron .Not another attack ?Not now ?Whatll we do ?said Ron aghast .Go back to the dormitory ?No said Harry glancing around .There was an ugly sort of wardrobe to his left full of the teachers cloaks .In here .Lets hear what its all about .Then we can tell them what weve found out .They hid themselves inside it listening to the rumbling of hundreds of people moving overhead and the staffroom door banging open .From between the musty folds of the cloaks they watched the teachers filtering into the room .Some of them were looking puzzled others downright scared .Then Professor McGonagall arrived .It has happened she told the silent staffroom .A student has been taken by the monster .Right into the Chamber itself .Professor Flitwick let out a squeal .Professor Sprout clapped her hands over her mouth .Snape gripped the back of a chair very hard and said How can you be sure ?The Heir of Slytherin said Professor McGonagall who was very white left another message .Right underneath the first one . ‘Her skeleton will lie in the Chamber forever .Professor Flitwick burst into tears .Who is it ?said Madam Hooch who had sunk weak kneed into a chair .Which student ?Ginny Weasley said Professor McGonagall .Harry felt Ron slide silently down onto the wardrobe floor beside him .We shall have to send all the students home tomorrow said Professor McGonagall .This is the end of Hogwarts .Dumbledore always said .The staffroom door banged open again .For one wild moment Harry was sure it would be Dumbledore .But it was Lockhart and he was beaming .So sorry dozed off what have I missed ?He didnt seem to notice that the other teachers were looking at him with something remarkably like hatred .Snape stepped forward .Just the man he said .The very man .A girl has been snatched by the monster Lockhart .Taken into the Chamber of Secrets itself .Your moment has come at last .Lockhart blanched .Thats right Gilderoy chipped in Professor Sprout .Werent you saying just last night that youve known all along where the entrance to the Chamber of Secrets is ?I well I sputtered Lockhart .Yes didnt you tell me you were sure you knew what was inside it ?piped up Professor Flitwick .Ddid I ?I dont recall I certainly remember you saying you were sorry you hadnt had a crack at the monster before Hagrid was arrested said Snape .Didnt you say that the whole affair had been bungled and that you should have been given a free rein from the first ?Lockhart stared around at his stonyfaced colleagues .I I really never you may have misunderstood Well leave it to you then Gilderoy said Professor McGonagall .Tonight will be an excellent time to do it .Well make sure everyones out of your way .Youll be able to tackle the monster all by yourself .A free rein at last .Lockhart gazed desperately around him but nobody came to the rescue .He didnt look remotely handsome anymore .His lip was trembling and in the absence of his usually toothy grin he looked weakchinned and feeble .Vvery well he said .Ill Ill be in my office getting getting ready .And he left the room .Right said Professor McGonagall whose nostrils were flared thats got him out from under our feet .The Heads of Houses should go and inform their students what has happened .Tell them the Hogwarts Express will take them home first thing tomorrow .Will the rest of you please make sure no students have been left outside their dormitories .The teachers rose and left one by one .It was probably the worst day of Harrys entire life .He Ron Fred and George sat together in a corner of the Gryffindor common room unable to say anything to each other .Percy wasnt there .He had gone to send an owl to Mr and Mrs Weasley then shut himself up in his dormitory .No afternoon ever lasted as long as that one nor had Gryffindor Tower ever been so crowded yet so quiet .Near sunset Fred and George went up to bed unable to sit there any longer .She knew something Harry said Ron speaking for the first time since they had entered the wardrobe in the staffroom .Thats why she was taken .It wasnt some stupid thing about Percy at all .Shed found out something about the Chamber of Secrets .That must be why she was Ron rubbed his eyes frantically .I mean she was a pureblood .There cant be any other reason .Harry could see the sun sinking bloodred below the skyline .This was the worst he had ever felt .If only there was something they could do .Anything .Harry said Ron .Dyou think theres any chance at all shes not you know Harry didnt know what to say .He couldnt see how Ginny could still be alive .Dyou know what ?said Ron .I think we should go and see Lockhart .Tell him what we know .Hes going to try and get into the Chamber .We can tell him where we think it is and tell him its a basilisk in there .Because Harry couldnt think of anything else to do and because he wanted to be doing something he agreed .The Gryffindors around them were so miserable and felt so sorry for the Weasleys that nobody tried to stop them as they got up crossed the room and left through the portrait hole .Darkness was falling as they walked down to Lockharts office .There seemed to be a lot of activity going on inside it .They could hear scraping thumps and hurried footsteps .Harry knocked and there was a sudden silence from inside .Then the door opened the tiniest crack and they saw one of Lockharts eyes peering through it .Oh Mr Potter Mr Weasley he said opening the door a bit wider .Im rather busy at the moment if you would be quick Professor weve got some information for you said Harry .We think itll help you .Er well its not terribly The side of Lockharts face that they could see looked very uncomfortable .I mean well all right He opened the door and they entered .His office had been almost completely stripped .Two large trunks stood open on the floor .Robes jade green lilac midnightblue had been hastily folded into one of them books were jumbled untidily into the other .The photographs that had covered the walls were now crammed into boxes on the desk .Are you going somewhere ?said Harry .Er well yes said Lockhart ripping a lifesize poster of himself from the back of the door as he spoke and starting to roll it up .Urgent call unavoidable got to go What about my sister ?said Ron jerkily .Well as to that most unfortunate said Lockhart avoiding their eyes as he wrenched open a drawer and started emptying the contents into a bag .No one regrets more than I Youre the Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher !said Harry .You cant go now !Not with all the Dark stuff going on here !Well I must say when I took the job Lockhart muttered now piling socks on top of his robes nothing in the job description didnt expect You mean youre running away ?said Harry disbelievingly .After all that stuff you did in your books Books can be misleading said Lockhart delicately .You wrote them !Harry shouted .My dear boy said Lockhart straightening up and frowning at Harry .Do use your common sense .My books wouldnt have sold half as well if people didnt think Id done all those things .No one wants to read about some ugly old Armenian warlock even if he did save a village from werewolves .Hed look dreadful on the front cover .No dress sense at all .And the witch who banished the Bandon Banshee had a hairy chin .I mean come on So youve just been taking credit for what a load of other people have done ?said Harry incredulously .Harry Harry said Lockhart shaking his head impatiently its not nearly as simple as that .There was work involved .I had to track these people down .Ask them exactly how they managed to do what they did .Then I had to put a Memory Charm on them so they wouldnt remember doing it .If theres one thing I pride myself on its my Memory Charms .No its been a lot of work Harry .Its not all book signings and publicity photos you know .You want fame you have to be prepared for a long hard slog .He banged the lids of his trunks shut and locked them .Lets see he said .I think thats everything .Yes .Only one thing left .He pulled out his wand and turned to them .Awfully sorry boys but Ill have to put a Memory Charm on you now .Cant have you blabbing my secrets all over the place .Id never sell another book Harry reached his wand just in time .Lockhart had barely raised his when Harry bellowed Expelliarmus Lockhart was blasted backward falling over his trunk his wand flew high into the air Ron caught it and flung it out of the open window .Shouldnt have let Professor Snape teach us that one said Harry furiously kicking Lockharts trunk aside .Lockhart was looking up at him feeble once more .Harry was still pointing his wand at him .What dyou want me to do ?said Lockhart weakly .I dont know where the Chamber of Secrets is .Theres nothing I can do .Youre in luck said Harry forcing Lockhart to his feet at wandpoint .We think we know where it is .And whats inside it .Lets go .They marched Lockhart out of his office and down the nearest stairs along the dark corridor where the messages shone on the wall to the door of Moaning Myrtles bathroom .They sent Lockhart in first .Harry was pleased to see that he was shaking .Moaning Myrtle was sitting on the tank of the end toilet .Oh its you she said when she saw Harry .What do you want this time ?To ask you how you died said Harry .Myrtles whole aspect changed at once .She looked as though she had never been asked such a flattering question .Ooooh it was dreadful she said with relish .It happened right in here .I died in this very stall .I remember it so well .Id hidden because Olive Hornby was teasing me about my glasses .The door was locked and I was crying and then I heard somebody come in .They said something funny .A different language I think it must have been .Anyway what really got me was that it was a boy speaking .So I unlocked the door to tell him to go and use his own toilet and then Myrtle swelled importantly her face shining .I died .How ?said Harry .No idea said Myrtle in hushed tones .I just remember seeing a pair of great big yellow eyes .My whole body sort of seized up and then I was floating away .She looked dreamily at Harry .And then I came back again .I was determined to haunt Olive Hornby you see .Oh she was sorry shed ever laughed at my glasses .Where exactly did you see the eyes ?said Harry .Somewhere there said Myrtle pointing vaguely toward the sink in front of her toilet .Harry and Ron hurried over to it .Lockhart was standing well back a look of utter terror on his face .It looked like an ordinary sink .They examined every inch of it inside and out including the pipes below .And then Harry saw it Scratched on the side of one of the copper taps was a tiny snake .That taps never worked said Myrtle brightly as he tried to turn it .Harry said Ron .Say something .Something in Parseltongue .But Harry thought hard .The only times hed ever managed to speak Parseltongue were when hed been faced with a real snake .He stared hard at the tiny engraving trying to imagine it was real .Open up he said .He looked at Ron who shook his head .English he said .Harry looked back at the snake willing himself to believe it was alive .If he moved his head the candlelight made it look as though it were moving .Open up he said .Except that the words werent what he heard a strange hissing had escaped him and at once the tap glowed with a brilliant white light and began to spin .Next second the sink began to move the sink in fact sank right out of sight leaving a large pipe exposed a pipe wide enough for a man to slide into .Harry heard Ron gasp and looked up again .He had made up his mind what he was going to do .Im going down there he said .He couldnt not go not now they had found the entrance to the Chamber not if there was even the faintest slimmest wildest chance that Ginny might be alive .Me too said Ron .There was a pause .Well you hardly seem to need me said Lockhart with a shadow of his old smile .Ill just He put his hand on the door knob but Ron and Harry both pointed their wands at him .You can go first Ron snarled .Whitefaced and wandless Lockhart approached the opening .Boys he said his voice feeble .Boys what good will it do ?Harry jabbed him in the back with his wand .Lockhart slid his legs into the pipe .I really dont think he started to say but Ron gave him a push and he slid out of sight .Harry followed quickly .He lowered himself slowly into the pipe then let go .It was like rushing down an endless slimy dark slide .He could see more pipes branching off in all directions but none as large as theirs which twisted and turned sloping steeply downward and he knew that he was falling deeper below the school than even the dungeons .Behind him he could hear Ron thudding slightly at the curves .And then just as he had begun to worry about what would happen when he hit the ground the pipe leveled out and he shot out of the end with a wet thud landing on the damp floor of a dark stone tunnel large enough to stand in .Lockhart was getting to his feet a little ways away covered in slime and white as a ghost .Harry stood aside as Ron came whizzing out of the pipe too .We must be miles under the school said Harry his voice echoing in the black tunnel .Under the lake probably said Ron squinting around at the dark slimy walls .All three of them turned to stare into the darkness ahead .Lumosl Harry muttered to his wand and it lit again .Cmon he said to Ron and Lockhart and off they went their footsteps slapping loudly on the wet floor .The tunnel was so dark that they could only see a little distance ahead .Their shadows on the wet walls looked monstrous in the wandlight .Remember Harry said quietly as they walked cautiously forward any sign of movement close your eyes right away .But the tunnel was quiet as the grave and the first unexpected sound they heard was a loud crunch as Ron stepped on what turned out to be a rats skull .Harry lowered his wand to look at the floor and saw that it was littered with small animal bones .Trying very hard not to imagine what Ginny might look like if they found her Harry led the way forward around a dark bend in the tunnel .Harry theres something up there said Ron hoarsely grabbing Harrys shoulder .They froze watching .Harry could just see the outline of something huge and curved lying right across the tunnel .It wasnt moving .Maybe its asleep he breathed glancing back at the other two .Lockharts hands were pressed over his eyes .Harry turned back to look at the thing his heart beating so fast it hurt .Very slowly his eyes as narrow as he could make them and still see Harry edged forward his wand held high .The light slid over a gigantic snake skin of a vivid poisonous green lying curled and empty across the tunnel floor .The creature that had shed it must have been twenty feet long at least .Blimey said Ron weakly .There was a sudden movement behind them .Gilderoy Lockharts knees had given way .Get up said Ron sharply pointing his wand at Lockhart .Lockhart got to his feet then he dived at Ron knocking him to the ground .Harry jumped forward but too late Lockhart was straightening up panting Rons wand in his hand and a gleaming smile back on his face .The adventure ends here boys !he said .I shall take a bit of this skin back up to the school tell them I was too late to save the girl and that you two tragically lost your minds at the sight of her mangled body say goodbye to your memories !He raised Rons Spellotaped wand high over his head and yelled Obliviatel The wand exploded with the force of a small bomb .Harry flung his arms over his head and ran slipping over the coils of snake skin out of the way of great chunks of tunnel ceiling that were thundering to the floor .Next moment he was standing alone gazing at a solid wall of broken rock .Ron !he shouted .Are you okay ?Ron !Im here !came Rons muffled voice from behind the rockfall .Im okay this gits not though he got blasted by the wand There was a dull thud and a loud ow !It sounded as though Ron had just kicked Lockhart in the shins .What now ?Rons voice said sounding desperate .We cant get through itll take ages .Harry looked up at the tunnel ceiling .Huge cracks had appeared in it .He had never tried to break apart anything as large as these rocks by magic and now didnt seem a good moment to try what if the whole tunnel caved in ?There was another thud and another ow !from behind the rocks .They were wasting time .Ginny had already been in the Chamber of Secrets for hours .Harry knew there was only one thing to do .Wait there he called to Ron .Wait with Lockhart .Ill go on .If Im not back in an hour .There was a very pregnant pause .Ill try and shift some of this rock said Ron who seemed to be trying to keep his voice steady .So you can can get back through .And Harry See you in a bit said Harry trying to inject some confidence into his shaking voice .And he set off alone past the giant snake skin .Soon the distant noise of Ron straining to shift the rocks was gone .The tunnel turned and turned again .Every nerve in Harrys body was tingling unpleasantly .He wanted the tunnel to end yet dreaded what hed find when it did .And then at last as he crept around yet another bend he saw a solid wall ahead on which two entwined serpents were carved their eyes set with great glinting emeralds .Harry approached his throat very dry .There was no need to pretend these stone snakes were real their eyes looked strangely alive .He could guess what he had to do .He cleared his throat and the emerald eyes seemed to flicker .Open said Harry in a low faint hiss .The serpents parted as the wall cracked open the halves slid smoothly out of sight and Harry shaking from head to foot walked inside .THE HEIR OF SLYTHERIN He was standing at the end of a very long dimly lit chamber .Towering stone pillars entwined with more carved serpents rose to support a ceiling lost in darkness casting long black shadows through the odd greenish gloom that filled the place .His heart beating very fast Harry stood listening to the chill silence .Could the basilisk be lurking in a shadowy corner behind a pillar ?And where was Ginny ?He pulled out his wand and moved forward between the serpentine columns .Every careful footstep echoed loudly off the shadowy walls .He kept his eyes narrowed ready to clamp them shut at the smallest sign of movement .The hollow eye sockets of the stone snakes seemed to be following him .More than once with a jolt of the stomach he thought he saw one stir .Then as he drew level with the last pair of pillars a statue high as the Chamber itself loomed into view standing against the back wall .Harry had to crane his neck to look up into the giant face above It was ancient and monkeyish with a long thin beard that fell almost to the bottom of the wizards sweeping stone robes where two enormous gray feet stood on the smooth Chamber floor .And between the feet facedown lay a small blackrobed figure with flamingred hair .Ginnyl Harry muttered sprinting to her and dropping to his knees .Ginny dont be dead please dont be dead He flung his wand aside grabbed Ginnys shoulders and turned her over .Her face was white as marble and as cold yet her eyes were closed so she wasnt Petrified .But then she must be Ginny please wake up Harry muttered desperately shaking her .Ginnys head lolled hopelessly from side to side .She wont wake said a soft voice .Harry jumped and spun around on his knees .A tall blackhaired boy was leaning against the nearest pillar watching .He was strangely blurred around the edges as though Harry were looking at him through a misted window .But there was no mistaking him Tom Tom Riddle ?Riddle nodded not taking his eyes off Harrys face .What dyou mean she wont wake ?Harry said desperately .Shes not shes not ?Shes still alive said Riddle .But only just .Harry stared at him .Tom Riddle had been at Hogwarts fifty years ago yet here he stood a weird misty light shining about him not a day older than sixteen .Are you a ghost ?Harry said uncertainly .A memory said Riddle quietly .Preserved in a diary for fifty years .He pointed toward the floor near the statues giant toes .Lying open there was the little black diary Harry had found in Moaning Myrtles bathroom .For a second Harry wondered how it had got there but there were more pressing matters to deal with .Youve got to help me Tom Harry said raising Ginnys head again .Weve got to get her out of here .Theres a basilisk .I dont know where it is but it could be along any moment .Please help me Riddle didnt move .Harry sweating managed to hoist Ginny half off the floor and bent to pick up his wand again .But his wand had gone .Did you see ?He looked up .Riddle was still watching him twirling Harrys wand between his long fingers .Thanks said Harry stretching out his hand for it .A smile curled the corners of Riddles mouth .He continued to stare at Harry twirling the wand idly .Listen said Harry urgently his knees sagging with Ginnys dead weight .Weve got to go If the basilisk comes It wont come until it is called said Riddle calmly .Harry lowered Ginny back onto the floor unable to hold her up any longer .What dyou mean ?he said .Look give me my wand I might need it Riddles smile broadened .You wont be needing it he said .Harry stared at him .What dyou mean I wont be ?Ive waited a long time for this Harry Potter said Riddle .For the chance to see you .To speak to you .Look said Harry losing patience I dont think you get it .Were in the Chamber of Secrets .We can talk later Were going to talk now said Riddle still smiling broadly and he pocketed Harrys wand .Harry stared at him .There was something very funny going on here .How did Ginny get like this ?he asked slowly .Well thats an interesting question said Riddle pleasantly .And quite a long story .I suppose the real reason Ginny Weasleys like this is because she opened her heart and spilled all her secrets to an invisible stranger .What are you talking about ?said Harry .The diary said Riddle .My diary .Little Ginnys been writing in it for months and months telling me all her pitiful worries and woes how her brothers tease her how she had to come to school with secondhand robes and books how Riddles eyes glinted how she didnt think famous good great Harry Potter would ever like her .All the time he spoke Riddles eyes never left Harrys face .There was an almost hungry look in them .Its very boring having to listen to the silly little troubles of an elevenyearold girl he went on .But I was patient .I wrote back .I was sympathetic I was kind .Ginny simply loved me .No ones ever understood me like you Tom .Im so glad Ive got this diary to confide in .Its like having a friend I can carry around in my pocket .Riddle laughed a high cold laugh that didnt suit him .It made the hairs stand up on the back of Harrys neck .If I say it myself Harry Ive always been able to charm the people I needed .So Ginny poured out her soul to me and her soul happened to be exactly what I wanted .I grew stronger and stronger on a diet of her deepest fears her darkest secrets .I grew powerful far more powerful than little Miss Weasley .Powerful enough to start feeding Miss Weasley a few of my secrets to start pouring a little of my soul back into her .What dyou mean ?said Harry whose mouth had gone very dry .Havent you guessed yet Harry Potter ?said Riddle softly .Ginny Weasley opened the Chamber of Secrets .She strangled the school roosters and daubed threatening messages on the walls .She set the Serpent of Slytherin on four Mudbloods and the Squibs cat .No Harry whispered .Yes said Riddle calmly .Of course she didnt know what she was doing at first .It was very amusing .I wish you could have seen her new diary entries .far more interesting they became .Dear Tom he recited watching Harrys horrified face 7 think Im losing my memory .There are rooster feathers all over my robes and I dont know how they got there .Dear Tom I cant remember what I did on the night of Halloween but a cat was attacked and Ive got paint all down my front .Dear Tom Percy keeps telling me Im pale and Im not myself .I think he suspects me .There was another attack today and I dont know where I was .Tom what am I going to do ?I think Im going mad .I think Im the one attacking everyone Tom Harrys fists were clenched the nails digging deep into his palms .It took a very long time for stupid little Ginny to stop trusting her diary said Riddle .But she finally became suspicious and tried to dispose of it .And thats where you came in Harry .You found it and I couldnt have been more delighted .Of all the people who could have picked it up it was you the very person I was most anxious to meet .And why did you want to meet me ?said Harry .Anger was coursing through him and it was an effort to keep his voice steady .Well you see Ginny told me all about you Harry said Riddle .Your whole fascinating history .His eyes roved over the lightning scar on Harrys forehead and their expression grew hungrier .I knew I must find out more about you talk to you meet you if I could .So I decided to show you my famous capture of that great oaf Hagrid to gain your trust Hagrids my friend said Harry his voice now shaking .And you framed him didnt you ?I thought you made a mistake but Riddle laughed his high laugh again .It was my word against Hagrids Harry .Well you can imagine how it looked to old Armando Dippet .On the one hand Tom Riddle poor but brilliant parentless but so brave school prefect model student .on the other hand big blundering Hagrid in trouble every other week trying to raise werewolf cubs under his bed sneaking off to the Forbidden Forest to wrestle trolls .but I admit even was surprised how well the plan worked .I thought someone must realize that Hagrid couldnt possibly be the Heir of Slytherin .It had taken me five whole years to find out everything I could about the Chamber of Secrets and discover the secret entrance .as though Hagrid had the brains or the power !Only the Transfiguration teacher Dumbledore seemed to think Hagrid was innocent .He persuaded Dippet to keep Hagrid and train him as gamekeeper .Yes I think Dumbledore might have guessed .Dumbledore never seemed to like me as much as the other teachers did .I bet Dumbledore saw right through you said Harry his teeth gritted .Well he certainly kept an annoyingly close watch on me after Hagrid was expelled said Riddle carelessly .I knew it wouldnt be safe to open the Chamber again while I was still at school .But I wasnt going to waste those long years Id spent searching for it .I decided to leave behind a diary preserving my sixteenyearold self in its pages so that one day with luck I would be able to lead another in my footsteps and finish Salazar Slytherins noble work .Well you havent finished it said Harry triumphantly .No ones died this time not even the cat .In a few hours the Mandrake Draught will be ready and everyone who was Petrified will be all right again Havent I already told you said Riddle quietly that killing Mudbloods doesnt matter to me anymore ?For many months now my new target has been you .Harry stared at him .Imagine how angry I was when the next time my diary was opened it was Ginny who was writing to me not you .She saw you with the diary you see and panicked .What if you found out how to work it and I repeated all her secrets to you ?What if even worse I told you whod been strangling roosters ?So the foolish little brat waited until your dormitory was deserted and stole it back .But I knew what I must do .It was clear to me that you were on the trail of Slytherins heir .From everything Ginny had told me about you I knew you would go to any lengths to solve the mystery particularly if one of your best friends was attacked .And Ginny had told me the whole school was buzzing because you could speak Parseltongue .So I made Ginny write her own farewell on the wall and come down here to wait .She struggled and cried and became very boring .But there isnt much life left in her .She put too much into the diary into me .Enough to let me leave its pages at last .I have been waiting for you to appear since we arrived here .I knew youd come .I have many questions for you Harry Potter .Like what ?Harry spat fists still clenched .Well said Riddle smiling pleasantly how is it that you a skinny boy with no extraordinary magical talent managed to defeat the greatest wizard of all time ?How did you escape with nothing but a scar while Lord Voldemorts powers were destroyed ?There was an odd red gleam in his hungry eyes now .Why do you care how I escaped ?said Harry slowly .Voldemort was after your time .Voldemort said Riddle softly is my past present and future Harry Potter .He pulled Harrys wand from his pocket and began to trace it through the air writing three shimmering words tom marvolo riddle Then he waved the wand once and the letters of his name rearranged themselves i am lord voldemort You see ?he whispered .It was a name I was already using at Hogwarts to my most intimate friends only of course .You think I was going to use my filthy Muggle fathers name forever ?I in whose veins runs the blood of Salazar Slytherin himself through my mothers side ?I keep the name of a foul common Muggle who abandoned me even before I was born just because he found out his wife was a witch ?No Harry I fashioned myself a new name a name I knew wizards everywhere would one day fear to speak when I had become the greatest sorcerer in the world !Harrys brain seemed to have jammed .He stared numbly at Riddle at the orphaned boy who had grown up to murder Harrys own parents and so many others .At last he forced himself to speak .Youre not he said his quiet voice full of hatred .Not what ?snapped Riddle .Not the greatest sorcerer in the world said Harry breathing fast .Sorry to disappoint you and all that but the greatest wizard in the world is Albus Dumbledore .Everyone says so .Even when you were strong you didnt dare try and take over at Hogwarts .Dumbledore saw through you when you were at school and he still frightens you now wherever youre hiding these days The smile had gone from Riddles face to be replaced by a very ugly look .Dumbledore s been driven out of this castle by the mere memory of me !he hissed .Hes not as gone as you might think !Harry retorted .He was speaking at random wanting to scare Riddle wishing rather than believing it to be true Riddle opened his mouth but froze .Music was coming from somewhere .Riddle whirled around to stare down the empty Chamber .The music was growing louder .It was eerie spinetingling unearthly it lifted the hair on Harrys scalp and made his heart feel as though it was swelling to twice its normal size .Then as the music reached such a pitch that Harry felt it vibrating inside his own ribs flames erupted at the top of the nearest pillar .A crimson bird the size of a swan had appeared piping its weird music to the vaulted ceiling .It had a glittering golden tail as long as a peacocks and gleaming golden talons which were gripping a ragged bundle .A second later the bird was flying straight at Harry .It dropped the ragged thing it was carrying at his feet then landed heavily on his shoulder .As it folded its great wings Harry looked up and saw it had a long sharp golden beak and a beady black eye .The bird stopped singing .It sat still and warm next to Harrys cheek gazing steadily at Riddle .Thats a phoenix .said Riddle staring shrewdly back at it .Fawkes ?Harry breathed and he felt the birds golden claws squeeze his shoulder gently .And that said Riddle now eyeing the ragged thing that Fawkes had dropped thats the old school Sorting Hat So it was .Patched frayed and dirty the hat lay motionless at Harrys feet .Riddle began to laugh again .He laughed so hard that the dark Chamber rang with it as though ten Riddles were laughing at once This is what Dumbledore sends his defender !A songbird and an old hat !Do you feel brave Harry Potter ?Do you feel safe now ?Harry didnt answer .He might not see what use Fawkes or the Sorting Hat were but he was no longer alone and he waited for Riddle to stop laughing with his courage mounting .To business Harry said Riddle still smiling broadly .Twice in your past in my future we have met .And twice I failed to kill you .How did you survive ?Tell me everything .The longer you talk he added softly the longer you stay alive .Harry was thinking fast weighing his chances .Riddle had the wand .He Harry had Fawkes and the Sorting Hat neither of which would be much good in a duel .It looked bad all right .but the longer Riddle stood there the more life was dwindling out of Ginny .and in the meantime Harry noticed suddenly Riddles outline was becoming clearer more solid .If it had to be a fight between him and Riddle better sooner than later .No one knows why you lost your powers when you attacked me said Harry abruptly .I dont know myself .But I know why you couldnt kill me .Because my mother died to save me .My common Muggleborn mother he added shaking with suppressed rage .She stopped you killing me .And Ive seen the real you I saw you last year .Youre a wreck .Youre barely alive .Thats where all your power got you .Youre in hiding .Youre ugly youre foul Riddles face contorted .Then he forced it into an awful smile .So .Your mother died to save you .Yes thats a powerful countercharm .I can see now .there is nothing special about you after all .I wondered you see .There are strange likenesses between us after all .Even you must have noticed .Both halfbloods orphans raised by Muggles .Probably the only two Parselmouths to come to Hogwarts since the great Slytherin himself .We even look something alike .but after all it was merely a lucky chance that saved you from me .Thats all I wanted to know .Harry stood tense waiting for Riddle to raise his wand .But Riddles twisted smile was widening again .Now Harry Im going to teach you a little lesson .Lets match the powers of Lord Voldemort Heir of Salazar Slytherin against famous Harry Potter and the best weapons Dumbledore can give him .He cast an amused eye over Fawkes and the Sorting Hat then walked away .Harry fear spreading up his numb legs watched Riddle stop between the high pillars and look up into the stone face of Slytherin high above him in the halfdarkness .Riddle opened his mouth wide and hissed but Harry understood what he was saying .Speak to me Slytherin greatest of the Hogwarts Four .Harry wheeled around to look up at the statue Fawkes swaying on his shoulder .Slytherins gigantic stone face was moving .Horrorstruck Harry saw his mouth opening wider and wider to make a huge black hole .And something was stirring inside the statues mouth .Something was slithering up from its depths .Harry backed away until he hit the dark Chamber wall and as he shut his eyes tight he felt Fawkes wing sweep his cheek as he took flight .Harry wanted to shout Dont leave me !but what chance did a phoenix have against the king of serpents ?Something huge hit the stone floor of the Chamber .Harry felt it shudder he knew what was happening he could sense it could almost see the giant serpent uncoiling itself from Slytherins mouth .Then he heard Riddles hissing voice Kill him .The basilisk was moving toward Harry he could hear its heavy body slithering heavily across the dusty floor .Eyes still tightly shut Harry began to run blindly sideways his hands outstretched feeling his way Voldemort was laughing Harry tripped .He fell hard onto the stone and tasted blood the serpent was barely feet from him he could hear it coming There was a loud explosive spitting sound right above him and then something heavy hit Harry so hard that he was smashed into the wall .Waiting for fangs to sink through his body he heard more mad hissing something thrashing wildly off the pillars He couldnt help it he opened his eyes wide enough to squint at what was going on .The enormous serpent bright poisonous green thick as an oak trunk had raised itself high in the air and its great blunt head was weaving drunkenly between the pillars .As Harry trembled ready to close his eyes if it turned he saw what had distracted the snake .Fawkes was soaring around its head and the basilisk was snapping furiously at him with fangs long and thin as sabers Fawkes dived .His long golden beak sank out of sight and a sudden shower of dark blood spattered the floor .The snakes tail thrashed narrowly missing Harry and before Harry could shut his eyes it turned Harry looked straight into its face and saw that its eyes both its great bulbous yellow eyes had been punctured by the phoenix blood was streaming to the floor and the snake was spitting in agony .NO !Harry heard Riddle screaming .LEAVE THE BIRD !LEAVE THE BIRD !THE BOY IS BEHIND YOU !YOU CAN STILL SMELL HIM !KILL HIM !The blinded serpent swayed confused still deadly .Fawkes was circling its head piping his eerie song jabbing here and there at its scaly nose as the blood poured from its ruined eyes .Help me help me Harry muttered wildly someone anyone The snakes tail whipped across the floor again .Harry ducked .Something soft hit his face .The basilisk had swept the Sorting Hat into Harrys arms .Harry seized it .It was all he had left his only chance he rammed it onto his head and threw himself flat onto the floor as the basilisks tail swung over him again .Help me help me Harry thought his eyes screwed tight under the hat .Please help me There was no answering voice .Instead the hat contracted as though an invisible hand was squeezing it very tightly .Something very hard and heavy thudded onto the top of Harrys head almost knocking him out .Stars winking in front of his eyes he grabbed the top of the hat to pull it off and felt something long and hard beneath it .A gleaming silver sword had appeared inside the hat its handle glittering with rubies the size of eggs .KILL THE BOY !LEAVE THE BIRD !THE BOY IS BEHIND YOU !SNIFF SMELL HIM !Harry was on his feet ready .The basilisks head was falling its body coiling around hitting pillars as it twisted to face him .He could see the vast bloody eye sockets see the mouth stretching wide wide enough to swallow him whole lined with fangs long as his sword thin glittering venomous It lunged blindly Harry dodged and it hit the Chamber wall .It lunged again and its forked tongue lashed Harrys side .He raised the sword in both his hands The basilisk lunged again and this time its aim was true Harry threw his whole weight behind the sword and drove it to the hilt into the roof of the serpents mouth But as warm blood drenched Harrys arms he felt a searing pain just above his elbow .One long poisonous fang was sinking deeper and deeper into his arm and it splintered as the basilisk keeled over sideways and fell twitching to the floor .Harry slid down the wall .He gripped the fang that was spreading poison through his body and wrenched it out of his arm .But he knew it was too late .White hot pain was spreading slowly and steadily from the wound .Even as he dropped the fang and watched his own blood soaking his robes his vision went foggy .The Chamber was dissolving in a whirl of dull color .A patch of scarlet swam past and Harry heard a soft clatter of claws beside him .Fawkes said Harry thickly .You were fantastic Fawkes .He felt the bird lay its beautiful head on the spot where the serpents fang had pierced him .He could hear echoing footsteps and then a dark shadow moved in front of him .Youre dead Harry Potter said Riddles voice above him .Dead .Even Dumbledores bird knows it .Do you see what hes doing Potter ?Hes crying .Harry blinked .Fawkess head slid in and out of focus .Thick pearly tears were trickling down the glossy feathers .Im going to sit here and watch you die Harry Potter .Take your time .Im in no hurry .Harry felt drowsy .Everything around him seemed to be spinning .So ends the famous Harry Potter said Riddles distant voice .Alone in the Chamber of Secrets forsaken by his friends defeated at last by the Dark Lord he so unwisely challenged .Youll be back with your dear Mudblood mother soon Harry .She bought you twelve years of borrowed time .but Lord Voldemort got you in the end as you knew he must .If this is dying thought Harry its not so bad .Even the pain was leaving him .But was this dying ?Instead of going black the Chamber seemed to be coming back into focus .Harry gave his head a little shake and there was Fawkes still resting his head on Harrys arm .A pearly patch of tears was shining all around the wound except that there was no wound Get away bird said Riddles voice suddenly .Get away from him I said get away Harry raised his head .Riddle was pointing Harrys wand at Fawkes there was a bang like a gun and Fawkes took flight again in a whirl of gold and scarlet .Phoenix tears .said Riddle quietly staring at Harrys arm .Of course .healing powers .I forgot He looked into Harrys face .But it makes no difference .In fact I prefer it this way .Just you and me Harry Potter .you and me .He raised the wand Then in a rush of wings Fawkes had soared back overhead and something fell into Harrys lap the diary .For a split second both Harry and Riddle wand still raised stared at it .Then without thinking without considering as though he had meant to do it all along Harry seized the basilisk fang on the floor next to him and plunged it straight into the heart of the book .There was a long dreadful piercing scream .Ink spurted out of the diary in torrents streaming over Harrys hands flooding the floor .Riddle was writhing and twisting screaming and flailing and then He had gone .Harrys wand fell to the floor with a clatter and there was silence .Silence except for the steady drip drip of ink still oozing from the diary .The basilisk venom had burned a sizzling hole right through it .Shaking all over Harry pulled himself up .His head was spinning as though hed just traveled miles by Floo powder .Slowly he gathered together his wand and the Sorting Hat and with a huge tug retrieved the glittering sword from the roof of the basilisks mouth .Then came a faint moan from the end of the Chamber .Ginny was stirring .As Harry hurried toward her she sat up .Her bemused eyes traveled from the huge form of the dead basilisk over Harry in his bloodsoaked robes then to the diary in his hand .She drew a great shuddering gasp and tears began to pour down her face .Harry oh Harry I tried to tell you at b breakfast but I c couldnt say it in front of Percy it was me Harry but I I sswear I ddidnt mean to RRiddle made me he ttook me over and how did you kill that that thing ?Wwheres Riddle ?The last thing I rremember is him coming out of the diary Its all right said Harry holding up the diary and showing Ginny the fang hole Riddles finished .Look !Him and the basilisk .Cmon Ginny lets get out of here Im going to be expelled !Ginny wept as Harry helped her awkwardly to her feet .Ive looked forward to coming to Hogwarts ever since BBill came and nnow Ill have to leave and wwhatll Mum and Dad say ?Fawkes was waiting for them hovering in the Chamber entrance .Harry urged Ginny forward they stepped over the motionless coils of the dead basilisk through the echoing gloom and back into the tunnel .Harry heard the stone doors close behind them with a soft hiss .After a few minutes progress up the dark tunnel a distant sound of slowly shifting rock reached Harrys ears .Ron !Harry yelled speeding up .Ginnys okay !Ive got her !He heard Ron give a strangled cheer and they turned the next bend to see his eager face staring through the sizable gap he had managed to make in the rockfall .Ginny Ron thrust an arm through the gap in the rock to pull her through first .Youre alive !I dont believe it !What happened ?How what where did that bird come from ?Fawkes had swooped through the gap after Ginny .Hes Dumbledores said Harry squeezing through himself .How come youve got a sword ?said Ron gaping at the glittering weapon in Harrys hand .Ill explain when we get out of here said Harry with a sideways glance at Ginny who was crying harder than ever .But Later Harry said shortly .He didnt think it was a good idea to tell Ron yet whod been opening the Chamber not in front of Ginny anyway .Wheres Lockhart ?Back there said Ron still looking puzzled but jerking his head up the tunnel toward the pipe .Hes in a bad way .Come and see .Led by Fawkes whose wide scarlet wings emitted a soft golden glow in the darkness they walked all the way back to the mouth of the pipe .Gilderoy Lockhart was sitting there humming placidly to himself .His memorys gone said Ron .The Memory Charm backfired .Hit him instead of us .Hasnt got a clue who he is or where he is or who we are .I told him to come and wait here .Hes a danger to himself .Lockhart peered goodnaturedly up at them all .Hello he said .Odd sort of place this isnt it ?Do you live here ?No said Ron raising his eyebrows at Harry .Harry bent down and looked up the long dark pipe .Have you thought how were going to get back up this ?he said to Ron .Ron shook his head but Fawkes the phoenix had swooped past Harry and was now fluttering in front of him his beady eyes bright in the dark .He was waving his long golden tail feathers .Harry looked uncertainly at him .He looks like he wants you to grab hold .said Ron looking perplexed .But youre much too heavy for a bird to pull up there Fawkes said Harry isnt an ordinary bird .He turned quickly to the others .Weve got to hold on to each other .Ginny grab Rons hand .Professor Lockhart He means you said Ron sharply to Lockhart .You hold Ginnys other hand Harry tucked the sword and the Sorting Hat into his belt Ron took hold of the back of Harrys robes and Harry reached out and took hold of Fawkess strangely hot tail feathers .An extraordinary lightness seemed to spread through his whole body and the next second in a rush of wings they were flying upward through the pipe .Harry could hear Lockhart dangling below him saying Amazing !Amazing !This is just like magic !The chill air was whipping through Harrys hair and before hed stopped enjoying the ride it was over all four of them were hitting the wet floor of Moaning Myrtles bathroom and as Lockhart straightened his hat the sink that hid the pipe was sliding back into place .Myrtle goggled at them .Youre alive she said blankly to Harry .Theres no need to sound so disappointed he said grimly wiping flecks of blood and slime off his glasses .Oh well .Id just been thinking .if you had died youd have been welcome to share my toilet said Myrtle blushing silver .Urgh !said Ron as they left the bathroom for the dark deserted corridor outside .Harry !I think Myrtles grown fond of you !Youve got competition Ginny !But tears were still flooding silently down Ginnys face .Where now ?said Ron with an anxious look at Ginny .Harry pointed .Fawkes was leading the way glowing gold along the corridor .They strode after him and moments later found themselves outside Professor McGonagalls office .Harry knocked and pushed the door open .DOBBYS REWARD For a moment there was silence as Harry Ron Ginny and Lockhart stood in the doorway covered in muck and slime and in Harrys case blood .Then there was a scream .Ginny It was Mrs Weasley who had been sitting crying in front of the fire .She leapt to her feet closely followed by Mr Weasley and both of them flung themselves on their daughter .Harry however was looking past them .Professor Dumbledore was standing by the mantelpiece beaming next to Professor McGonagall who was taking great steadying gasps clutching her chest .Fawkes went whooshing past Harrys ear and settled on Dumbledore s shoulder just as Harry found himself and Ron being swept into Mrs Weasleys tight embrace .You saved her !You saved her !How did you do it ?I think wed all like to know that said Professor McGonagall weakly .Mrs Weasley let go of Harry who hesitated for a moment then walked over to the desk and laid upon it the Sorting Hat the rubyencrusted sword and what remained of Riddles diary .Then he started telling them everything .For nearly a quarter of an hour he spoke into the rapt silence He told them about hearing the disembodied voice how Hermione had finally realized that he was hearing a basilisk in the pipes how he and Ron had followed the spiders into the forest that Aragog had told them where the last victim of the basilisk had died how he had guessed that Moaning Myrtle had been the victim and that the entrance to the Chamber of Secrets might be in her bathroom .Very well Professor McGonagall prompted him as he paused so you found out where the entrance was breaking a hundred school rules into pieces along the way I might add but how on earth did you all get out of there alive Potter ?So Harry his voice now growing hoarse from all this talking told them about Fawkess timely arrival and about the Sorting Hat giving him the sword .But then he faltered .He had so far avoided mentioning Riddles diary or Ginny .She was standing with her head against Mrs Weasley s shoulder and tears were still coursing silently down her cheeks .What if they expelled her ?Harry thought in panic .Riddles diary didnt work anymore .How could they prove it had been he whod made her do it all ?Instinctively Harry looked at Dumbledore who smiled faintly the firelight glancing off his halfmoon spectacles .What interests me most said Dumbledore gently is how Lord Voldemort managed to enchant Ginny when my sources tell me he is currently in hiding in the forests of Albania .Relief warm sweeping glorious relief swept over Harry .Wwhats that ?said Mr Weasley in a stunned voice .YouKnowWho ?Enenchant Ginny ?But Ginny s not .Ginny hasnt been .has she ?It was this diary said Harry quickly picking it up and showing it to Dumbledore .Riddle wrote it when he was sixteen .Dumbledore took the diary from Harry and peered keenly down his long crooked nose at its burnt and soggy pages .Brilliant he said softly .Of course he was probably the most brilliant student Hogwarts has ever seen .He turned around to the Weasleys who were looking utterly bewildered .Very few people know that Lord Voldemort was once called Tom Riddle .I taught him myself fifty years ago at Hogwarts .He disappeared after leaving the school .traveled far and wide .sank so deeply into the Dark Arts consorted with the very worst of our kind underwent so many dangerous magical transformations that when he resurfaced as Lord Voldemort he was barely recognizable .Hardly anyone connected Lord Voldemort with the clever handsome boy who was once Head Boy here .But Ginny said Mrs Weasley .Whats our Ginny got to do with with him ?His ddiary !Ginny sobbed .Ive bbeen writing in it and hes been w writing back all year Ginnyl said Mr Weasley flabbergasted .Havent I taught you anything ?What have I always told you ?Never trust anything that can think for itself if you cant see where it keeps its brain .Why didnt you show the diary to me or your mother ?A suspicious object like that it was clearly full of Dark Magic I ddidnt know sobbed Ginny .I found it inside one of the books Mum got me .I ththought someone had just left it in there and forgotten about it Miss Weasley should go up to the hospital wing right away Dumbledore interrupted in a firm voice .This has been a terrible ordeal for her .There will be no punishment .Older and wiser wizards than she have been hoodwinked by Lord Voldemort .He strode over to the door and opened it .Bed rest and perhaps a large steaming mug of hot chocolate .I always find that cheers me up he added twinkling kindly down at her .You will find that Madam Pomfrey is still awake .Shes just giving out Mandrake juice I daresay the basilisks victims will be waking up any moment .So Hermiones okay !said Ron brightly .There has been no lasting harm done Ginny said Dumbledore .Mrs Weasley led Ginny out and Mr Weasley followed still looking deeply shaken .You know Minerva Professor Dumbledore said thoughtfully to Professor McGonagall I think all this merits a good feast Might I ask you to go and alert the kitchens ?Right said Professor McGonagall crisply also moving to the door .Ill leave you to deal with Potter and Weasley shall I ?Certainly said Dumbledore .She left and Harry and Ron gazed uncertainly at Dumbledore .What exactly had Professor McGonagall meant deal with them ?Surely surely they werent about to be punished ?I seem to remember telling you both that I would have to expel you if you broke any more school rules said Dumbledore .Ron opened his mouth in horror .Which goes to show that the best of us must sometimes eat our words Dumbledore went on smiling .You will both receive Special Awards for Services to the School and let me see yes I think two hundred points apiece for Gryffindor .Ron went as brightly pink as Lockharts valentine flowers and closed his mouth again .But one of us seems to be keeping mightily quiet about his part in this dangerous adventure Dumbledore added .Why so modest Gilderoy ?Harry gave a start .He had completely forgotten about Lockhart .He turned and saw that Lockhart was standing in a corner of the room still wearing his vague smile .When Dumbledore addressed him Lockhart looked over his shoulder to see who he was talking to .Professor Dumbledore Ron said quickly there was an accident down in the Chamber of Secrets .Professor Lockhart Am I a professor ?said Lockhart in mild surprise .Goodness .I expect I was hopeless was I ?He tried to do a Memory Charm and the wand backfired Ron explained quietly to Dumbledore .Dear me said Dumbledore shaking his head his long silver mustache quivering .Impaled upon your own sword Gilderoy !Sword ?said Lockhart dimly .Havent got a sword .That boy has though .He pointed at Harry .Hell lend you one .Would you mind taking Professor Lockhart up to the infirmary too ?Dumbledore said to Ron .Id like a few more words with Harry .Lockhart ambled out .Ron cast a curious look back at Dumbledore and Harry as he closed the door .Dumbledore crossed to one of the chairs by the fire .Sit down Harry he said and Harry sat feeling unaccountably nervous .First of all Harry I want to thank you said Dumbledore eyes twinkling again .You must have shown me real loyalty down in the Chamber .Nothing but that could have called Fawkes to you .He stroked the phoenix which had fluttered down onto his knee .Harry grinned awkwardly as Dumbledore watched him .And so you met Tom Riddle said Dumbledore thoughtfully .I imagine he was most interested in you .Suddenly something that was nagging at Harry came tumbling out of his mouth .Professor Dumbledore .Riddle said Im like him .Strange likenesses he said .Did he now ?said Dumbledore looking thoughtfully at Harry from under his thick silver eyebrows .And what do you think Harry ?I dont think Im like him !said Harry more loudly than hed intended .I mean Im Im in Gryffindor Im .But he fell silent a lurking doubt resurfacing in his mind .Professor he started again after a moment .The Sorting Hat told me Id Id have done well in Slytherin .Everyone thought was Slytherins heir for a while .because I can speak Parseltongue .You can speak Parseltongue Harry said Dumbledore calmly because Lord Voldemort who is the last remaining descendant of Salazar Slytherin can speak Parseltongue .Unless Im much mistaken he transferred some of his own powers to you the night he gave you that scar .Not something he intended to do Im sure .Voldemort put a bit of himself in me ?Harry said thunderstruck .It certainly seems so .So I should be in Slytherin Harry said looking desperately into Dumbledore s face .The Sorting Hat could see Slytherin s power in me and it Put you in Gryffindor said Dumbledore calmly .Listen to me Harry .You happen to have many qualities Salazar Slytherin prized in his handpicked students .His own very rare gift Parseltongue resourcefulness determination a certain disregard for rules he added his mustache quivering again .Yet the Sorting Hat placed you in Gryffindor .You know why that was .Think .It only put me in Gryffindor said Harry in a defeated voice because I asked not to go in Slytherin .Exactly said Dumbledore beaming once more .Which makes you very different from Tom Riddle .It is our choices Harry that show what we truly are far more than our abilities .Harry sat motionless in his chair stunned .If you want proof Harry that you belong in Gryffindor I suggest you look more closely at this .Dumbledore reached across to Professor McGonagalls desk picked up the bloodstained silver sword and handed it to Harry .Dully Harry turned it over the rubies blazing in the firelight .And then he saw the name engraved just below the hilt .Godric Gryffindor .Only a true Gryffindor could have pulled that out of the hat Harry said Dumbledore simply .For a minute neither of them spoke .Then Dumbledore pulled open one of the drawers in Professor McGonagalls desk and took out a quill and a bottle of ink .What you need Harry is some food and sleep .I suggest you go down to the feast while I write to Azkaban we need our gamekeeper back .And I must draft an advertisement for the Daily Prophet too he added thoughtfully .Well be needing a new Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher .Dear me we do seem to run through them dont we ?Harry got up and crossed to the door .He had just reached for the handle however when the door burst open so violently that it bounced back off the wall .Lucius Malfoy stood there fury in his face .And cowering behind his legs heavily wrapped in bandages was Dobby .Good evening Lucius said Dumbledore pleasantly .Mr Malfoy almost knocked Harry over as he swept into the room .Dobby went scurrying in after him crouching at the hem of his cloak a look of abject terror on his face .The elf was carrying a stained rag with which he was attempting to finish cleaning Mr Malfoy s shoes .Apparently Mr Malfoy had set out in a great hurry for not only were his shoes halfpolished but his usually sleek hair was disheveled .Ignoring the elf bobbing apologetically around his ankles he fixed his cold eyes upon Dumbledore .So !he said Youve come back .The governors suspended you but you still saw fit to return to Hogwarts .Well you see Lucius said Dumbledore smiling serenely the other eleven governors contacted me today .It was something like being caught in a hailstorm of owls to tell the truth .Theyd heard that Arthur Weasleys daughter had been killed and wanted me back here at once .They seemed to think I was the best man for the job after all .Very strange tales they told me too .Several of them seemed to think that you had threatened to curse their families if they didnt agree to suspend me in the first place .Mr Malfoy went even paler than usual but his eyes were still slits of fury .So have you stopped the attacks yet ?he sneered .Have you caught the culprit ?We have said Dumbledore with a smile .Well ?said Mr Malfoy sharply .Who is it ?The same person as last time Lucius said Dumbledore .But this time Lord Voldemort was acting through somebody else .By means of this diary .He held up the small black book with the large hole through the center watching Mr Malfoy closely .Harry however was watching Dobby .The elf was doing something very odd .His great eyes fixed meaningfully on Harry he kept pointing at the diary then at Mr Malfoy and then hitting himself hard on the head with his fist .I see .said Mr Malfoy slowly to Dumbledore .A clever plan said Dumbledore in a level voice still staring Mr Malfoy straight in the eye .Because if Harry here Mr Malfoy shot Harry a swift sharp look and his friend Ron hadnt discovered this book why Ginny Weasley might have taken all the blame .No one would ever have been able to prove she hadnt acted of her own free will .Mr Malfoy said nothing .His face was suddenly masklike .And imagine Dumbledore went on what might have happened then .The Weasleys are one of our most prominent pureblood families .Imagine the effect on Arthur Weasley and his Muggle Protection Act if his own daughter was discovered attacking and killing Muggleborns .Very fortunate the diary was discovered and Riddles memories wiped from it .Who knows what the consequences might have been otherwise .Mr Malfoy forced himself to speak .Very fortunate he said stiffly .And still behind his back Dobby was pointing first to the diary then to Lucius Malfoy then punching himself in the head .And Harry suddenly understood .He nodded at Dobby and Dobby backed into a corner now twisting his ears in punishment .Dont you want to know how Ginny got hold of that diary Mr Malfoy ?said Harry .Lucius Malfoy rounded on him .How should I know how the stupid little girl got hold of it ?he said .Because you gave it to her said Harry .In Flourish and Blotts .You picked up her old Transfiguration book and slipped the diary inside it didnt you ?He saw Mr Malfoys white hands clench and unclench .Prove it he hissed .Oh no one will be able to do that said Dumbledore smiling at Harry .Not now that Riddle has vanished from the book .On the other hand I would advise you Lucius not to go giving out any more of Lord Voldemorts old school things .If any more of them find their way into innocent hands I think Arthur Weasley for one will make sure they are traced back to you .Lucius Malfoy stood for a moment and Harry distinctly saw his right hand twitch as though he was longing to reach for his wand .Instead he turned to his houseelf .Were going Dobby !He wrenched open the door and as the elf came hurrying up to him he kicked him right through it .They could hear Dobby squealing with pain all the way along the corridor .Harry stood for a moment thinking hard .Then it came to him Professor Dumbledore he said hurriedly .Can I give that diary back to Mr Malfoy please ?Certainly Harry said Dumbledore calmly .But hurry .The feast remember .Harry grabbed the diary and dashed out of the office .He could hear Dobbys squeals of pain receding around the corner .Quickly wondering if this plan could possibly work Harry took off one of his shoes pulled off his slimy filthy sock and stuffed the diary into it .Then he ran down the dark corridor .He caught up with them at the top of the stairs .Mr Malfoy he gasped skidding to a halt Ive got something for you And he forced the smelly sock into Lucius Malfoys hand .What the ?Mr Malfoy ripped the sock off the diary threw it aside then looked furiously from the ruined book to Harry .Youll meet the same sticky end as your parents one of these days Harry Potter he said softly .They were meddlesome fools too .He turned to go .Come Dobby .I said come .But Dobby didnt move .He was holding up Harrys disgusting slimy sock and looking at it as though it were a priceless treasure .Master has given a sock said the elf in wonderment .Master gave it to Dobby .Whats that ?spat Mr Malfoy .What did you say ?Got a sock said Dobby in disbelief .Master threw it and Dobby caught it and Dobby Dobby is free .Lucius Malfoy stood frozen staring at the elf .Then he lunged at Harry .Youve lost me my servant boy !But Dobby shouted You shall not harm Harry Potter !There was a loud bang and Mr Malfoy was thrown backward .He crashed down the stairs three at a time landing in a crumpled heap on the landing below .He got up his face livid and pulled out his wand but Dobby raised a long threatening finger .You shall go now he said fiercely pointing down at Mr Malfoy .You shall not touch Harry Potter .You shall go now .Lucius Malfoy had no choice .With a last incensed stare at the pair of them he swung his cloak around him and hurried out of sight .Harry Potter freed Dobby !said the elf shrilly gazing up at Harry moonlight from the nearest window reflected in his orblike eyes .Harry Potter set Dobby free !Least I could do Dobby said Harry grinning .Just promise never to try and save my life again .The elfs ugly brown face split suddenly into a wide toothy smile .Ive just got one question Dobby said Harry as Dobby pulled on Harrys sock with shaking hands .You told me all this had nothing to do with HeWho MustNotBeNamed remember ?Well It was a clue sir said Dobby his eyes widening as though this was obvious .Was giving you a clue .The Dark Lord before he changed his name could be freely named you see ?Right said Harry weakly .Well Id better go .Theres a feast and my friend Hermione should be awake by now .Dobby threw his arms around Harrys middle and hugged him .Harry Potter is greater by far than Dobby knew !he sobbed .Farewell Harry Potter !And with a final loud crack Dobby disappeared .Harry had been to several Hogwarts feasts but never one quite like this .Everybody was in their pajamas and the celebration lasted all night .Harry didnt know whether the best bit was Hermione running toward him screaming You solved it !You solved it !or Justin hurrying over from the Hufflepuff table to wring his hand and apologize endlessly for suspecting him or Hagrid turning up at half past three cuffing Harry and Ron so hard on the shoulders that they were knocked into their plates of trifle or his and Rons four hundred points for Gryffindor securing the House Cup for the second year running or Professor McGonagall standing up to tell them all that the exams had been canceled as a school treat Oh no !said Hermione or Dumbledore announcing that unfortunately Professor Lockhart would be unable to return next year owing to the fact that he needed to go away and get his memory back .Quite a few of the teachers joined in the cheering that greeted this news .Shame said Ron helping himself to a jam doughnut .He was starting to grow on me .The rest of the final term passed in a haze of blazing sunshine .Hogwarts was back to normal with only a few small differences Defense Against the Dark Arts classes were canceled but weve had plenty of practice at that anyway Ron told a disgruntled Hermione and Lucius Malfoy had been sacked as a school governor .Draco was no longer strutting around the school as though he owned the place .On the contrary he looked resentful and sulky .On the other hand Ginny Weasley was perfectly happy again .Too soon it was time for the journey home on the Hogwarts Express .Harry Ron Hermione Fred George and Ginny got a compartment to themselves .They made the most of the last few hours in which they were allowed to do magic before the holidays .They played Exploding Snap set off the very last of Fred and Georges Filibuster fireworks and practiced disarming each other by magic .Harry was getting very good at it .They were almost at Kings Cross when Harry remembered something .Ginny what did you see Percy doing that he didnt want you to tell anyone ?Oh that said Ginny giggling .Well Percys got a girlfriend .Fred dropped a stack of books on Georges head .What ?Its that Ravenclaw prefect Penelope Clearwater said Ginny .Thats who he was writing to all last summer .Hes been meeting her all over the school in secret .I walked in on them kissing in an empty classroom one day .He was so upset when she was you know attacked .You wont tease him will you ?she added anxiously .Wouldnt dream of it said Fred who was looking like his birthday had come early .Definitely not said George sniggering .The Hogwarts Express slowed and finally stopped .Harry pulled out his quill and a bit of parchment and turned to Ron and Hermione .This is called a telephone number he told Ron scribbling it twice tearing the parchment in two and handing it to them .I told your dad how to use a telephone last summer hell know .Call me at the Dursleys okay ?I cant stand another two months with only Dudley to talk to .Your aunt and uncle will be proud though wont they ?said Hermione as they got off the train and joined the crowd thronging toward the enchanted barrier .When they hear what you did this year ?Proud ?said Harry .Are you crazy ?All those times I couldve died and I didnt manage it ?Theyll be furious .And together they walked back through the gateway to the Muggle world .OWL POST Harry Potter was a highly unusual boy in many ways .For one thing he hated the summer holidays more than any other time of year .For another he really wanted to do his homework but was forced to do it in secret in the dead of night .And he also happened to be a wizard .It was nearly midnight and he was lying on his stomach in bed the blankets drawn right over his head like a tent a flashlight in one hand and a large leatherbound book A History of Magic by Bathilda Bagshot propped open against the pillow .Harry moved the tip of his eaglefeather quill down the page frowning as he looked for something that would help him write his essay Witch Burning in the Fourteenth Century Was Completely Pointless discuss .The quill paused at the top of a likelylooking paragraph .Harry pushed his round glasses up the bridge of his nose moved his flashlight closer to the book and read Nonmagic people more commonly known as Muggles were particularly afraid of magic in medieval times but not very good at recognizing it .On the rare occasion that they did catch a real witch or wizard burning had no effect whatsoever .The witch or wizard would perform a basic Flame Freezing Charm and then pretend to shriek with pain while enjoying a gentle tickling sensation .Indeed Wendelin the Weird enjoyed being burned so much that she allowed herself to be caught no less than fortyseven times in various disguises .Harry put his quill between his teeth and reached underneath his pillow for his ink bottle and a roll of parchment .Slowly and very carefully he unscrewed the ink bottle dipped his quill into it and began to write pausing every now and then to listen because if any of the Dursleys heard the scratching of his quill on their way to the bathroom hed probably find himself locked in the cupboard under the stairs for the rest of the summer .The Dursley family of number four Privet Drive was the reason that Harry never enjoyed his summer holidays .Uncle Vernon Aunt Petunia and their son Dudley were Harrys only living relatives .They were Muggles and they had a very medieval attitude toward magic .Harrys dead parents who had been a witch and wizard themselves were never mentioned under the Dursleys roof .For years Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon had hoped that if they kept Harry as downtrodden as possible they would be able to squash the magic out of him .To their fury they had been unsuccessful .These days they lived in terror of anyone finding out that Harry had spent most of the last two years at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry .The most they could do however was to lock away Harrys spellbooks wand cauldron and broomstick at the start of the summer break and forbid him to talk to the neighbors .This separation from his spellbooks had been a real problem for Harry because his teachers at Hogwarts had given him a lot of holiday work .One of the essays a particularly nasty one about shrinking potions was for Harrys least favorite teacher Professor Snape who would be delighted to have an excuse to give Harry detention for a month .Harry had therefore seized his chance in the first week of the holidays .While Uncle Vernon Aunt Petunia and Dudley had gone out into the front garden to admire Uncle Vernons new company car in very loud voices so that the rest of the street would notice it too Harry had crept downstairs picked the lock on the cupboard under the stairs grabbed some of his books and hidden them in his bedroom .As long as he didnt leave spots of ink on the sheets the Dursleys need never know that he was studying magic by night .Harry was particularly keen to avoid trouble with his aunt and uncle at the moment as they were already in an especially bad mood with him all because hed received a telephone call from a fellow wizard one week into the school vacation .Ron Weasley who was one of Harrys best friends at Hogwarts came from a whole family of wizards .This meant that he knew a lot of things Harry didnt but had never used a telephone before .Most unluckily it had been Uncle Vernon who had answered the call .Vernon Dursley speaking .Harry who happened to be in the room at the time froze as he heard Rons voice answer .HELLO ?HELLO ?CAN YOU HEAR ME ?I WANT TO TALK TO HARRY POTTER !Ron was yelling so loudly that Uncle Vernon jumped and held the receiver a foot away from his ear staring at it with an expression of mingled fury and alarm .WHO IS THIS ?he roared in the direction of the mouthpiece .WHO ARE YOU ?RON WEASLEY !Ron bellowed back as though he and Uncle Vernon were speaking from opposite ends of a football field .IM A FRIEND OF HARRYS FROM SCHOOL Uncle Vernons small eyes swiveled around to Harry who was rooted to the spot .THERE IS NO HARRY POTTER HERE !he roared now holding the receiver at arms length as though frightened it might explode .I DONT KNOW WHAT SCHOOL YOURE TALKING ABOUT !NEVER CONTACT ME AGAIN !DONT YOU COME NEAR MY FAMILY !And he threw the receiver back onto the telephone as if dropping a poisonous spider .The fight that had followed had been one of the worst ever .HOW DARE YOU GIVE THIS NUMBER TO PEOPLE LIKE PEOPLE LIKE YOU !Uncle Vernon had roared spraying Harry with spit .Ron obviously realized that hed gotten Harry into trouble because he hadnt called again .Harrys other best friend from Hogwarts Hermione Granger hadnt been in touch either .Harry suspected that Ron had warned Hermione not to call which was a pity because Hermione the cleverest witch in Harrys year had Muggle parents knew perfectly well how to use a telephone and would probably have had enough sense not to say that she went to Hogwarts .So Harry had had no word from any of his wizarding friends for five long weeks and this summer was turning out to be almost as bad as the last one .There was just one very small improvement after swearing that he wouldnt use her to send letters to any of his friends Harry had been allowed to let his owl Hedwig out at night .Uncle Vernon had given in because of the racket Hedwig made if she was locked in her cage all the time .Harry finished writing about Wendelin the Weird and paused to listen again .The silence in the dark house was broken only by the distant grunting snores of his enormous cousin Dudley .It must be very late Harry thought .His eyes were itching with tiredness .Perhaps hed finish this essay tomorrow night .He replaced the top of the ink bottle pulled an old pillowcase from under his bed put the flashlight A History of Magic his essay quill and ink inside it got out of bed and hid the lot under a loose floorboard under his bed .Then he stood up stretched and checked the time on the luminous alarm clock on his bedside table .It was one oclock in the morning .Harrys stomach gave a funny jolt .He had been thirteen years old without realizing it for a whole hour .Yet another unusual thing about Harry was how little he looked forward to his birthdays .He had never received a birthday card in his life .The Dursleys had completely ignored his last two birthdays and he had no reason to suppose they would remember this one .Harry walked across the dark room past Hedwigs large empty cage to the open window .He leaned on the sill the cool night air pleasant on his face after a long time under the blankets .Hedwig had been absent for two nights now .Harry wasnt worried about her shed been gone this long before .But he hoped shed be back soon she was the only living creature in this house who didnt flinch at the sight of him .Harry though still rather small and skinny for his age had grown a few inches over the last year .His jetblack hair however was just as it always had been stubbornly untidy whatever he did to it .The eyes behind his glasses were bright green and on his forehead clearly visible through his hair was a thin scar shaped like a bolt of lightning .Of all the unusual things about Harry this scar was the most extraordinary of all .It was not as the Dursleys had pretended for ten years a souvenir of the car crash that had killed Harrys parents because Lily and James Potter had not died in a car crash .They had been murdered murdered by the most feared Dark wizard for a hundred years Lord Voldemort .Harry had escaped from the same attack with nothing more than a scar on his forehead where Voldemorts curse instead of killing him had rebounded upon its originator .Barely alive Voldemort had fled .But Harry had come facetoface with him at Hogwarts .Remembering their last meeting as he stood at the dark window Harry had to admit he was lucky even to have reached his thirteenth birthday .He scanned the starry sky for a sign of Hedwig perhaps soaring back to him with a dead mouse dangling from her beak expecting praise .Gazing absently over the rooftops it was a few seconds before Harry realized what he was seeing .Silhouetted against the golden moon and growing larger every moment was a large strangely lopsided creature and it was flapping in Harrys direction .He stood quite still watching it sink lower and lower .For a split second he hesitated his hand on the window latch wondering whether to slam it shut .But then the bizarre creature soared over one of the street lamps of Privet Drive and Harry realizing what it was leapt aside .Through the window soared three owls two of them holding up the third which appeared to be unconscious .They landed with a soft flump on Harrys bed and the middle owl which was large and gray keeled right over and lay motionless .There was a large package tied to its legs .Harry recognized the unconscious owl at once his name was Errol and he belonged to the Weasley family .Harry dashed to the bed untied the cords around Errols legs took off the parcel and then carried Errol to Hedwigs cage .Errol opened one bleary eye gave a feeble hoot of thanks and began to gulp some water .Harry turned back to the remaining owls .One of them the large snowy female was his own Hedwig .She too was carrying a parcel and looked extremely pleased with herself .She gave Harry an affectionate nip with her beak as he removed her burden then flew across the room to join Errol .Harry didnt recognize the third owl a handsome tawny one but he knew at once where it had come from because in addition to a third package it was carrying a letter bearing the Hogwarts crest .When Harry relieved this owl of its burden it ruffled its feathers importantly stretched its wings and took off through the window into the night .Harry sat down on his bed and grabbed Errols package ripped off the brown paper and discovered a present wrapped in gold and his first ever birthday card .Fingers trembling slightly he opened the envelope .Two pieces of paper fell out a letter and a newspaper clipping .The clipping had clearly come out of the wizarding newspaper the Daily Prophet because the people in the blackandwhite picture were moving .Harry picked up the clipping smoothed it out and read MINISTRY OF MAGIC EMPLOYEE SCOOPS GRAND PRIZE Arthur Weasley Head of the Misuse of Muggle Artifacts Office at the Ministry of Magic has won the annual Daily Prophet Grand Prize Galleon Draw .A delighted Mr Weasley told the Daily Prophet We will be spending the gold on a summer holiday in Egypt where our eldest son Bill works as a curse breaker for Gringotts Wizarding Bank .The Weasley family will be spending a month in Egypt returning for the start of the new school year at Hogwarts which five of the Weasley children currently attend .Harry scanned the moving photograph and a grin spread across his face as he saw all nine of the Weasleys waving furiously at him standing in front of a large pyramid .Plump little Mrs Weasley tall balding Mr Weasley six sons and one daughter all though the blackandwhite picture didnt show it with flamingred hair .Right in the middle of the picture was Ron tall and gangling with his pet rat Scabbers on his shoulder and his arm around his little sister Ginny .Harry couldnt think of anyone who deserved to win a large pile of gold more than the Weasleys who were very nice and extremely poor .He picked up Rons letter and unfolded it .Dear Harry Happy birthday !Look Im really sorry about that telephone call .I hope the Muggles didnt give you a hard time .I asked Dad and he reckons I shouldnt have shouted .Its amazing here in Egypt .Bills taken us around all the tombs and you wouldnt believe the curses those old Egyptian wizards put on them .Mum wouldnt let Ginny come in the last one .There were all these mutant skeletons in there of Muggles whod broken in and grown extra heads and stuff .I couldnt believe it when Dad won the Daily Prophet Draw .Seven hundred galleons !Most of its gone on this trip but theyre going to buy me a new wand for next year .Harry remembered only too well the occasion when Rons old wand had snapped .It had happened when the car the two of them had been flying to Hogwarts had crashed into a tree on the school grounds .Well be back about a week before term starts and well be going up to London to get my wand and our new books .Any chance of meeting you there ?Dont let the Muggles get you down !Try and come to London Ron PS .Percys Head Boy .He got the letter last week .Harry glanced back at the photograph .Percy who was in his seventh and final year at Hogwarts was looking particularly smug .He had pinned his Head Boy badge to the fez perched jauntily on top of his neat hair his hornrimmed glasses flashing in the Egyptian sun .Harry now turned to his present and unwrapped it .Inside was what looked like a miniature glass spinning top .There was another note from Ron beneath it .Harry this is a Pocket Sneakoscope .If theres someone untrustworthy around its supposed to light up and spin .Bill says its rubbish sold for wizard tourists and isnt reliable because it kept lighting up at dinner last night .But he didnt realize Fred and George had put beetles in his soup .Bye Ron Harry put the Pocket Sneakoscope on his bedside table where it stood quite still balanced on its point reflecting the luminous hands of his clock .He looked at it happily for a few seconds then picked up the parcel Hedwig had brought .Inside this too there was a wrapped present a card and a letter this time from Hermione .Dear Harry Ron wrote to me and told me about his phone call to your Uncle Vernon .I do hope youre all right .Im on holiday in France at the moment and I didnt know how I was going to send this to you what if theyd opened it at customs ?but then Hedwig turned up !I think she wanted to make sure you got something for your birthday for a change .I bought your present by owlorder there was an advertisement in the Daily Prophet Ive been getting it delivered its so good to keep up with whats going on in the wizarding world .Did you see that picture of Ron and his family a week ago ?I bet hes learning loads .Im really jealous the ancient Egyptian wizards were fascinating .Theres some interesting local history of witchcraft here too .Ive rewritten my whole History of Magic essay to include some of the things Ive found out .I hope its not too long its two rolls of parchment more than Professor Binns asked for .Ron says hes going to be in London in the last week of the holidays .Can you make it ?Will your aunt and uncle let you come ?I really hope you can .If not Ill see you on the Hogwarts Express on September first !Love from Hermione PS .Ron says Percys Head Boy .Ill bet Percys really pleased .Ron doesnt seem too happy about it .Harry laughed as he put Hermione s letter aside and picked up her present .It was very heavy .Knowing Hermione he was sure it would be a large book full of very difficult spells but it wasnt .His heart gave a huge bound as he ripped back the paper and saw a sleek black leather case with silver words stamped across it reading Broomstick Servicing Kit .Wow Hermione !Harry whispered unzipping the case to look inside .There was a large jar of Fleetwoods HighFinish Handle Polish a pair of gleaming silver TailTwig Clippers a tiny brass compass to clip on your broom for long journeys and a Handbook of DoItYourself Broomcare .Apart from his friends the thing that Harry missed most about Hogwarts was Quidditch the most popular sport in the magical world highly dangerous very exciting and played on broomsticks .Harry happened to be a very good Quidditch player he had been the youngest person in a century to be picked for one of the Hogwarts House teams .One of Harrys most prized possessions was his Nimbus Two Thousand racing broom .Harry put the leather case aside and picked up his last parcel .He recognized the untidy scrawl on the brown paper at once this was from Hagrid the Hogwarts gamekeeper .He tore off the top layer of paper and glimpsed something green and leathery but before he could unwrap it properly the parcel gave a strange quiver and whatever was inside it snapped loudly as though it had jaws .Harry froze .He knew that Hagrid would never send him anything dangerous on purpose but then Hagrid didnt have a normal persons view of what was dangerous .Hagrid had been known to befriend giant spiders buy vicious threeheaded dogs from men in pubs and sneak illegal dragon eggs into his cabin .Harry poked the parcel nervously .It snapped loudly again .Harry reached for the lamp on his bedside table gripped it firmly in one hand and raised it over his head ready to strike .Then he seized the rest of the wrapping paper in his other hand and pulled .And out fell a book .Harry just had time to register its handsome green cover emblazoned with the golden title The Monster Book of Monsters before it flipped onto its edge and scuttled sideways along the bed like some weird crab .Uhoh Harry muttered .The book toppled off the bed with a loud clunk and shuffled rapidly across the room .Harry followed it stealthily .The book was hiding in the dark space under his desk .Praying that the Dursleys were still fast asleep Harry got down on his hands and knees and reached toward it .Ouch !The book snapped shut on his hand and then flapped past him still scuttling on its covers .Harry scrambled around threw himself forward and managed to flatten it .Uncle Vernon gave a loud sleepy grunt in the room next door .Hedwig and Errol watched interestedly as Harry clamped the struggling book tightly in his arms hurried to his chest of drawers and pulled out a belt which he buckled tightly around it .The Monster Book shuddered angrily but could no longer flap and snap so Harry threw it down on the bed and reached for Hagrids card .Dear Harry Happy birthday !Think you might find this useful for next year .Wont say no more here .Tell you when I see you .Hope the Muggles are treating you right .All the best Hagrid It struck Harry as ominous that Hagrid thought a biting book would come in useful but he put Hagrids card up next to Rons and Hermiones grinning more broadly than ever .Now there was only the letter from Hogwarts left .Noticing that it was rather thicker than usual Harry slit open the envelope pulled out the first page of parchment within and read Dear Mr Potter Please note that the new school year will begin on September the first .The Hogwarts Express will leave from Kings Cross station platform nine and three quarters at eleven oclock .Third years are permitted to visit the village of Hogsmeade on certain weekends .Please give the enclosed permission form to your parent or guardian to sign .A list of books for next year is enclosed .Yours sincerely Professor M .McGonagall Deputy Headmistress Harry pulled out the Hogsmeade permission form and looked at it no longer grinning .It would be wonderful to visit Hogsmeade on weekends he knew it was an entirely wizarding village and he had never set foot there .But how on earth was he going to persuade Uncle Vernon or Aunt Petunia to sign the form ?He looked over at the alarm clock .It was now two oclock in the morning .Deciding that hed worry about the Hogsmeade form when he woke up Harry got back into bed and reached up to cross off another day on the chart hed made for himself counting down the days left until his return to Hogwarts .Then he took off his glasses and lay down eyes open facing his three birthday cards .Extremely unusual though he was at that moment Harry Potter felt just like everyone else glad for the first time in his life that it was his birthday .AUNT MARGES BIG MISTAKE Harry went down to breakfast the next morning to find the three Dursleys already sitting around the kitchen table .They were watching a brandnew television a welcomehomeforthesummer present for Dudley who had been complaining loudly about the long walk between the fridge and the television in the living room .Dudley had spent most of the summer in the kitchen his piggy little eyes fixed on the screen and his five chins wobbling as he ate continually .Harry sat down between Dudley and Uncle Vernon a large beefy man with very little neck and a lot of mustache .Far from wishing Harry a happy birthday none of the Dursleys made any sign that they had noticed Harry enter the room but Harry was far too used to this to care .He helped himself to a piece of toast and then looked up at the reporter on the television who was halfway through a report on an escaped convict .The public is warned that Black is armed and extremely dangerous .A special hot line has been set up and any sighting of Black should be reported immediately .No need to tell us hes no good snorted Uncle Vernon staring over the top of his newspaper at the prisoner .Look at the state of him the filthy layabout !Look at his hair !He shot a nasty look sideways at Harry whose untidy hair had always been a source of great annoyance to Uncle Vernon .Compared to the man on the television however whose gaunt face was surrounded by a matted elbowlength tangle Harry felt very well groomed indeed .The reporter had reappeared .The Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries will announce today Hang on !barked Uncle Vernon staring furiously at the reporter .You didnt tell us where that maniacs escaped from !What use is that ?Lunatic could be coming up the street right now !Aunt Petunia who was bony and horsefaced whipped around and peered intently out of the kitchen window .Harry knew Aunt Petunia would simply love to be the one to call the hot line number .She was the nosiest woman in the world and spent most of her life spying on the boring lawabiding neighbors .When will they learn said Uncle Vernon pounding the table with his large purple fist that hangings the only way to deal with these people ?Very true said Aunt Petunia who was still squinting into next doors runner beans .Uncle Vernon drained his teacup glanced at his watch and added Id better be off in a minute Petunia .Marges train gets in at ten .Harry whose thoughts had been upstairs with the Broomstick Servicing Kit was brought back to earth with an unpleasant bump .Aunt Marge ?he blurted out .Sh shes not coming here is she ?Aunt Marge was Uncle Vernons sister .Even though she was not a blood relative of Harrys whose mother had been Aunt Petunias sister he had been forced to call her Aunt all his life .Aunt Marge lived in the country in a house with a large garden where she bred bulldogs .She didnt often stay at Privet Drive because she couldnt bear to leave her precious dogs but each of her visits stood out horribly vividly in Harrys mind .At Dudleys fifth birthday party Aunt Marge had whacked Harry around the shins with her walking stick to stop him from beating Dudley at musical statues .A few years later she had turned up at Christmas with a computerized robot for Dudley and a box of dog biscuits for Harry .On her last visit the year before Harry started at Hogwarts Harry had accidentally trodden on the tail of her favorite dog .Ripper had chased Harry out into the garden and up a tree and Aunt Marge had refused to call him off until past midnight .The memory of this incident still brought tears of laughter to Dudleys eyes .Margell be here for a week Uncle Vernon snarled and while were on the subject he pointed a fat finger threateningly at Harry we need to get a few things straight before I go and collect her .Dudley smirked and withdrew his gaze from the television .Watching Harry being bullied by Uncle Vernon was Dudleys favorite form of entertainment .Firstly growled Uncle Vernon youll keep a civil tongue in your head when youre talking to Marge .All right said Harry bitterly if she does when shes talking to me .Secondly said Uncle Vernon acting as though he had not heard Harrys reply as Marge doesnt know anything about your abnormality I dont want any any funny stuff while shes here .You behave yourself got me ?I will if she does said Harry through gritted teeth .And thirdly said Uncle Vernon his mean little eyes now slits in his great purple face weve told Marge you attend St .Brutuss Secure Center for Incurably Criminal Boys .What ?Harry yelled .And youll be sticking to that story boy or therell be trouble spat Uncle Vernon .Harry sat there whitefaced and furious staring at Uncle Vernon hardly able to believe it .Aunt Marge coming for a weeklong visit it was the worst birthday present the Dursleys had ever given him including that pair of Uncle Vernons old socks .Well Petunia said Uncle Vernon getting heavily to his feet 111 be off to the station then .Want to come along for the ride Dudders ?No said Dudley whose attention had returned to the television now that Uncle Vernon had finished threatening Harry .Duddys got to make himself smart for his auntie said Aunt Petunia smoothing Dudleys thick blond hair .Mummys bought him a lovely new bow tie .Uncle Vernon clapped Dudley on his porky shoulder .See you in a bit then he said and he left the kitchen .Harry who had been sitting in a kind of horrified trance had a sudden idea .Abandoning his toast he got quickly to his feet and followed Uncle Vernon to the front door .Uncle Vernon was pulling on his car coat .Im not taking you he snarled as he turned to see Harry watching him .Like I wanted to come said Harry coldly .I want to ask you something .Uncle Vernon eyed him suspiciously .Third years at Hog at my school are allowed to visit the village sometimes said Harry .So ?snapped Uncle Vernon taking his car keys from a hook next to the door .I need you to sign the permission form said Harry in a rush .And why should I do that ?sneered Uncle Vernon .Well said Harry choosing his words carefully itll be hard work pretending to Aunt Marge I go to that St .Whatsits St .Brutuss Secure Center for Incurably Criminal Boys !bellowed Uncle Vernon and Harry was pleased to hear a definite note of panic in Uncle Vernons voice .Exactly said Harry looking calmly up into Uncle Vernons large purple face .Its a lot to remember .Ill have to make it sound convincing wont I ?What if I accidentally let something slip ?Youll get the stuffing knocked out of you wont you ?roared Uncle Vernon advancing on Harry with his fist raised .But Harry stood his ground .Knocking the stuffing out of me wont make Aunt Marge forget what I could tell her he said grimly .Uncle Vernon stopped his fist still raised his face an ugly puce .But if you sign my permission form Harry went on quickly I swear Ill remember where Im supposed to go to school and Ill act like a Mug like Im normal and everything .Harry could tell that Uncle Vernon was thinking it over even if his teeth were bared and a vein was throbbing in his temple .Right he snapped finally .I shall monitor your behavior carefully during Marges visit .If at the end of it youve toed the line and kept to the story Ill sign your ruddy form .He wheeled around pulled open the front door and slammed it so hard that one of the little panes of glass at the top fell out .Harry didnt return to the kitchen .He went back upstairs to his bedroom .If he was going to act like a real Muggle hed better start now .Slowly and sadly he gathered up all his presents and his birthday cards and hid them under the loose floorboard with his homework .Then he went to Hedwigs cage .Errol seemed to have recovered he and Hedwig were both asleep heads under their wings .Harry sighed then poked them both awake .Hedwig he said gloomily youre going to have to clear off for a week .Go with Errol .Ronll look after you .Ill write him a note explaining .And dont look at me like that Hedwigs large amber eyes were reproachful its not my fault .Its the only way Ill be allowed to visit Hogsmeade with Ron and Hermione .Ten minutes later Errol and Hedwig who had a note to Ron bound to her leg soared out of the window and out of sight .Harry now feeling thoroughly miserable put the empty cage away inside the wardrobe .But Harry didnt have long to brood .In next to no time Aunt Petunia was shrieking up the stairs for Harry to come down and get ready to welcome their guest .Do something about your hair !Aunt Petunia snapped as he reached the hall .Harry couldnt see the point of trying to make his hair lie flat .Aunt Marge loved criticizing him so the untidier he looked the happier she would be .All too soon there was a crunch of gravel outside as Uncle Vernons car pulled back into the driveway then the clunk of the car doors and footsteps on the garden path .Get the door !Aunt Petunia hissed at Harry .A feeling of great gloom in his stomach Harry pulled the door open .On the threshold stood Aunt Marge .She was very like Uncle Vernon large beefy and purplefaced she even had a mustache though not as bushy as his .In one hand she held an enormous suitcase and tucked under the other was an old and eviltempered bulldog .Wheres my Dudders ?roared Aunt Marge .Wheres my neffypoo ?Dudley came waddling down the hall his blond hair plastered flat to his fat head a bow tie just visible under his many chins .Aunt Marge thrust the suitcase into Harrys stomach knocking the wind out of him seized Dudley in a tight onearmed hug and planted a large kiss on his cheek .Harry knew perfectly well that Dudley only put up with Aunt Marges hugs because he was well paid for it and sure enough when they broke apart Dudley had a crisp twentypound note clutched in his fat fist .Petunia !shouted Aunt Marge striding past Harry as though he was a hat stand .Aunt Marge and Aunt Petunia kissed or rather Aunt Marge bumped her large jaw against Aunt Petunias bony cheekbone .Uncle Vernon now came in smiling jovially as he shut the door .Tea Marge ?he said .And what will Ripper take ?Ripper can have some tea out of my saucer said Aunt Marge as they all proceeded into the kitchen leaving Harry alone in the hall with the suitcase .But Harry wasnt complaining any excuse not to be with Aunt Marge was fine by him so he began to heave the case upstairs into the spare bedroom taking as long as he could .By the time he got back to the kitchen Aunt Marge had been supplied with tea and fruitcake and Ripper was lapping noisily in the corner .Harry saw Aunt Petunia wince slightly as specks of tea and drool flecked her clean floor .Aunt Petunia hated animals .Whos looking after the other dogs Marge ?Uncle Vernon asked .Oh Ive got Colonel Fubster managing them boomed Aunt Marge .Hes retired now good for him to have something to do .But I couldnt leave poor old Ripper .He pines if hes away from me .Ripper began to growl again as Harry sat down .This directed Aunt Marges attention to Harry for the first time .So !she barked .Still here are you ?Yes said Harry .Dont you say ‘yes in that ungrateful tone Aunt Marge growled .Its damn good of Vernon and Petunia to keep you .Wouldnt have done it myself .Youd have gone straight to an orphanage if youd been dumped on my doorstep .Harry was bursting to say that hed rather live in an orphanage than with the Dursleys but the thought of the Hogsmeade form stopped him .He forced his face into a painful smile .Dont you smirk at me !boomed Aunt Marge .I can see you havent improved since I last saw you .I hoped school would knock some manners into you .She took a large gulp of tea wiped her mustache and said Where is it that you send him again Vernon ?St .Brutuss said Uncle Vernon promptly .Its a firstrate institution for hopeless cases .I see said Aunt Marge .Do they use the cane at St .Brutuss boy ?she barked across the table .Er Uncle Vernon nodded curtly behind Aunt Marges back .Yes said Harry .Then feeling he might as well do the thing properly he added all the time .Excellent said Aunt Marge .I wont have this nambypamby wishywashy nonsense about not hitting people who deserve it .A good thrashing is whats needed in ninetynine cases out of a hundred .Have you been beaten often ?Oh yeah said Harry loads of times .Aunt Marge narrowed her eyes .I still dont like your tone boy she said .If you can speak of your beatings in that casual way they clearly arent hitting you hard enough .Petunia Id write if I were you .Make it clear that you approve the use of extreme force in this boys case .Perhaps Uncle Vernon was worried that Harry might forget their bargain in any case he changed the subject abruptly .Heard the news this morning Marge ?What about that escaped prisoner eh ?As Aunt Marge started to make herself at home Harry caught himself thinking almost longingly of life at number four without her .Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia usually encouraged Harry to stay out of their way which Harry was only too happy to do .Aunt Marge on the other hand wanted Harry under her eye at all times so that she could boom out suggestions for his improvement .She delighted in comparing Harry with Dudley and took huge pleasure in buying Dudley expensive presents while glaring at Harry as though daring him to ask why he hadnt got a present too .She also kept throwing out dark hints about what made Harry such an unsatisfactory person .You mustnt blame yourself for the way the boys turned out Vernon she said over lunch on the third day .If theres something rotten on the inside theres nothing anyone can do about it .Harry tried to concentrate on his food but his hands shook and his face was starting to burn with anger .Remember the form he told himself .Think about Hogsmeade .Dont say anything .Dont rise Aunt Marge reached for her glass of wine .Its one of the basic rules of breeding she said .You see it all the time with dogs .If theres something wrong with the bitch therell be something wrong with the pup At that moment the wineglass Aunt Marge was holding exploded in her hand .Shards of glass flew in every direction and Aunt Marge sputtered and blinked her great ruddy face dripping .Marge !squealed Aunt Petunia .Marge are you all right ?Not to worry grunted Aunt Marge mopping her face with her napkin .Must have squeezed it too hard .Did the same thing at Colonel Fubsters the other day .No need to fuss Petunia I have a very firm grip .But Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon were both looking at Harry suspiciously so he decided hed better skip dessert and escape from the table as soon as he could .Outside in the hall he leaned against the wall breathing deeply .It had been a long time since hed lost control and made something explode .He couldnt afford to let it happen again .The Hogsmeade form wasnt the only thing at stake if he carried on like that hed be in trouble with the Ministry of Magic .Harry was still an underage wizard and he was forbidden by wizard law to do magic outside school .His record wasnt exactly clean either .Only last summer hed gotten an official warning that had stated quite clearly that if the Ministry got wind of any more magic in Privet Drive Harry would face expulsion from Hogwarts .He heard the Dursleys leaving the table and hurried upstairs out of the way .Harry got through the next three days by forcing himself to think about his Handbook of DoItYourself Broomcare whenever Aunt Marge started on him .This worked quite well though it seemed to give him a glazed look because Aunt Marge started voicing the opinion that he was mentally subnormal .At last at long last the final evening of Marges stay arrived .Aunt Petunia cooked a fancy dinner and Uncle Vernon uncorked several bottles of wine .They got all the way through the soup and the salmon without a single mention of Harrys faults during the lemon meringue pie Uncle Vernon bored them all with a long talk about Grunnings his drillmaking company then Aunt Petunia made coffee and Uncle Vernon brought out a bottle of brandy .Can I tempt you Marge ?Aunt Marge had already had quite a lot of wine .Her huge face was very red .Just a small one then she chuckled .A bit more than that .and a bit more .thats the ticket .Dudley was eating his fourth slice of pie .Aunt Petunia was sipping coffee with her little finger sticking out .Harry really wanted to disappear into his bedroom but he met Uncle Vernons angry little eyes and knew he would have to sit it out .Aah said Aunt Marge smacking her lips and putting the empty brandy glass back down .Excellent nosh Petunia .Its normally just a fryup for me of an evening with twelve dogs to look after .She burped richly and patted her great tweed stomach .Pardon me .But I do like to see a healthysized boy she went on winking at Dudley .Youll be a proper sized man Dudders like your father .Yes Ill have a spot more brandy Vernon .Now this one here She jerked her head at Harry who felt his stomach clench .The Handbook he thought quickly .This ones got a mean runty look about him .You get that with dogs .I had Colonel Fubster drown one last year .Ratty little thing it was .Weak .Underbred .Harry was trying to remember page twelve of his book A Charm to Cure Reluctant Reversers .It all comes down to blood as I was saying the other day .Bad blood will out .Now Im saying nothing against your family Petunia she patted Aunt Petunias bony hand with her shovellike one but your sister was a bad egg .They turn up in the best families .Then she ran off with a wastrel and heres the result right in front of us .Harry was staring at his plate a funny ringing in his ears .Grasp your broom firmly by the tail he thought .But he couldnt remember what came next .Aunt Marges voice seemed to be boring into him like one of Uncle Vernons drills .This Potter said Aunt Marge loudly seizing the brandy bottle and splashing more into her glass and over the tablecloth you never told me what he did ?Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia were looking extremely tense .Dudley had even looked up from his pie to gape at his parents .He didnt work said Uncle Vernon with half a glance at Harry .Unemployed .As I expected !said Aunt Marge taking a huge swig of brandy and wiping her chin on her sleeve .A no account goodfornothing lazy scrounger who He was not said Harry suddenly .The table went very quiet .Harry was shaking all over .He had never felt so angry in his life .MORE BRANDY !yelled Uncle Vernon who had gone very white .He emptied the bottle into Aunt Marges glass .You boy he snarled at Harry .Go to bed go on No Vernon hiccuped Aunt Marge holding up a hand her tiny bloodshot eyes fixed on Harrys .Go on boy go on .Proud of your parents are you ?They go and get themselves killed in a car crash drunk I expect They didnt die in a car crash !said Harry who found himself on his feet .They died in a car crash you nasty little liar and left you to be a burden on their decent hardworking relatives !screamed Aunt Marge swelling with fury .You are an insolent ungrateful little But Aunt Marge suddenly stopped speaking .For a moment it looked as though words had failed her .She seemed to be swelling with inexpressible anger but the swelling didnt stop .Her great red face started to expand her tiny eyes bulged and her mouth stretched too tightly for speech next second several buttons had just burst from her tweed jacket and pinged off the walls she was inflating like a monstrous balloon her stomach bursting free of her tweed waistband each of her fingers blowing up like a salami MARGE !yelled Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia together as Aunt Marges whole body began to rise off her chair toward the ceiling .She was entirely round now like a vast life buoy with piggy eyes and her hands and feet stuck out weirdly as she drifted up into the air making apoplectic popping noises .Ripper came skidding into the room barking madly .NOOOOOOO !Uncle Vernon seized one of Marges feet and tried to pull her down again but was almost lifted from the floor himself .A second later Ripper leapt forward and sank his teeth into Uncle Vernons leg .Harry tore from the dining room before anyone could stop him heading for the cupboard under the stairs .The cupboard door burst magically open as he reached it .In seconds he had heaved his trunk to the front door .He sprinted upstairs and threw himself under the bed wrenching up the loose floorboard and grabbed the pillowcase full of his books and birthday presents .He wriggled out seized Hedwigs empty cage and dashed back downstairs to his trunk just as Uncle Vernon burst out of the dining room his trouser leg in bloody tatters .COME BACK IN HERE !he bellowed .COME BACK AND PUT HER RIGHT !But a reckless rage had come over Harry .He kicked his trunk open pulled out his wand and pointed it at Uncle Vernon .She deserved it Harry said breathing very fast .She deserved what she got .You keep away from me .He fumbled behind him for the latch on the door .Im going Harry said .Ive had enough .And in the next moment he was out in the dark quiet street heaving his heavy trunk behind him Hedwigs cage under his arm .3 THE KNIGHT BUS Harry was several streets away before he collapsed onto a low wall in Magnolia Crescent panting from the effort of dragging his trunk .He sat quite still anger still surging through him listening to the frantic thumping of his heart .But after ten minutes alone in the dark street a new emotion overtook him panic .Whichever way he looked at it he had never been in a worse fix .He was stranded quite alone in the dark Muggle world with absolutely nowhere to go .And the worst of it was he had just done serious magic which meant that he was almost certainly expelled from Hogwarts .He had broken the Decree for the Restriction of Underage Wizardry so badly he was surprised Ministry of Magic representatives werent swooping down on him where he sat .Harry shivered and looked up and down Magnolia Crescent .What was going to happen to him ?Would he be arrested or would he simply be outlawed from the wizarding world ?He thought of Ron and Hermione and his heart sank even lower .Harry was sure that criminal or not Ron and Hermione would want to help him now but they were both abroad and with Hedwig gone he had no means of contacting them .He didnt have any Muggle money either .There was a little wizard gold in the money bag at the bottom of his trunk but the rest of the fortune his parents had left him was stored in a vault at Gringotts Wizarding Bank in London .Hed never be able to drag his trunk all the way to London .Unless .He looked down at his wand which he was still clutching in his hand .If he was already expelled his heart was now thumping painfully fast a bit more magic couldnt hurt .He had the Invisibility Cloak he had inherited from his father what if he bewitched the trunk to make it featherlight tied it to his broomstick covered himself in the cloak and flew to London ?Then he could get the rest of his money out of his vault and .begin his life as an outcast .It was a horrible prospect but he couldnt sit on this wall forever or hed find himself trying to explain to Muggle police why he was out in the dead of night with a trunkful of spellbooks and a broomstick .Harry opened his trunk again and pushed the contents aside looking for the Invisibility Cloak but before he had found it he straightened up suddenly looking around him once more .A funny prickling on the back of his neck had made Harry feel he was being watched but the street appeared to be deserted and no lights shone from any of the large square houses .He bent over his trunk again but almost immediately stood up once more his hand clenched on his wand .He had sensed rather than heard it someone or something was standing in the narrow gap between the garage and the fence behind him .Harry squinted at the black alleyway .If only it would move then hed know whether it was just a stray cat or something else .Lumos Harry muttered and a light appeared at the end of his wand almost dazzling him .He held it high over his head and the pebbledashed walls of number two suddenly sparkled the garage door gleamed and between them Harry saw quite distinctly the hulking outline of something very big with wide gleaming eyes .Harry stepped backward .His legs hit his trunk and he tripped .His wand flew out of his hand as he flung out an arm to break his fall and he landed hard in the gutter There was a deafening BANG and Harry threw up his hands to shield his eyes against a sudden blinding light With a yell he rolled back onto the pavement just in time .A second later a gigantic pair of wheels and headlights screeched to a halt exactly where Harry had just been lying .They belonged as Harry saw when he raised his head to a tripledecker violently purple bus which had appeared out of thin air .Gold lettering over the windshield spelled The Knight Bus .For a split second Harry wondered if he had been knocked silly by his fall .Then a conductor in a purple uniform leapt out of the bus and began to speak loudly to the night .Welcome to the Knight Bus emergency transport for the stranded witch or wizard .Just stick out your wand hand step on board and we can take you anywhere you want to go .My name is Stan Shunpike and I will be your conductor this eve The conductor stopped abruptly .He had just caught sight of Harry who was still sitting on the ground .Harry snatched up his wand again and scrambled to his feet .Close up he saw that Stan Shunpike was only a few years older than he was eighteen or nineteen at most with large protruding ears and quite a few pimples .What were you doin down there ?said Stan dropping his professional manner .Fell over said Harry .Choo fall over for ?sniggered Stan .I didnt do it on purpose said Harry annoyed .One of the knees in his jeans was torn and the hand he had thrown out to break his fall was bleeding .He suddenly remembered why he had fallen over and turned around quickly to stare at the alleyway between the garage and fence .The Knight Buss headlamps were flooding it with light and it was empty .Choo lookin at ?said Stan .There was a big black thing said Harry pointing uncertainly into the gap .Like a dog .but massive He looked around at Stan whose mouth was slightly open .With a feeling of unease Harry saw Stans eyes move to the scar on Harrys forehead .Woss that on your ead ?said Stan abruptly .Nothing said Harry quickly flattening his hair over his scar .If the Ministry of Magic was looking for him he didnt want to make it too easy for them .Woss your name ?Stan persisted .Neville Longbottom said Harry saying the first name that came into his head .So so this bus he went on quickly hoping to distract Stan did you say it goes anywhere ?Yep said Stan proudly anywhere you like longs its on land .Cant do nuffink underwater .Ere he said looking suspicious again you did flag us down dincha ?Stuck out your wand and dincha ?Yes said Harry quickly .Listen how much would it be to get to London ?Eleven Sickles said Stan but for firteen you get ot chocolate and for fifteen you get an ot water bottle an a toofbrush in the color of your choice .Harry rummaged once more in his trunk extracted his money bag and shoved some gold into Stans hand .He and Stan then lifted his trunk with Hedwigs cage balanced on top up the steps of the bus .There were no seats instead half a dozen brass bedsteads stood beside the curtained windows .Candles were burning in brackets beside each bed illuminating the woodpaneled walls .A tiny wizard in a nightcap at the rear of the bus muttered Not now thanks Im pickling some slugs and rolled over in his sleep .You ave this one Stan whispered shoving Harrys trunk under the bed right behind the driver who was sitting in an armchair in front of the steering wheel .This is our driver Ernie Prang .This is Neville Longbottom Ern .Ernie Prang an elderly wizard wearing very thick glasses nodded to Harry who nervously flattened his bangs again and sat down on his bed .Take er away Ern said Stan sitting down in the armchair next to Ernies .There was another tremendous BANG and the next moment Harry found himself flat on his bed thrown backward by the speed of the Knight Bus .Pulling himself up Harry stared out of the dark window and saw that they were now bowling along a completely different street .Stan was watching Harrys stunned face with great enjoyment .This is where we was before you flagged us down he said .Where are we Ern ?Somewhere in Wales ?Ar said Ernie .How come the Muggles dont hear the bus ?said Harry .Them !said Stan contemptuously .Don listen properly do they ?Don look properly either .Never notice nuffink they don .Best go wake up Madam Marsh Stan said Ern .Well be in Abergavenny in a minute .Stan passed Harrys bed and disappeared up a narrow wooden staircase .Harry was still looking out of the window feeling increasingly nervous .Ernie didnt seem to have mastered the use of a steering wheel .The Knight Bus kept mounting the pavement but it didnt hit anything lines of lampposts mailboxes and trash cans jumped out of its way as it approached and back into position once it had passed .Stan came back downstairs followed by a faintly green witch wrapped in a traveling cloak .Ere you go Madam Marsh said Stan happily as Ern stamped on the brake and the beds slid a foot or so toward the front of the bus .Madam Marsh clamped a handkerchief to her mouth and tottered down the steps .Stan threw her bag out after her and rammed the doors shut there was another loud BANG and they were thundering down a narrow country lane trees leaping out of the way .Harry wouldnt have been able to sleep even if he had been traveling on a bus that didnt keep banging loudly and jumping a hundred miles at a time .His stomach churned as he fell back to wondering what was going to happen to him and whether the Dursleys had managed to get Aunt Marge off the ceiling yet .Stan had unfurled a copy of the Daily Prophet and was now reading with his tongue between his teeth .A large photograph of a sunkenfaced man with long matted hair blinked slowly at Harry from the front page .He looked strangely familiar .That man !Harry said forgetting his troubles for a moment .He was on the Muggle news !Stanley turned to the front page and chuckled .Sirius Black he said nodding .Course e was on the Muggle news Neville where you been ?He gave a superior sort of chuckle at the blank look on Harrys face removed the front page and handed it to Harry .You oughta read the papers more Neville .Harry held the paper up to the candlelight and read BLACK STILL AT LARGE Sirius Black possibly the most infamous prisoner ever to be held in Azkaban fortress is still eluding capture the Ministry of Magic confirmed today .We are doing all we can to recapture Black said the Minister of Magic Cornelius Fudge this morning and we beg the magical community to remain calm .Fudge has been criticized by some members of the International Federation of Warlocks for informing the Muggle Prime Minister of the crisis .Well really I had to dont you know said an irritable Fudge .Black is mad .Hes a danger to anyone who crosses him magic or Muggle .I have the Prime Ministers assurance that he will not breathe a word of Blacks true identity to anyone .And lets face it whod believe him if he did ?While Muggles have been told that Black is carrying a gun a kind of metal wand that Muggles use to kill each other the magical community lives in fear of a massacre like that of twelve years ago when Black murdered thirteen people with a single curse .Harry looked into the shadowed eyes of Sirius Black the only part of the sunken face that seemed alive .Harry had never met a vampire but he had seen pictures of them in his Defense Against the Dark Arts classes and Black with his waxy white skin looked just like one .Scarylookin fing inee ?said Stan who had been watching Harry read .He murdered thirteen people ?said Harry handing the page back to Stan with one curse ?Yep said Stan in front of witnesses an all .Broad daylight .Big trouble it caused dinnit Ern ?Ar said Ern darkly .Stan swiveled in his armchair his hands on the back the better to look at Harry .Black woz a big supporter of YouKnowOo he said .What Voldemort ?said Harry without thinking .Even Stans pimples went white Ern jerked the steering wheel so hard that a whole farmhouse had to jump aside to avoid the bus .You outta your tree ?yelped Stan .Choo say is name for ?Sorry said Harry hastily .Sorry I I forgot Forgot !said Stan weakly .Blimey my earts goin that fast .So so Black was a supporter of YouKnowWho ?Harry prompted apologetically .Yeah said Stan still rubbing his chest .Yeah thats right .Very close to YouKnowOo they say .Anyway when little Arry Potter got the better of You KnowOo Harry nervously flattened his bangs down again .all YouKnowOos supporters was tracked down wasnt they Ern ?Most of em knew it was all over wiv YouKnowOo gone and they came quiet .But not Sirius Black .I eard he thought ed be secondin command once YouKnowOo ad taken over .Anyway they cornered Black in the middle of a street full of Muggles an Black took out is wand and e blasted alf the street apart an a wizard got it an so did a dozen Muggles what got in the way .Orrible eh ?An you know what Black did then ?Stan continued in a dramatic whisper .What ?said Harry .Laughed said Stan .Jus stood there an laughed .An when reinforcements from the Ministry of Magic got there e went wiv em quiet as anyfink still laughing is ead off .Cos es mad inee Ern ?Inee mad ?If he werent when he went to Azkaban he will be now said Ern in his slow voice .Id blow meself up before I set foot in that place .Serves him right mind you .after what he did .They ad a job coverin it up din they Ern ?Stan said .Ole street blown up an all them Muggles dead .What was it they said ad appened Ern ?Gas explosion grunted Ernie .An now es out said Stan examining the newspaper picture of Blacks gaunt face again .Never been a breakout from Azkaban before as there Ern ?Beats me ow e did it .Frightenin eh ?Mind I dont fancy is chances against them Azkaban guards eh Ern ?Ernie suddenly shivered .Talk about summat else Stan theres a good lad .Them Azkaban guards give me the collywobbles .Stan put the paper away reluctantly and Harry leaned against the window of the Knight Bus feeling worse than ever .He couldnt help imagining what Stan might be telling his passengers in a few nights time .Ear about that Arry Potter ?Blew up is aunt !We ad im ere on the Knight Bus dint we Ern ?E was tryin to run for it .He Harry had broken wizard law just like Sirius Black .Was inflating Aunt Marge bad enough to land him in Azkaban ?Harry didnt know anything about the wizard prison though everyone hed ever heard speak of it did so in the same fearful tone .Hagrid the Hogwarts gamekeeper had spent two months there only last year .Harry wouldnt soon forget the look of terror on Hagrid s face when he had been told where he was going and Hagrid was one of the bravest people Harry knew .The Knight Bus rolled through the darkness scattering bushes and wastebaskets telephone booths and trees and Harry lay restless and miserable on his feather bed .After a while Stan remembered that Harry had paid for hot chocolate but poured it all over Harrys pillow when the bus moved abruptly from Anglesey to Aberdeen .One by one wizards and witches in dressing gowns and slippers descended from the upper floors to leave the bus .They all looked very pleased to go .Finally Harry was the only passenger left .Right then Neville said Stan clapping his hands whereabouts in London ?Diagon Alley said Harry .Righto said Stan .Old tight then .BANG !They were thundering along Charing Cross Road .Harry sat up and watched buildings and benches squeezing themselves out of the Knight Buss way .The sky was getting a little lighter .He would lie low for a couple of hours go to Gringotts the moment it opened then set off where he didnt know .Ern slammed on the brakes and the Knight Bus skidded to a halt in front of a small and shabby looking pub the Leaky Cauldron behind which lay the magical entrance to Diagon Alley .Thanks Harry said to Ern .He jumped down the steps and helped Stan lower his trunk and Hedwigs cage onto the pavement .Well said Harry .Bye then !But Stan wasnt paying attention .Still standing in the doorway to the bus he was goggling at the shadowy entrance to the Leaky Cauldron .There you are Harry said a voice .Before Harry could turn he felt a hand on his shoulder .At the same time Stan shouted Blimey !Ern come ere !Come ere !Harry looked up at the owner of the hand on his shoulder and felt a bucketful of ice cascade into his stomach he had walked right into Cornelius Fudge the Minister of Magic himself .Stan leapt onto the pavement beside them .What didja call Neville Minister ?he said excitedly .Fudge a portly little man in a long pinstriped cloak looked cold and exhausted .Neville ?he repeated frowning .This is Harry Potter .I knew it !Stan shouted gleefully .Ern !Ern !Guess oo Neville is Ern !Es Arry Potter !I can see is scar !Yes said Fudge testily well Im very glad the Knight Bus picked Harry up but he and I need to step inside the Leaky Cauldron now .Fudge increased the pressure on Harrys shoulder and Harry found himself being steered inside the pub .A stooping figure bearing a lantern appeared through the door behind the bar .It was Tom the wizened toothless landlord .Youve got him Minister !said Tom .Will you be wanting anything ?Beer ?Brandy ?Perhaps a pot of tea said Fudge who still hadnt let go of Harry .There was a loud scraping and puffing from behind them and Stan and Ern appeared carrying Harrys trunk and Hedwigs cage and looking around excitedly .Ow come you dint tell us oo you are eh Neville ?said Stan beaming at Harry while Ernies owlish face peered interestedly over Stans shoulder .And a private parlor please Tom said Fudge pointedly .Bye Harry said miserably to Stan and Ern as Tom beckoned Fudge toward the passage that led from the bar .Bye Neville !called Stan .Fudge marched Harry along the narrow passage after Toms lantern and then into a small parlor .Tom clicked his fingers a fire burst into life in the grate and he bowed himself out of the room .Sit down Harry said Fudge indicating a chair by the fire .Harry sat down feeling goose bumps rising up his arms despite the glow of the fire .Fudge took off his pinstriped cloak and tossed it aside then hitched up the trousers of his bottlegreen suit and sat down opposite Harry .I am Cornelius Fudge Harry .The Minister of Magic .Harry already knew this of course he had seen Fudge once before but as he had been wearing his fathers Invisibility Cloak at the time Fudge wasnt to know that .Tom the innkeeper reappeared wearing an apron over his nightshirt and bearing a tray of tea and crumpets .He placed the tray on a table between Fudge and Harry and left the parlor closing the door behind him .Well Harry said Fudge pouring out tea youve had us all in a right flap I dont mind telling you .Running away from your aunt and uncles house like that !Id started to think .but youre safe and thats what matters .Fudge buttered himself a crumpet and pushed the plate toward Harry .Eat Harry you look dead on your feet .Now then .You will be pleased to hear that we have dealt with the unfortunate blowingup of Miss Marjorie Dursley .Two members of the Accidental Magic Reversal Squad were dispatched to Privet Drive a few hours ago .Miss Dursley has been punctured and her memory has been modified .She has no recollection of the incident at all .So thats that and no harm done .Fudge smiled at Harry over the rim of his teacup rather like an uncle surveying a favorite nephew .Harry who couldnt believe his ears opened his mouth to speak couldnt think of anything to say and closed it again .Ah youre worrying about the reaction of your aunt and uncle ?said Fudge .Well I wont deny that they are extremely angry Harry but they are prepared to take you back next summer as long as you stay at Hogwarts for the Christmas and Easter holidays .Harry unstuck his throat .I always stay at Hogwarts for the Christmas and Easter holidays he said and I dont ever want to go back to Privet Drive .Now now Im sure youll feel differently once youve calmed down said Fudge in a worried tone .They are your family after all and Im sure you are fond of each other er very deep down .It didnt occur to Harry to put Fudge right .He was still waiting to hear what was going to happen to him now .So all that remains said Fudge now buttering himself a second crumpet is to decide where youre going to spend the last three weeks of your vacation .I suggest you take a room here at the Leaky Cauldron and Hang on blurted Harry .What about my punishment ?Fudge blinked .Punishment ?I broke the law !Harry said .The Decree for the Restriction of Underage Wizardry !Oh my dear boy were not going to punish you for a little thing like that !cried Fudge waving his crumpet impatiently .It was an accident !We dont send people to Azkaban just for blowing up their aunts !But this didnt tally at all with Harrys past dealings with the Ministry of Magic .Last year I got an official warning just because a houseelf smashed a pudding in my uncles house !he told Fudge frowning .The Ministry of Magic said Id be expelled from Hogwarts if there was any more magic there !Unless Harrys eyes were deceiving him Fudge was suddenly looking awkward .Circumstances change Harry .We have to take into account .in the present climate .Surely you dont want to be expelled ?Of course I dont said Harry .Well then whats all the fuss about ?laughed Fudge .Now have a crumpet Harry while I go and see if Toms got a room for you .Fudge strode out of the parlor and Harry stared after him .There was something extremely odd going on .Why had Fudge been waiting for him at the Leaky Cauldron if not to punish him for what hed done ?And now Harry came to think of it surely it wasnt usual for the Minister of Magic himself to get involved in matters of underage magic ?Fudge came back accompanied by Tom the innkeeper .Room elevens free Harry said Fudge .I think youll be very comfortable .Just one thing and Im sure youll understand .I dont want you wandering off into Muggle London all right ?Keep to Diagon Alley .And youre to be back here before dark each night .Sure youll understand .Tom will be keeping an eye on you for me .Okay said Harry slowly but why ?Dont want to lose you again do we ?said Fudge with a hearty laugh .No no .best we know where you are .I mean .Fudge cleared his throat loudly and picked up his pinstriped cloak .Well Ill be off plenty to do you know .Have you had any luck with Black yet ?Harry asked .Fudges finger slipped on the silver fastenings of his cloak .Whats that ?Oh youve heard well no not yet but its only a matter of time .The Azkaban guards have never yet failed .and they are angrier than Ive ever seen them .Fudge shuddered slightly .So Ill say goodbye .He held out his hand and Harry shaking it had a sudden idea .Er Minister ?Can I ask you something ?Certainly said Fudge with a smile .Well third years at Hogwarts are allowed to visit Hogsmeade but my aunt and uncle didnt sign the permission form .Dyou think you could ?Fudge was looking uncomfortable .Ah he said .No no Im very sorry Harry but as Im not your parent or guardian But youre the Minister of Magic said Harry eagerly .If you gave me permission No Im sorry Harry but rules are rules said Fudge flatly .Perhaps youll be able to visit Hogsmeade next year .In fact I think its best if you dont .yes .well Ill be off .Enjoy your stay Harry .And with a last smile and shake of Harrys hand Fudge left the room .Tom now moved forward beaming at Harry .If youll follow me Mr Potter he said Ive already taken your things up .Harry followed Tom up a handsome wooden staircase to a door with a brass number eleven on it which Tom unlocked and opened for him .Inside was a very comfortablelooking bed some highly polished oak furniture a cheerfully crackling fire and perched on top of the wardrobe Hedwig !Harry gasped .The snowy owl clicked her beak and fluttered down onto Harrys arm .Very smart owl youve got there chuckled Tom .Arrived about five minutes after you did .If theres anything you need Mr Potter dont hesitate to ask .He gave another bow and left .Harry sat on his bed for a long time absentmindedly stroking Hedwig .The sky outside the window was changing rapidly from deep velvety blue to cold steely gray and then slowly to pink shot with gold .Harry could hardly believe that hed left Privet Drive only a few hours ago that he wasnt expelled and that he was now facing three Dursleyfree weeks .Its been a very weird night Hedwig he yawned .And without even removing his glasses he slumped back onto his pillows and fell asleep .THE LEAKY CAULDRON It took Harry several days to get used to his strange new freedom .Never before had he been able to get up whenever he wanted or eat whatever he fancied .He could even go wherever he pleased as long as it was in Diagon Alley and as this long cobbled street was packed with the most fascinating wizarding shops in the world Harry felt no desire to break his word to Fudge and stray back into the Muggle world .Harry ate breakfast each morning in the Leaky Cauldron where he liked watching the other guests funny little witches from the country up for a days shopping venerablelooking wizards arguing over the latest article in Transfiguration Today wildlooking warlocks raucous dwarfs and once what looked suspiciously like a hag who ordered a plate of raw liver from behind a thick woollen balaclava .After breakfast Harry would go out into the backyard take out his wand tap the third brick from the left above the trash bin and stand back as the archway into Diagon Alley opened in the wall .Harry spent the long sunny days exploring the shops and eating under the brightly colored umbrellas outside cafes where his fellow diners were showing one another their purchases its a lunascope old boy no more messing around with moon charts see ?or else discussing the case of Sirius Black personally I wont let any of the children out alone until hes back in Azkaban .Harry didnt have to do his homework under the blankets by flashlight anymore now he could sit in the bright sunshine outside Florean Fortescues Ice Cream Parlor finishing all his essays with occasional help from Florean Fortescue himself who apart from knowing a great deal about medieval witch burnings gave Harry free sundaes every half an hour .Once Harry had refilled his money bag with gold Galleons silver Sickles and bronze Knuts from his vault at Gringotts he had to exercise a lot of self control not to spend the whole lot at once .He had to keep reminding himself that he had five years to go at Hogwarts and how it would feel to ask the Dursleys for money for spellbooks to stop himself from buying a handsome set of solid gold Gobstones a wizarding game rather like marbles in which the stones squirt a nastysmelling liquid into the other players face when they lose a point .He was sorely tempted too by the perfect moving model of the galaxy in a large glass ball which would have meant he never had to take another Astronomy lesson .But the thing that tested Harrys resolution most appeared in his favorite shop Quality Quidditch Supplies a week after hed arrived at the Leaky Cauldron .Curious to know what the crowd in the shop was staring at Harry edged his way inside and squeezed in among the excited witches and wizards until he glimpsed a newly erected podium on which was mounted the most magnificent broom he had ever seen in his life .Just come out prototype a squarejawed wizard was telling his companion .Its the fastest broom in the world isnt it Dad ?squeaked a boy younger than Harry who was swinging off his fathers arm .Irish International Sides just put in an order for seven of these beauties !the proprietor of the shop told the crowd .And theyre favorites for the World Cup !A large witch in front of Harry moved and he was able to read the sign next to the broom THE FIREBOLT This stateoftheart racing broom sports a stream lined superfine handle of ash treated with a diamondhard polish and handnumbered with its own registration number .Each individually selected birch twig in the broomtail has been honed to aerodynamic perfection giving the Firebolt unsurpassable balance and pinpoint precision .The Firebolt has an acceleration of 150 miles an hour in ten seconds and incorporates an unbreakable Braking Charm .Price on request .Price on request .Harry didnt like to think how much gold the Firebolt would cost .He had never wanted anything as much in his whole life but he had never lost a Quidditch match on his Nimbus Two Thousand and what was the point in emptying his Gringotts vault for the Firebolt when he had a very good broom already ?Harry didnt ask for the price but he returned almost every day after that just to look at the Firebolt .There were however things that Harry needed to buy .He went to the Apothecary to replenish his store of potions ingredients and as his school robes were now several inches too short in the arm and leg he visited Madam Malkins Robes for All Occasions and bought new ones .Most important of all he had to buy his new schoolbooks which would include those for his two new subjects Care of Magical Creatures and Divination .Harry got a surprise as he looked in at the bookshop window .Instead of the usual display of gold embossed spellbooks the size of paving slabs there was a large iron cage behind the glass that held about a hundred copies of The Monster Book of Monsters .Torn pages were flying everywhere as the books grappled with each other locked together in furious wrestling matches and snapping aggressively .Harry pulled his booklist out of his pocket and consulted it for the first time .The Monster Book of Monsters was listed as the required book for Care of Magical Creatures .Now Harry understood why Hagrid had said it would come in useful .He felt relieved he had been wondering whether Hagrid wanted help with some terrifying new pet .As Harry entered Flourish and Blotts the manager came hurrying toward him .Hogwarts ?he said abruptly .Come to get your new books ?Yes said Harry I need Get out of the way said the manager impatiently brushing Harry aside .He drew on a pair of very thick gloves picked up a large knobbly walking stick and proceeded toward the door of the Monster Books cage .Hang on said Harry quickly Ive already got one of those .Have you ?A look of enormous relief spread over the managers face .Thank heavens for that .Ive been bitten five times already this morning A loud ripping noise rent the air two of the Monster Books had seized a third and were pulling it apart .Stop it !Stop it !cried the manager poking the walking stick through the bars and knocking the books apart .Im never stocking them again never !Its been bedlam !I thought wed seen the worst when we bought two hundred copies of the Invisible Book of Invisibility cost a fortune and we never found them .Well .is there anything else I can help you with ?Yes said Harry looking down his booklist I need Unfogging the Future by Cassandra Vablatsky .Ah starting Divination are you ?said the manager stripping off his gloves and leading Harry into the back of the shop where there was a corner devoted to fortunetelling .A small table was stacked with volumes such as Predicting the Unpredictable Insulate Yourself Against Shocks and Broken Balls When Fortunes Turn Foul .Here you are said the manager who had climbed a set of steps to take down a thick blackbound book .Unfogging the Future .Very good guide to all your basic fortunetelling methods palmistry crystal balls bird entrails But Harry wasnt listening .His eyes had fallen on another book which was among a display on a small table Death Omens What to Do When You Know the Worst Is Coming .Oh I wouldnt read that if I were you said the manager lightly looking to see what Harry was staring at .Youll start seeing death omens everywhere .Its enough to frighten anyone to death .But Harry continued to stare at the front cover of the book it showed a black dog large as a bear with gleaming eyes .It looked oddly familiar .The manager pressed Unfogging the Future into Harrys hands .Anything else ?he said .Yes said Harry tearing his eyes away from the dogs and dazedly consulting his booklist .Er I need Intermediate Transfiguration and The Standard Book of Spells Grade Three .Harry emerged from Flourish and Blotts ten minutes later with his new books under his arms and made his way back to the Leaky Cauldron hardly noticing where he was going and bumping into several people .He tramped up the stairs to his room went inside and tipped his books onto his bed .Somebody had been in to tidy the windows were open and sun was pouring inside .Harry could hear the buses rolling by in the unseen Muggle street behind him and the sound of the invisible crowd below in Diagon Alley .He caught sight of himself in the mirror over the basin .It cant have been a death omen he told his reflection defiantly .I was panicking when I saw that thing in Magnolia Crescent .It was probably just a stray dog .He raised his hand automatically and tried to make his hair lie flat .Youre fighting a losing battle there dear said his mirror in a wheezy voice .As the days slipped by Harry started looking wherever he went for a sign of Ron or Hermione .Plenty of Hogwarts students were arriving in Diagon Alley now with the start of term so near .Harry met Seamus Finnigan and Dean Thomas his fellow Gryffindors in Quality Quidditch Supplies where they too were ogling the Firebolt he also ran into the real Neville Longbottom a roundfaced forgetful boy outside Flourish and Blotts .Harry didnt stop to chat Neville appeared to have mislaid his booklist and was being told off by his very formidablelooking grandmother .Harry hoped she never found out that hed pretended to be Neville while on the run from the Ministry of Magic .Harry woke on the last day of the holidays thinking that he would at least meet Ron and Hermione tomorrow on the Hogwarts Express .He got up dressed went for a last look at the Firebolt and was just wondering where hed have lunch when someone yelled his name and he turned .Harry !HARRY !They were there both of them sitting outside Florean Fortescues Ice Cream Parlor Ron looking incredibly freckly Hermione very brown both waving frantically at him .Finally !said Ron grinning at Harry as he sat down .We went to the Leaky Cauldron but they said youd left and we went to Flourish and Blotts and Madam Malkins and I got all my school stuff last week Harry explained .And how come you knew Im staying at the Leaky Cauldron ?Dad said Ron simply .Mr Weasley who worked at the Ministry of Magic would of course have heard the whole story of what had happened to Aunt Marge .Did you really blow up your aunt Harry ?said Hermione in a very serious voice .I didnt mean to said Harry while Ron roared with laughter .I just lost control .Its not funny Ron said Hermione sharply .Honestly Im amazed Harry wasnt expelled .So am I admitted Harry .Forget expelled I thought I was going to be arrested .He looked at Ron .Your dad doesnt know why Fudge let me off does he ?Probably cause its you isnt it ?shrugged Ron still chuckling .Famous Harry Potter and all that .Id hate to see what the Ministryd do to me if I blew up an aunt .Mind you theyd have to dig me up first because Mum wouldve killed me .Anyway you can ask Dad yourself this evening .Were staying at the Leaky Cauldron tonight too !So you can come to Kings Cross with us tomorrow !Hermiones there as well !Hermione nodded beaming .Mum and Dad dropped me off this morning with all my Hogwarts things .Excellent !said Harry happily .So have you got all your new books and stuff ?Look at this said Ron pulling a long thin box out of a bag and opening it .Brandnew wand .Fourteen inches willow containing one unicorn tailhair .And weve got all our books He pointed at a large bag under his chair .What about those Monster Books eh ?The assistant nearly cried when we said we wanted two .Whats all that Hermione ?Harry asked pointing at not one but three bulging bags in the chair next to her .Well Im taking more new subjects than you arent I ?said Hermione .Those are my books for Arithmancy Care of Magical Creatures Divination Study of Ancient Runes Muggle Studies What are you doing Muggle Studies for ?said Ron rolling his eyes at Harry .Youre Muggleborn !Your mum and dad are Muggles !You already know all about Muggles !But itll be fascinating to study them from the wizarding point of view said Hermione earnestly .Are you planning to eat or sleep at all this year Hermione ?asked Harry while Ron sniggered .Hermione ignored them .Ive still got ten Galleons she said checking her purse .Its my birthday in September and Mum and Dad gave me some money to get myself an early birthday present .How about a nice book ?said Ron innocently .No I dont think so said Hermione composedly .I really want an owl .I mean Harrys got Hedwig and youve got Errol I havent said Ron .Errols a family owl .All Ive got is Scabbers .He pulled his pet rat out of his pocket .And I want to get him checked over he added placing Scabbers on the table in front of them .I dont think Egypt agreed with him .Scabbers was looking thinner than usual and there was a definite droop to his whiskers .Theres a magical creature shop just over there said Harry who knew Diagon Alley very well by now .You could see if theyve got anything for Scabbers and Hermione can get her owl .So they paid for their ice cream and crossed the street to the Magical Menagerie .There wasnt much room inside .Every inch of wall was hidden by cages .It was smelly and very noisy because the occupants of these cages were all squeaking squawking jabbering or hissing .The witch behind the counter was already advising a wizard on the care of doubleended newts so Harry Ron and Hermione waited examining the cages .A pair of enormous purple toads sat gulping wetly and feasting on dead blowflies .A gigantic tortoise with a jewelencrusted shell was glittering near the window .Poisonous orange snails were oozing slowly up the side of their glass tank and a fat white rabbit kept changing into a silk top hat and back again with a loud popping noise .Then there were cats of every color a noisy cage of ravens a basket of funny custardcolored furballs that were humming loudly and on the counter a vast cage of sleek black rats that were playing some sort of skipping game using their long bald tails .The doubleended newt wizard left and Ron approached the counter .Its my rat he told the witch .He been a bit offcolor ever since I brought him back from Egypt .Bang him on the counter said the witch pulling a pair of heavy black spectacles out of her pocket .Ron lifted Scabbers out of his inside pocket and placed him next to the cage of his fellow rats who stopped their skipping tricks and scuffled to the wire for a better look .Like nearly everything Ron owned Scabbers the rat was secondhand he had once belonged to Rons brother Percy and a bit battered .Next to the glossy rats in the cage he looked especially woebegone .Hm said the witch picking up Scabbers .How old is this rat ?Dunno said Ron .Quite old .He used to belong to my brother .What powers does he have ?said the witch examining Scabbers closely .Er The truth was that Scabbers had never shown the faintest trace of interesting powers .The witchs eyes moved from Scabbers s tattered left ear to his front paw which had a toe missing and tutted loudly .Hes been through the mill this one she said .He was like that when Percy gave him to me said Ron defensively .An ordinary common or garden rat like this cant be expected to live longer than three years or so said the witch .Now if you were looking for something a bit more hardwearing you might like one of these She indicated the black rats who promptly started skipping again .Ron muttered Showoffs .Well if you dont want a replacement you can try this rat tonic said the witch reaching under the counter and bringing out a small red bottle .Okay said Ron .How much OUCH !Ron buckled as something huge and orange came soaring from the top of the highest cage landed on his head and then propelled itself spitting madly at Scabbers .NO CROOKSHANKS NO !cried the witch but Scabbers shot from between her hands like a bar of soap landed splaylegged on the floor and then scampered for the door .Scabbers !Ron shouted racing out of the shop after him Harry followed .It took them nearly ten minutes to catch Scabbers who had taken refuge under a wastepaper bin outside Quality Quidditch Supplies .Ron stuffed the trembling rat back into his pocket and straightened up massaging his head .What was that ?It was either a very big cat or quite a small tiger said Harry .Wheres Hermione ?Probably getting her owl They made their way back up the crowded street to the Magical Menagerie .As they reached it Hermione came out but she wasnt carrying an owl .Her arms were clamped tightly around the enormous ginger cat .You bought that monster ?said Ron his mouth hanging open .Hes gorgeous isnt he ?said Hermione glowing .That was a matter of opinion thought Harry .The cats ginger fur was thick and fluffy but it was definitely a bit bowlegged and its face looked grumpy and oddly squashed as though it had run headlong into a brick wall .Now that Scabbers was out of sight however the cat was purring contentedly in Hermione s arms .Hermione that thing nearly scalped me !said Ron .He didnt mean to did you Crookshanks ?said Hermione .And what about Scabbers ?said Ron pointing at the lump in his chest pocket .He needs rest and relaxation !Hows he going to get it with that thing around ?That reminds me you forgot your rat tonic said Hermione slapping the small red bottle into Rons hand .And stop worrying Crookshanks will be sleeping in my dormitory and Scabbers in yours whats the problem ?Poor Crookshanks that witch said hed been in there for ages no one wanted him .I wonder why said Ron sarcastically as they set off toward the Leaky Cauldron .They found Mr Weasley sitting in the bar reading the Daily Prophet .Harry !he said smiling as he looked up .How are you ?Fine thanks said Harry as he Ron and Hermione joined Mr Weasley with all their shopping .Mr Weasley put down his paper and Harry saw the now familiar picture of Sirius Black staring up at him .They still havent caught him then ?he asked .No said Mr Weasley looking extremely grave .Theyve pulled us all off our regular jobs at the Ministry to try and find him but no luck so far .Would we get a reward if we caught him ?asked Ron .Itd be good to get some more money Dont be ridiculous Ron said Mr Weasley who on closer inspection looked very strained .Blacks not going to be caught by a thirteenyearold wizard .Its the Azkaban guards wholl get him back you mark my words .At that moment Mrs Weasley entered the bar laden with shopping bags and followed by the twins Fred and George who were about to start their fifth year at Hogwarts the newly elected Head Boy Percy and the Weasleys youngest child and only girl Ginny .Ginny who had always been very taken with Harry seemed even more heartily embarrassed than usual when she saw him perhaps because he had saved her life during their previous year at Hogwarts .She went very red and muttered hello without looking at him .Percy however held out his hand solemnly as though he and Harry had never met and said Harry .How nice to see you .Hello Percy said Harry trying not to laugh .I hope youre well ?said Percy pompously shaking hands .It was rather like being introduced to the mayor .Very well thanks Harry !said Fred elbowing Percy out of the way and bowing deeply .Simply splendid to see you old boy Marvelous said George pushing Fred aside and seizing Harrys hand in turn .Absolutely spiffing .Percy scowled .Thats enough now said Mrs Weasley .Mum !said Fred as though hed only just spotted her and seizing her hand too .How really corking to see you I said thats enough said Mrs Weasley depositing her shopping in an empty chair .Hello Harry dear .I suppose youve heard our exciting news ?She pointed to the brandnew silver badge on Percys chest .Second Head Boy in the family !she said swelling with pride .And last Fred muttered under his breath .I dont doubt that said Mrs Weasley frowning suddenly .I notice they havent made you two prefects .What do we want to be prefects for ?said George looking revolted at the very idea .Itd take all the fun out of life .Ginny giggled .You want to set a better example for your sister !snapped Mrs Weasley .Ginnys got other brothers to set her an example Mother said Percy loftily .Im going up to change for dinner .He disappeared and George heaved a sigh .We tried to shut him in a pyramid he told Harry .But Mum spotted us .Dinner that night was a very enjoyable affair .Tom the innkeeper put three tables together in the parlor and the seven Weasleys Harry and Hermione ate their way through five delicious courses .Howre we getting to Kings Cross tomorrow Dad ?asked Fred as they dug into a sumptuous chocolate pudding .The Ministrys providing a couple of cars said Mr Weasley .Everyone looked up at him .Why ?said Percy curiously .Its because of you Perce said George seriously .And therell be little flags on the hoods with HB on them for Humongous Bighead said Fred .Everyone except Percy and Mrs Weasley snorted into their pudding .Why are the Ministry providing cars Father ?Percy asked again in a dignified voice .Well as we havent got one anymore said Mr Weasley and as I work there theyre doing me a favor His voice was casual but Harry couldnt help noticing that Mr Weasleys ears had gone red just like Rons did when he was under pressure .Good thing too said Mrs Weasley briskly .Do you realize how much luggage youve all got between you ?A nice sight youd be on the Muggle Underground .You are all packed arent you ?Ron hasnt put all his new things in his trunk yet said Percy in a longsuffering voice .Hes dumped them on my bed .Youd better go and pack properly Ron because we wont have much time in the morning Mrs Weasley called down the table .Ron scowled at Percy .After dinner everyone felt very full and sleepy .One by one they made their way upstairs to their rooms to check their things for the next day .Ron and Percy were next door to Harry .He had just closed and locked his own trunk when he heard angry voices through the wall and went to see what was going on .The door of number twelve was ajar and Percy was shouting .It was here on the bedside table I took it off for polishing I havent touched it all right ?Ron roared back .Whats up ?said Harry .My Head Boy badge is gone said Percy rounding on Harry .Sos Scabberss rat tonic said Ron throwing things out of his trunk to look .I think I mightve left it in the bar Youre not going anywhere till youve found my badge !yelled Percy .Ill get Scabberss stuff Im packed Harry said to Ron and he went downstairs .Harry was halfway along the passage to the bar which was now very dark when he heard another pair of angry voices coming from the parlor .A second later he recognized them as Mr and Mrs Weasleys .He hesitated not wanting them to know hed heard them arguing when the sound of his own name made him stop then move closer to the parlor door . .makes no sense not to tell him Mr Weasley was saying heatedly .Harrys got a right to know .Ive tried to tell Fudge but he insists on treating Harry like a child .Hes thirteen years old and Arthur the truth would terrify him !said Mrs Weasley shrilly .Do you really want to send Harry back to school with that hanging over him ?For heavens sake hes happy not knowing !I dont want to make him miserable I want to put him on his guard !retorted Mr Weasley .You know what Harry and Ron are like wandering off by themselves theyve even ended up in the Forbidden Forest !But Harry mustnt do that this year !When I think what could have happened to him that night he ran away from home !If the Knight Bus hadnt picked him up Im prepared to bet he would have been dead before the Ministry found him .But hes not dead hes fine so whats the point Molly they say Sirius Blacks mad and maybe he is but he was clever enough to escape from Azkaban and thats supposed to be impossible .Its been a month and no ones seen hide nor hair of him and I dont care what Fudge keeps telling the Daily Prophet were no nearer catching Black than inventing self spelling wands .The only thing we know for sure is what Blacks after But Harry will be perfectly safe at Hogwarts .We thought Azkaban was perfectly safe .If Black can break out of Azkaban he can break into Hogwarts .But no ones really sure that Blacks after Harry There was a thud on wood and Harry was sure Mr Weasley had banged his fist on the table .Molly how many times do I have to tell you ?They didnt report it in the press because Fudge wanted it kept quiet but Fudge went out to Azkaban the night Black escaped .The guards told Fudge that Blacks been talking in his sleep for a while now .Always the same words ‘Hes at Hogwarts .hes at Hogwarts .Black is deranged Molly and he wants Harry dead .If you ask me he thinks murdering Harry will bring YouKnowWho back to power .Black lost everything the night Harry stopped YouKnowWho and hes had twelve years alone in Azkaban to brood on that .There was a silence .Harry leaned still closer to the door desperate to hear more .Well Arthur you must do what you think is right .But youre forgetting Albus Dumbledore .I dont think anything could hurt Harry at Hogwarts while Dumbledore s headmaster .I suppose he knows about all this ?Of course he knows .We had to ask him if he minds the Azkaban guards stationing themselves around the entrances to the school grounds .He wasnt happy about it but he agreed .Not happy ?Why shouldnt he be happy if theyre there to catch Black ?Dumbledore isnt fond of the Azkaban guards said Mr Weasley heavily .Nor am I if it comes to that .but when youre dealing with a wizard like Black you sometimes have to join forces with those youd rather avoid .If they save Harry then I will never say another word against them said Mr Weasley wearily .Its late Molly wed better go up .Harry heard chairs move .As quietly as he could he hurried down the passage to the bar and out of sight .The parlor door opened and a few seconds later footsteps told him that Mr and Mrs Weasley were climbing the stairs .The bottle of rat tonic was lying under the table they had sat at earlier .Harry waited until he heard Mr and Mrs Weasleys bedroom door close then headed back upstairs with the bottle .Fred and George were crouching in the shadows on the landing heaving with laughter as they listened to Percy dismantling his and Rons room in search of his badge .Weve got it Fred whispered to Harry .Weve been improving it .The badge now read BigheacL Boy .Harry forced a laugh went to give Ron the rat tonic then shut himself in his room and lay down on his bed .So Sirius Black was after him .This explained everything .Fudge had been lenient with him because he was so relieved to find him alive .Hed made Harry promise to stay in Diagon Alley where there were plenty of wizards to keep an eye on him .And he was sending two Ministry cars to take them all to the station tomorrow so that the Weasleys could look after Harry until he was on the train .Harry lay listening to the muffled shouting next door and wondered why he didnt feel more scared .Sirius Black had murdered thirteen people with one curse Mr and Mrs Weasley obviously thought Harry would be panicstricken if he knew the truth .But Harry happened to agree wholeheartedly with Mrs Weasley that the safest place on earth was wherever Albus Dumbledore happened to be .Didnt people always say that Dumbledore was the only person Lord Voldemort had ever been afraid of ?Surely Black as Voldemorts righthand man would be just as frightened of him ?And then there were these Azkaban guards everyone kept talking about .They seemed to scare most people senseless and if they were stationed all around the school Blacks chances of getting inside seemed very remote .No all in all the thing that bothered Harry most was the fact that his chances of visiting Hogsmeade now looked like zero .Nobody would want Harry to leave the safety of the castle until Black was caught in fact Harry suspected his every move would be carefully watched until the danger had passed .He scowled at the dark ceiling .Did they think he couldnt look after himself ?Hed escaped Lord Voldemort three times he wasnt completely useless .Unbidden the image of the beast in the shadows of Magnolia Crescent crossed his mind .What to do when you know the worst is coming .Im not going to be murdered Harry said out loud .Thats the spirit dear said his mirror sleepily .5 THE DEMENTOR Tom woke Harry the next morning with his usual toothless grin and a cup of tea .Harry got dressed and was just persuading a disgruntled Hedwig to get back into her cage when Ron banged his way into the room pulling a sweatshirt over his head and looking irritable .The sooner we get on the train the better he said .At least I can get away from Percy at Hogwarts .Now hes accusing me of dripping tea on his photo of Penelope Clearwater .You know Ron grimaced his girlfriend .Shes hidden her face under the frame because her nose has gone all blotchy .Ive got something to tell you Harry began but they were interrupted by Fred and George who had looked in to congratulate Ron on infuriating Percy again .They headed down to breakfast where Mr Weasley was reading the front page of the Daily Prophet with a furrowed brow and Mrs Weasley was telling Hermione and Ginny about a love potion shed made as a young girl .All three of them were rather giggly .What were you saying ?Ron asked Harry as they sat down .Later Harry muttered as Percy stormed in .Harry had no chance to speak to Ron or Hermione in the chaos of leaving they were too busy heaving all their trunks down the Leaky Cauldrons narrow staircase and piling them up near the door with Hedwig and Hermes Percys screech owl perched on top in their cages .A small wickerwork basket stood beside the heap of trunks spitting loudly .Its all right Crookshanks Hermione cooed through the wickerwork .Ill let you out on the train .You wont snapped Ron .What about poor Scabbers eh ?He pointed at his chest where a large lump indicated that Scabbers was curled up in his pocket .Mr Weasley who had been outside waiting for the Ministry cars stuck his head inside .Theyre here he said .Harry come on .Mr Weasley marched Harry across the short stretch of pavement toward the first of two oldfashioned dark green cars each of which was driven by a furtive looking wizard wearing a suit of emerald velvet .In you get Harry said Mr Weasley glancing up and down the crowded street .Harry got into the back of the car and was shortly joined by Hermione Ron and to Rons disgust Percy .The journey to Kings Cross was very uneventful compared with Harrys trip on the Knight Bus .The Ministry of Magic cars seemed almost ordinary though Harry noticed that they could slide through gaps that Uncle Vernons new company car certainly couldnt have managed .They reached Kings Cross with twenty minutes to spare the Ministry drivers found them trolleys unloaded their trunks touched their hats in salute to Mr Weasley and drove away somehow managing to jump to the head of an unmoving line at the traffic lights .Mr Weasley kept close to Harrys elbow all the way into the station .Right then he said glancing around them .Lets do this in pairs as there are so many of us .Ill go through first with Harry .Mr Weasley strolled toward the barrier between platforms nine and ten pushing Harrys trolley and apparently very interested in the Intercity 125 that had just arrived at platform nine .With a meaningful look at Harry he leaned casually against the barrier .Harry imitated him .In a moment they had fallen sideways through the solid metal onto platform nine and threequarters and looked up to see the Hogwarts Express a scarlet steam engine puffing smoke over a platform packed with witches and wizards seeing their children onto the train .Percy and Ginny suddenly appeared behind Harry .They were panting and had apparently taken the barrier at a run .Ah theres Penelope !said Percy smoothing his hair and going pink again .Ginny caught Harrys eye and they both turned away to hide their laughter as Percy strode over to a girl with long curly hair walking with his chest thrown out so that she couldnt miss his shiny badge .Once the remaining Weasleys and Hermione had joined them Harry and Ron led the way to the end of the train past packed compartments to a carriage that looked quite empty .They loaded the trunks onto it stowed Hedwig and Crookshanks in the luggage rack then went back outside to say goodbye to Mr and Mrs Weasley .Mrs Weasley kissed all her children then Hermione and finally Harry .He was embarrassed but really quite pleased when she gave him an extra hug .Do take care wont you Harry ?she said as she straightened up her eyes oddly bright .Then she opened her enormous handbag and said Ive made you all sandwiches .Here you are Ron .no theyre not corned beef .Fred ?Wheres Fred ?Here you are dear .Harry said Mr Weasley quietly come over here a moment .He jerked his head toward a pillar and Harry followed him behind it leaving the others crowded around Mrs Weasley .Theres something Ive got to tell you before you leave said Mr Weasley in a tense voice .Its all right Mr Weasley said Harry .I already know .You know ?How could you know ?I er I heard you and Mrs Weasley talking last night .I couldnt help hearing Harry added quickly .Sorry Thats not the way Id have chosen for you to find out said Mr Weasley looking anxious .No honestly its okay .This way you havent broken your word to Fudge and I know whats going on .Harry you must be very scared Im not said Harry sincerely .Really he added because Mr Weasley was looking disbelieving .Im not trying to be a hero but seriously Sirius Black cant be worse than Voldemort can he ?Mr Weasley flinched at the sound of the name but overlooked it .Harry I knew you were well made of stronger stuff than Fudge seems to think and Im obviously pleased that youre not scared but Arthur !called Mrs Weasley who was now shepherding the rest onto the train .Arthur what are you doing ?Its about to go !Hes coming Molly !said Mr Weasley but he turned back to Harry and kept talking in a lower and more hurried voice .Listen I want you to give me your word that Ill be a good boy and stay in the castle ?said Harry gloomily .Not entirely said Mr Weasley who looked more serious than Harry had ever seen him .Harry swear to me you wont go looking for Black .Harry stared .What ?There was a loud whistle .Guards were walking along the train slamming all the doors shut .Promise me Harry said Mr Weasley talking more quickly still that whatever happens Why would I go looking for someone I know wants to kill me ?said Harry blankly .Swear to me that whatever you might hear Arthur quickly !cried Mrs Weasley .Steam was billowing from the train it had started to move .Harry ran to the compartment door and Ron threw it open and stood back to let him on .They leaned out of the window and waved at Mr and Mrs Weasley until the train turned a corner and blocked them from view .I need to talk to you in private Harry muttered to Ron and Hermione as the train picked up speed .Go away Ginny said Ron .Oh thats nice said Ginny huffily and she stalked off .Harry Ron and Hermione set off down the corridor looking for an empty compartment but all were full except for the one at the very end of the train .This had only one occupant a man sitting fast asleep next to the window .Harry Ron and Hermione checked on the threshold .The Hogwarts Express was usually reserved for students and they had never seen an adult there before except for the witch who pushed the food cart .The stranger was wearing an extremely shabby set of wizards robes that had been darned in several places .He looked ill and exhausted .Though quite young his light brown hair was flecked with gray .Who dyou reckon he is ?Ron hissed as they sat down and slid the door shut taking the seats farthest away from the window .Professor R .J .Lupin whispered Hermione at once .How dyou know that ?Its on his case she replied pointing at the luggage rack over the mans head where there was a small battered case held together with a large quantity of neatly knotted string .The name Professor R .J .Lupin was stamped across one corner in peeling letters .Wonder what he teaches ?said Ron frowning at Professor Lupins pallid profile .Thats obvious whispered Hermione .Theres only one vacancy isnt there ?Defense Against the Dark Arts .Harry Ron and Hermione had already had two Defense Against the Dark Arts teachers both of whom had lasted only one year .There were rumors that the job was jinxed .Well I hope hes up to it said Ron doubtfully .He looks like one good hex would finish him off doesnt he ?Anyway .He turned to Harry .What were you going to tell us ?Harry explained all about Mr and Mrs Weasleys argument and the warning Mr Weasley had just given him .When hed finished Ron looked thunderstruck and Hermione had her hands over her mouth .She finally lowered them to say Sirius Black escaped to come after you ?Oh Harry .youll have to be really really careful .Dont go looking for trouble Harry I dont go looking for trouble said Harry nettled .Trouble usually finds me .How thick would Harry have to be to go looking for a nutter who wants to kill him ?said Ron shakily .They were taking the news worse than Harry had expected .Both Ron and Hermione seemed to be much more frightened of Black than he was .No one knows how he got out of Azkaban said Ron uncomfortably .No ones ever done it before .And he was a topsecurity prisoner too .But theyll catch him wont they ?said Hermione earnestly .I mean theyve got all the Muggles looking out for him too .Whats that noise ?said Ron suddenly .A faint tinny sort of whistle was coming from somewhere .They looked all around the compartment .Its coming from your trunk Harry said Ron standing up and reaching into the luggage rack .A moment later he had pulled the Pocket Sneakoscope out from between Harrys robes .It was spinning very fast in the palm of Rons hand and glowing brilliantly .Is that a Sneakoscope ?said Hermione interestedly standing up for a better look .Yeah .mind you its a very cheap one Ron said .It went haywire just as I was tying it to Errols leg to send it to Harry .Were you doing anything untrustworthy at the time ?said Hermione shrewdly .No !Well .I wasnt supposed to be using Errol .You know hes not really up to long journeys .but how else was I supposed to get Harrys present to him ?Stick it back in the trunk Harry advised as the Sneakoscope whistled piercingly or itll wake him up .He nodded toward Professor Lupin .Ron stuffed the Sneakoscope into a particularly horrible pair of Uncle Vernons old socks which deadened the sound then closed the lid of the trunk on it .We could get it checked in Hogsmeade said Ron sitting back down .They sell that sort of thing in Dervish and Banges magical instruments and stuff .Fred and George told me .Do you know much about Hogsmeade ?asked Hermione keenly .Ive read its the only entirely non Muggle settlement in Britain Yeah I think it is said Ron in an offhand sort of way but thats not why I want to go .I just want to get inside Honeydukes !Whats that ?said Hermione .Its this sweetshop said Ron a dreamy look coming over his face where theyve got everything .Pepper Imps they make you smoke at the mouth and great fat Chocoballs full of strawberry mousse and clotted cream and really excellent sugar quills which you can suck in class and just look like youre thinking what to write next But Hogsmeades a very interesting place isnt it ?Hermione pressed on eagerly .In Sites of Historical Sorcery it says the inn was the headquarters for the 1612 goblin rebellion and the Shrieking Shacks supposed to be the most severely haunted building in Britain and massive sherbet balls that make you levitate a few inches off the ground while youre sucking them said Ron who was plainly not listening to a word Hermione was saying .Hermione looked around at Harry .Wont it be nice to get out of school for a bit and explore Hogsmeade ?Spect it will said Harry heavily .Youll have to tell me when youve found out .What dyou mean ?said Ron .I cant go .The Dursleys didnt sign my permission form and Fudge wouldnt either .Ron looked horrified .Youre not allowed to come ?But no way McGonagall or someone will give you permission Harry gave a hollow laugh .Professor McGonagall head of Gryffindor House was very strict .or we can ask Fred and George they know every secret passage out of the castle Ron !said Hermione sharply .I dont think Harry should be sneaking out of school with Black on the loose Yeah I expect thats what McGonagall will say when I ask for permission said Harry bitterly .But if were with him said Ron spiritedly to Hermione Black wouldnt dare Oh Ron dont talk rubbish snapped Hermione .Blacks already murdered a whole bunch of people in the middle of a crowded street .Do you really think hes going to worry about attacking Harry just because were there ?She was fumbling with the straps of Crookshankss basket as she spoke .Dont let that thing out !Ron said but too late Crookshanks leapt lightly from the basket stretched yawned and sprang onto Rons knees the lump in Rons pocket trembled and he shoved Crookshanks angrily away .Get out of here !Ron dont !said Hermione angrily .Ron was about to answer back when Professor Lupin stirred .They watched him apprehensively but he simply turned his head the other way mouth slightly open and slept on .The Hogwarts Express moved steadily north and the scenery outside the window became wilder and darker while the clouds overhead thickened .People were chasing backward and forward past the door of their compartment .Crookshanks had now settled in an empty seat his squashed face turned toward Ron his yellow eyes on Rons top pocket .At one oclock the plump witch with the food cart arrived at the compartment door .Dyou think we should wake him up ?Ron asked awkwardly nodding toward Professor Lupin .He looks like he could do with some food .Hermione approached Professor Lupin cautiously .Er Professor ?she said .Excuse me Professor ?He didnt move .Dont worry dear said the witch as she handed Harry a large stack of Cauldron Cakes .If hes hungry when he wakes Ill be up front with the driver .I suppose he is asleep ?said Ron quietly as the witch slid the compartment door closed .I mean he hasnt died has he ?No no hes breathing whispered Hermione taking the Cauldron Cake Harry passed her .He might not be very good company but Professor Lupins presence in their compartment had its uses .Midafternoon just as it had started to rain blurring the rolling hills outside the window they heard footsteps in the corridor again and their three least favorite people appeared at the door Draco Malfoy flanked by his cronies Vincent Crabbe and Gregory Goyle .Draco Malfoy and Harry had been enemies ever since they had met on their very first train journey to Hogwarts .Malfoy who had a pale pointed sneering face was in Slytherin House he played Seeker on the Slytherin Quidditch team the same position that Harry played on the Gryffindor team .Crabbe and Goyle seemed to exist to do Malfoys bidding .They were both wide and musclely Crabbe was taller with a puddingbowl haircut and a very thick neck Goyle had short bristly hair and long gorillaish arms .Well look who it is said Malfoy in his usual lazy drawl pulling open the compartment door .Potty and the Weasel .Crabbe and Goyle chuckled trollishly .I heard your father finally got his hands on some gold this summer Weasley said Malfoy .Did your mother die of shock ?Ron stood up so quickly he knocked Crookshankss basket to the floor .Professor Lupin gave a snort .Whos that ?said Malfoy taking an automatic step backward as he spotted Lupin .New teacher said Harry who got to his feet too in case he needed to hold Ron back .What were you saying Malfoy ?Malfoys pale eyes narrowed he wasnt fool enough to pick a fight right under a teachers nose .Cmon he muttered resentfully to Crabbe and Goyle and they disappeared .Harry and Ron sat down again Ron massaging his knuckles .Im not going to take any crap from Malfoy this year he said angrily .I mean it .If he makes one more crack about my family Im going to get hold of his head and Ron made a violent gesture in midair .Ron hissed Hermione pointing at Professor Lupin be careful .But Professor Lupin was still fast asleep .The rain thickened as the train sped yet farther north the windows were now a solid shimmering gray which gradually darkened until lanterns flickered into life all along the corridors and over the luggage racks .The train rattled the rain hammered the wind roared but still Professor Lupin slept .We must be nearly there said Ron leaning forward to look past Professor Lupin at the now completely black window .The words had hardly left him when the train started to slow down .Great said Ron getting up and walking carefully past Professor Lupin to try and see outside .Im starving .I want to get to the feast .We cant be there yet said Hermione checking her watch .So whyre we stopping ?The train was getting slower and slower .As the noise of the pistons fell away the wind and rain sounded louder than ever against the windows .Harry who was nearest the door got up to look into the corridor .All along the carriage heads were sticking curiously out of their compartments .The train came to a stop with a jolt and distant thuds and bangs told them that luggage had fallen out of the racks .Then without warning all the lamps went out and they were plunged into total darkness .Whats going on ?said Rons voice from behind Harry .Ouch !gasped Hermione .Ron that was my foot !Harry felt his way back to his seat .Dyou think weve broken down ?Dunno .There was a squeaking sound and Harry saw the dim black outline of Ron wiping a patch clean on the window and peering out .Theres something moving out there Ron said .I think people are coming aboard .The compartment door suddenly opened and someone fell painfully over Harrys legs .Sorry dyou know whats going on ?Ouch sorry Hullo Neville said Harry feeling around in the dark and pulling Neville up by his cloak .Harry ?Is that you ?Whats happening ?No idea sit down There was a loud hissing and a yelp of pain Neville had tried to sit on Crookshanks .Im going to go and ask the driver whats going on came Hermiones voice .Harry felt her pass him heard the door slide open again and then a thud and two loud squeals of pain .Whos that ?Whos that ?Ginny ?Hermione ?What are you doing ?I was looking for Ron Come in and sit down Not here !said Harry hurriedly .Im here !Ouch !said Neville .Quiet !said a hoarse voice suddenly .Professor Lupin appeared to have woken up at last .Harry could hear movements in his corner .None of them spoke .There was a soft crackling noise and a shivering light filled the compartment .Professor Lupin appeared to be holding a handful of flames .They illuminated his tired gray face but his eyes looked alert and wary .Stay where you are he said in the same hoarse voice and he got slowly to his feet with his handful of fire held out in front of him .But the door slid slowly open before Lupin could reach it .Standing in the doorway illuminated by the shivering flames in Lupins hand was a cloaked figure that towered to the ceiling .Its face was completely hidden beneath its hood .Harrys eyes darted downward and what he saw made his stomach contract .There was a hand protruding from the cloak and it was glistening grayish slimylooking and scabbed like something dead that had decayed in water .But it was visible only for a split second .As though the creature beneath the cloak sensed Harrys gaze the hand was suddenly withdrawn into the folds of its black cloak .And then the thing beneath the hood whatever it was drew a long slow rattling breath as though it were trying to suck something more than air from its surroundings .An intense cold swept over them all .Harry felt his own breath catch in his chest .The cold went deeper than his skin .It was inside his chest it was inside his very heart .Harrys eyes rolled up into his head .He couldnt see .He was drowning in cold .There was a rushing in his ears as though of water .He was being dragged downward the roaring growing louder .And then from far away he heard screaming terrible terrified pleading screams .He wanted to help whoever it was he tried to move his arms but couldnt .a thick white fog was swirling around him inside him Harry !Harry !Are you all right ?Someone was slapping his face .W what ?Harry opened his eyes there were lanterns above him and the floor was shaking the Hogwarts Express was moving again and the lights had come back on .He seemed to have slid out of his seat onto the floor .Ron and Hermione were kneeling next to him and above them he could see Neville and Professor Lupin watching .Harry felt very sick when he put up his hand to push his glasses back on he felt cold sweat on his face .Ron and Hermione heaved him back onto his seat .Are you okay ?Ron asked nervously .Yeah said Harry looking quickly toward the door .The hooded creature had vanished .What happened ?Wheres that that thing ?Who screamed ?No one screamed said Ron more nervously still .Harry looked around the bright compartment .Ginny and Neville looked back at him both very pale .But I heard screaming A loud snap made them all jump .Professor Lupin was breaking an enormous slab of chocolate into pieces .Here he said to Harry handing him a particularly large piece .Eat it .Itll help .Harry took the chocolate but didnt eat it .What was that thing ?he asked Lupin .A dementor said Lupin who was now giving chocolate to everyone else .One of the dementors of Azkaban .Everyone stared at him .Professor Lupin crumpled up the empty chocolate wrapper and put it in his pocket .Eat he repeated .Itll help .I need to speak to the driver excuse me .He strolled past Harry and disappeared into the corridor .Are you sure youre okay Harry ?said Hermione watching Harry anxiously .I dont get it .What happened ?said Harry wiping more sweat off his face .Well that thing the dementor stood there and looked around I mean I think it did I couldnt see its face and you you I thought you were having a fit or something said Ron who still looked scared .You went sort of rigid and fell out of your seat and started twitching And Professor Lupin stepped over you and walked toward the dementor and pulled out his wand said Hermione and he said ‘None of us is hiding Sirius Black under our cloaks .Go .But the dementor didnt move so Lupin muttered something and a silvery thing shot out of his wand at it and it turned around and sort of glided away .It was horrible said Neville in a higher voice than usual .Did you feel how cold it got when it came in ?I felt weird said Ron shifting his shoulders uncomfortably .Like Id never be cheerful again .Ginny who was huddled in her corner looking nearly as bad as Harry felt gave a small sob Hermione went over and put a comforting arm around her .But didnt any of you fall off your seats ?said Harry awkwardly .No said Ron looking anxiously at Harry again .Ginny was shaking like mad though .Harry didnt understand .He felt weak and shivery as though he were recovering from a bad bout of flu he also felt the beginnings of shame .Why had he gone to pieces like that when no one else had ?Professor Lupin had come back .He paused as he entered looked around and said with a small smile I havent poisoned that chocolate you know .Harry took a bite and to his great surprise felt warmth spread suddenly to the tips of his fingers and toes .Well be at Hogwarts in ten minutes said Professor Lupin .Are you all right Harry ?Harry didnt ask how Professor Lupin knew his name .Fine he muttered embarrassed .They didnt talk much during the remainder of the journey .At long last the train stopped at Hogsmeade station and there was a great scramble to get outside owls hooted cats meowed and Nevilles pet toad croaked loudly from under his hat .It was freezing on the tiny platform rain was driving down in icy sheets .Firs years this way !called a familiar voice .Harry Ron and Hermione turned and saw the gigantic outline of Hagrid at the other end of the platform beckoning the terrifiedlooking new students forward for their traditional journey across the lake .All righ you three ?Hagrid yelled over the heads of the crowd .They waved at him but had no chance to speak to him because the mass of people around them was shunting them away along the platform .Harry Ron and Hermione followed the rest of the school along the platform and out onto a rough mud track where at least a hundred stagecoaches awaited the remaining students each pulled Harry could only assume by an invisible horse because when they climbed inside and shut the door the coach set off all by itself bumping and swaying in procession .The coach smelled faintly of mold and straw .Harry felt better since the chocolate but still weak .Ron and Hermione kept looking at him sideways as though frightened he might collapse again .As the carriage trundled toward a pair of magnificent wrought iron gates flanked with stone columns topped with winged boars Harry saw two more towering hooded dementors standing guard on either side .A wave of cold sickness threatened to engulf him again he leaned back into the lumpy seat and closed his eyes until they had passed the gates .The carriage picked up speed on the long sloping drive up to the castle Hermione was leaning out of the tiny window watching the many turrets and towers draw nearer .At last the carriage swayed to a halt and Hermione and Ron got out .As Harry stepped down a drawling delighted voice sounded in his ear .You fainted Potter ?Is Longbottom telling the truth ?You actually fainted ?Malfoy elbowed past Hermione to block Harrys way up the stone steps to the castle his face gleeful and his pale eyes glinting maliciously .Shove off Malfoy said Ron whose jaw was clenched .Did you faint as well Weasley ?said Malfoy loudly .Did the scary old dementor frighten you too Weasley ?Is there a problem ?said a mild voice .Professor Lupin had just gotten out of the next carriage .Malfoy gave Professor Lupin an insolent stare which took in the patches on his robes and the delapidated suitcase .With a tiny hint of sarcasm in his voice he said Oh no er Professor then he smirked at Crabbe and Goyle and led them up the steps into the castle .Hermione prodded Ron in the back to make him hurry and the three of them joined the crowd swarming up the steps through the giant oak front doors into the cavernous entrance hall which was lit with flaming torches and housed a magnificent marble staircase that led to the upper floors .The door into the Great Hall stood open at the right Harry followed the crowd toward it but had barely glimpsed the enchanted ceiling which was black and cloudy tonight when a voice called Potter !Granger !I want to see you both !Harry and Hermione turned around surprised .Professor McGonagall Transfiguration teacher and head of Gryffindor House was calling over the heads of the crowd .She was a sternlooking witch who wore her hair in a tight bun her sharp eyes were framed with square spectacles .Harry fought his way over to her with a feeling of foreboding Professor McGonagall had a way of making him feel he must have done something wrong .Theres no need to look so worried I just want a word in my office she told them .Move along there Weasley .Ron stared as Professor McGonagall ushered Harry and Hermione away from the chattering crowd they accompanied her across the entrance hall up the marble staircase and along a corridor .Once they were in her office a small room with a large welcoming fire Professor McGonagall motioned Harry and Hermione to sit down .She settled herself behind her desk and said abruptly Professor Lupin sent an owl ahead to say that you were taken ill on the train Potter .Before Harry could reply there was a soft knock on the door and Madam Pomfrey the nurse came bustling in .Harry felt himself going red in the face .It was bad enough that hed passed out or whatever he had done without everyone making all this fuss .Im fine he said I dont need anything Oh its you is it ?said Madam Pomfrey ignoring this and bending down to stare closely at him .I suppose youve been doing something dangerous again ?It was a dementor Poppy said Professor McGonagall .They exchanged a dark look and Madam Pomfrey clucked disapprovingly .Setting dementors around a school she muttered pushing back Harrys hair and feeling his forehead .He wont be the last one who collapses .Yes hes all clammy .Terrible things they are and the effect they have on people who are already delicate Im not delicate !said Harry crossly .Of course youre not said Madam Pomfrey absentmindedly now taking his pulse .What does he need ?said Professor McGonagall crisply .Bed rest ?Should he perhaps spend tonight in the hospital wing ? ‘Tm ine !said Harry jumping up .The thought of what Draco Malfoy would say if he had to go to the hospital wing was torture .Well he should have some chocolate at the very least said Madam Pomfrey who was now trying to peer into Harrys eyes .Ive already had some said Harry .Professor Lupin gave me some .He gave it to all of us .Did he now ?said Madam Pomfrey approvingly .So weve finally got a Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher who knows his remedies ?Are you sure you feel all right Potter ?Professor McGonagall said sharply .Yes said Harry .Very well .Kindly wait outside while I have a quick word with Miss Granger about her course schedule then we can go down to the feast together .Harry went back into the corridor with Madam Pomfrey who left for the hospital wing muttering to herself .He had to wait only a few minutes then Hermione emerged looking very happy about something followed by Professor McGonagall and the three of them made their way back down the marble staircase to the Great Hall .It was a sea of pointed black hats each of the long House tables was lined with students their faces glimmering by the light of thousands of candles which were floating over the tables in midair .Professor Flitwick who was a tiny little wizard with a shock of white hair was carrying an ancient hat and a threelegged stool out of the hall .Oh said Hermione softly weve missed the Sorting !New students at Hogwarts were sorted into Houses by trying on the Sorting Hat which shouted out the House they were best suited to Gryffindor Ravenclaw Hufflepuff or Slytherin .Professor McGonagall strode off toward her empty seat at the staff table and Harry and Hermione set off in the other direction as quietly as possible toward the Gryffindor table .People looked around at them as they passed along the back of the hall and a few of them pointed at Harry .Had the story of his collapsing in front of the dementor traveled that fast ?He and Hermione sat down on either side of Ron who had saved them seats .What was all that about ?he muttered to Harry .Harry started to explain in a whisper but at that moment the headmaster stood up to speak and he broke off .Professor Dumbledore though very old always gave an impression of great energy .He had several feet of long silver hair and beard halfmoon spectacles and an extremely crooked nose .He was often described as the greatest wizard of the age but that wasnt why Harry respected him .You couldnt help trusting Albus Dumbledore and as Harry watched him beaming around at the students he felt really calm for the first time since the dementor had entered the train compartment .Welcome !said Dumbledore the candlelight shimmering on his beard .Welcome to another year at Hogwarts !I have a few things to say to you all and as one of them is very serious I think it best to get it out of the way before you become befuddled by our excellent feast .Dumbledore cleared his throat and continued As you will all be aware after their search of the Hogwarts Express our school is presently playing host to some of the dementors of Azkaban who are here on Ministry of Magic business .He paused and Harry remembered what Mr Weasley had said about Dumbledore not being happy with the dementors guarding the school .They are stationed at every entrance to the grounds Dumbledore continued and while they are with us I must make it plain that nobody is to leave school without permission .Dementors are not to be fooled by tricks or disguises or even Invisibility Cloaks he added blandly and Harry and Ron glanced at each other .It is not in the nature of a dementor to understand pleading or excuses .I therefore warn each and every one of you to give them no reason to harm you .I look to the prefects and our new Head Boy and Girl to make sure that no student runs afoul of the dementors he said .Percy who was sitting a few seats down from Harry puffed out his chest again and stared around impressively .Dumbledore paused again he looked very seriously around the hall and nobody moved or made a sound .On a happier note he continued I am pleased to welcome two new teachers to our ranks this year .First Professor Lupin who has kindly consented to fill the post of Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher .There was some scattered rather unenthusiastic applause .Only those who had been in the compartment on the train with Professor Lupin clapped hard Harry among them .Professor Lupin looked particularly shabby next to all the other teachers in their best robes .Look at Snape !Ron hissed in Harrys ear .Professor Snape the Potions master was staring along the staff table at Professor Lupin .It was common knowledge that Snape wanted the Defense Against the Dark Arts job but even Harry who hated Snape was startled at the expression twisting his thin sallow face .It was beyond anger it was loathing .Harry knew that expression only too well it was the look Snape wore every time he set eyes on Harry .As to our second new appointment Dumbledore continued as the lukewarm applause for Professor Lupin died away .Well I am sorry to tell you that Professor Kettleburn our Care of Magical Creatures teacher retired at the end of last year in order to enjoy more time with his remaining limbs .However I am delighted to say that his place will be filled by none other than Rubeus Hagrid who has agreed to take on this teaching job in addition to his gamekeeping duties .Harry Ron and Hermione stared at one another stunned .Then they joined in with the applause which was tumultuous at the Gryffindor table in particular .Harry leaned forward to see Hagrid who was rubyred in the face and staring down at his enormous hands his wide grin hidden in the tangle of his black beard .We shouldve known !Ron roared pounding the table .Who else would have assigned us a biting book ?Harry Ron and Hermione were the last to stop clapping and as Professor Dumbledore started speaking again they saw that Hagrid was wiping his eyes on the tablecloth .Well I think thats everything of importance said Dumbledore .Let the feast begin !The golden plates and goblets before them filled suddenly with food and drink .Harry suddenly ravenous helped himself to everything he could reach and began to eat .It was a delicious feast the hall echoed with talk laughter and the clatter of knives and forks .Harry Ron and Hermione however were eager for it to finish so that they could talk to Hagrid .They knew how much being made a teacher would mean to him .Hagrid wasnt a fully qualified wizard he had been expelled from Hogwarts in his third year for a crime he had not committed .It had been Harry Ron and Hermione who had cleared Hagrid s name last year .At long last when the last morsels of pumpkin tart had melted from the golden platters Dumbledore gave the word that it was time for them all to go to bed and they got their chance .Congratulations Hagrid !Hermione squealed as they reached the teachers table .All down ter you three said Hagrid wiping his shining face on his napkin as he looked up at them .Can believe it .great man Dumbledore .came straight down to me hut after Professor Kettleburn said hed had enough .Its what I always wanted .Overcome with emotion he buried his face in his napkin and Professor McGonagall shooed them away .Harry Ron and Hermione joined the Gryffindors streaming up the marble staircase and very tired now along more corridors up more and more stairs to the hidden entrance to Gryffindor Tower .A large portrait of a fat lady in a pink dress asked them Password ?Coming through coming through !Percy called from behind the crowd .The new passwords ‘Fortuna Major !Oh no said Neville Longbottom sadly .He always had trouble remembering the passwords .Through the portrait hole and across the common room the girls and boys divided toward their separate staircases .Harry climbed the spiral stair with no thought in his head except how glad he was to be back .They reached their familiar circular dormitory with its five fourposter beds and Harry looking around felt he was home at last .TALONS AND TEA LEAVES When Harry Ron and Hermione entered the Great Hall for breakfast the next day the first thing they saw was Draco Malfoy who seemed to be entertaining a large group of Slytherins with a very funny story .As they passed Malfoy did a ridiculous impression of a swooning fit and there was a roar of laughter .Ignore him said Hermione who was right behind Harry .Just ignore him its not worth it .Hey Potter !shrieked Pansy Parkinson a Slytherin girl with a face like a pug .Potter !The dementors are coming Potter !Woooooooo !Harry dropped into a seat at the Gryffindor table next to George Weasley .New thirdyear course schedules said George passing them over .Whats up with you Harry ?Malfoy said Ron sitting down on Georges other side and glaring over at the Slytherin table .George looked up in time to see Malfoy pretending to faint with terror again .That little git he said calmly .He wasnt so cocky last night when the dementors were down at our end of the train .Came running into our compartment didnt he Fred ?Nearly wet himself said Fred with a contemptuous glance at Malfoy .I wasnt too happy myself said George .Theyre horrible things those dementors .Sort of freeze your insides dont they ?said Fred .You didnt pass out though did you ?said Harry in a low voice .Forget it Harry said George bracingly .Dad had to go out to Azkaban one time remember Fred ?And he said it was the worst place hed ever been he came back all weak and shaking .They suck the happiness out of a place dementors .Most of the prisoners go mad in there .Anyway well see how happy Malfoy looks after our first Quidditch match said Fred .Gryffindor versus Slytherin first game of the season remember ?The only time Harry and Malfoy had faced each other in a Quidditch match Malfoy had definitely come off worse .Feeling slightly more cheerful Harry helped himself to sausages and fried tomatoes .Hermione was examining her new schedule .Ooh good were starting some new subjects today she said happily .Hermione said Ron frowning as he looked over her shoulder theyve messed up your schedule .Look theyve got you down for about ten subjects a day .There isnt enough time .Ill manage .Ive fixed it all with Professor McGonagall .But look said Ron laughing see this morning ?Nine oclock Divination .And underneath nine oclock Muggle Studies .And Ron leaned closer to the schedule disbelieving look underneath that Arithmancy nine oclock .I mean I know youre good Hermione but no ones that good .Howre you supposed to be in three classes at once ?Dont be silly said Hermione shortly .Of course I wont be in three classes at once .Well then Pass the marmalade said Hermione .But Oh Ron whats it to you if my schedules a bit full ?Hermione snapped .I told you Ive fixed it all with Professor McGonagall .Just then Hagrid entered the Great Hall .He was wearing his long moleskin overcoat and was absentmindedly swinging a dead polecat from one enormous hand .All righ ?he said eagerly pausing on the way to the staff table .Yer in my firs ever lesson !Right after lunch !Bin up since five gettin everythin ready .Hope its okay .Me a teacher .honesly .He grinned broadly at them and headed off to the staff table still swinging the polecat .Wonder what hes been getting ready ?said Ron a note of anxiety in his voice .The hall was starting to empty as people headed off toward their first lesson .Ron checked his course schedule .Wed better go look Divinations at the top of North Tower .Itll take us ten minutes to get there .They finished their breakfasts hastily said goodbye to Fred and George and walked back through the hall .As they passed the Slytherin table Malfoy did yet another impression of a fainting fit .The shouts of laughter followed Harry into the entrance hall .The journey through the castle to North Tower was a long one .Two years at Hogwarts hadnt taught them everything about the castle and they had never been inside North Tower before .Theres got to be a shortcut Ron panted as they climbed their seventh long staircase and emerged on an unfamiliar landing where there was nothing but a large painting of a bare stretch of grass hanging on the stone wall .I think its this way said Hermione peering down the empty passage to the right .Cant be said Ron .Thats south look you can see a bit of the lake out of the window .Harry was watching the painting .A fat dapplegray pony had just ambled onto the grass and was grazing nonchalantly .Harry was used to the subjects of Hogwarts paintings moving around and leaving their frames to visit one another but he always enjoyed watching it .A moment later a short squat knight in a suit of armor clanked into the picture after his pony .By the look of the grass stains on his metal knees he had just fallen off .Aha !he yelled seeing Harry Ron and Hermione .What villains are these that trespass upon my private lands !Come to scorn at my fall perchance ?Draw you knaves you dogs !They watched in astonishment as the little knight tugged his sword out of its scabbard and began brandishing it violently hopping up and down in rage .But the sword was too long for him a particularly wild swing made him overbalance and he landed facedown in the grass .Are you all right ?said Harry moving closer to the picture .Get back you scurvy braggart !Back you rogue !The knight seized his sword again and used it to push himself back up but the blade sank deeply into the grass and though he pulled with all his might he couldnt get it out again .Finally he had to flop back down onto the grass and push up his visor to mop his sweating face .Listen said Harry taking advantage of the knights exhaustion were looking for the North Tower .You dont know the way do you ?A quest !The knights rage seemed to vanish instantly .He clanked to his feet and shouted Come follow me dear friends and we shall find our goal or else shall perish bravely in the charge !He gave the sword another fruitless tug tried and failed to mount the fat pony gave up and cried On foot then good sirs and gentle lady !On !On !And he ran clanking loudly into the left side of the frame and out of sight .They hurried after him along the corridor following the sound of his armor .Every now and then they spotted him running through a picture ahead .Be of stout heart the worst is yet to come !yelled the knight and they saw him reappear in front of an alarmed group of women in crinolines whose picture hung on the wall of a narrow spiral staircase .Puffing loudly Harry Ron and Hermione climbed the tightly spiraling steps getting dizzier and dizzier until at last they heard the murmur of voices above them and knew they had reached the classroom .Farewell !cried the knight popping his head into a painting of some sinisterlooking monks .Farewell my comradesinarms !If ever you have need of noble heart and steely sinew call upon Sir Cadogan !Yeah well call you muttered Ron as the knight disappeared if we ever need someone mental .They climbed the last few steps and emerged onto a tiny landing where most of the class was already assembled .There were no doors off this landing but Ron nudged Harry and pointed at the ceiling where there was a circular trapdoor with a brass plaque on it . ‘Sibyll Trelawney Divination teacher Harry read .Howre we supposed to get up there ?As though in answer to his question the trapdoor suddenly opened and a silvery ladder descended right at Harrys feet .Everyone got quiet .After you said Ron grinning so Harry climbed the ladder first .He emerged into the strangestlooking classroom he had ever seen .In fact it didnt look like a classroom at all more like a cross between someones attic and an oldfashioned tea shop .At least twenty small circular tables were crammed inside it all surrounded by chintz armchairs and fat little poufs .Everything was lit with a dim crimson light the curtains at the windows were all closed and the many lamps were draped with dark red scarves .It was stiflingly warm and the fire that was burning under the crowded mantelpiece was giving off a heavy sickly sort of perfume as it heated a large copper kettle .The shelves running around the circular walls were crammed with dustylooking feathers stubs of candles many packs of tattered playing cards countless silvery crystal balls and a huge array of teacups .Ron appeared at Harrys shoulder as the class assembled around them all talking in whispers .Where is she ?Ron said .A voice came suddenly out of the shadows a soft misty sort of voice .Welcome it said .How nice to see you in the physical world at last .Harrys immediate impression was of a large glittering insect .Professor Trelawney moved into the firelight and they saw that she was very thin her large glasses magnified her eyes to several times their natural size and she was draped in a gauzy spangled shawl .Innumerable chains and beads hung around her spindly neck and her arms and hands were encrusted with bangles and rings .Sit my children sit she said and they all climbed awkwardly into armchairs or sank onto poufs .Harry Ron and Hermione sat themselves around the same round table .Welcome to Divination said Professor Trelawney who had seated herself in a winged armchair in front of the fire .My name is Professor Trelawney .You may not have seen me before .I find that descending too often into the hustle and bustle of the main school clouds my Inner Eye .Nobody said anything to this extraordinary pronouncement .Professor Trelawney delicately rearranged her shawl and continued So you have chosen to study Divination the most difficult of all magical arts .I must warn you at the outset that if you do not have the Sight there is very little I will be able to teach you .Books can take you only so far in this field .At these words both Harry and Ron glanced grinning at Hermione who looked startled at the news that books wouldnt be much help in this subject .Many witches and wizards talented though they are in the area of loud bangs and smells and sudden disappearings are yet unable to penetrate the veiled mysteries of the future Professor Trelawney went on her enormous gleaming eyes moving from face to nervous face .It is a Gift granted to few .You boy she said suddenly to Neville who almost toppled off his pouf .Is your grandmother well ?I think so said Neville tremulously .I wouldnt be so sure if I were you dear said Professor Trelawney the firelight glinting on her long emerald earrings .Neville gulped .Professor Trelawney continued placidly .We will be covering the basic methods of Divination this year .The first term will be devoted to reading the tea leaves .Next term we shall progress to palmistry .By the way my dear she shot suddenly at Parvati Patil beware a redhaired man .Parvati gave a startled look at Ron who was right behind her and edged her chair away from him .In the second term Professor Trelawney went on we shall progress to the crystal ball if we have finished with fire omens that is .Unfortunately classes will be disrupted in February by a nasty bout of flu .I myself will lose my voice .And around Easter one of our number will leave us forever .A very tense silence followed this pronouncement but Professor Trelawney seemed unaware of it .I wonder dear she said to Lavender Brown who was nearest and shrank back in her chair if you could pass me the largest silver teapot ?Lavender looking relieved stood up took an enormous teapot from the shelf and put it down on the table in front of Professor Trelawney .Thank you my dear .Incidentally that thing you are dreading it will happen on Friday the sixteenth of October .Lavender trembled .Now I want you all to divide into pairs .Collect a teacup from the shelf come to me and I will fill it .Then sit down and drink drink until only the dregs remain .Swill these around the cup three times with the left hand then turn the cup upside down on its saucer wait for the last of the tea to drain away then give your cup to your partner to read .You will interpret the patterns using pages five and six of Unfogging the Future .I shall move among you helping and instructing .Oh and dear she caught Neville by the arm as he made to stand up after youve broken your first cup would you be so kind as to select one of the blue patterned ones ?Im rather attached to the pink .Sure enough Neville had no sooner reached the shelf of teacups when there was a tinkle of breaking china .Professor Trelawney swept over to him holding a dustpan and brush and said One of the blue ones then dear if you wouldnt mind .thank you .When Harry and Ron had had their teacups filled they went back to their table and tried to drink the scalding tea quickly .They swilled the dregs around as Professor Trelawney had instructed then drained the cups and swapped over .Right said Ron as they both opened their books at pages five and six .What can you see in mine ?A load of soggy brown stuff said Harry .The heavily perfumed smoke in the room was making him feel sleepy and stupid .Broaden your minds my dears and allow your eyes to see past the mundane !Professor Trelawney cried through the gloom .Harry tried to pull himself together .Right youve got a crooked sort of cross .He consulted Unfogging the Future .That means youre going to have ‘trials and suffering sorry about that but theres a thing that could be the sun .hang on .that means ‘great happiness .so youre going to suffer but be very happy .You need your Inner Eye tested if you ask me said Ron and they both had to stifle their laughs as Professor Trelawney gazed in their direction .My turn .Ron peered into Harrys teacup his forehead wrinkled with effort .Theres a blob a bit like a bowler hat he said .Maybe youre going to work for the Ministry of Magic .He turned the teacup the other way up .But this way it looks more like an acorn .Whats that ?He scanned his copy of Unfogging the Future . ‘A windfall unexpected gold .Excellent you can lend me some .and theres a thing here he turned the cup again that looks like an animal .yeah if that was its head .it looks like a hippo .no a sheep .Professor Trelawney whirled around as Harry let out a snort of laughter .Let me see that my dear she said reprovingly to Ron sweeping over and snatching Harrys cup from him .Everyone went quiet to watch .Professor Trelawney was staring into the teacup rotating it counterclockwise .The falcon .my dear you have a deadly enemy .But everyone knows that said Hermione in a loud whisper .Professor Trelawney stared at her .Well they do said Hermione .Everybody knows about Harry and YouKnowWho .Harry and Ron stared at her with a mixture of amazement and admiration .They had never heard Hermione speak to a teacher like that before .Professor Trelawney chose not to reply .She lowered her huge eyes to Harrys cup again and continued to turn it .The club .an attack .Dear dear this is not a happy cup .I thought that was a bowler hat said Ron sheepishly .The skull .danger in your path my dear .Everyone was staring transfixed at Professor Trelawney who gave the cup a final turn gasped and then screamed .There was another tinkle of breaking china Neville had smashed his second cup .Professor Trelawney sank into a vacant armchair her glittering hand at her heart and her eyes closed .My dear boy .my poor dear boy .no .it is kinder not to say .no .dont ask me .What is it Professor ?said Dean Thomas at once .Everyone had got to their feet and slowly they crowded around Harry and Rons table pressing close to Professor Trelawneys chair to get a good look at Harrys cup .My dear Professor Trelawneys huge eyes opened dramatically you have the Grim .The what ?said Harry .He could tell that he wasnt the only one who didnt understand Dean Thomas shrugged at him and Lavender Brown looked puzzled but nearly everybody else clapped their hands to their mouths in horror .The Grim my dear the Grim !cried Professor Trelawney who looked shocked that Harry hadnt understood .The giant spectral dog that haunts churchyards !My dear boy it is an omen the worst omen of death .Harrys stomach lurched .That dog on the cover of Death Omens in Flourish and Blotts the dog in the shadows of Magnolia Crescent .Lavender Brown clapped her hands to her mouth too .Everyone was looking at Harry everyone except Hermione who had gotten up and moved around to the back of Professor Trelawneys chair .I dont think it looks like a Grim she said flatly .Professor Trelawney surveyed Hermione with mounting dislike .Youll forgive me for saying so my dear but I perceive very little aura around you .Very little receptivity to the resonances of the future .Seamus Finnigan was tilting his head from side to side .It looks like a Grim if you do this he said with his eyes almost shut but it looks more like a donkey from here he said leaning to the left .When youve all finished deciding whether Im going to die or not !said Harry taking even himself by surprise .Now nobody seemed to want to look at him .I think we will leave the lesson here for today said Professor Trelawney in her mistiest voice .Yes .please pack away your things .Silently the class took their teacups back to Professor Trelawney packed away their books and closed their bags .Even Ron was avoiding Harrys eyes .Until we meet again said Professor Trelawney faintly fair fortune be yours .Oh and dear she pointed at Neville youll be late next time so mind you work extrahard to catch up .Harry Ron and Hermione descended Professor Trelawneys ladder and the winding stair in silence then set off for Professor McGonagalls Transfiguration lesson .It took them so long to find her classroom that early as they had left Divination they were only just in time .Harry chose a seat right at the back of the room feeling as though he were sitting in a very bright spotlight the rest of the class kept shooting furtive glances at him as though he were about to drop dead at any moment .He hardly heard what Professor McGonagall was telling them about Animagi wizards who could transform at will into animals and wasnt even watching when she transformed herself in front of their eyes into a tabby cat with spectacle markings around her eyes .Really what has got into you all today ?said Professor McGonagall turning back into herself with a faint pop and staring around at them all .Not that it matters but thats the first time my transformations not got applause from a class .Everybodys heads turned toward Harry again but nobody spoke .Then Hermione raised her hand .Please Professor weve just had our first Divination class and we were reading the tea leaves and Ah of course said Professor McGonagall suddenly frowning .There is no need to say any more Miss Granger .Tell me which of you will be dying this year ?Everyone stared at her .Me said Harry finally .I see said Professor McGonagall fixing Harry with her beady eyes .Then you should know Potter that Sibyll Trelawney has predicted the death of one student a year since she arrived at this school .None of them has died yet .Seeing death omens is her favorite way of greeting a new class .If it were not for the fact that I never speak ill of my colleagues Professor McGonagall broke off and they saw that her nostrils had gone white .She went on more calmly Divination is one of the most imprecise branches of magic .I shall not conceal from you that I have very little patience with it .True Seers are very rare and Professor Trelawney She stopped again and then said in a very matterof fact tone You look in excellent health to me Potter so you will excuse me if I dont let you off homework today .I assure you that if you die you need not hand it in .Hermione laughed .Harry felt a bit better .It was harder to feel scared of a lump of tea leaves away from the dim red light and befuddling perfume of Professor Trelawneys classroom .Not everyone was convinced however .Ron still looked worried and Lavender whispered But what about Nevilles cup ?When the Transfiguration class had finished they joined the crowd thundering toward the Great Hall for lunch .Ron cheer up said Hermione pushing a dish of stew toward him .You heard what Professor McGonagall said .Ron spooned stew onto his plate and picked up his fork but didnt start .Harry he said in a low serious voice you havent seen a great black dog anywhere have you ?Yeah I have said Harry .I saw one the night I left the Dursleys .Ron let his fork fall with a clatter .Probably a stray said Hermione calmly .Ron looked at Hermione as though she had gone mad .Hermione if Harrys seen a Grim thats thats bad he said .My my uncle Bilius saw one and and he died twentyfour hours later !Coincidence said Hermione airily pouring herself some pumpkin juice .You dont know what youre talking about !said Ron starting to get angry .Grims scare the living daylights out of most wizards !There you are then said Hermione in a superior tone .They see the Grim and die of fright .The Grims not an omen its the cause of death !And Harrys still with us because hes not stupid enough to see one and think right well Id better kick the bucket then !Ron mouthed wordlessly at Hermione who opened her bag took out her new Arithmancy book and propped it open against the juice jug .I think Divination seems very woolly she said searching for her page .A lot of guesswork if you ask me .There was nothing woolly about the Grim in that cup !said Ron hotly .You didnt seem quite so confident when you were telling Harry it was a sheep said Hermione coolly .Professor Trelawney said you didnt have the right aura !You just dont like being bad at something for a change !He had touched a nerve .Hermione slammed her Arithmancy book down on the table so hard that bits of meat and carrot flew everywhere .If being good at Divination means I have to pretend to see death omens in a lump of tea leaves Im not sure Ill be studying it much longer !That lesson was absolute rubbish compared with my Arithmancy class !She snatched up her bag and stalked away .Ron frowned after her .Whats she talking about ?he said to Harry .She hasnt been to an Arithmancy class yet .Harry was pleased to get out of the castle after lunch .Yesterdays rain had cleared the sky was a clear pale gray and the grass was springy and damp underfoot as they set off for their first ever Care of Magical Creatures class .Ron and Hermione werent speaking to each other .Harry walked beside them in silence as they went down the sloping lawns to Hagrids hut on the edge of the Forbidden Forest .It was only when he spotted three onlytoofamiliar backs ahead of them that he realized they must be having these lessons with the Slytherins .Malfoy was talking animatedly to Crabbe and Goyle who were chortling .Harry was quite sure he knew what they were talking about .Hagrid was waiting for his class at the door of his hut .He stood in his moleskin overcoat with Fang the boarhound at his heels looking impatient to start .Cmon now get a move on !he called as the class approached .Got a real treat for yeh today !Great lesson cornin up !Everyone here ?Right follow me !For one nasty moment Harry thought that Hagrid was going to lead them into the forest Harry had had enough unpleasant experiences in there to last him a lifetime .However Hagrid strolled off around the edge of the trees and five minutes later they found themselves outside a kind of paddock .There was nothing in there .Everyone gather round the fence here !he called .Thats it make sure yeh can see now firs thing yehll want ter do is open yer books How ?said the cold drawling voice of Draco Malfoy .Eh ?said Hagrid .How do we open our books ?Malfoy repeated .He took out his copy of The Monster Book of Monsters which he had bound shut with a length of rope .Other people took theirs out too some like Harry had belted their book shut others had crammed them inside tight bags or clamped them together with binder clips .Hasn hasn anyone bin able ter open their books ?said Hagrid looking crestfallen .The class all shook their heads .Yehve got ter stroke em said Hagrid as though this was the most obvious thing in the world .Look He took Hermiones copy and ripped off the Spellotape that bound it .The book tried to bite but Hagrid ran a giant forefinger down its spine and the book shivered and then fell open and lay quiet in his hand .Oh how silly weve all been !Malfoy sneered .We should have stroked them !Why didnt we guess !I I thought they were funny Hagrid said uncertainly to Hermione .Oh tremendously funny !said Malfoy .Really witty giving us books that try and rip our hands off !Shut up Malfoy said Harry quietly .Hagrid was looking downcast and Harry wanted Hagrid s first lesson to be a success .Righ then said Hagrid who seemed to have lost his thread so so yehve got yer books an an now yeh need the Magical Creatures .Yeah .So Ill go an get em .Hang on .He strode away from them into the forest and out of sight .God this place is going to the dogs said Malfoy loudly .That oaf teaching classes my fatherll have a fit when I tell him Shut up Malfoy Harry repeated .Careful Potter theres a dementor behind you Oooooooh !squealed Lavender Brown pointing toward the opposite side of the paddock .Trotting toward them were a dozen of the most bizarre creatures Harry had ever seen .They had the bodies hind legs and tails of horses but the front legs wings and heads of what seemed to be giant eagles with cruel steelcolored beaks and large brilliantly orange eyes .The talons on their front legs were half a foot long and deadly looking .Each of the beasts had a thick leather collar around its neck which was attached to a long chain and the ends of all of these were held in the vast hands of Hagrid who came jogging into the paddock behind the creatures .Gee up there !he roared shaking the chains and urging the creatures toward the fence where the class stood .Everyone drew back slightly as Hagrid reached them and tethered the creatures to the fence .Hippogriffs !Hagrid roared happily waving a hand at them .Beauiful aren they ?Harry could sort of see what Hagrid meant .Once you got over the first shock of seeing something that was half horse half bird you started to appreciate the hippogriffs gleaming coats changing smoothly from feather to hair each of them a different color stormy gray bronze pinkish roan gleaming chestnut and inky black .So said Hagrid rubbing his hands together and beaming around if yeh wan ter come a bit nearer No one seemed to want to .Harry Ron and Hermione however approached the fence cautiously .Now firs thing yeh gotta know abou hippogriffs is theyre proud said Hagrid .Easily offended hippogriffs are .Dont never insult one cause it might be the last thing yeh do .Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle werent listening they were talking in an undertone and Harry had a nasty feeling they were plotting how best to disrupt the lesson .Yeh always wait fer the hippogriff ter make the firs move Hagrid continued .Its polite see ?Yeh walk toward him and yeh bow an yeh wait .If he bows back yehre allowed ter touch him .If he doesn bow then get away from him sharpish cause those talons hurt .Right who wants ter go first ?Most of the class backed farther away in answer .Even Harry Ron and Hermione had misgivings .The hippogriffs were tossing their fierce heads and flexing their powerful wings they didnt seem to like being tethered like this .No one ?said Hagrid with a pleading look .Ill do it said Harry .There was an intake of breath from behind him and both Lavender and Parvati whispered Oooh no Harry remember your tea leaves !Harry ignored them .He climbed over the paddock fence .Good man Harry !roared Hagrid .Right then lets see how yeh get on with Buckbeak .He untied one of the chains pulled the gray hippogriff away from its fellows and slipped off its leather collar .The class on the other side of the paddock seemed to be holding its breath .Malfoys eyes were narrowed maliciously .Easy now Harry said Hagrid quietly .Yehve got eye contact now try not ter blink .Hippogriffs don trust yeh if yeh blink too much .Harrys eyes immediately began to water but he didnt shut them .Buckbeak had turned his great sharp head and was staring at Harry with one fierce orange eye .Thas it said Hagrid .Thas it Harry .now bow Harry didnt feel much like exposing the back of his neck to Buckbeak but he did as he was told .He gave a short bow and then looked up .The hippogriff was still staring haughtily at him .It didnt move .Ah said Hagrid sounding worried .Right back away now Harry easy does it But then to Harrys enormous surprise the hippogriff suddenly bent its scaly front knees and sank into what was an unmistakable bow .Well done Harry !said Hagrid ecstatic .Right yeh can touch him !Pat his beak go on !Feeling that a better reward would have been to back away Harry moved slowly toward the hippogriff and reached out toward it .He patted the beak several times and the hippogriff closed its eyes lazily as though enjoying it .The class broke into applause all except for Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle who were looking deeply disappointed .Righ then Harry said Hagrid .I reckon he might let yeh ride him !This was more than Harry had bargained for .He was used to a broomstick but he wasnt sure a hippogriff would be quite the same .Yeh climb up there jus behind the wing joint said Hagrid an mind yeh don pull any of his feathers out he won like that .Harry put his foot on the top of Buckbeaks wing and hoisted himself onto its back .Buckbeak stood up .Harry wasnt sure where to hold on everything in front of him was covered with feathers .Go on then !roared Hagrid slapping the hippogriffs hindquarters .Without warning twelvefoot wings flapped open on either side of Harry he just had time to seize the hippogriff around the neck before he was soaring upward .It was nothing like a broomstick and Harry knew which one he preferred the hippogriffs wings beat uncomfortably on either side of him catching him under his legs and making him feel he was about to be thrown off the glossy feathers slipped under his fingers and he didnt dare get a stronger grip instead of the smooth action of his Nimbus Two Thousand he now felt himself rocking backward and forward as the hindquarters of the hippogriff rose and fell with its wings .Buckbeak flew him once around the paddock and then headed back to the ground this was the bit Harry had been dreading he leaned back as the smooth neck lowered feeling he was going to slip off over the beak then felt a heavy thud as the four ill assorted feet hit the ground .He just managed to hold on and push himself straight again .Good work Harry !roared Hagrid as everyone except Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle cheered .Okay who else wants a go ?Emboldened by Harrys success the rest of the class climbed cautiously into the paddock .Hagrid untied the hippogriffs one by one and soon people were bowing nervously all over the paddock .Neville ran repeatedly backward from his which didnt seem to want to bend its knees .Ron and Hermione practiced on the chestnut while Harry watched .Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle had taken over Buckbeak .He had bowed to Malfoy who was now patting his beak looking disdainful .This is very easy Malfoy drawled loud enough for Harry to hear him .I knew it must have been if Potter could do it .I bet youre not dangerous at all are you ?he said to the hippogriff .Are you you great ugly brute ?It happened in a flash of steely talons Malfoy let out a highpitched scream and next moment Hagrid was wrestling Buckbeak back into his collar as he strained to get at Malfoy who lay curled in the grass blood blossoming over his robes .Im dying !Malfoy yelled as the class panicked .Im dying look at me !Its killed me !Yer not dyin !said Hagrid who had gone very white .Someone help me gotta get him outta here Hermione ran to hold open the gate as Hagrid lifted Malfoy easily .As they passed Harry saw that there was a long deep gash on Malfoys arm blood splattered the grass and Hagrid ran with him up the slope toward the castle .Very shaken the Care of Magical Creatures class followed at a walk .The Slytherins were all shouting about Hagrid .They should fire him straight away !said Pansy Parkinson who was in tears .It was Malfoys fault !snapped Dean Thomas .Crabbe and Goyle flexed their muscles threateningly .They all climbed the stone steps into the deserted entrance hall .Im going to see if hes okay !said Pansy and they all watched her run up the marble staircase .The Slytherins still muttering about Hagrid headed away in the direction of their dungeon common room Harry Ron and Hermione proceeded upstairs to Gryffindor Tower .Dyou think hell be all right ?said Hermione nervously .Course he will .Madam Pomfrey can mend cuts in about a second said Harry who had had far worse injuries mended magically by the nurse .That was a really bad thing to happen in Hagrid s first class though wasnt it ?said Ron looking worried .Trust Malfoy to mess things up for him .They were among the first to reach the Great Hall at dinnertime hoping to see Hagrid but he wasnt there .They wouldnt fire him would they ?said Hermione anxiously not touching her steakandkidney pudding .Theyd better not said Ron who wasnt eating either .Harry was watching the Slytherin table .A large group including Crabbe and Goyle was huddled together deep in conversation .Harry was sure they were cooking up their own version of how Malfoy had been injured .Well you cant say it wasnt an interesting first day back said Ron gloomily .They went up to the crowded Gryffindor common room after dinner and tried to do the homework Professor McGonagall had given them but all three of them kept breaking off and glancing out of the tower window .Theres a light on in Hagrids window Harry said suddenly .Ron looked at his watch .If we hurried we could go down and see him .Its still quite early .I dont know Hermione said slowly and Harry saw her glance at him .Im allowed to walk across the grounds he said pointedly .Sirius Black hasnt got past the dementors yet has he ?So they put their things away and headed out of the portrait hole glad to meet nobody on their way to the front doors as they werent entirely sure they were supposed to be out .The grass was still wet and looked almost black in the twilight .When they reached Hagrids hut they knocked and a voice growled Cmin .Hagrid was sitting in his shirtsleeves at his scrubbed wooden table his boarhound Fang had his head in Hagrids lap .One look told them that Hagrid had been drinking a lot there was a pewter tankard almost as big as a bucket in front of him and he seemed to be having difficulty getting them into focus .Spect its a record he said thickly when he recognized them .Don reckon theyve ever had a teacher who lasted ony a day before .You havent been fired Hagrid !gasped Hermione .Not yet said Hagrid miserably taking a huge gulp of whatever was in the tankard .But s only a matter o time int it after Malfoy .How is he ?said Ron as they all sat down .It wasnt serious was it ?Madam Pomfrey fixed him best she could said Hagrid dully but hes sayin its still agony .covered in bandages .moanin .Hes faking it said Harry at once .Madam Pomfrey can mend anything .She regrew half my bones last year .Trust Malfoy to milk it for all its worth .School govnors have bin told o course said Hagrid miserably .They reckon I started too big .Shoulda left hippogriffs fer later .done flobberworms or summat . .Jus thought itd make a good firs lesson .S all my fault .Its all Malfoy s fault Hagrid !said Hermione earnestly .Were witnesses said Harry .You said hippogriffs attack if you insult them .Its Malfoys problem that he wasnt listening .Well tell Dumbledore what really happened .Yeah dont worry Hagrid well back you up said Ron .Tears leaked out of the crinkled corners of Hagrid s beetleblack eyes .He grabbed both Harry and Ron and pulled them into a bonebreaking hug .I think youve had enough to drink Hagrid said Hermione firmly .She took the tankard from the table and went outside to empty it .Ar maybe shes right said Hagrid letting go of Harry and Ron who both staggered away rubbing their ribs .Hagrid heaved himself out of his chair and followed Hermione unsteadily outside .They heard a loud splash .Whats he done ?said Harry nervously as Hermione came back in with the empty tankard .Stuck his head in the water barrel said Hermione putting the tankard away .Hagrid came back his long hair and beard sopping wet wiping the water out of his eyes .Thas better he said shaking his head like a dog and drenching them all .Listen it was good of yeh ter come an see me I really Hagrid stopped dead staring at Harry as though hed only just realized he was there .WHAT DYEH THINK YOURE DOIN EH ?he roared so suddenly that they jumped a foot in the air .YEH RE NOT TO GO WANDERIN AROUND AFTER DARK HARRY !AN YOU TWO !LETTIN HIM !Hagrid strode over to Harry grabbed his arm and pulled him to the door .Cmon !Hagrid said angrily .Im takinyer all back up ter school an don let me catch yeh walkin down ter see me after dark again .Im not worth that !7 THE BOGGART IN THE WARDROBE Malfoy didnt reappear in classes until late on Thursday morning when the Slytherins and Gryffindors were halfway through double Potions .He swaggered into the dungeon his right arm covered in bandages and bound up in a sling acting in Harrys opinion as though he were the heroic survivor of some dreadful battle .How is it Draco ?simpered Pansy Parkinson .Does it hurt much ?Yeah said Malfoy putting on a brave sort of grimace .But Harry saw him wink at Crabbe and Goyle when Pansy had looked away .Settle down settle down said Professor Snape idly .Harry and Ron scowled at each other Snape wouldnt have said settle down if theyd walked in late hed have given them detention .But Malfoy had always been able to get away with anything in Snape s classes Snape was head of Slytherin House and generally favored his own students above all others .They were making a new potion today a Shrinking Solution .Malfoy set up his cauldron right next to Harry and Ron so that they were preparing their ingredients on the same table .Sir Malfoy called sir Ill need help cutting up these daisy roots because of my arm Weasley cut up Malfoys roots for him said Snape without looking up .Ron went brick red .Theres nothing wrong with your arm he hissed at Malfoy .Malfoy smirked across the table .Weasley you heard Professor Snape cut up these roots .Ron seized his knife pulled Malfoys roots toward him and began to chop them roughly so that they were all different sizes .Professor drawled Malfoy Weasleys mutilating my roots sir .Snape approached their table stared down his hooked nose at the roots then gave Ron an unpleasant smile from beneath his long greasy black hair .Change roots with Malfoy Weasley .But sir !Ron had spent the last quarter of an hour carefully shredding his own roots into exactly equal pieces .Now said Snape in his most dangerous voice .Ron shoved his own beautifully cut roots across the table at Malfoy then took up the knife again .And sir 111 need this shrivelfig skinned said Malfoy his voice full of malicious laughter .Potter you can skin Malfoys shrivelfig said Snape giving Harry the look of loathing he always reserved just for him .Harry took Malfoys shrivelfig as Ron began trying to repair the damage to the roots he now had to use .Harry skinned the shrivelfig as fast as he could and flung it back across the table at Malfoy without speaking .Malfoy was smirking more broadly than ever .Seen your pal Hagrid lately ?he asked them quietly .None of your business said Ron jerkily without looking up .Im afraid he wont be a teacher much longer said Malfoy in a tone of mock sorrow .Fathers not very happy about my injury Keep talking Malfoy and Ill give you a real injury snarled Ron .hes complained to the school governors .And to the Ministry of Magic .Fathers got a lot of influence you know .And a lasting injury like this he gave a huge fake sigh who knows if my armll ever be the same again ?So thats why youre putting it on said Harry accidentally beheading a dead caterpillar because his hand was shaking in anger .To try to get Hagrid fired .Well said Malfoy lowering his voice to a whisper partly Potter .But there are other benefits too .Weasley slice my caterpillars for me .A few cauldrons away Neville was in trouble .Neville regularly went to pieces in Potions lessons it was his worst subject and his great fear of Professor Snape made things ten times worse .His potion which was supposed to be a bright acid green had turned Orange Longbottom said Snape ladling some up and allowing it to splash back into the cauldron so that everyone could see .Orange .Tell me boy does anything penetrate that thick skull of yours ?Didnt you hear me say quite clearly that only one rat spleen was needed ?Didnt I state plainly that a dash of leech juice would suffice ?What do I have to do to make you understand Longbottom ?Neville was pink and trembling .He looked as though he was on the verge of tears .Please sir said Hermione please I could help Neville put it right I dont remember asking you to show off Miss Granger said Snape coldly and Hermione went as pink as Neville .Longbottom at the end of this lesson we will feed a few drops of this potion to your toad and see what happens .Perhaps that will encourage you to do it properly .Snape moved away leaving Neville breathless with fear .Help me !he moaned to Hermione .Hey Harry said Seamus Finnigan leaning over to borrow Harrys brass scales have you heard ?Daily Prophet this morning they reckon Sirius Blacks been sighted .Where ?said Harry and Ron quickly .On the other side of the table Malfoy looked up listening closely .Not too far from here said Seamus who looked excited .It was a Muggle who saw him .Course she didnt really understand .The Muggles think hes just an ordinary criminal dont they ?So she phoned the telephone hot line .By the time the Ministry of Magic got there he was gone .Not too far from here .Ron repeated looking significantly at Harry .He turned around and saw Malfoy watching closely .What Malfoy ?Need something else skinned ?But Malfoys eyes were shining malevolently and they were fixed on Harry .He leaned across the table .Thinking of trying to catch Black singlehanded Potter ?Yeah thats right said Harry offhandedly .Malfoys thin mouth was curving in a mean smile .Of course if it was me he said quietly Id have done something before now .I wouldnt be staying in school like a good boy Id be out there looking for him .What are you talking about Malfoy ?said Ron roughly .Dont you know Potter ?breathed Malfoy his pale eyes narrowed .Know what ?Malfoy let out a low sneering laugh .Maybe youd rather not risk your neck he said .Want to leave it to the dementors do you ?But if it was me Id want revenge .Id hunt him down myself .What are you talking about ?said Harry angrily but at that moment Snape called You should have finished adding your ingredients by now this potion needs to stew before it can be drunk so clear away while it simmers and then well test Longbottoms .Crabbe and Goyle laughed openly watching Neville sweat as he stirred his potion feverishly .Hermione was muttering instructions to him out of the corner of her mouth so that Snape wouldnt see .Harry and Ron packed away their unused ingredients and went to wash their hands and ladles in the stone basin in the corner .What did Malfoy mean ?Harry muttered to Ron as he stuck his hands under the icy jet that poured from the gargoyles mouth .Why would I want revenge on Black ?He hasnt done anything to me yet .Hes making it up said Ron savagely .Hes trying to make you do something stupid .The end of the lesson in sight Snape strode over to Neville who was cowering by his cauldron .Everyone gather round said Snape his black eyes glittering and watch what happens to Longbottoms toad .If he has managed to produce a Shrinking Solution it will shrink to a tadpole .If as I dont doubt he has done it wrong his toad is likely to be poisoned .The Gryffindors watched fearfully .The Slytherins looked excited .Snape picked up Trevor the toad in his left hand and dipped a small spoon into Nevilles potion which was now green .He trickled a few drops down Trevors throat .There was a moment of hushed silence in which Trevor gulped then there was a small pop and Trevor the tadpole was wriggling in Snape s palm .The Gryffindors burst into applause .Snape looking sour pulled a small bottle from the pocket of his robe poured a few drops on top of Trevor and he reappeared suddenly fully grown .Five points from Gryffindor said Snape which wiped the smiles from every face .I told you not to help him Miss Granger .Class dismissed .Harry Ron and Hermione climbed the steps to the entrance hall .Harry was still thinking about what Malfoy had said while Ron was seething about Snape .Five points from Gryffindor because the potion was all right !Why didnt you lie Hermione ?You shouldve said Neville did it all by himself !Hermione didnt answer .Ron looked around .Where is she ?Harry turned too .They were at the top of the steps now watching the rest of the class pass them heading for the Great Hall and lunch .She was right behind us said Ron frowning .Malfoy passed them walking between Crabbe and Goyle .He smirked at Harry and disappeared .There she is said Harry .Hermione was panting slightly hurrying up the stairs one hand clutched her bag the other seemed to be tucking something down the front of her robes .How did you do that ?said Ron .What ?said Hermione joining them .One minute you were right behind us the next moment you were back at the bottom of the stairs again .What ?Hermione looked slightly confused .Oh I had to go back for something .Oh no A seam had split on Hermiones bag .Harry wasnt surprised he could see that it was crammed with at least a dozen large and heavy books .Why are you carrying all these around with you ?Ron asked her .You know how many subjects Im taking said Hermione breathlessly .Couldnt hold these for me could you ?But Ron was turning over the books she had handed him looking at the covers .You havent got any of these subjects today .Its only Defense Against the Dark Arts this afternoon .Oh yes said Hermione vaguely but she packed all the books back into her bag just the same .I hope theres something good for lunch Im starving she added and she marched off toward the Great Hall .Dyou get the feeling Hermione s not telling us something ?Ron asked Harry .Professor Lupin wasnt there when they arrived at his first Defense Against the Dark Arts lesson .They all sat down took out their books quills and parchment and were talking when he finally entered the room .Lupin smiled vaguely and placed his tatty old briefcase on the teachers desk .He was as shabby as ever but looked healthier than he had on the train as though he had had a few square meals .Good afternoon he said .Would you please put all your books back in your bags .Todays will be a practical lesson .You will need only your wands .A few curious looks were exchanged as the class put away their books .They had never had a practical Defense Against the Dark Arts before unless you counted the memorable class last year when their old teacher had brought a cageful of pixies to class and set them loose .Right then said Professor Lupin when everyone was ready .If youd follow me .Puzzled but interested the class got to its feet and followed Professor Lupin out of the classroom .He led them along the deserted corridor and around a corner where the first thing they saw was Peeves the Poltergeist who was floating upside down in midair and stuffing the nearest keyhole with chewing gum .Peeves didnt look up until Professor Lupin was two feet away then he wiggled his curlytoed feet and broke into song .Loony loopy Lupin Peeves sang .Loony loopy Lupin loony loopy Lupin Rude and unmanageable as he almost always was Peeves usually showed some respect toward the teachers .Everyone looked quickly at Professor Lupin to see how he would take this to their surprise he was still smiling .Id take that gum out of the keyhole if I were you Peeves he said pleasantly .Mr Filch wont be able to get in to his brooms .Filch was the Hogwarts caretaker a badtempered failed wizard who waged a constant war against the students and indeed Peeves .However Peeves paid no attention to Professor Lupins words except to blow a loud wet raspberry .Professor Lupin gave a small sigh and took out his wand .This is a useful little spell he told the class over his shoulder .Please watch closely .He raised the wand to shoulder height said Waddiwasil and pointed it at Peeves .With the force of a bullet the wad of chewing gum shot out of the keyhole and straight down Peeves s left nostril he whirled upright and zoomed away cursing .Cool sir !said Dean Thomas in amazement .Thank you Dean said Professor Lupin putting his wand away again .Shall we proceed ?They set off again the class looking at shabby Professor Lupin with increased respect .He led them down a second corridor and stopped right outside the staffroom door .Inside please said Professor Lupin opening it and standing back .The staffroom a long paneled room full of old mismatched chairs was empty except for one teacher .Professor Snape was sitting in a low armchair and he looked around as the class filed in .His eyes were glittering and there was a nasty sneer playing around his mouth .As Professor Lupin came in and made to close the door behind him Snape said Leave it open Lupin .Td rather not witness this .He got to his feet and strode past the class his black robes billowing behind him .At the doorway he turned on his heel and said Possibly no ones warned you Lupin but this class contains Neville Longbottom .I would advise you not to entrust him with anything difficult .Not unless Miss Granger is hissing instructions in his ear .Neville went scarlet .Harry glared at Snape it was bad enough that he bullied Neville in his own classes let alone doing it in front of other teachers .Professor Lupin had raised his eyebrows .I was hoping that Neville would assist me with the first stage of the operation he said and I am sure he will perform it admirably .Nevilles face went if possible even redder .Snapes lip curled but he left shutting the door with a snap .Now then said Professor Lupin beckoning the class toward the end of the room where there was nothing but an old wardrobe where the teachers kept their spare robes .As Professor Lupin went to stand next to it the wardrobe gave a sudden wobble banging off the wall .Nothing to worry about said Professor Lupin calmly because a few people had jumped backward in alarm .Theres a boggart in there .Most people seemed to feel that this was something to worry about .Neville gave Professor Lupin a look of pure terror and Seamus Finnigan eyed the now rattling doorknob apprehensively .Boggarts like dark enclosed spaces said Professor Lupin .Wardrobes the gap beneath beds the cupboards under sinks Ive even met one that had lodged itself in a grandfather clock .This one moved in yesterday afternoon and I asked the headmaster if the staff would leave it to give my third years some practice .So the first question we must ask ourselves is what is a boggart ?Hermione put up her hand .Its a shapeshifter she said .It can take the shape of whatever it thinks will frighten us most .Couldnt have put it better myself said Professor Lupin and Hermione glowed .So the boggart sitting in the darkness within has not yet assumed a form .He does not yet know what will frighten the person on the other side of the door .Nobody knows what a boggart looks like when he is alone but when I let him out he will immediately become whatever each of us most fears .This means said Professor Lupin choosing to ignore Nevilles small sputter of terror that we have a huge advantage over the boggart before we begin .Have you spotted it Harry ?Trying to answer a question with Hermione next to him bobbing up and down on the balls of her feet with her hand in the air was very offputting but Harry had a go .Er because there are so many of us it wont know what shape it should be ?Precisely said Professor Lupin and Hermione put her hand down looking a little disappointed .Its always best to have company when youre dealing with a boggart .He becomes confused .Which should he become a headless corpse or a flesheating slug ?I once saw a boggart make that very mistake tried to frighten two people at once and turned himself into half a slug .Not remotely frightening .The charm that repels a boggart is simple yet it requires force of mind .You see the thing that really finishes a boggart is laughter .What you need to do is force it to assume a shape that you find amusing .We will practice the charm without wands first .After me please .riddikulusV RiddikulusV said the class together .Good said Professor Lupin .Very good .But that was the easy part Im afraid .You see the word alone is not enough .And this is where you come in Neville .The wardrobe shook again though not as much as Neville who walked forward as though he were heading for the gallows .Right Neville said Professor Lupin .First things first what would you say is the thing that frightens you most in the world ?Nevilles lips moved but no noise came out .Didnt catch that Neville sorry said Professor Lupin cheerfully .Neville looked around rather wildly as though begging someone to help him then said in barely more than a whisper Professor Snape .Nearly everyone laughed .Even Neville grinned apologetically .Professor Lupin however looked thoughtful .Professor Snape .hmmm .Neville I believe you live with your grandmother ?Er yes said Neville nervously .But I dont want the boggart to turn into her either .No no you misunderstand me said Professor Lupin now smiling .I wonder could you tell us what sort of clothes your grandmother usually wears ?Neville looked startled but said Well .always the same hat .A tall one with a stuffed vulture on top .And a long dress .green normally .and sometimes a foxfur scarf .And a handbag ?prompted Professor Lupin .A big red one said Neville .Right then said Professor Lupin .Can you picture those clothes very clearly Neville ?Can you see them in your minds eye ?Yes said Neville uncertainly plainly wondering what was coming next .When the boggart bursts out of this wardrobe Neville and sees you it will assume the form of Professor Snape said Lupin .And you will raise your wand thus and cry ‘Riddikulus and concentrate hard on your grandmothers clothes .If all goes well Professor Boggart Snape will be forced into that vulturetopped hat and that green dress with that big red handbag .There was a great shout of laughter .The wardrobe wobbled more violently .If Neville is successful the boggart is likely to shift his attention to each of us in turn said Professor Lupin .I would like all of you to take a moment now to think of the thing that scares you most and imagine how you might force it to look comical .The room went quiet .Harry thought .What scared him most in the world ?His first thought was Lord Voldemort a Voldemort returned to full strength .But before he had even started to plan a possible counterattack on a boggart Voldemort a horrible image came floating to the surface of his mind .A rotting glistening hand slithering back beneath a black cloak .a long rattling breath from an unseen mouth .then a cold so penetrating it felt like drowning .Harry shivered then looked around hoping no one had noticed .Many people had their eyes shut tight .Ron was muttering to himself Take its legs off .Harry was sure he knew what that was about .Rons greatest fear was spiders .Everyone ready ?said Professor Lupin .Harry felt a lurch of fear .He wasnt ready .How could you make a dementor less frightening ?But he didnt want to ask for more time everyone else was nodding and rolling up their sleeves .Neville were going to back away said Professor Lupin .Let you have a clear field all right ?Ill call the next person forward .Everyone back now so Neville can get a clear shot They all retreated backed against the walls leaving Neville alone beside the wardrobe .He looked pale and frightened but he had pushed up the sleeves of his robes and was holding his wand ready .On the count of three Neville said Professor Lupin who was pointing his own wand at the handle of the wardrobe .One two three now A jet of sparks shot from the end of Professor Lupins wand and hit the doorknob .The wardrobe burst open .Hooknosed and menacing Professor Snape stepped out his eyes flashing at Neville .Neville backed away his wand up mouthing wordlessly .Snape was bearing down upon him reaching inside his robes .R r riddikulusV squeaked Neville .There was a noise like a whip crack .Snape stumbled he was wearing a long lacetrimmed dress and a towering hat topped with a motheaten vulture and he was swinging a huge crimson handbag .There was a roar of laughter the boggart paused confused and Professor Lupin shouted Parvati !Forward !Parvati walked forward her face set .Snape rounded on her .There was another crack and where he had stood was a bloodstained bandaged mummy its sightless face was turned to Parvati and it began to walk toward her very slowly dragging its feet its stiff arms rising RiddikulusV cried Parvati .A bandage unraveled at the mummys feet it became entangled fell face forward and its head rolled off .Seamus !roared Professor Lupin .Seamus darted past Parvati .Crack !Where the mummy had been was a woman with floorlength black hair and a skeletal green tinged face a banshee .She opened her mouth wide and an unearthly sound filled the room a long wailing shriek that made the hair on Harrys head stand on end RiddikulusV shouted Seamus .The banshee made a rasping noise and clutched her throat her voice was gone .Crack .The banshee turned into a rat which chased its tail in a circle then crack .became a rattlesnake which slithered and writhed before crack !becoming a single bloody eyeball .Its confused !shouted Lupin .Were getting there !Dean !Dean hurried forward .Crack The eyeball became a severed hand which flipped over and began to creep along the floor like a crab .RiddikulusV yelled Dean .There was a snap and the hand was trapped in a mousetrap .Excellent !Ron you next !Ron leapt forward .Crack Quite a few people screamed .A giant spider six feet tall and covered in hair was advancing on Ron clicking its pincers menacingly .For a moment Harry thought Ron had frozen .Then RiddikulusV bellowed Ron and the spiders legs vanished it rolled over and over Lavender Brown squealed and ran out of its way and it came to a halt at Harrys feet .He raised his wand ready but Here !shouted Professor Lupin suddenly hurrying forward .Crack .The legless spider had vanished .For a second everyone looked wildly around to see where it was .Then they saw a silverywhite orb hanging in the air in front of Lupin who said RiddikulusV almost lazily .Crack !Forward Neville and finish him off !said Lupin as the boggart landed on the floor as a cockroach .Crack .Snape was back .This time Neville charged forward looking determined .RiddikulusV he shouted and they had a split seconds view of Snape in his lacy dress before Neville let out a great Ha !of laughter and the boggart exploded burst into a thousand tiny wisps of smoke and was gone .Excellent !cried Professor Lupin as the class broke into applause .Excellent Neville .Well done everyone .Let me see .five points to Gryffindor for every person to tackle the boggart ten for Neville because he did it twice .and five each to Hermione and Harry .But I didnt do anything said Harry .You and Hermione answered my questions correctly at the start of the class Harry Lupin said lightly .Very well everyone an excellent lesson .Homework kindly read the chapter on boggarts and summarize it for me .to be handed in on Monday .That will be all .Talking excitedly the class left the staffroom .Harry however wasnt feeling cheerful .Professor Lupin had deliberately stopped him from tackling the boggart .Why ?Was it because hed seen Harry collapse on the train and thought he wasnt up to much ?Had he thought Harry would pass out again ?But no one else seemed to have noticed anything .Did you see me take that banshee ?shouted Seamus .And the hand !said Dean waving his own around .And Snape in that hat !And my mummy !I wonder why Professor Lupins frightened of crystal balls ?said Lavender thoughtfully .That was the best Defense Against the Dark Arts lesson weve ever had wasnt it ?said Ron excitedly as they made their way back to the classroom to get their bags .He seems like a very good teacher said Hermione approvingly .But I wish I could have had a turn with the boggart What would it have been for you ?said Ron sniggering .A piece of homework that only got nine out of ten ?d FLIGHT OF THE FAT LADY In no time at all Defense Against the Dark Arts had become most peoples favorite class .Only Draco Malfoy and his gang of Slytherins had anything bad to say about Professor Lupin .Look at the state of his robes Malfoy would say in a loud whisper as Professor Lupin passed .He dresses like our old houseelf .But no one else cared that Professor Lupins robes were patched and frayed .His next few lessons were just as interesting as the first .After boggarts they studied Red Caps nasty little goblinlike creatures that lurked wherever there had been bloodshed in the dungeons of castles and the potholes of deserted battlefields waiting to bludgeon those who had gotten lost .From Red Caps they moved on to kappas creepy waterdwellers that looked like scaly monkeys with webbed hands itching to strangle unwitting waders in their ponds .Harry only wished he was as happy with some of his other classes .Worst of all was Potions .Snape was in a particularly vindictive mood these days and no one was in any doubt why .The story of the boggart assuming Snapes shape and the way that Neville had dressed it in his grandmothers clothes had traveled through the school like wildfire .Snape didnt seem to find it funny .His eyes flashed menacingly at the very mention of Professor Lupins name and he was bullying Neville worse than ever .Harry was also growing to dread the hours he spent in Professor Trelawneys stifling tower room deciphering lopsided shapes and symbols trying to ignore the way Professor Trelawneys enormous eyes filled with tears every time she looked at him .He couldnt like Professor Trelawney even though she was treated with respect bordering on reverence by many of the class .Parvati Patil and Lavender Brown had taken to haunting Professor Trelawneys tower room at lunchtimes and always returned with annoyingly superior looks on their faces as though they knew things the others didnt .They had also started using hushed voices whenever they spoke to Harry as though he were on his deathbed .Nobody really liked Care of Magical Creatures which after the actionpacked first class had become extremely dull .Hagrid seemed to have lost his confidence .They were now spending lesson after lesson learning how to look after flobberworms which had to be some of the most boring creatures in existence .Why would anyone bother looking after them ?said Ron after yet another hour of poking shredded lettuce down the flobberworms slimy throats .At the start of October however Harry had something else to occupy him something so enjoyable it more than made up for his unsatisfactory classes .The Quidditch season was approaching and Oliver Wood Captain of the Gryffindor team called a meeting one Thursday evening to discuss tactics for the new season .There were seven people on a Quidditch team three Chasers whose job it was to score goals by putting the Quaffle a red soccersized ball through one of the fiftyfoothigh hoops at each end of the field two Beaters who were equipped with heavy bats to repel the Bludgers two heavy black balls that zoomed around trying to attack the players a Keeper who defended the goal posts and the Seeker who had the hardest job of all that of catching the Golden Snitch a tiny winged walnutsized ball whose capture ended the game and earned the Seekers team an extra one hundred and fifty points .Oliver Wood was a burly seventeenyearold now in his seventh and final year at Hogwarts .There was a quiet sort of desperation in his voice as he addressed his six fellow team members in the chilly locker rooms on the edge of the darkening Quidditch field .This is our last chance my last chance to win the Quidditch Cup he told them striding up and down in front of them .Ill be leaving at the end of this year .Ill never get another shot at it .Gryffindor hasnt won for seven years now .Okay so weve had the worst luck in the world injuries then the tournament getting called off last year .Wood swallowed as though the memory still brought a lump to his throat .But we also know weve got the best ruddy team in the school he said punching a fist into his other hand the old manic glint back in his eye .Weve got three superb Chasers .Wood pointed at Alicia Spinnet Angelina Johnson and Katie Bell .Weve got two unbeatable Beaters .Stop it Oliver youre embarrassing us said Fred and George Weasley together pretending to blush .And weve got a Seeker who has never failed to win us a match .Wood rumbled glaring at Harry with a kind of furious pride .And me he added as an afterthought .We think youre very good too Oliver said George .Spanking good Keeper said Fred .The point is Wood went on resuming his pacing the Quidditch Cup should have had our name on it these last two years .Ever since Harry joined the team Ive thought the thing was in the bag .But we havent got it and this years the last chance well get to finally see our name on the thing .Wood spoke so dejectedly that even Fred and George looked sympathetic .Oliver this years our year said Fred .Well do it Oliver !said Angelina .Definitely said Harry .Full of determination the team started training sessions three evenings a week .The weather was getting colder and wetter the nights darker but no amount of mud wind or rain could tarnish Harrys wonderful vision of finally winning the huge silver Quidditch Cup .Harry returned to the Gryffindor common room one evening after training cold and stiff but pleased with the way practice had gone to find the room buzzing excitedly .Whats happened ?he asked Ron and Hermione who were sitting in two of the best chairs by the fireside and completing some star charts for Astronomy .First Hogsmeade weekend said Ron pointing at a notice that had appeared on the battered old bulletin board .End of October .Halloween .Excellent said Fred who had followed Harry through the portrait hole .I need to visit Zonkos .Im nearly out of Stink Pellets .Harry threw himself into a chair beside Ron his high spirits ebbing away .Hermione seemed to read his mind .Harry Im sure youll be able to go next time she said .Theyre bound to catch Black soon .Hes been sighted once already Blacks not fool enough to try anything in Hogsmeade said Ron .Ask McGonagall if you can go this time Harry .The next one might not be for ages Ron said Hermione .Harrys supposed to stay in school He cant be the only third year left behind said Ron .Ask McGonagall go on Harry Yeah I think I will said Harry making up his mind .Hermione opened her mouth to argue but at that moment Crookshanks leapt lightly onto her lap .A large dead spider was dangling from his mouth .Does he have to eat that in front of us ?said Ron scowling .Clever Crookshanks did you catch that all by yourself ?said Hermione .Crookshanks slowly chewed up the spider his yellow eyes fixed insolently on Ron .Just keep him over there thats all said Ron irritably turning back to his star chart .Ive got Scabbers asleep in my bag .Harry yawned .He really wanted to go to bed but he still had his own star chart to complete .He pulled his bag toward him took out parchment ink and quill and started work .You can copy mine if you like said Ron labeling his last star with a flourish and shoving the chart toward Harry .Hermione who disapproved of copying pursed her lips but didnt say anything .Crookshanks was still staring unblinkingly at Ron flicking the end of his bushy tail .Then without warning he pounced .OY !Ron roared seizing his bag as Crookshanks sank four sets of claws deep inside it and began tearing ferociously .GET OFF YOU STUPID ANIMAL !Ron tried to pull the bag away from Crookshanks but Crookshanks clung on spitting and slashing .Ron dont hurt him !squealed Hermione the whole common room was watching Ron whirled the bag around Crookshanks still clinging to it and Scabbers came flying out of the top CATCH THAT CAT !Ron yelled as Crookshanks freed himself from the remnants of the bag sprang over the table and chased after the terrified Scabbers .George Weasley made a lunge for Crookshanks but missed Scabbers streaked through twenty pairs of legs and shot beneath an old chest of drawers .Crookshanks skidded to a halt crouched low on his bandy legs and started making furious swipes beneath it with his front paw .Ron and Hermione hurried over Hermione grabbed Crookshanks around the middle and heaved him away Ron threw himself onto his stomach and with great difficulty pulled Scabbers out by the tail .Look at him !he said furiously to Hermione dangling Scabbers in front of her .Hes skin and bone !You keep that cat away from him !Crookshanks doesnt understand its wrong !said Hermione her voice shaking .All cats chase rats Ron !Theres something funny about that animal !said Ron who was trying to persuade a frantically wiggling Scabbers back into his pocket .It heard me say that Scabbers was in my bag !Oh what rubbish said Hermione impatiently .Crookshanks could smell him Ron how else dyou think That cats got it in for Scabbers !said Ron ignoring the people around him who were starting to giggle .And Scabbers was here first and hes ill !Ron marched through the common room and out of sight up the stairs to the boys dormitories .Ron was still in a bad mood with Hermione next day .He barely talked to her all through Herbology even though he Harry and Hermione were working together on the same puffapod .Hows Scabbers ?Hermione asked timidly as they stripped fat pink pods from the plants and emptied the shining beans into a wooden pail .Hes hiding at the bottom of my bed shaking said Ron angrily missing the pail and scattering beans over the greenhouse floor .Careful Weasley careful !cried Professor Sprout as the beans burst into bloom before their very eyes .They had Transfiguration next .Harry who had resolved to ask Professor McGonagall after the lesson whether he could go into Hogsmeade with the rest joined the line outside the class trying to decide how he was going to argue his case .He was distracted however by a disturbance at the front of the line .Lavender Brown seemed to be crying .Parvati had her arm around her and was explaining something to Seamus Finnigan and Dean Thomas who were looking very serious .Whats the matter Lavender ?said Hermione anxiously as she Harry and Ron went to join the group .She got a letter from home this morning Parvati whispered .Its her rabbit Binky .Hes been killed by a fox .Oh said Hermione Im sorry Lavender .I should have known !said Lavender tragically .You know what day it is ?Er The sixteenth of October !That thing youre dreading it will happen on the sixteenth of October !Remember ?She was right she was right !The whole class was gathered around Lavender now .Seamus shook his head seriously .Hermione hesitated then she said You you were dreading Binky being killed by a fox ?Well not necessarily by a fox said Lavender looking up at Hermione with streaming eyes but I was obviously dreading him dying wasnt I ?Oh said Hermione .She paused again .Then Was Binky an old rabbit ?N no !sobbed Lavender .H he was only a baby !Parvati tightened her arm around Lavenders shoulders .But then why would you dread him dying ?said Hermione .Parvati glared at her .Well look at it logically said Hermione turning to the rest of the group .I mean Binky didnt even die today did he ?Lavender just got the news today Lavender wailed loudly .and she cant have been dreading it because its come as a real shock Dont mind Hermione Lavender said Ron loudly she doesnt think other peoples pets matter very much .Professor McGonagall opened the classroom door at that moment which was perhaps lucky Hermione and Ron were looking daggers at each other and when they got into class they seated themselves on either side of Harry and didnt talk to each other for the whole class .Harry still hadnt decided what he was going to say to Professor McGonagall when the bell rang at the end of the lesson but it was she who brought up the subject of Hogsmeade first .One moment please !she called as the class made to leave .As youre all in my House you should hand Hogsmeade permission forms to me before Halloween .No form no visiting the village so dont forget !Neville put up his hand .Please Professor I I think Ive lost Your grandmother sent yours to me directly Longbottom said Professor McGonagall .She seemed to think it was safer .Well thats all you may leave .Ask her now Ron hissed at Harry .Oh but Hermione began .Go for it Harry said Ron stubbornly .Harry waited for the rest of the class to disappear then headed nervously for Professor McGonagalls desk .Yes Potter ?Harry took a deep breath .Professor my aunt and uncle er forgot to sign my form he said .Professor McGonagall looked over her square spectacles at him but didnt say anything .So er dyou think it would be all right I mean will it be okay if I if I go to Hogsmeade ?Professor McGonagall looked down and began shuffling papers on her desk .Im afraid not Potter she said .You heard what I said .No form no visiting the village .Thats the rule .But Professor my aunt and uncle you know theyre Muggles they dont really understand about about Hogwarts forms and stuff Harry said while Ron egged him on with vigorous nods .If you said I could go But I dont say so said Professor McGonagall standing up and piling her papers neatly into a drawer .The form clearly states that the parent or guardian must give permission .She turned to look at him with an odd expression on her face .Was it pity ?Im sorry Potter but thats my final word .You had better hurry or youll be late for your next lesson .There was nothing to be done .Ron called Professor McGonagall a lot of names that greatly annoyed Hermione Hermione assumed an allforthebest expression that made Ron even angrier and Harry had to endure everyone in the class talking loudly and happily about what they were going to do first once they got into Hogsmeade .Theres always the feast said Ron in an effort to cheer Harry up .You know the Halloween feast in the evening .Yeah said Harry gloomily great .The Halloween feast was always good but it would taste a lot better if he was coming to it after a day in Hogsmeade with everyone else .Nothing anyone said made him feel any better about being left behind .Dean Thomas who was good with a quill had offered to forge Uncle Vernons signature on the form but as Harry had already told Professor McGonagall he hadnt had it signed that was no good .Ron halfheartedly suggested the Invisibility Cloak but Hermione stamped on that one reminding Ron what Dumbledore had told them about the dementors being able to see through them .Percy had what were possibly the least helpful words of comfort .They make a fuss about Hogsmeade but I assure you Harry its not all its cracked up to be he said seriously .All right the sweetshops rather good and Zonkos Joke Shops frankly dangerous and yes the Shrieking Shacks always worth a visit but really Harry apart from that youre not missing anything .On Halloween morning Harry awoke with the rest and went down to breakfast feeling thoroughly depressed though doing his best to act normally .Well bring you lots of sweets back from Honeydukes said Hermione looking desperately sorry for him .Yeah loads said Ron .He and Hermione had finally forgotten their squabble about Crookshanks in the face of Harrys difficulties .Dont worry about me said Harry in what he hoped was an offhand voice Ill see you at the feast .Have a good time .He accompanied them to the entrance hall where Filch the caretaker was standing inside the front doors checking off names against a long list peering suspiciously into every face and making sure that no one was sneaking out who shouldnt be going .Staying here Potter ?shouted Malfoy who was standing in line with Crabbe and Goyle .Scared of passing the dementors ?Harry ignored him and made his solitary way up the marble staircase through the deserted corridors and back to Gryffindor Tower .Password ?said the Fat Lady jerking out of a doze .Fortuna Major said Harry listlessly .The portrait swung open and he climbed through the hole into the common room .It was full of chattering first and second years and a few older students who had obviously visited Hogsmeade so often the novelty had worn off .Harry !Harry !Hi Harry !It was Colin Creevey a second year who was deeply in awe of Harry and never missed an opportunity to speak to him .Arent you going to Hogsmeade Harry ?Why not ?Hey Colin looked eagerly around at his friends you can come and sit with us if you like Harry !Er no thanks Colin said Harry who wasnt in the mood to have a lot of people staring avidly at the scar on his forehead .I Ive got to go to the library got to get some work done .After that he had no choice but to turn right around and head back out of the portrait hole again .What was the point waking me up ?the Fat Lady called grumpily after him as he walked away .Harry wandered dispiritedly toward the library but halfway there he changed his mind he didnt feel like working .He turned around and came facetoface with Filch who had obviously just seen off the last of the Hogsmeade visitors .What are you doing ?Filch snarled suspiciously .Nothing said Harry truthfully .Nothing !spat Filch his jowls quivering unpleasantly .A likely story !Sneaking around on your own why arent you in Hogsmeade buying Stink Pellets and Belch Powder and Whizzing Worms like the rest of your nasty little friends ?Harry shrugged .Well get back to your common room where you belong !snapped Filch and he stood glaring until Harry had passed out of sight .But Harry didnt go back to the common room he climbed a staircase thinking vaguely of visiting the Owlery to see Hedwig and was walking along another corridor when a voice from inside one of the rooms said Harry ?Harry doubled back to see who had spoken and met Professor Lupin looking around his office door .What are you doing ?said Lupin though in a very different voice from Filch .Where are Ron and Hermione ?Hogsmeade said Harry in a wouldbe casual voice .Ah said Lupin .He considered Harry for a moment .Why dont you come in ?Ive just taken delivery of a grindylow for our next lesson .A what ?said Harry .He followed Lupin into his office .In the corner stood a very large tank of water .A sickly green creature with sharp little horns had its face pressed against the glass pulling faces and flexing its long spindly fingers .Water demon said Lupin surveying the grindylow thoughtfully .We shouldnt have much difficulty with him not after the kappas .The trick is to break his grip .You notice the abnormally long fingers ?Strong but very brittle .The grindylow bared its green teeth and then buried itself in a tangle of weeds in a corner .Cup of tea ?Lupin said looking around for his kettle .I was just thinking of making one .All right said Harry awkwardly .Lupin tapped the kettle with his wand and a blast of steam issued suddenly from the spout .Sit down said Lupin taking the lid off a dusty tin .Ive only got teabags Im afraid but I daresay youve had enough of tea leaves ?Harry looked at him .Lupins eyes were twinkling .How did you know about that ?Harry asked .Professor McGonagall told me said Lupin passing Harry a chipped mug of tea .Youre not worried are you ?No said Harry .He thought for a moment of telling Lupin about the dog hed seen in Magnolia Crescent but decided not to .He didnt want Lupin to think he was a coward especially since Lupin already seemed to think he couldnt cope with a boggart .Something of Harrys thoughts seemed to have shown on his face because Lupin said Anything worrying you Harry ?No Harry lied .He drank a bit of tea and watched the grindylow brandishing a fist at him .Yes he said suddenly putting his tea down on Lupins desk .You know that day we fought the boggart ?Yes said Lupin slowly .Why didnt you let me fight it ?said Harry abruptly .Lupin raised his eyebrows .I would have thought that was obvious Harry he said sounding surprised .Harry who had expected Lupin to deny that hed done any such thing was taken aback .Why ?he said again .Well said Lupin frowning slightly I assumed that if the boggart faced you it would assume the shape of Lord Voldemort .Harry stared .Not only was this the last answer hed expected but Lupin had said Voldemort s name .The only person Harry had ever heard say the name aloud apart from himself was Professor Dumbledore .Clearly I was wrong said Lupin still frowning at Harry .But I didnt think it a good idea for Lord Voldemort to materialize in the staffroom .I imagined that people would panic .I didnt think of Voldemort said Harry honestly .I I remembered those dementors .I see said Lupin thoughtfully .Well well .Im impressed .He smiled slightly at the look of surprise on Harrys face .That suggests that what you fear most of all is fear .Very wise Harry .Harry didnt know what to say to that so he drank some more tea .So youve been thinking that I didnt believe you capable of fighting the boggart ?said Lupin shrewdly .Well .yeah said Harry .He was suddenly feeling a lot happier .Professor Lupin you know the dementors He was interrupted by a knock on the door .Come in called Lupin .The door opened and in came Snape .He was carrying a goblet which was smoking faintly and stopped at the sight of Harry his black eyes narrowing .Ah Severus said Lupin smiling .Thanks very much .Could you leave it here on the desk for me ?Snape set down the smoking goblet his eyes wandering between Harry and Lupin .I was just showing Harry my grindylow said Lupin pleasantly pointing at the tank .Fascinating said Snape without looking at it .You should drink that directly Lupin .Yes yes I will said Lupin .I made an entire cauldronful Snape continued .If you need more .I should probably take some again tomorrow .Thanks very much Severus .Not at all said Snape but there was a look in his eye Harry didnt like .He backed out of the room unsmiling and watchful .Harry looked curiously at the goblet .Lupin smiled .Professor Snape has very kindly concocted a potion for me he said .I have never been much of a potion brewer and this one is particularly complex .He picked up the goblet and sniffed it .Pity sugar makes it useless he added taking a sip and shuddering .Why ?Harry began .Lupin looked at him and answered the unfinished question .Ive been feeling a bit offcolor he said .This potion is the only thing that helps .I am very lucky to be working alongside Professor Snape there arent many wizards who are up to making it .Professor Lupin took another sip and Harry had a crazy urge to knock the goblet out of his hands .Professor Snapes very interested in the Dark Arts he blurted out .Really ?said Lupin looking only mildly interested as he took another gulp of potion .Some people reckon Harry hesitated then plunged recklessly on some people reckon hed do anything to get the Defense Against the Dark Arts job .Lupin drained the goblet and pulled a face .Disgusting he said .Well Harry Id better get back to work .Ill see you at the feast later .Right said Harry putting down his empty teacup .The empty goblet was still smoking .There you go said Ron .We got as much as we could carry .A shower of brilliantly colored sweets fell into Harrys lap .It was dusk and Ron and Hermione had just turned up in the common room pinkfaced from the cold wind and looking as though theyd had the time of their lives .Thanks said Harry picking up a packet of tiny black Pepper Imps .Whats Hogsmeade like ?Where did you go ?By the sound of it everywhere .Dervish and Banges the wizarding equipment shop Zonkos Joke Shop into the Three Broomsticks for foaming mugs of hot butterbeer and many places besides .The post office Harry !About two hundred owls all sitting on shelves all colorcoded depending on how fast you want your letter to get there !Honeydukes has got a new kind of fudge they were giving out free samples theres a bit look We think we saw an ogre honestly they get all sorts at the Three Broomsticks Wish we could have brought you some butterbeer really warms you up What did you do ?said Hermione looking anxious .Did you get any work done ?No said Harry .Lupin made me a cup of tea in his office .And then Snape came in .He told them all about the goblet .Rons mouth fell open .Lupin drank it ?he gasped .Is he mad ?Hermione checked her watch .Wed better go down you know the feastll be starting in five minutes .They hurried through the portrait hole and into the crowd still discussing Snape .But if he you know Hermione dropped her voice glancing nervously around if he was trying to to poison Lupin he wouldnt have done it in front of Harry .Yeah maybe said Harry as they reached the entrance hall and crossed into the Great Hall .It had been decorated with hundreds and hundreds of candlefilled pumpkins a cloud of fluttering live bats and many flaming orange streamers which were swimming lazily across the stormy ceiling like brilliant watersnakes .The food was delicious even Hermione and Ron who were full to bursting with Honeydukes sweets managed second helpings of everything .Harry kept glancing at the staff table .Professor Lupin looked cheerful and as well as he ever did he was talking animatedly to tiny little Professor Flitwick the Charms teacher .Harry moved his eyes along the table to the place where Snape sat .Was he imagining it or were Snape s eyes flickering toward Lupin more often than was natural ?The feast finished with an entertainment provided by the Hogwarts ghosts .They popped out of the walls and tables to do a bit of formation gliding Nearly Headless Nick the Gryffindor ghost had a great success with a reenactment of his own botched beheading .It had been such a pleasant evening that Harrys good mood couldnt even be spoiled by Malfoy who shouted through the crowd as they all left the hall The dementors send their love Potter !Harry Ron and Hermione followed the rest of the Gryffindors along the usual path to Gryffindor Tower but when they reached the corridor that ended with the portrait of the Fat Lady they found it jammed with students .Why isnt anyone going in ?said Ron curiously .Harry peered over the heads in front of him .The portrait seemed to be closed .Let me through please came Percys voice and he came bustling importantly through the crowd .Whats the holdup here ?You cant all have forgotten the password excuse me Im Head Boy And then a silence fell over the crowd from the front first so that a chill seemed to spread down the corridor .They heard Percy say in a suddenly sharp voice Somebody get Professor Dumbledore .Quick .Peoples heads turned those at the back were standing on tiptoe .Whats going on ?said Ginny who had just arrived .A moment later Professor Dumbledore was there sweeping toward the portrait the Gryffindors squeezed together to let him through and Harry Ron and Hermione moved closer to see what the trouble was .Oh my Hermione grabbed Harrys arm .The Fat Lady had vanished from her portrait which had been slashed so viciously that strips of canvas littered the floor great chunks of it had been torn away completely .Dumbledore took one quick look at the ruined painting and turned his eyes somber to see Professors McGonagall Lupin and Snape hurrying toward him .We need to find her said Dumbledore .Professor McGonagall please go to Mr Filch at once and tell him to search every painting in the castle for the Fat Lady .Youll be lucky !said a cackling voice .It was Peeves the Poltergeist bobbing over the crowd and looking delighted as he always did at the sight of wreckage or worry .What do you mean Peeves ?said Dumbledore calmly and Peevess grin faded a little .He didnt dare taunt Dumbledore .Instead he adopted an oily voice that was no better than his cackle .Ashamed Your Headship sir .Doesnt want to be seen .Shes a horrible mess .Saw her running through the landscape up on the fourth floor sir dodging between the trees .Crying something dreadful he said happily .Poor thing he added unconvincingly .Did she say who did it ?said Dumbledore quietly .Oh yes Professorhead said Peeves with the air of one cradling a large bombshell in his arms .He got very angry when she wouldnt let him in you see .Peeves flipped over and grinned at Dumbledore from between his own legs .Nasty temper hes got that Sirius Black .9 GRIM DEFEAT Professor Dumbledore sent all the Gryffindors back to the Great Hall where they were joined ten minutes later by the students from Hufflepuff Ravenclaw and Slytherin who all looked extremely confused .The teachers and I need to conduct a thorough search of the castle Professor Dumbledore told them as Professors McGonagall and Flitwick closed all doors into the hall .Im afraid that for your own safety you will have to spend the night here .I want the prefects to stand guard over the entrances to the hall and I am leaving the Head Boy and Girl in charge .Any disturbance should be reported to me immediately he added to Percy who was looking immensely proud and important .Send word with one of the ghosts .Professor Dumbledore paused about to leave the hall and said Oh yes youll be needing .One casual wave of his wand and the long tables flew to the edges of the hall and stood themselves against the walls another wave and the floor was covered with hundreds of squashy purple sleeping bags .Sleep well said Professor Dumbledore closing the door behind him .The hall immediately began to buzz excitedly the Gryffindors were telling the rest of the school what had just happened .Everyone into their sleeping bags !shouted Percy .Come on now no more talking !Lights out in ten minutes !Cmon Ron said to Harry and Hermione they seized three sleeping bags and dragged them into a corner .Do you think Blacks still in the castle ?Hermione whispered anxiously .Dumbledore obviously thinks he might be said Ron .Its very lucky he picked tonight you know said Hermione as they climbed fully dressed into their sleeping bags and propped themselves on their elbows to talk .The one night we werent in the tower .I reckon hes lost track of time being on the run said Ron .Didnt realize it was Halloween .Otherwise hed have come bursting in here .Hermione shuddered .All around them people were asking one another the same question How did he get in ?Maybe he knows how to Apparate said a Ravenclaw a few feet away .Just appear out of thin air you know .Disguised himself probably said a Hufflepuff fifth year .He couldve flown in suggested Dean Thomas .Honestly am I the only person whos ever bothered to read Hogwarts A History ?said Hermione crossly to Harry and Ron .Probably said Ron .Why ?Because the castles protected by more than walls you know said Hermione .There are all sorts of enchantments on it to stop people entering by stealth .You cant just Apparate in here .And Id like to see the disguise that could fool those dementors .Theyre guarding every single entrance to the grounds .Theyd have seen him fly in too .And Filch knows all the secret passages theyll have them covered .The lights are going out now !Percy shouted .I want everyone in their sleeping bags and no more talking !The candles all went out at once .The only light now came from the silvery ghosts who were drifting about talking seriously to the prefects and the enchanted ceiling which like the sky outside was scattered with stars .What with that and the whispering that still filled the hall Harry felt as though he were sleeping outdoors in a light wind .Once every hour a teacher would reappear in the hall to check that everything was quiet .Around three in the morning when many students had finally fallen asleep Professor Dumbledore came in .Harry watched him looking around for Percy who had been pbetween the sleeping bags telling people off for talking .Percy was only a short way away from Harry Ron and Hermione who quickly pretended to be asleep as Dumbledores footsteps drew nearer .Any sign of him Professor ?asked Percy in a whisper .No .All well here ?Everything under control sir .Good .Theres no point moving them all now .Ive found a temporary guardian for the Gryffindor portrait hole .Youll be able to move them back in tomorrow .And the Fat Lady sir ?Hiding in a map of Argyllshire on the second floor .Apparently she refused to let Black in without the password so he attacked .Shes still very distressed but once shes calmed down Ill have Mr Filch restore her .Harry heard the door of the hall creak open again and more footsteps .Headmaster ?It was Snape .Harry kept quite still listening hard .The whole of the third floor has been searched .Hes not there .And Filch has done the dungeons nothing there either .What about the Astronomy tower ?Professor Trelawneys room ?The Owlery ?All searched .Very well Severus .I didnt really expect Black to linger .Have you any theory as to how he got in Professor ?asked Snape .Harry raised his head very slightly off his arms to free his other ear .Many Severus each of them as unlikely as the next .Harry opened his eyes a fraction and squinted up to where they stood Dumbledore s back was to him but he could see Percys face rapt with attention and Snape s profile which looked angry .You remember the conversation we had Headmaster just before ah the start of term ?said Snape who was barely opening his lips as though trying to block Percy out of the conversation .I do Severus said Dumbledore and there was something like warning in his voice .It seems almost impossible that Black could have entered the school without inside help .I did express my concerns when you appointed I do not believe a single person inside this castle would have helped Black enter it said Dumbledore and his tone made it so clear that the subject was closed that Snape didnt reply .I must go down to the dementors said Dumbledore .I said I would inform them when our search was complete .Didnt they want to help sir ?said Percy .Oh yes said Dumbledore coldly .But Im afraid no dementor will cross the threshold of this castle while I am headmaster .Percy looked slightly abashed .Dumbledore left the hall walking quickly and quietly .Snape stood for a moment watching the headmaster with an expression of deep resentment on his face then he too left .Harry glanced sideways at Ron and Hermione .Both of them had their eyes open too reflecting the starry ceiling .What was all that about ?Ron mouthed .The school talked of nothing but Sirius Black for the next few days .The theories about how he had entered the castle became wilder and wilder Hannah Abbott from Hufflepuff spent much of their next Herbology class telling anyone whod listen that Black could turn into a flowering shrub .The Fat Ladys ripped canvas had been taken off the wall and replaced with the portrait of Sir Cadogan and his fat gray pony .Nobody was very happy about this .Sir Cadogan spent half his time challenging people to duels and the rest thinking up ridiculously complicated passwords which he changed at least twice a day .Hes a complete lunatic said Seamus Finnigan angrily to Percy .Cant we get anyone else ?None of the other pictures wanted the job said Percy .Frightened of what happened to the Fat Lady .Sir Cadogan was the only one brave enough to volunteer .Sir Cadogan however was the least of Harrys worries .He was now being closely watched .Teachers found excuses to walk along corridors with him and Percy Weasley acting Harry suspected on his mothers orders was tailing him everywhere like an extremely pompous guard dog .To cap it all Professor McGonagall summoned Harry into her office with such a somber expression on her face Harry thought someone must have died .Theres no point hiding it from you any longer Potter she said in a very serious voice .I know this will come as a shock to you but Sirius Black I know hes after me said Harry wearily .I heard Rons dad telling his mum .Mr Weasley works for the Ministry of Magic .Professor McGonagall seemed very taken aback .She stared at Harry for a moment or two then said I see !Well in that case Potter youll understand why I dont think its a good idea for you to be practicing Quidditch in the evenings .Out on the field with only your team members its very exposed Potter Weve got our first match on Saturday !said Harry outraged .Ive got to train Professor !Professor McGonagall considered him intently .Harry knew she was deeply interested in the Gryffindor teams prospects it had been she after all whod suggested him as Seeker in the first place .He waited holding his breath .Hmm .Professor McGonagall stood up and stared out of the window at the Quidditch field just visible through the rain .Well .goodness knows Id like to see us win the Cup at last .but all the same Potter .Id be happier if a teacher were present .Ill ask Madam Hooch to oversee your training sessions .The weather worsened steadily as the first Quidditch match drew nearer .Undaunted the Gryffindor team was training harder than ever under the eye of Madam Hooch .Then at their final training session before Saturdays match Oliver Wood gave his team some unwelcome news .Were not playing Slytherin !he told them looking very angry .Flints just been to see me .Were playing Hufflepuff instead .Why ?chorused the rest of the team .Flints excuse is that their Seekers arms still injured said Wood grinding his teeth furiously .But its obvious why theyre doing it .Dont want to play in this weather .Think itll damage their chances .There had been strong winds and heavy rain all day and as Wood spoke they heard a distant rumble of thunder .Theres nothing wrong with Malfoys arm !said Harry furiously .Hes faking it !I know that but we cant prove it said Wood bitterly .And weve been practicing all those moves assuming were playing Slytherin and instead its Hufflepuff and their styles quite different .Theyve got a new Captain and Seeker Cedric Diggory Angelina Alicia and Katie suddenly giggled .What ?said Wood frowning at this lighthearted behavior .Hes that tall goodlooking one isnt he ?said Angelina .Strong and silent said Katie and they started to giggle again .Hes only silent because hes too thick to string two words together said Fred impatiently .I dont know why youre worried Oliver Hufflepuff is a pushover .Last time we played them Harry caught the Snitch in about five minutes remember ?We were playing in completely different conditions !Wood shouted his eyes bulging slightly .Diggorys put a very strong side together !Hes an excellent Seeker !I was afraid youd take it like this !We mustnt relax !We must keep our focus !Slytherin is trying to wrongfoot us !We must win !Oliver calm down !said Fred looking slightly alarmed .Were taking Hufflepuff very seriously .Seriously .The day before the match the winds reached howling point and the rain fell harder than ever .It was so dark inside the corridors and classrooms that extra torches and lanterns were lit .The Slytherin team was looking very smug indeed and none more so than Malfoy .Ah if only my arm was feeling a bit better !he sighed as the gale outside pounded the windows .Harry had no room in his head to worry about anything except the match tomorrow .Oliver Wood kept hurrying up to him between classes and giving him tips .The third time this happened Wood talked for so long that Harry suddenly realized he was ten minutes late for Defense Against the Dark Arts and set off at a run with Wood shouting after him Diggorys got a very fast swerve Harry so you might want to try looping him Harry skidded to a halt outside the Defense Against the Dark Arts classroom pulled the door open and dashed inside .Sorry Im late Professor Lupin I But it wasnt Professor Lupin who looked up at him from the teachers desk it was Snape .This lesson began ten minutes ago Potter so I think well make it ten points from Gryffindor .Sit down .But Harry didnt move .Wheres Professor Lupin ?he said .He says he is feeling too ill to teach today said Snape with a twisted smile .I believe I told you to sit down ?But Harry stayed where he was .Whats wrong with him ?Snape s black eyes glittered .Nothing lifethreatening he said looking as though he wished it were .Five more points from Gryffindor and if I have to ask you to sit down again it will be fifty .Harry walked slowly to his seat and sat down .Snape looked around at the class .As I was saying before Potter interrupted Professor Lupin has not left any record of the topics you have covered so far Please sir weve done boggarts Red Caps kappas and grindylows said Hermione quickly and were just about to start Be quiet said Snape coldly .I did not ask for information .I was merely commenting on Professor Lupins lack of organization .Hes the best Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher weve ever had said Dean Thomas boldly and there was a murmur of agreement from the rest of the class .Snape looked more menacing than ever .You are easily satisfied .Lupin is hardly overtaxing you I would expect first years to be able to deal with Red Caps and grindylows .Today we shall discuss Harry watched him flick through the textbook to the very back chapter which he must know they hadnt covered .werewolves said Snape .But sir said Hermione seemingly unable to restrain herself were not supposed to do werewolves yet were due to start hinkypunks Miss Granger said Snape in a voice of deadly calm I was under the impression that I am teaching this lesson not you .And I am telling you all to turn to All of you !Now With many bitter sidelong looks and some sullen muttering the class opened their books .Which of you can tell me how we distinguish between the werewolf and the true wolf ?said Snape .Everyone sat in motionless silence everyone except Hermione whose hand as it so often did had shot straight into the air .Anyone ?Snape said ignoring Hermione .His twisted smile was back .Are you telling me that Professor Lupin hasnt even taught you the basic distinction between We told you said Parvati suddenly we havent got as far as werewolves yet were still on Silencel snarled Snape .Well well well I never thought Id meet a third year class who wouldnt even recognize a werewolf when they saw one .I shall make a point of informing Professor Dumbledore how very behind you all are .Please sir said Hermione whose hand was still in the air the werewolf differs from the true wolf in several small ways .The snout of the werewolf That is the second time you have spoken out of turn Miss Granger said Snape coolly .Five more points from Gryffindor for being an insufferable knowitall .Hermione went very red put down her hand and stared at the floor with her eyes full of tears .It was a mark of how much the class loathed Snape that they were all glaring at him because every one of them had called Hermione a knowitall at least once and Ron who told Hermione she was a knowitall at least twice a week said loudly You asked us a question and she knows the answer !Why ask if you dont want to be told ?The class knew instantly hed gone too far .Snape advanced on Ron slowly and the room held its breath .Detention Weasley Snape said silkily his face very close to Rons .And if I ever hear you criticize the way I teach a class again you will be very sorry indeed .No one made a sound throughout the rest of the lesson .They sat and made notes on werewolves from the textbook while Snape prowled up and down the rows of desks examining the work they had been doing with Professor Lupin .Very poorly explained .That is incorrect the kappa is more commonly found in Mongolia .Professor Lupin gave this eight out of ten ?I wouldnt have given it three .When the bell rang at last Snape held them back .You will each write an essay to be handed in to me on the ways you recognize and kill werewolves .I want two rolls of parchment on the subject and I want them by Monday morning .It is time somebody took this class in hand .Weasley stay behind we need to arrange your detention .Harry and Hermione left the room with the rest of the class who waited until they were well out of earshot then burst into a furious tirade about Snape .Snape s never been like this with any of our other Defense Against the Dark Arts teachers even if he did want the job Harry said to Hermione .Whys he got it in for Lupin ?Dyou think this is all because of the boggart ?I dont know said Hermione pensively .But I really hope Professor Lupin gets better soon .Ron caught up with them five minutes later in a towering rage .Dyou know what that he called Snape something that made Hermione say Ron is making me do ?Ive got to scrub out the bedpans in the hospital wing .Without magid He was breathing deeply his fists clenched .Why couldnt Black have hidden in Snapes office eh ?He could have finished him off for us !Harry woke extremely early the next morning so early that it was still dark .For a moment he thought the roaring of the wind had woken him .Then he felt a cold breeze on the back of his neck and sat bolt upright Peeves the Poltergeist had been floating next to him blowing hard in his ear .What did you do that for ?said Harry furiously .Peeves puffed out his cheeks blew hard and zoomed backward out of the room cackling .Harry fumbled for his alarm clock and looked at it .It was half past four .Cursing Peeves he rolled over and tried to get back to sleep but it was very difficult now that he was awake to ignore the sounds of the thunder rumbling overhead the pounding of the wind against the castle walls and the distant creaking of the trees in the Forbidden Forest .In a few hours he would be out on the Quidditch field battling through that gale .Finally he gave up any thought of more sleep got up dressed picked up his Nimbus Two Thousand and walked quietly out of the dormitory .As Harry opened the door something brushed against his leg .He bent down just in time to grab Crookshanks by the end of his bushy tail and drag him outside .You know I reckon Ron was right about you Harry told Crookshanks suspiciously .There are plenty of mice around this place go and chase them .Go on he added nudging Crookshanks down the spiral staircase with his foot .Leave Scabbers alone .The noise of the storm was even louder in the common room .Harry knew better than to think the match would be canceled Quidditch matches werent called off for trifles like thunderstorms .Nevertheless he was starting to feel very apprehensive .Wood had pointed out Cedric Diggory to him in the corridor Diggory was a fifth year and a lot bigger than Harry .Seekers were usually light and speedy but Diggorys weight would be an advantage in this weather because he was less likely to be blown off course .Harry whiled away the hours until dawn in front of the fire getting up every now and then to stop Crookshanks from sneaking up the boys staircase again .At long last Harry thought it must be time for breakfast so he headed through the portrait hole alone .Stand and fight you mangy cur !yelled Sir Cadogan .Oh shut up Harry yawned .He revived a bit over a large bowl of porridge and by the time hed started on toast the rest of the team had turned up .Its going to be a tough one said Wood who wasnt eating anything .Stop worrying Oliver said Alicia soothingly we dont mind a bit of rain .But it was considerably more than a bit of rain .Such was the popularity of Quidditch that the whole school turned out to watch the match as usual but they ran down the lawns toward the Quidditch field heads bowed against the ferocious wind umbrellas being whipped out of their hands as they went .Just before he entered the locker room Harry saw Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle laughing and pointing at him from under an enormous umbrella on their way to the stadium .The team changed into their scarlet robes and waited for Woods usual prematch pep talk but it didnt come .He tried to speak several times made an odd gulping noise then shook his head hopelessly and beckoned them to follow him .The wind was so strong that they staggered sideways as they walked out onto the field .If the crowd was cheering they couldnt hear it over the fresh rolls of thunder .Rain was splattering over Harrys glasses .How on earth was he going to see the Snitch in this ?The Hufflepuffs were approaching from the opposite side of the field wearing canary yellow robes .The Captains walked up to each other and shook hands Diggory smiled at Wood but Wood now looked as though he had lockjaw and merely nodded .Harry saw Madam Hoochs mouth form the words Mount your brooms .He pulled his right foot out of the mud with a squelch and swung it over his Nimbus Two Thousand .Madam Hooch put her whistle to her lips and gave it a blast that sounded shrill and distant they were off .Harry rose fast but his Nimbus was swerving slightly with the wind .He held it as steady as he could and turned squinting into the rain .Within five minutes Harry was soaked to his skin and frozen hardly able to see his teammates let alone the tiny Snitch .He flew backward and forward across the field past blurred red and yellow shapes with no idea of what was happening in the rest of the game .He couldnt hear the commentary over the wind .The crowd was hidden beneath a sea of cloaks and battered umbrellas .Twice Harry came very close to being unseated by a Bludger his vision was so clouded by the rain on his glasses he hadnt seen them coming .He lost track of time .It was getting harder and harder to hold his broom straight .The sky was getting darker as though night had decided to come early .Twice Harry nearly hit another player without knowing whether it was a teammate or opponent everyone was now so wet and the rain so thick he could hardly tell them apart .With the first flash of lightning came the sound of Madam Hoochs whistle Harry could just see the outline of Wood through the thick rain gesturing him to the ground .The whole team splashed down into the mud .I called for timeout !Wood roared at his team .Come on under here They huddled at the edge of the field under a large umbrella Harry took off his glasses and wiped them hurriedly on his robes .Whats the score ?Were fifty points up said Wood but unless we get the Snitch soon well be playing into the night .Ive got no chance with these on Harry said exasperatedly waving his glasses .At that very moment Hermione appeared at his shoulder she was holding her cloak over her head and was inexplicably beaming .Ive had an idea Harry !Give me your glasses quick !He handed them to her and as the team watched in amazement Hermione tapped them with her wand and said Imperviusl There !she said handing them back to Harry .Theyll repel water !Wood looked as though he could have kissed her .Brilliant !he called hoarsely after her as she disappeared into the crowd .Okay team lets go for it !Hermione s spell had done the trick .Harry was still numb with cold still wetter than hed ever been in his life but he could see .Full of fresh determination he urged his broom through the turbulent air staring in every direction for the Snitch avoiding a Bludger ducking beneath Diggory who was streaking in the opposite direction .There was another clap of thunder followed immediately by forked lightning .This was getting more and more dangerous .Harry needed to get the Snitch quickly He turned intending to head back toward the middle of the field but at that moment another flash of lightning illuminated the stands and Harry saw something that distracted him completely the silhouette of an enormous shaggy black dog clearly imprinted against the sky motionless in the topmost empty row of seats .Harrys numb hands slipped on the broom handle and his Nimbus dropped a few feet .Shaking his sodden bangs out of his eyes he squinted back into the stands .The dog had vanished .Harry !came Woods anguished yell from the Gryffindor goal posts .Harry behind you !Harry looked wildly around .Cedric Diggory was pelting up the field and a tiny speck of gold was shimmering in the rainfilled air between them With a jolt of panic Harry threw himself flat to the broomhandle and zoomed toward the Snitch .Come on !he growled at his Nimbus as the rain whipped his face .Fasteri But something odd was happening .An eerie silence was falling across the stadium .The wind though as strong as ever was forgetting to roar .It was as though someone had turned off the sound as though Harry had gone suddenly deaf what was going on ?And then a horribly familiar wave of cold swept over him inside him just as he became aware of something moving on the field below .Before hed had time to think Harry had taken his eyes off the Snitch and looked down .At least a hundred dementors their hidden faces pointing up at him were standing beneath him .It was as though freezing water were rising in his chest cutting at his insides .And then he heard it again .Someone was screaming screaming inside his head .a woman .Not Harry not Harry please not Harry Stand aside you silly girl .stand aside now .Not Harry please no take me kill me instead Numbing swirling white mist was filling Harrys brain .What was he doing ?Why was he flying ?He needed to help her .She was going to die .She was going to be murdered .He was falling falling through the icy mist .Not Harry Please .have mercy .have mercy .A shrill voice was laughing the woman was screaming and Harry knew no more .Lucky the ground was so soft .I thought he was dead for sure .But he didnt even break his glasses .Harry could hear the voices whispering but they made no sense whatsoever .He didnt have a clue where he was or how hed got there or what hed been doing before he got there .All he knew was that every inch of him was aching as though it had been beaten .That was the scariest thing Ive ever seen in my life .Scariest .the scariest thing .hooded black figures .cold .screaming .Harrys eyes snapped open .He was lying in the hospital wing .The Gryffindor Quidditch team spattered with mud from head to foot was gathered around his bed .Ron and Hermione were also there looking as though theyd just climbed out of a swimming pool .Harry !said Fred who looked extremely white underneath the mud .Howre you feeling ?It was as though Harrys memory was on fast forward .The lightning the Grim the Snitch and the dementors .What happened ?he said sitting up so suddenly they all gasped .You fell off said Fred .Mustve been what fifty feet ?We thought youd died said Alicia who was shaking .Hermione made a small squeaky noise .Her eyes were extremely bloodshot .But the match said Harry .What happened ?Are we doing a replay ?No one said anything .The horrible truth sank into Harry like a stone .We didnt lose ?Diggory got the Snitch said George .Just after you fell .He didnt realize what had happened .When he looked back and saw you on the ground he tried to call it off .Wanted a rematch .But they won fair and square .even Wood admits it .Where is Wood ?said Harry suddenly realizing he wasnt there .Still in the showers said Fred .We think hes trying to drown himself .Harry put his face to his knees his hands gripping his hair .Fred grabbed his shoulder and shook it roughly .Cmon Harry youve never missed the Snitch before .There had to be one time you didnt get it said George .Its not over yet said Fred .We lost by a hundred points right ?So if Hufflepuff loses to Ravenclaw and we beat Ravenclaw and Slytherin .Hufflepuffll have to lose by at least two hundred points said George .But if they beat Ravenclaw .No way Ravenclaw is too good .But if Slytherin loses against Hufflepuff .It all depends on the points a margin of a hundred either way Harry lay there not saying a word .They had lost .for the first time ever he had lost a Quidditch match .After ten minutes or so Madam Pomfrey came over to tell the team to leave him in peace .Well come and see you later Fred told him .Dont beat yourself up Harry youre still the best Seeker weve ever had .The team trooped out trailing mud behind them .Madam Pomfrey shut the door behind them looking disapproving .Ron and Hermione moved nearer to Harrys bed .Dumbledore was really angry Hermione said in a quaking voice .Ive never seen him like that before .He ran onto the field as you fell waved his wand and you sort of slowed down before you hit the ground .Then he whirled his wand at the dementors .Shot silver stuff at them .They left the stadium right away . .He was furious theyd come onto the grounds .We heard him Then he magicked you onto a stretcher said Ron .And walked up to school with you floating on it .Everyone thought you were .His voice faded but Harry hardly noticed .He was thinking about what the dementors had done to him .about the screaming voice .He looked up and saw Ron and Hermione looking at him so anxiously that he quickly cast around for something matteroffact to say .Did someone get my Nimbus ?Ron and Hermione looked quickly at each other .Er What ?said Harry looking from one to the other .Well .when you fell off it got blown away said Hermione hesitantly .And ?And it hit it hit oh Harry it hit the Whomping Willow .Harrys insides lurched .The Whomping Willow was a very violent tree that stood alone in the middle of the grounds .And ?he said dreading the answer .Well you know the Whomping Willow said Ron .It it doesnt like being hit .Professor Flitwick brought it back just before you came around said Hermione in a very small voice .Slowly she reached down for a bag at her feet turned it upside down and tipped a dozen bits of splintered wood and twig onto the bed the only remains of Harrys faithful finally beaten broomstick .10 THE MARAUDERS MAP Madam Pomfrey insisted on keeping Harry in the hospital wing for the rest of the weekend .He didnt argue or complain but he wouldnt let her throw away the shattered remnants of his Nimbus Two Thousand .He knew he was being stupid knew that the Nimbus was beyond repair but Harry couldnt help it he felt as though hed lost one of his best friends .He had a stream of visitors all intent on cheering him up .Hagrid sent him a bunch of earwiggy flowers that looked like yellow cabbages and Ginny Weasley blushing furiously turned up with a getwell card she had made herself which sang shrilly unless Harry kept it shut under his bowl of fruit .The Gryffindor team visited again on Sunday morning this time accompanied by Wood who told Harry in a hollow dead sort of voice that he didnt blame him in the slightest .Ron and Hermione left Harrys bedside only at night .But nothing anyone said or did could make Harry feel any better because they knew only half of what was troubling him .He hadnt told anyone about the Grim not even Ron and Hermione because he knew Ron would panic and Hermione would scoff .The fact remained however that it had now appeared twice and both appearances had been followed by nearfatal accidents the first time he had nearly been run over by the Knight Bus the second fallen fifty feet from his broomstick .Was the Grim going to haunt him until he actually died ?Was he going to spend the rest of his life looking over his shoulder for the beast ?And then there were the dementors .Harry felt sick and humiliated every time he thought of them .Everyone said the dementors were horrible but no one else collapsed every time they went near one .No one else heard echoes in their head of their dying parents .Because Harry knew who that screaming voice belonged to now .He had heard her words heard them over and over again during the night hours in the hospital wing while he lay awake staring at the strips of moonlight on the ceiling .When the dementors approached him he heard the last moments of his mothers life her attempts to protect him Harry from Lord Voldemort and Voldemorts laughter before he murdered her .Harry dozed fitfully sinking into dreams full of clammy rotted hands and petrified pleading jerking awake to dwell again on his mothers voice .It was a relief to return to the noise and bustle of the main school on Monday where he was forced to think about other things even if he had to endure Draco Malfoys taunting .Malfoy was almost beside himself with glee at Gryffindors defeat .He had finally taken off his bandages and celebrated having the full use of both arms again by doing spirited imitations of Harry falling off his broom .Malfoy spent much of their next Potions class doing dementor imitations across the dungeon Ron finally cracked and flung a large slippery crocodile heart at Malfoy which hit him in the face and caused Snape to take fifty points from Gryffindor .If Snapes teaching Defense Against the Dark Arts again Im skiving off said Ron as they headed toward Lupins classroom after lunch .Check whos in there Hermione .Hermione peered around the classroom door .Its okay !Professor Lupin was back at work .It certainly looked as though he had been ill .His old robes were hanging more loosely on him and there were dark shadows beneath his eyes nevertheless he smiled at the class as they took their seats and they burst at once into an explosion of complaints about Snapes behavior while Lupin had been ill .Its not fair he was only filling in why should he give us homework ?We dont know anything about werewolves two rolls of parchment !Did you tell Professor Snape we havent covered them yet ?Lupin asked frowning slightly .The babble broke out again .Yes but he said we were really behind he wouldnt listen two rolls of parchmenti Professor Lupin smiled at the look of indignation on every face .Dont worry .Ill speak to Professor Snape .You dont have to do the essay .Oh no said Hermione looking very disappointed .Ive already finished it !They had a very enjoyable lesson .Professor Lupin had brought along a glass box containing a hinkypunk a little onelegged creature who looked as though he were made of wisps of smoke rather frail and harmlesslooking .Lures travelers into bogs said Professor Lupin as they took notes .You notice the lantern dangling from his hand ?Hops ahead people follow the light then The hinkypunk made a horrible squelching noise against the glass .When the bell rang everyone gathered up their things and headed for the door Harry among them but Wait a moment Harry Lupin called .Id like a word .Harry doubled back and watched Professor Lupin covering the hinkypunks box with a cloth .I heard about the match said Lupin turning back to his desk and starting to pile books into his briefcase and Im sorry about your broomstick .Is there any chance of fixing it ?No said Harry .The tree smashed it to bits .Lupin sighed .They planted the Whomping Willow the same year that I arrived at Hogwarts .People used to play a game trying to get near enough to touch the trunk .In the end a boy called Davey Gudgeon nearly lost an eye and we were forbidden to go near it .No broomstick would have a chance .Did you hear about the dementors too ?said Harry with difficulty .Lupin looked at him quickly .Yes I did .I dont think any of us have seen Professor Dumbledore that angry .They have been growing restless for some time .furious at his refusal to let them inside the grounds .I suppose they were the reason you fell ?Yes said Harry .He hesitated and then the question he had to ask burst from him before he could stop himself .Why ?Why do they affect me like that ?Am I just ?It has nothing to do with weakness said Professor Lupin sharply as though he had read Harrys mind .The dementors affect you worse than the others because there are horrors in your past that the others dont have .A ray of wintery sunlight fell across the classroom illuminating Lupins gray hairs and the lines on his young face .Dementors are among the foulest creatures that walk this earth .They infest the darkest filthiest places they glory in decay and despair they drain peace hope and happiness out of the air around them .Even Muggles feel their presence though they cant see them .Get too near a dementor and every good feeling every happy memory will be sucked out of you .If it can the dementor will feed on you long enough to reduce you to something like itself .soul less and evil .Youll be left with nothing but the worst experiences of your life .And the worst that happened to you Harry is enough to make anyone fall off their broom .You have nothing to feel ashamed of .When they get near me Harry stared at Lupins desk his throat tight .I can hear Voldemort murdering my mum .Lupin made a sudden motion with his arm as though to grip Harrys shoulder but thought better of it .There was a moments silence then Why did they have to come to the match ?said Harry bitterly .Theyre getting hungry said Lupin coolly shutting his briefcase with a snap .Dumbledore wont let them into the school so their supply of human prey has dried up .I dont think they could resist the large crowd around the Quidditch field .All that excitement .emotions running high .it was their idea of a feast .Azkaban must be terrible Harry muttered .Lupin nodded grimly .The fortress is set on a tiny island way out to sea but they dont need walls and water to keep the prisoners in not when theyre all trapped inside their own heads incapable of a single cheerful thought .Most of them go mad within weeks .But Sirius Black escaped from them Harry said slowly .He got away .Lupins briefcase slipped from the desk he had to stoop quickly to catch it .Yes he said straightening up Black must have found a way to fight them .I wouldnt have believed it possible .Dementors are supposed to drain a wizard of his powers if he is left with them too long .You made that dementor on the train back off said Harry suddenly .There are certain defenses one can use said Lupin .But there was only one dementor on the train .The more there are the more difficult it becomes to resist .What defenses ?said Harry at once .Can you teach me ?I dont pretend to be an expert at fighting dementors Harry .quite the contrary .But if the dementors come to another Quidditch match I need to be able to fight them Lupin looked into Harrys determined face hesitated then said Well .all right .Ill try and help .But itll have to wait until next term Im afraid .I have a lot to do before the holidays .I chose a very inconvenient time to fall ill .What with the promise of antidementor lessons from Lupin the thought that he might never have to hear his mothers death again and the fact that Ravenclaw flattened Hufflepuff in their Quidditch match at the end of November Harrys mood took a definite upturn .Gryffindor were not out of the running after all although they could not afford to lose another match .Wood became repossessed of his manic energy and worked his team as hard as ever in the chilly haze of rain that persisted into December .Harry saw no hint of a dementor within the grounds .Dumbledores anger seemed to be keeping them at their stations at the entrances .Two weeks before the end of the term the sky lightened suddenly to a dazzling opaline white and the muddy grounds were revealed one morning covered in glittering frost .Inside the castle there was a buzz of Christmas in the air .Professor Flitwick the Charms teacher had already decorated his classroom with shimmering lights that turned out to be real fluttering fairies .The students were all happily discussing their plans for the holidays .Both Ron and Hermione had decided to remain at Hogwarts and though Ron said it was because he couldnt stand two weeks with Percy and Hermione insisted she needed to use the library Harry wasnt fooled they were doing it to keep him company and he was very grateful .To everyones delight except Harrys there was to be another Hogsmeade trip on the very last weekend of the term .We can do all our Christmas shopping there !said Hermione .Mum and Dad would really love those Toothflossing Stringmints from Honeydukes !Resigned to the fact that he would be the only third year staying behind again Harry borrowed a copy of Which Broomstick from Wood and decided to spend the day reading up on the different makes .He had been riding one of the school brooms at team practice an ancient Shooting Star which was very slow and jerky he definitely needed a new broom of his own .On the Saturday morning of the Hogsmeade trip Harry bid goodbye to Ron and Hermione who were wrapped in cloaks and scarves then turned up the marble staircase alone and headed back toward Gryffindor Tower .Snow had started to fall outside the windows and the castle was very still and quiet .Psst Harry !He turned halfway along the thirdfloor corridor to see Fred and George peering out at him from behind a statue of a humpbacked oneeyed witch .What are you doing ?said Harry curiously .How come youre not going to Hogsmeade ?Weve come to give you a bit of festive cheer before we go said Fred with a mysterious wink .Come in here .He nodded toward an empty classroom to the left of the oneeyed statue .Harry followed Fred and George inside .George closed the door quietly and then turned beaming to look at Harry .Early Christmas present for you Harry he said .Fred pulled something from inside his cloak with a flourish and laid it on one of the desks .It was a large square very worn piece of parchment with nothing written on it .Harry suspecting one of Fred and Georges jokes stared at it .Whats that supposed to be ?This Harry is the secret of our success said George patting the parchment fondly .Its a wrench giving it to you said Fred but we decided last night your needs greater than ours .Anyway we know it by heart said George .We bequeath it to you .We dont really need it anymore .And what do I need with a bit of old parchment ?said Harry .A bit of old parchment !said Fred closing his eyes with a grimace as though Harry had mortally offended him .Explain George .Well .when we were in our first year Harry young carefree and innocent Harry snorted .He doubted whether Fred and George had ever been innocent .well more innocent than we are now we got into a spot of bother with Filch .We let off a Dungbomb in the corridor and it upset him for some reason So he hauled us off to his office and started threatening us with the usual detention disembowelment and we couldnt help noticing a drawer in one of his filing cabinets marked Confiscated and Highly Dangerous .Dont tell me said Harry starting to grin .Well what would youve done ?said Fred .George caused a diversion by dropping another Dungbomb I whipped the drawer open and grabbed this .Its not as bad as it sounds you know said George .We dont reckon Filch ever found out how to work it .He probably suspected what it was though or he wouldnt have confiscated it .And you know how to work it ?Oh yes said Fred smirking .This little beautys taught us more than all the teachers in this school .Youre winding me up said Harry looking at the ragged old bit of parchment .Oh are we ?said George .He took out his wand touched the parchment lightly and said I solemnly swear that I am up to no good .And at once thin ink lines began to spread like a spiders web from the point that Georges wand had touched .They joined each other they crisscrossed they fanned into every corner of the parchment then words began to blossom across the top great curly green words that proclaimed Messrs .Moony Wormtail Padfoot and Prongs Purveyors of Aids to Magical MischiefMakers are proud to present THE MARAUDERS MAP It was a map showing every detail of the Hogwarts castle and grounds .But the truly remarkable thing were the tiny ink dots moving around it each labeled with a name in minuscule writing .Astounded Harry bent over it .A labeled dot in the top left corner showed that Professor Dumbledore was pacing his study the caretakers cat Mrs Norris was pthe second floor and Peeves the Poltergeist was currently bouncing around the trophy room .And as Harrys eyes traveled up and down the familiar corridors he noticed something else .This map showed a set of passages he had never entered .And many of them seemed to lead Right into Hogsmeade said Fred tracing one of them with his finger .There are seven in all .Now Filch knows about these four he pointed them out but were sure were the only ones who know about these .Dont bother with the one behind the mirror on the fourth floor .We used it until last winter but its caved in completely blocked .And we dont reckon anyones ever used this one because the Whomping Willows planted right over the entrance .But this one here this one leads right into the cellar of Honeydukes .Weve used it loads of times .And as you mightve noticed the entrance is right outside this room through that oneeyed old crones hump .Moony Wormtail Padfoot and Prongs sighed George patting the heading of the map .We owe them so much .Noble men working tirelessly to help a new generation of lawbreakers said Fred solemnly .Right said George briskly .Dont forget to wipe it after youve used it or anyone can read it Fred said warningly .Just tap it again and say ‘Mischief managed !And itll go blank .So young Harry said Fred in an uncanny impersonation of Percy mind you behave yourself .See you in Honeydukes said George winking .They left the room both smirking in a satisfied sort of way .Harry stood there gazing at the miraculous map .He watched the tiny ink Mrs Norris turn left and pause to sniff at something on the floor .If Filch really didnt know .he wouldnt have to pass the dementors at all .But even as he stood there flooded with excitement something Harry had once heard Mr Weasley say came floating out of his memory .Never trust anything that can think for itself if you cant see where it keeps its brain .This map was one of those dangerous magical objects Mr Weasley had been warning against .Aids for Magical MischiefMakers .but then Harry reasoned he only wanted to use it to get into Hogsmeade it wasnt as though he wanted to steal anything or attack anyone .and Fred and George had been using it for years without anything horrible happening .Harry traced the secret passage to Honeydukes with his finger .Then quite suddenly as though following orders he rolled up the map stuffed it inside his robes and hurried to the door of the classroom .He opened it a couple of inches .There was no one outside .Very carefully he edged out of the room and behind the statue of the oneeyed witch .What did he have to do ?He pulled out the map again and saw to his astonishment that a new ink figure had appeared upon it labeled Harry Potter .This figure was standing exactly where the real Harry was standing about halfway down the thirdfloor corridor .Harry watched carefully .His little ink self appeared to be tapping the witch with his minute wand .Harry quickly took out his real wand and tapped the statue .Nothing happened .He looked back at the map .The tiniest speech bubble had appeared next to his figure .The word inside said Dissendium .Dissendiurrd Harry whispered tapping the stone witch again .At once the statues hump opened wide enough to admit a fairly thin person .Harry glanced quickly up and down the corridor then tucked the map away again hoisted himself into the hole headfirst and pushed himself forward .He slid a considerable way down what felt like a stone slide then landed on cold damp earth .He stood up looking around .It was pitch dark .He held up his wand muttered Lumos and saw that he was in a very narrow low earthy passageway .He raised the map tapped it with the tip of his wand and muttered Mischief managed !The map went blank at once .He folded it carefully tucked it inside his robes then heart beating fast both excited and apprehensive he set off .The passage twisted and turned more like the burrow of a giant rabbit than anything else .Harry hurried along it stumbling now and then on the uneven floor holding his wand out in front of him .It took ages but Harry had the thought of Honeydukes to sustain him .After what felt like an hour the passage began to rise .Panting Harry sped up his face hot his feet very cold .Ten minutes later he came to the foot of some worn stone steps which rose out of sight above him .Careful not to make any noise Harry began to climb .A hundred steps two hundred steps he lost count as he climbed watching his feet .Then without warning his head hit something hard .It seemed to be a trapdoor .Harry stood there massaging the top of his head listening .He couldnt hear any sounds above him .Very slowly he pushed the trapdoor open and peered over the edge .He was in a cellar which was full of wooden crates and boxes .Harry climbed out of the trapdoor and replaced it it blended so perfectly with the dusty floor that it was impossible to tell it was there .Harry crept slowly toward the wooden staircase that led upstairs .Now he could definitely hear voices not to mention the tinkle of a bell and the opening and shutting of a door .Wondering what he ought to do he suddenly heard a door open much closer at hand somebody was about to come downstairs .And get another box of Jelly Slugs dear theyve nearly cleaned us out said a womans voice .A pair of feet was coming down the staircase .Harry leapt behind an enormous crate and waited for the footsteps to pass .He heard the man shifting boxes against the opposite wall .He might not get another chance Quickly and silently Harry dodged out from his hiding place and climbed the stairs looking back he saw an enormous backside and shiny bald head buried in a box .Harry reached the door at the top of the stairs slipped through it and found himself behind the counter of Honeydukes he ducked crept sideways and then straightened up .Honeydukes was so crowded with Hogwarts students that no one looked twice at Harry .He edged among them looking around and suppressed a laugh as he imagined the look that would spread over Dudleys piggy face if he could see where Harry was now .There were shelves upon shelves of the most succulentlooking sweets imaginable .Creamy chunks of nougat shimmering pink squares of coconut ice fat honeycolored toffees hundreds of different kinds of chocolate in neat rows there was a large barrel of Every Flavor Beans and another of Fizzing Whizbees the levitating sherbert balls that Ron had mentioned along yet another wall were Special Effects sweets Droobles Best Blowing Gum which filled a room with bluebellcolored bubbles that refused to pop for days the strange splintery Toothflossing Stringmints tiny black Pepper Imps breathe fire for your friends !Ice Mice hear your teeth chatter and squeak !peppermint creams shaped like toads hop realistically in the stomach !fragile sugarspun quills and exploding bonbons .Harry squeezed himself through a crowd of sixth years and saw a sign hanging in the farthest corner of the shop UNUSUAL TASTES .Ron and Hermione were standing underneath it examining a tray of bloodflavored lollipops .Harry sneaked up behind them .Ugh no Harry wont want one of those theyre for vampires I expect Hermione was saying .How about these ?said Ron shoving ajar of Cockroach Clusters under Hermione s nose .Definitely not said Harry .Ron nearly dropped the jar .Harry squealed Hermione .What are you doing here ?How how did you ?Wow !said Ron looking very impressed youve learned to Apparate !Course I havent said Harry .He dropped his voice so that none of the sixth years could hear him and told them all about the Marauders Map .How come Fred and George never gave it to me !said Ron outraged .Im their brother !But Harry isnt going to keep it !said Hermione as though the idea were ludicrous .Hes going to hand it in to Professor McGonagall arent you Harry ?No Im not !said Harry .Are you mad ?said Ron goggling at Hermione .Hand in something that good ?If I hand it in Ill have to say where I got it !Filch would know Fred and George had nicked it !But what about Sirius Black ?Hermione hissed .He could be using one of the passages on that map to get into the castle !The teachers have got to know !He cant be getting in through a passage said Harry quickly .There are seven secret tunnels on the map right ?Fred and George reckon Filch already knows about four of them .And of the other three one of thems caved in so no one can get through it .One of thems got the Whomping Willow planted over the entrance so you cant get out of it .And the one I just came through well its really hard to see the entrance to it down in the cellar so unless he knew it was there .Harry hesitated .What if Black did know the passage was there ?Ron however cleared his throat significantly and pointed to a notice pasted on the inside of the sweetshop door .BY ORDER OF THE MINISTRY OF MAGIC Customers are reminded that until further notice dementors will be patrolling the streets of Hogsmeade every night after sundown .This measure has been put in place for the safety of Hogsmeade residents and will be lifted upon the recapture of Sirius Black .It is therefore advisable that you complete your shopping well before nightfall .Merry Christmas !See ?said Ron quietly .Id like to see Black try and break into Honeydukes with dementors swarming all over the village .Anyway Hermione the Honeydukes owners would hear a breakin wouldnt they ?They live over the shop !Yes but but Hermoine seemed to be struggling to find another problem .Look Harry still shouldnt be coming into Hogsmeade .He hasnt got a signed form !If anyone finds out hell be in so much trouble !And its not nightfall yet what if Sirius Black turns up today ?Now ?Hed have a job spotting Harry in this said Ron nodding through the mullioned windows at the thick swirling snow .Come on Hermione its Christmas .Harry deserves a break .Hermione bit her lip looking extremely worried .Are you going to report me ?Harry asked her grinning .Oh of course not but honestly Harry Seen the Fizzing Whizbees Harry ?said Ron grabbing him and leading him over to their barrel .And the Jelly Slugs ?And the Acid Pops ?Fred gave me one of those when I was seven it burnt a hole right through my tongue .I remember Mum walloping him with her broomstick .Ron stared broodingly into the Acid Pop box .Reckon Fredd take a bit of Cockroach Cluster if I told him they were peanuts ?When Ron and Hermione had paid for all their sweets the three of them left Honeydukes for the blizzard outside .Hogsmeade looked like a Christmas card the little thatched cottages and shops were all covered in a layer of crisp snow there were holly wreaths on the doors and strings of enchanted candles hanging in the trees .Harry shivered unlike the other two he didnt have his cloak .They headed up the street heads bowed against the wind Ron and Hermione shouting through their scarves .Thats the post office Zonkos is up there We could go up to the Shrieking Shack Tell you what said Ron his teeth chattering shall we go for a butterbeer in the Three Broomsticks ?Harry was more than willing the wind was fierce and his hands were freezing so they crossed the road and in a few minutes were entering the tiny inn .It was extremely crowded noisy warm and smoky .A curvy sort of woman with a pretty face was serving a bunch of rowdy warlocks up at the bar .Thats Madam Rosmerta said Ron .Ill get the drinks shall I ?he added going slightly red .Harry and Hermione made their way to the back of the room where there was a small vacant table between the window and a handsome Christmas tree which stood next to the fireplace .Ron came back five minutes later carrying three foaming tankards of hot butterbeer .Merry Christmas !he said happily raising his tankard .Harry drank deeply .It was the most delicious thing hed ever tasted and seemed to heat every bit of him from the inside .A sudden breeze ruffled his hair .The door of the Three Broomsticks had opened again .Harry looked over the rim of his tankard and choked .Professors McGonagall and Flitwick had just entered the pub with a flurry of snowflakes shortly followed by Hagrid who was deep in conversation with a portly man in a limegreen bowler hat and a pinstriped cloak Cornelius Fudge Minister of Magic .In an instant Ron and Hermione had both placed hands on the top of Harrys head and forced him off his stool and under the table .Dripping with butterbeer and crouching out of sight Harry clutched his empty tankard and watched the teachers and Fudges feet move toward the bar pause then turn and walk right toward him .Somewhere above him Hermione whispered Mobiliarbus The Christmas tree beside their table rose a few inches off the ground drifted sideways and landed with a soft thump right in front of their table hiding them from view .Staring through the dense lower branches Harry saw four sets of chair legs move back from the table right beside theirs then heard the grunts and sighs of the teachers and minister as they sat down .Next he saw another pair of feet wearing sparkly turquoise high heels and heard a womans voice .A small gillywater Mine said Professor McGonagalls voice .Four pints of mulled mead Ta Rosmerta said Hagrid .A cherry syrup and soda with ice and umbrella Mmm !said Professor Flitwick smacking his lips .So you 11 be the red currant rum Minister .Thank you Rosmerta mdear said Fudges voice .Lovely to see you again I must say .Have one yourself wont you ?Come and join us .Well thank you very much Minister .Harry watched the glittering heels march away and back again .His heart was pounding uncomfortably in his throat .Why hadnt it occurred to him that this was the last weekend of term for the teachers too ?And how long were they going to sit there ?He needed time to sneak back into Honeydukes if he wanted to return to school tonight .Hermiones leg gave a nervous twitch next to him .So what brings you to this neck of the woods Minister ?came Madam Rosmertas voice .Harry saw the lower part of Fudges thick body twist in his chair as though he were checking for eavesdroppers .Then he said in a quiet voice What else mdear but Sirius Black ?I daresay you heard what happened up at the school at Halloween ?I did hear a rumor admitted Madam Rosmerta .Did you tell the whole pub Hagrid ?said Professor McGonagall exasperatedly .Do you think Blacks still in the area Minister ?whispered Madam Rosmerta .Im sure of it said Fudge shortly .You know that the dementors have searched the whole village twice ?said Madam Rosmerta a slight edge to her voice .Scared all my customers away .Its very bad for business Minister .Rosmerta mdear I dont like them any more than you do said Fudge uncomfortably .Necessary precaution .unfortunate but there you are .Ive just met some of them .Theyre in a fury against Dumbledore he wont let them inside the castle grounds .I should think not said Professor McGonagall sharply .How are we supposed to teach with those horrors floating around ?Hear hear !squeaked tiny Professor Flitwick whose feet were dangling a foot from the ground .All the same demurred Fudge they are here to protect you all from something much worse .We all know what Blacks capable of .Do you know I still have trouble believing it said Madam Rosmerta thoughtfully .Of all the people to go over to the Dark Side Sirius Black was the last Id have thought .I mean I remember him when he was a boy at Hogwarts .If youd told me then what he was going to become Id have said youd had too much mead .You dont know the half of it Rosmerta said Fudge gruffly .The worst he did isnt widely known .The worst ?said Madam Rosmerta her voice alive with curiosity .Worse than murdering all those poor people you mean ?I certainly do said Fudge .I cant believe that .What could possibly be worse ?You say you remember him at Hogwarts Rosmerta murmured Professor McGonagall .Do you remember who his best friend was ?Naturally said Madam Rosmerta with a small laugh .Never saw one without the other did you ?The number of times I had them in here ooh they used to make me laugh .Quite the double act Sirius Black and James Potter !Harry dropped his tankard with a loud clunk .Ron kicked him .Precisely said Professor McGonagall .Black and Potter .Ringleaders of their little gang .Both very bright of course exceptionally bright in fact but I dont think weve ever had such a pair of troublemakers I dunno chuckled Hagrid .Fred and George Weasley could give em a run fer their money .Youd have thought Black and Potter were brothers !chimed in Professor Flitwick .Inseparable !Of course they were said Fudge .Potter trusted Black beyond all his other friends .Nothing changed when they left school .Black was best man when James married Lily .Then they named him godfather to Harry .Harry has no idea of course .You can imagine how the idea would torment him .Because Black turned out to be in league with You KnowWho ?whispered Madam Rosmerta .Worse even than that mdear .Fudge dropped his voice and proceeded in a sort of low rumble .Not many people are aware that the Potters knew You KnowWho was after them .Dumbledore who was of course working tirelessly against YouKnowWho had a number of useful spies .One of them tipped him off and he alerted James and Lily at once .He advised them to go into hiding .Well of course YouKnow Who wasnt an easy person to hide from .Dumbledore told them that their best chance was the Fidelius Charm .How does that work ?said Madam Rosmerta breathless with interest .Professor Flitwick cleared his throat .An immensely complex spell he said squeakily involving the magical concealment of a secret inside a single living soul .The information is hidden inside the chosen person or SecretKeeper and is henceforth impossible to find unless of course the SecretKeeper chooses to divulge it .As long as the SecretKeeper refused to speak YouKnowWho could search the village where Lily and James were staying for years and never find them not even if he had his nose pressed against their sitting room window !So Black was the Potters SecretKeeper ?whispered Madam Rosmerta .Naturally said Professor McGonagall .James Potter told Dumbledore that Black would die rather than tell where they were that Black was planning to go into hiding himself .and yet Dumbledore remained worried .I remember him offering to be the Potters SecretKeeper himself .He suspected Black ?gasped Madam Rosmerta .He was sure that somebody close to the Potters had been keeping YouKnowWho informed of their movements said Professor McGonagall darkly .Indeed he had suspected for some time that someone on our side had turned traitor and was passing a lot of information to YouKnowWho .But James Potter insisted on using Black ?He did said Fudge heavily .And then barely a week after the Fidelius Charm had been performed Black betrayed them ?breathed Madam Rosmerta .He did indeed .Black was tired of his doubleagent role he was ready to declare his support openly for YouKnowWho and he seems to have planned this for the moment of the Potters death .But as we all know YouKnowWho met his downfall in little Harry Potter .Powers gone horribly weakened he fled .And this left Black in a very nasty position indeed .His master had fallen at the very moment when he Black had shown his true colors as a traitor .He had no choice but to run for it Filthy stinkin turncoat !Hagrid said so loudly that half the bar went quiet .Shh !said Professor McGonagall .I met him !growled Hagrid .I musta bin the last ter see him before he killed all them people !It was me what rescued Harry from Lily an Jamess house after they was killed !Jus got him outta the ruins poor little thing with a great slash across his forehead an his parents dead .an Sirius Black turns up on that flyin motorbike he used ter ride .Never occurred ter me what he was doin there .I didn know hed bin Lily an Jamess SecretKeeper .Thought hed jus heard the news o You Know Whos attack an come ter see what he could do .White an shakin he was .An yeh know what I did ?I COMFORTED THE MURDERIN TRAITOR !Hagrid roared .Hagrid please !said Professor McGonagall .Keep your voice down !How was I ter know he wasn upset abou Lily an James ?It was YouKnowWho he cared abou !An then he says ‘Give Harry ter me Hagrid Im his godfather Ill look after him Ha !But Id had me orders from Dumbledore an I told Black no Dumbledore said Harry was ter go ter his aunt an uncles .Black argued but in the end he gave in .Told me ter take his motorbike ter get Harry there . ‘I wont need it anymore he says .I shoulda known there was somethin fishy goin on then .He loved that motorbike what was he givin it ter me for ?Why wouldn he need it anymore ?Fact was it was too easy ter trace .Dumbledore knew hed bin the Potters SecretKeeper .Black knew he was goin ter have ter run fer it that night knew it was a matter o hours before the Ministry was after him .But what if Id given Harry to him eh ?I bet he dve pitched him off the bike halfway out ter sea .His bes friends son !But when a wizard goes over ter the Dark Side theres nothin and no one that matters to em anymore .A long silence followed Hagrid s story .Then Madam Rosmerta said with some satisfaction But he didnt manage to disappear did he ?The Ministry of Magic caught up with him next day !Alas if only we had said Fudge bitterly .It was not we who found him .It was little Peter Pettigrew another of the Potters friends .Maddened by grief no doubt and knowing that Black had been the Potters SecretKeeper he went after Black himself .Pettigrew .that fat little boy who was always tagging around after them at Hogwarts ?said Madam Rosmerta .Heroworshipped Black and Potter said Professor McGonagall .Never quite in their league talentwise .I was often rather sharp with him .You can imagine how I how I regret that now .She sounded as though she had a sudden head cold .There now Minerva said Fudge kindly Pettigrew died a heros death .Eyewitnesses Muggles of course we wiped their memories later told us how Pettigrew cornered Black .They say he was sobbing Lily and James Sirius !How could you ?And then he went for his wand .Well of course Black was quicker .Blew Pettigrew to smithereens .Professor McGonagall blew her nose and said thickly Stupid boy .foolish boy .he was always hopeless at dueling .should have left it to the Ministry .I tell yeh if Id got ter Black before little Pettigrew did I wouldntve messed around with wands Idve ripped him limb from limb Hagrid growled .You dont know what youre talking about Hagrid said Fudge sharply .Nobody but trained Hit Wizards from the Magical Law Enforcement Squad would have stood a chance against Black once he was cornered .I was Junior Minister in the Department of Magical Catastrophes at the time and I was one of the first on the scene after Black murdered all those people .I I will never forget it .I still dream about it sometimes .A crater in the middle of the street so deep it had cracked the sewer below .Bodies everywhere .Muggles screaming .And Black standing there laughing with what was left of Pettigrew in front of him .a heap of bloodstained robes and a few a few fragments Fudges voice stopped abruptly .There was the sound of five noses being blown .Well there you have it Rosmerta said Fudge thickly .Black was taken away by twenty members of the Magical Law Enforcement Squad and Pettigrew received the Order of Merlin First Class which I think was some comfort to his poor mother .Blacks been in Azkaban ever since .Madam Rosmerta let out a long sigh .Is it true hes mad Minister ?I wish I could say that he was said Fudge slowly .I certainly believe his masters defeat unhinged him for a while .The murder of Pettigrew and all those Muggles was the action of a cornered and desperate man cruel .pointless .Yet I met Black on my last inspection of Azkaban .You know most of the prisoners in there sit muttering to themselves in the dark theres no sense in them .but I was shocked at how normal Black seemed .He spoke quite rationally to me .It was unnerving .Youd have thought he was merely bored asked if Id finished with my newspaper cool as you please said he missed doing the crossword .Yes I was astounded at how little effect the dementors seemed to be having on him and he was one of the most heavily guarded in the place you know .Dementors outside his door day and night .But what do you think hes broken out to do ?said Madam Rosmerta .Good gracious Minister he isnt trying to rejoin YouKnowWho is he ?I daresay that is his er eventual plan said Fudge evasively .But we hope to catch Black long before that .I must say YouKnowWho alone and friendless is one thing .but give him back his most devoted servant and I shudder to think how quickly hell rise again .There was a small chink of glass on wood .Someone had set down their glass .You know Cornelius if youre dining with the headmaster wed better head back up to the castle said Professor McGonagall .One by one the pairs of feet in front of Harry took the weight of their owners once more hems of cloaks swung into sight and Madam Rosemertas glittering heels disappeared behind the bar .The door of the Three Broomsticks opened again there was another flurry of snow and the teachers had disappeared .Harry ?Rons and Hermiones faces appeared under the table .They were both staring at him lost for words .THE FIREBOLT Harry didnt have a very clear idea of how he had managed to get back into the Honeydukes cellar through the tunnel and into the castle once more .All he knew was that the return trip seemed to take no time at all and that he hardly noticed what he was doing because his head was still pounding with the conversation he had just heard .Why had nobody ever told him ?Dumbledore Hagrid Mr Weasley Cornelius Fudge .why hadnt anyone ever mentioned the fact that Harrys parents had died because their best friend had betrayed them ?Ron and Hermione watched Harry nervously all through dinner not daring to talk about what theyd overheard because Percy was sitting close by them .When they went upstairs to the crowded common room it was to find Fred and George had set off half a dozen Dungbombs in a fit of endofterm high spirits .Harry who didnt want Fred and George asking him whether hed reached Hogsmeade or not sneaked quietly up to the empty dormitory and headed straight for his bedside cabinet .He pushed his books aside and quickly found what he was looking for the leatherbound photo album Hagrid had given him two years ago which was full of wizard pictures of his mother and father .He sat down on his bed drew the hangings around him and started turning the pages searching until .He stopped on a picture of his parents wedding day .There was his father waving up at him beaming the untidy black hair Harry had inherited standing up in all directions .There was his mother alight with happiness arm in arm with his dad .And there .that must be him .Their best man .Harry had never given him a thought before .If he hadnt known it was the same person he would never have guessed it was Black in this old photograph .His face wasnt sunken and waxy but handsome full of laughter .Had he already been working for Voldemort when this picture had been taken ?Was he already planning the deaths of the two people next to him ?Did he realize he was facing twelve years in Azkaban twelve years that would make him unrecognizable ?But the dementors dont affect him Harry thought staring into the handsome laughing face .He doesnt have to hear my mum screaming if they get too close Harry slammed the album shut reached over and stuffed it back into his cabinet took off his robe and glasses and got into bed making sure the hangings were hiding him from view .The dormitory door opened .Harry ?said Rons voice uncertainly .But Harry lay still pretending to be asleep .He heard Ron leave again and rolled over on his back his eyes wide open .A hatred such as he had never known before was coursing through Harry like poison .He could see Black laughing at him through the darkness as though somebody had pasted the picture from the album over his eyes .He watched as though somebody was playing him a piece of film Sirius Black blasting Peter Pettigrew who resembled Neville Longbottom into a thousand pieces .He could hear though having no idea what Blacks voice might sound like a low excited mutter .It has happened My Lord .the Potters have made me their Secret Keeper .And then came another voice laughing shrilly the same laugh that Harry heard inside his head whenever the dementors drew near .Harry you you look terrible .Harry hadnt gotten to sleep until daybreak .He had awoken to find the dormitory deserted dressed and gone down the spiral staircase to a common room that was completely empty except for Ron who was eating a Peppermint Toad and massaging his stomach and Hermione who had spread her homework over three tables .Where is everyone ?said Harry .Gone !Its the first day of the holidays remember ?said Ron watching Harry closely .Its nearly lunchtime I was going to come and wake you up in a minute .Harry slumped into a chair next to the fire .Snow was still falling outside the windows .Crookshanks was spread out in front of the fire like a large ginger rug .You really dont look well you know Hermione said peering anxiously into his face .Im fine said Harry .Harry listen said Hermione exchanging a look with Ron you must be really upset about what we heard yesterday .But the thing is you mustnt go doing anything stupid .Like what ?said Harry .Like trying to go after Black said Ron sharply .Harry could tell they had rehearsed this conversation while he had been asleep .He didnt say anything .You wont will you Harry ?said Hermione .Because Blacks not worth dying for said Ron .Harry looked at them .They didnt seem to understand at all .Dyou know what I see and hear every time a dementor gets too near me ?Ron and Hermione shook their heads looking apprehensive .I can hear my mum screaming and pleading with Voldemort .And if youd heard your mum screaming like that just about to be killed you wouldnt forget it in a hurry .And if you found out someone who was supposed to be a friend of hers betrayed her and sent Voldemort after her Theres nothing you can do !said Hermione looking stricken .The dementors will catch Black and hell go back to Azkaban and and serve him right !You heard what Fudge said .Black isnt affected by Azkaban like normal people are .Its not a punishment for him like it is for the others .So what are you saying ?said Ron looking very tense .You want to to kill Black or something ?Dont be silly said Hermione in a panicky voice .Harry doesnt want to kill anyone do you Harry ?Again Harry didnt answer .He didnt know what he wanted to do .All he knew was that the idea of doing nothing while Black was at liberty was almost more than he could stand .Malfoy knows he said abruptly .Remember what he said to me in Potions ? ‘If it was me Id hunt him down myself .Id want revenge .Youre going to take Malfoy s advice instead of ours ?said Ron furiously .Listen .you know what Pettigrews mother got back after Black had finished with him ?Dad told me the Order of Merlin First Class and Pettigrews finger in a box .That was the biggest bit of him they could find .Blacks a madman Harry and hes dangerous Malfoys dad must have told him said Harry ignoring Ron .He was right in Voldemorts inner circle Say YouKnotuWho will you ?interjected Ron angrily .so obviously the Malfoys knew Black was working for Voldemort and Malfoyd love to see you blown into about a million pieces like Pettigrew !Get a grip .Malfoys just hoping you 11 get yourself killed before he has to play you at Quidditch .Harry please said Hermione her eyes now shining with tears please be sensible .Black did a terrible terrible thing but ddont put yourself in danger its what Black wants .Oh Harry youd be playing right into Blacks hands if you went looking for him .Your mum and dad wouldnt want you to get hurt would they ?Theyd never want you to go looking for Black !Ill never know what theyd have wanted because thanks to Black Ive never spoken to them said Harry shortly .There was a silence in which Crookshanks stretched luxuriously flexing his claws .Rons pocket quivered .Look said Ron obviously casting around for a change of subject its the holidays !Its nearly Christmas !Lets lets go down and see Hagrid .We havent visited him for ages !No !said Hermione quickly .Harry isnt supposed to leave the castle Ron Yeah lets go said Harry sitting up and I can ask him how come he never mentioned Black when he told me all about my parents !Further discussion of Sirius Black plainly wasnt what Ron had had in mind .Or we could have a game of chess he said hastily or Gobstones .Percy left a set No lets visit Hagrid said Harry firmly .So they got their cloaks from their dormitories and set off through the portrait hole Stand and fight you yellowbellied mongrels !down through the empty castle and out through the oak front doors .They made their way slowly down the lawn making a shallow trench in the glittering powdery snow their socks and the hems of their cloaks soaked and freezing .The Forbidden Forest looked as though it had been enchanted each tree smattered with silver and Hagrids cabin looked like an iced cake .Ron knocked but there was no answer .Hes not out is he ?said Hermione who was shivering under her cloak .Ron had his ear to the door .Theres a weird noise he said .Listen is that Fang ?Harry and Hermione put their ears to the door too .From inside the cabin came a series of low throbbing moans .Think wed better go and get someone ?said Ron nervously .Hagrid !called Harry thumping the door .Hagrid are you in there ?There was a sound of heavy footsteps then the door creaked open .Hagrid stood there with his eyes red and swollen tears splashing down the front of his leather vest .Yehve heard ?he bellowed and he flung himself onto Harrys neck .Hagrid being at least twice the size of a normal man this was no laughing matter .Harry about to collapse under Hagrids weight was rescued by Ron and Hermione who each seized Hagrid under an arm and heaved him back into the cabin .Hagrid allowed himself to be steered into a chair and slumped over the table sobbing uncontrollably his face glazed with tears that dripped down into his tangled beard .Hagrid what is it ?said Hermione aghast .Harry spotted an officiallooking letter lying open on the table .Whats this Hagrid ?Hagrids sobs redoubled but he shoved the letter toward Harry who picked it up and read aloud Dear Mr Hagrid Further to our inquiry into the attack by a hippogriff on a student in your class we have accepted the assurances of Professor Dumbledore that you bear no responsibility for the regrettable incident .Well thats okay then Hagrid !said Ron clapping Hagrid on the shoulder .But Hagrid continued to sob and waved one of his gigantic hands inviting Harry to read on .However we must register our concern about the hippogriff in question .We have decided to uphold the official complaint of Mr Lucius Malfoy and this matter will therefore be taken to the Committee for the Disposal of Dangerous Creatures .The hearing will take place on April 20th and we ask you to present yourself and your hippogriff at the Committees offices in London on that date .In the meantime the hippogriff should be kept tethered and isolated .Yours in fellowship .There followed a list of the school governors .Oh said Ron .But you said Buckbeak isnt a bad hippogriff Hagrid .I bet hell get off Yeh don know them gargoyles at the Committee fer the Disposal o Dangerous Creatures !choked Hagrid wiping his eyes on his sleeve .Theyve got it in fer interestin creatures !A sudden sound from the corner of Hagrid s cabin made Harry Ron and Hermione whip around .Buckbeak the hippogriff was lying in the corner chomping on something that was oozing blood all over the floor .I couldn leave him tied up out there in the snow !choked Hagrid .All on his own !At Christmas .Harry Ron and Hermione looked at one another .They had never seen eye to eye with Hagrid about what he called interesting creatures and other people called terrifying monsters .On the other hand there didnt seem to be any particular harm in Buckbeak .In fact by Hagrids usual standards he was positively cute .Youll have to put up a good strong defense Hagrid said Hermione sitting down and laying a hand on Hagrids massive forearm .Im sure you can prove Buckbeak is safe .Wont make no difference !sobbed Hagrid .Them Disposal devils theyre all in Lucius Malfoys pocket !Scared o him !An if I lose the case Buckbeak Hagrid drew his finger swiftly across his throat then gave a great wail and lurched forward his face in his arms .What about Dumbledore Hagrid ?said Harry .Hes done moren enough fer me already groaned Hagrid .Got enough on his plate what with keepin them dementors outta the castle an Sirius Black lurkin around Ron and Hermione looked quickly at Harry as though expecting him to start berating Hagrid for not telling him the truth about Black .But Harry couldnt bring himself to do it not now that he saw Hagrid so miserable and scared .Listen Hagrid he said you cant give up .Hermiones right you just need a good defense .You can call us as witnesses Im sure Ive read about a case of hippogriffbaiting said Hermione thoughtfully where the hippogriff got off .Ill look it up for you Hagrid and see exactly what happened .Hagrid howled still more loudly .Harry and Hermione looked at Ron to help them .Er shall I make a cup of tea ?said Ron .Harry stared at him .Its what my mum does whenever someones upset Ron muttered shrugging .At last after many more assurances of help with a steaming mug of tea in front of him Hagrid blew his nose on a handkerchief the size of a tablecloth and said Yer right .I can afford to go ter pieces .Gotta pull meself together .Fang the boarhound came timidly out from under the table and laid his head on Hagrid s knee .Ive not bin meself lately said Hagrid stroking Fang with one hand and mopping his face with the other .Worried abou Buckbeak an no one likin me classes We do like them !lied Hermione at once .Yeah theyre great !said Ron crossing his fingers under the table .Er how are the flobberworms ?Dead said Hagrid gloomily .Too much lettuce .Oh no !said Ron his lip twitching .An them dementors make me feel ruddy terrible an all said Hagrid with a sudden shudder .Gotta walk past em evry time I want a drink in the Three Broomsticks .S like bein back in Azkaban He fell silent gulping his tea .Harry Ron and Hermione watched him breathlessly .They had never heard Hagrid talk about his brief spell in Azkaban before .After a pause Hermione said timidly Is it awful in there Hagrid ?Yehve no idea said Hagrid quietly .Never bin anywhere like it .Thought I was goin mad .Kep goin over horrible stuff in me mind .the day I got expelled from Hogwarts .day me dad died .day I had ter let Norbert go .His eyes filled with tears .Norbert was the baby dragon Hagrid had once won in a game of cards .Yeh can really remember who yeh are after a while .An yeh can see the point o livin at all .I used ter hope Id jus die in me sleep .When they let me out it was like bein born again evrythin came floodin back it was the bes feelin in the world .Mind the dementors werent keen on lettin me go .But you were innocent !said Hermione .Hagrid snorted .Think that matters to them ?They don care .Long as theyve got a couple o hundred humans stuck there with em so they can leech all the happiness out of em they don give a damn whos guilty an whos not .Hagrid went quiet for a moment staring into his tea .Then he said quietly Thought o jus letting Buckbeak go .tryin ter make him fly away .but how dyeh explain ter a hippogriff its gotta go inter hidin ?An an Im scared o breakin the law .He looked up at them tears leaking down his face again .I don ever want ter go back ter Azkaban .The trip to Hagrids though far from fun had nevertheless had the effect Ron and Hermione had hoped .Though Harry had by no means forgotten about Black he couldnt brood constantly on revenge if he wanted to help Hagrid win his case against the Committee for the Disposal of Dangerous Creatures .He Ron and Hermione went to the library the next day and returned to the empty common room laden with books that might help prepare a defense for Buckbeak .The three of them sat in front of the roaring fire slowly turning the pages of dusty volumes about famous cases of marauding beasts speaking occasionally when they ran across something relevant .Heres something .there was a case in 1722 .but the hippogriff was convicted ugh look what they did to it thats disgusting This might help look a manticore savaged someone in 1296 and they let the manticore off oh no that was only because everyone was too scared to go near it .Meanwhile in the rest of the castle the usual magnificent Christmas decorations had been put up despite the fact that hardly any of the students remained to enjoy them .Thick streamers of holly and mistletoe were strung along the corridors mysterious lights shone from inside every suit of armor and the Great Hall was filled with its usual twelve Christmas trees glittering with golden stars .A powerful and delicious smell of cooking pervaded the corridors and by Christmas Eve it had grown so strong that even Scabbers poked his nose out of the shelter of Rons pocket to sniff hopefully at the air .On Christmas morning Harry was woken by Ron throwing his pillow at him .Oy !Presents !Harry reached for his glasses and put them on squinting through the semidarkness to the foot of his bed where a small heap of parcels had appeared .Ron was already ripping the paper off his own presents .Another sweater from Mum .maroon again .see if youve got one .Harry had .Mrs Weasley had sent him a scarlet sweater with the Gryffindor lion knitted on the front also a dozen homebaked mince pies some Christmas cake and a box of nut brittle .As he moved all these things aside he saw a long thin package lying underneath .Whats that ?said Ron looking over a freshly unwrapped pair of maroon socks in his hand .Dunno .Harry ripped the parcel open and gasped as a magnificent gleaming broomstick rolled out onto his bedspread .Ron dropped his socks and jumped off his bed for a closer look .I dont believe it he said hoarsely .It was a Firebolt identical to the dream broom Harry had gone to see every day in Diagon Alley .Its handle glittered as he picked it up .He could feel it vibrating and let go it hung in midair unsupported at exactly the right height for him to mount it .His eyes moved from the golden registration number at the top of the handle right down to the perfectly smooth streamlined birch twigs that made up the tail .Who sent it to you ?said Ron in a hushed voice .Look and see if theres a card said Harry .Ron ripped apart the Firebolts wrappings .Nothing !Blimey whod spend that much on you ?Well said Harry feeling stunned Im betting it wasnt the Dursleys .I bet it was Dumbledore said Ron now walking around and around the Firebolt taking in every glorious inch .He sent you the Invisibility Cloak anonymously .That was my dads though said Harry .Dumbledore was just passing it on to me .He wouldnt spend hundreds of Galleons on me .He cant go giving students stuff like this Thats why he wouldnt say it was from him !said Ron .In case some git like Malfoy said it was favoritism .Hey Harry Ron gave a great whoop of laughter Malfoyl Wait till he sees you on this !Hell be sick as a pig !This is an international standard broom this is !I cant believe this Harry muttered running a hand along the Firebolt while Ron sank onto Harrys bed laughing his head off at the thought of Malfoy .Who ?I know said Ron controlling himself I know who it couldve been Lupin !What ?said Harry now starting to laugh himself .Lupin ?Listen if he had this much gold hed be able to buy himself some new robes .Yeah but he likes you said Ron .And he was away when your Nimbus got smashed and he mightve heard about it and decided to visit Diagon Alley and get this for you What dyou mean he was away ?said Harry .He was ill when I was playing in that match .Well he wasnt in the hospital wing said Ron .I was there cleaning out the bedpans on that detention from Snape remember ?Harry frowned at Ron .I cant see Lupin affording something like this .What re you two laughing about ?Hermione had just come in wearing her dressing gown and carrying Crookshanks who was looking very grumpy with a string of tinsel tied around his neck .Dont bring him in here !said Ron hurriedly snatching Scabbers from the depths of his bed and stowing him in his pajama pocket .But Hermione wasnt listening .She dropped Crookshanks onto Seamuss empty bed and stared openmouthed at the Firebolt .Oh Harry Who sent you that ?No idea said Harry .There wasnt a card or anything with it .To his great surprise Hermione did not appear either excited or intrigued by the news .On the contrary her face fell and she bit her lip .Whats the matter with you ?said Ron .I dont know said Hermione slowly but its a bit odd isnt it ?I mean this is supposed to be quite a good broom isnt it ?Ron sighed exasperatedly .Its the best broom there is Hermione he said .So it mustve been really expensive .Probably cost more than all the Slytherins brooms put together said Ron happily .Well .whod send Harry something as expensive as that and not even tell him theyd sent it ?said Hermione .Who cares ?said Ron impatiently .Listen Harry can I have a go on it ?Can I ?I dont think anyone should ride that broom just yet !said Hermione shrilly .Harry and Ron looked at her .What dyou think Harrys going to do with it sweep the floor ?said Ron .But before Hermione could answer Crookshanks sprang from Seamuss bed right at Rons chest .GET HIM OUT OF HERE !Ron bellowed as Crookshanks s claws ripped his pajamas and Scabbers attempted a wild escape over his shoulder .Ron seized Scabbers by the tail and aimed a misjudged kick at Crookshanks that hit the trunk at the end of Harrys bed knocking it over and causing Ron to hop up and down howling with pain .Crookshanks s fur suddenly stood on end .A shrill tinny whistling was filling the room .The Pocket Sneakoscope had become dislodged from Uncle Vernons old socks and was whirling and gleaming on the floor .I forgot about that !Harry said bending down and picking up the Sneakoscope .I never wear those socks if I can help it .The Sneakoscope whirled and whistled in his palm .Crookshanks was hissing and spitting at it .Youd better take that cat out of here Hermione said Ron furiously sitting on Harrys bed nursing his toe .Cant you shut that thing up ?he added to Harry as Hermione strode out of the room Crookshanks s yellow eyes still fixed maliciously on Ron .Harry stuffed the Sneakoscope back inside the socks and threw it back into his trunk .All that could be heard now were Rons stifled moans of pain and rage .Scabbers was huddled in Rons hands .It had been a while since Harry had seen him out of Rons pocket and he was unpleasantly surprised to see that Scabbers once so fat was now very skinny patches of fur seemed to have fallen out too .Hes not looking too good is he ?Harry said .Its stress !said Ron .Hed be fine if that big stupid furball left him alone !But Harry remembering what the woman at the Magical Menagerie had said about rats living only three years couldnt help feeling that unless Scabbers had powers he had never revealed he was reaching the end of his life .And despite Rons frequent complaints that Scabbers was both boring and useless he was sure Ron would be very miserable if Scabbers died .Christmas spirit was definitely thin on the ground in the Gryffindor common room that morning .Hermione had shut Crookshanks in her dormitory but was furious with Ron for trying to kick him Ron was still fuming about Crookshanks s fresh attempt to eat Scabbers .Harry gave up trying to make them talk to each other and devoted himself to examining the Firebolt which he had brought down to the common room with him .For some reason this seemed to annoy Hermione as well she didnt say anything but she kept looking darkly at the broom as though it too had been criticizing her cat .At lunchtime they went down to the Great Hall to find that the House tables had been moved against the walls again and that a single table set for twelve stood in the middle of the room .Professors Dumbledore McGonagall Snape Sprout and Flitwick were there along with Filch the caretaker who had taken off his usual brown coat and was wearing a very old and rather moldylooking tailcoat .There were only three other students two extremely nervouslooking first years and a sullenfaced Slytherin fifth year .Merry Christmas !said Dumbledore as Harry Ron and Hermione approached the table .As there are so few of us it seemed foolish to use the House tables . .Sit down sit down !Harry Ron and Hermione sat down side by side at the end of the table .Crackers !said Dumbledore enthusiastically offering the end of a large silver noisemaker to Snape who took it reluctantly and tugged .With a bang like a gunshot the cracker flew apart to reveal a large pointed witchs hat topped with a stuffed vulture .Harry remembering the boggart caught Rons eye and they both grinned Snape s mouth thinned and he pushed the hat toward Dumbledore who swapped it for his wizards hat at once .Dig in !he advised the table beaming around .As Harry was helping himself to roast potatoes the doors of the Great Hall opened again .It was Professor Trelawney gliding toward them as though on wheels .She had put on a green sequined dress in honor of the occasion making her look more than ever like a glittering oversized dragonfly .Sibyll this is a pleasant surprise !said Dumbledore standing up .I have been crystal gazing Headmaster said Professor Trelawney in her mistiest most faraway voice and to my astonishment I saw myself abandoning my solitary luncheon and coming to join you .Who am I to refuse the promptings of fate ?I at once hastened from my tower and I do beg you to forgive my lateness .Certainly certainly said Dumbledore his eyes twinkling .Let me draw you up a chair And he did indeed draw a chair in midair with his wand which revolved for a few seconds before falling with a thud between Professors Snape and McGonagall .Professor Trelawney however did not sit down her enormous eyes had been roving around the table and she suddenly uttered a kind of soft scream .I dare not Headmaster !If I join the table we shall be thirteen !Nothing could be more unlucky !Never forget that when thirteen dine together the first to rise will be the first to die !Well risk it Sibyll said Professor McGonagall impatiently .Do sit down the turkeys getting stone cold .Professor Trelawney hesitated then lowered herself into the empty chair eyes shut and mouth clenched tight as though expecting a thunderbolt to hit the table .Professor McGonagall poked a large spoon into the nearest tureen .Tripe Sibyll ?Professor Trelawney ignored her .Eyes open again she looked around once more and said But where is dear Professor Lupin ?Im afraid the poor fellow is ill again said Dumbledore indicating that everybody should start serving themselves .Most unfortunate that it should happen on Christmas Day .But surely you already knew that Sibyll ?said Professor McGonagall her eyebrows raised .Professor Trelawney gave Professor McGonagall a very cold look .Certainly I knew Minerva she said quietly .But one does not parade the fact that one is AllKnowing .I frequently act as though I am not possessed of the Inner Eye so as not to make others nervous .That explains a great deal said Professor McGonagall tartly .Professor Trelawneys voice suddenly became a good deal less misty .If you must know Minerva I have seen that poor Professor Lupin will not be with us for very long .He seems aware himself that his time is short .He positively fled when I offered to crystal gaze for him Imagine that said Professor McGonagall dryly .I doubt said Dumbledore in a cheerful but slightly raised voice which put an end to Professor McGonagall and Professor Trelawneys conversation that Professor Lupin is in any immediate danger .Severus youve made the potion for him again ?Yes Headmaster said Snape .Good said Dumbledore .Then he should be up and about in no time .Derek have you had any of these chipolatas ?Theyre excellent .The firstyear boy went furiously red on being addressed directly by Dumbledore and took the platter of sausages with trembling hands .Professor Trelawney behaved almost normally until the very end of Christmas dinner two hours later .Full to bursting with Christmas dinner and still wearing their party hats Harry and Ron got up first from the table and she shrieked loudly .My dears !Which of you left his seat first ?Which ?Dunno said Ron looking uneasily at Harry .I doubt it will make much difference said Professor McGonagall coldly unless a mad axeman is waiting outside the doors to slaughter the first into the entrance hall .Even Ron laughed .Professor Trelawney looked highly affronted .Coming ?Harry said to Hermione .No Hermione muttered I want a quick word with Professor McGonagall .Probably trying to see if she can take any more classes yawned Ron as they made their way into the entrance hall which was completely devoid of mad axemen .When they reached the portrait hole they found Sir Cadogan enjoying a Christmas party with a couple of monks several previous headmasters of Hogwarts and his fat pony .He pushed up his visor and toasted them with a flagon of mead .Merry hie Christmas !Password ?Scurvy cur said Ron .And the same to you sir !roared Sir Cadogan as the painting swung forward to admit them .Harry went straight up to the dormitory collected the Firebolt and the Broomstick Servicing Kit Hermione had given him for his birthday brought them downstairs and tried to find something to do to the Firebolt however there were no bent twigs to clip and the handle was so shiny already it seemed pointless to polish it .He and Ron simply sat admiring it from every angle until the portrait hole opened and Hermione came in accompanied by Professor McGonagall .Though Professor McGonagall was head of Gryffindor House Harry had seen her in the common room only once before and that had been to make a very grave announcement .He and Ron stared at her both holding the Firebolt .Hermione walked around them sat down picked up the nearest book and hid her face behind it .So thats it is it ?said Professor McGonagall beadily walking over to the fireside and staring at the Firebolt .Miss Granger has just informed me that you have been sent a broomstick Potter .Harry and Ron looked around at Hermione .They could see her forehead reddening over the top of her book which was upside down .May I ?said Professor McGonagall but she didnt wait for an answer before pulling the Firebolt out of their hands .She examined it carefully from handle to twigends .Hmm .And there was no note at all Potter ?No card ?No message of any kind ?No said Harry blankly .I see .said Professor McGonagall .Well Im afraid I will have to take this Potter .W what ?said Harry scrambling to his feet .Why ?It will need to be checked for jinxes said Professor McGonagall .Of course Im no expert but I daresay Madam Hooch and Professor Flitwick will strip it down Strip it down ?repeated Ron as though Professor McGonagall was mad .It shouldnt take more than a few weeks said Professor McGonagall .You will have it back if we are sure it is jinxfree .Theres nothing wrong with it !said Harry his voice shaking slightly .Honestly Professor You cant know that Potter said Professor McGonagall quite kindly not until youve flown it at any rate and Im afraid that is out of the question until we are certain that it has not been tampered with .I shall keep you informed .Professor McGonagall turned on her heel and carried the Firebolt out of the portrait hole which closed behind her .Harry stood staring after her the tin of HighFinish Polish still clutched in his hands .Ron however rounded on Hermione .What did you go running to McGonagall for ?Hermione threw her book aside .She was still pink in the face but stood up and faced Ron defiantly .Because I thought and Professor McGonagall agrees with me that that broom was probably sent to Harry by Sirius Black !THE PATRONUS Harry knew that Hermione had meant well but that didnt stop him from being angry with her .He had been the owner of the best broom in the world for a few short hours and now because of her interference he didnt know whether he would ever see it again .He was positive that there was nothing wrong with the Firebolt now but what sort of state would it be in once it had been subjected to all sorts of antijinx tests ?Ron was furious with Hermione too .As far as he was concerned the strippingdown of a brandnew Firebolt was nothing less than criminal damage .Hermione who remained convinced that she had acted for the best started avoiding the common room .Harry and Ron supposed she had taken refuge in the library and didnt try to persuade her to come back .All in all they were glad when the rest of the school returned shortly after New Year and Gryffindor Tower became crowded and noisy again .Wood sought Harry out on the night before term started .Had a good Christmas ?he said and then without waiting for an answer he sat down lowered his voice and said Ive been doing some thinking over Christmas Harry .After the last match you know .If the dementors come to the next one .I mean .we cant afford you to well Wood broke off looking awkward .Im working on it said Harry quickly .Professor Lupin said hed train me to ward off the dementors .We should be starting this week .He said hed have time after Christmas .Ah said Wood his expression clearing .Well in that case I really didnt want to lose you as Seeker Harry .And have you ordered a new broom yet ?No said Harry .What !Youd better get a move on you know you cant ride that Shooting Star against Ravenclaw !He got a Firebolt for Christmas said Ron .A Firebolt ?No !Seriously ?A a real Firebolt ?Dont get excited Oliver said Harry gloomily .I havent got it anymore .It was confiscated .And he explained all about how the Firebolt was now being checked for jinxes .Jinxed ?How could it be jinxed ?Sirius Black Harry said wearily .Hes supposed to be after me .So McGonagall reckons he might have sent it .Waving aside the information that a famous murderer was after his Seeker Wood said But Black couldnt have bought a Firebolt !Hes on the run !The whole countrys on the lookout for him !How could he just walk into Quality Quidditch Supplies and buy a broomstick ?I know said Harry but McGonagall still wants to strip it down Wood went pale .Ill go and talk to her Harry he promised .Ill make her see reason .A Firebolt .a real Firebolt on our team .She wants Gryffindor to win as much as we do .Ill make her see sense .A Firebolt .Classes started again the next day .The last thing anyone felt like doing was spending two hours on the grounds on a raw January morning but Hagrid had provided a bonfire full of salamanders for their enjoyment and they spent an unusually good lesson collecting dry wood and leaves to keep the fire blazing while the flameloving lizards scampered up and down the crumbling whitehot logs .The first Divination lesson of the new term was much less fun Professor Trelawney was now teaching them palmistry and she lost no time in informing Harry that he had the shortest life line she had ever seen .It was Defense Against the Dark Arts that Harry was keen to get to after his conversation with Wood he wanted to get started on his antidementor lessons as soon as possible .Ah yes said Lupin when Harry reminded him of his promise at the end of class .Let me see .how about eight oclock on Thursday evening ?The History of Magic classroom should be large enough .Ill have to think carefully about how were going to do this .We cant bring a real dementor into the castle to practice on .Still looks ill doesnt he ?said Ron as they walked down the corridor heading to dinner .What dyou reckon s the matter with him ?There was a loud and impatient tuh from behind them .It was Hermione who had been sitting at the feet of a suit of armor repacking her bag which was so full of books it wouldnt close .And what are you tutting at us for ?said Ron irritably .Nothing said Hermione in a lofty voice heaving her bag back over her shoulder .Yes you were said Ron .I said I wonder whats wrong with Lupin and you Well isnt it obvious ?said Hermione with a look of maddening superiority .If you dont want to tell us dont snapped Ron .Fine said Hermione haughtily and she marched off .She doesnt know said Ron staring resentfully after Hermione .Shes just trying to get us to talk to her again .At eight oclock on Thursday evening Harry left Gryffindor Tower for the History of Magic classroom .It was dark and empty when he arrived but he lit the lamps with his wand and had waited only five minutes when Professor Lupin turned up carrying a large packing case which he heaved onto Professor Binns desk .Whats that ?said Harry .Another boggart said Lupin stripping off his cloak .Ive been combing the castle ever since Tuesday and very luckily I found this one lurking inside Mr Filchs filing cabinet .Its the nearest well get to a real dementor .The boggart will turn into a dementor when he sees you so well be able to practice on him .I can store him in my office when were not using him theres a cupboard under my desk hell like .Okay said Harry trying to sound as though he wasnt apprehensive at all and merely glad that Lupin had found such a good substitute for a real dementor .So .Professor Lupin had taken out his own wand and indicated that Harry should do the same .The spell I am going to try and teach you is highly advanced magic Harry well beyond Ordinary Wizarding Level .It is called the Patronus Charm .How does it work ?said Harry nervously .Well when it works correctly it conjures up a Patronus said Lupin which is a kind of anti dementor a guardian that acts as a shield between you and the dementor .Harry had a sudden vision of himself crouching behind a Hagridsized figure holding a large club .Professor Lupin continued The Patronus is a kind of positive force a projection of the very things that the dementor feeds upon hope happiness the desire to survive but it cannot feel despair as real humans can so the dementors cant hurt it .But I must warn you Harry that the charm might be too advanced for you .Many qualified wizards have difficulty with it .What does a Patronus look like ?said Harry curiously .Each one is unique to the wizard who conjures it .And how do you conjure it ?With an incantation which will work only if you are concentrating with all your might on a single very happy memory .Harry cast his mind about for a happy memory .Certainly nothing that had happened to him at the Dursleys was going to do .Finally he settled on the moment when he had first ridden a broomstick .Right he said trying to recall as exactly as possible the wonderful soaring sensation of his stomach .The incantation is this Lupin cleared his throat .Expecto patronum .Expecto patronum Harry repeated under his breath expecto patronum .Concentrating hard on your happy memory ?Oh yeah said Harry quickly forcing his thoughts back to that first broom ride .Expecto patrono no patronum sorry expecto patronum expecto patronum Something whooshed suddenly out of the end of his wand it looked like a wisp of silvery gas .Did you see that ?said Harry excitedly .Something happened !Very good said Lupin smiling .Right then ready to try it on a dementor ?Yes Harry said gripping his wand very tightly and moving into the middle of the deserted classroom .He tried to keep his mind on flying but something else kept intruding .Any second now he might hear his mother again .but he shouldnt think that or he would hear her again and he didnt want to .or did he ?Lupin grasped the lid of the packing case and pulled .A dementor rose slowly from the box its hooded face turned toward Harry one glistening scabbed hand gripping its cloak .The lamps around the classroom flickered and went out .The dementor stepped from the box and started to sweep silently toward Harry drawing a deep rattling breath .A wave of piercing cold broke over him Expecto patronurrd Harry yelled .Expecto patronum .Expecto But the classroom and the dementor were dissolving . .Harry was falling again through thick white fog and his mothers voice was louder than ever echoing inside his head Not Harry Not Harry Please Ill do anything Stand aside .Stand aside girl Harry !Harry jerked back to life .He was lying flat on his back on the floor .The classroom lamps were alight again .He didnt have to ask what had happened .Sorry he muttered sitting up and feeling cold sweat trickling down behind his glasses .Are you all right ?said Lupin .Yes .Harry pulled himself up on one of the desks and leaned against it .Here Lupin handed him a Chocolate Frog .Eat this before we try again .I didnt expect you to do it your first time in fact I would have been astounded if you had .Its getting worse Harry muttered biting off the Frogs head .I could hear her louder that time and him Voldemort Lupin looked paler than usual .Harry if you dont want to continue I will more than understand I do !said Harry fiercely stuffing the rest of the Chocolate Frog into his mouth .Ive got to !What if the dementors turn up at our match against Ravenclaw ?I cant afford to fall off again .If we lose this game weve lost the Quidditch Cup !All right then .said Lupin .You might want to select another memory a happy memory I mean to concentrate on .That one doesnt seem to have been strong enough .Harry thought hard and decided his feelings when Gryffindor had won the House Championship last year had definitely qualified as very happy .He gripped his wand tightly again and took up his position in the middle of the classroom .Ready ?said Lupin gripping the box lid .Ready said Harry trying hard to fill his head with happy thoughts about Gryffindor winning and not dark thoughts about what was going to happen when the box opened .Go !said Lupin pulling off the lid .The room went icily cold and dark once more .The dementor glided forward drawing its breath one rotting hand was extending toward Harry Expecto patronum .Harry yelled .Expecto patronuml Expecto pat White fog obscured his senses .big blurred shapes were moving around him .then came a new voice a mans voice shouting panicking Lily take Harry and go Its him Go !Run Ill hold him off~ The sounds of someone stumbling from a room a door bursting open a cackle of highpitched laughter Harry !Harry .wake up .Lupin was tapping Harry hard on the face .This time it was a minute before Harry understood why he was lying on a dusty classroom floor .I heard my dad Harry mumbled .Thats the first time Ive ever heard him he tried to take on Voldemort himself to give my mum time to run for it .Harry suddenly realized that there were tears on his face mingling with the sweat .He bent his face as low as possible wiping them off on his robes pretending to do up his shoelace so that Lupin wouldnt see .You heard James ?said Lupin in a strange voice .Yeah .Face dry Harry looked up .Why you didnt know my dad did you ?I I did as a matter of fact said Lupin .We were friends at Hogwarts .Listen Harry perhaps we should leave it here for tonight .This charm is ridiculously advanced .I shouldnt have suggested putting you through this .No !said Harry .He got up again .Ill have one more go !Im not thinking of happy enough things thats what it is .Hang on .He racked his brains .A really really happy memory .one that he could turn into a good strong Patronus .The moment when hed first found out he was a wizard and would be leaving the Dursleys for Hogwarts !If that wasnt a happy memory he didnt know what was .Concentrating very hard on how he had felt when hed realized hed be leaving Privet Drive Harry got to his feet and faced the packing case once more .Ready ?said Lupin who looked as though he were doing this against his better judgment .Concentrating hard ?All right go !He pulled off the lid of the case for the third time and the dementor rose out of it the room fell cold and dark EXPECTO PATRONUM Harry bellowed .EXPECTO PATRONUM EXPECTO PATRONUM The screaming inside Harrys head had started again except this time it sounded as though it were coming from a badly tuned radio softer and louder and softer again and he could still see the dementor it had halted and then a huge silver shadow came bursting out of the end of Harrys wand to hover between him and the dementor and though Harrys legs felt like water he was still on his feet though for how much longer he wasnt sure RiddikulusV roared Lupin springing forward .There was a loud crack and Harrys cloudy Patronus vanished along with the dementor he sank into a chair feeling as exhausted as if hed just run a mile and felt his legs shaking .Out of the corner of his eye he saw Professor Lupin forcing the boggart back into the packing case with his wand it had turned into a silvery orb again .Excellent !Lupin said striding over to where Harry sat .Excellent Harry !That was definitely a start !Can we have another go ?Just one more go ?Not now said Lupin firmly .Youve had enough for one night .Here He handed Harry a large bar of Honeydukes best chocolate .Eat the lot or Madam Pomfrey will be after my blood .Same time next week ?Okay said Harry .He took a bite of the chocolate and watched Lupin extinguishing the lamps that had rekindled with the disappearance of the dementor .A thought had just occurred to him .Professor Lupin ?he said .If you knew my dad you mustve known Sirius Black as well .Lupin turned very quickly .What gives you that idea ?he said sharply .Nothing I mean I just knew they were friends at Hogwarts too .Lupins face relaxed .Yes I knew him he said shortly .Or I thought I did .Youd better be off Harry its getting late .Harry left the classroom walking along the corridor and around a corner then took a detour behind a suit of armor and sank down on its plinth to finish his chocolate wishing he hadnt mentioned Black as Lupin was obviously not keen on the subject .Then Harrys thoughts wandered back to his mother and father .He felt drained and strangely empty even though he was so full of chocolate .Terrible though it was to hear his parents last moments replayed inside his head these were the only times Harry had heard their voices since he was a very small child .But hed never be able to produce a proper Patronus if he half wanted to hear his parents again .Theyre dead he told himself sternly .Theyre dead and listening to echoes of them wont bring them back .Youd better get a grip on yourself if you want that Quidditch Cup .He stood up crammed the last bit of chocolate into his mouth and headed back to Gryffindor Tower .Ravenclaw played Slytherin a week after the start of term .Slytherin won though narrowly .According to Wood this was good news for Gryffindor who would take second place if they beat Ravenclaw too .He therefore increased the number of team practices to five a week .This meant that with Lupins anti dementor classes which in themselves were more draining than six Quidditch practices Harry had just one night a week to do all his homework .Even so he wasnt showing the strain nearly as much as Hermione whose immense workload finally seemed to be getting to her .Every night without fail Hermione was to be seen in a corner of the common room several tables spread with books Arithmancy charts rune dictionaries diagrams of Muggles lifting heavy objects and file upon file of extensive notes she barely spoke to anybody and snapped when she was interrupted .Hows she doing it ?Ron muttered to Harry one evening as Harry sat finishing a nasty essay on Undetectable Poisons for Snape .Harry looked up .Hermione was barely visible behind a tottering pile of books .Doing what ?Getting to all her classes !Ron said .I heard her talking to Professor Vector that Arithmancy witch this morning .They were going on about yesterdays lesson but Hermione cantve been there because she was with us in Care of Magical Creatures !And Ernie McMillan told me shes never missed a Muggle Studies class but half of them are at the same time as Divination and shes never missed one of them either !Harry didnt have time to fathom the mystery of Hermiones impossible schedule at the moment he really needed to get on with Snapes essay .Two seconds later however he was interrupted again this time by Wood .Bad news Harry .Ive just been to see Professor McGonagall about the Firebolt .She er got a bit shirty with me .Told me Id got my priorities wrong .Seemed to think I cared more about winning the Cup than I do about you staying alive .Just because I told her I didnt care if it threw you off as long as you caught the Snitch first .Wood shook his head in disbelief .Honestly the way she was yelling at me .youd think Id said something terrible .Then I asked her how much longer she was going to keep it . .He screwed up his face and imitated Professor McGonagalls severe voice . ‘As long as necessary Wood .I reckon its time you ordered a new broom Harry .Theres an order form at the back of Which Broomstick .you could get a Nimbus Two Thousand and One like Malfoys got .Im not buying anything Malfoy thinks is good said Harry flatly .January faded imperceptibly into February with no change in the bitterly cold weather .The match against Ravenclaw was drawing nearer and nearer but Harry still hadnt ordered a new broom .He was now asking Professor McGonagall for news of the Firebolt after every Transfiguration lesson Ron standing hopefully at his shoulder Hermione rushing past with her face averted .No Potter you cant have it back yet Professor McGonagall told him the twelfth time this happened before hed even opened his mouth .Weve checked for most of the usual curses but Professor Flitwick believes the broom might be carrying a Hurling Hex .I shall tell you once weve finished checking it .Now please stop badgering me .To make matters even worse Harrys antidementor lessons were not going nearly as well as he had hoped .Several sessions on he was able to produce an indistinct silvery shadow every time the boggart dementor approached him but his Patronus was too feeble to drive the dementor away .All it did was hover like a semitransparent cloud draining Harry of energy as he fought to keep it there .Harry felt angry with himself guilty about his secret desire to hear his parents voices again .Youre expecting too much of yourself said Professor Lupin sternly in their fourth week of practice .For a thirteenyearold wizard even an indistinct Patronus is a huge achievement .You arent passing out anymore are you ?I thought a Patronus would charge the dementors down or something said Harry dispiritedly .Make them disappear The true Patronus does do that said Lupin .But youve achieved a great deal in a very short space of time .If the dementors put in an appearance at your next Quidditch match you will be able to keep them at bay long enough to get back to the ground .You said its harder if there are loads of them said Harry .I have complete confidence in you said Lupin smiling .Here youve earned a drink something from the Three Broomsticks .You wont have tried it before He pulled two bottles out of his briefcase .Butterbeer !said Harry without thinking .Yeah I like that stuff !Lupin raised an eyebrow .Oh Ron and Hermione brought me some back from Hogsmeade Harry lied quickly .I see said Lupin though he still looked slightly suspicious .Well lets drink to a Gryffindor victory against Ravenclaw !Not that Im supposed to take sides as a teacher .he added hastily .They drank the butterbeer in silence until Harry voiced something hed been wondering for a while .Whats under a dementors hood ?Professor Lupin lowered his bottle thoughtfully .Hmmm .well the only people who really know are in no condition to tell us .You see the dementor lowers its hood only to use its last and worst weapon .Whats that ?They call it the Dementors Kiss said Lupin with a slightly twisted smile .Its what dementors do to those they wish to destroy utterly .I suppose there must be some kind of mouth under there because they clamp their jaws upon the mouth of the victim and and suck out his soul .Harry accidentally spat out a bit of butterbeer .What they kill ?Oh no said Lupin .Much worse than that .You can exist without your soul you know as long as your brain and heart are still working .But you 11 have no sense of self anymore no memory no .anything .Theres no chance at all of recovery .Youll just exist .As an empty shell .And your soul is gone forever .lost .Lupin drank a little more butterbeer then said Its the fate that awaits Sirius Black .It was in the Daily Prophet this morning .The Ministry have given the dementors permission to perform it if they find him .Harry sat stunned for a moment at the idea of someone having their soul sucked out through their mouth .But then he thought of Black .He deserves it he said suddenly .You think so ?said Lupin lightly .Do you really think anyone deserves that ?Yes said Harry defiantly .For .for some things .He would have liked to have told Lupin about the conversation hed overheard about Black in the Three Broomsticks about Black betraying his mother and father but it would have involved revealing that hed gone to Hogsmeade without permission and he knew Lupin wouldnt be very impressed by that .So he finished his butterbeer thanked Lupin and left the History of Magic classroom .Harry half wished that he hadnt asked what was under a dementors hood the answer had been so horrible and he was so lost in unpleasant thoughts of what it would feel like to have your soul sucked out of you that he walked headlong into Professor McGonagall halfway up the stairs .Do watch where youre going Potter !Sorry Professor Ive just been looking for you in the Gryffindor common room .Well here it is weve done everything we could think of and there doesnt seem to be anything wrong with it at all .Youve got a very good friend somewhere Potter .Harrys jaw dropped .She was holding out his Firebolt and it looked as magnificent as ever .I can have it back ?Harry said weakly .Seriously ?Seriously said Professor McGonagall and she was actually smiling .I daresay youll need to get the feel of it before Saturdays match wont you ?And Potter do try and win wont you ?Or well be out of the running for the eighth year in a row as Professor Snape was kind enough to remind me only last night .Speechless Harry carried the Firebolt back upstairs toward Gryffindor Tower .As he turned a corner he saw Ron dashing toward him grinning from ear to ear .She gave it to you ?Excellent !Listen can I still have a go on it ?Tomorrow ?Yeah .anything .said Harry his heart lighter than it had been in a month .You know what we should make up with Hermione .She was only trying to help .Yeah all right said Ron .Shes in the common room now working for a change They turned into the corridor to Gryffindor Tower and saw Neville Longbottom pleading with Sir Cadogan who seemed to be refusing him entrance .I wrote them down !Neville was saying tearfully .But I mustve dropped them somewhere !A likely tale !roared Sir Cadogan .Then spotting Harry and Ron Good even my fine young yeomen !Come clap this loon in irons .He is trying to force entry to the chambers within !Oh shut up said Ron as he and Harry drew level with Neville .Ive lost the passwords !Neville told them miserably .I made him tell me what passwords he was going to use this week because he keeps changing them and now I dont know what Ive done with them !Oddsbodikins said Harry to Sir Cadogan who looked extremely disappointed and reluctantly swung forward to let them into the common room .There was a sudden excited murmur as every head turned and the next moment Harry was surrounded by people exclaiming over his Firebolt .Where d you get it Harry ?Will you let me have a go ?Have you ridden it yet Harry ?Ravenclawll have no chance theyre all on Cleansweep Sevens !Can I just hold it Harry ?After ten minutes or so during which the Firebolt was passed around and admired from every angle the crowd dispersed and Harry and Ron had a clear view of Hermione the only person who hadnt rushed over to them bent over her work and carefully avoiding their eyes .Harry and Ron approached her table and at last she looked up .I got it back said Harry grinning at her and holding up the Firebolt .See Hermione ?There wasnt anything wrong with it !said Ron .Well there might have been !said Hermione .I mean at least you know now that its safe !Yeah I suppose so said Harry .Id better put it upstairs Ill take it !said Ron eagerly .Ive got to give Scabbers his rat tonic .He took the Firebolt and holding it as if it were made of glass carried it away up the boys staircase .Can I sit down then ?Harry asked Hermione .I suppose so said Hermione moving a great stack of parchment off a chair .Harry looked around at the cluttered table at the long Arithmancy essay on which the ink was still glistening at the even longer Muggle Studies essay Explain Why Muggles Need Electricity and at the rune translation Hermione was now poring over .How are you getting through all this stuff ?Harry asked her .Oh well you know working hard said Hermione .Closeup Harry saw that she looked almost as tired as Lupin .Why dont you just drop a couple of subjects ?Harry asked watching her lifting books as she searched for her rune dictionary .I couldnt do that !said Hermione looking scandalized .Arithmancy looks terrible said Harry picking up a very complicatedlooking number chart .Oh no its wonderful !said Hermione earnestly .Its my favorite subject !Its But exactly what was wonderful about Arithmancy Harry never found out .At that precise moment a strangled yell echoed down the boys staircase .The whole common room fell silent staring petrified at the entrance .Then came hurried footsteps growing louder and louder and then Ron came leaping into view dragging with him a bedsheet .LOOK !he bellowed striding over to Hermiones table .LOOK !he yelled shaking the sheets in her face .Ron what ?SCABBERS !LOOK !SCABBERS !Hermione was leaning away from Ron looking utterly bewildered .Harry looked down at the sheet Ron was holding .There was something red on it .Something that looked horribly like BLOOD !Ron yelled into the stunned silence .HES GONE !AND YOU KNOW WHAT WAS ON THE FLOOR ?N no said Hermione in a trembling voice .Ron threw something down onto Hermione s rune translation .Hermione and Harry leaned forward .Lying on top of the weird spiky shapes were several long ginger cat hairs .GRYFFINDOR VERSUS RAVENCLAW It looked like the end of Ron and Hermiones friendship .Each was so angry with the other that Harry couldnt see how theyd ever make up .Ron was enraged that Hermione had never taken Crookshankss attempts to eat Scabbers seriously hadnt bothered to keep a close enough watch on him and was still trying to pretend that Crookshanks was innocent by suggesting that Ron look for Scabbers under all the boys beds .Hermione meanwhile maintained fiercely that Ron had no proof that Crookshanks had eaten Scabbers that the ginger hairs might have been there since Christmas and that Ron had been prejudiced against her cat ever since Crookshanks had landed on Rons head in the Magical Menagerie .Personally Harry was sure that Crookshanks had eaten Scabbers and when he tried to point out to Hermione that the evidence all pointed that way she lost her temper with Harry too .Okay side with Ron I knew you would !she said shrilly .First the Firebolt now Scabbers everythings my fault isnt it !Just leave me alone Harry Ive got a lot of work to do !Ron had taken the loss of his rat very hard indeed .Come on Ron you were always saying how boring Scabbers was said Fred bracingly And hes been offcolor for ages he was wasting away .It was probably better for him to snuff it quickly one swallow he probably didnt feel a thing .Fred said Ginny indignantly .All he did was eat and sleep Ron you said it yourself said George .He bit Goyle for us once !Ron said miserably .Remember Harry ?Yeah thats true said Harry .His finest hour said Fred unable to keep a straight face .Let the scar on Goyle s finger stand as a lasting tribute to his memory .Oh come on Ron get yourself down to Hogsmeade and buy a new rat whats the point of moaning ?In a lastditch attempt to cheer Ron up Harry persuaded him to come along to the Gryffindor teams final practice before the Ravenclaw match so that he could have a ride on the Firebolt after theyd finished .This did seem to take Rons mind off Scabbers for a moment Great !Can I try and shoot a few goals on it ?so they set off for the Quidditch field together .Madam Hooch who was still overseeing Gryffindor practices to keep an eye on Harry was just as impressed with the Firebolt as everyone else had been .She took it in her hands before takeoff and gave them the benefit of her professional opinion .Look at the balance on it !If the Nimbus series has a fault its a slight list to the tail end you often find they develop a drag after a few years .Theyve updated the handle too a bit slimmer than the Cleansweeps reminds me of the old Silver Arrows a pity theyve stopped making them .I learned to fly on one and a very fine old broom it was too .She continued in this vein for some time until Wood said Er Madam Hooch ?Is it okay if Harry has the Firebolt back ?We need to practice .Oh right here you are then Potter said Madam Hooch .Ill sit over here with Weasley .She and Ron left the field to sit in the stadium and the Gryffindor team gathered around Wood for his final instructions for tomorrows match .Harry Ive just found out who Ravenclaw is playing as Seeker .Its Cho Chang .Shes a fourth year and shes pretty good .I really hoped she wouldnt be fit shes had some problems with injuries .Wood scowled his displeasure that Cho Chang had made a full recovery then said On the other hand she rides a Comet Two Sixty which is going to look like a joke next to the Firebolt .He gave Harrys broom a look of fervent admiration then said Okay everyone lets go And at long last Harry mounted his Firebolt and kicked off from the ground .It was better than hed ever dreamed .The Firebolt turned with the lightest touch it seemed to obey his thoughts rather than his grip it sped across the field at such speed that the stadium turned into a green andgray blur Harry turned it so sharply that Alicia Spinnet screamed then he went into a perfectly controlled dive brushing the grassy field with his toes before rising thirty forty fifty feet into the air again Harry Im letting the Snitch out !Wood called .Harry turned and raced a Bludger toward the goal posts he outstripped it easily saw the Snitch dart out from behind Wood and within ten seconds had caught it tightly in his hand .The team cheered madly .Harry let the Snitch go again gave it a minutes head start then tore after it weaving in and out of the others he spotted it lurking near Katie Bells knee looped her easily and caught it again .It was the best practice ever the team inspired by the presence of the Firebolt in their midst performed their best moves faultlessly and by the time they hit the ground again Wood didnt have a single criticism to make which as George Weasley pointed out was a first .I cant see whats going to stop us tomorrow !said Wood .Not unless Harry youve sorted out your dementor problem havent you ?Yeah said Harry thinking of his feeble Patronus and wishing it were stronger .The dementors wont turn up again Oliver .Dumbledored go ballistic said Fred confidently .Well lets hope not said Wood .Anyway good work everyone .Lets get back to the tower .turn in early Im staying out for a bit Ron wants a go on the Firebolt Harry told Wood and while the rest of the team headed off to the locker rooms Harry strode over to Ron who vaulted the barrier to the stands and came to meet him .Madam Hooch had fallen asleep in her seat .Here you go said Harry handing Ron the Firebolt .Ron an expression of ecstasy on his face mounted the broom and zoomed off into the gathering darkness while Harry walked around the edge of the field watching him .Night had fallen before Madam Hooch awoke with a start told Harry and Ron off for not waking her and insisted that they go back to the castle .Harry shouldered the Firebolt and he and Ron walked out of the shadowy stadium discussing the Firebolts superbly smooth action its phenomenal acceleration and its pinpoint turning .They were halfway toward the castle when Harry glancing to his left saw something that made his heart turn over a pair of eyes gleaming out of the darkness .Harry stopped dead his heart banging against his ribs .Whats the matter ?said Ron .Harry pointed .Ron pulled out his wand and muttered Lumos A beam of light fell across the grass hit the bottom of a tree and illuminated its branches there crouching among the budding leaves was Crookshanks .Get out of here !Ron roared and he stooped down and seized a stone lying on the grass but before he could do anything else Crookshanks had vanished with one swish of his long ginger tail .See ?Ron said furiously chucking the stone down again .Shes still letting him wander about wherever he wants probably washing down Scabbers with a couple of birds now .Harry didnt say anything .He took a deep breath as relief seeped through him he had been sure for a moment that those eyes had belonged to the Grim .They set off for the castle once more .Slightly ashamed of his moment of panic Harry didnt say anything to Ron nor did he look left or right until they had reached the welllit entrance hall .Harry went down to breakfast the next morning with the rest of the boys in his dormitory all of whom seemed to think the Firebolt deserved a sort of guard of honor .As Harry entered the Great Hall heads turned in the direction of the Firebolt and there was a good deal of excited muttering .Harry saw with enormous satisfaction that the Slytherin team were all looking thunderstruck .Did you see his face ?said Ron gleefully looking back at Malfoy .He cant believe it !This is brilliant !Wood too was basking in the reflected glory of the Firebolt .Put it here Harry he said laying the broom in the middle of the table and carefully turning it so that its name faced upward .People from the Ravenclaw and Hufflepuff tables were soon coming over to look .Cedric Diggory came over to congratulate Harry on having acquired such a superb replacement for his Nimbus and Percys Ravenclaw girlfriend Penelope Clearwater asked if she could actually hold the Firebolt .Now now Penny no sabotage !said Percy heartily as she examined the Firebolt closely Penelope and I have got a bet on he told the team .Ten Galleons on the outcome of the match !Penelope put the Firebolt down again thanked Harry and went back to her table .Harry make sure you win said Percy in an urgent whisper .I havent got ten Galleons .Yes Im coming Penny !And he bustled off to join her in a piece of toast .Sure you can manage that broom Potter ?said a cold drawling voice .Draco Malfoy had arrived for a closer look Crabbe and Goyle right behind him .Yeah reckon so said Harry casually .Got plenty of special features hasnt it ?said Malfoy eyes glittering maliciously .Shame it doesnt come with a parachute in case you get too near a dementor .Crabbe and Goyle sniggered .Pity you cant attach an extra arm to yours Malfoy said Harry .Then it could catch the Snitch for you .The Gryffindor team laughed loudly .Malfoys pale eyes narrowed and he stalked away .They watched him rejoin the rest of the Slytherin team who put their heads together no doubt asking Malfoy whether Harrys broom really was a Firebolt .At a quarter to eleven the Gryffindor team set off for the locker rooms .The weather couldnt have been more different from their match against Hufflepuff .It was a clear cool day with a very light breeze there would be no visibility problems this time and Harry though nervous was starting to feel the excitement only a Quidditch match could bring .They could hear the rest of the school moving into the stadium beyond .Harry took off his black school robes removed his wand from his pocket and stuck it inside the Tshirt he was going to wear under his Quidditch robes .He only hoped he wouldnt need it .He wondered suddenly whether Professor Lupin was in the crowd watching .You know what weve got to do said Wood as they prepared to leave the locker rooms .If we lose this match were out of the running .Just just fly like you did in practice yesterday and well be okay !They walked out onto the field to tumultuous applause .The Ravenclaw team dressed in blue were already standing in the middle of the field .Their Seeker Cho Chang was the only girl on their team .She was shorter than Harry by about a head and Harry couldnt help noticing nervous as he was that she was extremely pretty .She smiled at Harry as the teams faced each other behind their captains and he felt a slight lurch in the region of his stomach that he didnt think had anything to do with nerves .Wood Davies shake hands Madam Hooch said briskly and Wood shook hands with the Ravenclaw Captain .Mount your brooms .on my whistle .three two one Harry kicked off into the air and the Firebolt zoomed higher and faster than any other broom he soared around the stadium and began squinting around for the Snitch listening all the while to the commentary which was being provided by the Weasley twins friend Lee Jordan .Theyre off and the big excitement this match is the Firebolt that Harry Potter is flying for Gryffindor .According to Which Broomstick the Firebolts going to be the broom of choice for the national teams at this years World Championship Jordan would you mind telling us whats going on in the match ?interrupted Professor McGonagalls voice .Right you are Professor just giving a bit of background information the Firebolt incidentally has a builtin autobrake and Jordan !Okay okay Gryffindor in possession Katie Bell of Gryffindor heading for goal .Harry streaked past Katie in the opposite direction gazing around for a glint of gold and noticing that Cho Chang was tailing him closely .She was undoubtedly a very good flier she kept cutting across him forcing him to change direction .Show her your acceleration Harry !Fred yelled as he whooshed past in pursuit of a Bludger that was aiming for Alicia .Harry urged the Firebolt forward as they rounded the Ravenclaw goal posts and Cho fell behind .Just as Katie succeeded in scoring the first goal of the match and the Gryffindor end of the field went wild he saw it the Snitch was close to the ground flitting near one of the barriers .Harry dived Cho saw what he was doing and tore after him Harry was speeding up excitement flooding him dives were his speciality he was ten feet away Then a Bludger hit by one of the Ravenclaw Beaters came pelting out of nowhere Harry veered off course avoiding it by an inch and in those few crucial seconds the Snitch had vanished .There was a great Ooooooh of disappointment from the Gryffindor supporters but much applause for their Beater from the Ravenclaw end .George Weasley vented his feelings by hitting the second Bludger directly at the offending Beater who was forced to roll right over in midair to avoid it .Gryffindor leads by eighty points to zero and look at that Firebolt go !Potters really putting it through its paces now see it turn Changs Comet is just no match for it the Firebolts precisionbalance is really noticeable in these long JORDAN !ARE YOU BEING PAID TO ADVERTISE FIREBOLTS ?GET ON WITH THE COMMENTARY !Ravenclaw was pulling back they had now scored three goals which put Gryffindor only fifty points ahead if Cho got the Snitch before him Ravenclaw would win .Harry dropped lower narrowly avoiding a Ravenclaw Chaser scanning the field frantically a glint of gold a flutter of tiny wings the Snitch was circling the Gryffindor goal post Harry accelerated eyes fixed on the speck of gold ahead but just then Cho appeared out of thin air blocking him HARRY THIS IS NO TIME TO BE A GENTLEMAN !Wood roared as Harry swerved to avoid a collision .KNOCK HER OFF HER BROOM IF YOU HAVE TO !Harry turned and caught sight of Cho she was grinning .The Snitch had vanished again .Harry turned his Firebolt upward and was soon twenty feet above the game .Out of the corner of his eye he saw Cho following him .Shed decided to mark him rather than search for the Snitch herself .All right then .if she wanted to tail him shed have to take the consequences .He dived again and Cho thinking hed seen the Snitch tried to follow Harry pulled out of the dive very sharply she hurtled downward he rose fast as a bullet once more and then saw it for the third time the Snitch was glittering way above the field at the Ravenclaw end .He accelerated so many feet below did Cho .He was winning gaining on the Snitch with every second then Oh !screamed Cho pointing .Distracted Harry looked down .Three dementors three tall black hooded dementors were looking up at him .He didnt stop to think .Plunging a hand down the neck of his robes he whipped out his wand and roared Expecto patronum .Something silverwhite something enormous erupted from the end of his wand .He knew it had shot directly at the dementors but didnt pause to watch his mind still miraculously clear he looked ahead he was nearly there .He stretched out the hand still grasping his wand and just managed to close his fingers over the small struggling Snitch .Madam Hoochs whistle sounded .Harry turned around in midair and saw six scarlet blurs bearing down on him next moment the whole team was hugging him so hard he was nearly pulled off his broom .Down below he could hear the roars of the Gryffindors in the crowd .Thats my boy !Wood kept yelling .Alicia Angelina and Katie had all kissed Harry Fred had him in a grip so tight Harry felt as though his head would come off .In complete disarray the team managed to make its way back to the ground .Harry got off his broom and looked up to see a gaggle of Gryffindor supporters sprinting onto the field Ron in the lead .Before he knew it he had been engulfed by the cheering crowd .Yes !Ron yelled yanking Harrys arm into the air .Yes !Yes !Well done Harry !said Percy looking delighted .Ten Galleons to me !Must find Penelope excuse me Good for you Harry !roared Seamus Finnigan .Ruddy brilliant !boomed Hagrid over the heads of the milling Gryffindors .That was quite some Patronus said a voice in Harrys ear .Harry turned around to see Professor Lupin who looked both shaken and pleased .The dementors didnt affect me at all !Harry said excitedly .I didnt feel a thing !That would be because they er werent dementors said Professor Lupin .Come and see He led Harry out of the crowd until they were able to see the edge of the field .You gave Mr Malfoy quite a fright said Lupin .Harry stared .Lying in a crumpled heap on the ground were Malfoy Crabbe Goyle and Marcus Flint the Slytherin team Captain all struggling to remove themselves from long black hooded robes .It looked as though Malfoy had been standing on Goyle s shoulders .Standing over them with an expression of the utmost fury on her face was Professor McGonagall .An unworthy trick !she was shouting .A low and cowardly attempt to sabotage the Gryffindor Seeker !Detention for all of you and fifty points from Slytherin !I shall be speaking to Professor Dumbledore about this make no mistake !Ah here he comes now !If anything could have set the seal on Gryffindors victory it was this .Ron who had fought his way through to Harrys side doubled up with laughter as they watched Malfoy fighting to extricate himself from the robe Goyles head still stuck inside it .Come on Harry !said George fighting his way over .Party !Gryffindor common room now !Right said Harry and feeling happier than he had in ages he and the rest of the team led the way still in their scarlet robes out of the stadium and back up to the castle .It felt as though they had already won the Quidditch Cup the party went on all day and well into the night .Fred and George Weasley disappeared for a couple of hours and returned with armfuls of bottles of butterbeer pumpkin fizz and several bags full of Honeydukes sweets .How did you do that ?squealed Angelina Johnson as George started throwing Peppermint Toads into the crowd .With a little help from Moony Wormtail Padfoot and Prongs Fred muttered in Harrys ear .Only one person wasnt joining in the festivities .Hermione incredibly was sitting in a corner attempting to read an enormous book entitled Home Life and Social Habits of British Muggles .Harry broke away from the table where Fred and George had started juggling butterbeer bottles and went over to her .Did you even come to the match ?he asked her .Of course I did said Hermione in a strangely high pitched voice not looking up .And Im very glad we won and I think you did really well but I need to read this by Monday .Come on Hermione come and have some food Harry said looking over at Ron and wondering whether he was in a good enough mood to bury the hatchet .I cant Harry .Ive still got four hundred and twenty two pages to read !said Hermione now sounding slightly hysterical .Anyway .She glanced over at Ron too .He doesnt want me to join in .There was no arguing with this as Ron chose that moment to say loudly If Scabbers hadnt just been eaten he could have had some of those Fudge Flies .He used to really like them Hermione burst into tears .Before Harry could say or do anything she tucked the enormous book under her arm and still sobbing ran toward the staircase to the girls dormitories and out of sight .Cant you give her a break ?Harry asked Ron quietly .No said Ron flatly .If she just acted like she was sorry but shell never admit shes wrong Hermione .Shes still acting like Scabbers has gone on vacation or something .The Gryffindor party ended only when Professor McGonagall turned up in her tartan dressing gown and hair net at one in the morning to insist that they all go to bed .Harry and Ron climbed the stairs to their dormitory still discussing the match .At last exhausted Harry climbed into bed twitched the hangings of his fourposter shut to block out a ray of moonlight lay back and felt himself almost instantly drifting off to sleep .He had a very strange dream .He was walking through a forest his Firebolt over his shoulder following something silvery white .It was winding its way through the trees ahead and he could only catch glimpses of it between the leaves .Anxious to catch up with it he sped up but as he moved faster so did his quarry .Harry broke into a run and ahead he heard hooves gathering speed .Now he was running flat out and ahead he could hear galloping .Then he turned a corner into a clearing and aaRRRRRRRRRRRRGGGGGHHHHH !NOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO !Harry woke as suddenly as though hed been hit in the face .Disoriented in the total darkness he fumbled with his hangings he could hear movements around him and Seamus Finnigans voice from the other side of the room Whats going on ?Harry thought he heard the dormitory door slam .At last finding the divide in his curtains he ripped them back and at the same moment Dean Thomas lit his lamp .Ron was sitting up in bed the hangings torn from one side a look of utmost terror on his face .Black !Sirius Black !With a knife !What ?Here !Just now !Slashed the curtains !Woke me up !You sure you werent dreaming Ron ?said Dean .Look at the curtains !I tell you he was here !They all scrambled out of bed Harry reached the dormitory door first and they sprinted back down the staircase .Doors opened behind them and sleepy voices called after them .Who shouted ?What re you doing ?The common room was lit with the glow of the dying fire still littered with the debris from the party .It was deserted .Are you sure you werent dreaming Ron ?Im telling you I saw him !Whats all the noise ?Professor McGonagall told us to go to bed !A few of the girls had come down their staircase pulling on dressing gowns and yawning .Boys too were reappearing .Excellent are we carrying on ?said Fred Weasley brightly .Everyone back upstairs !said Percy hurrying into the common room and pinning his Head Boy badge to his pajamas as he spoke .Perce Sirius Black !said Ron faintly .In our dormitory !With a knife !Woke me up !The common room went very still .Nonsense !said Percy looking startled .You had too much to eat Ron had a nightmare Im telling you Now really enoughs enough !Professor McGonagall was back .She slammed the portrait behind her as she entered the common room and stared furiously around .I am delighted that Gryffindor won the match but this is getting ridiculous !Percy I expected better of you !I certainly didnt authorize this Professor !said Percy puffing himself up indignantly .I was just telling them all to get back to bed !My brother Ron here had a nightmare IT WASNT A NIGHTMARE !Ron yelled .PROFESSOR I WOKE UP AND SIRIUS BLACK WAS STANDING OVER ME HOLDING A KNIFE !Professor McGonagall stared at him .Dont be ridiculous Weasley how could he possibly have gotten through the portrait hole ?Ask him !said Ron pointing a shaking finger at the back of Sir Cadogans picture .Ask him if he saw Glaring suspiciously at Ron Professor McGonagall pushed the portrait back open and went outside .The whole common room listened with bated breath .Sir Cadogan did you just let a man enter Gryffindor Tower ?Certainly good lady !cried Sir Cadogan .There was a stunned silence both inside and outside the common room .You you did ?said Professor McGonagall .But but the password !He had em !said Sir Cadogan proudly .Had the whole weeks my lady !Read em off a little piece of paper !Professor McGonagall pulled herself back through the portrait hole to face the stunned crowd .She was white as chalk .Which person she said her voice shaking which abysmally foolish person wrote down this weeks passwords and left them lying around ?There was utter silence broken by the smallest of terrified squeaks .Neville Longbottom trembling from head to fluffyslippered toes raised his hand slowly into the air .SNAPES GRUDGE No one in Gryffindor Tower slept that night .They knew that the castle was being searched again and the whole House stayed awake in the common room waiting to hear whether Black had been caught .Professor McGonagall came back at dawn to tell them that he had again escaped .Throughout the day everywhere they went they saw signs of tighter security Professor Flitwick could be seen teaching the front doors to recognize a large picture of Sirius Black Filch was suddenly bustling up and down the corridors boarding up everything from tiny cracks in the walls to mouse holes .Sir Cadogan had been fired .His portrait had been taken back to its lonely landing on the seventh floor and the Fat Lady was back .She had been expertly restored but was still extremely nervous and had agreed to return to her job only on condition that she was given extra protection .A bunch of surly security trolls had been hired to guard her .They paced the corridor in a menacing group talking in grunts and comparing the size of their clubs .Harry couldnt help noticing that the statue of the oneeyed witch on the third floor remained unguarded and unblocked .It seemed that Fred and George had been right in thinking that they and now Harry Ron and Hermione were the only ones who knew about the hidden passageway within it .Dyou reckon we should tell someone ?Harry asked Ron .We know hes not coming in through Honey dukes said Ron dismissively Wedve heard if the shop had been broken into .Harry was glad Ron took this view .If the oneeyed witch was boarded up too he would never be able to go into Hogsmeade again .Ron had become an instant celebrity .For the first time in his life people were paying more attention to him than to Harry and it was clear that Ron was rather enjoying the experience .Though still severely shaken by the nights events he was happy to tell anyone who asked what had happened with a wealth of detail . .I was asleep and I heard this ripping noise and I thought it was in my dream you know ?But then there was this draft .I woke up and one side of the hangings on my bed had been pulled down .I rolled over .and I saw him standing over me .like a skeleton with loads of filthy hair .holding this great long knife mustve been twelve inches .and he looked at me and I looked at him and then I yelled and he scampered .Why though ?Ron added to Harry as the group of secondyear girls who had been listening to his chilling tale departed .Why did he run ?Harry had been wondering the same thing .Why had Black having got the wrong bed not silenced Ron and proceeded to Harry ?Black had proved twelve years ago that he didnt mind murdering innocent people and this time he had been facing five unarmed boys four of whom were asleep .He mustve known hed have a job getting back out of the castle once youd yelled and woken people up said Harry thoughtfully .Hedve had to kill the whole House to get back through the portrait hole .then he wouldve met the teachers .Neville was in total disgrace .Professor McGonagall was so furious with him she had banned him from all future Hogsmeade visits given him a detention and forbidden anyone to give him the password into the tower .Poor Neville was forced to wait outside the common room every night for somebody to let him in while the security trolls leered unpleasantly at him .None of these punishments however came close to matching the one his grandmother had in store for him .Two days after Blacks breakin she sent Neville the very worst thing a Hogwarts student could receive over breakfast a Howler .The school owls swooped into the Great Hall carrying the mail as usual and Neville choked as a huge barn owl landed in front of him a scarlet envelope clutched in its beak .Harry and Ron who were sitting opposite him recognized the letter as a Howler at once Ron had got one from his mother the year before .Run for it Neville Ron advised .Neville didnt need telling twice .He seized the envelope and holding it before him like a bomb sprinted out of the hall while the Slytherin table exploded with laughter at the sight of him .They heard the Howler go off in the entrance hall Nevilles grandmothers voice magically magnified to a hundred times its usual volume shrieking about how he had brought shame on the whole family .Harry was too busy feeling sorry for Neville to notice immediately that he had a letter too .Hedwig got his attention by nipping him sharply on the wrist .Ouch !Oh thanks Hedwig .Harry tore open the envelope while Hedwig helped herself to some of Nevilles cornflakes .The note inside said Dear Harry and Ron How about having tea with me this afternoon round six ?Ill come and collect you from the castle .WAIT FOR ME IN THE ENTRANCE HALL YOURE NOT ALLOWED OUT ON YOUR OWN Cheers Hagrid He probably wants to hear all about Black !said Ron .So at six oclock that afternoon Harry and Ron left Gryffindor Tower passed the security trolls at a run and headed down to the entrance hall .Hagrid was already waiting for them .All right Hagrid !said Ron .Spose you want to hear about Saturday night do you ?Ive already heard all abou it said Hagrid opening the front doors and leading them outside .Oh said Ron looking slightly put out .The first thing they saw on entering Hagrids cabin was Buckbeak who was stretched out on top of Hagrids patchwork quilt his enormous wings folded tight to his body enjoying a large plate of dead ferrets .Averting his eyes from this unpleasant sight Harry saw a gigantic hairy brown suit and a very horrible yellowandorange tie hanging from the top of Hagrids wardrobe door .What are they for Hagrid ?said Harry .Buckbeaks case against the Committee fer the Disposal o Dangerous Creatures said Hagrid .This Friday .Him an mell be goin down ter London together .Ive booked two beds on the Knight Bus .Harry felt a nasty pang of guilt .He had completely forgotten that Buckbeaks trial was so near and judging by the uneasy look on Rons face he had too .They had also forgotten their promise about helping him prepare Buckbeaks defense the arrival of the Firebolt had driven it clean out of their minds .Hagrid poured them tea and offered them a plate of Bath buns but they knew better than to accept they had had too much experience with Hagrids cooking .I got somethin ter discuss with you two said Hagrid sitting himself between them and looking uncharacteristically serious .What ?said Harry .Hermione said Hagrid .What about her ?said Ron .Shes in a righ state thats what .Shes bin cornin down ter visit me a lot since Chris mas .Bin feelin lonely .Firs yeh weren talking to her because o the Firebolt now yer not talkin to her because her cat ate Scabbers !Ron interjected angrily .Because her cat acted like all cats do Hagrid continued doggedly .Shes cried a fair few times yeh know .Goin through a rough time at the moment .Bitten off moren she can chew if yeh ask me all the work shes tryin ter do .Still found time ter help me with Buckbeaks case mind .Shes found some really good stuff fer me .reckon hell stand a good chance now .Hagrid we shouldve helped as well sorry Harry began awkwardly .Im not blamin yeh !said Hagrid waving Harrys apology aside .Gawd knows yehve had enough ter be gettin on with .Ive seen yeh practicin Quidditch evry hour o the day an night but I gotta tell yeh I thought you twod value yer friend moren broomsticks or rats .Thas all .Harry and Ron exchanged uncomfortable looks .Really upset she was when Black nearly stabbed yeh Ron .Shes got her heart in the right place Hermione has an you two not talkin to her If shed just get rid of that cat Id speak to her again !Ron said angrily .But shes still sticking up for it !Its a maniac and she wont hear a word against it !Ah well people can be a bit stupid abou their pets said Hagrid wisely .Behind him Buckbeak spat a few ferret bones onto Hagrids pillow .They spent the rest of their visit discussing Gryffindors improved chances for the Quidditch Cup .At nine oclock Hagrid walked them back up to the castle .A large group of people was bunched around the bulletin board when they returned to the common room .Hogsmeade next weekend !said Ron craning over the heads to read the new notice .What dyou reckon ?he added quietly to Harry as they went to sit down .Well Filch hasnt done anything about the passage into Honeydukes .Harry said even more quietly .Harry !said a voice in his right ear .Harry started and looked around at Hermione who was sitting at the table right behind them and clearing a space in the wall of books that had been hiding her .Harry if you go into Hogsmeade again .Ill tell Professor McGonagall about that map !said Hermione .Can you hear someone talking Harry ?growled Ron not looking at Hermione .Ron how can you let him go with you ?After what Sirius Black nearly did to youl I mean it Ill tell So now youre trying to get Harry expelled !said Ron furiously .Havent you done enough damage this year ?Hermione opened her mouth to respond but with a soft hiss Crookshanks leapt onto her lap .Hermione took one frightened look at the expression on Rons face gathered up Crookshanks and hurried away toward the girls dormitories .So how about it ?Ron said to Harry as though there had been no interruption .Come on last time we went you didnt see anything .You havent even been inside Zonkos yet !Harry looked around to check that Hermione was well out of earshot .Okay he said .But Im taking the Invisibility Cloak this time .On Saturday morning Harry packed his Invisibility Cloak in his bag slipped the Marauders Map into his pocket and went down to breakfast with everyone else .Hermione kept shooting suspicious looks down the table at him but he avoided her eye and was careful to let her see him walking back up the marble staircase in the entrance hall as everybody else proceeded to the front doors .Bye !Harry called to Ron .See you when you get back !Ron grinned and winked .Harry hurried up to the third floor slipping the Marauders Map out of his pocket as he went .Crouching behind the oneeyed witch he smoothed it out .A tiny dot was moving in his direction .Harry squinted at it .The minuscule writing next to it read Neville Longbottom .Harry quickly pulled out his wand muttered Dissendium .and shoved his bag into the statue but before he could climb in himself Neville came around the corner .Harry !I forgot you werent going to Hogsmeade either !Hi Neville said Harry moving swiftly away from the statue and pushing the map back into his pocket .What are you up to ?Nothing shrugged Neville .Want a game of Exploding Snap ?Er not now I was going to go to the library and do that vampire essay for Lupin Ill come with you !said Neville brightly .I havent done it either !Er hang on yeah I forgot I finished it last night !Great you can help me !said Neville his round face anxious .I dont understand that thing about the garlic at all do they have to eat it or He broke off with a small gasp looking over Harrys shoulder .It was Snape .Neville took a quick step behind Harry .And what are you two doing here ?said Snape coming to a halt and looking from one to the other .An odd place to meet To Harrys immense disquiet Snapes black eyes flicked to the doorways on either side of them and then to the oneeyed witch .Were not meeting here said Harry .We just met here .Indeed ?said Snape .You have a habit of turning up in unexpected places Potter and you are very rarely there for no good reason .I suggest the pair of you return to Gryffindor Tower where you belong .Harry and Neville set off without another word .As they turned the corner Harry looked back .Snape was running one of his hands over the oneeyed witchs head examining it closely .Harry managed to shake Neville off at the Fat Lady by telling him the password then pretending hed left his vampire essay in the library and doubling back .Once out of sight of the security trolls he pulled out the map again and held it close to his nose .The third floor corridor seemed to be deserted .Harry scanned the map carefully and saw with a leap of relief that the tiny dot labeled Severus Snape was now back in its office .He sprinted back to the oneeyed witch opened her hump heaved himself inside and slid down to meet his bag at the bottom of the stone chute .He wiped the Marauders Map blank again then set off at a run .Harry completely hidden beneath the Invisibility Cloak emerged into the sunlight outside Honeydukes and prodded Ron in the back .Its me he muttered .What kept you ?Ron hissed .Snape was hanging around .They set off up the High Street .Where are you ?Ron kept muttering out of the corner of his mouth .Are you still there ?This feels weird .They went to the post office Ron pretended to be checking the price of an owl to Bill in Egypt so that Harry could have a good look around .The owls sat hooting softly down at him at least three hundred of them from Great Grays right down to tiny little Scops owls Local Deliveries Only which were so small they could have sat in the palm of Harrys hand .Then they visited Zonkos which was so packed with students Harry had to exercise great care not to tread on anyone and cause a panic .There were jokes and tricks to fulfill even Freds and Georges wildest dreams Harry gave Ron whispered orders and passed him some gold from under the cloak .They left Zonkos with their money bags considerably lighter than they had been on entering but their pockets bulging with Dungbombs Hiccup Sweets Frog Spawn Soap and a NoseBiting Teacup apiece .The day was fine and breezy and neither of them felt like staying indoors so they walked past the Three Broomsticks and climbed a slope to visit the Shrieking Shack the most haunted dwelling in Britain .It stood a little way above the rest of the village and even in daylight was slightly creepy with its boarded windows and dank overgrown garden .Even the Hogwarts ghosts avoid it said Ron as they leaned on the fence looking up at it .I asked Nearly Headless Nick .he says hes heard a very rough crowd lives here .No one can get in .Fred and George tried obviously but all the entrances are sealed shut .Harry feeling hot from their climb was just considering taking off the cloak for a few minutes when they heard voices nearby .Someone was climbing toward the house from the other side of the hill moments later Malfoy had appeared followed closely by Crabbe and Goyle .Malfoy was speaking . .should have an owl from Father any time now .He had to go to the hearing to tell them about my arm .about how I couldnt use it for three months .Crabbe and Goyle sniggered .I really wish I could hear that great hairy moron trying to defend himself .Theres no arm in im onest .that hippogriffs as good as dead Malfoy suddenly caught sight of Ron .His pale face split in a malevolent grin .What are you doing Weasley ?Malfoy looked up at the crumbling house behind Ron .Suppose youd love to live here wouldnt you Weasley ?Dreaming about having your own bedroom ?I heard your family all sleep in one room is that true ?Harry seized the back of Rons robes to stop him from leaping on Malfoy .Leave him to me he hissed in Rons ear .The opportunity was too perfect to miss .Harry crept silently around behind Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle bent down and scooped a large handful of mud out of the path .We were just discussing your friend Hagrid Malfoy said to Ron .Just trying to imagine what hes saying to the Committee for the Disposal of Dangerous Creatures .Dyou think hell cry when they cut off his hippogriffs SPLAT .Malfoys head jerked forward as the mud hit him his silverblond hair was suddenly dripping in muck .What the ?Ron had to hold onto the fence to keep himself standing he was laughing so hard .Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle spun stupidly on the spot staring wildly around Malfoy trying to wipe his hair clean .What was that ?Who did that ?Very haunted up here isnt it ?said Ron with the air of one commenting on the weather .Crabbe and Goyle were looking scared .Their bulging muscles were no use against ghosts .Malfoy was staring madly around at the deserted landscape .Harry sneaked along the path where a particularly sloppy puddle yielded some foulsmelling green sludge .SPLATTER .Crabbe and Goyle caught some this time .Goyle hopped furiously on the spot trying to rub it out of his small dull eyes .It came from over there !said Malfoy wiping his face and staring at a spot some six feet to the left of Harry .Crabbe blundered forward his long arms outstretched like a zombie .Harry dodged around him picked up a stick and lobbed it at Crabbe s back .Harry doubled up with silent laughter as Crabbe did a kind of pirouette in midair trying to see who had thrown it .As Ron was the only person Crabbe could see it was Ron he started toward but Harry stuck out his leg .Crabbe stumbled and his huge flat foot caught the hem of Harrys cloak .Harry felt a great tug then the cloak slid off his face .For a split second Malfoy stared at him .aaRGH !he yelled pointing at Harrys head .Then he turned tail and ran at breakneck speed back down the hill Crabbe and Goyle behind him .Harry tugged the cloak up again but the damage was done .Harry !Ron said stumbling forward and staring hopelessly at the point where Harry had disappeared youd better run for it !If Malfoy tells anyone youd better get back to the castle quick See you later said Harry and without another word he tore back down the path toward Hogsmeade .Would Malfoy believe what he had seen ?Would anyone believe Malfoy ?Nobody knew about the Invisibility Cloak nobody except Dumbledore .Harrys stomach turned over Dumbledore would know exactly what had happened if Malfoy said anything Back into Honeydukes back down the cellar steps across the stone floor through the trapdoor Harry pulled off the cloak tucked it under his arm and ran flat out along the passage .Malfoy would get back first .how long would it take him to find a teacher ?Panting a sharp pain in his side Harry didnt slow down until he reached the stone slide .He would have to leave the cloak where it was it was too much of a giveaway in case Malfoy had tipped off a teacher he hid it in a shadowy corner then started to climb fast as he could his sweaty hands slipping on the sides of the chute .He reached the inside of the witchs hump tapped it with his wand stuck his head through and hoisted himself out the hump closed and just as Harry jumped out from behind the statue he heard quick footsteps approaching .It was Snape .He approached Harry at a swift walk his black robes swishing then stopped in front of him .So he said .There was a look of suppressed triumph about him .Harry tried to look innocent all too aware of his sweaty face and his muddy hands which he quickly hid in his pockets .Come with me Potter said Snape .Harry followed him downstairs trying to wipe his hands clean on the inside of his robes without Snape noticing .They walked down the stairs to the dungeons and then into Snapes office .Harry had been in here only once before and he had been in very serious trouble then too .Snape had acquired a few more slimy horrible things in jars since last time all standing on shelves behind his desk glinting in the firelight and adding to the threatening atmosphere .Sit said Snape .Harry sat .Snape however remained standing .Mr Malfoy has just been to see me with a strange story Potter said Snape .Harry didnt say anything .He tells me that he was up by the Shrieking Shack when he ran into Weasley apparently alone .Still Harry didnt speak .Mr Malfoy states that he was standing talking to Weasley when a large amount of mud hit him in the back of the head .How do you think that could have happened ?Harry tried to look mildly surprised .I dont know Professor .Snapes eyes were boring into Harrys .It was exactly like trying to stare down a hippogriff .Harry tried hard not to blink .Mr Malfoy then saw an extraordinary apparition .Can you imagine what it might have been Potter ?No said Harry now trying to sound innocently curious .It was your head Potter .Floating in midair .There was a long silence .Maybe hed better go to Madam Pomfrey said Harry .If hes seeing things like What would your head have been doing in Hogsmeade Potter ?said Snape softly .Your head is not allowed in Hogsmeade .No part of your body has permission to be in Hogsmeade .I know that said Harry striving to keep his face free of guilt or fear .It sounds like Malfoys having hallucin Malfoy is not having hallucinations snarled Snape and he bent down a hand on each arm of Harrys chair so that their faces were a foot apart .If your head was in Hogsmeade so was the rest of you .Ive been up in Gryffindor Tower said Harry .Like you told Can anyone confirm that ?Harry didnt say anything .Snapes thin mouth curled into a horrible smile .So he said straightening up again .Everyone from the Minister of Magic downward has been trying to keep famous Harry Potter safe from Sirius Black .But famous Harry Potter is a law unto himself .Let the ordinary people worry about his safety !Famous Harry Potter goes where he wants to with no thought for the consequences .Harry stayed silent .Snape was trying to provoke him into telling the truth .He wasnt going to do it .Snape had no proof yet .How extraordinarily like your father you are Potter Snape said suddenly his eyes glinting .He too was exceedingly arrogant .A small amount of talent on the Quidditch field made him think he was a cut above the rest of us too .Strutting around the place with his friends and admirers .The resemblance between you is uncanny .My dad didnt strut said Harry before he could stop himself .And neither do I .Your father didnt set much store by rules either Snape went on pressing his advantage his thin face full of malice .Rules were for lesser mortals not Quidditch Cupwinners .His head was so swollen SHUT UP !Harry was suddenly on his feet .Rage such as he had not felt since his last night in Privet Drive was coursing through him .He didnt care that Snapes face had gone rigid the black eyes flashing dangerously .What did you say to me Potter ?I told you to shut up about my dad !Harry yelled .I know the truth all right ?He saved your life !Dumbledore told me !You wouldnt even be here if it wasnt for my dad !Snapes sallow skin had gone the color of sour milk .And did the headmaster tell you the circumstances in which your father saved my life ?he whispered .Or did he consider the details too unpleasant for precious Potters delicate ears ?Harry bit his lip .He didnt know what had happened and didnt want to admit it but Snape seemed to have guessed the truth .I would hate for you to run away with a false idea of your father Potter he said a terrible grin twisting his face .Have you been imagining some act of glorious heroism ?Then let me correct you your saintly father and his friends played a highly amusing joke on me that would have resulted in my death if your father hadnt got cold feet at the last moment .There was nothing brave about what he did .He was saving his own skin as much as mine .Had their joke succeeded he would have been expelled from Hogwarts .Snapes uneven yellowish teeth were bared .Turn out your pockets Potter !he spat suddenly .Harry didnt move .There was a pounding in his ears .Turn out your pockets or we go straight to the headmaster !Pull them out Potter !Cold with dread Harry slowly pulled out the bag of Zonkos tricks and the Marauders Map .Snape picked up the Zonkos bag .Ron gave them to me said Harry praying hed get a chance to tip Ron off before Snape saw him .He brought them back from Hogsmeade last time Indeed ?And youve been carrying them around ever since ?How very touching .and what is this ?Snape had picked up the map .Harry tried with all his might to keep his face impassive .Spare bit of parchment he said with a shrug .Snape turned it over his eyes on Harry .Surely you dont need such a very old piece of parchment ?he said .Why dont I just throw this away ?His hand moved toward the fire .No !Harry said quickly .So !said Snape his long nostrils quivering .Is this another treasured gift from Mr Weasley ?Or is it something else ?A letter perhaps written in invisible ink ?Or instructions to get into Hogsmeade without passing the dementors ?Harry blinked .Snape s eyes gleamed .Let me see let me see .he muttered taking out his wand and smoothing the map out on his desk .Reveal your secret !he said touching the wand to the parchment .Nothing happened .Harry clenched his hands to stop them from shaking .Show yourself !Snape said tapping the map sharply .It stayed blank .Harry was taking deep calming breaths .Professor Severus Snape master of this school commands you to yield the information you conceal !Snape said hitting the map with his wand .As though an invisible hand were writing upon it words appeared on the smooth surface of the map .Mr Moony presents his compliments to Professor Snape and begs him to keep his abnormally large nose out of other peoples business .Snape froze .Harry stared dumbstruck at the message .But the map didnt stop there .More writing was appearing beneath the first .Mr Prongs agrees with Mr Moony and would like to add that Professor Snape is an ugly git .It would have been very funny if the situation hadnt been so serious .And there was more .Mr Padfoot would like to register his astonishment that an idiot like that ever became a professor .Harry closed his eyes in horror .When hed opened them the map had had its last word .Mr Wormtail bids Professor Snape good day and advises him to wash his hair the slimeball .Harry waited for the blow to fall .So .said Snape softly .Well see about this .He strode across to his fire seized a fistful of glittering powder from ajar on the fireplace and threw it into the flames .Lupin !Snape called into the fire .I want a word !Utterly bewildered Harry stared at the fire .A large shape had appeared in it revolving very fast .Seconds later Professor Lupin was clambering out of the fireplace brushing ash off his shabby robes .You called Severus ?said Lupin mildly .I certainly did said Snape his face contorted with fury as he strode back to his desk .I have just asked Potter to empty his pockets .He was carrying this .Snape pointed at the parchment on which the words of Messrs .Moony Wormtail Padfoot and Prongs were still shining .An odd closed expression appeared on Lupins face .Well ?said Snape .Lupin continued to stare at the map .Harry had the impression that Lupin was doing some very quick thinking .Well ?said Snape again .This parchment is plainly full of Dark Magic .This is supposed to be your area of expertise Lupin .Where do you imagine Potter got such a thing ?Lupin looked up and by the merest halfglance in Harrys direction warned him not to interrupt .Full of Dark Magic ?he repeated mildly .Do you really think so Severus ?It looks to me as though it is merely a piece of parchment that insults anybody who reads it .Childish but surely not dangerous ?I imagine Harry got it from a joke shop Indeed ?said Snape .His jaw had gone rigid with anger .You think a joke shop could supply him with such a thing ?You dont think it more likely that he got it directly from the manufacturers ?Harry didnt understand what Snape was talking about .Nor apparently did Lupin .You mean by Mr Wormtail or one of these people ?he said .Harry do you know any of these men ?No said Harry quickly .You see Severus ?said Lupin turning back to Snape .It looks like a Zonko product to me Right on cue Ron came bursting into the office .He was completely out of breath and stopped just short of Snape s desk clutching the stitch in his chest and trying to speak .I gave Harry that stuff he choked .Bought it .in Zonko s .ages ago .Well !said Lupin clapping his hands together and looking around cheerfully .That seems to clear that up !Severus Ill take this back shall I ?He folded the map and tucked it inside his robes .Harry Ron come with me I need a word about my vampire essay excuse us Severus Harry didnt dare look at Snape as they left his office .He Ron and Lupin walked all the way back into the entrance hall before speaking .Then Harry turned to Lupin .Professor I I dont want to hear explanations said Lupin shortly .He glanced around the empty entrance hall and lowered his voice .I happen to know that this map was confiscated by Mr Filch many years ago .Yes I know its a map he said as Harry and Ron looked amazed .I dont want to know how it fell into your possession .I am however astounded that you didnt hand it in .Particularly after what happened the last time a student left information about the castle lying around .And I cant let you have it back Harry .Harry had expected that and was too keen for explanations to protest .Why did Snape think Id got it from the manufacturers ?Because .Lupin hesitated because these mapmakers would have wanted to lure you out of school .Theyd think it extremely entertaining .Do you know them ?said Harry impressed .Weve met he said shortly .He was looking at Harry more seriously than ever before .Dont expect me to cover up for you again Harry .I cannot make you take Sirius Black seriously .But I would have thought that what you have heard when the dementors draw near you would have had more of an effect on you .Your parents gave their lives to keep you alive Harry .A poor way to repay them gambling their sacrifice for a bag of magic tricks .He walked away leaving Harry feeling worse by far than he had at any point in Snape s office .Slowly he and Ron mounted the marble staircase .As Harry passed the oneeyed witch he remembered the Invisibility Cloak it was still down there but he didnt dare go and get it .Its my fault said Ron abruptly .I persuaded you to go .Lupins right it was stupid we shouldntve done it He broke off they reached the corridor where the security trolls were pacing and Hermione was walking toward them .One look at her face convinced Harry that she had heard what had happened .His heart plummeted had she told Professor McGonagall ?Come to have a good gloat ?said Ron savagely as she stopped in front of them .Or have you just been to tell on us ?No said Hermione .She was holding a letter in her hands and her lip was trembling .I just thought you ought to know .Hagrid lost his case .Buckbeak is going to be executed .THE QUIDDITCH FINAL He he sent me this Hermione said holding out the letter .Harry took it .The parchment was damp and enormous teardrops had smudged the ink so badly in places that it was very difficult to read .Dear Hermione We lost Im allowed to bring him back to Hogwarts .Execution date to be fixed .Beaky has enjoyed London .I wont forget all the help you gave us .Hagrid They cant do this said Harry .They cant .Buckbeak isnt dangerous .Malfoys dads frightened the Committee into it said Hermione wiping her eyes .You know what hes like .Theyre a bunch of doddery old fools and they were scared .Therell be an appeal though there always is .Only I cant see any hope .Nothing will have changed .Yeah it will said Ron fiercely .You wont have to do all the work alone this time Hermione .Ill help .Oh Ron !Hermione flung her arms around Rons neck and broke down completely .Ron looking quite terrified patted her very awkwardly on the top of the head .Finally Hermione drew away .Ron Im really really sorry about Scabbers .she sobbed .Oh well he was old said Ron looking thoroughly relieved that she had let go of him .And he was a bit useless .You never know Mum and Dad might get me an owl now .The safety measures imposed on the students since Blacks second breakin made it impossible for Harry Ron and Hermione to go and visit Hagrid in the evenings .Their only chance of talking to him was during Care of Magical Creatures lessons .He seemed numb with shock at the verdict .Sall my fault .Got all tonguetied .They was all sittin there in black robes an I kep droppin me notes and forgettin all them dates yeh looked up fer me Hermione .An then Lucius Malfoy stood up an said his bit and the Committee jus did exacly what he told em .Theres still the appeal !said Ron fiercely .Dont give up yet were working on it !They were walking back up to the castle with the rest of the class .Ahead they could see Malfoy who was walking with Crabbe and Goyle and kept looking back laughing derisively .Sno good Ron said Hagrid sadly as they reached the castle steps .That Committees in Lucius Malfoy s pocket .Im jus gonna make sure the rest o Beakys time is the happiest hes ever had .I owe him that .Hagrid turned around and hurried back toward his cabin his face buried in his handkerchief .Look at him blubber !Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle had been standing just inside the castle doors listening .Have you ever seen anything quite as pathetic ?said Malfoy .And hes supposed to be our teacher !Harry and Ron both made furious moves toward Malfoy but Hermione got there first SMACK !She had slapped Malfoy across the face with all the strength she could muster .Malfoy staggered .Harry Ron Crabbe and Goyle stood flabbergasted as Hermione raised her hand again .Dont you dare call Hagrid pathetic you foul you evil Hermione !said Ron weakly and he tried to grab her hand as she swung it back .Get off Ron !Hermione pulled out her wand .Malfoy stepped backward .Crabbe and Goyle looked at him for instructions thoroughly bewildered .Cmon Malfoy muttered and in a moment all three of them had disappeared into the passageway to the dungeons .Hermionel Ron said again sounding both stunned and impressed .Harry youd better beat him in the Quidditch final !Hermione said shrilly .You just better had because I cant stand it if Slytherin wins !Were due in Charms said Ron still goggling at Hermione .Wed better go .They hurried up the marble staircase toward Professor Flitwicks classroom .Youre late boys !said Professor Flitwick reprovingly as Harry opened the classroom door .Come along quickly wands out were experimenting with Cheering Charms today weve already divided into pairs Harry and Ron hurried to a desk at the back and opened their bags .Ron looked behind him .Wheres Hermione gone ?Harry looked around too .Hermione hadnt entered the classroom yet Harry knew she had been right next to him when he had opened the door .Thats weird said Harry staring at Ron .Maybe maybe she went to the bathroom or something ?But Hermione didnt turn up all lesson .She couldve done with a Cheering Charm on her too said Ron as the class left for lunch all grinning broadly the Cheering Charms had left them with a feeling of great contentment .Hermione wasnt at lunch either .By the time they had finished their apple pie the aftereffects of the Cheering Charms were wearing off and Harry and Ron had started to get slightly worried .You dont think Malfoy did something to her ?Ron said anxiously as they hurried upstairs toward Gryffindor Tower .They passed the security trolls gave the Fat Lady the password Flibbertigibbet and scrambled through the portrait hole into the common room .Hermione was sitting at a table fast asleep her head resting on an open Arithmancy book .They went to sit down on either side of her .Harry prodded her awake .Wh what ?said Hermione waking with a start and staring wildly around .Is it time to go ?W which lesson have we got now ?Divination but its not for another twenty minutes said Harry .Hermione why didnt you come to Charms ?What ?Oh no !Hermione squeaked .I forgot to go to Charms !But how could you forget ?said Harry .You were with us till we were right outside the classroom !I dont believe it !Hermione wailed .Was Professor Flitwick angry ?Oh it was Malfoy I was thinking about him and I lost track of things !You know what Hermione ?said Ron looking down at the enormous Arithmancy book Hermione had been using as a pillow .I reckon youre cracking up .Youre trying to do too much .No Im not !said Hermione brushing her hair out of her eyes and staring hopelessly around for her bag .I just made a mistake thats all !Id better go and see Professor Flitwick and say sorry .Ill see you in Divination !Hermione joined them at the foot of the ladder to Professor Trelawneys classroom twenty minutes later looking extremely harassed .I cant believe I missed Cheering Charms !And I bet they come up in our exams Professor Flitwick hinted they might !Together they climbed the ladder into the dim stifling tower room .Glowing on every little table was a crystal ball full of pearly white mist .Harry Ron and Hermione sat down together at the same rickety table .I thought we werent starting crystal balls until next term Ron muttered casting a wary eye around for Professor Trelawney in case she was lurking nearby .Dont complain this means weve finished palmistry Harry muttered back .I was getting sick of her flinching every time she looked at my hands .Good day to you !said the familiar misty voice and Professor Trelawney made her usual dramatic entrance out of the shadows .Parvati and Lavender quivered with excitement their faces lit by the milky glow of their crystal ball .I have decided to introduce the crystal ball a little earlier than I had planned said Professor Trelawney sitting with her back to the fire and gazing around .The fates have informed me that your examination in June will concern the Orb and I am anxious to give you sufficient practice .Hermione snorted .Well honestly . ‘the fates have informed her .who sets the exam ?She does !What an amazing prediction !she said not troubling to keep her voice low .Harry and Ron choked back laughs .It was hard to tell whether Professor Trelawney had heard them as her face was hidden in shadow .She continued however as though she had not .Crystal gazing is a particularly refined art she said dreamily .I do not expect any of you to See when first you peer into the Orbs infinite depths .We shall start by practicing relaxing the conscious mind and external eyes Ron began to snigger uncontrollably and had to stuff his fist in his mouth to stifle the noise so as to clear the Inner Eye and the superconscious .Perhaps if we are lucky some of you will See before the end of the class .And so they began .Harry at least felt extremely foolish staring blankly at the crystal ball trying to keep his mind empty when thoughts such as this is stupid kept drifting across it .It didnt help that Ron kept breaking into silent giggles and Hermione kept tutting .Seen anything yet ?Harry asked them after a quarter of an hours quiet crystal gazing .Yeah theres a burn on this table said Ron pointing .Someones spilled their candle .This is such a waste of time Hermione hissed .I could be practicing something useful .I could be catching up on Cheering Charms Professor Trelawney rustled past .Would anyone like me to help them interpret the shadowy portents within their Orb ?she murmured over the clinking of her bangles .I dont need help Ron whispered .Its obvious what this means .Theres going to be loads of fog tonight .Both Harry and Hermione burst out laughing .Now really !said Professor Trelawney as everyones heads turned in their direction .Parvati and Lavender were looking scandalized .You are disturbing the clairvoyant vibrations !She approached their table and peered into their crystal ball .Harry felt his heart sinking .He was sure he knew what was coming There is something here !Professor Trelawney whispered lowering her face to the ball so that it was reflected twice in her huge glasses .Something moving .but what is it ?Harry was prepared to bet everything he owned including his Firebolt that it wasnt good news whatever it was .And sure enough My dear .Professor Trelawney breathed gazing up at Harry .It is here plainer than ever before .my dear stalking toward you growing ever closer .the Gr Oh for goodness sake !said Hermione loudly .Not that ridiculous Grim again Professor Trelawney raised her enormous eyes to Hermione s face .Parvati whispered something to Lavender and they both glared at Hermione too .Professor Trelawney stood up surveying Hermione with unmistakable anger .I am sorry to say that from the moment you have arrived in this class my dear it has been apparent that you do not have what the noble art of Divination requires .Indeed I dont remember ever meeting a student whose mind was so hopelessly mundane .There was a moments silence .Then Fine !said Hermione suddenly getting up and cramming Unfogging the Future back into her bag .Fine !she repeated swinging the bag over her shoulder and almost knocking Ron off his chair .I give up !Im leaving !And to the whole classs amazement Hermione strode over to the trapdoor kicked it open and climbed down the ladder out of sight .It took a few minutes for the class to settle down again .Professor Trelawney seemed to have forgotten all about the Grim .She turned abruptly from Harry and Rons table breathing rather heavily as she tugged her gauzy shawl more closely to her .Ooooo !said Lavender suddenly making everyone start .Oooooo Professor Trelawney Ive just remembered !You saw her leaving didnt you ?Didnt you Professor ? ‘Around Easter one of our number will leave us forever .You said it ages ago Professor !Professor Trelawney gave her a dewy smile .Yes my dear I did indeed know that Miss Granger would be leaving us .One hopes however that one might have mistaken the Signs .The Inner Eye can be a burden you know .Lavender and Parvati looked deeply impressed and moved over so that Professor Trelawney could join their table instead .Some day Hermiones having eh ?Ron muttered to Harry looking awed .Yeah .Harry glanced into the crystal ball but saw nothing but swirling white mist .Had Professor Trelawney really seen the Grim again ?Would he ?The last thing he needed was another nearfatal accident with the Quidditch final drawing ever nearer .The Easter holidays were not exactly relaxing .The third years had never had so much homework .Neville Longbottom seemed close to a nervous collapse and he wasnt the only one .Call this a holiday !Seamus Finnigan roared at the common room one afternoon .The exams are ages away whatre they playing at ?But nobody had as much to do as Hermione .Even without Divination she was taking more subjects than anybody else .She was usually last to leave the common room at night first to arrive at the library the next morning she had shadows like Lupins under her eyes and seemed constantly close to tears .Ron had taken over responsibility for Buckbeaks appeal .When he wasnt doing his own work he was poring over enormously thick volumes with names like The Handbook of Hippogriff Psychology and Fowl or Foul ?A Study of Hippogriff Brutality .He was so absorbed he even forgot to be horrible to Crookshanks .Harry meanwhile had to fit in his homework around Quidditch practice every day not to mention endless discussions of tactics with Wood .The Gryffindor Slytherin match would take place on the first Saturday after the Easter holidays .Slytherin was leading the tournament by exactly two hundred points .This meant as Wood constantly reminded his team that they needed to win the match by more than that amount to win the Cup .It also meant that the burden of winning fell largely on Harry because capturing the Snitch was worth one hundred and fifty points .So you must catch it only if were more than fifty points up Wood told Harry constantly .Only if were more than fifty points up Harry or we win the match but lose the Cup .Youve got that havent you ?You must catch the Snitch only if were I KNOW OLIVER !Harry yelled .The whole of Gryffindor House was obsessed with the coming match .Gryffindor hadnt won the Quidditch Cup since the legendary Charlie Weasley Rons second oldest brother had been Seeker .But Harry doubted whether any of them even Wood wanted to win as much as he did .The enmity between Harry and Malfoy was at its highest point ever .Malfoy was still smarting about the mudthrowing incident in Hogsmeade and was even more furious that Harry had somehow wormed his way out of punishment .Harry hadnt forgotten Malfoys attempt to sabotage him in the match against Ravenclaw but it was the matter of Buckbeak that made him most determined to beat Malfoy in front of the entire school .Never in anyones memory had a match approached in such a highly charged atmosphere .By the time the holidays were over tension between the two teams and their Houses was at the breaking point .A number of small scuffles broke out in the corridors culminating in a nasty incident in which a Gryffindor fourth year and a Slytherin sixth year ended up in the hospital wing with leeks sprouting out of their ears .Harry was having a particularly bad time of it .He couldnt walk to class without Slytherins sticking out their legs and trying to trip him up Crabbe and Goyle kept popping up wherever he went and slouching away looking disappointed when they saw him surrounded by people .Wood had given instructions that Harry should be accompanied everywhere he went in case the Slytherins tried to put him out of action .The whole of Gryffindor House took up the challenge enthusiastically so that it was impossible for Harry to get to classes on time because he was surrounded by a vast chattering crowd .Harry was more concerned for his Firebolts safety than his own .When he wasnt flying it he locked it securely in his trunk and frequently dashed back up to Gryffindor Tower at break times to check that it was still there .All usual pursuits were abandoned in the Gryffindor common room the night before the match .Even Hermione had put down her books .I cant work I cant concentrate she said nervously .There was a great deal of noise .Fred and George Weasley were dealing with the pressure by being louder and more exuberant than ever .Oliver Wood was crouched over a model of a Quidditch field in the corner prodding little figures across it with his wand and muttering to himself .Angelina Alicia and Katie were laughing at Freds and Georges jokes .Harry was sitting with Ron and Hermione removed from the center of things trying not to think about the next day because every time he did he had the horrible sensation that something very large was fighting to get out of his stomach .Youre going to be fine Hermione told him though she looked positively terrified .Youve got a Firebolti said Ron .Yeah .said Harry his stomach writhing .It came as a relief when Wood suddenly stood up and yelled Team !Bed !Harry slept badly .First he dreamed that he had overslept and that Wood was yelling Where were you ?We had to use Neville instead !Then he dreamed that Malfoy and the rest of the Slytherin team arrived for the match riding dragons .He was flying at breakneck speed trying to avoid a spurt of flames from Malfoy s steeds mouth when he realized he had forgotten his Firebolt .He fell through the air and woke with a start .It was a few seconds before Harry remembered that the match hadnt taken place yet that he was safe in bed and that the Slytherin team definitely wouldnt be allowed to play on dragons .He was feeling very thirsty .Quietly as he could he got out of his four poster and went to pour himself some water from the silver jug beneath the window .The grounds were still and quiet .No breath of wind disturbed the treetops in the Forbidden Forest the Whomping Willow was motionless and innocent looking .It looked as though the conditions for the match would be perfect .Harry set down his goblet and was about to turn back to his bed when something caught his eye .An animal of some kind was pacross the silvery lawn .Harry dashed to his bedside table snatched up his glasses and put them on then hurried back to the window .It couldnt be the Grim not now not right before the match He peered out at the grounds again and after a minutes frantic searching spotted it .It was skirting the edge of the forest now .It wasnt the Grim at all .it was a cat .Harry clutched the window ledge in relief as he recognized the bottlebrush tail .It was only Crookshanks .Or was it only Crookshanks ?Harry squinted pressing his nose flat against the glass .Crookshanks seemed to have come to a halt .Harry was sure he could see something else moving in the shadow of the trees too .And just then it emerged a gigantic shaggy black dog moving stealthily across the lawn Crookshanks trotting at its side .Harry stared .What did this mean ?If Crookshanks could see the dog as well how could it be an omen of Harrys death ?Ron !Harry hissed .Ron !Wake up !Huh ?I need you to tell me if you can see something !Sall dark Harry Ron muttered thickly .Whatre you on about ?Down here Harry looked quickly back out of the window .Crookshanks and the dog had vanished .Harry climbed onto the windowsill to look right down into the shadows of the castle but they werent there .Where had they gone ?A loud snore told him Ron had fallen asleep again .Harry and the rest of the Gryffindor team entered the Great Hall the next day to enormous applause .Harry couldnt help grinning broadly as he saw that both the Ravenclaw and Hufflepuff tables were applauding them too .The Slytherin table hissed loudly as they passed .Harry noticed that Malfoy looked even paler than usual .Wood spent the whole of breakfast urging his team to eat while touching nothing himself .Then he hurried them off to the field before anyone else had finished so they could get an idea of the conditions .As they left the Great Hall everyone applauded again .Good luck Harry !called Cho .Harry felt himself blushing .Okay no wind to speak of suns a bit bright that could impair your vision watch out for it grounds fairly hard good thatll give us a fast kickoff ?Wood paced the field staring around with the team behind him .Finally they saw the front doors of the castle open in the distance and the rest of the school spilling onto the lawn .Locker rooms said Wood tersely .None of them spoke as they changed into their scarlet robes .Harry wondered if they were feeling like he was as though hed eaten something extremely wriggly for breakfast .In what seemed like no time at all Wood was saying Okay its time lets go They walked out onto the field to a tidal wave of noise .Threequarters of the crowd was wearing scarlet rosettes waving scarlet flags with the Gryffindor lion upon them or brandishing banners with slogans like GO GRYFFINDOR !and LIONS FOR THE CUP !Behind the Slytherin goal posts however two hundred people were wearing green the silver serpent of Slytherin glittered on their flags and Professor Snape sat in the very front row wearing green like everyone else and a very grim smile .And here are the Gryffindors !yelled Lee Jordan who was acting as commentator as usual .Potter Bell Johnson Spinnet Weasley Weasley and Wood .Widely acknowledged as the best team Hogwarts has seen in a good few years Lees comments were drowned by a tide of boos from the Slytherin end .And here come the Slytherin team led by Captain Flint .Hes made some changes in the lineup and seems to be going for size rather than skill More boos from the Slytherin crowd .Harry however thought Lee had a point .Malfoy was easily the smallest person on the Slytherin team the rest of them were enormous .Captains shake hands !said Madam Hooch .Flint and Wood approached each other and grasped each others hand very tightly it looked as though each was trying to break the others fingers .Mount your brooms !said Madam Hooch .Three .two .one .The sound of her whistle was lost in the roar from the crowd as fourteen brooms rose into the air .Harry felt his hair fly back off his forehead his nerves left him in the thrill of the flight he glanced around saw Malfoy on his tail and sped off in search of the Snitch .And its Gryffindor in possession Alicia Spinnet of Gryffindor with the Quaffle heading straight for the Slytherin goal posts looking good Alicia !Argh no Quaffle intercepted by Warrington Warrington of Slytherin tearing up the field WHAM !nice Bludger work there by George Weasley Warrington drops the Quaffle its caught by Johnson Gryffindor back in possession come on Angelina nice swerve around Montague duck Angelina thats a Bludger SHE SCORES !TENZERO TO GRYFFINDOR !Angelina punched the air as she soared around the end of the field the sea of scarlet below was screaming its delight OUCH !Angelina was nearly thrown from her broom as Marcus Flint went smashing into her .Sorry !said Flint as the crowd below booed .Sorry didnt see her !A moment later Fred Weasley chucked his Beaters club at the back of Flints head .Flints nose smashed into the handle of his broom and began to bleed .That will do !shrieked Madam Hooch zooming between them .Penalty shot to Gryffindor for an unprovoked attack on their Chaser !Penalty shot to Slytherin for deliberate damage to their Chaser !Come off it Miss !howled Fred but Madam Hooch blew her whistle and Alicia flew forward to take the penalty .Come on Alicia !yelled Lee into the silence that had descended on the crowd .YES !SHES BEATEN THE KEEPER !TWENTYZERO TO GRYFFINDOR !Harry turned the Firebolt sharply to watch Flint still bleeding freely fly forward to take the Slytherin penalty .Wood was hovering in front of the Gryffindor goal posts his jaw clenched .Course Woods a superb Keeper !Lee Jordan told the crowd as Flint waited for Madam Hoochs whistle .Superb !Very difficult to pass very difficult indeed YES !I DONT BELIEVE IT !HES SAVED IT !Relieved Harry zoomed away gazing around for the Snitch but still making sure he caught every word of Lees commentary .It was essential that he hold Malfoy off the Snitch until Gryffindor was more than fifty points up Gryffindor in possession no Slytherin in possession no !Gryffindor back in possession and its Katie Bell Katie Bell for Gryffindor with the Quaffle shes streaking up the field THAT WAS DELIBERATE !Montague a Slytherin Chaser had swerved in front of Katie and instead of seizing the Quaffle had grabbed her head .Katie cartwheeled in the air managed to stay on her broom but dropped the Quaffle .Madam Hoochs whistle rang out again as she soared over to Montague and began shouting at him .A minute later Katie had put another penalty past the Slytherin Seeker .THIRTYZERO !TAKE THAT YOU DIRTY CHEATING Jordan if you cant commentate in an unbiased way !Im telling it like it is Professor !Harry felt a huge jolt of excitement .He had seen the Snitch it was shimmering at the foot of one of the Gryffindor goal posts but he mustnt catch it yet and if Malfoy saw it Faking a look of sudden concentration Harry pulled his Firebolt around and sped off toward the Slytherin end it worked .Malfoy went haring after him clearly thinking Harry had seen the Snitch there .WHOOSH .One of the Bludgers came streaking past Harrys right ear hit by the gigantic Slytherin Beater Derrick .Then again WHOOSH .The second Bludger grazed Harrys elbow .The other Beater Bole was closing in .Harry had a fleeting glimpse of Bole and Derrick zooming toward him clubs raised He turned the Firebolt upward at the last second and Bole and Derrick collided with a sickening crunch .Ha haa !yelled Lee Jordan as the Slytherin Beaters lurched away from each other clutching their heads .Too bad boys !Youll need to get up earlier than that to beat a Firebolt !And its Gryffindor in possession again as Johnson takes the Quaffle Flint alongside her poke him in the eye Angelina !it was a joke Professor it was a joke oh no Flint in possession Flint flying toward the Gryffindor goal posts come on now Wood save !But Flint had scored there was an eruption of cheers from the Slytherin end and Lee swore so badly that Professor McGonagall tried to tug the magical megaphone away from him .Sorry Professor sorry !Wont happen again !So Gryffindor in the lead thirty points to ten and Gryffindor in possession It was turning into the dirtiest game Harry had ever played in .Enraged that Gryffindor had taken such an early lead the Slytherins were rapidly resorting to any means to take the Quaffle .Bole hit Alicia with his club and tried to say hed thought she was a Bludger .George Weasley elbowed Bole in the face in retaliation .Madam Hooch awarded both teams penalties and Wood pulled off another spectacular save making the score fortyten to Gryffindor .The Snitch had disappeared again .Malfoy was still keeping close to Harry as he soared over the match looking around for it once Gryffindor was fifty points ahead Katie scored .Fiftyten .Fred and George Weasley were swooping around her clubs raised in case any of the Slytherins were thinking of revenge .Bole and Derrick took advantage of Freds and Georges absence to aim both Bludgers at Wood they caught him in the stomach one after the other and he rolled over in the air clutching his broom completely winded .Madam Hooch was beside herself .YOU DO NOT ATTACK THE KEEPER UNLESS THE QUAFFLE IS WITHIN THE SCORING AREA !she shrieked at Bole and Derrick .Gryffindor penalty !And Angelina scored .Sixtyten .Moments later Fred Weasley pelted a Bludger at Warrington knocking the Quaffle out of his hands Alicia seized it and put it through the Slytherin goal seventyten .The Gryffindor crowd below was screaming itself hoarse Gryffindor was sixty points in the lead and if Harry caught the Snitch now the Cup was theirs .Harry could almost feel hundreds of eyes following him as he soared around the field high above the rest of the game with Malfoy speeding along behind him .And then he saw it .The Snitch was sparkling twenty feet above him .Harry put on a huge burst of speed the wind was roaring in his ears he stretched out his hand but suddenly the Firebolt was slowing down Horrified he looked around .Malfoy had thrown himself forward grabbed hold of the Firebolts tail and was pulling it back .You Harry was angry enough to hit Malfoy but couldnt reach Malfoy was panting with the effort of holding onto the Firebolt but his eyes were sparkling maliciously .He had achieved what hed wanted to do the Snitch had disappeared again .Penalty !Penalty to Gryffindor !Ive never seen such tactics !Madam Hooch screeched shooting up to where Malfoy was sliding back onto his Nimbus Two Thousand and One .YOU CHEATING SCUM !Lee Jordan was howling into the megaphone dancing out of Professor McGonagalls reach .YOU FILTHY CHEATING B Professor McGonagall didnt even bother to tell him off .She was actually shaking her finger in Malfoys direction her hat had fallen off and she too was shouting furiously .Alicia took Gryffindors penalty but she was so angry she missed by several feet .The Gryffindor team was losing concentration and the Slytherins delighted by Malfoys foul on Harry were being spurred on to greater heights .Slytherin in possession Slytherin heading for goal Montague scores Lee groaned .Seventytwenty to Gryffindor .Harry was now marking Malfoy so closely their knees kept hitting each other .Harry wasnt going to let Malfoy anywhere near the Snitch .Get out of it Potter !Malfoy yelled in frustration as he tried to turn and found Harry blocking him .Angelina Johnson gets the Quaffle for Gryffindor come on Angelina COME ON !Harry looked around .Every single Slytherin player apart from Malfoy was streaking up the pitch toward Angelina including the Slytherin Keeper they were all going to block her Harry wheeled the Firebolt around bent so low he was lying flat along the handle and kicked it forward .Like a bullet he shot toward the Slytherins .aaRRRGH !They scattered as the Firebolt zoomed toward them Angelinas way was clear .SHE SCORES !SHE SCORES !Gryffindor leads by eighty points to twenty !Harry who had almost pelted headlong into the stands skidded to a halt in midair reversed and zoomed back into the middle of the field .And then he saw something to make his heart stand still .Malfoy was diving a look of triumph on his face there a few feet above the grass below was a tiny golden glimmer Harry urged the Firebolt downward but Malfoy was miles ahead Go !Go !Go !Harry urged his broom .He was gaining on Malfoy Harry flattened himself to the broom handle as Bole sent a Bludger at him he was at Malfoys ankles he was level Harry threw himself forward took both hands off his broom .He knocked Malfoys arm out of the way and YES !He pulled out of his dive his hand in the air and the stadium exploded .Harry soared above the crowd an odd ringing in his ears .The tiny golden ball was held tight in his fist beating its wings hopelessly against his fingers .Then Wood was speeding toward him halfblinded by tears he seized Harry around the neck and sobbed unrestrainedly into his shoulder .Harry felt two large thumps as Fred and George hit them then Angelinas Alicias and Katies voices Weve won the Cup Weve won the Cup Tangled together in a manyarmed hug the Gryffindor team sank yelling hoarsely back to earth .Wave upon wave of crimson supporters was pouring over the barriers onto the field .Hands were raining down on their backs .Harry had a confused impression of noise and bodies pressing in on him .Then he and the rest of the team were hoisted onto the shoulders of the crowd .Thrust into the light he saw Hagrid plastered with crimson rosettes Yeh beat em Harry yeh beat em !Wait till I tell Buckbeak !There was Percy jumping up and down like a maniac all dignity forgotten .Professor McGonagall was sobbing harder even than Wood wiping her eyes with an enormous Gryffindor flag and there fighting their way toward Harry were Ron and Hermione .Words failed them .They simply beamed as Harry was borne toward the stands where Dumbledore stood waiting with the enormous Quidditch Cup .If only there had been a dementor around .As a sobbing Wood passed Harry the Cup as he lifted it into the air Harry felt he could have produced the worlds best Patronus .PROFESSOR TRELAWNEYS PREDICTION Harrys euphoria at finally winning the Quidditch Cup lasted at least a week .Even the weather seemed to be celebrating as June approached the days became cloudless and sultry and all anybody felt like doing was strolling onto the grounds and flopping down on the grass with several pints of iced pumpkin juice perhaps playing a casual game of Gobstones or watching the giant squid propel itself dreamily across the surface of the lake .But they couldnt .Exams were nearly upon them and instead of lazing around outside the students were forced to remain inside the castle trying to bully their brains into concentrating while enticing wafts of summer air drifted in through the windows .Even Fred and George Weasley had been spotted working they were about to take their O .W .L .s Ordinary Wizarding Levels .Percy was getting ready to take his N .E .W .T .s Nastily Exhausting Wizarding Tests the highest qualification Hogwarts offered .As Percy hoped to enter the Ministry of Magic he needed top grades .He was becoming increasingly edgy and gave very severe punishments to anybody who disturbed the quiet of the common room in the evenings .In fact the only person who seemed more anxious than Percy was Hermione .Harry and Ron had given up asking her how she was managing to attend several classes at once but they couldnt restrain themselves when they saw the exam schedule she had drawn up for herself .The first column read Monday 9 oclock Arithmancy 9 oclock Transfiguration Lunch 1 oclock Charms 1 oclock Ancient Runes Hermione ?Ron said cautiously because she was liable to explode when interrupted these days .Er are you sure youve copied down these times right ?What ?snapped Hermione picking up the exam schedule and examining it .Yes of course I have .Is there any point asking how youre going to sit for two exams at once ?said Harry .No said Hermione shortly .Have either of you seen my copy of Numerology and Gramatica ?Oh yeah I borrowed it for a bit of bedtime reading said Ron but very quietly .Hermione started shifting heaps of parchment around on her table looking for the book .Just then there was a rustle at the window and Hedwig fluttered through it a note clutched tight in her beak .Its from Hagrid said Harry ripping the note open .Buckbeaks appeal its set for the sixth .Thats the day we finish our exams said Hermione still looking everywhere for her Arithmancy book .And theyre coming up here to do it said Harry still reading from the letter .Someone from the Ministry of Magic and and an executioner .Hermione looked up startled .Theyre bringing the executioner to the appeal !But that sounds as though theyve already decided !Yeah it does said Harry slowly .They cant !Ron howled .Ive spent ages reading up on stuff for him they cant just ignore it all !But Harry had a horrible feeling that the Committee for the Disposal of Dangerous Creatures had had its mind made up for it by Mr Malfoy .Draco who had been noticeably subdued since Gryffindors triumph in the Quidditch final seemed to regain some of his old swagger over the next few days .From sneering comments Harry overheard Malfoy was certain Buckbeak was going to be killed and seemed thoroughly pleased with himself for bringing it about .It was all Harry could do to stop himself imitating Hermione and hitting Malfoy in the face on these occasions .And the worst thing of all was that they had no time or opportunity to go and see Hagrid because the strict new security measures had not been lifted and Harry didnt dare retrieve his Invisibility Cloak from below the oneeyed witch .k k k Exam week began and an unnatural hush fell over the castle .The third years emerged from Transfiguration at lunchtime on Monday limp and ashenfaced comparing results and bemoaning the difficulty of the tasks they had been set which had included turning a teapot into a tortoise .Hermione irritated the rest by fussing about how her tortoise had looked more like a turtle which was the least of everyone elses worries .Mine still had a spout for a tail what a nightmare .Were the tortoises supposed to breathe steam ?It still had a willowpatterned shell dyou think that 11 count against me ?Then after a hasty lunch it was straight back upstairs for the Charms exam .Hermione had been right Professor Flitwick did indeed test them on Cheering Charms .Harry slightly overdid his out of nerves and Ron who was partnering him ended up in fits of hysterical laughter and had to be led away to a quiet room for an hour before he was ready to perform the charm himself .After dinner the students hurried back to their common rooms not to relax but to start studying for Care of Magical Creatures Potions and Astronomy .Hagrid presided over the Care of Magical Creatures exam the following morning with a very preoccupied air indeed his heart didnt seem to be in it at all .He had provided a large tub of fresh flobberworms for the class and told them that to pass the test their flobberworm had to still be alive at the end of one hour .As flobberworms flourished best if left to their own devices it was the easiest exam any of them had ever taken and also gave Harry Ron and Hermione plenty of opportunity to speak to Hagrid .Beakys gettin a bit depressed Hagrid told them bending low on the pretense of checking that Harrys flobberworm was still alive .Bin cooped up too long .But still .well know day after tomorrow one way or the other They had Potions that afternoon which was an unqualified disaster .Try as Harry might he couldnt get his Confusing Concoction to thicken and Snape standing watch with an air of vindictive pleasure scribbled something that looked suspiciously like a zero onto his notes before moving away .Then came Astronomy at midnight up on the tallest tower History of Magic on Wednesday morning in which Harry scribbled everything Florean Fortescue had ever told him about medieval witchhunts while wishing he could have had one of Fortescue s choco nut sundaes with him in the stifling classroom .Wednesday afternoon meant Herbology in the greenhouses under a bakinghot sun then back to the common room once more with sunburnt necks thinking longingly of this time next day when it would all be over .Their second to last exam on Thursday morning was Defense Against the Dark Arts .Professor Lupin had compiled the most unusual exam any of them had ever taken a sort of obstacle course outside in the sun where they had to wade across a deep paddling pool containing a grindylow cross a series of potholes full of Red Caps squish their way across a patch of marsh while ignoring misleading directions from a hinkypunk then climb into an old trunk and battle with a new boggart .Excellent Harry Lupin muttered as Harry climbed out of the trunk grinning .Full marks .Flushed with his success Harry hung around to watch Ron and Hermione .Ron did very well until he reached the hinkypunk which successfully confused him into sinking waisthigh into the quagmire .Hermione did everything perfectly until she reached the trunk with the boggart in it .After about a minute inside it she burst out again screaming .Hermione !said Lupin startled .Whats the matter ?P P Professor McGonagall !Hermione gasped pointing into the trunk .Sh she said Id failed everything !It took a little while to calm Hermione down .When at last she had regained a grip on herself she Harry and Ron went back to the castle .Ron was still slightly inclined to laugh at Hermione s boggart but an argument was averted by the sight that met them on the top of the steps .Cornelius Fudge sweating slightly in his pinstriped cloak was standing there staring out at the grounds .He started at the sight of Harry .Hello there Harry !he said .Just had an exam I expect ?Nearly finished ?Yes said Harry .Hermione and Ron not being on speaking terms with the Minister of Magic hovered awkwardly in the background .Lovely day said Fudge casting an eye over the lake .Pity .pity .He sighed deeply and looked down at Harry .Im here on an unpleasant mission Harry .The Committee for the Disposal of Dangerous Creatures required a witness to the execution of a mad hippogriff .As I needed to visit Hogwarts to check on the Black situation I was asked to step in .Does that mean the appeals already happened ?Ron interrupted stepping forward .No no its scheduled for this afternoon said Fudge looking curiously at Ron .Then you might not have to witness an execution at all !said Ron stoutly .The hippogriff might get off !Before Fudge could answer two wizards came through the castle doors behind him .One was so ancient he appeared to be withering before their very eyes the other was tall and strapping with a thin black mustache .Harry gathered that they were representatives of the Committee for the Disposal of Dangerous Creatures because the very old wizard squinted toward Hagrids cabin and said in a feeble voice Dear dear Im getting too old for this .Two oclock isnt it Fudge ?The blackmustached man was fingering something in his belt Harry looked and saw that he was running one broad thumb along the blade of a shining axe .Ron opened his mouth to say something but Hermione nudged him hard in the ribs and jerked her head toward the entrance hall .Whyd you stop me ?said Ron angrily as they entered the Great Hall for lunch .Did you see them ?Theyve even got the axe ready !This isnt justice !Ron your dad works for the Ministry you cant go saying things like that to his boss !said Hermione but she too looked very upset .As long as Hagrid keeps his head this time and argues his case properly they cant possibly execute Buckbeak .But Harry could tell Hermione didnt really believe what she was saying .All around them people were talking excitedly as they ate their lunch happily anticipating the end of the exams that afternoon but Harry Ron and Hermione lost in worry about Hagrid and Buckbeak didnt join in .Harrys and Rons last exam was Divination Hermiones Muggle Studies .They walked up the marble staircase together Hermione left them on the first floor and Harry and Ron proceeded all the way up to the seventh where many of their class were sitting on the spiral staircase to Professor Trelawneys classroom trying to cram in a bit of lastminute studying .Shes seeing us all separately Neville informed them as they went to sit down next to him .He had his copy of Unfogging the Future open on his lap at the pages devoted to crystal gazing .Have either of you ever seen anything in a crystal ball ?he asked them unhappily .Nope said Ron in an offhand voice .He kept checking his watch Harry knew that he was counting down the time until Buckbeaks appeal started .The line of people outside the classroom shortened very slowly .As each person climbed back down the silver ladder the rest of the class hissed What did she ask ?Was it okay ?But they all refused to say .She says the crystal balls told her that if I tell you Ill have a horrible accident !squeaked Neville as he clambered back down the ladder toward Harry and Ron who had now reached the landing .Thats convenient snorted Ron .You know Im starting to think Hermione was right about her he jabbed his thumb toward the trapdoor overhead shes a right old fraud .Yeah said Harry looking at his own watch .It was now two oclock .Wish shed hurry up .Parvati came back down the ladder glowing with pride .She says Ive got all the makings of a true Seer she informed Harry and Ron .I saw loads of stuff .Well good luck !She hurried off down the spiral staircase toward Lavender .Ronald Weasley said the familiar misty voice from over their heads .Ron grimaced at Harry and climbed the silver ladder out of sight .Harry was now the only person left to be tested .He settled himself on the floor with his back against the wall listening to a fly buzzing in the sunny window his mind across the grounds with Hagrid .Finally after about twenty minutes Rons large feet reappeared on the ladder .Howd it go ?Harry asked him standing up .Rubbish said Ron .Couldnt see a thing so I made some stuff up .Dont think she was convinced though .Meet you in the common room Harry muttered as Professor Trelawneys voice called Harry Potter !The tower room was hotter than ever before the curtains were closed the fire was alight and the usual sickly scent made Harry cough as he stumbled through the clutter of chairs and tables to where Professor Trelawney sat waiting for him before a large crystal ball .Good day my dear she said softly .If you would kindly gaze into the Orb .Take your time now .then tell me what you see within it .Harry bent over the crystal ball and stared stared as hard as he could willing it to show him something other than swirling white fog but nothing happened .Well ?Professor Trelawney prompted delicately .What do you see ?The heat was overpowering and his nostrils were stinging with the perfumed smoke wafting from the fire beside them .He thought of what Ron had just said and decided to pretend .Er said Harry a dark shape .um .What does it resemble ?whispered Professor Trelawney .Think now .Harry cast his mind around and it landed on Buckbeak .A hippogriff he said firmly .Indeed !whispered Professor Trelawney scribbling keenly on the parchment perched upon her knees .My boy you may well be seeing the outcome of poor Hagrids trouble with the Ministry of Magic !Look closer .Does the hippogriff appear to .have its head ?Yes said Harry firmly .Are you sure ?Professor Trelawney urged him .Are you quite sure dear ?You dont see it writhing on the ground perhaps and a shadowy figure raising an axe behind it ?No !said Harry starting to feel slightly sick .No blood ?No weeping Hagrid ?No !said Harry again wanting more than ever to leave the room and the heat .It looks fine its flying away .Professor Trelawney sighed .Well dear I think well leave it there .A little disappointing .but Im sure you did your best .Relieved Harry got up picked up his bag and turned to go but then a loud harsh voice spoke behind him .It will happen tonight .Harry wheeled around .Professor Trelawney had gone rigid in her armchair her eyes were unfocused and her mouth sagging .S sorry ?said Harry .But Professor Trelawney didnt seem to hear him .Her eyes started to roll .Harry sat there in a panic .She looked as though she was about to have some sort of seizure .He hesitated thinking of running to the hospital wing and then Professor Trelawney spoke again in the same harsh voice quite unlike her own The Dark Lord lies alone and friendless abandoned by his followers .His servant has been chained these twelve years .Tonight before midnight .the servant will break free and set out to rejoin his master .The Dark Lord will rise again with his servants aid greater and more terrible than ever he was .Tonight .before midnight .the servant .will set out .to rejoin .his master .Professor Trelawneys head fell forward onto her chest .She made a grunting sort of noise .Harry sat there staring at her .Then quite suddenly Professor Trelawneys head snapped up again .Im so sorry dear boy she said dreamily the heat of the day you know .I drifted off for a moment .Harry sat there staring at her .Is there anything wrong my dear ?You you just told me that the the Dark Lords going to rise again .that his servants going to go back to him .Professor Trelawney looked thoroughly startled .The Dark Lord ?HeWhoMustNotBeNamed ?My dear boy thats hardly something to joke about .Rise again indeed But you just said it !You said the Dark Lord I think you must have dozed off too dear !said Professor Trelawney .I would certainly not presume to predict anything quite as farfetched as that Harry climbed back down the ladder and the spiral staircase wondering .had he just heard Professor Trelawney make a real prediction ?Or had that been her idea of an impressive end to the test ?Five minutes later he was dashing past the security trolls outside the entrance to Gryffindor Tower Professor Trelawneys words still resounding in his head .People were striding past him in the opposite direction laughing and joking heading for the grounds and a bit of longawaited freedom by the time he had reached the portrait hole and entered the common room it was almost deserted .Over in the corner however sat Ron and Hermione .Professor Trelawney Harry panted just told me But he stopped abruptly at the sight of their faces .Buckbeak lost said Ron weakly .Hagrids just sent this .Hagrids note was dry this time no tears had splattered it yet his hand seemed to have shaken so much as he wrote that it was hardly legible .Lost appeal .Theyre going to execute at sunset Nothing you can do .Dont come down .I dont want you to see it Hagrid Weve got to go said Harry at once .He cant just sit there on his own waiting for the executioner !Sunset though said Ron who was staring out the window in a glazed sort of way .Wed never be allowed .specially you Harry .Harry sank his head into his hands thinking .If we only had the Invisibility Cloak .Where is it ?said Hermione .Harry told her about leaving it in the passageway under the oneeyed witch . .if Snape sees me anywhere near there again Im in serious trouble he finished .Thats true said Hermione getting to her feet .If he sees you .How do you open the witchs hump again ?You you tap it and say ‘Dissendium said Harry .But Hermione didnt wait for the rest of his sentence she strode across the room pushed open the Fat Ladys portrait and vanished from sight .She hasnt gone to get it ?Ron said staring after her .She had .Hermione returned a quarter of an hour later with the silvery cloak folded carefully under her robes .Hermione I dont know whats gotten into you lately !said Ron astounded .First you hit Malfoy then you walk out on Professor Trelawney Hermione looked rather flattered .They went down to dinner with everybody else but did not return to Gryffindor Tower afterward .Harry had the cloak hidden down the front of his robes he had to keep his arms folded to hide the lump .They skulked in an empty chamber off the entrance hall listening until they were sure it was deserted .They heard a last pair of people hurrying across the hall and a door slamming .Hermione poked her head around the door .Okay she whispered no one there cloak on Walking very close together so that nobody would see them they crossed the hall on tiptoe beneath the cloak then walked down the stone front steps into the grounds .The sun was already sinking behind the Forbidden Forest gilding the top branches of the trees .They reached Hagrids cabin and knocked .He was a minute in answering and when he did he looked all around for his visitor palefaced and trembling .Its us Harry hissed .Were wearing the Invisibility Cloak .Let us in and we can take it off .Yeh shouldnve come !Hagrid whispered but he stood back and they stepped inside .Hagrid shut the door quickly and Harry pulled off the cloak .Hagrid was not crying nor did he throw himself upon their necks .He looked like a man who did not know where he was or what to do .This helplessness was worse to watch than tears .Wan some tea ?he said .His great hands were shaking as he reached for the kettle .Wheres Buckbeak Hagrid ?said Hermione hesitantly .I I took him outside said Hagrid spilling milk all over the table as he filled up the jug .Hes tethered in me pumpkin patch .Thought he oughta see the trees an an smell fresh air before Hagrid s hand trembled so violently that the milk jug slipped from his grasp and shattered all over the floor .Ill do it Hagrid said Hermione quickly hurrying over and starting to clean up the mess .Theres another one in the cupboard Hagrid said sitting down and wiping his forehead on his sleeve .Harry glanced at Ron who looked back hopelessly .Isnt there anything anyone can do Hagrid ?Harry asked fiercely sitting down next to him .Dumbledore Hes tried said Hagrid .Hes got no power ter overrule the Committee .He told em Buckbeaks all right but theyre scared .Yeh know what Lucius Malfoys like .threatened em I expect .an the executioner Macnair hes an old pal o Malfoys .but itll be quick an clean .an Ill be beside him .Hagrid swallowed .His eyes were darting all over the cabin as though looking for some shred of hope or comfort .Dumbledore s gonna come down while it while it happens .Wrote me this mornin .Said he wants ter ter be with me .Great man Dumbledore .Hermione who had been rummaging in Hagrid s cupboard for another milk jug let out a small quickly stifled sob .She straightened up with the new jug in her hands fighting back tears .Well stay with you too Hagrid she began but Hagrid shook his shaggy head .Yehre ter go back up ter the castle .I told yeh I don wan yeh watchin .An yeh shouldn be down here anyway .If Fudge an Dumbledore catch yeh out without permission Harry yehll be in big trouble .Silent tears were now streaming down Hermione s face but she hid them from Hagrid bustling around making tea .Then as she picked up the milk bottle to pour some into the jug she let out a shriek .Ron !I I dont believe it its Scabbersl Ron gaped at her .What are you talking about ?Hermione carried the milk jug over to the table and turned it upside down .With a frantic squeak and much scrambling to get back inside Scabbers the rat came sliding out onto the table .Scabbers !said Ron blankly .Scabbers what are you doing here ?He grabbed the struggling rat and held him up to the light .Scabbers looked dreadful .He was thinner than ever large tufts of hair had fallen out leaving wide bald patches and he writhed in Rons hands as though desperate to free himself .Its okay Scabbers !said Ron .No cats !Theres nothing here to hurt you !Hagrid suddenly stood up his eyes fixed on the window .His normally ruddy face had gone the color of parchment .Theyre cornin .Harry Ron and Hermione whipped around .A group of men was walking down the distant castle steps .In front was Albus Dumbledore his silver beard gleaming in the dying sun .Next to him trotted Cornelius Fudge .Behind them came the feeble old Committee member and the executioner Macnair .Yeh gotta go said Hagrid .Every inch of him was trembling .They mustn find yeh here .Go now .Ron stuffed Scabbers into his pocket and Hermione picked up the cloak .Ill let yeh out the back way said Hagrid .They followed him to the door into his back garden .Harry felt strangely unreal and even more so when he saw Buckbeak a few yards away tethered to a tree behind Hagrids pumpkin patch .Buckbeak seemed to know something was happening .He turned his sharp head from side to side and pawed the ground nervously .Its okay Beaky said Hagrid softly .Its okay .He turned to Harry Ron and Hermione .Go on he said .Get goin .But they didnt move .Hagrid we cant Well tell them what really happened They cant kill him Go !said Hagrid fiercely .Its bad enough without you lot in trouble an all !They had no choice .As Hermione threw the cloak over Harry and Ron they heard voices at the front of the cabin .Hagrid looked at the place where they had just vanished from sight .Go quick he said hoarsely .Don listen .And he strode back into his cabin as someone knocked at the front door .Slowly in a kind of horrified trance Harry Ron and Hermione set off silently around Hagrids house .As they reached the other side the front door closed with a sharp snap .Please lets hurry Hermione whispered .I cant stand it I cant bear it .They started up the sloping lawn toward the castle .The sun was sinking fast now the sky had turned to a clear purpletinged grey but to the west there was a rubyred glow .Ron stopped dead .Oh please Ron Hermione began .Its Scabbers he wont stay put Ron was bent over trying to keep Scabbers in his pocket but the rat was going berserk squeaking madly twisting and flailing trying to sink his teeth into Rons hand .Scabbers its me you idiot its Ron Ron hissed .They heard a door open behind them and mens voices .Oh Ron please lets move theyre going to do it !Hermione breathed .Okay Scabbers stay put They walked forward Harry like Hermione was trying not to listen to the rumble of voices behind them .Ron stopped again .I cant hold him Scabbers shut up everyonell hear us The rat was squealing wildly but not loudly enough to cover up the sounds drifting from Hagrids garden .There was a jumble of indistinct male voices a silence and then without warning the unmistakable swish and thud of an axe .Hermione swayed on the spot .They did it !she whispered to Harry .I d dont believe it they did it !CAT RAT AND DOG Harrys mind had gone blank with shock .The three of them stood transfixed with horror under the Invisibility Cloak .The very last rays of the setting sun were casting a bloody light over the longshadowed grounds .Then behind them they heard a wild howling .Hagrid Harry muttered .Without thinking about what he was doing he made to turn back but both Ron and Hermione seized his arms .We cant said Ron who was paperwhite .Hell be in worse trouble if they know weve been to see him .Hermione s breathing was shallow and uneven .How could they ?she choked .How could they ?Come on said Ron whose teeth seemed to be chattering .They set off back toward the castle walking slowly to keep themselves hidden under the cloak .The light was fading fast now .By the time they reached open ground darkness was settling like a spell around them .Scabbers keep still Ron hissed clamping his hand over his chest .The rat was wriggling madly .Ron came to a sudden halt trying to force Scabbers deeper into his pocket .Whats the matter with you you stupid rat ?Stay still OUCH !He bit me !Ron be quiet !Hermione whispered urgently .Fudgell be out here in a minute He wont stay put Scabbers was plainly terrified .He was writhing with all his might trying to break free of Rons grip .Whats the matter with him ?But Harry had just seen slinking toward them his body low to the ground wide yellow eyes glinting eerily in the darkness Crookshanks .Whether he could see them or was following the sound of Scabberss squeaks Harry couldnt tell .Crookshanks !Hermione moaned .No go away Crookshanks !Go away !But the cat was getting nearer Scabbers NO !Too late the rat had slipped between Rons clutching fingers hit the ground and scampered away .In one bound Crookshanks sprang after him and before Harry or Hermione could stop him Ron had thrown the Invisibility Cloak off himself and pelted away into the darkness .Ron Hermione moaned .She and Harry looked at each other then followed at a sprint it was impossible to run full out under the cloak they pulled it off and it streamed behind them like a banner as they hurtled after Ron they could hear his feet thundering along ahead and his shouts at Crookshanks .Get away from him get away Scabbers come here There was a loud thud .Gotchal Get off you stinking cat Harry and Hermione almost fell over Ron they skidded to a stop right in front of him .He was sprawled on the ground but Scabbers was back in his pocket he had both hands held tight over the quivering lump .Ron come on back under the cloak Hermione panted .Dumbledore the Minister theyll be coming back out in a minute But before they could cover themselves again before they could even catch their breath they heard the soft pounding of gigantic paws .Something was bounding toward them quiet as a shadow an enormous paleeyed jetblack dog .Harry reached for his wand but too late the dog had made an enormous leap and the front paws hit him on the chest he keeled over backward in a whirl of hair he felt its hot breath saw inchlong teeth But the force of its leap had carried it too far it rolled off him .Dazed feeling as though his ribs were broken Harry tried to stand up he could hear it gas it skidded around for a new attack .Ron was on his feet .As the dog sprang back toward them he pushed Harry aside the dogs jaws fastened instead around Rons outstretched arm .Harry lunged forward he seized a handful of the brutes hair but it was dragging Ron away as easily as though he were a rag doll Then out of nowhere something hit Harry so hard across the face he was knocked off his feet again .He heard Hermione shriek with pain and fall too .Harry groped for his wand blinking blood out of his eyes Lumos he whispered .The wandlight showed him the trunk of a thick tree they had chased Scabbers into the shadow of the Whomping Willow and its branches were creaking as though in a high wind whipping backward and forward to stop them going nearer .And there at the base of the trunk was the dog dragging Ron backward into a large gap in the roots Ron was fighting furiously but his head and torso were slipping out of sight Ron !Harry shouted trying to follow but a heavy branch whipped lethally through the air and he was forced backward again .All they could see now was one of Rons legs which he had hooked around a root in an effort to stop the dog from pulling him farther underground but a horrible crack cut the air like a gunshot Rons leg had broken and a moment later his foot vanished from sight .Harry weve got to go for help Hermione gasped she was bleeding too the Willow had cut her across the shoulder .No !That things big enough to eat him we havent got time Harry were never going to get through without help Another branch whipped down at them twigs clenched like knuckles .If that dog can get in we can Harry panted darting here and there trying to find a way through the vicious swishing branches but he couldnt get an inch nearer to the tree roots without being in range of the trees blows .Oh help help Hermione whispered frantically dancing uncertainly on the spot please .Crookshanks darted forward .He slithered between the battering branches like a snake and placed his front paws upon a knot on the trunk .Abruptly as though the tree had been turned to marble it stopped moving .Not a leaf twitched or shook .Crookshanks !Hermione whispered uncertainly .She now grasped Harrys arm painfully hard .How did he know ?Hes friends with that dog said Harry grimly .Ive seen them together .Come on and keep your wand out They covered the distance to the trunk in seconds but before they had reached the gap in the roots Crookshanks had slid into it with a flick of his bottlebrush tail .Harry went next he crawled forward headfirst and slid down an earthy slope to the bottom of a very low tunnel .Crookshanks was a little way along his eyes flashing in the light from Harrys wand .Seconds later Hermione slithered down beside him .Wheres Ron ?she whispered in a terrified voice .This way said Harry setting off bentbacked after Crookshanks .Where does this tunnel come out ?Hermione asked breathlessly from behind him .I dont know .Its marked on the Marauders Map but Fred and George said no ones ever gotten into it . .It goes off the edge of the map but it looked like it was heading for Hogsmeade .They moved as fast as they could bent almost double ahead of them Crookshanks s tail bobbed in and out of view .On and on went the passage it felt at least as long as the one to Honeydukes .All Harry could think of was Ron and what the enormous dog might be doing to him .He was drawing breath in sharp painful gasps running at a crouch .And then the tunnel began to rise moments later it twisted and Crookshanks had gone .Instead Harry could see a patch of dim light through a small opening .He and Hermione paused gasping for breath edging forward .Both raised their wands to see what lay beyond .It was a room a very disordered dusty room .Paper was peeling from the walls there were stains all over the floor every piece of furniture was broken as though somebody had smashed it .The windows were all boarded up .Harry glanced at Hermione who looked very frightened but nodded .Harry pulled himself out of the hole staring around .The room was deserted but a door to their right stood open leading to a shadowy hallway .Hermione suddenly grabbed Harrys arm again .Her wide eyes were traveling around the boarded windows .Harry she whispered I think were in the Shrieking Shack .Harry looked around .His eyes fell on a wooden chair near them .Large chunks had been torn out of it one of the legs had been ripped off entirely .Ghosts didnt do that he said slowly .At that moment there was a creak overhead .Something had moved upstairs .Both of them looked up at the ceiling .Hermione s grip on Harrys arm was so tight he was losing feeling in his fingers .He raised his eyebrows at her she nodded again and let go .Quietly as they could they crept out into the hall and up the crumbling staircase .Everything was covered in a thick layer of dust except the floor where a wide shiny stripe had been made by something being dragged upstairs .They reached the dark landing .Nox they whispered together and the lights at the end of their wands went out .Only one door was open .As they crept toward it they heard movement from behind it a low moan and then a deep loud purring .They exchanged a last look a last nod .Wand held tightly before him Harry kicked the door wide open .On a magnificent fourposter bed with dusty hangings lay Crookshanks purring loudly at the sight of them .On the floor beside him clutching his leg which stuck out at a strange angle was Ron .Harry and Hermione dashed across to him .Ron are you okay ?Wheres the dog ?Not a dog Ron moaned .His teeth were gritted with pain .Harry its a trap What Hes the dog .hes an Animagus .Ron was staring over Harrys shoulder .Harry wheeled around .With a snap the man in the shadows closed the door behind them .A mass of filthy matted hair hung to his elbows .If eyes hadnt been shining out of the deep dark sockets he might have been a corpse .The waxy skin was stretched so tightly over the bones of his face it looked like a skull .His yellow teeth were bared in a grin .It was Sirius Black .ExpelliarmusV he croaked pointing Rons wand at them .Harrys and Hermiones wands shot out of their hands high in the air and Black caught them .Then he took a step closer .His eyes were fixed on Harry .I thought youd come and help your friend he said hoarsely .His voice sounded as though he had long since lost the habit of using it .Your father would have done the same for me .Brave of you not to run for a teacher .Im grateful .it will make everything much easier .The taunt about his father rang in Harrys ears as though Black had bellowed it .A boiling hate erupted in Harrys chest leaving no place for fear .For the first time in his life he wanted his wand back in his hand not to defend himself but to attack .to kill .Without knowing what he was doing he started forward but there was a sudden movement on either side of him and two pairs of hands grabbed him and held him back .No Harry !Hermione gasped in a petrified whisper Ron however spoke to Black .If you want to kill Harry youll have to kill us too !he said fiercely though the effort of standing upright was draining him of still more color and he swayed slightly as he spoke .Something flickered in Blacks shadowed eyes .Lie down he said quietly to Ron .You will damage that leg even more .Did you hear me ?Ron said weakly though he was clinging painfully to Harry to stay upright .Youll have to kill all three of us !Therell be only one murder here tonight said Black and his grin widened .Whys that ?Harry spat trying to wrench himself free of Ron and Hermione .Didnt care last time did you ?Didnt mind slaughtering all those Muggles to get at Pettigrew .Whats the matter gone soft in Azkaban ?Harry !Hermione whimpered .Be quiet !HE KILLED MY MUM AND DAD !Harry roared and with a huge effort he broke free of Hermione s and Rons restraint and lunged forward He had forgotten about magic he had forgotten that he was short and skinny and thirteen whereas Black was a tall fullgrown man all Harry knew was that he wanted to hurt Black as badly as he could and that he didnt care how much he got hurt in return Perhaps it was the shock of Harry doing something so stupid but Black didnt raise the wands in time one of Harrys hands fastened over his wasted wrist forcing the wand tips away the knuckles of Harrys other hand collided with the side of Blacks head and they fell backward into the wall Hermione was screaming Ron was yelling there was a blinding flash as the wands in Blacks hand sent a jet of sparks into the air that missed Harrys face by inches Harry felt the shrunken arm under his fingers twisting madly but he clung on his other hand punching every part of Black it could find .But Blacks free hand had found Harrys throat No he hissed Ive waited too long The fingers tightened Harry choked his glasses askew .Then he saw Hermione s foot swing out of nowhere .Black let go of Harry with a grunt of pain Ron had thrown himself on Blacks wand hand and Harry heard a faint clatter He fought free of the tangle of bodies and saw his own wand rolling across the floor he threw himself toward it but Argh !Crookshanks had joined the fray both sets of front claws had sunk themselves deep into Harrys arm Harry threw him off but Crookshanks now darted toward Harrys wand NO YOU DONT !roared Harry and he aimed a kick at Crookshanks that made the cat leap aside spitting Harry snatched up his wand and turned Get out of the way !he shouted at Ron and Hermione .They didnt need telling twice .Hermione gasping for breath her lip bleeding scrambled aside snatching up her and Rons wands .Ron crawled to the four poster and collapsed onto it panting his white face now tinged with green both hands clutching his broken leg .Black was sprawled at the bottom of the wall .His thin chest rose and fell rapidly as he watched Harry walking slowly nearer his wand pointing straight at Blacks heart .Going to kill me Harry ?he whispered .Harry stopped right above him his wand still pointing at Blacks chest looking down at him .A livid bruise was rising around Blacks left eye and his nose was bleeding .You killed my parents said Harry his voice shaking slightly but his wand hand quite steady .Black stared up at him out of those sunken eyes .I dont deny it he said very quietly .But if you knew the whole story .The whole story ?Harry repeated a furious pounding in his ears .You sold them to Voldemort .Thats all I need to know .Youve got to listen to me Black said and there was a note of urgency in his voice now .Youll regret it if you dont .You dont understand .I understand a lot better than you think said Harry and his voice shook more than ever .You never heard her did you ?My mum .trying to stop Voldemort killing me .and you did that .you did it .Before either of them could say another word something ginger streaked past Harry Crookshanks leapt onto Blacks chest and settled himself there right over Blacks heart .Black blinked and looked down at the cat .Get off he murmured trying to push Crookshanks off him .But Crookshanks sank his claws into Blacks robes and wouldnt shift .He turned his ugly squashed face to Harry and looked up at him with those great yellow eyes .To his right Hermione gave a dry sob .Harry stared down at Black and Crookshanks his grip tightening on the wand .So what if he had to kill the cat too ?It was in league with Black .If it was prepared to die trying to protect Black that wasnt Harrys business .If Black wanted to save it that only proved he cared more for Crookshanks than for Harrys parents .Harry raised the wand .Now was the moment to do it .Now was the moment to avenge his mother and father .He was going to kill Black .He had to kill Black .This was his chance .The seconds lengthened .And still Harry stood frozen there wand poised Black staring up at him Crookshanks on his chest .Rons ragged breathing came from near the bed Hermione was quite silent .And then came a new sound Muffled footsteps were echoing up through the floor someone was moving downstairs .WERE UP HERE !Hermione screamed suddenly .WERE UP HERE SIRIUS BLACK QUICK !Black made a startled movement that almost dislodged Crookshanks Harry gripped his wand convulsively Do it nouA said a voice in his head but the footsteps were thundering up the stairs and Harry still hadnt done it .The door of the room burst open in a shower of red sparks and Harry wheeled around as Professor Lupin came hurtling into the room his face bloodless his wand raised and ready .His eyes flickered over Ron lying on the floor over Hermione cowering next to the door to Harry standing there with his wand covering Black and then to Black himself crumpled and bleeding at Harrys feet .ExpelliarmusV Lupin shouted .Harrys wand flew once more out of his hand so did the two Hermione was holding .Lupin caught them all deftly then moved into the room staring at Black who still had Crookshanks lying protectively across his chest .Harry stood there feeling suddenly empty .He hadnt done it .His nerve had failed him .Black was going to be handed back to the dementors .Then Lupin spoke in a very tense voice .Where is he Sirius ?Harry looked quickly at Lupin .He didnt understand what Lupin meant .Who was Lupin talking about ?He turned to look at Black again .Blacks face was quite expressionless .For a few seconds he didnt move at all .Then very slowly he raised his empty hand and pointed straight at Ron .Mystified Harry glanced around at Ron who looked bewildered .But then .Lupin muttered staring at Black so intently it seemed he was trying to read his mind .why hasnt he shown himself before now ?Unless Lupins eyes suddenly widened as though he was seeing something beyond Black something none of the rest could see unless he was the one .unless you switched .without telling me ?Very slowly his sunken gaze never leaving Lupins face Black nodded .Professor Harry interrupted loudly whats going on ?But he never finished the question because what he saw made his voice die in his throat .Lupin was lowering his wand gazing fixedly at Black .The Professor walked to Blacks side seized his hand pulled him to his feet so that Crookshanks fell to the floor and embraced Black like a brother .Harry felt as though the bottom had dropped out of his stomach .I DONT BELIEVE IT !Hermione screamed .Lupin let go of Black and turned to her .She had raised herself off the floor and was pointing at Lupin wildeyed .You you Hermione you and him !Hermione calm down I didnt tell anyone !Hermione shrieked .Ive been covering up for you Hermione listen to me please !Lupin shouted .I can explain Harry could feel himself shaking not with fear but with a fresh wave of fury .I trusted you he shouted at Lupin his voice wavering out of control and all the time youve been his friend !Youre wrong said Lupin .I havent been Siriuss friend but I am now Let me explain .NO !Hermione screamed .Harry dont trust him hes been helping Black get into the castle he wants you dead too hes a werewolf .There was a ringing silence .Everyones eyes were now on Lupin who looked remarkably calm though rather pale .Not at all up to your usual standard Hermione he said .Only one out of three Im afraid .I have not been helping Sirius get into the castle and I certainly dont want Harry dead .An odd shiver passed over his face .But I wont deny that I am a werewolf .Ron made a valiant effort to get up again but fell back with a whimper of pain .Lupin made toward him looking concerned but Ron gasped Get away from me werewolf Lupin stopped dead .Then with an obvious effort he turned to Hermione and said How long have you known ?Ages Hermione whispered .Since I did Professor Snapes essay .Hell be delighted said Lupin coolly .He assigned that essay hoping someone would realize what my symptoms meant .Did you check the lunar chart and realize that I was always ill at the full moon ?Or did you realize that the boggart changed into the moon when it saw me ?Both Hermione said quietly .Lupin forced a laugh .Youre the cleverest witch of your age Ive ever met Hermione .Im not Hermione whispered .If Id been a bit cleverer Id have told everyone what you are !But they already know said Lupin .At least the staff do .Dumbledore hired you when he knew you were a werewolf ?Ron gasped .Is he mad ?Some of the staff thought so said Lupin .He had to work very hard to convince certain teachers that Im trustworthy AND HE WAS WRONG !Harry yelled .YOU VE BEEN HELPING HIM ALL THE TIME !He was pointing at Black who suddenly crossed to the fourposter bed and sank onto it his face hidden in one shaking hand .Crookshanks leapt up beside him and stepped onto his lap purring .Ron edged away from both of them dragging his leg .I have not been helping Sirius said Lupin .If youll give me a chance Ill explain .Look He separated Harrys Rons and Hermiones wands and threw each back to its owner Harry caught his stunned .There said Lupin sticking his own wand back into his belt .Youre armed were not .Now will you listen ?Harry didnt know what to think .Was it a trick ?If you havent been helping him he said with a furious glance at Black how did you know he was here ?The map said Lupin .The Marauders Map .I was in my office examining it You know how to work it ?Harry said suspiciously .Of course I know how to work it said Lupin waving his hand impatiently .I helped write it .Im Moony that was my friends nickname for me at school .You wrote ?The important thing is I was watching it carefully this evening because I had an idea that you Ron and Hermione might try and sneak out of the castle to visit Hagrid before his hippogriff was executed .And I was right wasnt I ?He had started to pace up and down looking at them .Little patches of dust rose at his feet .You might have been wearing your fathers old cloak Harry How dyou know about the cloak ?The number of times I saw James disappearing under it .said Lupin waving an impatient hand again .The point is even if youre wearing an Invisibility Cloak you still show up on the Marauders Map .I watched you cross the grounds and enter Hagrids hut .Twenty minutes later you left Hagrid and set off back toward the castle .But you were now accompanied by somebody else .What ?said Harry .No we werent !I couldnt believe my eyes said Lupin still pacing and ignoring Harrys interruption .I thought the map must be malfunctioning .How could he be with you ?No one was with us !said Harry .And then I saw another dot moving fast toward you labeled Sirius Black .I saw him collide with you I watched as he pulled two of you into the Whomping Willow One of us !Ron said angrily .No Ron said Lupin .Two of you .He had stopped his pacing his eyes moving over Ron .Do you think I could have a look at the rat ?he said evenly .What ?said Ron .Whats Scabbers got to do with it ?Everything said Lupin .Could I see him please ?Ron hesitated then put a hand inside his robes .Scabbers emerged thrashing desperately Ron had to seize his long bald tail to stop him escaping .Crookshanks stood up on Blacks leg and made a soft hissing noise .Lupin moved closer to Ron .He seemed to be holding his breath as he gazed intently at Scabbers .What ?Ron said again holding Scabbers close to him looking scared .Whats my rat got to do with anything ?Thats not a rat croaked Sirius Black suddenly .What dyou mean of course hes a rat No hes not said Lupin quietly .Hes a wizard .An Animagus said Black by the name of Peter Pettigrew .MOONY WORMTAIL PADFOOT AND PRONGS It took a few seconds for the absurdity of this statement to sink in .Then Ron voiced what Harry was thinking .Youre both mental .Ridiculous !said Hermione faintly .Peter Pettigrews dead !said Harry .He killed him twelve years ago !He pointed at Black whose face twitched convulsively .I meant to he growled his yellow teeth bared but little Peter got the better of me .not this time though !And Crookshanks was thrown to the floor as Black lunged at Scabbers Ron yelled with pain as Blacks weight fell on his broken leg .Sirius NO !Lupin yelled launching himself forwards and dragging Black away from Ron again WAIT !You cant do it just like that they need to understand weve got to explain We can explain afterwards !snarled Black trying to throw Lupin off .One hand was still clawing the air as it tried to reach Scabbers who was squealing like a piglet scratching Rons face and neck as he tried to escape .Theyve got a right to know everything !Lupin panted still trying to restrain Black .Rons kept him as a pet !There are parts of it even I dont understand !And Harry you owe Harry the truth Sirius !Black stopped struggling though his hollowed eyes were still fixed on Scabbers who was clamped tightly under Rons bitten scratched and bleeding hands .All right then Black said without taking his eyes off the rat .Tell them whatever you like .But make it quick Remus .I want to commit the murder I was imprisoned for .Youre nutters both of you said Ron shakily looking round at Harry and Hermione for support .Ive had enough of this .Im off .He tried to heave himself up on his good leg but Lupin raised his wand again pointing it at Scabbers .Youre going to hear me out Ron he said quietly .Just keep a tight hold on Peter while you listen .HES NOT PETER HES SCABBERS !Ron yelled trying to force the rat back into his front pocket but Scabbers was fighting too hard Ron swayed and overbalanced and Harry caught him and pushed him back down to the bed .Then ignoring Black Harry turned to Lupin .There were witnesses who saw Pettigrew die he said .A whole street full of them .They didnt see what they thought they saw !said Black savagely still watching Scabbers struggling in Rons hands .Everyone thought Sirius killed Peter said Lupin nodding .I believed it myself until I saw the map tonight .Because the Marauders map never lies .Peters alive .Rons holding him Harry .Harry looked down at Ron and as their eyes met they agreed silently Black and Lupin were both out of their minds .Their story made no sense whatsoever .How could Scabbers be Peter Pettigrew ?Azkaban must have unhinged Black after all but why was Lupin playing along with him ?Then Hermione spoke in a trembling wouldbe calm sort of voice as though trying to will Professor Lupin to talk sensibly .But Professor Lupin .Scabbers cant be Pettigrew .it just cant be true you know it cant .Why cant it be true ?Lupin said calmly as though they were in class and Hermione had simply spotted a problem in an experiment with grindylows .Because .because people would know if Peter Pettigrew had been an Animagus .We did Animagi in class with Professor McGonagall .And I looked them up when I did my homework the Ministry of Magic keeps tabs on witches and wizards who can become animals theres a register showing what animal they become and their markings and things .and I went and looked Professor McGonagall up on the register and there have been only seven Animagi this century and Pettigrews name wasnt on the list Harry had barely had time to marvel inwardly at the effort Hermione put into her homework when Lupin started to laugh .Right again Hermione !he said .But the Ministry never knew that there used to be three unregistered Animagi running around Hogwarts .If youre going to tell them the story get a move on Remus snarled Black who was still watching Scabberss every desperate move .Ive waited twelve years Im not going to wait much longer .All right .but youll need to help me Sirius said Lupin I only know how it began .Lupin broke off .There had been a loud creak behind him .The bedroom door had opened of its own accord .All five of them stared at it .Then Lupin strode toward it and looked out into the landing .No one there .This place is haunted !said Ron .Its not said Lupin still looking at the door in a puzzled way .The Shrieking Shack was never haunted .The screams and howls the villagers used to hear were made by me .He pushed his graying hair out of his eyes thought for a moment then said Thats where all of this starts with my becoming a werewolf .None of this could have happened if I hadnt been bitten .and if I hadnt been so foolhardy .He looked sober and tired .Ron started to interrupt but Hermione said Shh !She was watching Lupin very intently .I was a very small boy when I received the bite .My parents tried everything but in those days there was no cure .The potion that Professor Snape has been making for me is a very recent discovery .It makes me safe you see .As long as I take it in the week preceding the full moon I keep my mind when I transform .I am able to curl up in my office a harmless wolf and wait for the moon to wane again .Before the Wolfsbane Potion was discovered however I became a fully fledged monster once a month .It seemed impossible that I would be able to come to Hogwarts .Other parents werent likely to want their children exposed to me .But then Dumbledore became Headmaster and he was sympathetic .He said that as long as we took certain precautions there was no reason I shouldnt come to school .Lupin sighed and looked directly at Harry .I told you months ago that the Whomping Willow was planted the year I came to Hogwarts .The truth is that it was planted because I came to Hogwarts .This house Lupin looked miserably around the room the tunnel that leads to it they were built for my use .Once a month I was smuggled out of the castle into this place to transform .The tree was placed at the tunnel mouth to stop anyone coming across me while I was dangerous .Harry couldnt see where this story was going but he was listening raptly all the same .The only sound apart from Lupins voice was Scabberss frightened squeaking .My transformations in those days were were terrible .It is very painful to turn into a werewolf .I was separated from humans to bite so I bit and scratched myself instead .The villagers heard the noise and the screaming and thought they were hearing particularly violent spirits .Dumbledore encouraged the rumor .Even now when the house has been silent for years the villagers dont dare approach it .But apart from my transformations I was happier than I had ever been in my life .For the first time ever I had friends three great friends .Sirius Black .Peter Pettigrew .and of course your father Harry James Potter .Now my three friends could hardly fail to notice that I disappeared once a month .I made up all sorts of stories .I told them my mother was ill and that I had to go home to see her .I was terrified they would desert me the moment they found out what I was .But of course they like you Hermione worked out the truth .And they didnt desert me at all .Instead they did something for me that would make my transformations not only bearable but the best times of my life .They became Animagi .My dad too ?said Harry astounded .Yes indeed said Lupin .It took them the best part of three years to work out how to do it .Your father and Sirius here were the cleverest students in the school and lucky they were because the Animagus transformation can go horribly wrong one reason the Ministry keeps a close watch on those attempting to do it .Peter needed all the help he could get from James and Sirius .Finally in our fifth year they managed it .They could each turn into a different animal at will .But how did that help you ?said Hermione sounding puzzled .They couldnt keep me company as humans so they kept me company as animals said Lupin .A werewolf is only a danger to people .They sneaked out of the castle every month under Jamess Invisibility Cloak .They transformed .Peter as the smallest could slip beneath the Willows attacking branches and touch the knot that freezes it .They would then slip down the tunnel and join me .Under their influence I became less dangerous .My body was still wolfish but my mind seemed to become less so while I was with them .Hurry up Remus snarled Black who was still watching Scabbers with a horrible sort of hunger on his face .Im getting there Sirius Im getting there .well highly exciting possibilities were open to us now that we could all transform .Soon we were leaving the Shrieking Shack and roaming the school grounds and the village by night .Sirius and James transformed into such large animals they were able to keep a werewolf in check .I doubt whether any Hogwarts students ever found out more about the Hogwarts grounds and Hogsmeade than we did .And thats how we came to write the Marauders Map and sign it with our nicknames .Sirius is Padfoot .Peter is Wormtail .James was Prongs .What sort of animal ?Harry began but Hermione cut him off .That was still really dangerous !Running around in the dark with a werewolf !What if youd given the others the slip and bitten somebody ?A thought that still haunts me said Lupin heavily .And there were near misses many of them .We laughed about them afterwards .We were young thoughtless carried away with our own cleverness .I sometimes felt guilty about betraying Dumbledores trust of course .he had admitted me to Hogwarts when no other headmaster would have done so and he had no idea I was breaking the rules he had set down for my own and others safety .He never knew I had led three fellow students into becoming Animagi illegally .But I always managed to forget my guilty feelings every time we sat down to plan our next months adventure .And I havent changed .Lupins face had hardened and there was selfdisgust in his voice .All this year I have been battling with myself wondering whether I should tell Dumbledore that Sirius was an Animagus .But I didnt do it .Why ?Because I was too cowardly .It would have meant admitting that Id betrayed his trust while I was at school admitting that Id led others along with me .and Dumbledores trust has meant everything to me .He let me into Hogwarts as a boy and he gave me a job when I have been shunned all my adult life unable to find paid work because of what I am .And so I convinced myself that Sirius was getting into the school using dark arts he learned from Voldemort that being an Animagus had nothing to do with it .so in a way Snapes been right about me all along .Snape ?said Black harshly taking his eyes off Scabbers for the first time in minutes and looking up at Lupin .Whats Snape got to do with it ?Hes here Sirius said Lupin heavily .Hes teaching here as well .He looked up at Harry Ron and Hermione .Professor Snape was at school with us .He fought very hard against my appointment to the Defense Against the Dark Arts job .He has been telling Dumbledore all year that I am not to be trusted .He has his reasons .you see Sirius here played a trick on him which nearly killed him a trick which involved me Black made a derisive noise .It served him right he sneered .Sneaking around trying to find out what we were up to .hoping he could get us expelled .Severus was very interested in where I went every month .Lupin told Harry Ron and Hermione .We were in the same year you know and we er didnt like each other very much .He especially disliked James .Jealous I think of Jamess talent on the Quidditch field .anyway Snape had seen me crossing the grounds with Madam Pomfrey one evening as she led me toward the Whomping Willow to transform .Sirius thought it would be er amusing to tell Snape all he had to do was prod the knot on the tree trunk with a long stick and hed be able to get in after me .Well of course Snape tried it if hed got as far as this house hed have met a fully grown werewolf but your father whod heard what Sirius had done went after Snape and pulled him back at great risk to his life .Snape glimpsed me though at the end of the tunnel .He was forbidden by Dumbledore to tell anybody but from that time on he knew what I was .So thats why Snape doesnt like you said Harry slowly because he thought you were in on the joke ?Thats right sneered a cold voice from the wall behind Lupin .Severus Snape was pulling off the Invisibility Cloak his wand pointing directly at Lupin .THE SERVANT OF LORD VOLDERMORT Hermione screamed .Black leapt to his feet .Harry felt as though hed received a huge electric shock .I found this at the base of the Whomping Willow said Snape throwing the cloak aside careful to keep this wand pointing directly at Lupins chest .Very useful Potter I thank you .Snape was slightly breathless but his face was full of suppressed triumph .Youre wondering perhaps how I knew you were here ?he said his eyes glittering .Ive just been to your office Lupin .You forgot to take your potion tonight so I took a gobletful along .And very lucky I did .lucky for me I mean .Lying on your desk was a certain map .One glance at it told me all I needed to know .I saw you running along this passageway and out of sight .Severus Lupin began but Snape overrode him .Ive told the headmaster again and again that youre helping your old friend Black into the castle Lupin and heres the proof .Not even I dreamed you would have the nerve to use this old place as your hideout Severus youre making a mistake said Lupin urgently .You havent heard everything I can explain Sirius is not here to kill Harry Two more for Azkaban tonight said Snape his eyes now gleaming fanatically .I shall be interested to see how Dumbledore takes this .He was quite convinced you were harmless you know Lupin .a tame werewolf You fool said Lupin softly .Is a schoolboy grudge worth putting an innocent man back inside Azkaban ?BANG !Thin snakelike cords burst from the end of Snapes wand and twisted themselves around Lupins mouth wrists and ankles he overbalanced and fell to the floor unable to move .With a roar of rage Black started toward Snape but Snape pointed his wand straight between Blacks eyes .Give me a reason he whispered .Give me a reason to do it and I swear I will .Black stopped dead .It would have been impossible to say which face showed more hatred .Harry stood there paralyzed not knowing what to do or whom to believe .He glanced around at Ron and Hermione .Ron looked just as confused as he did still fighting to keep hold on the struggling Scabbers .Hermione however took an uncertain step toward Snape and said in a very breathless voice Professor Snape it it wouldnt hurt to hear what theyve got to say w would it ?Miss Granger you are already facing suspension from this school Snape spat .You Potter and Weasley are outofbounds in the company of a convicted murderer and a werewolf .For once in your life hold your tongue .But if if there was a mistake KEEP QUIET YOU STUPID GIRL !Snape shouted looking suddenly quite deranged .DONT TALK ABOUT WHAT YOU DONT UNDERSTAND !A few sparks shot out of the end of his wand which was still pointed at Blacks face .Hermione fell silent .Vengeance is very sweet Snape breathed at Black .How I hoped I would be the one to catch you .The jokes on you again Severus Black snarled .As long as this boy brings his rat up to the castle he jerked his head at Ron Ill come quietly .Up to the castle ?said Snape silkily .I dont think we need to go that far .All I have to do is call the dementors once we get out of the Willow .Theyll be very pleased to see you Black .pleased enough to give you a little kiss I daresay .What little color there was in Blacks face left it .You youve got to hear me out he croaked .The rat look at the rat But there was a mad glint in Snape s eyes that Harry had never seen before .He seemed beyond reason .Come on all of you he said .He clicked his fingers and the ends of the cords that bound Lupin flew to his hands .Ill drag the werewolf .Perhaps the dementors will have a kiss for him too Before he knew what he was doing Harry had crossed the room in three strides and blocked the door .Get out of the way Potter youre in enough trouble already snarled Snape .If I hadnt been here to save your skin Professor Lupin could have killed me about a hundred times this year Harry said .Ive been alone with him loads of times having defense lessons against the dementors .If he was helping Black why didnt he just finish me off then ?Dont ask me to fathom the way a werewolfs mind works hissed Snape .Get out of the way Potter .YOURE PATHETIC !Harry yelled .JUST BECAUSE THEY MADE A FOOL OF YOU AT SCHOOL YOU WONT EVEN LISTEN SILENCE !I WILL NOT BE SPOKEN TO LIKE THAT !Snape shrieked looking madder than ever .Like father like son Potter !I have just saved your neck you should be thanking me on bended knee !You would have been well served if hed killed you !Youd have died like your father too arrogant to believe you might be mistaken in Black now get out of the way or I will make you .GET OUT OF THE WAY POTTER !Harry made up his mind in a split second .Before Snape could take even one step toward him he had raised his wand .Expelliarmus he yelled except that his wasnt the only voice that shouted .There was a blast that made the door rattle on its hinges Snape was lifted off his feet and slammed into the wall then slid down it to the floor a trickle of blood oozing from under his hair .He had been knocked out .Harry looked around .Both Ron and Hermione had tried to disarm Snape at exactly the same moment .Snape s wand soared in a high arc and landed on the bed next to Crookshanks .You shouldnt have done that said Black looking at Harry .You should have left him to me .Harry avoided Blacks eyes .He wasnt sure even now that hed done the right thing .We attacked a teacher .We attacked a teacher .Hermione whimpered staring at the lifeless Snape with frightened eyes .Oh were going to be in so much trouble Lupin was struggling against his bonds .Black bent down quickly and untied him .Lupin straightened up rubbing his arms where the ropes had cut into them .Thank you Harry he said .Im still not saying I believe you he told Lupin .Then its time we offered you some proof said Lupin .You boy give me Peter please .Now .Ron clutched Scabbers closer to his chest .Come off it he said weakly .Are you trying to say he broke out of Azkaban just to get his hands on Scabbers ?I mean .He looked up at Harry and Hermione for support Okay say Pettigrew could turn into a rat there are millions of rats hows he supposed to know which one hes after if he was locked up in Azkaban ?You know Sirius thats a fair question said Lupin turning to Black and frowning slightly .How did you find out where he was ?Black put one of his clawlike hands inside his robes and took out a crumpled piece of paper which he smoothed flat and held out to show the others .It was the photograph of Ron and his family that had appeared in the Daily Prophet the previous summer and there on Rons shoulder was Scabbers .How did you get this ?Lupin asked Black thunderstruck .Fudge said Black .When he came to inspect Azkaban last year he gave me his paper .And there was Peter on the front page .on this boys shoulder . .I knew him at once .how many times had I seen him transform ?And the caption said the boy would be going back to Hogwarts .to where Harry was .My God said Lupin softly staring from Scabbers to the picture in the paper and back again .His front paw .What about it ?said Ron defiantly .Hes got a toe missing said Black .Of course Lupin breathed .So simple .so brilliant .he cut it off himself ?Just before he transformed said Black .When I cornered him he yelled for the whole street to hear that Id betrayed Lily and James .Then before I could curse him he blew apart the street with the wand behind his back killed everyone within twenty feet of himself and sped down into the sewer with the other rats .Didnt you ever hear Ron ?said Lupin .The biggest bit of Peter they found was his finger .Look Scabbers probably had a fight with another rat or something !Hes been in my family for ages right Twelve years in fact said Lupin .Didnt you ever wonder why he was living so long ?We weve been taking good care of him !said Ron .Not looking too good at the moment though is he ?said Lupin .Id guess hes been losing weight ever since he heard Sirius was on the loose again .Hes been scared of that mad cat !said Ron nodding toward Crookshanks who was still purring on the bed .But that wasnt right Harry thought suddenly .Scabbers had been looking ill before he met Crookshanks .ever since Rons return from Egypt .since the time when Black had escaped .This cat isnt mad said Black hoarsely .He reached out a bony hand and stroked Crookshanks s fluffy head .Hes the most intelligent of his kind Ive ever met .He recognized Peter for what he was right away .And when he met me he knew I was no dog .It was a while before he trusted me .Finally I managed to communicate to him what I was after and hes been helping me .What do you mean ?breathed Hermione .He tried to bring Peter to me but couldnt .so he stole the passwords into Gryffindor Tower for me .As I understand it he took them from a boys bedside table .Harrys brain seemed to be sagging under the weight of what he was hearing .It was absurd .and yet .But Peter got wind of what was going on and ran for it .croaked Black .This cat Crookshanks did you call him ?told me Peter had left blood on the sheets .I supposed he bit himself .Well faking his own death had worked once .These words jolted Harry to his senses .And why did he fake his death ?he said furiously .Because he knew you were about to kill him like you killed my parents !No said Lupin Harry And now youve come to finish him off !Yes I have said Black with an evil look at Scabbers .Then I shouldve let Snape take you !Harry shouted .Harry said Lupin hurriedly dont you see ?All this time weve thought Sirius betrayed your parents and Peter tracked him down but it was the other way around dont you see ?Peter betrayed your mother and father Sirius tracked Peter down THATS NOT TRUE !Harry yelled .HE WAS THEIR SECRETKEEPER !HE SAID SO BEFORE YOU TURNED UP .HE SAID HE KILLED THEM !He was pointing at Black who shook his head slowly the sunken eyes were suddenly overbright .Harry .I as good as killed them he croaked .I persuaded Lily and James to change to Peter at the last moment persuaded them to use him as Secret Keeper instead of me .Im to blame I know it .The night they died Id arranged to check on Peter make sure he was still safe but when I arrived at his hiding place hed gone .Yet there was no sign of a struggle .It didnt feel right .I was scared .I set out for your parents house straight away .And when I saw their house destroyed and their bodies .I realized what Peter mustve done .what Id done .His voice broke .He turned away .Enough of this said Lupin and there was a steely note in his voice Harry had never heard before .Theres one certain way to prove what really happened .Ron give me that rat What are you going to do with him if I give him to you ?Ron asked Lupin tensely .Force him to show himself said Lupin .If he really is a rat it wont hurt him .Ron hesitated .Then at long last he held out Scabbers and Lupin took him .Scabbers began to squeak without stopping twisting and turning his tiny black eyes bulging in his head .Ready Sirius ?said Lupin .Black had already retrieved Snapes wand from the bed .He approached Lupin and the struggling rat and his wet eyes suddenly seemed to be burning in his face .Together ?he said quietly .I think so said Lupin holding Scabbers tightly in one hand and his wand in the other .On the count of three .One two THREE !A flash of bluewhite light erupted from both wands for a moment Scabbers was frozen in midair his small gray form twisting madly Ron yelled the rat fell and hit the floor .There was another blinding flash of light and then It was like watching a speededup film of a growing tree .A head was shooting upward from the ground limbs were sprouting a moment later a man was standing where Scabbers had been cringing and wringing his hands .Crookshanks was spitting and snarling on the bed the hair on his back was standing up .He was a very short man hardly taller than Harry and Hermione .His thin colorless hair was unkempt and there was a large bald patch on top .He had the shrunken appearance of a plump man who has lost a lot of weight in a short time .His skin looked grubby almost like Scabbers s fur and something of the rat lingered around his pointed nose and his very small watery eyes .He looked around at them all his breathing fast and shallow .Harry saw his eyes dart to the door and back again .Well hello Peter said Lupin pleasantly as though rats frequently erupted into old school friends around him .Long time no see .S Sirius .R Remus .Even Pettigrews voice was squeaky .Again his eyes darted toward the door .My friends .my old friends .Blacks wand arm rose but Lupin seized him around the wrist gave him a warning look then turned again to Pettigrew his voice light and casual .Weve been having a little chat Peter about what happened the night Lily and James died .You might have missed the finer points while you were squeaking around down there on the bed Remus gasped Pettigrew and Harry could see beads of sweat breaking out over his pasty face you dont believe him do you . ?He tried to kill me Remus .So weve heard said Lupin more coldly .Id like to clear up one or two little matters with you Peter if youd be so Hes come to try and kill me again !Pettigrew squeaked suddenly pointing at Black and Harry saw that he used his middle finger because his index was missing .He killed Lily and James and now hes going to kill me too .Youve got to help me Remus .Blacks face looked more skulllike than ever as he stared at Pettigrew with his fathomless eyes .No ones going to try and kill you until weve sorted a few things out said Lupin .Sorted things out ?squealed Pettigrew looking wildly about him once more eyes taking in the boarded windows and again the only door .I knew hed come after me !I knew hed be back for me !Ive been waiting for this for twelve years !You knew Sirius was going to break out of Azkaban ?said Lupin his brow furrowed .When nobody has ever done it before ?Hes got dark powers the rest of us can only dream of !Pettigrew shouted shrilly .How else did he get out of there ?I suppose HeWhoMustNotBeNamed taught him a few tricks !Black started to laugh a horrible mirthless laugh that filled the whole room .Voldemort teach me tricks ?he said .Pettigrew flinched as though Black had brandished a whip at him .What scared to hear your old masters name ?said Black .I dont blame you Peter .His lot arent very happy with you are they ?Dont know what you mean Sirius muttered Pettigrew his breathing faster than ever .His whole face was shining with sweat now .You havent been hiding from me for twelve years said Black .Youve been hiding from Voldemorts old supporters .I heard things in Azkaban Peter .They all think youre dead or youd have to answer to them .Ive heard them screaming all sorts of things in their sleep .Sounds like they think the double crosser doublecrossed them .Voldemort went to the Potters on your information .and Voldemort met his downfall there .And not all Voldemorts supporters ended up in Azkaban did they ?There are still plenty out here biding their time pretending theyve seen the error of their ways .If they ever got wind that you were still alive Peter Dont know .what youre talking about .said Pettigrew again more shrilly than ever .He wiped his face on his sleeve and looked up at Lupin .You dont believe this this madness Remus I must admit Peter I have difficulty in understanding why an innocent man would want to spend twelve years as a rat said Lupin evenly .Innocent but scared !squealed Pettigrew .If Voldemorts supporters were after me it was because I put one of their best men in Azkaban the spy Sirius Black !Blacks face contorted .How dare you he growled sounding suddenly like the bearsized dog he had been .I a spy for Voldemort ?When did I ever sneak around people who were stronger and more powerful than myself ?But you Peter Ill never understand why I didnt see you were the spy from the start .You always liked big friends whod look after you didnt you ?It used to be us .me and Remus .and James .Pettigrew wiped his face again he was almost panting for breath .Me a spy .must be out of your mind .never .dont know how you can say such a Lily and James only made you SecretKeeper because I suggested it Black hissed so venomously that Pettigrew took a step backward .I thought it was the perfect plan .a bluff .Voldemort would be sure to come after me would never dream theyd use a weak talentless thing like you .It must have been the finest moment of your miserable life telling Voldemort you could hand him the Potters .Pettigrew was muttering distractedly Harry caught words like farfetched and lunacy but he couldnt help paying more attention to the ashen color of Pettigrews face and the way his eyes continued to dart toward the windows and door .Professor Lupin ?said Hermione timidly .Can can I say something ?Certainly Hermione said Lupin courteously .Well Scabbers I mean this this man hes been sleeping in Harrys dormitory for three years .If hes working for YouKnowWho how come he never tried to hurt Harry before now ?There !said Pettigrew shrilly pointing at Ron with his maimed hand .Thank you !You see Remus ?I have never hurt a hair of Harrys head !Why should I ?Ill tell you why said Black .Because you never did anything for anyone unless you could see what was in it for you .Voldemorts been in hiding for fifteen years they say hes half dead .You werent about to commit murder right under Albus Dumbledores nose for a wreck of a wizard whod lost all of his power were you ?Youd want to be quite sure he was the biggest bully in the playground before you went back to him wouldnt you ?Why else did you find a wizard family to take you in ?Keeping an ear out for news werent you Peter ?Just in case your old protector regained strength and it was safe to rejoin him .Pettigrew opened his mouth and closed it several times .He seemed to have lost the ability to talk .Er Mr Black Sirius ?said Hermione .Black jumped at being addressed like this and stared at Hermione as though he had never seen anything quite like her .If you dont mind me asking how how did you get out of Azkaban if you didnt use Dark Magic ?Thank you !gasped Pettigrew nodding frantically at her .Exactly !Precisely what I But Lupin silenced him with a look .Black was frowning slightly at Hermione but not as though he were annoyed with her .He seemed to be pondering his answer .I dont know how I did it he said slowly .I think the only reason I never lost my mind is that I knew I was innocent .That wasnt a happy thought so the dementors couldnt suck it out of me .but it kept me sane and knowing who I am .helped me keep my powers .so when it all became .too much .I could transform in my cell .become a dog .Dementors cant see you know .He swallowed .They feel their way toward people by feeding off their emotions .They could tell that my feelings were less less human less complex when I was a dog .but they thought of course that I was losing my mind like everyone else in there so it didnt trouble them .But I was weak very weak and I had no hope of driving them away from me without a wand .But then I saw Peter in that picture .I realized he was at Hogwarts with Harry .perfectly positioned to act if one hint reached his ears that the Dark Side was gathering strength again .Pettigrew was shaking his head mouthing noiselessly but staring all the while at Black as though hypnotized . .ready to strike at the moment he could be sure of allies .and to deliver the last Potter to them .If he gave them Harry whod dare say hed betrayed Lord Voldemort ?Hed be welcomed back with honors .So you see I had to do something .I was the only one who knew Peter was still alive .Harry remembered what Mr Weasley had told Mrs Weasley .The guards say hes been talking in his sleep .always the same words . ‘Hes at Hog warts .It was as if someone had lit a fire in my head and the dementors couldnt destroy it .It wasnt a happy feeling .it was an obsession .but it gave me strength it cleared my mind .So one night when they opened my door to bring food I slipped past them as a dog .Its so much harder for them to sense animal emotions that they were confused .I was thin very thin .thin enough to slip through the bars .I swam as a dog back to the mainland .I journeyed north and slipped into the Hogwarts grounds as a dog .Ive been living in the forest ever since except when I came to watch the Quidditch of course .You fly as well as your father did Harry .He looked at Harry who did not look away .Believe me croaked Black .Believe me Harry .I never betrayed James and Lily .I would have died before I betrayed them .And at long last Harry believed him .Throat too tight to speak he nodded .No !Pettigrew had fallen to his knees as though Harrys nod had been his own death sentence .He shuffled forward on his knees groveling his hands clasped in front of him as though praying .Sirius its me .its Peter .your friend .you wouldnt .Black kicked out and Pettigrew recoiled .Theres enough filth on my robes without you touching them said Black .Remus !Pettigrew squeaked turning to Lupin instead writhing imploringly in front of him .You dont believe this .wouldnt Sirius have told you theyd changed the plan ?Not if he thought I was the spy Peter said Lupin .I assume thats why you didnt tell me Sirius ?he said casually over Pettigrews head .Forgive me Remus said Black .Not at all Padfoot old friend said Lupin who was now rolling up his sleeves .And will you in turn forgive me for believing you were the spy ?Of course said Black and the ghost of a grin flitted across his gaunt face .He too began rolling up his sleeves .Shall we kill him together ?Yes I think so said Lupin grimly .You wouldnt .you wont .gasped Pettigrew .And he scrambled around to Ron .Ron .havent I been a good friend .a good pet ?You wont let them kill me Ron will you .youre on my side arent you ?But Ron was staring at Pettigrew with the utmost revulsion .I let you sleep in my bed he said .Kind boy .kind master .Pettigrew crawled toward Ron you wont let them do it .I was your rat .I was a good pet .If you made a better rat than a human its not much to boast about Peter said Black harshly .Ron going still paler with pain wrenched his broken leg out of Pettigrews reach .Pettigrew turned on his knees staggered forward and seized the hem of Hermiones robes .Sweet girl .clever girl .you you wont let them . .Help me .Hermione pulled her robes out of Pettigrews clutching hands and backed away against the wall looking horrified .Pettigrew knelt trembling uncontrollably and turned his head slowly toward Harry .Harry .Harry .you look just like your father .just like him .HOW DARE YOU SPEAK TO HARRY ?roared Black .HOW DARE YOU FACE HIM ?HOW DARE YOU TALK ABOUT JAMES IN FRONT OF HIM ?Harry whispered Pettigrew shuffling toward him hands outstretched .Harry James wouldnt have wanted me killed .James would have understood Harry .he would have shown me mercy .Both Black and Lupin strode forward seized Pettigrews shoulders and threw him backward onto the floor .He sat there twitching with terror staring up at them .You sold Lily and James to Voldemort said Black who was shaking too .Do you deny it ?Pettigrew burst into tears .It was horrible to watch like an oversized balding baby cowering on the floor .Sirius Sirius what could I have done ?The Dark Lord .you have no idea .he has weapons you cant imagine .I was scared Sirius I was never brave like you and Remus and James .I never meant it to happen .HeWhoMustNotBeNamed forced me DONT LIE !bellowed Black .YOUD BEEN PASSING INFORMATION TO HIM FOR A YEAR BEFORE LILY AND JAMES DIED !YOU WERE HIS SPY !He he was taking over everywhere !gasped Pettigrew .Wh what was there to be gained by refusing him ?What was there to be gained by fighting the most evil wizard who has ever existed ?said Black with a terribly fury in his face .Only innocent lives Peter !You dont understand !whined Pettigrew .He would have killed me Sirius !THEN YOU SHOULD HAVE DIED !roared Black .DIED RATHER THAN BETRAY YOUR FRIENDS AS WE WOULD HAVE DONE FOR YOU !Black and Lupin stood shoulder to shoulder wands raised .You should have realized said Lupin quietly if Voldemort didnt kill you we would .Goodbye Peter .Hermione covered her face with her hands and turned to the wall .NO !Harry yelled .He ran forward placing himself in front of Pettigrew facing the wands .You cant kill him he said breathlessly .You cant .Black and Lupin both looked staggered .Harry this piece of vermin is the reason you have no parents Black snarled .This cringing bit of filth would have seen you die too without turning a hair .You heard him .His own stinking skin meant more to him than your whole family .I know Harry panted .Well take him up to the castle .Well hand him over to the dementors .He can go to Azkaban .but dont kill him .Harry !gasped Pettigrew and he flung his arms around Harrys knees .You thank you its more than I deserve thank you Get off me Harry spat throwing Pettigrews hands off him in disgust .Im not doing this for you .Im doing it because I dont reckon my dad wouldve wanted them to become killers just for you .No one moved or made a sound except Pettigrew whose breath was coming in wheezes as he clutched his chest .Black and Lupin were looking at each other .Then with one movement they lowered their wands .Youre the only person who has the right to decide Harry said Black .But think .think what he did .He can go to Azkaban Harry repeated .If anyone deserves that place he does .Pettigrew was still wheezing behind him .Very well said Lupin .Stand aside Harry .Harry hesitated .Im going to tie him up said Lupin .Thats all I swear .Harry stepped out of the way .Thin cords shot from Lupins wand this time and next moment Pettigrew was wriggling on the floor bound and gagged .But if you transform Peter growled Black his own wand pointing at Pettigrew too we will kill you .You agree Harry ?Harry looked down at the pitiful figure on the floor and nodded so that Pettigrew could see him .Right said Lupin suddenly businesslike .Ron I cant mend bones nearly as well as Madam Pomfrey so I think its best if we just strap your leg up until we can get you to the hospital wing .He hurried over to Ron bent down tapped Rons leg with his wand and muttered Ferula .Bandages spun up Rons leg strapping it tightly to a splint .Lupin helped him to his feet Ron put his weight gingerly on the leg and didnt wince .Thats better he said .Thanks .What about Professor Snape ?said Hermione in a small voice looking down at Snapes prone figure .Theres nothing seriously wrong with him said Lupin bending over Snape and checking his pulse .You were just a little overenthusiastic .Still out cold .Er perhaps it will be best if we dont revive him until were safely back in the castle .We can take him like this .He muttered Mobilicorpus .As though invisible strings were tied to Snapes wrists neck and knees he was pulled into a standing position head still lolling unpleasantly like a grotesque puppet .He hung a few inches above the ground his limp feet dangling .Lupin picked up the Invisibility Cloak and tucked it safely into his pocket .And two of us should be chained to this said Black nudging Pettigrew with his toe .Just to make sure .Ill do it said Lupin .And me said Ron savagely limping forward .Black conjured heavy manacles from thin air soon Pettigrew was upright again left arm chained to Lupins right right arm to Rons left .Rons face was set .He seemed to have taken Scabberss true identity as a personal insult .Crookshanks leapt lightly off the bed and led the way out of the room his bottlebrush tail held jauntily high .THE DEMENTORS KISS Harry had never been part of a stranger group .Crookshanks led the way down the stairs Lupin Pettigrew and Ron went next looking like entrants in a sixlegged race .Next came Professor Snape drifting creepily along his toes hitting each stair as they descended held up by his own wand which was being pointed at him by Sirius .Harry and Hermione brought up the rear .Getting back into the tunnel was difficult .Lupin Pettigrew and Ron had to turn sideways to manage it Lupin still had Pettigrew covered with his wand .Harry could see them edging awkwardly along the tunnel in single file .Crookshanks was still in the lead .Harry went right after Black who was still making Snape drift along ahead of them he kept bumping his lolling head on the low ceiling .Harry had the impression Black was making no effort to prevent this .You know what this means ?Black said abruptly to Harry as they made their slow progress along the tunnel .Turning Pettigrew in ?Youre free said Harry .Yes .said Black .But Im also I dont know if anyone ever told you Im your godfather .Yeah I knew that said Harry .Well .your parents appointed me your guardian said Black stiffly .If anything happened to them .Harry waited .Did Black mean what he thought he meant ?Ill understand of course if you want to stay with your aunt and uncle said Black .But .well .think about it .Once my names cleared .if you wanted a .a different home .Some sort of explosion took place in the pit of Harrys stomach .What live with you ?he said accidentally cracking his head on a bit of rock protruding from the ceiling .Leave the Dursleys ?Of course I thought you wouldnt want to said Black quickly .I understand I just thought Id Are you insane ?said Harry his voice easily as croaky as Blacks .Of course I want to leave the Dursleys !Have you got a house ?When can I move in ?Black turned right around to look at him Snapes head was scraping the ceiling but Black didnt seem to care .You want to ?he said .You mean it ?Yeah I mean it !said Harry .Blacks gaunt face broke into the first true smile Harry had seen upon it .The difference it made was startling as though a person ten years younger were shining through the starved mask for a moment he was recognizable as the man who had laughed at Harrys parents wedding .They did not speak again until they had reached the end of the tunnel .Crookshanks darted up first he had evidently pressed his paw to the knot on the trunk because Lupin Pettigrew and Ron clambered upward without any sound of savaging branches .Black saw Snape up through the hole then stood back for Harry and Hermione to pass .At last all of them were out .The grounds were very dark now the only light came from the distant windows of the castle .Without a word they set off .Pettigrew was still wheezing and occasionally whimpering .Harrys mind was buzzing .He was going to leave the Dursleys .He was going to live with Sirius Black his parents best friend .He felt dazed .What would happen when he told the Dursleys he was going to live with the convict theyd seen on television . !One wrong move Peter said Lupin threateningly ahead .His wand was still pointed sideways at Pettigrews chest .Silently they tramped through the grounds the castle lights growing slowly larger .Snape was still drifting weirdly ahead of Black his chin bumping on his chest .And then A cloud shifted .There were suddenly dim shadows on the ground .Their party was bathed in moonlight .Snape collided with Lupin Pettigrew and Ron who had stopped abruptly .Black froze .He flung out one arm to make Harry and Hermione stop .Harry could see Lupins silhouette .He had gone rigid .Then his limbs began to shake .Oh my Hermione gasped .He didnt take his potion tonight !Hes not safe !Run Black whispered .Run .Now .But Harry couldnt run .Ron was chained to Pettigrew and Lupin .He leapt forward but Black caught him around the chest and threw him back .Leave it to me RUN !There was a terrible snarling noise .Lupins head was lengthening .So was his body .His shoulders were hunching .Hair was sprouting visibly on his face and hands which were curling into clawed paws .Crookshankss hair was on end again he was backing away As the werewolf reared snapping its long jaws Sirius disappeared from Harrys side .He had transformed .The enormous bearlike dog bounded forward .As the werewolf wrenched itself free of the manacle binding it the dog seized it about the neck and pulled it backward away from Ron and Pettigrew .They were locked jaw to jaw claws ripping at each other Harry stood transfixed by the sight too intent upon the battle to notice anything else .It was Hermiones scream that alerted him Pettigrew had dived for Lupins dropped wand .Ron unsteady on his bandaged leg fell .There was a bang a burst of light and Ron lay motionless on the ground .Another bang Crookshanks flew into the air and back to the earth in a heap .ExpelliarmusV Harry yelled pointing his own wand at Pettigrew Lupins wand flew high into the air and out of sight .Stay where you are !Harry shouted running forward .Too late .Pettigrew had transformed .Harry saw his bald tail whip through the manacle on Rons outstretched arm and heard a scurrying through the grass .There was a howl and a rumbling growl Harry turned to see the werewolf taking flight it was galloping into the forest Sirius hes gone Pettigrew transformed !Harry yelled .Black was bleeding there were gashes across his muzzle and back but at Harrys words he scrambled up again and in an instant the sound of his paws faded to silence as he pounded away across the grounds .Harry and Hermione dashed over to Ron .What did he do to him ?Hermione whispered .Rons eyes were only halfclosed his mouth hung open he was definitely alive they could hear him breathing but he didnt seem to recognize them .I dont know .Harry looked desperately around .Black and Lupin both gone .they had no one but Snape for company still hanging unconscious in midair .Wed better get them up to the castle and tell someone said Harry pushing his hair out of his eyes trying to think straight .Come But then from beyond the range of their vision they heard a yelping a whining a dog in pain .Sirius Harry muttered staring into the darkness .He had a moments indecision but there was nothing they could do for Ron at the moment and by the sound of it Black was in trouble Harry set off at a run Hermione right behind him .The yelping seemed to be coming from the ground near the edge of the lake .They pelted toward it and Harry running flat out felt the cold without realizing what it must mean The yelping stopped abruptly .As they reached the lakeshore they saw why Sirius had turned back into a man .He was crouched on all fours his hands over his head .iVooo he moaned .Noooo .please .And then Harry saw them .Dementors at least a hundred of them gliding in a black mass around the lake toward them .He spun around the familiar icy cold penetrating his insides fog starting to obscure his vision more were appearing out of the darkness on every side they were encircling them .Hermione think of something happy !Harry yelled raising his wand blinking furiously to try and clear his vision shaking his head to rid it of the faint screaming that had started inside it Im going to live with my godfather .Im leaving the Dursleys .He forced himself to think of Black and only Black and began to chant Expecto patronum .Expecto patronum .Black gave a shudder rolled over and lay motionless on the ground pale as death .Hell be all right .Im going to go and live with him .Expecto patronum .Hermione help me !Expecto patronum .Expecto Hermione whispered expecto expecto But she couldnt do it .The dementors were closing in barely ten feet from them .They formed a solid wall around Harry and Hermione and were getting closer .EXPECTO PATRONUM Harry yelled trying to blot the screaming from his ears .EXPECTO PATRONUM .A thin wisp of silver escaped his wand and hovered like mist before him .At the same moment Harry felt Hermione collapse next to him .He was alone .completely alone .Expecto expecto patronum Harry felt his knees hit the cold grass .Fog was clouding his eyes .With a huge effort he fought to remember Sirius was innocent innocent Well be okay Im going to live with him Expecto patronum J he gasped .By the feeble light of his formless Patronus he saw a dementor halt very close to him .It couldnt walk through the cloud of silver mist Harry had conjured .A dead slimy hand slid out from under the cloak .It made a gesture as though to sweep the Patronus aside .No no Harry gasped .Hes innocent .expecto expecto patronum He could feel them watching him hear their rattling breath like an evil wind around him .The nearest dementor seemed to be considering him .Then it raised both its rotting hands and lowered its hood .Where there should have been eyes there was only thin gray scabbed skin stretched blankly over empty sockets .But there was a mouth .a gaping shapeless hole sucking the air with the sound of a death rattle .A paralyzing terror filled Harry so that he couldnt move or speak .His Patronus flickered and died .White fog was blinding him .He had to fight .expecto patronum .he couldnt see .and in the distance he heard the familiar screaming .expecto patronum .he groped in the mist for Sirius and found his arm .they werent going to take him .But a pair of strong clammy hands suddenly attached themselves around Harrys neck .They were forcing his face upward .He could feel its breath .It was going to get rid of him first .He could feel its putrid breath .His mother was screaming in his ears .She was going to be the last thing he ever heard And then through the fog that was drowning him he thought he saw a silvery light growing brighter and brighter .He felt himself fall forward onto the grass . .Facedown too weak to move sick and shaking Harry opened his eyes .The dementor must have released him .The blinding light was illuminating the grass around him .The screaming had stopped the cold was ebbing away .Something was driving the dementors back .It was circling around him and Black and Hermione .They were leaving .The air was warm again .With every ounce of strength he could muster Harry raised his head a few inches and saw an animal amid the light galloping away across the lake .Eyes blurred with sweat Harry tried to make out what it was .It was as bright as a unicorn .Fighting to stay conscious Harry watched it canter to a halt as it reached the opposite shore .For a moment Harry saw by its brightness somebody welcoming it back .raising his hand to pat it .someone who looked strangely familiar .but it couldnt be .Harry didnt understand .He couldnt think anymore .He felt the last of his strength leave him and his head hit the ground as he fainted .HERMIONES SECRET Shocking business .shocking .miracle none of them died .never heard the like .by thunder it was lucky you were there Snape .Thank you Minister .Order of Merlin Second Class Id say .First Class if I can wangle it !Thank you very much indeed Minister .Nasty cut youve got there .Blacks work I suppose ?As a matter of fact it was Potter Weasley and Granger Minister .iVo !Black had bewitched them I saw it immediately .A Confundus Charm to judge by their behavior .They seemed to think there was a possibility he was innocent .They werent responsible for their actions .On the other hand their interference might have permitted Black to escape .They obviously thought they were going to catch Black singlehanded .Theyve got away with a great deal before now .Im afraid its given them a rather high opinion of themselves .and of course Potter has always been allowed an extraordinary amount of license by the headmaster Ah well Snape .Harry Potter you know .weve all got a bit of a blind spot where hes concerned .And yet is it good for him to be given so much special treatment ?Personally I try and treat him like any other student .And any other student would be suspended at the very least for leading his friends into such danger .Consider Minister against all school rules after all the precautions put in place for his protection outofbounds at night consorting with a werewolf and a murderer and I have reason to believe he has been visiting Hogsmeade illegally too Well well .we shall see Snape we shall see .The boy has undoubtedly been foolish .Harry lay listening with his eyes tight shut .He felt very groggy .The words he was hearing seemed to be traveling very slowly from his ears to his brain so that it was difficult to understand .His limbs felt like lead his eyelids too heavy to lift .He wanted to lie here on this comfortable bed forever .What amazes me most is the behavior of the dementors .youve really no idea what made them retreat Snape ?No Minister .by the time I had come round they were heading back to their positions at the entrances .Extraordinary .And yet Black and Harry and the girl All unconscious by the time I reached them .I bound and gagged Black naturally conjured stretchers and brought them all straight back to the castle .There was a pause .Harrys brain seemed to be moving a little faster and as it did a gnawing sensation grew in the pit of his stomach .He opened his eyes .Everything was slightly blurred .Somebody had removed his glasses .He was lying in the dark hospital wing .At the very end of the ward he could make out Madam Pomfrey with her back to him bending over a bed .Harry squinted .Rons red hair was visible beneath Madam Pomfreys arm .Harry moved his head over on the pillow .In the bed to his right lay Hermione .Moonlight was falling across her bed .Her eyes were open too .She looked petrified and when she saw that Harry was awake pressed a finger to her lips then pointed to the hospital wing door .It was ajar and the voices of Cornelius Fudge and Snape were coming through it from the corridor outside .Madam Pomfrey now came walking briskly up the dark ward to Harrys bed .He turned to look at her .She was carrying the largest block of chocolate he had ever seen in his life .It looked like a small boulder .Ah youre awake !she said briskly .She placed the chocolate on Harrys bedside table and began breaking it apart with a small hammer .Hows Ron ?said Harry and Hermione together .Hell live said Madam Pomfrey grimly .As for you two .youll be staying here until Im satisfied youre Potter what do you think youre doing ?Harry was sitting up putting his glasses back on and picking up his wand .I need to see the headmaster he said .Potter said Madam Pomfrey soothingly its all right .Theyve got Black .Hes locked away upstairs .The dementors will be performing the kiss any moment now WHAT ?Harry jumped up out of bed Hermione had done the same .But his shout had been heard in the corridor outside next second Cornelius Fudge and Snape had entered the ward .Harry Harry whats this ?said Fudge looking agitated .You should be in bed has he had any chocolate ?he asked Madam Pomfrey anxiously .Minister listen !Harry said .Sirius Blacks innocent !Peter Pettigrew faked his own death !We saw him tonight !You cant let the dementors do that thing to Sirius hes But Fudge was shaking his head with a small smile on his face .Harry Harry youre very confused youve been through a dreadful ordeal lie back down now weve got everything under control .YOU HAVENT !Harry yelled .YOU VE GOT THE WRONG MAN !Minister listen please Hermione said she had hurried to Harrys side and was gazing imploringly into Fudges face .I saw him too .It was Rons rat hes an Animagus Pettigrew I mean and You see Minister ?said Snape .Confunded both of them .Blacks done a very good job on them .WERE NOT CONFUNDED !Harry roared .Minister !Professor !said Madam Pomfrey angrily .I must insist that you leave .Potter is my patient and he should not be distressed !Im not distressed Im trying to tell them what happened !Harry said furiously .If theyd just listen But Madam Pomfrey suddenly stuffed a large chunk of chocolate into Harrys mouth he choked and she seized the opportunity to force him back onto the bed .Now please Minister these children need care .Please leave The door opened again .It was Dumbledore .Harry swallowed his mouthful of chocolate with great difficulty and got up again .Professor Dumbledore Sirius Black For heavens sake !said Madam Pomfrey hysterically .Is this a hospital wing or not ?Headmaster I must insist My apologies Poppy but I need a word with Mr Potter and Miss Granger said Dumbledore calmly .I have just been talking to Sirius Black I suppose hes told you the same fairy tale hes planted in Potters mind ?spat Snape .Something about a rat and Pettigrew being alive That indeed is Blacks story said Dumbledore surveying Snape closely through his halfmoon spectacles .And does my evidence count for nothing ?snarled Snape .Peter Pettigrew was not in the Shrieking Shack nor did I see any sign of him on the grounds .That was because you were knocked out Professor !said Hermione earnestly .You didnt arrive in time to hear Miss Granger HOLD YOUR TONGUE !Now Snape said Fudge startled the young lady is disturbed in her mind we must make allowances I would like to speak to Harry and Hermione alone said Dumbledore abruptly .Cornelius Severus Poppy please leave us .Headmaster !sputtered Madam Pomfrey They need treatment they need rest This cannot wait said Dumbledore .I must insist .Madam Pomfrey pursed her lips and strode away into her office at the end of the ward slamming the door behind her .Fudge consulted the large gold pocket watch dangling from his waistcoat .The dementors should have arrived by now he said .Ill go and meet them .Dumbledore 111 see you upstairs .He crossed to the door and held it open for Snape but Snape hadnt moved .You surely dont believe a word of Blacks story ?Snape whispered his eyes fixed on Dumbledore s face .I wish to speak to Harry and Hermione alone Dumbledore repeated .Snape took a step toward Dumbledore .Sirius Black showed he was capable of murder at the age of sixteen he breathed .You havent forgotten that Headmaster ?You havent forgotten that he once tried to kill me ?My memory is as good as it ever was Severus said Dumbledore quietly .Snape turned on his heel and marched through the door Fudge was still holding .It closed behind them and Dumbledore turned to Harry and Hermione .They both burst into speech at the same time .Professor Blacks telling the truth we saw Pettigrew he escaped when Professor Lupin turned into a werewolf hes a rat Pettigrews front paw I mean finger he cut it off Pettigrew attacked Ron it wasnt Sirius But Dumbledore held up his hand to stem the flood of explanations .It is your turn to listen and I beg you will not interrupt me because there is very little time he said quietly .There is not a shred of proof to support Blacks story except your word and the word of two thirteenyearold wizards will not convince anybody .A street full of eyewitnesses swore they saw Sirius murder Pettigrew .I myself gave evidence to the Ministry that Sirius had been the Potters Secret Keeper .Professor Lupin can tell you Harry said unable to stop himself .Professor Lupin is currently deep in the forest unable to tell anyone anything .By the time he is human again it will be too late Sirius will be worse than dead .I might add that werewolves are so mistrusted by most of our kind that his support will count for very little and the fact that he and Sirius are old friends But Listen to me Harry .It is too late you understand me ?You must see that Professor Snapes version of events is far more convincing than yours .He hates Sirius Hermione said desperately .All because of some stupid trick Sirius played on him Sirius has not acted like an innocent man .The attack on the Fat Lady entering Gryffindor Tower with a knife without Pettigrew alive or dead we have no chance of overturning Siriuss sentence .But you believe us .Yes I do said Dumbledore quietly .But I have no power to make other men see the truth or to overrule the Minister of Magic .Harry stared up into the grave face and felt as though the ground beneath him were falling sharply away .He had grown used to the idea that Dumbledore could solve anything .He had expected Dumbledore to pull some amazing solution out of the air .But no .their last hope was gone .What we need said Dumbledore slowly and his light blue eyes moved from Harry to Hermione is more time .But Hermione began .And then her eyes became very round .OH !Now pay attention said Dumbledore speaking very low and very clearly .Sirius is locked in Professor Flitwicks office on the seventh floor .Thirteenth window from the right of the West Tower .If all goes well you will be able to save more than one innocent life tonight .But remember this both of you you must not be seen .Miss Granger you know the law you know what is at stake .You must not be seen .Harry didnt have a clue what was going on .Dumbledore had turned on his heel and looked back as he reached the door .I am going to lock you in .It is he consulted his watch five minutes to midnight .Miss Granger three turns should do it .Good luck .Good luck ?Harry repeated as the door closed behind Dumbledore .Three turns ?Whats he talking about ?What are we supposed to do ?But Hermione was fumbling with the neck of her robes pulling from beneath them a very long very fine gold chain .Harry come here she said urgently .Quick .Harry moved toward her completely bewildered .She was holding the chain out .He saw a tiny sparkling hourglass hanging from it .Here She had thrown the chain around his neck too .Ready ?she said breathlessly .What are we doing ?Harry said completely lost .Hermione turned the hourglass over three times .The dark ward dissolved .Harry had the sensation that he was flying very fast backward .A blur of colors and shapes rushed past him his ears were pounding he tried to yell but couldnt hear his own voice And then he felt solid ground beneath his feet and everything came into focus again He was standing next to Hermione in the deserted entrance hall and a stream of golden sunlight was falling across the paved floor from the open front doors .He looked wildly around at Hermione the chain of the hourglass cutting into his neck .Hermione what ?In here !Hermione seized Harrys arm and dragged him across the hall to the door of a broom closet she opened it pushed him inside among the buckets and mops then slammed the door behind them .What how Hermione what happened ?Weve gone back in time Hermione whispered lifting the chain off Harrys neck in the darkness .Three hours back .Harry found his own leg and gave it a very hard pinch .It hurt a lot which seemed to rule out the possibility that he was having a very bizarre dream .But Shh !Listen !Someones coming !I think I think it might be us !Hermione had her ear pressed against the cupboard door .Footsteps across the hall .yes I think its us going down to Hagrids !Are you telling me Harry whispered that were here in this cupboard and were out there too ?Yes said Hermione her ear still glued to the cupboard door .Im sure its us .It doesnt sound like more than three people .and were walking slowly because were under the Invisibility Cloak She broke off still listening intently .Weve gone down the front steps .Hermione sat down on an upturned bucket looking desperately anxious but Harry wanted a few questions answered .Where did you get that hourglass thing ?Its called a TimeTurner Hermione whispered and I got it from Professor McGonagall on our first day back .Ive been using it all year to get to all my lessons .Professor McGonagall made me swear I wouldnt tell anyone .She had to write all sorts of letters to the Ministry of Magic so I could have one .She had to tell them that I was a model student and that Id never ever use it for anything except my studies .Ive been turning it back so I could do hours over again thats how Ive been doing several lessons at once see ?But .Harry I dont understand what Dumbledore wants us to do .Why did he tell us to go back three hours ?Hows that going to help Sirius ?Harry stared at her shadowy face .There must be something that happened around now he wants us to change he said slowly .What happened ?We were walking down to Hagrids three hours ago .This is three hours ago and we are walking down to Hagrids said Hermione .We just heard ourselves leaving .Harry frowned he felt as though he were screwing up his whole brain in concentration .Dumbledore just said just said we could save more than one innocent life .And then it hit him .Hermione were going to save Buckbeak !But how will that help Sirius ?Dumbledore said he just told us where the window is the window of Flitwicks office !Where theyve got Sirius locked up !Weve got to fly Buckbeak up to the window and rescue Sirius !Sirius can escape on Buckbeak they can escape together !From what Harry could see of Hermiones face she looked terrified .If we manage that without being seen itll be a miracle !Well weve got to try havent we ?said Harry .He stood up and pressed his ear against the door .Doesnt sound like anyones there .Come on lets go .Harry pushed open the closet door .The entrance hall was deserted .As quietly and quickly as they could they darted out of the closet and down the stone steps .The shadows were already lengthening the tops of the trees in the Forbidden Forest gilded once more with gold .If anyones looking out of the window Hermione squeaked looking up at the castle behind them .Well run for it said Harry determinedly .Straight into the forest all right ?Well have to hide behind a tree or something and keep a lookout Okay but well go around by the greenhouses !said Hermione breathlessly .We need to keep out of sight of Hagrids front door or well see us !We must be nearly at Hagrids by now !Still working out what she meant Harry set off at a sprint Hermione behind him .They tore across the vegetable gardens to the greenhouses paused for a moment behind them then set off again fast as they could skirting around the Whomping Willow tearing toward the shelter of the forest .Safe in the shadows of the trees Harry turned around seconds later Hermione arrived beside him panting .Right she gasped .We need to sneak over to Hagrids .Keep out of sight Harry .They made their way silently through the trees keeping to the very edge of the forest .Then as they glimpsed the front of Hagrids house they heard a knock upon his door .They moved quickly behind a wide oak trunk and peered out from either side .Hagrid had appeared in his doorway shaking and white looking around to see who had knocked .And Harry heard his own voice .Its us .Were wearing the Invisibility Cloak .Let us in and we can take it off .Yeh shouldnve come !Hagrid whispered .He stood back then shut the door quickly .This is the weirdest thing weve ever done Harry said fervently .Lets move along a bit Hermione whispered .We need to get nearer to Buckbeak !They crept through the trees until they saw the nervous hippogriff tethered to the fence around Hagrids pumpkin patch .Now ?Harry whispered .No !said Hermione .If we steal him now those Committee people will think Hagrid set him free !Weve got to wait until theyve seen hes tied outside !Thats going to give us about sixty seconds said Harry .This was starting to seem impossible .At that moment there was a crash of breaking china from inside Hagrids cabin .Thats Hagrid breaking the milk jug Hermione whispered .Im going to find Scabbers in a moment Sure enough a few minutes later they heard Hermione s shriek of surprise .Hermione said Harry suddenly what if we we just run in there and grab Pettigrew No !said Hermione in a terrified whisper .Dont you understand ?Were breaking one of the most important wizarding laws !Nobodys supposed to change time nobody !You heard Dumbledore if were seen Wed only be seen by ourselves and Hagrid !Harry what do you think youd do if you saw yourself bursting into Hagrids house ?said Hermione .Id Id think Id gone mad said Harry or Id think there was some Dark Magic going on Exactly !You wouldnt understand you might even attack yourself !Dont you see ?Professor McGonagall told me what awful things have happened when wizards have meddled with time .Loads of them ended up killing their past or future selves by mistake !Okay !said Harry .It was just an idea I just thought But Hermione nudged him and pointed toward the castle .Harry moved his head a few inches to get a clear view of the distant front doors .Dumbledore Fudge the old Committee member and Macnair the executioner were coming down the steps .Were about to come out !Hermione breathed .And sure enough moments later Hagrids back door opened and Harry saw himself Ron and Hermione walking out of it with Hagrid .It was without a doubt the strangest sensation of his life standing behind the tree and watching himself in the pumpkin patch .Its okay Beaky its okay .Hagrid said to Buckbeak .Then he turned to Harry Ron and Hermione .Go on .Get goin .Hagrid we cant Well tell them what really happened They cant kill him Go !Its bad enough without you lot in trouble an all !Harry watched the Hermione in the pumpkin patch throw the Invisibility Cloak over him and Ron .Go quick .Don listen .There was a knock on Hagrids front door .The execution party had arrived .Hagrid turned around and headed back into his cabin leaving the back door ajar .Harry watched the grass flatten in patches all around the cabin and heard three pairs of feet retreating .He Ron and Hermione had gone .but the Harry and Hermione hidden in the trees could now hear what was happening inside the cabin through the back door .Where is the beast ?came the cold voice of Macnair .Out outside Hagrid croaked .Harry pulled his head out of sight as Macnairs face appeared at Hagrids window staring out at Buckbeak .Then they heard Fudge .We er have to read you the official notice of execution Hagrid .Ill make it quick .And then you and Macnair need to sign it .Macnair youre supposed to listen too thats procedure Macnairs face vanished from the window .It was now or never .Wait here Harry whispered to Hermione .Ill do it .As Fudges voice started again Harry darted out from behind his tree vaulted the fence into the pumpkin patch and approached Buckbeak .It is the decision of the Committee for the Disposal of Dangerous Creatures that the hippogriff Buckbeak hereafter called the condemned shall be executed on the sixth of June at sundown Careful not to blink Harry stared up into Buckbeaks fierce orange eyes once more and bowed .Buckbeak sank to his scaly knees and then stood up again .Harry began to fumble with the knot of rope tying Buckbeak to the fence . .sentenced to execution by beheading to be carried out by the Committees appointed executioner Walden Macnair .Come on Buckbeak Harry murmured come on were going to help you .Quietly .quietly . .as witnessed below .Hagrid you sign here .Harry threw all his weight onto the rope but Buckbeak had dug in his front feet .Well lets get this over with said the reedy voice of the Committee member from inside Hagrids cabin .Hagrid perhaps it will be better if you stay inside No I I wan ter be with him .I don wan him ter be alone Footsteps echoed from within the cabin .Buckbeak move Harry hissed .Harry tugged harder on the rope around Buckbeaks neck .The hippogriff began to walk rustling its wings irritably .They were still ten feet away from the forest in plain view of Hagrids back door .One moment please Macnair came Dumbledores voice .You need to sign too .The footsteps stopped .Harry heaved on the rope .Buckbeak snapped his beak and walked a little faster .Hermione s white face was sticking out from behind a tree .Harry hurry !she mouthed .Harry could still hear Dumbledores voice talking from within the cabin .He gave the rope another wrench .Buckbeak broke into a grudging trot .They had reached the trees .Quick !Quick !Hermione moaned darting out from behind her tree seizing the rope too and adding her weight to make Buckbeak move faster .Harry looked over his shoulder they were now blocked from sight they couldnt see Hagrids garden at all .Stop !he whispered to Hermione .They might hear us Hagrids back door had opened with a bang .Harry Hermione and Buckbeak stood quite still even the hippogriff seemed to be listening intently .Silence .then Where is it ?said the reedy voice of the Committee member .Where is the beast ?It was tied here !said the executioner furiously .I saw it !Just here !How extraordinary said Dumbledore .There was a note of amusement in his voice .Beaky !said Hagrid huskily .There was a swishing noise and the thud of an axe .The executioner seemed to have swung it into the fence in anger .And then came the howling and this time they could hear Hagrid s words through his sobs .Gone !Gone !Bless his little beak hes gone Musta pulled himself free !Beaky yeh clever boy !Buckbeak started to strain against the rope trying to get back to Hagrid .Harry and Hermione tightened their grip and dug their heels into the forest floor to stop him .Someone untied him !the executioner was snarling .We should search the grounds the forest Macnair if Buckbeak has indeed been stolen do you really think the thief will have led him away on foot ?said Dumbledore still sounding amused .Search the skies if you will .Hagrid I could do with a cup of tea .Or a large brandy .O o course Professor said Hagrid who sounded weak with happiness .Come in come in .Harry and Hermione listened closely .They heard footsteps the soft cursing of the executioner the snap of the door and then silence once more .Now what ?whispered Harry looking around .Well have to hide in here said Hermione who looked very shaken .We need to wait until theyve gone back to the castle .Then we wait until its safe to fly Buckbeak up to Siriuss window .He wont be there for another couple of hours .Oh this is going to be difficult .She looked nervously over her shoulder into the depths of the forest .The sun was setting now .Were going to have to move said Harry thinking hard .Weve got to be able to see the Whomping Willow or we wont know whats going on .Okay said Hermione getting a firmer grip on Buckbeaks rope .But weve got to keep out of sight Harry remember .They moved around the edge of the forest darkness falling thickly around them until they were hidden behind a clump of trees through which they could make out the Willow .Theres Ron !said Harry suddenly .A dark figure was sprinting across the lawn and its shout echoed through the still night air .Get away from him get away Scabbers come here And then they saw two more figures materialize out of nowhere .Harry watched himself and Hermione chasing after Ron .Then he saw Ron dive .Gotchcd Get off you stinking cat Theres Sirius !said Harry .The great shape of the dog had bounded out from the roots of the Willow .They saw him bowl Harry over then seize Ron .Looks even worse from here doesnt it ?said Harry watching the dog pulling Ron into the roots .Ouch look I just got walloped by the tree and so did you this is weird The Whomping Willow was creaking and lashing out with its lower branches they could see themselves darting here and there trying to reach the trunk .And then the tree froze .That was Crookshanks pressing the knot said Hermione .And there we go .Harry muttered .Were in .The moment they disappeared the tree began to move again .Seconds later they heard footsteps quite close by .Dumbledore Macnair Fudge and the old Committee member were making their way up to the castle .Right after wed gone down into the passage !said Hermione .If only Dumbledore had come with us .Macnair and Fudge wouldve come too said Harry bitterly .I bet you anything Fudge wouldve told Macnair to murder Sirius on the spot .They watched the four men climb the castle steps and disappear from view .For a few minutes the scene was deserted .Then Here comes Lupin !said Harry as they saw another figure sprinting down the stone steps and haring toward the Willow .Harry looked up at the sky .Clouds were obscuring the moon completely .They watched Lupin seize a broken branch from the ground and prod the knot on the trunk .The tree stopped fighting and Lupin too disappeared into the gap in its roots .If hed only grabbed the cloak said Harry .Its just lying there .He turned to Hermione .If I just dashed out now and grabbed it Snaped never be able to get it and Harry we mustnt be seen !How can you stand this ?he asked Hermione fiercely .Just standing here and watching it happen ?He hesitated .Im going to grab the cloak !Harry no !Hermione seized the back of Harrys robes not a moment too soon .Just then they heard a burst of song .It was Hagrid making his way up to the castle singing at the top of his voice and weaving slightly as he walked .A large bottle was swinging from his hands .See ?Hermione whispered .See what would have happened ?Weve got to keep out of sight !No Buckbeak .The hippogriff was making frantic attempts to get to Hagrid again Harry seized his rope too straining to hold Buckbeak back .They watched Hagrid meander tipsily up to the castle .He was gone .Buckbeak stopped fighting to get away .His head drooped sadly .Barely two minutes later the castle doors flew open yet again and Snape came charging out of them running toward the Willow .Harrys fists clenched as they watched Snape skid to a halt next to the tree looking around .He grabbed the cloak and held it up .Get your filthy hands off it Harry snarled under his breath .Shh !Snape seized the branch Lupin had used to freeze the tree prodded the knot and vanished from view as he put on the cloak .So thats it said Hermione quietly .Were all down there .and now weve just got to wait until we come back up again .She took the end of Buckbeaks rope and tied it securely around the nearest tree then sat down on the dry ground arms around her knees .Harry theres something I dont understand .Why didnt the dementors get Sirius ?I remember them coming and then I think I passed out .there were so many of them .Harry sat down too .He explained what hed seen how as the nearest dementor had lowered its mouth to Harrys a large silver something had come galloping across the lake and forced the dementors to retreat .Hermione s mouth was slightly open by the time Harry had finished .But what was it ?Theres only one thing it could have been to make the dementors go said Harry .A real Patronus .A powerful one .But who conjured it ?Harry didnt say anything .He was thinking back to the person hed seen on the other bank of the lake .He knew who he thought it had been .but how could it have been ?Didnt you see what they looked like ?said Hermione eagerly .Was it one of the teachers ?No said Harry .He wasnt a teacher .But it must have been a really powerful wizard to drive all those dementors away .If the Patronus was shining so brightly didnt it light him up ?Couldnt you see ?Yeah I saw him said Harry slowly .But .maybe I imagined it .I wasnt thinking straight .I passed out right afterward .Who did you think it was ?I think Harry swallowed knowing how strange this was going to sound .I think it was my dad .Harry glanced up at Hermione and saw that her mouth was fully open now .She was gazing at him with a mixture of alarm and pity .Harry your dads well dead she said quietly .I know that said Harry quickly .You think you saw his ghost ?I dont know .no .he looked solid .But then Maybe I was seeing things said Harry .But .from what I could see .it looked like him .Ive got photos of him .Hermione was still looking at him as though worried about his sanity .I know it sounds crazy said Harry flatly .He turned to look at Buckbeak who was digging his beak into the ground apparently searching for worms .But he wasnt really watching Buckbeak .He was thinking about his father and about his fathers three oldest friends .Moony Wormtail Padfoot and Prongs .Had all four of them been out on the grounds tonight ?Wormtail had reappeared this evening when everyone had thought he was dead . .Was it so impossible his father had done the same ?Had he been seeing things across the lake ?The figure had been too far away to see distinctly .yet he had felt sure for a moment before hed lost consciousness .The leaves overhead rustled faintly in the breeze .The moon drifted in and out of sight behind the shifting clouds .Hermione sat with her face turned toward the Willow waiting .And then at last after over an hour .Here we come !Hermione whispered .She and Harry got to their feet .Buckbeak raised his head .They saw Lupin Pettigrew and Ron clambering awkwardly out of the hole in the roots .followed by the unconscious Snape drifting weirdly upward .Next came Harry Hermione and Black .They all began to walk toward the castle .Harrys heart was starting to beat very fast .He glanced up at the sky .Any moment now that cloud was going to move aside and show the moon .Harry Hermione muttered as though she knew exactly what he was thinking weve got to stay put .We mustnt be seen .Theres nothing we can do .So were just going to let Pettigrew escape all over again .said Harry quietly .How do you expect to find a rat in the dark ?snapped Hermione .Theres nothing we can do !We came back to help Sirius were not supposed to be doing anything else !All right .The moon slid out from behind its cloud .They saw the tiny figures across the grounds stop .Then they saw movement There goes Lupin Hermione whispered .Hes transforming Hermione !said Harry suddenly .Weve got to move !We mustnt I keep telling you Not to interfere !Lupins going to run into the forest right at us !Hermione gasped .Quick !she moaned dashing to untie Buckbeak .Quick !Where are we going to go ?Where are we going to hide ?The dementors will be coming any moment Back to Hagrids !Harry said .Its empty now come on !They ran as fast as they could Buckbeak cantering along behind them .They could hear the werewolf howling behind them .The cabin was in sight Harry skidded to the door wrenched it open and Hermione and Buckbeak flashed past him Harry threw himself in after them and bolted the door .Fang the boarhound barked loudly .Shh Fang its us !said Hermione hurrying over and scratching his ears to quieten him .That was really close !she said to Harry .Yeah .Harry was looking out of the window .It was much harder to see what was going on from here .Buckbeak seemed very happy to find himself back inside Hagrids house .He lay down in front of the fire folded his wings contentedly and seemed ready for a good nap .I think Id better go outside again you know said Harry slowly .I cant see whats going on we wont know when its time Hermione looked up .Her expression was suspicious .Im not going to try and interfere said Harry quickly .But if we dont see whats going on howre we going to know when its time to rescue Sirius ?Well .okay then .Ill wait here with Buckbeak .but Harry be careful theres a werewolf out there and the dementors Harry stepped outside again and edged around the cabin .He could hear yelping in the distance .That meant the dementors were closing in on Sirius .He and Hermione would be running to him any moment .Harry stared out toward the lake his heart doing a kind of drumroll in his chest .Whoever had sent that Patronus would be appearing at any moment .For a fraction of a second he stood irresolute in front of Hagrids door .You must not be seen .But he didnt want to be seen .He wanted to do the seeing .He had to know .And there were the dementors .They were emerging out of the darkness from every direction gliding around the edges of the lake .They were moving away from where Harry stood to the opposite bank . .He wouldnt have to get near them .Harry began to run .He had no thought in his head except his father .If it was him .if it really was him .he had to know had to find out .The lake was coming nearer and nearer but there was no sign of anybody .On the opposite bank he could see tiny glimmers of silver his own attempts at a Patronus There was a bush at the very edge of the water .Harry threw himself behind it peering desperately through the leaves .On the opposite bank the glimmers of silver were suddenly extinguished .A terrified excitement shot through him any moment now Come on !he muttered staring about .Where are you ?Dad come on But no one came .Harry raised his head to look at the circle of dementors across the lake .One of them was lowering its hood .It was time for the rescuer to appear but no one was coming to help this time And then it hit him he understood .He hadnt seen his father he had seen himself Harry flung himself out from behind the bush and pulled out his wand .EXPECTO PATRONUM he yelled .And out of the end of his wand burst not a shapeless cloud of mist but a blinding dazzling silver animal .He screwed up his eyes trying to see what it was .It looked like a horse .It was galloping silently away from him across the black surface of the lake .He saw it lower its head and charge at the swarming dementors .Now it was galloping around and around the black shapes on the ground and the dementors were falling back scattering retreating into the darkness .They were gone .The Patronus turned .It was cantering back toward Harry across the still surface of the water .It wasnt a horse .It wasnt a unicorn either .It was a stag .It was shining brightly as the moon above .it was coming back to him .It stopped on the bank .Its hooves made no mark on the soft ground as it stared at Harry with its large silver eyes .Slowly it bowed its antlered head .And Harry realized .Prongs he whispered .But as his trembling fingertips stretched toward the creature it vanished .Harry stood there hand still outstretched .Then with a great leap of his heart he heard hooves behind him he whirled around and saw Hermione dashing toward him dragging Buckbeak behind her .What did you do ?she said fiercely .You said you were only going to keep a lookout !I just saved all our lives .said Harry .Get behind here behind this bush Ill explain .Hermione listened to what had just happened with her mouth open yet again .Did anyone see you ?Yes havent you been listening ?I saw me but I thought I was my dad !Its okay !Harry I cant believe it .You conjured up a Patronus that drove away all those dementors !Thats very very advanced magic .I knew I could do it this time said Harry because Id already done it .Does that make sense ?I dont know Harry look at Snape !Together they peered around the bush at the other bank .Snape had regained consciousness .He was conjuring stretchers and lifting the limp forms of Harry Hermione and Black onto them .A fourth stretcher no doubt bearing Ron was already floating at his side .Then wand held out in front of him he moved them away toward the castle .Right its nearly time said Hermione tensely looking at her watch .Weve got about fortyfive minutes until Dumbledore locks the door to the hospital wing .Weve got to rescue Sirius and get back into the ward before anybody realizes were missing .They waited watching the moving clouds reflected in the lake while the bush next to them whispered in the breeze .Buckbeak bored was ferreting for worms again .Dyou reckon hes up there yet ?said Harry checking his watch .He looked up at the castle and began counting the windows to the right of the West Tower .Look !Hermione whispered .Whos that ?Someones coming back out of the castle !Harry stared through the darkness .The man was hurrying across the grounds toward one of the entrances .Something shiny glinted in his belt .Macnair !said Harry .The executioner !Hes gone to get the dementors !This is it Hermione Hermione put her hands on Buckbeaks back and Harry gave her a leg up .Then he placed his foot on one of the lower branches of the bush and climbed up in front of her .He pulled Buckbeaks rope back over his neck and tied it to the other side of his collar like reins .Ready ?he whispered to Hermione .Youd better hold on to me He nudged Buckbeaks sides with his heels .Buckbeak soared straight into the dark air .Harry gripped his flanks with his knees feeling the great wings rising powerfully beneath them .Hermione was holding Harry very tight around the waist he could hear her muttering Oh no I dont like this oh I really dont like this Harry urged Buckbeak forward .They were gliding quietly toward the upper floors of the castle .Harry pulled hard on the lefthand side of the rope and Buckbeak turned .Harry was trying to count the windows flashing past Whoa !he said pulling backward as hard as he could .Buckbeak slowed down and they found themselves at a stop unless you counted the fact that they kept rising up and down several feet as the hippogriff beat his wings to remain airborne .Hes there !Harry said spotting Sirius as they rose up beside the window .He reached out and as Buckbeaks wings fell was able to tap sharply on the glass .Black looked up .Harry saw his jaw drop .He leapt from his chair hurried to the window and tried to open it but it was locked .Stand back !Hermione called to him and she took out her wand still gripping the back of Harrys robes with her left hand .Alohomoral The window sprang open .How how ?said Black weakly staring at the hippogriff .Get on theres not much time said Harry gripping Buckbeak firmly on either side of his sleek neck to hold him steady .Youve got to get out of here the dementors are coming Macnairs gone to get them .Black placed a hand on either side of the window frame and heaved his head and shoulders out of it .It was very lucky he was so thin .In seconds he had managed to fling one leg over Buckbeaks back and pull himself onto the hippogriff behind Hermione .Okay Buckbeak up !said Harry shaking the rope .Up to the tower come on !The hippogriff gave one sweep of its mighty wings and they were soaring upward again high as the top of the West Tower .Buckbeak landed with a clatter on the battlements and Harry and Hermione slid off him at once .Sirius youd better go quick Harry panted .Theyll reach Flitwicks office any moment theyll find out youre gone .Buckbeak pawed the ground tossing his sharp head .What happened to the other boy ?Ron ?croaked Sirius .Hes going to be okay .Hes still out of it but Madam Pomfrey says shell be able to make him better .Quick go But Black was still staring down at Harry .How can I ever thank GO !Harry and Hermione shouted together .Black wheeled Buckbeak around facing the open sky .Well see each other again he said .You are truly your fathers son Harry .He squeezed Buckbeaks sides with his heels .Harry and Hermione jumped back as the enormous wings rose once more .The hippogriff took off into the air . .He and his rider became smaller and smaller as Harry gazed after them .then a cloud drifted across the moon .They were gone .OWL POST AGAIN Harry !Hermione was tugging at his sleeve staring at her watch .Weve got exactly ten minutes to get back down to the hospital wing without anybody seeing us before Dumbledore locks the door Okay said Harry wrenching his gaze from the sky lets go .They slipped through the doorway behind them and down a tightly spiraling stone staircase .As they reached the bottom of it they heard voices .They flattened themselves against the wall and listened .It sounded like Fudge and Snape .They were walking quickly along the corridor at the foot of the staircase . .only hope Dumbledore s not going to make difficulties Snape was saying .The Kiss will be performed immediately ?As soon as Macnair returns with the dementors .This whole Black affair has been highly embarrassing .I cant tell you how much Im looking forward to informing the Daily Prophet that weve got him at last . .I daresay theyll want to interview you Snape .and once young Harrys back in his right mind I expect hell want to tell the Prophet exactly how you saved him .Harry clenched his teeth .He caught a glimpse of Snapes smirk as he and Fudge passed Harry and Hermiones hiding place .Their footsteps died away .Harry and Hermione waited a few moments to make sure theyd really gone then started to run in the opposite direction .Down one staircase then another along a new corridor then they heard a cackling ahead .Peeves Harry muttered grabbing Hermiones wrist .In here !They tore into a deserted classroom to their left just in time .Peeves seemed to be bouncing along the corridor in boisterous good spirits laughing his head off .Oh hes horrible whispered Hermione her ear to the door .I bet hes all excited because the dementors are going to finish off Sirius .She checked her watch .Three minutes Harry !They waited until Peeves s gloating voice had faded into the distance then slid back out of the room and broke into a run again .Hermione whatll happen if we dont get back inside before Dumbledore locks the door ?Harry panted .I dont want to think about it !Hermione moaned checking her watch again .One minute !They had reached the end of the corridor with the hospital wing entrance .Okay I can hear Dumbledore said Hermione tensely .Come on Harry !They crept along the corridor .The door opened .Dumbledore s back appeared .I am going to lock you in they heard him saying .It is five minutes to midnight .Miss Granger three turns should do it .Good luck .Dumbledore backed out of the room closed the door and took out his wand to magically lock it .Panicking Harry and Hermione ran forward .Dumbledore looked up and a wide smile appeared under the long silver mustache .Well ?he said quietly .We did it !said Harry breathlessly .Sirius has gone on Buckbeak .Dumbledore beamed at them .Well done .I think He listened intently for any sound within the hospital wing .Yes I think youve gone too get inside Ill lock you in Harry and Hermione slipped back inside the dormitory .It was empty except for Ron who was still lying motionless in the end bed .As the lock clicked behind them Harry and Hermione crept back to their own beds Hermione tucking the TimeTurner back under her robes .A moment later Madam Pomfrey came striding back out of her office .Did I hear the headmaster leaving ?Am I allowed to look after my patients now ?She was in a very bad mood .Harry and Hermione thought it best to accept their chocolate quietly .Madam Pomfrey stood over them making sure they ate it .But Harry could hardly swallow .He and Hermione were waiting listening their nerves jangling .And then as they both took a fourth piece of chocolate from Madam Pomfrey they heard a distant roar of fury echoing from somewhere above them .What was that ?said Madam Pomfrey in alarm .Now they could hear angry voices growing louder and louder .Madam Pomfrey was staring at the door .Really theyll wake everybody up !What do they think theyre doing ?Harry was trying to hear what the voices were saying .They were drawing nearer He must have Disapparated Severus .We should have left somebody in the room with him .When this gets out HE DIDNT DISAPPARATE !Snape roared now very close at hand .YOU CANT APPARATE OR DISAPPARATE INSIDE THIS CASTLE !THIS HAS SOMETHING TO DO WITH POTTER !Severus be reasonable Harry has been locked up BAM .The door of the hospital wing burst open .Fudge Snape and Dumbledore came striding into the ward .Dumbledore alone looked calm .Indeed he looked as though he was quite enjoying himself .Fudge appeared angry .But Snape was beside himself .OUT WITH IT POTTER !he bellowed .WHAT DID YOU DO ?Professor Snape !shrieked Madam Pomfrey .Control yourself !See here Snape be reasonable said Fudge .This doors been locked we just saw THEY HELPED HIM ESCAPE I KNOW IT !Snape howled pointing at Harry and Hermione .His face was twisted spit was flying from his mouth .Calm down man !Fudge barked .Youre talking nonsense !YOU DONT KNOW POTTER !shrieked Snape .HE DID IT I KNOW HE DID IT That will do Severus said Dumbledore quietly .Think about what you are saying .This door has been locked since I left the ward ten minutes ago .Madam Pomfrey have these students left their beds ?Of course not !said Madam Pomfrey bristling .I would have heard them !Well there you have it Severus said Dumbledore calmly .Unless you are suggesting that Harry and Hermione are able to be in two places at once Im afraid I dont see any point in troubling them further .Snape stood there seething staring from Fudge who looked thoroughly shocked at his behavior to Dumbledore whose eyes were twinkling behind his glasses .Snape whirled about robes swishing behind him and stormed out of the ward .Fellow seems quite unbalanced said Fudge staring after him .Id watch out for him if I were you Dumbledore .Oh hes not unbalanced said Dumbledore quietly .Hes just suffered a severe disappointment .Hes not the only one !puffed Fudge .The Daily Prophets going to have a field day !We had Black cornered and he slipped through our fingers yet again !All it needs now is for the story of that hippogriffs escape to get out and Ill be a laughingstock !Well .Id better go and notify the Ministry .And the dementors ?said Dumbledore .Theyll be removed from the school I trust ?Oh yes theyll have to go said Fudge running his fingers distractedly through his hair .Never dreamed theyd attempt to administer the Kiss on an innocent boy .Completely out of control .no Ill have them packed off back to Azkaban tonight .Perhaps we should think about dragons at the school entrance .Hagrid would like that said Dumbledore smiling at Harry and Hermione .As he and Fudge left the dormitory Madam Pomfrey hurried to the door and locked it again .Muttering angrily to herself she headed back to her office .There was a low moan from the other end of the ward .Ron had woken up .They could see him sitting up rubbing his head looking around .What what happened ?he groaned .Harry ?Why are we in here ?Wheres Sirius ?Wheres Lupin ?Whats going on ?Harry and Hermione looked at each other .You explain said Harry helping himself to some more chocolate .When Harry Ron and Hermione left the hospital wing at noon the next day it was to find an almost deserted castle .The sweltering heat and the end of the exams meant that everyone was taking full advantage of another Hogsmeade visit .Neither Ron nor Hermione felt like going however so they and Harry wandered onto the grounds still talking about the extraordinary events of the previous night and wondering where Sirius and Buckbeak were now .Sitting near the lake watching the giant squid waving its tentacles lazily above the water Harry lost the thread of the conversation as he looked across to the opposite bank .The stag had galloped toward him from there just last night .A shadow fell across them and they looked up to see a very blearyeyed Hagrid mopping his sweaty face with one of his tableclothsized handkerchiefs and beaming down at them .Know I shouldn feel happy after wha happened las night he said .I mean Black escapin again an everythin but guess what ?What ?they said pretending to look curious .Beaky !He escaped !Hes free !Bin celebratin all night !Thats wonderful !said Hermione giving Ron a reproving look because he looked as though he was close to laughing .Yeah .cantve tied him up properly said Hagrid gazing happily out over the grounds .I was worried this mornin mind .thought he mighta met Professor Lupin on the grounds but Lupin says he never ate anythin las night .What ?said Harry quickly .Blimey haven yeh heard ?said Hagrid his smile fading a little .He lowered his voice even though there was nobody in sight .Er Snape told all the Slytherins this mornin .Thought everyone d know by now .Professor Lupins a werewolf see .An he was loose on the grounds las night .Hes packin now o course .Hes packing ?said Harry alarmed .Why ?Leavin isn he ?said Hagrid looking surprised that Harry had to ask .Resigned firs thing this mornin .Says he cant risk it happenin again .Harry scrambled to his feet .Im going to see him he said to Ron and Hermione .But if hes resigned doesnt sound like theres anything we can do I dont care .I still want to see him .Ill meet you back here .Lupins office door was open .He had already packed most of his things .The grindylows empty tank stood next to his battered old suitcase which was open and nearly full .Lupin was bending over something on his desk and looked up only when Harry knocked on the door .I saw you coming said Lupin smiling .He pointed to the parchment he had been poring over .It was the Marauders Map .I just saw Hagrid said Harry .And he said youd resigned .Its not true is it ?Im afraid it is said Lupin .He started opening his desk drawers and taking out the contents .Why ?said Harry .The Ministry of Magic dont think you were helping Sirius do they ?Lupin crossed to the door and closed it behind Harry .No .Professor Dumbledore managed to convince Fudge that I was trying to save your lives .He sighed .That was the final straw for Severus .I think the loss of the Order of Merlin hit him hard .So he er accidentally let slip that I am a werewolf this morning at breakfast .Youre not leaving just because of that !said Harry .Lupin smiled wryly .This time tomorrow the owls will start arriving from parents .They will not want a werewolf teaching their children Harry .And after last night I see their point .I could have bitten any of you .That must never happen again .Youre the best Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher weve ever had !said Harry .Dont go !Lupin shook his head and didnt speak .He carried on emptying his drawers .Then while Harry was trying to think of a good argument to make him stay Lupin said From what the headmaster told me this morning you saved a lot of lives last night Harry .If Im proud of anything Ive done this year its how much youve learned .Tell me about your Patronus .How dyou know about that ?said Harry distracted .What else could have driven the dementors back ?Harry told Lupin what had happened .When hed finished Lupin was smiling again .Yes your father was always a stag when he transformed he said .You guessed right .thats why we called him Prongs .Lupin threw his last few books into his case closed the desk drawers and turned to look at Harry .Here I brought this from the Shrieking Shack last night he said handing Harry back the Invisibility Cloak .And .He hesitated then held out the Marauders Map too .I am no longer your teacher so I dont feel guilty about giving you back this as well .Its no use to me and I daresay you Ron and Hermione will find uses for it .Harry took the map and grinned .You told me Moony Wormtail Padfoot and Prongs wouldve wanted to lure me out of school .you said theyd have thought it was funny .And so we would have said Lupin now reaching down to close his case .I have no hesitation in saying that James would have been highly disappointed if his son had never found any of the secret passages out of the castle .There was a knock on the door .Harry hastily stuffed the Marauders Map and the Invisibility Cloak into his pocket .It was Professor Dumbledore .He didnt look surprised to see Harry there .Your carriage is at the gates Remus he said .Thank you Headmaster .Lupin picked up his old suitcase and the empty grindylow tank .Well goodbye Harry he said smiling .It has been a real pleasure teaching you .I feel sure well meet again sometime .Headmaster there is no need to see me to the gates I can manage .Harry had the impression that Lupin wanted to leave as quickly as possible .Goodbye then Remus said Dumbledore soberly .Lupin shifted the grindylow tank slightly so that he and Dumbledore could shake hands .Then with a final nod to Harry and a swift smile Lupin left the office .Harry sat down in his vacated chair staring glumly at the floor .He heard the door close and looked up .Dumbledore was still there .Why so miserable Harry ?he said quietly .You should be very proud of yourself after last night .It didnt make any difference said Harry bitterly .Pettigrew got away .Didnt make any difference ?said Dumbledore quietly .It made all the difference in the world Harry .You helped uncover the truth .You saved an innocent man from a terrible fate .Terrible .Something stirred in Harrys memory .Greater and more terrible than ever before .Professor Trelawneys prediction !Professor Dumbledore yesterday when I was having my Divination exam Professor Trelawney went very very strange .Indeed ?said Dumbledore .Er stranger than usual you mean ?Yes .her voice went all deep and her eyes rolled and she said .she said Voldemorts servant was going to set out to return to him before midnight .She said the servant would help him come back to power .Harry stared up at Dumbledore .And then she sort of became normal again and she couldnt remember anything shed said .Was it was she making a real prediction ?Dumbledore looked mildly impressed .Do you know Harry I think she might have been he said thoughtfully .Whod have thought it ?That brings her total of real predictions up to two .I should offer her a pay raise .But Harry looked at him aghast .How could Dumbledore take this so calmly ?But I stopped Sirius and Professor Lupin from killing Pettigrew !That makes it my fault if Voldemort comes back !It does not said Dumbledore quietly .Hasnt your experience with the TimeTurner taught you anything Harry ?The consequences of our actions are always so complicated so diverse that predicting the future is a very difficult business indeed .Professor Trelawney bless her is living proof of that .You did a very noble thing in saving Pettigrews life .But if he helps Voldemort back to power !Pettigrew owes his life to you .You have sent Voldemort a deputy who is in your debt .When one wizard saves another wizards life it creates a certain bond between them .and Im much mistaken if Voldemort wants his servant in the debt of Harry Potter .I dont want a connection with Pettigrew !said Harry .He betrayed my parents !This is magic at its deepest its most impenetrable Harry .But trust me .the time may come when you will be very glad you saved Pettigrews life .Harry couldnt imagine when that would be .Dumbledore looked as though he knew what Harry was thinking .I knew your father very well both at Hogwarts and later Harry he said gently .He would have saved Pettigrew too I am sure of it .Harry looked up at him .Dumbledore wouldnt laugh he could tell Dumbledore .I thought it was my dad whod conjured my Patronus .I mean when I saw myself across the lake .I thought I was seeing him .An easy mistake to make said Dumbledore softly .I expect you 11 tire of hearing it but you do look extraordinarily like James .Except for the eyes .you have your mothers eyes .Harry shook his head .It was stupid thinking it was him he muttered .I mean I knew he was dead .You think the dead we loved ever truly leave us ?You think that we dont recall them more clearly than ever in times of great trouble ?Your father is alive in you Harry and shows himself most plainly when you have need of him .How else could you produce that particular Patronus ?Prongs rode again last night .It took a moment for Harry to realize what Dumbledore had said .Last night Sirius told me all about how they became Animagi said Dumbledore smiling .An extraordinary achievement not least keeping it quiet from me .And then I remembered the most unusual form your Patronus took when it charged Mr Malfoy down at your Quidditch match against Ravenclaw .You know Harry in a way you did see your father last night .You found him inside yourself .And Dumbledore left the office leaving Harry to his very confused thoughts .Nobody at Hogwarts now knew the truth of what had happened the night that Sirius Buckbeak and Pettigrew had vanished except Harry Ron Hermione and Professor Dumbledore .As the end of term approached Harry heard many different theories about what had really happened but none of them came close to the truth .Malfoy was furious about Buckbeak .He was convinced that Hagrid had found a way of smuggling the hippogriff to safety and seemed outraged that he and his father had been outwitted by a gamekeeper .Percy Weasley meanwhile had much to say on the subject of Siriuss escape .If I manage to get into the Ministry Ill have a lot of proposals to make about Magical Law Enforcement !he told the only person who would listen his girlfriend Penelope .Though the weather was perfect though the atmosphere was so cheerful though he knew they had achieved the near impossible in helping Sirius to freedom Harry had never approached the end of a school year in worse spirits .He certainly wasnt the only one who was sorry to see Professor Lupin go .The whole of Harrys Defense Against the Dark Arts class was miserable about his resignation .Wonder what theyll give us next year ?said Seamus Finnigan gloomily .Maybe a vampire suggested Dean Thomas hopefully .It wasnt only Professor Lupins departure that was weighing on Harrys mind .He couldnt help thinking a lot about Professor Trelawneys prediction .He kept wondering where Pettigrew was now whether he had sought sanctuary with Voldemort yet .But the thing that was lowering Harrys spirits most of all was the prospect of returning to the Dursleys .For maybe half an hour a glorious half hour he had believed he would be living with Sirius from now on .his parents best friend .It would have been the next best thing to having his own father back .And while no news of Sirius was definitely good news because it meant he had successfully gone into hiding Harry couldnt help feeling miserable when he thought of the home he might have had and the fact that it was now impossible .The exam results came out on the last day of term .Harry Ron and Hermione had passed every subject .Harry was amazed that he had got through Potions .He had a shrewd suspicion that Dumbledore might have stepped in to stop Snape failing him on purpose .Snapes behavior toward Harry over the past week had been quite alarming .Harry wouldnt have thought it possible that Snapes dislike for him could increase but it certainly had .A muscle twitched unpleasantly at the corner of Snapes thin mouth every time he looked at Harry and he was constantly flexing his fingers as though itching to place them around Harrys throat .Percy had got his topgrade N .E .W .T .s Fred and George had scraped a handful of O .W .L .s each .Gryffindor House meanwhile largely thanks to their spectacular performance in the Quidditch Cup had won the House championship for the third year running .This meant that the end of term feast took place amid decorations of scarlet and gold and that the Gryffindor table was the noisiest of the lot as everybody celebrated .Even Harry managed to forget about the journey back to the Dursleys the next day as he ate drank talked and laughed with the rest .As the Hogwarts Express pulled out of the station the next morning Hermione gave Harry and Ron some surprising news .I went to see Professor McGonagall this morning just before breakfast .Ive decided to drop Muggle Studies .But you passed your exam with three hundred and twenty percent !said Ron .I know sighed Hermione but I cant stand another year like this one .That TimeTurner it was driving me mad .Ive handed it in .Without Muggle Studies and Divination Ill be able to have a normal schedule again .I still cant believe you didnt tell us about it said Ron grumpily .Were supposed to be your friends .I promised I wouldnt tell anyone said Hermione severely .She looked around at Harry who was watching Hogwarts disappear from view behind a mountain .Two whole months before hed see it again .Oh cheer up Harry !said Hermione sadly .Im okay said Harry quickly .Just thinking about the holidays .Yeah Ive been thinking about them too said Ron .Harry youve got to come and stay with us .Ill fix it up with Mum and Dad then Ill call you .I know how to use a fellytone now A telephone Ron said Hermione .Honestly you should take Muggle Studies next year .Ron ignored her .Its the Quidditch World Cup this summer !How about it Harry ?Come and stay and well go and see it !Dad can usually get tickets from work .This proposal had the effect of cheering Harry up a great deal .Yeah .I bet the Dursleysd be pleased to let me come .especially after what I did to Aunt Marge .Feeling considerably more cheerful Harry joined Ron and Hermione in several games of Exploding Snap and when the witch with the tea cart arrived he bought himself a very large lunch though nothing with chocolate in it .But it was late in the afternoon before the thing that made him truly happy turned up .Harry said Hermione suddenly peering over his shoulder .Whats that thing outside your window ?Harry turned to look outside .Something very small and gray was bobbing in and out of sight beyond the glass .He stood up for a better look and saw that it was a tiny owl carrying a letter that was much too big for it .The owl was so small in fact that it kept tumbling over in the air buffeted this way and that in the trains slipstream .Harry quickly pulled down the window stretched out his arm and caught it .It felt like a very fluffy Snitch .He brought it carefully inside .The owl dropped its letter onto Harrys seat and began zooming around their compartment apparently very pleased with itself for accomplishing its task .Hedwig clicked her beak with a sort of dignified disapproval .Crookshanks sat up in his seat following the owl with his great yellow eyes .Ron noticing this snatched the owl safely out of harms way .Harry picked up the letter .It was addressed to him .He ripped open the letter and shouted Its from Sirius !What ?said Ron and Hermione excitedly .Read it aloud !Dear Harry I hope this finds you before you reach your aunt and uncle .I dont know whether theyre used to owl post Buckbeak and I are in hiding .I wont tell you where in case this owl falls into the wrong hands .I have some doubt about his reliability but he is the best I could find and he did seem eager for the job .I believe the dementors are still searching for me but they havent a hope of finding me here .I am planning to allow some Muggles to glimpse me soon a long way from Hogwarts so that the security on the castle will be lifted .There is something I never got around to telling you during our brief meeting .It was I who sent you the Firebolt Ha !said Hermione triumphantly .See !I told you it was from him !Yes but he hadnt jinxed it had he ?said Ron .Ouch !The tiny owl now hooting happily in his hand had nibbled one of his fingers in what it seemed to think was an affectionate way .Crookshanks took the order to the Owl Office for me .I used your name but told them to take the gold from my own Gringotts vault .Please consider it as thirteen birthdays worth of presents from your godfather .I would also like to apologize for the fright I think I gave you that night last year when you left your uncles house .I had only hoped to get a glimpse of you before starting my journey north but I think the sight of me alarmed you .I am enclosing something else for you which I think will make your next year at Hogwarts more enjoyable .If ever you need me send word .Your owl will find me .Ill write again soon .Sirius Harry looked eagerly inside the envelope .There was another piece of parchment in there .He read it through quickly and felt suddenly as warm and contented as though hed swallowed a bottle of hot butterbeer in one gulp .I Sirius Black Harry Potters godfather hereby give him permission to visit Hogsmeade on weekends .Thatll be good enough for Dumbledore !said Harry happily .He looked back at Siriuss letter .Hang on theres a P .S .I thought your friend Ron might like to keep this owl as its my fault he no longer has a rat .Rons eyes widened .The minute owl was still hooting excitedly .Keep him ?he said uncertainly .He looked closely at the owl for a moment then to Harrys and Hermiones great surprise he held him out for Crookshanks to sniff .What doyou reckon ?Ron asked the cat .Definitely an owl ?Crookshanks purred .Thats good enough for me said Ron happily .Hes mine .Harry read and reread the letter from Sirius all the way back into Kings Cross station .It was still clutched tightly in his hand as he Ron and Hermione stepped back through the barrier of platform nine and threequarters .Harry spotted Uncle Vernon at once .He was standing a good distance from Mr and Mrs Weasley eyeing them suspiciously and when Mrs Weasley hugged Harry in greeting his worst suspicions about them seemed confirmed .Ill call about the World Cup !Ron yelled after Harry as Harry bid him and Hermione goodbye then wheeled the trolley bearing his trunk and Hedwigs cage toward Uncle Vernon who greeted him in his usual fashion .Whats that ?he snarled staring at the envelope Harry was still clutching in his hand .If its another form for me to sign youve got another Its not said Harry cheerfully .Its a letter from my godfather .Godfather ?sputtered Uncle Vernon .You havent got a godfather !Yes I have said Harry brightly .He was my mum and dads best friend .Hes a convicted murderer but hes broken out of wizard prison and hes on the run .He likes to keep in touch with me though .keep up with my news .check if Im happy .And grinning broadly at the look of horror on Uncle Vernons face Harry set off toward the station exit Hedwig rattling along in front of him for what looked like a much better summer than the last .THE RIDDLE HOUSE The villagers of Little Hangleton still called it the Riddle House even though it had been many years since the Riddle family had lived there .It stood on a hill overlooking the village some of its windows boarded tiles missing from its roof and ivy spreading unchecked over its face .Once a finelooking manor and easily the largest and grandest building for miles around the Riddle House was now damp derelict and unoccupied .The Little Hangletons all agreed that the old house was creepy .Half a century ago something strange and horrible had happened there something that the older inhabitants of the village still liked to discuss when topics for gossip were scarce .The story had been picked over so many times and had been embroidered in so many places that nobody was quite sure what the truth was anymore .Every version of the tale however started in the same place Fifty years before at daybreak on a fine summers morning when the Riddle House had still been well kept and impressive a maid had entered the drawing room to find all three Riddles dead .The maid had run screaming down the hill into the village and roused as many people as she could .Lying there with their eyes wide open !Cold as ice !Still in their dinner things !The police were summoned and the whole of Little Hangleton had seethed with shocked curiosity and ill disguised excitement .Nobody wasted their breath pretending to feel very sad about the Riddles for they had been most unpopular .Elderly Mr and Mrs Riddle had been rich snobbish and rude and their grownup son Tom had been if anything worse .All the villagers cared about was the identity of their murderer for plainly three apparently healthy people did not all drop dead of natural causes on the same night .The Hanged Man the village pub did a roaring trade that night the whole village seemed to have turned out to discuss the murders .They were rewarded for leaving their firesides when the Riddles cook arrived dramatically in their midst and announced to the suddenly silent pub that a man called Frank Bryce had just been arrested .Frank !cried several people .Never !Frank Bryce was the Riddles gardener .He lived alone in a rundown cottage on the grounds of the Riddle House .Frank had come back from the war with a very stiff leg and a great dislike of crowds and loud noises and had been working for the Riddles ever since .There was a rush to buy the cook drinks and hear more details .Always thought he was odd she told the eagerly listening villagers after her fourth sherry .Unfriendly like .Im sure if Ive offered him a cuppa once Ive offered it a hundred times .Never wanted to mix he didnt .Ah now said a woman at the bar he had a hard war Frank .He likes the quiet life .Thats no reason to Who else had a key to the back door then ?barked the cook .Theres been a spare key hanging in the gardeners cottage far back as I can remember !Nobody forced the door last night !No broken windows !All Frank had to do was creep up to the big house while we was all sleeping .The villagers exchanged dark looks .I always thought he had a nasty look about him right enough grunted a man at the bar .War turned him funny if you ask me said the landlord .Told you I wouldnt like to get on the wrong side of Frank didnt I Dot ?said an excited woman in the corner .Horrible temper said Dot nodding fervently .I remember when he was a kid .By the following morning hardly anyone in Little Hangleton doubted that Frank Bryce had killed the Riddles .But over in the neighboring town of Great Hangleton in the dark and dingy police station Frank was stubbornly repeating again and again that he was innocent and that the only person he had seen near the house on the day of the Riddles deaths had been a teenage boy a stranger darkhaired and pale .Nobody else in the village had seen any such boy and the police were quite sure that Frank had invented him .Then just when things were looking very serious for Frank the report on the Riddles bodies came back and changed everything .The police had never read an odder report .A team of doctors had examined the bodies and had concluded that none of the Riddles had been poisoned stabbed shot strangled suffocated or as far as they could tell harmed at all .In fact the report continued in a tone of unmistakable bewilderment the Riddles all appeared to be in perfect health apart from the fact that they were all dead .The doctors did note as though determined to find something wrong with the bodies that each of the Riddles had a look of terror upon his or her face but as the frustrated police said whoever heard of three people being frightened to death ?As there was no proof that the Riddles had been murdered at all the police were forced to let Frank go .The Riddles were buried in the Little Hangleton churchyard and their graves remained objects of curiosity for a while .To everyones surprise and amid a cloud of suspicion Frank Bryce returned to his cottage on the grounds of the Riddle House .S far as Im concerned he killed them and I dont care what the police say said Dot in the Hanged Man .And if he had any decency hed leave here knowing as how we knows he did it .But Frank did not leave .He stayed to tend the garden for the next family who lived in the Riddle House and then the next for neither family stayed long .Perhaps it was partly because of Frank that the new owners said there was a nasty feeling about the place which in the absence of inhabitants started to fall into disrepair .The wealthy man who owned the Riddle House these days neither lived there nor put it to any use they said in the village that he kept it for tax reasons though nobody was very clear what these might be .The wealthy owner continued to pay Frank to do the gardening however .Frank was nearing his seventy seventh birthday now very deaf his bad leg stiffer than ever but could be seen pottering around the flower beds in fine weather even though the weeds were starting to creep up on him try as he might to suppress them .Weeds were not the only things Frank had to contend with either .Boys from the village made a habit of throwing stones through the windows of the Riddle House .They rode their bicycles over the lawns Frank worked so hard to keep smooth .Once or twice they broke into the old house for a dare .They knew that old Franks devotion to the house and grounds amounted almost to an obsession and it amused them to see him limping across the garden brandishing his stick and yelling croakily at them .Frank for his part believed the boys tormented him because they like their parents and grandparents thought him a murderer .So when Frank awoke one night in August and saw something very odd up at the old house he merely assumed that the boys had gone one step further in their attempts to punish him .It was Franks bad leg that woke him it was paining him worse than ever in his old age .He got up and limped downstairs into the kitchen with the idea of refilling his hotwater bottle to ease the stiffness in his knee .Standing at the sink filling the kettle he looked up at the Riddle House and saw lights glimmering in its upper windows .Frank knew at once what was going on .The boys had broken into the house again and judging by the flickering quality of the light they had started a fire .Frank had no telephone and in any case he had deeply mistrusted the police ever since they had taken him in for questioning about the Riddles deaths .He put down the kettle at once hurried back upstairs as fast as his bad leg would allow and was soon back in his kitchen fully dressed and removing a rusty old key from its hook by the door .He picked up his walking stick which was propped against the wall and set off into the night .The front door of the Riddle House bore no sign of being forced nor did any of the windows .Frank limped around to the back of the house until he reached a door almost completely hidden by ivy took out the old key put it into the lock and opened the door noiselessly .He let himself into the cavernous kitchen .Frank had not entered it for many years nevertheless although it was very dark he remembered where the door into the hall was and he groped his way toward it his nostrils full of the smell of decay ears pricked for any sound of footsteps or voices from overhead .He reached the hall which was a little lighter owing to the large mullioned windows on either side of the front door and started to climb the stairs blessing the dust that lay thick upon the stone because it muffled the sound of his feet and stick .On the landing Frank turned right and saw at once where the intruders were At the very end of the passage a door stood ajar and a flickering light shone through the gap casting a long sliver of gold across the black floor .Frank edged closer and closer grasping his walking stick firmly .Several feet from the entrance he was able to see a narrow slice of the room beyond .The fire he now saw had been lit in the grate .This surprised him .Then he stopped moving and listened intently for a mans voice spoke within the room it sounded timid and fearful .There is a little more in the bottle My Lord if you are still hungry .Later said a second voice .This too belonged to a man but it was strangely highpitched and cold as a sudden blast of icy wind .Something about that voice made the sparse hairs on the back of Franks neck stand up .Move me closer to the fire Wormtail .Frank turned his right ear toward the door the better to hear .There came the clink of a bottle being put down upon some hard surface and then the dull scraping noise of a heavy chair being dragged across the floor .Frank caught a glimpse of a small man his back to the door pushing the chair into place .He was wearing a long black cloak and there was a bald patch at the back of his head .Then he went out of sight again .Where is Nagini ?said the cold voice .I I dont know My Lord said the first voice nervously .She set out to explore the house I think .You will milk her before we retire Wormtail said the second voice .I will need feeding in the night .The journey has tired me greatly .Brow furrowed Frank inclined his good ear still closer to the door listening very hard .There was a pause and then the man called Wormtail spoke again .My Lord may I ask how long we are going to stay here ?A week said the cold voice .Perhaps longer .The place is moderately comfortable and the plan cannot proceed yet .It would be foolish to act before the Quidditch World Cup is over .Frank inserted a gnarled finger into his ear and rotated it .Owing no doubt to a buildup of earwax he had heard the word Quidditch which was not a word at all .The the Quidditch World Cup My Lord ?said Wormtail .Frank dug his finger still more vigorously into his ear .Forgive me but I do not understand why should we wait until the World Cup is over ?Because fool at this very moment wizards are pouring into the country from all over the world and every meddler from the Ministry of Magic will be on duty on the watch for signs of unusual activity checking and doublechecking identities .They will be obsessed with security lest the Muggles notice anything .So we wait .Frank stopped trying to clear out his ear .He had distinctly heard the words Ministry of Magic wizards and Muggles .Plainly each of these expressions meant something secret and Frank could think of only two sorts of people who would speak in code spies and criminals .Frank tightened his hold on his walking stick once more and listened more closely still .Your Lordship is still determined then ?Wormtail said quietly .Certainly I am determined Wormtail .There was a note of menace in the cold voice now .A slight pause followed and then Wormtail spoke the words tumbling from him in a rush as though he was forcing himself to say this before he lost his nerve .It could be done without Harry Potter My Lord .Another pause more protracted and then Without Harry Potter ?breathed the second voice softly .I see .My Lord I do not say this out of concern for the boy !said Wormtail his voice rising squeakily .The boy is nothing to me nothing at all !It is merely that if we were to use another witch or wizard any wizard the thing could be done so much more quickly !If you allowed me to leave you for a short while you know that I can disguise myself most effectively I could be back here in as little as two days with a suitable person I could use another wizard said the cold voice softly that is true .My Lord it makes sense said Wormtail sounding thoroughly relieved now .Laying hands on Harry Potter would be so difficult he is so well protected And so you volunteer to go and fetch me a substitute ?I wonder .perhaps the task of nursing me has become wearisome for you Wormtail ?Could this suggestion of abandoning the plan be nothing more than an attempt to desert me ?My Lord !I I have no wish to leave you none at all Do not lie to me !hissed the second voice .I can always tell Wormtail !You are regretting that you ever returned to me .I revolt you .I see you flinch when you look at me feel you shudder when you touch me .No !My devotion to Your Lordship Your devotion is nothing more than cowardice .You would not be here if you had anywhere else to go .How am I to survive without you when I need feeding every few hours ?Who is to milk Nagini ?But you seem so much stronger My Lord Liar breathed the second voice .I am no stronger and a few days alone would be enough to rob me of the little health I have regained under your clumsy care .Silencel Wormtail who had been sputtering incoherently fell silent at once .For a few seconds Frank could hear nothing but the fire crackling .Then the second man spoke once more in a whisper that was almost a hiss .I have my reasons for using the boy as I have already explained to you and I will use no other .I have waited thirteen years .A few more months will make no difference .As for the protection surrounding the boy I believe my plan will be effective .All that is needed is a little courage from you Wormtail courage you will find unless you wish to feel the full extent of Lord Voldemorts wrath My Lord I must speak !said Wormtail panic in his voice now .All through our journey I have gone over the plan in my head My Lord Bertha Jorkinss disappearance will not go unnoticed for long and if we proceed if I murder IP whispered the second voice .If ?If you follow the plan Wormtail the Ministry need never know that anyone else has died .You will do it quietly and without fuss I only wish that I could do it myself but in my present condition .Come Wormtail one more death and our path to Harry Potter is clear .I am not asking you to do it alone .By that time my faithful servant will have rejoined us I am a faithful servant said Wormtail the merest trace of sullenness in his voice .Wormtail I need somebody with brains somebody whose loyalty has never wavered and you unfortunately fulfill neither requirement .I found you said Wormtail and there was definitely a sulky edge to his voice now .I was the one who found you .I brought you Bertha Jorkins .That is true said the second man sounding amused .A stroke of brilliance I would not have thought possible from you Wormtail though if truth be told you were not aware how useful she would be when you caught her were you ?I I thought she might be useful My Lord Liar said the second voice again the cruel amusement more pronounced than ever .However I do not deny that her information was invaluable .Without it I could never have formed our plan and for that you will have your reward Wormtail .I will allow you to perform an essential task for me one that many of my followers would give their right hands to perform .Rreally My Lord ?What ?Wormtail sounded terrified again .Ah Wormtail you dont want me to spoil the surprise ?Your part will come at the very end .but I promise you you will have the honor of being just as useful as Bertha Jorkins .You .you .Wormtails voice suddenly sounded hoarse as though his mouth had gone very dry .You .are going .to kill me too ?Wormtail Wormtail said the cold voice silkily why would I kill you ?I killed Bertha because I had to .She was fit for nothing after my questioning quite useless .In any case awkward questions would have been asked if she had gone back to the Ministry with the news that she had met you on her holidays .Wizards who are supposed to be dead would do well not to run into Ministry of Magic witches at wayside inns .Wormtail muttered something so quietly that Frank could not hear it but it made the second man laugh an entirely mirthless laugh cold as his speech .We could have modified her memory ?But Memory Charms can be broken by a powerful wizard as I proved when I questioned her .It would be an insult to her memory not to use the information I extracted from her Wormtail .Out in the corridor Frank suddenly became aware that the hand gripping his walking stick was slippery with sweat .The man with the cold voice had killed a woman .He was talking about it without any kind of remorse with amusement .He was dangerous a madman .And he was planning more murders this boy Harry Potter whoever he was was in danger Frank knew what he must do .Now if ever was the time to go to the police .He would creep out of the house and head straight for the telephone box in the village .but the cold voice was speaking again and Frank remained where he was frozen to the spot listening with all his might .One more murder .my faithful servant at Hogwarts .Harry Potter is as good as mine Wormtail .It is decided .There will be no more argument .But quiet .I think I hear Nagini .And the second mans voice changed .He started making noises such as Frank had never heard before he was hissing and spitting without drawing breath .Frank thought he must be having some sort of fit or seizure .And then Frank heard movement behind him in the dark passageway .He turned to look and found himself paralyzed with fright .Something was slithering toward him along the dark corridor floor and as it drew nearer to the sliver of firelight he realized with a thrill of terror that it was a gigantic snake at least twelve feet long .Horrified transfixed Frank stared as its undulating body cut a wide curving track through the thick dust on the floor coming closer and closer What was he to do ?The only means of escape was into the room where two men sat plotting murder yet if he stayed where he was the snake would surely kill him But before he had made his decision the snake was level with him and then incredibly miraculously it was passing it was following the spitting hissing noises made by the cold voice beyond the door and in seconds the tip of its diamondpatterned tail had vanished through the gap .There was sweat on Franks forehead now and the hand on the walking stick was trembling .Inside the room the cold voice was continuing to hiss and Frank was visited by a strange idea an impossible idea .This man could talk to snakes .Frank didnt understand what was going on .He wanted more than anything to be back in his bed with his hotwater bottle .The problem was that his legs didnt seem to want to move .As he stood there shaking and trying to master himself the cold voice switched abruptly to English again .Nagini has interesting news Wormtail it said .Inindeed My Lord ?said Wormtail .Indeed yes said the voice .According to Nagini there is an old Muggle standing right outside this room listening to every word we say .Frank didnt have a chance to hide himself .There were footsteps and then the door of the room was flung wide open .A short balding man with graying hair a pointed nose and small watery eyes stood before Frank a mixture of fear and alarm in his face .Invite him inside Wormtail .Where are your manners ?The cold voice was coming from the ancient armchair before the fire but Frank couldnt see the speaker .The snake on the other hand was curled up on the rotting hearth rug like some horrible travesty of a pet dog .Wormtail beckoned Frank into the room .Though still deeply shaken Frank took a firmer grip upon his walking stick and limped over the threshold .The fire was the only source of light in the room it cast long spidery shadows upon the walls .Frank stared at the back of the armchair the man inside it seemed to be even smaller than his servant for Frank couldnt even see the back of his head .You heard everything Muggle ?said the cold voice .Whats that youre calling me ?said Frank defiantly for now that he was inside the room now that the time had come for some sort of action he felt braver it had always been so in the war .I am calling you a Muggle said the voice coolly .It means that you are not a wizard .I dont know what you mean by wizard said Frank his voice growing steadier .All I know is Ive heard enough to interest the police tonight I have .Youve done murder and youre planning more !And Ill tell you this too he added on a sudden inspiration my wife knows Im up here and if I dont come back You have no wife said the cold voice very quietly .Nobody knows you are here .You told nobody that you were coming .Do not lie to Lord Voldemort Muggle for he knows .he always knows .Is that right ?said Frank roughly .Lord is it ?Well I dont think much of your manners My Lord .Turn round and face me like a man why dont you ?But I am not a man Muggle said the cold voice barely audible now over the crackling of the flames .I am much much more than a man .However .why not ?I will face you .Wormtail come turn my chair around .The servant gave a whimper .You heard me Wormtail .Slowly with his face screwed up as though he would rather have done anything than approach his master and the hearth rug where the snake lay the small man walked forward and began to turn the chair .The snake lifted its ugly triangular head and hissed slightly as the legs of the chair snagged on its rug .And then the chair was facing Frank and he saw what was sitting in it .His walking stick fell to the floor with a clatter .He opened his mouth and let out a scream .He was screaming so loudly that he never heard the words the thing in the chair spoke as it raised a wand .There was a flash of green light a rushing sound and Frank Bryce crumpled .He was dead before he hit the floor .Two hundred miles away the boy called Harry Potter woke with a start .THE SCAR Harry lay flat on his back breathing hard as though he had been running .He had awoken from a vivid dream with his hands pressed over his face .The old scar on his forehead which was shaped like a bolt of lightning was burning beneath his fingers as though someone had just pressed a whitehot wire to his skin .He sat up one hand still on his scar the other reaching out in the darkness for his glasses which were on the bedside table .He put them on and his bedroom came into clearer focus lit by a faint misty orange light that was filtering through the curtains from the street lamp outside the window .Harry ran his fingers over the scar again .It was still painful .He turned on the lamp beside him scrambled out of bed crossed the room opened his wardrobe and peered into the mirror on the inside of the door .A skinny boy of fourteen looked back at him his bright green eyes puzzled under his untidy black hair .He examined the lightningbolt scar of his reflection more closely .It looked normal but it was still stinging .Harry tried to recall what he had been dreaming about before he had awoken .It had seemed so real .There had been two people he knew and one he didnt .He concentrated hard frowning trying to remember .The dim picture of a darkened room came to him .There had been a snake on a hearth rug .a small man called Peter nicknamed Wormtail .and a cold high voice .the voice of Lord Voldemort .Harry felt as though an ice cube had slipped down into his stomach at the very thought .He closed his eyes tightly and tried to remember what Voldemort had looked like but it was impossible .All Harry knew was that at the moment when Voldemorts chair had swung around and he Harry had seen what was sitting in it he had felt a spasm of horror which had awoken him .or had that been the pain in his scar ?And who had the old man been ?For there had definitely been an old man Harry had watched him fall to the ground .It was all becoming confused .Harry put his face into his hands blocking out his bedroom trying to hold on to the picture of that dimly lit room but it was like trying to keep water in his cupped hands the details were now trickling away as fast as he tried to hold on to them .Voldemort and Wormtail had been talking about someone they had killed though Harry could not remember the name .and they had been plotting to kill someone else .him .Harry took his face out of his hands opened his eyes and stared around his bedroom as though expecting to see something unusual there .As it happened there were an extraordinary number of unusual things in this room .A large wooden trunk stood open at the foot of his bed revealing a cauldron broomstick black robes and assorted spellbooks .Rolls of parchment littered that part of his desk that was not taken up by the large empty cage in which his snowy owl Hedwig usually perched .On the floor beside his bed a book lay open Harry had been reading it before he fell asleep last night .The pictures in this book were all moving .Men in bright orange robes were zooming in and out of sight on broomsticks throwing a red ball to one another .Harry walked over to the book picked it up and watched one of the wizards score a spectacular goal by putting the ball through a fiftyfoothigh hoop .Then he snapped the book shut .Even Quidditch in Harrys opinion the best sport in the world couldnt distract him at the moment .He placed Flying with the Cannons on his bedside table crossed to the window and drew back the curtains to survey the street below .Privet Drive looked exactly as a respectable suburban street would be expected to look in the early hours of Saturday morning .All the curtains were closed .As far as Harry could see through the darkness there wasnt a living creature in sight not even a cat .And yet .and yet .Harry went restlessly back to the bed and sat down on it running a finger over his scar again .It wasnt the pain that bothered him Harry was no stranger to pain and injury .He had lost all the bones from his right arm once and had them painfully regrown in a night .The same arm had been pierced by a venomous footlong fang not long afterward .Only last year Harry had fallen fifty feet from an airborne broomstick .He was used to bizarre accidents and injuries they were unavoidable if you attended Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry and had a knack for attracting a lot of trouble .No the thing that was bothering Harry was that the last time his scar had hurt him it had been because Voldemort had been close by .But Voldemort couldnt be here now .The idea of Voldemort lurking in Privet Drive was absurd impossible .Harry listened closely to the silence around him .Was he halfexpecting to hear the creak of a stair or the swish of a cloak ?And then he jumped slightly as he heard his cousin Dudley give a tremendous grunting snore from the next room .Harry shook himself mentally he was being stupid .There was no one in the house with him except Uncle Vernon Aunt Petunia and Dudley and they were plainly still asleep their dreams untroubled and painless .Asleep was the way Harry liked the Dursleys best it wasnt as though they were ever any help to him awake .Uncle Vernon Aunt Petunia and Dudley were Harrys only living relatives .They were Muggles who hated and despised magic in any form which meant that Harry was about as welcome in their house as dry rot .They had explained away Harrys long absences at Hogwarts over the last three years by telling everyone that he went to St .Brutuss Secure Center for Incurably Criminal Boys .They knew perfectly well that as an underage wizard Harry wasnt allowed to use magic outside Hogwarts but they were still apt to blame him for anything that went wrong about the house .Harry had never been able to confide in them or tell them anything about his life in the wizarding world .The very idea of going to them when they awoke and telling them about his scar hurting him and about his worries about Voldemort was laughable .And yet it was because of Voldemort that Harry had come to live with the Dursleys in the first place .If it hadnt been for Voldemort Harry would not have had the lightning scar on his forehead .If it hadnt been for Voldemort Harry would still have had parents .Harry had been a year old the night that Voldemort the most powerful Dark wizard for a century a wizard who had been gaining power steadily for eleven years arrived at his house and killed his father and mother .Voldemort had then turned his wand on Harry he had performed the curse that had disposed of many fullgrown witches and wizards in his steady rise to power and incredibly it had not worked .Instead of killing the small boy the curse had rebounded upon Voldemort .Harry had survived with nothing but a lightningshaped cut on his forehead and Voldemort had been reduced to something barely alive .His powers gone his life almost extinguished Voldemort had fled the terror in which the secret community of witches and wizards had lived for so long had lifted Voldemorts followers had disbanded and Harry Potter had become famous .It had been enough of a shock for Harry to discover on his eleventh birthday that he was a wizard it had been even more disconcerting to find out that everyone in the hidden wizarding world knew his name .Harry had arrived at Hogwarts to find that heads turned and whispers followed him wherever he went .But he was used to it now At the end of this summer he would be starting his fourth year at Hogwarts and Harry was already counting the days until he would be back at the castle again .But there was still a fortnight to go before he went back to school .He looked hopelessly around his room again and his eye paused on the birthday cards his two best friends had sent him at the end of July .What would they say if Harry wrote to them and told them about his scar hurting ?At once Hermione Grangers voice seemed to fill his head shrill and panicky .Your scar hurt ?Harry thats really serious .Write to Professor Dumbledorel And Ill go and check Common Magical Ailments and Afflictions .Maybe theres something in there about curse scars .Yes that would be Hermiones advice Go straight to the headmaster of Hogwarts and in the meantime consult a book .Harry stared out of the window at the inky blueblack sky .He doubted very much whether a book could help him now .As far as he knew he was the only living person to have survived a curse like Voldemorts it was highly unlikely therefore that he would find his symptoms listed in Common Magical Ailments and Afflictions .As for informing the headmaster Harry had no idea where Dumbledore went during the summer holidays .He amused himself for a moment picturing Dumbledore with his long silver beard fulllength wizards robes and pointed hat stretched out on a beach somewhere rubbing suntan lotion onto his long crooked nose .Wherever Dumbledore was though Harry was sure that Hedwig would be able to find him Harrys owl had never yet failed to deliver a letter to anyone even without an address .But what would he write ?Dear Professor Dumbledore Sorry to bother you but my scar hurt this morning .Yours sincerely Harry Potter .Even inside his head the words sounded stupid .And so he tried to imagine his other best friend Ron Weasleys reaction and in a moment Rons red hair and longnosed freckled face seemed to swim before Harry wearing a bemused expression .Your scar hurt ?But .but YouKnotuWho cant be near you now can he ?I mean .youd know wouldnt you ?Hed be trying to do you in again wouldnt he ?I dunno Harry maybe curse scars always twinge a bit .Ill ask Dad .Mr Weasley was a fully qualified wizard who worked in the Misuse of Muggle Artifacts Office at the Ministry of Magic but he didnt have any particular expertise in the matter of curses as far as Harry knew .In any case Harry didnt like the idea of the whole Weasley family knowing that he Harry was getting jumpy about a few moments pain .Mrs Weasley would fuss worse than Hermione and Fred and George Rons sixteenyearold twin brothers might think Harry was losing his nerve .The Weasleys were Harrys favorite family in the world he was hoping that they might invite him to stay any time now Ron had mentioned something about the Quidditch World Cup and he somehow didnt want his visit punctuated with anxious inquiries about his scar .Harry kneaded his forehead with his knuckles .What he really wanted and it felt almost shameful to admit it to himself was someone like someone like a parent an adult wizard whose advice he could ask without feeling stupid someone who cared about him who had had experience with Dark Magic .And then the solution came to him .It was so simple and so obvious that he couldnt believe it had taken so long Sirius .Harry leapt up from the bed hurried across the room and sat down at his desk he pulled a piece of parchment toward him loaded his eaglefeather quill with ink wrote Dear Sirius then paused wondering how best to phrase his problem still marveling at the fact that he hadnt thought of Sirius straight away .But then perhaps it wasnt so surprising after all he had only found out that Sirius was his godfather two months ago .There was a simple reason for Siriuss complete absence from Harrys life until then Sirius had been in Azkaban the terrifying wizard jail guarded by creatures called dementors sightless soulsucking fiends who had come to search for Sirius at Hogwarts when he had escaped .Yet Sirius had been innocent the murders for which he had been convicted had been committed by Wormtail Voldemorts supporter whom nearly everybody now believed dead .Harry Ron and Hermione knew otherwise however they had come facetoface with Wormtail only the previous year though only Professor Dumbledore had believed their story .For one glorious hour Harry had believed that he was leaving the Dursleys at last because Sirius had offered him a home once his name had been cleared .But the chance had been snatched away from him Wormtail had escaped before they could take him to the Ministry of Magic and Sirius had had to flee for his life .Harry had helped him escape on the back of a hippogriff called Buckbeak and since then Sirius had been on the run .The home Harry might have had if Wormtail had not escaped had been haunting him all summer .It had been doubly hard to return to the Dursleys knowing that he had so nearly escaped them forever .Nevertheless Sirius had been of some help to Harry even if he couldnt be with him .It was due to Sirius that Harry now had all his school things in his bedroom with him .The Dursleys had never allowed this before their general wish of keeping Harry as miserable as possible coupled with their fear of his powers had led them to lock his school trunk in the cupboard under the stairs every summer prior to this .But their attitude had changed since they had found out that Harry had a dangerous murderer for a godfather for Harry had conveniently forgotten to tell them that Sirius was innocent .Harry had received two letters from Sirius since he had been back at Privet Drive .Both had been delivered not by owls as was usual with wizards but by large brightly colored tropical birds .Hedwig had not approved of these flashy intruders she had been most reluctant to allow them to drink from her water tray before flying off again .Harry on the other hand had liked them they put him in mind of palm trees and white sand and he hoped that wherever Sirius was Sirius never said in case the letters were intercepted he was enjoying himself .Somehow Harry found it hard to imagine dementors surviving for long in bright sunlight perhaps that was why Sirius had gone south .Siriuss letters which were now hidden beneath the highly useful loose floorboard under Harrys bed sounded cheerful and in both of them he had reminded Harry to call on him if ever Harry needed to .Well he needed to now all right .Harrys lamp seemed to grow dimmer as the cold gray light that precedes sunrise slowly crept into the room .Finally when the sun had risen when his bedroom walls had turned gold and when sounds of movement could be heard from Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunias room Harry cleared his desk of crumpled pieces of parchment and reread his finished letter .Dear Sirius Thanks for your last letter .That bird was enormous it could hardly get through my window .Things are the same as usual here .Dudleys diet isnt going too well .My aunt found him smuggling doughnuts into his room yesterday .They told him they d have to cut his pocket money if he keeps doing it so he got really angry and chucked his PlayStation out of the window .Thats a sort of computer thing you can play games on .Bit stupid really now he hasnt even got MegaMutilation Part Three to take his mind off things .Im okay mainly because the Dursleys are terrified you might turn up and turn them all into bats if I ask you to .A weird thing happened this morning though .My scar hurt again .Last time that happened it was because Voldemort was at Hogwarts .But I dont reckon he can be anywhere near me now can he ?Do you know if curse scars sometimes hurt years afterward ?Ill send this with Hedwig when she gets back shes offhunting at the moment .Say hello to Buckbeak for me .Harry Yes thought Harry that looked all right .There was no point putting in the dream he didnt want it to look as though he was too worried .He folded up the parchment and laid it aside on his desk ready for when Hedwig returned .Then he got to his feet stretched and opened his wardrobe once more .Without glancing at his reflection he started to get dressed before going down to breakfast .3 THE INVITATION By the time Harry arrived in the kitchen the three Dursleys were already seated around the table .None of them looked up as he entered or sat down .Uncle Vernons large red face was hidden behind the mornings Daily Mail and Aunt Petunia was cutting a grapefruit into quarters her lips pursed over her horselike teeth .Dudley looked furious and sulky and somehow seemed to be taking up even more space than usual .This was saying something as he always took up an entire side of the square table by himself .When Aunt Petunia put a quarter of unsweetened grapefruit onto Dudleys plate with a tremulous There you are Diddy darling Dudley glowered at her .His life had taken a most unpleasant turn since he had come home for the summer with his endofyear report .Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia had managed to find excuses for his bad marks as usual Aunt Petunia always insisted that Dudley was a very gifted boy whose teachers didnt understand him while Uncle Vernon maintained that he didnt want some swotty little nancy boy for a son anyway .They also skated over the accusations of bullying in the report Hes a boisterous little boy but he wouldnt hurt a fly !Aunt Petunia had said tearfully .However at the bottom of the report there were a few wellchosen comments from the school nurse that not even Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia could explain away .No matter how much Aunt Petunia wailed that Dudley was bigboned and that his poundage was really puppy fat and that he was a growing boy who needed plenty of food the fact remained that the school outfitters didnt stock knickerbockers big enough for him anymore .The school nurse had seen what Aunt Petunias eyes so sharp when it came to spotting fingerprints on her gleaming walls and in observing the comings and goings of the neighbors simply refused to see that far from needing extra nourishment Dudley had reached roughly the size and weight of a young killer whale .So after many tantrums after arguments that shook Harrys bedroom floor and many tears from Aunt Petunia the new regime had begun .The diet sheet that had been sent by the Smeltings school nurse had been taped to the fridge which had been emptied of all Dudleys favorite things fizzy drinks and cakes chocolate bars and burgers and filled instead with fruit and vegetables and the sorts of things that Uncle Vernon called rabbit food .To make Dudley feel better about it all Aunt Petunia had insisted that the whole family follow the diet too .She now passed a grapefruit quarter to Harry .He noticed that it was a lot smaller than Dudleys .Aunt Petunia seemed to feel that the best way to keep up Dudleys morale was to make sure that he did at least get more to eat than Harry .But Aunt Petunia didnt know what was hidden under the loose floorboard upstairs .She had no idea that Harry was not following the diet at all .The moment he had got wind of the fact that he was expected to survive the summer on carrot sticks Harry had sent Hedwig to his friends with pleas for help and they had risen to the occasion magnificently .Hedwig had returned from Hermiones house with a large box stuffed full of sugarfree snacks .Hermiones parents were dentists .Hagrid the Hogwarts gamekeeper had obliged with a sack full of his own homemade rock cakes .Harry hadnt touched these he had had too much experience of Hagrid s cooking .Mrs Weasley however had sent the family owl Errol with an enormous fruitcake and assorted meat pies .Poor Errol who was elderly and feeble had needed a full five days to recover from the journey .And then on Harrys birthday which the Dursleys had completely ignored he had received four superb birthday cakes one each from Ron Hermione Hagrid and Sirius .Harry still had two of them left and so looking forward to a real breakfast when he got back upstairs he ate his grapefruit without complaint .Uncle Vernon laid aside his paper with a deep sniff of disapproval and looked down at his own grapefruit quarter .Is this it ?he said grumpily to Aunt Petunia .Aunt Petunia gave him a severe look and then nodded pointedly at Dudley who had already finished his own grapefruit quarter and was eyeing Harrys with a very sour look in his piggy little eyes .Uncle Vernon gave a great sigh which ruffled his large bushy mustache and picked up his spoon .The doorbell rang .Uncle Vernon heaved himself out of his chair and set off down the hall .Quick as a flash while his mother was occupied with the kettle Dudley stole the rest of Uncle Vernons grapefruit .Harry heard talking at the door and someone laughing and Uncle Vernon answering curtly .Then the front door closed and the sound of ripping paper came from the hall .Aunt Petunia set the teapot down on the table and looked curiously around to see where Uncle Vernon had got to .She didnt have to wait long to find out after about a minute he was back .He looked livid .You he barked at Harry .In the living room .Now .Bewildered wondering what on earth he was supposed to have done this time Harry got up and followed Uncle Vernon out of the kitchen and into the next room .Uncle Vernon closed the door sharply behind both of them .So he said marching over to the fireplace and turning to face Harry as though he were about to pronounce him under arrest .So .Harry would have dearly loved to have said So what ?but he didnt feel that Uncle Vernons temper should be tested this early in the morning especially when it was already under severe strain from lack of food .He therefore settled for looking politely puzzled .This just arrived said Uncle Vernon .He brandished a piece of purple writing paper at Harry .A letter .About you .Harrys confusion increased .Who would be writing to Uncle Vernon about him ?Who did he know who sent letters by the postman ?Uncle Vernon glared at Harry then looked down at the letter and began to read aloud Dear Mr and Mrs Dursley We have never been introduced but I am sure you have heard a great deal from Harry about my son Ron .As Harry might have told you the final of the Quidditch World Cup takes place this Monday night and my husband Arthur has just managed to get prime tickets through his connections at the Department of Magical Games and Sports .I do hope you will allow us to take Harry to the match as this really is a onceinalifetime opportunity Britain hasnt hosted the cup for thirty years and tickets are extremely hard to come by .We would of course be glad to have Harry stay for the remainder of the summer holidays and to see him safely onto the train back to school .It would be best for Harry to send us your answer as quickly as possible in the normal way because the Muggle postman has never delivered to our house and I am not sure he even knows where it is .Hoping to see Harry soon Yours sincerely Molly Weasley P .S .I do hope weve put enough stamps on .Uncle Vernon finished reading put his hand back into his breast pocket and drew out something else .Look at this he growled .He held up the envelope in which Mrs Weasleys letter had come and Harry had to fight down a laugh .Every bit of it was covered in stamps except for a square inch on the front into which Mrs Weasley had squeezed the Dursleys address in minute writing .She did put enough stamps on then said Harry trying to sound as though Mrs Weasleys was a mistake anyone could make .His uncles eyes flashed .The postman noticed he said through gritted teeth .Very interested to know where this letter came from he was .Thats why he rang the doorbell .Seemed to think it was funny .Harry didnt say anything .Other people might not understand why Uncle Vernon was making a fuss about too many stamps but Harry had lived with the Dursleys too long not to know how touchy they were about anything even slightly out of the ordinary .Their worst fear was that someone would find out that they were connected however distantly with people like Mrs Weasley .Uncle Vernon was still glaring at Harry who tried to keep his expression neutral .If he didnt do or say anything stupid he might just be in for the treat of a lifetime .He waited for Uncle Vernon to say something but he merely continued to glare .Harry decided to break the silence .So can I go then ?he asked .A slight spasm crossed Uncle Vernons large purple face .The mustache bristled .Harry thought he knew what was going on behind the mustache a furious battle as two of Uncle Vernons most fundamental instincts came into conflict .Allowing Harry to go would make Harry happy something Uncle Vernon had struggled against for thirteen years .On the other hand allowing Harry to disappear to the Weasleys for the rest of the summer would get rid of him two weeks earlier than anyone could have hoped and Uncle Vernon hated having Harry in the house .To give himself thinking time it seemed he looked down at Mrs Weasleys letter again .Who is this woman ?he said staring at the signature with distaste .Youve seen her said Harry .Shes my friend Rons mother she was meeting him off the Hog off the school train at the end of last term .He had almost said Hogwarts Express and that was a sure way to get his uncles temper up .Nobody ever mentioned the name of Harrys school aloud in the Dursley household .Uncle Vernon screwed up his enormous face as though trying to remember something very unpleasant .Dumpy sort of woman ?he growled finally .Load of children with red hair ?Harry frowned .He thought it was a bit rich of Uncle Vernon to call anyone dumpy when his own son Dudley had finally achieved what hed been threatening to do since the age of three and become wider than he was tall .Uncle Vernon was perusing the letter again .Quidditch he muttered under his breath .Quidditch what is this rubbish ?Harry felt a second stab of annoyance .Its a sport he said shortly .Played on broom All right all right !said Uncle Vernon loudly .Harry saw with some satisfaction that his uncle looked vaguely panicky .Apparently his nerves couldnt stand the sound of the word broomsticks in his living room .He took refuge in perusing the letter again .Harry saw his lips form the words send us your answer .in the normal way .He scowled .What does she mean ‘the normal way ?he spat .Normal for us said Harry and before his uncle could stop him he added you know owl post .Thats whats normal for wizards .Uncle Vernon looked as outraged as if Harry had just uttered a disgusting swear word .Shaking with anger he shot a nervous look through the window as though expecting to see some of the neighbors with their ears pressed against the glass .How many times do I have to tell you not to mention that unnaturalness under my roof ?he hissed his face now a rich plum color .You stand there in the clothes Petunia and I have put on your ungrateful back Only after Dudley finished with them said Harry coldly and indeed he was dressed in a sweatshirt so large for him that he had had to roll back the sleeves five times so as to be able to use his hands and which fell past the knees of his extremely baggy jeans .I will not be spoken to like that !said Uncle Vernon trembling with rage .But Harry wasnt going to stand for this .Gone were the days when he had been forced to take every single one of the Dursleys stupid rules .He wasnt following Dudleys diet and he wasnt going to let Uncle Vernon stop him from going to the Quidditch World Cup not if he could help it .Harry took a deep steadying breath and then said Okay I cant see the World Cup .Can I go now then ?Only Ive got a letter to Sirius I want to finish .You know my godfather .He had done it .He had said the magic words .Now he watched the purple recede blotchily from Uncle Vernons face making it look like badly mixed black currant ice cream .Youre youre writing to him are you ?said Uncle Vernon in a wouldbe calm voice but Harry had seen the pupils of his tiny eyes contract with sudden fear .Well yeah said Harry casually .Its been a while since he heard from me and you know if he doesnt he might start thinking somethings wrong .He stopped there to enjoy the effect of these words .He could almost see the cogs working under Uncle Vernons thick dark neatly parted hair .If he tried to stop Harry writing to Sirius Sirius would think Harry was being mistreated .If he told Harry he couldnt go to the Quidditch World Cup Harry would write and tell Sirius who would know Harry was being mistreated .There was only one thing for Uncle Vernon to do .Harry could see the conclusion forming in his uncles mind as though the great mustached face were transparent .Harry tried not to smile to keep his own face as blank as possible .And then Well all right then .You can go to this ruddy .this stupid .this World Cup thing .You write and tell these these Weasleys theyre to pick you up mind .I havent got time to go dropping you off all over the country .And you can spend the rest of the summer there .And you can tell your your godfather .tell him .tell him youre going .Okay then said Harry brightly .He turned and walked toward the living room door fighting the urge to jump into the air and whoop .He was going .he was going to the Weasleys he was going to watch the Quidditch World Cup !Outside in the hall he nearly ran into Dudley who had been lurking behind the door clearly hoping to overhear Harry being told off .He looked shocked to see the broad grin on Harrys face .That was an excellent breakfast wasnt it ?said Harry .I feel really full dont you ?Laughing at the astonished look on Dudleys face Harry took the stairs three at a time and hurled himself back into his bedroom .The first thing he saw was that Hedwig was back .She was sitting in her cage staring at Harry with her enormous amber eyes and clicking her beak in the way that meant she was annoyed about something .Exactly what was annoying her became apparent almost at once .OUCH !said Harry as what appeared to be a small gray feathery tennis ball collided with the side of his head .Harry massaged the spot furiously looking up to see what had hit him and saw a minute owl small enough to fit into the palm of his hand whizzing excitedly around the room like a loose firework .Harry then realized that the owl had dropped a letter at his feet .Harry bent down recognized Rons handwriting then tore open the envelope .Inside was a hastily scribbled note .Harry DAD GOT THE TICKETS Ireland versus Bulgaria Monday night .Mums writing to the Muggles to ask you to stay .They might already have the letter I dont know how fast Muggle post is .Thought Id send this with Pig anyway .Harry stared at the word Pig then looked up at the tiny owl now zooming around the light fixture on the ceiling .He had never seen anything that looked less like a pig .Maybe he couldnt read Rons writing .He went back to the letter Were coming for you whether the Muggles like it or not you cant miss the World Cup only Mum and Dad reckon its better if we pretend to ask their permission first .If they say yes send Pig back with your answer pronto and well come and get you at five oclock on Sunday .If they say no send Pig back pronto and well come and get you at five oclock on Sunday anyway .Hermiones arriving this afternoon .Percys started work the Department of International Magical Cooperation .Dont mention anything about Abroad while youre here unless you want the pants bored off you .See you soon Ron Calm down !Harry said as the small owl flew low over his head twittering madly with what Harry could only assume was pride at having delivered the letter to the right person .Come here I need you to take my answer back !The owl fluttered down on top of Hedwigs cage .Hedwig looked coldly up at it as though daring it to try and come any closer .Harry seized his eaglefeather quill once more grabbed a fresh piece of parchment and wrote Ron its all okay the Muggles say I can come .See you five oclock tomorrow .Cant wait .Harry He folded this note up very small and with immense difficulty tied it to the tiny owls leg as it hopped on the spot with excitement .The moment the note was secure the owl was off again it zoomed out of the window and out of sight .Harry turned to Hedwig .Feeling up to a long journey ?he asked her .Hedwig hooted in a dignified sort of a way .Can you take this to Sirius for me ?he said picking up his letter .Hang on .I just want to finish it .He unfolded the parchment and hastily added a postscript .If you want to contact me Ill be at my friend Ron Weasleys for the rest of the summer .His dads got us tickets for the Quidditch World Cup The letter finished he tied it to Hedwigs leg she kept unusually still as though determined to show him how a real post owl should behave .Ill be at Rons when you get back all right ?Harry told her .She nipped his finger affectionately then with a soft swooshing noise spread her enormous wings and soared out of the open window .Harry watched her out of sight then crawled under his bed wrenched up the loose floorboard and pulled out a large chunk of birthday cake .He sat there on the floor eating it savoring the happiness that was flooding through him .He had cake and Dudley had nothing but grapefruit it was a bright summers day he would be leaving Privet Drive tomorrow his scar felt perfectly normal again and he was going to watch the Quidditch World Cup .It was hard just now to feel worried about anything even Lord Voldemort .BACK TO THE BURROW By twelve oclock the next day Harrys school trunk was packed with his school things and all his most prized possessions the Invisibility Cloak he had inherited from his father the broomstick he had gotten from Sirius the enchanted map of Hogwarts he had been given by Fred and George Weasley last year .He had emptied his hiding place under the loose floorboard of all food doublechecked every nook and cranny of his bedroom for forgotten spellbooks or quills and taken down the chart on the wall counting down the days to September the first on which he liked to cross off the days remaining until his return to Hogwarts .The atmosphere inside number four Privet Drive was extremely tense .The imminent arrival at their house of an assortment of wizards was making the Dursleys uptight and irritable .Uncle Vernon had looked downright alarmed when Harry informed him that the Weasley s would be arriving at five oclock the very next day .I hope you told them to dress properly these people he snarled at once .Ive seen the sort of stuff your lot wear .Theyd better have the decency to put on normal clothes thats all .Harry felt a slight sense of foreboding .He had rarely seen Mr or Mrs Weasley wearing anything that the Dursleys would call normal .Their children might don Muggle clothing during the holidays but Mr and Mrs Weasley usually wore long robes in varying states of shabbiness .Harry wasnt bothered about what the neighbors would think but he was anxious about how rude the Dursleys might be to the Weasleys if they turned up looking like their worst idea of wizards .Uncle Vernon had put on his best suit .To some people this might have looked like a gesture of welcome but Harry knew it was because Uncle Vernon wanted to look impressive and intimidating .Dudley on the other hand looked somehow diminished .This was not because the diet was at last taking effect but due to fright .Dudley had emerged from his last encounter with a fullygrown wizard with a curly pigs tail poking out of the seat of his trousers and Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon had had to pay for its removal at a private hospital in London .It wasnt altogether surprising therefore that Dudley kept running his hand nervously over his backside and walking sideways from room to room so as not to present the same target to the enemy .Lunch was an almost silent meal .Dudley didnt even protest at the food cottage cheese and grated celery .Aunt Petunia wasnt eating anything at all .Her arms were folded her lips were pursed and she seemed to be chewing her tongue as though biting back the furious diatribe she longed to throw at Harry .Theyll be driving of course ?Uncle Vernon barked across the table .Er said Harry .He hadnt thought of that .How were the Weasleys going to pick him up ?They didnt have a car anymore the old Ford Anglia they had once owned was currently running wild in the Forbidden Forest at Hogwarts .But Mr Weasley had borrowed a Ministry of Magic car last year possibly he would do the same today ?I think so said Harry .Uncle Vernon snorted into his mustache .Normally Uncle Vernon would have asked what car Mr Weasley drove he tended to judge other men by how big and expensive their cars were .But Harry doubted whether Uncle Vernon would have taken to Mr Weasley even if he drove a Ferrari .Harry spent most of the afternoon in his bedroom he couldnt stand watching Aunt Petunia peer out through the net curtains every few seconds as though there had been a warning about an escaped rhinoceros .Finally at a quarter to five Harry went back downstairs and into the living room .Aunt Petunia was compulsively straightening cushions .Uncle Vernon was pretending to read the paper but his tiny eyes were not moving and Harry was sure he was really listening with all his might for the sound of an approaching car .Dudley was crammed into an armchair his porky hands beneath him clamped firmly around his bottom .Harry couldnt take the tension he left the room and went and sat on the stairs in the hall his eyes on his watch and his heart pumping fast from excitement and nerves .But five oclock came and then went .Uncle Vernon perspiring slightly in his suit opened the front door peered up and down the street then withdrew his head quickly .Theyre late !he snarled at Harry .I know said Harry .Maybe er the traffics bad or something .Ten past five .then a quarter past five .Harry was starting to feel anxious himself now .At half past he heard Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia conversing in terse mutters in the living room .No consideration at all .We mightve had an engagement .Maybe they think theyll get invited to dinner if theyre late .Well they most certainly wont be said Uncle Vernon and Harry heard him stand up and start pacing the living room .Theyll take the boy and go there 11 be no hanging around .Thats if theyre coming at all .Probably mistaken the day .I daresay their kind dont set much store by punctuality .Either that or they drive some tinpot car thats broken d aaRRRRRGH !Harry jumped up .From the other side of the living room door came the sounds of the three Dursleys scrambling panicstricken across the room .Next moment Dudley came flying into the hall looking terrified .What happened ?said Harry .Whats the matter ?But Dudley didnt seem able to speak .Hands still clamped over his buttocks he waddled as fast as he could into the kitchen .Harry hurried into the living room .Loud hangings and scrapings were coming from behind the Dursleys boardedup fireplace which had a fake coal fire plugged in front of it .What is it ?gasped Aunt Petunia who had backed into the wall and was staring terrified toward the fire .What is it Vernon ?But they were left in doubt barely a second longer .Voices could be heard from inside the blocked fireplace .Ouch !Fred no go back go back theres been some kind of mistake tell George not to OUCH !George no theres no room go back quickly and tell Ron Maybe Harry can hear us Dad maybe hell be able to let us out There was a loud hammering of fists on the boards behind the electric fire .Harry ?Harry can you hear us ?The Dursleys rounded on Harry like a pair of angry wolverines .What is this ?growled Uncle Vernon .Whats going on ?They theyve tried to get here by Floo powder said Harry fighting a mad desire to laugh .They can travel by fire only youve blocked the fireplace hang on He approached the fireplace and called through the boards .Mr Weasley ?Can you hear me ?The hammering stopped .Somebody inside the chimney piece said Shh !Mr Weasley its Harry .the fireplace has been blocked up .You wont be able to get through there .Damn !said Mr Weasleys voice .What on earth did they want to block up the fireplace for ?Theyve got an electric fire Harry explained .Really ?said Mr Weasleys voice excitedly .Eclectic you say ?With a plug ?Gracious I must see that .Lets think .ouch Ron !Rons voice now joined the others .What are we doing here ?Has something gone wrong ?Oh no Ron came Freds voice very sarcastically .No this is exactly where we wanted to end up .Yeah were having the time of our lives here said George whose voice sounded muffled as though he was squashed against the wall .Boys boys .said Mr Weasley vaguely .Im trying to think what to do .Yes .only way .Stand back Harry .Harry retreated to the sofa .Uncle Vernon however moved forward .Wait a moment !he bellowed at the fire .What exactly are you going to BANG .The electric fire shot across the room as the boarded up fireplace burst outward expelling Mr Weasley Fred George and Ron in a cloud of rubble and loose chippings .Aunt Petunia shrieked and fell backward over the coffee table Uncle Vernon caught her before she hit the floor and gaped speechless at the Weasleys all of whom had bright red hair including Fred and George who were identical to the last freckle .Thats better panted Mr Weasley brushing dust from his long green robes and straightening his glasses .Ah you must be Harrys aunt and uncle !Tall thin and balding he moved toward Uncle Vernon his hand outstretched but Uncle Vernon backed away several paces dragging Aunt Petunia .Words utterly failed Uncle Vernon .His best suit was covered in white dust which had settled in his hair and mustache and made him look as though he had just aged thirty years .Er yes sorry about that said Mr Weasley lowering his hand and looking over his shoulder at the blasted fireplace .Its all my fault .It just didnt occur to me that we wouldnt be able to get out at the other end .I had your fireplace connected to the Floo Network you see just for an afternoon you know so we could get Harry .Muggle fireplaces arent supposed to be connected strictly speaking but Ive got a useful contact at the Floo Regulation Panel and he fixed it for me .I can put it right in a jiffy though dont worry .Ill light a fire to send the boys back and then I can repair your fireplace before I Disapparate .Harry was ready to bet that the Dursleys hadnt understood a single word of this .They were still gaping at Mr Weasley thunderstruck .Aunt Petunia staggered upright again and hid behind Uncle Vernon .Hello Harry !said Mr Weasley brightly .Got your trunk ready ?Its upstairs said Harry grinning back .Well get it said Fred at once .Winking at Harry he and George left the room .They knew where Harrys bedroom was having once rescued him from it in the dead of night .Harry suspected that Fred and George were hoping for a glimpse of Dudley they had heard a lot about him from Harry .Well said Mr Weasley swinging his arms slightly while he tried to find words to break the very nasty silence .Very erm very nice place youve got here .As the usually spotless living room was now covered in dust and bits of brick this remark didnt go down too well with the Dursleys .Uncle Vernons face purpled once more and Aunt Petunia started chewing her tongue again .However they seemed too scared to actually say anything .Mr Weasley was looking around .He loved everything to do with Muggles .Harry could see him itching to go and examine the television and the video recorder .They run off eckeltricity do they ?he said knowledgeably .Ah yes I can see the plugs .I collect plugs he added to Uncle Vernon .And batteries .Got a very large collection of batteries .My wife thinks Im mad but there you are .Uncle Vernon clearly thought Mr Weasley was mad too .He moved ever so slightly to the right screening Aunt Petunia from view as though he thought Mr Weasley might suddenly run at them and attack .Dudley suddenly reappeared in the room .Harry could hear the clunk of his trunk on the stairs and knew that the sounds had scared Dudley out of the kitchen .Dudley edged along the wall gazing at Mr Weasley with terrified eyes and attempted to conceal himself behind his mother and father .Unfortunately Uncle Vernons bulk while sufficient to hide bony Aunt Petunia was nowhere near enough to conceal Dudley .Ah this is your cousin is it Harry ?said Mr Weasley taking another brave stab at making conversation .Yep said Harry thats Dudley .He and Ron exchanged glances and then quickly looked away from each other the temptation to burst out laughing was almost overwhelming .Dudley was still clutching his bottom as though afraid it might fall off .Mr Weasley however seemed genuinely concerned at Dudleys peculiar behavior .Indeed from the tone of his voice when he next spoke Harry was quite sure that Mr Weasley thought Dudley was quite as mad as the Dursleys thought he was except that Mr Weasley felt sympathy rather than fear .Having a good holiday Dudley ?he said kindly .Dudley whimpered .Harry saw his hands tighten still harder over his massive backside .Fred and George came back into the room carrying Harrys school trunk .They glanced around as they entered and spotted Dudley .Their faces cracked into identical evil grins .Ah right said Mr Weasley .Better get cracking then .He pushed up the sleeves of his robes and took out his wand .Harry saw the Dursleys draw back against the wall as one .Incendio said Mr Weasley pointing his wand at the hole in the wall behind him .Flames rose at once in the fireplace crackling merrily as though they had been burning for hours .Mr Weasley took a small drawstring bag from his pocket untied it took a pinch of the powder inside and threw it onto the flames which turned emerald green and roared higher than ever .Off you go then Fred said Mr Weasley .Coming said Fred .Oh no hang on A bag of sweets had spilled out of Freds pocket and the contents were now rolling in every direction big fat toffees in brightly colored wrappers .Fred scrambled around cramming them back into his pocket then gave the Dursleys a cheery wave stepped forward and walked right into the fire saying the Burrow !Aunt Petunia gave a little shuddering gasp .There was a whooshing sound and Fred vanished .Right then George said Mr Weasley you and the trunk .Harry helped George carry the trunk forward into the flames and turn it onto its end so that he could hold it better .Then with a second whoosh George had cried the Burrow !and vanished too .Ron you next said Mr Weasley .See you said Ron brightly to the Dursleys .He grinned broadly at Harry then stepped into the fire shouted the Burrow !and disappeared .Now Harry and Mr Weasley alone remained .Well .Tye then Harry said to the Dursleys .They didnt say anything at all .Harry moved toward the fire but just as he reached the edge of the hearth Mr Weasley put out a hand and held him back .He was looking at the Dursleys in amazement .Harry said goodbye to you he said .Didnt you hear him ?It doesnt matter Harry muttered to Mr Weasley .Honestly I dont care .Mr Weasley did not remove his hand from Harrys shoulder .You arent going to see your nephew till next summer he said to Uncle Vernon in mild indignation .Surely youre going to say goodbye ?Uncle Vernons face worked furiously .The idea of being taught consideration by a man who had just blasted away half his living room wall seemed to be causing him intense suffering .But Mr Weasleys wand was still in his hand and Uncle Vernons tiny eyes darted to it once before he said very resentfully Goodbye then .See you said Harry putting one foot forward into the green flames which felt pleasantly like warm breath .At that moment however a horrible gagging sound erupted behind him and Aunt Petunia started to scream .Harry wheeled around .Dudley was no longer standing behind his parents .He was kneeling beside the coffee table and he was gagging and sputtering on a footlong purple slimy thing that was protruding from his mouth .One bewildered second later Harry realized that the footlong thing was Dudleys tongue and that a brightly colored toffee wrapper lay on the floor before him .Aunt Petunia hurled herself onto the ground beside Dudley seized the end of his swollen tongue and attempted to wrench it out of his mouth unsurprisingly Dudley yelled and sputtered worse than ever trying to fight her off .Uncle Vernon was bellowing and waving his arms around and Mr Weasley had to shout to make himself heard .Not to worry I can sort him out !he yelled advancing on Dudley with his wand outstretched but Aunt Petunia screamed worse than ever and threw herself on top of Dudley shielding him from Mr Weasley .No really !said Mr Weasley desperately .Its a simple process it was the toffee my son Fred real practical joker but its only an Engorgement Charm at least I think it is please I can correct it But far from being reassured the Dursleys became more panicstricken Aunt Petunia was sobbing hysterically tugging Dudleys tongue as though determined to rip it out Dudley appeared to be suffocating under the combined pressure of his mother and his tongue and Uncle Vernon who had lost control completely seized a china figure from on top of the sideboard and threw it very hard at Mr Weasley who ducked causing the ornament to shatter in the blasted fireplace .Now really !said Mr Weasley angrily brandishing his wand .Im trying to help Bellowing like a wounded hippo Uncle Vernon snatched up another ornament .Harry go !Just go !Mr Weasley shouted his wand on Uncle Vernon .Ill sort this out !Harry didnt want to miss the fun but Uncle Vernons second ornament narrowly missed his left ear and on balance he thought it best to leave the situation to Mr Weasley .He stepped into the fire looking over his shoulder as he said the Burrow !His last fleeting glimpse of the living room was of Mr Weasley blasting a third ornament out of Uncle Vernons hand with his wand Aunt Petunia screaming and lying on top of Dudley and Dudleys tongue lolling around like a great slimy python .But next moment Harry had begun to spin very fast and the Dursleys living room was whipped out of sight in a rush of emeraldgreen flames .5 WEASLEYS WIZARD WHEEZES Harry spun faster and faster elbows tucked tightly to his sides blurred fireplaces flashing past him until he started to feel sick and closed his eyes .Then when at last he felt himself slowing down he threw out his hands and came to a halt in time to prevent himself from falling face forward out of the Weasleys kitchen fire .Did he eat it ?said Fred excitedly holding out a hand to pull Harry to his feet .Yeah said Harry straightening up .What was it ?TonTongue Toffee said Fred brightly .George and I invented them and weve been looking for someone to test them on all summer .The tiny kitchen exploded with laughter Harry looked around and saw that Ron and George were sitting at the scrubbed wooden table with two redhaired people Harry had never seen before though he knew immediately who they must be Bill and Charlie the two eldest Weasley brothers .Howre you doing Harry ?said the nearer of the two grinning at him and holding out a large hand which Harry shook feeling calluses and blisters under his fingers .This had to be Charlie who worked with dragons in Romania .Charlie was built like the twins shorter and stockier than Percy and Ron who were both long and lanky .He had a broad goodnatured face which was weatherbeaten and so freckly that he looked almost tanned his arms were muscular and one of them had a large shiny burn on it .Bill got to his feet smiling and also shook Harrys hand .Bill came as something of a surprise .Harry knew that he worked for the wizarding bank Gringotts and that Bill had been Head Boy at Hogwarts Harry had always imagined Bill to be an older version of Percy fussy about rulebreaking and fond of bossing everyone around .However Bill was there was no other word for it cool .He was tall with long hair that he had tied back in a ponytail .He was wearing an earring with what looked like a fang dangling from it .Bills clothes would not have looked out of place at a rock concert except that Harry recognized his boots to be made not of leather but of dragon hide .Before any of them could say anything else there was a faint popping noise and Mr Weasley appeared out of thin air at Georges shoulder .He was looking angrier than Harry had ever seen him .That wasnt funny Fred !he shouted .What on earth did you give that Muggle boy ?I didnt give him anything said Fred with another evil grin .I just dropped it .It was his fault he went and ate it I never told him to .You dropped it on purpose !roared Mr Weasley .You knew hed eat it you knew he was on a diet How big did his tongue get ?George asked eagerly .It was four feet long before his parents would let me shrink it !Harry and the Weasleys roared with laughter again .It isnt funny Mr Weasley shouted .That sort of behavior seriously undermines wizardMuggle relations !I spend half my life campaigning against the mistreatment of Muggles and my own sons We didnt give it to him because hes a Muggle !said Fred indignantly .No we gave it to him because hes a great bullying git said George .Isnt he Harry ?Yeah he is Mr Weasley said Harry earnestly .Thats not the point !raged Mr Weasley .You wait until I tell your mother Tell me what ?said a voice behind them .Mrs Weasley had just entered the kitchen .She was a short plump woman with a very kind face though her eyes were presently narrowed with suspicion .Oh hello Harry dear she said spotting him and smiling .Then her eyes snapped back to her husband .Tell me what Arthur ?Mr Weasley hesitated .Harry could tell that however angry he was with Fred and George he hadnt really intended to tell Mrs Weasley what had happened .There was a silence while Mr Weasley eyed his wife nervously .Then two girls appeared in the kitchen doorway behind Mrs Weasley .One with very bushy brown hair and rather large front teeth was Harrys and Rons friend Hermione Granger .The other who was small and redhaired was Rons younger sister Ginny .Both of them smiled at Harry who grinned back which made Ginny go scarlet she had been very taken with Harry ever since his first visit to the Burrow .Tell me what Arthur ?Mrs Weasley repeated in a dangerous sort of voice .Its nothing Molly mumbled Mr Weasley Fred and George just but Ive had words with them What have they done this time ?said Mrs Weasley .If its got anything to do with Weasleys Wizard Wheezes Why dont you show Harry where hes sleeping Ron ?said Hermione from the doorway .He knows where hes sleeping said Ron in my room he slept there last We can all go said Hermione pointedly .Oh said Ron cottoning on .Right .Yeah well come too said George .You stay where you are !snarled Mrs Weasley .Harry and Ron edged out of the kitchen and they Hermione and Ginny set off along the narrow hallway and up the rickety staircase that zigzagged through the house to the upper stories .What are Weasleys Wizard Wheezes ?Harry asked as they climbed .Ron and Ginny both laughed although Hermione didnt .Mum found this stack of order forms when she was cleaning Fred and Georges room said Ron quietly .Great long price lists for stuff theyve invented .Joke stuff you know .Fake wands and trick sweets loads of stuff .It was brilliant I never knew theyd been inventing all that .Weve been hearing explosions out of their room for ages but we never thought they were actually making things said Ginny .We thought they just liked the noise .Only most of the stuff well all of it really was a bit dangerous said Ron and you know they were planning to sell it at Hogwarts to make some money and Mum went mad at them .Told them they werent allowed to make any more of it and burned all the order forms .Shes furious at them anyway .They didnt get as many O .W .L .s as she expected .O .W .L .s were Ordinary Wizarding Levels the examinations Hogwarts students took at the age of fifteen .And then there was this big row Ginny said because Mum wants them to go into the Ministry of Magic like Dad and they told her all they want to do is open a joke shop .Just then a door on the second landing opened and a face poked out wearing hornrimmed glasses and a very annoyed expression .Hi Percy said Harry .Oh hello Harry said Percy .I was wondering who was making all the noise .Im trying to work in here you know Ive got a report to finish for the office and its rather difficult to concentrate when people keep thundering up and down the stairs .Were not thundering said Ron irritably .Were walking .Sorry if weve disturbed the topsecret workings of the Ministry of Magic .What are you working on ?said Harry .A report for the Department of International Magical Cooperation said Percy smugly .Were trying to standardize cauldron thickness .Some of these foreign imports are just a shade too thin leakages have been increasing at a rate of almost three percent a year Thatll change the world that report will said Ron .Front page of the Daily Prophet I expect cauldron leaks .Percy went slightly pink .You might sneer Ron he said heatedly but unless some sort of international law is imposed we might well find the market flooded with flimsy shallow bottomed products that seriously endanger Yeah yeah all right said Ron and he started off upstairs again .Percy slammed his bedroom door shut .As Harry Hermione and Ginny followed Ron up three more flights of stairs shouts from the kitchen below echoed up to them .It sounded as though Mr Weasley had told Mrs Weasley about the toffees .The room at the top of the house where Ron slept looked much as it had the last time that Harry had come to stay the same posters of Rons favorite Quidditch team the Chudley Cannons were whirling and waving on the walls and sloping ceiling and the fish tank on the windowsill which had previously held frog spawn now contained one extremely large frog .Rons old rat Scabbers was here no more but instead there was the tiny gray owl that had delivered Rons letter to Harry in Privet Drive .It was hopping up and down in a small cage and twittering madly .Shut up Pig said Ron edging his way between two of the four beds that had been squeezed into the room .Fred and George are in here with us because Bill and Charlie are in their room he told Harry .Percy gets to keep his room all to himself because hes got to work .Er why are you calling that owl Pig ?Harry asked Ron .Because hes being stupid said Ginny .Its proper name is Pigwidgeon .Yeah and thats not a stupid name at all said Ron sarcastically .Ginny named him he explained to Harry .She reckons its sweet .And I tried to change it but it was too late he wont answer to anything else .So now hes Pig .Ive got to keep him up here because he annoys Errol and Hermes .He annoys me too come to that .Pigwidgeon zoomed happily around his cage hooting shrilly .Harry knew Ron too well to take him seriously .He had moaned continually about his old rat Scabbers but had been most upset when Hermiones cat Crookshanks appeared to have eaten him .Wheres Crookshanks ?Harry asked Hermione now .Out in the garden I expect she said .He likes chasing gnomes .Hes never seen any before .Percys enjoying work then ?said Harry sitting down on one of the beds and watching the Chudley Cannons zooming in and out of the posters on the ceiling .Enjoying it ?said Ron darkly .I dont reckon hed come home if Dad didnt make him .Hes obsessed .Just dont get him onto the subject of his boss .According to Mr Crouch .as I was saying to Mr Crouch .Mr Crouch is of the opinion .Mr Crouch was telling me .They 11 be announcing their engagement any day now .Have you had a good summer Harry ?said Hermione .Did you get our food parcels and everything ?Yeah thanks a lot said Harry .They saved my life those cakes .And have you heard from ?Ron began but at a look from Hermione he fell silent .Harry knew Ron had been about to ask about Sirius .Ron and Hermione had been so deeply involved in helping Sirius escape from the Ministry of Magic that they were almost as concerned about Harrys godfather as he was .However discussing him in front of Ginny was a bad idea .Nobody but themselves and Professor Dumbledore knew about how Sirius had escaped or believed in his innocence .I think theyve stopped arguing said Hermione to cover the awkward moment because Ginny was looking curiously from Ron to Harry .Shall we go down and help your mum with dinner ?Yeah all right said Ron .The four of them left Rons room and went back downstairs to find Mrs Weasley alone in the kitchen looking extremely badtempered .Were eating out in the garden she said when they came in .Theres just not room for eleven people in here .Could you take the plates outside girls ?Bill and Charlie are setting up the tables .Knives and forks please you two she said to Ron and Harry pointing her wand a little more vigorously than she had intended at a pile of potatoes in the sink which shot out of their skins so fast that they ricocheted off the walls and ceiling .Oh for heavens sake she snapped now directing her wand at a dustpan which hopped off the sideboard and started skating across the floor scooping up the potatoes .Those two !she burst out savagely now pulling pots and pans out of a cupboard and Harry knew she meant Fred and George .I dont know whats going to happen to them I really dont .No ambition unless you count making as much trouble as they possibly can .Mrs Weasley slammed a large copper saucepan down on the kitchen table and began to wave her wand around inside it .A creamy sauce poured from the wand tip as she stirred .Its not as though they havent got brains she continued irritably taking the saucepan over to the stove and lighting it with a further poke of her wand but theyre wasting them and unless they pull themselves together soon theyll be in real trouble .Ive had more owls from Hogwarts about them than the rest put together .If they carry on the way theyre going theyll end up in front of the Improper Use of Magic Office .Mrs Weasley jabbed her wand at the cutlery drawer which shot open .Harry and Ron both jumped out of the way as several knives soared out of it flew across the kitchen and began chopping the potatoes which had just been tipped back into the sink by the dustpan .I dont know where we went wrong with them said Mrs Weasley putting down her wand and starting to pull out still more saucepans .Its been the same for years one thing after another and they wont listen to OH NOT AGAIN .She had picked up her wand from the table and it had emitted a loud squeak and turned into a giant rubber mouse .One of their fake wands again !she shouted .How many times have I told them not to leave them lying around ?She grabbed her real wand and turned around to find that the sauce on the stove was smoking .Cmon Ron said hurriedly to Harry seizing a handful of cutlery from the open drawer lets go and help Bill and Charlie .They left Mrs Weasley and headed out the back door into the yard .They had only gone a few paces when Hermiones bandylegged ginger cat Crookshanks came pelting out of the garden bottlebrush tail held high in the air chasing what looked like a muddy potato on legs .Harry recognized it instantly as a gnome .Barely ten inches high its horny little feet pattered very fast as it sprinted across the yard and dived headlong into one of the Wellington boots that lay scattered around the door .Harry could hear the gnome giggling madly as Crookshanks inserted a paw into the boot trying to reach it .Meanwhile a very loud crashing noise was coming from the other side of the house .The source of the commotion was revealed as they entered the garden and saw that Bill and Charlie both had their wands out and were making two battered old tables fly high above the lawn smashing into each other each attempting to knock the others out of the air .Fred and George were cheering Ginny was laughing and Hermione was hovering near the hedge apparently torn between amusement and anxiety .Bills table caught Charlies with a huge bang and knocked one of its legs off .There was a clatter from overhead and they all looked up to see Percys head poking out of a window on the second floor .Will you keep it down ?!he bellowed .Sorry Perce said Bill grinning .Howre the cauldron bottoms coming on ?Very badly said Percy peevishly and he slammed the window shut .Chuckling Bill and Charlie directed the tables safely onto the grass end to end and then with a flick of his wand Bill reattached the table leg and conjured tablecloths from nowhere .By seven oclock the two tables were groaning under dishes and dishes of Mrs Weasleys excellent cooking and the nine Weasleys Harry and Hermione were settling themselves down to eat beneath a clear deep blue sky .To somebody who had been living on meals of increasingly stale cake all summer this was paradise and at first Harry listened rather than talked as he helped himself to chicken and ham pie boiled potatoes and salad .At the far end of the table Percy was telling his father all about his report on cauldron bottoms .Ive told Mr Crouch that Ill have it ready by Tuesday Percy was saying pompously .Thats a bit sooner than he expected it but I like to keep on top of things .I think hell be grateful Ive done it in good time I mean its extremely busy in our department just now what with all the arrangements for the World Cup .Were just not getting the support we need from the Department of Magical Games and Sports .Ludo Bagman I like Ludo said Mr Weasley mildly .He was the one who got us such good tickets for the Cup .I did him a bit of a favor His brother Otto got into a spot of trouble a lawnmower with unnatural powers I smoothed the whole thing over .Oh Bagmans likable enough of course said Percy dismissively but how he ever got to be Head of Department .when I compare him to Mr Crouch !I cant see Mr Crouch losing a member of our department and not trying to find out whats happened to them .You realize Bertha Jorkins has been missing for over a month now ?Went on holiday to Albania and never came back ?Yes I was asking Ludo about that said Mr Weasley frowning .He says Berthas gotten lost plenty of times before now though I must say if it was someone in my department Id be worried .Oh Berthas hopeless all right said Percy .I hear shes been shunted from department to department for years much more trouble than shes worth .but all the same Bagman ought to be trying to find her .Mr Crouch has been taking a personal interest she worked in our department at one time you know and I think Mr Crouch was quite fond of her but Bagman just keeps laughing and saying she probably misread the map and ended up in Australia instead of Albania .However Percy heaved an impressive sigh and took a deep swig of elderflower wine weve got quite enough on our plates at the Department of International Magical Cooperation without trying to find members of other departments too .As you know weve got another big event to organize right after the World Cup .Percy cleared his throat significantly and looked down toward the end of the table where Harry Ron and Hermione were sitting .You know the one Im talking about Father .He raised his voice slightly .The top secret one .Ron rolled his eyes and muttered to Harry and Hermione Hes been trying to get us to ask what that event is ever since he started work .Probably an exhibition of thickbottomed cauldrons .In the middle of the table Mrs Weasley was arguing with Bill about his earring which seemed to be a recent acquisition . .with a horrible great fang on it .Really Bill what do they say at the bank ?Mum no one at the bank gives a damn how I dress as long as I bring home plenty of treasure said Bill patiently .And your hairs getting silly dear said Mrs Weasley fingering her wand lovingly .I wish youd let me give it a trim .I like it said Ginny who was sitting beside Bill .Youre so oldfashioned Mum .Anyway its nowhere near as long as Professor Dumbledores .Next to Mrs Weasley Fred George and Charlie were all talking spiritedly about the World Cup .Its got to be Ireland said Charlie thickly through a mouthful of potato .They flattened Peru in the semifinals .Bulgaria has got Viktor Krum though said Fred .Krums one decent player Ireland has got seven said Charlie shortly .I wish England had got through .That was embarrassing that was .What happened ?said Harry eagerly regretting more than ever his isolation from the wizarding world when he was stuck on Privet Drive .Went down to Transylvania three hundred and ninety to ten said Charlie gloomily .Shocking performance .And Wales lost to Uganda and Scotland was slaughtered by Luxembourg .Harry had been on the Gryffindor House Quidditch team ever since his first year at Hogwarts and owned one of the best racing brooms in the world a Firebolt .Flying came more naturally to Harry than anything else in the magical world and he played in the position of Seeker on the Gryffindor House team .Mr Weasley conjured up candles to light the darkening garden before they had their homemade strawberry ice cream and by the time they had finished moths were fluttering low over the table and the warm air was perfumed with the smells of grass and honeysuckle .Harry was feeling extremely well fed and at peace with the world as he watched several gnomes sprinting through the rosebushes laughing madly and closely pursued by Crookshanks .Ron looked carefully up the table to check that the rest of the family were all busy talking then he said very quietly to Harry So have you heard from Sirius lately ?Hermione looked around listening closely .Yeah said Harry softly twice .He sounds okay .I wrote to him yesterday .He might write back while Im here .He suddenly remembered the reason he had written to Sirius and for a moment was on the verge of telling Ron and Hermione about his scar hurting again and about the dream that had awoken him .but he really didnt want to worry them just now not when he himself was feeling so happy and peaceful .Look at the time Mrs Weasley said suddenly checking her wristwatch .You really should be in bed the whole lot of you youll be up at the crack of dawn to get to the Cup .Harry if you leave your school list out Ill get your things for you tomorrow in Diagon Alley .Im getting everyone elses .There might not be time after the World Cup the match went on for five days last time .Wow hope it does this time !said Harry enthusiastically .Well I certainly dont said Percy sanctimoniously .I shudder to think what the state of my intray would be if I was away from work for five days .Yeah someone might slip dragon dung in it again eh Perce ?said Fred .That was a sample of fertilizer from Norway !said Percy going very red in the face .It was nothing personall It was Fred whispered to Harry as they got up from the table .We sent it .THE PORTKEY Harry felt as though he had barely lain down to sleep in Rons room when he was being shaken awake by Mrs Weasley .Time to go Harry dear she whispered moving away to wake Ron .Harry felt around for his glasses put them on and sat up .It was still dark outside .Ron muttered indistinctly as his mother roused him .At the foot of Harrys mattress he saw two large disheveled shapes emerging from tangles of blankets .S time already ?said Fred groggily .They dressed in silence too sleepy to talk then yawning and stretching the four of them headed downstairs into the kitchen .Mrs Weasley was stirring the contents of a large pot on the stove while Mr Weasley was sitting at the table checking a sheaf of large parchment tickets .He looked up as the boys entered and spread his arms so that they could see his clothes more clearly .He was wearing what appeared to be a golfing sweater and a very old pair of jeans slightly too big for him and held up with a thick leather belt .What dyou think ?he asked anxiously .Were supposed to go incognito do I look like a Muggle Harry ?Yeah said Harry smiling very good .Where re Bill and Charlie and PerPerPercy ?said George failing to stifle a huge yawn .Well theyre Apparating arent they ?said Mrs Weasley heaving the large pot over to the table and starting to ladle porridge into bowls .So they can have a bit of a liein .Harry knew that Apparating meant disappearing from one place and reappearing almost instantly in another but had never known any Hogwarts student to do it and understood that it was very difficult .So theyre still in bed ?said Fred grumpily pulling his bowl of porridge toward him .Why cant we Apparate too ?Because youre not of age and you havent passed your test snapped Mrs Weasley .And where have those girls got to ?She bustled out of the kitchen and they heard her climbing the stairs .You have to pass a test to Apparate ?Harry asked .Oh yes said Mr Weasley tucking the tickets safely into the back pocket of his jeans .The Department of Magical Transportation had to fine a couple of people the other day for Apparating without a license .Its not easy Apparition and when its not done properly it can lead to nasty complications .This pair Im talking about went and splinched themselves .Everyone around the table except Harry winced .Er splinched ?said Harry .They left half of themselves behind said Mr Weasley now spooning large amounts of treacle onto his porridge .So of course they were stuck .Couldnt move either way .Had to wait for the Accidental Magic Reversal Squad to sort them out .Meant a fair old bit of paperwork I can tell you what with the Muggles who spotted the body parts theyd left behind .Harry had a sudden vision of a pair of legs and an eyeball lying abandoned on the pavement of Privet Drive .Were they okay ?he asked startled .Oh yes said Mr Weasley matteroffactly .But they got a heavy fine and I dont think theyll be trying it again in a hurry .You dont mess around with Apparition .There are plenty of adult wizards who dont bother with it .Prefer brooms slower but safer .But Bill and Charlie and Percy can all do it ?Charlie had to take the test twice said Fred grinning .He failed the first time Apparated five miles south of where he meant to right on top of some poor old dear doing her shopping remember ?Yes well he passed the second time said Mrs Weasley marching back into the kitchen amid hearty sniggers .Percy only passed two weeks ago said George .Hes been Apparating downstairs every morning since just to prove he can .There were footsteps down the passageway and Hermione and Ginny came into the kitchen both looking pale and drowsy .Why do we have to be up so early ?Ginny said rubbing her eyes and sitting down at the table .Weve got a bit of a walk said Mr Weasley .Walk ?said Harry .What are we walking to the World Cup ?No no thats miles away said Mr Weasley smiling .We only need to walk a short way .Its just that its very difficult for a large number of wizards to congregate without attracting Muggle attention .We have to be very careful about how we travel at the best of times and on a huge occasion like the Quidditch World Cup George !said Mrs Weasley sharply and they all jumped .What ?said George in an innocent tone that deceived nobody .What is that in your pocket ?Nothing !Dont you lie to me !Mrs Weasley pointed her wand at Georges pocket and said Acciol Several small brightly colored objects zoomed out of Georges pocket he made a grab for them but missed and they sped right into Mrs Weasley s outstretched hand .We told you to destroy them !said Mrs Weasley furiously holding up what were unmistakably more TonTongue Toffees .We told you to get rid of the lot !Empty your pockets go on both of you !It was an unpleasant scene the twins had evidently been trying to smuggle as many toffees out of the house as possible and it was only by using her Summoning Charm that Mrs Weasley managed to find them all .Acciol Acciol Acciol she shouted and toffees zoomed from all sorts of unlikely places including the lining of Georges jacket and the turnups of Freds jeans .We spent six months developing those !Fred shouted at his mother as she threw the toffees away .Oh a fine way to spend six months !she shrieked .No wonder you didnt get more O .W .L .s !All in all the atmosphere was not very friendly as they took their departure .Mrs Weasley was still glowering as she kissed Mr Weasley on the cheek though not nearly as much as the twins who had each hoisted their rucksacks onto their backs and walked out without a word to her .Well have a lovely time said Mrs Weasley and behave yourselves she called after the twins retreating backs but they did not look back or answer .Ill send Bill Charlie and Percy along around midday Mrs Weasley said to Mr Weasley as he Harry Ron Hermione and Ginny set off across the dark yard after Fred and George .It was chilly and the moon was still out .Only a dull greenish tinge along the horizon to their right showed that daybreak was drawing closer .Harry having been thinking about thousands of wizards speeding toward the Quidditch World Cup sped up to walk with Mr Weasley .So how does everyone get there without all the Muggles noticing ?he asked .Its been a massive organizational problem sighed Mr Weasley .The trouble is about a hundred thousand wizards turn up at the World Cup and of course we just havent got a magical site big enough to accommodate them all .There are places Muggles cant penetrate but imagine trying to pack a hundred thousand wizards into Diagon Alley or platform nine and threequarters .So we had to find a nice deserted moor and set up as many antiMuggle precautions as possible .The whole Ministrys been working on it for months .First of course we have to stagger the arrivals .People with cheaper tickets have to arrive two weeks beforehand .A limited number use Muggle transport but we cant have too many clogging up their buses and trains remember wizards are coming from all over the world .Some Apparate of course but we have to set up safe points for them to appear well away from Muggles .I believe theres a handy wood theyre using as the Apparition point .For those who dont want to Apparate or cant we use Portkeys .Theyre objects that are used to transport wizards from one spot to another at a prearranged time .You can do large groups at a time if you need to .There have been two hundred Portkeys placed at strategic points around Britain and the nearest one to us is up at the top of Stoatshead Hill so thats where were headed .Mr Weasley pointed ahead of them where a large black mass rose beyond the village of Ottery St .Catchpole .What sort of objects are Portkeys ?said Harry curiously .Well they can be anything said Mr Weasley .Unobtrusive things obviously so Muggles dont go picking them up and playing with them .stuff theyll just think is litter .They trudged down the dark dank lane toward the village the silence broken only by their footsteps .The sky lightened very slowly as they made their way through the village its inky blackness diluting to deepest blue .Harrys hands and feet were freezing .Mr Weasley kept checking his watch .They didnt have breath to spare for talking as they began to climb Stoatshead Hill stumbling occasionally in hidden rabbit holes slipping on thick black tuffets of grass .Each breath Harry took was sharp in his chest and his legs were starting to seize up when at last his feet found level ground .Whew panted Mr Weasley taking off his glasses and wiping them on his sweater .Well weve made good time weve got ten minutes .Hermione came over the crest of the hill last clutching a stitch in her side .Now we just need the Portkey said Mr Weasley replacing his glasses and squinting around at the ground .It wont be big .Come on .They spread out searching .They had only been at it for a couple of minutes however when a shout rent the still air .Over here Arthur !Over here son weve got it !Two tall figures were silhouetted against the starry sky on the other side of the hilltop .Amos !said Mr Weasley smiling as he strode over to the man who had shouted .The rest of them followed .Mr Weasley was shaking hands with a ruddyfaced wizard with a scrubby brown beard who was holding a moldylooking old boot in his other hand .This is Amos Diggory everyone said Mr Weasley .He works for the Department for the Regulation and Control of Magical Creatures .And I think you know his son Cedric ?Cedric Diggory was an extremely handsome boy of around seventeen .He was Captain and Seeker of the Hufflepuff House Quidditch team at Hogwarts .Hi said Cedric looking around at them all .Everybody said hi back except Fred and George who merely nodded .They had never quite forgiven Cedric for beating their team Gryffindor in the first Quidditch match of the previous year .Long walk Arthur ?Cedrics father asked .Not too bad said Mr Weasley .We live just on the other side of the village there .You ?Had to get up at two didnt we Ced ?I tell you Ill be glad when hes got his Apparition test .Still .not complaining .Quidditch World Cup wouldnt miss it for a sackful of Galleons and the tickets cost about that .Mind you looks like I got off easy .Amos Diggory peered goodnaturedly around at the three Weasley boys Harry Hermione and Ginny .All these yours Arthur ?Oh no only the redheads said Mr Weasley pointing out his children .This is Hermione friend of Rons and Harry another friend Merlins beard said Amos Diggory his eyes widening .Harry ?Harry Potter ?Er yeah said Harry .Harry was used to people looking curiously at him when they met him used to the way their eyes moved at once to the lightning scar on his forehead but it always made him feel uncomfortable .Ceds talked about you of course said Amos Diggory .Told us all about playing against you last year .I said to him I said Ced thatll be something to tell your grandchildren that will .You beat Harry Potterl Harry couldnt think of any reply to this so he remained silent .Fred and George were both scowling again .Cedric looked slightly embarrassed .Harry fell off his broom Dad he muttered .I told you .it was an accident .Yes but you didnt fall off did you ?roared Amos genially slapping his son on his back .Always modest our Ced always the gentleman .but the best man won Im sure Harryd say the same wouldnt you eh ?One falls off his broom one stays on you dont need to be a genius to tell which ones the better flier !Must be nearly time said Mr Weasley quickly pulling out his watch again .Do you know whether were waiting for any more Amos ?No the Lovegoods have been there for a week already and the Fawcetts couldnt get tickets said Mr Diggory .There arent any more of us in this area are there ?Not that I know of said Mr Weasley .Yes its a minute off .Wed better get ready .He looked around at Harry and Hermione .You just need to touch the Portkey thats all a finger will do With difficulty owing to their bulky backpacks the nine of them crowded around the old boot held out by Amos Diggory .They all stood there in a tight circle as a chill breeze swept over the hilltop .Nobody spoke .It suddenly occurred to Harry how odd this would look if a Muggle were to walk up here now .nine people two of them grown men clutching this manky old boot in the semidarkness waiting .Three .muttered Mr Weasley one eye still on his watch two .one .It happened immediately Harry felt as though a hook just behind his navel had been suddenly jerked irresistibly forward .His feet left the ground he could feel Ron and Hermione on either side of him their shoulders banging into his they were all speeding forward in a howl of wind and swirling color his forefinger was stuck to the boot as though it was pulling him magnetically onward and then His feet slammed into the ground Ron staggered into him and he fell over the Portkey hit the ground near his head with a heavy thud .Harry looked up .Mr Weasley Mr Diggory and Cedric were still standing though looking very windswept everybody else was on the ground .Seven past five from Stoatshead Hill said a voice .7 BAGMAN AND CROUCH Harry disentangled himself from Ron and got to his feet .They had arrived on what appeared to be a deserted stretch of misty moor .In front of them was a pair of tired and grumpylooking wizards one of whom was holding a large gold watch the other a thick roll of parchment and a quill .Both were dressed as Muggles though very inexpertly The man with the watch wore a tweed suit with thighlength galoshes his colleague a kilt and a poncho .Morning Basil said Mr Weasley picking up the boot and handing it to the kilted wizard who threw it into a large box of used Portkeys beside him Harry could see an old newspaper an empty drinks can and a punctured football .Hello there Arthur said Basil wearily .Not on duty eh ?Its all right for some .Weve been here all night .Youd better get out of the way weve got a big party coming in from the Black Forest at five fifteen .Hang on Ill find your campsite .Weasley .Weasley .He consulted his parchment list .About a quarter of a miles walk over there first field you come to .Site managers called Mr Roberts .Diggory .second field .ask for Mr Payne .Thanks Basil said Mr Weasley and he beckoned everyone to follow him .They set off across the deserted moor unable to make out much through the mist .After about twenty minutes a small stone cottage next to a gate swam into view .Beyond it Harry could just make out the ghostly shapes of hundreds and hundreds of tents rising up the gentle slope of a large field toward a dark wood on the horizon .They said goodbye to the Diggorys and approached the cottage door .A man was standing in the doorway looking out at the tents .Harry knew at a glance that this was the only real Muggle for several acres .When he heard their footsteps he turned his head to look at them .Morning !said Mr Weasley brightly .Morning said the Muggle .Would you be Mr Roberts ?Aye I would said Mr Roberts .And whore you ?Weasley two tents booked a couple of days ago ?Aye said Mr Roberts consulting a list tacked to the door .Youve got a space up by the wood there .Just the one night ?Thats it said Mr Weasley .Youll be paying now then ?said Mr Roberts .Ah right certainly said Mr Weasley .He retreated a short distance from the cottage and beckoned Harry toward him .Help me Harry he muttered pulling a roll of Muggle money from his pocket and starting to peel the notes apart .This ones a a a ten ?Ah yes I see the little number on it now .So this is a five ?A twenty Harry corrected him in an undertone uncomfortably aware of Mr Roberts trying to catch every word .Ah yes so it is .I dont know these little bits of paper .You foreign ?said Mr Roberts as Mr Weasley returned with the correct notes .Foreign ?repeated Mr Weasley puzzled .Youre not the first one whos had trouble with money said Mr Roberts scrutinizing Mr Weasley closely .I had two try and pay me with great gold coins the size of hubcaps ten minutes ago .Did you really ?said Mr Weasley nervously .Mr Roberts rummaged around in a tin for some change .Never been this crowded he said suddenly looking out over the misty field again .Hundreds of pre bookings .People usually just turn up .Is that right ?said Mr Weasley his hand held out for his change but Mr Roberts didnt give it to him .Aye he said thoughtfully .People from all over .Loads of foreigners .And not just foreigners .Weirdos you know ?Theres a bloke walking round in a kilt and a poncho .Shouldnt he ?said Mr Weasley anxiously .Its like some sort of .I dunno .like some sort of rally said Mr Roberts .They all seem to know each other .Like a big party .At that moment a wizard in plusfours appeared out of thin air next to Mr Robertss front door .Obliviate he said sharply pointing his wand at Mr Roberts .Instantly Mr Robertss eyes slid out of focus his brows unknitted and a look of dreamy unconcern fell over his face .Harry recognized the symptoms of one who had just had his memory modified .A map of the campsite for you Mr Roberts said placidly to Mr Weasley .And your change .Thanks very much said Mr Weasley .The wizard in plusfours accompanied them toward the gate to the campsite .He looked exhausted His chin was blue with stubble and there were deep purple shadows under his eyes .Once out of earshot of Mr Roberts he muttered to Mr Weasley Been having a lot of trouble with him .Needs a Memory Charm ten times a day to keep him happy .And Ludo Bagmans not helping .Trotting around talking about Bludgers and Quaffles at the top of his voice not a worry about antiMuggle security .Blimey Ill be glad when this is over .See you later Arthur .He Disapparated .I thought Mr Bagman was Head of Magical Games and Sports said Ginny looking surprised .He should know better than to talk about Bludgers near Muggles shouldnt he ?He should said Mr Weasley smiling and leading them through the gates into the campsite but Ludos always been a bit .well .lax about security .You couldnt wish for a more enthusiastic head of the sports department though .He played Quidditch for England himself you know .And he was the best Beater the Wimbourne Wasps ever had .They trudged up the misty field between long rows of tents .Most looked almost ordinary their owners had clearly tried to make them as Mugglelike as possible but had slipped up by adding chimneys or bellpulls or weather vanes .However here and there was a tent so obviously magical that Harry could hardly be surprised that Mr Roberts was getting suspicious .Halfway up the field stood an extravagant confection of striped silk like a miniature palace with several live peacocks tethered at the entrance .A little farther on they passed a tent that had three floors and several turrets and a short way beyond that was a tent that had a front garden attached complete with birdbath sundial and fountain .Always the same said Mr Weasley smiling .We cant resist showing off when we get together .Ah here we are look this is us .They had reached the very edge of the wood at the top of the field and here was an empty space with a small sign hammered into the ground that read WEEZLY .Couldnt have a better spot !said Mr Weasley happily .The field is just on the other side of the wood there were as close as we could be .He hoisted his backpack from his shoulders .Right he said excitedly no magic allowed strictly speaking not when were out in these numbers on Muggle land .Well be putting these tents up by hand !Shouldnt be too difficult .Muggles do it all the time .Here Harry where do you reckon we should start ?Harry had never been camping in his life the Dursleys had never taken him on any kind of holiday preferring to leave him with Mrs Figg an old neighbor .However he and Hermione worked out where most of the poles and pegs should go and though Mr Weasley was more of a hindrance than a help because he got thoroughly overexcited when it came to using the mallet they finally managed to erect a pair of shabby twoman tents .All of them stood back to admire their handiwork .Nobody looking at these tents would guess they belonged to wizards Harry thought but the trouble was that once Bill Charlie and Percy arrived they would be a party of ten .Hermione seemed to have spotted this problem too she gave Harry a quizzical look as Mr Weasley dropped to his hands and knees and entered the first tent .Well be a bit cramped he called but I think well all squeeze in .Come and have a look .Harry bent down ducked under the tent flap and felt his jaw drop .He had walked into what looked like an oldfashioned threeroom flat complete with bathroom and kitchen .Oddly enough it was furnished in exactly the same sort of style as Mrs Figgs house There were crocheted covers on the mismatched chairs and a strong smell of cats .Well its not for long said Mr Weasley mopping his bald patch with a handkerchief and peering in at the four bunk beds that stood in the bedroom .I borrowed this from Perkins at the office .Doesnt camp much anymore poor fellow hes got lumbago .He picked up the dusty kettle and peered inside it .Well need water .Theres a tap marked on this map the Muggle gave us said Ron who had followed Harry inside the tent and seemed completely unimpressed by its extraordinary inner proportions .Its on the other side of the field .Well why dont you Harry and Hermione go and get us some water then Mr Weasley handed over the kettle and a couple of saucepans and the rest of us will get some wood for a fire ?But weve got an oven said Ron .Why cant we just Ron antiMuggle security !said Mr Weasley his face shining with anticipation .When real Muggles camp they cook on fires outdoors .Ive seen them at it !After a quick tour of the girls tent which was slightly smaller than the boys though without the smell of cats Harry Ron and Hermione set off across the campsite with the kettle and saucepans .Now with the sun newly risen and the mist lifting they could see the city of tents that stretched in every direction .They made their way slowly through the rows staring eagerly around .It was only just dawning on Harry how many witches and wizards there must be in the world he had never really thought much about those in other countries .Their fellow campers were starting to wake up .First to stir were the families with small children Harry had never seen witches and wizards this young before .A tiny boy no older than two was crouched outside a large pyramidshaped tent holding a wand and poking happily at a slug in the grass which was swelling slowly to the size of a salami .As they drew level with him his mother came hurrying out of the tent .How ma .ny times Kevin ?You dont touch Daddys wand yecchh !She had trodden on the giant slug which burst .Her scolding carried after them on the still air mingling with the little boys yells You bust slug !You bust slug !A short way farther on they saw two little witches barely older than Kevin who were riding toy broomsticks that rose only high enough for the girls toes to skim the dewy grass .A Ministry wizard had already spotted them as he hurried past Harry Ron and Hermione he muttered distractedly In broad daylight !Parents having a liein I suppose Here and there adult wizards and witches were emerging from their tents and starting to cook breakfast .Some with furtive looks around them conjured fires with their wands others were striking matches with dubious looks on their faces as though sure this couldnt work .Three African wizards sat in serious conversation all of them wearing long white robes and roasting what looked like a rabbit on a bright purple fire while a group of middleaged American witches sat gossiping happily beneath a spangled banner stretched between their tents that read THE SALEM WITCHES INSTITUTE .Harry caught snatches of conversation in strange languages from the inside of tents they passed and though he couldnt understand a word the tone of every single voice was excited .Er is it my eyes or has everything gone green ?said Ron .It wasnt just Rons eyes .They had walked into a patch of tents that were all covered with a thick growth of shamrocks so that it looked as though small oddly shaped hillocks had sprouted out of the earth .Grinning faces could be seen under those that had their flaps open .Then from behind them they heard their names .Harry !Ron !Hermione !It was Seamus Finnigan their fellow Gryffindor fourth year .He was sitting in front of his own shamrock covered tent with a sandyhaired woman who had to be his mother and his best friend Dean Thomas also of Gryffindor .Like the decorations ?said Seamus grinning .The Ministrys not too happy .Ah why shouldnt we show our colors ?said Mrs Finnigan .You should see what the Bulgarians have got dangling all over their tents .Youll be supporting Ireland of course ?she added eyeing Harry Ron and Hermione beadily .When they had assured her that they were indeed supporting Ireland they set off again though as Ron said Like wed say anything else surrounded by that lot .I wonder what the Bulgarians have got dangling all over their tents ?said Hermione .Lets go and have a look said Harry pointing to a large patch of tents upheld where the Bulgarian flag white green and red was fluttering in the breeze .The tents here had not been bedecked with plant life but each and every one of them had the same poster attached to it a poster of a very surly face with heavy black eyebrows .The picture was of course moving but all it did was blink and scowl .Krum said Ron quietly .What ?said Hermione .Krum !said Ron .Viktor Krum the Bulgarian Seeker !He looks really grumpy said Hermione looking around at the many Krums blinking and scowling at them . ‘Really grumpy ?Ron raised his eyes to the heavens .Who cares what he looks like ?Hes unbelievable .Hes really young too .Only just eighteen or something .Hes a genius you wait until tonight youll see .There was already a small queue for the tap in the corner of the field .Harry Ron and Hermione joined it right behind a pair of men who were having a heated argument .One of them was a very old wizard who was wearing a long flowery nightgown .The other was clearly a Ministry wizard he was holding out a pair of pinstriped trousers and almost crying with exasperation .Just put them on Archie theres a good chap .You cant walk around like that the Muggle at the gates already getting suspicious I bought this in a Muggle shop said the old wizard stubbornly .Muggles wear them .Muggle women wear them Archie not the men they wear these said the Ministry wizard and he brandished the pinstriped trousers .Im not putting them on said old Archie in indignation .I like a healthy breeze round my privates thanks .Hermione was overcome with such a strong fit of the giggles at this point that she had to duck out of the queue and only returned when Archie had collected his water and moved away .Walking more slowly now because of the weight of the water they made their way back through the campsite .Here and there they saw more familiar faces other Hogwarts students with their families .Oliver Wood the old captain of Harrys House Quidditch team who had just left Hogwarts dragged Harry over to his parents tent to introduce him and told him excitedly that he had just been signed to the Puddlemere United reserve team .Next they were hailed by Ernie Macmillan a Hufflepuff fourth year and a little farther on they saw Cho Chang a very pretty girl who played Seeker on the Ravenclaw team .She waved and smiled at Harry who slopped quite a lot of water down his front as he waved back .More to stop Ron from smirking than anything Harry hurriedly pointed out a large group of teenagers whom he had never seen before .Who dyou reckon they are ?he said .They dont go to Hogwarts do they ?Spect they go to some foreign school said Ron .I know there are others .Never met anyone who went to one though .Bill had a penfriend at a school in Brazil .this was years and years ago .and he wanted to go on an exchange trip but Mum and Dad couldnt afford it .His penfriend got all offended when he said he wasnt going and sent him a cursed hat .It made his ears shrivel up .Harry laughed but didnt voice the amazement he felt at hearing about other wizarding schools .He supposed now that he saw representatives of so many nationalities in the campsite that he had been stupid never to realize that Hogwarts couldnt be the only one .He glanced at Hermione who looked utterly unsurprised by the information .No doubt she had run across the news about other wizarding schools in some book or other .Youve been ages said George when they finally got back to the Weasleys tents .Met a few people said Ron setting the water down .You not got that fire started yet ?Dads having fun with the matches said Fred .Mr Weasley was having no success at all in lighting the fire but it wasnt for lack of trying .Splintered matches littered the ground around him but he looked as though he was having the time of his life .Oops !he said as he managed to light a match and promptly dropped it in surprise .Come here Mr Weasley said Hermione kindly taking the box from him and showing him how to do it properly .At last they got the fire lit though it was at least another hour before it was hot enough to cook anything .There was plenty to watch while they waited however .Their tent seemed to be pitched right alongside a kind of thoroughfare to the field and Ministry members kept hurrying up and down it greeting Mr Weasley cordially as they passed .Mr Weasley kept up a running commentary mainly for Harrys and Hermiones benefit his own children knew too much about the Ministry to be greatly interested .That was Cuthbert Mockridge Head of the Goblin Liaison Office .Here comes Gilbert Wimple hes with the Committee on Experimental Charms hes had those horns for awhile now .Hello Arnie .Arnold Peasegood hes an Obliviator member of the Accidental Magic Reversal Squad you know .and thats Bode and Croaker .theyre Unspeakables .Theyre what ?From the Department of Mysteries top secret no idea what they get up to .At last the fire was ready and they had just started cooking eggs and sausages when Bill Charlie and Percy came strolling out of the woods toward them .Just Apparated Dad said Percy loudly .Ah excellent lunch !They were halfway through their plates of eggs and sausages when Mr Weasley jumped to his feet waving and grinning at a man who was striding toward them .Aha !he said .The man of the moment !Ludo !Ludo Bagman was easily the most noticeable person Harry had seen so far even including old Archie in his flowered nightdress .He was wearing long Quidditch robes in thick horizontal stripes of bright yellow and black .An enormous picture of a wasp was splashed across his chest .He had the look of a powerfully built man gone slightly to seed the robes were stretched tightly across a large belly he surely had not had in the days when he had played Quidditch for England .His nose was squashed probably broken by a stray Bludger Harry thought but his round blue eyes short blond hair and rosy complexion made him look like a very overgrown schoolboy .Ahoy there !Bagman called happily .He was walking as though he had springs attached to the balls of his feet and was plainly in a state of wild excitement .Arthur old man he puffed as he reached the campfire what a day eh ?What a day !Could we have asked for more perfect weather ?A cloudless night coming .and hardly a hiccough in the arrangements .Not much for me to do !Behind him a group of haggardlooking Ministry wizards rushed past pointing at the distant evidence of some sort of a magical fire that was sending violet sparks twenty feet into the air .Percy hurried forward with his hand outstretched .Apparently his disapproval of the way Ludo Bagman ran his department did not prevent him from wanting to make a good impression .Ah yes said Mr Weasley grinning this is my son Percy .Hes just started at the Ministry and this is Fred no George sorry thats Fred Bill Charlie Ron my daughter Ginny and Rons friends Hermione Granger and Harry Potter .Bagman did the smallest of double takes when he heard Harrys name and his eyes performed the familiar flick upward to the scar on Harrys forehead .Everyone Mr Weasley continued this is Ludo Bagman you know who he is its thanks to him weve got such good tickets Bagman beamed and waved his hand as if to say it had been nothing .Fancy a flutter on the match Arthur ?he said eagerly jingling what seemed to be a large amount of gold in the pockets of his yellowandblack robes .Ive already got Roddy Pontner betting me Bulgaria will score first I offered him nice odds considering Irelands front three are the strongest Ive seen in years and little Agatha Timms has put up half shares in her eel farm on a weeklong match .Oh .go on then said Mr Weasley .Lets see .a Galleon on Ireland to win ?A Galleon ?Ludo Bagman looked slightly disappointed but recovered himself .Very well very well .any other takers ?Theyre a bit young to be gambling said Mr Weasley .Molly wouldnt like Well bet thirtyseven Galleons fifteen Sickles three Knuts said Fred as he and George quickly pooled all their money that Ireland wins but Viktor Krum gets the Snitch .Oh and well throw in a fake wand .You dont want to go showing Mr Bagman rubbish like that Percy hissed but Bagman didnt seem to think the wand was rubbish at all on the contrary his boyish face shone with excitement as he took it from Fred and when the wand gave a loud squawk and turned into a rubber chicken Bagman roared with laughter .Excellent !I havent seen one that convincing in years !Id pay five Galleons for that !Percy froze in an attitude of stunned disapproval .Boys said Mr Weasley under his breath I dont want you betting .Thats all your savings .Your mother Dont be a spoilsport Arthur !boomed Ludo Bagman rattling his pockets excitedly .Theyre old enough to know what they want !You reckon Ireland will win but Krum ll get the Snitch ?Not a chance boys not a chance .Ill give you excellent odds on that one .Well add five Galleons for the funny wand then shall we .Mr Weasley looked on helplessly as Ludo Bagman whipped out a notebook and quill and began jotting down the twins names .Cheers said George taking the slip of parchment Bagman handed him and tucking it away carefully .Bagman turned most cheerfully back to Mr Weasley .Couldnt do me a brew I suppose ?Im keeping an eye out for Barty Crouch .My Bulgarian opposite numbers making difficulties and I cant understand a word hes saying .Bartyll be able to sort it out .He speaks about a hundred and fifty languages .Mr Crouch ?said Percy suddenly abandoning his look of pokerstiff disapproval and positively writhing with excitement .He speaks over two hundred !Mermish and Gobbledegook and Troll .Anyone can speak Troll said Fred dismissively .All you have to do is point and grunt .Percy threw Fred an extremely nasty look and stoked the fire vigorously to bring the kettle back to the boil .Any news of Bertha Jorkins yet Ludo ?Mr Weasley asked as Bagman settled himself down on the grass beside them all .Not a dicky bird said Bagman comfortably .But shell turn up .Poor old Bertha .memory like a leaky cauldron and no sense of direction .Lost you take my word for it .Shell wander back into the office sometime in October thinking its still July .You dont think it might be time to send someone to look for her ?Mr Weasley suggested tentatively as Percy handed Bagman his tea .Barty Crouch keeps saying that said Bagman his round eyes widening innocently but we really cant spare anyone at the moment .Oh talk of the devil !Barty !A wizard had just Apparated at their fireside and he could not have made more of a contrast with Ludo Bagman sprawled on the grass in his old Wasp robes .Barty Crouch was a stiff upright elderly man dressed in an impeccably crisp suit and tie .The parting in his short gray hair was almost unnaturally straight and his narrow toothbrush mustache looked as though he trimmed it using a slide rule .His shoes were very highly polished .Harry could see at once why Percy idolized him .Percy was a great believer in rigidly following rules and Mr Crouch had complied with the rule about Muggle dressing so thoroughly that he could have passed for a bank manager Harry doubted even Uncle Vernon would have spotted him for what he really was .Pull up a bit of grass Barty said Ludo brightly patting the ground beside him .No thank you Ludo said Crouch and there was a bite of impatience in his voice .Ive been looking for you everywhere .The Bulgarians are insisting we add another twelve seats to the Top Box .Oh is that what theyre after ?said Bagman .I thought the chap was asking to borrow a pair of tweezers .Bit of a strong accent .Mr Crouch !said Percy breathlessly sunk into a kind of halfbow that made him look like a hunchback .Would you like a cup of tea ?Oh said Mr Crouch looking over at Percy in mild surprise .Yes thank you Weatherby .Fred and George choked into their own cups .Percy very pink around the ears busied himself with the kettle .Oh and Ive been wanting a word with you too Arthur said Mr Crouch his sharp eyes falling upon Mr Weasley .Ali Bashirs on the warpath .He wants a word with you about your embargo on flying carpets .Mr Weasley heaved a deep sigh .I sent him an owl about that just last week .If Ive told him once Ive told him a hundred times Carpets are defined as a Muggle Artifact by the Registry of Proscribed Charmable Objects but will he listen ?I doubt it said Mr Crouch accepting a cup from Percy .Hes desperate to export here .Well theyll never replace brooms in Britain will they ?said Bagman .Ali thinks theres a niche in the market for a family vehicle said Mr Crouch .I remember my grandfather had an Axminster that could seat twelve but that was before carpets were banned of course .He spoke as though he wanted to leave nobody in any doubt that all his ancestors had abided strictly by the law .So been keeping busy Barty ?said Bagman breezily .Fairly said Mr Crouch dryly .Organizing Portkeys across five continents is no mean feat Ludo .I expect youll both be glad when this is over ?said Mr Weasley .Ludo Bagman looked shocked .Glad !Dont know when Ive had more fun .Still its not as though we havent got anything to look forward to eh Barty ?Eh ?Plenty left to organize eh ?Mr Crouch raised his eyebrows at Bagman .We agreed not to make the announcement until all the details Oh details !said Bagman waving the word away like a cloud of midges .Theyve signed havent they ?Theyve agreed havent they ?I bet you anything these kidsll know soon enough anyway .I mean its happening at Hogwarts Ludo we need to meet the Bulgarians you know said Mr Crouch sharply cutting Bagmans remarks short .Thank you for the tea Weatherby .He pushed his undrunk tea back at Percy and waited for Ludo to rise Bagman struggled to his feet swigging down the last of his tea the gold in his pockets chinking merrily .See you all later !he said .Youll be up in the Top Box with me Im commentating !He waved Barty Crouch nodded curtly and both of them Disapparated .Whats happening at Hogwarts Dad ?said Fred at once .What were they talking about ?Youll find out soon enough said Mr Weasley smiling .Its classified information until such time as the Ministry decides to release it said Percy stiffly .Mr Crouch was quite right not to disclose it .Oh shut up Weatherby said Fred .A sense of excitement rose like a palpable cloud over the campsite as the afternoon wore on .By dusk the still summer air itself seemed to be quivering with anticipation and as darkness spread like a curtain over the thousands of waiting wizards the last vestiges of pretence disappeared the Ministry seemed to have bowed to the inevitable and stopped fighting the signs of blatant magic now breaking out everywhere .Salesmen were Apparating every few feet carrying trays and pushing carts full of extraordinary merchandise .There were luminous rosettes green for Ireland red for Bulgaria which were squealing the names of the players pointed green hats bedecked with dancing shamrocks Bulgarian scarves adorned with lions that really roared flags from both countries that played their national anthems as they were waved there were tiny models of Firebolts that really flew and collectible figures of famous players which strolled across the palm of your hand preening themselves .Been saving my pocket money all summer for this Ron told Harry as they and Hermione strolled through the salesmen buying souvenirs .Though Ron purchased a dancing shamrock hat and a large green rosette he also bought a small figure of Viktor Krum the Bulgarian Seeker .The miniature Krum walked backward and forward over Rons hand scowling up at the green rosette above him .Wow look at these !said Harry hurrying over to a cart piled high with what looked like brass binoculars except that they were covered with all sorts of weird knobs and dials .Omnioculars said the saleswizard eagerly .You can replay action .slow everything down .and they flash up a playbyplay breakdown if you need it .Bargain ten Galleons each .Wish I hadnt bought this now said Ron gesturing at his dancing shamrock hat and gazing longingly at the Omnioculars .Three pairs said Harry firmly to the wizard .No dont bother said Ron going red .He was always touchy about the fact that Harry who had inherited a small fortune from his parents had much more money than he did .You wont be getting anything for Christmas Harry told him thrusting Omnioculars into his and Hermiones hands .For about ten years mind .Fair enough said Ron grinning .Oooh thanks Harry said Hermione .And Ill get us some programs look Their money bags considerably lighter they went back to the tents .Bill Charlie and Ginny were all sporting green rosettes too and Mr Weasley was carrying an Irish flag .Fred and George had no souvenirs as they had given Bagman all their gold .And then a deep booming gong sounded somewhere beyond the woods and at once green and red lanterns blazed into life in the trees lighting a path to the field .Its time !said Mr Weasley looking as excited as any of them .Come on lets go !4 THE QUIDDITCH WORLD CUP Clutching their purchases Mr Weasley in the lead they all hurried into the wood following the lantern lit trail .They could hear the sounds of thousands of people moving around them shouts and laughter snatches of singing .The atmosphere of feverish excitement was highly infectious Harry couldnt stop grinning .They walked through the wood for twenty minutes talking and joking loudly until at last they emerged on the other side and found themselves in the shadow of a gigantic stadium .Though Harry could see only a fraction of the immense gold walls surrounding the field he could tell that ten cathedrals would fit comfortably inside it .Seats a hundred thousand said Mr Weasley spotting the awestruck look on Harrys face .Ministry task force of five hundred have been working on it all year .Muggle Repelling Charms on every inch of it .Every time Muggles have got anywhere near here all year theyve suddenly remembered urgent appointments and had to dash away again .bless them he added fondly leading the way toward the nearest entrance which was already surrounded by a swarm of shouting witches and wizards .Prime seats !said the Ministry witch at the entrance when she checked their tickets .Top Box !Straight upstairs Arthur and as high as you can go .The stairs into the stadium were carpeted in rich purple .They clambered upward with the rest of the crowd which slowly filtered away through doors into the stands to their left and right .Mr Weasleys party kept climbing and at last they reached the top of the staircase and found themselves in a small box set at the highest point of the stadium and situated exactly halfway between the golden goal posts .About twenty purpleandgilt chairs stood in two rows here and Harry filing into the front seats with the Weasleys looked down upon a scene the likes of which he could never have imagined .A hundred thousand witches and wizards were taking their places in the seats which rose in levels around the long oval field .Everything was suffused with a mysterious golden light which seemed to come from the stadium itself .The field looked smooth as velvet from their lofty position .At either end of the field stood three goal hoops fifty feet high right opposite them almost at Harrys eye level was a gigantic blackboard .Gold writing kept dashing across it as though an invisible giants hand were scrawling upon the blackboard and then wiping it off again watching it Harry saw that it was flashing advertisements across the field .The Bluebottle A Broom for All the Family safe reliable and with Builtin AntiBurglar Buzzer .Mrs Skowers AllPurpose Magical Mess Remover No Pain No Stain ! .Gladrags Wizardwear London Paris Hogsmeade .Harry tore his eyes away from the sign and looked over his shoulder to see who else was sharing the box with them .So far it was empty except for a tiny creature sitting in the second from last seat at the end of the row behind them .The creature whose legs were so short they stuck out in front of it on the chair was wearing a tea towel draped like a toga and it had its face hidden in its hands .Yet those long batlike ears were oddly familiar .Dobby ?said Harry incredulously .The tiny creature looked up and stretched its fingers revealing enormous brown eyes and a nose the exact size and shape of a large tomato .It wasnt Dobby it was however unmistakably a houseelf as Harrys friend Dobby had been .Harry had set Dobby free from his old owners the Malfoy family .Did sir just call me Dobby ?squeaked the elf curiously from between its fingers .Its voice was higher even than Dobbys had been a teeny quivering squeak of a voice and Harry suspected though it was very hard to tell with a houseelf that this one might just be female .Ron and Hermione spun around in their seats to look .Though they had heard a lot about Dobby from Harry they had never actually met him .Even Mr Weasley looked around in interest .Sorry Harry told the elf I just thought you were someone I knew .But I knows Dobby too sir !squeaked the elf .She was shielding her face as though blinded by light though the Top Box was not brightly lit .My name is Winky sir and you sir Her dark brown eyes widened to the size of side plates as they rested upon Harrys scar .You is surely Harry Potter !Yeah I am said Harry .But Dobby talks of you all the time sir !she said lowering her hands very slightly and looking awestruck .How is he ?said Harry .Hows freedom suiting him ?Ah sir said Winky shaking her head ah sir meaning no disrespect sir but I is not sure you did Dobby a favor sir when you is setting him free .Why ?said Harry taken aback .Whats wrong with him ?Freedom is going to Dobbys head sir said Winky sadly .Ideas above his station sir .Cant get another position sir .Why not ?said Harry .Winky lowered her voice by a halfoctave and whispered He is wanting paying for his work sir .Paying ?said Harry blankly .Well why shouldnt he be paid ?Winky looked quite horrified at the idea and closed her fingers slightly so that her face was halfhidden again .Houseelves is not paid sir !she said in a muffled squeak .No no no .I says to Dobby I says go find yourself a nice family and settle down Dobby .He is getting up to all sorts of high jinks sir what is unbecoming to a houseelf .You goes racketing around like this Dobby I says and next thing I hear yous up in front of the Department for the Regulation and Control of Magical Creatures like some common goblin .Well its about time he had a bit of fun said Harry .Houseelves is not supposed to have fun Harry Potter said Winky firmly from behind her hands .Houseelves does what they is told .I is not liking heights at all Harry Potter she glanced toward the edge of the box and gulped but my master sends me to the Top Box and I comes sir .Whys he sent you up here if he knows you dont like heights ?said Harry frowning .Master master wants me to save him a seat Harry Potter .He is very busy said Winky tilting her head toward the empty space beside her .Winky is wishing she is back in masters tent Harry Potter but Winky does what she is told .Winky is a good houseelf .She gave the edge of the box another frightened look and hid her eyes completely again .Harry turned back to the others .So thats a houseelf ?Ron muttered .Weird things arent they ?Dobby was weirder said Harry fervently .Ron pulled out his Omnioculars and started testing them staring down into the crowd on the other side of the stadium .Wild !he said twiddling the replay knob on the side .I can make that old bloke down there pick his nose again .and again .and again .Hermione meanwhile was skimming eagerly through her velvetcovered tasseled program . ‘A display from the team mascots will precede the match she read aloud .Oh thats always worth watching said Mr Weasley .National teams bring creatures from their native land you know to put on a bit of a show .The box filled gradually around them over the next half hour .Mr Weasley kept shaking hands with people who were obviously very important wizards .Percy jumped to his feet so often that he looked as though he were trying to sit on a hedgehog .When Cornelius Fudge the Minister of Magic himself arrived Percy bowed so low that his glasses fell off and shattered .Highly embarrassed he repaired them with his wand and thereafter remained in his seat throwing jealous looks at Harry whom Cornelius Fudge had greeted like an old friend .They had met before and Fudge shook Harrys hand in a fatherly fashion asked how he was and introduced him to the wizards on either side of him .Harry Potter you know he told the Bulgarian minister loudly who was wearing splendid robes of black velvet trimmed with gold and didnt seem to understand a word of English .Harry Potter .oh come on now you know who he is .the boy who survived YouKnowWho .you do know who he is The Bulgarian wizard suddenly spotted Harrys scar and started gabbling loudly and excitedly pointing at it .Knew wed get there in the end said Fudge wearily to Harry .Im no great shakes at languages I need Barty Crouch for this sort of thing .Ah I see his houseelfs saving him a seat .Good job too these Bulgarian blighters have been trying to cadge all the best places .ah and heres Lucius !Harry Ron and Hermione turned quickly .Edging along the second row to three stillempty seats right behind Mr Weasley were none other than Dobby the houseelfs former owners Lucius Malfoy his son Draco and a woman Harry supposed must be Dracos mother .Harry and Draco Malfoy had been enemies ever since their very first journey to Hogwarts .A pale boy with a pointed face and whiteblond hair Draco greatly resembled his father .His mother was blonde too tall and slim she would have been nicelooking if she hadnt been wearing a look that suggested there was a nasty smell under her nose .Ah Fudge said Mr Malfoy holding out his hand as he reached the Minister of Magic .How are you ?I dont think youve met my wife Narcissa ?Or our son Draco ?How do you do how do you do ?said Fudge smiling and bowing to Mrs Malfoy .And allow me to introduce you to Mr Oblansk Obalonsk Mr well hes the Bulgarian Minister of Magic and he cant understand a word Im saying anyway so never mind .And lets see who else you know Arthur Weasley I daresay ?It was a tense moment .Mr Weasley and Mr Malfoy looked at each other and Harry vividly recalled the last time they had come facetoface It had been in Flourish and Blotts bookshop and they had had a fight .Mr Malfoys cold gray eyes swept over Mr Weasley and then up and down the row .Good lord Arthur he said softly .What did you have to sell to get seats in the Top Box ?Surely your house wouldnt have fetched this much ?Fudge who wasnt listening said Lucius has just given a very generous contribution to St .Mungos Hospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries Arthur .Hes here as my guest .How how nice said Mr Weasley with a very strained smile .Mr Malfoys eyes had returned to Hermione who went slightly pink but stared determinedly back at him .Harry knew exactly what was making Mr Malfoys lip curl like that .The Malfoys prided themselves on being purebloods in other words they considered anyone of Muggle descent like Hermione secondclass .However under the gaze of the Minister of Magic Mr Malfoy didnt dare say anything .He nodded sneeringly to Mr Weasley and continued down the line to his seats .Draco shot Harry Ron and Hermione one contemptuous look then settled himself between his mother and father .Slimy gits Ron muttered as he Harry and Hermione turned to face the field again .Next moment Ludo Bagman charged into the box .Everyone ready ?he said his round face gleaming like a great excited Edam .Minister ready to go ?Ready when you are Ludo said Fudge comfortably .Ludo whipped out his wand directed it at his own throat and said Sonorusl and then spoke over the roar of sound that was now filling the packed stadium his voice echoed over them booming into every corner of the stands .Ladies and gentlemen .welcome !Welcome to the final of the four hundred and twentysecond Quidditch World Cup !The spectators screamed and clapped .Thousands of flags waved adding their discordant national anthems to the racket .The huge blackboard opposite them was wiped clear of its last message Bertie Botts Every Flavor Beans A Risk With Every Mouthfull and now showed BULGARIA 0 IRELAND 0 .And now without further ado allow me to introduce .the Bulgarian National Team Mascots !The righthand side of the stands which was a solid block of scarlet roared its approval .I wonder what theyve brought said Mr Weasley leaning forward in his seat .aah !He suddenly whipped off his glasses and polished them hurriedly on his robes .Veelal What are veel ?But a hundred veela were now gliding out onto the field and Harrys question was answered for him .Veela were women .the most beautiful women Harry had ever seen .except that they werent they couldnt be human .This puzzled Harry for a moment while he tried to guess what exactly they could be what could make their skin shine moon bright like that or their whitegold hair fan out behind them without wind .but then the music started and Harry stopped worrying about them not being human in fact he stopped worrying about anything at all .The veela had started to dance and Harrys mind had gone completely and blissfully blank .All that mattered in the world was that he kept watching the veela because if they stopped dancing terrible things would happen .And as the veela danced faster and faster wild half formed thoughts started chasing through Harrys dazed mind .He wanted to do something very impressive right now .Jumping from the box into the stadium seemed a good idea .but would it be good enough ?Harry what are you doing ?said Hermiones voice from a long way off .The music stopped .Harry blinked .He was standing up and one of his legs was resting on the wall of the box .Next to him Ron was frozen in an attitude that looked as though he were about to dive from a springboard .Angry yells were filling the stadium .The crowd didnt want the veela to go .Harry was with them he would of course be supporting Bulgaria and he wondered vaguely why he had a large green shamrock pinned to his chest .Ron meanwhile was absentmindedly shredding the shamrocks on his hat .Mr Weasley smiling slightly leaned over to Ron and tugged the hat out of his hands .Youll be wanting that he said once Ireland have had their say .Huh ?said Ron staring openmouthed at the veela who had now lined up along one side of the field .Hermione made a loud tutting noise .She reached up and pulled Harry back into his seat .Honestlyl she said .And now roared Ludo Bagmans voice kindly put your wands in the air .for the Irish National Team Mascots !Next moment what seemed to be a great greenand gold comet came zooming into the stadium .It did one circuit of the stadium then split into two smaller comets each hurtling toward the goal posts .A rainbow arced suddenly across the field connecting the two balls of light .The crowd oooohed and aahed as though at a fireworks display .Now the rainbow faded and the balls of light reunited and merged they had formed a great shimmering shamrock which rose up into the sky and began to soar over the stands .Something like golden rain seemed to be falling from it Excellent !yelled Ron as the shamrock soared over them and heavy gold coins rained from it bouncing off their heads and seats .Squinting up at the shamrock Harry realized that it was actually comprised of thousands of tiny little bearded men with red vests each carrying a minute lamp of gold or green .Leprechauns !said Mr Weasley over the tumultuous applause of the crowd many of whom were still fighting and rummaging around under their chairs to retrieve the gold .There you go Ron yelled happily stuffing a fistful of gold coins into Harrys hand for the Omnioculars !Now youve got to buy me a Christmas present ha !The great shamrock dissolved the leprechauns drifted down onto the field on the opposite side from the veela and settled themselves crosslegged to watch the match .And now ladies and gentlemen kindly welcome the Bulgarian National Quidditch Team !I give you Dimitrov !A scarletclad figure on a broomstick moving so fast it was blurred shot out onto the field from an entrance far below to wild applause from the Bulgarian supporters .Ivanova !A second scarletrobed player zoomed out .Zograf !Levski !Vulchanov !Volkov !aand Krum Thats him thats him !yelled Ron following Krum with his Omnioculars .Harry quickly focused his own .Viktor Krum was thin dark and sallowskinned with a large curved nose and thick black eyebrows .He looked like an overgrown bird of prey .It was hard to believe he was only eighteen .And now please greet the Irish National Quidditch Team !yelled Bagman .Presenting Connolly !Ryan !Troy !Mullet !Moran !Quigley !aand Lynch .Seven green blurs swept onto the field Harry spun a small dial on the side of his Omnioculars and slowed the players down enough to read the word Firebolt on each of their brooms and see their names embroidered in silver upon their backs .And here all the way from Egypt our referee acclaimed Chairwizard of the International Association of Quidditch Hassan Mostafa !A small and skinny wizard completely bald but with a mustache to rival Uncle Vernons wearing robes of pure gold to match the stadium strode out onto the field .A silver whistle was protruding from under the mustache and he was carrying a large wooden crate under one arm his broomstick under the other .Harry spun the speed dial on his Omnioculars back to normal watching closely as Mostafa mounted his broomstick and kicked the crate open four balls burst into the air the scarlet Quaffle the two black Bludgers and Harry saw it for the briefest moment before it sped out of sight the minuscule winged Golden Snitch .With a sharp blast on his whistle Mostafa shot into the air after the balls .Theeeeeeeeyre OFF !screamed Bagman .And its Mullet !Troy !Moran !Dimitrov !Back to Mullet !Troy !Levski !Moran !It was Quidditch as Harry had never seen it played before .He was pressing his Omnioculars so hard to his glasses that they were cutting into the bridge of his nose .The speed of the players was incredible the Chasers were throwing the Quaffle to one another so fast that Bagman only had time to say their names .Harry spun the slow dial on the right of his Omnioculars again pressed the playbyplay button on the top and he was immediately watching in slow motion while glittering purple lettering flashed across the lenses and the noise of the crowd pounded against his eardrums .Hawkshead Attacking Formation he read as he watched the three Irish Chasers zoom closely together Troy in the center slightly ahead of Mullet and Moran bearing down upon the Bulgarians .Porskoff Ploy flashed up next as Troy made as though to dart upward with the Quaffle drawing away the Bulgarian Chaser Ivanova and dropping the Quaffle to Moran .One of the Bulgarian Beaters Volkov swung hard at a passing Bludger with his small club knocking it into Morans path Moran ducked to avoid the Bludger and dropped the Quaffle and Levski soaring beneath caught it TROY SCORES !roared Bagman and the stadium shuddered with a roar of applause and cheers .Ten zero to Ireland !What ?Harry yelled looking wildly around through his Omnioculars .But Levskis got the Quaffle !Harry if youre not going to watch at normal speed youre going to miss things !shouted Hermione who was dancing up and down waving her arms in the air while Troy did a lap of honor around the field .Harry looked quickly over the top of his Omnioculars and saw that the leprechauns watching from the sidelines had all risen into the air again and formed the great glittering shamrock .Across the field the veela were watching them sulkily .Furious with himself Harry spun his speed dial back to normal as play resumed .Harry knew enough about Quidditch to see that the Irish Chasers were superb .They worked as a seamless team their movements so well coordinated that they appeared to be reading one anothers minds as they positioned themselves and the rosette on Harrys chest kept squeaking their names Troy Mullet Moran .And within ten minutes Ireland had scored twice more bringing their lead to thirtyzero and causing a thunderous tide of roars and applause from the greenclad supporters .The match became still faster but more brutal .Volkov and Vulchanov the Bulgarian Beaters were whacking the Bludgers as fiercely as possible at the Irish Chasers and were starting to prevent them from using some of their best moves twice they were forced to scatter and then finally Ivanova managed to break through their ranks dodge the Keeper Ryan and score Bulgarias first goal .Fingers in your ears !bellowed Mr Weasley as the veela started to dance in celebration .Harry screwed up his eyes too he wanted to keep his mind on the game .After a few seconds he chanced a glance at the field .The veela had stopped dancing and Bulgaria was again in possession of the Quaffle .Dimitrov !Levski !Dimitrov !Ivanova oh I say !roared Bagman .One hundred thousand wizards gasped as the two Seekers Krum and Lynch plummeted through the center of the Chasers so fast that it looked as though they had just jumped from airplanes without parachutes .Harry followed their descent through his Omnioculars squinting to see where the Snitch was Theyre going to crash !screamed Hermione next to Harry .She was half right at the very last second Viktor Krum pulled out of the dive and spiraled off .Lynch however hit the ground with a dull thud that could be heard throughout the stadium .A huge groan rose from the Irish seats .Fool !moaned Mr Weasley .Krum was feinting !Its timeout !yelled Bagmans voice as trained mediwizards hurry onto the field to examine Aidan Lynch !Hell be okay he only got ploughed !Charlie said reassuringly to Ginny who was hanging over the side of the box looking horrorstruck .Which is what Krum was after of course .Harry hastily pressed the replay and playbyplay buttons on his Omnioculars twiddled the speed dial and put them back up to his eyes .He watched as Krum and Lynch dived again in slow motion .Wronski Defensive Feint dangerous Seeker diversion read the shining purple lettering across his lenses .He saw Krums face contorted with concentration as he pulled out of the dive just in time while Lynch was flattened and he understood Krum hadnt seen the Snitch at all he was just making Lynch copy him .Harry had never seen anyone fly like that Krum hardly looked as though he was using a broomstick at all he moved so easily through the air that he looked unsupported and weightless .Harry turned his Omnioculars back to normal and focused them on Krum .He was now circling high above Lynch who was being revived by mediwizards with cups of potion .Harry focusing still more closely upon Krums face saw his dark eyes darting all over the ground a hundred feet below .He was using the time while Lynch was revived to look for the Snitch without interference .Lynch got to his feet at last to loud cheers from the greenclad supporters mounted his Firebolt and kicked back off into the air .His revival seemed to give Ireland new heart .When Mostafa blew his whistle again the Chasers moved into action with a skill unrivaled by anything Harry had seen so far .After fifteen more fast and furious minutes Ireland had pulled ahead by ten more goals .They were now leading by one hundred and thirty points to ten and the game was starting to get dirtier .As Mullet shot toward the goal posts yet again clutching the Quaffle tightly under her arm the Bulgarian Keeper Zograf flew out to meet her .Whatever happened was over so quickly Harry didnt catch it but a scream of rage from the Irish crowd and Mostafas long shrill whistle blast told him it had been a foul .And Mostafa takes the Bulgarian Keeper to task for cobbing excessive use of elbows !Bagman informed the roaring spectators .And yes its a penalty to Ireland !The leprechauns who had risen angrily into the air like a swarm of glittering hornets when Mullet had been fouled now darted together to form the words HA HA HA !The veela on the other side of the field leapt to their feet tossed their hair angrily and started to dance again .As one the Weasley boys and Harry stuffed their fingers into their ears but Hermione who hadnt bothered was soon tugging on Harrys arm .He turned to look at her and she pulled his fingers impatiently out of his ears .Look at the referee !she said giggling .Harry looked down at the field .Hassan Mostafa had landed right in front of the dancing veela and was acting very oddly indeed .He was flexing his muscles and smoothing his mustache excitedly .Now we cant have that !said Ludo Bagman though he sounded highly amused .Somebody slap the referee !A mediwizard came tearing across the field his fingers stuffed into his own ears and kicked Mostafa hard in the shins .Mostafa seemed to come to himself Harry watching through the Omnioculars again saw that he looked exceptionally embarrassed and had started shouting at the veela who had stopped dancing and were looking mutinous .And unless Im much mistaken Mostafa is actually attempting to send off the Bulgarian team mascots !said Bagmans voice .Now theres something we havent seen before .Oh this could turn nasty .It did The Bulgarian Beaters Volkov and Vulchanov landed on either side of Mostafa and began arguing furiously with him gesticulating toward the leprechauns who had now gleefully formed the words HEE HEE HEE .Mostafa was not impressed by the Bulgarians arguments however he was jabbing his finger into the air clearly telling them to get flying again and when they refused he gave two short blasts on his whistle .Two penalties for Ireland !shouted Bagman and the Bulgarian crowd howled with anger .And Volkov and Vulchanov had better get back on those brooms .yes .there they go .and Troy takes the Quaffle .Play now reached a level of ferocity beyond anything they had yet seen .The Beaters on both sides were acting without mercy Volkov and Vulchanov in particular seemed not to care whether their clubs made contact with Bludger or human as they swung them violently through the air .Dimitrov shot straight at Moran who had the Quaffle nearly knocking her off her broom .Foul roared the Irish supporters as one all standing up in a great wave of green .Foul !echoed Ludo Bagmans magically magnified voice .Dimitrov skins Moran deliberately flying to collide there and its got to be another penalty yes theres the whistle !The leprechauns had risen into the air again and this time they formed a giant hand which was making a very rude sign indeed at the veela across the field .At this the veela lost control .Instead of dancing they launched themselves across the field and began throwing what seemed to be handfuls of fire at the leprechauns .Watching through his Omnioculars Harry saw that they didnt look remotely beautiful now .On the contrary their faces were elongating into sharp cruelbeaked bird heads and long scaly wings were bursting from their shoulders And that boys yelled Mr Weasley over the tumult of the crowd below is why you should never go for looks alone !Ministry wizards were flooding onto the field to separate the veela and the leprechauns but with little success meanwhile the pitched battle below was nothing to the one taking place above .Harry turned this way and that staring through his Omnioculars as the Quaffle changed hands with the speed of a bullet .Levski Dimitrov Moran Troy Mullet Ivanova Moran again Moran MORAN SCORES !But the cheers of the Irish supporters were barely heard over the shrieks of the veela the blasts now issuing from the Ministry members wands and the furious roars of the Bulgarians .The game recommenced immediately now Levski had the Quaffle now Dimitrov The Irish Beater Quigley swung heavily at a passing Bludger and hit it as hard as possible toward Krum who did not duck quickly enough .It hit him full in the face .There was a deafening groan from the crowd Krums nose looked broken there was blood everywhere but Hassan Mostafa didnt blow his whistle .He had become distracted and Harry couldnt blame him one of the veela had thrown a handful of fire and set his broom tail alight .Harry wanted someone to realize that Krum was injured even though he was supporting Ireland Krum was the most exciting player on the field .Ron obviously felt the same .Timeout !Ah come on he cant play like that look at him Look at Lynch 1 Harry yelled .For the Irish Seeker had suddenly gone into a dive and Harry was quite sure that this was no Wronski Feint this was the real thing .Hes seen the Snitch !Harry shouted .Hes seen it !Look at him go !Half the crowd seemed to have realized what was happening the Irish supporters rose in another great wave of green screaming their Seeker on .but Krum was on his tail .How he could see where he was going Harry had no idea there were flecks of blood flying through the air behind him but he was drawing level with Lynch now as the pair of them hurtled toward the ground again Theyre going to crash !shrieked Hermione .Theyre not !roared Ron .Lynch is !yelled Harry .And he was right for the second time Lynch hit the ground with tremendous force and was immediately stampeded by a horde of angry veela .The Snitch wheres the Snitch ?bellowed Charlie along the row .Hes got it Krums got it its all over !shouted Harry .Krum his red robes shining with blood from his nose was rising gently into the air his fist held high a glint of gold in his hand .The scoreboard was flashing BULGARIA 160 IRELAND 170 across the crowd who didnt seem to have realized what had happened .Then slowly as though a great jumbo jet were revving up the rumbling from the Ireland supporters grew louder and louder and erupted into screams of delight .IRELAND WINS !Bagman shouted who like the Irish seemed to be taken aback by the sudden end of the match .KRUM GETS THE SNITCH BUT IRELAND WINS good lord I dont think any of us were expecting that !What did he catch the Snitch for ?Ron bellowed even as he jumped up and down applauding with his hands over his head .He ended it when Ireland were a hundred and sixty points ahead the idiot !He knew they were never going to catch up !Harry shouted back over all the noise also applauding loudly .The Irish Chasers were too good .He wanted to end it on his terms thats all .He was very brave wasnt he ?Hermione said leaning forward to watch Krum land as a swarm of mediwizards blasted a path through the battling leprechauns and veela to get to him .He looks a terrible mess .Harry put his Omnioculars to his eyes again .It was hard to see what was happening below because leprechauns were zooming delightedly all over the field but he could just make out Krum surrounded by mediwizards .He looked surlier than ever and refused to let them mop him up .His team members were around him shaking their heads and looking dejected a short way away the Irish players were dancing gleefully in a shower of gold descending from their mascots .Flags were waving all over the stadium the Irish national anthem blared from all sides the veela were shrinking back into their usual beautiful selves now though looking dispirited and forlorn .Veil ve fought bravely said a gloomy voice behind Harry .He looked around it was the Bulgarian Minister of Magic .You can speak English !said Fudge sounding outraged .And youve been letting me mime everything all day !Veil it vos very funny said the Bulgarian minister shrugging .And as the Irish team performs a lap of honor flanked by their mascots the Quidditch World Cup itself is brought into the Top Box !roared Bagman .Harrys eyes were suddenly dazzled by a blinding white light as the Top Box was magically illuminated so that everyone in the stands could see the inside .Squinting toward the entrance he saw two panting wizards carrying a vast golden cup into the box which they handed to Cornelius Fudge who was still looking very disgruntled that hed been using sign language all day for nothing .Lets have a really loud hand for the gallant losers Bulgaria !Bagman shouted .And up the stairs into the box came the seven defeated Bulgarian players .The crowd below was applauding appreciatively Harry could see thousands and thousands of Omniocular lenses flashing and winking in their direction .One by one the Bulgarians filed between the rows of seats in the box and Bagman called out the name of each as they shook hands with their own minister and then with Fudge .Krum who was last in line looked a real mess .Two black eyes were blooming spectacularly on his bloody face .He was still holding the Snitch .Harry noticed that he seemed much less coordinated on the ground .He was slightly duck footed and distinctly roundshouldered .But when Krums name was announced the whole stadium gave him a resounding earsplitting roar .And then came the Irish team .Aidan Lynch was being supported by Moran and Connolly the second crash seemed to have dazed him and his eyes looked strangely unfocused .But he grinned happily as Troy and Quigley lifted the Cup into the air and the crowd below thundered its approval .Harrys hands were numb with clapping .At last when the Irish team had left the box to perform another lap of honor on their brooms Aidan Lynch on the back of Connollys clutching hard around his waist and still grinning in a bemused sort of way Bagman pointed his wand at his throat and muttered Quietus .Theyll be talking about this one for years he said hoarsely a really unexpected twist that .shame it couldnt have lasted longer .Ah yes .yes I owe you .how much ?For Fred and George had just scrambled over the backs of their seats and were standing in front of Ludo Bagman with broad grins on their faces their hands outstretched .9 THE DARK MARK Dont tell your mother youve been gambling Mr Weasley implored Fred and George as they all made their way slowly down the purplecarpeted stairs .Dont worry Dad said Fred gleefully weve got big plans for this money .We dont want it confiscated .Mr Weasley looked for a moment as though he was going to ask what these big plans were but seemed to decide upon reflection that he didnt want to know .They were soon caught up in the crowds now flooding out of the stadium and back to their campsites .Raucous singing was borne toward them on the night air as they retraced their steps along the lanternlit path and leprechauns kept shooting over their heads cackling and waving their lanterns .When they finally reached the tents nobody felt like sleeping at all and given the level of noise around them Mr Weasley agreed that they could all have one last cup of cocoa together before turning in .They were soon arguing enjoyably about the match Mr Weasley got drawn into a disagreement about cobbing with Charlie and it was only when Ginny fell asleep right at the tiny table and spilled hot chocolate all over the floor that Mr Weasley called a halt to the verbal replays and insisted that everyone go to bed .Hermione and Ginny went into the next tent and Harry and the rest of the Weasleys changed into pajamas and clambered into their bunks .From the other side of the campsite they could still hear much singing and the odd echoing bang .Oh I am glad Im not on duty muttered Mr Weasley sleepily .I wouldnt fancy having to go and tell the Irish theyve got to stop celebrating .Harry who was on a top bunk above Ron lay staring up at the canvas ceiling of the tent watching the glow of an occasional leprechaun lantern flying overhead and picturing again some of Krums more spectacular moves .He was itching to get back on his own Firebolt and try out the Wronski Feint .Somehow Oliver Wood had never managed to convey with all his wriggling diagrams what that move was supposed to look like .Harry saw himself in robes that had his name on the back and imagined the sensation of hearing a hundredthousandstrong crowd roar as Ludo Bagmans voice echoed throughout the stadium I give you .PotteA .Harry never knew whether or not he had actually dropped off to sleep his fantasies of flying like Krum might well have slipped into actual dreams all he knew was that quite suddenly Mr Weasley was shouting .Get up !Ron Harry come on now get up this is urgent !Harry sat up quickly and the top of his head hit canvas .S matter ?he said .Dimly he could tell that something was wrong .The noises in the campsite had changed .The singing had stopped .He could hear screams and the sound of people running .He slipped down from the bunk and reached for his clothes but Mr Weasley who had pulled on his jeans over his own pajamas said No time Harry just grab a jacket and get outside quickly !Harry did as he was told and hurried out of the tent Ron at his heels .By the light of the few fires that were still burning he could see people running away into the woods fleeing something that was moving across the field toward them something that was emitting odd flashes of light and noises like gunfire .Loud jeering roars of laughter and drunken yells were drifting toward them then came a burst of strong green light which illuminated the scene .A crowd of wizards tightly packed and moving together with wands pointing straight upward was marching slowly across the field .Harry squinted at them .They didnt seem to have faces .Then he realized that their heads were hooded and their faces masked .High above them floating along in midair four struggling figures were being contorted into grotesque shapes .It was as though the masked wizards on the ground were puppeteers and the people above them were marionettes operated by invisible strings that rose from the wands into the air .Two of the figures were very small .More wizards were joining the marching group laughing and pointing up at the floating bodies .Tents crumpled and fell as the marching crowd swelled .Once or twice Harry saw one of the marchers blast a tent out of his way with his wand .Several caught fire .The screaming grew louder .The floating people were suddenly illuminated as they passed over a burning tent and Harry recognized one of them Mr Roberts the campsite manager .The other three looked as though they might be his wife and children .One of the marchers below flipped Mrs Roberts upside down with his wand her nightdress fell down to reveal voluminous drawers and she struggled to cover herself up as the crowd below her screeched and hooted with glee .Thats sick Ron muttered watching the smallest Muggle child who had begun to spin like a top sixty feet above the ground his head flopping limply from side to side .That is really sick .Hermione and Ginny came hurrying toward them pulling coats over their nightdresses with Mr Weasley right behind them .At the same moment Bill Charlie and Percy emerged from the boys tent fully dressed with their sleeves rolled up and their wands out .Were going to help the Ministry !Mr Weasley shouted over all the noise rolling up his own sleeves .You lot get into the woods and stick together .Ill come and fetch you when weve sorted this out !Bill Charlie and Percy were already sprinting away toward the oncoming marchers Mr Weasley tore after them .Ministry wizards were dashing from every direction toward the source of the trouble .The crowd beneath the Roberts family was coming ever closer .Cmon said Fred grabbing Ginnys hand and starting to pull her toward the wood .Harry Ron Hermione and George followed .They all looked back as they reached the trees .The crowd beneath the Roberts family was larger than ever they could see the Ministry wizards trying to get through it to the hooded wizards in the center but they were having great difficulty .It looked as though they were scared to perform any spell that might make the Roberts family fall .The colored lanterns that had lit the path to the stadium had been extinguished .Dark figures were blundering through the trees children were crying anxious shouts and panicked voices were reverberating around them in the cold night air .Harry felt himself being pushed hither and thither by people whose faces he could not see .Then he heard Ron yell with pain .What happened ?said Hermione anxiously stopping so abruptly that Harry walked into her .Ron where are you ?Oh this is stupid lumos She illuminated her wand and directed its narrow beam across the path .Ron was lying sprawled on the ground .Tripped over a tree root he said angrily getting to his feet again .Well with feet that size hard not to said a drawling voice from behind them .Harry Ron and Hermione turned sharply .Draco Malfoy was standing alone nearby leaning against a tree looking utterly relaxed .His arms folded he seemed to have been watching the scene at the campsite through a gap in the trees .Ron told Malfoy to do something that Harry knew he would never have dared say in front of Mrs Weasley Language Weasley said Malfoy his pale eyes glittering .Hadnt you better be hurrying along now ?You wouldnt like her spotted would you ?He nodded at Hermione and at the same moment a blast like a bomb sounded from the campsite and a flash of green light momentarily lit the trees around them .Whats that supposed to mean ?said Hermione defiantly .Granger theyre after Muggles said Malfoy .Dyou want to be showing off your knickers in midair ?Because if you do hang around .theyre moving this way and it would give us all a laugh .Hermiones a witch Harry snarled .Have it your own way Potter said Malfoy grinning maliciously .If you think they cant spot a Mudblood stay where you are .You watch your mouth !shouted Ron .Everybody present knew that Mudblood was a very offensive term for a witch or wizard of Muggle parentage .Never mind Ron said Hermione quickly seizing Rons arm to restrain him as he took a step toward Malfoy .There came a bang from the other side of the trees that was louder than anything they had heard .Several people nearby screamed .Malfoy chuckled softly .Scare easily dont they ?he said lazily .I suppose your daddy told you all to hide ?Whats he up to trying to rescue the Muggles ?Wherere your parents ?said Harry his temper rising .Out there wearing masks are they ?Malfoy turned his face to Harry still smiling .Well .if they were I wouldnt be likely to tell you would I Potter ?Oh come on said Hermione with a disgusted look at Malfoy lets go and find the others .Keep that big bushy head down Granger sneered Malfoy .Come on Hermione repeated and she pulled Harry and Ron up the path again .Ill bet you anything his dad is one of that masked lot !said Ron hotly .Well with any luck the Ministry will catch him !said Hermione fervently .Oh I cant believe this .Where have the others got to ?Fred George and Ginny were nowhere to be seen though the path was packed with plenty of other people all looking nervously over their shoulders toward the commotion back at the campsite .A huddle of teenagers in pajamas was arguing vociferously a little way along the path .When they saw Harry Ron and Hermione a girl with thick curly hair turned and said quickly Ou est Madame Maxime ?Nous Vavons perdue Er what ?said Ron .Oh .The girl who had spoken turned her back on him and as they walked on they distinctly heard her say Ogwarts .Beauxbatons muttered Hermione .Sorry ?said Harry .They must go to Beauxbatons said Hermione .You know .Beauxbatons Academy of Magic .I read about it in An Appraisal of Magical Education in Europe .Oh .yeah .right said Harry .Fred and George cant have gone that far said Ron pulling out his wand lighting it like Hermiones and squinting up the path .Harry dug in the pockets of his jacket for his own wand but it wasnt there .The only thing he could find was his Omnioculars .Ah no I dont believe it .Ive lost my wand !Youre kidding !Ron and Hermione raised their wands high enough to spread the narrow beams of light farther on the ground Harry looked all around him but his wand was nowhere to be seen .Maybe its back in the tent said Ron .Maybe it fell out of your pocket when we were running ?Hermione suggested anxiously .Yeah said Harry maybe .He usually kept his wand with him at all times in the wizarding world and finding himself without it in the midst of a scene like this made him feel very vulnerable .A rustling noise nearby made all three of them jump .Winky the houseelf was fighting her way out of a clump of bushes nearby .She was moving in a most peculiar fashion apparently with great difficulty it was as though someone invisible were trying to hold her back .There is bad wizards about !she squeaked distractedly as she leaned forward and labored to keep running .People high high in the air !Winky is getting out of the way !And she disappeared into the trees on the other side of the path panting and squeaking as she fought the force that was restraining her .Whats up with her ?said Ron looking curiously after Winky .Why cant she run properly ?Bet she didnt ask permission to hide said Harry .He was thinking of Dobby Every time he had tried to do something the Malfoys wouldnt like the houseelf had been forced to start beating himself up .You know houseelves get a very raw deal !said Hermione indignantly .Its slavery thats what it is !That Mr Crouch made her go up to the top of the stadium and she was terrified and hes got her bewitched so she cant even run when they start trampling tents !Why doesnt anyone do something about it ?Well the elves are happy arent they ?Ron said .You heard old Winky back at the match . ‘House elves is not supposed to have fun .thats what she likes being bossed around .Its people like you Ron Hermione began hotly who prop up rotten and unjust systems just because theyre too lazy to Another loud bang echoed from the edge of the wood .Lets just keep moving shall we ?said Ron and Harry saw him glance edgily at Hermione .Perhaps there was truth in what Malfoy had said perhaps Hermione was in more danger than they were .They set off again Harry still searching his pockets even though he knew his wand wasnt there .They followed the dark path deeper into the wood still keeping an eye out for Fred George and Ginny .They passed a group of goblins who were cackling over a sack of gold that they had undoubtedly won betting on the match and who seemed quite unperturbed by the trouble at the campsite .Farther still along the path they walked into a patch of silvery light and when they looked through the trees they saw three tall and beautiful veela standing in a clearing surrounded by a gaggle of young wizards all of whom were talking very loudly .I pull down about a hundred sacks of Galleons a year !one of them shouted .Im a dragon killer for the Committee for the Disposal of Dangerous Creatures .No youre not !yelled his friend .Youre a dishwasher at the Leaky Cauldron .but Im a vampire hunter Ive killed about ninety so far A third young wizard whose pimples were visible even by the dim silvery light of the veela now cut in Im about to become the youngest ever Minister of Magic I am .Harry snorted with laughter .He recognized the pimply wizard His name was Stan Shunpike and he was in fact a conductor on the tripledecker Knight Bus .He turned to tell Ron this but Rons face had gone oddly slack and next second Ron was yelling Did I tell you Ive invented a broomstick thatll reach Jupiter ?Honestly said Hermione and she and Harry grabbed Ron firmly by the arms wheeled him around and marched him away .By the time the sounds of the veela and their admirers had faded completely they were in the very heart of the wood .They seemed to be alone now everything was much quieter .Harry looked around .I reckon we can just wait here you know .Well hear anyone coming a mile off .The words were hardly out of his mouth when Ludo Bagman emerged from behind a tree right ahead of them .Even by the feeble light of the two wands Harry could see that a great change had come over Bagman .He no longer looked buoyant and rosyfaced there was no more spring in his step .He looked very white and strained .Whos that ?he said blinking down at them trying to make out their faces .What are you doing in here all alone ?They looked at one another surprised .Well theres a sort of riot going on said Ron .Bagman stared at him .What ?At the campsite .some people have got hold of a family of Muggles .Bagman swore loudly .Damn them !he said looking quite distracted and without another word he Disapparated with a small pop Not exactly on top of things Mr Bagman is he ?said Hermione frowning .He was a great Beater though said Ron leading the way off the path into a small clearing and sitting down on a patch of dry grass at the foot of a tree .The Wimbourne Wasps won the league three times in a row while he was with them .He took his small figure of Krum out of his pocket set it down on the ground and watched it walk around .Like the real Krum the model was slightly duck footed and roundshouldered much less impressive on his splayed feet than on his broomstick .Harry was listening for noise from the campsite .Everything seemed much quieter perhaps the riot was over .I hope the others are okay said Hermione after a while .Theyll be fine said Ron .Imagine if your dad catches Lucius Malfoy said Harry sitting down next to Ron and watching the small figure of Krum slouching over the fallen leaves .Hes always said hed like to get something on him .Thatd wipe the smirk off old Dracos face all right said Ron .Those poor Muggles though said Hermione nervously .What if they cant get them down ?They will said Ron reassuringly .Theyll find a way .Mad though to do something like that when the whole Ministry of Magics out here tonight !said Hermione .I mean how do they expect to get away with it ?Do you think theyve been drinking or are they just But she broke off abruptly and looked over her shoulder .Harry and Ron looked quickly around too .It sounded as though someone was staggering toward their clearing .They waited listening to the sounds of the uneven steps behind the dark trees .But the footsteps came to a sudden halt .Hello ?called Harry .There was silence .Harry got to his feet and peered around the tree .It was too dark to see very far but he could sense somebody standing just beyond the range of his vision .Whos there ?he said .And then without warning the silence was rent by a voice unlike any they had heard in the wood and it uttered not a panicked shout but what sounded like a spell .MORSMORDREl And something vast green and glittering erupted from the patch of darkness Harrys eyes had been struggling to penetrate it flew up over the treetops and into the sky .What the ?gasped Ron as he sprang to his feet again staring up at the thing that had appeared .For a split second Harry thought it was another leprechaun formation .Then he realized that it was a colossal skull comprised of what looked like emerald stars with a serpent protruding from its mouth like a tongue .As they watched it rose higher and higher blazing in a haze of greenish smoke etched against the black sky like a new constellation .Suddenly the wood all around them erupted with screams .Harry didnt understand why but the only possible cause was the sudden appearance of the skull which had now risen high enough to illuminate the entire wood like some grisly neon sign .He scanned the darkness for the person who had conjured the skull but he couldnt see anyone .Whos there ?he called again .Harry come on move Hermione had seized the collar of his jacket and was tugging him backward .Whats the matter ?Harry said startled to see her face so white and terrified .Its the Dark Mark Harry !Hermione moaned pulling him as hard as she could .YouKnowWhos sign !Voldemorts ?Harry come on !Harry turned Ron was hurriedly scooping up his miniature Krum the three of them started across the clearing but before they had taken a few hurried steps a series of popping noises announced the arrival of twenty wizards appearing from thin air surrounding them .Harry whirled around and in an instant he registered one fact Each of these wizards had his wand out and every wand was pointing right at himself Ron and Hermione .Without pausing to think he yelled DUCK !He seized the other two and pulled them down onto the ground .STUPEFYl roared twenty voices there was a blinding series of flashes and Harry felt the hair on his head ripple as though a powerful wind had swept the clearing .Raising his head a fraction of an inch he saw jets of fiery red light flying over them from the wizards wands crossing one another bouncing off tree trunks rebounding into the darkness Stop !yelled a voice he recognized .STOP !Thats my son Harrys hair stopped blowing about .He raised his head a little higher .The wizard in front of him had lowered his wand .He rolled over and saw Mr Weasley striding toward them looking terrified .Ron Harry his voice sounded shaky Hermione are you all right ?Out of the way Arthur said a cold curt voice .It was Mr Crouch .He and the other Ministry wizards were closing in on them .Harry got to his feet to face them .Mr Crouchs face was taut with rage .Which of you did it ?he snapped his sharp eyes darting between them .Which of you conjured the Dark Mark ?We didnt do that !said Harry gesturing up at the skull .We didnt do anything !said Ron who was rubbing his elbow and looking indignantly at his father .What did you want to attack us for ?Do not lie sir !shouted Mr Crouch .His wand was still pointing directly at Ron and his eyes were popping he looked slightly mad .You have been discovered at the scene of the crime !Barty whispered a witch in a long woolen dressing gown theyre kids Barty theyd never have been able to Where did the Mark come from you three ?said Mr Weasley quickly .Over there said Hermione shakily pointing at the place where they had heard the voice .There was someone behind the trees .they shouted words an incantation Oh stood over there did they ?said Mr Crouch turning his popping eyes on Hermione now disbelief etched all over his face .Said an incantation did they ?You seem very well informed about how that Mark is summoned missy But none of the Ministry wizards apart from Mr Crouch seemed to think it remotely likely that Harry Ron or Hermione had conjured the skull on the contrary at Hermiones words they had all raised their wands again and were pointing in the direction she had indicated squinting through the dark trees .Were too late said the witch in the woolen dressing gown shaking her head .Theyll have Disapparated .I dont think so said a wizard with a scrubby brown beard .It was Amos Diggory Cedrics father .Our Stunners went right through those trees .Theres a good chance we got them .Amos be careful !said a few of the wizards warningly as Mr Diggory squared his shoulders raised his wand marched across the clearing and disappeared into the darkness .Hermione watched him vanish with her hands over her mouth .A few seconds later they heard Mr Diggory shout .Yes !We got them !Theres someone here !Unconscious !Its but blimey .Youve got someone ?shouted Mr Crouch sounding highly disbelieving .Who ?Who is it ?They heard snapping twigs the rustling of leaves and then crunching footsteps as Mr Diggory reemerged from behind the trees .He was carrying a tiny limp figure in his arms .Harry recognized the tea towel at once .It was Winky .Mr Crouch did not move or speak as Mr Diggory deposited his elf on the ground at his feet .The other Ministry wizards were all staring at Mr Crouch .For a few seconds Crouch remained transfixed his eyes blazing in his white face as he stared down at Winky .Then he appeared to come to life again .This cannot be he said jerkily .No He moved quickly around Mr Diggory and strode off toward the place where he had found Winky .No point Mr Crouch Mr Diggory called after him .Theres no one else there .But Mr Crouch did not seem prepared to take his word for it .They could hear him moving around and the rustling of leaves as he pushed the bushes aside searching .Bit embarrassing Mr Diggory said grimly looking down at Winkys unconscious form .Barty Crouchs houseelf .I mean to say .Come off it Amos said Mr Weasley quietly you dont seriously think it was the elf ?The Dark Marks a wizards sign .It requires a wand .Yeah said Mr Diggory and she had a wand .What ?said Mr Weasley .Here look .Mr Diggory held up a wand and showed it to Mr Weasley .Had it in her hand .So thats clause three of the Code of Wand Use broken for a start .No nonhuman creature is permitted to carry or use a wand .Just then there was another pop and Ludo Bagman Apparated right next to Mr Weasley .Looking breathless and disorientated he spun on the spot goggling upward at the emeraldgreen skull .The Dark Mark !he panted almost trampling Winky as he turned inquiringly to his colleagues .Who did it ?Did you get them ?Barty !Whats going on ?Mr Crouch had returned emptyhanded .His face was still ghostly white and his hands and his toothbrush mustache were both twitching .Where have you been Barty ?said Bagman .Why werent you at the match ?Your elf was saving you a seat too gulping gargoyles !Bagman had just noticed Winky lying at his feet .What happened to her ?I have been busy Ludo said Mr Crouch still talking in the same jerky fashion barely moving his lips .And my elf has been stunned .Stunned ?By you lot you mean ?But why ?Comprehension dawned suddenly on Bagmans round shiny face he looked up at the skull down at Winky and then at Mr Crouch .iVo !he said .Winky ?Conjure the Dark Mark ?She wouldnt know how !Shed need a wand for a start !And she had one said Mr Diggory .I found her holding one Ludo .If its all right with you Mr Crouch I think we should hear what shes got to say for herself .Crouch gave no sign that he had heard Mr Diggory but Mr Diggory seemed to take his silence for assent .He raised his own wand pointed it at Winky and said Rennervatel Winky stirred feebly .Her great brown eyes opened and she blinked several times in a bemused sort of way .Watched by the silent wizards she raised herself shakily into a sitting position .She caught sight of Mr Diggorys feet and slowly tremulously raised her eyes to stare up into his face then more slowly still she looked up into the sky .Harry could see the floating skull reflected twice in her enormous glassy eyes .She gave a gasp looked wildly around the crowded clearing and burst into terrified sobs .Elf !said Mr Diggory sternly .Do you know who I am ?Im a member of the Department for the Regulation and Control of Magical Creatures !Winky began to rock backward and forward on the ground her breath coming in sharp bursts .Harry was reminded forcibly of Dobby in his moments of terrified disobedience .As you see elf the Dark Mark was conjured here a short while ago said Mr Diggory .And you were discovered moments later right beneath it !An explanation if you please !I I I is not doing it sir !Winky gasped .I is not knowing how sir !You were found with a wand in your hand !barked Mr Diggory brandishing it in front of her .And as the wand caught the green light that was filling the clearing from the skull above Harry recognized it .Hey thats mine !he said .Everyone in the clearing looked at him .Excuse me ?said Mr Diggory incredulously .Thats my wand !said Harry .I dropped it !You dropped it ?repeated Mr Diggory in disbelief .Is this a confession ?You threw it aside after you conjured the Mark ?Amos think who youre talking to !said Mr Weasley very angrily .Is Harry Potter likely to conjure the Dark Mark ?Er of course not mumbled Mr Diggory .Sorry .carried away .I didnt drop it there anyway said Harry jerking his thumb toward the trees beneath the skull .I missed it right after we got into the wood .So said Mr Diggory his eyes hardening as he turned to look at Winky again cowering at his feet .You found this wand eh elf ?And you picked it up and thought youd have some fun with it did you ?I is not doing magic with it sir !squealed Winky tears streaming down the sides of her squashed and bulbous nose .I is .I is .I is just picking it up sir !I is not making the Dark Mark sir I is not knowing how !It wasnt her !said Hermione .She looked very nervous speaking up in front of all these Ministry wizards yet determined all the same .Winkys got a squeaky little voice and the voice we heard doing the incantation was much deeper !She looked around at Harry and Ron appealing for their support .It didnt sound anything like Winky did it ?No said Harry shaking his head .It definitely didnt sound like an elf .Yeah it was a human voice said Ron .Well well soon see growled Mr Diggory looking unimpressed .Theres a simple way of discovering the last spell a wand performed elf did you know that ?Winky trembled and shook her head frantically her ears flapping as Mr Diggory raised his own wand again and placed it tip to tip with Harrys .Prior Incantatol roared Mr Diggory .Harry heard Hermione gasp horrified as a gigantic serpenttongued skull erupted from the point where the two wands met but it was a mere shadow of the green skull high above them it looked as though it were made of thick gray smoke the ghost of a spell .Deletrius Mr Diggory shouted and the smoky skull vanished in a wisp of smoke .So said Mr Diggory with a kind of savage triumph looking down upon Winky who was still shaking convulsively .I is not doing it !she squealed her eyes rolling in terror .I is not I is not I is not knowing how !I is a good elf I isnt using wands I isnt knowing how !Youve been caught redhanded elf .Mr Diggory roared .Caught with the guilty wand in your hand Amos said Mr Weasley loudly think about it .precious few wizards know how to do that spell .Where would she have learned it ?Perhaps Amos is suggesting said Mr Crouch cold anger in every syllable that I routinely teach my servants to conjure the Dark Mark ?There was a deeply unpleasant silence .Amos Diggory looked horrified .Mr Crouch .not .not at all .You have now come very close to accusing the two people in this clearing who are least likely to conjure that Mark !barked Mr Crouch .Harry Potter and myself !I suppose you are familiar with the boys story Amos ?Of course everyone knows muttered Mr Diggory looking highly discomforted .And I trust you remember the many proofs I have given over a long career that I despise and detest the Dark Arts and those who practice them ?Mr Crouch shouted his eyes bulging again .Mr Crouch I I never suggested you had anything to do with it !Amos Diggory muttered again now reddening behind his scrubby brown beard .If you accuse my elf you accuse me Diggory !shouted Mr Crouch .Where else would she have learned to conjure it ?She she mightve picked it up anywhere Precisely Amos said Mr Weasley .She might have picked it up anywhere .Winky ?he said kindly turning to the elf but she flinched as though he too was shouting at her .Where exactly did you find Harrys wand ?Winky was twisting the hem of her tea towel so violently that it was fraying beneath her fingers .I I is finding it .finding it there sir .she whispered there .in the trees sir .You see Amos ?said Mr Weasley .Whoever conjured the Mark could have Disapparated right after theyd done it leaving Harrys wand behind .A clever thing to do not using their own wand which could have betrayed them .And Winky here had the misfortune to come across the wand moments later and pick it up .But then shed have been only a few feet away from the real culprit !said Mr Diggory impatiently .Elf ?Did you see anyone ?Winky began to tremble worse than ever .Her giant eyes flickered from Mr Diggory to Ludo Bagman and onto Mr Crouch .Then she gulped and said I is seeing no one sir .no one .Amos said Mr Crouch curtly I am fully aware that in the ordinary course of events you would want to take Winky into your department for questioning .I ask you however to allow me to deal with her .Mr Diggory looked as though he didnt think much of this suggestion at all but it was clear to Harry that Mr Crouch was such an important member of the Ministry that he did not dare refuse him .You may rest assured that she will be punished Mr Crouch added coldly .Mmmaster .Winky stammered looking up at Mr Crouch her eyes brimming with tears .Mmmaster ppplease .Mr Crouch stared back his face somehow sharpened each line upon it more deeply etched .There was no pity in his gaze .Winky has behaved tonight in a manner I would not have believed possible he said slowly .I told her to remain in the tent .I told her to stay there while I went to sort out the trouble .And I find that she disobeyed me .This means clothes .No !shrieked Winky prostrating herself at Mr Crouchs feet .No master !Not clothes not clothes !Harry knew that the only way to turn a houseelf free was to present it with proper garments .It was pitiful to see the way Winky clutched at her tea towel as she sobbed over Mr Crouchs feet .But she was frightened !Hermione burst out angrily glaring at Mr Crouch .Your elfs scared of heights and those wizards in masks were levitating people !You cant blame her for wanting to get out of their way !Mr Crouch took a step backward freeing himself from contact with the elf whom he was surveying as though she were something filthy and rotten that was contaminating his overshined shoes .I have no use for a houseelf who disobeys me he said coldly looking over at Hermione .I have no use for a servant who forgets what is due to her master and to her masters reputation .Winky was crying so hard that her sobs echoed around the clearing .There was a very nasty silence which was ended by Mr Weasley who said quietly Well I think Ill take my lot back to the tent if nobodys got any objections .Amos that wands told us all it can if Harry could have it back please Mr Diggory handed Harry his wand and Harry pocketed it .Come on you three Mr Weasley said quietly .But Hermione didnt seem to want to move her eyes were still upon the sobbing elf .Hermione !Mr Weasley said more urgently .She turned and followed Harry and Ron out of the clearing and off through the trees .Whats going to happen to Winky ?said Hermione the moment they had left the clearing .I dont know said Mr Weasley .The way they were treating her !said Hermione furiously .Mr Diggory calling her ‘elf all the time .and Mr Crouch !He knows she didnt do it and hes still going to sack her !He didnt care how frightened shed been or how upset she was it was like she wasnt even human !Well shes not said Ron .Hermione rounded on him .That doesnt mean she hasnt got feelings Ron .Its disgusting the way Hermione I agree with you said Mr Weasley quickly beckoning her on but now is not the time to discuss elf rights .I want to get back to the tent as fast as we can .What happened to the others ?We lost them in the dark said Ron .Dad why was everyone so uptight about that skull thing ?Ill explain everything back at the tent said Mr Weasley tensely .But when they reached the edge of the wood their progress was impeded .A large crowd of frightened looking witches and wizards was congregated there and when they saw Mr Weasley coming toward them many of them surged forward .Whats going on in there ?Who conjured it ?Arthur its not Him ?Of course its not Him said Mr Weasley impatiently .We dont know who it was it looks like they Disapparated .Now excuse me please I want to get to bed .He led Harry Ron and Hermione through the crowd and back into the campsite .All was quiet now there was no sign of the masked wizards though several ruined tents were still smoking .Charlies head was poking out of the boys tent .Dad whats going on ?he called through the dark .Fred George and Ginny got back okay but the others Ive got them here said Mr Weasley bending down and entering the tent .Harry Ron and Hermione entered after him .Bill was sitting at the small kitchen table holding a bedsheet to his arm which was bleeding profusely .Charlie had a large rip in his shirt and Percy was sporting a bloody nose .Fred George and Ginny looked unhurt though shaken .Did you get them Dad ?said Bill sharply .The person who conjured the Mark ?No said Mr Weasley .We found Barty Crouchs elf holding Harrys wand but were none the wiser about who actually conjured the Mark .What ?said Bill Charlie and Percy together .Harrys wand ?said Fred .Mr Crouchs elf ?said Percy sounding thunderstruck .With some assistance from Harry Ron and Hermione Mr Weasley explained what had happened in the woods .When they had finished their story Percy swelled indignantly .Well Mr Crouch is quite right to get rid of an elf like that !he said .Running away when hed expressly told her not to .embarrassing him in front of the whole Ministry .how would that have looked if shed been brought up in front of the Department for the Regulation and Control She didnt do anything she was just in the wrong place at the wrong time !Hermione snapped at Percy who looked very taken aback .Hermione had always got on fairly well with Percy better indeed than any of the others .Hermione a wizard in Mr Crouchs position cant afford a houseelf whos going to run amok with a wand !said Percy pompously recovering himself .She didnt run amok !shouted Hermione .She just picked it up off the ground !Look can someone just explain what that skull thing was ?said Ron impatiently .It wasnt hurting anyone .Whys it such a big deal ?I told you its YouKnowWhos symbol Ron said Hermione before anyone else could answer .I read about it in The Rise and Fall of the Dark Arts .And it hasnt been seen for thirteen years said Mr Weasley quietly .Of course people panicked .it was almost like seeing YouKnowWho back again .I dont get it said Ron frowning .I mean .its still only a shape in the sky .Ron YouKnowWho and his followers sent the Dark Mark into the air whenever they killed said Mr Weasley .The terror it inspired .you have no idea youre too young .Just picture coming home and finding the Dark Mark hovering over your house and knowing what youre about to find inside .Mr Weasley winced .Everyones worst fear .the very worst .There was silence for a moment .Then Bill removing the sheet from his arm to check on his cut said Well it didnt help us tonight whoever conjured it .It scared the Death Eaters away the moment they saw it .They all Disapparated before wed got near enough to unmask any of them .We caught the Robertses before they hit the ground though .Theyre having their memories modified right now .Death Eaters ?said Harry .What are Death Eaters ?Its what YouKnow Whos supporters called themselves said Bill .I think we saw whats left of them tonight the ones who managed to keep themselves out of Azkaban anyway .We cant prove it was them Bill said Mr Weasley .Though it probably was he added hopelessly .Yeah I bet it was !said Ron suddenly .Dad we met Draco Malfoy in the woods and he as good as told us his dad was one of those nutters in masks !And we all know the Malfoys were right in with YouKnowWho !But what were Voldemorts supporters Harry began .Everybody flinched like most of the wizarding world the Weasleys always avoided saying Voldemorts name .Sorry said Harry quickly .What were You Know Whos supporters up to levitating Muggles ?I mean what was the point ?The point ?said Mr Weasley with a hollow laugh .Harry thats their idea of fun .Half the Muggle killings back when YouKnowWho was in power were done for fun .I suppose they had a few drinks tonight and couldnt resist reminding us all that lots of them are still at large .A nice little reunion for them he finished disgustedly .But if they were the Death Eaters why did they Disapparate when they saw the Dark Mark ?said Ron .Theyd have been pleased to see it wouldnt they ?Use your brains Ron said Bill .If they really were Death Eaters they worked very hard to keep out of Azkaban when YouKnowWho lost power and told all sorts of lies about him forcing them to kill and torture people .I bet theyd be even more frightened than the rest of us to see him come back .They denied theyd ever been involved with him when he lost his powers and went back to their daily lives .I dont reckon hed be overpleased with them do you ?So .whoever conjured the Dark Mark .said Hermione slowly were they doing it to show support for the Death Eaters or to scare them away ?Your guess is as good as ours Hermione said Mr Weasley .But Ill tell you this .it was only the Death Eaters who ever knew how to conjure it .Id be very surprised if the person who did it hadnt been a Death Eater once even if theyre not now .Listen its very late and if your mother hears whats happened shell be worried sick .Well get a few more hours sleep and then try and get an early Portkey out of here .Harry got back into his bunk with his head buzzing .He knew he ought to feel exhausted It was nearly three in the morning but he felt wideawake wide awake and worried .Three days ago it felt like much longer but it had only been three days he had awoken with his scar burning .And tonight for the first time in thirteen years Lord Voldemorts mark had appeared in the sky .What did these things mean ?He thought of the letter he had written to Sirius before leaving Privet Drive .Would Sirius have gotten it yet ?When would he reply ?Harry lay looking up at the canvas but no flying fantasies came to him now to ease him to sleep and it was a long time after Charlies snores filled the tent that Harry finally dozed off .10 MAYHEM AT THE MINISTRY Mr Weasley woke them after only a few hours sleep .He used magic to pack up the tents and they left the campsite as quickly as possible passing Mr Roberts at the door of his cottage .Mr Roberts had a strange dazed look about him and he waved them off with a vague Merry Christmas .Hell be all right said Mr Weasley quietly as they marched off onto the moor .Sometimes when a persons memorys modified it makes him a bit disorientated for a while .and that was a big thing they had to make him forget .They heard urgent voices as they approached the spot where the Portkeys lay and when they reached it they found a great number of witches and wizards gathered around Basil the keeper of the Portkeys all clamoring to get away from the campsite as quickly as possible .Mr Weasley had a hurried discussion with Basil they joined the queue and were able to take an old rubber tire back to Stoatshead Hill before the sun had really risen .They walked back through Ottery St .Catchpole and up the damp lane toward the Burrow in the dawn light talking very little because they were so exhausted and thinking longingly of their breakfast .As they rounded the corner and the Burrow came into view a cry echoed along the lane .Oh thank goodness thank goodness !Mrs Weasley who had evidently been waiting for them in the front yard came running toward them still wearing her bedroom slippers her face pale and strained a rolledup copy of the Daily Prophet clutched in her hand .Arthur Ive been so worried so worried She flung her arms around Mr Weasleys neck and the Daily Prophet fell out of her limp hand onto the ground .Looking down Harry saw the headline SCENES OF TERROR AT THE QUIDDITCH WORLD CUP complete with a twinkling blackandwhite photograph of the Dark Mark over the treetops .Youre all right Mrs Weasley muttered distractedly releasing Mr Weasley and staring around at them all with red eyes youre alive .Oh boys .And to everybodys surprise she seized Fred and George and pulled them both into such a tight hug that their heads banged together .Ouch Mum youre strangling us I shouted at you before you left !Mrs Weasley said starting to sob .Its all Ive been thinking about !What if YouKnowWho had got you and the last thing I ever said to you was that you didnt get enough O .W .L .s ?Oh Fred .George .Come on now Molly were all perfectly okay said Mr Weasley soothingly prising her off the twins and leading her back toward the house .Bill he added in an undertone pick up that paper I want to see what it says .When they were all crammed into the tiny kitchen and Hermione had made Mrs Weasley a cup of very strong tea into which Mr Weasley insisted on pouring a shot of Ogdens Old Firewhiskey Bill handed his father the newspaper .Mr Weasley scanned the front page while Percy looked over his shoulder .I knew it said Mr Weasley heavily .Ministry blunders .culprits not apprehended .lax security .Dark wizards running unchecked .national disgrace .Who wrote this ?Ah .of course .Rita Skeeter .That womans got it in for the Ministry of Magic !said Percy furiously .Last week she was saying were wasting our time quibbling about cauldron thickness when we should be stamping out vampires !As if it wasnt specifically stated in paragraph twelve of the Guidelines for the Treatment of NonWizard Part Humans Do us a favor Perce said Bill yawning and shut up .Im mentioned said Mr Weasley his eyes widening behind his glasses as he reached the bottom of the Daily Prophet article .Where ?spluttered Mrs Weasley choking on her tea and whiskey .If Id seen that Id have known you were alive !Not by name said Mr Weasley .Listen to this ‘If the terrified wizards and witches who waited breathlessly for news at the edge of the wood expected reassurance from the Ministry of Magic they were sadly disappointed .A Ministry official emerged some time after the appearance of the Dark Mark alleging that nobody had been hurt but refusing to give any more information .Whether this statement will be enough to quash the rumors that several bodies were removed from the woods an hour later remains to be seen .Oh really said Mr Weasley in exasperation handing the paper to Percy .Nobody was hurt .What was I supposed to say ?Rumors that several bodies were removed from the woods .well there certainly will be rumors now shes printed that .He heaved a deep sigh .Molly Im going to have to go into the office this is going to take some smoothing over .Ill come with you Father said Percy importantly .Mr Crouch will need all hands on deck .And I can give him my cauldron report in person .He bustled out of the kitchen .Mrs Weasley looked most upset .Arthur youre supposed to be on holiday !This hasnt got anything to do with your office surely they can handle this without you ?Ive got to go Molly said Mr Weasley .Ive made things worse .Ill just change into my robes and Ill be off .Mrs Weasley said Harry suddenly unable to contain himself Hedwig hasnt arrived with a letter for me has she ?Hedwig dear ?said Mrs Weasley distractedly .No .no there hasnt been any post at all .Ron and Hermione looked curiously at Harry .With a meaningful look at both of them he said All right if I go and dump my stuff in your room Ron ?Yeah .think I will too said Ron at once .Hermione ?Yes she said quickly and the three of them marched out of the kitchen and up the stairs .Whats up Harry ?said Ron the moment they had closed the door of the attic room behind them .Theres something I havent told you Harry said .On Saturday morning I woke up with my scar hurting again .Rons and Hermiones reactions were almost exactly as Harry had imagined them back in his bedroom on Privet Drive .Hermione gasped and started making suggestions at once mentioning a number of reference books and everybody from Albus Dumbledore to Madam Pomfrey the Hogwarts nurse .Ron simply looked dumbstruck .But he wasnt there was he ?YouKnowWho ?I mean last time your scar kept hurting he was at Hogwarts wasnt he ?Im sure he wasnt on Privet Drive said Harry .But I was dreaming about him .him and Peter you know Wormtail .I cant remember all of it now but they were plotting to kill .someone .He had teetered for a moment on the verge of saying me but couldnt bring himself to make Hermione look any more horrified than she already did .It was only a dream said Ron bracingly .Just a nightmare .Yeah but was it though ?said Harry turning to look out of the window at the brightening sky .Its weird isnt it ? .My scar hurts and three days later the Death Eaters are on the march and Voldemorts signs up in the sky again .Dont say his name !Ron hissed through gritted teeth .And remember what Professor Trelawney said ?Harry went on ignoring Ron .At the end of last year ?Professor Trelawney was their Divination teacher at Hogwarts .Hermione s terrified look vanished as she let out a derisive snort .Oh Harry you arent going to pay attention to anything that old fraud says ?You werent there said Harry .You didnt hear her .This time was different .I told you she went into a trance a real one .And she said the Dark Lord would rise again .greater and more terrible than ever before .and hed manage it because his servant was going to go back to him .and that night Wormtail escaped .There was a silence in which Ron fidgeted absentmindedly with a hole in his Chudley Cannons bedspread .Why were you asking if Hedwig had come Harry ?Hermione asked .Are you expecting a letter ?I told Sirius about my scar said Harry shrugging .Im waiting for his answer .Good thinking !said Ron his expression clearing .I bet Sirius ll know what to do !I hoped hed get back to me quickly said Harry .But we dont know where Sirius is .he could be in Africa or somewhere couldnt he ?said Hermione reasonably .Hedwigs not going to manage that journey in a few days .Yeah I know said Harry but there was a leaden feeling in his stomach as he looked out of the window at the Hedwigfree sky .Come and have a game of Quidditch in the orchard Harry said Ron .Come on three on three Bill and Charlie and Fred and George will play .You can try out the Wronski Feint .Ron said Hermione in an Idontthinkyoure being very sensitive sort of voice Harry doesnt want to play Quidditch right now .Hes worried and hes tired .We all need to go to bed .Yeah I want to play Quidditch said Harry suddenly .Hang on Ill get my Firebolt .Hermione left the room muttering something that sounded very much like Boys .k k k Neither Mr Weasley nor Percy was at home much over the following week .Both left the house each morning before the rest of the family got up and returned well after dinner every night .Its been an absolute uproar Percy told them importantly the Sunday evening before they were due to return to Hogwarts .Ive been putting out fires all week .People keep sending Howlers and of course if you dont open a Howler straight away it explodes .Scorch marks all over my desk and my best quill reduced to cinders .Why are they all sending Howlers ?asked Ginny who was mending her copy of One Thousand Magical Herbs and Fungi with Spellotape on the rug in front of the living room fire .Complaining about security at the World Cup said Percy .They want compensation for their ruined property .Mundungus Fletchers put in a claim for a twelvebedroomed tent with ensuite Jacuzzi but Ive got his number .I know for a fact he was sleeping under a cloak propped on sticks .Mrs Weasley glanced at the grandfather clock in the corner .Harry liked this clock .It was completely useless if you wanted to know the time but otherwise very informative .It had nine golden hands and each of them was engraved with one of the Weasley familys names .There were no numerals around the face but descriptions of where each family member might be .Home school and work were there but there was also traveling lost hospital prison and in the position where the number twelve would be on a normal clock mortal peril .Eight of the hands were currently pointing to the home position but Mr Weasleys which was the longest was still pointing to work .Mrs Weasley sighed .Your father hasnt had to go into the office on weekends since the days of YouKnowWho she said .Theyre working him far too hard .His dinners going to be mined if he doesnt come home soon .Well Father feels hes got to make up for his mistake at the match doesnt he ?said Percy .If truth be told he was a tad unwise to make a public statement without clearing it with his Head of Department first Dont you dare blame your father for what that wretched Skeeter woman wrote !said Mrs Weasley flaring up at once .If Dad hadnt said anything old Rita would just have said it was disgraceful that nobody from the Ministry had commented said Bill who was playing chess with Ron .Rita Skeeter never makes anyone look good .Remember she interviewed all the Gringotts Charm Breakers once and called me ‘a longhaired pillock ?Well it is a bit long dear said Mrs Weasley gently .If youd just let me No Mum .Rain lashed against the living room window .Hermione was immersed in The Standard Book of Spells Grade 4 copies of which Mrs Weasley had bought for her Harry and Ron in Diagon Alley .Charlie was darning a fireproof balaclava .Harry was polishing his Firebolt the broomstick servicing kit Hermione had given him for his thirteenth birthday open at his feet .Fred and George were sitting in a far corner quills out talking in whispers their heads bent over a piece of parchment .What are you two up to ?said Mrs Weasley sharply her eyes on the twins .Homework said Fred vaguely .Dont be ridiculous youre still on holiday said Mrs Weasley .Yeah weve left it a bit late said George .Youre not by any chance writing out a new order form are you ?said Mrs Weasley shrewdly .You wouldnt be thinking of restarting Weasleys Wizard Wheezes by any chance ?Now Mum said Fred looking up at her a pained look on his face .If the Hogwarts Express crashed tomorrow and George and I died how would you feel to know that the last thing we ever heard from you was an unfounded accusation ?Everyone laughed even Mrs Weasley .Oh your fathers coming !she said suddenly looking up at the clock again .Mr Weasleys hand had suddenly spun from work to traveling a second later it had shuddered to a halt on home with the others and they heard him calling from the kitchen .Coming Arthur !called Mrs Weasley hurrying out of the room .A few moments later Mr Weasley came into the warm living room carrying his dinner on a tray .He looked completely exhausted .Well the fats really in the fire now he told Mrs Weasley as he sat down in an armchair near the hearth and toyed unenthusiastically with his somewhat shriveled cauliflower .Rita Skeeters been ferreting around all week looking for more Ministry messups to report .And now shes found out about poor old Bertha going missing so thatll be the headline in the Prophet tomorrow .I told Bagman he should have sent someone to look for her ages ago .Mr Crouch has been saying it for weeks and weeks said Percy swiftly .Crouch is very lucky Rita hasnt found out about Winky said Mr Weasley irritably .Thered be a weeks worth of headlines in his houseelf being caught holding the wand that conjured the Dark Mark .I thought we were all agreed that that elf while irresponsible did not conjure the Mark ?said Percy hotly .If you ask me Mr Crouch is very lucky no one at the Daily Prophet knows how mean he is to elves !said Hermione angrily .Now look here Hermione !said Percy .A high ranking Ministry official like Mr Crouch deserves unswerving obedience from his servants His slave you mean !said Hermione her voice rising passionately because he didnt pay Winky did he ?I think youd all better go upstairs and check that youve packed properly !said Mrs Weasley breaking up the argument .Come on now all of you .Harry repacked his broomstick servicing kit put his Firebolt over his shoulder and went back upstairs with Ron .The rain sounded even louder at the top of the house accompanied by loud whistlings and moans from the wind not to mention sporadic howls from the ghoul who lived in the attic .Pigwidgeon began twittering and zooming around his cage when they entered .The sight of the halfpacked trunks seemed to have sent him into a frenzy of excitement .Bung him some Owl Treats said Ron throwing a packet across to Harry .It might shut him up .Harry poked a few Owl Treats through the bars of Pigwidgeons cage then turned to his trunk .Hedwigs cage stood next to it still empty .Its been over a week Harry said looking at Hedwigs deserted perch .Ron you dont reckon Sirius has been caught do you ?Nah it wouldve been in the Daily Prophet said Ron .The Ministry would want to show theyd caught someone wouldnt they ?Yeah I suppose .Look heres the stuff Mum got for you in Diagon Alley .And shes got some gold out of your vault for you .and shes washed all your socks .He heaved a pile of parcels onto Harrys camp bed and dropped the money bag and a load of socks next to it .Harry started unwrapping the shopping .Apart from The Standard Book of Spells Grade 4 by Miranda Goshawk he had a handful of new quills a dozen rolls of parchment and refills for his potion making kit he had been running low on spine of lionfish and essence of belladonna .He was just piling underwear into his cauldron when Ron made a loud noise of disgust behind him .What is that supposed to be ?He was holding up something that looked to Harry like a long maroon velvet dress .It had a moldy looking lace frill at the collar and matching lace cuffs .There was a knock on the door and Mrs Weasley entered carrying an armful of freshly laundered Hogwarts robes .Here you are she said sorting them into two piles .Now mind you pack them properly so they dont crease .Mum youve given me Ginnys new dress said Ron handing it out to her .Of course I havent said Mrs Weasley .Thats for you .Dress robes .What ?said Ron looking horrorstruck .Dress robes !repeated Mrs Weasley .It says on your school list that youre supposed to have dress robes this year .robes for formal occasions .Youve got to be kidding said Ron in disbelief .Im not wearing that no way .Everyone wears them Ron !said Mrs Weasley crossly .Theyre all like that !Your fathers got some for smart parties !Ill go starkers before I put that on said Ron stubbornly .Dont be so silly said Mrs Weasley .Youve got to have dress robes theyre on your list !I got some for Harry too .show him Harry .In some trepidation Harry opened the last parcel on his camp bed .It wasnt as bad as he had expected however his dress robes didnt have any lace on them at all in fact they were more or less the same as his school ones except that they were bottle green instead of black .I thought theyd bring out the color of your eyes dear said Mrs Weasley fondly .Well theyre okay !said Ron angrily looking at Harrys robes .Why couldnt I have some like that ?Because .well I had to get yours secondhand and there wasnt a lot of choice !said Mrs Weasley flushing .Harry looked away .He would willingly have split all the money in his Gringotts vault with the Weasleys but he knew they would never take it .Im never wearing them Ron was saying stubbornly .Never .Fine snapped Mrs Weasley .Go naked .And Harry make sure you get a picture of him .Goodness knows I could do with a laugh .She left the room slamming the door behind her .There was a funny spluttering noise from behind them .Pigwidgeon was choking on an overlarge Owl Treat .Why is everything I own rubbish ?said Ron furiously striding across the room to unstick Pigwidgeons beak .ABOARD THE HOGWARTS EXPRESS There was a definite endoftheholidays gloom in the air when Harry awoke next morning .Heavy rain was still splattering against the window as he got dressed in jeans and a sweatshirt they would change into their school robes on the Hogwarts Express .He Ron Fred and George had just reached the first floor landing on their way down to breakfast when Mrs Weasley appeared at the foot of the stairs looking harassed .Arthur !she called up the staircase .Arthur !Urgent message from the Ministry !Harry flattened himself against the wall as Mr Weasley came clattering past with his robes on back tofront and hurtled out of sight .When Harry and the others entered the kitchen they saw Mrs Weasley rummaging anxiously in the drawers Ive got a quill here somewhere !and Mr Weasley bending over the fire talking to Harry shut his eyes hard and opened them again to make sure that they were working properly .Amos Diggorys head was sitting in the middle of the flames like a large bearded egg .It was talking very fast completely unperturbed by the sparks flying around it and the flames licking its ears . .Muggle neighbors heard bangs and shouting so they went and called those whatdyoucallems pleasemen .Arthur youve got to get over there Here !said Mrs Weasley breathlessly pushing a piece of parchment a bottle of ink and a crumpled quill into Mr Weasleys hands .its a real stroke of luck I heard about it said Mr Diggorys head .I had to come into the office early to send a couple of owls and I found the Improper Use of Magic lot all setting off if Rita Skeeter gets hold of this one Arthur What does MadEye say happened ?asked Mr Weasley unscrewing the ink bottle loading up his quill and preparing to take notes .Mr Diggorys head rolled its eyes .Says he heard an intruder in his yard .Says he was creeping toward the house but was ambushed by his dustbins .What did the dustbins do ?asked Mr Weasley scribbling frantically .Made one hell of a noise and fired rubbish everywhere as far as I can tell said Mr Diggory .Apparently one of them was still rocketing around when the pleasemen turned up Mr Weasley groaned .And what about the intruder ?Arthur you know MadEye said Mr Diggorys head rolling its eyes again .Someone creeping into his yard in the dead of night ?More likely theres a very shell shocked cat wandering around somewhere covered in potato peelings .But if the Improper Use of Magic lot get their hands on MadEye hes had it think of his record weve got to get him off on a minor charge something in your department what are exploding dustbins worth ?Might be a caution said Mr Weasley still writing very fast his brow furrowed .MadEye didnt use his wand ?He didnt actually attack anyone ?Ill bet he leapt out of bed and started jinxing everything he could reach through the window said Mr Diggory but theyll have a job proving it there arent any casualties .All right Im off Mr Weasley said and he stuffed the parchment with his notes on it into his pocket and dashed out of the kitchen again .Mr Diggorys head looked around at Mrs Weasley .Sorry about this Molly it said more calmly bothering you so early and everything .but Arthurs the only one who can get MadEye off and MadEyes supposed to be starting his new job today .Why he had to choose last night .Never mind Amos said Mrs Weasley .Sure you wont have a bit of toast or anything before you go ?Oh go on then said Mr Diggory .Mrs Weasley took a piece of buttered toast from a stack on the kitchen table put it into the fire tongs and transferred it into Mr Diggorys mouth .Fanks he said in a muffled voice and then with a small pop vanished .Harry could hear Mr Weasley calling hurried good byes to Bill Charlie Percy and the girls .Within five minutes he was back in the kitchen his robes on the right way now dragging a comb through his hair .Id better hurry you have a good term boys said Mr Weasley to Harry Ron and the twins fastening a cloak over his shoulders and preparing to Disapparate .Molly are you going to be all right taking the kids to Kings Cross ?Of course I will she said .You just look after Mad Eye well be fine .As Mr Weasley vanished Bill and Charlie entered the kitchen .Did someone say MadEye ?Bill asked .Whats he been up to now ?He says someone tried to break into his house last night said Mrs Weasley .MadEye Moody ?said George thoughtfully spreading marmalade on his toast .Isnt he that nutter Your father thinks very highly of MadEye Moody said Mrs Weasley sternly .Yeah well Dad collects plugs doesnt he ?said Fred quietly as Mrs Weasley left the room .Birds of a feather .Moody was a great wizard in his time said Bill .Hes an old friend of Dumbledores isnt he ?said Charlie .Dumbledores not what youd call normal though is he ?said Fred .I mean I know hes a genius and everything .Who is MadEye ?asked Harry .Hes retired used to work at the Ministry said Charlie .I met him once when Dad took me into work with him .He was an Auror one of the best .a Dark wizard catcher he added seeing Harrys blank look .Half the cells in Azkaban are full because of him .He made himself loads of enemies though .the families of people he caught mainly .and I heard hes been getting really paranoid in his old age .Doesnt trust anyone anymore .Sees Dark wizards everywhere .Bill and Charlie decided to come and see everyone off at Kings Cross station but Percy apologizing most profusely said that he really needed to get to work .I just cant justify taking more time off at the moment he told them .Mr Crouch is really starting to rely on me .Yeah you know what Percy ?said George seriously .I reckon hell know your name soon .Mrs Weasley had braved the telephone in the village post office to order three ordinary Muggle taxis to take them into London .Arthur tried to borrow Ministry cars for us Mrs Weasley whispered to Harry as they stood in the rain washed yard watching the taxi drivers heaving six heavy Hogwarts trunks into their cars .But there werent any to spare .Oh dear they dont look happy do they ?Harry didnt like to tell Mrs Weasley that Muggle taxi drivers rarely transported overexcited owls and Pigwidgeon was making an earsplitting racket .Nor did it help that a number of Filibusters Fabulous WetStart NoHeat Fireworks went off unexpectedly when Freds trunk sprang open causing the driver carrying it to yell with fright and pain as Crookshanks clawed his way up the mans leg .The journey was uncomfortable owing to the fact that they were jammed in the back of the taxis with their trunks .Crookshanks took quite a while to recover from the fireworks and by the time they entered London Harry Ron and Hermione were all severely scratched .They were very relieved to get out at Kings Cross even though the rain was coming down harder than ever and they got soaked carrying their trunks across the busy road and into the station .Harry was used to getting onto platform nine and threequarters by now .It was a simple matter of walking straight through the apparently solid barrier dividing platforms nine and ten .The only tricky part was doing this in an unobtrusive way so as to avoid attracting Muggle attention .They did it in groups today Harry Ron and Hermione the most conspicuous since they were accompanied by Pigwidgeon and Crookshanks went first they leaned casually against the barrier chatting unconcernedly and slid sideways through it .and as they did so platform nine and threequarters materialized in front of them .The Hogwarts Express a gleaming scarlet steam engine was already there clouds of steam billowing from it through which the many Hogwarts students and parents on the platform appeared like dark ghosts .Pigwidgeon became noisier than ever in response to the hooting of many owls through the mist .Harry Ron and Hermione set off to find seats and were soon stowing their luggage in a compartment halfway along the train .They then hopped back down onto the platform to say goodbye to Mrs Weasley Bill and Charlie .I might be seeing you all sooner than you think said Charlie grinning as he hugged Ginny goodbye .Why ?said Fred keenly .Youll see said Charlie .Just dont tell Percy I mentioned it .its ‘classified information until such time as the Ministry sees fit to release it after all .Yeah I sort of wish I were back at Hogwarts this year said Bill hands in his pockets looking almost wistfully at the train .Why ?said George impatiently .Youre going to have an interesting year said Bill his eyes twinkling .I might even get time off to come and watch a bit of it .A bit of what ?said Ron .But at that moment the whistle blew and Mrs Weasley chivvied them toward the train doors .Thanks for having us to stay Mrs Weasley said Hermione as they climbed on board closed the door and leaned out of the window to talk to her .Yeah thanks for everything Mrs Weasley said Harry .Oh it was my pleasure dears said Mrs Weasley .Td invite you for Christmas but .well I expect youre all going to want to stay at Hogwarts what with .one thing and another .Mum !said Ron irritably .What dyou three know that we dont ?Youll find out this evening I expect said Mrs Weasley smiling .Its going to be very exciting mind you Im very glad theyve changed the rules What rules ?said Harry Ron Fred and George together .Im sure Professor Dumbledore will tell you .Now behave wont you ?Wont you Fred ?And you George ?The pistons hissed loudly and the train began to move .Tell us whats happening at Hogwarts !Fred bellowed out of the window as Mrs Weasley Bill and Charlie sped away from them .What rules are they changing ?But Mrs Weasley only smiled and waved .Before the train had rounded the corner she Bill and Charlie had Disapparated .Harry Ron and Hermione went back to their compartment .The thick rain splattering the windows made it very difficult to see out of them .Ron undid his trunk pulled out his maroon dress robes and flung them over Pigwidgeons cage to muffle his hooting .Bagman wanted to tell us whats happening at Hogwarts he said grumpily sitting down next to Harry .At the World Cup remember ?But my own mother wont say .Wonder what Shh !Hermione whispered suddenly pressing her finger to her lips and pointing toward the compartment next to theirs .Harry and Ron listened and heard a familiar drawling voice drifting in through the open door . .Father actually considered sending me to Durmstrang rather than Hogwarts you know .He knows the headmaster you see .Well you know his opinion of Dumbledore the mans such a Mudbloodlover and Durmstrang doesnt admit that sort of riffraff .But Mother didnt like the idea of me going to school so far away .Father says Durmstrang takes a far more sensible line than Hogwarts about the Dark Arts .Durmstrang students actually learn them not just the defense rubbish we do .Hermione got up tiptoed to the compartment door and slid it shut blocking out Malfoys voice .So he thinks Durmstrang would have suited him does he ?she said angrily .I wish he had gone then we wouldnt have to put up with him .Durmstrangs another wizarding school ?said Harry .Yes said Hermione sniffily and its got a horrible reputation .According to An Appraisal of Magical Education in Europe it puts a lot of emphasis on the Dark Arts .I think Ive heard of it said Ron vaguely .Where is it ?What country ?Well nobody knows do they ?said Hermione raising her eyebrows .Er why not ?said Harry .Theres traditionally been a lot of rivalry between all the magic schools .Durmstrang and Beauxbatons like to conceal their whereabouts so nobody can steal their secrets said Hermione matteroffactly .Come off it said Ron starting to laugh .Durmstrangs got to be about the same size as Hogwarts how are you going to hide a great big castle ?But Hogwarts is hidden said Hermione in surprise .Everyone knows that .well everyone whos read Hogwarts A History anyway .Just you then said Ron .So go on how dyou hide a place like Hogwarts ?Its bewitched said Hermione .If a Muggle looks at it all they see is a moldering old ruin with a sign over the entrance saying DANGER DO NOT ENTER UNSAFE .So Durmstrangll just look like a min to an outsider too ?Maybe said Hermione shrugging or it might have Mugglerepelling charms on it like the World Cup stadium .And to keep foreign wizards from finding it theyll have made it Unplottable Come again ?Well you can enchant a building so its impossible to plot on a map cant you ?Er .if you say so said Harry .But I think Durmstrang must be somewhere in the far north said Hermione thoughtfully .Somewhere very cold because theyve got fur capes as part of their uniforms .Ah think of the possibilities said Ron dreamily .It wouldve been so easy to push Malfoy off a glacier and make it look like an accident .Shame his mother likes him .The rain became heavier and heavier as the train moved farther north .The sky was so dark and the windows so steamy that the lanterns were lit by midday .The lunch trolley came rattling along the corridor and Harry bought a large stack of Cauldron Cakes for them to share .Several of their friends looked in on them as the afternoon progressed including Seamus Finnigan Dean Thomas and Neville Longbottom a round faced extremely forgetful boy who had been brought up by his formidable witch of a grandmother .Seamus was still wearing his Ireland rosette .Some of its magic seemed to be wearing off now it was still squeaking Troy Mullet Moran but in a very feeble and exhausted sort of way .After half an hour or so Hermione growing tired of the endless Quidditch talk buried herself once more in The Standard Book of Spells Grade 4 and started trying to learn a Summoning Charm .Neville listened jealously to the others conversation as they relived the Cup match .Gran didnt want to go he said miserably .Wouldnt buy tickets .It sounded amazing though .It was said Ron .Look at this Neville .He rummaged in his trunk up in the luggage rack and pulled out the miniature figure of Viktor Krum .Oh wow said Neville enviously as Ron tipped Krum onto his pudgy hand .We saw him right up close as well said Ron .We were in the Top Box For the first and last time in your life Weasley .Draco Malfoy had appeared in the doorway .Behind him stood Crabbe and Goyle his enormous thuggish cronies both of whom appeared to have grown at least a foot during the summer .Evidently they had overheard the conversation through the compartment door which Dean and Seamus had left ajar .Dont remember asking you to join us Malfoy said Harry coolly .Weasley .what is that ?said Malfoy pointing at Pigwidgeons cage .A sleeve of Rons dress robes was dangling from it swaying with the motion of the train the moldy lace cuff very obvious .Ron made to stuff the robes out of sight but Malfoy was too quick for him he seized the sleeve and pulled .Look at this !said Malfoy in ecstasy holding up Rons robes and showing Crabbe and Goyle Weasley you werent thinking of wearing these were you ?I mean they were very fashionable in about eighteen ninety .Eat dung Malfoy !said Ron the same color as the dress robes as he snatched them back out of Malfoys grip .Malfoy howled with derisive laughter Crabbe and Goyle guffawed stupidly .So .going to enter Weasley ?Going to try and bring a bit of glory to the family name ?Theres money involved as well you know .youd be able to afford some decent robes if you won .What are you talking about ?snapped Ron .Are you going to enter ?Malfoy repeated .I suppose you will Potter ?You never miss a chance to show off do you ?Either explain what youre on about or go away Malfoy said Hermione testily over the top of The Standard Book of Spells Grade 4 .A gleeful smile spread across Malfoys pale face .Dont tell me you dont know ?he said delightedly .Youve got a father and brother at the Ministry and you dont even know ?My God my father told me about it ages ago .heard it from Cornelius Fudge .But then Fathers always associated with the top people at the Ministry .Maybe your fathers too junior to know about it Weasley .yes .they probably dont talk about important stuff in front of him .Laughing once more Malfoy beckoned to Crabbe and Goyle and the three of them disappeared .Ron got to his feet and slammed the sliding compartment door so hard behind them that the glass shattered .Ronl said Hermione reproachfully and she pulled out her wand muttered ReparoV and the glass shards flew back into a single pane and back into the door .Well .making it look like he knows everything and we dont .Ron snarled . ‘Fathers always associated with the top people at the Ministry ..Dad couldve got a promotion any time .he just likes it where he is .Of course he does said Hermione quietly .Dont let Malfoy get to you Ron Him !Get to me !?As if !said Ron picking up one of the remaining Cauldron Cakes and squashing it into a pulp .Rons bad mood continued for the rest of the journey .He didnt talk much as they changed into their school robes and was still glowering when the Hogwarts Express slowed down at last and finally stopped in the pitchdarkness of Hogsmeade station .As the train doors opened there was a rumble of thunder overhead .Hermione bundled up Crookshanks in her cloak and Ron left his dress robes over Pigwidgeon as they left the train heads bent and eyes narrowed against the downpour .The rain was now coming down so thick and fast that it was as though buckets of icecold water were being emptied repeatedly over their heads .Hi Hagrid !Harry yelled seeing a gigantic silhouette at the far end of the platform .All righ Harry ?Hagrid bellowed back waving .See yeh at the feast if we don drown !First years traditionally reached Hogwarts Castle by sailing across the lake with Hagrid .Oooh I wouldnt fancy crossing the lake in this weather said Hermione fervently shivering as they inched slowly along the dark platform with the rest of the crowd .A hundred horseless carriages stood waiting for them outside the station .Harry Ron Hermione and Neville climbed gratefully into one of them the door shut with a snap and a few moments later with a great lurch the long procession of carriages was rumbling and splashing its way up the track toward Hogwarts Castle .THE TRIWIZARD TOURNAMENT Through the gates flanked with statues of winged boars and up the sweeping drive the carriages trundled swaying dangerously in what was fast becoming a gale .Leaning against the window Harry could see Hogwarts coming nearer its many lighted windows blurred and shimmering behind the thick curtain of rain .Lightning flashed across the sky as their carriage came to a halt before the great oak front doors which stood at the top of a flight of stone steps .People who had occupied the carriages in front were already hurrying up the stone steps into the castle .Harry Ron Hermione and Neville jumped down from their carriage and dashed up the steps too looking up only when they were safely inside the cavernous torchlit entrance hall with its magnificent marble staircase .Blimey said Ron shaking his head and sending water everywhere if that keeps up the lakes going to overflow .Im soak ARRGH !A large red waterfilled balloon had dropped from out of the ceiling onto Rons head and exploded .Drenched and sputtering Ron staggered sideways into Harry just as a second water bomb dropped narrowly missing Hermione it burst at Harrys feet sending a wave of cold water over his sneakers into his socks .People all around them shrieked and started pushing one another in their efforts to get out of the line of fire .Harry looked up and saw floating twenty feet above them Peeves the Poltergeist a little man in a bellcovered hat and orange bow tie his wide malicious face contorted with concentration as he took aim again .PEEVES !yelled an angry voice .Peeves come down here at ONCE !Professor McGonagall Deputy Headmistress and head of Gryffindor House had come dashing out of the Great Hall she skidded on the wet floor and grabbed Hermione around the neck to stop herself from falling .Ouch sorry Miss Granger Thats all right Professor !Hermione gasped massaging her throat .Peeves get down here NOW !barked Professor McGonagall straightening her pointed hat and glaring upward through her squarerimmed spectacles .Not doing nothing !cackled Peeves lobbing a water bomb at several fifthyear girls who screamed and dived into the Great Hall .Already wet arent they ?Little squirts !Wheeeeeeeeee !And he aimed another bomb at a group of second years who had just arrived .I shall call the headmaster !shouted Professor McGonagall .Im warning you Peeves Peeves stuck out his tongue threw the last of his water bombs into the air and zoomed off up the marble staircase cackling insanely .Well move along then !said Professor McGonagall sharply to the bedraggled crowd .Into the Great Hall come on !Harry Ron and Hermione slipped and slid across the entrance hall and through the double doors on the right Ron muttering furiously under his breath as he pushed his sopping hair off his face .The Great Hall looked its usual splendid self decorated for the startofterm feast .Golden plates and goblets gleamed by the light of hundreds and hundreds of candles floating over the tables in midair .The four long House tables were packed with chattering students at the top of the Hall the staff sat along one side of a fifth table facing their pupils .It was much warmer in here .Harry Ron and Hermione walked past the Slytherins the Ravenclaws and the Hufflepuffs and sat down with the rest of the Gryffindors at the far side of the Hall next to Nearly Headless Nick the Gryffindor ghost .Pearly white and semitransparent Nick was dressed tonight in his usual doublet but with a particularly large ruff which served the dual purpose of looking extrafestive and insuring that his head didnt wobble too much on his partially severed neck .Good evening he said beaming at them .Says who ?said Harry taking off his sneakers and emptying them of water .Hope they hurry up with the Sorting .Im starving .The Sorting of the new students into Houses took place at the start of every school year but by an unlucky combination of circumstances Harry hadnt been present at one since his own .He was quite looking forward to it .Just then a highly excited breathless voice called down the table .Hiya Harry !It was Colin Creevey a third year to whom Harry was something of a hero .Hi Colin said Harry warily .Harry guess what ?Guess what Harry ?My brothers starting !My brother Dennis !Er good said Harry .Hes really excited !said Colin practically bouncing up and down in his seat .I just hope hes in Gryffindor !Keep your fingers crossed eh Harry ?Er yeah all right said Harry .He turned back to Hermione Ron and Nearly Headless Nick .Brothers and sisters usually go in the same Houses dont they ?he said .He was judging by the Weasleys all seven of whom had been put into Gryffindor .Oh no not necessarily said Hermione .Parvati Patils twins in Ravenclaw and theyre identical .Youd think theyd be together wouldnt you ?Harry looked up at the staff table .There seemed to be rather more empty seats there than usual .Hagrid of course was still fighting his way across the lake with the first years Professor McGonagall was presumably supervising the drying of the entrance hall floor but there was another empty chair too and Harry couldnt think who else was missing .Wheres the new Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher ?said Hermione who was also looking up at the teachers .They had never yet had a Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher who had lasted more than three terms .Harrys favorite by far had been Professor Lupin who had resigned last year .He looked up and down the staff table .There was definitely no new face there .Maybe they couldnt get anyone !said Hermione looking anxious .Harry scanned the table more carefully .Tiny little Professor Flitwick the Charms teacher was sitting on a large pile of cushions beside Professor Sprout the Herbology teacher whose hat was askew over her flyaway gray hair .She was talking to Professor Sinistra of the Astronomy department .On Professor Sinistra s other side was the sallowfaced hook nosed greasyhaired Potions master Snape Harrys least favorite person at Hogwarts .Harrys loathing of Snape was matched only by Snape s hatred of him a hatred which had if possible intensified last year when Harry had helped Sirius escape right under Snape s overlarge nose Snape and Sirius had been enemies since their own school days .On Snape s other side was an empty seat which Harry guessed was Professor McGonagalls .Next to it and in the very center of the table sat Professor Dumbledore the headmaster his sweeping silver hair and beard shining in the candlelight his magnificent deep green robes embroidered with many stars and moons .The tips of Dumbledore s long thin fingers were together and he was resting his chin upon them staring up at the ceiling through his halfmoon spectacles as though lost in thought .Harry glanced up at the ceiling too .It was enchanted to look like the sky outside and he had never seen it look this stormy .Black and purple clouds were swirling across it and as another thunderclap sounded outside a fork of lightning flashed across it .Oh hurry up Ron moaned beside Harry I could eat a hippogriff .The words were no sooner out of his mouth than the doors of the Great Hall opened and silence fell .Professor McGonagall was leading a long line of first years up to the top of the Hall .If Harry Ron and Hermione were wet it was nothing to how these first years looked .They appeared to have swum across the lake rather than sailed .All of them were shivering with a combination of cold and nerves as they filed along the staff table and came to a halt in a line facing the rest of the school all of them except the smallest of the lot a boy with mousy hair who was wrapped in what Harry recognized as Hagrids moleskin overcoat .The coat was so big for him that it looked as though he were draped in a furry black circus tent .His small face protruded from over the collar looking almost painfully excited .When he had lined up with his terrifiedlooking peers he caught Colin Creeveys eye gave a double thumbsup and mouthed I fell in the lake He looked positively delighted about it .Professor McGonagall now placed a threelegged stool on the ground before the first years and on top of it an extremely old dirty patched wizards hat .The first years stared at it .So did everyone else .For a moment there was silence .Then a long tear near the brim opened wide like a mouth and the hat broke into song A thousand years or more ago When I was newly sewn There lived four wizards of renown Whose names are still well known Bold Gryffindor from wild moor Fair Ravenclaw from glen Sweet Hufflepuff from valley broad Shrewd Slytherin from fen .They shared a wish a hope a dream They hatched a daring plan To educate young sorcerers Thus Hogwarts School began .Now each of these four founders Formed their own house for each Did value different virtues In the ones they had to teach .By Gryffindor the bravest were Prized far beyond the rest For Ravenclaw the cleverest Would always be the best For Hufflepuff hard workers were Most worthy of admission And powerhungry Slytherin Loved those of great ambition .While still alive they did divide Their favorites from the throng Yet how to pick the worthy ones When they were dead and gone ?Twas Gryffindor who found the way He whipped me off his head The founders put some brains in me So I could choose instead !Now slip me snug about your ears Ive never yet been wrong 111 have a look inside your mind And tell where you belong !The Great Hall rang with applause as the Sorting Hat finished .Thats not the song it sang when it Sorted us said Harry clapping along with everyone else .Sings a different one every year said Ron .Its got to be a pretty boring life hasnt it being a hat ?I suppose it spends all year making up the next one .Professor McGonagall was now unrolling a large scroll of parchment .When I call out your name you will put on the hat and sit on the stool she told the first years .When the hat announces your House you will go and sit at the appropriate table .Ackerley Stewart !A boy walked forward visibly trembling from head to foot picked up the Sorting Hat put it on and sat down on the stool .RAVENCLAW !shouted the hat .Stewart Ackerley took off the hat and hurried into a seat at the Ravenclaw table where everyone was applauding him .Harry caught a glimpse of Cho the Ravenclaw Seeker cheering Stewart Ackerley as he sat down .For a fleeting second Harry had a strange desire to join the Ravenclaw table too .Baddock Malcolm !SLYTHERIN !The table on the other side of the hall erupted with cheers Harry could see Malfoy clapping as Baddock joined the Slytherins .Harry wondered whether Baddock knew that Slytherin House had turned out more Dark witches and wizards than any other .Fred and George hissed Malcolm Baddock as he sat down .Branstone Eleanor !HUFFLEPUFF !Cauldwell Owen !HUFFLEPUFF !Creevey Dennis !Tiny Dennis Creevey staggered forward tripping over Hagrid s moleskin just as Hagrid himself sidled into the Hall through a door behind the teachers table .About twice as tall as a normal man and at least three times as broad Hagrid with his long wild tangled black hair and beard looked slightly alarming a misleading impression for Harry Ron and Hermione knew Hagrid to possess a very kind nature .He winked at them as he sat down at the end of the staff table and watched Dennis Creevey putting on the Sorting Hat .The rip at the brim opened wide GRYFFINDOR !the hat shouted .Hagrid clapped along with the Gryffindors as Dennis Creevey beaming widely took off the hat placed it back on the stool and hurried over to join his brother .Colin I fell in !he said shrilly throwing himself into an empty seat .It was brilliant !And something in the water grabbed me and pushed me back in the boat !Cool !said Colin just as excitedly .It was probably the giant squid Dennis !Wow said Dennis as though nobody in their wildest dreams could hope for more than being thrown into a stormtossed fathomsdeep lake and pushed out of it again by a giant sea monster .Dennis !Dennis !See that boy down there ?The one with the black hair and glasses ?See him ?Know who he is Dennis ?Harry looked away staring very hard at the Sorting Hat now Sorting Emma Dobbs .The Sorting continued boys and girls with varying degrees of fright on their faces moving one by one to the threelegged stool the line dwindling slowly as Professor McGonagall passed the Ls .Oh hurry up Ron moaned massaging his stomach .Now Ron the Sortings much more important than food said Nearly Headless Nick as Madley Laura !became a Hufflepuff .Course it is if youre dead snapped Ron .I do hope this years batch of Gryffindors are up to scratch said Nearly Headless Nick applauding as McDonald Natalie !joined the Gryffindor table .We dont want to break our winning streak do we ?Gryffindor had won the InterHouse Championship for the last three years in a row .Pritchard Graham !SLYTHERIN !Quirke Orla !RAVENCLAW !And finally with Whitby Kevin !HUFFLEPUFF !the Sorting ended .Professor McGonagall picked up the hat and the stool and carried them away .About time said Ron seizing his knife and fork and looking expectantly at his golden plate .Professor Dumbledore had gotten to his feet .He was smiling around at the students his arms opened wide in welcome .I have only two words to say to you he told them his deep voice echoing around the Hall .Tuck in .Hear hear !said Harry and Ron loudly as the empty dishes filled magically before their eyes .Nearly Headless Nick watched mournfully as Harry Ron and Hermione loaded their own plates .aah ats beer said Ron with his mouth full of mashed potato .Youre lucky theres a feast at all tonight you know said Nearly Headless Nick .There was trouble in the kitchens earlier .Why ?Wha appened ?said Harry through a sizable chunk of steak .Peeves of course said Nearly Headless Nick shaking his head which wobbled dangerously .He pulled his ruff a little higher up on his neck .The usual argument you know .He wanted to attend the feast well its quite out of the question you know what hes like utterly uncivilized cant see a plate of food without throwing it .We held a ghosts council the Fat Friar was all for giving him the chance but most wisely in my opinion the Bloody Baron put his foot down .The Bloody Baron was the Slytherin ghost a gaunt and silent specter covered in silver bloodstains .He was the only person at Hogwarts who could really control Peeves .Yeah we thought Peeves seemed hacked off about something said Ron darkly .So what did he do in the kitchens ?Oh the usual said Nearly Headless Nick shrugging .Wreaked havoc and mayhem .Pots and pans everywhere .Place swimming in soup .Terrified the houseelves out of their wits Clang .Hermione had knocked over her golden goblet .Pumpkin juice spread steadily over the tablecloth staining several feet of white linen orange but Hermione paid no attention .There are houseelves here ?she said staring horrorstruck at Nearly Headless Nick .Here at Hogwarts ?Certainly said Nearly Headless Nick looking surprised at her reaction .The largest number in any dwelling in Britain I believe .Over a hundred .Ive never seen one !said Hermione .Well they hardly ever leave the kitchen by day do they ?said Nearly Headless Nick .They come out at night to do a bit of cleaning .see to the fires and so on .I mean youre not supposed to see them are you ?Thats the mark of a good houseelf isnt it that you dont know its there ?Hermione stared at him .But they get paid ?she said .They get holidays dont they ?And and sick leave and pensions and everything ?Nearly Headless Nick chortled so much that his ruff slipped and his head flopped off dangling on the inch or so of ghostly skin and muscle that still attached it to his neck .Sick leave and pensions ?he said pushing his head back onto his shoulders and securing it once more with his ruff .Houseelves dont want sick leave and pensions !Hermione looked down at her hardly touched plate of food then put her knife and fork down upon it and pushed it away from her .Oh cmon Ermyknee said Ron accidentally spraying Harry with bits of Yorkshire pudding .Oops sorry Arry He swallowed .You wont get them sick leave by starving yourself !Slave labor said Hermione breathing hard through her nose .Thats what made this dinner .Slave labor .And she refused to eat another bite .The rain was still drumming heavily against the high dark glass .Another clap of thunder shook the windows and the stormy ceiling flashed illuminating the golden plates as the remains of the first course vanished and were replaced instantly with puddings .Treacle tart Hermione !said Ron deliberately wafting its smell toward her .Spotted dick look !Chocolate gateau !But Hermione gave him a look so reminiscent of Professor McGonagall that he gave up .When the puddings too had been demolished and the last crumbs had faded off the plates leaving them sparkling clean Albus Dumbledore got to his feet again .The buzz of chatter filling the Hall ceased almost at once so that only the howling wind and pounding rain could be heard .So !said Dumbledore smiling around at them all .Now that we are all fed and watered Hmph !said Hermione I must once more ask for your attention while I give out a few notices .Mr Filch the caretaker has asked me to tell you that the list of objects forbidden inside the castle has this year been extended to include Screaming Yoyos Fanged Frisbees and EverBashing Boomerangs .The full list comprises some four hundred and thirty seven items I believe and can be viewed in Mr Filch s office if anybody would like to check it .The corners of Dumbledore s mouth twitched .He continued As ever I would like to remind you all that the forest on the grounds is outofbounds to students as is the village of Hogsmeade to all below third year .It is also my painful duty to inform you that the InterHouse Quidditch Cup will not take place this year .What ?Harry gasped .He looked around at Fred and George his fellow members of the Quidditch team .They were mouthing soundlessly at Dumbledore apparently too appalled to speak .Dumbledore went on This is due to an event that will be starting in October and continuing throughout the school year taking up much of the teachers time and energy but I am sure you will all enjoy it immensely .I have great pleasure in announcing that this year at Hogwarts But at that moment there was a deafening rumble of thunder and the doors of the Great Hall banged open .A man stood in the doorway leaning upon a long staff shrouded in a black traveling cloak .Every head in the Great Hall swiveled toward the stranger suddenly brightly illuminated by a fork of lightning that flashed across the ceiling .He lowered his hood shook out a long mane of grizzled dark gray hair then began to walk up toward the teachers table .A dull clunk echoed through the Hall on his every other step .He reached the end of the top table turned right and limped heavily toward Dumbledore .Another flash of lightning crossed the ceiling .Hermione gasped .The lightning had thrown the mans face into sharp relief and it was a face unlike any Harry had ever seen .It looked as though it had been carved out of weathered wood by someone who had only the vaguest idea of what human faces are supposed to look like and was none too skilled with a chisel .Every inch of skin seemed to be scarred .The mouth looked like a diagonal gash and a large chunk of the nose was missing .But it was the mans eyes that made him frightening .One of them was small dark and beady .The other was large round as a coin and a vivid electric blue .The blue eye was moving ceaselessly without blinking and was rolling up down and from side to side quite independently of the normal eye and then it rolled right over pointing into the back of the mans head so that all they could see was whiteness .The stranger reached Dumbledore .He stretched out a hand that was as badly scarred as his face and Dumbledore shook it muttering words Harry couldnt hear .He seemed to be making some inquiry of the stranger who shook his head unsmilingly and replied in an undertone .Dumbledore nodded and gestured the man to the empty seat on his righthand side .The stranger sat down shook his mane of dark gray hair out of his face pulled a plate of sausages toward him raised it to what was left of his nose and sniffed it .He then took a small knife out of his pocket speared a sausage on the end of it and began to eat .His normal eye was fixed upon the sausages but the blue eye was still darting restlessly around in its socket taking in the Hall and the students .May I introduce our new Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher ?said Dumbledore brightly into the silence .Professor Moody .It was usual for new staff members to be greeted with applause but none of the staff or students clapped except Dumbledore and Hagrid who both put their hands together and applauded but the sound echoed dismally into the silence and they stopped fairly quickly .Everyone else seemed too transfixed by Moodys bizarre appearance to do more than stare at him .Moody ?Harry muttered to Ron .MacLEye Moody ?The one your dad went to help this morning ?Must be said Ron in a low awed voice .What happened to him ?Hermione whispered .What happened to his face ?Dunno Ron whispered back watching Moody with fascination .Moody seemed totally indifferent to his lessthan warm welcome .Ignoring the jug of pumpkin juice in front of him he reached again into his traveling cloak pulled out a hip flask and took a long draught from it .As he lifted his arm to drink his cloak was pulled a few inches from the ground and Harry saw below the table several inches of carved wooden leg ending in a clawed foot .Dumbledore cleared his throat .As I was saying he said smiling at the sea of students before him all of whom were still gazing transfixed at MadEye Moody we are to have the honor of hosting a very exciting event over the coming months an event that has not been held for over a century .It is my very great pleasure to inform you that the Triwizard Tournament will be taking place at Hogwarts this year .Youre JOKING !said Fred Weasley loudly .The tension that had filled the Hall ever since Moodys arrival suddenly broke .Nearly everyone laughed and Dumbledore chuckled appreciatively .I am not joking Mr Weasley he said though now that you mention it I did hear an excellent one over the summer about a troll a hag and a leprechaun who all go into a bar .Professor McGonagall cleared her throat loudly .Er but maybe this is not the time .no .said Dumbledore where was I ?Ah yes the Triwizard Tournament .well some of you will not know what this tournament involves so I hope those who do know will forgive me for giving a short explanation and allow their attention to wander freely .The Triwizard Tournament was first established some seven hundred years ago as a friendly competition between the three largest European schools of wizardry Hogwarts Beauxbatons and Durmstrang .A champion was selected to represent each school and the three champions competed in three magical tasks .The schools took it in turns to host the tournament once every five years and it was generally agreed to be a most excellent way of establishing ties between young witches and wizards of different nationalities until that is the death toll mounted so high that the tournament was discontinued .Death toll ?Hermione whispered looking alarmed .But her anxiety did not seem to be shared by the majority of students in the Hall many of them were whispering excitedly to one another and Harry himself was far more interested in hearing about the tournament than in worrying about deaths that had happened hundreds of years ago .There have been several attempts over the centuries to reinstate the tournament Dumbledore continued none of which has been very successful .However our own departments of International Magical Cooperation and Magical Games and Sports have decided the time is ripe for another attempt .We have worked hard over the summer to ensure that this time no champion will find himself or herself in mortal danger .The heads of Beauxbatons and Durmstrang will be arriving with their shortlisted contenders in October and the selection of the three champions will take place at Halloween .An impartial judge will decide which students are most worthy to compete for the Triwizard Cup the glory of their school and a thousand Galleons personal prize money .Im going for it !Fred Weasley hissed down the table his face lit with enthusiasm at the prospect of such glory and riches .He was not the only person who seemed to be visualizing himself as the Hogwarts champion .At every House table Harry could see people either gazing raptly at Dumbledore or else whispering fervently to their neighbors .But then Dumbledore spoke again and the Hall quieted once more .Eager though I know all of you will be to bring the Triwizard Cup to Hogwarts he said the heads of the participating schools along with the Ministry of Magic have agreed to impose an age restriction on contenders this year .Only students who are of age that is to say seventeen years or older will be allowed to put forward their names for consideration .This Dumbledore raised his voice slightly for several people had made noises of outrage at these words and the Weasley twins were suddenly looking furious is a measure we feel is necessary given that the tournament tasks will still be difficult and dangerous whatever precautions we take and it is highly unlikely that students below sixth and seventh year will be able to cope with them .I will personally be ensuring that no underage student hoodwinks our impartial judge into making them Hogwarts champion .His light blue eyes twinkled as they flickered over Freds and Georges mutinous faces .I therefore beg you not to waste your time submitting yourself if you are under seventeen .The delegations from Beauxbatons and Durmstrang will be arriving in October and remaining with us for the greater part of this year .I know that you will all extend every courtesy to our foreign guests while they are with us and will give your wholehearted support to the Hogwarts champion when he or she is selected .And now it is late and I know how important it is to you all to be alert and rested as you enter your lessons tomorrow morning .Bedtime !Chop chop !Dumbledore sat down again and turned to talk to MadEye Moody .There was a great scraping and banging as all the students got to their feet and swarmed toward the double doors into the entrance hall .They cant do that !said George Weasley who had not joined the crowd moving toward the door but was standing up and glaring at Dumbledore .Were seventeen in April why cant we have a shot ?Theyre not stopping me entering said Fred stubbornly also scowling at the top table .The championsll get to do all sorts of stuff youd never be allowed to do normally .And a thousand Galleons prize money !Yeah said Ron a faraway look on his face .Yeah a thousand Galleons .Come on said Hermione well be the only ones left here if you dont move .Harry Ron Hermione Fred and George set off for the entrance hall Fred and George debating the ways in which Dumbledore might stop those who were under seventeen from entering the tournament .Whos this impartial judge whos going to decide who the champions are ?said Harry .Dunno said Fred but its them well have to fool .I reckon a couple of drops of Aging Potion might do it George .Dumbledore knows youre not of age though said Ron .Yeah but hes not the one who decides who the champion is is he ?said Fred shrewdly .Sounds to me like once this judge knows who wants to enter hell choose the best from each school and never mind how old they are .Dumbledore s trying to stop us giving our names .People have died though !said Hermione in a worried voice as they walked through a door concealed behind a tapestry and started up another narrower staircase .Yeah said Fred airily but that was years ago wasnt it ?Anyway wheres the fun without a bit of risk ?Hey Ron what if we find out how to get round Dumbledore ?Fancy entering ?What dyou reckon ?Ron asked Harry .Be cool to enter wouldnt it ?But I spose they might want someone older .Dunno if weve learned enough .I definitely havent came Nevilles gloomy voice from behind Fred and George .I expect my grand want me to try though .Shes always going on about how I should be upholding the family honor .Ill just have to oops .Nevilles foot had sunk right through a step halfway up the staircase .There were many of these trick stairs at Hogwarts it was second nature to most of the older students to jump this particular step but Nevilles memory was notoriously poor .Harry and Ron seized him under the armpits and pulled him out while a suit of armor at the top of the stairs creaked and clanked laughing wheezily .Shut it you said Ron banging down its visor as they passed .They made their way up to the entrance to Gryffindor Tower which was concealed behind a large portrait of a fat lady in a pink silk dress .Password ?she said as they approached .Balderdash said George a prefect downstairs told me .The portrait swung forward to reveal a hole in the wall through which they all climbed .A crackling fire warmed the circular common room which was full of squashy armchairs and tables .Hermione cast the merrily dancing flames a dark look and Harry distinctly heard her mutter Slave labor before bidding them good night and disappearing through the doorway to the girls dormitory .Harry Ron and Neville climbed up the last spiral staircase until they reached their own dormitory which was situated at the top of the tower .Five four poster beds with deep crimson hangings stood against the walls each with its owners trunk at the foot .Dean and Seamus were already getting into bed Seamus had pinned his Ireland rosette to his headboard and Dean had tacked up a poster of Viktor Krum over his bedside table .His old poster of the West Ham football team was pinned right next to it .Mental Ron sighed shaking his head at the completely stationary soccer players .Harry Ron and Neville got into their pajamas and into bed .Someone a houseelf no doubt had placed warming pans between the sheets .It was extremely comfortable lying there in bed and listening to the storm raging outside .I might go in for it you know Ron said sleepily through the darkness if Fred and George find out how to .the tournament .you never know do you ?Spose not .Harry rolled over in bed a series of dazzling new pictures forming in his minds eye .He had hoodwinked the impartial judge into believing he was seventeen .he had become Hogwarts champion .he was standing on the grounds his arms raised in triumph in front of the whole school all of whom were applauding and screaming .he had just won the Triwizard Tournament .Chos face stood out particularly clearly in the blurred crowd her face glowing with admiration .Harry grinned into his pillow exceptionally glad that Ron couldnt see what he could .MADEYE MOODY The storm had blown itself out by the following morning though the ceiling in the Great Hall was still gloomy heavy clouds of pewter gray swirled overhead as Harry Ron and Hermione examined their new course schedules at breakfast .A few seats along Fred George and Lee Jordan were discussing magical methods of aging themselves and bluffing their way into the Triwizard Tournament .Todays not bad .outside all morning said Ron who was running his finger down the Monday column of his schedule .Herbology with the Hufflepuffs and Care of Magical Creatures .damn it were still with the Slytherins .Double Divination this afternoon Harry groaned looking down .Divination was his least favorite subject apart from Potions .Professor Trelawney kept predicting Harrys death which he found extremely annoying .You should have given it up like me shouldnt you ?said Hermione briskly buttering herself some toast .Then youd be doing something sensible like Arithmancy .Youre eating again I notice said Ron watching Hermione adding liberal amounts of jam to her toast too .Ive decided there are better ways of making a stand about elf rights said Hermione haughtily .Yeah .and you were hungry said Ron grinning .There was a sudden rustling noise above them and a hundred owls came soaring through the open windows carrying the morning mail .Instinctively Harry looked up but there was no sign of white among the mass of brown and gray .The owls circled the tables looking for the people to whom their letters and packages were addressed .A large tawny owl soared down to Neville Longbottom and deposited a parcel into his lap Neville almost always forgot to pack something .On the other side of the Hall Draco Malfoys eagle owl had landed on his shoulder carrying what looked like his usual supply of sweets and cakes from home .Trying to ignore the sinking feeling of disappointment in his stomach Harry returned to his porridge .Was it possible that something had happened to Hedwig and that Sirius hadnt even got his letter ?His preoccupation lasted all the way across the sodden vegetable patch until they arrived in greenhouse three but here he was distracted by Professor Sprout showing the class the ugliest plants Harry had ever seen .Indeed they looked less like plants than thick black giant slugs protruding vertically out of the soil .Each was squirming slightly and had a number of large shiny swellings upon it which appeared to be full of liquid .Bubotubers Professor Sprout told them briskly .They need squeezing .You will collect the pus The what ?said Seamus Finnigan sounding revolted .Pus Finnigan pus said Professor Sprout and its extremely valuable so dont waste it .You will collect the pus I say in these bottles .Wear your dragon hide gloves it can do funny things to the skin when undiluted bubotuber pus .Squeezing the bubotubers was disgusting but oddly satisfying .As each swelling was popped a large amount of thick yellowishgreen liquid burst forth which smelled strongly of petrol .They caught it in the bottles as Professor Sprout had indicated and by the end of the lesson had collected several pints .Thisll keep Madam Pomfrey happy said Professor Sprout stoppering the last bottle with a cork .An excellent remedy for the more stubborn forms of acne bubotuber pus .Should stop students resorting to desperate measures to rid themselves of pimples .Like poor Eloise Midgen said Hannah Abbott a Hufflepuff in a hushed voice .She tried to curse hers off .Silly girl said Professor Sprout shaking her head .But Madam Pomfrey fixed her nose back on in the end .A booming bell echoed from the castle across the wet grounds signaling the end of the lesson and the class separated the Hufflepuffs climbing the stone steps for Transfiguration and the Gryffindors heading in the other direction down the sloping lawn toward Hagrid s small wooden cabin which stood on the edge of the Forbidden Forest .Hagrid was standing outside his hut one hand on the collar of his enormous black boarhound Fang .There were several open wooden crates on the ground at his feet and Fang was whimpering and straining at his collar apparently keen to investigate the contents more closely .As they drew nearer an odd rattling noise reached their ears punctuated by what sounded like minor explosions .Mornin !Hagrid said grinning at Harry Ron and Hermione .Beer wait fer the Slytherins they won want ter miss this BlastEnded Skrewts !Come again ?said Ron .Hagrid pointed down into the crates .Eurgh !squealed Lavender Brown jumping backward .Eurgh just about summed up the BlastEnded Skrewts in Harrys opinion .They looked like deformed shellless lobsters horribly pale and slimy looking with legs sticking out in very odd places and no visible heads .There were about a hundred of them in each crate each about six inches long crawling over one another bumping blindly into the sides of the boxes .They were giving off a very powerful smell of rotting fish .Every now and then sparks would fly out of the end of a skrewt and with a small phut it would be propelled forward several inches .Ony jus hatched said Hagrid proudly so yehll be able ter raise em yerselves !Thought wed make a bit of a project of it !And why would we want to raise them ?said a cold voice .The Slytherins had arrived .The speaker was Draco Malfoy .Crabbe and Goyle were chuckling appreciatively at his words .Hagrid looked stumped at the question .I mean what do they do ?asked Malfoy .What is the point of them ?Hagrid opened his mouth apparently thinking hard there was a few seconds pause then he said roughly Thas next lesson Malfoy .Yer jus feedin em today .Now yehll wan ter try em on a few diffrent things Ive never had em before not sure what theyll go fer I got ant eggs an frog livers an a bit o grass snake just try em out with a bit of each .First pus and now this muttered Seamus .Nothing but deep affection for Hagrid could have made Harry Ron and Hermione pick up squelchy handfuls of frog liver and lower them into the crates to tempt the BlastEnded Skrewts .Harry couldnt suppress the suspicion that the whole thing was entirely pointless because the skrewts didnt seem to have mouths .Ouch yelled Dean Thomas after about ten minutes .It got me !Hagrid hurried over to him looking anxious .Its end exploded !said Dean angrily showing Hagrid a burn on his hand .Ah yeah that can happen when they blast off said Hagrid nodding .Eurgh !said Lavender Brown again .Eurgh Hagrid whats that pointy thing on it ?Ah some of em have got stings said Hagrid enthusiastically Lavender quickly withdrew her hand from the box .I reckon theyre the males .The females Ve got sorta sucker things on their bellies .I think they might be ter suck blood .Well I can certainly see why were trying to keep them alive said Malfoy sarcastically .Who wouldnt want pets that can burn sting and bite all at once ?Just because theyre not very pretty it doesnt mean theyre not useful Hermione snapped .Dragon bloods amazingly magical but you wouldnt want a dragon for a pet would you ?Harry and Ron grinned at Hagrid who gave them a furtive smile from behind his bushy beard .Hagrid would have liked nothing better than a pet dragon as Harry Ron and Hermione knew only too well he had owned one for a brief period during their first year a vicious Norwegian Ridgeback by the name of Norbert .Hagrid simply loved monstrous creatures the more lethal the better .Well at least the skrewts are small said Ron as they made their way back up to the castle for lunch an hour later .They are now said Hermione in an exasperated voice but once Hagrids found out what they eat I expect theyll be six feet long .Well that wont matter if they turn out to cure seasickness or something will it ?said Ron grinning slyly at her .You know perfectly well I only said that to shut Malfoy up said Hermione .As a matter of fact I think hes right .The best thing to do would be to stamp on the lot of them before they start attacking us all .They sat down at the Gryffindor table and helped themselves to lamb chops and potatoes .Hermione began to eat so fast that Harry and Ron stared at her .Er is this the new stand on elf rights ?said Ron .Youre going to make yourself puke instead ?No said Hermione with as much dignity as she could muster with her mouth bulging with sprouts .I just want to get to the library .What ?said Ron in disbelief .Hermione its the first day back !We havent even got homework yet !Hermione shrugged and continued to shovel down her food as though she had not eaten for days .Then she leapt to her feet said See you at dinner !and departed at high speed .When the bell rang to signal the start of afternoon lessons Harry and Ron set off for North Tower where at the top of a tightly spiraling staircase a silver stepladder led to a circular trapdoor in the ceiling and the room where Professor Trelawney lived .The familiar sweet perfume spreading from the fire met their nostrils as they emerged at the top of the stepladder .As ever the curtains were all closed the circular room was bathed in a dim reddish light cast by the many lamps which were all draped with scarves and shawls .Harry and Ron walked through the mass of occupied chintz chairs and poufs that cluttered the room and sat down at the same small circular table .Good day said the misty voice of Professor Trelawney right behind Harry making him jump .A very thin woman with enormous glasses that made her eyes appear far too large for her face Professor Trelawney was peering down at Harry with the tragic expression she always wore whenever she saw him .The usual large amount of beads chains and bangles glittered upon her person in the firelight .You are preoccupied my dear she said mournfully to Harry .My inner eye sees past your brave face to the troubled soul within .And I regret to say that your worries are not baseless .I see difficult times ahead for you alas .most difficult .I fear the thing you dread will indeed come to pass .and perhaps sooner than you think .Her voice dropped almost to a whisper .Ron rolled his eyes at Harry who looked stonily back .Professor Trelawney swept past them and seated herself in a large winged armchair before the fire facing the class .Lavender Brown and Parvati Patil who deeply admired Professor Trelawney were sitting on poufs very close to her .My dears it is time for us to consider the stars she said .The movements of the planets and the mysterious portents they reveal only to those who understand the steps of the celestial dance .Human destiny may be deciphered by the planetary rays which intermingle .But Harrys thoughts had drifted .The perfumed fire always made him feel sleepy and dullwitted and Professor Trelawneys rambling talks on fortune telling never held him exactly spellbound though he couldnt help thinking about what she had just said to him . ‘I fear the thing you dread will indeed come to pass .But Hermione was right Harry thought irritably Professor Trelawney really was an old fraud .He wasnt dreading anything at the moment at all .well unless you counted his fears that Sirius had been caught .but what did Professor Trelawney know ?He had long since come to the conclusion that her brand of fortunetelling was really no more than lucky guesswork and a spooky manner .Except of course for that time at the end of last term when she had made the prediction about Voldemort rising again .and Dumbledore himself had said that he thought that trance had been genuine when Harry had described it to him .Harry Ron muttered .What ?Harry looked around the whole class was staring at him .He sat up straight he had been almost dozing off lost in the heat and his thoughts .I was saying my dear that you were clearly born under the baleful influence of Saturn said Professor Trelawney a faint note of resentment in her voice at the fact that he had obviously not been hanging on her words .Born under what sorry ?said Harry .Saturn dear the planet Saturn !said Professor Trelawney sounding definitely irritated that he wasnt riveted by this news .I was saying that Saturn was surely in a position of power in the heavens at the moment of your birth .Your dark hair .your mean stature .tragic losses so young in life .I think I am right in saying my dear that you were born in midwinter ?No said Harry I was born in July .Ron hastily turned his laugh into a hacking cough .Half an hour later each of them had been given a complicated circular chart and was attempting to fill in the position of the planets at their moment of birth .It was dull work requiring much consultation of timetables and calculation of angles .Ive got two Neptunes here said Harry after a while frowning down at his piece of parchment that cant be right can it ?aah said Ron imitating Professor Trelawneys mystical whisper when two Neptunes appear in the sky it is a sure sign that a midget in glasses is being born Harry .Seamus and Dean who were working nearby sniggered loudly though not loudly enough to mask the excited squeals from Lavender Brown Oh Professor look !I think Ive got an unaspected planet !Oooh which ones that Professor ?It is Uranus my dear said Professor Trelawney peering down at the chart .Can I have a look at Uranus too Lavender ?said Ron .Most unfortunately Professor Trelawney heard him and it was this perhaps that made her give them so much homework at the end of the class .A detailed analysis of the way the planetary movements in the coming month will affect you with reference to your personal chart she snapped sounding much more like Professor McGonagall than her usual airyfairy self .I want it ready to hand in next Monday and no excuses !Miserable old bat said Ron bitterly as they joined the crowds descending the staircases back to the Great Hall and dinner .Thatll take all weekend that will .Lots of homework ?said Hermione brightly catching up with them .Professor Vector didnt give us any at all !Well bully for Professor Vector said Ron moodily .They reached the entrance hall which was packed with people queuing for dinner .They had just joined the end of the line when a loud voice rang out behind them .Weasley !Hey Weasley !Harry Ron and Hermione turned .Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle were standing there each looking thoroughly pleased about something .What ?said Ron shortly .Your dads in the paper Weasley !said Malfoy brandishing a copy of the Daily Prophet and speaking very loudly so that everyone in the packed entrance hall could hear .Listen to this !FURTHER MISTAKES AT THE MINISTRY OF MAGIC It seems as though the Ministry of Magics troubles are not yet at an end writes Rita Skeeter Special Correspondent .Recently under fire for its poor crowd control at the Quidditch World Cup and still unable to account for the disappearance of one of its witches the Ministry was plunged into fresh embarrassment yesterday by the antics of Arnold Weasley of the Misuse of Muggle Artifacts Office .Malfoy looked up .Imagine them not even getting his name right Weasley .Its almost as though hes a complete nonentity isnt it ?he crowed .Everyone in the entrance hall was listening now .Malfoy straightened the paper with a flourish and read on Arnold Weasley who was charged with possession of a flying car two years ago was yesterday involved in a tussle with several Muggle lawkeepers policemen over a number of highly aggressive dustbins .Mr Weasley appears to have rushed to the aid of Mad Eye Moody the aged exAuror who retired from the Ministry when no longer able to tell the difference between a handshake and attempted murder .Unsurprisingly Mr Weasley found upon arrival at Mr Moody s heavily guarded house that Mr Moody had once again raised a false alarm .Mr Weasley was forced to modify several memories before he could escape from the policemen but refused to answer Daily Prophet questions about why he had involved the Ministry in such an undignified and potentially embarrassing scene .And theres a picture Weasley !said Malfoy flipping the paper over and holding it up .A picture of your parents outside their house if you can call it a house !Your mother could do with losing a bit of weight couldnt she ?Ron was shaking with fury .Everyone was staring at him .Get stuffed Malfoy said Harry .Cmon Ron .Oh yeah you were staying with them this summer werent you Potter ?sneered Malfoy .So tell me is his mother really that porky or is it just the picture ?You know your mother Malfoy ?said Harry both he and Hermione had grabbed the back of Rons robes to stop him from launching himself at Malfoy that expression shes got like shes got dung under her nose ?Has she always looked like that or was it just because you were with her ?Malfoys pale face went slightly pink .Dont you dare insult my mother Potter .Keep your fat mouth shut then said Harry turning away .BANG !Several people screamed Harry felt something whitehot graze the side of his face he plunged his hand into his robes for his wand but before hed even touched it he heard a second loud BANG and a roar that echoed through the entrance hall .OH NO YOU DONT LADDIE !Harry spun around .Professor Moody was limping down the marble staircase .His wand was out and it was pointing right at a pure white ferret which was shivering on the stoneflagged floor exactly where Malfoy had been standing .There was a terrified silence in the entrance hall .Nobody but Moody was moving a muscle .Moody turned to look at Harry at least his normal eye was looking at Harry the other one was pointing into the back of his head .Did he get you ?Moody growled .His voice was low and gravelly .No said Harry missed .LEAVE IT !Moody shouted .Leave what ?Harry said bewildered .Not you him !Moody growled jerking his thumb over his shoulder at Crabbe who had just frozen about to pick up the white ferret .It seemed that Moodys rolling eye was magical and could see out of the back of his head .Moody started to limp toward Crabbe Goyle and the ferret which gave a terrified squeak and took off streaking toward the dungeons .I dont think so !roared Moody pointing his wand at the ferret again it flew ten feet into the air fell with a smack to the floor and then bounced upward once more .I dont like people who attack when their opponents backs turned growled Moody as the ferret bounced higher and higher squealing in pain .Stinking cowardly scummy thing to do .The ferret flew through the air its legs and tail flailing helplessly .Never do that again said Moody speaking each word as the ferret hit the stone floor and bounced upward again .Professor Moody !said a shocked voice .Professor McGonagall was coming down the marble staircase with her arms full of books .Hello Professor McGonagall said Moody calmly bouncing the ferret still higher .What what are you doing ?said Professor McGonagall her eyes following the bouncing ferrets progress through the air .Teaching said Moody .Teach Moody is that a student ?shrieked Professor McGonagall the books spilling out of her arms .Yep said Moody .No !cried Professor McGonagall running down the stairs and pulling out her wand a moment later with a loud snapping noise Draco Malfoy had reappeared lying in a heap on the floor with his sleek blond hair all over his now brilliantly pink face .He got to his feet wincing .Moody we never use Transfiguration as a punishment !said Professor McGonagall weakly .Surely Professor Dumbledore told you that ?He mightve mentioned it yeah said Moody scratching his chin unconcernedly but I thought a good sharp shock We give detentions Moody !Or speak to the offenders Head of House !Ill do that then said Moody staring at Malfoy with great dislike .Malfoy whose pale eyes were still watering with pain and humiliation looked malevolently up at Moody and muttered something in which the words my father were distinguishable .Oh yeah ?said Moody quietly limping forward a few steps the dull clunk of his wooden leg echoing around the hall .Well I know your father of old boy .You tell him Moodys keeping a close eye on his son .you tell him that from me .Now your Head of Housell be Snape will it ?Yes said Malfoy resentfully .Another old friend growled Moody .Ive been looking forward to a chat with old Snape .Come on you .And he seized Malfoys upper arm and marched him off toward the dungeons .Professor McGonagall stared anxiously after them for a few moments then waved her wand at her fallen books causing them to soar up into the air and back into her arms .Dont talk to me Ron said quietly to Harry and Hermione as they sat down at the Gryffindor table a few minutes later surrounded by excited talk on all sides about what had just happened .Why not ?said Hermione in surprise .Because I want to fix that in my memory forever said Ron his eyes closed and an uplifted expression on his face .Draco Malfoy the amazing bouncing ferret .Harry and Hermione both laughed and Hermione began doling beef casserole onto each of their plates .He could have really hurt Malfoy though she said .It was good really that Professor McGonagall stopped it Hermione !said Ron furiously his eyes snapping open again youre ruining the best moment of my life !Hermione made an impatient noise and began to eat at top speed again .Dont tell me youre going back to the library this evening ?said Harry watching her .Got to said Hermione thickly .Loads to do .But you told us Professor Vector Its not schoolwork she said .Within five minutes she had cleared her plate and departed .No sooner had she gone than her seat was taken by Fred Weasley .Moody !he said .How cool is he ?Beyond cool said George sitting down opposite Fred .Supercool said the twins best friend Lee Jordan sliding into the seat beside George .We had him this afternoon he told Harry and Ron .What was it like ?said Harry eagerly .Fred George and Lee exchanged looks full of meaning .Never had a lesson like it said Fred .He knows man said Lee .Knows what ?said Ron leaning forward .Knows what its like to be out there doing it said George impressively .Doing what ?said Harry .Fighting the Dark Arts said Fred .Hes seen it all said George .Mazing said Lee .Ron dived into his bag for his schedule .We havent got him till Thursday !he said in a disappointed voice .THE UNFORGIVABLE CURSES The next two days passed without great incident unless you counted Neville melting his sixth cauldron in Potions .Professor Snape who seemed to have attained new levels of vindictiveness over the summer gave Neville detention and Neville returned from it in a state of nervous collapse having been made to disembowel a barrel full of horned toads .You know why Snape s in such a foul mood dont you ?said Ron to Harry as they watched Hermione teaching Neville a Scouring Charm to remove the frog guts from under his fingernails .Yeah said Harry .Moody .It was common knowledge that Snape really wanted the Dark Arts job and he had now failed to get it for the fourth year running .Snape had disliked all of their previous Dark Arts teachers and shown it but he seemed strangely wary of displaying overt animosity to MadEye Moody .Indeed whenever Harry saw the two of them together at mealtimes or when they passed in the corridors he had the distinct impression that Snape was avoiding Moodys eye whether magical or normal .I reckon Snapes a bit scared of him you know Harry said thoughtfully .Imagine if Moody turned Snape into a horned toad said Ron his eyes misting over and bounced him all around his dungeon .The Gryffindor fourth years were looking forward to Moodys first lesson so much that they arrived early on Thursday lunchtime and queued up outside his classroom before the bell had even rung .The only person missing was Hermione who turned up just in time for the lesson .Been in the Library .Harry finished her sentence for her .Cmon quick or we wont get decent seats .They hurried into three chairs right in front of the teachers desk took out their copies of The Dark Forces A Guide to SelfProtection and waited unusually quiet .Soon they heard Moodys distinctive clunking footsteps coming down the corridor and he entered the room looking as strange and frightening as ever .They could just see his clawed wooden foot protruding from underneath his robes .You can put those away he growled stumping over to his desk and sitting down those books .You wont need them .They returned the books to their bags Ron looking excited .Moody took out a register shook his long mane of grizzled gray hair out of his twisted and scarred face and began to call out names his normal eye moving steadily down the list while his magical eye swiveled around fixing upon each student as he or she answered .Right then he said when the last person had declared themselves present Ive had a letter from Professor Lupin about this class .Seems youve had a pretty thorough grounding in tackling Dark creatures youve covered boggarts Red Caps hinkypunks grindylows Kappas and werewolves is that right ?There was a general murmur of assent .But youre behind very behind on dealing with curses said Moody .So Im here to bring you up to scratch on what wizards can do to each other .Ive got one year to teach you how to deal with Dark What arent you staying ?Ron blurted out .Moodys magical eye spun around to stare at Ron Ron looked extremely apprehensive but after a moment Moody smiled the first time Harry had seen him do so .The effect was to make his heavily scarred face look more twisted and contorted than ever but it was nevertheless good to know that he ever did anything as friendly as smile .Ron looked deeply relieved .Youll be Arthur Weasleys son eh ?Moody said .Your father got me out of a very tight corner a few days ago .Yeah Im staying just the one year .Special favor to Dumbledore .One year and then back to my quiet retirement .He gave a harsh laugh and then clapped his gnarled hands together .So straight into it .Curses .They come in many strengths and forms .Now according to the Ministry of Magic Im supposed to teach you countercurses and leave it at that .Im not supposed to show you what illegal Dark curses look like until youre in the sixth year .Youre not supposed to be old enough to deal with it till then .But Professor Dumbledores got a higher opinion of your nerves he reckons you can cope and I say the sooner you know what youre up against the better .How are you supposed to defend yourself against something youve never seen ?A wizard whos about to put an illegal curse on you isnt going to tell you what hes about to do .Hes not going to do it nice and polite to your face .You need to be prepared .You need to be alert and watchful .You need to put that away Miss Brown when Im talking .Lavender jumped and blushed .She had been showing Parvati her completed horoscope under the desk .Apparently Moodys magical eye could see through solid wood as well as out of the back of his head .So .do any of you know which curses are most heavily punished by wizarding law ?Several hands rose tentatively into the air including Rons and Hermiones .Moody pointed at Ron though his magical eye was still fixed on Lavender .Er said Ron tentatively my dad told me about one . .Is it called the Imperius Curse or something ?Ah yes said Moody appreciatively .Your father would know that one .Gave the Ministry a lot of trouble at one time the Imperius Curse .Moody got heavily to his mismatched feet opened his desk drawer and took out a glass jar .Three large black spiders were scuttling around inside it .Harry felt Ron recoil slightly next to him Ron hated spiders .Moody reached into the jar caught one of the spiders and held it in the palm of his hand so that they could all see it .He then pointed his wand at it and muttered Imperio The spider leapt from Moodys hand on a fine thread of silk and began to swing backward and forward as though on a trapeze .It stretched out its legs rigidly then did a back flip breaking the thread and landing on the desk where it began to cartwheel in circles .Moody jerked his wand and the spider rose onto two of its hind legs and went into what was unmistakably a tap dance .Everyone was laughing everyone except Moody .Think its funny do you ?he growled .Youd like it would you if I did it to you ?The laughter died away almost instantly .Total control said Moody quietly as the spider balled itself up and began to roll over and over .I could make it jump out of the window drown itself throw itself down one of your throats .Ron gave an involuntary shudder .Years back there were a lot of witches and wizards being controlled by the Imperius Curse said Moody and Harry knew he was talking about the days in which Voldemort had been allpowerful .Some job for the Ministry trying to sort out who was being forced to act and who was acting of their own free will .The Imperius Curse can be fought and Ill be teaching you how but it takes real strength of character and not everyones got it .Better avoid being hit with it if you can .CONSTANT VIGILANCE !he barked and everyone jumped .Moody picked up the somersaulting spider and threw it back into the jar .Anyone else know one ?Another illegal curse ?Hermiones hand flew into the air again and so to Harrys slight surprise did Nevilles .The only class in which Neville usually volunteered information was Herbology which was easily his best subject .Neville looked surprised at his own daring .Yes ?said Moody his magical eye rolling right over to fix on Neville .Theres one the Cruciatus Curse said Neville in a small but distinct voice .Moody was looking very intently at Neville this time with both eyes .Your names Longbottom ?he said his magical eye swooping down to check the register again .Neville nodded nervously but Moody made no further inquiries .Turning back to the class at large he reached into the jar for the next spider and placed it upon the desktop where it remained motionless apparently too scared to move .The Cruciatus Curse said Moody .Needs to be a bit bigger for you to get the idea he said pointing his wand at the spider .Engorgio The spider swelled .It was now larger than a tarantula .Abandoning all pretense Ron pushed his chair backward as far away from Moodys desk as possible .Moody raised his wand again pointed it at the spider and muttered CrucioV At once the spiders legs bent in upon its body it rolled over and began to twitch horribly rocking from side to side .No sound came from it but Harry was sure that if it could have given voice it would have been screaming .Moody did not remove his wand and the spider started to shudder and jerk more violently Stop it !Hermione said shrilly .Harry looked around at her .She was looking not at the spider but at Neville and Harry following her gaze saw that Nevilles hands were clenched upon the desk in front of him his knuckles white his eyes wide and horrified .Moody raised his wand .The spiders legs relaxed but it continued to twitch .Reducio Moody muttered and the spider shrank back to its proper size .He put it back into the jar .Pain said Moody softly .You dont need thumbscrews or knives to torture someone if you can perform the Cruciatus Curse .That one was very popular once too .Right .anyone know any others ?Harry looked around .From the looks on everyones faces he guessed they were all wondering what was going to happen to the last spider .Hermiones hand shook slightly as for the third time she raised it into the air .Yes ?said Moody looking at her .Avada Kedavra Hermione whispered .Several people looked uneasily around at her including Ron .Ah said Moody another slight smile twisting his lopsided mouth .Yes the last and worst .Avada Kedavra .the Killing Curse .He put his hand into the glass jar and almost as though it knew what was coming the third spider scuttled frantically around the bottom of the jar trying to evade Moodys fingers but he trapped it and placed it upon the desktop .It started to scuttle frantically across the wooden surface .Moody raised his wand and Harry felt a sudden thrill of foreboding .Avada Kedavral Moody roared .There was a flash of blinding green light and a rushing sound as though a vast invisible something was soaring through the air instantaneously the spider rolled over onto its back unmarked but unmistakably dead .Several of the students stifled cries Ron had thrown himself backward and almost toppled off his seat as the spider skidded toward him .Moody swept the dead spider off the desk onto the floor .Not nice he said calmly .Not pleasant .And theres no countercurse .Theres no blocking it .Only one known person has ever survived it and hes sitting right in front of me .Harry felt his face redden as Moodys eyes both of them looked into his own .He could feel everyone else looking around at him too .Harry stared at the blank blackboard as though fascinated by it but not really seeing it at all .So that was how his parents had died .exactly like that spider .Had they been unblemished and unmarked too ?Had they simply seen the flash of green light and heard the rush of speeding death before life was wiped from their bodies ?Harry had been picturing his parents deaths over and over again for three years now ever since hed found out they had been murdered ever since hed found out what had happened that night Wormtail had betrayed his parents whereabouts to Voldemort who had come to find them at their cottage .How Voldemort had killed Harrys father first .How James Potter had tried to hold him off while he shouted at his wife to take Harry and run .Voldemort had advanced on Lily Potter told her to move aside so that he could kill Harry .how she had begged him to kill her instead refused to stop shielding her son .and so Voldemort had murdered her too before turning his wand on Harry .Harry knew these details because he had heard his parents voices when he had fought the dementors last year for that was the terrible power of the dementors to force their victims to relive the worst memories of their lives and drown powerless in their own despair .Moody was speaking again from a great distance it seemed to Harry .With a massive effort he pulled himself back to the present and listened to what Moody was saying .Avada Kedavras a curse that needs a powerful bit of magic behind it you could all get your wands out now and point them at me and say the words and I doubt Id get so much as a nosebleed .But that doesnt matter .Im not here to teach you how to do it .Now if theres no countercurse why am I showing you ?Because youve got to know .Youve got to appreciate what the worst is .You dont want to find yourself in a situation where youre facing it .CONSTANT VIGILANCE !he roared and the whole class jumped again .Now .those three curses Avada Kedavra Imperius and Cruciatus are known as the Unforgivable Curses .The use of any one of them on a fellow human being is enough to earn a life sentence in Azkaban .Thats what youre up against .Thats what Ive got to teach you to fight .You need preparing .You need arming .But most of all you need to practice constant neverceasing vigilance .Get out your quills .copy this down .They spent the rest of the lesson taking notes on each of the Unforgivable Curses .No one spoke until the bell rang but when Moody had dismissed them and they had left the classroom a torrent of talk burst forth .Most people were discussing the curses in awed voices Did you see it twitch ?and when he killed it just like that !They were talking about the lesson Harry thought as though it had been some sort of spectacular show but he hadnt found it very entertaining and nor it seemed had Hermione .Hurry up she said tensely to Harry and Ron .Not the ruddy library again ?said Ron .No said Hermione curtly pointing up a side passage .Neville .Neville was standing alone halfway up the passage staring at the stone wall opposite him with the same horrified wideeyed look he had worn when Moody had demonstrated the Cruciatus Curse .Neville ?Hermione said gently .Neville looked around .Oh hello he said his voice much higher than usual .Interesting lesson wasnt it ?I wonder whats for dinner Im Im starving arent you ?Neville are you all right ?said Hermione .Oh yes Im fine Neville gabbled in the same unnaturally high voice .Very interesting dinner I mean lesson whats for eating ?Ron gave Harry a startled look .Neville what ?But an odd clunking noise sounded behind them and they turned to see Professor Moody limping toward them .All four of them fell silent watching him apprehensively but when he spoke it was in a much lower and gentler growl than they had yet heard .Its all right sonny he said to Neville .Why dont you come up to my office ?Come on .we can have a cup of tea .Neville looked even more frightened at the prospect of tea with Moody .He neither moved nor spoke .Moody turned his magical eye upon Harry .You all right are you Potter ?Yes said Harry almost defiantly .Moodys blue eye quivered slightly in its socket as it surveyed Harry .Then he said Youve got to know .It seems harsh maybe but youve got to know .No point pretending .well .come on Longbottom Ive got some books that might interest you .Neville looked pleadingly at Harry Ron and Hermione but they didnt say anything so Neville had no choice but to allow himself to be steered away one of Moodys gnarled hands on his shoulder .What was that about ?said Ron watching Neville and Moody turn the corner .I dont know said Hermione looking pensive .Some lesson though eh ?said Ron to Harry as they set off for the Great Hall .Fred and George were right werent they ?He really knows his stuff Moody doesnt he ?When he did Avada Kedavra the way that spider just died just snuffed it right But Ron fell suddenly silent at the look on Harrys face and didnt speak again until they reached the Great Hall when he said he supposed they had better make a start on Professor Trelawneys predictions tonight since they would take hours .Hermione did not join in with Harry and Rons conversation during dinner but ate furiously fast and then left for the library again .Harry and Ron walked back to Gryffindor Tower and Harry who had been thinking of nothing else all through dinner now raised the subject of the Unforgivable Curses himself .Wouldnt Moody and Dumbledore be in trouble with the Ministry if they knew wed seen the curses ?Harry asked as they approached the Fat Lady .Yeah probably said Ron .But Dumbledores always done things his way hasnt he and Moodys been getting in trouble for years I reckon .Attacks first and asks questions later look at his dustbins .Balderdash .The Fat Lady swung forward to reveal the entrance hole and they climbed into the Gryffindor common room which was crowded and noisy .Shall we get our Divination stuff then ?said Harry .I spose Ron groaned .They went up to the dormitory to fetch their books and charts to find Neville there alone sitting on his bed reading .He looked a good deal calmer than at the end of Moodys lesson though still not entirely normal .His eyes were rather red .You all right Neville ?Harry asked him .Oh yes said Neville Im fine thanks .Just reading this book Professor Moody lent me .He held up the book Magical Water Plants of the Mediterranean .Apparently Professor Sprout told Professor Moody Im really good at Herbology Neville said .There was a faint note of pride in his voice that Harry had rarely heard there before .He thought Id like this .Telling Neville what Professor Sprout had said Harry thought had been a very tactful way of cheering Neville up for Neville very rarely heard that he was good at anything .It was the sort of thing Professor Lupin would have done .Harry and Ron took their copies of Unfogging the Future back down to the common room found a table and set to work on their predictions for the coming month .An hour later they had made very little progress though their table was littered with bits of parchment bearing sums and symbols and Harrys brain was as fogged as though it had been filled with the fumes from Professor Trelawneys fire .I havent got a clue what this lots supposed to mean he said staring down at a long list of calculations .You know said Ron whose hair was on end because of all the times he had run his fingers through it in frustration I think its back to the old Divination standby .What make it up ?Yeah said Ron sweeping the jumble of scrawled notes off the table dipping his pen into some ink and starting to write .Next Monday he said as he scribbled I am likely to develop a cough owing to the unlucky conjunction of Mars and Jupiter .He looked up at Harry .You know her just put in loads of misery shell lap it up .Right said Harry crumpling up his first attempt and lobbing it over the heads of a group of chattering first years into the fire .Okay .on Monday will be in danger of er burns .Yeah you will be said Ron darkly were seeing the skrewts again on Monday .Okay Tuesday Ill .erm Lose a treasured possession said Harry who was flicking through Unfogging the Future for ideas .Good one said Ron copying it down .Because of .erm .Mercury .Why dont you get stabbed in the back by someone you thought was a friend ?Yeah .cool .said Harry scribbling it down because .Venus is in the twelfth house .And on Wednesday I think Ill come off worst in a fight .aah I was going to have a fight .Okay Ill lose a bet .Yeah youll be betting Ill win my fight .They continued to make up predictions which grew steadily more tragic for another hour while the common room around them slowly emptied as people went up to bed .Crookshanks wandered over to them leapt lightly into an empty chair and stared inscrutably at Harry rather as Hermione might look if she knew they werent doing their homework properly .Staring around the room trying to think of a kind of misfortune he hadnt yet used Harry saw Fred and George sitting together against the opposite wall heads together quills out poring over a single piece of parchment .It was most unusual to see Fred and George hidden away in a corner and working silently they usually liked to be in the thick of things and the noisy center of attention .There was something secretive about the way they were working on the piece of parchment and Harry was reminded of how they had sat together writing something back at the Burrow .He had thought then that it was another order form for Weasleys Wizard Wheezes but it didnt look like that this time if it had been they would surely have let Lee Jordan in on the joke .He wondered whether it had anything to do with entering the Triwizard Tournament .As Harry watched George shook his head at Fred scratched out something with his quill and said in a very quiet voice that nevertheless carried across the almost deserted room No that sounds like were accusing him .Got to be careful .Then George looked over and saw Harry watching him .Harry grinned and quickly returned to his predictions he didnt want George to think he was eavesdropping .Shortly after that the twins rolled up their parchment said good night and went off to bed .Fred and George had been gone ten minutes or so when the portrait hole opened and Hermione climbed into the common room carrying a sheaf of parchment in one hand and a box whose contents rattled as she walked in the other .Crookshanks arched his back purring .Hello she said Ive just finished !So have I !said Ron triumphantly throwing down his quill .Hermione sat down laid the things she was carrying in an empty armchair and pulled Rons predictions toward her .Not going to have a very good month are you ?she said sardonically as Crookshanks curled up in her lap .Ah well at least Im forewarned Ron yawned .You seem to be drowning twice said Hermione .Oh am I ?said Ron peering down at his predictions .Id better change one of them to getting trampled by a rampaging hippogriff .Dont you think its a bit obvious youve made these up ?said Hermione .How dare you !said Ron in mock outrage .Weve been working like houseelves here !Hermione raised her eyebrows .Its just an expression said Ron hastily .Harry laid down his quill too having just finished predicting his own death by decapitation .Whats in the box ?he asked pointing at it .Funny you should ask said Hermione with a nasty look at Ron .She took off the lid and showed them the contents .Inside were about fifty badges all of different colors but all bearing the same letters S .P .E .W . ‘Spew ?said Harry picking up a badge and looking at it .Whats this about ?Not spew said Hermione impatiently .Its SPEW .Stands for the Society for the Promotion of Elfish Welfare .Never heard of it said Ron .Well of course you havent said Hermione briskly Ive only just started it .Yeah ?said Ron in mild surprise .How many members have you got ?Well if you two join three said Hermione .And you think we want to walk around wearing badges saying ‘spew do you ?said Ron .SPEW !said Hermione hotly .I was going to put Stop the Outrageous Abuse of Our Fellow Magical Creatures and Campaign for a Change in Their Legal Status but it wouldnt fit .So thats the heading of our manifesto .She brandished the sheaf of parchment at them .Ive been researching it thoroughly in the library .Elf enslavement goes back centuries .I cant believe no ones done anything about it before now .Hermione open your ears said Ron loudly .They .Like .It .They like being enslaved !Our shortterm aims said Hermione speaking even more loudly than Ron and acting as though she hadnt heard a word are to secure houseelves fair wages and working conditions .Our longterm aims include changing the law about nonwand use and trying to get an elf into the Department for the Regulation and Control of Magical Creatures because theyre shockingly underrepresented .And how do we do all this ?Harry asked .We start by recruiting members said Hermione happily .I thought two Sickles to join that buys a badge and the proceeds can fund our leaflet campaign .Youre treasurer Ron Ive got you a collecting tin upstairs and Harry youre secretary so you might want to write down everything Im saying now as a record of our first meeting .There was a pause in which Hermione beamed at the pair of them and Harry sat torn between exasperation at Hermione and amusement at the look on Rons face .The silence was broken not by Ron who in any case looked as though he was temporarily dumbstruck but by a soft tap tap on the window .Harry looked across the now empty common room and saw illuminated by the moonlight a snowy owl perched on the windowsill .Hedwig !he shouted and he launched himself out of his chair and across the room to pull open the window .Hedwig flew inside soared across the room and landed on the table on top of Harrys predictions .About time !said Harry hurrying after her .Shes got an answer !said Ron excitedly pointing at the grubby piece of parchment tied to Hedwigs leg .Harry hastily untied it and sat down to read whereupon Hedwig fluttered onto his knee hooting softly .What does it say ?Hermione asked breathlessly .The letter was very short and looked as though it had been scrawled in a great hurry .Harry read it aloud Harry Im flying north immediately .This news about your scar is the latest in a series of strange rumors that have reached me here .If it hurts again go straight to Dumbledore theyre saying hes got MadEye out of retirement which means hes reading the signs even if no one else is .Ill be in touch soon .My best to Ron and Hermione .Keep your eyes open Harry .Sirius Harry looked up at Ron and Hermione who stared back at him .Hes flying north ?Hermione whispered .Hes coming back ?Dumbledores reading what signs ?said Ron looking perplexed .Harry whats up ?For Harry had just hit himself in the forehead with his fist jolting Hedwig out of his lap .I shouldntve told him !Harry said furiously .What are you on about ?said Ron in surprise .Its made him think hes got to come back !said Harry now slamming his fist on the table so that Hedwig landed on the back of Rons chair hooting indignantly .Coming back because he thinks Im in trouble !And theres nothing wrong with me !And I havent got anything for you Harry snapped at Hedwig who was clicking her beak expectantly youll have to go up to the Owlery if you want food .Hedwig gave him an extremely offended look and took off for the open window cuffing him around the head with her outstretched wing as she went .Harry Hermione began in a pacifying sort of voice .Im going to bed said Harry shortly .See you in the morning .Upstairs in the dormitory he pulled on his pajamas and got into his fourposter but he didnt feel remotely tired .If Sirius came back and got caught it would be his Harrys fault .Why hadnt he kept his mouth shut ?A few seconds pain and hed had to blab .If hed just had the sense to keep it to himself .He heard Ron come up into the dormitory a short while later but did not speak to him .For a long time Harry lay staring up at the dark canopy of his bed .The dormitory was completely silent and had he been less preoccupied Harry would have realized that the absence of Nevilles usual snores meant that he was not the only one lying awake .BEAUXBATONS AND DRUMSTRANG Early next morning Harry woke with a plan fully formed in his mind as though his sleeping brain had been working on it all night .He got up dressed in the pale dawn light left the dormitory without waking Ron and went back down to the deserted common room .Here he took a piece of parchment from the table upon which his Divination homework still lay and wrote the following letter Dear Sirius I reckon I just imagined my scar hurting I was half asleep when I wrote to you last time .Theres no point coming back everythings fine here .Dont worry about me my head feels completely normal .Harry He then climbed out of the portrait hole up through the silent castle held up only briefly by Peeves who tried to overturn a large vase on him halfway along the fourthfloor corridor finally arriving at the Owlery which was situated at the top of West Tower .The Owlery was a circular stone room rather cold and drafty because none of the windows had glass in them .The floor was entirely covered in straw owl droppings and the regurgitated skeletons of mice and voles .Hundreds upon hundreds of owls of every breed imaginable were nestled here on perches that rose right up to the top of the tower nearly all of them asleep though here and there a round amber eye glared at Harry .He spotted Hedwig nestled between a barn owl and a tawny and hurried over to her sliding a little on the droppingstrewn floor .It took him a while to persuade her to wake up and then to look at him as she kept shuffling around on her perch showing him her tail .She was evidently still furious about his lack of gratitude the previous night .In the end it was Harry suggesting she might be too tired and that perhaps he would ask Ron to borrow Pigwidgeon that made her stick out her leg and allow him to tie the letter to it .Just find him all right ?Harry said stroking her back as he carried her on his arm to one of the holes in the wall .Before the dementors do .She nipped his finger perhaps rather harder than she would ordinarily have done but hooted softly in a reassuring sort of way all the same .Then she spread her wings and took off into the sunrise .Harry watched her fly out of sight with the familiar feeling of unease back in his stomach .He had been so sure that Siriuss reply would alleviate his worries rather than increasing them .That was a lie Harry said Hermione sharply over breakfast when he told her and Ron what he had done .You didnt imagine your scar hurting and you know it .So what ?said Harry .Hes not going back to Azkaban because of me .Drop it said Ron sharply to Hermione as she opened her mouth to argue some more and for once Hermione heeded him and fell silent .Harry did his best not to worry about Sirius over the next couple of weeks .True he could not stop himself from looking anxiously around every morning when the post owls arrived nor late at night before he went to sleep prevent himself from seeing horrible visions of Sirius cornered by dementors down some dark London street but betweentimes he tried to keep his mind off his godfather .He wished he still had Quidditch to distract him nothing worked so well on a troubled mind as a good hard training session .On the other hand their lessons were becoming more difficult and demanding than ever before particularly Moodys Defense Against the Dark Arts .To their surprise Professor Moody had announced that he would be putting the Imperius Curse on each of them in turn to demonstrate its power and to see whether they could resist its effects .But but you said its illegal Professor said Hermione uncertainly as Moody cleared away the desks with a sweep of his wand leaving a large clear space in the middle of the room .You said to use it against another human was Dumbledore wants you taught what it feels like said Moody his magical eye swiveling onto Hermione and fixing her with an eerie unblinking stare .If youd rather learn the hard way when someones putting it on you so they can control you completely fine by me .Youre excused .Off you go .He pointed one gnarled finger toward the door .Hermione went very pink and muttered something about not meaning that she wanted to leave .Harry and Ron grinned at each other .They knew Hermione would rather eat bubotuber pus than miss such an important lesson .Moody began to beckon students forward in turn and put the Imperius Curse upon them .Harry watched as one by one his classmates did the most extraordinary things under its influence .Dean Thomas hopped three times around the room singing the national anthem .Lavender Brown imitated a squirrel .Neville performed a series of quite astonishing gymnastics he would certainly not have been capable of in his normal state .Not one of them seemed to be able to fight off the curse and each of them recovered only when Moody had removed it .Potter Moody growled you next .Harry moved forward into the middle of the classroom into the space that Moody had cleared of desks .Moody raised his wand pointed it at Harry and said Imperio It was the most wonderful feeling .Harry felt a floating sensation as every thought and worry in his head was wiped gently away leaving nothing but a vague untraceable happiness .He stood there feeling immensely relaxed only dimly aware of everyone watching him .And then he heard MadEye Moodys voice echoing in some distant chamber of his empty brain Jump onto the desk .jump onto the desk .Harry bent his knees obediently preparing to spring .Jump onto the desk .Why though ?Another voice had awoken in the back of his brain .Stupid thing to do really said the voice .Jump onto the desk .No I dont think I will thanks said the other voice a little more firmly .no I dont really want to .Jump NOW The next thing Harry felt was considerable pain .He had both jumped and tried to prevent himself from jumping the result was that hed smashed headlong into the desk knocking it over and by the feeling in his legs fractured both his kneecaps .Now thats more like it !growled Moodys voice and suddenly Harry felt the empty echoing feeling in his head disappear .He remembered exactly what was happening and the pain in his knees seemed to double .Look at that you lot .Potter fought !He fought it and he damn near beat it !Well try that again Potter and the rest of you pay attention watch his eyes thats where you see it very good Potter very good indeed !Theyll have trouble controlling you !The way he talks Harry muttered as he hobbled out of the Defense Against the Dark Arts class an hour later Moody had insisted on putting Harry through his paces four times in a row until Harry could throw off the curse entirely youd think we were all going to be attacked any second .Yeah I know said Ron who was skipping on every alternate step .He had had much more difficulty with the curse than Harry though Moody assured him the effects would wear off by lunchtime .Talk about paranoid .Ron glanced nervously over his shoulder to check that Moody was definitely out of earshot and went on .No wonder they were glad to get shot of him at the Ministry .Did you hear him telling Seamus what he did to that witch who shouted ‘Boo behind him on April Fools Day ?And when are we supposed to read up on resisting the Imperius Curse with everything else weve got to do ?All the fourth years had noticed a definite increase in the amount of work they were required to do this term .Professor McGonagall explained why when the class gave a particularly loud groan at the amount of Transfiguration homework she had assigned .You are now entering a most important phase of your magical education !she told them her eyes glinting dangerously behind her square spectacles .Your Ordinary Wizarding Levels are drawing closer We dont take O .W .L .s till fifth year !said Dean Thomas indignantly .Maybe not Thomas but believe me you need all the preparation you can get !Miss Granger remains the only person in this class who has managed to turn a hedgehog into a satisfactory pincushion .I might remind you that your pincushion Thomas still curls up in fright if anyone approaches it with a pin !Hermione who had turned rather pink again seemed to be trying not to look too pleased with herself .Harry and Ron were deeply amused when Professor Trelawney told them that they had received top marks for their homework in their next Divination class .She read out large portions of their predictions commending them for their unflinching acceptance of the horrors in store for them but they were less amused when she asked them to do the same thing for the month after next both of them were running out of ideas for catastrophes .Meanwhile Professor Binns the ghost who taught History of Magic had them writing weekly essays on the goblin rebellions of the eighteenth century .Professor Snape was forcing them to research antidotes .They took this one seriously as he had hinted that he might be poisoning one of them before Christmas to see if their antidote worked .Professor Flitwick had asked them to read three extra books in preparation for their lesson on Summoning Charms .Even Hagrid was adding to their workload .The Blast Ended Skrewts were growing at a remarkable pace given that nobody had yet discovered what they ate .Hagrid was delighted and as part of their project suggested that they come down to his hut on alternate evenings to observe the skrewts and make notes on their extraordinary behavior .I will not said Draco Malfoy flatly when Hagrid had proposed this with the air of Father Christmas pulling an extra large toy out of his sack .I see enough of these foul things during lessons thanks .Hagrid s smile faded off his face .Yehll do whayer told he growled or Ill be takin a leaf outta Professor Moodys book .I hear yeh made a good ferret Malfoy .The Gryffindors roared with laughter .Malfoy flushed with anger but apparently the memory of Moodys punishment was still sufficiently painful to stop him from retorting .Harry Ron and Hermione returned to the castle at the end of the lesson in high spirits seeing Hagrid put down Malfoy was particularly satisfying especially because Malfoy had done his very best to get Hagrid sacked the previous year .When they arrived in the entrance hall they found themselves unable to proceed owing to the large crowd of students congregated there all milling around a large sign that had been erected at the foot of the marble staircase .Ron the tallest of the three stood on tiptoe to see over the heads in front of them and read the sign aloud to the other two TRIWIZARD TOURNAMENT The delegations from Beauxbatons and Durmstrang will be arriving at 6 oclock on Friday the 30th of October .Lessons will end half an hour early Brilliant !said Harry .Its Potions last thing on Friday !Snape wont have time to poison us all !Students will return their bags and books to their dormitories and assemble in front of the castle to greet our guests before the Welcoming Feast .Only a week away !said Ernie Macmillan of Hufflepuff emerging from the crowd his eyes gleaming .I wonder if Cedric knows ?Think 111 go and tell him .Cedric ?said Ron blankly as Ernie hurried off .Diggory said Harry .He must be entering the tournament .That idiot Hogwarts champion ?said Ron as they pushed their way through the chattering crowd toward the staircase .Hes not an idiot .You just dont like him because he beat Gryffindor at Quidditch said Hermione .Ive heard hes a really good student and hes a prefect .She spoke as though this settled the matter .You only like him because hes handsome said Ron scathingly .Excuse me I dont like people just because theyre handsome !said Hermione indignantly .Ron gave a loud false cough which sounded oddly like Lockhart The appearance of the sign in the entrance hall had a marked effect upon the inhabitants of the castle .During the following week there seemed to be only one topic of conversation no matter where Harry went the Triwizard Tournament .Rumors were flying from student to student like highly contagious germs who was going to try for Hogwarts champion what the tournament would involve how the students from Beauxbatons and Durmstrang differed from themselves .Harry noticed too that the castle seemed to be undergoing an extrathorough cleaning .Several grimy portraits had been scrubbed much to the displeasure of their subjects who sat huddled in their frames muttering darkly and wincing as they felt their raw pink faces .The suits of armor were suddenly gleaming and moving without squeaking and Argus Filch the caretaker was behaving so ferociously to any students who forgot to wipe their shoes that he terrified a pair of firstyear girls into hysterics .Other members of the staff seemed oddly tense too .Longbottom kindly do not reveal that you cant even perform a simple Switching Spell in front of anyone from Durmstrang !Professor McGonagall barked at the end of one particularly difficult lesson during which Neville had accidentally transplanted his own ears onto a cactus .When they went down to breakfast on the morning of the thirtieth of October they found that the Great Hall had been decorated overnight .Enormous silk banners hung from the walls each of them representing a Hogwarts House red with a gold lion for Gryffindor blue with a bronze eagle for Ravenclaw yellow with a black badger for Hufflepuff and green with a silver serpent for Slytherin .Behind the teachers table the largest banner of all bore the Hogwarts coat of arms lion eagle badger and snake united around a large letter H .Harry Ron and Hermione sat down beside Fred and George at the Gryffindor table .Once again and most unusually they were sitting apart from everyone else and conversing in low voices .Ron led the way over to them .Its a bummer all right George was saying gloomily to Fred .But if he wont talk to us in person well have to send him the letter after all .Or well stuff it into his hand .He cant avoid us forever .Whos avoiding you ?said Ron sitting down next to them .Wish you would said Fred looking irritated at the interruption .Whats a bummer ?Ron asked George .Having a nosy git like you for a brother said George .You two got any ideas on the Triwizard Tournament yet ?Harry asked .Thought any more about trying to enter ?I asked McGonagall how the champions are chosen but she wasnt telling said George bitterly .She just told me to shut up and get on with transfiguring my raccoon .Wonder what the tasks are going to be ?said Ron thoughtfully .You know I bet we could do them Harry .Weve done dangerous stuff before .Not in front of a panel of judges you havent said Fred .McGonagall says the champions get awarded points according to how well theyve done the tasks .Who are the judges ?Harry asked .Well the Heads of the participating schools are always on the panel said Hermione and everyone looked around at her rather surprised because all three of them were injured during the Tournament of 1792 when a cockatrice the champions were supposed to be catching went on the rampage .She noticed them all looking at her and said with her usual air of impatience that nobody else had read all the books she had Its all in Hogwarts A History .Though of course that books not entirely reliable .A Revised History of Hogwarts would be a more accurate title .Or A Highly Biased and Selective History of Hogwarts Which Glosses Over the Nastier Aspects of the School .What are you on about ?said Ron though Harry thought he knew what was coming .Houseelves said Hermione her eyes flashing .Not once in over a thousand pages does Hogwarts A History mention that we are all colluding in the oppression of a hundred slaves !Harry shook his head and applied himself to his scrambled eggs .His and Rons lack of enthusiasm had done nothing whatsoever to curb Hermione s determination to pursue justice for houseelves .True both of them had paid two Sickles for a S .P .E .W .badge but they had only done it to keep her quiet .Their Sickles had been wasted however if anything they seemed to have made Hermione more vociferous .She had been badgering Harry and Ron ever since first to wear the badges then to persuade others to do the same and she had also taken to rattling around the Gryffindor common room every evening cornering people and shaking the collecting tin under their noses .You do realize that your sheets are changed your fires lit your classrooms cleaned and your food cooked by a group of magical creatures who are unpaid and enslaved ?she kept saying fiercely .Some people like Neville had paid up just to stop Hermione from glowering at them .A few seemed mildly interested in what she had to say but were reluctant to take a more active role in campaigning .Many regarded the whole thing as a joke .Ron now rolled his eyes at the ceiling which was flooding them all in autumn sunlight and Fred became extremely interested in his bacon both twins had refused to buy a S .P .E .W .badge .George however leaned in toward Hermione .Listen have you ever been down in the kitchens Hermione ?No of course not said Hermione curtly I hardly think students are supposed to Well we have said George indicating Fred loads of times to nick food .And weve met them and theyre happy .They think theyve got the best job in the world Thats because theyre uneducated and brainwashed !Hermione began hotly but her next few words were drowned out by the sudden whooshing noise from overhead which announced the arrival of the post owls .Harry looked up at once and saw Hedwig soaring toward him .Hermione stopped talking abruptly she and Ron watched Hedwig anxiously as she fluttered down onto Harrys shoulder folded her wings and held out her leg wearily .Harry pulled off Siriuss reply and offered Hedwig his bacon rinds which she ate gratefully .Then checking that Fred and George were safely immersed in further discussions about the Triwizard Tournament Harry read out Siriuss letter in a whisper to Ron and Hermione .Nice try Harry .Im back in the country and well hidden .I want you to keep me posted on everything thats going on at Hog warts .Dont use Hedwig keep changing owls and dont worry about me just watch out for yourself .Dont forget what I said about your scar .Sirius Why dyou have to keep changing owls ?Ron asked in a low voice .Hedwigll attract too much attention said Hermione at once .She stands out .A snowy owl that keeps returning to wherever hes hiding .I mean theyre not native birds are they ?Harry rolled up the letter and slipped it inside his robes wondering whether he felt more or less worried than before .He supposed that Sirius managing to get back without being caught was something .He couldnt deny either that the idea that Sirius was much nearer was reassuring at least he wouldnt have to wait so long for a response every time he wrote .Thanks Hedwig he said stroking her .She hooted sleepily dipped her beak briefly into his goblet of orange juice then took off again clearly desperate for a good long sleep in the Owlery .There was a pleasant feeling of anticipation in the air that day .Nobody was very attentive in lessons being much more interested in the arrival that evening of the people from Beauxbatons and Durmstrang even Potions was more bearable than usual as it was half an hour shorter .When the bell rang early Harry Ron and Hermione hurried up to Gryffindor Tower deposited their bags and books as they had been instructed pulled on their cloaks and rushed back downstairs into the entrance hall .The Heads of Houses were ordering their students into lines .Weasley straighten your hat Professor McGonagall snapped at Ron .Miss Patil take that ridiculous thing out of your hair .Parvati scowled and removed a large ornamental butterfly from the end of her plait .Follow me please said Professor McGonagall .First years in front .no pushing .They filed down the steps and lined up in front of the castle .It was a cold clear evening dusk was falling and a pale transparentlooking moon was already shining over the Forbidden Forest .Harry standing between Ron and Hermione in the fourth row from the front saw Dennis Creevey positively shivering with anticipation among the other first years .Nearly six said Ron checking his watch and then staring down the drive that led to the front gates .How dyou reckon theyre coming ?The train ?I doubt it said Hermione .How then ?Broomsticks ?Harry suggested looking up at the starry sky .I dont think so .not from that far away .A Portkey ?Ron suggested .Or they could Apparate maybe youre allowed to do it under seventeen wherever they come from ?You cant Apparate inside the Hogwarts grounds how often do I have to tell you ?said Hermione impatiently .They scanned the darkening grounds excitedly but nothing was moving everything was still silent and quite as usual .Harry was starting to feel cold .He wished theyd hurry up .Maybe the foreign students were preparing a dramatic entrance .He remembered what Mr Weasley had said back at the campsite before the Quidditch World Cup always the same we cant resist showing off when we get together .And then Dumbledore called out from the back row where he stood with the other teachers Aha !Unless I am very much mistaken the delegation from Beauxbatons approaches !Where ?said many students eagerly all looking in different directions .There !yelled a sixth year pointing over the forest .Something large much larger than a broomstick or indeed a hundred broomsticks was hurtling across the deep blue sky toward the castle growing larger all the time .Its a dragon !shrieked one of the first years losing her head completely .Dont be stupid .its a flying house !said Dennis Creevey .Denniss guess was closer .As the gigantic black shape skimmed over the treetops of the Forbidden Forest and the lights shining from the castle windows hit it they saw a gigantic powderblue horsedrawn carriage the size of a large house soaring toward them pulled through the air by a dozen winged horses all palominos and each the size of an elephant .The front three rows of students drew backward as the carriage hurtled ever lower coming in to land at a tremendous speed then with an almighty crash that made Neville jump backward onto a Slytherin fifth years foot the horses hooves larger than dinner plates hit the ground .A second later the carriage landed too bouncing upon its vast wheels while the golden horses tossed their enormous heads and rolled large fiery red eyes .Harry just had time to see that the door of the carriage bore a coat of arms two crossed golden wands each emitting three stars before it opened .A boy in pale blue robes jumped down from the carriage bent forward fumbled for a moment with something on the carriage floor and unfolded a set of golden steps .He sprang back respectfully .Then Harry saw a shining highheeled black shoe emerging from the inside of the carriage a shoe the size of a childs sled followed almost immediately by the largest woman he had ever seen in his life .The size of the carriage and of the horses was immediately explained .A few people gasped .Harry had only ever seen one person as large as this woman in his life and that was Hagrid he doubted whether there was an inch difference in their heights .Yet somehow maybe simply because he was used to Hagrid this woman now at the foot of the steps and looking around at the waiting wideeyed crowd seemed even more unnaturally large .As she stepped into the light flooding from the entrance hall she was revealed to have a handsome oliveskinned face large black liquidlooking eyes and a rather beaky nose .Her hair was drawn back in a shining knob at the base of her neck .She was dressed from head to foot in black satin and many magnificent opals gleamed at her throat and on her thick fingers .Dumbledore started to clap the students following his lead broke into applause too many of them standing on tiptoe the better to look at this woman .Her face relaxed into a gracious smile and she walked forward toward Dumbledore extending a glittering hand .Dumbledore though tall himself had barely to bend to kiss it .My dear Madame Maxime he said .Welcome to Hogwarts .Dumblydorr said Madame Maxime in a deep voice .I ope I find you well ?In excellent form I thank you said Dumbledore .My pupils said Madame Maxime waving one of her enormous hands carelessly behind her .Harry whose attention had been focused completely upon Madame Maxime now noticed that about a dozen boys and girls all by the look of them in their late teens had emerged from the carriage and were now standing behind Madame Maxime .They were shivering which was unsurprising given that their robes seemed to be made of fine silk and none of them were wearing cloaks .A few had wrapped scarves and shawls around their heads .From what Harry could see of them they were standing in Madame Maxime s enormous shadow they were staring up at Hogwarts with apprehensive looks on their faces .As Karkaroff arrived yet ?Madame Maxime asked .He should be here any moment said Dumbledore .Would you like to wait here and greet him or would you prefer to step inside and warm up a trifle ?Warm up I think said Madame Maxime .But ze orses Our Care of Magical Creatures teacher will be delighted to take care of them said Dumbledore the moment he has returned from dealing with a slight situation that has arisen with some of his other er charges .Skrewts Ron muttered to Harry grinning .My steeds require er forceful andling said Madame Maxime looking as though she doubted whether any Care of Magical Creatures teacher at Hogwarts could be up to the job .Zey are very strong .I assure you that Hagrid will be well up to the job said Dumbledore smiling .Very well said Madame Maxime bowing slightly .Will you please inform zis Agrid zat ze orses drink only singlemalt whiskey ?It will be attended to said Dumbledore also bowing .Come said Madame Maxime imperiously to her students and the Hogwarts crowd parted to allow her and her students to pass up the stone steps .How big dyou reckon Durmstrangs horses are going to be ?Seamus Finnigan said leaning around Lavender and Parvati to address Harry and Ron .Well if theyre any bigger than this lot even Hagrid wont be able to handle them said Harry .Thats if he hasnt been attacked by his skrewts .Wonder whats up with them ?Maybe theyve escaped said Ron hopefully .Oh dont say that said Hermione with a shudder .Imagine that lot loose on the grounds .They stood shivering slightly now waiting for the Durmstrang party to arrive .Most people were gazing hopefully up at the sky .For a few minutes the silence was broken only by Madame Maximes huge horses snorting and stamping .But then Can you hear something ?said Ron suddenly .Harry listened a loud and oddly eerie noise was drifting toward them from out of the darkness a muffled rumbling and sucking sound as though an immense vacuum cleaner were moving along a riverbed .The lake !yelled Lee Jordan pointing down at it .Look at the lake !From their position at the top of the lawns overlooking the grounds they had a clear view of the smooth black surface of the water except that the surface was suddenly not smooth at all .Some disturbance was taking place deep in the center great bubbles were forming on the surface waves were now washing over the muddy banks and then out in the very middle of the lake a whirlpool appeared as if a giant plug had just been pulled out of the lakes floor .What seemed to be a long black pole began to rise slowly out of the heart of the whirlpool .and then Harry saw the rigging .Its a mast !he said to Ron and Hermione .Slowly magnificently the ship rose out of the water gleaming in the moonlight .It had a strangely skeletal look about it as though it were a resurrected wreck and the dim misty lights shimmering at its portholes looked like ghostly eyes .Finally with a great sloshing noise the ship emerged entirely bobbing on the turbulent water and began to glide toward the bank .A few moments later they heard the splash of an anchor being thrown down in the shallows and the thud of a plank being lowered onto the bank .People were disembarking they could see their silhouettes passing the lights in the ships portholes .All of them Harry noticed seemed to be built along the lines of Crabbe and Goyle .but then as they drew nearer walking up the lawns into the light streaming from the entrance hall he saw that their bulk was really due to the fact that they were wearing cloaks of some kind of shaggy matted fur .But the man who was leading them up to the castle was wearing furs of a different sort sleek and silver like his hair .Dumbledore !he called heartily as he walked up the slope .How are you my dear fellow how are you ?Blooming thank you Professor Karkaroff Dumbledore replied .Karkaroff had a fruity unctuous voice when he stepped into the light pouring from the front doors of the castle they saw that he was tall and thin like Dumbledore but his white hair was short and his goatee finishing in a small curl did not entirely hide his rather weak chin .When he reached Dumbledore he shook hands with both of his own .Dear old Hogwarts he said looking up at the castle and smiling his teeth were rather yellow and Harry noticed that his smile did not extend to his eyes which remained cold and shrewd .How good it is to be here how good .Viktor come along into the warmth .you dont mind Dumbledore ?Viktor has a slight head cold .Karkaroff beckoned forward one of his students .As the boy passed Harry caught a glimpse of a prominent curved nose and thick black eyebrows .He didnt need the punch on the arm Ron gave him or the hiss in his ear to recognize that profile .Harry its Krum tfyfflapier l6 THE GOBLET OF FIRE I dont believe it !Ron said in a stunned voice as the Hogwarts students filed back up the steps behind the party from Durmstrang .Krum Harry !Viktor Kruml For heavens sake Ron hes only a Quidditch player said Hermione .Only a Quidditch player ?Ron said looking at her as though he couldnt believe his ears .Hermione hes one of the best Seekers in the world !I had no idea he was still at school !As they recrossed the entrance hall with the rest of the Hogwarts students heading for the Great Hall Harry saw Lee Jordan jumping up and down on the soles of his feet to get a better look at the back of Krums head .Several sixthyear girls were frantically searching their pockets as they walked Oh I dont believe it I havent got a single quill on me ?Dyou think hed sign my hat in lipstick ?Really Hermione said loftily as they passed the girls now squabbling over the lipstick .Im getting his autograph if I can said Ron .You havent got a quill have you Harry ?Nope theyre upstairs in my bag said Harry .They walked over to the Gryffindor table and sat down .Ron took care to sit on the side facing the doorway because Krum and his fellow Durmstrang students were still gathered around it apparently unsure about where they should sit .The students from Beauxbatons had chosen seats at the Ravenclaw table .They were looking around the Great Hall with glum expressions on their faces .Three of them were still clutching scarves and shawls around their heads .Its not that cold said Hermione defensively .Why didnt they bring cloaks ?Over here !Come and sit over here !Ron hissed .Over here !Hermione budge up make a space What ?Too late said Ron bitterly .Viktor Krum and his fellow Durmstrang students had settled themselves at the Slytherin table .Harry could see Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle looking very smug about this .As he watched Malfoy bent forward to speak to Krum .Yeah thats right smarm up to him Malfoy said Ron scathingly .I bet Krum can see right through him though .bet he gets people fawning over him all the time .Where dyou reckon theyre going to sleep ?We could offer him a space in our dormitory Harry .I wouldnt mind giving him my bed I could kip on a camp bed .Hermione snorted .They look a lot happier than the Beauxbatons lot said Harry .The Durmstrang students were pulling off their heavy furs and looking up at the starry black ceiling with expressions of interest a couple of them were picking up the golden plates and goblets and examining them apparently impressed .Up at the staff table Filch the caretaker was adding chairs .He was wearing his moldy old tailcoat in honor of the occasion .Harry was surprised to see that he added four chairs two on either side of Dumbledores .But there are only two extra people Harry said .Whys Filch putting out four chairs who else is coming ?Eh ?said Ron vaguely .He was still staring avidly at Krum .When all the students had entered the Hall and settled down at their House tables the staff entered filing up to the top table and taking their seats .Last in line were Professor Dumbledore Professor Karkaroff and Madame Maxime .When their headmistress appeared the pupils from Beauxbatons leapt to their feet .A few of the Hogwarts students laughed .The Beauxbatons party appeared quite unembarrassed however and did not resume their seats until Madame Maxime had sat down on Dumbledore s lefthand side .Dumbledore remained standing and a silence fell over the Great Hall .Good evening ladies and gentlemen ghosts and most particularly guests said Dumbledore beaming around at the foreign students .I have great pleasure in welcoming you all to Hogwarts .I hope and trust that your stay here will be both comfortable and enjoyable .One of the Beauxbatons girls still clutching a muffler around her head gave what was unmistakably a derisive laugh .No ones making you stay !Hermione whispered bristling at her .The tournament will be officially opened at the end of the feast said Dumbledore .I now invite you all to eat drink and make yourselves at home !He sat down and Harry saw Karkaroff lean forward at once and engage him in conversation .The plates in front of them filled with food as usual .The houseelves in the kitchen seemed to have pulled out all the stops there was a greater variety of dishes in front of them than Harry had ever seen including several that were definitely foreign .Whats that ?said Ron pointing at a large dish of some sort of shellfish stew that stood beside a large steakandkidney pudding .Bouillabaisse said Hermione .Bless you said Ron .Its French said Hermione I had it on holiday summer before last .Its very nice .Ill take your word for it said Ron helping himself to black pudding .The Great Hall seemed somehow much more crowded than usual even though there were barely twenty additional students there perhaps it was because their differently colored uniforms stood out so clearly against the black of the Hogwarts robes .Now that they had removed their furs the Durmstrang students were revealed to be wearing robes of a deep bloodred .Hagrid sidled into the Hall through a door behind the staff table twenty minutes after the start of the feast .He slid into his seat at the end and waved at Harry Ron and Hermione with a very heavily bandaged hand .Skrewts doing all right Hagrid ?Harry called .Thrivin Hagrid called back happily .Yeah Ill just bet they are said Ron quietly .Looks like theyve finally found a food they like doesnt it ?Hagrid s fingers .At that moment a voice said Excuse me are you wanting ze bouillabaisse ?It was the girl from Beauxbatons who had laughed during Dumbledores speech .She had finally removed her muffler .A long sheet of silveryblonde hair fell almost to her waist .She had large deep blue eyes and very white even teeth .Ron went purple .He stared up at her opened his mouth to reply but nothing came out except a faint gurgling noise .Yeah have it said Harry pushing the dish toward the girl .You ave finished wiz it ?Yeah Ron said breathlessly .Yeah it was excellent .The girl picked up the dish and carried it carefully off to the Ravenclaw table .Ron was still goggling at the girl as though he had never seen one before .Harry started to laugh .The sound seemed to jog Ron back to his senses .Shes a veelcd he said hoarsely to Harry .Of course she isnt !said Hermione tartly .I dont see anyone else gaping at her like an idiot !But she wasnt entirely right about that .As the girl crossed the Hall many boys heads turned and some of them seemed to have become temporarily speechless just like Ron .Im telling you thats not a normal girl !said Ron leaning sideways so he could keep a clear view of her .They dont make them like that at Hogwarts !They make them okay at Hogwarts said Harry without thinking .Cho happened to be sitting only a few places away from the girl with the silvery hair .When youve both put your eyes back in said Hermione briskly youll be able to see whos just arrived .She was pointing up at the staff table .The two remaining empty seats had just been filled .Ludo Bagman was now sitting on Professor Karkaroffs other side while Mr Crouch Percys boss was next to Madame Maxime .What are they doing here ?said Harry in surprise .They organized the Triwizard Tournament didnt they ?said Hermione .I suppose they wanted to be here to see it start .When the second course arrived they noticed a number of unfamiliar desserts too .Ron examined an odd sort of pale blancmange closely then moved it carefully a few inches to his right so that it would be clearly visible from the Ravenclaw table .The girl who looked like a veela appeared to have eaten enough however and did not come over to get it .Once the golden plates had been wiped clean Dumbledore stood up again .A pleasant sort of tension seemed to fill the Hall now .Harry felt a slight thrill of excitement wondering what was coming .Several seats down from them Fred and George were leaning forward staring at Dumbledore with great concentration .The moment has come said Dumbledore smiling around at the sea of upturned faces .The Triwizard Tournament is about to start .I would like to say a few words of explanation before we bring in the casket The what ?Harry muttered .Ron shrugged .just to clarify the procedure that we will be following this year .But first let me introduce for those who do not know them Mr Bartemius Crouch Head of the Department of International Magical Cooperation there was a smattering of polite applause and Mr Ludo Bagman Head of the Department of Magical Games and Sports .There was a much louder round of applause for Bagman than for Crouch perhaps because of his fame as a Beater or simply because he looked so much more likable .He acknowledged it with a jovial wave of his hand .Bartemius Crouch did not smile or wave when his name was announced .Remembering him in his neat suit at the Quidditch World Cup Harry thought he looked strange in wizards robes .His toothbrush mustache and severe parting looked very odd next to Dumbledores long white hair and beard .Mr Bagman and Mr Crouch have worked tirelessly over the last few months on the arrangements for the Triwizard Tournament Dumbledore continued and they will be joining myself Professor Karkaroff and Madame Maxime on the panel that will judge the champions efforts .At the mention of the word champions the attentiveness of the listening students seemed to sharpen .Perhaps Dumbledore had noticed their sudden stillness for he smiled as he said The casket then if you please Mr Filch .Filch who had been lurking unnoticed in a far corner of the Hall now approached Dumbledore carrying a great wooden chest encrusted with jewels .It looked extremely old .A murmur of excited interest rose from the watching students Dennis Creevey actually stood on his chair to see it properly but being so tiny his head hardly rose above anyone elses .The instructions for the tasks the champions will face this year have already been examined by Mr Crouch and Mr Bagman said Dumbledore as Filch placed the chest carefully on the table before him and they have made the necessary arrangements for each challenge .There will be three tasks spaced throughout the school year and they will test the champions in many different ways .their magical prowess their daring their powers of deduction and of course their ability to cope with danger .At this last word the Hall was filled with a silence so absolute that nobody seemed to be breathing .As you know three champions compete in the tournament Dumbledore went on calmly one from each of the participating schools .They will be marked on how well they perform each of the Tournament tasks and the champion with the highest total after task three will win the Triwizard Cup .The champions will be chosen by an impartial selector the Goblet of Fire .Dumbledore now took out his wand and tapped three times upon the top of the casket .The lid creaked slowly open .Dumbledore reached inside it and pulled out a large roughly hewn wooden cup .It would have been entirely unremarkable had it not been full to the brim with dancing bluewhite flames .Dumbledore closed the casket and placed the goblet carefully on top of it where it would be clearly visible to everyone in the Hall .Anybody wishing to submit themselves as champion must write their name and school clearly upon a slip of parchment and drop it into the goblet said Dumbledore .Aspiring champions have twentyfour hours in which to put their names forward .Tomorrow night Halloween the goblet will return the names of the three it has judged most worthy to represent their schools .The goblet will be placed in the entrance hall tonight where it will be freely accessible to all those wishing to compete .To ensure that no underage student yields to temptation said Dumbledore I will be drawing an Age Line around the Goblet of Fire once it has been placed in the entrance hall .Nobody under the age of seventeen will be able to cross this line .Finally I wish to impress upon any of you wishing to compete that this tournament is not to be entered into lightly .Once a champion has been selected by the Goblet of Fire he or she is obliged to see the tournament through to the end .The placing of your name in the goblet constitutes a binding magical contract .There can be no change of heart once you have become a champion .Please be very sure therefore that you are wholeheartedly prepared to play before you drop your name into the goblet .Now I think it is time for bed .Good night to you all .An Age Line !Fred Weasley said his eyes glinting as they all made their way across the Hall to the doors into the entrance hall .Well that should be fooled by an Aging Potion shouldnt it ?And once your names in that goblet youre laughing it cant tell whether youre seventeen or not !But I dont think anyone under seventeen will stand a chance said Hermione we just havent learned enough .Speak for yourself said George shortly .Youll try and get in wont you Harry ?Harry thought briefly of Dumbledore s insistence that nobody under seventeen should submit their name but then the wonderful picture of himself winning the Triwizard Tournament filled his mind again .He wondered how angry Dumbledore would be if someone younger than seventeen did find a way to get over the Age Line .Where is he ?said Ron who wasnt listening to a word of this conversation but looking through the crowd to see what had become of Krum .Dumbledore didnt say where the Durmstrang people are sleeping did he ?But this query was answered almost instantly they were level with the Slytherin table now and Karkaroff had just bustled up to his students .Back to the ship then he was saying .Viktor how are you feeling ?Did you eat enough ?Should I send for some mulled wine from the kitchens ?Harry saw Krum shake his head as he pulled his furs back on .Professor I vood like some vine said one of the other Durmstrang boys hopefully .I wasnt offering it to you Poliakoff snapped Karkaroff his warmly paternal air vanishing in an instant .I notice you have dribbled food all down the front of your robes again disgusting boy Karkaroff turned and led his students toward the doors reaching them at exactly the same moment as Harry Ron and Hermione .Harry stopped to let him walk through first .Thank you said Karkaroff carelessly glancing at him .And then Karkaroff froze .He turned his head back to Harry and stared at him as though he couldnt believe his eyes .Behind their headmaster the students from Durmstrang came to a halt too .Karkaroff s eyes moved slowly up Harrys face and fixed upon his scar .The Durmstrang students were staring curiously at Harry too .Out of the corner of his eye Harry saw comprehension dawn on a few of their faces .The boy with food all down his front nudged the girl next to him and pointed openly at Harrys forehead .Yeah thats Harry Potter said a gvoice from behind them .Professor Karkaroff spun around .MadEye Moody was standing there leaning heavily on his staff his magical eye glaring unblinkingly at the Durmstrang headmaster .The color drained from Karkaroffs face as Harry watched .A terrible look of mingled fury and fear came over him .You !he said staring at Moody as though unsure he was really seeing him .Me said Moody grimly .And unless youve got anything to say to Potter Karkaroff you might want to move .Youre blocking the doorway .It was true half the students in the Hall were now waiting behind them looking over one anothers shoulders to see what was causing the holdup .Without another word Professor Karkaroff swept his students away with him .Moody watched him until he was out of sight his magical eye fixed upon his back a look of intense dislike upon his mutilated face .As the next day was Saturday most students would normally have breakfasted late .Harry Ron and Hermione however were not alone in rising much earlier than they usually did on weekends .When they went down into the entrance hall they saw about twenty people milling around it some of them eating toast all examining the Goblet of Fire .It had been placed in the center of the hall on the stool that normally bore the Sorting Hat .A thin golden line had been traced on the floor forming a circle ten feet around it in every direction .Anyone put their name in yet ?Ron asked a third year girl eagerly .All the Durmstrang lot she replied .But I havent seen anyone from Hogwarts yet .Bet some of them put it in last night after wed all gone to bed said Harry .I wouldve if it had been me .wouldnt have wanted everyone watching .What if the goblet just gobbed you right back out again ?Someone laughed behind Harry .Turning he saw Fred George and Lee Jordan hurrying down the staircase all three of them looking extremely excited .Done it Fred said in a triumphant whisper to Harry Ron and Hermione .Just taken it .What ?said Ron .The Aging Potion dung brains said Fred .One drop each said George rubbing his hands together with glee .We only need to be a few months older .Were going to split the thousand Galleons between the three of us if one of us wins said Lee grinning broadly .Im not sure this is going to work you know said Hermione warningly Im sure Dumbledore will have thought of this .Fred George and Lee ignored her .Ready ?Fred said to the other two quivering with excitement .Cmon then Ill go first Harry watched fascinated as Fred pulled a slip of parchment out of his pocket bearing the words Fred Weasley Hog warts .Fred walked right up to the edge of the line and stood there rocking on his toes like a diver preparing for a fiftyfoot drop .Then with the eyes of every person in the entrance hall upon him he took a great breath and stepped over the line .For a split second Harry thought it had worked George certainly thought so for he let out a yell of triumph and leapt after Fred but next moment there was a loud sizzling sound and both twins were hurled out of the golden circle as though they had been thrown by an invisible shotputter .They landed painfully ten feet away on the cold stone floor and to add insult to injury there was a loud popping noise and both of them sprouted identical long white beards .The entrance hall rang with laughter .Even Fred and George joined in once they had gotten to their feet and taken a good look at each others beards .I did warn you said a deep amused voice and everyone turned to see Professor Dumbledore coming out of the Great Hall .He surveyed Fred and George his eyes twinkling .I suggest you both go up to Madam Pomfrey .She is already tending to Miss Fawcett of Ravenclaw and Mr Summers of Hufflepuff both of whom decided to age themselves up a little too .Though I must say neither of their beards is anything like as fine as yours .Fred and George set off for the hospital wing accompanied by Lee who was howling with laughter and Harry Ron and Hermione also chortling went in to breakfast .The decorations in the Great Hall had changed this morning .As it was Halloween a cloud of live bats was fluttering around the enchanted ceiling while hundreds of carved pumpkins leered from every corner .Harry led the way over to Dean and Seamus who were discussing those Hogwarts students of seventeen or over who might be entering .Theres a rumor going around that Warrington got up early and put his name in Dean told Harry .That big bloke from Slytherin who looks like a sloth .Harry who had played Quidditch against Warrington shook his head in disgust .We cant have a Slytherin champion !And all the Hufflepuffs are talking about Diggory said Seamus contemptuously .But I wouldnt have thought hed have wanted to risk his good looks .Listen !said Hermione suddenly .People were cheering out in the entrance hall .They all swiveled around in their seats and saw Angelina Johnson coming into the Hall grinning in an embarrassed sort of way .A tall black girl who played Chaser on the Gryffindor Quidditch team Angelina came over to them sat down and said Well Ive done it !Just put my name in !Youre kidding !said Ron looking impressed .Are you seventeen then ?asked Harry .Course she is cant see a beard can you ?said Ron .I had my birthday last week said Angelina .Well Im glad someone from Gryffindors entering said Hermione .I really hope you get it Angelina !Thanks Hermione said Angelina smiling at her .Yeah better you than PrettyBoy Diggory said Seamus causing several Hufflepuffs passing their table to scowl heavily at him .Whatre we going to do today then ?Ron asked Harry and Hermione when they had finished breakfast and were leaving the Great Hall .We havent been down to visit Hagrid yet said Harry .Okay said Ron just as long as he doesnt ask us to donate a few fingers to the skrewts .A look of great excitement suddenly dawned on Hermione s face .Ive just realized I havent asked Hagrid to join S .P .E .W .yet !she said brightly .Wait for me will you while I nip upstairs and get the badges ?What is it with her ?said Ron exasperated as Hermione ran away up the marble staircase .Hey Ron said Harry suddenly .Its your friend .The students from Beauxbatons were coming through the front doors from the grounds among them the veelagirl .Those gathered around the Goblet of Fire stood back to let them pass watching eagerly .Madame Maxime entered the hall behind her students and organized them into a line .One by one the Beauxbatons students stepped across the Age Line and dropped their slips of parchment into the blue white flames .As each name entered the fire it turned briefly red and emitted sparks .What dyou reckonll happen to the ones who arent chosen ?Ron muttered to Harry as the veelagirl dropped her parchment into the Goblet of Fire .Reckon theyll go back to school or hang around to watch the tournament ?Dunno said Harry .Hang around I suppose .Madame Maximes staying to judge isnt she ?When all the Beauxbatons students had submitted their names Madame Maxime led them back out of the hall and out onto the grounds again .Where are they sleeping then ?said Ron moving toward the front doors and staring after them .A loud rattling noise behind them announced Hermiones reappearance with the box of S .P .E .W .badges .Oh good hurry up said Ron and he jumped down the stone steps keeping his eyes on the back of the veelagirl who was now halfway across the lawn with Madame Maxime .As they neared Hagrids cabin on the edge of the Forbidden Forest the mystery of the Beauxbatons sleeping quarters was solved .The gigantic powder blue carriage in which they had arrived had been parked two hundred yards from Hagrids front door and the students were climbing back inside it .The elephantine flying horses that had pulled the carriage were now grazing in a makeshift paddock alongside it .Harry knocked on Hagrids door and Fangs booming barks answered instantly Bout time !said Hagrid when hed flung open the door .Thought you lotd forgotten where I live !Weve been really busy Hag Hermione started to say but then she stopped dead looking up at Hagrid apparently lost for words .Hagrid was wearing his best and very horrible hairy brown suit plus a checked yellowandorange tie .This wasnt the worst of it though he had evidently tried to tame his hair using large quantities of what appeared to be axle grease .It was now slicked down into two bunches perhaps he had tried a ponytail like Bills but found he had too much hair .The look didnt really suit Hagrid at all .For a moment Hermione goggled at him then obviously deciding not to comment she said Erm where are the skrewts ?Out by the pumpkin patch said Hagrid happily .Theyre gettin massive mus be nearly three foot long now .Ony trouble is theyve started killin each other .Oh no really ?said Hermione shooting a repressive look at Ron who staring at Hagrids odd hairstyle had just opened his mouth to say something about it .Yeah said Hagrid sadly .S okay though Ive got em in separate boxes now .Still got abou twenty .Well thats lucky said Ron .Hagrid missed the sarcasm .Hagrids cabin comprised a single room in one corner of which was a gigantic bed covered in a patchwork quilt .A similarly enormous wooden table and chairs stood in front of the fire beneath the quantity of cured hams and dead birds hanging from the ceiling .They sat down at the table while Hagrid started to make tea and were soon immersed in yet more discussion of the Triwizard Tournament .Hagrid seemed quite as excited about it as they were .You wait he said grinning .You jus wait .Yer going ter see some stuff yehve never seen before .Firs task .ah but Im not supposed ter say .Go on Hagrid !Harry Ron and Hermione urged him but he just shook his head grinning .I don want ter spoil it fer yeh said Hagrid .But its gonna be spectacular Ill tell yeh that .Them champions re going ter have their work cut out .Never thought Id live ter see the Triwizard Tournament played again !They ended up having lunch with Hagrid though they didnt eat much Hagrid had made what he said was a beef casserole but after Hermione unearthed a large talon in hers she Harry and Ron rather lost their appetites .However they enjoyed themselves trying to make Hagrid tell them what the tasks in the tournament were going to be speculating which of the entrants were likely to be selected as champions and wondering whether Fred and George were beardless yet .A light rain had started to fall by midafternoon it was very cozy sitting by the fire listening to the gentle patter of the drops on the window watching Hagrid darning his socks and arguing with Hermione about houseelves for he flatly refused to join S .P .E .W .when she showed him her badges .Itd be doin em an unkindness Hermione he said gravely threading a massive bone needle with thick yellow yarn .Its in their nature ter look after humans thats what they like see ?Yehd be makin em unhappy ter take away their work an insultin em if yeh tried ter pay em .But Harry set Dobby free and he was over the moon about it !said Hermione .And we heard hes asking for wages now !Yeah well yeh get weirdos in every breed .Im not sayin there isnt the odd elf whod take freedom but yehll never persuade most of em ter do it no nothin doin Hermione .Hermione looked very cross indeed and stuffed her box of badges back into her cloak pocket .By half past five it was growing dark and Ron Harry and Hermione decided it was time to get back up to the castle for the Halloween feast and more important the announcement of the school champions .Ill come with yeh said Hagrid putting away his darning .Jus give us a sec .Hagrid got up went across to the chest of drawers beside his bed and began searching for something inside it .They didnt pay too much attention until a truly horrible smell reached their nostrils .Coughing Ron said Hagrid whats that ?Eh ?said Hagrid turning around with a large bottle in his hand .Don yeh like it ?Is that aftershave ?said Hermione in a slightly choked voice .Er eau de cologne Hagrid muttered .He was blushing .Maybe its a bit much he said gruffly .Ill go take it off hang on .He stumped out of the cabin and they saw him washing himself vigorously in the water barrel outside the window .Eau de cologne ?said Hermione in amazement .Hagrid ?And whats with the hair and the suit ?said Harry in an undertone .Look !said Ron suddenly pointing out of the window .Hagrid had just straightened up and turned round .If he had been blushing before it was nothing to what he was doing now .Getting to their feet very cautiously so that Hagrid wouldnt spot them Harry Ron and Hermione peered through the window and saw that Madame Maxime and the Beauxbatons students had just emerged from their carriage clearly about to set off for the feast too .They couldnt hear what Hagrid was saying but he was talking to Madame Maxime with a rapt mistyeyed expression Harry had only ever seen him wear once before when he had been looking at the baby dragon Norbert .Hes going up to the castle with her !said Hermione indignantly .I thought he was waiting for us !Without so much as a backward glance at his cabin Hagrid was trudging off up the grounds with Madame Maxime the Beauxbatons students following in their wake jogging to keep up with their enormous strides .He fancies her !said Ron incredulously .Well if they end up having children theyll be setting a world record bet any baby of theirs would weigh about a ton .They let themselves out of the cabin and shut the door behind them .It was surprisingly dark outside .Drawing their cloaks more closely around themselves they set off up the sloping lawns .Ooh its them look !Hermione whispered .The Durmstrang party was walking up toward the castle from the lake .Viktor Krum was walking side by side with Karkaroff and the other Durmstrang students were straggling along behind them .Ron watched Krum excitedly but Krum did not look around as he reached the front doors a little ahead of Hermione Ron and Harry and proceeded through them .When they entered the candlelit Great Hall it was almost full .The Goblet of Fire had been moved it was now standing in front of Dumbledore s empty chair at the teachers table .Fred and George cleanshaven again seemed to have taken their disappointment fairly well .Hope its Angelina said Fred as Harry Ron and Hermione sat down .So do I !said Hermione breathlessly .Well well soon know !The Halloween feast seemed to take much longer than usual .Perhaps because it was their second feast in two days Harry didnt seem to fancy the extravagantly prepared food as much as he would have normally .Like everyone else in the Hall judging by the constantly craning necks the impatient expressions on every face the fidgeting and the standing up to see whether Dumbledore had finished eating yet Harry simply wanted the plates to clear and to hear who had been selected as champions .At long last the golden plates returned to their original spotless state there was a sharp upswing in the level of noise within the Hall which died away almost instantly as Dumbledore got to his feet .On either side of him Professor Karkaroff and Madame Maxime looked as tense and expectant as anyone .Ludo Bagman was beaming and winking at various students .Mr Crouch however looked quite uninterested almost bored .Well the goblet is almost ready to make its decision said Dumbledore .I estimate that it requires one more minute .Now when the champions names are called I would ask them please to come up to the top of the Hall walk along the staff table and go through into the next chamber he indicated the door behind the staff table where they will be receiving their first instructions .He took out his wand and gave a great sweeping wave with it at once all the candles except those inside the carved pumpkins were extinguished plunging them into a state of semidarkness .The Goblet of Fire now shone more brightly than anything in the whole Hall the sparkling bright blueywhiteness of the flames almost painful on the eyes .Everyone watched waiting .A few people kept checking their watches .Any second Lee Jordan whispered two seats away from Harry .The flames inside the goblet turned suddenly red again .Sparks began to fly from it .Next moment a tongue of flame shot into the air a charred piece of parchment fluttered out of it the whole room gasped .Dumbledore caught the piece of parchment and held it at arms length so that he could read it by the light of the flames which had turned back to bluewhite .The champion for Durmstrang he read in a strong clear voice will be Viktor Krum .No surprises there !yelled Ron as a storm of applause and cheering swept the Hall .Harry saw Viktor Krum rise from the Slytherin table and slouch up toward Dumbledore he turned right walked along the staff table and disappeared through the door into the next chamber .Bravo Viktor !boomed Karkaroff so loudly that everyone could hear him even over all the applause .Knew you had it in you !The clapping and chatting died down .Now everyones attention was focused again on the goblet which seconds later turned red once more .A second piece of parchment shot out of it propelled by the flames .The champion for Beauxbatons said Dumbledore is Fleur Delacour !Its her Ron !Harry shouted as the girl who so resembled a veela got gracefully to her feet shook back her sheet of silvery blonde hair and swept up between the Ravenclaw and Hufflepuff tables .Oh look theyre all disappointed Hermione said over the noise nodding toward the remainder of the Beauxbatons party .Disappointed was a bit of an understatement Harry thought .Two of the girls who had not been selected had dissolved into tears and were sobbing with their heads on their arms .When Fleur Delacour too had vanished into the side chamber silence fell again but this time it was a silence so stiff with excitement you could almost taste it .The Hogwarts champion next .And the Goblet of Fire turned red once more sparks showered out of it the tongue of flame shot high into the air and from its tip Dumbledore pulled the third piece of parchment .The Hogwarts champion he called is Cedric Diggory !No !said Ron loudly but nobody heard him except Harry the uproar from the next table was too great .Every single Hufflepuff had jumped to his or her feet screaming and stamping as Cedric made his way past them grinning broadly and headed off toward the chamber behind the teachers table .Indeed the applause for Cedric went on so long that it was some time before Dumbledore could make himself heard again .Excellent !Dumbledore called happily as at last the tumult died down .Well we now have our three champions .I am sure I can count upon all of you including the remaining students from Beauxbatons and Durmstrang to give your champions every ounce of support you can muster .By cheering your champion on you will contribute in a very real But Dumbledore suddenly stopped speaking and it was apparent to everybody what had distracted him .The fire in the goblet had just turned red again .Sparks were flying out of it .A long flame shot suddenly into the air and borne upon it was another piece of parchment .Automatically it seemed Dumbledore reached out a long hand and seized the parchment .He held it out and stared at the name written upon it .There was a long pause during which Dumbledore stared at the slip in his hands and everyone in the room stared at Dumbledore .And then Dumbledore cleared his throat and read out Harry Potter .THE FOUR CHAMPIONS Harry sat there aware that every head in the Great Hall had turned to look at him .He was stunned .He felt numb .He was surely dreaming .He had not heard correctly .There was no applause .A buzzing as though of angry bees was starting to fill the Hall some students were standing up to get a better look at Harry as he sat frozen in his seat .Up at the top table Professor McGonagall had got to her feet and swept past Ludo Bagman and Professor Karkaroff to whisper urgently to Professor Dumbledore who bent his ear toward her frowning slightly .Harry turned to Ron and Hermione beyond them he saw the long Gryffindor table all watching him openmouthed .I didnt put my name in Harry said blankly .You know I didnt .Both of them stared just as blankly back .At the top table Professor Dumbledore had straightened up nodding to Professor McGonagall .Harry Potter !he called again .Harry !Up here if you please !Go on Hermione whispered giving Harry a slight push .Harry got to his feet trod on the hem of his robes and stumbled slightly .He set off up the gap between the Gryffindor and Hufflepuff tables .It felt like an immensely long walk the top table didnt seem to be getting any nearer at all and he could feel hundreds and hundreds of eyes upon him as though each were a searchlight .The buzzing grew louder and louder .After what seemed like an hour he was right in front of Dumbledore feeling the stares of all the teachers upon him .Well .through the door Harry said Dumbledore .He wasnt smiling .Harry moved off along the teachers table .Hagrid was seated right at the end .He did not wink at Harry or wave or give any of his usual signs of greeting .He looked completely astonished and stared at Harry as he passed like everyone else .Harry went through the door out of the Great Hall and found himself in a smaller room lined with paintings of witches and wizards .A handsome fire was roaring in the fireplace opposite him .The faces in the portraits turned to look at him as he entered .He saw a wizened witch flit out of the frame of her picture and into the one next to it which contained a wizard with a walrus mustache .The wizened witch started whispering in his ear .Viktor Krum Cedric Diggory and Fleur Delacour were grouped around the fire .They looked strangely impressive silhouetted against the flames .Krum hunchedup and brooding was leaning against the mantelpiece slightly apart from the other two .Cedric was standing with his hands behind his back staring into the fire .Fleur Delacour looked around when Harry walked in and threw back her sheet of long silvery hair .What is it ?she said .Do zey want us back in ze Hall ?She thought he had come to deliver a message .Harry didnt know how to explain what had just happened .He just stood there looking at the three champions .It struck him how very tall all of them were .There was a sound of scurrying feet behind him and Ludo Bagman entered the room .He took Harry by the arm and led him forward .Extraordinary !he muttered squeezing Harrys arm .Absolutely extraordinary !Gentlemen .lady he added approaching the fireside and addressing the other three .May I introduce incredible though it may seem the fourth Triwizard champion ?Viktor Krum straightened up .His surly face darkened as he surveyed Harry .Cedric looked nonplussed .He looked from Bagman to Harry and back again as though sure he must have misheard what Bagman had said .Fleur Delacour however tossed her hair smiling and said Oh vairy funny joke Meester Bagman .Joke ?Bagman repeated bewildered .No no not at all !Harrys name just came out of the Goblet of Fire !Krums thick eyebrows contracted slightly .Cedric was still looking politely bewildered .Fleur frowned .But evidently zair as been a mistake she said contemptuously to Bagman .E cannot compete .E is too young .Well .it is amazing said Bagman rubbing his smooth chin and smiling down at Harry .But as you know the age restriction was only imposed this year as an extra safety measure .And as his names come out of the goblet .I mean I dont think there can be any ducking out at this stage .Its down in the rules youre obliged .Harry will just have to do the best he The door behind them opened again and a large group of people came in Professor Dumbledore followed closely by Mr Crouch Professor Karkaroff Madame Maxime Professor McGonagall and Professor Snape .Harry heard the buzzing of the hundreds of students on the other side of the wall before Professor McGonagall closed the door .Madame Maxime !said Fleur at once striding over to her headmistress .Zey are saying zat zis little boy is to compete also !Somewhere under Harrys numb disbelief he felt a ripple of anger .Little boy ?Madame Maxime had drawn herself up to her full and considerable height .The top of her handsome head brushed the candlefilled chandelier and her gigantic blacksatin bosom swelled .What is ze meaning of zis Dumblydorr ?she said imperiously .Id rather like to know that myself Dumbledore said Professor Karkaroff .He was wearing a steely smile and his blue eyes were like chips of ice .Two Hogwarts champions ?I dont remember anyone telling me the host school is allowed two champions or have I not read the rules carefully enough ?He gave a short and nasty laugh .Cest impossible said Madame Maxime whose enormous hand with its many superb opals was resting upon Fleurs shoulder .Ogwarts cannot ave two champions .It is most injust .We were under the impression that your Age Line would keep out younger contestants Dumbledore said Karkaroff his steely smile still in place though his eyes were colder than ever .Otherwise we would of course have brought along a wider selection of candidates from our own schools .Its no ones fault but Potters Karkaroff said Snape softly .His black eyes were alight with malice .Dont go blaming Dumbledore for Potters determination to break rules .He has been crossing lines ever since he arrived here Thank you Severus said Dumbledore firmly and Snape went quiet though his eyes still glinted malevolently through his curtain of greasy black hair .Professor Dumbledore was now looking down at Harry who looked right back at him trying to discern the expression of the eyes behind the halfmoon spectacles .Did you put your name into the Goblet of Fire Harry ?he asked calmly .No said Harry .He was very aware of everybody watching him closely .Snape made a soft noise of impatient disbelief in the shadows .Did you ask an older student to put it into the Goblet of Fire for you ?said Professor Dumbledore ignoring Snape .No said Harry vehemently .Ah but of course e is lying !cried Madame Maxime .Snape was now shaking his head his lip curling .He could not have crossed the Age Line said Professor McGonagall sharply .I am sure we are all agreed on that Dumblydorr must ave made a mistake wiz ze line said Madame Maxime shrugging .It is possible of course said Dumbledore politely Dumbledore you know perfectly well you did not make a mistake !said Professor McGonagall angrily .Really what nonsense !Harry could not have crossed the line himself and as Professor Dumbledore believes that he did not persuade an older student to do it for him Im sure that should be good enough for everybody else !She shot a very angry look at Professor Snape .Mr Crouch .Mr Bagman said Karkaroff his voice unctuous once more you are our er objective judges .Surely you will agree that this is most irregular ?Bagman wiped his round boyish face with his handkerchief and looked at Mr Crouch who was standing outside the circle of the firelight his face half hidden in shadow .He looked slightly eerie the half darkness making him look much older giving him an almost skulllike appearance .When he spoke however it was in his usual curt voice .We must follow the rules and the rules state clearly that those people whose names come out of the Goblet of Fire are bound to compete in the tournament .Well Barty knows the rule book back to front said Bagman beaming and turning back to Karkaroff and Madame Maxime as though the matter was now closed .I insist upon resubmitting the names of the rest of my students said Karkaroff .He had dropped his unctuous tone and his smile now .His face wore a very ugly look indeed .You will set up the Goblet of Fire once more and we will continue adding names until each school has two champions .Its only fair Dumbledore .But Karkaroff it doesnt work like that said Bagman .The Goblet of Fires just gone out it wont reignite until the start of the next tournament in which Durmstrang will most certainly not be competing !exploded Karkaroff .After all our meetings and negotiations and compromises I little expected something of this nature to occur !I have half a mind to leave now !Empty threat Karkaroff growled a voice from near the door .You cant leave your champion now .Hes got to compete .Theyve all got to compete .Binding magical contract like Dumbledore said .Convenient eh ?Moody had just entered the room .He limped toward the fire and with every right step he took there was a loud clunk .Convenient ?said Karkaroff .Im afraid I dont understand you Moody .Harry could tell he was trying to sound disdainful as though what Moody was saying was barely worth his notice but his hands gave him away they had balled themselves into fists .Dont you ?said Moody quietly .Its very simple Karkaroff .Someone put Potters name in that goblet knowing hed have to compete if it came out .Evidently someone oo wished to give Ogwarts two bites at ze apple !said Madame Maxime .I quite agree Madame Maxime said Karkaroff bowing to her .I shall be lodging complaints with the Ministry of Magic and the International Confederation of Wizards If anyones got reason to complain its Potter growled Moody but .funny thing .I dont hear him saying a word .Why should e complain ?burst out Fleur Delacour stamping her foot .E as ze chance to compete asnt e ?We ave all been oping to be chosen for weeks and weeks !Ze honor for our schools !A thousand Galleons in prize money zis is a chance many would die for !Maybe someones hoping Potter is going to die for it said Moody with the merest trace of a growl .An extremely tense silence followed these words .Ludo Bagman who was looking very anxious indeed bounced nervously up and down on his feet and said Moody old man .what a thing to say !We all know Professor Moody considers the morning wasted if he hasnt discovered six plots to murder him before lunchtime said Karkaroff loudly .Apparently he is now teaching his students to fear assassination too .An odd quality in a Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher Dumbledore but no doubt you had your reasons .Imagining things am I ?growled Moody .Seeing things eh ?It was a skilled witch or wizard who put the boys name in that goblet .Ah what evidence is zere of zat ?said Madame Maxime throwing up her huge hands .Because they hoodwinked a very powerful magical object !said Moody .It would have needed an exceptionally strong Confundus Charm to bamboozle that goblet into forgetting that only three schools compete in the tournament .Im guessing they submitted Potters name under a fourth school to make sure he was the only one in his category .You seem to have given this a great deal of thought Moody said Karkaroff coldly and a very ingenious theory it is though of course I heard you recently got it into your head that one of your birthday presents contained a cunningly disguised basilisk egg and smashed it to pieces before realizing it was a carriage clock .So youll understand if we dont take you entirely seriously .There are those wholl turn innocent occasions to their advantage Moody retorted in a menacing voice .Its my job to think the way Dark wizards do Karkaroff as you ought to remember .Alas tor !said Dumbledore warningly .Harry wondered for a moment whom he was speaking to but then realized MadEye could hardly be Moodys real first name .Moody fell silent though still surveying Karkaroff with satisfaction Karkaroffs face was burning .How this situation arose we do not know said Dumbledore speaking to everyone gathered in the room .It seems to me however that we have no choice but to accept it .Both Cedric and Harry have been chosen to compete in the Tournament .This therefore they will do .Ah but Dumblydorr My dear Madame Maxime if you have an alternative I would be delighted to hear it .Dumbledore waited but Madame Maxime did not speak she merely glared .She wasnt the only one either .Snape looked furious Karkaroff livid Bagman however looked rather excited .Well shall we crack on then ?he said rubbing his hands together and smiling around the room .Got to give our champions their instructions havent we ?Barty want to do the honors ?Mr Crouch seemed to come out of a deep reverie .Yes he said instructions .Yes .the first task .He moved forward into the firelight .Close up Harry thought he looked ill .There were dark shadows beneath his eyes and a thin papery look about his wrinkled skin that had not been there at the Quidditch World Cup .The first task is designed to test your daring he told Harry Cedric Fleur and Viktor so we are not going to be telling you what it is .Courage in the face of the unknown is an important quality in a wizard .very important .The first task will take place on November the twentyfourth in front of the other students and the panel of judges .The champions are not permitted to ask for or accept help of any kind from their teachers to complete the tasks in the tournament .The champions will face the first challenge armed only with their wands .They will receive information about the second task when the first is over .Owing to the demanding and time consuming nature of the tournament the champions are exempted from endofyear tests .Mr Crouch turned to look at Dumbledore .I think thats all is it Albus ?I think so said Dumbledore who was looking at Mr Crouch with mild concern .Are you sure you wouldnt like to stay at Hogwarts tonight Barty ?No Dumbledore I must get back to the Ministry said Mr Crouch .It is a very busy very difficult time at the moment .Ive left young Weatherby in charge .Very enthusiastic .a little overenthusiastic if truth be told .Youll come and have a drink before you go at least ?said Dumbledore .Come on Barty Im staying !said Bagman brightly .Its all happening at Hogwarts now you know much more exciting here than at the office !I think not Ludo said Crouch with a touch of his old impatience .Professor Karkaroff Madame Maxime a nightcap ?said Dumbledore .But Madame Maxime had already put her arm around Fleurs shoulders and was leading her swiftly out of the room .Harry could hear them both talking very fast in French as they went off into the Great Hall .Karkaroff beckoned to Krum and they too exited though in silence .Harry Cedric I suggest you go up to bed said Dumbledore smiling at both of them .I am sure Gryffindor and Hufflepuff are waiting to celebrate with you and it would be a shame to deprive them of this excellent excuse to make a great deal of mess and noise .Harry glanced at Cedric who nodded and they left together .The Great Hall was deserted now the candles had burned low giving the jagged smiles of the pumpkins an eerie flickering quality .So said Cedric with a slight smile .Were playing against each other again !I spose said Harry .He really couldnt think of anything to say .The inside of his head seemed to be in complete disarray as though his brain had been ransacked .So .tell me .said Cedric as they reached the entrance hall which was now lit only by torches in the absence of the Goblet of Fire .How did you get your name in ?I didnt said Harry staring up at him .I didnt put it in .I was telling the truth .Ah .okay said Cedric .Harry could tell Cedric didnt believe him .Well .see you then .Instead of going up the marble staircase Cedric headed for a door to its right .Harry stood listening to him going down the stone steps beyond it then slowly he started to climb the marble ones .Was anyone except Ron and Hermione going to believe him or would they all think hed put himself in for the tournament ?Yet how could anyone think that when he was facing competitors whod had three years more magical education than he had when he was now facing tasks that not only sounded very dangerous but which were to be performed in front of hundreds of people ?Yes hed thought about it .hed fantasized about it .but it had been a joke really an idle sort of dream .hed never really seriously considered entering .But someone else had considered it .someone else had wanted him in the tournament and had made sure he was entered .Why ?To give him a treat ?He didnt think so somehow .To see him make a fool of himself ?Well they were likely to get their wish .But to get him killed ?Was Moody just being his usual paranoid self ?Couldnt someone have put Harrys name in the goblet as a trick a practical joke ?Did anyone really want him dead ?Harry was able to answer that at once .Yes someone wanted him dead someone had wanted him dead ever since he had been a year old .Lord Voldemort .But how could Voldemort have ensured that Harrys name got into the Goblet of Fire ?Voldemort was supposed to be far away in some distant country in hiding alone .feeble and powerless .Yet in that dream he had had just before he had awoken with his scar hurting Voldemort had not been alone .he had been talking to Wormtail .plotting Harrys murder .Harry got a shock to find himself facing the Fat Lady already .He had barely noticed where his feet were carrying him .It was also a surprise to see that she was not alone in her frame .The wizened witch who had flitted into her neighbors painting when he had joined the champions downstairs was now sitting smugly beside the Fat Lady .She must have dashed through every picture lining seven staircases to reach here before him .Both she and the Fat Lady were looking down at him with the keenest interest .Well well well said the Fat Lady Violets just told me everything .Whos just been chosen as school champion then ?Balderdash said Harry dully .It most certainly isnt !said the pale witch indignantly .No no Vi its the password said the Fat Lady soothingly and she swung forward on her hinges to let Harry into the common room .The blast of noise that met Harrys ears when the portrait opened almost knocked him backward .Next thing he knew he was being wrenched inside the common room by about a dozen pairs of hands and was facing the whole of Gryffindor House all of whom were screaming applauding and whistling .You shouldve told us youd entered !bellowed Fred he looked half annoyed half deeply impressed .How did you do it without getting a beard ?Brilliant !roared George .I didnt Harry said .I dont know how But Angelina had now swooped down upon him Oh if it couldnt be me at least its a Gryffindor Youll be able to pay back Diggory for that last Quidditch match Harry !shrieked Katie Bell another of the Gryffindor Chasers .Weve got food Harry come and have some Im not hungry I had enough at the feast But nobody wanted to hear that he wasnt hungry nobody wanted to hear that he hadnt put his name in the goblet not one single person seemed to have noticed that he wasnt at all in the mood to celebrate . .Lee Jordan had unearthed a Gryffindor banner from somewhere and he insisted on draping it around Harry like a cloak .Harry couldnt get away whenever he tried to sidle over to the staircase up to the dormitories the crowd around him closed ranks forcing another butterbeer on him stuffing crisps and peanuts into his hands .Everyone wanted to know how he had done it how he had tricked Dumbledores Age Line and managed to get his name into the goblet .I didnt he said over and over again I dont know how it happened .But for all the notice anyone took he might just as well not have answered at all .Im tired !he bellowed finally after nearly half an hour .No seriously George Im going to bed He wanted more than anything to find Ron and Hermione to find a bit of sanity but neither of them seemed to be in the common room .Insisting that he needed to sleep and almost flattening the little Creevey brothers as they attempted to waylay him at the foot of the stairs Harry managed to shake everyone off and climb up to the dormitory as fast as he could .To his great relief he found Ron was lying on his bed in the otherwise empty dormitory still fully dressed .He looked up when Harry slammed the door behind him .Where ve you been ?Harry said .Oh hello said Ron .He was grinning but it was a very odd strained sort of grin .Harry suddenly became aware that he was still wearing the scarlet Gryffindor banner that Lee had tied around him .He hastened to take it off but it was knotted very tightly .Ron lay on the bed without moving watching Harry struggle to remove it .So he said when Harry had finally removed the banner and thrown it into a corner .Congratulations .What dyou mean congratulations ?said Harry staring at Ron .There was definitely something wrong with the way Ron was smiling It was more like a grimace .Well .no one else got across the Age Line said Ron .Not even Fred and George .What did you use the Invisibility Cloak ?The Invisibility Cloak wouldnt have got me over that line said Harry slowly .Oh right said Ron .I thought you mightve told me if it was the cloak .because it wouldve covered both of us wouldnt it ?But you found another way did you ?Listen said Harry I didnt put my name in that goblet .Someone else mustve done it .Ron raised his eyebrows .What would they do that for ?I dunno said Harry .He felt it would sound very melodramatic to say To kill me .Rons eyebrows rose so high that they were in danger of disappearing into his hair .Its okay you know you can tell me the truth he said .If you dont want everyone else to know fine but I dont know why youre bothering to lie you didnt get into trouble for it did you ?That friend of the Fat Ladys that Violet shes already told us all Dumbledores letting you enter .A thousand Galleons prize money eh ?And you dont have to do endof year tests either .I didnt put my name in that goblet !said Harry starting to feel angry .Yeah okay said Ron in exactly the same sceptical tone as Cedric .Only you said this morning youd have done it last night and no one wouldve seen you . .Im not stupid you know .Youre doing a really good impression of it Harry snapped .Yeah ?said Ron and there was no trace of a grin forced or otherwise on his face now .You want to get to bed Harry .I expect youll need to be up early tomorrow for a photocall or something .He wrenched the hangings shut around his four poster leaving Harry standing there by the door staring at the dark red velvet curtains now hiding one of the few people he had been sure would believe him .THE WEIGHING OF THE WANDS When Harry woke up on Sunday morning it took him a moment to remember why he felt so miserable and worried .Then the memory of the previous night rolled over him .He sat up and ripped back the curtains of his own fourposter intending to talk to Ron to force Ron to believe him only to find that Rons bed was empty he had obviously gone down to breakfast .Harry dressed and went down the spiral staircase into the common room .The moment he appeared the people who had already finished breakfast broke into applause again .The prospect of going down into the Great Hall and facing the rest of the Gryffindors all treating him like some sort of hero was not inviting it was that however or stay here and allow himself to be cornered by the Creevey brothers who were both beckoning frantically to him to join them .He walked resolutely over to the portrait hole pushed it open climbed out of it and found himself facetoface with Hermione .Hello she said holding up a stack of toast which she was carrying in a napkin .I brought you this .Want to go for a walk ?Good idea said Harry gratefully .They went downstairs crossed the entrance hall quickly without looking in at the Great Hall and were soon striding across the lawn toward the lake where the Durmstrang ship was moored reflected blackly in the water .It was a chilly morning and they kept moving munching their toast as Harry told Hermione exactly what had happened after he had left the Gryffindor table the night before .To his immense relief Hermione accepted his story without question .Well of course I knew you hadnt entered yourself she said when hed finished telling her about the scene in the chamber off the Hall .The look on your face when Dumbledore read out your name !But the question is who did put it in ?Because Moodys right Harry .I dont think any student could have done it .theyd never be able to fool the Goblet or get over Dumbledore s Have you seen Ron ?Harry interrupted .Hermione hesitated .Erm .yes .he was at breakfast she said .Does he still think I entered myself ?Well .no I dont think so .not really said Hermione awkwardly .Whats that supposed to mean ‘not really ?Oh Harry isnt it obvious ?Hermione said despairingly .Hes jealous !Jealous ?Harry said incredulously .Jealous of what ?He wants to make a prat of himself in front of the whole school does he ?Look said Hermione patiently its always you who gets all the attention you know it is .I know its not your fault she added quickly seeing Harry open his mouth furiously .I know you dont ask for it .but well you know Rons got all those brothers to compete against at home and youre his best friend and youre really famous hes always shunted to one side whenever people see you and he puts up with it and he never mentions it but I suppose this is just one time too many .Great said Harry bitterly .Really great .Tell him from me Ill swap any time he wants .Tell him from me hes welcome to it .People gawping at my forehead everywhere I go .Im not telling him anything Hermione said shortly .Tell him yourself .Its the only way to sort this out .Im not running around after him trying to make him grow up !Harry said so loudly that several owls in a nearby tree took flight in alarm .Maybe hell believe Im not enjoying myself once Ive got my neck broken or Thats not funny said Hermione quietly .Thats not funny at all .She looked extremely anxious .Harry Ive been thinking you know what weve got to do dont you ?Straight away the moment we get back to the castle ?Yeah give Ron a good kick up the Write to Sirius .Youve got to tell him whats happened .He asked you to keep him posted on everything thats going on at Hogwarts .Its almost as if he expected something like this to happen .I brought some parchment and a quill out with me Come off it said Harry looking around to check that they couldnt be overheard but the grounds were quite deserted .He came back to the country just because my scar twinged .Hell probably come bursting right into the castle if I tell him someones entered me in the Triwizard Tournament Hed want you to tell him said Hermione sternly .Hes going to find out anyway How ?Harry this isnt going to be kept quiet said Hermione very seriously .This tournaments famous and youre famous .Ill be really surprised if there isnt anything in the Daily Prophet about you competing .Youre already in half the books about YouKnow Who you know .and Sirius would rather hear it from you I know he would .Okay okay Ill write to him said Harry throwing his last piece of toast into the lake .They both stood and watched it floating there for a moment before a large tentacle rose out of the water and scooped it beneath the surface .Then they returned to the castle .Whose owl am I going to use ?Harry said as they climbed the stairs .He told me not to use Hedwig again .Ask Ron if you can borrow Im not asking Ron for anything Harry said flatly .Well borrow one of the school owls then anyone can use them said Hermione .They went up to the Owlery Hermione gave Harry a piece of parchment a quill and a bottle of ink then strolled around the long lines of perches looking at all the different owls while Harry sat down against a wall and wrote his letter .Dear Sirius You told me to keep you posted on whats happening at Hogwarts so here goes I dont know if youve heard but the Triwizard Tournaments happening this year and on Saturday night I got picked as a fourth champion .I dont know who put my name in the Goblet of Fire because I didnt The other Hogwarts champion is Cedric Diggory from Hufflepuff He paused at this point thinking .He had an urge to say something about the large weight of anxiety that seemed to have settled inside his chest since last night but he couldnt think how to translate this into words so he simply dipped his quill back into the ink bottle and wrote Hope youre okay and Buckbeak Harry Finished he told Hermione getting to his feet and brushing straw off his robes .At this Hedwig came fluttering down onto his shoulder and held out her leg .I cant use you Harry told her looking around for the school owls .Ive got to use one of these .Hedwig gave a very loud hoot and took off so suddenly that her talons cut into his shoulder .She kept her back to Harry all the time he was tying his letter to the leg of a large barn owl .When the barn owl had flown off Harry reached out to stroke Hedwig but she clicked her beak furiously and soared up into the rafters out of reach .First Ron then you said Harry angrily .This isnt my fault .If Harry had thought that matters would improve once everyone got used to the idea of him being champion the following day showed him how mistaken he was .He could no longer avoid the rest of the school once he was back at lessons and it was clear that the rest of the school just like the Gryffindors thought Harry had entered himself for the tournament .Unlike the Gryffindors however they did not seem impressed .The Hufflepuffs who were usually on excellent terms with the Gryffindors had turned remarkably cold toward the whole lot of them .One Herbology lesson was enough to demonstrate this .It was plain that the Hufflepuffs felt that Harry had stolen their champions glory a feeling exacerbated perhaps by the fact that Hufflepuff House very rarely got any glory and that Cedric was one of the few who had ever given them any having beaten Gryffindor once at Quidditch .Ernie Macmillan and Justin Finch Fletchley with whom Harry normally got on very well did not talk to him even though they were repotting Bouncing Bulbs at the same tray though they did laugh rather unpleasantly when one of the Bouncing Bulbs wriggled free from Harrys grip and smacked him hard in the face .Ron wasnt talking to Harry either .Hermione sat between them making very forced conversation but though both answered her normally they avoided making eye contact with each other .Harry thought even Professor Sprout seemed distant with him but then she was Head of Hufflepuff House .He would have been looking forward to seeing Hagrid under normal circumstances but Care of Magical Creatures meant seeing the Slytherins too the first time he would come facetoface with them since becoming champion .Predictably Malfoy arrived at Hagrid s cabin with his familiar sneer firmly in place .Ah look boys its the champion he said to Crabbe and Goyle the moment he got within earshot of Harry .Got your autograph books ?Better get a signature now because I doubt hes going to be around much longer .Half the Triwizard champions have died .how long dyou reckon youre going to last Potter ?Ten minutes into the first tasks my bet .Crabbe and Goyle guffawed sycophantically but Malfoy had to stop there because Hagrid emerged from the back of his cabin balancing a teetering tower of crates each containing a very large BlastEnded Skrewt .To the classs horror Hagrid proceeded to explain that the reason the skrewts had been killing one another was an excess of pentup energy and that the solution would be for each student to fix a leash on a skrewt and take it for a short walk .The only good thing about this plan was that it distracted Malfoy completely .Take this thing for a walk ?he repeated in disgust staring into one of the boxes .And where exactly are we supposed to fix the leash ?Around the sting the blasting end or the sucker ?Roun the middle said Hagrid demonstrating .Er yeh might want ter put on yer dragonhide gloves jus as an extra precaution like .Harry you come here an help me with this big one .Hagrids real intention however was to talk to Harry away from the rest of the class .He waited until everyone else had set off with their skrewts then turned to Harry and said very seriously So yer competin Harry .In the tournament .School champion .One of the champions Harry corrected him .Hagrids beetleblack eyes looked very anxious under his wild eyebrows .No idea who put yeh in fer it Harry ?You believe I didnt do it then ?said Harry concealing with difficulty the rush of gratitude he felt at Hagrids words .Course I do Hagrid grunted .Yeh say it wasn you an I believe yeh an Dumbledore believes yer an all .Wish I knew who did do it said Harry bitterly .The pair of them looked out over the lawn the class was widely scattered now and all in great difficulty .The skrewts were now over three feet long and extremely powerful .No longer shellless and colorless they had developed a kind of thick grayish shiny armor .They looked like a cross between giant scorpions and elongated crabs but still without recognizable heads or eyes .They had become immensely strong and very hard to control .Look like theyre havin fun don they ?Hagrid said happily .Harry assumed he was talking about the skrewts because his classmates certainly werent every now and then with an alarming bang one of the skrewts ends would explode causing it to shoot forward several yards and more than one person was being dragged along on their stomach trying desperately to get back on their feet .Ah I don know Harry Hagrid sighed suddenly looking back down at him with a worried expression on his face .School champion .everythin seems ter happen ter you doesn it ?Harry didnt answer .Yes everything did seem to happen to him .that was more or less what Hermione had said as they had walked around the lake and that was the reason according to her that Ron was no longer talking to him .The next few days were some of Harrys worst at Hogwarts .The closest he had ever come to feeling like this had been during those months in his second year when a large part of the school had suspected him of attacking his fellow students .But Ron had been on his side then .He thought he could have coped with the rest of the schools behavior if he could just have had Ron back as a friend but he wasnt going to try and persuade Ron to talk to him if Ron didnt want to .Nevertheless it was lonely with dislike pouring in on him from all sides .He could understand the Hufflepuffs attitude even if he didnt like it they had their own champion to support .He expected nothing less than vicious insults from the Slytherins he was highly unpopular there and always had been because he had helped Gryffindor beat them so often both at Quidditch and in the InterHouse Championship .But he had hoped the Ravenclaws might have found it in their hearts to support him as much as Cedric .He was wrong however .Most Ravenclaws seemed to think that he had been desperate to earn himself a bit more fame by tricking the goblet into accepting his name .Then there was the fact that Cedric looked the part of a champion so much more than he did .Exceptionally handsome with his straight nose dark hair and gray eyes it was hard to say who was receiving more admiration these days Cedric or Viktor Krum .Harry actually saw the same sixthyear girls who had been so keen to get Krums autograph begging Cedric to sign their school bags one lunchtime .Meanwhile there was no reply from Sirius Hedwig was refusing to come anywhere near him Professor Trelawney was predicting his death with even more certainty than usual and he did so badly at Summoning Charms in Professor Flitwicks class that he was given extra homework the only person to get any apart from Neville .Its really not that difficult Harry Hermione tried to reassure him as they left Flitwicks class she had been making objects zoom across the room to her all lesson as though she were some sort of weird magnet for board dusters wastepaper baskets and lunascopes .You just werent concentrating properly Wonder why that was said Harry darkly as Cedric Diggory walked past surrounded by a large group of simpering girls all of whom looked at Harry as though he were a particularly large BlastEnded Skrewt .Still never mind eh ?Double Potions to look forward to this afternoon .Double Potions was always a horrible experience but these days it was nothing short of torture .Being shut in a dungeon for an hour and a half with Snape and the Slytherins all of whom seemed determined to punish Harry as much as possible for daring to become school champion was about the most unpleasant thing Harry could imagine .He had already struggled through one Fridays worth with Hermione sitting next to him intoning ignore them ignore them ignore them under her breath and he couldnt see why today should be any better .When he and Hermione arrived at Snape s dungeon after lunch they found the Slytherins waiting outside each and every one of them wearing a large badge on the front of his or her robes .For one wild moment Harry thought they were S .P .E .W .badges then he saw that they all bore the same message in luminous red letters that burnt brightly in the dimly lit underground passage Support CEDRIC DIGGORY The REAL Hogwarts Champion Like them Potter ?said Malfoy loudly as Harry approached .And this isnt all they do look !He pressed his badge into his chest and the message upon it vanished to be replaced by another one which glowed green POTTER STINKS The Slytherins howled with laughter .Each of them pressed their badges too until the message POTTER STINKS was shining brightly all around Harry .He felt the heat rise in his face and neck .Oh very funny Hermione said sarcastically to Pansy Parkinson and her gang of Slytherin girls who were laughing harder than anyone really witty .Ron was standing against the wall with Dean and Seamus .He wasnt laughing but he wasnt sticking up for Harry either .Want one Granger ?said Malfoy holding out a badge to Hermione .Ive got loads .But dont touch my hand now .Ive just washed it you see dont want a Mudblood sliming it up .Some of the anger Harry had been feeling for days and days seemed to burst through a dam in his chest .He had reached for his wand before hed thought what he was doing .People all around them scrambled out of the way backing down the corridor .Harry !Hermione said warningly .Go on then Potter Malfoy said quietly drawing out his own wand .Moodys not here to look after you now do it if youve got the guts For a split second they looked into each others eyes then at exactly the same time both acted .FurnunculusV Harry yelled .DensaugeoV screamed Malfoy .Jets of light shot from both wands hit each other in midair and ricocheted off at angles Harrys hit Goyle in the face and Malfoys hit Hermione .Goyle bellowed and put his hands to his nose where great ugly boils were springing up Hermione whimpering in panic was clutching her mouth .Hermione !Ron had hurried forward to see what was wrong with her Harry turned and saw Ron dragging Hermione s hand away from her face .It wasnt a pretty sight .Hermione s front teeth already larger than average were now growing at an alarming rate she was looking more and more like a beaver as her teeth elongated past her bottom lip toward her chin panicstricken she felt them and let out a terrified cry .And what is all this noise about ?said a soft deadly voice .Snape had arrived .The Slytherins clamored to give their explanations Snape pointed a long yellow finger at Malfoy and said Explain .Potter attacked me sir We attacked each other at the same time !Harry shouted .and he hit Goyle look Snape examined Goyle whose face now resembled something that would have been at home in a book on poisonous fungi .Hospital wing Goyle Snape said calmly .Malfoy got Hermione !Ron said .Lood He forced Hermione to show Snape her teeth she was doing her best to hide them with her hands though this was difficult as they had now grown down past her collar .Pansy Parkinson and the other Slytherin girls were doubled up with silent giggles pointing at Hermione from behind Snape s back .Snape looked coldly at Hermione then said I see no difference .Hermione let out a whimper her eyes filled with tears she turned on her heel and ran ran all the way up the corridor and out of sight .It was lucky perhaps that both Harry and Ron started shouting at Snape at the same time lucky their voices echoed so much in the stone corridor for in the confused din it was impossible for him to hear exactly what they were calling him .He got the gist however .Lets see he said in his silkiest voice .Fifty points from Gryffindor and a detention each for Potter and Weasley .Now get inside or itll be a weeks worth of detentions .Harrys ears were ringing .The injustice of it made him want to curse Snape into a thousand slimy pieces .He passed Snape walked with Ron to the back of the dungeon and slammed his bag down onto the table .Ron was shaking with anger too for a moment it felt as though everything was back to normal between them but then Ron turned and sat down with Dean and Seamus instead leaving Harry alone at his table .On the other side of the dungeon Malfoy turned his back on Snape and pressed his badge smirking .POTTER STINKS flashed once more across the room .Harry sat there staring at Snape as the lesson began picturing horrific things happening to him .If only he knew how to do the Cruciatus Curse .hed have Snape flat on his back like that spider jerking and twitching .Antidotes !said Snape looking around at them all his cold black eyes glittering unpleasantly .You should all have prepared your recipes now .I want you to brew them carefully and then we will be selecting someone on whom to test one .Snapes eyes met Harrys and Harry knew what was coming .Snape was going to poison him .Harry imagined picking up his cauldron and sprinting to the front of the class and bringing it down on Snapes greasy head And then a knock on the dungeon door burst in on Harrys thoughts .It was Colin Creevey he edged into the room beaming at Harry and walked up to Snapes desk at the front of the room .Yes ?said Snape curtly .Please sir Im supposed to take Harry Potter upstairs .Snape stared down his hooked nose at Colin whose smile faded from his eager face .Potter has another hour of Potions to complete said Snape coldly .He will come upstairs when this class is finished .Colin went pink .Sir sir Mr Bagman wants him he said nervously .All the champions have got to go I think they want to take photographs .Harry would have given anything he owned to have stopped Colin saying those last few words .He chanced half a glance at Ron but Ron was staring determinedly at the ceiling .Very well very well Snape snapped .Potter leave your things here I want you back down here later to test your antidote .Please sir hes got to take his things with him squeaked Colin .All the champions Very well said Snape .Potter take your bag and get out of my sight !Harry swung his bag over his shoulder got up and headed for the door .As he walked through the Slytherin desks POTTER STINKS flashed at him from every direction .Its amazing isnt it Harry ?said Colin starting to speak the moment Harry had closed the dungeon door behind him .Isnt it though ?You being champion ?Yeah really amazing said Harry heavily as they set off toward the steps into the entrance hall .What do they want photos for Colin ?The Daily Prophet I think !Great said Harry dully .Exactly what I need .More publicity .Good luck !said Colin when they had reached the right room .Harry knocked on the door and entered .He was in a fairly small classroom most of the desks had been pushed away to the back of the room leaving a large space in the middle three of them however had been placed endtoend in front of the blackboard and covered with a long length of velvet .Five chairs had been set behind the velvetcovered desks and Ludo Bagman was sitting in one of them talking to a witch Harry had never seen before who was wearing magenta robes .Viktor Krum was standing moodily in a corner as usual and not talking to anybody .Cedric and Fleur were in conversation .Fleur looked a good deal happier than Harry had seen her so far she kept throwing back her head so that her long silvery hair caught the light .A paunchy man holding a large black camera that was smoking slightly was watching Fleur out of the corner of his eye .Bagman suddenly spotted Harry got up quickly and bounded forward .Ah here he is !Champion number four !In you come Harry in you come .nothing to worry about its just the wand weighing ceremony the rest of the judges will be here in a moment Wand weighing ?Harry repeated nervously .We have to check that your wands are fully functional no problems you know as theyre your most important tools in the tasks ahead said Bagman .The experts upstairs now with Dumbledore .And then theres going to be a little photo shoot .This is Rita Skeeter he added gesturing toward the witch in magenta robes .Shes doing a small piece on the tournament for the Daily Prophet .Maybe not that small Ludo said Rita Skeeter her eyes on Harry .Her hair was set in elaborate and curiously rigid curls that contrasted oddly with her heavyjawed face .She wore jeweled spectacles .The thick fingers clutching her crocodileskin handbag ended in twoinch nails painted crimson .I wonder if I could have a little word with Harry before we start ?she said to Bagman but still gazing fixedly at Harry .The youngest champion you know .to add a bit of color ?Certainly !cried Bagman .That is if Harry has no objection ?Er said Harry .Lovely said Rita Skeeter and in a second her scarlettaloned fingers had Harrys upper arm in a surprisingly strong grip and she was steering him out of the room again and opening a nearby door .We dont want to be in there with all that noise she said .Lets see .ah yes this is nice and cozy .It was a broom cupboard .Harry stared at her .Come along dear thats right lovely said Rita Skeeter again perching herself precariously upon an upturned bucket pushing Harry down onto a cardboard box and closing the door throwing them into darkness .Lets see now .She unsnapped her crocodileskin handbag and pulled out a handful of candles which she lit with a wave of her wand and magicked into midair so that they could see what they were doing .You wont mind Harry if I use a QuickQuotes Quill ?It leaves me free to talk to you normally .A what ?said Harry .Rita Skeeters smile widened .Harry counted three gold teeth .She reached again into her crocodile bag and drew out a long acidgreen quill and a roll of parchment which she stretched out between them on a crate of Mrs Skowers AllPurpose Magical Mess Remover .She put the tip of the green quill into her mouth sucked it for a moment with apparent relish then placed it upright on the parchment where it stood balanced on its point quivering slightly .Testing .my name is Rita Skeeter Daily Prophet reporter .Harry looked down quickly at the quill .The moment Rita Skeeter had spoken the green quill had started to scribble skidding across the parchment Attractive blonde Rita Skeeter fortythree whose savage quill has punctured many inflated reputations Lovely said Rita Skeeter yet again and she ripped the top piece of parchment off crumpled it up and stuffed it into her handbag .Now she leaned toward Harry and said So Harry .what made you decide to enter the Triwizard Tournament ?Er said Harry again but he was distracted by the quill .Even though he wasnt speaking it was dashing across the parchment and in its wake he could make out a fresh sentence An ugly scar souvenir of a tragic past disfigures the otherwise charming face of Harry Potter whose eyes Ignore the quill Harry said Rita Skeeter firmly .Reluctantly Harry looked up at her instead .Now why did you decide to enter the tournament Harry ?I didnt said Harry .I dont know how my name got into the Goblet of Fire .I didnt put it in there .Rita Skeeter raised one heavily penciled eyebrow .Come now Harry theres no need to be scared of getting into trouble .We all know you shouldnt really have entered at all .But dont worry about that .Our readers love a rebel .But I didnt enter Harry repeated .I dont know who How do you feel about the tasks ahead ?said Rita Skeeter .Excited ?Nervous ?I havent really thought .yeah nervous I suppose said Harry .His insides squirmed uncomfortably as he spoke .Champions have died in the past havent they ?said Rita Skeeter briskly .Have you thought about that at all ?Well .they say its going to be a lot safer this year said Harry .The quill whizzed across the parchment between them back and forward as though it were skating .Of course youve looked death in the face before havent you ?said Rita Skeeter watching him closely .How would you say thats affected you ?Er said Harry yet again .Do you think that the trauma in your past might have made you keen to prove yourself ?To live up to your name ?Do you think that perhaps you were tempted to enter the Triwizard Tournament because I didnt enter said Harry starting to feel irritated .Can you remember your parents at all ?said Rita Skeeter talking over him .No said Harry .How do you think theyd feel if they knew you were competing in the Triwizard Tournament ?Proud ?Worried ?Angry ?Harry was feeling really annoyed now .How on earth was he to know how his parents would feel if they were alive ?He could feel Rita Skeeter watching him very intently .Frowning he avoided her gaze and looked down at words the quill had just written Tears fill those startling green eyes as our conversation turns to the parents he can barely remember .I have NOT got tears in my eyes !said Harry loudly .Before Rita Skeeter could say a word the door of the broom cupboard was pulled open .Harry looked around blinking in the bright light .Albus Dumbledore stood there looking down at both of them squashed into the cupboard .Dumbledorel cried Rita Skeeter with every appearance of delight but Harry noticed that her quill and the parchment had suddenly vanished from the box of Magical Mess Remover and Ritas clawed fingers were hastily snapping shut the clasp of her crocodileskin bag .How are you ?she said standing up and holding out one of her large mannish hands to Dumbledore .I hope you saw my piece over the summer about the International Confederation of Wizards Conference ?Enchantingly nasty said Dumbledore his eyes twinkling .I particularly enjoyed your description of me as an obsolete dingbat .Rita Skeeter didnt look remotely abashed .I was just making the point that some of your ideas are a little oldfashioned Dumbledore and that many wizards in the street I will be delighted to hear the reasoning behind the rudeness Rita said Dumbledore with a courteous bow and a smile but Im afraid we will have to discuss the matter later .The Weighing of the Wands is about to start and it cannot take place if one of our champions is hidden in a broom cupboard .Very glad to get away from Rita Skeeter Harry hurried back into the room .The other champions were now sitting in chairs near the door and he sat down quickly next to Cedric looking up at the velvet covered table where four of the five judges were now sitting Professor Karkaroff Madame Maxime Mr Crouch and Ludo Bagman .Rita Skeeter settled herself down in a corner Harry saw her slip the parchment out of her bag again spread it on her knee suck the end of the QuickQuotes Quill and place it once more on the parchment .May I introduce Mr Ollivander ?said Dumbledore taking his place at the judges table and talking to the champions .He will be checking your wands to ensure that they are in good condition before the tournament .Harry looked around and with a jolt of surprise saw an old wizard with large pale eyes standing quietly by the window .Harry had met Mr Ollivander before he was the wandmaker from whom Harry had bought his own wand over three years ago in Diagon Alley .Mademoiselle Delacour could we have you first please ?said Mr Ollivander stepping into the empty space in the middle of the room .Fleur Delacour swept over to Mr Ollivander and handed him her wand .Hmmm .he said .He twirled the wand between his long fingers like a baton and it emitted a number of pink and gold sparks .Then he held it close to his eyes and examined it carefully .Yes he said quietly nine and a half inches .inflexible .rosewood .and containing .dear me An air from ze ead of a veela said Fleur .One of my grandmuzzers .So Fleur was part veela thought Harry making a mental note to tell Ron .then he remembered that Ron wasnt speaking to him .Yes said Mr Ollivander yes Ive never used veela hair myself of course .I find it makes for rather temperamental wands .however to each his own and if this suits you .Mr Ollivander ran his fingers along the wand apparently checking for scratches or bumps then he muttered OrchideousV and a bunch of flowers burst from the wand tip .Very well very well its in fine working order said Mr Ollivander scooping up the flowers and handing them to Fleur with her wand .Mr Diggory you next .Fleur glided back to her seat smiling at Cedric as he passed her .Ah now this is one of mine isnt it ?said Mr Ollivander with much more enthusiasm as Cedric handed over his wand .Yes I remember it well .Containing a single hair from the tail of a particularly fine male unicorn .must have been seventeen hands nearly gored me with his horn after I plucked his tail .Twelve and a quarter inches .ash .pleasantly springy .Its in fine condition .You treat it regularly ?Polished it last night said Cedric grinning .Harry looked down at his own wand .He could see finger marks all over it .He gathered a fistful of robe from his knee and tried to rub it clean surreptitiously .Several gold sparks shot out of the end of it .Fleur Delacour gave him a very patronizing look and he desisted .Mr Ollivander sent a stream of silver smoke rings across the room from the tip of Cedrics wand pronounced himself satisfied and then said Mr Krum if you please .Viktor Krum got up and slouched roundshouldered and duckfooted toward Mr Ollivander .He thrust out his wand and stood scowling with his hands in the pockets of his robes .Hmm said Mr Ollivander this is a Gregorovitch creation unless Im much mistaken ?A fine wand maker though the styling is never quite what I .however .He lifted the wand and examined it minutely turning it over and over before his eyes .Yes .hornbeam and dragon heartstring ?he shot at Krum who nodded .Rather thicker than one usually sees .quite rigid .ten and a quarter inches .Avis .The hornbeam wand let off a blast like a gun and a number of small twittering birds flew out of the end and through the open window into the watery sunlight .Good said Mr Ollivander handing Krum back his wand .Which leaves .Mr Potter .Harry got to his feet and walked past Krum to Mr Ollivander .He handed over his wand .aah yes said Mr Ollivander his pale eyes suddenly gleaming .Yes yes yes .How well I remember .Harry could remember too .He could remember it as though it had happened yesterday .Four summers ago on his eleventh birthday he had entered Mr Ollivanders shop with Hagrid to buy a wand .Mr Ollivander had taken his measurements and then started handing him wands to try .Harry had waved what felt like every wand in the shop until at last he had found the one that suited him this one which was made of holly eleven inches long and contained a single feather from the tail of a phoenix .Mr Ollivander had been very surprised that Harry had been so compatible with this wand .Curious he had said curious and not until Harry asked what was curious had Mr Ollivander explained that the phoenix feather in Harrys wand had come from the same bird that had supplied the core of Lord Voldemorts .Harry had never shared this piece of information with anybody .He was very fond of his wand and as far as he was concerned its relation to Voldemorts wand was something it couldnt help rather as he couldnt help being related to Aunt Petunia .However he really hoped that Mr Ollivander wasnt about to tell the room about it .He had a funny feeling Rita Skeeters QuickQuotes Quill might just explode with excitement if he did .Mr Ollivander spent much longer examining Harrys wand than anyone elses .Eventually however he made a fountain of wine shoot out of it and handed it back to Harry announcing that it was still in perfect condition .Thank you all said Dumbledore standing up at the judges table .You may go back to your lessons now or perhaps it would be quicker just to go down to dinner as they are about to end Feeling that at last something had gone right today Harry got up to leave but the man with the black camera jumped up and cleared his throat .Photos Dumbledore photos !cried Bagman excitedly .All the judges and champions what do you think Rita ?Er yes lets do those first said Rita Skeeter whose eyes were upon Harry again .And then perhaps some individual shots .The photographs took a long time .Madame Maxime cast everyone else into shadow wherever she stood and the photographer couldnt stand far enough back to get her into the frame eventually she had to sit while everyone else stood around her .Karkaroff kept twirling his goatee around his finger to give it an extra curl Krum whom Harry would have thought would have been used to this sort of thing skulked half hidden at the back of the group .The photographer seemed keenest to get Fleur at the front but Rita Skeeter kept hurrying forward and dragging Harry into greater prominence .Then she insisted on separate shots of all the champions .At last they were free to go .Harry went down to dinner .Hermione wasnt there he supposed she was still in the hospital wing having her teeth fixed .He ate alone at the end of the table then returned to Gryffindor Tower thinking of all the extra work on Summoning Charms that he had to do .Up in the dormitory he came across Ron .Youve had an owl said Ron brusquely the moment he walked in .He was pointing at Harrys pillow .The school barn owl was waiting for him there .Oh right said Harry .And weve got to do our detentions tomorrow night Snapes dungeon said Ron .He then walked straight out of the room not looking at Harry .For a moment Harry considered going after him he wasnt sure whether he wanted to talk to him or hit him both seemed quite appealing but the lure of Siriuss answer was too strong .Harry strode over to the barn owl took the letter off its leg and unrolled it .Harry I cant say everything I would like to in a letter its too risky in case the owl is intercepted we need to talk facetoface .Can you ensure that you are alone by the fire in Gryffindor Tower at one oclock in the morning on the 22nd of November ?I know better than anyone that you can look after yourself and while youre around Dumbledore and Moody I dont think anyone will be able to hurt you .However someone seems to be having a good try .Entering you in that tournament would have been very risky especially right under Dumbledore s nose .Be on the watch Harry .I still want to hear about anything unusual .Let me know about the 22nd of November as quickly as you can .Sirius THE HUNGARIAN HORNTAIL The prospect of talking facetoface with Sirius was all that sustained Harry over the next fortnight the only bright spot on a horizon that had never looked darker .The shock of finding himself school champion had worn off slightly now and the fear of what was facing him had started to sink in .The first task was drawing steadily nearer he felt as though it were crouching ahead of him like some horrific monster barring his path .He had never suffered nerves like these they were way beyond anything he had experienced before a Quidditch match not even his last one against Slytherin which had decided who would win the Quidditch Cup .Harry was finding it hard to think about the future at all he felt as though his whole life had been leading up to and would finish with the first task .Admittedly he didnt see how Sirius was going to make him feel any better about having to perform an unknown piece of difficult and dangerous magic in front of hundreds of people but the mere sight of a friendly face would be something at the moment .Harry wrote back to Sirius saying that he would be beside the common room fire at the time Sirius had suggested and he and Hermione spent a long time going over plans for forcing any stragglers out of the common room on the night in question .If the worst came to the worst they were going to drop a bag of Dungbombs but they hoped they wouldnt have to resort to that Filch would skin them alive .In the meantime life became even worse for Harry within the confines of the castle for Rita Skeeter had published her piece about the Triwizard Tournament and it had turned out to be not so much a report on the tournament as a highly colored life story of Harry .Much of the front page had been given over to a picture of Harry the article continuing on pages two six and seven had been all about Harry the names of the Beauxbatons and Durmstrang champions misspelled had been squashed into the last line of the article and Cedric hadnt been mentioned at all .The article had appeared ten days ago and Harry still got a sick burning feeling of shame in his stomach every time he thought about it .Rita Skeeter had reported him saying an awful lot of things that he couldnt remember ever saying in his life let alone in that broom cupboard .I suppose I get my strength from my parents .I know theyd be very proud of me if they could see me now . .Yes sometimes at night I still cry about them Im not ashamed to admit it .I know nothing will hurt me during the tournament because theyre watching over me .But Rita Skeeter had gone even further than transforming his ers into long sickly sentences She had interviewed other people about him too .Harry has at last found love at Hogwarts .His close friend Colin Creevey says that Harry is rarely seen out of the company of one Hermione Granger a stunningly pretty Muggleborn girl who like Harry is one of the top students in the school .From the moment the article had appeared Harry had had to endure people Slytherins mainly quoting it at him as he passed and making sneering comments .Want a hanky Potter in case you start crying in Transfiguration ?Since when have you been one of the top students in the school Potter ?Or is this a school you and Longbottom have set up together ?Hey Harry !Yeah thats right !Harry found himself shouting as he wheeled around in the corridor having had just about enough .Ive just been crying my eyes out over my dead mum and Im just off to do a bit more .No it was just you dropped your quill .It was Cho .Harry felt the color rising in his face .Oh right sorry he muttered taking the quill back .Er .good luck on Tuesday she said .I really hope you do well .Which left Harry feeling extremely stupid .Hermione had come in for her fair share of unpleasantness too but she hadnt yet started yelling at innocent bystanders in fact Harry was full of admiration for the way she was handling the situation .Stunningly pretty ?Her ?Pansy Parkinson had shrieked the first time she had come facetoface with Hermione after Ritas article had appeared .What was she judging against a chipmunk ?Ignore it Hermione said in a dignified voice holding her head in the air and stalking past the sniggering Slytherin girls as though she couldnt hear them .Just ignore it Harry .But Harry couldnt ignore it .Ron hadnt spoken to him at all since he had told him about Snapes detentions .Harry had half hoped they would make things up during the two hours they were forced to pickle rats brains in Snapes dungeon but that had been the day Ritas article had appeared which seemed to have confirmed Rons belief that Harry was really enjoying all the attention .Hermione was furious with the pair of them she went from one to the other trying to force them to talk to each other but Harry was adamant He would talk to Ron again only if Ron admitted that Harry hadnt put his name in the Goblet of Fire and apologized for calling him a liar .I didnt start this Harry said stubbornly .Its his problem .You miss him !Hermione said impatiently .And I know he misses you Miss him ?said Harry .I dont miss him .But this was a downright lie .Harry liked Hermione very much but she just wasnt the same as Ron .There was much less laughter and a lot more hanging around in the library when Hermione was your best friend .Harry still hadnt mastered Summoning Charms he seemed to have developed something of a block about them and Hermione insisted that learning the theory would help .They consequently spent a lot of time poring over books during their lunchtimes .Viktor Krum was in the library an awful lot too and Harry wondered what he was up to .Was he studying or was he looking for things to help him through the first task ?Hermione often complained about Krum being there not that he ever bothered them but because groups of giggling girls often turned up to spy on him from behind bookshelves and Hermione found the noise distracting .Hes not even goodlooking !she muttered angrily glaring at Krums sharp profile .They only like him because hes famous !They wouldnt look twice at him if he couldnt do that Wonky Faint thing Wronski Feint said Harry through gritted teeth .Quite apart from liking to get Quidditch terms correct it caused him another pang to imagine Rons expression if he could have heard Hermione talking about Wonky Faints .It is a strange thing but when you are dreading something and would give anything to slow down time it has a disobliging habit of speeding up .The days until the first task seemed to slip by as though someone had fixed the clocks to work at double speed .Harrys feeling of barely controlled panic was with him wherever he went as everpresent as the snide comments about the Daily Prophet article .On the Saturday before the first task all students in the third year and above were permitted to visit the village of Hogsmeade .Hermione told Harry that it would do him good to get away from the castle for a bit and Harry didnt need much persuasion .What about Ron though ?he said .Dont you want to go with him ?Oh .well .Hermione went slightly pink .I thought we might meet up with him in the Three Broomsticks .No said Harry flatly .Oh Harry this is so stupid Ill come but Im not meeting Ron and Im wearing my Invisibility Cloak .Oh all right then .Hermione snapped but I hate talking to you in that cloak I never know if Im looking at you or not .So Harry put on his Invisibility Cloak in the dormitory went back downstairs and together he and Hermione set off for Hogsmeade .Harry felt wonderfully free under the cloak he watched other students walking past them as they entered the village most of them sporting Support Cedric Diggory badges but no horrible remarks came his way for a change and nobody was quoting that stupid article .People keep looking at me now said Hermione grumpily as they came out of Honeydukes Sweetshop later eating large creamfilled chocolates .They think Im talking to myself .Dont move your lips so much then .Come on please just take off your cloak for a bit no ones going to bother you here .Oh yeah ?said Harry .Look behind you .Rita Skeeter and her photographer friend had just emerged from the Three Broomsticks pub .Talking in low voices they passed right by Hermione without looking at her .Harry backed into the wall of Honeydukes to stop Rita Skeeter from hitting him with her crocodileskin handbag .When they were gone Harry said Shes staying in the village .I bet shes coming to watch the first task .As he said it his stomach flooded with a wave of molten panic .He didnt mention this he and Hermione hadnt discussed what was coming in the first task much he had the feeling she didnt want to think about it .Shes gone said Hermione looking right through Harry toward the end of the street .Why dont we go and have a butterbeer in the Three Broomsticks its a bit cold isnt it ?You dont have to talk to Ron !she added irritably correctly interpreting his silence .The Three Broomsticks was packed mainly with Hogwarts students enjoying their free afternoon but also with a variety of magical people Harry rarely saw anywhere else .Harry supposed that as Hogsmeade was the only allwizard village in Britain it was a bit of a haven for creatures like hags who were not as adept as wizards at disguising themselves .It was very hard to move through crowds in the Invisibility Cloak in case you accidentally trod on someone which tended to lead to awkward questions .Harry edged slowly toward a spare table in the corner while Hermione went to buy drinks .On his way through the pub Harry spotted Ron who was sitting with Fred George and Lee Jordan .Resisting the urge to give Ron a good hard poke in the back of the head he finally reached the table and sat down at it .Hermione joined him a moment later and slipped him a butterbeer under his cloak .I look like such an idiot sitting here on my own she muttered .Lucky I brought something to do .And she pulled out a notebook in which she had been keeping a record of S .P .E .W .members .Harry saw his and Rons names at the top of the very short list .It seemed a long time ago that they had sat making up those predictions together and Hermione had turned up and appointed them secretary and treasurer .You know maybe I should try and get some of the villagers involved in S .P .E .W .Hermione said thoughtfully looking around the pub .Yeah right said Harry .He took a swig of butterbeer under his cloak .Hermione when are you going to give up on this spew stuff ?When houseelves have decent wages and working conditions !she hissed back .You know Im starting to think its time for more direct action .I wonder how you get into the school kitchens ?No idea ask Fred and George said Harry .Hermione lapsed into thoughtful silence while Harry drank his butterbeer watching the people in the pub .All of them looked cheerful and relaxed .Ernie Macmillan and Hannah Abbott were swapping Chocolate Frog cards at a nearby table both of them sporting Support Cedric Diggory badges on their cloaks .Right over by the door he saw Cho and a large group of her Ravenclaw friends .She wasnt wearing a Cedric badge though .This cheered up Harry very slightly .What wouldnt he have given to be one of these people sitting around laughing and talking with nothing to worry about but homework ?He imagined how it would have felt to be here if his name hadnt come out of the Goblet of Fire .He wouldnt be wearing the Invisibility Cloak for one thing .Ron would be sitting with him .The three of them would probably be happily imagining what deadly dangerous task the school champions would be facing on Tuesday .Hed have been really looking forward to it watching them do whatever it was .cheering on Cedric with everyone else safe in a seat at the back of the stands .He wondered how the other champions were feeling .Every time he had seen Cedric lately he had been surrounded by admirers and looking nervous but excited .Harry glimpsed Fleur Delacour from time to time in the corridors she looked exactly as she always did haughty and unruffled .And Krum just sat in the library poring over books .Harry thought of Sirius and the tight tense knot in his chest seemed to ease slightly .He would be speaking to him in just over twelve hours for tonight was the night they were meeting at the common room fire assuming nothing went wrong as everything else had done lately .Look its Hagrid !said Hermione .The back of Hagrid s enormous shaggy head he had mercifully abandoned his bunches emerged over the crowd .Harry wondered why he hadnt spotted him at once as Hagrid was so large but standing up carefully he saw that Hagrid had been leaning low talking to Professor Moody .Hagrid had his usual enormous tankard in front of him but Moody was drinking from his hip flask .Madam Rosmerta the pretty landlady didnt seem to think much of this she was looking askance at Moody as she collected glasses from tables around them .Perhaps she thought it was an insult to her mulled mead but Harry knew better .Moody had told them all during their last Defense Against the Dark Arts lesson that he preferred to prepare his own food and drink at all times as it was so easy for Dark wizards to poison an unattended cup .As Harry watched he saw Hagrid and Moody get up to leave .He waved then remembered that Hagrid couldnt see him .Moody however paused his magical eye on the corner where Harry was standing .He tapped Hagrid in the small of the back being unable to reach his shoulder muttered something to him and then the pair of them made their way back across the pub toward Harry and Hermiones table .All right Hermione ?said Hagrid loudly .Hello said Hermione smiling back .Moody limped around the table and bent down Harry thought he was reading the S .P .E .W .notebook until he muttered Nice cloak Potter .Harry stared at him in amazement .The large chunk missing from Moodys nose was particularly obvious at a few inches distance .Moody grinned .Can your eye I mean can you ?Yeah it can see through Invisibility Cloaks Moody said quietly .And its come in useful at times I can tell you .Hagrid was beaming down at Harry too .Harry knew Hagrid couldnt see him but Moody had obviously told Hagrid he was there .Hagrid now bent down on the pretext of reading the S .P .E .W .notebook as well and said in a whisper so low that only Harry could hear it Harry meet me tonight at midnight at me cabin .Wear that cloak .Straightening up Hagrid said loudly Nice ter see yeh Hermione winked and departed .Moody followed him .Why does Hagrid want me to meet him at midnight ?Harry said very surprised .Does he ?said Hermione looking startled .I wonder what hes up to ?I dont know whether you should go Harry .She looked nervously around and hissed It might make you late for Sirius .It was true that going down to Hagrid s at midnight would mean cutting his meeting with Sirius very fine indeed Hermione suggested sending Hedwig down to Hagrid s to tell him he couldnt go always assuming she would consent to take the note of course Harry however thought it better just to be quick at whatever Hagrid wanted him for .He was very curious to know what this might be Hagrid had never asked Harry to visit him so late at night .At half past eleven that evening Harry who had pretended to go up to bed early pulled the Invisibility Cloak back over himself and crept back downstairs through the common room .Quite a few people were still in there .The Creevey brothers had managed to get hold of a stack of Support Cedric Diggoryl badges and were trying to bewitch them to make them say Support Harry Potter instead .So far however all they had managed to do was get the badges stuck on POTTER STINKS .Harry crept past them to the portrait hole and waited for a minute or so keeping an eye on his watch .Then Hermione opened the Fat Lady for him from outside as they had planned .He slipped past her with a whispered Thanks !and set off through the castle .The grounds were very dark .Harry walked down the lawn toward the lights shining in Hagrids cabin .The inside of the enormous Beauxbatons carriage was also lit up Harry could hear Madame Maxime talking inside it as he knocked on Hagrids front door .You there Harry ?Hagrid whispered opening the door and looking around .Yeah said Harry slipping inside the cabin and pulling the cloak down off his head .Whats up ?Got summat ter show yeh said Hagrid .There was an air of enormous excitement about Hagrid .He was wearing a flower that resembled an oversized artichoke in his buttonhole .It looked as though he had abandoned the use of axle grease but he had certainly attempted to comb his hair Harry could see the combs broken teeth tangled in it .Whatre you showing me ?Harry said warily wondering if the skrewts had laid eggs or Hagrid had managed to buy another giant threeheaded dog off a stranger in a pub .Come with me keep quiet an keep yerself covered with that cloak said Hagrid .We won take Fang he won like it .Listen Hagrid I cant stay long .Ive got to be back up at the castle by one oclock But Hagrid wasnt listening he was opening the cabin door and striding off into the night .Harry hurried to follow and found to his great surprise that Hagrid was leading him to the Beauxbatons carriage .Hagrid what ?Shhh !said Hagrid and he knocked three times on the door bearing the crossed golden wands .Madame Maxime opened it .She was wearing a silk shawl wrapped around her massive shoulders .She smiled when she saw Hagrid .Ah Agrid .it is time ?Bongsewer said Hagrid beaming at her and holding out a hand to help her down the golden steps .Madame Maxime closed the door behind her Hagrid offered her his arm and they set off around the edge of the paddock containing Madame Maxime s giant winged horses with Harry totally bewildered running to keep up with them .Had Hagrid wanted to show him Madame Maxime ?He could see her any old time he wanted .she wasnt exactly hard to miss .But it seemed that Madame Maxime was in for the same treat as Harry because after a while she said playfully Wair is it you are taking me Agrid ?Yehll enjoy this said Hagrid gruffly worth seem trust me .Ony don go tellin anyone I showed yeh right ?Yehre not sposed ter know .Of course not said Madame Maxime fluttering her long black eyelashes .And still they walked Harry getting more and more irritated as he jogged along in their wake checking his watch every now and then .Hagrid had some harebrained scheme in hand which might make him miss Sirius .If they didnt get there soon he was going to turn around go straight back to the castle and leave Hagrid to enjoy his moonlit stroll with Madame Maxime .But then when they had walked so far around the perimeter of the forest that the castle and the lake were out of sight Harry heard something .Men were shouting up ahead .then came a deafening earsplitting roar .Hagrid led Madame Maxime around a clump of trees and came to a halt .Harry hurried up alongside them for a split second he thought he was seeing bonfires and men darting around them and then his mouth fell open .Dragons .Four fully grown enormous viciouslooking dragons were rearing onto their hind legs inside an enclosure fenced with thick planks of wood roaring and snorting torrents of fire were shooting into the dark sky from their open fanged mouths fifty feet above the ground on their outstretched necks .There was a silveryblue one with long pointed horns snapping and snarling at the wizards on the ground a smooth scaled green one which was writhing and stamping with all its might a red one with an odd fringe of fine gold spikes around its face which was shooting mushroomshaped fire clouds into the air and a gigantic black one more lizardlike than the others which was nearest to them .At least thirty wizards seven or eight to each dragon were attempting to control them pulling on the chains connected to heavy leather straps around their necks and legs .Mesmerized Harry looked up high above him and saw the eyes of the black dragon with vertical pupils like a cats bulging with either fear or rage he couldnt tell which .It was making a horrible noise a yowling screeching scream .Keep back there Hagrid !yelled a wizard near the fence straining on the chain he was holding .They can shoot fire at a range of twenty feet you know !Ive seen this Horntail do forty !Isn it beautiful ?said Hagrid softly .Its no good !yelled another wizard .Stunning Spells on the count of three !Harry saw each of the dragon keepers pull out his wand .Stupefy they shouted in unison and the Stunning Spells shot into the darkness like fiery rockets bursting in showers of stars on the dragons scaly hides Harry watched the dragon nearest to them teeter dangerously on its back legs its jaws stretched wide in a silent howl its nostrils were suddenly devoid of flame though still smoking then very slowly it fell .Several tons of sinewy scalyblack dragon hit the ground with a thud that Harry could have sworn made the trees behind him quake .The dragon keepers lowered their wands and walked forward to their fallen charges each of which was the size of a small hill .They hurried to tighten the chains and fasten them securely to iron pegs which they forced deep into the ground with their wands .Wan a closer look ?Hagrid asked Madame Maxime excitedly .The pair of them moved right up to the fence and Harry followed .The wizard who had warned Hagrid not to come any closer turned and Harry realized who it was Charlie Weasley .All right Hagrid ?he panted coming over to talk .They should be okay now we put them out with a Sleeping Draft on the way here thought it might be better for them to wake up in the dark and the quiet but like you saw they werent happy not happy at all What breeds you got here Charlie ?said Hagrid gazing at the closest dragon the black one with something close to reverence .Its eyes were still just open .Harry could see a strip of gleaming yellow beneath its wrinkled black eyelid .This is a Hungarian Horntail said Charlie .Theres a Common Welsh Green over there the smaller one a Swedish ShortSnout that bluegray and a Chinese Fireball thats the red .Charlie looked around Madame Maxime was strolling away around the edge of the enclosure gazing at the stunned dragons .I didnt know you were bringing her Hagrid Charlie said frowning .The champions arent supposed to know whats coming shes bound to tell her student isnt she ?Jus thought shed like ter see em shrugged Hagrid still gazing enraptured at the dragons .Really romantic date Hagrid said Charlie shaking his head .Four .said Hagrid so its one fer each o the champions is it ?Whatve they gotta do fight em ?Just get past them I think said Charlie .Well be on hand if it gets nasty Extinguishing Spells at the ready .They wanted nesting mothers I dont know why .but I tell you this I dont envy the one who gets the Horntail .Vicious thing .Its back ends as dangerous as its front look .Charlie pointed toward the Horntails tail and Harry saw long bronzecolored spikes protruding along it every few inches .Five of Charlies fellow keepers staggered up to the Horntail at that moment carrying a clutch of huge granitegray eggs between them in a blanket .They placed them carefully at the Horntails side .Hagrid let out a moan of longing .Ive got them counted Hagrid said Charlie sternly .Then he said Hows Harry ?Fine said Hagrid .He was still gazing at the eggs .Just hope hes still fine after hes faced this lot said Charlie grimly looking out over the dragons enclosure .I didnt dare tell Mum what hes got to do for the first task shes already having kittens about him .Charlie imitated his mothers anxious voice . ‘ How could they let him enter that tournament hes much too young I thought they were all safe I thought there was going to he an age limiti She was in floods after that Daily Prophet article about him . ‘He still cries about his parents Oh bless him I never knew Harry had had enough .Trusting to the fact that Hagrid wouldnt miss him with the attractions of four dragons and Madame Maxime to occupy him he turned silently and began to walk away back to the castle .He didnt know whether he was glad hed seen what was coming or not .Perhaps this way was better .The first shock was over now .Maybe if hed seen the dragons for the first time on Tuesday he would have passed out cold in front of the whole school .but maybe he would anyway .He was going to be armed with his wand which just now felt like nothing more than a narrow strip of wood against a fifty foothigh scaly spikeridden firebreathing dragon .And he had to get past it .With everyone watching .How ?Harry sped up skirting the edge of the forest he had just under fifteen minutes to get back to the fireside and talk to Sirius and he couldnt remember ever wanting to talk to someone more than he did right now when without warning he ran into something very solid .Harry fell backward his glasses askew clutching the cloak around him .A voice nearby said Ouch !Whos there ?Harry hastily checked that the cloak was covering him and lay very still staring up at the dark outline of the wizard he had hit .He recognized the goatee .it was Karkaroff .Whos there ?said Karkaroff again very suspiciously looking around in the darkness .Harry remained still and silent .After a minute or so Karkaroff seemed to decide that he had hit some sort of animal he was looking around at waist height as though expecting to see a dog .Then he crept back under the cover of the trees and started to edge forward toward the place where the dragons were .Very slowly and very carefully Harry got to his feet and set off again as fast as he could without making too much noise hurrying through the darkness back toward Hogwarts .He had no doubt whatsoever what Karkaroff was up to .He had sneaked off his ship to try and find out what the first task was going to be .He might even have spotted Hagrid and Madame Maxime heading off around the forest together they were hardly difficult to spot at a distance .and now all Karkaroff had to do was follow the sound of voices and he like Madame Maxime would know what was in store for the champions .By the looks of it the only champion who would be facing the unknown on Tuesday was Cedric .Harry reached the castle slipped in through the front doors and began to climb the marble stairs he was very out of breath but he didnt dare slow down .He had less than five minutes to get up to the fire .Balderdash !he gasped at the Fat Lady who was snoozing in her frame in front of the portrait hole .If you say so she muttered sleepily without opening her eyes and the picture swung forward to admit him .Harry climbed inside .The common room was deserted and judging by the fact that it smelled quite normal Hermione had not needed to set off any Dungbombs to ensure that he and Sirius got privacy .Harry pulled off the Invisibility Cloak and threw himself into an armchair in front of the fire .The room was in semidarkness the flames were the only source of light .Nearby on a table the Support Cedric Diggoryl badges the Creeveys had been trying to improve were glinting in the firelight .They now read POTTER REALLY STINKS .Harry looked back into the flames and jumped .Siriuss head was sitting in the fire .If Harry hadnt seen Mr Diggory do exactly this back in the Weasleys kitchen it would have scared him out of his wits .Instead his face breaking into the first smile he had worn for days he scrambled out of his chair crouched down by the hearth and said Sirius how re you doing ?Sirius looked different from Harrys memory of him .When they had said goodbye Siriuss face had been gaunt and sunken surrounded by a quantity of long black matted hair but the hair was short and clean now Siriuss face was fuller and he looked younger much more like the only photograph Harry had of him which had been taken at the Potters wedding .Never mind me how are you ?said Sirius seriously .Im For a second Harry tried to say fine but he couldnt do it .Before he could stop himself he was talking more than hed talked in days about how no one believed he hadnt entered the tournament of his own free will how Rita Skeeter had lied about him in the Daily Prophet how he couldnt walk down a corridor without being sneered at and about Ron Ron not believing him Rons jealousy . .and now Hagrids just shown me whats coming in the first task and its dragons Sirius and Im a goner he finished desperately .Sirius looked at him eyes full of concern eyes that had not yet lost the look that Azkaban had given them that deadened haunted look .He had let Harry talk himself into silence without interruption but now he said Dragons we can deal with Harry but well get to that in a minute I havent got long here .Ive broken into a wizarding house to use the fire but they could be back at any time .There are things I need to warn you about .What ?said Harry feeling his spirits slip a further few notches .Surely there could be nothing worse than dragons coming ?Karkaroff said Sirius .Harry he was a Death Eater .You know what Death Eaters are dont you ?Yes he what ?He was caught he was in Azkaban with me but he got released .Id bet everything thats why Dumbledore wanted an Auror at Hogwarts this year to keep an eye on him .Moody caught Karkaroff .Put him into Azkaban in the first place .Karkaroff got released ?Harry said slowly his brain seemed to be struggling to absorb yet another piece of shocking information .Why did they release him ?He did a deal with the Ministry of Magic said Sirius bitterly .He said hed seen the error of his ways and then he named names .he put a load of other people into Azkaban in his place .Hes not very popular in there I can tell you .And since he got out from what I can tell hes been teaching the Dark Arts to every student who passes through that school of his .So watch out for the Durmstrang champion as well .Okay said Harry slowly .But .are you saying Karkaroff put my name in the goblet ?Because if he did hes a really good actor .He seemed furious about it .He wanted to stop me from competing .We know hes a good actor said Sirius because he convinced the Ministry of Magic to set him free didnt he ?Now Ive been keeping an eye on the Daily Prophet Harry you and the rest of the world said Harry bitterly .and reading between the lines of that Skeeter womans article last month Moody was attacked the night before he started at Hogwarts .Yes I know she says it was another false alarm Sirius said hastily seeing Harry about to speak but I dont think so somehow .I think someone tried to stop him from getting to Hogwarts .I think someone knew their job would be a lot more difficult with him around .And no ones going to look into it too closely MadEyes heard intruders a bit too often .But that doesnt mean he cant still spot the real thing .Moody was the best Auror the Ministry ever had .So .what are you saying ?said Harry slowly .Karkaroffs trying to kill me ?But why ?Sirius hesitated .Ive been hearing some very strange things he said slowly .The Death Eaters seem to be a bit more active than usual lately .They showed themselves at the Quidditch World Cup didnt they ?Someone set off the Dark Mark .and then did you hear about that Ministry of Magic witch whos gone missing ?Bertha Jorkins ?said Harry .Exactly .she disappeared in Albania and thats definitely where Voldemort was rumored to be last .and she would have known the Triwizard Tournament was coming up wouldnt she ?Yeah but .its not very likely shed have walked straight into Voldemort is it ?said Harry .Listen I knew Bertha Jorkins said Sirius grimly .She was at Hogwarts when I was a few years above your dad and me .And she was an idiot .Very nosy but no brains none at all .Its not a good combination Harry .Id say shed be very easy to lure into a trap .So .so Voldemort could have found out about the tournament ?said Harry .Is that what you mean ?You think Karkaroff might be here on his orders ?I dont know said Sirius slowly I just dont know .Karkaroff doesnt strike me as the type whod go back to Voldemort unless he knew Voldemort was powerful enough to protect him .But whoever put your name in that goblet did it for a reason and I cant help thinking the tournament would be a very good way to attack you and make it look like an accident .Looks like a really good plan from where Im standing said Harry grinning bleakly .Theyll just have to stand back and let the dragons do their stuff .Right these dragons said Sirius speaking very quickly now .Theres a way Harry .Dont be tempted to try a Stunning Spell dragons are strong and too powerfully magical to be knocked out by a single Stunner you need about half a dozen wizards at a time to overcome a dragon Yeah I know I just saw said Harry .But you can do it alone said Sirius .There is a way and a simple spells all you need .Just But Harry held up a hand to silence him his heart suddenly pounding as though it would burst .He could hear footsteps coming down the spiral staircase behind him .Go !he hissed at Sirius .Go !Theres someone coming !Harry scrambled to his feet hiding the fire if someone saw Siriuss face within the walls of Hogwarts they would raise an almighty uproar the Ministry would get dragged in he Harry would be questioned about Siriuss whereabouts Harry heard a tiny pop in the fire behind him and knew Sirius had gone .He watched the bottom of the spiral staircase .Who had decided to go for a stroll at one oclock in the morning and stopped Sirius from telling him how to get past a dragon ?It was Ron .Dressed in his maroon paisley pajamas Ron stopped dead facing Harry across the room and looked around .Who were you talking to ?he said .Whats that got to do with you ?Harry snarled .What are you doing down here at this time of night ?I just wondered where you Ron broke off shrugging .Nothing .Im going back to bed .Just thought youd come nosing around did you ?Harry shouted .He knew that Ron had no idea what hed walked in on knew he hadnt done it on purpose but he didnt care at this moment he hated everything about Ron right down to the several inches of bare ankle showing beneath his pajama trousers .Sorry about that said Ron his face reddening with anger .Shouldve realized you didnt want to be disturbed .Ill let you get on with practicing for your next interview in peace .Harry seized one of the POTTER REALLY STINKS badges off the table and chucked it as hard as he could across the room .It hit Ron on the forehead and bounced off .There you go Harry said .Something for you to wear on Tuesday .You might even have a scar now if youre lucky .Thats what you want isnt it ?He strode across the room toward the stairs he half expected Ron to stop him he would even have liked Ron to throw a punch at him but Ron just stood there in his toosmall pajamas and Harry having stormed upstairs lay awake in bed fuming for a long time afterward and didnt hear him come up to bed .THE FIRST TASK Harry got up on Sunday morning and dressed so inattentively that it was a while before he realized he was trying to pull his hat onto his foot instead of his sock .When hed finally got all his clothes on the right parts of his body he hurried off to find Hermione locating her at the Gryffindor table in the Great Hall where she was eating breakfast with Ginny .Feeling too queasy to eat Harry waited until Hermione had swallowed her last spoonful of porridge then dragged her out onto the grounds .There he told her all about the dragons and about everything Sirius had said while they took another long walk around the lake .Alarmed as she was by Siriuss warnings about Karkaroff Hermione still thought that the dragons were the more pressing problem .Lets just try and keep you alive until Tuesday evening she said desperately and then we can worry about Karkaroff .They walked three times around the lake trying all the way to think of a simple spell that would subdue a dragon .Nothing whatsoever occurred to them so they retired to the library instead .Here Harry pulled down every book he could find on dragons and both of them set to work searching through the large pile . ‘Talonclipping by charms .treating scalerot .This is no good this is for nutters like Hagrid who want to keep them healthy . ‘Dragons are extremely difficult to slay owing to the ancient magic that imbues their thick hides which none but the most powerful spells can penetrate .But Sirius said a simple one would do it .Lets try some simple spellbooks then said Harry throwing aside Men Who Love Dragons Too Much .He returned to the table with a pile of spellbooks set them down and began to flick through each in turn Hermione whispering nonstop at his elbow .Well there are Switching Spells .but whats the point of Switching it ?Unless you swapped its fangs for winegums or something that would make it less dangerous .The trouble is like that book said not much is going to get through a dragons hide .Id say Transfigure it but something that big you really havent got a hope I doubt even Professor McGonagall .unless youre supposed to put the spell on yourself ?Maybe to give yourself extra powers ?But theyre not simple spells I mean we havent done any of those in class I only know about them because Ive been doing O .W .L .practice papers .Hermione Harry said through gritted teeth will you shut up for a bit please ?Im trying to concentrate .But all that happened when Hermione fell silent was that Harrys brain filled with a sort of blank buzzing which didnt seem to allow room for concentration .He stared hopelessly down the index of Basic Hexes for the Busy and Vexed .Instant scalping .but dragons had no hair .pepper breath .that would probably increase a dragons firepower .horn tongue .just what he needed to give it an extra weapon .Oh no hes back again why cant he read on his stupid ship ?said Hermione irritably as Viktor Krum slouched in cast a surly look over at the pair of them and settled himself in a distant corner with a pile of books .Come on Harry well go back to the common room .his fan clubll be here in a moment twittering away .And sure enough as they left the library a gang of girls tiptoed past them one of them wearing a Bulgaria scarf tied around her waist .Harry barely slept that night .When he awoke on Monday morning he seriously considered for the first time ever just running away from Hogwarts .But as he looked around the Great Hall at breakfast time and thought about what leaving the castle would mean he knew he couldnt do it .It was the only place he had ever been happy .well he supposed he must have been happy with his parents too but he couldnt remember that .Somehow the knowledge that he would rather be here and facing a dragon than back on Privet Drive with Dudley was good to know it made him feel slightly calmer .He finished his bacon with difficulty his throat wasnt working too well and as he and Hermione got up he saw Cedric Diggory leaving the Hufflepuff table .Cedric still didnt know about the dragons .the only champion who didnt if Harry was right in thinking that Maxime and Karkaroff would have told Fleur and Krum .Hermione Ill see you in the greenhouses Harry said coming to his decision as he watched Cedric leaving the Hall .Go on Ill catch you up .Harry youll be late the bells about to ring Ill catch you up okay ?By the time Harry reached the bottom of the marble staircase Cedric was at the top .He was with a load of sixthyear friends .Harry didnt want to talk to Cedric in front of them they were among those who had been quoting Rita Skeeters article at him every time he went near them .He followed Cedric at a distance and saw that he was heading toward the Charms corridor .This gave Harry an idea .Pausing at a distance from them he pulled out his wand and took careful aim .Diffindol Cedrics bag split .Parchment quills and books spilled out of it onto the floor .Several bottles of ink smashed .Dont bother said Cedric in an exasperated voice as his friends bent down to help him .Tell Flitwick Im coming go on .This was exactly what Harry had been hoping for .He slipped his wand back into his robes waited until Cedrics friends had disappeared into their classroom and hurried up the corridor which was now empty of everyone but himself and Cedric .Hi said Cedric picking up a copy of A Guide to Advanced Transfiguration that was now splattered with ink .My bag just split .brandnew and all .Cedric said Harry the first task is dragons .What ?said Cedric looking up .Dragons said Harry speaking quickly in case Professor Flitwick came out to see where Cedric had got to .Theyve got four one for each of us and weve got to get past them .Cedric stared at him .Harry saw some of the panic hed been feeling since Saturday night flickering in Cedrics gray eyes .Are you sure ?Cedric said in a hushed voice .Dead sure said Harry .Ive seen them .But how did you find out ?Were not supposed to know .Never mind said Harry quickly he knew Hagrid would be in trouble if he told the truth .But Im not the only one who knows .Fleur and Krum will know by now Maxime and Karkaroff both saw the dragons too .Cedric straightened up his arms full of inky quills parchment and books his ripped bag dangling off one shoulder .He stared at Harry and there was a puzzled almost suspicious look in his eyes .Why are you telling me ?he asked .Harry looked at him in disbelief .He was sure Cedric wouldnt have asked that if he had seen the dragons himself .Harry wouldnt have let his worst enemy face those monsters unprepared well perhaps Malfoy or Snape .Its just .fair isnt it ?he said to Cedric .We all know now .were on an even footing arent we ?Cedric was still looking at him in a slightly suspicious way when Harry heard a familiar clunking noise behind him .He turned around and saw MadEye Moody emerging from a nearby classroom .Come with me Potter he growled .Diggory off you go .Harry stared apprehensively at Moody .Had he overheard them ?Er Professor Im supposed to be in Herbology Never mind that Potter .In my office please .Harry followed him wondering what was going to happen to him now .What if Moody wanted to know how hed found out about the dragons ?Would Moody go to Dumbledore and tell on Hagrid or just turn Harry into a ferret ?Well it might be easier to get past a dragon if he were a ferret Harry thought dully hed be smaller much less easy to see from a height of fifty feet .He followed Moody into his office .Moody closed the door behind them and turned to look at Harry his magical eye fixed upon him as well as the normal one .That was a very decent thing you just did Potter Moody said quietly .Harry didnt know what to say this wasnt the reaction he had expected at all .Sit down said Moody and Harry sat looking around .He had visited this office under two of its previous occupants .In Professor Lockharts day the walls had been plastered with beaming winking pictures of Professor Lockhart himself .When Lupin had lived here you were more likely to come across a specimen of some fascinating new Dark creature he had procured for them to study in class .Now however the office was full of a number of exceptionally odd objects that Harry supposed Moody had used in the days when he had been an Auror .On his desk stood what looked like a large cracked glass spinning top Harry recognized it at once as a Sneakoscope because he owned one himself though it was much smaller than Moodys .In the corner on a small table stood an object that looked something like an extra squiggly golden television aerial .It was humming slightly .What appeared to be a mirror hung opposite Harry on the wall but it was not reflecting the room .Shadowy figures were moving around inside it none of them clearly in focus .Like my Dark Detectors do you ?said Moody who was watching Harry closely .Whats that ?Harry asked pointing at the squiggly golden aerial .Secrecy Sensor .Vibrates when it detects concealment and lies .no use here of course too much interference students in every direction lying about why they havent done their homework .Been humming ever since I got here .I had to disable my Sneakoscope because it wouldnt stop whistling .Its extrasensitive picks up stuff about a mile around .Of course it could be picking up more than kid stuff he added in a growl .And whats the mirror for ?Oh thats my FoeGlass .See them out there skulking around ?Im not really in trouble until I see the whites of their eyes .Thats when I open my trunk .He let out a short harsh laugh and pointed to the large trunk under the window .It had seven keyholes in a row .Harry wondered what was in there until Moodys next question brought him sharply back to earth .So .found out about the dragons have you ?Harry hesitated .Hed been afraid of this but he hadnt told Cedric and he certainly wasnt going to tell Moody that Hagrid had broken the rules .Its all right said Moody sitting down and stretching out his wooden leg with a groan .Cheatings a traditional part of the Triwizard Tournament and always has been .I didnt cheat said Harry sharply .It was a sort of accident that I found out .Moody grinned .I wasnt accusing you laddie .Ive been telling Dumbledore from the start he can be as highminded as he likes but you can bet old Karkaroff and Maxime wont be .Theyll have told their champions everything they can .They want to win .They want to beat Dumbledore .Theyd like to prove hes only human .Moody gave another harsh laugh and his magical eye swiveled around so fast it made Harry feel queasy to watch it .So .got any ideas how youre going to get past your dragon yet ?said Moody .No said Harry .Well Im not going to tell you said Moody gruffly .I dont show favoritism me .Im just going to give you some good general advice .And the first bit is play to your strengths .I havent got any said Harry before he could stop himself .Excuse me growled Moody youve got strengths if I say youve got them .Think now .What are you best at ?Harry tried to concentrate .What was he best at ?Well that was easy really Quidditch he said dully and a fat lot of help Thats right said Moody staring at him very hard his magical eye barely moving at all .Youre a damn good flier from what Ive heard .Yeah but .Harry stared at him .Im not allowed a broom Ive only got my wand My second piece of general advice said Moody loudly interrupting him is to use a nice simple spell that will enable you to get what you need .Harry looked at him blankly .What did he need ?Come on boy .whispered Moody .Put them together .its not that difficult .And it clicked .He was best at flying .He needed to pass the dragon in the air .For that he needed his Firebolt .And for his Firebolt he needed Hermione Harry whispered when he had sped into greenhouse three minutes later uttering a hurried apology to Professor Sprout as he passed her .Hermione I need you to help me .What dyou think Ive been trying to do Harry ?she whispered back her eyes round with anxiety over the top of the quivering Flutterby Bush she was pruning .Hermione I need to learn how to do a Summoning Charm properly by tomorrow afternoon .And so they practiced .They didnt have lunch but headed for a free classroom where Harry tried with all his might to make various objects fly across the room toward him .He was still having problems .The books and quills kept losing heart halfway across the room and dropping like stones to the floor .Concentrate Harry concentrate .What dyou think Im trying to do ?said Harry angrily .A great big dragon keeps popping up in my head for some reason .Okay try again .He wanted to skip Divination to keep practicing but Hermione refused pointblank to skive off Arithmancy and there was no point in staying without her .He therefore had to endure over an hour of Professor Trelawney who spent half the lesson telling everyone that the position of Mars with relation to Saturn at that moment meant that people born in July were in great danger of sudden violent deaths .Well thats good said Harry loudly his temper getting the better of him just as long as its not drawnout .I dont want to suffer .Ron looked for a moment as though he was going to laugh he certainly caught Harrys eye for the first time in days but Harry was still feeling too resentful toward Ron to care .He spent the rest of the lesson trying to attract small objects toward him under the table with his wand .He managed to make a fly zoom straight into his hand though he wasnt entirely sure that was his prowess at Summoning Charms perhaps the fly was just stupid .He forced down some dinner after Divination then returned to the empty classroom with Hermione using the Invisibility Cloak to avoid the teachers .They kept practicing until past midnight .They would have stayed longer but Peeves turned up and pretending to think that Harry wanted things thrown at him started chucking chairs across the room .Harry and Hermione left in a hurry before the noise attracted Filch and went back to the Gryffindor common room which was now mercifully empty .At two oclock in the morning Harry stood near the fireplace surrounded by heaps of objects books quills several upturned chairs an old set of Gobstones and Nevilles toad Trevor .Only in the last hour had Harry really got the hang of the Summoning Charm .Thats better Harry thats loads better Hermione said looking exhausted but very pleased .Well now we know what to do next time I cant manage a spell Harry said throwing a rune dictionary back to Hermione so he could try again threaten me with a dragon .Right .He raised his wand once more .Accio Dictionary !The heavy book soared out of Hermione s hand flew across the room and Harry caught it .Harry I really think youve got it !said Hermione delightedly .Just as long as it works tomorrow Harry said .The Firebolts going to be much farther away than the stuff in here its going to be in the castle and Im going to be out there on the grounds .That doesnt matter said Hermione firmly Just as long as youre concentrating really really hard on it itll come .Harry wed better get some sleep .youre going to need it .Harry had been focusing so hard on learning the Summoning Charm that evening that some of his blind panic had left him .It returned in full measure however on the following morning .The atmosphere in the school was one of great tension and excitement .Lessons were to stop at midday giving all the students time to get down to the dragons enclosure though of course they didnt yet know what they would find there .Harry felt oddly separate from everyone around him whether they were wishing him good luck or hissing Well have a box of tissues ready Potted as he passed .It was a state of nervousness so advanced that he wondered whether he mightnt just lose his head when they tried to lead him out to his dragon and start trying to curse everyone in sight .Time was behaving in a more peculiar fashion than ever rushing past in great dollops so that one moment he seemed to be sitting down in his first lesson History of Magic and the next walking into lunch .and then where had the morning gone ?the last of the dragonfree hours ?Professor McGonagall was hurrying over to him in the Great Hall .Lots of people were watching .Potter the champions have to come down onto the grounds now .You have to get ready for your first task .Okay said Harry standing up his fork falling onto his plate with a clatter .Good luck Harry Hermione whispered .Youll be fine !Yeah said Harry in a voice that was most unlike his own .He left the Great Hall with Professor McGonagall .She didnt seem herself either in fact she looked nearly as anxious as Hermione .As she walked him down the stone steps and out into the cold November afternoon she put her hand on his shoulder .Now dont panic she said just keep a cool head . .Weve got wizards standing by to control the situation if it gets out of hand .The main thing is just to do your best and nobody will think any the worse of you .Are you all right ?Yes Harry heard himself say .Yes Im fine .She was leading him toward the place where the dragons were around the edge of the forest but when they approached the clump of trees behind which the enclosure would be clearly visible Harry saw that a tent had been erected its entrance facing them screening the dragons from view .Youre to go in here with the other champions said Professor McGonagall in a rather shaky sort of voice and wait for your turn Potter .Mr Bagman is in there .hell be telling you the the procedure .Good luck .Thanks said Harry in a flat distant voice .She left him at the entrance of the tent .Harry went inside .Fleur Delacour was sitting in a corner on a low wooden stool .She didnt look nearly as composed as usual but rather pale and clammy .Viktor Krum looked even surlier than usual which Harry supposed was his way of showing nerves .Cedric was pacing up and down .When Harry entered Cedric gave him a small smile which Harry returned feeling the muscles in his face working rather hard as though they had forgotten how to do it .Harry !Goodo !said Bagman happily looking around at him .Come in come in make yourself at home !Bagman looked somehow like a slightly overblown cartoon figure standing amid all the palefaced champions .He was wearing his old Wasp robes again .Well now were all here time to fill you in !said Bagman brightly .When the audience has assembled Im going to be offering each of you this bag he held up a small sack of purple silk and shook it at them from which you will each select a small model of the thing you are about to face !There are different er varieties you see .And I have to tell you something else too .ah yes .your task is to collect the golden egg Harry glanced around .Cedric had nodded once to show that he understood Bagmans words and then started pacing around the tent again he looked slightly green .Fleur Delacour and Krum hadnt reacted at all .Perhaps they thought they might be sick if they opened their mouths that was certainly how Harry felt .But they at least had volunteered for this .And in no time at all hundreds upon hundreds of pairs of feet could be heard passing the tent their owners talking excitedly laughing joking .Harry felt as separate from the crowd as though they were a different species .And then it seemed like about a second later to Harry Bagman was opening the neck of the purple silk sack .Ladies first he said offering it to Fleur Delacour .She put a shaking hand inside the bag and drew out a tiny perfect model of a dragon a Welsh Green .It had the number two around its neck .And Harry knew by the fact that Fleur showed no sign of surprise but rather a determined resignation that he had been right Madame Maxime had told her what was coming .The same held true for Krum .He pulled out the scarlet Chinese Fireball .It had a number three around its neck .He didnt even blink just sat back down and stared at the ground .Cedric put his hand into the bag and out came the blueishgray Swedish ShortSnout the number one tied around its neck .Knowing what was left Harry put his hand into the silk bag and pulled out the Hungarian Horntail and the number four .It stretched its wings as he looked down at it and bared its minuscule fangs .Well there you are !said Bagman .You have each pulled out the dragon you will face and the numbers refer to the order in which you are to take on the dragons do you see ?Now Im going to have to leave you in a moment because Im commentating .Mr Diggory youre first just go out into the enclosure when you hear a whistle all right ?Now .Harry .could I have a quick word ?Outside ?Er .yes said Harry blankly and he got up and went out of the tent with Bagman who walked him a short distance away into the trees and then turned to him with a fatherly expression on his face .Feeling all right Harry ?Anything I can get you ?What ?said Harry .I no nothing .Got a plan ?said Bagman lowering his voice conspiratorially .Because I dont mind sharing a few pointers if youd like them you know .I mean Bagman continued lowering his voice still further youre the underdog here Harry .Anything I can do to help .No said Harry so quickly he knew he had sounded rude no I I know what Im going to do thanks .Nobody would know Harry said Bagman winking at him .No Im fine said Harry wondering why he kept telling people this and wondering whether he had ever been less fine .Ive got a plan worked out I A whistle had blown somewhere .Good lord Ive got to run !said Bagman in alarm and he hurried off .Harry walked back to the tent and saw Cedric emerging from it greener than ever .Harry tried to wish him luck as he walked past but all that came out of his mouth was a sort of hoarse grunt .Harry went back inside to Fleur and Krum .Seconds later they heard the roar of the crowd which meant Cedric had entered the enclosure and was now face toface with the living counterpart of his model .It was worse than Harry could ever have imagined sitting there and listening .The crowd screamed .yelled .gasped like a single manyheaded entity as Cedric did whatever he was doing to get past the Swedish ShortSnout .Krum was still staring at the ground .Fleur had now taken to retracing Cedrics steps around and around the tent .And Bagmans commentary made everything much much worse .Horrible pictures formed in Harrys mind as he heard Oooh narrow miss there very narrow .Hes taking risks this one ! .Clever move pity it didnt work !And then after about fifteen minutes Harry heard the deafening roar that could mean only one thing Cedric had gotten past his dragon and captured the golden egg .Very good indeed !Bagman was shouting .And now the marks from the judges !But he didnt shout out the marks Harry supposed the judges were holding them up and showing them to the crowd .One down three to go !Bagman yelled as the whistle blew again .Miss Delacour if you please !Fleur was trembling from head to foot Harry felt more warmly toward her than he had done so far as she left the tent with her head held high and her hand clutching her wand .He and Krum were left alone at opposite sides of the tent avoiding each others gaze .The same process started again .Oh Im not sure that was wise !they could hear Bagman shouting gleefully .Oh .nearly !Careful now .good lord I thought shed had it then !Ten minutes later Harry heard the crowd erupt into applause once more .Fleur must have been successful too .A pause while Fleurs marks were being shown .more clapping .then for the third time the whistle .And here comes Mr Krum !cried Bagman and Krum slouched out leaving Harry quite alone .He felt much more aware of his body than usual very aware of the way his heart was pumping fast and his fingers tingling with fear .yet at the same time he seemed to be outside himself seeing the walls of the tent and hearing the crowd as though from far away .Very daring !Bagman was yelling and Harry heard the Chinese Fireball emit a horrible roaring shriek while the crowd drew its collective breath .Thats some nerve hes showing and yes hes got the egg !Applause shattered the wintery air like breaking glass Krum had finished it would be Harrys turn any moment .He stood up noticing dimly that his legs seemed to be made of marshmallow .He waited .And then he heard the whistle blow .He walked out through the entrance of the tent the panic rising into a crescendo inside him .And now he was walking past the trees through a gap in the enclosure fence .He saw everything in front of him as though it was a very highly colored dream .There were hundreds and hundreds of faces staring down at him from stands that had been magicked there since hed last stood on this spot .And there was the Horntail at the other end of the enclosure crouched low over her clutch of eggs her wings halffurled her evil yellow eyes upon him a monstrous scaly black lizard thrashing her spiked tail leaving yardlong gouge marks in the hard ground .The crowd was making a great deal of noise but whether friendly or not Harry didnt know or care .It was time to do what he had to do .to focus his mind entirely and absolutely upon the thing that was his only chance .He raised his wand .Accio Firebolti he shouted .Harry waited every fiber of him hoping praying .If it hadnt worked .if it wasnt coming .He seemed to be looking at everything around him through some sort of shimmering transparent barrier like a heat haze which made the enclosure and the hundreds of faces around him swim strangely .And then he heard it speeding through the air behind him he turned and saw his Firebolt hurtling toward him around the edge of the woods soaring into the enclosure and stopping dead in midair beside him waiting for him to mount .The crowd was making even more noise .Bagman was shouting something .but Harrys ears were not working properly anymore .listening wasnt important .He swung his leg over the broom and kicked off from the ground .And a second later something miraculous happened .As he soared upward as the wind rushed through his hair as the crowds faces became mere fleshcolored pinpricks below and the Horntail shrank to the size of a dog he realized that he had left not only the ground behind but also his fear .He was back where he belonged .This was just another Quidditch match that was all .just another Quidditch match and that Horntail was just another ugly opposing team .He looked down at the clutch of eggs and spotted the gold one gleaming against its cementcolored fellows residing safely between the dragons front legs .Okay Harry told himself diversionary tactics .lets go .He dived .The Horntails head followed him he knew what it was going to do and pulled out of the dive just in time a jet of fire had been released exactly where he would have been had he not swerved away .but Harry didnt care .that was no more than dodging a Bludger .Great Scott he can fly !yelled Bagman as the crowd shrieked and gasped .Are you watching this Mr Krum ?Harry soared higher in a circle the Horntail was still following his progress its head revolving on its long neck if he kept this up it would be nicely dizzy but better not push it too long or it would be breathing fire again Harry plummeted just as the Horntail opened its mouth but this time he was less lucky he missed the flames but the tail came whipping up to meet him instead and as he swerved to the left one of the long spikes grazed his shoulder ripping his robes He could feel it stinging he could hear screaming and groans from the crowd but the cut didnt seem to be deep .Now he zoomed around the back of the Horntail and a possibility occurred to him .The Horntail didnt seem to want to take off she was too protective of her eggs .Though she writhed and twisted furling and unfurling her wings and keeping those fearsome yellow eyes on Harry she was afraid to move too far from them .but he had to persuade her to do it or hed never get near them .The trick was to do it carefully gradually .He began to fly first this way then the other not near enough to make her breathe fire to stave him off but still posing a sufficient threat to ensure she kept her eyes on him .Her head swayed this way and that watching him out of those vertical pupils her fangs bared .He flew higher .The Horntails head rose with him her neck now stretched to its fullest extent still swaying like a snake before its charmer .Harry rose a few more feet and she let out a roar of exasperation .He was like a fly to her a fly she was longing to swat her tail thrashed again but he was too high to reach now .She shot fire into the air which he dodged .Her jaws opened wide .Come on Harry hissed swerving tantalizingly above her come on come and get me .up you get now .And then she reared spreading her great black leathery wings at last as wide as those of a small airplane and Harry dived .Before the dragon knew what he had done or where he had disappeared to he was speeding toward the ground as fast as he could go toward the eggs now unprotected by her clawed front legs he had taken his hands off his Firebolt he had seized the golden egg And with a huge spurt of speed he was off he was soaring out over the stands the heavy egg safely under his uninjured arm and it was as though somebody had just turned the volume back up for the first time he became properly aware of the noise of the crowd which was screaming and applauding as loudly as the Irish supporters at the World Cup Look at that !Bagman was yelling .Will you look at that !Our youngest champion is quickest to get his egg !Well this is going to shorten the odds on Mr Potter !Harry saw the dragon keepers rushing forward to subdue the Horntail and over at the entrance to the enclosure Professor McGonagall Professor Moody and Hagrid hurrying to meet him all of them waving him toward them their smiles evident even from this distance .He flew back over the stands the noise of the crowd pounding his eardrums and came in smoothly to land his heart lighter than it had been in weeks .He had got through the first task he had survived .That was excellent Potter !cried Professor McGonagall as he got off the Firebolt which from her was extravagant praise .He noticed that her hand shook as she pointed at his shoulder .Youll need to see Madam Pomfrey before the judges give out your score .Over there shes had to mop up Diggory already .Yeh did it Harry !said Hagrid hoarsely .Yeh did it !An agains the Horntail an all an yeh know Charlie said that was the wors Thanks Hagrid said Harry loudly so that Hagrid wouldnt blunder on and reveal that he had shown Harry the dragons beforehand .Professor Moody looked very pleased too his magical eye was dancing in its socket .Nice and easy does the trick Potter he growled .Right then Potter the first aid tent please .said Professor McGonagall .Harry walked out of the enclosure still panting and saw Madam Pomfrey standing at the mouth of a second tent looking worried .Dragons !she said in a disgusted tone pulling Harry inside .The tent was divided into cubicles he could make out Cedrics shadow through the canvas but Cedric didnt seem to be badly injured he was sitting up at least .Madam Pomfrey examined Harrys shoulder talking furiously all the while .Last year dementors this year dragons what are they going to bring into this school next ?Youre very lucky .this is quite shallow .itll need cleaning before I heal it up though .She cleaned the cut with a dab of some purple liquid that smoked and stung but then poked his shoulder with her wand and he felt it heal instantly .Now just sit quietly for a minute sit !And then you can go and get your score .She bustled out of the tent and he heard her go next door and say How does it feel now Diggory ?Harry didnt want to sit still He was too full of adrenaline .He got to his feet wanting to see what was going on outside but before hed reached the mouth of the tent two people had come darting inside Hermione followed closely by Ron .Harry you were brilliant !Hermione said squeakily .There were fingernail marks on her face where she had been clutching it in fear .You were amazing !You really were !But Harry was looking at Ron who was very white and staring at Harry as though he were a ghost .Harry he said very seriously whoever put your name in that goblet I I reckon theyre trying to do you in !It was as though the last few weeks had never happened as though Harry were meeting Ron for the first time right after hed been made champion .Caught on have you ?said Harry coldly .Took you long enough .Hermione stood nervously between them looking from one to the other .Ron opened his mouth uncertainly .Harry knew Ron was about to apologize and suddenly he found he didnt need to hear it .Its okay he said before Ron could get the words out .Forget it .No said Ron I shouldntve Forget it Harry said .Ron grinned nervously at him and Harry grinned back .Hermione burst into tears .Theres nothing to cry about !Harry told her bewildered .You two are so stupid .she shouted stamping her foot on the ground tears splashing down her front .Then before either of them could stop her she had given both of them a hug and dashed away now positively howling .Barking mad said Ron shaking his head .Harry cmon theyll be putting up your scores .Picking up the golden egg and his Firebolt feeling more elated than he would have believed possible an hour ago Harry ducked out of the tent Ron by his side talking fast .You were the best you know no competition .Cedric did this weird thing where he Transfigured a rock on the ground .turned it into a dog .he was trying to make the dragon go for the dog instead of him .Well it was a pretty cool bit of Transfiguration and it sort of worked because he did get the egg but he got burned as well the dragon changed its mind halfway through and decided it would rather have him than the Labrador he only just got away .And that Fleur girl tried this sort of charm I think she was trying to put it into a trance well that kind of worked too it went all sleepy but then it snored and this great jet of flame shot out and her skirt caught fire she put it out with a bit of water out of her wand .And Krum you wont believe this but he didnt even think of flying !He was probably the best after you though .Hit it with some sort of spell right in the eye .Only thing is it went trampling around in agony and squashed half the real eggs they took marks off for that he wasnt supposed to do any damage to them .Ron drew breath as he and Harry reached the edge of the enclosure .Now that the Horntail had been taken away Harry could see where the five judges were sitting right at the other end in raised seats draped in gold .Its marks out of ten from each one Ron said and Harry squinting up the field saw the first judge Madame Maxime raise her wand in the air .What looked like a long silver ribbon shot out of it which twisted itself into a large figure eight .Not bad !said Ron as the crowd applauded .I suppose she took marks off for your shoulder .Mr Crouch came next .He shot a number nine into the air .Looking good !Ron yelled thumping Harry on the back .Next Dumbledore .He too put up a nine .The crowd was cheering harder than ever .Ludo Bagman ten .Ten ?said Harry in disbelief .But .I got hurt .Whats he playing at ?Harry dont complain !Ron yelled excitedly .And now Karkaroff raised his wand .He paused for a moment and then a number shot out of his wand too four .What ?Ron bellowed furiously .Four ?You lousy biased scumbag you gave Krum ten !But Harry didnt care he wouldnt have cared if Karkaroff had given him zero Rons indignation on his behalf was worth about a hundred points to him .He didnt tell Ron this of course but his heart felt lighter than air as he turned to leave the enclosure .And it wasnt just Ron .those werent only Gryffindors cheering in the crowd .When it had come to it when they had seen what he was facing most of the school had been on his side as well as Cedrics .He didnt care about the Slytherins he could stand whatever they threw at him now .Youre tied in first place Harry !You and Krum !said Charlie Weasley hurrying to meet them as they set off back toward the school .Listen Ive got to run Ive got to go and send Mum an owl I swore Id tell her what happened but that was unbelievable !Oh yeah and they told me to tell you youve got to hang around for a few more minutes .Bagman wants a word back in the champions tent .Ron said he would wait so Harry reentered the tent which somehow looked quite different now friendly and welcoming .He thought back to how hed felt while dodging the Horntail and compared it to the long wait before hed walked out to face it .There was no comparison the wait had been immeasurably worse .Fleur Cedric and Krum all came in together .One side of Cedrics face was covered in a thick orange paste which was presumably mending his burn .He grinned at Harry when he saw him .Good one Harry .And you said Harry grinning back .Well done all of you !said Ludo Bagman bouncing into the tent and looking as pleased as though he personally had just got past a dragon .Now just a quick few words .Youve got a nice long break before the second task which will take place at half past nine on the morning of February the twentyfourth but were giving you something to think about in the meantime !If you look down at those golden eggs youre all holding you will see that they open .see the hinges there ?You need to solve the clue inside the egg because it will tell you what the second task is and enable you to prepare for it !All clear ?Sure ?Well off you go then !Harry left the tent rejoined Ron and they started to walk back around the edge of the forest talking hard Harry wanted to hear what the other champions had done in more detail .Then as they rounded the clump of trees behind which Harry had first heard the dragons roar a witch leapt out from behind them .It was Rita Skeeter .She was wearing acidgreen robes today the QuickQuotes Quill in her hand blended perfectly against them .Congratulations Harry !she said beaming at him .I wonder if you could give me a quick word ?How you felt facing that dragon ?How you feel now about the fairness of the scoring ?Yeah you can have a word said Harry savagely .Goodbye .And he set off back to the castle with Ron .THE HOUSEELF LIBERATION FRONT Harry Ron and Hermione went up to the Owlery that evening to find Pigwidgeon so that Harry could send Sirius a letter telling him that he had managed to get past his dragon unscathed .On the way Harry filled Ron in on everything Sirius had told him about Karkaroff .Though shocked at first to hear that Karkaroff had been a Death Eater by the time they entered the Owlery Ron was saying that they ought to have suspected it all along .Fits doesnt it ?he said .Remember what Malfoy said on the train about his dad being friends with Karkaroff ?Now we know where they knew each other .They were probably running around in masks together at the World Cup .Ill tell you one thing though Harry if it was Karkaroff who put your name in the goblet hes going to be feeling really stupid now isnt he ?Didnt work did it ?You only got a scratch !Come here Ill do it Pigwidgeon was so overexcited at the idea of a delivery he was flying around and around Harrys head hooting incessantly .Ron snatched Pigwidgeon out of the air and held him still while Harry attached the letter to his leg .Theres no way any of the other tasks are going to be that dangerous how could they be ?Ron went on as he carried Pigwidgeon to the window .You know what ?I reckon you could win this tournament Harry Im serious .Harry knew that Ron was only saying this to make up for his behavior of the last few weeks but he appreciated it all the same .Hermione however leaned against the Owlery wall folded her arms and frowned at Ron .Harrys got a long way to go before he finishes this tournament she said seriously .If that was the first task I hate to think whats coming next .Right little ray of sunshine arent you ?said Ron .You and Professor Trelawney should get together sometime .He threw Pigwidgeon out of the window .Pigwidgeon plummeted twelve feet before managing to pull himself back up again the letter attached to his leg was much longer and heavier than usual Harry hadnt been able to resist giving Sirius a blowbyblow account of exactly how he had swerved circled and dodged the Horntail .They watched Pigwidgeon disappear into the darkness and then Ron said Well wed better get downstairs for your surprise party Harry Fred and George should have nicked enough food from the kitchens by now .Sure enough when they entered the Gryffindor common room it exploded with cheers and yells again .There were mountains of cakes and flagons of pumpkin juice and butterbeer on every surface Lee Jordan had let off some Filibusters Fireworks so that the air was thick with stars and sparks and Dean Thomas who was very good at drawing had put up some impressive new banners most of which depicted Harry zooming around the Horntails head on his Firebolt though a couple showed Cedric with his head on fire .Harry helped himself to food he had almost forgotten what it was like to feel properly hungry and sat down with Ron and Hermione .He couldnt believe how happy he felt he had Ron back on his side hed gotten through the first task and he wouldnt have to face the second one for three months .Blimey this is heavy said Lee Jordan picking up the golden egg which Harry had left on a table and weighing it in his hands .Open it Harry go on !Lets just see whats inside it !Hes supposed to work out the clue on his own Hermione said swiftly .Its in the tournament rules .I was supposed to work out how to get past the dragon on my own too Harry muttered so only Hermione could hear him and she grinned rather guiltily .Yeah go on Harry open it !several people echoed .Lee passed Harry the egg and Harry dug his fingernails into the groove that ran all the way around it and prised it open .It was hollow and completely empty but the moment Harry opened it the most horrible noise a loud and screechy wailing filled the room .The nearest thing to it Harry had ever heard was the ghost orchestra at Nearly Headless Nicks deathday party who had all been playing the musical saw .Shut it !Fred bellowed his hands over his ears .What was that ?said Seamus Finnigan staring at the egg as Harry slammed it shut again .Sounded like a banshee .Maybe youve got to get past one of those next Harry !It was someone being tortured !said Neville who had gone very white and spilled sausage rolls all over the floor .Youre going to have to fight the Cruciatus Curse !Dont be a prat Neville thats illegal said George .They wouldnt use the Cruciatus Curse on the champions .I thought it sounded a bit like Percy singing .maybe youve got to attack him while hes in the shower Harry .Want a jam tart Hermione ?said Fred .Hermione looked doubtfully at the plate he was offering her .Fred grinned .Its all right he said .I havent done anything to them .Its the custard creams youve got to watch Neville who had just bitten into a custard cream choked and spat it out .Fred laughed .Just my little joke Neville .Hermione took a jam tart .Then she said Did you get all this from the kitchens Fred ?Yep said Fred grinning at her .He put on a high pitched squeak and imitated a houseelf . ‘Anything we can get you sir anything at all !Theyre dead helpful .get me a roast ox if I said I was peckish .How do you get in there ?Hermione said in an innocently casual sort of voice .Easy said Fred concealed door behind a painting of a bowl of fruit .Just tickle the pear and it giggles and He stopped and looked suspiciously at her .Why ?Nothing said Hermione quickly .Going to try and lead the houseelves out on strike now are you ?said George .Going to give up all the leaflet stuff and try and stir them up into rebellion ?Several people chortled .Hermione didnt answer .Dont you go upsetting them and telling them theyve got to take clothes and salaries !said Fred warningly .Youll put them off their cooking !Just then Neville caused a slight diversion by turning into a large canary .Oh sorry Neville !Fred shouted over all the laughter .I forgot it was the custard creams we hexed Within a minute however Neville had molted and once his feathers had fallen off he reappeared looking entirely normal .He even joined in laughing .Canary Creams !Fred shouted to the excitable crowd .George and I invented them seven Sickles each a bargain !It was nearly one in the morning when Harry finally went up to the dormitory with Ron Neville Seamus and Dean .Before he pulled the curtains of his four poster shut Harry set his tiny model of the Hungarian Horntail on the table next to his bed where it yawned curled up and closed its eyes .Really Harry thought as he pulled the hangings on his fourposter closed Hagrid had a point .they were all right really dragons .The start of December brought wind and sleet to Hogwarts .Drafty though the castle always was in winter Harry was glad of its fires and thick walls every time he passed the Durmstrang ship on the lake which was pitching in the high winds its black sails billowing against the dark skies .He thought the Beauxbatons caravan was likely to be pretty chilly too .Hagrid he noticed was keeping Madame Maximes horses well provided with their preferred drink of singlemalt whiskey the fumes wafting from the trough in the corner of their paddock was enough to make the entire Care of Magical Creatures class lightheaded .This was unhelpful as they were still tending the horrible skrewts and needed their wits about them .Im not sure whether they hibernate or not Hagrid told the shivering class in the windy pumpkin patch next lesson .Thought wed jus try an see if they fancied a kip .well jus settle em down in these boxes .There were now only ten skrewts left apparently their desire to kill one another had not been exercised out of them .Each of them was now approaching six feet in length .Their thick gray armor their powerful scuttling legs their fireblasting ends their stings and their suckers combined to make the skrewts the most repulsive things Harry had ever seen .The class looked dispiritedly at the enormous boxes Hagrid had brought out all lined with pillows and fluffy blankets .Well jus lead em in here Hagrid said an put the lids on and well see what happens .But the skrewts it transpired did not hibernate and did not appreciate being forced into pillowlined boxes and nailed in .Hagrid was soon yelling Don panic now don panic !while the skrewts rampaged around the pumpkin patch now strewn with the smoldering wreckage of the boxes .Most of the class Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle in the lead had fled into Hagrid s cabin through the back door and barricaded themselves in Harry Ron and Hermione however were among those who remained outside trying to help Hagrid .Together they managed to restrain and tie up nine of the skrewts though at the cost of numerous burns and cuts finally only one skrewt was left .Don frighten him now !Hagrid shouted as Ron and Harry used their wands to shoot jets of fiery sparks at the skrewt which was advancing menacingly on them its sting arched quivering over its back .Jus try an slip the rope round his sting so he won hurt any o the others !Yeah we wouldnt want that !Ron shouted angrily as he and Harry backed into the wall of Hagrid s cabin still holding the skrewt off with their sparks .Well well well .this does look like fun .Rita Skeeter was leaning on Hagrid s garden fence looking in at the mayhem .She was wearing a thick magenta cloak with a furry purple collar today and her crocodileskin handbag was over her arm .Hagrid launched himself forward on top of the skrewt that was cornering Harry and Ron and flattened it a blast of fire shot out of its end withering the pumpkin plants nearby .Who re you ?Hagrid asked Rita Skeeter as he slipped a loop of rope around the skrewts sting and tightened it .Rita Skeeter Daily Prophet reporter Rita replied beaming at him .Her gold teeth glinted .Thought Dumbledore said you weren allowed inside the school anymore said Hagrid frowning slightly as he got off the slightly squashed skrewt and started tugging it over to its fellows .Rita acted as though she hadnt heard what Hagrid had said .What are these fascinating creatures called ?she asked beaming still more widely .BlastEnded Skrewts grunted Hagrid .Really ?said Rita apparently full of lively interest .Ive never heard of them before .where do they come from ?Harry noticed a dull red flush rising up out of Hagrids wild black beard and his heart sank .Where had Hagrid got the skrewts from ?Hermione who seemed to be thinking along these lines said quickly Theyre very interesting arent they ?Arent they Harry ?What ?Oh yeah .ouch .interesting said Harry as she stepped on his foot .Ah youre here Harry !said Rita Skeeter as she looked around .So you like Care of Magical Creatures do you ?One of your favorite lessons ?Yes said Harry stoutly .Hagrid beamed at him .Lovely said Rita .Really lovely .Been teaching long ?she added to Hagrid .Harry noticed her eyes travel over Dean who had a nasty cut across one cheek Lavender whose robes were badly singed Seamus who was nursing several burnt fingers and then to the cabin windows where most of the class stood their noses pressed against the glass waiting to see if the coast was clear .This is ony me second year said Hagrid .Lovely .I dont suppose youd like to give an interview would you ?Share some of your experience of magical creatures ?The Prophet does a zoological column every Wednesday as Im sure you know .We could feature these er BangEnded Scoots .BlastEnded Skrewts Hagrid said eagerly .Er yeah why not ?Harry had a very bad feeling about this but there was no way of communicating it to Hagrid without Rita Skeeter seeing so he had to stand and watch in silence as Hagrid and Rita Skeeter made arrangements to meet in the Three Broomsticks for a good long interview later that week .Then the bell rang up at the castle signaling the end of the lesson .Well goodbye Harry !Rita Skeeter called merrily to him as he set off with Ron and Hermione .Until Friday night then Hagrid !Shell twist everything he says Harry said under his breath .Just as long as he didnt import those skrewts illegally or anything said Hermione desperately .They looked at one another it was exactly the sort of thing Hagrid might do .Hagrids been in loads of trouble before and Dumbledores never sacked him said Ron consolingly .Worst that can happen is Hagridll have to get rid of the skrewts .Sorry .did I say worst ?I meant best .Harry and Hermione laughed and feeling slightly more cheerful went off to lunch .Harry thoroughly enjoyed double Divination that afternoon they were still doing star charts and predictions but now that he and Ron were friends once more the whole thing seemed very funny again .Professor Trelawney who had been so pleased with the pair of them when they had been predicting their own horrific deaths quickly became irritated as they sniggered through her explanation of the various ways in which Pluto could disrupt everyday life .I would think she said in a mystical whisper that did not conceal her obvious annoyance that some of us she stared very meaningfully at Harry might be a little less frivolous had they seen what I have seen during my crystal gazing last night .As I sat here absorbed in my needlework the urge to consult the orb overpowered me .I arose I settled myself before it and I gazed into its crystalline depths .and what do you think I saw gazing back at me ?An ugly old bat in outsize specs ?Ron muttered under his breath .Harry fought hard to keep his face straight .Death my dears .Parvati and Lavender both put their hands over their mouths looking horrified .Yes said Professor Trelawney nodding impressively it comes ever closer it circles overhead like a vulture ever lower .ever lower over the castle .She stared pointedly at Harry who yawned very widely and obviously .Itd be a bit more impressive if she hadnt done it about eighty times before Harry said as they finally regained the fresh air of the staircase beneath Professor Trelawneys room .But if Id dropped dead every time shes told me Im going to Id be a medical miracle .Youd be a sort of extraconcentrated ghost said Ron chortling as they passed the Bloody Baron going in the opposite direction his wide eyes staring sinisterly .At least we didnt get homework .I hope Hermione got loads off Professor Vector I love not working when she is .But Hermione wasnt at dinner nor was she in the library when they went to look for her afterward .The only person in there was Viktor Krum .Ron hovered behind the bookshelves for a while watching Krum debating in whispers with Harry whether he should ask for an autograph but then Ron realized that six or seven girls were lurking in the next row of books debating exactly the same thing and he lost his enthusiasm for the idea .Wonder where shes got to ?Ron said as he and Harry went back to Gryffindor Tower .Dunno .balderdash .But the Fat Lady had barely begun to swing forward when the sound of racing feet behind them announced Hermiones arrival .Harry !she panted skidding to a halt beside him the Fat Lady stared down at her eyebrows raised .Harry youve got to come youve got to come the most amazing things happened please She seized Harrys arm and started to try to drag him back along the corridor .Whats the matter ?Harry said .Ill show you when we get there oh come on quick Harry looked around at Ron he looked back at Harry intrigued .Okay Harry said starting off back down the corridor with Hermione Ron hurrying to keep up .Oh dont mind me !the Fat Lady called irritably after them .Dont apologize for bothering me !Ill just hang here wide open until you get back shall I ?Yeah thanks !Ron shouted over his shoulder .Hermione where are we going ?Harry asked after she had led them down through six floors and started down the marble staircase into the entrance hall .Youll see youll see in a minute !said Hermione excitedly .She turned left at the bottom of the staircase and hurried toward the door through which Cedric Diggory had gone the night after the Goblet of Fire had regurgitated his and Harrys names .Harry had never been through here before .He and Ron followed Hermione down a flight of stone steps but instead of ending up in a gloomy underground passage like the one that led to Snapes dungeon they found themselves in a broad stone corridor brightly lit with torches and decorated with cheerful paintings that were mainly of food .Oh hang on .said Harry slowly halfway down the corridor .Wait a minute Hermione .What ?She turned around to look at him anticipation all over her face .I know what this is about said Harry .He nudged Ron and pointed to the painting just behind Hermione .It showed a gigantic silver fruit bowl .Hermione !said Ron cottoning on .Youre trying to rope us into that spew stuff again !No no Im not !she said hastily .And its not spew Ron Changed the name have you ?said Ron frowning at her .What are we now then the HouseElf Liberation Front ?Im not barging into that kitchen and trying to make them stop work Im not doing it ‘Tm not asking you to !Hermione said impatiently .I came down here just now to talk to them all and I found oh come on Harry I want to show you !She seized his arm again pulled him in front of the picture of the giant fruit bowl stretched out her forefinger and tickled the huge green pear .It began to squirm chuckling and suddenly turned into a large green door handle .Hermione seized it pulled the door open and pushed Harry hard in the back forcing him inside .He had one brief glimpse of an enormous high ceilinged room large as the Great Hall above it with mounds of glittering brass pots and pans heaped around the stone walls and a great brick fireplace at the other end when something small hurtled toward him from the middle of the room squealing Harry Potter sir !Harry Potteri Next second all the wind had been knocked out of him as the squealing elf hit him hard in the midriff hugging him so tightly he thought his ribs would break .DDobby ?Harry gasped .It is Dobby sir it is !squealed the voice from somewhere around his navel .Dobby has been hoping and hoping to see Harry Potter sir and Harry Potter has come to see him sir !Dobby let go and stepped back a few paces beaming up at Harry his enormous green tennisballshaped eyes brimming with tears of happiness .He looked almost exactly as Harry remembered him the pencil shaped nose the batlike ears the long fingers and feet all except the clothes which were very different .When Dobby had worked for the Malfoys he had always worn the same filthy old pillowcase .Now however he was wearing the strangest assortment of garments Harry had ever seen he had done an even worse job of dressing himself than the wizards at the World Cup .He was wearing a tea cozy for a hat on which he had pinned a number of bright badges a tie patterned with horseshoes over a bare chest a pair of what looked like childrens soccer shorts and odd socks .One of these Harry saw was the black one Harry had removed from his own foot and tricked Mr Malfoy into giving Dobby thereby setting Dobby free .The other was covered in pink and orange stripes .Dobby whatre you doing here ?Harry said in amazement .Dobby has come to work at Hogwarts sir !Dobby squealed excitedly .Professor Dumbledore gave Dobby and Winky jobs sir !Winky ?said Harry .Shes here too ?Yes sir yes !said Dobby and he seized Harrys hand and pulled him off into the kitchen between the four long wooden tables that stood there .Each of these tables Harry noticed as he passed them was positioned exactly beneath the four House tables above in the Great Hall .At the moment they were clear of food dinner having finished but he supposed that an hour ago they had been laden with dishes that were then sent up through the ceiling to their counterparts above .At least a hundred little elves were standing around the kitchen beaming bowing and curtsying as Dobby led Harry past them .They were all wearing the same uniform a tea towel stamped with the Hogwarts crest and tied as Winkys had been like a toga .Dobby stopped in front of the brick fireplace and pointed .Winky sir !he said .Winky was sitting on a stool by the fire .Unlike Dobby she had obviously not foraged for clothes .She was wearing a neat little skirt and blouse with a matching blue hat which had holes in it for her large ears .However while every one of Dobby s strange collection of garments was so clean and well cared for that it looked brandnew Winky was plainly not taking care of her clothes at all .There were soup stains all down her blouse and a burn in her skirt .Hello Winky said Harry .Winkys lip quivered .Then she burst into tears which spilled out of her great brown eyes and splashed down her front just as they had done at the Quidditch World Cup .Oh dear said Hermione .She and Ron had followed Harry and Dobby to the end of the kitchen .Winky dont cry please dont .But Winky cried harder than ever .Dobby on the other hand beamed up at Harry .Would Harry Potter like a cup of tea ?he squeaked loudly over Winkys sobs .Er yeah okay said Harry .Instantly about six houseelves came trotting up behind him bearing a large silver tray laden with a teapot cups for Harry Ron and Hermione a milk jug and a large plate of biscuits .Good service !Ron said in an impressed voice .Hermione frowned at him but the elves all looked delighted they bowed very low and retreated .How long have you been here Dobby ?Harry asked as Dobby handed around the tea .Only a week Harry Potter sir !said Dobby happily .Dobby came to see Professor Dumbledore sir .You see sir it is very difficult for a houseelf who has been dismissed to get a new position sir very difficult indeed At this Winky howled even harder her squashed tomato of a nose dribbling all down her front though she made no effort to stem the flow .Dobby has traveled the country for two whole years sir trying to find work !Dobby squeaked .But Dobby hasnt found work sir because Dobby wants paying now !The houseelves all around the kitchen who had been listening and watching with interest all looked away at these words as though Dobby had said something rude and embarrassing .Hermione however said Good for you Dobby !Thank you miss !said Dobby grinning toothily at her .But most wizards doesnt want a houseelf who wants paying miss .Thats not the point of a house elf they says and they slammed the door in Dobby s face !Dobby likes work but he wants to wear clothes and he wants to be paid Harry Potter .Dobby likes being free !The Hogwarts houseelves had now started edging away from Dobby as though he were carrying something contagious .Winky however remained where she was though there was a definite increase in the volume of her crying .And then Harry Potter Dobby goes to visit Winky and finds out Winky has been freed too sir !said Dobby delightedly .At this Winky flung herself forward off her stool and lay facedown on the flagged stone floor beating her tiny fists upon it and positively screaming with misery .Hermione hastily dropped down to her knees beside her and tried to comfort her but nothing she said made the slightest difference .Dobby continued with his story shouting shrilly over Winkys screeches .And then Dobby had the idea Harry Potter sir !Why doesnt Dobby and Winky find work together ?Dobby says .Where is there enough work for two house elves ?says Winky .And Dobby thinks and it comes to him sir !Hogwarts So Dobby and Winky came to see Professor Dumbledore sir and Professor Dumbledore took us on !Dobby beamed very brightly and happy tears welled in his eyes again .And Professor Dumbledore says he will pay Dobby sir if Dobby wants paying !And so Dobby is a free elf sir and Dobby gets a Galleon a week and one day off a month !Thats not very much !Hermione shouted indignantly from the floor over Winkys continued screaming and fistbeating .Professor Dumbledore offered Dobby ten Galleons a week and weekends off said Dobby suddenly giving a little shiver as though the prospect of so much leisure and riches were frightening but Dobby beat him down miss .Dobby likes freedom miss but he isnt wanting too much miss he likes work better .And how much is Professor Dumbledore paying you Winky ?Hermione asked kindly .If she had thought this would cheer up Winky she was wildly mistaken .Winky did stop crying but when she sat up she was glaring at Hermione through her massive brown eyes her whole face sopping wet and suddenly furious .Winky is a disgraced elf but Winky is not yet getting paid !she squeaked .Winky is not sunk so low as that !Winky is properly ashamed of being freed !Ashamed ?said Hermione blankly .But Winky come on !Its Mr Crouch who should be ashamed not you !You didnt do anything wrong he was really horrible to you But at these words Winky clapped her hands over the holes in her hat flattening her ears so that she couldnt hear a word and screeched You is not insulting my master miss !You is not insulting Mr Crouch !Mr Crouch is a good wizard miss !Mr Crouch is right to sack bad Winky !Winky is having trouble adjusting Harry Potter squeaked Dobby confidentially .Winky forgets she is not bound to Mr Crouch anymore she is allowed to speak her mind now but she wont do it .Cant houseelves speak their minds about their masters then ?Harry asked .Oh no sir no said Dobby looking suddenly serious .Tis part of the houseelfs enslavement sir .We keeps their secrets and our silence sir .We upholds the familys honor and we never speaks ill of them though Professor Dumbledore told Dobby he does not insist upon this .Professor Dumbledore said we is free to to Dobby looked suddenly nervous and beckoned Harry closer .Harry bent forward .Dobby whispered He said we is free to call him a a barmy old codger if we likes sir !Dobby gave a frightened sort of giggle .But Dobby is not wanting to Harry Potter he said talking normally again and shaking his head so that his ears flapped .Dobby likes Professor Dumbledore very much sir and is proud to keep his secrets and our silence for him .But you can say what you like about the Malfoys now ?Harry asked him grinning .A slightly fearful look came into Dobbys immense eyes .Dobby Dobby could he said doubtfully .He squared his small shoulders .Dobby could tell Harry Potter that his old masters were were bad Dark wizards .Dobby stood for a moment quivering all over horror struck by his own daring then he rushed over to the nearest table and began banging his head on it very hard squealing Bad Dobby !Bad Dobby Harry seized Dobby by the back of his tie and pulled him away from the table .Thank you Harry Potter thank you said Dobby breathlessly rubbing his head .You just need a bit of practice Harry said .Practice !squealed Winky furiously .You is ought to be ashamed of yourself Dobby talking that way about your masters !They isnt my masters anymore Winky !said Dobby defiantly .Dobby doesnt care what they think anymore !Oh you is a bad elf Dobby !moaned Winky tears leaking down her face once more .My poor Mr Crouch what is he doing without Winky ?He is needing me he is needing my help !I is looking after the Crouches all my life and my mother is doing it before me and my grandmother is doing it before her .oh what is they saying if they knew Winky was freed ?Oh the shame the shame !She buried her face in her skirt again and bawled .Winky said Hermione firmly Im quite sure Mr Crouch is getting along perfectly well without you .Weve seen him you know You is seeing my master ?said Winky breathlessly raising her tearstained face out of her skirt once more and goggling at Hermione .You is seeing him here at Hogwarts ?Yes said Hermione he and Mr Bagman are judges in the Triwizard Tournament .Mr Bagman comes too ?squeaked Winky and to Harrys great surprise and Rons and Hermiones too by the looks on their faces she looked angry again .Mr Bagman is a bad wizard !A very bad wizard !My master isnt liking him oh no not at all !Bagman bad ?said Harry .Oh yes Winky said nodding her head furiously .My master is telling Winky some things !But Winky is not saying .Winky Winky keeps her masters secrets .She dissolved yet again in tears they could hear her sobbing into her skirt Poor master poor master no Winky to help him no more !They couldnt get another sensible word out of Winky .They left her to her crying and finished their tea while Dobby chatted happily about his life as a free elf and his plans for his wages .Dobby is going to buy a sweater next Harry Potter !he said happily pointing at his bare chest .Tell you what Dobby said Ron who seemed to have taken a great liking to the elf Ill give you the one my mum knits me this Christmas I always get one from her .You dont mind maroon do you ?Dobby was delighted .We might have to shrink it a bit to fit you Ron told him but itll go well with your tea cozy .As they prepared to take their leave many of the surrounding elves pressed in upon them offering snacks to take back upstairs .Hermione refused with a pained look at the way the elves kept bowing and curtsying but Harry and Ron loaded their pockets with cream cakes and pies .Thanks a lot !Harry said to the elves who had all clustered around the door to say good night .See you Dobby !Harry Potter .can Dobby come and see you sometimes sir ?Dobby asked tentatively .Course you can said Harry and Dobby beamed .You know what ?said Ron once he Hermione and Harry had left the kitchens behind and were climbing the steps into the entrance hall again .All these years Ive been really impressed with Fred and George nicking food from the kitchens well its not exactly difficult is it ?They cant wait to give it away !I think this is the best thing that could have happened to those elves you know said Hermione leading the way back up the marble staircase .Dobby coming to work here I mean .The other elves will see how happy he is being free and slowly itll dawn on them that they want that too !Lets hope they dont look too closely at Winky said Harry .Oh shell cheer up said Hermione though she sounded a bit doubtful .Once the shocks worn off and shes got used to Hogwarts shell see how much better off she is without that Crouch man .She seems to love him said Ron thickly he had just started on a cream cake .Doesnt think much of Bagman though does she ?said Harry .Wonder what Crouch says at home about him ?Probably says hes not a very good Head of Department said Hermione and lets face it .hes got a point hasnt he ?Id still rather work for him than old Crouch said Ron .At least Bagmans got a sense of humor .Dont let Percy hear you saying that Hermione said smiling slightly .Yeah well Percy wouldnt want to work for anyone with a sense of humor would he ?said Ron now starting on a chocolate eclair .Percy wouldnt recognize a joke if it danced naked in front of him wearing Dobbys tea cozy .THE UNEXPECTED TASK Potter !Weasley !Will you pay attention ?Professor McGonagalls irritated voice cracked like a whip through the Transfiguration class on Thursday and Harry and Ron both jumped and looked up .It was the end of the lesson they had finished their work the guinea fowl they had been changing into guinea pigs had been shut away in a large cage on Professor McGonagalls desk Nevilles still had feathers they had copied down their homework from the blackboard Describe with examples the ways in which Transforming Spells must be adapted when performing CrossSpecies Switches .The bell was due to ring at any moment and Harry and Ron who had been having a sword fight with a couple of Fred and Georges fake wands at the back of the class looked up Ron holding a tin parrot and Harry a rubber haddock .Now that Potter and Weasley have been kind enough to act their age said Professor McGonagall with an angry look at the pair of them as the head of Harrys haddock drooped and fell silently to the floor Rons parrots beak had severed it moments before I have something to say to you all .The Yule Ball is approaching a traditional part of the Triwizard Tournament and an opportunity for us to socialize with our foreign guests .Now the ball will be open only to fourth years and above although you may invite a younger student if you wish Lavender Brown let out a shrill giggle .Parvati Patil nudged her hard in the ribs her face working furiously as she too fought not to giggle .They both looked around at Harry .Professor McGonagall ignored them which Harry thought was distinctly unfair as she had just told off him and Ron .Dress robes will be worn Professor McGonagall continued and the ball will start at eight oclock on Christmas Day finishing at midnight in the Great Hall .Now then Professor McGonagall stared deliberately around the class .The Yule Ball is of course a chance for us all to er let our hair down she said in a disapproving voice .Lavender giggled harder than ever with her hand pressed hard against her mouth to stifle the sound .Harry could see what was funny this time Professor McGonagall with her hair in a tight bun looked as though she had never let her hair down in any sense .But that does NOT mean Professor McGonagall went on that we will be relaxing the standards of behavior we expect from Hogwarts students .I will be most seriously displeased if a Gryffindor student embarrasses the school in any way .The bell rang and there was the usual scuffle of activity as everyone packed their bags and swung them onto their shoulders .Professor McGonagall called above the noise Potter a word if you please .Assuming this had something to do with his headless rubber haddock Harry proceeded gloomily to the teachers desk .Professor McGonagall waited until the rest of the class had gone and then said Potter the champions and their partners What partners ?said Harry .Professor McGonagall looked suspiciously at him as though she thought he was trying to be funny .Your partners for the Yule Ball Potter she said coldly .Your dance partners .Harrys insides seemed to curl up and shrivel .Dance partners ?He felt himself going red .I dont dance he said quickly .Oh yes you do said Professor McGonagall irritably .Thats what Im telling you .Traditionally the champions and their partners open the ball .Harry had a sudden mental image of himself in a top hat and tails accompanied by a girl in the sort of frilly dress Aunt Petunia always wore to Uncle Vernons work parties .Im not dancing he said .It is traditional said Professor McGonagall firmly .You are a Hogwarts champion and you will do what is expected of you as a representative of the school .So make sure you get yourself a partner Potter .But I dont You heard me Potter said Professor McGonagall in a very final sort of way .A week ago Harry would have said finding a partner for a dance would be a cinch compared to taking on a Hungarian Horntail .But now that he had done the latter and was facing the prospect of asking a girl to the ball he thought hed rather have another round with the dragon .Harry had never known so many people to put their names down to stay at Hogwarts for Christmas he always did of course because the alternative was usually going back to Privet Drive but he had always been very much in the minority before now .This year however everyone in the fourth year and above seemed to be staying and they all seemed to Harry to be obsessed with the coming ball or at least all the girls were and it was amazing how many girls Hogwarts suddenly seemed to hold he had never quite noticed that before .Girls giggling and whispering in the corridors girls shrieking with laughter as boys passed them girls excitedly comparing notes on what they were going to wear on Christmas night .Why do they have to move in packs ?Harry asked Ron as a dozen or so girls walked past them sniggering and staring at Harry .Howre you supposed to get one on their own to ask them ?Lasso one ?Ron suggested .Got any idea who youre going to try ?Harry didnt answer .He knew perfectly well whom hed like to ask but working up the nerve was something else .Cho was a year older than he was she was very pretty she was a very good Quidditch player and she was also very popular .Ron seemed to know what was going on inside Harrys head .Listen youre not going to have any trouble .Youre a champion .Youve just beaten a Hungarian Horntail .I bet they 11 be queuing up to go with you .In tribute to their recently repaired friendship Ron had kept the bitterness in his voice to a bare minimum .Moreover to Harrys amazement he turned out to be quite right .A curlyhaired thirdyear Hufflepuff girl to whom Harry had never spoken in his life asked him to go to the ball with her the very next day .Harry was so taken aback he said no before hed even stopped to consider the matter .The girl walked off looking rather hurt and Harry had to endure Deans Seamuss and Rons taunts about her all through History of Magic .The following day two more girls asked him a second year and to his horror a fifth year who looked as though she might knock him out if he refused .She was quite goodlooking said Ron fairly after hed stopped laughing .She was a foot taller than me said Harry still unnerved .Imagine what Id look like trying to dance with her .Hermiones words about Krum kept coming back to him .They only like him because hes famous !Harry doubted very much if any of the girls who had asked to be his partner so far would have wanted to go to the ball with him if he hadnt been a school champion .Then he wondered if this would bother him if Cho asked him .On the whole Harry had to admit that even with the embarrassing prospect of opening the ball before him life had definitely improved since he had got through the first task .He wasnt attracting nearly as much unpleasantness in the corridors anymore which he suspected had a lot to do with Cedric he had an idea Cedric might have told the Hufflepuffs to leave Harry alone in gratitude for Harrys tipoff about the dragons .There seemed to be fewer Support Cedric Diggoryl badges around too .Draco Malfoy of course was still quoting Rita Skeeters article to him at every possible opportunity but he was getting fewer and fewer laughs out of it and just to heighten Harrys feeling of wellbeing no story about Hagrid had appeared in the Daily Prophet She didn seem very intrested in magical creatures ter tell yeh the truth Hagrid said when Harry Ron and Hermione asked him how his interview with Rita Skeeter had gone during the last Care of Magical Creatures lesson of the term .To their very great relief Hagrid had given up on direct contact with the skrewts now and they were merely sheltering behind his cabin today sitting at a trestle table and preparing a fresh selection of food with which to tempt the skrewts .She jus wanted me ter talk about you Harry Hagrid continued in a low voice .Well I told her wed been friends since I went ter fetch yeh from the Dursleys . ‘Never had to tell him off in four years ?she said . ‘Never played you up in lessons has he ?I told her no an she didn seem happy at all .Yehd think she wanted me to say yeh were horrible Harry .Course she did said Harry throwing lumps of dragon liver into a large metal bowl and picking up his knife to cut some more .She cant keep writing about what a tragic little hero I am itll get boring .She wants a new angle Hagrid said Ron wisely as he shelled salamander eggs .You were supposed to say Harrys a mad delinquent !But hes not !said Hagrid looking genuinely shocked .She shouldve interviewed Snape said Harry grimly .Hed give her the goods on me any day . ‘Potter has been crossing lines ever since he first arrived at this school .Said that did he ?said Hagrid while Ron and Hermione laughed .Well yeh mightve bent a few rules Harry bu yehre all righ really aren you ?Cheers Hagrid said Harry grinning .You coming to this ball thing on Christmas Day Hagrid ?said Ron .Though I might look in on it yeah said Hagrid gruffly .Should be a good do I reckon .Youll be openin the dancin won yeh Harry ?Who re you takin ?No one yet said Harry feeling himself going red again .Hagrid didnt pursue the subject .The last week of term became increasingly boisterous as it progressed .Rumors about the Yule Ball were flying everywhere though Harry didnt believe half of them for instance that Dumbledore had bought eight hundred barrels of mulled mead from Madam Rosmerta .It seemed to be fact however that he had booked the Weird Sisters .Exactly who or what the Weird Sisters were Harry didnt know never having had access to a wizards wireless but he deduced from the wild excitement of those who had grown up listening to the WWN Wizarding Wireless Network that they were a very famous musical group .Some of the teachers like little Professor Flitwick gave up trying to teach them much when their minds were so clearly elsewhere he allowed them to play games in his lesson on Wednesday and spent most of it talking to Harry about the perfect Summoning Charm Harry had used during the first task of the Triwizard Tournament .Other teachers were not so generous .Nothing would ever deflect Professor Binns for example from plowing on through his notes on goblin rebellions as Binns hadnt let his own death stand in the way of continuing to teach they supposed a small thing like Christmas wasnt going to put him off .It was amazing how he could make even bloody and vicious goblin riots sound as boring as Percys cauldronbottom report .Professors McGonagall and Moody kept them working until the very last second of their classes too and Snape of course would no sooner let them play games in class than adopt Harry .Staring nastily around at them all he informed them that he would be testing them on poison antidotes during the last lesson of the term .Evil he is Ron said bitterly that night in the Gryffindor common room .Springing a test on us on the last day .Ruining the last bit of term with a whole load of studying .Mmm .youre not exactly straining yourself though are you ?said Hermione looking at him over the top of her Potions notes .Ron was busy building a card castle out of his Exploding Snap pack a much more interesting pastime than with Muggle cards because of the chance that the whole thing would blow up at any second .Its Christmas Hermione said Harry lazily he was rereading Flying with the Cannons for the tenth time in an armchair near the fire .Hermione looked severely over at him too .Id have thought youd be doing something constructive Harry even if you dont want to learn your antidotes !Like what ?Harry said as he watched Joey Jenkins of the Cannons belt a Bludger toward a Ballycastle Bats Chaser .That egg !Hermione hissed .Come on Hermione Ive got till February the twenty fourth Harry said .He had put the golden egg upstairs in his trunk and hadnt opened it since the celebration party after the first task .There were still two and a half months to go until he needed to know what all the screechy wailing meant after all .But it might take weeks to work it out !said Hermione .Youre going to look a real idiot if everyone else knows what the next task is and you dont !Leave him alone Hermione hes earned a bit of a break said Ron and he placed the last two cards on top of the castle and the whole lot blew up singeing his eyebrows .Nice look Ron .go well with your dress robes that will .It was Fred and George .They sat down at the table with Harry Ron and Hermione as Ron felt how much damage had been done .Ron can we borrow Pigwidgeon ?George asked .No hes off delivering a letter said Ron .Why ?Because George wants to invite him to the ball said Fred sarcastically .Because we want to send a letter you stupid great prat said George .Who dyou two keep writing to eh ?said Ron .Nose out Ron or Ill burn that for you too said Fred waving his wand threateningly .So .you lot got dates for the ball yet ?Nope said Ron .Well youd better hurry up mate or all the good ones will be gone said Fred .Whore you going with then ?said Ron .Angelina said Fred promptly without a trace of embarrassment .What ?said Ron taken aback .Youve already asked her ?Good point said Fred .He turned his head and called across the common room Oi !Angelina !Angelina who had been chatting with Alicia Spinnet near the fire looked over at him .What ?she called back .Want to come to the ball with me ?Angelina gave Fred an appraising sort of look .All right then she said and she turned back to Alicia and carried on chatting with a bit of a grin on her face .There you go said Fred to Harry and Ron piece of cake .He got to his feet yawning and said Wed better use a school owl then George come on .They left .Ron stopped feeling his eyebrows and looked across the smoldering wreck of his card castle at Harry .We should get a move on you know .ask someone .Hes right .We dont want to end up with a pair of trolls .Hermione let out a sputter of indignation .A pair of .what excuse me ?Well you know said Ron shrugging .Id rather go alone than with with Eloise Midgen say .Her acnes loads better lately and shes really nice !Her nose is offcenter said Ron .Oh I see Hermione said bristling .So basically youre going to take the bestlooking girl wholl have you even if shes completely horrible ?Er yeah that sounds about right said Ron .Im going to bed Hermione snapped and she swept off toward the girls staircase without another word .The Hogwarts staff demonstrating a continued desire to impress the visitors from Beauxbatons and Durmstrang seemed determined to show the castle at its best this Christmas .When the decorations went up Harry noticed that they were the most stunning he had yet seen inside the school .Everlasting icicles had been attached to the banisters of the marble staircase the usual twelve Christmas trees in the Great Hall were bedecked with everything from luminous holly berries to real hooting golden owls and the suits of armor had all been bewitched to sing carols whenever anyone passed them .It was quite something to hear O Come All Ye Faithful sung by an empty helmet that only knew half the words .Several times Filch the caretaker had to extract Peeves from inside the armor where he had taken to hiding filling in the gaps in the songs with lyrics of his own invention all of which were very rude .And still Harry hadnt asked Cho to the ball .He and Ron were getting very nervous now though as Harry pointed out Ron would look much less stupid than he would without a partner Harry was supposed to be starting the dancing with the other champions .I suppose theres always Moaning Myrtle he said gloomily referring to the ghost who haunted the girls toilets on the second floor .Harry weve just got to grit our teeth and do it said Ron on Friday morning in a tone that suggested they were planning the storming of an impregnable fortress .When we get back to the common room tonight well both have partners agreed ?Er .okay said Harry .But every time he glimpsed Cho that day during break and then lunchtime and once on the way to History of Magic she was surrounded by friends .Didnt she ever go anywhere alone ?Could he perhaps ambush her as she was going into a bathroom ?But no she even seemed to go there with an escort of four or five girls .Yet if he didnt do it soon she was bound to have been asked by somebody else .He found it hard to concentrate on Snapes Potions test and consequently forgot to add the key ingredient a bezoar meaning that he received bottom marks .He didnt care though he was too busy screwing up his courage for what he was about to do .When the bell rang he grabbed his bag and hurried to the dungeon door .Ill meet you at dinner he said to Ron and Hermione and he dashed off upstairs .Hed just have to ask Cho for a private word that was all .He hurried off through the packed corridors looking for her and rather sooner than he had expected he found her emerging from a Defense Against the Dark Arts lesson .Er Cho ?Could I have a word with you ?Giggling should be made illegal Harry thought furiously as all the girls around Cho started doing it .She didnt though .She said Okay and followed him out of earshot of her classmates .Harry turned to look at her and his stomach gave a weird lurch as though he had missed a step going downstairs .Er he said .He couldnt ask her .He couldnt .But he had to .Cho stood there looking puzzled watching him .The words came out before Harry had quite got his tongue around them .Wangoballwime ?Sorry ?said Cho .Dyou dyou want to go to the ball with me ?said Harry .Why did he have to go red now ?Why ?Oh !said Cho and she went red too .Oh Harry Im really sorry and she truly looked it .Ive already said Ill go with someone else .Oh said Harry .It was odd a moment before his insides had been writhing like snakes but suddenly he didnt seem to have any insides at all .Oh okay he said no problem .Im really sorry she said again .Thats okay said Harry .They stood there looking at each other and then Cho said Well Yeah said Harry .Well bye said Cho still very red .She walked away .Harry called after her before he could stop himself .Who re you going with ?Oh Cedric she said .Cedric Diggory .Oh right said Harry .His insides had come back again .It felt as though they had been filled with lead in their absence .Completely forgetting about dinner he walked slowly back up to Gryffindor Tower Chos voice echoing in his ears with every step he took .Cedric Cedric Diggory .He had been starting to quite like Cedric prepared to overlook the fact that he had once beaten him at Quidditch and was handsome and popular and nearly everyones favorite champion .Now he suddenly realized that Cedric was in fact a useless pretty boy who didnt have enough brains to fill an eggcup .Fairy lights he said dully to the Fat Lady the password had been changed the previous day .Yes indeed dear !she trilled straightening her new tinsel hair band as she swung forward to admit him .Entering the common room Harry looked around and to his surprise he saw Ron sitting ashenfaced in a distant corner .Ginny was sitting with him talking to him in what seemed to be a low soothing voice .Whats up Ron ?said Harry joining them .Ron looked up at Harry a sort of blind horror in his face .Why did I do it ?he said wildly .I dont know what made me do it !What ?said Harry .He er just asked Fleur Delacour to go to the ball with him said Ginny .She looked as though she was fighting back a smile but she kept patting Rons arm sympathetically .You what ?said Harry .I dont know what made me do it !Ron gasped again .What was I playing at ?There were people all around Ive gone mad everyone watching !I was just walking past her in the entrance hall she was standing there talking to Diggory and it sort of came over me and I asked her !Ron moaned and put his face in his hands .He kept talking though the words were barely distinguishable .She looked at me like I was a sea slug or something .Didnt even answer .And then I dunno I just sort of came to my senses and ran for it .Shes part veela said Harry .You were right her grandmother was one .It wasnt your fault I bet you just walked past when she was turning on the old charm for Diggory and got a blast of it but she was wasting her time .Hes going with Cho Chang .Ron looked up .I asked her to go with me just now Harry said dully and she told me .Ginny had suddenly stopped smiling .This is mad said Ron .Were the only ones left who havent got anyone well except Neville .Hey guess who he asked ?Hermionel What ?said Harry completely distracted by this startling news .Yeah I know !said Ron some of the color coming back into his face as he started to laugh .He told me after Potions !Said shes always been really nice helping him out with work and stuff but she told him she was already going with someone .Ha !As if !She just didnt want to go with Neville .I mean who would ?Dont !said Ginny annoyed .Dont laugh Just then Hermione climbed in through the portrait hole .Why werent you two at dinner ?she said coming over to join them .Because oh shut up laughing you two because theyve both just been turned down by girls they asked to the ball !said Ginny .That shut Harry and Ron up .Thanks a bunch Ginny said Ron sourly .All the goodlooking ones taken Ron ?said Hermione loftily .Eloise Midgen starting to look quite pretty now is she ?Well Im sure youll find someone somewhere wholl have you .But Ron was staring at Hermione as though suddenly seeing her in a whole new light .Hermione Nevilles right you are a girl .Oh well spotted she said acidly .Well you can come with one of us !No I cant snapped Hermione .Oh come on he said impatiently we need partners were going to look really stupid if we havent got any everyone else has .I cant come with you said Hermione now blushing because Im already going with someone .No youre not !said Ron .You just said that to get rid of Neville !Oh did I ?said Hermione and her eyes flashed dangerously .Just because its taken you three years to notice Ron doesnt mean no one else has spotted Im a girl !Ron stared at her .Then he grinned again .Okay okay we know youre a girl he said .That do ?Will you come now ?Ive already told you !Hermione said very angrily .Im going with someone else !And she stormed off toward the girls dormitories again .Shes lying said Ron flatly watching her go .Shes not said Ginny quietly .Who is it then ?said Ron sharply .Im not telling you its her business said Ginny .Right said Ron who looked extremely put out this is getting stupid .Ginny you can go with Harry and Ill just I cant said Ginny and she went scarlet too .Im going with with Neville .He asked me when Hermione said no and I thought .well .Im not going to be able to go otherwise Im not in fourth year .She looked extremely miserable .I think Ill go and have dinner she said and she got up and walked off to the portrait hole her head bowed .Ron goggled at Harry .Whats got into them ?he demanded .But Harry had just seen Parvati and Lavender come in through the portrait hole .The time had come for drastic action .Wait here he said to Ron and he stood up walked straight up to Parvati and said Parvati ?Will you go to the ball with me ?Parvati went into a fit of giggles .Harry waited for them to subside his fingers crossed in the pocket of his robes .Yes all right then she said finally blushing furiously .Thanks said Harry in relief .Lavender will you go with Ron ?Shes going with Seamus said Parvati and the pair of them giggled harder than ever .Harry sighed .Cant you think of anyone whod go with Ron ?he said lowering his voice so that Ron wouldnt hear .What about Hermione Granger ?said Parvati .Shes going with someone else .Parvati looked astonished .Ooooh who ?she said keenly .Harry shrugged .No idea he said .So what about Ron ?Well .said Parvati slowly I suppose my sister might .Padma you know .in Ravenclaw .Ill ask her if you like .Yeah that would be great said Harry .Let me know will you ?And he went back over to Ron feeling that this ball was a lot more trouble than it was worth and hoping very much that Padma Patils nose was dead center .THE YULE BALL Despite the very heavy load of homework that the fourth years had been given for the holidays Harry was in no mood to work when term ended and spent the week leading up to Christmas enjoying himself as fully as possible along with everyone else .Gryffindor Tower was hardly less crowded now than during termtime it seemed to have shrunk slightly too as its inhabitants were being so much rowdier than usual .Fred and George had had a great success with their Canary Creams and for the first couple of days of the holidays people kept bursting into feather all over the place .Before long however all the Gryffindors had learned to treat food anybody else offered them with extreme caution in case it had a Canary Cream concealed in the center and George confided to Harry that he and Fred were now working on developing something else .Harry made a mental note never to accept so much as a crisp from Fred and George in future .He still hadnt forgotten Dudley and the TonTongue Toffee .Snow was falling thickly upon the castle and its grounds now .The pale blue Beauxbatons carriage looked like a large chilly frosted pumpkin next to the iced gingerbread house that was Hagrids cabin while the Durmstrang ships portholes were glazed with ice the rigging white with frost .The houseelves down in the kitchen were outdoing themselves with a series of rich warming stews and savory puddings and only Fleur Delacour seemed to be able to find anything to complain about .It is too eavy all zis Ogwarts food they heard her saying grumpily as they left the Great Hall behind her one evening Ron skulking behind Harry keen not to be spotted by Fleur .I will not fit into my dress robes !Oooh theres a tragedy Hermione snapped as Fleur went out into the entrance hall .She really thinks a lot of herself that one doesnt she ?Hermione who are you going to the ball with ?said Ron .He kept springing this question on her hoping to startle her into a response by asking it when she least expected it .However Hermione merely frowned and said Im not telling you youll just make fun of me .Youre joking Weasley !said Malfoy behind them .Youre not telling me someones asked that to the ball ?Not the longmolared Mudblood ?Harry and Ron both whipped around but Hermione said loudly waving to somebody over Malfoys shoulder Hello Professor Moody !Malfoy went pale and jumped backward looking wildly around for Moody but he was still up at the staff table finishing his stew .Twitchy little ferret arent you Malfoy ?said Hermione scathingly and she Harry and Ron went up the marble staircase laughing heartily .Hermione said Ron looking sideways at her suddenly frowning your teeth .What about them ?she said .Well theyre different .Ive just noticed .Of course they are did you expect me to keep those fangs Malfoy gave me ?No I mean theyre different to how they were before he put that hex on you .Theyre all .straight and and normalsized .Hermione suddenly smiled very mischievously and Harry noticed it too It was a very different smile from the one he remembered .Well .when I went up to Madam Pomfrey to get them shrunk she held up a mirror and told me to stop her when they were back to how they normally were she said .And I just .let her carry on a bit .She smiled even more widely .Mum and Dad wont be too pleased .Ive been trying to persuade them to let me shrink them for ages but they wanted me to carry on with my braces .You know theyre dentists they just dont think teeth and magic should look !Pigwidgeons back !Rons tiny owl was twittering madly on the top of the icicleladen banisters a scroll of parchment tied to his leg .People passing him were pointing and laughing and a group of thirdyear girls paused and said Oh look at the weeny owl !Isnt he cute ?Stupid little feathery git !Ron hissed hurrying up the stairs and snatching up Pigwidgeon .You bring letters to the addressee !You dont hang around showing off !Pigwidgeon hooted happily his head protruding over Rons fist .The thirdyear girls all looked very shocked .Clear off !Ron snapped at them waving the fist holding Pigwidgeon who hooted more happily than ever as he soared through the air .Here take it Harry Ron added in an undertone as the thirdyear girls scuttled away looking scandalized .He pulled Siriuss reply off Pigwidgeons leg Harry pocketed it and they hurried back to Gryffindor Tower to read it .Everyone in the common room was much too busy in letting off more holiday steam to observe what anyone else was up to .Ron Harry and Hermione sat apart from everyone else by a dark window that was gradually filling up with snow and Harry read out Dear Harry Congratulations on getting past the Horntail .Whoever put your name in that goblet shouldnt be feeling too happy right now !I was going to suggest a Conjunctivitis Curse as a dragons eyes are its weakest point Thats what Krum did !Hermione whispered but your way was better Im impressed .Dont get complacent though Harry .Youve only done one task whoever put you in for the tournaments got plenty more opportunity if theyre trying to hurt you .Keep your eyes open particularly when the person we discussed is around and concentrate on keeping yourself out of trouble .Keep in touch I still want to hear about anything unusual .Sirius He sounds exactly like Moody said Harry quietly tucking the letter away again inside his robes . ‘Constant vigilance !Youd think I walk around with my eyes shut banging off the walls .But hes right Harry said Hermione you have still got two tasks to do .You really ought to have a look at that egg you know and start working out what it means .Hermione hes got ages !snapped Ron .Want a game of chess Harry ?Yeah okay said Harry .Then spotting the look on Hermione s face he said Come on howm I supposed to concentrate with all this noise going on ?I wont even be able to hear the egg over this lot .Oh I suppose not she sighed and she sat down to watch their chess match which culminated in an exciting checkmate of Rons involving a couple of recklessly brave pawns and a very violent bishop .Harry awoke very suddenly on Christmas Day .Wondering what had caused his abrupt return to consciousness he opened his eyes and saw something with very large round green eyes staring back at him in the darkness so close they were almost nose to nose .Dobbyl Harry yelled scrambling away from the elf so fast he almost fell out of bed .Dont do that !Dobby is sorry sir !squeaked Dobby anxiously jumping backward with his long fingers over his mouth .Dobby is only wanting to wish Harry Potter ‘Merry Christmas and bring him a present sir !Harry Potter did say Dobby could come and see him sometimes sir !Its okay said Harry still breathing rather faster than usual while his heart rate returned to normal .Just just prod me or something in future all right dont bend over me like that .Harry pulled back the curtains around his four poster took his glasses from his bedside table and put them on .His yell had awoken Ron Seamus Dean and Neville .All of them were peering through the gaps in their own hangings heavyeyed and touslehaired .Someone attacking you Harry ?Seamus asked sleepily .No its just Dobby Harry muttered .Go back to sleep .Nah .presents !said Seamus spotting the large pile at the foot of his bed .Ron Dean and Neville decided that now they were awake they might as well get down to some presentopening too .Harry turned back to Dobby who was now standing nervously next to Harrys bed still looking worried that he had upset Harry .There was a Christmas bauble tied to the loop on top of his tea cozy .Can Dobby give Harry Potter his present ?he squeaked tentatively .Course you can said Harry .Er .Ive got something for you too .It was a lie he hadnt bought anything for Dobby at all but he quickly opened his trunk and pulled out a particularly knobbly rolledup pair of socks .They were his oldest and foulest mustard yellow and had once belonged to Uncle Vernon .The reason they were extraknobbly was that Harry had been using them to cushion his Sneakoscope for over a year now .He pulled out the Sneakoscope and handed the socks to Dobby saying Sorry I forgot to wrap them .But Dobby was utterly delighted .Socks are Dobbys favorite favorite clothes sir !he said ripping off his odd ones and pulling on Uncle Vernons .I has seven now sir .But sir .he said his eyes widening having pulled both socks up to their highest extent so that they reached to the bottom of his shorts they has made a mistake in the shop Harry Potter they is giving you two the same !Ah no Harry how come you didnt spot that ?said Ron grinning over from his own bed which was now strewn with wrapping paper .Tell you what Dobby here you go take these two and you can mix them up properly .And heres your sweater .He threw Dobby a pair of violet socks he had just unwrapped and the handknitted sweater Mrs Weasley had sent .Dobby looked quite overwhelmed .Sir is very kind !he squeaked his eyes brimming with tears again bowing deeply to Ron .Dobby knew sir must be a great wizard for he is Harry Potters greatest friend but Dobby did not know that he was also as generous of spirit as noble as selfless Theyre only socks said Ron who had gone slightly pink around the ears though he looked rather pleased all the same .Wow Harry He had just opened Harrys present a Chudley Cannon hat .Cool !He jammed it onto his head where it clashed horribly with his hair .Dobby now handed Harry a small package which turned out to be socks .Dobby is making them himself sir !the elf said happily .He is buying the wool out of his wages sir !The left sock was bright red and had a pattern of broomsticks upon it the right sock was green with a pattern of Snitches .Theyre .theyre really .well thanks Dobby said Harry and he pulled them on causing Dobbys eyes to leak with happiness again .Dobby must go now sir we is already making Christmas dinner in the kitchens !said Dobby and he hurried out of the dormitory waving goodbye to Ron and the others as he passed .Harrys other presents were much more satisfactory than Dobbys odd socks with the obvious exception of the Dursleys which consisted of a single tissue an alltime low Harry supposed they too were remembering the TonTongue Toffee .Hermione had given Harry a book called Quidditch Teams of Britain and Ireland Ron a bulging bag of Dungbombs Sirius a handy penknife with attachments to unlock any lock and undo any knot and Hagrid a vast box of sweets including all Harrys favorites Bertie Botts Every Flavor Beans Chocolate Frogs Droobles Best Blowing Gum and Fizzing Whizbees .There was also of course Mrs Weasleys usual package including a new sweater green with a picture of a dragon on it Harry supposed Charlie had told her all about the Horntail and a large quantity of homemade mince pies .Harry and Ron met up with Hermione in the common room and they went down to breakfast together .They spent most of the morning in Gryffindor Tower where everyone was enjoying their presents then returned to the Great Hall for a magnificent lunch which included at least a hundred turkeys and Christmas puddings and large piles of Cribbages Wizarding Crackers .They went out onto the grounds in the afternoon the snow was untouched except for the deep channels made by the Durmstrang and Beauxbatons students on their way up to the castle .Hermione chose to watch Harry and the Weasleys snowball fight rather than join in and at five oclock said she was going back upstairs to get ready for the ball .What you need three hours ?said Ron looking at her incredulously and paying for his lapse in concentration when a large snowball thrown by George hit him hard on the side of the head .Who re you going with ?he yelled after Hermione but she just waved and disappeared up the stone steps into the castle .There was no Christmas tea today as the ball included a feast so at seven oclock when it had become hard to aim properly the others abandoned their snowball fight and trooped back to the common room .The Fat Lady was sitting in her frame with her friend Violet from downstairs both of them extremely tipsy empty boxes of chocolate liqueurs littering the bottom of her picture .Lairy fights thats the one !she giggled when they gave the password and she swung forward to let them inside .Harry Ron Seamus Dean and Neville changed into their dress robes up in their dormitory all of them looking very selfconscious but none as much as Ron who surveyed himself in the long mirror in the corner with an appalled look on his face .There was just no getting around the fact that his robes looked more like a dress than anything else .In a desperate attempt to make them look more manly he used a Severing Charm on the ruff and cuffs .It worked fairly well at least he was now lacefree although he hadnt done a very neat job and the edges still looked depressingly frayed as the boys set off downstairs .I still cant work out how you two got the best looking girls in the year muttered Dean .Animal magnetism said Ron gloomily pulling stray threads out of his cuffs .The common room looked strange full of people wearing different colors instead of the usual mass of black .Parvati was waiting for Harry at the foot of the stairs .She looked very pretty indeed in robes of shocking pink with her long dark plait braided with gold and gold bracelets glimmering at her wrists .Harry was relieved to see that she wasnt giggling .You er look nice he said awkwardly .Thanks she said .Padmas going to meet you in the entrance hall she added to Ron .Right said Ron looking around .Wheres Hermione ?Parvati shrugged .Shall we go down then Harry ?Okay said Harry wishing he could just stay in the common room .Fred winked at Harry as he passed him on the way out of the portrait hole .The entrance hall was packed with students too all milling around waiting for eight oclock when the doors to the Great Hall would be thrown open .Those people who were meeting partners from different Houses were edging through the crowd trying to find one another .Parvati found her sister Padma and led her over to Harry and Ron .Hi said Padma who was looking just as pretty as Parvati in robes of bright turquoise .She didnt look too enthusiastic about having Ron as a partner though her dark eyes lingered on the frayed neck and sleeves of his dress robes as she looked him up and down .Hi said Ron not looking at her but staring around at the crowd .Oh no .He bent his knees slightly to hide behind Harry because Fleur Delacour was passing looking stunning in robes of silvergray satin and accompanied by the Ravenclaw Quidditch captain Roger Davies .When they had disappeared Ron stood straight again and stared over the heads of the crowd .Where is Hermione ?he said again .A group of Slytherins came up the steps from their dungeon common room .Malfoy was in front he was wearing dress robes of black velvet with a high collar which in Harrys opinion made him look like a vicar .Pansy Parkinson in very frilly robes of pale pink was clutching Malfoys arm .Crabbe and Goyle were both wearing green they resembled mosscolored boulders and neither of them Harry was pleased to see had managed to find a partner .The oak front doors opened and everyone turned to look as the Durmstrang students entered with Professor Karkaroff .Krum was at the front of the party accompanied by a pretty girl in blue robes Harry didnt know .Over their heads he saw that an area of lawn right in front of the castle had been transformed into a sort of grotto full of fairy lights meaning hundreds of actual living fairies were sitting in the rosebushes that had been conjured there and fluttering over the statues of what seemed to be Father Christmas and his reindeer .Then Professor McGonagalls voice called Champions over here please !Parvati readjusted her bangles beaming she and Harry said See you in a minute to Ron and Padma and walked forward the chattering crowd parting to let them through .Professor McGonagall who was wearing dress robes of red tartan and had arranged a rather ugly wreath of thistles around the brim of her hat told them to wait on one side of the doors while everyone else went inside they were to enter the Great Hall in procession when the rest of the students had sat down .Fleur Delacour and Roger Davies stationed themselves nearest the doors Davies looked so stunned by his good fortune in having Fleur for a partner that he could hardly take his eyes off her .Cedric and Cho were close to Harry too he looked away from them so he wouldnt have to talk to them .His eyes fell instead on the girl next to Krum .His jaw dropped .It was Hermione .But she didnt look like Hermione at all .She had done something with her hair it was no longer bushy but sleek and shiny and twisted up into an elegant knot at the back of her head .She was wearing robes made of a floaty periwinkleblue material and she was holding herself differently somehow or maybe it was merely the absence of the twenty or so books she usually had slung over her back .She was also smiling rather nervously it was true but the reduction in the size of her front teeth was more noticeable than ever Harry couldnt understand how he hadnt spotted it before .Hi Harry !she said .Hi Parvati !Parvati was gazing at Hermione in unflattering disbelief .She wasnt the only one either when the doors to the Great Hall opened Krums fan club from the library stalked past throwing Hermione looks of deepest loathing .Pansy Parkinson gaped at her as she walked by with Malfoy and even he didnt seem to be able to find an insult to throw at her .Ron however walked right past Hermione without looking at her .Once everyone else was settled in the Hall Professor McGonagall told the champions and their partners to get in line in pairs and to follow her .They did so and everyone in the Great Hall applauded as they entered and started walking up toward a large round table at the top of the Hall where the judges were sitting .The walls of the Hall had all been covered in sparkling silver frost with hundreds of garlands of mistletoe and ivy crossing the starry black ceiling .The House tables had vanished instead there were about a hundred smaller lanternlit ones each seating about a dozen people .Harry concentrated on not tripping over his feet .Parvati seemed to be enjoying herself she was beaming around at everybody steering Harry so forcefully that he felt as though he were a show dog she was putting through its paces .He caught sight of Ron and Padma as he neared the top table .Ron was watching Hermione pass with narrowed eyes .Padma was looking sulky .Dumbledore smiled happily as the champions approached the top table but Karkaroff wore an expression remarkably like Rons as he watched Krum and Hermione draw nearer .Ludo Bagman tonight in robes of bright purple with large yellow stars was clapping as enthusiastically as any of the students and Madame Maxime who had changed her usual uniform of black satin for a flowing gown of lavender silk was applauding them politely .But Mr Crouch Harry suddenly realized was not there .The fifth seat at the table was occupied by Percy Weasley .When the champions and their partners reached the table Percy drew out the empty chair beside him staring pointedly at Harry .Harry took the hint and sat down next to Percy who was wearing brandnew navyblue dress robes and an expression of such smugness that Harry thought it ought to be fined .Ive been promoted Percy said before Harry could even ask and from his tone he might have been announcing his election as supreme ruler of the universe .Im now Mr Crouchs personal assistant and Im here representing him .Why didnt he come ?Harry asked .He wasnt looking forward to being lectured on cauldron bottoms all through dinner .‘Tm afraid to say Mr Crouch isnt well not well at all .Hasnt been right since the World Cup .Hardly surprising overwork .Hes not as young as he was though still quite brilliant of course the mind remains as great as it ever was .But the World Cup was a fiasco for the whole Ministry and then Mr Crouch suffered a huge personal shock with the misbehavior of that houseelf of his Blinky or whatever she was called .Naturally he dismissed her immediately afterward but well as I say hes getting on he needs looking after and I think hes found a definite drop in his home comforts since she left .And then we had the tournament to arrange and the aftermath of the Cup to deal with that revolting Skeeter woman buzzing around no poor man hes having a well earned quiet Christmas .Im just glad he knew he had someone he could rely upon to take his place .Harry wanted very much to ask whether Mr Crouch had stopped calling Percy Weatherby yet but resisted the temptation .There was no food as yet on the glittering golden plates but small menus were lying in front of each of them .Harry picked his up uncertainly and looked around there were no waiters .Dumbledore however looked carefully down at his own menu then said very clearly to his plate Pork chops !And pork chops appeared .Getting the idea the rest of the table placed their orders with their plates too .Harry glanced up at Hermione to see how she felt about this new and more complicated method of dining surely it meant plenty of extra work for the houseelves ?but for once Hermione didnt seem to be thinking about S .P .E .W .She was deep in talk with Viktor Krum and hardly seemed to notice what she was eating .It now occurred to Harry that he had never actually heard Krum speak before but he was certainly talking now and very enthusiastically at that .Veil ve have a castle also not as big as this nor as comfortable I am thinking he was telling Hermione .Ve have just four floors and the fires are lit only for magical purposes .But ve have grounds larger even than these though in vinter ve have very little daylight so ve are not enjoying them .But in summer ve are flying every day over the lakes and the mountains Now now Viktor !said Karkaroff with a laugh that didnt reach his cold eyes dont go giving away anything else now or your charming friend will know exactly where to find us !Dumbledore smiled his eyes twinkling .Igor all this secrecy .one would almost think you didnt want visitors .Well Dumbledore said Karkaroff displaying his yellowing teeth to their fullest extent we are all protective of our private domains are we not ?Do we not jealously guard the halls of learning that have been entrusted to us ?Are we not right to be proud that we alone know our schools secrets and right to protect them ?Oh I would never dream of assuming I know all Hogwarts secrets Igor said Dumbledore amicably .Only this morning for instance I took a wrong turning on the way to the bathroom and found myself in a beautifully proportioned room I have never seen before containing a really rather magnificent collection of chamber pots .When I went back to investigate more closely I discovered that the room had vanished .But I must keep an eye out for it .Possibly it is only accessible at fivethirty in the morning .Or it may only appear at the quarter moon or when the seeker has an exceptionally full bladder .Harry snorted into his plate of goulash .Percy frowned but Harry could have sworn Dumbledore had given him a very small wink .Meanwhile Fleur Delacour was criticizing the Hogwarts decorations to Roger Davies .Zis is nothing she said dismissively looking around at the sparkling walls of the Great Hall .At ze Palace of Beauxbatons we ave ice sculptures all around ze dining chamber at Chreestmas .Zey do not melt of course .zey are like uge statues of diamond glittering around ze place .And ze food is seemply superb .And we ave choirs of wood nymphs oo serenade us as we eat .We ave none of zis ugly armor in ze alls and eef a poltergeist ever entaired into Beauxbatons e would be expelled like zat .She slapped her hand onto the table impatiently .Roger Davies was watching her talk with a very dazed look on his face and he kept missing his mouth with his fork .Harry had the impression that Davies was too busy staring at Fleur to take in a word she was saying .Absolutely right he said quickly slapping his own hand down on the table in imitation of Fleur .Like that .Yeah .Harry looked around the Hall .Hagrid was sitting at one of the other staff tables he was back in his horrible hairy brown suit and gazing up at the top table .Harry saw him give a small wave and looking around saw Madame Maxime return it her opals glittering in the candlelight .Hermione was now teaching Krum to say her name properly he kept calling her Hermyown .Hermyohnee she said slowly and clearly .Hermownninny .Close enough she said catching Harrys eye and grinning .When all the food had been consumed Dumbledore stood up and asked the students to do the same .Then with a wave of his wand all the tables zoomed back along the walls leaving the floor clear and then he conjured a raised platform into existence along the right wall .A set of drums several guitars a lute a cello and some bagpipes were set upon it .The Weird Sisters now trooped up onto the stage to wildly enthusiastic applause they were all extremely hairy and dressed in black robes that had been artfully ripped and torn .They picked up their instruments and Harry who had been so interested in watching them that he had almost forgotten what was coming suddenly realized that the lanterns on all the other tables had gone out and that the other champions and their partners were standing up .Come on !Parvati hissed .Were supposed to dance !Harry tripped over his dress robes as he stood up .The Weird Sisters struck up a slow mournful tune Harry walked onto the brightly lit dance floor carefully avoiding catching anyones eye he could see Seamus and Dean waving at him and sniggering and next moment Parvati had seized his hands placed one around her waist and was holding the other tightly in hers .It wasnt as bad as it could have been Harry thought revolving slowly on the spot Parvati was steering .He kept his eyes fixed over the heads of the watching people and very soon many of them too had come onto the dance floor so that the champions were no longer the center of attention .Neville and Ginny were dancing nearby he could see Ginny wincing frequently as Neville trod on her feet and Dumbledore was waltzing with Madame Maxime .He was so dwarfed by her that the top of his pointed hat barely tickled her chin however she moved very gracefully for a woman so large .MadEye Moody was doing an extremely ungainly twostep with Professor Sinistra who was nervously avoiding his wooden leg .Nice socks Potter Moody growled as he passed his magical eye staring through Harrys robes .Oh yeah Dobby the houseelf knitted them for me said Harry grinning .He is so creepy Parvati whispered as Moody clunked away .I dont think that eye should be allowed Harry heard the final quavering note from the bagpipe with relief .The Weird Sisters stopped playing applause filled the hall once more and Harry let go of Parvati at once .Lets sit down shall we ?Oh but this is a really good one !Parvati said as the Weird Sisters struck up a new song which was much faster .No I dont like it Harry lied and he led her away from the dance floor past Fred and Angelina who were dancing so exhuberantly that people around them were backing away in fear of injury and over to the table where Ron and Padma were sitting .Hows it going ?Harry asked Ron sitting down and opening a bottle of butterbeer .Ron didnt answer .He was glaring at Hermione and Krum who were dancing nearby .Padma was sitting with her arms and legs crossed one foot jiggling in time to the music .Every now and then she threw a disgruntled look at Ron who was completely ignoring her .Parvati sat down on Harrys other side crossed her arms and legs too and within minutes was asked to dance by a boy from Beauxbatons .You dont mind do you Harry ?Parvati said .What ?said Harry who was now watching Cho and Cedric .Oh never mind snapped Parvati and she went off with the boy from Beauxbatons .When the song ended she did not return .Hermione came over and sat down in Parvatis empty chair .She was a bit pink in the face from dancing .Hi said Harry .Ron didnt say anything .Its hot isnt it ?said Hermione fanning herself with her hand .Viktors just gone to get some drinks .Ron gave her a withering look .Viktor ?he said .Hasnt he asked you to call him Vicky yet ?Hermione looked at him in surprise .Whats up with you ?she said .If you dont know said Ron scathingly Im not going to tell you .Hermione stared at him then at Harry who shrugged .Ron what ?Hes from Durmstrang !spat Ron .Hes competing against Harry !Against Hogwarts !You youre Ron was obviously casting around for words strong enough to describe Hermione s crime fraternizing with the enemy thats what youre doing !Hermiones mouth fell open .Dont be so stupid !she said after a moment .The enemy Honestly who was the one who was all excited when they saw him arrive ?Who was the one who wanted his autograph ?Whos got a model of him up in their dormitory ?Ron chose to ignore this .I spose he asked you to come with him while you were both in the library ?Yes he did said Hermione the pink patches on her cheeks glowing more brightly .So what ?What happened trying to get him to join spew were you ?No I wasnt !If you really want to know he he said hed been coming up to the library every day to try and talk to me but he hadnt been able to pluck up the courage !Hermione said this very quickly and blushed so deeply that she was the same color as Parvatis robes .Yeah well thats his story said Ron nastily .And whats that supposed to mean ?Obvious isnt it ?Hes Karkaroffs student isnt he ?He knows who you hang around with .Hes just trying to get closer to Harry get inside information on him or get near enough to jinx him Hermione looked as though Ron had slapped her .When she spoke her voice quivered .For your information he hasnt asked me one single thing about Harry not one Ron changed tack at the speed of light .Then hes hoping youll help him find out what his egg means !I suppose youve been putting your heads together during those cozy little library sessions Id never help him work out that egg !said Hermione looking outraged .Never .How could you say something like that I want Harry to win the tournament Harry knows that dont you Harry ?Youve got a funny way of showing it sneered Ron .This whole tournaments supposed to be about getting to know foreign wizards and making friends with them !said Hermione hotly .No it isnt !shouted Ron .Its about winning !People were starting to stare at them .Ron said Harry quietly I havent got a problem with Hermione coming with Krum But Ron ignored Harry too .Why dont you go and find Vicky hell be wondering where you are said Ron .Dont call him Vickyl Hermione jumped to her feet and stormed off across the dance floor disappearing into the crowd .Ron watched her go with a mixture of anger and satisfaction on his face .Are you going to ask me to dance at all ?Padma asked him .No said Ron still glaring after Hermione .Fine snapped Padma and she got up and went to join Parvati and the Beauxbatons boy who conjured up one of his friends to join them so fast that Harry could have sworn he had zoomed him there by a Summoning Charm .Vare is Hermownninny ?said a voice .Krum had just arrived at their table clutching two butterbeers .No idea said Ron mulishly looking up at him .Lost her have you ?Krum was looking surly again .Veil if you see her tell her I haff drinks he said and he slouched off .Made friends with Viktor Krum have you Ron ?Percy had bustled over rubbing his hands together and looking extremely pompous .Excellent !Thats the whole point you know international magical cooperation !To Harrys displeasure Percy now took Padmas vacated seat .The top table was now empty Professor Dumbledore was dancing with Professor Sprout Ludo Bagman with Professor McGonagall Madame Maxime and Hagrid were cutting a wide path around the dance floor as they waltzed through the students and Karkaroff was nowhere to be seen .When the next song ended everybody applauded once more and Harry saw Ludo Bagman kiss Professor McGonagalls hand and make his way back through the crowds at which point Fred and George accosted him .What do they think theyre doing annoying senior Ministry members ?Percy hissed watching Fred and George suspiciously .No respect .Ludo Bagman shook off Fred and George fairly quickly however and spotting Harry waved and came over to their table .I hope my brothers werent bothering you Mr Bagman ?said Percy at once .What ?Oh not at all not at all !said Bagman .No they were just telling me a bit more about those fake wands of theirs .Wondering if I could advise them on the marketing .Ive promised to put them in touch with a couple of contacts of mine at Zonkos Joke Shop .Percy didnt look happy about this at all and Harry was prepared to bet he would be rushing to tell Mrs Weasley about this the moment he got home .Apparently Fred and Georges plans had grown even more ambitious lately if they were hoping to sell to the public .Bagman opened his mouth to ask Harry something but Percy diverted him .How do you feel the tournaments going Mr Bagman ?Our departments quite satisfied the hitch with the Goblet of Fire he glanced at Harry was a little unfortunate of course but it seems to have gone very smoothly since dont you think ?Oh yes Bagman said cheerfully its all been enormous fun .Hows old Barty doing ?Shame he couldnt come .Oh Im sure Mr Crouch will be up and about in no time said Percy importantly but in the meantime Im more than willing to take up the slack .Of course its not all attending balls he laughed airily oh no Ive had to deal with all sorts of things that have cropped up in his absence you heard Ali Bashir was caught smuggling a consignment of flying carpets into the country ?And then weve been trying to persuade the Transylvanians to sign the International Ban on Dueling .Ive got a meeting with their Head of Magical Cooperation in the new year Lets go for a walk Ron muttered to Harry get away from Percy .Pretending they wanted more drinks Harry and Ron left the table edged around the dance floor and slipped out into the entrance hall .The front doors stood open and the fluttering fairy lights in the rose garden winked and twinkled as they went down the front steps where they found themselves surrounded by bushes winding ornamental paths and large stone statues .Harry could hear splashing water which sounded like a fountain .Here and there people were sitting on carved benches .He and Ron set off along one of the winding paths through the rosebushes but they had gone only a short way when they heard an unpleasantly familiar voice . .dont see what there is to fuss about Igor .Severus you cannot pretend this isnt happening !Karkaroffs voice sounded anxious and hushed as though keen not to be overheard .Its been getting clearer and clearer for months .I am becoming seriously concerned I cant deny it Then flee said Snapes voice curtly .Flee I will make your excuses .I however am remaining at Hogwarts .Snape and Karkaroff came around the corner .Snape had his wand out and was blasting rosebushes apart his expression most illnatured .Squeals issued from many of the bushes and dark shapes emerged from them .Ten points from Ravenclaw Fawcett !Snape snarled as a girl ran past him .And ten points from Hufflepuff too Stebbins !as a boy went rushing after her .And what are you two doing ?he added catching sight of Harry and Ron on the path ahead .Karkaroff Harry saw looked slightly discomposed to see them standing there .His hand went nervously to his goatee and he began winding it around his finger .Were walking Ron told Snape shortly .Not against the law is it ?Keep walking then !Snape snarled and he brushed past them his long black cloak billowing out behind him .Karkaroff hurried away after Snape .Harry and Ron continued down the path .Whats got Karkaroff all worried ?Ron muttered .And since when have he and Snape been on first name terms ?said Harry slowly .They had reached a large stone reindeer now over which they could see the sparkling jets of a tall fountain .The shadowy outlines of two enormous people were visible on a stone bench watching the water in the moonlight .And then Harry heard Hagrid speak .Momen I saw yeh I knew he was saying in an oddly husky voice .Harry and Ron froze .This didnt sound like the sort of scene they ought to walk in on somehow .Harry looked around back up the path and saw Fleur Delacour and Roger Davies standing halfconcealed in a rosebush nearby .He tapped Ron on the shoulder and jerked his head toward them meaning that they could easily sneak off that way without being noticed Fleur and Davies looked very busy to Harry but Ron eyes widening in horror at the sight of Fleur shook his head vigorously and pulled Harry deeper into the shadows behind the reindeer .What did you know Agrid ?said Madame Maxime a purr in her low voice .Harry definitely didnt want to listen to this he knew Hagrid would hate to be overheard in a situation like this he certainly would have if it had been possible he would have put his fingers in his ears and hummed loudly but that wasnt really an option .Instead he tried to interest himself in a beetle crawling along the stone reindeers back but the beetle just wasnt interesting enough to block out Hagrids next words .I jus knew .knew you were like me .Was it yer mother or yer father ?I I dont know what you mean Agrid .It was my mother said Hagrid quietly .She was one o the las ones in Britain .Course I can remember her too well .she left see .When I was abou three .She wasn really the maternal sort .Well .its not in their natures is it ?Dunno what happened to her .might be dead fer all I know .Madame Maxime didnt say anything .And Harry in spite of himself took his eyes off the beetle and looked over the top of the reindeers antlers listening . .He had never heard Hagrid talk about his childhood before .Me dad was brokenhearted when she wen .Tiny little bloke my dad was .By the time I was six I could lift him up an put him on top o the dresser if he annoyed me .Used ter make him laugh .Hagrids deep voice broke .Madame Maxime was listening motionless apparently staring at the silvery fountain .Dad raised me .but he died o course jus after I started school .Sorta had ter make me own way after that .Dumbledore was a real help mind .Very kind ter me he was .Hagrid pulled out a large spotted silk handkerchief and blew his nose heavily .So .anyway .enough abou me .What about you ?Which side you got it on ?But Madame Maxime had suddenly got to her feet .It is chilly she said but whatever the weather was doing it was nowhere near as cold as her voice .I think I will go in now .Eh ?said Hagrid blankly .No don go !Ive Ive never met another one before !Anuzzer what precisely ?said Madame Maxime her tone icy .Harry could have told Hagrid it was best not to answer he stood there in the shadows gritting his teeth hoping against hope he wouldnt but it was no good .Another halfgiant o course !said Hagrid .Ow dare you !shrieked Madame Maxime .Her voice exploded through the peaceful night air like a foghorn behind him Harry heard Fleur and Roger fall out of their rosebush .I ave nevair been more insulted in my life !Alfgiant ?Moi ?I ave I ave big bones !She stormed away great multicolored swarms of fairies rose into the air as she passed angrily pushing aside bushes .Hagrid was still sitting on the bench staring after her .It was much too dark to make out his expression .Then after about a minute he stood up and strode away not back to the castle but off out into the dark grounds in the direction of his cabin .Cmon Harry said very quietly to Ron .Lets go .But Ron didnt move .Whats up ?said Harry looking at him .Ron looked around at Harry his expression very serious indeed .Did you know ?he whispered .About Hagrid being halfgiant ?No Harry said shrugging .So what ?He knew immediately from the look Ron was giving him that he was once again revealing his ignorance of the wizarding world .Brought up by the Dursleys there were many things that wizards took for granted that were revelations to Harry but these surprises had become fewer with each successive year .Now however he could tell that most wizards would not have said So what ?upon finding out that one of their friends had a giantess for a mother .Ill explain inside said Ron quietly cmon .Fleur and Roger Davies had disappeared probably into a more private clump of bushes .Harry and Ron returned to the Great Hall .Parvati and Padma were now sitting at a distant table with a whole crowd of Beauxbatons boys and Hermione was once more dancing with Krum .Harry and Ron sat down at a table far removed from the dance floor .So ?Harry prompted Ron .Whats the problem with giants ?Well theyre .theyre .Ron struggled for words . .not very nice he finished lamely .Who cares ?Harry said .Theres nothing wrong with Hagrid !I know there isnt but .blimey no wonder he keeps it quiet Ron said shaking his head .I always thought hed got in the way of a bad Engorgement Charm when he was a kid or something .Didnt like to mention it .But whats it matter if his mother was a giantess ?said Harry .Well .no one who knows him will care cos theyll know hes not dangerous said Ron slowly .But .Harry theyre just vicious giants .Its like Hagrid said its in their natures theyre like trolls .they just like killing everyone knows that .There arent any left in Britain now though .What happened to them ?Well they were dying out anyway and then loads got themselves killed by Aurors .There re supposed to be giants abroad though .They hide out in mountains mostly .I dont know who Maxime thinks shes kidding Harry said watching Madame Maxime sitting alone at the judges table looking very somber .If Hagrid s halfgiant she definitely is .Big bones .the only thing thats got bigger bones than her is a dinosaur .Harry and Ron spent the rest of the ball discussing giants in their corner neither of them having any inclination to dance .Harry tried not to watch Cho and Cedric too much it gave him a strong desire to kick something .When the Weird Sisters finished playing at midnight everyone gave them a last loud round of applause and started to wend their way into the entrance hall .Many people were expressing the wish that the ball could have gone on longer but Harry was perfectly happy to be going to bed as far as he was concerned the evening hadnt been much fun .Out in the entrance hall Harry and Ron saw Hermione saying good night to Krum before he went back to the Durmstrang ship .She gave Ron a very cold look and swept past him up the marble staircase without speaking .Harry and Ron followed her but halfway up the staircase Harry heard someone calling him .Hey Harry !It was Cedric Diggory .Harry could see Cho waiting for him in the entrance hall below .Yeah ?said Harry coldly as Cedric ran up the stairs toward him .Cedric looked as though he didnt want to say whatever it was in front of Ron who shrugged looking badtempered and continued to climb the stairs .Listen .Cedric lowered his voice as Ron disappeared .I owe you one for telling me about the dragons .You know that golden egg ?Does yours wail when you open it ?Yeah said Harry .Well .take a bath okay ?What ?Take a bath and er take the egg with you and er just mull things over in the hot water .Itll help you think .Trust me .Harry stared at him .Tell you what Cedric said use the prefects bathroom .Fourth door to the left of that statue of Boris the Bewildered on the fifth floor .Passwords ‘pine fresh .Gotta go .want to say good night He grinned at Harry again and hurried back down the stairs to Cho .Harry walked back to Gryffindor Tower alone .That had been extremely strange advice .Why would a bath help him to work out what the wailing egg meant ?Was Cedric pulling his leg ?Was he trying to make Harry look like a fool so Cho would like him even more by comparison ?The Fat Lady and her friend Vi were snoozing in the picture over the portrait hole .Harry had to yell Fairy lights !before he woke them up and when he did they were extremely irritated .He climbed into the common room and found Ron and Hermione having a blazing row .Standing ten feet apart they were bellowing at each other each scarlet in the face .Well if you dont like it you know what the solution is dont you ?yelled Hermione her hair was coming down out of its elegant bun now and her face was screwed up in anger .Oh yeah ?Ron yelled back .Whats that ?Next time theres a ball ask me before someone else does and not as a last resort !Ron mouthed soundlessly like a goldfish out of water as Hermione turned on her heel and stormed up the girls staircase to bed .Ron turned to look at Harry .Well he sputtered looking thunderstruck well that just proves completely missed the point Harry didnt say anything .He liked being back on speaking terms with Ron too much to speak his mind right now but he somehow thought that Hermione had gotten the point much better than Ron had .RITA SKEBTERS SCOOP Everybody got up late on Boxing Day .The Gryffindor common room was much quieter than it had been lately many yawns punctuating the lazy conversations .Hermiones hair was bushy again she confessed to Harry that she had used liberal amounts of Sleekeazys Hair Potion on it for the ball but its way too much bother to do every day she said matteroffactly scratching a purring Crookshanks behind the ears .Ron and Hermione seemed to have reached an unspoken agreement not to discuss their argument .They were being quite friendly to each other though oddly formal .Ron and Harry wasted no time in telling Hermione about the conversation they had overheard between Madame Maxime and Hagrid but Hermione didnt seem to find the news that Hagrid was a half giant nearly as shocking as Ron did .Well I thought he must be she said shrugging .I knew he couldnt be pure giant because theyre about twenty feet tall .But honestly all this hysteria about giants .They cant all be horrible .Its the same sort of prejudice that people have toward werewolves .Its just bigotry isnt it ?Ron looked as though he would have liked to reply scathingly but perhaps he didnt want another row because he contented himself with shaking his head disbelievingly while Hermione wasnt looking .It was time now to think of the homework they had neglected during the first week of the holidays .Everybody seemed to be feeling rather flat now that Christmas was over everybody except Harry that is who was starting once again to feel slightly nervous .The trouble was that February the twentyfourth looked a lot closer from this side of Christmas and he still hadnt done anything about working out the clue inside the golden egg .He therefore started taking the egg out of his trunk every time he went up to the dormitory opening it and listening intently hoping that this time it would make some sense .He strained to think what the sound reminded him of apart from thirty musical saws but he had never heard anything else like it .He closed the egg shook it vigorously and opened it again to see if the sound had changed but it hadnt .He tried asking the egg questions shouting over all the wailing but nothing happened .He even threw the egg across the room though he hadnt really expected that to help .Harry had not forgotten the hint that Cedric had given him but his lessthanfriendly feelings toward Cedric just now meant that he was keen not to take his help if he could avoid it .In any case it seemed to him that if Cedric had really wanted to give Harry a hand he would have been a lot more explicit .He Harry had told Cedric exactly what was coming in the first task and Cedrics idea of a fair exchange had been to tell Harry to take a bath .Well he didnt need that sort of rubbishy help not from someone who kept walking down corridors hand in hand with Cho anyway .And so the first day of the new term arrived and Harry set off to lessons weighed down with books parchment and quills as usual but also with the lurking worry of the egg heavy in his stomach as though he were carrying that around with him too .Snow was still thick upon the grounds and the greenhouse windows were covered in condensation so thick that they couldnt see out of them in Herbology .Nobody was looking forward to Care of Magical Creatures much in this weather though as Ron said the skrewts would probably warm them up nicely either by chasing them or blasting off so forcefully that Hagrids cabin would catch fire .When they arrived at Hagrids cabin however they found an elderly witch with closely cropped gray hair and a very prominent chin standing before his front door .Hurry up now the bell rang five minutes ago she barked at them as they struggled toward her through the snow .Who re you ?said Ron staring at her .Wheres Hagrid ?My name is Professor GrubblyPlank she said briskly .I am your temporary Care of Magical Creatures teacher .Wheres Hagrid ?Harry repeated loudly .He is indisposed said Professor GrubblyPlank shortly .Soft and unpleasant laughter reached Harrys ears .He turned Draco Malfoy and the rest of the Slytherins were joining the class .All of them looked gleeful and none of them looked surprised to see Professor GrubblyPlank .This way please said Professor GrubblyPlank and she strode off around the paddock where the Beauxbatons horses were shivering .Harry Ron and Hermione followed her looking back over their shoulders at Hagrids cabin .All the curtains were closed .Was Hagrid in there alone and ill ?Whats wrong with Hagrid ?Harry said hurrying to catch up with Professor GrubblyPlank .Never you mind she said as though she thought he was being nosy .I do mind though said Harry hotly .Whats up with him ?Professor GrubblyPlank acted as though she couldnt hear him .She led them past the paddock where the huge Beauxbatons horses were standing huddled against the cold and toward a tree on the edge of the forest where a large and beautiful unicorn was tethered .Many of the girls ooooohed !at the sight of the unicorn .Oh its so beautiful !whispered Lavender Brown .How did she get it ?Theyre supposed to be really hard to catch !The unicorn was so brightly white it made the snow all around look gray .It was pawing the ground nervously with its golden hooves and throwing back its horned head .Boys keep back !barked Professor GrubblyPlank throwing out an arm and catching Harry hard in the chest .They prefer the womans touch unicorns .Girls to the front and approach with care come on easy does it .She and the girls walked slowly forward toward the unicorn leaving the boys standing near the paddock fence watching .The moment Professor Grubbly Plank was out of earshot Harry turned to Ron .What dyou reckons wrong with him ?You dont think a skrewt ?Oh he hasnt been attacked Potter if thats what youre thinking said Malfoy softly .No hes just too ashamed to show his big ugly face .What dyou mean ?said Harry sharply .Malfoy put his hand inside the pocket of his robes and pulled out a folded page of newsprint .There you go he said .Hate to break it to you Potter .He smirked as Harry snatched the page unfolded it and read it with Ron Seamus Dean and Neville looking over his shoulder .It was an article topped with a picture of Hagrid looking extremely shifty .DUMBLEDORES GIANT MISTAKE Albus Dumbledore eccentric Headmaster of Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry has never been afraid to make controversial staff appointments writes Rita Skeeter Special Correspondent .In September of this year he hired Alastor MadEye Moody the notoriously jinxhappy exAuror to teach Defense Against the Dark Arts a decision that caused many raised eyebrows at the Ministry of Magic given Moodys wellknown habit of attacking anybody who makes a sudden movement in his presence .MadEye Moody however looks responsible and kindly when set beside the parthuman Dumbledore employs to teach Care of Magical Creatures .Rubeus Hagrid who admits to being expelled from Hogwarts in his third year has enjoyed the position of gamekeeper at the school ever since a job secured for him by Dumbledore .Last year however Hagrid used his mysterious influence over the headmaster to secure the additional post of Care of Magical Creatures teacher over the heads of many better qualified candidates .An alarmingly large and ferociouslooking man Hagrid has been using his newfound authority to terrify the students in his care with a succession of horrific creatures .While Dumbledore turns a blind eye Hagrid has maimed several pupils during a series of lessons that many admit to being very frightening .I was attacked by a hippogriff and my friend Vincent Crabbe got a bad bite off a flobberworm says Draco Malfoy a fourthyear student .We all hate Hagrid but were just too scared to say anything .Hagrid has no intention of ceasing his campaign of intimidation however .In conversation with a Daily Prophet reporter last month he admitted breeding creatures he has dubbed BlastEnded Skrewts highly dangerous crosses between manticores and fire crabs .The creation of new breeds of magical creature is of course an activity usually closely observed by the Department for the Regulation and Control of Magical Creatures .Hagrid however considers himself to be above such petty restrictions .I was just having some fun he says before hastily changing the subject .As if this were not enough the Daily Prophet has now unearthed evidence that Hagrid is not as he has always pretended a pureblood wizard .He is not in fact even pure human .His mother we can exclusively reveal is none other than the giantess Fridwulfa whose whereabouts are currently unknown .Bloodthirsty and brutal the giants brought themselves to the point of extinction by warring amongst themselves during the last century .The handful that remained joined the ranks of HeWho MustNotBeNamed and were responsible for some of the worst mass Muggle killings of his reign of terror .While many of the giants who served HeWhoMust NotBeNamed were killed by Aurors working against the Dark Side Fridwulfa was not among them .It is possible she escaped to one of the giant communities still existing in foreign mountain ranges .If his antics during Care of Magical Creatures lessons are any guide however Fridwulfas son appears to have inherited her brutal nature .In a bizarre twist Hagrid is reputed to have developed a close friendship with the boy who brought around YouKnow Whos fall from power thereby driving Hagrid s own mother like the rest of YouKnow Whos supporters into hiding .Perhaps Harry Potter is unaware of the unpleasant truth about his large friend but Albus Dumbledore surely has a duty to ensure that Harry Potter along with his fellow students is warned about the dangers of associating with partgiants .Harry finished reading and looked up at Ron whose mouth was hanging open .How did she find out ?he whispered .But that wasnt what was bothering Harry .What dyou mean we all hate Hagrid ?Harry spat at Malfoy .Whats this rubbish about him he pointed at Crabbe getting a bad bite off a flobberworm ?They havent even got teeth !Crabbe was sniggering apparently very pleased with himself .Well I think this should put an end to the oafs teaching career said Malfoy his eyes glinting .Half giant .and there was me thinking hed just swallowed a bottle of SkeleGro when he was young . .None of the mummies and daddies are going to like this at all .Theyll be worried hell eat their kids ha ha .You Are you paying attention over there ?Professor GrubblyPlanks voice carried over to the boys the girls were all clustered around the unicorn now stroking it .Harry was so angry that the Daily Prophet article shook in his hands as he turned to stare unseeingly at the unicorn whose many magical properties Professor GrubblyPlank was now enumerating in a loud voice so that the boys could hear too .I hope she stays that woman !said Parvati Patil when the lesson had ended and they were all heading back to the castle for lunch .Thats more what I thought Care of Magical Creatures would be like .proper creatures like unicorns not monsters .What about Hagrid ?Harry said angrily as they went up the steps .What about him ?said Parvati in a hard voice .He can still be gamekeeper cant he ?Parvati had been very cool toward Harry since the ball .He supposed that he ought to have paid her a bit more attention but she seemed to have had a good time all the same .She was certainly telling anybody who would listen that she had made arrangements to meet the boy from Beauxbatons in Hogsmeade on the next weekend trip .That was a really good lesson said Hermione as they entered the Great Hall .I didnt know half the things Professor GrubblyPlank told us about uni Look at this !Harry snarled and he shoved the Daily Prophet article under Hermione s nose .Hermione s mouth fell open as she read .Her reaction was exactly the same as Rons .How did that horrible Skeeter woman find out ?You dont think Hagrid told her ?No said Harry leading the way over to the Gryffindor table and throwing himself into a chair furious .He never even told us did he ?I reckon she was so mad he wouldnt give her loads of horrible stuff about me she went ferreting around to get him back .Maybe she heard him telling Madame Maxime at the ball said Hermione quietly .Wed have seen her in the garden !said Ron .Anyway shes not supposed to come into school anymore Hagrid said Dumbledore banned her .Maybe shes got an Invisibility Cloak said Harry ladling chicken casserole onto his plate and splashing it everywhere in his anger .Sort of thing shed do isnt it hide in bushes listening to people .Like you and Ron did you mean said Hermione .We werent trying to hear him !said Ron indignantly .We didnt have any choice !The stupid prat talking about his giantess mother where anyone could have heard him !Weve got to go and see him said Harry .This evening after Divination .Tell him we want him back .you do want him back ?he shot at Hermione .I well Im not going to pretend it didnt make a nice change having a proper Care of Magical Creatures lesson for once but I do want Hagrid back of course I do !Hermione added hastily quailing under Harrys furious stare .So that evening after dinner the three of them left the castle once more and went down through the frozen grounds to Hagrids cabin .They knocked and Fangs booming barks answered .Hagrid its us !Harry shouted pounding on the door .Open up !Hagrid didnt answer .They could hear Fang scratching at the door whining but it didnt open .They hammered on it for ten more minutes Ron even went and banged on one of the windows but there was no response .Whats he avoiding us for ?Hermione said when they had finally given up and were walking back to the school .He surely doesnt think wed care about him being halfgiant ?But it seemed that Hagrid did care .They didnt see a sign of him all week .He didnt appear at the staff table at mealtimes they didnt see him going about his gamekeeper duties on the grounds and Professor GrubblyPlank continued to take the Care of Magical Creatures classes .Malfoy was gloating at every possible opportunity .Missing your halfbreed pal ?he kept whispering to Harry whenever there was a teacher around so that he was safe from Harrys retaliation .Missing the elephantman ?There was a Hogsmeade visit halfway through January .Hermione was very surprised that Harry was going to go .I just thought youd want to take advantage of the common room being quiet she said .Really get to work on that egg .Oh I I reckon Ive got a pretty good idea what its about now Harry lied .Have you really ?said Hermione looking impressed .Well done !Harrys insides gave a guilty squirm but he ignored them .He still had five weeks to work out that egg clue after all and that was ages .whereas if he went into Hogsmeade he might run into Hagrid and get a chance to persuade him to come back .He Ron and Hermione left the castle together on Saturday and set off through the cold wet grounds toward the gates .As they passed the Durmstrang ship moored in the lake they saw Viktor Krum emerge onto the deck dressed in nothing but swimming trunks .He was very skinny indeed but apparently a lot tougher than he looked because he climbed up onto the side of the ship stretched out his arms and dived right into the lake .Hes mad !said Harry staring at Krums dark head as it bobbed out into the middle of the lake .It must be freezing its January !Its a lot colder where he comes from said Hermione .I suppose it feels quite warm to him .Yeah but theres still the giant squid said Ron .He didnt sound anxious if anything he sounded hopeful .Hermione noticed his tone of voice and frowned .Hes really nice you know she said .Hes not at all like youd think coming from Durmstrang .He likes it much better here he told me .Ron said nothing .He hadnt mentioned Viktor Krum since the ball but Harry had found a miniature arm under his bed on Boxing Day which had looked very much as though it had been snapped off a small model figure wearing Bulgarian Quidditch robes .Harry kept his eyes skinned for a sign of Hagrid all the way down the slushy High Street and suggested a visit to the Three Broomsticks once he had ascertained that Hagrid was not in any of the shops .The pub was as crowded as ever but one quick look around at all the tables told Harry that Hagrid wasnt there .Heart sinking he went up to the bar with Ron and Hermione ordered three butterbeers from Madam Rosmerta and thought gloomily that he might just as well have stayed behind and listened to the egg wailing after all .Doesnt he ever go into the office ?Hermione whispered suddenly .Look !She pointed into the mirror behind the bar and Harry saw Ludo Bagman reflected there sitting in a shadowy corner with a bunch of goblins .Bagman was talking very fast in a low voice to the goblins all of whom had their arms crossed and were looking rather menacing .It was indeed odd Harry thought that Bagman was here at the Three Broomsticks on a weekend when there was no Triwizard event and therefore no judging to be done .He watched Bagman in the mirror .He was looking strained again quite as strained as he had that night in the forest before the Dark Mark had appeared .But just then Bagman glanced over at the bar saw Harry and stood up .In a moment in a moment !Harry heard him say brusquely to the goblins and Bagman hurried through the pub toward Harry his boyish grin back in place .Harry !he said .How are you ?Been hoping to run into you !Everything going all right ?Fine thanks said Harry .Wonder if I could have a quick private word Harry ?said Bagman eagerly .You couldnt give us a moment you two could you ?Er okay said Ron and he and Hermione went off to find a table .Bagman led Harry along the bar to the end furthest from Madam Rosmerta .Well I just thought Id congratulate you again on your splendid performance against that Horntail Harry said Bagman .Really superb .Thanks said Harry but he knew this couldnt be all that Bagman wanted to say because he could have congratulated Harry in front of Ron and Hermione .Bagman didnt seem in any particular rush to spill the beans though .Harry saw him glance into the mirror over the bar at the goblins who were all watching him and Harry in silence through their dark slanting eyes .Absolute nightmare said Bagman to Harry in an undertone noticing Harry watching the goblins too .Their English isnt too good .its like being back with all the Bulgarians at the Quidditch World Cup .but at least they used sign language another human could recognize .This lot keep gabbling in Gobbledegook .and I only know one word of Gobbledegook .Bladvak .It means ‘pickax .I dont like to use it in case they think Im threatening them .He gave a short booming laugh .What do they want ?Harry said noticing how the goblins were still watching Bagman very closely .Er well .said Bagman looking suddenly nervous .They .er .theyre looking for Barry Crouch .Why are they looking for him here ?said Harry .Hes at the Ministry in London isnt he ?Er .as a matter of fact Ive no idea where he is said Bagman .Hes sort of .stopped coming to work .Been absent for a couple of weeks now .Young Percy his assistant says hes ill .Apparently hes just been sending instructions in by owl .But would you mind not mentioning that to anyone Harry ?Because Rita Skeeters still poking around everywhere she can and Im willing to bet shed work up Bartys illness into something sinister .Probably say hes gone missing like Bertha Jorkins .Have you heard anything about Bertha Jorkins ?Harry asked .No said Bagman looking strained again .Ive got people looking of course .About time thought Harry and its all very strange .She definitely arrived in Albania because she met her second cousin there .And then she left the cousins house to go south and see an aunt .and she seems to have vanished without trace en route .Blowed if I can see where shes got to .she doesnt seem the type to elope for instance .but still .What are we doing talking about goblins and Bertha Jorkins ?I really wanted to ask you he lowered his voice how are you getting on with your golden egg ?Er .not bad Harry said untruthfully .Bagman seemed to know he wasnt being honest .Listen Harry he said still in a very low voice I feel very bad about all this .you were thrown into this tournament you didnt volunteer for it .and if .his voice was so quiet now Harry had to lean closer to listen if I can help at all .a prod in the right direction .Ive taken a liking to you .the way you got past that dragon ! .well just say the word .Harry stared up into Bagmans round rosy face and his wide babyblue eyes .Were supposed to work out the clues alone arent we ?he said careful to keep his voice casual and not sound as though he was accusing the head of the Department of Magical Games and Sports of breaking the rules .Well .well yes said Bagman impatiently but come on Harry we all want a Hogwarts victory dont we ?Have you offered Cedric help ?Harry said .The smallest of frowns creased Bagmans smooth face .No I havent he said .I well like I say Ive taken a liking to you .Just thought Id offer .Well thanks said Harry but I think Im nearly there with the egg .couple more days should crack it .He wasnt entirely sure why he was refusing Bagmans help except that Bagman was almost a stranger to him and accepting his assistance would feel somehow much more like cheating than asking advice from Ron Hermione or Sirius .Bagman looked almost affronted but couldnt say much more as Fred and George turned up at that point .Hello Mr Bagman said Fred brightly .Can we buy you a drink ?Er .no said Bagman with a last disappointed glance at Harry no thank you boys .Fred and George looked quite as disappointed as Bagman who was surveying Harry as though he had let him down badly .Well I must dash he said .Nice seeing you all .Good luck Harry .He hurried out of the pub .The goblins all slid off their chairs and exited after him .Harry went to rejoin Ron and Hermione .What did he want ?Ron said the moment Harry had sat down .He offered to help me with the golden egg said Harry .He shouldnt be doing that !said Hermione looking very shocked .Hes one of the judges !And anyway youve already worked it out havent you ?Er .nearly said Harry .Well I dont think Dumbledore would like it if he knew Bagman was trying to persuade you to cheat !said Hermione still looking deeply disapproving .I hope hes trying to help Cedric as much !Hes not I asked said Harry .Who cares if Diggorys getting help ?said Ron .Harry privately agreed .Those goblins didnt look very friendly said Hermione sipping her butterbeer .What were they doing here ?Looking for Crouch according to Bagman said Harry .Hes still ill .Hasnt been into work .Maybe Percys poisoning him said Ron .Probably thinks if Crouch snuffs it hell be made head of the Department of International Magical Cooperation .Hermione gave Ron a dont jokeaboutthingslike that look and said Funny goblins looking for Mr Crouch .Theyd normally deal with the Department for the Regulation and Control of Magical Creatures .Crouch can speak loads of different languages though said Harry .Maybe they need an interpreter .Worrying about poor ickle goblins now are you ?Ron asked Hermione .Thinking of starting up S .P .U .G .or something ?Society for the Protection of Ugly Goblins ?Ha ha ha said Hermione sarcastically .Goblins dont need protection .Havent you been listening to what Professor Binns has been telling us about goblin rebellions ?No said Harry and Ron together .Well theyre quite capable of dealing with wizards said Hermione taking another sip of butterbeer .Theyre very clever .Theyre not like houseelves who never stick up for themselves .Uhoh said Ron staring at the door .Rita Skeeter had just entered .She was wearing bananayellow robes today her long nails were painted shocking pink and she was accompanied by her paunchy photographer .She bought drinks and she and the photographer made their way through the crowds to a table nearby Harry Ron and Hermione glaring at her as she approached .She was talking fast and looking very satisfied about something . .didnt seem very keen to talk to us did he Bozo ?Now why would that be do you think ?And whats he doing with a pack of goblins in tow anyway ?Showing them the sights .what nonsense .he was always a bad liar .Reckon somethings up ?Think we should do a bit of digging ? ‘Disgraced ExHead of Magical Games and Sports Ludo Bagman .Snappy start to a sentence Bozo we just need to find a story to fit it Trying to ruin someone elses life ?said Harry loudly .A few people looked around .Rita Skeeter s eyes widened behind her jeweled spectacles as she saw who had spoken .Harry !she said beaming .How lovely !Why dont you come and join ?I wouldnt come near you with a tenfoot broomstick said Harry furiously .What did you do that to Hagrid for eh ?Rita Skeeter raised her heavily penciled eyebrows .Our readers have a right to the truth Harry .I am merely doing my Who cares if hes half giant ?Harry shouted .Theres nothing wrong with him !The whole pub had gone very quiet .Madam Rosmerta was staring over from behind the bar apparently oblivious to the fact that the flagon she was filling with mead was overflowing .Rita Skeeters smile flickered very slightly but she hitched it back almost at once she snapped open her crocodileskin handbag pulled out her QuickQuotes Quill and said How about giving me an interview about the Hagrid you know Harry ?The man behind the muscles ?Your unlikely friendship and the reasons behind it .Would you call him a father substitute ?Hermione stood up very abruptly her butterbeer clutched in her hand as though it were a grenade .You horrible woman she said through gritted teeth you dont care do you anything for a story and anyone will do wont they ?Even Ludo Bagman Sit down you silly little girl and dont talk about things you dont understand said Rita Skeeter coldly her eyes hardening as they fell on Hermione .I know things about Ludo Bagman that would make your hair curl .not that it needs it she added eyeing Hermione s bushy hair .Lets go said Hermione cmon Harry Ron .They left many people were staring at them as they went .Harry glanced back as they reached the door .Rita Skeeters QuickQuotes Quill was out it was zooming backward and forward over a piece of parchment on the table .Shell be after you next Hermione said Ron in a low and worried voice as they walked quickly back up the street .Let her try !said Hermione defiantly she was shaking with rage .Ill show her !Silly little girl am I ?Oh Ill get her back for this .First Harry then Hagrid You dont want to go upsetting Rita Skeeter said Ron nervously .Im serious Hermione shell dig up something on you My parents dont read the Daily Prophet She cant scare me into hiding !said Hermione now striding along so fast that it was all Harry and Ron could do to keep up with her .The last time Harry had seen Hermione in a rage like this she had hit Draco Malfoy around the face .And Hagrid isnt hiding anymore !He should never have let that excuse for a human being upset him !Come on !Breaking into a run she led them all the way back up the road through the gates flanked by winged boars and up through the grounds to Hagrid s cabin .The curtains were still drawn and they could hear Fang barking as they approached .Hagrid !Hermione shouted pounding on his front door .Hagrid thats enough !We know youre in there !Nobody cares if your mum was a giantess Hagrid !You cant let that foul Skeeter woman do this to you !Hagrid get out here youre just being The door opened .Hermione said About t !and then stopped very suddenly because she had found herself facetoface not with Hagrid but with Albus Dumbledore .Good afternoon he said pleasantly smiling down at them .We er we wanted to see Hagrid said Hermione in a rather small voice .Yes I surmised as much said Dumbledore his eyes twinkling .Why dont you come in ?Oh .um .okay said Hermione .She Ron and Harry went into the cabin Fang launched himself upon Harry the moment he entered barking madly and trying to lick his ears .Harry fended off Fang and looked around .Hagrid was sitting at his table where there were two large mugs of tea .He looked a real mess .His face was blotchy his eyes swollen and he had gone to the other extreme where his hair was concerned far from trying to make it behave it now looked like a wig of tangled wire .Hi Hagrid said Harry .Hagrid looked up .Lo he said in a very hoarse voice .More tea I think said Dumbledore closing the door behind Harry Ron and Hermione drawing out his wand and twiddling it a revolving tea tray appeared in midair along with a plate of cakes .Dumbledore magicked the tray onto the table and everybody sat down .There was a slight pause and then Dumbledore said Did you by any chance hear what Miss Granger was shouting Hagrid ?Hermione went slightly pink but Dumbledore smiled at her and continued Hermione Harry and Ron still seem to want to know you judging by the way they were attempting to break down the door .Of course we still want to know you !Harry said staring at Hagrid .You dont think anything that Skeeter cow sorry Professor he added quickly looking at Dumbledore .I have gone temporarily deaf and havent any idea what you said Harry said Dumbledore twiddling his thumbs and staring at the ceiling .Er right said Harry sheepishly .I just meant Hagrid how could you think wed care what that woman wrote about you ?Two fat tears leaked out of Hagrid s beetleblack eyes and fell slowly into his tangled beard .Living proof of what Ive been telling you Hagrid said Dumbledore still looking carefully up at the ceiling .I have shown you the letters from the countless parents who remember you from their own days here telling me in no uncertain terms that if I sacked you they would have something to say about it Not all of em said Hagrid hoarsely .Not all of em wan me ter stay .Really Hagrid if you are holding out for universal popularity Im afraid you will be in this cabin for a very long time said Dumbledore now peering sternly over his halfmoon spectacles .Not a week has passed since I became headmaster of this school when I havent had at least one owl complaining about the way I run it .But what should I do ?Barricade myself in my study and refuse to talk to anybody ?Yeh yehre not halfgiant !said Hagrid croakily .Hagrid look what Ive got for relatives !Harry said furiously .Look at the Dursleys !An excellent point said Professor Dumbledore .My own brother Aberforth was prosecuted for practicing inappropriate charms on a goat .It was all over the papers but did Aberforth hide ?No he did not !He held his head high and went about his business as usual !Of course Im not entirely sure he can read so that may not have been bravery .Come back and teach Hagrid said Hermione quietly please come back we really miss you .Hagrid gulped .More tears leaked out down his cheeks and into his tangled beard .Dumbledore stood up .I refuse to accept your resignation Hagrid and I expect you back at work on Monday he said .You will join me for breakfast at eightthirty in the Great Hall .No excuses .Good afternoon to you all .Dumbledore left the cabin pausing only to scratch Fangs ears .When the door had shut behind him Hagrid began to sob into his dustbinlidsized hands .Hermione kept patting his arm and at last Hagrid looked up his eyes very red indeed and said Great man Dumbledore .great man .Yeah he is said Ron .Can I have one of these cakes Hagrid ?Help yerself said Hagrid wiping his eyes on the back of his hand .Ar hes righ o course yehre all righ .I bin stupid .my ol dad woulda bin ashamed o the way Ive bin behavin .More tears leaked out but he wiped them away more forcefully and said Never shown you a picture of my old dad have I ?Here .Hagrid got up went over to his dresser opened a drawer and pulled out a picture of a short wizard with Hagrids crinkled black eyes beaming as he sat on top of Hagrids shoulder .Hagrid was a good seven or eight feet tall judging by the apple tree beside him but his face was beardless young round and smooth he looked hardly older than eleven .Tha was taken jus after I got inter Hogwarts Hagrid croaked .Dad was dead chuffed .thought I migh not be a wizard see cos me mum .well anyway .Course I never was great shakes at magic really .but at least he never saw me expelled .Died see in me second year .Dumbledore was the one who stuck up for me after Dad went .Got me the gamekeeper job .trusts people he does .Gives em second chances .thas what sets him apar from other heads see .Hell accept anyone at Hogwarts slong as theyve got the talent .Knows people can turn out okay even if their families weren .well .all tha respectable .But some don understand that .Theres some whod always hold it against yeh .theres some whod even pretend they just had big bones rather than stand up an say I am what I am an Im not ashamed . ‘Never be ashamed my ol dad used ter say ‘theres some wholl hold it against you but theyre not worth botherin with .An he was right .Ive bin an idiot .Im not botherin with her no more I promise yeh that .Big bones .Ill give her big bones .Harry Ron and Hermione looked at one another nervously Harry would rather have taken fifty Blast Ended Skrewts for a walk than admit to Hagrid that he had overheard him talking to Madame Maxime but Hagrid was still talking apparently unaware that he had said anything odd .Yeh know wha Harry ?he said looking up from the photograph of his father his eyes very bright when I firs met you you reminded me o me a bit .Mum an Dad gone an you was feelin like yeh wouldn fit in at Hogwarts remember ?Not sure yeh were really up to it .an now look at yeh Harry !School champion !He looked at Harry for a moment and then said very seriously Yeh know what Id love Harry ?Id love yeh ter win I really would .Itd show em all .yeh don have ter be pureblood ter do it .Yeh don have ter be ashamed of what yeh are .Itd show em Dumbledores the one whos got it righ lettin anyone in as long as they can do magic .How you doin with that egg Harry ?Great said Harry .Really great .Hagrid s miserable face broke into a wide watery smile .Thas my boy .you show em Harry you show em .Beat em all .Lying to Hagrid wasnt quite like lying to anyone else .Harry went back to the castle later that afternoon with Ron and Hermione unable to banish the image of the happy expression on Hagrids whiskery face as he had imagined Harry winning the tournament .The incomprehensible egg weighed more heavily than ever on Harrys conscience that evening and by the time he had got into bed he had made up his mind it was time to shelve his pride and see if Cedrics hint was worth anything .THE EGG AND THE EYE As Harry had no idea how long a bath he would need to work out the secret of the golden egg he decided to do it at night when he would be able to take as much time as he wanted .Reluctant though he was to accept more favours from Cedric he also decided to use the prefects bathroom far fewer people were allowed in there so it was much less likely that he would be disturbed .Harry planned his excursion carefully because he had been caught out of bed and outofbounds by Filch the caretaker in the middle of the night once before and had no desire to repeat the experience .The Invisibility Cloak would of course be essential and as an added precaution Harry thought he would take the Marauders Map which next to the cloak was the most useful aid to rulebreaking Harry owned .The map showed the whole of Hogwarts including its many shortcuts and secret passageways and most important of all it revealed the people inside the castle as minuscule labeled dots moving around the corridors so that Harry would be forewarned if somebody was approaching the bathroom .On Thursday night Harry sneaked up to bed put on the cloak crept back downstairs and just as he had done on the night when Hagrid had shown him the dragons waited for the portrait hole to open .This time it was Ron who waited outside to give the Fat Lady the password banana fritters .Good luck Ron muttered climbing into the room as Harry crept out past him .It was awkward moving under the cloak tonight because Harry had the heavy egg under one arm and the map held in front of his nose with the other .However the moonlit corridors were empty and silent and by checking the map at strategic intervals Harry was able to ensure that he wouldnt run into anyone he wanted to avoid .When he reached the statue of Boris the Bewildered a lostlooking wizard with his gloves on the wrong hands he located the right door leaned close to it and muttered the password Pine fresh just as Cedric had told him .The door creaked open .Harry slipped inside bolted the door behind him and pulled off the Invisibility Cloak looking around .His immediate reaction was that it would be worth becoming a prefect just to be able to use this bathroom .It was softly lit by a splendid candlefilled chandelier and everything was made of white marble including what looked like an empty rectangular swimming pool sunk into the middle of the floor .About a hundred golden taps stood all around the pools edges each with a differently colored jewel set into its handle .There was also a diving board .Long white linen curtains hung at the windows a large pile of fluffy white towels sat in a corner and there was a single goldenframed painting on the wall .It featured a blonde mermaid who was fast asleep on a rock her long hair over her face .It fluttered every time she snored .Harry moved forward looking around his footsteps echoing off the walls .Magnificent though the bathroom was and quite keen though he was to try out a few of those taps now he was here he couldnt quite suppress the feeling that Cedric might have been having him on .How on earth was this supposed to help solve the mystery of the egg ?Nevertheless he put one of the fluffy towels the cloak the map and the egg at the side of the swimmingpoolsized bath then knelt down and turned on a few of the taps .He could tell at once that they carried different sorts of bubble bath mixed with the water though it wasnt bubble bath as Harry had ever experienced it .One tap gushed pink and blue bubbles the size of footballs another poured icewhite foam so thick that Harry thought it would have supported his weight if hed cared to test it a third sent heavily perfumed purple clouds hovering over the surface of the water .Harry amused himself for a while turning the taps on and off particularly enjoying the effect of one whose jet bounced off the surface of the water in large arcs .Then when the deep pool was full of hot water foam and bubbles which took a very short time considering its size Harry turned off all the taps pulled off his pajamas slippers and dressing gown and slid into the water .It was so deep that his feet barely touched the bottom and he actually did a couple of lengths before swimming back to the side and treading water staring at the egg .Highly enjoyable though it was to swim in hot and foamy water with clouds of different colored steam wafting all around him no stroke of brilliance came to him no sudden burst of understanding .Harry stretched out his arms lifted the egg in his wet hands and opened it .The wailing screeching sound filled the bathroom echoing and reverberating off the marble walls but it sounded just as incomprehensible as ever if not more so with all the echoes .He snapped it shut again worried that the sound would attract Filch wondering whether that hadnt been Cedrics plan and then making him jump so badly that he dropped the egg which clattered away across the bathroom floor someone spoke .Id try putting it in the water if I were you .Harry had swallowed a considerable amount of bubbles in shock .He stood up sputtering and saw the ghost of a very glumlooking girl sitting cross legged on top of one of the taps .It was Moaning Myrtle who was usually to be heard sobbing in the S bend of a toilet three floors below .Myrtle !Harry said in outrage Im Im not wearing anything !The foam was so dense that this hardly mattered but he had a nasty feeling that Myrtle had been spying on him from out of one of the taps ever since he had arrived .I closed my eyes when you got in she said blinking at him through her thick spectacles .You havent been to see me for ages .Yeah .well .said Harry bending his knees slightly just to make absolutely sure Myrtle couldnt see anything but his head Im not supposed to come into your bathroom am I ?Its a girls one .You didnt used to care said Myrtle miserably .You used to be in there all the time .This was true though only because Harry Ron and Hermione had found Myrtles outoforder toilets a convenient place to brew Polyjuice Potion in secret a forbidden potion that had turned him and Ron into living replicas of Crabbe and Goyle for an hour so that they could sneak into the Slytherin common room .I got told off for going in there said Harry which was halftrue Percy had once caught him coming out of Myrtles bathroom .I thought Id better not come back after that .Oh .I see .said Myrtle picking at a spot on her chin in a morose sort of way .Well .anyway .Id try the egg in the water .Thats what Cedric Diggory did .Have you been spying on him too ?said Harry indignantly .What dyou do sneak up here in the evenings to watch the prefects take baths ?Sometimes said Myrtle rather slyly but Ive never come out to speak to anyone before .Im honored said Harry darkly .You keep your eyes shut !He made sure Myrtle had her glasses well covered before hoisting himself out of the bath wrapping the towel firmly around his waist and going to retrieve the egg .Once he was back in the water Myrtle peered through her fingers and said Go on then .open it under the water !Harry lowered the egg beneath the foamy surface and opened it .and this time it did not wail .A gurgling song was coming out of it a song whose words he couldnt distinguish through the water .You need to put your head under too said Myrtle who seemed to be thoroughly enjoying bossing him around .Go on !Harry took a great breath and slid under the surface and now sitting on the marble bottom of the bubblefilled bath he heard a chorus of eerie voices singing to him from the open egg in his hands Come seek us where our voices sound We cannot sing above the ground And while youre searching ponder this Weve taken what youll sorely miss An hour long youll have to look And to recover what we took But past an hour the prospects black Too late its gone it wont come back .Harry let himself float back upward and broke the bubbly surface shaking his hair out of his eyes .Hear it ?said Myrtle .Yeah . ‘Come seek us where our voices sound .and if I need persuading .hang on I need to listen again .He sank back beneath the water .It took three more underwater renditions of the eggs song before Harry had it memorized then he trod water for a while thinking hard while Myrtle sat and watched him .Ive got to go and look for people who cant use their voices above the ground .he said slowly .Er .who could that be ?Slow arent you ?He had never seen Moaning Myrtle so cheerful apart from the day when a dose of Polyjuice Potion had given Hermione the hairy face and tail of a cat .Harry stared around the bathroom thinking .if the voices could only be heard underwater then it made sense for them to belong to underwater creatures .He ran this theory past Myrtle who smirked at him .Well thats what Diggory thought she said .He lay there talking to himself for ages about it .Ages and ages .nearly all the bubbles had gone .Underwater .Harry said slowly .Myrtle .what lives in the lake apart from the giant squid ?Oh all sorts she said .I sometimes go down there .sometimes dont have any choice if someone flushes my toilet when Im not expecting it .Trying not to think about Moaning Myrtle zooming down a pipe to the lake with the contents of a toilet Harry said Well does anything in there have a human voice ?Hang on Harrys eyes had fallen on the picture of the snoozing mermaid on the wall .Myrtle there arent merpeople in there are there ?Oooh very good she said her thick glasses twinkling it took Diggory much longer than that !And that was with her awake too Myrtle jerked her head toward the mermaid with an expression of great dislike on her glum face giggling and showing off and flashing her fins .Thats it isnt it ?said Harry excitedly .The second tasks to go and find the merpeople in the lake and .and .But he suddenly realized what he was saying and he felt the excitement drain out of him as though someone had just pulled a plug in his stomach .He wasnt a very good swimmer hed never had much practice .Dudley had had lessons in his youth but Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon no doubt hoping that Harry would drown one day hadnt bothered to give him any .A couple of lengths of this bath were all very well but that lake was very large and very deep .and merpeople would surely live right at the bottom .Myrtle Harry said slowly how am I supposed to breathe ?At this Myrtles eyes filled with sudden tears again .Tactless !she muttered groping in her robes for a handkerchief .Whats tactless ?said Harry bewildered .Talking about breathing in front of me !she said shrilly and her voice echoed loudly around the bathroom .When I cant .when I havent .not for ages .She buried her face in her handkerchief and sniffed loudly .Harry remembered how touchy Myrtle had always been about being dead but none of the other ghosts he knew made such a fuss about it .Sorry he said impatiently .I didnt mean I just forgot .Oh yes very easy to forget Myrtles dead said Myrtle gulping looking at him out of swollen eyes .Nobody missed me even when I was alive .Took them hours and hours to find my body I know I was sitting there waiting for them .Olive Hornby came into the bathroom ‘Are you in here again sulking Myrtle ?she said ‘because Professor Dippet asked me to look for you And then she saw my body .ooooh she didnt forget it until her dying day I made sure of that .followed her around and reminded her I did .I remember at her brothers wedding But Harry wasnt listening he was thinking about the merpeoples song again .Weve taken what youll sorely miss .That sounded as though they were going to steal something of his something he had to get back .What were they going to take ?and then of course she went to the Ministry of Magic to stop me stalking her so I had to come back here and live in my toilet .Good said Harry vaguely .Well Im a lot further on than I was .Shut your eyes again will you ?Im getting out .He retrieved the egg from the bottom of the bath climbed out dried himself and pulled on his pajamas and dressing gown again .Will you come and visit me in my bathroom again sometime ?Moaning Myrtle asked mournfully as Harry picked up the Invisibility Cloak .Er .Ill try Harry said though privately thinking the only way hed be visiting Myrtles bathroom again was if every other toilet in the castle got blocked .See you Myrtle .thanks for your help .Bye bye she said gloomily and as Harry put on the Invisibility Cloak he saw her zoom back up the tap .Out in the dark corridor Harry examined the Marauders Map to check that the coast was still clear .Yes the dots belonging to Filch and his cat Mrs Norris were safely in their office .nothing else seemed to be moving apart from Peeves though he was bouncing around the trophy room on the floor above .Harry had taken his first step back toward Gryffindor Tower when something else on the map caught his eye .something distinctly odd .Peeves was not the only thing that was moving .A single dot was flitting around a room in the bottom lefthand corner Snapes office .But the dot wasnt labeled Severus Snape .it was Bartemius Crouch .Harry stared at the dot .Mr Crouch was supposed to be too ill to go to work or to come to the Yule Ball so what was he doing sneaking into Hogwarts at one oclock in the morning ?Harry watched closely as the dot moved around and around the room pausing here and there .Harry hesitated thinking .and then his curiosity got the better of him .He turned and set off in the opposite direction toward the nearest staircase .He was going to see what Crouch was up to .Harry walked down the stairs as quietly as possible though the faces in some of the portraits still turned curiously at the squeak of a floorboard the rustle of his pajamas .He crept along the corridor below pushed aside a tapestry about halfway along and proceeded down a narrower staircase a shortcut that would take him down two floors .He kept glancing down at the map wondering .It just didnt seem in character somehow for correct lawabiding Mr Crouch to be sneaking around somebody elses office this late at night .And then halfway down the staircase not thinking about what he was doing not concentrating on anything but the peculiar behavior of Mr Crouch Harrys leg suddenly sank right through the trick step Neville always forgot to jump .He gave an ungainly wobble and the golden egg still damp from the bath slipped from under his arm .He lurched forward to try and catch it but too late the egg fell down the long staircase with a bang as loud as a bass drum on every step the Invisibility Cloak slipped Harry snatched at it and the Marauders Map fluttered out of his hand and slid down six stairs where sunk in the step to above his knee he couldnt reach it .The golden egg fell through the tapestry at the bottom of the staircase burst open and began wailing loudly in the corridor below .Harry pulled out his wand and struggled to touch the Marauders Map to wipe it blank but it was too far away to reach Pulling the cloak back over himself Harry straightened up listening hard with his eyes screwed up with fear .and almost immediately PEEVES !It was the unmistakable hunting cry of Filch the caretaker .Harry could hear his rapid shuffling footsteps coming nearer and nearer his wheezy voice raised in fury .Whats this racket ?Wake up the whole castle will you ?Ill have you Peeves Ill have you youll .and what is this ?Filch s footsteps halted there was a clink of metal on metal and the wailing stopped Filch had picked up the egg and closed it .Harry stood very still one leg still jammed tightly in the magical step listening .Any moment now Filch was going to pull aside the tapestry expecting to see Peeves .and there would be no Peeves .but if he came up the stairs he would spot the Marauders Map .and Invisibility Cloak or not the map would show Harry Potter standing exactly where he was .Egg ?Filch said quietly at the foot of the stairs .My sweet !Mrs Norris was obviously with him This is a Triwizard clue !This belongs to a school champion !Harry felt sick his heart was hammering very fast PEEVES !Filch roared gleefully .Youve been stealing !He ripped back the tapestry below and Harry saw his horrible pouchy face and bulging pale eyes staring up the dark and to Filch deserted staircase .Hiding are you ?he said softly .Im coming to get you Peeves .Youve gone and stolen a Tri wizard clue Peeves .Dumbledorell have you out of here for this you filthy pilfering poltergeist .Filch started to climb the stairs his scrawny dust colored cat at his heels .Mrs Norriss lamplike eyes so very like her masters were fixed directly upon Harry .He had had occasion before now to wonder whether the Invisibility Cloak worked on cats .Sick with apprehension he watched Filch drawing nearer and nearer in his old flannel dressing gown he tried desperately to pull his trapped leg free but it merely sank a few more inches any second now Filch was going to spot the map or walk right into him Filch ?Whats going on ?Filch stopped a few steps below Harry and turned .At the foot of the stairs stood the only person who could make Harrys situation worse Snape .He was wearing a long gray nightshirt and he looked livid .Its Peeves Professor Filch whispered malevolently .He threw this egg down the stairs .Snape climbed up the stairs quickly and stopped beside Filch .Harry gritted his teeth convinced his loudly thumping heart would give him away at any second .Peeves ?said Snape softly staring at the egg in Filchs hands .But Peeves couldnt get into my office .This egg was in your office Professor ?Of course not Snape snapped .I heard banging and wailing Yes Professor that was the egg I was coming to investigate Peeves threw it Professor and when I passed my office I saw that the torches were lit and a cupboard door was ajar !Somebody has been searching it !But Peeves couldnt I know he couldnt Filch !Snape snapped again .I seal my office with a spell none but a wizard could break !Snape looked up the stairs straight through Harry and then down into the corridor below .I want you to come and help me search for the intruder Filch .I yes Professor but Filch looked yearningly up the stairs right through Harry who could see that he was very reluctant to forgo the chance of cornering Peeves .Go Harry pleaded with him silently go with Snape .go .Mrs Norris was peering around Filch s legs .Harry had the distinct impression that she could smell him .Why had he filled that bath with so much perfumed foam ?The thing is Professor said Filch plaintively the headmaster will have to listen to me this time .Peeves has been stealing from a student it might be my chance to get him thrown out of the castle once and for all Filch I dont give a damn about that wretched poltergeist its my office thats Clunk .Clunk .Clunk .Snape stopped talking very abruptly .He and Filch both looked down at the foot of the stairs .Harry saw MadEye Moody limp into sight through the narrow gap between their heads .Moody was wearing his old traveling cloak over his nightshirt and leaning on his staff as usual .Pajama party is it ?he growled up the stairs .Professor Snape and I heard noises Professor said Filch at once .Peeves the Poltergeist throwing things around as usual and then Professor Snape discovered that someone had broken into his off Shut up !Snape hissed to Filch .Moody took a step closer to the foot of the stairs .Harry saw Moodys magical eye travel over Snape and then unmistakably onto himself .Harrys heart gave a horrible jolt .Moody could see through Invisibility Cloaks .he alone could see the full strangeness of the scene Snape in his nightshirt Filch clutching the egg and he Harry trapped in the stairs behind them .Moodys lopsided gash of a mouth opened in surprise .For a few seconds he and Harry stared straight into each others eyes .Then Moody closed his mouth and turned his blue eye upon Snape again .Did I hear that correctly Snape ?he asked slowly .Someone broke into your office ?It is unimportant said Snape coldly .On the contrary growled Moody it is very important .Whod want to break into your office ?A student I daresay said Snape .Harry could see a vein flickering horribly on Snape s greasy temple .It has happened before .Potion ingredients have gone missing from my private store cupboard .students attempting illicit mixtures no doubt .Reckon they were after potion ingredients eh ?said Moody .Not hiding anything else in your office are you ?Harry saw the edge of Snape s sallow face turn a nasty brick color the vein in his temple pulsing more rapidly .You know Im hiding nothing Moody he said in a soft and dangerous voice as youve searched my office pretty thoroughly yourself .Moodys face twisted into a smile .Aurors privilege Snape .Dumbledore told me to keep an eye Dumbledore happens to trust me said Snape through clenched teeth .I refuse to believe that he gave you orders to search my office !Course Dumbledore trusts you growled Moody .Hes a trusting man isnt he ?Believes in second chances .But me I say there are spots that dont come off Snape .Spots that never come off dyou know what I mean ?Snape suddenly did something very strange .He seized his left forearm convulsively with his right hand as though something on it had hurt him .Moody laughed .Get back to bed Snape .You dont have the authority to send me anywhere !Snape hissed letting go of his arm as though angry with himself .I have as much right to prowl this school after dark as you do !Prowl away said Moody but his voice was full of menace .I look forward to meeting you in a dark corridor some time .Youve dropped something by the way .With a stab of horror Harry saw Moody point at the Marauders Map still lying on the staircase six steps below him .As Snape and Filch both turned to look at it Harry threw caution to the winds he raised his arms under the cloak and waved furiously at Moody to attract his attention mouthing Its mine !Mine !Snape had reached out for it a horrible expression of dawning comprehension on his face Accio Parchments The map flew up into the air slipped through Snape s outstretched fingers and soared down the stairs into Moodys hand .My mistake Moody said calmly .Its mine mustve dropped it earlier But Snape s black eyes were darting from the egg in Filchs arms to the map in Moodys hand and Harry could tell he was putting two and two together as only Snape could .Potter he said quietly .Whats that ?said Moody calmly folding up the map and pocketing it .Potter !Snape snarled and he actually turned his head and stared right at the place where Harry was as though he could suddenly see him .That egg is Potters egg .That piece of parchment belongs to Potter .I have seen it before I recognize it !Potter is here !Potter in his Invisibility Cloak !Snape stretched out his hands like a blind man and began to move up the stairs Harry could have sworn his overlarge nostrils were dilating trying to sniff Harry out trapped Harry leaned backward trying to avoid Snapes fingertips but any moment now Theres nothing there Snape !barked Moody but Ill be happy to tell the headmaster how quickly your mind jumped to Harry Potter !Meaning what ?Snape turned again to look at Moody his hands still outstretched inches from Harrys chest .Meaning that Dumbledores very interested to know whos got it in for that boy !said Moody limping nearer still to the foot of the stairs .And so am I Snape .very interested .The torchlight flickered across his mangled face so that the scars and the chunk missing from his nose looked deeper and darker than ever .Snape was looking down at Moody and Harry couldnt see the expression on his face .For a moment nobody moved or said anything .Then Snape slowly lowered his hands .I merely thought said Snape in a voice of forced calm that if Potter was wandering around after hours again .its an unfortunate habit of his .he should be stopped .For for his own safety .Ah I see said Moody softly .Got Potters best interests at heart have you ?There was a pause .Snape and Moody were still staring at each other .Mrs Norris gave a loud meow still peering around Filchs legs looking for the source of Harrys bubblebath smell .I think I will go back to bed Snape said curtly .Best idea youve had all night said Moody .Now Filch if youll just give me that egg No !said Filch clutching the egg as though it were his firstborn son .Professor Moody this is evidence of Peeves treachery !Its the property of the champion he stole it from said Moody .Hand it over now .Snape swept downstairs and passed Moody without another word .Filch made a chirruping noise to Mrs Norris who stared blankly at Harry for a few more seconds before turning and following her master .Still breathing very fast Harry heard Snape walking away down the corridor Filch handed Moody the egg and disappeared from view too muttering to Mrs Norris .Never mind my sweet .well see Dumbledore in the morning .tell him what Peeves was up to .A door slammed .Harry was left staring down at Moody who placed his staff on the bottommost stair and started to climb laboriously toward him a dull clunk on every other step .Close shave Potter he muttered .Yeah .I er .thanks said Harry weakly .What is this thing ?said Moody drawing the Marauders Map out of his pocket and unfolding it .Map of Hogwarts said Harry hoping Moody was going to pull him out of the staircase soon his leg was really hurting him .Merlins beard Moody whispered staring at the map his magical eye going haywire .This .this is some map Potter !Yeah its .quite useful Harry said .His eyes were starting to water from the pain .Er Professor Moody dyou think you could help me ?What ?Oh !Yes .yes of course .Moody took hold of Harrys arms and pulled Harrys leg came free of the trick step and he climbed onto the one above it .Moody was still gazing at the map .Potter .he said slowly you didnt happen by any chance to see who broke into Snapes office did you ?On this map I mean ?Er .yeah I did .Harry admitted .It was Mr Crouch .Moodys magical eye whizzed over the entire surface of the map .He looked suddenly alarmed .Crouch ?he said .Youre youre sure Potter ?Positive said Harry .Well hes not here anymore said Moody his eye still whizzing over the map .Crouch .thats very very interesting .He said nothing for almost a minute still staring at the map .Harry could tell that this news meant something to Moody and very much wanted to know what it was .He wondered whether he dared ask .Moody scared him slightly .yet Moody had just helped him avoid an awful lot of trouble .Er .Professor Moody .why dyou reckon Mr Crouch wanted to look around S napes office ?Moodys magical eye left the map and fixed quivering upon Harry .It was a penetrating glare and Harry had the impression that Moody was sizing him up wondering whether to answer or not or how much to tell him .Put it this way Potter Moody muttered finally they say old MadEyes obsessed with catching Dark wizards .but Im nothing nothing compared to Barty Crouch .He continued to stare at the map .Harry was burning to know more .Professor Moody ?he said again .Dyou think .could this have anything to do with .maybe Mr Crouch thinks theres something going on .Like what ?said Moody sharply .Harry wondered how much he dare say .He didnt want Moody to guess that he had a source of information outside Hogwarts that might lead to tricky questions about Sirius .I dont know Harry muttered odd stuffs been happening lately hasnt it ?Its been in the Daily Prophet .the Dark Mark at the World Cup and the Death Eaters and everything .Both of Moodys mismatched eyes widened .Youre a sharp boy Potter he said .His magical eye roved back to the Marauders Map .Crouch could be thinking along those lines he said slowly .Very possible .there have been some funny rumors flying around lately helped along by Rita Skeeter of course .Its making a lot of people nervous I reckon .A grim smile twisted his lopsided mouth .Oh if theres one thing I hate he muttered more to himself than to Harry and his magical eye was fixed on the lefthand corner of the map its a Death Eater who walked free .Harry stared at him .Could Moody possibly mean what Harry thought he meant ?And now I want to ask you a question Potter said Moody in a more businesslike tone .Harrys heart sank he had thought this was coming .Moody was going to ask where he had got this map which was a very dubious magical object and the story of how it had fallen into his hands incriminated not only him but his own father Fred and George Weasley and Professor Lupin their last Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher .Moody waved the map in front of Harry who braced himself Can I borrow this ?Oh !said Harry .He was very fond of his map but on the other hand he was extremely relieved that Moody wasnt asking where hed got it and there was no doubt that he owed Moody a favor .Yeah okay .Good boy growled Moody .I can make good use of this .this might be exactly what Ive been looking for .Right bed Potter come on now .They climbed to the top of the stairs together Moody still examining the map as though it was a treasure the like of which he had never seen before .They walked in silence to the door of Moodys office where he stopped and looked up at Harry .You ever thought of a career as an Auror Potter ?No said Harry taken aback .You want to consider it said Moody nodding and looking at Harry thoughtfully .Yes indeed .and incidentally .Im guessing you werent just taking that egg for a walk tonight ?Er no said Harry grinning .Ive been working out the clue .Moody winked at him his magical eye going haywire again .Nothing like a nighttime stroll to give you ideas Potter .See you in the morning .He went back into his office staring down at the Marauders Map again and closed the door behind him .Harry walked slowly back to Gryffindor Tower lost in thought about Snape and Crouch and what it all meant .Why was Crouch pretending to be ill if he could manage to get to Hogwarts when he wanted to ?What did he think Snape was concealing in his office ?And Moody thought he Harry ought to be an Auror !Interesting idea .but somehow Harry thought as he got quietly into his fourposter ten minutes later the egg and the cloak now safely back in his trunk he thought hed like to check how scarred the rest of them were before he chose it as a career .THE SECOND TASK You said youd already worked out that egg clue !said Hermione indignantly .Keep your voice down !said Harry crossly .I just need to sort of finetune it all right ?He Ron and Hermione were sitting at the very back of the Charms class with a table to themselves .They were supposed to be practicing the opposite of the Summoning Charm today the Banishing Charm .Owing to the potential for nasty accidents when objects kept flying across the room Professor Flitwick had given each student a stack of cushions on which to practice the theory being that these wouldnt hurt anyone if they went off target .It was a good theory but it wasnt working very well .Nevilles aim was so poor that he kept accidentally sending much heavier things flying across the room Professor Flitwick for instance .Just forget the egg for a minute all right ?Harry hissed as Professor Flitwick went whizzing resignedly past them landing on top of a large cabinet .Im trying to tell you about Snape and Moody .This class was an ideal cover for a private conversation as everyone was having far too much fun to pay them any attention .Harry had been recounting his adventures of the previous night in whispered installments for the last half hour .Snape said Moodys searched his office as well ?Ron whispered his eyes alight with interest as he Banished a cushion with a sweep of his wand it soared into the air and knocked Parvatis hat off .What .dyou reckon Moodys here to keep an eye on Snape as well as Karkaroff ?Well I dunno if thats what Dumbledore asked him to do but hes definitely doing it said Harry waving his wand without paying much attention so that his cushion did an odd sort of belly flop off the desk .Moody said Dumbledore only lets Snape stay here because hes giving him a second chance or something .What ?said Ron his eyes widening his next cushion spinning high into the air ricocheting off the chandelier and dropping heavily onto Flitwicks desk .Harry .maybe Moody thinks Snape put your name in the Goblet of Fire !Oh Ron said Hermione shaking her head sceptically we thought Snape was trying to kill Harry before and it turned out he was saving Harrys life remember ?She Banished a cushion and it flew across the room and landed in the box they were all supposed to be aiming at .Harry looked at Hermione thinking .it was true that Snape had saved his life once but the odd thing was Snape definitely loathed him just as hed loathed Harrys father when they had been at school together .Snape loved taking points from Harry and had certainly never missed an opportunity to give him punishments or even to suggest that he should be suspended from the school .I dont care what Moody says Hermione went on .Dumbledores not stupid .He was right to trust Hagrid and Professor Lupin even though loads of people wouldnt have given them jobs so why shouldnt he be right about Snape even if Snape is a bit evil said Ron promptly .Come on Hermione why are all these Dark wizard catchers searching his office then ?Why has Mr Crouch been pretending to be ill ?said Hermione ignoring Ron .Its a bit funny isnt it that he cant manage to come to the Yule Ball but he can get up here in the middle of the night when he wants to ?You just dont like Crouch because of that elf Winky said Ron sending a cushion soaring into the window .You just want to think Snapes up to something said Hermione sending her cushion zooming neatly into the box .I just want to know what Snape did with his first chance if hes on his second one said Harry grimly and his cushion to his very great surprise flew straight across the room and landed neatly on top of Hermione s .Obedient to Siriuss wish of hearing about anything odd at Hogwarts Harry sent him a letter by brown owl that night explaining all about Mr Crouch breaking into Snapes office and Moody and Snapes conversation .Then Harry turned his attention in earnest to the most urgent problem facing him how to survive underwater for an hour on the twenty fourth of February .Ron quite liked the idea of using the Summoning Charm again Harry had explained about Aqua Lungs and Ron couldnt see why Harry shouldnt Summon one from the nearest Muggle town .Hermione squashed this plan by pointing out that in the unlikely event that Harry managed to learn how to operate an AquaLung within the set limit of an hour he was sure to be disqualified for breaking the International Code of Wizarding Secrecy it was too much to hope that no Muggles would spot an Aqua Lung zooming across the countryside to Hogwarts .Of course the ideal solution would be for you to Transfigure yourself into a submarine or something Hermione said .If only wed done human Transfiguration already !But I dont think we start that until sixth year and it can go badly wrong if you dont know what youre doing .Yeah I dont fancy walking around with a periscope sticking out of my head said Harry .I spose I could always attack someone in front of Moody he might do it for me .I dont think hed let you choose what you wanted to be turned into though said Hermione seriously .No I think your best chance is some sort of charm .So Harry thinking that he would soon have had enough of the library to last him a lifetime buried himself once more among the dusty volumes looking for any spell that might enable a human to survive without oxygen .However though he Ron and Hermione searched through their lunchtimes evenings and whole weekends though Harry asked Professor McGonagall for a note of permission to use the Restricted Section and even asked the irritable vulturelike librarian Madam Pince for help they found nothing whatsoever that would enable Harry to spend an hour underwater and live to tell the tale .Familiar flutterings of panic were starting to disturb Harry now and he was finding it difficult to concentrate in class again .The lake which Harry had always taken for granted as just another feature of the grounds drew his eyes whenever he was near a classroom window a great irongray mass of chilly water whose dark and icy depths were starting to seem as distant as the moon .Just as it had before he faced the Horntail time was slipping away as though somebody had bewitched the clocks to go extrafast .There was a week to go before February the twentyfourth there was still time .there were five days to go he was bound to find something soon .three days to go please let me find something .please .With two days left Harry started to go off food again .The only good thing about breakfast on Monday was the return of the brown owl he had sent to Sirius .He pulled off the parchment unrolled it and saw the shortest letter Sirius had ever written to him .Send date of next Hogsmeade weekend by return owl .Harry turned the parchment over and looked at the back hoping to see something else but it was blank .Weekend after next whispered Hermione who had read the note over Harrys shoulder .Here take my quill and send this owl back straight away .Harry scribbled the dates down on the back of Siriuss letter tied it onto the brown owls leg and watched it take flight again .What had he expected ?Advice on how to survive underwater ?He had been so intent on telling Sirius all about Snape and Moody he had completely forgotten to mention the eggs clue .Whats he want to know about the next Hogsmeade weekend for ?said Ron .Dunno said Harry dully .The momentary happiness that had flared inside him at the sight of the owl had died .Come on .Care of Magical Creatures .Whether Hagrid was trying to make up for the Blast Ended Skrewts or because there were now only two skrewts left or because he was trying to prove he could do anything that Professor GrubblyPlank could Harry didnt know but Hagrid had been continuing her lessons on unicorns ever since hed returned to work .It turned out that Hagrid knew quite as much about unicorns as he did about monsters though it was clear that he found their lack of poisonous fangs disappointing .Today he had managed to capture two unicorn foals .Unlike fullgrown unicorns they were pure gold .Parvati and Lavender went into transports of delight at the sight of them and even Pansy Parkinson had to work hard to conceal how much she liked them .Easier ter spot than the adults Hagrid told the class .They turn silver when theyre abou two years old an they grow horns at aroun four .Don go pure white till theyre full grown round about seven .Theyre a bit more trustin when theyre babies .don mind boys so much .Cmon move in a bit yeh can pat em if yeh want .give em a few o these sugar lumps .You okay Harry ?Hagrid muttered moving aside slightly while most of the others swarmed around the baby unicorns .Yeah said Harry .Jus nervous eh ?said Hagrid .Bit said Harry .Harry said Hagrid clapping a massive hand on his shoulder so that Harrys knees buckled under its weight Idve bin worried before I saw yeh take on tha Horntail but I know now yeh can do anythin yeh set yer mind ter .Im not worried at all .Yehre goin ter be fine .Got yer clue worked out haven yeh ?Harry nodded but even as he did so an insane urge to confess that he didnt have any idea how to survive at the bottom of the lake for an hour came over him .He looked up at Hagrid perhaps he had to go into the lake sometimes to deal with the creatures in it ?He looked after everything else on the grounds after all Yehre goin ter win Hagrid growled patting Harrys shoulder again so that Harry actually felt himself sink a couple of inches into the soft ground .I know it .I can feel it .Yehre goin ter win Harry .Harry just couldnt bring himself to wipe the happy confident smile off Hagrid s face .Pretending he was interested in the young unicorns he forced a smile in return and moved forward to pat them with the others .By the evening before the second task Harry felt as though he were trapped in a nightmare .He was fully aware that even if by some miracle he managed to find a suitable spell hed have a real job mastering it overnight .How could he have let this happen ?Why hadnt he got to work on the eggs clue sooner ?Why had he ever let his mind wander in class what if a teacher had once mentioned how to breathe underwater ?He sat with Hermione and Ron in the library as the sun set outside tearing feverishly through page after page of spells hidden from one another by the massive piles of books on the desk in front of each of them .Harrys heart gave a huge leap every time he saw the word water on a page but more often than not it was merely Take two pints of water half a pound of shredded mandrake leaves and a newt .I dont reckon it can be done said Rons voice flatly from the other side of the table .Theres nothing .Nothing .Closest was that thing to dry up puddles and ponds that Drought Charm but that was nowhere near powerful enough to drain the lake .There must be something Hermione muttered moving a candle closer to her .Her eyes were so tired she was poring over the tiny print of Olde and Forgotten Bewitchments and Charmes with her nose about an inch from the page .Theyd never have set a task that was undoable .They have said Ron .Harry just go down to the lake tomorrow right stick your head in yell at the merpeople to give back whatever theyve nicked and see if they chuck it out .Best you can do mate .Theres a way of doing it !Hermione said crossly .There just has to be !She seemed to be taking the librarys lack of useful information on the subject as a personal insult it had never failed her before .I know what I should have done said Harry resting facedown on Saucy Tricks for Tricky Sorts .I shouldve learned to be an Animagus like Sirius .An Animagus was a wizard who could transform into an animal .Yeah you couldve turned into a goldfish any time you wanted !said Ron .Or a frog yawned Harry .He was exhausted .It takes years to become an Animagus and then you have to register yourself and everything said Hermione vaguely now squinting down the index of Weird Wizarding Dilemmas and Their Solutions .Professor McGonagall told us remember .youve got to register yourself with the Improper Use of Magic Office .what animal you become and your markings so you cant abuse it .Hermione I was joking said Harry wearily .I know I havent got a chance of turning into a frog by tomorrow morning .Oh this is no use Hermione said snapping shut Weird Wizarding Dilemmas .Who on earth wants to make their nose hair grow into ringlets ?I wouldnt mind said Fred Weasleys voice .Be a talking point wouldnt it ?Harry Ron and Hermione looked up .Fred and George had just emerged from behind some bookshelves .Whatre you two doing here ?Ron asked .Looking for you said George .McGonagall wants you Ron .And you Hermione .Why ?said Hermione looking surprised .Dunno .she was looking a bit grim though said Fred .Were supposed to take you down to her office said George .Ron and Hermione stared at Harry who felt his stomach drop .Was Professor McGonagall about to tell Ron and Hermione off ?Perhaps shed noticed how much they were helping him when he ought to be working out how to do the task alone ?Well meet you back in the common room Hermione told Harry as she got up to go with Ron both of them looked very anxious .Bring as many of these books as you can okay ?Right said Harry uneasily .By eight oclock Madam Pince had extinguished all the lamps and came to chivvy Harry out of the library .Staggering under the weight of as many books as he could carry Harry returned to the Gryffindor common room pulled a table into a corner and continued to search .There was nothing in Madcap Magic for Wacky Warlocks .nothing in A Guide to Medieval Sorcery .not one mention of underwater exploits in An Anthology of EighteenthCentury Charms or in Dreadful Denizens of the Deep or Powers You Never Knew You Had and What to Do with Them Now Youve Wised Up .Crookshanks crawled into Harrys lap and curled up purring deeply .The common room emptied slowly around Harry .People kept wishing him luck for the next morning in cheery confident voices like Hagrids all of them apparently convinced that he was about to pull off another stunning performance like the one he had managed in the first task .Harry couldnt answer them he just nodded feeling as though there were a golfball stuck in his throat .By ten to midnight he was alone in the room with Crookshanks .He had searched all the remaining books and Ron and Hermione had not come back .Its over he told himself .You cant do it .Youll just have to go down to the lake in the morning and tell the judges .He imagined himself explaining that he couldnt do the task .He pictured Bagmans look of roundeyed surprise Karkaroffs satisfied yellowtoothed smile .He could almost hear Fleur Delacour saying I knew it .e is too young e is only a little boy .He saw Malfoy flashing his POTTER STINKS badge at the front of the crowd saw Hagrids crestfallen disbelieving face .Forgetting that Crookshanks was on his lap Harry stood up very suddenly Crookshanks hissed angrily as he landed on the floor gave Harry a disgusted look and stalked away with his bottlebrush tail in the air but Harry was already hurrying up the spiral staircase to his dormitory .He would grab the Invisibility Cloak and go back to the library hed stay there all night if he had to .Lumos Harry whispered fifteen minutes later as he opened the library door .Wand tip alight he crept along the bookshelves pulling down more books books of hexes and charms books on merpeople and water monsters books on famous witches and wizards on magical inventions on anything at all that might include one passing reference to underwater survival .He carried them over to a table then set to work searching them by the narrow beam of his wand occasionally checking his watch .One in the morning .two in the morning .the only way he could keep going was to tell himself over and over again next book .in the next one .the next one The mermaid in the painting in the prefects bathroom was laughing .Harry was bobbing like a cork in bubbly water next to her rock while she held his Firebolt over his head .Come and get it !she giggled maliciously .Come on jump !I cant Harry panted snatching at the Firebolt and struggling not to sink .Give it to me !But she just poked him painfully in the side with the end of the broomstick laughing at him .That hurts get off ouch Harry Potter must wake up sir !Stop poking me Dobby must poke Harry Potter sir he must wake up !Harry opened his eyes .He was still in the library the Invisibility Cloak had slipped off his head as hed slept and the side of his face was stuck to the pages of Where Theres a Wand Theres a Way .He sat up straightening his glasses blinking in the bright daylight .Harry Potter needs to hurry !squeaked Dobby .The second task starts in ten minutes and Harry Potter Ten minutes ?Harry croaked .Ten ten minutes ?He looked down at his watch .Dobby was right .It was twenty past nine .A large dead weight seemed to fall through Harrys chest into his stomach .Hurry Harry Potter !squeaked Dobby plucking at Harrys sleeve .You is supposed to be down by the lake with the other champions sir !Its too late Dobby Harry said hopelessly .Im not doing the task I dont know how Harry Potter will do the task !squeaked the elf .Dobby knew Harry had not found the right book so Dobby did it for him !What ?said Harry .But you dont know what the second task is Dobby knows sir !Harry Potter has to go into the lake and find his Wheezy Find my what ?and take his Wheezy back from the merpeople !Whats a Wheezy ?Your Wheezy sir your Wheezy Wheezy who is giving Dobby his sweater !Dobby plucked at the shrunken maroon sweater he was now wearing over his shorts .What ?Harry gasped .Theyve got .theyve got Ron ?The thing Harry Potter will miss most sir !squeaked Dobby . ‘But past an hour ‘the prospects black Harry recited staring horrorstruck at the elf . ‘Too late its gone it wont come back .Dobby whatve I got to do ?You has to eat this sir !squeaked the elf and he put his hand in the pocket of his shorts and drew out a ball of what looked like slimy grayishgreen rat tails .Right before you go into the lake sir gillyweed !Whats it do ?said Harry staring at the gillyweed .It will make Harry Potter breathe underwater sir !Dobby said Harry frantically listen are you sure about this ?He couldnt quite forget that the last time Dobby had tried to help him he had ended up with no bones in his right arm .Dobby is quite sure sir !said the elf earnestly .Dobby hears things sir he is a houseelf he goes all over the castle as he lights the fires and mops the floors .Dobby heard Professor McGonagall and Professor Moody in the staffroom talking about the next task .Dobby cannot let Harry Potter lose his Wheezy !Harrys doubts vanished .Jumping to his feet he pulled off the Invisibility Cloak stuffed it into his bag grabbed the gillyweed and put it into his pocket then tore out of the library with Dobby at his heels .Dobby is supposed to be in the kitchens sir !Dobby squealed as they burst into the corridor .Dobby will be missed good luck Harry Potter sir good luck !See you later Dobby !Harry shouted and he sprinted along the corridor and down the stairs three at a time .The entrance hall contained a few lastminute stragglers all leaving the Great Hall after breakfast and heading through the double oak doors to watch the second task .They stared as Harry flashed past sending Colin and Dennis Creevey flying as he leapt down the stone steps and out onto the bright chilly grounds .As he pounded down the lawn he saw that the seats that had encircled the dragons enclosure in November were now ranged along the opposite bank rising in stands that were packed to the bursting point and reflected in the lake below .The excited babble of the crowd echoed strangely across the water as Harry ran flatout around the other side of the lake toward the judges who were sitting at another gold draped table at the waters edge .Cedric Fleur and Krum were beside the judges table watching Harry sprint toward them .‘Tm .here .Harry panted skidding to a halt in the mud and accidentally splattering Fleurs robes .Where have you been ?said a bossy disapproving voice .The tasks about to start !Harry looked around .Percy Weasley was sitting at the judges table Mr Crouch had failed to turn up again .Now now Percy !said Ludo Bagman who was looking intensely relieved to see Harry .Let him catch his breath !Dumbledore smiled at Harry but Karkaroff and Madame Maxime didnt look at all pleased to see him . .It was obvious from the looks on their faces that they had thought he wasnt going to turn up .Harry bent over hands on his knees gasping for breath he had a stitch in his side that felt as though he had a knife between his ribs but there was no time to get rid of it Ludo Bagman was now moving among the champions spacing them along the bank at intervals of ten feet .Harry was on the very end of the line next to Krum who was wearing swimming trunks and was holding his wand ready .All right Harry ?Bagman whispered as he moved Harry a few feet farther away from Krum .Know what youre going to do ?Yeah Harry panted massaging his ribs .Bagman gave Harrys shoulder a quick squeeze and returned to the judges table he pointed his wand at his throat as he had done at the World Cup said Sonorusl and his voice boomed out across the dark water toward the stands .Well all our champions are ready for the second task which will start on my whistle .They have precisely an hour to recover what has been taken from them .On the count of three then .One .two .three !The whistle echoed shrilly in the cold still air the stands erupted with cheers and applause without looking to see what the other champions were doing Harry pulled off his shoes and socks pulled the handful of gillyweed out of his pocket stuffed it into his mouth and waded out into the lake .It was so cold he felt the skin on his legs searing as though this were fire not icy water .His sodden robes weighed him down as he walked in deeper now the water was over his knees and his rapidly numbing feet were slipping over silt and flat slimy stones .He was chewing the gillyweed as hard and fast as he could it felt unpleasantly slimy and rubbery like octopus tentacles .Waistdeep in the freezing water he stopped swallowed and waited for something to happen .He could hear laughter in the crowd and knew he must look stupid walking into the lake without showing any sign of magical power .The part of him that was still dry was covered in goose pimples half immersed in the icy water a cruel breeze lifting his hair Harry started to shiver violently .He avoided looking at the stands the laughter was becoming louder and there were catcalls and jeering from the Slytherins .Then quite suddenly Harry felt as though an invisible pillow had been pressed over his mouth and nose .He tried to draw breath but it made his head spin his lungs were empty and he suddenly felt a piercing pain on either side of his neck Harry clapped his hands around his throat and felt two large slits just below his ears flapping in the cold air .He had gills .Without pausing to think he did the only thing that made sense he flung himself forward into the water .The first gulp of icy lake water felt like the breath of life .His head had stopped spinning he took another great gulp of water and felt it pass smoothly through his gills sending oxygen back to his brain .He stretched out his hands in front of him and stared at them .They looked green and ghostly under the water and they had become webbed .He twisted around and looked at his bare feet they had become elongated and the toes were webbed too It looked as though he had sprouted flippers .The water didnt feel icy anymore either .on the contrary he felt pleasantly cool and very light .Harry struck out once more marveling at how far and fast his flipperlike feet propelled him through the water and noticing how clearly he could see and how he no longer seemed to need to blink .He had soon swum so far into the lake that he could no longer see the bottom .He flipped over and dived into its depths .Silence pressed upon his ears as he soared over a strange dark foggy landscape .He could only see ten feet around him so that as he sped through the water new scenes seemed to loom suddenly out of the oncoming darkness forests of rippling tangled black weed wide plains of mud littered with dull glimmering stones .He swam deeper and deeper out toward the middle of the lake his eyes wide staring through the eerily graylit water around him to the shadows beyond where the water became opaque .Small fish flickered past him like silver darts .Once or twice he thought he saw something larger moving ahead of him but when he got nearer he discovered it to be nothing but a large blackened log or a dense clump of weed .There was no sign of any of the other champions merpeople Ron nor thankfully the giant squid .Light green weed stretched ahead of him as far as he could see two feet deep like a meadow of very overgrown grass .Harry was staring unblinkingly ahead of him trying to discern shapes through the gloom .and then without warning something grabbed hold of his ankle .Harry twisted his body around and saw a grindylow a small horned water demon poking out of the weed its long fingers clutched tightly around Harrys leg its pointed fangs bared Harry stuck his webbed hand quickly inside his robes and fumbled for his wand .By the time he had grasped it two more grindylows had risen out of the weed had seized handfuls of Harrys robes and were attempting to drag him down .Relashio Harry shouted except that no sound came out .A large bubble issued from his mouth and his wand instead of sending sparks at the grindylows pelted them with what seemed to be a jet of boiling water for where it struck them angry red patches appeared on their green skin .Harry pulled his ankle out of the grindylows grip and swam as fast as he could occasionally sending more jets of hot water over his shoulder at random every now and then he felt one of the grindylows snatch at his foot again and he kicked out hard finally he felt his foot connect with a horned skull and looking back saw the dazed grindylow floating away crosseyed while its fellows shook their fists at Harry and sank back into the weed .Harry slowed down a little slipped his wand back inside his robes and looked around listening again .He turned full circle in the water the silence pressing harder than ever against his eardrums .He knew he must be even deeper in the lake now but nothing was moving but the rippling weed .How are you getting on ?Harry thought he was having a heart attack .He whipped around and saw Moaning Myrtle floating hazily in front of him gazing at him through her thick pearly glasses .Myrtle !Harry tried to shout but once again nothing came out of his mouth but a very large bubble .Moaning Myrtle actually giggled .You want to try over there !she said pointing .I wont come with you .I dont like them much they always chase me when I get too close .Harry gave her the thumbsup to show his thanks and set off once more careful to swim a bit higher over the weed to avoid any more grindylows that might be lurking there .He swam on for what felt like at least twenty minutes .He was passing over vast expanses of black mud now which swirled murkily as he disturbed the water .Then at long last he heard a snatch of haunting mersong .An hour long youll have to look And to recover what we took .Harry swam faster and soon saw a large rock emerge out of the muddy water ahead .It had paintings of merpeople on it they were carrying spears and chasing what looked like the giant squid .Harry swam on past the rock following the mersong . .your times half gone so tarry not Lest what you seek stays here to rot .A cluster of crude stone dwellings stained with algae loomed suddenly out of the gloom on all sides .Here and there at the dark windows Harry saw faces .faces that bore no resemblance at all to the painting of the mermaid in the prefects bathroom .The merpeople had grayish skin and long wild dark green hair .Their eyes were yellow as were their broken teeth and they wore thick ropes of pebbles around their necks .They leered at Harry as he swam past one or two of them emerged from their caves to watch him better their powerful silver fish tails beating the water spears clutched in their hands .Harry sped on staring around and soon the dwellings became more numerous there were gardens of weed around some of them and he even saw a pet grindylow tied to a stake outside one door .Merpeople were emerging on all sides now watching him eagerly pointing at his webbed hands and gills talking behind their hands to one another .Harry sped around a corner and a very strange sight met his eyes .A whole crowd of merpeople was floating in front of the houses that lined what looked like a merversion of a village square .A choir of merpeople was singing in the middle calling the champions toward them and behind them rose a crude sort of statue a gigantic merperson hewn from a boulder .Four people were bound tightly to the tail of the stone merperson .Ron was tied between Hermione and Cho Chang .There was also a girl who looked no older than eight whose clouds of silvery hair made Harry feel sure that she was Fleur Delacours sister .All four of them appeared to be in a very deep sleep .Their heads were lolling onto their shoulders and fine streams of bubbles kept issuing from their mouths .Harry sped toward the hostages half expecting the merpeople to lower their spears and charge at him but they did nothing .The ropes of weed tying the hostages to the statue were thick slimy and very strong .For a fleeting second he thought of the knife Sirius had bought him for Christmas locked in his trunk in the castle a quarter of a mile away no use to him whatsoever .He looked around .Many of the merpeople surrounding them were carrying spears .He swam swiftly toward a sevenfoottall merman with a long green beard and a choker of shark fangs and tried to mime a request to borrow the spear .The merman laughed and shook his head .We do not help he said in a harsh croaky voice .Come ON Harry said fiercely but only bubbles issued from his mouth and he tried to pull the spear away from the merman but the merman yanked it back still shaking his head and laughing .Harry swirled around staring about .Something sharp .anything .There were rocks littering the lake bottom .He dived and snatched up a particularly jagged one and returned to the statue .He began to hack at the ropes binding Ron and after several minutes hard work they broke apart .Ron floated unconscious a few inches above the lake bottom drifting a little in the ebb of the water .Harry looked around .There was no sign of any of the other champions .What were they playing at ?Why didnt they hurry up ?He turned back to Hermione raised the jagged rock and began to hack at her bindings too At once several pairs of strong gray hands seized him .Half a dozen mermen were pulling him away from Hermione shaking their greenhaired heads and laughing .You take your own hostage one of them said to him .Leave the others .No way !said Harry furiously but only two large bubbles came out .Your task is to retrieve your own friend .leave the others .Shes my friend too !Harry yelled gesturing toward Hermione an enormous silver bubble emerging soundlessly from his lips .And I dont want them to die either !Chos head was on Hermione s shoulder the small silverhaired girl was ghostly green and pale .Harry struggled to fight off the mermen but they laughed harder than ever holding him back .Harry looked wildly around .Where were the other champions ?Would he have time to take Ron to the surface and come back down for Hermione and the others ?Would he be able to find them again ?He looked down at his watch to see how much time was left it had stopped working .But then the merpeople around him pointed excitedly over his head .Harry looked up and saw Cedric swimming toward them .There was an enormous bubble around his head which made his features look oddly wide and stretched .Got lost !he mouthed looking panicstricken .Fleur and Krumre coming now !Feeling enormously relieved Harry watched Cedric pull a knife out of his pocket and cut Cho free .He pulled her upward and out of sight .Harry looked around waiting .Where were Fleur and Krum ?Time was getting short and according to the song the hostages would be lost after an hour .The merpeople started screeching animatedly .Those holding Harry loosened their grip staring behind them .Harry turned and saw something monstrous cutting through the water toward them a human body in swimming trunks with the head of a shark .It was Krum .He appeared to have transfigured himself but badly .The sharkman swam straight to Hermione and began snapping and biting at her ropes the trouble was that Krums new teeth were positioned very awkwardly for biting anything smaller than a dolphin and Harry was quite sure that if Krum wasnt careful he was going to rip Hermione in half .Darting forward Harry hit Krum hard on the shoulder and held up the jagged stone .Krum seized it and began to cut Hermione free .Within seconds he had done it he grabbed Hermione around the waist and without a backward glance began to rise rapidly with her toward the surface .Now what ?Harry thought desperately .If he could be sure that Fleur was coming .But still no sign .There was nothing to be done except .He snatched up the stone which Krum had dropped but the mermen now closed in around Ron and the little girl shaking their heads at him .Harry pulled out his wand .Get out of the way !Only bubbles flew out of his mouth but he had the distinct impression that the mermen had understood him because they suddenly stopped laughing .Their yellowish eyes were fixed upon Harrys wand and they looked scared .There might be a lot more of them than there were of him but Harry could tell by the looks on their faces that they knew no more magic than the giant squid did .Youve got until three !Harry shouted a great stream of bubbles burst from him but he held up three fingers to make sure they got the message .One .he put down a finger two .he put down a second one They scattered .Harry darted forward and began to hack at the ropes binding the small girl to the statue and at last she was free .He seized the little girl around the waist grabbed the neck of Rons robes and kicked off from the bottom .It was very slow work .He could no longer use his webbed hands to propel himself forward he worked his flippers furiously but Ron and Fleurs sister were like potatofilled sacks dragging him back down .He fixed his eyes skyward though he knew he must still be very deep the water above him was so dark .Merpeople were rising with him .He could see them swirling around him with ease watching him struggle through the water .Would they pull him back down to the depths when the time was up ?Did they perhaps eat humans ?Harrys legs were seizing up with the effort to keep swimming his shoulders were aching horribly with the effort of dragging Ron and the girl .He was drawing breath with extreme difficulty .He could feel pain on the sides of his neck again .he was becoming very aware of how wet the water was in his mouth .yet the darkness was definitely thinning now .he could see daylight above him .He kicked hard with his flippers and discovered that they were nothing more than feet .water was flooding through his mouth into his lungs .he was starting to feel dizzy but he knew light and air were only ten feet above him .he had to get there .he had to .Harry kicked his legs so hard and fast it felt as though his muscles were screaming in protest his very brain felt waterlogged he couldnt breathe he needed oxygen he had to keep going he could not stop And then he felt his head break the surface of the lake wonderful cold clear air was making his wet face sting he gulped it down feeling as though he had never breathed properly before and panting pulled Ron and the little girl up with him .All around him wild greenhaired heads were emerging out of the water with him but they were smiling at him .The crowd in the stands was making a great deal of noise shouting and screaming they all seemed to be on their feet Harry had the impression they thought that Ron and the little girl might be dead but they were wrong .both of them had opened their eyes the girl looked scared and confused but Ron merely expelled a great spout of water blinked in the bright light turned to Harry and said Wet this isnt it ?Then he spotted Fleurs sister .What did you bring her for ?Fleur didnt turn up I couldnt leave her Harry panted .Harry you prat said Ron you didnt take that song thing seriously did you ?Dumbledore wouldnt have let any of us drown !The song said It was only to make sure you got back inside the time limit !said Ron .I hope you didnt waste time down there acting the hero !Harry felt both stupid and annoyed .It was all very well for Ron hed been asleep he hadnt felt how eerie it was down in the lake surrounded by spear carrying merpeople whod looked more than capable of murder .Cmon Harry said shortly help me with her I dont think she can swim very well .They pulled Fleurs sister through the water back toward the bank where the judges stood watching twenty merpeople accompanying them like a guard of honor singing their horrible screechy songs .Harry could see Madam Pomfrey fussing over Hermione Krum Cedric and Cho all of whom were wrapped in thick blankets .Dumbledore and Ludo Bagman stood beaming at Harry and Ron from the bank as they swam nearer but Percy who looked very white and somehow much younger than usual came splashing out to meet them .Meanwhile Madame Maxime was trying to restrain Fleur Delacour who was quite hysterical fighting tooth and nail to return to the water .Gabrielle !Gabrielle Is she alive ?Is she urt ?Shes fine !Harry tried to tell her but he was so exhausted he could hardly talk let alone shout .Percy seized Ron and was dragging him back to the bank Gerroff Percy Im all right !Dumbledore and Bagman were pulling Harry upright Fleur had broken free of Madame Maxime and was hugging her sister .It was ze grindylows .zey attacked me .oh Gabrielle I thought .I thought .Come here you said Madam Pomfrey .She seized Harry and pulled him over to Hermione and the others wrapped him so tightly in a blanket that he felt as though he were in a straitjacket and forced a measure of very hot potion down his throat .Steam gushed out of his ears .Harry well done !Hermione cried .You did it you found out how all by yourself !Well said Harry .He would have told her about Dobby but he had just noticed Karkaroff watching him .He was the only judge who had not left the table the only judge not showing signs of pleasure and relief that Harry Ron and Fleurs sister had got back safely .Yeah thats right said Harry raising his voice slightly so that Karkaroff could hear him .You haff a water beetle in your hair Hermown ninny said Krum .Harry had the impression that Krum was drawing her attention back onto himself perhaps to remind her that he had just rescued her from the lake but Hermione brushed away the beetle impatiently and said Youre well outside the time limit though Harry .Did it take you ages to find us ?No .I found you okay .Harrys feeling of stupidity was growing .Now he was out of the water it seemed perfectly clear that Dumbledores safety precautions wouldnt have permitted the death of a hostage just because their champion hadnt turned up .Why hadnt he just grabbed Ron and gone ?He would have been first back .Cedric and Krum hadnt wasted time worrying about anyone else they hadnt taken the mersong seriously .Dumbledore was crouching at the waters edge deep in conversation with what seemed to be the chief merperson a particularly wild and ferociouslooking female .He was making the same sort of screechy noises that the merpeople made when they were above water clearly Dumbledore could speak Mermish .Finally he straightened up turned to his fellow judges and said A conference before we give the marks I think .The judges went into a huddle .Madam Pomfrey had gone to rescue Ron from Percys clutches she led him over to Harry and the others gave him a blanket and some Pepperup Potion then went to fetch Fleur and her sister .Fleur had many cuts on her face and arms and her robes were torn but she didnt seem to care nor would she allow Madam Pomfrey to clean them .Look after Gabrielle she told her and then she turned to Harry .You saved er she said breathlessly .Even though she was not your ostage .Yeah said Harry who was now heartily wishing hed left all three girls tied to the statue .Fleur bent down kissed Harry twice on each cheek he felt his face burn and wouldnt have been surprised if steam was coming out of his ears again then said to Ron And you too you elped Yeah said Ron looking extremely hopeful yeah a bit Fleur swooped down on him too and kissed him .Hermione looked simply furious but just then Ludo Bagmans magically magnified voice boomed out beside them making them all jump and causing the crowd in the stands to go very quiet .Ladies and gentlemen we have reached our decision .Merchieftainess Murcus has told us exactly what happened at the bottom of the lake and we have therefore decided to award marks out of fifty for each of the champions as follows .Fleur Delacour though she demonstrated excellent use of the BubbleHead Charm was attacked by grindylows as she approached her goal and failed to retrieve her hostage .We award her twentyfive points .Applause from the stands .I deserved zero said Fleur throatily shaking her magnificent head .Cedric Diggory who also used the BubbleHead Charm was first to return with his hostage though he returned one minute outside the time limit of an hour .Enormous cheers from the Hufflepuffs in the crowd Harry saw Cho give Cedric a glowing look .We therefore award him fortyseven points .Harrys heart sank .If Cedric had been outside the time limit he most certainly had been .Viktor Krum used an incomplete form of Transfiguration which was nevertheless effective and was second to return with his hostage .We award him forty points .Karkaroff clapped particularly hard looking very superior .Harry Potter used gillyweed to great effect Bagman continued .He returned last and well outside the time limit of an hour .However the Merchieftainess informs us that Mr Potter was first to reach the hostages and that the delay in his return was due to his determination to return all hostages to safety not merely his own .Ron and Hermione both gave Harry halfexasperated halfcommiserating looks .Most of the judges and here Bagman gave Karkaroff a very nasty look feel that this shows moral fiber and merits full marks .However .Mr Potters score is fortyfive points .Harrys stomach leapt he was now tying for first place with Cedric .Ron and Hermione caught by surprise stared at Harry then laughed and started applauding hard with the rest of the crowd .There you go Harry !Ron shouted over the noise .You werent being thick after all you were showing moral fiber !Fleur was clapping very hard too but Krum didnt look happy at all .He attempted to engage Hermione in conversation again but she was too busy cheering Harry to listen .The third and final task will take place at dusk on the twentyfourth of June continued Bagman .The champions will be notified of what is coming precisely one month beforehand .Thank you all for your support of the champions .It was over Harry thought dazedly as Madam Pomfrey began herding the champions and hostages back to the castle to get into dry clothes .it was over he had got through .he didnt have to worry about anything now until June the twentyfourth .Next time he was in Hogsmeade Harry decided as he walked back up the stone steps into the castle he was going to buy Dobby a pair of socks for every day of the year .PADFOOT RETURNS One of the best things about the aftermath of the second task was that everybody was very keen to hear details of what had happened down in the lake which meant that Ron was getting to share Harrys limelight for once .Harry noticed that Rons version of events changed subtly with every retelling .At first he gave what seemed to be the truth it tallied with Hermiones story anyway Dumbledore had put all the hostages into a bewitched sleep in Professor McGonagalls office first assuring them that they would be quite safe and would awake when they were back above the water .One week later however Ron was telling a thrilling tale of kidnap in which he struggled singlehandedly against fifty heavily armed merpeople who had to beat him into submission before tying him up .But I had my wand hidden up my sleeve he assured Padma Patil who seemed to be a lot keener on Ron now that he was getting so much attention and was making a point of talking to him every time they passed in the corridors .I couldve taken those mer idiots any time I wanted .What were you going to do snore at them ?said Hermione waspishly .People had been teasing her so much about being the thing that Viktor Krum would most miss that she was in a rather tetchy mood .Rons ears went red and thereafter he reverted to the bewitched sleep version of events .As they entered March the weather became drier but cruel winds skinned their hands and faces every time they went out onto the grounds .There were delays in the post because the owls kept being blown off course .The brown owl that Harry had sent to Sirius with the dates of the Hogsmeade weekend turned up at breakfast on Friday morning with half its feathers sticking up the wrong way Harry had no sooner torn off Siriuss reply than it took flight clearly afraid it was going to be sent outside again .Siriuss letter was almost as short as the previous one .Be at stile at end of road out of Hogsmeade past Dervish and Banges at two oclock on Saturday afternoon .Bring as much food as you can .He hasnt come back to Hogsmeade ?said Ron incredulously .It looks like it doesnt it ?said Hermione .I cant believe him said Harry tensely if hes caught .Made it so far though hasnt he ?said Ron .And its not like the place is swarming with dementors anymore .Harry folded up the letter thinking .If he was honest with himself he really wanted to see Sirius again .He therefore approached the final lesson of the afternoon double Potions feeling considerably more cheerful than he usually did when descending the steps to the dungeons .Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle were standing in a huddle outside the classroom door with Pansy Parkinsons gang of Slytherin girls .All of them were looking at something Harry couldnt see and sniggering heartily .Pansys puglike face peered excitedly around Goyle s broad back as Harry Ron and Hermione approached .There they are there they are !she giggled and the knot of Slytherins broke apart .Harry saw that Pansy had a magazine in her hands Witch Weekly .The moving picture on the front showed a curlyhaired witch who was smiling toothily and pointing at a large sponge cake with her wand .You might find something to interest you in there Granger !Pansy said loudly and she threw the magazine at Hermione who caught it looking startled .At that moment the dungeon door opened and Snape beckoned them all inside .Hermione Harry and Ron headed for a table at the back of the dungeon as usual .Once Snape had turned his back on them to write up the ingredients of todays potion on the blackboard Hermione hastily rifled through the magazine under the desk .At last in the center pages Hermione found what they were looking for .Harry and Ron leaned in closer .A color photograph of Harry headed a short piece entitled Harry Potters Secret Heartache A boy like no other perhaps yet a boy suffering all the usual pangs of adolescence writes Rita Skeeter .Deprived of love since the tragic demise of his parents fourteenyearold Harry Potter thought he had found solace in his steady girlfriend at Hogwarts Muggle born Hermione Granger .Little did he know that he would shortly be suffering yet another emotional blow in a life already littered with personal loss .Miss Granger a plain but ambitious girl seems to have a taste for famous wizards that Harry alone cannot satisfy .Since the arrival at Hogwarts of Viktor Krum Bulgarian Seeker and hero of the last World Quidditch Cup Miss Granger has been toying with both boys affections .Krum who is openly smitten with the devious Miss Granger has already invited her to visit him in Bulgaria over the summer holidays and insists that he has never felt this way about any other girl .However it might not be Miss Grangers doubtful natural charms that have captured these unfortunate boys interest .Shes really ugly says Pansy Parkinson a pretty and vivacious fourthyear student but shed be well up to making a Love Potion shes quite brainy .I think thats how shes doing it .Love Potions are of course banned at Hogwarts and no doubt Albus Dumbledore will want to investigate these claims .In the meantime Harry Potters well wishers must hope that next time he bestows his heart on a worthier candidate .I told you !Ron hissed at Hermione as she stared down at the article .I told you not to annoy Rita Skeeter !Shes made you out to be some sort of of scarlet woman !Hermione stopped looking astonished and snorted with laughter .Scarlet woman ?she repeated shaking with suppressed giggles as she looked around at Ron .Its what my mum calls them Ron muttered his ears going red .If thats the best Rita can do shes losing her touch said Hermione still giggling as she threw Witch Weekly onto the empty chair beside her .What a pile of old rubbish .She looked over at the Slytherins who were all watching her and Harry closely across the room to see if they had been upset by the article .Hermione gave them a sarcastic smile and a wave and she Harry and Ron started unpacking the ingredients they would need for their WitSharpening Potion .Theres something funny though said Hermione ten minutes later holding her pestle suspended over a bowl of scarab beetles .How could Rita Skeeter have known . ?Known what ?said Ron quickly .You havent been mixing up Love Potions have you ?Dont be stupid Hermione snapped starting to pound up her beetles again .No its just .how did she know Viktor asked me to visit him over the summer ?Hermione blushed scarlet as she said this and determinedly avoided Rons eyes .What ?said Ron dropping his pestle with a loud clunk .He asked me right after hed pulled me out of the lake Hermione muttered .After hed got rid of his sharks head .Madam Pomfrey gave us both blankets and then he sort of pulled me away from the judges so they wouldnt hear and he said if I wasnt doing anything over the summer would I like to And what did you say ?said Ron who had picked up his pestle and was grinding it on the desk a good six inches from his bowl because he was looking at Hermione .And he did say hed never felt the same way about anyone else Hermione went on going so red now that Harry could almost feel the heat coming from her but how could Rita Skeeter have heard him ?She wasnt there .or was she ?Maybe she has got an Invisibility Cloak maybe she sneaked onto the grounds to watch the second task .And what did you say ?Ron repeated pounding his pestle down so hard that it dented the desk .Well I was too busy seeing whether you and Harry were okay to Fascinating though your social life undoubtedly is Miss Granger said an icy voice right behind them and all three of them jumped I must ask you not to discuss it in my class .Ten points from Gryffindor .Snape had glided over to their desk while they were talking .The whole class was now looking around at them Malfoy took the opportunity to flash POTTER STINKS across the dungeon at Harry .Ah .reading magazines under the table as well ?Snape added snatching up the copy of Witch Weekly .A further ten points from Gryffindor .oh but of course .Snapes black eyes glittered as they fell on Rita Skeeters article .Potter has to keep up with his press cuttings .The dungeon rang with the Slytherins laughter and an unpleasant smile curled Snapes thin mouth .To Harrys fury he began to read the article aloud . ‘Harry Potters Secret Heartache .dear dear Potter whats ailing you now ? ‘A boy like no other perhaps .Harry could feel his face burning .Snape was pausing at the end of every sentence to allow the Slytherins a hearty laugh .The article sounded ten times worse when read by Snape .Even Hermione was blushing scarlet now . ‘.Harry Potters wellwishers must hope that next time he bestows his heart upon a worthier candidate .How very touching sneered Snape rolling up the magazine to continued gales of laughter from the Slytherins .Well I think I had better separate the three of you so you can keep your minds on your potions rather than on your tangled love lives .Weasley you stay here .Miss Granger over there beside Miss Parkinson .Potter that table in front of my desk .Move .Now .Furious Harry threw his ingredients and his bag into his cauldron and dragged it up to the front of the dungeon to the empty table .Snape followed sat down at his desk and watched Harry unload his cauldron .Determined not to look at Snape Harry resumed the mashing of his scarab beetles imagining each one to have Snapes face .All this press attention seems to have inflated your already overlarge head Potter said Snape quietly once the rest of the class had settled down again .Harry didnt answer .He knew Snape was trying to provoke him he had done this before .No doubt he was hoping for an excuse to take a round fifty points from Gryffindor before the end of the class .You might be laboring under the delusion that the entire wizarding world is impressed with you Snape went on so quietly that no one else could hear him Harry continued to pound his scarab beetles even though he had already reduced them to a very fine powder but I dont care how many times your picture appears in the papers .To me Potter you are nothing but a nasty little boy who considers rules to be beneath him .Harry tipped the powdered beetles into his cauldron and started cutting up his ginger roots .His hands were shaking slightly out of anger but he kept his eyes down as though he couldnt hear what Snape was saying to him .So I give you fair warning Potter Snape continued in a softer and more dangerous voice pintsized celebrity or not if I catch you breaking into my office one more time I havent been anywhere near your office !said Harry angrily forgetting his feigned deafness .Dont lie to me Snape hissed his fathomless black eyes boring into Harrys .Boomslang skin .Gillyweed .Both come from my private stores and I know who stole them .Harry stared back at Snape determined not to blink or to look guilty .In truth he hadnt stolen either of these things from Snape .Hermione had taken the boomslang skin back in their second year they had needed it for the Polyjuice Potion and while Snape had suspected Harry at the time he had never been able to prove it .Dobby of course had stolen the gillyweed .I dont know what youre talking about Harry lied coldly .You were out of bed on the night my office was broken into !Snape hissed .I know it Potter !Now MadEye Moody might have joined your fan club but I will not tolerate your behavior !One more nighttime stroll into my office Potter and you will pay !Right said Harry coolly turning back to his ginger roots .Ill bear that in mind if I ever get the urge to go in there .Snapes eyes flashed .He plunged a hand into the inside of his black robes .For one wild moment Harry thought Snape was about to pull out his wand and curse him then he saw that Snape had drawn out a small crystal bottle of a completely clear potion .Harry stared at it .Do you know what this is Potter ?Snape said his eyes glittering dangerously again .No said Harry with complete honesty this time .It is Veritaserum a Truth Potion so powerful that three drops would have you spilling your innermost secrets for this entire class to hear said Snape viciously .Now the use of this potion is controlled by very strict Ministry guidelines .But unless you watch your step you might just find that my hand slips he shook the crystal bottle slightly right over your evening pumpkin juice .And then Potter .then well find out whether youve been in my office or not .Harry said nothing .He turned back to his ginger roots once more picked up his knife and started slicing them again .He didnt like the sound of that Truth Potion at all nor would he put it past Snape to slip him some .He repressed a shudder at the thought of what might come spilling out of his mouth if Snape did it .quite apart from landing a whole lot of people in trouble Hermione and Dobby for a start there were all the other things he was concealing .like the fact that he was in contact with Sirius .and his insides squirmed at the thought how he felt about Cho .He tipped his ginger roots into the cauldron too and wondered whether he ought to take a leaf out of Moodys book and start drinking only from a private hip flask .There was a knock on the dungeon door .Enter said Snape in his usual voice .The class looked around as the door opened .Professor Karkaroff came in .Everyone watched him as he walked up toward Snape s desk .He was twisting his finger around his goatee and looking agitated .We need to talk said Karkaroff abruptly when he had reached Snape .He seemed so determined that nobody should hear what he was saying that he was barely opening his lips it was as though he were a rather poor ventriloquist .Harry kept his eyes on his ginger roots listening hard .Ill talk to you after my lesson Karkaroff Snape muttered but Karkaroff interrupted him .I want to talk now while you cant slip off Severus .Youve been avoiding me .After the lesson Snape snapped .Under the pretext of holding up a measuring cup to see if hed poured out enough armadillo bile Harry sneaked a sidelong glance at the pair of them .Karkaroff looked extremely worried and Snape looked angry .Karkaroff hovered behind Snape s desk for the rest of the double period .He seemed intent on preventing Snape from slipping away at the end of class .Keen to hear what Karkaroff wanted to say Harry deliberately knocked over his bottle of armadillo bile with two minutes to go to the bell which gave him an excuse to duck down behind his cauldron and mop up while the rest of the class moved noisily toward the door .Whats so urgent ?he heard Snape hiss at Karkaroff .This said Karkaroff and Harry peering around the edge of his cauldron saw Karkaroff pull up the left hand sleeve of his robe and show Snape something on his inner forearm .Well ?said Karkaroff still making every effort not to move his lips .Do you see ?Its never been this clear never since Put it away !snarled Snape his black eyes sweeping the classroom .But you must have noticed Karkaroff began in an agitated voice .We can talk later Karkaroff !spat Snape .Potter !What are you doing ?Clearing up my armadillo bile Professor said Harry innocently straightening up and showing Snape the sodden rag he was holding .Karkaroff turned on his heel and strode out of the dungeon .He looked both worried and angry .Not wanting to remain alone with an exceptionally angry Snape Harry threw his books and ingredients back into his bag and left at top speed to tell Ron and Hermione what he had just witnessed .They left the castle at noon the next day to find a weak silver sun shining down upon the grounds .The weather was milder than it had been all year and by the time they arrived in Hogsmeade all three of them had taken off their cloaks and thrown them over their shoulders .The food Sirius had told them to bring was in Harrys bag they had sneaked a dozen chicken legs a loaf of bread and a flask of pumpkin juice from the lunch table .They went into Gladrags Wizardwear to buy a present for Dobby where they had fun selecting the most lurid socks they could find including a pair patterned with flashing gold and silver stars and another that screamed loudly when they became too smelly .Then at half past one they made their way up the High Street past Dervish and Banges and out toward the edge of the village .Harry had never been in this direction before .The winding lane was leading them out into the wild countryside around Hogsmeade .The cottages were fewer here and their gardens larger they were walking toward the foot of the mountain in whose shadow Hogsmeade lay .Then they turned a corner and saw a stile at the end of the lane .Waiting for them its front paws on the topmost bar was a very large shaggy black dog which was carrying some newspapers in its mouth and looking very familiar .Hello Sirius said Harry when they had reached him .The black dog sniffed Harrys bag eagerly wagged its tail once then turned and began to trot away from them across the scrubby patch of ground that rose to meet the rocky foot of the mountain .Harry Ron and Hermione climbed over the stile and followed .Sirius led them to the very foot of the mountain where the ground was covered with boulders and rocks .It was easy for him with his four paws but Harry Ron and Hermione were soon out of breath .They followed Sirius higher up onto the mountain itself .For nearly half an hour they climbed a steep winding and stony path following Siriuss wagging tail sweating in the sun the shoulder straps of Harrys bag cutting into his shoulders .Then at last Sirius slipped out of sight and when they reached the place where he had vanished they saw a narrow fissure in the rock .They squeezed into it and found themselves in a cool dimly lit cave .Tethered at the end of it one end of his rope around a large rock was Buckbeak the hippogriff .Half gray horse half giant eagle Buckbeaks fierce orange eye flashed at the sight of them .All three of them bowed low to him and after regarding them imperiously for a moment Buckbeak bent his scaly front knees and allowed Hermione to rush forward and stroke his feathery neck .Harry however was looking at the black dog which had just turned into his godfather .Sirius was wearing ragged gray robes the same ones he had been wearing when he had left Azkaban .His black hair was longer than it had been when he had appeared in the fire and it was untidy and matted once more .He looked very thin .Chicken !he said hoarsely after removing the old Daily Prophets from his mouth and throwing them down onto the cave floor .Harry pulled open his bag and handed over the bundle of chicken legs and bread .Thanks said Sirius opening it grabbing a drumstick sitting down on the cave floor and tearing off a large chunk with his teeth .Ive been living off rats mostly .Cant steal too much food from Hogsmeade Id draw attention to myself .He grinned up at Harry but Harry returned the grin only reluctantly .Whatre you doing here Sirius ?he said .Fulfilling my duty as godfather said Sirius gnawing on the chicken bone in a very doglike way .Dont worry about it Im pretending to be a lovable stray .He was still grinning but seeing the anxiety in Harrys face said more seriously I want to be on the spot .Your last letter .well lets just say things are getting fishier .Ive been stealing the paper every time someone throws one out and by the looks of things Im not the only one whos getting worried .He nodded at the yellowing Daily Prophets on the cave floor and Ron picked them up and unfolded them .Harry however continued to stare at Sirius .What if they catch you ?What if youre seen ?You three and Dumbledore are the only ones around here who know Im an Animagus said Sirius shrugging and continuing to devour the chicken leg .Ron nudged Harry and passed him the Daily Prophets .There were two The first bore the headline Mystery Illness of Bartemius Crouch the second Ministry Witch Still Missing Minister of Magic Now Personally Involved .Harry scanned the story about Crouch .Phrases jumped out at him hasnt been seen in public since November .house appears deserted .St .Mungos Hospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries decline comment .Ministry refuses to confirm rumors of critical illness .Theyre making it sound like hes dying said Harry slowly .But he cant be that ill if he managed to get up here .My brothers Crouchs personal assistant Ron informed Sirius .He says Crouch is suffering from overwork .Mind you he did look ill last time I saw him up close said Harry slowly still reading the story .The night my name came out of the goblet .Getting his comeuppance for sacking Winky isnt he ?said Hermione an edge to her voice .She was stroking Buckbeak who was crunching up Siriuss chicken bones .I bet he wishes he hadnt done it now bet he feels the difference now shes not there to look after him .Hermiones obsessed with houseelfs Ron muttered to Sirius casting Hermione a dark look .Sirius however looked interested .Crouch sacked his houseelf ?Yeah at the Quidditch World Cup said Harry and he launched into the story of the Dark Marks appearance and Winky being found with Harrys wand clutched in her hand and Mr Crouchs fury .When Harry had finished Sirius was on his feet again and had started pacing up and down the cave .Let me get this straight he said after a while brandishing a fresh chicken leg .You first saw the elf in the Top Box .She was saving Crouch a seat right ?Right said Harry Ron and Hermione together .But Crouch didnt turn up for the match ?No said Harry .I think he said hed been too busy .Sirius paced all around the cave in silence .Then he said Harry did you check your pockets for your wand after youd left the Top Box ?Erm .Harry thought hard .No he said finally .I didnt need to use it before we got in the forest .And then I put my hand in my pocket and all that was in there were my Omnioculars .He stared at Sirius .Are you saying whoever conjured the Mark stole my wand in the Top Box ?Its possible said Sirius .Winky didnt steal that wand !Hermione insisted .The elf wasnt the only one in that box said Sirius his brow furrowed as he continued to pace .Who else was sitting behind you ?Loads of people said Harry .Some Bulgarian ministers .Cornelius Fudge .the Malfoys .The Malfoys !said Ron suddenly so loudly that his voice echoed all around the cave and Buckbeak tossed his head nervously .I bet it was Lucius Malfoy !Anyone else ?said Sirius .No one said Harry .Yes there was there was Ludo Bagman Hermione reminded him .Oh yeah .I dont know anything about Bagman except that he used to be Beater for the Wimbourne Wasps said Sirius still pacing .Whats he like ?Hes okay said Harry .He keeps offering to help me with the Triwizard Tournament .Does he now ?said Sirius frowning more deeply .I wonder why hed do that ?Says hes taken a liking to me said Harry .Hmm said Sirius looking thoughtful .We saw him in the forest just before the Dark Mark appeared Hermione told Sirius .Remember ?she said to Harry and Ron .Yeah but he didnt stay in the forest did he ?said Ron .The moment we told him about the riot he went off to the campsite .How dyou know ?Hermione shot back .How dyou know where he Disapparated to ?Come off it said Ron incredulously .Are you saying you reckon Ludo Bagman conjured the Dark Mark ?Its more likely he did it than Winky said Hermione stubbornly .Told you said Ron looking meaningfully at Sirius told you shes obsessed with house But Sirius held up a hand to silence Ron .When the Dark Mark had been conjured and the elf had been discovered holding Harrys wand what did Crouch do ?Went to look in the bushes said Harry but there wasnt anyone else there .Of course Sirius muttered pacing up and down of course hed want to pin it on anyone but his own elf .and then he sacked her ?Yes said Hermione in a heated voice he sacked her just because she hadnt stayed in her tent and let herself get trampled Hermione will you give it a rest with the elf !said Ron .Sirius shook his head and said Shes got the measure of Crouch better than you have Ron .If you want to know what a mans like take a good look at how he treats his inferiors not his equals .He ran a hand over his unshaven face evidently thinking hard .All these absences of Barty Crouchs .he goes to the trouble of making sure his houseelf saves him a seat at the Quidditch World Cup but doesnt bother to turn up and watch .He works very hard to reinstate the Triwizard Tournament and then stops coming to that too .Its not like Crouch .If hes ever taken a day off work because of illness before this Ill eat Buckbeak .Dyou know Crouch then ?said Harry .Siriuss face darkened .He suddenly looked as menacing as he had the night when Harry first met him the night when Harry still believed Sirius to be a murderer .Oh I know Crouch all right he said quietly .He was the one who gave the order for me to be sent to Azkaban without a trial .What ?said Ron and Hermione together .Youre kidding !said Harry .No Im not said Sirius taking another great bite of chicken .Crouch used to be Head of the Department of Magical Law Enforcement didnt you know ?Harry Ron and Hermione shook their heads .He was tipped for the next Minister of Magic said Sirius .Hes a great wizard Barty Crouch powerfully magical and powerhungry .Oh never a Voldemort supporter he said reading the look on Harrys face .No Barty Crouch was always very outspoken against the Dark Side .But then a lot of people who were against the Dark Side .well you wouldnt understand .youre too young .Thats what my dad said at the World Cup said Ron with a trace of irritation in his voice .Try us why dont you ?A grin flashed across Siriuss thin face .All right Ill try you .He walked once up the cave back again and then said Imagine that Voldemorts powerful now .You dont know who his supporters are you dont know whos working for him and who isnt you know he can control people so that they do terrible things without being able to stop themselves .Youre scared for yourself and your family and your friends .Every week news comes of more deaths more disappearances more torturing .the Ministry of Magics in disarray they dont know what to do theyre trying to keep everything hidden from the Muggles but meanwhile Muggles are dying too .Terror everywhere .panic .confusion .thats how it used to be .Well times like that bring out the best in some people and the worst in others .Crouchs principles mightve been good in the beginning I wouldnt know .He rose quickly through the Ministry and he started ordering very harsh measures against Voldemorts supporters .The Aurors were given new powers powers to kill rather than capture for instance .And I wasnt the only one who was handed straight to the dementors without trial .Crouch fought violence with violence and authorized the use of the Unforgivable Curses against suspects .I would say he became as ruthless and cruel as many on the Dark Side .He had his supporters mind you plenty of people thought he was going about things the right way and there were a lot of witches and wizards clamoring for him to take over as Minister of Magic .When Voldemort disappeared it looked like only a matter of time until Crouch got the top job .But then something rather unfortunate happened .Sirius smiled grimly .Crouchs own son was caught with a group of Death Eaters whod managed to talk their way out of Azkaban .Apparently they were trying to find Voldemort and return him to power .Crouchs son was caught ?gasped Hermione .Yep said Sirius throwing his chicken bone to Buckbeak flinging himself back down on the ground beside the loaf of bread and tearing it in half .Nasty little shock for old Barty Id imagine .Should have spent a bit more time at home with his family shouldnt he ?Ought to have left the office early once in a while .gotten to know his own son .He began to wolf down large pieces of bread .Was his son a Death Eater ?said Harry .No idea said Sirius still stuffing down bread .I was in Azkaban myself when he was brought in .This is mostly stuff Ive found out since I got out .The boy was definitely caught in the company of people Id bet my life were Death Eaters but he might have been in the wrong place at the wrong time just like the houseelf .Did Crouch try and get his son off ?Hermione whispered .Sirius let out a laugh that was much more like a bark .Crouch let his son off ?I thought you had the measure of him Hermione !Anything that threatened to tarnish his reputation had to go he had dedicated his whole life to becoming Minister of Magic .You saw him dismiss a devoted houseelf because she associated him with the Dark Mark again doesnt that tell you what hes like ?Crouchs fatherly affection stretched just far enough to give his son a trial and by all accounts it wasnt much more than an excuse for Crouch to show how much he hated the boy .then he sent him straight to Azkaban .He gave his own son to the dementors ?asked Harry quietly .Thats right said Sirius and he didnt look remotely amused now .I saw the dementors bringing him in watched them through the bars in my cell door .He cant have been more than nineteen .They took him into a cell near mine .He was screaming for his mother by nightfall .He went quiet after a few days though .they all went quiet in the end .except when they shrieked in their sleep .For a moment the deadened look in Siriuss eyes became more pronounced than ever as though shutters had closed behind them .So hes still in Azkaban ?Harry said .No said Sirius dully .No hes not in there anymore .He died about a year after they brought him in .He died ?He wasnt the only one said Sirius bitterly .Most go mad in there and plenty stop eating in the end .They lose the will to live .You could always tell when a death was coming because the dementors could sense it they got excited .That boy looked pretty sickly when he arrived .Crouch being an important Ministry member he and his wife were allowed a deathbed visit .That was the last time I saw Barty Crouch half carrying his wife past my cell .She died herself apparently shortly afterward .Grief .Wasted away just like the boy .Crouch never came for his sons body .The dementors buried him outside the fortress I watched them do it .Sirius threw aside the bread he had just lifted to his mouth and instead picked up the flask of pumpkin juice and drained it .So old Crouch lost it all just when he thought he had it made he continued wiping his mouth with the back of his hand .One moment a hero poised to become Minister of Magic .next his son dead his wife dead the family name dishonored and so Ive heard since I escaped a big drop in popularity .Once the boy had died people started feeling a bit more sympathetic toward the son and started asking how a nice young lad from a good family had gone so badly astray .The conclusion was that his father never cared much for him .So Cornelius Fudge got the top job and Crouch was shunted sideways into the Department of International Magical Cooperation .There was a long silence .Harry was thinking of the way Crouchs eyes had bulged as hed looked down at his disobedient houseelf back in the wood at the Quidditch World Cup .This then must have been why Crouch had overreacted to Winky being found beneath the Dark Mark .It had brought back memories of his son and the old scandal and his fall from grace at the Ministry .Moody says Crouch is obsessed with catching Dark wizards Harry told Sirius .Yeah Ive heard its become a bit of a mania with him said Sirius nodding .If you ask me he still thinks he can bring back the old popularity by catching one more Death Eater .And he sneaked up here to search Snapes office !said Ron triumphantly looking at Hermione .Yes and that doesnt make sense at all said Sirius .Yeah it does !said Ron excitedly but Sirius shook his head .Listen if Crouch wants to investigate Snape why hasnt he been coming to judge the tournament ?It would be an ideal excuse to make regular visits to Hogwarts and keep an eye on him .So you think Snape could be up to something then ?asked Harry but Hermione broke in .Look I dont care what you say Dumbledore trusts Snape Oh give it a rest Hermione said Ron impatiently .I know Dumbledore s brilliant and everything but that doesnt mean a really clever Dark wizard couldnt fool him Why did Snape save Harrys life in the first year then ?Why didnt he just let him die ?I dunno maybe he thought Dumbledore would kick him out What dyou think Sirius ?Harry said loudly and Ron and Hermione stopped bickering to listen .I think theyve both got a point said Sirius looking thoughtfully at Ron and Hermione .Ever since I found out Snape was teaching here Ive wondered why Dumbledore hired him .Snape s always been fascinated by the Dark Arts he was famous for it at school .Slimy oily greasyhaired kid he was Sirius added and Harry and Ron grinned at each other .Snape knew more curses when he arrived at school than half the kids in seventh year and he was part of a gang of Slytherins who nearly all turned out to be Death Eaters .Sirius held up his fingers and began ticking off names .Rosier and Wilkes they were both killed by Aurors the year before Voldemort fell .The Lestranges theyre a married couple theyre in Azkaban .Avery from what Ive heard he wormed his way out of trouble by saying hed been acting under the Imperius Curse hes still at large .But as far as I know Snape was never even accused of being a Death Eater not that that means much .Plenty of them were never caught .And Snape s certainly clever and cunning enough to keep himself out of trouble .Snape knows Karkaroff pretty well but he wants to keep that quiet said Ron .Yeah you shouldve seen Snapes face when Karkaroff turned up in Potions yesterday !said Harry quickly .Karkaroff wanted to talk to Snape he says Snapes been avoiding him .Karkaroff looked really worried .He showed Snape something on his arm but I couldnt see what it was .He showed Snape something on his arm ?said Sirius looking frankly bewildered .He ran his fingers distractedly through his filthy hair then shrugged again .Well Ive no idea what thats about .but if Karkaroffs genuinely worried and hes going to Snape for answers .Sirius stared at the cave wall then made a grimace of frustration .Theres still the fact that Dumbledore trusts Snape and I know Dumbledore trusts where a lot of other people wouldnt but I just cant see him letting Snape teach at Hogwarts if hed ever worked for Voldemort .Why are Moody and Crouch so keen to get into Snape s office then ?said Ron stubbornly .Well said Sirius slowly I wouldnt put it past Mad Eye to have searched every single teachers office when he got to Hogwarts .He takes his Defense Against the Dark Arts seriously Moody .Im not sure he trusts anyone at all and after the things hes seen its not surprising .Ill say this for Moody though he never killed if he could help it .Always brought people in alive where possible .He was tough but he never descended to the level of the Death Eaters .Crouch though .hes a different matter .is he really ill ?If he is why did he make the effort to drag himself up to Snape s office ?And if hes not .whats he up to ?What was he doing at the World Cup that was so important he didnt turn up in the Top Box ?Whats he been doing while he should have been judging the tournament ?Sirius lapsed into silence still staring at the cave wall .Buckbeak was ferreting around on the rocky floor looking for bones he might have overlooked .Finally Sirius looked up at Ron .You say your brothers Crouchs personal assistant ?Any chance you could ask him if hes seen Crouch lately ?I can try said Ron doubtfully .Better not make it sound like I reckon Crouch is up to anything dodgy though .Percy loves Crouch .And you might try and find out whether theyve got any leads on Bertha Jorkins while youre at it said Sirius gesturing to the second copy of the Daily Prophet .Bagman told me they hadnt said Harry .Yes hes quoted in the article in there said Sirius nodding at the paper .Blustering on about how bad Berthas memory is .Well maybe shes changed since I knew her but the Bertha I knew wasnt forgetful at all quite the reverse .She was a bit dim but she had an excellent memory for gossip .It used to get her into a lot of trouble she never knew when to keep her mouth shut .I can see her being a bit of a liability at the Ministry of Magic .maybe thats why Bagman didnt bother to look for her for so long .Sirius heaved an enormous sigh and rubbed his shadowed eyes .Whats the time ?Harry checked his watch then remembered it hadnt been working since it had spent over an hour in the lake .Its half past three said Hermione .Youd better get back to school Sirius said getting to his feet .Now listen .He looked particularly hard at Harry .I dont want you lot sneaking out of school to see me all right ?Just send notes to me here .I still want to hear about anything odd .But youre not to go leaving Hogwarts without permission it would be an ideal opportunity for someone to attack you .No ones tried to attack me so far except a dragon and a couple of grindylows Harry said but Sirius scowled at him .I dont care .Ill breathe freely again when this tournaments over and thats not until June .And dont forget if youre talking about me among yourselves call me Snuffles okay ?He handed Harry the empty napkin and flask and went to pat Buckbeak goodbye .Ill walk to the edge of the village with you said Sirius see if I can scrounge another paper .He transformed into the great black dog before they left the cave and they walked back down the mountainside with him across the boulderstrewn ground and back to the stile .Here he allowed each of them to pat him on the head before turning and setting off at a run around the outskirts of the village .Harry Ron and Hermione made their way back into Hogsmeade and up toward Hogwarts .Wonder if Percy knows all that stuff about Crouch ?Ron said as they walked up the drive to the castle .But maybe he doesnt care .itd probably just make him admire Crouch even more .Yeah Percy loves rules .Hed just say Crouch was refusing to break them for his own son .Percy would never throw any of his family to the dementors said Hermione severely .I dont know said Ron .If he thought we were standing in the way of his career .Percys really ambitious you know .They walked up the stone steps into the entrance hall where the delicious smells of dinner wafted toward them from the Great Hall .Poor old Snuffles said Ron breathing deeply .He must really like you Harry .Imagine having to live off rats .THE MADNESS OF MR CROUCH Harry Ron and Hermione went up to the Owlery after breakfast on Sunday to send a letter to Percy asking as Sirius had suggested whether he had seen Mr Crouch lately .They used Hedwig because it had been so long since shed had a job .When they had watched her fly out of sight through the Owlery window they proceeded down to the kitchen to give Dobby his new socks .The houseelves gave them a very cheery welcome bowing and curtsying and bustling around making tea again .Dobby was ecstatic about his present .Harry Potter is too good to Dobby !he squeaked wiping large tears out of his enormous eyes .You saved my life with that gillyweed Dobby you really did said Harry .No chance of more of those eclairs is there ?said Ron who was looking around at the beaming and bowing houseelves .Youve just had breakfast !said Hermione irritably but a great silver platter of eclairs was already zooming toward them supported by four elves .We should get some stuff to send up to Snuffles Harry muttered .Good idea said Ron .Give Pig something to do .You couldnt give us a bit of extra food could you ?he said to the surrounding elves and they bowed delightedly and hurried off to get some more .Dobby wheres Winky ?said Hermione who was looking around .Winky is over there by the fire miss said Dobby quietly his ears drooping slightly .Oh dear said Hermione as she spotted Winky .Harry looked over at the fireplace too .Winky was sitting on the same stool as last time but she had allowed herself to become so filthy that she was not immediately distinguishable from the smoke blackened brick behind her .Her clothes were ragged and unwashed .She was clutching a bottle of butterbeer and swaying slightly on her stool staring into the fire .As they watched her she gave an enormous hiccup .Winky is getting through six bottles a day now Dobby whispered to Harry .Well its not strong that stuff Harry said .But Dobby shook his head .Tis strong for a house elf sir he said .Winky hiccuped again .The elves who had brought the eclairs gave her disapproving looks as they returned to work .Winky is pining Harry Potter Dobby whispered sadly .Winky wants to go home .Winky still thinks Mr Crouch is her master sir and nothing Dobby says will persuade her that Professor Dumbledore is her master now .Hey Winky said Harry struck by a sudden inspiration walking over to her and bending down you dont know what Mr Crouch might be up to do you ?Because hes stopped turning up to judge the Triwizard Tournament .Winkys eyes flickered .Her enormous pupils focused on Harry .She swayed slightly again and then said M Master is stopped hie coming ?Yeah said Harry we havent seen him since the first task .The Daily Prophets saying hes ill .Winky swayed some more staring blurrily at Harry .Master hie ill ?Her bottom lip began to tremble .But were not sure if thats true said Hermione quickly .Master is needing his hie Winky !whimpered the elf .Master cannot hie manage hie all by himself .Other people manage to do their own housework you know Winky Hermione said severely .Winky hie is not only hie doing housework for Mr Crouch !Winky squeaked indignantly swaying worse than ever and slopping butterbeer down her already heavily stained blouse .Master is hie trusting Winky with hie the most important hie the most secret What ?said Harry .But Winky shook her head very hard spilling more butterbeer down herself .Winky keeps hie her masters secrets she said mutinously swaying very heavily now frowning up at Harry with her eyes crossed .You is hie nosing you is .Winky must not talk like that to Harry Potter !said Dobby angrily .Harry Potter is brave and noble and Harry Potter is not nosy !He is nosing hie into my masters hie private and secret hie Winky is a good houseelf hie Winky keeps her silence hie people trying to hie pry and poke hie Winkys eyelids drooped and suddenly without warning she slid off her stool into the hearth snoring loudly .The empty bottle of butterbeer rolled away across the stoneflagged floor .Half a dozen house elves came hurrying forward looking disgusted .One of them picked up the bottle the others covered Winky with a large checked tablecloth and tucked the ends in neatly hiding her from view .We is sorry you had to see that sirs and miss !squeaked a nearby elf shaking his head and looking very ashamed .We is hoping you will not judge us all by Winky sirs and miss !Shes unhappy !said Hermione exasperated .Why dont you try and cheer her up instead of covering her up ?Begging your pardon miss said the houseelf bowing deeply again but houseelves has no right to be unhappy when there is work to be done and masters to be served .Oh for heavens sake !Hermione cried .Listen to me all of you !Youve got just as much right as wizards to be unhappy !Youve got the right to wages and holidays and proper clothes you dont have to do everything youre told look at Dobby !Miss will please keep Dobby out of this Dobby mumbled looking scared .The cheery smiles had vanished from the faces of the houseelves around the kitchen .They were suddenly looking at Hermione as though she were mad and dangerous .We has your extra food !squeaked an elf at Harrys elbow and he shoved a large ham a dozen cakes and some fruit into Harrys arms .Goodbye !The houseelves crowded around Harry Ron and Hermione and began shunting them out of the kitchen many little hands pushing in the smalls of their backs .Thank you for the socks Harry Potter !Dobby called miserably from the hearth where he was standing next to the lumpy tablecloth that was Winky .You couldnt keep your mouth shut could you Hermione ?said Ron angrily as the kitchen door slammed shut behind them .They wont want us visiting them now !We couldve tried to get more stuff out of Winky about Crouch !Oh as if you care about that !scoffed Hermione .You only like coming down here for the food !It was an irritable sort of day after that .Harry got so tired of Ron and Hermione sniping at each other over their homework in the common room that he took Siriuss food up to the Owlery that evening on his own .Pigwidgeon was much too small to carry an entire ham up to the mountain by himself so Harry enlisted the help of two school screech owls as well .When they had set off into the dusk looking extremely odd carrying the large package between them Harry leaned on the windowsill looking out at the grounds at the dark rustling treetops of the Forbidden Forest and the rippling sails of the Durmstrang ship .An eagle owl flew through the coil of smoke rising from Hagrids chimney it soared toward the castle around the Owlery and out of sight .Looking down Harry saw Hagrid digging energetically in front of his cabin .Harry wondered what he was doing it looked as though he were making a new vegetable patch .As he watched Madame Maxime emerged from the Beauxbatons carriage and walked over to Hagrid .She appeared to be trying to engage him in conversation .Hagrid leaned upon his spade but did not seem keen to prolong their talk because Madame Maxime returned to the carriage shortly afterward .Unwilling to go back to Gryffindor Tower and listen to Ron and Hermione snarling at each other Harry watched Hagrid digging until the darkness swallowed him and the owls around Harry began to awake swooshing past him into the night .By breakfast the next day Rons and Hermiones bad moods had burnt out and to Harrys relief Rons dark predictions that the houseelves would send substandard food up to the Gryffindor table because Hermione had insulted them proved false the bacon eggs and kippers were quite as good as usual .When the post owls arrived Hermione looked up eagerly she seemed to be expecting something .Percy wontve had time to answer yet said Ron .We only sent Hedwig yesterday .No its not that said Hermione .Ive taken out a subscription to the Daily Prophet Im getting sick of finding everything out from the Slytherins .Good thinking !said Harry also looking up at the owls .Hey Hermione I think youre in luck A gray owl was soaring down toward Hermione .It hasnt got a newspaper though she said looking disappointed .Its But to her bewilderment the gray owl landed in front of her plate closely followed by four barn owls a brown owl and a tawny .How many subscriptions did you take out ?said Harry seizing Hermione s goblet before it was knocked over by the cluster of owls all of whom were jostling close to her trying to deliver their own letter first .What on earth ?Hermione said taking the letter from the gray owl opening it and starting to read .Oh really !she sputtered going rather red .Whats up ?said Ron .Its oh how ridiculous She thrust the letter at Harry who saw that it was not handwritten but composed from pasted letters that seemed to have been cut out of the Daily Prophet .You are a WickEd giRL .HarRy PotTER desErves BeTteR .GO back wherE you cAMe from mUGgle .Theyre all like it !said Hermione desperately opening one letter after another . ‘Harry Potter can do much better than the likes of you . ‘You deserve to be boiled in frog spawn .Ouch !She had opened the last envelope and yellowish green liquid smelling strongly of petrol gushed over her hands which began to erupt in large yellow boils .Undiluted bubotuber pus !said Ron picking up the envelope gingerly and sniffing it .Ow !said Hermione tears starting in her eyes as she tried to rub the pus off her hands with a napkin but her fingers were now so thickly covered in painful sores that it looked as though she were wearing a pair of thick knobbly gloves .Youd better get up to the hospital wing said Harry as the owls around Hermione took flight .Well tell Professor Sprout where youve gone .I warned her !said Ron as Hermione hurried out of the Great Hall cradling her hands .I warned her not to annoy Rita Skeeter !Look at this one .He read out one of the letters Hermione had left behind ‘I read in Witch Weekly about how you are playing Harry Potter false and that boy has had enough hardship and I will be sending you a curse by next post as soon as I can find a big enough envelope .Blimey shed better watch out for herself .Hermione didnt turn up for Herbology .As Harry and Ron left the greenhouse for their Care of Magical Creatures class they saw Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle descending the stone steps of the castle .Pansy Parkinson was whispering and giggling behind them with her gang of Slytherin girls .Catching sight of Harry Pansy called Potter have you split up with your girlfriend ?Why was she so upset at breakfast ?Harry ignored her he didnt want to give her the satisfaction of knowing how much trouble the Witch Weekly article had caused .Hagrid who had told them last lesson that they had finished with unicorns was waiting for them outside his cabin with a fresh supply of open crates at his feet .Harrys heart sank at the sight of the crates surely not another skrewt hatching ?but when he got near enough to see inside he found himself looking at a number of fluffy black creatures with long snouts .Their front paws were curiously flat like spades and they were blinking up at the class looking politely puzzled at all the attention .Thesere nifflers said Hagrid when the class had gathered around .Yeh find em down mines mostly .They like sparkly stuff .There yeh go look .One of the nifflers had suddenly leapt up and attempted to bite Pansy Parkinsons watch off her wrist .She shrieked and jumped backward .Useful little treasure detectors said Hagrid happily .Thought wed have some fun with em today .See over there ?He pointed at the large patch of freshly turned earth Harry had watched him digging from the Owlery window .Ive buried some gold coins .Ive got a prize fer whoever picks the niffler that digs up most .Jus take off all yer valuables an choose a niffler an get ready ter set em loose .Harry took off his watch which he was only wearing out of habit as it didnt work anymore and stuffed it into his pocket .Then he picked up a niffler .It put its long snout in Harrys ear and sniffed enthusiastically .It was really quite cuddly .Hang on said Hagrid looking down into the crate theres a spare niffler here .whos missin ?Wheres Hermione ?She had to go to the hospital wing said Ron .Well explain later Harry muttered Pansy Parkinson was listening .It was easily the most fun they had ever had in Care of Magical Creatures .The nifflers dived in and out of the patch of earth as though it were water each scurrying back to the student who had released it and spitting gold into their hands .Rons was particularly efficient it had soon filled his lap with coins .Can you buy these as pets Hagrid ?he asked excitedly as his niffler dived back into the soil splattering his robes .Yer mum wouldn be happy Ron said Hagrid grinning .They wreck houses nifflers .I reckon theyve nearly got the lot now he added pacing around the patch of earth while the nifflers continued to dive .I ony buried a hundred coins .Oh there yare Hermione !Hermione was walking toward them across the lawn .Her hands were very heavily bandaged and she looked miserable .Pansy Parkinson was watching her beadily .Well lets check how yehve done !said Hagrid .Count yer coins !An theres no point tryin ter steal any Goyle he added his beetleblack eyes narrowed .Its leprechaun gold .Vanishes after a few hours .Goyle emptied his pockets looking extremely sulky .It turned out that Rons niffler had been most successful so Hagrid gave him an enormous slab of Honeydukes chocolate for a prize .The bell rang across the grounds for lunch the rest of the class set off back to the castle but Harry Ron and Hermione stayed behind to help Hagrid put the nifflers back in their boxes .Harry noticed Madame Maxime watching them out of her carriage window .What yeh done ter your hands Hermione ?said Hagrid looking concerned .Hermione told him about the hate mail she had received that morning and the envelope full of bubotuber pus .aah don worry said Hagrid gently looking down at her .I got some o those letters an all after Rita Skeeter wrote abou me mum . ‘Yehre a monster an yeh should be put down . ‘Yer mother killed innocent people an if you had any decency youd jump in a lake .No !said Hermione looking shocked .Yeah said Hagrid heaving the niffler crates over by his cabin wall .Theyre jus nutters Hermione .Don open em if yeh get any more .Chuck em straigh in the fire .You missed a really good lesson Harry told Hermione as they headed back toward the castle .Theyre good nifflers arent they Ron ?Ron however was frowning at the chocolate Hagrid had given him .He looked thoroughly put out about something .Whats the matter ?said Harry .Wrong flavor ?No said Ron shortly .Why didnt you tell me about the gold ?What gold ?said Harry .The gold I gave you at the Quidditch World Cup said Ron .The leprechaun gold I gave you for my Omnioculars .In the Top Box .Why didnt you tell me it disappeared ?Harry had to think for a moment before he realized what Ron was talking about .Oh .he said the memory coming back to him at last .I dunno .I never noticed it had gone .I was more worried about my wand wasnt I ?They climbed the steps into the entrance hall and went into the Great Hall for lunch .Must be nice Ron said abruptly when they had sat down and started serving themselves roast beef and Yorkshire puddings .To have so much money you dont notice if a pocketful of Galleons goes missing .Listen I had other stuff on my mind that night !said Harry impatiently .We all did remember ?I didnt know leprechaun gold vanishes Ron muttered .I thought I was paying you back .You shouldnt ve given me that Chudley Cannon hat for Christmas .Forget it all right ?said Harry .Ron speared a roast potato on the end of his fork glaring at it .Then he said I hate being poor .Harry and Hermione looked at each other .Neither of them really knew what to say .Its rubbish said Ron still glaring down at his potato .I dont blame Fred and George for trying to make some extra money .Wish I could .Wish I had a niffler .Well we know what to get you next Christmas said Hermione brightly .Then when Ron continued to look gloomy she said Come on Ron it could be worse .At least your fingers arent full of pus .Hermione was having a lot of difficulty managing her knife and fork her fingers were so stiff and swollen .I hate that Skeeter woman !she burst out savagely .Ill get her back for this if its the last thing I do !Hate mail continued to arrive for Hermione over the following week and although she followed Hagrids advice and stopped opening it several of her ill wishers sent Howlers which exploded at the Gryffindor table and shrieked insults at her for the whole Hall to hear .Even those people who didnt read Witch Weekly knew all about the supposed Harry KrumHermione triangle now .Harry was getting sick of telling people that Hermione wasnt his girlfriend .Itll die down though he told Hermione if we just ignore it .People got bored with that stuff she wrote about me last time I want to know how shes listening into private conversations when shes supposed to be banned from the grounds !said Hermione angrily .Hermione hung back in their next Defense Against the Dark Arts lesson to ask Professor Moody something .The rest of the class was very eager to leave Moody had given them such a rigorous test of hexdeflection that many of them were nursing small injuries .Harry had such a bad case of Twitchy Ears he had to hold his hands clamped over them as he walked away from the class .Well Ritas definitely not using an Invisibility Cloak !Hermione panted five minutes later catching up with Harry and Ron in the entrance hall and pulling Harrys hand away from one of his wiggling ears so that he could hear her .Moody says he didnt see her anywhere near the judges table at the second task or anywhere near the lake !Hermione is there any point in telling you to drop this ?said Ron .No !said Hermione stubbornly .I want to know how she heard me talking to Viktor !And how she found out about Hagrids mum !Maybe she had you bugged said Harry .Bugged ?said Ron blankly .What .put fleas on her or something ?Harry started explaining about hidden microphones and recording equipment .Ron was fascinated but Hermione interrupted them .Arent you two ever going to read Hogwarts A History ?Whats the point ?said Ron .You know it by heart we can just ask you .All those substitutes for magic Muggles use electricity computers and radar and all those things they all go haywire around Hogwarts theres too much magic in the air .No Ritas using magic to eavesdrop she must be .If I could just find out what it is .ooh if its illegal Ill have her .Havent we got enough to worry about ?Ron asked her .Do we have to start a vendetta against Rita Skeeter as well ?Im not asking you to help !Hermione snapped .Ill do it on my own !She marched back up the marble staircase without a backward glance .Harry was quite sure she was going to the library .Whats the betting she comes back with a box of Hate Rita Skeeter badges ?said Ron .Hermione however did not ask Harry and Ron to help her pursue vengeance against Rita Skeeter for which they were both grateful because their workload was mounting ever higher in the days before the Easter holidays .Harry frankly marveled at the fact that Hermione could research magical methods of eavesdropping as well as everything else they had to do .He was working flatout just to get through all their homework though he made a point of sending regular food packages up to the cave in the mountain for Sirius after last summer Harry had not forgotten what it felt like to be continually hungry .He enclosed notes to Sirius telling him that nothing out of the ordinary had happened and that they were still waiting for an answer from Percy .Hedwig didnt return until the end of the Easter holidays .Percys letter was enclosed in a package of Easter eggs that Mrs Weasley had sent .Both Harrys and Rons were the size of dragon eggs and full of homemade toffee .Hermiones however was smaller than a chicken egg .Her face fell when she saw it .Your mum doesnt read Witch Weekly by any chance does she Ron ?she asked quietly .Yeah said Ron whose mouth was full of toffee .Gets it for the recipes .Hermione looked sadly at her tiny egg .Dont you want to see what Percys written ?Harry asked her hastily .Percys letter was short and irritated .As I am constantly telling the Daily Prophet Mr Crouch is taking a welldeserved break .He is sending in regular owls with instructions .No I havent actually seen him but I think I can be trusted to know my own superiors handwriting .I have quite enough to do at the moment without trying to quash these ridiculous rumors .Please dont bother me again unless its something important .Happy Easter .The start of the summer term would normally have meant that Harry was training hard for the last Quidditch match of the season .This year however it was the third and final task in the Triwizard Tournament for which he needed to prepare but he still didnt know what he would have to do .Finally in the last week of May Professor McGonagall held him back in Transfiguration .You are to go down to the Quidditch field tonight at nine oclock Potter she told him .Mr Bagman will be there to tell the champions about the third task .So at half past eight that night Harry left Ron and Hermione in Gryffindor Tower and went downstairs .As he crossed the entrance hall Cedric came up from the Hufflepuff common room .What dyou reckon its going to be ?he asked Harry as they went together down the stone steps out into the cloudy night .Fleur keeps going on about underground tunnels she reckons weve got to find treasure .That wouldnt be too bad said Harry thinking that he would simply ask Hagrid for a niffler to do the job for him .They walked down the dark lawn to the Quidditch stadium turned through a gap in the stands and walked out onto the field .Whatve they done to it ?Cedric said indignantly stopping dead .The Quidditch field was no longer smooth and flat .It looked as though somebody had been building long low walls all over it that twisted and crisscrossed in every direction .Theyre hedges !said Harry bending to examine the nearest one .Hello there !called a cheery voice .Ludo Bagman was standing in the middle of the field with Krum and Fleur .Harry and Cedric made their way toward them climbing over the hedges .Fleur beamed at Harry as he came nearer .Her attitude toward him had changed completely since he had saved her sister from the lake .Well what dyou think ?said Bagman happily as Harry and Cedric climbed over the last hedge .Growing nicely arent they ?Give them a month and Hagridll have them twenty feet high .Dont worry he added grinning spotting the lessthanhappy expressions on Harrys and Cedrics faces youll have your Quidditch field back to normal once the task is over !Now I imagine you can guess what were making here ?No one spoke for a moment .Then Maze grunted Krum .Thats right !said Bagman .A maze .The third tasks really very straightforward .The Triwizard Cup will be placed in the center of the maze .The first champion to touch it will receive full marks .We seemply ave to get through the maze ?said Fleur .There will be obstacles said Bagman happily bouncing on the balls of his feet .Hagrid is providing a number of creatures .then there will be spells that must be broken .all that sort of thing you know .Now the champions who are leading on points will get a head start into the maze .Bagman grinned at Harry and Cedric .Then Mr Krum will enter .then Miss Delacour .But you 11 all be in with a fighting chance depending how well you get past the obstacles .Should be fun eh ?Harry who knew only too well the kind of creatures that Hagrid was likely to provide for an event like this thought it was unlikely to be any fun at all .However he nodded politely like the other champions .Very well .if you havent got any questions well go back up to the castle shall we its a bit chilly .Bagman hurried alongside Harry as they began to wend their way out of the growing maze .Harry had the feeling that Bagman was going to start offering to help him again but just then Krum tapped Harry on the shoulder .Could I haff a vord ?Yeah all right said Harry slightly surprised .Vill you valk vith me ?Okay said Harry curiously .Bagman looked slightly perturbed .Ill wait for you Harry shall I ?No its okay Mr Bagman said Harry suppressing a smile I think I can find the castle on my own thanks .Harry and Krum left the stadium together but Krum did not set a course for the Durmstrang ship .Instead he walked toward the forest .What re we going this way for ?said Harry as they passed Hagrids cabin and the illuminated Beauxbatons carriage .Dont vant to be overheard said Krum shortly .When at last they had reached a quiet stretch of ground a short way from the Beauxbatons horses paddock Krum stopped in the shade of the trees and turned to face Harry .I vant to know he said glowering vot there is between you and Hermyownninny .Harry who from Krums secretive manner had expected something much more serious than this stared up at Krum in amazement .Nothing he said .But Krum glowered at him and Harry somehow struck anew by how tall Krum was elaborated .Were friends .Shes not my girlfriend and she never has been .Its just that Skeeter woman making things up .Hermyownninny talks about you very often said Krum looking suspiciously at Harry .Yeah said Harry because were friends .He couldnt quite believe he was having this conversation with Viktor Krum the famous International Quidditch player .It was as though the eighteenyearold Krum thought he Harry was an equal a real rival You haff never .you haff not .No said Harry very firmly .Krum looked slightly happier .He stared at Harry for a few seconds then said You fly very veil .I vos votching at the first task .Thanks said Harry grinning broadly and suddenly feeling much taller himself .I saw you at the Quidditch World Cup .The Wronski Feint you really But something moved behind Krum in the trees and Harry who had some experience of the sort of thing that lurked in the forest instinctively grabbed Krums arm and pulled him around .Vot is it ?Harry shook his head staring at the place where hed seen movement .He slipped his hand inside his robes reaching for his wand .Suddenly a man staggered out from behind a tall oak .For a moment Harry didnt recognize him .then he realized it was Mr Crouch .He looked as though he had been traveling for days .The knees of his robes were ripped and bloody his face scratched he was unshaven and gray with exhaustion .His neat hair and mustache were both in need of a wash and a trim .His strange appearance however was nothing to the way he was behaving .Muttering and gesticulating Mr Crouch appeared to be talking to someone that he alone could see .He reminded Harry vividly of an old tramp he had seen once when out shopping with the Dursleys .That man too had been conversing wildly with thin air Aunt Petunia had seized Dudleys hand and pulled him across the road to avoid him Uncle Vernon had then treated the family to a long rant about what he would like to do with beggars and vagrants .Vosnt he a judge ?said Krum staring at Mr Crouch .Isnt he vith your Ministry ?Harry nodded hesitated for a moment then walked slowly toward Mr Crouch who did not look at him but continued to talk to a nearby tree . .and when youve done that Weatherby send an owl to Dumbledore confirming the number of Durmstrang students who will be attending the tournament Karkaroff has just sent word there will be twelve .Mr Crouch ?said Harry cautiously . .and then send another owl to Madame Maxime because she might want to up the number of students shes bringing now Karkaroffs made it a round dozen .do that Weatherby will you ?Will you ?Will .Mr Crouchs eyes were bulging .He stood staring at the tree muttering soundlessly at it .Then he staggered sideways and fell to his knees .Mr Crouch ?Harry said loudly .Are you all right ?Crouchs eyes were rolling in his head .Harry looked around at Krum who had followed him into the trees and was looking down at Crouch in alarm .Vot is wrong with him ?No idea Harry muttered .Listen youd better go and get someone Dumbledore !gasped Mr Crouch .He reached out and seized a handful of Harrys robes dragging him closer though his eyes were staring over Harrys head .I need .see .Dumbledore .Okay said Harry if you get up Mr Crouch we can go up to the Ive done .stupid .thing .Mr Crouch breathed .He looked utterly mad .His eyes were rolling and bulging and a trickle of spittle was sliding down his chin .Every word he spoke seemed to cost him a terrible effort .Must .tell .Dumbledore .Get up Mr Crouch said Harry loudly and clearly .Get up Ill take you to Dumbledore !Mr Crouchs eyes rolled forward onto Harry .Who .you ?he whispered .Im a student at the school said Harry looking around at Krum for some help but Krum was hanging back looking extremely nervous .Youre not .his ?whispered Crouch his mouth sagging .No said Harry without the faintest idea what Crouch was talking about .Dumbledore s ?Thats right said Harry .Crouch was pulling him closer Harry tried to loosen Crouchs grip on his robes but it was too powerful .Warn .Dumbledore .Ill get Dumbledore if you let go of me said Harry .Just let go Mr Crouch and Ill get him .Thank you Weatherby and when you have done that I would like a cup of tea .My wife and son will be arriving shortly we are attending a concert tonight with Mr and Mrs Fudge .Crouch was now talking fluently to a tree again and seemed completely unaware that Harry was there which surprised Harry so much he didnt notice that Crouch had released him .Yes my son has recently gained twelve O .W .L .s most satisfactory yes thank you yes very proud indeed .Now if you could bring me that memo from the Andorran Minister of Magic I think I will have time to draft a response .You stay here with him !Harry said to Krum .Ill get Dumbledore Ill be quicker I know where his office is He is mad said Krum doubtfully staring down at Crouch who was still gabbling to the tree apparently convinced it was Percy .Just stay with him said Harry starting to get up but his movement seemed to trigger another abrupt change in Mr Crouch who seized him hard around the knees and pulled Harry back to the ground .Dont .leave .me !he whispered his eyes bulging again .I .escaped .must warn .must tell .see Dumbledore .my fault .all my fault .Bertha .dead .all my fault .my son .my fault .tell Dumbledore .Harry Potter .the Dark Lord .stronger .Harry Potter .Ill get Dumbledore if you let me go Mr Crouch !said Harry .He looked furiously around at Krum .Help me will you ?Looking extremely apprehensive Krum moved forward and squatted down next to Mr Crouch .Just keep him here said Harry pulling himself free of Mr Crouch .Ill be back with Dumbledore .Hurry vont you ?Krum called after him as Harry sprinted away from the forest and up through the dark grounds .They were deserted Bagman Cedric and Fleur had disappeared .Harry tore up the stone steps through the oak front doors and off up the marble staircase toward the second floor .Five minutes later he was hurtling toward a stone gargoyle standing halfway along an empty corridor .Sher sherbet lemon !he panted at it .This was the password to the hidden staircase to Dumbledore s office or at least it had been two years ago .The password had evidently changed however for the stone gargoyle did not spring to life and jump aside but stood frozen glaring at Harry malevolently .Move !Harry shouted at it .Cmon !But nothing at Hogwarts had ever moved just because he shouted at it he knew it was no good .He looked up and down the dark corridor .Perhaps Dumbledore was in the staffroom ?He started running as fast as he could toward the staircase POTTER !Harry skidded to a halt and looked around .Snape had just emerged from the hidden staircase behind the stone gargoyle .The wall was sliding shut behind him even as he beckoned Harry back toward him .What are you doing here Potter ?I need to see Professor Dumbledore !said Harry running back up the corridor and skidding to a standstill in front of Snape instead .Its Mr Crouch .hes just turned up .hes in the forest .hes asking What is this rubbish ?said Snape his black eyes glittering .What are you talking about ?Mr Crouch !Harry shouted .From the Ministry !Hes ill or something hes in the forest he wants to see Dumbledore !Just give me the password up to The headmaster is busy Potter said Snape his thin mouth curling into an unpleasant smile .Ive got to tell Dumbledore !Harry yelled .Didnt you hear me Potter ?Harry could tell Snape was thoroughly enjoying himself denying Harry the thing he wanted when he was so panicky .Look said Harry angrily Crouch isnt right hes hes out of his mind he says he wants to warn The stone wall behind Snape slid open .Dumbledore was standing there wearing long green robes and a mildly curious expression .Is there a problem ?he said looking between Harry and Snape .Professor !Harry said sidestepping Snape before Snape could speak Mr Crouch is here hes down in the forest he wants to speak to you !Harry expected Dumbledore to ask questions but to his relief Dumbledore did nothing of the sort .Lead the way he said promptly and he swept off along the corridor behind Harry leaving Snape standing next to the gargoyle and looking twice as ugly .What did Mr Crouch say Harry ?said Dumbledore as they walked swiftly down the marble staircase .Said he wants to warn you .said hes done something terrible .he mentioned his son .and Bertha Jorkins .and and Voldemort .something about Voldemort getting stronger .Indeed said Dumbledore and he quickened his pace as they hurried out into the pitchdarkness .Hes not acting normally Harry said hurrying along beside Dumbledore .He doesnt seem to know where he is .He keeps talking like he thinks Percy Weasleys there and then he changes and says he needs to see you .I left him with Viktor Krum .You did ?said Dumbledore sharply and he began to take longer strides still so that Harry was running to keep up .Do you know if anybody else saw Mr Crouch ?No said Harry .Krum and I were talking Mr Bagman had just finished telling us about the third task we stayed behind and then we saw Mr Crouch coming out of the forest Where are they ?said Dumbledore as the Beauxbatons carriage emerged from the darkness .Over here said Harry moving in front of Dumbledore leading the way through the trees .He couldnt hear Crouchs voice anymore but he knew where he was going it hadnt been much past the Beauxbatons carriage .somewhere around here .Viktor ?Harry shouted .No one answered .They were here Harry said to Dumbledore .They were definitely somewhere around here .Lumos Dumbledore said lighting his wand and holding it up .Its narrow beam traveled from black trunk to black trunk illuminating the ground .And then it fell upon a pair of feet .Harry and Dumbledore hurried forward .Krum was sprawled on the forest floor .He seemed to be unconscious .There was no sign at all of Mr Crouch .Dumbledore bent over Krum and gently lifted one of his eyelids .Stunned he said softly .His halfmoon glasses glittered in the wandlight as he peered around at the surrounding trees .Should I go and get someone ?said Harry .Madam Pomfrey ?No said Dumbledore swiftly .Stay here .He raised his wand into the air and pointed it in the direction of Hagrid s cabin .Harry saw something silvery dart out of it and streak away through the trees like a ghostly bird .Then Dumbledore bent over Krum again pointed his wand at him and muttered Renneruate .Krum opened his eyes .He looked dazed .When he saw Dumbledore he tried to sit up but Dumbledore put a hand on his shoulder and made him lie still .He attacked me !Krum muttered putting a hand up to his head .The old madman attacked me !I vos looking around to see vare Potter had gone and he attacked from behind !Lie still for a moment Dumbledore said .The sound of thunderous footfalls reached them and Hagrid came panting into sight with Fang at his heels .He was carrying his crossbow .Professor Dumbledore !he said his eyes widening .Harry what the ?Hagrid I need you to fetch Professor Karkaroff said Dumbledore .His student has been attacked .When youve done that kindly alert Professor Moody No need Dumbledore said a wheezy growl .Im here .Moody was limping toward them leaning on his staff his wand lit .Damn leg he said furiously .Wouldve been here quicker .whats happened ?Snape said something about Crouch Crouch ?said Hagrid blankly .Karkaroff please Hagrid !said Dumbledore sharply .Oh yeah .right yare Professor .said Hagrid and he turned and disappeared into the dark trees Fang trotting after him .I dont know where Barty Crouch is Dumbledore told Moody but it is essential that we find him .Im onto it growled Moody and he pulled out his wand and limped off into the forest .Neither Dumbledore nor Harry spoke again until they heard the unmistakable sounds of Hagrid and Fang returning .Karkaroff was hurrying along behind them .He was wearing his sleek silver furs and he looked pale and agitated .What is this ?he cried when he saw Krum on the ground and Dumbledore and Harry beside him .Whats going on ?I vos attacked !said Krum sitting up now and rubbing his head .Mr Crouch or votever his name Crouch attacked you ?Crouch attacked you ?The Triwizard judge ?Igor Dumbledore began but Karkaroff had drawn himself up clutching his furs around him looking livid .Treachery !he bellowed pointing at Dumbledore .It is a plot !You and your Ministry of Magic have lured me here under false pretenses Dumbledore !This is not an equal competition !First you sneak Potter into the tournament though he is underage !Now one of your Ministry friends attempts to put my champion out of action !I smell doubledealing and corruption in this whole affair and you Dumbledore you with your talk of closer international wizarding links of rebuilding old ties of forgetting old differences heres what I think of you !Karkaroff spat onto the ground at Dumbledores feet .In one swift movement Hagrid seized the front of Karkaroffs furs lifted him into the air and slammed him against a nearby tree .Apologize !Hagrid snarled as Karkaroff gasped for breath Hagrids massive fist at his throat his feet dangling in midair .Hagrid no Dumbledore shouted his eyes flashing .Hagrid removed the hand pinning Karkaroff to the tree and Karkaroff slid all the way down the trunk and slumped in a huddle at its roots a few twigs and leaves showered down upon his head .Kindly escort Harry back up to the castle Hagrid said Dumbledore sharply .Breathing heavily Hagrid gave Karkaroff a glowering look .Maybe Id better stay here Headmaster .You will take Harry back to school Hagrid Dumbledore repeated firmly .Take him right up to Gryffindor Tower .And Harry I want you to stay there .Anything you might want to do any owls you might want to send they can wait until morning do you understand me ?Er yes said Harry staring at him .How had Dumbledore known that at that very moment he had been thinking about sending Pigwidgeon straight to Sirius to tell him what had happened ?Ill leave Fang with yeh Headmaster Hagrid said staring menacingly at Karkaroff who was still sprawled at the foot of the tree tangled in furs and tree roots .Stay Fang .Cmon Harry .They marched in silence past the Beauxbatons carriage and up toward the castle .How dare he Hagrid growled as they strode past the lake .How dare he accuse Dumbledore .Like Dumbledore d do anythin like that .Like Dumbledore wanted you in the tournament in the firs place .Worried !I dunno when I seen Dumbledore more worried than hes bin lately .An you !Hagrid suddenly said angrily to Harry who looked up at him taken aback .What were yeh doin wanderin off with ruddy Krum ?Hes from Durmstrang Harry !Coulda jinxed yeh right there couldn he ?Hasn Moody taught yeh nothin ?Magine lettin him lure yeh off on yer own Krums all right !said Harry as they climbed the steps into the entrance hall .He wasnt trying to jinx me he just wanted to talk about Hermione Ill be havin a few words with her an all said Hagrid grimly stomping up the stairs .The less you lot ave ter do with these foreigners the happier yehll be .Yeh can trust any of em .You were getting on all right with Madame Maxime Harry said annoyed .Don you talk ter me abou her !said Hagrid and he looked quite frightening for a moment .Ive got her number now !Tryin ter get back in me good books tryin ter get me ter tell her whats cornin in the third task .Ha !You can trust any of em !Hagrid was in such a bad mood Harry was quite glad to say goodbye to him in front of the Fat Lady .He clambered through the portrait hole into the common room and hurried straight for the corner where Ron and Hermione were sitting to tell them what had happened .z ?THE DREAM It comes down to this said Hermione rubbing her forehead .Either Mr Crouch attacked Viktor or somebody else attacked both of them when Viktor wasnt looking .It mustve been Crouch said Ron at once .Thats why he was gone when Harry and Dumbledore got there .Hed done a runner .I dont think so said Harry shaking his head .He seemed really weak I dont reckon he was up to Disapparating or anything .You cant Disapparate on the Hogwarts grounds havent I told you enough times ?said Hermione .Okay .hows this for a theory said Ron excitedly .Krum attacked Crouch no wait for it and then Stunned himself !And Mr Crouch evaporated did he ?said Hermione coldly .Oh yeah .It was daybreak .Harry Ron and Hermione had crept out of their dormitories very early and hurried up to the Owlery together to send a note to Sirius .Now they were standing looking out at the misty grounds .All three of them were puffyeyed and pale because they had been talking late into the night about Mr Crouch .Just go through it again Harry said Hermione .What did Mr Crouch actually say ?Ive told you he wasnt making much sense said Harry .He said he wanted to warn Dumbledore about something .He definitely mentioned Bertha Jorkins and he seemed to think she was dead .He kept saying stuff was his fault .He mentioned his son .Well that was his fault said Hermione testily .He was out of his mind said Harry .Half the time he seemed to think his wife and son were still alive and he kept talking to Percy about work and giving him instructions .And .remind me what he said about YouKnow Who ?said Ron tentatively .Ive told you Harry repeated dully .He said hes getting stronger .There was a pause .Then Ron said in a falsely confident voice But he was out of his mind like you said so half of it was probably just raving .He was sanest when he was trying to talk about Voldemort said Harry and Ron winced at the sound of the name .He was having real trouble stringing two words together but that was when he seemed to know where he was and know what he wanted to do .He just kept saying he had to see Dumbledore .Harry turned away from the window and stared up into the rafters .The many perches were halfempty every now and then another owl would swoop in through one of the windows returning from its nights hunting with a mouse in its beak .If Snape hadnt held me up Harry said bitterly we mightve got there in time .The headmaster is busy Potter .whats this rubbish Potter ?Why couldnt he have just got out of the way ?Maybe he didnt want you to get there !said Ron quickly .Maybe hang on how fast dyou reckon he couldve gotten down to the forest ?Dyou reckon he couldve beaten you and Dumbledore there ?Not unless he can turn himself into a bat or something said Harry .Wouldnt put it past him Ron muttered .We need to see Professor Moody said Hermione .We need to find out whether he found Mr Crouch .If he had the Marauders Map on him it wouldve been easy said Harry .Unless Crouch was already outside the grounds said Ron because it only shows up to the boundaries doesnt Shh !said Hermione suddenly .Somebody was climbing the steps up to the Owlery .Harry could hear two voices arguing coming closer and closer .thats blackmail that is we could get into a lot of trouble for that weve tried being polite its time to play dirty like him .He wouldnt like the Ministry of Magic knowing what he did Im telling you if you put that in writing its blackmail !Yeah and you wont be complaining if we get a nice fat payoff will you ?The Owlery door banged open .Fred and George came over the threshold then froze at the sight of Harry Ron and Hermione .Whatre you doing here ?Ron and Fred said at the same time .Sending a letter said Harry and George in unison .What at this time ?said Hermione and Fred .Fred grinned .Fine we wont ask you what youre doing if you dont ask us he said .He was holding a sealed envelope in his hands .Harry glanced at it but Fred whether accidentally or on purpose shifted his hand so that the name on it was covered .Well dont let us hold you up Fred said making a mock bow and pointing at the door .Ron didnt move .Whore you blackmailing ?he said .The grin vanished from Freds face .Harry saw George half glance at Fred before smiling at Ron .Dont be stupid I was only joking he said easily .Didnt sound like that said Ron .Fred and George looked at each other .Then Fred said abruptly Ive told you before Ron keep your nose out if you like it the shape it is .Cant see why you would but Its my business if youre blackmailing someone said Ron .Georges right you could end up in serious trouble for that .Told you I was joking said George .He walked over to Fred pulled the letter out of his hands and began attaching it to the leg of the nearest barn owl .Youre starting to sound a bit like our dear older brother you are Ron .Carry on like this and youll be made a prefect .No I wont !said Ron hotly .George carried the barn owl over to the window and it took off .George turned around and grinned at Ron .Well stop telling people what to do then .See you later .He and Fred left the Owlery .Harry Ron and Hermione stared at one another .You dont think they know something about all this do you ?Hermione whispered .About Crouch and everything ?No said Harry .If it was something that serious theyd tell someone .Theyd tell Dumbledore .Ron however was looking uncomfortable .Whats the matter ?Hermione asked him .Well .said Ron slowly I dunno if they would .Theyre .theyre obsessed with making money lately I noticed it when I was hanging around with them when you know We werent talking .Harry finished the sentence for him .Yeah but blackmail .Its this joke shop idea theyve got said Ron .I thought they were only saying it to annoy Mum but they really mean it they want to start one .Theyve only got a year left at Hogwarts they keep going on about how its time to think about their future and Dad cant help them and they need gold to get started .Hermione was looking uncomfortable now .Yes but .they wouldnt do anything against the law to get gold .Wouldnt they ?said Ron looking skeptical .I dunno .they dont exactly mind breaking rules do they ?Yes but this is the law said Hermione looking scared .This isnt some silly school rule .Theyll get a lot more than detention for blackmail !Ron .maybe youd better tell Percy .Are you mad ?said Ron .Tell Percy ?Hed probably do a Crouch and turn them in .He stared at the window through which Fred and Georges owl had departed then said Come on lets get some breakfast .Dyou think its too early to go and see Professor Moody ?Hermione said as they went down the spiral staircase .Yes said Harry .Hed probably blast us through the door if we wake him at the crack of dawn hell think were trying to attack him while hes asleep .Lets give it till break .History of Magic had rarely gone so slowly .Harry kept checking Rons watch having finally discarded his own but Rons was moving so slowly he could have sworn it had stopped working too .All three of them were so tired they could happily have put their heads down on the desks and slept even Hermione wasnt taking her usual notes but was sitting with her head on her hand gazing at Professor Binns with her eyes out of focus .When the bell finally rang they hurried out into the corridors toward the Dark Arts classroom and found Professor Moody leaving it .He looked as tired as they felt .The eyelid of his normal eye was drooping giving his face an even more lopsided appearance than usual .Professor Moody ?Harry called as they made their way toward him through the crowd .Hello Potter growled Moody .His magical eye followed a couple of passing first years who sped up looking nervous it rolled into the back of Moodys head and watched them around the corner before he spoke again .Come in here .He stood back to let them into his empty classroom limped in after them and closed the door .Did you find him ?Harry asked without preamble .Mr Crouch ?No said Moody .He moved over to his desk sat down stretched out his wooden leg with a slight groan and pulled out his hip flask .Did you use the map ?Harry said .Of course said Moody taking a swig from his flask .Took a leaf out of your book Potter .Summoned it from my office into the forest .He wasnt anywhere on there .So he did Disapparate ?said Ron .You cant Disapparate on the grounds Ron said Hermione .There are other ways he could have disappeared arent there Professor ?Moodys magical eye quivered as it rested on Hermione .Youre another one who might think about a career as an Auror he told her .Mind works the right way Granger .Hermione flushed pink with pleasure .Well he wasnt invisible said Harry .The map shows invisible people .He mustve left the grounds then .But under his own steam ?said Hermione eagerly or because someone made him ?Yeah someone couldve couldve pulled him onto a broom and flown off with him couldnt they ?said Ron quickly looking hopefully at Moody as if he too wanted to be told he had the makings of an Auror .We cant rule out kidnap growled Moody .So said Ron dyou reckon hes somewhere in Hogsmeade ?Could be anywhere said Moody shaking his head .Only thing we know for sure is that hes not here .He yawned widely so that his scars stretched and his lopsided mouth revealed a number of missing teeth .Then he said Now Dumbledores told me you three fancy yourselves as investigators but theres nothing you can do for Crouch .The Ministryll be looking for him now Dumbledores notified them .Potter you just keep your mind on the third task .What ?said Harry .Oh yeah .He hadnt given the maze a single thought since hed left it with Krum the previous night .Should be right up your street this one said Moody looking up at Harry and scratching his scarred and stubbly chin .From what Dumbledores said youve managed to get through stuff like this plenty of times .Broke your way through a series of obstacles guarding the Sorcerers Stone in your first year didnt you ?We helped Ron said quickly .Me and Hermione helped .Moody grinned .Well help him practice for this one and Ill be very surprised if he doesnt win said Moody .In the meantime .constant vigilance Potter .Constant vigilance .He took another long draw from his hip flask and his magical eye swiveled onto the window .The topmost sail of the Durmstrang ship was visible through it .You two counseled Moody his normal eye on Ron and Hermione you stick close to Potter all right ?Im keeping an eye on things but all the same .you can never have too many eyes out . •k k k Sirius sent their owl back the very next morning .It fluttered down beside Harry at the same moment that a tawny owl landed in front of Hermione clutching a copy of the Daily Prophet in its beak .She took the newspaper scanned the first few pages said Ha !She hasnt got wind of Crouch !then joined Ron and Harry in reading what Sirius had to say on the mysterious events of the night before last .Harry what do you think you are playing at walking off into the forest with Viktor Krum ?I want you to swear by return owl that you are not going to go walking with anyone else at night .There is somebody highly dangerous at Hogwarts .It is clear to me that they wanted to stop Crouch from seeing Dumbledore and you were probably feet away from them in the dark .You could have been killed .Your name didnt get into the Goblet of Fire by accident .If someones trying to attack you theyre on their last chance .Stay close to Ron and Hermione do not leave Gryffindor Tower after hours and arm yourself for the third task .Practice Stunning and Disarming .A few hexes wouldnt go amiss either .Theres nothing you can do about Crouch .Keep your head down and look after yourself .Im waiting for your letter giving me your word you wont stray outof bounds again .Sirius Whos he to lecture me about being outofbounds ?said Harry in mild indignation as he folded up Siriuss letter and put it inside his robes .After all the stuff he did at school !Hes worried about you !said Hermione sharply .Just like Moody and Hagrid !So listen to them !No ones tried to attack me all year said Harry .No ones done anything to me at all Except put your name in the Goblet of Fire said Hermione .And they mustve done that for a reason Harry .Snuffles is right .Maybe theyve been biding their time .Maybe this is the task theyre going to get you .Look said Harry impatiently lets say Sirius is right and someone Stunned Krum to kidnap Crouch .Well they wouldve been in the trees near us wouldnt they ?But they waited till I was out of the way until they acted didnt they ?So it doesnt look like Im their target does it ?They couldnt have made it look like an accident if theyd murdered you in the forest !said Hermione .But if you die during a task They didnt care about attacking Krum did they ?said Harry .Why didnt they just polish me off at the same time ?They couldve made it look like Krum and I had a duel or something .Harry I dont understand it either said Hermione desperately .I just know there are a lot of odd things going on and I dont like it .Moodys right Sirius is right youve got to get in training for the third task straight away .And you make sure you write back to Sirius and promise him youre not going to go sneaking off alone again .The Hogwarts grounds never looked more inviting than when Harry had to stay indoors .For the next few days he spent all of his free time either in the library with Hermione and Ron looking up hexes or else in empty classrooms which they sneaked into to practice .Harry was concentrating on the Stunning Spell which he had never used before .The trouble was that practicing it involved certain sacrifices on Rons and Hermione s part .Cant we kidnap Mrs Norris ?Ron suggested on Monday lunchtime as he lay flat on his back in the middle of their Charms classroom having just been Stunned and reawoken by Harry for the fifth time in a row .Lets Stun her for a bit .Or you could use Dobby Harry I bet hed do anything to help you .Im not complaining or anything he got gingerly to his feet rubbing his backside but Im aching all over .Well you keep missing the cushions dont you !said Hermione impatiently rearranging the pile of cushions they had used for the Banishing Spell which Flitwick had left in a cabinet .Just try and fall backward !Once youre Stunned you cant aim too well Hermione !said Ron angrily .Why dont you take a turn ?Well I think Harrys got it now anyway said Hermione hastily .And we dont have to worry about Disarming because hes been able to do that for ages . .I think we ought to start on some of these hexes this evening .She looked down the list they had made in the library .I like the look of this one she said this Impediment Curse .Should slow down anything thats trying to attack you Harry .Well start with that one .The bell rang .They hastily shoved the cushions back into Flitwicks cupboard and slipped out of the classroom .See you at dinner !said Hermione and she set off for Arithmancy while Harry and Ron headed toward North Tower and Divination .Broad strips of dazzling gold sunlight fell across the corridor from the high windows .The sky outside was so brightly blue it looked as though it had been enameled .Its going to be boiling in Trelawneys room she never puts out that fire said Ron as they started up the staircase toward the silver ladder and the trapdoor .He was quite right .The dimly lit room was swelteringly hot .The fumes from the perfumed fire were heavier than ever .Harrys head swam as he made his way over to one of the curtained windows .While Professor Trelawney was looking the other way disentangling her shawl from a lamp he opened it an inch or so and settled back in his chintz armchair so that a soft breeze played across his face .It was extremely comfortable .My dears said Professor Trelawney sitting down in her winged armchair in front of the class and peering around at them all with her strangely enlarged eyes we have almost finished our work on planetary divination .Today however will be an excellent opportunity to examine the effects of Mars for he is placed most interestingly at the present time .If you will all look this way I will dim the lights .She waved her wand and the lamps went out .The fire was the only source of light now .Professor Trelawney bent down and lifted from under her chair a miniature model of the solar system contained within a glass dome .It was a beautiful thing each of the moons glimmered in place around the nine planets and the fiery sun all of them hanging in thin air beneath the glass .Harry watched lazily as Professor Trelawney began to point out the fascinating angle Mars was making to Neptune .The heavily perfumed fumes washed over him and the breeze from the window played across his face .He could hear an insect humming gently somewhere behind the curtain .His eyelids began to droop .He was riding on the back of an eagle owl soaring through the clear blue sky toward an old ivycovered house set high on a hillside .Lower and lower they flew the wind blowing pleasantly in Harrys face until they reached a dark and broken window in the upper story of the house and entered .Now they were flying along a gloomy passageway to a room at the very end .through the door they went into a dark room whose windows were boarded up .Harry had left the owls back .he was watching now as it fluttered across the room into a chair with its back to him .There were two dark shapes on the floor beside the chair .both of them were stirring .One was a huge snake .the other was a man .a short balding man a man with watery eyes and a pointed nose .he was wheezing and sobbing on the hearth rug .You are in luck Wormtail said a cold highpitched voice from the depths of the chair in which the owl had landed .You are very fortunate indeed .Your blunder has not ruined everything .He is dead .My Lord !gasped the man on the floor .My Lord I am .1 am so pleased .and so sorry .Nagini said the cold voice you are out of luck .1 will not be feeding Wormtail to you after all .but never mind never mind .there is still Harry Potter .The snake hissed .Harry could see its tongue fluttering .Now Wormtail said the cold voice perhaps one more little reminder why I will not tolerate another blunder from you .My Lord .no .I beg you .The tip of a wand emerged from around the back of the chair ft was pointing at Wormtail .Crucio said the cold voice .Wormtail screamed screamed as though every nerve in his body were on fire the screaming filled Harrys ears as the scar on his forehead seared with pain he was yelling too .Voldemort would hear him would know he was there .Harry !Harry Harry opened his eyes .He was lying on the floor of Professor Trelawneys room with his hands over his face .His scar was still burning so badly that his eyes were watering .The pain had been real .The whole class was standing around him and Ron was kneeling next to him looking terrified .You all right ?he said .Of course he isnt !said Professor Trelawney looking thoroughly excited .Her great eyes loomed over Harry gazing at him .What was it Potter ?A premonition ?An apparition ?What did you see ?Nothing Harry lied .He sat up .He could feel himself shaking .He couldnt stop himself from looking around into the shadows behind him Voldemorts voice had sounded so close .You were clutching your scar !said Professor Trelawney .You were rolling on the floor clutching your scar !Come now Potter I have experience in these matters !Harry looked up at her .I need to go to the hospital wing I think he said .Bad headache .My dear you were undoubtedly stimulated by the extraordinary clairvoyant vibrations of my room !said Professor Trelawney If you leave now you may lose the opportunity to see further than you have ever I dont want to see anything except a headache cure said Harry .He stood up .The class backed away .They all looked unnerved .See you later Harry muttered to Ron and he picked up his bag and headed for the trapdoor ignoring Professor Trelawney who was wearing an expression of great frustration as though she had just been denied a real treat .When Harry reached the bottom of her stepladder however he did not set off for the hospital wing .He had no intention whatsoever of going there .Sirius had told him what to do if his scar hurt him again and Harry was going to follow his advice He was going straight to Dumbledores office .He marched down the corridors thinking about what he had seen in the dream .it had been as vivid as the one that had awoken him on Privet Drive .He ran over the details in his mind trying to make sure he could remember them .He had heard Voldemort accusing Wormtail of making a blunder .but the owl had brought good news the blunder had been repaired somebody was dead .so Wormtail was not going to be fed to the snake .he Harry was going to be fed to it instead .Harry had walked right past the stone gargoyle guarding the entrance to Dumbledores office without noticing .He blinked looked around realized what he had done and retraced his steps stopping in front of it .Then he remembered that he didnt know the password .Sherbet lemon ?he tried tentatively .The gargoyle did not move .Okay said Harry staring at it Pear Drop .Er Licorice Wand .Fizzing Whizbee .Droobles Best Blowing Gum .Bertie Botts Every Flavor Beans .oh no he doesnt like them does he ? .oh just open cant you ?he said angrily .I really need to see him its urgent !The gargoyle remained immovable .Harry kicked it achieving nothing but an excruciating pain in his big toe .Chocolate Frog !he yelled angrily standing on one leg .Sugar Quill !Cockroach Cluster !The gargoyle sprang to life and jumped aside .Harry blinked .Cockroach Cluster ?he said amazed .I was only joking .He hurried through the gap in the walls and stepped onto the foot of a spiral stone staircase which moved slowly upward as the doors closed behind him taking him up to a polished oak door with a brass door knocker .He could hear voices from inside the office .He stepped off the moving staircase and hesitated listening .Dumbledore Im afraid I dont see the connection dont see it at all !It was the voice of the Minister of Magic Cornelius Fudge .Ludo says Berthas perfectly capable of getting herself lost .I agree we would have expected to have found her by now but all the same weve no evidence of foul play Dumbledore none at all .As for her disappearance being linked with Barty Crouchs !And what do you thinks happened to Barty Crouch Minister ?said Moodys gvoice .I see two possibilities Alastor said Fudge .Either Crouch has finally cracked more than likely Im sure youll agree given his personal history lost his mind and gone wandering off somewhere He wandered extremely quickly if that is the case Cornelius said Dumbledore calmly .Or else well .Fudge sounded embarrassed .Well Ill reserve judgment until after Ive seen the place where he was found but you say it was just past the Beauxbatons carriage ?Dumbledore you know what that woman is ?I consider her to be a very able headmistress and an excellent dancer said Dumbledore quietly .Dumbledore come !said Fudge angrily .Dont you think you might be prejudiced in her favor because of Hagrid ?They dont all turn out harmless if indeed you can call Hagrid harmless with that monster fixation hes got I no more suspect Madame Maxime than Hagrid said Dumbledore just as calmly .I think it possible that it is you who are prejudiced Cornelius .Can we wrap up this discussion ?growled Moody .Yes yes lets go down to the grounds then said Fudge impatiently .No its not that said Moody its just that Potter wants a word with you Dumbledore .Hes just outside the door .THE PENSIEVE The door of the office opened .Hello Potter said Moody .Come in then .Harry walked inside .He had been inside Dumbledores office once before it was a very beautiful circular room lined with pictures of previous headmasters and headmistresses of Hogwarts all of whom were fast asleep their chests rising and falling gently .Cornelius Fudge was standing beside Dumbledores desk wearing his usual pinstriped cloak and holding his limegreen bowler hat .Harry !said Fudge jovially moving forward .How are you ?Fine Harry lied .We were just talking about the night when Mr Crouch turned up on the grounds said Fudge .It was you who found him was it not ?Yes said Harry .Then feeling it was pointless to pretend that he hadnt overheard what they had been saying he added I didnt see Madame Maxime anywhere though and shed have a job hiding wouldnt she ?Dumbledore smiled at Harry behind Fudges back his eyes twinkling .Yes well said Fudge looking embarrassed were about to go for a short walk on the grounds Harry if youll excuse us .perhaps if you just go back to your class I wanted to talk to you Professor Harry said quickly looking at Dumbledore who gave him a swift searching look .Wait here for me Harry he said .Our examination of the grounds will not take long .They trooped out in silence past him and closed the door .After a minute or so Harry heard the clunks of Moodys wooden leg growing fainter in the corridor below .He looked around .Hello Fawkes he said .Fawkes Professor Dumbledores phoenix was standing on his golden perch beside the door .The size of a swan with magnificent scarletandgold plumage he swished his long tail and blinked benignly at Harry .Harry sat down in a chair in front of Dumbledores desk .For several minutes he sat and watched the old headmasters and headmistresses snoozing in their frames thinking about what he had just heard and running his fingers over his scar .It had stopped hurting now .He felt much calmer somehow now that he was in Dumbledores office knowing he would shortly be telling him about the dream .Harry looked up at the walls behind the desk .The patched and ragged Sorting Hat was standing on a shelf .A glass case next to it held a magnificent silver sword with large rubies set into the hilt which Harry recognized as the one he himself had pulled out of the Sorting Hat in his second year .The sword had once belonged to Godric Gryffindor founder of Harrys House .He was gazing at it remembering how it had come to his aid when he had thought all hope was lost when he noticed a patch of silvery light dancing and shimmering on the glass case .He looked around for the source of the light and saw a sliver of silverwhite shining brightly from within a black cabinet behind him whose door had not been closed properly .Harry hesitated glanced at Fawkes then got up walked across the office and pulled open the cabinet door .A shallow stone basin lay there with odd carvings around the edge runes and symbols that Harry did not recognize .The silvery light was coming from the basins contents which were like nothing Harry had ever seen before .He could not tell whether the substance was liquid or gas .It was a bright whitish silver and it was moving ceaselessly the surface of it became ruffled like water beneath wind and then like clouds separated and swirled smoothly .It looked like light made liquid or like wind made solid Harry couldnt make up his mind .He wanted to touch it to find out what it felt like but nearly four years experience of the magical world told him that sticking his hand into a bowl full of some unknown substance was a very stupid thing to do .He therefore pulled his wand out of the inside of his robes cast a nervous look around the office looked back at the contents of the basin and prodded them .The surface of the silvery stuff inside the basin began to swirl very fast .Harry bent closer his head right inside the cabinet .The silvery substance had become transparent it looked like glass .He looked down into it expecting to see the stone bottom of the basin and saw instead an enormous room below the surface of the mysterious substance a room into which he seemed to be looking through a circular window in the ceiling .The room was dimly lit he thought it might even be underground for there were no windows merely torches in brackets such as the ones that illuminated the walls of Hogwarts .Lowering his face so that his nose was a mere inch away from the glassy substance Harry saw that rows and rows of witches and wizards were seated around every wall on what seemed to be benches rising in levels .An empty chair stood in the very center of the room .There was something about the chair that gave Harry an ominous feeling .Chains encircled the arms of it as though its occupants were usually tied to it .Where was this place ?It surely wasnt Hogwarts he had never seen a room like that here in the castle .Moreover the crowd in the mysterious room at the bottom of the basin was comprised of adults and Harry knew there were not nearly that many teachers at Hogwarts .They seemed he thought to be waiting for something even though he could only see the tops of their hats all of their faces seemed to be pointing in one direction and none of them were talking to one another .The basin being circular and the room he was observing square Harry could not make out what was going on in the corners of it .He leaned even closer tilting his head trying to see .The tip of his nose touched the strange substance into which he was staring .Dumbledores office gave an almighty lurch Harry was thrown forward and pitched headfirst into the substance inside the basin But his head did not hit the stone bottom .He was falling through something icycold and black it was like being sucked into a dark whirlpool And suddenly Harry found himself sitting on a bench at the end of the room inside the basin a bench raised high above the others .He looked up at the high stone ceiling expecting to see the circular window through which he had just been staring but there was nothing there but dark solid stone .Breathing hard and fast Harry looked around him .Not one of the witches and wizards in the room and there were at least two hundred of them was looking at him .Not one of them seemed to have noticed that a fourteenyear old boy had just dropped from the ceiling into their midst .Harry turned to the wizard next to him on the bench and uttered a loud cry of surprise that reverberated around the silent room .He was sitting right next to Albus Dumbledore .Professor !Harry said in a kind of strangled whisper .Im sorry I didnt mean to I was just looking at that basin in your cabinet I where are we ?But Dumbledore didnt move or speak .He ignored Harry completely .Like every other wizard on the benches he was staring into the far corner of the room where there was a door .Harry gazed nonplussed at Dumbledore then around at the silently watchful crowd then back at Dumbledore .And then it dawned on him .Once before Harry had found himself somewhere that nobody could see or hear him .That time he had fallen through a page in an enchanted diary right into somebody elses memory .and unless he was very much mistaken something of the sort had happened again .Harry raised his right hand hesitated and then waved it energetically in front of Dumbledore s face .Dumbledore did not blink look around at Harry or indeed move at all .And that in Harrys opinion settled the matter .Dumbledore wouldnt ignore him like that .He was inside a memory and this was not the presentday Dumbledore .Yet it couldnt be that long ago .the Dumbledore sitting next to him now was silverhaired just like the presentday Dumbledore .But what was this place ?What were all these wizards waiting for ?Harry looked around more carefully .The room as he had suspected when observing it from above was almost certainly underground more of a dungeon than a room he thought .There was a bleak and forbidding air about the place there were no pictures on the walls no decorations at all just these serried rows of benches rising in levels all around the room all positioned so that they had a clear view of that chair with the chains on its arms .Before Harry could reach any conclusions about the place in which they were he heard footsteps .The door in the corner of the dungeon opened and three people entered or at least one man flanked by two dementors .Harrys insides went cold .The dementors tall hooded creatures whose faces were concealed were gliding slowly toward the chair in the center of the room each grasping one of the mans arms with their dead and rottenlooking hands .The man between them looked as though he was about to faint and Harry couldnt blame him .he knew the dementors could not touch him inside a memory but he remembered their power only too well .The watching crowd recoiled slightly as the dementors placed the man in the chained chair and glided back out of the room .The door swung shut behind them .Harry looked down at the man now sitting in the chair and saw that it was Karkaroff .Unlike Dumbledore Karkaroff looked much younger his hair and goatee were black .He was not dressed in sleek furs but in thin and ragged robes .He was shaking .Even as Harry watched the chains on the arms of the chair glowed suddenly gold and snaked their way up Karkaroffs arms binding him there .Igor Karkaroff said a curt voice to Harrys left .Harry looked around and saw Mr Crouch standing up in the middle of the bench beside him .Crouchs hair was dark his face was much less lined he looked fit and alert .You have been brought from Azkaban to present evidence to the Ministry of Magic .You have given us to understand that you have important information for us .Karkaroff straightened himself as best he could tightly bound to the chair .I have sir he said and although his voice was very scared Harry could still hear the familiar unctuous note in it .I wish to be of use to the Ministry .I wish to help .I I know that the Ministry is trying to to round up the last of the Dark Lords supporters .I am eager to assist in any way I can .There was a murmur around the benches .Some of the wizards and witches were surveying Karkaroff with interest others with pronounced mistrust .Then Harry heard quite distinctly from Dumbledores other side a familiar gvoice saying Filth .Harry leaned forward so that he could see past Dumbledore .MadEye Moody was sitting there except that there was a very noticeable difference in his appearance .He did not have his magical eye but two normal ones .Both were looking down upon Karkaroff and both were narrowed in intense dislike .Crouch is going to let him out Moody breathed quietly to Dumbledore .Hes done a deal with him .Took me six months to track him down and Crouch is going to let him go if hes got enough new names .Lets hear his information I say and throw him straight back to the dementors .Dumbledore made a small noise of dissent through his long crooked nose .Ah I was forgetting .you dont like the dementors do you Albus ?said Moody with a sardonic smile .No said Dumbledore calmly Im afraid I dont .I have long felt the Ministry is wrong to ally itself with such creatures .But for filth like this .Moody said softly .You say you have names for us Karkaroff said Mr Crouch .Let us hear them please .You must understand said Karkaroff hurriedly that HeWhoMustNotBeNamed operated always in the greatest secrecy .He preferred that we I mean to say his supporters and I regret now very deeply that I ever counted myself among them Get on with it sneered Moody .we never knew the names of every one of our fellows He alone knew exactly who we all were Which was a wise move wasnt it as it prevented someone like you Karkaroff from turning all of them in muttered Moody .Yet you say you have some names for us ?said Mr Crouch .I I do said Karkaroff breathlessly .And these were important supporters mark you .People I saw with my own eyes doing his bidding .I give this information as a sign that I fully and totally renounce him and am filled with a remorse so deep I can barely These names are ?said Mr Crouch sharply .Karkaroff drew a deep breath .There was Antonin Dolohov he said .I I saw him torture countless Muggles and and nonsupporters of the Dark Lord .And helped him do it murmured Moody .We have already apprehended Dolohov said Crouch .He was caught shortly after yourself .Indeed ?said Karkaroff his eyes widening .I I am delighted to hear it !But he didnt look it .Harry could tell that this news had come as a real blow to him .One of his names was worthless .Any others ?said Crouch coldly .Why yes .there was Rosier said Karkaroff hurriedly .Evan Rosier .Rosier is dead said Crouch .He was caught shortly after you were too .He preferred to fight rather than come quietly and was killed in the struggle .Took a bit of me with him though whispered Moody to Harrys right .Harry looked around at him once more and saw him indicating the large chunk out of his nose to Dumbledore .No no more than Rosier deserved !said Karkaroff a real note of panic in his voice now .Harry could see that he was starting to worry that none of his information would be of any use to the Ministry .Karkaroffs eyes darted toward the door in the corner behind which the dementors undoubtedly still stood waiting .Any more ?said Crouch .Yes !said Karkaroff .There was Travers he helped murder the McKinnons !Mulciber he specialized in the Imperius Curse forced countless people to do horrific things !Rookwood who was a spy and passed HeWhoMustNotBeNamed useful information from inside the Ministry itself !Harry could tell that this time Karkaroff had struck gold .The watching crowd was all murmuring together .Rookwood ?said Mr Crouch nodding to a witch sitting in front of him who began scribbling upon her piece of parchment .Augustus Rookwood of the Department of Mysteries ?The very same said Karkaroff eagerly .I believe he used a network of wellplaced wizards both inside the Ministry and out to collect information But Travers and Mulciber we have said Mr Crouch .Very well Karkaroff if that is all you will be returned to Azkaban while we decide Not yet !cried Karkaroff looking quite desperate .Wait I have more !Harry could see him sweating in the torchlight his white skin contrasting strongly with the black of his hair and beard .Snape !he shouted .Severus Snape !Snape has been cleared by this council said Crouch disdainfully .He has been vouched for by Albus Dumbledore .No !shouted Karkaroff straining at the chains that bound him to the chair .I assure you !Severus Snape is a Death Eater !Dumbledore had gotten to his feet .I have given evidence already on this matter he said calmly .Severus Snape was indeed a Death Eater .However he rejoined our side before Lord Voldemorts downfall and turned spy for us at great personal risk .He is now no more a Death Eater than I am .Harry turned to look at MadEye Moody .He was wearing a look of deep skepticism behind Dumbledore s back .Very well Karkaroff Crouch said coldly you have been of assistance .I shall review your case .You will return to Azkaban in the meantime .Mr Crouchs voice faded .Harry looked around the dungeon was dissolving as though it were made of smoke everything was fading he could see only his own body all else was swirling darkness .And then the dungeon returned .Harry was sitting in a different seat still on the highest bench but now to the left side of Mr Crouch .The atmosphere seemed quite different relaxed even cheerful .The witches and wizards all around the walls were talking to one another almost as though they were at some sort of sporting event .Harry noticed a witch halfway up the rows of benches opposite .She had short blonde hair was wearing magenta robes and was sucking the end of an acidgreen quill .It was unmistakably a younger Rita Skeeter .Harry looked around Dumbledore was sitting beside him again wearing different robes .Mr Crouch looked more tired and somehow fiercer gaunter .Harry understood .It was a different memory a different day .a different trial .The door in the corner opened and Ludo Bagman walked into the room .This was not however a Ludo Bagman gone to seed but a Ludo Bagman who was clearly at the height of his Quidditchplaying fitness .His nose wasnt broken now he was tall and lean and muscular .Bagman looked nervous as he sat down in the chained chair but it did not bind him there as it had bound Karkaroff and Bagman perhaps taking heart from this glanced around at the watching crowd waved at a couple of them and managed a small smile .Ludo Bagman you have been brought here in front of the Council of Magical Law to answer charges relating to the activities of the Death Eaters said Mr Crouch .We have heard the evidence against you and are about to reach our verdict .Do you have anything to add to your testimony before we pronounce judgment ?Harry couldnt believe his ears .Ludo Bagman a Death Eater ?Only said Bagman smiling awkwardly well I know Ive been a bit of an idiot One or two wizards and witches in the surrounding seats smiled indulgently .Mr Crouch did not appear to share their feelings .He was staring down at Ludo Bagman with an expression of the utmost severity and dislike .You never spoke a truer word boy someone muttered dryly to Dumbledore behind Harry .He looked around and saw Moody sitting there again .If I didnt know hed always been dim Id have said some of those Bludgers had permanently affected his brain .Ludovic Bagman you were caught passing information to Lord Voldemorts supporters said Mr Crouch .For this I suggest a term of imprisonment in Azkaban lasting no less than But there was an angry outcry from the surrounding benches .Several of the witches and wizards around the walls stood up shaking their heads and even their fists at Mr Crouch .But Ive told you I had no idea !Bagman called earnestly over the crowds babble his round blue eyes widening .None at all !Old Rookwood was a friend of my dads .never crossed my mind he was in with YouKnowWho !I thought I was collecting information for our side !And Rookwood kept talking about getting me a job in the Ministry later on .once my Quidditch days are over you know .I mean I cant keep getting hit by Bludgers for the rest of my life can I ?There were titters from the crowd .It will be put to the vote said Mr Crouch coldly .He turned to the righthand side of the dungeon .The jury will please raise their hands .those in favor of imprisonment .Harry looked toward the righthand side of the dungeon .Not one person raised their hand .Many of the witches and wizards around the walls began to clap .One of the witches on the jury stood up .Yes ?barked Crouch .Wed just like to congratulate Mr Bagman on his splendid performance for England in the Quidditch match against Turkey last Saturday the witch said breathlessly .Mr Crouch looked furious .The dungeon was ringing with applause now .Bagman got to his feet and bowed beaming .Despicable Mr Crouch spat at Dumbledore sitting down as Bagman walked out of the dungeon .Rookwood get him a job indeed .The day Ludo Bagman joins us will be a sad day indeed for the Ministry .And the dungeon dissolved again .When it had returned Harry looked around .He and Dumbledore were still sitting beside Mr Crouch but the atmosphere could not have been more different .There was total silence broken only by the dry sobs of a frail wispylooking witch in the seat next to Mr Crouch .She was clutching a handkerchief to her mouth with trembling hands .Harry looked up at Crouch and saw that he looked gaunter and grayer than ever before .A nerve was twitching in his temple .Bring them in he said and his voice echoed through the silent dungeon .The door in the corner opened yet again .Six dementors entered this time flanking a group of four people .Harry saw the people in the crowd turn to look up at Mr Crouch .A few of them whispered to one another .The dementors placed each of the four people in the four chairs with chained arms that now stood on the dungeon floor .There was a thickset man who stared blankly up at Crouch a thinner and more nervous looking man whose eyes were darting around the crowd a woman with thick shining dark hair and heavily hooded eyes who was sitting in the chained chair as though it were a throne and a boy in his late teens who looked nothing short of petrified .He was shivering his strawcolored hair all over his face his freckled skin milkwhite .The wispy little witch beside Crouch began to rock backward and forward in her seat whimpering into her handkerchief .Crouch stood up .He looked down upon the four in front of him and there was pure hatred in his face .You have been brought here before the Council of Magical Law he said clearly so that we may pass judgment on you for a crime so heinous Father said the boy with the strawcolored hair .Father .please .that we have rarely heard the like of it within this court said Crouch speaking more loudly drowning out his sons voice .We have heard the evidence against you .The four of you stand accused of capturing an Auror Frank Longbottom and subjecting him to the Cruciatus Curse believing him to have knowledge of the present whereabouts of your exiled master HeWhoMustNotBeNamed Father I didnt !shrieked the boy in chains below .I didnt I swear it Father dont send me back to the dementors You are further accused bellowed Mr Crouch of using the Cruciatus Curse on Frank Longbottoms wife when he would not give you information .You planned to restore HeWhoMustNotBeNamed to power and to resume the lives of violence you presumably led while he was strong .I now ask the jury Mother !screamed the boy below and the wispy little witch beside Crouch began to sob rocking backward and forward .Mother stop him Mother I didnt do it it wasnt me !I now ask the jury shouted Mr Crouch to raise their hands if they believe as I do that these crimes deserve a life sentence in Azkaban !In unison the witches and wizards along the right hand side of the dungeon raised their hands .The crowd around the walls began to clap as it had for Bagman their faces full of savage triumph .The boy began to scream .No !Mother no !I didnt do it I didnt do it I didnt know !Dont send me there dont let him !The dementors were gliding back into the room .The boys three companions rose quietly from their seats the woman with the heavylidded eyes looked up at Crouch and called The Dark Lord will rise again Crouch !Throw us into Azkaban we will wait !He will rise again and will come for us he will reward us beyond any of his other supporters !We alone were faithful !We alone tried to find him !But the boy was trying to fight off the dementors even though Harry could see their cold draining power starting to affect him .The crowd was jeering some of them on their feet as the woman swept out of the dungeon and the boy continued to struggle .Im your son !he screamed up at Crouch .Im your son !You are no son of mine !bellowed Mr Crouch his eyes bulging suddenly .I have no son !The wispy witch beside him gave a great gasp and slumped in her seat .She had fainted .Crouch appeared not to have noticed .Take them away !Crouch roared at the dementors spit flying from his mouth .Take them away and may they rot there !Father !Father I wasnt involved !No !No !Father please !I think Harry it is time to return to my office said a quiet voice in Harrys ear .Harry started .He looked around .Then he looked on his other side .There was an Albus Dumbledore sitting on his right watching Crouchs son being dragged away by the dementors and there was an Albus Dumbledore on his left looking right at him .Come said the Dumbledore on his left and he put his hand under Harrys elbow .Harry felt himself rising into the air the dungeon dissolved around him for a moment all was blackness and then he felt as though he had done a slowmotion somersault suddenly landing flat on his feet in what seemed like the dazzling light of Dumbledore s sunlit office .The stone basin was shimmering in the cabinet in front of him and Albus Dumbledore was standing beside him .Professor Harry gasped I know I shouldntve I didnt mean the cabinet door was sort of open and I quite understand said Dumbledore .He lifted the basin carried it over to his desk placed it upon the polished top and sat down in the chair behind it .He motioned for Harry to sit down opposite him .Harry did so staring at the stone basin .The contents had returned to their original silverywhite state swirling and rippling beneath his gaze .What is it ?Harry asked shakily .This ?It is called a Pensieve said Dumbledore .I sometimes find and I am sure you know the feeling that I simply have too many thoughts and memories crammed into my mind .Er said Harry who couldnt truthfully say that he had ever felt anything of the sort .At these times said Dumbledore indicating the stone basin I use the Pensieve .One simply siphons the excess thoughts from ones mind pours them into the basin and examines them at ones leisure .It becomes easier to spot patterns and links you understand when they are in this form .You mean .that stuffs your thoughts ?Harry said staring at the swirling white substance in the basin .Certainly said Dumbledore .Let me show you .Dumbledore drew his wand out of the inside of his robes and placed the tip into his own silvery hair near his temple .When he took the wand away hair seemed to be clinging to it but then Harry saw that it was in fact a glistening strand of the same strange silverywhite substance that filled the Pensieve .Dumbledore added this fresh thought to the basin and Harry astonished saw his own face swimming around the surface of the bowl .Dumbledore placed his long hands on either side of the Pensieve and swirled it rather as a gold prospector would pan for fragments of gold .and Harry saw his own face change smoothly into Snapes who opened his mouth and spoke to the ceiling his voice echoing slightly .Its coming back .Karkaroffs too .stronger and clearer than ever .A connection I could have made without assistance Dumbledore sighed but never mind .He peered over the top of his halfmoon spectacles at Harry who was gaping at Snapes face which was continuing to swirl around the bowl .I was using the Pensieve when Mr Fudge arrived for our meeting and put it away rather hastily .Undoubtedly I did not fasten the cabinet door properly .Naturally it would have attracted your attention .Im sorry Harry mumbled .Dumbledore shook his head .Curiosity is not a sin he said .But we should exercise caution with our curiosity .yes indeed .Frowning slightly he prodded the thoughts within the basin with the tip of his wand .Instantly a figure rose out of it a plump scowling girl of about sixteen who began to revolve slowly with her feet still in the basin .She took no notice whatsoever of Harry or Professor Dumbledore .When she spoke her voice echoed as Snapes had done as though it were coming from the depths of the stone basin .He put a hex on me Professor Dumbledore and I was only teasing him sir .I only said Id seen him kissing Florence behind the greenhouses last Thursday .But why Bertha said Dumbledore sadly looking up at the now silently revolving girl why did you have to follow him in the first place ?Bertha ?Harry whispered looking up at her .Is that was that Bertha Jorkins ?Yes said Dumbledore prodding the thoughts in the basin again Bertha sank back into them and they became silvery and opaque once more .That was Bertha as I remember her at school .The silvery light from the Pensieve illuminated Dumbledores face and it struck Harry suddenly how very old he was looking .He knew of course that Dumbledore was getting on in years but somehow he never really thought of Dumbledore as an old man .So Harry said Dumbledore quietly .Before you got lost in my thoughts you wanted to tell me something .Yes said Harry .Professor I was in Divination just now and er I fell asleep .He hesitated here wondering if a reprimand was coming but Dumbledore merely said Quite understandable .Continue .Well I had a dream said Harry .A dream about Lord Voldemort .He was torturing Wormtail .you know who Wormtail I do know said Dumbledore promptly .Please continue .Voldemort got a letter from an owl .He said something like Wormtails blunder had been repaired .He said someone was dead .Then he said Wormtail wouldnt be fed to the snake there was a snake beside his chair .He said he said hed be feeding me to it instead .Then he did the Cruciatus Curse on Wormtail and my scar hurt Harry said .It woke me up it hurt so badly .Dumbledore merely looked at him .Er thats all said Harry .I see said Dumbledore quietly .I see .Now has your scar hurt at any other time this year excepting the time it woke you up over the summer ?No I how did you know it woke me up over the summer ?said Harry astonished .You are not Siriuss only correspondent said Dumbledore .I have also been in contact with him ever since he left Hogwarts last year .It was I who suggested the mountainside cave as the safest place for him to stay .Dumbledore got up and began walking up and down behind his desk .Every now and then he placed his wand tip to his temple removed another shining silver thought and added it to the Pensieve .The thoughts inside began to swirl so fast that Harry couldnt make out anything clearly It was merely a blur of color .Professor ?he said quietly after a couple of minutes .Dumbledore stopped pacing and looked at Harry .My apologies he said quietly .He sat back down at his desk .Dyou dyou know why my scars hurting me ?Dumbledore looked very intently at Harry for a moment and then said I have a theory no more than that .It is my belief that your scar hurts both when Lord Voldemort is near you and when he is feeling a particularly strong surge of hatred .But .why ?Because you and he are connected by the curse that failed said Dumbledore .That is no ordinary scar .So you think .that dream .did it really happen ?It is possible said Dumbledore .I would say probable .Harry did you see Voldemort ?No said Harry .Just the back of his chair .But there wouldnt have been anything to see would there ?I mean he hasnt got a body has he ?But .but then how could he have held the wand ?Harry said slowly .How indeed ?muttered Dumbledore .How indeed Neither Dumbledore nor Harry spoke for a while .Dumbledore was gazing across the room and every now and then placing his wand tip to his temple and adding another shining silver thought to the seething mass within the Pensieve .Professor Harry said at last do you think hes getting stronger ?Voldemort ?said Dumbledore looking at Harry over the Pensieve .It was the characteristic piercing look Dumbledore had given him on other occasions and always made Harry feel as though Dumbledore were seeing right through him in a way that even Moodys magical eye could not .Once again Harry I can only give you my suspicions .Dumbledore sighed again and he looked older and wearier than ever .The years of Voldemorts ascent to power he said were marked with disappearances .Bertha Jorkins has vanished without a trace in the place where Voldemort was certainly known to be last .Mr Crouch too has disappeared .within these very grounds .And there was a third disappearance one which the Ministry I regret to say do not consider of any importance for it concerns a Muggle .His name was Frank Bryce he lived in the village where Voldemorts father grew up and he has not been seen since last August .You see I read the Muggle newspapers unlike most of my Ministry friends .Dumbledore looked very seriously at Harry .These disappearances seem to me to be linked .The Ministry disagrees as you may have heard while waiting outside my office .Harry nodded .Silence fell between them again Dumbledore extracting thoughts every now and then .Harry felt as though he ought to go but his curiosity held him in his chair .Professor ?he said again .Yes Harry ?said Dumbledore .Er .could I ask you about .that court thing I was in .in the Pensieve ?You could said Dumbledore heavily .I attended it many times but some trials come back to me more clearly than others .particularly now .You know you know the trial you found me in ?The one with Crouchs son ?Well .were they talking about Nevilles parents ?Dumbledore gave Harry a very sharp look .Has Neville never told you why he has been brought up by his grandmother ?he said .Harry shook his head wondering as he did so how he could have failed to ask Neville this in almost four years of knowing him .Yes they were talking about Nevilles parents said Dumbledore .His father Frank was an Auror just like Professor Moody .He and his wife were tortured for information about Voldemorts whereabouts after he lost his powers as you heard .So theyre dead ?said Harry quietly .No said Dumbledore his voice full of a bitterness Harry had never heard there before .They are insane .They are both in St .Mungos Hospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries .I believe Neville visits them with his grandmother during the holidays .They do not recognize him .Harry sat there horrorstruck .He had never known .never in four years bothered to find out .The Longbottoms were very popular said Dumbledore .The attacks on them came after Voldemorts fall from power just when everyone thought they were safe .Those attacks caused a wave of fury such as I have never known .The Ministry was under great pressure to catch those who had done it .Unfortunately the Longbottoms evidence was given their condition none too reliable .Then Mr Crouchs son might not have been involved ?said Harry slowly .Dumbledore shook his head .As to that I have no idea .Harry sat in silence once more watching the contents of the Pensieve swirl .There were two more questions he was burning to ask .but they concerned the guilt of living people .Er he said Mr Bagman . .has never been accused of any Dark activity since said Dumbledore calmly .Right said Harry hastily staring at the contents of the Pensieve again which were swirling more slowly now that Dumbledore had stopped adding thoughts .And .er .But the Pensieve seemed to be asking his question for him .Snapes face was swimming on the surface again .Dumbledore glanced down into it and then up at Harry .No more has Professor Snape he said .Harry looked into Dumbledore s light blue eyes and the thing he really wanted to know spilled out of his mouth before he could stop it .What made you think hed really stopped supporting Voldemort Professor ?Dumbledore held Harrys gaze for a few seconds and then said That Harry is a matter between Professor Snape and myself .Harry knew that the interview was over Dumbledore did not look angry yet there was a finality in his tone that told Harry it was time to go .He stood up and so did Dumbledore .Harry he said as Harry reached the door .Please do not speak about Nevilles parents to anybody else .He has the right to let people know when he is ready .Yes Professor said Harry turning to go .And Harry looked back .Dumbledore was standing over the Pensieve his face lit from beneath by its silvery spots of light looking older than ever .He stared at Harry for a moment and then said Good luck with the third task .THE THIRD TASK Dumbledore reckons You Know Whos getting stronger again as well ?Ron whispered .Everything Harry had seen in the Pensieve nearly everything Dumbledore had told and shown him afterward he had now shared with Ron and Hermione and of course with Sirius to whom Harry had sent an owl the moment he had left Dumbledores office .Harry Ron and Hermione sat up late in the common room once again that night talking it all over until Harrys mind was reeling until he understood what Dumbledore had meant about a head becoming so full of thoughts that it would have been a relief to siphon them off .Ron stared into the common room fire .Harry thought he saw Ron shiver slightly even though the evening was warm .And he trusts Snape ?Ron said .He really trusts Snape even though he knows he was a Death Eater ?Yes said Harry .Hermione had not spoken for ten minutes .She was sitting with her forehead in her hands staring at her knees .Harry thought she too looked as though she could have done with a Pensieve .Rita Skeeter she muttered finally .How can you be worrying about her now ?said Ron in utter disbelief .Im not worrying about her Hermione said to her knees .Im just thinking .remember what she said to me in the Three Broomsticks ? ‘I know things about Ludo Bagman that would make your hair curl .This is what she meant isnt it ?She reported his trial she knew hed passed information to the Death Eaters .And Winky too remember . ‘Ludo Bagmans a bad wizard .Mr Crouch would have been furious he got off he would have talked about it at home .Yeah but Bagman didnt pass information on purpose did he ?Hermione shrugged .And Fudge reckons Madame Maxime attacked Crouch ?Ron said turning back to Harry .Yeah said Harry but hes only saying that because Crouch disappeared near the Beauxbatons carriage .We never thought of her did we ?said Ron slowly .Mind you shes definitely got giant blood and she doesnt want to admit it Of course she doesnt said Hermione sharply looking up .Look what happened to Hagrid when Rita found out about his mother .Look at Fudge jumping to conclusions about her just because shes part giant .Who needs that sort of prejudice ?Id probably say I had big bones if I knew thats what Id get for telling the truth .Hermione looked at her watch .We havent done any practicing !she said looking shocked .We were going to do the Impediment Curse !Well have to really get down to it tomorrow !Come on Harry you need to get some sleep .Harry and Ron went slowly upstairs to their dormitory .As Harry pulled on his pajamas he looked over at Nevilles bed .True to his word to Dumbledore he had not told Ron and Hermione about Nevilles parents .As Harry took off his glasses and climbed into his fourposter he imagined how it must feel to have parents still living but unable to recognize you .He often got sympathy from strangers for being an orphan but as he listened to Nevilles snores he thought that Neville deserved it more than he did .Lying in the darkness Harry felt a rush of anger and hate toward the people who had tortured Mr and Mrs Longbottom .He remembered the jeers of the crowd as Crouchs son and his companions had been dragged from the court by the dementors .He understood how they had felt .Then he remembered the milkwhite face of the screaming boy and realized with a jolt that he had died a year later .It was Voldemort Harry thought staring up at the canopy of his bed in the darkness it all came back to Voldemort .He was the one who had torn these families apart who had ruined all these lives .Ron and Hermione were supposed to be studying for their exams which would finish on the day of the third task but they were putting most of their efforts into helping Harry prepare .Dont worry about it Hermione said shortly when Harry pointed this out to them and said he didnt mind practicing on his own for a while at least well get top marks in Defense Against the Dark Arts .Wed never have found out about all these hexes in class .Good training for when were all Aurors said Ron excitedly attempting the Impediment Curse on a wasp that had buzzed into the room and making it stop dead in midair .The mood in the castle as they entered June became excited and tense again .Everyone was looking forward to the third task which would take place a week before the end of term .Harry was practicing hexes at every available moment .He felt more confident about this task than either of the others .Difficult and dangerous though it would undoubtedly be Moody was right Harry had managed to find his way past monstrous creatures and enchanted barriers before now and this time he had some notice some chance to prepare himself for what lay ahead .Tired of walking in on Harry Hermione and Ron all over the school Professor McGonagall had given them permission to use the empty Transfiguration classroom at lunchtimes .Harry had soon mastered the Impediment Curse a spell to slow down and obstruct attackers the Reductor Curse which would enable him to blast solid objects out of his way and the FourPoint Spell a useful discovery of Hermiones that would make his wand point due north therefore enabling him to check whether he was going in the right direction within the maze .He was still having trouble with the Shield Charm though .This was supposed to cast a temporary invisible wall around himself that deflected minor curses Hermione managed to shatter it with a wellplaced JellyLegs Jinx and Harry wobbled around the room for ten minutes afterward before she had looked up the counterjinx .Youre still doing really well though Hermione said encouragingly looking down her list and crossing off those spells they had already learned .Some of these are bound to come in handy .Come and look at this said Ron who was standing by the window .He was staring down onto the grounds .Whats Malfoy doing ?Harry and Hermione went to see .Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle were standing in the shadow of a tree below .Crabbe and Goyle seemed to be keeping a lookout both were smirking .Malfoy was holding his hand up to his mouth and speaking into it .He looks like hes using a walkietalkie said Harry curiously .He cant be said Hermione Ive told you those sorts of things dont work around Hogwarts .Come on Harry she added briskly turning away from the window and moving back into the middle of the room lets try that Shield Charm again .Sirius was sending daily owls now .Like Hermione he seemed to want to concentrate on getting Harry through the last task before they concerned themselves with anything else .He reminded Harry in every letter that whatever might be going on outside the walls of Hogwarts was not Harrys responsibility nor was it within his power to influence it .If Voldemort is really getting stronger again he wrote my priority is to ensure your safety .He cannot hope to lay hands on you while you are under Dumbledores protection but all the same take no risks Concentrate on getting through that maze safely and then we can turn our attention to other matters .Harrys nerves mounted as June the twentyfourth drew closer but they were not as bad as those he had felt before the first and second tasks .For one thing he was confident that this time he had done everything in his power to prepare for the task .For another this was the final hurdle and however well or badly he did the tournament would at last be over which would be an enormous relief .Breakfast was a very noisy affair at the Gryffindor table on the morning of the third task .The post owls appeared bringing Harry a goodluck card from Sirius .It was only a piece of parchment folded over and bearing a muddy paw print on its front but Harry appreciated it all the same .A screech owl arrived for Hermione carrying her morning copy of the Daily Prophet as usual .She unfolded the paper glanced at the front page and spat out a mouthful of pumpkin juice all over it .What ?said Harry and Ron together staring at her .Nothing said Hermione quickly trying to shove the paper out of sight but Ron grabbed it .He stared at the headline and said No way .Not today .That old cow .What ?said Harry .Rita Skeeter again ?No said Ron and just like Hermione he attempted to push the paper out of sight .Its about me isnt it ?said Harry .No said Ron in an entirely unconvincing tone .But before Harry could demand to see the paper Draco Malfoy shouted across the Great Hall from the Slytherin table .Hey Potter !Potteri Hows your head ?You feeling all right ?Sure youre not going to go berserk on us ?Malfoy was holding a copy of the Daily Prophet too .Slytherins up and down the table were sniggering twisting in their seats to see Harrys reaction .Let me see it Harry said to Ron .Give it here .Very reluctantly Ron handed over the newspaper .Harry turned it over and found himself staring at his own picture beneath the banner headline HARRY POTTER DISTURBED AND DANGEROUS The boy who defeated HeWhoMustNotBeNamed is unstable and possibly dangerous writes Rita Skeeter Special Correspondent .Alarming evidence has recently come to light about Harry Potters strange behavior which casts doubts upon his suitability to compete in a demanding competition like the Triwizard Tournament or even to attend Hogwarts School .Potter the Daily Prophet can exclusively reveal regularly collapses at school and is often heard to complain of pain in the scar on his forehead relic of the curse with which YouKnowWho attempted to kill him .On Monday last midway through a Divination lesson your Daily Prophet reporter witnessed Potter storming from the class claiming that his scar was hurting too badly to continue studying .It is possible say top experts at St .Mungos Hospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries that Potters brain was affected by the attack inflicted upon him by You KnowWho and that his insistence that the scar is still hurting is an expression of his deepseated confusion .He might even be pretending said one specialist .This could be a plea for attention .The Daily Prophet however has unearthed worrying facts about Harry Potter thatAlbus Dumbledore Headmaster of Hogwarts has carefully concealed from the wizarding public .Potter can speak Parseltongue reveals Draco Malfoy a Hogwarts fourth year .There were a lot of attacks on students a couple of years ago and most people thought Potter was behind them after they saw him lose his temper at a dueling club and set a snake on another boy .It was all hushed up though .But hes made friends with werewolves and giants too .We think hed do anything for a bit of power .Parseltongue the ability to converse with snakes has long been considered a Dark Art .Indeed the most famous Parselmouth of our times is none other than YouKnowWho himself .A member of the Dark Force Defense League who wished to remain unnamed stated that he would regard any wizard who could speak Parseltongue as worthy of investigation .Personally I would be highly suspicious of anybody who could converse with snakes as serpents are often used in the worst kinds of Dark Magic and are historically associated with evildoers .Similarly anyone who seeks out the company of such vicious creatures as werewolves and giants would appear to have a fondness for violence .Albus Dumbledore should surely consider whether a boy such as this should be allowed to compete in the Triwizard Tournament .Some fear that Potter might resort to the Dark Arts in his desperation to win the tournament the third task of which takes place this evening .Gone off me a bit hasnt she ?said Harry lightly folding up the paper .Over at the Slytherin table Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle were laughing at him tapping their heads with their fingers pulling grotesquely mad faces and waggling their tongues like snakes .How did she know your scar hurt in Divination ?Ron said .Theres no way she was there theres no way she couldve heard The window was open said Harry .I opened it to breathe .You were at the top of North Tower !Hermione said .Your voice couldnt have carried all the way down to the grounds !Well youre the one whos supposed to be researching magical methods of bugging !said Harry .You tell me how she did it !Ive been trying !said Hermione .But I .but .An odd dreamy expression suddenly came over Hermione s face .She slowly raised a hand and ran her fingers through her hair .Are you all right ?said Ron frowning at her .Yes said Hermione breathlessly .She ran her fingers through her hair again and then held her hand up to her mouth as though speaking into an invisible walkietalkie .Harry and Ron stared at each other .Ive had an idea Hermione said gazing into space .I think I know .because then no one would be able to see .even Moody .and shed have been able to get onto the window ledge .but shes not allowed .shes definitely not allowed .I think weve got her !Just give me two seconds in the library just to make sure !With that Hermione seized her school bag and dashed out of the Great Hall .Oi !Ron called after her .Weve got our History of Magic exam in ten minutes !Blimey he said turning back to Harry she must really hate that Skeeter woman to risk missing the start of an exam .Whatre you going to do in Binnss class read again ?Exempt from the endofterm tests as a Triwizard champion Harry had been sitting in the back of every exam class so far looking up fresh hexes for the third task .Spose so Harry said to Ron but just then Professor McGonagall came walking alongside the Gryffindor table toward him .Potter the champions are congregating in the chamber off the Hall after breakfast she said .But the tasks not till tonight !said Harry accidentally spilling scrambled eggs down his front afraid he had mistaken the time .Im aware of that Potter she said .The champions families are invited to watch the final task you know .This is simply a chance for you to greet them .She moved away .Harry gaped after her .She doesnt expect the Dursleys to turn up does she ?he asked Ron blankly .Dunno said Ron .Harry Id better hurry Im going to be late for Binns .See you later .Harry finished his breakfast in the emptying Great Hall .He saw Fleur Delacour get up from the Ravenclaw table and join Cedric as he crossed to the side chamber and entered .Krum slouched off to join them shortly afterward .Harry stayed where he was .He really didnt want to go into the chamber .He had no family no family who would turn up to see him risk his life anyway .But just as he was getting up thinking that he might as well go up to the library and do a spot more hex research the door of the side chamber opened and Cedric stuck his head out .Harry come on theyre waiting for you !Utterly perplexed Harry got up .The Dursleys couldnt possibly be here could they ?He walked across the Hall and opened the door into the chamber .Cedric and his parents were just inside the door .Viktor Krum was over in a corner conversing with his darkhaired mother and father in rapid Bulgarian .He had inherited his fathers hooked nose .On the other side of the room Fleur was jabbering away in French to her mother .Fleurs little sister Gabrielle was holding her mothers hand .She waved at Harry who waved back grinning .Then he saw Mrs Weasley and Bill standing in front of the fireplace beaming at him .Surprise !Mrs Weasley said excitedly as he smiled broadly and walked over to them .Thought wed come and watch you Harry !She bent down and kissed him on the cheek .You all right ?said Bill grinning at Harry and shaking his hand .Charlie wanted to come but he couldnt get time off .He said you were incredible against the Horntail .Fleur Delacour Harry noticed was eyeing Bill with great interest over her mothers shoulder .Harry could tell she had no objection whatsoever to long hair or earrings with fangs on them .This is really nice of you Harry muttered to Mrs Weasley .I thought for a moment the Dursleys Hmm said Mrs Weasley pursing her lips .She had always refrained from criticizing the Dursleys in front of Harry but her eyes flashed every time they were mentioned .Its great being back here said Bill looking around the chamber Violet the Fat Ladys friend winked at him from her frame .Havent seen this place for five years .Is that picture of the mad knight still around ?Sir Cadogan ?Oh yeah said Harry who had met Sir Cadogan the previous year .And the Fat Lady ?said Bill .She was here in my time said Mrs Weasley .She gave me such a telling off one night when I got back to the dormitory at four in the morning What were you doing out of your dormitory at four in the morning ?said Bill surveying his mother with amazement .Mrs Weasley grinned her eyes twinkling .Your father and I had been for a nighttime stroll she said .He got caught by Apollyon Pringle he was the caretaker in those days your fathers still got the marks .Fancy giving us a tour Harry ?said Bill .Yeah okay said Harry and they made their way back toward the door into the Great Hall .As they passed Amos Diggory he looked around .There you are are you ?he said looking Harry up and down .Bet youre not feeling quite as full of yourself now Cedrics caught you up on points are you ?What ?said Harry .Ignore him said Cedric in a low voice to Harry frowning after his father .Hes been angry ever since Rita Skeeters article about the Triwizard Tournament you know when she made out you were the only Hogwarts champion .Didnt bother to correct her though did he ?said Amos Diggory loudly enough for Harry to hear as he started to walk out of the door with Mrs Weasley and Bill .Still .youll show him Ced .Beaten him once before havent you ?Rita Skeeter goes out of her way to cause trouble Amos !Mrs Weasley said angrily .I would have thought youd know that working at the Ministry !Mr Diggory looked as though he was going to say something angry but his wife laid a hand on his arm and he merely shrugged and turned away .Harry had a very enjoyable morning walking over the sunny grounds with Bill and Mrs Weasley showing them the Beauxbatons carriage and the Durmstrang ship .Mrs Weasley was intrigued by the Whomping Willow which had been planted after she had left school and reminisced at length about the gamekeeper before Hagrid a man called Ogg .Hows Percy ?Harry asked as they walked around the greenhouses .Not good said Bill .Hes very upset said Mrs Weasley lowering her voice and glancing around .The Ministry wants to keep Mr Crouchs disappearance quiet but Percys been hauled in for questioning about the instructions Mr Crouch has been sending in .They seem to think theres a chance they werent genuinely written by him .Percys been under a lot of strain .Theyre not letting him fill in for Mr Crouch as the fifth judge tonight .Cornelius Fudge is going to be doing it .They returned to the castle for lunch .Mum Bill !said Ron looking stunned as he joined the Gryffindor table .What re you doing here ?Come to watch Harry in the last task !said Mrs Weasley brightly .I must say it makes a lovely change not having to cook .How was your exam ?Oh .okay said Ron .Couldnt remember all the goblin rebels names so I invented a few .Its all right he said helping himself to a Cornish pasty while Mrs Weasley looked stern theyre all called stuff like Bodrod the Bearded and Urg the Unclean it wasnt hard .Fred George and Ginny came to sit next to them too and Harry was having such a good time he felt almost as though he were back at the Burrow he had forgotten to worry about that evenings task and not until Hermione turned up halfway through lunch did he remember that she had had a brainwave about Rita Skeeter .Are you going to tell us ?Hermione shook her head warningly and glanced at Mrs Weasley .Hello Hermione said Mrs Weasley much more stiffly than usual .Hello said Hermione her smile faltering at the cold expression on Mrs Weasleys face .Harry looked between them then said Mrs Weasley you didnt believe that rubbish Rita Skeeter wrote in Witch Weekly did you ?Because Hermione s not my girlfriend .Oh !said Mrs Weasley .No of course I didnt !But she became considerably warmer toward Hermione after that .Harry Bill and Mrs Weasley whiled away the afternoon with a long walk around the castle and then returned to the Great Hall for the evening feast .Ludo Bagman and Cornelius Fudge had joined the staff table now .Bagman looked quite cheerful but Cornelius Fudge who was sitting next to Madame Maxime looked stern and was not talking .Madame Maxime was concentrating on her plate and Harry thought her eyes looked red .Hagrid kept glancing along the table at her .There were more courses than usual but Harry who was starting to feel really nervous now didnt eat much .As the enchanted ceiling overhead began to fade from blue to a dusky purple Dumbledore rose to his feet at the staff table and silence fell .Ladies and gentlemen in five minutes time I will be asking you to make your way down to the Quidditch field for the third and final task of the Triwizard Tournament .Will the champions please follow Mr Bagman down to the stadium now .Harry got up .The Gryffindors all along the table were applauding him the Weasleys and Hermione all wished him good luck and he headed off out of the Great Hall with Cedric Fleur and Viktor .Feeling all right Harry ?Bagman asked as they went down the stone steps onto the grounds .Confident ?Im okay said Harry .It was sort of true he was nervous but he kept running over all the hexes and spells he had been practicing in his mind as they walked and the knowledge that he could remember them all made him feel better .They walked onto the Quidditch field which was now completely unrecognizable .A twentyfoothigh hedge ran all the way around the edge of it .There was a gap right in front of them the entrance to the vast maze .The passage beyond it looked dark and creepy .Five minutes later the stands had begun to fill the air was full of excited voices and the rumbling of feet as the hundreds of students filed into their seats .The sky was a deep clear blue now and the first stars were starting to appear .Hagrid Professor Moody Professor McGonagall and Professor Flitwick came walking into the stadium and approached Bagman and the champions .They were wearing large red luminous stars on their hats all except Hagrid who had his on the back of his moleskin vest .We are going to be patrolling the outside of the maze said Professor McGonagall to the champions .If you get into difficulty and wish to be rescued send red sparks into the air and one of us will come and get you do you understand ?The champions nodded .Off you go then !said Bagman brightly to the four patrollers .Good luck Harry Hagrid whispered and the four of them walked away in different directions to station themselves around the maze .Bagman now pointed his wand at his throat muttered Sonorus and his magically magnified voice echoed into the stands .Ladies and gentlemen the third and final task of the Triwizard Tournament is about to begin !Let me remind you how the points currently stand !Tied in first place with eightyfive points each Mr Cedric Diggory and Mr Harry Potter both of Hogwarts School !The cheers and applause sent birds from the Forbidden Forest fluttering into the darkening sky .In second place with eighty points Mr Viktor Krum of Durmstrang Institute !More applause .And in third place Miss Fleur Delacour of Beauxbatons Academy !Harry could just make out Mrs Weasley Bill Ron and Hermione applauding Fleur politely halfway up the stands .He waved up at them and they waved back beaming at him .So .on my whistle Harry and Cedric !said Bagman .Three two one He gave a short blast on his whistle and Harry and Cedric hurried forward into the maze .The towering hedges cast black shadows across the path and whether because they were so tall and thick or because they had been enchanted the sound of the surrounding crowd was silenced the moment they entered the maze .Harry felt almost as though he were underwater again .He pulled out his wand muttered Lumos and heard Cedric do the same just behind him .After about fifty yards they reached a fork .They looked at each other .See you Harry said and he took the left one while Cedric took the right .Harry heard Bagmans whistle for the second time .Krum had entered the maze .Harry sped up .His chosen path seemed completely deserted .He turned right and hurried on holding his wand high over his head trying to see as far ahead as possible .Still there was nothing in sight .Bagmans whistle blew in the distance for the third time .All of the champions were now inside .Harry kept looking behind him .The old feeling that he was being watched was upon him .The maze was growing darker with every passing minute as the sky overhead deepened to navy .He reached a second fork .Point Me he whispered to his wand holding it flat in his palm .The wand spun around once and pointed toward his right into solid hedge .That way was north and he knew that he needed to go northwest for the center of the maze .The best he could do was to take the left fork and go right again as soon as possible .The path ahead was empty too and when Harry reached a right turn and took it he again found his way unblocked .Harry didnt know why but the lack of obstacles was unnerving him .Surely he should have met something by now ?It felt as though the maze were luring him into a false sense of security .Then he heard movement right behind him .He held out his wand ready to attack but its beam fell only upon Cedric who had just hurried out of a path on the righthand side .Cedric looked severely shaken .The sleeve of his robe was smoking .Hagrids BlastEnded Skrewts !he hissed .Theyre enormous I only just got away !He shook his head and dived out of sight along another path .Keen to put plenty of distance between himself and the skrewts Harry hurried off again .Then as he turned a corner he saw .a dementor gliding toward him .Twelve feet tall its face hidden by its hood its rotting scabbed hands outstretched it advanced sensing its way blindly toward him .Harry could hear its rattling breath he felt clammy coldness stealing over him but knew what he had to do .He summoned the happiest thought he could concentrated with all his might on the thought of getting out of the maze and celebrating with Ron and Hermione raised his wand and cried Expecto Patronum .A silver stag erupted from the end of Harrys wand and galloped toward the dementor which fell back and tripped over the hem of its robes .Harry had never seen a dementor stumble .Hang on !he shouted advancing in the wake of his silver Patronus .Youre a boggart !Riddikulusl There was a loud crack and the shapeshifter exploded in a wisp of smoke .The silver stag faded from sight .Harry wished it could have stayed he could have used some company .but he moved on quickly and quietly as possible listening hard his wand held high once more .Left .right .left again .Twice he found himself facing dead ends .He did the FourPoint Spell again and found that he was going too far east .He turned back took a right turn and saw an odd golden mist floating ahead of him .Harry approached it cautiously pointing the wands beam at it .This looked like some kind of enchantment .He wondered whether he might be able to blast it out of the way .Reductol he said .The spell shot straight through the mist leaving it intact .He supposed he should have known better the Reductor Curse was for solid objects .What would happen if he walked through the mist ?Was it worth chancing it or should he double back ?He was still hesitating when a scream shattered the silence .Fleur ?Harry yelled .There was silence .He stared all around him .What had happened to her ?Her scream seemed to have come from somewhere ahead .He took a deep breath and ran through the enchanted mist .The world turned upside down .Harry was hanging from the ground with his hair on end his glasses dangling off his nose threatening to fall into the bottomless sky .He clutched them to the end of his nose and hung there terrified .It felt as though his feet were glued to the grass which had now become the ceiling .Below him the dark starspangled heavens stretched endlessly .He felt as though if he tried to move one of his feet he would fall away from the earth completely .Think he told himself as all the blood rushed to his head think .But not one of the spells he had practiced had been designed to combat a sudden reversal of ground and sky .Did he dare move his foot ?He could hear the blood pounding in his ears .He had two choices try and move or send up red sparks and get rescued and disqualified from the task .He shut his eyes so he wouldnt be able to see the view of endless space below him and pulled his right foot as hard as he could away from the grassy ceiling .Immediately the world righted itself .Harry fell forward onto his knees onto the wonderfully solid ground .He felt temporarily limp with shock .He took a deep steadying breath then got up again and hurried forward looking back over his shoulder as he ran away from the golden mist which twinkled innocently at him in the moonlight .He paused at a junction of two paths and looked around for some sign of Fleur .He was sure it had been she who had screamed .What had she met ?Was she all right ?There was no sign of red sparks did that mean she had got herself out of trouble or was she in such trouble that she couldnt reach her wand ?Harry took the right fork with a feeling of increasing unease .but at the same time he couldnt help thinking One champion down .The cup was somewhere close by and it sounded as though Fleur was no longer in the running .Hed got this far hadnt he ?What if he actually managed to win ?Fleetingly and for the first time since hed found himself champion he saw again that image of himself raising the Triwizard Cup in front of the rest of the school .He met nothing for ten minutes but kept running into dead ends .Twice he took the same wrong turning .Finally he found a new route and started to jog along it his wandlight waving making his shadow flicker and distort on the hedge walls .Then he rounded another corner and found himself facing a BlastEnded Skrewt .Cedric was right it was enormous .Ten feet long it looked more like a giant scorpion than anything .Its long sting was curled over its back .Its thick armor glinted in the light from Harrys wand which he pointed at it .Stupefy .The spell hit the skrewts armor and rebounded Harry ducked just in time but could smell burning hair it had singed the top of his head .The skrewt issued a blast of fire from its end and flew forward toward him .Impedimental Harry yelled .The spell hit the skrewts armor again and ricocheted off Harry staggered back a few paces and fell over .a IMPEDIMENT A The skrewt was inches from him when it froze he had managed to hit it on its fleshy shellless underside .Panting Harry pushed himself away from it and ran hard in the opposite direction the Impediment Curse was not permanent the skrewt would be regaining the use of its legs at any moment .He took a left path and hit a dead end a right and hit another forcing himself to stop heart hammering he performed the FourPoint Spell again backtracked and chose a path that would take him northwest .He had been hurrying along the new path for a few minutes when he heard something in the path running parallel to his own that made him stop dead .What are you doing ?yelled Cedrics voice .What the hell dyou think youre doing ?And then Harry heard Krums voice .Crucio The air was suddenly full of Cedrics yells .Horrified Harry began sprinting up his path trying to find a way into Cedrics .When none appeared he tried the Reductor Curse again .It wasnt very effective but it burned a small hole in the hedge through which Harry forced his leg kicking at the thick brambles and branches until they broke and made an opening he struggled through it tearing his robes and looking to his right saw Cedric jerking and twitching on the ground Krum standing over him .Harry pulled himself up and pointed his wand at Krum just as Krum looked up .Krum turned and began to run .Stupefy Harry yelled .The spell hit Krum in the back he stopped dead in his tracks fell forward and lay motionless facedown in the grass .Harry dashed over to Cedric who had stopped twitching and was lying there panting his hands over his face .Are you all right ?Harry said roughly grabbing Cedrics arm .Yeah panted Cedric .Yeah .I dont believe it .he crept up behind me .I heard him I turned around and he had his wand on me .Cedric got up .He was still shaking .He and Harry looked down at Krum .I cant believe this .I thought he was all right Harry said staring at Krum .So did I said Cedric .Did you hear Fleur scream earlier ?said Harry .Yeah said Cedric .You dont think Krum got her too ?I dont know said Harry slowly .Should we leave him here ?Cedric muttered .No said Harry .I reckon we should send up red sparks .Someonell come and collect him .otherwise hell probably be eaten by a skrewt .Hed deserve it Cedric muttered but all the same he raised his wand and shot a shower of red sparks into the air which hovered high above Krum marking the spot where he lay .Harry and Cedric stood there in the darkness for a moment looking around them .Then Cedric said Well .I spose wed better go on .What ?said Harry .Oh .yeah .right .It was an odd moment .He and Cedric had been briefly united against Krum now the fact that they were opponents came back to Harry .The two of them proceeded up the dark path without speaking then Harry turned left and Cedric right .Cedrics footsteps soon died away .Harry moved on continuing to use the FourPoint Spell making sure he was moving in the right direction .It was between him and Cedric now .His desire to reach the cup first was now burning stronger than ever but he could hardly believe what hed just seen Krum do .The use of an Unforgivable Curse on a fellow human being meant a life term in Azkaban that was what Moody had told them .Krum surely couldnt have wanted the Triwizard Cup that badly .Harry sped up .Every so often he hit more dead ends but the increasing darkness made him feel sure he was getting near the heart of the maze .Then as he strode down a long straight path he saw movement once again and his beam of wandlight hit an extraordinary creature one which he had only seen in picture form in his Monster Book of Monsters .It was a sphinx .It had the body of an overlarge lion great clawed paws and a long yellowish tail ending in a brown tuft .Its head however was that of a woman .She turned her long almondshaped eyes upon Harry as he approached .He raised his wand hesitating .She was not crouching as if to spring but pacing from side to side of the path blocking his progress .Then she spoke in a deep hoarse voice .You are very near your goal .The quickest way is past me .So .so will you move please ?said Harry knowing what the answer was going to be .No she said continuing to pace .Not unless you can answer my riddle .Answer on your first guess I let you pass .Answer wrongly I attack .Remain silent I will let you walk away from me unscathed .Harrys stomach slipped several notches .It was Hermione who was good at this sort of thing not him .He weighed his chances .If the riddle was too hard he could keep silent get away from the sphinx unharmed and try and find an alternative route to the center .Okay he said .Can I hear the riddle ?The sphinx sat down upon her hind legs in the very middle of the path and recited First think of the person who lives in disguise Who deals in secrets and tells naught but lies .Next tell me whats always the last thing to mend The middle of middle and end of the end ?And finally give me the sound often heard During the search for a hardtofind word .Now string them together and answer me this Which creature would you be unwilling to kiss ?Harry gaped at her .Could I have it again .more slowly ?he asked tentatively .She blinked at him smiled and repeated the poem .All the clues add up to a creature I wouldnt want to kiss ?Harry asked .She merely smiled her mysterious smile .Harry took that for a yes .Harry cast his mind around .There were plenty of animals he wouldnt want to kiss his immediate thought was a BlastEnded Skrewt but something told him that wasnt the answer .Hed have to try and work out the clues .A person in disguise Harry muttered staring at her who lies .er .thatd be a an imposter .No thats not my guess !A a spy ?Ill come back to that .could you give me the next clue again please ?She repeated the next lines of the poem .The last thing to mend Harry repeated .Er .no idea . ‘middle of middle .could I have the last bit again ?She gave him the last four lines .The sound often heard during the search for a hard tofind word said Harry .Er .thatd be .er .hang on ‘er !Ers a sound !The sphinx smiled at him .Spy .er .spy .er .said Harry pacing up and down .A creature I wouldnt want to kiss .a spiderl The sphinx smiled more broadly .She got up stretched her front legs and then moved aside for him to pass .Thanks !said Harry and amazed at his own brilliance he dashed forward .He had to be close now he had to be .His wand was telling him he was bang on course as long as he didnt meet anything too horrible he might have a chance .Harry broke into a run .He had a choice of paths up ahead .Point Mel he whispered again to his wand and it spun around and pointed him to the right hand one .He dashed up this one and saw light ahead .The Triwizard Cup was gleaming on a plinth a hundred yards away .Suddenly a dark figure hurtled out onto the path in front of him .Cedric was going to get there first .Cedric was sprinting as fast as he could toward the cup and Harry knew he would never catch up Cedric was much taller had much longer legs Then Harry saw something immense over a hedge to his left moving quickly along a path that intersected with his own it was moving so fast Cedric was about to run into it and Cedric his eyes on the cup had not seen it Cedric !Harry bellowed .On your left !Cedric looked around just in time to hurl himself past the thing and avoid colliding with it but in his haste he tripped .Harry saw Cedrics wand fly out of his hand as a gigantic spider stepped into the path and began to bear down upon Cedric .Stupefy .Harry yelled the spell hit the spiders gigantic hairy black body but for all the good it did he might as well have thrown a stone at it the spider jerked scuttled around and ran at Harry instead .Stupefy !Impedimenta !Stupefy !But it was no use the spider was either so large or so magical that the spells were doing no more than aggravating it .Harry had one horrifying glimpse of eight shining black eyes and razorsharp pincers before it was upon him .He was lifted into the air in its front legs struggling madly he tried to kick it his leg connected with the pincers and next moment he was in excruciating pain .He could hear Cedric yelling Stupefy .too but his spell had no more effect than Harrys Harry raised his wand as the spider opened its pincers once more and shouted Expelliarmus .It worked the Disarming Spell made the spider drop him but that meant that Harry fell twelve feet onto his already injured leg which crumpled beneath him .Without pausing to think he aimed high at the spiders underbelly as he had done with the skrewt and shouted Stupefyl just as Cedric yelled the same thing .The two spells combined did what one alone had not The spider keeled over sideways flattening a nearby hedge and strewing the path with a tangle of hairy legs .Harry !he heard Cedric shouting .You all right ?Did it fall on you ?No Harry called back panting .He looked down at his leg .It was bleeding freely .He could see some sort of thick gluey secretion from the spiders pincers on his torn robes .He tried to get up but his leg was shaking badly and did not want to support his weight .He leaned against the hedge gasping for breath and looked around .Cedric was standing feet from the Triwizard Cup which was gleaming behind him .Take it then Harry panted to Cedric .Go on take it .Youre there .But Cedric didnt move .He merely stood there looking at Harry .Then he turned to stare at the cup .Harry saw the longing expression on his face in its golden light .Cedric looked around at Harry again who was now holding onto the hedge to support himself .Cedric took a deep breath .You take it .You should win .Thats twice youve saved my neck in here .Thats not how its supposed to work Harry said .He felt angry his leg was very painful he was aching all over from trying to throw off the spider and after all his efforts Cedric had beaten him to it just as hed beaten Harry to ask Cho to the ball .The one who reaches the cup first gets the points .Thats you .Im telling you Im not going to win any races on this leg .Cedric took a few paces nearer to the Stunned spider away from the cup shaking his head .No he said .Stop being noble said Harry irritably .Just take it then we can get out of here .Cedric watched Harry steadying himself holding tight to the hedge .You told me about the dragons Cedric said .I wouldve gone down in the first task if you hadnt told me what was coming .I had help on that too Harry snapped trying to mop up his bloody leg with his robes .You helped me with the egg were square .I had help on the egg in the first place said Cedric .Were still square said Harry testing his leg gingerly it shook violently as he put weight on it he had sprained his ankle when the spider had dropped him .You shouldve got more points on the second task said Cedric mulishly .You stayed behind to get all the hostages .I shouldve done that .I was the only one who was thick enough to take that song seriously !said Harry bitterly .Just take the cup !No said Cedric .He stepped over the spiders tangled legs to join Harry who stared at him .Cedric was serious .He was walking away from the sort of glory Hufflepuff House hadnt had in centuries .Go on Cedric said .He looked as though this was costing him every ounce of resolution he had but his face was set his arms were folded he seemed decided .Harry looked from Cedric to the cup .For one shining moment he saw himself emerging from the maze holding it .He saw himself holding the Triwizard Cup aloft heard the roar of the crowd saw Chos face shining with admiration more clearly than he had ever seen it before .and then the picture faded and he found himself staring at Cedrics shadowy stubborn face .Both of us Harry said .What ?Well take it at the same time .Its still a Hogwarts victory .Well tie for it .Cedric stared at Harry .He unfolded his arms .You you sure ?Yeah said Harry .Yeah .weve helped each other out havent we ?We both got here .Lets just take it together .For a moment Cedric looked as though he couldnt believe his ears then his face split in a grin .Youre on he said .Come here .He grabbed Harrys arm below the shoulder and helped Harry limp toward the plinth where the cup stood .When they had reached it they both held a hand out over one of the cups gleaming handles .On three right ?said Harry .One two three He and Cedric both grasped a handle .Instantly Harry felt a jerk somewhere behind his navel .His feet had left the ground .He could not unclench the hand holding the Triwizard Cup it was pulling him onward in a howl of wind and swirling color Cedric at his side .FLESH BLOOD AND BONE Harry felt his feet slam into the ground his injured leg gave way and he fell forward his hand let go of the Triwizard Cup at last .He raised his head .Where are we ?he said .Cedric shook his head .He got up pulled Harry to his feet and they looked around .They had left the Hogwarts grounds completely they had obviously traveled miles perhaps hundreds of miles for even the mountains surrounding the castle were gone .They were standing instead in a dark and overgrown graveyard the black outline of a small church was visible beyond a large yew tree to their right .A hill rose above them to their left .Harry could just make out the outline of a fine old house on the hillside .Cedric looked down at the Triwizard Cup and then up at Harry .Did anyone tell you the cup was a Portkey ?he asked .Nope said Harry .He was looking around the graveyard .It was completely silent and slightly eerie .Is this supposed to be part of the task ?I dunno said Cedric .He sounded slightly nervous .Wands out dyou reckon ?Yeah said Harry glad that Cedric had made the suggestion rather than him .They pulled out their wands .Harry kept looking around him .He had yet again the strange feeling that they were being watched .Someones coming he said suddenly .Squinting tensely through the darkness they watched the figure drawing nearer walking steadily toward them between the graves .Harry couldnt make out a face but from the way it was walking and holding its arms he could tell that it was carrying something .Whoever it was he was short and wearing a hooded cloak pulled up over his head to obscure his face .And several paces nearer the gap between them closing all the time Harry saw that the thing in the persons arms looked like a baby .or was it merely a bundle of robes ?Harry lowered his wand slightly and glanced sideways at Cedric .Cedric shot him a quizzical look .They both turned back to watch the approaching figure .It stopped beside a towering marble headstone only six feet from them .For a second Harry and Cedric and the short figure simply looked at one another .And then without warning Harrys scar exploded with pain .It was agony such as he had never felt in all his life his wand slipped from his fingers as he put his hands over his face his knees buckled he was on the ground and he could see nothing at all his head was about to split open .From far away above his head he heard a high cold voice say Kill the spare .A swishing noise and a second voice which screeched the words to the night Avada KedavraV A blast of green light blazed through Harrys eyelids and he heard something heavy fall to the ground beside him the pain in his scar reached such a pitch that he retched and then it diminished terrified of what he was about to see he opened his stinging eyes .Cedric was lying spreadeagled on the ground beside him .He was dead .For a second that contained an eternity Harry stared into Cedrics face at his open gray eyes blank and expressionless as the windows of a deserted house at his halfopen mouth which looked slightly surprised .And then before Harrys mind had accepted what he was seeing before he could feel anything but numb disbelief he felt himself being pulled to his feet .The short man in the cloak had put down his bundle lit his wand and was dragging Harry toward the marble headstone .Harry saw the name upon it flickering in the wandlight before he was forced around and slammed against it .TOM RIDDLE The cloaked man was now conjuring tight cords around Harry tying him from neck to ankles to the headstone .Harry could hear shallow fast breathing from the depths of the hood he struggled and the man hit him hit him with a hand that had a finger missing .And Harry realized who was under the hood .It was Wormtail .You !he gasped .But Wormtail who had finished conjuring the ropes did not reply he was busy checking the tightness of the cords his fingers trembling uncontrollably fumbling over the knots .Once sure that Harry was bound so tightly to the headstone that he couldnt move an inch Wormtail drew a length of some black material from the inside of his cloak and stuffed it roughly into Harrys mouth then without a word he turned from Harry and hurried away .Harry couldnt make a sound nor could he see where Wormtail had gone he couldnt turn his head to see beyond the headstone he could see only what was right in front of him .Cedrics body was lying some twenty feet away .Some way beyond him glinting in the starlight lay the Triwizard Cup .Harrys wand was on the ground at Cedrics feet .The bundle of robes that Harry had thought was a baby was close by at the foot of the grave .It seemed to be stirring fretfully .Harry watched it and his scar seared with pain again .and he suddenly knew that he didnt want to see what was in those robes .he didnt want that bundle opened .He could hear noises at his feet .He looked down and saw a gigantic snake slithering through the grass circling the headstone where he was tied .Wormtails fast wheezy breathing was growing louder again .It sounded as though he was forcing something heavy across the ground .Then he came back within Harrys range of vision and Harry saw him pushing a stone cauldron to the foot of the grave .It was full of what seemed to be water Harry could hear it slopping around and it was larger than any cauldron Harry had ever used a great stone belly large enough for a fullgrown man to sit in .The thing inside the bundle of robes on the ground was stirring more persistently as though it was trying to free itself .Now Wormtail was busying himself at the bottom of the cauldron with a wand .Suddenly there were crackling flames beneath it .The large snake slithered away into the darkness .The liquid in the cauldron seemed to heat very fast .The surface began not only to bubble but to send out fiery sparks as though it were on fire .Steam was thickening blurring the outline of Wormtail tending the fire .The movements beneath the robes became more agitated .And Harry heard the high cold voice again .Hurry The whole surface of the water was alight with sparks now .It might have been encrusted with diamonds .It is ready Master .Now .said the cold voice .Wormtail pulled open the robes on the ground revealing what was inside them and Harry let out a yell that was strangled in the wad of material blocking his mouth .It was as though Wormtail had flipped over a stone and revealed something ugly slimy and blind but worse a hundred times worse .The thing Wormtail had been carrying had the shape of a crouched human child except that Harry had never seen anything less like a child .It was hairless and scaly looking a dark raw reddish black .Its arms and legs were thin and feeble and its face no child alive ever had a face like that flat and snakelike with gleaming red eyes .The thing seemed almost helpless it raised its thin arms put them around Wormtails neck and Wormtail lifted it .As he did so his hood fell back and Harry saw the look of revulsion on Wormtails weak pale face in the firelight as he carried the creature to the rim of the cauldron .For one moment Harry saw the evil flat face illuminated in the sparks dancing on the surface of the potion .And then Wormtail lowered the creature into the cauldron there was a hiss and it vanished below the surface Harry heard its frail body hit the bottom with a soft thud .Let it drown Harry thought his scar burning almost past endurance please .let it drown .Wormtail was speaking .His voice shook he seemed frightened beyond his wits .He raised his wand closed his eyes and spoke to the night .Bone of the father unknowingly given you will renew your son !The surface of the grave at Harrys feet cracked .Horrified Harry watched as a fine trickle of dust rose into the air at Wormtails command and fell softly into the cauldron .The diamond surface of the water broke and hissed it sent sparks in all directions and turned a vivid poisonouslooking blue .And now Wormtail was whimpering .He pulled a long thin shining silver dagger from inside his cloak .His voice broke into petrified sobs .Flesh of the servant wwillingly given you will revive your master .He stretched his right hand out in front of him the hand with the missing finger .He gripped the dagger very tightly in his left hand and swung it upward .Harry realized what Wormtail was about to do a second before it happened he closed his eyes as tightly as he could but he could not block the scream that pierced the night that went through Harry as though he had been stabbed with the dagger too .He heard something fall to the ground heard Wormtails anguished panting then a sickening splash as something was dropped into the cauldron .Harry couldnt stand to look .but the potion had turned a burning red the light of it shone through Harrys closed eyelids .Wormtail was gasping and moaning with agony .Not until Harry felt Wormtails anguished breath on his face did he realize that Wormtail was right in front of him .Bblood of the enemy .forcibly taken .you will .resurrect your foe .Harry could do nothing to prevent it he was tied too tightly .Squinting down struggling hopelessly at the ropes binding him he saw the shining silver dagger shaking in Wormtails remaining hand .He felt its point penetrate the crook of his right arm and blood seeping down the sleeve of his torn robes .Wormtail still panting with pain fumbled in his pocket for a glass vial and held it to Harrys cut so that a dribble of blood fell into it .He staggered back to the cauldron with Harrys blood .He poured it inside .The liquid within turned instantly a blinding white .Wormtail his job done dropped to his knees beside the cauldron then slumped sideways and lay on the ground cradling the bleeding stump of his arm gasping and sobbing .The cauldron was simmering sending its diamond sparks in all directions so blindingly bright that it turned all else to velvety blackness .Nothing happened .Let it have drowned Harry thought let it have gone wrong .And then suddenly the sparks emanating from the cauldron were extinguished .A surge of white steam billowed thickly from the cauldron instead obliterating everything in front of Harry so that he couldnt see Wormtail or Cedric or anything but vapor hanging in the air .Its gone wrong he thought .its drowned .please .please let it be dead .But then through the mist in front of him he saw with an icy surge of terror the dark outline of a man tall and skeletally thin rising slowly from inside the cauldron .Robe me said the high cold voice from behind the steam and Wormtail sobbing and moaning still cradling his mutilated arm scrambled to pick up the black robes from the ground got to his feet reached up and pulled them onehanded over his masters head .The thin man stepped out of the cauldron staring at Harry .and Harry stared back into the face that had haunted his nightmares for three years .Whiter than a skull with wide livid scarlet eyes and a nose that was flat as a snakes with slits for nostrils .Lord Voldemort had risen again .THE DEATH EATERS Voldemort looked away from Harry and began examining his own body .His hands were like large pale spiders his long white fingers caressed his own chest his arms his face the red eyes whose pupils were slits like a cats gleamed still more brightly through the darkness .He held up his hands and flexed the fingers his expression rapt and exultant .He took not the slightest notice of Wormtail who lay twitching and bleeding on the ground nor of the great snake which had slithered back into sight and was circling Harry again hissing .Voldemort slipped one of those unnaturally longfingered hands into a deep pocket and drew out a wand .He caressed it gently too and then he raised it and pointed it at Wormtail who was lifted off the ground and thrown against the headstone where Harry was tied he fell to the foot of it and lay there crumpled up and crying .Voldemort turned his scarlet eyes upon Harry laughing a high cold mirthless laugh .Wormtails robes were shining with blood now he had wrapped the stump of his arm in them .My Lord .he choked my Lord .you promised .you did promise .Hold out your arm said Voldemort lazily .Oh Master .thank you Master .He extended the bleeding stump but Voldemort laughed again .The other arm Wormtail .Master please .please .Voldemort bent down and pulled out Wormtails left arm he forced the sleeve of Wormtails robes up past his elbow and Harry saw something upon the skin there something like a vivid red tattoo a skull with a snake protruding from its mouth the image that had appeared in the sky at the Quidditch World Cup the Dark Mark .Voldemort examined it carefully ignoring Wormtails uncontrollable weeping .It is back he said softly they will all have noticed it .and now we shall see .now we shall know .He pressed his long white forefinger to the brand on Wormtails arm .The scar on Harrys forehead seared with a sharp pain again and Wormtail let out a fresh howl Voldemort removed his fingers from Wormtails mark and Harry saw that it had turned jet black .A look of cruel satisfaction on his face Voldemort straightened up threw back his head and stared around at the dark graveyard .How many will be brave enough to return when they feel it ?he whispered his gleaming red eyes fixed upon the stars .And how many will be foolish enough to stay away ?He began to pace up and down before Harry and Wormtail eyes sweeping the graveyard all the while .After a minute or so he looked down at Harry again a cruel smile twisting his snakelike face .You stand Harry Potter upon the remains of my late father he hissed softly .A Muggle and a fool .very like your dear mother .But they both had their uses did they not ?Your mother died to defend you as a child .and I killed my father and see how useful he has proved himself in death .Voldemort laughed again .Up and down he paced looking all around him as he walked and the snake continued to circle in the grass .You see that house upon the hillside Potter ?My father lived there .My mother a witch who lived here in this village fell in love with him .But he abandoned her when she told him what she was .He didnt like magic my father .He left her and returned to his Muggle parents before I was even born Potter and she died giving birth to me leaving me to be raised in a Muggle orphanage .but I vowed to find him .I revenged myself upon him that fool who gave me his name .Tom Riddle .Still he paced his red eyes darting from grave to grave .Listen to me reliving family history .he said quietly why I am growing quite sentimental .But look Harry !My true family returns .The air was suddenly full of the swishing of cloaks .Between graves behind the yew tree in every shadowy space wizards were Apparating .All of them were hooded and masked .And one by one they moved forward .slowly cautiously as though they could hardly believe their eyes .Voldemort stood in silence waiting for them .Then one of the Death Eaters fell to his knees crawled toward Voldemort and kissed the hem of his black robes .Master .Master .he murmured .The Death Eaters behind him did the same each of them approaching Voldemort on his knees and kissing his robes before backing away and standing up forming a silent circle which enclosed Tom Riddles grave Harry Voldemort and the sobbing and twitching heap that was Wormtail .Yet they left gaps in the circle as though waiting for more people .Voldemort however did not seem to expect more .He looked around at the hooded faces and though there was no wind a rustling seemed to run around the circle as though it had shivered .Welcome Death Eaters said Voldemort quietly .Thirteen years .thirteen years since last we met .Yet you answer my call as though it were yesterday . .We are still united under the Dark Mark then !Or are we ?He put back his terrible face and sniffed his slitlike nostrils widening .I smell guilt he said .There is a stench of guilt upon the air .A second shiver ran around the circle as though each member of it longed but did not dare to step back from him .I see you all whole and healthy with your powers intact such prompt appearances !and I ask myself .why did this band of wizards never come to the aid of their master to whom they swore eternal loyalty ?No one spoke .No one moved except Wormtail who was upon the ground still sobbing over his bleeding arm .And I answer myself whispered Voldemort they must have believed me broken they thought I was gone .They slipped back among my enemies and they pleaded innocence and ignorance and bewitchment .And then I ask myself but how could they have believed I would not rise again ?They who knew the steps I took long ago to guard myself against mortal death ?They who had seen proofs of the immensity of my power in the times when I was mightier than any wizard living ?And I answer myself perhaps they believed a still greater power could exist one that could vanquish even Lord Voldemort .perhaps they now pay allegiance to another .perhaps that champion of commoners of Mudbloods and Muggles Albus Dumbledore ?At the mention of Dumbledores name the members of the circle stirred and some muttered and shook their heads .Voldemort ignored them .It is a disappointment to me .I confess myself disappointed .One of the men suddenly flung himself forward breaking the circle .Trembling from head to foot he collapsed at Voldemorts feet .Master !he shrieked Master forgive me !Forgive us all !Voldemort began to laugh .He raised his wand .Cruciol The Death Eater on the ground writhed and shrieked Harry was sure the sound must carry to the houses around .Let the police come he thought desperately .anyone .anything .Voldemort raised his wand .The tortured Death Eater lay flat upon the ground gasping .Get up Avery said Voldemort softly .Stand up .You ask for forgiveness ?I do not forgive .I do not forget .Thirteen long years .I want thirteen years repayment before I forgive you .Wormtail here has paid some of his debt already have you not Wormtail ?He looked down at Wormtail who continued to sob .You returned to me not out of loyalty but out of fear of your old friends .You deserve this pain Wormtail .You know that dont you ?Yes Master moaned Wormtail please Master .please .Yet you helped return me to my body said Voldemort coolly watching Wormtail sob on the ground .Worthless and traitorous as you are you helped me .and Lord Voldemort rewards his helpers .Voldemort raised his wand again and whirled it through the air .A streak of what looked like molten silver hung shining in the wands wake .Momentarily shapeless it writhed and then formed itself into a gleaming replica of a human hand bright as moonlight which soared downward and fixed itself upon Wormtails bleeding wrist .Wormtails sobbing stopped abruptly .His breathing harsh and ragged he raised his head and stared in disbelief at the silver hand now attached seamlessly to his arm as though he were wearing a dazzling glove .He flexed the shining fingers then trembling picked up a small twig on the ground and crushed it into powder .My Lord he whispered .Master .it is beautiful .thank you .thank you .He scrambled forward on his knees and kissed the hem of Voldemorts robes .May your loyalty never waver again Wormtail said Voldemort .No my Lord .never my Lord .Wormtail stood up and took his place in the circle staring at his powerful new hand his face still shining with tears .Voldemort now approached the man on Wormtails right .Lucius my slippery friend he whispered halting before him .I am told that you have not renounced the old ways though to the world you present a respectable face .You are still ready to take the lead in a spot of Muggletorture I believe ?Yet you never tried to find me Lucius .Your exploits at the Quidditch World Cup were fun I daresay .but might not your energies have been better directed toward finding and aiding your master ?My Lord I was constantly on the alert came Lucius Malfoys voice swiftly from beneath the hood .Had there been any sign from you any whisper of your whereabouts I would have been at your side immediately nothing could have prevented me And yet you ran from my Mark when a faithful Death Eater sent it into the sky last summer ?said Voldemort lazily and Mr Malfoy stopped talking abruptly .Yes I know all about that Lucius .You have disappointed me .I expect more faithful service in the future .Of course my Lord of course .You are merciful thank you .Voldemort moved on and stopped staring at the space large enough for two people that separated Malfoy and the next man .The Lestranges should stand here said Voldemort quietly .But they are entombed in Azkaban .They were faithful .They went to Azkaban rather than renounce me .When Azkaban is broken open the Lestranges will be honored beyond their dreams .The dementors will join us .they are our natural allies .we will recall the banished giants .I shall have all my devoted servants returned to me and an army of creatures whom all fear .He walked on .Some of the Death Eaters he passed in silence but he paused before others and spoke to them .Macnair .destroying dangerous beasts for the Ministry of Magic now Wormtail tells me ?You shall have better victims than that soon Macnair .Lord Voldemort will provide .Thank you Master .thank you murmured Macnair .And here Voldemort moved on to the two largest hooded figures we have Crabbe .you will do better this time will you not Crabbe ?And you Goyle ?They bowed clumsily muttering dully .Yes Master .We will Master .The same goes for you Nott said Voldemort quietly as he walked past a stooped figure in Mr Goyle s shadow .My Lord I prostrate myself before you I am your most faithful That will do said Voldemort .He had reached the largest gap of all and he stood surveying it with his blank red eyes as though he could see people standing there .And here we have six missing Death Eaters .three dead in my service .One too cowardly to return .he will pay .One who I believe has left me forever .he will be killed of course .and one who remains my most faithful servant and who has already reentered my service .The Death Eaters stirred and Harry saw their eyes dart sideways at one another through their masks .He is at Hogwarts that faithful servant and it was through his efforts that our young friend arrived here tonight .Yes said Voldemort a grin curling his lipless mouth as the eyes of the circle flashed in Harrys direction .Harry Potter has kindly joined us for my rebirthing party .One might go so far as to call him my guest of honor .There was a silence .Then the Death Eater to the right of Wormtail stepped forward and Lucius Malfoys voice spoke from under the mask .Master we crave to know .we beg you to tell us .how you have achieved this .this miracle .how you managed to return to us .Ah what a story it is Lucius said Voldemort .And it begins and ends with my young friend here .He walked lazily over to stand next to Harry so that the eyes of the whole circle were upon the two of them .The snake continued to circle .You know of course that they have called this boy my downfall ?Voldemort said softly his red eyes upon Harry whose scar began to burn so fiercely that he almost screamed in agony .You all know that on the night I lost my powers and my body I tried to kill him .His mother died in the attempt to save him and unwittingly provided him with a protection I admit I had not foreseen .I could not touch the boy .Voldemort raised one of his long white fingers and put it very close to Harrys cheek .His mother left upon him the traces of her sacrifice . .This is old magic I should have remembered it I was foolish to overlook it .but no matter .I can touch him now .Harry felt the cold tip of the long white finger touch him and thought his head would burst with the pain .Voldemort laughed softly in his ear then took the finger away and continued addressing the Death Eaters .I miscalculated my friends I admit it .My curse was deflected by the womans foolish sacrifice and it rebounded upon myself .aah .pain beyond pain my friends nothing could have prepared me for it .I was ripped from my body I was less than spirit less than the meanest ghost .but still I was alive .What I was even I do not know .I who have gone further than anybody along the path that leads to immortality .You know my goal to conquer death .And now I was tested and it appeared that one or more of my experiments had worked .for I had not been killed though the curse should have done it .Nevertheless I was as powerless as the weakest creature alive and without the means to help myself .for I had no body and every spell that might have helped me required the use of a wand .I remember only forcing myself sleeplessly endlessly second by second to exist .I settled in a faraway place in a forest and I waited .Surely one of my faithful Death Eaters would try and find me .one of them would come and perform the magic I could not to restore me to a body .but I waited in vain .The shiver ran once more around the circle of listening Death Eaters .Voldemort let the silence spiral horribly before continuing .Only one power remained to me .I could possess the bodies of others .But I dared not go where other humans were plentiful for I knew that the Aurors were still abroad and searching for me .I sometimes inhabited animals snakes of course being my preference but I was little better off inside them than as pure spirit for their bodies were ill adapted to perform magic .and my possession of them shortened their lives none of them lasted long .Then .four years ago .the means for my return seemed assured .A wizard young foolish and gullible wandered across my path in the forest I had made my home .Oh he seemed the very chance I had been dreaming of .for he was a teacher at Dumbledores school .he was easy to bend to my will .he brought me back to this country and after a while I took possession of his body to supervise him closely as he carried out my orders .But my plan failed .I did not manage to steal the Sorcerers Stone .I was not to be assured immortal life .I was thwarted .thwarted once again by Harry Potter .Silence once more nothing was stirring not even the leaves on the yew tree .The Death Eaters were quite motionless the glittering eyes in their masks fixed upon Voldemort and upon Harry .The servant died when I left his body and I was left as weak as ever I had been Voldemort continued .I returned to my hiding place far away and I will not pretend to you that I didnt then fear that I might never regain my powers .Yes that was perhaps my darkest hour .I could not hope that I would be sent another wizard to possess .and I had given up hope now that any of my Death Eaters cared what had become of me .One or two of the masked wizards in the circle moved uncomfortably but Voldemort took no notice .And then not even a year ago when I had almost abandoned hope it happened at last .a servant returned to me .Wormtail here who had faked his own death to escape justice was driven out of hiding by those he had once counted friends and decided to return to his master .He sought me in the country where it had long been rumored I was hiding .helped of course by the rats he met along the way .Wormtail has a curious affinity with rats do you not Wormtail ?His filthy little friends told him there was a place deep in an Albanian forest that they avoided where small animals like themselves had met their deaths by a dark shadow that possessed them .But his journey back to me was not smooth was it Wormtail ?For hungry one night on the edge of the very forest where he had hoped to find me he foolishly stopped at an inn for some food .and who should he meet there but one Bertha Jorkins a witch from the Ministry of Magic .Now see the way that fate favors Lord Voldemort .This might have been the end of Wormtail and of my last hope for regeneration .But Wormtail displaying a presence of mind I would never have expected from him convinced Bertha Jorkins to accompany him on a nighttime stroll .He overpowered her .he brought her to me .And Bertha Jorkins who might have ruined all proved instead to be a gift beyond my wildest dreams .for with a little persuasion she became a veritable mine of information .She told me that the Triwizard Tournament would be played at Hogwarts this year .She told me that she knew of a faithful Death Eater who would be only too willing to help me if I could only contact him .She told me many things .but the means I used to break the Memory Charm upon her were powerful and when I had extracted all useful information from her her mind and body were both damaged beyond repair .She had now served her purpose .I could not possess her .I disposed of her .Voldemort smiled his terrible smile his red eyes blank and pitiless .Wormtails body of course was ill adapted for possession as all assumed him dead and would attract far too much attention if noticed .However he was the ablebodied servant I needed and poor wizard though he is Wormtail was able to follow the instructions I gave him which would return me to a rudimentary weak body of my own a body I would be able to inhabit while awaiting the essential ingredients for true rebirth .a spell or two of my own invention .a little help from my dear Nagini Voldemorts red eyes fell upon the continually circling snake a potion concocted from unicorn blood and the snake venom Nagini provided .I was soon returned to an almost human form and strong enough to travel .There was no hope of stealing the Sorcerers Stone anymore for I knew that Dumbledore would have seen to it that it was destroyed .But I was willing to embrace mortal life again before chasing immortality .I set my sights lower .I would settle for my old body back again and my old strength .I knew that to achieve this it is an old piece of Dark Magic the potion that revived me tonight I would need three powerful ingredients .Well one of them was already at hand was it not Wormtail ?Flesh given by a servant .My fathers bone naturally meant that we would have to come here where he was buried .But the blood of a foe .Wormtail would have had me use any wizard would you not Wormtail ?Any wizard who had hated me .as so many of them still do .But I knew the one I must use if I was to rise again more powerful than I had been when I had fallen .I wanted Harry Potters blood .I wanted the blood of the one who had stripped me of power thirteen years ago .for the lingering protection his mother once gave him would then reside in my veins too .But how to get at Harry Potter ?For he has been better protected than I think even he knows protected in ways devised by Dumbledore long ago when it fell to him to arrange the boys future .Dumbledore invoked an ancient magic to ensure the boys protection as long as he is in his relations care .Not even I can touch him there .Then of course there was the Quidditch World Cup .I thought his protection might be weaker there away from his relations and Dumbledore but I was not yet strong enough to attempt kidnap in the midst of a horde of Ministry wizards .And then the boy would return to Hogwarts where he is under the crooked nose of that Muggleloving fool from morning until night .So how could I take him ?Why .by using Bertha Jorkinss information of course .Use my one faithful Death Eater stationed at Hogwarts to ensure that the boys name was entered into the Goblet of Fire .Use my Death Eater to ensure that the boy won the tournament that he touched the Triwizard Cup first the cup which my Death Eater had turned into a Portkey which would bring him here beyond the reach of Dumbledores help and protection and into my waiting arms .And here he is .the boy you all believed had been my downfall .Voldemort moved slowly forward and turned to face Harry .He raised his wand .Crucio It was pain beyond anything Harry had ever experienced his very bones were on fire his head was surely splitting along his scar his eyes were rolling madly in his head he wanted it to end .to black out .to die .And then it was gone .He was hanging limply in the ropes binding him to the headstone of Voldemorts father looking up into those bright red eyes through a kind of mist .The night was ringing with the sound of the Death Eaters laughter .You see I think how foolish it was to suppose that this boy could ever have been stronger than me said Voldemort .But I want there to be no mistake in anybodys mind .Harry Potter escaped me by a lucky chance .And I am now going to prove my power by killing him here and now in front of you all when there is no Dumbledore to help him and no mother to die for him .I will give him his chance .He will be allowed to fight and you will be left in no doubt which of us is the stronger .Just a little longer Nagini he whispered and the snake glided away through the grass to where the Death Eaters stood watching .Now untie him Wormtail and give him back his wand .PRIORI INCANTATEM Wormtail approached Harry who scrambled to find his feet to support his own weight before the ropes were untied .Wormtail raised his new silver hand pulled out the wad of material gagging Harry and then with one swipe cut through the bonds tying Harry to the gravestone .There was a split second perhaps when Harry might have considered running for it but his injured leg shook under him as he stood on the overgrown grave as the Death Eaters closed ranks forming a tighter circle around him and Voldemort so that the gaps where the missing Death Eaters should have stood were filled .Wormtail walked out of the circle to the place where Cedrics body lay and returned with Harrys wand which he thrust roughly into Harrys hand without looking at him .Then Wormtail resumed his place in the circle of watching Death Eaters .You have been taught how to duel Harry Potter ?said Voldemort softly his red eyes glinting through the darkness .At these words Harry remembered as though from a former life the dueling club at Hogwarts he had attended briefly two years ago .All he had learned there was the Disarming Spell Expelliarmus .and what use would it be to deprive Voldemort of his wand even if he could when he was surrounded by Death Eaters outnumbered by at least thirty to one ?He had never learned anything that could possibly fit him for this .He knew he was facing the thing against which Moody had always warned .the unblockable Avada Kedavra curse and Voldemort was right his mother was not here to die for him this time .He was quite unprotected .We bow to each other Harry said Voldemort bending a little but keeping his snakelike face upturned to Harry .Come the niceties must be observed .Dumbledore would like you to show manners .Bow to death Harry .The Death Eaters were laughing again .Voldemorts lipless mouth was smiling .Harry did not bow .He was not going to let Voldemort play with him before killing him .he was not going to give him that satisfaction .I said bow Voldemort said raising his wand and Harry felt his spine curve as though a huge invisible hand were bending him ruthlessly forward and the Death Eaters laughed harder than ever .Very good said Voldemort softly and as he raised his wand the pressure bearing down upon Harry lifted too .And now you face me like a man .straight backed and proud the way your father died .And now we duel .Voldemort raised his wand and before Harry could do anything to defend himself before he could even move he had been hit again by the Cruciatus Curse .The pain was so intense so allconsuming that he no longer knew where he was .Whitehot knives were piercing every inch of his skin his head was surely going to burst with pain he was screaming more loudly than hed ever screamed in his life And then it stopped .Harry rolled over and scrambled to his feet he was shaking as uncontrollably as Wormtail had done when his hand had been cut off he staggered sideways into the wall of watching Death Eaters and they pushed him away back toward Voldemort .A little break said Voldemort the slitlike nostrils dilating with excitement a little pause .That hurt didnt it Harry ?You dont want me to do that again do you ?Harry didnt answer .He was going to die like Cedric those pitiless red eyes were telling him so .he was going to die and there was nothing he could do about it .but he wasnt going to play along .He wasnt going to obey Voldemort .he wasnt going to beg .I asked you whether you want me to do that again said Voldemort softly .Answer me !ImperioV And Harry felt for the third time in his life the sensation that his mind had been wiped of all thought .Ah it was bliss not to think it was as though he were floating dreaming .just answer no .say no .just answer no .I will not said a stronger voice in the back of his head I wont answer .Just answer no .I wont do it I wont say it .Just answer no .I WONT !And these words burst from Harrys mouth they echoed through the graveyard and the dream state was lifted as suddenly as though cold water had been thrown over him back rushed the aches that the Cruciatus Curse had left all over his body back rushed the realization of where he was and what he was facing .You wont ?said Voldemort quietly and the Death Eaters were not laughing now .You wont say no ?Harry obedience is a virtue I need to teach you before you die .Perhaps another little dose of pain ?Voldemort raised his wand but this time Harry was ready with the reflexes born of his Quidditch training he flung himself sideways onto the ground he rolled behind the marble headstone of Voldemorts father and he heard it crack as the curse missed him .We are not playing hideandseek Harry said Voldemorts soft cold voice drawing nearer as the Death Eaters laughed .You cannot hide from me .Does this mean you are tired of our duel ?Does this mean that you would prefer me to finish it now Harry ?Come out Harry .come out and play then .it will be quick .it might even be painless .I would not know .I have never died .Harry crouched behind the headstone and knew the end had come .There was no hope .no help to be had .And as he heard Voldemort draw nearer still he knew one thing only and it was beyond fear or reason He was not going to die crouching here like a child playing hideandseek he was not going to die kneeling at Voldemorts feet .he was going to die upright like his father and he was going to die trying to defend himself even if no defense was possible .Before Voldemort could stick his snakelike face around the headstone Harry stood up .he gripped his wand tightly in his hand thrust it out in front of him and threw himself around the headstone facing Voldemort .Voldemort was ready .As Harry shouted ExpelliarmusV Voldemort cried Avada KedavraV A jet of green light issued from Voldemorts wand just as a jet of red light blasted from Harrys they met in midair and suddenly Harrys wand was vibrating as though an electric charge were surging through it his hand seized up around it he couldnt have released it if hed wanted to and a narrow beam of light connected the two wands neither red nor green but bright deep gold .Harry following the beam with his astonished gaze saw that Voldemorts long white fingers too were gripping a wand that was shaking and vibrating .And then nothing could have prepared Harry for this he felt his feet lift from the ground .He and Voldemort were both being raised into the air their wands still connected by that thread of shimmering golden light .They glided away from the tombstone of Voldemorts father and then came to rest on a patch of ground that was clear and free of graves .The Death Eaters were shouting they were asking Voldemort for instructions they were closing in reforming the circle around Harry and Voldemort the snake slithering at their heels some of them drawing their wands The golden thread connecting Harry and Voldemort splintered though the wands remained connected a thousand more beams arced high over Harry and Voldemort crisscrossing all around them until they were enclosed in a golden domeshaped web a cage of light beyond which the Death Eaters circled like jackals their cries strangely muffled now .Do nothing !Voldemort shrieked to the Death Eaters and Harry saw his red eyes wide with astonishment at what was happening saw him fighting to break the thread of light still connecting his wand with Harrys Harry held onto his wand more tightly with both hands and the golden thread remained unbroken .Do nothing unless I command you !Voldemort shouted to the Death Eaters .And then an unearthly and beautiful sound filled the air .It was coming from every thread of the light spun web vibrating around Harry and Voldemort .It was a sound Harry recognized though he had heard it only once before in his life phoenix song .It was the sound of hope to Harry .the most beautiful and welcome thing he had ever heard in his life .He felt as though the song were inside him instead of just around him .It was the sound he connected with Dumbledore and it was almost as though a friend were speaking in his ear .Dont break the connection .I know Harry told the music I know I mustnt .but no sooner had he thought it than the thing became much harder to do .His wand began to vibrate more powerfully than ever .and now the beam between him and Voldemort changed too .it was as though large beads of light were sliding up and down the thread connecting the wands Harry felt his wand give a shudder under his hand as the light beads began to slide slowly and steadily his way .The direction of the beams movement was now toward him from Voldemort and he felt his wand shudder angrily .As the closest bead of light moved nearer to Harrys wand tip the wood beneath his fingers grew so hot he feared it would burst into flame .The closer that bead moved the harder Harrys wand vibrated he was sure his wand would not survive contact with it it felt as though it was about to shatter under his fingers He concentrated every last particle of his mind upon forcing the bead back toward Voldemort his ears full of phoenix song his eyes furious fixed .and slowly very slowly the beads quivered to a halt and then just as slowly they began to move the other way .and it was Voldemort s wand that was vibrating extra hard now .Voldemort who looked astonished and almost fearful .One of the beads of light was quivering inches from the tip of Voldemorts wand .Harry didnt understand why he was doing it didnt know what it might achieve .but he now concentrated as he had never done in his life on forcing that bead of light right back into Voldemorts wand .and slowly .very slowly .it moved along the golden thread .it trembled for a moment .and then it connected .At once Voldemorts wand began to emit echoing screams of pain .then Voldemorts red eyes widened with shock a dense smoky hand flew out of the tip of it and vanished .the ghost of the hand he had made Wormtail .more shouts of pain .and then something much larger began to blossom from Voldemorts wand tip a great grayish something that looked as though it were made of the solidest densest smoke .It was a head .now a chest and arms .the torso of Cedric Diggory .If ever Harry might have released his wand from shock it would have been then but instinct kept him clutching his wand tightly so that the thread of golden light remained unbroken even though the thick gray ghost of Cedric Diggory was it a ghost ?it looked so solid emerged in its entirety from the end of Voldemorts wand as though it were squeezing itself out of a very narrow tunnel .and this shade of Cedric stood up and looked up and down the golden thread of light and spoke .Hold on Harry it said .Its voice was distant and echoing .Harry looked at Voldemort .his wide red eyes were still shocked .he had no more expected this than Harry had .and very dimly Harry heard the frightened yells of the Death Eaters paround the edges of the golden dome .More screams of pain from the wand .and then something else emerged from its tip .the dense shadow of a second head quickly followed by arms and torso .an old man Harry had seen only in a dream was now pushing himself out of the end of the wand just as Cedric had done .and his ghost or his shadow or whatever it was fell next to Cedrics and surveyed Harry and Voldemort and the golden web and the connected wands with mild surprise leaning on his walking stick .He was a real wizard then ?the old man said his eyes on Voldemort .Killed me that one did .You fight him boy .But already yet another head was emerging .and this head gray as a smoky statue was a womans .Harry both arms shaking now as he fought to keep his wand still saw her drop to the ground and straighten up like the others staring .The shadow of Bertha Jorkins surveyed the battle before her with wide eyes .Dont let go now !she cried and her voice echoed like Cedrics as though from very far away .Dont let him get you Harry dont let go !She and the other two shadowy figures began to pace around the inner walls of the golden web while the Death Eaters flitted around the outside of it .and Voldemorts dead victims whispered as they circled the duelers whispered words of encouragement to Harry and hissed words Harry couldnt hear to Voldemort .And now another head was emerging from the tip of Voldemorts wand .and Harry knew when he saw it who it would be .he knew as though he had expected it from the moment when Cedric had appeared from the wand .knew because the woman was the one hed thought of more than any other tonight .The smoky shadow of a young woman with long hair fell to the ground as Bertha had done straightened up and looked at him .and Harry his arms shaking madly now looked back into the ghostly face of his mother .Your fathers coming .she said quietly .Hold on for your father .it will be all right .hold on .And he came .first his head then his body .tall and untidyhaired like Harry the smoky shadowy form of James Potter blossomed from the end of Voldemorts wand fell to the ground and straightened like his wife .He walked close to Harry looking down at him and he spoke in the same distant echoing voice as the others but quietly so that Voldemort his face now livid with fear as his victims prowled around him could not hear .When the connection is broken we will linger for only moments .but we will give you time .you must get to the Portkey it will return you to Hogwarts .do you understand Harry ?Yes Harry gasped fighting now to keep a hold on his wand which was slipping and sliding beneath his fingers .Harry .whispered the figure of Cedric take my body back will you ?Take my body back to my parents .I will said Harry his face screwed up with the effort of holding the wand .Do it now whispered his fathers voice be ready to run .do it now .NOW !Harry yelled he didnt think he could have held on for another moment anyway he pulled his wand upward with an almighty wrench and the golden thread broke the cage of light vanished the phoenix song died but the shadowy figures of Voldemorts victims did not disappear they were closing in upon Voldemort shielding Harry from his gaze And Harry ran as he had never run in his life knocking two stunned Death Eaters aside as he passed he zigzagged behind headstones feeling their curses following him hearing them hit the headstones he was dodging curses and graves pelting toward Cedrics body no longer aware of the pain in his leg his whole being concentrated on what he had to do Stun him he heard Voldemort scream .Ten feet from Cedric Harry dived behind a marble angel to avoid the jets of red light and saw the tip of its wing shatter as the spells hit it .Gripping his wand more tightly he dashed out from behind the angel Impedimental he bellowed pointing his wand wildly over his shoulder at the Death Eaters running at him .From a muffled yell he thought he had stopped at least one of them but there was no time to stop and look he jumped over the cup and dived as he heard more wand blasts behind him more jets of light flew over his head as he fell stretching out his hand to grab Cedrics arm Stand aside !I will kill him !He is mine !shrieked Voldemort .Harrys hand had closed on Cedrics wrist one tombstone stood between him and Voldemort but Cedric was too heavy to carry and the cup was out of reach Voldemorts red eyes flamed in the darkness .Harry saw his mouth curl into a smile saw him raise his wand .Acciol Harry yelled pointing his wand at the Triwizard Cup .It flew into the air and soared toward him .Harry caught it by the handle He heard Voldemorts scream of fury at the same moment that he felt the jerk behind his navel that meant the Portkey had worked it was speeding him away in a whirl of wind and color and Cedric along with him .They were going back .VERITASERUM Harry felt himself slam flat into the ground his face was pressed into grass the smell of it filled his nostrils .He had closed his eyes while the Portkey transported him and he kept them closed now .He did not move .All the breath seemed to have been knocked out of him his head was swimming so badly he felt as though the ground beneath him were swaying like the deck of a ship .To hold himself steady he tightened his hold on the two things he was still clutching the smooth cold handle of the Tri wizard Cup and Cedrics body .He felt as though he would slide away into the blackness gathering at the edges of his brain if he let go of either of them .Shock and exhaustion kept him on the ground breathing in the smell of the grass waiting .waiting for someone to do something .something to happen .and all the while his scar burned dully on his forehead .A torrent of sound deafened and confused him there were voices everywhere footsteps screams .He remained where he was his face screwed up against the noise as though it were a nightmare that would pass .Then a pair of hands seized him roughly and turned him over .Harry !HarryV He opened his eyes .He was looking up at the starry sky and Albus Dumbledore was crouched over him .The dark shadows of a crowd of people pressed in around them pushing nearer Harry felt the ground beneath his head reverberating with their footsteps .He had come back to the edge of the maze .He could see the stands rising above him the shapes of people moving in them the stars above .Harry let go of the cup but he clutched Cedric to him even more tightly .He raised his free hand and seized Dumbledore s wrist while Dumbledore s face swam in and out of focus .Hes back Harry whispered .Hes back .Voldemort .Whats going on ?Whats happened ?The face of Cornelius Fudge appeared upside down over Harry it looked white appalled .My God Diggory !it whispered .Dumbledore hes dead !The words were repeated the shadowy figures pressing in on them gasped it to those around them .and then others shouted it screeched it into the night Hes dead !Hes dead !Cedric Diggory !Dead .Harry let go of him he heard Fudges voice say and he felt fingers trying to pry him from Cedrics limp body but Harry wouldnt let him go .Then Dumbledores face which was still blurred and misted came closer .Harry you cant help him now .Its over .Let go .He wanted me to bring him back Harry muttered it seemed important to explain this .He wanted me to bring him back to his parents .Thats right Harry .just let go now .Dumbledore bent down and with extraordinary strength for a man so old and thin raised Harry from the ground and set him on his feet .Harry swayed .His head was pounding .His injured leg would no longer support his weight .The crowd around them jostled fighting to get closer pressing darkly in on him Whats happened ?Whats wrong with him ?Dig gorys dead Hell need to go to the hospital wing !Fudge was saying loudly .Hes ill hes injured Dumbledore Diggorys parents theyre here theyre in the stands .Ill take Harry Dumbledore Ill take him No I would prefer Dumbledore Amos Diggorys running .hes coming over .Dont you think you should tell him before he sees ?Harry stay here Girls were screaming sobbing hysterically .The scene flickered oddly before Harrys eyes .Its all right son Ive got you .come on .hospital wing .Dumbledore said stay said Harry thickly the pounding in his scar making him feel as though he was about to throw up his vision was blurring worse than ever .You need to lie down .Come on now .Someone larger and stronger than he was was half pulling half carrying him through the frightened crowd .Harry heard people gasping screaming and shouting as the man supporting him pushed a path through them taking him back to the castle .Across the lawn past the lake and the Durmstrang ship Harry heard nothing but the heavy breathing of the man helping him walk .What happened Harry ?the man asked at last as he lifted Harry up the stone steps .Clunk .Clunk .Clunk .It was MadEye Moody .Cup was a Portkey said Harry as they crossed the entrance hall .Took me and Cedric to a graveyard .and Voldemort was there .Lord Voldemort .Clunk .Clunk .Clunk .Up the marble stairs .The Dark Lord was there ?What happened then ?Killed Cedric .they killed Cedric .And then ?Clunk .Clunk .Clunk .Along the corridor .Made a potion .got his body back .The Dark Lord got his body back ?Hes returned ?And the Death Eaters came .and then we dueled .You dueled with the Dark Lord ?Got away .my wand .did something funny .I saw my mum and dad .they came out of his wand .In here Harry .in here and sit down .Youll be all right now .drink this .Harry heard a key scrape in a lock and felt a cup being pushed into his hands .Drink it .youll feel better .come on now Harry I need to know exactly what happened .Moody helped tip the stuff down Harrys throat he coughed a peppery taste burning his throat .Moodys office came into sharper focus and so did Moody himself .He looked as white as Fudge had looked and both eyes were fixed unblinkingly upon Harrys face .Voldemorts back Harry ?Youre sure hes back ?How did he do it ?He took stuff from his fathers grave and from Wormtail and me said Harry .His head felt clearer his scar wasnt hurting so badly he could now see Moodys face distinctly even though the office was dark .He could still hear screaming and shouting from the distant Quidditch field .What did the Dark Lord take from you ?said Moody .Blood said Harry raising his arm .His sleeve was ripped where Wormtails dagger had torn it .Moody let out his breath in a long low hiss .And the Death Eaters ?They returned ?Yes said Harry .Loads of them .How did he treat them ?Moody asked quietly .Did he forgive them ?But Harry had suddenly remembered .He should have told Dumbledore he should have said it straightaway Theres a Death Eater at Hogwarts !Theres a Death Eater here they put my name in the Goblet of Fire they made sure I got through to the end Harry tried to get up but Moody pushed him back down .I know who the Death Eater is he said quietly .Karkaroff ?said Harry wildly .Where is he ?Have you got him ?Is he locked up ?Karkaroff ?said Moody with an odd laugh .Karkaroff fled tonight when he felt the Dark Mark burn upon his arm .He betrayed too many faithful supporters of the Dark Lord to wish to meet them .but I doubt he will get far .The Dark Lord has ways of tracking his enemies .Karkaroffs gone ?He ran away ?But then he didnt put my name in the goblet ?No said Moody slowly .No he didnt .It was I who did that .Harry heard but didnt believe .No you didnt he said .You didnt do that .you cant have done .I assure you I did said Moody and his magical eye swung around and fixed upon the door and Harry knew he was making sure that there was no one outside it .At the same time Moody drew out his wand and pointed it at Harry .He forgave them then ?he said .The Death Eaters who went free ?The ones who escaped Azkaban ?What ?said Harry .He was looking at the wand Moody was pointing at him .This was a bad joke it had to be .I asked you said Moody quietly whether he forgave the scum who never even went to look for him .Those treacherous cowards who wouldnt even brave Azkaban for him .The faithless worthless bits of filth who were brave enough to cavort in masks at the Quidditch World Cup but fled at the sight of the Dark Mark when I fired it into the sky .You fired .What are you talking about . ?I told you Harry .I told you .If theres one thing I hate more than any other its a Death Eater who walked free .They turned their backs on my master when he needed them most .I expected him to punish them .I expected him to torture them .Tell me he hurt them Harry .Moodys face was suddenly lit with an insane smile .Tell me he told them that I I alone remained faithful .prepared to risk everything to deliver to him the one thing he wanted above all .you .You didnt .it it cant be you .Who put your name in the Goblet of Fire under the name of a different school ?I did .Who frightened off every person I thought might try to hurt you or prevent you from winning the tournament ?I did .Who nudged Hagrid into showing you the dragons ?I did .Who helped you see the only way you could beat the dragon ?I did .Moodys magical eye had now left the door .It was fixed upon Harry .His lopsided mouth leered more widely than ever .It hasnt been easy Harry guiding you through these tasks without arousing suspicion .I have had to use every ounce of cunning I possess so that my hand would not be detectable in your success .Dumbledore would have been very suspicious if you had managed everything too easily .As long as you got into that maze preferably with a decent head start then I knew I would have a chance of getting rid of the other champions and leaving your way clear .But I also had to contend with your stupidity .The second task .that was when I was most afraid we would fail .I was keeping watch on you Potter .I knew you hadnt worked out the eggs clue so I had to give you another hint You didnt Harry said hoarsely .Cedric gave me the clue Who told Cedric to open it underwater ?I did .I trusted that he would pass the information on to you .Decent people are so easy to manipulate Potter .I was sure Cedric would want to repay you for telling him about the dragons and so he did .But even then Potter even then you seemed likely to fail .I was watching all the time .all those hours in the library .Didnt you realize that the book you needed was in your dormitory all along ?I planted it there early on I gave it to the Longbottom boy dont you remember ?Magical Water Plants of the Mediterranean .It would have told you all you needed to know about gillyweed .I expected you to ask everyone and anyone you could for help .Longbottom would have told you in an instant .But you did not .you did not .You have a streak of pride and independence that might have ruined all .So what could I do ?Feed you information from another innocent source .You told me at the Yule Ball a houseelf called Dobby had given you a Christmas present .I called the elf to the staffroom to collect some robes for cleaning .I staged a loud conversation with Professor McGonagall about the hostages who had been taken and whether Potter would think to use gillyweed .And your little elf friend ran straight to Snapes office and then hurried to find you .Moodys wand was still pointing directly at Harrys heart .Over his shoulder foggy shapes were moving in the FoeGlass on the wall .You were so long in that lake Potter I thought you had drowned .But luckily Dumbledore took your idiocy for nobility and marked you high for it .I breathed again .You had an easier time of it than you should have in that maze tonight of course said Moody .I was patrolling around it able to see through the outer hedges able to curse many obstacles out of your way .I Stunned Fleur Delacour as she passed .I put the Imperius Curse on Krum so that he would finish Diggory and leave your path to the cup clear .Harry stared at Moody .He just didnt see how this could be .Dumbledores friend the famous Auror .the one who had caught so many Death Eaters .It made no sense .no sense at all .The foggy shapes in the FoeGlass were sharpening had become more distinct .Harry could see the outlines of three people over Moodys shoulder moving closer and closer .But Moody wasnt watching them .His magical eye was upon Harry .The Dark Lord didnt manage to kill you Potter and he so wanted to whispered Moody .Imagine how he will reward me when he finds I have done it for him .I gave you to him the thing he needed above all to regenerate and then I killed you for him .I will be honored beyond all other Death Eaters .I will be his dearest his closest supporter .closer than a son .Moodys normal eye was bulging the magical eye fixed upon Harry .The door was barred and Harry knew he would never reach his own wand in time .The Dark Lord and I said Moody and he looked completely insane now towering over Harry leering down at him have much in common .Both of us for instance had very disappointing fathers .very disappointing indeed .Both of us suffered the indignity Harry of being named after those fathers .And both of us had the pleasure .the very great pleasure .of killing our fathers to ensure the continued rise of the Dark Order !Youre mad Harry said he couldnt stop himself youre mad !Mad am I ?said Moody his voice rising uncontrollably .Well see !Well see whos mad now that the Dark Lord has returned with me at his side !He is back Harry Potter you did not conquer him and now I conquer you !Moody raised his wand he opened his mouth Harry plunged his own hand into his robes Stupefy There was a blinding flash of red light and with a great splintering and crashing the door of Moodys office was blasted apart Moody was thrown backward onto the office floor .Harry still staring at the place where Moodys face had been saw Albus Dumbledore Professor Snape and Professor McGonagall looking back at him out of the FoeGlass .He looked around and saw the three of them standing in the doorway Dumbledore in front his wand outstretched .At that moment Harry fully understood for the first time why people said Dumbledore was the only wizard Voldemort had ever feared .The look upon Dumbledore s face as he stared down at the unconscious form of MadEye Moody was more terrible than Harry could have ever imagined .There was no benign smile upon Dumbledore s face no twinkle in the eyes behind the spectacles .There was cold fury in every line of the ancient face a sense of power radiated from Dumbledore as though he were giving off burning heat .He stepped into the office placed a foot underneath Moodys unconscious body and kicked him over onto his back so that his face was visible .Snape followed him looking into the FoeGlass where his own face was still visible glaring into the room .Professor McGonagall went straight to Harry .Come along Potter she whispered .The thin line of her mouth was twitching as though she was about to cry .Come along .hospital wing .No said Dumbledore sharply .Dumbledore he ought to look at him hes been through enough tonight He will stay Minerva because he needs to understand said Dumbledore curtly .Understanding is the first step to acceptance and only with acceptance can there be recovery .He needs to know who has put him through the ordeal he has suffered tonight and why .Moody Harry said .He was still in a state of complete disbelief .How can it have been Moody ?This is not Alastor Moody said Dumbledore quietly .You have never known Alastor Moody .The real Moody would not have removed you from my sight after what happened tonight .The moment he took you I knew and I followed .Dumbledore bent down over Moodys limp form and put a hand inside his robes .He pulled out Moodys hip flask and a set of keys on a ring .Then he turned to Professors McGonagall and Snape .Severus please fetch me the strongest Truth Potion you possess and then go down to the kitchens and bring up the houseelf called Winky .Minerva kindly go down to Hagrids house where you will find a large black dog sitting in the pumpkin patch .Take the dog up to my office tell him I will be with him shortly then come back here .If either Snape or McGonagall found these instructions peculiar they hid their confusion .Both turned at once and left the office .Dumbledore walked over to the trunk with seven locks fitted the first key in the lock and opened it .It contained a mass of spellbooks .Dumbledore closed the trunk placed a second key in the second lock and opened the trunk again .The spellbooks had vanished this time it contained an assortment of broken Sneakoscopes some parchment and quills and what looked like a silvery Invisibility Cloak .Harry watched astounded as Dumbledore placed the third fourth fifth and sixth keys in their respective locks reopening the trunk and each time revealing different contents .Then he placed the seventh key in the lock threw open the lid and Harry let out a cry of amazement .He was looking down into a kind of pit an underground room and lying on the floor some ten feet below apparently fast asleep thin and starved in appearance was the real MadEye Moody .His wooden leg was gone the socket that should have held the magical eye looked empty beneath its lid and chunks of his grizzled hair were missing .Harry stared thunderstruck between the sleeping Moody in the trunk and the unconscious Moody lying on the floor of the office .Dumbledore climbed into the trunk lowered himself and fell lightly onto the floor beside the sleeping Moody .He bent over him .Stunned controlled by the Imperius Curse very weak he said .Of course they would have needed to keep him alive .Harry throw down the imposters cloak hes freezing .Madam Pomfrey will need to see him but he seems in no immediate danger .Harry did as he was told Dumbledore covered Moody in the cloak tucked it around him and clambered out of the trunk again .Then he picked up the hip flask that stood upon the desk unscrewed it and turned it over .A thick glutinous liquid splattered onto the office floor .Polyjuice Potion Harry said Dumbledore .You see the simplicity of it and the brilliance .For Moody never does drink except from his hip flask hes well known for it .The imposter needed of course to keep the real Moody close by so that he could continue making the potion .You see his hair .Dumbledore looked down on the Moody in the trunk .The imposter has been cutting it off all year see where it is uneven ?But I think in the excitement of tonight our fake Moody might have forgotten to take it as frequently as he should have done .on the hour .every hour .We shall see .Dumbledore pulled out the chair at the desk and sat down upon it his eyes fixed upon the unconscious Moody on the floor .Harry stared at him too .Minutes passed in silence .Then before Harrys very eyes the face of the man on the floor began to change .The scars were disappearing the skin was becoming smooth the mangled nose became whole and started to shrink .The long mane of grizzled gray hair was withdrawing into the scalp and turning the color of straw .Suddenly with a loud clunk the wooden leg fell away as a normal leg regrew in its place next moment the magical eyeball had popped out of the mans face as a real eye replaced it it rolled away across the floor and continued to swivel in every direction .Harry saw a man lying before him paleskinned slightly freckled with a mop of fair hair .He knew who he was .He had seen him in Dumbledores Pensieve had watched him being led away from court by the dementors trying to convince Mr Crouch that he was innocent .but he was lined around the eyes now and looked much older .There were hurried footsteps outside in the corridor .Snape had returned with Winky at his heels .Professor McGonagall was right behind them .Crouch !Snape said stopping dead in the doorway .Barty Crouch !Good heavens said Professor McGonagall stopping dead and staring down at the man on the floor .Filthy disheveled Winky peered around Snapes legs .Her mouth opened wide and she let out a piercing shriek .Master Barty Master Barty what is you doing here ?She flung herself forward onto the young mans chest .You is killed him !You is killed him !You is killed Masters son !He is simply Stunned Winky said Dumbledore .Step aside please .Severus you have the potion ?Snape handed Dumbledore a small glass bottle of completely clear liquid the Veritaserum with which he had threatened Harry in class .Dumbledore got up bent over the man on the floor and pulled him into a sitting position against the wall beneath the Foe Glass in which the reflections of Dumbledore Snape and McGonagall were still glaring down upon them all .Winky remained on her knees trembling her hands over her face .Dumbledore forced the mans mouth open and poured three drops inside it .Then he pointed his wand at the mans chest and said Rennervate .Crouchs son opened his eyes .His face was slack his gaze unfocused .Dumbledore knelt before him so that their faces were level .Can you hear me ?Dumbledore asked quietly .The mans eyelids flickered .Yes he muttered .I would like you to tell us said Dumbledore softly how you came to be here .How did you escape from Azkaban ?Crouch took a deep shuddering breath then began to speak in a flat expressionless voice .My mother saved me .She knew she was dying .She persuaded my father to rescue me as a last favor to her .He loved her as he had never loved me .He agreed .They came to visit me .They gave me a draft of Polyjuice Potion containing one of my mothers hairs .She took a draft of Polyjuice Potion containing one of my hairs .We took on each others appearance .Winky was shaking her head trembling .Say no more Master Barty say no more you is getting your father into trouble !But Crouch took another deep breath and continued in the same flat voice .The dementors are blind .They sensed one healthy one dying person entering Azkaban .They sensed one healthy one dying person leaving it .My father smuggled me out disguised as my mother in case any prisoners were watching through their doors .My mother died a short while afterward in Azkaban .She was careful to drink Polyjuice Potion until the end .She was buried under my name and bearing my appearance .Everyone believed her to be me .The mans eyelids flickered .And what did your father do with you when he had got you home ?said Dumbledore quietly .Staged my mothers death .A quiet private funeral .That grave is empty .The houseelf nursed me back to health .Then I had to be concealed .I had to be controlled .My father had to use a number of spells to subdue me .When I had recovered my strength I thought only of finding my master .of returning to his service .How did your father subdue you ?said Dumbledore .The Imperius Curse Crouch said .I was under my fathers control .I was forced to wear an Invisibility Cloak day and night .I was always with the houseelf .She was my keeper and caretaker .She pitied me .She persuaded my father to give me occasional treats .Rewards for my good behavior .Master Barty Master Barty sobbed Winky through her hands .You isnt ought to tell them we is getting in trouble .Did anybody ever discover that you were still alive ?said Dumbledore softly .Did anyone know except your father and the houseelf ?Yes said Crouch his eyelids flickering again .A witch in my fathers office .Bertha Jorkins .She came to the house with papers for my fathers signature .He was not at home .Winky showed her inside and returned to the kitchen to me .But Bertha Jorkins heard Winky talking to me .She came to investigate .She heard enough to guess who was hiding under the Invisibility Cloak .My father arrived home .She confronted him .He put a very powerful Memory Charm on her to make her forget what shed found out .Too powerful .He said it damaged her memory permanently .Why is she coming to nose into my masters private business ?sobbed Winky .Why isnt she leaving us be ?Tell me about the Quidditch World Cup said Dumbledore .Winky talked my father into it said Crouch still in the same monotonous voice .She spent months persuading him .I had not left the house for years .I had loved Quidditch .Let him go she said .He will be in his Invisibility Cloak .He can watch .Let him smell fresh air for once .She said my mother would have wanted it .She told my father that my mother had died to give me freedom .She had not saved me for a life of imprisonment .He agreed in the end .It was carefully planned .My father led me and Winky up to the Top Box early in the day .Winky was to say that she was saving a seat for my father .I was to sit there invisible .When everyone had left the box we would emerge .Winky would appear to be alone .Nobody would ever know .But Winky didnt know that I was growing stronger .I was starting to fight my fathers Imperius Curse .There were times when I was almost myself again .There were brief periods when I seemed outside his control .It happened there in the Top Box .It was like waking from a deep sleep .I found myself out in public in the middle of the match and I saw in front of me a wand sticking out of a boys pocket .I had not been allowed a wand since before Azkaban .I stole it .Winky didnt know .Winky is frightened of heights .She had her face hidden .Master Barty you bad boy !whispered Winky tears trickling between her fingers .So you took the wand said Dumbledore and what did you do with it ?We went back to the tent said Crouch .Then we heard them .We heard the Death Eaters .The ones who had never been to Azkaban .The ones who had never suffered for my master .They had turned their backs on him .They were not enslaved as I was .They were free to seek him but they did not .They were merely making sport of Muggles .The sound of their voices awoke me .My mind was clearer than it had been in years .I was angry .I had the wand .I wanted to attack them for their disloyalty to my master .My father had left the tent he had gone to free the Muggles .Winky was afraid to see me so angry .She used her own brand of magic to bind me to her .She pulled me from the tent pulled me into the forest away from the Death Eaters .I tried to hold her back .I wanted to return to the campsite .I wanted to show those Death Eaters what loyalty to the Dark Lord meant and to punish them for their lack of it .I used the stolen wand to cast the Dark Mark into the sky .Ministry wizards arrived .They shot Stunning Spells everywhere .One of the spells came through the trees where Winky and I stood .The bond connecting us was broken .We were both Stunned .When Winky was discovered my father knew I must be nearby .He searched the bushes where she had been found and felt me lying there .He waited until the other Ministry members had left the forest .He put me back under the Imperius Curse and took me home .He dismissed Winky .She had failed him .She had let me acquire a wand .She had almost let me escape .Winky let out a wail of despair .Now it was just Father and I alone in the house .And then .and then .Crouchs head rolled on his neck and an insane grin spread across his face .My master came for me .He arrived at our house late one night in the arms of his servant Wormtail .My master had found out that I was still alive .He had captured Bertha Jorkins in Albania .He had tortured her .She told him a great deal .She told him about the Triwizard Tournament .She told him the old Auror Moody was going to teach at Hogwarts .He tortured her until he broke through the Memory Charm my father had placed upon her .She told him I had escaped from Azkaban .She told him my father kept me imprisoned to prevent me from seeking my master .And so my master knew that I was still his faithful servant perhaps the most faithful of all .My master conceived a plan based upon the information Bertha had given him .He needed me .He arrived at our house near midnight .My father answered the door .The smile spread wider over Crouchs face as though recalling the sweetest memory of his life .Winkys petrified brown eyes were visible through her fingers .She seemed too appalled to speak .It was very quick .My father was placed under the Imperius Curse by my master .Now my father was the one imprisoned controlled .My master forced him to go about his business as usual to act as though nothing was wrong .And I was released .I awoke .I was myself again alive as I hadnt been in years .And what did Lord Voldemort ask you to do ?said Dumbledore .He asked me whether I was ready to risk everything for him .I was ready .It was my dream my greatest ambition to serve him to prove myself to him .He told me he needed to place a faithful servant at Hogwarts .A servant who would guide Harry Potter through the Triwizard Tournament without appearing to do so .A servant who would watch over Harry Potter .Ensure he reached the Triwizard Cup .Turn the cup into a Portkey which would take the first person to touch it to my master .But first You needed Alastor Moody said Dumbledore .His blue eyes were blazing though his voice remained calm .Wormtail and I did it .We had prepared the Polyjuice Potion beforehand .We journeyed to his house .Moody put up a struggle .There was a commotion .We managed to subdue him just in time .Forced him into a compartment of his own magical trunk .Took some of his hair and added it to the potion .I drank it I became Moodys double .I took his leg and his eye .I was ready to face Arthur Weasley when he arrived to sort out the Muggles who had heard a disturbance .I made the dustbins move around the yard .I told Arthur Weasley I had heard intruders in my yard who had set off the dustbins .Then I packed up Moodys clothes and Dark detectors put them in the trunk with Moody and set off for Hogwarts .I kept him alive under the Imperius Curse .I wanted to be able to question him .To find out about his past learn his habits so that I could fool even Dumbledore .I also needed his hair to make the Polyjuice Potion .The other ingredients were easy .I stole boomslang skin from the dungeons .When the Potions master found me in his office I said I was under orders to search it .And what became of Wormtail after you attacked Moody ?said Dumbledore .Wormtail returned to care for my master in my fathers house and to keep watch over my father .But your father escaped said Dumbledore .Yes .After a while he began to fight the Imperius Curse just as I had done .There were periods when he knew what was happening .My master decided it was no longer safe for my father to leave the house .He forced him to send letters to the Ministry instead .He made him write and say he was ill .But Wormtail neglected his duty .He was not watchful enough .My father escaped .My master guessed that he was heading for Hogwarts .My father was going to tell Dumbledore everything to confess .He was going to admit that he had smuggled me from Azkaban .My master sent me word of my fathers escape .He told me to stop him at all costs .So I waited and watched .I used the map I had taken from Harry Potter .The map that had almost mined everything .Map ?said Dumbledore quickly .What map is this ?Potters map of Hogwarts .Potter saw me on it .Potter saw me stealing more ingredients for the Polyjuice Potion from Snapes office one night .He thought I was my father .We have the same first name .I took the map from Potter that night .I told him my father hated Dark wizards .Potter believed my father was after Snape .For a week I waited for my father to arrive at Hogwarts .At last one evening the map showed my father entering the grounds .I pulled on my Invisibility Cloak and went down to meet him .He was walking around the edge of the forest .Then Potter came and Krum .I waited .I could not hurt Potter my master needed him .Potter ran to get Dumbledore .I Stunned Krum .I killed my father .iVoooo !wailed Winky .Master Barty Master Barty what is you saying ?You killed your father Dumbledore said in the same soft voice .What did you do with the body ?Carried it into the forest .Covered it with the Invisibility Cloak .I had the map with me .I watched Potter run into the castle .He met Snape .Dumbledore joined them .I watched Potter bringing Dumbledore out of the castle .I walked back out of the forest doubled around behind them went to meet them .I told Dumbledore Snape had told me where to come .Dumbledore told me to go and look for my father .I went back to my fathers body .Watched the map .When everyone was gone I Transfigured my fathers body .He became a bone .I buried it while wearing the Invisibility Cloak in the freshly dug earth in front of Hagrids cabin .There was complete silence now except for Winkys continued sobs .Then Dumbledore said And tonight I offered to carry the Triwizard Cup into the maze before dinner whispered Barty Crouch .Turned it into a Portkey .My masters plan worked .He is returned to power and I will be honored by him beyond the dreams of wizards .The insane smile lit his features once more and his head drooped onto his shoulder as Winky wailed and sobbed at his side .THE PARTING OF THE WAYS Dumbledore stood up .He stared down at Barty Crouch for a moment with disgust on his face .Then he raised his wand once more and ropes flew out of it ropes that twisted themselves around Barty Crouch binding him tightly .He turned to Professor McGonagall .Minerva could I ask you to stand guard here while I take Harry upstairs ?Of course said Professor McGonagall .She looked slightly nauseous as though she had just watched someone being sick .However when she drew out her wand and pointed it at Barty Crouch her hand was quite steady .Severus Dumbledore turned to Snape please tell Madam Pomfrey to come down here we need to get Alastor Moody into the hospital wing .Then go down into the grounds find Cornelius Fudge and bring him up to this office .He will undoubtedly want to question Crouch himself .Tell him I will be in the hospital wing in half an hours time if he needs me .Snape nodded silently and swept out of the room .Harry ?Dumbledore said gently .Harry got up and swayed again the pain in his leg which he had not noticed all the time he had been listening to Crouch now returned in full measure .He also realized that he was shaking .Dumbledore gripped his arm and helped him out into the dark corridor .I want you to come up to my office first Harry he said quietly as they headed up the passageway .Sirius is waiting for us there .Harry nodded .A kind of numbness and a sense of complete unreality were upon him but he did not care he was even glad of it .He didnt want to have to think about anything that had happened since he had first touched the Triwizard Cup .He didnt want to have to examine the memories fresh and sharp as photographs which kept flashing across his mind .MadEye Moody inside the trunk .Wormtail slumped on the ground cradling his stump of an arm .Voldemort rising from the steaming cauldron .Cedric .dead .Cedric asking to be returned to his parents .Professor Harry mumbled where are Mr and Mrs Diggory ?They are with Professor Sprout said Dumbledore .His voice which had been so calm throughout the interrogation of Barty Crouch shook very slightly for the first time .She was Head of Cedrics house and knew him best .They had reached the stone gargoyle .Dumbledore gave the password it sprang aside and he and Harry went up the moving spiral staircase to the oak door .Dumbledore pushed it open .Sirius was standing there .His face was white and gaunt as it had been when he had escaped Azkaban .In one swift moment he had crossed the room .Harry are you all right ?I knew it I knew something like this what happened ?His hands shook as he helped Harry into a chair in front of the desk .What happened ?he asked more urgently .Dumbledore began to tell Sirius everything Barty Crouch had said .Harry was only half listening .So tired every bone in his body was aching he wanted nothing more than to sit here undisturbed for hours and hours until he fell asleep and didnt have to think or feel anymore .There was a soft rush of wings .Fawkes the phoenix had left his perch flown across the office and landed on Harrys knee .Lo Fawkes said Harry quietly .He stroked the phoenixs beautiful scarletandgold plumage .Fawkes blinked peacefully up at him .There was something comforting about his warm weight .Dumbledore stopped talking .He sat down opposite Harry behind his desk .He was looking at Harry who avoided his eyes .Dumbledore was going to question him .He was going to make Harry relive everything .I need to know what happened after you touched the Portkey in the maze Harry said Dumbledore .We can leave that till morning cant we Dumbledore ?said Sirius harshly .He had put a hand on Harrys shoulder .Let him have a sleep .Let him rest .Harry felt a rush of gratitude toward Sirius but Dumbledore took no notice of Siriuss words .He leaned forward toward Harry .Very unwillingly Harry raised his head and looked into those blue eyes .If I thought I could help you Dumbledore said gently by putting you into an enchanted sleep and allowing you to postpone the moment when you would have to think about what has happened tonight I would do it .But I know better .Numbing the pain for a while will make it worse when you finally feel it .You have shown bravery beyond anything I could have expected of you .I ask you to demonstrate your courage one more time .I ask you to tell us what happened .The phoenix let out one soft quavering note .It shivered in the air and Harry felt as though a drop of hot liquid had slipped down his throat into his stomach warming him and strengthening him .He took a deep breath and began to tell them .As he spoke visions of everything that had passed that night seemed to rise before his eyes he saw the sparkling surface of the potion that had revived Voldemort he saw the Death Eaters Apparating between the graves around them he saw Cedrics body lying on the ground beside the cup .Once or twice Sirius made a noise as though about to say something his hand still tight on Harrys shoulder but Dumbledore raised his hand to stop him and Harry was glad of this because it was easier to keep going now he had started .It was even a relief he felt almost as though something poisonous were being extracted from him .It was costing him every bit of determination he had to keep talking yet he sensed that once he had finished he would feel better .When Harry told of Wormtail piercing his arm with the dagger however Sirius let out a vehement exclamation and Dumbledore stood up so quickly that Harry started .Dumbledore walked around the desk and told Harry to stretch out his arm .Harry showed them both the place where his robes were torn and the cut beneath them .He said my blood would make him stronger than if hed used someone elses Harry told Dumbledore .He said the protection my my mother left in me hed have it too .And he was right he could touch me without hurting himself he touched my face .For a fleeting instant Harry thought he saw a gleam of something like triumph in Dumbledore s eyes .But next second Harry was sure he had imagined it for when Dumbledore had returned to his seat behind the desk he looked as old and weary as Harry had ever seen him .Very well he said sitting down again .Voldemort has overcome that particular barrier .Harry continue please .Harry went on he explained how Voldemort had emerged from the cauldron and told them all he could remember of Voldemorts speech to the Death Eaters .Then he told how Voldemort had untied him returned his wand to him and prepared to duel .But when he reached the part where the golden beam of light had connected his and Voldemorts wands he found his throat obstructed .He tried to keep talking but the memories of what had come out of Voldemorts wand were flooding into his mind .He could see Cedric emerging see the old man Bertha Jorkins .his father .his mother .He was glad when Sirius broke the silence .The wands connected ?he said looking from Harry to Dumbledore .Why ?Harry looked up at Dumbledore again on whose face there was an arrested look .Priori Incantatem he muttered .His eyes gazed into Harrys and it was almost as though an invisible beam of understanding shot between them .The Reverse Spell effect ?said Sirius sharply .Exactly said Dumbledore .Harrys wand and Voldemorts wand share cores .Each of them contains a feather from the tail of the same phoenix .This phoenix in fact he added and he pointed at the scarletandgold bird perching peacefully on Harrys knee .My wands feather came from Fawkes ?Harry said amazed .Yes said Dumbledore .Mr Ollivander wrote to tell me you had bought the second wand the moment you left his shop four years ago .So what happens when a wand meets its brother ?said Sirius .They will not work properly against each other said Dumbledore .If however the owners of the wands force the wands to do battle .a very rare effect will take place .One of the wands will force the other to regurgitate spells it has performed in reverse .The most recent first .and then those which preceded it .He looked interrogatively at Harry and Harry nodded .Which means said Dumbledore slowly his eyes upon Harrys face that some form of Cedric must have reappeared .Harry nodded again .Diggory came back to life ?said Sirius sharply .No spell can reawaken the dead said Dumbledore heavily .All that would have happened is a kind of reverse echo .A shadow of the living Cedric would have emerged from the wand .am I correct Harry ?He spoke to me Harry said .He was suddenly shaking again .The .the ghost Cedric or whatever he was spoke .An echo said Dumbledore which retained Cedrics appearance and character .I am guessing other such forms appeared .less recent victims of Voldemorts wand .An old man Harry said his throat still constricted .Bertha Jorkins .And .Your parents ?said Dumbledore quietly .Yes said Harry .Siriuss grip on Harrys shoulder was now so tight it was painful .The last murders the wand performed said Dumbledore nodding .In reverse order .More would have appeared of course had you maintained the connection .Very well Harry these echoes these shadows .what did they do ?Harry described how the figures that had emerged from the wand had prowled the edges of the golden web how Voldemort had seemed to fear them how the shadow of Harrys father had told him what to do how Cedrics had made its final request .At this point Harry found he could not continue .He looked around at Sirius and saw that he had his face in his hands .Harry suddenly became aware that Fawkes had left his knee .The phoenix had fluttered to the floor .It was resting its beautiful head against Harrys injured leg and thick pearly tears were falling from its eyes onto the wound left by the spider .The pain vanished .The skin mended .His leg was repaired .I will say it again said Dumbledore as the phoenix rose into the air and resettled itself upon the perch beside the door .You have shown bravery beyond anything I could have expected of you tonight Harry .You have shown bravery equal to those who died fighting Voldemort at the height of his powers .You have shouldered a grown wizards burden and found yourself equal to it and you have now given us all that we have a right to expect .You will come with me to the hospital wing .I do not want you returning to the dormitory tonight .A Sleeping Potion and some peace .Sirius would you like to stay with him ?Sirius nodded and stood up .He transformed back into the great black dog and walked with Harry and Dumbledore out of the office accompanying them down a flight of stairs to the hospital wing .When Dumbledore pushed open the door Harry saw Mrs Weasley Bill Ron and Hermione grouped around a harassedlooking Madam Pomfrey .They appeared to be demanding to know where Harry was and what had happened to him .All of them whipped around as Harry Dumbledore and the black dog entered and Mrs Weasley let out a kind of muffled scream .Harry !Oh Harry !She started to hurry toward him but Dumbledore moved between them .Molly he said holding up a hand please listen to me for a moment .Harry has been through a terrible ordeal tonight .He has just had to relive it for me .What he needs now is sleep and peace and quiet .If he would like you all to stay with him he added looking around at Ron Hermione and Bill too you may do so .But I do not want you questioning him until he is ready to answer and certainly not this evening .Mrs Weasley nodded .She was very white .She rounded on Ron Hermione and Bill as though they were being noisy and hissed Did you hear ?He needs quiet !Headmaster said Madam Pomfrey staring at the great black dog that was Sirius may I ask what ?This dog will be remaining with Harry for a while said Dumbledore simply .I assure you he is extremely well trained .Harry I will wait while you get into bed .Harry felt an inexpressible sense of gratitude to Dumbledore for asking the others not to question him .It wasnt as though he didnt want them there but the thought of explaining it all over again the idea of reliving it one more time was more than he could stand .I will be back to see you as soon as I have met with Fudge Harry said Dumbledore .I would like you to remain here tomorrow until I have spoken to the school .He left .As Madam Pomfrey led Harry to a nearby bed he caught sight of the real Moody lying motionless in a bed at the far end of the room .His wooden leg and magical eye were lying on the bedside table .Is he okay ?Harry asked .Hell be fine said Madam Pomfrey giving Harry some pajamas and pulling screens around him .He took off his robes pulled on the pajamas and got into bed .Ron Hermione Bill Mrs Weasley and the black dog came around the screen and settled themselves in chairs on either side of him .Ron and Hermione were looking at him almost cautiously as though scared of him .Im all right he told them .Just tired .Mrs Weasleys eyes filled with tears as she smoothed his bedcovers unnecessarily .Madam Pomfrey who had bustled off to her office returned holding a small bottle of some purple potion and a goblet .Youll need to drink all of this Harry she said .Its a potion for dreamless sleep .Harry took the goblet and drank a few mouthfuls .He felt himself becoming drowsy at once .Everything around him became hazy the lamps around the hospital wing seemed to be winking at him in a friendly way through the screen around his bed his body felt as though it was sinking deeper into the warmth of the feather matress .Before he could finish the potion before he could say another word his exhaustion had carried him off to sleep .Harry woke up so warm so very sleepy that he didnt open his eyes wanting to drop off again .The room was still dimly lit he was sure it was still nighttime and had a feeling that he couldnt have been asleep very long .Then he heard whispering around him .Theyll wake him if they dont shut up !What are they shouting about ?Nothing else can have happened can it ?Harry opened his eyes blearily Someone had removed his glasses .He could see the fuzzy outlines of Mrs Weasley and Bill close by .Mrs Weasley was on her feet .Thats Fudges voice she whispered .And thats Minerva McGonagalls isnt it ?But what are they arguing about ?Now Harry could hear them too people shouting and running toward the hospital wing .Regrettable but all the same Minerva Cornelius Fudge was saying loudly .You should never have brought it inside the castle !yelled Professor McGonagall .When Dumbledore finds out Harry heard the hospital doors burst open .Unnoticed by any of the people around his bed all of whom were staring at the door as Bill pulled back the screens Harry sat up and put his glasses back on .Fudge came striding up the ward .Professors McGonagall and Snape were at his heels .Wheres Dumbledore ?Fudge demanded of Mrs Weasley .Hes not here said Mrs Weasley angrily .This is a hospital wing Minister dont you think youd do better to But the door opened and Dumbledore came sweeping up the ward .What has happened ?said Dumbledore sharply looking from Fudge to Professor McGonagall .Why are you disturbing these people ?Minerva Im surprised at you I asked you to stand guard over Barty Crouch There is no need to stand guard over him anymore Dumbledore !she shrieked .The Minister has seen to that !Harry had never seen Professor McGonagall lose control like this .There were angry blotches of color in her cheeks and her hands were balled into fists she was trembling with fury .When we told Mr Fudge that we had caught the Death Eater responsible for tonights events said Snape in a low voice he seemed to feel his personal safety was in question .He insisted on summoning a dementor to accompany him into the castle .He brought it up to the office where Barty Crouch I told him you would not agree Dumbledore !Professor McGonagall fumed .I told him you would never allow dementors to set foot inside the castle but My dear woman !roared Fudge who likewise looked angrier than Harry had ever seen him as Minister of Magic it is my decision whether I wish to bring protection with me when interviewing a possibly dangerous But Professor McGonagalls voice drowned Fudges .The moment that that thing entered the room she screamed pointing at Fudge trembling all over it swooped down on Crouch and and Harry felt a chill in his stomach as Professor McGonagall struggled to find words to describe what had happened .He did not need her to finish her sentence .He knew what the dementor must have done .It had administered its fatal kiss to Barty Crouch .It had sucked his soul out through his mouth .He was worse than dead .By all accounts he is no loss !blustered Fudge .It seems he has been responsible for several deaths !But he cannot now give testimony Cornelius said Dumbledore .He was staring hard at Fudge as though seeing him plainly for the first time .He cannot give evidence about why he killed those people .Why he killed them ?Well thats no mystery is it ?blustered Fudge .He was a raving lunatic !From what Minerva and Severus have told me he seems to have thought he was doing it all on YouKnow Whos instructions !Lord Voldemort was giving him instructions Cornelius Dumbledore said .Those peoples deaths were mere byproducts of a plan to restore Voldemort to full strength again .The plan succeeded .Voldemort has been restored to his body .Fudge looked as though someone had just swung a heavy weight into his face .Dazed and blinking he stared back at Dumbledore as if he couldnt quite believe what he had just heard .He began to sputter still goggling at Dumbledore .YouKnow Who .returned ?Preposterous .Come now Dumbledore .As Minerva and Severus have doubtless told you said Dumbledore we heard Barry Crouch confess .Under the influence of Veritaserum he told us how he was smuggled out of Azkaban and how Voldemort learning of his continued existence from Bertha Jorkins went to free him from his father and used him to capture Harry .The plan worked I tell you .Crouch has helped Voldemort to return .See here Dumbledore said Fudge and Harry was astonished to see a slight smile dawning on his face you you cant seriously believe that .YouKnow Who back ?Come now come now .certainly Crouch may have believed himself to be acting upon YouKnow Whos orders but to take the word of a lunatic like that Dumbledore .When Harry touched the Triwizard Cup tonight he was transported straight to Voldemort said Dumbledore steadily .He witnessed Lord Voldemorts rebirth .I will explain it all to you if you will step up to my office .Dumbledore glanced around at Harry and saw that he was awake but shook his head and said I am afraid I cannot permit you to question Harry tonight .Fudges curious smile lingered .He too glanced at Harry then looked back at Dumbledore and said You are er prepared to take Harrys word on this are you Dumbledore ?There was a moments silence which was broken by Sirius g.His hackles were raised and he was baring his teeth at Fudge .Certainly I believe Harry said Dumbledore .His eyes were blazing now .I heard Crouchs confession and I heard Harrys account of what happened after he touched the Triwizard Cup the two stories make sense they explain everything that has happened since Bertha Jorkins disappeared last summer .Fudge still had that strange smile on his face .Once again he glanced at Harry before answering .You are prepared to believe that Lord Voldemort has returned on the word of a lunatic murderer and a boy who .well .Fudge shot Harry another look and Harry suddenly understood .Youve been reading Rita Skeeter Mr Fudge he said quietly .Ron Hermione Mrs Weasley and Bill all jumped .None of them had realized that Harry was awake .Fudge reddened slightly but a defiant and obstinate look came over his face .And if I have ?he said looking at Dumbledore .If I have discovered that youve been keeping certain facts about the boy very quiet ?A Parselmouth eh ?And having funny turns all over the place I assume that you are referring to the pains Harry has been experiencing in his scar ?said Dumbledore coolly .You admit that he has been having these pains then ?said Fudge quickly .Headaches ?Nightmares ?Possibly hallucinations ?Listen to me Cornelius said Dumbledore taking a step toward Fudge and once again he seemed to radiate that indefinable sense of power that Harry had felt after Dumbledore had Stunned young Crouch .Harry is as sane as you or I .That scar upon his forehead has not addled his brains .I believe it hurts him when Lord Voldemort is close by or feeling particularly murderous .Fudge had taken half a step back from Dumbledore but he looked no less stubborn .Youll forgive me Dumbledore but Ive never heard of a curse scar acting as an alarm bell before .Look I saw Voldemort come back !Harry shouted .He tried to get out of bed again but Mrs Weasley forced him back .I saw the Death Eaters !I can give you their names !Lucius Malfoy Snape made a sudden movement but as Harry looked at him Snapes eyes flew back to Fudge .Malfoy was cleared !said Fudge visibly affronted .A very old family donations to excellent causes Macnair !Harry continued .Also cleared !Now working for the Ministry !Avery Nott Crabbe Goyle You are merely repeating the names of those who were acquitted of being Death Eaters thirteen years ago !said Fudge angrily .You could have found those names in old reports of the trials !For heavens sake Dumbledore the boy was full of some crackpot story at the end of last year too his tales are getting taller and youre still swallowing them the boy can talk to snakes Dumbledore and you still think hes trustworthy ?You fool !Professor McGonagall cried .Cedric Diggory !Mr Crouch !These deaths were not the random work of a lunatic !I see no evidence to the contrary !shouted Fudge now matching her anger his face purpling .It seems to me that you are all determined to start a panic that will destabilize everything we have worked for these last thirteen years !Harry couldnt believe what he was hearing .He had always thought of Fudge as a kindly figure a little blustering a little pompous but essentially good natured .But now a short angry wizard stood before him refusing pointblank to accept the prospect of disruption in his comfortable and ordered world to believe that Voldemort could have risen .Voldemort has returned Dumbledore repeated .If you accept that fact straightaway Fudge and take the necessary measures we may still be able to save the situation .The first and most essential step is to remove Azkaban from the control of the dementors Preposterous !shouted Fudge again .Remove the dementors ?Id be kicked out of office for suggesting it !Half of us only feel safe in our beds at night because we know the dementors are standing guard at Azkaban !The rest of us sleep less soundly in our beds Cornelius knowing that you have put Lord Voldemort s most dangerous supporters in the care of creatures who will join him the instant he asks them !said Dumbledore .They will not remain loyal to you Fudge !Voldemort can offer them much more scope for their powers and their pleasures than you can !With the dementors behind him and his old supporters returned to him you will be hardpressed to stop him regaining the sort of power he had thirteen years ago !Fudge was opening and closing his mouth as though no words could express his outrage .The second step you must take and at once Dumbledore pressed on is to send envoys to the giants .Envoys to the giants ?Fudge shrieked finding his tongue again .What madness is this ?Extend them the hand of friendship now before it is too late said Dumbledore or Voldemort will persuade them as he did before that he alone among wizards will give them their rights and their freedom !You you cannot be serious !Fudge gasped shaking his head and retreating further from Dumbledore .If the magical community got wind that I had approached the giants people hate them Dumbledore end of my career You are blinded said Dumbledore his voice rising now the aura of power around him palpable his eyes blazing once more by the love of the office you hold Cornelius !You place too much importance and you always have done on the socalled purity of blood !You fail to recognize that it matters not what someone is born but what they grow to be !Your dementor has just destroyed the last remaining member of a pure blood family as old as any and see what that man chose to make of his life !I tell you now take the steps I have suggested and you will be remembered in office or out as one of the bravest and greatest Ministers of Magic we have ever known .Fail to act and history will remember you as the man who stepped aside and allowed Voldemort a second chance to destroy the world we have tried to rebuild !Insane whispered Fudge still backing away .Mad And then there was silence .Madam Pomfrey was standing frozen at the foot of Harrys bed her hands over her mouth .Mrs Weasley was still standing over Harry her hand on his shoulder to prevent him from rising .Bill Ron and Hermione were staring at Fudge .If your determination to shut your eyes will carry you as far as this Cornelius said Dumbledore we have reached a parting of the ways .You must act as you see fit .And I I shall act as I see fit .Dumbledore s voice carried no hint of a threat it sounded like a mere statement but Fudge bristled as though Dumbledore were advancing upon him with a wand .Now see here Dumbledore he said waving a threatening finger .Ive given you free rein always .Ive had a lot of respect for you .I might not have agreed with some of your decisions but Ive kept quiet .There arent many whod have let you hire werewolves or keep Hagrid or decide what to teach your students without reference to the Ministry .But if youre going to work against me The only one against whom I intend to work said Dumbledore is Lord Voldemort .If you are against him then we remain Cornelius on the same side .It seemed Fudge could think of no answer to this .He rocked backward and forward on his small feet for a moment and spun his bowler hat in his hands .Finally he said with a hint of a plea in his voice He cant be back Dumbledore he just cant be .Snape strode forward past Dumbledore pulling up the left sleeve of his robes as he went .He stuck out his forearm and showed it to Fudge who recoiled .There said Snape harshly .There .The Dark Mark .It is not as clear as it was an hour or so ago when it burned black but you can still see it .Every Death Eater had the sign burned into him by the Dark Lord .It was a means of distinguishing one another and his means of summoning us to him .When he touched the Mark of any Death Eater we were to Disapparate and Apparate instantly at his side .This Mark has been growing clearer all year .Karkaroffs too .Why do you think Karkaroff fled tonight ?We both felt the Mark burn .We both knew he had returned .Karkaroff fears the Dark Lords vengeance .He betrayed too many of his fellow Death Eaters to be sure of a welcome back into the fold .Fudge stepped back from Snape too .He was shaking his head .He did not seem to have taken in a word Snape had said .He stared apparently repelled by the ugly mark on Snape s arm then looked up at Dumbledore and whispered I dont know what you and your staff are playing at Dumbledore but I have heard enough .I have no more to add .I will be in touch with you tomorrow Dumbledore to discuss the running of this school .I must return to the Ministry .He had almost reached the door when he paused .He turned around strode back down the dormitory and stopped at Harrys bed .Your winnings he said shortly taking a large bag of gold out of his pocket and dropping it onto Harrys bedside table .One thousand Galleons .There should have been a presentation ceremony but under the circumstances .He crammed his bowler hat onto his head and walked out of the room slamming the door behind him .The moment he had disappeared Dumbledore turned to look at the group around Harrys bed .There is work to be done he said .Molly .am I right in thinking that I can count on you and Arthur ?Of course you can said Mrs Weasley .She was white to the lips but she looked resolute .We know what Fudge is .Its Arthurs fondness for Muggles that has held him back at the Ministry all these years .Fudge thinks he lacks proper wizarding pride .Then I need to send a message to Arthur said Dumbledore .All those that we can persuade of the truth must be notified immediately and he is well placed to contact those at the Ministry who are not as shortsighted as Cornelius .Ill go to Dad said Bill standing up .Ill go now .Excellent said Dumbledore .Tell him what has happened .Tell him I will be in direct contact with him shortly .He will need to be discreet however .If Fudge thinks I am interfering at the Ministry Leave it to me said Bill .He clapped a hand on Harrys shoulder kissed his mother on the cheek pulled on his cloak and strode quickly from the room .Minerva said Dumbledore turning to Professor McGonagall I want to see Hagrid in my office as soon as possible .Also if she will consent to come Madame Maxime .Professor McGonagall nodded and left without a word .Poppy Dumbledore said to Madam Pomfrey would you be very kind and go down to Professor Moodys office where I think you will find a houseelf called Winky in considerable distress ?Do what you can for her and take her back to the kitchens .I think Dobby will look after her for us .Very very well said Madam Pomfrey looking startled and she too left .Dumbledore made sure that the door was closed and that Madam Pomfreys footsteps had died away before he spoke again .And now he said it is time for two of our number to recognize each other for what they are .Sirius .if you could resume your usual form .The great black dog looked up at Dumbledore then in an instant turned back into a man .Mrs Weasley screamed and leapt back from the bed .Sirius Black !she shrieked pointing at him .Mum shut up !Ron yelled .Its okay !Snape had not yelled or jumped backward but the look on his face was one of mingled fury and horror .Him !he snarled staring at Sirius whose face showed equal dislike .What is he doing here ?He is here at my invitation said Dumbledore looking between them as are you Severus .I trust you both .It is time for you to lay aside your old differences and trust each other .Harry thought Dumbledore was asking for a near miracle .Sirius and Snape were eyeing each other with the utmost loathing .I will settle in the short term said Dumbledore with a bite of impatience in his voice for a lack of open hostility .You will shake hands .You are on the same side now .Time is short and unless the few of us who know the truth do not stand united there is no hope for any of us .Very slowly but still glaring at each other as though each wished the other nothing but ill Sirius and Snape moved toward each other and shook hands .They let go extremely quickly .That will do to be going on with said Dumbledore stepping between them once more .Now I have work for each of you .Fudges attitude though not unexpected changes everything .Sirius I need you to set off at once .You are to alert Remus Lupin Arabella Figg Mundungus Fletcher the old crowd .Lie low at Lupins for a while I will contact you there .But said Harry .He wanted Sirius to stay .He did not want to have to say goodbye again so quickly .Youll see me very soon Harry said Sirius turning to him .I promise you .But I must do what I can you understand dont you ?Yeah said Harry .Yeah .of course I do .Sirius grasped his hand briefly nodded to Dumbledore transformed again into the black dog and ran the length of the room to the door whose handle he turned with a paw .Then he was gone .Severus said Dumbledore turning to Snape you know what I must ask you to do .If you are ready .if you are prepared .I am said Snape .He looked slightly paler than usual and his cold black eyes glittered strangely .Then good luck said Dumbledore and he watched with a trace of apprehension on his face as Snape swept wordlessly after Sirius .It was several minutes before Dumbledore spoke again .I must go downstairs he said finally .I must see the Diggorys .Harry take the rest of your potion .I will see all of you later .Harry slumped back against his pillows as Dumbledore disappeared .Hermione Ron and Mrs Weasley were all looking at him .None of them spoke for a very long time .Youve got to take the rest of your potion Harry Mrs Weasley said at last .Her hand nudged the sack of gold on his bedside cabinet as she reached for the bottle and the goblet .You have a good long sleep .Try and think about something else for a while .think about what youre going to buy with your winnings !I dont want that gold said Harry in an expressionless voice .You have it .Anyone can have it .I shouldnt have won it .It shouldve been Cedrics .The thing against which he had been fighting on and off ever since he had come out of the maze was threatening to overpower him .He could feel a burning prickling feeling in the inner corners of his eyes .He blinked and stared up at the ceiling .It wasnt your fault Harry Mrs Weasley whispered .I told him to take the cup with me said Harry .Now the burning feeling was in his throat too .He wished Ron would look away .Mrs Weasley set the potion down on the bedside cabinet bent down and put her arms around Harry .He had no memory of ever being hugged like this as though by a mother .The full weight of everything he had seen that night seemed to fall in upon him as Mrs Weasley held him to her .His mothers face his fathers voice the sight of Cedric dead on the ground all started spinning in his head until he could hardly bear it until he was screwing up his face against the howl of misery fighting to get out of him .There was a loud slamming noise and Mrs Weasley and Harry broke apart .Hermione was standing by the window .She was holding something tight in her hand .Sorry she whispered .Your potion Harry said Mrs Weasley quickly wiping her eyes on the back of her hand .Harry drank it in one gulp .The effect was instantaneous .Heavy irresistible waves of dreamless sleep broke over him he fell back onto his pillows and thought no more .THE BEGINNING When he looked back even a month later Harry found he had only scattered memories of the next few days .It was as though he had been through too much to take in any more .The recollections he did have were very painful .The worst perhaps was the meeting with the Diggorys that took place the following morning .They did not blame him for what had happened on the contrary both thanked him for returning Cedrics body to them .Mr Diggory sobbed through most of the interview .Mrs Diggory s grief seemed to be beyond tears .He suffered very little then she said when Harry had told her how Cedric had died .And after all Amos .he died just when hed won the tournament .He must have been happy .When they got to their feet she looked down at Harry and said You look after yourself now .Harry seized the sack of gold on the bedside table .You take this he muttered to her .It shouldve been Cedrics he got there first you take it But she backed away from him .Oh no its yours dear I couldnt .you keep it .Harry returned to Gryffindor Tower the following evening .From what Hermione and Ron told him Dumbledore had spoken to the school that morning at breakfast .He had merely requested that they leave Harry alone that nobody ask him questions or badger him to tell the story of what had happened in the maze .Most people he noticed were skirting him in the corridors avoiding his eyes .Some whispered behind their hands as he passed .He guessed that many of them had believed Rita Skeeters article about how disturbed and possibly dangerous he was .Perhaps they were formulating their own theories about how Cedric had died .He found he didnt care very much .He liked it best when he was with Ron and Hermione and they were talking about other things or else letting him sit in silence while they played chess .He felt as though all three of them had reached an understanding they didnt need to put into words that each was waiting for some sign some word of what was going on outside Hogwarts and that it was useless to speculate about what might be coming until they knew anything for certain .The only time they touched upon the subject was when Ron told Harry about a meeting Mrs Weasley had had with Dumbledore before going home .She went to ask him if you could come straight to us this summer he said .But he wants you to go back to the Dursleys at least at first .Why ?said Harry .She said Dumbledores got his reasons said Ron shaking his head darkly .I suppose weve got to trust him havent we ?The only person apart from Ron and Hermione that Harry felt able to talk to was Hagrid .As there was no longer a Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher they had those lessons free .They used the one on Thursday afternoon to go down and visit Hagrid in his cabin .It was a bright and sunny day Fang bounded out of the open door as they approached barking and wagging his tail madly .Whos that ?called Hagrid coming to the door .Harry He strode out to meet them pulled Harry into a one armed hug ruffled his hair and said Good ter see yeh mate .Good ter see yeh .They saw two bucketsize cups and saucers on the wooden table in front of the fireplace when they entered Hagrid s cabin .Bin havin a cuppa with Olympe Hagrid said .Shes jus left .Who ?said Ron curiously .Madame Maxime o course !said Hagrid .You two made up have you ?said Ron .Dunno what yehre talkin about said Hagrid airily fetching more cups from the dresser .When he had made tea and offered around a plate of doughy cookies he leaned back in his chair and surveyed Harry closely through his beetleblack eyes .You all righ ?he said gruffly .Yeah said Harry .No yehre not said Hagrid .Course yehre not .But yeh will be .Harry said nothing .Knew he was goin ter come back said Hagrid and Harry Ron and Hermione looked up at him shocked .Known it fer years Harry .Knew he was out there bidin his time .It had ter happen .Well now it has an well jus have ter get on with it .Well fight .Migh be able ter stop him before he gets a good hold .Thats Dumbledores plan anyway .Great man Dumbledore .S long as weve got him Im not too worried .Hagrid raised his bushy eyebrows at the disbelieving expressions on their faces .No good sittin worryin abou it he said .Whats cornin will come an well meet it when it does .Dumbledore told me wha you did Harry .Hagrids chest swelled as he looked at Harry .Yeh did as much as yer father wouldve done an I can give yeh no higher praise than that .Harry smiled back at him .It was the first time hed smiled in days .Whats Dumbledore asked you to do Hagrid ?he asked .He sent Professor McGonagall to ask you and Madame Maxime to meet him that night .Got a little job fer me over the summer said Hagrid .Secret though .Im not spposed ter talk abou it no not even ter you lot .Olympe Madame Maxime ter you might be cornin with me .I think she will .Think I got her persuaded .Is it to do with Voldemort ?Hagrid flinched at the sound of the name .Migh be he said evasively .Now .whod like ter come an visit the las skrewt with me ?I was jokin jokin !he added hastily seeing the looks on their faces .k k k It was with a heavy heart that Harry packed his trunk up in the dormitory on the night before his return to Privet Drive .He was dreading the Leaving Feast which was usually a cause for celebration when the winner of the InterHouse Championship would be announced .He had avoided being in the Great Hall when it was full ever since he had left the hospital wing preferring to eat when it was nearly empty to avoid the stares of his fellow students .When he Ron and Hermione entered the Hall they saw at once that the usual decorations were missing .The Great Hall was normally decorated with the winning Houses colors for the Leaving Feast .Tonight however there were black drapes on the wall behind the teachers table .Harry knew instantly that they were there as a mark of respect to Cedric .The real MadEye Moody was at the staff table now his wooden leg and his magical eye back in place .He was extremely twitchy jumping every time someone spoke to him .Harry couldnt blame him Moodys fear of attack was bound to have been increased by his tenmonth imprisonment in his own trunk .Professor Karkaroffs chair was empty .Harry wondered as he sat down with the other Gryffindors where Karkaroff was now and whether Voldemort had caught up with him .Madame Maxime was still there .She was sitting next to Hagrid .They were talking quietly together .Further along the table sitting next to Professor McGonagall was Snape .His eyes lingered on Harry for a moment as Harry looked at him .His expression was difficult to read .He looked as sour and unpleasant as ever .Harry continued to watch him long after Snape had looked away .What was it that Snape had done on Dumbledores orders the night that Voldemort had returned ?And why .why .was Dumbledore so convinced that Snape was truly on their side ?He had been their spy Dumbledore had said so in the Pensieve .Snape had turned spy against Voldemort at great personal risk .Was that the job he had taken up again ?Had he made contact with the Death Eaters perhaps ?Pretended that he had never really gone over to Dumbledore that he had been like Voldemort himself biding his time ?Harrys musings were ended by Professor Dumbledore who stood up at the staff table .The Great Hall which in any case had been less noisy than it usually was at the Leaving Feast became very quiet .The end said Dumbledore looking around at them all of another year .He paused and his eyes fell upon the Hufflepuff table .Theirs had been the most subdued table before he had gotten to his feet and theirs were still the saddest and palest faces in the Hall .There is much that I would like to say to you all tonight said Dumbledore but I must first acknowledge the loss of a very fine person who should be sitting here he gestured toward the Hufflepuffs enjoying our feast with us .I would like you all please to stand and raise your glasses to Cedric Diggory .They did it all of them the benches scraped as everyone in the Hall stood and raised their goblets and echoed in one loud low rumbling voice Cedric Diggory .Harry caught a glimpse of Cho through the crowd .There were tears pouring silently down her face .He looked down at the table as they all sat down again .Cedric was a person who exemplified many of the qualities that distinguish Hufflepuff house Dumbledore continued .He was a good and loyal friend a hard worker he valued fair play .His death has affected you all whether you knew him well or not .I think that you have the right therefore to know exactly how it came about .Harry raised his head and stared at Dumbledore .Cedric Diggory was murdered by Lord Voldemort .A panicked whisper swept the Great Hall .People were staring at Dumbledore in disbelief in horror .He looked perfectly calm as he watched them mutter themselves into silence .The Ministry of Magic Dumbledore continued does not wish me to tell you this .It is possible that some of your parents will be horrified that I have done so either because they will not believe that Lord Voldemort has returned or because they think I should not tell you so young as you are .It is my belief however that the truth is generally preferable to lies and that any attempt to pretend that Cedric died as the result of an accident or some sort of blunder of his own is an insult to his memory .Stunned and frightened every face in the Hall was turned toward Dumbledore now .or almost every face .Over at the Slytherin table Harry saw Draco Malfoy muttering something to Crabbe and Goyle .Harry felt a hot sick swoop of anger in his stomach .He forced himself to look back at Dumbledore .There is somebody else who must be mentioned in connection with Cedrics death Dumbledore went on .I am talking of course about Harry Potter .A kind of ripple crossed the Great Hall as a few heads turned in Harrys direction before flicking back to face Dumbledore .Harry Potter managed to escape Lord Voldemort said Dumbledore .He risked his own life to return Cedrics body to Hogwarts .He showed in every respect the sort of bravery that few wizards have ever shown in facing Lord Voldemort and for this I honor him .Dumbledore turned gravely to Harry and raised his goblet once more .Nearly everyone in the Great Hall followed suit .They murmured his name as they had murmured Cedrics and drank to him .But through a gap in the standing figures Harry saw that Malfoy Crabbe Goyle and many of the other Slytherins had remained defiantly in their seats their goblets untouched .Dumbledore who after all possessed no magical eye did not see them .When everyone had once again resumed their seats Dumbledore continued The Triwizard Tournaments aim was to further and promote magical understanding .In the light of what has happened of Lord Voldemorts return such ties are more important than ever before .Dumbledore looked from Madame Maxime and Hagrid to Fleur Delacour and her fellow Beauxbatons students to Viktor Krum and the Durmstrangs at the Slytherin table .Krum Harry saw looked wary almost frightened as though he expected Dumbledore to say something harsh .Every guest in this Hall said Dumbledore and his eyes lingered upon the Durmstrang students will be welcomed back here at any time should they wish to come .I say to you all once again in the light of Lord Voldemorts return we are only as strong as we are united as weak as we are divided .Lord Voldemorts gift for spreading discord and enmity is very great .We can fight it only by showing an equally strong bond of friendship and trust .Differences of habit and language are nothing at all if our aims are identical and our hearts are open .It is my belief and never have I so hoped that I am mistaken that we are all facing dark and difficult times .Some of you in this Hall have already suffered directly at the hands of Lord Voldemort .Many of your families have been torn asunder .A week ago a student was taken from our midst .Remember Cedric .Remember if the time should come when you have to make a choice between what is right and what is easy remember what happened to a boy who was good and kind and brave because he strayed across the path of Lord Voldemort .Remember Cedric Diggory .Harrys trunk was packed Hedwig was back in her cage on top of it .He Ron and Hermione were waiting in the crowded entrance hall with the rest of the fourth years for the carriages that would take them back to Hogsmeade station .It was another beautiful summers day .He supposed that Privet Drive would be hot and leafy its flower beds a riot of color when he arrived there that evening .The thought gave him no pleasure at all .Arry !He looked around .Fleur Delacour was hurrying up the stone steps into the castle .Beyond her far across the grounds Harry could see Hagrid helping Madame Maxime to back two of the giant horses into their harness .The Beauxbatons carriage was about to take off .We will see each uzzer again I ope said Fleur as she reached him holding out her hand .I am oping to get a job ere to improve my Eenglish .Its very good already said Ron in a strangled sort of voice .Fleur smiled at him Hermione scowled .Goodbye Arry said Fleur turning to go .It az been a pleasure meeting you !Harrys spirits couldnt help but lift slightly as he watched Fleur hurry back across the lawns to Madame Maxime her silvery hair rippling in the sunlight .Wonder how the Durmstrang students are getting back said Ron .Dyou reckon they can steer that ship without Karkaroff ?Karkaroff did not steer said a gruff voice .He stayed in his cabin and let us do the vork .Krum had come to say goodbye to Hermione .Could I have a vord ?he asked her .Oh .yes .all right said Hermione looking slightly flustered and following Krum through the crowd and out of sight .Youd better hurry up !Ron called loudly after her .The carriagesll be here in a minute !He let Harry keep a watch for the carriages however and spent the next few minutes craning his neck over the crowd to try and see what Krum and Hermione might be up to .They returned quite soon .Ron stared at Hermione but her face was quite impassive .I liked Diggory said Krum abruptly to Harry .He vos alvays polite to me .Alvays .Even though I vos from Durmstrang with Karkaroff he added scowling .Have you got a new headmaster yet ?said Harry .Krum shrugged .He held out his hand as Fleur had done shook Harrys hand and then Rons .Ron looked as though he was suffering some sort of painful internal struggle .Krum had already started walking away when Ron burst out Can I have your autograph ?Hermione turned away smiling at the horseless carriages that were now trundling toward them up the drive as Krum looking surprised but gratified signed a fragment of parchment for Ron .The weather could not have been more different on the journey back to Kings Cross than it had been on their way to Hogwarts the previous September .There wasnt a single cloud in the sky .Harry Ron and Hermione had managed to get a compartment to themselves .Pigwidgeon was once again hidden under Rons dress robes to stop him from hooting continually Hedwig was dozing her head under her wing and Crookshanks was curled up in a spare seat like a large furry ginger cushion .Harry Ron and Hermione talked more fully and freely than they had all week as the train sped them southward .Harry felt as though Dumbledores speech at the Leaving Feast had unblocked him somehow .It was less painful to discuss what had happened now .They broke off their conversation about what action Dumbledore might be taking even now to stop Voldemort only when the lunch trolley arrived .When Hermione returned from the trolley and put her money back into her schoolbag she dislodged a copy of the Daily Prophet that she had been carrying in there .Harry looked at it unsure whether he really wanted to know what it might say but Hermione seeing him looking at it said calmly Theres nothing in there .You can look for yourself but theres nothing at all .Ive been checking every day .Just a small piece the day after the third task saying you won the tournament .They didnt even mention Cedric .Nothing about any of it .If you ask me Fudge is forcing them to keep quiet .Hell never keep Rita quiet said Harry .Not on a story like this .Oh Rita hasnt written anything at all since the third task said Hermione in an oddly constrained voice .As a matter of fact she added her voice now trembling slightly Rita Skeeter isnt going to be writing anything at all for a while .Not unless she wants me to spill the beans on her .What are you talking about ?said Ron .I found out how she was listening in on private conversations when she wasnt supposed to be coming onto the grounds said Hermione in a rush .Harry had the impression that Hermione had been dying to tell them this for days but that she had restrained herself in light of everything else that had happened .How was she doing it ?said Harry at once .How did you find out ?said Ron staring at her .Well it was you really who gave me the idea Harry she said .Did I ?said Harry perplexed .How ?Bugging said Hermione happily .But you said they didnt work Oh not electronic bugs said Hermione .No you see .Rita Skeeter Hermione s voice trembled with quiet triumph is an unregistered Animagus .She can turn Hermione pulled a small sealed glass jar out of her bag .into a beetle .Youre kidding said Ron .You havent .shes not Oh yes she is said Hermione happily brandishing the jar at them .Inside were a few twigs and leaves and one large fat beetle .Thats never youre kidding Ron whispered lifting the jar to his eyes .No Im not said Hermione beaming .I caught her on the windowsill in the hospital wing .Look very closely and you 11 notice the markings around her antennae are exactly like those foul glasses she wears .Harry looked and saw that she was quite right .He also remembered something .There was a beetle on the statue the night we heard Hagrid telling Madame Maxime about his mum !Exactly said Hermione .And Viktor pulled a beetle out of my hair after wed had our conversation by the lake .And unless Im very much mistaken Rita was perched on the windowsill of the Divination class the day your scar hurt .Shes been buzzing around for stories all year .When we saw Malfoy under that tree .said Ron slowly .He was talking to her in his hand said Hermione .He knew of course .Thats how shes been getting all those nice little interviews with the Slytherins .They wouldnt care that she was doing something illegal as long as they were giving her horrible stuff about us and Hagrid .Hermione took the glass jar back from Ron and smiled at the beetle which buzzed angrily against the glass .Ive told her Ill let her out when we get back to London said Hermione .Ive put an Unbreakable Charm on the jar you see so she cant transform .And Ive told her shes to keep her quill to herself for a whole year .See if she cant break the habit of writing horrible lies about people .Smiling serenely Hermione placed the beetle back inside her schoolbag .The door of the compartment slid open .Very clever Granger said Draco Malfoy .Crabbe and Goyle were standing behind him .All three of them looked more pleased with themselves more arrogant and more menacing than Harry had ever seen them .So said Malfoy slowly advancing slightly into the compartment and looking slowly around at them a smirk quivering on his lips .You caught some pathetic reporter and Potters Dumbledores favorite boy again .Big deal .His smirk widened .Crabbe and Goyle leered .Trying not to think about it are we ?said Malfoy softly looking around at all three of them .Trying to pretend it hasnt happened ?Get out said Harry .He had not been this close to Malfoy since he had watched him muttering to Crabbe and Goyle during Dumbledores speech about Cedric .He could feel a kind of ringing in his ears .His hand gripped his wand under his robes .Youve picked the losing side Potter !I warned you !I told you you ought to choose your company more carefully remember ?When we met on the train first day at Hogwarts ?I told you not to hang around with riffraff like this !He jerked his head at Ron and Hermione .Too late now Potter !Theyll be the first to go now the Dark Lords back !Mudbloods and Mugglelovers first !Well second Diggory was the f It was as though someone had exploded a box of fireworks within the compartment .Blinded by the blaze of the spells that had blasted from every direction deafened by a series of bangs Harry blinked and looked down at the floor .Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle were all lying unconscious in the doorway .He Ron and Hermione were on their feet all three of them having used a different hex .Nor were they the only ones to have done so .Thought wed see what those three were up to said Fred matteroffactly stepping onto Goyle and into the compartment .He had his wand out and so did George who was careful to tread on Malfoy as he followed Fred inside .Interesting effect said George looking down at Crabbe .Who used the Furnunculus Curse ?Me said Harry .Odd said George lightly .I used JellyLegs .Looks as though those two shouldnt be mixed .He seems to have sprouted little tentacles all over his face .Well lets not leave them here they dont add much to the decor .Ron Harry and George kicked rolled and pushed the unconscious Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle each of whom looked distinctly the worse for the jumble of jinxes with which they had been hit out into the corridor then came back into the compartment and rolled the door shut .Exploding Snap anyone ?said Fred pulling out a pack of cards .They were halfway through their fifth game when Harry decided to ask them .You going to tell us then ?he said to George .Who you were blackmailing ?Oh said George darkly .That It doesnt matter said Fred shaking his head impatiently .It wasnt anything important .Not now anyway .Weve given up said George shrugging .But Harry Ron and Hermione kept on asking and finally Fred said All right all right if you really want to know .it was Ludo Bagman .Bagman ?said Harry sharply .Are you saying he was involved in Nah said George gloomily .Nothing like that .Stupid git .He wouldnt have the brains .Well what then ?said Ron .Fred hesitated then said You remember that bet we had with him at the Quidditch World Cup ?About how Ireland would win but Krum would get the Snitch ?Yeah said Harry and Ron slowly .Well the git paid us in leprechaun gold hed caught from the Irish mascots .So ?So said Fred impatiently it vanished didnt it ?By next morning it had gone !But it mustve been an accident mustnt it ?said Hermione .George laughed very bitterly .Yeah thats what we thought at first .We thought if we just wrote to him and told him hed made a mistake hed cough up .But nothing doing .Ignored our letter .We kept trying to talk to him about it at Hogwarts but he was always making some excuse to get away from us .In the end he turned pretty nasty said Fred .Told us we were too young to gamble and he wasnt giving us anything .So we asked for our money back said George glowering .He didnt refuse !gasped Hermione .Right in one said Fred .But that was all your savings !said Ron .Tell me about it said George .Course we found out what was going on in the end .Lee Jordans dad had had a bit of trouble getting money off Bagman as well .Turns out hes in big trouble with the goblins .Borrowed loads of gold off them .A gang of them cornered him in the woods after the World Cup and took all the gold he had and it still wasnt enough to cover all his debts .They followed him all the way to Hogwarts to keep an eye on him .Hes lost everything gambling .Hasnt got two Galleons to rub together .And you know how the idiot tried to pay the goblins back ?How ?said Harry .He put a bet on you mate said Fred .Put a big bet on you to win the tournament .Bet against the goblins .So thats why he kept trying to help me win !said Harry .Well I did win didnt I ?So he can pay you your gold !Nope said George shaking his head .The goblins play as dirty as him .They say you drew with Diggory and Bagman was betting youd win outright .So Bagman had to run for it .He did run for it right after the third task .George sighed deeply and started dealing out the cards again .The rest of the journey passed pleasantly enough Harry wished it could have gone on all summer in fact and that he would never arrive at Kings Cross .but as he had learned the hard way that year time will not slow down when something unpleasant lies ahead and all too soon the Hogwarts Express was pulling in at platform nine and threequarters .The usual confusion and noise filled the corridors as the students began to disembark .Ron and Hermione struggled out past Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle carrying their trunks .Harry however stayed put .Fred George wait a moment .The twins turned .Harry pulled open his trunk and drew out his Triwizard winnings .Take it he said and he thrust the sack into Georges hands .What ?said Fred looking flabbergasted .Take it Harry repeated firmly .I dont want it .Youre mental said George trying to push it back at Harry .No Im not said Harry .You take it and get inventing .Its for the joke shop .He is mental Fred said in an almost awed voice .Listen said Harry firmly .If you dont take it Im throwing it down the drain .I dont want it and I dont need it .But I could do with a few laughs .We could all do with a few laughs .Ive got a feeling were going to need them more than usual before long .Harry said George weakly weighing the money bag in his hands theres got to be a thousand Galleons in here .Yeah said Harry grinning .Think how many Canary Creams that is .The twins stared at him .Just dont tell your mum where you got it .although she might not be so keen for you to join the Ministry anymore come to think of it .Harry Fred began but Harry pulled out his wand .Look he said flatly take it or Ill hex you .I know some good ones now .Just do me one favor okay ?Buy Ron some different dress robes and say theyre from you .He left the compartment before they could say another word stepping over Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle who were still lying on the floor covered in hex marks .Uncle Vernon was waiting beyond the barrier .Mrs Weasley was close by him .She hugged Harry very tightly when she saw him and whispered in his ear I think Dumbledore will let you come to us later in the summer .Keep in touch Harry .See you Harry said Ron clapping him on the back .Bye Harry !said Hermione and she did something she had never done before and kissed him on the cheek .Harry thanks George muttered while Fred nodded fervently at his side .Harry winked at them turned to Uncle Vernon and followed him silently from the station .There was no point worrying yet he told himself as he got into the back of the Dursleys car .As Hagrid had said what would come would come .and he would have to meet it when it did .HARRY POTTER I DUDLEY DEMENTED The hottest day of the summer so far was drawing to a close and a drowsy silence lay over the large square houses of Privet Drive .Cars that were usually gleaming stood dusty in their drives and lawns that were once emerald green lay parched and yellowing the use of hosepipes had been banned due to drought .Deprived of their usual carwashing and lawnmowing pursuits the inhabitants of Privet Drive had retreated into the shade of their cool houses windows thrown wide in the hope of tempting in a nonexistent breeze .The only person left outdoors was a teenage boy who was lying flat on his back in a flower bed outside number four .He was a skinny blackhaired bespectacled boy who had the pinched slightly unhealthy look of someone who has grown a lot in a short space of time .His jeans were torn and dirty his Tshirt baggy and faded and the soles of his trainers were peeling away from the uppers .Harry Potters appearance did not endear him to the neighbors who were the sort of people who thought scruffiness ought to be punishable by law but as he had hidden himself behind a large hydrangea bush this evening he was quite invisible to passersby .In fact the only way he would be spotted was if his Uncle Vernon or Aunt Petunia stuck their heads out of the living room window and looked straight down into the flower bed below .On the whole Harry thought he was to be congratulated on his idea of hiding here .He was not perhaps very comfortable lying on the hot hard earth but on the other hand nobody was glaring at him grinding their teeth so loudly that he could not hear the news or shooting nasty questions at him as had happened every time he had tried sitting down in the living room and watching television with his aunt and uncle .Almost as though this thought had fluttered through the open window Vernon Dursley Harrys uncle suddenly spoke .Glad to see the boys stopped trying to butt in .Where is he anyway ?I dont know said Aunt Petunia unconcernedly .Not in the house .Uncle Vernon grunted .Watching the news .he said scathingly .Id like to know what hes really up to .As if a normal boy cares whats on the news Dudley hasnt got a clue whats going on doubt he knows who the Prime Minister is !Anyway its not as if there d be anything about his lot on our news Vernon shh said Aunt Petunia .The windows open !Oh yes sorry dear .The Dursleys fell silent .Harry listened to a jingle about Fruit N Bran breakfast cereal while he watched Mrs Figg a batty catloving old lady from nearby Wisteria Walk amble slowly past .She was frowning and muttering to herself .Harry was very pleased that he was concealed behind the bush Mrs Figg had recently taken to asking him around for tea whenever she met him in the street .She had rounded the corner and vanished from view before Uncle Vernons voice floated out of the window again .Dudders out for tea ?At the Polkisses said Aunt Petunia fondly .Hes got so many little friends hes so popular .Harry repressed a snort with difficulty .The Dursleys really were astonishingly stupid about their son Dudley they had swallowed all his dimwitted lies about having tea with a different member of his gang every night of the summer holidays .Harry knew perfectly well that Dudley had not been to tea anywhere he and his gang spent every evening vandalizing the play park smoking on street corners and throwing stones at passing cars and children .Harry had seen them at it during his evening walks around Little Whinging he had spent most of the holidays wandering the streets scavenging newspapers from bins along the way .The opening notes of the music that heralded the seven oclock news reached Harrys ears and his stomach turned over .Perhaps tonight after a month of waiting would be the night Record numbers of stranded holidaymakers fill airports as the Spanish baggagehandlers strike reaches its second week Give em a lifelong siesta I would snarled Uncle Vernon over the end of the newsreaders sentence but no matter Outside in the flower bed Harrys stomach seemed to unclench .If anything had happened it would surely have been the first item on the news death and destruction were more important than stranded holidaymakers .He let out a long slow breath and stared up at the brilliant blue sky .Every day this summer had been the same the tension the expectation the temporary relief and then mounting tension again .and always growing more insistent all the time the question of why nothing had happened yet .He kept listening just in case there was some small clue not recognized for what it really was by the Muggles an unexplained disappearance perhaps or some strange accident .but the baggagehandlers strike was followed by news on the drought in the Southeast I hope hes listening next door !bellowed Uncle Vernon with his sprinklers on at three in the morning !then a helicopter that had almost crashed in a field in Surrey then a famous actresss divorce from her famous husband as if were interested in their sordid affairs sniffed Aunt Petunia who had followed the case obsessively in every magazine she could lay her bony hands on .Harry closed his eyes against the now blazing evening sky as the newsreader said And finally Bungy the budgie has found a novel way of keeping cool this summer .Bungy who lives at the Five Feathers in Barnsley has learned to waterski !Mary Dorkins went to find out more .Harry opened his eyes again .If they had reached waterskiing budgerigars there was nothing else worth hearing .He rolled cautiously onto his front and raised himself onto his knees and elbows preparing to crawl out from under the window .He had moved about two inches when several things happened in very quick succession .A loud echoing crack broke the sleepy silence like a gunshot a cat streaked out from under a parked car and flew out of sight a shriek a bellowed oath and the sound of breaking china came from the Dursleys living room and as though Harry had been waiting for this signal he jumped to his feet at the same time pulling from the waistband of his jeans a thin wooden wand as if he were unsheathing a sword .But before he could draw himself up to full height the top of his head collided with the Dursleys open window and the resultant crash made Aunt Petunia scream even louder .Harry felt as if his head had been split in two eyes streaming he swayed trying to focus on the street and spot the source of the noise but he had barely staggered upright again when two large purple hands reached through the open window and closed tightly around his throat .Put it away Uncle Vernon snarled into Harrys ear .Now Before anyone sees !Get off me !Harry gasped for a few seconds they struggled Harry pulling at his uncles sausage like fingers with his left hand his right maintaining a firm grip on his raised wand .Then as the pain in the top of Harrys head gave a particularly nasty throb Uncle Vernon yelped and released Harry as though he had received an electric shock some invisible force seemed to have surged through his nephew making him impossible to hold .Panting Harry fell forward over the hydrangea bush straightened up and stared around .There was no sign of what had caused the loud cracking noise but there were several faces peering through various nearby windows .Harry stuffed his wand hastily back into his jeans and tried to look innocent .Lovely evening !shouted Uncle Vernon waving at Mrs Number Seven who was glaring from behind her net curtains .Did you hear that car backfire just now ?Gave Petunia and me quite a turn !He continued to grin in a horrible manic way until all the curious neighbors had disappeared from their various windows then the grin became a grimace of rage as he beckoned Harry back toward him .Harry moved a few steps closer taking care to stop just short of the point at which Uncle Vernons outstretched hands could resume their strangling .What the devil do you mean by it boy ?asked Uncle Vernon in a croaky voice that trembled with fury .What do I mean by what ?said Harry coldly .He kept looking left and right up the street still hoping to see the person who had made the cracking noise .Making a racket like a starting pistol right outside our I didnt make that noise said Harry firmly .Aunt Petunias thin horsey face now appeared beside Uncle Vernons wide purple one .She looked livid .Why were you lurking under our window ?Yes yes good point Petunia !What were you doing under our window boy ?Listening to the news said Harry in a resigned voice .His aunt and uncle exchanged looks of outrage .Listening to the news !Again ?Well it changes every day you see said Harry .Dont you be clever with me boy !I want to know what youre really up to and dont give me any more of this listening to the news tosh !You know perfectly well that your lot .Careful Vernon !breathed Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon lowered his voice so that Harry could barely hear him .that your lot dont get on our news !Thats all you know said Harry .The Dursleys goggled at him for a few seconds then Aunt Petunia said Youre a nasty little liar .What are all those she too lowered her voice so that Harry had to lipread the next word owls doing if theyre not bringing you news ?Aha !said Uncle Vernon in a triumphant whisper .Get out of that one boy !As if we didnt know you get all your news from those pestilential birds !Harry hesitated for a moment .It cost him something to tell the truth this time even though his aunt and uncle could not possibly know how bad Harry felt at admitting it .The owls .arent bringing me news said Harry tonelessly .I dont believe it said Aunt Petunia at once .No more do I said Uncle Vernon forcefully .We know youre up to something funny said Aunt Petunia .Were not stupid you know said Uncle Vernon .Well thats news to me said Harry his temper rising and before the Dursleys could call him back he had wheeled about crossed the front lawn stepped over the low garden wall and was striding off up the street .He was in trouble now and he knew it .He would have to face his aunt and uncle later and pay the price for his rudeness but he did not care very much just at the moment he had much more pressing matters on his mind .Harry was sure that the cracking noise had been made by someone Apparating or Disapparating .It was exactly the sound Dobby the houseelf made when he vanished into thin air .Was it possible that Dobby was here in Privet Drive ?Could Dobby be following him right at this very moment ?As this thought occurred he wheeled around and stared back down Privet Drive but it appeared to be completely deserted again and Harry was sure that Dobby did not know how to become invisible .He walked on hardly aware of the route he was taking for he had pounded these streets so often lately that his feet carried him to his favorite haunts automatically .Every few steps he glanced back over his shoulder .Someone magical had been near him as he lay among Aunt Petunias dying begonias he was sure of it .Why hadnt they spoken to him why hadnt they made contact why were they hiding now ?And then as his feeling of frustration peaked his certainty leaked away .Perhaps it hadnt been a magical sound after all .Perhaps he was so desperate for the tiniest sign of contact from the world to which he belonged that he was simply overreacting to perfectly ordinary noises .Could he be sure it hadnt been the sound of something breaking inside a neighbors house ?Harry felt a dull sinking sensation in his stomach and before he knew it the feeling of hopelessness that had plagued him all summer rolled over him once again .Tomorrow morning he would be awoken by the alarm at five oclock so that he could pay the owl that delivered the Daily Prophet but was there any point in continuing to take it ?Harry merely glanced at the front page before throwing it aside these days when the idiots who ran the paper finally realized that Voldemort was back it would be headline news and that was the only kind Harry cared about .If he was lucky there would also be owls carrying letters from his best friends Ron and Hermione though any expectation he had had that their letters would bring him news had long since been dashed .We cant say much about youknowwhat obviously .Weve been told not to say anything important in case our letters go astray .Were quite busy but I cant give you details here .Theres a fair amount going on well tell you everything when we see you .But when were they going to see him ?Nobody seemed too bothered with a precise date .Hermione had scribbled I expect well be seeing you quite soon inside his birthday card but how soon was soon ?As far as Harry could tell from the vague hints in their letters Hermione and Ron were in the same place presumably at Rons parents house .He could hardly bear to think of the pair of them having fun at the Burrow when he was stuck in Privet Drive .In fact he was so angry at them that he had thrown both their birthday presents of Honeydukes chocolates away unopened though he had regretted this after eating the wilting salad Aunt Petunia had provided for dinner that night .And what were Ron and Hermione busy with ?Why wasnt he Harry busy ?Hadnt he proved himself capable of handling much more than they ?Had they all forgotten what he had done ?Hadnt it been he who had entered that graveyard and watched Cedric being murdered and been tied to that tombstone and nearly killed . ?Dont think about that Harry told himself sternly for the hundredth time that summer .It was bad enough that he kept revisiting the graveyard in his nightmares without dwelling on it in his waking moments too .He turned a corner into Magnolia Crescent halfway along he passed the narrow alleyway down the side of a garage where he had first clapped eyes on his godfather .Sirius at least seemed to understand how Harry was feeling admittedly his letters were just as empty of proper news as Ron and Hermiones but at least they contained words of caution and consolation instead of tantalizing hints I know this must be frustrating for you .Keep your nose clean and everything will be okay .Be careful and dont do anything rash .Well thought Harry as he crossed Magnolia Crescent turned into Magnolia Road and headed toward the darkening play park he had by and large done as Sirius advised he had at least resisted the temptation to tie his trunk to his broomstick and set off for the Burrow by himself .In fact Harry thought his behavior had been very good considering how frustrated and angry he felt at being stuck in Privet Drive this long reduced to hiding in flower beds in the hope of hearing something that might point to what Lord Voldemort was doing .Nevertheless it was quite galling to be told not to be rash by a man who had served twelve years in the wizard prison Azkaban escaped attempted to commit the murder he had been convicted for in the first place then gone on the run with a stolen hippogriff .Harry vaulted over the locked park gate and set off across the parched grass .The park was as empty as the surrounding streets .When he reached the swings he sank onto the only one that Dudley and his friends had not yet managed to break coiled one arm around the chain and stared moodily at the ground .He would not be able to hide in the Dursleys flower bed again .Tomorrow he would have to think of some fresh way of listening to the news .In the meantime he had nothing to look forward to but another restless disturbed night because even when he escaped nightmares about Cedric he had unsettling dreams about long dark corridors all finishing in dead ends and locked doors which he supposed had something to do with the trapped feeling he had when he was awake .Often the old scar on his forehead prickled uncomfortably but he did not fool himself that Ron or Hermione or Sirius would find that very interesting anymore .In the past his scar hurting had warned that Voldemort was getting stronger again but now that Voldemort was back they would probably remind him that its regular irritation was only to be expected .Nothing to worry about .old news .The injustice of it all welled up inside him so that he wanted to yell with fury .If it hadnt been for him nobody would even have known Voldemort was back !And his reward was to be stuck in Little Whinging for four solid weeks completely cut off from the magical world reduced to squatting among dying begonias so that he could hear about waterskiing budgerigars !How could Dumbledore have forgotten him so easily ?Why had Ron and Hermione got together without inviting him along too ?How much longer was he supposed to endure Sirius telling him to sit tight and be a good boy or resist the temptation to write to the stupid Daily Prophet and point out that Voldemort had returned ?These furious thoughts whirled around in Harrys head and his insides writhed with anger as a sultry velvety night fell around him the air full of the smell of warm dry grass and the only sound that of the low grumble of traffic on the road beyond the park railings .He did not know how long he had sat on the swing before the sound of voices interrupted his musings and he looked up .The streetlamps from the surrounding roads were casting a misty glow strong enough to silhouette a group of people making their way across the park .One of them was singing a loud crude song .The others were laughing .A soft ticking noise came from several expensive racing bikes that they were wheeling along .Harry knew who those people were .The figure in front was unmistakably his cousin Dudley Dursley wending his way home accompanied by his faithful gang .Dudley was as vast as ever but a years hard dieting and the discovery of a new talent had wrought quite a change in his physique .As Uncle Vernon delightedly told anyone who would listen Dudley had recently become the Junior Heavyweight InterSchool Boxing Champion of the Southeast .The noble sport as Uncle Vernon called it had made Dudley even more formidable than he had seemed to Harry in the primary school days when he had served as Dudleys first punching bag .Harry was not remotely afraid of his cousin anymore but he still didnt think that Dudley learning to punch harder and more accurately was cause for celebration .Neighborhood children all around were terrified of him even more terrified than they were of that Potter boy who they had been warned was a hardened hooligan who attended St .Brutuss Secure Center for Incurably Criminal Boys .Harry watched the dark figures crossing the grass and wondered whom they had been beating up tonight .Look round Harry found himself thinking as he watched them .Come on .look round .Im sitting here all alone .Come and have ago .If Dudleys friends saw him sitting here they would be sure to make a beeline for him and what would Dudley do then ?He wouldnt want to lose face in front of the gang but hed be terrified of provoking Harry .It would be really fun to watch Dudleys dilemma to taunt him watch him with him powerless to respond .and if any of the others tried hitting Harry Harry was ready he had his wand .let them try .Hed love to vent some of his frustration on the boys who had once made his life hell But they did not turn around they did not see him they were almost at the railings .Harry mastered the impulse to call after them .Seeking a fight was not a smart move .He must not use magic .He would be risking expulsion again .Dudleys gangs voices died they were out of sight heading along Magnolia Road .There you go Sirius Harry thought dully .Nothing rash .Kept my nose clean .Exactly the opposite of what youd have done .He got to his feet and stretched .Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon seemed to feel that whenever Dudley turned up was the right time to be home and anytime after that was much too late .Uncle Vernon had threatened to lock Harry in the shed if he came home after Dudley again so stifling a yawn still scowling Harry set off toward the park gate .Magnolia Road like Privet Drive was full of large square houses with perfectly manicured lawns all owned by large square owners who drove very clean cars similar to Uncle Vernons .Harry preferred Little Whinging by night when the curtained windows made patches of jewelbright colors in the darkness and he ran no danger of hearing disapproving mutters about his delinquent appearance when he passed the householders .He walked quickly so that halfway along Magnolia Road Dudleys gang came into view again they were saying their farewells at the entrance to Magnolia Crescent .Harry stepped into the shadow of a large lilac tree and waited . .squealed like a pig didnt he ?Malcolm was saying to guffaws from the others .Nice right hook Big D said Piers .Same time tomorrow ?said Dudley .Round at my place my parents are out said Gordon .See you then said Dudley .Bye Dud !See ya Big D !Harry waited for the rest of the gang to move on before setting off again .When their voices had faded once more he headed around the corner into Magnolia Crescent and by walking very quickly he soon came within hailing distance of Dudley who was strolling along at his ease humming tunelessly .Hey Big D !Dudley turned .Oh he grunted .Its you .How long have you been ‘Big D then ?said Harry .Shut it snarled Dudley turning away again .Cool name said Harry grinning and falling into step beside his cousin .But youll always be Ickle Diddykins to me .I said SHUT IT !said Dudley whose hamlike hands had curled into fists .Dont the boys know thats what your mum calls you ?Shut your face .You dont tell her to shut her face .What about ‘popkin and ‘Dinky Diddydums can I use them then ?Dudley said nothing .The effort of keeping himself from hitting Harry seemed to be demanding all his selfcontrol .So whove you been beating up tonight ?Harry asked his grin fading .Another tenyearold ?I know you did Mark Evans two nights ago He was asking for it snarled Dudley .Oh yeah ?He cheeked me .Yeah ?Did he say you look like a pig thats been taught to walk on its hind legs ?Cause thats not cheek Dud thats true .A muscle was twitching in Dudleys jaw .It gave Harry enormous satisfaction to know how furious he was making Dudley he felt as though he was siphoning off his own frustration into his cousin the only outlet he had .They turned right down the narrow alleyway where Harry had first seen Sirius and which formed a shortcut between Magnolia Crescent and Wisteria Walk .It was empty and much darker than the streets it linked because there were no streetlamps .Their footsteps were muffled between garage walls on one side and a high fence on the other .Think youre a big man carrying that thing dont you ?Dudley said after a few seconds .What thing ?That that thing youre hiding .Harry grinned again .Not as stupid as you look are you Dud ?But I spose if you were you wouldnt be able to walk and talk at the same time .Harry pulled out his wand .He saw Dudley look sideways at it .Youre not allowed Dudley said at once .I know youre not .Youd get expelled from that freak school you go to .How dyou know they havent changed the rules Big D ?They havent said Dudley though he didnt sound completely convinced .Harry laughed softly .You havent got the guts to take me on without that thing have you ?Dudley snarled .Whereas you just need four mates behind you before you can beat up a tenyearold .You know that boxing title you keep banging on about ?How old was your opponent ?Seven ?Eight ?He was sixteen for your information snarled Dudley and he was out cold for twenty minutes after Id finished with him and he was twice as heavy as you .You just wait till I tell Dad you had that thing out Running to Daddy now are you ?Is his ickle boxing champ frightened of nasty Harrys wand ?Not this brave at night are you ?sneered Dudley .This is night Diddykins .Thats what we call it when it goes all dark like this .I mean when youre in bed !Dudley snarled .He had stopped walking .Harry stopped too staring at his cousin .From the little he could see of Dudleys large face he was wearing a strangely triumphant look .What dyou mean Im not brave in bed ?said Harry completely nonplussed .What am I supposed to be frightened of pillows or something ?I heard you last night said Dudley breathlessly .Talking in your sleep .Moaning .What dyou mean ?Harry said again but there was a cold plunging sensation in his stomach .He had revisited the graveyard last night in his dreams .Dudley gave a harsh bark of laughter then adopted a highpitched whimpering voice . ‘Dont kill Cedric !Dont kill Cedric !Whos Cedric your boyfriend ?I youre lying said Harry automatically .But his mouth had gone dry .He knew Dudley wasnt lying how else would he know about Cedric ?Tad !Help me Dad !Hes going to kill me Dad !Boo hoo !Shut up said Harry quietly .Shut up Dudley Im warning you ! ‘Come and help me Dad !Mum come and help me !Hes killed Cedric !Dad help me !Hes going to Dont you point that thing at me Dudley backed into the alley wall .Harry was pointing the wand directly at Dudleys heart .Harry could feel fourteen years hatred of Dudley pounding in his veins what wouldnt he give to strike now to jinx Dudley so thoroughly hed have to crawl home like an insect struck dumb sprouting feelers Dont ever talk about that again Harry snarled .Dyou understand me ?Point that thing somewhere else !I said do you understand me ?Point it somewhere else DO YOU UNDERSTAND ME ?GET THAT THING AWAY FROM Dudley gave an odd shuddering gasp as though he had been doused in icy water .Something had happened to the night .The star strewn indigo sky was suddenly pitchblack and lightless the stars the moon the misty streetlamps at either end of the alley had vanished .The distant grumble of cars and the whisper of trees had gone .The balmy evening was suddenly piercingly bitingly cold .They were surrounded by total impenetrable silent darkness as though some giant hand had dropped a thick icy mantle over the entire alleyway blinding them .For a split second Harry thought he had done magic without meaning to despite the fact that hed been resisting as hard as he could then his reason caught up with his senses he didnt have the power to turn off the stars .He turned his head this way and that trying to see something but the darkness pressed on his eyes like a weightless veil .Dudleys terrified voice broke in Harrys ear .Wwhat are you ddoing ?Ststop it !Im not doing anything !Shut up and dont move !I ccant see !Ive ggone blind !I I said shut up !Harry stood stockstill turning his sightless eyes left and right .The cold was so intense that he was shivering all over goose bumps had erupted up his arms and the hairs on the back of his neck were standing up he opened his eyes to their fullest extent staring blankly around unseeing .It was impossible .They couldnt be here .Not in Little Whinging .He strained his ears .He would hear them before he saw them .Ill ttell Dad !Dudley whimpered .Wwhere are you ?What are you ddo ?Will you shut up ?Harry hissed Im trying to lis But he fell silent .He had heard just the thing he had been dreading .There was something in the alleyway apart from themselves something that was drawing long hoarse rattling breaths .Harry felt a horrible jolt of dread as he stood trembling in the freezing air .Ccut it out !Stop doing it !Ill hhit you I swear I will !Dudley shut WHAM A fist made contact with the side of Harrys head lifting Harry off his feet .Small white lights popped in front of Harrys eyes for the second time in an hour he felt as though his head had been cleaved in two next moment he had landed hard on the ground and his wand had flown out of his hand .You moron Dudley !Harry yelled his eyes watering with pain as he scrambled to his hands and knees now feeling around frantically in the blackness .He heard Dudley blundering away hitting the alley fence stumbling .DUDLEY COME BACK !YOURE RUNNING RIGHT AT IT !There was a horrible squealing yell and Dudleys footsteps stopped .At the same moment Harry felt a creeping chill behind him that could mean only one thing .There was more than one .DUDLEY KEEP YOUR MOUTH SHUT !WHATEVER YOU DO KEEP YOUR MOUTH SHUT !Wand !Harry muttered frantically his hands flying over the ground like spiders .Wheres wand come on Lumosl He said the spell automatically desperate for light to help him in his search and to his disbelieving relief light flared inches from his right hand the wand tip had ignited .Harry snatched it up scrambled to his feet and turned around .His stomach turned over .A towering hooded figure was gliding smoothly toward him hovering over the ground no feet or face visible beneath its robes sucking on the night as it came .Stumbling backward Harry raised his wand .Expecto Patronurrd A silvery wisp of vapor shot from the tip of the wand and the dementor slowed but the spell hadnt worked properly tripping over his feet Harry retreated farther as the dementor bore down upon him panic fogging his brain concentrate A pair of gray slimy scabbed hands slid from inside the dementors robes reaching for him .A rushing noise filled Harrys ears .Expecto PatronumV His voice sounded dim and distant .Another wisp of silver smoke feebler than the last drifted from the wand he couldnt do it anymore he couldnt work the spell There was laughter inside his own head shrill high pitched laughter .He could smell the dementors putrid deathcold breath filling his own lungs drowning him Think .something happy .But there was no happiness in him .The dementors icy fingers were closing on his throat the high pitched laughter was growing louder and louder and a voice spoke inside his head Bow to death Harry .It might even be painless .I would not know .I have never died .He was never going to see Ron and Hermione again And their faces burst clearly into his mind as he fought for breath EXPECTO PATRONUM An enormous silver stag erupted from the tip of Harrys wand its antlers caught the dementor in the place where the heart should have been it was thrown backward weightless as darkness and as the stag charged the dementor swooped away batlike and defeated .THIS WAY !Harry shouted at the stag .Wheeling around he sprinted down the alleyway holding the lit wand aloft .DUDLEY ?DUDLEY !He had run barely a dozen steps when he reached them Dudley was curled on the ground his arms clamped over his face a second dementor was crouching low over him gripping his wrists in its slimy hands prizing them slowly almost lovingly apart lowering its hooded head toward Dudleys face as though about to kiss him .GET IT !Harry bellowed and with a rushing roaring sound the silver stag he had conjured came galloping back past him .The dementors eyeless face was barely an inch from Dudleys when the silver antlers caught it the thing was thrown up into the air and like its fellow it soared away and was absorbed into the darkness .The stag cantered to the end of the alleyway and dissolved into silver mist .Moon stars and streetlamps burst back into life .A warm breeze swept the alleyway .Trees rustled in neighboring gardens and the mundane rumble of cars in Magnolia Crescent filled the air again .Harry stood quite still all his senses vibrating taking in the abrupt return to normality .After a moment he became aware that his Tshirt was sticking to him he was drenched in sweat .He could not believe what had just happened .Dementors here in Little Whinging .Dudley lay curled up on the ground whimpering and shaking .Harry bent down to see whether he was in a fit state to stand up but then heard loud running footsteps behind him instinctively raising his wand again he spun on his heel to face the newcomer .Mrs Figg their batty old neighbor came panting into sight .Her grizzled gray hair was escaping from its hairnet a clanking string shopping bag was swinging from her wrist and her feet were halfway out of her tartan carpet slippers .Harry made to stow his wand hurriedly out of sight but Dont put it away idiot boy !she shrieked .What if there are more of them around ?Oh Im going to kill Mundungus Fletcher !A PECK OF OWLS What ?said Harry blankly .He left !said Mrs Figg wringing her hands .Left to see someone about a batch of cauldrons that fell off the back of a broom !I told him Id flay him alive if he went and now look !Dementors !Its just lucky I put Mr Tibbies on the case !But we havent got time to stand around !Hurry now weve got to get you back !Oh the trouble this is going to cause !I will kill him !But The revelation that his batty old catobsessed neighbor knew what dementors were was almost as big a shock to Harry as meeting two of them down the alleyway .Youre youre a witch ?Im a Squib as Mundungus knows full well so how on earth was I supposed to help you fight off dementors ?He left you completely without cover when I warned him This bloke Mundungus has been following me ?Hang on it was him .He Disapparated from the front of my house !Yes yes yes but luckily Id stationed Mr Tibbies under a car just in case and Mr Tibbies came and warned me but by the time I got to your house youd gone and now oh whats Dumbledore going to say ?You !she shrieked at Dudley still supine on the alley floor .Get your fat bottom off the ground quick !You know Dumbledore ?said Harry staring at her .Of course I know Dumbledore who doesnt know Dumbledore ?But come on Ill be no help if they come back Ive never so much as Transfigured a teabag She stooped down seized one of Dudleys massive arms in her wizened hands and tugged .Get up you useless lump get up !But Dudley either could not or would not move .He was still on the ground trembling and ashenfaced his mouth shut very tight .Ill do it .Harry took hold of Dudleys arm and heaved With an enormous effort he managed to hoist Dudley to his feet .Dudley seemed to be on the point of fainting His small eyes were rolling in their sockets and sweat was beading his face the moment Harry let go of him he swayed dangerously .Hurry up !said Mrs Figg hysterically .Harry pulled one of Dudleys massive arms around his own shoulders and dragged him toward the road sagging slightly under his weight .Mrs Figg tottered along in front of them peering anxiously around the corner .Keep your wand out she told Harry as they entered Wisteria Walk .Never mind the Statute of Secrecy now theres going to be hell to pay anyway we might as well be hanged for a dragon as an egg .Talk about the Reasonable Restriction of Underage Sorcery .This was exactly what Dumbledore was afraid of whats that at the end of the street ?Oh its just Mr Prentice .Dont put your wand away boy dont I keep telling you Im no use ?It was not easy to hold a wand steady and carry Dudley along at the same time .Harry gave his cousin an impatient dig in the ribs but Dudley seemed to have lost all desire for independent movement .He was slumped on Harrys shoulder his large feet dragging along the ground .Why didnt you tell me youre a Squib ?Harry asked Mrs Figg panting with the effort to keep walking .All those times I came round your house why didnt you say anything ?Dumbledore s orders .I was to keep an eye on you but not say anything you were too young .Im sorry I gave you such a miserable time but the Dursleys would never have let you come if theyd thought you enjoyed it .It wasnt easy you know .But oh my word she said tragically wringing her hands once more when Dumbledore hears about this how could Mundungus have left he was supposed to be on duty until midnight where is he ?How am I going to tell Dumbledore whats happened I cant Apparate Ive got an owl you can borrow her Harry groaned wondering whether his spine was going to snap under Dudleys weight .Harry you dont understand !Dumbledore will need to act as quickly as possible the Ministry have their own ways of detecting underage magic theyll know already you mark my words But I was getting rid of dementors I had to use magic theyre going to be more worried what dementors were doing floating around Wisteria Walk surely ?Oh my dear I wish it were so but Im afraid MUNDUNGUS FLETCHER I AM GOING TO KILL YOU !There was a loud crack and a strong smell of mingled drink and stale tobacco filled the air as a squat unshaven man in a tattered overcoat materialized right in front of them .He had short bandy legs long straggly ginger hair and bloodshot baggy eyes that gave him the doleful look of a basset hound he was also clutching a silvery bundle that Harry recognized at once as an Invisibility Cloak .S up Figgy ?he said staring from Mrs Figg to Harry and Dudley .What appened to staying undercover ?Ill give you undercover !cried Mrs Figg .Dementors you useless skiving sneak thief !Dementors ?repeated Mundungus aghast .Dementors here ?Yes here you worthless pile of bat droppings here !shrieked Mrs Figg .Dementors attacking the boy on your watch !Blimey said Mundungus weakly looking from Mrs Figg to Harry and back again .Blimey I .And you off buying stolen cauldrons !Didnt I tell you not to go ?Didnt i ?I well I Mundungus looked deeply uncomfortable .It .it was a very good business opportunity see .Mrs Figg raised the arm from which her string bag dangled and whacked Mundungus around the face and neck with it judging by the clanking noise it made it was full of cat food .Ouch gerroff gerroff you mad old bat !Someones gotta tell Dumbledore !Yes they have !yelled Mrs Figg still swinging the bag of cat food at every bit of Mundungus she could reach .And it had better be you and you can tell him why you werent there to help !Keep your airnet on !said Mundungus his arms over his head cowering .Im going Im going !And with another loud crack he vanished .I hope Dumbledore murders him !said Mrs Figg furiously .Now come on Harry what are you waiting for ?Harry decided not to waste his remaining breath on pointing out that he could barely walk under Dudleys bulk .He gave the semiconscious Dudley a heave and staggered onward .Ill take you to the door said Mrs Figg as they turned into Privet Drive .Just in case there are more of them around .Oh my word what a catastrophe .and you had to fight them off yourself .and Dumbledore said we were to keep you from doing magic at all costs .Well its no good crying over spilled potion I suppose .but the cats among the pixies now .So Harry panted Dumbledore s .been having .me followed ?Of course he has said Mrs Figg impatiently .Did you expect him to let you wander around on your own after what happened in June ?Good Lord boy they told me you were intelligent .Right .get inside and stay there she said as they reached number four .I expect someone will be in touch with you soon enough .What are you going to do ?asked Harry quickly .Im going straight home said Mrs Figg staring around the dark street and shuddering .Ill need to wait for more instructions .Just stay in the house .Good night .Hang on dont go yet !I want to know But Mrs Figg had already set off at a trot carpet slippers flopping string bag clanking .Wait !Harry shouted after her he had a million questions to ask anyone who was in contact with Dumbledore but within seconds Mrs Figg was swallowed by the darkness .Scowling Harry readjusted Dudley on his shoulder and made his slow painful way up number fours garden path .The hall light was on .Harry stuck his wand back inside the waistband of his jeans rang the bell and watched Aunt Petunias outline grow larger and larger oddly distorted by the rippling glass in the front door .Diddy !About time too I was getting quite quite Diddy whats the matter ?Harry looked sideways at Dudley and ducked out from under his arm just in time .Dudley swayed for a moment on the spot his face pale green then he opened his mouth at last and vomited all over the doormat .DIDDY !Diddy whats the matter with you ?Vernon ?VERNON !Harrys uncle came galumphing out of the living room walrus mustache blowing hither and thither as it always did when he was agitated .He hurried forward to help Aunt Petunia negotiate a weakkneed Dudley over the threshold while avoiding stepping in the pool of sick .Hes ill Vernon !What is it son ?Whats happened ?Did Mrs Polkiss give you something foreign for tea ?Why are you all covered in dirt darling ?Have you been lying on the ground ?Hang on you havent been mugged have you son ?Aunt Petunia screamed .Phone the police Vernon !Phone the police !Diddy darling speak to Mummy !What did they do to you ?In all the kerfuffle nobody seemed to have noticed Harry which suited him perfectly .He managed to slip inside just before Uncle Vernon slammed the door and while the Dursleys made their noisy progress down the hall toward the kitchen Harry moved carefully and quietly toward the stairs .Who did it son ?Give us names .Well get them dont worry .Shh !Hes trying to say something Vernon !What is it Diddy ?Tell Mummy !Harrys foot was on the bottommost stair when Dudley found his voice .Him Harry froze foot on the stair face screwed up braced for the explosion .BOY !COME HERE !With a feeling of mingled dread and anger Harry removed his foot slowly from the stair and turned to follow the Dursleys .The scrupulously clean kitchen had an oddly unreal glitter after the darkness outside .Aunt Petunia was ushering Dudley into a chair he was still very green and clammy looking .Uncle Vernon was standing in front of the draining board glaring at Harry through tiny narrowed eyes .What have you done to my son ?he said in a menacing growl .Nothing said Harry knowing perfectly well that Uncle Vernon wouldnt believe him .What did he do to you Diddy ?Aunt Petunia said in a quavering voice now sponging sick from the front of Dudleys leather jacket .Was it was it youknow what darling ?Did he use his thing ?Slowly tremulously Dudley nodded .I didnt !Harry said sharply as Aunt Petunia let out a wail and Uncle Vernon raised his fists .I didnt do anything to him it wasnt me it was But at that precise moment a screech owl swooped in through the kitchen window .Narrowly missing the top of Uncle Vernons head it soared across the kitchen dropped the large parchment envelope it was carrying in its beak at Harrys feet and turned gracefully the tips of its wings just brushing the top of the fridge then zoomed outside again and off across the garden .OWLS !bellowed Uncle Vernon the wellworn vein in his temple pulsing angrily as he slammed the kitchen window shut .OWLS AGAIN !I WILL NOT HAVE ANY MORE OWLS IN MY HOUSE !But Harry was already ripping open the envelope and pulling out the letter inside his heart pounding somewhere in the region of his Adams apple .Dear Mr Potter We have received intelligence that you performed the Patronus Charm at twentythree minutes past nine this evening in a Muggleinhabited area and in the presence of a Muggle .The severity of this breach of the Decree for the Reasonable Restriction of Underage Sorcery has resulted in your expulsion from Hog warts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry .Ministry representatives will be calling at your place of residence shortly to destroy your wand .As you have already received an official warning for a previous offense under section 13 of the International Confederation of Wizards Statute of Secrecy we regret to inform you that your presence is required at a disciplinary hearing at the Ministry of Magic at 9 a .m .on August 12th .Hoping you are well Yours sincerely Mafalda Hopkirk IMPROPER USE OF MAGIC OFFICE Ministry of Magic Harry read the letter through twice .He was only vaguely aware of Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia talking in the vicinity .Inside his head all was icy and numb .One fact had penetrated his consciousness like a paralyzing dart .He was expelled from Hogwarts .It was all over .He was never going back .He looked up at the Dursleys .Uncle Vernon was purplefaced shouting his fists still raised Aunt Petunia had her arms around Dudley who was retching again .Harrys temporarily stupefied brain seemed to reawaken .Ministry representatives will be calling at your place of residence shortly to destroy your wand .There was only one thing for it .He would have to run now .Where he was going to go Harry didnt know but he was certain of one thing At Hogwarts or outside it he needed his wand .In an almost dreamlike state he pulled his wand out and turned to leave the kitchen .Where dyou think youre going ?yelled Uncle Vernon .When Harry didnt reply he pounded across the kitchen to block the doorway into the hall .I havent finished with you boy !Get out of the way said Harry quietly .Youre going to stay here and explain how my son If you dont get out of the way Im going to jinx you said Harry raising the wand .You cant pull that one on me !snarled Uncle Vernon .I know youre not allowed to use it outside that madhouse you call a school !The madhouse has chucked me out said Harry .So I can do whatever I like .Youve got three seconds .One two A resounding CRACK filled the kitchen Aunt Petunia screamed Uncle Vernon yelled and ducked but for the third time that night Harry was staring for the source of a disturbance he had not made .He spotted it at once A dazed and ruffledlooking barn owl was sitting outside on the kitchen sill having just collided with the closed window .Ignoring Uncle Vernons anguished yell of OWLS !Harry crossed the room at a run and wrenched the window open again .The owl stuck out its leg to which a small roll of parchment was tied shook its feathers and took off the moment Harry had pulled off the letter .Hands shaking Harry unfurled the second message which was written very hastily and blotchily in black ink .Harry Dumbledores just arrived at the Ministry and hes trying to sort it all out .DO NOT LEAVE YOUR AUNT AND UNCLES HOUSE .DO NOT DO ANYMORE MAGIC .DO NOT SURRENDER YOUR WAND .Arthur Weasley Dumbledore was trying to sort it all out .What did that mean ?How much power did Dumbledore have to override the Ministry of Magic ?Was there a chance that he might be allowed back to Hogwarts then ?A small shoot of hope burgeoned in Harrys chest almost immediately strangled by panic how was he supposed to refuse to surrender his wand without doing magic ?Hed have to duel with the Ministry representatives and if he did that hed be lucky to escape Azkaban let alone expulsion .His mind was racing .He could run for it and risk being captured by the Ministry or stay put and wait for them to find him here .He was much more tempted by the former course but he knew that Mr Weasley had his best interests at heart .and after all Dumbledore had sorted out much worse than this before .Right Harry said Ive changed my mind Im staying .He flung himself down at the kitchen table and faced Dudley and Aunt Petunia .The Dursleys appeared taken aback at his abrupt change of mind .Aunt Petunia glanced despairingly at Uncle Vernon .The vein in Uncle Vernons purple temple was throbbing worse than ever .Who are all these ruddy owls from ?he growled .The first one was from the Ministry of Magic expelling me said Harry calmly he was straining his ears to catch noises outside in case the Ministry representatives were approaching and it was easier and quieter to answer Uncle Vernons questions than to have him start raging and bellowing .The second one was from my friend Rons dad he works at the Ministry .Ministry of Magic ?bellowed Uncle Vernon .People like you in government ?Oh this explains everything everything no wonder the countrys going to the dogs .When Harry did not respond Uncle Vernon glared at him then spat And why have you been expelled ?Because I did magic .AHA !roared Uncle Vernon slamming his fist down on the top of the fridge which sprang open several of Dudleys lowfat snacks toppled out and burst on the floor .So you admit it !What did you do to Dudley ?Nothing said Harry slightly less calmly .That wasnt me Was muttered Dudley unexpectedly and Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia instantly made flapping gestures at Harry to quiet him while they both bent low over Dudley .Go on son said Uncle Vernon what did he do ?Tell us darling whispered Aunt Petunia .Pointed his wand at me Dudley mumbled .Yeah I did but I didnt use Harry began angrily but .SHUT UP !roared Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia in unison .Go on son repeated Uncle Vernon mustache blowing about furiously .All dark Dudley said hoarsely shuddering .Everything dark .And then I hheard .things .Inside mmy head .Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia exchanged looks of utter horror .If their least favorite thing in the world was magic closely followed by neighbors who cheated more than they did on the hosepipe ban people who heard voices were definitely in the bottom ten .They obviously thought Dudley was losing his mind .What sort of things did you hear popkin ?breathed Aunt Petunia very whitefaced and with tears in her eyes .But Dudley seemed incapable of saying .He shuddered again and shook his large blond head and despite the sense of numb dread that had settled on Harry since the arrival of the first owl he felt a certain curiosity .Dementors caused a person to relive the worst moments of their life .What would spoiled pampered bullying Dudley have been forced to hear ?How come you fell over son ?said Uncle Vernon in an unnaturally quiet voice the kind of voice he would adopt at the bedside of a very ill person .Ttripped said Dudley shakily .And then He gestured at his massive chest .Harry understood Dudley was remembering the clammy cold that filled the lungs as hope and happiness were sucked out of you .Horrible croaked Dudley .Cold .Really cold .Okay said Uncle Vernon in a voice of forced calm while Aunt Petunia laid an anxious hand on Dudleys forehead to feel his temperature .What happened then Dudders ?Felt .felt .felt .as if .as if .As if youd never be happy again Harry supplied tonelessly .Yes Dudley whispered still trembling .So said Uncle Vernon voice restored to full and considerable volume as he straightened up .So you put some crackpot spell on my son so hed hear voices and believe he was was doomed to misery or something did you ?How many times do I have to tell you ?said Harry temper and voice rising together .It wasnt me It was a couple of dementors !A couple of whats this codswallop ?De men tors said Harry slowly and clearly .Two of them .And what the ruddy hell are dementors ?They guard the wizard prison Azkaban said Aunt Petunia .Two seconds ringing silence followed these words and then Aunt Petunia clapped her hand over her mouth as though she had let slip a disgusting swear word .Uncle Vernon was goggling at her .Harrys brain reeled .Mrs Figg was one thing but Aunt Petunia ?How dyou know that ?he asked her astonished .Aunt Petunia looked quite appalled with herself .She glanced at Uncle Vernon in fearful apology then lowered her hand slightly to reveal her horsey teeth .I heard that awful boy telling her about them years ago she said jerkily .If you mean my mum and dad why dont you use their names ?said Harry loudly but Aunt Petunia ignored him .She seemed horribly flustered .Harry was stunned .Except for one outburst years ago in the course of which Aunt Petunia had screamed that Harrys mother had been a freak he had never heard her mention her sister .He was astounded that she had remembered this scrap of information about the magical world for so long when she usually put all her energies into pretending it didnt exist .Uncle Vernon opened his mouth closed it again opened it once more shut it then apparently struggling to remember how to talk opened it for a third time and croaked So so they er they er they actually exist do they er dementy whatsits ?Aunt Petunia nodded .Uncle Vernon looked from Aunt Petunia to Dudley to Harry as if hoping somebody was going to shout April Fool !When nobody did he opened his mouth yet again but was spared the struggle to find more words by the arrival of the third owl of the evening which zoomed through the stillopen window like a feathery cannonball and landed with a clatter on the kitchen table causing all three of the Dursleys to jump with fright .Harry tore a second officiallooking envelope from the owls beak and ripped it open as the owl swooped back out into the night .Enough effing owls .muttered Uncle Vernon distractedly stomping over to the window and slamming it shut again .Dear Mr Potter Further to our letter of approximately twentytwo minutes ago the Ministry of Magic has revised its decision to destroy your wand forthwith .You may retain your wand until your disciplinary hearing on 12th August at which time an official decision will be taken .Following discussions with the Headmaster of Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry the Ministry has agreed that the question of your expulsion will also be decided at that time .You should therefore consider yourself suspended from school pending further inquiries .With best wishes Yours sincerely Mafalda Hopkirk IMPROPER USE OF MAGIC OFFICE Ministry of Magic Harry read this letter through three times in quick succession .The miserable knot in his chest loosened slightly at the thought that he was not definitely expelled though his fears were by no means banished .Everything seemed to hang on this hearing on the twelfth of August .Well ?said Uncle Vernon recalling Harry to his surroundings .What now ?Have they sentenced you to anything ?Do your lot have the death penalty ?he added as a hopeful afterthought .Ive got to go to a hearing said Harry .And theyll sentence you there ?I suppose so .I wont give up hope then said Uncle Vernon nastily .Well if thats all said Harry getting to his feet .He was desperate to be alone to think perhaps to send a letter to Ron Hermione or Sirius .NO IT RUDDY WELL IS NOT ALL !bellowed Uncle Vernon .SIT BACK DOWN !What now ?said Harry impatiently .DUDLEY !roared Uncle Vernon .I want to know exactly what happened to my son !FINE !yelled Harry and in his temper red and gold sparks shot out of the end of his wand still clutched in his hand .All three Dursleys flinched looking terrified .Dudley and I were in the alleyway between Magnolia Crescent and Wisteria Walk said Harry speaking fast fighting to control his temper .Dudley thought hed be smart with me I pulled out my wand but didnt use it .Then two dementors turned up But what ARE dementoids ?asked Uncle Vernon furiously .What do they DO ?I told you they suck all the happiness out of you said Harry and if they get the chance they kiss you Kiss you ?said Uncle Vernon his eyes popping slightly .Kiss you ?Its what they call it when they suck the soul out of your mouth .Aunt Petunia uttered a soft scream .His soul ?They didnt take hes still got his She seized Dudley by the shoulders and shook him as though testing to see whether she could hear his soul rattling around inside him .Of course they didnt get his soul youd know if they had said Harry exasperated .Fought em off did you son ?said Uncle Vernon loudly with the appearance of a man struggling to bring the conversation back onto a plane he understood .Gave em the old onetwo did you ?You cant give a dementor the old onetwo said Harry through clenched teeth .Whys he all right then ?blustered Uncle Vernon .Why isnt he all empty then ?Because I used the Patronus WHOOSH .With a clattering a whirring of wings and a soft fall of dust a fourth owl came shooting out of the kitchen fireplace .FOR GODS SAKE !roared Uncle Vernon pulling great clumps of hair out of his mustache something he hadnt been driven to in a long time .I WILL NOT HAVE OWLS HERE I WILL NOT TOLERATE THIS I TELL YOU !But Harry was already pulling a roll of parchment from the owls leg .He was so convinced that this letter had to be from Dumbledore explaining everything the dementors Mrs Figg what the Ministry was up to how he Dumbledore intended to sort everything out that for the first time in his life he was disappointed to see Siriuss handwriting .Ignoring Uncle Vernons ongoing rant about owls and narrowing his eyes against a second cloud of dust as the most recent owl took off back up the chimney Harry read Siriuss message .Arthurs just told us whats happened .Dont leave the house again whatever you do .Harry found this such an inadequate response to everything that had happened tonight that he turned the piece of parchment over looking for the rest of the letter but there was nothing there .And now his temper was rising again .Wasnt anybody going to say well done for fighting off two dementors singlehandedly ?Both Mr Weasley and Sirius were acting as though hed misbehaved and they were saving their tellingsoff until they could ascertain how much damage had been done .a peck I mean pack of owls shooting in and out of my house and I wont have it boy I wont I cant stop the owls coming Harry snapped crushing Siriuss letter in his fist .I want the truth about what happened tonight !barked Uncle Vernon .If it was demenders who hurt Dudley how come youve been expelled ?You did you knowwhat youve admitted it !Harry took a deep steadying breath .His head was beginning to ache again .He wanted more than anything to get out of the kitchen away from the Dursleys .I did the Patronus Charm to get rid of the dementors he said forcing himself to remain calm .Its the only thing that works against them .But what were dementoids doing in Little Whinging ?said Uncle Vernon in tones of outrage .Couldnt tell you said Harry wearily .No idea .His head was pounding in the glare of the strip lighting now .His anger was ebbing away .He felt drained exhausted .The Dursleys were all staring at him .Its you said Uncle Vernon forcefully .Its got something to do with you boy I know it .Why else would they turn up here ?Why else would they be down that alleyway ?Youve got to be the only the only Evidently he couldnt bring himself to say the word wizard .The only youknowwhat for miles .I dont know why they were here .But at these words of Uncle Vernons Harrys exhausted brain ground back into action .Why had the dementors come to Little Whinging ?How could it be coincidence that they had arrived in the alleyway where Harry was ?Had they been sent ?Had the Ministry of Magic lost control of the dementors had they deserted Azkaban and joined Voldemort as Dumbledore had predicted they would ?These demembers guard some weirdos prison ?said Uncle Vernon lumbering in the wake of Harrys train of thought .Yes said Harry .If only his head would stop hurting if only he could just leave the kitchen and get to his dark bedroom and think .Oho !They were coming to arrest you !said Uncle Vernon with the triumphant air of a man reaching an unassailable conclusion .Thats it isnt it boy ?Youre on the run from the law !Of course Im not said Harry shaking his head as though to scare off a fly his mind racing now .Then why ?He must have sent them said Harry quietly more to himself than to Uncle Vernon .Whats that ?Who must have sent them ?Lord Voldemort said Harry .He registered dimly how strange it was that the Dursleys who flinched winced and squawked if they heard words like wizard magic or wand could hear the name of the most evil wizard of all time without the slightest tremor .Lord hang on said Uncle Vernon his face screwed up a look of dawning comprehension in his piggy eyes .Ive heard that name .that was the one who .Murdered my parents yes Harry said .But hes gone said Uncle Vernon impatiently without the slightest sign that the murder of Harrys parents might be a painful topic to anybody .That giant bloke said so .Hes gone .Hes back said Harry heavily .It felt very strange to be standing here in Aunt Petunias surgically clean kitchen beside the topof therange fridge and the widescreen television and talking calmly of Lord Voldemort to Uncle Vernon .The arrival of the dementors in Little Whinging seemed to have caused a breach in the great invisible wall that divided the relentlessly nonmagical world of Privet Drive and the world beyond .Harrys two lives had somehow become fused and everything had been turned upside down The Dursleys were asking for details about the magical world and Mrs Figg knew Albus Dumbledore dementors were soaring around Little Whinging and he might never go back to Hogwarts .Harrys head throbbed more painfully .Back ?whispered Aunt Petunia .She was looking at Harry as she had never looked at him before .And all of a sudden for the very first time in his life Harry fully appreciated that Aunt Petunia was his mothers sister .He could not have said why this hit him so very powerfully at this moment .All he knew was that he was not the only person in the room who had an inkling of what Lord Voldemort being back might mean .Aunt Petunia had never in her life looked at him like that before .Her large pale eyes so unlike her sisters were not narrowed in dislike or anger They were wide and fearful .The furious pretense that Aunt Petunia had maintained all Harrys life that there was no magic and no world other than the world she inhabited with Uncle Vernon seemed to have fallen away .Yes Harry said talking directly to Aunt Petunia now .He came back a month ago .I saw him .Her hands found Dudleys massive leatherclad shoulders and clutched them .Hang on said Uncle Vernon looking from his wife to Harry and back again apparently dazed and confused by the unprecedented understanding that seemed to have sprung up between them .Hang on .This Lord Voldythings back you say .Yes .The one who murdered your parents .Yes .And now hes sending dismembers after you ?Looks like it said Harry .I see said Uncle Vernon looking from his white faced wife to Harry and hitching up his trousers .He seemed to be swelling his great purple face stretching before Harrys eyes .Well that settles it he said his shirt front straining as he inflated himself you can get out of this house boy What ?said Harry .You heard me OUT !Uncle Vernon bellowed and even Aunt Petunia and Dudley jumped .OUT !OUT !I shouldve done it years ago !Owls treating the place like a rest home puddings exploding half the lounge destroyed Dudleys tail Marge bobbing around on the ceiling and that flying Ford Anglia OUT !OUT !Youve had it !Youre history !Youre not staying here if some loonys after you youre not endangering my wife and son youre not bringing trouble down on us if youre going the same way as your useless parents Ive had it !OUT !Harry stood rooted to the spot .The letters from the Ministry Mr Weasley and Sirius were crushed in his left hand .Dont leave the house again whatever you do .DO NOT LEA VE YOUR A UNT AND UNCLES HOUSE .You heard me !said Uncle Vernon bending forward now so that his massive purple face came closer to Harrys so that Harry actually felt flecks of spit hit his face .Get going !You were all keen to leave half an hour ago !Im right behind you !Get out and never darken our doorstep again !Why we ever kept you in the first place I dont know .Marge was right it should have been the orphanage we were too damn soft for our own good thought we could squash it out of you thought we could turn you normal but youve been rotten from the beginning and Ive had enough OWLS !The fifth owl zoomed down the chimney so fast it actually hit the floor before zooming into the air again with a loud screech .Harry raised his hand to seize the letter which was in a scarlet envelope but it soared straight over his head flying directly at Aunt Petunia who let out a scream and ducked her arms over her face .The owl dropped the red envelope on her head turned and flew straight up the chimney again .Harry darted forward to pick up the letter but Aunt Petunia beat him to it .You can open it if you like said Harry but Ill hear what it says anyway .Thats a Howler .Let go of it Petunia !roared Uncle Vernon .Dont touch it it could be dangerous !Its addressed to me said Aunt Petunia in a shaking voice .Its addressed to me Vernon look !Mrs Petunia Dursley The Kitchen Number Four Privet Drive She caught her breath horrified .The red envelope had begun to smoke .Open it !Harry urged her .Get it over with !Itll happen anyway No Aunt Petunias hand was trembling .She looked wildly around the kitchen as though looking for an escape route but too late the envelope burst into flames .Aunt Petunia screamed and dropped it .An awful voice filled the kitchen echoing in the confined space issuing from the burning letter on the table .REMEMBER MY LAST PETUNIA .Aunt Petunia looked as though she might faint .She sank into the chair beside Dudley her face in her hands .The remains of the envelope smoldered into ash in the silence .What is this ?Uncle Vernon said hoarsely .What I dont Petunia ?Aunt Petunia said nothing .Dudley was staring stupidly at his mother his mouth hanging open .The silence spiraled horribly .Harry was watching his aunt utterly bewildered his head throbbing fit to burst .Petunia dear ?said Uncle Vernon timidly .P Petunia ?She raised her head .She was still trembling .She swallowed .The boy the boy will have to stay Vernon she said weakly .Wwhat ?He stays she said .She was not looking at Harry .She got to her feet again .He .but Petunia .If we throw him out the neighbors will talk she said .She was regaining her usual brisk snappish manner rapidly though she was still very pale .Theyll ask awkward questions theyll want to know where hes gone .Well have to keep him .Uncle Vernon was deflating like an old tire .But Petunia dear Aunt Petunia ignored him .She turned to Harry .Youre to stay in your room she said .Youre not to leave the house .Now get to bed .Harry didnt move .Who was that Howler from ?Dont ask questions Aunt Petunia snapped .Are you in touch with wizards ?I told you to get to bed !What did it mean ?Remember the last what ?Go to bed !How come ?YOU HEARD YOUR AUNT NOW GET TO BED !THE ADVANCED GUARD Fve just been attacked by dementors and I might be expelled from Hogwarts .I want to know whats going on and when Im going to get out of here .Harry copied these words onto three separate pieces of parchment the moment he reached the desk in his dark bedroom .He addressed the first to Sirius the second to Ron and the third to Hermione .His owl Hedwig was off hunting her cage stood empty on the desk .Harry paced the bedroom waiting for her to come back his head pounding his brain too busy for sleep even though his eyes stung and itched with tiredness .His back ached from carrying Dudley home and the two lumps on his head where the window and Dudley had hit him were throbbing painfully .Up and down he paced consumed with anger and frustration grinding his teeth and clenching his fists casting angry looks out at the empty starstrewn sky every time he passed the window .Dementors sent to get him Mrs Figg and Mundungus Fletcher tailing him in secret then suspension from Hogwarts and a hearing at the Ministry of Magic and still no one was telling him what was going on .And what what had that Howler been about ?Whose voice had echoed so horribly so menacingly through the kitchen ?Why was he still trapped here without information ?Why was everyone treating him like some naughty kid ?Dont do any more magic stay in the house .He kicked his school trunk as he passed it but far from relieving his anger he felt worse as he now had a sharp pain in his toe to deal with in addition to the pain in the rest of his body .Just as he limped past the window Hedwig soared through it with a soft rustle of wings like a small ghost .About time !Harry snarled as she landed lightly on top of her cage .You can put that down IVe got work for you !Hedwigs large round amber eyes gazed reproachfully at him over the dead frog clamped in her beak .Come here said Harry picking up the three small rolls of parchment and a leather thong and tying the scrolls to her scaly leg .Take these straight to Sirius Ron and Hermione and dont come back here without good long replies .Keep pecking them till theyve written decentlength answers if youve got to .Understand ?Hedwig gave a muffled hooting noise beak still full of frog .Get going then said Harry .She took off immediately .The moment shed gone Harry threw himself down onto his bed without undressing and stared at the dark ceiling .In addition to every other miserable feeling he now felt guilty that hed been irritable with Hedwig she was the only friend he had at number four Privet Drive .But hed make it up to her when she came back with Siriuss Rons and Hermiones answers .They were bound to write back quickly they couldnt possibly ignore a dementor attack .Hed probably wake up tomorrow to three fat letters full of sympathy and plans for his immediate removal to the Burrow .And with that comforting idea sleep rolled over him stifling all further thought . •k Jc k But Hedwig didnt return next morning .Harry spent the day in his bedroom leaving it only to go to the bathroom .Three times that day Aunt Petunia shoved food into his room through the cat flap Uncle Vernon had installed three summers ago .Every time Harry heard her approaching he tried to question her about the Howler but he might as well have interrogated the doorknob for all the answers he got .Otherwise the Dursleys kept well clear of his bedroom .Harry couldnt see the point of forcing his company on them another row would achieve nothing except perhaps making him so angry hed perform more illegal magic .So it went on for three whole days .Harry was filled alternately with restless energy that made him unable to settle to anything during which he paced his bedroom again furious at the whole lot of them for leaving him to stew in this mess and with a lethargy so complete that he could lie on his bed for an hour at a time staring dazedly into space aching with dread at the thought of the Ministry hearing .What if they ruled against him ?What if he was expelled and his wand was snapped in half ?What would he do where would he go ?He could not return to living fulltime with the Dursleys not now that he knew the other world the one to which he really belonged .Was it possible that he might be able to move into Siriuss house as Sirius had suggested a year ago before he had been forced to flee from the Ministry himself ?Would he be allowed to live there alone given that he was still underage ?Or would the matter of where he went next be decided for him had his breach of the International Statute of Secrecy been severe enough to land him in a cell in Azkaban ?Whenever this thought occurred Harry invariably slid off his bed and began pacing again .On the fourth night after Hedwigs departure Harry was lying in one of his apathetic phases staring at the ceiling his exhausted mind quite blank when his uncle entered his bedroom .Harry looked slowly around at him .Uncle Vernon was wearing his best suit and an expression of enormous smugness .Were going out he said .Sorry ?We that is to say your aunt Dudley and I are going out .Fine said Harry dully looking back at the ceiling .You are not to leave your bedroom while we are away .Okay .You are not to touch the television the stereo or any of our possessions .Right .You are not to steal food from the fridge .Okay .I am going to lock your door .You do that .Uncle Vernon glared at Harry clearly suspicious of this lack of argument then stomped out of the room and closed the door behind him .Harry heard the key turn in the lock and Uncle Vernons footsteps walking heavily down the stairs .A few minutes later he heard the slamming of car doors the rumble of an engine and the unmistakable sound of the car sweeping out of the drive .Harry had no particular feeling about the Dursleys leaving .It made no difference to him whether they were in the house or not .He could not even summon the energy to get up and turn on his bedroom light .The room grew steadily darker around him as he lay listening to the night sounds through the window he kept open all the time waiting for the blessed moment when Hedwig returned .The empty house creaked around him .The pipes gurgled .Harry lay there in a kind of stupor thinking of nothing suspended in misery .And then quite distinctly he heard a crash in the kitchen below .He sat bolt upright listening intently .The Dursleys couldnt be back it was much too soon and in any case he hadnt heard their car .There was silence for a few seconds and then he heard voices .Burglars he thought sliding off the bed onto his feet but a split second later it occurred to him that burglars would keep their voices down and whoever was moving around in the kitchen was certainly not troubling to do so .He snatched up his wand from his bedside table and stood facing his bedroom door listening with all his might .Next moment he jumped as the lock gave a loud click and his door swung open .Harry stood motionless staring through the open door at the dark upstairs landing straining his ears for further sounds but none came .He hesitated for a moment and then moved swiftly and silently out of his room to the head of the stairs .His heart shot upward into his throat .There were people standing in the shadowy hall below silhouetted against the streetlight glowing through the glass door eight or nine of them all as far as he could see looking up at him .Lower your wand boy before you take someones eye out said a low gvoice .Harrys heart was thumping uncontrollably .He knew that voice but he did not lower his wand .Professor Moody ?he said uncertainly .I dont know so much about ‘Professor growled the voice never got round to much teaching did I ?Get down here we want to see you properly .Harry lowered his wand slightly but did not relax his grip on it nor did he move .He had very good reason to be suspicious .He had recently spent nine months in what he had thought was MadEye Moodys company only to find out that it wasnt Moody at all but an impostor an impostor moreover who had tried to kill Harry before being unmasked .But before he could make a decision about what to do next a second slightly hoarse voice floated upstairs .Its all right Harry .Weve come to take you away .Harrys heart leapt .He knew that voice too though he hadnt heard it for more than a year .PProfessor Lupin ?he said disbelievingly .Is that you ?Why are we all standing in the dark ?said a third voice this one completely unfamiliar a womans .Lumos .A wand tip flared illuminating the hall with magical light .Harry blinked .The people below were crowded around the foot of the stairs gazing intently up at him some craning their heads for a better look .Remus Lupin stood nearest to him .Though still quite young Lupin looked tired and rather ill he had more gray hair than when Harry had said goodbye to him and his robes were more patched and shabbier than ever .Nevertheless he was smiling broadly at Harry who tried to smile back through his shock .Oooh he looks just like I thought he would said the witch who was holding her lit wand aloft .She looked the youngest there she had a pale heartshaped face dark twinkling eyes and short spiky hair that was a violent shade of violet .Wotcher Harry !Yeah I see what you mean Remus said a bald black wizard standing farthest back he had a deep slow voice and wore a single gold hoop in his ear .He looks exactly like James .Except the eyes said a wheezyvoiced silverhaired wizard at the back .Lilys eyes .MadEye Moody who had long grizzled gray hair and a large chunk missing from his nose was squinting suspiciously at Harry through his mismatched eyes .One of the eyes was small dark and beady the other large round and electric blue the magical eye that could see through walls doors and the back of Moodys own head .Are you quite sure its him Lupin ?he growled .Itd be a nice lookout if we bring back some Death Eater impersonating him .We ought to ask him something only the real Potter would know .Unless anyone brought any Veritaserum ?Harry what form does your Patronus take ?said Lupin .A stag said Harry nervously .Thats him MadEye said Lupin .Harry descended the stairs very conscious of everybody still staring at him stowing his wand into the back pocket of his jeans as he came .Dont put your wand there boy !roared Moody .What if it ignited ?Better wizards than you have lost buttocks you know !Who dyou know whos lost a buttock ?the violet haired woman asked MadEye interestedly .Never you mind you just keep your wand out of your back pocket !growled MadEye .Elementary wand safety nobody bothers about it anymore .He stumped off toward the kitchen .And I saw that he added irritably as the woman rolled her eyes at the ceiling .Lupin held out his hand and shook Harrys .How are you ?he asked looking at Harry closely .Ffine .Harry could hardly believe this was real .Four weeks with nothing not the tiniest hint of a plan to remove him from Privet Drive and suddenly a whole bunch of wizards was standing matteroffactly in the house as though this were a longstanding arrangement .He glanced at the people surrounding Lupin they were still gazing avidly at him .He felt very conscious of the fact that he had not combed his hair for four days .Im youre really lucky the Dursleys are out .he mumbled .Lucky ha !said the violethaired woman .It was me that lured them out of the way .Sent a letter by Muggle post telling them theyd been shortlisted for the AllEngland BestKept Suburban Lawn Competition .Theyre heading off to the prizegiving right now .Or they think they are .Harry had a fleeting vision of Uncle Vernons face when he realized there was no AllEngland BestKept Suburban Lawn Competition .We are leaving arent we ?he asked .Soon ?Almost at once said Lupin were just waiting for the allclear .Where are we going ?The Burrow ?Harry asked hopefully .Not the Burrow no said Lupin motioning Harry toward the kitchen the little knot of wizards followed all still eyeing Harry curiously .Too risky .Weve set up headquarters somewhere undetectable .Its taken a while .MadEye Moody was now sitting at the kitchen table swigging from a hip flask his magical eye spinning in all directions taking in the Dursleys many labor saving appliances .This is Alastor Moody Harry Lupin continued pointing toward Moody .Yeah I know said Harry uncomfortably it felt odd to be introduced to somebody hed thought hed known for a year .And this is Nymphadora Dont call me Nymphadora Remus said the young witch with a shudder .Its Tonks .Nymphadora Tonks who prefers to be known by her surname only finished Lupin .So would you if your fool of a mother had called you ‘Nymphadora muttered Tonks .And this is Kingsley Shacklebolt he indicated the tall black wizard who bowed Elphias Doge the wheezyvoiced wizard nodded Dedalus Diggle Weve met before squeaked the excitable Diggle dropping his top hat .Emmeline Vance a stately looking witch in an emeraldgreen shawl inclined her head Sturgis Podmore a squarejawed wizard with thick straw colored hair winked and Hestia Jones .A pink cheeked blackhaired witch waved from next to the toaster .Harry inclined his head awkwardly at each of them as they were introduced .He wished they would look at something other than him it was as though he had suddenly been ushered onstage .He also wondered why so many of them were there .A surprising number of people volunteered to come and get you said Lupin as though he had read Harrys mind the corners of his mouth twitched slightly .Yeah well the more the better said Moody darkly .Were your guard Potter .Were just waiting for the signal to tell us its safe to set off said Lupin glancing out of the kitchen window .Weve got about fifteen minutes .Very clean arent they these Muggles ?said the witch called Tonks who was looking around the kitchen with great interest .My dads Muggleborn and hes a right old slob .I suppose it varies just like with wizards ?Er yeah said Harry .Look he turned back to Lupin whats going on I havent heard anything from anyone whats Vol ?Several of the witches and wizards made odd hissing noises Dedalus Diggle dropped his hat again and Moody growled Shut up What ?said Harry .Were not discussing anything here its too risky said Moody turning his normal eye on Harry his magical eye remained pointing up at the ceiling .Damn it he added angrily putting a hand up to the magical eye it keeps sticking ever since that scum wore it And with a nasty squelching sound much like a plunger being pulled from a sink he popped out his eye .MadEye you do know thats disgusting dont you ?said Tonks conversationally .Get me a glass of water would you Harry ?asked Moody .Harry crossed to the dishwasher took out a clean glass and filled it with water at the sink still watched eagerly by the band of wizards .Their relentless staring was starting to annoy him .Cheers said Moody when Harry handed him the glass .He dropped the magical eyeball into the water and prodded it up and down the eye whizzed around staring at them all in turn .I want threehundred andsixty degrees visibility on the return journey .Howre we getting wherever were going ?Harry asked .Brooms said Lupin .Only way .Youre too young to Apparate theyll be watching the Floo Network and its more than our lifes worth to set up an unauthorized Portkey .Remus says youre a good flier said Kingsley Shacklebolt in his deep voice .Hes excellent said Lupin who was checking his watch .Anyway youd better go and get packed Harry we want to be ready to go when the signal comes .Ill come and help you said Tonks brightly .She followed Harry back into the hall and up the stairs looking around with much curiosity and interest .Funny place she said its a bit too clean dyou know what I mean ?Bit unnatural .Oh this is better she added as they entered Harrys bedroom and he turned on the light .His room was certainly much messier than the rest of the house .Confined to it for four days in a very bad mood Harry had not bothered tidying up after himself .Most of the books he owned were strewn over the floor where hed tried to distract himself with each in turn and thrown it aside .Hedwigs cage needed cleaning out and was starting to smell and his trunk lay open revealing a jumbled mixture of Muggle clothes and wizards robes that had spilled onto the floor around it .Harry started picking up books and throwing them hastily into his trunk .Tonks paused at his open wardrobe to look critically at her reflection in the mirror on the inside of the door .You know I dont think purples really my color she said pensively tugging at a lock of spiky hair .Dyou think it makes me look a bit peaky ?Er said Harry looking up at her over the top of Quidditch Teams of Britain and Ireland .Yeah it does said Tonks decisively .She screwed up her eyes in a strained expression as though she were struggling to remember something .A second later her hair had turned bubblegum pink .How did you do that ?said Harry gaping at her as she opened her eyes again .Im a Metamorphmagus she said looking back at her reflection and turning her head so that she could see her hair from all directions .It means I can change my appearance at will she added spotting Harrys puzzled expression in the mirror behind her .I was born one .I got top marks in Concealment and Disguise during Auror training without any study at all it was great .Youre an Auror ?said Harry impressed .Being a Dark wizard catcher was the only career hed ever considered after Hogwarts .Yeah said Tonks looking proud .Kingsley is as well hes a bit higher up than I am though .I only qualified a year ago .Nearly failed on Stealth and Tracking Im dead clumsy did you hear me break that plate when we arrived downstairs ?Can you learn how to be a Metamorphmagus ?Harry asked her straightening up completely forgetting about packing .Tonks chuckled .Bet you wouldnt mind hiding that scar sometimes eh ?Her eyes found the lightningshaped scar on Harrys forehead .No I wouldnt mind Harry mumbled turning away .He did not like people staring at his scar .Well you 11 have to learn the hard way Im afraid said Tonks .Metamorphmagi are really rare theyre born not made .Most wizards need to use a wand or potions to change their appearance .But weve got to get going Harry were supposed to be packing she added guiltily looking around at all the mess on the floor .Oh yeah said Harry grabbing up a few more books .Dont be stupid itll be much quicker if I pack .cried Tonks waving her wand in a long sweeping movement over the floor .Books clothes telescope and scales all soared into the air and flew pellmell into the trunk .Its not very neat said Tonks walking over to the trunk and looking down at the jumble inside .My mums got this knack of getting stuff to fit itself in neatly she even gets the socks to fold themselves but Ive never mastered how she does it its a kind of flick She flicked her wand hopefully one of Harrys socks gave a feeble sort of wiggle and flopped back on top of the mess within .Ah well said Tonks slamming the trunks lid shut at least its all in .That could do with a bit of cleaning too Scourgify She pointed her wand at Hedwigs cage a few feathers and droppings vanished .Well thats a bit better Ive never quite got the hang of these sort of householdy spells .Right got everything ?Cauldron ?Broom ?Wow !A Firebolt ?Her eyes widened as they fell on the broomstick in Harrys right hand .It was his pride and joy a gift from Sirius an international standard broomstick .And Im still riding a Comet Two Sixty said Tonks enviously .Ah well .wand still in your jeans ?Both buttocks still on ?Okay lets go .Locomotor Trunk .Harrys trunk rose a few inches into the air .Holding her wand like a conductors baton Tonks made it hover across the room and out of the door ahead of them Hedwigs cage in her left hand .Harry followed her down the stairs carrying his broomstick .Back in the kitchen Moody had replaced his eye which was spinning so fast after its cleaning it made Harry feel sick .Kingsley Shacklebolt and Sturgis Podmore were examining the microwave and Hestia Jones was laughing at a potato peeler she had come across while rummaging in the drawers .Lupin was sealing a letter addressed to the Dursleys .Excellent said Lupin looking up as Tonks and Harry entered .Weve got about a minute I think .We should probably get out into the garden so were ready .Harry Ive left a letter telling your aunt and uncle not to worry They wont said Harry .That youre safe Thatll just depress them .and youll see them next summer .Do I have to ?Lupin smiled but made no answer .Come here boy said Moody gruffly beckoning Harry toward him with his wand .I need to Disillusion you .You need to what ?said Harry nervously .Disillusionment Charm said Moody raising his wand .Lupin says youve got an Invisibility Cloak but it wont stay on while were flying thisll disguise you better .Here you go He rapped Harry hard on the top of the head and Harry felt a curious sensation as though Moody had just smashed an egg there cold trickles seemed to be running down his body from the point the wand had struck .Nice one MadEye said Tonks appreciatively staring at Harrys midriff .Harry looked down at his body or rather what had been his body for it didnt look anything like his anymore .It was not invisible it had simply taken on the exact color and texture of the kitchen unit behind him .He seemed to have become a human chameleon .Come on said Moody unlocking the back door with his wand .They all stepped outside onto Uncle Vernons beautifully kept lawn .Clear night grunted Moody his magical eye scanning the heavens .Couldve done with a bit more cloud cover .Right you he barked at Harry were going to be flying in close formation .Tonksll be right in front of you keep close on her tail .Lupinll be covering you from below .Im going to be behind you .The restll be circling us .We dont break ranks for anything got me ?If one of us is killed Is that likely ?Harry asked apprehensively but Moody ignored him .the others keep flying dont stop dont break ranks .If they take out all of us and you survive Harry the rear guard are standing by to take over keep flying east and theyll join you .Stop being so cheerful MadEye hell think were not taking this seriously said Tonks as she strapped Harrys trunk and Hedwigs cage into a harness hanging from her broom .Im just telling the boy the plan growled Moody .Our jobs to deliver him safely to headquarters and if we die in the attempt No ones going to die said Kingsley Shacklebolt in his deep calming voice .Mount your brooms thats the first signal !said Lupin sharply pointing into the sky .Far far above them a shower of bright red sparks had flared among the stars .Harry recognized them at once as wand sparks .He swung his right leg over his Firebolt gripped its handle tightly and felt it vibrating very slightly as though it was as keen as he was to be up in the air once more .Second signal lets go !said Lupin loudly as more sparks green this time exploded high above them .Harry kicked off hard from the ground .The cool night air rushed through his hair as the neat square gardens of Privet Drive fell away shrinking rapidly into a patchwork of dark greens and blacks and every thought of the Ministry hearing was swept from his mind as though the rush of air had blown it out of his head .He felt as though his heart was going to explode with pleasure he was flying again flying away from Privet Drive as hed been fantasizing about all summer he was going home .For a few glorious moments all his problems seemed to recede into nothing insignificant in the vast starry sky .Hard left hard left theres a Muggle looking up !shouted Moody from behind him .Tonks swerved and Harry followed her watching his trunk swinging wildly beneath her broom .We need more height .Give it another quarter of a mile !Harrys eyes watered in the chill as they soared upward he could see nothing below now but tiny pinpricks of light that were car headlights and streetlamps .Two of those tiny lights might belong to Uncle Vernons car .The Dursleys would be heading back to their empty house right now full of rage about the nonexistent lawn competition .and Harry laughed aloud at the thought though his voice was drowned by the flapping of the others robes the creaking of the harness holding his trunk and the cage the whoosh of the wind in their ears as they sped through the air .He had not felt this alive in a month or this happy .Bearing south !shouted MadEye .Town ahead !They soared right so that they did not pass directly over the glittering spiderweb of lights below .Bear southeast and keep climbing theres some low cloud ahead we can lose ourselves in !called Moody .Were not going through clouds !shouted Tonks angrily .Well get soaked MadEye !Harry was relieved to hear her say this his hands were growing numb on the Firebolts handle .He wished he had thought to put on a coat he was starting to shiver .They altered their course every now and then according to MadEye s instructions .Harrys eyes were screwed up against the rush of icy wind that was starting to make his ears ache .He could remember being this cold on a broom only once before during the Quidditch match against Hufflepuff in his third year which had taken place in a storm .The guard around him was circling continuously like giant birds of prey .Harry lost track of time .He wondered how long they had been flying it felt like an hour at least .Turning southwest !yelled Moody .We want to avoid the motorway !Harry was now so chilled that he thought longingly for a moment of the snug dry interiors of the cars streaming along below then even more longingly of traveling by Floo powder it might be uncomfortable to spin around in fireplaces but it was at least warm in the flames .Kingsley Shacklebolt swooped around him bald pate and earring gleaming slightly in the moonlight .Now Emmeline Vance was on his right her wand out her head turning left and right .then she too swooped over him to be replaced by Sturgis Podmore .We ought to double back for a bit just to make sure were not being followed !Moody shouted .ARE YOU MAD MADEYE ?Tonks screamed from the front .Were all frozen to our brooms !If we keep going off course were not going to get there until next week !Were nearly there now !Time to start the descent !came Lupins voice .Follow Tonks Harry !Harry followed Tonks into a dive .They were heading for the largest collection of lights he had yet seen a huge sprawling crisscrossing mass glittering in lines and grids interspersed with patches of deepest black .Lower and lower they flew until Harry could see individual headlights and streetlamps chimneys and television aerials .He wanted to reach the ground very much though he felt sure that someone would have to unfreeze him from his broom .Here we go !called Tonks and a few seconds later she had landed .Harry touched down right behind her and dismounted on a patch of unkempt grass in the middle of a small square .Tonks was already unbuckling Harrys trunk .Shivering Harry looked around .The grimy fronts of the surrounding houses were not welcoming some of them had broken windows glimmering dully in the light from the streetlamps paint was peeling from many of the doors and heaps of rubbish lay outside several sets of front steps .Where are we ?Harry asked but Lupin said quietly In a minute .Moody was rummaging in his cloak his gnarled hands clumsy with cold .Got it he muttered raising what looked like a silver cigarette lighter into the air and clicking it .The nearest streetlamp went out with a pop .He clicked the unlighter again the next lamp went out .He kept clicking until every lamp in the square was extinguished and the only light in the square came from curtained windows and the sickle moon overhead .Borrowed it from Dumbledore growled Moody pocketing the PutOuter .Thatll take care of any Muggles looking out of the window see ?Now come on quick .He took Harry by the arm and led him from the patch of grass across the road and onto the pavement .Lupin and Tonks followed carrying Harrys trunk between them the rest of the guard all with their wands out flanking them .The muffled pounding of a stereo was coming from an upper window in the nearest house .A pungent smell of rotting rubbish came from the pile of bulging bin bags just inside the broken gate .Here Moody muttered thrusting a piece of parchment toward Harrys Disillusioned hand and holding his lit wand close to it so as to illuminate the writing .Read quickly and memorize .Harry looked down at the piece of paper .The narrow handwriting was vaguely familiar .It said The headquarters of the Order of the Phoenix may he found at number twelve Grimmauld Place London .NUMBER TWELVE GRIMMAULD PLACE Whats the Order of the ?Harry began .Not here boy !snarled Moody .Wait till were inside !He pulled the piece of parchment out of Harrys hand and set fire to it with his wand tip .As the message curled into flames and floated to the ground Harry looked around at the houses again .They were standing outside number eleven he looked to the left and saw number ten to the right however was number thirteen .But wheres ?Think about what youve just memorized said Lupin quietly .Harry thought and no sooner had he reached the part about number twelve Grimmauld Place than a battered door emerged out of nowhere between numbers eleven and thirteen followed swiftly by dirty walls and grimy windows .It was as though an extra house had inflated pushing those on either side out of its way .Harry gaped at it .The stereo in number eleven thudded on .Apparently the Muggles inside hadnt even felt anything .Come on hurry growled Moody prodding Harry in the back .Harry walked up the worn stone steps staring at the newly materialized door .Its black paint was shabby and scratched .The silver door knocker was in the form of a twisted serpent .There was no keyhole or letterbox .Lupin pulled out his wand and tapped the door once .Harry heard many loud metallic clicks and what sounded like the clatter of a chain .The door creaked open .Get in quick Harry Lupin whispered .But dont go far inside and dont touch anything .Harry stepped over the threshold into the almost total darkness of the hall .He could smell damp dust and a sweetish rotting smell the place had the feeling of a derelict building .He looked over his shoulder and saw the others filing in behind him Lupin and Tonks carrying his trunk and Hedwigs cage .Moody was standing on the top step and releasing the balls of light the PutOuter had stolen from the streetlamps they flew back to their bulbs and the square beyond glowed momentarily with orange light before Moody limped inside and closed the front door so that the darkness in the hall became complete .Here He rapped Harry hard over the head with his wand Harry felt as though something hot was trickling down his back this time and knew that the Disillusionment Charm must have lifted .Now stay still everyone while I give us a bit of light in here Moody whispered .The others hushed voices were giving Harry an odd feeling of foreboding it was as though they had just entered the house of a dying person .He heard a soft hissing noise and then oldfashioned gas lamps sputtered into life all along the walls casting a flickering insubstantial light over the peeling wallpaper and threadbare carpet of a long gloomy hallway where a cobwebby chandelier glimmered overhead and ageblackened portraits hung crooked on the walls .Harry heard something scuttling behind the baseboard .Both the chandelier and the candelabra on a rickety table nearby were shaped like serpents .There were hurried footsteps and Rons mother Mrs Weasley emerged from a door at the far end of the hall .She was beaming in welcome as she hurried toward them though Harry noticed that she was rather thinner and paler than she had been last time he had seen her .Oh Harry its lovely to see you !she whispered pulling him into a ribcracking hug before holding him at arms length and examining him critically .Youre looking peaky you need feeding up but youll have to wait a bit for dinner Im afraid .She turned to the gang of wizards behind him and whispered urgently Hes just arrived the meetings started .The wizards behind Harry all made noises of interest and excitement and began filing past Harry toward the door through which Mrs Weasley had just come Harry made to follow Lupin but Mrs Weasley held him back .No Harry the meetings only for members of the Order .Ron and Hermione are upstairs you can wait with them until the meetings over and then well have dinner .And keep your voice down in the hall she added in an urgent whisper .Why ?I dont want to wake anything up .What dyou ?Ill explain later Ive got to hurry Im supposed to be at the meeting Ill just show you where youre sleeping .Pressing her finger to her lips she led him on tiptoes past a pair of long motheaten curtains behind which Harry supposed there must be another door and after skirting a large umbrella stand that looked as though it had been made from a severed trolls leg they started up the dark staircase passing a row of shrunken heads mounted on plaques on the wall .A closer look showed Harry that the heads belonged to houseelves .All of them had the same rather snoutlike nose .Harrys bewilderment deepened with every step he took .What on earth were they doing in a house that looked as though it belonged to the Darkest of wizards ?Mrs Weasley why ?Ron and Hermione will explain everything dear Ive really got to dash Mrs Weasley whispered distractedly .There they had reached the second landing youre the door on the right .Ill call you when its over .And she hurried off downstairs again .Harry crossed the dingy landing turned the bedroom doorknob which was shaped like a serpents head and opened the door .He caught a brief glimpse of a gloomy highceilinged twinbedded room then there was a loud twittering noise followed by an even louder shriek and his vision was completely obscured by a large quantity of very bushy hair Hermione had thrown herself onto him in a hug that nearly knocked him flat while Rons tiny owl Pigwidgeon zoomed excitedly round and round their heads .HARRY !Ron hes here Harrys here !We didnt hear you arrive !Oh how are you ?Are you all right ?Have you been furious with us ?I bet you have I know our letters were useless but we couldnt tell you anything Dumbledore made us swear we wouldnt oh weve got so much to tell you and youve got to tell us the dementors !When we heard and that Ministry hearing its just outrageous Ive looked it all up they cant expel you they just cant theres provision in the Decree for the Restriction of Underage Sorcery for the use of magic in life threatening situations Let him breathe Hermione said Ron grinning closing the door behind Harry .He seemed to have grown several more inches during their month apart making him taller and more gangly looking than ever though the long nose bright red hair and freckles were the same .Hermione still beaming let go of Harry but before she could say another word there was a soft whooshing sound and something white soared from the top of a dark wardrobe and landed gently on Harrys shoulder .Hedwig !The snowy owl clicked her beak and nibbled his ear affectionately as Harry stroked her feathers .Shes been in a right state said Ron .Pecked us half to death when she brought your last letters look at this He showed Harry the index finger of his right hand which sported a halfhealed but clearly deep cut .Oh yeah Harry said .Sorry about that but I wanted answers you know .We wanted to give them to you mate said Ron .Hermione was going spare she kept saying youd do something stupid if you were stuck all on your own without news but Dumbledore made us swear not to tell me said Harry .Yeah Hermiones already said .The warm glow that had flared inside him at the sight of his two best friends was extinguished as something icy flooded the pit of his stomach .All of a sudden after yearning to see them for a solid month he felt he would rather Ron and Hermione left him alone .There was a strained silence in which Harry stroked Hedwig automatically not looking at either of the others .He seemed to think it was best said Hermione rather breathlessly .Dumbledore I mean .Right said Harry .He noticed that her hands too bore the marks of Hedwigs beak and found that he was not at all sorry .I think he thought you were safest with the Muggles Ron began .Yeah ?said Harry raising his eyebrows .Have either of you been attacked by dementors this summer ?Well no but thats why hes had people from the Order of the Phoenix tailing you all the time Harry felt a great jolt in his guts as though he had just missed a step going downstairs .So everyone had known he was being followed except him .Didnt work that well though did it ?said Harry doing his utmost to keep his voice even .Had to look after myself after all didnt I ?He was so angry said Hermione in an almost awestruck voice .Dumbledore .We saw him .When he found out Mundungus had left before his shift had ended .He was scary .Well Im glad he left Harry said coldly .If he hadnt I wouldnt have done magic and Dumbledore would probably have left me at Privet Drive all summer .Arent you .arent you worried about the Ministry of Magic hearing ?said Hermione quietly .No Harry lied defiantly .He walked away from them looking around with Hedwig nestled contentedly on his shoulder but this room was not likely to raise his spirits .It was dank and dark .A blank stretch of canvas in an ornate picture frame was all that relieved the bareness of the peeling walls and as Harry passed it he thought he heard someone lurking out of sight snigger .So whys Dumbledore been so keen to keep me in the dark ?Harry asked still trying hard to keep his voice casual .Did you er bother to ask him at all ?He glanced up just in time to see them exchanging a look that told him he was behaving just as they had feared he would .It did nothing to improve his temper .We told Dumbledore we wanted to tell you what was going on said Ron .We did mate .But hes really busy now weve only seen him twice since we came here and he didnt have much time he just made us swear not to tell you important stuff when we wrote he said the owls might be intercepted He could stillve kept me informed if hed wanted to Harry said shortly .Youre not telling me he doesnt know ways to send messages without owls .Hermione glanced at Ron and then said I thought that too .But he didnt want you to know anything .Maybe he thinks I cant be trusted said Harry watching their expressions .Dont be thick said Ron looking highly disconcerted .Or that I cant take care of myself Of course he doesnt think that !said Hermione anxiously .So how come I have to stay at the Dursleys while you two get to join in everything thats going on here ?said Harry the words tumbling over one another in a rush his voice growing louder with every word .How come you two are allowed to know everything thats going on ?Were not !Ron interrupted .Mum wont let us near the meetings she says were too young But before he knew it Harry was shouting .SO YOU HAVENT BEEN IN THE MEETINGS BIG DEAL !YOUVE STILL BEEN HERE HAVEN T YOU ?YOUVE STILL BEEN TOGETHER !ME IVE BEEN STUCK AT THE DURSLEYS FOR A MONTH !AND IVE HANDLED MORE THAN YOU TWOVE EVER MANAGED AND DUMBLEDORE KNOWS IT WHO SAVED THE SORCERERS STONE ?WHO GOT RID OF RIDDLE ?WHO SAVED BOTH YOUR SKINS FROM THE DEMENTORS ?Every bitter and resentful thought that Harry had had in the past month was pouring out of him his frustration at the lack of news the hurt that they had all been together without him his fury at being followed and not told about it All the feelings he was halfashamed of finally burst their boundaries .Hedwig took fright at the noise and soared off on top of the wardrobe again Pigwidgeon twittered in alarm and zoomed even faster around their heads .WHO HAD TO GET PAST DRAGONS AND SPHINXES AND EVERY OTHER FOUL THING LAST YEAR ?WHO SAW HIM COME BACK ?WHO HAD TO ESCAPE FROM HIM ?ME !Ron was standing there with his mouth halfopen clearly stunned and at a loss for anything to say while Hermione looked on the verge of tears .BUT WHY SHOULD I KNOW WHATS GOING ON ?WHY SHOULD ANYONE BOTHER TO TELL ME WHATS BEEN HAPPENING ?Harry we wanted to tell you we really did Hermione began .CANTVE WANTED TO THAT MUCH CAN YOU OR YOUD HAVE SENT ME AN OWL BUT DUMBLEDORE MADE YOU SWEAR Well he did FOUR WEEKS IVE BEEN STUCK IN PRIVET DRIVE NICKING PAPERS OUT OF BINS TO TRY AND FIND OUT WHATS BEEN GOING ON We wanted to I SUPPOSE YOUVE BEEN HAVING A REAL LAUGH HAVENT YOU ALL HOLED UP HERE TOGETHER No honest Harry were really sorry !said Hermione desperately her eyes now sparkling with tears .Youre absolutely right Harry Id be furious if it was me !Harry glared at her still breathing deeply then turned away from them again pacing up and down .Hedwig hooted glumly from the top of the wardrobe .There was a long pause broken only by the mournful creak of the floorboards below Harrys feet .What is this place anyway ?he shot at Ron and Hermione .Headquarters of the Order of the Phoenix said Ron at once .Is anyone going to bother telling me what the Order of the Phoenix ?Its a secret society said Hermione quickly .Dumbledores in charge he founded it .Its the people who fought against YouKnowWho last time .Whos in it ?said Harry coming to a halt with his hands in his pockets .Quite a few people weve met about twenty of them said Ron but we think there are more .Harry glared at them .Well ?he demanded looking from one to the other .Er said Ron .Well what ?Voldemorti said Harry furiously and both Ron and Hermione winced .Whats happening ?Whats he up to ?Where is he ?What are we doing to stop him ?Weve told you the Order dont let us in on their meetings said Hermione nervously .So we dont know the details but weve got a general idea she added hastily seeing the look on Harrys face .Fred and George have invented Extendable Ears see said Ron .Theyre really useful .Extendable ?Ears yeah .Only weve had to stop using them lately because Mum found out and went berserk .Fred and George had to hide them all to stop Mum binning them .But we got a good bit of use out of them before Mum realized what was going on .We know some of the Order are following known Death Eaters keeping tabs on them you know some of them are working on recruiting more people to the Order said Hermione .and some of them are standing guard over something said Ron .Theyre always talking about guard duty .Couldnt have been me could it ?said Harry sarcastically .Oh yeah said Ron with a look of dawning comprehension .Harry snorted .He walked around the room again looking anywhere but at Ron and Hermione .So what have you two been doing if youre not allowed in meetings ?he demanded .You said youd been busy .We have said Hermione quickly .Weve been decontaminating this house its been empty for ages and stuffs been breeding in here .Weve managed to clean out the kitchen most of the bedrooms and I think were doing the drawing room tomo AARGH !With two loud cracks Fred and George Rons elder twin brothers had materialized out of thin air in the middle of the room .Pigwidgeon twittered more wildly than ever and zoomed off to join Hedwig on top of the wardrobe .Stop doing that !Hermione said weakly to the twins who were as vividly redhaired as Ron though stockier and slightly shorter .Hello Harry said George beaming at him .We thought we heard your dulcet tones .You dont want to bottle up your anger like that Harry let it all out said Fred also beaming .There might be a couple of people fifty miles away who didnt hear you .You two passed your Apparation tests then ?asked Harry grumpily .With distinction said Fred who was holding what looked like a piece of very long fleshcolored string .It would have taken you about thirty seconds longer to walk down the stairs said Ron .Time is Galleons little brother said Fred .Anyway Harry youre interfering with reception .Extendable Ears he added in response to Harrys raised eyebrows holding up the string which Harry now saw was trailing out onto the landing .Were trying to hear whats going on downstairs .You want to be careful said Ron staring at the ear .If Mum sees one of them again .Its worth the risk thats a major meeting theyre having said Fred .The door opened and a long mane of red hair appeared .Oh hello Harry !said Rons younger sister Ginny brightly .I thought I heard your voice .Turning to Fred and George she said Its no go with the Extendable Ears shes gone and put an Imperturbable Charm on the kitchen door .How dyou know ?said George looking crestfallen .Tonks told me how to find out said Ginny .You just chuck stuff at the door and if it cant make contact the doors been Imperturbed .Ive been flicking Dungbombs at it from the top of the stairs and they just soar away from it so theres no way the Extendable Ears will be able to get under the gap .Fred heaved a deep sigh .Shame .I really fancied finding out what old Snapes been up to .Snape ?said Harry quickly .Is he here ?Yeah said George carefully closing the door and sitting down on one of the beds Fred and Ginny followed .Giving a report .Top secret .Git said Fred idly .Hes on our side now said Hermione reprovingly .Ron snorted .Doesnt stop him being a git .The way he looks at us when he sees us .Bill doesnt like him either said Ginny as though that settled the matter .Harry was not sure his anger had abated yet but his thirst for information was now overcoming his urge to keep shouting .He sank onto the bed opposite the others .Is Bill here ?he asked .I thought he was working in Egypt .He applied for a desk job so he could come home and work for the Order said Fred .He says he misses the tombs but he smirked there are compensations .What dyou mean ?Remember old Fleur Delacour ?said George .Shes got a job at Gringotts to eemprove er Eeenglish and Bills been giving her a lot of private lessons sniggered Fred .Charlies in the Order too said George but hes still in Romania Dumbledore wants as many foreign wizards brought in as possible so Charlies trying to make contacts on his days off .Couldnt Percy do that ?Harry asked .The last he had heard the third Weasley brother was working in the Department of International Magical Cooperation at the Ministry of Magic .At these words all the Weasleys and Hermione exchanged darkly significant looks .Whatever you do dont mention Percy in front of Mum and Dad Ron told Harry in a tense voice .Why not ?Because every time Percys names mentioned Dad breaks whatever hes holding and Mum starts crying Fred said .Its been awful said Ginny sadly .I think were well shut of him said George with an uncharacteristically ugly look on his face .Whats happened ?Harry said .Percy and Dad had a row said Fred .Ive never seen Dad row with anyone like that .Its normally Mum who shouts .It was the first week back after term ended said Ron .We were about to come and join the Order .Percy came home and told us hed been promoted .Youre kidding ?said Harry .Though he knew perfectly well that Percy was highly ambitious Harrys impression was that Percy had not made a great success of his first job at the Ministry of Magic .Percy had committed the fairly large oversight of failing to notice that his boss was being controlled by Lord Voldemort not that the Ministry had believed that they all thought that Mr Crouch had gone mad .Yeah we were all surprised said George because Percy got into a load of trouble about Crouch there was an inquiry and everything .They said Percy ought to have realized Crouch was off his rocker and informed a superior .But you know Percy Crouch left him in charge he wasnt going to complain .So how come they promoted him ?Thats exactly what we wondered said Ron who seemed very keen to keep normal conversation going now that Harry had stopped yelling .He came home really pleased with himself even more pleased than usual if you can imagine that and told Dad hed been offered a position in Fudges own office .A really good one for someone only a year out of Hogwarts Junior Assistant to the Minister .He expected Dad to be all impressed I think .Only Dad wasnt said Fred grimly .Why not ?said Harry .Well apparently Fudge has been storming round the Ministry checking that nobodys having any contact with Dumbledore said George .Dumbledores names mud with the Ministry these days see said Fred .They all think hes just making trouble saying YouKnow Whos back .Dad says Fudge has made it clear that anyone whos in league with Dumbledore can clear out their desks said George .Trouble is Fudge suspects Dad he knows hes friendly with Dumbledore and hes always thought Dads a bit of a weirdo because of his Muggle obsession But whats this got to do with Percy ?asked Harry confused .Im coming to that .Dad reckons Fudge only wants Percy in his office because he wants to use him to spy on the family and Dumbledore .Harry let out a low whistle .Bet Percy loved that .Ron laughed in a hollow sort of way .He went completely berserk .He said well he said loads of terrible stuff .He said hes been having to struggle against Dads lousy reputation ever since he joined the Ministry and that Dads got no ambition and thats why weve always been you know not had a lot of money I mean What ?said Harry in disbelief as Ginny made a noise like an angry cat .I know said Ron in a low voice .And it got worse .He said Dad was an idiot to run around with Dumbledore that Dumbledore was heading for big trouble and Dad was going to go down with him and that he Percy knew where his loyalty lay and it was with the Ministry .And if Mum and Dad were going to become traitors to the Ministry he was going to make sure everyone knew he didnt belong to our family anymore .And he packed his bags the same night and left .Hes living here in London now .Harry swore under his breath .He had always liked Percy least of Rons brothers but he had never imagined he would say such things to Mr Weasley .Mums been in a right state said Ron .You know crying and stuff .She came up to London to try and talk to Percy but he slammed the door in her face .I dunno what he does if he meets Dad at work ignores him I spose .But Percy must know Voldemorts back said Harry slowly .Hes not stupid he must know your mum and dad wouldnt risk everything without proof Yeah well your name got dragged into the row said Ron shooting Harry a furtive look .Percy said the only evidence was your word and .I dunno .he didnt think it was good enough .Percy takes the Daily Prophet seriously said Hermione tartly and the others all nodded .What are you talking about ?Harry asked looking around at them all .They were all regarding him warily .Havent havent you been getting the Daily Prophet ?Hermione asked nervously .Yeah I have !said Harry .Have you er been reading it thoroughly ?Hermione asked still more anxiously .Not cover to cover said Harry defensively .If they were going to report anything about Voldemort it would be headline news wouldnt it !The others flinched at the sound of the name .Hermione hurried on Well youd need to read it cover to cover to pick it up but they um they mention you a couple of times a week .But Id have seen Not if youve only been reading the front page you wouldnt said Hermione shaking her head .Im not talking about big articles .They just slip you in like youre a standing joke .What dyou ?Its quite nasty actually said Hermione in a voice of forced calm .Theyre just building on Ritas stuff .But shes not writing for them anymore is she ?Oh no shes kept her promise not that shes got any choice Hermione added with satisfaction .But she laid the foundation for what theyre trying to do now .Which is what ?said Harry impatiently .Okay you know she wrote that you were collapsing all over the place and saying your scar was hurting and all that ?Yeah said Harry who was not likely to forget Rita Skeeters stories about him in a hurry .Well theyre writing about you as though youre this deluded attentionseeking person who thinks hes a great tragic hero or something said Hermione very fast as though it would be less unpleasant for Harry to hear these facts quickly .They keep slipping in snide comments about you .If some farfetched story appears they say something like ‘a tale worthy of Harry Potter and if anyone has a funny accident or anything its lets hope he hasnt got a scar on his forehead or well be asked to worship him next I dont want anyone to worship Harry began hotly .I know you dont said Hermione quickly looking frightened .I know Harry .But you see what theyre doing ?They want to turn you into someone nobody will believe .Fudge is behind it Ill bet anything .They want wizards on the street to think youre just some stupid boy whos a bit of a joke who tells ridiculous tall stories because he loves being famous and wants to keep it going .I didnt ask I didnt want Voldemort killed my parentsV Harry spluttered .I got famous because he murdered my family but couldnt kill me !Who wants to be famous for that ?Dont they think Id rather itd never We know Harry said Ginny earnestly .And of course they didnt report a word about the dementors attacking you said Hermione .Someones told them to keep that quiet .That shouldve been a really big story outofcontrol dementors .They havent even reported that you broke the International Statute of Secrecy we thought they would it would tie in so well with this image of you as some stupid showoff we think theyre biding their time until youre expelled then theyre really going to go to town I mean if youre expelled obviously she went on hastily you really shouldnt be not if they abide by their own laws theres no case against you .They were back on the hearing and Harry did not want to think about it .He cast around for another change of subject but was saved the necessity of finding one by the sound of footsteps coming up the stairs .Uhoh .Fred gave the Extendable Ear a hearty tug there was another loud crack and he and George vanished .Seconds later Mrs Weasley appeared in the bedroom doorway .The meetings over you can come down and have dinner now everyones dying to see you Harry .And whos left all those Dungbombs outside the kitchen door ?Crookshanks said Ginny unblushingly .He loves playing with them .Oh said Mrs Weasley I thought it might have been Kreacher he keeps doing odd things like that .Now dont forget to keep your voices down in the hall .Ginny your hands are filthy what have you been doing ?Go and wash them before dinner please .Ginny grimaced at the others and followed her mother out of the room leaving Harry alone with Ron and Hermione again .Both of them were watching him apprehensively as though they feared that he would start shouting again now that everyone else had gone .The sight of them looking so nervous made him feel slightly ashamed .Look .he muttered but Ron shook his head and Hermione said quietly We knew youd be angry Harry we really dont blame you but youve got to understand we did try and persuade Dumbledore Yeah I know said Harry grudgingly .He cast around for a topic to change the subject from Dumbledore the very thought of him made Harrys insides burn with anger again .Whos Kreacher ?he asked .The houseelf who lives here said Ron .Nutter .Never met one like him .Hermione frowned at Ron .Hes not a nutter Ron His lifes ambition is to have his head cut off and stuck up on a plaque just like his mother said Ron irritably .Is that normal Hermione ?Well well if he is a bit strange its not his fault Ron rolled his eyes at Harry .Hermione still hasnt given up on spew Its not ‘spew !said Hermione heatedly .Its the Society for the Promotion of Elfish Welfare and its not just me Dumbledore says we should be kind to Kreacher too Yeah yeah said Ron .Cmon Im starving .He led the way out of the door and onto the landing but before they could descend the stairs Hold it !Ron breathed flinging out an arm to stop Harry and Hermione walking any farther .Theyre still in the hall we might be able to hear something The three of them looked cautiously over the banisters .The gloomy hallway below was packed with witches and wizards including all of Harrys guard .They were whispering excitedly together .In the very center of the group Harry saw the dark greasyhaired head and prominent nose of his least favorite teacher at Hogwarts Professor Snape .Harry leaned farther over the banisters .He was very interested in what Snape was doing for the Order of the Phoenix .A thin piece of fleshcolored string descended in front of Harrys eyes .Looking up he saw Fred and George on the landing above cautiously lowering the Extendable Ear toward the dark knot of people below .A moment later however they began to move toward the front door and out of sight .Dammit Harry heard Fred whisper as he hoisted the Extendable Ear back up again .They heard the front door open and then close .Snape never eats here Ron told Harry quietly .Thank God .Cmon .And dont forget to keep your voice down in the hall Harry Hermione whispered .As they passed the row of houseelf heads on the wall they saw Lupin Mrs Weasley and Tonks at the front door magically sealing its many locks and bolts behind those who had just left .Were eating down in the kitchen Mrs Weasley whispered meeting them at the bottom of the stairs .Harry dear if youll just tiptoe across the hall its through this door here CRASH .Tonksl cried Mrs Weasley exasperatedly turning to look behind her .Im sorry !wailed Tonks who was lying flat on the floor .Its that stupid umbrella stand thats the second time Ive tripped over But the rest of her words were drowned by a horrible earsplitting bloodcurdling screech .The motheaten velvet curtains Harry had passed earlier had flown apart but there was no door behind them .For a split second Harry thought he was looking through a window a window behind which an old woman in a black cap was screaming and screaming as though she was being tortured then Page lOOHarry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix J .K .he realized it was simply a lifesize portrait but the most realistic and the most unpleasant he had ever seen in his life .The old woman was drooling her eyes were rolling the yellowing skin of her face stretched taut as she screamed and all along the hall behind them the other portraits awoke and began to yell too so that Harry actually screwed up his eyes at the noise and clapped his hands over his ears .Lupin and Mrs Weasley darted forward and tried to tug the curtains shut over the old woman but they would not close and she screeched louder than ever brandishing clawed hands as though trying to tear at their faces .Filth !Scum !Byproducts of dirt and vileness !Half breeds mutants freaks begone from this place !How dare you befoul the house of my fathers Tonks apologized over and over again at the same time dragging the huge heavy trolls leg back off the floor .Mrs Weasley abandoned the attempt to close the curtains and hurried up and down the hall Stunning all the other portraits with her wand .Then a man with long black hair came charging out of a door facing Harry .Shut up you horrible old hag shut UP !he roared seizing the curtain Mrs Weasley had abandoned .The old womans face blanched .Yooooul she howled her eyes popping at the sight of the man .Blood traitor abomination shame of my fleshl Page lOlHarry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix J .K .I said shut UP !roared the man and with a stupendous effort he and Lupin managed to force the curtains closed again .The old womans screeches died and an echoing silence fell .Panting slightly and sweeping his long dark hair out of his eyes Harrys godfather Sirius turned to face him .Hello Harry he said grimly I see youve met my mother .5 THE ORDER OF THE PHOENIX Your ?My dear old mum yeah said Sirius .Weve been trying to get her down for a month but we think she put a Permanent Sticking Charm on the back of the canvas .Lets get downstairs quick before they all wake up again .But whats a portrait of your mother doing here ?Harry asked bewildered as they went through the door from the hall and led the way down a flight of narrow stone steps the others just behind them .Hasnt anyone told you ?This was my parents house said Sirius .But Im the last Black left so its mine now .I offered it to Dumbledore for headquarters about the only useful thing Ive been able to do .Harry who had expected a better welcome noted how hard and bitter Siriuss voice sounded .He followed his godfather to the bottom of the stairs and through a door leading into the basement kitchen .It was scarcely less gloomy than the hall above a cavernous room with rough stone walls .Most of the light was coming from a large fire at the far end of the room .A haze of pipe smoke hung in the air like battle fumes through which loomed the menacing shapes of heavy iron pots and pans hanging from the dark ceiling .Many chairs had been crammed into the room for the meeting and a long wooden table stood in the middle of the room littered with rolls of parchment goblets empty wine bottles and a heap of what appeared to be rags .Mr Weasley and his eldest son Bill were talking quietly with their heads together at the end of the table .Mrs Weasley cleared her throat .Her husband a thin balding redhaired man who wore hornrimmed glasses looked around and jumped to his feet .Harry !Mr Weasley said hurrying forward to greet him and shaking his hand vigorously .Good to see you !Over his shoulder Harry saw Bill who still wore his long hair in a ponytail hastily rolling up the lengths of parchment left on the table .Journey all right Harry ?Bill called trying to gather up twelve scrolls at once .MadEye didnt make you come via Greenland then ?He tried said Tonks striding over to help Bill and immediately sending a candle toppling onto the last piece of parchment .Oh no sorry Here dear said Mrs Weasley sounding exasperated and she repaired the parchment with a wave of her wand In the flash of light caused by Mrs Weasleys charm Harry caught a glimpse of what looked like the plan of a building .Mrs Weasley had seen him looking .She snatched the plan off the table and stuffed it into Bills heavily laden arms .This sort of thing ought to be cleared away promptly at the end of meetings she snapped before sweeping off toward an ancient dresser from which she started unloading dinner plates .Bill took out his wand muttered Evanescol and the scrolls vanished .Sit down Harry said Sirius .Youve met Mundungus havent you ?The thing Harry had taken to be a pile of rags gave a prolonged grunting snore and then jerked awake .Somen say m name ?Mundungus mumbled sleepily .I gree with Sirius .He raised a very grubby hand in the air as though voting his droopy bloodshot eyes unfocused .Ginny giggled .The meetings over Dung said Sirius as they all sat down around him at the table .Harrys arrived .Eh ?said Mundungus peering balefully at Harry through his matted ginger hair .Blimey so e as .Yeah .you all right arry ?Yeah said Harry .Mundungus fumbled nervously in his pockets still staring at Harry and pulled out a grimy black pipe .He stuck it in his mouth ignited the end of it with his wand and took a deep pull on it .Great billowing clouds of greenish smoke obscured him in seconds .Owe you a pology grunted a voice from the middle of the smelly cloud .For the last time Mundungus called Mrs Weasley will you please not smoke that thing in the kitchen especially not when were about to eat !Ah said Mundungus .Right .Sorry Molly .The cloud of smoke vanished as Mundungus stowed his pipe back in his pocket but an acrid smell of burning socks lingered .And if you want dinner before midnight Ill need a hand Mrs Weasley said to the room at large .No you can stay where you are Harry dear youve had a long journey What can I do Molly ?said Tonks enthusiastically bounding forward .Mrs Weasley hesitated looking apprehensive .Er no its all right Tonks you have a rest too youve done enough today No no I want to help !said Tonks brightly knocking over a chair as she hurried toward the dresser from which Ginny was collecting cutlery .Soon a series of heavy knives were chopping meat and vegetables of their own accord supervised by Mr Weasley while Mrs Weasley stirred a cauldron dangling over the fire and the others took out plates more goblets and food from the pantry .Harry was left at the table with Sirius and Mundungus who was still blinking mournfully at him .Seen old Figgy since ?he asked .No said Harry I havent seen anyone .See I wouldnt ave left said Mundungus leaning forward a pleading note in his voice but I ad a business opportunity Harry felt something brush against his knees and started but it was only Crookshanks Hermiones bandylegged ginger cat who wound himself once around Harrys legs purring then jumped onto Siriuss lap and curled up .Sirius scratched him absentmindedly behind the ears as he turned still grimfaced to Harry .Had a good summer so far ?No its been lousy said Harry .For the first time something like a grin flitted across Siriuss face .Dont know what youre complaining about myself .What ?said Harry incredulously .Personally Id have welcomed a dementor attack .A deadly struggle for my soul would have broken the monotony nicely .You think youve had it bad at least youve been able to get out and about stretch your legs get into a few fights .Ive been stuck inside for a month .How come ?asked Harry frowning .Because the Ministry of Magics still after me and Voldemort will know all about me being an Animagus by now Wormtail will have told him so my big disguise is useless .Theres not much I can do for the Order of the Phoenix .or so Dumbledore feels .There was something about the slightly flattened tone of voice in which Sirius uttered Dumbledores name that told Harry that Sirius was not very happy with the headmaster either .Harry felt a sudden upsurge of affection for his godfather .At least youve known whats been going on he said bracingly .Oh yeah said Sirius sarcastically .Listening to Snapes reports having to take all his snide hints that hes out there risking his life while Im sat on my backside here having a nice comfortable time .asking me how the cleanings going What cleaning ?asked Harry .Trying to make this place fit for human habitation said Sirius waving a hand around the dismal kitchen .No ones lived here for ten years not since my dear mother died unless you count her old houseelf and hes gone round the twist hasnt cleaned anything in ages Sirius ?said Mundungus who did not appear to have paid any attention to this conversation but had been minutely examining an empty goblet .This solid silver mate ?Yes said Sirius surveying it with distaste .Finest fifteenthcentury goblinwrought silver embossed with the Black family crest .Thatd come off though muttered Mundungus polishing it with his cuff .Fred George NO JUST CARRY THEM !Mrs Weasley shrieked .Harry Sirius and Mundungus looked around and a split second later dived away from the table .Fred and George had bewitched a large cauldron of stew an iron flagon of butterbeer and a heavy wooden breadboard complete with knife to hurtle through the air toward them .The stew skidded the length of the table and came to a halt just before the end leaving a long black burn on the wooden surface the flagon of butterbeer fell with a crash spilling its contents everywhere and the bread knife slipped off the board and landed point down and quivering ominously exactly where Siriuss right hand had been seconds before .FOR HEAVENS SAKE !screamed Mrs Weasley .THERE WAS NO NEED IVE HAD ENOUGH OF THIS JUST BECAUSE YOURE ALLOWED TO USE MAGIC NOW YOU DONT HAVE TO WHIP YOUR WANDS OUT FOR EVERY TINY LITTLE THING !We were just trying to save a bit of time !said Fred hurrying forward and wrenching the bread knife out of the table .Sorry Sirius mate didnt mean to Harry and Sirius were both laughing .Mundungus who had toppled backward off his chair was swearing as he got to his feet .Crookshanks had given an angry hiss and shot off under the dresser from whence his large yellow eyes glowed in the darkness .Boys Mr Weasley said lifting the stew back into the middle of the table your mothers right youre supposed to show a sense of responsibility now youve come of age none of your brothers caused this sort of trouble !Mrs Weasley raged at the twins slamming a fresh flagon of butterbeer onto the table and spilling almost as much again .Bill didnt feel the need to Apparate every few feet !Charlie didnt Charm everything he met !Percy She stopped dead catching her breath with a frightened look at her husband whose expression was suddenly wooden .Lets eat said Bill quickly .It looks wonderful Molly said Lupin ladling stew onto a plate for her and handing it across the table .For a few minutes there was silence but for the chink of plates and cutlery and the scraping of chairs as everyone settled down to their food .Then Mrs Weasley turned to Sirius and said Ive been meaning to tell you theres something trapped in that writing desk in the drawing room it keeps rattling and shaking .Of course it could just be a boggart but I thought we ought to ask Alastor to have a look at it before we let it out .Whatever you like said Sirius indifferently .The curtains in there are full of doxies too Mrs Weasley went on .I thought we might try and tackle them tomorrow .I look forward to it said Sirius .Harry heard the sarcasm in his voice but he was not sure that anyone else did .Opposite Harry Tonks was entertaining Hermione and Ginny by transforming her nose between mouthfuls .Screwing up her eyes each time with the same pained expression she had worn back in Harrys bedroom her nose swelled to a beaklike protuberance like Snapes shrank to something resembling a button mushroom and then sprouted a great deal of Page llOHarry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix J .K .hair from each nostril .Apparently this was a regular mealtime entertainment because after a while Hermione and Ginny started requesting their favorite noses .Do that one like a pig snout Tonks .Tonks obliged and Harry looking up had the fleeting impression that a female Dudley was grinning at him from across the table .Mr Weasley Bill and Lupin were having an intense discussion about goblins .Theyre not giving anything away yet said Bill .I still cant work out whether they believe hes back or not .Course they might prefer not to take sides at all .Keep out of it .Im sure theyd never go over to YouKnowWho said Mr Weasley shaking his head .Theyve suffered losses too .Remember that goblin family he murdered last time somewhere near Nottingham ?I think it depends what theyre offered said Lupin .And Im not talking about gold if theyre offered freedoms weve been denying them for centuries theyre going to be tempted .Have you still not had any luck with Ragnok Bill ?Hes feeling pretty antiwizard at the moment said Bill .He hasnt stopped raging about the Bagman business he reckons the Ministry did a coverup those goblins never got their gold from him you know A gale of laughter from the middle of the table drowned the rest of Bills words .Fred George Ron and Mundungus were rolling around in their seats .Page lllHarry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix J .K ..and then choked Mundungus tears running down his face and then if youll believe it e says to me e says ‘ere Dung where didja get all them toads from ?Cos some son of a Bludgers gone and nicked all mine !And I says ‘Nicked all your toads Will what next ?So youll be wanting some more then ?And if youll believe me lads the gormless gargoyle buys all is own toads back orf me for twice what e paid in the first place ■ I dont think we need to hear any more of your business dealings thank you very much Mundungus said Mrs Weasley sharply as Ron slumped forward onto the table howling with laughter .Beg pardon Molly said Mundungus at once wiping his eyes and winking at Harry .But you know Will nicked em orf Warty Harris in the first place so I wasnt really doing nothing wrong I dont know where you learned about right and wrong Mundungus but you seem to have missed a few crucial lessons said Mrs Weasley coldly .Fred and George buried their faces in their goblets of butterbeer George was hiccuping .For some reason Mrs Weasley threw a very nasty look at Sirius before getting to her feet and going to fetch a large rhubarb crumble for pudding .Harry looked round at his godfather .Molly doesnt approve of Mundungus said Sirius in an undertone .How come hes in the Order ?Harry said very quietly .Hes useful Sirius muttered .Knows all the crooks well he would seeing as hes one himself .But hes also very loyal to Dumbledore who helped him out of a tight spot once .It pays to have someone like Dung around he hears things we dont .But Molly thinks inviting him to stay for dinner is going too far .She hasnt forgiven him for slipping off duty when he was supposed to be tailing you .Three helpings of rhubarb crumble and custard later and the waistband on Harrys jeans was feeling uncomfortably tight which was saying something as the jeans had once been Dudleys .He lay down his spoon in a lull in the general conversation .Mr Weasley was leaning back in his chair looking replete and relaxed Tonks was yawning widely her nose now back to normal and Ginny who had lured Crookshanks out from under the dresser was sitting crosslegged on the floor rolling butterbeer corks for him to chase .Nearly time for bed I think said Mrs Weasley on a yawn .Not just yet Molly said Sirius pushing away his empty plate and turning to look at Harry .You know Im surprised at you .I thought the first thing youd do when you got here would be to start asking questions about Voldemort .The atmosphere in the room changed with the rapidity Harry associated with the arrival of dementors .Where seconds before it had been sleepily relaxed it was now alert even tense .A frisson had gone around the table at the mention of Voldemorts name .Lupin who had been about to take a sip of wine lowered his goblet slowly looking wary .I did !said Harry indignantly .I asked Ron and Hermione but they said were not allowed in the Order so And theyre quite right said Mrs Weasley .Youre too young .She was sitting bolt upright in her chair her fists clenched upon its arms every trace of drowsiness gone .Since when did someone have to be in the Order of the Phoenix to ask questions ?asked Sirius .Harrys been trapped in that Muggle house for a month .Hes got the right to know whats been happen Hang on !interrupted George loudly .How come Harry gets his questions answered ?said Fred angrily .Weve been trying to get stuff out of you for a month and you havent told us a single stinking thing !said George . ‘Youre too young youre not in the Order said Fred in a highpitched voice that sounded uncannily like his mothers .Harrys not even of age !Its not my fault you havent been told what the Orders doing said Sirius calmly .Thats your parents decision .Harry on the other hand Its not down to you to decide whats good for Harry !said Mrs Weasley sharply .Her normally kindly face looked dangerous .You havent forgotten what Dumbledore said I suppose ?Which bit ?Sirius asked politely but with an air as though readying himself for a fight .The bit about not telling Harry more than he needs to know said Mrs Weasley placing a heavy emphasis on the last three words .Ron Hermione Fred and Georges heads turned from Sirius to Mrs Weasley as though following a tennis rally .Ginny was kneeling amid a pile of abandoned butterbeer corks watching the conversation with her mouth slightly open .Lupins eyes were fixed on Sirius .I dont intend to tell him more than he needs to know Molly said Sirius .But as he was the one who saw Voldemort come back again there was a collective shudder around the table at the name he has more right than most to Hes not a member of the Order of the Phoenix !said Mrs Weasley .Hes only fifteen and and hes dealt with as much as most in the Order said Sirius and more than some No ones denying what hes done !said Mrs Weasley her voice rising her fists trembling on the arms of her chair .But hes still Hes not a child !said Sirius impatiently .Hes not an adult either !said Mrs Weasley the color rising in her cheeks .Hes not James Sirius !Im perfectly clear who he is thanks Molly said Sirius coldly .‘Tm not sure you are !said Mrs Weasley .Sometimes the way you talk about him its as though you think youve got your best friend back !Whats wrong with that ?said Harry .Whats wrong Harry is that you are not your father however much you might look like him !said Mrs Weasley her eyes still boring into Sirius .You are still at school and adults responsible for you should not forget it !Meaning Im an irresponsible godfather ?demanded Sirius his voice rising .Meaning youve been known to act rashly Sirius which is why Dumbledore keeps reminding you to stay at home and Well leave my instructions from Dumbledore out of this if you please !said Sirius loudly .Arthur !said Mrs Weasley rounding on her husband .Arthur back me up !Mr Weasley did not speak at once .He took off his glasses and cleaned them slowly on his robes not looking at his wife .Only when he had replaced them carefully on his nose did he say Dumbledore knows the position has changed Molly .He accepts that Harry will have to be filled in to a certain extent now that he is staying at headquarters Yes but theres a difference between that and inviting him to ask whatever he likes !Personally said Lupin quietly looking away from Sirius at last as Mrs Weasley turned quickly to him hopeful that finally she was about to get an ally I think it better that Harry gets the facts not all the facts Molly but the general picture from us rather than a garbled version from .others .His expression was mild but Harry felt sure that Lupin at least knew that some Extendable Ears had survived Mrs Weasleys purge .Well said Mrs Weasley breathing deeply and looking around the table for support that did not come well .I can see Im going to be overruled .Ill just say this Dumbledore must have had his reasons for not wanting Harry to know too much and speaking as someone who has got Harrys best interests at heart Hes not your son said Sirius quietly .Hes as good as said Mrs Weasley fiercely .Who else has he got ?Hes got me !Yes said Mrs Weasley her lip curling .The thing is its been rather difficult for you to look after him while youve been locked up in Azkaban hasnt it ?Sirius started to rise from his chair .Molly youre not the only person at this table who cares about Harry said Lupin sharply .Sirius sit down .Mrs Weasleys lower lip was trembling .Sirius sank slowly back into his chair his face white .I think Harry ought to be allowed a say in this Lupin continued .Hes old enough to decide for himself .I want to know whats been going on Harry said at once .He did not look at Mrs Weasley .He had been touched by what she had said about his being as good as a son but he was also impatient at her mollycoddling .Sirius was right he was not a child .Very well said Mrs Weasley her voice cracking .Ginny Ron Hermione Fred George I want you out of this kitchen now .There was instant uproar .Were of age !Fred and George bellowed together .If Harrys allowed why cant I ?shouted Ron .Mum I want to !wailed Ginny .NO !shouted Mrs Weasley standing up her eyes overbright .I absolutely forbid Molly you cant stop Fred and George said Mr Weasley wearily .They are of age Theyre still at school But theyre legally adults now said Mr Weasley in the same tired voice .Mrs Weasley was now scarlet in the face .I oh all right then Fred and George can stay but Ron Harryll tell me and Hermione everything you say anyway !said Ron hotly .Wont wont you ?he added uncertainly meeting Harrys eyes .For a split second Harry considered telling Ron that he wouldnt tell him a single word that he could try a taste of being kept in the dark and see how he liked it .But the nasty impulse vanished as they looked at each other .Course I will Harry said .Ron and Hermione beamed .Fine !shouted Mrs Weasley .Fine !Ginny BED !Ginny did not go quietly .They could hear her raging and storming at her mother all the way up the stairs and when she reached the hall Mrs Blacks earsplitting shrieks were added to the din .Lupin hurried off to the portrait to restore calm .It was only after he had returned closing the kitchen door behind him and taking his seat at the table again that Sirius spoke .Okay Harry .what do you want to know ?Harry took a deep breath and asked the question that had been obsessing him for a month .Wheres Voldemort ?Whats he doing ?Ive been trying to watch the Muggle news he said ignoring the renewed shudders and winces at the name and there hasnt been anything that looks like him yet no funny deaths or anything Thats because there havent been any suspicious deaths yet said Sirius not as far as we know anyway .And we know quite a lot .More than he thinks we do anyway said Lupin .How come hes stopped killing people ?Harry asked .He knew that Voldemort had murdered more than once in the last year alone .Because he doesnt want to draw attention to himself at the moment said Sirius .It would be dangerous for him .His comeback didnt come off quite the way he wanted it to you see .He messed it up .Or rather you messed it up for him said Lupin with a satisfied smile .How ?Harry asked perplexedly .You werent supposed to survive !said Sirius .Nobody apart from his Death Eaters was supposed to know hed come back .But you survived to bear witness .And the very last person he wanted alerted to his return the moment he got back was Dumbledore said Lupin .And you made sure Dumbledore knew at once .How has that helped ?Harry asked .Are you kidding ?said Bill incredulously .Dumbledore was the only one YouKnowWho was ever scared of !Thanks to you Dumbledore was able to recall the Order of the Phoenix about an hour after Voldemort returned said Sirius .So whats the Order been doing ?said Harry looking around at them all .Working as hard as we can to make sure Voldemort cant carry out his plans said Sirius .How dyou know what his plans are ?Harry asked quickly .Dumbledores got a shrewd idea said Lupin and Dumbledores shrewd ideas normally turn out to be accurate .So what does Dumbledore reckon hes planning ?Well firstly he wants to build up his army again said Sirius .In the old days he had huge numbers at his command witches and wizards hed bullied or bewitched into following him his faithful Death Eaters a great variety of Dark creatures .You heard him planning to recruit the giants well theyll be just one group hes after .Hes certainly not going to try and take on the Ministry of Magic with only a dozen Death Eaters .So youre trying to stop him getting more followers ?Were doing our best said Lupin .How ?Well the main thing is to try and convince as many people as possible that YouKnowWho really has returned to put them on their guard said Bill .Its proving tricky though .Why ?Because of the Ministrys attitude said Tonks .You saw Cornelius Fudge after YouKnowWho came back Harry .Well he hasnt shifted his position at all .Hes absolutely refusing to believe its happened .But why ?said Harry desperately .Whys he being so stupid ?If Dumbledore Ah well youve put your finger on the problem said Mr Weasley with a wry smile .Dumbledore .Fudge is frightened of him you see said Tonks sadly .Frightened of Dumbledore ?said Harry incredulously .Frightened of what hes up to said Mr Weasley .You see Fudge thinks Dumbledores plotting to overthrow him .He thinks Dumbledore wants to be Minister of Magic .But Dumbledore doesnt want Of course he doesnt said Mr Weasley .Hes never wanted the Ministers job even though a lot of people wanted him to take it when Millicent Bagnold retired .Fudge came to power instead but hes never quite forgotten how much popular support Dumbledore had even though Dumbledore never applied for the job .Deep down Fudge knows Dumbledores much cleverer than he is a much more powerful wizard and in the early days of his Ministry he was forever asking Dumbledore for help and advice said Lupin .But it seems that hes become fond of power now and much more confident .He loves being Minister of Magic and hes managed to convince himself that hes the clever one and Dumbledores simply stirring up trouble for the sake of it .How can he think that ?said Harry angrily .How can he think Dumbledore would just make it all up that Id make it all up ?Because accepting that Voldemorts back would mean trouble like the Ministry hasnt had to cope with for nearly fourteen years said Sirius bitterly .Fudge just cant bring himself to face it .Its so much more comfortable to convince himself Dumbledores lying to destabilize him .You see the problem said Lupin .While the Ministry insists there is nothing to fear from Voldemort its hard to convince people hes back especially as they really dont want to believe it in the first place .Whats more the Ministrys leaning heavily on the Daily Prophet not to report any of what theyre calling Dumbledores rumormongering so most of the Wizarding community are completely unaware anythings happened and that makes them easy targets for the Death Eaters if theyre using the Imperius Curse .But youre telling people arent you ?said Harry looking around at Mr Weasley Sirius Bill Mundungus Lupin and Tonks .Youre letting people know hes back ?They all smiled humorlessly .Well as everyone thinks Im a mad mass murderer and the Ministrys put a tenthousandGalleon price on my head I can hardly stroll up the street and start handing out leaflets can I ?said Sirius restlessly .And Im not a very popular dinner guest with most of the community said Lupin .Its an occupational hazard of being a werewolf .Tonks and Arthur would lose their jobs at the Ministry if they started shooting their mouths off said Sirius and its very important for us to have spies inside the Ministry because you can bet Voldemort will have them .Weve managed to convince a couple of people though said Mr Weasley .Tonks here for one shes too young to have been in the Order of the Phoenix last time and having Aurors on our side is a huge advantage Kingsley Shacklebolts been a real asset too .Hes in charge of the hunt for Sirius so hes been feeding the Ministry information that Sirius is in Tibet .But if none of yous putting the news out that Voldemort s back Harry began .Who said none of us was putting the news out ?said Sirius .Why dyou think Dumbledores in such trouble ?What dyou mean ?Harry asked .Theyre trying to discredit him said Lupin .Didnt you see the Daily Prophet last week ?They reported that hed been voted out of the Chairmanship of the International Confederation of Wizards because hes getting old and losing his grip but its not true he was voted out by Ministry wizards after he made a speech announcing Voldemorts return .Theyve demoted him from Chief Warlock on the Wizengamot thats the Wizard High Court and theyre talking about taking away his Order of Merlin First Class too .But Dumbledore says he doesnt care what they do as long as they dont take him off the Chocolate Frog cards said Bill grinning .Its no laughing matter said Mr Weasley shortly .If he carries on defying the Ministry like this he could end up in Azkaban and the last thing we want is Dumbledore locked up .While YouKnowWho knows Dumbledores out there and wise to what hes up to hes going to go cautiously for a while .If Dumbledores out of the way well YouKnowWho will have a clear field .But if Voldemorts trying to recruit more Death Eaters its bound to get out that hes come back isnt it ?asked Harry desperately .Voldemort doesnt march up to peoples houses and bang on their front doors Harry said Sirius .He tricks jinxes and blackmails them .Hes well practiced at operating in secrecy .In any case gathering followers is only one thing hes interested in hes got other plans too plans he can put into operation very quietly indeed and hes concentrating on them at the moment .Whats he after apart from followers ?Harry asked swiftly .He thought he saw Sirius and Lupin exchange the most fleeting of looks before Sirius said Stuff he can only get by stealth .When Harry continued to look puzzled Sirius said Like a weapon .Something he didnt have last time .When he was powerful before ?Yes .Like what kind of weapon ?said Harry .Something worse than the Avada Kedavra ?Thats enough .Mrs Weasley spoke from the shadows beside the door .Harry had not noticed her return from taking Ginny upstairs .Her arms were crossed and she looked furious .I want you in bed now .All of you she added looking around at Fred George Ron and Hermione .You cant boss us Fred began .Watch me snarled Mrs Weasley .She was trembling slightly as she looked at Sirius .Youve given Harry plenty of information .Any more and you might just as well induct him into the Order straightaway .Why not ?said Harry quickly .Ill join I want to join I want to fight No .It was not Mrs Weasley who spoke this time but Lupin .The Order is comprised only of overage wizards he said .Wizards who have left school he added as Fred and George opened their mouths .There are dangers involved of which you can have no idea any of you .I think Mollys right Sirius .Weve said enough .Sirius halfshrugged but did not argue .Mrs Weasley beckoned imperiously to her sons and Hermione .One by one they stood up and Harry recognizing defeat followed suit .THE NOBLE AND MOST ANCIENT HOUSE OF BLACK Mrs Weasley followed them upstairs looking grim .I want you all to go straight to bed no talking she said as they reached the first landing .Weve got a busy day tomorrow .I expect Ginnys asleep she added to Hermione so try not to wake her up .Asleep yeah right said Fred in an undertone after Hermione bade them good night and they were climbing to the next floor .If Ginnys not lying awake waiting for Hermione to tell her everything they said downstairs then Im a flobberworm .All right Ron Harry said Mrs Weasley on the second landing pointing them into their bedroom .Off to bed with you .Night Harry and Ron said to the twins .Sleep tight said Fred winking .Mrs Weasley closed the door behind Harry with a sharp snap .The bedroom looked if anything even danker and gloomier than it had on first sight .The blank picture on the wall was now breathing very slowly and deeply as though its invisible occupant was asleep .Harry put on his pajamas took off his glasses and climbed into his chilly bed while Ron threw Owl Treats up on top of the wardrobe to pacify Hedwig and Pigwidgeon who were clattering around and rustling their wings restlessly .We cant let them out to hunt every night Ron explained as he pulled on his maroon pajamas .Dumbledore doesnt want too many owls swooping around the square thinks itll look suspicious .Oh yeah .I forgot .He crossed to the door and bolted it .What re you doing that for ?Kreacher said Ron as he turned off the light .First night I was here he came wandering in at three in the morning .Trust me you dont want to wake up and find him paround your room .Anyway .He got into his bed settled down under the covers then turned to look at Harry in the darkness .Harry could see his outline by the moonlight filtering in through the grimy window .What dyou reckon ?Harry didnt need to ask what Ron meant .Well they didnt tell us much we couldnt have guessed did they ?he said thinking of all that had been said downstairs .I mean all theyve really said is that the Orders trying to stop people joining Vol There was a sharp intake of breath from Ron .demort said Harry firmly .When are you going to start using his name ?Sirius and Lupin do .Ron ignored this last comment .Yeah youre right he said .We already knew nearly everything they told us from using the Extendable Ears .The only new bit was Crack .OUCH !Keep your voice down Ron or Mumll be back up here .You two just Apparated on my knees !Yeah well its harder in the dark Harry saw the blurred outlines of Fred and George leaping down from Rons bed .There was a groan of bedsprings and Harrys mattress descended a few inches as George sat down near his feet .So got there yet ?said George eagerly .The weapon Sirius mentioned ?said Harry .Let slip more like said Fred with relish now sitting next to Ron .We didnt hear about that on the old Extendables did we ?What dyou reckon it is ?said Harry .Could be anything said Fred .But there cant be anything worse than the Avada Kedavra curse can there ?said Ron .Whats worse than death ?Maybe its something that can kill loads of people at once suggested George .Maybe its some particularly painful way of killing people said Ron fearfully .Hes got the Cruciatus Curse for causing pain said Harry .He doesnt need anything more efficient than that .There was a pause and Harry knew that the others like him were wondering what horrors this weapon could perpetrate .So who dyou thinks got it now ?asked George .I hope its our side said Ron sounding slightly nervous .If it is Dumbledores probably keeping it said Fred .Where ?said Ron quickly .Hogwarts ?Bet it is !said George .Thats where he hid the Sorcerers Stone !A weapons going to be a lot bigger than the Stone though !said Ron .Not necessarily said Fred .Yeah size is no guarantee of power said George .Look at Ginny .What dyou mean ?said Harry .Youve never been on the receiving end of one of her BatBogey Hexes have you ?Shhh !said Fred halfrising from the bed .Listen !They fell silent .Footsteps were coming up the stairs again .Mum said George and without further ado there was a loud crack and Harry felt the weight vanish from the end of his bed .A few seconds later and they heard the floorboard creak outside their door Mrs Weasley was plainly listening to see whether they were talking or not .Hedwig and Pigwidgeon hooted dolefully .The floorboard creaked again and they heard her heading upstairs to check on Fred and George .She doesnt trust us at all you know said Ron regretfully .Harry was sure he would not be able to fall asleep the evening had been so packed with things to think about that he fully expected to lie awake for hours mulling it all over .He wanted to continue talking to Ron but Mrs Weasley was now creaking back downstairs again and once she had gone he distinctly heard others making their way upstairs .In fact manylegged creatures were cantering softly up and down outside the bedroom door and Hagrid the Care of Magical Creatures teacher was saying Beauties aren they eh Harry ?Well be study in weapons this term .And Harry saw that the creatures had cannons for heads and were wheeling to face him .He ducked .The next thing he knew he was curled in a warm ball under his bedclothes and Georges loud voice was filling the room .Mum says get up your breakfast is in the kitchen and then she needs you in the drawing room there are loads more doxies than she thought and shes found a nest of dead puffskeins under the sofa .Half an hour later Harry and Ron who had dressed and breakfasted quickly entered the drawing room a long highceilinged room on the first floor with olive green walls covered in dirty tapestries .The carpet exhaled little clouds of dust every time someone put their foot on it and the long mossgreen velvet curtains were buzzing as though swarming with invisible bees .It was around these that Mrs Weasley Hermione Ginny Fred and George were grouped all looking rather peculiar as they had tied cloths over their noses and mouths .Each of them was also holding a large bottle of black liquid with a nozzle at the end .Cover your faces and take a spray Mrs Weasley said to Harry and Ron the moment she saw them pointing to two more bottles of black liquid standing on a spindlelegged table .Its Doxycide .Ive never seen an infestation this bad what that houseelfs been doing for the last ten years Hermione s face was half concealed by a tea towel but Harry distinctly saw her throw a reproachful look at Mrs Weasley at these words .Kreachers really old he probably couldnt manage Youd be surprised what Kreacher can manage when he wants to Hermione said Sirius who had just entered the room carrying a bloodstained bag of what appeared to be dead rats .Ive just been feeding Buckbeak he added in reply to Harrys inquiring look .I keep him upstairs in my mothers bedroom .Anyway .this writing desk .He dropped the bag of rats onto an armchair then bent over to examine the locked cabinet which Harry now noticed for the first time was shaking slightly .Well Molly Im pretty sure this is a boggart said Sirius peering through the keyhole but perhaps we ought to let MadEye have a shifty at it before we let it out knowing my mother it could be something much worse .Right you are Sirius said Mrs Weasley .They were both speaking in carefully light polite voices that told Harry quite plainly that neither had forgotten their disagreement of the night before .A loud clanging bell sounded from downstairs followed at once by the cacophony of screams and wails that had been triggered the previous night by Tonks knocking over the umbrella stand .I keep telling them not to ring the doorbell !said Sirius exasperatedly hurrying back out of the room .They heard him thundering down the stairs as Mrs Blacks screeches echoed up through the house once more Stains of dishonor filthy halfbreeds blood traitors children of filth .Close the door please Harry said Mrs Weasley .Harry took as much time as he dared to close the drawing room door he wanted to listen to what was going on downstairs .Sirius had obviously managed to shut the curtains over his mothers portrait because she had stopped screaming .He heard Sirius walking down the hall then the clattering of the chain on the front door and then a deep voice he recognized as Kingsley Shacklebolts saying Hestias just relieved me so shes got Moodys cloak now thought Id leave a report for Dumbledore .Feeling Mrs Weasleys eyes on the back of his head Harry regretfully closed the drawing room door and rejoined the doxy party .Mrs Weasley was bending over to check the page on doxies in Gilderoy Lockharts Guide to Household Pests which was lying open on the sofa .Right you lot you need to be careful because doxies bite and their teeth are poisonous .Ive got a bottle of antidote here but Id rather nobody needed it .She straightened up positioned herself squarely in front of the curtains and beckoned them all forward .When I say the word start spraying immediately she said .Theyll come flying out at us I expect but it says on the sprays one good squirt will paralyze them .When theyre immobilized just throw them in this bucket .She stepped carefully out of their line of fire and raised her own spray .All right squirti Harry had been spraying only a few seconds when a fully grown doxy came soaring out of a fold in the material shiny beetlelike wings whirring tiny needle sharp teeth bared its fairylike body covered with thick black hair and its four tiny fists clenched with fury .Harry caught it full in the face with a blast of Doxycide it froze in midair and fell with a surprisingly loud thunk onto the worn carpet below .Harry picked it up and threw it in the bucket .Fred what are you doing ?said Mrs Weasley sharply .Spray that at once and throw it away !Harry looked around .Fred was holding a struggling doxy between his forefinger and thumb .Righto Fred said brightly spraying the doxy quickly in the face so that it fainted but the moment Mrs Weasleys back was turned he pocketed it with a wink .We want to experiment with doxy venom for our Skiving Snackboxes George told Harry under his breath .Deftly spraying two doxies at once as they soared straight for his nose Harry moved closer to George and muttered out of the corner of his mouth What are Skiving Snackboxes ?Range of sweets to make you ill George whispered keeping a wary eye on Mrs Weasleys back .Not seriously ill mind just ill enough to get you out of a class when you feel like it .Fred and I have been developing them this summer .Theyre doubleended colorcoded chews .If you eat the orange half of the Puking Pastilles you throw up .Moment youve been rushed out of the lesson for the hospital wing you swallow the purple half ‘ which restores you to full fitness enabling you to pursue the leisure activity of your own choice during an hour that would otherwise have been devoted to unprofitable boredom .Thats what were putting in the adverts anyway whispered Fred who had edged over out of Mrs Weasleys line of vision and was now sweeping a few stray doxies from the floor and adding them to his pocket .But they still need a bit of work .At the moment our testers are having a bit of trouble stopping puking long enough to swallow the purple end .Testers ?Us said Fred .We take it in turns .George did the Fainting Fancies we both tried the Nosebleed Nougat Mum thought wed been dueling said George .Joke shop still on then ?Harry muttered pretending to be adjusting the nozzle on his spray .Well we havent had a chance to get premises yet said Fred dropping his voice even lower as Mrs Weasley mopped her brow with her scarf before returning to the attack so were running it as a mail order service at the moment .We put advertisements in the Daily Prophet last week .All thanks to you mate said George .But dont worry .Mum hasnt got a clue .She wont read the Daily Prophet anymore cause of it telling lies about you and Dumbledore .Harry grinned .He had forced the Weasley twins to take the thousandGalleon prize money he had won in the Triwizard Tournament to help them realize their ambition to open a joke shop but he was still glad to know that his part in furthering their plans was unknown to Mrs Weasley who did not think that running a joke shop was a suitable career for two of her sons .The dedoxying of the curtains took most of the morning .It was past midday when Mrs Weasley finally removed her protective scarf sank into a sagging armchair and sprang up again with a cry of disgust having sat on the bag of dead rats .The curtains were no longer buzzing they hung limp and damp from the intensive spraying unconscious doxies lay crammed in the bucket at the foot of them beside a bowl of their black eggs at which Crookshanks was now sniffing and Fred and George were shooting covetous looks .I think well tackle those after lunch .Mrs Weasley pointed at the dusty glassfronted cabinets standing on either side of the mantelpiece .They were crammed with an odd assortment of objects a selection of rusty daggers claws a coiled snakeskin a number of tarnished silver boxes inscribed with languages Harry could not understand and least pleasant of all an ornate crystal bottle with a large opal set into the stopper full of what Harry was quite sure was blood .The clanging doorbell rang again .Everyone looked at Mrs Weasley .Stay here she said firmly snatching up the bag of rats as Mrs Blacks screeches started up again from down below .Ill bring up some sandwiches .She left the room closing the door carefully behind her .At once everyone dashed over to the window to look down onto the doorstep .They could see the top of an unkempt gingery head and a stack of precariously balanced cauldrons .Mundungus !said Hermione .Whats he brought all those cauldrons for ?Probably looking for a safe place to keep them said Harry .Isnt that what he was doing the night he was supposed to be tailing me ?Picking up dodgy cauldrons ?Yeah youre right !said Fred as the front door opened Mundungus heaved his cauldrons through it and disappeared from view .Blimey Mum wont like that .He and George crossed to the door and stood beside it listening intently .Mrs Blacks screaming had stopped again .Mundungus is talking to Sirius and Kingsley Fred muttered frowning with concentration .Cant hear properly .dyou reckon we can risk the Extendable Ears ?Might be worth it said George .I could sneak upstairs and get a pair But at that precise moment there was an explosion of sound from downstairs that rendered Extendable Ears quite unnecessary .All of them could hear exactly what Mrs Weasley was shouting at the top of her voice .WE ARE NOT RUNNING A HIDEOUT FOR STOLEN GOODS !I love hearing Mum shouting at someone else said Fred with a satisfied smile on his face as he opened the door an inch or so to allow Mrs Weasley s voice to permeate the room better .It makes such a nice change .COMPLETELY IRRESPONSIBLE AS IF WE HAVENT GOT ENOUGH TO WORRY ABOUT WITHOUT YOU DRAGGING STOLEN CAULDRONS INTO THE HOUSE The idiots are letting her get into her stride said George shaking his head .Youve got to head her off early otherwise she builds up a head of steam and goes on for hours .And shes been dying to have a go at Mundungus ever since he sneaked off when he was supposed to be following you Harry and there goes Siriuss mum again Mrs Weasleys voice was lost amid fresh shrieks and screams from the portraits in the hall .George made to shut the door to drown the noise but before he could do so a houseelf edged into the room .Except for the filthy rag tied like a loincloth around its middle it was completely naked .It looked very old .Its skin seemed to be several times too big for it and though it was bald like all houseelves there was a quantity of white hair growing out of its large batlike ears .Its eyes were a bloodshot and watery gray and its fleshy nose was large and rather snoutlike .The elf took absolutely no notice of Harry and the rest .Acting as though it could not see them it shuffled hunchbacked slowly and doggedly toward the far end of the room muttering under its breath all the while in a hoarse deep voice like a bullfrogs .Smells like a drain and a criminal to boot but shes no better nasty old blood traitor with her brats messing up my Mistresss house oh my poor Mistress if she knew if she knew the scum theyve let in her house what would she say to old Kreacher oh the shame of it Mudbloods and werewolves and traitors and thieves poor old Kreacher what can he do .Hello Kreacher said Fred very loudly closing the door with a snap .The houseelf froze in his tracks stopped muttering and then gave a very pronounced and very unconvincing start of surprise .Kreacher did not see Young Master he said turning around and bowing to Fred .Still facing the carpet he added perfectly audibly Nasty little brat of a blood traitor it is .Sorry ?said George .Didnt catch that last bit .Kreacher said nothing said the elf with a second bow to George adding in a clear undertone and theres its twin unnatural little beasts they are .Harry didnt know whether to laugh or not .The elf straightened up eyeing them all very malevolently and apparently convinced that they could not hear him as he continued to mutter . .and theres the Mudblood standing there bold as brass oh if my Mistress knew oh how shed cry and theres a new boy Kreacher doesnt know his name what is he doing here Kreacher doesnt know .This is Harry Kreacher said Hermione tentatively .Harry Potter .Kreachers pale eyes widened and he muttered faster and more furiously than ever .The Mudblood is talking to Kreacher as though she is my friend if Kreachers Mistress saw him in such company oh what would she say Dont call her a Mudblood !said Ron and Ginny together very angrily .It doesnt matter Hermione whispered hes not in his right mind he doesnt know what hes Dont kid yourself Hermione he knows exactly what hes saying said Fred eyeing Kreacher with great dislike .Kreacher was still muttering his eyes on Harry .Is it true ?Is it Harry Potter ?Kreacher can see the scar it must be true thats that boy who stopped the Dark Lord Kreacher wonders how he did it Dont we all Kreacher ?said Fred .What do you want anyway ?George asked .Kreacher s huge eyes darted onto George .Kreacher is cleaning he said evasively .A likely story said a voice behind Harry .Sirius had come back he was glowering at the elf from the doorway .The noise in the hall had abated perhaps Mrs Weasley and Mundungus had moved their argument down into the kitchen .At the sight of Sirius Kreacher flung himself into a ridiculously low bow that flattened his snoutlike nose on the floor .Stand up straight said Sirius impatiently .Now what are you up to ?Kreacher is cleaning the elf repeated .Kreacher lives to serve the noble house of Black and its getting blacker every day its filthy said Sirius .Master always liked his little joke said Kreacher bowing again and continuing in an undertone Master was a nasty ungrateful swine who broke his mothers heart My mother didnt have a heart Kreacher Sirius snapped .She kept herself alive out of pure spite .Kreacher bowed again and said Whatever Master says then muttered furiously Master is not fit to wipe slime from his mothers boots oh my poor Mistress what would she say if she saw Kreacher serving him how she hated him what a disappointment he was I asked you what you were up to said Sirius coldly .Every time you show up pretending to be cleaning you sneak something off to your room so we cant throw it out .Kreacher would never move anything from its proper place in Masters house said the elf then muttered very fast Mistress would never forgive Kreacher if the tapestry was thrown out seven centuries its been in the family Kreacher must save it Kreacher will not let Master and the blood traitors and the brats destroy it I thought it might be that said Sirius casting a disdainful look at the opposite wall .Shell have put another Permanent Sticking Charm on the back of it I dont doubt but if I can get rid of it I certainly will .Now go away Kreacher .It seemed that Kreacher did not dare disobey a direct order nevertheless the look he gave Sirius as he shuffled out past him was redolent of deepest loathing and he muttered all the way out of the room .comes back from Azkaban ordering Kreacher around oh my poor Mistress what would she say if she saw the house now scum living in it her treasures thrown out she swore he was no son of hers and hes back they say hes a murderer too Keep muttering and I will be a murderer !said Sirius irritably and he slammed the door shut on the elf .Sirius hes not right in the head said Hermione pleadingly I dont think he realizes we can hear him .Hes been alone too long said Sirius taking mad orders from my mothers portrait and talking to himself but he was always a foul little If you just set him free said Hermione hopefully maybe We cant set him free he knows too much about the Order said Sirius curtly .And anyway the shock would kill him .You suggest to him that he leaves this house see how he takes it .Sirius walked across the room where the tapestry Kreacher had been trying to protect hung the length of the wall .Harry and the others followed .The tapestry looked immensely old it was faded and looked as though doxies had gnawed it in places nevertheless the golden thread with which it was embroidered still glinted brightly enough to show them a sprawling family tree dating back as far as Harry could tell to the Middle Ages .Large words at the very top of the tapestry read THE NOBLE AND MOST ANCIENT HOUSE OF BLACK TOUJOURS PUR Youre not on here !said Harry after scanning the bottom of the tree .I used to be there said Sirius pointing at a small round charred hole in the tapestry rather like a cigarette burn .My sweet old mother blasted me off after I ran away from home Kreachers quite fond of muttering the story under his breath .You ran away from home ?When I was about sixteen said Sirius .Id had enough .Where did you go ?asked Harry staring at him .Your dads place said Sirius .Your grandparents were really good about it they sort of adopted me as a second son .Yeah I camped out at your dads during the school holidays and then when I was seventeen I got a place of my own my Uncle Alphard had left me a decent bit of gold hes been wiped off here too thats probably why anyway after that I looked after myself .I was always welcome at Mr and Mrs Potters for Sunday lunch though .But .why did you . ?Leave ?Sirius smiled bitterly and ran a hand through his long unkempt hair .Because I hated the whole lot of them my parents with their pureblood mania convinced that to be a Black made you practically royal .my idiot brother soft enough to believe them .thats him .Sirius jabbed a finger at the very bottom of the tree at the name REGULUS BLACK .A date of death some fifteen years previously followed the date of birth .He was younger than me said Sirius and a much better son as I was constantly reminded .But he died said Harry .Yeah said Sirius .Stupid idiot .he joined the Death Eaters .Youre kidding !Come on Harry havent you seen enough of this house to tell what kind of wizards my family were ?said Sirius testily .Were were your parents Death Eaters as well ?No no but believe me they thought Voldemort had the right idea they were all for the purification of the Wizarding race getting rid of Muggleborns and having purebloods in charge .They werent alone either there were quite a few people before Voldemort showed his true colors who thought he had the right idea about things .They got cold feet when they saw what he was prepared to do to get power though .But I bet my parents thought Regulus was a right little hero for joining up at first .Was he killed by an Auror ?Harry asked tentatively .Oh no said Sirius .No he was murdered by Voldemort .Or on Voldemorts orders more likely I doubt Regulus was ever important enough to be killed by Voldemort in person .From what I found out after he died he got in so far then panicked about what he was being asked to do and tried to back out .Well you dont just hand in your resignation to Voldemort .Its a lifetime of service or death .Lunch said Mrs Weasleys voice .She was holding her wand high in front of her balancing a huge tray loaded with sandwiches and cake on its tip .She was very red in the face and still looked angry .The others moved over to her eager for some food but Harry remained with Sirius who had bent closer to the tapestry .I havent looked at this for years .Theres Phineas Nigellus .my greatgreatgrandfather see ?Least popular headmaster Hogwarts ever had .and Araminta Meliflua .cousin of my mothers .tried to force through a Ministry Bill to make Mugglehunting legal .and dear Aunt Elladora .she started the family tradition of beheading houseelves when they got too old to carry tea trays .of course anytime the family produced someone halfway decent they were disowned .I see Tonks isnt on here .Maybe thats why Kreacher wont take orders from her hes supposed to do whatever anyone in the family asks him .You and Tonks are related ?Harry asked surprised .Oh yeah her mother Andromeda was my favorite cousin said Sirius examining the tapestry carefully .No Andromedas not on here either look He pointed to another small round burn mark between two names Bellatrix and Narcissa .Andromedas sisters are still here because they made lovely respectable pureblood marriages but Andromeda married a Muggleborn Ted Tonks so Sirius mimed blasting the tapestry with a wand and laughed sourly .Harry however did not laugh he was too busy staring at the names to the right of Andromedas burn mark .A double line of gold embroidery linked Narcissa Black with Lucius Malfoy and a single vertical gold line from their names led to the name Draco .Youre related to the Malfoys !The pureblood families are all interrelated said Sirius .If youre only going to let your sons and daughters marry purebloods your choice is very limited there are hardly any of us left .Molly and I are cousins by marriage and Arthurs something like my second cousin once removed .But theres no point looking for them on here if ever a family was a bunch of blood traitors its the Weasleys .But Harry was now looking at the name to the left of Andromedas burn Bellatrix Black which was connected by a double line to Rodolphus Lestrange .Lestrange .Harry said aloud .The name had stirred something in his memory he knew it from somewhere but for a moment he couldnt think where though it gave him an odd creeping sensation in the pit of his stomach .Theyre in Azkaban said Sirius shortly .Harry looked at him curiously .Bellatrix and her husband Rodolphus came in with Barty Crouch Junior said Sirius in the same brusque voice .Rodolphus s brother Rabastan was with them too .And Harry remembered He had seen Bellatrix Lestrange inside Dumbledores Pensieve the strange device in which thoughts and memories could be stored a tall dark woman with heavylidded eyes who had stood at her trial and proclaimed her continuing allegiance to Lord Voldemort her pride that she had tried to find him after his downfall and her conviction that she would one day be rewarded for her loyalty .You never said she was your Does it matter if shes my cousin ?snapped Sirius .As far as Im concerned theyre not my family .Shes certainly not my family .I havent seen her since I was your age unless you count a glimpse of her coming in to Azkaban .Dyou think Im proud of having relatives like her ?Sorry said Harry quickly I didnt mean I was just surprised thats all It doesnt matter dont apologize Sirius mumbled at once .He turned away from the tapestry his hands deep in his pockets .I dont like being back here he said staring across the drawing room .I never thought Id be stuck in this house again .Harry understood completely .He knew how he would feel if forced when he was grown up and thought he was free of the place forever to return and live at number four Privet Drive .Its ideal for headquarters of course Sirius said .My father put every security measure known to Wizardkind on it when he lived here .Its Unplottable so Muggles could never come and call as if theyd have wanted to and now Dumbledores added his protection youd be hard put to find a safer house anywhere .Dumbledores SecretKeeper for the Order you know nobody can find headquarters unless he tells them personally where it is that note Moody showed you last night that was from Dumbledore .Sirius gave a short barklike laugh .If my parents could see the use it was being put to now .well my mothers portrait should give you some idea .He scowled for a moment then sighed .I wouldnt mind if I could just get out occasionally and do something useful .Ive asked Dumbledore whether I can escort you to your hearing as Snuffles obviously so I can give you a bit of moral support what dyou think ?Harry felt as though his stomach had sunk through the dusty carpet .He had not thought about the hearing once since dinner the previous evening in the excitement of being back with the people he liked best of hearing everything that was going on it had completely flown his mind .At Siriuss words however the crushing sense of dread returned to him .He stared at Hermione and the Weasleys all tucking into their sandwiches and thought how he would feel if they went back to Hogwarts without him .Dont worry Sirius said .Harry looked up and realized that Sirius had been watching him .Im sure theyre going to clear you theres definitely something in the International Statute of Secrecy about being allowed to use magic to save your own life .But if they do expel me said Harry quietly can I come back here and live with you ?Sirius smiled sadly .Well see .Id feel a lot better about the hearing if I knew I didnt have to go back to the Dursleys Harry pressed him .They must be bad if you prefer this place said Sirius gloomily .Hurry up you two or there wont be any food left Mrs Weasley called .Sirius heaved another great sigh cast a dark look at the tapestry and he and Harry went to join the others .Harry tried his best not to think about the hearing while they emptied the glass cabinets that afternoon .Fortunately for him it was a job that required a lot of concentration as many of the objects in there seemed very reluctant to leave their dusty shelves .Sirius sustained a bad bite from a silver snuffbox within seconds his bitten hand had developed an unpleasant crusty covering like a tough brown glove .Its okay he said examining the hand with interest before tapping it lightly with his wand and restoring its skin to normal must be Wartcap powder in there .He threw the box aside into the sack where they were depositing the debris from the cabinets Harry saw George wrap his own hand carefully in a cloth moments later and sneak the box into his already doxyfilled pocket .They found an unpleasantlooking silver instrument something like a manylegged pair of tweezers which scuttled up Harrys arm like a spider when he picked it up and attempted to puncture his skin Sirius seized it and smashed it with a heavy book entitled Natures Nobility A Wizarding Genealogy .There was a musical box that emitted a faintly sinister tinkling tune when wound and they all found themselves becoming curiously weak and sleepy until Ginny had the sense to slam the lid shut also a heavy locket that none of them could open a number of ancient seals and in a dusty box an Order of Merlin First Class that had been awarded to Siriuss grandfather for Services to the Ministry .It means he gave them a load of gold said Sirius contemptuously throwing the medal into the rubbish sack .Several times Kreacher sidled into the room and attempted to smuggle things away under his loincloth muttering horrible curses every time they caught him at it .When Sirius wrested a large golden ring bearing the Black crest from his grip Kreacher actually burst into furious tears and left the room sobbing under his breath and calling Sirius names Harry had never heard before .It was my fathers said Sirius throwing the ring into the sack .Kreacher wasnt quite as devoted to him as to my mother but I still caught him snogging a pair of my fathers old trousers last week .Mrs Weasley kept them all working very hard over the next few days .The drawing room took three days to decontaminate finally the only undesirable things left in it were the tapestry of the Black family tree which resisted all their attempts to remove it from the wall and the rattling writing desk Moody had not dropped by headquarters yet so they could not be sure what was inside it .They moved from the drawing room to a dining room on the ground floor where they found spiders large as saucers lurking in the dresser Ron left the room hurriedly to make a cup of tea and did not return for an hour and a half .The china which bore the Black crest and motto was all thrown unceremoniously into a sack by Sirius and the same fate met a set of old photographs in tarnished silver frames all of whose occupants squealed shrilly as the glass covering them smashed .Snape might refer to their work as cleaning but in Harrys opinion they were really waging war on the house which was putting up a very good fight aided and abetted by Kreacher .The houseelf kept appearing wherever they were congregated his muttering becoming more and more offensive as he attempted to remove anything he could from the rubbish sacks .Sirius went as far as to threaten him with clothes but Kreacher fixed him with a watery stare and said Master must do as Master wishes before turning away and muttering very loudly but Master will not turn Kreacher away no because Kreacher knows what they are up to oh yes he is plotting against the Dark Lord yes with these Mudbloods and traitors and scum .At which Sirius ignoring Hermiones protests seized Kreacher by the back of his loincloth and threw him bodily from the room .The doorbell rang several times a day which was the cue for Siriuss mother to start shrieking again and for Harry and the others to attempt to eavesdrop on the visitor though they gleaned very little from the brief glimpses and snatches of conversation they were able to sneak before Mrs Weasley recalled them to their tasks .Snape flitted in and out of the house several times more though to Harrys relief they never came facetoface he also caught sight of his Transfiguration teacher Professor McGonagall looking very odd in a Muggle dress and coat though she also seemed too busy to linger .Sometimes however the visitors stayed to help Tonks joined them for a memorable afternoon in which they found a murderous old ghoul lurking in an upstairs toilet and Lupin who was staying in the house with Sirius but who left it for long periods to do mysterious work for the Order helped them repair a grandfather clock that had developed the unpleasant habit of shooting heavy bolts at passersby .Mundungus redeemed himself slightly in Mrs Weasleys eyes by rescuing Ron from an ancient set of purple robes that had tried to strangle him when he removed them from their wardrobe .Despite the fact that he was still sleeping badly still having dreams about corridors and locked doors that made his scar prickle Harry was managing to have fun for the first time all summer .As long as he was busy he was happy when the action abated however whenever he dropped his guard or lay exhausted in bed watching blurred shadows move across the ceiling the thought of the looming Ministry hearing returned to him .Fear jabbed at his insides like needles as he wondered what was going to happen to him if he was expelled .The idea was so terrible that he did not dare voice it aloud not even to Ron and Hermione who though he often saw them whispering together and casting anxious looks in his direction followed his lead in not mentioning it .Sometimes he could not prevent his imagination showing him a faceless Ministry official who was snapping his wand in two and ordering him back to the Dursleys .but he would not go .He was determined on that .He would come back here to Grimmauld Place and live with Sirius .He felt as though a brick had dropped into his stomach when Mrs Weasley turned to him during dinner on Wednesday evening and said quietly Ive ironed your best clothes for tomorrow morning Harry and I want you to wash your hair tonight too .A good first impression can work wonders .Ron Hermione Fred George and Ginny all stopped talking and looked over at him .Harry nodded and tried to keep eating his chops but his mouth had become so dry he could not chew .How am I getting there ?he asked Mrs Weasley trying to sound unconcerned .Arthurs taking you to work with him said Mrs Weasley gently .Mr Weasley smiled encouragingly at Harry across the table .You can wait in my office until its time for the hearing he said .Harry looked over at Sirius but before he could ask the question Mrs Weasley had answered it .Professor Dumbledore doesnt think its a good idea for Sirius to go with you and I must say I think hes quite right said Sirius through clenched teeth .Mrs Weasley pursed her lips .When did Dumbledore tell you that ?Harry said staring at Sirius .He came last night when you were in bed said Mr Weasley .Sirius stabbed moodily at a potato with his fork .Harry dropped his own eyes to his plate .The thought that Dumbledore had been in the house on the eve of his hearing and not asked to see him made him feel if that were possible even worse .7 THE MINISTRY OF MAGIC Harry awoke at halfpast five the next morning as abruptly and completely as if somebody had yelled in his ear .For a few moments he lay immobile as the prospect of the hearing filled every tiny particle of his brain then unable to bear it he leapt out of bed and put on his glasses .Mrs Weasley had laid out his freshly laundered jeans and Tshirt at the foot of his bed .Harry scrambled into them .The blank picture on the wall sniggered again .Ron was lying sprawled on his back with his mouth wide open fast asleep .He did not stir as Harry crossed the room stepped out onto the landing and closed the door softly behind him .Trying not to think of the next time he would see Ron when they might no longer be fellow students at Hogwarts Harry walked quietly down the stairs past the heads of Kreachers ancestors and into the kitchen .He had expected it to be empty but it was not .When he reached the door he heard the soft rumble of voices on the other side and when he pushed it open he saw Mr and Mrs Weasley Sirius Lupin and Tonks sitting there almost as though they were waiting for him .All were fully dressed except Mrs Weasley who was wearing a quilted purple dressing gown .She leapt to her feet the moment he entered .Breakfast she said as she pulled out her wand and hurried over to the fire .Mmmorning Harry yawned Tonks .Her hair was blonde and curly this morning .Sleep all right ?Yeah said Harry .Ive bbbeen up all night she said with another shuddering yawn .Come and sit down .She drew out a chair knocking over the one beside it in the process .What do you want Harry ?Mrs Weasley called .Porridge ?Muffins ?Kippers ?Bacon and eggs ?Toast ?Just just toast thanks said Harry .Lupin glanced at Harry then said to Tonks What were you saying about Scrimgeour ?Oh .yeah .well we need to be a bit more careful hes been asking Kingsley and me funny questions .Harry felt vaguely grateful that he was not required to join in the conversation .His insides were squirming .Mrs Weasley placed a couple of pieces of toast and marmalade in front of him he tried to eat but it was like chewing carpet .Mrs Weasley sat down on his other side and started fussing with his Tshirt tucking in the label and smoothing out creases across the shoulders .He wished she wouldnt . .and Ill have to tell Dumbledore I cant do night duty tomorrow Im just tttoo tired Tonks finished yawning hugely again .Ill cover for you said Mr Weasley .Im okay Ive got a report to finish anyway .Mr Weasley was not wearing wizards robes but a pair of pinstriped trousers and an old bomber jacket .He turned from Tonks to Harry .How are you feeling ?Harry shrugged .Itll all be over soon Mr Weasley said bracingly .In a few hours time youll be cleared .Harry said nothing .The hearings on my floor in Amelia Bones s office .Shes Head of the Department of Magical Law Enforcement and shes the one wholl be questioning you .Amelia Bones is okay Harry said Tonks earnestly .Shes fair shell hear you out .Harry nodded still unable to think of anything to say .Dont lose your temper said Sirius abruptly .Be polite and stick to the facts .Harry nodded again .The laws on your side said Lupin quietly .Even underage wizards are allowed to use magic in life threatening situations .Something very cold trickled down the back of Harrys neck for a moment he thought someone was putting a Disillusionment Charm on him again then he realized that Mrs Weasley was attacking his hair with a wet comb .She pressed hard on the top of his head .Doesnt it ever lie flat ?she said desperately .Harry shook his head .Mr Weasley checked his watch and looked up at Harry .I think well go now he said .Were a bit early but I think youll be better off there than hanging around here .Okay said Harry automatically dropping his toast and getting to his feet .Youll be all right Harry said Tonks patting him on the arm .Good luck said Lupin .Im sure it will be fine .And if its not said Sirius grimly Ill see to Amelia Bones for you .Harry smiled weakly .Mrs Weasley hugged him .Weve all got our fingers crossed she said .Right said Harry .Well .see you later then .He followed Mr Weasley upstairs and along the hall .He could hear Siriuss mother grunting in her sleep behind her curtains .Mr Weasley unbolted the door and they stepped out into the cold gray dawn .You dont normally walk to work do you ?Harry asked him as they set off briskly around the square .No I usually Apparate said Mr Weasley but obviously you cant and I think its best we arrive in a thoroughly nonmagical fashion .makes a better impression given what youre being disciplined for .Mr Weasley kept his hand inside his jacket as they walked .Harry knew it was clenched around his wand .The rundown streets were almost deserted but when they arrived at the miserable little Underground station they found it already full of early morning commuters .As ever when he found himself in close proximity to Muggles going about their daily business Mr Weasley was hard put to contain his enthusiasm .Simply fabulous he whispered indicating the automatic ticket machines .Wonderfully ingenious .Theyre out of order said Harry pointing at the sign .Yes but even so .said Mr Weasley beaming fondly at them .They bought their tickets instead from a sleepy looking guard Harry handled the transaction as Mr Weasley was not very good with Muggle money and five minutes later they were boarding an Underground train that rattled them off toward the center of London .Mr Weasley kept anxiously checking and rechecking the Underground map above the windows .Four stops Harry .three stops left now .two stops to go Harry .They got off at a station in the very heart of London swept from the train in a tide of besuited men and women carrying briefcases .Up the escalator they went through the ticket barrier Mr Weasley delighted with the way the stile swallowed his ticket and emerged onto a broad street lined with imposing looking buildings already full of traffic .Where are we ?said Mr Weasley blankly and for one heartstopping moment Harry thought they had gotten off at the wrong station despite Mr Weasleys continual references to the map but a second later he said Ah yes .this way Harry and led him down a side road .Sorry he said but I never come by train and it all looks rather different from a Muggle perspective .As a matter of fact Ive never even used the visitors entrance before .The farther they walked the smaller and less imposing the buildings became until finally they reached a street that contained several rather shabbylooking offices a pub and an overflowing dumpster .Harry had expected a rather more impressive location for the Ministry of Magic .Here we are said Mr Weasley brightly pointing at an old red telephone box which was missing several panes of glass and stood before a heavily graffittied wall .After you Harry .He opened the telephone box door .Harry stepped inside wondering what on earth this was about .Mr Weasley folded himself in beside Harry and closed the door .It was a tight fit Harry was jammed against the telephone apparatus which was hanging crookedly from the wall as though a vandal had tried to rip it off .Mr Weasley reached past Harry for the receiver .Mr Weasley I think this might be out of order too Harry said .No no Im sure its fine said Mr Weasley holding the receiver above his head and peering at the dial .Lets see .six .he dialed the number two .four .and another four .and another two .As the dial whirred smoothly back into place a cool female voice sounded inside the telephone box not from the receiver in Mr Weasleys hand but as loudly and plainly as though an invisible woman were standing right beside them .Welcome to the Ministry of Magic .Please state your name and business .Er .said Mr Weasley clearly uncertain whether he should talk into the receiver or not he compromised by holding the mouthpiece to his ear Arthur Weasley Misuse of Muggle Artifacts Office here to escort Harry Potter who has been asked to attend a disciplinary hearing .Thank you said the cool female voice .Visitor please take the badge and attach it to the front of your robes .There was a click and a rattle and Harry saw something slide out of the metal chute where returned coins usually appeared .He picked it up It was a square silver badge with Harry Potter Disciplinary Hearing on it .He pinned it to the front of his Tshirt as the female voice spoke again .Visitor to the Ministry you are required to submit to a search and present your wand for registration at the security desk which is located at the far end of the Atrium .The floor of the telephone box shuddered .They were sinking slowly into the ground .Harry watched apprehensively as the pavement rose up past the glass windows of the telephone box until darkness closed over their heads .Then he could see nothing at all he could only hear a dull grinding noise as the telephone box made its way down through the earth .After about a minute though it felt much longer to Harry a chink of golden light illuminated his feet and widening rose up his body until it hit him in the face and he had to blink to stop his eyes from watering .The Ministry of Magic wishes you a pleasant day said the womans voice .The door of the telephone box sprang open and Mr Weasley stepped out of it followed by Harry whose mouth had fallen open .They were standing at one end of a very long and splendid hall with a highly polished dark wood floor .The peacockblue ceiling was inlaid with gleaming golden symbols that were continually moving and changing like some enormous heavenly notice board .The walls on each side were paneled in shiny dark wood and had many gilded fireplaces set into them .Every few seconds a witch or wizard would emerge from one of the lefthand fireplaces with a soft whoosh on the righthand side short queues of wizards were forming before each fireplace waiting to depart .Halfway down the hall was a fountain .A group of golden statues larger than lifesize stood in the middle of a circular pool .Tallest of them all was a noblelooking wizard with his wand pointing straight up in the air .Grouped around him were a beautiful witch a centaur a goblin and a houseelf .The last three were all looking adoringly up at the witch and wizard .Glittering jets of water were flying from the ends of the two wands the point of the centaurs arrow the tip of the goblins hat and each of the houseelfs ears so that the tinkling hiss of falling water was added to the pops and cracks of Apparators and the clatter of footsteps as hundreds of witches and wizards most of whom were wearing glum earlymorning looks strode toward a set of golden gates at the far end of the hall .This way said Mr Weasley .They joined the throng wending their way between the Ministry workers some of whom were carrying tottering piles of parchment others battered briefcases still others reading the Daily Prophet as they walked .As they passed the fountain Harry saw silver Sickles and bronze Knuts glinting up at him from the bottom of the pool .A small smudged sign beside it read All proceeds from the Fountain of Magical Brethren will be given to St .Mungos Hospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries If Im not expelled from Hogwarts Ill put in ten Galleons Harry found himself thinking desperately .Over here Harry said Mr Weasley and they stepped out of the stream of Ministry employees heading for the golden gates toward a desk on the left over which hung a sign saying SECURITY .A badly shaven wizard in peacockblue robes looked up as they approached and put down his Daily Prophet .Im escorting a visitor said Mr Weasley gesturing toward Harry .Step over here said the wizard in a bored voice .Harry walked closer to him and the wizard held up a long golden rod thin and flexible as a car aerial and passed it up and down Harrys front and back .Wand grunted the security wizard at Harry putting down the golden instrument and holding out his hand .Harry produced his wand .The wizard dropped it onto a strange brass instrument which looked something like a set of scales with only one dish .It began to vibrate .A narrow strip of parchment came speeding out of a slit in the base .The wizard tore this off and read the writing upon it .Eleven inches phoenixfeather core been in use four years .That correct ?Yes said Harry nervously .I keep this said the wizard impaling the slip of parchment on a small brass spike .You get this back he added thrusting the wand at Harry .Thank you .Hang on .said the wizard slowly .His eyes had darted from the silver visitors badge on Harrys chest to his forehead .Thank you Eric said Mr Weasley firmly and grasping Harry by the shoulder he steered him away from the desk and back into the stream of wizards and witches walking through the golden gates .Jostled slightly by the crowd Harry followed Mr Weasley through the gates into the smaller hall beyond where at least twenty lifts stood behind wrought golden grilles .Harry and Mr Weasley joined the crowd around one of them .A big bearded wizard holding a large cardboard box stood nearby .The box was emitting rasping noises .All right Arthur ?said the wizard nodding at Mr Weasley .Whatve you got there Bob ?asked Mr Weasley looking at the box .Were not sure said the wizard seriously .We thought it was a bogstandard chicken until it started breathing fire .Looks like a serious breach of the Ban on Experimental Breeding to me .With a great jangling and clattering a lift descended in front of them the golden grille slid back and Harry and Mr Weasley moved inside it with the rest of the crowd .Harry found himself jammed against the back wall of the lift .Several witches and wizards were looking at him curiously he stared at his feet to avoid catching anyones eye flattening his fringe as he did so .The grilles slid shut with a crash and the lift ascended slowly chains rattling all the while while the same cool female voice Harry had heard in the telephone box rang out again .Level seven Department of Magical Games and Sports incorporating the British and Irish Quidditch League Headquarters Official Gobstones Club and Ludicrous Patents Office .The lift doors opened Harry glimpsed an untidy looking corridor with various posters of Quidditch teams tacked lopsidedly on the walls one of the wizards in the lift who was carrying an armful of broomsticks extricated himself with difficulty and disappeared down the corridor .The doors closed the lift juddered upward again and the womans voice said Level six Department of Magical Transport incorporating the Floo Network Authority Broom Regulatory Control Portkey Office and Apparation Test Center .Once again the lift doors opened and four or five witches and wizards got out at the same time several paper airplanes swooped into the lift .Harry stared up at them as they flapped idly around above his head they were a pale violet color and he could see MINISTRY OF MAGIC stamped along the edges of their wings .Just Interdepartmental memos Mr Weasley muttered to him .We used to use owls but the mess was unbelievable .droppings all over the desks .As they clattered upward again the memos flapped around the swaying lamp in the lifts ceiling .Level five Department of International Magical Cooperation incorporating the International Magical Trading Standards Body the International Magical Office of Law and the International Confederation of Wizards British Seats .When the doors opened two of the memos zoomed out with a few more witches and wizards but several more memos zoomed in so that the light from the lamp in the ceiling flickered and flashed as they darted around it .Level four Department for the Regulation and Control of Magical Creatures incorporating Beast Being and Spirit Divisions Goblin Liaison Office and Pest Advisory Bureau .Scuse said the wizard carrying the firebreathing chicken and he left the lift pursued by a little flock of memos .The doors clanged shut yet again .Level three Department of Magical Accidents and Catastrophes including the Accidental Magic Reversal Squad Obliviator Headquarters and MuggleWorthy Excuse Committee .Everybody left the lift on this floor except Mr Weasley Harry and a witch who was reading an extremely long piece of parchment that was trailing on the ground .The remaining memos continued to soar around the lamp as the lift juddered upward again and then the doors opened and the voice said Level two Department of Magical Law Enforcement including the Improper Use of Magic Office Auror Headquarters and Wizengamot Administration Services .This is us Harry said Mr Weasley and they followed the witch out of the lift into a corridor lined with doors .My office is on the other side of the floor .Mr Weasley said Harry as they passed a window through which sunlight was streaming arent we underground ?Yes we are said Mr Weasley those are enchanted windows Magical Maintenance decide what weather were getting every day .We had two months of hurricanes last time they were angling for a pay raise .Just round here Harry .They turned a corner walked through a pair of heavy oak doors and emerged in a cluttered open area divided into cubicles which were buzzing with talk and laughter .Memos were zooming in and out of cubicles like miniature rockets .A lopsided sign on the nearest cubicle read AUROR HEADQUARTERS .Harry looked surreptitiously through the doorways as they passed .The Aurors had covered their cubicle walls with everything from pictures of wanted wizards and photographs of their families to posters of their favorite Quidditch teams and articles from the Daily Prophet A scarletrobed man with a ponytail longer than Bills was sitting with his boots up on his desk dictating a report to his quill .A little farther along a witch with a patch over her eye was talking over the top of her cubicle wall to Kingsley Shacklebolt .Morning Weasley said Kingsley carelessly as they drew nearer .Ive been wanting a word with you have you got a second ?Yes if it really is a second said Mr Weasley Im in rather a hurry .They were talking to each other as though they hardly knew each other and when Harry opened his mouth to say hello to Kingsley Mr Weasley stood on his foot .They followed Kingsley along the row and into the very last cubicle .Harry received a slight shock Siriuss face was blinking down at him from every direction .Newspaper cuttings and old photographs even the one of Sirius being best man at the Potters wedding papered the walls .The only Siriusfree space was a map of the world in which little red pins were glowing like jewels .Here said Kingsley brusquely to Mr Weasley shoving a sheaf of parchment into his hand I need as much information as possible on flying Muggle vehicles sighted in the last twelve months .Weve received information that Black might still be using his old motorcycle .Kingsley tipped Harry an enormous wink and added in a whisper Give him the magazine he might find it interesting .Then he said in normal tones And dont take too long Weasley the delay on that firelegs report held our investigation up for a month .If you had read my report you would know that the term is ‘firearms said Mr Weasley coolly .And Im afraid youll have to wait for information on motorcycles were extremely busy at the moment .He dropped his voice and said If you can get away before seven Mollys making meatballs .He beckoned to Harry and led him out of Kingsleys cubicle through a second set of oak doors into another passage turned left marched along another corridor turned right into a dimly lit and distinctly shabby corridor and finally reached a dead end where a door on the left stood ajar revealing a broom cupboard and a door on the right bore a tarnished brass plaque reading MISUSE OF MUGGLE ARTIFACTS .Mr Weasleys dingy office seemed to be slightly smaller than the broom cupboard .Two desks had been crammed inside it and there was barely room to move around them because of all the overflowing filing cabinets lining the walls on top of which were tottering piles of files .The little wall space available bore witness to Mr Weasleys obsessions there were several posters of cars including one of a dismantled engine two illustrations of postboxes he seemed to have cut out of Muggle childrens books and a diagram showing how to wire a plug .Sitting on top of Mr Weasleys overflowing intray was an old toaster that was hiccuping in a disconsolate way and a pair of empty leather gloves that were twiddling their thumbs .A photograph of the Weasley family stood beside the intray .Harry noticed that Percy appeared to have walked out of it .We havent got a window said Mr Weasley apologetically taking off his bomber jacket and placing it on the back of his chair .Weve asked but they dont seem to think we need one .Have a seat Harry doesnt look as if Perkins is in yet .Harry squeezed himself into the chair behind Perkinss desk while Mr Weasley rifled through the sheaf of parchment Kingsley Shacklebolt had given him .Ah he said grinning as he extracted a copy of a magazine entitled The Quibbler from its midst yes .He flicked through it .Yes hes right Im sure Sirius will find that very amusing oh dear whats this now ?A memo had just zoomed in through the open door and fluttered to rest on top of the hiccuping toaster .Mr Weasley unfolded it and read aloud Third regurgitating public toilet reported in Bethnal Green kindly investigate immediately .This is getting ridiculous .A regurgitating toilet ?AntiMuggle pranksters said Mr Weasley frowning .We had two last week one in Wimbledon one in Elephant and Castle .Muggles are pulling the flush and instead of everything disappearing well you can imagine .The poor things keep calling in those those pumbles I think theyre called you know the ones who mend pipes and things Plumbers ?exactly yes but of course theyre flummoxed .I only hope we can catch whoevers doing it .Will it be Aurors who catch them ?Oh no this is too trivial for Aurors itll be the ordinary Magical Law Enforcement Patrol ah Harry this is Perkins .A stooped timidlooking old wizard with fluffy white hair had just entered the room panting .Oh Arthur !he said desperately without looking at Harry .Thank goodness I didnt know what to do for the best whether to wait here for you or not Ive just sent an owl to your home but youve obviously missed it an urgent message came ten minutes ago I know about the regurgitating toilet said Mr Weasley .No no its not the toilet its the Potter boys hearing theyve changed the time and venue it starts at eight oclock now and its down in old Courtroom Ten Down in old but they told me Merlins beard Mr Weasley looked at his watch let out a yelp and leapt from his chair .Quick Harry we should have been there five minutes ago !Perkins flattened himself against the filing cabinets as Mr Weasley left the office at a run Harry on his heels .Why have they changed the time ?Harry said breathlessly as they hurtled past the Auror cubicles people poked out their heads and stared as they streaked past .Harry felt as though he had left all his insides back at Perkinss desk .Ive no idea but thank goodness we got here so early if youd missed it it would have been catastrophic !Mr Weasley skidded to a halt beside the lifts and jabbed impatiently at the down button .Come ON !The lift clattered into view and they hurried inside .Every time it stopped Mr Weasley cursed furiously and pummelled the number nine button .Those courtrooms havent been used in years said Mr Weasley angrily .I cant think why theyre doing it down there unless but no .A plump witch carrying a smoking goblet entered the lift at that moment and Mr Weasley did not elaborate .The Atrium said the cool female voice and the golden grilles slid open showing Harry a distant glimpse of the golden statues in the fountain .The plump witch got out and a sallowskinned wizard with a very mournful face got in .Morning Arthur he said in a sepulchral voice as the lift began to descend .Dont often see you down here .Urgent business Bode said Mr Weasley who was bouncing on the balls of his feet and throwing anxious looks over at Harry .Ah yes said Bode surveying Harry unblinkingly .Of course .Harry barely had emotion to spare for Bode but his unfaltering gaze did not make him feel any more comfortable .Department of Mysteries said the cool female voice and left it at that .Quick Harry said Mr Weasley as the lift doors rattled open and they sped up a corridor that was quite different from those above .The walls were bare there were no windows and no doors apart from a plain black one set at the very end of the corridor .Harry expected them to go through it but instead Mr Weasley seized him by the arm and dragged him to the left where there was an opening leading to a flight of steps .Down here down here panted Mr Weasley taking two steps at a time .The lift doesnt even come down this far .why theyre doing it there .They reached the bottom of the steps and ran along yet another corridor which bore a great resemblance to that which led to Snapes dungeon at Hogwarts with rough stone walls and torches in brackets .The doors they passed here were heavy wooden ones with iron bolts and keyholes .Courtroom .ten .I think .were nearly .yes .Mr Weasley stumbled to a halt outside a grimy dark door with an immense iron lock and slumped against the wall clutching at a stitch in his chest .Go on he panted pointing his thumb at the door .Get in there .Arent arent you coming with ?No no Im not allowed .Good luck !Harrys heart was beating a violent tattoo against his Adams apple .He swallowed hard turned the heavy iron door handle and stepped inside the courtroom .8 THE HEARING Harry gasped he could not help himself .The large dungeon he had entered was horribly familiar .He had not only seen it before he had been here before This was the place he had visited inside Dumbledores Pensieve the place where he had watched the Lestranges sentenced to life imprisonment in Azkaban .The walls were made of dark stone dimly lit by torches .Empty benches rose on either side of him but ahead in the highest benches of all were many shadowy figures .They had been talking in low voices but as the heavy door swung closed behind Harry an ominous silence fell .A cold male voice rang across the courtroom .Youre late .Sorry said Harry nervously .II didnt know the time had changed .That is not the Wizengamots fault said the voice .An owl was sent to you this morning .Take your seat .Harry dropped his gaze to the chair in the center of the room the arms of which were covered in chains .He had seen those chains spring to life and bind whoever sat between them .His footsteps echoed loudly as he walked across the stone floor .When he sat gingerly on the edge of the chair the chains clinked rather threateningly but did not bind him .Feeling rather sick he looked up at the people seated at the bench above .There were about fifty of them all as far as he could see wearing plumcolored robes with an elaborately worked silver W on the lefthand side of the chest and all staring down their noses at him some with very austere expressions others looks of frank curiosity .In the very middle of the front row sat Cornelius Fudge the Minister of Magic .Fudge was a portly man who often sported a limegreen bowler hat though today he had dispensed with it he had dispensed too with the indulgent smile he had once worn when he spoke to Harry .A broad squarejawed witch with very short gray hair sat on Fudges left she wore a monocle and looked forbidding .On Fudges right was another witch but she was sitting so far back on the bench that her face was in shadow .Very well said Fudge .The accused being present finally let us begin .Are you ready ?he called down the row .Yes sir said an eager voice Harry knew .Rons brother Percy was sitting at the very end of the front bench .Harry looked at Percy expecting some sign of recognition from him but none came .Percys eyes behind his hornrimmed glasses were fixed on his parchment a quill poised in his hand .Disciplinary hearing of the twelfth of August said Fudge in a ringing voice and Percy began taking notes at once into offenses committed under the Decree for the Reasonable Restriction of Underage Sorcery and the International Statute of Secrecy by Harry James Potter resident at number four Privet Drive Little Whinging Surrey .Interrogators Cornelius Oswald Fudge Minister of Magic Amelia Susan Bones Head of the Department of Magical Law Enforcement Dolores Jane Umbridge Senior Undersecretary to the Minister .Court Scribe Percy Ignatius Weasley Witness for the defense Albus Percival Wulfric Brian Dumbledore said a quiet voice from behind Harry who turned his head so fast he cricked his neck .Dumbledore was striding serenely across the room wearing long midnightblue robes and a perfectly calm expression .His long silver beard and hair gleamed in the torchlight as he drew level with Harry and looked up at Fudge through the halfmoon spectacles that rested halfway down his very crooked nose .The members of the Wizengamot were muttering .All eyes were now on Dumbledore .Some looked annoyed others slightly frightened two elderly witches in the back row however raised their hands and waved in welcome .A powerful emotion had risen in Harrys chest at the sight of Dumbledore a fortified hopeful feeling rather like that which phoenix song gave him .He wanted to catch Dumbledores eye but Dumbledore was not looking his way he was continuing to look up at the obviously flustered Fudge .Ah said Fudge who looked thoroughly disconcerted .Dumbledore .Yes .You er got our er message that the time and er place of the hearing had been changed then ?I must have missed it said Dumbledore cheerfully .However due to a lucky mistake I arrived at the Ministry three hours early so no harm done .Yes well I suppose well need another chair I Weasley could you ?Not to worry not to worry said Dumbledore pleasantly he took out his wand gave it a little flick and a squashy chintz armchair appeared out of nowhere next to Harry .Dumbledore sat down put the tips of his long fingers together and looked at Fudge over them with an expression of polite interest .The Wizengamot was still muttering and fidgeting restlessly only when Fudge spoke again did they settle down .Yes said Fudge again shuffling his notes .Well then .So .The charges .Yes .He extricated a piece of parchment from the pile before him took a deep breath and read The charges against the accused are as follows That he did knowingly deliberately and in full awareness of the illegality of his actions having received a previous written warning from the Ministry of Magic on a similar charge produce a Patronus Charm in a Muggleinhabited area in the presence of a Muggle on August the second at twentythree minutes past nine which constitutes an offense under paragraph C of the Decree for the Reasonable Restriction of Underage Sorcery 1875 and also under section thirteen of the International Confederation of Wizards Statute of Secrecy .You are Harry James Potter of number four Privet Drive Little Whinging Surrey ?Fudge said glaring at Harry over the top of his parchment .Yes Harry said .You received an official warning from the Ministry for using illegal magic three years ago did you not ?Yes but And yet you conjured a Patronus on the night of the second of August ?said Fudge .Yes said Harry but Knowing that you are not permitted to use magic outside school while you are under the age of seventeen ?Yes but Knowing that you were in an area full of Muggles ?Yes but Fully aware that you were in close proximity to a Muggle at the time ?Yes said Harry angrily but I only used it because we were The witch with the monocle on Fudges left cut across him in a booming voice .You produced a fully fledged Patronus ?Yes said Harry because A corporeal Patronus ?A what ?said Harry .Your Patronus had a clearly defined form ?I mean to say it was more than vapor or smoke ?Yes said Harry feeling both impatient and slightly desperate its a stag its always a stag .Always ?boomed Madam Bones .You have produced a Patronus before now ?Yes said Harry Ive been doing it for over a year And you are fifteen years old ?Yes and You learned this at school ?Yes Professor Lupin taught me in my third year because of the Impressive said Madam Bones staring down at him a true Patronus at that age .very impressive indeed .Some of the wizards and witches around her were muttering again a few nodded but others were frowning and shaking their heads .Its not a question of how impressive the magic was said Fudge in a testy voice .In fact the more impressive the worse it is I would have thought given that the boy did it in plain view of a Muggle !Those who had been frowning now murmured in agreement but it was the sight of Percys sanctimonious little nod that goaded Harry into speech .I did it because of the dementors !he said loudly before anyone could interrupt him again .He had expected more muttering but the silence that fell seemed to be somehow denser than before .Dementors ?said Madam Bones after a moment raising her thick eyebrows so that her monocle looked in danger of falling out .What do you mean boy ?I mean there were two dementors down that alleyway and they went for me and my cousin !Ah said Fudge again smirking unpleasantly as he looked around at the Wizengamot as though inviting them to share the joke .Yes .Yes I thought wed be hearing something like this .Dementors in Little Whinging ?Madam Bones said in tones of great surprise .I dont understand Dont you Amelia ?said Fudge still smirking .Let me explain .Hes been thinking it through and decided dementors would make a very nice little cover story very nice indeed .Muggles cant see dementors can they boy ?Highly convenient highly convenient .so its just your word and no witnesses .Im not lying !said Harry loudly over another outbreak of muttering from the court .There were two of them coming from opposite ends of the alley everything went dark and cold and my cousin felt them and ran for it Enough enough !said Fudge with a very supercilious look on his face .Im sorry to interrupt what Im sure would have been a very wellrehearsed story Dumbledore cleared his throat .The Wizengamot fell silent again .We do in fact have a witness to the presence of dementors in that alleyway he said other than Dudley Dursley I mean .Fudges plump face seemed to slacken as though somebody had let air out of it .He stared down at Dumbledore for a moment or two then with the appearance of a man pulling himself back together said We havent got time to listen to more taradiddles Im afraid Dumbledore .I want this dealt with quickly I may be wrong said Dumbledore pleasantly but I am sure that under the Wizengamot Charter of Rights the accused has the right to present witnesses for his or her case ?Isnt that the policy of the Department of Magical Law Enforcement Madam Bones ?he continued addressing the witch in the monocle .True said Madam Bones .Perfectly true .Oh very well very well snapped Fudge .Where is this person ?I brought her with me said Dumbledore .Shes just outside the door .Should I ?No Weasley you go Fudge barked at Percy who got up at once hurried down the stone steps from the judges balcony and hastened past Dumbledore and Harry without glancing at them .A moment later Percy returned followed by Mrs Figg .She looked scared and more batty than ever .Harry wished she had thought to change out of her carpet slippers .Dumbledore stood up and gave Mrs Figg his chair conjuring a second one for himself .Full name ?said Fudge loudly when Mrs Figg had perched herself nervously on the very edge of her seat .Arabella Doreen Figg said Mrs Figg in her quavery voice .And who exactly are you ?said Fudge in a bored and lofty voice .Im a resident of Little Whinging close to where Harry Potter lives said Mrs Figg .We have no record of any witch or wizard living in Little Whinging other than Harry Potter said Madam Bones at once .That situation has always been closely monitored given .given past events .Im a Squib said Mrs Figg .So you wouldnt have me registered would you ?A Squib eh ?said Fudge eyeing her suspiciously .Well be checking that .Youll leave details of your parentage with my assistant Weasley .Incidentally can Squibs see dementors ?he added looking left and right along the bench where he sat .Yes we can !said Mrs Figg indignantly .Fudge looked back down at her his eyebrows raised .Very well he said coolly .What is your story ?I had gone out to buy cat food from the corner shop at the end of Wisteria Walk shortly after nine on the evening of the second of August gabbled Mrs Figg at once as though she had learned what she was saying by heart when I heard a disturbance down the alleyway between Magnolia Crescent and Wisteria Walk .On approaching the mouth of the alleyway I saw dementors running Running ?said Madam Bones sharply .Dementors dont run they glide .Thats what I meant to say said Mrs Figg quickly patches of pink appearing in her withered cheeks .Gliding along the alley toward what looked like two boys .What did they look like ?said Madam Bones narrowing her eyes so that the monocles edges disappeared into her flesh .Well one was very large and the other one rather skinny No no said Madam Bones impatiently the dementors .describe them .Oh said Mrs Figg the pink flush creeping up her neck now .They were big .Big and wearing cloaks .Harry felt a horrible sinking in the pit of his stomach .Whatever Mrs Figg said to the contrary it sounded to him as though the most she had ever seen was a picture of a dementor and a picture could never convey the truth of what these beings were like the eerie way they moved hovering inches over the ground or the rotting smell of them or that terrible rattling noise they made as they sucked on the surrounding air .A dumpy wizard with a large black mustache in the second row leaned close to his neighbor a frizzyhaired witch and whispered something in her ear .She smirked and nodded .Big and wearing cloaks repeated Madam Bones coolly while Fudge snorted derisively .I see .Anything else ?Yes said Mrs Figg .I felt them .Everything went cold and this was a very warm summers night mark you .And I felt .as though all happiness had gone from the world .and I remembered .dreadful things .Her voice shook and died .Madam Bones eyes widened slightly .Harry could see red marks under her eyebrow where the monocle had dug into it .What did the dementors do ?she asked and Harry felt a rush of hope .They went for the boys said Mrs Figg her voice stronger and more confident now the pink flush ebbing away from her face .One of them had fallen .The other was backing away trying to repel the dementor .That was Harry .He tried twice and produced silver vapor .On the third attempt he produced a Patronus which charged down the first dementor and then with his encouragement chased away the second from his cousin .And that .that was what happened Mrs Figg finished somewhat lamely .Madam Bones looked down at Mrs Figg in silence Fudge was not looking at her at all but fidgeting with his papers .Finally he raised his eyes and said rather aggressively Thats what you saw is it ?That was what happened Mrs Figg repeated .Very well said Fudge .You may go .Mrs Figg cast a frightened look from Fudge to Dumbledore then got up and shuffled off toward the door again .Harry heard it thud shut behind her .Not a very convincing witness said Fudge loftily .Oh I dont know said Madam Bones in her booming voice .She certainly described the effects of a dementor attack very accurately .And I cant imagine why she would say they were there if they werent But dementors wandering into a Muggle suburb and just happening to come across a wizard ?snorted Fudge .The odds on that must be very very long even Bagman wouldnt have bet Oh I dont think any of us believe the dementors were there by coincidence said Dumbledore lightly .The witch sitting to the right of Fudge with her face in shadow moved slightly but everyone else was quite still and silent .And what is that supposed to mean ?asked Fudge icily .It means that I think they were ordered there said Dumbledore .I think we might have a record of it if someone had ordered a pair of dementors to go strolling through Little Whinging !barked Fudge .Not if the dementors are taking orders from someone other than the Ministry of Magic these days said Dumbledore calmly .I have already given you my views on this matter Cornelius .Yes you have said Fudge forcefully and I have no reason to believe that your views are anything other than bilge Dumbledore .The dementors remain in place in Azkaban and are doing everything we ask them to .Then said Dumbledore quietly but clearly we must ask ourselves why somebody within the Ministry ordered a pair of dementors into that alleyway on the second of August .In the complete silence that greeted these words the witch to the right of Fudge leaned forward so that Harry saw her for the first time .He thought she looked just like a large pale toad .She was rather squat with a broad flabby face as little neck as Uncle Vernon and a very wide slack mouth .Her eyes were large round and slightly bulging .Even the little black velvet bow perched on top of her short curly hair put him in mind of a large fly she was about to catch on a long sticky tongue .The Chair recognizes Dolores Jane Umbridge Senior Undersecretary to the Minister said Fudge .The witch spoke in a fluttery girlish highpitched voice that took Harry aback he had been expecting a croak .Im sure I must have misunderstood you Professor Dumbledore she said with a simper that left her big round eyes as cold as ever .So silly of me .But it sounded for a teensy moment as though you were suggesting that the Ministry of Magic had ordered an attack on this boy !She gave a silvery laugh that made the hairs on the back of Harrys neck stand up .A few other members of the Wizengamot laughed with her .It could not have been plainer that not one of them was really amused .If it is true that the dementors are taking orders only from the Ministry of Magic and it is also true that two dementors attacked Harry and his cousin a week ago then it follows logically that somebody at the Ministry might have ordered the attacks said Dumbledore politely .Of course these particular dementors may have been outside Ministry control There are no dementors outside Ministry control !snapped Fudge who had turned brick red .Dumbledore inclined his head in a little bow .Then undoubtedly the Ministry will be making a full inquiry into why two dementors were so very far from Azkaban and why they attacked without authorization .It is not for you to decide what the Ministry of Magic does or does not do Dumbledore !snapped Fudge now a shade of magenta of which Uncle Vernon would have been proud .Of course it isnt said Dumbledore mildly .I was merely expressing my confidence that this matter will not go uninvestigated .He glanced at Madam Bones who readjusted her monocle and stared back at him frowning slightly .I would remind everybody that the behavior of these dementors if indeed they are not figments of this boys imagination is not the subject of this hearing !said Fudge .We are here to examine Harry Potters offenses under the Decree for the Reasonable Restriction of Underage Sorcery !Of course we are said Dumbledore but the presence of dementors in that alleyway is highly relevant .Clause seven of the Decree states that magic may be used before Muggles in exceptional circumstances and as those exceptional circumstances include situations that threaten the life of the wizard or witch himself or witches wizards or Muggles present at the time of the We are familiar with clause seven thank you very much !snarled Fudge .Of course you are said Dumbledore courteously .Then we are in agreement that Harrys use of the Patronus Charm in these circumstances falls precisely into the category of exceptional circumstances it describes ?If there were dementors which I doubt You have heard from an eyewitness Dumbledore interrupted .If you still doubt her truthfulness call her back question her again .I am sure she would not object .I that not blustered Fudge fiddling with the papers before him .Its I want this over with today Dumbledore !But naturally you would not care how many times you heard from a witness if the alternative was a serious miscarriage of justice said Dumbledore .Serious miscarriage my hat !said Fudge at the top of his voice .Have you ever bothered to tot up the number of cockandbull stories this boy has come out with Dumbledore while trying to cover up his flagrant misuse of magic out of school ?I suppose youve forgotten the Hover Charm he used three years ago That wasnt me it was a houseelf !said Harry .YOU SEE ?roared Fudge gesturing flamboyantly in Harrys direction .A houseelf !In a Muggle house !I ask you The houseelf in question is currently in the employ of Hogwarts School said Dumbledore .I can summon him here in an instant to give evidence if you wish .I not I havent got time to listen to houseelves !Anyway thats not the only he blew up his aunt for Gods sake !Fudge shouted banging his fist on the judges bench and upsetting a bottle of ink .And you very kindly did not press charges on that occasion accepting I presume that even the best wizards cannot always control their emotions said Dumbledore calmly as Fudge attempted to scrub the ink off his notes .And I havent even started on what he gets up to at school but as the Ministry has no authority to punish Hogwarts students for misdemeanors at school Harrys behavior there is not relevant to this inquiry said Dumbledore politely as ever but now with a suggestion of coolness behind his words .Oho !said Fudge .Not our business what he does at school eh ?You think so ?The Ministry does not have the power to expel Hogwarts students Cornelius as I reminded you on the night of the second of August said Dumbledore .Nor does it have the right to confiscate wands until charges have been successfully proven again as I reminded you on the night of the second of August .In your admirable haste to ensure that the law is upheld you appear inadvertently I am sure to have overlooked a few laws yourself .Laws can be changed said Fudge savagely .Of course they can said Dumbledore inclining his head .And you certainly seem to be making many changes Cornelius .Why in the few short weeks since I was asked to leave the Wizengamot it has already become the practice to hold a full criminal trial to deal with a simple matter of underage magic !A few of the wizards above them shifted uncomfortably in their seats .Fudge turned a slightly deeper shade of puce .The toadlike witch on his right however merely gazed at Dumbledore her face quite expressionless .As far as I am aware however Dumbledore continued there is no law yet in place that says this courts job is to punish Harry for every bit of magic he has ever performed .He has been charged with a specific offense and he has presented his defense .All he and I can do now is to await your verdict .Dumbledore put his fingertips together again and said no more .Fudge glared at him evidently incensed .Harry glanced sideways at Dumbledore seeking reassurance he was not at all sure that Dumbledore was right in telling the Wizengamot in effect that it was about time they made a decision .Again however Dumbledore seemed oblivious to Harrys attempt to catch his eye .He continued to look up at the benches where the entire Wizengamot had fallen into urgent whispered conversations .Harry looked at his feet .His heart which seemed to have swollen to an unnatural size was thumping loudly under his ribs .He had expected the hearing to last longer than this .He was not at all sure that he had made a good impression .He had not really said very much .He ought to have explained more fully about the dementors about how he had fallen over about how both he and Dudley had nearly been kissed .Twice he looked up at Fudge and opened his mouth to speak but his swollen heart was now constricting his air passages and both times he merely took a deep breath and looked back at his shoes .Then the whispering stopped .Harry wanted to look up at the judges but found that it was really much much easier to keep examining his laces .Those in favor of clearing the accused of all charges ?said Madam Bones s booming voice .Harrys head jerked upward .There were hands in the air many of them .more than half !Breathing very fast he tried to count but before he could finish Madam Bones had said And those in favor of conviction ?Fudge raised his hand so did half a dozen others including the witch on his right and the heavily mustached wizard and the frizzyhaired witch in the second row .Fudge glanced around at them all looking as though there was something large stuck in his throat then lowered his own hand .He took two deep breaths and then said in a voice distorted by suppressed rage Very well very well .cleared of all charges .Excellent said Dumbledore briskly springing to his feet pulling out his wand and causing the two chintz armchairs to vanish .Well I must be getting along .Good day to you all .And without looking once at Harry he swept from the dungeon .THE WOES OF MRS WEASLEY Dumbledores abrupt departure took Harry completely by surprise .He remained sitting where he was in the chained chair struggling with his feelings of shock and relief .The Wizengamot were all getting to their feet talking and gathering up their papers and packing them away .Harry stood up .Nobody seemed to be paying him the slightest bit of attention except the toadlike witch on Fudges right who was now gazing down at him instead of at Dumbledore .Ignoring her he tried to catch Fudges eye or Madam Boness wanting to ask whether he was free to go but Fudge seemed quite determined not to notice Harry and Madam Bones was busy with her briefcase so he took a few tentative steps toward the exit and when nobody called him back broke into a very fast walk .He took the last few steps at a run wrenched open the door and almost collided with Mr Weasley who was standing right outside looking pale and apprehensive .Dumbledore didnt say Cleared Harry said pulling the door closed behind him of all charges !Beaming Mr Weasley seized Harry by the shoulders .Harry thats wonderful !Well of course they couldnt have found you guilty not on the evidence but even so I cant pretend I wasnt But Mr Weasley broke off because the courtroom door had just opened again .The Wizengamot were filing out .Merlins beard said Mr Weasley wonderingly pulling Harry aside to let them all pass you were tried by the full court ?I think so said Harry quietly .One or two of the passing wizards nodded to Harry as they passed and a few including Madam Bones said Morning Arthur to Mr Weasley but most averted their eyes .Cornelius Fudge and the toadlike witch were almost the last to leave the dungeon .Fudge acted as though Mr Weasley and Harry were part of the wall but again the witch looked almost appraisingly at Harry as she passed .Last of all to pass was Percy .Like Fudge he completely ignored his father and Harry he marched past clutching a large roll of parchment and a handful of spare quills his back rigid and his nose in the air .The lines around Mr Weasleys mouth tightened slightly but other than this he gave no sign that he had noticed his third son .Im going to take you straight back so you can tell the others the good news he said beckoning Harry forward as Percys heels disappeared up the stairs to the ninth level .Ill drop you off on the way to that toilet in Bethnal Green .Come on .So what will you have to do about the toilet ?Harry asked grinning .Everything suddenly seemed five times funnier than usual .It was starting to sink in He was cleared he was going hack to Hogwarts .Oh its a simple enough antijinx said Mr Weasley as they mounted the stairs but its not so much having to repair the damage its more the attitude behind the vandalism Harry .Mugglebaiting might strike some wizards as funny but its an expression of something much deeper and nastier and I for one Mr Weasley broke off in midsentence .They had just reached the ninthlevel corridor and Cornelius Fudge was standing a few feet away from them talking quietly to a tall man with sleek blond hair and a pointed pale face .The second man turned at the sound of their footsteps .He too broke off in midconversation his cold gray eyes narrowed and fixed upon Harrys face .Well well well .Patronus Potter said Lucius Malfoy coolly .Harry felt winded as though he had just walked into something heavy .He had last seen those cool gray eyes through slits in a Death Eaters hood and last heard that mans voice jeering in a dark graveyard while Lord Voldemort tortured him .He could not believe that Lucius Malfoy dared look him in the face he could not believe that he was here in the Ministry of Magic or that Cornelius Fudge was talking to him when Harry had told Fudge mere weeks ago that Malfoy was a Death Eater .The Minister was just telling me about your lucky escape Potter drawled Mr Malfoy .Quite astonishing the way you continue to wriggle out of very tight holes .Snakelike in fact .Mr Weasley gripped Harrys shoulder in warning .Yeah said Harry yeah Im good at escaping .Lucius Malfoy raised his eyes to Mr Weasleys face .And Arthur Weasley too !What are you doing here Arthur ?I work here said Mr Weasley shortly .Not here surely ?said Mr Malfoy raising his eyebrows and glancing toward the door over Mr Weasleys shoulder .I thought you were up on the second floor .Dont you do something that involves sneaking Muggle artifacts home and bewitching them ?No said Mr Weasley curtly his fingers now biting into Harrys shoulder .What are you doing here anyway ?Harry asked Lucius Malfoy .I dont think private matters between myself and the Minister are any concern of yours Potter said Malfoy smoothing the front of his robes Harry distinctly heard the gentle clinking of what sounded like a full pocket of gold .Really just because you are Dumbledores favorite boy you must not expect the same indulgence from the rest of us .Shall we go up to your office then Minister ?Certainly said Fudge turning his back on Harry and Mr Weasley .This way Lucius .They strode off together talking in low voices .Mr Weasley did not let go of Harrys shoulder until they had disappeared into the lift .Why wasnt he waiting outside Fudges office if theyve got business to do together ?Harry burst out furiously .What was he doing down here ?Trying to sneak down to the courtroom if you ask me said Mr Weasley looking extremely agitated as he glanced over his shoulder as though making sure they could not be overheard .Trying to find out whether youd been expelled or not .Ill leave a note for Dumbledore when I drop you off he ought to know Malfoys been talking to Fudge again .What private business have they got together anyway ?Gold I expect said Mr Weasley angrily .Malfoys been giving generously to all sorts of things for years .Gets him in with the right people .then he can ask favors .delay laws he doesnt want passed .Oh hes very well connected Lucius Malfoy .The lift arrived it was empty except for a flock of memos that flapped around Mr Weasleys head as he pressed the button for the Atrium and the doors clanged shut he waved them away irritably .Mr Weasley said Harry slowly if Fudge is meeting Death Eaters like Malfoy if hes seeing them alone how do we know they havent put the Imperius Curse on him ?Dont think it hadnt occurred to us Harry muttered Mr Weasley .But Dumbledore thinks Fudge is acting of his own accord at the moment which as Dumbledore says is not a lot of comfort .Best not talk about it anymore just now Harry .The doors slid open and they stepped out into the now almostdeserted Atrium .Eric the security man was hidden behind his Daily Prophet again .They had walked straight past the golden fountain before Harry remembered .Wait .he told Mr Weasley and pulling his money bag from his pocket he turned back to the fountain .He looked up into the handsome wizards face but up close Harry thought he looked rather weak and foolish .The witch was wearing a vapid smile like a beauty contestant and from what Harry knew of goblins and centaurs they were most unlikely to be caught staring this soppily at humans of any description .Only the houseelfs attitude of creeping servility looked convincing .With a grin at the thought of what Hermione would say if she could see the statue of the elf Harry turned his money bag upside down and emptied not just ten Galleons but the whole contents into the pool at the statues feet .I knew it !yelled Ron punching the air .You always get away with stuff !They were bound to clear you said Hermione who had looked positively faint with anxiety when Harry had entered the kitchen and was now holding a shaking hand over her eyes .There was no case against you none at all .Everyone seems quite relieved though considering they all knew Id get off said Harry smiling .Mrs Weasley was wiping her face on her apron and Fred George and Ginny were doing a kind of war dance to a chant that went He got off he got off he got off Thats enough settle down !shouted Mr Weasley though he too was smiling .Listen Sirius Lucius Malfoy was at the Ministry What ?said Sirius sharply .He got off he got off he got off Be quiet you three !Yes we saw him talking to Fudge on level nine then they went up to Fudges office together .Dumbledore ought to know .Absolutely said Sirius .Well tell him dont worry .Well Id better get going theres a vomiting toilet in Bethnal Green waiting for me .Molly Ill be late Im covering for Tonks but Kingsley might be dropping in for dinner He got off he got off he got off Thats enough Fred George Ginny !said Mrs Weasley as Mr Weasley left the kitchen .Harry dear come and sit down have some lunch you hardly ate breakfast .Ron and Hermione sat themselves down opposite him looking happier than they had done since he had first arrived at number twelve Grimmauld Place and Harrys feeling of giddy relief which had been somewhat dented by his encounter with Lucius Malfoy swelled again .The gloomy house seemed warmer and more welcoming all of a sudden even Kreacher looked less ugly as he poked his snoutlike nose into the kitchen to investigate the source of all the noise .Course once Dumbledore turned up on your side there was no way they were going to convict you said Ron happily now dishing great mounds of mashed potatoes onto everyones plates .Yeah he swung it for me said Harry .He felt that it would sound highly ungrateful not to mention childish to say I wish hed talked to me though .Or even looked at me .And as he thought this the scar on his forehead burned so badly that he clapped his hand to it .Whats up ?said Hermione looking alarmed .Scar Harry mumbled .But its nothing .It happens all the time now .None of the others had noticed a thing all of them were now helping themselves to food while gloating over Harrys narrow escape Fred George and Ginny were still singing .Hermione looked rather anxious but before she could say anything Ron said happily I bet Dumbledore turns up this evening to celebrate with us you know .I dont think hell be able to Ron said Mrs Weasley setting a huge plate of roast chicken down in front of Harry .Hes really very busy at the moment .HE GOT OFF HE GOT OFF HE GOT OFF SHUT UP !roared Mrs Weasley .Over the next few days Harry could not help noticing that there was one person within number twelve Grimmauld Place who did not seem wholly overjoyed that he would be returning to Hogwarts .Sirius had put up a very good show of happiness on first hearing the news wringing Harrys hand and beaming just like the rest of them soon however he was moodier and surlier than before talking less to everybody even Harry and spending increasing amounts of time shut up in his mothers room with Buckbeak .Dont you go feeling guilty !said Hermione sternly after Harry had confided some of his feelings to her and Ron while they scrubbed out a moldy cupboard on the third floor a few days later .You belong at Hogwarts and Sirius knows it .Personally I think hes being selfish .Thats a bit harsh Hermione said Ron frowning as he attempted to prize off a bit of mold that had attached itself firmly to his finger you wouldnt want to be stuck inside this house without company .Hell have company !said Hermione .Its headquarters to the Order of the Phoenix isnt it ?He just got his hopes up that Harry would be coming to live here with him .I dont think thats true said Harry wringing out his cloth .He wouldnt give me a straight answer when I asked him if I could .He just didnt want to get his own hopes up even more said Hermione wisely .And he probably felt a bit guilty himself because I think a part of him was really hoping youd be expelled .Then youd both be outcasts together .Come off it !said Harry and Ron together but Hermione merely shrugged .Suit yourselves .But I sometimes think Rons mums right and Sirius gets confused about whether youre you or your father Harry .So you think hes touched in the head ?said Harry heatedly .No I just think hes been very lonely for a long time said Hermione simply .At this point Mrs Weasley entered the bedroom behind them .Still not finished ?she said poking her head into the cupboard .I thought you might be here to tell us to have a break !said Ron bitterly .Dyou know how much mold weve got rid of since we arrived here ?You were so keen to help the Order said Mrs Weasley you can do your bit by making headquarters fit to live in .I feel like a houseelf grumbled Ron .Well now that you understand what dreadful lives they lead perhaps youll be a bit more active in S .P .E .W .said Hermione hopefully as Mrs Weasley left them to it again .You know maybe it wouldnt be a bad idea to show people exactly how horrible it is to clean all the time we could do a sponsored scrub of Gryffindor common room all proceeds to S .P .E .W .it would raise awareness as well as funds Ill sponsor you to shut up about spew Ron muttered irritably but only so Harry could hear him .Harry found himself daydreaming about Hogwarts more and more as the end of the holidays approached he could not wait to see Hagrid again to play Quidditch even to stroll across the vegetable patches to the Herbology greenhouses .It would be a treat just to leave this dusty musty house where half of the cupboards were still bolted shut and Kreacher wheezed insults out of the shadows as you passed though Harry was careful not to say any of this within earshot of Sirius .The fact was that living at the headquarters of the antiVoldemort movement was not nearly as interesting or exciting as Harry would have expected before hed experienced it .Though members of the Order of the Phoenix came and went regularly sometimes staying for meals sometimes only for a few minutes whispered conversation Mrs Weasley made sure that Harry and the others were kept well out of earshot whether Extendable or normal and nobody not even Sirius seemed to feel that Harry needed to know anything more than he had heard on the night of his arrival .On the very last day of the holidays Harry was sweeping up Hedwigs owl droppings from the top of the wardrobe when Ron entered their bedroom carrying a couple of envelopes .Booklists have arrived he said throwing one of the envelopes up to Harry who was standing on a chair .About time I thought theyd forgotten they usually come much earlier than this .Harry swept the last of the droppings into a rubbish bag and threw the bag over Rons head into the wastepaper basket in the corner which swallowed it and belched loudly .He then opened his letter It contained two pieces of parchment one the usual reminder that term started on the first of September the other telling him which books he would need for the coming year .Only two new ones he said reading the list .The Standard Book of Spells Grade 5 by Miranda Goshawk and Defensive Magical Theory by Wilbert Slinkhard .Crack .Fred and George Apparated right beside Harry .He was so used to them doing this by now that he didnt even fall off his chair .We were just wondering who assigned the Slinkhard book said Fred conversationally .Because it means Dumbledores found a new Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher said George .And about time too said Fred .What dyou mean ?Harry asked jumping down beside them .Well we overheard Mum and Dad talking on the Extendable Ears a few weeks back Fred told Harry and from what they were saying Dumbledore was having real trouble finding anyone to do the job this year .Not surprising is it when you look at whats happened to the last four ?said George .One sacked one dead ones memory removed and one locked in a trunk for nine months said Harry counting them off on his fingers .Yeah I see what you mean .Whats up with you Ron ?asked Fred .Ron did not answer .Harry looked around .Ron was standing very still with his mouth slightly open gaping at his letter from Hogwarts .Whats the matter ?said Fred impatiently moving around Ron to look over his shoulder at the parchment .Freds mouth fell open too .Prefect ?he said staring incredulously at the letter .Prefect ?George leapt forward seized the envelope in Rons other hand and turned it upside down .Harry saw something scarlet and gold fall into Georges palm .No way said George in a hushed voice .Theres been a mistake said Fred snatching the letter out of Rons grasp and holding it up to the light as though checking for a watermark .No one in their right mind would make Ron a prefect .The twins heads turned in unison and both of them stared at Harry .We thought you were a cert !said Fred in a tone that suggested Harry had tricked them in some way .We thought Dumbledore was bound to pick you !said George indignantly .Winning the Triwizard and everything !said Fred .I suppose all the mad stuff mustve counted against him said George to Fred .Yeah said Fred slowly .Yeah youve caused too much trouble mate .Well at least one of yous got their priorities right .He strode over to Harry and clapped him on the back while giving Ron a scathing look .Prefect .ickle Ronnie the prefect .Oh Mums going to be revolting groaned George thrusting the prefect badge back at Ron as though it might contaminate him .Ron who still had not said a word took the badge stared at it for a moment and then held it out to Harry as though asking mutely for confirmation that it was genuine .Harry took it .A large P was superimposed on the Gryffindor lion .He had seen a badge just like this on Percys chest on his very first day at Hogwarts .The door banged open .Hermione came tearing into the room her cheeks flushed and her hair flying .There was an envelope in her hand .Did you did you get ?She spotted the badge in Harrys hand and let out a shriek .I knew it !she said excitedly brandishing her letter .Me too Harry me too !No said Harry quickly pushing the badge back into Rons hand .Its Ron not me .It what ?Rons prefect not me Harry said .Ron ?said Hermione her jaw dropping .But .are you sure ?I mean She turned red as Ron looked around at her with a defiant expression on his face .Its my name on the letter he said .I .said Hermione looking thoroughly bewildered .I .well .wow !Well done Ron !Thats really Unexpected said George nodding .No said Hermione blushing harder than ever no its not .Rons done loads of .hes really .The door behind her opened a little wider and Mrs Weasley backed into the room carrying a pile of freshly laundered robes .Ginny said the booklists had come at last she said glancing around at all the envelopes as she made her way over to the bed and started sorting the robes into two piles .If you give them to me Ill take them over to Diagon Alley this afternoon and get your books while youre packing .Ron Ill have to get you more pajamas these are at least six inches too short I cant believe how fast youre growing .what color would you like ?Get him red and gold to match his badge said George smirking .Match his what ?said Mrs Weasley absently rolling up a pair of maroon socks and placing them on Rons pile .His badge said Fred with the air of getting the worst over quickly .His lovely shiny new prefects badge .Freds words took a moment to penetrate Mrs Weasleys preoccupation about pajamas .His .but .Ron youre not . ?Ron held up his badge .Mrs Weasley let out a shriek just like Hermiones .I dont believe it !I dont believe it !Oh Ron how wonderful !A prefect !Thats everyone in the family !What are Fred and I nextdoor neighbors ?said George indignantly as his mother pushed him aside and flung her arms around her youngest son .Wait until your father hears !Ron Im so proud of you what wonderful news you could end up Head Boy just like Bill and Percy its the first step !Oh what a thing to happen in the middle of all this worry Im just thrilled oh Ronnie Fred and George were both making loud retching noises behind her back but Mrs Weasley did not notice arms tight around Rons neck she was kissing him all over his face which had turned a brighter scarlet than his badge .Mum .dont .Mum get a grip .he muttered trying to push her away .She let go of him and said breathlessly Well what will it be ?We gave Percy an owl but youve already got one of course .Wwhat do you mean ?said Ron looking as though he did not dare believe his ears .Youve got to have a reward for this !said Mrs Weasley fondly .How about a nice new set of dress robes ?Weve already bought him some said Fred sourly who looked as though he sincerely regretted this generosity .Or a new cauldron Charlies old ones rusting through or a new rat you always liked Scabbers Mum said Ron hopefully can I have a new broom ?Mrs Weasleys face fell slightly broomsticks were expensive .Not a really good one !Ron hastened to add .Just just a new one for a change .Mrs Weasley hesitated then smiled .Of course you can .Well Id better get going if Ive got a broom to buy too .Ill see you all later .Little Ronnie a prefect !And dont forget to pack your trunks .A prefect .Oh Im all of a dither !She gave Ron yet another kiss on the cheek sniffed loudly and bustled from the room .Fred and George exchanged looks .You dont mind if we dont kiss you do you Ron ?said Fred in a falsely anxious voice .We could curtsy if you like said George .Oh shut up said Ron scowling at them .Or what ?said Fred an evil grin spreading across his face .Going to put us in detention ?Id love to see him try sniggered George .He could if you dont watch out !said Hermione angrily at which Fred and George burst out laughing and Ron muttered Drop it Hermione .Were going to have to watch our step George said Fred pretending to tremble with these two on our case .Yeah it looks like our lawbreaking days are finally over said George shaking his head .And with another loud crack the twins Disapparated .Those two !said Hermione furiously staring up at the ceiling through which they could now hear Fred and George roaring with laughter in the room upstairs .Dont pay any attention to them Ron theyre only jealous !I dont think they are said Ron doubtfully also looking up at the ceiling .Theyve always said only prats become prefects .Still he added on a happier note theyve never had new brooms !I wish I could go with Mum and choose .Shell never be able to afford a Nimbus but theres the new Cleansweep out thatd be great .Yeah I think Ill go and tell her I like the Cleansweep just so she knows .He dashed from the room leaving Harry and Hermione alone .For some reason Harry found that he did not want to look at Hermione .He turned to his bed picked up the pile of clean robes Mrs Weasley had laid upon it and crossed the room to his trunk .Harry ?said Hermione tentatively .Well done said Harry so heartily it did not sound like his voice at all and still not looking at her .Brilliant .Prefect .Great .Thanks said Hermione .Erm Harry could I borrow Hedwig so I can tell Mum and Dad ?Theyll be really pleased I mean prefect is something they can understand Yeah no problem said Harry still in the horrible hearty voice that did not belong to him .Take her !He leaned over his trunk laid the robes on the bottom of it and pretended to be rummaging for something while Hermione crossed to the wardrobe and called Hedwig down .A few moments passed Harry heard the door close but remained bent double listening the only sounds he could hear were the blank picture on the wall sniggering again and the wastepaper basket in the corner coughing up the owl droppings .He straightened up and looked behind him .Hermione and Hedwig had gone .Harry returned slowly to his bed and sank onto it gazing unseeingly at the foot of the wardrobe .He had forgotten completely about prefects being chosen in the fifth year .He had been too anxious about the possibility of being expelled to spare a thought for the fact that badges must be winging their way toward certain people .But if he had remembered .if he had thought about it .what would he have expected ?Not this said a small and truthful voice inside his head .Harry screwed up his face and buried it in his hands .He could not lie to himself if he had known the prefect badge was on its way he would have expected it to come to him not Ron .Did this make him as arrogant as Draco Malfoy ?Did he think himself superior to everyone else ?Did he really believe he was better than Ron ?No said the small voice defiantly .Was that true ?Harry wondered anxiously probing his own feelings .Im better at Quidditch said the voice .But Im not better at anything else .That was definitely true Harry thought he was no better than Ron in lessons .But what about outside lessons ?What about those adventures he Ron and Hermione had had together since they had started at Hogwarts often risking much worse than expulsion ?Well Ron and Hermione were with me most of the time said the voice in Harrys head .Not all the time though Harry argued with himself .They didnt fight Quirrell with me .They didnt take on Riddle and the basilisk .They didnt get rid of all those dementors the night Sirius escaped .They werent in that graveyard with me the night Voldemort returned .And the same feeling of ill usage that had overwhelmed him on the night he had arrived rose again .Ive definitely done more Harry thought indignantly .Ive done more than either of them But maybe said the small voice fairly maybe Dumbledore doesnt choose prefects because theyve got themselves into a load of dangerous situations .Maybe he chooses them for other reasons .Ron must have something you dont .Harry opened his eyes and stared through his fingers at the wardrobes clawed feet remembering what Fred had said .No one in their right mind would make Ron a prefect .Harry gave a small snort of laughter .A second later he felt sickened with himself .Ron had not asked Dumbledore to give him the prefect badge .This was not Rons fault .Was he Harry Rons best friend in the world going to sulk because he didnt have a badge laugh with the twins behind Rons back ruin this for Ron when for the first time he had beaten Harry at something ?At this point Harry heard Rons footsteps on the stairs again .He stood up straightened his glasses and hitched a grin onto his face as Ron bounded back through the door .Just caught her !he said happily .She says shell get the Cleansweep if she can .Cool Harry said and he was relieved to hear that his voice had stopped sounding hearty .Listen Ron well done mate .The smile faded off Rons face .I never thought it would be me !he said shaking his head I thought it would be you !Nah Ive caused too much trouble Harry said echoing Fred .Yeah said Ron yeah I suppose .Well wed better get our trunks packed hadnt we ?It was odd how widely their possessions seemed to have scattered themselves since they had arrived .It took them most of the afternoon to retrieve their books and belongings from all over the house and stow them back inside their school trunks .Harry noticed that Ron kept moving his prefects badge around first placing it on his bedside table then putting it into his jeans pocket then taking it out and laying it on his folded robes as though to see the effect of the red on the black .Only when Fred and George dropped in and offered to attach it to his forehead with a Permanent Sticking Charm did he wrap it tenderly in his maroon socks and lock it in his trunk .Mrs Weasley returned from Diagon Alley around six oclock laden with books and carrying a long package wrapped in thick brown paper that Ron took from her with a moan of longing .Never mind unwrapping it now people are arriving for dinner I want you all downstairs she said but the moment she was out of sight Ron ripped off the paper in a frenzy and examined every inch of his new broom an ecstatic expression on his face .Down in the basement Mrs Weasley had hung a scarlet banner over the heavily laden dinner table which read CONGRATULATIONS RON AND HERMIONE NEW PREFECTS .She looked in a better mood than Harry had seen her all holiday .I thought wed have a little party not a sitdown dinner she told Harry Ron Hermione Fred George and Ginny as they entered the room .Your father and Bill are on their way Ron Ive sent them both owls and theyre thrilled she added beaming .Fred rolled his eyes .Sirius Lupin Tonks and Kingsley Shacklebolt were already there and MadEye Moody stumped in shortly after Harry had got himself a butterbeer .Oh Alastor I am glad youre here said Mrs Weasley brightly as MadEye shrugged off his traveling cloak .Weve been wanting to ask you for ages could you have a look in the writing desk in the drawing room and tell us whats inside it ?We havent wanted to open it just in case its something really nasty .No problem Molly .Moodys electricblue eye swiveled upward and stared fixedly through the ceiling of the kitchen .Drawing room .he growled as the pupil contracted .Desk in the corner ?Yeah I see it .Yeah its a boggart .Want me to go up and get rid of it Molly ?No no Ill do it myself later beamed Mrs Weasley .You have your drink .Were having a little bit of a celebration actually .She gestured at the scarlet banner .Fourth prefect in the family !she said fondly ruffling Rons hair .Prefect eh ?growled Moody his normal eye on Ron and his magical eye swiveling around to gaze into the side of his head .Harry had the very uncomfortable feeling it was looking at him and moved away toward Sirius and Lupin .Well congratulations said Moody still glaring at Ron with his normal eye authority figures always attract trouble but I suppose Dumbledore thinks you can withstand most major jinxes or he wouldnt have appointed you .Ron looked rather startled at this view of the matter but was saved the trouble of responding by the arrival of his father and eldest brother .Mrs Weasley was in such a good mood she did not even complain that they had brought Mundungus with them too he was wearing a long overcoat that seemed oddly lumpy in unlikely places and declined the offer to remove it and put it with Moodys traveling cloak .Well I think a toast is in order said Mr Weasley when everyone had a drink .He raised his goblet .To Ron and Hermione the new Gryffindor prefects !Ron and Hermione beamed as everyone drank to them and then applauded .I was never a prefect myself said Tonks brightly from behind Harry as everybody moved toward the table to help themselves to food .Her hair was tomato red and waist length today she looked like Ginnys older sister .My Head of House said I lacked certain necessary qualities .Like what ?said Ginny who was choosing a baked potato .Like the ability to behave myself said Tonks .Ginny laughed Hermione looked as though she did not know whether to smile or not and compromised by taking an extra large gulp of butterbeer and choking on it .What about you Sirius ?Ginny asked thumping Hermione on the back .Sirius who was right beside Harry let out his usual barklike laugh .No one would have made me a prefect I spent too much time in detention with James .Lupin was the good boy he got the badge .I think Dumbledore might have hoped that I would be able to exercise some control over my best friends said Lupin .I need scarcely say that I failed dismally .Harrys mood suddenly lifted .His father had not been a prefect either .All at once the party seemed much more enjoyable he loaded up his plate feeling unusually fond of everyone in the room .Ron was rhapsodizing about his new broom to anybody who would listen . .naught to seventy in ten seconds not bad is it ?When you think the Comet Two Ninetys only naught to sixty and thats with a decent tailwind according to Which Broomstick ?Hermione was talking very earnestly to Lupin about her view of elf rights .I mean its the same kind of nonsense as werewolf segregation isnt it ?It all stems from this horrible thing wizards have of thinking theyre superior to other creatures .Mrs Weasley and Bill were having their usual argument about Bills hair . .getting really out of hand and youre so good looking it would look much better shorter wouldnt it Harry ?Oh I dunno said Harry slightly alarmed at being asked his opinion he slid away from them in the direction of Fred and George who were huddled in a corner with Mundungus .Mundungus stopped talking when he saw Harry but Fred winked and beckoned Harry closer .Its okay he told Mundungus we can trust Harry hes our financial backer .Look what Dungs gotten us said George holding out his hand to Harry .It was full of what looked like shriveled black pods .A faint rattling noise was coming from them even though they were completely stationary .Venomous Tentacula seeds said George .We need them for the Skiving Snackboxes but theyre a Class C NonTradeable Substance so weve been having a bit of trouble getting hold of them .Ten Galleons the lot then Dung ?said Fred .Wiv all the trouble I went to to get em ?said Mundungus his saggy bloodshot eyes stretching even wider .Im sorry lads but Im not taking a Knut under twenty .Dung likes his little joke Fred said to Harry .Yeah his best one so far has been six Sickles for a bag of knarl quills said George .Be careful Harry warned them quietly .What ?said Fred .Mums busy cooing over Prefect Ron were okay .But Moody could have his eye on you Harry pointed out .Mundungus looked nervously over his shoulder .Good point that he grunted .All right lads ten it is if youll take em quick .Cheers Harry !said Fred delightedly when Mundungus had emptied his pockets into the twins outstretched hands and scuttled off toward the food .Wed better get these upstairs .Harry watched them go feeling slightly uneasy .It had just occurred to him that Mr and Mrs Weasley would want to know how Fred and George were financing their joke shop business when as was inevitable they finally found out about it .Giving the twins his Triwizard winnings had seemed a simple thing to do at the time but what if it led to another family row and a Percylike estrangement ?Would Mrs Weasley still feel that Harry was as good as her son if she found out he had made it possible for Fred and George to start a career she thought quite unsuitable ?Standing where the twins had left him with nothing but a guilty weight in the pit of his stomach for company Harry caught the sound of his own name .Kingsley Shacklebolts deep voice was audible even over the surrounding chatter ..why Dumbledore didnt make Potter a prefect ?said Kingsley .Hell have had his reasons replied Lupin .But it wouldve shown confidence in him .Its what Idve done persisted Kingsley specially with the Daily Prophet having a go at him every few days .Harry did not look around he did not want Lupin or Kingsley to know he had heard .He followed Mundungus back toward the table though not remotely hungry .His pleasure in the party had evaporated as quickly as it had come he wished he were upstairs in bed .MadEye Moody was sniffing at a chicken leg with what remained of his nose evidently he could not detect any trace of poison because he then tore a strip off it with his teeth . .the handles made of Spanish oak with antijinx varnish and inbuilt vibration control Ron was saying to Tonks .Mrs Weasley yawned widely .Well I think Ill sort out that boggart before I turn in .Arthur I dont want this lot up too late all right ?Night Harry dear .She left the kitchen .Harry set down his plate and wondered whether he could follow her without attracting attention .You all right Potter ?grunted Moody .Yeah fine lied Harry .Moody took a swig from his hip flask his electric blue eye staring sideways at Harry .Come here Ive got something that might interest you he said .From an inner pocket of his robes Moody pulled a very tattered old Wizarding photograph .Original Order of the Phoenix growled Moody .Found it last night when I was looking for my spare Invisibility Cloak seeing as Podmore hasnt had the manners to return my best one .Thought people might like to see it .Harry took the photograph .A small crowd of people some waving at him others lifting their glasses looked back up at him .Theres me said Moody unnecessarily pointing at himself .The Moody in the picture was unmistakable though his hair was slightly less gray and his nose was intact .And theres Dumbledore beside me Dedalus Diggle on the other side .Thats Marlene McKinnon she was killed two weeks after this was taken they got her whole family .Thats Frank and Alice Longbottom Harrys stomach already uncomfortable clenched as he looked at Alice Longbottom he knew her round friendly face very well even though he had never met her because she was the image of her son Neville .Poor devils growled Moody .Better dead than what happened to them .and thats Emmeline Vance youve met her and that theres Lupin obviously .Benjy Fenwick he copped it too we only ever found bits of him .shift aside there he added poking the picture and the little photographic people edged sideways so that those who were partially obscured could move to the front .Thats Edgar Bones .brother of Amelia Bones they got him and his family too he was a great wizard .Sturgis Podmore blimey he looks young .Caradoc Dearborn vanished six months after this we never found his body .Hagrid of course looks exactly the same as ever .Elphias Doge youve met him Id forgotten he used to wear that stupid hat .Gideon Prewett it took five Death Eaters to kill him and his brother Fabian they fought like heroes .budge along budge along .The little people in the photograph jostled among themselves and those hidden right at the back appeared at the forefront of the picture .Thats Dumbledores brother Aberforth only time I ever met him strange bloke .Thats Dorcas Meadowes Voldemort killed her personally .Sirius when he still had short hair .and .there you go thought that would interest you !Harrys heart turned over .His mother and father were beaming up at him sitting on either side of a small wateryeyed man Harry recognized at once as Wormtail He was the one who had betrayed their whereabouts to Voldemort and so helped bring about their deaths .Eh ?said Moody .Harry looked up into Moodys heavily scarred and pitted face .Evidently Moody was under the impression he had just given Harry a bit of a treat .Yeah said Harry attempting to grin again .Er .listen Ive just remembered I havent packed my .He was spared the trouble of inventing an object he had not packed Sirius had just said Whats that youve got there MadEye ?and Moody had turned toward him .Harry crossed the kitchen slipped through the door and up the stairs before anyone could call him back .He did not know why he had received such a shock he had seen his parents pictures before after all and he had met Wormtail .but to have them sprung on him like that when he was least expecting it .No one would like that he thought angrily .And then to see them surrounded by all those other happy faces .Benjy Fenwick who had been found in bits and Gideon Prewett who had died like a hero and the Longbottoms who had been tortured into madness .all waving happily out of the photograph forevermore not knowing that they were doomed .Well Moody might find that interesting .he Harry found it disturbing .Harry tiptoed up the stairs in the hall past the stuffed elf heads glad to be on his own again but as he approached the first landing he heard noises .Someone was sobbing in the drawing room .Hello ?Harry said .There was no answer but the sobbing continued .He climbed the remaining stairs two at a time walked across the landing and opened the drawingroom door .Someone was cowering against the dark wall her wand in her hand her whole body shaking with sobs .Sprawled on the dusty old carpet in a patch of moonlight clearly dead was Ron .All the air seemed to vanish from Harrys lungs he felt as though he were falling through the floor his brain turned icy cold Ron dead no it couldnt be But wait a moment it couldnt be Ron was downstairs Mrs Weasley ?Harry croaked .Rrriddikulus Mrs Weasley sobbed pointing her shaking wand at Rons body .Crack .Rons body turned into Bills spreadeagled on his back his eyes wide open and empty .Mrs Weasley sobbed harder than ever .Rriddikulus she sobbed again .Crack .Mr Weasleys body replaced Bills his glasses askew a trickle of blood running down his face .No !Mrs Weasley moaned .No .riddikulus Riddikulusl RIDDIKULUSl Crack .Dead twins .Crack .Dead Percy .Crack .Dead Harry .Mrs Weasley just get out of here !shouted Harry staring down at his own dead body on the floor .Let someone else Whats going on ?Lupin had come running into the room closely followed by Sirius with Moody stumping along behind them .Lupin looked from Mrs Weasley to the dead Harry on the floor and seemed to understand in an instant .Pulling out his own wand he said very firmly and clearly RiddikulusV Harrys body vanished .A silvery orb hung in the air over the spot where it had lain .Lupin waved his wand once more and the orb vanished in a puff of smoke .Oh oh oh !gulped Mrs Weasley and she broke into a storm of crying her face in her hands .Molly said Lupin bleakly walking over to her Molly dont .Next second she was sobbing her heart out on Lupins shoulder .Molly it was just a boggart he said soothingly patting her on the head .Just a stupid boggart .I see them dddead all the time !Mrs Weasley moaned into his shoulder .All the tttime !I dd dream about it .Sirius was staring at the patch of carpet where the boggart pretending to be Harrys body had lain .Moody was looking at Harry who avoided his gaze .He had a funny feeling Moodys magical eye had followed him all the way out of the kitchen .Dddont tell Arthur Mrs Weasley was gulping now mopping her eyes frantically with her cuffs .I d ddont want him to know .Being silly .Lupin handed her a handkerchief and she blew her nose .Harry Im so sorry what must you think of me ?she said shakily .Not even able to get rid of a boggart .Dont be stupid said Harry trying to smile .Im just ssso worried she said tears spilling out of her eyes again .Half the fffamilys in the Order itll bbbe a miracle if we all come through this .and P PPercys not talking to us .What if something dd dreadful happens and we had never mmmade up ?And whats going to happen if Arthur and I get killed whos gggoing to look after Ron and Ginny ?Molly thats enough said Lupin firmly .This isnt like last time .The Order is better prepared weve got a head start we know what Voldemorts up to Mrs Weasley gave a little squeak of fright at the sound of the name .Oh Molly come on its about time you got used to hearing it look I cant promise no ones going to get hurt nobody can promise that but were much better off than we were last time you werent in the Order then you dont understand last time we were outnumbered twenty to one by the Death Eaters and they were picking us off one by one .Harry thought of the photograph again of his parents beaming faces .He knew Moody was still watching him .Dont worry about Percy said Sirius abruptly .Hell come round .Its a matter of time before Voldemort moves into the open once he does the whole Ministrys going to be begging us to forgive them .And Im not sure Ill be accepting their apology he added bitterly .And as for whos going to look after Ron and Ginny if you and Arthur died said Lupin smiling slightly what do you think wed do let them starve ?Mrs Weasley smiled tremulously .Being silly she muttered again mopping her eyes .But Harry closing his bedroom door behind him some ten minutes later could not think Mrs Weasley silly .He could still see his parents beaming up at him from the tattered old photograph unaware that their lives like so many of those around them were drawing to a close .The image of the boggart posing as the corpse of each member of Mrs Weasleys family in turn kept flashing before his eyes .Without warning the scar on his forehead seared with pain again and his stomach churned horribly .Cut it out he said firmly rubbing the scar as the pain receded again .First sign of madness talking to your own head said a sly voice from the empty picture on the wall .Harry ignored it .He felt older than he had ever felt in his life and it seemed extraordinary to him that barely an hour ago he had been worried about a joke shop and who had gotten a prefects badge .10 LUNA LOVEGOOD Harry had a troubled nights sleep .His parents wove in and out of his dreams never speaking Mrs Weasley sobbed over Kreachers dead body watched by Ron and Hermione who were wearing crowns and yet again Harry found himself walking down a corridor ending in a locked door .He awoke abruptly with his scar prickling to find Ron already dressed and talking to him . .better hurry up Mums going ballistic she says were going to miss the train .There was a lot of commotion in the house .From what he heard as he dressed at top speed Harry gathered that Fred and George had bewitched their trunks to fly downstairs to save the bother of carrying them with the result that they had hurtled straight into Ginny and knocked her down two flights of stairs into the hall Mrs Black and Mrs Weasley were both screaming at the top of their voices .COULD HAVE DONE HER A SERIOUS INJURY YOU IDIOTS FILTHY HALFBREEDS BESMIRCHING THE HOUSE OF MY FATHERS Hermione came hurrying into the room looking flustered just as Harry was putting on his trainers Hedwig was swaying on her shoulder and she was carrying a squirming Crookshanks in her arms .Mum and Dad just sent Hedwig back the owl fluttered obligingly over and perched on top of her cage are you ready yet ?Nearly Ginny all right ?Harry asked shoving on his glasses .Mrs Weasleys patched her up said Hermione .But now MadEyes complaining that we cant leave unless Sturgis Podmores here otherwise the guard will be one short .Guard ?said Harry .We have to go to Kings Cross with a guard ?You have to go to Kings Cross with a guard Hermione corrected him .Why ?said Harry irritably .I thought Voldemort was supposed to be lying low or are you telling me hes going to jump out from behind a dustbin to try and do me in ?I dont know its just what MadEye says said Hermione distractedly looking at her watch .But if we dont leave soon were definitely going to miss the train .WILL YOU LOT GET DOWN HERE NOW PLEASE !Mrs Weasley bellowed and Hermione jumped as though scalded and hurried out of the room .Harry seized Hedwig stuffed her unceremoniously into her cage and set off downstairs after Hermione dragging his trunk .Mrs Blacks portrait was howling with rage but nobody was bothering to close the curtains over her all the noise in the hall was bound to rouse her again anyway .Harry youre to come with me and Tonks shouted Mrs Weasley over the repeated screeches of MUDBLOODSl SCUM CREATURES OF DIRV .Leave your trunk and your owl Alastors going to deal with the luggage .Oh for heavens sake Sirius Dumbledore said no !A bearlike black dog had appeared at Harrys side as Harry clambered over the various trunks cluttering the hall to get to Mrs Weasley .Oh honestly .said Mrs Weasley despairingly well on your own head be it !She wrenched open the front door and stepped out into the weak September sunlight .Harry and the dog followed her .The door slammed behind them and Mrs Blacks screeches were cut off instantly .Wheres Tonks ?Harry said looking around as they went down the stone steps of number twelve which vanished the moment they reached the pavement .Shes waiting for us just up here said Mrs Weasley stiffly averting her eyes from the lolloping black dog beside Harry .An old woman greeted them on the corner .She had tightly curled gray hair and wore a purple hat shaped like a porkpie .Wotcher Harry she said winking .Better hurry up hadnt we Molly ?she added checking her watch .I know I know moaned Mrs Weasley lengthening her stride but MadEye wanted to wait for Sturgis .If only Arthur could have got us cars from the Ministry again .but Fudge wouldnt let him borrow so much as an empty ink bottle these days .How Muggles can stand traveling without magic .But the great black dog gave a joyful bark and gamboled around them snapping at pigeons and chasing its own tail .Harry couldnt help laughing .Sirius had been trapped inside for a very long time .Mrs Weasley pursed her lips in an almost Aunt Petuniaish way .It took them twenty minutes to reach Kings Cross by foot and nothing more eventful happened during that time than Sirius scaring a couple of cats for Harrys entertainment .Once inside the station they lingered casually beside the barrier between platforms nine and ten until the coast was clear then each of them leaned against it in turn and fell easily through onto platform nine and three quarters where the Hogwarts Express stood belching sooty steam over a platform packed with departing students and their families .Harry inhaled the familiar smell and felt his spirits soar .He was really going back .I hope the others make it in time said Mrs Weasley anxiously staring behind her at the wroughtiron arch spanning the platform through which new arrivals would come .Nice dog Harry !called a tall boy with dreadlocks .Thanks Lee said Harry grinning as Sirius wagged his tail frantically .Oh good said Mrs Weasley sounding relieved heres Alas tor with the luggage look .A porters cap pulled low over his mismatched eyes Moody came limping through the archway pushing a cart full of their trunks .All okay he muttered to Mrs Weasley and Tonks .Dont think we were followed .Seconds later Mr Weasley emerged onto the platform with Ron and Hermione .They had almost unloaded Moodys luggage cart when Fred George and Ginny turned up with Lupin .No trouble ?growled Moody .Nothing said Lupin .Ill still be reporting Sturgis to Dumbledore said Moody .Thats the second time hes not turned up in a week .Getting as unreliable as Mundungus .Well look after yourselves said Lupin shaking hands all round .He reached Harry last and gave him a clap on the shoulder .You too Harry .Be careful .Yeah keep your head down and your eyes peeled said Moody shaking Harrys hand too .And dont forget all of you careful what you put in writing .If in doubt dont put it in a letter at all .Its been great meeting all of you said Tonks hugging Hermione and Ginny .Well see you soon I expect .A warning whistle sounded the students still on the platform started hurrying onto the train .Quick quick said Mrs Weasley distractedly hugging them at random and catching Harry twice .Write .Be good .If youve forgotten anything well send it on .Onto the train now hurry .For one brief moment the great black dog reared onto its hind legs and placed its front paws on Harrys shoulders but Mrs Weasley shoved Harry away toward the train door hissing For heavens sake act more like a dog Sirius !See you !Harry called out of the open window as the train began to move while Ron Hermione and Ginny waved beside him .The figures of Tonks Lupin Moody and Mr and Mrs Weasley shrank rapidly but the black dog was bounding alongside the window wagging its tail blurred people on the platform were laughing to see it chasing the train and then they turned the corner and Sirius was gone .He shouldnt have come with us said Hermione in a worried voice .Oh lighten up said Ron he hasnt seen daylight for months poor bloke .Well said Fred clapping his hands together cant stand around chatting all day weve got business to discuss with Lee .See you later and he and George disappeared down the corridor to the right .The train was gathering still more speed so that the houses outside the window flashed past and they swayed where they stood .Shall we go and find a compartment then ?Harry asked Ron and Hermione .Ron and Hermione exchanged looks .Er said Ron .Were well Ron and I are supposed to go into the prefect carriage Hermione said awkwardly .Ron wasnt looking at Harry he seemed to have become intensely interested in the fingernails on his left hand .Oh said Harry .Right .Fine .I dont think well have to stay there all journey said Hermione quickly .Our letters said we just get instructions from the Head Boy and Girl and then patrol the corridors from time to time .Fine said Harry again .Well II might see you later then .Yeah definitely said Ron casting a shifty anxious look at Harry .Its a pain having to go down there Id rather but we have to I mean Im not enjoying it Im not Percy he finished defiantly .I know youre not said Harry and he grinned .But as Hermione and Ron dragged their trunks Crookshanks and a caged Pigwidgeon off toward the engine end of the train Harry felt an odd sense of loss .He had never traveled on the Hogwarts Express without Ron .Come on Ginny told him if we get a move on well be able to save them places .Right said Harry picking up Hedwigs cage in one hand and the handle of his trunk in the other .They struggled off down the corridor peering through the glasspaneled doors into the compartments they passed which were already full .Harry could not help noticing that a lot of people stared back at him with great interest and that several of them nudged their neighbors and pointed him out .After he had met this behavior in five consecutive carriages he remembered that the Daily Prophet had been telling its readers all summer what a lying showoff he was .He wondered bleakly whether the people now staring and whispering believed the stories .In the very last carriage they met Neville Longbottom Harrys fellow fifthyear Gryffindor his round face shining with the effort of pulling his trunk along and maintaining a onehanded grip on his struggling toad Trevor .Hi Harry he panted .Hi Ginny .Everywhere s full .I cant find a seat .What are you talking about ?said Ginny who had squeezed past Neville to peer into the compartment behind him .Theres room in this one theres only Loony Lovegood in here Neville mumbled something about not wanting to disturb anyone .Dont be silly said Ginny laughing shes all right .She slid the door open and pulled her trunk inside it .Harry and Neville followed .Hi Luna said Ginny .Is it okay if we take these seats ?The girl beside the window looked up .She had straggly waistlength dirtyblond hair very pale eyebrows and protuberant eyes that gave her a permanently surprised look .Harry knew at once why Neville had chosen to pass this compartment by .The girl gave off an aura of distinct dottiness .Perhaps it was the fact that she had stuck her wand behind her left ear for safekeeping or that she had chosen to wear a necklace of butterbeer caps or that she was reading a magazine upside down .Her eyes ranged over Neville and came to rest on Harry .She nodded .Thanks said Ginny smiling at her .Harry and Neville stowed the three trunks and Hedwigs cage in the luggage rack and sat down .The girl called Luna watched them over her upsidedown magazine which was called The Quibbler .She did not seem to need to blink as much as normal humans .She stared and stared at Harry who had taken the seat opposite her and now wished he had not .Had a good summer Luna ?Ginny asked .Yes said Luna dreamily without taking her eyes off Harry .Yes it was quite enjoyable you know .Youre Harry Potter she added .I know I am said Harry .Neville chuckled .Luna turned her pale eyes upon him instead .And I dont know who you are .Im nobody said Neville hurriedly .No youre not said Ginny sharply .Neville Longbottom Luna Lovegood .Lunas in my year but in Ravenclaw .Wit beyond measure is mans greatest treasure said Luna in a singsong voice .She raised her upsidedown magazine high enough to hide her face and fell silent .Harry and Neville looked at each other with their eyebrows raised .Ginny suppressed a giggle .The train rattled onward speeding them out into open country .It was an odd unsettled sort of day one moment the carriage was full of sunlight and the next they were passing beneath ominously gray clouds .Guess what I got for my birthday ?said Neville .Another Remembrall ?said Harry remembering the marblelike device Nevilles grandmother had sent him in an effort to improve his abysmal memory .No said Neville I could do with one though I lost the old one ages ago .No look at this .He dug the hand that was not keeping a firm grip on Trevor into his schoolbag and after a little bit of rummaging pulled out what appeared to be a small gray cactus in a pot except that it was covered with what looked like boils rather than spines .Mimbulus mimbletonia he said proudly .Harry stared at the thing .It was pulsating slightly giving it the rather sinister look of some diseased internal organ .Its really really rare said Neville beaming .I dont know if theres one in the greenhouse at Hogwarts even .I cant wait to show it to Professor Sprout .My greatuncle Algie got it for me in Assyria .Im going to see if I can breed from it .Harry knew that Nevilles favorite subject was Herbology but for the life of him he could not see what he would want with this stunted little plant .Does it er do anything ?he asked .Loads of stuff !said Neville proudly .Its got an amazing defensive mechanism hold Trevor for me .He dumped the toad into Harrys lap and took a quill from his schoolbag .Luna Lovegoods popping eyes appeared over the top of her upsidedown magazine again watching what Neville was doing .Neville held the Mimbulus mimbletonia up to his eyes his tongue between his teeth chose his spot and gave the plant a sharp prod with the tip of his quill .Liquid squirted from every boil on the plant thick stinking darkgreen jets of it they hit the ceiling the windows and spattered Luna Lovegoods magazine .Ginny who had flung her arms up in front of her face just in time merely looked as though she was wearing a slimy green hat but Harry whose hands had been busy preventing the escape of Trevor received a face full .It smelled like rancid manure .Neville whose face and torso were also drenched shook his head to get the worst out of his eyes .Ssorry he gasped .I havent tried that before .Didnt realize it would be quite so .Dont worry though Stinksaps not poisonous he added nervously as Harry spat a mouthful onto the floor .At that precise moment the door of their compartment slid open .Oh .hello Harry said a nervous voice .Um .bad time ?Harry wiped the lenses of his glasses with his Trevor free hand .A very pretty girl with long shiny black hair was standing in the doorway smiling at him Cho Chang the Seeker on the Ravenclaw Quidditch team .Oh .hi said Harry blankly .Um .said Cho .Well .just thought Id say hello .bye then .She closed the door again rather pink in the face and departed .Harry slumped back in his seat and groaned .He would have liked Cho to discover him sitting with a group of very cool people laughing their heads off at a joke he had just told he would not have chosen to be sitting with Neville and Loony Lovegood clutching a toad and dripping in Stinksap .Never mind said Ginny bracingly .Look we can get rid of all this easily .She pulled out her wand .Scour gif yY The Stinksap vanished .Sorry said Neville again in a small voice .Ron and Hermione did not turn up for nearly an hour by which time the food trolley had already gone by .Harry Ginny and Neville had finished their Pumpkin Pasties and were busy swapping Chocolate Frog cards when the compartment door slid open and they walked in accompanied by Crookshanks and a shrilly hooting Pigwidgeon in his cage .Im starving said Ron stowing Pigwidgeon next to Hedwig grabbing a Chocolate Frog from Harry and throwing himself into the seat next to him .He ripped open the wrapper bit off the Frogs head and leaned back with his eyes closed as though he had had a very exhausting morning .Well there are two fifthyear prefects from each House said Hermione looking thoroughly disgruntled as she took her seat .Boy and girl from each .And guess whos a Slytherin prefect ?said Ron still with his eyes closed .Malfoy replied Harry at once his worst fear confirmed .Course said Ron bitterly stuffing the rest of the Frog into his mouth and taking another .And that complete cow Pansy Parkinson said Hermione viciously .How she got to be a prefect when shes thicker than a concussed troll .Whos Hufflepuff ?Harry asked .Ernie Macmillan and Hannah Abbott said Ron thickly .And Anthony Goldstein and Padma Patil for Ravenclaw said Hermione .You went to the Yule Ball with Padma Patil said a vague voice .Everyone turned to look at Luna Lovegood who was gazing unblinkingly at Ron over the top of The Quibbler .He swallowed his mouthful of Frog .Yeah I know I did he said looking mildly surprised .She didnt enjoy it very much Luna informed him .She doesnt think you treated her very well because you wouldnt dance with her .I dont think Id have minded she added thoughtfully I dont like dancing very much .She retreated behind The Quibbler again .Ron stared at the cover with his mouth hanging open for a few seconds then looked around at Ginny for some kind of explanation but Ginny had stuffed her knuckles in her mouth to stop herself giggling .Ron shook his head bemused then checked his watch .Were supposed to patrol the corridors every so often he told Harry and Neville and we can give out punishments if people are misbehaving .I cant wait to get Crabbe and Goyle for something .Youre not supposed to abuse your position Ron !said Hermione sharply .Yeah right because Malfoy wont abuse it at all said Ron sarcastically .So youre going to descend to his level ?No Im just going to make sure I get his mates before he gets mine .For heavens sake Ron Ill make Goyle do lines itll kill him he hates writing said Ron happily .He lowered his voice to Goyle s low grunt and screwing up his face in a look of pained concentration mimed writing in midair .I .must .not .look .like .a .baboons .backside .Everyone laughed but nobody laughed harder than Luna Lovegood .She let out a scream of mirth that caused Hedwig to wake up and flap her wings indignantly and Crookshanks to leap up into the luggage rack hissing .She laughed so hard that her magazine slipped out of her grasp slid down her legs and onto the floor .That was funny Her prominent eyes swam with tears as she gasped for breath staring at Ron .Utterly nonplussed he looked around at the others who were now laughing at the expression on Rons face and at the ludicrously prolonged laughter of Luna Lovegood who was rocking backward and forward clutching her sides .Are you taking the mickey ?said Ron frowning at her .Baboons .backside !she choked holding her ribs .Everyone else was watching Luna laughing but Harry glancing at the magazine on the floor noticed something that made him dive for it .Upside down it had been hard to tell what the picture on the front was but Harry now realized it was a fairly bad cartoon of Cornelius Fudge Harry only recognized him because of the limegreen bowler hat .One of Fudges hands was clenched around a bag of gold the other hand was throttling a goblin .The cartoon was captioned How Far Will Fudge Go to Gain Gringotts ?Beneath this were listed the titles of other articles inside the magazine .CORRUPTION IN THE QUIDDITCH LEAGUE How the Tornados Are Taking Control SECRETS OF THE ANCIENT RUNES REVEALED SIRIUS BLACK Villain or Victim ?Can I have a look at this ?Harry asked Luna eagerly .She nodded still gazing at Ron breathless with laughter .Harry opened the magazine and scanned the index until this moment he had completely forgotten the magazine Kingsley had handed Mr Weasley to give to Sirius but it must have been this edition of The Quibbler .He found the page and turned excitedly to the article .This too was illustrated by a rather bad cartoon in fact Harry would not have known it was supposed to be Sirius if it hadnt been captioned .Sirius was standing on a pile of human bones with his wand out .The headline on the article read SIRIUS Black As Hes Painted ?Notorious Mass Murderer OR Innocent Singing Sensation ?Harry had to read this sentence several times before he was convinced that he had not misunderstood it .Since when had Sirius been a singing sensation ?For fourteen years Sirius Black has been believed guilty of the mass murder of twelve innocent Muggles and one wizard .Blacks audacious escape from Azkaban two years ago has led to the widest manhunt ever conducted by the Ministry of Magic .None of us has ever questioned that he deserves to be recaptured and handed back to the dementors .BUT DOES HE ?Startling new evidence has recently come to light that Sirius Black may not have committed the crimes for which he was sent to Azkaban .In fact says Doris Purkiss of 18 Acanthia Way Little Norton Black may not even have been present at the killings .What people dont realize is that Sirius Black is a false name says Mrs Purkiss .The man people believe to be Sirius Black is actually Stubby Boardman lead singer of the popular singing group The Hobgoblins who retired from public life after being struck in the ear by a turnip at a concert in Little Norton Church Hall nearly fifteen years ago .I recognized him the moment I saw his picture in the paper .Now Stubby couldnt possibly have committed those crimes because on the day in question he happened to be enjoying a romantic candlelit dinner with me .I have written to the Minister of Magic and am expecting him to give Stubby alias Sirius a full pardon any day now .Harry finished reading and stared at the page in disbelief .Perhaps it was a joke he thought perhaps the magazine often printed spoof items .He flicked back a few pages and found the piece on Fudge .Cornelius Fudge the Minister of Magic denied that he had any plans to take over the running of the Wizarding Bank Gringotts when he was elected Minister of Magic five years ago .Fudge has always insisted that he wants nothing more than to cooperate peacefully with the guardians of our gold .BUT DOES HE ?Sources close to the Minister have recently disclosed that Fudges dearest ambition is to seize control of the goblin gold supplies and that he will not hesitate to use force if need be .It wouldnt be the first time either said a Ministry insider .Cornelius ‘GoblinCrusher Fudge thats what his friends call him if you could hear him when he thinks no ones listening oh hes always talking about the goblins hes had done in hes had them drowned hes had them dropped off buildings hes had them poisoned hes had them cooked in pies .Harry did not read any further .Fudge might have many faults but Harry found it extremely hard to imagine him ordering goblins to be cooked in pies .He flicked through the rest of the magazine .Pausing every few pages he read an accusation that the Tutshill Tornados were winning the Quidditch League by a combination of blackmail illegal broom tampering and torture an interview with a wizard who claimed to have flown to the moon on a Cleansweep Six and brought back a bag of moon frogs to prove it and an article on ancient runes which at least explained why Luna had been reading The Quibbler upside down .According to the magazine if you turned the runes on their heads they revealed a spell to make your enemys ears turn into kumquats .In fact compared to the rest of the articles in The Quibbler the suggestion that Sirius might really be the lead singer of The Hobgoblins was quite sensible .Anything good in there ?asked Ron as Harry closed the magazine .Of course not said Hermione scathingly before Harry could answer The Quibblers rubbish everyone knows that .Excuse me said Luna her voice had suddenly lost its dreamy quality .My fathers the editor .I oh said Hermione looking embarrassed .Well .its got some interesting .I mean its quite .Ill have it back thank you said Luna coldly and leaning forward she snatched it out of Harrys hands .Rifling through it to page fiftyseven she turned it resolutely upside down again and disappeared behind it just as the compartment door opened for the third time .Harry looked around he had expected this but that did not make the sight of Draco Malfoy smirking at him from between his cronies Crabbe and Goyle any more enjoyable .What ?he said aggressively before Malfoy could open his mouth .Manners Potter or Ill have to give you a detention drawled Malfoy whose sleek blond hair and pointed chin were just like his fathers .You see I unlike you have been made a prefect which means that I unlike you have the power to hand out punishments .Yeah said Harry but you unlike me are a git so get out and leave us alone .Ron Hermione Ginny and Neville laughed .Malfoys lip curled .Tell me how does it feel being secondbest to Weasley Potter ?he asked .Shut up Malfoy said Hermione sharply .I seem to have touched a nerve said Malfoy smirking .Well just watch yourself Potter because Ill be dogging your footsteps in case you step out of line .Get out !said Hermione standing up .Sniggering Malfoy gave Harry a last malicious look and departed Crabbe and Goyle lumbering in his wake .Hermione slammed the compartment door behind them and turned to look at Harry who knew at once that she like him had registered what Malfoy had said and been just as unnerved by it .Chuck us another Frog said Ron who had clearly noticed nothing .Harry could not talk freely in front of Neville and Luna .He exchanged another nervous look with Hermione and then stared out of the window .He had thought Sirius coming with him to the station was a bit of a laugh but suddenly it seemed reckless if not downright dangerous .Hermione had been right .Sirius should not have come .What if Mr Malfoy had noticed the black dog and told Draco what if he had deduced that the Weasleys Lupin Tonks and Moody knew where Sirius was hiding ?Or had Malfoys use of the word dogging been a coincidence ?The weather remained undecided as they traveled farther and farther north .Rain spattered the windows in a halfhearted way then the sun put in a feeble appearance before clouds drifted over it once more .When darkness fell and lamps came on inside the carriages Luna rolled up The Quibbler put it carefully away in her bag and took to staring at everyone in the compartment instead .Harry was sitting with his forehead pressed against the train window trying to get a first distant glimpse of Hogwarts but it was a moonless night and the rainstreaked window was grimy .Wed better change said Hermione at last .She and Ron pinned their prefect badges carefully to their chests .Harry saw Ron checking how it looked in the black window .At last the train began to slow down and they heard the usual racket up and down it as everybody scrambled to get their luggage and pets assembled ready for departure .Ron and Hermione were supposed to supervise all this they disappeared from the carriage again leaving Harry and the others to look after Crookshanks and Pigwidgeon .Ill carry that owl if you like said Luna to Harry reaching out for Pigwidgeon as Neville stowed Trevor carefully in an inside pocket .Oh er thanks said Harry handing her the cage and hoisting Hedwigs more securely into his arms .They shuffled out of the compartment feeling the first sting of the night air on their faces as they joined the crowd in the corridor .Slowly they moved toward the doors .Harry could smell the pine trees that lined the path down to the lake .He stepped down onto the platform and looked around listening for the familiar call of Firs years over here .firs years .But it did not come .Instead a quite different voice a brisk female one was calling First years line up over here please !All first years to me !A lantern came swinging toward Harry and by its light he saw the prominent chin and severe haircut of Professor GrubblyPlank the witch who had taken over Hagrid s Care of Magical Creatures lessons for a while the previous year .Wheres Hagrid ?he said out loud .I dont know said Ginny but wed better get out of the way were blocking the door .Oh yeah .Harry and Ginny became separated as they moved off along the platform and out through the station .Jostled by the crowd Harry squinted through the darkness for a glimpse of Hagrid he had to be here Harry had been relying on it seeing Hagrid again had been one of the things to which he had been looking forward most .But there was no sign of him at all .He cant have left Harry told himself as he shuffled slowly through a narrow doorway onto the road outside with the rest of the crowd .Hes just got a cold or something .He looked around for Ron or Hermione wanting to know what they thought about the reappearance of Professor GrubblyPlank but neither of them was anywhere near him so he allowed himself to be shunted forward onto the dark rainwashed road outside Hogsmeade station .Here stood the hundred or so horseless stagecoaches that always took the students above first year up to the castle .Harry glanced quickly at them turned away to keep a lookout for Ron and Hermione then did a double take .The coaches were no longer horseless .There were creatures standing between the carriage shafts if he had had to give them a name he supposed he would have called them horses though there was something reptilian about them too .They were completely fleshless their black coats clinging to their skeletons of which every bone was visible .Their heads were dragonish and their pupilless eyes white and staring .Wings sprouted from each wither vast black leathery wings that looked as though they ought to belong to giant bats .Standing still and quiet in the gloom the creatures looked eerie and sinister .Harry could not understand why the coaches were being pulled by these horrible horses when they were quite capable of moving along by themselves .Wheres Pig ?said Rons voice right behind Harry .That Luna girl was carrying him said Harry turning quickly eager to consult Ron about Hagrid .Where dyou reckon Hagrid is ?I dunno said Ron sounding worried .Hed better be okay .A short distance away Draco Malfoy followed by a small gang of cronies including Crabbe Goyle and Pansy Parkinson was pushing some timidlooking second years out of the way so that they could get a coach to themselves .Seconds later Hermione emerged panting from the crowd .Malfoy was being absolutely foul to a first year back there I swear Im going to report him hes only had his badge three minutes and hes using it to bully people worse than ever .Wheres Crookshanks ?Ginnys got him said Harry .There she is .Ginny had just emerged from the crowd clutching a squirming Crookshanks .Thanks said Hermione relieving Ginny of the cat .Come on lets get a carriage together before they all fillup .I havent got Pig yet !Ron said but Hermione was already heading off toward the nearest unoccupied coach .Harry remained behind with Ron .What are those things dyou reckon ?he asked Ron nodding at the horrible horses as the other students surged past them .What things ?Those horse Luna appeared holding Pigwidgeons cage in her arms the tiny owl was twittering excitedly as usual .Here you are she said .Hes a sweet little owl isnt he ?Er .yeah .Hes all right said Ron gruffly .Well come on then lets get in .what were you saying Harry ?I was saying what are those horse things ?Harry said as he Ron and Luna made for the carriage in which Hermione and Ginny were already sitting .What horse things ?The horse things pulling the carriages !said Harry impatiently they were after all about three feet from the nearest one it was watching them with empty white eyes .Ron however gave Harry a perplexed look .What are you talking about ?Im talking about look !Harry grabbed Rons arm and wheeled him about so that he was facetoface with the winged horse .Ron stared straight at it for a second then looked back at Harry .What am I supposed to be looking at ?At the there between the shafts !Harnessed to the coach !Its right there in front But as Ron continued to look bemused a strange thought occurred to Harry .Cant .cant you see them ?See what ?Cant you see whats pulling the carriages ?Ron looked seriously alarmed now .Are you feeling all right Harry ?I .yeah .Harry felt utterly bewildered .The horse was there in front of him gleaming solidly in the dim light issuing from the station windows behind them vapor rising from its nostrils in the chilly night air .Yet unless Ron was faking and it was a very feeble joke if he was Ron could not see it at all .Shall we get in then ?said Ron uncertainly looking at Harry as though worried about him .Yeah said Harry .Yeah go on .Its all right said a dreamy voice from beside Harry as Ron vanished into the coachs dark interior .Youre not going mad or anything .I can see them too .Can you ?said Harry desperately turning to Luna .He could see the batwinged horses reflected in her wide silvery eyes .Oh yes said Luna Ive been able to see them ever since my first day here .Theyve always pulled the carriages .Dont worry .Youre just as sane as I am .Smiling faintly she climbed into the musty interior of the carriage after Ron .Not altogether reassured Harry followed her .XX THE SORTING HATS NEW SONG Harry did not want to tell the others that he and Luna were having the same hallucination if that was what it was so he said nothing about the horses as he sat down inside the carriage and slammed the door behind him .Nevertheless he could not help watching the silhouettes of the horses moving beyond the window .Did everyone see that GrubblyPlank woman ?asked Ginny .Whats she doing back here ?Hagrid cant have left can he ?Ill be quite glad if he has said Luna .He isnt a very good teacher is he ?Yes he is !said Harry Ron and Ginny angrily .Harry glared at Hermione she cleared her throat and quickly said Erm .yes .hes very good .Well we think hes a bit of a joke in Ravenclaw said Luna unfazed .Youve got a rubbish sense of humor then Ron snapped as the wheels below them creaked into motion .Luna did not seem perturbed by Rons rudeness on the contrary she simply watched him for a while as though he were a mildly interesting television program .Rattling and swaying the carriages moved in convoy up the road .When they passed between the tall stone pillars topped with winged boars on either side of the gates to the school grounds Harry leaned forward to try and see whether there were any lights on in Hagrids cabin by the Forbidden Forest but the grounds were in complete darkness .Hogwarts Castle however loomed ever closer a towering mass of turrets jetblack against the dark sky here and there a window blazing fiery bright above them .The carriages jingled to a halt near the stone steps leading up to the oak front doors and Harry got out of the carriage first .He turned again to look for lit windows down by the forest but there was definitely no sign of life within Hagrids cabin .Unwillingly because he had half hoped they would have vanished he turned his eyes instead upon the strange skeletal creatures standing quietly in the chill night air their blank white eyes gleaming .Harry had once before had the experience of seeing something that Ron could not but that had been a reflection in a mirror something much more insubstantial than a hundred very solidlooking beasts strong enough to pull a fleet of carriages .If Luna was to be believed the beasts had always been there but invisible why then could Harry suddenly see them and why could Ron not ?Are you coming or what ?said Ron beside him .Oh .yeah said Harry quickly and they joined the crowd hurrying up the stone steps into the castle .The entrance hall was ablaze with torches and echoing with footsteps as the students crossed the flagged stone floor for the double doors to the right leading to the Great Hall and the startofterm feast .The four long House tables in the Great Hall were filling up under the starless black ceiling which was just like the sky they could glimpse through the high windows .Candles floated in midair all along the tables illuminating the silvery ghosts who were dotted about the Hall and the faces of the students talking eagerly to one another exchanging summer news shouting greetings at friends from other Houses eyeing one anothers new haircuts and robes .Again Harry noticed people putting their heads together to whisper as he passed he gritted his teeth and tried to act as though he neither noticed nor cared .Luna drifted away from them at the Ravenclaw table .The moment they reached Gryffindors Ginny was hailed by some fellow fourth years and left to sit with them Harry Ron Hermione and Neville found seats together about halfway down the table between Nearly Headless Nick the Gryffindor House ghost and Parvati Patil and Lavender Brown the last two of whom gave Harry airy overly friendly greetings that made him quite sure they had stopped talking about him a split second before .He had more important things to worry about however He was looking over the students heads to the staff table that ran along the top wall of the Hall .Hes not there .Ron and Hermione scanned the staff table too though there was no real need Hagrids size made him instantly obvious in any lineup .He cant have left said Ron sounding slightly anxious .Of course he hasnt said Harry firmly .You dont think hes .hurt or anything do you ?said Hermione uneasily .No said Harry at once .But where is he then ?There was a pause then Harry said very quietly so that Neville Parvati and Lavender could not hear Maybe hes not back yet .You know from his mission the thing he was doing over the summer for Dumbledore .Yeah .yeah thatll be it said Ron sounding reassured but Hermione bit her lip looking up and down the staff table as though hoping for some conclusive explanation of Hagrids absence .Whos that ?she said sharply pointing toward the middle of the staff table .Harrys eyes followed hers .They lit first upon Professor Dumbledore sitting in his highbacked golden chair at the center of the long staff table wearing deeppurple robes scattered with silvery stars and a matching hat .Dumbledores head was inclined toward the woman sitting next to him who was talking into his ear .She looked Harry thought like somebodys maiden aunt squat with short curly mousebrown hair in which she had placed a horrible pink Alice band that matched the fluffy pink cardigan she wore over her robes .Then she turned her face slightly to take a sip from her goblet and he saw with a shock of recognition a pallid toadlike face and a pair of prominent pouchy eyes .Its that Umbridge woman !Who ?said Hermione .She was at my hearing she works for Fudge !Nice cardigan said Ron smirking .She works for Fudge ?Hermione repeated frowning .What on earths she doing here then ?Dunno .Hermione scanned the staff table her eyes narrowed .No she muttered no surely not .Harry did not understand what she was talking about but did not ask his attention had just been caught by Professor GrubblyPlank who had just appeared behind the staff table she worked her way along to the very end and took the seat that ought to have been Hagrids .That meant that the first years must have crossed the lake and reached the castle and sure enough a few seconds later the doors from the entrance hall opened .A long line of scaredlooking first years entered led by Professor McGonagall who was carrying a stool on which sat an ancient wizards hat heavily patched and darned with a wide rip near the frayed brim .The buzz of talk in the Great Hall faded away .The first years lined up in front of the staff table facing the rest of the students and Professor McGonagall placed the stool carefully in front of them then stood back .The first years faces glowed palely in the candlelight .A small boy right in the middle of the row looked as though he was trembling .Harry recalled fleetingly how terrified he had felt when he had stood there waiting for the unknown test that would determine to which House he belonged .The whole school waited with bated breath .Then the rip near the hats brim opened wide like a mouth and the Sorting Hat burst into song In times of old when I was new And Hogwarts barely started The founders of our noble school Thought never to be parted United by a common goal They had the selfsame yearning To make the worlds best magic school And pass along their learning .Together we will build and teach !The four good friends decided And never did they dream that they Might someday be divided For were there such friends anywhere As Slytherin and Gryffndor ?Unless it was the second pair Of Huffepuff and Ravenclaw ?So how could it have gone so wrong ?How could such friendships fail ?Why I was there and so can tell The whole sad sorry tale .Said Slytherin Well teach just those Whose ancestry is purest .Said Ravenclaw Well teach those whose Intelligence is surest .Said Gryffindor Well teach all those With brave deeds to their name Said Hufflepuff 111 teach the lot And treat them just the same .These differences caused little strife When first they came to light For each of the four founders had A House in which they might Take only those they wanted so For instance Slytherin Took only pureblood wizards Of great cunning just like him And only those of sharpest mind Were taught by Ravenclaw While the bravest and the boldest Went to daring Gryffindor .Good Hufflepuff she took the rest And taught them all she knew Thus the Houses and their founders Retained friendships firm and true .So Hogwarts worked in harmony For several happy years But then discord crept among us Feeding on our faults and fears .The Houses that like pillars four Had once held up our school Now turned upon each other and Divided sought to rule .And for a while it seemed the school Must meet an early end What with dueling and with fighting And the clash of friend on friend And at last there came a morning When old Slytherin departed And though the fighting then died out He left us quite downhearted .And never since the founders four Were whittled down to three Have the Houses been united As they once were meant to be .And now the Sorting Hat is here And you all know the score I sort you into Houses Because that is what Im for But this year Ill go further Listen closely to my song Though condemned I am to split you Still I worry that its wrong Though I must fulfill my duty And must quarter every year Still I wonder whether sorting May not bring the end I fear .Oh know the perils read the signs The warning history shows For our Hogwarts is in danger From external deadly foes And we must unite inside her Or well crumble from within .I have told you I have warned you .Let the Sorting now begin .The hat became motionless once more applause broke out though it was punctured for the first time in Harrys memory with muttering and whispers .All across the Great Hall students were exchanging remarks with their neighbors and Harry clapping along with everyone else knew exactly what they were talking about .Branched out a bit this year hasnt it ?said Ron his eyebrows raised .Too right it has said Harry .The Sorting Hat usually confined itself to describing the different qualities looked for by each of the four Hogwarts Houses and its own role in sorting them Harry could not remember it ever trying to give the school advice before .I wonder if its ever given warnings before ?said Hermione sounding slightly anxious .Yes indeed said Nearly Headless Nick knowledgeably leaning across Neville toward her Neville winced it was very uncomfortable to have a ghost lean through you .The hat feels itself honor bound to give the school due warning whenever it feels But Professor McGonagall who was waiting to read out the list of first years names was giving the whispering students the sort of look that scorches .Nearly Headless Nick placed a seethrough finger to his lips and sat primly upright again as the muttering came to an abrupt end .With a last frowning look that swept the four House tables Professor McGonagall lowered her eyes to her long piece of parchment and called out Abercrombie Euan .The terrifiedlooking boy Harry had noticed earlier stumbled forward and put the hat on his head it was only prevented from falling right down to his shoulders by his very prominent ears .The hat considered for a moment then the rip near the brim opened again and shouted GR YFFIND OR !Harry clapped loudly with the rest of Gryffindor House as Euan Abercrombie staggered to their table and sat down looking as though he would like very much to sink through the floor and never be looked at again .Slowly the long line of first years thinned in the pauses between the names and the Sorting Hats decisions Harry could hear Rons stomach rumbling loudly .Finally Zeller Rose was sorted into Hufflepuff and Professor McGonagall picked up the hat and stool and marched them away as Professor Dumbledore rose to his feet .Harry was somehow soothed to see Dumbledore standing before them all whatever his recent bitter feelings toward his headmaster .Between the absence of Hagrid and the presence of those dragonish horses he had felt that his return to Hogwarts so long anticipated was full of unexpected surprises like jarring notes in a familiar song .But this at least was how it was supposed to be their headmaster rising to greet them all before the startofterm feast .To our newcomers said Dumbledore in a ringing voice his arms stretched wide and a beaming smile on his lips welcome !To our old hands welcome back !There is a time for speech making but this is not it .Tuck in !There was an appreciative laugh and an outbreak of applause as Dumbledore sat down neatly and threw his long beard over his shoulder so as to keep it out of the way of his plate for food had appeared out of nowhere so that the five long tables were groaning under joints and pies and dishes of vegetables bread sauces and flagons of pumpkin juice .Excellent said Ron with a kind of groan of longing and he seized the nearest plate of chops and began piling them onto his plate watched wistfully by Nearly Headless Nick .What were you saying before the Sorting ?Hermione asked the ghost .About the hat giving warnings ?Oh yes said Nick who seemed glad of a reason to turn away from Ron who was now eating roast potatoes with almost indecent enthusiasm .Yes I have heard the hat give several warnings before always at times when it detects periods of great danger for the school .And always of course its advice is the same Stand together be strong from within .Ow kunnit nofe skusin danger ifzat ?said Ron .His mouth was so full Harry thought it was quite an achievement for him to make any noise at all .I beg your pardon ?said Nearly Headless Nick politely while Hermione looked revolted .Ron gave an enormous swallow and said How can it know if the schools in danger if its a hat ?I have no idea said Nearly Headless Nick .Of course it lives in Dumbledores office so I daresay it picks things up there .And it wants all the Houses to be friends ?said Harry looking over at the Slytherin table where Draco Malfoy was holding court .Fat chance .Well now you shouldnt take that attitude said Nick reprovingly .Peaceful cooperation thats the key .We ghosts though we belong to separate Houses maintain links of friendship .In spite of the competitiveness between Gryffindor and Slytherin I would never dream of seeking an argument with the Bloody Baron .Only because youre terrified of him said Ron .Nearly Headless Nick looked highly affronted .Terrified ?I hope I Sir Nicholas de Mimsy Porpington have never been guilty of cowardice in my life !The noble blood that runs in my veins What blood ?asked Ron .Surely you havent still got ?Its a figure of speech !said Nearly Headless Nick now so annoyed his head was trembling ominously on his partially severed neck .I assume I am still allowed to enjoy the use of whichever words I like even if the pleasures of eating and drinking are denied me !But I am quite used to students poking fun at my death I assure you !Nick he wasnt really laughing at you !said Hermione throwing a furious look at Ron .Unfortunately Rons mouth was packed to exploding point again and all he could manage was node iddum eentup sechew which Nick did not seem to think constituted an adequate apology .Rising into the air he straightened his feathered hat and swept away from them to the other end of the table coming to rest between the Creevey brothers Colin and Dennis .Well done Ron snapped Hermione .What ?said Ron indignantly having managed finally to swallow his food .Im not allowed to ask a simple question ?Oh forget it said Hermione irritably and the pair of them spent the rest of the meal in huffy silence .Harry was too used to their bickering to bother trying to reconcile them he felt it was a better use of his time to eat his way steadily through his steakand kidney pie then a large plateful of his favorite treacle tart .When all the students had finished eating and the noise level in the hall was starting to creep upward again Dumbledore got to his feet once more .Talking ceased immediately as all turned to face the headmaster .Harry was feeling pleasantly drowsy now .His fourposter bed was waiting somewhere above wonderfully warm and soft .Well now that we are all digesting another magnificent feast I beg a few moments of your attention for the usual startofterm notices said Dumbledore .First years ought to know that the forest in the grounds is out of bounds to students and a few of our older students ought to know by now too .Harry Ron and Hermione exchanged smirks .Mr Filch the caretaker has asked me for what he tells me is the four hundred and sixtysecond time to remind you all that magic is not permitted in corridors between classes nor are a number of other things all of which can be checked on the extensive list now fastened to Mr Filchs office door .We have had two changes in staffing this year .We are very pleased to welcome back Professor Grubbly Plank who will be taking Care of Magical Creatures lessons we are also delighted to introduce Professor Umbridge our new Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher .There was a round of polite but fairly unenthusiastic applause during which Harry Ron and Hermione exchanged slightly panicked looks Dumbledore had not said for how long GrubblyPlank would be teaching .Dumbledore continued Tryouts for the House Quidditch teams will take place on the He broke off looking inquiringly at Professor Umbridge .As she was not much taller standing than sitting there was a moment when nobody understood why Dumbledore had stopped talking but then Professor Umbridge said Hem hem and it became clear that she had got to her feet and was intending to make a speech .Dumbledore only looked taken aback for a moment then he sat back down smartly and looked alertly at Professor Umbridge as though he desired nothing better than to listen to her talk .Other members of staff were not as adept at hiding their surprise .Professor Sprouts eyebrows had disappeared into her flyaway hair and Professor McGonagalls mouth was as thin as Harry had ever seen it .No new teacher had ever interrupted Dumbledore before .Many of the students were smirking this woman obviously did not know how things were done at Hogwarts .Thank you Headmaster Professor Umbridge simpered for those kind words of welcome .Her voice was highpitched breathy and littlegirlish and again Harry felt a powerful rush of dislike that he could not explain to himself all he knew was that he loathed everything about her from her stupid voice to her fluffy pink cardigan .She gave another little throatclearing cough Hem hem and continued Well it is lovely to be back at Hogwarts I must say !She smiled revealing very pointed teeth .And to see such happy little faces looking back at me !Harry glanced around .None of the faces he could see looked happy on the contrary they all looked rather taken aback at being addressed as though they were five years old .I am very much looking forward to getting to know you all and Im sure well be very good friends !Students exchanged looks at this some of them were barely concealing grins .Ill be her friend as long as I dont have to borrow that cardigan Parvati whispered to Lavender and both of them lapsed into silent giggles .Professor Umbridge cleared her throat again Hem hem but when she continued some of the breathiness had vanished from her voice .She sounded much more businesslike and now her words had a dull learnedbyheart sound to them .The Ministry of Magic has always considered the education of young witches and wizards to be of vital importance .The rare gifts with which you were born may come to nothing if not nurtured and honed by careful instruction .The ancient skills unique to the Wizarding community must be passed down through the generations lest we lose them forever .The treasure trove of magical knowledge amassed by our ancestors must be guarded replenished and polished by those who have been called to the noble profession of teaching .Professor Umbridge paused here and made a little bow to her fellow staff members none of whom bowed back .Professor McGonagalls dark eyebrows had contracted so that she looked positively hawklike and Harry distinctly saw her exchange a significant glance with Professor Sprout as Umbridge gave another little Hem hem and went on with her speech .Every headmaster and headmistress of Hogwarts has brought something new to the weighty task of governing this historic school and that is as it should be for without progress there will be stagnation and decay .There again progress for progresss sake must be discouraged for our tried and tested traditions often require no tinkering .A balance then between old and new between permanence and change between tradition and innovation .Harry found his attentiveness ebbing as though his brain was slipping in and out of tune .The quiet that always filled the Hall when Dumbledore was speaking was breaking up as students put their heads together whispering and giggling .Over at the Ravenclaw table Cho Chang was chatting animatedly with her friends .A few seats along from Cho Luna Lovegood had got out The Quibbler again .Meanwhile at the Hufflepuff table Ernie Macmillan was one of the few still staring at Professor Umbridge but he was glassyeyed and Harry was sure he was only pretending to listen in an attempt to live up to the new prefects badge gleaming on his chest .Professor Umbridge did not seem to notice the restlessness of her audience .Harry had the impression that a fullscale riot could have broken out under her nose and she would have plowed on with her speech .The teachers however were still listening very attentively and Hermione seemed to be drinking in every word Umbridge spoke though judging by her expression they were not at all to her taste . .because some changes will be for the better while others will come in the fullness of time to be recognized as errors of judgment .Meanwhile some old habits will be retained and rightly so whereas others outmoded and outworn must be abandoned .Let us move forward then into a new era of openness effectiveness and accountability intent on preserving what ought to be preserved perfecting what needs to be perfected and pruning wherever we find practices that ought to be prohibited .She sat down .Dumbledore clapped .The staff followed his lead though Harry noticed that several of them brought their hands together only once or twice before stopping .A few students joined in but most had been taken unawares by the end of the speech not having listened to more than a few words of it and before they could start applauding properly Dumbledore had stood up again .Thank you very much Professor Umbridge that was most illuminating he said bowing to her .Now as I was saying Quidditch tryouts will be held .Yes it certainly was illuminating said Hermione in a low voice .Youre not telling me you enjoyed it ?Ron said quietly turning a glazed face upon Hermione .That was about the dullest speech Ive ever heard and I grew up with Percy .I said illuminating not enjoyable said Hermione .It explained a lot .Did it ?said Harry in surprise .Sounded like a load of waffle to me .There was some important stuff hidden in the waffle said Hermione grimly .Was there ?said Ron blankly .How about ‘progress for progresss sake must be discouraged ?How about ‘pruning wherever we find practices that ought to be prohibited ?Well what does that mean ?said Ron impatiently .Ill tell you what it means said Hermione ominously .It means the Ministrys interfering at Hogwarts .There was a great clattering and banging all around them Dumbledore had obviously just dismissed the school because everyone was standing up ready to leave the Hall .Hermione jumped up looking flustered .Ron were supposed to show the first years where to go !Oh yeah said Ron who had obviously forgotten .Hey hey you lot !Midgets !Ron Well they are theyre titchy .I know but you cant call them midgets .First years !Hermione called commandingly along the table .This way please !A group of new students walked shyly up the gap between the Gryffindor and Hufflepuff tables all of them trying hard not to lead the group .They did indeed seem very small Harry was sure he had not appeared that young when he had arrived here .He grinned at them .A blond boy next to Euan Abercrombie looked petrified nudged Euan and whispered something in his ear .Euan Abercrombie looked equally frightened and stole a horrified look at Harry who felt the grin slide off his face like Stinksap .See you later he said to Ron and Hermione and he made his way out of the Great Hall alone doing everything he could to ignore more whispering staring and pointing as he passed .He kept his eyes fixed ahead as he wove his way through the crowd in the entrance hall then he hurried up the marble staircase took a couple of concealed shortcuts and had soon left most of the crowds behind .He had been stupid not to expect this he thought angrily as he walked through much emptier upstairs corridors .Of course everyone was staring at him He had emerged from the Triwizard maze two months ago clutching the dead body of a fellow student and claiming to have seen Lord Voldemort return to power .There had not been time last term to explain himself before everyone went home even if he had felt up to giving the whole school a detailed account of the terrible events in that graveyard .He had reached the end of the corridor to the Gryffindor common room and had come to a halt in front of the portrait of the Fat Lady before he realized that he did not know the new password .Er .he said glumly staring up at the Fat Lady who smoothed the folds of her pink satin dress and looked sternly back at him .No password no entrance she said loftily .Harry I know it !someone panted from behind him and he turned to see Neville jogging toward him .Guess what it is ?Im actually going to be able to remember it for once He waved the stunted little cactus he had shown them on the train .Mimbulus mimbletonio 1 Correct said the Fat Lady and her portrait swung open toward them like a door revealing a circular hole in the wall behind through which Harry and Neville now climbed .The Gryffindor common room looked as welcoming as ever a cozy circular tower room full of dilapidated squashy armchairs and rickety old tables .A fire was crackling merrily in the grate and a few people were warming their hands before going up to their dormitories on the other side of the room Fred and George Weasley were pinning something up on the notice board .Harry waved good night to them and headed straight for the door to the boys dormitories he was not in much of a mood for talking at the moment .Neville followed him .Dean Thomas and Seamus Finnigan had reached the dormitory first and were in the process of covering the walls beside their beds with posters and photographs .They had been talking as Harry pushed open the door but stopped abruptly the moment they saw him .Harry wondered whether they had been talking about him then whether he was being paranoid .Hi he said moving across to his own trunk and opening it .Hey Harry said Dean who was putting on a pair of pajamas in the West Ham colors .Good holiday ?Not bad muttered Harry as a true account of his holiday would have taken most of the night to relate and he could not face it .You ?Yeah it was okay chuckled Dean .Better than Seamuss anyway he was just telling me .Why what happened Seamus ?Neville asked as he placed his Mimbulus mimbletonia tenderly on his bedside cabinet .Seamus did not answer immediately he was making rather a meal of ensuring that his poster of the Kenmare Kestrels Quidditch team was quite straight .Then he said with his back still turned to Harry Me mam didnt want me to come back .What ?said Harry pausing in the act of pulling off his robes .She didnt want me to come back to Hogwarts .Seamus turned away from his poster and pulled his own pajamas out of his trunk still not looking at Harry .But why ?said Harry astonished .He knew that Seamuss mother was a witch and could not understand therefore why she should have come over so Dursleyish .Seamus did not answer until he had finished buttoning his pajamas .Well he said in a measured voice I suppose .because of you .What dyou mean ?said Harry quickly .His heart was beating rather fast .He felt vaguely as though something was closing in on him .Well said Seamus again still avoiding Harrys eyes she .er .well its not just you its Dumbledore too .She believes the Daily Prophet ?said Harry .She thinks Im a liar and Dumbledore s an old fool ?Seamus looked up at him .Yeah something like that .Harry said nothing .He threw his wand down onto his bedside table pulled off his robes stuffed them angrily into his trunk and pulled on his pajamas .He was sick of it sick of being the person who was stared at and talked about all the time .If any of them knew if any of them had the faintest idea what it felt like to be the one all these things had happened to .Mrs Finnigan had no idea the stupid woman he thought savagely .He got into bed and made to pull the hangings closed around him but before he could do so Seamus said Look .what did happen that night when .you know when .with Cedric Diggory and all ?Seamus sounded nervous and eager at the same time .Dean who had been bending over his trunk trying to retrieve a slipper went oddly still and Harry knew he was listening hard .What are you asking me for ?Harry retorted .Just read the Daily Prophet like your mother why dont you ?Thatll tell you all you need to know .Dont you have a go at my mother snapped Seamus .Ill have a go at anyone who calls me a liar said Harry .Dont talk to me like that !Ill talk to you how I want said Harry his temper rising so fast he snatched his wand back from his bedside table .If youve got a problem sharing a dormitory with me go and ask McGonagall if you can be moved stop your mummy worrying Leave my mother out of this Potter !Whats going on ?Ron had appeared in the doorway .His wide eyes traveled from Harry who was kneeling on his bed with his wand pointing at Seamus to Seamus who was standing there with his fists raised .Hes having a go at my mother !Seamus yelled .What ?said Ron .Harry wouldnt do that we met your mother we liked her .Thats before she started believing every word the stinking Daily Prophet writes about me !said Harry at the top of his voice .Oh said Ron comprehension dawning across his freckled face .Oh .right .You know what ?said Seamus heatedly casting Harry a venomous look .Hes right I dont want to share a dormitory with him anymore hes a madman .Thats out of order Seamus said Ron whose ears were starting to glow red always a danger sign .Out of order am I ?shouted Seamus who in contrast with Ron was turning paler .You believe all the rubbish hes come out with about YouKnowWho do you you reckon hes telling the truth ?Yeah I do !said Ron angrily .Then youre mad too said Seamus in disgust .Yeah ?Well unfortunately for you pal Im also a prefect !said Ron jabbing himself in the chest with a finger .So unless you want detention watch your mouth !Seamus looked for a few seconds as though detention would be a reasonable price to pay to say what was going through his mind but with a noise of contempt he turned on his heel vaulted into bed and pulled the hangings shut with such violence that they were ripped from the bed and fell in a dusty pile to the floor .Ron glared at Seamus then looked at Dean and Neville .Anyone elses parents got a problem with Harry ?he said aggressively .My parents are Muggles mate said Dean shrugging .They dont know nothing about no deaths at Hogwarts because Im not stupid enough to tell them .You dont know my mother shell weasel anything out of anyone !Seamus snapped at him .Anyway your parents dont get the Daily Prophet they dont know our headmasters been sacked from the Wizengamot and the International Confederation of Wizards because hes losing his marbles My gran says thats rubbish piped up Neville .She says its the Daily Prophet thats going downhill not Dumbledore .Shes canceled our subscription .We believe Harry he said simply .He climbed into bed and pulled the covers up to his chin looking owlishly over them at Seamus .My grans always said You KnowWho would come back one day .She says if Dumbledore says hes back hes back .Harry felt a rush of gratitude toward Neville .Nobody else said anything .Seamus got out his wand repaired the bed hangings and vanished behind them .Dean got into bed rolled over and fell silent .Neville who appeared to have nothing more to say either was gazing fondly at his moonlit cactus .Harry lay back on his pillows while Ron bustled around the next bed putting his things away .He felt shaken by the argument with Seamus whom he had always liked very much .How many more people were going to suggest that he was lying or unhinged ?Had Dumbledore suffered like this all summer as first the Wizengamot then the International Confederation of Wizards had thrown him from their ranks ?Was it anger at Harry perhaps that had stopped Dumbledore getting in touch with him for months ?The two of them were in this together after all Dumbledore had believed Harry announced his version of events to the whole school and then to the wider Wizarding community .Anyone who thought Harry was a liar had to think that Dumbledore was too or else that Dumbledore had been hoodwinked .Theyll know were right in the end thought Harry miserably as Ron got into bed and extinguished the last candle in the dormitory .But he wondered how many attacks like Seamuss he would have to endure before that time came .PROFESSOR UMBRIDGE Seamus dressed at top speed next morning and left the dormitory before Harry had even put on his socks .Does he think hell turn into a nutter if he stays in a room with me too long ?asked Harry loudly as the hem of Seamuss robes whipped out of sight .Dont worry about it Harry Dean muttered hoisting his schoolbag onto his shoulder .Hes just .But apparently he was unable to say exactly what Seamus was and after a slightly awkward pause followed him out of the room .Neville and Ron both gave Harry itshisproblemnot yours looks but Harry was not much consoled .How much more of this was he going to have to take ?Whats the matter ?asked Hermione five minutes later catching up with Harry and Ron halfway across the common room as they all headed toward breakfast .You look absolutely oh for heavens sake .She was staring at the common room notice board where a large new sign had been put up .GALLONS OF GALLEONS !Pocket money failing to keep pace with your outgoings ?Like to earn a little extra gold ?Contact Fred and George Weasley Gryffindor common room for simple parttime virtually painless jobs WE REGRET THAT ALL WORK IS UNDERTAKEN AT APPLICANTS OWN RISK They are the limit said Hermione grimly taking down the sign which Fred and George had pinned up over a poster giving the date of the first Hogsmeade weekend in October .Well have to talk to them Ron .Ron looked positively alarmed .Why ?Because were prefects !said Hermione as they climbed out through the portrait hole .Its up to us to stop this kind of thing !Ron said nothing Harry could tell from his glum expression that the prospect of stopping Fred and George doing exactly what they liked was not one that he found inviting .Anyway whats up Harry ?Hermione continued as they walked down a flight of stairs lined with portraits of old witches and wizards all of whom ignored them being engrossed in their own conversation .You look really angry about something .Seamus reckons Harrys lying about YouKnow Who said Ron succinctly when Harry did not respond .Hermione whom Harry had expected to react angrily on his behalf sighed .Yes Lavender thinks so too she said gloomily .Been having a nice little chat with her about whether or not Im a lying attentionseeking prat have you ?Harry said loudly .No said Hermione calmly I told her to keep her big fat mouth shut about you actually .And it would be quite nice if you stopped jumping down Rons and my throats Harry because if you havent noticed were on your side .There was a short pause .Sorry said Harry in a low voice .Thats quite all right said Hermione with dignity .Then she shook her head .Dont you remember what Dumbledore said at the endofterm feast last year ?Harry and Ron both looked at her blankly and Hermione sighed again .About YouKnowWho .He said ‘His gift for spreading discord and enmity is very great .We can fight it only by showing an equally strong bond of friendship and trust How do you remember stuff like that ?asked Ron looking at her in admiration .I listen Ron said Hermione with a touch of asperity .So do I but I still couldnt tell you exactly what The point Hermione pressed on loudly is that this sort of thing is exactly what Dumbledore was talking about .YouKnow Whos only been back two months and weve started fighting among ourselves .And the Sorting Hats warning was the same stand together be united And Harry said it last night retorted Ron if that means were supposed to get matey with the Slytherins fat chance .Well I think its a pity were not trying for a bit of interHouse unity said Hermione crossly .They had reached the foot of the marble staircase .A line of fourthyear Ravenclaws was crossing the entrance hall they caught sight of Harry and hurried to form a tighter group as though frightened he might attack stragglers .Yeah we really ought to be trying to make friends with people like that said Harry sarcastically .They followed the Ravenclaws into the Great Hall looking instinctively at the staff table as they entered .Professor GrubblyPlank was chatting to Professor Sinistra the Astronomy teacher and Hagrid was once again conspicuous only by his absence .The enchanted ceiling above them echoed Harrys mood it was a miserable raincloud gray .Dumbledore didnt even mention how long that GrubblyPlank womans staying he said as they made their way across to the Gryffindor table .Maybe .said Hermione thoughtfully .What ?said both Harry and Ron together .Well .maybe he didnt want to draw attention to Hagrid not being here .What dyou mean draw attention to it ?said Ron half laughing .How could we not notice ?Before Hermione could answer a tall black girl with long braided hair had marched up to Harry .Hi Angelina .Hi she said briskly good summer ?And without waiting for an answer Listen Ive been made Gryffindor Quidditch Captain .Nice one said Harry grinning at her he suspected Angelinas pep talks might not be as longwinded as Oliver Woods had been which could only be an improvement .Yeah well we need a new Keeper now Olivers left .Tryouts are on Friday at five oclock and I want the whole team there all right ?Then we can see how the new personll fit in .Okay said Harry and she smiled at him and departed .Id forgotten Wood had left said Hermione vaguely sitting down beside Ron and pulling a plate of toast toward her .I suppose that will make quite a difference to the team ?I spose said Harry taking the bench opposite .He was a good Keeper .Still it wont hurt to have some new blood will it ?said Ron .With a whoosh and a clatter hundreds of owls came soaring in through the upper windows .They descended all over the Hall bringing letters and packages to their owners and showering the breakfasters with droplets of water it was clearly raining hard outside .Hedwig was nowhere to be seen but Harry was hardly surprised his only correspondent was Sirius and he doubted Sirius would have anything new to tell him after only twentyfour hours apart .Hermione however had to move her orange juice aside quickly to make way for a large damp barn owl bearing a sodden Daily Prophet in its beak .What are you still getting that for ?said Harry irritably thinking of Seamus as Hermione placed a Knut in the leather pouch on the owls leg and it took off again .Im not bothering .load of rubbish .Its best to know what the enemy are saying said Hermione darkly and she unfurled the newspaper and disappeared behind it not emerging until Harry and Ron had finished eating .Nothing she said simply rolling up the newspaper and laying it down by her plate .Nothing about you or Dumbledore or anything .Professor McGonagall was now moving along the table handing out schedules .Look at today !groaned Ron .History of Magic double Potions Divination and double Defense Against the Dark Arts .Binns Snape Trelawney and that Umbridge woman all in one day !I wish Fred and George d hurry up and get those Skiving Snackboxes sorted .Do mine ears deceive me ?said Fred arriving with George and squeezing onto the bench beside Harry .Hogwarts prefects surely dont wish to skive off lessons ?Look what weve got today said Ron grumpily shoving his schedule under Freds nose .Thats the worst Monday Ive ever seen .Fair point little bro said Fred scanning the column .You can have a bit of Nosebleed Nougat cheap if you like .Whys it cheap ?said Ron suspiciously .Because youll keep bleeding till you shrivel up we havent got an antidote yet said George helping himself to a kipper .Cheers said Ron moodily pocketing his schedule but I think Ill take the lessons .And speaking of your Skiving Snackboxes said Hermione eyeing Fred and George beadily you cant advertise for testers on the Gryffindor notice board .Says who ?said George looking astonished .Says me said Hermione .And Ron .Leave me out of it said Ron hastily .Hermione glared at him .Fred and George sniggered .Youll be singing a different tune soon enough Hermione said Fred thickly buttering a crumpet .Youre starting your fifth year youll be begging us for a Snackbox before long .And why would starting fifth year mean I want a Skiving Snackbox ?asked Hermione .Fifth years O .W .L .year said George .So ?So youve got your exams coming up havent you ?Theyll be keeping your noses so hard to that grindstone theyll be rubbed raw said Fred with satisfaction .Half our year had minor breakdowns coming up to O .W .L .s said George happily .Tears and tantrums .Patricia Stimpson kept coming over faint .Kenneth Towler came out in boils dyou remember ?said Fred reminiscently .Thats cause you put Bulbadox Powder in his pajamas said George .Oh yeah said Fred grinning .Id forgotten .Hard to keep track sometimes isnt it ?Anyway its a nightmare of a year the fifth said George .If you care about exam results anyway .Fred and I managed to keep our spirits up somehow .Yeah .you got what was it three O .W .L .s each ?said Ron .Yep said Fred unconcernedly .But we feel our futures lie outside the world of academic achievement .We seriously debated whether we were going to bother coming back for our seventh year said George brightly now that weve got He broke off at a warning look from Harry who knew George had been about to mention the Triwizard winnings he had given them .now that weve got our O .W .L .s George said hastily .I mean do we really need N .E .W .T .s ?But we didnt think Mum could take us leaving school early not on top of Percy turning out to be the worlds biggest prat .Were not going to waste our last year here though said Fred looking affectionately around at the Great Hall .Were going to use it to do a bit of market research find out exactly what the average Hogwarts student requires from his joke shop carefully evaluate the results of our research and then produce the products to fit the demand .But where are you going to get the gold to start a joke shop ?asked Hermione skeptically .Youre going to need all the ingredients and materials and premises too I suppose .Harry did not look at the twins .His face felt hot he deliberately dropped his fork and dived down to retrieve it .He heard Fred say overhead Ask us no questions and well tell you no lies Hermione .Cmon George if we get there early we might be able to sell a few Extendable Ears before Herbology .Harry emerged from under the table to see Fred and George walking away each carrying a stack of toast .What did that mean ?said Hermione looking from Harry to Ron . ‘Ask us no questions .Does that mean theyve already got some gold to start a joke shop ?You know Ive been wondering about that said Ron his brow furrowed .They bought me a new set of dress robes this summer and I couldnt understand where they got the Galleons .Harry decided it was time to steer the conversation out of these dangerous waters .Dyou reckon its true this years going to be really tough ?Because of the exams ?Oh yeah said Ron .Bound to be isnt it ?O .W .L .s are really important affect the jobs you can apply for and everything .We get career advice too later this year Bill told me .So you can choose what N .E .W .T .s you want to do next year .Dyou know what you want to do after Hogwarts ?Harry asked the other two as they left the Great Hall shortly afterward and set off toward their History of Magic classroom .Not really said Ron slowly .Except .well .He looked slightly sheepish .What ?Harry urged him .Well itd be cool to be an Auror said Ron in an offhand voice .Yeah it would said Harry fervently .But theyre like the elite said Ron .Youve got to be really good .What about you Hermione ?I dont know said Hermione .I think Id really like to do something worthwhile .An Aurors worthwhile !said Harry .Yes it is but its not the only worthwhile thing said Hermione thoughtfully .I mean if I could take S .P .E .W .further .Harry and Ron carefully avoided looking at each other .History of Magic was by common consent the most boring subject ever devised by Wizardkind .Professor Binns their ghost teacher had a wheezy droning voice that was almost guaranteed to cause severe drowsiness within ten minutes five in warm weather .He never varied the form of their lessons but lectured them without pausing while they took notes or rather gazed sleepily into space .Harry and Ron had so far managed to scrape passes in this subject only by copying Hermiones notes before exams she alone seemed able to resist the soporific power of Binns s voice .Today they suffered through three quarters of an hours droning on the subject of giant wars .Harry heard just enough within the first ten minutes to appreciate dimly that in another teachers hands this subject might have been mildly interesting but then his brain disengaged and he spent the remaining thirtyfive minutes playing hangman on a corner of his parchment with Ron while Hermione shot them filthy looks out of the corner of her eye .How would it be she asked them coldly as they left the classroom for break Binns drifting away through the blackboard if I refused to lend you my notes this year ?Wed fail our O .W .L .s said Ron .If you want that on your conscience Hermione .Well youd deserve it she snapped .You dont even try to listen to him do you ?We do try said Ron .We just havent got your brains or your memory or your concentration youre just cleverer than we are is it nice to rub it in ?Oh dont give me that rubbish said Hermione but she looked slightly mollified as she led the way out into the damp courtyard .A fine misty drizzle was falling so that the people standing in huddles around the yard looked blurred at the edges .Harry Ron and Hermione chose a secluded corner under a heavily dripping balcony turning up the collars of their robes against the chilly September air and talking about what Snape was likely to set them in the first lesson of the year .They had got as far as agreeing that it was likely to be something extremely difficult just to catch them off guard after a twomonth holiday when someone walked around the corner toward them .Hello Harry !It was Cho Chang and what was more she was on her own again .This was most unusual Cho was almost always surrounded by a gang of giggling girls Harry remembered the agony of trying to get her by herself to ask her to the Yule Ball .Hi said Harry feeling his face grow hot .At least youre not covered in Stinksap this time he told himself .Cho seemed to be thinking along the same lines .You got that stuff off then ?Yeah said Harry trying to grin as though the memory of their last meeting was funny as opposed to mortifying .So did you .er .have a good summer ?The moment he had said this he wished he hadnt Cedric had been Chos boyfriend and the memory of his death must have affected her holiday almost as badly as it had affected Harrys .Something seemed to tauten in her face but she said Oh it was all right you know .Is that a Tornados badge ?Ron demanded suddenly pointing at the front of Chos robes to which a sky blue badge emblazoned with a double gold T was pinned .You dont support them do you ?Yeah I do said Cho .Have you always supported them or just since they started winning the league ?said Ron in what Harry considered an unnecessarily accusatory tone of voice .Ive supported them since I was six said Cho coolly .Anyway .see you Harry .She walked away .Hermione waited until Cho was halfway across the courtyard before rounding on Ron .You are so tactless !What ?I only asked her if Couldnt you tell she wanted to talk to Harry on her own ?So ?She couldve done I wasnt stopping What on earth were you attacking her about her Quidditch team for ?Attacking ?I wasnt attacking her I was only Who cares if she supports the Tornados ?Oh come on half the people you see wearing those badges only bought them last season But what does it matter ?It means theyre not real fans theyre just jumping on the bandwagon Thats the bell said Harry listlessly because Ron and Hermione were bickering too loudly to hear it .They did not stop arguing all the way down to Snapes dungeon which gave Harry plenty of time to reflect that between Neville and Ron he would be lucky ever to have two minutes conversation with Cho that he could look back on without wanting to leave the country .And yet he thought as they joined the queue lining up outside Snapes classroom door she had chosen to come and talk to him hadnt she ?She had been Cedrics girlfriend she could easily have hated Harry for coming out of the Triwizard maze alive when Cedric had died yet she was talking to him in a perfectly friendly way not as though she thought him mad or a liar or in some horrible way responsible for Cedrics death .Yes she had definitely chosen to come and talk to him and that made the second time in two days .and at this thought Harrys spirits rose .Even the ominous sound of Snapes dungeon door creaking open did not puncture the small hopeful bubble that seemed to have swelled in his chest .He filed into the classroom behind Ron and Hermione and followed them to their usual table at the back ignoring the huffy irritable noises now issuing from both of them .Settle down said Snape coldly shutting the door behind him .There was no real need for the call to order the moment the class had heard the door close quiet had fallen and all fidgeting stopped .Snapes mere presence was usually enough to ensure a classs silence .Before we begin todays lesson said Snape sweeping over to his desk and staring around at them all I think it appropriate to remind you that next June you will be sitting an important examination during which you will prove how much you have learned about the composition and use of magical potions .Moronic though some of this class undoubtedly are I expect you to scrape an ‘Acceptable in your O .W .L .or suffer my .displeasure .His gaze lingered this time upon Neville who gulped .After this year of course many of you will cease studying with me Snape went on .I take only the very best into my N .E .W .T .Potions class which means that some of us will certainly be saying good bye .His eyes rested on Harry and his lip curled .Harry glared back feeling a grim pleasure at the idea that he would be able to give up Potions after fifth year .But we have another year to go before that happy moment of farewell said Snape softly so whether you are intending to attempt N .E .W .T .or not I advise all of you to concentrate your efforts upon maintaining the highpass level I have come to expect from my O .W .L .students .Today we will be mixing a potion that often comes up at Ordinary Wizarding Level the Draught of Peace a potion to calm anxiety and soothe agitation .Be warned If you are too heavyhanded with the ingredients you will put the drinker into a heavy and sometimes irreversible sleep so you will need to pay close attention to what you are doing .On Harrys left Hermione sat up a little straighter her expression one of the utmost attentiveness .The ingredients and method Snape flicked his wand are on the blackboard they appeared there you will find everything you need he flicked his wand again in the store cupboard the door of the said cupboard sprang open you have an hour and a half .Start .Just as Harry Ron and Hermione had predicted Snape could hardly have set them a more difficult fiddly potion .The ingredients had to be added to the cauldron in precisely the right order and quantities the mixture had to be stirred exactly the right number of times firstly in clockwise then in counterclockwise directions the heat of the flames on which it was simmering had to be lowered to exactly the right level for a specific number of minutes before the final ingredient was added .A light silver vapor should now be rising from your potion called Snape with ten minutes left to go .Harry who was sweating profusely looked desperately around the dungeon .His own cauldron was issuing copious amounts of dark gray steam Rons was spitting green sparks .Seamus was feverishly prodding the flames at the base of his cauldron with the tip of his wand as they had gone out .The surface of Hermiones potion however was a shimmering mist of silver vapor and as Snape swept by he looked down his hooked nose at it without comment which meant that he could find nothing to criticize .At Harrys cauldron however Snape stopped looking down at Harry with a horrible smirk on his face .Potter what is this supposed to be ?The Slytherins at the front of the class all looked up eagerly they loved hearing Snape taunt Harry .The Draught of Peace said Harry tensely .Tell me Potter said Snape softly can you read ?Draco Malfoy laughed .Yes I can said Harry his fingers clenched tightly around his wand .Read the third line of the instructions for me Potter .Harry squinted at the blackboard it was not easy to make out the instructions through the haze of multicolored steam now filling the dungeon . ‘Add powdered moonstone stir three times counterclockwise allow to simmer for seven minutes then add two drops of syrup of hellebore .His heart sank .He had not added syrup of hellebore but had proceeded straight to the fourth line of the instructions after allowing his potion to simmer for seven minutes .Did you do everything on the third line Potter ?No said Harry very quietly .I beg your pardon ?No said Harry more loudly .I forgot the hellebore .I know you did Potter which means that this mess is utterly worthless .Evanesco .The contents of Harrys potion vanished he was left standing foolishly beside an empty cauldron .Those of you who have managed to read the instructions fill one flagon with a sample of your potion label it clearly with your name and bring it up to my desk for testing said Snape .Homework twelve inches of parchment on the properties of moonstone and its uses in potionmaking to be handed in on Thursday .While everyone around him filled their flagons Harry cleared away his things seething .His potion had been no worse than Rons which was now giving off a foul odor of bad eggs or Nevilles which had achieved the consistency of justmixed cement and which Neville was now having to gouge out of his cauldron yet it was he Harry who would be receiving zero marks for the days work .He stuffed his wand back into his bag and slumped down onto his seat watching everyone else march up to Snapes desk with filled and corked flagons .When at long last the bell rang Harry was first out of the dungeon and had already started his lunch by the time Ron and Hermione joined him in the Great Hall .The ceiling had turned an even murkier gray during the morning .Rain was lashing the high windows .That was really unfair said Hermione consolingly sitting down next to Harry and helping herself to shepherds pie .Your potion wasnt nearly as bad as Goyles when he put it in his flagon the whole thing shattered and set his robes on fire .Yeah well said Harry glowering at his plate since when has Snape ever been fair to me ?Neither of the others answered all three of them knew that Snape and Harrys mutual enmity had been absolute from the moment Harry had set foot in Hogwarts .I did think he might be a bit better this year said Hermione in a disappointed voice .I mean .you know .She looked carefully around there were half a dozen empty seats on either side of them and nobody was passing the table .Now hes in the Order and everything .Poisonous toadstools dont change their spots said Ron sagely .Anyway Ive always thought Dumbledore was cracked trusting Snape wheres the evidence he ever really stopped working for YouKnowWho ?I think Dumbledores probably got plenty of evidence even if he doesnt share it with you Ron snapped Hermione .Oh shut up the pair of you said Harry heavily as Ron opened his mouth to argue back .Hermione and Ron both froze looking angry and offended .Cant you give it a rest ?he said .Youre always having a go at each other its driving me mad .And abandoning his shepherds pie he swung his schoolbag back over his shoulder and left them sitting there .He walked up the marble staircase two steps at a time past the many students hurrying toward lunch .The anger that had just flared so unexpectedly still blazed inside him and the vision of Ron and Hermione s shocked faces afforded him a sense of deep satisfaction .Serve them right he thought .Why cant they give it a rest ? .Bickering all the time .Its enough to drive anyone up the wall .He passed the large picture of Sir Cadogan the knight on a landing Sir Cadogan drew his sword and brandished it fiercely at Harry who ignored him .Come back you scurvy dog stand fast and fight !yelled Sir Cadogan in a muffled voice from behind his visor but Harry merely walked on and when Sir Cadogan attempted to follow him by running into a neighboring picture he was rebuffed by its inhabitant a large and angrylooking wolfhound .Harry spent the rest of the lunch hour sitting alone underneath the trapdoor at the top of North Tower and consequently he was the first to ascend the silver ladder that led to Sibyll Trelawneys classroom when the bell rang .Divination was Harrys least favorite class after Potions which was due mainly to Professor Trelawneys habit of predicting his premature death every few lessons .A thin woman heavily draped in shawls and glittering with strings of beads she always reminded Harry of some kind of insect with her glasses hugely magnifying her eyes .She was busy putting copies of battered leatherbound books on each of the spindly little tables with which her room was littered when Harry entered the room but so dim was the light cast by the lamps covered by scarves and the lowburning sicklyscented fire that she appeared not to notice him as he took a seat in the shadows .The rest of the class arrived over the next five minutes .Ron emerged from the trapdoor looked around carefully spotted Harry and made directly for him or as directly as he could while having to wend his way between tables chairs and overstuffed poufs .Hermione and me have stopped arguing he said sitting down beside Harry .Good grunted Harry .But Hermione says she thinks it would be nice if you stopped taking out your temper on us said Ron .Im not Im just passing on the message said Ron talking over him .But I reckon shes right .Its not our fault how Seamus and Snape treat you .I never said it Good day said Professor Trelawney in her usual misty dreamy voice and Harry broke off feeling both annoyed and slightly ashamed of himself again .And welcome back to Divination .I have of course been following your fortunes most carefully over the holidays and am delighted to see that you have all returned to Hogwarts safely as of course I knew you would .You will find on the tables before you copies of The Dream Oracle by Inigo Imago .Dream interpretation is a most important means of divining the future and one that may very probably be tested in your O .W .L .Not of course that I believe examination passes or failures are of the remotest importance when it comes to the sacred art of divination .If you have the Seeing Eye certificates and grades matter very little .However the headmaster likes you to sit the examination so .Her voice trailed away delicately leaving them all in no doubt that Professor Trelawney considered her subject above such sordid matters as examinations .Turn please to the introduction and read what Imago has to say on the matter of dream interpretation .Then divide into pairs .Use The Dream Oracle to interpret each others most recent dreams .Carry on .The one good thing to be said for this lesson was that it was not a double period .By the time they had all finished reading the introduction of the book they had barely ten minutes left for dream interpretation .At the table next to Harry and Ron Dean had paired up with Neville who immediately embarked on a long winded explanation of a nightmare involving a pair of giant scissors wearing his grandmothers best hat Harry and Ron merely looked at each other glumly .I never remember my dreams said Ron .You say one .You must remember one of them said Harry impatiently .He was not going to share his dreams with anyone .He knew perfectly well what his regular nightmare about a graveyard meant he did not need Ron or Professor Trelawney or the stupid Dream Oracle to tell him that .Well I had one that I was playing Quidditch the other night said Ron screwing up his face in an effort to remember .What dyou reckon that means ?Probably that youre going to be eaten by a giant marshmallow or something said Harry turning the pages of The Dream Oracle without interest .It was very dull work looking up bits of dreams in the Oracle and Harry was not cheered up when Professor Trelawney set them the task of keeping a dream diary for a month as homework .When the bell went he and Ron led the way back down the ladder Ron grumbling loudly .Dyou realize how much homework weve got already ?Binns set us a footandahalflong essay on giant wars Snape wants a foot on the use of moonstones and now weve got a months dream diary from Trelawney !Fred and George werent wrong about O .W .L .year were they ?That Umbridge woman had better not give us any .When they entered the Defense Against the Dark Arts classroom they found Professor Umbridge already seated at the teachers desk wearing the fluffy pink cardigan of the night before and the black velvet bow on top of her head .Harry was again reminded forcibly of a large fly perched unwisely on top of an even larger toad .The class was quiet as it entered the room Professor Umbridge was as yet an unknown quantity and nobody knew yet how strict a disciplinarian she was likely to be .Well good afternoon !she said when finally the whole class had sat down .A few people mumbled Good afternoon in reply .Tut tut said Professor Umbridge .That wont do now will it ?I should like you please to reply ‘Good afternoon Professor Umbridge .One more time please .Good afternoon class !Good afternoon Professor Umbridge they chanted back at her .There now said Professor Umbridge sweetly .That wasnt too difficult was it ?Wands away and quills out please .Many of the class exchanged gloomy looks the order wands away had never yet been followed by a lesson they had found interesting .Harry shoved his wand back inside his bag and pulled out quill ink and parchment .Professor Umbridge opened her handbag extracted her own wand which was an unusually short one and tapped the blackboard sharply with it words appeared on the board at once Defense Against the Dark Arts A Return to Basic Principles .Well now your teaching in this subject has been rather disrupted and fragmented hasnt it ?stated Professor Umbridge turning to face the class with her hands clasped neatly in front of her .The constant changing of teachers many of whom do not seem to have followed any Ministryapproved curriculum has unfortunately resulted in your being far below the standard we would expect to see in your O .W .L .year .You will be pleased to know however that these problems are now to be rectified .We will be following a carefully structured theorycentered Ministry approved course of defensive magic this year .Copy down the following please .She rapped the blackboard again the first message vanished and was replaced by Course aims 1 .Understanding the principles underlying defensive magic .2 .Learning to recognize situations in which defensive magic can legally be used .3 .Placing the use of defensive magic in a context for practical use .For a couple of minutes the room was full of the sound of scratching quills on parchment .When everyone had copied down Professor Umbridges three course aims she said Has everybody got a copy of Defensive Magical Theory by Wilbert Slinkhard ?There was a dull murmur of assent throughout the class .I think well try that again said Professor Umbridge .When I ask you a question I should like you to reply ‘Yes Professor Umbridge or ‘No Professor Umbridge .So has everyone got a copy of Defensive Magical Theory by Wilbert Slinkhard ?Yes Professor Umbridge rang through the room .Good said Professor Umbridge .I should like you to turn to page five and read chapter one ‘Basics for Beginners .There will be no need to talk .Professor Umbridge left the blackboard and settled herself in the chair behind the teachers desk observing them all with those pouchy toads eyes .Harry turned to page five of his copy of Defensive Magical Theory and started to read .It was desperately dull quite as bad as listening to Professor Binns .He felt his concentration sliding away from him he had soon read the same line half a dozen times without taking in more than the first few words .Several silent minutes passed .Next to him Ron was absentmindedly turning his quill over and over in his fingers staring at the same spot on the page .Harry looked right and received a surprise to shake him out of his torpor .Hermione had not even opened her copy of Defensive Magical Theory .She was staring fixedly at Professor Umbridge with her hand in the air .Harry could not remember Hermione ever neglecting to read when instructed to or indeed resisting the temptation to open any book that came under her nose .He looked at her questioningly but she merely shook her head slightly to indicate that she was not about to answer questions and continued to stare at Professor Umbridge who was looking just as resolutely in another direction .After several more minutes had passed however Harry was not the only one watching Hermione .The chapter they had been instructed to read was so tedious that more and more people were choosing to watch Hermiones mute attempt to catch Professor Umbridges eye than to struggle on with Basics for Beginners .When more than half the class were staring at Hermione rather than at their books Professor Umbridge seemed to decide that she could ignore the situation no longer .Did you want to ask something about the chapter dear ?she asked Hermione as though she had only just noticed her .Not about the chapter no said Hermione .Well were reading just now said Professor Umbridge showing her small pointed teeth .If you have other queries we can deal with them at the end of class .Ive got a query about your course aims said Hermione .Professor Umbridge raised her eyebrows .And your name is ?Hermione Granger said Hermione .Well Miss Granger I think the course aims are perfectly clear if you read them through carefully said Professor Umbridge in a voice of determined sweetness .Well I dont said Hermione bluntly .Theres nothing written up there about using defensive spells .There was a short silence in which many members of the class turned their heads to frown at the three course aims still written on the blackboard .Using defensive spells ?Professor Umbridge repeated with a little laugh .Why I cant imagine any situation arising in my classroom that would require you to use a defensive spell Miss Granger .You surely arent expecting to be attacked during class ?Were not going to use magic ?Ron ejaculated loudly .Students raise their hands when they wish to speak in my class Mr  ?Weasley said Ron thrusting his hand into the air .Professor Umbridge smiling still more widely turned her back on him .Harry and Hermione immediately raised their hands too .Professor Umbridges pouchy eyes lingered on Harry for a moment before she addressed Hermione .Yes Miss Granger ?You wanted to ask something else ?Yes said Hermione .Surely the whole point of Defense Against the Dark Arts is to practice defensive spells ?Are you a Ministrytrained educational expert Miss Granger ?asked Professor Umbridge in her falsely sweet voice .No but Well then Im afraid you are not qualified to decide what the Svhole point of any class is .Wizards much older and cleverer than you have devised our new program of study .You will be learning about defensive spells in a secure riskfree way What use is that ?said Harry loudly .If were going to be attacked it wont be in a Hand Mr Potter !sang Professor Umbridge .Harry thrust his fist in the air .Professor Umbridge promptly turned away from him again but now several other people had their hands up too .And your name is ?Professor Umbridge said to Dean .Dean Thomas .Well Mr Thomas ?Well its like Harry said isnt it ?said Dean .If were going to be attacked it wont be riskfree I repeat said Professor Umbridge smiling in a very irritating fashion at Dean do you expect to be attacked during my classes ?No but Professor Umbridge talked over him .I do not wish to criticize the way things have been run in this school she said an unconvincing smile stretching her wide mouth but you have been exposed to some very irresponsible wizards in this class very irresponsible indeed not to mention she gave a nasty little laugh extremely dangerous halfbreeds .If you mean Professor Lupin piped up Dean Thomas angrily he was the best we ever Hand Mr Thomas !As I was saying you have been introduced to spells that have been complex inappropriate to your age group and potentially lethal .You have been frightened into believing that you are likely to meet Dark attacks every other day No we havent Hermione said we just Your hand is not up Miss Grangeii Hermione put up her hand Professor Umbridge turned away from her .It is my understanding that my predecessor not only performed illegal curses in front of you he actually performed them on you Well he turned out to be a maniac didnt he ?said Dean Thomas hotly .Mind you we still learned loads Your hand is not up Mr ThomasY trilled Professor Umbridge .Now it is the view of the Ministry that a theoretical knowledge will be more than sufficient to get you through your examination which after all is what school is all about .And your name is ?she added staring at Parvati whose hand had just shot up .Parvati Patil and isnt there a practical bit in our Defense Against the Dark Arts O .W .L .Arent we supposed to show that we can actually do the countercurses and things ?As long as you have studied the theory hard enough there is no reason why you should not be able to perform the spells under carefully controlled examination conditions said Professor Umbridge dismissively .Without ever practicing them before ?said Parvati incredulously .Are you telling us that the first time well get to do the spells will be during our exam ?I repeat as long as you have studied the theory hard enough And what goods theory going to be in the real world ?said Harry loudly his fist in the air again .Professor Umbridge looked up .This is school Mr Potter not the real world she said softly .So were not supposed to be prepared for whats waiting out there ?There is nothing waiting out there Mr Potter .Oh yeah ?said Harry .His temper which seemed to have been bubbling just beneath the surface all day was reaching boiling point .Who do you imagine wants to attack children like yourselves ?inquired Professor Umbridge in a horribly honeyed voice .Hmm lets think .said Harry in a mock thoughtful voice maybe Lord Voldemort ?Ron gasped Lavender Brown uttered a little scream Neville slipped sideways off his stool .Professor Umbridge however did not flinch .She was staring at Harry with a grimly satisfied expression on her face .Ten points from Gryffindor Mr Potter .The classroom was silent and still .Everyone was staring at either Umbridge or Harry .Now let me make a few things quite plain .Professor Umbridge stood up and leaned toward them her stubbyfingered hands splayed on her desk .You have been told that a certain Dark wizard has returned from the dead He wasnt dead said Harry angrily but yeah hes returned !Mr PotteryouhavealreadylostyourHouseten pointsdonotmakemattersworseforyourself said Professor Umbridge in one breath without looking at him .As I was saying you have been informed that a certain Dark wizard is at large once again .This is a lie .It is NOT a lie !said Harry .I saw him I fought him !Detention Mr Potter !said Professor Umbridge triumphantly .Tomorrow evening .Five oclock .My office .I repeat this is a lie .The Ministry of Magic guarantees that you are not in danger from any Dark wizard .If you are still worried by all means come and see me outside class hours .If someone is alarming you with fibs about reborn Dark wizards I would like to hear about it .I am here to help .I am your friend .And now you will kindly continue your reading .Page five ‘Basics for Beginners .Professor Umbridge sat down behind her desk again .Harry however stood up .Everyone was staring at him Seamus looked halfscared halffascinated .Harry no !Hermione whispered in a warning voice tugging at his sleeve but Harry jerked his arm out of her reach .So according to you Cedric Diggory dropped dead of his own accord did he ?Harry asked his voice shaking .There was a collective intake of breath from the class for none of them apart from Ron and Hermione had ever heard Harry talk about what had happened on the night that Cedric had died .They stared avidly from Harry to Professor Umbridge who had raised her eyes and was staring at him without a trace of a fake smile on her face .Cedric Diggorys death was a tragic accident she said coldly .It was murder said Harry .He could feel himself shaking .He had hardly talked to anyone about this least of all thirty eagerly listening classmates .Voldemort killed him and you know it .Professor Umbridges face was quite blank .For a moment he thought she was going to scream at him .Then she said in her softest most sweetly girlish voice Come here Mr Potter dear .He kicked his chair aside strode around Ron and Hermione and up to the teachers desk .He could feel the rest of the class holding its breath .He felt so angry he did not care what happened next .Professor Umbridge pulled a small roll of pink parchment out of her handbag stretched it out on the desk dipped her quill into a bottle of ink and started scribbling hunched over so that Harry could not see what she was writing .Nobody spoke .After a minute or so she rolled up the parchment and tapped it with her wand it sealed itself seamlessly so that he could not open it .Take this to Professor McGonagall dear said Professor Umbridge holding out the note to him .He took it from her without saying a word and left the room not even looking back at Ron and Hermione and slamming the classroom door shut behind him .He walked very fast along the corridor the note to McGonagall clutched tight in his hand and turning a corner walked slap into Peeves the Poltergeist a wide faced little man floating on his back in midair juggling several inkwells .Why its Potty Wee Potter !cackled Peeves allowing two of the inkwells to fall to the ground where they smashed and spattered the walls with ink Harry jumped backward out of the way with a snarl .Get out of it Peeves .Oooh Crackpots feeling cranky said Peeves pursuing Harry along the corridor leering as he zoomed along above him .What is it this time my fine Potty friend ?Hearing voices ?Seeing visions ?Speaking in Peeves blew a gigantic raspberry tongues ?I said leave me ALONE !Harry shouted running down the nearest flight of stairs but Peeves merely slid down the banister on his back beside him .Oh most think hes barking the Potty wee lad But some are more kindly and think hes just sad But Peevesy knows better and says that hes mad SHUT UP !A door to his left flew open and Professor McGonagall emerged from her office looking grim and slightly harassed .What on earth are you shouting about Potter ?she snapped as Peeves cackled gleefully and zoomed out of sight .Why arent you in class ?Ive been sent to see you said Harry stiffly .Sent ?What do you mean sent ?He held out the note from Professor Umbridge .Professor McGonagall took it from him frowning slit it open with a tap of her wand stretched it out and began to read .Her eyes zoomed from side to side behind their square spectacles as she read what Umbridge had written and with each line they became narrower .Come in here Potter .He followed her inside her study .The door closed automatically behind him .Well ?said Professor McGonagall rounding on him .Is this true ?Is what true ?Harry asked rather more aggressively than he had intended .Professor ?he added in an attempt to sound more polite .Is it true that you shouted at Professor Umbridge ?Yes said Harry .You called her a liar ?Yes .You told her HeWhoMustNotBeNamed is back ?Yes .Professor McGonagall sat down behind her desk frowning at Harry .Then she said Have a biscuit Potter .Have what ?Have a biscuit she repeated impatiently indicating a tartan tin of cookies lying on top of one of the piles of papers on her desk .And sit down .There had been a previous occasion when Harry expecting to be caned by Professor McGonagall had instead been appointed by her to the Gryffindor Quidditch team .He sank into a chair opposite her and helped himself to a Ginger Newt feeling just as confused and wrongfooted as he had done on that occasion .Professor McGonagall set down Professor Umbridges note and looked very seriously at Harry .Potter you need to be careful .Harry swallowed his mouthful of Ginger Newt and stared at her .Her tone of voice was not at all what he was used to it was not brisk crisp and stern it was low and anxious and somehow much more human than usual .Misbehavior in Dolores Umbridges class could cost you much more than House points and a detention .What do you ?Potter use your common sense snapped Professor McGonagall with an abrupt return to her usual manner .You know where she comes from you must know to whom she is reporting .The bell rang for the end of the lesson .Overhead and all around came the elephantine sounds of hundreds of students on the move .It says here shes given you detention every evening this week starting tomorrow Professor McGonagall said looking down at Umbridges note again .Every evening this week !Harry repeated horrified .But Professor couldnt you ?No I couldnt said Professor McGonagall flatly .But She is your teacher and has every right to give you detention .You will go to her room at five oclock tomorrow for the first one .Just remember Tread carefully around Dolores Umbridge .But I was telling the truth !said Harry outraged .Voldemorts back you know he is Professor Dumbledore knows he is For heavens sake Potter !said Professor McGonagall straightening her glasses angrily she had winced horribly when he had used Voldemorts name .Do you really think this is about truth or lies ?Its about keeping your head down and your temper under control !She stood up nostrils wide and mouth very thin and he stood too .Have another biscuit she said irritably thrusting the tin at him .No thanks said Harry coldly .Dont be ridiculous she snapped .He took one .Thanks he said grudgingly .Didnt you listen to Dolores Umbridges speech at the startofterm feast Potter ?Yeah said Harry .Yeah .she said .progress will be prohibited or .well it meant that .that the Ministry of Magic is trying to interfere at Hogwarts .Professor McGonagall eyed him for a moment then sniffed walked around her desk and held open the door for him .Well Im glad you listen to Hermione Granger at any rate she said pointing him out of her office .DETENTION WITH DOLORES Dinner in the Great Hall that night was not a pleasant experience for Harry .The news about his shouting match with Umbridge seemed to have traveled exceptionally fast even by Hogwarts standards .He heard whispers all around him as he sat eating between Ron and Hermione .The funny thing was that none of the whisperers seemed to mind him overhearing what they were saying about him on the contrary it was as though they were hoping he would get angry and start shouting again so that they could hear his story firsthand .He says he saw Cedric Diggory murdered .He reckons he dueled with YouKnowWho .Come off it .Who does he think hes kidding ?Pur lease .What I dont get said Harry in a shaking voice laying down his knife and fork his hands were trembling too much to hold them steady is why they all believed the story two months ago when Dumbledore told them .The thing is Harry Im not sure they did said Hermione grimly .Oh lets get out of here .She slammed down her own knife and fork Ron looked sadly at his halffinished apple pie but followed suit .People stared at them all the way out of the Hall .What dyou mean youre not sure they believed Dumbledore ?Harry asked Hermione when they reached the firstfloor landing .Look you dont understand what it was like after it happened said Hermione quietly .You arrived back in the middle of the lawn clutching Cedrics dead body .None of us saw what happened in the maze .We just had Dumbledores word for it that YouKnow Who had come back and killed Cedric and fought you .Which is the truth !said Harry loudly .I know it is Harry so will you please stop biting my head off ?said Hermione wearily .Its just that before the truth could sink in everyone went home for the summer where they spent two months reading about how youre a nutcase and Dumbledores going senile !Rain pounded on the windowpanes as they strode along the empty corridors back to Gryffindor Tower .Harry felt as though his first day had lasted a week but he still had a mountain of homework to do before bed .A dull pounding pain was developing over his right eye .He glanced out of a rainwashed window at the dark grounds as they turned into the Fat Ladys corridor .There was still no light in Hagrids cabin .Mimbulus mimbletonia said Hermione before the Fat Lady could ask .The portrait swung open to reveal the hole behind and the three of them scrambled back through it .The common room was almost empty nearly everyone was still down at dinner .Crookshanks uncoiled himself from an armchair and trotted to meet them purring loudly and when Harry Ron and Hermione took their three favorite chairs at the fireside he leapt lightly into Hermione s lap and curled up there like a furry ginger cushion .Harry gazed into the flames feeling drained and exhausted .How can Dumbledore have let this happen ?Hermione cried suddenly making Harry and Ron jump Crookshanks leapt off her looking affronted .She pounded the arms of her chair in fury so that bits of stuffing leaked out of the holes .How can he let that terrible woman teach us ?And in our O .W .L .year too !Well weve never had great Defense Against the Dark Arts teachers have we ?said Harry .You know what its like Hagrid told us nobody wants the job they say its jinxed .Yes but to employ someone whos actually refusing to let us do magic !Whats Dumbledore playing at ?And shes trying to get people to spy for her said Ron darkly .Remember when she said she wanted us to come and tell her if we hear anyone saying You Know Whos back ?Of course shes here to spy on us all thats obvious why else would Fudge have wanted her to come ?snapped Hermione .Dont start arguing again said Harry wearily as Ron opened his mouth to retaliate .Cant we just .Lets just do that homework get it out of the way .They collected their schoolbags from a corner and returned to the chairs by the fire .People were coming back from dinner now .Harry kept his face averted from the portrait hole but could still sense the stares he was attracting .Shall we do Snapes stuff first ?said Ron dipping his quill into his ink . ‘The properties .of moonstone .and its uses .in potionmaking .he muttered writing the words across the top of his parchment as he spoke them .There .He underlined the title then looked up expectantly at Hermione .So what are the properties of moonstone and its uses in potionmaking ?But Hermione was not listening she was squinting over into the far corner of the room where Fred George and Lee Jordan were now sitting at the center of a knot of innocentlooking first years all of whom were chewing something that seemed to have come out of a large paper bag that Fred was holding .No Im sorry theyve gone too far she said standing up and looking positively furious .Come on Ron .I what ?said Ron plainly playing for time .No come on Hermione we cant tell them off for giving out sweets .You know perfectly well that those are bits of Nosebleed Nougat or or Puking Pastilles or Fainting Fancies ?Harry suggested quietly .One by one as though hit over the heads with invisible mallets the first years were slumping unconscious in their seats some slid right onto the floor others merely hung over the arms of their chairs their tongues lolling out .Most of the people watching were laughing Hermione however squared her shoulders and marched directly over to where Fred and George now stood with clipboards closely observing the unconscious first years .Ron rose halfway out of his chair hovered uncertainly for a moment or two then muttered to Harry Shes got it under control before sinking as low in his chair as his lanky frame permitted .Thats enough !Hermione said forcefully to Fred and George both of whom looked up in mild surprise .Yeah youre right said George nodding this dosage looks strong enough doesnt it ?I told you this morning you cant test your rubbish on students !Were paying them !said Fred indignantly .I dont care it could be dangerous !Rubbish said Fred .Calm down Hermione theyre fine !said Lee reassuringly as he walked from first year to first year inserting purple sweets into their open mouths .Yeah look theyre coming round now said George .A few of the first years were indeed stirring .Several looked so shocked to find themselves lying on the floor or dangling off their chairs that Harry was sure Fred and George had not warned them what the sweets were going to do .Feel all right ?said George kindly to a small dark haired girl lying at his feet .II think so she said shakily .Excellent said Fred happily but the next second Hermione had snatched both his clipboard and the paper bag of Fainting Fancies from his hands .It is NOT excellent !Course it is theyre alive arent they ?said Fred angrily .You cant do this what if you made one of them really ill ?Were not going to make them ill weve already tested them all on ourselves this is just to see if everyone reacts the same If you dont stop doing it Im going to Put us in detention ?said Fred in an Idliketosee youtryit voice .Make us write lines ?said George smirking .Onlookers all over the room were laughing .Hermione drew herself up to her full height her eyes were narrowed and her bushy hair seemed to crackle with electricity .No she said her voice quivering with anger but I will write to your mother .You wouldnt said George horrified taking a step back from her .Oh yes I would said Hermione grimly .I cant stop you eating the stupid things yourselves but youre not giving them to first years .Fred and George looked thunderstruck .It was clear that as far as they were concerned Hermione s threat was way below the belt .With a last threatening look at them she thrust Freds clipboard and the bag of Fancies back into his arms and stalked back to her chair by the fire .Ron was now so low in his seat that his nose was roughly level with his knees .Thank you for your support Ron Hermione said acidly .You handled it fine by yourself Ron mumbled .Hermione stared down at her blank piece of parchment for a few seconds then said edgily Oh its no good I cant concentrate now .Im going to bed .She wrenched her bag open Harry thought she was about to put her books away but instead she pulled out two misshapen woolly objects placed them carefully on a table by the fireplace covered them with a few screwedup bits of parchment and a broken quill and stood back to admire the effect .What in the name of Merlin are you doing ?said Ron watching her as though fearful for her sanity .Theyre hats for houseelves she said briskly now stuffing her books back into her bag .I did them over the summer .Im a really slow knitter without magic but now Im back at school I should be able to make lots more .Youre leaving out hats for the houseelves ?said Ron slowly .And youre covering them up with rubbish first ?Yes said Hermione defiantly swinging her bag onto her back .Thats not on said Ron angrily .Youre trying to trick them into picking up the hats .Youre setting them free when they might not want to be free .Of course they want to be free !said Hermione at once though her face was turning pink .Dont you dare touch those hats Ron !She left .Ron waited until she had disappeared through the door to the girls dormitories then cleared the rubbish off the woolly hats .They should at least see what theyre picking up he said firmly .Anyway .He rolled up the parchment on which he had written the title of Snapes essay .Theres no point trying to finish this now I cant do it without Hermione I havent got a clue what youre supposed to do with moonstones have you ?Harry shook his head noticing as he did so that the ache in his right temple was getting worse .He thought of the long essay on giant wars and the pain stabbed at him sharply .Knowing perfectly well that he would regret not finishing his homework tonight when the morning came he piled his books back into his bag .‘Tm going to bed too .He passed Seamus on the way to the door leading to the dormitories but did not look at him .Harry had a fleeting impression that Seamus had opened his mouth to speak but sped up and reached the soothing peace of the stone spiral staircase without having to endure any more provocation .The following day dawned just as leaden and rainy as the previous one .Hagrid was still absent from the staff table at breakfast .But on the plus side no Snape today said Ron bracingly .Hermione yawned widely and poured herself some coffee .She looked mildly pleased about something and when Ron asked her what she had to be so happy about she simply said The hats have gone .Seems the houseelves do want freedom after all .I wouldnt bet on it Ron told her cuttingly .They might not count as clothes .They didnt look anything like hats to me more like woolly bladders .Hermione did not speak to him all morning .Double Charms was succeeded by double Transfiguration .Professor Flitwick and Professor McGonagall both spent the first fifteen minutes of their lessons lecturing the class on the importance of O .W .L .s .What you must remember said little Professor Flitwick squeakily perched as ever on a pile of books so that he could see over the top of his desk is that these examinations may influence your futures for many years to come !If you have not already given serious thought to your careers now is the time to do so .And in the meantime Im afraid we shall be working harder than ever to ensure that you all do yourselves justice !They then spent more than an hour reviewing Summoning Charms which according to Professor Flitwick were bound to come up in their O .W .L .and he rounded off the lesson by setting them their largest amount of Charms homework ever .It was the same if not worse in Transfiguration .You cannot pass an O .W .L .said Professor McGonagall grimly without serious application practice and study .I see no reason why everybody in this class should not achieve an O .W .L .in Transfiguration as long as they put in the work .Neville made a sad little disbelieving noise .Yes you too Longbottom said Professor McGonagall .Theres nothing wrong with your work except lack of confidence .So .today we are starting Vanishing Spells .These are easier than Conjuring Spells which you would not usually attempt until N .E .W .T .level but they are still among the most difficult magic you will be tested on in your O .W .L .She was quite right Harry found the Vanishing Spells horribly difficult .By the end of a double period neither he nor Ron had managed to vanish the snails on which they were practicing though Ron said hopefully that he thought his looked a bit paler .Hermione on the other hand successfully vanished her snail on the third attempt earning her a tenpoint bonus for Gryffindor from Professor McGonagall .She was the only person not given homework everybody else was told to practice the spell overnight ready for a fresh attempt on their snails the following afternoon .Now panicking slightly about the amount of homework they had to do Harry and Ron spent their lunch hour in the library looking up the uses of moonstones in potionmaking .Still angry about Rons slur on her woolly hats Hermione did not join them .By the time they reached Care of Magical Creatures in the afternoon Harrys head was aching again .The day had become cool and breezy and as they walked down the sloping lawn toward Hagrids cabin on the edge of the Forbidden Forest they felt the occasional drop of rain on their faces .Professor GrubblyPlank stood waiting for the class some ten yards from Hagrids front door a long trestle table in front of her laden with many twigs .As Harry and Ron reached her a loud shout of laughter sounded behind them turning they saw Draco Malfoy striding toward them surrounded by his usual gang of Slytherin cronies .He had clearly just said something highly amusing because Crabbe Goyle Pansy Parkinson and the rest continued to snigger heartily as they gathered around the trestle table .Judging by the fact that all of them kept looking over at Harry he was able to guess the subject of the joke without too much difficulty .Everyone here ?barked Professor GrubblyPlank once all the Slytherins and Gryffindors had arrived .Lets crack on then who can tell me what these things are called ?She indicated the heap of twigs in front of her .Hermione s hand shot into the air .Behind her back Malfoy did a bucktoothed imitation of her jumping up and down in eagerness to answer a question .Pansy Parkinson gave a shriek of laughter that turned almost at once into a scream as the twigs on the table leapt into the air and revealed themselves to be what looked like tiny pixieish creatures made of wood each with knobbly brown arms and legs two twiglike fingers at the end of each hand and a funny flat barklike face in which a pair of beetlebrown eyes glittered .Oooooh !said Parvati and Lavender thoroughly irritating Harry Anyone would have thought that Hagrid never showed them impressive creatures admittedly the flobberworms had been a bit dull but the salamanders and hippogriffs had been interesting enough and the BlastEnded Skrewts perhaps too much so .Kindly keep your voices down girls !said Professor GrubblyPlank sharply scattering a handful of what looked like brown rice among the stickcreatures who immediately fell upon the food .So anyone know the names of these creatures ?Miss Granger ?Bowtruckles said Hermione .Theyre tree guardians usually live in wandtrees .Five points for Gryffindor said Professor Grubbly Plank .Yes these are bowtruckles and as Miss Granger rightly says they generally live in trees whose wood is of wand quality .Anybody know what they eat ?Wood lice said Hermione promptly which explained why what Harry had taken for grains of brown rice were moving .But fairy eggs if they can get them .Good girl take another five points .So whenever you need leaves or wood from a tree in which a bowtruckle lodges it is wise to have a gift of wood lice ready to distract or placate it .They may not look dangerous but if angered they will gouge out human eyes with their fingers which as you can see are very sharp and not at all desirable near the eyeballs .So if youd like to gather closer take a few wood lice and a bowtruckle I have enough here for one between three you can study them more closely .I want a sketch from each of you with all body parts labeled by the end of the lesson .The class surged forward around the trestle table .Harry deliberately circled around the back so that he ended up right next to Professor GrubblyPlank .Wheres Hagrid ?he asked her while everyone else was choosing bowtruckles .Never you mind said Professor GrubblyPlank repressively which had been her attitude last time Hagrid had failed to turn up for a class too .Smirking all over his pointed face Draco Malfoy leaned across Harry and seized the largest bowtruckle .Maybe said Malfoy in an undertone so that only Harry could hear him the stupid great oafs got himself badly injured .Maybe you will if you dont shut up said Harry out of the side of his mouth .Maybe hes been messing with stuff thats too big for him if you get my drift .Malfoy walked away smirking over his shoulder at Harry who suddenly felt sick .Did Malfoy know something ?His father was a Death Eater after all what if he had information about Hagrid s fate that had not yet reached the Orders ears ?He hurried back around the table to Ron and Hermione who were squatting on the grass some distance away and attempting to persuade a bowtruckle to remain still long enough to draw it .Harry pulled out parchment and quill crouched down beside the others and related in a whisper what Malfoy had just said .Dumbledore would know if something had happened to Hagrid said Hermione at once .Its just playing into Malfoys hands to look worried it tells him we dont know exactly whats going on .Weve got to ignore him Harry .Here hold the bowtruckle for a moment just so I can draw its face .Yes came Malfoys clear drawl from the group nearest them Father was talking to the Minister just a couple of days ago you know and it sounds as though the Ministrys really determined to crack down on substandard teaching in this place .So even if that overgrown moron does show up again hell probably be sent packing straight away .OUCH !Harry had gripped the bowtruckle so hard that it had almost snapped it had just taken a great retaliatory swipe at his hand with its sharp fingers leaving two long deep cuts there .Harry dropped it Crabbe and Goyle who had already been guffawing at the idea of Hagrid being sacked laughed still harder as the bowtruckle set off at full tilt toward the forest a little moving stickman soon swallowed up by the tree roots .When the bell echoed distantly over the grounds Harry rolled up his bloodstained bowtruckle picture and marched off to Herbology with his hand wrapped in a handkerchief of Hermione s and Malfoys derisive laughter still ringing in his ears .If he calls Hagrid a moron one more time .snarled Harry .Harry dont go picking a row with Malfoy dont forget hes a prefect now he could make life difficult for you .Wow I wonder what itd be like to have a difficult life ?said Harry sarcastically .Ron laughed but Hermione frowned .Together they traipsed across the vegetable patch .The sky still appeared unable to make up its mind whether it wanted to rain or not .I just wish Hagrid would hurry up and get back thats all said Harry in a low voice as they reached the greenhouses .And dont say that GrubblyPlank womans a better teacher !he added threateningly .I wasnt going to said Hermione calmly .Because shell never be as good as Hagrid said Harry firmly fully aware that he had just experienced an exemplary Care of Magical Creatures lesson and was thoroughly annoyed about it .The door of the nearest greenhouse opened and some fourth years spilled out of it including Ginny .Hi she said brightly as she passed .A few seconds later Luna Lovegood emerged trailing behind the rest of the class a smudge of earth on her nose and her hair tied in a knot on the top of her head .When she saw Harry her prominent eyes seemed to bulge excitedly and she made a beeline straight for him .Many of his classmates turned curiously to watch .Luna took a great breath and then said without so much as a preliminary hello I believe HeWhoMust NotBeNamed is back and I believe you fought him and escaped from him .Er right said Harry awkwardly .Luna was wearing what looked like a pair of orange radishes for earrings a fact that Parvati and Lavender seemed to have noticed as they were both giggling and pointing at her earlobes .You can laugh !Luna said her voice rising apparently under the impression that Parvati and Lavender were laughing at what she had said rather than what she was wearing .But people used to believe there were no such things as the Blibbering Humdinger or the CrumpleHorned Snorkack !Well they were right werent they ?said Hermione impatiently .There werent any such things as the Blibbering Humdinger or the CrumpleHorned Snorkack .Luna gave her a withering look and flounced away radishes swinging madly .Parvati and Lavender were not the only ones hooting with laughter now .Dyou mind not offending the only people who believe me ?Harry asked Hermione as they made their way into class .Oh for heavens sake Harry you can do better than her said Hermione .Ginnys told me all about her apparently shell only believe in things as long as theres no proof at all .Well I wouldnt expect anything else from someone whose father runs The Quibbler .Harry thought of the sinister winged horses he had seen on the night he had arrived and how Luna had said she could see them too .His spirits sank slightly .Had she been lying ?But before he could devote much more thought to the matter Ernie Macmillan had stepped up to him .I want you to know Potter he said in a loud carrying voice that its not only weirdos who support you .I personally believe you one hundred percent .My family have always stood firm behind Dumbledore and so do I .Er thanks very much Ernie said Harry taken aback but pleased .Ernie might be pompous on occasions like these but Harry was in a mood to deeply appreciate a vote of confidence from somebody who was not wearing radishes in their ears .Ernies words had certainly wiped the smile from Lavender Browns face and as he turned to talk to Ron and Hermione Harry caught Seamuss expression which looked both confused and defiant .To nobodys surprise Professor Sprout started their lesson by lecturing them about the importance of O .W .L .s .Harry wished all the teachers would stop doing this he was starting to get an anxious twisted feeling in his stomach every time he remembered how much homework he had to do a feeling that worsened dramatically when Professor Sprout gave them yet another essay at the end of class .Tired and smelling strongly of dragon dung Professor Sprouts preferred brand of fertilizer the Gryffindors trooped back up to the castle an hour and a half later none of them talking very much it had been another long day .As Harry was starving and he had his first detention with Umbridge at five oclock he headed straight for dinner without dropping off his bag in Gryffindor Tower so that he could bolt something down before facing whatever she had in store for him .He had barely reached the entrance of the Great Hall however when a loud and angry voice said Oy Potter !What now ?he muttered wearily turning to face Angelina Johnson who looked as though she was in a towering temper .Ill tell you what now she said marching straight up to him and poking him hard in the chest with her finger .How come youve landed yourself in detention for five oclock on Friday ?What ?said Harry .Why .oh yeah Keeper tryouts !Now he remembers !snarled Angelina .Didnt I tell you I wanted to do a tryout with the whole team and find someone who fitted in with everyone ?Didnt I tell you Id booked the Quidditch pitch specially ?And now youve decided youre not going to be there !I didnt decide not to be there !said Harry stung by the injustice of these words .I got detention from that Umbridge woman just because I told her the truth about YouKnowWho Well you can just go straight to her and ask her to let you off on Friday said Angelina fiercely and I dont care how you do it tell her YouKnowWho s a figment of your imagination if you like just make sure youre therel She stormed away .You know what ?Harry said to Ron and Hermione as they entered the Great Hall .I think wed better check with Puddlemere United whether Oliver Woods been killed during a training session because she seems to be channeling his spirit .What dyou reckon are the odds of Umbridge letting you off on Friday ?said Ron skeptically as they sat down at the Gryffindor table .Less than zero said Harry glumly tipping lamb chops onto his plate and starting to eat .Better try though hadnt I ?Ill offer to do two more detentions or something I dunno .He swallowed a mouthful of potato and added I hope she doesnt keep me too long this evening .You realize weve got to write three essays practice Vanishing Spells for McGonagall work out a countercharm for Flitwick finish the bowtruckle drawing and start that stupid dream diary for Trelawney ?Ron moaned and for some reason glanced up at the ceiling .And it looks like its going to rain .Whats that got to do with our homework ?said Hermione her eyebrows raised .Nothing said Ron at once his ears reddening .At five to five Harry bade the other two goodbye and set off for Umbridges office on the third floor .When he knocked on the door she said Come in in a sugary voice .He entered cautiously looking around .He had known this office under three of its previous occupants .In the days when Gilderoy Lockhart had lived here it had been plastered in beaming portraits of its owner .When Lupin had occupied it it was likely you would meet some fascinating Dark creature in a cage or tank if you came to call .In the impostor Moodys days it had been packed with various instruments and artifacts for the detection of wrongdoing and concealment .Now however it looked totally unrecognizable .The surfaces had all been draped in lacy covers and cloths .There were several vases full of dried flowers each residing on its own doily and on one of the walls was a collection of ornamental plates each decorated with a large technicolor kitten wearing a different bow around its neck .These were so foul that Harry stared at them transfixed until Professor Umbridge spoke again .Good evening Mr Potter .Harry started and looked around .He had not noticed her at first because she was wearing a luridly flowered set of robes that blended only too well with the tablecloth on the desk behind her .Evening Harry said stiffly .Well sit down she said pointing toward a small table draped in lace beside which she had drawn up a straightbacked chair .A piece of blank parchment lay on the table apparently waiting for him .Er said Harry without moving .Professor Umbridge ?Er before we start II wanted to ask you a .a favor .Her bulging eyes narrowed .Oh yes ?Well Im .Im on the Gryffindor Quidditch team .And I was supposed to be at the tryouts for the new Keeper at five oclock on Friday and I was was wondering whether I could skip detention that night and do it do it another night .instead .He knew long before he reached the end of his sentence that it was no good .Oh no said Umbridge smiling so widely that she looked as though she had just swallowed a particularly juicy fly .Oh no no no .This is your punishment for spreading evil nasty attention seeking stories Mr Potter and punishments certainly cannot be adjusted to suit the guilty ones convenience .No you will come here at five oclock tomorrow and the next day and on Friday too and you will do your detentions as planned .I think it rather a good thing that you are missing something you really want to do .It ought to reinforce the lesson I am trying to teach you .Harry felt the blood surge to his head and heard a thumping noise in his ears .So he told evil nasty attentionseeking stories did he ?She was watching him with her head slightly to one side still smiling widely as though she knew exactly what he was thinking and was waiting to see whether he would start shouting again .With a massive effort Harry looked away from her dropped his schoolbag beside the straightbacked chair and sat down .There said Umbridge sweetly were getting better at controlling our temper already arent we ?Now you are going to be doing some lines for me Mr Potter .No not with your quill she added as Harry bent down to open his bag .Youre going to be using a rather special one of mine .Here you are .She handed him a long thin black quill with an unusually sharp point .I want you to write ‘ I must not tell lies she told him softly .How many times ?Harry asked with a creditable imitation of politeness .Oh as long as it takes for the message to sink in said Umbridge sweetly .Off you go .She moved over to her desk sat down and bent over a stack of parchment that looked like essays for marking .Harry raised the sharp black quill and then realized what was missing .You havent given me any ink he said .Oh you wont need ink said Professor Umbridge with the merest suggestion of a laugh in her voice .Harry placed the point of the quill on the paper and wrote I must not tell lies .He let out a gasp of pain .The words had appeared on the parchment in what appeared to be shining red ink .At the same time the words had appeared on the back of Harrys right hand cut into his skin as though traced there by a scalpel yet even as he stared at the shining cut the skin healed over again leaving the place where it had been slightly redder than before but quite smooth .Harry looked around at Umbridge .She was watching him her wide toadlike mouth stretched in a smile .Yes ?Nothing said Harry quietly .He looked back at the parchment placed the quill upon it once more wrote I must not tell lies and felt the searing pain on the back of his hand for a second time once again the words had been cut into his skin once again they healed over seconds later .And on it went .Again and again Harry wrote the words on the parchment in what he soon came to realize was not ink but his own blood .And again and again the words were cut into the back of his hand healed and then reappeared the next time he set quill to parchment .Darkness fell outside Umbridges window .Harry did not ask when he would be allowed to stop .He did not even check his watch .He knew she was watching him for signs of weakness and he was not going to show any not even if he had to sit here all night cutting open his own hand with this quill .Come here she said after what seemed hours .He stood up .His hand was stinging painfully .When he looked down at it he saw that the cut had healed but that the skin there was red raw .Hand she said .He extended it .She took it in her own .Harry repressed a shudder as she touched him with her thick stubby fingers on which she wore a number of ugly old rings .Tut tut I dont seem to have made much of an impression yet she said smiling .Well well just have to try again tomorrow evening wont we ?You may go .Harry left her office without a word .The school was quite deserted it was surely past midnight .He walked slowly up the corridor then when he had turned the corner and was sure that she would not hear him broke into a run .He had not had time to practice Vanishing Spells had not written a single dream in his dream diary and had not finished the drawing of the bowtruckle nor had he written his essays .He skipped breakfast next morning to scribble down a couple of madeup dreams for Divination their first lesson and was surprised to find a disheveled Ron keeping him company .How come you didnt do it last night ?Harry asked as Ron stared wildly around the common room for inspiration .Ron who had been fast asleep when Harry got back to the dormitory muttered something about doing other stuff bent low over his parchment and scrawled a few words .Thatll have to do he said slamming the diary shut Ive said I dreamed I was buying a new pair of shoes she cant make anything weird out of that can she ?They hurried off to North Tower together .How was detention with Umbridge anyway ?What did she make you do ?Harry hesitated for a fraction of a second then said Lines .Thats not too bad then eh ?said Ron .Nope said Harry .Hey I forgot did she let you off for Friday ?No said Harry .Ron groaned sympathetically .It was another bad day for Harry he was one of the worst in Transfiguration not having practiced Vanishing Spells at all .He had to give up his lunch hour to complete the picture of the bowtruckle and meanwhile Professors McGonagall GrubblyPlank and Sinistra gave them yet more homework which he had no prospect of finishing that evening because of his second detention with Umbridge .To cap it all Angelina Johnson tracked him down at dinner again and on learning that he would not be able to attend Fridays Keeper tryouts told him she was not at all impressed by his attitude and that she expected players who wished to remain on the team to put training before their other commitments .Im in detention !Harry yelled after her as she stalked away .Dyou think Id rather be stuck in a room with that old toad or playing Quidditch ?At least its only lines said Hermione consolingly as Harry sank back onto his bench and looked down at his steakandkidney pie which he no longer fancied very much .Its not as if its a dreadful punishment really .Harry opened his mouth closed it again and nodded .He was not really sure why he was not telling Ron and Hermione exactly what was happening in Umbridge s room He only knew that he did not want to see their looks of horror that would make the whole thing seem worse and therefore more difficult to face .He also felt dimly that this was between himself and Umbridge a private battle of wills and he was not going to give her the satisfaction of hearing that he had complained about it .I cant believe how much homework weve got said Ron miserably .Well why didnt you do any last night ?Hermione asked him .Where were you anyway ?I was .I fancied a walk said Ron shiftily .Harry had the distinct impression that he was not alone in concealing things at the moment .k k k The second detention was just as bad as the previous one .The skin on the back of Harrys hand became irritated more quickly now red and inflamed Harry thought it unlikely to keep healing as effectively for long .Soon the cut would remain etched in his hand and Umbridge would perhaps be satisfied .He let no moan of pain escape him however and from the moment of entering the room to the moment of his dismissal again past midnight he said nothing but Good evening and Good night .His homework situation however was now desperate and when he returned to the Gryffindor common room he did not though exhausted go to bed but opened his books and began Snapes moonstone essay .It was halfpast two by the time he had finished it .He knew he had done a poor job but there was no help for it unless he had something to give in he would be in detention with Snape next .He then dashed off answers to the questions Professor McGonagall had set them cobbled together something on the proper handling of bowtruckles for Professor GrubblyPlank and staggered up to bed where he fell fully clothed on top of the bed covers and fell asleep immediately .Thursday passed in a haze of tiredness .Ron seemed very sleepy too though Harry could not see why he should be .Harrys third detention passed in the same way as the previous two except that after two hours the words I must not tell lies did not fade from the back of Harrys hand but remained scratched there oozing droplets of blood .The pause in the pointed quills scratching made Professor Umbridge look up .Ah she said softly moving around her desk to examine his hand herself .Good .That ought to serve as a reminder to you oughtnt it ?You may leave for tonight .Do I still have to come back tomorrow ?said Harry picking up his schoolbag with his left hand rather than his smarting right .Oh yes said Professor Umbridge smiling widely as before .Yes I think we can etch the message a little deeper with another evenings work .He had never before considered the possibility that there might be another teacher in the world he hated more than Snape but as he walked back toward Gryffindor Tower he had to admit he had found a contender .Shes evil he thought as he climbed a staircase to the seventh floor shes an evil twisted mad old Ron ?He had reached the top of the stairs turned right and almost walked into Ron who was lurking behind a statue of Lachlan the Lanky clutching his broomstick .He gave a great leap of surprise when he saw Harry and attempted to hide his new Cleansweep Eleven behind his back .What are you doing ?Er nothing .What are you doing ?Harry frowned at him .Come on you can tell me !What are you hiding here for ?Im Im hiding from Fred and George if you must know said Ron .They just went past with a bunch of first years I bet theyre testing stuff on them again I mean they cant do it in the common room now can they not with Hermione there .He was talking in a very fast feverish way .But what have you got your broom for you havent been flying have you ?Harry asked .I well well okay Ill tell you but dont laugh all right ?Ron said defensively turning redder with every second .II thought Id try out for Gryffindor Keeper now Ive got a decent broom .There .Go on .Laugh .Im not laughing said Harry .Ron blinked .Its a brilliant idea !Itd be really cool if you got on the team !Ive never seen you play Keeper are you good ?Im not bad said Ron who looked immensely relieved at Harrys reaction .Charlie Fred and George always made me Keep for them when they were training during the holidays .So youve been practicing tonight ?Every evening since Tuesday .just on my own though Ive been trying to bewitch Quaffles to fly at me but it hasnt been easy and I dont know how much use itll be .Ron looked nervous and anxious .Fred and George are going to laugh themselves stupid when I turn up for the tryouts .They havent stopped taking the mickey out of me since I got made a prefect .I wish I was going to be there said Harry bitterly as they set off together toward the common room .Yeah so do Harry whats that on the back of your hand ?Harry who had just scratched his nose with his free right hand tried to hide it but had as much success as Ron with his Cleans weep .Its just a cut its nothing its But Ron had grabbed Harrys forearm and pulled the back of Harrys hand up level with his eyes .There was a pause during which he stared at the words carved into the skin then he released Harry looking sick .I thought you said she was giving you lines ?Harry hesitated but after all Ron had been honest with him so he told Ron the truth about the hours he had been spending in Umbridges office .The old hag !Ron said in a revolted whisper as they came to a halt in front of the Fat Lady who was dozing peacefully with her head against her frame .Shes sick !Go to McGonagall say something !No said Harry at once .Im not giving her the satisfaction of knowing shes got to me .Got to you ?You cant let her get away with this !I dont know how much power McGonagalls got over her said Harry .Dumbledore then tell Dumbledore !No said Harry flatly .Why not ?Hes got enough on his mind said Harry but that was not the true reason .He was not going to go to Dumbledore for help when Dumbledore had not spoken to him once since last June .Well I reckon you should Ron began but he was interrupted by the Fat Lady who had been watching them sleepily and now burst out Are you going to give me the password or will I have to stay awake all night waiting for you to finish your conversation ?Friday dawned sullen and sodden as the rest of the week .Though Harry glanced toward the staff table automatically when he entered the Great Hall it was without real hope of seeing Hagrid and he turned his mind immediately to his more pressing problems such as the mountainous pile of homework he had to do and the prospect of yet another detention with Umbridge .Two things sustained Harry that day .One was the thought that it was almost the weekend the other was that dreadful though his final detention with Umbridge was sure to be he had a distant view of the Quidditch pitch from her window and might with luck be able to see something of Rons tryout .These were rather feeble rays of light it was true but Harry was grateful for anything that might lighten his present darkness he had never had a worse first week of term at Hogwarts .At five oclock that evening he knocked on Professor Umbridges office door for what he sincerely hoped would be the final time was told to enter and did so .The blank parchment lay ready for him on the lace covered table the pointed black quill beside it .You know what to do Mr Potter said Umbridge smiling sweetly over at him .Harry picked up the quill and glanced through the window .If he just shifted his chair an inch or so to the right .On the pretext of shifting himself closer to the table he managed it .He now had a distant view of the Gryffindor Quidditch team soaring up and down the pitch while half a dozen black figures stood at the foot of the three high goalposts apparently awaiting their turn to Keep .It was impossible to tell which one was Ron at this distance .I must not tell lies Harry wrote .The cut in the back of his right hand opened and began to bleed afresh .I must not tell lies .The cut dug deeper stinging and smarting .I must not tell lies .Blood trickled down his wrist .He chanced another glance out of the window .Whoever was defending the goalposts now was doing a very poor job indeed .Katie Bell scored twice in the few seconds Harry dared watch .Hoping very much that the Keeper wasnt Ron he dropped his eyes back to the parchment dotted with blood .I must not tell lies .I must not tell lies .He looked up whenever he thought he could risk it when he could hear the scratching of Umbridges quill or the opening of a desk drawer .The third person to try out was pretty good the fourth was terrible the fifth dodged a Bludger exceptionally well but then fumbled an easy save .The sky was darkening so that Harry doubted he would be able to watch the sixth and seventh people at all .I must not tell lies .I must not tell lies .The parchment was now shining with drops of blood from the back of his hand which was searing with pain .When he next looked up night had fallen and the Quidditch pitch was no longer visible .Lets see if youve gotten the message yet shall we ?said Umbridges soft voice half an hour later .She moved toward him stretching out her short be ringed fingers for his arm .And then as she took hold of him to examine the words now cut into his skin pain seared not across the back of his hand but across the scar on his forehead .At the same time he had a most peculiar sensation somewhere around his midriff .He wrenched his arm out of her grip and leapt to his feet staring at her .She looked back at him a smile stretching her wide slack mouth .Yes it hurts doesnt it ?she said softly .He did not answer .His heart was thumping very hard and fast .Was she talking about his hand or did she know what he had just felt in his forehead ?Well I think Ive made my point Mr Potter .You may go .He caught up his schoolbag and left the room as quickly as he could .Stay calm he told himself as he sprinted up the stairs .Stay calm it doesnt necessarily mean what you think it means .Mimbulus mimbletoniaV he gasped at the Fat Lady who swung forward once more .A roar of sound greeted him .Ron came running toward him beaming all over his face and slopping butterbeer down his front from the goblet he was clutching .Harry I did it Im in Im Keeper !What ?Oh brilliant !said Harry trying to smile naturally while his heart continued to race and his hand throbbed and bled .Have a butterbeer .Ron pressed a bottle onto him .I cant believe it wheres Hermione gone ?Shes there said Fred who was also swigging butterbeer and pointed to an armchair by the fire .Hermione was dozing in it her drink tipping precariously in her hand .Well she said she was pleased when I told her said Ron looking slightly put out .Let her sleep said George hastily .It was a few moments before Harry noticed that several of the first years gathered around them bore unmistakable signs of recent nosebleeds .Come here Ron and see if Olivers old robes fit you called Katie Bell .We can take off his name and put yours on instead .As Ron moved away Angelina came striding up to Harry .Sorry I was a bit short with you earlier Potter she said abruptly .Its stressful this managing lark you know Im starting to think I was a bit hard on Wood sometimes .She was watching Ron over the rim of her goblet with a slight frown on her face .Look I know hes your best mate but hes not fabulous she said bluntly .I think with a bit of training hell be all right though .He comes from a family of good Quidditch players .Im banking on him turning out to have a bit more talent than he showed today to be honest .Vicky Frobisher and Geoffrey Hooper both flew better this evening but Hoopers a real whiner hes always moaning about something or other and Vickys involved in all sorts of societies she admitted herself that if training clashed with her Charm Club shed put Charms first .Anyway were having a practice session at two oclock tomorrow so just make sure youre there this time .And do me a favor and help Ron as much as you can okay ?He nodded and Angelina strolled back to Alicia Spinnet .Harry moved over to sit next to Hermione who awoke with a jerk as he put down his bag .Oh Harry its you .Good about Ron isnt it ?she said blearily .Im just so so so tired she yawned .I was up until one oclock making more hats .Theyre disappearing like mad !And sure enough now that he looked Harry saw that there were woolly hats concealed all around the room where unwary elves might accidentally pick them up .Great said Harry distractedly if he did not tell somebody soon he would burst .Listen Hermione I was just up in Umbridges office and she touched my arm .Hermione listened closely .When Harry had finished she said slowly Youre worried that YouKnow Whos controlling her like he controlled Quirrell ?Well said Harry dropping his voice its a possibility isnt it ?I suppose so said Hermione though she sounded unconvinced .But I dont think he can be possessing her the way he possessed Quirrell I mean hes properly alive again now isnt he hes got his own body he wouldnt need to share someone elses .He could have her under the Imperius Curse I suppose .Harry watched Fred George and Lee Jordan juggling empty butterbeer bottles for a moment .Then Hermione said But last year your scar hurt when nobody was touching you and didnt Dumbledore say it had to do with what You Know Who was feeling at the time ?I mean maybe this hasnt got anything to do with Umbridge at all maybe its just coincidence it happened while you were with her ?Shes evil said Harry flatly .Twisted .Shes horrible yes but .Harry I think you ought to tell Dumbledore your scar hurt .It was the second time in two days he had been advised to go to Dumbledore and his answer to Hermione was just the same as his answer to Ron .Im not bothering him with this .Like you just said its not a big deal .Its been hurting on and off all summer it was just a bit worse tonight thats all Harry Im sure Dumbledore would want to be bothered by this Yeah said Harry before he could stop himself thats the only bit of me Dumbledore cares about isnt it my scar ?Dont say that its not true !I think Ill write and tell Sirius about it see what he thinks Harry you cant put something like that in a letter !said Hermione looking alarmed .Dont you remember Moody told us to be careful what we put in writing !We just cant guarantee owls arent being intercepted anymore !All right all right I wont tell him then !said Harry irritably .He got to his feet .Im going to bed .Tell Ron for me will you ?Oh no said Hermione looking relieved if youre going that means I can go without being rude too Im absolutely exhausted and I want to make some more hats tomorrow .Listen you can help me if you like its quite fun Im getting better I can do patterns and bobbles and all sorts of things now .Harry looked into her face which was shining with glee and tried to look as though he was vaguely tempted by this offer .Er .no I dont think I will thanks he said .Er not tomorrow .Ive got loads of homework to do .And he traipsed off to the boys stairs leaving her looking slightly disappointed behind him .PERCY AND PADFOOT Harry was the first to awake in his dormitory next morning .He lay for a moment watching dust swirl in the chink of sunlight falling through the gap in his fourposters hangings and savored the thought that it was Saturday .The first week of term seemed to have dragged on forever like one gigantic History of Magic lesson .Judging by the sleepy silence and the freshly minted look of that beam of sunlight it was just after daybreak .He pulled open the curtains around his bed got up and started to dress .The only sound apart from the distant twittering of birds was the slow deep breathing of his fellow Gryffindors .He opened his schoolbag carefully pulled out parchment and quill and headed out of the dormitory for the common room .Making straight for his favorite squashy old armchair beside the now extinct fire Harry settled himself down comfortably and unrolled his parchment while looking around the room .The detritus of crumpledup bits of parchment old Gobstones empty ingredient jars and candy wrappers that usually covered the common room at the end of each day was gone as were all Hermiones elf hats .Wondering vaguely how many elves had now been set free whether they wanted to be or not Harry uncorked his ink bottle dipped his quill into it and then held it suspended an inch above the smooth yellowish surface of his parchment thinking hard .But after a minute or so he found himself staring into the empty grate at a complete loss for what to say .He could now appreciate how hard it had been for Ron and Hermione to write him letters over the summer .How was he supposed to tell Sirius everything that had happened over the past week and pose all the questions he was burning to ask without giving potential letterthieves a lot of information he did not want them to have ?He sat quite motionless for a while gazing into the fireplace then finally coming to a decision he dipped his quill into the ink bottle once more and set it resolutely upon the parchment .Dear Snuffles Hope youre okay the first week back heres been terrible Im really glad its the weekend .Weve got a new Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher Professor Umbridge .Shes nearly as nice as your mum .Im writing because that thing I wrote to you about last summer happened again last night when I was doing a detention with Umbridge .Were all missing our biggest friend we hope hell be back soon .Please write back quickly .Best Harry Harry reread this letter several times trying to see it from the point of view of an outsider .He could not see how they would know what he was talking about or who he was talking to just from reading this letter .He did hope Sirius would pick up the hint about Hagrid and tell them when he might be back Harry did not want to ask directly in case it drew too much attention to what Hagrid might be up to while he was not at Hogwarts .Considering it was a very short letter it had taken a long time to write sunlight had crept halfway across the room while he had been working on it and he could now hear distant sounds of movement from the dormitories above .Sealing the parchment carefully he climbed through the portrait hole and headed off for the Owlery .I would not go that way if I were you said Nearly Headless Nick drifting disconcertingly through a wall just ahead of him as he walked down the passage .Peeves is planning an amusing joke on the next person to pass the bust of Paracelsus halfway down the corridor .Does it involve Paracelsus falling on top of the persons head ?asked Harry .Funnily enough it does said Nearly Headless Nick in a bored voice .Subtlety has never been Peeves s strong point .Im off to try and find the Bloody Baron .He might be able to put a stop to it .See you Harry .Yeah bye said Harry and instead of turning right he turned left taking a longer but safer route up to the Owlery .His spirits rose as he walked past window after window showing brilliantly blue sky he had training later he would be back on the Quidditch pitch at last Something brushed his ankles .He looked down and saw the caretakers skeletal gray cat Mrs Norris slinking past him .She turned lamplike yellow eyes upon him for a moment before disappearing behind a statue of Wilfred the Wistful .Im not doing anything wrong Harry called after her .She had the unmistakable air of a cat that was off to report to her boss yet Harry could not see why he was perfectly entitled to walk up to the Owlery on a Saturday morning .The sun was high in the sky now and when Harry entered the Owlery the glassless windows dazzled his eyes thick silvery beams of sunlight crisscrossed the circular room in which hundreds of owls nestled on rafters a little restless in the early morning light some clearly just returned from hunting .The straw covered floor crunched a little as he stepped across tiny animal bones craning his neck for a sight of Hedwig .There you are he said spotting her somewhere near the very top of the vaulted ceiling .Get down here Ive got a letter for you .With a low hoot she stretched her great white wings and soared down onto his shoulder .Right I know this says ‘Snuffles on the outside he told her giving her the letter to clasp in her beak and without knowing exactly why whispering but its for Sirius okay ?She blinked her amber eyes once and he took that to mean that she understood .Safe flight then said Harry and he carried her to one of the windows with a moments pressure on his arm Hedwig took off into the blindingly bright sky .He watched her until she became a tiny black speck and vanished then switched his gaze to Hagrids hut clearly visible from this window and just as clearly uninhabited the chimney smokeless the curtains drawn .The treetops of the Forbidden Forest swayed in a light breeze .Harry watched them savoring the fresh air on his face thinking about Quidditch later .and then he saw it .A great reptilian winged horse just like the ones pulling the Hogwarts carriages with leathery black wings spread wide like a pterodactyls rose up out of the trees like a grotesque giant bird .It soared in a great circle and then plunged once more into the trees .The whole thing had happened so quickly Harry could hardly believe what he had seen except that his heart was hammering madly .The Owlery door opened behind him .He leapt in shock and turning quickly saw Cho Chang holding a letter and a parcel in her hands .Hi said Harry automatically .Oh .hi she said breathlessly .I didnt think anyone would be up here this early .I only remembered five minutes ago its my mums birthday .She held up the parcel .Right said Harry .His brain seemed to have jammed .He wanted to say something funny and interesting but the memory of that terrible winged horse was fresh in his mind .Nice day he said gesturing to the windows .His insides seemed to shrivel with embarrassment .The weather .He was talking about the weather .Yeah said Cho looking around for a suitable owl .Good Quidditch conditions .I havent been out all week have you ?No said Harry .Cho had selected one of the school barn owls .She coaxed it down onto her arm where it held out an obliging leg so that she could attach the parcel .Hey has Gryffindor got a new Keeper yet ?she asked .Yeah said Harry .Its my friend Ron Weasley dyou know him ?The Tornadohater ?said Cho rather coolly .Is he any good ?Yeah said Harry I think so .I didnt see his tryout though I was in detention .Cho looked up the parcel only halfattached to the owls legs .That Umbridge womans foul she said in a low voice .Putting you in detention just because you told the truth about how how how he died .Everyone heard about it it was all over the school .You were really brave standing up to her like that .Harrys insides reinflated so rapidly he felt as though he might actually float a few inches off the dropping strewn floor .Who cared about a stupid flying horse Cho thought he had been really brave .For a moment he considered accidentallyonpurpose showing her his cut hand as he helped her tie her parcel onto her owl .But the very instant that this thrilling thought occurred the Owlery door opened again .Filch the caretaker came wheezing into the room .There were purple patches on his sunken veined cheeks his jowls were aquiver and his thin gray hair disheveled he had obviously run here .Mrs Norris came trotting at his heels gazing up at the owls overhead and mewing hungrily .There was a restless shifting of wings from above and a large brown owl snapped his beak in a menacing fashion .Aha !said Filch taking a flatfooted step toward Harry his pouchy cheeks trembling with anger .Ive had a tipoff that you are intending to place a massive order for Dungbombs !Harry folded his arms and stared at the caretaker .Who told you I was ordering Dungbombs ?Cho was looking from Harry to Filch also frowning the barn owl on her arm tired of standing on one leg gave an admonitory hoot but she ignored it .I have my sources said Filch in a selfsatisfied hiss .Now hand over whatever it is youre sending .Feeling immensely thankful that he had not dawdled in posting off the letter Harry said I cant its gone .Gone ?said Filch his face contorting with rage .Gone said Harry calmly .Filch opened his mouth furiously mouthed for a few seconds then raked Harrys robes with his eyes .How do I know you havent got it in your pocket ?Because I saw him send it said Cho angrily .Filch rounded on her .You saw him ?Thats right I saw him she said fiercely .There was a moments pause in which Filch glared at Cho and Cho glared right back then the caretaker turned and shuffled back toward the door .He stopped with his hand on the handle and looked back at Harry .If I get so much as a whiff of a Dungbomb .He stumped off down the stairs .Mrs Norris cast a last longing look at the owls and followed him .Harry and Cho looked at each other .Thanks Harry said .No problem said Cho finally fixing the parcel to the barn owls other leg her face slightly pink .You werent ordering Dungbombs were you ?No said Harry .I wonder why he thought you were then ?she said as she carried the owl to the window .Harry shrugged he was quite as mystified by that as she was though oddly it was not bothering him very much at the moment .They left the Owlery together .At the entrance of a corridor that led toward the west wing of the castle Cho said Im going this way .Well Ill .Ill see you around Harry .Yeah .see you .She smiled at him and departed .He walked on feeling quietly elated .He had managed to have an entire conversation with her and not embarrassed himself once .You were really brave standing up to her like that .She had called him brave .She did not hate him for being alive .Of course she had preferred Cedric he knew that .Though if hed only asked her to the ball before Cedric had things might have turned out differently .She had seemed sincerely sorry that she had to refuse when Harry had asked her .Morning Harry said brightly to Ron and Hermione joining them at the Gryffindor table in the Great Hall .What are you looking so pleased about ?said Ron eyeing Harry in surprise .Erm .Quidditch later said Harry happily pulling a large platter of bacon and eggs toward him .Oh .yeah .said Ron .He put down the bit of toast he was eating and took a large swig of pumpkin juice .Then he said Listen .you dont fancy going out a bit earlier with me do you ?Just to er give me some practice before training ?So I can you know get my eye in a bit .Yeah okay said Harry .Look I dont think you should said Hermione seriously youre both really behind on homework as it But she broke off the morning post was arriving and as usual the Daily Prophet was soaring toward her in the beak of a screech owl which landed perilously close to the sugar bowl and held out a leg Hermione pushed a Knut into its leather pouch took the newspaper and scanned the front page critically as the owl took off again .Anything interesting ?said Ron Harry smiled he knew Ron was keen to get her off the subject of homework .No she sighed just some guff about the bass player in the Weird Sisters getting married .She opened the paper and disappeared behind it .Harry devoted himself to another helping of eggs and bacon Ron was staring up at the high windows looking slightly preoccupied .Wait a moment said Hermione suddenly .Oh no .Sirius !Whats happened ?said Harry and he snatched at the paper so violently that it ripped down the middle so that he and Hermione were holding half each . ‘The Ministry of Magic has received a tipoff from a reliable source that Sirius Black notorious mass murderer .blah blah blah .is currently hiding in London Hermione read from her half in an anguished whisper .Lucius Malfoy Ill bet anything said Harry in a low furious voice .He did recognize Sirius on the platform .What ?said Ron looking alarmed .You didnt say Shh !said the other two . . ‘Ministry warns Wizarding community that Black is very dangerous .killed thirteen people .broke out of Azkaban .the usual rubbish Hermione concluded laying down her half of the paper and looking fearfully at Harry and Ron .Well he just wont be able to leave the house again thats all she whispered .Dumbledore did warn him not to .Harry looked down glumly at the bit of the Prophet he had torn off .Most of the page was devoted to an advertisement for Madame Malkins Robes for All Occasions which was apparently having a sale .Hey !he said flattening it down so Hermione and Ron could both see it .Look at this !Ive got all the robes I want said Ron .No said Harry look .this little piece here .Ron and Hermione bent closer to read it the item was barely an inch long and placed right at the bottom of a column .It was headlined TRESPASS AT MINISTRY Sturgis Podmore 38 of number two Laburnum Gardens Clapham has appeared in front of the Wizengamot charged with trespass and attempted robbery at the Ministry of Magic on 31st August .Podmore was arrested by Ministry of Magic watch wizard Eric Munch who found him attempting to force his way through a topsecurity door at one oclock in the morning .Podmore who refused to speak in his own defense was convicted on both charges and sentenced to six months in Azkaban .Sturgis Podmore ?said Ron slowly but hes that bloke who looks like his heads been thatched isnt he ?Hes one of the Ord Ron shh said Hermione casting a terrified look around them .Six months in Azkaban !whispered Harry shocked .Just for trying to get through a door !Dont be silly it wasnt just for trying to get through a door what on earth was he doing at the Ministry of Magic at one oclock in the morning ?breathed Hermione .Dyou reckon he was doing something for the Order ?Ron muttered .Wait a moment .said Harry slowly .Sturgis was supposed to come and see us off remember ?The other two looked at him .Yeah he was supposed to be part of our guard going to Kings Cross remember ?And Moody was all annoyed because he didnt turn up so that doesnt seem like he was supposed to be on a iob for them does it ?Well maybe they didnt expect him to get caught said Hermione .It could be a frameup !Ron exclaimed excitedly .No listen !he went on dropping his voice dramatically at the threatening look on Hermiones face .The Ministry suspects hes one of Dumbledores lot so I dunno they lured him to the Ministry and he wasnt trying to get through a door at all !Maybe theyve just made something up to get him !There was a pause while Harry and Hermione considered this .Harry thought it seemed farfetched Hermione on the other hand looked rather impressed and said Do you know I wouldnt be at all surprised if that were true .She folded up her half of the newspaper thoughtfully .When Harry laid down his knife and fork she seemed to come out of a reverie .Right well I think we should tackle that essay for Sprout on SelfFertilizing Shrubs first and if were lucky well be able to start McGonagalls Inanimatus Conjurus before lunch .Harry felt a small twinge of guilt at the thought of the pile of homework awaiting him upstairs but the sky was a clear exhilarating blue and he had not been on his Firebolt for a week .I mean we can do it tonight said Ron as he and Harry walked down the sloping lawns toward the Quidditch pitch their broomsticks over their shoulders Hermiones dire warnings that they would fail all their O .W .L .s still ringing in their ears .And weve got tomorrow .She gets too worked up about work thats her trouble .There was a pause and he added in a slightly more anxious tone Dyou think she meant it when she said we werent copying from her ?Yeah I do said Harry .Still this is important too weve got to practice if we want to stay on the Quidditch team .Yeah thats right said Ron in a heartened tone .And we have got plenty of time to do it all .Harry glanced over to his right as they approached the Quidditch pitch to where the trees of the Forbidden Forest were swaying darkly .Nothing flew out of them the sky was empty but for a few distant owls fluttering around the Owlery Tower .He had enough to worry about the flying horse wasnt doing him any harm He pushed it out of his mind .They collected balls from the cupboard in the changing room and set to work Ron guarding the three tall goalposts Harry playing Chaser and trying to get the Quaffle past Ron .Harry thought Ron was pretty good he blocked threequarters of the goals Harry attempted to put past him and played better the longer they practiced .After a couple of hours they returned to the school where they ate lunch during which Hermione made it quite clear that she thought they were irresponsible then returned to the Quidditch pitch for the real training session .All their teammates but Angelina were already in the changing room when they entered .All right Ron ?said George winking at him .Yeah said Ron who had become quieter and quieter all the way down to the pitch .Ready to show us all up Ickle Prefect ?said Fred emerging touslehaired from the neck of his Quidditch robes a slightly malicious grin on his face .Shut up said Ron stonyfaced pulling on his own team robes for the first time .They fitted him well considering they had been Oliver Woods who was rather broader in the shoulder .Okay everyone said Angelina entering from the Captains office already changed .Lets get to it Alicia and Fred if you can just bring the ball crate out for us .Oh and there are a couple of people out there watching but I want you to just ignore them all right ?Something in her wouldbe casual voice made Harry think he might know who the uninvited spectators were and sure enough when they left the changing room for the bright sunlight of the pitch it was to a storm of catcalls and jeers from the Slytherin Quidditch team and assorted hangerson who were grouped halfway up the empty stands and whose voices echoed loudly around the stadium .Whats that Weasleys riding ?Malfoy called in his sneering drawl .Why would anyone put a Flying Charm on a moldy old log like that ?Crabbe Goyle and Pansy Parkinson guffawed and shrieked with laughter .Ron mounted his broom and kicked off from the ground and Harry followed him watching his ears turn red from behind .Ignore them he said accelerating to catch up with Ron .Well see whos laughing after we play them .Exactly the attitude I want Harry said Angelina approvingly soaring around them with the Quaffle under her arm and slowing to hover on the spot in front of her airborne team .Okay everyone were going to start with some passes just to warm up the whole team please Hey Johnson whats with that hairstyle anyway ?shrieked Pansy Parkinson from below .Why would anyone want to look like theyve got worms coming out of their head ?Angelina swept her long braided hair out of her face and said calmly Spread out then and lets see what we can do .Harry reversed away from the others to the far side of the pitch .Ron fell back toward the opposite goal .Angelina raised the Quaffle with one hand and threw it hard to Fred who passed to George who passed to Harry who passed to Ron who dropped it .The Slytherins led by Malfoy roared and screamed with laughter .Ron who had pelted toward the ground to catch the Quaffle before it landed pulled out of the dive untidily so that he slipped sideways on his broom and returned to playing height blushing .Harry saw Fred and George exchange looks but uncharacteristically neither of them said anything for which he was grateful .Pass it on Ron called Angelina as though nothing had happened .Ron threw the Quaffle to Alicia who passed back to Harry who passed to George .Hey Potter hows your scar feeling ?called Malfoy .Sure you dont need a liedown ?It must be what a whole week since you were in the hospital wing thats a record for you isnt it ?Fred passed to Angelina she reverse passed to Harry who had not been expecting it but caught it in the very tips of his fingers and passed it quickly to Ron who lunged for it and missed by inches .Come on now Ron said Angelina crossly as Ron dived for the ground again chasing the Quaffle .Pay attention .It would have been hard to say whether Rons face or the Quaffle was a deeper scarlet when he returned again to playing height .Malfoy and the rest of the Slytherin team were howling with laughter .On his third attempt Ron caught the Quaffle perhaps out of relief he passed it on so enthusiastically that it soared straight through Katies outstretched hands and hit her hard in the face .Sorry !Ron groaned zooming forward to see whether he had done any damage .Get back in position shes fine !barked Angelina .But as youre passing to a teammate do try not to knock her off her broom wont you ?Weve got Bludgers for that !Katies nose was bleeding .Down below the Slytherins were stamping their feet and jeering .Fred and George converged on Katie .Here take this Fred told her handing her something small and purple from out of his pocket .Itll clear it up in no time .All right called Angelina Fred George go and get your bats and a Bludger Ron get up to the goalposts Harry release the Snitch when I say so .Were going to aim for Rons goal obviously .Harry zoomed off after the twins to fetch the Snitch .Rons making a right pigs ear of things isnt he ?muttered George as the three of them landed at the crate containing the balls and opened it to extract one of the Bludgers and the Snitch .Hes just nervous said Harry .He was fine when I was practicing with him this morning .Yeah well I hope he hasnt peaked too soon said Fred gloomily .They returned to the air .When Angelina blew her whistle Harry released the Snitch and Fred and George let fly the Bludger from that moment on Harry was barely aware of what the others were doing .It was his job to recapture the tiny fluttering golden ball that was worth a hundred and fifty points to the Seekers team and doing so required enormous speed and skill .He accelerated rolling and swerving in and out of the Chasers the warm autumn air whipping his face and the distant yells of the Slytherins so much meaningless roaring in his ears .But too soon the whistle brought him to a halt again .Stop stop STOP !screamed Angelina .Ron youre not covering your middle post !Harry looked around at Ron who was hovering in front of the lefthand hoop leaving the other two completely unprotected .Oh .sorry .You keep shifting around while youre watching the Chasers !said Angelina .Either stay in center position until you have to move to defend a hoop or else circle the hoops but dont drift vaguely off to one side thats how you let in the last three goals !Sorry .Ron repeated his red face shining like a beacon against the bright blue sky .And Katie cant you do something about that nosebleed ?Its just getting worse !said Katie thickly attempting to stem the flow with her sleeve .Harry glanced around at Fred who was looking anxious and checking his pockets .He saw Fred pull out something purple examine it for a second and then look around at Katie evidently horrorstruck .Well lets try again said Angelina .She was ignoring the Slytherins who had now set up a chant of Gryffindor are losers Gryffindor are losers but there was a certain rigidity about her seat on the broom nevertheless .This time they had been flying for barely three minutes when Angelinas whistle sounded .Harry who had just sighted the Snitch circling the opposite goalpost pulled up feeling distinctly aggrieved .What now ?he said impatiently to Alicia who was nearest .Katie she said shortly .Harry turned and saw Angelina Fred and George all flying as fast as they could toward Katie .Harry and Alicia sped toward her too .It was plain that Angelina had stopped training just in time Katie was now chalk white and covered in blood .She needs the hospital wing said Angelina .Well take her said Fred .She er might have swallowed a Blood Blisterpod by mistake Well theres no point continuing with no Beaters and a Chaser gone said Angelina glumly as Fred and George zoomed off toward the castle supporting Katie between them .Come on lets go and get changed .The Slytherins continued to chant as they trailed back into the changing rooms .How was practice ?asked Hermione rather coolly half an hour later as Harry and Ron climbed through the portrait hole into the Gryffindor common room .It was Harry began .Completely lousy said Ron in a hollow voice sinking into a chair beside Hermione .She looked up at Ron and her frostiness seemed to melt .Well it was only your first one she said consolingly its bound to take time to Who said it was me who made it lousy ?snapped Ron .No one said Hermione looking taken aback I thought You thought I was bound to be rubbish ?No of course I didnt !Look you said it was lousy so I just Im going to get started on some homework said Ron angrily and stomped off to the staircase to the boys dormitories and vanished from sight .Hermione turned to Harry .Was he lousy ?No said Harry loyally .Hermione raised her eyebrows .Well I suppose he couldve played better Harry muttered but it was only the first training session like you said .Neither Harry nor Ron seemed to make much headway with their homework that night .Harry knew Ron was too preoccupied with how badly he had performed at Quidditch practice and he himself was having difficulty in getting the chant of Gryffindor are losers out of his head .They spent the whole of Sunday in the common room buried in their books while the room around them filled up then emptied It was another clear fine day and most of their fellow Gryffindors spent the day out in the grounds enjoying what might well be some of the last sunshine that year .By the evening Harry felt as though somebody had been beating his brain against the inside of his skull .You know we probably should try and get more homework done during the week Harry muttered to Ron as they finally laid aside Professor McGonagalls long essay on the Inanimatus Conjurus spell and turned miserably to Professor Sinistra s equally long and difficult essay about Jupiters moons .Yeah said Ron rubbing slightly bloodshot eyes and throwing his fifth spoiled bit of parchment into the fire beside them .Listen .shall we just ask Hermione if we can have a look at what shes done ?Harry glanced over at her she was sitting with Crookshanks on her lap and chatting merrily to Ginny as a pair of knitting needles flashed in midair in front of her now knitting a pair of shapeless elf socks .No he said heavily you know she wont let us .And so they worked on while the sky outside the windows became steadily darker slowly the crowd in the common room began to thin again .At halfpast eleven Hermione wandered over to them yawning .Nearly done ?No said Ron shortly .Jupiters biggest moon is Ganymede not Callisto she said pointing over Rons shoulder at a line in his Astronomy essay and its Io thats got the volcanos .Thanks snarled Ron scratching out the offending sentences .Sorry I only Yeah well if youve just come over here to criticize Ron I havent got time to listen to a sermon all right Hermione Im up to my neck in it here No look !Hermione was pointing to the nearest window .Harry and Ron both looked over .A handsome screech owl was standing on the windowsill gazing into the room at Ron .Isnt that Hermes ?said Hermione sounding amazed .Blimey it is !said Ron quietly throwing down his quill and getting to his feet .Whats Percy writing to me for ?He crossed to the window and opened it Hermes flew inside landed upon Rons essay and held out a leg to which a letter was attached .Ron took it off and the owl departed at once leaving inky footprints across Rons drawing of the moon Io .Thats definitely Percys handwriting said Ron sinking back into his chair and staring at the words on the outside of the scroll To Ronald Weasley Gryffindor House Hogwarts .He looked up at the other two .What dyou reckon ?Open it !said Hermione eagerly .Harry nodded .Ron unrolled the scroll and began to read .The farther down the parchment his eyes traveled the more pronounced became his scowl .When he had finished reading he looked disgusted .He thrust the letter at Harry and Hermione who leaned toward each other to read it together Dear Ron I have only just heard from no less a person than the Minister of Magic himself who has it from your new teacher Professor Umbridge that you have become a Hogwarts prefect I was most pleasantly surprised when I heard this news and must firstly offer my congratulations .I must admit that I have always been afraid that you would take what we might call the Fred and George route rather than following in my footsteps so you can imagine my feelings on hearing you have stopped flouting authority and have decided to shoulder some real responsibility .But I want to give you more than congratulations Ron I want to give you some advice which is why I am sending this at night rather than by the usual morning post Hopefully you will be able to read this away from prying eyes and avoid awkward questions .From something the Minister let slip when telling me you are now a prefect I gather that you are still seeing a lot of Harry Potter .I must tell you Ron that nothing could put you in danger of losing your badge more than continued fraternization with that boy .Yes I am sure you are surprised to hear this no doubt you will say that Potter has always been Dumbledores favorite but I feel bound to tell you that Dumbledore may not be in charge at Hogwarts much longer and the people who count have a very different and probably more accurate view of Potters behavior .I shall say no more here but if you look at the Daily Prophet tomorrow you will get a good idea of the way the wind is blowing and see if you can spot yours truly !Seriously Ron you do not want to be tarred with the same brush as Potter it could be very damaging to your future prospects and I am talking here about life after school too .As you must be aware given that our father escorted him to court Potter had a disciplinary hearing this summer in front of the whole Wizengamot and he did not come out of it looking too good .He got off on a mere technicality if you ask me and many of the people Ive spoken to remain convinced of his guilt .It may be that you are afraid to sever ties with Potter I know that he can be unbalanced and for all I know violent but if you have any worries about this or have spotted anything else in Potters behavior that is troubling you I urge you to speak to Dolores Umbridge a really delightful woman who I know will be only too happy to advise you .This leads me to my other bit of advice .As I have hinted above Dumbledores regime at Hog warts may soon be over .Your loyalty Ron should be not to him but to the school and the Ministry .I am very sorry to hear that so far Professor Umbridge is encountering very little cooperation from staff as she strives to make those necessary changes within Hogwarts that the Ministry so ardently desires although she should find this easier from next week again see the Prophet tomorrow .I shall say only this a student who shows himself willing to help Professor Umbridge now may be very well placed for Head Boy ship in a couple of years !I am sorry that I was unable to see more of you over the summer .It pains me to criticize our parents but I am afraid I can no longer live under their roof while they remain mixed up with the dangerous crowd around Dumbledore if you are writing to Mother at any point you might tell her that a certain Sturgis Podmore who is a great friend of Dumbledores has recently been sent to Azkaban for trespass at the Ministry .Perhaps that will open their eyes to the kind of petty criminals with whom they are currently rubbing shoulders .I count myself very lucky to have escaped the stigma of association with such people the Minister really could not be more gracious to me and I do hope Ron that you will not allow family ties to blind you to the misguided nature of our parents beliefs and actions either .I sincerely hope that in time they will realize how mistaken they were and I shall of course be ready to accept a full apology when that day comes .Please think over what I have said most carefully particularly the bit about Harry Potter and congratulations again on becoming prefect .Your brother Percy Harry looked up at Ron .Well he said trying to sound as though he found the whole thing a joke if you want to er what is it ?He checked Percys letter .Oh yeah ‘sever ties with me I swear I wont get violent .Give it back said Ron holding out his hand .He is Ron said jerkily tearing Percys letter in half the worlds he tore it into quarters biggest he tore it into eighths git .He threw the pieces into the fire .Come on weve got to get this finished some time before dawn he said briskly to Harry pulling Professor Sinistra s essay back toward him .Hermione was looking at Ron with an odd expression on her face .Oh give them here she said abruptly .What ?said Ron .Give them to me Ill look through them and correct them she said .Are you serious ?Ah Hermione youre a lifesaver said Ron what can I ?What you can say is ‘We promise well never leave our homework this late again she said holding out both hands for their essays but she looked slightly amused all the same .Thanks a million Hermione said Harry weakly passing over his essay and sinking back into his armchair rubbing his eyes .It was now past midnight and the common room was deserted but for the three of them and Crookshanks .The only sound was that of Hermiones quill scratching out sentences here and there on their essays and the ruffle of pages as she checked various facts in the reference books strewn across the table .Harry was exhausted .He also felt an odd sick empty feeling in his stomach that had nothing to do with tiredness and everything to do with the letter now curling blackly in the heart of the fire .He knew that half the people inside Hogwarts thought him strange even mad he knew that the Daily Prophet had been making snide allusions to him for months but there was something about seeing it written down like that in Percys writing about knowing that Percy was advising Ron to drop him and even to tell tales on him to Umbridge that made his situation real to him as nothing else had .He had known Percy for four years had stayed in his house during the summers shared a tent with him during the Quidditch World Cup had even been awarded full marks by him in the second task of the Triwizard Tournament last year yet now Percy thought him unbalanced and possibly violent .And with a surge of sympathy for his godfather Harry thought that Sirius was probably the only person he knew who could really understand how he felt at the moment because Sirius was in the same situation nearly everyone in the Wizarding world thought Sirius a dangerous murderer and a great Voldemort supporter and he had had to live with that knowledge for fourteen years .Harry blinked .He had just seen something in the fire that could not have been there .It had flashed into sight and vanished immediately .No .it could not have been .He had imagined it because he had been thinking about Sirius .Okay write that down Hermione said to Ron pushing his essay and a sheet covered in her own writing back to Ron and then copy out this conclusion that Ive written for you .Hermione you are honestly the most wonderful person Ive ever met said Ron weakly and if Im ever rude to you again Ill know youre back to normal said Hermione .Harry yours is okay except for this bit at the end I think you must have misheard Professor Sinistra Europas covered in ice not mice Harry ?Harry had slid off his chair onto his knees and was now crouching on the singed and threadbare hearthrug gazing into the flames .Er Harry ?said Ron uncertainly .Why are you down there ?Because Ive just seen Siriuss head in the fire said Harry .He spoke quite calmly after all he had seen Siriuss head in this very fire the previous year and talked to it too .Nevertheless he could not be sure that he had really seen it this time .It had vanished so quickly .Siriuss head ?Hermione repeated .You mean like when he wanted to talk to you during the Triwizard Tournament ?But he wouldnt do that now it would be too Siriusl She gasped gazing at the fire Ron dropped his quill .There in the middle of the dancing flames sat Siriuss head long dark hair falling around his grinning face .I was starting to think youd go to bed before everyone else had disappeared he said .Ive been checking every hour .Youve been popping into the fire every hour ?Harry said half laughing .Just for a few seconds to check if the coast was clear yet .But what if youd been seen ?said Hermione anxiously .Well I think a girl first year by the look of her mightve got a glimpse of me earlier but dont worry Sirius said hastily as Hermione clapped a hand to her mouth .I was gone the moment she looked back at me and Ill bet she just thought I was an oddly shaped log or something .But Sirius this is taking an awful risk Hermione began .You sound like Molly said Sirius .This was the only way I could come up with of answering Harrys letter without resorting to a code and codes are breakable .At the mention of Harrys letter Hermione and Ron had both turned to stare at him .You didnt say youd written to Sirius !said Hermione accusingly .I forgot said Harry which was perfectly true his meeting with Cho in the Owlery had driven everything before it out of his mind .Dont look at me like that Hermione there was no way anyone would have got secret information out of it was there Sirius ?No it was very good said Sirius smiling .Anyway wed better be quick just in case were disturbed your scar .What about ?Ron began but Hermione said quickly Well tell you afterward go on Sirius .Well I know it cant be fun when it hurts but we dont think its anything to really worry about .It kept aching all last year didnt it ?Yeah and Dumbledore said it happened whenever Voldemort was feeling a powerful emotion said Harry ignoring as usual Ron and Hermione s winces .So maybe he was just I dunno really angry or something the night I had that detention .Well now hes back its bound to hurt more often said Sirius .So you dont think it had anything to do with Umbridge touching me when I was in detention with her ?Harry asked .I doubt it said Sirius .I know her by reputation and Im sure shes no Death Eater Shes foul enough to be one said Harry darkly and Ron and Hermione nodded vigorously in agreement .Yes but the world isnt split into good people and Death Eaters said Sirius with a wry smile .I know shes a nasty piece of work though you should hear Remus talk about her .Does Lupin know her ?asked Harry quickly remembering Umbridges comments about dangerous halfbreeds during her first lesson .No said Sirius but she drafted a bit of anti werewolf legislation two years ago that makes it almost impossible for him to get a job .Harry remembered how much shabbier Lupin looked these days and his dislike of Umbridge deepened even further .Whats she got against werewolves ?said Hermione angrily .Scared of them I expect said Sirius smiling at her indignation .Apparently she loathes parthumans she campaigned to have merpeople rounded up and tagged last year too .Imagine wasting your time and energy persecuting merpeople when there are little toerags like Kreacher on the loose Ron laughed but Hermione looked upset .Sirius !she said reproachfully .Honestly if you made a bit of an effort with Kreacher Im sure hed respond after all you are the only member of his family hes got left and Professor Dumbledore said So what are Umbridges lessons like ?Sirius interrupted .Is she training you all to kill half breeds ?No said Harry ignoring Hermiones affronted look at being cut off in her defense of Kreacher .Shes not letting us use magic at all !All we do is read the stupid textbook said Ron .Ah well that figures said Sirius .Our information from inside the Ministry is that Fudge doesnt want you trained in combat .Trained in combat ?repeated Harry incredulously .What does he think were doing here forming some sort of wizard army ?Thats exactly what he thinks youre doing said Sirius or rather thats exactly what hes afraid Dumbledores doing forming his own private army with which he will be able to take on the Ministry of Magic .There was a pause at this then Ron said Thats the stupidest thing Ive ever heard including all the stuff that Luna Lovegood comes out with .So were being prevented from learning Defense Against the Dark Arts because Fudge is scared well use spells against the Ministry ?said Hermione looking furious .Yep said Sirius .Fudge thinks Dumbledore will stop at nothing to seize power .Hes getting more paranoid about Dumbledore by the day .Its a matter of time before he has Dumbledore arrested on some trumpedup charge .This reminded Harry of Percys letter .Dyou know if theres going to be anything about Dumbledore in the Daily Prophet tomorrow ?Only Rons brother Percy reckons there will be I dont know said Sirius I havent seen anyone from the Order all weekend theyre all busy .Its just been Kreacher and me here .There was a definite note of bitterness in Siriuss voice .So you havent had any news about Hagrid either ?Ah .said Sirius well he was supposed to be back by now no ones sure whats happened to him .Then seeing their stricken faces he added quickly But Dumbledores not worried so dont you three get yourselves in a state Im sure Hagrids fine .But if he was supposed to be back by now .said Hermione in a small worried voice .Madame Maxime was with him weve been in touch with her and she says they got separated on the journey home but theres nothing to suggest hes hurt or well nothing to suggest hes not perfectly okay .Unconvinced Harry Ron and Hermione exchanged worried looks .Listen dont go asking too many questions about Hagrid said Sirius hastily itll just draw even more attention to the fact that hes not back and I know Dumbledore doesnt want that .Hagrids tough hell be okay .And when they did not appear cheered by this Sirius added Whens your next Hogsmeade weekend anyway ?I was thinking we got away with the dog disguise at the station didnt we ?I thought I could NO !said Harry and Hermione together very loudly .Sirius didnt you see the Daily Prophet ?said Hermione anxiously .Oh that said Sirius grinning theyre always guessing where I am they havent really got a clue Yeah but we think this time they have said Harry .Something Malfoy said on the train made us think he knew it was you and his father was on the platform Sirius you know Lucius Malfoy so dont come up here whatever you do if Malfoy recognizes you again All right all right Ive got the point said Sirius .He looked most displeased .Just an idea thought you might like to get together I would I just dont want you chucked back in Azkaban !said Harry .There was a pause in which Sirius looked out of the fire at Harry a crease between his sunken eyes .Youre less like your father than I thought he said finally a definite coolness in his voice .The risk wouldve been what made it fun for James .Look Well Id better get going I can hear Kreacher coming down the stairs said Sirius but Harry was sure he was lying .Ill write to tell you a time I can make it back into the fire then shall I ?If you can stand to risk it ?There was a tiny pop and the place where Siriuss head had been was flickering flame once more .THE HOGWARTS HIGH INQUISITOR They had expected to have to comb Hermiones Daily Prophet carefully next morning to find the article Percy had mentioned in his letter .However the departing delivery owl had barely cleared the top of the milk jug when Hermione let out a huge gasp and flattened the newspaper to reveal a large photograph of Dolores Umbridge smiling widely and blinking slowly at them from beneath the headline MINISTRY SEEKS EDUCATIONAL REFORM DOLORES UMBRIDGE APPOINTED FIRSTEVER HIGH INQUISITOR High Inquisitor ?said Harry darkly his halfeaten bit of toast slipping from his fingers .What does that mean ?Hermione read aloud In a surprise move last night the Ministry of Magic passed new legislation giving itself an unprecedented level of control at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry . ‘The Minister has been growing uneasy about goings on at Hogwarts for some time said Junior Assistant to the Minister Percy Weasley . ‘He is now responding to concerns voiced by anxious parents who feel the school may be moving in a direction they do not approve .This is not the first time in recent weeks Fudge has used new laws to effect improvements at the Wizarding school .As recently as August 30th Educational Decree Twenty two was passed to ensure that in the event of the current headmaster being unable to provide a candidate for a teaching post the Ministry should select an appropriate person . ‘Thats how Dolores Umbridge came to be appointed to the teaching staff at Hogwarts said Weasley last night . ‘Dumbledore couldnt find anyone so the Minister put in Umbridge and of course shes been an immediate success Shes been a WHAT ?said Harry loudly .Wait theres more said Hermione grimly . ‘ an immediate success totally revolutionizing the teaching of Defense Against the Dark Arts and providing the Minister with ontheground feedback about whats really happening at Hogwarts .It is this last function that the Ministry has now formalized with the passing of Educational Decree Twentythree which creates the new position of ‘Hogwarts High Inquisitor .‘This is an exciting new phase in the Ministers plan to get to grips with what some are calling the falling standards at Hog warts said Weasley . ‘The Inquisitor will have powers to inspect her fellow educators and make sure that they are coming up to scratch .Professor Umbridge has been offered this position in addition to her own teaching post and we are delighted to say that she has accepted .The Ministrys new moves have received enthusiastic support from parents of students at Hogwarts . ‘I feel much easier in my mind now that I know that Dumbledore is being subjected to fair and objective evaluation said Mr Lucius Malfoy 41 speaking from his Wiltshire mansion last night . ‘Many of us with our childrens best interests at heart have been concerned about some of Dumbledores eccentric decisions in the last few years and will be glad to know that the Ministry is keeping an eye on the situation .Among those ‘eccentric decisions are undoubtedly the controversial staff appointments previously described in this newspaper which have included the hiring of werewolf Remus Lupin half giant Rubeus Hagrid and delusional exAuror ‘MadEye Moody .Rumors abound of course that Albus Dumbledore once Supreme Mugwump of the International Confederation of Wizards and Chief Warlock of the Wizengamot is no longer up to the task of managing the prestigious school of Hogwarts . ‘I think the appointment of the Inquisitor is a first step toward ensuring that Hogwarts has a headmaster in whom we can all repose confidence said a Ministry insider last night .Wizengamot elders Gris elda M archbanks and Tiberius Ogden have resigned in protest at the introduction of the post of Inquisitor to Hogwarts . ‘Hogwarts is a school not an outpost of Cornelius Fudges office said Madam Marchbanks . ‘This is a further disgusting attempt to discredit Albus Dumbledore .For a full account of Madam Marchbanks alleged links to subversive goblin groups turn to page 17 .Hermione finished reading and looked across the table at the other two .So now we know how we ended up with Umbridge !Fudge passed this ‘Educational Decree and forced her on us !And now hes given her the power to inspect other teachers !Hermione was breathing fast and her eyes were very bright .I cant believe this .Its outrageous .I know it is said Harry .He looked down at his right hand clenched upon the tabletop and saw the faint white outline of the words Umbridge had forced him to cut into his skin .But a grin was unfurling on Rons face .What ?said Harry and Hermione together staring at him .Oh I cant wait to see McGonagall inspected said Ron happily .Umbridge wont know whats hit her .Well come on said Hermione jumping up wed better get going if shes inspecting Binnss class we dont want to be late .But Professor Umbridge was not inspecting their History of Magic lesson which was just as dull as the previous Monday nor was she in Snapes dungeon when they arrived for double Potions where Harrys moonstone essay was handed back to him with a large spiky black D scrawled in an upper corner .I have awarded you the grades you would have received if you presented this work in your O .W .L said Snape with a smirk as he swept among them passing back their homework .This should give you a realistic idea of what to expect in your examination .Snape reached the front of the class and turned to face them .The general standard of this homework was abysmal .Most of you would have failed had this been your examination .I expect to see a great deal more effort for this weeks essay on the various varieties of venom antidotes or I shall have to start handing out detentions to those dunces who get Ds .He smirked as Malfoy sniggered and said in a carrying whisper Some people got Ds ?Ha !Harry realized that Hermione was looking sideways to see what grade he had received he slid his moonstone essay back into his bag as quickly as possible feeling that he would rather keep that information private .Determined not to give Snape an excuse to fail him this lesson Harry read and reread every line of the instructions on the blackboard at least three times before acting on them .His Strengthening Solution was not precisely the clear turquoise shade of Hermione s but it was at least blue rather than pink like Nevilles and he delivered a flask of it to Snapes desk at the end of the lesson with a feeling of mingled defiance and relief .Well that wasnt as bad as last week was it ?said Hermione as they climbed the steps out of the dungeon and made their way across the entrance hall toward lunch .And the homework didnt go too badly either did it ?When neither Ron nor Harry answered she pressed on I mean all right I didnt expect the top grade not if hes marking to O .W .L .standard but a pass is quite encouraging at this stage wouldnt you say ?Harry made a noncommittal noise in his throat .Of course a lot can happen between now and the exam weve got plenty of time to improve but the grades were getting now are a sort of baseline arent they ?Something we can build on .They sat down together at the Gryffindor table .Obviously Id have been thrilled if Id gotten an O Hermione said Ron sharply if you want to know what grades we got ask .I dont I didnt mean well if you want to tell me I got a P said Ron ladling soup into his bowl .Happy ?Well thats nothing to be ashamed of said Fred who had just arrived at the table with George and Lee Jordan and was sitting down on Harrys right .Nothing wrong with a good healthy P .But said Hermione doesnt P stand for .Boor yeah said Lee Jordan .Still better than D isnt it ? ‘Dreadful ?Harry felt his face grow warm and faked a small coughing fit over his roll .When he emerged from this he was sorry to find that Hermione was still in full flow about O .W .L .grades .So top grades O for ‘Outstanding she was saying and then theres A No E George corrected her E for ‘Exceeds Expectations .And Ive always thought Fred and I shouldve got E in everything because we exceeded expectations just by turning up for the exams .They all laughed except Hermione who plowed on So after E its A for ‘Acceptable and thats the last pass grade isnt it ?Yep said Fred dunking an entire roll in his soup transferring it to his mouth and swallowing it whole .Then you get P for ‘Poor Ron raised both his arms in mock celebration and D for ‘Dreadful .And then T George reminded him .T ?asked Hermione looking appalled .Even lower than a D ?What on earth does that stand for ?Troll said George promptly .Harry laughed again though he was not sure whether or not George was joking .He imagined trying to conceal from Hermione that he had received Ts in all his O .W .L .s and immediately resolved to work harder from now on .You lot had an inspected lesson yet ?Fred asked them .No said Hermione at once have you ?Just now before lunch said George .Charms .What was it like ?Harry and Hermione asked together .Fred shrugged .Not that bad .Umbridge just lurked in the corner making notes on a clipboard .You know what Flitwicks like he treated her like a guest didnt seem to bother him at all .She didnt say much .Asked Alicia a couple of questions about what the classes are normally like Alicia told her they were really good that was it .I cant see old Flitwick getting marked down said George he usually gets everyone through their exams all right .Whove you got this afternoon ?Fred asked Harry .Trelawney A T if ever I saw one and Umbridge herself .Well be a good boy and keep your temper with Umbridge today said George .Angelinall do her nut if you miss any more Quidditch practices .But Harry did not have to wait for Defense Against the Dark Arts to meet Professor Umbridge .He was pulling out his dream diary in a seat at the very back of the shadowy Divination room when Ron elbowed him in the ribs and looking round he saw Professor Umbridge emerging through the trapdoor in the floor .The class which had been talking cheerily fell silent at once .The abrupt fall in the noise level made Professor Trelawney who had been wafting about handing out Dream Oracles look round .Good afternoon Professor Trelawney said Professor Umbridge with her wide smile .You received my note I trust ?Giving the time and date of your inspection ?Professor Trelawney nodded curtly and looking very disgruntled turned her back on Professor Umbridge and continued to give out books .Still smiling Professor Umbridge grasped the back of the nearest armchair and pulled it to the front of the class so that it was a few inches behind Professor Trelawneys seat .She then sat down took her clipboard from her flowery bag and looked up expectantly waiting for the class to begin .Professor Trelawney pulled her shawls tight about her with slightly trembling hands and surveyed the class through her hugely magnifying lenses .We shall be continuing our study of prophetic dreams today she said in a brave attempt at her usual mystic tones though her voice shook slightly .Divide into pairs please and interpret each others latest nighttime visions with the aid of the Oracle .She made as though to sweep back to her seat saw Professor Umbridge sitting right beside it and immediately veered left toward Parvati and Lavender who were already deep in discussion about Parvatis most recent dream .Harry opened his copy of The Dream Oracle watching Umbridge covertly .She was making notes on her clipboard now .After a few minutes she got to her feet and began to pace the room in Trelawneys wake listening to her conversations with students and posing questions here and there .Harry bent his head hurriedly over his book .Think of a dream quick he told Ron in case the old toad comes our way .I did it last time Ron protested its your turn you tell me one .Oh I dunno .said Harry desperately who could not remember dreaming anything at all over the last few days .Lets say I dreamed I was .drowning Snape in my cauldron .Yeah thatll do .Ron chortled as he opened his Dream Oracle .Okay weve got to add your age to the date you had the dream the number of letters in the subject .would that be ‘drowning or ‘cauldron or ‘Snape ?It doesnt matter pick any of them said Harry chancing a glance behind him .Professor Umbridge was now standing at Professor Trelawneys shoulder making notes while the Divination teacher questioned Neville about his dream diary .What night did you dream this again ?Ron said immersed in calculations .I dunno last night whenever you like Harry told him trying to listen to what Umbridge was saying to Professor Trelawney .They were only a table away from him and Ron now .Professor Umbridge was making another note on her clipboard and Professor Trelawney was looking extremely put out .Now said Umbridge looking up at Trelawney youve been in this post how long exactly ?Professor Trelawney scowled at her arms crossed and shoulders hunched as though wishing to protect herself as much as possible from the indignity of the inspection .After a slight pause in which she seemed to decide that the question was not so offensive that she could reasonably ignore it she said in a deeply resentful tone Nearly sixteen years .Quite a period said Professor Umbridge making a note on her clipboard .So it was Professor Dumbledore who appointed you ?Thats right said Professor Trelawney shortly .Professor Umbridge made another note .And you are a greatgreatgranddaughter of the celebrated Seer Cassandra Trelawney ?Yes said Professor Trelawney holding her head a little higher .Another note on the clipboard .But I think correct me if I am mistaken that you are the first in your family since Cassandra to be possessed of second sight ?These things often skip er three generations said Professor Trelawney .Professor Umbridges toadlike smile widened .Of course she said sweetly making yet another note .Well if you could just predict something for me then ?She looked up inquiringly still smiling .Professor Trelawney had stiffened as though unable to believe her ears .I dont understand you said Professor Trelawney clutching convulsively at the shawl around her scrawny neck .Id like you to make a prediction for me said Professor Umbridge very clearly .Harry and Ron were not the only people watching and listening sneakily from behind their books now most of the class were staring transfixed at Professor Trelawney as she drew herself up to her full height her beads and bangles clinking .The Inner Eye does not See upon command !she said in scandalized tones .I see said Professor Umbridge softly making yet another note on her clipboard .I but but .wait said Professor Trelawney suddenly in an attempt at her usual ethereal voice though the mystical effect was ruined somewhat by the way it was shaking with anger .I .I think I do see something .something that concerns you .Why I sense something .something dark .some grave peril .Professor Trelawney pointed a shaking finger at Professor Umbridge who continued to smile blandly at her eyebrows raised .I am afraid .I am afraid that you are in grave danger !Professor Trelawney finished dramatically .There was a pause .Professor Umbridges eyebrows were still raised .Right she said softly scribbling on her clipboard once more .Well if thats really the best you can do She turned away leaving Professor Trelawney standing rooted to the spot her chest heaving .Harry caught Rons eye and knew that Ron was thinking exactly the same as he was They both knew that Professor Trelawney was an old fraud but on the other hand they loathed Umbridge so much that they felt very much on Trelawneys side until she swooped down on them a few seconds later that was .Well ?she said snapping her long fingers under Harrys nose uncharacteristically brisk .Let me see the start youve made on your dream diary please .And by the time she had interpreted Harrys dreams at the top of her voice all of which even the ones that involved eating porridge apparently foretold a gruesome and early death he was feeling much less sympathetic toward her .All the while Professor Umbridge stood a few feet away making notes on that clipboard and when the bell rang she descended the silver ladder first so that she was waiting for them all when they reached their Defense Against the Dark Arts lesson ten minutes later .She was humming and smiling to herself when they entered the room .Harry and Ron told Hermione who had been in Arithmancy exactly what had happened in Divination while they all took out their copies of Defensive Magical Theory but before Hermione could ask any questions Professor Umbridge had called them all to order and silence fell .Wands away she instructed them all smilingly and those people who had been hopeful enough to take them out sadly returned them to their bags .As we finished chapter one last lesson I would like you all to turn to page nineteen today and commence chapter two ‘Common Defensive Theories and Their Derivation .There will be no need to talk .Still smiling her wide selfsatisfied smile she sat down at her desk .The class gave an audible sigh as it turned as one to page nineteen .Harry wondered dully whether there were enough chapters in the book to keep them reading through all this years lessons and was on the point of checking the contents when he noticed that Hermione had her hand in the air again .Professor Umbridge had noticed too and what was more she seemed to have worked out a strategy for just such an eventuality .Instead of trying to pretend she had not noticed Hermione she got to her feet and walked around the front row of desks until they were facetoface then she bent down and whispered so that the rest of the class could not hear What is it this time Miss Granger ?Ive already read chapter two said Hermione .Well then proceed to chapter three .Ive read that too .Ive read the whole book .Professor Umbridge blinked but recovered her poise almost instantly .Well then you should be able to tell me what Slinkhard says about counterjinxes in chapter fifteen .He says that counterjinxes are improperly named said Hermione promptly .He says ‘counterjinx is just a name people give their jinxes when they want to make them sound more acceptable .Professor Umbridge raised her eyebrows and Harry knew she was impressed against her will .But I disagree Hermione continued .Professor Umbridges eyebrows rose a little higher and her gaze became distinctly colder .You disagree ?Yes I do said Hermione who unlike Umbridge was not whispering but speaking in a clear carrying voice that had by now attracted the rest of the classs attention .Mr Slinkhard doesnt like jinxes does he ?But I think they can be very useful when theyre used defensively .Oh you do do you ?said Professor Umbridge forgetting to whisper and straightening up .Well Im afraid it is Mr Slinkhard s opinion and not yours that matters within this classroom Miss Granger .But Hermione began .That is enough said Professor Umbridge .She walked back to the front of the class and stood before them all the jauntiness she had shown at the beginning of the lesson gone .Miss Granger I am going to take five points from Gryffindor House .There was an outbreak of muttering at this .What for ?said Harry angrily .Dont you get involved !Hermione whispered urgently to him .For disrupting my class with pointless interruptions said Professor Umbridge smoothly .I am here to teach you using a Ministryapproved method that does not include inviting students to give their opinions on matters about which they understand very little .Your previous teachers in this subject may have allowed you more license but as none of them with the possible exception of Professor Quirrell who did at least appear to have restricted himself to ageappropriate subjects would have passed a Ministry inspection Yeah Quirrell was a great teacher said Harry loudly there was just that minor drawback of him having Lord Voldemort sticking out of the back of his head .This pronouncement was followed by one of the loudest silences Harry had ever heard .Then I think another weeks detentions would do you some good Mr Potter said Umbridge sleekly .k k k The cut on the back of Harrys hand had barely healed and by the following morning it was bleeding again .He did not complain during the evenings detention he was determined not to give Umbridge the satisfaction over and over again he wrote I must not tell lies and not a sound escaped his lips though the cut deepened with every letter .The very worst part of this second weeks worth of detentions was just as George had predicted Angelinas reaction .She cornered him just as he arrived at the Gryffindor table for breakfast on Tuesday and shouted so loudly that Professor McGonagall came sweeping down upon the pair of them from the staff table .Miss Johnson how dare you make such a racket in the Great Hall !Five points from Gryffindor !But Professor hes gone and landed himself in detention again Whats this Potter ?said Professor McGonagall sharply rounding on Harry .Detention ?From whom ?From Professor Umbridge muttered Harry not meeting Professor McGonagalls beady squareframed eyes .Are you telling me she said lowering her voice so that the group of curious Ravenclaws behind them could not hear that after the warning I gave you last Monday you lost your temper in Professor Umbridges class again ?Yes Harry muttered speaking to the floor .Potter you must get a grip on yourself !You are heading for serious trouble !Another five points from Gryffindor !But what ?Professor no !Harry said furious at this injustice .Im already being punished by her why do you have to take points as well ?Because detentions do not appear to have any effect on you whatsoever !said Professor McGonagall tartly .No not another word of complaint Potter !And as for you Miss Johnson you will confine your shouting matches to the Quidditch pitch in future or risk losing the team Captaincy !She strode back toward the staff table .Angelina gave Harry a look of deepest disgust and stalked away upon which Harry flung himself onto the bench beside Ron fuming .Shes taken points off Gryffindor because Im having my hand sliced open every night !How is that fair how ?I know mate said Ron sympathetically tipping bacon onto Harrys plate shes bang out of order .Hermione however merely rustled the pages of her Daily Prophet and said nothing .You think McGonagall was right do you ?said Harry angrily to the picture of Cornelius Fudge obscuring Hermione s face .I wish she hadnt taken points from you but I think shes right to warn you not to lose your temper with Umbridge said Hermiones voice while Fudge gesticulated forcefully from the front page clearly giving some kind of speech .Harry did not speak to Hermione all through Charms but when they entered Transfiguration he forgot his anger Professor Umbridge and her clipboard were sitting in a corner and the sight of her drove the memory of breakfast right out of his head .Excellent whispered Ron as they sat down in their usual seats .Lets see Umbridge get what she deserves .Professor McGonagall marched into the room without giving the slightest indication that she knew Professor Umbridge was there .That will do she said and silence fell immediately .Mr Finnigan kindly come here and hand back the homework Miss Brown please take this box of mice dont be silly girl they wont hurt you and hand one to each student Hem hem said Professor Umbridge employing the same silly little cough she had used to interrupt Dumbledore on the first night of term .Professor McGonagall ignored her .Seamus handed back Harrys essay Harry took it without looking at him and saw to his relief that he had managed an A .Right then everyone listen closely Dean Thomas if you do that to the mouse again I shall put you in detention most of you have now successfully vanished your snails and even those who were left with a certain amount of shell have the gist of the spell .Today we shall be Hem hem said Professor Umbridge .Yes ?said Professor McGonagall turning round her eyebrows so close together they seemed to form one long severe line .I was just wondering Professor whether you received my note telling you of the date and time of your inspec Obviously I received it or I would have asked you what you are doing in my classroom said Professor McGonagall turning her back firmly on Professor Umbridge .Many of the students exchanged looks of glee .As I was saying today we shall be practicing the altogether more difficult vanishment of mice .Now the Vanishing Spell Hem hem .I wonder said Professor McGonagall in cold fury turning on Professor Umbridge how you expect to gain an idea of my usual teaching methods if you continue to interrupt me ?You see I do not generally permit people to talk when I am talking .Professor Umbridge looked as though she had just been slapped in the face .She did not speak but straightened the parchment on her clipboard and began scribbling furiously .Looking supremely unconcerned Professor McGonagall addressed the class once more .As I was saying the Vanishing Spell becomes more difficult with the complexity of the animal to be vanished .The snail as an invertebrate does not present much of a challenge the mouse as a mammal offers a much greater one .This is not therefore magic you can accomplish with your mind on your dinner .So you know the incantation let me see what you can do .How she can lecture me about not losing my temper with Umbridge !Harry said to Ron under his voice but he was grinning his anger with Professor McGonagall had quite evaporated .Professor Umbridge did not follow Professor McGonagall around the class as she had followed Professor Trelawney perhaps she thought that Professor McGonagall would not permit it .She did however take many more notes while she sat in her corner and when Professor McGonagall finally told them all to pack away rose with a grim expression on her face .Well its a start said Ron holding up a long wriggling mouse tail and dropping it back into the box Lavender was passing around .As they filed out of the classroom Harry saw Professor Umbridge approach the teachers desk he nudged Ron who nudged Hermione in turn and the three of them deliberately fell back to eavesdrop .How long have you been teaching at Hogwarts ?Professor Umbridge asked .Thirtynine years this December said Professor McGonagall brusquely snapping her bag shut .Professor Umbridge made a note .Very well she said you will receive the results of your inspection in ten days time .I can hardly wait said Professor McGonagall in a coldly indifferent voice and she strode off toward the door .Hurry up you three she added sweeping Harry Ron and Hermione before her .Harry could not help giving her a faint smile and could have sworn he received one in return .He had thought that the next time he would see Umbridge would be in his detention that evening but he was wrong .When they walked down the lawns toward the forest for Care of Magical Creatures they found her and her clipboard waiting for them beside Professor GrubblyPlank .You do not usually take this class is that correct ?Harry heard her ask as they arrived at the trestle table where the group of captive bowtruckles were scrabbling around for wood lice like so many living twigs .Quite correct said Professor GrubblyPlank hands behind her back and bouncing on the balls of her feet .I am a substitute teacher standing in for Professor Hagrid .Harry exchanged uneasy looks with Ron and Hermione .Malfoy was whispering with Crabbe and Goyle he would surely love this opportunity to tell tales on Hagrid to a member of the Ministry .Hmm said Professor Umbridge dropping her voice though Harry could still hear her quite clearly I wonder the headmaster seems strangely reluctant to give me any information on the matter can you tell me what is causing Professor Hagrids very extended leave of absence ?Harry saw Malfoy look up eagerly .Fraid I cant said Professor GrubblyPlank breezily .Dont know anything more about it than you do .Got an owl from Dumbledore would I like a couple of weeks teaching work accepted thats as much as I know .Well .shall I get started then ?Yes please do said Professor Umbridge scribbling upon her clipboard .Umbridge took a different tack in this class and wandered among the students questioning them on magical creatures .Most people were able to answer well and Harrys spirits lifted somewhat at least the class was not letting Hagrid down .Overall said Professor Umbridge returning to Professor GrubblyPlanks side after a lengthy interrogation of Dean Thomas how do you as a temporary member of staff an objective outsider I suppose you might say how do you find Hogwarts ?Do you feel you receive enough support from the school management ?Oh yes Dumbledores excellent said Professor GrubblyPlank heartily .No Im very happy with the way things are run very happy indeed .Looking politely incredulous Umbridge made a tiny note on her clipboard and went on And what are you planning to cover with this class this year assuming of course that Professor Hagrid does not return ?Oh Ill take them through the creatures that most often come up in O .W .L .said Professor Grubbly Plank .Not much left to do theyve studied unicorns and nifflers I thought wed cover porlocks and kneazles make sure they can recognize crups and knarls you know .Well you seem to know what youre doing at any rate said Professor Umbridge making a very obvious tick on her clipboard .Harry did not like the emphasis she put on you and liked it even less when she put her next question to Goyle Now I hear there have been injuries in this class ?Goyle gave a stupid grin .Malfoy hastened to answer the question .That was me he said .I was slashed by a hippogriff .A hippogriff ?said Professor Umbridge now scribbling frantically .Only because he was too stupid to listen to what Hagrid told him to do said Harry angrily .Both Ron and Hermione groaned .Professor Umbridge turned her head slowly in Harrys direction .Another nights detention I think she said softly .Well thank you very much Professor GrubblyPlank I think thats all I need here .You will be receiving the results of your inspection within ten days .Jolly good said Professor GrubblyPlank and Professor Umbridge set off back across the lawn to the castle .ie ie ie It was nearly midnight when Harry left Umbridges office that night his hand now bleeding so severely that it was staining the scarf he had wrapped around it .He expected the common room to be empty when he returned but Ron and Hermione had sat up waiting for him .He was pleased to see them especially as Hermione was disposed to be sympathetic rather than critical .Here she said anxiously pushing a small bowl of yellow liquid toward him soak your hand in that its a solution of strained and pickled murtlap tentacles it should help .Harry placed his bleeding aching hand into the bowl and experienced a wonderful feeling of relief .Crookshanks curled around his legs purring loudly and then leapt into his lap and settled down .Thanks he said gratefully scratching behind Crookshanks s ears with his left hand .I still reckon you should complain about this said Ron in a low voice .No said Harry flatly .McGonagall would go nuts if she knew Yeah she probably would said Harry .And how long dyou reckon itd take Umbridge to pass another Decree saying anyone who complains about the High Inquisitor gets sacked immediately ?Ron opened his mouth to retort but nothing came out and after a moment he closed it again in a defeated sort of way .Shes an awful woman said Hermione in a small voice .Awful .You know I was just saying to Ron when you came in .weve got to do something about her .I suggested poison said Ron grimly .No .I mean something about what a dreadful teacher she is and how were not going to learn any defense from her at all said Hermione .Well what can we do about that ?said Ron yawning .S too late isnt it ?She got the job shes here to stay Fudgell make sure of that .Well said Hermione tentatively .You know I was thinking today .She shot a slightly nervous look at Harry and then plunged on I was thinking that maybe the times come when we should just just do it ourselves .Do what ourselves ?said Harry suspiciously still floating his hand in the essence of murtlap tentacles .Well learn Defense Against the Dark Arts ourselves said Hermione .Come off it groaned Ron .You want us to do extra work ?Dyou realize Harry and I are behind on homework again and its only the second week ?But this is much more important than homework !said Hermione .Harry and Ron goggled at her .I didnt think there was anything in the universe more important than homework said Ron .Dont be silly of course there is !said Hermione and Harry saw with an ominous feeling that her face was suddenly alight with the kind of fervor that S .P .E .W .usually inspired in her .Its about preparing ourselves like Harry said in Umbridges first lesson for whats waiting out there .Its about making sure we really can defend ourselves .If we dont learn anything for a whole year We cant do much by ourselves said Ron in a defeated voice .I mean all right we can go and look jinxes up in the library and try and practice them I suppose No I agree weve gone past the stage where we can just learn things out of books said Hermione .We need a teacher a proper one who can show us how to use the spells and correct us if were going wrong .If youre talking about Lupin .Harry began .No no Im not talking about Lupin said Hermione .Hes too busy with the Order and anyway the most we could see him is during Hogsmeade weekends and thats not nearly often enough .Who then ?said Harry frowning at her .Hermione heaved a very deep sigh .Isnt it obvious ?she said .Im talking about you Harry .There was a moments silence .A light night breeze rattled the windowpanes behind Ron and the fire guttered .About me what ?said Harry .Im talking about you teaching us Defense Against the Dark Arts .Harry stared at her .Then he turned to Ron ready to exchange the exasperated looks they sometimes shared when Hermione elaborated on farfetched schemes like S .P .E .W .To Harrys consternation however Ron did not look exasperated .He was frowning slightly apparently thinking .Then he said Thats an idea .Whats an idea ?said Harry .You said Ron .Teaching us to do it .But .Harry was grinning now sure the pair of them were pulling his leg .But Im not a teacher I cant Harry youre the best in the year at Defense Against the Dark Arts said Hermione .Me ?said Harry now grinning more broadly than ever .No Im not youve beaten me in every test Actually I havent said Hermione coolly .You beat me in our third year the only year we both sat the test and had a teacher who actually knew the subject But Im not talking about test results Harry .Look what youve done How dyou mean ?You know what Im not sure I want someone this stupid teaching me Ron said to Hermione smirking slightly .He turned to Harry .Lets think he said pulling a face like Goyle concentrating .Uh .first year you saved the Stone from YouKnowWho .But that was luck said Harry that wasnt skill Second year Ron interrupted you killed the basilisk and destroyed Riddle .Yeah but if Fawkes hadnt turned up I Third year said Ron louder still you fought off about a hundred dementors at once You know that was a fluke if the TimeTurner hadnt ?Last year Ron said almost shouting now you fought off YouKnowWho again Listen to me !said Harry almost angrily because Ron and Hermione were both smirking now .Just listen to me all right ?It sounds great when you say it like that but all that stuff was luck I didnt know what I was doing half the time I didnt plan any of it I just did whatever I could think of and I nearly always had help Ron and Hermione were still smirking and Harry felt his temper rise he wasnt even sure why he was feeling so angry .Dont sit there grinning like you know better than I do I was there wasnt I ?he said heatedly .I know what went on all right ?And I didnt get through any of that because I was brilliant at Defense Against the Dark Arts I got through it all because because help came at the right time or because I guessed right but I just blundered through it all I didnt have a clue what I was doing STOP LAUGHING !The bowl of murtlap essence fell to the floor and smashed .He became aware that he was on his feet though he couldnt remember standing up .Crookshanks streaked away under a sofa Ron and Hermione s smiles had vanished .You dont know what its likel You neither of you youve never had to face him have you ?You think its just memorizing a bunch of spells and throwing them at him like youre in class or something ?The whole time you know theres nothing between you and dying except your own your own brain or guts or whatever like you can think straight when you know youre about a second from being murdered or tortured or watching your friends die theyve never taught us that in their classes what its like to deal with things like that and you two sit there acting like Im a clever little boy to be standing here alive like Diggory was stupid like he messed up you just dont get it that could just as easily have been me it would have been if Voldemort hadnt needed me We werent saying anything like that mate said Ron looking aghast .We werent having a go at Diggory we didnt youve got the wrong end of the He looked helplessly at Hermione whose face was stricken .Harry she said timidly dont you see ?This .this is exactly why we need you .We need to know what its rreally like .facing him .facing VVoldemort .It was the first time she had ever said Voldemorts name and it was this more than anything else that calmed Harry .Still breathing hard he sank back into his chair becoming aware as he did so that his hand was throbbing horribly again .He wished he had not smashed the bowl of murtlap essence .Well .think about it said Hermione quietly .Please ?Harry could not think of anything to say .He was feeling ashamed of his outburst already .He nodded hardly aware of what he was agreeing to .Hermione stood up .Well Im off to bed she said in a voice that was clearly as natural as she could make it .Erm .night .Ron had gotten to his feet too .Coming ?he said awkwardly to Harry .Yeah said Harry .In .in a minute .Ill just clear this up .He indicated the smashed bowl on the floor .Ron nodded and left .Reparo Harry muttered pointing his wand at the broken pieces of china .They flew back together good as new but there was no returning the murtlap essence to the bowl .He was suddenly so tired that he was tempted to sink back into his armchair and sleep there but instead he got to his feet and followed Ron upstairs .His restless night was punctuated once more by dreams of long corridors and locked doors and he awoke next day with his scar prickling again .IN THE HOGS HEAD Hermione made no mention of Harry giving Defense Against the Dark Arts lessons for two whole weeks after her original suggestion .Harrys detentions with Umbridge were finally over he doubted whether the words now etched on the back of his hand would ever fade entirely Ron had had four more Quidditch practices and not been shouted at during the last two and all three of them had managed to vanish their mice in Transfiguration Hermione had actually progressed to vanishing kittens before the subject was broached again on a wild blustery evening at the end of September when the three of them were sitting in the library looking up potion ingredients for Snape .I was wondering Hermione said suddenly whether youd thought any more about Defense Against the Dark Arts Harry .Course I have said Harry grumpily .Cant forget it can we with that hag teaching us I meant the idea Ron and I had Ron cast her an alarmed threatening kind of look she frowned at him oh all right the idea had then about you teaching us .Harry did not answer at once .He pretended to be perusing a page of Asiatic AntiVenoms because he did not want to say what was in his mind .The fact was that he had given the matter a great deal of thought over the past fortnight .Sometimes it seemed an insane idea just as it had on the night Hermione had proposed it but at others he had found himself thinking about the spells that had served him best in his various encounters with Dark creatures and Death Eaters found himself in fact subconsciously planning lessons .Well he said slowly when he could not pretend to find Asiatic antivenoms interesting much longer yeah I Ive thought about it a bit .And ?said Hermione eagerly .I dunno said Harry playing for time .He looked up at Ron .I thought it was a good idea from the start said Ron who seemed keener to join in this conversation now that he was sure that Harry was not going to start shouting again .Harry shifted uncomfortably in his chair .You did listen to what I said about a load of it being luck didnt you ?Yes Harry said Hermione gently but all the same theres no point pretending that youre not good at Defense Against the Dark Arts because you are .You were the only person last year who could throw off the Imperius Curse completely you can produce a Patronus you can do all sorts of stuff that fullgrown wizards cant Viktor always said Ron looked around at her so fast he appeared to crick his neck rubbing it he said Yeah ?What did Vicky say ?Ho ho said Hermione in a bored voice .He said Harry knew how to do stuff even he didnt and he was in the final year at Durmstrang .Ron was looking at Hermione suspiciously .Youre not still in contact with him are you ?So what if I am ?said Hermione coolly though her face was a little pink .I can have a pen pal if I He didnt only want to be your pen pal said Ron accusingly .Hermione shook her head exasperatedly and ignoring Ron who was continuing to watch her said to Harry Well what do you think ?Will you teach us ?Just you and Ron yeah ?Well said Hermione now looking a mite anxious again .Well .now dont fly off the handle again Harry please .But I really think you ought to teach anyone who wants to learn .I mean were talking about defending ourselves against VVoldemort oh dont be pathetic Ron it doesnt seem fair if we dont offer the chance to other people .Harry considered this for a moment then said Yeah but I doubt anyone except you two would want to be taught by me .Im a nutter remember ?Well I think you might be surprised how many people would be interested in hearing what youve got to say said Hermione seriously .Look she leaned toward him Ron who was still watching her with a frown on his face leaned forward to listen too you know the first weekend in Octobers a Hogsmeade weekend ?How would it be if we tell anyone whos interested to meet us in the village and we can talk it over ?Why do we have to do it outside school ?said Ron .Because said Hermione returning to the diagram of the Chinese Chomping Cabbage she was copying I dont think Umbridge would be very happy if she found out what we were up to .Harry had been looking forward to the weekend trip into Hogsmeade but there was one thing worrying him .Sirius had maintained a stony silence since he had appeared in the fire at the beginning of September Harry knew they had made him angry by saying that they did not want him to come but he still worried from time to time that Sirius might throw caution to the winds and turn up anyway .What were they going to do if the great black dog came bounding up the street toward them in Hogsmeade perhaps under the nose of Draco Malfoy ?Well you cant blame him for wanting to get out and about said Ron when Harry discussed his fears with him and Hermione .I mean hes been on the run for over two years hasnt he and I know that cant have been a laugh but at least he was free wasnt he ?And now hes just shut up all the time with that lunatic elf .Hermione scowled at Ron but otherwise ignored the slight on Kreacher .The trouble is she said to Harry until VVoldemort oh for heavens sake Ron comes out into the open Sirius is going to have to stay hidden isnt he ?I mean the stupid Ministry isnt going to realize Sirius is innocent until they accept that Dumbledores been telling the truth about him all along .And once the fools start catching real Death Eaters again itll be obvious Sirius isnt one .I mean he hasnt got the Mark for one thing .I dont reckon hed be stupid enough to turn up said Ron bracingly .Dumbledored go mad if he did and Sirius listens to Dumbledore even if he doesnt like what he hears .When Harry continued to look worried Hermione said Listen Ron and I have been sounding out people who we thought might want to learn some proper Defense Against the Dark Arts and there are a couple who seem interested .Weve told them to meet us in Hogsmeade .Right said Harry vaguely his mind still on Sirius .Dont worry Harry Hermione said quietly .Youve got enough on your plate without Sirius too .She was quite right of course he was barely keeping up with his homework though he was doing much better now that he was no longer spending every evening in detention with Umbridge .Ron was even further behind with his work than Harry because while they both had Quidditch practices twice a week Ron also had prefect duties .However Hermione who was taking more subjects than either of them had not only finished all her homework but was also finding time to knit more elf clothes .Harry had to admit that she was getting better it was now almost always possible to distinguish between the hats and the socks .The morning of the Hogsmeade visit dawned bright but windy .After breakfast they queued up in front of Filch who matched their names to the long list of students who had permission from their parents or guardian to visit the village .With a slight pang Harry remembered that if it hadnt been for Sirius he would not have been going at all .When Harry reached Filch the caretaker gave a great sniff as though trying to detect a whiff of something from Harry .Then he gave a curt nod that set his jowls aquiver again and Harry walked on out onto the stone steps and the cold sunlit day .Er why was Filch sniffing you ?asked Ron as he Harry and Hermione set off at a brisk pace down the wide drive to the gates .I suppose he was checking for the smell of Dungbombs said Harry with a small laugh .I forgot to tell you .And he recounted the story of sending his letter to Sirius and Filch bursting in seconds later demanding to see the letter .To his slight surprise Hermione found this story highly interesting much more indeed than he did himself .He said he was tipped off you were ordering Dungbombs ?But who had tipped him off ?I dunno said Harry shrugging .Maybe Malfoy hed think it was a laugh .They walked between the tall stone pillars topped with winged boars and turned left onto the road into the village the wind whipping their hair into their eyes .Malfoy ?said Hermione very skeptically .Well .yes .maybe .And she remained deep in thought all the way into the outskirts of Hogsmeade .Where are we going anyway ?Harry asked .The Three Broomsticks ?Oh no said Hermione coming out of her reverie no its always packed and really noisy .Ive told the others to meet us in the Hogs Head that other pub you know the one its not on the main road .I think its a bit .you know .dodgy .but students dont normally go in there so I dont think well be overheard .They walked down the main street past Zonkos Joke Shop where they were unsurprised to see Fred George and Lee Jordan past the post office from which owls issued at regular intervals and turned up a side street at the top of which stood a small inn .A battered wooden sign hung from a rusty bracket over the door with a picture upon it of a wild boars severed head leaking blood onto the white cloth around it .The sign creaked in the wind as they approached .All three of them hesitated outside the door .Well come on said Hermione slightly nervously .Harry led the way inside .It was not at all like the Three Broomsticks whose large bar gave an impression of gleaming warmth and cleanliness .The Hogs Head bar comprised one small dingy and very dirty room that smelled strongly of something that might have been goats .The bay windows were so encrusted with grime that very little daylight could permeate the room which was lit instead with the stubs of candles sitting on rough wooden tables .The floor seemed at first glance to be earthy though as Harry stepped onto it he realized that there was stone beneath what seemed to be the accumulated filth of centuries .Harry remembered Hagrid mentioning this pub in his first year Yeh get a lot o funny folk in the Hogs Head he had said explaining how he had won a dragons egg from a hooded stranger there .At the time Harry had wondered why Hagrid had not found it odd that the stranger kept his face hidden throughout their encounter now he saw that keeping your face hidden was something of a fashion in the Hogs Head .There was a man at the bar whose whole head was wrapped in dirty gray bandages though he was still managing to gulp endless glasses of some smoking fiery substance through a slit over his mouth .Two figures shrouded in hoods sat at a table in one of the windows Harry might have thought them dementors if they had not been talking in strong Yorkshire accents in a shadowy corner beside the fireplace sat a witch with a thick black veil that fell to her toes .They could just see the tip of her nose because it caused the veil to protrude slightly .I dont know about this Hermione Harry muttered as they crossed to the bar .He was looking particularly at the heavily veiled witch .Has it occurred to you Umbridge might be under that ?Hermione cast an appraising eye at the veiled figure .Umbridge is shorter than that woman she said quietly .And anyway even if Umbridge does come in here theres nothing she can do to stop us Harry because Ive double and triplechecked the school rules .Were not outofbounds I specifically asked Professor Flitwick whether students were allowed to come in the Hogs Head and he said yes but he advised me strongly to bring our own glasses .And Ive looked up everything I can think of about study groups and homework groups and theyre definitely allowed .I just dont think its a good idea if we parade what were doing .No said Harry dryly especially as its not exactly a homework group youre planning is it ?The barman sidled toward them out of a back room .He was a grumpylooking old man with a great deal of long gray hair and beard .He was tall and thin and looked vaguely familiar to Harry .What ?he grunted .Three butterbeers please said Hermione .The man reached beneath the counter and pulled up three very dusty very dirty bottles which he slammed on the bar .Six Sickles he said .Ill get them said Harry quickly passing over the silver .The barmans eyes traveled over Harry resting for a fraction of a second on his scar .Then he turned away and deposited Harrys money in an ancient wooden till whose drawer slid open automatically to receive it .Harry Ron and Hermione retreated to the farthest table from the bar and sat down looking around while the man in the dirty gray bandages rapped the counter with his knuckles and received another smoking drink from the barman .You know what ?Ron murmured looking over at the bar with enthusiasm .We could order anything we liked in here I bet that bloke would sell us anything he wouldnt care .Ive always wanted to try firewhisky You are a prefect snarled Hermione .Oh said Ron the smile fading from his face .Yeah So who did you say is supposed to be meeting us ?Harry asked wrenching open the rusty top of his butterbeer and taking a swig .Just a couple of people Hermione repeated checking her watch and then looking anxiously toward the door .I told them to be here about now and Im sure they all know where it is oh look this might be them now The door of the pub had opened .A thick band of dusty sunlight split the room in two for a moment and then vanished blocked by the incoming rush of a crowd of people .First came Neville with Dean and Lavender who were closely followed by Parvati and Padma Patil with Harrys stomach did a back flip Cho and one of her usually giggling girlfriends then on her own and looking so dreamy that she might have walked in by accident Luna Lovegood then Katie Bell Alicia Spinnet and Angelina Johnson Colin and Dennis Creevey Ernie Macmillan Justin FinchFletchley Hannah Abbott and a Hufflepuff girl with a long plait down her back whose name Harry did not know three Ravenclaw boys he was pretty sure were called Anthony Goldstein Michael Corner and Terry Boot Ginny followed by a tall skinny blond boy with an upturned nose whom Harry recognized vaguely as being a member of the Hufflepuff Quidditch team and bringing up the rear Fred and George Weasley with their friend Lee Jordan all three of whom were carrying large paper bags crammed with Zonkos merchandise .A couple of people ?said Harry hoarsely to Hermione .A couple of people ?Yes well the idea seemed quite popular said Hermione happily .Ron do you want to pull up some more chairs ?The barman had frozen in the act of wiping out a glass with a rag so filthy it looked as though it had never been washed .Possibly he had never seen his pub so full .Hi said Fred reaching the bar first and counting his companions quickly .Could we have .twenty five butterbeers please ?The barman glared at him for a moment then throwing down his rag irritably as though he had been interrupted in something very important he started passing up dusty butterbeers from under the bar .Cheers said Fred handing them out .Cough up everyone I havent got enough gold for all of these .Harry watched numbly as the large chattering group took their beers from Fred and rummaged in their robes to find coins .He could not imagine what all these people had turned up for until the horrible thought occurred to him that they might be expecting some kind of speech at which he rounded on Hermione .What have you been telling people ?he said in a low voice .What are they expecting ?Ive told you they just want to hear what youve got to say said Hermione soothingly but Harry continued to look at her so furiously that she added quickly You dont have to do anything yet Ill speak to them first .Hi Harry said Neville beaming and taking a seat opposite Harry .Harry tried to smile back but did not speak his mouth was exceptionally dry .Cho had just smiled at him and sat down on Rons right .Her friend who had curly reddishblonde hair did not smile but gave Harry a thoroughly mistrustful look that told Harry plainly that given her way she would not be here at all .In twos and threes the new arrivals settled around Harry Ron and Hermione some looking rather excited others curious Luna Lovegood gazing dreamily into space .When everybody had pulled up a chair the chatter died out .Every eye was upon Harry .Er said Hermione her voice slightly higher than usual out of nerves .Well er hi .The group focused its attention on her instead though eyes continued to dart back regularly to Harry .Well .erm .well you know why youre here .Erm .well Harry here had the idea I mean Harry had thrown her a sharp look I had the idea that it might be good if people who wanted to study Defense Against the Dark Arts and I mean really study it you know not the rubbish that Umbridge is doing with us Hermiones voice became suddenly much stronger and more confident because nobody could call that Defense Against the Dark Arts Hear hear said Anthony Goldstein and Hermione looked heartened well I thought it would be good if we well took matters into our own hands .She paused looked sideways at Harry and went on And by that I mean learning how to defend ourselves properly not just theory but the real spells You want to pass your Defense Against the Dark Arts O .W .L .too though I bet ?said Michael Corner .Of course I do said Hermione at once .But I want more than that I want to be properly trained in Defense because .because .She took a great breath and finished Because Lord Voldemorts back .The reaction was immediate and predictable .Chos friend shrieked and slopped butterbeer down herself Terry Boot gave a kind of involuntary twitch Padma Patil shuddered and Neville gave an odd yelp that he managed to turn into a cough .All of them however looked fixedly even eagerly at Harry .Well .thats the plan anyway said Hermione .If you want to join us we need to decide how were going to Wheres the proof YouKnow Whos back ?said the blond Hufflepuff player in a rather aggressive voice .Well Dumbledore believes it Hermione began .You mean Dumbledore believes him said the blond boy nodding at Harry .Who are you ?said Ron rather rudely .Zacharias Smith said the boy and I think weve got the right to know exactly what makes him say YouKnowWhos back .Look said Hermione intervening swiftly thats really not what this meeting was supposed to be about Its okay Hermione said Harry .It had just dawned upon him why there were so many people there .He felt that Hermione should have seen this coming .Some of these people maybe even most of them had turned up in the hope of hearing Harrys story firsthand .What makes me say YouKnowWhos back ?he asked looking Zacharias straight in the face .I saw him .But Dumbledore told the whole school what happened last year and if you didnt believe him you dont believe me and Im not wasting an afternoon trying to convince anyone .The whole group seemed to have held its breath while Harry spoke .Harry had the impression that even the barman was listening in .He was wiping the same glass with the filthy rag it was becoming steadily dirtier .Zacharias said dismissively All Dumbledore told us last year was that Cedric Diggory got killed by You KnowWho and that you brought Diggorys body back to Hogwarts .He didnt give us details he didnt tell us exactly how Diggory got murdered I think wed all like to know If youve come to hear exactly what it looks like when Voldemort murders someone I cant help you Harry said .His temper always so close to the surface these days was rising again .He did not take his eyes from Zacharias Smiths aggressive face determined not to look at Cho .I dont want to talk about Cedric Diggory all right ?So if thats what youre here for you might as well clear out .He cast an angry look in Hermiones direction .This was he felt all her fault she had decided to display him like some sort of freak and of course they had all turned up to see just how wild his story was .But none of them left their seats not even Zacharias Smith though he continued to gaze intently at Harry .So said Hermione her voice very highpitched again .So .like I was saying .if you want to learn some defense then we need to work out how were going to do it how often were going to meet and where were going to Is it true interrupted the girl with the long plait down her back looking at Harry that you can produce a Patronus ?There was a murmur of interest around the group at this .Yeah said Harry slightly defensively .A corporeal Patronus ?The phrase stirred something in Harrys memory .Er you dont know Madam Bones do you ?he asked .The girl smiled .Shes my auntie she said .Im Susan Bones .She told me about your hearing .So is it really true ?You make a stag Patronus ?Yes said Harry .Blimey Harry !said Lee looking deeply impressed .I never knew that !Mum told Ron not to spread it around said Fred grinning at Harry .She said you got enough attention as it was .Shes not wrong mumbled Harry and a couple of people laughed .The veiled witch sitting alone shifted very slightly in her seat .And did you kill a basilisk with that sword in Dumbledores office ?demanded Terry Boot .Thats what one of the portraits on the wall told me when I was in there last year .Er yeah I did yeah said Harry .Justin FinchFletchley whistled the Creevey brothers exchanged awestruck looks and Lavender Brown said wow softly .Harry was feeling slightly hot around the collar now he was determinedly looking anywhere but at Cho .And in our first year said Neville to the group at large he saved that Sorcerous Stone Sorcerers hissed Hermione .Yes that from YouKnowWho finished Neville .Hannah Abbotts eyes were as round as Galleons .And thats not to mention said Cho Harrys eyes snapped onto her she was looking at him smiling his stomach did another somersault all the tasks he had to get through in the Triwizard Tournament last year getting past dragons and merpeople and acromantulas and things .There was a murmur of impressed agreement around the table .Harrys insides were squirming .He was trying to arrange his face so that he did not look too pleased with himself .The fact that Cho had just praised him made it much much harder for him to say the thing he had sworn to himself he would tell them .Look he said and everyone fell silent at once I .I dont want to sound like Im trying to be modest or anything but .I had a lot of help with all that stuff .Not with the dragon you didnt said Michael Corner at once .That was a seriously cool bit of flying .Yeah well said Harry feeling it would be churlish to disagree .And nobody helped you get rid of those dementors this summer said Susan Bones .No said Harry no okay I know I did bits of it without help but the point Im trying to make is Are you trying to weasel out of showing us any of this stuff ?said Zacharias Smith .Heres an idea said Ron loudly before Harry could speak why dont you shut your mouth ?Perhaps the word weasel had affected Ron particularly strongly in any case he was now looking at Zacharias as though he would like nothing better than to thump him .Zacharias flushed .Well weve all turned up to learn from him and now hes telling us he cant really do any of it he said .Thats not what he said snarled Fred Weasley .Would you like us to clean out your ears for you ?inquired George pulling a long and lethallooking metal instrument from inside one of the Zonkos bags .Or any part of your body really were not fussy where we stick this said Fred .Yes well said Hermione hastily moving on .the point is are we agreed we want to take lessons from Harry ?There was a murmur of general agreement .Zacharias folded his arms and said nothing though perhaps this was because he was too busy keeping an eye on the instrument in Georges hand .Right said Hermione looking relieved that something had at last been settled .Well then the next question is how often we do it .I really dont think theres any point in meeting less than once a week Hang on said Angelina we need to make sure this doesnt clash with our Quidditch practice .No said Cho nor with ours .Nor ours added Zacharias Smith .Im sure we can find a night that suits everyone said Hermione slightly impatiently but you know this is rather important were talking about learning to defend ourselves against VVoldemorts Death Eaters Well said !barked Ernie Macmillan whom Harry had been expecting to speak long before this .Personally I think this is really important possibly more important than anything else well do this year even with our O .W .L .s coming up !He looked around impressively as though waiting for people to cry Surely not !When nobody spoke he went on I personally am at a loss to see why the Ministry has foisted such a useless teacher upon us at this critical period .Obviously they are in denial about the return of YouKnowWho but to give us a teacher who is trying to actively prevent us from using defensive spells We think the reason Umbridge doesnt want us trained in Defense Against the Dark Arts said Hermione is that shes got some .some mad idea that Dumbledore could use the students in the school as a kind of private army .She thinks hed mobilize us against the Ministry .Nearly everybody looked stunned at this news everybody except Luna Lovegood who piped up Well that makes sense .After all Cornelius Fudge has got his own private army .What ?said Harry completely thrown by this unexpected piece of information .Yes hes got an army of heliopaths said Luna solemnly .No he hasnt snapped Hermione .Yes he has said Luna .What are heliopaths ?asked Neville looking blank .Theyre spirits of fire said Luna her protuberant eyes widening so that she looked madder than ever .Great tall flaming creatures that gallop across the ground burning everything in front of They dont exist Neville said Hermione tartly .Oh yes they do !said Luna angrily .Im sorry but wheres the proof of that ?snapped Hermione .There are plenty of eyewitness accounts just because youre so narrowminded you need to have everything shoved under your nose before you Hem hem said Ginny in such a good imitation of Professor Umbridge that several people looked around in alarm and then laughed .Werent we trying to decide how often were going to meet and get Defense lessons ?Yes said Hermione at once yes we were youre right .Well once a week sounds cool said Lee Jordan .As long as began Angelina .Yes yes we know about the Quidditch said Hermione in a tense voice .Well the other thing to decide is where were going to meet .This was rather more difficult the whole group fell silent .Library ?suggested Katie Bell after a few moments .I cant see Madam Pince being too chuffed with us doing jinxes in the library said Harry .Maybe an unused classroom ?said Dean .Yeah said Ron McGonagall might let us have hers she did when Harry was practicing for the Tri wizard .But Harry was pretty certain that McGonagall would not be so accommodating this time .For all that Hermione had said about study and homework groups being allowed he had the distinct feeling this one might be considered a lot more rebellious .Right well well try to find somewhere said Hermione .Well send a message round to everybody when weve got a time and a place for the first meeting .She rummaged in her bag and produced parchment and a quill then hesitated rather as though she was steeling herself to say something .II think everybody should write their name down just so we know who was here .But I also think she took a deep breath that we all ought to agree not to shout about what were doing .So if you sign youre agreeing not to tell Umbridge or anybody else what were up to .Fred reached out for the parchment and cheerfully put down his signature but Harry noticed at once that several people looked less than happy at the prospect of putting their names on the list .Er .said Zacharias slowly not taking the parchment that George was trying to pass him .Well .Im sure Ernie will tell me when the meeting is .But Ernie was looking rather hesitant about signing too .Hermione raised her eyebrows at him .I well we are prefects Ernie burst out .And if this list was found .well I mean to say .you said yourself if Umbridge finds out .You just said this group was the most important thing youd do this year Harry reminded him .I yes said Ernie yes I do believe that its just Ernie do you really think Id leave that list lying around ?said Hermione testily .No .No of course not said Ernie looking slightly less anxious .I yes of course Ill sign .Nobody raised objections after Ernie though Harry saw Chos friend give her a rather reproachful look before adding her name .When the last person Zacharias had signed Hermione took the parchment back and slipped it carefully into her bag .There was an odd feeling in the group now .It was as though they had just signed some kind of contract .Well times ticking on said Fred briskly getting to his feet .George Lee and I have got items of a sensitive nature to purchase well be seeing you all later .In twos and threes the rest of the group took their leave too .Cho made rather a business of fastening the catch on her bag before leaving her long dark curtain of hair swinging forward to hide her face but her friend stood beside her arms folded clicking her tongue so that Cho had little choice but to leave with her .As her friend ushered her through the door Cho looked back and waved at Harry .Well I think that went quite well said Hermione happily as she Harry and Ron walked out of the Hogs Head into the bright sunlight a few moments later Harry and Ron still clutching their bottles of butterbeer .That Zacharias blokes a wart said Ron who was glowering after the figure of Smith just discernible in the distance .I dont like him much either admitted Hermione but he overheard me talking to Ernie and Hannah at the Hufflepuff table and he seemed really interested in coming so what could I say ?But the more people the better really I mean Michael Corner and his friends wouldnt have come if he hadnt been going out with Ginny Ron who had been draining the last few drops from his butterbeer bottle gagged and sprayed butterbeer down his front .Hes WHAT ?said Ron outraged his ears now resembling curls of raw beef .Shes going out with my sisters going what dyou mean Michael Corner ?Well thats why he and his friends came I think well theyre obviously interested in learning defense but if Ginny hadnt told Michael what was going on When did this when did she ?They met at the Yule Ball and they got together at the end of last year said Hermione composedly .They had turned into the High Street and she paused outside Scrivenshafts Quill Shop where there was a handsome display of pheasantfeather quills in the window .Hmm .I could do with a new quill .She turned into the shop .Harry and Ron followed her .Which one was Michael Corner ?Ron demanded furiously .The dark one said Hermione .I didnt like him said Ron at once .Big surprise said Hermione under her breath .But said Ron following Hermione along a row of quills in copper pots I thought Ginny fancied Harry !Hermione looked at him rather pityingly and shook her head .Ginny used to fancy Harry but she gave up on him months ago .Not that she doesnt like you of course she added kindly to Harry while she examined a long blackandgold quill .Harry whose head was still full of Chos parting wave did not find this subject quite as interesting as Ron who was positively quivering with indignation but it did bring something home to him that until now he had not really registered .So thats why she talks now ?he asked Hermione .She never used to talk in front of me .Exactly said Hermione .Yes I think Ill have this one .She went up to the counter and handed over fifteen Sickles and two Knuts Ron still breathing down her neck .Ron she said severely as she turned and trod on his feet this is exactly why Ginny hasnt told you shes seeing Michael she knew youd take it badly .So dont harp on about it for heavens sake .What dyou mean whos taking anything badly ?Im not going to harp on about anything .Ron continued to chunter under his breath all the way down the street .Hermione rolled her eyes at Harry and then said in an undertone while Ron was muttering imprecations about Michael Corner And talking about Michael and Ginny .what about Cho and you ?What dyou mean ?said Harry quickly .It was as though boiling water was rising rapidly inside him a burning sensation that was causing his face to smart in the cold had he been that obvious ?Well said Hermione smiling slightly she just couldnt keep her eyes off you could she ?Harry had never before appreciated just how beautiful the village of Hogsmeade was .EDUCATIONAL DECREE NUMBER TWENTYFOUR Harry felt happier for the rest of the weekend than he had done all term .He and Ron spent much of Sunday catching up with all their homework again and although this could hardly be called fun the last burst of autumn sunshine persisted so rather than sitting hunched over tables in the common room they took their work outside and lounged in the shade of a large beech tree on the edge of the lake .Hermione who of course was up to date with all her work brought more wool outside with her and bewitched her knitting needles so that they flashed and clicked in midair beside her producing more hats and scarves .The knowledge that they were doing something to resist Umbridge and the Ministry and that he was a key part of the rebellion gave Harry a feeling of immense satisfaction .He kept reliving Saturdays meeting in his mind all those people coming to him to learn Defense Against the Dark Arts .and the looks on their faces as they had heard some of the things he had done .and Cho praising his performance in the Triwizard Tournament .The knowledge that all those people did not think him a lying weirdo but someone to be admired buoyed him up so much that he was still cheerful on Monday morning despite the imminent prospect of all his least favorite classes .He and Ron headed downstairs from their dormitory together discussing Angelinas idea that they were to work on a new move called the Sloth Grip Roll during that nights Quidditch practice and not until they were halfway across the sunlit common room did they notice the addition to the room that had already attracted the attention of a small group of people .A large sign had been affixed to the Gryffindor notice board so large that it covered everything else on there the lists of secondhand spellbooks for sale the regular reminders of school rules from Argus Filch the Quidditch team training schedule the offers to barter certain Chocolate Frog cards for others the Weasleys new advertisement for testers the dates of the Hogsmeade weekends and the lostandfound notices .The new sign was printed in large black letters and there was a highly officiallooking seal at the bottom beside a neat and curly signature .BY ORDER OF THE HIGH INQUISITOR OF HOGWARTS All Student Organizations Societies Teams Groups and Clubs are henceforth disbanded .An Organization Society Team Group or Club is hereby defined as a regular meeting of three or more students .Permission to reform may be sought from the High Inquisitor Professor Umbridge .No Student Organization Society Team Group or Club may exist without the knowledge and approval of the High Inquisitor .Any student found to have formed or to belong to an Organization Society Team Group or Club that has not been approved by the High Inquisitor will be expelled .The above is in accordance with Educational Decree Number Twentyfour .Signed Dolores Jane Umbridge HIGH INQUISITOR Harry and Ron read the notice over the heads of some anxiouslooking second years .Does this mean theyre going to shut down the Gobstones Club ?one of them asked his friend .I reckon youll be okay with Gobstones Ron said darkly making the second year jump .I dont think were going to be as lucky though do you ?he asked Harry as the second years hurried away .Harry was reading the notice through again .The happiness that had filled him since Saturday was gone .His insides were pulsing with rage .This isnt a coincidence he said his hands forming fists .She knows .She cant said Ron at once .There were people listening in that pub .And lets face it we dont know how many of the people who turned up we can trust .Any of them could have run off and told Umbridge .And he had thought they believed him thought they even admired him .Zacharias Smith !said Ron at once punching a fist into his hand .Or I thought that Michael Corner had a really shifty look too I wonder if Hermiones seen this yet ?Harry said looking around at the door to the girls dormitories .Lets go and tell her said Ron .He bounded forward pulled open the door and set off up the spiral staircase .He was on the sixth stair when it happened .There was a loud wailing klaxonlike sound and the steps melted together to make a long smooth stone slide .There was a brief moment when Ron tried to keep running arms working madly like windmills then he toppled over backward and shot down the newly created slide coming to rest on his back at Harrys feet .Er I dont think were allowed in the girls dormitories said Harry pulling Ron to his feet and trying not to laugh .Two fourthyear girls came zooming gleefully down the stone slide .Oooh who tried to get upstairs ?they giggled happily leaping to their feet and ogling Harry and Ron .Me said Ron who was still rather disheveled .I didnt realize that would happen .Its not fair !he added to Harry as the girls headed off for the portrait hole still giggling madly .Hermiones allowed in our dormitory how come were not allowed ?Well its an oldfashioned rule said Hermione who had just slid neatly onto a rug in front of them and was now getting to her feet but it says in Hogwarts A History that the founders thought boys were less trustworthy than girls .Anyway why were you trying to get in there ?To see you look at this !said Ron dragging her over to the notice board .Hermiones eyes slid rapidly down the notice .Her expression became stony .Someone must have blabbed to her !Ron said angrily .They cant have done said Hermione in a low voice .Youre so naive said Ron you think just because youre all honorable and trustworthy No they cant have done because I put a jinx on that piece of parchment we all signed said Hermione grimly .Believe me if anyones run off and told Umbridge well know exactly who they are and they will really regret it .Whatll happen to them ?said Ron eagerly .Well put it this way said Hermione itll make Eloise Midgens acne look like a couple of cute freckles .Come on lets get down to breakfast and see what the others think .I wonder whether this has been put up in all the Houses ?It was immediately apparent on entering the Great Hall that Umbridges sign had not only appeared in Gryffindor Tower .There was a peculiar intensity about the chatter and an extra measure of movement in the Hall as people scurried up and down their tables conferring on what they had read .Harry Ron and Hermione had barely taken their seats when Neville Dean Fred George and Ginny descended upon them .Did you see it ?Dyou reckon she knows ?What are we going to do ?They were all looking at Harry .He glanced around to make sure there were no teachers near them .Were going to do it anyway of course he said quietly .Knew youd say that said George beaming and thumping Harry on the arm .The prefects as well ?said Fred looking quizzically at Ron and Hermione .Of course said Hermione coolly .Here comes Ernie and Hannah Abbott said Ron looking over his shoulder .And those Ravenclaw blokes and Smith .and no one looks very spotty .Hermione looked alarmed .Never mind spots the idiots cant come over here now itll look really suspicious sit down !she mouthed to Ernie and Hannah gesturing frantically to them to rejoin the Hufflepuff table .Later !Well talk to you lateri Ill tell Michael said Ginny impatiently swinging herself off her bench .The fool honestly .She hurried off toward the Ravenclaw table Harry watched her go .Cho was sitting not far away talking to the curlyhaired friend she had brought along to the Hogs Head .Would Umbridges notice scare her off meeting them again ?But the full repercussions of the sign were not felt until they were leaving the Great Hall for History of Magic .Harry !Ron It was Angelina and she was hurrying toward them looking perfectly desperate .Its okay said Harry quietly when she was near enough to hear him .Were still going to You realize shes including Quidditch in this ?Angelina said over him .We have to go and ask permission to reform the Gryffindor team !What ?said Harry .No way said Ron appalled .You read the sign it mentions teams too !So listen Harry .I am saying this for the last time .Please please dont lose your temper with Umbridge again or she might not let us play anymore !Okay okay said Harry for Angelina looked as though she was on the verge of tears .Dont worry Ill behave myself .Bet Umbridge is in History of Magic said Ron grimly as they set off for Binnss lesson .She hasnt inspected Binns yet .Bet you anything shes there .But he was wrong the only teacher present when they entered was Professor Binns floating an inch or so above his chair as usual and preparing to continue his monotonous drone on giant wars .Harry did not even attempt to follow what he was saying today he doodled idly on his parchment ignoring Hermiones frequent glares and nudges until a particularly painful poke in the ribs made him look up angrily .What ?She pointed at the window .Harry looked around .Hedwig was perched on the narrow window ledge gazing through the thick glass at him a letter tied to her leg .Harry could not understand it they had just had breakfast why on earth hadnt she delivered the letter then as usual ?Many of his classmates were pointing out Hedwig to each other too .Oh Ive always loved that owl shes so beautiful Harry heard Lavender sigh to Parvati .He glanced around at Professor Binns who continued to read his notes serenely unaware that the classs attention was even less focused upon him than usual .Harry slipped quietly off his chair crouched down and hurried along the row to the window where he slid the catch and opened it very slowly .He had expected Hedwig to hold out her leg so that he could remove the letter and then fly off to the Owlery but the moment the window was open wide enough she hopped inside hooting dolefully .He closed the window with an anxious glance at Professor Binns crouched low again and sped back to his seat with Hedwig on his shoulder .He regained his seat transferred Hedwig to his lap and made to remove the letter tied to her leg .It was only then that he realized that Hedwigs feathers were oddly ruffled some were bent the wrong way and she was holding one of her wings at an odd angle .Shes hurt !Harry whispered bending his head low over her .Hermione and Ron leaned in closer Hermione even put down her quill .Look theres something wrong with her wing Hedwig was quivering when Harry made to touch the wing she gave a little jump all her feathers on end as though she was inflating herself and gazed at him reproachfully .Professor Binns said Harry loudly and everyone in the class turned to look at him .Im not feeling well .Professor Binns raised his eyes from his notes looking amazed as always to find the room in front of him full of people .Not feeling well ?he repeated hazily .Not at all well said Harry firmly getting to his feet while concealing Hedwig behind his back .So I think Ill need to go to the hospital wing .Yes said Professor Binns clearly very much wrong footed .Yes .yes hospital wing .well off you go then Perkins .Once outside the room Harry returned Hedwig to his shoulder and hurried off up the corridor pausing to think only when he was out of sight of Binnss door .His first choice of somebody to cure Hedwig would have been Hagrid of course but as he had no idea where Hagrid was his only remaining option was to find Professor GrubblyPlank and hope she would help .He peered out of a window at the blustery overcast grounds .There was no sign of her anywhere near Hagrids cabin if she was not teaching she was probably in the staffroom .He set off downstairs Hedwig hooting feebly as she swayed on his shoulder .Two stone gargoyles flanked the staffroom door .As Harry approached one of them croaked You should be in class sunny Jim .This is urgent said Harry curtly .Ooooh urgent is it ?said the other gargoyle in a highpitched voice .Well thats put us in our place hasnt it ?Harry knocked he heard footsteps and then the door opened and he found himself facetoface with Professor McGonagall .You havent been given another detention !she said at once her square spectacles flashing alarmingly .No Professor !said Harry hastily .Well then why are you out of class ?Its urgent apparently said the second gargoyle snidely .Im looking for Professor GrubblyPlank Harry explained .Its my owl shes injured .Injured owl did you say ?Professor GrubblyPlank appeared at Professor McGonagalls shoulder smoking a pipe and holding a copy of the Daily Prophet Yes said Harry lifting Hedwig carefully off his shoulder she turned up after the other post owls and her wings all funny look Professor GrubblyPlank stuck her pipe firmly between her teeth and took Hedwig from Harry while Professor McGonagall watched .Hmm said Professor GrubblyPlank her pipe waggling slightly as she talked .Looks like somethings attacked her .Cant think what would have done it though .Thestrals will sometimes go for birds of course but Hagrids got the Hogwarts thestrals well trained not to touch owls .Harry neither knew nor cared what thestrals were he just wanted to know that Hedwig was going to be all right .Professor McGonagall however looked sharply at Harry and said Do you know how far this owls traveled Potter ?Er said Harry .From London I think .He met her eyes briefly and knew that she understood London to mean number twelve Grimmauld Place by the way her eyebrows had joined in the middle .Professor GrubblyPlank pulled a monocle out of the inside of her robes and screwed it into her eye to examine Hedwigs wing closely .I should be able to sort this out if you leave her with me Potter she said .She shouldnt be flying long distances for a few days in any case .Er right thanks said Harry just as the bell rang for break .No problem said Professor GrubblyPlank gruffly turning back into the staffroom .Just a moment Wilhelmina !said Professor McGonagall .Potters letter !Oh yeah !said Harry who had momentarily forgotten the scroll tied to Hedwigs leg .Professor GrubblyPlank handed it over and then disappeared into the staffroom carrying Hedwig who was staring at Harry as though unable to believe he would give her away like this .Feeling slightly guilty he turned to go but Professor McGonagall called him back .Potter !Yes Professor ?She glanced up and down the corridor there were students coming from both directions .Bear in mind she said quickly and quietly her eyes on the scroll in his hand that channels of communication in and out of Hogwarts may be being watched wont you ?I said Harry but the flood of students rolling along the corridor was almost upon him .Professor McGonagall gave him a curt nod and retreated into the staffroom leaving Harry to be swept out into the courtyard with the crowd .Here he spotted Ron and Hermione already standing in a sheltered corner their cloak collars turned up against the wind .Harry slit open the scroll as he hurried toward them and found five words in Siriuss handwriting Today same time same place .Is Hedwig okay ?asked Hermione anxiously the moment he was within earshot .Where did you take her ?asked Ron .To GrubblyPlank said Harry .And I met McGonagall .Listen .And he told them what Professor McGonagall had said .To his surprise neither of the others looked shocked on the contrary they exchanged significant looks .What ?said Harry looking from Ron to Hermione and back again .Well I was just saying to Ron .what if someone had tried to intercept Hedwig ?I mean shes never been hurt on a flight before has she ?Whos the letter from anyway ?asked Ron taking the note from Harry .Snuffles said Harry quietly . ‘Same time same place ?Does he mean the fire in the common room ?Obviously said Hermione also reading the note .She looked uneasy .I just hope nobody else has read this .But it was still sealed and everything said Harry trying to convince himself as much as her .And nobody would understand what it meant if they didnt know where wed spoken to him before would they ?I dont know said Hermione anxiously hitching her bag back over her shoulder as the bell rang again .It wouldnt be exactly difficult to reseal the scroll by magic .And if anyones watching the Floo Network .but I dont really see how we can warn him not to come without that being intercepted too !They trudged down the stone steps to the dungeons for Potions all three of them lost in thought but as they reached the bottom of the stairs they were recalled to themselves by the voice of Draco Malfoy who was standing just outside Snapes classroom door waving around an officiallooking piece of parchment and talking much louder than was necessary so that they could hear every word .Yeah Umbridge gave the Slytherin Quidditch team permission to continue playing straightaway I went to ask her first thing this morning .Well it was pretty much automatic I mean she knows my father really well hes always popping in and out of the Ministry .Itll be interesting to see whether Gryffindor are allowed to keep playing wont it ?Dont rise Hermione whispered imploringly to Harry and Ron who were both watching Malfoy faces set and fists clenched .Its what he wants .I mean said Malfoy raising his voice a little more his gray eyes glittering malevolently in Harry and Rons direction if its a question of influence with the Ministry I dont think theyve got much chance .From what my father says theyve been looking for an excuse to sack Arthur Weasley for years .And as for Potter .My father says its a matter of time before the Ministry has him carted off to St .Mungos .apparently theyve got a special ward for people whose brains have been addled by magic .Malfoy made a grotesque face his mouth sagging open and his eyes rolling .Crabbe and Goyle gave their usual grunts of laughter Pansy Parkinson shrieked with glee .Something collided hard with Harrys shoulder knocking him sideways .A split second later he realized that Neville had just charged past him heading straight for Malfoy .Neville no !Harry leapt forward and seized the back of Nevilles robes Neville struggled frantically his fists flailing trying desperately to get at Malfoy who looked for a moment extremely shocked .Help me !Harry flung at Ron managing to get an arm around Nevilles neck and dragging him backward away from the Slytherins .Crabbe and Goyle were now flexing their arms closing in front of Malfoy ready for the fight .Ron hurried forward and seized Nevilles arms together he and Harry succeeded in dragging Neville back into the Gryffindor line .Nevilles face was scarlet the pressure Harry was exerting on his throat rendered him quite incomprehensible but odd words spluttered from his mouth .Not .funny .dont .Mungos .show .him .The dungeon door opened .Snape appeared there .His black eyes swept up the Gryffindor line to the point where Harry and Ron were wrestling with Neville .Fighting Potter Weasley Longbottom ?Snape said in his cold sneering voice .Ten points from Gryffindor .Release Longbottom Potter or it will be detention .Inside all of you .Harry let go of Neville who stood panting and glaring at him .I had to stop you Harry gasped picking up his bag .Crabbe and Goyle wouldve torn you apart .Neville said nothing he merely snatched up his own bag and stalked off into the dungeon .What in the name of Merlin said Ron slowly as they followed Neville was that about ?Harry did not answer .He knew exactly why the subject of people who were in St .Mungos because of magical damage to their brains was highly distressing to Neville but he had sworn to Dumbledore that he would not tell anyone Nevilles secret .Even Neville did not know that Harry knew .Harry Ron and Hermione took their usual seats at the back of the class and pulled out parchment quills and their copies of One Thousand Magical Herbs and Fungi .The class around them was whispering about what Neville had just done but when Snape closed the dungeon door with an echoing bang everybody fell silent immediately .You will notice said Snape in his low sneering voice that we have a guest with us today .He gestured toward the dim corner of the dungeon and Harry saw Professor Umbridge sitting there clipboard on her knee .He glanced sideways at Ron and Hermione his eyebrows raised .Snape and Umbridge the two teachers he hated most .it was hard to decide which he wanted to triumph over the other .We are continuing with our Strengthening Solutions today you will find your mixtures as you left them last lesson if correctly made they should have matured well over the weekend instructions he waved his wand again on the board .Carry on .Professor Umbridge spent the first half hour of the lesson making notes in her corner .Harry was very interested in hearing her question Snape so interested that he was becoming careless with his potion again .Salamander blood Harry !Hermione moaned grabbing his wrist to prevent him adding the wrong ingredient for the third time .Not pomegranate juice !Right said Harry vaguely putting down the bottle and continuing to watch the corner .Umbridge had just gotten to her feet .Ha he said softly as she strode between two lines of desks toward Snape who was bending over Dean Thomass cauldron .Well the class seems fairly advanced for their level she said briskly to Snape s back .Though I would question whether it is advisable to teach them a potion like the Strengthening Solution .I think the Ministry would prefer it if that was removed from the syllabus .Snape straightened up slowly and turned to look at her .Now .how long have you been teaching at Hogwarts ?she asked her quill poised over her clipboard .Fourteen years Snape replied .His expression was unfathomable .His eyes on Snape Harry added a few drops to his potion it hissed menacingly and turned from turquoise to orange .You applied first for the Defense Against the Dark Arts post I believe ?Professor Umbridge asked Snape .Yes said Snape quietly .But you were unsuccessful ?Snape s lip curled .Obviously .Professor Umbridge scribbled on her clipboard .And you have applied regularly for the Defense Against the Dark Arts post since you first joined the school I believe ?Yes said Snape quietly barely moving his lips .He looked very angry .Do you have any idea why Dumbledore has consistently refused to appoint you ?asked Umbridge .I suggest you ask him said Snape jerkily .Oh I shall said Professor Umbridge with a sweet smile .I suppose this is relevant ?Snape asked his black eyes narrowed .Oh yes said Professor Umbridge .Yes the Ministry wants a thorough understanding of teachers er backgrounds .She turned away walked over to Pansy Parkinson and began questioning her about the lessons .Snape looked around at Harry and their eyes met for a second .Harry hastily dropped his gaze to his potion which was now congealing foully and giving off a strong smell of burned rubber .No marks again then Potter said Snape maliciously emptying Harrys cauldron with a wave of his wand .You will write me an essay on the correct composition of this potion indicating how and why you went wrong to be handed in next lesson do you understand ?Yes said Harry furiously .Snape had already given them homework and he had Quidditch practice this evening this would mean another couple of sleepless nights .It did not seem possible that he had awoken that morning feeling very happy .All he felt now was a fervent desire for this day to end as soon as possible .Maybe Ill skive off Divination he said glumly as they stood again in the courtyard after lunch the wind whipping at the hems of robes and brims of hats .Ill pretend to be ill and do Snapes essay instead then I wont have to stay up half the night .You cant skive off Divination said Hermione severely .Hark whos talking you walked out of Divination you hate Trelawney !said Ron indignantly .I dont hate her said Hermione loftily .I just think shes an absolutely appalling teacher and a real old fraud .But Harrys already missed History of Magic and I dont think he ought to miss anything else today !There was too much truth in this to ignore so half an hour later Harry took his seat in the hot over perfumed atmosphere of the Divination classroom feeling angry at everybody .Professor Trelawney was handing out copies of The Dream Oracle yet again he would surely be much better employed doing Snapes punishment essay than sitting here trying to find meaning in a lot of madeup dreams .It seemed however that he was not the only person in Divination who was in a temper .Professor Trelawney slammed a copy of the Oracle down on the table between Harry and Ron and swept away her lips pursed she threw the next copy of the Oracle at Seamus and Dean narrowly avoiding Seamuss head and thrust the final one into Nevilles chest with such force that he slipped off his pouf .Well carry on !said Professor Trelawney loudly her voice high pitched and somewhat hysterical .You know what to do !Or am I such a substandard teacher that you have never learned how to open a book ?The class stared perplexedly at her and then at each other .Harry however thought he knew what was the matter .As Professor Trelawney flounced back to the highbacked teachers chair her magnified eyes full of angry tears he leaned his head closer to Rons and muttered I think shes got the results of her inspection back .Professor ?said Parvati Patil in a hushed voice she and Lavender had always rather admired Professor Trelawney .Professor is there anything er wrong ?Wrong !cried Professor Trelawney in a voice throbbing with emotion .Certainly not !I have been insulted certainly .Insinuations have been made against me .Unfounded accusations levelled .but no there is nothing wrong certainly not .She took a great shuddering breath and looked away from Parvati angry tears spilling from under her glasses .I say nothing she choked of sixteen years devoted service .It has passed apparently unnoticed .But I shall not be insulted no I shall not !But Professor whos insulting you ?asked Parvati timidly .The establishment !said Professor Trelawney in a deep dramatic wavering voice .Yes those with eyes too clouded by the Mundane to See as I See to Know as I Know .Of course we Seers have always been feared always persecuted .It is alas our fate .She gulped dabbed at her wet cheeks with the end of her shawl and then pulled a small embroidered handkerchief from her sleeve into which she blew her nose very hard with a sound like Peeves blowing a raspberry .Ron sniggered .Lavender shot him a disgusted look .Professor said Parvati do you mean .is it something Professor Umbridge . ?Do not speak to me about that woman !cried Professor Trelawney leaping to her feet her beads rattling and her spectacles flashing .Kindly continue with your work !And she spent the rest of the lesson striding among them tears still leaking from behind her glasses muttering what sounded like threats under her breath . .may well choose to leave .the indignity of it .on probation .we shall see .how she dares .You and Umbridge have got something in common Harry told Hermione quietly when they met again in Defense Against the Dark Arts .She obviously reckons Trelawneys an old fraud too .Looks like shes put her on probation .Umbridge entered the room as he spoke wearing her black velvet bow and an expression of great smugness .Good afternoon class .Good afternoon Professor Umbridge they chanted drearily .Wands away please .But there was no answering flurry of movement this time nobody had bothered to take out their wands .Please turn to page thirtyfour of Defensive Magical Theory and read the third chapter entitled The Case for NonOffensive Responses to Magical Attack .There will be no need to talk Harry Ron and Hermione said together under their breaths .No Quidditch practice said Angelina in hollow tones when Harry Ron and Hermione entered the common room that night after dinner .But I kept my temper !said Harry horrified .I didnt say anything to her Angelina I swear I I know I know said Angelina miserably .She just said she needed a bit of time to consider .Consider what ?said Ron angrily .Shes given the Slytherins permission why not us ?But Harry could imagine how much Umbridge was enjoying holding the threat of no Gryffindor Quidditch team over their heads and could easily understand why she would not want to relinquish that weapon over them too soon .Well said Hermione look on the bright side at least now youll have time to do Snapes essay !Thats a bright side is it ?snapped Harry while Ron stared incredulously at Hermione .No Quidditch practice and extra Potions ?Harry slumped down into a chair dragged his Potions essay reluctantly from his bag and set to work .It was very hard to concentrate even though he knew that Sirius was not due in the fire until much later he could not help glancing into the flames every few minutes just in case .There was also an incredible amount of noise in the room Fred and George appeared finally to have perfected one type of Skiving Snackbox which they were taking turns to demonstrate to a cheering and whooping crowd .First Fred would take a bite out of the orange end of a chew at which he would vomit spectacularly into a bucket they had placed in front of them .Then he would force down the purple end of the chew at which the vomiting would immediately cease .Lee Jordan who was assisting the demonstration was lazily vanishing the vomit at regular intervals with the same Vanishing Spell Snape kept using on Harrys potions .What with the regular sounds of retching cheering and Fred and George taking advance orders from the crowd Harry was finding it exceptionally difficult to focus on the correct method for Strengthening Solutions .Hermione was not helping matters the cheers and sound of vomit hitting the bottom of Fred and Georges bucket were punctuated by loud and disapproving sniffs that Harry found if anything more distracting .Just go and stop them then !he said irritably after crossing out the wrong weight of powdered griffin claw for the fourth time .I cant theyre not technically doing anything wrong said Hermione through gritted teeth .Theyre quite within their rights to eat the foul things themselves and I cant find a rule that says the other idiots arent entitled to buy them not unless theyre proven to be dangerous in some way and it doesnt look as though they are .She Harry and Ron watched George projectilevomit into the bucket gulp down the rest of the chew and straighten up beaming with his arms wide to protracted applause .You know I dont get why Fred and George only got three O .W .L .s each said Harry watching as Fred George and Lee collected gold from the eager crowd .They really know their stuff .Oh they only know flashy stuff thats no real use to anyone said Hermione disparagingly .No real use ?said Ron in a strained voice .Hermione theyve got about twentysix Galleons already .It was a long while before the crowd around the Weasleys dispersed and then Fred Lee and George sat up counting their takings even longer so that it was well past midnight when Harry Ron and Hermione finally had the common room to themselves again .At long last Fred closed the doorway to the boys dormitories behind him rattling his box of Galleons ostentatiously so that Hermione scowled .Harry who was making very little progress with his Potions essay decided to give it up for the night .As he put his books away Ron who was dozing lightly in an armchair gave a muffled grunt awoke looked blearily into the fire and said Sirius !Harry whipped around Siriuss untidy dark head was sitting in the fire again .Hi he said grinning .Hi chorused Harry Ron and Hermione all three kneeling down upon the hearthrug .Crookshanks purred loudly and approached the fire trying despite the heat to put his face close to Siriuss .Howre things ?said Sirius .Not that good said Harry as Hermione pulled Crookshanks back to stop him singeing his whiskers .The Ministrys forced through another decree which means were not allowed to have Quidditch teams or secret Defense Against the Dark Arts groups ?said Sirius .There was a short pause .How did you know about that ?Harry demanded .You want to choose your meeting places more carefully said Sirius grinning still more broadly .The Hogs Head I ask you .Well it was better than the Three Broomsticks !said Hermione defensively .Thats always packed with people which means youd have been harder to overhear said Sirius .Youve got a lot to learn Hermione .Who overheard us ?Harry demanded .Mundungus of course said Sirius and when they all looked puzzled he laughed .He was the witch under the veil .That was Mundungus ?Harry said stunned .What was he doing in the Hogs Head ?What do you think he was doing ?said Sirius impatiently .Keeping an eye on you of course .Im still being followed ?asked Harry angrily .Yeah you are said Sirius and just as well isnt it if the first thing youre going to do on your weekend off is organize an illegal defense group .But he looked neither angry nor worried on the contrary he was looking at Harry with distinct pride .Why was Dung hiding from us ?asked Ron sounding disappointed .Wedve liked tove seen him .He was banned from the Hogs Head twenty years ago said Sirius and that barmans got a long memory .We lost Moodys spare Invisibility Cloak when Sturgis was arrested so Dungs been dressing as a witch a lot lately .Anyway .First of all Ron Ive sworn to pass on a message from your mother .Oh yeah ?said Ron sounding apprehensive .She says on no account whatsoever are you to take part in an illegal secret Defense Against the Dark Arts group .She says youll be expelled for sure and your future will be ruined .She says there will be plenty of time to learn how to defend yourself later and that you are too young to be worrying about that right now .She also Siriuss eyes turned to the other two advises Harry and Hermione not to proceed with the group though she accepts that she has no authority over either of them and simply begs them to remember that she has their best interests at heart .She would have written all this to you but if the owl had been intercepted youd all have been in real trouble and she cant say it for herself because shes on duty tonight .On duty doing what ?said Ron quickly .Never you mind just stuff for the Order said Sirius .So its fallen to me to be the messenger and make sure you tell her I passed it all on because I dont think she trusts me to .There was another pause in which Crookshanks mewing attempted to paw Siriuss head and Ron fiddled with a hole in the hearthrug .So you want me to say Im not going to take part in the defense group ?he muttered finally .Me ?Certainly not !said Sirius looking surprised .I think its an excellent idea !You do ?said Harry his heart lifting .Of course I do !said Sirius .Dyou think your father and I wouldve lain down and taken orders from an old hag like Umbridge ?But last term all you did was tell me to be careful and not take risks Last year all the evidence was that someone inside Hogwarts was trying to kill you Harry !said Sirius impatiently .This year we know that theres someone outside Hogwarts whod like to kill us all so I think learning to defend yourselves properly is a very good idea !And if we do get expelled ?Hermione asked a quizzical look on her face .Hermione this whole thing was your idea !said Harry staring at her .I know it was .I just wondered what Sirius thought she said shrugging .Well better expelled and able to defend yourselves than sitting safely in school without a clue said Sirius .Hear hear said Harry and Ron enthusiastically .So said Sirius how are you organizing this group ?Where are you meeting ?Well thats a bit of a problem now said Harry .Dunno where were going to be able to go .How about the Shrieking Shack ?suggested Sirius .Hey thats an idea !said Ron excitedly but Hermione made a skeptical noise and all three of them looked at her Siriuss head turning in the flames .Well Sirius its just that there were only four of you meeting in the Shrieking Shack when you were at school said Hermione and all of you could transform into animals and I suppose you could all have squeezed under a single Invisibility Cloak if youd wanted to .But there are twentyeight of us and none of us is an Animagus so we wouldnt need so much an Invisibility Cloak as an Invisibility Marquee Fair point said Sirius looking slightly crestfallen .Well Im sure youll come up with somewhere .There used to be a pretty roomy secret passageway behind that big mirror on the fourth floor you might have enough space to practice jinxes in there Fred and George told me its blocked said Harry shaking his head .Caved in or something .Oh .said Sirius frowning .Well 111 have a think and get back to He broke off .His face was suddenly tense alarmed .He turned sideways apparently looking into the solid brick wall of the fireplace .Sirius ?said Harry anxiously .But he had vanished .Harry gaped at the flames for a moment then turned to look at Ron and Hermione .Why did he ?Hermione gave a horrified gasp and leapt to her feet still staring at the fire .A hand had appeared amongst the flames groping as though to catch hold of something a stubby short fingered hand covered in ugly oldfashioned rings .The three of them ran for it at the door of the boys dormitory Harry looked back .Umbridges hand was still making snatching movements amongst the flames as though she knew exactly where Siriuss hair had been moments before and was determined to seize it .DUMBLEDORES ARMY Umbridge has been reading your mail Harry .Theres no other explanation .You think Umbridge attacked Hedwig ?he said outraged .Im almost certain of it said Hermione grimly .Watch your frog its escaping .Harry pointed his wand at the bullfrog that had been hopping hopefully toward the other side of the table Acciol and it zoomed gloomily back into his hand .Charms was always one of the best lessons in which to enjoy a private chat There was generally so much movement and activity that the danger of being overheard was very slight .Today with the room full of croaking bullfrogs and cawing ravens and with a heavy downpour of rain clattering and pounding against the classroom windows Harry Ron and Hermione s whispered discussion about how Umbridge had nearly caught Sirius went quite unnoticed .Ive been suspecting this ever since Filch accused you of ordering Dungbombs because it seemed such a stupid lie Hermione whispered .I mean once your letter had been read it would have been quite clear you werent ordering them so you wouldnt have been in trouble at all its a bit of a feeble joke isnt it ?But then I thought what if somebody just wanted an excuse to read your mail ?Well then it would be a perfect way for Umbridge to manage it tip off Filch let him do the dirty work and confiscate the letter then either find a way of stealing it from him or else demand to see it I dont think Filch would object whens he ever stuck up for a students rights ?Harry youre squashing your frog .Harry looked down he was indeed squeezing his bullfrog so tightly its eyes were popping he replaced it hastily upon the desk .It was a very very close call last night said Hermione .I just wonder if Umbridge knows how close it was .Silenciol The bullfrog on which she was practicing her Silencing Charm was struck dumb midcroak and glared at her reproachfully .If shed caught Snuffles .Harry finished the sentence for her .Hed probably be back in Azkaban this morning .He waved his wand without really concentrating his bullfrog swelled like a green balloon and emitted a highpitched whistle .Silenciol said Hermione hastily pointing her wand at Harrys frog which deflated silently before them .Well he mustnt do it again thats all .I just dont know how were going to let him know .We cant send him an owl .I dont reckon hell risk it again said Ron .Hes not stupid he knows she nearly got him .Silenciol The large and ugly raven in front of him let out a derisive caw .Silenciol SILENCIO The raven cawed more loudly .Its the way youre moving your wand said Hermione watching Ron critically .You dont want to wave it its more a sharp jab .Ravens are harder than frogs said Ron testily .Fine lets swap said Hermione seizing Rons raven and replacing it with her own fat bullfrog .Silencio The raven continued to open and close its sharp beak but no sound came out .Very good Miss Granger !said Professor Flitwicks squeaky little voice and Harry Ron and Hermione all jumped .Now let me see you try Mr Weasley !Wha ?Oh oh right said Ron very flustered .Er Silenciol He jabbed at the bullfrog so hard that he poked it in the eye the frog gave a deafening croak and leapt off the desk .It came as no surprise to any of them that Harry and Ron were given additional practice of the Silencing Charm for homework .They were allowed to remain inside over break due to the downpour outside .They found seats in a noisy and overcrowded classroom on the first floor in which Peeves was floating dreamily up near the chandelier occasionally blowing an ink pellet at the top of somebodys head .They had barely sat down when Angelina came struggling toward them through the groups of gossiping students .Ive got permission !she said .To reform the Quidditch team !Excellent .said Ron and Harry together .Yeah said Angelina beaming .I went to McGonagall and I think she might have appealed to Dumbledore anyway Umbridge had to give in .Ha !So I want you down at the pitch at seven oclock tonight all right because weve got to make up time you realize were only three weeks away from our first match ?She squeezed away from them narrowly dodged an ink pellet from Peeves which hit a nearby first year instead and vanished from sight .Rons smile slipped slightly as he looked out of the window which was now opaque with hammering rain .Hope this clears up .Whats up with you Hermione ?She too was gazing at the window but not as though she really saw it .Her eyes were unfocused and there was a frown on her face .Just thinking .she said still frowning at the rain washed window .About Siri .Snuffles ?said Harry .No .not exactly .said Hermione slowly .More .wondering .I suppose were doing the right thing .I think .arent we ?Harry and Ron looked at each other .Well that clears that up said Ron .It wouldve been really annoying if you hadnt explained yourself properly .Hermione looked at him as though she had only just realized he was there .I was just wondering she said her voice stronger now whether were doing the right thing starting this Defense Against the Dark Arts group .What !said Harry and Ron together .Hermione it was your idea in the first place !said Ron indignantly .I know said Hermione twisting her fingers together .But after talking to Snuffles .But hes all for it !said Harry .Yes said Hermione staring at the window again .Yes thats what made me think maybe it wasnt a good idea after all .Peeves floated over them on his stomach peashooter at the ready automatically all three of them lifted their bags to cover their heads until he had passed .Lets get this straight said Harry angrily as they put their bags back on the floor Sirius agrees with us so you dont think we should do it anymore ?Hermione looked tense and rather miserable .Now staring at her own hands she said Do you honestly trust his judgment ?Yes I do !said Harry at once .Hes always given us great advice !An ink pellet whizzed past them striking Katie Bell squarely in the ear .Hermione watched Katie leap to her feet and start throwing things at Peeves it was a few moments before Hermione spoke again and it sounded as though she was choosing her words very carefully .You dont think he has become .sort of .reckless .since hes been cooped up in Grimmauld Place ?You dont think hes .kind of .living through us ?What dyou mean ‘living through us ?Harry retorted .I mean .well I think hed love to be forming secret defense societies right under the nose of someone from the Ministry .I think hes really frustrated at how little he can do where he is .so I think hes keen to kind of .egg us on .Ron looked utterly perplexed .Sirius is right he said you do sound just like my mother .Hermione bit her lip and did not answer .The bell rang just as Peeves swooped down upon Katie and emptied an entire ink bottle over her head .The weather did not improve as the day wore on so that at seven oclock that evening when Harry and Ron went down to the Quidditch pitch for practice they were soaked through within minutes their feet slipping and sliding on the sodden grass .The sky was a deep thundery gray and it was a relief to gain the warmth and light of the changing rooms even if they knew the respite was only temporary .They found Fred and George debating whether to use one of their own Skiving Snackboxes to get out of flying .but I bet shed know what wed done Fred said out of the corner of his mouth .If only I hadnt offered to sell her some Puking Pastilles yesterday We could try the Fever Fudge George muttered no ones seen that yet Does it work ?inquired Ron hopefully as the hammering of rain on the roof intensified and wind howled around the building .Well yeah said Fred your temperaturell go right up but you get these massive pusfilled boils too said George and we havent worked out how to get rid of them yet .I cant see any boils said Ron staring at the twins .No well you wouldnt said Fred darkly theyre not in a place we generally display to the public but they make sitting on a broom a right pain in the All right everyone listen up said Angelina loudly emerging from the Captains office .I know its not ideal weather but theres a good chance well be playing Slytherin in conditions like this so its a good idea to work out how were going to cope with them .Harry didnt you do something to your glasses to stop the rain fogging them up when we played Hufflepuff in that storm ?Hermione did it said Harry .He pulled out his wand tapped his glasses and said Imperviusl I think we all ought to try that said Angelina .If we could just keep the rain off our faces it would really help visibility all together come on Imperviusl Okay .Lets go .They all stowed their wands back in the inside pockets of their robes shouldered their brooms and followed Angelina out of the changing rooms .They squelched through the deepening mud to the middle of the pitch visibility was still very poor even with the Impervius Charm light was fading fast and curtains of rain were sweeping the grounds .All right on my whistle shouted Angelina .Harry kicked off from the ground spraying mud in all directions and shot upward the wind pulling him slightly off course .He had no idea how he was going to see the Snitch in this weather he was having enough difficulty seeing the one Bludger with which they were practicing a minute into the practice it almost unseated him and he had to use the Sloth Grip Roll to avoid it .Unfortunately Angelina did not see this in fact she did not appear to be able to see anything none of them had a clue what the others were doing .The wind was picking up even at a distance Harry could hear the swishing pounding sounds of the rain pummeling the surface of the lake .Angelina kept them at it for nearly an hour before conceding defeat .She led her sodden and disgruntled team back into the changing rooms insisting that the practice had not been a waste of time though without any real conviction in her voice .Fred and George were looking particularly annoyed both were bandylegged and winced with every movement .Harry could hear them complaining in low voices as he toweled his hair dry .I think a few of mine have ruptured said Fred in a hollow voice .Mine havent said George wincing .Theyre throbbing like mad .feel bigger if anything .OUCH !said Harry .He pressed the towel to his face his eyes screwed tight with pain .The scar on his forehead had seared again more painfully than in months .Whats up ?said several voices .Harry emerged from behind his towel the changing room was blurred because he was not wearing his glasses but he could still tell that everyones face was turned toward him .Nothing he muttered I poked myself in the eye thats all .But he gave Ron a significant look and the two of them hung back as the rest of the team filed back outside muffled in their cloaks their hats pulled low over their ears .What happened ?said Ron the moment that Alicia had disappeared through the door .Was it your scar ?Harry nodded .But .Looking scared Ron strode across to the window and stared out into the rain He he cant be near us now can he ?No Harry muttered sinking onto a bench and rubbing his forehead .Hes probably miles away .It hurt because .hes .angry .Harry had not meant to say that at all and heard the words as though a stranger had spoken them yet he knew at once that they were true .He did not know how he knew it but he did Voldemort wherever he was whatever he was doing was in a towering temper .Did you see him ?said Ron looking horrified .Did you .get a vision or something ?Harry sat quite still staring at his feet allowing his mind and his memory to relax in the aftermath of the pain .A confused tangle of shapes a howling rush of voices He wants something done and its not happening fast enough he said .Again he felt surprised to hear the words coming out of his mouth and yet quite certain that they were true .But .how do you know ?said Ron .Harry shook his head and covered his eyes with his hands pressing down upon them with his palms .Little stars erupted in them .He felt Ron sit down on the bench beside him and knew Ron was staring at him .Is this what it was about last time ?said Ron in a hushed voice .When your scar hurt in Umbridges office ?YouKnowWho was angry ?Harry shook his head .What is it then ?Harry was thinking himself back .He had been looking into Umbridges face .His scar had hurt .and he had had that odd feeling in his stomach .a strange leaping feeling .a happy feeling .But of course he had not recognized it for what it was as he had been feeling so miserable himself .Last time it was because he was pleased he said .Really pleased .He thought .something good was going to happen .And the night before we came back to Hogwarts .He thought back to the moment when his scar had hurt so badly in his and Rons bedroom in Grimmauld Place .He was furious .He looked around at Ron who was gaping at him .You could take over from Trelawney mate he said in an awed voice .Im not making prophecies said Harry .No you know what youre doing ?Ron said sounding both scared and impressed .Harry youre reading YouKnowWhos mind .No said Harry shaking his head .Its more like .his mood I suppose .Im just getting flashes of what mood hes in .Dumbledore said something like this was happening last year .He said that when Voldemort was near me or when he was feeling hatred I could tell .Well now Im feeling it when hes pleased too .There was a pause .The wind and rain lashed at the building .Youve got to tell someone said Ron .I told Sirius last time .Well tell him about this time !Cant can I ?said Harry grimly .Umbridge is watching the owls and the fires remember ?Well then Dumbledore Ive just told you he already knows said Harry shortly getting to his feet taking his cloak off his peg and swinging it around himself .Theres no point telling him again .Ron did up the fastening of his own cloak watching Harry thoughtfully .Dumbledored want to know he said .Harry shrugged .Cmon .weve still got Silencing Charms to practice They hurried back through the dark grounds sliding and stumbling up the muddy lawns not talking .Harry was thinking hard .What was it that Voldemort wanted done that was not happening quickly enough ?Hes got other plans .plans he can put into operation very quietly indeed .stuff he can only get by stealth .like a weapon .Something he didnt have last time .He had not thought about those words in weeks he had been too absorbed in what was going on at Hogwarts too busy dwelling on the ongoing battles with Umbridge the injustice of all the Ministry interference .But now they came back to him and made him wonder .Voldemorts anger would make sense if he was no nearer laying hands on the weapon whatever it was .Had the Order thwarted him stopped him from seizing it ?Where was it kept ?Who had it now ?Mimbulus mimbletonia said Rons voice and Harry came back to his senses just in time to clamber through the portrait hole into the common room .It appeared that Hermione had gone to bed early leaving Crookshanks curled in a nearby chair and an assortment of knobbly knitted elf hats lying on a table by the fire .Harry was rather grateful that she was not around because he did not much want to discuss his scar hurting and have her urge him to go to Dumbledore too .Ron kept throwing him anxious glances but Harry pulled out his Potions book and set to work to finish his essay though he was only pretending to concentrate and by the time that Ron said he was going to bed too had written hardly anything .Midnight came and went while Harry was reading and rereading a passage about the uses of scurvygrass lovage and sneezewort and not taking in a word of it .These plantes are moste efficacious in the inflaming of the braine and are therefore much used in Confusing and Befuddlement Draughts where the wizard is desirous of producing hotheadedness and recklessness . .Hermione said Sirius was becoming reckless cooped up in Grimmauld Place . .moste efficacious in the inflaming of the braine and are therefore much used . .the Daily Prophet would think his brain was inflamed if they found out that he knew what Voldemort was feeling . .therefore much used in Confusing and Befuddlement Draughts . .confusing was the word all right why did he know what Voldemort was feeling ?What was this weird connection between them which Dumbledore had never been able to explain satisfactorily ? .where the wizard is desirous . .how he would like to sleep . .of producing hotheadedness ..It was warm and comfortable in his armchair before the fire with the rain still beating heavily on the windowpanes and Crookshanks purring and the crackling of the flames .The book slipped from Harrys slack grip and landed with a dull thud on the hearthrug .His head fell sideways .He was walking once more along a windowless corridor his footsteps echoing in the silence .As the door at the end of the passage loomed larger his heart beat fast with excitement .If he could only open it .enter beyond .He stretched out his hand .His fingertips were inches from it .Harry Potter sir !He awoke with a start .The candles had all been extinguished in the common room but there was something moving close by .Whozair ?said Harry sitting upright in his chair .The fire was almost extinguished the room very dark .Dobby has your owl sir !said a squeaky voice .Dobby ?said Harry thickly peering through the gloom toward the source of the voice .Dobby the houseelf was standing beside the table on which Hermione had left her half a dozen knitted hats .His large pointed ears were now sticking out from beneath what looked like all the hats that Hermione had ever knitted he was wearing one on top of the other so that his head seemed elongated by two or three feet and on the very topmost bobble sat Hedwig hooting serenely and obviously cured .Dobby volunteered to return Harry Potters owl !said the elf squeakily with a look of positive adoration on his face .Professor GrubblyPlank says she is all well now sir !He sank into a deep bow so that his pencillike nose brushed the threadbare surface of the hearthrug and Hedwig gave an indignant hoot and fluttered onto the arm of Harrys chair .Thanks Dobby !said Harry stroking Hedwigs head and blinking hard trying to rid himself of the image of the door in his dream .It had been very vivid .Looking back at Dobby he noticed that the elf was also wearing several scarves and innumerable socks so that his feet looked far too big for his body .Er .have you been taking all the clothes Hermiones been leaving out ?Oh no sir said Dobby happily Dobby has been taking some for Winky too sir .Yeah how is Winky ?asked Harry .Dobbys ears drooped slightly .Winky is still drinking lots sir he said sadly his enormous round green eyes large as tennis balls downcast .She still does not care for clothes Harry Potter .Nor do the other houseelves .None of them will clean Gryffindor Tower anymore not with the hats and socks hidden everywhere they finds them insulting sir .Dobby does it all himself sir but Dobby does not mind sir for he always hopes to meet Harry Potter and tonight sir he has got his wish !Dobby sank into a deep bow again .But Harry Potter does not seem happy Dobby went on straightening up again and looking timidly at Harry .Dobby heard him muttering in his sleep .Was Harry Potter having bad dreams ?Not really bad said Harry yawning and rubbing his eyes .Ive had worse .The elf surveyed Harry out of his vast orblike eyes .Then he said very seriously his ears drooping Dobby wishes he could help Harry Potter for Harry Potter set Dobby free and Dobby is much much happier now .Harry smiled .You cant help me Dobby but thanks for the offer .He bent and picked up his Potions book .Hed have to try and finish the essay tomorrow .He closed the book and as he did so the firelight illuminated the thin white scars on the back of his hand the result of his detention with Umbridge .Wait a moment there is something you can do for me Dobby said Harry slowly .The elf looked around beaming .Name it Harry Potter sir !I need to find a place where twentyeight people can practice Defense Against the Dark Arts without being discovered by any of the teachers .Especially Harry clenched his hand on the book so that the scars shone pearly white Professor Umbridge .He expected the elfs smile to vanish his ears to droop he expected him to say that this was impossible or else that he would try but his hopes were not high .What he had not expected was for Dobby to give a little skip his ears waggling happily and clap his hands together .Dobby knows the perfect place sir !he said happily .Dobby heard tell of it from the other houseelves when he came to Hogwarts sir .It is known by us as the Come and Go Room sir or else as the Room of Requirement !Why ?said Harry curiously .Because it is a room that a person can only enter said Dobby seriously when they have real need of it .Sometimes it is there and sometimes it is not but when it appears it is always equipped for the seekers needs .Dobby has used it sir said the elf dropping his voice and looking guilty when Winky has been very drunk .He has hidden her in the Room of Requirement and he has found antidotes to butterbeer there and a nice elfsized bed to settle her on while she sleeps it off sir .And Dobby knows Mr Filch has found extra cleaning materials there when he has run short sir and and if you really needed a bathroom said Harry suddenly remembering something Dumbledore had said at the Yule Ball the previous Christmas would it fill itself with chamber pots ?Dobby expects so sir said Dobby nodding earnestly .It is a most amazing room sir .How many people know about it ?said Harry sitting up straighter in his chair .Very few sir .Mostly people stumbles across it when they needs it sir but often they never finds it again for they do not know that it is always there waiting to be called into service sir .It sounds brilliant said Harry his heart racing .It sounds perfect Dobby .When can you show me where it is ?Anytime Harry Potter sir said Dobby looking delighted at Harrys enthusiasm .We could go now if you like !For a moment Harry was tempted to go now he was halfway out of his seat intending to hurry upstairs for his Invisibility Cloak when not for the first time a voice very much like Hermiones whispered in his ear reckless .It was after all very late he was exhausted and had Snapes essay to finish .Not tonight Dobby said Harry reluctantly sinking back into his chair .This is really important .I dont want to blow it itll need proper planning .Listen can you just tell me exactly where this Room of Requirement is and how to get in there ?Their robes billowed and swirled around them as they splashed across the flooded vegetable patch to double Herbology where they could hardly hear what Professor Sprout was saying over the hammering of raindrops hard as hailstones on the greenhouse roof .The afternoons Care of Magical Creatures lesson was to be relocated from the stormswept grounds to a free classroom on the ground floor and to their intense relief Angelina sought out her team at lunch to tell them that Quidditch practice was canceled .Good said Harry quietly when she told him because weve found somewhere to have our first Defense meeting .Tonight eight oclock seventh floor opposite that tapestry of Barnabas the Barmy being clubbed by those trolls .Can you tell Katie and Alicia ?She looked slightly taken aback but promised to tell the others Harry returned hungrily to his sausages and mash .When he looked up to take a drink of pumpkin juice he found Hermione watching him .What ?he said thickly .Well .its just that Dobbys plans arent always that safe .Dont you remember when he lost you all the bones in your arm ?This room isnt just some mad idea of Dobbys Dumbledore knows about it too he mentioned it to me at the Yule Ball .Hermiones expression cleared .Dumbledore told you about it ?Just in passing said Harry shrugging .Oh well thats all right then said Hermione briskly and she raised no more objections .Together with Ron they had spent most of the day seeking out those people who had signed their names to the list in the Hogs Head and telling them where to meet that evening .Somewhat to Harrys disappointment it was Ginny who managed to find Cho Chang and her friend first however by the end of dinner he was confident that the news had been passed to every one of the twentyfive people who had turned up in the Hogs Head .At halfpast seven Harry Ron and Hermione left the Gryffindor common room Harry clutching a certain piece of aged parchment in his hand .Fifth years were allowed to be out in the corridors until nine oclock but all three of them kept looking around nervously as they made their way up to the seventh floor .Hold it said Harry warningly unfolding the piece of parchment at the top of the last staircase tapping it with his wand and muttering I solemnly swear that I am up to no good .A map of Hogwarts appeared upon the blank surface of the parchment .Tiny black moving dots labeled with names showed where various people were .Filch is on the second floor said Harry holding the map close to his eyes and scanning it closely and Mrs Norris is on the fourth .And Umbridge ?said Hermione anxiously .In her office said Harry pointing .Okay lets go .They hurried along the corridor to the place Dobby had described to Harry a stretch of blank wall opposite an enormous tapestry depicting Barnabas the Barmys foolish attempt to train trolls for the ballet .Okay said Harry quietly while a motheaten troll paused in his relentless clubbing of the wouldbe ballet teacher to watch .Dobby said to walk past this bit of wall three times concentrating hard on what we need .They did so turning sharply at the window just beyond the blank stretch of wall then at the mansize vase on its other side .Ron had screwed up his eyes in concentration Hermione was whispering something under her breath Harrys fists were clenched as he stared ahead of him .We need somewhere to learn to fight .he thought .Just give us a place to practice .somewhere they cant find us .Harry said Hermione sharply as they wheeled around after their third walk past .A highly polished door had appeared in the wall .Ron was staring at it looking slightly wary .Harry reached out seized the brass handle pulled open the door and led the way into a spacious room lit with flickering torches like those that illuminated the dungeons eight floors below .The walls were lined with wooden bookcases and instead of chairs there were large silk cushions on the floor .A set of shelves at the far end of the room carried a range of instruments such as Sneakoscopes Secrecy Sensors and a large cracked FoeGlass that Harry was sure had hung the previous year in the fake Moodys office .These will be good when were practicing Stunning said Ron enthusiastically prodding one of the cushions with his foot .And just look at these books !said Hermione excitedly running a finger along the spines of the large leatherbound tomes .A Compendium of Common Curses and Their CounterActions .The Dark Arts Outsmarted .SelfDefensive Spellwork .wow .She looked around at Harry her face glowing and he saw that the presence of hundreds of books had finally convinced Hermione that what they were doing was right .Harry this is wonderful theres everything we need here !And without further ado she slid Jinxes for the Jinxed from its shelf sank onto the nearest cushion and began to read .There was a gentle knock on the door .Harry looked around Ginny Neville Lavender Parvati and Dean had arrived .Whoa said Dean staring around impressed .What is this place ?Harry began to explain but before he had finished more people had arrived and he had to start all over again .By the time eight oclock arrived every cushion was occupied .Harry moved across to the door and turned the key protruding from the lock it clicked in a satisfyingly loud way and everybody fell silent looking at him .Hermione carefully marked her page of Jinxes for the Jinxed and set the book aside .Well said Harry slightly nervously .This is the place weve found for practices and youve er obviously found it okay Its fantastic !said Cho and several people murmured their agreement .Its bizarre said Fred frowning around at it .We once hid from Filch in here remember George ?But it was just a broom cupboard then .Hey Harry whats this stuff ?asked Dean from the rear of the room indicating the Sneakoscopes and the FoeGlass .Dark Detectors said Harry stepping between the cushions to reach them .Basically they all show when Dark wizards or enemies are around but you dont want to rely on them too much they can be fooled .He gazed for a moment into the cracked FoeGlass shadowy figures were moving around inside it though none was recognizable .He turned his back on it .Well Ive been thinking about the sort of stuff we ought to do first and er He noticed a raised hand .What Hermione ?I think we ought to elect a leader said Hermione .Harrys leader said Cho at once looking at Hermione as though she were mad and Harrys stomach did yet another back flip .Yes but I think we ought to vote on it properly said Hermione unperturbed .It makes it formal and it gives him authority .So everyone who thinks Harry ought to be our leader ?Everybody put up their hands even Zacharias Smith though he did it very halfheartedly .Er right thanks said Harry who could feel his face burning .And what Hermione ?I also think we ought to have a name she said brightly her hand still in the air .It would promote a feeling of team spirit and unity dont you think ?Can we be the AntiUmbridge League ?said Angelina hopefully .Or the Ministry of Magic Are Morons Group ?suggested Fred .I was thinking said Hermione frowning at Fred more of a name that didnt tell everyone what we were up to so we can refer to it safely outside meetings .The Defense Association ?said Cho .The D .A .for short so nobody knows what were talking about ?Yeah the D .A .s good said Ginny .Only lets make it stand for Dumbledores Army because thats the Ministrys worst fear isnt it ?There was a good deal of appreciative murmuring and laughter at this .All in favor of the D .A .said Hermione bossily kneeling up on her cushion to count .Thats a majority motion passed !She pinned the piece of paper with all of their names on it on the wall and wrote DUMBLEDORES ARMY across the top in large letters .Right said Harry when she had sat down again shall we get practicing then ?I was thinking the first thing we should do is Expelliarmus you know the Disarming Charm .I know its pretty basic but Ive found it really useful Oh please said Zacharias Smith rolling his eyes and folding his arms .I dont think Expelliarmus is exactly going to help us against YouKnowWho do you ?Ive used it against him said Harry quietly .It saved my life last June .Smith opened his mouth stupidly .The rest of the room was very quiet .But if you think its beneath you you can leave Harry said .Smith did not move .Nor did anybody else .Okay said Harry his mouth slightly drier than usual with all those eyes upon him I reckon we should all divide into pairs and practice .It felt very odd to be issuing instructions but not nearly as odd as seeing them followed .Everybody got to their feet at once and divided up .Predictably Neville was left partnerless .You can practice with me Harry told him .Right on the count of three then one two three The room was suddenly full of shouts of Expelliarmusl Wands flew in all directions missed spells hit books on shelves and sent them flying into the air .Harry was too quick for Neville whose wand went spinning out of his hand hit the ceiling in a shower of sparks and landed with a clatter on top of a bookshelf from which Harry retrieved it with a Summoning Charm .Glancing around he thought he had been right to suggest that they practice the basics first there was a lot of shoddy spellwork going on many people were not succeeding in disarming their opponents at all but merely causing them to jump backward a few paces or wince as the feeble spell whooshed over them .Expelliarmusl said Neville and Harry caught unawares felt his wand fly out of his hand .I DID IT !said Neville gleefully .Ive never done it before I DID IT !Good one !said Harry encouragingly deciding not to point out that in a real duel situation Nevilles opponent was unlikely to be staring in the opposite direction with his wand held loosely at his side .Listen Neville can you take it in turns to practice with Ron and Hermione for a couple of minutes so I can walk around and see how the rest are doing ?Harry moved off into the middle of the room .Something very odd was happening to Zacharias Smith every time he opened his mouth to disarm Anthony Goldstein his own wand would fly out of his hand yet Anthony did not seem to be making a sound .Harry did not have to look far for the solution of the mystery however Fred and George were several feet from Smith and taking it in turns to point their wands at his back .Sorry Harry said George hastily when Harry caught his eye .Couldnt resist .Harry walked around the other pairs trying to correct those who were doing the spell wrong .Ginny was teamed with Michael Corner she was doing very well whereas Michael was either very bad or unwilling to jinx her .Ernie Macmillan was flourishing his wand unnecessarily giving his partner time to get in under his guard the Creevey brothers were enthusiastic but erratic and mainly responsible for all the books leaping off the shelves around them .Luna Lovegood was similarly patchy occasionally sending Justin FinchFletchleys wand spinning out of his hand at other times merely causing his hair to stand on end .Okay stop !Harry shouted .Stop STOP .I need a whistle he thought and immediately spotted one lying on top of the nearest row of books .He caught it up and blew hard .Everyone lowered their wands .That wasnt bad said Harry but theres definite room for improvement .Zacharias Smith glared at him .Lets try again .He moved off around the room again stopping here and there to make suggestions .Slowly the general performance improved .He avoided going near Cho and her friend for a while but after walking twice around every other pair in the room felt he could not ignore them any longer .Oh no said Cho rather wildly as he approached .Expelliarmiousl I mean Exnellimellius I oh sorry Marietta !Her curlyhaired friends sleeve had caught fire Marietta extinguished it with her own wand and glared at Harry as though it was his fault .You made me nervous I was doing all right before then !Cho told Harry ruefully .That was quite good Harry lied but when she raised her eyebrows he said Well no it was lousy but I know you can do it properly I was watching from over there .She laughed .Her friend Marietta looked at them rather sourly and turned away .Dont mind her Cho muttered .She doesnt really want to be here but I made her come with me .Her parents have forbidden her to do anything that might upset Umbridge you see her mum works for the Ministry .What about your parents ?asked Harry .Well theyve forbidden me to get on the wrong side of Umbridge too said Cho drawing herself up proudly .But if they think Im not going to fight YouKnow Who after what happened to Cedric She broke off looking rather confused and an awkward silence fell between them Terry Boots wand went whizzing past Harrys ear and hit Alicia Spinnet hard on the nose .Well my father is very supportive of any anti Ministry action !said Luna Lovegood proudly from just behind Harry evidently she had been eavesdropping on his conversation while Justin FinchFletchley attempted to disentangle himself from the robes that had flown up over his head .Hes always saying hed believe anything of Fudge I mean the number of goblins Fudge has had assassinated !And of course he uses the Department of Mysteries to develop terrible poisons which he feeds secretly to anybody who disagrees with him .And then theres his Umgubular Slashkilter Dont ask Harry muttered to Cho as she opened her mouth looking puzzled .She giggled .Hey Harry Hermione called from the other end of the room have you checked the time ?He looked down at his watch and received a shock it was already ten past nine which meant they needed to get back to their common rooms immediately or risk being caught and punished by Filch for being outofbounds .He blew his whistle everybody stopped shouting Expelliarmusl and the last couple of wands clattered to the floor .Well that was pretty good said Harry but weve overrun wed better leave it here .Same time same place next week ?Sooner !said Dean Thomas eagerly and many people nodded in agreement .Angelina however said quickly The Quidditch seasons about to start we need team practices too !Lets say next Wednesday night then said Harry and we can decide on additional meetings then .Come on wed better get going .He pulled out the Marauders Map again and checked it carefully for signs of teachers on the seventh floor .He let them all leave in threes and fours watching their tiny dots anxiously to see that they returned safely to their dormitories the Hufflepuffs to the basement corridor that also led to the kitchens the Ravenclaws to a tower on the west side of the castle and the Gryffindors along the corridor to the seventh floor and the Fat Ladys portrait .That was really really good Harry said Hermione when finally it was just her Harry and Ron left .Yeah it was !said Ron enthusiastically as they slipped out of the door and watched it melt back into stone behind them .Did you see me disarm Hermione Harry ?Only once said Hermione stung .I got you loads more than you got me I did not only get you once I got you at least three times Well if youre counting the one where you tripped over your own feet and knocked the wand out of my hand They argued all the way back to the common room but Harry was not listening to them .He had one eye on the Marauders Map but he was also thinking of how Cho had said he made her nervous .THE LION AND THE SERPENT Harry felt as though he were carrying some kind of talisman inside his chest over the following two weeks a glowing secret that supported him through Umbridges classes and even made it possible for him to smile blandly as he looked into her horrible bulging eyes .He and the D .A .were resisting her under her very nose doing the very thing that she and the Ministry most feared and whenever he was supposed to be reading Wilbert Slinkhards book during her lessons he dwelled instead on satisfying memories of their most recent meetings remembering how Neville had successfully disarmed Hermione how Colin Creevey had mastered the Impediment Jinx after three meetings hard effort how Parvati Patil had produced such a good Reductor Curse that she had reduced the table carrying all the Sneakoscopes to dust .He was finding it almost impossible to fix a regular night of the week for D .A .meetings as they had to accommodate three separate Quidditch teams practices which were often rearranged depending on the weather conditions but Harry was not sorry about this he had a feeling that it was probably better to keep the timing of their meetings unpredictable .If anyone was watching them it would be hard to make out a pattern .Hermione soon devised a very clever method of communicating the time and date of the next meeting to all the members in case they needed to change it at short notice because it would look so suspicious if people from different Houses were seen crossing the Great Hall to talk to each other too often .She gave each of the members of the D .A .a fake Galleon Ron became very excited when he saw the basket at first convinced that she was actually giving out gold .You see the numerals around the edge of the coins ?Hermione said holding one up for examination at the end of their fourth meeting .The coin gleamed fat and yellow in the light from the torches .On real Galleons thats just a serial number referring to the goblin who cast the coin .On these fake coins though the numbers will change to reflect the time and date of the next meeting .The coins will grow hot when the date changes so if youre carrying them in a pocket youll be able to feel them .We take one each and when Harry sets the date of the next meeting hell change the numbers on his coin and because Ive put a Protean Charm on them theyll all change to mimic his .A blank silence greeted Hermione s words .She looked around at all the faces upturned to her rather disconcerted .Well I thought it was a good idea she said uncertainly I mean even if Umbridge asked us to turn out our pockets theres nothing fishy about carrying a Galleon is there ?But .well if you dont want to use them .You can do a Protean Charm ?said Terry Boot .Yes said Hermione .But thats .thats N .E .W .T .standard that is he said weakly .Oh said Hermione trying to look modest .Oh .well .yes I suppose it is .How come youre not in Ravenclaw ?he demanded staring at Hermione with something close to wonder .With brains like yours ?Well the Sorting Hat did seriously consider putting me in Ravenclaw during my Sorting said Hermione brightly but it decided on Gryffindor in the end .So does that mean were using the Galleons ?There was a murmur of assent and everybody moved forward to collect one from the basket .Harry looked sideways at Hermione .You know what these remind me of ?No whats that ?The Death Eaters scars .Voldemort touches one of them and all their scars burn and they know theyve got to join him .Well .yes said Hermione quietly .That is where I got the idea .but youll notice I decided to engrave the date on bits of metal rather than on our members skin .Yeah .I prefer your way said Harry grinning as he slipped his Galleon into his pocket .I suppose the only danger with these is that we might accidentally spend them .Fat chance said Ron who was examining his own fake Galleon with a slightly mournful air .I havent got any real Galleons to confuse it with .As the first Quidditch match of the season Gryffindor versus Slytherin drew nearer their D .A .meetings were put on hold because Angelina insisted on almost daily practices .The fact that the Quidditch Cup had not been held for so long added considerably to the interest and excitement surrounding the forthcoming game .The Ravenclaws and Hufflepuffs were taking a lively interest in the outcome for they of course would be playing both teams over the coming year and the Heads of House of the competing teams though they attempted to disguise it under a decent pretense of sportsmanship were determined to see their sides victory .Harry realized how much Professor McGonagall cared about beating Slytherin when she abstained from giving them homework in the week leading up to the match .I think youve got enough to be getting on with at the moment she said loftily .Nobody could quite believe their ears until she looked directly at Harry and Ron and said grimly Ive become accustomed to seeing the Quidditch Cup in my study boys and I really dont want to have to hand it over to Professor Snape so use the extra time to practice wont you ?Snape was no less obviously partisan He had booked the Quidditch pitch for Slytherin practice so often that the Gryffindors had difficulty getting on it to play .He was also turning a deaf ear to the many reports of Slytherin attempts to hex Gryffindor players in the corridors .When Alicia Spinnet turned up in the hospital wing with her eyebrows growing so thick and fast that they obscured her vision and obstructed her mouth Snape insisted that she must have attempted a HairThickening Charm on herself and refused to listen to the fourteen eyewitnesses who insisted that they had seen the Slytherin Keeper Miles Bletchley hit her from behind with a jinx while she worked in the library .Harry felt optimistic about Gryffindors chances they had after all never lost to Malfoys team .Admittedly Ron was still not performing to Woods standard but he was working extremely hard to improve .His greatest weakness was a tendency to lose confidence when he made a blunder if he let in one goal he became flustered and was therefore likely to miss more .On the other hand Harry had seen Ron make some truly spectacular saves when he was on form During one memorable practice he had hung one handed from his broom and kicked the Quaffle so hard away from the goal hoop that it soared the length of the pitch and through the center hoop at the other end .The rest of the team felt this save compared favorably with one made recently by Barry Ryan the Irish International Keeper against Polands top Chaser Ladislaw Zamojski .Even Fred had said that Ron might yet make him and George proud and that they were seriously considering admitting that he was related to them something he assured Ron they had been trying to deny for four years .The only thing really worrying Harry was how much Ron was allowing the tactics of the Slytherin team to upset him before they even got onto the pitch .Harry of course had endured their snide comments for more than four years so whispers of Hey Potty I heard Warringtons sworn to knock you off your broom on Saturday far from chilling his blood made him laugh .Warringtons aims so pathetic Id be more worried if he was aiming for the person next to me he retorted which made Ron and Hermione laugh and wiped the smirk off Pansy Parkinsons face .But Ron had never endured a relentless campaign of insults jeers and intimidation .When Slytherins some of them seventh years and considerably larger than he was muttered as they passed in the corridors Got your bed booked in the hospital wing Weasley ?he did not laugh but turned a delicate shade of green .When Draco Malfoy imitated Ron dropping the Quaffle which he did whenever they were within sight of each other Rons ears glowed red and his hands shook so badly that he was likely to drop whatever he was holding at the time too .October extinguished itself in a rush of howling winds and driving rain and November arrived cold as frozen iron with hard frosts every morning and icy drafts that bit at exposed hands and faces .The skies and the ceiling of the Great Hall turned a pale pearly gray the mountains around Hogwarts became snowcapped and the temperature in the castle dropped so far that many students wore their thick protective dragon skin gloves in the corridors between lessons .The morning of the match dawned bright and cold .When Harry awoke he looked around at Rons bed and saw him sitting bolt upright his arms around his knees staring fixedly into space .You all right ?said Harry .Ron nodded but did not speak .Harry was reminded forcibly of the time that Ron had accidentally put a slug vomiting charm on himself .He looked just as pale and sweaty as he had done then not to mention as reluctant to open his mouth .You just need some breakfast Harry said bracingly .Cmon .The Great Hall was filling up fast when they arrived the talk louder and the mood more exuberant than usual .As they passed the Slytherin table there was an upsurge of noise Harry looked around and saw that nearly everyone there was wearing in addition to the usual greenandsilver scarves and hats silver badges in the shape of what seemed to be crowns .For some reason many of them waved at Ron laughing uproariously .Harry tried to see what was written on the badges as he walked by but he was too concerned to get Ron past their table quickly to linger long enough to read them .They received a rousing welcome at the Gryffindor table where everyone was wearing red and gold but far from raising Rons spirits the cheers seemed to sap the last of his morale he collapsed onto the nearest bench looking as though he were facing his final meal .I mustve been mental to do this he said in a croaky whisper .Mental .Dont be thick said Harry firmly passing him a choice of cereals .Youre going to be fine .Its normal to be nervous .Im rubbish croaked Ron .Im lousy .I cant play to save my life .What was I thinking ?Get a grip said Harry sternly .Look at that save you made with your foot the other day even Fred and George said it was brilliant Ron turned a tortured face to Harry .That was an accident he whispered miserably .I didnt mean to do it I slipped off my broom when none of you were looking and I was trying to get back on and I kicked the Quaffle by accident .Well said Harry recovering quickly from this unpleasant surprise a few more accidents like that and the games in the bag isnt it ?Hermione and Ginny sat down opposite them wearing redandgold scarves gloves and rosettes .Howre you feeling ?Ginny asked Ron who was now staring into the dregs of milk at the bottom of his empty cereal bowl as though seriously considering attempting to drown himself in them .Hes just nervous said Harry .Well thats a good sign I never feel you perform as well in exams if youre not a bit nervous said Hermione heartily .Hello said a vague and dreamy voice from behind them .Harry looked up Luna Lovegood had drifted over from the Ravenclaw table .Many people were staring at her and a few openly laughing and pointing she had managed to procure a hat shaped like a lifesize lions head which was perched precariously on her head .Im supporting Gryffindor said Luna pointing unnecessarily at her hat .Look what it does .She reached up and tapped the hat with her wand .It opened its mouth wide and gave an extremely realistic roar that made everyone in the vicinity jump .Its good isnt it ?said Luna happily .I wanted to have it chewing up a serpent to represent Slytherin you know but there wasnt time .Anyway .good luck Ronald !She drifted away .They had not quite recovered from the shock of Lunas hat before Angelina came hurrying toward them accompanied by Katie and Alicia whose eyebrows had mercifully been returned to normal by Madam Pomfrey .When youre ready she said were going to go straight down to the pitch check out conditions and change .Well be there in a bit Harry assured her .Rons just got to have some breakfast .It became clear after ten minutes however that Ron was not capable of eating anything more and Harry thought it best to get him down to the changing rooms .As they rose from the table Hermione got up too and taking Harrys arm she drew him to one side .Dont let Ron see whats on those Slytherins badges she whispered urgently .Harry looked questioningly at her but she shook her head warningly Ron had just ambled over to them looking lost and desperate .Good luck Ron said Hermione standing on tiptoe and kissing him on the cheek .And you Harry Ron seemed to come to himself slightly as they walked back across the Great Hall .He touched the spot on his face where Hermione had kissed him looking puzzled as though he was not quite sure what had just happened .He seemed too distracted to notice much around him but Harry cast a curious glance at the crownshaped badges as they passed the Slytherin table and this time he made out the words etched onto them WEASLEY IS OUR KING With an unpleasant feeling that this could mean nothing good he hurried Ron across the entrance hall down the stone steps and out into the icy air .The frosty grass crunched under their feet as they hurried down the sloping lawns toward the stadium .There was no wind at all and the sky was a uniform pearly white which meant that visibility would be good without the drawback of direct sunlight in the eyes .Harry pointed out these encouraging factors to Ron as they walked but he was not sure that Ron was listening .Angelina had changed already and was talking to the rest of the team when they entered .Harry and Ron pulled on their robes Ron attempted to do his up backtofront for several minutes before Alicia took pity on him and went to help and then sat down to listen to the prematch talk while the babble of voices outside grew steadily louder as the crowd came pouring out of the castle toward the pitch .Okay Eve only just found out the final lineup for Slytherin said Angelina consulting a piece of parchment .Last years Beaters Derrick and Bole have left now but it looks as though Montagues replaced them with the usual gorillas rather than anyone who can fly particularly well .Theyre two blokes called Crabbe and Goyle I dont know much about them We do said Harry and Ron together .Well they dont look bright enough to tell one end of a broom from another said Angelina pocketing her parchment but then I was always surprised Derrick and Bole managed to find their way onto the pitch without signposts .Crabbe and Goyle are in the same mold Harry assured her .They could hear hundreds of footsteps mounting the banked benches of the spectators stands now .Some people were singing though Harry could not make out the words .He was starting to feel nervous but he knew his butterflies were as nothing to Rons who was clutching his stomach and staring straight ahead again his jaw set and his complexion pale gray .Its time said Angelina in a hushed voice looking at her watch .Cmon everyone .good luck .The team rose shouldered their brooms and marched in single file out of the changing room and into the dazzling sunlight .A roar of sound greeted them in which Harry could still hear singing though it was muffled by the cheers and whistles .The Slytherin team were standing waiting for them .They too were wearing those silver crownshaped badges .The new captain Montague was built along the same lines as Dudley with massive forearms like hairy hams .Behind him lurked Crabbe and Goyle almost as large blinking stupidly in the sunlight swinging their new Beaters bats .Malfoy stood to one side the sunlight gleaming on his whiteblond head .He caught Harrys eye and smirked tapping the crownshaped badge on his chest .Captains shake hands ordered the umpire Madam Hooch as Angelina and Montague reached each other .Harry could tell that Montague was trying to crush Angelinas fingers though she did not wince .Mount your brooms .Madam Hooch placed her whistle in her mouth and blew .The balls were released and the fourteen players shot upward out of the corner of his eye Harry saw Ron streak off toward the goal hoops .He zoomed higher dodging a Bludger and set off on a wide lap of the pitch gazing around for a glint of gold on the other side of the stadium Draco Malfoy was doing exactly the same .And its Johnson Johnson with the Quaffle what a player that girl is Ive been saying it for years but she still wont go out with me JORDAN !yelled Professor McGonagall .Just a fun fact Professor adds a bit of interest and shes ducked Warrington shes passed Montague shes ouch been hit from behind by a Bludger from Crabbe .Montague catches the Quaffle Montague heading back up the pitch and nice Bludger there from George Weasley thats a Bludger to the head for Montague he drops the Quaffle caught by Katie Bell Katie Bell of Gryffindor reverse passes to Alicia Spinnet and Spinnets away Lee Jordans commentary rang through the stadium and Harry listened as hard as he could through the wind whistling in his ears and the din of the crowd all yelling and booing and singing dodges Warrington avoids a Bludger close call Alicia and the crowd are loving this just listen to them whats that theyre singing ?And as Lee paused to listen the song rose loud and clear from the sea of green and silver in the Slytherin section of the stands Weasley cannot save a thing He cannot block a single ring Thats why Slytherins all sing Weasley is our King .Weasley was born in a bin He always lets the Quaffle in Weasley will make sure we win Weasley is our King .and Alicia passes back to Angelina !Lee shouted and as Harry swerved his insides boiling at what he had just heard he knew Lee was trying to drown out the sound of the singing .Come on now Angelina looks like shes got just the Keeper to beat !SHE SHOOTS SHE aah .Bletchley the Slytherin Keeper had saved the goal he threw the Quaffle to Warrington who sped off with it zigzagging in between Alicia and Katie the singing from below grew louder and louder as he drew nearer and nearer Ron Weasley is our King Weasley is our King He always lets the Quaffle in Weasley is our King .Harry could not help himself Abandoning his search for the Snitch he turned his Firebolt toward Ron a lone figure at the far end of the pitch hovering before the three goal hoops while the massive Warrington pelted toward him .and its Warrington with the Quaffle Warrington heading for goal hes out of Bludger range with just the Keeper ahead A great swell of song rose from the Slytherin stands below Weasley cannot save a thing He cannot block a single ring .so its the first test for new Gryffindor Keeper Weasley brother of Beaters Fred and George and a promising new talent on the team come on Ron !But the scream of delight came from the Slytherin end Ron had dived wildly his arms wide and the Quaffle had soared between them straight through Rons central hoop .Slytherin score !came Lees voice amid the cheering and booing from the crowds below .So thats tennil to Slytherin bad luck Ron .The Slytherins sang even louder WEASLEY WAS BORN IN A BIN HE ALWAYS LETS THE QUAFFLE IN .and Gryffindor back in possession and its Katie Bell tanking up the pitch cried Lee valiantly though the singing was now so deafening that he could hardly make himself heard above it .WEASLEY WILL MAKE SURE WE WIN WEASLEY IS OUR KING .Harry WHAT ARE YOU DOING ?screamed Angelina soaring past him to keep up with Katie .GET GOING !Harry realized that he had been stationary in midair for more than a minute watching the progress of the match without sparing a thought for the whereabouts of the Snitch horrified he went into a dive and started circling the pitch again staring around trying to ignore the chorus now thundering through the stadium WEASLEY IS OUR KING WEASLEY IS OUR KING .There was no sign of the Snitch anywhere he looked Malfoy was still circling the stadium just like Harry .They passed midway around the pitch going in opposite directions and Harry heard Malfoy singing loudly WEASLEY WAS BORN IN A BIN .and its Warrington again bellowed Lee who passes to Pucey Puceys off past Spinnet come on now Angelina you can take him turns out you cant but nice Bludger from Fred Weasley I mean George Weasley oh who cares one of them anyway and Warrington drops the Quaffle and Katie Bell er drops it too so thats Montague with the Quaffle Slytherin Captain Montague takes the Quaffle and hes off up the pitch come on now Gryffindor block him !Harry zoomed around the end of the stadium behind the Slytherin goal hoops willing himself not to look at what was going on at Rons end as he sped past the Slytherin Keeper he heard Bletchley singing along with the crowd below WEASLEY CANNOT SAVE A THING .and Puceys dodged Alicia again and hes heading straight for goal stop it Ron !Harry did not have to look to see what had happened There was a terrible groan from the Gryffindor end coupled with fresh screams and applause from the Slytherins .Looking down Harry saw the pugfaced Pansy Parkinson right at the front of the stands her back to the pitch as she conducted the Slytherin supporters who were roaring THATS WHY SLYTHERINS ALL SING WEASLEY IS OUR KING .But twentynil was nothing there was still time for Gryffindor to catch up or catch the Snitch a few goals and they would be in the lead as usual Harry assured himself bobbing and weaving through the other players in pursuit of something shiny that turned out to be Montagues watch strap .But Ron let in two more goals .There was an edge of panic in Harrys desire to find the Snitch now .If he could just get it soon and finish the game quickly .and Katie Bell of Gryffindor dodges Pucey ducks Montague nice swerve Katie and she throws to Johnson Angelina Johnson takes the Quaffle shes past Warrington shes heading for goal come on now Angelina GRYFFINDOR SCORE !Its fortyten forty ten to Slytherin and Pucey has the Quaffle .Harry could hear Lunas ludicrous lion hat roaring amidst the Gryffindor cheers and felt heartened only thirty points in it that was nothing they could pull back easily .Harry ducked a Bludger that Crabbe had sent rocketing in his direction and resumed his frantic scouring of the pitch for the Snitch keeping one eye on Malfoy in case he showed signs of having spotted it but Malfoy like him was continuing to soar around the stadium searching fruitlessly .Pucey throws to Warrington Warrington to Montague Montague back to Pucey Johnson intervenes Johnson takes the Quaffle Johnson to Bell this looks good I mean bad Bells hit by a Bludger from Goyle of Slytherin and its Pucey in possession again .WEASLEY WAS BORN IN A BIN HE ALWAYS LETS THE QUAFFLE IN WEASLEY WILL MAKE SURE WE WIN But Harry had seen it at last The tiny fluttering Golden Snitch was hovering feet from the ground at the Slytherin end of the pitch .He dived .In a matter of seconds Malfoy was streaking out of the sky on Harrys left a greenandsilver blur lying flat on his broom .The Snitch skirted the foot of one of the goal hoops and scooted off toward the other side of the stands its change of direction suited Malfoy who was nearer .Harry pulled his Firebolt around he and Malfoy were now neck and neck .Feet from the ground Harry lifted his right hand from his broom stretching toward the Snitch .to his right Malfoys arm extended too reaching groping .It was over in two breathless desperate windswept seconds Harrys fingers closed around the tiny struggling ball Malfoys fingernails scrabbled the back of Harrys hand hopelessly Harry pulled his broom upward holding the struggling ball in his hand and the Gryffindor spectators screamed their approval .They were saved it did not matter that Ron had let in those goals nobody would remember as long as Gryffindor had won WHAM A Bludger hit Harry squarely in the small of the back and he flew forward off his broom luckily he was only five or six feet above the ground having dived so low to catch the Snitch but he was winded all the same as he landed flat on his back on the frozen pitch .He heard Madam Hoochs shrill whistle an uproar in the stands compounded of catcalls angry yells and jeering a thud then Angelinas frantic voice .Are you all right ?Course I am said Harry grimly taking her hand and allowing her to pull him to his feet .Madam Hooch was zooming toward one of the Slytherin players above him though he could not see who it was at this angle .It was that thug Crabbe said Angelina angrily .He whacked the Bludger at you the moment he saw youd got the Snitch but we won Harry we won !Harry heard a snort from behind him and turned around still holding the Snitch tightly in his hand Draco Malfoy had landed close by whitefaced with fury he was still managing to sneer .Saved Weasleys neck havent you ?he said to Harry .Ive never seen a worse Keeper .but then he was born in a bin .Did you like my lyrics Potter ?Harry did not answer he turned away to meet the rest of the team who were now landing one by one yelling and punching the air in triumph all except Ron who had dismounted from his broom over by the goalposts and was making his way slowly back to the changing rooms alone .We wanted to write another couple of verses !Malfoy called as Katie and Alicia hugged Harry .But we couldnt find rhymes for fat and ugly we wanted to sing about his mother see Talk about sour grapes said Angelina casting Malfoy a disgusted look .we couldnt fit in useless loser either for his father you know Fred and George had realized what Malfoy was talking about .Halfway through shaking Harrys hand they stiffened looking around at Malfoy .Leave it said Angelina at once taking Fred by the arm .Leave it Fred let him yell hes just sore he lost the jumpedup little but you like the Weasleys dont you Potter ?said Malfoy sneering .Spend holidays there and everything dont you ?Cant see how you stand the stink but I suppose when youve been dragged up by Muggles even the Weasleys hovel smells okay Harry grabbed hold of George meanwhile it was taking the combined efforts of Angelina Alicia and Katie to stop Fred leaping on Malfoy who was laughing openly .Harry looked around for Madam Hooch but she was still berating Crabbe for his illegal Bludger attack .Or perhaps said Malfoy leering as he backed away you can remember what your mothers house stank like Potter and Weasleys pigsty reminds you of it Harry was not aware of releasing George all he knew was that a second later both of them were sprinting at Malfoy .He had completely forgotten the fact that all the teachers were watching All he wanted to do was cause Malfoy as much pain as possible .With no time to draw out his wand he merely drew back the fist clutching the Snitch and sank it as hard as he could into Malfoys stomach Harry !HARRY !GEORGE !1VO !He could hear girls voices screaming Malfoy yelling George swearing a whistle blowing and the bellowing of the crowd around him but he did not care not until somebody in the vicinity yelled IMPEDIMENTA !and only when he was knocked over backward by the force of the spell did he abandon the attempt to punch every inch of Malfoy he could reach .What do you think youre doing ?screamed Madam Hooch as Harry leapt to his feet again it was she who had hit him with the Impediment Jinx .She was holding her whistle in one hand and a wand in the other her broom lay abandoned several feet away .Malfoy was curled up on the ground whimpering and moaning his nose bloody George was sporting a swollen lip Fred was still being forcibly restrained by the three Chasers and Crabbe was cackling in the background .Ive never seen behavior like it back up to the castle both of you and straight to your Head of Houses office !Go !Now Harry and George marched off the pitch both panting neither saying a word to each other .The howling and jeering of the crowd grew fainter and fainter until they reached the entrance hall where they could hear nothing except the sound of their own footsteps .Harry became aware that something was still struggling in his right hand the knuckles of which he had bruised against Malfoys jaw looking down he saw the Snitchs silver wings protruding from between his fingers struggling for release .They had barely reached the door of Professor McGonagalls office when she came marching along the corridor behind them .She was wearing a Gryffindor scarf but tore it from her throat with shaking hands as she strode toward them looking livid .In !she said furiously pointing to the door .Harry and George entered .She strode around behind her desk and faced them quivering with rage as she threw the Gryffindor scarf aside onto the floor .Well ?she said .I have never seen such a disgraceful exhibition .Two onto one !Explain yourselves !Malfoy provoked us said Harry stiffly .Provoked you ?shouted Professor McGonagall slamming a fist onto her desk so that her tartan biscuit tin slid sideways off it and burst open littering the floor with Ginger Newts .Hed just lost hadnt he of course he wanted to provoke you !But what on earth he can have said that justified what you two He insulted my parents snarled George .And Harrys mother .But instead of leaving it to Madam Hooch to sort out you two decided to give an exhibition of Muggle dueling did you ?bellowed Professor McGonagall .Have you any idea what youve ?Hem hem .George and Harry both spun around .Dolores Umbridge was standing in the doorway wrapped in a green tweed cloak that greatly enhanced her resemblance to a giant toad and smiling in the horribly sickly ominous way that Harry had come to associate with imminent misery .May I help Professor McGonagall ?asked Professor Umbridge in her most poisonously sweet voice .Blood rushed into Professor McGonagalls face .Help ?she repeated in a constricted voice .What do you mean ‘help ?Professor Umbridge moved forward into the office still smiling her sickly smile .Why I thought you might be grateful for a little extra authority .Harry would not have been surprised to see sparks fly from Professor McGonagalls nostrils .You thought wrong she said turning her back on Umbridge .Now you two had better listen closely .I do not care what provocation Malfoy offered you I do not care if he insulted every family member you possess your behavior was disgusting and I am giving each of you a weeks worth of detention !Do not look at me like that Potter you deserve it !And if either of you ever Hem hem .Professor McGonagall closed her eyes as though praying for patience as she turned her face toward Professor Umbridge again .Yes ?I think they deserve rather more than detentions said Umbridge smiling still more broadly .Professor McGonagalls eyes flew open .But unfortunately she said with an attempt at a reciprocal smile that made her look as though she had lockjaw it is what I think that counts as they are in my House Dolores .Well actually Minerva simpered Umbridge I think youll find that what I think does count .Now where is it ?Cornelius just sent it .I mean she gave a little false laugh as she rummaged in her handbag the Minister just sent it .Ah yes .She had pulled out a piece of parchment that she now unfurled clearing her throat fussily before starting to read what it said .Hem hem . ‘Educational Decree Number Twenty five .Not another one !exclaimed Professor McGonagall violently .Well yes said Umbridge still smiling .As a matter of fact Minerva it was you who made me see that we needed a further amendment .You remember how you overrode me when I was unwilling to allow the Gryffindor Quidditch team to reform ?How you took the case to Dumbledore who insisted that the team be allowed to play ?Well now I couldnt have that .I contacted the Minister at once and he quite agreed with me that the High Inquisitor has to have the power to strip pupils of privileges or she that is to say I would have less authority than common teachers !And you see now dont you Minerva how right I was in attempting to stop the Gryffindor team reforming ?Dreadful tempers .Anyway I was reading out our amendment .hem hem .The High Inquisitor will henceforth have supreme authority over all punishments sanctions and removal of privileges pertaining to the students of Hogwarts and the power to alter such punishments sanctions and removals of privileges as may have been ordered by other staff members .Signed Cornelius Fudge Minister of Magic Order of Merlin First Class etc .etc .She rolled up the parchment and put it back into her handbag still smiling .So .I really think I will have to ban these two from playing Quidditch ever again she said looking from Harry to George and back again .Harry felt the Snitch fluttering madly in his hand .Ban us ?he said and his voice sounded strangely distant .From playing .ever again ?Yes Mr Potter I think a lifelong ban ought to do the trick said Umbridge her smile widening still further as she watched him struggle to comprehend what she had said .You and Mr Weasley here .And I think to be safe this young mans twin ought to be stopped too if his teammates had not restrained him I feel sure he would have attacked young Mr Malfoy as well .I will want their broomsticks confiscated of course I shall keep them safely in my office to make sure there is no infringement of my ban .But I am not unreasonable Professor McGonagall she continued turning back to Professor McGonagall who was now standing as still as though carved from ice staring at her .The rest of the team can continue playing I saw no signs of violence from any of them .Well .good afternoon to you .And with a look of the utmost satisfaction Umbridge left the room leaving a horrified silence in her wake .Banned said Angelina in a hollow voice late that evening in the common room .Banned .No Seeker and no Beaters .What on earth are we going to do ?It did not feel as though they had won the match at all .Everywhere Harry looked there were disconsolate and angry faces the team themselves were slumped around the fire all apart from Ron who had not been seen since the end of the match .Its just so unfair said Alicia numbly .I mean what about Crabbe and that Bludger he hit after the whistle had been blown ?Has she banned him ?No said Ginny miserably she and Hermione were sitting on either side of Harry .He just got lines I heard Montague laughing about it at dinner .And banning Fred when he didnt even do anything !said Alicia furiously pummeling her knee with her fist .Its not my fault I didnt said Fred with a very ugly look on his face .I wouldve pounded the little scumbag to a pulp if you three hadnt been holding me back .Harry stared miserably at the dark window .Snow was falling .The Snitch he had caught earlier was now zooming around and around the common room people were watching its progress as though hypnotized and Crookshanks was leaping from chair to chair trying to catch it .Im going to bed said Angelina getting slowly to her feet .Maybe this will all turn out to have been a bad dream .Maybe Ill wake up tomorrow and find we havent played yet .She was soon followed by Alicia and Katie .Fred and George sloped off to bed some time later glowering at everyone they passed and Ginny went not long after that .Only Harry and Hermione were left beside the fire .Have you seen Ron ?Hermione asked in a low voice .Harry shook his head .I think hes avoiding us said Hermione .Where do you think he ?But at that precise moment there was a creaking sound behind them as the Fat Lady swung forward and Ron came clambering through the portrait hole .He was very pale indeed and there was snow in his hair .When he saw Harry and Hermione he stopped dead in his tracks .Where have you been ?said Hermione anxiously springing up .Walking Ron mumbled .He was still wearing his Quidditch things .You look frozen said Hermione .Come and sit down !Ron walked to the fireside and sank into the chair farthest from Harrys not looking at him .The stolen Snitch zoomed over their heads .Im sorry Ron mumbled looking at his feet .What for ?said Harry .For thinking I can play Quidditch said Ron .Im going to resign first thing tomorrow .If you resign said Harry testily therell only be three players left on the team .And when Ron looked puzzled he said Ive been given a lifetime ban .Sove Fred and George .What ?Ron yelped .Hermione told him the full story Harry could not bear to tell it again .When she had finished Ron looked more anguished than ever .This is all my fault You didnt make me punch Malfoy said Harry angrily .if I wasnt so lousy at Quidditch its got nothing to do with that it was that song that wound me up it wouldve wound anyone up Hermione got up and walked to the window away from the argument watching the snow swirling down against the pane .Look drop it will you !Harry burst out .Its bad enough without you blaming yourself for everything !Ron said nothing but sat gazing miserably at the damp hem of his robes .After a while he said in a dull voice This is the worst Ive ever felt in my life .Join the club said Harry bitterly .Well said Hermione her voice trembling slightly .I can think of one thing that might cheer you both up .Oh yeah ?said Harry skeptically .Yeah said Hermione turning away from the pitch black snowflecked window a broad smile spreading across her face .Hagrids back .HAGRIDS TALE Harry sprinted up to the boys dormitory to fetch the Invisibility Cloak and the Marauders Map from his trunk he was so quick that he and Ron were ready to leave at least five minutes before Hermione hurried back down from the girls dormitories wearing scarf gloves and one of her own knobbly elf hats .Well its cold out there !she said defensively as Ron clicked his tongue impatiently .They crept through the portrait hole and covered themselves hastily in the cloak Ron had grown so much he now needed to crouch to prevent his feet showing then moving slowly and cautiously they proceeded down the many staircases pausing at intervals to check the map for signs of Filch or Mrs Norris .They were lucky they saw nobody but Nearly Headless Nick who was gliding along absentmindedly humming something that sounded horribly like Weasley Is Our King .They crept across the entrance hall and then out into the silent snowy grounds .With a great leap of his heart Harry saw little golden squares of light ahead and smoke coiling up from Hagrids chimney .He set off at a quick march the other two jostling and bumping along behind him and they crunched excitedly through the thickening snow until at last they reached the wooden front door when Harry raised his fist and knocked three times a dog started barking frantically inside .Hagrid its us !Harry called through the keyhole .Shoulda known !said a gruff voice .They beamed at one another under the cloak they could tell that Hagrids voice was pleased .Bin home three seconds .Out the way Fang .Out the way yeh dozy dog .The bolt was drawn back the door creaked open and Hagrids head appeared in the gap .Hermione screamed .Merlins beard keep it down !said Hagrid hastily staring wildly over their heads .Under that cloak are yeh ?Well get in get in !Im sorry !Hermione gasped as the three of them squeezed past Hagrid into the house and pulled the cloak off themselves so he could see them .I just oh Hagrid .Its nuthin its nuthin !said Hagrid hastily shutting the door behind them and hurrying to close all the curtains but Hermione continued to gaze up at him in horror .Hagrids hair was matted with congealed blood and his left eye had been reduced to a puffy slit amid a mass of purpleandblack bruises .There were many cuts on his face and hands some of them still bleeding and he was moving gingerly which made Harry suspect broken ribs .It was obvious that he had only just got home a thick black traveling cloak lay over the back of a chair and a haversack large enough to carry several small children leaned against the wall inside the door .Hagrid himself twice the size of a normal man and three times as broad was now limping over to the fire and placing a copper kettle over it .What happened to you ?Harry demanded while Fang danced around them all trying to lick their faces .Told yeh nuthin said Hagrid firmly .Want a cuppa ?Come off it said Ron youre in a right state !Im tellinyeh Im fine said Hagrid straightening up and turning to beam at them all but wincing .Blimey its good ter see you three again had good summers did yeh ?Hagrid youve been attacked !said Ron .Fer the las time its nuthin !said Hagrid firmly .Would you say it was nothing if one of us turned up with a pound of mince instead of a face ?Ron demanded .You ought to go and see Madam Pomfrey Hagrid said Hermione anxiously .Some of those cuts look nasty .Im dealin with it all righ ?said Hagrid repressively .He walked across to the enormous wooden table that stood in the middle of his cabin and twitched aside a tea towel that had been lying on it .Underneath was a raw bloody greentinged steak slightly larger than the average car tire .Youre not going to eat that are you Hagrid ?said Ron leaning in for a closer look .It looks poisonous .Its s posed ter look like that its dragon meat Hagrid said .An I didn get it ter eat .He picked up the steak and slapped it over the left side of his face .Greenish blood trickled down into his beard as he gave a soft moan of satisfaction .Thas better .It helps with the stingin yeh know .So are you going to tell us whats happened to you ?Harry asked .Can Harry .Top secret .Moren me jobs worth ter tell yeh that .Did the giants beat you up Hagrid ?asked Hermione quietly .Hagrids fingers slipped on the dragon steak and it slid squelchily onto his chest .Giants ?said Hagrid catching the steak before it reached his belt and slapping it back over his face .Who said anythin abou giants ?Who yeh bin talkin to ?Whos told yeh what Ive whos said Ive bin eh ?We guessed said Hermione apologetically .Oh yeh did did yeh ?said Hagrid fixing her sternly with the eye that was not hidden by the steak .It was kind of .obvious said Ron .Harry nodded .Hagrid glared at them then snorted threw the steak onto the table again and strode back to the kettle which was now whistling .Never known kids like you three fer knowin moren yeh oughta he muttered splashing boiling water into three of his bucketshaped mugs .An Im not complimentin yeh neither .Nosy somed call it .Interferin .But his beard twitched .So you have been to look for giants ?said Harry grinning as he sat down at the table .Hagrid set tea in front of each of them sat down picked up his steak again and slapped it back over his face .Yeah all righ he grunted I have .And you found them ?said Hermione in a hushed voice .Well theyre not that difficult ter find ter be honest said Hagrid .Pretty big see .Where are they ?said Ron .Mountains said Hagrid unhelpfully .So why dont Muggles ?They do said Hagrid darkly .Ony their deaths are always put down ter mountaineerin accidents aren they ?He adjusted the steak a little so that it covered the worst of the bruising .Come on Hagrid tell us what youve been up to !said Ron .Tell us about being attacked by the giants and Harry can tell you about being attacked by the dementors Hagrid choked in his mug and dropped his steak at the same time a large quantity of spit tea and dragon blood was sprayed over the table as Hagrid coughed and spluttered and the steak slid with a soft splat onto the floor .Whadda yeh mean attacked by dementors ?growled Hagrid .Didnt you know ?Hermione asked him wideeyed .I don know anything thats been happenin since I left .I was on a secret mission wasn I didn wan owls followin me all over the place ruddy dementors !Yehre not serious ?Yeah I am they turned up in Little Whinging and attacked my cousin and me and then the Ministry of Magic expelled me WHAT ?and I had to go to a hearing and everything but tell us about the giants first .You were expelled ?Tell us about your summer and Ill tell you about mine .Hagrid glared at him through his one open eye .Harry looked right back an expression of innocent determination on his face .Oh all righ Hagrid said in a resigned voice .He bent down and tugged the dragon steak out of Fangs mouth .Oh Hagrid dont its not hygien Hermione began but Hagrid had already slapped the meat back over his swollen eye .He took another fortifying gulp of tea and then said Well we set off righ after term ended Madame Maxime went with you then ?Hermione interjected .Yeah thas right said Hagrid and a softened expression appeared on the few inches of face that were not obscured by beard or green steak .Yeah it was jus the pair of us .An Ill tell yeh this shes not afraid of roughin it Olympe .Yeh know shes a fine welldressed woman an knowin where we was goin I wondered ow shed feel abou clamberin over boulders an sleepin in caves an tha bu she never complained once .You knew where you were going ?Harry asked .You knew where the giants were ?Well Dumbledore knew an he told us said Hagrid .Are they hidden ?asked Ron .Is it a secret where they are ?Not really said Hagrid shaking his shaggy head .Its jus that mos wizards aren bothered where they are s long as its a good long way away .But where they ares very difficult ter get ter fer humans anyway so we needed Dumbledores instructions .Took us abou a month ter get there A month ?said Ron as though he had never heard of a journey lasting such a ridiculously long time .But why couldnt you just grab a Portkey or something ?There was an odd expression in Hagrids unobscured eye as he squinted at Ron it was almost pitying .Were bein watched Ron he said gruffly .What dyou mean ?Yeh don understand said Hagrid .The Ministrys keepin an eye on Dumbledore an anyone they reckons in league with him an We know about that said Harry quickly keen to hear the rest of Hagrids story .We know about the Ministry watching Dumbledore So you couldnt use magic to get there ?asked Ron looking thunderstruck .You had to act like Muggles all the way ?Well not exactly all the way said Hagrid cagily .We jus had ter be careful cause Olympe an me we stick out a bit Ron made a stifled noise somewhere between a snort and a sniff and hastily took a gulp of tea .so were not hard ter follow .We was pretendin we was goin on holiday together so we got inter France an we made like we was headin fer where Olympes school is cause we knew we was bein tailed by someone from the Ministry .We had to go slow cause Im not really s posed ter use magic an we knew the Ministryd be lookin fer a reason ter run us in .But we managed ter give the berk tailin us the slip round abou DeeJohn Ooooh Dijon ?said Hermione excitedly .Ive been there on holiday did you see ?She fell silent at the look on Rons face .We chanced a bit o magic after that and it wasn a bad journey .Ran inter a couple o mad trolls on the Polish border an I had a sligh disagreement with a vampire in a pub in Minsk but apart from tha couldnta bin smoother .An then we reached the place an we started trekkin up through the mountains lookin fer signs of em .We had ter lay off the magic once we got near em .Partly cause they don like wizards an we didn want ter put their backs up too soon and partly cause Dumbledore had warned us YouKnowWho was bound ter be after the giants an all .Said it was odds on hed sent a messenger off ter them already .Told us ter be very careful of drawin attention ter ourselves as we got nearer in case there was Death Eaters around .Hagrid paused for a long draft of tea .Go on !said Harry urgently .Found em said Hagrid baldly .Went over a ridge one nigh an there they was spread ou underneath us .Little fires burnin below an huge shadows .It was like watchin bits o the mountain movin .How big are they ?asked Ron in a hushed voice .T3out twenty feet said Hagrid casually .Some o the bigger ones mighta bin twentyfive .And how many were there ?asked Harry .I reckon abou seventy or eighty said Hagrid .Is that all ?said Hermione .Yep said Hagrid sadly eighty left an there was loads once musta bin a hundred diffrent tribes from all over the world .But theyve bin dyin out fer ages .Wizards killed a few o course but mostly they killed each other an now theyre dyin out faster than ever .Theyre not made ter live bunched up together like tha .Dumbledore says its our fault it was the wizards who forced em to go an made em live a good long way from us an they had no choice but ter stick together fer their own protection .So said Harry you saw them and then what ?Well we waited till morning didn want ter go sneakin up on em in the dark fer our own safety said Hagrid .Bout three in the mornin they fell asleep jus where they was sittin .We didn dare sleep .Fer one thing we wanted ter make sure none of em woke up an came up where we were an fer another the snorin was unbelievable .Caused an avalanche near mornin .Anyway once it was light we wen down ter see em .Just like that ?said Ron looking awestruck .You just walked right into a giant camp ?Well Dumbledored told us how ter do it said Hagrid .Give the Gurg gifts show some respect yeh know .Give the what gifts ?asked Harry .Oh the Gurg means the chief .How could you tell which one was the Gurg ?asked Ron .Hagrid grunted in amusement .No problem he said .He was the biggest the ugliest an the laziest .Sittin there waitin ter be brought food by the others .Dead goats an such like .Name o Karkus .Id put him at twentytwo twenty three feet an the weight of a couple o bull elephants .Skin like rhino hide an all .And you just walked up to him ?said Hermione breathlessly .Well .down ter him where he was lyin in the valley .They was in this dip between four pretty high mountains see beside a mountain lake an Karkus was lyin by the lake roarin at the others ter feed him an his wife .Olympe an I went down the mountainside But didnt they try and kill you when they saw you ?asked Ron incredulously .It was defnitely on some of their minds said Hagrid shrugging but we did what Dumbledore told us ter do which was ter hold our gift up high an keep our eyes on the Gurg an ignore the others .So thas what we did .An the rest of em went quiet an watched us pass an we got right up ter Karkuss feet an we bowed an put our present down in front o him .What do you give a giant ?asked Ron eagerly .Food ?Nah he can get food all righ fer himself said Hagrid .We took him magic .Giants like magic jus dont like us usin it against em .Anyway that firs day we gave him a branch o Gubraithian fire .Hermione said wow softly but Harry and Ron both frowned in puzzlement .A branch of ?Everlasting fire said Hermione irritably you ought to know that by now Professor Flitwicks mentioned it at least twice in class !Well anyway said Hagrid quickly intervening before Ron could answer back Dumbledored bewitched this branch to burn evermore which isn somethin any wizard could do an so I lies it down in the snow by Karkuss feet and says ‘A gift to the Gurg of the giants from Albus Dumbledore who sends his respectful greetings .And what did Karkus say ?asked Harry eagerly .Nothin said Hagrid .Didn speak English .Youre kidding !Didn matter said Hagrid imperturbably Dumbledore had warned us tha migh happen .Karkus knew enough to yell fer a couple o giants who knew our lingo an they translated fer us .And did he like the present ?asked Ron .Oh yeah it went down a storm once they understood what it was said Hagrid turning his dragon steak over to press the cooler side to his swollen eye .Very pleased .So then I said Altars Dumbledore asks the Gurg to speak with his messenger when he returns tomorrow with another gift .Why couldnt you speak to them that day ?asked Hermione .Dumbledore wanted us ter take it very slow said Hagrid .Let em see we kept our promises .Well come back tomorrow with another present an then we do come back with another present gives a good impression see ?An gives them time ter test out the firs present an find out its a good one an get em eager fer more .In any case giants like Karkus overload em with information an theyll kill yeh jus to simplify things .So we bowed outta the way an went off an found ourselves a nice little cave ter spend that night in an the followin mornin we went back an this time we found Karkus sittin up waitin fer us lookin all eager .And you talked to him ?Oh yeah .Firs we presented him with a nice battle helmet goblinmade an indestructible yeh know an then we sat down an we talked .What did he say ?Not much said Hagrid .Listened mostly .But there were good signs .Hed heard o Dumbledore heard hed argued against the killin of the last giants in Britain .Karkus seemed ter be quite intrested in what Dumbledore had ter say .An a few o the others specially the ones who had some English they gathered round an listened too .We were hopeful when we left that day .Promised ter come back next day with another present .But that night it all wen wrong .What dyou mean ?said Ron quickly .Well like I say theyre not meant ter live together giants said Hagrid sadly .Not in big groups like that .They can help themselves they half kill each other every few weeks .The men fight each other an the women fight each other the remnants of the old tribes fight each other an thats even without squabbles over food an the best fires an sleepin spots .Yehd think seein as how their whole race is abou finished theyd lay off each other but .Hagrid sighed deeply That night a fight broke out we saw it from the mouth of our cave lookin down on the valley .Went on fer hours yeh wouldn believe the noise .An when the sun came up the snow was scarlet an his head was lyin at the bottom o the lake .Whose head ?gasped Hermione .Karkuss said Hagrid heavily .There was a new Gurg Golgomath .He sighed deeply .Well we hadn bargained on a new Gurg two days after wed made friendly contact with the firs one an we had a funny feelin Golgomath wouldn be so keen ter listen to us but we had ter try .You went to speak to him ?asked Ron incredulously .After youd watched him rip off another giants head ?Course we did said Hagrid we hadn gone all that way ter give up after two days !We wen down with the next present wed meant ter give ter Karkus .I knew it was no go before Id opened me mouth .He was sitting there wearin Karkus s helmet leerin at us as we got nearer .Hes massive one o the biggest ones there .Black hair an matchin teeth an a necklace o bones .Humanlookin bones some of em .Well I gave it a go held out a great roll o dragon skin an said A gift fer the Gurg of the giants Nex thing I knew I was hangin upside down in the air by me feet two of his mates had grabbed me .Hermione clapped her hands to her mouth .How did you get out of that ?asked Harry .Wouldnta done if Olympe hadn bin there said Hagrid .She pulled out her wand an did some o the fastes spellwork Ive ever seen .Ruddy marvelous .Hit the two holdin me right in the eyes with Conjunctivitus Curses an they dropped me straightaway bu we were in trouble then cause wed used magic against em an thats what giants hate abou wizards .We had ter leg it an we knew there was no way we was going ter be able ter march inter camp again .Blimey Hagrid said Ron quietly .So how come its taken you so long to get home if you were only there for three days ?asked Hermione .We didn leave after three days !said Hagrid looking outraged .Dumbledore was relyin on us !But youve just said there was no way you could go back !Not by daylight we couldn no .We just had ter rethink a bit .Spent a couple o days lyin low up in the cave an watchin .An wha we saw wasn good .Did he rip off more heads ?asked Hermione sounding squeamish .No said Hagrid .I wish he had .What dyou mean ?I mean we soon found out he didn object ter all wizards just us .Death Eaters ?said Harry quickly .Yep said Hagrid darkly .Couple of em were visitin him evry day bringin gifts ter the Gurg an he wasn dangling them upside down .How dyou know they were Death Eaters ?said Ron .Because I recognized one of em Hagrid growled .Macnair remember him ?Bloke they sent ter kill Buckbeak ?Maniac he is .Likes killin as much as Golgomath no wonder they were gettin on so well .So Macnairs persuaded the giants to join YouKnow Who ?said Hermione desperately .Hold yer hippogriffs I haven finished me story yet !said Hagrid indignantly who considering he had not wanted to tell them anything in the first place now seemed to be rather enjoying himself .Me an Olympe talked it over an we agreed jus cause the Gurg looked like favorin YouKnowWho didn mean all of em would .We had ter try an persuade some o the others the ones who hadn wanted Golgomath as Gurg .How could you tell which ones they were ?asked Ron .Well they were the ones bein beaten to a pulp weren they ?said Hagrid patiently .The ones with any sense were keepin outta Golgomath s way hidin out in caves roun the gully jus like we were .So we decided wed go pokin round the caves by night an see if we couldn persuade a few o them .You went poking around dark caves looking for giants ?said Ron with awed respect in his voice .Well it wasn the giants who worried us most said Hagrid .We were more concerned abou the Death Eaters .Dumbledore had told us before we wen not ter tangle with em if we could avoid it an the trouble was they knew we was around spect Golgomath told him abou us .At night when the giants were sleepin an we wanted ter be creepin inter the caves Macnair an the other one were sneakin round the mountains lookin fer us .I was hard put to stop Olympe jumpin out at them said Hagrid the corners of his mouth lifting his wild beard .She was rarin ter attack em .shes somethin when shes roused Olympe .Fiery yeh know .spect its the French in her .Hagrid gazed mistyeyed into the fire .Harry allowed him thirty seconds reminiscence before clearing his throat loudly .So what happened ?Did you ever get near any of the other giants ?What ?Oh .oh yeah we did .Yeah on the third night after Karkus was killed we crept outta the cave wed bin hidin in and headed back down inter the gully keepin our eyes skinned fer the Death Eaters .Got inside a few o the caves no go then in abou the sixth one we found three giants hidin .Cave mustve been cramped said Ron .Wasn room ter swing a kneazle said Hagrid .Didnt they attack you when they saw you ?asked Hermione .Probably woulda done if theyd bin in any condition said Hagrid but they was badly hurt all three o them .Golgomaths lot had beaten em unconscious theyd woken up an crawled inter the nearest shelter they could find .Anyway one o them had a bit of English an e translated fer the others an what we had ter say didn seem ter go down too badly .So we kep goin back visitin the wounded .I reckon we had abou six or seven o them convinced at one poin .Six or seven ?said Ron eagerly .Well thats not bad are they going to come over here and start fighting YouKnowWho with us ?But Hermione said What do you mean ‘at one point Hagrid ?Hagrid looked at her sadly .Golgomaths lot raided the caves .The ones tha survived didn wan no more ter to do with us after that .So .so there arent any giants coming ?said Ron looking disappointed .Nope said Hagrid heaving a deep sigh as he turned over his steak again and applied the cooler side to his face but we did wha we meant ter do we gave em Dumbledores message an some o them heard it an I spect some o themll remember it .Jus maybe them that don want ter stay around Golgomathll move outta the mountains an theres gotta be a chance theyll remember Dumbledores friendly to em .Could be theyll come .Snow was filling up the window now .Harry became aware that the knees of his robes were soaked through Fang was drooling with his head in Harrys lap .Hagrid ?said Hermione quietly after a while .Mmm ?Did you .was there any sign of .did you hear anything about your .your .mother while you were there ?Hagrids unobscured eye rested upon her and Hermione looked rather scared .Im sorry .I .forget it Dead Hagrid grunted .Died years ago .They told me .Oh .Im .Im really sorry said Hermione in a very small voice .Hagrid shrugged his massive shoulders .No need he said shortly .Can remember her much .Wasn a great mother .They were silent again .Hermione glanced nervously at Harry and Ron plainly wanting them to speak .But you still havent explained how you got in this state Hagrid Ron said gesturing toward Hagrids bloodstained face .Or why youre back so late said Harry .Sirius says Madame Maxime got back ages ago Who attacked you ?said Ron .I haven bin attacked !said Hagrid emphatically .I But the rest of his words were drowned in a sudden outbreak of rapping on the door .Hermione gasped her mug slipped through her fingers and smashed on the floor Fang yelped .All four of them stared at the window beside the doorway .The shadow of somebody small and squat rippled across the thin curtain .Its her Ron whispered .Get under here !Harry said quickly seizing the Invisibility Cloak he whirled it over himself and Hermione while Ron tore around the table and dived beneath the cloak as well .Huddled together they backed away into a corner .Fang was barking madly at the door .Hagrid looked thoroughly confused .Hagrid hide our mugs !Hagrid seized Harrys and Rons mugs and shoved them under the cushion in Fangs basket .Fang was now leaping up at the door Hagrid pushed him out of the way with his foot and pulled it open .Professor Umbridge was standing in the doorway wearing her green tweed cloak and a matching hat with earflaps .Lips pursed she leaned back so as to see Hagrids face she barely reached his navel .So she said slowly and loudly as though speaking to somebody deaf .Youre Hagrid are you ?Without waiting for an answer she strolled into the room her bulging eyes rolling in every direction .Get away she snapped waving her handbag at Fang who had bounded up to her and was attempting to lick her face .Er I don want ter be rude said Hagrid staring at her but who the ruddy hell are you ?My name is Dolores Umbridge .Her eyes were sweeping the cabin .Twice they stared directly into the corner where Harry stood sandwiched between Ron and Hermione .Dolores Umbridge ?Hagrid said sounding thoroughly confused .I thought you were one o them Ministry don you work with Fudge ?I was Senior Undersecretary to the Minister yes said Umbridge now pacing around the cabin taking in every tiny detail within from the haversack against the wall to the abandoned traveling cloak .I am now the Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher Thas brave of yeh said Hagrid theres not manyd take tha job anymore and Hogwarts High Inquisitor said Umbridge giving no sign that she had heard him .Whas that ?said Hagrid frowning .Precisely what I was going to ask said Umbridge pointing at the broken shards of china on the floor that had been Hermiones mug .Oh said Hagrid with a most unhelpful glance toward the corner where Harry Ron and Hermione stood hidden oh tha was .was Fang .He broke a mug .So I had ter use this one instead .Hagrid pointed to the mug from which he had been drinking one hand still clamped over the dragon steak pressed to his eye .Umbridge stood facing him now taking in every detail of his appearance instead of the cabins .I heard voices she said quietly .I was talkin ter Fang said Hagrid stoutly .And was he talking back to you ?Well .in a manner o speakin said Hagrid looking uncomfortable .I sometimes say Fangs near enough human There are three sets of footprints in the snow leading from the castle doors to your cabin said Umbridge sleekly .Hermione gasped Harry clapped a hand over her mouth .Luckily Fang was sniffing loudly around the hem of Professor Umbridges robes and she did not appear to have heard .Well I ony jus got back said Hagrid waving an enormous hand at the haversack .Maybe someone came ter call earlier an I missed em .There are no footsteps leading away from your cabin door .Well I .I don know why thatd be .said Hagrid tugging nervously at his beard and again glancing toward the corner where Harry Ron and Hermione stood as though asking for help .Erm .Umbridge wheeled around and strode the length of the cabin looking around carefully .She bent and peered under the bed .She opened Hagrid s cupboards .She passed within two inches of where Harry Ron and Hermione stood pressed against the wall Harry actually pulled in his stomach as she walked by .After looking carefully inside the enormous cauldron Hagrid used for cooking she wheeled around again and said What has happened to you ?How did you sustain those injuries ?Hagrid hastily removed the dragon steak from his face which in Harrys opinion was a mistake because the blackandpurple bruising all around his eye was now clearly visible not to mention the large amount of fresh and congealed blood on his face .Oh I .had a bit of an accident he said lamely .What sort of accident ?II tripped .You tripped she repeated coolly .Yeah thas right .Over .over a friends broomstick .I don fly meself .Well look at the size o me I don reckon theres a broomstick thatd hold me .Friend o mine breeds Abraxan horses I dunno if youve ever seen em big beasts winged yeh know Ive had a bit of a ride on one o them an it was Where have you been ?asked Umbridge cutting coolly through Hagrids babbling .Where ve I . ?Been yes she said .Term started more than two months ago .Another teacher has had to cover your classes .None of your colleagues has been able to give me any information as to your whereabouts .You left no address .Where have you been ?There was a pause in which Hagrid stared at her with his newly uncovered eye .Harry could almost hear his brain working furiously .I Ive been away for me health he said .For your health said Umbridge .Her eyes traveled over Hagrids discolored and swollen face dragon blood dripped gently onto his waistcoat in the silence .I see .Yeah said Hagrid bit o o fresh air yeh know Yes as gamekeeper fresh air must be so difficult to come by said Umbridge sweetly .The small patch of Hagrids face that was not black or purple flushed .Well change o scene yeh know Mountain scenery ?said Umbridge swiftly .She knows Harry thought desperately .Mountains ?Hagrid repeated clearly thinking fast .Nope South of France fer me .Bit o sun an .an sea .Really ?said Umbridge .You dont have much of a tan .Yeah .well .sensitive skin said Hagrid attempting an ingratiating smile .Harry noticed that two of his teeth had been knocked out .Umbridge looked at him coldly his smile faltered .Then she hoisted her handbag a little higher into the crook of her arm and said I shall of course be informing the Minister of your late return .Righ said Hagrid nodding .You ought to know too that as High Inquisitor it is my unfortunate but necessary duty to inspect my fellow teachers .So I daresay we shall meet again soon enough .She turned sharply and marched back to the door .Youre inspectin us ?Hagrid echoed blankly looking after her .Oh yes said Umbridge softly looking back at him with her hand on the door handle .The Ministry is determined to weed out unsatisfactory teachers Hagrid .Good night .She left closing the door behind her with a snap .Harry made to pull off the Invisibility Cloak but Hermione seized his wrist .Not yet she breathed in his ear .She might not be gone yet .Hagrid seemed to be thinking the same way he stumped across the room and pulled back the curtain an inch or so .Shes goin back ter the castle he said in a low voice .Blimey .inspectin people is she ?Yeah said Harry pulling the cloak off .Trelawneys on probation already .Um .what sort of thing are you planning to do with us in class Hagrid ?asked Hermione .Oh don you worry abou that Ive got a great load o lessons planned said Hagrid enthusiastically scooping up his dragon steak from the table and slapping it over his eye again .Ive bin keepin a couple o creatures saved fer yer O .W .L .year you wait theyre somethin really special .Erm .special in what way ?asked Hermione tentatively .Im not sayin said Hagrid happily .I don want ter spoil the surprise .Look Hagrid said Hermione urgently dropping all pretense Professor Umbridge wont be at all happy if you bring anything to class thats too dangerous Dangerous ?said Hagrid looking genially bemused .Don be silly I wouldn give yeh anythin dangerous !I mean all righ they can look after themselves Hagrid youve got to pass Umbridges inspection and to do that it would really be better if she saw you teaching us how to look after porlocks how to tell the difference between knarls and hedgehogs stuff like that !said Hermione earnestly .But thas not very interestin Hermione said Hagrid .The stuff Ive gots much more impressive Ive bin bringin em on fer years I reckon Ive got the ony domestic herd in Britain Hagrid .please .said Hermione a note of real desperation in her voice .Umbridge is looking for any excuse to get rid of teachers she thinks are too close to Dumbledore .Please Hagrid teach us something dull thats bound to come up in our O .W .L .But Hagrid merely yawned widely and cast a oneeyed look of longing toward the vast bed in the corner .Lisen its bin a long day an its late he said patting Hermione gently on the shoulder so that her knees gave way and hit the floor with a thud .Oh sorry He pulled her back up by the neck of her robes .Look don you go worryin abou me I promise yeh Ive got really good stuff planned fer yer lessons now Im back .Now you lot had better get back up to the castle an don forget ter wipe yer footprints out behind yeh !I dunno if you got through to him said Ron a short while later when having checked that the coast was clear they walked back up to the castle through the thickening snow leaving no trace behind them due to the Obliteration Charm Hermione was performing as they went .Then Ill go back again tomorrow said Hermione determinedly .Ill plan his lessons for him if I have to .I dont care if she throws out Trelawney but shes not taking Hagrid !THE EYE OF THE SNAKE Hermione plowed her way back to Hagrids cabin through two feet of snow on Sunday morning .Harry and Ron wanted to go with her but their mountain of homework had reached an alarming height again so they grudgingly remained in the common room trying to ignore the gleeful shouts drifting up from the grounds outside where students were enjoying themselves skating on the frozen lake tobogganing and worst of all bewitching snowballs to zoom up to Gryffindor Tower and rap hard on the windows .Oy !bellowed Ron finally losing patience and sticking his head out of the window I am a prefect and if one more snowball hits this window OUCH !He withdrew his head sharply his face covered in snow .Its Fred and George he said bitterly slamming the window behind him .Gits .Hermione returned from Hagrids just before lunch shivering slightly her robes damp to the knees .So ?said Ron looking up when she entered .Got all his lessons planned for him ?Well I tried she said dully sinking into a chair beside Harry .She pulled out her wand and gave it a complicated little wave so that hot air streamed out of the tip she then pointed this at her robes which began to steam as they dried out .He wasnt even there when I arrived I was knocking for at least half an hour .And then he came stumping out of the forest Harry groaned .The Forbidden Forest was teeming with the kind of creatures most likely to get Hagrid the sack .Whats he keeping in there ?Did he say ?asked Harry .No said Hermione miserably .He says he wants them to be a surprise .I tried to explain about Umbridge but he just doesnt get it .He kept saying nobody in their right mind would rather study knarls than chimaeras oh I dont think hes got a chimaera she added at the appalled look on Harry and Rons faces but thats not for lack of trying from what he said about how hard it is to get eggs .I dont know how many times I told him hed be better off following GrubblyPlanks plan I honestly dont think he listened to half of what I said .Hes in a bit of a funny mood you know .He still wont say how he got all those injuries .Hagrids reappearance at the staff table at breakfast next day was not greeted by enthusiasm from all students .Some like Fred George and Lee roared with delight and sprinted up the aisle between the Gryffindor and Hufflepuff tables to wring Hagrids enormous hand others like Parvati and Lavender exchanged gloomy looks and shook their heads .Harry knew that many of them preferred Professor Grubbly Planks lessons and the worst of it was that a very small unbiased part of him knew that they had good reason GrubblyPlanks idea of an interesting class was not one where there was a risk that somebody might have their head ripped off .It was with a certain amount of apprehension that Harry Ron and Hermione headed down to Hagrids on Tuesday heavily muffled against the cold .Harry was worried not only about what Hagrid might have decided to teach them but also about how the rest of the class particularly Malfoy and his cronies would behave if Umbridge was watching them .However the High Inquisitor was nowhere to be seen as they struggled through the snow toward Hagrid who stood waiting for them on the edge of the forest .He did not present a reassuring sight the bruises that had been purple on Saturday night were now tinged with green and yellow and some of his cuts still seemed to be bleeding .Harry could not understand this Had Hagrid perhaps been attacked by some creature whose venom prevented the wounds it inflicted from healing ?As though to complete the ominous picture Hagrid was carrying what looked like half a dead cow over his shoulder .Were workin in here today !Hagrid called happily to the approaching students jerking his head back at the dark trees behind him .Bit more sheltered !Anyway they prefer the dark .What prefers the dark ?Harry heard Malfoy say sharply to Crabbe and Goyle a trace of panic in his voice .What did he say prefers the dark did you hear ?Harry remembered the only occasion on which Malfoy had entered the forest before now he had not been very brave then either .He smiled to himself after the Quidditch match anything that caused Malfoy discomfort was all right with him .Ready ?said Hagrid happily looking around at the class .Right well Ive bin savin a trip inter the forest fer yer fifth year .Thought wed go an see these creatures in their natural habitat .Now what were studyin today is pretty rare I reckon Im probably the ony person in Britain whos managed ter train em And youre sure theyre trained are you ?said Malfoy the panic in his voice even more pronounced now .Only it wouldnt be the first time youd brought wild stuff to class would it ?The Slytherins murmured agreement and a few Gryffindors looked as though they thought Malfoy had a fair point too .Course theyre trained said Hagrid scowling and hoisting the dead cow a little higher on his shoulder .So what happened to your face then ?demanded Malfoy .Mind yer own business !said Hagrid angrily .Now if yehve finished askin stupid questions follow me !He turned and strode straight into the forest .Nobody seemed much disposed to follow .Harry glanced at Ron and Hermione who sighed but nodded and the three of them set off after Hagrid leading the rest of the class .They walked for about ten minutes until they reached a place where the trees stood so closely together that it was as dark as twilight and there was no snow on the ground at all .Hagrid deposited his half a cow with a grunt on the ground stepped back and turned to face his class again most of whom were creeping toward him from tree to tree peering around nervously as though expecting to be set upon at any moment .Gather roun gather roun said Hagrid encouragingly .Now theyll be attracted by the smell o the meat but Im goin ter give em a call anyway cause theyll like ter know its me .He turned shook his shaggy head to get the hair out of his face and gave an odd shrieking cry that echoed through the dark trees like the call of some monstrous bird .Nobody laughed most of them looked too scared to make a sound .Hagrid gave the shrieking cry again .A minute passed in which the class continued to peer nervously over their shoulders and around trees for a first glimpse of whatever it was that was coming .And then as Hagrid shook his hair back for a third time and expanded his enormous chest Harry nudged Ron and pointed into the black space between two gnarled yew trees .A pair of blank white shining eyes were growing larger through the gloom and a moment later the dragonish face neck and then skeletal body of a great black winged horse emerged from the darkness .It looked around at the class for a few seconds swishing its long black tail then bowed its head and began to tear flesh from the dead cow with its pointed fangs .A great wave of relief broke over Harry .Here at last was proof that he had not imagined these creatures that they were real Hagrid knew about them too .He looked eagerly at Ron but Ron was still staring around into the trees and after a few seconds he whispered Why doesnt Hagrid call again ?Most of the rest of the class were wearing expressions as confused and nervously expectant as Rons and were still gazing everywhere but at the horse standing feet from them .There were only two other people who seemed to be able to see them a stringy Slytherin boy standing just behind Goyle was watching the horse eating with an expression of great distaste on his face and Neville whose eyes were following the swishing progress of the long black tail .Oh an here comes another one !said Hagrid proudly as a second black horse appeared out of the dark trees folded its leathery wings closer to its body and dipped its head to gorge on the meat .Now .put yer hands up who can see em ?Immensely pleased to feel that he was at last going to understand the mystery of these horses Harry raised his hand .Hagrid nodded at him .Yeah .yeah I knew youd be able ter Harry he said seriously .An you too Neville eh ?An Excuse me said Malfoy in a sneering voice but what exactly are we supposed to be seeing ?For answer Hagrid pointed at the cow carcass on the ground .The whole class stared at it for a few seconds then several people gasped and Parvati squealed .Harry understood why Bits of flesh stripping themselves away from the bones and vanishing into thin air had to look very odd indeed .Whats doing it ?Parvati demanded in a terrified voice retreating behind the nearest tree .Whats eating it ?Thestrals said Hagrid proudly and Hermione gave a soft oh !of comprehension at Harrys shoulder .Hogwarts has got a whole herd of em in here .Now who knows ?But theyre really really unlucky !interrupted Parvati looking alarmed .Theyre supposed to bring all sorts of horrible misfortune on people who see them .Professor Trelawney told me once No no no said Hagrid chuckling thas jus superstition that is they aren unlucky theyre dead clever an useful !Course this lot don get a lot o work its mainly jus pullin the school carriages unless Dumbledores takin a long journey an don want ter Apparate an heres another couple look Two more horses came quietly out of the trees one of them passing very close to Parvati who shivered and pressed herself closer to the tree saying I think I felt something I think its near me !Don worry it won hurt yeh said Hagrid patiently .Righ now who can tell me why some o you can see them an some cant ?Hermione raised her hand .Go on then said Hagrid beaming at her .The only people who can see thestrals she said are people who have seen death .Thas exactly right said Hagrid solemnly ten points ter Gryffindor .Now thestrals Hem hem .Professor Umbridge had arrived .She was standing a few feet away from Harry wearing her green hat and cloak again her clipboard at the ready .Hagrid who had never heard Umbridge s fake cough before was gazing in some concern at the closest thestral evidently under the impression that it had made the sound .Hem hem .Oh hello !Hagrid said smiling having located the source of the noise .You received the note I sent to your cabin this morning ?said Umbridge in the same loud slow voice she had used with him earlier as though she was addressing somebody both foreign and very slow .Telling you that I would be inspecting your lesson ?Oh yeah said Hagrid brightly .Glad yeh found the place all righ !Well as you can see or I dunno can you ?Were doin thestrals today Im sorry ?said Umbridge loudly cupping her hand around her ear and frowning .What did you say ?Hagrid looked a little confused .Er thestralsl he said loudly .Big er winged horses yeh know !He flapped his gigantic arms hopefully .Professor Umbridge raised her eyebrows at him and muttered as she made a note on her clipboard ‘has .to .resort .to .crude .sign .language Well .anyway .said Hagrid turning back to the class and looking slightly flustered .Erm .what was I sayin ? ‘Appears .to .have .poor .short .term .memory muttered Umbridge loudly enough for everyone to hear her .Draco Malfoy looked as though Christmas had come a month early Hermione on the other hand had turned scarlet with suppressed rage .Oh yeah said Hagrid throwing an uneasy glance at Umbridges clipboard but plowing on valiantly .Yeah I was gonna tell yeh how come we got a herd .Yeah so we started off with a male an five females .This one he patted the first horse to have appeared name o Tenebrus hes my special favorite firs one born here in the forest Are you aware Umbridge said loudly interrupting him that the Ministry of Magic has classified thestrals as ‘dangerous ?Harrys heart sank like a stone but Hagrid merely chuckled .Thestrals aren dangerous !All righ they might take a bite outta you if yeh really annoy them ‘Shows .signs .of .pleasure .at .idea .of .violence . ‘ muttered Umbridge scribbling on her clipboard again .No come on !said Hagrid looking a little anxious now .I mean a dogll bite if yeh bait it won it but thestrals have jus got a bad reputation because o the death thing people used ter think they were bad omens didn they ?Jus didn understand did they ?Umbridge did not answer she finished writing her last note then looked up at Hagrid and said again very loudly and slowly Please continue teaching as usual .I am going to walk she mimed walking Malfoy and Pansy Parkinson were having silent fits of laughter among the students she pointed around at individual members of the class and ask them questions .She pointed at her mouth to indicate talking .Hagrid stared at her clearly at a complete loss to understand why she was acting as though he did not understand normal English .Hermione had tears of fury in her eyes now .You hag you evil hag !she whispered as Umbridge walked toward Pansy Parkinson .I know what youre doing you awful twisted vicious Erm .anyway said Hagrid clearly struggling to regain the flow of his lesson so thestrals .Yeah .Well theres loads o good stuff abou them .Do you find said Professor Umbridge in a ringing voice to Pansy Parkinson that you are able to understand Professor Hagrid when he talks ?Just like Hermione Pansy had tears in her eyes but these were tears of laughter indeed her answer was almost incoherent because she was trying to suppress her giggles .No .because .well .it sounds .like grunting a lot of the time .Umbridge scribbled on her clipboard .The few unbruised bits of Hagrid s face flushed but he tried to act as though he had not heard Pansys answer .Er .yeah .good stuff abou thestrals .Well once theyre tamed like this lot yehll never be lost again . ‘Mazin senses o direction jus tell em where yeh want ter go Assuming they can understand you of course said Malfoy loudly and Pansy Parkinson collapsed in a fit of renewed giggles .Professor Umbridge smiled indulgently at them and then turned to Neville .You can see the thestrals Longbottom can you ?she said .Neville nodded .Whom did you see die ?she asked her tone indifferent .My .my grandad said Neville .And what do you think of them ?she said waving her stubby hand at the horses who by now had stripped a great deal of the carcass down to bone .Erm said Neville nervously with a glance at Hagrid .Well theyre .er .okay . ‘Students .are .too .intimidated .to .admit .they .are .frightened .muttered Umbridge making another note on her clipboard .No !said Neville looking upset no Im not scared of them !Its quite all right said Umbridge patting Neville on the shoulder with what she evidently intended to be an understanding smile though it looked more like a leer to Harry .Well Hagrid she turned to look up at him again speaking once more in that loud slow voice I think Ive got enough to be getting along with .You will receive she mimed taking something from the air in front of her the results of your inspection she pointed at the clipboard in ten days time .She held up ten stubby little fingers then her smile wider and more toadlike than ever before beneath her green hat she bustled from their midst leaving Malfoy and Pansy Parkinson in fits of laughter Hermione actually shaking with fury and Neville looking confused and upset .That foul lying twisting old gargoyle !stormed Hermione half an hour later as they made their way back up to the castle through the channels they had made earlier in the snow .You see what shes up to ?Its her thing about halfbreeds all over again shes trying to make out Hagrids some kind of dimwitted troll just because he had a giantess for a mother and oh its not fair that really wasnt a bad lesson at all I mean all right if it had been BlastEnded Skrewts again but thestrals are fine in fact for Hagrid theyre really good !Umbridge said theyre dangerous said Ron .Well its like Hagrid said they can look after themselves said Hermione impatiently and I suppose a teacher like GrubblyPlank wouldnt usually show them to us before N .E .W .T .level but well they are very interesting arent they ?The way some people can see them and some cant !I wish I could .Do you ?Harry asked her quietly .She looked horrorstruck .Oh Harry Im sorry no of course I dont that was a really stupid thing to say Its okay he said quickly dont worry .Im surprised so many people could see them said Ron .Three in a class Yeah Weasley we were just wondering said a malicious voice nearby .Unheard by any of them in the muffling snow Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle were walking along right behind them .Dyou reckon if you saw someone snuff it youd be able to see the Quaffle better ?He Crabbe and Goyle roared with laughter as they pushed past on their way to the castle and then broke into a chorus of Weasley Is Our King .Rons ears turned scarlet .Ignore them just ignore them intoned Hermione pulling out her wand and performing the charm to produce hot air again so that she could melt them an easier path through the untouched snow between them and the greenhouses .December arrived bringing with it more snow and a positive avalanche of homework for the fifth years .Ron and Hermione s prefect duties also became more and more onerous as Christmas approached .They were called upon to supervise the decoration of the castle You try putting up tinsel when Peeves has got the other end and is trying to strangle you with it said Ron to watch over first and second years spending their break times inside because of the bitter cold And theyre cheeky little snotrags you know we definitely werent that rude when we were in first year said Ron and to patrol the corridors in shifts with Argus Filch who suspected that the holiday spirit might show itself in an outbreak of wizard duels Hes got dung for brains that one said Ron furiously .They were so busy that Hermione had stopped knitting elf hats and was fretting that she was down to her last three .All those poor elves I havent set free yet having to stay over during Christmas because there arent enough hats !Harry who had not had the heart to tell her that Dobby was taking everything she made bent lower over his History of Magic essay .In any case he did not want to think about Christmas .For the first time in his school career he very much wanted to spend the holidays away from Hogwarts .Between his Quidditch ban and worry about whether or not Hagrid was going to be put on probation he felt highly resentful toward the place at the moment .The only thing he really looked forward to were the D .A .meetings and they would have to stop over the holidays as nearly everybody in the D .A .would be spending the time with their families .Hermione was going skiing with her parents something that greatly amused Ron who had never before heard of Muggles strapping narrow strips of wood to their feet to slide down mountains .Ron meanwhile was going home to the Burrow .Harry endured several days of jealousy before Ron said in response to Harry asking how Ron was going to get home for Christmas But youre coming too !Didnt I say ?Mum wrote and told me to invite you weeks ago !Hermione rolled her eyes but Harrys spirits soared The thought of Christmas at the Burrow was truly wonderful only slightly marred by Harrys guilty feeling that he would not be able to spend the holiday with Sirius .He wondered whether he could possibly persuade Mrs Weasley to invite his godfather for the festivities too but apart from the fact that he doubted whether Dumbledore would permit Sirius to leave Grimmauld Place he could not help but feel that Mrs Weasley might not want him they were so often at loggerheads .Sirius had not contacted Harry at all since his last appearance in the fire and although Harry knew that with Umbridge on the constant watch it would be unwise to attempt to contact him he did not like to think of Sirius alone in his mothers old house perhaps pulling a lonely cracker with Kreacher .Harry arrived early in the Room of Requirement for the last D .A .meeting before the holidays and was very glad he had because when the lamps burst into light he saw that Dobby had taken it upon himself to decorate the place for Christmas .He could tell the elf had done it because nobody else would have strung a hundred golden baubles from the ceiling each showing a picture of Harrys face and bearing the legend HAVE A VERY HARRY CHRISTMAS !Harry had only just managed to get the last of them down before the door creaked open and Luna Lovegood entered looking dreamy as always .Hello she said vaguely looking around at what remained of the decorations .These are nice did you put them up ?No said Harry it was Dobby the houseelf .Mistletoe said Luna dreamily pointing at a large clump of white berries placed almost over Harrys head .He jumped out from under it .Good thinking said Luna very seriously .Its often infested with nargles .Harry was saved the necessity of asking what nargles were by the arrival of Angelina Katie and Alicia .All three of them were breathless and looked very cold .Well said Angelina dully pulling off her cloak and throwing it into a corner weve replaced you .Replaced me ?said Harry blankly .You and Fred and George she said impatiently .Weve got another Seeker !Who ?said Harry quickly .Ginny Weasley said Katie .Harry gaped at her .Yeah I know said Angelina pulling out her wand and flexing her arm .But shes pretty good actually .Nothing on you of course she said throwing him a very dirty look but as we cant have you .Harry bit back the retort he was longing to utter Did she imagine for a second that he did not regret his expulsion from the team a hundred times more than she did ?And what about the Beaters ?he asked trying to keep his voice even .Andrew Kirke said Alicia without enthusiasm and Jack Sloper .Neither of them are brilliant but compared with the rest of the idiots who turned up The arrival of Ron Hermione and Neville brought this depressing discussion to an end and within five minutes the room was full enough to prevent him seeing Angelinas burning reproachful looks .Okay he said calling them all to order .I thought this evening we should just go over the things weve done so far because its the last meeting before the holidays and theres no point starting anything new right before a threeweek break Were not doing anything new ?said Zacharias Smith in a disgruntled whisper loud enough to carry through the room .If Id known that I wouldnt have come .Were all really sorry Harry didnt tell you then said Fred loudly .Several people sniggered .Harry saw Cho laughing and felt the familiar swooping sensation in his stomach as though he had missed a step going downstairs .We can practice in pairs said Harry .Well start with the Impediment Jinx just for ten minutes then we can get out the cushions and try Stunning again .They all divided up obediently Harry partnered Neville as usual .The room was soon full of intermittent cries of Impedimental People froze for a minute or so during which their partners would stare aimlessly around the room watching other pairs at work then would unfreeze and take their turn at the jinx .Neville had improved beyond all recognition .After a while when Harry had unfrozen three times in a row he had Neville join Ron and Hermione again so that he could walk around the room and watch the others .When he passed Cho she beamed at him he resisted the temptation to walk past her several more times .After ten minutes on the Impediment Jinx they laid out cushions all over the floor and started practicing Stunning again .Space was really too confined to allow them all to work this spell at once half the group observed the others for a while then swapped over .Harry felt himself positively swelling with pride as he watched them all .True Neville did Stun Padma Patil rather than Dean at whom he had been aiming but it was a much closer miss than usual and everybody else had made enormous progress .At the end of an hour Harry called a halt .Youre getting really good he said beaming around at them .When we get back from the holidays we can start doing some of the big stuff maybe even Patronuses .There was a murmur of excitement .The room began to clear in the usual twos and threes most people wished Harry a Happy Christmas as they went .Feeling cheerful he collected up the cushions with Ron and Hermione and stacked them neatly away .Ron and Hermione left before he did he hung back a little because Cho was still there and he was hoping to receive a Merry Christmas from her .No you go on he heard her say to her friend Marietta and his heart gave a jolt that seemed to take it into the region of his Adams apple .He pretended to be straightening the cushion pile .He was quite sure they were alone now and waited for her to speak .Instead he heard a hearty sniff .He turned and saw Cho standing in the middle of the room tears pouring down her face .Wha ?He didnt know what to do .She was simply standing there crying silently .Whats up ?he said feebly .She shook her head and wiped her eyes on her sleeve .Im sorry she said thickly .I suppose .its just .learning all this stuff .It just makes me .wonder whether .if hed known it all .hed still be alive .Harrys heart sank right back past its usual spot and settled somewhere around his navel .He ought to have known .She wanted to talk about Cedric .He did know this stuff Harry said heavily .He was really good at it or he could never have got to the middle of that maze .But if Voldemort really wants to kill you you dont stand a chance .She hiccuped at the sound of Voldemorts name but stared at Harry without flinching .You survived when you were just a baby she said quietly .Yeah well said Harry wearily moving toward the door I dunno why nor does anyone else so its nothing to be proud of .Oh dont go !said Cho sounding tearful again .Im really sorry to get all upset like this .I didnt mean to .She hiccuped again .She was very pretty even when her eyes were red and puffy .Harry felt thoroughly miserable .Hed have been so pleased just with a Merry Christmas .I know it must be horrible for you she said mopping her eyes on her sleeve again .Me mentioning Cedric when you saw him die .I suppose you just want to forget about it .Harry did not say anything to this it was quite true but he felt heartless saying it .Youre a rreally good teacher you know said Cho with a watery smile .Ive never been able to Stun anything before .Thanks said Harry awkwardly .They looked at each other for a long moment .Harry felt a burning desire to run from the room and at the same time a complete inability to move his feet .Mistletoe said Cho quietly pointing at the ceiling over his head .Yeah said Harry .His mouth was very dry .Its probably full of nargles though .What are nargles ?No idea said Harry .She had moved closer .His brain seemed to have been Stunned .Youd have to ask Loony .Luna I mean .Cho made a funny noise halfway between a sob and a laugh .She was even nearer him now .He could have counted the freckles on her nose .I really like you Harry .He could not think .A tingling sensation was spreading throughout him paralyzing his arms legs and brain .She was much too close .He could see every tear clinging to her eyelashes .He returned to the common room half an hour later to find Hermione and Ron in the best seats by the fire nearly everybody else had gone to bed .Hermione was writing a very long letter she had already filled half a roll of parchment which was dangling from the edge of the table .Ron was lying on the hearthrug trying to finish his Transfiguration homework .What kept you ?he asked as Harry sank into the armchair next to Hermione s .Harry did not answer .He was in a state of shock .Half of him wanted to tell Ron and Hermione what had just happened but the other half wanted to take the secret with him to the grave .Are you all right Harry ?Hermione asked peering at him over the tip of her quill .Harry gave a halfhearted shrug .In truth he didnt know whether he was all right or not .Whats up ?said Ron hoisting himself up on his elbow to get a clearer view of Harry .Whats happened ?Harry didnt quite know how to set about telling them and still wasnt sure whether he wanted to .Just as he had decided not to say anything Hermione took matters out of his hands .Is it Cho ?she asked in a businesslike way .Did she corner you after the meeting ?Numbly surprised Harry nodded .Ron sniggered breaking off when Hermione caught his eye .So er what did she want ?he asked in a mock casual voice .She Harry began rather hoarsely he cleared his throat and tried again .She er Did you kiss ?asked Hermione briskly .Ron sat up so fast that he sent his ink bottle flying all over the rug .Disregarding this completely he stared avidly at Harry .Well ?he demanded .Harry looked from Rons expression of mingled curiosity and hilarity to Hermiones slight frown and nodded .HA !Ron made a triumphant gesture with his fist and went into a raucous peal of laughter that made several timidlooking second years over beside the window jump .A reluctant grin spread over Harrys face as he watched Ron rolling around on the hearthrug .Hermione gave Ron a look of deep disgust and returned to her letter .Well ?Ron said finally looking up at Harry .How was it ?Harry considered for a moment .Wet he said truthfully .Ron made a noise that might have indicated jubilation or disgust it was hard to tell .Because she was crying Harry continued heavily .Oh said Ron his smile fading slightly .Are you that bad at kissing ?Dunno said Harry who hadnt considered this and immediately felt rather worried .Maybe I am .Of course youre not said Hermione absently still scribbling away at her letter .How do you know ?said Ron in a sharp voice .Because Cho spends half her time crying these days said Hermione vaguely .She does it at mealtimes in the loos all over the place .Youd think a bit of kissing would cheer her up said Ron grinning .Ron said Hermione in a dignified voice dipping the point of her quill into her ink pot you are the most insensitive wart I have ever had the misfortune to meet .Whats that supposed to mean ?said Ron indignantly .What sort of person cries while someones kissing them ?Yeah said Harry slightly desperately who does ?Hermione looked at the pair of them with an almost pitying expression on her face .Dont you understand how Chos feeling at the moment ?she asked .No said Harry and Ron together .Hermione sighed and laid down her quill .Well obviously shes feeling very sad because of Cedric dying .Then I expect shes feeling confused because she liked Cedric and now she likes Harry and she cant work out who she likes best .Then shell be feeling guilty thinking its an insult to Cedrics memory to be kissing Harry at all and shell be worrying about what everyone else might say about her if she starts going out with Harry .And she probably cant work out what her feelings toward Harry are anyway because he was the one who was with Cedric when Cedric died so thats all very mixed up and painful .Oh and shes afraid shes going to be thrown off the Ravenclaw Quidditch team because shes been flying so badly .A slightly stunned silence greeted the end of this speech then Ron said One person cant feel all that at once theyd explode .Just because youve got the emotional range of a teaspoon doesnt mean we all have said Hermione nastily picking up her quill again .She was the one who started it said Harry .I wouldntve she just sort of came at me and next thing shes crying all over me I didnt know what to do Dont blame you mate said Ron looking alarmed at the very thought .You just had to be nice to her said Hermione looking up anxiously .You were werent you ?Well said Harry an unpleasant heat creeping up his face I sort of patted her on the back a bit .Hermione looked as though she was restraining herself from rolling her eyes with extreme difficulty .Well I suppose it could have been worse she said .Are you going to see her again ?Ill have to wont I ?said Harry .Weve got D .A .meetings havent we ?You know what I mean said Hermione impatiently .Harry said nothing .Hermione s words opened up a whole new vista of frightening possibilities .He tried to imagine going somewhere with Cho Hogsmeade perhaps and being alone with her for hours at a time .Of course she would have been expecting him to ask her out after what had just happened .The thought made his stomach clench painfully .Oh well said Hermione distantly buried in her letter once more youll have plenty of opportunities to ask her .What if he doesnt want to ask her ?said Ron who had been watching Harry with an unusually shrewd expression on his face .Dont be silly said Hermione vaguely Harrys liked her for ages havent you Harry ?He did not answer .Yes he had liked Cho for ages but whenever he had imagined a scene involving the two of them it had always featured a Cho who was enjoying herself as opposed to a Cho who was sobbing uncontrollably into his shoulder .Who re you writing the novel to anyway ?Ron asked Hermione trying to read the bit of parchment now trailing on the floor .Hermione hitched it up out of sight .Viktor .Krum ?How many other Viktors do we know ?Ron said nothing but looked disgruntled .They sat in silence for another twenty minutes Ron finishing his Transfiguration essay with many snorts of impatience and crossingsout Hermione writing steadily to the very end of the parchment rolling it up carefully and sealing it and Harry staring into the fire wishing more than anything that Siriuss head would appear there and give him some advice about girls .But the fire merely crackled lower and lower until the redhot embers crumbled into ash and looking around Harry saw that they were yet again the last in the common room .Well night said Hermione yawning widely and she set off up the girls staircase .What does she see in Krum ?Ron demanded as he and Harry climbed the boys stairs .Well said Harry considering the matter I spose hes older isnt he .and hes an international Quidditch player .Yeah but apart from that said Ron sounding aggravated .I mean hes a grouchy git isnt he ?Bit grouchy yeah said Harry whose thoughts were still on Cho .They pulled off their robes and put on pajamas in silence Dean Seamus and Neville were already asleep .Harry put his glasses on his bedside table and got into bed but did not pull the hangings closed around his fourposter instead he stared at the patch of starry sky visible through the window next to Nevilles bed .If he had known this time last night that in twentyfour hours time he would have kissed Cho Chang .Night grunted Ron from somewhere to his right .Night said Harry .Maybe next time .if there was a next time .shed be a bit happier .He ought to have asked her out she had probably been expecting it and was now really angry with him .or was she lying in bed still crying about Cedric ?He did not know what to think .Hermiones explanation had made it all seem more complicated rather than easier to understand .Thats what they should teach us here he thought turning over onto his side how girls brains work .itd be more useful than Divination anyway .Neville snuffled in his sleep .An owl hooted somewhere out in the night .Harry dreamed he was back in the D .A .room .Cho was accusing him of luring her there under false pretenses she said that he had promised her a hundred and fifty Chocolate Frog cards if she showed up .Harry protested .Cho shouted Cedric gave me loads of Chocolate Frog cards look And she pulled out fistfuls of cards from inside her robes and threw them into the air and then turned into Hermione who said You did promise her you know Harry .I think youd better give her something else instead .How about your Firebolt ?And Harry was protesting that he could not give Cho his Firebolt because Umbridge had it and anyway the whole thing was ridiculous hed only come to the D .A .room to put up some Christmas baubles shaped like Dobbys head .The dream changed .His body felt smooth powerful and flexible .He was gliding between shining metal bars across dark cold stone .He was flat against the floor sliding along on his belly .It was dark yet he could see objects around him shimmering in strange vibrant colors .He was turning his head .At first glance the corridor was empty .but no .a man was sitting on the floor ahead his chin drooping onto his chest his outline gleaming in the dark .Harry put out his tongue .He tasted the mans scent on the air .He was alive but drowsing .sitting in front of a door at the end of the corridor .Harry longed to bite the man .but he must master the impulse .He had more important work to do .But the man was stirring .a silvery cloak fell from his legs as he jumped to his feet and Harry saw his vibrant blurred outline towering above him saw a wand withdrawn from a belt .He had no choice .He reared high from the floor and struck once twice three times plunging his fangs deeply into the mans flesh feeling his ribs splinter beneath his jaws feeling the warm gush of blood .The man was yelling in pain .then he fell silent .He slumped backward against the wall .Blood was splattering onto the floor .His forehead hurt terribly .It was aching fit to burst .Harry !HARRY !He opened his eyes .Every inch of his body was covered in icy sweat his bedcovers were twisted all around him like a straitjacket he felt as though a whitehot poker was being applied to his forehead .Harryl Ron was standing over him looking extremely frightened .There were more figures at the foot of Harrys bed .He clutched his head in his hands the pain was blinding him .He rolled right over and vomited over the edge of the mattress .Hes really ill said a scared voice .Should we call someone ?Harry !Harryl He had to tell Ron it was very important that he tell him .Taking great gulps of air Harry pushed himself up in bed willing himself not to throw up again the pain halfblinding him .Your dad he panted his chest heaving .Your dads .been attacked .What ?said Ron uncomprehendingly .Your dad !Hes been bitten its serious there was blood everywhere .Im going for help said the same scared voice and Harry heard footsteps running out of the dormitory .Harry mate said Ron uncertainly you .you were just dreaming .No !said Harry furiously it was crucial that Ron understand .It wasnt a dream .not an ordinary dream .I was there I saw it .I did it .He could hear Seamus and Dean muttering but did not care .The pain in his forehead was subsiding slightly though he was still sweating and shivering feverishly .He retched again and Ron leapt backward out of the way .Harry youre not well he said shakily .Nevilles gone for help .Im fine !Harry choked wiping his mouth on his pajamas and shaking uncontrollably .Theres nothing wrong with me its your dad youve got to worry about we need to find out where he is hes bleeding like mad I was it was a huge snake .He tried to get out of bed but Ron pushed him back into it Dean and Seamus were still whispering somewhere nearby .Whether one minute passed or ten Harry did not know he simply sat there shaking feeling the pain recede very slowly from his scar .Then there were hurried footsteps coming up the stairs and he heard Nevilles voice again .Over here Professor .Professor McGonagall came hurrying into the dormitory in her tartan dressing gown her glasses perched lopsidedly on the bridge of her bony nose .What is it Potter ?Where does it hurt ?He had never been so pleased to see her it was a member of the Order of the Phoenix he needed now not someone fussing over him and prescribing useless potions .Its Rons dad he said sitting up again .Hes been attacked by a snake and its serious I saw it happen .What do you mean you saw it happen ?said Professor McGonagall her dark eyebrows contracting .I dont know .I was asleep and then I was there .You mean you dreamed this ?No !said Harry angrily .Would none of them understand ?I was having a dream at first about something completely different something stupid .and then this interrupted it .It was real I didnt imagine it Mr Weasley was asleep on the floor and he was attacked by a gigantic snake there was a load of blood he collapsed someones got to find out where he is .Professor McGonagall was gazing at him through her lopsided spectacles as though horrified at what she was seeing .Im not lying and Im not mad !Harry told her his voice rising to a shout .I tell you I saw it happen !I believe you Potter said Professor McGonagall curtly .Put on your dressinggown were going to see the headmaster .ST .MUNGOS HOSPITAL FOR MAGICAL MALADIES AND INJURIES Harry was so relieved that she was taking him seriously that he did not hesitate but jumped out of bed at once pulled on his dressing gown and pushed his glasses back onto his nose .Weasley you ought to come too said Professor McGonagall .They followed Professor McGonagall past the silent figures of Neville Dean and Seamus out of the dormitory down the spiral stairs into the common room through the portrait hole and off along the Fat Ladys moonlit corridor .Harry felt as though the panic inside him might spill over at any moment he wanted to run to yell for Dumbledore .Mr Weasley was bleeding as they walked along so sedately and what if those fangs Harry tried hard not to think my fangs had been poisonous ?They passed Mrs Norris who turned her lamplike eyes upon them and hissed faintly but Professor McGonagall said Shoo !Mrs Norris slunk away into the shadows and in a few minutes they had reached the stone gargoyle guarding the entrance to Dumbledores office .Fizzing Whizbee said Professor McGonagall .The gargoyle sprang to life and leapt aside the wall behind it split in two to reveal a stone staircase that was moving continuously upward like a spiral escalator .The three of them stepped onto the moving stairs the wall closed behind them with a thud and they were moving upward in tight circles until they reached the highly polished oak door with the brass knocker shaped like a griffin .Though it was now well past midnight there were voices coming from inside the room a positive babble of them .It sounded as though Dumbledore was entertaining at least a dozen people .Professor McGonagall rapped three times with the griffin knocker and the voices ceased abruptly as though someone had switched them all off .The door opened of its own accord and Professor McGonagall led Harry and Ron inside .The room was in half darkness the strange silver instruments standing on tables were silent and still rather than whirring and emitting puffs of smoke as they usually did .The portraits of old headmasters and headmistresses covering the walls were all snoozing in their frames .Behind the door a magnificent redandgold bird the size of a swan dozed on its perch with its head under its wing .Oh its you Professor McGonagall .and .ah .Dumbledore was sitting in a highbacked chair behind his desk he leaned forward into the pool of candlelight illuminating the papers laid out before him .He was wearing a magnificently embroidered purpleandgold dressing gown over a snowywhite nightshirt but seemed wide awake his penetrating lightblue eyes fixed intently upon Professor McGonagall .Professor Dumbledore Potter has had a .well a nightmare said Professor McGonagall .He says .It wasnt a nightmare said Harry quickly .Professor McGonagall looked around at Harry frowning slightly .Very well then Potter you tell the headmaster about it . ~ I .well I was asleep .said Harry and even in his terror and his desperation to make Dumbledore understand he felt slightly irritated that the headmaster was not looking at him but examining his own interlocked fingers .But it wasnt an ordinary dream .it was real .I saw it happen .He took a deep breath Rons dad Mr Weasley has been attacked by a giant snake .The words seemed to reverberate in the air after he had said them slightly ridiculous even comic .There was a pause in which Dumbledore leaned back and stared meditatively at the ceiling .Ron looked from Harry to Dumbledore whitefaced and shocked .How did you see this ?Dumbledore asked quietly still not looking at Harry .Well .I dont know said Harry rather angrily what did it matter ?Inside my head I suppose You misunderstand me said Dumbledore still in the same calm tone .I mean .can you remember er where you were positioned as you watched this attack happen ?Were you perhaps standing beside the victim or else looking down on the scene from above ?This was such a curious question that Harry gaped at Dumbledore it was almost as though he knew .I was the snake he said .I saw it all from the snakes point of view .Nobody else spoke for a moment then Dumbledore now looking at Ron who was still wheyfaced said in a new and sharper voice Is Arthur seriously injured ?Yes said Harry emphatically why were they all so slow on the uptake did they not realize how much a person bled when fangs that long pierced their side ?And why could Dumbledore not do him the courtesy of looking at him ?But Dumbledore stood up so quickly that Harry jumped and addressed one of the old portraits hanging very near the ceiling .Everard ?he said sharply .And you too Dilys !A sallowfaced wizard with short black bangs and an elderly witch with long silver ringlets in the frame beside him both of whom seemed to have been in the deepest of sleeps opened their eyes immediately .You were listening ?said Dumbledore .The wizard nodded the witch said Naturally .The man has red hair and glasses said Dumbledore .Everard you will need to raise the alarm make sure he is found by the right people Both nodded and moved sideways out of their frames but instead of emerging in neighboring pictures as usually happened at Hogwarts neither reappeared one frame now contained nothing but a backdrop of dark curtain the other a handsome leather armchair .Harry noticed that many of the other headmasters and mistresses on the walls though snoring and drooling most convincingly kept sneaking peeks at him under their eyelids and he suddenly understood who had been talking when they had knocked .Everard and Dilys were two of Hogwarts s most celebrated Heads Dumbledore said now sweeping around Harry Ron and Professor McGonagall and approaching the magnificent sleeping bird on his perch beside the door .Their renown is such that both have portraits hanging in other important Wizarding institutions .As they are free to move between their own portraits they can tell us what may be happening elsewhere .But Mr Weasley could be anywhere !said Harry .Please sit down all three of you said Dumbledore as though Harry had not spoken .Everard and Dilys may not be back for several minutes .Professor McGonagall if you could draw up extra chairs .Professor McGonagall pulled her wand from the pocket of her dressing gown and waved it three chairs appeared out of thin air straightbacked and wooden quite unlike the comfortable chintz armchairs that Dumbledore had conjured back at Harrys hearing .Harry sat down watching Dumbledore over his shoulder .Dumbledore was now stroking Fawkess plumed golden head with one finger .The phoenix awoke immediately .He stretched his beautiful head high and observed Dumbledore through bright dark eyes .We will need said Dumbledore very quietly to the bird a warning .There was a flash of fire and the phoenix had gone .Dumbledore now swooped down upon one of the fragile silver instruments whose function Harry had never known carried it over to his desk sat down facing them again and tapped it gently with the tip of his wand .The instrument tinkled into life at once with rhythmic clinking noises .Tiny puffs of pale green smoke issued from the minuscule silver tube at the top .Dumbledore watched the smoke closely his brow furrowed and after a few seconds the tiny puffs became a steady stream of smoke that thickened and coiled in the air .A serpents head grew out of the end of it opening its mouth wide .Harry wondered whether the instrument was confirming his story He looked eagerly at Dumbledore for a sign that he was right but Dumbledore did not look up .Naturally naturally murmured Dumbledore apparently to himself still observing the stream of smoke without the slightest sign of surprise .But in essence divided ?Harry could make neither head nor tail of this question .The smoke serpent however split itself instantly into two snakes both coiling and undulating in the dark air .With a look of grim satisfaction Dumbledore gave the instrument another gentle tap with his wand The clinking noise slowed and died and the smoke serpents grew faint became a formless haze and vanished .Dumbledore replaced the instrument upon its spindly little table Harry saw many of the old headmasters in the portraits follow him with their eyes then realizing that Harry was watching them hastily pretend to be sleeping again .Harry wanted to ask what the strange silver instrument was for but before he could do so there was a shout from the top of the wall to their right the wizard called Everard had reappeared in his portrait panting slightly .Dumbledore !What news ?said Dumbledore at once .I yelled until someone came running said the wizard who was mopping his brow on the curtain behind him said Id heard something moving downstairs they werent sure whether to believe me but went down to check you know there are no portraits down there to watch from .Anyway they carried him up a few minutes later .He doesnt look good hes covered in blood I ran along to Elfrida Craggs portrait to get a good view as they left Good said Dumbledore as Ron made a convulsive movement I take it Dilys will have seen him arrive then And moments later the silverringletted witch had reappeared in her picture too she sank coughing into her armchair and said Yes theyve taken him to St .Mungos Dumbledore .They carried him past under my portrait .He looks bad .Thank you said Dumbledore .He looked around at Professor McGonagall .Minerva I need you to go and wake the other Weasley children .Of course .Professor McGonagall got up and moved swiftly to the door Harry cast a sideways glance at Ron who was now looking terrified .And Dumbledore what about Molly ?said Professor McGonagall pausing at the door .That will be a job for Fawkes when he has finished keeping a lookout for anybody approaching said Dumbledore .But she may already know .that excellent clock of hers .Harry knew Dumbledore was referring to the clock that told not the time but the whereabouts and conditions of the various Weasley family members and with a pang he thought that Mr Weasleys hand must even now be pointing at mortal peril .But it was very late .Mrs Weasley was probably asleep not watching the clock .And he felt cold as he remembered Mrs Weasleys boggart turning into Mr Weasleys lifeless body his glasses askew blood running down his face .But Mr Weasley wasnt going to die .He couldnt .Dumbledore was now rummaging in a cupboard behind Harry and Ron .He emerged from it carrying a blackened old kettle which he placed carefully upon his desk .He raised his wand and murmured Portus for a moment the kettle trembled glowing with an odd blue light then it quivered to a rest as solidly black as ever .Dumbledore marched over to another portrait this time of a cleverlooking wizard with a pointed beard who had been painted wearing the Slytherin colors of green and silver and was apparently sleeping so deeply that he could not hear Dumbledore s voice when he attempted to rouse him .Phineas .Phineas .And now the subjects of the portraits lining the room were no longer pretending to be asleep they were shifting around in their frames the better to watch what was happening .When the cleverlooking wizard continued to feign sleep some of them shouted his name too .Phineas !Phineas !PHINEAS !He could not pretend any longer he gave a theatrical jerk and opened his eyes wide .Did someone call ?I need you to visit your other portrait again Phineas said Dumbledore .IVe got another message .Visit my other portrait ?said Phineas in a reedy voice giving a long fake yawn his eyes traveling around the room and focusing upon Harry .Oh no Dumbledore I am too tired tonight .Something about Phineas s voice was familiar to Harry .Where had he heard it before ?But before he could think the portraits on the surrounding walls broke into a storm of protest .Insubordination sir !roared a corpulent rednosed wizard brandishing his fists .Dereliction of duty !We are honorbound to give service to the present Headmaster of Hogwarts !cried a fraillooking old wizard whom Harry recognized as Dumbledores predecessor Armando Dippet .Shame on you Phineas !Shall I persuade him Dumbledore ?called a gimlet eyed witch raising an unusually thick wand that looked not unlike a birch rod .Oh very well said the wizard called Phineas eyeing this wand slightly apprehensively though he may well have destroyed my picture by now hes done most of the family Sirius knows not to destroy your portrait said Dumbledore and Harry realized immediately where he had heard Phineas s voice before issuing from the apparently empty frame in his bedroom in Grimmauld Place .You are to give him the message that Arthur Weasley has been gravely injured and that his wife children and Harry Potter will be arriving at his house shortly .Do you understand ?Arthur Weasley injured wife and children and Harry Potter coming to stay recited Phineas in a bored voice .Yes yes .very well .He sloped away into the frame of the portrait and disappeared from view at the very moment that the study door opened again .Fred George and Ginny were ushered inside by Professor McGonagall all three of them looking disheveled and shocked still in their night things .Harry whats going on ?asked Ginny who looked frightened .Professor McGonagall says you saw Dad hurt Your father has been injured in the course of his work for the Order of the Phoenix said Dumbledore before Harry could speak .He has been taken to St .Mungos Hospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries .I am sending you back to Siriuss house which is much more convenient for the hospital than the Burrow .You will meet your mother there .Howre we going ?asked Fred looking shaken .Floo powder ?No said Dumbledore Floo powder is not safe at the moment the Network is being watched .You will be taking a Portkey .He indicated the old kettle lying innocently on his desk .We are just waiting for Phineas Nigellus to report back .I wish to be sure that the coast is clear before sending you There was a flash of flame in the very middle of the office leaving behind a single golden feather that floated gently to the floor .It is Fawkess warning said Dumbledore catching the feather as it fell .She must know youre out of your beds .Minerva go and head her off tell her any story Professor McGonagall was gone in a swish of tartan .He says hell be delighted said a bored voice behind Dumbledore the wizard called Phineas had reappeared in front of his Slytherin banner .My greatgreatgrandson has always had odd taste in houseguests .Come here then Dumbledore said to Harry and the Weasleys .And quickly before anyone else joins us Harry and the others gathered around Dumbledores desk .You have all used a Portkey before ?asked Dumbledore and they nodded each reaching out to touch some part of the blackened kettle .Good .On the count of three then .one .two .It happened in a fraction of a second In the infinitesimal pause before Dumbledore said three Harry looked up at him they were very close together and Dumbledores clear blue gaze moved from the Portkey to Harrys face .At once Harrys scar burned whitehot as though the old wound had burst open again and unbidden unwanted but terrifyingly strong there rose within Harry a hatred so powerful he felt for that instant that he would like nothing better than to strike to bite to sink his fangs into the man before him .three .He felt a powerful jerk behind his navel the ground vanished from beneath his feet his hand was glued to the kettle he was banging into the others as all sped forward in a swirl of colors and a rush of wind the kettle pulling them onward and then His feet hit the ground so hard that his knees buckled the kettle clattered to the ground and somewhere close at hand a voice said Back again the blood traitor brats is it true their fathers dying . ?OUT !roared a second voice .Harry scrambled to his feet and looked around they had arrived in the gloomy basement kitchen of number twelve Grimmauld Place .The only sources of light were the fire and one guttering candle which illuminated the remains of a solitary supper .Kreacher was disappearing through the door to the hall looking back at them malevolently as he hitched up his loincloth Sirius was hurrying toward them all looking anxious .He was unshaven and still in his day clothes there was also a slightly Mundunguslike whiff of stale drink about him .Whats going on ?he said stretching out a hand to help Ginny up .Phineas Nigellus said Arthurs been badly injured Ask Harry said Fred .Yeah I want to hear this for myself said George .The twins and Ginny were staring at him .Kreachers footsteps had stopped on the stairs outside .It was Harry began this was even worse than telling McGonagall and Dumbledore .I had a a kind of vision .And he told them all that he had seen though he altered the story so that it sounded as though he had watched from the sidelines as the snake attacked rather than from behind the snakes own eyes .Ron who was still very white gave him a fleeting look but did not speak .When Harry had finished Fred George and Ginny continued to stare at him for a moment .Harry did not know whether he was imagining it or not but he fancied there was something accusatory in their looks .Well if they were going to blame him for just seeing the attack he was glad he had not told them that he had been inside the snake at the time .Is Mum here ?said Fred turning to Sirius .She probably doesnt even know whats happened yet said Sirius .The important thing was to get you away before Umbridge could interfere .I expect Dumbledores letting Molly know now .Weve got to go to St .Mungos said Ginny urgently .She looked around at her brothers they were of course still in their pajamas .Sirius can you lend us cloaks or anything ?Hang on you cant go tearing off to St .Mungos !said Sirius .Course we can go to St .Mungos if we want said Fred with a mulish expression hes our dad !And how are you going to explain how you knew Arthur was attacked before the hospital even let his wife know ?What does that matter ?said George hotly .It matters because we dont want to draw attention to the fact that Harry is having visions of things that are happening hundreds of miles away !said Sirius angrily .Have you any idea what the Ministry would make of that information ?Fred and George looked as though they could not care less what the Ministry made of anything .Ron was still whitefaced and silent .Ginny said Somebody else could have told us .We could have heard it somewhere other than Harry .Like who ?said Sirius impatiently .Listen your dads been hurt while on duty for the Order and the circumstances are fishy enough without his children knowing about it seconds after it happened you could seriously damage the Orders We dont care about the dumb Order !shouted Fred .Its our dad dying were talking about !yelled George .Your father knew what he was getting into and he wont thank you for messing things up for the Order !said Sirius angrily in his turn .This is how it is this is why youre not in the Order you dont understand there are things worth dying for !Easy for you to say stuck here !bellowed Fred .I dont see you risking your neck !The little color remaining in Siriuss face drained from it .He looked for a moment as though he would quite like to hit Fred but when he spoke it was in a voice of determined calm .I know its hard but weve all got to act as though we dont know anything yet .Weve got to stay put at least until we hear from your mother all right ?Fred and George still looked mutinous .Ginny however took a few steps over to the nearest chair and sank into it .Harry looked at Ron who made a funny movement somewhere between a nod and shrug and they sat down too .The twins glared at Sirius for another minute then took seats on either side of Ginny .Thats right said Sirius encouragingly come on lets all .lets all have a drink while were waiting .Accio Butterbeeri He raised his wand as he spoke and half a dozen bottles came flying toward them out of the pantry skidded along the table scattering the debris of Siriuss meal and stopped neatly in front of the six of them .They all drank and for a while the only sounds were those of the crackling of the kitchen fire and the soft thud of their bottles on the table .Harry was only drinking to have something to do with his hands .His stomach was full of horrible hot bubbling guilt .They would not be here if it were not for him they would all still be asleep in bed .And it was no good telling himself that by raising the alarm he had ensured that Mr Weasley was found because there was also the inescapable business of it being he who had attacked Mr Weasley in the first place .Dont be stupid you havent got fangs he told himself trying to keep calm though the hand on his butterbeer bottle was shaking .You were lying in bed you werent attacking anyone .But then what just happened in Dumbledores office ?he asked himself .I felt like I wanted to attack Dumbledore too .He put the bottle down on the table a little harder than he meant to so that it slopped over onto the table .No one took any notice .Then a burst of fire in midair illuminated the dirty plates in front of them and as they gave cries of shock a scroll of parchment fell with a thud onto the table accompanied by a single golden phoenix tail feather .Fawkes !said Sirius at once snatching up the parchment .Thats not Dumbledores writing it must be a message from your mother here He thrust the letter into Georges hand who ripped it open and read aloud Dad is still alive .I am setting out for St .Mungos now .Stay where you are .I will send news as soon as I can .Mum .George looked around the table .Still alive .he said slowly .But that makes it sound .He did not need to finish the sentence .It sounded to Harry too as though Mr Weasley was hovering somewhere between life and death .Still exceptionally pale Ron stared at the back of his mothers letter as though it might speak words of comfort to him .Fred pulled the parchment out of Georges hands and read it for himself then looked up at Harry who felt his hand shaking on his butterbeer bottle again and clenched it more tightly to stop the trembling .If Harry had ever sat through a longer night than this one he could not remember it .Sirius suggested once that they all go to bed but without any real conviction and the Weasleys looks of disgust were answer enough .They mostly sat in silence around the table watching the candle wick sinking lower and lower into liquid wax now and then raising bottles to their lips speaking only to check the time to wonder aloud what was happening and to reassure one another that if there was bad news they would know straightaway for Mrs Weasley must long since have arrived at St .Mungos .Fred fell into a doze his head sagging sideways onto his shoulder .Ginny was curled like a cat on her chair but her eyes were open Harry could see them reflecting the firelight .Ron was sitting with his head in his hands whether awake or asleep it was impossible to tell .And he and Sirius looked at each other every so often intruders upon the family grief waiting .waiting .And then at ten past five in the morning by Rons watch the kitchen door swung open and Mrs Weasley entered the kitchen .She was extremely pale but when they all turned to look at her Fred Ron and Harry halfrising from their chairs she gave a wan smile .Hes going to be all right she said her voice weak with tiredness .Hes sleeping .We can all go and see him later .Bills sitting with him now hes going to take the morning off work .Fred fell back into his chair with his hands over his face .George and Ginny got up walked swiftly over to their mother and hugged her .Ron gave a very shaky laugh and downed the rest of his butterbeer in one .Breakfast !said Sirius loudly and joyfully jumping to his feet .Wheres that accursed houseelf ?Kreacher !KREACHER !But Kreacher did not answer the summons .Oh forget it then muttered Sirius counting the people in front of him .So its breakfast for lets see seven .Bacon and eggs I think and some tea and toast Harry hurried over to the stove to help .He did not want to intrude upon the Weasleys happiness and he dreaded the moment when Mrs Weasley would ask him to recount his vision .However he had barely taken plates from the dresser when Mrs Weasley lifted them out of his hands and pulled him into a hug .I dont know what would have happened if it hadnt been for you Harry she said in a muffled voice .They might not have found Arthur for hours and then it would have been too late but thanks to you hes alive and Dumbledores been able to think up a good cover story for Arthur being where he was youve no idea what trouble he would have been in otherwise look at poor Sturgis .Harry could hardly stand her gratitude but fortunately she soon released him to turn to Sirius and thank him for looking after her children through the night .Sirius said that he was very pleased to have been able to help and hoped they would all stay with him as long as Mr Weasley was in hospital .Oh Sirius Im so grateful .They think hell be there a little while and it would be wonderful to be nearer .Of course that might mean were here for Christmas .The more the merrier !said Sirius with such obvious sincerity that Mrs Weasley beamed at him threw on an apron and began to help with breakfast .Sirius Harry muttered unable to stand it a moment longer .Can I have a quick word ?Er now ?He walked into the dark pantry and Sirius followed .Without preamble Harry told his godfather every detail of the vision he had had including the fact that he himself had been the snake who had attacked Mr Weasley .When he paused for breath Sirius said Did you tell Dumbledore this ?Yes said Harry impatiently but he didnt tell me what it meant .Well he doesnt tell me anything anymore .Im sure he would have told you if it was anything to worry about said Sirius steadily .But thats not all said Harry in a voice only a little above a whisper .Sirius I .I think Im going mad .Back in Dumbledores office just before we took the Portkey .for a couple of seconds there I thought I was a snake I felt like one my scar really hurt when I was looking at Dumbledore Sirius I wanted to attack him He could only see a sliver of Siriuss face the rest was in darkness .It must have been the aftermath of the vision thats all said Sirius .You were still thinking of the dream or whatever it was and It wasnt that said Harry shaking his head .It was like something rose up inside me like theres a snake inside me You need to sleep said Sirius firmly .Youre going to have breakfast and then go upstairs to bed and then you can go and see Arthur after lunch with the others .Youre in shock Harry youre blaming yourself for something you only witnessed and its lucky you did witness it or Arthur might have died .Just stop worrying .He clapped Harry on the shoulder and left the pantry leaving Harry standing alone in the dark .Everyone but Harry spent the rest of the morning sleeping .He went up to the bedroom he had shared with Ron over the summer but while Ron crawled into bed and was asleep within minutes Harry sat fully clothed hunched against the cold metal bars of the bedstead keeping himself deliberately uncomfortable determined not to fall into a doze terrified that he might become the serpent again in his sleep and awake to find that he had attacked Ron or else slithered through the house after one of the others .When Ron woke up Harry pretended to have enjoyed a refreshing nap too .Their trunks arrived from Hogwarts while they were eating lunch so that they could dress as Muggles for the trip to St .Mungos .Everybody except Harry was riotously happy and talkative as they changed out of their robes into jeans and sweatshirts and they greeted Tonks and Mad Eye who had turned up to escort them across London gleefully laughing at the bowler hat MadEye was wearing at an angle to conceal his magical eye and assuring him truthfully that Tonks whose hair was short and bright pink again would attract far less attention on the underground .Tonks was very interested in Harrys vision of the attack on Mr Weasley something he was not remotely interested in discussing .There isnt any Seer blood in your family is there ?she inquired curiously as they sat side by side on a train rattling toward the heart of the city .No said Harry thinking of Professor Trelawney and feeling insulted .No said Tonks musingly no I suppose its not really prophecy youre doing is it ?I mean youre not seeing the future youre seeing the present .Its odd isnt it ?Useful though .Harry did not answer fortunately they got out at the next stop a station in the very heart of London and in the bustle of leaving the train he was able to allow Fred and George to get between himself and Tonks who was leading the way .They all followed her up the escalator Moody clunking along at the back of the group his bowler tilted low and one gnarled hand stuck in between the buttons of his coat clutching his wand .Harry thought he sensed the concealed eye staring hard at him trying to deflect more questions about his dream he asked MadEye where St .Mungos was hidden .Not far from here grunted Moody as they stepped out into the wintry air on a broad storelined street packed with Christmas shoppers .He pushed Harry a little ahead of him and stumped along just behind Harry knew the eye was rolling in all directions under the tilted hat .Wasnt easy to find a good location for a hospital .Nowhere in Diagon Alley was big enough and we couldnt have it underground like the Ministry unhealthy .In the end they managed to get hold of a building up here .Theory was sick wizards could come and go and just blend in with the crowd .He seized Harrys shoulder to prevent them being separated by a gaggle of shoppers plainly intent on nothing but making it into a nearby shop full of electrical gadgets .Here we go said Moody a moment later .They had arrived outside a large oldfashioned red brick department store called Purge and Dowse Ltd .The place had a shabby miserable air the window displays consisted of a few chipped dummies with their wigs askew standing at random and modeling fashions at least ten years out of date .Large signs on all the dusty doors read CLOSED FOR REFURBISHMENT .Harry distinctly heard a large woman laden with plastic shopping bags say to her friend as they passed Its never open that place .Right said Tonks beckoning them forward to a window displaying nothing but a particularly ugly female dummy whose false eyelashes were hanging off and who was modeling a green nylon pinafore dress .Everybody ready ?They nodded clustering around her Moody gave Harry another shove between the shoulder blades to urge him forward and Tonks leaned close to the glass looking up at the very ugly dummy and said her breath steaming up the glass Wotcher .Were here to see Arthur Weasley .For a split second Harry thought how absurd it was for Tonks to expect the dummy to hear her talking that quietly through a sheet of glass when there were buses rumbling along behind her and all the racket of a street full of shoppers .Then he reminded himself that dummies could not hear anyway .Next second his mouth opened in shock as the dummy gave a tiny nod beckoned its jointed finger and Tonks had seized Ginny and Mrs Weasley by the elbows stepped right through the glass and vanished .Fred George and Ron stepped after them Harry glanced around at the jostling crowd not one of them seemed to have a glance to spare for window displays as ugly as Purge and Dowse Ltd .s nor did any of them seem to have noticed that six people had just melted into thin air in front of them .Cmon growled Moody giving Harry yet another poke in the back and together they stepped forward through what felt like a sheet of cool water emerging quite warm and dry on the other side .There was no sign of the ugly dummy or the space where she had stood .They had arrived in what seemed to be a crowded reception area where rows of witches and wizards sat upon rickety wooden chairs some looking perfectly normal and perusing out of date copies of Witch Weekly others sporting gruesome disfigurements such as elephant trunks or extra hands sticking out of their chests .The room was scarcely less quiet than the street outside for many of the patients were making very peculiar noises .A sweatyfaced witch in the center of the front row who was fanning herself vigorously with a copy of the Daily Prophet kept letting off a highpitched whistle as steam came pouring out of her mouth and a grubbylooking warlock in the corner clanged like a bell every time he moved and with each clang his head vibrated horribly so that he had to seize himself by the ears and hold it steady .Witches and wizards in limegreen robes were walking up and down the rows asking questions and making notes on clipboards like Umbridges .Harry noticed the emblem embroidered on their chests a wand and bone crossed .Are they doctors ?he asked Ron quietly .Doctors ?said Ron looking startled .Those Muggle nutters that cut people up ?Nah theyre Healers .Over here !called Mrs Weasley over the renewed clanging of the warlock in the corner and they followed her to the queue in front of a plump blonde witch seated at a desk marked inquiries .The wall behind her was covered in notices and posters saying things like A CLEAN CAULDRON KEEPS POTIONS FROM BECOMING POISONS and ANTIDOTES ARE ANTIDONTS UNLESS APPROVED BY A QUALIFIED HEALER .There was also a large portrait of a witch with long silver ringlets that was labelled DILYS DERWENT ST .MUNGOS HEALER 17221741 HEADMISTRESS OF HOGWARTS SCHOOL OF WITCHCRAFT AND WIZARDRY I74II768 Dilys was eyeing the Weasley party as though counting them when Harry caught her eye she gave a tiny wink walked sideways out of her portrait and vanished .Meanwhile at the front of the queue a young wizard was performing an odd onthespot jig and trying in between yelps of pain to explain his predicament to the witch behind the desk .Its these ouch shoes my brother gave me ow theyre eating my OUCH feet look at them there must be some kind of AARGH jinx on them and I cant aaRGH get them off He hopped from one foot to the other as though dancing on hot coals .The shoes dont prevent you reading do they ?said the blonde witch irritably pointing at a large sign to the left of her desk .You want Spell Damage fourth floor .Just like it says on the floor guide .Next !The wizard hobbled and pranced sideways out of the way the Weasley party moved forward a few steps and Harry read the floor guide ARTIFACT ACCIDENTS Ground Floor Cauldron explosion wand backfiring broom crashes etc .CREATUREINDUCED INJURIES First Floor Bites stings burns embedded spines etc .MAGICAL BUGS Second Floor Contagious maladies e .g .dragon pox vanishing sickness scrofungulus POTION AND PLANT POISONING ..Third Floor Rashes regurgitation uncontrollable giggling etc .SPELL DAMAGE Fourth Floor Unliftable jinxes hexes and incorrectly applied charms etc .VISITORS TEAROOM AND HOSPITAL SHOP .Fifth Floor If you are unsure where to go incapable of normal speech or unable to remember why you are here our Welcome Witch will be pleased to help .A very old stooped wizard with a hearing trumpet had shuffled to the front of the queue now .Im here to see Broderick Bode !he wheezed .Ward fortynine but Im afraid youre wasting your time said the witch dismissively Hes completely addled you know still thinks hes a teapot .Next !A harassedlooking wizard was holding his small daughter tightly by the ankle while she flapped around his head using the immensely large feathery wings that had sprouted right out the back of her romper suit .Fourth floor said the witch in a bored voice without asking and the man disappeared through the double doors beside the desk holding his daughter like an oddly shaped balloon .Next !Mrs Weasley moved forward to the desk .Hello she said .My husband Arthur Weasley was supposed to be moved to a different ward this morning could you tell us ?Arthur Weasley ?said the witch running her finger down a long list in front of her .Yes first floor second door on the right Dai Llewellyn ward .Thank you said Mrs Weasley .Come on you lot .They followed through the double doors and along the narrow corridor beyond which was lined with more portraits of famous Healers and lit by crystal bubbles full of candles that floated up on the ceiling looking like giant soapsuds .More witches and wizards in limegreen robes walked in and out of the doors they passed a foulsmelling yellow gas wafted into the passageway as they passed one door and every now and then they heard distant wailing .They climbed a flight of stairs and entered the CreatureInduced Injuries corridor where the second door on the right bore the words DANGEROUS DAI LLEWELLYN WARD SERIOUS BITES .Underneath this was a card in a brass holder on which had been handwritten HealerinCharge Hippocrates Smethwyck Trainee Healer Augustus Pye .Well wait outside Molly Tonks said .Arthur wont want too many visitors at once .It ought to be just the family first .MadEye growled his approval of this idea and set himself with his back against the corridor wall his magical eye spinning in all directions .Harry drew back too but Mrs Weasley reached out a hand and pushed him through the door saying Dont be silly Harry Arthur wants to thank you .The ward was small and rather dingy as the only window was narrow and set high in the wall facing the door .Most of the light came from more shining crystal bubbles clustered in the middle of the ceiling .The walls were of panelled oak and there was a portrait of a rather viciouslooking wizard on the wall captioned URQUHART RACKHARROW 16121697 INVENTOR OF THE ENTRAIL EXPELLING CURSE .There were only three patients .Mr Weasley was occupying the bed at the far end of the ward beside the tiny window .Harry was pleased and relieved to see that he was propped up on several pillows and reading the Daily Prophet by the solitary ray of sunlight falling onto his bed .He looked around as they walked toward him and seeing whom it was beamed .Hello !he called throwing the Prophet aside .Bill just left Molly had to get back to work but he says hell drop in on you later .How are you Arthur ?asked Mrs Weasley bending down to kiss his cheek and looking anxiously into his face .Youre still looking a bit peaky .I feel absolutely fine said Mr Weasley brightly holding out his good arm to give Ginny a hug .If they could only take the bandages off Id be fit to go home .Why cant they take them off Dad ?asked Fred .Well I start bleeding like mad every time they try said Mr Weasley cheerfully reaching across for his wand which lay on his bedside cabinet and waving it so that six extra chairs appeared at his bedside to seat them all .It seems there was some rather unusual kind of poison in that snakes fangs that keeps wounds open .Theyre sure theyll find an antidote though they say theyve had much worse cases than mine and in the meantime I just have to keep taking a BloodReplenishing Potion every hour .But that fellow over there he said dropping his voice and nodding toward the bed opposite in which a man lay looking green and sickly and staring at the ceiling .Bitten by a werewolf poor chap .No cure at all .A werewolf ?whispered Mrs Weasley looking alarmed .Is he safe in a public ward ?Shouldnt he be in a private room ?Its two weeks till full moon Mr Weasley reminded her quietly .Theyve been talking to him this morning the Healers you know trying to persuade him hell be able to lead an almost normal life .I said to him didnt mention names of course but I said I knew a werewolf personally very nice man who finds the condition quite easy to manage .What did he say ?asked George .Said hed give me another bite if I didnt shut up said Mr Weasley sadly .And that woman over there he indicated the only other occupied bed which was right beside the door wont tell the Healers what bit her which makes us all think it must have been something she was handling illegally .Whatever it was took a real chunk out of her leg very nasty smell when they take off the dressings .So you going to tell us what happened Dad ?asked Fred pulling his chair closer to the bed .Well you already know dont you ?said Mr Weasley with a significant smile at Harry .Its very simple Id had a very long day dozed off got sneaked up on and bitten .Is it in the Prophet you being attacked ?asked Fred indicating the newspaper Mr Weasley had cast aside .No of course not said Mr Weasley with a slightly bitter smile the Ministry wouldnt want everyone to know a dirty great serpent got Arthur !said Mrs Weasley warningly .got er me Mr Weasley said hastily though Harry was quite sure that was not what he had meant to say .So where were you when it happened Dad ?asked George .Thats my business said Mr Weasley though with a small smile .He snatched up the Daily Prophet shook it open again and said I was just reading about Willy Widdershinss arrest when you arrived .You know Willy turned out to be behind those regurgitating toilets last summer ?One of his jinxes backfired the toilet exploded and they found him lying unconscious in the wreckage covered from head to foot in When you say you were ‘on duty Fred interrupted in a low voice what were you doing ?You heard your father whispered Mrs Weasley we are not discussing this here !Go on about Willy Widdershins Arthur Well dont ask me how but he actually got off on the toilet charge said Mr Weasley grimly .I can only suppose gold changed hands You were guarding it werent you ?said George quietly .The weapon ?The thing YouKnow Whos after ?George be quiet !snapped Mrs Weasley .Anyway said Mr Weasley in a raised voice this time Willys been caught selling biting doorknobs to Muggles and I dont think hell be able to worm his way out of it because according to this article two Muggles have lost fingers and are now in St .Mungos for emergency bone regrowth and memory modification .Just think of it Muggles in St .Mungos !I wonder which ward theyre in ?And he looked eagerly around as though hoping to see a signpost .Didnt you say YouKnow Whos got a snake Harry ?asked Fred looking at his father for a reaction .A massive one ?You saw it the night he returned didnt you ?Thats enough said Mrs Weasley crossly .MadEye and Tonks are outside Arthur they want to come and see you .And you lot can wait outside she added to her children and Harry .You can come and say goodbye afterward .Go on .They trooped back into the corridor .MadEye and Tonks went in and closed the door of the ward behind them .Fred raised his eyebrows .Fine he said coolly rummaging in his pockets be like that .Dont tell us anything .Looking for these ?said George holding out what looked like a tangle of fleshcolored string .You read my mind said Fred grinning .Lets see if St .Mungos puts Imperturbable Charms on its ward doors shall we ?He and George disentangled the string and separated five Extendable Ears from each other .Fred and George handed them around .Harry hesitated to take one .Go on Harry take it !You saved Dads life if anyones got the right to eavesdrop on him its you .Grinning in spite of himself Harry took the end of the string and inserted it into his ear as the twins had done .Okay go !Fred whispered .The fleshcolored strings wriggled like long skinny worms then snaked under the door .For a few seconds Harry could hear nothing then he heard Tonks whispering as clearly as though she were standing right beside him . .they searched the whole area but they couldnt find the snake anywhere it just seems to have vanished after it attacked you Arthur .But You KnowWho cant have expected a snake to get in can he ?I reckon he sent it as a lookout growled Moody cause hes not had any luck so far has he ?No I reckon hes trying to get a clearer picture of what hes facing and if Arthur hadnt been there the beast wouldve had much more time to look around .So Potter says he saw it all happen ?Yes said Mrs Weasley .She sounded rather uneasy .You know Dumbledore seems almost to have been waiting for Harry to see something like this .Yeah well said Moody theres something funny about the Potter kid we all know that .Dumbledore seemed worried about Harry when I spoke to him this morning whispered Mrs Weasley .Course hes worried growled Moody .The boys seeing things from inside YouKnow Whos snake .Obviously Potter doesnt realize what that means but if You Know Whos possessing him Harry pulled the Extendable Ear out of his own his heart hammering very fast and heat rushing up his face .He looked around at the others .They were all staring at him the strings still trailing from their ears looking suddenly fearful .CHRISTMAS ON THE CLOSED WARD Was this why Dumbledore would no longer meet Harrys eyes ?Did he expect to see Voldemort staring out of them afraid perhaps that their vivid green might turn suddenly to scarlet with catlike slits for pupils ?Harry remembered how the snakelike face of Voldemort had once forced itself out of the back of Professor Quirrells head and he ran his hand over the back of his own wondering what it would feel like if Voldemort burst out of his skull .He felt dirty contaminated as though he were carrying some deadly germ unworthy to sit on the underground train back from the hospital with innocent clean people whose minds and bodies were free of the taint of Voldemort .He had not merely seen the snake he had been the snake he knew it now .And then a truly terrible thought occurred to him a memory bobbing to the surface of his mind one that made his insides writhe and squirm like serpents .Whats he after apart from followers ?Stuff he can only get by stealth .like a weapon .Something he didnt have last time .Im the weapon Harry thought and it was as though poison were pumping through his veins chilling him bringing him out in a sweat as he swayed with the train through the dark tunnel .Im the one Voldemorts trying to use thats why theyve got guards around me everywhere I go its not for my protection its for other peoples only its not working they cant have someone on me all the time at Hogwarts .I did attack Mr Weasley last night it was me Voldemort made me do it and he could be inside me listening to my thoughts right now .Are you all right Harry dear ?whispered Mrs Weasley leaning across Ginny to speak to him as the train rattled along through its dark tunnel .You dont look very well .Are you feeling sick ?They were all watching him .He shook his head violently and stared up at an advertisement for home insurance .Harry dear are you sure youre all right ?said Mrs Weasley in a worried voice as they walked around the unkempt patch of grass in the middle of Grimmauld Place .You look ever so pale .Are you sure you slept this morning ?You go upstairs to bed right now and you can have a couple of hours sleep before dinner all right ?He nodded here was a readymade excuse not to talk to any of the others which was precisely what he wanted so when she opened the front door he proceeded straight past the trolls leg umbrella stand and up the stairs and hurried into his and Rons bedroom .Here he began to pace up and down past the two beds and Phineas Nigelluss empty portrait his brain teeming and seething with questions and ever more dreadful ideas .How had he become a snake ?Perhaps he was an Animagus .No he couldnt be he would know .perhaps Voldemort was an Animagus .Yes thought Harry that would fit he would turn into a snake of course .and when hes possessing me then we both transform .That still doesnt explain how come I got to London and back to my bed in the space of about five minutes though .But then Voldemort s about the most powerful wizard in the world apart from Dumbledore its probably no problem at all to him to transport people like that .And then with a terrible stab of panic he thought but this is insane if Voldemorts possessing me Im giving him a clear view into the headquarters of the Order of the Phoenix right now !Hell know whos in the Order and where Sirius is .and Ive heard loads of stuff I shouldnt have everything Sirius told me the first night I was here .There was only one thing for it He would have to leave Grimmauld Place straightaway .He would spend Christmas at Hogwarts without the others which would keep them safe over the holidays at least .But no that wouldnt do there were still plenty of people at Hogwarts to maim and injure what if it was Seamus Dean or Neville next time ?He stopped his pacing and stood staring at Phineas Nigelluss empty frame .A leaden sensation was settling in the pit of his stomach .He had no alternative He was going to have to return to Privet Drive cut himself off from other wizards entirely .Well if he had to do it he thought there was no point hanging around .Trying with all his might not to think how the Dursleys were going to react when they found him on their doorstep six months earlier than they had expected he strode over to his trunk slammed the lid shut and locked it then glanced around automatically for Hedwig before remembering that she was still at Hogwarts well her cage would be one less thing to carry he seized one end of his trunk and had dragged it halfway toward the door when a sneaky voice said Running away are we ?He looked around .Phineas Nigellus had appeared upon the canvas of his portrait and was leaning against the frame watching Harry with an amused expression on his face .Not running away no said Harry shortly dragging his trunk a few more feet across the room .I thought said Phineas Nigellus stroking his pointed beard that to belong in Gryffindor House you were supposed to be brave ?It looks to me as though you would have been better off in my own house .We Slytherins are brave yes but not stupid .For instance given the choice we will always choose to save our own necks .Its not my own neck Im saving said Harry tersely tugging the trunk over a patch of particularly uneven motheaten carpet right in front of the door .Oh I see said Phineas Nigellus still stroking his beard .This is no cowardly flight you are being noble .Harry ignored him .His hand was on the doorknob when Phineas Nigellus said lazily I have a message for you from Albus Dumbledore .Harry spun around .What is it ?Stay where you are .I havent moved !said Harry his hand still upon the doorknob .So whats the message ?I have just given it to you dolt said Phineas Nigellus smoothly .Dumbledore says ‘Stay where you are .Why ?said Harry eagerly dropping the end of his trunk .Why does he want me to stay ?What else did he say ?Nothing whatsoever said Phineas Nigellus raising a thin black eyebrow as though he found Harry impertinent .Harrys temper rose to the surface like a snake rearing from long grass .He was exhausted he was confused beyond measure he had experienced terror relief and then terror again in the last twelve hours and still Dumbledore did not want to talk to him !So thats it is it ?he said loudly .Stay there ?Thats all anyone could tell me after I got attacked by those dementors too !Just stay put while the grownups sort it out Harry !We wont bother telling you anything though because your tiny little brain might not be able to cope with it !You know said Phineas Nigellus even more loudly than Harry this is precisely why I loathed being a teacher !Young people are so infernally convinced that they are absolutely right about everything .Has it not occurred to you my poor puffedup popinjay that there might be an excellent reason why the headmaster of Hogwarts is not confiding every tiny detail of his plans to you ?Have you never paused while feeling harddoneby to note that following Dumbledore s orders has never yet led you into harm ?No .No like all young people you are quite sure that you alone feel and think you alone recognize danger you alone are the only one clever enough to realize what the Dark Lord may be planning .He is planning something to do with me then ?said Harry swiftly .Did I say that ?said Phineas Nigellus idly examining his silk gloves .Now if you will excuse me I have better things to do than to listen to adolescent agonizing .Good day to you .And he strolled into his frame and out of sight .Fine go then !Harry bellowed at the empty frame .And tell Dumbledore thanks for nothing !The empty canvas remained silent .Fuming Harry dragged his trunk back to the foot of his bed then threw himself facedown upon the motheaten covers his eyes shut his body heavy and aching .He felt he had journeyed miles and miles .It seemed impossible that less than twentyfour hours ago Cho Chang had been approaching him under the mistletoe .He was so tired .He was scared to sleep .yet he did not know how long he could fight it .Dumbledore had told him to stay .That must mean he was allowed to sleep .But he was scared .What if it happened again . ?He was sinking into shadows .It was as though a film in his head had been waiting to start .He was walking down a deserted corridor toward a plain black door past rough stone walls torches and an open doorway onto a flight of stone steps leading downstairs on the left .He reached the black door but could not open it .He stood gazing at it desperate for entry .Something he wanted with all his heart lay beyond .A prize beyond his dreams .If only his scar would stop prickling .then he would be able to think more clearly .Harry said Rons voice from far far away Mum says dinners ready but shell save you something if you want to stay in bed .Harry opened his eyes but Ron had already left the room .He doesnt want to be on his own with me Harry thought .Not after what he heard Moody say .He supposed none of them would want him there anymore now that they knew what was inside him .He would not go down to dinner he would not inflict his company upon them .He turned over onto his other side and after a while dropped back off to sleep waking much later in the early hours of the morning with his insides aching with hunger and Ron snoring in the next bed .Squinting around the room he saw the dark outline of Phineas Nigellus standing again in his portrait and it occurred to Harry that Dumbledore had probably set Phineas Nigellus to watch over him in case he attacked somebody else .The feeling of being unclean intensified .He half wished he had not obeyed Dumbledore and stayed .If this was how life was going to be in Grimmauld Place from now on maybe he would be better off in Privet Drive after all .Everybody else spent the following morning putting up Christmas decorations .Harry could not remember Sirius ever being in such a good mood he was actually singing carols apparently delighted that he was to have company over Christmas .Harry could hear his voice echoing up through the floor in the cold and empty drawing room where he was sitting alone watching the sky outside the windows growing whiter threatening snow all the time feeling a savage pleasure that he was giving the others the opportunity to keep talking about him as they were bound to be doing .When he heard Mrs Weasley calling his name softly up the stairs around lunchtime he retreated farther upstairs and ignored her .It was around six oclock in the evening that the doorbell rang and Mrs Black started screaming again .Assuming that Mundungus or some other Order member had come to call Harry merely settled himself more comfortably against the wall of Buckbeak the hippogriffs room where he was hiding trying to ignore how hungry he felt as he fed Buckbeak dead rats .It came as a slight shock when somebody hammered hard on the door a few minutes later .I know youre in there said Hermiones voice .Will you please come out ?I want to talk to you .What are you doing here ?Harry asked her pulling open the door as Buckbeak resumed his scratching at the strawstrewn floor for any fragments of rat he might have dropped .I thought you were skiing with your mum and dad .Well to tell the truth skiings not really my thing said Hermione .So Ive come for Christmas .There was snow in her hair and her face was pink with cold .But dont tell Ron that I told him its really good because he kept laughing so much .Anyway Mum and Dad are a bit disappointed but Ive told them that everyone whos serious about the exams is staying at Hogwarts to study .They want me to do well theyll understand .Anyway she said briskly lets go to your bedroom Rons mums lit a fire in there and shes sent up sandwiches .Harry followed her back to the second floor .When he entered the bedroom he was rather surprised to see both Ron and Ginny waiting for them sitting on Rons bed .I came on the Knight Bus said Hermione airily pulling off her jacket before Harry had time to speak .Dumbledore told me what had happened first thing this morning but I had to wait for term to end officially before setting off .Umbridge is already livid that you lot disappeared right under her nose even though Dumbledore told her Mr Weasley was in St .Mungos and hed given you all permission to visit .So She sat down next to Ginny and the two girls and Ron looked up at Harry .Howre you feeling ?asked Hermione .Fine said Harry stiffly .Oh dont lie Harry she said impatiently .Ron and Ginny say youve been hiding from everyone since you got back from St .Mungos .They do do they ?said Harry glaring at Ron and Ginny .Ron looked down at his feet but Ginny seemed quite unabashed .Well you have !she said .And you wont look at any of us !Its you lot who wont look at me !said Harry angrily .Maybe youre taking it in turns to look and keep missing each other suggested Hermione the corners of her mouth twitching .Very funny snapped Harry turning away .Oh stop feeling all misunderstood said Hermione sharply .Look the others have told me what you overheard last night on the Extendable Ears Yeah ?growled Harry his hands deep in his pockets as he watched the snow now falling thickly outside .All been talking about me have you ?Well Im getting used to it .We wanted to talk to you Harry said Ginny but as youve been hiding ever since we got back I didnt want anyone to talk to me said Harry who was feeling more and more nettled .Well that was a bit stupid of you said Ginny angrily seeing as you dont know anyone but me whos been possessed by YouKnowWho and I can tell you how it feels .Harry remained quite still as the impact of these words hit him .Then he turned on the spot to face her .I forgot he said .Lucky you said Ginny coolly .Im sorry Harry said and he meant it .So .so do you think Im being possessed then ?Well can you remember everything youve been doing ?Ginny asked .Are there big blank periods where you dont know what youve been up to ?Harry racked his brains .No he said .Then YouKnowWho hasnt ever possessed you said Ginny simply .When he did it to me I couldnt remember what Id been doing for hours at a time .Id find myself somewhere and not know how I got there .Harry hardly dared believe her yet his heart was lightening almost in spite of himself .That dream I had about your dad and the snake though Harry youve had these dreams before Hermione said .You had flashes of what Voldemort was up to last year .This was different said Harry shaking his head .I was inside that snake .It was like I was the snake .What if Voldemort somehow transported me to London ?One day said Hermione sounding thoroughly exasperated youll read Hogwarts A History and perhaps that will remind you that you cant Apparate or Disapparate inside Hogwarts .Even Voldemort couldnt just make you fly out of your dormitory Harry .You didnt leave your bed mate said Ron .I saw you thrashing around in your sleep about a minute before we could wake you up .Harry started pacing up and down the room again thinking .What they were all saying was not only comforting it made sense .Without really thinking he took a sandwich from the plate on the bed and crammed it hungrily into his mouth .Im not the weapon after all thought Harry .His heart swelled with happiness and relief and he felt like joining in as they heard Sirius tramping past their door toward Buckbeaks room singing God Rest Ye Merry Hippogriffs at the top of his voice .How could he have dreamed of returning to Privet Drive for Christmas ?Siriuss delight at having the house full again and especially at having Harry back was infectious .He was no longer their sullen host of the summer now he seemed determined that everyone should enjoy themselves as much if not more than they would have done at Hogwarts and he worked tirelessly in the runup to Christmas Day cleaning and decorating with their help so that by the time they all went to bed on Christmas Eve the house was barely recognizable .The tarnished chandeliers were no longer hung with cobwebs but with garlands of holly and gold and silver streamers magical snow glittered in heaps over the threadbare carpets a great Christmas tree obtained by Mundungus and decorated with live fairies blocked Siriuss family tree from view and even the stuffed elf heads on the hall wall wore Father Christmas hats and beards .Harry awoke on Christmas morning to find a stack of presents at the foot of his bed and Ron already halfway through opening his own rather larger pile .Good haul this year he informed Harry through a cloud of paper .Thanks for the Broom Compass its excellent beats Hermiones shes got me a homework planner Harry sorted through his presents and found one with Hermiones handwriting on it .She had given him too a book that resembled a diary except that it said things like Do it today or later youll pay every time he opened a page .Sirius and Lupin had given Harry a set of excellent books entitled Practical Defensive Magic and Its Use Against the Dark Arts which had superb moving color illustrations of all the counterjinxes and hexes it described .Harry flicked through the first volume eagerly he could see it was going to be highly useful in his plans for the D .A .Hagrid had sent a furry brown wallet that had fangs which were presumably supposed to be an antitheft device but unfortunately prevented Harry putting any money in without getting his fingers ripped off .Tonkss present was a small working model of a Firebolt which Harry watched fly around the room wishing he still had his fullsize version Ron had given him an enormous box of EveryFlavor Beans Mr and Mrs Weasley the usual handknitted jumper and some mince pies and Dobby a truly dreadful painting that Harry suspected had been done by the elf himself .He had just turned it upside down to see whether it looked better that way when with a loud crack Fred and George Apparated at the foot of his bed .Merry Christmas said George .Dont go downstairs for a bit .Why not ?said Ron .Mums crying again said Fred heavily .Percy sent back his Christmas jumper .Without a note added George .Hasnt asked how Dad is or visited him or anything .We tried to comfort her said Fred moving around the bed to look at Harrys portrait .Told her Percys nothing more than a humongous pile of rat droppings didnt work said George helping himself to a Chocolate Frog .So Lupin took over .Best let him cheer her up before we go down for breakfast I reckon .Whats that supposed to be anyway ?asked Fred squinting at Dobbys painting .Looks like a gibbon with two black eyes .Its Harry !said George pointing at the back of the picture .Says so on the back !Good likeness said Fred grinning .Harry threw his new homework diary at him it hit the wall opposite and fell to the floor where it said happily If youve dotted the is and crossed the ts then you may do whatever you pleasel They got up and dressed they could hear various inhabitants of the house calling Merry Christmas to each other .On their way downstairs they met Hermione .Thanks for the book Harry !she said happily .Ive been wanting that New Theory of Numerology for ages !And that perfume is really unusual Ron .No problem said Ron .Whos that for anyway ?he added nodding at the neatly wrapped present she was carrying .Kreacher said Hermione brightly .It had better not be clothes !said Ron warningly .You know what Sirius said Kreacher knows too much we cant set him free !It isnt clothes said Hermione although if I had my way Id certainly give him something to wear other than that filthy old rag .No its a patchwork quilt I thought it would brighten up his bedroom .What bedroom ?said Harry dropping his voice to a whisper as they were passing the portrait of Siriuss mother .Well Sirius says its not so much a bedroom more a kind of den said Hermione .Apparently he sleeps under the boiler in that cupboard off the kitchen .Mrs Weasley was the only person in the basement when they arrived there .She was standing at the stove and sounded as though she had a bad head cold when she wished them Merry Christmas and they all averted their eyes .So this is Kreachers bedroom ?said Ron strolling over to a dingy door in the corner opposite the pantry which Harry had never seen open .Yes said Hermione now sounding a little nervous .Er .I think wed better knock .Ron rapped the door with his knuckles but there was no reply .He must be sneaking around upstairs he said and without further ado pulled open the door .Urgh .Harry peered inside .Most of the cupboard was taken up with a very large and oldfashioned boiler but in the foots space underneath the pipes Kreacher had made himself something that looked like a nest .A jumble of assorted rags and smelly old blankets were piled on the floor and the small dent in the middle of it showed where Kreacher curled up to sleep every night .Here and there among the material were stale bread crusts and moldy old bits of cheese .In a far corner glinted small objects and coins that Harry guessed Kreacher had saved magpielike from Siriuss purge of the house and he had also managed to retrieve the silverframed family photographs that Sirius had thrown away over the summer .Their glass might be shattered but still the little blackandwhite people inside them peered haughtily up at him including he felt a little jolt in his stomach the dark heavylidded woman whose trial he had witnessed in Dumbledores Pensieve Bellatrix Lestrange .By the looks of it hers was Kreacher s favorite photograph he had placed it to the fore of all the others and had mended the glass clumsily with Spellotape .I think Ill just leave his present here said Hermione laying the package neatly in the middle of the depression in the rags and blankets and closing the door quietly .Hell find it later thatll be fine .Come to think of it said Sirius emerging from the pantry carrying a large turkey as they closed the cupboard door has anyone actually seen Kreacher lately ?I havent seen him since the night we came back here said Harry .You were ordering him out of the kitchen .Yeah .said Sirius frowning .You know I think thats the last time I saw him too .He must be hiding upstairs somewhere .He couldnt have left could he ?said Harry .I mean when you said ‘out maybe he thought you meant get out of the house ?No no houseelves cant leave unless theyre given clothes theyre tied to their familys house said Sirius .They can leave the house if they really want to Harry contradicted him .Dobby did he left the Malfoys to give me warnings two years ago .He had to punish himself afterward but he still managed it .Sirius looked slightly disconcerted for a moment then said Ill look for him later I expect Ill find him upstairs crying his eyes out over my mothers old bloomers or something .Of course he might have crawled into the airing cupboard and died .But I mustnt get my hopes up .Fred George and Ron laughed Hermione however looked reproachful .Once they had had their Christmas lunch the Weasleys and Harry and Hermione were planning to pay Mr Weasley another visit escorted by MadEye and Lupin .Mundungus turned up in time for Christmas pudding and trifle having managed to borrow a car for the occasion as the Underground did not run on Christmas Day .The car which Harry doubted very much had been taken with the knowledge or consent of its owner had had a similar Enlarging Spell put upon it as the Weasleys old Ford Anglia although normally proportioned outside ten people with Mundungus driving were able to fit into it quite comfortably .Mrs Weasley hesitated at the point of getting inside Harry knew that her disapproval of Mundungus was battling with her dislike of traveling without magic finally the cold outside and her childrens pleading triumphed and she settled herself into the backseat between Fred and Bill with good grace .The journey to St .Mungos was quite quick as there was very little traffic on the roads .A small trickle of witches and wizards were creeping furtively up the otherwise deserted street to visit the hospital .Harry and the others got out of the car and Mundungus drove off around the corner to wait for them they strolled casually toward the window where the dummy in green nylon stood then one by one stepped through the glass .The reception area looked pleasantly festive The crystal orbs that illuminated St .Mungos had been turned to red and gold so that they became gigantic glowing Christmas baubles holly hung around every doorway and shining white Christmas trees covered in magical snow and icicles glittered in every corner each topped with a gleaming gold star .It was less crowded than the last time they had been there although halfway across the room Harry found himself shunted aside by a witch with a walnut jammed up her left nostril .Family argument eh ?smirked the blonde witch behind the desk .Youre the third Ive seen today .Spell Damage fourth floor .They found Mr Weasley propped up in bed with the remains of his turkey dinner on a tray in his lap and a rather sheepish expression on his face .Everything all right Arthur ?asked Mrs Weasley after they had all greeted Mr Weasley and handed over their presents .Fine fine said Mr Weasley a little too heartily .You er havent seen Healer Smethwyck have you ?No said Mrs Weasley suspiciously why ?Nothing nothing said Mr Weasley airily starting to unwrap his pile of gifts .Well everyone had a good day ?What did you all get for Christmas ?Oh Harry this is absolutely wonderful For he had just opened Harrys gift of fusewire and screwdrivers .Mrs Weasley did not seem entirely satisfied with Mr Weasleys answer .As her husband leaned over to shake Harrys hand she peered at the bandaging under his nightshirt .Arthur she said with a snap in her voice like a mousetrap youve had your bandages changed .Why have you had your bandages changed a day early Arthur ?They told me they wouldnt need doing until tomorrow .What ?said Mr Weasley looking rather frightened and pulling the bed covers higher up his chest .No no its nothing its I He seemed to deflate under Mrs Weasleys piercing gaze .Well now dont get upset Molly but Augustus Pye had an idea .Hes the Trainee Healer you know lovely young chap and very interested in .um .complementary medicine .I mean some of these old Muggle remedies .well theyre called stitches Molly and they work very well on on Muggle wounds Mrs Weasley let out an ominous noise somewhere between a shriek and a snarl .Lupin strolled away from the bed and over to the werewolf who had no visitors and was looking rather wistfully at the crowd around Mr Weasley Bill muttered something about getting himself a cup of tea and Fred and George leapt up to accompany him grinning .Do you mean to tell me said Mrs Weasley her voice growing louder with every word and apparently unaware that her fellow visitors were scurrying for cover that you have been messing about with Muggle remedies ?Not messing about Molly dear said Mr Weasley imploringly .It was just just something Pye and I thought wed try only most unfortunately well with these particular kinds of wounds it doesnt seem to work as well as wed hoped Meaning ?Well .well I dont know whether you know what what stitches are ?It sounds as though youve been trying to sew your skin back together said Mrs Weasley with a snort of mirthless laughter but even you Arthur wouldnt be that stupid I fancy a cup of tea too said Harry jumping to his feet .Hermione Ron and Ginny almost sprinted to the door with him .As it swung closed behind them they heard Mrs Weasley shriek WHAT DO YOU MEAN THATS THE GENERAL IDEA ?Typical Dad said Ginny shaking her head as they set off up the corridor .Stitches .I ask you .Well you know they do work well on nonmagical wounds said Hermione fairly .I suppose something in that snakes venom dissolves them or something .I wonder where the tearoom is ?Fifth floor said Harry remembering the sign over the Welcome Witchs desk .They walked along the corridor through a set of double doors and found a rickety staircase lined with more portraits of brutallooking Healers .As they climbed it the various Healers called out to them diagnosing odd complaints and suggesting horrible remedies .Ron was seriously affronted when a medieval wizard called out that he clearly had a bad case of spattergroit .And whats that supposed to be ?he asked angrily as the Healer pursued him through six more portraits shoving the occupants out of the way .Tis a most grievous affliction of the skin young master that will leave you pockmarked and more gruesome even than you are now Watch who youre calling gruesome !said Ron his ears turning red .The only remedy is to take the liver of a toad bind it tight about your throat stand naked by the full moon in a barrel of eels eyes I have not got spattergroit !But the unsightly blemishes upon your visage young master Theyre freckles !said Ron furiously .Now get back in your own picture and leave me alone !He rounded on the others who were all keeping determinedly straight faces .What floors this ?I think its the fifth said Hermione .Nah its the fourth said Harry one more But as he stepped onto the landing he came to an abrupt halt staring at the small window set into the double doors that marked the start of a corridor signposted SPELL DAMAGE .A man was peering out at them all with his nose pressed against the glass .He had wavy blond hair bright blue eyes and a broad vacant smile that revealed dazzlingly white teeth .Blimey !said Ron also staring at the man .Oh my goodness said Hermione suddenly sounding breathless .Professor Lockhart !Their exDefense Against the Dark Arts teacher pushed open the doors and moved toward them wearing a long lilac dressing gown .Well hello there !he said .I expect youd like my autograph would you ?Hasnt changed much has he ?Harry muttered to Ginny who grinned .Er how are you Professor ?said Ron sounding slightly guilty .It had been Rons malfunctioning wand that had damaged Professor Lockharts memory so badly that he had landed here in the first place though as Lockhart had been attempting to permanently wipe Harry and Rons memories at the time Harrys sympathy was limited .Im very well indeed thank you !said Lockhart exuberantly pulling a rather battered peacockfeather quill from his pocket .Now how many autographs would you like ?I can do joinedup writing now you know !Er we dont want any at the moment thanks said Ron raising his eyebrows at Harry who asked Professor should you be wandering around the corridors ?Shouldnt you be in a ward ?The smile faded slowly from Lockharts face .For a few moments he gazed intently at Harry then he said Havent we met ?Er .yeah we have said Harry .You used to teach us at Hogwarts remember ?Teach ?repeated Lockhart looking faintly unsettled .Me ?Did I ?And then the smile reappeared upon his face so suddenly it was rather alarming .Taught you everything you know I expect did I ?Well how about those autographs then ?Shall we say a round dozen you can give them to all your little friends then and nobody will be left out !But just then a head poked out of a door at the far end of the corridor and a voice said Gilderoy you naughty boy where have you wandered off to ?A motherly looking Healer wearing a tinsel wreath in her hair came bustling up the corridor smiling warmly at Harry and the others .Oh Gilderoy youve got visitors !How lovely and on Christmas Day too !Do you know he never gets visitors poor lamb and I cant think why hes such a sweetie arent you ?Were doing autographs !Gilderoy told the Healer with another glittering smile .They want loads of them wont take no for an answer !I just hope weve got enough photographs !Listen to him said the Healer taking Lockharts arm and beaming fondly at him as though he were a precocious twoyearold .He was rather well known a few years ago we very much hope that this liking for giving autographs is a sign that his memory might be coming back a little bit .Will you step this way ?Hes in a closed ward you know he must have slipped out while I was bringing in the Christmas presents the doors usually kept locked .not that hes dangerous !But she lowered her voice to a whisper bit of a danger to himself bless him .Doesnt know who he is you see wanders off and cant remember how to get back .It is nice of you to have come to see him Er said Ron gesturing uselessly at the floor above actually we were just er But the Healer was smiling expectantly at them and Rons feeble mutter of going to have a cup of tea trailed away into nothingness .They looked at one another rather hopelessly and then followed Lockhart and his Healer along the corridor .Lets not stay long Ron said quietly .The Healer pointed her wand at the door of the Janus Thickey ward and muttered Alohomora .The door swung open and she led the way inside keeping a firm grasp on Gilderoys arm until she had settled him into an armchair beside his bed .This is our longterm resident ward she informed Harry Ron Hermione and Ginny in a low voice .For permanent spell damage you know .Of course with intensive remedial potions and charms and a bit of luck we can produce some improvement .Gilderoy does seem to be getting back some sense of himself and weve seen a real improvement in Mr Bode he seems to be regaining the power of speech very well though he isnt speaking any language we recognize yet .Well I must finish giving out the Christmas presents Ill leave you all to chat .Harry looked around this ward bore unmistakable signs of being a permanent home to its residents .They had many more personal effects around their beds than in Mr Weasleys ward the wall around Gilderoys headboard for instance was papered with pictures of himself all beaming toothily and waving at the new arrivals .He had autographed many of them to himself in disjointed childish writing .The moment he had been deposited in his chair by the Healer Gilderoy pulled a fresh stack of photographs toward him seized a quill and started signing them all feverishly .You can put them in envelopes he said to Ginny throwing the signed pictures into her lap one by one as he finished them .I am not forgotten you know no I still receive a very great deal of fan mail .Gladys Gudgeon writes weekly .I just wish I knew why .He paused looking faintly puzzled then beamed again and returned to his signing with renewed vigor .I suspect it is simply my good looks .A sallowskinned mournfullooking wizard lay in the bed opposite staring at the ceiling he was mumbling to himself and seemed quite unaware of anything around him .Two beds along was a woman whose entire head was covered in fur Harry remembered something similar happening to Hermione during their second year although fortunately the damage in her case had not been permanent .At the far end of the ward flowery curtains had been drawn around two beds to give the occupants and their visitors some privacy .Here you are Agnes said the Healer brightly to the furryfaced woman handing her a small pile of Christmas presents .See not forgotten are you ?And your sons sent an owl to say hes visiting tonight so thats nice isnt it ?Agnes gave several loud barks .And look Broderick youve been sent a potted plant and a lovely calendar with a different fancy hippogriff for each month theyll brighten things up wont they ?said the Healer bustling along to the mumbling man setting a rather ugly plant with long swaying tentacles on the bedside cabinet and fixing the calendar to the wall with her wand .And oh Mrs Longbottom are you leaving already ?Harrys head spun round .The curtains had been drawn back from the two beds at the end of the ward and two visitors were walking back down the aisle between the beds a formidablelooking old witch wearing a long green dress a motheaten fox fur and a pointed hat decorated with what was unmistakably a stuffed vulture and trailing behind her looking thoroughly depressed Neville .With a sudden rush of understanding Harry realized who the people in the end beds must be .He cast around wildly for some means of distracting the others so that Neville could leave the ward unnoticed and unquestioned but Ron had looked up at the sound of the name Longbottom too and before Harry could stop him had called Neville Neville jumped and cowered as though a bullet had narrowly missed him .Its us Neville !said Ron brightly getting to his feet .Have you seen ?Lockharts here !Whove you been visiting ?Friends of yours Neville dear ?said Nevilles grandmother graciously bearing down upon them all .Neville looked as though he would rather be anywhere in the world but here .A dull purple flush was creeping up his plump face and he was not making eye contact with any of them .Ah yes said his grandmother looking closely at Harry and sticking out a shriveled clawlike hand for him to shake .Yes yes I know who you are of course .Neville speaks most highly of you .Er thanks said Harry shaking hands .Neville did not look at him but stared at his own feet the color deepening in his face all the while .And you two are clearly Weasleys Mrs Longbottom continued proffering her hand regally to Ron and Ginny in turn .Yes I know your parents not well of course but fine people fine people .and you must be Hermione Granger ?Hermione looked rather startled that Mrs Longbottom knew her name but shook hands all the same .Yes Nevilles told me all about you .Helped him out of a few sticky spots havent you ?Hes a good boy she said casting a sternly appraising look down her rather bony nose at Neville but he hasnt got his fathers talent Im afraid to say .And she jerked her head in the direction of the two beds at the end of the ward so that the stuffed vulture on her hat trembled alarmingly .What ?said Ron looking amazed Harry wanted to stamp on Rons foot but that sort of thing was much harder to bring off unnoticed when you were wearing jeans rather than robes .Is that your dad down the end Neville ?Whats this ?said Mrs Longbottom sharply .Havent you told your friends about your parents Neville ?Neville took a deep breath looked up at the ceiling and shook his head .Harry could not remember ever feeling sorrier for anyone but he could not think of any way of helping Neville out of the situation .Well its nothing to be ashamed of !said Mrs Longbottom angrily .You should be proud Neville proud .They didnt give their health and their sanity so their only son would be ashamed of them you know !Im not ashamed said Neville very faintly still looking anywhere but at Harry and the others .Ron was now standing on tiptoe to look over at the inhabitants of the two beds .Well youve got a funny way of showing it !said Mrs Longbottom .My son and his wife she said turning haughtily to Harry Ron Hermione and Ginny were tortured into insanity by YouKnow Whos followers .Hermione and Ginny both clapped their hands over their mouths .Ron stopped craning his neck to catch a glimpse of Nevilles parents and looked mortified .They were Aurors you know and very well respected within the Wizarding community Mrs Longbottom went on .Highly gifted the pair of them .I yes Alice dear what is it ?Nevilles mother had come edging down the ward in her nightdress .She no longer had the plump happy looking face Harry had seen in Moodys old photograph of the original Order of the Phoenix .Her face was thin and worn now her eyes seemed overlarge and her hair which had turned white was wispy and deadlooking .She did not seem to want to speak or perhaps she was not able to but she made timid motions toward Neville holding something in her outstretched hand .Again ?said Mrs Longbottom sounding slightly weary .Very well Alice dear very well Neville take it whatever it is .But Neville had already stretched out his hand into which his mother dropped an empty Droobles Blowing Gum wrapper .Very nice dear said Nevilles grandmother in a falsely cheery voice patting his mother on the shoulder .But Neville said quietly Thanks Mum .His mother tottered away back up the ward humming to herself .Neville looked around at the others his expression defiant as though daring them to laugh but Harry did not think hed ever found anything less funny in his life .Well wed better get back sighed Mrs Longbottom drawing on long green gloves .Very nice to have met you all .Neville put that wrapper in the bin she must have given you enough of them to paper your bedroom by now .But as they left Harry was sure he saw Neville slip the wrapper into his pocket .The door closed behind them .I never knew said Hermione who looked tearful .Nor did I said Ron rather hoarsely .Nor me whispered Ginny .They all looked at Harry .I did he said glumly .Dumbledore told me but I promised I wouldnt mention it .thats what Bellatrix Lestrange got sent to Azkaban for using the Cruciatus Curse on Nevilles parents until they lost their minds .Bellatrix Lestrange did that ?whispered Hermione horrified .That woman Kreachers got a photo of in his den ?There was a long silence broken by Lockharts angry voice .Look I didnt learn joinedup writing for nothing you know !OCCLUMENCY Kreacher it transpired had been lurking in the attic .Sirius said he had found him up there covered in dust no doubt looking for more relics of the Black family to hide in his cupboard .Though Sirius seemed satisfied with this story it made Harry uneasy .Kreacher seemed to be in a better mood on his reappearance his bitter muttering had subsided somewhat and he submitted to orders more docilely than usual though once or twice Harry caught the houseelf staring avidly at him always looking quickly away when he saw that Harry had noticed .Harry did not mention his vague suspicions to Sirius whose cheerfulness was evaporating fast now that Christmas was over .As the date of their departure back to Hogwarts drew nearer he became more and more prone to what Mrs Weasley called fits of the sullens in which he would become taciturn and grumpy often withdrawing to Buckbeaks room for hours at a time .His gloom seeped through the house oozing under doorways like some noxious gas so that all of them became infected by it .Harry did not want to leave Sirius all alone again with only Kreacher for company .In fact for the first time in his life he was not looking forward to returning to Hogwarts .Going back to school would mean placing himself once again under the tyranny of Dolores Umbridge who had no doubt managed to force through another dozen decrees in their absence .Then there was no Quidditch to look forward to now that he had been banned there was every likelihood that their burden of homework would increase as the exams drew even nearer Dumbledore remained as remote as ever in fact if it had not been for the D .A .Harry felt he might have gone to Sirius and begged him to let him leave Hogwarts and remain in Grimmauld Place .Then on the very last day of the holidays something happened that made Harry positively dread his return to school .Harry dear said Mrs Weasley poking her head into his and Rons bedroom where the pair of them were playing wizard chess watched by Hermione Ginny and Crookshanks could you come down to the kitchen ?Professor Snape would like a word with you .Harry did not immediately register what she had said one of his castles was engaged in a violent tussle with a pawn of Rons and he was egging it on enthusiastically .Squash him squash him hes only a pawn you idiot sorry Mrs Weasley what did you say ?Professor Snape dear .In the kitchen .Hed like a word .Harrys mouth fell open in horror .He looked around at Ron Hermione and Ginny all of whom were gaping back at him .Crookshanks whom Hermione had been restraining with difficulty for the past quarter of an hour leapt gleefully upon the board and set the pieces running for cover squealing at the top of their voices .Snape ?said Harry blankly .Professor Snape dear said Mrs Weasley reprovingly .Now come on quickly he says he cant stay long .Whats he want with you ?said Ron looking unnerved as Mrs Weasley withdrew from the room .You havent done anything have you ?No !said Harry indignantly racking his brains to think what he could have done that would make Snape pursue him to Grimmauld Place .Had his last piece of homework perhaps earned a T ?He pushed open the kitchen door a minute or two later to find Sirius and Snape both seated at the long kitchen table glaring in opposite directions .The silence between them was heavy with mutual dislike .A letter lay open on the table in front of Sirius .Er said Harry to announce his presence .Snape looked around at him his face framed between curtains of greasy black hair .Sit down Potter .You know said Sirius loudly leaning back on his rear chair legs and speaking to the ceiling I think Id prefer it if you didnt give orders here Snape .Its my house you see .An ugly flush suffused Snape s pallid face .Harry sat down in a chair beside Sirius facing Snape across the table .I was supposed to see you alone Potter said Snape the familiar sneer curling his mouth but Black Im his godfather said Sirius louder than ever .I am here on Dumbledores orders said Snape whose voice by contrast was becoming more and more quietly waspish but by all means stay Black I know you like to feel .involved .Whats that supposed to mean ?said Sirius letting his chair fall back onto all four legs with a loud bang .Merely that I am sure you must feel ah frustrated by the fact that you can do nothing useful Snape laid a delicate stress on the word for the Order .It was Siriuss turn to flush .Snape s lip curled in triumph as he turned to Harry .The headmaster has sent me to tell you Potter that it is his wish for you to study Occlumency this term .Study what ?said Harry blankly .Snapes sneer became more pronounced .Occlumency Potter .The magical defense of the mind against external penetration .An obscure branch of magic but a highly useful one .Harrys heart began to pump very fast indeed .Defense against external penetration ?But he was not being possessed they had all agreed on that .Why do I have to study Occlu thing ?he blurted out .Because the headmaster thinks it a good idea said Snape smoothly .You will receive private lessons once a week but you will not tell anybody what you are doing least of all Dolores Umbridge .You understand ?Yes said Harry .Whos going to be teaching me ?Snape raised an eyebrow .I am he said .Harry had the horrible sensation that his insides were melting .Extra lessons with Snape what on earth had he done to deserve this ?He looked quickly around at Sirius for support .Why cant Dumbledore teach Harry ?asked Sirius aggressively .Why you ?I suppose because it is a headmasters privilege to delegate less enjoyable tasks said Snape silkily .I assure you I did not beg for the job .He got to his feet .I will expect you at six oclock on Monday evening Potter .My office .If anybody asks you are taking Remedial Potions .Nobody who has seen you in my classes could deny you need them .He turned to leave his black traveling cloak billowing behind him .Wait a moment said Sirius sitting up straighter in his chair .Snape turned back to face them sneering .I am in rather a hurry Black .unlike you I do not have unlimited leisure time .Ill get to the point then said Sirius standing up .He was rather taller than Snape who Harry noticed had balled his fist in the pocket of his cloak over what Harry was sure was the handle of his wand .If I hear youre using these Occlumency lessons to give Harry a hard time youll have me to answer to .How touching Snape sneered .But surely you have noticed that Potter is very like his father ?Yes I have said Sirius proudly .Well then youll know hes so arrogant that criticism simply bounces off him Snape said sleekly .Sirius pushed his chair roughly aside and strode around the table toward Snape pulling out his wand as he went Snape whipped out his own .They were squaring up to each other Sirius looking livid Snape calculating his eyes darting from Siriuss wand tip to his face .Sirius !said Harry loudly but Sirius appeared not to hear him .Ive warned you Snivellus said Sirius his face barely a foot from Snape s I dont care if Dumbledore thinks youve reformed I know better Oh but why dont you tell him so ?whispered Snape .Or are you afraid he might not take the advice of a man who has been hiding inside his mothers house for six months very seriously ?Tell me how is Lucius Malfoy these days ?I expect hes delighted his lapdogs working at Hogwarts isnt he ?Speaking of dogs said Snape softly did you know that Lucius Malfoy recognized you last time you risked a little jaunt outside ?Clever idea Black getting yourself seen on a safe station platform .gave you a castiron excuse not to leave your hidey hole in future didnt it ?Sirius raised his wand .NO !Harry yelled vaulting over the table and trying to get in between them Sirius dont Are you calling me a coward ?roared Sirius trying to push Harry out of the way but Harry would not budge .Why yes I suppose I am said Snape .Harry get out of it !snarled Sirius pushing him out of the way with his free hand .The kitchen door opened and the entire Weasley family plus Hermione came inside all looking very happy with Mr Weasley walking proudly in their midst dressed in a pair of striped pajamas covered by a mackintosh .Cured !he announced brightly to the kitchen at large .Completely cured !He and all the other Weasleys froze on the threshold gazing at the scene in front of them which was also suspended in midaction both Sirius and Snape looking toward the door with their wands pointing into each others faces and Harry immobile between them a hand stretched out to each of them trying to force them apart .Merlins beard said Mr Weasley the smile sliding off his face whats going on here ?Both Sirius and Snape lowered their wands .Harry looked from one to the other .Each wore an expression of utmost contempt yet the unexpected entrance of so many witnesses seemed to have brought them to their senses .Snape pocketed his wand and swept back across the kitchen passing the Weasleys without comment .At the door he looked back .Six oclock Monday evening Potter .He was gone .Sirius glared after him his wand at his side .But whats been going on ?asked Mr Weasley again .Nothing Arthur said Sirius who was breathing heavily as though he had just run a long distance .Just a friendly little chat between two old school friends .With what looked like an enormous effort he smiled .So .youre cured ?Thats great news really great .Yes isnt it ?said Mrs Weasley leading her husband forward into a chair .Healer Smethwyck worked his magic in the end found an antidote to whatever that snakes got in its fangs and Arthurs learned his lesson about dabbling in Muggle medicine havent you dear ?she added rather menacingly .Yes Molly dear said Mr Weasley meekly .That nights meal should have been a cheerful one with Mr Weasley back amongst them Harry could tell Sirius was trying to make it so yet when his godfather was not forcing himself to laugh loudly at Fred and Georges jokes or offering everyone more food his face fell back into a moody brooding expression .Harry was separated from him by Mundungus and MadEye who had dropped in to offer Mr Weasley their congratulations he wanted to talk to Sirius to tell him that he should not listen to a word Snape said that Snape was goading him deliberately and that the rest of them did not think Sirius was a coward for doing as Dumbledore told him and remaining in Grimmauld Place but he had no opportunity to do so and wondered occasionally eyeing the ugly look on Siriuss face whether he would have dared to even if he had the chance .Instead he told Ron and Hermione under his voice about having to take Occlumency lessons with Snape .Dumbledore wants to stop you having those dreams about Voldemort said Hermione at once .Well you wont be sorry not to have them anymore will you ?Extra lessons with Snape ?said Ron sounding aghast .Id rather have the nightmares !They were to return to Hogwarts on the Knight Bus the following day escorted once again by Tonks and Lupin both of whom were eating breakfast in the kitchen when Harry Ron and Hermione arrived there next morning .The adults seemed to have been midway through a whispered conversation when the door opened all of them looked around hastily and fell silent .After a hurried breakfast they pulled on jackets and scarves against the chilly gray January morning .Harry had an unpleasant constricted sensation in his chest he did not want to say goodbye to Sirius .He had a bad feeling about this parting he did not know when they would next see each other and felt that it was incumbent upon him to say something to Sirius to stop him doing anything stupid Harry was worried that Snapes accusation of cowardice had stung Sirius so badly he might even now be planning some foolhardy trip beyond Grimmauld Place .Before he could think of what to say however Sirius had beckoned him to his side .I want you to take this he said quietly thrusting a badly wrapped package roughly the size of a paperback book into Harrys hands .What is it ?Harry asked .A way of letting me know if Snapes giving you a hard time .No dont open it in here !said Sirius with a wary look at Mrs Weasley who was trying to persuade the twins to wear handknitted mittens .I doubt Molly would approve but I want you to use it if you need me all right ?Okay said Harry stowing the package away in the inside pocket of his jacket but he knew he would never use whatever it was .It would not be he Harry who lured Sirius from his place of safety no matter how foully Snape treated him in their forthcoming Occlumency classes .Lets go then said Sirius clapping Harry on the shoulder and smiling grimly and before Harry could say anything else they were heading upstairs stopping before the heavily chained and bolted front door surrounded by Weasleys .Goodbye Harry take care said Mrs Weasley hugging him .See you Harry and keep an eye out for snakes for me !said Mr Weasley genially shaking his hand .Right yeah said Harry distractedly .It was his last chance to tell Sirius to be careful he turned looked into his godfathers face and opened his mouth to speak but before he could do so Sirius was giving him a brief onearmed hug .He said gruffly Look after yourself Harry and next moment Harry found himself being shunted out into the icy winter air with Tonks today heavily disguised as a tall tweedy woman with irongray hair chivvying him down the steps .The door of number twelve slammed shut behind them .They followed Lupin down the front steps .As he reached the pavement Harry looked around .Number twelve was shrinking rapidly as those on either side of it stretched sideways squeezing it out of sight one blink later it had gone .Come on the quicker we get on the bus the better said Tonks and Harry thought there was nervousness in the glance she threw around the square .Lupin flung out his right arm .BANG .A violently purple tripledecker bus had appeared out of thin air in front of them narrowly avoiding the nearest lamppost which jumped backward out of its way .A thin pimply jugeared youth in a purple uniform leapt down onto the pavement and said Welcome to the Yes yes we know thank you said Tonks swiftly .On on get on And she shoved Harry forward toward the steps past the conductor who goggled at Harry as he passed .Ere its Arry !If you shout his name I will curse you into oblivion muttered Tonks menacingly now shunting Ginny and Hermione forward .Ive always wanted to go on this thing said Ron happily joining Harry on board and looking around .It had been evening the last time Harry had traveled by Knight Bus and its three decks had been full of brass bedsteads .Now in the early morning it was crammed with an assortment of mismatched chairs grouped haphazardly around windows .Some of these appeared to have fallen over when the bus stopped abruptly in Grimmauld Place a few witches and wizards were still getting to their feet grumbling and somebodys shopping bag had slid the length of the bus an unpleasant mixture of frog spawn cockroaches and custard creams was scattered all over the floor .Looks like well have to split up said Tonics briskly looking around for empty chairs .Fred George and Ginny if you just take those seats at the back .Remus can stay with you .She Harry Ron and Hermione proceeded up to the very top deck where there were two chairs at the very front of the bus and two at the back .Stan Shunpike the conductor followed Harry and Ron eagerly to the back .Heads turned as Harry passed and when he sat down he saw all the faces flick back to the front again .As Harry and Ron handed Stan eleven Sickles each the bus set off again swaying ominously .It rumbled around Grimmauld Square weaving on and off the pavement then with another tremendous BANG they were all flung backward Rons chair toppled right over and Pigwidgeon who had been on his lap burst out of his cage and flew twittering wildly up to the front of the bus where he fluttered down upon Hermiones shoulder instead .Harry who had narrowly avoided falling by seizing a candle bracket looked out of the window they were now speeding down what appeared to be a motorway .Just outside Birmingham said Stan happily answering Harrys unasked question as Ron struggled up from the floor .You keepin well then Arry ?I seen your name in the paper loads over the summer but it werent never nuffink very nice .I said to Ern I said ‘e didnt seem like a nutter when we met im just goes to show dunnit ?He handed over their tickets and continued to gaze enthralled at Harry apparently Stan did not care how nutty somebody was if they were famous enough to be in the paper .The Knight Bus swayed alarmingly overtaking a line of cars on the inside .Looking toward the front of the bus Harry saw Hermione cover her eyes with her hands Pigwidgeon still swaying happily on her shoulder .BANG .Chairs slid backward again as the Knight Bus jumped from the Birmingham motorway to a quiet country lane full of hairpin bends .Hedgerows on either side of the road were leaping out of their way as they mounted the verges .From here they moved to a main street in the middle of a busy town then to a viaduct surrounded by tall hills then to a windswept road between highrise flats each time with a loud BANG .Ive changed my mind muttered Ron picking himself up from the floor for the sixth time I never want to ride on here again .Listen its Ogwarts stop after this said Stan brightly swaying toward them .That bossy woman up front oo got on with you shes given us a little tip to move you up the queue .Were just gonna let Madam Marsh off first though There was more retching from downstairs followed by a horrible spattering sound .Shes not feeling er best .A few minutes later the Knight Bus screeched to a halt outside a small pub which squeezed itself out of the way to avoid a collision .They could hear Stan ushering the unfortunate Madam Marsh out of the bus and the relieved murmurings of her fellow passengers on the second deck .The bus moved on again gathering speed until BANG .They were rolling through a snowy Hogsmeade .Harry caught a glimpse of the Hogs Head down its side street the severed boars head sign creaking in the wintry wind .Flecks of snow hit the large window at the front of the bus .At last they rolled to a halt outside the gates to Hogwarts .Lupin and Tonks helped them off the bus with their luggage and then got off to say goodbye .Harry glanced up at the three decks of the Knight Bus and saw all the passengers staring down at them noses flat against the windows .Youll be safe once youre in the grounds said Tonks casting a careful eye around at the deserted road .Have a good term okay ?Look after yourselves said Lupin shaking hands all round and reaching Harry last .And listen .He lowered his voice while the rest of them exchanged lastminute goodbyes with Tonks Harry I know you dont like Snape but he is a superb Occlumens and we all Sirius included want you to learn to protect yourself so work hard all right ?Yeah all right said Harry heavily looking up into Lupins prematurely lined face .See you then .The six of them struggled up the slippery drive toward the castle dragging their trunks .Hermione was already talking about knitting a few elf hats before bedtime .Harry glanced back when they reached the oak front doors the Knight Bus had already gone and he halfwished given what was coming the following day that he was still on board .Harry spent most of the next day dreading the evening .His morning Potions lesson did nothing to dispel his trepidation as Snape was as unpleasant as ever and Harrys mood was further lowered by the fact that members of the D .A .were continually approaching him in the corridors between classes asking hopefully whether there would be a meeting that night .Ill let you know when the next one is Harry said over and over again but I cant do it tonight Ive got to go to er Remedial Potions .You take Remedial Potions ?asked Zacharias Smith superciliously having cornered Harry in the entrance hall after lunch .Good Lord you must be terrible Snape doesnt usually give extra lessons does he ?As Smith strode away in an annoyingly buoyant fashion Ron glared after him .Shall I jinx him ?I can still get him from here he said raising his wand and taking aim between Smiths shoulder blades .Forget it said Harry dismally .Its what everyones going to think isnt it ?That Im really stup Hi Harry said a voice behind him .He turned around and found Cho standing there .Oh said Harry as his stomach leapt uncomfortably .Hi .Well be in the library Harry said Hermione firmly and she seized Ron above the elbow and dragged him off toward the marble staircase .Had a good Christmas ?asked Cho .Yeah not bad said Harry .Mine was pretty quiet said Cho .For some reason she was looking rather embarrassed .Erm .theres another Hogsmeade trip next month did you see the notice ?What ?Oh no I havent checked the notice board since I got back .Yes its on Valentines Day .Right said Harry wondering why she was telling him this .Well I suppose you want to ?Only if you do she said eagerly .Harry stared .He had been about to say I suppose you want to know when the next D .A .meeting is ?but her response did not seem to fit .I er he said .Oh its okay if you dont she said looking mortified .Dont worry .IIll see you around .She walked away .Harry stood staring after her his brain working frantically .Then something clunked into place .Cho !Hey CHO !He ran after her catching her halfway up the marble staircase .Er dyou want to come into Hogsmeade with me on Valentines Day ?Oooh yes !she said blushing crimson and beaming at him .Right .well .thats settled then said Harry and feeling that the day was not going to be a complete loss after all he headed off to the library to pick up Ron and Hermione before their afternoon lessons walking in a rather bouncy way himself .By six oclock that evening however even the glow of having successfully asked out Cho Chang was insufficient to lighten the ominous feelings that intensified with every step Harry took toward Snapes office .He paused outside the door when he reached it wishing he were almost anywhere else then taking a deep breath knocked and entered .It was a shadowy room lined with shelves bearing hundreds of glass jars in which floated slimy bits of animals and plants suspended in variously colored potions .In a corner stood the cupboard full of ingredients that Snape had once accused Harry not without reason of robbing .Harrys attention was drawn toward the desk however where a shallow stone basin engraved with runes and symbols lay in a pool of candlelight .Harry recognized it at once Dumbledores Pensieve .Wondering what on earth it was doing here he jumped when Snapes cold voice came out of the corner .Shut the door behind you Potter .Harry did as he was told with the horrible feeling that he was imprisoning himself as he did so .When he turned back to face the room Snape had moved into the light and was pointing silently at the chair opposite his desk .Harry sat down and so did Snape his cold black eyes fixed unblinkingly upon Harry dislike etched in every line of his face .Well Potter you know why you are here he said .The headmaster has asked me to teach you Occlumency .I can only hope that you prove more adept at it than Potions .Right said Harry tersely .This may not be an ordinary class Potter said Snape his eyes narrowed malevolently but I am still your teacher and you will therefore call me ‘sir or ‘Professor at all times .Yes .sir said Harry .Now Occlumency .As I told you back in your dear godfathers kitchen this branch of magic seals the mind against magical intrusion and influence .And why does Professor Dumbledore think I need it sir ?said Harry looking directly into Snapes dark cold eyes and wondering whether he would answer .Snape looked back at him for a moment and then said contemptuously Surely even you could have worked that out by now Potter ?The Dark Lord is highly skilled at Legilimency Whats that ?Sir ?It is the ability to extract feelings and memories from another persons mind He can read minds ?said Harry quickly his worst fears confirmed .You have no subtlety Potter said Snape his dark eyes glittering .You do not understand fine distinctions .It is one of the shortcomings that makes you such a lamentable potionmaker .Snape paused for a moment apparently to savor the pleasure of insulting Harry before continuing Only Muggles talk of ‘mind reading .The mind is not a book to be opened at will and examined at leisure .Thoughts are not etched on the inside of skulls to be perused by any invader .The mind is a complex and manylayered thing Potter .or at least most minds are .He smirked .It is true however that those who have mastered Legilimency are able under certain conditions to delve into the minds of their victims and to interpret their findings correctly .The Dark Lord for instance almost always knows when somebody is lying to him .Only those skilled at Occlumency are able to shut down those feelings and memories that contradict the lie and so utter falsehoods in his presence without detection .Whatever Snape said Legilimency sounded like mind reading to Harry and he did not like the sound of it at all .So he could know what were thinking right now ?Sir ?The Dark Lord is at a considerable distance and the walls and grounds of Hogwarts are guarded by many ancient spells and charms to ensure the bodily and mental safety of those who dwell within them said Snape .Time and space matter in magic Potter .Eye contact is often essential to Legilimency .Well then why do I have to learn Occlumency ?Snape eyed Harry tracing his mouth with one long thin finger as he did so .The usual rules do not seem to apply with you Potter .The curse that failed to kill you seems to have forged some kind of connection between you and the Dark Lord .The evidence suggests that at times when your mind is most relaxed and vulnerable when you are asleep for instance you are sharing the Dark Lords thoughts and emotions .The headmaster thinks it inadvisable for this to continue .He wishes me to teach you how to close your mind to the Dark Lord .Harrys heart was pumping fast again .None of this added up .But why does Professor Dumbledore want to stop it ?he asked abruptly .I dont like it much but its been useful hasnt it ?I mean .I saw that snake attack Mr Weasley and if I hadnt Professor Dumbledore wouldnt have been able to save him would he ?Sir ?Snape stared at Harry for a few moments still tracing his mouth with his finger .When he spoke again it was slowly and deliberately as though he weighed every word .It appears that the Dark Lord has been unaware of the connection between you and himself until very recently .Up till now it seems that you have been experiencing his emotions and sharing his thoughts without his being any the wiser .However the vision you had shortly before Christmas The one with the snake and Mr Weasley ?Do not interrupt me Potter said Snape in a dangerous voice .As I was saying .the vision you had shortly before Christmas represented such a powerful incursion upon the Dark Lords thoughts I saw inside the snakes head not his !I thought I just told you not to interrupt me Potter ?But Harry did not care if Snape was angry at last he seemed to be getting to the bottom of this business .He had moved forward in his chair so that without realizing it he was perched on the very edge tense as though poised for flight .How come I saw through the snakes eyes if its Voldemorts thoughts Im sharing ?Do not say the Dark Lords name spat Snape .There was a nasty silence .They glared at each other across the Pensieve .Professor Dumbledore says his name said Harry quietly .Dumbledore is an extremely powerful wizard Snape muttered .While he may feel secure enough to use the name .the rest of us .He rubbed his left forearm apparently unconsciously on the spot where Harry knew the Dark Mark was burned into his skin .I just wanted to know Harry began again forcing his voice back to politeness why You seem to have visited the snakes mind because that was where the Dark Lord was at that particular moment snarled Snape .He was possessing the snake at the time and so you dreamed you were inside it too .And Vol he realized I was there ?It seems so said Snape coolly .How do you know ?said Harry urgently .Is this just Professor Dumbledore guessing or ?I told you said Snape rigid in his chair his eyes slits to call me ‘sir .Yes sir said Harry impatiently but how do you know ?It is enough that we know said Snape repressively .The important point is that the Dark Lord is now aware that you are gaining access to his thoughts and feelings .He has also deduced that the process is likely to work in reverse that is to say he has realized that he might be able to access your thoughts and feelings in return And he might try and make me do things ?asked Harry .Sir ?he added hurriedly .He might said Snape sounding cold and unconcerned .Which brings us back to Occlumency .Snape pulled out his wand from an inside pocket of his robes and Harry tensed in his chair but Snape merely raised the wand to his temple and placed its tip into the greasy roots of his hair .When he withdrew it some silvery substance came away stretching from temple to wand like a thick gossamer strand which broke as he pulled the wand away from it and fell gracefully into the Pensieve where it swirled silvery white neither gas nor liquid .Twice more Snape raised the wand to his temple and deposited the silvery substance into the stone basin then without offering any explanation of his behavior he picked up the Pensieve carefully removed it to a shelf out of their way and returned to face Harry with his wand held at the ready .Stand up and take out your wand Potter .Harry got to his feet feeling nervous .They faced each other with the desk between them .You may use your wand to attempt to disarm me or defend yourself in any other way you can think of said Snape .And what are you going to do ?Harry asked eyeing Snape s wand apprehensively .I am about to attempt to break into your mind said Snape softly .We are going to see how well you resist .I have been told that you have already shown aptitude at resisting the Imperius Curse .You will find that similar powers are needed for this .Brace yourself now .LegilimensV Snape had struck before Harry was ready before Harry had even begun to summon any force of resistance the office swam in front of his eyes and vanished image after image was racing through his mind like a flickering film so vivid it blinded him to his surroundings .He was five watching Dudley riding a new red bicycle and his heart was bursting with jealousy .He was nine and Ripper the bulldog was chasing him up a tree and the Dursleys were laughing below on the lawn .He was sitting under the Sorting Hat and it was telling him he would do well in Slytherin .Hermione was lying in the hospital wing her face covered with thick black hair .A hundred dementors were closing in on him beside the dark lake .Cho Chang was drawing nearer to him under the mistletoe .No said a voice in Harrys head as the memory of Cho drew nearer youre not watching that youre not watching it its private He felt a sharp pain in his knee .Snape s office had come back into view and he realized that he had fallen to the floor one of his knees had collided painfully with the leg of Snape s desk .He looked up at Snape who had lowered his wand and was rubbing his wrist .There was an angry weal there like a scorch mark .Did you mean to produce a Stinging Hex ?asked Snape coolly .No said Harry bitterly getting up from the floor .I thought not said Snape contemptuously .You let me get in too far .You lost control .Did you see everything I saw ?Harry asked unsure whether he wanted to hear the answer .Flashes of it said Snape his lip curling .To whom did the dog belong ?My Aunt Marge Harry muttered hating Snape .Well for a first attempt that was not as poor as it might have been said Snape raising his wand once more .You managed to stop me eventually though you wasted time and energy shouting .You must remain focused .Repel me with your brain and you will not need to resort to your wand .Im trying said Harry angrily but youre not telling me how !Manners Potter said Snape dangerously .Now I want you to close your eyes .Harry threw him a filthy look before doing as he was told .He did not like the idea of standing there with his eyes shut while Snape faced him carrying a wand .Clear your mind Potter said Snape s cold voice .Let go of all emotion .But Harrys anger at Snape continued to pound through his veins like venom .Let go of his anger ?He could as easily detach his legs .Youre not doing it Potter .You will need more discipline than this .Focus now .Harry tried to empty his mind tried not to think or remember or feel .Lets go again .on the count of three .one two three Legilimensl A great black dragon was rearing in front of him .His father and mother were waving at him out of an enchanted mirror .Cedric Diggory was lying on the ground with blank eyes staring at him .NOOOOOOO !He was on his knees again his face buried in his hands his brain aching as though someone had been trying to pull it from his skull .Get up !said Snape sharply .Get up !You are not trying you are making no effort you are allowing me access to memories you fear handing me weapons !Harry stood up again his heart thumping wildly as though he had really just seen Cedric dead in the graveyard .Snape looked paler than usual and angrier though not nearly as angry as Harry was .I am making an effort he said through clenched teeth .I told you to empty yourself of emotion !Yeah ?Well Im finding that hard at the moment Harry snarled .Then you will find yourself easy prey for the Dark Lord !said Snape savagely .Fools who wear their hearts proudly on their sleeves who cannot control their emotions who wallow in sad memories and allow themselves to be provoked this easily weak people in other words they stand no chance against his powers !He will penetrate your mind with absurd ease Potter !I am not weak said Harry in a low voice fury now pumping through him so that he thought he might attack Snape in a moment .Then prove it !Master yourself !spat Snape .Control your anger discipline your mind !We shall try again !Get ready now !Legilimens He was watching Uncle Vernon hammering the letter box shut .A hundred dementors were drifting across the lake in the grounds toward him .He was running along a windowless passage with Mr Weasley .They were drawing nearer to the plain black door at the end of the corridor .Harry expected to go through it .but Mr Weasley led him off to the left down a flight of stone steps .I KNOW !I KNOW !He was on all fours again on Snapes office floor his scar was prickling unpleasantly but the voice that had just issued from his mouth was triumphant .He pushed himself up again to find Snape staring at him his wand raised .It looked as though this time Snape had lifted the spell before Harry had even tried to fight back .What happened then Potter ?he asked eyeing Harry intently .I saw I remembered Harry panted .Ive just realized .Realized what ?asked Snape sharply .Harry did not answer at once he was still savoring the moment of blinding realization as he rubbed his forehead .He had been dreaming about a windowless corridor ending in a locked door for months without once realizing that it was a real place .Now seeing the memory again he knew that all along he had been dreaming about the corridor down which he had run with Mr Weasley on the twelfth of August as they hurried to the courtrooms in the Ministry .It was the corridor leading to the Department of Mysteries and Mr Weasley had been there the night that he had been attacked by Voldemorts snake .He looked up at Snape .Whats in the Department of Mysteries ?What did you say ?Snape asked quietly and Harry saw with deep satisfaction that Snape was unnerved .I said whats in the Department of Mysteries sir ?Harry said .And why said Snape slowly would you ask such a thing ?Because said Harry watching Snape closely for a reaction that corridor Ive just seen Ive been dreaming about it for months Ive just recognized it it leads to the Department of Mysteries .and I think Voldemort wants something from I have told you not to say the Dark Lords name They glared at each other .Harrys scar seared again but he did not care .Snape looked agitated .When he spoke again he sounded as though he was trying to appear cool and unconcerned .There are many things in the Department of Mysteries Potter few of which you would understand and none of which concern you do I make myself plain ?Yes Harry said still rubbing his prickling scar which was becoming more painful .I want you back here same time on Wednesday and we will continue work then .Fine said Harry .He was desperate to get out of Snape s office and find Ron and Hermione .You are to rid your mind of all emotion every night before sleep empty it make it blank and calm you understand ?Yes said Harry who was barely listening .And be warned Potter .I shall know if you have not practiced .Right Harry mumbled .He picked up his schoolbag swung it over his shoulder and hurried toward the office door .As he opened it he glanced back at Snape who had his back to Harry and was scooping his own thoughts out of the Pensieve with the tip of his wand and replacing them carefully inside his own head .Harry left without another word closing the door carefully behind him his scar still throbbing painfully .Harry found Ron and Hermione in the library where they were working on Umbridges most recent ream of homework .Other students nearly all of them fifth years sat at lamplit tables nearby noses close to books quills scratching feverishly while the sky outside the mullioned windows grew steadily blacker .The only other sound was the slight squeaking of one of Madam Pinces shoes as the librarian prowled the aisles menacingly breathing down the necks of those touching her precious books .Harry felt shivery his scar was still aching he felt almost feverish .When he sat down opposite Ron and Hermione he caught sight of himself in the window opposite .He was very white and his scar seemed to be showing up more clearly than usual .How did it go ?Hermione whispered and then looking concerned Are you all right Harry ?Yeah .fine .I dunno said Harry impatiently wincing as pain shot through his scar again .Listen .Ive just realized something .And he told them what he had just seen and deduced .So .so are you saying .whispered Ron as Madam Pince swept past squeaking slightly that the weapon the thing YouKnow Whos after is in the Ministry of Magic ?In the Department of Mysteries its got to be Harry whispered .I saw that door when your dad took me down to the courtrooms for my hearing and its definitely the same one he was guarding when the snake bit him .Hermione let out a long slow sigh .Of course she breathed .Of course what ?said Ron rather impatiently .Ron think about it .Sturgis Podmore was trying to get through a door at the Ministry of Magic .It must have been that one its too much of a coincidence !How come Sturgis was trying to break in when hes on our side ?said Ron .Well I dont know Hermione admitted .That is a bit odd .So whats in the Department of Mysteries ?Harry asked Ron .Has your dad ever mentioned anything about it ?I know they call the people who work in there ‘Unspeakables said Ron frowning .Because no one really seems to know what they do in there .Weird place to have a weapon .Its not weird at all it makes perfect sense said Hermione .It will be something top secret that the Ministry has been developing I expect .Harry are you sure youre all right ?For Harry had just run both his hands hard over his forehead as though trying to iron it .Yeah .fine .he said lowering his hands which were trembling .I just feel a bit .I dont like Occlumency much .I expect anyone would feel shaky if theyd had their mind attacked over and over again said Hermione sympathetically .Look lets get back to the common room well be a bit more comfortable there .But the common room was packed and full of shrieks of laughter and excitement Fred and George were demonstrating their latest bit of joke shop merchandise .Headless Hats !shouted George as Fred waved a pointed hat decorated with a fluffy pink feather at the watching students .Two Galleons each watch Fred now !Fred swept the hat onto his head beaming .For a second he merely looked rather stupid then both hat and head vanished .Several girls screamed but everyone else was roaring with laughter .And off again !shouted George and Freds hand groped for a moment in what seemed to be thin air over his shoulder then his head reappeared as he swept the pinkfeathered hat from it again .How do those hats work then ?said Hermione distracted from her homework and watching Fred and George .I mean obviously its some kind of Invisibility Spell but its rather clever to have extended the field of invisibility beyond the boundaries of the charmed object .Id imagine the charm wouldnt have a very long life though .Harry did not answer he was still feeling ill .Im going to have to do this tomorrow he muttered pushing the books he had just taken out of his bag back inside it .Well write it in your homework planner then !said Hermione encouragingly .So you dont forget !Harry and Ron exchanged looks as he reached into his bag withdrew the planner and opened it tentatively .Dont leave it till later you big secondrateri chided the book as Harry scribbled down Umbridges homework .Hermione beamed at it .I think 111 go to bed said Harry stuffing the homework planner back into his bag and making a mental note to drop it in the fire the first opportunity he got .He walked across the common room dodging George who tried to put a Headless Hat on him and reached the peace and cool of the stone staircase to the boys dormitories .He was feeling sick again just as he had the night he had had the vision of the snake but thought that if he could just lie down for a while he would be all right .He opened the door of his dormitory and was one step inside it when he experienced pain so severe he thought that someone must have sliced into the top of his head .He did not know where he was whether he was standing or lying down he did not even know his own name .Maniacal laughter was ringing in his ears .He was happier than he had been in a very long time .Jubilant ecstatic triumphant .A wonderful wonderful thing had happened .Harry ?HARRY !Someone had hit him around the face .The insane laughter was punctuated with a cry of pain .The happiness was draining out of him but the laughter continued .He opened his eyes and as he did so he became aware that the wild laughter was coming out of his own mouth .The moment he realized this it died away Harry lay panting on the floor staring up at the ceiling the scar on his forehead throbbing horribly .Ron was bending over him looking very worried .What happened ?he said .I .dunno .Harry gasped sitting up again .Hes really happy .really happy .YouKnowWho is ?Something goods happened mumbled Harry .He was shaking as badly as he had done after seeing the snake attack Mr Weasley and felt very sick .Something hes been hoping for .The words came just as they had back in the Gryffindor changing room as though a stranger was speaking them through Harrys mouth yet he knew they were true .He took deep breaths willing himself not to vomit all over Ron .He was very glad that Dean and Seamus were not here to watch this time .Hermione told me to come and check on you said Ron in a low voice helping Harry to his feet .She says your defenses will be low at the moment after Snapes been fiddling around with your mind .Still I suppose itll help in the long run wont it ?He looked doubtfully at Harry as he helped him toward bed .Harry nodded without any conviction and slumped back on his pillows aching all over from having fallen to the floor so often that evening his scar still prickling painfully .He could not help feeling that his first foray into Occlumency had weakened his minds resistance rather than strengthening it and he wondered with a feeling of great trepidation what had happened to make Lord Voldemort the happiest he had been in fourteen years .THE BEETLE AT BAY Harrys question was answered the very next morning .When Hermiones Daily Prophet arrived she smoothed it out gazed for a moment at the front page and then gave a yelp that caused everyone in the vicinity to stare at her .What ?said Harry and Ron together .For an answer she spread the newspaper on the table in front of them and pointed at ten blackandwhite photographs that filled the whole of the front page nine showing wizards faces and the tenth a witchs .Some of the people in the photographs were silently jeering others were tapping their fingers on the frame of their pictures looking insolent .Each picture was captioned with a name and the crime for which the person had been sent to Azkaban .Antonin Dolohov read the legend beneath a wizard with a long pale twisted face who was sneering up at Harry convicted of the brutal murders of Gideon and Fabian Prewett .Augustus Rookwood said the caption beneath a pockmarked man with greasy hair who was leaning against the edge of his picture looking bored convicted of leaking Ministry of Magic Secrets to He WhoMustNotBeNamed .But Harrys eyes were drawn to the picture of the witch .Her face had leapt out at him the moment he had seen the page .She had long dark hair that looked unkempt and straggly in the picture though he had seen it sleek thick and shining .She glared up at him through heavily lidded eyes an arrogant disdainful smile playing around her thin mouth .Like Sirius she retained vestiges of great good looks but something perhaps Azkaban had taken most of her beauty .Bellatrix Lestrange convicted of the torture and permanent incapacitation of Frank and Alice Longbottom .Hermione nudged Harry and pointed at the headline over the pictures which Harry concentrating on Bellatrix had not yet read .MASS BREAKOUT FROM AZKABAN MINISTRY FEARS BLACK IS RALLYING POINT FOR OLD DEATH EATERS Black ?said Harry loudly .Not ?Shhh whispered Hermione desperately .Not so loud just read it !The Ministry of Magic announced late last night that there has been a mass breakout from Azkaban .Speaking to reporters in his private office Cornelius Fudge Minister of Magic confirmed that ten high security prisoners escaped in the early hours of yesterday evening and that he has already informed the Muggle Prime Minister of the dangerous nature of these individuals .We find ourselves most unfortunately in the same position we were two and a half years ago when the murderer Sirius Black escaped said Fudge last night .Nor do we think the two breakouts are unrelated .An escape of this magnitude suggests outside help and we must remember that Black as the first person ever to break out of Azkaban would be ideally placed to help others follow in his footsteps .We think it likely that these individuals who include Blacks cousin Bellatrix Lestrange have rallied around Black as their leader .We are however doing all we can to round up the criminals and beg the magical community to remain alert and cautious .On no account should any of these individuals be approached .There you are Harry said Ron looking awestruck .Thats why he was happy last night .I dont believe this snarled Harry Fudge is blaming the breakout on Sirius ?What other options does he have ?said Hermione bitterly .He can hardly say ‘Sorry everyone Dumbledore warned me this might happen the Azkaban guards have joined Lord Voldemort stop whimpering Ron ‘and now Voldemorts worst supporters have broken out too .I mean hes spent a good six months telling everyone you and Dumbledore are liars hasnt he ?Hermione ripped open the newspaper and began to read the report inside while Harry looked around the Great Hall .He could not understand why his fellow students were not looking scared or at least discussing the terrible piece of news on the front page but very few of them took the newspaper every day like Hermione .There they all were talking about homework and Quidditch and who knew what other rubbish and outside these walls ten more Death Eaters had swollen Voldemorts ranks .He glanced up at the staff table .It was a different story here Dumbledore and Professor McGonagall were deep in conversation both looking extremely grave .Professor Sprout had the Prophet propped against a bottle of ketchup and was reading the front page with such concentration that she was not noticing the gentle drip of egg yolk falling into her lap from her stationary spoon .Meanwhile at the far end of the table Professor Umbridge was tucking into a bowl of porridge .For once her pouchy toads eyes were not sweeping the Great Hall looking for misbehaving students .She scowled as she gulped down her food and every now and then she shot a malevolent glance up the table to where Dumbledore and McGonagall were talking so intently .Oh my said Hermione wonderingly still staring at the newspaper .What now ?said Harry quickly he was feeling jumpy .Its .horrible said Hermione looking shaken .She folded back page ten of the newspaper and handed it back to Harry and Ron .TRAGIC DEMISE OF MINISTRY OF MAGIC WORKER St .Mungos Hospital promised a full inquiry last night after Ministry of Magic worker Broderick Bode 49 was discovered dead in his bed strangled by a pottedplant .Healers called to the scene were unable to revive Mr Bode who had been injured in a workplace accident some weeks prior to his death .Healer Miriam Strout who was in charge of Mr Bodes ward at the time of the incident has been suspended on full pay and was unavailable for comment yesterday but a spokeswizard for the hospital said in a statement St .Mungos deeply regrets the death of Mr Bode whose health was improving steadily prior to this tragic accident .We have strict guidelines on the decorations permitted on our wards but it appears that Healer Strout busy over the Christmas period overlooked the dangers of the plant on Mr Bodes bedside table .As his speech and mobility improved Healer Strout encouraged Mr Bode to look after the plant himself unaware that it was not an innocent Flitterbloom but a cutting of Devils Snare which when touched by the convalescent Mr Bode throttled him instantly .St .Mungos is as yet unable to account for the presence of the plant on the ward and asks any witch or wizard with information to come forward .Bode .said Ron .Bode .It rings a bell .We saw him Hermione whispered .In St .Mungos remember ?He was in the bed opposite Lockharts just lying there staring at the ceiling .And we saw the Devils Snare arrive .She the Healer said it was a Christmas present .Harry looked back at the story .A feeling of horror was rising like bile in his throat .How come we didnt recognize Devils Snare . ?Weve seen it before .we couldve stopped this from happening .Who expects Devils Snare to turn up in a hospital disguised as a potted plant ?said Ron sharply .Its not our fault whoever sent it to the bloke is to blame !They must be a real prat why didnt they check what they were buying ?Oh come on Ron !said Hermione shakily I dont think anyone could put Devils Snare in a pot and not realize it tries to kill whoever touches it ?This this was murder .A clever murder as well .If the plant was sent anonymously hows anyone ever going to find out who did it ?Harry was not thinking about Devils Snare .He was remembering taking the lift down to the ninth level of the Ministry on the day of his hearing and the sallowfaced man who had got in on the Atrium level .I met Bode he said slowly .I saw him at the Ministry with your dad .Rons mouth fell open .Ive heard Dad talk about him at home !He was an Unspeakable he worked in the Department of Mysteries !They looked at one another for a moment then Hermione pulled the newspaper back toward her closed it glared for a moment at the pictures of the ten escaped Death Eaters on the front then leapt to her feet .Where are you going ?said Ron startled .To send a letter said Hermione swinging her bag onto her shoulder .It .well I dont know whether .but its worth trying .and Im the only one who can I hate it when she does that grumbled Ron as he and Harry got up from the table and made their own slower way out of the Great Hall .Would it kill her to tell us what shes up to for once ?Itd take her about ten more seconds hey Hagrid !Hagrid was standing beside the doors into the entrance hall waiting for a crowd of Ravenclaws to pass .He was still as heavily bruised as he had been on the day he had come back from his mission to the giants and there was a new cut right across the bridge of his nose .All righ you two ?he said trying to muster a smile but managing only a kind of pained grimace .Are you okay Hagrid ?asked Harry following him as he lumbered after the Ravenclaws .Fine fine said Hagrid with a feeble assumption of airiness he waved a hand and narrowly missed concussing a frightenedlooking Professor Vector who was passing .Jus busy yeh know usual stuff lessons ter prepare couple o salamanders got scale rot an Im on probation he mumbled .Youre on probation ?said Ron very loudly so that many students passing looked around curiously .Sorry I mean youre on probation ?he whispered .Yeah said Hagrid .Sno moren I expected ter tell yeh the truth .Yeh migh notve picked up on it bu that inspection didn go too well yeh know .anyway he sighed deeply .Bes go an mb a bit more chili powder on them salamanders or their tailsll be hangin off em next .See yeh Harry .Ron .He trudged away out the front doors and down the stone steps into the damp grounds .Harry watched him go wondering how much more bad news he could stand .The fact that Hagrid was now on probation became common knowledge within the school over the next few days but to Harrys indignation hardly anybody appeared to be upset about it indeed some people Draco Malfoy prominent among them seemed positively gleeful .As for the freakish death of an obscure Department of Mysteries employee in St .Mungos Harry Ron and Hermione seemed to be the only people who knew or cared .There was only one topic of conversation in the corridors now the ten escaped Death Eaters whose story had finally filtered through the school from those few people who read the newspapers .Rumors were flying that some of the convicts had been spotted in Hogsmeade that they were supposed to be hiding out in the Shrieking Shack and that they were going to break into Hogwarts just as Sirius Black had done .Those who came from Wizarding families had grown up hearing the names of these Death Eaters spoken with almost as much fear as Voldemorts the crimes they had committed during the days of Voldemorts reign of terror were legendary .There were relatives of their victims among the Hogwarts students who now found themselves the unwilling objects of a gruesome sort of reflected fame as they walked the corridors Susan Bones who had an uncle aunt and cousins who had all died at the hands of one of the ten said miserably during Herbology that she now had a good idea what it felt like to be Harry .And I dont know how you stand it its horrible she said bluntly dumping far too much dragon manure on her tray of Screechsnap seedlings causing them to wriggle and squeak in discomfort .It was true that Harry was the subject of much renewed muttering and pointing in the corridors these days yet he thought he detected a slight difference in the tone of the whisperers voices .They sounded curious rather than hostile now and once or twice he was sure he overheard snatches of conversation that suggested that the speakers were not satisfied with the Prophets version of how and why ten Death Eaters had managed to break out of Azkaban fortress .In their confusion and fear these doubters now seemed to be turning to the only other explanation available to them the one that Harry and Dumbledore had been expounding since the previous year .It was not only the students mood that had changed .It was now quite common to come across two or three teachers conversing in low urgent whispers in the corridors breaking off their conversations the moment they saw students approaching .They obviously cant talk freely in the staffroom anymore said Hermione in a low voice as she Harry and Ron passed Professors McGonagall Flitwick and Sprout huddled together outside the Charms classroom one day .Not with Umbridge there .Reckon they know anything new ?said Ron gazing back over his shoulder at the three teachers .If they do were not going to hear about it are we ?said Harry angrily .Not after Decree .What number are we on now ?For new signs had appeared on the house notice boards the morning after news of the Azkaban breakout BY ORDER OF THE HIGH INQUISITOR OF HOGWARTS Teachers are hereby banned from giving students any information that is not strictly related to the subjects they are paid to teach .The above is in accordance with Educational Decree Number Twentysix .Signed Dolores Jane Umbridge HIGH INQUISITOR This latest decree had been the subject of a great number of jokes among the students .Lee Jordan had pointed out to Umbridge that by the terms of the new rule she was not allowed to tell Fred and George off for playing Exploding Snap in the back of the class .Exploding Snaps got nothing to do with Defense Against the Dark Arts Professor !Thats not information relating to your subject !When Harry next saw Lee the back of his hand was bleeding rather badly .Harry recommended essence of murtlap .Harry had thought that the breakout from Azkaban might have humbled Umbridge a little that she might have been abashed at the catastrophe that had occurred right under her beloved Fudges nose .It seemed however to have only intensified her furious desire to bring every aspect of life at Hogwarts under her personal control .She seemed determined at the very least to achieve a sacking before long and the only question was whether it would be Professor Trelawney or Hagrid who went first .Every single Divination and Care of Magical Creatures lesson was now conducted in the presence of Umbridge and her clipboard .She lurked by the fire in the heavily perfumed tower room interrupting Professor Trelawneys increasingly hysterical talks with difficult questions about Ornithomancy and Heptomology insisting that she predict students answers before they gave them and demanding that she demonstrate her skill at the crystal ball the tea leaves and the rune stones in turn .Harry thought that Professor Trelawney might soon crack under the strain several times he passed her in the corridors in itself a very unusual occurrence as she generally remained in her tower room muttering wildly to herself wringing her hands and shooting terrified glances over her shoulder all the time giving off a powerful smell of cooking sherry .If he had not been so worried about Hagrid he would have felt sorry for her but if one of them was to be ousted out of a job there could be only one choice for Harry as to who should remain .Unfortunately Harry could not see that Hagrid was putting up a better show than Trelawney .Though he seemed to be following Hermiones advice and had shown them nothing more frightening than a crup a creature indistinguishable from a Jack Russell terrier except for its forked tail since before Christmas he also seemed to have lost his nerve .He was oddly distracted and jumpy in lessons losing the thread of what he was saying while talking to the class answering questions wrongly and glancing anxiously at Umbridge all the time .He was also more distant with Harry Ron and Hermione than he had ever been before expressly forbidding them to visit him after dark .If she catches yeh itll be all of our necks on the line he told them flatly and with no desire to do anything that jeopardized his job further they abstained from walking down to his hut in the evenings .It seemed to Harry that Umbridge was steadily depriving him of everything that made his life at Hogwarts worth living visits to Hagrids house letters from Sirius his Firebolt and Quidditch .He took his revenge the only way he had redoubling his efforts for the D .A .Harry was pleased to see that all of them even Zacharias Smith had been spurred to work harder than ever by the news that ten more Death Eaters were now on the loose but in nobody was this improvement more pronounced than in Neville .The news of his parents attackers escape had wrought a strange and even slightly alarming change in him .He had not once mentioned his meeting with Harry Ron and Hermione on the closed ward in St .Mungos and taking their lead from him they had kept quiet about it too .Nor had he said anything on the subject of Bellatrix and her fellow torturers escape in fact he barely spoke during D .A .meetings anymore but worked relentlessly on every new jinx and countercurse Harry taught them his plump face screwed up in concentration apparently indifferent to injuries or accidents working harder than anyone else in the room .He was improving so fast it was quite unnerving and when Harry taught them the Shield Charm a means of deflecting minor jinxes so that they rebounded upon the attacker only Hermione mastered the charm faster than Neville .In fact Harry would have given a great deal to be making as much progress at Occlumency as Neville was making during D .A .meetings .Harrys sessions with Snape which had started badly enough were not improving on the contrary Harry felt he was getting worse with every lesson .Before he had started studying Occlumency his scar had prickled occasionally usually during the night or else following one of those strange flashes of Voldemorts thoughts or moods that he experienced every now and then .Nowadays however his scar hardly ever stopped prickling and he often felt lurches of annoyance or cheerfulness that were unrelated to what was happening to him at the time which were always accompanied by a particularly painful twinge from his scar .He had the horrible impression that he was slowly turning into a kind of aerial that was tuned in to tiny fluctuations in Voldemorts mood and he was sure he could date this increased sensitivity firmly from his first Occlumency lesson with Snape .What was more he was now dreaming about walking down the corridor toward the entrance to the Department of Mysteries almost every night dreams that always culminated in him standing longingly in front of the plain black door .Maybe its a bit like an illness said Hermione looking concerned when Harry confided in her and Ron .A fever or something .It has to get worse before it gets better .Its lessons with Snape that are making it worse said Harry flatly .Im getting sick of my scar hurting and Im getting bored walking down that corridor every night .He rubbed his forehead angrily .I just wish the door would open Im sick of standing staring at it Thats not funny said Hermione sharply .Dumbledore doesnt want you to have dreams about that corridor at all or he wouldnt have asked Snape to teach you Occlumency .Youre just going to have to work a bit harder in your lessons .I am working !said Harry nettled .You try it sometime Snape trying to get inside your head its not a bundle of laughs you know !Maybe .said Ron slowly .Maybe what ?said Hermione rather snappishly .Maybe its not Harrys fault he cant close his mind said Ron darkly .What do you mean ?said Hermione .Well maybe Snape isnt really trying to help Harry .Harry and Hermione stared at him .Ron looked darkly and meaningfully from one to the other .Maybe he said again in a lower voice hes actually trying to open Harrys mind a bit wider .make it easier for YouKnow Shut up Ron said Hermione angrily .How many times have you suspected Snape and when have you ever been right ?Dumbledore trusts him he works for the Order that ought to be enough .He used to be a Death Eater said Ron stubbornly .And weve never seen proof that he really swapped sides .Dumbledore trusts him Hermione repeated .And if we cant trust Dumbledore we cant trust anyone .With so much to worry about and so much to do startling amounts of homework that frequently kept the fifth years working until past midnight secret D .A .meetings and regular classes with Snape January seemed to be passing alarmingly fast .Before Harry knew it February had arrived bringing with it wetter and warmer weather and the prospect of the second Hogsmeade visit of the year .Harry had had very little time to spare on conversations with Cho since they had agreed to visit the village together but suddenly found himself facing a Valentines Day spent entirely in her company .On the morning of the fourteenth he dressed particularly carefully .He and Ron arrived at breakfast just in time for the arrival of the post owls .Hedwig was not there not that he had expected her but Hermione was tugging a letter from the beak of an unfamiliar brown owl as they sat down .And about time !If it hadnt come today .she said eagerly tearing open the envelope and pulling out a small piece of parchment .Her eyes sped from left to right as she read through the message and a grimly pleased expression spread across her face .Listen Harry she said looking up at him .This is really important .Do you think you could meet me in the Three Broomsticks around midday ?Well .I dunno said Harry dubiously .Cho might be expecting me to spend the whole day with her .We never said what we were going to do .Well bring her along if you must said Hermione urgently .But will you come ?Well .all right but why ?I havent got time to tell you now Ive got to answer this quickly And she hurried out of the Great Hall the letter clutched in one hand and a piece of uneaten toast in the other .Are you coming ?Harry asked Ron but he shook his head looking glum .I cant come into Hogsmeade at all Angelina wants a full days training .Like its going to help were the worst team Ive ever seen .You should see Sloper and Kirke theyre pathetic even worse than I am .He heaved a great sigh .I dunno why Angelina wont just let me resign .Its because youre good when youre on form thats why said Harry irritably .He found it very hard to be sympathetic to Rons plight when he himself would have given almost anything to be playing in the forthcoming match against Hufflepuff .Ron seemed to notice Harrys tone because he did not mention Quidditch again during breakfast and there was a slight frostiness in the way they said goodbye to each other shortly afterward .Ron departed for the Quidditch pitch and Harry after attempting to flatten his hair while staring at his reflection in the back of a teaspoon proceeded alone to the entrance hall to meet Cho feeling very apprehensive and wondering what on earth they were going to talk about .She was waiting for him a little to the side of the oak front doors looking very pretty with her hair tied back in a long ponytail .Harrys feet seemed to be too big for his body as he walked toward her and he was suddenly horribly aware of his arms and how stupid they looked swinging at his sides .Hi said Cho slightly breathlessly .Hi said Harry .They stared at each other for a moment then Harry said Well er shall we go then ?Oh yes .They joined the queue of people being signed out by Filch occasionally catching each others eye and grinning shiftily but not talking to each other .Harry was relieved when they reached the fresh air finding it easier to walk along in silence than just stand there looking awkward .It was a fresh breezy sort of day and as they passed the Quidditch stadium Harry glimpsed Ron and Ginny skimming over the stands and felt a horrible pang that he was not up there with them .You really miss it dont you ?said Cho .He looked around and saw her watching him .Yeah sighed Harry .I do .Remember the first time we played against each other in the third year ?she asked him .Yeah said Harry grinning .You kept blocking me .And Wood told you not to be a gentleman and knock me off my broom if you had to said Cho smiling reminiscently .I heard he got taken on by Pride of Portree is that right ?Nah it was Puddlemere United I saw him at the World Cup last year .Oh I saw you there too remember ?We were on the same campsite .It was really good wasnt it ?The subject of the Quidditch World Cup carried them all the way down the drive and out through the gates .Harry could hardly believe how easy it was to talk to her no more difficult in fact than talking to Ron and Hermione and he was just starting to feel confident and cheerful when a large gang of Slytherin girls passed them including Pansy Parkinson .Potter and Chang !screeched Pansy to a chorus of snide giggles .Urgh Chang I dont think much of your taste .At least Diggory was goodlooking !They sped up talking and shrieking in a pointed fashion with many exaggerated glances back at Harry and Cho leaving an embarrassed silence in their wake .Harry could think of nothing else to say about Quidditch and Cho slightly flushed was watching her feet .So .where dyou want to go ?Harry asked as they entered Hogsmeade .The High Street was full of students ambling up and down peering into the shop windows and messing about together on the pavements .Oh .I dont mind said Cho shrugging .Um .shall we just have a look in the shops or something ?They wandered toward Dervish and Banges .A large poster had been stuck up in the window and a few Hogsmeaders were looking at it .They moved aside when Harry and Cho approached and Harry found himself staring once more at the ten pictures of the escaped Death Eaters .The poster By Order of the Ministry of Magic offered a thousandGalleon reward to any witch or wizard with information relating to the recapture of any of the convicts pictured .Its funny isnt it said Cho in a low voice also gazing up at the pictures of the Death Eaters .Remember when that Sirius Black escaped and there were dementors all over Hogsmeade looking for him ?And now ten Death Eaters are on the loose and there arent dementors anywhere .Yeah said Harry tearing his eyes away from Bellatrix Lestranges face to glance up and down the High Street .Yeah it is weird .He was not sorry that there were no dementors nearby but now he came to think of it their absence was highly significant .They had not only let the Death Eaters escape they were not bothering to look for them .It looked as though they really were outside Ministry control now .The ten escaped Death Eaters were staring out of every shop window he and Cho passed .It started to rain as they passed Scrivenshafts cold heavy drops of water kept hitting Harrys face and the back of his neck .Um .dyou want to get a coffee ?said Cho tentatively as the rain began to fall more heavily .Yeah all right said Harry looking around .Where ?Oh theres a really nice place just up here havent you ever been to Madam Puddifoots ?she said brightly and she led him up a side road and into a small tea shop that Harry had never noticed before .It was a cramped steamy little place where everything seemed to have been decorated with frills or bows .Harry was reminded unpleasantly of Umbridges office .Cute isnt it ?said Cho happily .Er .yeah said Harry untruthfully .Look shes decorated it for Valentines Day !said Cho indicating a number of golden cherubs that were hovering over each of the small circular tables occasionally throwing pink confetti over the occupants .aah .They sat down at the last remaining table which was situated in the steamy window .Roger Davies the Ravenclaw Quidditch Captain was sitting about a foot and a half away with a pretty blonde girl .They were holding hands .The sight made Harry feel uncomfortable particularly when looking around the tea shop he saw that it was full of nothing but couples all of them holding hands .Perhaps Cho would expect him to hold her hand .What can I get you mdears ?said Madam Puddifoot a very stout woman with a shiny black bun squeezing between their table and Roger Daviess with great difficulty .Two coffees please said Cho .In the time it took for their coffees to arrive Roger Davies and his girlfriend started kissing over their sugar bowl .Harry wished they wouldnt he felt that Davies was setting a standard with which Cho would soon expect him to compete .He felt his face growing hot and tried staring out of the window but it was so steamed up he could not see the street outside .To postpone the moment when he had to look at Cho he stared up at the ceiling as though examining the paintwork and received a handful of confetti in the face from their hovering cherub .After a few more painful minutes Cho mentioned Umbridge Harry seized on the subject with relief and they passed a few happy moments abusing her but the subject had already been so thoroughly canvassed during D .A .meetings it did not last very long .Silence fell again .Harry was very conscious of the slurping noises coming from the table next door and cast wildly around for something else to say .Er .listen dyou want to come with me to the Three Broomsticks at lunchtime ?Im meeting Hermione Granger there .Cho raised her eyebrows .Youre meeting Hermione Granger ?Today ?Yeah .Well she asked me to so I thought I would .Dyou want to come with me ?She said it wouldnt matter if you did .Oh .well .that was nice of her .But Cho did not sound as though she thought it was nice at all on the contrary her tone was cold and all of a sudden she looked rather forbidding .A few more minutes passed in total silence Harry drinking his coffee so fast that he would soon need a fresh cup .Next door Roger Davies and his girlfriend seemed glued together by the lips .Chos hand was lying on the table beside her coffee and Harry was feeling a mounting pressure to take hold of it .Just do it he told himself as a fount of mingled panic and excitement surged up inside his chest .Just reach out and grab it .Amazing how much more difficult it was to extend his arm twelve inches and touch her hand than to snatch a speeding Snitch from midair .But just as he moved his hand forward Cho took hers off the table .She was now watching Roger Davies kissing his girlfriend with a mildly interested expression .He asked me out you know she said in a quiet voice .A couple of weeks ago .Roger .I turned him down though .Harry who had grabbed the sugar bowl to excuse his sudden lunging movement across the table could not think why she was telling him this .If she wished she were sitting at the table next door being heartily kissed by Roger Davies why had she agreed to come out with him ?He said nothing .Their cherub threw another handful of confetti over them some of it landed in the last cold dregs of coffee Harry had been about to drink .I came in here with Cedric last year said Cho .In the second or so it took for him to take in what she had said Harrys insides had become glacial .He could not believe she wanted to talk about Cedric now while kissing couples surrounded them and a cherub floated over their heads .Chos voice was rather higher when she spoke again .Ive been meaning to ask you for ages .Did Cedric did he mmmention me at all before he died ?This was the very last subject on earth Harry wanted to discuss and least of all with Cho .Well no he said quietly .There there wasnt time for him to say anything .Erm .so .dyou .dyou get to see a lot of Quidditch in the holidays ?You support the Tornados right ?His voice sounded falsely bright and cheery .To his horror he saw that her eyes were swimming with tears again just as they had been after the last D .A .meeting before Christmas .Look he said desperately leaning in so that nobody else could overhear lets not talk about Cedric right now .Lets talk about something else .But this apparently was quite the wrong thing to say .I thought she said tears spattering down onto the table .I thought youd uuunderstand !I need to talk about it !Surely you nneed to talk about it ttoo !I mean you saw it happen ddidnt you ?Everything was going nightmarishly wrong Roger Davies girlfriend had even unglued herself to look around at Cho crying .Well I have talked about it Harry said in a whisper to Ron and Hermione but Oh youll talk to Hermione Granger !she said shrilly her face now shining with tears and several more kissing couples broke apart to stare .But you wont talk to me !Pperhaps it would be best if we just .just ppaid and you went and met up with Hermione GGranger like you obviously want to !Harry stared at her utterly bewildered as she seized a frilly napkin and dabbed at her shining face with it .Cho ?he said weakly wishing Roger would seize his girlfriend and start kissing her again to stop her goggling at him and Cho .Go on leave !she said now crying into the napkin .I dont know why you asked me out in the first place if youre going to make arrangements to meet other girls right after me .How many are you meeting after Hermione ?Its not like that !said Harry and he was so relieved at finally understanding what she was annoyed about that he laughed which he realized a split second too late was a mistake .Cho sprang to her feet .The whole tearoom was quiet and everybody was watching them now .Ill see you around Harry she said dramatically and hiccuping slightly she dashed to the door wrenched it open and hurried off into the pouring rain .Cho !Harry called after her but the door had already swung shut behind her with a tuneful tinkle .There was total silence within the tea shop .Every eye was upon Harry .He threw a Galleon down onto the table shook pink confetti out of his eyes and followed Cho out of the door .It was raining hard now and she was nowhere to be seen .He simply did not understand what had happened half an hour ago they had been getting along fine .Women !he muttered angrily sloshing down the rainwashed street with his hands in his pockets .What did she want to talk about Cedric for anyway ?Why does she always want to drag up a subject that makes her act like a human hosepipe ?He turned right and broke into a splashy run and within minutes he was turning into the doorway of the Three Broomsticks .He knew he was too early to meet Hermione but he thought it likely there would be someone in here with whom he could spend the intervening time .He shook his wet hair out of his eyes and looked around .Hagrid was sitting alone in a corner looking morose .Hi Hagrid !he said when he had squeezed through the crammed tables and pulled up a chair beside him .Hagrid jumped and looked down at Harry as though he barely recognized him .Harry saw that he had two fresh cuts on his face and several new bruises .Oh its you Harry said Hagrid .You all righ ?Yeah Im fine lied Harry in fact next to this battered and mournfullooking Hagrid he felt he did not have much to complain about .Er are you okay ?Me ?said Hagrid .Oh yeah Im grand Harry grand .He gazed into the depths of his pewter tankard which was the size of a large bucket and sighed .Harry did not know what to say to him .They sat side by side in silence for a moment .Then Hagrid said abruptly In the same boat you an me aren we Harry ?Er said Harry .Yeah .Ive said it before .Both outsiders like said Hagrid nodding wisely .An both orphans .Yeah .both orphans .He took a great swig from his tankard .Makes a diffrence havin a decent family he said .Me dad was decent .An your mum an dad were decent .If theyd lived life woulda bin diffrent eh ?Yeah .I spose said Harry cautiously .Hagrid seemed to be in a very strange mood .Family said Hagrid gloomily .Whatever yeh say bloods important .And he wiped a trickle of it out of his eye .Hagrid said Harry unable to stop himself where are you getting all these injuries ?Eh ?said Hagrid looking startled .Wha injuries ?All those !said Harry pointing at Hagrid s face .Oh .thas jus normal bumps an bruises Harry said Hagrid dismissively .I got a rough job .He drained his tankard set it back upon the table and got to his feet .Ill be seeinyeh Harry .Take care now .And he lumbered out of the pub looking wretched and then disappeared into the torrential rain .Harry watched him go feeling miserable .Hagrid was unhappy and he was hiding something but he seemed determined not to accept help .What was going on ?But before Harry could think about the matter any further he heard a voice calling his name .Harry !Harry over here !Hermione was waving at him from the other side of the room .He got up and made his way toward her through the crowded pub .He was still a few tables away when he realized that Hermione was not alone she was sitting at a table with the unlikeliest pair of drinking mates he could ever have imagined Luna Lovegood and none other than Rita Skeeter ex journalist on the Daily Prophet and one of Hermiones least favorite people in the world .Youre early !said Hermione moving along to give him room to sit down .I thought you were with Cho I wasnt expecting you for another hour at least !Cho ?said Rita at once twisting around in her seat to stare avidly at Harry .A girl ?She snatched up her crocodileskin handbag and groped within it .Its none of your business if Harrys been with a hundred girls Hermione told Rita coolly .So you can put that away right now .Rita had been on the point of withdrawing an acid green quill from her bag .Looking as though she had been forced to swallow Stinksap she snapped her bag shut again .What are you up to ?Harry asked sitting down and staring from Rita to Luna to Hermione .Little Miss Perfect was just about to tell me when you arrived said Rita taking a large slurp of her drink .I suppose Im allowed to talk to him am I ?she shot at Hermione .Yes I suppose you are said Hermione coldly .Unemployment did not suit Rita .The hair that had once been set in elaborate curls now hung lank and unkempt around her face .The scarlet paint on her twoinch talons was chipped and there were a couple of false jewels missing from her winged glasses .She took another great gulp of her drink and said out of the corner of her mouth Pretty girl is she Harry ?One more word about Harrys love life and the deals off and thats a promise said Hermione irritably .What deal ?said Rita wiping her mouth on the back of her hand .You havent mentioned a deal yet Miss Prissy you just told me to turn up .Oh one of these days .She took a deep shuddering breath .Yes yes one of these days youll write more horrible stories about Harry and me said Hermione indifferently .Find someone who cares why dont you ?Theyve run plenty of horrible stories about Harry this year without my help said Rita shooting a sideways look at him over the top of her glass and adding in a rough whisper How has that made you feel Harry ?Betrayed ?Distraught ?Misunderstood ?He feels angry of course said Hermione in a hard clear voice .Because hes told the Minister of Magic the truth and the Ministers too much of an idiot to believe him .So you actually stick to it do you that HeWho MustNotBeNamed is back ?said Rita lowering her glass and subjecting Harry to a piercing stare while her finger strayed longingly to the clasp of the crocodile bag .You stand by all this garbage Dumbledores been telling everybody about You KnowWho returning and you being the sole witness ?I wasnt the sole witness snarled Harry .There were a dozenodd Death Eaters there as well .Want their names ?Id love them breathed Rita now fumbling in her bag once more and gazing at him as though he was the most beautiful thing she had ever seen .A great bold headline ‘Potter Accuses .A subheading ‘Harry Potter Names Death Eaters Still Among Us .And then beneath a nice big photograph of you ‘Disturbed teenage survivor of YouKnowWhos attack Harry Potter 1 5 caused outrage yesterday by accusing respectable and prominent members of the Wizarding community of being Death Eaters .The QuickQuotes Quill was actually in her hand and halfway to her mouth when the rapturous expression died out of her face .But of course she said lowering the quill and looking daggers at Hermione Little Miss Perfect wouldnt want that story out there would she ?As a matter of fact said Hermione sweetly thats exactly what Little Miss Perfect does want .Rita stared at her .So did Harry .Luna on the other hand sang Weasley Is Our King dreamily under her breath and stirred her drink with a cocktail onion on a stick .You want me to report what he says about HeWho MustNotBeNamed ?Rita asked Hermione in a hushed voice .Yes I do said Hermione .The true story .All the facts .Exactly as Harry reports them .Hell give you all the details hell tell you the names of the undiscovered Death Eaters he saw there hell tell you what Voldemort looks like now oh get a grip on yourself she added contemptuously throwing a napkin across the table for at the sound of Voldemorts name Rita had jumped so badly that she had slopped half her glass of firewhisky down herself .Rita blotted the front of her grubby raincoat still staring at Hermione .Then she said baldly The Prophet wouldnt print it .In case you havent noticed nobody believes his cockandbull story .Everyone thinks hes delusional .Now if you let me write the story from that angle We dont need another story about how Harrys lost his marbles !said Hermione angrily .Weve had plenty of those already thank you !I want him given the opportunity to tell the truth !Theres no market for a story like that said Rita coldly .You mean the Prophet wont print it because Fudge wont let them said Hermione irritably .Rita gave Hermione a long hard look .Then leaning forward across the table toward her she said in a businesslike tone All right Fudge is leaning on the Prophet but it comes to the same thing .They wont print a story that shows Harry in a good light .Nobody wants to read it .Its against the public mood .This last Azkaban breakout has got people quite worried enough .People just dont want to believe YouKnow Whos back .So the Daily Prophet exists to tell people what they want to hear does it ?said Hermione scathingly .Rita sat up straight again her eyebrows raised and drained her glass of firewhisky .The Prophet exists to sell itself you silly girl she said coldly .My dad thinks its an awful paper said Luna chipping into the conversation unexpectedly .Sucking on her cocktail onion she gazed at Rita with her enormous protuberant slightly mad eyes .He publishes important stories that he thinks the public needs to know .He doesnt care about making money .Rita looked disparagingly at Luna .Im guessing your father runs some stupid little village newsletter ?she said .Twentyfive Ways to Mingle with Muggles and the dates of the next Bring andFly Sale ?No said Luna dipping her onion back into her gillywater hes the editor of The Quibbler .Rita snorted so loudly that people at a nearby table looked around in alarm .‘Important stories he thinks the public needs to know ?she said witheringly .I could manure my garden with the contents of that rag .Well this is your chance to raise the tone of it a bit isnt it ?said Hermione pleasantly .Luna says her fathers quite happy to take Harrys interview .Thats wholl be publishing it .Rita stared at them both for a moment and then let out a great whoop of laughter .The Quibbleii she said cackling .You think people will take him seriously if hes published in The Quibbler ?Some people wont said Hermione in a level voice .But the Daily Prophets version of the Azkaban breakout had some gaping holes in it .I think a lot of people will be wondering whether there isnt a better explanation of what happened and if theres an alternative story available even if it is published in a she glanced sideways at Luna in a well an unusual magazine I think they might be rather keen to read it .Rita did not say anything for a while but eyed Hermione shrewdly her head a little to one side .All right lets say for a moment Ill do it she said abruptly .What kind of fee am I going to get ?I dont think Daddy exactly pays people to write for the magazine said Luna dreamily .They do it because its an honor and of course to see their names in print .Rita Skeeter looked as though the taste of Stinksap was strong in her mouth again as she rounded on Hermione .Im supposed to do this for free ?Well yes said Hermione calmly taking a sip of her drink .Otherwise as you very well know I will inform the authorities that you are an unregistered Animagus .Of course the Prophet might give you rather a lot for an insiders account of life in Azkaban .Rita looked as though she would have liked nothing better than to seize the paper umbrella sticking out of Hermione s drink and thrust it up her nose .I dont suppose Ive got any choice have I ?said Rita her voice shaking slightly .She opened her crocodile bag once more withdrew a piece of parchment and raised her QuickQuotes Quill .Daddy will be pleased said Luna brightly .A muscle twitched in Ritas jaw .Okay Harry ?said Hermione turning to him .Ready to tell the public the truth ?I suppose said Harry watching Rita balancing the QuickQuotes Quill at the ready on the parchment between them .Fire away then Rita said Hermione serenely fishing a cherry out of the bottom of her glass .SEEN AND UNFORESEEN Luna said vaguely that she did not know how soon Ritas interview with Harry would appear in The Quibbler that her father was expecting a lovely long article on recent sightings of CrumpleHorned Snorkacks .And of course thatll be a very important story so Harrys might have to wait for the following issue said Luna .Harry had not found it an easy experience to talk about the night when Voldemort had returned .Rita had pressed him for every little detail and he had given her everything he could remember knowing that this was his one big opportunity to tell the world the truth .He wondered how people would react to the story .He guessed that it would confirm a lot of people in the view that he was completely insane not least because his story would be appearing alongside utter rubbish about CrumpleHorned Snorkacks .But the breakout of Bellatrix Lestrange and her fellow Death Eaters had given Harry a burning desire to do something whether it worked or not .Cant wait to see what Umbridge thinks of you going public said Dean sounding awestruck at dinner on Monday night .Seamus was shoveling down large amounts of chickenandham pie on Deans other side but Harry knew he was listening .Its the right thing to do Harry said Neville who was sitting opposite him .He was rather pale but went on in a low voice It must have been .tough .talking about it .Was it ?Yeah mumbled Harry but people have got to know what Voldemorts capable of havent they ?Thats right said Neville nodding and his Death Eaters too .People should know .Neville left his sentence hanging and returned to his baked potato .Seamus looked up but when he caught Harrys eye he looked quickly back at his plate again .After a while Dean Seamus and Neville departed for the common room leaving Harry and Hermione at the table waiting for Ron who had not yet had dinner because of Quidditch practice .Cho Chang walked into the hall with her friend Marietta .Harrys stomach gave an unpleasant lurch but she did not look over at the Gryffindor table and sat down with her back to him .Oh I forgot to ask you said Hermione brightly glancing over at the Ravenclaw table what happened on your date with Cho ?How come you were back so early ?Er .well it was .said Harry pulling a dish of rhubarb crumble toward him and helping himself to seconds a complete fiasco now that you mention it .And he told her what had happened in Madam Puddifoots Tea Shop . .so then he finished several minutes later as the final bit of crumble disappeared she jumps up right and says ‘111 see you around Harry and runs out of the place !He put down his spoon and looked at Hermione .I mean what was all that about ?What was going on ?Hermione glanced over at the back of Chos head and sighed .Oh Harry she said sadly .Well Im sorry but you were a bit tactless .Me tactless ?said Harry outraged .One minute we were getting on fine next minute she was telling me that Roger Davies asked her out and how she used to go and snog Cedric in that stupid tea shop how was I supposed to feel about that ?Well you see said Hermione with the patient air of one explaining that one plus one equals two to an overemotional toddler you shouldnt have told her that you wanted to meet me halfway through your date .But but spluttered Harry but you told me to meet you at twelve and to bring her along how was I supposed to do that without telling her ?You should have told her differently said Hermione still with that maddeningly patient air .You should have said it was really annoying but Id made you promise to come along to the Three Broomsticks and you really didnt want to go youd much rather spend the whole day with her but unfortunately you thought you really ought to meet me and would she please please come along with you and hopefully youd be able to get away more quickly ?And it might have been a good idea to mention how ugly you think I am too Hermione added as an afterthought .But I dont think youre ugly said Harry bemused .Hermione laughed .Harry youre worse than Ron .Well no youre not she sighed as Ron himself came stumping into the Hall splattered with mud and looking grumpy .Look you upset Cho when you said you were going to meet me so she tried to make you jealous .It was her way of trying to find out how much you liked her .Is that what she was doing ?said Harry as Ron dropped onto the bench opposite them and pulled every dish within reach toward himself .Well wouldnt it have been easier if shed just asked me whether I liked her better than you ?Girls dont often ask questions like that said Hermione .Well they should !said Harry forcefully .Then I couldve just told her I fancy her and she wouldnt have had to get herself all worked up again about Cedric dying !Im not saying what she did was sensible said Hermione as Ginny joined them just as muddy as Ron and looking equally disgruntled .Im just trying to make you see how she was feeling at the time .You should write a book Ron told Hermione as he cut up his potatoes translating mad things girls do so boys can understand them .Yeah said Harry fervently looking over at the Ravenclaw table .Cho had just got up still not looking at him she left the Great Hall .Feeling rather depressed he looked back at Ron and Ginny .So how was Quidditch practice ?It was a nightmare said Ron in a surly voice .Oh come on said Hermione looking at Ginny Im sure it wasnt that Yes it was said Ginny .It was appalling .Angelina was nearly in tears by the end of it .Ron and Ginny went off for baths after dinner Harry and Hermione returned to the busy Gryffindor common room and their usual pile of homework .Harry had been struggling with a new star chart for Astronomy for half an hour when Fred and George turned up .Ron and Ginny not here ?asked Fred looking around as he pulled up a chair and when Harry shook his head he said Good .We were watching their practice .Theyre going to be slaughtered .Theyre complete rubbish without us .Come on Ginnys not bad said George fairly sitting down next to Fred .Actually I dunno how she got so good seeing how we never let her play with us .Shes been breaking into your broom shed in the garden since the age of six and taking each of your brooms out in turn when you werent looking said Hermione from behind her tottering pile of Ancient Rune books .Oh said George looking mildly impressed .Well thatd explain it .Has Ron saved a goal yet ?asked Hermione peering over the top of Magical Hieroglyphs and Logograms .Well he can do it if he doesnt think anyones watching him said Fred rolling his eyes .So all we have to do is ask the crowd to turn their backs and talk among themselves every time the Quaffle goes up his end on Saturday .He got up again and moved restlessly to the window staring out across the dark grounds .You know Quidditch was about the only thing in this place worth staying for .Hermione cast him a stern look .Youve got exams coming !Told you already were not fussed about N .E .W .T .s said Fred .The Snackboxes are ready to roll we found out how to get rid of those boils just a couple of drops of murtlap essence sorts them Lee put us onto it .George yawned widely and looked out disconsolately at the cloudy night sky .I dunno if I even want to watch this match .If Zacharias Smith beats us I might have to kill myself .Kill him more like said Fred firmly .Thats the trouble with Quidditch said Hermione absentmindedly once again bent over her Rune translation it creates all this bad feeling and tension between the Houses .She looked up to find her copy of Spellmans Syllabary and caught Fred George and Harry looking at her with expressions of mingled disgust and incredulity on their faces .Well it does !she said impatiently .Its only a game isnt it ?Hermione said Harry shaking his head youre good on feelings and stuff but you just dont understand about Quidditch .Maybe not she said darkly returning to her translation again but at least my happiness doesnt depend on Rons goalkeeping ability .And though Harry would rather have jumped off the Astronomy Tower than admit it to her by the time he had watched the game the following Saturday he would have given any number of Galleons not to care about Quidditch either .The very best thing you could say about the match was that it was short the Gryffindor spectators had to endure only twentytwo minutes of agony .It was hard to say what the worst thing was Harry thought it was a closerun contest between Rons fourteenth failed save Sloper missing the Bludger but hitting Angelina in the mouth with his bat and Kirke shrieking and falling backward off his broom as Zacharias Smith zoomed at him carrying the Quaffle .The miracle was that Gryffindor only lost by ten points Ginny managed to snatch the Snitch from right under Hufflepuff Seeker Summerbys nose so that the final score was two hundred and forty versus two hundred and thirty .Good catch Harry told Ginny back in the common room where the atmosphere closely resembled that of a particularly dismal funeral .I was lucky she shrugged .It wasnt a very fast Snitch and Summerbys got a cold he sneezed and closed his eyes at exactly the wrong moment .Anyway once youre back on the team Ginny Ive got a lifelong ban .Youre banned as long as Umbridge is in the school Ginny corrected him .Theres a difference .Anyway once youre back I think Ill try out for Chaser .Angelina and Alicia are both leaving next year and I prefer goalscoring to Seeking anyway .Harry looked over at Ron who was hunched in a corner staring at his knees a bottle of butterbeer clutched in his hand .Angelina still wont let him resign Ginny said as though reading Harrys mind .She says she knows hes got it in him .Harry liked Angelina for the faith she was showing in Ron but at the same time thought it would really be kinder to let him leave the team .Ron had left the pitch to another booming chorus of Weasley Is Our King sung with great gusto by the Slytherins who were now favorites to win the Quidditch Cup .Fred and George wandered over .I havent got the heart to take the mickey out of him even said Fred looking over at Rons crumpled figure .Mind you .when he missed the fourteenth He made wild motions with his arms as though doing an upright doggypaddle .Well Ill save it for parties eh ?Ron dragged himself up to bed shortly after this .Out of respect for his feelings Harry waited a while before going up to the dormitory himself so that Ron could pretend to be asleep if he wanted to .Sure enough when Harry finally entered the room Ron was snoring a little too loudly to be entirely plausible .Harry got into bed thinking about the match .It had been immensely frustrating watching from the sidelines .He was quite impressed by Ginnys performance but he felt that if he had been playing he could have caught the Snitch sooner .There had been a moment when it had been fluttering near Kirkes ankle if she hadnt hesitated she might have been able to scrape a win for Gryffindor .Umbridge had been sitting a few rows below Harry and Hermione .Once or twice she had turned squatly in her seat to look at him her wide toads mouth stretched in what he thought had been a gloating smile .The memory of it made him feel hot with anger as he lay there in the dark .After a few minutes however he remembered that he was supposed to be emptying his mind of all emotion before he slept as Snape kept instructing him at the end of every Occlumency lesson .He tried for a moment or two but the thought of Snape on top of memories of Umbridge merely increased his sense of grumbling resentment and he found himself focusing instead on how much he loathed the pair of them .Slowly Rons snores died away replaced by the sound of deep slow breathing .It took Harry much longer to get to sleep his body was tired but it took his brain a long time to close down .He dreamed that Neville and Professor Sprout were waltzing around the Room of Requirement while Professor McGonagall played the bagpipes .He watched them happily for a while then decided to go and find the other members of the D .A .But when he left the room he found himself facing not the tapestry of Barnabas the Barmy but a torch burning in its bracket on a stone wall .He turned his head slowly to the left .There at the far end of the windowless passage was a plain black door .He walked toward it with a sense of mounting excitement .He had the strangest feeling that this time he was going to get lucky at last and find the way to open it .He was feet from it and saw with a leap of excitement that there was a glowing strip of faint blue light down the righthand side .The door was ajar .He stretched out his hand to push it wide and Ron gave a loud rasping genuine snore and Harry awoke abruptly with his right hand stretched in front of him in the darkness to open a door that was hundreds of miles away .He let it fall with a feeling of mingled disappointment and guilt .He knew he should not have seen the door but at the same time felt so consumed with curiosity about what was behind it that he could not help feeling annoyed with Ron .If he could have saved his snore for just another minute .k k k They entered the Great Hall for breakfast at exactly the same moment as the post owls on Monday morning .Hermione was not the only person eagerly awaiting her Daily Prophet Nearly everyone was eager for more news about the escaped Death Eaters who despite many reported sightings had still not been caught .She gave the delivery owl a Knut and unfolded the newspaper eagerly while Harry helped himself to orange juice as he had only received one note during the entire year he was sure when the first owl landed with a thud in front of him that it had made a mistake .Who re you after ?he asked it languidly removing his orange juice from underneath its beak and leaning forward to see the recipients name and address Harry Potter Great Hall Hogwarts School Frowning he made to take the letter from the owl but before he could do so three four five more owls had fluttered down beside it and were jockeying for position treading in the butter knocking over the salt and each attempting to give him their letters first .Whats going on ?Ron asked in amazement as the whole of Gryffindor table leaned forward to watch as another seven owls landed amongst the first ones screeching hooting and flapping their wings .Harry !said Hermione breathlessly plunging her hands into the feathery mass and pulling out a screech owl bearing a long cylindrical package .I think I know what this means open this one first !Harry ripped off the brown packaging .Out rolled a tightly furled copy of Marchs edition of The Quibbler .He unrolled it to see his own face grinning sheepishly at him from the front cover .In large red letters across his picture were the words HARRY POTTER SPEAKS OUT AT LAST THE TRUTH ABOUT HEWHOMUSTNOTBE NAMED AND THE NIGHT I SAW HIM RETURN Its good isnt it ?said Luna who had drifted over to the Gryffindor table and now squeezed herself onto the bench between Fred and Ron .It came out yesterday I asked Dad to send you a free copy .I expect all these she waved a hand at the assembled owls still scrabbling around on the table in front of Harry are letters from readers .Thats what I thought said Hermione eagerly Harry dyou mind if we ?Help yourself said Harry feeling slightly bemused .Ron and Hermione both started ripping open envelopes .This ones from a bloke who thinks youre off your rocker said Ron glancing down his letter .Ah well This woman recommends you try a good course of Shock Spells at St .Mungos said Hermione looking disappointed and crumpling up a second .This one looks okay though said Harry slowly scanning a long letter from a witch in Paisley .Hey she says she believes me !This ones in two minds said Fred who had joined in the letteropening with enthusiasm .Says you dont come across as a mad person but he really doesnt want to believe YouKnow Whos back so he doesnt know what to think now .Blimey what a waste of parchment .Heres another one youve convinced Harry !said Hermione excitedly . ‘Having read your side of the story I am forced to the conclusion that the Daily Prophet has treated you very unfairly .Little though I want to think that HeWhoMustNotBeNamed has returned I am forced to accept that you are telling the truth .Oh this is wonderful !Another one who thinks youre barking said Ron throwing a crumpled letter over his shoulder but this one says youve got her converted and she now thinks youre a real hero shes put in a photograph too wow What is going on here ?said a falsely sweet girlish voice .Harry looked up with his hands full of envelopes .Professor Umbridge was standing behind Fred and Luna her bulging toads eyes scanning the mess of owls and letters on the table in front of Harry .Behind her he saw many of the students watching them avidly .Why have you got all these letters Mr Potter ?she asked slowly .Is that a crime now ?said Fred loudly .Getting mail ?Be careful Mr Weasley or I shall have to put you in detention said Umbridge .Well Mr Potter ?Harry hesitated but he did not see how he could keep what he had done quiet it was surely only a matter of time before a copy of The Quibbler came to Umbridges attention .People have written to me because I gave an interview said Harry .About what happened to me last June .For some reason he glanced up at the staff table as he said this .He had the strangest feeling that Dumbledore had been watching him a second before but when he looked Dumbledore seemed to be absorbed in conversation with Professor Flitwick .An interview ?repeated Umbridge her voice thinner and higher than ever .What do you mean ?I mean a reporter asked me questions and I answered them said Harry .Here And he threw the copy of The Quibbler at her .She caught it and stared down at the cover .Her pale doughy face turned an ugly patchy violet .When did you do this ?she asked her voice trembling slightly .Last Hogsmeade weekend said Harry .She looked up at him incandescent with rage the magazine shaking in her stubby fingers .There will be no more Hogsmeade trips for you Mr Potter she whispered .How you dare .how you could .She took a deep breath .I have tried again and again to teach you not to tell lies .The message apparently has still not sunk in .Fifty points from Gryffindor and another weeks worth of detentions .She stalked away clutching The Quibbler to her chest the eyes of many students following her .By midmorning enormous signs had been put up all over the school not just on House notice boards but in the corridors and classrooms too .BY ORDER OF THE HIGH INQUISITOR OF HOGWARTS Any student found in possession of the magazine The Quibbler will be expelled .The above is in accordance with Educational Decree Number Twentyseven .Signed Dolores Jane Umbridge HIGH INQUISITOR For some reason every time Hermione caught sight of one of these signs she beamed with pleasure .What exactly are you so happy about ?Harry asked her .Oh Harry dont you see ?Hermione breathed .If she could have done one thing to make absolutely sure that every single person in this school will read your interview it was banning it !And it seemed that Hermione was quite right .By the end of that day though Harry had not seen so much as a corner of The Quibbler anywhere in the school the whole place seemed to be quoting the interview at each other Harry heard them whispering about it as they queued up outside classes discussing it over lunch and in the back of lessons while Hermione even reported that every occupant of the cubicles in the girls toilets had been talking about it when she nipped in there before Ancient Runes .And then they spotted me and obviously they know I know you so they were bombarding me with questions Hermione told Harry her eyes shining and Harry I think they believe you I really do I think youve finally got them convinced !Meanwhile Professor Umbridge was stalking the school stopping students at random and demanding that they turn out their books and pockets .Harry knew she was looking for copies of The Quibbler but the students were several steps ahead of her .The pages carrying Harrys interview had been bewitched to resemble extracts from textbooks if anyone but themselves read it or else wiped magically blank until they wanted to peruse it again .Soon it seemed that every single person in the school had read it .The teachers were of course forbidden from mentioning the interview by Educational Decree Number Twentysix but they found ways to express their feelings about it all the same .Professor Sprout awarded Gryffindor twenty points when Harry passed her a watering can a beaming Professor Flitwick pressed a box of squeaking sugar mice on him at the end of Charms said Shh and hurried away and Professor Trelawney broke into hysterical sobs during Divination and announced to the startled class and a very disapproving Umbridge that Harry was not going to suffer an early death after all but would live to a ripe old age become Minister of Magic and have twelve children .But what made Harry happiest was Cho catching up with him as he was hurrying along to Transfiguration the next day .Before he knew what had happened her hand was in his and she was breathing in his ear Im really really sorry .That interview was so brave .it made me cry .He was sorry to hear she had shed even more tears over it but very glad they were on speaking terms again and even more pleased when she gave him a swift kiss on the cheek and hurried off again .And unbelievably no sooner had he arrived outside Transfiguration than something just as good happened Seamus stepped out of the queue to face him .I just wanted to say he mumbled squinting at Harrys left knee I believe you .And Ive sent a copy of that magazine to me mam .If anything more was needed to complete Harrys happiness it was Malfoy Crabbe and Goyles reactions .He saw them with their heads together later that afternoon in the library together with a weedylooking boy Hermione whispered was called Theodore Nott .They looked around at Harry as he browsed the shelves for the book he needed on Partial Vanishment and Goyle cracked his knuckles threateningly and Malfoy whispered something undoubtedly malevolent to Crabbe .Harry knew perfectly well why they were acting like this He had named all of their fathers as Death Eaters .And the best bit is whispered Hermione gleefully as they left the library they cant contradict you because they cant admit theyve read the article !To cap it all Luna told him over dinner that no copy of The Quibbler had ever sold out faster .Dads reprinting !she told Harry her eyes popping excitedly .He cant believe it he says people seem even more interested in this than the Crumple Horned Snorkacks !Harry was a hero in the Gryffindor common room that night daringly Fred and George had put an Enlargement Charm on the front cover of The Quibbler and hung it on the wall so that Harrys giant head gazed down upon the proceedings occasionally saying things like The Ministry are morons and Eat dung Umbridge in a booming voice .Hermione did not find this very amusing she said it interfered with her concentration and ended up going to bed early out of irritation .Harry had to admit that the poster was not quite as funny after an hour or two especially when the talking spell had started to wear off so that it merely shouted disconnected words like Dung and Umbridge at more and more frequent intervals in a progressively higher voice .In fact it started to make his head ache and his scar began prickling uncomfortably again .To disappointed moans from the many people who were sitting around him asking him to relive his interview for the umpteenth time he announced that he too needed an early night .The dormitory was empty when he reached it .He rested his forehead for a moment against the cool glass of the window beside his bed it felt soothing against his scar .Then he undressed and got into bed wishing his headache would go away .He also felt slightly sick .He rolled over onto his side closed his eyes and fell asleep almost at once .He was standing in a dark curtained room lit by a single branch of candles .His hands were clenched on the back of a chair in front of him .They were long fingered and white as though they had not seen sunlight for years and looked like large pale spiders against the dark velvet of the chair .Beyond the chair in a pool of light cast upon the floor by the candles knelt a man in black robes .I have been badly advised it seems said Harry in a high cold voice that pulsed with anger .Master I crave your pardon .croaked the man kneeling on the floor .The back of his head glimmered in the candlelight .He seemed to be trembling .I do not blame you Rookwood said Harry in that cold cruel voice .He relinquished his grip upon the chair and walked around it closer to the man cowering upon the floor until he stood directly over him in the darkness looking down from a far greater height than usual .You are sure of your facts Rookwood ?asked Harry .Yes My Lord yes .I used to work in the department after after all .Avery told me Bode would be able to remove it .Bode could never have taken it Master .Bode would have known he could not .Undoubtedly that is why he fought so hard against Malfoys Imperius Curse .Stand up Rookwood whispered Harry .The kneeling man almost fell over in his haste to obey .His face was pockmarked the scars were thrown into relief by the candlelight .He remained a little stooped when standing as though halfway through a bow and he darted terrified looks up at Harrys face .You have done well to tell me this said Harry .Very well .I have wasted months on fruitless schemes it seems .But no matter .We begin again from now .You have Lord Voldemorts gratitude Rookwood .My Lord .yes My Lord gasped Rookwood his voice hoarse with relief .I shall need your help .I shall need all the information you can give me .Of course My Lord of course .anything .Very well .you may go .Send Avery to me .Rookwood scurried backward bowing and disappeared through a door .Left alone in the dark room Harry turned toward the wall .A cracked agespotted mirror hung on the wall in the shadows .Harry moved toward it .His reflection grew larger and clearer in the darkness .A face whiter than a skull .red eyes with slits for pupils .NOOOOOOOOO !What ?yelled a voice nearby .Harry flailed around madly became entangled in the hangings and fell out of his bed .For a few seconds he did not know where he was he was convinced that he was about to see the white skulllike face looming at him out of the dark again then Rons voice spoke very near to him .Will you stop acting like a maniac and I can get you out of here !Ron wrenched the hangings apart and Harry stared up at him in the moonlight as he lay flat on his back his scar searing with pain .Ron looked as though he had just been getting ready for bed one arm was out of his robes .Has someone been attacked again ?asked Ron pulling Harry roughly to his feet .Is it Dad ?Is it that snake ?No everyones fine gasped Harry whose forehead felt as though it was on fire again .Well .Avery isnt .Hes in trouble .He gave him the wrong information .Hes really angry .Harry groaned and sank shaking onto his bed rubbing his scar .But Rookwoods going to help him now .Hes on the right track again .What are you talking about ?said Ron sounding scared .Dyou mean .did you just see YouKnow Who ?I was YouKnowWho said Harry and he stretched out his hands in the darkness and held them up to his face to check that they were no longer deathly white and longfingered .He was with Rookwood hes one of the Death Eaters who escaped from Azkaban remember ?Rookwoods just told him Bode couldnt have done it .Done what ?Remove something .He said Bode would have known he couldnt have done it .Bode was under the Imperius Curse .I think he said Malfoys dad put it on him .Bode was bewitched to remove something ?Ron said .But Harry thats got to be The weapon Harry finished the sentence for him .I know .The dormitory door opened Dean and Seamus came in .Harry swung his legs back into bed .He did not want to look as though anything odd had just happened seeing as Seamus had only just stopped thinking Harry was a nutter .Did you say murmured Ron putting his head close to Harrys on the pretense of helping himself to water from the jug on his bedside table that you were You KnowWho ?Yeah said Harry quietly .Ron took an unnecessarily large gulp of water .Harry saw it spill over his chin onto his chest .Harry he said as Dean and Seamus clattered around noisily pulling off their robes and talking youve got to tell I havent got to tell anyone said Harry shortly .I wouldnt have seen it at all if I could do Occlumency .Im supposed to have learned to shut this stuff out .Thats what they want .By they he meant Dumbledore .He got back into bed and rolled over onto his side with his back to Ron and after a while he heard Rons mattress creak as he lay back down too .His scar began to burn he bit hard on his pillow to stop himself making a noise .Somewhere he knew Avery was being punished .Harry and Ron waited until break next morning to tell Hermione exactly what had happened .They wanted to be absolutely sure they could not be overheard .Standing in their usual corner of the cool and breezy courtyard Harry told her every detail of the dream he could remember .When he had finished she said nothing at all for a few moments but stared with a kind of painful intensity at Fred and George who were both headless and selling their magical hats from under their cloaks on the other side of the yard .So thats why they killed him she said quietly withdrawing her gaze from Fred and George at last .When Bode tried to steal this weapon something funny happened to him .I think there must be defensive spells on it or around it to stop people from touching it .Thats why he was in St .Mungos his brain had gone all funny and he couldnt talk .But remember what the Healer told us ?He was recovering .And they couldnt risk him getting better could they ?I mean the shock of whatever happened when he touched that weapon probably made the Imperius Curse lift .Once hed got his voice back hed explain what hed been doing wouldnt he ?They would have known hed been sent to steal the weapon .Of course it would have been easy for Lucius Malfoy to put the curse on him .Never out of the Ministry is he ?He was even hanging around that day I had my hearing said Harry .In the hang on .he said slowly .He was in the Department of Mysteries corridor that day !Your dad said he was probably trying to sneak down and find out what happened in my hearing but what if Sturgis gasped Hermione looking thunderstruck .Sorry ?said Ron looking bewildered .Sturgis Podmore said Hermione breathlessly .Arrested for trying to get through a door .Lucius Malfoy got him too .I bet he did it the day you saw him there Harry .Sturgis had Moodys Invisibility Cloak right ?So what if he was standing guard by the door invisible and Malfoy heard him move or guessed he was there or just did the Imperius Curse on the off chance that a guard was there ?So when Sturgis next had an opportunity probably when it was his turn on guard duty again he tried to get into the department to steal the weapon for Voldemort Ron be quiet but he got caught and sent to Azkaban .She gazed at Harry .And now Rookwoods told Voldemort how to get the weapon ?I didnt hear all the conversation but thats what it sounded like said Harry .Rookwood used to work there .Maybe Voldemortll send Rookwood to do it ?Hermione nodded apparently still lost in thought .Then quite abruptly she said But you shouldnt have seen this at all Harry .What ?he said taken aback .Youre supposed to be learning how to close your mind to this sort of thing said Hermione suddenly stern .I know I am said Harry .But Well I think we should just try and forget what you saw said Hermione firmly .And you ought to put in a bit more effort on your Occlumency from now on .Harry was so angry with her that he did not talk to her for the rest of the day which proved to be another bad one .When people were not discussing the escaped Death Eaters in the corridors today they were laughing at Gryffindors abysmal performance in their match against Hufflepuff the Slytherins were singing Weasley Is Our King so loudly and frequently that by sundown Filch had banned it from the corridors out of sheer irritation .The week did not improve as it progressed Harry received two more Ds in Potions was still on tenterhooks that Hagrid might get the sack and could not stop himself from dwelling on the dream in which he had seen Voldemort though he did not bring it up with Ron and Hermione again because he did not want another tellingoff from Hermione .He wished very much that he could have talked to Sirius about it but that was out of the question so he tried to push the matter to the back of his mind .Unfortunately the back of his mind was no longer the secure place it had once been .Get up Potter .A couple of weeks after his dream of Rookwood Harry was to be found yet again kneeling on the floor of Snapes office trying to clear his head .He had just been forced yet again to relive a stream of very early memories he had not even realized he still had most of them concerning humiliations Dudley and his gang had inflicted upon him in primary school .That last memory said Snape .What was it ?I dont know said Harry getting wearily to his feet .He was finding it increasingly difficult to disentangle separate memories from the rush of images and sound that Snape kept calling forth .You mean the one where my cousin tried to make me stand in the toilet ?No said Snape softly .I mean the one concerning a man kneeling in the middle of a darkened room .Its .nothing said Harry .Snapes dark eyes bored into Harrys .Remembering what Snape had said about eye contact being crucial to Legilimency Harry blinked and looked away .How do that man and that room come to be inside your head Potter ?said Snape .It said Harry looking everywhere but at Snape it was just a dream I had .A dream repeated Snape .There was a pause during which Harry stared fixedly at a large dead frog suspended in a purple liquid in its jar .You do know why we are here dont you Potter ?said Snape in a low dangerous voice .You do know why I am giving up my evenings to this tedious job ?Yes said Harry stiffly .Remind me why we are here Potter .So I can learn Occlumency said Harry now glaring at a dead eel .Correct Potter .And dim though you may be Harry looked back at Snape hating him I would have thought that after two months worth of lessons you might have made some progress .How many other dreams about the Dark Lord have you had ?Just that one lied Harry .Perhaps said Snape his dark cold eyes narrowing slightly perhaps you actually enjoy having these visions and dreams Potter .Maybe they make you feel special important ?No they dont said Harry his jaw set and his fingers clenched tightly around the handle of his wand .That is just as well Potter said Snape coldly because you are neither special nor important and it is not up to you to find out what the Dark Lord is saying to his Death Eaters .No thats your job isnt it ?Harry shot at him .He had not meant to say it it had burst out of him in temper .For a long moment they stared at each other Harry convinced he had gone too far .But there was a curious almost satisfied expression on Snapes face when he answered .Yes Potter he said his eyes glinting .That is my job .Now if you are ready we will start again .He raised his wand .One two three LegilimensV A hundred dementors were swooping toward Harry across the lake in the grounds .He screwed up his face in concentration .They were coming closer .He could see the dark holes beneath their hoods .yet he could also see Snape standing in front of him his eyes fixed upon Harrys face muttering under his breath .And somehow Snape was growing clearer and the dementors were growing fainter .Harry raised his own wand .Protegol Snape staggered his wand flew upward away from Harry and suddenly Harrys mind was teeming with memories that were not his a hooknosed man was shouting at a cowering woman while a small darkhaired boy cried in a corner .A greasyhaired teenager sat alone in a dark bedroom pointing his wand at the ceiling shooting down flies .A girl was laughing as a scrawny boy tried to mount a bucking broomstick ENOUGH !Harry felt as though he had been pushed hard in the chest he took several staggering steps backward hit some of the shelves covering Snapes walls and heard something crack .Snape was shaking slightly very white in the face .The back of Harrys robes were damp .One of the jars behind him had broken when he fell against it the pickled slimy thing within was swirling in its draining potion .Reparo hissed Snape and the jar sealed itself once more .Well Potter .that was certainly an improvement .Panting slightly Snape straightened the Pensieve in which he had again stored some of his thoughts before starting the lesson almost as though checking that they were still there .I dont remember telling you to use a Shield Charm .but there is no doubt that it was effective .Harry did not speak he felt that to say anything might be dangerous .He was sure he had just broken into Snapes memories that he had just seen scenes from Snapes childhood and it was unnerving to think that the crying little boy who had watched his parents shouting was actually standing in front of him with such loathing in his eyes .Lets try again shall we ?said Snape .Harry felt a thrill of dread He was about to pay for what had just happened he was sure of it .They moved back into position with the desk between them Harry feeling he was going to find it much harder to empty his mind this time .On the count of three then said Snape raising his wand once more .One two Harry did not have time to gather himself together and attempt to clear his mind for Snape had already cried Legilimens He was hurtling along the corridor toward the Department of Mysteries past the blank stone walls past the torches the plain black door was growing ever larger he was moving so fast he was going to collide with it he was feet from it and he could see that chink of faint blue light again The door had flown open !He was through it at last inside a blackwalled blackfloored circular room lit with blueflamed candles and there were more doors all around him he needed to go on but which door ought he to take ?POTTER !Harry opened his eyes .He was flat on his back again with no memory of having gotten there he was also panting as though he really had run the length of the Department of Mysteries corridor really had sprinted through the black door and found the circular room .Explain yourself !said Snape who was standing over him looking furious .I .dunno what happened said Harry truthfully standing up .There was a lump on the back of his head from where he had hit the ground and he felt feverish .Ive never seen that before .I mean I told you Ive dreamed about the door .but its never opened before .You are not working hard enough !For some reason Snape seemed even angrier than he had done two minutes before when Harry had seen into his own memories .You are lazy and sloppy Potter it is small wonder that the Dark Lord Can you tell me something sir ?said Harry firing up again .Why do you call Voldemort the Dark Lord Ive only ever heard Death Eaters call him that Snape opened his mouth in a snarl and a woman screamed from somewhere outside the room .Snapes head jerked upward he was gazing at the ceiling .What the ?he muttered .Harry could hear a muffled commotion coming from what he thought might be the entrance hall .Snape looked around at him frowning .Did you see anything unusual on your way down here Potter ?Harry shook his head .Somewhere above them the woman screamed again .Snape strode to his office door his wand still held at the ready and swept out of sight .Harry hesitated for a moment then followed .The screams were indeed coming from the entrance hall they grew louder as Harry ran toward the stone steps leading up from the dungeons .When he reached the top he found the entrance hall packed .Students had come flooding out of the Great Hall where dinner was still in progress to see what was going on .Others had crammed themselves onto the marble staircase .Harry pushed forward through a knot of tall Slytherins and saw that the onlookers had formed a great ring some of them looking shocked others even frightened .Professor McGonagall was directly opposite Harry on the other side of the hall she looked as though what she was watching made her feel faintly sick .Professor Trelawney was standing in the middle of the entrance hall with her wand in one hand and an empty sherry bottle in the other looking utterly mad .Her hair was sticking up on end her glasses were lopsided so that one eye was magnified more than the other her innumerable shawls and scarves were trailing haphazardly from her shoulders giving the impression that she was falling apart at the seams .Two large trunks lay on the floor beside her one of them upside down it looked very much as though it had been thrown down the stairs after her .Professor Trelawney was staring apparently terrified at something Harry could not see but that seemed to be standing at the foot of the stairs .No !she shrieked .NO !This cannot be happening .It cannot .I refuse to accept it !You didnt realize this was coming ?said a high girlish voice sounding callously amused and Harry moving slightly to his right saw that Trelawneys terrifying vision was nothing other than Professor Umbridge .Incapable though you are of predicting even tomorrows weather you must surely have realized that your pitiful performance during my inspections and lack of any improvement would make it inevitable you would be sacked ?You ccant !howled Professor Trelawney tears streaming down her face from behind her enormous lenses you ccant sack me !Ive bbeen here sixteen years !HHogwarts is mmy hhome !It was your home said Professor Umbridge and Harry was revolted to see the enjoyment stretching her toadlike face as she watched Professor Trelawney sink sobbing uncontrollably onto one of her trunks until an hour ago when the Minister of Magic countersigned the order for your dismissal .Now kindly remove yourself from this hall .You are embarrassing us .But she stood and watched with an expression of gloating enjoyment as Professor Trelawney shuddered and moaned rocking backward and forward on her trunk in paroxysms of grief .Harry heard a sob to his left and looked around .Lavender and Parvati were both crying silently their arms around each other .Then he heard footsteps .Professor McGonagall had broken away from the spectators marched straight up to Professor Trelawney and was patting her firmly on the back while withdrawing a large handkerchief from within her robes .There there Sibyll .Calm down .Blow your nose on this .Its not as bad as you think now .You are not going to have to leave Hogwarts .Oh really Professor McGonagall ?said Umbridge in a deadly voice taking a few steps forward .And your authority for that statement is . ?That would be mine said a deep voice .The oak front doors had swung open .Students beside them scuttled out of the way as Dumbledore appeared in the entrance .What he had been doing out in the grounds Harry could not imagine but there was something impressive about the sight of him framed in the doorway against an oddly misty night .Leaving the doors wide behind him he strode forward through the circle of onlookers toward the place where Professor Trelawney sat tearstained and trembling upon her trunk Professor McGonagall alongside her .Yours Professor Dumbledore ?said Umbridge with a singularly unpleasant little laugh .Im afraid you do not understand the position .I have here she pulled a parchment scroll from within her robes an Order of Dismissal signed by myself and the Minister of Magic .Under the terms of Educational Decree Number Twentythree the High Inquisitor of Hogwarts has the power to inspect place upon probation and sack any teacher she that is to say I feel is not performing up to the standard required by the Ministry of Magic .I have decided that Professor Trelawney is not up to scratch .I have dismissed her .To Harrys very great surprise Dumbledore continued to smile .He looked down at Professor Trelawney who was still sobbing and choking on her trunk and said You are quite right of course Professor Umbridge .As High Inquisitor you have every right to dismiss my teachers .You do not however have the authority to send them away from the castle .I am afraid he went on with a courteous little bow that the power to do that still resides with the headmaster and it is my wish that Professor Trelawney continue to live at Hogwarts .At this Professor Trelawney gave a wild little laugh in which a hiccup was barely hidden .No no Ill ggo Dumbledore !I shshall 1leave Hogwarts and sseek my fortune elsewhere No said Dumbledore sharply .It is my wish that you remain Sibyll .He turned to Professor McGonagall .Might I ask you to escort Sibyll back upstairs Professor McGonagall ?Of course said McGonagall .Up you get Sibyll .Professor Sprout came hurrying forward out of the crowd and grabbed Professor Trelawneys other arm .Together they guided her past Umbridge and up the marble stairs .Professor Flitwick went scurrying after them his wand held out before him he squeaked Locomotor trunksl and Professor Trelawneys luggage rose into the air and proceeded up the staircase after her Professor Flitwick bringing up the rear .Professor Umbridge was standing stockstill staring at Dumbledore who continued to smile benignly .And what she said in a whisper that nevertheless carried all around the entrance hall are you going to do with her once I appoint a new Divination teacher who needs her lodgings ?Oh that wont be a problem said Dumbledore pleasantly .You see I have already found us a new Divination teacher and he will prefer lodgings on the ground floor .Youve found ?said Umbridge shrilly .Youve found ?Might I remind you Dumbledore that under Educational Decree Twentytwo the Ministry has the right to appoint a suitable candidate if and only if the headmaster is unable to find one said Dumbledore .And I am happy to say that on this occasion I have succeeded .May I introduce you ?He turned to face the open front doors through which night mist was now drifting .Harry heard hooves .There was a shocked murmur around the hall and those nearest the doors hastily moved even farther backward some of them tripping over in their haste to clear a path for the newcomer .Through the mist came a face Harry had seen once before on a dark dangerous night in the Forbidden Forest whiteblond hair and astonishingly blue eyes the head and torso of a man joined to the palomino body of a horse .This is Firenze said Dumbledore happily to a thunderstruck Umbridge .I think you 11 find him suitable .THE CENTAUR AND THE SNEAK Ill bet you wish you hadnt given up Divination now dont you Hermione ?asked Parvati smirking .It was breakfast time a few days after the sacking of Professor Trelawney and Parvati was curling her eyelashes around her wand and examining the effect in the back of her spoon .They were to have their first lesson with Firenze that morning .Not really said Hermione indifferently who was reading the Daily Prophet Ive never really liked horses .She turned a page of the newspaper scanning its columns .Hes not a horse hes a centaur !said Lavender sounding shocked .A gorgeous centaur .sighed Parvati .Either way hes still got four legs said Hermione coolly .Anyway I thought you two were all upset that Trelawney had gone ?We are !Lavender assured her .We went up to her office to see her we took her some daffodils not the honking ones that Sprouts got nice ones .How is she ?asked Harry .Not very good poor thing said Lavender sympathetically .She was crying and saying shed rather leave the castle forever than stay here if Umbridge is still here and I dont blame her .Umbridge was horrible to her wasnt she ?Ive got a feeling Umbridge has only just started being horrible said Hermione darkly .Impossible said Ron who was tucking into a large plate of eggs and bacon .She cant get any worse than shes been already .You mark my words shes going to want revenge on Dumbledore for appointing a new teacher without consulting her said Hermione closing the newspaper .Especially another parthuman .You saw the look on her face when she saw Firenze .After breakfast Hermione departed for her Arithmancy class and Harry and Ron followed Parvati and Lavender into the entrance hall heading for Divination .Arent we going up to North Tower ?asked Ron looking puzzled as Parvati bypassed the marble staircase .Parvati looked scornfully over her shoulder at him .How dyou expect Firenze to climb that ladder ?Were in classroom eleven now it was on the notice board yesterday .Classroom eleven was situated in the groundfloor corridor leading off the entrance hall on the opposite side to the Great Hall .Harry knew it to be one of those classrooms that were never used regularly and that it therefore had the slightly neglected feeling of a cupboard or storeroom .When he entered it right behind Ron and found himself right in the middle of a forest clearing he was therefore momentarily stunned .What the ?The classroom floor had become springily mossy and trees were growing out of it their leafy branches fanned across the ceiling and windows so that the room was full of slanting shafts of soft dappled green light .The students who had already arrived were sitting on the earthy floor with their backs resting against tree trunks or boulders arms wrapped around their knees or folded tightly across their chests looking rather nervous .In the middle of the room where there were no trees stood Firenze .Harry Potter he said holding out a hand when Harry entered .Er hi said Harry shaking hands with the centaur who surveyed him unblinkingly through those astonishingly blue eyes but did not smile .Er good to see you .And you said the centaur inclining his whiteblond head .It was foretold that we would meet again .Harry noticed that there was the shadow of a hoof shaped bruise on Firenzes chest .As he turned to join the rest of the class upon the floor he saw that they were all looking at him with awe apparently deeply impressed that he was on speaking terms with Firenze whom they seemed to find intimidating .When the door was closed and the last student had sat down upon a tree stump beside the wastepaper basket Firenze gestured around the room .Professor Dumbledore has kindly arranged this classroom for us said Firenze when everyone had settled down in imitation of my natural habitat .I would have preferred to teach you in the Forbidden Forest which was until Monday my home .but this is not possible .Please er sir said Parvati breathlessly raising her hand why not ?Weve been in there with Hagrid were not frightened !It is not a question of your bravery said Firenze but of my position .I can no longer return to the forest .My herd has banished me .Herd ?said Lavender in a confused voice and Harry knew she was thinking of cows .What oh !Comprehension dawned on her face .There are more of you ?she said stunned .Did Hagrid breed you like the thestrals ?asked Dean eagerly .Firenze turned his head very slowly to face Dean who seemed to realize at once that he had said something very offensive .I didnt I meant sorry he finished in a hushed voice .Centaurs are not the servants or playthings of humans said Firenze quietly .There was a pause then Parvati raised her hand again .Please sir .why have the other centaurs banished you ?Because I have agreed to work for Professor Dumbledore said Firenze .They see this as a betrayal of our kind .Harry remembered how nearly four years ago the centaur Bane had shouted at Firenze for allowing Harry to ride to safety upon his back calling him a common mule .He wondered whether it had been Bane who had kicked Firenze in the chest .Let us begin said Firenze .He swished his long palomino tail raised his hand toward the leafy canopy overhead then lowered it slowly and as he did so the light in the room dimmed so that they now seemed to be sitting in a forest clearing by twilight and stars emerged upon the ceiling .There were oohs and gasps and Ron said audibly Blimey !Lie back upon the floor said Firenze in his calm voice and observe the heavens .Here is written for those who can see the fortune of our races .Harry stretched out on his back and gazed upward at the ceiling .A twinkling red star winked at him from overhead .I know that you have learned the names of the planets and their moons in Astronomy said Firenzes calm voice and that you have mapped the stars progress through the heavens .Centaurs have unraveled the mysteries of these movements over centuries .Our findings teach us that the future may be glimpsed in the sky above us .Professor Trelawney did Astrology with us !said Parvati excitedly raising her hand in front of her so that it stuck up in the air as she lay on her back .Mars causes accidents and burns and things like that and when it makes an angle to Saturn like now she drew a right angle in the air above her that means that people need to be extra careful when handling hot things That said Firenze calmly is human nonsense .Parvatis hand fell limply to her side .Trivial hurts tiny human accidents said Firenze as his hooves thudded over the mossy floor .These are of no more significance than the scurryings of ants to the wide universe and are unaffected by planetary movements .Professor Trelawney began Parvati in a hurt and indignant voice .is a human said Firenze simply .And is therefore blinkered and fettered by the limitations of your kind .Harry turned his head very slightly to look at Parvati .She looked very offended as did several of the people surrounding her .Sibyll Trelawney may have Seen I do not know continued Firenze and Harry heard the swishing of his tail again as he walked up and down before them but she wastes her time in the main on the self flattering nonsense humans call fortunetelling .I however am here to explain the wisdom of centaurs which is impersonal and impartial .We watch the skies for the great tides of evil or change that are sometimes marked there .It may take ten years to be sure of what we are seeing .Firenze pointed to the red star directly above Harry .In the past decade the indications have been that Wizardkind is living through nothing more than a brief calm between two wars .Mars bringer of battle shines brightly above us suggesting that the fight must break out again soon .How soon centaurs may attempt to divine by the burning of certain herbs and leaves by the observation of fume and flame .It was the most unusual lesson Harry had ever attended .They did indeed burn sage and mallowsweet there on the classroom floor and Firenze told them to look for certain shapes and symbols in the pungent fumes but he seemed perfectly unconcerned that not one of them could see any of the signs he described telling them that humans were hardly ever good at this that it took centaurs years and years to become competent and finished by telling them that it was foolish to put too much faith in such things anyway because even centaurs sometimes read them wrongly .He was nothing like any human teacher Harry had ever had .His priority did not seem to be to teach them what he knew but rather to impress upon them that nothing not even centaurs knowledge was foolproof .Hes not very definite on anything is he ?said Ron in a low voice as they put out their mallowsweet fire .I mean I could do with a few more details about this war were about to have couldnt you ?The bell rang right outside the classroom door and everyone jumped Harry had completely forgotten that they were still inside the castle quite convinced that he was really in the forest .The class filed out looking slightly perplexed Harry and Ron were on the point of following them when Firenze called Harry Potter a word please .Harry turned .The centaur advanced a little toward him .Ron hesitated .You may stay Firenze told him .But close the door please .Ron hastened to obey .Harry Potter you are a friend of Hagrids are you not ?said the centaur .Yes said Harry .Then give him a warning from me .His attempt is not working .He would do better to abandon it .His attempt is not working ?Harry repeated blankly .And he would do better to abandon it said Firenze nodding .I would warn Hagrid myself but I am banished it would be unwise for me to go too near the forest now Hagrid has troubles enough without a centaurs battle .But whats Hagrid attempting to do ?said Harry nervously .Firenze looked at Harry impassively .Hagrid has recently rendered me a great service said Firenze and he has long since earned my respect for the care he shows all living creatures .I shall not betray his secret .But he must be brought to his senses .The attempt is not working .Tell him Harry Potter .Good day to you .The happiness Harry had felt in the aftermath of The Quibbler interview had long since evaporated .As a dull March blurred into a squally April his life seemed to have become one long series of worries and problems again .Umbridge had continued attending all Care of Magical Creatures lessons so it had been very difficult to deliver Firenzes warning to Hagrid .At last Harry had managed it by pretending he had lost his copy of Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them and doubling back after class one day .When he passed on Firenzes message Hagrid gazed at him for a moment through his puffy blackened eyes apparently taken aback .Then he seemed to pull himself together .Nice bloke Firenze he said gruffly but he don know what hes talkin abou on this .The attemps cornin on fine .Hagrid whatre you up to ?asked Harry seriously .Because youve got to be careful Umbridge has already sacked Trelawney and if you ask me shes on a roll .If youre doing anything you shouldnt be Theres things more importan than keepin a job said Hagrid though his hands shook slightly as he said this and a basin full of knarl droppings crashed to the floor .Don worry abou me Harry jus get along now theres a good lad .Harry had no choice but to leave Hagrid mopping up the dung all over his floor but he felt thoroughly dispirited as he trudged back up to the castle .Meanwhile as the teachers and Hermione persisted in reminding them the O .W .L .s were drawing ever nearer .All the fifth years were suffering from stress to some degree but Hannah Abbott became the first to receive a Calming Draught from Madam Pomfrey after she burst into tears during Herbology and sobbed that she was too stupid to take exams and wanted to leave school now .If it had not been for the D .A .lessons Harry thought he would have been extremely unhappy .He sometimes felt that he was living for the hours he spent in the Room of Requirement working hard but thoroughly enjoying himself at the same time swelling with pride as he looked around at his fellow D .A .members and saw how far they had come .Indeed Harry sometimes wondered how Umbridge was going to react when all the members of the D .A .received Outstanding in their Defense Against the Dark Arts O .W .L .s .They had finally started work on Patronuses which everybody had been very keen to practice though as Harry kept reminding them producing a Patronus in the middle of a brightly lit classroom when they were not under threat was very different to producing it when confronted by something like a dementor .Oh dont be such a killjoy said Cho brightly watching her silvery swanshaped Patronus soar around the Room of Requirement during their last lesson before Easter .Theyre so pretty !Theyre not supposed to be pretty theyre supposed to protect you said Harry patiently .What we really need is a boggart or something thats how I learned I had to conjure a Patronus while the boggart was pretending to be a dementor But that would be really scary !said Lavender who was shooting puffs of silver vapor out of the end of her wand .And I still cant do it !she added angrily .Neville was having trouble too .His face was screwed up in concentration but only feeble wisps of silver smoke issued from his wand tip .Youve got to think of something happy Harry reminded him .Im trying said Neville miserably who was trying so hard his round face was actually shining with sweat .Harry I think Im doing it !yelled Seamus who had been brought along to his first ever D .A .meeting by Dean .Look ah its gone .But it was definitely something hairy Harry !Hermiones Patronus a shining silver otter was gamboling around her .They are sort of nice arent they ?she said looking at it fondly .The door of the Room of Requirement opened and then closed again Harry looked around to see who had entered but there did not seem to be anybody there .It was a few moments before he realized that the people close to the door had fallen silent .Next thing he knew something was tugging at his robes somewhere near the knee .He looked down and saw to his very great astonishment Dobby the houseelf peering up at him from beneath his usual eight hats .Hi Dobby !he said .What are you whats wrong ?For the elfs eyes were wide with terror and he was shaking .The members of the D .A .closest to Harry had fallen silent now Everybody in the room was watching Dobby .The few Patronuses people had managed to conjure faded away into silver mist leaving the room looking much darker than before .Harry Potter sir .squeaked the elf trembling from head to foot Harry Potter sir .Dobby has come to warn you .but the houseelves have been warned not to tell .He ran headfirst at the wall Harry who had some experience of Dobbys habits of selfpunishment made to seize him but Dobby merely bounced off the stone cushioned by his eight hats .Hermione and a few of the other girls let out squeaks of fear and sympathy .Whats happened Dobby ?Harry asked grabbing the elfs tiny arm and holding him away from anything with which he might seek to hurt himself .Harry Potter .she .she .Dobby hit himself hard on the nose with his free fist Harry seized that too .Whos ‘she Dobby ?But he thought he knew surely only one she could induce such fear in Dobby ?The elf looked up at him slightly crosseyed and mouthed wordlessly .Umbridge ?asked Harry horrified .Dobby nodded then tried to bang his head off Harrys knees Harry held him at bay .What about her ?Dobby she hasnt found out about this about us about the D .A .He read the answer in the elfs stricken face .His hands held fast by Harry the elf tried to kick himself and fell to the floor .Is she coming ?Harry asked quietly .Dobby let out a howl and began beating his bare feet hard on the floor .Yes Harry Potter yes !Harry straightened up and looked around at the motionless terrified people gazing at the thrashing elf .WHAT ARE YOU WAITING FOR ?Harry bellowed .RUN !They all pelted toward the exit at once forming a scrum at the door then people burst through Harry could hear them sprinting along the corridors and hoped they had the sense not to try and make it all the way to their dormitories .It was only ten to nine if they just took refuge in the library or the Owlery which were both nearer Harry come on !shrieked Hermione from the center of the knot of people now fighting to get out .He scooped up Dobby who was still attempting to do himself serious injury and ran with the elf in his arms to join the back of the queue .Dobby this is an order get back down to the kitchen with the other elves and if she asks you whether you warned me lie and say no !said Harry .And I forbid you to hurt yourself !he added dropping the elf as he made it over the threshold at last and slamming the door behind him .Thank you Harry Potter !squeaked Dobby and he streaked off .Harry glanced left and right the others were all moving so fast that he caught only glimpses of flying heels at either end of the corridor before they vanished .He started to run right there was a boys bathroom up ahead he could pretend hed been in there all the time if he could just reach it aaRGH !Something caught him around the ankles and he fell spectacularly skidding along on his front for six feet before coming to a halt .Someone behind him was laughing .He rolled over onto his back and saw Malfoy concealed in a niche beneath an ugly dragonshaped vase .Trip Jinx Potter !he said .Hey Professor PROFESSOR !Ive got one !Umbridge came bustling around the far corner breathless but wearing a delighted smile .Its him !she said jubilantly at the sight of Harry on the floor .Excellent Draco excellent oh very good fifty points to Slytherin !Ill take him from here .Stand up Potter !Harry got to his feet glaring at the pair of them .He had never seen Umbridge looking so happy .She seized his arm in a vicelike grip and turned beaming broadly to Malfoy .You hop along and see if you can round up anymore of them Draco she said .Tell the others to look in the library anybody out of breath check the bathrooms Miss Parkinson can do the girls ones off you go and you she added in her softest most dangerous voice as Malfoy walked away .You can come with me to the headmasters office Potter .They were at the stone gargoyle within minutes .Harry wondered how many of the others had been caught .He thought of Ron Mrs Weasley would kill him and of how Hermione would feel if she was expelled before she could take her O .W .L .s .And it had been Seamuss very first meeting .and Neville had been getting so good .Fizzing Whizbee sang Umbridge and the stone gargoyle jumped aside the wall behind split open and they ascended the moving stone staircase .They reached the polished door with the griffin knocker but Umbridge did not bother to knock she strode straight inside still holding tight to Harry .The office was full of people .Dumbledore was sitting behind his desk his expression serene the tips of his long fingers together .Professor McGonagall stood rigidly beside him her face extremely tense .Cornelius Fudge Minister of Magic was rocking backward and forward on his toes beside the fire apparently immensely pleased with the situation .Kingsley Shacklebolt and a toughlooking wizard Harry did not recognize with very short wiry hair were positioned on either side of the door like guards and the freckled bespectacled form of Percy Weasley hovered excitedly beside the wall a quill and a heavy scroll of parchment in his hands apparently poised to take notes .The portraits of old headmasters and mistresses were not shamming sleep tonight .All of them were watching what was happening below alert and serious .As Harry entered a few flitted into neighboring frames and whispered urgently into their neighbors ears .Harry pulled himself free of Umbridges grasp as the door swung shut behind them .Cornelius Fudge was glaring at him with a kind of vicious satisfaction upon his face .Well he said .Well well well .Harry replied with the dirtiest look he could muster .His heart drummed madly inside him but his brain was oddly cool and clear .He was heading back to Gryffindor Tower said Umbridge .There was an indecent excitement in her voice the same callous pleasure Harry had heard as she watched Professor Trelawney dissolving with misery in the entrance hall .The Malfoy boy cornered him .Did he did he ?said Fudge appreciatively .I must remember to tell Lucius .Well Potter .I expect you know why you are here ?Harry fully intended to respond with a defiant yes His mouth had opened and the word was half formed when he caught sight of Dumbledores face .Dumbledore was not looking directly at Harry his eyes were fixed upon a point just over his shoulder but as Harry stared at him he shook his head a fraction of an inch to each side .Harry changed direction mid word .Yeh no .I beg your pardon ?said Fudge .No said Harry firmly .You dont know why you are here ?No I dont said Harry .Fudge looked incredulously from Harry to Professor Umbridge Harry took advantage of his momentary inattention to steal another quick look at Dumbledore who gave the carpet the tiniest of nods and the shadow of a wink .So you have no idea said Fudge in a voice positively sagging with sarcasm why Professor Umbridge has brought you to this office ?You are not aware that you have broken any school rules ?School rules ?said Harry .No .Or Ministry decrees ?amended Fudge angrily .Not that Im aware of said Harry blandly .His heart was still hammering very fast .It was almost worth telling these lies to watch Fudges blood pressure rising but he could not see how on earth he would get away with them .If somebody had tipped off Umbridge about the D .A .then he the leader might as well be packing his trunk right now .So its news to you is it said Fudge his voice now thick with anger that an illegal student organization has been discovered within this school ?Yes it is said Harry hoisting an unconvincing look of innocent surprise onto his face .I think Minister said Umbridge silkily from beside him we might make better progress if I fetch our informant .Yes yes do said Fudge nodding and he glanced maliciously at Dumbledore as Umbridge left the room .Theres nothing like a good witness is there Dumbledore ?Nothing at all Cornelius said Dumbledore gravely inclining his head .There was a wait of several minutes in which nobody looked at each other then Harry heard the door open behind him .Umbridge moved past him into the room gripping by the shoulder Chos curlyhaired friend Marietta who was hiding her face in her hands .Dont be scared dear dont be frightened said Professor Umbridge softly patting her on the back its quite all right now .You have done the right thing .The minister is very pleased with you .Hell be telling your mother what a good girl youve been .Mariettas mother Minister she added looking up at Fudge is Madam Edgecombe from the Department of Magical Transportation .Floo Network office shes been helping us police the Hogwarts fires you know .Jolly good jolly good !said Fudge heartily .Like mother like daughter eh ?Well come on now dear look up dont be shy lets hear what youve got to galloping gargoyles !As Marietta raised her head Fudge leapt backward in shock nearly landing himself in the fire .He cursed and stamped on the hem of his cloak which had started to smoke and Marietta gave a wail and pulled the neck of her robes right up to her eyes but not before the whole room had seen that her face was horribly disfigured by a series of close set purple pustules that had spread across her nose and cheeks to form the word SNEAK .Never mind the spots now dear said Umbridge impatiently just take your robes away from your mouth and tell the Minister But Marietta gave another muffled wail and shook her head frantically .Oh very well you silly girl Ill tell him snapped Umbridge .She hitched her sickly smile back onto her face and said Well Minister Miss Edgecombe here came to my office shortly after dinner this evening and told me she had something she wanted to tell me .She said that if I proceeded to a secret room on the seventh floor sometimes known as the Room of Requirement I would find out something to my advantage .I questioned her a little further and she admitted that there was to be some kind of meeting there .Unfortunately at that point this hex she waved impatiently at Mariettas concealed face came into operation and upon catching sight of her face in my mirror the girl became too distressed to tell me any more .Well now said Fudge fixing Marietta with what he evidently imagined was a kind and fatherly look .It is very brave of you my dear coming to tell Professor Umbridge you did exactly the right thing .Now will you tell me what happened at this meeting ?What was its purpose ?Who was there ?But Marietta would not speak .She merely shook her head again her eyes wide and fearful .Havent we got a counterjinx for this ?Fudge asked Umbridge impatiently gesturing at Mariettas face .So she can speak freely ?I have not yet managed to find one Umbridge admitted grudgingly and Harry felt a surge of pride in Hermiones jinxing ability .But it doesnt matter if she wont speak I can take up the story from here .You will remember Minister that I sent you a report back in October that Potter had met a number of fellow students in the Hogs Head in Hogsmeade And what is your evidence for that ?cut in Professor McGonagall .I have testimony from Willy Widdershins Minerva who happened to be in the bar at the time .He was heavily bandaged it is true but his hearing was quite unimpaired said Umbridge smugly .He heard every word Potter said and hastened straight to the school to report to me Oh so thats why he wasnt prosecuted for setting up all those regurgitating toilets !said Professor McGonagall raising her eyebrows .What an interesting insight into our justice system !Blatant corruption !roared the portrait of the corpulent rednosed wizard on the wall behind Dumbledores desk .The Ministry did not cut deals with petty criminals in my day no sir they did not !Thank you Fortescue that will do said Dumbledore softly .The purpose of Potters meeting with these students continued Professor Umbridge was to persuade them to join an illegal society whose aim was to learn spells and curses the Ministry has decided are inappropriate for schoolage I think you 11 find youre wrong there Dolores said Dumbledore quietly peering at her over the half moon spectacles perched halfway down his crooked nose .Harry stared at him .He could not see how Dumbledore was going to talk him out of this one if Willy Widdershins had indeed heard every word he said in the Hogs Head there was simply no escaping it .Oho !said Fudge bouncing up and down on the balls of his feet again .Yes do lets hear the latest cockandbull story designed to pull Potter out of trouble !Go on then Dumbledore go on Willy Widdershins was lying was he ?Or was it Potters identical twin in the Hogs Head that day ?Or is there the usual simple explanation involving a reversal of time a dead man coming back to life and a couple of invisible dementors ?Percy Weasley let out a hearty laugh .Oh very good Minister very good !Harry could have kicked him .Then he saw to his astonishment that Dumbledore was smiling gently too .Cornelius I do not deny and nor I am sure does Harry that he was in the Hogs Head that day nor that he was trying to recruit students to a Defense Against the Dark Arts group .I am merely pointing out that Dolores is quite wrong to suggest that such a group was at that time illegal .If you remember the Ministry decree banning all student societies was not put into effect until two days after Harrys Hogsmeade meeting so he was not breaking any rules in the Hogs Head at all .Percy looked as though he had been struck in the face by something very heavy .Fudge remained motionless in midbounce his mouth hanging open .Umbridge recovered first .Thats all very fine Headmaster she said smiling sweetly .But we are now nearly six months on from the introduction of Educational Decree Number Twentyfour .If the first meeting was not illegal all those that have happened since most certainly are .Well said Dumbledore surveying her with polite interest over the top of his interlocked fingers they certainly would be if they had continued after the decree came into effect .Do you have any evidence that these meetings continued ?As Dumbledore spoke Harry heard a rustle behind him and rather thought Kingsley whispered something .He could have sworn too that he felt something brush against his side a gentle something like a draft or bird wings but looking down he saw nothing there .Evidence ?repeated Umbridge with that horrible wide toadlike smile .Have you not been listening Dumbledore ?Why do you think Miss Edgecombe is here ?Oh can she tell us about six months worth of meetings ?said Dumbledore raising his eyebrows .I was under the impression that she was merely reporting a meeting tonight .Miss Edgecombe said Umbridge at once tell us how long these meetings have been going on dear .You can simply nod or shake your head Im sure that wont make the spots worse .Have they been happening regularly over the last six months ?Harry felt a horrible plummeting in his stomach .This was it they had hit a dead end of solid evidence that not even Dumbledore would be able to shift aside .Just nod or shake your head dear Umbridge said coaxingly to Marietta .Come on now that wont activate the jinx further .Everyone in the room was gazing at the top of Mariettas face .Only her eyes were visible between the pulled up robes and her curly fringe .Perhaps it was a trick of the firelight but her eyes looked oddly blank .And then to Harrys utter amazement Marietta shook her head .Umbridge looked quickly at Fudge and then back at Marietta .I dont think you understood the question did you dear ?Im asking whether youve been going to these meetings for the past six months ?You have havent you ?Again Marietta shook her head .What do you mean by shaking your head dear ?said Umbridge in a testy voice .I would have thought her meaning was quite clear said Professor McGonagall harshly .There have been no secret meetings for the past six months .Is that correct Miss Edgecombe ?Marietta nodded .But there was a meeting tonight !said Umbridge furiously .There was a meeting Miss Edgecombe you told me about it in the Room of Requirement !And Potter was the leader was he not Potter organized it Potter why are you shaking your head girl ?Well usually when a person shakes their head said McGonagall coldly they mean ‘no .So unless Miss Edgecombe is using a form of sign language as yet unknown to humans Professor Umbridge seized Marietta pulled her around to face her and began shaking her very hard .A split second later Dumbledore was on his feet his wand raised .Kingsley started forward and Umbridge leapt back from Marietta waving her hands in the air as though they had been burned .I cannot allow you to manhandle my students Dolores said Dumbledore and for the first time he looked angry .You want to calm yourself Madam Umbridge said Kingsley in his deep slow voice .You dont want to get yourself into trouble now .No said Umbridge breathlessly glancing up at the towering figure of Kingsley .I mean yes youre right Shacklebolt I I forgot myself .Marietta was standing exactly where Umbridge had released her .She seemed neither perturbed by Umbridges sudden attack nor relieved by her release .She was still clutching her robe up to her oddly blank eyes staring straight ahead of her .A sudden suspicion connected to Kingsleys whisper and the thing he had felt shoot past him sprang into Harrys mind .Dolores said Fudge with the air of trying to settle something once and for all the meeting tonight the one we know definitely happened Yes said Umbridge pulling herself together yes .well Miss Edgecombe tipped me off and I proceeded at once to the seventh floor accompanied by certain trustworthy students so as to catch those in the meeting redhanded .It appears that they were forewarned of my arrival however because when we reached the seventh floor they were running in every direction .It does not matter however .I have all their names here Miss Parkinson ran into the Room of Requirement for me to see if they had left anything behind .We needed evidence and the room provided And to Harrys horror she withdrew from her pocket the list of names that had been pinned upon the Room of Requirements wall and handed it to Fudge .The moment I saw Potters name on the list I knew what we were dealing with she said softly .Excellent said Fudge a smile spreading across his face .Excellent Dolores .And .by thunder .He looked up at Dumbledore who was still standing beside Marietta his wand held loosely in his hand .See what theyve named themselves ?said Fudge quietly .DumbledoresArmy .Dumbledore reached out and took the piece of parchment from Fudge .He gazed at the heading scribbled by Hermione months before and for a moment seemed unable to speak .Then he looked up smiling .Well the game is up he said simply .Would you like a written confession from me Cornelius or will a statement before these witnesses suffice ?Harry saw McGonagall and Kingsley look at each other .There was fear in both faces .He did not understand what was going on and neither apparently did Fudge .Statement ?said Fudge slowly .What I dont ?Dumbledores Army Cornelius said Dumbledore still smiling as he waved the list of names before Fudges face .Not Potters Army .Dumbledores Army .But but Understanding blazed suddenly in Fudges face .He took a horrified step backward yelped and jumped out of the fire again .You ?he whispered stamping again on his smoldering cloak .Thats right said Dumbledore pleasantly .You organized this ?I did said Dumbledore .You recruited these students for for your army ?Tonight was supposed to be the first meeting said Dumbledore nodding .Merely to see whether they would be interested in joining me .I see now that it was a mistake to invite Miss Edgecombe of course .Marietta nodded .Fudge looked from her to Dumbledore his chest swelling .Then you have been plotting against me !he yelled .Thats right said Dumbledore cheerfully .NO !shouted Harry .Kingsley flashed a look of warning at him McGonagall widened her eyes threateningly but it had suddenly dawned upon Harry what Dumbledore was about to do and he could not let it happen .No Professor Dumbledore !Be quiet Harry or I am afraid you will have to leave my office said Dumbledore calmly .Yes shut up Potter !barked Fudge who was still ogling Dumbledore with a kind of horrified delight .Well well well I came here tonight expecting to expel Potter and instead Instead you get to arrest me said Dumbledore smiling .Its like losing a Knut and finding a Galleon isnt it ?Weasley !cried Fudge now positively quivering with delight Weasley have you written it all down everything hes said his confession have you got it ?Yes sir I think so sir !said Percy eagerly whose nose was splattered with ink from the speed of his notetaking .The bit about how hes been trying to build up an army against the Ministry how hes been working to destabilize me ?Yes sir Ive got it yes !said Percy scanning his notes joyfully .Very well then said Fudge now radiant with glee .Duplicate your notes Weasley and send a copy to the Daily Prophet at once .If we send a fast owl we should make the morning edition !Percy dashed from the room slamming the door behind him and Fudge turned back to Dumbledore .You will now be escorted back to the Ministry where you will be formally charged and then sent to Azkaban to await trial !Ah said Dumbledore gently yes .Yes I thought we might hit that little snag .Snag ?said Fudge his voice still vibrating with joy .I see no snag Dumbledore !Well said Dumbledore apologetically Im afraid I do .Oh really ?Well its just that you seem to be laboring under the delusion that I am going to what is the phrase ? ‘Come quietly .I am afraid I am not going to come quietly at all Cornelius .I have absolutely no intention of being sent to Azkaban .I could break out of course but what a waste of time and frankly I can think of a whole host of things I would rather be doing .Umbridges face was growing steadily redder she looked as though she was being filled with boiling water .Fudge stared at Dumbledore with a very silly expression on his face as though he had just been stunned by a sudden blow and could not quite believe it had happened .He made a small choking noise and then looked around at Kingsley and the man with short gray hair who alone of everyone in the room had remained entirely silent so far .The latter gave Fudge a reassuring nod and moved forward a little away from the wall .Harry saw his hand drift almost casually toward his pocket .Dont be silly Dawlish said Dumbledore kindly .Im sure you are an excellent Auror I seem to remember that you achieved ‘Outstanding in all your N .E .W .T .s but if you attempt to er ‘bring me in by force I will have to hurt you .The man called Dawlish blinked looking rather foolish .He looked toward Fudge again but this time seemed to be hoping for a clue as to what to do next .So sneered Fudge recovering himself you intend to take on Dawlish Shacklebolt Dolores and myself singlehanded do you Dumbledore ?Merlins beard no said Dumbledore smiling .Not unless you are foolish enough to force me to .He will not be singlehanded !said Professor McGonagall loudly plunging her hand inside her robes .Oh yes he will Minerva !said Dumbledore sharply .Hogwarts needs you !Enough of this rubbish !said Fudge pulling out his own wand .Dawlish !Shacklebolt !Take him .A streak of silver light flashed around the room .There was a bang like a gunshot and the floor trembled .A hand grabbed the scruff of Harrys neck and forced him down on the floor as a second silver flash went off several of the portraits yelled Fawkes screeched and a cloud of dust filled the air .Coughing in the dust Harry saw a dark figure fall to the ground with a crash in front of him .There was a shriek and a thud and somebody cried No !Then the sound of breaking glass frantically scuffling footsteps a groan and silence .Harry struggled around to see who was half strangling him and saw Professor McGonagall crouched beside him .She had forced both him and Marietta out of harms way .Dust was still floating gently down through the air onto them .Panting slightly Harry saw a very tall figure moving toward them .Are you all right ?said Dumbledore .Yes !said Professor McGonagall getting up and dragging Harry and Marietta with her .The dust was clearing .The wreckage of the office loomed into view Dumbledores desk had been overturned all of the spindly tables had been knocked to the floor their silver instruments in pieces .Fudge Umbridge Kingsley and Dawlish lay motionless on the floor .Fawkes the phoenix soared in wide circles above them singing softly .Unfortunately I had to hex Kingsley too or it would have looked very suspicious said Dumbledore in a low voice .He was remarkably quick on the uptake modifying Miss Edgecombes memory like that while everyone was looking the other way thank him for me wont you Minerva ?Now they will all awake very soon and it will be best if they do not know that we had time to communicate you must act as though no time has passed as though they were merely knocked to the ground they will not remember Where will you go Dumbledore ?whispered Professor McGonagall .Grimmauld Place ?Oh no said Dumbledore with a grim smile .I am not leaving to go into hiding .Fudge will soon wish hed never dislodged me from Hogwarts I promise you .Professor Dumbledore .Harry began .He did not know what to say first how sorry he was that he had started the D .A .in the first place and caused all this trouble or how terrible he felt that Dumbledore was leaving to save him from expulsion ?But Dumbledore cut him off before he could say another word .Listen to me Harry he said urgently you must study Occlumency as hard as you can do you understand me ?Do everything Professor Snape tells you and practice it particularly every night before sleeping so that you can close your mind to bad dreams you will understand why soon enough but you must promise me The man called Dawlish was stirring .Dumbledore seized Harrys wrist .Remember close your mind But as Dumbledore s fingers closed over Harrys skin a pain shot through the scar on his forehead and he felt again that terrible snakelike longing to strike Dumbledore to bite him to hurt him you will understand whispered Dumbledore .Fawkes circled the office and swooped low over him .Dumbledore released Harry raised his hand and grasped the phoenixs long golden tail .There was a flash of fire and the pair of them had gone .Where is he ?yelled Fudge pushing himself up from the ground .Where is he ?I dont know !shouted Kingsley also leaping to his feet .Well he cant have Disapparated !cried Umbridge .You cant inside this school The stairs !cried Dawlish and he flung himself upon the door wrenched it open and disappeared followed closely by Kingsley and Umbridge .Fudge hesitated then got to his feet slowly brushing dust from his front .There was a long and painful silence .Well Minerva said Fudge nastily straightening his torn shirtsleeve Im afraid this is the end of your friend Dumbledore .You think so do you ?said Professor McGonagall scornfully .Fudge seemed not to hear her .He was looking around at the wrecked office .A few of the portraits hissed at him one or two even made rude hand gestures .Youd better get those two off to bed said Fudge looking back at Professor McGonagall with a dismissive nod toward Harry and Marietta .She said nothing but marched Harry and Marietta to the door .As it swung closed behind them Harry heard Phineas Nigelluss voice .You know Minister I disagree with Dumbledore on many counts .but you cannot deny hes got style .SNAPES WORST MEMORY BY ORDER OF THE MINISTRY OF MAGIC Dolores Jane Umbridge High Inquisitor has replaced Albus Dumbledore as Head of Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry .The above is in accordance with Educational Decree Number Twentyeight .Signed Cornelius Oswald Fudge MINISTER OF MAGIC The notices had gone up all over the school overnight but they did not explain how every single person within the castle seemed to know that Dumbledore had overcome two Aurors the High Inquisitor the Minister of Magic and his Junior Assistant to escape .No matter where Harry went within the castle next day the sole topic of conversation was Dumbledores flight and though some of the details might have gone awry in the retelling Harry overheard one secondyear girl assuring another that Fudge was now lying in St .Mungos with a pumpkin for a head it was surprising how accurate the rest of their information was .Everybody seemed aware for instance that Harry and Marietta were the only students to have witnessed the scene in Dumbledores office and as Marietta was now in the hospital wing Harry found himself besieged with requests to give a firsthand account wherever he went .Dumbledore will be back before long said Ernie Macmillan confidently on the way back from Herbology after listening intently to Harrys story .They couldnt keep him away in our second year and they wont be able to this time .The Fat Friar told me .He dropped his voice conspiratorially so that Harry Ron and Hermione had to lean closer to him to hear .that Umbridge tried to get back into his office last night after theyd searched the castle and grounds for him .Couldnt get past the gargoyle .The Heads office has sealed itself against her .Ernie smirked .Apparently she had a right little tantrum .Oh I expect she really fancied herself sitting up there in the Heads office said Hermione viciously as they walked up the stone steps into the entrance hall .Lording it over all the other teachers the stupid puffedup powercrazy old Now do you really want to finish that sentence Granger ?Draco Malfoy had slid out from behind the door followed by Crabbe and Goyle .His pale pointed face was alight with malice .Afraid Im going to have to dock a few points from Gryffindor and Hufflepuff he drawled .Its only teachers that can dock points from Houses Malfoy said Ernie at once .Yeah were prefects too remember ?snarled Ron .I know prefects cant dock points Weasel King sneered Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle sniggered .But members of the Inquisitorial Squad The what ?said Hermione sharply .The Inquisitorial Squad Granger said Malfoy pointing toward a tiny silver I upon his robes just beneath his prefects badge .A select group of students who are supportive of the Ministry of Magic handpicked by Professor Umbridge .Anyway members of the Inquisitorial Squad do have the power to dock points .So Granger Ill have five from you for being rude about our new headmistress .Macmillan five for contradicting me .Five because I dont like you Potter .Weasley your shirts untucked so Ill have another five for that .Oh yeah I forgot youre a Mudblood Granger so ten for that .Ron pulled out his wand but Hermione pushed it away whispering Dont !Wise move Granger breathed Malfoy .New Head new times .Be good now Potty .Weasel King .He strode away laughing heartily with Crabbe and Goyle .He was bluffing said Ernie looking appalled .He cant be allowed to dock points .that would be ridiculous .It would completely undermine the prefect system .But Harry Ron and Hermione had turned automatically toward the giant hourglasses set in niches along the wall behind them which recorded the House points .Gryffindor and Ravenclaw had been neck and neck in the lead that morning .Even as they watched stones flew upward reducing the amounts in the lower bulbs .In fact the only glass that seemed unchanged was the emeraldfilled one of Slytherin .Noticed have you ?said Freds voice .He and George had just come down the marble staircase and joined Harry Ron Hermione and Ernie in front of the hourglasses .Malfoy just docked us all about fifty points said Harry furiously as they watched several more stones fly upward from the Gryffindor hourglass .Yeah Montague tried to do us during break said George .What do you mean ‘tried ?said Ron quickly .He never managed to get all the words out said Fred due to the fact that we forced him headfirst into that Vanishing Cabinet on the first floor .Hermione looked very shocked .But youll get into terrible trouble !Not until Montague reappears and that could take weeks I dunno where we sent him said Fred coolly .Anyway .weve decided we dont care about getting into trouble anymore .Have you ever ?asked Hermione .Course we have said George .Never been expelled have we ?Weve always known where to draw the line said Fred .We might have put a toe across it occasionally said George .But weve always stopped short of causing real mayhem said Fred .But now ?said Ron tentatively .Well now said George .what with Dumbledore gone said Fred .we reckon a bit of mayhem said George .is exactly what our dear new Head deserves said Fred .You mustnt !whispered Hermione .You really mustnt !Shed love a reason to expel you !You dont get it Hermione do you ?said Fred smiling at her .We dont care about staying anymore .Wed walk out right now if we werent determined to do our bit for Dumbledore first .So anyway he checked his watch phase one is about to begin .Id get in the Great Hall for lunch if I were you that way the teachers will see you cant have had anything to do with it .Anything to do with what ?said Hermione anxiously .Youll see said George .Run along now .Fred and George turned away and disappeared in the swelling crowd descending the stairs toward lunch .Looking highly disconcerted Ernie muttered something about unfinished Transfiguration homework and scurried away .I think we should get out of here you know said Hermione nervously .Just in case .Yeah all right said Ron and the three of them moved toward the doors to the Great Hall but Harry had barely glimpsed todays ceiling of scudding white clouds when somebody tapped him on the shoulder and turning he found himself almost nose to nose with Filch the caretaker .He took several hasty steps backward Filch was best viewed at a distance .The headmistress would like to see you Potter he leered .I didnt do it said Harry stupidly thinking of whatever Fred and George were planning .Filchs jowls wobbled with silent laughter .Guilty conscience eh ?he wheezed .Follow me .Harry glanced back at Ron and Hermione who were both looking worried .He shrugged and followed Filch back into the entrance hall against the tide of hungry students .Filch seemed to be in an extremely good mood he hummed creakily under his breath as they climbed the marble staircase .As they reached the first landing he said Things are changing around here Potter .Ive noticed said Harry coldly .Yerse .Ive been telling Dumbledore for years and years hes too soft with you all said Filch chuckling nastily .You filthy little beasts would never have dropped Stinkpellets if youd known I had it in my power to whip you raw would you now ?Nobody would have thought of throwing Fanged Frisbees down the corridors if I couldve strung you up by the ankles in my office would they ?But when Educational Decree Twentynine comes in Potter Ill be allowed to do them things .And shes asked the Minister to sign an order for the expulsion of Peeves .Oh things are going to be very different around here with her in charge .Umbridge had obviously gone to some lengths to get Filch on her side Harry thought and the worst of it was that he would probably prove an important weapon his knowledge of the schools secret passageways and hiding places was probably second only to the Weasley twins .Here we are he said leering down at Harry as he rapped three times upon Professor Umbridges door and pushed it open .The Potter boy to see you maam .Umbridges office so very familiar to Harry from his many detentions was the same as usual except for the large wooden block lying across the front of her desk on which golden letters spelled the word HEADMISTRESS also his Firebolt and Freds and Georges Cleansweeps which he saw with a pang were now chained and padlocked to a stout iron peg in the wall behind the desk .Umbridge was sitting behind the desk busily scribbling upon some of her pink parchment but looked up and smiled widely at their entrance .Thank you Argus she said sweetly .Not at all maam not at all said Filch bowing as low as his rheumatism would permit and exiting backward .Sit said Umbridge curtly pointing toward a chair and Harry sat .She continued to scribble for a few moments .He watched some of the foul kittens gamboling around the plates over her head wondering what fresh horror she had in store for him .Well now she said finally setting down her quill and looking like a toad about to swallow a particularly juicy fly .What would you like to drink ?What ?said Harry quite sure he had misheard her .To drink Mr Potter she said smiling still more widely .Tea ?Coffee ?Pumpkin juice ?As she named each drink she gave her short wand a wave and a cup or glass of it appeared upon her desk .Nothing thank you said Harry .I wish you to have a drink with me she said her voice becoming more dangerously sweet .Choose one .Fine .tea then said Harry shrugging .She got up and made quite a performance of adding milk with her back to him .She then bustled around the desk with it smiling in sinisterly sweet fashion .There she said handing it to him .Drink it before it gets cold wont you ?Well now Mr Potter .I thought we ought to have a little chat after the distressing events of last night .He said nothing .She settled herself back into her seat and waited .When several long moments had passed in silence she said gaily Youre not drinking up !He raised the cup to his lips and then just as suddenly lowered it .One of the horrible painted kittens behind Umbridge had great round blue eyes just like MadEye Moodys magical one and it had just occurred to Harry what MadEye would say if he ever heard that Harry had drunk anything offered by a known enemy .Whats the matter ?said Umbridge who was still watching him .Do you want sugar ?No said Harry .He raised the cup to his lips again and pretended to take a sip though keeping his mouth tightly closed .Umbridges smile widened .Good she whispered .Very good .Now then .She leaned forward a little .Where is Albus Dumbledore ?No idea said Harry promptly .Drink up drink up she said still smiling .Now Mr Potter let us not play childish games .I know that you know where he has gone .You and Dumbledore have been in this together from the beginning .Consider your position Mr Potter .I dont know where he is .Harry pretended to drink again .Very well said Umbridge looking displeased .In that case you will kindly tell me the whereabouts of Sirius Black .Harrys stomach turned over and his hand holding the teacup shook so that the cup rattled in its saucer .He tilted the cup to his mouth with his lips pressed together so that some of the hot liquid trickled down onto his robes .I dont know he said a little too quickly .Mr Potter said Umbridge let me remind you that it was I who almost caught the criminal Black in the Gryffindor fire in October .I know perfectly well it was you he was meeting and if I had had any proof neither of you would be at large today I promise you .I repeat Mr Potter .Where is Sirius Black ?No idea said Harry loudly .Havent got a clue .They stared at each other so long that Harry felt his eyes watering .Then she stood up .Very well Potter I will take your word for it this time but be warned The might of the Ministry stands behind me .All channels of communication in and out of this school are being monitored .A Floo Network Regulator is keeping watch over every fire in Hogwarts except my own of course .My Inquisitorial Squad is opening and reading all owl post entering and leaving the castle .And Mr Filch is observing all secret passages in and out of the castle .If I find a shred of evidence .BOOM !The very floor of the office shook Umbridge slipped sideways clutching her desk for support looking shocked .What was ?She was gazing toward the door Harry took the opportunity to empty his almost full cup of tea into the nearest vase of dried flowers .He could hear people running and screaming several floors below .Back to lunch with you Potter !cried Umbridge raising her wand and dashing out of the office .Harry gave her a few seconds start then hurried after her to see what the source of all the uproar was .It was not difficult to find .One floor down pandemonium reigned .Somebody and Harry had a very shrewd idea who had set off what seemed to be an enormous crate of enchanted fireworks .Dragons comprised entirely of greenandgold sparks were soaring up and down the corridors emitting loud fiery blasts and bangs as they went .Shocking pink Catherine wheels five feet in diameter were whizzing lethally through the air like so many flying saucers .Rockets with long tails of brilliant silver stars were ricocheting off the walls .Sparklers were writing swearwords in midair of their own accord .Firecrackers were exploding like mines everywhere Harry looked and instead of burning themselves out fading from sight or fizzling to a halt these pyrotechnical miracles seemed to be gaining in energy and momentum the longer he watched .Filch and Umbridge were standing apparently transfixed with horror halfway down the stairs .As Harry watched one of the larger Catherine wheels seemed to decide that what it needed was more room to maneuver it whirled toward Umbridge and Filch with a sinister voheeeeeeeeee .Both adults yelled with fright and ducked and it soared straight out of the window behind them and off across the grounds .Meanwhile several of the dragons and a large purple bat that was smoking ominously took advantage of the open door at the end of the corridor to escape toward the second floor .Hurry Filch hurry !shrieked Umbridge .Theyll be all over the school unless we do something Stupefy A jet of red light shot out of the end of her wand and hit one of the rockets .Instead of freezing in midair it exploded with such force that it blasted a hole in a painting of a soppylooking witch in the middle of a meadow she ran for it just in time reappearing seconds later squashed into the painting next door where a couple of wizards playing cards stood up hastily to make room for her .Dont Stun them Filch !shouted Umbridge angrily for all the world as though it had been his suggestion .Right you are Headmistress !wheezed Filch who was a Squib and could no more have Stunned the fireworks than swallowed them .He dashed to a nearby cupboard pulled out a broom and began swatting at the fireworks in midair within seconds the head of the broom was ablaze .Harry had seen enough .Laughing he ducked down low ran to a door he knew was concealed behind a tapestry a little way along the corridor and slipped through it to find Fred and George hiding just behind it listening to Umbridges and Filchs yells and quaking with suppressed mirth .Impressive Harry said quietly grinning .Very impressive .Youll put Dr .Filibuster out of business no problem .Cheers whispered George wiping tears of laughter from his face .Oh I hope she tries Vanishing them next .They multiply by ten every time you try .The fireworks continued to burn and to spread all over the school that afternoon .Though they caused plenty of disruption particularly the firecrackers the other teachers did not seem to mind them very much .Dear dear said Professor McGonagall sardonically as one of the dragons soared around her classroom emitting loud bangs and exhaling flame .Miss Brown would you mind running along to the headmistress and informing her that we have an escaped firework in our classroom ?The upshot of it all was that Professor Umbridge spent her first afternoon as headmistress running all over the school answering the summonses of the other teachers none of whom seemed able to rid their rooms of the fireworks without her .When the final bell rang and the students were heading back to Gryffindor Tower with their bags Harry saw with immense satisfaction a disheveled and soot blackened Umbridge tottering sweatyfaced from Professor Flitwicks classroom .Thank you so much Professor !said Professor Flitwick in his squeaky little voice .I could have got rid of the sparklers myself of course but I wasnt sure whether I had the authority .Beaming he closed his classroom door in her snarling face .Fred and George were heroes that night in the Gryffindor common room .Even Hermione fought her way through the excited crowd around them to congratulate them .They were wonderful fireworks she said admiringly .Thanks said George looking both surprised and pleased .Weasleys Wildfire WhizBangs .Only thing is we used our whole stock were going to have to start again from scratch now .It was worth it though said Fred who was taking orders from clamoring Gryffindors .If you want to add your name to the waiting list Hermione its five Galleons for your Basic Blaze box and twenty for the Deflagration Deluxe .Hermione returned to the table where Harry and Ron were sitting staring at their schoolbags as though hoping their homework might spring out of it and start doing itself .Oh why dont we have a night off ?said Hermione brightly as a silvertailed Weasley rocket zoomed past the window .After all the Easter holidays start on Friday well have plenty of time then .Are you feeling all right ?Ron asked staring at her in disbelief .Now you mention it said Hermione happily dyou know .I think Im feeling a bit .rebellious .Harry could still hear the distant bangs of escaped firecrackers when he and Ron went up to bed an hour later and as he got undressed a sparkler floated past the tower still resolutely spelling out the word POO .He got into bed yawning .With his glasses off the occasional firework still passing the window became blurred looking like sparkling clouds beautiful and mysterious against the black sky .He turned onto his side wondering how Umbridge was feeling about her first day in Dumbledores job and how Fudge would react when he heard that the school had spent most of the day in a state of advanced disruption .Smiling to himself he closed his eyes .The whizzes and bangs of escaped fireworks in the grounds seemed to be growing more distant .or perhaps he Harry was simply speeding away from them .He had fallen right into the corridor leading to the Department of Mysteries .He was speeding toward the plain black door .Let it open .Let it open .It did .He was inside the circular room lined with doors .He crossed it placed his hand upon an identical door and it swung inward .Now he was in a long rectangular room full of an odd mechanical clicking .There were dancing flecks of light on the walls but he did not pause to investigate .He had to go on .There was a door at the far end .It too opened at his touch .And now he was in a dimly lit room as high and wide as a church full of nothing but rows and rows of towering shelves each laden with small dusty spun glass spheres .Now Harrys heart was beating fast with excitement .He knew where to go .He ran forward but his footsteps made no noise in the enormous deserted room .There was something in this room he wanted very very much .Something he wanted .or somebody else wanted .His scar was hurting .BANG !Harry awoke instantly confused and angry .The dark dormitory was full of the sound of laughter .Cool !said Seamus who was silhouetted against the window .I think one of those Catherine wheels hit a rocket and its like they mated come and see !Harry heard Ron and Dean scramble out of bed for a better look .He lay quite still and silent while the pain in his scar subsided and disappointment washed over him .He felt as though a wonderful treat had been snatched from him at the very last moment .He had got so close that time .Glittering pinkandsilver winged piglets were now soaring past the windows of Gryffindor Tower .Harry lay and listened to the appreciative whoops of Gryffindors in the dormitories below them .His stomach gave a sickening jolt as he remembered that he had Occlumency the following evening .Harry spent the whole of the next day dreading what Snape was going to say if he found out how much farther into the Department of Mysteries he had penetrated during his last dream .With a surge of guilt he realized that he had not practiced Occlumency once since their last lesson There had been too much going on since Dumbledore had left .He was sure he would not have been able to empty his mind even if he had tried .He doubted however whether Snape would accept that excuse .He attempted a little lastminute practice during classes that day but it was no good Hermione kept asking him what was wrong whenever he fell silent trying to rid himself of all thought and emotion and after all the best moment to empty his brain was not while teachers were firing review questions at the class .Resigned to the worst he set off for Snape s office after dinner .Halfway across the entrance hall however Cho came hurrying up to him .Over here said Harry glad of a reason to postpone his meeting with Snape and beckoning her across to the corner of the entrance hall where the giant hourglasses stood .Gryffindors was now almost empty .Are you okay ?Umbridge hasnt been asking you about the D .A .has she ?Oh no said Cho hurriedly .No it was only .Well I just wanted to say .Harry I never dreamed Marietta would tell .Yeah well said Harry moodily .He did feel Cho might have chosen her friends a bit more carefully .It was small consolation that the last he had heard Marietta was still up in the hospital wing and Madam Pomfrey had not been able to make the slightest improvement to her pimples .Shes a lovely person really said Cho .She just made a mistake Harry looked at her incredulously .A lovely person who made a mistake ?She sold us all out including you !Well .we all got away didnt we ?said Cho pleadingly .You know her mum works for the Ministry its really difficult for her Rons dad works for the Ministry too !Harry said furiously .And in case you hadnt noticed he hasnt got ‘sneak written across his face That was a really horrible trick of Hermione Grangers said Cho fiercely .She should have told us shed jinxed that list I think it was a brilliant idea said Harry coldly .Cho flushed and her eyes grew brighter .Oh yes I forgot of course if it was darling Hermiones idea Dont start crying again said Harry warningly .I wasnt going to !she shouted .Yeah .well .good he said .Ive got enough to cope with at the moment .Go and cope with it then !she said furiously turning on her heel and stalking off .Fuming Harry descended the stairs to Snapes dungeon and though he knew from experience how much easier it would be for Snape to penetrate his mind if he arrived angry and resentful he succeeded in nothing but thinking of a few more good things he should have said to Cho about Marietta before reaching the dungeon door .Youre late Potter said Snape coldly as Harry closed the door behind him .Snape was standing with his back to Harry removing as usual certain of his thoughts and placing them carefully in Dumbledores Pensieve .He dropped the last silvery strand into the stone basin and turned to face Harry .So he said .Have you been practicing ?Yes Harry lied looking carefully at one of the legs of Snapes desk .Well well soon find out wont we ?said Snape smoothly .Wand out Potter .Harry moved into his usual position facing Snape with the desk between them .His heart was pumping fast with anger at Cho and anxiety about how much Snape was about to extract from his mind .On the count of three then said Snape lazily .One two Snapes office door banged open and Draco Malfoy sped in .Professor Snape sir oh sorry Malfoy was looking at Snape and Harry in some surprise .Its all right Draco said Snape lowering his wand .Potter is here for a little Remedial Potions .Harry had not seen Malfoy look so gleeful since Umbridge had turned up to inspect Hagrid .I didnt know he said leering at Harry who knew his face was burning .He would have given a great deal to be able to shout the truth at Malfoy or even better to hit him with a good curse .Well Draco what is it ?asked Snape .Its Professor Umbridge sir she needs your help said Malfoy .Theyve found Montague sir .Hes turned up jammed inside a toilet on the fourth floor .How did he get in there ?demanded Snape .I dont know sir hes a bit confused .Very well very well Potter said Snape we shall resume this lesson tomorrow evening instead .He turned and swept from his office .Malfoy mouthed Remedial Potions ?at Harry behind Snape s back before following him .Seething Harry replaced his wand inside his robes and made to leave the room .At least he had twenty four more hours in which to practice he knew he ought to feel grateful for the narrow escape though it was hard that it came at the expense of Malfoy telling the whole school that he needed Remedial Potions .He was at the office door when he saw it a patch of shivering light dancing on the door frame .He stopped looking at it reminded of something .Then he remembered It was a little like the lights he had seen in his dream last night the lights in the second room he had walked through on his journey through the Department of Mysteries .He turned around .The light was coming from the Pensieve sitting on Snape s desk .The silver white contents were ebbing and swirling within .Snapes thoughts .things he did not want Harry to see if he broke through Snapes defenses accidentally .Harry gazed at the Pensieve curiosity welling inside him .What was it that Snape was so keen to hide from Harry ?The silvery lights shivered on the wall .Harry took two steps toward the desk thinking hard .Could it possibly be information about the Department of Mysteries that Snape was determined to keep from him ?Harry looked over his shoulder his heart now pumping harder and faster than ever .How long would it take Snape to release Montague from the toilet ?Would he come straight back to his office afterward or accompany Montague to the hospital wing ?Surely the latter .Montague was Captain of the Slytherin Quidditch team Snape would want to make sure he was all right .Harry walked the remaining few feet to the Pensieve and stood over it gazing into its depths .He hesitated listening then pulled out his wand again .The office and the corridor beyond were completely silent .He gave the contents of the Pensieve a small prod with the end of his wand .The silvery stuff within began to swirl very fast .Harry leaned forward over it and saw that it had become transparent .He was once again looking down into a room as though through a circular window in the ceiling .In fact unless he was much mistaken he was looking down upon the Great Hall .His breath was actually fogging the surface of Snapes thoughts .His brain seemed to be in limbo .It would be insane to do the thing that he was so strongly tempted to do .He was trembling .Snape could be back at any moment .but Harry thought of Chos anger of Malfoys jeering face and a reckless daring seized him .He took a great gulp of breath and plunged his face into the surface of Snapes thoughts .At once the floor of the office lurched tipping Harry headfirst into the Pensieve .He was falling through cold blackness spinning furiously as he went and then He was standing in the middle of the Great Hall but the four House tables were gone .Instead there were more than a hundred smaller tables all facing the same way at each of which sat a student head bent low scribbling on a roll of parchment .The only sound was the scratching of quills and the occasional rustle as somebody adjusted their parchment .It was clearly exam time .Sunshine was streaming through the high windows onto the bent heads which shone chestnut and copper and gold in the bright light .Harry looked around carefully .Snape had to be here somewhere .This was his memory .And there he was at a table right behind Harry .Harry stared .Snapetheteenager had a stringy pallid look about him like a plant kept in the dark .His hair was lank and greasy and was flopping onto the table his hooked nose barely half an inch from the surface of the parchment as he scribbled .Harry moved around behind Snape and read the heading of the examination paper DEFENSE AGAINST THE DARK ARTS ORDINARY WIZARDING LEVEL So Snape had to be fifteen or sixteen around Harrys own age .His hand was flying across the parchment he had written at least a foot more than his closest neighbors and yet his writing was minuscule and cramped .Five more minutes !The voice made Harry jump turning he saw the top of Professor Flitwicks head moving between the desks a short distance away .Professor Flitwick was walking past a boy with untidy black hair .very untidy black hair .Harry moved so quickly that had he been solid he would have knocked desks flying .Instead he seemed to slide dreamlike across two aisles and up a third .The back of the blackhaired boys head drew nearer and nearer .He was straightening up now putting down his quill pulling his roll of parchment toward him so as to reread what he had written .Harry stopped in front of the desk and gazed down at his fifteenyear old father .Excitement exploded in the pit of his stomach It was as though he was looking at himself but with deliberate mistakes .Jamess eyes were hazel his nose was slightly longer than Harrys and there was no scar on his forehead but they had the same thin face same mouth same eyebrows .Jamess hair stuck up at the back exactly as Harrys did his hands could have been Harrys and Harry could tell that when James stood up they would be within an inch of each others heights .James yawned hugely and rumpled up his hair making it even messier than it had been .Then with a glance toward Professor Flitwick he turned in his seat and grinned at a boy sitting four seats behind him .With another shock of excitement Harry saw Sirius give James the thumbsup .Sirius was lounging in his chair at his ease tilting it back on two legs .He was very goodlooking his dark hair fell into his eyes with a sort of casual elegance neither Jamess nor Harrys could ever have achieved and a girl sitting behind him was eyeing him hopefully though he didnt seem to have noticed .And two seats along from this girl Harrys stomach gave another pleasurable squirm was Remus Lupin .He looked rather pale and peaky was the full moon approaching ?and was absorbed in the exam As he reread his answers he scratched his chin with the end of his quill frowning slightly .So that meant Wormtail had to be around here somewhere too .and sure enough Harry spotted him within seconds a small mousyhaired boy with a pointed nose .Wormtail looked anxious he was chewing his fingernails staring down at his paper scuffing the ground with his toes .Every now and then he glanced hopefully at his neighbors paper .Harry stared at Wormtail for a moment then back at James who was now doodling on a bit of scrap parchment .He had drawn a Snitch and was now tracing the letters L .E .What did they stand for ?Quills down please !squeaked Professor Flitwick .That means you too Stebbins !Please remain seated while I collect your parchment !Acciol More than a hundred rolls of parchment zoomed into the air and into Professor Flitwicks outstretched arms knocking him backward off his feet .Several people laughed .A couple of students at the front desks got up took hold of Professor Flitwick beneath the elbows and lifted him onto his feet again .Thank you .thank you panted Professor Flitwick .Very well everybody youre free to go !Harry looked down at his father who had hastily crossed out the L .E .he had been embellishing jumped to his feet stuffed his quill and the exam question paper into his bag which he slung over his back and stood waiting for Sirius to join him .Harry looked around and glimpsed Snape a short way away moving between the tables toward the doors into the entrance hall still absorbed in his own examination paper .Roundshouldered yet angular he walked in a twitchy manner that recalled a spider his oily hair swinging about his face .A gang of chattering girls separated Snape from James and Sirius and by planting himself in the midst of this group Harry managed to keep Snape in sight while straining his ears to catch the voices of James and his friends .Did you like question ten Moony ?asked Sirius as they emerged into the entrance hall .Loved it said Lupin briskly . ‘Give five signs that identify the werewolf .Excellent question .Dyou think you managed to get all the signs ?said James in tones of mock concern .Think I did said Lupin seriously as they joined the crowd thronging around the front doors eager to get out into the sunlit grounds .One Hes sitting on my chair .Two Hes wearing my clothes .Three His names Remus Lupin .Wormtail was the only one who didnt laugh .I got the snout shape the pupils of the eyes and the tufted tail he said anxiously but I couldnt think what else How thick are you Wormtail ?said James impatiently .You run round with a werewolf once a month Keep your voice down implored Lupin .Harry looked anxiously behind him again .Snape remained close by still buried in his examination questions but this was Snapes memory and Harry was sure that if Snape chose to wander off in a different direction once outside in the grounds he Harry would not be able to follow James any farther .To his intense relief however when James and his three friends strode off down the lawn toward the lake Snape followed still poring over the paper and apparently with no fixed idea of where he was going .By jogging a little ahead of him Harry managed to maintain a close watch on James and the others .Well I thought that paper was a piece of cake he heard Sirius say .Ill be surprised if I dont get Outstanding on it at least .Me too said James .He put his hand in his pocket and took out a struggling Golden Snitch .Where d you get that ?Nicked it said James casually .He started playing with the Snitch allowing it to fly as much as a foot away and seizing it again his reflexes were excellent .Wormtail watched him in awe .They stopped in the shade of the very same beech tree on the edge of the lake where Harry Ron and Hermione had spent a Sunday finishing their homework and threw themselves down on the grass .Harry looked over his shoulder yet again and saw to his delight that Snape had settled himself on the grass in the dense shadows of a clump of bushes .He was as deeply immersed in the O .W .L .paper as ever which left Harry free to sit down on the grass between the beech and the bushes and watch the foursome under the tree .The sunlight was dazzling on the smooth surface of the lake on the bank of which the group of laughing girls who had just left the Great Hall were sitting with shoes and socks off cooling their feet in the water .Lupin had pulled out a book and was reading .Sirius stared around at the students milling over the grass looking rather haughty and bored but very handsomely so .James was still playing with the Snitch letting it zoom farther and farther away almost escaping but always grabbed at the last second .Wormtail was watching him with his mouth open .Every time James made a particularly difficult catch Wormtail gasped and applauded .After five minutes of this Harry wondered why James didnt tell Wormtail to get a grip on himself but James seemed to be enjoying the attention .Harry noticed his father had a habit of rumpling up his hair as though to make sure it did not get too tidy and also that he kept looking over at the girls by the waters edge .Put that away will you ?said Sirius finally as James made a fine catch and Wormtail let out a cheer .Before Wormtail wets himself from excitement .Wormtail turned slightly pink but James grinned .If it bothers you he said stuffing the Snitch back in his pocket .Harry had the distinct impression that Sirius was the only one for whom James would have stopped showing off .Im bored said Sirius .Wish it was full moon .You might said Lupin darkly from behind his book .Weve still got Transfiguration if youre bored you could test me .Here .He held out his book .Sirius snorted .I dont need to look at that rubbish I know it all .Thisll liven you up Padfoot said James quietly .Look who it is .Siriuss head turned .He had become very still like a dog that has scented a rabbit .Excellent he said softly .Snivellus .Harry turned to see what Sirius was looking at .Snape was on his feet again and was stowing the O .W .L .paper in his bag .As he emerged from the shadows of the bushes and set off across the grass Sirius and James stood up .Lupin and Wormtail remained sitting Lupin was still staring down at his book though his eyes were not moving and a faint frown line had appeared between his eyebrows .Wormtail was looking from Sirius and James to Snape with a look of avid anticipation on his face .All right Snivellus ?said James loudly .Snape reacted so fast it was as though he had been expecting an attack Dropping his bag he plunged his hand inside his robes and his wand was halfway into the air when James shouted ExpelliarmusV Snape s wand flew twelve feet into the air and fell with a little thud in the grass behind him .Sirius let out a bark of laughter .Impedimental he said pointing his wand at Snape who was knocked off his feet halfway through a dive toward his own fallen wand .Students all around had turned to watch .Some of them had gotten to their feet and were edging nearer to watch .Some looked apprehensive others entertained .Snape lay panting on the ground .James and Sirius advanced on him wands up James glancing over his shoulder at the girls at the waters edge as he went .Wormtail was on his feet now watching hungrily edging around Lupin to get a clearer view .Howd the exam go Snivelly ?said James .I was watching him his nose was touching the parchment said Sirius viciously .Therell be great grease marks all over it they wont be able to read a word .Several people watching laughed Snape was clearly unpopular .Wormtail sniggered shrilly .Snape was trying to get up but the jinx was still operating on him he was struggling as though bound by invisible ropes .You wait he panted staring up at James with an expression of purest loathing .You wait .Wait for what ?said Sirius coolly .Whatre you going to do Snivelly wipe your nose on us ?Snape let out a stream of mixed swearwords and hexes but his wand being ten feet away nothing happened .Wash out your mouth said James coldly .Scourgifyl Pink soap bubbles streamed from Snapes mouth at once the froth was covering his lips making him gag choking him Leave him ALONE !James and Sirius looked around .Jamess free hand jumped to his hair again .It was one of the girls from the lake edge .She had thick dark red hair that fell to her shoulders and startlingly green almondshaped eyes Harrys eyes .Harrys mother .All right Evans ?said James and the tone of his voice was suddenly pleasant deeper more mature .Leave him alone Lily repeated .She was looking at James with every sign of great dislike .Whats he done to you ?Well said James appearing to deliberate the point its more the fact that he exists if you know what I mean .Many of the surrounding watchers laughed Sirius and Wormtail included but Lupin still apparently intent on his book didnt and neither did Lily .You think youre funny she said coldly .But youre just an arrogant bullying toerag Potter .Leave him alone .I will if you go out with me Evans said James quickly .Go on .Go out with me and Ill never lay a wand on old Snivelly again .Behind him the Impediment Jinx was wearing off .Snape was beginning to inch toward his fallen wand spitting out soapsuds as he crawled .I wouldnt go out with you if it was a choice between you and the giant squid said Lily .Bad luck Prongs said Sirius briskly turning back to Snape .OY !But too late Snape had directed his wand straight at James there was a flash of light and a gash appeared on the side of Jamess face spattering his robes with blood .James whirled about a second flash of light later Snape was hanging upside down in the air his robes falling over his head to reveal skinny pallid legs and a pair of graying underpants .Many people in the small crowd watching cheered .Sirius James and Wormtail roared with laughter .Lily whose furious expression had twitched for an instant as though she was going to smile said Let him down !Certainly said James and he jerked his wand upward .Snape fell into a crumpled heap on the ground .Disentangling himself from his robes he got quickly to his feet wand up but Sirius said Petrificus Totalusl and Snape keeled over again at once rigid as a board .LEAVE HIM ALONE !Lily shouted .She had her own wand out now .James and Sirius eyed it warily .Ah Evans dont make me hex you said James earnestly .Take the curse off him then !James sighed deeply then turned to Snape and muttered the countercurse .There you go he said as Snape struggled to his feet again youre lucky Evans was here Snivellus I dont need help from filthy little Mudbloods like her !Lily blinked .Fine she said coolly .I wont bother in future .And Id wash your pants if I were you Snivellus .Apologize to Evans !James roared at Snape his wand pointed threateningly at him .I dont want you to make him apologize Lily shouted rounding on James .Youre as bad as he is .What ?yelped James .Id NEVER call you a you knowwhat !Messing up your hair because you think it looks cool to look like youve just got off your broomstick showing off with that stupid Snitch walking down corridors and hexing anyone who annoys you just because you can Im surprised your broomstick can get off the ground with that fat head on it .You make me SICK .She turned on her heel and hurried away .Evans !James shouted after her Hey EVANS !But she didnt look back .What is it with her ?said James trying and failing to look as though this was a throwaway question of no real importance to him .Reading between the lines Id say she thinks youre a bit conceited mate said Sirius .Right said James who looked furious now right There was another flash of light and Snape was once again hanging upside down in the air .Who wants to see me take off Snivellys pants ?But whether James really did take off Snapes pants Harry never found out .A hand had closed tight over his upper arm closed with a pincerlike grip .Wincing Harry looked around to see who had hold of him and saw with a thrill of horror a fully grown adultsized Snape standing right beside him white with rage .Having fun ?Harry felt himself rising into the air .The summers day evaporated around him he was floating upward through icy blackness Snapes hand still tight upon his upper arm .Then with a swooping feeling as though he had turned head over heels in midair his feet hit the stone floor of Snapes dungeon and he was standing again beside the Pensieve on Snapes desk in the shadowy presentday Potions masters study .So said Snape gripping Harrys arm so tightly Harrys hand was starting to feel numb .So .been enjoying yourself Potter ?Nno .said Harry trying to free his arm .It was scary Snapes lips were shaking his face was white his teeth were bared .Amusing man your father wasnt he ?said Snape shaking Harry so hard that his glasses slipped down his nose .I didnt Snape threw Harry from him with all his might .Harry fell hard onto the dungeon floor .You will not tell anybody what you saw !Snape bellowed .No said Harry getting to his feet as far from Snape as he could .No of course I w Get out get out I dont want to see you in this office ever again !And as Harry hurtled toward the door ajar of dead cockroaches exploded over his head .He wrenched the door open and flew away up the corridor stopping only when he had put three floors between himself and Snape .There he leaned against the wall panting and rubbing his bruised arm .He had no desire at all to return to Gryffindor Tower so early nor to tell Ron and Hermione what he had just seen .What was making Harry feel so horrified and unhappy was not being shouted at or having jars thrown at him it was that he knew how it felt to be humiliated in the middle of a circle of onlookers knew exactly how Snape had felt as his father had taunted him and that judging from what he had just seen his father had been every bit as arrogant as Snape had always told him .CAREER ADVICE But why havent you got Occlumency lessons anymore ?said Hermione frowning .Ive told you Harry muttered .Snape reckons I can carry on by myself now Ive got the basics .So youve stopped having funny dreams ?said Hermione skeptically .Pretty much said Harry not looking at her .Well I dont think Snape should stop until youre absolutely sure you can control them !said Hermione indignantly .Harry I think you should go back to him and ask No said Harry forcefully .Just drop it Hermione okay ?It was the first day of the Easter holidays and Hermione as was her custom had spent a large part of the day drawing up study schedules for the three of them .Harry and Ron had let her do it it was easier than arguing with her and in any case they might come in useful .Ron had been startled to discover that there were only six weeks left until their exams .How can that come as a shock ?Hermione demanded as she tapped each little square on Rons schedule with her wand so that it flashed a different color according to its subject .I dunno .said Ron theres been a lot going on .Well there you are she said handing him his schedule if you follow that you should do fine .Ron looked down it gloomily but then brightened .Youve given me an evening off every week !Thats for Quidditch practice said Hermione .The smile faded from Rons face .Whats the point ?he said .Weve got about as much chance of winning the Quidditch Cup this year as Dads got of becoming Minister of Magic .Hermione said nothing .She was looking at Harry who was staring blankly at the opposite wall of the common room while Crookshanks pawed at his hand trying to get his ears scratched .Whats wrong Harry ?What ?he said quickly .Nothing .He seized his copy of Defensive Magical Theory and pretended to be looking something up in the index .Crookshanks gave him up as a bad job and slunk away under Hermiones chair .I saw Cho earlier said Hermione tentatively and she looked really miserable too .Have you two had a row again ?Wha oh yeah we have said Harry seizing gratefully on the excuse .What about ?That sneak friend of hers Marietta said Harry .Yeah well I dont blame you !said Ron angrily setting down his study schedule .If it hadnt been for her .Ron went into a rant about Marietta Edgecombe which Harry found helpful .All he had to do was look angry nod and say yeah and thats right whenever Ron drew breath leaving his mind free to dwell ever more miserably on what he had seen in the Pensieve .He felt as though the memory of it was eating him from inside .He had been so sure that his parents had been wonderful people that he never had the slightest difficulty in disbelieving Snapes aspersions on his fathers character .Hadnt people like Hagrid and Sirius told Harry how wonderful his father had been ?Yeah well look what Sirius was like himself said a nagging voice inside Harrys head .He was as bad wasnt he ?Yes he had once overheard Professor McGonagall saying that his father and Sirius had been troublemakers at school but she had described them as forerunners of the Weasley twins and Harry could not imagine Fred and George dangling someone upside down for the fun of it .not unless they really loathed them .Perhaps Malfoy or somebody who really deserved it .Harry tried to make a case for Snape having deserved what he had suffered at Jamess hands but hadnt Lily asked Whats he done to you ?And hadnt James replied Its more the fact that he exists if you know what I mean ?Hadnt James started it all simply because Sirius said he was bored ?Harry remembered Lupin saying back in Grimmauld Place that Dumbledore had made him prefect in the hope that he would be able to exercise some control over James and Sirius .But in the Pensieve he had sat there and let it all happen .Harry reminded himself that Lily had intervened his mother had been decent yet the memory of the look on her face as she had shouted at James disturbed him quite as much as anything else .She had clearly loathed James and Harry simply could not understand how they could have ended up married .Once or twice he even wondered whether James had forced her into it .For nearly five years the thought of his father had been a source of comfort of inspiration .Whenever someone had told him he was like James he had glowed with pride inside .And now .now he felt cold and miserable at the thought of him .The weather grew breezier brighter and warmer as the holidays passed but Harry was stuck with the rest of the fifth and seventh years who were all trapped inside traipsing back and forth to the library .Harry pretended that his bad mood had no other cause but the approaching exams and as his fellow Gryffindors were sick of studying themselves his excuse went unchallenged .Harry Im talking to you can you hear me ?Huh ?He looked around .Ginny Weasley looking very windswept had joined him at the library table where he had been sitting alone .It was late on Sunday evening Hermione had gone back to Gryffindor Tower to review Ancient Runes Ron had Quidditch practice .Oh hi said Harry pulling his books back toward him .How come youre not at practice ?Its over said Ginny .Ron had to take Jack Sloper up to the hospital wing .Why ?Well were not sure but we think he knocked himself out with his own bat .She sighed heavily .Anyway .a package just arrived its only just got through Umbridges new screening process .She hoisted a box wrapped in brown paper onto the table it had clearly been unwrapped and carelessly rewrapped and there was a scribbled note across it in red ink reading INSPECTED AND PASSED BY THE HOGWARTS HIGH INQUISITOR .Its Easter eggs from Mum said Ginny .Theres one for you .There you go .She handed him a handsome chocolate egg decorated with small iced Snitches and according to the packaging containing a bag of Fizzing Whizbees .Harry looked at it for a moment then to his horror felt a hard lump rise in his throat .Are you okay Harry ?asked Ginny quietly .Yeah Im fine said Harry gruffly .The lump in his throat was painful .He did not understand why an Easter egg should have made him feel like this .You seem really down lately Ginny persisted .You know Im sure if you just talked to Cho .Its not Cho I want to talk to said Harry brusquely .Who is it then ?asked Ginny .He glanced around to make quite sure that nobody was listening Madam Pince was several shelves away stamping out a pile of books for a franticlooking Hannah Abbott .I wish I could talk to Sirius he muttered .But I know I cant .More to give himself something to do than because he really wanted any Harry unwrapped his Easter egg broke off a large bit and put it into his mouth .Well said Ginny slowly helping herself to a bit of egg too if you really want to talk to Sirius I expect we could think of a way to do it .Come on said Harry hopelessly .With Umbridge policing the fires and reading all our mail ?The thing about growing up with Fred and George said Ginny thoughtfully is that you sort of start thinking anythings possible if youve got enough nerve .Harry looked at her .Perhaps it was the effect of the chocolate Lupin had always advised eating some after encounters with dementors or simply because he had finally spoken aloud the wish that had been burning inside him for a week but he felt a bit more hopeful .WHAT DO YOU THINK YOU ARE DOING ?Oh damn whispered Ginny jumping to her feet .I forgot Madam Pince was swooping down upon them her shriveled face contorted with rage .Chocolate in the library she screamed .Out out OUT !And whipping out her wand she caused Harrys books bag and ink bottle to chase him and Ginny from the library whacking them repeatedly over the head as they ran .As though to underline the importance of their upcoming examinations a batch of pamphlets leaflets and notices concerning various Wizarding careers appeared on the tables in Gryffindor Tower shortly before the end of the holidays along with yet another notice on the board which read CAREER ADVICE All fifth years will be required to attend a short meeting with their Head of House during the first week of the Summer term in which they will be given the opportunity to discuss their future careers .Times of individual appointments are listed below .Harry looked down the list and found that he was expected in Professor McGonagalls office at halfpast two on Monday which would mean missing most of Divination .He and the other fifth years spent a considerable part of the final weekend of the Easter break reading all the career information that had been left there for their perusal .Well I dont fancy Healing said Ron on the last evening of the holidays .He was immersed in a leaflet that carried the crossed boneandwand emblem of St .Mungos on its front .It says here you need at least an E at N .E .W .T .level in Potions Herbology Transfiguration Charms and Defense Against the Dark Arts .I mean .blimey .Dont want much do they ?Well its a very responsible job isnt it ?said Hermione absently .She was poring over a bright pinkandorange leaflet that was headed SO YOU THINK YOUD LIKE TO WORK IN MUGGLE RELATIONS ?You dont seem to need many qualifications to liaise with Muggles .All they want is an O .W .L .in Muggle Studies . ‘Much more important is your enthusiasm patience and a good sense offunV Youd need more than a good sense of fun to liaise with my uncle said Harry darkly .Good sense of when to duck more like .He was halfway through a pamphlet on Wizard banking .Listen to this ‘Are you seeking a challenging career involving travel adventure and substantial dangerrelated treasure bonuses ?Then consider a position with Gringotts Wizarding Bank who are currently recruiting Curse Breakers for thrilling opportunities abroad .They want Arithmancy though .You could do it Hermione !I dont much fancy banking said Hermione vaguely now immersed in HAVE YOU GOT WHAT IT TAKES TO TRAIN SECURITY TROLLS ?Hey said a voice in Harrys ear .He looked around Fred and George had come to join them .Ginnys had a word with us about you said Fred stretching out his legs on the table in front of them and causing several booklets on careers with the Ministry of Magic to slide off onto the floor .She says you need to talk to Sirius ?What ?said Hermione sharply freezing with her hand halfway toward picking up MAKE A BANG AT THE DEPARTMENT OF MAGICAL ACCIDENTS AND CATASTROPHES .Yeah .said Harry trying to sound casual yeah I thought Id like Dont be so ridiculous said Hermione straightening up and looking at him as though she could not believe her eyes .With Umbridge groping around in the fires and frisking all the owls ?Well we think we can find a way around that said George stretching and smiling .Its a simple matter of causing a diversion .Now you might have noticed that we have been rather quiet on the mayhem front during the Easter holidays ?What was the point we asked ourselves of disrupting leisure time ?continued Fred .No point at all we answered ourselves .And of course wed have messed up peoples studying too which would be the very last thing wed want to do .He gave Hermione a sanctimonious little nod .She looked rather taken aback by this thoughtfulness .But its business as usual from tomorrow Fred continued briskly .And if were going to be causing a bit of uproar why not do it so that Harry can have his chat with Sirius ?Yes but still said Hermione with an air of explaining something very simple to somebody very obtuse even if you do cause a diversion how is Harry supposed to talk to him ?Umbridges office said Harry quietly .He had been thinking about it for a fortnight and could think of no alternative Umbridge herself had told him that the only fire that was not being watched was her own .Are you insane ?said Hermione in a hushed voice .Ron had lowered his leaflet on jobs in the cultivated fungus trade and was watching the conversation warily .I dont think so said Harry shrugging .And how are you going to get in there in the first place ?Harry was ready for this question .Siriuss knife he said .Excuse me ?Christmas before last Sirius gave me a knife thatll open any lock said Harry .So even if shes bewitched the door so Alohomora wont work which I bet she has What do you think about this ?Hermione demanded of Ron and Harry was reminded irresistibly of Mrs Weasley appealing to her husband during Harrys first dinner in Grimmauld Place .I dunno said Ron looking alarmed at being asked to give an opinion .If Harry wants to do it its up to him isnt it ?Spoken like a true friend and Weasley said Fred clapping Ron hard on the back .Right then .Were thinking of doing it tomorrow just after lessons because it should cause maximum impact if everybodys in the corridors Harry well set it off in the east wing somewhere draw her right away from her own office I reckon we should be able to guarantee you what twenty minutes ?he said looking at George .Easy said George .What sort of diversion is it ?asked Ron .Youll see little bro said Fred as he and George got up again .At least you will if you trot along to Gregory the Smarmys corridor round about five oclock tomorrow .Harry awoke very early the next day feeling almost as anxious as he had done on the morning of his hearing at the Ministry of Magic .It was not only the prospect of breaking into Umbridges office and using her fire to speak to Sirius that was making him feel nervous though that was certainly bad enough today also happened to be the first time he would be in close proximity with Snape since Snape had thrown him out of his office as they had Potions that day .After lying in bed for a while thinking about the day ahead Harry got up very quietly and moved across to the window beside Nevilles bed staring out on a truly glorious morning .The sky was a clear misty opalescent blue .Directly ahead of him Harry could see the towering beech tree below which his father had once tormented Snape .He was not sure what Sirius could possibly say to him that would make up for what he had seen in the Pensieve but he was desperate to hear Siriuss own account of what had happened to know of any mitigating factors there might have been any excuse at all for his fathers behavior .Something caught Harrys attention movement on the edge of the Forbidden Forest .Harry squinted into the sun and saw Hagrid emerging from between the trees .He seemed to be limping .As Harry watched Hagrid staggered to the door of his cabin and disappeared inside it .Harry watched the cabin for several minutes .Hagrid did not emerge again but smoke furled from the chimney so Hagrid could not be so badly injured that he was unequal to stoking the fire .Harry turned away from the window headed back to his trunk and started to dress .With the prospect of forcing entry into Umbridges office ahead Harry had never expected the day to be a restful one but he had not reckoned on Hermiones almost continual attempts to dissuade him from what he was planning to do at five oclock .For the first time ever she was at least as inattentive to Professor Binns in History of Magic as Harry and Ron were keeping up a stream of whispered admonitions that Harry tried very hard to ignore . .and if she does catch you there apart from being expelled shell be able to guess youve been talking to Snuffles and this time I expect shell force you to drink Veritaserum and answer her questions .Hermione said Ron in a low and indignant voice are you going to stop telling Harry off and listen to Binns or am I going to have to take notes instead ?You take notes for a change it wont kill you !By the time they reached the dungeons neither Harry nor Ron was speaking to Hermione any longer .Undeterred she took advantage of their silence to maintain an uninterrupted flow of dire warnings all uttered under her breath in a vehement hiss that caused Seamus to waste five whole minutes checking his cauldron for leaks .Snape meanwhile seemed to have decided to act as though Harry were invisible .Harry was of course well used to this tactic as it was one of Uncle Vernons favorites and on the whole was grateful he had to suffer nothing worse .In fact compared to what he usually had to endure from Snape in the way of taunts and snide remarks he found the new approach something of an improvement and was pleased to find that when left well alone he was able to concoct an Invigoration Draught quite easily .At the end of the lesson he scooped some of the potion into a flask corked it and took it up to Snapes desk for marking feeling that he might at last have scraped an E .He had just turned away when he heard a smashing noise Malfoy gave a gleeful yell of laughter .Harry whipped around again .His potion sample lay in pieces on the floor and Snape was watching him with a look of gloating pleasure .Whoops he said softly .Another zero then Potter Harry was too incensed to speak .He strode back to his cauldron intending to fill another flask and force Snape to mark it but saw to his horror that the rest of the contents had vanished .Im sorry !said Hermione with her hands over her mouth .Im really sorry Harry I thought youd finished so I cleared up !Harry could not bring himself to answer .When the bell rang he hurried out of the dungeon without a backward glance and made sure that he found himself a seat between Neville and Seamus for lunch so that Hermione could not start nagging him about using Umbridges office again .He was in such a bad mood by the time that he got to Divination that he had quite forgotten his career appointment with Professor McGonagall remembering only when Ron asked him why he wasnt in her office .He hurtled back upstairs and arrived out of breath only a few minutes late .Sorry Professor he panted as he closed the door .I forgot .No matter Potter she said briskly but as she spoke somebody else sniffed from the corner .Harry looked around .Professor Umbridge was sitting there a clipboard on her knee a fussy little piefrill around her neck and a small horribly smug smile on her face .Sit down Potter said Professor McGonagall tersely .Her hands shook slightly as she shuffled the many pamphlets littering her desk .Harry sat down with his back to Umbridge and did his best to pretend he could not hear the scratching of her quill on her clipboard .Well Potter this meeting is to talk over any career ideas you might have and to help you decide which subjects you should continue into sixth and seventh years said Professor McGonagall .Have you had any thoughts about what you would like to do after you leave Hogwarts ?Er said Harry .He was finding the scratching noise from behind him very distracting .Yes ?Professor McGonagall prompted Harry .Well I thought of maybe being an Auror Harry mumbled .Youd need top grades for that said Professor McGonagall extracting a small dark leaflet from under the mass on her desk and opening it .They ask for a minimum of five N .E .W .T .s and nothing under ‘Exceeds Expectations grade I see .Then you would be required to undergo a stringent series of character and aptitude tests at the Auror office .Its a difficult career path Potter they only take the best .In fact I dont think anybody has been taken on in the last three years .At this moment Professor Umbridge gave a very tiny cough as though she was trying to see how quietly she could do it .Professor McGonagall ignored her .Youll want to know which subjects you ought to take I suppose ?she went on talking a little more loudly than before .Yes said Harry .Defense Against the Dark Arts I suppose ?Naturally said Professor McGonagall crisply .I would also advise Professor Umbridge gave another cough a little more audible this time .Professor McGonagall closed her eyes for a moment opened them again and continued as though nothing had happened .I would also advise Transfiguration because Aurors frequently need to Transfigure or Untransfigure in their work .And I ought to tell you now Potter that I do not accept students into my N .E .W .T .classes unless they have achieved ‘Exceeds Expectations or higher at Ordinary Wizarding Level .Id say youre averaging ‘Acceptable at the moment so youll need to put in some good hard work before the exams to stand a chance of continuing .Then you ought to do Charms always useful and Potions .Yes Potter Potions she added with the merest flicker of a smile .Poisons and antidotes are essential study for Aurors .And I must tell you that Professor Snape absolutely refuses to take students who get anything other than ‘Outstanding in their O .W .L .s so Professor Umbridge gave her most pronounced cough yet .May I offer you a cough drop Dolores ?Professor McGonagall asked curtly without looking at Professor Umbridge .Oh no thank you very much said Umbridge with that simpering laugh Harry hated so much .I just wondered whether I could make the teensiest interruption Minerva ?I daresay you 11 find you can said Professor McGonagall through tightly gritted teeth .I was just wondering whether Mr Potter has quite the temperament for an Auror ?said Professor Umbridge sweetly .Were you ?said Professor McGonagall haughtily .Well Potter she continued as though there had been no interruption if you are serious in this ambition I would advise you to concentrate hard on bringing your Transfiguration and Potions up to scratch .I see Professor Flitwick has graded you between Acceptable and ‘Exceeds Expectations for the last two years so your Charm work seems satisfactory as for Defense Against the Dark Arts your marks have been generally high Professor Lupin in particular thought you are you quite sure you wouldnt like a cough drop Dolores ?Oh no need thank you Minerva simpered Professor Umbridge who had just coughed her loudest yet .I was just concerned that you might not have Harrys most recent Defense Against the Dark Arts marks in front of you .Im quite sure I slipped in a note .What this thing ?said Professor McGonagall in a tone of revulsion as she pulled a sheet of pink parchment from between the leaves of Harrys folder .She glanced down it her eyebrows slightly raised then placed it back into the folder without comment .Yes as I was saying Potter Professor Lupin thought you showed a pronounced aptitude for the subject and obviously for an Auror Did you not understand my note Minerva ?asked Professor Umbridge in honeyed tones quite forgetting to cough .Of course I understood it said Professor McGonagall her teeth clenched so tightly that the words came out a little muffled .Well then I am confused .Im afraid I dont quite understand how you can give Mr Potter false hope that False hope ?repeated Professor McGonagall still refusing to look round at Professor Umbridge .He has achieved high marks in all his Defense Against the Dark Arts tests Im terribly sorry to have to contradict you Minerva but as you will see from my note Harry has been achieving very poor results in his classes with me I should have made my meaning plainer said Professor McGonagall turning at last to look Umbridge directly in the eyes .He has achieved high marks in all Defense Against the Dark Arts tests set by a competent teacher .Professor Umbridges smile vanished as suddenly as a lightbulb blowing .She sat back in her chair turned a sheet on her clipboard and began scribbling very fast indeed her bulging eyes rolling from side to side .Professor McGonagall turned back to Harry her thin nostrils flared her eyes burning .Any questions Potter ?Yes said Harry .What sort of character and aptitude tests do the Ministry do on you if you get enough N .E .W .T .s ?Well youll need to demonstrate the ability to react well to pressure and so forth said Professor McGonagall perseverance and dedication because Auror training takes a further three years not to mention very high skills in practical defense .It will mean a lot more study even after youve left school so unless youre prepared to I think youll also find said Umbridge her voice very cold now that the Ministry looks into the records of those applying to be Aurors .Their criminal records .unless youre prepared to take even more exams after Hogwarts you should really look at another which means that this boy has as much chance of becoming an Auror as Dumbledore has of ever returning to this school .A very good chance then said Professor McGonagall .Potter has a criminal record said Umbridge loudly .Potter has been cleared of all charges said Professor McGonagall even more loudly .Professor Umbridge stood up .She was so short that this did not make a great deal of difference but her fussy simpering demeanor had given place to a hard fury that made her broad flabby face look oddly sinister .Potter has no chance whatsoever of becoming an Auror !Professor McGonagall got to her feet too and in her case this was a much more impressive move .She towered over Professor Umbridge .Potter she said in ringing tones I will assist you to become an Auror if it is the last thing I do !If I have to coach you nightly I will make sure you achieve the required results !The Minister of Magic will never employ Harry Potter !said Umbridge her voice rising furiously .There may well be a new Minister of Magic by the time Potter is ready to join !shouted Professor McGonagall .Aha !shrieked Professor Umbridge pointing a stubby finger at McGonagall .Yes !Yes yes yes !Of course !Thats what you want isnt it Minerva McGonagall ?You want Cornelius Fudge replaced by Albus Dumbledore !You think youll be where I am dont you Senior Undersecretary to the Minister and headmistress to boot !You are raving said Professor McGonagall superbly disdainful .Potter that concludes our career consultation .Harry swung his bag over his shoulder and hurried out of the room not daring to look at Umbridge .He could hear her and Professor McGonagall continuing to shout at each other all the way back along the corridor .Professor Umbridge was still breathing as though she had just run a race when she strode into their Defense Against the Dark Arts lesson that afternoon .I hope youve thought better of what you were planning to do Harry Hermione whispered the moment they had opened their books to chapter thirty four NonRetaliation and Negotiation .Umbridge looks like shes in a really bad mood already .Every now and then Umbridge shot glowering looks at Harry who kept his head down staring at Defensive Magical Theory his eyes unfocused thinking .He could just imagine Professor McGonagalls reaction if he were caught trespassing in Professor Umbridges office mere hours after she had vouched for him .There was nothing to stop him simply going back to Gryffindor Tower and hoping that sometime during the next summer holiday he would have a chance to ask Sirius about the scene he had witnessed in the Pensieve .Nothing except that the thought of taking this sensible course of action made him feel as though a lead weight had dropped into his stomach .And then there was the matter of Fred and George whose diversion was already planned not to mention the knife Sirius had given him which was currently residing in his schoolbag along with his fathers old Invisibility Cloak .But the fact remained that if he were caught .Dumbledore sacrificed himself to keep you in school Harry !whispered Hermione raising her book to hide her face from Umbridge .And if you get thrown out today it will all have been for nothing !He could abandon the plan and simply learn to live with the memory of what his father had done on a summers day more than twenty years ago .And then he remembered Sirius in the fire upstairs in the Gryffindor common room .You re less like your father than I thought .The risk wouldve been what made it fun for James .But did he want to be like his father anymore ?Harry dont do it please dont do it !Hermione said in anguished tones as the bell rang at the end of the class .He did not answer he did not know what to do .Ron seemed determined to give neither his opinion nor his advice .He would not look at Harry though when Hermione opened her mouth to try dissuading Harry some more he said in a low voice Give it a rest okay ?He can make up his own mind .Harrys heart beat very fast as he left the classroom .He was halfway along the corridor outside when he heard the unmistakable sounds of a diversion going off in the distance .There were screams and yells reverberating from somewhere above them .People exiting the classrooms all around Harry were stopping in their tracks and looking up at the ceiling fearfully Then Umbridge came pelting out of her classroom as fast as her short legs would carry her .Pulling out her wand she hurried off in the opposite direction It was now or never .Harry please !said Hermione weakly .But he had made up his mind hitching his bag more securely onto his shoulder he set off at a run weaving in and out of students now hurrying in the opposite direction off to see what all the fuss was about in the east wing .Harry reached the corridor where Umbridges office was situated and found it deserted .Dashing behind a large suit of armor whose helmet creaked around to watch him he pulled open his bag seized Siriuss knife and donned the Invisibility Cloak .He then crept slowly and carefully back out from behind the suit of armor and along the corridor until he reached Umbridges door .He inserted the blade of the magical knife into the crack around it and moved it gently up and down then withdrew it .There was a tiny click and the door swung open .He ducked inside the office closed the door quickly behind him and looked around .It was empty nothing was moving except the horrible kittens on the plates continuing to frolic on the wall above the confiscated broomsticks .Harry pulled off his cloak and striding over to the fireplace found what he was looking for within seconds a small box containing glittering Floo powder .He crouched down in front of the empty grate his hands shaking .He had never done this before though he thought he knew how it must work .Sticking his head into the fireplace he took a large pinch of powder and dropped it onto the logs stacked neatly beneath him .They exploded at once into emeraldgreen flames .Number twelve Grimmauld Place !Harry said loudly and clearly .It was one of the most curious sensations he had ever experienced he had traveled by Floo powder before of course but then it had been his entire body that had spun around and around in the flames through the network of Wizarding fireplaces that stretched over the country This time his knees remained firm upon the cold floor of Umbridges office and only his head hurtled through the emerald fire .And then abruptly as it had begun the spinning stopped .Feeling rather sick and as though he was wearing an exceptionally hot muffler around his head Harry opened his eyes to find that he was looking up out of the kitchen fireplace at the long wooden table where a man sat poring over a piece of parchment .Sirius ?The man jumped and looked around .It was not Sirius but Lupin .Harry !he said looking thoroughly shocked .What are you whats happened is everything all right ?Yeah said Harry .I just wondered I mean I just fancied a a chat with Sirius .Ill call him said Lupin getting to his feet still looking perplexed .He went upstairs to look for Kreacher he seems to be hiding in the attic again .And Harry saw Lupin hurry out of the kitchen .Now he was left with nothing to look at but the chair and table legs .He wondered why Sirius had never mentioned how very uncomfortable it was to speak out of the fire his knees were already objecting painfully to their prolonged contact with Umbridges hard stone floor .Lupin returned with Sirius at his heels moments later .What is it ?said Sirius urgently sweeping his long dark hair out of his eyes and dropping to the ground in front of the fire so that he and Harry were on a level Lupin knelt down too looking very concerned .Are you all right ?Do you need help ?No said Harry its nothing like that .I just wanted to talk .about my dad .They exchanged a look of great surprise but Harry did not have time to feel awkward or embarrassed his knees were becoming sorer by the second and he guessed that five minutes had already passed from the start of the diversion George had only guaranteed him twenty .He therefore plunged immediately into the story of what he had seen in the Pensieve .When he had finished neither Sirius nor Lupin spoke for a moment .Then Lupin said quietly I wouldnt like you to judge your father on what you saw there Harry .He was only fifteen Im fifteen !said Harry heatedly .Look Harry said Sirius placatingly James and Snape hated each other from the moment they set eyes on each other it was just one of those things you can understand that cant you ?I think James was everything Snape wanted to be he was popular he was good at Quidditch good at pretty much everything .And Snape was just this little oddball who was up to his eyes in the Dark Arts and James whatever else he may have appeared to you Harry always hated the Dark Arts .Yeah said Harry but he just attacked Snape for no good reason just because well just because you said you were bored he finished with a slightly apologetic note in his voice .Im not proud of it said Sirius quickly .Lupin looked sideways at Sirius and then said Look Harry what youve got to understand is that your father and Sirius were the best in the school at whatever they did everyone thought they were the height of cool if they sometimes got a bit carried away If we were sometimes arrogant little berks you mean said Sirius .Lupin smiled .He kept messing up his hair said Harry in a pained voice .Sirius and Lupin laughed .Id forgotten he used to do that said Sirius affectionately .Was he playing with the Snitch ?said Lupin eagerly .Yeah said Harry watching uncomprehendingly as Sirius and Lupin beamed reminiscently .Well .I thought he was a bit of an idiot .Of course he was a bit of an idiot !said Sirius bracingly .We were all idiots !Well not Moony so much he said fairly looking at Lupin but Lupin shook his head .Did I ever tell you to lay off Snape ?he said .Did I ever have the guts to tell you I thought you were out of order ?Yeah well said Sirius you made us feel ashamed of ourselves sometimes .That was something .And said Harry doggedly determined to say everything that was on his mind now he was here he kept looking over at the girls by the lake hoping they were watching him !Oh well he always made a fool of himself whenever Lily was around said Sirius shrugging .He couldnt stop himself showing off whenever he got near her .How come she married him ?Harry asked miserably .She hated him !Nah she didnt said Sirius .She started going out with him in seventh year said Lupin .Once James had deflated his head a bit said Sirius .And stopped hexing people just for the fun of it said Lupin .Even Snape ?said Harry .Well said Lupin slowly Snape was a special case .I mean he never lost an opportunity to curse James so you couldnt really expect James to take that lying down could you ?And my mum was okay with that ?She didnt know too much about it to tell you the truth said Sirius .I mean James didnt take Snape on dates with her and jinx him in front of her did he ?Sirius frowned at Harry who was still looking unconvinced .Look he said your father was the best friend I ever had and he was a good person .A lot of people are idiots at the age of fifteen .He grew out of it .Yeah okay said Harry heavily .I just never thought Id feel sorry for Snape .Now you mention it said Lupin a faint crease between his eyebrows how did Snape react when he found youd seen all this ?He told me hed never teach me Occlumency again said Harry indifferently like thats a big disappoint He WHAT ?shouted Sirius causing Harry to jump and inhale a mouthful of ashes .Are you serious Harry ?said Lupin quickly .Hes stopped giving you lessons ?Yeah said Harry surprised at what he considered a great overreaction .But its okay I dont care its a bit of a relief to tell you the Im coming up there to have a word with Snape !said Sirius forcefully and he actually made to stand up but Lupin wrenched him back down again .If anyones going to tell Snape it will be me !he said firmly .But Harry first of all youre to go back to Snape and tell him that on no account is he to stop giving you lessons when Dumbledore hears I cant tell him that hed kill me !said Harry outraged .You didnt see him when we got out of the Pensieve Harry there is nothing so important as you learning Occlumency !said Lupin sternly .Do you understand me ?Nothing !Okay okay said Harry thoroughly discomposed not to mention annoyed .Ill .Ill try and say something to him .But it wont be .He fell silent .He could hear distant footsteps .Is that Kreacher coming downstairs ?No said Sirius glancing behind him .It must be somebody your end .Harrys heart skipped several beats .Id better go !he said hastily and he pulled his head backward out of Grimmauld Places fire .For a moment his head seemed to be revolving on his shoulders and then he found himself kneeling in front of Umbridges fire with his head firmly back on watching the emerald flames flicker and die .Quickly quickly !he heard a wheezy voice mutter right outside the office door .Ah shes left it open .Harry dived for the Invisibility Cloak and had just managed to pull it back over himself when Filch burst into the office .He looked absolutely delighted about something and was talking to himself feverishly as he crossed the room pulled open a drawer in Umbridges desk and began rifling through the papers inside it .Approval for Whipping .Approval for Whipping .I can do it at last .Theyve had it coming to them for years .He pulled out a piece of parchment kissed it then shuffled rapidly back out of the door clutching it to his chest .Harry leapt to his feet and making sure that he had his bag and the Invisibility Cloak was completely covering him he wrenched open the door and hurried out of the office after Filch who was hobbling along faster than Harry had ever seen him go .One landing down from Umbridges office and Harry thought it was safe to become visible again he pulled off the cloak shoved it in his bag and hurried onward .There was a great deal of shouting and movement coming from the entrance hall .He ran down the marble staircase and found what looked like most of the school assembled there .It was just like the night when Trelawney had been sacked .Students were standing all around the walls in a great ring some of them Harry noticed covered in a substance that looked very like Stinksap teachers and ghosts were also in the crowd .Prominent among the onlookers were members of the Inquisitorial Squad who were all looking exceptionally pleased with themselves and Peeves who was bobbing overhead gazed down upon Fred and George who stood in the middle of the floor with the unmistakable look of two people who had just been cornered .So !said Umbridge triumphantly whom Harry realized was standing just a few stairs in front of him once more looking down upon her prey .So .you think it amusing to turn a school corridor into a swamp do you ?Pretty amusing yeah said Fred looking back up at her without the slightest sign of fear .Filch elbowed his way closer to Umbridge almost crying with happiness .Ive got the form Headmistress he said hoarsely waving the piece of parchment Harry had just seen him take from her desk .Ive got the form and Ive got the whips waiting .Oh let me do it now .Very good Argus she said .You two she went on gazing down at Fred and George are about to learn what happens to wrongdoers in my school .You know what ?said Fred .I dont think we are .He turned to his twin .George said Fred I think weve outgrown fulltime education .Yeah Ive been feeling that way myself said George lightly .Time to test our talents in the real world dyou reckon ?asked Fred .Definitely said George .And before Umbridge could say a word they raised their wands and said together Accio BroomsV Harry heard a loud crash somewhere in the distance .Looking to his left he ducked just in time Fred and Georges broomsticks one still trailing the heavy chain and iron peg with which Umbridge had fastened them to the wall were hurtling along the corridor toward their owners .They turned left streaked down the stairs and stopped sharply in front of the twins the chain clattering loudly on the flagged stone floor .We wont be seeing you Fred told Professor Umbridge swinging his leg over his broomstick .Yeah dont bother to keep in touch said George mounting his own .Fred looked around at the assembled students and at the silent watchful crowd .If anyone fancies buying a Portable Swamp as demonstrated upstairs come to number ninetythree Diagon Alley Weasleys Wizarding Wheezes he said in a loud voice .Our new premises !Special discounts to Hogwarts students who swear theyre going to use our products to get rid of this old bat added George pointing at Professor Umbridge .STOP THEM !shrieked Umbridge but it was too late .As the Inquisitorial Squad closed in Fred and George kicked off from the floor shooting fifteen feet into the air the iron peg swinging dangerously below .Fred looked across the hall at the poltergeist bobbing on his level above the crowd .Give her hell from us Peeves .And Peeves whom Harry had never seen take an order from a student before swept his belled hat from his head and sprang to a salute as Fred and George wheeled about to tumultuous applause from the students below and sped out of the open front doors into the glorious sunset .GRAWP The story of Fred and Georges flight to freedom was retold so often over the next few days that Harry could tell it would soon become the stuff of Hogwarts legend .Within a week even those who had been eyewitnesses were half convinced that they had seen the twins divebomb Umbridge on their brooms pelting her with Dungbombs before zooming out of the doors .In the immediate aftermath of their departure there was a great wave of talk about copying them so that Harry frequently heard students saying things like Honestly some days I just feel like jumping on my broom and leaving this place or else One more lesson like that and I might just do a Weasley .Fred and George had made sure that nobody was likely to forget them very soon .For one thing they had not left instructions on how to remove the swamp that now filled the corridor on the fifth floor of the east wing .Umbridge and Filch had been observed trying different means of removing it but without success .Eventually the area was roped off and Filch gnashing his teeth furiously was given the task of punting students across it to their classrooms .Harry was certain that teachers like McGonagall or Flitwick could have removed the swamp in an instant but just as in the case of Fred and Georges Wildfire Whiz Bangs they seemed to prefer to watch Umbridge struggle .Then there were the two large broomshaped holes in Umbridge s office door through which Fred and Georges Cleansweeps had smashed to rejoin their masters .Filch fitted a new door and removed Harrys Firebolt to the dungeons where it was rumored Umbridge had set an armed security troll to guard it .However her troubles were far from over .Inspired by Fred and Georges example a great number of students were now vying for the newly vacant positions of TroublemakersinChief .In spite of the new door somebody managed to slip a hairy snouted niffler into Umbridge s office which promptly tore the place apart in its search for shiny objects leapt on Umbridge on her reentrance and tried to gnaw the rings off her stubby fingers .Dungbombs and Stinkpellets were dropped so frequently in the corridors that it became the new fashion for students to perform BubbleHead Charms on themselves before leaving lessons which ensured them a supply of fresh clean air even though it gave them all the peculiar appearance of wearing upsidedown goldfish bowls on their heads .Filch prowled the corridors with a horsewhip ready in his hands desperate to catch miscreants but the problem was that there were now so many of them that he did not know which way to turn .The Inquisitorial Squad were attempting to help him but odd things kept happening to its members .Warrington of the Slytherin Quidditch team reported to the hospital wing with a horrible skin complaint that made him look as though he had been coated in cornflakes .Pansy Parkinson to Hermiones delight missed all her lessons the following day as she had sprouted antlers .Meanwhile it became clear just how many Skiving Snackboxes Fred and George had managed to sell before leaving Hogwarts .Umbridge only had to enter her classroom for the students assembled there to faint vomit develop dangerous fevers or else spout blood from both nostrils .Shrieking with rage and frustration she attempted to trace the mysterious symptoms to their source but the students told her stubbornly they were suffering Umbridgeitis .After putting four successive classes in detention and failing to discover their secret she was forced to give up and allow the bleeding swooning sweating and vomiting students to leave her classes in droves .But not even the users of the Snackboxes could compete with that master of chaos Peeves who seemed to have taken Freds parting words deeply to heart .Cackling madly he soared through the school upending tables bursting out of blackboards and toppling statues and vases .Twice he shut Mrs Norris inside suits of armor from which she was rescued yowling loudly by the furious caretaker .He smashed lanterns and snuffed out candles juggled burning torches over the heads of screaming students caused neatly stacked piles of parchment to topple into fires or out of windows flooded the second floor when he pulled off all the taps in the bathrooms dropped a bag of tarantulas in the middle of the Great Hall during breakfast and whenever he fancied a break spent hours at a time floating along after Umbridge and blowing loud raspberries every time she spoke .None of the staff but Filch seemed to be stirring themselves to help her .Indeed a week after Fred and Georges departure Harry witnessed Professor McGonagall walking right past Peeves who was determinedly loosening a crystal chandelier and could have sworn he heard her tell the poltergeist out of the corner of her mouth It unscrews the other way .To cap matters Montague had still not recovered from his sojourn in the toilet .He remained confused and disorientated and his parents were to be observed one Tuesday morning striding up the front drive looking extremely angry .Should we say something ?said Hermione in a worried voice pressing her cheek against the Charms window so that she could see Mr and Mrs Montague marching inside .About what happened to him ?In case it helps Madam Pomfrey cure him ?Course not hell recover said Ron indifferently .Anyway more trouble for Umbridge isnt it ?said Harry in a satisfied voice .He and Ron both tapped the teacups they were supposed to be charming with their wands .Harrys spouted four very short legs that would not reach the desk and wriggled pointlessly in midair .Rons grew four very thin spindly legs that hoisted the cup off the desk with great difficulty trembled for a few seconds then folded causing the cup to crack into two .Reparo said Hermione quickly mending Rons cup with a wave of her wand .Thats all very well but what if Montagues permanently injured ?Who cares ?said Ron irritably while his teacup stood drunkenly again trembling violently at the knees .Montague shouldnt have tried to take all those points from Gryffindor should he ?If you want to worry about anyone Hermione worry about me !You ?she said catching her teacup as it scampered happily away across the desk on four sturdy little willowpatterned legs and replacing it in front of her .Why should I be worried about you ?When Mums next letter finally gets through Umbridges screening process said Ron bitterly now holding his cup up while its frail legs tried feebly to support its weight Im going to be in deep trouble .I wouldnt be surprised if shes sent a Howler again .But Itll be my fault Fred and George left you wait said Ron darkly .Shell say I shouldve stopped them leaving I shouldve grabbed the ends of their brooms and hung on or something .Yeah itll be all my fault .Well if she does say that itll be very unfair you couldnt have done anything !But Im sure she wont I mean if its really true theyve got premises in Diagon Alley now they must have been planning this for ages .Yeah but thats another thing how did they get premises ?said Ron hitting his teacup so hard with his wand that its legs collapsed again and it lay twitching before him .Its a bit dodgy isnt it ?Theyll need loads of Galleons to afford the rent on a place in Diagon Alley shell want to know what theyve been up to to get their hands on that sort of gold .Well yes that occurred to me too said Hermione allowing her teacup to jog in neat little circles around Harrys whose stubby little legs were still unable to touch the desktop .Ive been wondering whether Mundungus has persuaded them to sell stolen goods or something awful .He hasnt said Harry curtly .How do you know ?said Ron and Hermione together .Because Harry hesitated but the moment to confess finally seemed to have come .There was no good to be gained in keeping silent if it meant anyone suspected that Fred and George were criminals .Because they got the gold from me .I gave them my Triwizard winnings last June .There was a shocked silence then Hermiones teacup jogged right over the edge of the desk and smashed on the floor .Oh Harry you didnt she said .Yes I did said Harry mutinously .And I dont regret it either I didnt need the gold and theyll be great at a joke shop .But this is excellent !said Ron looking thrilled .Its all your fault Harry Mum cant blame me at all !Can I tell her ?Yeah I suppose youd better said Harry dully .Specially if she thinks theyre receiving stolen cauldrons or something .Hermione said nothing at all for the rest of the lesson but Harry had a shrewd suspicion that her self restraint was bound to crack before long .Sure enough once they had left the castle for break and were standing around in the weak May sunshine she fixed Harry with a beady eye and opened her mouth with a determined air .Harry interrupted her before she had even started .Its no good nagging me its done he said firmly .Fred and George have got the gold spent a good bit of it too by the sounds of it and I cant get it back from them and I dont want to .So save your breath Hermione .I wasnt going to say anything about Fred and George !she said in an injured voice .Ron snorted disbelievingly and Hermione threw him a very dirty look .No I wasnt !she said angrily .As a matter of fact I was going to ask Harry when hes going to go back to Snape and ask for Occlumency lessons again !Harrys heart sank .Once they had exhausted the subject of Fred and Georges dramatic departure which admittedly had taken many hours Ron and Hermione had wanted to hear news of Sirius .As Harry had not confided in them the reason he had wanted to talk to Sirius in the first place it had been hard to think of things to tell them .He had ended up saying to them truthfully that Sirius wanted Harry to resume Occlumency lessons .He had been regretting this ever since Hermione would not let the subject drop and kept reverting to it when Harry least expected it .You cant tell me youve stopped having funny dreams Hermione said now because Ron told me last night you were muttering in your sleep again .Harry threw Ron a furious look .Ron had the grace to look ashamed of himself .You were only muttering a bit he mumbled apologetically .Something about ‘just a bit farther .I dreamed I was watching you lot play Quidditch Harry lied brutally .I was trying to get you to stretch out a bit farther to grab the Quaffle .Rons ears went red .Harry felt a kind of vindictive pleasure He had not of course dreamed anything of the sort .Last night he had once again made the journey along the Department of Mysteries corridor .He had passed through the circular room then the room full of clicking and dancing light until he found himself again inside that cavernous room full of shelves on which were ranged dusty glass spheres .He had hurried straight toward row number ninety seven turned left and ran along it .It had probably been then that he had spoken aloud .Just a bit farther .for he could feel his conscious self struggling to wake .and before he had reached the end of the row he had found himself lying in bed again gazing up at the canopy of his fourposter .You are trying to block your mind arent you ?said Hermione looking beadily at Harry .You are keeping going with your Occlumency ?Of course I am said Harry trying to sound as though this question was insulting but not quite meeting her eye .The truth was that he was so intensely curious about what was hidden in that room full of dusty orbs that he was quite keen for the dreams to continue .The problem was that with just under a month to go until the exams and every free moment devoted to studying his mind seemed saturated with information when he went to bed so that he found it very difficult to get to sleep at all .When he did his overwrought brain presented him most nights with stupid dreams about the exams .He also suspected that part of his mind the part that often spoke in Hermiones voice now felt guilty on the occasions it strayed down that corridor ending in the black door and sought to wake him before he could reach journeys end .You know said Ron whose ears were still flaming red if Montague doesnt recover before Slytherin play Hufflepuff we might be in with a chance of winning the Cup .Yeah I spose so said Harry glad of a change of subject .I mean weve won one lost one if Slytherin lose to Hufflepuff next Saturday Yeah thats right said Harry losing track of what he was agreeing to Cho Chang had just walked across the courtyard determinedly not looking at him .The final match of the Quidditch season Gryffindor versus Ravenclaw was to take place on the last weekend of May .Although Slytherin had been narrowly defeated by Hufflepuff in their last match Gryffindor was not daring to hope for victory due mainly though of course nobody said it to him to Rons abysmal goalkeeping record .He however seemed to have found a new optimism .I mean I cant get any worse can I ?he told Harry and Hermione grimly over breakfast on the morning of the match .Nothing to lose now is there ?You know said Hermione as she and Harry walked down to the pitch a little later in the midst of a very excitable crowd I think Ron might do better without Fred and George around .They never exactly gave him a lot of confidence .Luna Lovegood overtook them with what appeared to be a live eagle perched on top of her head .Oh gosh I forgot !said Hermione watching the eagle flapping its wings as Luna walked serenely past a group of cackling and pointing Slytherins .Cho will be playing wont she ?Harry who had not forgotten this merely grunted .They found seats in the topmost row of the stands .It was a fine clear day .Ron could not wish for better and Harry found himself hoping against hope that Ron would not give the Slytherins cause for more rousing choruses of Weasley Is Our King .Lee Jordan who had been very dispirited since Fred and George had left was commentating as usual .As the teams zoomed out onto the pitches he named the players with something less than his usual gusto . .Bradley .Davies .Chang he said and Harry felt his stomach perform less of a back flip more a feeble lurch as Cho walked out onto the pitch her shiny black hair rippling in the slight breeze .He was not sure what he wanted to happen anymore except that he could not stand any more rows .Even the sight of her chatting animatedly to Roger Davies as they prepared to mount their brooms caused him only a slight twinge of jealousy .And theyre off !said Lee .And Davies takes the Quaffle immediately Ravenclaw Captain Davies with the Quaffle he dodges Johnson he dodges Bell he dodges Spinnet as well .Hes going straight for goal !Hes going to shoot and and Lee swore very loudly .And hes scored .Harry and Hermione groaned with the rest of the Gryffindors .Predictably horribly the Slytherins on the other side of the stands began to sing Weasley cannot save a thing He cannot block a single ring .Harry said a hoarse voice in Harrys ear .Hermione Harry looked around and saw Hagrids enormous bearded face sticking between the seats apparently he had squeezed his way all along the row behind for the first and second years he had just passed had a ruffled flattened look about them .For some reason Hagrid was bent double as though anxious not to be seen though he was still at least four feet taller than everybody else .Listen he whispered can yeh come with me ?Now ?While evryones watchin the match ?Er .cant it wait Hagrid ?asked Harry .Till the match is over ?No said Hagrid .No Harry its gotta be now .while evryones lookin the other way .Please ?Hagrids nose was gently dripping blood .His eyes were both blackened .Harry had not seen him this close up since his return to the school he looked utterly woebegone .Course said Harry at once course well come .He and Hermione edged back along their row of seats causing much grumbling among the students who had to stand up for them .The people in Hagrids row were not complaining merely attempting to make themselves as small as possible .I ppreciate this you two I really do said Hagrid as they reached the stairs .He kept looking around nervously as they descended toward the lawn below .I jus hope she doesn notice us goin .You mean Umbridge ?said Harry .She wont shes got her whole Inquisitorial Squad sitting with her didnt you see ?She must be expecting trouble at the match .Yeah well a bit o trouble wouldn hurt said Hagrid pausing to peer around the edge of the stands to make sure the stretch of lawn between there and his cabin was deserted .Give us more time .What is it Hagrid ?said Hermione looking up at him with a concerned expression on her face as they hurried across the lawn toward the edge of the forest .Yeh yehll see in a mo said Hagrid looking over his shoulder as a great roar rose from the stands behind them .Hey did someone jus score ?Itll be Ravenclaw said Harry heavily .Good .good .said Hagrid distractedly .Thas good .They had to jog to keep up with him as he strode across the lawn looking around with every other step .When they reached his cabin Hermione turned automatically left toward the front door Hagrid however walked straight past it into the shade of the trees on the outermost edge of the forest where he picked up a crossbow that was leaning against a tree .When he realized they were no longer with him he turned .Were goin in here he said jerking his shaggy head behind him .Into the forest ?said Hermione perplexed .Yeah said Hagrid .Cmon now quick before were spotted !Harry and Hermione looked at each other then ducked into the cover of the trees behind Hagrid who was already striding away from them into the green gloom his crossbow over his arm .Harry and Hermione ran to catch up with him .Hagrid why are you armed ?said Harry .Jus a precaution said Hagrid shrugging his massive shoulders .You didnt bring your crossbow the day you showed us the thestrals said Hermione timidly .Nah well we weren goin in so far then said Hagrid .An anyway tha was before Firenze left the forest wasn it ?Why does Firenze leaving make a difference ?asked Hermione curiously .Cause the other centaurs are good an riled at me thas why said Hagrid quietly glancing around .They used ter be well yeh couldn call em friendly but we got on all righ .Kept emselves to emselves bu always turned up if I wanted a word .Not anymore He sighed deeply .Firenze said that theyre angry because he went to work for Dumbledore ?Harry asked tripping on a protruding root because he was busy watching Hagrid s profile .Yeah said Hagrid heavily .Well angry doesn cover it .Ruddy livid .If I hadn stepped in I reckon theyd ve kicked Firenze ter death They attacked him ?said Hermione sounding shocked .Yep said Hagrid gruffly forcing his way through several lowhanging branches .He had half the herd onto him And you stopped it ?said Harry amazed and impressed .By yourself ?Course I did couldnt stand by an watch em kill him could I ?said Hagrid .Lucky I was passin really .an Idve thought Firenze mighta remembered tha before he started sendin me stupid warnins !he added hotly and unexpectedly .Harry and Hermione looked at each other startled but Hagrid scowling did not elaborate .Anyway he said breathing a little more heavily than usual since then the other centaurs Ve bin livid with me an the trouble is theyve got a lot of influence in the forest .Cleverest creatures in here Is that why were here Hagrid ?asked Hermione .The centaurs ?Ah no said Hagrid shaking his head dismissively no its not them .Well o course they could complicate the problem yeah .But yehll see what I mean in a bit .On this incomprehensible note he fell silent and forged a little ahead taking one stride for every three of theirs so that they had great trouble keeping up with him .The path was becoming increasingly overgrown and the trees grew so closely together as they walked farther and farther into the forest that it was as dark as dusk .They were soon a long way past the clearing where Hagrid had shown them the thestrals but Harry felt no sense of unease until Hagrid stepped unexpectedly off the path and began wending his way in and out of trees toward the dark heart of the forest .Hagrid ?said Harry fighting his way through thickly knotted brambles over which Hagrid had stepped easily and remembering very vividly what had happened to him on the other occasions he had stepped off the forest path .Where are we going ?Bit further said Hagrid over his shoulder .Cmon Harry .We need ter keep together now .It was a great struggle to keep up with Hagrid what with branches and thickets of thorn through which Hagrid marched as easily as though they were cobwebs but which snagged Harry and Hermiones robes frequently entangling them so severely that they had to stop for minutes at a time to free themselves .Harrys arms and legs were soon covered in small cuts and scratches .They were so deep in the forest now that sometimes all Harry could see of Hagrid in the gloom was a massive dark shape ahead of him .Any sound seemed threatening in the muffled silence .The breaking of a twig echoed loudly and the tiniest rustle of movement though it might have been made by an innocent sparrow caused Harry to peer through the gloom for a culprit .It occurred to him that he had never managed to get this far into the forest without meeting some kind of creature their absence struck him as rather ominous .Hagrid would it be all right if we lit our wands ?said Hermione quietly .Er .all righ Hagrid whispered back .In fact .He stopped suddenly and turned around Hermione walked right into him and was knocked over backward .Harry caught her just before she hit the forest floor .Maybe we bes jus stop fer a momen so I can .fill yeh in said Hagrid .Before we ge there like .Good !said Hermione as Harry set her back on her feet .They both murmured Lumos and their wand tips ignited .Hagrid s face swam through the gloom by the light of the two wavering beams and Harry saw that he looked nervous and sad again .Righ said Hagrid .Well .see .the thing is .He took a great breath .Well theres a good chance Im goin ter be gettin the sack any day now he said .Harry and Hermione looked at each other then back at him .But youve lasted this long Hermione said tentatively .What makes you think Umbridge reckons it was me that put tha niffler in her office .And was it ?said Harry before he could stop himself .No it ruddy well wasn !said Hagrid indignantly .Ony anythin ter do with magical creatures an she thinks its got somethin ter do with me .Yeh know shes bin lookin fer a chance ter get rid of me ever since I got back .I don wan ter go o course but if it wasn fer .well .the special circumstances Im abou ter explain to yeh Id leave righ now before shes go the chance ter do it in front o the whole school like she did with Trelawney .Harry and Hermione both made noises of protest but Hagrid overrode them with a wave of one of his enormous hands .Its not the end o the world Ill be able ter help Dumbledore once Im outta here I can be useful ter the Order .An you lotll have GrubblyPlank yehll yehll get through yer exams fine .His voice trembled and broke .Don worry abou me he said hastily as Hermione made to pat his arm .He pulled his enormous spotted handkerchief from the pocket of his waistcoat and mopped his eyes with it .Look I wouldn be tellin yer this at all if I didn have ter .See if I go .well I can leave withou .withou fellin someone .because Ill Ill need you two ter help me .An Ron if hes willin .Of course well help you said Harry at once .What do you want us to do ?Hagrid gave a great sniff and patted Harry wordlessly on the shoulder with such force that Harry was knocked sideways into a tree .I knew yehd say yes said Hagrid into his handkerchief but I won .never .forget .Well .cmon .jus a little bit further through here .Watch yerselves now theres nettles .They walked on in silence for another fifteen minutes .Harry had opened his mouth to ask how much farther they had to go when Hagrid threw out his right arm to signal that they should stop .Really easy he said softly .Very quiet now .They crept forward and Harry saw that they were facing a large smooth mound of earth nearly as tall as Hagrid that he thought with a jolt of dread was sure to be the lair of some enormous animal .Trees had been ripped up at the roots all around the mound so that it stood on a bare patch of ground surrounded by heaps of trunks and boughs that formed a kind of fence or barricade behind which Harry Hermione and Hagrid now stood .Sleepin breathed Hagrid .Sure enough Harry could hear a distant rhythmic rumbling that sounded like a pair of enormous lungs at work .He glanced sideways at Hermione who was gazing at the mound with her mouth slightly open .She looked utterly terrified .Hagrid she said in a whisper barely audible over the sound of the sleeping creature who is he ?Harry found this an odd question .What is it ?was the one he had been planning on asking .Hagrid you told us said Hermione her wand now shaking in her hand you told us none of them wanted to come !Harry looked from her to Hagrid and then as realization hit him he looked back at the mound with a small gasp of horror .The great mound of earth on which he Hermione and Hagrid could easily have stood was moving slowly up and down in time with the deep grunting breathing .It was not a mound at all .It was the curved back of what was clearly .Well no he didn want ter come said Hagrid sounding desperate .But I had ter bring him Hermione I had ter !But why ?asked Hermione who sounded as though she wanted to cry .Why what oh Hagrid I knew if I jus got him back said Hagrid sounding close to tears himself an an taught him a few manners Id be able ter take him outside an show evryone hes harmless !Harmless !said Hermione shrilly and Hagrid made frantic hushing noises with his hands as the enormous creature before them grunted loudly and shifted in its sleep .Hes been hurting you all this time hasnt he ?Thats why youve had all these injuries !He don know his own strength !said Hagrid earnestly .An hes gettin better hes not fightin so much anymore So this is why it took you two months to get home !said Hermione distractedly .Oh Hagrid why did you bring him back if he didnt want to come wouldnt he have been happier with his own people ?They were all bullyin him Hermione cause hes so small !said Hagrid .Small ?said Hermione .Small ?Hermione I couldn leave him said Hagrid tears now trickling down his bruised face into his beard .See hes my brother !Hermione simply stared at him her mouth open .Hagrid when you say ‘brother said Harry slowly do you mean ?Well halfbrother amended Hagrid .Turns out me mother took up with another giant when she left me dad an she went an had Grawp here Grawp ?said Harry .Yeah .well thas what it sounds like when he says his name said Hagrid anxiously .He don speak a lot of English .Ive bin tryin ter teach him .Anyway she don seem ter have liked him much moren she liked me .See with giantesses what counts is producin good big kids and hes always been a bit on the runty side fer a giant ony sixteen foot Oh yes tiny !said Hermione with a kind of hysterical sarcasm .Absolutely minuscule !He was bein kicked around by all o them I jus couldn leave him Did Madame Maxime want to bring him back ?asked Harry .She well she could see it was right importan ter me said Hagrid twisting his enormous hands .Bu bu she got a bit tired of him after a while I must admit .so we split up on the journey home .She promised not ter tell anyone though .How on earth did you get him back without anyone noticing ?said Harry .Well thas why it took so long see said Hagrid .Could ony travel by nigh an through wild country an stuff .Course he covers the ground pretty well when he wants ter but he kep wantin ter go back .Oh Hagrid why on earth didnt you let him !said Hermione flopping down onto a rippedup tree and burying her face in her hands .What do you think youre going to do with a violent giant who doesnt even want to be here !Well now Violent thas a bit harsh said Hagrid still twisting his hands agitatedly .Ill admit he mighta taken a couple o swings at me when hes bin in a bad mood but hes gettin better loads better settlin down well .What are those ropes for then ?Harry asked .He had just noticed ropes thick as saplings stretching from around the trunks of the largest nearby trees toward the place where Grawp lay curled on the ground with his back to them .You have to keep him tied up ?said Hermione faintly .Well .yeah .said Hagrid looking anxious .See its like I say he doesn really know his strength Harry understood now why there had been such a suspicious lack of any other living creature in this part of the forest .So what is it you want Harry and Ron and me to do ?Hermione asked apprehensively .Look after him said Hagrid croakily .After Im gone .Harry and Hermione exchanged miserable looks Harry uncomfortably aware that he had already promised Hagrid that he would do whatever he asked .What what does that involve exactly ?Hermione inquired .Not food or anythin !said Hagrid eagerly .He can get his own food no problem .Birds an deer an stuff .No its company he needs .If I jus knew someone was carryin on tryin ter help him a bit .teachin him yeh know .Harry said nothing but turned to look back at the gigantic form lying asleep on the ground in front of them .Grawp had his back to them .Unlike Hagrid who simply looked like a very oversize human Grawp looked strangely misshapen .What Harry had taken to be a vast mossy boulder to the left of the great earthen mound he now recognized as Grawp s head .It was much larger in proportion to the body than a human head almost perfectly round and covered with tightly curling closegrowing hair the color of bracken .The rim of a single large fleshy ear was visible on top of the head which seemed to sit rather like Uncle Vernons directly upon the shoulders with little or no neck in between .The back under what looked like a dirty brownish smock comprised of animal skins sewn roughly together was very broad and as Grawp slept it seemed to strain a little at the rough seams of the skins .The legs were curled up under the body Harry could see the soles of enormous filthy bare feet large as sledges resting one on top of the other on the earthy forest floor .You want us to teach him Harry said in a hollow voice .He now understood what Firenzes warning had meant .His attempt is not working .He would do better to abandon it .Of course the other creatures who lived in the forest would have heard Hagrids fruitless attempts to teach Grawp English .Yeah even if yeh jus talk ter him a bit said Hagrid hopefully .Cause I reckon if he can talk ter people hell understand more that we all like him really an want him to stay .Harry looked at Hermione who peered back at him from between the fingers over her face .Kind of makes you wish we had Norbert back doesnt it ?he said and she gave a very shaky laugh .Yehll do it then ?said Hagrid who did not seem to have caught what Harry had just said .Well .said Harry already bound by his promise .Well try Hagrid .I knew I could count on yeh Harry Hagrid said beaming in a very watery way and dabbing at his face with his handkerchief again .An I don wan yeh ter put yerself out too much like .I know yehve got exams .If yeh could jus nip down here in yer Invisibility Cloak maybe once a week an have a little chat with him .Ill wake him up then introduce you Wha no !said Hermione jumping up Hagrid no dont wake him really we dont need But Hagrid had already stepped over the great trunk in front of them and was proceeding toward Grawp .When he was around ten feet away he lifted a long broken bough from the ground smiled reassuringly over his shoulder at Harry and Hermione and then poked Grawp hard in the middle of the back with the end of the bough .The giant gave a roar that echoed around the silent forest .Birds in the treetops overhead rose twittering from their perches and soared away .In front of Harry and Hermione meanwhile the gigantic Grawp was rising from the ground which shuddered as he placed an enormous hand upon it to push himself onto his knees and turned his head to see who and what had disturbed him .All righ Grawpy ?said Hagrid in a wouldbe cheery voice backing away with the long bough raised ready to poke Grawp again .Had a nice sleep eh ?Harry and Hermione retreated as far as they could while still keeping the giant within their sights .Grawp knelt between two trees he had not yet uprooted .They looked up into his startlingly huge face which resembled a gray full moon swimming in the gloom of the clearing .It was as though the features had been hewn onto a great stone ball .The nose was stubby and shapeless the mouth lopsided and full of misshapen yellow teeth the size of halfbricks .The small eyes were a muddy greenishbrown and just now were half gummed together with sleep .Grawp raised dirty knuckles as big as cricket balls to his eyes rubbed vigorously then without warning pushed himself to his feet with surprising speed and agility .Oh my .Harry heard Hermione squeal terrified beside him .The trees to which the other ends of the ropes around Grawps wrists and ankles were attached creaked ominously .He was as Hagrid had said at least sixteen feet tall .Gazing blearily around he reached out a hand the size of a beach umbrella seized a birds nest from the upper branches of a towering pine and turned it upside down with a roar of apparent displeasure that there was no bird in it eggs fell like grenades toward the ground and Hagrid threw his arms over his head to protect himself .Anyway Grawpy shouted Hagrid looking up apprehensively in case of further falling eggs Ive brought some friends ter meet yeh .Remember I told yeh I might ?Remember when I said I might have ter go on a little trip an leave them ter look after yeh fer a bit ?Remember that Grawpy ?But Grawp merely gave another low roar it was hard to say whether he was listening to Hagrid or whether he even recognized the sounds Hagrid was making as speech .He had now seized the top of the pine tree and was pulling it toward him evidently for the simple pleasure of seeing how far it would spring back when he let go .Now Grawpy don do that !shouted Hagrid .Thas how you ended up pullin up the others And sure enough Harry could see the earth around the trees roots beginning to crack .I got company fer yeh !Hagrid shouted .Company see !Look down yeh big buffoon I brought yeh some friends !Oh Hagrid dont moaned Hermione but Hagrid had already raised the bough again and gave Grawps knee a sharp poke .The giant let go of the top of the pine tree which swayed menacingly and deluged Hagrid with a rain of needles and looked down .This said Hagrid hastening over to where Harry and Hermione stood is Harry Grawp !Harry Potter !He migh be cornin ter visit yeh if I have ter go away understand ?The giant had only just realized that Harry and Hermione were there .They watched in great trepidation as he lowered his huge boulder of a head so that he could peer blearily at them .An this is Hermione see ?Her Hagrid hesitated .Turning to Hermione he said Would yeh mind if he called yeh Hermy Hermione ?Ony its a difficult name fer him ter remember .No not at all squeaked Hermione .This is Hermy Grawp !An shes gonna be cornin an all !Isn tha nice ?Eh ?Two friends fer yeh ter GRAWPY NO !Grawps hand had shot out of nowhere toward Hermione Harry seized her and pulled her backward behind the tree so that Grawps fist scraped the trunk but closed on thin air .BAD BOY GRAWPY !Harry heard Hagrid yelling as Hermione clung to Harry behind the tree shaking and whimpering .VERY BAD BOY !YEH DON GRAB OUCH !Harry poked his head out from around the trunk and saw Hagrid lying on his back his hand over his nose .Grawp apparently losing interest had straightened up again and was again engaged in pulling back the pine as far as it would go .Righ said Hagrid thickly getting up with one hand pinching his bleeding nose and the other grasping his crossbow .Well .there yeh are .Yehve met him an an now hell know yeh when yeh come back .Yeah .well .He looked up at Grawp who was now pulling back the pine with an expression of detached pleasure on his boulderish face the roots were creaking as he ripped them away from the ground .Well I reckon thas enough fer one day said Hagrid .Well er well go back now shall we ?Harry and Hermione nodded .Hagrid shouldered his crossbow again and still pinching his nose led the way back into the trees .Nobody spoke for a while not even when they heard the distant crash that meant Grawp had pulled over the pine tree at last .Hermiones face was pale and set .Harry could not think of a single thing to say .What on earth was going to happen when somebody found out that Hagrid had hidden Grawp in the forest ?And he had promised that he Ron and Hermione would continue Hagrids totally pointless attempts to civilize the giant .How could Hagrid even with his immense capacity to delude himself that fanged monsters were lovably harmless fool himself that Grawp would ever be fit to mix with humans ?Hold it said Hagrid abruptly just as Harry and Hermione were struggling through a patch of thick knotgrass behind him .He pulled an arrow out of the quiver over his shoulder and fitted it into the crossbow .Harry and Hermione raised their wands now that they had stopped walking they too could hear movement close by .Oh blimey said Hagrid quietly .I thought that we told you Hagrid said a deep male voice that you are no longer welcome here ?A mans naked torso seemed for an instant to be floating toward them through the dappled green half light .Then they saw that his waist joined smoothly with a horses chestnut body .This centaur had a proud highcheekboned face and long black hair .Like Hagrid he was armed A quiverful of arrows and a long bow were slung over his shoulders .How are yeh Magorian ?said Hagrid warily .The trees behind the centaur rustled and four or five more emerged behind him .Harry recognized the blackbodied and bearded Bane whom he had met nearly four years ago on the same night he had met Firenze .Bane gave no sign that he had ever seen Harry before .So he said with a nasty inflection in his voice before turning immediately to Magorian .We agreed I think what we would do if this human showed his face in the forest again ?This human now am I ?said Hagrid testily .Jus fer stoppin all of yeh committin murder ?You ought not to have meddled Hagrid said Magorian .Our ways are not yours nor are our laws .Firenze has betrayed and dishonored us .I dunno how yeh work that out said Hagrid impatiently .Hes done nothin except help Albus Dumbledore Firenze has entered into servitude to humans said a gray centaur with a hard deeply lined face .Servitude !said Hagrid scathingly .Hes doin Dumbledore a favor is all He is peddling our knowledge and secrets among humans said Magorian quietly .There can be no return from such disgrace .If yeh say so said Hagrid shrugging but personally I think yeh re makin a big mistake As are you human said Bane coming back into our forest when we warned you Now you listen ter me said Hagrid angrily .Ill have less of the ‘our forest if its all the same ter you .Its not up ter you who comes an goes in here No more is it up to you Hagrid said Magorian smoothly .I shall let you pass today because you are accompanied by your young Theyre not his !interrupted Bane contemptuously .Students Magorian from up at the school !They have probably already profited from the traitor F irenze s teachings .Nevertheless said Magorian calmly the slaughter of foals is a terrible crime .We do not touch the innocent .Today Hagrid you pass .Henceforth stay away from this place .You forfeited the friendship of the centaurs when you helped the traitor Firenze escape us .I won be kept outta the fores by a bunch of mules like you !said Hagrid loudly .Hagrid said Hermione in a highpitched and terrified voice as both Bane and the gray centaur pawed at the ground lets go please lets go !Hagrid moved forward but his crossbow was still raised and his eyes were still fixed threateningly upon Magorian .We know what you are keeping in the forest Hagrid !Magorian called after them as the centaurs slipped out of sight .And our tolerance is waning !Hagrid turned and gave every appearance of wanting to walk straight back to Magorian again .Youll tolerate him as long as hes here its as much his forest as yours !he yelled while Harry and Hermione both pushed with all their might against Hagrid s moleskin waistcoat in an effort to keep him moving forward .Still scowling he looked down his expression changed to mild surprise at the sight of them both pushing him .He seemed not to have felt it .Calm down you two he said turning to walk on while they panted along behind him .Ruddy old nags though eh ?Hagrid said Hermione breathlessly skirting the patch of nettles they had passed on their way there if the centaurs dont want humans in the forest it doesnt really look as though Harry and I will be able Ah you heard what they said said Hagrid dismissively They wouldnt hurt foals I mean kids .Anyway we can let ourselves be pushed around by that lot .Nice try Harry murmured to Hermione who looked crestfallen .At last they rejoined the path and after another ten minutes the trees began to thin .They were able to see patches of clear blue sky again and hear in the distance the definite sounds of cheering and shouting .Was that another goal ?asked Hagrid pausing in the shelter of the trees as the Quidditch stadium came into view .Or dyou reckon the match is over ?I dont know said Hermione miserably .Harry saw that she looked much the worse for wear her hair was full of bits of twig and leaves her robes were ripped in several places and there were numerous scratches on her face and arms .He knew he could look little better .I reckon its over yeh know !said Hagrid still squinting toward the stadium .Look theres people cornin out already if you two hurry yeh ll be able ter blend in with the crowd an no onell know you werent there !Good idea said Harry .Well .see you later then Hagrid .I dont believe him said Hermione in a very unsteady voice the moment they were out of earshot of Hagrid .I dont believe him .I really dont believe him .Calm down said Harry .Calm down !she said feverishly .A giant !A giant in the forest !And were supposed to give him English lessons !Always assuming of course we can get past the herd of murderous centaurs on the way in and out !I dont believe him !We havent got to do anything yet !Harry tried to reassure her in a quiet voice as they joined a stream of jabbering Hufflepuffs heading back toward the castle .Hes not asking us to do anything unless he gets chucked out and that might not even happen Oh come off it Harry !said Hermione angrily stopping dead in her tracks so that the people behind her had to swerve to avoid her .Of course hes going to be chucked out and to be perfectly honest after what weve just seen who can blame Umbridge ?There was a pause in which Harry glared at her and her eyes filled slowly with tears .You didnt mean that said Harry quietly .No .well .all right .I didnt she said wiping her eyes angrily .But why does he have to make life so difficult for himself for us ?I dunno Weasley is our King Weasley is our King He didnt let the Quaffle in Weasley is our King .And I wish theyd stop singing that stupid song said Hermione miserably havent they gloated enough ?A great tide of students was moving up the sloping lawns from the pitch .Oh lets get in before we have to meet the Slytherins said Hermione .Weasley can save anything He never leaves a single ring Thats why Gryffindors all sing Weasley is our King .Hermione .said Harry slowly .The song was growing louder but it was issuing not from a crowd of greenandsilverclad Slytherins but from a mass of red and gold moving slowly toward the castle which was bearing a solitary figure upon its many shoulders .Weasley is our King Weasley is our King He didnt let the Quaffle in Weasley is our King .No !said Hermione in a hushed voice .YES !said Harry loudly .HARRY !HERMIONE !yelled Ron waving the silver Quidditch Cup in the air and looking quite beside himself .WE DID IT !WE WON !They beamed up at him as he passed there was a scrum at the door of the castle and Rons head got rather badly bumped on the lintel but nobody seemed to want to put him down .Still singing the crowd squeezed itself into the entrance hall and out of sight .Harry and Hermione watched them go beaming until the last echoing strains of Weasley Is Our King died away .Then they turned to each other their smiles fading .Well save our news till tomorrow shall we ?said Harry .Yes all right said Hermione wearily .Im not in any hurry .They climbed the steps together .At the front doors both instinctively looked back at the Forbidden Forest .Harry was not sure whether it was his imagination or not but he rather thought he saw a small cloud of birds erupting into the air over the treetops in the distance almost as though the tree in which they had been nesting had just been pulled up by the roots .O .W .L .S Rons euphoria at helping Gryffindor scrape the Quidditch Cup was such that he could not settle to anything next day .All he wanted to do was talk over the match and Harry and Hermione found it very difficult to find an opening in which to mention Grawp not that either of them tried very hard neither was keen to be the one to bring Ron back to reality in quite such a brutal fashion .As it was another fine warm day they persuaded him to join them in studying under the beech tree on the edge of the lake where they stood less chance of being overheard than in the common room .Ron was not particularly keen on this idea at first he was thoroughly enjoying being patted on the back by Gryffindors walking past his chair not to mention the occasional outbursts of Weasley Is Our King but agreed after a while that some fresh air might do him good .They spread their books out in the shade of the beech tree and sat down while Ron talked them through his first save of the match for what felt like the dozenth time .Well I mean Id already let in that one of Daviess so I wasnt feeling that confident but I dunno when Bradley came toward me just out of nowhere I thought you can do this And I had about a second to decide which way to fly you know because he looked like he was aiming for the right goal hoop my right obviously his left but I had a funny feeling that he was feinting and so I took the chance and flew left his right I mean and well you saw what happened he concluded modestly sweeping his hair back quite unnecessarily so that it looked interestingly windswept and glancing around to see whether the people nearest to them a bunch of gossiping thirdyear Hufflepuffs had heard him .And then when Chambers came at me about five minutes later what ?Ron said stopping mid sentence at the look on Harrys face .Why are you grinning ?Im not said Harry quickly looking down at his Transfiguration notes and attempting to straighten his face .The truth was that Ron had just reminded Harry forcibly of another Gryffindor Quidditch player who had once sat rumpling his hair under this very tree .Im just glad we won thats all .Yeah said Ron slowly savoring the words we won .Did you see the look on Changs face when Ginny got the Snitch right out from under her nose ?I suppose she cried did she ?said Harry bitterly .Well yeah more out of temper than anything though .Ron frowned slightly .But you saw her chuck her broom away when she got back to the ground didnt you ?Er said Harry .Well actually .no Ron said Hermione with a heavy sigh putting down her book and looking at him apologetically .As a matter of fact the only bit of the match Harry and I saw was Daviess first goal .Rons carefully ruffled hair seemed to wilt with disappointment .You didnt watch ?he said faintly looking from one to the other .You didnt see me make any of those saves ?Well no said Hermione stretching out a placatory hand toward him .But Ron we didnt want to leave we had to !Yeah ?said Ron whose face was growing rather red .How come ?It was Hagrid said Harry .He decided to tell us why hes been covered in injuries ever since he got back from the giants .He wanted us to go into the forest with him we had no choice you know how he gets .Anyway .The story was told in five minutes by the end of which Rons indignation had been replaced by a look of total incredulity .He brought one back and hid it in the forest ?Yep said Harry grimly .No said Ron as though by saying this he could make it untrue .No he cant have .Well he has said Hermione firmly .Grawps about sixteen feet tall enjoys ripping up twentyfoot pine trees and knows me she snorted as Hermy .Ron gave a nervous laugh .And Hagrid wants us to . ?Teach him English yeah said Harry .Hes lost his mind said Ron in an almost awed voice .Yes said Hermione irritably turning a page of Intermediate Transfiguration and glaring at a series of diagrams showing an owl turning into a pair of opera glasses .Yes Im starting to think he has .But unfortunately he made Harry and me promise .Well youre just going to have to break your promise thats all said Ron firmly .I mean come on .Weve got exams and were about that far he held up his hand to show thumb and forefinger a millimeter apart from being chucked out as it is .And anyway .remember Norbert ?Remember Aragog ?Have we ever come off better for mixing with any of Hagrid s monster mates ?I know its just that we promised said Hermione in a small voice .Ron smoothed his hair flat again looking preoccupied .Well he sighed Hagrid hasnt been sacked yet has he ?Hes hung on this long maybe hell hang on till the end of term and we wont have to go near Grawp at all .The castle grounds were gleaming in the sunlight as though freshly painted the cloudless sky smiled at itself in the smoothly sparkling lake the satingreen lawns rippled occasionally in a gentle breeze June had arrived but to the fifth years this meant only one thing Their O .W .L .s were upon them at last .Their teachers were no longer setting them homework lessons were devoted to reviewing those topics their teachers thought most likely to come up in the exams .The purposeful feverish atmosphere drove nearly everything but the O .W .L .s from Harrys mind though he did wonder occasionally during Potions lessons whether Lupin had ever told Snape that he must continue giving Harry Occlumency tuition If he had then Snape had ignored Lupin as thoroughly as he was now ignoring Harry .This suited Harry very well he was quite busy and tense enough without extra classes with Snape and to his relief Hermione was much too preoccupied these days to badger him about Occlumency .She was spending a lot of time muttering to herself and had not laid out any elf clothes for days .She was not the only person acting oddly as the O .W .L .s drew steadily nearer .Ernie Macmillan had developed an irritating habit of interrogating people about their study habits .How many hours dyou think youre doing a day ?he demanded of Harry and Ron as they queued outside Herbology a manic gleam in his eyes .I dunno said Ron .A few .More or less than eight ?Less I spose said Ron looking slightly alarmed .‘Tm doing eight said Ernie puffing out his chest .Eight or nine .Im getting an hour in before breakfast every day .Eights my average .I can do ten on a good weekend day .I did nine and a half on Monday .Not so good on Tuesday only seven and a quarter .Then on Wednesday ■ Harry was deeply thankful that Professor Sprout ushered them into greenhouse three at that point forcing Ernie to abandon his recital .Meanwhile Draco Malfoy had found a different way to induce panic .Of course its not what you know he was heard to tell Crabbe and Goyle loudly outside Potions a few days before the exams were to start its who you know .Now Fathers been friendly with the head of the Wizarding Examinations Authority for years old Griselda Marchbanks weve had her round for dinner and everything .Do you think thats true ?Hermione whispered to Harry and Ron looking frightened .Nothing we can do about it if it is said Ron gloomily .I dont think its true said Neville quietly from behind them .Because Griselda Marchbanks is a friend of my grans and shes never mentioned the Malfoys .Whats she like Neville ?asked Hermione at once .Is she strict ?Bit like Gran really said Neville in a subdued voice .Knowing her wont hurt your chances though will it ?Ron told him encouragingly .Oh I dont think it will make any difference said Neville still more miserably .Grans always telling Professor Marchbanks Im not as good as my dad .Well .you saw what shes like at St .Mungos .Neville looked fixedly at the floor .Harry Ron and Hermione glanced at one another but didnt know what to say .It was the first time that Neville had acknowledged that they had met at the Wizarding hospital .Meanwhile a flourishing blackmarket trade in aids to concentration mental agility and wakefulness had sprung up among the fifth and seventh years .Harry and Ron were much tempted by the bottle of Baruffios Brain Elixir offered to them by Ravenclaw sixth year Eddie Carmichael who swore it was solely responsible for the nine Outstanding O .W .L .s he had gained the previous summer and was offering the whole pint for a mere twelve Galleons .Ron assured Harry he would reimburse him for his half the moment he left Hogwarts and got a job but before they could close the deal Hermione had confiscated the bottle from Carmichael and poured the contents down a toilet .Hermione we wanted to buy that !shouted Ron .Dont be stupid she snarled .You might as well take Harold Dingles powdered dragon claw and have done with it .Dingles got powdered dragon claw ?said Ron eagerly .Not anymore said Hermione .I confiscated that too .None of these things actually works you know Dragon claw does work !said Ron .Its supposed to be incredible really gives your brain a boost you come over all cunning for a few hours Hermione let me have a pinch go on it cant hurt This stuff can said Hermione grimly .Ive had a look at it and its actually dried doxy droppings .This information took the edge off Harry and Rons desire for brain stimulants .They received their examination schedules and details of the procedure for O .W .L .s during their next Transfiguration lesson .As you can see Professor McGonagall told the class while they copied down the dates and times of their exams from the blackboard your O .W .L .s are spread over two successive weeks .You will sit the theory exams in the mornings and the practice in the afternoons .Your practical Astronomy examination will of course take place at night .Now I must warn you that the most stringent Anti Cheating Charms have been applied to your examination papers .AutoAnswer Quills are banned from the examination hall as are Remembralls Detachable Cribbing Cuffs and Self Correcting Ink .Every year I am afraid to say seems to harbor at least one student who thinks that he or she can get around the Wizarding Examinations Authoritys rules .I can only hope that it is nobody in Gryffindor .Our new headmistress Professor McGonagall pronounced the word with the same look on her face that Aunt Petunia had whenever she was contemplating a particularly stubborn bit of dirt has asked the Heads of House to tell their students that cheating will be punished most severely because of course your examination results will reflect upon the headmistresss new regime at the school .Professor McGonagall gave a tiny sigh .Harry saw the nostrils of her sharp nose flare .However that is no reason not to do your very best .You have your own futures to think about .Please Professor said Hermione her hand in the air when will we find out our results ?An owl will be sent to you some time in July said Professor McGonagall .Excellent said Dean Thomas in an audible whisper so we dont have to worry about it till the holidays .Harry imagined sitting in his bedroom in Privet Drive in six weeks time waiting for his O .W .L .results .Well he thought at least he would be sure of one bit of post next summer .Their first exam Theory of Charms was scheduled for Monday morning .Harry agreed to test Hermione after lunch on Sunday but regretted it almost at once .She was very agitated and kept snatching the book back from him to check that she had gotten the answer completely right finally hitting him hard on the nose with the sharp edge of Achievements in Charming .Why dont you just do it yourself ?he said firmly handing the book back to her his eyes watering .Meanwhile Ron was reading two years of Charms notes with his fingers in his ears his lips moving soundlessly Seamus was lying flat on his back on the floor reciting the definition of a Substantive Charm while Dean checked it against The Standard Book of Spells Grade 5 and Parvati and Lavender who were practicing basic locomotion charms were making their pencil cases race each other around the edge of the table .Dinner was a subdued affair that night .Harry and Ron did not talk much but ate with gusto having studied hard all day .Hermione on the other hand kept putting down her knife and fork and diving under the table for her bag from which she would seize a book to check some fact or figure .Ron was just telling her that she ought to eat a decent meal or she would not sleep that night when her fork slid from her limp fingers and landed with a loud tinkle on her plate .Oh my goodness she said faintly staring into the entrance hall .Is that them ?Is that the examiners ?Harry and Ron whipped around on their bench .Through the doors to the Great Hall they could see Umbridge standing with a small group of ancient looking witches and wizards .Umbridge Harry was pleased to see looked rather nervous .Shall we go and have a closer look ?said Ron .Harry and Hermione nodded and they hastened toward the double doors into the entrance hall slowing down as they stepped over the threshold to walk sedately past the examiners .Harry thought Professor Marchbanks must be the tiny stooped witch with a face so lined it looked as though it had been draped in cobwebs Umbridge was speaking to her very deferentially .Professor Marchbanks seemed to be a little deaf she was answering Umbridge very loudly considering that they were only a foot apart .Journey was fine journey was fine weve made it plenty of times before !she said impatiently .Now I havent heard from Dumbledore lately !she added peering around the hall as though hopeful he might suddenly emerge from a broom cupboard .No idea where he is I suppose ?None at all said Umbridge shooting a malevolent look at Harry Ron and Hermione who were now dawdling around the foot of the stairs as Ron pretended to do up his shoelace .But I daresay the Ministry of Magic will track him down soon enough .I doubt it shouted tiny Professor Marchbanks not if Dumbledore doesnt want to be found !I should know .Examined him personally in Transfiguration and Charms when he did N .E .W .T .s .Did things with a wand Id never seen before .Yes .well .said Professor Umbridge as Harry Ron and Hermione dragged their feet up the marble staircase as slowly as they dared let me show you to the staffroom .I daresay youd like a cup of tea after your journey .It was an uncomfortable sort of an evening .Everyone was trying to do some lastminute studying but nobody seemed to be getting very far .Harry went to bed early but then lay awake for what felt like hours .He remembered his careers consultation and McGonagalls furious declaration that she would help him become an Auror if it was the last thing she did .He wished he had expressed a more achievable ambition now that exam time was here .He knew that he was not the only one lying awake but none of the others in the dormitory spoke and finally one by one they fell asleep .None of the fifth years talked very much at breakfast next day either .Parvati was practicing incantations under her breath while the salt cellar in front of her twitched Hermione was rereading Achievement in Charming so fast that her eyes appeared blurred and Neville kept dropping his knife and fork and knocking over the marmalade .Once breakfast was over the fifth and seventh years milled around in the entrance hall while the other students went off to lessons .Then at halfpast nine they were called forward class by class to reenter the Great Hall which was now arranged exactly as Harry had seen it in the Pensieve when his father Sirius and Snape had been taking their O .W .L .s .The four House tables had been removed and replaced instead with many tables for one all facing the stafftable end of the Hall where Professor McGonagall stood facing them .When they were all seated and quiet she said You may begin and turned over an enormous hourglass on the desk beside her on which were also spare quills ink bottles and rolls of parchment .Harry turned over his paper his heart thumping hard .Three rows to his right and four seats ahead Hermione was already scribbling .He lowered his eyes to the first question a Give the incantation and b describe the wand movement required to make objects fly .Harry had a fleeting memory of a club soaring high into the air and landing loudly on the thick skull of a troll .Smiling slightly he bent over the paper and began to write .Well it wasnt too bad was it ?asked Hermione anxiously in the entrance hall two hours later still clutching the exam paper .Im not sure I did myself justice on Cheering Charms I just ran out of time did you put in the countercharm for hiccups ?I wasnt sure whether I ought to it felt like too much and on question twentythree Hermione said Ron sternly weve been through this before .Were not going through every exam afterward its bad enough doing them once .The fifth years ate lunch with the rest of the school the four House tables reappeared over the lunch hour and then trooped off into the small chamber beside the Great Hall where they were to wait until called for their practical examination .As small groups of students were called forward in alphabetical order those left behind muttered incantations and practiced wand movements occasionally poking one another in the back or eye by mistake .Hermiones name was called .Trembling she left the chamber with Anthony Goldstein Gregory Goyle and Daphne Greengrass .Students who had already been tested did not return afterward so Harry and Ron had no idea how Hermione had done .Shell be fine remember she got a hundred and twelve percent on one of our Charms tests ?said Ron .Ten minutes later Professor Flitwick called Parkinson Pansy Patil Padma Patil Parvati Potter Harry .Good luck said Ron quietly .Harry walked into the Great Hall clutching his wand so tightly his hand shook .Professor Tofty is free Potter squeaked Professor Flitwick who was standing just inside the door .He pointed Harry toward what looked like the very oldest and baldest examiner who was sitting behind a small table in a far corner a short distance from Professor Marchbanks who was halfway through testing Draco Malfoy .Potter is it ?said Professor Tofty consulting his notes and peering over his pincenez at Harry as he approached .The famous Potter ?Out of the corner of his eye Harry distinctly saw Malfoy throw a scathing look over at him the wine glass Malfoy had been levitating fell to the floor and smashed .Harry could not suppress a grin .Professor Tofty smiled back at him encouragingly .Thats it he said in his quavery old voice no need to be nervous .Now if I could ask you to take this eggcup and make it do some cartwheels for me .On the whole Harry thought it went rather well his Levitation Charm was certainly much better than Malfoys had been though he wished he had not mixed up the incantations for Color Change and Growth Charms so that the rat he was supposed to be turning orange swelled shockingly and was the size of a badger before Harry could rectify his mistake .He was glad Hermione had not been in the Hall at the time and neglected to mention it to her afterward .He could tell Ron though Ron had caused a dinner plate to mutate into a large mushroom and had no idea how it had happened .There was no time to relax that night they went straight to the common room after dinner and submerged themselves in studying for Transfiguration next day .Harry went to bed his head buzzing with complex spell models and theories .He forgot the definition of a Switching Spell during his written exam next morning but thought his practical could have been a lot worse .At least he managed to vanish the whole of his iguana whereas poor Hannah Abbott lost her head completely at the next table and somehow managed to multiply her ferret into a flock of flamingos causing the examination to be halted for ten minutes while the birds were captured and carried out of the Hall .They had their Herbology exam on Wednesday other than a small bite from a Fanged Geranium Harry felt he had done reasonably well and then on Thursday Defense Against the Dark Arts .Here for the first time Harry felt sure he had passed .He had no problem with any of the written questions and took particular pleasure during the practical examination in performing all the counterjinxes and defensive spells right in front of Umbridge who was watching coolly from near the doors into the entrance hall .Oh bravo !cried Professor Tofty who was examining Harry again when Harry demonstrated a perfect boggart banishing spell .Very good indeed !Well I think thats all Potter .unless .He leaned forward a little .I heard from my dear friend Tiberius Ogden that you can produce a Patronus ?For a bonus point . ?Harry raised his wand looked directly at Umbridge and imagined her being sacked .Expecto Patronum .The silver stag erupted from the end of his wand and cantered the length of the hall .All of the examiners looked around to watch its progress and when it dissolved into silver mist Professor Tofty clapped his veined and knotted hands enthusiastically .Excellent !he said .Very well Potter you may go !As Harry passed Umbridge beside the door their eyes met .There was a nasty smile playing around her wide slack mouth but he did not care .Unless he was very much mistaken and he was not planning on saying it to anybody in case he was he had just achieved an Outstanding O .W .L .On Friday Harry and Ron had a day off while Hermione sat her Ancient Runes exam and as they had the whole weekend in front of them they permitted themselves a break from studying .They stretched and yawned beside the open window through which warm summer air wafted over them as they played a desultory game of wizard chess .Harry could see Hagrid in the distance teaching a class on the edge of the forest .He was trying to guess what creatures they were examining he thought it must be unicorns because the boys seemed to be standing back a little when the portrait hole opened and Hermione clambered in looking thoroughly bad tempered .How were the runes ?said Ron yawning and stretching .I mistranslated ‘ehwaz said Hermione furiously .It means ‘partnership not ‘defense I mixed it up with ‘eihwaz .Ah well said Ron lazily thats only one mistake isnt it youll still get Oh shut up said Hermione angrily it could be the one mistake that makes the difference between a pass and a fail .And whats more someones put another niffler in Umbridges office I dont know how they got it through that new door but I just walked past there and Umbridge is shrieking her head off by the sound of it it tried to take a chunk out of her leg Good said Harry and Ron together .It is not good !said Hermione hotly .She thinks its Hagrid doing it remember ?And we do not want Hagrid chucked out !Hes teaching at the moment she cant blame him said Harry gesturing out of the window .Oh youre so naive sometimes Harry you really think Umbridge will wait for proof ?said Hermione who seemed determined to be in a towering temper and she swept off toward the girls dormitories banging the door behind her .Such a lovely sweettempered girl said Ron very quietly prodding his queen forward so that she could begin beating up one of Harrys knights .Hermione s bad mood persisted for most of the weekend though Harry and Ron found it quite easy to ignore as they spent most of Saturday and Sunday studying for Potions on Monday the exam to which Harry was looking forward least and which he was sure would be the one that would be the downfall of his ambitions to become an Auror .Sure enough he found the written exam difficult though he thought he might have got full marks on the question about Polyjuice Potion He could describe its effects extremely accurately having taken it illegally in his second year .The afternoon practical was not as dreadful as he had expected it to be .With Snape absent from the proceedings he found that he was much more relaxed than he usually was while making potions .Neville who was sitting very near Harry also looked happier than Harry had ever seen him during a Potions class .When Professor Marchbanks said Step away from your cauldrons please the examination is over Harry corked his sample flask feeling that he might not have achieved a good grade but that he had with luck avoided a fail .Only four exams left said Parvati Patil wearily as they headed back to Gryffindor common room .Only !said Hermione snappishly .Ive got Arithmancy and its probably the toughest subject there is !Nobody was foolish enough to snap back so she was unable to vent her spleen on any of them and was reduced to telling off some first years for giggling too loudly in the common room .Harry was determined to perform well in Tuesdays Care of Magical Creatures exam so as not to let Hagrid down .The practical examination took place in the afternoon on the lawn on the edge of the Forbidden Forest where students were required to correctly identify the knarl hidden among a dozen hedgehogs the trick was to offer them all milk in turn knarls highly suspicious creatures whose quills had many magical properties generally went berserk at what they saw as an attempt to poison them then demonstrate correct handling of a bowtruckle feed and clean a firecrab without sustaining serious burns and choose from a wide selection of food the diet they would give a sick unicorn .Harry could see Hagrid watching anxiously out of his cabin window .When Harrys examiner a plump little witch this time smiled at him and told him he could leave Harry gave Hagrid a fleeting thumbsup before heading back up to the castle .The Astronomy theory exam on Wednesday morning went well enough Harry was not convinced he had got the names of all of Jupiters moons right but was at least confident that none of them was inhabited by mice .They had to wait until evening for their practical Astronomy the afternoon was devoted instead to Divination .Even by Harrys low standards in Divination the exam went very badly .He might as well have tried to see moving pictures in the desktop as in the stubbornly blank crystal ball he lost his head completely during tealeaf reading saying it looked to him as though Professor Marchbanks would shortly be meeting a round dark soggy stranger and rounded off the whole fiasco by mixing up the life and head lines on her palm and informing her that she ought to have died the previous Tuesday .Well we were always going to fail that one said Ron gloomily as they ascended the marble staircase .He had just made Harry feel rather better by telling him how he told the examiner in detail about the ugly man with a wart on his nose in his crystal ball only to look up and realize he had been describing his examiners reflection .We shouldnt have taken the stupid subject in the first place said Harry .Still at least we can give it up now .Yeah said Harry .No more pretending we care what happens when Jupiter and Uranus get too friendly .And from now on I dont care if my tea leaves spell die Ron die Im just chucking them in the bin where they belong .Harry laughed just as Hermione came running up behind them .He stopped laughing at once in case it annoyed her .Well I think Ive done all right in Arithmancy she said and Harry and Ron both sighed with relief .Just time for a quick look over our star charts before dinner then .When they reached the top of the Astronomy Tower at eleven oclock they found a perfect night for stargazing cloudless and still .The grounds were bathed in silvery moonlight and there was a slight chill in the air .Each of them set up his or her telescope and when Professor Marchbanks gave the word proceeded to fill in the blank star chart he or she had been given .Professors Marchbanks and Tofty strolled among them watching as they entered the precise positions of the stars and planets they were observing .All was quiet except for the rustle of parchment the occasional creak of a telescope as it was adjusted on its stand and the scribbling of many quills .Half an hour passed then an hour the little squares of reflected gold light flickering on the ground below started to vanish as lights in the castle windows were extinguished .As Harry completed the constellation Orion on his chart however the front doors of the castle opened directly below the parapet where he was standing so that light spilled down the stone steps a little way across the lawn .Harry glanced down as he made a slight adjustment to the position of his telescope and saw five or six elongated shadows moving over the brightly lit grass before the doors swung shut and the lawn became a sea of darkness once more .Harry put his eye back to his telescope and refocused it now examining Venus .He looked down at his chart to enter the planet there but something distracted him .Pausing with his quill suspended over the parchment he squinted down into the shadowy grounds and saw half a dozen figures walking over the lawn .If they had not been moving and the moonlight had not been gilding the tops of their heads they would have been indistinguishable from the dark ground on which they stood .Even at this distance Harry had a funny feeling that he recognized the walk of the squattest among them who seemed to be leading the group .He could not think why Umbridge would be taking a stroll outside past midnight much less accompanied by five others .Then somebody coughed behind him and he remembered that he was halfway through an exam .He had quite forgotten Venuss position jamming his eye to his telescope he found it again and was again on the point of entering it on his chart when alert for any odd sound he heard a distant knock that echoed through the deserted grounds followed immediately by the muffled barking of a large dog .He looked up his heart hammering .There were lights on in Hagrids windows and the people he had observed crossing the lawn were now silhouetted against them .The door opened and he distinctly saw six tiny but sharply defined figures walk over the threshold .The door closed again and there was silence .Harry felt very uneasy .He glanced around to see whether Ron or Hermione had noticed what he had but Professor Marchbanks came walking behind him at that moment and not wanting to appear as though he was sneaking looks at anyone elses work he hastily bent over his star chart and pretended to be adding notes to it while really peering over the top of the parapet toward Hagrids cabin .Figures were now moving across the cabin windows temporarily blocking the light .He could feel Professor Marchbankss eyes on the back of his neck and pressed his eye again to his telescope staring up at the moon though he had marked its position an hour ago but as Professor Marchbanks moved on he heard a roar from the distant cabin that echoed through the darkness right to the top of the Astronomy Tower .Several of the people around Harry ducked out from behind their telescopes and peered instead in the direction of Hagrids cabin .Professor Tofty gave another dry little cough .Try and concentrate now boys and girls he said softly .Most people returned to their telescopes .Harry looked to his left .Hermione was gazing transfixed at Hagrids .Ahem twenty minutes to go said Professor Tofty .Hermione jumped and returned at once to her star chart Harry looked down at his own and noticed that he had mislabelled Venus as Mars .He bent to correct it .There was a loud BANG from the grounds .Several people said Ouch !as they poked themselves in the face with the ends of their telescopes hastening to see what was going on below .Hagrids door had burst open and by the light flooding out of the cabin they saw him quite clearly a massive figure roaring and brandishing his fists surrounded by six people all of whom judging by the tiny threads of red light they were casting in his direction seemed to be attempting to Stun him .No !cried Hermione .My dear !said Professor Tofty in a scandalized voice .This is an examination !But nobody was paying the slightest attention to their star charts anymore Jets of red light were still flying beside Hagrids cabin yet somehow they seemed to be bouncing off him .He was still upright and still as far as Harry could see fighting .Cries and yells echoed across the grounds a man yelled Be reasonable Hagrid !and Hagrid roared Reasonable be damned yeh won take me like this Dawlish !Harry could see the tiny outline of Fang attempting to defend Hagrid leaping at the wizards surrounding him until a Stunning Spell caught him and he fell to the ground .Hagrid gave a howl of fury lifted the culprit bodily from the ground and threw him The man flew what looked like ten feet and did not get up again .Hermione gasped both hands over her mouth Harry looked around at Ron and saw that he too was looking scared .None of them had ever seen Hagrid in a real temper before .Look !squealed Parvati who was leaning over the parapet and pointing to the foot of the castle where the front doors seemed to have opened again more light had spilled out onto the dark lawn and a single long black shadow was now rippling across the lawn .Now really !said Professor Tofty anxiously .Only sixteen minutes left you know !But nobody paid him the slightest attention They were watching the person now sprinting toward the battle beside Hagrids cabin .How dare you !the figure shouted as she ran .How dare you !Its McGonagall !whispered Hermione .Leave him alone !Alone I say !said Professor McGonagalls voice through the darkness .On what grounds are you attacking him ?He has done nothing nothing to warrant such Hermione Parvati and Lavender all screamed .No fewer than four Stunners had shot from the figures around the cabin toward Professor McGonagall .Halfway between cabin and castle the red beams collided with her .For a moment she looked luminous illuminated by an eerie red glow then was lifted right off her feet landed hard on her back and moved no more .Galloping gargoyles !shouted Professor Tofty who seemed to have forgotten the exam completely .Not so much as a warning !Outrageous behavior !COWARDS !bellowed Hagrid his voice carrying clearly to the top of the tower and several lights flickered back on inside the castle .RUDDY COWARDS !HAVE SOME O THAT AN THAT Oh my gasped Hermione .Hagrid took two massive swipes at his closest attackers judging by their immediate collapse they had been knocked cold .Harry saw him double over and thought for a moment that he had finally been overcome by a spell but on the contrary next moment Hagrid was standing again with what appeared to be a sack on his back then Harry realized that Fangs limp body was draped around his shoulders .Get him get him !screamed Umbridge but her remaining helper seemed highly reluctant to go within reach of Hagrid s fists .Indeed he was backing away so fast he tripped over one of his unconscious colleagues and fell over .Hagrid had turned and begun to run with Fang still hung around his neck Umbridge sent one last Stunning Spell after him but it missed and Hagrid running fullpelt toward the distant gates disappeared into the darkness .There was a long minutes quivering silence everybody gazing openmouthed into the grounds .Then Professor Toftys voice said feebly Um .five minutes to go everybody .Though he had only filled in twothirds of his chart Harry was desperate for the end of the exam .When it came at last he Ron and Hermione forced their telescopes haphazardly back into their holders and dashed back down the spiral staircase .None of the students were going to bed they were all talking loudly and excitedly at the foot of the stairs about what they had witnessed .That evil woman !gasped Hermione who seemed to be having difficulty talking due to rage .Trying to sneak up on Hagrid in the dead of night !She clearly wanted to avoid another scene like Trelawneys said Ernie Macmillan sagely squeezing over to join them .Hagrid did well didnt he ?said Ron who looked more alarmed than impressed .How come all the spells bounced off him ?Itll be his giant blood said Hermione shakily .Its very hard to Stun a giant theyre like trolls really tough .But poor Professor McGonagall .Four Stunners straight in the chest and shes not exactly young is she ?Dreadful dreadful said Ernie shaking his head pompously .Well Im off to bed .Night all .People around them were drifting away still talking excitedly about what they had just seen .At least they didnt get to take Hagrid off to Azkaban said Ron .I spect hes gone to join Dumbledore hasnt he ?I suppose so said Hermione who looked tearful .Oh this is awful I really thought Dumbledore would be back before long but now weve lost Hagrid too .They traipsed back to the Gryffindor common room to find it full .The commotion out in the grounds had woken several people who had hastened to rouse their friends .Seamus and Dean who had arrived ahead of Harry Ron and Hermione were now telling everyone what they had heard from the top of the Astronomy Tower .But why sack Hagrid now ?asked Angelina Johnson shaking her head .Its not like Trelawney hes been teaching much better than usual this year !Umbridge hates parthumans said Hermione bitterly flopping down into an armchair .She was always going to try and get Hagrid out .And she thought Hagrid was putting nifflers in her office piped up Katie Bell .Oh blimey said Lee Jordan covering his mouth .Its mes been putting the nifflers in her office Fred and George left me a couple Ive been levitating them in through her window .Shed have sacked him anyway said Dean .He was too close to Dumbledore .Thats true said Harry sinking into an armchair beside Hermione s .I just hope Professor McGonagalls all right said Lavender tearfully .They carried her back up to the castle we watched through the dormitory window said Colin Creevey .She didnt look very well .Madam Pomfrey will sort her out said Alicia Spinnet firmly .Shes never failed yet .It was nearly four in the morning before the common room cleared .Harry felt wide awake the image of Hagrid sprinting away into the dark was haunting him .He was so angry with Umbridge he could not think of a punishment bad enough for her though Rons suggestion of having her fed to a box of starving BlastEnded Skrewts had its merits .He fell asleep contemplating hideous revenges and arose from bed three hours later feeling distinctly unrested .Their final exam History of Magic was not to take place until that afternoon .Harry would very much have liked to go back to bed after breakfast but he had been counting on the morning for a spot of last minute studying so instead he sat with his head in his hands by the common room window trying hard not to doze off as he read through some of the notes stacked threeandahalf feet high that Hermione had lent him .The fifth years entered the Great Hall at two oclock and took their places in front of their overturned examination papers .Harry felt exhausted .He just wanted this to be over so that he could go and sleep .Then tomorrow he and Ron were going to go down to the Quidditch pitch he was going to have a fly on Rons broom and savor their freedom from studying .Turn over your papers said Professor Marchbanks from the front of the Hall flicking over the giant hourglass .You may begin .Harry stared fixedly at the first question .It was several seconds before it occurred to him that he had not taken in a word of it there was a wasp buzzing distractingly against one of the high windows .Slowly tortuously he began to write an answer .He was finding it very difficult to remember names and kept confusing dates .He simply skipped question four In your opinion did wand legislation contribute to or lead to better control of goblin riots of the eighteenth century ?thinking that he would go back to it if he had time at the end .He had a stab at question five How was the Statute of Secrecy breached in 1 749 and what measures were introduced to prevent a recurrence ?but had a nagging suspicion that he had missed several important points .He had a feeling vampires had come into the story somewhere .He looked ahead for a question he could definitely answer and his eyes alighted upon number ten .Describe the circumstances that led to the Formation of the International Confederation of Wizards and explain why the warlocks of Liechtenstein refused to join .I know this Harry thought though his brain felt torpid and slack .He could visualize a heading in Hermiones handwriting The Formation of the International Confederation of Wizards .He had read these notes only this morning .He began to write looking up now and again to check the large hourglass on the desk beside Professor Marchbanks .He was sitting right behind Parvati Patil whose long dark hair fell below the back of her chair .Once or twice he found himself staring at the tiny golden lights that glistened in it when she moved her head very slightly and had to give his own head a little shake to clear it . .the first Supreme Mugwump of the International Confederation of Wizards was Pierre Bonaccord but his appointment was contested by the Wizarding community of Liechtenstein because All around Harry quills were scratching on parchment like scurrying burrowing rats .The sun was very hot on the back of his head .What was it that Bonaccord had done to offend the wizards of Liechtenstein ?Harry had a feeling it had something to do with trolls .He gazed blankly at the back of Parvati s head again .If he could only perform Legilimency and open a window in the back of her head and see what it was about trolls that had caused the breach between Pierre Bonaccord and Liechtenstein .Harry closed his eyes and buried his face in his hands so that the glowing red of his eyelids grew dark and cool .Bonaccord had wanted to stop troll hunting and give the trolls rights .but Liechtenstein was having problems with a tribe of particularly vicious mountain trolls .That was it .He opened his eyes they stung and watered at the sight of the blazing white parchment .Slowly he wrote two lines about the trolls then read through what he had done so far .It did not seem very informative or detailed yet he was sure Hermiones notes on the confederation had gone on for pages and pages .He closed his eyes again trying to see them trying to remember .The confederation had met for the first time in France yes he had written that already .Goblins had tried to attend and been ousted .He had written that too .And nobody from Liechtenstein had wanted to come Think he told himself his face in his hands while all around him quills scratched out neverending answers and the sand trickled through the hourglass at the front .He was walking along the cool dark corridor to the Department of Mysteries again walking with a firm and purposeful tread breaking occasionally into a run determined to reach his destination at last .The black door swung open for him as usual and here he was in the circular room with its many doors .Straight across the stone floor and through the second door .patches of dancing light on the walls and floor and that odd mechanical clicking but no time to explore he must hurry .He jogged the last few feet to the third door which swung open just like the others .Once again he was in the cathedralsized room full of shelves and glass spheres .His heart was beating very fast now .He was going to get there this time .When he reached number ninetyseven he turned left and hurried along the aisle between two rows .But there was a shape on the floor at the very end a black shape moving upon the floor like a wounded animal .Harrys stomach contracted with fear .with excitement .A voice issued from his own mouth a high cold voice empty of any human kindness Take it for me .Lift it down now .I cannot touch it .but you can .The black shape upon the floor shifted a little .Harry saw a longfingered white hand clutching a wand rise on the end of his own arm .heard the high cold voice say Cruciol The man on the floor let out a scream of pain attempted to stand but fell back writhing .Harry was laughing .He raised his wand the curse lifted and the figure groaned and became motionless .Lord Voldemort is waiting .Very slowly his arms trembling the man on the ground raised his shoulders a few inches and lifted his head .His face was bloodstained and gaunt twisted in pain yet rigid with defiance .Youll have to kill me whispered Sirius .Undoubtedly I shall in the end said the cold voice .But you will fetch it for me first Black .You think you have felt pain thus far ?Think again .We have hours ahead of us and nobody to hear you scream .But somebody screamed as Voldemort lowered his wand again somebody yelled and fell sideways off a hot desk onto the cold stone floor .Harry hit the ground and awoke still yelling his scar on fire as the Great Hall erupted all around him .OUT OF THE FIRE Im not going .I dont need the hospital wing .I dont want .He was gibbering trying to pull away from Professor Tofty who was looking at him with much concern and who had just helped Harry out into the entrance hall while the students all around them stared .Im Im fine sir Harry stammered wiping the sweat from his face .Really .I just fell asleep .Had a nightmare .Pressure of examinations !said the old wizard sympathetically patting Harry shakily on the shoulder .It happens young man it happens !Now a cooling drink of water and perhaps you will be ready to return to the Great Hall ?The examination is nearly over but you may be able to round off your last answer nicely ?Yes said Harry wildly .I mean .no .Ive done done as much as I can I think .Very well very well said the old wizard gently .I shall go and collect your examination paper and I suggest that you go and have a nice lie down .Ill do that said Harry nodding vigorously .Thanks very much .He waited for the second when the old mans heels disappeared over the threshold into the Great Hall then ran up the marble staircase and then more staircases toward the hospital wing hurtling along the corridors so fast that the portraits he passed muttered reproaches and burst through the double doors like a hurricane causing Madam Pomfrey who had been spooning some bright blue liquid into Montagues open mouth to shriek in alarm .Potter what do you think youre doing ?I need to see Professor McGonagall gasped Harry the breath tearing his lungs .Now .Its urgent .Shes not here Potter said Madam Pomfrey sadly .She was transferred to St .Mungos this morning .Four Stunning Spells straight to the chest at her age ?Its a wonder they didnt kill her .Shes .gone ?said Harry stunned .The bell rang just outside the dormitory and he heard the usual distant rumbling of students starting to flood out into the corridors above and below him .He remained quite still looking at Madam Pomfrey .Terror was rising inside him .There was nobody left to tell .Dumbledore had gone Hagrid had gone but he had always expected Professor McGonagall to be there irascible and inflexible perhaps but always dependably solidly present .I dont wonder youre shocked Potter said Madam Pomfrey with a kind of fierce approval in her face .As if one of them could have Stunned Minerva McGonagall face on by daylight !Cowardice thats what it was .Despicable cowardice .If I wasnt worried what would happen to you students without me Id resign in protest .Yes said Harry blankly .He strode blindly from the hospital wing into the teeming corridor where he stood buffeted by the crowd the panic expanding inside him like poison gas so that his head swam and he could not think what to do .Ron and Hermione said a voice in his head .He was running again pushing students out of the way oblivious to their angry protests and shouts .He sprinted back down two floors and was at the top of the marble staircase when he saw them hurrying toward him .Harry !said Hermione at once looking very frightened .What happened ?Are you all right ?Are you ill ?Where have you been ?demanded Ron .Come with me Harry said quickly .Come on Ive got to tell you something .He led them along the firstfloor corridor peering through doorways and at last found an empty classroom into which he dived closing the door behind Ron and Hermione the moment they were inside and leaning against it facing them .Voldemorts got Sirius .What ?How dyou ?Saw it .Just now .When I fell asleep in the exam .But but where ?How ?said Hermione whose face was white .I dunno how said Harry .But I know exactly where .Theres a room in the Department of Mysteries full of shelves covered in these little glass balls and theyre at the end of row ninetyseven .Hes trying to use Sirius to get whatever it is he wants from in there .Hes torturing him .Says hell end by killing him .Harry found his voice was shaking as were his knees .He moved over to a desk and sat down on it trying to master himself .Howre we going to get there ?he asked them .There was a moments silence .Then Ron said Gget there ?Get to the Department of Mysteries so we can rescue Sirius !Harry said loudly .But Harry .said Ron weakly .What ?What ?said Harry .He could not understand why they were both gaping at him as though he was asking them something unreasonable .Harry said Hermione in a rather frightened voice er .how .how did Voldemort get into the Ministry of Magic without anybody realizing he was there ?How do I know ?bellowed Harry .The question is how were going to get in there !But .Harry think about this said Hermione taking a step toward him its five oclock in the afternoon .The Ministry of Magic must be full of workers .How would Voldemort and Sirius have got in without being seen ?Harry .theyre probably the two most wanted wizards in the world .You think they could get into a building full of Aurors undetected ?I dunno Voldemort used an Invisibility Cloak or something !Harry shouted .Anyway the Department of Mysteries has always been completely empty whenever Ive been Youve never been there Harry said Hermione quietly .Youve dreamed about the place thats all .Theyre not normal dreams !Harry shouted in her face standing up and taking a step closer to her in turn .He wanted to shake her .How dyou explain Rons dad then what was all that about how come I knew what had happened to him ?Hes got a point said Ron quietly looking at Hermione .But this is just just so unlikely said Hermione desperately .Harry how on earth could Voldemort have got hold of Sirius when hes been in Grimmauld Place all the time ?Sirius mightve cracked and just wanted some fresh air said Ron sounding worried .Hes been desperate to get out of that house for ages But why Hermione persisted why on earth would Voldemort want to use Sirius to get the weapon or whatever the thing is ?I dunno there could be loads of reasons !Harry yelled at her .Maybe Sirius is just someone Voldemort doesnt care about seeing hurt You know what Ive just thought of something said Ron in a hushed voice .Siriuss brother was a Death Eater wasnt he ?Maybe he told Sirius the secret of how to get the weapon !Yeah and thats why Dumbledores been so keen to keep Sirius locked up all the time !said Harry .Look Im sorry cried Hermione but neither of you are making sense and weve got no proof for any of this no proof Voldemort and Sirius are even there Hermione Harrys seen them !said Ron rounding on her .Okay she said looking frightened yet determined Ive just got to say this .What ?You .This isnt a criticism Harry !But you do .sort of .I mean dont you think youve got a bit of a a savingpeoplething ?she said .He glared at her .And whats that supposed to mean a ‘savingpeoplething ?Well .you .She looked more apprehensive than ever .I mean .last year for instance .in the lake .during the Tournament .you shouldnt have .I mean you didnt need to save that little Delacour girl .You got a bit .carried away .A wave of hot prickly anger swept Harrys body how could she remind him of that blunder now ? .I mean it was really great of you and everything said Hermione quickly looking positively petrified at the look on Harrys face .Everyone thought it was a wonderful thing to do Thats funny said Harry in a trembling voice because I definitely remember Ron saying Id wasted time acting the hero .Is that what you think this is ?You reckon I want to act the hero again ?No no no !said Hermione looking aghast .Thats not what I mean at all !Well spit out what youve got to say because were wasting time here !Harry shouted .Im trying to say Voldemort knows you Harry !He took Ginny down into the Chamber of Secrets to lure you there its the kind of thing he does he knows youre the the sort of person whod go to Siriuss aid !What if hes just trying to get you into the Department of Myst ?Hermione it doesnt matter if hes done it to get me there or not theyve taken McGonagall to St .Mungos there isnt anyone left from the Order at Hogwarts who we can tell and if we dont go Sirius is dead !But Harry what if your dream was was just that a dream ?Harry let out a roar of frustration .Hermione actually stepped back from him looking alarmed .You dont get it !Harry shouted at her .Im not having nightmares Im not just dreaming !What dyou think all the Occlumency was for why dyou think Dumbledore wanted me prevented from seeing these things ?Because theyre REAL Hermione Sirius is trapped Ive seen him Voldemorts got him and no one else knows and that means were the only ones who can save him and if you dont want to do it fine but Im going understand ?And if I remember rightly you didnt have a problem with my saving peoplething when it was you I was saving from the dementors or he rounded on Ron when it was your sister I was saving from the basilisk I never said I had a problem !said Ron heatedly .But Harry youve just said it said Hermione fiercely .Dumbledore wanted you to learn to shut these things out of your mind if youd done Occlumency properly youd never have seen this IF YOU THINK IM JUST GOING TO ACT LIKE I HAVEN T SEEN Sirius told you there was nothing more important than you learning to close your mind !WELL I EXPECT HED SAY SOMETHING DIFFERENT IF HE KNEW WHAT ID JUST The classroom door opened .Harry Ron and Hermione whipped around .Ginny walked in looking curious followed by Luna who as usual looked as though she had drifted in accidentally .Hi said Ginny uncertainly .We recognized Harrys voice what are you yelling about ?Never you mind said Harry roughly .Ginny raised her eyebrows .Theres no need to take that tone with me she said coolly .I was only wondering whether I could help .Well you cant said Harry shortly .Youre being rather rude you know said Luna serenely .Harry swore and turned away .The very last thing he wanted now was a conversation with Luna Lovegood .Wait said Hermione suddenly .Wait .Harry they can help .Harry and Ron looked at her .Listen she said urgently Harry we need to establish whether Sirius really has left headquarters Ive told you I saw Harry Im begging you please !said Hermione desperately .Please lets just check that Sirius isnt at home before we go charging off to London if we find out hes not there then I swear I wont try and stop you Ill come Ill ddo whatever it takes to try and save him Sirius is being tortured NOW !shouted Harry .We havent got time to waste But if this is a trick of VVoldemorts Harry weve got to check weve got to How ?Harry demanded .Howre we going to check ?Well have to use Umbridges fire and see if we can contact him said Hermione who looked positively terrified at the thought .Well draw Umbridge away again but well need lookouts and thats where we can use Ginny and Luna .Though clearly struggling to understand what was going on Ginny said immediately Yeah well do it and Luna said When you say ‘Sirius are you talking about Stubby Boardman ?Nobody answered her .Okay Harry said aggressively to Hermione Okay if you can think of a way of doing this quickly Im with you otherwise Im going to the Department of Mysteries right now The Department of Mysteries ?said Luna looking mildly surprised .But how are you going to get there ?Again Harry ignored her .Right said Hermione twisting her hands together and pacing up and down between the desks .Right .well .One of us has to go and find Umbridge and and send her off in the wrong direction keep her away from her office .They could tell her I dont know that Peeves is up to something awful as usual .Ill do it said Ron at once .Ill tell her Peeves is smashing up the Transfiguration department or something its miles away from her office .Come to think of it I could probably persuade Peeves to do it if I met him on the way .It was a mark of the seriousness of the situation that Hermione made no objection to the smashing up of the Transfiguration department .Okay she said her brow furrowed as she continued to pace .Now we need to keep students away from her office while we force entry or some Slytherins bound to go and tip her off .Luna and I can stand at either end of the corridor said Ginny promptly and warn people not to go down there because someones let off a load of Garroting Gas .Hermione looked surprised at the readiness with which Ginny had come up with this lie .Ginny shrugged and said Fred and George were planning to do it before they left .Okay said Hermione well then Harry you and I will be under the Invisibility Cloak and well sneak into the office and you can talk to Sirius Hes not there Hermione !I mean you can can check whether Sirius is at home or not while I keep watch I dont think you should be in there alone Lees already proved the windows a weak spot sending those nifflers through it .Even through his anger and impatience Harry recognized Hermione s offer to accompany him into Umbridges office as a sign of solidarity and loyalty .I .okay thanks he muttered .Right well even if we do all of that I dont think were going to be able to bank on more than five minutes said Hermione looking relieved that Harry seemed to have accepted the plan not with Filch and the wretched Inquisitorial Squad floating around .Five minutesll be enough said Harry .Cmon lets go Now ?said Hermione looking shocked .Of course now !said Harry angrily .What did you think were going to wait until after dinner or something ?Hermione Sirius is being tortured right now I oh all right she said desperately .You go and get the Invisibility Cloak and well meet you at the end of Umbridges corridor okay ?Harry did not answer but flung himself out of the room and began to fight his way through the milling crowds outside .Two floors up he met Seamus and Dean who hailed him jovially and told him they were planning a dusktilldawn endofexams celebration in the common room .Harry barely heard them .He scrambled through the portrait hole while they were still arguing about how many blackmarket butterbeers they would need and was climbing back out of it the Invisibility Cloak and Siriuss knife secure in his bag before they noticed he had left them .Harry dyou want to chip in a couple of Galleons ?Harold Dingle reckons he could sell us some firewhisky .But Harry was already tearing away back along the corridor and a couple of minutes later was jumping the last few stairs to join Ron Hermione Ginny and Luna who were huddled together at the end of Umbridges corridor .Got it he panted .Ready to go then ?All right whispered Hermione as a gang of loud sixth years passed them .So Ron you go and head Umbridge off .Ginny Luna if you can start moving people out of the corridor .Harry and I will get the cloak on and wait until the coast is clear .Ron strode away his bright red hair visible right to the end of the passage .Meanwhile Ginnys equally vivid head bobbed between the jostling students surrounding them in the other direction trailed by Lunas blonde one .Get over here muttered Hermione tugging at Harrys wrist and pulling him back into a recess where the ugly stone head of a medieval wizard stood muttering to itself on a column .Are are you sure youre okay Harry ?Youre still very pale .Im fine he said shortly tugging the Invisibility Cloak from out of his bag .In truth his scar was aching but not so badly that he thought Voldemort had yet dealt Sirius a fatal blow .It had hurt much worse than this when Voldemort had been punishing Avery .Here he said .He threw the Invisibility Cloak over both of them and they stood listening carefully over the Latin mumblings of the bust in front of them .You cant come down here !Ginny was calling to the crowd .No sorry youre going to have to go round by the swiveling staircase someones let off Garroting Gas just along here They could hear people complaining one surly voice said I cant see no gas .Thats because its colorless said Ginny in a convincingly exasperated voice but if you want to walk through it carry on then well have your body as proof for the next idiot who didnt believe us .Slowly the crowd thinned .The news about the Garroting Gas seemed to have spread people were not coming this way anymore .When at last the surrounding area was quite clear Hermione said quietly I think thats as good as were going to get Harry come on lets do it .Together they moved forward covered by the cloak .Luna was standing with her back to them at the far end of the corridor .As they passed Ginny Hermione whispered Good one .dont forget the signal .Whats the signal ?muttered Harry as they approached Umbridges door .A loud chorus of Weasley Is Our King if they see Umbridge coming replied Hermione as Harry inserted the blade of Siriuss knife in the crack between door and wall .The lock clicked open and they entered the office .The garish kittens were basking in the late afternoon sunshine warming their plates but otherwise the office was as still and empty as last time .Hermione breathed a sigh of relief .I thought she might have added extra security after the second niffler .They pulled off the cloak .Hermione hurried over to the window and stood out of sight peering down into the grounds with her wand out .Harry dashed over to the fireplace seized the pot of Floo powder and threw a pinch into the grate causing emerald flames to burst into life there .He knelt down quickly thrust his head into the dancing fire and cried Number twelve Grimmauld Place !His head began to spin as though he had just got off a fairground ride though his knees remained firmly planted upon the cold office floor .He kept his eyes screwed up against the whirling ash and when the spinning stopped he opened them to find himself looking out upon the long cold kitchen of Grimmauld Place .There was nobody there .He had expected this yet was not prepared for the molten wave of dread and panic that seemed to burst through his stomach floor at the sight of the deserted room .Sirius ?he shouted .Sirius are you there ?His voice echoed around the room but there was no answer except a tiny scuffing sound to the right of the fire .Whos there ?he called wondering whether it was just a mouse .Kreacher the houseelf came creeping into view .He looked highly delighted about something though he seemed to have recently sustained a nasty injury to both hands which were heavily bandaged .Its the Potter boys head in the fire Kreacher informed the empty kitchen stealing furtive oddly triumphant glances at Harry .What has he come for Kreacher wonders ?Wheres Sirius Kreacher ?Harry demanded .The houseelf gave a wheezy chuckle .Master has gone out Harry Potter .Wheres he gone ?Wheres he gone Kreacher ?Kreacher merely cackled .Im warning you !said Harry fully aware that his scope for inflicting punishment upon Kreacher was almost nonexistent in this position .What about Lupin ?MadEye ?Any of them are any of them here ?Nobody here but Kreacher !said the elf gleefully and turning away from Harry he began to walk slowly toward the door at the end of the kitchen .Kreacher thinks he will have a little chat with his Mistress now yes he hasnt had a chance in a long time Kreachers Master has been keeping him away from her Where has Sirius gone ?Harry yelled after the elf .Kreacher has he gone to the Department of Mysteries ?Kreacher stopped in his tracks .Harry could just make out the back of his bald head through the forest of chair legs before him .Master does not tell poor Kreacher where he is going said the elf quietly .But you know !shouted Harry .Dont you ?You know where he is !There was a moments silence then the elf let out his loudest cackle yet .Master will not come back from the Department of Mysteries !he said gleefully .Kreacher and his Mistress are alone again !And he scurried forward and disappeared through the door to the hall .You !But before he could utter a single curse or insult Harry felt a great pain at the top of his head .He inhaled a lot of ash and choking found himself being dragged backward through the flames until with a horrible abruptness he was staring up into the wide pallid face of Professor Umbridge who had dragged him backward out of the fire by the hair and was now bending his neck back as far as it would go as though she was going to slit his throat .You think she whispered bending Harrys neck back even farther so that he was looking up at the ceiling above him that after two nifflers I was going to let one more foul scavenging little creature enter my office without my knowledge ?I had Stealth Sensoring Spells placed all around my doorway after the last one got in you foolish boy .Take his wand she barked at someone he could not see and he felt a hand grope inside the chest pocket of his robes and remove the wand .Hers too .Harry heard a scuffle over by the door and knew that Hermione had just had her wand wrested from her as well .I want to know why you are in my office said Umbridge shaking the fist clutching his hair so that he staggered .I was trying to get my Firebolt !Harry croaked .Liar .She shook his head again .Your Firebolt is under strict guard in the dungeons as you very well know Potter .You had your head in my fire .With whom have you been communicating ?No one said Harry trying to pull away from her .He felt several hairs part company with his scalp .LiaA shouted Umbridge .She threw him from her and he slammed into the desk .Now he could see Hermione pinioned against the wall by Millicent Bulstrode .Malfoy was leaning on the windowsill smirking as he threw Harrys wand into the air one handed and then caught it again .There was a commotion outside and several large Slytherins entered each gripping Ron Ginny Luna and to Harrys bewilderment Neville who was trapped in a stranglehold by Crabbe and looked in imminent danger of suffocation .All four of them had been gagged .Got em all said Warrington shoving Ron roughly forward into the room .That one .he poked a thick finger at Neville tried to stop me taking her he pointed at Ginny who was trying to kick the shins of the large Slytherin girl holding her so I brought him along too .Good good said Umbridge watching Ginnys struggles .Well it looks as though Hogwarts will shortly be a Weasleyfree zone doesnt it ?Malfoy laughed loudly and sycophantically .Umbridge gave her wide complacent smile and settled herself into a chintzcovered armchair blinking up at her captives like a toad in a flowerbed .So Potter she said .You stationed lookouts around my office and you sent this buffoon she nodded at Ron and Malfoy laughed even louder to tell me the poltergeist was wreaking havoc in the Transfiguration department when I knew perfectly well that he was busy smearing ink on the eyepieces of all the school telescopes Mr Filch having just informed me so .Clearly it was very important for you to talk to somebody .Was it Albus Dumbledore ?Or the half breed Hagrid ?I doubt it was Minerva McGonagall I hear she is still too ill to talk to anyone .Malfoy and a few of the other members of the Inquisitorial Squad laughed some more at that .Harry found he was so full of rage and hatred he was shaking .Its none of your business who I talk to he snarled .Umbridges slack face seemed to tighten .Very well she said in her most dangerous and falsely sweet voice .Very well Mr Potter .I offered you the chance to tell me freely .You refused .I have no alternative but to force you .Draco fetch Professor Snape .Malfoy stowed Harrys wand inside his robes and left the room smirking but Harry hardly noticed .He had just realized something he could not believe he had been so stupid as to forget it .He had thought that all the members of the Order all those who could help him save Sirius were gone but he had been wrong .There was still a member of the Order of the Phoenix at Hogwarts Snape .There was silence in the office except for the fidgetings and scufflings resultant from the Slytherins efforts to keep Ron and the others under control .Rons lip was bleeding onto Umbridges carpet as he struggled against Warringtons half nelson .Ginny was still trying to stamp on the feet of the sixthyear girl who had both her upper arms in a tight grip .Neville was turning steadily more purple in the face while tugging at Crabbes arms and Hermione was attempting vainly to throw Millicent Bulstrode off her .Luna however stood limply by the side of her captor gazing vaguely out of the window as though rather bored by the proceedings .Harry looked back at Umbridge who was watching him closely .He kept his face deliberately smooth and blank as footsteps were heard in the corridor outside and Draco Malfoy came back into the room holding open the door for Snape .You wanted to see me Headmistress ?said Snape looking around at all the pairs of struggling students with an expression of complete indifference .Ah Professor Snape said Umbridge smiling widely and standing up again .Yes I would like another bottle of Veritaserum as quick as you can please .You took my last bottle to interrogate Potter he said observing her coolly through his greasy curtains of black hair .Surely you did not use it all ?I told you that three drops would be sufficient .Umbridge flushed .You can make some more cant you ?she said her voice becoming more sweetly girlish as it always did when she was furious .Certainly said Snape his lip curling .It takes a full moon cycle to mature so I should have it ready for you in around a month .A month ?squawked Umbridge swelling toadishly .A month ?But I need it this evening Snape !I have just found Potter using my fire to communicate with a person or persons unknown !Really ?said Snape showing his first faint sign of interest as he looked around at Harry .Well it doesnt surprise me .Potter has never shown much inclination to follow school rules .His cold dark eyes were boring into Harrys who met his gaze unflinchingly concentrating hard on what he had seen in his dream willing Snape to read it in his mind to understand .I wish to interrogate him !shouted Umbridge angrily and Snape looked away from Harry back into her furiously quivering face .I wish you to provide me with a potion that will force him to tell me the truth !I have already told you said Snape smoothly that I have no further stocks of Veritaserum .Unless you wish to poison Potter and I assure you I would have the greatest sympathy with you if you did I cannot help you .The only trouble is that most venoms act too fast to give the victim much time for truthtelling .Snape looked back at Harry who stared at him frantic to communicate without words .Voldemorts got Sirius in the Department of Mysteries he thought desperately .Voldemorts got Sirius You are on probation !shrieked Professor Umbridge and Snape looked back at her his eyebrows slightly raised .You are being deliberately unhelpful !I expected better Lucius Malfoy always speaks most highly of you !Now get out of my office !Snape gave her an ironic bow and turned to leave .Harry knew his last chance of letting the Order know what was going on was walking out of the door .Hes got Padfoot !he shouted .Hes got Padfoot at the place where its hidden !Snape had stopped with his hand on Umbridges door handle .Padfoot ?cried Professor Umbridge looking eagerly from Harry to Snape .What is Padfoot ?Where what is hidden ?What does he mean Snape ?Snape looked around at Harry .His face was inscrutable .Harry could not tell whether he had understood or not but he did not dare speak more plainly in front of Umbridge .I have no idea said Snape coldly .Potter when I want nonsense shouted at me I shall give you a Babbling Beverage .And Crabbe loosen your hold a little if Longbottom suffocates it will mean a lot of tedious paperwork and I am afraid I shall have to mention it on your reference if ever you apply for a job .He closed the door behind him with a snap leaving Harry in a state of worse turmoil than before Snape had been his very last hope .He looked at Umbridge who seemed to be feeling the same way her chest was heaving with rage and frustration .Very well she said and she pulled out her wand .Very well .I am left with no alternative .This is more than a matter of school discipline .This is an issue of Ministry security .Yes .yes .She seemed to be talking herself into something .She was shifting her weight nervously from foot to foot staring at Harry beating her wand against her empty palm and breathing heavily .Harry felt horribly powerless without his own wand as he watched her .You are forcing me Potter .I do not want to said Umbridge still moving restlessly on the spot but sometimes circumstances justify the use .I am sure the Minister will understand that I had no choice .Malfoy was watching her with a hungry expression on his face .The Cruciatus Curse ought to loosen your tongue said Umbridge quietly .No !shrieked Hermione .Professor Umbridge its illegal but Umbridge took no notice .There was a nasty eager excited look on her face that Harry had never seen before .She raised her wand .The Minister wouldnt want you to break the law Professor Umbridge !cried Hermione .What Cornelius doesnt know wont hurt him said Umbridge who was now panting slightly as she pointed her wand at different parts of Harrys body in turn apparently trying to decide what would hurt the most .He never knew I ordered dementors after Potter last summer but he was delighted to be given the chance to expel him all the same .It was you ?gasped Harry .You sent the dementors after me ?Somebody had to act breathed Umbridge as her wand came to rest pointing directly at Harrys forehead .They were all bleating about silencing you somehow discrediting you but I was the one who actually did something about it .Only you wriggled out of that one didnt you Potter ?Not today though not now .And taking a deep breath she cried Cruc NO !shouted Hermione in a cracked voice from behind Millicent Bulstrode .No Harry Harry well have to tell her !No way !yelled Harry staring at the little of Hermione he could see .Well have to Harry shell force it out of you anyway whats .whats the point . ?And Hermione began to cry weakly into the back of Millicent Bulstrode s robes .Millicent stopped trying to squash her against the wall immediately and dodged out of her way looking disgusted .Well well well !said Umbridge looking triumphant .Little Miss QuestionAll is going to give us some answers !Come on then girl come on !Er my nee no !shouted Ron through his gag .Ginny was staring at Hermione as though she had never seen her before Neville still choking for breath was gazing at her too .But Harry had just noticed something .Though Hermione was sobbing desperately into her hands there was no trace of a tear .Im Im sorry everyone said Hermione .But I cant stand it ■ Thats right thats right girl !said Umbridge seizing Hermione by the shoulders thrusting her into the abandoned chintz chair and leaning over her .Now then .with whom was Potter communicating just now ?Well gulped Hermione into her hands well he was trying to speak to Professor Dumbledore .Ron froze his eyes wide Ginny stopped trying to stamp on her Slytherin captors toes even Luna looked mildly surprised .Fortunately the attention of Umbridge and her minions was focused too exclusively upon Hermione to notice these suspicious signs .Dumbledore ?said Umbridge eagerly .You know where Dumbledore is then ?Well .no !sobbed Hermione .Weve tried the Leaky Cauldron in Diagon Alley and the Three Broomsticks and even the Hogs Head Idiot girl Dumbledore wont be sitting in a pub when the whole Ministrys looking for him !shouted Umbridge disappointment etched in every sagging line of her face .But but we needed to tell him something important !wailed Hermione holding her hands more tightly over her face not Harry knew out of anguish but to disguise the continued absence of tears .Yes ?said Umbridge with a sudden resurgence of excitement .What was it you wanted to tell him ?We .we wanted to tell him its rready !choked Hermione .Whats ready ?demanded Umbridge and now she grabbed Hermione s shoulders again and shook her slightly .Whats ready girl ?The .the weapon said Hermione .Weapon ?Weapon ?said Umbridge and her eyes seemed to pop with excitement .You have been developing some method of resistance ?A weapon you could use against the Ministry ?On Professor Dumbledores orders of course ?Yyyes gasped Hermione .But he had to leave before it was finished and nnnow weve finished it for him and we cccant find him ttto tell him !What kind of weapon is it ?said Umbridge harshly her stubby hands still tight on Hermione s shoulders .We dont rrreally understand it said Hermione sniffing loudly .We jjjust did what PPProfessor Dumbledore told us ttto do .Umbridge straightened up looking exultant .Lead me to the weapon she said .‘Tm not showing .them said Hermione shrilly looking around at the Slytherins through her fingers .It is not for you to set conditions said Professor Umbridge harshly .Fine said Hermione now sobbing into her hands again fine .let them see it I hope they use it on you !In fact I wish youd invite loads and loads of people to come and see !Ththat would serve you right oh Id love it if the whwhole school knew where it was and how to uuse it and then if you annoy any of them theyll be able to ssort you out !These words had a powerful impact on Umbridge .She glanced swiftly and suspiciously around at her Inquisitorial Squad her bulging eyes resting for a moment on Malfoy who was too slow to disguise the look of eagerness and greed that had appeared on his face .Umbridge contemplated Hermione for another long moment and then spoke in what she clearly thought was a motherly voice .All right dear lets make it just you and me .and well take Potter too shall we ?Get up now Professor said Malfoy eagerly Professor Umbridge I think some of the squad should come with you to look after I am a fully qualified Ministry official Malfoy do you really think I cannot manage two wandless teenagers alone ?asked Umbridge sharply .In any case it does not sound as though this weapon is something that schoolchildren should see .You will remain here until I return and make sure none of these she gestured around at Ron Ginny Neville and Luna escape .All right said Malfoy looking sulky and disappointed .And you two can go ahead of me and show me the way said Umbridge pointing at Harry and Hermione with her wand .Lead on .FIGHT AND FLIGHT Harry had no idea what Hermione was planning or even whether she had a plan .He walked half a pace behind her as they headed down the corridor outside Umb ridges office knowing it would look very suspicious if he appeared not to know where they were going .He did not dare attempt to talk to her Umbridge was walking so closely behind them that he could hear her ragged breathing .Hermione led the way down the stairs into the entrance hall .The din of loud voices and the clatter of cutlery on plates echoed from out of the double doors to the Great Hall .It seemed incredible to Harry that twenty feet away were people who were enjoying dinner celebrating the end of exams not a care in the world .Hermione walked straight out of the oak front doors and down the stone steps into the balmy evening air .The sun was falling toward the tops of the trees in the Forbidden Forest now as Hermione marched purposefully across the grass Umbridge jogging to keep up .Their long dark shadows rippled over the grass behind them like cloaks .Its hidden in Hagrids hut is it ?said Umbridge eagerly in Harrys ear .Of course not said Hermione scathingly .Hagrid might have set it off accidentally .Yes said Umbridge whose excitement seemed to be mounting .Yes he would have done of course the great halfbreed oaf .She laughed .Harry felt a strong urge to swing around and seize her by the throat but resisted .His scar was throbbing in the soft evening air but it had not yet burned whitehot as he knew it would if Voldemort had moved in for the kill .Then .where is it ?asked Umbridge with a hint of uncertainty in her voice as Hermione continued to stride toward the forest .In there of course said Hermione pointing into the dark trees .It had to be somewhere that students werent going to find it accidentally didnt it ?Of course said Umbridge though she sounded a little apprehensive now .Of course .very well then .you two stay ahead of me .Can we have your wand then if were going first ?Harry asked her .No I dont think so Mr Potter said Umbridge sweetly poking him in the back with it .The Ministry places a rather higher value on my life than yours Im afraid .As they reached the cool shade of the first trees Harry tried to catch Hermione s eye walking into the forest without wands seemed to him to be more foolhardy than anything they had done so far this evening .She however merely gave Umbridge a contemptuous glance and plunged straight into the trees moving at such a pace that Umbridge with her shorter legs had difficulty in keeping up .Is it very far in ?Umbridge asked as her robe ripped on a bramble .Oh yes said Hermione .Yes its well hidden .Harrys misgivings increased .Hermione was not taking the path they had followed to visit Grawp but the one he had followed three years ago to the lair of the monster Aragog .Hermione had not been with him on that occasion he doubted she had any idea what danger lay at the end of it .Er are you sure this is the right way ?he asked her pointedly .Oh yes she said in a steely voice crashing through the undergrowth with what he thought was a wholly unnecessary amount of noise .Behind them Umbridge tripped over a fallen sapling .Neither of them paused to help her up again Hermione merely strode on calling loudly over her shoulder Its a bit further in !Hermione keep your voice down Harry muttered hurrying to catch up with her .Anything could be listening in here I want us heard she answered quietly as Umbridge jogged noisily after them .Youll see .They walked on for what seemed a long time until they were once again so deep into the forest that the dense tree canopy blocked out all light .Harry had the feeling he had had before in the forest one of being watched by unseen eyes .How much further ?demanded Umbridge angrily from behind him .Not far now !shouted Hermione as they emerged into a dim dank clearing .Just a little bit An arrow flew through the air and landed with a menacing thud in the tree just over her head .The air was suddenly full of the sound of hooves .Harry could feel the forest floor trembling Umbridge gave a little scream and pushed him in front of her like a shield He wrenched himself free of her and turned .Around fifty centaurs were emerging on every side their bows raised and loaded pointing at Harry Hermione and Umbridge who backed slowly into the center of the clearing Umbridge uttering odd little whimpers of terror .Harry looked sideways at Hermione .She was wearing a triumphant smile .Who are you ?said a voice .Harry looked left .The chestnutbodied centaur called Magorian was walking toward them out of the circle his bow like the others was raised .On Harrys right Umbridge was still whimpering her wand trembling violently as she pointed it at the advancing centaur .I asked you who are you human said Magorian roughly .I am Dolores Umbridge !said Umbridge in a high pitched terrified voice .Senior Undersecretary to the Minister of Magic and Headmistress and High Inquisitor of Hogwarts !You are from the Ministry of Magic ?said Magorian as many of the centaurs in the surrounding circle shifted restlessly .Thats right !said Umbridge in an even higher voice .So be very careful !By the laws laid down by the Department for the Regulation and Control of Magical Creatures any attack by halfbreeds such as yourselves on a human What did you call us ?shouted a wildlooking black centaur whom Harry recognized as Bane .There was a great deal of angry muttering and tightening of bowstrings around them .Dont call them that !Hermione said furiously but Umbridge did not appear to have heard her .Still pointing her shaking wand at Magorian she continued Law Fifteen B states clearly that ‘Any attack by a magical creature who is deemed to have nearhuman intelligence and therefore considered responsible for its actions ‘Nearhuman intelligence ?repeated Magorian as Bane and several others roared with rage and pawed the ground .We consider that a great insult human !Our intelligence thankfully far outstrips your own What are you doing in our forest ?bellowed the hardfaced gray centaur whom Harry and Hermione had seen on their last trip into the forest .Why are you here ?Your forest ?said Umbridge shaking now not only with fright but also it seemed with indignation .I would remind you that you live here only because the Ministry of Magic permits you certain areas of land An arrow flew so close to her head that it caught at her mousy hair in passing .She let out an earsplitting scream and threw her hands over her head while some of the centaurs bellowed their approval and others laughed raucously .The sound of their wild neighing laughter echoing around the dimly lit clearing and the sight of their pawing hooves was extremely unnerving .Whose forest is it now human ?bellowed Bane .Filthy halfbreeds !she screamed her hands still tight over her head .Beasts !Uncontrolled animals !Be quiet !shouted Hermione but it was too late Umbridge pointed her wand at Magorian and screamed Incarcerousl Ropes flew out of midair like thick snakes wrapping themselves tightly around the centaurs torso and trapping his arms .He gave a cry of rage and reared onto his hind legs attempting to free himself while the other centaurs charged .Harry grabbed Hermione and pulled her to the ground .Facedown on the forest floor he knew a moment of terror as hooves thundered around him but the centaurs leapt over and around them bellowing and screaming with rage .Nooooo !he heard Umbridge shriek .Noooooo .I am Senior Undersecretary .you cannot .unhand me you animals .nooooo !He saw a flash of red light and knew that she had attempted to Stun one of them then she screamed very loudly .Lifting his head a few inches Harry saw that Umbridge had been seized from behind by Bane and lifted high into the air wriggling and yelling with fright .Her wand fell from her hand to the ground and Harrys heart leapt if he could just reach it But as he stretched out a hand toward it a centaurs hoof descended upon the wand and it broke cleanly in half .Now !roared a voice in Harrys ear and a thick hairy arm descended from thin air and dragged him upright Hermione too had been pulled to her feet .Over the plunging manycolored backs and heads of the centaurs Harry saw Umbridge being borne away through the trees by Bane still screaming nonstop her voice grew fainter and fainter until they could no longer hear it over the trampling of hooves surrounding them .And these ?said the hardfaced gray centaur holding Hermione .They are young said a slow doleful voice from behind Harry .We do not attack foals .They brought her here Ronan replied the centaur who had such a firm grip on Harry .And they are not so young .He is nearing manhood this one .He shook Harry by the neck of his robes .Please said Hermione breathlessly please dont attack us we dont think like her we arent Ministry of Magic employees !We only came in here because we hoped youd drive her off for us Harry knew at once from the look on the face of the gray centaur holding Hermione that she had made a terrible mistake in saying this .The gray centaur threw back his head his back legs stamping furiously and bellowed You see Ronan ?They already have the arrogance of their kind !So we were to do your dirty work were we human girl ?We were to act as your servants drive away your enemies like obedient hounds ?No !said Hermione in a horrorstruck squeak .Please I didnt mean that !I just hoped youd be able to to help us But she seemed to be going from bad to worse .We do not help humans !snarled the centaur holding Harry tightening his grip and rearing a little at the same time so that Harrys feet left the ground momentarily .We are a race apart and proud to be so .We will not permit you to walk from here boasting that we did your bidding !Were not going to say anything like that !Harry shouted .We know you didnt do anything because we wanted you to But nobody seemed to be listening to him .A bearded centaur toward the back of the crowd shouted They came here unasked they must pay the consequences !A roar of approval met these words and a duncolored centaur shouted They can join the woman !You said you didnt hurt the innocent !shouted Hermione real tears sliding down her face now .We havent done anything to hurt you we havent used wands or threats we just want to go back to school please let us go back We are not all like the traitor Firenze human girl !shouted the gray centaur to more neighing roars of approval from his fellows .Perhaps you thought us pretty talking horses ?We are an ancient people who will not stand wizard invasions and insults !We do not recognize your laws we do not acknowledge your superiority we are But they did not hear what else centaurs were for at that moment there came a crashing noise on the edge of the clearing so loud that all of them Harry Hermione and the fifty or so centaurs filling the clearing looked around .Harrys centaur let him fall to the ground again as his hands flew to his bow and quiver of arrows Hermione had been dropped too and Harry hurried toward her as two thick tree trunks parted ominously and the monstrous form of Grawp the giant appeared in the gap .The centaurs nearest him backed into those behind .The clearing was now a forest of bows and arrows waiting to be fired all pointing upward at the enormous grayish face now looming over them from just beneath the thick canopy of branches .Grawp s lopsided mouth was gaping stupidly .They could see his bricklike yellow teeth glimmering in the halflight his dull sludgecolored eyes narrowed as he squinted down at the creatures at his feet .Broken ropes trailed from both ankles .He opened his mouth even wider .Hagger .Harry did not know what hagger meant or what language it was from nor did he much care he was watching Grawp s feet which were almost as long as Harrys whole body .Hermione gripped his arm tightly the centaurs were quite silent staring up at the giant whose huge round head moved from side to side as he continued to peer amongst them as though looking for something he had dropped .Haggeii he said again more insistently .Get away from here giant !called Magorian .You are not welcome among us !These words seemed to make no impression whatsoever on Grawp .He stooped a little the centaurs arms tensed on their bows and then bellowed HAGGER !A few of the centaurs looked worried now .Hermione however gave a gasp .Harry !she whispered .I think hes trying to say ‘Hagrid !At this precise moment Grawp caught sight of them the only two humans in a sea of centaurs .He lowered his head another foot or so staring intently at them .Harry could feel Hermione shaking as Grawp opened his mouth wide again and said in a deep rumbling voice Hermy .Goodness said Hermione gripping Harrys arm so tightly it was growing numb and looking as though she was about to faint he he remembered !HERMY !roared Grawp .WHERE HAGGER ?I dont know !squealed Hermione terrified .Im sorry Grawp I dont know !GRAWP WANT HAGGER !One of the giants massive hands swooped down upon them Hermione let out a real scream ran a few steps backward and fell over .Wandless Harry braced himself to punch kick bite or whatever else it took as the hand flew toward him and knocked a snow white centaur off his legs .It was what the centaurs had been waiting for Grawps outstretched fingers were a foot from Harry when fifty arrows went soaring through the air at the giant peppering his enormous face causing him to howl with pain and rage and straighten up again rubbing his face with his enormous hands breaking off the arrow shafts but forcing the heads in still deeper .He yelled and stamped his enormous feet and the centaurs scattered out of the way .Pebblesized droplets of Grawps blood showered Harry as he pulled Hermione to her feet and the pair of them ran as fast as they could for the shelter of the trees .Once there they looked back Grawp was snatching blindly at the centaurs as blood ran all down his face they were retreating in disorder galloping away through the trees on the other side of the clearing .As Harry and Hermione watched Grawp gave another roar of fury and plunged after them smashing more trees aside as he went .Oh no said Hermione quaking so badly that her knees gave way .Oh that was horrible .And he might kill them all .Im not that fussed to be honest said Harry bitterly .The sounds of the galloping centaurs and the blundering giant were growing fainter and fainter .As Harry listened to them his scar gave another great throb and a wave of terror swept over him .They had wasted so much time they were even further from rescuing Sirius than they had been when he had had the vision .Not only had Harry managed to lose his wand but they were stuck in the middle of the Forbidden Forest with no means of transport whatsoever .Smart plan he spat at Hermione keen to release some of his fury .Really smart plan .Where do we go from here ?We need to get back up to the castle said Hermione faintly .By the time weve done that Sirius 11 probably be dead !said Harry kicking a nearby tree in temper there was a highpitched chattering overhead and he looked up to see an angry bowtruckle flexing its long twiglike fingers at him .Well we cant do anything without wands said Hermione hopelessly dragging herself up again .Anyway Harry how exactly were you planning to get all the way to London ?Yeah we were just wondering that said a familiar voice from behind her .Harry and Hermione moved instinctively together peering through the trees as Ron came into sight with Ginny Neville and Luna hurrying along behind him .All of them looked a little the worse for wear there were several long scratches running the length of Ginnys cheek a large purple lump was swelling above Nevilles right eye Rons lip was bleeding worse than ever but all were looking rather pleased with themselves .So said Ron pushing aside a lowhanging branch and holding out Harrys wand had any ideas ?How did you get away ?asked Harry in amazement taking his wand from Ron .Couple of Stunners a Disarming Charm Neville brought off a really nice little Impediment Jinx said Ron airily now handing back Hermiones wand too .But Ginny was best she got Malfoy BatBogey Hex it was superb his whole face was covered in the great flapping things .Anyway we saw you heading into the forest out of the window and followed .Whatve you done with Umbridge ?She got carried away said Harry .By a herd of centaurs .And they left you behind ?asked Ginny looking astonished .No they got chased off by Grawp said Harry .Whos Grawp ?Luna asked interestedly .Hagrids little brother said Ron promptly .Anyway never mind that now .Harry what did you find out in the fire ?Has YouKnowWho got Sirius or ?Yes said Harry as his scar gave another painful prickle and Im sure Sirius is still alive but I cant see how were going to get there to help him .They all fell silent looking rather scared .The problem facing them seemed insurmountable .Well well have to fly wont we ?said Luna in the closest thing to a matteroffact voice Harry had ever heard her use .Okay said Harry irritably rounding on her first of all we arent doing anything if youre including yourself in that and second of all Rons the only one with a broomstick that isnt being guarded by a security troll so Ive got a broom !said Ginny .Yeah but youre not coming said Ron angrily .Excuse me but I care what happens to Sirius as much as you do !said Ginny her jaw set so that her resemblance to Fred and George was suddenly striking .Youre too Harry began .Im three years older than you were when you fought YouKnowWho over the Sorcerers Stone she said fiercely and its because of me Malfoys stuck back in Umbridges office with giant flying bogeys attacking him Yeah but We were all in the D .A .together said Neville quietly .It was all supposed to be about fighting YouKnow Who wasnt it ?And this is the first chance weve had to do something real or was that all just a game or something ?No of course it wasnt said Harry impatiently .Then we should come too said Neville simply .We want to help .Thats right said Luna smiling happily .Harrys eyes met Rons .He knew that Ron was thinking exactly what he was If he could have chosen any members of the D .A .in addition to himself Ron and Hermione to join him in the attempt to rescue Sirius he would not have picked Ginny Neville or Luna .Well it doesnt matter anyway said Harry frustratedly because we still dont know how to get there I thought wed settled that ?said Luna maddeningly .Were flying !Look said Ron barely containing his anger you might be able to fly without a broomstick but the rest of us cant sprout wings whenever we There are other ways of flying than with broomsticks said Luna serenely .I spose were going to ride on the back of the Kacky Snorgle or whatever it is ?Ron demanded .The CrumpleHorned Snorkack cant fly said Luna in a dignified voice but they can and Hagrid says theyre very good at finding places their riders are looking for .Harry whirled around .Standing between two trees their white eyes gleaming eerily were two thestrals watching the whispered conversation as though they understood every word .Yes !he whispered moving toward them .They tossed their reptilian heads throwing back long black manes and Harry stretched out his hand eagerly and patted the nearest ones shining neck .How could he ever have thought them ugly ?Is it those mad horse things ?said Ron uncertainly staring at a point slightly to the left of the thestral Harry was patting .Those ones you cant see unless youve watched someone snuff it ?Yeah said Harry .How many ?Just two .Well we need three said Hermione who was still looking a little shaken but determined just the same .Four Hermione said Ginny scowling .I think there are six of us actually said Luna calmly counting .Dont be stupid we cant all go !said Harry angrily .Look you three he pointed at Neville Ginny and Luna youre not involved in this youre not They burst into more protests .His scar gave another more painful twinge .Every moment they delayed was precious he did not have time to argue .Okay fine its your choice he said curtly .But unless we can find more thestrals youre not going to be able Oh more of them will come said Ginny confidently who like Ron was squinting in quite the wrong direction apparently under the impression that she was looking at the horses .What makes you think that ?Because in case you hadnt noticed you and Hermione are both covered in blood she said coolly and we know Hagrid lures thestrals with raw meat so thats probably why these two turned up in the first place .Harry felt a soft tug on his robes at that moment and looked down to see the closest thestral licking his sleeve which was damp with Grawps blood .Okay then he said a bright idea occurring .Ron and I will take these two and go ahead and Hermione can stay here with you three and shell attract more thestrals Im not staying behind !said Hermione furiously .Theres no need said Luna smiling .Look here come more now .You two must really smell .Harry turned .No fewer than six or seven thestrals were picking their way through the trees now their great leathery wings folded tight to their bodies their eyes gleaming through the darkness .He had no excuse now .All right he said angrily pick one and get on then .THE DEPARTMENT OF MYSTERIES Harry wound his hand tightly into the mane of the nearest thestral placed a foot on a stump nearby and scrambled clumsily onto the horses silken back .It did not object but twisted its head around fangs bared and attempted to continue its eager licking of his robes .He found there was a way of lodging his knees behind the wing joints that made him feel more secure and looked around at the others .Neville had heaved himself over the back of the next thestral and was now attempting to swing one short leg over the creatures back .Luna was already in place sitting sidesaddle and adjusting her robes as though she did this every day .Ron Hermione and Ginny however were still standing motionless on the spot openmouthed and staring .What ?he said .Howre we supposed to get on ?said Ron faintly .When we cant see the things ?Oh its easy said Luna sliding obligingly from her thestral and marching over to him Hermione and Ginny .Come here .She pulled them over to the other thestrals standing around and one by one managed to help them onto the backs of their mounts .All three looked extremely nervous as she wound their hands into the horses manes and told them to grip tightly before getting back onto her own steed .This is mad Ron said faintly moving his free hand gingerly up and down his horses neck .Mad .if I could just see it Youd better hope it stays invisible said Harry darkly .We all ready then ?They all nodded and he saw five pairs of knees tighten beneath their robes .Okay .He looked down at the back of his thestrals glossy black head and swallowed .Ministry of Magic visitors entrance London then he said uncertainly .Er .if you know .where to go .For a moment his thestral did nothing at all .Then with a sweeping movement that nearly unseated him the wings on either side extended the horse crouched slowly and then rocketed upward so fast and so steeply that Harry had to clench his arms and legs tightly around the horse to avoid sliding backward over its bony rump .He closed his eyes and put his face down into the horses silky mane as they burst through the topmost branches of the trees and soared out into a bloodred sunset .Harry did not think he had ever moved so fast The thestral streaked over the castle its wide wings hardly beating .The cooling air was slapping Harrys face eyes screwed up against the rushing wind he looked around and saw his five fellows soaring along behind him each of them bent as low as possible into the neck of their thestral to protect themselves from its slipstream .They were over the Hogwarts grounds they had passed Hogsmeade .Harry could see mountains and gullies below them .In the falling darkness Harry saw small collections of lights as they passed over more villages then a winding road on which a single car was beetling its way home through the hills .This is bizarre !Harry heard Ron yell from somewhere behind him and he imagined how it must feel to be speeding along at this height with no visible means of support .Twilight fell The sky turned to a light dusky purple littered with tiny silver stars and soon it was only the lights of Muggle towns that gave them any clue of how far from the ground they were or how very fast they were traveling .Harrys arms were wrapped tightly around his horses neck as he willed it to go even faster .How much time had elapsed since he had seen Sirius lying on the Department of Mysteries floor ?How much longer would he be able to resist Voldemort ?All Harry knew for sure was that Sirius had neither done as Voldemort wanted nor died for he was convinced that either outcome would cause him to feel Voldemorts jubilation or fury course through his own body making his scar sear as painfully as it had on the night Mr Weasley was attacked .On they flew through the gathering darkness Harrys face felt stiff and cold his legs numb from gripping the thestrals sides so tightly but he did not dare shift positions lest he slip .He was deaf from the thundering in his ears and his mouth was dry and frozen from the rush of cold night air .He had lost all sense of how far they had come all his faith was in the beast below him still streaking purposefully through the night barely flapping its wings as it sped ever onward .If they were too late .Hes still alive hes still fighting I can feel it .If Voldemort decided Sirius was not going to crack .Id know .Harrys stomach gave a jolt .The thestrals head was suddenly pointing toward the ground and he had actually slid forward a few inches along its neck .They were descending at last .He heard one of the girls shriek behind him and twisted around dangerously but could see no sign of a falling body .Presumably they had received a shock from the change of position just as he had .And now bright orange lights were growing larger and rounder on all sides .They could see the tops of buildings streams of headlights like luminous insect eyes squares of pale yellow that were windows .Quite suddenly it seemed they were hurtling toward the pavement .Harry gripped the thestral with every last ounce of his strength braced for a sudden impact but the horse touched the dark ground as lightly as a shadow and Harry slid from his back looking around at the street where the overflowing dumpster still stood a short way from the vandalized telephone box both drained of color in the flat orange glare of the streetlights .Ron landed a short way away and toppled immediately off his thestral onto the pavement .Never again he said struggling to his feet .He made as though to stride away from his thestral but unable to see it collided with its hindquarters and almost fell over again .Never ever again .that was the worst Hermione and Ginny touched down on either side of him .Both slid off their mounts a little more gracefully than Ron though with similar expressions of relief at being back on firm ground .Neville jumped down shaking but Luna dismounted smoothly .Where do we go from here then ?she asked Harry in a politely interested voice as though this was all a rather interesting day trip .Over here he said .He gave his thestral a quick grateful pat then led the way quickly to the battered telephone box and opened the door .Come on he urged the others as they hesitated .Ron and Ginny marched in obediently Hermione Neville and Luna squashed themselves in after them Harry took one glance back at the thestrals now foraging for scraps of rotten food inside the dumpster then forced himself into the box after Luna .Whoevers nearest the receiver dial six two four four two !he said .Ron did it his arm bent bizarrely to reach the dial .As it whirred back into place the cool female voice sounded inside the box Welcome to the Ministry of Magic .Please state your name and business .Harry Potter Ron Weasley Hermione Granger Harry said very quickly Ginny Weasley Neville Longbottom Luna Lovegood .Were here to save someone unless your Ministry can do it first !Thank you said the cool female voice .Visitors please take the badges and attach them to the front of your robes .Half a dozen badges slid out of the metal chute where returned coins usually appeared .Hermione scooped them up and handed them mutely to Harry over Ginny s head he glanced at the topmost one .HARRY POTTER RESCUE MISSION Visitor to the Ministry you are required to submit to a search and present your wand for registration at the security desk which is located at the far end of the Atrium .Fine !Harry said loudly as his scar gave another throb .Now can we move ?The floor of the telephone box shuddered and the pavement rose up past the glass windows of the telephone box .The scavenging thestrals were sliding out of sight blackness closed over their heads and with a dull grinding noise they sank down into the depths of the Ministry of Magic .A chink of soft golden light hit their feet and widening rose up their bodies .Harry bent his knees and held his wand as ready as he could in such cramped conditions peering through the glass to see whether anybody was waiting for them in the Atrium but it seemed to be completely empty .The light was dimmer than it had been by day .There were no fires burning under the mantelpieces set into the walls but he saw as the lift slid smoothly to a halt that golden symbols continued to twist sinuously in the dark blue ceiling .The Ministry of Magic wishes you a pleasant evening said the womans voice .The door of the telephone box burst open Harry toppled out of it followed by Neville and Luna .The only sound in the Atrium was the steady rush of water from the golden fountain where jets from the wands of the witch and wizard the point of the centaurs arrow the tip of the goblins hat and the houseelfs ears continued to gush into the surrounding pool .Come on said Harry quietly and the six of them sprinted off down the hall Harry in the lead past the fountain toward the desk where the security man who had weighed Harrys wand had sat and which was now deserted .Harry felt sure that there ought to be a security person there sure that their absence was an ominous sign and his feeling of foreboding increased as they passed through the golden gates to the lifts .He pressed the nearest down button and a lift clattered into sight almost immediately the golden grilles slid apart with a great echoing clanking and they dashed inside .Harry stabbed the number nine button the grilles closed with a bang and the lift began to descend jangling and rattling .Harry had not realized how noisy the lifts were on the day that he had come with Mr Weasley he was sure that the din would raise every security person within the building yet when the lift halted the cool female voice said Department of Mysteries and the grilles slid open again they stepped out into the corridor where nothing was moving but the nearest torches flickering in the rush of air from the lift .Harry turned toward the plain black door .After months and months of dreaming about it he was here at last .Lets go he whispered and he led the way down the corridor Luna right behind him gazing around with her mouth slightly open .Okay listen said Harry stopping again within six feet of the door .Maybe .maybe a couple of people should stay here as a as a lookout and And howre we going to let you know somethings coming ?asked Ginny her eyebrows raised .You could be miles away .Were coming with you Harry said Neville .Lets get on with it said Ron firmly .Harry still did not want to take them all with him but it seemed he had no choice .He turned to face the door and walked forward .Just as it had in his dream it swung open and he marched forward leading the others over the threshold .They were standing in a large circular room .Everything in here was black including the floor and ceiling identical unmarked handleless black doors were set at intervals all around the black walls interspersed with branches of candles whose flames burned blue their cool shimmering light reflected in the shining marble floor so that it looked as though there was dark water underfoot .Someone shut the door Harry muttered .He regretted giving this order the moment Neville had obeyed it .Without the long chink of light from the torchlit corridor behind them the place became so dark that for a moment the only things they could see were the bunches of shivering blue flames on the walls and their ghostly reflections in the floor below .In his dream Harry had always walked purposefully across this room to the door immediately opposite the entrance and walked on .But there were around a dozen doors here .Just as he was gazing ahead at the doors opposite him trying to decide which was the right one there was a great rumbling noise and the candles began to move sideways .The circular wall was rotating .Hermione grabbed Harrys arm as though frightened the floor might move too but it did not .For a few seconds the blue flames around them were blurred to resemble neon lines as the wall sped around and then quite as suddenly as it had started the rumbling stopped and everything became stationary once again .Harrys eyes had blue streaks burned into them it was all he could see .What was that about ?whispered Ron fearfully .I think it was to stop us knowing which door we came in from said Ginny in a hushed voice .Harry realized at once that she was right He could no sooner have picked the exit from the other doors than located an ant upon the jetblack floor .Meanwhile the door through which they needed to proceed could be any of the dozen surrounding them .Howre we going to get back out ?said Neville uncomfortably .Well that doesnt matter now said Harry forcefully blinking to try and erase the blue lines from his vision and clutching his wand tighter than ever .We wont need to get out till weve found Sirius Dont go calling for him though !Hermione said urgently but Harry had never needed her advice less his instinct was to keep as quiet as possible for the time being .Where do we go then Harry ?Ron asked .I dont Harry began .He swallowed .In the dreams I went through the door at the end of the corridor from the lifts into a dark room thats this one and then I went through another door into a room that kind of .glitters .We should try a few doors he said hastily .Ill know the right way when I see it .Cmon .He marched straight at the door now facing him the others following close behind him set his left hand against its cool shining surface raised his wand ready to strike the moment it opened and pushed .It swung open easily .After the darkness of the first room the lamps hanging low on golden chains from this ceiling gave the impression that this long rectangular room was much brighter though there were no glittering shimmering lights such as Harry had seen in his dreams .The place was quite empty except for a few desks and in the very middle of the room an enormous glass tank of deepgreen water big enough for all of them to swim in which contained a number of pearly white objects that were drifting around lazily in the liquid .Whatre those things ?whispered Ron .Dunno said Harry .Are they fish ?breathed Ginny .Aquavirius maggots !said Luna excitedly .Dad said the Ministry were breeding No said Hermione .She sounded odd .She moved forward to look through the side of the tank .Theyre brains .Brains ?Yes .I wonder what theyre doing with them ?Harry joined her at the tank .Sure enough there could be no mistake now that he saw them at close quarters .Glimmering eerily they drifted in and out of sight in the depths of the green water looking something like slimy cauliflowers .Lets get out of here said Harry .This isnt right we need to try another door There are doors here too said Ron pointing around the walls .Harrys heart sank how big was this place ?In my dream I went through that dark room into the second one he said .I think we should go back and try from there .So they hurried back into the dark circular room the ghostly shapes of the brains were now swimming before Harrys eyes instead of the blue candle flames .Wait !said Hermione sharply as Luna made to close the door of the brain room behind them .FlagrateV She drew with her wand in midair and a fiery X appeared on the door .No sooner had the door clicked shut behind them than there was a great rumbling and once again the wall began to revolve very fast but now there was a great redgold blur in amongst the faint blue and when all became still again the fiery cross still burned showing the door they had already tried .Good thinking said Harry .Okay lets try this one Again he strode directly at the door facing him and pushed it open his wand still raised the others at his heels .This room was larger than the last dimly lit and rectangular and the center of it was sunken forming a great stone pit some twenty feet below them .They were standing on the topmost tier of what seemed to be stone benches running all around the room and descending in steep steps like an amphitheater or the courtroom in which Harry had been tried by the Wizengamot .Instead of a chained chair however there was a raised stone dais in the center of the lowered floor and upon this dais stood a stone archway that looked so ancient cracked and crumbling that Harry was amazed the thing was still standing .Unsupported by any surrounding wall the archway was hung with a tattered black curtain or veil which despite the complete stillness of the cold surrounding air was fluttering very slightly as though it had just been touched .Whos there ?said Harry jumping down onto the bench below .There was no answering voice but the veil continued to flutter and sway .Careful !whispered Hermione .Harry scrambled down the benches one by one until he reached the stone bottom of the sunken pit .His footsteps echoed loudly as he walked slowly toward the dais .The pointed archway looked much taller from where he stood now than when he had been looking down on it from above .Still the veil swayed gently as though somebody had just passed through it .Sirius ?Harry spoke again but much more quietly now that he was nearer .He had the strangest feeling that there was someone standing right behind the veil on the other side of the archway .Gripping his wand very tightly he edged around the dais but there was nobody there .All that could be seen was the other side of the tattered black veil .Lets go called Hermione from halfway up the stone steps .This isnt right Harry come on lets go .She sounded scared much more scared than she had in the room where the brains swam yet Harry thought the archway had a kind of beauty about it old though it was .The gently rippling veil intrigued him he felt a very strong inclination to climb up on the dais and walk through it .Harry lets go okay ?said Hermione more forcefully .Okay he said but he did not move .He had just heard something .There were faint whispering murmuring noises coming from the other side of the veil .What are you saying ?he said very loudly so that the words echoed all around the surrounding stone benches .Nobodys talking Harry !said Hermione now moving over to him .Someones whispering behind there he said moving out of her reach and continuing to frown at the veil .Is that you Ron ?Im here mate said Ron appearing around the side of the archway .Cant anyone else hear it ?Harry demanded for the whispering and murmuring was becoming louder without really meaning to put it there he found his foot was on the dais .I can hear them too breathed Luna joining them around the side of the archway and gazing at the swaying veil .There are people in there What do you mean ‘in there ?demanded Hermione jumping down from the bottom step and sounding much angrier than the occasion warranted .There isnt any ‘in there its just an archway theres no room for anybody to be there Harry stop it come away She grabbed his arm and pulled but he resisted .Harry we are supposed to be here for Sirius !she said in a highpitched strained voice .Sirius Harry repeated still gazing mesmerized at the continuously swaying veil .Yeah .And then something slid back into place in his brain Sirius captured bound and tortured and he was staring at this archway .He took several paces back from the dais and wrenched his eyes from the veil .Lets go he said .Thats what Ive been trying to well come on then !said Hermione and she led the way back around the dais .On the other side Ginny and Neville were staring apparently entranced at the veil too .Without speaking Hermione took hold of Ginnys arm Ron Nevilles and they marched them firmly back to the lowest stone bench and clambered all the way back up to the door .What dyou reckon that arch was ?Harry asked Hermione as they regained the dark circular room .I dont know but whatever it was it was dangerous she said firmly again inscribing a fiery cross upon the door .Once more the wall spun and became still again .Harry approached a door at random and pushed .It did not move .Whats wrong ?said Hermione .Its .locked .said Harry throwing his weight at the door but it did not budge .This is it then isnt it ?said Ron excitedly joining Harry in the attempt to force the door open .Bound to be !Get out of the way !said Hermione sharply .She pointed her wand at the place where a lock would have been on an ordinary door and said Alohomora Nothing happened .Siriuss knife !said Harry and he pulled it out from inside his robes and slid it into the crack between the door and the wall .The others all watched eagerly as he ran it from top to bottom withdrew it and then flung his shoulder again at the door .It remained as firmly shut as ever .What was more when Harry looked down at the knife he saw that the blade had melted .Right were leaving that room said Hermione decisively .But what if thats the one ?said Ron staring at it with a mixture of apprehension and longing .It cant be Harry could get through all the doors in his dream said Hermione marking the door with another fiery cross as Harry replaced the nowuseless handle of Siriuss knife in his pocket .You know what could be in there ?said Luna eagerly as the wall started to spin yet again .Something blibbering no doubt said Hermione under her breath and Neville gave a nervous little laugh .The wall slid back to a halt and Harry with a feeling of increasing desperation pushed the next door open .This is it !He knew it at once by the beautiful dancing diamondsparkling light .As Harrys eyes became more accustomed to the brilliant glare he saw clocks gleaming from every surface large and small grandfather and carriage hanging in spaces between the bookcases or standing on desks ranging the length of the room so that a busy relentless ticking filled the place like thousands of minuscule marching footsteps .The source of the dancing diamondbright light was a towering crystal bell jar that stood at the far end of the room .This way !Harrys heart was pumping frantically now that he knew they were on the right track .He led the way forward down the narrow space between the lines of the desks heading as he had done in his dream for the source of the light the crystal bell jar quite as tall as he was that stood on a desk and appeared to be full of a billowing glittering wind .Oh look .said Ginny as they drew nearer pointing at the very heart of the bell jar .Drifting along in the sparkling current inside was a tiny jewelbright egg .As it rose in the jar it cracked open and a hummingbird emerged which was carried to the very top of the jar but as it fell on the draft its feathers became bedraggled and damp again and by the time it had been borne back to the bottom of the jar it had been enclosed once more in its egg .Keep going !said Harry sharply because Ginny showed signs of wanting to stop and watch the eggs progress back into a bird .You dawdled enough by that old arch !she said crossly but followed him past the bell jar to the only door behind it .This is it Harry said again and his heart was now pumping so hard and fast he felt it must interfere with his speech .Its through here He glanced around at them all .They had their wands out and looked suddenly serious and anxious .He looked back at the door and pushed .It swung open .They were there they had found the place high as a church and full of nothing but towering shelves covered in small dusty glass orbs .They glimmered dully in the light issuing from more candle brackets set at intervals along the shelves .Like those in the circular room behind them their flames were burning blue .The room was very cold .Harry edged forward and peered down one of the shadowy aisles between two rows of shelves .He could not hear anything nor see the slightest sign of movement .You said it was row ninetyseven whispered Hermione .Yeah breathed Harry looking up at the end of the closest row .Beneath the branch of blueglowing candles protruding from it glimmered the silver figure 53 .We need to go right I think whispered Hermione squinting to the next row .Yes .thats fiftyfour .Keep your wands out Harry said softly .They crept forward staring behind them as they went on down the long alleys of shelves the farther ends of which were in near total darkness .Tiny yellowing labels had been stuck beneath each glass orb on the shelf .Some of them had a weird liquid glow others were as dull and dark within as blown lightbulbs .They passed row eightyfour .eightyfive .Harry was listening hard for the slightest sound of movement but Sirius might be gagged now or else unconscious .or said an unbidden voice inside his head he might already be dead .Id have felt it he told himself his heart now hammering against his Adams apple .Id already know .Ninetyseven !whispered Hermione .They stood grouped around the end of the row gazing down the alley beside it .There was nobody there .Hes right down at the end said Harry whose mouth had become slightly dry .You cant see properly from here .And he led them forward between the towering rows of glass balls some of which glowed softly as they passed .He should be near here whispered Harry convinced that every step was going to bring the ragged form of Sirius into view upon the darkened floor .Anywhere here .really close .Harry ?said Hermione tentatively but he did not want to respond .His mouth was very dry now .Somewhere about .here .he said .They had reached the end of the row and emerged into more dim candlelight .There was nobody there at all .All was echoing dusty silence .He might be .Harry whispered hoarsely peering down the alley next door .Or maybe .He hurried to look down the one beyond that .Harry ?said Hermione again .What ?he snarled .I .I dont think Sirius is here .Nobody spoke .Harry did not want to look at any of them .He felt sick .He did not understand why Sirius was not here .He had to be here .This was where he Harry had seen him .He ran up the space at the end of the rows staring down them .Empty aisle after empty aisle flickered past .He ran the other way back past his staring companions .There was no sign of Sirius anywhere nor any hint of a struggle .Harry ?Ron called .What ?He did not want to hear what Ron had to say did not want to hear Ron tell him he had been stupid or suggest that they ought to go back to Hogwarts .But the heat was rising in his face and he felt as though he would like to skulk down here in the darkness for a long while before facing the brightness of the Atrium above and the others accusing stares .Have you seen this ?said Ron .What ?said Harry but eagerly this time it had to be a sign that Sirius had been there a clue he strode back to where they were all standing a little way down row ninetyseven but found nothing except Ron staring at one of the dusty glass spheres on the shelves .What ?Harry repeated glumly .Its its got your name on said Ron .Harry moved a little closer .Ron was pointing at one of the small glass spheres that glowed with a dull inner light though it was very dusty and appeared not to have been touched for many years .My name ?said Harry blankly .He stepped forward .Not as tall as Ron he had to crane his neck to read the yellowish label affixed to the shelf right beneath the dusty glass ball .In spidery writing was written a date of some sixteen years previously and below that S .P .T .to A .P .W .B .D .Dark Lord and ?Harry Potter Harry stared at it .What is it ?Ron asked sounding unnerved .Whats your name doing down here ?He glanced along at the other labels on that stretch of shelf .‘Tm not here he said sounding perplexed .None of the rest of us are here .Harry I dont think you should touch it said Hermione sharply as he stretched out his hand .Why not ?he said .Its something to do with me isnt it ?Dont Harry said Neville suddenly .Harry looked around at him .Nevilles round face was shining slightly with sweat .He looked as though he could not take much more suspense .Its got my name on said Harry .And feeling slightly reckless he closed his fingers around the dusty balls surface .He had expected it to feel cold but it did not .On the contrary it felt as though it had been lying in the sun for hours as though the glow of light within was warming it .Expecting even hoping that something dramatic was going to happen something exciting that might make their long and dangerous journey worthwhile after all he lifted the glass ball down from its shelf and stared at it .Nothing whatsoever happened .The others moved in closer around Harry gazing at the orb as he brushed it free of the clogging dust .And then from right behind them a drawling voice said Very good Potter .Now turn around nice and slowly and give that to me .35 BEYOND THE VEIL Black shapes were emerging out of thin air all around them blocking their way left and right eyes glinted through slits in hoods a dozen lit wand tips were pointing directly at their hearts .Ginny gave a gasp of horror .To me Potter repeated the drawling voice of Lucius Malfoy as he held out his hand palm up .Harrys insides plummeted sickeningly .They were trapped and outnumbered two to one .To me said Malfoy yet again .Wheres Sirius ?Harry said .Several of the Death Eaters laughed .A harsh female voice from the midst of the shadowy figures to Harrys left said triumphantly The Dark Lord always knows !Always echoed Malfoy softly .Now give me the prophecy Potter .I want to know where Sirius is !I want to know where Sirius is !mimicked the woman to his left .She and her fellow Death Eaters had closed in so that they were mere feet away from Harry and the others the light from their wands dazzling Harrys eyes .Youve got him said Harry ignoring the rising panic in his chest the dread he had been fighting since they had first entered the ninetyseventh row .Hes here .I know he is .The little baby woke up fwightened and fort what it dweamed was twoo said the woman in a horrible mockbaby voice .Harry felt Ron stir beside him .Dont do anything he muttered .Not yet The woman who had mimicked him let out a raucous scream of laughter .You hear him ?You hear him ?Giving instructions to the other children as though he thinks of fighting us !Oh you dont know Potter as I do Bellatrix said Malfoy softly .He has a great weakness for heroics the Dark Lord understands this about him .Now give me the prophecy Potter .I know Sirius is here said Harry though panic was causing his chest to constrict and he felt as though he could not breathe properly .I know youve got him !More of the Death Eaters laughed though the woman still laughed loudest of all .Its time you learned the difference between life and dreams Potter said Malfoy .Now give me the prophecy or we start using wands .Go on then said Harry raising his own wand to chest height .As he did so the five wands of Ron Hermione Neville Ginny and Luna rose on either side of him .The knot in Harrys stomach tightened .If Sirius really was not here he had led his friends to their deaths for no reason at all .But the Death Eaters did not strike .Hand over the prophecy and no one need get hurt said Malfoy coolly .It was Harrys turn to laugh .Yeah right !he said .I give you this prophecy is it ?And youll just let us skip off home will you ?The words were hardly out of his mouth when the female Death Eater shrieked Accio Proph Harry was just ready for her .He shouted Protego before she had finished her spell and though the glass sphere slipped to the tips of his fingers he managed to cling on to it .Oh he knows how to play little bitty baby Potter she said her mad eyes staring through the slits in her hood .Very well then I TOLD YOU NO !Lucius Malfoy roared at the woman .If you smash it !Harrys mind was racing .The Death Eaters wanted this dusty spunglass sphere .He had no interest in it .He just wanted to get them all out of this alive make sure that none of his friends paid a terrible price for his stupidity .The woman stepped forward away from her fellows and pulled off her hood .Azkaban had hollowed Bellatrix Lestranges face making it gaunt and skull like but it was alive with a feverish fanatical glow .You need more persuasion ?she said her chest rising and falling rapidly .Very well take the smallest one she ordered the Death Eaters beside her .Let him watch while we torture the little girl .Ill do it .Harry felt the others close in around Ginny .He stepped sideways so that he was right in front of her the prophecy held up to his chest .Youll have to smash this if you want to attack any of us he told Bellatrix .I dont think your boss will be too pleased if you come back without it will he ?She did not move she merely stared at him the tip of her tongue moistening her thin mouth .So said Harry what kind of prophecy are we talking about anyway ?He could not think what to do but to keep talking .Nevilles arm was pressed against his and he could feel him shaking .He could feel one of the others quickened breath on the back of his head .He was hoping they were all thinking hard about ways to get out of this because his mind was blank .Page lOOOHarry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix J .K .What kind of prophecy ?repeated Bellatrix the grin fading from her face .You jest Harry Potter .Nope not jesting said Harry his eyes flicking from Death Eater to Death Eater looking for a weak link a space through which they could escape .How come Voldemort wants it ?Several of the Death Eaters let out low hisses .You dare speak his name ?whispered Bellatrix .Yeah said Harry maintaining his tight grip on the glass ball expecting another attempt to bewitch it from him .Yeah IVe got no problem saying Vol Shut your mouth !Bellatrix shrieked .You dare speak his name with your unworthy lips you dare besmirch it with your halfbloods tongue you dare Did you know hes a halfblood too ?said Harry recklessly .Hermione gave a little moan in his ear .Voldemort ?Yeah his mother was a witch but his dad was a Muggle or has he been telling you lot hes pureblood ?STUPEF iVO !A jet of red light had shot from the end of Bellatrix Lestranges wand but Malfoy had deflected it .His spell caused hers to hit the shelf a foot to the left of Harry and several of the glass orbs there shattered .Two figures pearly white as ghosts fluid as smoke unfurled themselves from the fragments of broken glass upon the floor and each began to speak .Their Page lOOlHarry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix J .K .voices vied with each other so that only fragments of what they were saying could be heard over Malfoy and Bellatrixs shouts . .at the Solstice will come a new .said the figure of an old bearded man .DO NOT ATTACK !WE NEED THE PROPHECY !He dared he dares shrieked Bellatrix incoherently .He stands there filthy halfblood WAIT UNTIL WEVE GOT THE PROPHECY !bawled Malfoy . .and none will come after .said the figure of a young woman .The two figures that had burst from the shattered spheres had melted into thin air .Nothing remained of them or their erstwhile homes but fragments of glass upon the floor .They had however given Harry an idea .The problem was going to be conveying it to the others .You havent told me whats so special about this prophecy Im supposed to be handing over he said playing for time .He moved his foot slowly sideways feeling around for someone elses .Do not play games with us Potter said Malfoy .Im not playing games said Harry half his mind on the conversation half on his wandering foot .And then he found someones toes and pressed down upon them .A sharp intake of breath behind him told him they were Hermiones .What ?she whispered .Dumbledore never told you that the reason you bear that scar was hidden in the bowels of the Department of Mysteries ?said Malfoy sneeringly .I what ?said Harry and for a moment he quite forgot his plan .What about my scar ?What ?whispered Hermione more urgently behind him .Can this be ?said Malfoy sounding maliciously delighted some of the Death Eaters were laughing again and under cover of their laughter Harry hissed to Hermione moving his lips as little as possible Smash shelves Dumbledore never told you ?Malfoy repeated .Well this explains why you didnt come earlier Potter the Dark Lord wondered why when I say go you didnt come running when he showed you the place where it was hidden in your dreams .He thought natural curiosity would make you want to hear the exact wording .Did he ?said Harry .Behind him he felt rather than heard Hermione passing his message to the others and he sought to keep talking to distract the Death Eaters .So he wanted me to come and get it did he ?Why ?Why ?Malfoy sounded incredulously delighted .Because the only people who are permitted to retrieve a prophecy from the Department of Mysteries Potter are those about whom it was made as the Dark Lord discovered when he attempted to use others to steal it for him .And why did he want to steal a prophecy about me ?About both of you Potter about both of you .Havent you ever wondered why the Dark Lord tried to kill you as a baby ?Harry stared into the slitted eyeholes through which Malfoys gray eyes were gleaming .Was this prophecy the reason Harrys parents had died the reason he carried his lightningbolt scar ?Was the answer to all of this clutched in his hand ?Someone made a prophecy about Voldemort and me ?he said quietly gazing at Lucius Malfoy his fingers tightening over the warm glass sphere in his hand .It was hardly larger than a Snitch and still gritty with dust .And hes made me come and get it for him ?Why couldnt he come and get it himself ?Get it himself ?shrieked Bellatrix on a cackle of mad laughter .The Dark Lord walk into the Ministry of Magic when they are so sweetly ignoring his return ?The Dark Lord reveal himself to the Aurors when at the moment they are wasting their time on my dear cousin ?So hes got you doing his dirty work for him has he ?said Harry .Like he tried to get Sturgis to steal it and Bode ?Very good Potter very good .said Malfoy slowly .But the Dark Lord knows you are not unintell NOW !yelled Harry .Five different voices behind him bellowed REDUCTOl Five curses flew in five different directions and the shelves opposite them exploded as they hit .The towering structure swayed as a hundred glass spheres burst apart pearlywhite figures unfurled into the air and floated there their voices echoing from who knew what longdead past amid the torrent of crashing glass and splintered wood now raining down upon the floor RUN !Harry yelled and as the shelves swayed precariously and more glass spheres began to pour from above he seized a handful of Hermiones robes and dragged her forward one arm over his head as chunks of shelf and shards of glass thundered down upon them .A Death Eater lunged forward through the cloud of dust and Harry elbowed him hard in the masked face .They were all yelling there were cries of pain thunderous crashes as the shelves collapsed upon themselves weirdly echoing fragments of the Seers unleashed from their spheres Harry found the way ahead clear and saw Ron Ginny and Luna sprint past him their arms over their heads .Something heavy struck him on the side of the face but he merely ducked his head and sprinted onward a hand caught him by the shoulder he heard Hermione shout Stupefy and the hand released him at once .They were at the end of row ninetyseven Harry turned right and began to sprint in earnest .He could hear footsteps right behind him and Hermiones voice urging Neville on .The door through which they had come was ajar straight ahead Harry could see the glittering light of the bell jar he pelted through it the prophecy still clutched tight and safe in his hand waited for the others to hurtle over the threshold before slamming the door behind them Colloportus gasped Hermione and the door sealed itself with an odd squelching noise .Where where are the others ?gasped Harry .He had thought that Ron Luna and Ginny had been ahead of them that they would be waiting in this room but there was nobody there .They must have gone the wrong way !whispered Hermione terror in her face .Listen !whispered Neville .Footsteps and shouts echoed from behind the door they had just sealed .Harry put his ear close to the door to listen and heard Lucius Malfoy roar Leave Nott leave him I say the Dark Lord will not care for Notts injuries as much as losing that prophecy Jugson come back here we need to organize !Well split into pairs and search and dont forget be gentle with Potter until weve got the prophecy you can kill the others if necessary Bellatrix Rodolphus you take the left Crabbe Rabastan go right Jugson Dolohov the door straight ahead Macnair and Avery through here Rookwood over there Mulciber come with me !What do we do ?Hermione asked Harry trembling from head to foot .Well we dont stand here waiting for them to find us for a start said Harry .Lets get away from this door .They ran quietly as they could past the shimmering bell jar where the tiny egg was hatching and unhatching toward the exit into the circular hallway at the far end of the room .They were almost there when Harry heard something large and heavy collide with the door Hermione had charmed shut .Stand aside !said a rough voice .Alohomora As the door flew open Harry Hermione and Neville dived under desks .They could see the bottom of the two Death Eaters robes drawing nearer their feet moving rapidly .They mightve run straight through to the hall said the rough voice .Check under the desks said another .Harry saw the knees of the Death Eaters bend .Poking his wand out from under the desk he shouted STUPEFY A jet of red light hit the nearest Death Eater he fell backward into a grandfather clock and knocked it over .The second Death Eater however had leapt aside to avoid Harrys spell and now pointed his own wand at Hermione who had crawled out from under the desk to get a better aim .Avada Harry launched himself across the floor and grabbed the Death Eater around the knees causing him to topple and his aim to go awry .Neville overturned his desk in his anxiety to help pointing his wand wildly at the struggling pair he cried EXPELLIARMUS Both Harrys and the Death Eaters wands flew out of their hands and soared back toward the entrance to the Hall of Prophecy both scrambled to their feet and charged after them the Death Eater in front and Harry hot on his heels Neville bringing up the rear plainly horrors truck at what he had done .Get out of the way Harry !yelled Neville clearly determined to repair the damage .Harry flung himself sideways as Neville took aim again and shouted STUPEFY !The jet of red light flew right over the Death Eaters shoulder and hit a glassfronted cabinet on the wall full of variously shaped hourglasses .The cabinet fell to the floor and burst apart glass flying everywhere then sprang back up onto the wall fully mended then fell down again and shattered The Death Eater had snatched up his wand which lay on the floor beside the glittering bell jar .Harry ducked down behind another desk as the man turned his mask had slipped so that he could not see he ripped it off with his free hand and shouted STUP STUPEFY screamed Hermione who had just caught up with them .The jet of red light hit the Death Eater in the middle of his chest he froze his arm still raised his wand fell to the floor with a clatter and he collapsed backward toward the bell jar .Harry expected to hear a clunk for the man to hit solid glass and slide off the jar onto the floor but instead his head sank through the surface of the bell jar as though it was nothing but a soap bubble and he came to rest sprawled on his back on the table with his head lying inside the jar full of glittering wind .Accio Wand cried Hermione .Harrys wand flew from a dark corner into her hand and she threw it to him .Thanks he said right lets get out of Look out !said Neville horrified staring at the Death Eaters head in the bell jar .All three of them raised their wands again but none of them struck .They were all gazing openmouthed appalled at what was happening to the mans head .It was shrinking very fast growing balder and balder the black hair and stubble retracting into his skull his cheeks smooth his skull round and covered with a peachlike fuzz .A babys head now sat grotesquely on top of the thick muscled neck of the Death Eater as he struggled to get up again .But even as they watched their mouths open the head began to swell to its previous proportions again thick black hair was sprouting from the pate and chin .Its time said Hermione in an awestruck voice .Time .The Death Eater shook his ugly head again trying to clear it but before he could pull himself together again it began to shrink back to babyhood once more .There was a shout from a room nearby then a crash and a scream .RON ?Harry yelled turning quickly from the monstrous transformation taking place before them .GINNY ?LUNA ?Harry !Hermione screamed .The Death Eater had pulled his head out of the bell jar .His appearance was utterly bizarre his tiny babys head bawling loudly while his thick arms flailed dangerously in all directions narrowly missing Harry who ducked .Harry raised his wand but to his amazement Hermione seized his arm .You cant hurt a baby !There was no time to argue the point .Harry could hear more footsteps growing louder from the Hall of Prophecy they had just left and knew too late that he ought not to have shouted and given away their position .Come on !he said again and leaving the ugly baby headed Death Eater staggering behind them they took off for the door that stood ajar at the other end of the room leading back into the black hallway .They had run halfway toward it when Harry saw through the open door two more Death Eaters running across the black room toward them .Veering left he burst instead into a small dark cluttered office and slammed the door behind them .Collo began Hermione but before she could complete the spell the door had burst open again and the two Death Eaters had come hurtling inside .With a cry of triumph both yelled IMPEDIMENT A Harry Hermione and Neville were all knocked backward off their feet .Neville was thrown over the desk and disappeared from view Hermione smashed into a bookcase and was promptly deluged in a cascade of heavy books the back of Harrys head slammed into the stone wall behind him tiny lights burst in front of his eyes and for a moment he was too dizzy and bewildered to react .WEVE GOT HIM !yelled the Death Eater nearest Harry IN AN OFFICE OFF Page lOlOHarry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix J .K .Silenciol cried Hermione and the mans voice was extinguished .He continued to mouth through the hole in his mask but no sound came out he was thrust aside by his fellow .Petrificus Totalusl shouted Harry as the second Death Eater raised his wand .His arms and legs snapped together and he fell forward facedown onto the rug at Harrys feet stiff as a board and unable to move at all .Well done Ha But the Death Eater Hermione had just struck dumb made a sudden slashing movement with his wand from which flew a streak of what looked like purple flame .It passed right across Hermiones chest she gave a tiny oh !as though of surprise and then crumpled onto the floor where she lay motionless .HERMIONE !Harry fell to his knees beside her as Neville crawled rapidly toward her from under the desk his wand held up in front of him .The Death Eater kicked out hard at Nevilles head as he emerged his foot broke Nevilles wand in two and connected with his face Neville gave a howl of pain and recoiled clutching his mouth and nose .Harry twisted around his own wand held high and saw that the Death Eater had ripped off his mask and was pointing his wand directly at Harry who recognized the long pale twisted face from the Daily Prophet Antonin Dolohov the wizard who had murdered the Prewetts .Dolohov grinned .With his free hand he pointed from the prophecy still clutched in Harrys hand to himself then at Hermione .Though he could no longer Page lOUHarry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix J .K .speak his meaning could not have been clearer Give me the prophecy or you get the same as her .Like you wont kill us all the moment I hand it over anyway !said Harry .A whine of panic inside his head was preventing him thinking properly .He had one hand on Hermiones shoulder which was still warm yet did not dare look at her properly .Dont let her be dead dont let her be dead its my fault if shes dead .Whaddever you do Harry said Neville fiercely from under the desk lowering his hands to show a clearly broken nose and blood pouring down his mouth and chin dond gib it to him !Then there was a crash outside the door and Dolohov looked over his shoulder the babyheaded Death Eater had appeared in the doorway his head bawling his great fists still flailing uncontrollably at everything around him .Harry seized his chance PETRIFICUS TOT ALU S The spell hit Dolohov before he could block it and he toppled forward across his comrade both of them rigid as boards and unable to move an inch .Hermione Harry said at once shaking her as the babyheaded Death Eater blundered out of sight again .Hermione wake up .Whaddid he do to her ?said Neville crawling out from under the desk again to kneel at her other side blood streaming from his rapidly swelling nose .I dunno .Neville groped for Hermiones wrist .Dats a pulse Harry Ib sure id is .Such a powerful wave of relief swept through Harry that for a moment he felt lightheaded .Shes alive ?Yeah I dink so .There was a pause in which Harry listened hard for the sounds of more footsteps but all he could hear were the whimpers and blunderings of the baby Death Eater in the next room .Neville were not far from the exit Harry whispered .Were right next to that circular room .If we can just get you across it and find the right door before any more Death Eaters come Ill bet you can get Hermione up the corridor and into the lift .Then you could find someone .Raise the alarm .And whad are you going do do ?said Neville mopping his bleeding nose with his sleeve and frowning at Harry .Ive got to find the others said Harry .Well Ib going do find dem wid you said Neville firmly .But Hermione Well dake her wid us said Neville firmly .Ill carry her youre bedder at fighding dem dan I ab He stood up and seized one of Hermiones arms glared at Harry who hesitated then grabbed the other and helped hoist Hermiones limp form over Nevilles shoulders .Wait said Harry snatching up Hermiones wand from the floor and shoving it into Nevilles hand youd better take this .Neville kicked aside the broken fragments of his own wand as they walked slowly toward the door .My grans going do kill be said Neville thickly blood spattering from his nose as he spoke dat was by dads old wand .Harry stuck his head out of the door and looked around cautiously .The babyheaded Death Eater was screaming and banging into things toppling grandfather clocks and overturning desks bawling and confused while the glass cabinet that Harry now suspected had contained TimeTurners continued to fall shatter and repair itself on the wall behind them .Hes never going to notice us he whispered .Cmon .keep close behind me .They crept out of the office and back toward the door into the black hallway which now seemed completely deserted .They walked a few steps forward Neville tottering slightly due to Hermiones weight .The door of the Time Room swung shut behind them and the walls began to rotate once more .The recent blow on the back of Harrys head seemed to have unsteadied him he narrowed his eyes swaying slightly until the walls stopped moving again .With a sinking heart Harry saw that Hermiones fiery crosses had faded from the doors .So which way dyou reck ?But before they could make a decision as to which way to try a door to their right sprang open and three people fell out of it .Ron !croaked Harry dashing toward them .Ginny are you all ?Harry said Ron giggling weakly lurching forward seizing the front of Harrys robes and gazing at him with unfocused eyes .There you are .Ha ha ha .You look funny Harry .Youre all messed up .Rons face was very white and something dark was trickling from the corner of his mouth .Next moment his knees had given way but he still clutched the front of Harrys robes so that Harry was pulled into a kind of bow .Ginny ?Harry said fearfully .What happened ?But Ginny shook her head and slid down the wall into a sitting position panting and holding her ankle .I think her ankles broken I heard something crack whispered Luna who was bending over her and who alone seemed to be unhurt .Four of them chased us into a dark room full of planets it was a very odd place some of the time we were just floating in the dark Harry we saw Uranus up close !said Ron still giggling feebly .Get it Harry ?We saw Uranus ha ha ha A bubble of blood grew at the corner of Rons mouth and burst .Anyway one of them grabbed Ginnys foot I used the Reductor Curse and blew up Pluto in his face but .Luna gestured hopelessly at Ginny who was breathing in a very shallow way her eyes still closed .And what about Ron ?said Harry fearfully as Ron continued to giggle still hanging off the front of Harrys robes .I dont know what they hit him with said Luna sadly but hes gone a bit funny I could hardly get him along at all .Harry said Ron pulling Harrys ear down to his mouth and still giggling weakly you know who this girl is Harry ?Shes Loony .Loony Lovegood .ha ha ha .Weve got to get out of here said Harry firmly .Luna can you help Ginny ?Yes said Luna sticking her wand behind her ear for safekeeping putting an arm around Ginnys waist and pulling her up .Its only my ankle I can do it myself !said Ginny impatiently but next moment she had collapsed sideways and grabbed Luna for support .Harry pulled Rons arm over his shoulder just as so many months ago he had pulled Dudleys .He looked around They had a oneintwelve chance of getting the exit right the first time He heaved Ron toward a door they were within a few feet of it when another door across the hall burst open and three Death Eaters sped into the hall led by Bellatrix Lestrange .There they are !she shrieked .Stunning Spells shot across the room Harry smashed his way through the door ahead flung Ron unceremoniously from him and ducked back to help Neville in with Hermione .They were all over the threshold just in time to slam the door against Bellatrix .Colloportus shouted Harry and he heard three bodies slam into the door on the other side .It doesnt matter !said a mans voice .There are other ways in WEVE GOT THEM THEYRE HERE !Harry spun around .They were back in the Brain Room and sure enough there were doors all around the walls .He could hear footsteps in the hall behind them as more Death Eaters came running to join the first .Luna Neville help me !The three of them tore around the room sealing the doors as they went Harry crashed into a table and rolled over the top of it in his haste to reach the next door .Colloportusl There were footsteps running along behind the doors every now and then another heavy body would launch itself against one so it creaked and shuddered .Luna and Neville were bewitching the doors along the opposite wall then as Harry reached the very top of the room he heard Luna cry Collo aargh ?He turned in time to see her flying through the air .Five Death Eaters were surging into the room through the door she had not reached in time Luna hit a desk slid over its surface and onto the floor on the other side where she lay sprawled as still as Hermione .Get Potter !shrieked Bellatrix and she ran at him .He dodged her and sprinted back up the room he was safe as long as they thought they might hit the prophecy Hey !said Ron who had staggered to his feet and was now tottering drunkenly toward Harry giggling .Hey Harry there are brains in here ha ha ha isnt that weird Harry ?Ron get out of the way get down But Ron had already pointed his wand at the tank .Honest Harry theyre brains look Accio Brain The scene seemed momentarily frozen .Harry Ginny and Neville and each of the Death Eaters turned in spite of themselves to watch the top of the tank as a brain burst from the green liquid like a leaping fish .For a moment it seemed suspended in midair then it soared toward Ron spinning as it came and what looked like ribbons of moving images flew from it unraveling like rolls of film Ha ha ha Harry look at it said Ron watching it disgorge its gaudy innards .Harry come and touch it bet its weird RON NO !Harry did not know what would happen if Ron touched the tentacles of thought now flying behind the brain but he was sure it would not be anything good .He darted forward but Ron had already caught the brain in his outstretched hands .The moment they made contact with his skin the tentacles began wrapping themselves around Rons arms like ropes .Harry look whats happen no no I dont like it no stop stop But the thin ribbons were spinning around Rons chest now .He tugged and tore at them as the brain was pulled tight against him like an octopuss body .Diffindol yelled Harry trying to sever the feelers wrapping themselves tightly around Ron before his eyes but they would not break .Ron fell over still thrashing against his bonds .Harry itll suffocate him !screamed Ginny immobilized by her broken ankle on the floor then a jet of red light flew from one of the Death Eaters wands and hit her squarely in the face .She keeled over sideways and lay there unconscious .STUBEFYl shouted Neville wheeling around and waving Hermiones wand at the oncoming Death Eaters .STUBEFY STUBEFYl But nothing happened one of the Death Eaters shot their own Stunning Spell at Neville it missed him by inches .Harry and Neville were now the only two left fighting the five Death Eaters two of whom sent streams of silver light like arrows past them that left craters in the wall behind them .Harry ran for it as Bellatrix Lestrange sprinted right at him .Holding the prophecy high above his head he sprinted back up the room all he could think of doing was to draw the Death Eaters away from the others .It seemed to have worked .They streaked after him knocking chairs and tables flying but not daring to bewitch him in case they hurt the prophecy and he dashed through the only door still open the one through which the Death Eaters themselves had come .Inwardly praying that Neville would stay with Ron find some way of releasing him he ran a few feet into the new room and felt the floor vanish He was falling down steep stone step after steep stone step bouncing on every tier until at last with a crash that knocked all the breath out of his body he landed flat on his back in the sunken pit where the stone archway stood on its dais .The whole room was ringing with the Death Eaters laughter .He looked up and saw the five who had been in the Brain Room descending toward him while as many more emerged through other doorways and began leaping from bench to bench toward him .Harry got to his feet though his legs were trembling so badly they barely supported him .The prophecy was still miraculously unbroken in his left hand his wand clutched tightly in his right .He backed away looking around trying to keep all the Death Eaters within his sights .The back of his legs hit something solid he had reached the dais where the archway stood .He climbed backward onto it .The Death Eaters all halted gazing at him .Some were panting as hard as he was .One was bleeding badly Dolohov freed of the full BodyBind was leering his wand pointing straight at Harrys face .Potter your race is run drawled Lucius Malfoy pulling off his mask .Now hand me the prophecy like a good boy .Let let the others go and Ill give it to you !said Harry desperately .A few of the Death Eaters laughed .You are not in a position to bargain Potter said Lucius Malfoy his pale face flushed with pleasure .You see there are ten of us and only one of you .or hasnt Dumbledore ever taught you how to count ?Hes dot alone !shouted a voice from above them .Hes still god be !Harrys heart sank .Neville was scrambling down the stone benches toward them Hermiones wand held fast in his trembling hand .Neville no go back to Ron STUBEFYl Neville shouted again pointing his wand at each Death Eater in turn STUBEFYl .STUBE One of the largest Death Eaters seized Neville from behind pinioning his arms to his sides .He struggled and kicked several of the Death Eaters laughed .Its Longbottom isnt it ?sneered Lucius Malfoy .Well your grandmother is used to losing family members to our cause .Your death will not come as a great shock .Longbottom ?repeated Bellatrix and a truly evil smile lit her gaunt face .Why I have had the pleasure of meeting your parents boy .I DOE YOU HAB !roared Neville and he fought so hard against his captors encircling grip that the Death Eater shouted Someone Stun him !No no no said Bellatrix .She looked transported alive with excitement as she glanced at Harry then back at Neville .No lets see how long Longbottom lasts before he cracks like his parents .Unless Potter wants to give us the prophecy DOND GIB ID DO DEM !roared Neville who seemed beside himself kicking and writhing as Bellatrix drew nearer to him and his captor her wand raised .DOND GIB ID DO DEM HARRY !Bellatrix raised her wand .Cruciol Neville screamed his legs drawn up to his chest so that the Death Eater holding him was momentarily holding him off the ground .The Death Eater dropped him and he fell to the floor twitching and screaming in agony .That was just a taster !said Bellatrix raising her wand so that Nevilles screams stopped and he lay sobbing at her feet .She turned and gazed up at Harry .Now Potter either give us the prophecy or watch your little friend die the hard way !Harry did not have to think there was no choice .The prophecy was hot with the heat from his clutching hand as he held it out .Malfoy jumped forward to take it .Then high above them two more doors burst open and five more people sprinted into the room Sirius Lupin Moody Tonks and Kingsley .Malfoy turned and raised his wand but Tonks had already sent a Stunning Spell right at him .Harry did not wait to see whether it had made contact but dived off the dais out of the way .The Death Eaters were completely distracted by the appearance of the members of the Order who were now raining spells down upon them as they jumped from step to step toward the sunken floor Through the darting bodies the flashes of light Harry could see Neville crawling along .He dodged another jet of red light and flung himself flat on the ground to reach Neville .Are you okay ?he yelled as another spell soared inches over their heads .Yes said Neville trying to pull himself up .And Ron ?I dink hes all right he was still fighding the brain when I left The stone floor between them exploded as a spell hit it leaving a crater right where Nevilles hand had been seconds before .Both scrambled away from the spot then a thick arm came out of nowhere seized Harry around the neck and pulled him upright so that his toes were barely touching the floor .Give it to me growled a voice in his ear give me the prophecy The man was pressing so tightly on Harrys windpipe that he could not breathe through watering eyes he saw Sirius dueling with a Death Eater some ten feet away .Kingsley was fighting two at once Tonks still halfway up the tiered seats was firing spells down at Bellatrix nobody seemed to realize that Harry was dying .He turned his wand backward toward the mans side but had no breath to utter an incantation and the mans free hand was groping toward the hand in which Harry was grasping the prophecy AARGH !Neville had come lunging out of nowhere Unable to articulate a spell he had jabbed Hermiones wand hard into the eyehole of the Death Eaters mask .The man relinquished Harry at once with a howl of pain and Harry whirled around to face him and gasped STUPEFY The Death Eater keeled over backward and his mask slipped off .It was Macnair Buckbeaks wouldbe killer one of his eyes now swollen and bloodshot .Thanks !Harry said to Neville pulling him aside as Sirius and his Death Eater lurched past dueling so fiercely that their wands were blurs .Then Harrys foot made contact with something round and hard and he slipped for a moment he thought he had dropped the prophecy then saw Moodys magic eye spinning away across the floor .Its owner was lying on his side bleeding from the head and his attacker was now bearing down upon Harry and Neville Dolohov his long pale face twisted with glee .Tarantallegrcd he shouted his wand pointing at Neville whose legs went immediately into a kind of frenzied tap dance unbalancing him and causing him to fall to the floor again .Now Potter He made the same slashing movement with his wand that he had used on Hermione just as Harry yelled Protego Harry felt something streak across his face like a blunt knife but the force of it knocked him sideways and he fell over Nevilles jerking legs but the Shield Charm had stopped the worst of the spell .Dolohov raised his wand again .Accio Proph Sirius hurtled out of nowhere rammed Dolohov with his shoulder and sent him flying out of the way .The prophecy had again flown to the tips of Harrys fingers but he had managed to cling to it .Now Sirius and Dolohov were dueling their wands flashing like swords sparks flying from their wand tips Dolohov drew back his wand to make the same slashing movement he had used on Harry and Hermione .Springing up Harry yelled Petrificus Totalusl Once again Dolohovs arms and legs snapped together and he keeled over backward landing with a crash on his back .Nice one !shouted Sirius forcing Harrys head down as a pair of Stunning Spells flew toward them .Now I want you to get out of They both ducked again .A jet of green light had narrowly missed Sirius across the room Harry saw Tonks fall from halfway up the stone steps her limp form toppling from stone seat to stone seat and Bellatrix triumphant running back toward the fray .Harry take the prophecy grab Neville and run !Sirius yelled dashing to meet Bellatrix .Harry did not see what happened next Kingsley swayed across his field of vision battling with the pockmarked Rookwood now maskless another jet of green light flew over Harrys head as he launched himself toward Neville Can you stand ?he bellowed in Nevilles ear as Nevilles legs jerked and twitched uncontrollably .Put your arm round my neck Neville did so Harry heaved Nevilles legs were still flying in every direction they would not support him and then out of nowhere a man lunged at them .Both fell backward Nevilles legs waving wildly like an overturned beetles Harry with his left arm held up in the air to try and save the small glass ball from being smashed .The prophecy give me the prophecy Potter !snarled Lucius Malfoys voice in his ear and Harry felt the tip of Malfoys wand pressing hard between his ribs .No get off me .Neville catch it !Harry flung the prophecy across the floor Neville spun himself around on his back and scooped the ball to his chest .Malfoy pointed the wand instead at Neville but Harry jabbed his own wand back over his shoulder and yelled Impedimental Malfoy was blasted off his back .As Harry scrambled up again he looked around and saw Malfoy smash into the dais on which Sirius and Bellatrix were now dueling .Malfoy aimed his wand at Harry and Neville again but before he could draw breath to strike Lupin had jumped between them .Harry round up the others and GO !Harry seized Neville by the shoulder of his robes and lifted him bodily onto the first tier of stone steps .Nevilles legs twitched and jerked and would not support his weight .Harry heaved again with all the strength he possessed and they climbed another step A spell hit the stone bench at Harrys heel .It crumbled away and he fell back to the step below Neville sank to the ground his legs still jerking and thrashing and thrust the prophecy into his pocket .Come on !said Harry desperately hauling at Nevilles robes .Just try and push with your legs He gave another stupendous heave and Nevilles robes tore all along the left seam the small spunglass ball dropped from his pocket and before either of them could catch it one of Nevilles floundering feet kicked it .It flew some ten feet to their right and smashed on the step beneath them .As both of them stared at the place where it had broken appalled at what had happened a pearlywhite figure with hugely magnified eyes rose into the air unnoticed by any but them .Harry could see its mouth moving but in all the crashes and screams and yells surrounding them not one word of the prophecy could he hear .The figure stopped speaking and dissolved into nothingness .Harry Ib sorry !cried Neville his face anguished as his legs continued to flounder Ib so sorry Harry I didnd bean do ■ It doesnt matter !Harry shouted .Just try and stand lets get out of Dubbledorel said Neville his sweaty face suddenly transported staring over Harrys shoulder .What ?DUBBLEDORE !Harry turned to look where Neville was staring .Directly above them framed in the doorway from the Brain Room stood Albus Dumbledore his wand aloft his face white and furious .Harry felt a kind of electric charge surge through every particle of his body they were saved .Dumbledore sped down the steps past Neville and Harry who had no more thought of leaving .Dumbledore was already at the foot of the steps when the Death Eaters nearest realized he was there .There were yells one of the Death Eaters ran for it scrabbling like a monkey up the stone steps opposite .Dumbledores spell pulled him back as easily and effortlessly as though he had hooked him with an invisible line Only one couple were still battling apparently unaware of the new arrival .Harry saw Sirius duck Bellatrixs jet of red light He was laughing at her .Come on you can do better than that !he yelled his voice echoing around the cavernous room .The second jet of light hit him squarely on the chest .The laughter had not quite died from his face but his eyes widened in shock .Harry released Neville though he was unaware of doing so .He was jumping down the steps again pulling out his wand as Dumbledore turned to the dais too .It seemed to take Sirius an age to fall .His body curved in a graceful arc as he sank backward through the ragged veil hanging from the arch .And Harry saw the look of mingled fear and surprise on his godfathers wasted oncehandsome face as he fell through the ancient doorway and disappeared behind the veil which fluttered for a moment as though in a high wind and then fell back into place .Harry heard Bellatrix Lestranges triumphant scream but knew it meant nothing Sirius had only just fallen through the archway he would reappear from the other side any second .But Sirius did not reappear .SIRIUS !Harry yelled SIRIUS !He had reached the floor his breath coming in searing gasps .Sirius must be just behind the curtain he Harry would pull him back out again .But as he reached the ground and sprinted toward the dais Lupin grabbed Harry around the chest holding him back .Theres nothing you can do Harry Get him save him hes only just gone through !Its too late Harry We can still reach him Harry struggled hard and viciously but Lupin would not let go .Theres nothing you can do Harry .nothing .Hes gone .THE ONLY ONE HE EVER FEARED He hasnt gone !Harry yelled .He did not believe it he would not believe it still he fought Lupin with every bit of strength he had Lupin did not understand people hid behind that curtain he had heard them whispering the first time he had entered the room Sirius was hiding simply lurking out of sight SIRIUS !he bellowed SIRIUS !He cant come back Harry said Lupin his voice breaking as he struggled to contain Harry .He cant come back because hes d HE IS NOT DEAD !roared Harry .SIRIUS !There was movement going on around them pointless bustling the flashes of more spells .To Harry it was meaningless noise the deflected curses flying past them did not matter nothing mattered except that Lupin stop pretending that Sirius who was standing feet from them behind that old curtain was not going to emerge at any moment shaking back his dark hair and eager to reenter the battle Lupin dragged Harry away from the dais Harry still staring at the archway angry at Sirius now for keeping him waiting But some part of him realized even as he fought to break free from Lupin that Sirius had never kept him waiting before .Sirius had risked everything always to see Harry to help him .If Sirius was not reappearing out of that archway when Harry was yelling for him as though his life depended on it the only possible explanation was that he could not come back .That he really was .Dumbledore had most of the remaining Death Eaters grouped in the middle of the room seemingly immobilized by invisible ropes .MadEye Moody had crawled across the room to where Tonks lay and was attempting to revive her .Behind the dais there were still flashes of light grunts and cries Kingsley had run forward to continue Siriuss duel with Bellatrix .Harry ?Neville had slid down the stone benches one by one to the place where Harry stood .Harry was no longer struggling against Lupin who maintained a precautionary grip on his arm nevertheless .Harry .Ib really sorry .said Neville .His legs were still dancing uncontrollably .Was dat man was Sirius Black a a friend of yours ?Harry nodded .Here said Lupin quietly and pointing his wand at Nevilles legs he said Finite .The spell was lifted .Nevilles legs fell back onto the floor and remained still .Lupins face was pale .Lets lets find the others .Where are they all Neville ?Lupin turned away from the archway as he spoke .It sounded as though every word was causing him pain .Deyre all back dere said Neville .A brain addacked Ron bud I dink hes all righd and Herbiones unconscious bud we could feel a bulse There was a loud bang and a yell from behind the dais .Harry saw Kingsley yelling in pain hit the ground .Bellatrix Lestrange turned tail and ran as Dumbledore whipped around .He aimed a spell at her but she deflected it .She was halfway up the steps now Harry no !cried Lupin but Harry had already ripped his arm from Lupins slackened grip .SHE KILLED SIRIUS !bellowed Harry .SHE KILLED HIM ILL KILL HER !And he was off scrambling up the stone benches .People were shouting behind him but he did not care .The hem of Bellatrixs robes whipped out of sight ahead and they were back in the room where the brains were swimming .She aimed a curse over her shoulder .The tank rose into the air and tipped .Harry was deluged in the foul smelling potion within .The brains slipped and slid over him and began spinning their long colored tentacles but he shouted Wingardium Levioscd and they flew into the air away from him .Slipping and sliding he ran on toward the door .He leapt over Luna who was groaning on the floor past Ginny who said Harry what ?past Ron who giggled feebly and Hermione who was still unconscious .He wrenched open the door into the circular black hall and saw Bellatrix disappearing through a door on the other side of the room beyond her was the corridor leading back to the lifts .He ran but she had slammed the door behind her and the walls had begun to rotate again .Once more he was surrounded by streaks of blue light from the whirling candelabra .Wheres the exit ?he shouted desperately as the wall rumbled to a halt again .Wheres the way out ?The room seemed to have been waiting for him to ask .The door right behind him flew open and the corridor toward the lifts stretched ahead of him torch lit and empty .He ran .He could hear a lift clattering ahead of him .He sprinted up the passageway swung around the corner and slammed his fist onto the button to call a second lift .It jangled and banged lower and lower the grilles slid open and Harry dashed inside now hammering the button marked Atrium .The doors slid shut and he was rising .He forced his way out of the lift before the grilles were fully open and looked around .Bellatrix was almost at the telephone lift at the other end of the hall but she looked back as he sprinted toward her and aimed another spell at him .He dodged behind the Fountain of Magical Brethren the spell zoomed past him and hit the wrought gold gates at the other end of the Atrium so that they rang like bells .There were no more footsteps .She had stopped running .He crouched behind the statues listening .Come out come out little HarryV she called in her mockbaby voice which echoed off the polished wooden floors .What did you come after me for then ?I thought you were here to avenge my dear cousin !I am !shouted Harry and a score of ghostly Harrys seemed to chorus I am I am I am all around the room .aah .did you love him little baby Potter ?Hatred rose in Harry such as he had never known before .He flung himself out from behind the fountain and bellowed CrucioV Bellatrix screamed .The spell had knocked her off her feet but she did not writhe and shriek with pain as Neville had she was already on her feet again breathless no longer laughing .Harry dodged behind the golden fountain again her counterspell hit the head of the handsome wizard which was blown off and landed twenty feet away gouging long scratches into the wooden floor .Never used an Unforgivable Curse before have you boy ?she yelled .She had abandoned her baby voice now .You need to mean them Potter !You need to really want to cause pain to enjoy it righteous anger wont hurt me for long Ill show you how it is done shall I ?Ill give you a lesson Harry had been edging around the fountain on the other side .She screamed Cruciol and he was forced to duck down again as the centaurs arm holding its bow spun off and landed with a crash on the floor a short distance from the golden wizards head .Potter you cannot win against me !she cried .He could hear her moving to the right trying to get a clear shot of him .He backed around the statue away from her crouching behind the centaurs legs his head level with the houseelfs .I was and am the Dark Lords most loyal servant I learned the Dark Arts from him and I know spells of such power that you pathetic little boy can never hope to compete Stupefy yelled Harry .He had edged right around to where the goblin stood beaming up at the now headless wizard and taken aim at her back as she peered around the fountain for him .She reacted so fast he barely had time to duck .Protegol The jet of red light his own Stunning Spell bounced back at him .Harry scrambled back behind the fountain and one of the goblins ears went flying across the room .Potter I am going to give you one chance !shouted Bellatrix .Give me the prophecy roll it out toward me now and I may spare your life !Well youre going to have to kill me because its gone !Harry roared and as he shouted it pain seared across his forehead .His scar was on fire again and he felt a surge of fury that was quite unconnected with his own rage .And he knows !said Harry with a mad laugh to match Bellatrix s own .Your dear old mate Voldemort knows its gone !Hes not going to be happy with you is he ?What ?What do you mean ?she cried and for the first time there was fear in her voice .The prophecy smashed when I was trying to get Neville up the steps !What do you think Voldemortll say about that then ?His scar seared and burned .The pain of it was making his eyes stream .LIAR !she shrieked but he could hear the terror behind the anger now .YOUVE GOT IT POTTER AND YOU WILL GIVE IT TO ME Accio Prophecy !ACCIO PROPHECY !Harry laughed again because he knew it would incense her the pain building in his head so badly he thought his skull might burst .He waved his empty hand from behind the oneeared goblin and withdrew it quickly as she sent another jet of green light flying at him .Nothing there !he shouted .Nothing to summon !It smashed and nobody heard what it said tell your boss that No !she screamed .It isnt true youre lying MASTER I TRIED I TRIED DO NOT PUNISH ME Dont waste your breath !yelled Harry his eyes screwed up against the pain in his scar now more terrible than ever .He cant hear you from here !Cant I Potter ?said a high cold voice .Harry opened his eyes .Tall thin and blackhooded his terrible snakelike face white and gaunt his scarlet slitpupiled eyes staring .Lord Voldemort had appeared in the middle of the hall his wand pointing at Harry who stood frozen quite unable to move .So you smashed my prophecy ?said Voldemort softly staring at Harry with those pitiless red eyes .No Bella he is not lying .I see the truth looking at me from within his worthless mind .Months of preparation months of effort .and my Death Eaters have let Harry Potter thwart me again .Master I am sorry I knew not I was fighting the Animagus Black !sobbed Bellatrix flinging herself down at Voldemorts feet as he paced slowly nearer .Master you should know Be quiet Bella said Voldemort dangerously .I shall deal with you in a moment .Do you think I have entered the Ministry of Magic to hear your sniveling apologies ?But Master he is here he is below Voldemort paid no attention .I have nothing more to say to you Potter he said quietly .You have irked me too often for too long .AVADA KEDAVRAl Harry had not even opened his mouth to resist .His mind was blank his wand pointing uselessly at the floor .But the headless golden statue of the wizard in the fountain had sprung alive leaping from its plinth and landed on the floor with a crash between Harry and Voldemort .The spell merely glanced off its chest as the statue flung out its arms protecting Harry .What ?said Voldemort staring around .And then he breathed Dumbledore !Harry looked behind him his heart pounding .Dumbledore was standing in front of the golden gates .Voldemort raised his wand and sent another jet of green light at Dumbledore who turned and was gone in a whirling of his cloak next second he had reappeared behind Voldemort and waved his wand toward the remnants of the fountain the other statues sprang to life too .The statue of the witch ran at Bellatrix who screamed and sent spells streaming uselessly off its chest before it dived at her pinning her to the floor .Meanwhile the goblin and the house elf scuttled toward the fireplaces set along the wall and the onearmed centaur galloped at Voldemort who vanished and reappeared beside the pool .The headless statue thrust Harry backward away from the fight as Dumbledore advanced on Voldemort and the golden centaur cantered around them both .It was foolish to come here tonight Tom said Dumbledore calmly .The Aurors are on their way By which time I shall be gone and you dead !spat Voldemort .He sent another Killing Curse at Dumbledore but missed instead hitting the security guards desk which burst into flame .Dumbledore flicked his own wand .The force of the spell that emanated from it was such that Harry though shielded by his stone guard felt his hair stand on end as it passed and this time Voldemort was forced to conjure a shining silver shield out of thin air to deflect it .The spell whatever it was caused no visible damage to the shield though a deep gonglike note reverberated from it an oddly chilling sound .You do not seek to kill me Dumbledore ?called Voldemort his scarlet eyes narrowed over the top of the shield .Above such brutality are you ?We both know that there are other ways of destroying a man Tom Dumbledore said calmly continuing to walk toward Voldemort as though he had not a fear in the world as though nothing had happened to interrupt his stroll up the hall .Merely taking your life would not satisfy me I admit There is nothing worse than death Dumbledore !snarled Voldemort .You are quite wrong said Dumbledore still closing in upon Voldemort and speaking as lightly as though they were discussing the matter over drinks .Harry felt scared to see him walking along undefended shieldless .He wanted to cry out a warning but his headless guard kept shunting him backward toward the wall blocking his every attempt to get out from behind it .Indeed your failure to understand that there are things much worse than death has always been your greatest weakness Another jet of green light flew from behind the silver shield .This time it was the onearmed centaur galloping in front of Dumbledore that took the blast and shattered into a hundred pieces but before the fragments had even hit the floor Dumbledore had drawn back his wand and waved it as though brandishing a whip .A long thin flame flew from the tip it wrapped itself around Voldemort shield and all .For a moment it seemed Dumbledore had won but then the fiery rope became a serpent which relinquished its hold upon Voldemort at once and turned hissing furiously to face Dumbledore .Voldemort vanished .The snake reared from the floor ready to strike There was a burst of flame in midair above Dumbledore just as Voldemort reappeared standing on the plinth in the middle of the pool where so recently the five statues had stood .Look outi Harry yelled .But even as he shouted one more jet of green light had flown at Dumbledore from Voldemorts wand and the snake had struck Fawkes swooped down in front of Dumbledore opened his beak wide and swallowed the jet of green light whole .He burst into flame and fell to the floor small wrinkled and flightless .At the same moment Dumbledore brandished his wand in one long fluid movement the snake which had been an instant from sinking its fangs into him flew high into the air and vanished in a wisp of dark smoke the water in the pool rose up and covered Voldemort like a cocoon of molten glass For a few seconds Voldemort was visible only as a dark rippling faceless figure shimmering and indistinct upon the plinth clearly struggling to throw off the suffocating mass Then he was gone and the water fell with a crash back into its pool slopping wildly over the sides drenching the polished floor .MASTER !screamed Bellatrix .Sure it was over sure Voldemort had decided to flee Harry made to run out from behind his statue guard but Dumbledore bellowed Stay where you are Harry !For the first time Dumbledore sounded frightened .Harry could not see why .The hall was quite empty but for themselves the sobbing Bellatrix still trapped under her statue and the tiny baby Fawkes croaking feebly on the floor And then Harrys scar burst open .He knew he was dead it was pain beyond imagining pain past endurance He was gone from the hall he was locked in the coils of a creature with red eyes so tightly bound that Harry did not know where his body ended and the creatures began .They were fused together bound by pain and there was no escape And when the creature spoke it used Harrys mouth so that in his agony he felt his jaw move .Kill me now Dumbledore .Blinded and dying every part of him screaming for release Harry felt the creature use him again .If death is nothing Dumbledore kill the boy .Let the pain stop thought Harry .Let him kill us .End it Dumbledore .Death is nothing compared to this .And Ill see Sirius again .And as Harrys heart filled with emotion the creatures coils loosened the pain was gone Harry was lying facedown on the floor his glasses gone shivering as though he lay upon ice not wood .And there were voices echoing through the hall more voices than there should have been Harry opened his eyes saw his glasses lying at the heel of the headless statue that had been guarding him but which now lay flat on its back cracked and immobile .He put them on and raised his head an inch to find Dumbledores crooked nose inches from his own .Are you all right Harry ?Yes said Harry shaking so violently he could not hold his head up properly .Yeah Im wheres Voldemort where who are all these whats The Atrium was full of people .The floor was reflecting emeraldgreen flames that had burst into life in all the fireplaces along one wall and a stream of witches and wizards was emerging from them .As Dumbledore pulled him back to his feet Harry saw the tiny gold statues of the houseelf and the goblin leading a stunnedlooking Cornelius Fudge forward .He was there !shouted a scarletrobed man with a ponytail who was pointing at a pile of golden rubble on the other side of the hall where Bellatrix had lain trapped moments before .I saw him Mr Fudge I swear it was YouKnowWho he grabbed a woman and Disapparated !I know Williamson I know I saw him too !gibbered Fudge who was wearing pajamas under his pinstriped cloak and was gasping as though he had just run miles .Merlins beard here here !in the Ministry of Magic !great heavens above it doesnt seem possible my word how can this be ?If you proceed downstairs into the Department of Mysteries Cornelius said Dumbledore apparently satisfied that Harry was all right and walking forward so that the newcomers realized he was there for the first time a few of them raised their wands others simply looked amazed the statues of the elf and goblin applauded and Fudge jumped so much that his slipperclad feet left the floor you will find several escaped Death Eaters contained in the Death Chamber bound by an AntiDisapparation Jinx and awaiting your decision as to what to do with them .Dumbledore !gasped Fudge apparently beside himself with amazement .You here I I He looked wildly around at the Aurors he had brought with him and it could not have been clearer that he was in half a mind to cry Seize him !Cornelius I am ready to fight your men and win again !said Dumbledore in a thunderous voice .But a few minutes ago you saw proof with your own eyes that I have been telling you the truth for a year .Lord Voldemort has returned you have been chasing the wrong men for twelve months and it is time you listened to sense !I dont well blustered Fudge looking around as though hoping somebody was going to tell him what to do .When nobody did he said Very well Dawlish !Williamson !Go down to the Department of Mysteries and see .Dumbledore you you will need to tell me exactly the Fountain of Magical Brethren what happened ?he added in a kind of whimper staring around at the floor where the remains of the statues of the witch wizard and centaur now lay scattered .We can discuss that after I have sent Harry back to Hogwarts said Dumbledore .Harry Harry Potter ?Fudge spun around and stared at Harry who was still standing against the wall beside the fallen statue that had been guarding him during Dumbledore and Voldemorts duel .Hehere ?said Fudge .Why whats all this about ?I shall explain everything repeated Dumbledore when Harry is back at school .He walked away from the pool to the place where the golden wizards head lay on the floor .He pointed his wand at it and muttered Portus .The head glowed blue and trembled noisily against the wooden floor for a few seconds then became still once more .Now see here Dumbledore !said Fudge as Dumbledore picked up the head and walked back to Harry carrying it .You havent got authorization for that Portkey !You cant do things like that right in front of the Minister of Magic you you His voice faltered as Dumbledore surveyed him magisterially over his halfmoon spectacles .You will give the order to remove Dolores Umbridge from Hogwarts said Dumbledore .You will tell your Aurors to stop searching for my Care of Magical Creatures teacher so that he can return to work .I will give you .Dumbledore pulled a watch with twelve hands from his pocket and glanced at it half an hour of my time tonight in which I think we shall be more than able to cover the important points of what has happened here .After that I shall need to return to my school .If you need more help from me you are of course more than welcome to contact me at Hogwarts .Letters addressed to the headmaster will find me .Fudge goggled worse than ever .His mouth was open and his round face grew pinker under his rumpled gray hair .I you Dumbledore turned his back on him .Take this Portkey Harry .He held out the golden head of the statue and Harry placed his hand upon it past caring what he did next or where he went .I shall see you in half an hour said Dumbledore quietly .One .two .three .Harry felt the familiar sensation of a hook being jerked behind his navel .The polished wooden floor was gone from beneath his feet the Atrium Fudge and Dumbledore had all disappeared and he was flying forward in a whirlwind of color and sound .THE LOST PROPHECY Harrys feet hit solid ground again his knees buckled a little and the golden wizards head fell with a resounding clunk to the floor .He looked around and saw that he had arrived in Dumbledores office .Everything seemed to have repaired itself during the headmasters absence .The delicate silver instruments stood again upon the spindlelegged tables puffing and whirring serenely .The portraits of the headmasters and headmistresses were snoozing in their frames heads lolling back in armchairs or against the edge of their pictures .Harry looked through the window .There was a cool line of pale green along the horizon Dawn was approaching .The silence and the stillness broken only by the occasional grunt or snuffle of a sleeping portrait was unbearable to him .If his surroundings could have reflected the feelings inside him the pictures would have been screaming in pain .He walked around the quiet beautiful office breathing quickly trying not to think .But he had to think .There was no escape .It was his fault Sirius had died it was all his fault .If he Harry had not been stupid enough to fall for Voldemorts trick if he had not been so convinced that what he had seen in his dream was real if he had only opened his mind to the possibility that Voldemort was as Hermione had said banking on Harrys love of playing the hero .It was unbearable he would not think about it he could not stand it .There was a terrible hollow inside him he did not want to feel or examine a dark hole where Sirius had been where Sirius had vanished .He did not want to have to be alone with that great silent space he could not stand it A picture behind him gave a particularly loud grunting snore and a cool voice said Ah .Harry Potter .Phineas Nigellus gave a long yawn stretching his arms as he watched Harry with shrewd narrow eyes .And what brings you here in the early hours of the morning ?said Phineas .This office is supposed to be barred to all but the rightful headmaster .Or has Dumbledore sent you here ?Oh dont tell me .He gave another shuddering yawn .Another message for my worthless greatgreatgrandson ?Harry could not speak .Phineas Nigellus did not know that Sirius was dead but Harry could not tell him .To say it aloud would be to make it final absolute irretrievable .A few more of the portraits had stirred now .Terror of being interrogated made Harry stride across the room and seize the doorknob .It would not turn .He was shut in .I hope this means said the corpulent rednosed wizard who hung on the wall behind Dumbledores desk that Dumbledore will soon be back with us ?Harry turned .The wizard was eyeing him with great interest .Harry nodded .He tugged again on the doorknob behind his back but it remained immovable .Oh good said the wizard .It has been very dull without him very dull indeed .He settled himself on the thronelike chair on which he had been painted and smiled benignly upon Harry .Dumbledore thinks very highly of you as I am sure you know he said comfortably .Oh yes .Holds you in great esteem .The guilt filling the whole of Harrys chest like some monstrous weighty parasite now writhed and squirmed .Harry could not stand this he could not stand being Harry anymore .He had never felt more trapped inside his own head and body never wished so intensely that he could be somebody anybody else .The empty fireplace burst into emeraldgreen flame making Harry leap away from the door staring at the man spinning inside the grate .As Dumbledores tall form unfolded itself from the fire the wizards and witches on the surrounding walls jerked awake .Many of them gave cries of welcome .Thank you said Dumbledore softly .He did not look at Harry at first but walked over to the perch beside the door and withdrew from an inside pocket of his robes the tiny ugly featherless Fawkes whom he placed gently on the tray of soft ashes beneath the golden post where the fullgrown Fawkes usually stood .Well Harry said Dumbledore finally turning away from the baby bird you will be pleased to hear that none of your fellow students are going to suffer lasting damage from the nights events .Harry tried to say Good but no sound came out .It seemed to him that Dumbledore was reminding him of the amount of damage he had caused by his actions tonight and although Dumbledore was for once looking at him directly and though his expression was kindly rather than accusatory Harry could not bear to meet his eyes .Madam Pomfrey is patching everybody up now said Dumbledore .Nymphadora Tonks may need to spend a little time in St .Mungos but it seems that she will make a full recovery .Harry contented himself with nodding at the carpet which was growing lighter as the sky outside grew paler .He was sure that all the portraits around the room were listening eagerly to every word Dumbledore spoke wondering where Dumbledore and Harry had been and why there had been injuries .I know how you are feeling Harry said Dumbledore very quietly .No you dont said Harry and his voice was suddenly loud and strong .Whitehot anger leapt inside him .Dumbledore knew nothing about his feelings .You see Dumbledore ?said Phineas Nigellus slyly .Never try to understand the students .They hate it .They would much rather be tragically misunderstood wallow in selfpity stew in their own Thats enough Phineas said Dumbledore .Harry turned his back on Dumbledore and stared determinedly out of the opposite window .He could see the Quidditch stadium in the distance .Sirius had appeared there once disguised as the shaggy black dog so he could watch Harry play .He had probably come to see whether Harry was as good as James had been .Harry had never asked him .There is no shame in what you are feeling Harry said Dumbledore s voice .On the contrary .the fact that you can feel pain like this is your greatest strength .Harry felt the whitehot anger lick his insides blazing in the terrible emptiness filling him with the desire to hurt Dumbledore for his calmness and his empty words .My greatest strength is it ?said Harry his voice shaking as he stared out at the Quidditch stadium no longer seeing it .You havent got a clue .You dont know .What dont I know ?asked Dumbledore calmly .It was too much .Harry turned around shaking with rage .I dont want to talk about how I feel all right ?Harry suffering like this proves you are still a man !This pain is part of being human THEN I DONT WANT TOBE HUMAN !Harry roared and he seized one of the delicate silver instruments from the spindlelegged table beside him and flung it across the room .It shattered into a hundred tiny pieces against the wall .Several of the pictures let out yells of anger and fright and the portrait of Armando Dippet said a Reallyl I DONT CARE !Harry yelled at them snatching up a lunascope and throwing it into the fireplace .IVE HAD ENOUGH IVE SEEN ENOUGH I WANT OUT I WANT IT TO END I DONT CARE ANYMORE He seized the table on which the silver instrument had stood and threw that too .It broke apart on the floor and the legs rolled in different directions .You do care said Dumbledore .He had not flinched or made a single move to stop Harry demolishing his office .His expression was calm almost detached .You care so much you feel as though you will bleed to death with the pain of it .I DONT !Harry screamed so loudly that he felt his throat might tear and for a second he wanted to rush at Dumbledore and break him too shatter that calm old face shake him hurt him make him feel some tiny part of the horror inside Harry .Oh yes you do said Dumbledore still more calmly .You have now lost your mother your father and the closest thing to a parent you have ever known .Of course you care .YOU DONT KNOW HOW I FEEL !Harry roared .YOU STANDING THERE YOU But words were no longer enough smashing things was no more help .He wanted to run he wanted to keep running and never look back he wanted to be somewhere he could not see the clear blue eyes staring at him that hatefully calm old face .He ran to the door seized the doorknob again and wrenched at it .But the door would not open .Harry turned back to Dumbledore .Let me out he said .He was shaking from head to foot .No said Dumbledore simply .For a few seconds they stared at each other .Let me out Harry said again .No Dumbledore repeated .If you dont if you keep me in here if you dont let me By all means continue destroying my possessions said Dumbledore serenely .I daresay I have too many .He walked around his desk and sat down behind it watching Harry .Let me out Harry said yet again in a voice that was cold and almost as calm as Dumbledore s .Not until I have had my say said Dumbledore .Do you do you think I want to do you think I give a I DONT CARE WHAT YOUVE GOT TO SAY !Harry roared .I dont want to hear anything youve got to say !You will said Dumbledore sadly .Because you are not nearly as angry with me as you ought to be .If you are to attack me as I know you are close to doing I would like to have thoroughly earned it .What are you talking ?It is my fault that Sirius died said Dumbledore clearly .Or I should say almost entirely my fault I will not be so arrogant as to claim responsibility for the whole .Sirius was a brave clever and energetic man and such men are not usually content to sit at home in hiding while they believe others to be in danger .Nevertheless you should never have believed for an instant that there was any necessity for you to go to the Department of Mysteries tonight .If I had been open with you Harry as I should have been you would have known a long time ago that Voldemort might try and lure you to the Department of Mysteries and you would never have been tricked into going there tonight .And Sirius would not have had to come after you .That blame lies with me and with me alone .Harry was still standing with his hand on the doorknob but he was unaware of it .He was gazing at Dumbledore hardly breathing listening yet barely understanding what he was hearing .Please sit down said Dumbledore .It was not an order it was a request .Harry hesitated then walked slowly across the room now littered with silver cogs and fragments of wood and took the seat facing Dumbledore s desk .Am I to understand said Phineas Nigellus slowly from Harrys left that my greatgreatgrandson the last of the Blacks is dead ?Yes Phineas said Dumbledore .I dont believe it said Phineas brusquely .Harry turned his head in time to see Phineas marching out of his portrait and knew that he had gone to visit his other painting in Grimmauld Place .He would walk perhaps from portrait to portrait calling for Sirius through the house .Harry I owe you an explanation said Dumbledore .An explanation of an old mans mistakes .For I see now that what I have done and not done with regard to you bears all the hallmarks of the failings of age .Youth cannot know how age thinks and feels .But old men are guilty if they forget what it was to be young .and I seem to have forgotten lately .The sun was rising properly now .There was a rim of dazzling orange visible over the mountains and the sky above it was colorless and bright .The light fell upon Dumbledore upon the silver of his eyebrows and beard upon the lines gouged deeply into his face .I guessed fifteen years ago said Dumbledore when I saw the scar upon your forehead what it might mean .I guessed that it might be the sign of a connection forged between you and Voldemort .Youve told me this before Professor said Harry bluntly .He did not care about being rude .He did not care about anything very much anymore .Yes said Dumbledore apologetically .Yes but you see it is necessary to start with your scar .For it became apparent shortly after you rejoined the magical world that I was correct and that your scar was giving you warnings when Voldemort was close to you or else feeling powerful emotion .I know said Harry wearily .And this ability of yours to detect Voldemorts presence even when he is disguised and to know what he is feeling when his emotions are roused has become more and more pronounced since Voldemort returned to his own body and his full powers .Harry did not bother to nod .He knew all of this already .More recently said Dumbledore I became concerned that Voldemort might realize that this connection between you exists .Sure enough there came a time when you entered so far into his mind and thoughts that he sensed your presence .I am speaking of course of the night when you witnessed the attack on Mr Weasley .Yeah Snape told me Harry muttered .Professor Snape Harry Dumbledore corrected him quietly .But did you not wonder why it was not I who explained this to you ?Why I did not teach you Occlumency ?Why I had not so much as looked at you for months ?Harry looked up .He could see now that Dumbledore looked sad and tired .Yeah Harry mumbled .Yeah I wondered .You see continued Dumbledore heavily .I believed it could not be long before Voldemort attempted to force his way into your mind to manipulate and misdirect your thoughts and I was not eager to give him more incentives to do so .I was sure that if he realized that our relationship was or had ever been closer than that of headmaster and pupil he would seize his chance to use you as a means to spy on me .I feared the uses to which he would put you the possibility that he might try and possess you .Harry I believe I was right to think that Voldemort would have made use of you in such a way .On those rare occasions when we had close contact I thought I saw a shadow of him stir behind your eyes .I was trying in distancing myself from you to protect you .An old mans mistake .Harry remembered the feeling that a dormant snake had risen in him ready to strike on those occasions when he and Dumbledore made eye contact .Voldemorts aim in possessing you as he demonstrated tonight would not have been my destruction .It would have been yours .He hoped when he possessed you briefly a short while ago that I would sacrifice you in the hope of killing him .He sighed deeply .Harry was letting the words wash over him .He would have been so interested to know all this a few months ago and now it was meaningless compared to the gaping chasm inside him that was the loss of Sirius none of it mattered .Sirius told me that you felt Voldemort awake inside you the very night that you had the vision of Arthur Weasleys attack .I knew at once that my worst fears were correct Voldemort from that point had realized he could use you .In an attempt to arm you against Voldemorts assaults on your mind I arranged Occlumency lessons with Professor Snape .He paused .Harry watched the sunlight which was sliding slowly across the polished surface of Dumbledores desk illuminate a silver ink pot and a handsome scarlet quill .Harry could tell that the portraits all around them were awake and listening raptly to Dumbledores explanation .He could hear the occasional rustle of robes the slight clearing of a throat .Phineas Nigellus had still not returned .Professor Snape discovered Dumbledore resumed that you had been dreaming about the door to the Department of Mysteries for months .Voldemort of course had been obsessed with the possibility of hearing the prophecy ever since he regained his body and as he dwelled on the door so did you though you did not know what it meant .And then you saw Rookwood who worked in the Department of Mysteries before his arrest telling Voldemort what we had known all along that the prophecies held in the Ministry of Magic are heavily protected .Only the people to whom they refer can lift them from the shelves without suffering madness .In this case either Voldemort himself would have to enter the Ministry of Magic and risk revealing himself at last or else you would have to take it for him .It became a matter of even greater urgency that you should master Occlumency .But I didnt muttered Harry .He said it aloud to try and ease the dead weight of guilt inside him a confession must surely relieve some of the terrible pressure squeezing his heart .I didnt practice I didnt bother I couldve stopped myself having those dreams Hermione kept telling me to do it if I had hed never have been able to show me where to go and Sirius wouldnt Sirius wouldnt Something was erupting inside Harrys head a need to justify himself to explain I tried to check if hed really taken Sirius I went to Umbridges office I spoke to Kreacher in the fire and he said Sirius wasnt there he said hed gone !Kreacher lied said Dumbledore calmly .You are not his master he could lie to you without even needing to punish himself .Kreacher intended you to go to the Ministry of Magic .He he sent me on purpose ?Oh yes .Kreacher I am afraid has been serving more than one master for months .How ?said Harry blankly .He hasnt been out of Grimmauld Place for years .Kreacher seized his opportunity shortly before Christmas said Dumbledore when Sirius apparently shouted at him to ‘get out .He took Sirius at his word and interpreted this as an order to leave the house .He went to the only Black family member for whom he had any respect left .Blacks cousin Narcissa sister of Bellatrix and wife of Lucius Malfoy .How do you know all this ?Harry said .His heart was beating very fast .He felt sick .He remembered worrying about Kreachers odd absence over Christmas remembered him turning up again in the attic .Kreacher told me last night said Dumbledore .You see when you gave Professor Snape that cryptic warning he realized that you had had a vision of Sirius trapped in the bowels of the Department of Mysteries .He like you attempted to contact Sirius at once .I should explain that members of the Order of the Phoenix have more reliable methods of communicating than the fire in Dolores Umbridges office .Professor Snape found that Sirius was alive and safe in Grimmauld Place .When however you did not return from your trip into the forest with Dolores Umbridge Professor Snape grew worried that you still believed Sirius to be a captive of Lord Voldemorts .He alerted certain Order members at once .Dumbledore heaved a great sigh and then said Alastor Moody Nymphadora Tonks Kingsley Shacklebolt and Remus Lupin were at headquarters when he made contact .All agreed to go to your aid at once .Professor Snape requested that Sirius remain behind as he needed somebody to remain at headquarters to tell me what had happened for I was due there at any moment .In the meantime he Professor Snape intended to search the forest for you .But Sirius did not wish to remain behind while the others went to search for you .He delegated to Kreacher the task of telling me what had happened .And so it was that when I arrived in Grimmauld Place shortly after they had all left for the Ministry it was the elf who told me laughing fit to burst where Sirius had gone .He was laughing ?said Harry in a hollow voice .Oh yes said Dumbledore .You see Kreacher was not able to betray us totally .He is not SecretKeeper for the Order he could not give the Malfoys our whereabouts or tell them any of the Orders confidential plans that he had been forbidden to reveal .He was bound by the enchantments of his kind which is to say that he could not disobey a direct order from his master Sirius .But he gave Narcissa information of the sort that is very valuable to Voldemort yet must have seemed much too trivial for Sirius to think of banning him from repeating it .Like what ?said Harry .Like the fact that the person Sirius cared most about in the world was you said Dumbledore quietly .Like the fact that you were coming to regard Sirius as a mixture of father and brother .Voldemort knew already of course that Sirius was in the Order that you knew where he was but Kreachers information made him realize that the one person whom you would go to any lengths to rescue was Sirius Black .Harrys lips were cold and numb .So .when I asked Kreacher if Sirius was there last night .The Malfoys undoubtedly on Voldemorts instructions had told him he must find a way of keeping Sirius out of the way once you had seen the vision of Sirius being tortured .Then if you decided to check whether Sirius was at home or not Kreacher would be able to pretend he was not .Kreacher injured Buckbeak the hippogriff yesterday and at the moment when you made your appearance in the fire Sirius was upstairs trying to tend to him .There seemed to be very little air in Harrys lungs his breathing was quick and shallow .And Kreacher told you all this .and laughed ?he croaked .He did not wish to tell me said Dumbledore .But I am a sufficiently accomplished Legilimens myself to know when I am being lied to and I persuaded him to tell me the full story before I left for the Department of Mysteries .And whispered Harry his hands curled in cold fists on his knees and Hermione kept telling us to be nice to him She was quite right Harry said Dumbledore .I warned Sirius when we adopted twelve Grimmauld Place as our headquarters that Kreacher must be treated with kindness and respect .I also told him that Kreacher could be dangerous to us .I do not think that Sirius took me very seriously or that he ever saw Kreacher as a being with feelings as acute as a humans Dont you blame dont you talk about Sirius like Harrys breath was constricted he could not get the words out properly .But the rage that had subsided so briefly had flared in him again he would not let Dumbledore criticize Sirius .Kreacher s a lying foul he deserved Kreacher is what he has been made by wizards Harry said Dumbledore .Yes he is to be pitied .His existence has been as miserable as your friend Dobbys .He was forced to do Siriuss bidding because Sirius was the last of the family to which he was enslaved but he felt no true loyalty to him .And whatever Kreachers faults it must be admitted that Sirius did nothing to make Kreachers lot easier DONT TALK ABOUT SIRIUS LIKE THAT !Harry yelled .He was on his feet again furious ready to fly at Dumbledore who had plainly not understood Sirius at all how brave he was how much he had suffered What about Snape ?Harry spat .Youre not talking about him are you ?When I told him Voldemort had Sirius he just sneered at me as usual Harry you know that Professor Snape had no choice but to pretend not to take you seriously in front of Dolores Umbridge said Dumbledore steadily but as I have explained he informed the Order as soon as possible about what you had said .It was he who deduced where you had gone when you did not return from the forest .It was he too who gave Professor Umbridge fake Veritaserum when she was attempting to force you to tell of Siriuss whereabouts .Harry disregarded this he felt a savage pleasure in blaming Snape it seemed to be easing his own sense of dreadful guilt and he wanted to hear Dumbledore agree with him .Snape Snape ggoaded Sirius about staying in the house he made out Sirius was a coward Sirius was much too old and clever to have allowed such feeble taunts to hurt him said Dumbledore .Snape stopped giving me Occlumency lessons !Harry snarled .He threw me out of his office !I am aware of it said Dumbledore heavily .I have already said that it was a mistake for me not to teach you myself though I was sure at the time that nothing could have been more dangerous than to open your mind even further to Voldemort while in my presence Snape made it worse my scar always hurt worse after lessons with him Harry remembered Rons thoughts on the subject and plunged on .How do you know he wasnt trying to soften me up for Voldemort make it easier for him to get inside my I trust Severus Snape said Dumbledore simply .But I forgot another old mans mistake that some wounds run too deep for the healing .I thought Professor Snape could overcome his feelings about your father I was wrong .But thats okay is it ?yelled Harry ignoring the scandalized faces and disapproving mutterings of the portraits covering the walls .Its okay for Snape to hate my dad but its not okay for Sirius to hate Kreacher ?Sirius did not hate Kreacher said Dumbledore .He regarded him as a servant unworthy of much interest or notice .Indifference and neglect often do much more damage than outright dislike .The fountain we destroyed tonight told a lie .We wizards have mistreated and abused our fellows for too long and we are now reaping our reward .SO SIRIUS DESERVED WHAT HE GOT DID HE ?Harry yelled .I did not say that nor will you ever hear me say it Dumbledore replied quietly .Sirius was not a cruel man he was kind to houseelves in general .He had no love for Kreacher because Kreacher was a living reminder of the home Sirius had hated .Yeah he did hate it !said Harry his voice cracking turning his back on Dumbledore and walking away .The sun was bright inside the room now and the eyes of all the portraits followed him as he walked without realizing what he was doing without seeing the office at all .You made him stay shut up in that house and he hated it thats why he wanted to get out last night I was trying to keep Sirius alive said Dumbledore quietly .People dont like being locked up !Harry said furiously rounding on him .You did it to me all last summer Dumbledore closed his eyes and buried his face in his longfingered hands .Harry watched him but this uncharacteristic sign of exhaustion or sadness or whatever it was from Dumbledore did not soften him .On the contrary he felt even angrier that Dumbledore was showing signs of weakness .He had no business being weak when Harry wanted to rage and storm at him .Dumbledore lowered his hands and surveyed Harry through his halfmoon glasses .It is time he said for me to tell you what I should have told you five years ago Harry .Please sit down .I am going to tell you everything .I ask only a little patience .You will have your chance to rage at me to do whatever you like when I have finished .I will not stop you .Harry glared at him for a moment then flung himself back into the chair opposite Dumbledore and waited .Dumbledore stared for a moment at the sunlit grounds outside the window then looked back at Harry and said Five years ago you arrived at Hogwarts Harry safe and whole as I had planned and intended .Well not quite whole .You had suffered .I knew you would when I left you on your aunt and uncles doorstep .I knew I was condemning you to ten dark and difficult years .He paused .Harry said nothing .You might ask and with good reason why it had to be so .Why could some Wizarding family not have taken you in ?Many would have done so more than gladly would have been honored and delighted to raise you as a son .My answer is that my priority was to keep you alive .You were in more danger than perhaps anyone but myself realized .Voldemort had been vanquished hours before but his supporters and many of them are almost as terrible as he were still at large angry desperate and violent .And I had to make my decision too with regard to the years ahead .Did I believe that Voldemort was gone forever ?No .I knew not whether it would be ten twenty or fifty years before he returned but I was sure he would do so and I was sure too knowing him as I have done that he would not rest until he killed you .I knew that Voldemort s knowledge of magic is perhaps more extensive than any wizard alive .I knew that even my most complex and powerful protective spells and charms were unlikely to be invincible if he ever returned to full power .But I knew too where Voldemort was weak .And so I made my decision .You would be protected by an ancient magic of which he knows which he despises and which he has always therefore underestimated to his cost .I am speaking of course of the fact that your mother died to save you .She gave you a lingering protection he never expected a protection that flows in your veins to this day .I put my trust therefore in your mothers blood .I delivered you to her sister her only remaining relative .She doesnt love me said Harry at once .She doesnt give a damn But she took you Dumbledore cut across him .She may have taken you grudgingly furiously unwillingly bitterly yet still she took you and in doing so she sealed the charm I placed upon you .Your mothers sacrifice made the bond of blood the strongest shield I could give you .I still dont While you can still call home the place where your mothers blood dwells there you cannot be touched or harmed by Voldemort .He shed her blood but it lives on in you and her sister .Her blood became your refuge .You need return there only once a year but as long as you can still call it home there he cannot hurt you .Your aunt knows this .I explained what I had done in the letter I left with you on her doorstep .She knows that allowing you houseroom may well have kept you alive for the past fifteen years .Wait said Harry .Wait a moment .He sat up straighter in his chair staring at Dumbledore .You sent that Howler .You told her to remember it was your voice I thought said Dumbledore inclining his head slightly that she might need reminding of the pact she had sealed by taking you .I suspected the dementor attack might have awoken her to the dangers of having you as a surrogate son .It did said Harry quietly .Well my uncle more than her .He wanted to chuck me out but after the Howler came she she said I had to stay .He stared at the floor for a moment then said But whats this got to do with .He could not say Siriuss name .Five years ago then continued Dumbledore as though he had not paused in his story you arrived at Hogwarts neither as happy nor as well nourished as I would have liked perhaps yet alive and healthy .You were not a pampered little prince but as normal a boy as I could have hoped under the circumstances .Thus far my plan was working well .And then .well you will remember the events of your first year at Hogwarts quite as clearly as I do .You rose magnificently to the challenge that faced you and sooner much sooner than I had anticipated you found yourself facetoface with Voldemort .You survived again .You did more .You delayed his return to full power and strength .You fought a mans fight .I was .prouder of you than I can say .Yet there was a flaw in this wonderful plan of mine said Dumbledore .An obvious flaw that I knew even then might be the undoing of it all .And yet knowing how important it was that my plan should succeed I told myself that I would not permit this flaw to min it .I alone could prevent this so I alone must be strong .And here was my first test as you lay in the hospital wing weak from your struggle with Voldemort .I dont understand what youre saying said Harry .Dont you remember asking me as you lay in the hospital wing why Voldemort had tried to kill you when you were a baby ?Harry nodded .Ought I to have told you then ?Harry stared into the blue eyes and said nothing but his heart was racing again .You do not see the flaw in the plan yet ?No .perhaps not .Well as you know I decided not to answer you .Eleven I told myself was much too young to know .I had never intended to tell you when you were eleven .The knowledge would be too much at such a young age .I should have recognized the danger signs then .I should have asked myself why I did not feel more disturbed that you had already asked me the question to which I knew one day I must give a terrible answer .I should have recognized that I was too happy to think that I did not have to do it on that particular day .You were too young much too young .And so we entered your second year at Hogwarts .And once again you met challenges even grown wizards have never faced .Once again you acquitted yourself beyond my wildest dreams .You did not ask me again however why Voldemort had left that mark upon you .We discussed your scar oh yes .We came very very close to the subject .Why did I not tell you everything ?Well it seemed to me that twelve was after all hardly better than eleven to receive such information .I allowed you to leave my presence bloodstained exhausted but exhilarated and if I felt a twinge of unease that I ought perhaps have told you then it was swiftly silenced .You were still so young you see and I could not find it in me to spoil that night of triumph .Do you see Harry ?Do you see the flaw in my brilliant plan now ?I had fallen into the trap I had foreseen that I had told myself I could avoid that I must avoid .I dont I cared about you too much said Dumbledore simply .I cared more for your happiness than your knowing the truth more for your peace of mind than my plan more for your life than the lives that might be lost if the plan failed .In other words I acted exactly as Voldemort expects we fools who love to act .Is there a defense ?I defy anyone who has watched you as I have and I have watched you more closely than you can have imagined not to want to save you more pain than you had already suffered .What did I care if numbers of nameless and faceless people and creatures were slaughtered in the vague future if in the here and now you were alive and well and happy ?I never dreamed that I would have such a person on my hands .We entered your third year .I watched from afar as you struggled to repel dementors as you found Sirius learned what he was and rescued him .Was I to tell you then at the moment when you had triumphantly snatched your godfather from the jaws of the Ministry ?But now at the age of thirteen my excuses were running out .Young you might be but you had proved you were exceptional .My conscience was uneasy Harry .I knew the time must come soon .But you came out of the maze last year having watched Cedric Diggory die having escaped death so narrowly yourself .and I did not tell you though I knew now Voldemort had returned I must do it soon .And now tonight I know you have long been ready for the knowledge I have kept from you for so long because you have proved that I should have placed the burden upon you before this .My only defense is this I have watched you struggling under more burdens than any student who has ever passed through this school and I could not bring myself to add another the greatest one of all .Harry waited but Dumbledore did not speak .I still dont understand .Voldemort tried to kill you when you were a child because of a prophecy made shortly before your birth .He knew the prophecy had been made though he did not know its full contents .He set out to kill you when you were still a baby believing he was fulfilling the terms of the prophecy .He discovered to his cost that he was mistaken when the curse intended to kill you backfired .And so since his return to his body and particularly since your extraordinary escape from him last year he has been determined to hear that prophecy in its entirety .This is the weapon he has been seeking so assiduously since his return the knowledge of how to destroy you .The sun had risen fully now .Dumbledores office was bathed in it .The glass case in which the sword of Godric Gryffindor resided gleamed white and opaque the fragments of the instruments Harry had thrown to the floor glistened like raindrops and behind him the baby Fawkes made soft chirruping noises in his nest of ashes .The prophecys smashed Harry said blankly .I was pulling Neville up those benches in the the room where the archway was and I ripped his robes and it fell .The thing that smashed was merely the record of the prophecy kept by the Department of Mysteries .But the prophecy was made to somebody and that person has the means of recalling it perfectly .Who heard it ?asked Harry though he thought he knew the answer already .I did said Dumbledore .On a cold wet night sixteen years ago in a room above the bar at the Hogs Head Inn .I had gone there to see an applicant for the post of Divination teacher though it was against my inclination to allow the subject of Divination to continue at all .The applicant however was the greatgreatgranddaughter of a very famous very gifted Seer and I thought it common politeness to meet her .I was disappointed .It seemed to me that she had not a trace of the gift herself .I told her courteously I hope that I did not think she would be suitable for the post .I turned to leave .Dumbledore got to his feet and walked past Harry to the black cabinet that stood beside Fawkess perch .He bent down slid back a catch and took from inside it the shallow stone basin carved with runes around the edges in which Harry had seen his father tormenting Snape .Dumbledore walked back to the desk placed the Pensieve upon it and raised his wand to his own temple .From it he withdrew silvery gossamerfine strands of thought clinging to the wand and deposited them in the basin .He sat back down behind his desk and watched his thoughts swirl and drift inside the Pensieve for a moment .Then with a sigh he raised his wand and prodded the silvery substance with its tip .A figure rose out of it draped in shawls her eyes magnified to enormous size behind her glasses and she revolved slowly her feet in the basin .But when Sibyll Trelawney spoke it was not in her usual ethereal mystic voice but in the harsh hoarse tones Harry had heard her use once before .The one with the power to vanquish the Dark Lord approaches .Born to those who have thrice defied him born as the seventh month dies .and the Dark Lord will mark him as his equal but he will have power the Dark Lord knows not .and either must die at the hand of the other for neither can live while the other survives .The one with the power to vanquish the Dark Lord will be born as the seventh month dies .The slowly revolving Professor Trelawney sank back into the silver mass below and vanished .The silence within the office was absolute .Neither Dumbledore nor Harry nor any of the portraits made a sound .Even Fawkes had fallen silent .Professor Dumbledore ?Harry said very quietly for Dumbledore still staring at the Pensieve seemed completely lost in thought .It .did that mean .What did that mean ?It meant said Dumbledore that the person who has the only chance of conquering Lord Voldemort for good was born at the end of July nearly sixteen years ago .This boy would be born to parents who had already defied Voldemort three times .Harry felt as though something was closing in upon him .His breathing seemed difficult again .It means me ?Dumbledore surveyed him for a moment through his glasses .The odd thing is Harry he said softly that it may not have meant you at all .Sibylls prophecy could have applied to two wizard boys both born at the end of July that year both of whom had parents in the Order of the Phoenix both sets of parents having narrowly escaped Voldemort three times .One of course was you .The other was Neville Longbottom .But then .but then why was it my name on the prophecy and not Nevilles ?The official record was relabeled after Voldemort s attack on you as a child said Dumbledore .It seemed plain to the keeper of the Hall of Prophecy that Voldemort could only have tried to kill you because he knew you to be the one to whom Sibyll was referring .Then it might not be me ?said Harry .I am afraid said Dumbledore slowly looking as though every word cost him a great effort that there is no doubt that it is you .But you said Neville was born at the end of July too and his mum and dad You are forgetting the next part of the prophecy the final identifying feature of the boy who could vanquish Voldemort .Voldemort himself would ‘mark him as his equal .And so he did Harry .He chose you not Neville .He gave you the scar that has proved both blessing and curse .But he might have chosen wrong !said Harry .He might have marked the wrong person !He chose the boy he thought most likely to be a danger to him said Dumbledore .And notice this Harry .He chose not the pureblood which according to his creed is the only kind of wizard worth being or knowing but the halfblood like himself .He saw himself in you before he had ever seen you and in marking you with that scar he did not kill you as he intended but gave you powers and a future which have fitted you to escape him not once but four times so far something that neither your parents nor Nevilles parents ever achieved .Why did he do it then ?said Harry who felt numb and cold .Why did he try and kill me as a baby ?He should have waited to see whether Neville or I looked more dangerous when we were older and tried to kill whoever it was then That might indeed have been the more practical course said Dumbledore except that Voldemorts information about the prophecy was incomplete .The Hogs Head Inn which Sibyll chose for its cheapness has long attracted shall we say a more interesting clientele than the Three Broomsticks .As you and your friends found out to your cost and I to mine that night it is a place where it is never safe to assume you are not being overheard .Of course I had not dreamed when I set out to meet Sibyll Trelawney that I would hear anything worth overhearing .My our one stroke of good fortune was that the eavesdropper was detected only a short way into the prophecy and thrown from the building .So he only heard . ?He heard only the first part the part foretelling the birth of a boy in July to parents who had thrice defied Voldemort .Consequently he could not warn his master that to attack you would be to risk transferring power to you again marking you as his equal .So Voldemort never knew that there might be danger in attacking you that it might be wise to wait or to learn more .He did not know that you would have ‘power the Dark Lord knows not But I dont !said Harry in a strangled voice .I havent any powers he hasnt got I couldnt fight the way he did tonight I cant possess people or or kill them There is a room in the Department of Mysteries interrupted Dumbledore that is kept locked at all times .It contains a force that is at once more wonderful and more terrible than death than human intelligence than forces of nature .It is also perhaps the most mysterious of the many subjects for study that reside there .It is the power held within that room that you possess in such quantities and which Voldemort has not at all .That power took you to save Sirius tonight .That power also saved you from possession by Voldemort because he could not bear to reside in a body so full of the force he detests .In the end it mattered not that you could not close your mind .It was your heart that saved you .Harry closed his eyes .If he had not gone to save Sirius Sirius would not have died .More to stave off the moment when he would have to think of Sirius again Harry asked without caring much about the answer The end of the prophecy .it was something about . ‘neither can live . ‘.while the other survives said Dumbledore .So said Harry dredging up the words from what felt like a deep well of despair inside him so does that mean that .that one of us has got to kill the other one .in the end ?Yes said Dumbledore .For a long time neither of them spoke .Somewhere far beyond the office walls Harry could hear the sound of voices students heading down to the Great Hall for an early breakfast perhaps .It seemed impossible that there could be people in the world who still desired food who laughed who neither knew nor cared that Sirius Black was gone forever .Sirius seemed a million miles away already even if a part of Harry still believed that if he had only pulled back that veil he would have found Sirius looking back at him greeting him perhaps with his laugh like a bark .I feel I owe you another explanation Harry said Dumbledore hesitantly .You may perhaps have wondered why I never chose you as a prefect ?I must confess .that I rather thought .you had enough responsibility to be going on with .Harry looked up at him and saw a tear trickling down Dumbledore s face into his long silver beard .THE SECOND WAR BEGINS HEWHOMUSTNOTBENAMED RETURNS In a brief statement Friday night Minister of Magic Cornelius Fudge confirmed that HeWhoMustNotBe Named has returned to this country and is active once more .It is with great regret that I must confirm that the wizard styling himself Lord well you know who I mean is alive and among us again said Fudge looking tired and flustered as he addressed reporters .It is with almost equal regret that we report the mass revolt of the dementors of Azkaban who have shown themselves averse to continuing in the Ministrys employ .We believe that the dementors are currently taking direction from Lord Thingy .We urge the magical population to remain vigilant The Ministry is currently publishing guides to elementary home and personal defense that will be delivered free to all Wizarding homes within the coming month .The Ministers statement was met with dismay and alarm from the Wizarding community which as recently as last Wednesday was receiving Ministry assurances that there was no truth whatsoever in these persistent rumors that YouKnowWho is operating amongst us once more .Details of the events that led to the Ministry turnaround are still hazy though it is believed that HeWhoMustNotBeNamed and a select band of followers known as Death Eaters gained entry to the Ministry of Magic itself on Thursday evening .Albus Dumbledore newly reinstated headmaster of Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry reinstated member of the International Confederation of Wizards and reinstated Chief Warlock of the Wizengamot was unavailable for comment last night .He has insisted for a year that YouKnowWho was not dead as was widely hoped and believed but recruiting followers once more for a fresh attempt to seize power .Meanwhile the Boy Who Lived There you are Harry I knew theyd drag you into it somehow said Hermione looking over the top of the paper at him .They were in the hospital wing .Harry was sitting on the end of Rons bed and they were both listening to Hermione read the front page of the Sunday Prophet .Ginny whose ankle had been mended in a trice by Madam Pomfrey was curled up at the foot of Hermiones bed Neville whose nose had likewise been returned to its normal size and shape was in a chair between the two beds and Luna who had dropped in to visit clutching the latest edition of The Quibbler was reading the magazine upside down and apparently not taking in a word Hermione was saying .Hes ‘the Boy Who Lived again now though isnt he ?said Ron darkly .Not such a showoff maniac anymore eh ?He helped himself to a handful of Chocolate Frogs from the immense pile on his bedside cabinet threw a few to Harry Ginny and Neville and ripped off the wrapper of his own with his teeth .There were still deep welts on his forearms where the brains tentacles had wrapped around him .According to Madam Pomfrey thoughts could leave deeper scarring than almost anything else though since she had started applying copious amounts of Dr .Ubblys Oblivious Unction there seemed to be some improvement .Yes theyre very complimentary about you now Harry said Hermione now scanning down the article . ‘A lone voice of truth .perceived as unbalanced yet never wavered in his story .forced to bear ridicule and slander .Hmmm said Hermione frowning I notice they dont mention the fact that it was them doing all the ridiculing and slandering though .She winced slightly and put a hand to her ribs .The curse Dolohov had used on her though less effective than it would have been had he been able to say the incantation aloud had nevertheless caused in Madam Pomfreys words quite enough damage to be going on with .Hermione was having to take ten different types of potion every day and although she was improving greatly was already bored with the hospital wing . ‘YouKnow Whos Last Attempt to Take Over pages two to four What the Ministry Should Have Told Us page five Why Nobody Listened to Albus Dumbledore pages six to eight Exclusive Interview with Harry Potter page nine .Well said Hermione folding up the newspaper and throwing it aside its certainly given them lots to write about .And that interview with Harry isnt exclusive its the one that was in The Quibbler months ago .Daddy sold it to them said Luna vaguely turning a page of The Quibbler .He got a very good price for it too so were going to go on an expedition to Sweden this summer and see if we can catch a Crumple Horned Snorkack .Hermione seemed to struggle with herself for a moment then said That sounds lovely .Ginny caught Harrys eye and looked away quickly grinning .So anyway said Hermione sitting up a little straighter and wincing again whats going on in school ?Well Flitwicks got rid of Fred and Georges swamp said Ginny .He did it in about three seconds .But he left a tiny patch under the window and hes roped it off Why ?said Hermione looking startled .Oh he just says it was a really good bit of magic said Ginny shrugging .I think he left it as a monument to Fred and George said Ron through a mouthful of chocolate .They sent me all these you know he told Harry pointing at the small mountain of Frogs beside him .Must be doing all right out of that joke shop eh ?Hermione looked rather disapproving and asked So has all the trouble stopped now Dumbledores back ?Yes said Neville everythings settled right back down again .I spose Filch is happy is he ?asked Ron propping a Chocolate Frog card featuring Dumbledore against his water jug .Not at all said Ginny .Hes really really miserable actually .She lowered her voice to a whisper .He keeps saying Umbridge was the best thing that ever happened to Hogwarts .All six of them looked around .Professor Umbridge was lying in a bed opposite them gazing up at the ceiling .Dumbledore had strode alone into the forest to rescue her from the centaurs .How he had done it how he had emerged from the trees supporting Professor Umbridge without so much as a scratch on him nobody knew and Umbridge was certainly not telling .Since she had returned to the castle she had not as far as any of them knew uttered a single word .Nobody really knew what was wrong with her either .Her usually neat mousy hair was very untidy and there were bits of twig and leaf in it but otherwise she seemed to be quite unscathed .Madam Pomfrey says shes just in shock whispered Hermione .Sulking more like said Ginny Yeah she shows signs of life if you do this said Ron and with his tongue he made soft clipclopping noises .Umbridge sat bolt upright looking wildly around .Anything wrong Professor ?called Madam Pomfrey poking her head around her office door .No .no .said Umbridge sinking back into her pillows no I must have been dreaming .Hermione and Ginny muffled their laughter in the bedclothes .Speaking of centaurs said Hermione when she had recovered a little whos Divination teacher now ?Is Firenze staying ?Hes got to said Harry the other centaurs wont take him back will they ?It looks like he and Trelawney are both going to teach said Ginny .Bet Dumbledore wishes he couldve got rid of Trelawney for good said Ron now munching on his fourteenth Frog .Mind you the whole subjects useless if you ask me Firenze isnt a lot better .How can you say that ?Hermione demanded .After weve just found out that there are real prophecies ?Harrys heart began to race .He had not told Ron Hermione or anyone else what the prophecy had contained .Neville had told them it had smashed while Harry was pulling him up the steps in the Death Room and Harry had not yet corrected this impression .He was not ready to see their expressions when he told them that he must be either murderer or victim there was no other way .It is a pity it broke said Hermione quietly shaking her head .Yeah it is said Ron .Still at least YouKnowWho never found out what was in it either where are you going ?he added looking both surprised and disappointed as Harry stood up .Er Hagrids said Harry .You know he just got back and I promised Id go down and see him and tell him how you two are .Oh all right then said Ron grumpily looking out of the dormitory window at the patch of bright blue sky beyond .Wish we could come .Say hello to him for us !called Hermione as Harry proceeded down the ward .And ask him whats happening about .about his little friend !Harry gave a wave of his hand to show he had heard and understood as he left the dormitory .The castle seemed very quiet even for a Sunday .Everybody was clearly out in the sunny grounds enjoying the end of their exams and the prospect of a last few days of term unhampered by studying or homework .Harry walked slowly along the deserted corridor peering out of windows as he went .He could see people messing around in the air over the Quidditch pitch and a couple of students swimming in the lake accompanied by the giant squid .He was finding it hard at the moment to decide whether he wanted to be with people or not .Whenever he was in company he wanted to get away and whenever he was alone he wanted company .He thought he might really go and visit Hagrid though he had not talked to him properly since he had returned .Harry had just descended the last marble step into the entrance hall when Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle emerged from a door on the right that Harry knew led down to the Slytherin common room .Harry stopped dead so did Malfoy and the others .For a few moments the only sounds were the shouts laughter and splashes drifting into the hall from the grounds through the open front doors .Malfoy glanced around .Harry knew he was checking for signs of teachers .Then he looked back at Harry and said in a low voice Youre dead Potter .Harry raised his eyebrows .Funny he said youd think Id have stopped walking around .Malfoy looked angrier than Harry had ever seen him .He felt a kind of detached satisfaction at the sight of his pale pointed face contorted with rage .Youre going to pay said Malfoy in a voice barely louder than a whisper .Im going to make you pay for what youve done to my father .Well Im terrified now said Harry sarcastically .I spose Lord Voldemorts just a warmup act compared to you three whats the matter ?he said for Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle had all looked stricken at the sound of the name .Hes your dads mate isnt he ?Not scared of him are you ?You think youre such a big man Potter said Malfoy advancing now Crabbe and Goyle flanking him .You wait .Ill have you .You cant land my father in prison I thought I just had said Harry .The dementors have left Azkaban said Malfoy quietly .Dad and the othersll be out in no time .Yeah I expect they will said Harry .Still at least everyone knows what scumbags they are now Malfoys hand flew toward his wand but Harry was too quick for him .He had drawn his own wand before Malfoys fingers had even entered the pocket of his robes .Potter !The voice rang across the entrance hall Snape had emerged from the staircase leading down to his office and at the sight of him Harry felt a great rush of hatred beyond anything he felt toward Malfoy .Whatever Dumbledore said he would never forgive Snape .never .What are you doing Potter ?said Snape coldly as ever as he strode over to the four of them .Im trying to decide what curse to use on Malfoy sir said Harry fiercely .Snape stared at him .Put that wand away at once he said curtly .Ten points from Gryff Snape looked toward the giant hourglasses on the walls and gave a sneering smile .Ah .I see there are no longer any points left in the Gryffindor hourglass to take away .In that case Potter we will simply have to Add some more ?Professor McGonagall had just stumped up the stone steps into the castle .She was carrying a tartan carpetbag in one hand and leaning heavily on a walking stick with her other but otherwise looked quite well .Professor McGonagall !said Snape striding forward .Out of St .Mungos I see !Yes Professor Snape said Professor McGonagall shrugging off her traveling cloak Im quite as good as new .You two Crabbe Goyle She beckoned them forward imperiously and they came shuffling their large feet and looking awkward .Here said Professor McGonagall thrusting her carpetbag into Crabbe s chest and her cloak into Goyles take these up to my office for me .They turned and stumped away up the marble staircase .Right then said Professor McGonagall looking up at the hourglasses on the wall well I think Potter and his friends ought to have fifty points apiece for alerting the world to the return of You Know Who !What say you Professor Snape ?What ?snapped Snape though Harry knew he had heard perfectly well .Oh well I suppose .So thats fifty each for Potter the two Weasleys Longbottom and Miss Granger said Professor McGonagall and a shower of rubies fell down into the bottom bulb of Gryffindors hourglass as she spoke .Oh and fifty for Miss Lovegood I suppose she added and a number of sapphires fell into Ravenclaws glass .Now you wanted to take ten from Mr Potter I think Professor Snape so there we are .A few rubies retreated into the upper bulb leaving a respectable amount below nevertheless .Well Potter Malfoy I think you ought to be outside on a glorious day like this Professor McGonagall continued briskly .Harry did not need telling twice .He thrust his wand back inside his robes and headed straight for the front doors without another glance at Snape and Malfoy .The hot sun hit him with a blast as he walked across the lawns toward Hagrids cabin .Students lying around on the grass sunbathing talking reading the Sunday Prophet and eating sweets looked up at him as he passed .Some called out to him or else waved clearly eager to show that they like the Prophet had decided he was something of a hero .Harry said nothing to any of them .He had no idea how much they knew of what had happened three days ago but he had so far avoided being questioned and preferred it that way .He thought at first when he knocked on Hagrids cabin door that he was out but then Fang came charging around the corner and almost bowled him over with the enthusiasm of his welcome .Hagrid it transpired was picking runner beans in his back garden .All righ Harry !he said beaming when Harry approached the fence .Come in come in well have a cup o dandelion juice .Hows things ?Hagrid asked him as they settled down at his wooden table with a glass apiece of iced juice .You er feelin all righ are yeh ?Harry knew from the look of concern on Hagrids face that he was not referring to Harrys physical well being .Im fine Harry said quickly because he could not bear to discuss the thing that he knew was in Hagrids mind .So whereve you been ?Bin hidin out in the mountains said Hagrid .Up in a cave like Sirius did when he Hagrid broke off cleared his throat gruffly looked at Harry and took a long draft of juice .Anyway back now he said feebly .You you look better said Harry who was determined to keep the conversation moving away from Sirius .Wha ?said Hagrid raising a massive hand and feeling his face .Oh oh yeah .Well Grawpys loads better behaved now loads .Seemed right pleased ter see me when I got back ter tell yeh the truth .Hes a good lad really .Ive bin thinkin abou tryin ter find him a lady friend actually .Harry would normally have tried to persuade Hagrid out of this idea at once .The prospect of a second giant taking up residence in the forest possibly even wilder and more brutal than Grawp was positively alarming but somehow Harry could not muster the energy necessary to argue the point .He was starting to wish he was alone again and with the idea of hastening his departure he took several large gulps of his dandelion juice half emptying his glass .Evryone knows youve bin tellin the truth now Harry said Hagrid softly and unexpectedly .Thas gotta be better hasn it ?Harry shrugged .Look .Hagrid leaned toward him across the table I knew Sirius longer n you did .He died in battle an thas the way hedve wanted ter go He didnt want to go at all !said Harry angrily .Hagrid bowed his great shaggy head .Nah I don reckon he did he said quietly .But still Harry .he was never one ter sit around at home an let other people do the fightin .He couldn have lived with himself if he hadn gone ter help Harry leapt up again .Ive got to go and visit Ron and Hermione in the hospital wing he said mechanically .Oh said Hagrid looking rather upset .Oh .all righ then Harry .Take care of yerself then an drop back in if yehve got a mo .Yeah .right .Harry crossed to the door as fast as he could and pulled it open .He was out in the sunshine again before Hagrid had finished saying goodbye and walked away across the lawn .Once again people called out to him as he passed .He closed his eyes for a few moments wishing they would all vanish that he could open his eyes and find himself alone in the grounds .A few days ago before his exams had finished and he had seen the vision Voldemort had planted in his mind he would have given almost anything for the Wizarding world to know that he had been telling the truth for them to believe that Voldemort was back and know that he was neither a liar nor mad .Now however .He walked a short way around the lake sat down on its bank sheltered from the gaze of passersby behind a tangle of shrubs and stared out over the gleaming water thinking .Perhaps the reason he wanted to be alone was because he had felt isolated from everybody since his talk with Dumbledore .An invisible barrier separated him from the rest of the world .He was he had always been a marked man .It was just that he had never really understood what that meant .And yet sitting here on the edge of the lake with the terrible weight of grief dragging at him with the loss of Sirius so raw and fresh inside he could not muster any great sense of fear .It was sunny and the grounds around him were full of laughing people and even though he felt as distant from them as though he belonged to a different race it was still very hard to believe as he sat here that his life must include or end in murder .He sat there for a long time gazing out at the water trying not to think about his godfather or to remember that it was directly across from here on the opposite bank that Sirius had collapsed trying to fend off a hundred dementors .The sun had fallen before he realized that he was cold .He got up and returned to the castle wiping his face on his sleeve as he went .Ron and Hermione left the hospital wing completely cured three days before the end of term .Hermione showed signs of wanting to talk about Sirius but Ron tended to make hushing noises every time she mentioned his name .Harry was not sure whether or not he wanted to talk about his godfather yet his wishes varied with his mood .He knew one thing though Unhappy as he felt at the moment he would greatly miss Hogwarts in a few days time when he was back at number four Privet Drive .Even though he now understood exactly why he had to return there every summer he did not feel any better about it .Indeed he had never dreaded his return more .Professor Umbridge left Hogwarts the day before the end of term .It seemed that she had crept out of the hospital wing during dinnertime evidently hoping to depart undetected but unfortunately for her she met Peeves on the way who seized his last chance to do as Fred had instructed and chased her gleefully from the premises whacking her alternately with a walking stick and a sock full of chalk .Many students ran out into the entrance hall to watch her running away down the path and the Heads of Houses tried only halfheartedly to restrain their pupils .Indeed Professor McGonagall sank back into her chair at the staff table after a few feeble remonstrances and was clearly heard to express a regret that she could not run cheering after Umbridge herself because Peeves had borrowed her walking stick .Their last evening at school arrived most people had finished packing and were already heading down to the endofterm feast but Harry had not even started .Just do it tomorrow !said Ron who was waiting by the door of their dormitory .Come on Im starving .I wont be long .Look you go ahead .But when the dormitory door closed behind Ron Harry made no effort to speed up his packing .The very last thing he wanted to do was to attend the end ofterm feast .He was worried that Dumbledore would make some reference to him in his speech .He was sure to mention Voldemorts return he had talked to them about it last year after all .Harry pulled some crumpled robes out of the very bottom of his trunk to make way for folded ones and as he did so noticed a badly wrapped package lying in a corner of it .He could not think what it was doing there .He bent down pulled it out from underneath his trainers and examined it .He realized what it was within seconds .Sirius had given it to him just inside the front door of twelve Grimmauld Place .Use it if you need me all right ?Harry sank down onto his bed and unwrapped the package .Out fell a small square mirror .It looked old it was certainly dirty .Harry held it up to his face and saw his own reflection looking back at him .He turned the mirror over .There on the reverse side was a scribbled note from Sirius .This is a twoway mirror .Ive got the other .If you need to speak to me just say my name into it youll appear in my mirror and Ill be able to talk in yours .James and I used to use them when we were in separate detentions .And Harrys heart began to race .He remembered seeing his dead parents in the Mirror of Erised four years ago .He was going to be able to talk to Sirius again right now he knew it He looked around to make sure there was nobody else there the dormitory was quite empty .He looked back at the mirror raised it in front of his face with trembling hands and said loudly and clearly Sirius .His breath misted the surface of the glass .He held the mirror even closer excitement flooding through him but the eyes blinking back at him through the fog were definitely his own .He wiped the mirror clear again and said so that every syllable rang clearly through the room Sirius Black !Nothing happened .The frustrated face looking back out of the mirror was still definitely his own .Sirius didnt have his mirror on him when he went through the archway said a small voice in Harrys head .Thats why its not working .Harry remained quite still for a moment then hurled the mirror back into the trunk where it shattered .He had been convinced for a whole shining minute that he was going to see Sirius talk to him again .Disappointment was burning in his throat .He got up and began throwing his things pellmell into the trunk on top of the broken mirror But then an idea struck him .A better idea than a mirror .A much bigger more important idea .How had he never thought of it before why had he never asked ?He was sprinting out of the dormitory and down the spiral staircase hitting the walls as he ran and barely noticing .He hurtled across the empty common room through the portrait hole and off along the corridor ignoring the Fat Lady who called after him The feast is about to start you know youre cutting it very fine !But Harry had no intention of going to the feast .How could it be that the place was full of ghosts whenever you didnt need one yet now .He ran down staircases and along corridors and met nobody either alive or dead .They were all clearly in the Great Hall .Outside his Charms classroom he came to a halt panting and thinking disconsolately that he would have to wait until later until after the end of the feast .But just as he had given up hope he saw it a translucent somebody drifting across the end of the corridor .Hey hey Nick !NICK !The ghost stuck its head back out of the wall revealing the extravagantly plumed hat and dangerously wobbling head of Sir Nicholas de Mimsy Porpington .Good evening he said withdrawing the rest of his body from the solid stone and smiling at Harry .I am not the only one who is late then ?Though he sighed in rather different senses of course .Nick can I ask you something ?A most peculiar expression stole over Nearly Headless Nicks face as he inserted a finger in the stiff ruff at his neck and tugged it a little straighter apparently to give himself thinking time .He desisted only when his partially severed neck seemed about to give way completely .Er now Harry ?said Nick looking discomforted .Cant it wait until after the feast ?No Nick please said Harry I really need to talk to you .Can we go in here ?Harry opened the door of the nearest classroom and Nearly Headless Nick sighed .Oh very well he said looking resigned .I cant pretend I havent been expecting it .Harry was holding the door open for him but he drifted through the wall instead .Expecting what ?Harry asked as he closed the door .You to come and find me said Nick now gliding over to the window and looking out at the darkening grounds .It happens sometimes .when somebody has suffered a .loss .Well said Harry refusing to be deflected .You were right Ive Ive come to find you .Nick said nothing .Its said Harry who was finding this more awkward than he had anticipated its just youre dead .But youre still here arent you ?Nick sighed and continued to gaze out at the grounds .Thats right isnt it ?Harry urged him .You died but Im talking to you .You can walk around Hogwarts and everything cant you ?Yes said Nearly Headless Nick quietly I walk and talk yes .So you came back didnt you ?said Harry urgently .People can come back right ?As ghosts .They dont have to disappear completely .Well ?he added impatiently when Nick continued to say nothing .Nearly Headless Nick hesitated then said Not everyone can come back as a ghost .What dyou mean ?said Harry quickly .Only .only wizards .Oh said Harry and he almost laughed with relief .Well thats okay then the person Im asking about is a wizard .So he can come back right ?Nick turned away from the window and looked mournfully at Harry .He wont come back .Who ?Sirius Black said Nick .But you did !said Harry angrily .You came back youre dead and you didnt disappear Wizards can leave an imprint of themselves upon the earth to walk palely where their living selves once trod said Nick miserably .But very few wizards choose that path .Why not ?said Harry .Anyway it doesnt matter Sirius wont care if its unusual hell come back I know he will !And so strong was his belief that Harry actually turned his head to check the door sure for a split second that he was going to see Sirius pearly white and transparent but beaming walking through it toward him .He will not come back repeated Nick quietly .He will have .gone on .What dyou mean ‘gone on ?said Harry quickly .Gone on where ?Listen what happens when you die anyway ?Where do you go ?Why doesnt everyone come back ?Why isnt this place full of ghosts ?Why ?I cannot answer said Nick .Youre dead arent you ?said Harry exasperatedly .Who can answer better than you ?I was afraid of death said Nick .I chose to remain behind .I sometimes wonder whether I oughtnt to have .Well that is neither here nor there .In fact I am neither here nor there .He gave a small sad chuckle .I know nothing of the secrets of death Harry for I chose my feeble imitation of life instead .I believe learned wizards study the matter in the Department of Mysteries Dont talk to me about that place !said Harry fiercely .I am sorry not to have been more help said Nick gently .Well .well do excuse me .the feast you know .And he left the room leaving Harry there alone gazing blankly at the wall through which Nick had disappeared .Harry felt almost as though he had lost his godfather all over again in losing the hope that he might be able to see or speak to him once more .He walked slowly and miserably back up through the empty castle wondering whether he would ever feel cheerful again .He had turned the corner toward the Fat Ladys corridor when he saw somebody up ahead fastening a note to a board on the wall .A second glance showed him that it was Luna .There were no good hiding places nearby she was bound to have heard his footsteps and in any case Harry could hardly muster the energy to avoid anyone at the moment .Hello said Luna vaguely glancing around at him as she stepped back from the notice .How come youre not at the feast ?Harry asked .Well Ive lost most of my possessions said Luna serenely .People take them and hide them you know .But as its the last night I really do need them back so Ive been putting up signs .She gestured toward the notice board upon which sure enough she had pinned a list of all her missing books and clothes with a plea for their return .An odd feeling rose in Harry an emotion quite different from the anger and grief that had filled him since Siriuss death .It was a few moments before he realized that he was feeling sorry for Luna .How come people hide your stuff ?he asked her frowning .Oh .well .She shrugged .I think they think Im a bit odd you know .Some people call me ‘Loony Lovegood actually .Harry looked at her and the new feeling of pity intensified rather painfully .Thats no reason for them to take your things he said flatly .Dyou want help finding them ?Oh no she said smiling at him .Theyll come back they always do in the end .It was just that I wanted to pack tonight .Anyway .why arent you at the feast ?Harry shrugged .Just didnt feel like it .No said Luna observing him with those oddly misty protuberant eyes .I dont suppose you do .That man the Death Eaters killed was your godfather wasnt he ?Ginny told me .Harry nodded curtly but found that for some reason he did not mind Luna talking about Sirius .He had just remembered that she too could see thestrals .Have you .he began .I mean who .has anyone youve known ever died ?Yes said Luna simply my mother .She was a quite extraordinary witch you know but she did like to experiment and one of her spells went rather badly wrong one day .I was nine .Im sorry Harry mumbled .Yes it was rather horrible said Luna conversationally .I still feel very sad about it sometimes .But Ive still got Dad .And anyway its not as though Ill never see Mum again is it ?Er isnt it ?said Harry uncertainly .She shook her head in disbelief .Oh come on .You heard them just behind the veil didnt you ?You mean .In that room with the archway .They were just lurking out of sight thats all .You heard them .They looked at each other .Luna was smiling slightly .Harry did not know what to say or to think .Luna believed so many extraordinary things .yet he had been sure he had heard voices behind the veil too .Are you sure you dont want me to help you look for your stuff ?he said .Oh no said Luna .No I think Ill just go down and have some pudding and wait for it all to turn up .It always does in the end .Well have a nice holiday Harry .Yeah .yeah you too .She walked away from him and as he watched her go he found that the terrible weight in his stomach seemed to have lessened slightly .The journey home on the Hogwarts Express next day was eventful in several ways .Firstly Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle who had clearly been waiting all week for the opportunity to strike without teacher witnesses attempted to ambush Harry halfway down the train as he made his way back from the toilet .The attack might have succeeded had it not been for the fact that they unwittingly chose to stage the attack right outside a compartment full of D .A .members who saw what was happening through the glass and rose as one to rush to Harrys aid .By the time Ernie Macmillan Hannah Abbott Susan Bones Justin Page llOOHarry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix J .K .FinchFletchley Anthony Goldstein and Terry Boot had finished using a wide variety of the hexes and jinxes Harry had taught them Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle resembled nothing so much as three gigantic slugs squeezed into Hogwarts uniforms as Harry Ernie and Justin hoisted them into the luggage rack and left them there to ooze .I must say Im looking forward to seeing Malfoys mothers face when he gets off the train said Ernie with some satisfaction as he watched Malfoy squirm above him .Ernie had never quite got over the indignity of Malfoy docking points from Hufflepuff during his brief spell as a member of the Inquisitorial Squad .Goyles mumll be really pleased though said Ron who had come to investigate the source of the commotion .Hes loads betterlooking now .Anyway Harry the food trolleys just stopped if you want anything .Harry thanked the others and accompanied Ron back to their compartment where he bought a large pile of Cauldron Cakes and Pumpkin Pasties .Hermione was reading the Daily Prophet again Ginny was doing a quiz in The Quibbler and Neville was stroking his Mimbulus mimbletonia which had grown a great deal over the year and now made odd crooning noises when touched .Harry and Ron whiled away most of the journey playing wizard chess while Hermione read out snippets from the Prophet It was now full of articles about how to repel dementors attempts by the Ministry to track down Death Eaters and hysterical letters claiming that the writer had seen Lord Voldemort walking past their house that very morning .Page llOlHarry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix J .K .It hasnt really started yet sighed Hermione gloomily folding up the newspaper again .But it wont be long now .Hey Harry said Ron nodding toward the glass window onto the corridor .Harry looked around .Cho was passing accompanied by Marietta Edgecombe who was wearing a balaclava .His and Chos eyes met for a moment .Cho blushed and kept walking .Harry looked back down at the chessboard just in time to see one of his pawns chased off its square by Rons knight .Whats er going on with you and her anyway ?Ron asked quietly .Nothing said Harry truthfully .I er heard shes going out with someone else now said Hermione tentatively .Harry was surprised to find that this information did not hurt at all .Wanting to impress Cho seemed to belong to a past that was no longer quite connected with him .So much of what he had wanted before Siriuss death felt that way these days .The week that had elapsed since he had last seen Sirius seemed to have lasted much much longer It stretched across two universes the one with Sirius in it and the one without .Youre well out of it mate said Ron forcefully .I mean shes quite goodlooking and all that but you want someone a bit more cheerful .Shes probably cheerful enough with someone else said Harry shrugging .Whos she with now anyway ?Ron asked Hermione but it was Ginny who answered .Michael Corner she said .Michael but said Ron craning around in his seat to stare at her .But you were going out with him !Not anymore said Ginny resolutely .He didnt like Gryffindor beating Ravenclaw at Quidditch and got really sulky so I ditched him and he ran off to comfort Cho instead .She scratched her nose absently with the end of her quill turned The Quibbler upside down and began marking her answers .Ron looked highly delighted .Well I always thought he was a bit of an idiot he said prodding his queen forward toward Harrys quivering castle .Good for you .Just choose someone better next time .He cast Harry an oddly furtive look as he said it .Well Ive chosen Dean Thomas would you say hes better ?asked Ginny vaguely .WHAT ?shouted Ron upending the chessboard .Crookshanks went plunging after the pieces and Hedwig and Pigwidgeon twittered and hooted angrily from overhead .As the train slowed down in the approach to Kings Cross Harry thought he had never wanted to leave it less .He even wondered fleetingly what would happen if he simply refused to get off but remained stubbornly sitting there until the first of September when it would take him back to Hogwarts .When it finally puffed to a standstill however he lifted down Hedwigs cage and prepared to drag his trunk from the train as usual .When the ticket inspector signaled to him Ron and Hermione that it was safe to walk through the magical barrier between platforms nine and ten however he found a surprise awaiting him on the other side a group of people standing there to greet him whom he had not expected at all .There was MadEye Moody looking quite as sinister with his bowler hat pulled low over his magical eye as he would have done without it his gnarled hands clutching a long staff his body wrapped in a voluminous traveling cloak .Tonks stood just behind him her bright bubblegumpink hair gleaming in the sunlight filtering through the dirty glass station ceiling wearing heavily patched jeans and a bright purple Tshirt bearing the legend THE WEIRD SISTERS .Next to Tonks was Lupin his face pale his hair graying a long and threadbare overcoat covering a shabby jumper and trousers .At the front of the group stood Mr and Mrs Weasley dressed in their Muggle best and Fred and George who were both wearing brandnew jackets in some lurid green scaly material .Ron Ginny !called Mrs Weasley hurrying forward and hugging her children tightly .Oh and Harry dear how are you ?Fine lied Harry as she pulled him into a tight embrace .Over her shoulder he saw Ron goggling at the twins new clothes .What are they supposed to be ?he asked pointing at the jackets .Finest dragon skin little bro said Fred giving his zip a little tweak .Business is booming and we thought wed treat ourselves .Hello Harry said Lupin as Mrs Weasley let go of Harry and turned to greet Hermione .Hi said Harry .I didnt expect .what are you all doing here ?Well said Lupin with a slight smile we thought we might have a little chat with your aunt and uncle before letting them take you home .I dunno if thats a good idea said Harry at once .Oh I think it is growled Moody who had limped a little closer .Thatll be them will it Potter ?He pointed with his thumb over his shoulder his magical eye was evidently peering through the back of his head and his bowler hat .Harry leaned an inch or so to the left to see where MadEye was pointing and there sure enough were the three Dursleys who looked positively appalled to see Harrys reception committee .Ah Harry !said Mr Weasley turning from Hermiones parents whom he had been greeting enthusiastically and who were taking it in turns to hug Hermione .Well shall we do it then ?Yeah I reckon so Arthur said Moody .He and Mr Weasley took the lead across the station toward the place where the Dursleys stood apparently rooted to the floor .Hermione disengaged herself gently from her mother to join the group .Good afternoon said Mr Weasley pleasantly to Uncle Vernon coming to a halt right in front of him .You might remember me my names Arthur Weasley .As Mr Weasley had singlehandedly demolished most of the Dursleys living room two years previously Harry would have been very surprised if Uncle Vernon had forgotten him .Sure enough Uncle Vernon turned a deeper shade of puce and glared at Mr Weasley but chose not to say anything partly perhaps because the Dursleys were outnumbered two to one .Aunt Petunia looked both frightened and embarrassed .She kept glancing around as though terrified somebody she knew would see her in such company .Dudley meanwhile seemed to be trying to look small and insignificant a feat at which he was failing extravagantly .We thought wed just have a few words with you about Harry said Mr Weasley still smiling .Yeah growled Moody .About how hes treated when hes at your place .Uncle Vernons mustache seemed to bristle with indignation .Possibly because the bowler hat gave him the entirely mistaken impression that he was dealing with a kindred spirit he addressed himself to Moody .I am not aware that it is any of your business what goes on in my house I expect what youre not aware of would fill several books Dursley growled Moody .Anyway thats not the point interjected Tonks whose pink hair seemed to offend Aunt Petunia more than all the rest put together for she closed her eyes rather than look at her .The point is if we find out youve been horrible to Harry and make no mistake well hear about it added Lupin pleasantly .Yes said Mr Weasley even if you wont let Harry use the fellytone Telephone whispered Hermione .Yeah if we get any hint that Potters been mistreated in any way youll have us to answer to said Moody .Uncle Vernon swelled ominously .His sense of outrage seemed to outweigh even his fear of this bunch of oddballs .Are you threatening me sir ?he said so loudly that passersby actually turned to stare .Yes I am said MadEye who seemed rather pleased that Uncle Vernon had grasped this fact so quickly .And do I look like the kind of man who can be intimidated ?barked Uncle Vernon .Well .said Moody pushing back his bowler hat to reveal his sinisterly revolving magical eye .Uncle Vernon leapt backward in horror and collided painfully with a luggage trolley .Yes Id have to say you do Dursley .He turned from Uncle Vernon to Harry .So Potter .give us a shout if you need us .If we dont hear from you for three days in a row well send someone along .Aunt Petunia whimpered piteously .It could not have been plainer that she was thinking of what the neighbors would say if they caught sight of these people marching up the garden path .T3ye then Potter said Moody grasping Harrys shoulder for a moment with a gnarled hand .Take care Harry said Lupin quietly .Keep in touch .Harry well have you away from there as soon as we can Mrs Weasley whispered hugging him again .Well see you soon mate said Ron anxiously shaking Harrys hand .Really soon Harry said Hermione earnestly .We promise .Harry nodded .He somehow could not find words to tell them what it meant to him to see them all ranged there on his side .Instead he smiled raised a hand in farewell turned around and led the way out of the station toward the sunlit street with Uncle Vernon Aunt Petunia and Dudley hurrying along in his wake .J THE OTHER MINISTER It was nearing midnight and the Prime Minister was sitting alone in his office reading a long memo that was slipping through his brain without leaving the slightest trace of meaning behind .He was waiting for a call from the President of a far distant country and between wondering when the wretched man would telephone and trying to suppress unpleasant memories of what had been a very long tiring and difficult week there was not much space in his head for anything else .The more he attempted to focus on the print on the page before him the more clearly the Prime Minister could see the gloating face of one of his political opponents .This particular opponent had appeared on the news that very day not only to enumerate all the terrible things that had happened in the last week as though anyone needed reminding but also to explain why each and every one of them was the governments fault .The Prime Ministers pulse quickened at the very thought of these accusations for they were neither fair nor true .How on earth was his government supposed to have stopped that bridge collapsing ?It was outrageous for anybody to suggest that they were not spending enough on bridges .The bridge was fewer than ten years old and the best experts were at a loss to explain why it had snapped cleanly in two sending a dozen cars into the watery depths of the river below .And how dare anyone suggest that it was lack of policemen that had resulted in those two very nasty and wellpublicized murders ?Or that the government should have somehow foreseen the freak hurricane in the West Country that had caused so much damage to both people and property ?And was it his fault that one of his Junior Ministers Herbert Chorley had chosen this week to act so peculiarly that he was now going to be spending a lot more time with his family ?A grim mood has gripped the country the opponent had concluded barely concealing his own broad grin .And unfortunately this was perfectly true .The Prime Minister felt it himself people really did seem more miserable than usual .Even the weather was dismal all this chilly mist in the middle of July .It wasnt right it wasnt normal .He turned over the second page of the memo saw how much longer it went on and gave it up as a bad job .Stretching his arms above his head he looked around his office mournfully .It was a handsome room with a fine marble fireplace facing the long sash windows firmly closed against the unseasonable chill .With a slight shiver the Prime Minister got up and moved over to the window looking out at the thin mist that was pressing itself against the glass .It was then as he stood with his back to the room that he heard a soft cough behind him .He froze nose to nose with his own scaredlooking reflection in the dark glass .He knew that cough .He had heard it before .He turned very slowly to face the empty room .Hello ?he said trying to sound braver than he felt .For a brief moment he allowed himself the impossible hope that nobody would answer him .However a voice responded at once a crisp decisive voice that sounded as though it were reading a prepared statement .It was coming as the Prime Minister had known at the first cough from the froglike little man wearing a long silver wig who was depicted in a small dirty oil painting in the far corner of the room .To the Prime Minister of Muggles .Urgent we meet .Kindly respond immediately .Sincerely Fudge .The man in the painting looked inquiringly at the Prime Minister .Er said the Prime Minister listen .Its not a very good time for me .Im waiting for a telephone call you see .from the President of That can be rearranged said the portrait at once .The Prime Ministers heart sank .He had been afraid of that .But I really was rather hoping to speak We shall arrange for the President to forget to call .He will telephone tomorrow night instead said the little man .Kindly respond immediately to Mr Fudge .I .oh .very well said the Prime Minister weakly .Yes Ill see Fudge .He hurried back to his desk straightening his tie as he went .He had barely resumed his seat and arranged his face into what he hoped was a relaxed and unfazed expression when bright green flames burst into life in the empty grate beneath his marble mantelpiece .He watched trying not to betray a flicker of surprise or alarm as a portly man appeared within the flames spinning as fast as a top .Seconds later he had climbed out onto a rather fine antique rug brushing ash from the sleeves of his long pinstriped cloak a limegreen bowler hat in his hand .Ah .Prime Minister said Cornelius Fudge striding forward with his hand outstretched .Good to see you again .The Prime Minister could not honestly return this compliment so said nothing at all .He was not remotely pleased to see Fudge whose occasional appearances apart from being downright alarming in themselves generally meant that he was about to hear some very bad news .Furthermore Fudge was looking distinctly careworn .He was thinner balder and grayer and his face had a crumpled look .The Prime Minister had seen that kind of look in politicians before and it never boded well .How can I help you ?he said shaking Fudges hand very briefly and gesturing toward the hardest of the chairs in front of the desk .Difficult to know where to begin muttered Fudge pulling up the chair sitting down and placing his green bowler upon his knees .What a week what a week .Had a bad one too have you ?asked the Prime Minister stiffly hoping to convey by this that he had quite enough on his plate already without any extra helpings from Fudge .Yes of course said Fudge rubbing his eyes wearily and looking morosely at the Prime Minister .Ive been having the same week you have Prime Minister .The Brockdale Bridge .the Bones and Vance murders .not to mention the ruckus in the West Country .You er your I mean to say some of your people were were involved in those those things were they ?Fudge fixed the Prime Minister with a rather stern look .Of course they were he said .Surely youve realized whats going on ?I .hesitated the Prime Minister .It was precisely this sort of behavior that made him dislike Fudges visits so much .He was after all the Prime Minister and did not appreciate being made to feel like an ignorant schoolboy .But of course it had been like this from his very first meeting with Fudge on his very first evening as Prime Minister .He remembered it as though it were yesterday and knew it would haunt him until his dying day .He had been standing alone in this very office savoring the triumph that was his after so many years of dreaming and scheming when he had heard a cough behind him just like tonight and turned to find that ugly little portrait talking to him announcing that the Minister of Magic was about to arrive and introduce himself .Naturally he had thought that the long campaign and the strain of the election had caused him to go mad .He had been utterly terrified to find a portrait talking to him though this had been nothing to how he felt when a selfproclaimed wizard had bounced out of the fireplace and shaken his hand .He had remained speechless throughout Fudges kindly explanation that there were witches and wizards still living in secret all over the world and his reassurances that he was not to bother his head about them as the Ministry of Magic took responsibility for the whole Wizarding community and prevented the nonmagical population from getting wind of them .It was said Fudge a difficult job that encompassed everything from regulations on responsible use of broomsticks to keeping the dragon population under control the Prime Minister remembered clutching the desk for support at this point .Fudge had then patted the shoulder of the stilldumbstruck Prime Minister in a fatherly sort of way .Not to worry he had said its oddson youll never see me again .Ill only bother you if theres something really serious going on our end something thats likely to affect the Muggles the nonmagical population I should say .Otherwise its live and let live .And I must say youre taking it a lot better than your predecessor .He tried to throw me out the window thought I was a hoax planned by the opposition .At this the Prime Minister had found his voice at last .Youre youre not a hoax then ?It had been his last desperate hope .No said Fudge gently .No Im afraid Im not .Look .And he had turned the Prime Ministers teacup into a gerbil .But said the Prime Minister breathlessly watching his teacup chewing on the corner of his next speech but why why has nobody told me ?The Minister of Magic only reveals him or herself to the Muggle Prime Minister of the day said Fudge poking his wand back inside his jacket .We find it the best way to maintain secrecy .But then bleated the Prime Minister why hasnt a former Prime Minister warned me ?At this Fudge had actually laughed .My dear Prime Minister are you ever going to tell anybody ?Still chortling Fudge had thrown some powder into the fireplace stepped into the emerald flames and vanished with a whooshing sound .The Prime Minister had stood there quite motionless and realized that he would never as long as he lived dare mention this encounter to a living soul for who in the wide world would believe him ?The shock had taken a little while to wear off .For a time he had tried to convince himself that Fudge had indeed been a hallucination brought on by lack of sleep during his grueling election campaign .In a vain attempt to rid himself of all reminders of this uncomfortable encounter he had given the gerbil to his delighted niece and instructed his private secretary to take down the portrait of the ugly little man who had announced Fudges arrival .To the Prime Ministers dismay however the portrait had proved impossible to remove .When several carpenters a builder or two an art historian and the Chancellor of the Exchequer had all tried unsuccessfully to prise it from the wall the Prime Minister had abandoned the attempt and simply resolved to hope that the thing remained motionless and silent for the rest of his term in office .Occasionally he could have sworn he saw out of the corner of his eye the occupant of the painting yawning or else scratching his nose even once or twice simply walking out of his frame and leaving nothing but a stretch of muddybrown canvas behind .However he had trained himself not to look at the picture very much and always to tell himself firmly that his eyes were playing tricks on him when anything like this happened .Then three years ago on a night very like tonight the Prime Minister had been alone in his office when the portrait had once again announced the imminent arrival of Fudge who had burst out of the fireplace sopping wet and in a state of considerable panic .Before the Prime Minister could ask why he was dripping all over the Axminster Fudge had started ranting about a prison the Prime Minister had never heard of a man named Serious Black something that sounded like Hogwarts and a boy called Harry Potter none of which made the remotest sense to the Prime Minister . .Fve just come from Azkaban Fudge had panted tipping a large amount of water out of the rim of his bowler hat into his pocket .Middle of the North Sea you know nasty flight .the dementors are in uproar he shuddered theyve never had a breakout before .Anyway I had to come to you Prime Minister .Blacks a known Muggle killer and may be planning to rejoin YouKnowWho .But of course you dont even know who YouKnowWho is !He had gazed hopelessly at the Prime Minister for a moment then said Well sit down sit down Id better fill you in .Have a whiskey .The Prime Minister rather resented being told to sit down in his own office let alone offered his own whiskey but he sat nevertheless .Fudge pulled out his wand conjured two large glasses full of amber liquid out of thin air pushed one of them into the Prime Ministers hand and drew up a chair .Fudge had talked for more than an hour .At one point he had refused to say a certain name aloud and wrote it instead on a piece of parchment which he had thrust into the Prime Ministers whiskeyfree hand .When at last Fudge had stood up to leave the Prime Minister had stood up too .So you think that .He had squinted down at the name in his left hand .Lord Vol HeWhoMustNotBeNamed snarled Fudge .Im sorry .You think that HeWhoMustNotBe Named is still alive then ?Well Dumbledore says he is said Fudge as he had fastened his pinstriped cloak under his chin but weve never found him .If you ask me hes not dangerous unless hes got support so its Black we ought to be worrying about .Youll put out that warning then ?Excellent .Well I hope we dont see each other again Prime Minister !Good night .But they had seen each other again .Less than a year later a harassedlooking Fudge had appeared out of thin air in the cabinet room to inform the Prime Minister that there had been a spot of bother at the Kwidditch or that was what it had sounded like World Cup and that several Muggles had been involved but that the Prime Minister was not to worry the fact that YouKnow Whos Mark had been seen again meant nothing Fudge was sure it was an isolated incident and the Muggle Liaison Office was dealing with all memory modifications as they spoke .Oh and I almost forgot Fudge had added .Were importing three foreign dragons and a sphinx for the Triwizard Tournament quite routine but the Department for the Regulation and Control of Magical Creatures tells me that its down in the rule book that we have to notify you if were bringing highly dangerous creatures into the country .I what dragons ?spluttered the Prime Minister .Yes three said Fudge .And a sphinx .Well good day to you .The Prime Minister had hoped beyond hope that dragons and sphinxes would be the worst of it but no .Less than two years later Fudge had erupted out of the fire yet again this time with the news that there had been a mass breakout from Azkaban .A mass breakout ?repeated the Prime Minister hoarsely .No need to worry no need to worry !shouted Fudge already with one foot in the flames .Well have them rounded up in no time just thought you ought to know !And before the Prime Minister could shout Now wait just one moment !Fudge had vanished in a shower of green sparks .Whatever the press and the opposition might say the Prime Minister was not a foolish man .It had not escaped his notice that despite Fudges assurances at their first meeting they were now seeing rather a lot of each other nor that Fudge was becoming more flustered with each visit .Little though he liked to think about the Minister of Magic or as he always called Fudge in his head the Other Minister the Prime Minister could not help but fear that the next time Fudge appeared it would be with graver news still .The sight therefore of Fudge stepping out of the fire once more looking disheveled and fretful and sternly surprised that the Prime Minister did not know exactly why he was there was about the worst thing that had happened in the course of this extremely gloomy week .How should I know whats going on in the er Wizarding community ?snapped the Prime Minister now .I have a country to run and quite enough concerns at the moment without We have the same concerns Fudge interrupted .The Brockdale Bridge didnt wear out .That wasnt really a hurricane .Those murders were not the work of Muggles .And Herbert Chorleys family would be safer without him .We are currently making arrangements to have him transferred to St .Mungos Hospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries .The move should be effected tonight .What do you .Im afraid I .What ?blustered the Prime Minister .Fudge took a great deep breath and said Prime Minister I am very sorry to have to tell you that hes back .HeWhoMustNotBeNamed is back .Back ?When you say ‘back .hes alive ?I mean The Prime Minister groped in his memory for the details of that horrible conversation of three years previously when Fudge had told him about the wizard who was feared above all others the wizard who had committed a thousand terrible crimes before his mysterious disappearance fifteen years earlier .Yes alive said Fudge .That is I dont know is a man alive if he cant be killed ?I dont really understand it and Dumbledore wont explain properly but anyway hes certainly got a body and is walking and talking and killing so I suppose for the purposes of our discussion yes hes alive .The Prime Minister did not know what to say to this but a persistent habit of wishing to appear well informed on any subject that came up made him cast around for any details he could remember of their previous conversations .Is Serious Black with er HeWhoMustNotBe Named ?Black ?Black ?said Fudge distractedly turning his bowler rapidly in his fingers .Sirius Black you mean ?Merlins beard no .Blacks dead .Turns out we were er mistaken about Black .He was innocent after all .And he wasnt in league with HeWhoMust NotBeNamed either .I mean he added defensively spinning the bowler hat still faster all the evidence pointed we had more than fifty eyewitnesses but anyway as I say hes dead .Murdered as a matter of fact .On Ministry of Magic premises .Theres going to be an inquiry actually .To his great surprise the Prime Minister felt a fleeting stab of pity for Fudge at this point .It was however eclipsed almost immediately by a glow of smugness at the thought that deficient though he himself might be in the area of materializing out of fireplaces there had never been a murder in any of the government departments under his charge .Not yet anyway .While the Prime Minister surreptitiously touched the wood of his desk Fudge continued But Blacks by theby now .The point is were at war Prime Minister and steps must be taken .At war ?repeated the Prime Minister nervously .Surely thats a little bit of an overstatement ?HeWhoMustNotBeNamed has now been joined by those of his followers who broke out of Azkaban in January said Fudge speaking more and more rapidly and twirling his bowler so fast that it was a limegreen blur .Since they have moved into the open they have been wreaking havoc .The Brockdale Bridge he did it Prime Minister he threatened a mass Muggle killing unless I stood aside for him and Good grief so its your fault those people were killed and Im having to answer questions about rusted rigging and corroded expansion joints and I dont know what else !said the Prime Minister furiously .My fault !said Fudge coloring up .Are you saying you would have caved in to blackmail like that ?Maybe not said the Prime Minister standing up and striding about the room but I would have put all my efforts into catching the blackmailer before he committed any such atrocity !Do you really think I wasnt already making every effort ?demanded Fudge heatedly .Every Auror in the Ministry was and is trying to find him and round up his followers but we happen to be talking about one of the most powerful wizards of all time a wizard who has eluded capture for almost three decades !So I suppose youre going to tell me he caused the hurricane in the West Country too ?said the Prime Minister his temper rising with every pace he took .It was infuriating to discover the reason for all these terrible disasters and not to be able to tell the public almost worse than it being the governments fault after all .That was no hurricane said Fudge miserably .Excuse me !barked the Prime Minister now positively stamping up and down .Trees uprooted roofs ripped off lampposts bent horrible injuries It was the Death Eaters said Fudge .HeWhoMust NotBeNameds followers .And .and we suspect giant involvement .The Prime Minister stopped in his tracks as though he had hit an invisible wall .What involvement ?Fudge grimaced .He used giants last time when he wanted to go for the grand effect he said .The Office of Misinformation has been working around the clock weve had teams of Obliviators out trying to modify the memories of all the Muggles who saw what really happened weve got most of the Department for the Regulation and Control of Magical Creatures running around Somerset but we cant find the giant its been a disaster .You dont say !said the Prime Minister furiously .I wont deny that morale is pretty low at the Ministry said Fudge .What with all that and then losing Amelia Bones .Losing who ?Amelia Bones .Head of the Department of Magical Law Enforcement .We think HeWhoMustNotBe Named may have murdered her in person because she was a very gifted witch and and all the evidence was that she put up a real fight .Fudge cleared his throat and with an effort it seemed stopped spinning his bowler hat .But that murder was in the newspapers said the Prime Minister momentarily diverted from his anger .Our newspapers .Amelia Bones .it just said she was a middleaged woman who lived alone .It was a a nasty killing wasnt it ?Its had rather a lot of publicity .The police are baffled you see .Fudge sighed .Well of course they are he said .Killed in a room that was locked from the inside wasnt she ?We on the other hand know exactly who did it not that that gets us any further toward catching him .And then there was Emmeline Vance maybe you didnt hear about that one Oh yes I did !said the Prime Minister .It happened just around the corner from here as a matter of fact .The papers had a field day with it ‘breakdown of law and order in the Prime Ministers backyard And as if all that wasnt enough said Fudge barely listening to the Prime Minister weve got dementors swarming all over the place attacking people left right and center .Once upon a happier time this sentence would have been unintelligible to the Prime Minister but he was wiser now .I thought dementors guard the prisoners in Azkaban he said cautiously .They did said Fudge wearily .But not anymore .Theyve deserted the prison and joined HeWhoMust NotBeNamed .I wont pretend that wasnt a blow .But said the Prime Minister with a sense of dawning horror didnt you tell me theyre the creatures that drain hope and happiness out of people ?Thats right .And theyre breeding .Thats whats causing all this mist .The Prime Minister sank weakkneed into the nearest chair .The idea of invisible creatures swooping through the towns and countryside spreading despair and hopelessness in his voters made him feel quite faint .Now see here Fudge youve got to do something !Its your responsibility as Minister of Magic !My dear Prime Minister you cant honestly think Im still Minister of Magic after all this ?I was sacked three days ago !The whole Wizarding community has been screaming for my resignation for a fortnight .Ive never known them so united in my whole term of office !said Fudge with a brave attempt at a smile .The Prime Minister was momentarily lost for words .Despite his indignation at the position into which he had been placed he still rather felt for the shrunken looking man sitting opposite him .Im very sorry he said finally .If theres anything I can do ?Its very kind of you Prime Minister but there is nothing .I was sent here tonight to bring you up to date on recent events and to introduce you to my successor .I rather thought hed be here by now but of course hes very busy at the moment with so much going on .Fudge looked around at the portrait of the ugly little man wearing the long curly silver wig who was digging in his ear with the point of a quill .Catching Fudges eye the portrait said Hell be here in a moment hes just finishing a letter to Dumbledore .I wish him luck said Fudge sounding bitter for the first time .Ive been writing to Dumbledore twice a day for the past fortnight but he wont budge .If hed just been prepared to persuade the boy I might still be .Well maybe Scrimgeour will have more success .Fudge subsided into what was clearly an aggrieved silence but it was broken almost immediately by the portrait which suddenly spoke in its crisp official voice .To the Prime Minister of Muggles .Requesting a meeting .Urgent .Kindly respond immediately .Rufus Scrimgeour Minister of Magic .Yes yes fine said the Prime Minister distractedly and he barely flinched as the flames in the grate turned emerald green again rose up and revealed a second spinning wizard in their heart disgorging him moments later onto the antique rug .Fudge got to his feet and after a moments hesitation the Prime Minister did the same watching the new arrival straighten up dust down his long black robes and look around .The Prime Ministers first foolish thought was that Rufus Scrimgeour looked rather like an old lion .There were streaks of gray in his mane of tawny hair and his bushy eyebrows he had keen yellowish eyes behind a pair of wirerimmed spectacles and a certain rangy loping grace even though he walked with a slight limp .There was an immediate impression of shrewdness and toughness the Prime Minister thought he understood why the Wizarding community preferred Scrimgeour to Fudge as a leader in these dangerous times .How do you do ?said the Prime Minister politely holding out his hand .Scrimgeour grasped it briefly his eyes scanning the room then pulled out a wand from under his robes .Fudge told you everything ?he asked striding over to the door and tapping the keyhole with his wand .The Prime Minister heard the lock click .Er yes said the Prime Minister .And if you dont mind Id rather that door remained unlocked .Id rather not be interrupted said Scrimgeour shortly or watched he added pointing his wand at the windows so that the curtains swept across them .Right well Im a busy man so lets get down to business .First of all we need to discuss your security .The Prime Minister drew himself up to his fullest height and replied I am perfectly happy with the security Ive already got thank you very Well were not Scrimgeour cut in .Itll be a poor lookout for the Muggles if their Prime Minister gets put under the Imperius Curse .The new secretary in your outer office ‘Tm not getting rid of Kingsley Shacklebolt if thats what youre suggesting !said the Prime Minister hotly .Hes highly efficient gets through twice the work the rest of them Thats because hes a wizard said Scrimgeour without a flicker of a smile .A highly trained Auror who has been assigned to you for your protection .Now wait a moment !declared the Prime Minister .You cant just put your people into my office I decide who works for me I thought you were happy with Shacklebolt ?said Scrimgeour coldly .I am thats to say I was Then theres no problem is there ?said Scrimgeour .I .well as long as Shacklebolts work continues to be .er .excellent said the Prime Minister lamely but Scrimgeour barely seemed to hear him .Now about Herbert Chorley your Junior Minister he continued .The one who has been entertaining the public by impersonating a duck .What about him ?asked the Prime Minister .He has clearly reacted to a poorly performed Imperius Curse said Scrimgeour .Its addled his brains but he could still be dangerous .Hes only quacking !said the Prime Minister weakly .Surely a bit of a rest .Maybe go easy on the drink A team of Healers from St .Mungos Hospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries are examining him as we speak .So far he has attempted to strangle three of them said Scrimgeour .I think it best that we remove him from Muggle society for a while .I .well .Hell be all right wont he ?said the Prime Minister anxiously .Scrimgeour merely shrugged already moving back toward the fireplace .Well thats really all I had to say .I will keep you posted of developments Prime Minister or at least I shall probably be too busy to come personally in which case I shall send Fudge here .He has consented to stay on in an advisory capacity .Fudge attempted to smile but was unsuccessful he merely looked as though he had a toothache .Scrimgeour was already rummaging in his pocket for the mysterious powder that turned the fire green .The Prime Minister gazed hopelessly at the pair of them for a moment then the words he had fought to suppress all evening burst from him at last .But for heavens sake youre wizards .You can do magic !Surely you can sort out well anything !Scrimgeour turned slowly on the spot and exchanged an incredulous look with Fudge who really did manage a smile this time as he said kindly The trouble is the other side can do magic too Prime Minister .And with that the two wizards stepped one after the other into the bright green fire and vanished .SPINNERS END Many miles away the chilly mist that had pressed against the Prime Ministers windows drifted over a dirty river that wound between overgrown rubbish strewn banks .An immense chimney relic of a disused mill reared up shadowy and ominous .There was no sound apart from the whisper of the black water and no sign of life apart from a scrawny fox that had slunk down the bank to nose hopefully at some old fishandchip wrappings in the tall grass .But then with a very faint pop a slim hooded figure appeared out of thin air on the edge of the river .The fox froze wary eyes fixed upon this strange new phenomenon .The figure seemed to take its bearings for a few moments then set off with light quick strides its long cloak rustling over the grass .With a second and louder pop another hooded figure materialized .Wait !The harsh cry startled the fox now crouching almost flat in the undergrowth .It leapt from its hiding place and up the bank .There was a flash of green light a yelp and the fox fell back to the ground dead .The second figure turned over the animal with its toe .Just a fox said a womans voice dismissively from under the hood .I thought perhaps an Auror Cissy wait !But her quarry who had paused and looked back at the flash of light was already scrambling up the bank the fox had just fallen down .Cissy Narcissa listen to me The second woman caught the first and seized her arm but the other wrenched it away .Go back Bella !You must listen to me !Ive listened already .Ive made my decision .Leave me alone !The woman named Narcissa gained the top of the bank where a line of old railings separated the river from a narrow cobbled street .The other woman Bella followed at once .Side by side they stood looking across the road at the rows and rows of dilapidated brick houses their windows dull and blind in the darkness .He lives here ?asked Bella in a voice of contempt .Here ?In this Muggle dunghill ?We must be the first of our kind ever to set foot But Narcissa was not listening she had slipped through a gap in the rusty railings and was already hurrying across the road .Cissy wait Bella followed her cloak streaming behind and saw Narcissa darting through an alley between the houses into a second almost identical street .Some of the streetlamps were broken the two women were running between patches of light and deep darkness .The pursuer caught up with her prey just as she turned another corner this time succeeding in catching hold of her arm and swinging her around so that they faced each other .Cissy you must not do this you cant trust him The Dark Lord trusts him doesnt he ?The Dark Lord is .I believe .mistaken Bella panted and her eyes gleamed momentarily under her hood as she looked around to check that they were indeed alone .In any case we were told not to speak of the plan to anyone .This is a betrayal of the Dark Lords Let go Bella !snarled Narcissa and she drew a wand from beneath her cloak holding it threateningly in the others face .Bella merely laughed .Cissy your own sister ?You wouldnt There is nothing I wouldnt do anymore !Narcissa breathed a note of hysteria in her voice and as she brought down the wand like a knife there was another flash of light .Bella let go of her sisters arm as though burned .Narcisscd But Narcissa had rushed ahead .Rubbing her hand her pursuer followed again keeping her distance now as they moved deeper into the deserted labyrinth of brick houses .At last Narcissa hurried up a street named Spinners End over which the towering mill chimney seemed to hover like a giant admonitory finger .Her footsteps echoed on the cobbles as she passed boarded and broken windows until she reached the very last house where a dim light glimmered through the curtains in a downstairs room .She had knocked on the door before Bella cursing under her breath had caught up .Together they stood waiting panting slightly breathing in the smell of the dirty river that was carried to them on the night breeze .After a few seconds they heard movement behind the door and it opened a crack .A sliver of a man could be seen looking out at them a man with long black hair parted in curtains around a sallow face and black eyes .Narcissa threw back her hood .She was so pale that she seemed to shine in the darkness the long blonde hair streaming down her back gave her the look of a drowned person .Narcissa !said the man opening the door a little wider so that the light fell upon her and her sister too .What a pleasant surprise !Severus she said in a strained whisper .May I speak to you ?Its urgent .But of course .He stood back to allow her to pass him into the house .Her stillhooded sister followed without invitation .Snape she said curtly as she passed him .Bellatrix he replied his thin mouth curling into a slightly mocking smile as he closed the door with a snap behind them .They had stepped directly into a tiny sitting room which had the feeling of a dark padded cell .The walls were completely covered in books most of them bound in old black or brown leather a threadbare sofa an old armchair and a rickety table stood grouped together in a pool of dim light cast by a candlefilled lamp hung from the ceiling .The place had an air of neglect as though it was not usually inhabited .Snape gestured Narcissa to the sofa .She threw off her cloak cast it aside and sat down staring at her white and trembling hands clasped in her lap .Bellatrix lowered her hood more slowly .Dark as her sister was fair with heavily lidded eyes and a strong jaw she did not take her gaze from Snape as she moved to stand behind Narcissa .So what can I do for you ?Snape asked settling himself in the armchair opposite the two sisters .We .we are alone arent we ?Narcissa asked quietly .Yes of course .Well Wormtails here but were not counting vermin are we ?He pointed his wand at the wall of books behind him and with a bang a hidden door flew open revealing a narrow staircase upon which a small man stood frozen .As you have clearly realized Wormtail we have guests said Snape lazily .The man crept hunchbacked down the last few steps and moved into the room .He had small watery eyes a pointed nose and wore an unpleasant simper .His left hand was caressing his right which looked as though it was encased in a bright silver glove .Narcissa !he said in a squeaky voice .And Bellatrix !How charming Wormtail will get us drinks if youd like them said Snape .And then he will return to his bedroom .Wormtail winced as though Snape had thrown something at him .I am not your servant !he squeaked avoiding Snape s eye .Really ?I was under the impression that the Dark Lord placed you here to assist me .To assist yes but not to make you drinks and and clean your house !I had no idea Wormtail that you were craving more dangerous assignments said Snape silkily .This can be easily arranged I shall speak to the Dark Lord I can speak to him myself if I want to !Of course you can said Snape sneering .But in the meantime bring us drinks .Some of the elfmade wine will do .Wormtail hesitated for a moment looking as though he might argue but then turned and headed through a second hidden door .They heard banging and a clinking of glasses .Within seconds he was back bearing a dusty bottle and three glasses upon a tray .He dropped these on the rickety table and scurried from their presence slamming the bookcovered door behind him .Snape poured out three glasses of bloodred wine and handed two of them to the sisters .Narcissa murmured a word of thanks whilst Bellatrix said nothing but continued to glower at Snape .This did not seem to discompose him on the contrary he looked rather amused .The Dark Lord he said raising his glass and draining it .The sisters copied him .Snape refilled their glasses .As Narcissa took her second drink she said in a rush Severus Im sorry to come here like this but I had to see you .I think you are the only one who can help me Snape held up a hand to stop her then pointed his wand again at the concealed staircase door .There was a loud bang and a squeal followed by the sound of Wormtail scurrying back up the stairs .My apologies said Snape .He has lately taken to listening at doors I dont know what he means by it . .You were saying Narcissa ?She took a great shuddering breath and started again .Severus I know I ought not to be here I have been told to say nothing to anyone but Then you ought to hold your tongue !snarled Bellatrix .Particularly in present company ! ‘Present company ?repeated Snape sardonically .And what am I to understand by that Bellatrix ?That I dont trust you Snape as you very well know !Narcissa let out a noise that might have been a dry sob and covered her face with her hands .Snape set his glass down upon the table and sat back again his hands upon the arms of his chair smiling into Bellatrixs glowering face .Narcissa I think we ought to hear what Bellatrix is bursting to say it will save tedious interruptions .Well continue Bellatrix said Snape .Why is it that you do not trust me ?A hundred reasons !she said loudly striding out from behind the sofa to slam her glass upon the table .Where to start !Where were you when the Dark Lord fell ?Why did you never make any attempt to find him when he vanished ?What have you been doing all these years that youve lived in Dumbledores pocket ?Why did you stop the Dark Lord procuring the Sorcerers Stone ?Why did you not return at once when the Dark Lord was reborn ?Where were you a few weeks ago when we battled to retrieve the prophecy for the Dark Lord ?And why Snape is Harry Potter still alive when you have had him at your mercy for five years ?She paused her chest rising and falling rapidly the color high in her cheeks .Behind her Narcissa sat motionless her face still hidden in her hands .Snape smiled .Before I answer you oh yes Bellatrix I am going to answer !You can carry my words back to the others who whisper behind my back and carry false tales of my treachery to the Dark Lord !Before I answer you I say let me ask a question in turn .Do you really think that the Dark Lord has not asked me each and every one of those questions ?And do you really think that had I not been able to give satisfactory answers I would be sitting here talking to you ?She hesitated .I know he believes you but .You think he is mistaken ?Or that I have somehow hoodwinked him ?Fooled the Dark Lord the greatest wizard the most accomplished Legilimens the world has ever seen ?Bellatrix said nothing but looked for the first time a little discomfited .Snape did not press the point .He picked up his drink again sipped it and continued You ask where I was when the Dark Lord fell .I was where he had ordered me to be at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry because he wished me to spy upon Albus Dumbledore .You know I presume that it was on the Dark Lords orders that I took up the post ?She nodded almost imperceptibly and then opened her mouth but Snape forestalled her .You ask why I did not attempt to find him when he vanished .For the same reason that Avery Yaxley the Carrows Greyback Lucius he inclined his head slightly to Narcissa and many others did not attempt to find him .I believed him finished .I am not proud of it I was wrong but there it is .If he had not forgiven we who lost faith at that time he would have very few followers left .Hed have me !said Bellatrix passionately .I who spent many years in Azkaban for him !Yes indeed most admirable said Snape in a bored voice .Of course you werent a lot of use to him in prison but the gesture was undoubtedly fine Gesture !she shrieked in her fury she looked slightly mad .While I endured the dementors you remained at Hogwarts comfortably playing Dumbledores pet !Not quite said Snape calmly .He wouldnt give me the Defense Against the Dark Arts job you know .Seemed to think it might ah bring about a relapse .tempt me into my old ways .This was your sacrifice for the Dark Lord not to teach your favorite subject ?she jeered .Why did you stay there all that time Snape ?Still spying on Dumbledore for a master you believed dead ?Hardly said Snape although the Dark Lord is pleased that I never deserted my post I had sixteen years of information on Dumbledore to give him when he returned a rather more useful welcomeback present than endless reminiscences of how unpleasant Azkaban is .But you stayed Yes Bellatrix I stayed said Snape betraying a hint of impatience for the first time .I had a comfortable job that I preferred to a stint in Azkaban .They were rounding up the Death Eaters you know .Dumbledores protection kept me out of jail it was most convenient and I used it .I repeat The Dark Lord does not complain that I stayed so I do not see why you do .I think you next wanted to know he pressed on a little more loudly for Bellatrix showed every sign of interrupting why I stood between the Dark Lord and the Sorcerers Stone .That is easily answered .He did not know whether he could trust me .He thought like you that I had turned from faithful Death Eater to Dumbledores stooge .He was in a pitiable condition very weak sharing the body of a mediocre wizard .He did not dare reveal himself to a former ally if that ally might turn him over to Dumbledore or the Ministry .I deeply regret that he did not trust me .He would have returned to power three years sooner .As it was I saw only greedy and unworthy Quirrell attempting to steal the stone and I admit I did all I could to thwart him .Bellatrixs mouth twisted as though she had taken an unpleasant dose of medicine .But you didnt return when he came back you didnt fly back to him at once when you felt the Dark Mark burn Correct .I returned two hours later .I returned on Dumbledores orders .On Dumbledores ?she began in tones of outrage .Think !said Snape impatient again .Think !By waiting two hours just two hours I ensured that I could remain at Hogwarts as a spy !By allowing Dumbledore to think that I was only returning to the Dark Lords side because I was ordered to I have been able to pass information on Dumbledore and the Order of the Phoenix ever since !Consider Bellatrix The Dark Mark had been growing stronger for months .I knew he must be about to return all the Death Eaters knew !I had plenty of time to think about what I wanted to do to plan my next move to escape like Karkaroff didnt I ?The Dark Lords initial displeasure at my lateness vanished entirely I assure you when I explained that I remained faithful although Dumbledore thought I was his man .Yes the Dark Lord thought that I had left him forever but he was wrong .But what use have you been ?sneered Bellatrix .What useful information have we had from you ?My information has been conveyed directly to the Dark Lord said Snape .If he chooses not to share it with you He shares everything with me !said Bellatrix firing up at once .He calls me his most loyal his most faithful Does he ?said Snape his voice delicately inflected to suggest his disbelief .Does he still after the fiasco at the Ministry ?That was not my fault !said Bellatrix flushing .The Dark Lord has in the past entrusted me with his most precious if Lucius hadnt Dont you dare dont you dare blame my husband !said Narcissa in a low and deadly voice looking up at her sister .There is no point apportioning blame said Snape smoothly .What is done is done .But not by you !said Bellatrix furiously .No you were once again absent while the rest of us ran dangers were you not Snape ?My orders were to remain behind said Snape .Perhaps you disagree with the Dark Lord perhaps you think that Dumbledore would not have noticed if I had joined forces with the Death Eaters to fight the Order of the Phoenix ?And forgive me you speak of dangers .you were facing six teenagers were you not ?They were joined as you very well know by half of the Order before long !snarled Bellatrix .And while we are on the subject of the Order you still claim you cannot reveal the whereabouts of their headquarters dont you ?I am not the SecretKeeper I cannot speak the name of the place .You understand how the enchantment works I think ?The Dark Lord is satisfied with the information I have passed him on the Order .It led as perhaps you have guessed to the recent capture and murder of Emmeline Vance and it certainly helped dispose of Sirius Black though I give you full credit for finishing him off .He inclined his head and toasted her .Her expression did not soften .You are avoiding my last question Snape .Harry Potter .You could have killed him at any point in the past five years .You have not done it .Why ?Have you discussed this matter with the Dark Lord ?asked Snape .He .lately we .I am asking you Snape !If I had murdered Harry Potter the Dark Lord could not have used his blood to regenerate making him invincible You claim you foresaw his use of the boy !she jeered .I do not claim it I had no idea of his plans I have already confessed that I thought the Dark Lord dead .I am merely trying to explain why the Dark Lord is not sorry that Potter survived at least until a year ago .But why did you keep him alive ?Have you not understood me ?It was only Dumbledores protection that was keeping me out of Azkaban !Do you disagree that murdering his favorite student might have turned him against me ?But there was more to it than that .I should remind you that when Potter first arrived at Hogwarts there were still many stories circulating about him rumors that he himself was a great Dark wizard which was how he had survived the Dark Lords attack .Indeed many of the Dark Lords old followers thought Potter might be a standard around which we could all rally once more .I was curious I admit it and not at all inclined to murder him the moment he set foot in the castle .Of course it became apparent to me very quickly that he had no extraordinary talent at all .He has fought his way out of a number of tight corners by a simple combination of sheer luck and more talented friends .He is mediocre to the last degree though as obnoxious and selfsatisfied as was his father before him .I have done my utmost to have him thrown out of Hogwarts where I believe he scarcely belongs but kill him or allow him to be killed in front of me ?I would have been a fool to risk it with Dumbledore close at hand .And through all this we are supposed to believe Dumbledore has never suspected you ?asked Bellatrix .He has no idea of your true allegiance he trusts you implicitly still ?I have played my part well said Snape .And you overlook Dumbledores greatest weakness He has to believe the best of people .I spun him a tale of deepest remorse when I joined his staff fresh from my Death Eater days and he embraced me with open arms though as I say never allowing me nearer the Dark Arts than he could help .Dumbledore has been a great wizard oh yes he has for Bellatrix had made a scathing noise the Dark Lord acknowledges it .I am pleased to say however that Dumbledore is growing old .The duel with the Dark Lord last month shook him .He has since sustained a serious injury because his reactions are slower than they once were .But through all these years he has never stopped trusting Severus Snape and therein lies my great value to the Dark Lord .Bellatrix still looked unhappy though she appeared unsure how best to attack Snape next .Taking advantage of her silence Snape turned to her sister .Now .you came to ask me for help Narcissa ?Narcissa looked up at him her face eloquent with despair .Yes Severus .I I think you are the only one who can help me I have nowhere else to turn .Lucius is in jail and .She closed her eyes and two large tears seeped from beneath her eyelids .The Dark Lord has forbidden me to speak of it Narcissa continued her eyes still closed .He wishes none to know of the plan .It is .very secret .But If he has forbidden it you ought not to speak said Snape at once .The Dark Lords word is law .Narcissa gasped as though he had doused her with cold water .Bellatrix looked satisfied for the first time since she had entered the house .There !she said triumphantly to her sister .Even Snape says so You were told not to talk so hold your silence !But Snape had gotten to his feet and strode to the small window peered through the curtains at the deserted street then closed them again with a jerk .He turned around to face Narcissa frowning .It so happens that I know of the plan he said in a low voice .I am one of the few the Dark Lord has told .Nevertheless had I not been in on the secret Narcissa you would have been guilty of great treachery to the Dark Lord .I thought you must know about it !said Narcissa breathing more freely .He trusts you so Severus .You know about the plan ?said Bellatrix her fleeting expression of satisfaction replaced by a look of outrage .You know ?Certainly said Snape .But what help do you require Narcissa ?If you are imagining I can persuade the Dark Lord to change his mind I am afraid there is no hope none at all .Severus she whispered tears sliding down her pale cheeks .My son .my only son .Draco should be proud said Bellatrix indifferently .The Dark Lord is granting him a great honor .And I will say this for Draco He isnt shrinking away from his duty he seems glad of a chance to prove himself excited at the prospect Narcissa began to cry in earnest gazing beseechingly all the while at Snape .Thats because he is sixteen and has no idea what lies in store !Why Severus ?Why my son ?It is too dangerous !This is vengeance for Luciuss mistake I know it !Snape said nothing .He looked away from the sight of her tears as though they were indecent but he could not pretend not to hear her .Thats why hes chosen Draco isnt it ?she persisted .To punish Lucius ?If Draco succeeds said Snape still looking away from her he will be honored above all others .But he wont succeed !sobbed Narcissa .How can he when the Dark Lord himself ?Bellatrix gasped Narcissa seemed to lose her nerve .I only meant .that nobody has yet succeeded .Severus .please .You are you have always been Dracos favorite teacher .You are Luciuss old friend .I beg you .You are the Dark Lords favorite his most trusted advisor .Will you speak to him persuade him ?The Dark Lord will not be persuaded and I am not stupid enough to attempt it said Snape flatly .I cannot pretend that the Dark Lord is not angry with Lucius .Lucius was supposed to be in charge .He got himself captured along with how many others and failed to retrieve the prophecy into the bargain .Yes the Dark Lord is angry Narcissa very angry indeed .Then I am right he has chosen Draco in revenge !choked Narcissa .He does not mean him to succeed he wants him to be killed trying !When Snape said nothing Narcissa seemed to lose what little selfrestraint she still possessed .Standing up she staggered to Snape and seized the front of his robes .Her face close to his her tears falling onto his chest she gasped You could do it .You could do it instead of Draco Severus .You would succeed of course you would and he would reward you beyond all of us Snape caught hold of her wrists and removed her clutching hands .Looking down into her tears tained face he said slowly He intends me to do it in the end I think .But he is determined that Draco should try first .You see in the unlikely event that Draco succeeds I shall be able to remain at Hogwarts a little longer fulfilling my useful role as spy .In other words it doesnt matter to him if Draco is killed !The Dark Lord is very angry repeated Snape quietly .He failed to hear the prophecy .You know as well as I do Narcissa that he does not forgive easily .She crumpled falling at his feet sobbing and moaning on the floor .My only son .my only son .You should be proud !said Bellatrix ruthlessly .If I had sons I would be glad to give them up to the service of the Dark Lord !Narcissa gave a little scream of despair and clutched at her long blonde hair .Snape stooped seized her by the arms lifted her up and steered her back onto the sofa .He then poured her more wine and forced the glass into her hand .Narcissa thats enough .Drink this .Listen to me .She quieted a little slopping wine down herself she took a shaky sip .It might be possible .for me to help Draco .She sat up her face paperwhite her eyes huge .Severus oh Severus you would help him ?Would you look after him see he comes to no harm ?I can try .She flung away her glass it skidded across the table as she slid off the sofa into a kneeling position at Snape s feet seized his hand in both of hers and pressed her lips to it .If you are there to protect him .Severus will you swear it ?Will you make the Unbreakable Vow ?The Unbreakable Vow ?Snapes expression was blank unreadable .Bellatrix however let out a cackle of triumphant laughter .Arent you listening Narcissa ?Oh hell try Im sure . .The usual empty words the usual slithering out of action .oh on the Dark Lords orders of course !Snape did not look at Bellatrix .His black eyes were fixed upon Narcissas tearfilled blue ones as she continued to clutch his hand .Certainly Narcissa I shall make the Unbreakable Vow he said quietly .Perhaps your sister will consent to be our Bonder .Bellatrixs mouth fell open .Snape lowered himself so that he was kneeling opposite Narcissa .Beneath Bellatrixs astonished gaze they grasped right hands .You will need your wand Bellatrix said Snape coldly .She drew it still looking astonished .And you will need to move a little closer he said .She stepped forward so that she stood over them and placed the tip of her wand on their linked hands .Narcissa spoke .Will you Severus watch over my son Draco as he attempts to fulfill the Dark Lords wishes ?I will said Snape .A thin tongue of brilliant flame issued from the wand and wound its way around their hands like a redhot wire .And will you to the best of your ability protect him from harm ?I will said Snape .A second tongue of flame shot from the wand and interlinked with the first making a fine glowing chain .And should it prove necessary .if it seems Draco will fail .whispered Narcissa Snapes hand twitched within hers but he did not draw away will you carry out the deed that the Dark Lord has ordered Draco to perform ?There was a moments silence .Bellatrix watched her wand upon their clasped hands her eyes wide .I will said Snape .Bellatrixs astounded face glowed red in the blaze of a third tongue of flame which shot from the wand twisted with the others and bound itself thickly around their clasped hands like a rope like a fiery snake .3 WILL AND WONT Harry Potter was snoring loudly .He had been sitting in a chair beside his bedroom window for the best part of four hours staring out at the darkening street and had finally fallen asleep with one side of his face pressed against the cold windowpane his glasses askew and his mouth wide open .The misty fug his breath had left on the window sparkled in the orange glare of the streetlamp outside and the artificial light drained his face of all color so that he looked ghostly beneath his shock of untidy black hair .The room was strewn with various possessions and a good smattering of rubbish .Owl feathers apple cores and sweet wrappers littered the floor a number of spellbooks lay higgledypiggledy among the tangled robes on his bed and a mess of newspapers sat in a puddle of light on his desk .The headline of one blared HARRY POTTER THE CHOSEN ONE ?Rumors continue to fly about the mysterious recent disturbance at the Ministry of Magic during which HeWhoMustNotBeNamed was sighted once more .Were not allowed to talk about it dont ask me anything said one agitated Obliviator who refused to give his name as he left the Ministry last night .Nevertheless highly placed sources within the Ministry have confirmed that the disturbance centered on the fabled Hall of Prophecy .Though Ministry spokeswizards have hitherto refused even to confirm the existence of such a place a growing number of the Wizarding community believe that the Death Eaters now serving sentences in Azkaban for trespass and attempted theft were attempting to steal a prophecy .The nature of that prophecy is unknown although speculation is rife that it concerns Harry Potter the only person ever known to have survived the Killing Curse and who is also known to have been at the Ministry on the night in question .Some are going so far as to call Potter the Chosen One believing that the prophecy names him as the only one who will be able to rid us of He WhoMustNotBeNamed .The current whereabouts of the prophecy if it exists are unknown although ctd .This one bore the headline SCRIMGEOUR SUCCEEDS FUDGE Most of this front page was taken up with a large blackandwhite picture of a man with a lionlike mane of thick hair and a rather ravaged face .The picture was moving the man was waving at the ceiling .Rufus Scrimgeour previously Head of the Auror office in the Department of Magical Law Enforcement has succeeded Cornelius Fudge as Minister of Magic .The appointment has largely been greeted with enthusiasm by the Wizarding community though rumors of a rift between the new Minister and Albus Dumbledore newly reinstated Chief Warlock of the Wizengamot surfaced within hours of Scrimgeour taking office .Scrimgeours representatives admitted that he had met with Dumbledore at once upon taking possession of the top job but refused to comment on the topics under discussion .Albus Dumbledore is known to ctd .Newly appointed Minister of Magic Rufus Scrimgeour spoke today of the tough new measures taken by his Ministry to ensure the safety of students returning to Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry this autumn .For obvious reasons the Ministry will not be going into detail about its stringent new security plans said the Minister although an insider confirmed that measures include defensive spells and charms a complex array of countercurses and a small task force of Aurors dedicated solely to the protection of Hogwarts School .Most seem reassured by the new Ministers tough stand on student safety .Said Mrs Augusta Longbottom My grandson Neville a good friend of Harry Potters incidentally who fought the Death Eaters alongside him at the Ministry in June and But the rest of this story was obscured by the large birdcage standing on top of it .Inside it was a magnificent snowy owl .Her amber eyes surveyed the room imperiously her head swiveling occasionally to gaze at her snoring master .Once or twice she clicked her beak impatiently but Harry was too deeply asleep to hear her .A large trunk stood in the very middle of the room .Its lid was open it looked expectant yet it was almost empty but for a residue of old underwear sweets empty ink bottles and broken quills that coated the very bottom .Nearby on the floor lay a purple leaflet emblazoned with the words ISSUED ON BEHALF OF THE MINISTRY OF MAGIC PROTECTING YOUR HOME AND FAMILY AGAINST DARK FORCES The Wizarding community is currently under threat from an organization calling itself the Death Eaters .Observing the following simple security guidelines will help protect you your family and your home from attack .1 .You are advised not to leave the house alone .2 .Particular care should be taken during the hours of darkness .Wherever possible arrange to complete journeys before night has fallen .3 .Review the security arrangements around your house making sure that all family members are aware of emergency measures such as Shield and Disillusionment Charms and in the case of underage family members SideAlongApparition .4 .Agree on security questions with close friends and family so as to detect Death Eaters masquerading as others by use of the Polyjuice Potion see Should the Dark Mark appear over any dwelling place or other building DO NOT ENTER but contact the Auror office immediately .7 .Unconfirmed sightings suggest that the Death Eaters may now be using Inferi see Harry grunted in his sleep and his face slid down the window an inch or so making his glasses still more lopsided but he did not wake up .An alarm clock repaired by Harry several years ago ticked loudly on the sill showing one minute to eleven .Beside it held in place by Harrys relaxed hand was a piece of parchment covered in thin slanting writing .Harry had read this letter so often since its arrival three days ago that although it had been delivered in a tightly furled scroll it now lay quite flat .Dear Harry If it is convenient to you I shall call at number four Privet Drive this coming Friday at eleven p .m .to escort you to the Burrow where you have been invited to spend the remainder of your school holidays .If you are agreeable I should also be glad of your assistance in a matter to which I hope to attend on the way to the Burrow .I shall explain this more fully when I see you .Kindly send your answer by return of this owl .Hoping to see you this Friday I am yours most sincerely Albus Dumbledore Though he already knew it by heart Harry had been stealing glances at this missive every few minutes since seven oclock that evening when he had first taken up his position beside his bedroom window which had a reasonable view of both ends of Privet Drive .He knew it was pointless to keep rereading Dumbledore s words Harry had sent back his yes with the delivering owl as requested and all he could do now was wait Either Dumbledore was going to come or he was not .But Harry had not packed .It just seemed too good to be true that he was going to be rescued from the Dursleys after a mere fortnight of their company .He could not shrug off the feeling that something was going to go wrong his reply to Dumbledore s letter might have gone astray Dumbledore could be prevented from collecting him the letter might turn out not to be from Dumbledore at all but a trick or joke or trap .Harry had not been able to face packing and then being let down and having to unpack again .The only gesture he had made to the possibility of a journey was to shut his snowy owl Hedwig safely in her cage .The minute hand on the alarm clock reached the number twelve and at that precise moment the streetlamp outside the window went out .Harry awoke as though the sudden darkness were an alarm .Hastily straightening his glasses and unsticking his cheek from the glass he pressed his nose against the window instead and squinted down at the pavement .A tall figure in a long billowing cloak was walking up the garden path .Harry jumped up as though he had received an electric shock knocked over his chair and started snatching anything and everything within reach from the floor and throwing it into the trunk .Even as he lobbed a set of robes two spellbooks and a packet of crisps across the room the doorbell rang .Downstairs in the living room his Uncle Vernon shouted Who the blazes is calling at this time of night ?Harry froze with a brass telescope in one hand and a pair of trainers in the other .He had completely forgotten to warn the Dursleys that Dumbledore might be coming .Feeling both panicky and close to laughter he clambered over the trunk and wrenched open his bedroom door in time to hear a deep voice say Good evening .You must be Mr Dursley .I daresay Harry has told you I would be coming for him ?Harry ran down the stairs two at a time coming to an abrupt halt several steps from the bottom as long experience had taught him to remain out of arms reach of his uncle whenever possible .There in the doorway stood a tall thin man with waistlength silver hair and beard .Halfmoon spectacles were perched on his crooked nose and he was wearing a long black traveling cloak and a pointed hat .Vernon Dursley whose mustache was quite as bushy as Dumbledore s though black and who was wearing a puce dressing gown was staring at the visitor as though he could not believe his tiny eyes .Judging by your look of stunned disbelief Harry did not warn you that I was coming said Dumbledore pleasantly .However let us assume that you have invited me warmly into your house .It is unwise to linger overlong on doorsteps in these troubled times .He stepped smartly over the threshold and closed the front door behind him .It is a long time since my last visit said Dumbledore peering down his crooked nose at Uncle Vernon .I must say your agapanthus are flourishing .Vernon Dursley said nothing at all .Harry did not doubt that speech would return to him and soon the vein pulsing in his uncles temple was reaching danger point but something about Dumbledore seemed to have robbed him temporarily of breath .It might have been the blatant wizardishness of his appearance but it might too have been that even Uncle Vernon could sense that here was a man whom it would be very difficult to bully .Ah good evening Harry said Dumbledore looking up at him through his halfmoon glasses with a most satisfied expression .Excellent excellent .These words seemed to rouse Uncle Vernon .It was clear that as far as he was concerned any man who could look at Harry and say excellent was a man with whom he could never see eye to eye .I dont mean to be rude he began in a tone that threatened rudeness in every syllable .yet sadly accidental rudeness occurs alarmingly often Dumbledore finished the sentence gravely .Best to say nothing at all my dear man .Ah and this must be Petunia .The kitchen door had opened and there stood Harrys aunt wearing rubber gloves and a housecoat over her nightdress clearly halfway through her usual pre bedtime wipedown of all the kitchen surfaces .Her rather horsey face registered nothing but shock .Albus Dumbledore said Dumbledore when Uncle Vernon failed to effect an introduction .We have corresponded of course .Harry thought this an odd way of reminding Aunt Petunia that he had once sent her an exploding letter but Aunt Petunia did not challenge the term .And this must be your son Dudley ?Dudley had that moment peered round the living room door .His large blond head rising out of the stripy collar of his pajamas looked oddly disembodied his mouth gaping in astonishment and fear .Dumbledore waited a moment or two apparently to see whether any of the Dursleys were going to say anything but as the silence stretched on he smiled .Shall we assume that you have invited me into your sitting room ?Dudley scrambled out of the way as Dumbledore passed him .Harry still clutching the telescope and trainers jumped the last few stairs and followed Dumbledore who had settled himself in the armchair nearest the fire and was taking in the surroundings with an expression of benign interest .He looked quite extraordinarily out of place .Arent arent we leaving sir ?Harry asked anxiously .Yes indeed we are but there are a few matters we need to discuss first said Dumbledore .And I would prefer not to do so in the open .We shall trespass upon your aunt and uncles hospitality only a little longer .You will will you ?Vernon Dursley had entered the room Petunia at his shoulder and Dudley skulking behind them both .Yes said Dumbledore simply I shall .He drew his wand so rapidly that Harry barely saw it with a casual flick the sofa zoomed forward and knocked the knees out from under all three of the Dursley s so that they collapsed upon it in a heap .Another flick of the wand and the sofa zoomed back to its original position .We may as well be comfortable said Dumbledore pleasantly .As he replaced his wand in his pocket Harry saw that his hand was blackened and shriveled it looked as though his flesh had been burned away .Sir what happened to your ?Later Harry said Dumbledore .Please sit down .Harry took the remaining armchair choosing not to look at the Dursleys who seemed stunned into silence .I would assume that you were going to offer me refreshment Dumbledore said to Uncle Vernon but the evidence so far suggests that that would be optimistic to the point of foolishness .A third twitch of the wand and a dusty bottle and five glasses appeared in midair .The bottle tipped and poured a generous measure of honeycolored liquid into each of the glasses which then floated to each person in the room .Madam Rosmertas finest oakmatured mead said Dumbledore raising his glass to Harry who caught hold of his own and sipped .He had never tasted anything like it before but enjoyed it immensely .The Dursleys after quick scared looks at one another tried to ignore their glasses completely a difficult feat as they were nudging them gently on the sides of their heads .Harry could not suppress a suspicion that Dumbledore was rather enjoying himself .Well Harry said Dumbledore turning toward him a difficulty has arisen which I hope you will be able to solve for us .By us I mean the Order of the Phoenix .But first of all I must tell you that Siriuss will was discovered a week ago and that he left you everything he owned .Over on the sofa Uncle Vernons head turned but Harry did not look at him nor could he think of anything to say except Oh .Right .This is in the main fairly straightforward Dumbledore went on .You add a reasonable amount of gold to your account at Gringotts and you inherit all of Siriuss personal possessions .The slightly problematic part of the legacy His godfathers dead ?said Uncle Vernon loudly from the sofa .Dumbledore and Harry both turned to look at him .The glass of mead was now knocking quite insistently on the side of Vernons head he attempted to beat it away .Hes dead ?His godfather ?Yes said Dumbledore .He did not ask Harry why he had not confided in the Dursleys .Our problem he continued to Harry as if there had been no interruption is that Sirius also left you number twelve Grimmauld Place .Hes been left a house ?said Uncle Vernon greedily his small eyes narrowing but nobody answered him .You can keep using it as headquarters said Harry .I dont care .You can have it I dont really want it .Harry never wanted to set foot in number twelve Grimmauld Place again if he could help it .He thought he would be haunted forever by the memory of Sirius pits dark musty rooms alone imprisoned within the place he had wanted so desperately to leave .That is generous said Dumbledore .We have however vacated the building temporarily .Why ?Well said Dumbledore ignoring the mutterings of Uncle Vernon who was now being rapped smartly over the head by the persistent glass of mead Black family tradition decreed that the house was handed down the direct line to the next male with the name of ‘Black .Sirius was the very last of the line as his younger brother Regulus predeceased him and both were childless .While his will makes it perfectly plain that he wants you to have the house it is nevertheless possible that some spell or enchantment has been set upon the place to ensure that it cannot be owned by anyone other than a pureblood .A vivid image of the shrieking spitting portrait of Siriuss mother that hung in the hall of number twelve Grimmauld Place flashed into Harrys mind .I bet there has he said .Quite said Dumbledore .And if such an enchantment exists then the ownership of the house is most likely to pass to the eldest of Siriuss living relatives which would mean his cousin Bellatrix Lestrange .Without realizing what he was doing Harry sprang to his feet the telescope and trainers in his lap rolled across the floor .Bellatrix Lestrange Siriuss killer inherit his house ?No he said .Well obviously we would prefer that she didnt get it either said Dumbledore calmly .The situation is fraught with complications .We do not know whether the enchantments we ourselves have placed upon it for example making it Unplottable will hold now that ownership has passed from Siriuss hands .It might be that Bellatrix will arrive on the doorstep at any moment .Naturally we had to move out until such time as we have clarified the position .But how are you going to find out if Im allowed to own it ?Fortunately said Dumbledore there is a simple test .He placed his empty glass on a small table beside his chair but before he could do anything else Uncle Vernon shouted Will you get these ruddy things off us ?Harry looked around all three of the Dursleys were cowering with their arms over their heads as their glasses bounced up and down on their skulls their contents flying everywhere .Oh Im so sorry said Dumbledore politely and he raised his wand again .All three glasses vanished .But it would have been better manners to drink it you know .It looked as though Uncle Vernon was bursting with any number of unpleasant retorts but he merely shrank back into the cushions with Aunt Petunia and Dudley and said nothing keeping his small piggy eyes on Dumbledore s wand .You see Dumbledore said turning back to Harry and again speaking as though Uncle Vernon had not uttered if you have indeed inherited the house you have also inherited He flicked his wand for a fifth time .There was a loud crack and a houseelf appeared with a snout for a nose giant bats ears and enormous bloodshot eyes crouching on the Dursleys shag carpet and covered in grimy rags .Aunt Petunia let out a hairraising shriek nothing this filthy had entered her house in living memory .Dudley drew his large bare pink feet off the floor and sat with them raised almost above his head as though he thought the creature might run up his pajama trousers and Uncle Vernon bellowed What the hell is that ?Kreacher finished Dumbledore .Kreacher wont Kreacher wont Kreacher wont !croaked the houseelf quite as loudly as Uncle Vernon stamping his long gnarled feet and pulling his ears .Kreacher belongs to Miss Bellatrix oh yes Kreacher belongs to the Blacks Kreacher wants his new mistress Kreacher wont go to the Potter brat Kreacher wont wont wont As you can see Harry said Dumbledore loudly over Kreachers continued croaks of wont wont wont Kreacher is showing a certain reluctance to pass into your ownership .I dont care said Harry again looking with disgust at the writhing stamping houseelf .I dont want him .Wont wont wont wont You would prefer him to pass into the ownership of Bellatrix Lestrange ?Bearing in mind that he has lived at the headquarters of the Order of the Phoenix for the past year ?Wont wont wont wont Harry stared at Dumbledore .He knew that Kreacher could not be permitted to go and live with Bellatrix Lestrange but the idea of owning him of having responsibility for the creature that had betrayed Sirius was repugnant .Give him an order said Dumbledore .If he has passed into your ownership he will have to obey .If not then we shall have to think of some other means of keeping him from his rightful mistress .Wont wont wont WONT .Kreachers voice had risen to a scream .Harry could think of nothing to say except Kreacher shut up !It looked for a moment as though Kreacher was going to choke .He grabbed his throat his mouth still working furiously his eyes bulging .After a few seconds of frantic gulping he threw himself face forward onto the carpet Aunt Petunia whimpered and beat the floor with his hands and feet giving himself over to a violent but entirely silent tantrum .Well that simplifies matters said Dumbledore cheerfully .It seems that Sirius knew what he was doing .You are the rightful owner of number twelve Grimmauld Place and of Kreacher .Do I do I have to keep him with me ?Harry asked aghast as Kreacher thrashed around at his feet .Not if you dont want to said Dumbledore .If I might make a suggestion you could send him to Hogwarts to work in the kitchen there .In that way the other houseelves could keep an eye on him .Yeah said Harry in relief yeah Ill do that .Er Kreacher I want you to go to Hogwarts and work in the kitchens there with the other houseelves .Kreacher who was now lying flat on his back with his arms and legs in the air gave Harry one upsidedown look of deepest loathing and with another loud crack vanished .Good said Dumbledore .There is also the matter of the hippogriff Buckbeak .Hagrid has been looking after him since Sirius died but Buckbeak is yours now so if you would prefer to make different arrangements No said Harry at once he can stay with Hagrid .I think Buckbeak would prefer that .Hagrid will be delighted said Dumbledore smiling .He was thrilled to see Buckbeak again .Incidentally we have decided in the interests of Buckbeaks safety to rechristen him ‘Witherwings for the time being though I doubt that the Ministry would ever guess he is the hippogriff they once sentenced to death .Now Harry is your trunk packed ?Erm .Doubtful that I would turn up ?Dumbledore suggested shrewdly .Ill just go and er finish off said Harry hastily hurrying to pick up his fallen telescope and trainers .It took him a little over ten minutes to track down everything he needed at last he had managed to extract his Invisibility Cloak from under the bed screwed the top back on his jar of colorchange ink and forced the lid of his trunk shut on his cauldron .Then heaving his trunk in one hand and holding Hedwigs cage in the other he made his way back downstairs .He was disappointed to discover that Dumbledore was not waiting in the hall which meant that he had to return to the living room .Nobody was talking .Dumbledore was humming quietly apparently quite at his ease but the atmosphere was thicker than cold custard and Harry did not dare look at the Dursleys as he said Professor Im ready now .Good said Dumbledore .Just one last thing then .And he turned to speak to the Dursleys once more .As you will no doubt be aware Harry comes of age in a years time No said Aunt Petunia speaking for the first time since Dumbledores arrival .Im sorry ?said Dumbledore politely .No he doesnt .Hes a month younger than Dudley and Dudders doesnt turn eighteen until the year after next .Ah said Dumbledore pleasantly but in the Wizarding world we come of age at seventeen .Uncle Vernon muttered Preposterous but Dumbledore ignored him .Now as you already know the wizard called Lord Voldemort has returned to this country .The Wizarding community is currently in a state of open warfare .Harry whom Lord Voldemort has already attempted to kill on a number of occasions is in even greater danger now than the day when I left him upon your doorstep fifteen years ago with a letter explaining about his parents murder and expressing the hope that you would care for him as though he were your own .Dumbledore paused and although his voice remained light and calm and he gave no obvious sign of anger Harry felt a kind of chill emanating from him and noticed that the Dursleys drew very slightly closer together .You did not do as I asked .You have never treated Harry as a son .He has known nothing but neglect and often cruelty at your hands .The best that can be said is that he has at least escaped the appalling damage you have inflicted upon the unfortunate boy sitting between you .Both Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon looked around instinctively as though expecting to see someone other than Dudley squeezed between them .Us mistreat Dudders ?What dyou ?began Uncle Vernon furiously but Dumbledore raised his finger for silence a silence which fell as though he had struck Uncle Vernon dumb .The magic I evoked fifteen years ago means that Harry has powerful protection while he can still call this house ‘home .However miserable he has been here however unwelcome however badly treated you have at least grudgingly allowed him houseroom .This magic will cease to operate the moment that Harry turns seventeen in other words at the moment he becomes a man .I ask only this that you allow Harry to return once more to this house before his seventeenth birthday which will ensure that the protection continues until that time .None of the Dursleys said anything .Dudley was frowning slightly as though he was still trying to work out when he had ever been mistreated .Uncle Vernon looked as though he had something stuck in his throat Aunt Petunia however was oddly flushed .Well Harry .time for us to be off said Dumbledore at last standing up and straightening his long black cloak .Until we meet again he said to the Dursleys who looked as though that moment could wait forever as far as they were concerned and after doffing his hat he swept from the room .Bye said Harry hastily to the Dursleys and followed Dumbledore who paused beside Harrys trunk upon which Hedwigs cage was perched .We do not want to be encumbered by these just now he said pulling out his wand again .I shall send them to the Burrow to await us there .However I would like you to bring your Invisibility Cloak .just in case .Harry extracted his cloak from his trunk with some difficulty trying not to show Dumbledore the mess within .When he had stuffed it into an inside pocket of his jacket Dumbledore waved his wand and the trunk cage and Hedwig vanished .Dumbledore then waved his wand again and the front door opened onto cool misty darkness .And now Harry let us step out into the night and pursue that flighty temptress adventure .HORACE SLUGHORN Despite the fact that he had spent every waking moment of the past few days hoping desperately that Dumbledore would indeed come to fetch him Harry felt distinctly awkward as they set off down Privet Drive together .He had never had a proper conversation with the headmaster outside of Hogwarts before there was usually a desk between them .The memory of their last facetoface encounter kept intruding too and it rather heightened Harrys sense of embarrassment he had shouted a lot on that occasion not to mention done his best to smash several of Dumbledore s most prized possessions .Dumbledore however seemed completely relaxed .Keep your wand at the ready Harry he said brightly .But I thought Im not allowed to use magic outside school sir ?If there is an attack said Dumbledore I give you permission to use any counterjinx or curse that might occur to you .However I do not think you need worry about being attacked tonight .Why not sir ?You are with me said Dumbledore simply .This will do Harry .He came to an abrupt halt at the end of Privet Drive .You have not of course passed your Apparition Test he said .No said Harry .I thought you had to be seventeen ?You do said Dumbledore .So you will need to hold on to my arm very tightly .My left if you dont mind as you have noticed my wand arm is a little fragile at the moment .Harry gripped Dumbledores proffered forearm .Very good said Dumbledore .Well here we go .Harry felt Dumbledores arm twist away from him and redoubled his grip the next thing he knew everything went black he was being pressed very hard from all directions he could not breathe there were iron bands tightening around his chest his eyeballs were being forced back into his head his eardrums were being pushed deeper into his skull and then He gulped great lungfuls of cold night air and opened his streaming eyes .He felt as though he had just been forced through a very tight rubber tube .It was a few seconds before he realized that Privet Drive had vanished .He and Dumbledore were now standing in what appeared to be a deserted village square in the center of which stood an old war memorial and a few benches .His comprehension catching up with his senses Harry realized that he had just Apparated for the first time in his life .Are you all right ?asked Dumbledore looking down at him solicitously .The sensation does take some getting used to .Im fine said Harry rubbing his ears which felt as though they had left Privet Drive rather reluctantly .But I think I might prefer brooms .Dumbledore smiled drew his traveling cloak a little more tightly around his neck and said This way .He set off at a brisk pace past an empty inn and a few houses .According to a clock on a nearby church it was almost midnight .So tell me Harry said Dumbledore .Your scar .has it been hurting at all ?Harry raised a hand unconsciously to his forehead and rubbed the lightningshaped mark .No he said and IVe been wondering about that .I thought it would be burning all the time now Voldemorts getting so powerful again .He glanced up at Dumbledore and saw that he was wearing a satisfied expression .I on the other hand thought otherwise said Dumbledore .Lord Voldemort has finally realized the dangerous access to his thoughts and feelings you have been enjoying .It appears that he is now employing Occlumency against you .Well Im not complaining said Harry who missed neither the disturbing dreams nor the startling flashes of insight into Voldemorts mind .They turned a corner passing a telephone box and a bus shelter .Harry looked sideways at Dumbledore again .Professor ?Harry ?Er where exactly are we ?This Harry is the charming village of Budleigh Babberton .And what are we doing here ?Ah yes of course I havent told you said Dumbledore .Well I have lost count of the number of times I have said this in recent years but we are once again one member of staff short .We are here to persuade an old colleague of mine to come out of retirement and return to Hogwarts .How can I help with that sir ?Oh I think well find a use for you said Dumbledore vaguely .Left here Harry .They proceeded up a steep narrow street lined with houses .All the windows were dark .The odd chill that had lain over Privet Drive for two weeks persisted here too .Thinking of dementors Harry cast a look over his shoulder and grasped his wand reassuringly in his pocket .Professor why couldnt we just Apparate directly into your old colleagues house ?Because it would be quite as rude as kicking down the front door said Dumbledore .Courtesy dictates that we offer fellow wizards the opportunity of denying us entry .In any case most Wizarding dwellings are magically protected from unwanted Apparators .At Hogwarts for instance you cant Apparate anywhere inside the buildings or grounds said Harry quickly .Hermione Granger told me .And she is quite right .We turn left again .The church clock chimed midnight behind them .Harry wondered why Dumbledore did not consider it rude to call on his old colleague so late but now that conversation had been established he had more pressing questions to ask .Sir I saw in the Daily Prophet that Fudge has been sacked .Correct said Dumbledore now turning up a steep side street .He has been replaced as I am sure you also saw by Rufus Scrimgeour who used to be Head of the Auror office .Is he .Do you think hes good ?asked Harry .An interesting question said Dumbledore .He is able certainly .A more decisive and forceful personality than Cornelius .Yes but I meant I know what you meant .Rufus is a man of action and having fought Dark wizards for most of his working life does not underestimate Lord Voldemort .Harry waited but Dumbledore did not say anything about the disagreement with Scrimgeour that the Daily Prophet had reported and he did not have the nerve to pursue the subject so he changed it .And .sir .I saw about Madam Bones .Yes said Dumbledore quietly .A terrible loss .She was a great witch .Just up here I think ouch .He had pointed with his injured hand .Professor what happened to your ?I have no time to explain now said Dumbledore .It is a thrilling tale I wish to do it justice .He smiled at Harry who understood that he was not being snubbed and that he had permission to keep asking questions .Sir I got a Ministry of Magic leaflet by owl about security measures we should all take against the Death Eaters .Yes I received one myself said Dumbledore still smiling .Did you find it useful ?Not really .No I thought not .You have not asked me for instance what is my favorite flavor of jam to check that I am indeed Professor Dumbledore and not an impostor .I didnt .Harry began not entirely sure whether he was being reprimanded or not .For future reference Harry it is raspberry .although of course if I were a Death Eater I would have been sure to research my own jam preferences before impersonating myself .Er .right said Harry .Well on that leaflet it said something about Inferi .What exactly are they ?The leaflet wasnt very clear .They are corpses said Dumbledore calmly .Dead bodies that have been bewitched to do a Dark wizards bidding .Inferi have not been seen for a long time however not since Voldemort was last powerful . .He killed enough people to make an army of them of course .This is the place Harry just here .They were nearing a small neat stone house set in its own garden .Harry was too busy digesting the horrible idea of Inferi to have much attention left for anything else but as they reached the front gate Dumbledore stopped dead and Harry walked into him .Oh dear .Oh dear dear dear .Harry followed his gaze up the carefully tended front path and felt his heart sink .The front door was hanging off its hinges .Dumbledore glanced up and down the street .It seemed quite deserted .Wand out and follow me Harry he said quietly .He opened the gate and walked swiftly and silently up the garden path Harry at his heels then pushed the front door very slowly his wand raised and at the ready .Lumos .Dumbledore s wand tip ignited casting its light up a narrow hallway .To the left another door stood open .Holding his illuminated wand aloft Dumbledore walked into the sitting room with Harry right behind him .A scene of total devastation met their eyes .A grandfather clock lay splintered at their feet its face cracked its pendulum lying a little farther away like a dropped sword .A piano was on its side its keys strewn across the floor .The wreckage of a fallen chandelier glittered nearby .Cushions lay deflated feathers oozing from slashes in their sides fragments of glass and china lay like powder over everything .Dumbledore raised his wand even higher so that its light was thrown upon the walls where something darkly red and glutinous was spattered over the wallpaper .Harrys small intake of breath made Dumbledore look around .Not pretty is it ?he said heavily .Yes something horrible has happened here .Dumbledore moved carefully into the middle of the room scrutinizing the wreckage at his feet .Harry followed gazing around halfscared of what he might see hidden behind the wreck of the piano or the overturned sofa but there was no sign of a body .Maybe there was a fight and and they dragged him off Professor ?Harry suggested trying not to imagine how badly wounded a man would have to be to leave those stains spattered halfway up the walls .I dont think so said Dumbledore quietly peering behind an overstuffed armchair lying on its side .You mean hes ?Still here somewhere ?Yes .And without warning Dumbledore swooped plunging the tip of his wand into the seat of the overstuffed armchair which yelled Ouch !Good evening Horace said Dumbledore straightening up again .Harrys jaw dropped .Where a split second before there had been an armchair there now crouched an enormously fat bald old man who was massaging his lower belly and squinting up at Dumbledore with an aggrieved and watery eye .There was no need to stick the wand in that hard he said gruffly clambering to his feet .It hurt .The wandlight sparkled on his shiny pate his prominent eyes his enormous silver walruslike mustache and the highly polished buttons on the maroon velvet jacket he was wearing over a pair of lilac silk pajamas .The top of his head barely reached Dumbledore s chin .What gave it away ?he grunted as he staggered to his feet still rubbing his lower belly .He seemed remarkably unabashed for a man who had just been discovered pretending to be an armchair .My dear Horace said Dumbledore looking amused if the Death Eaters really had come to call the Dark Mark would have been set over the house .The wizard clapped a pudgy hand to his vast forehead .The Dark Mark he muttered .Knew there was something .ah well .Wouldnt have had time anyway Id only just put the finishing touches to my upholstery when you entered the room .He heaved a great sigh that made the ends of his mustache flutter .Would you like my assistance clearing up ?asked Dumbledore politely .Please said the other .They stood back to back the tall thin wizard and the short round one and waved their wands in one identical sweeping motion .The furniture flew back to its original places ornaments reformed in midair feathers zoomed into their cushions torn books repaired themselves as they landed upon their shelves oil lanterns soared onto side tables and reignited a vast collection of splintered silver picture frames flew glittering across the room and alighted whole and untarnished upon a desk rips cracks and holes healed everywhere and the walls wiped themselves clean .What kind of blood was that incidentally ?asked Dumbledore loudly over the chiming of the newly unsmashed grandfather clock .On the walls ?Dragon shouted the wizard called Horace as with a deafening grinding and tinkling the chandelier screwed itself back into the ceiling .There was a final plunk from the piano and silence .Yes dragon repeated the wizard conversationally .My last bottle and prices are skyhigh at the moment .Still it might be reusable .He stumped over to a small crystal bottle standing on top of a sideboard and held it up to the light examining the thick liquid within .Hmm .Bit dusty .He set the bottle back on the sideboard and sighed .It was then that his gaze fell upon Harry .Oho he said his large round eyes flying to Harrys forehead and the lightningshaped scar it bore .Ohol This said Dumbledore moving forward to make the introduction is Harry Potter .Harry this is an old friend and colleague of mine Horace Slughorn .Slughorn turned on Dumbledore his expression shrewd .So thats how you thought youd persuade me is it ?Well the answers no Albus .He pushed past Harry his face turned resolutely away with the air of a man trying to resist temptation .I suppose we can have a drink at least ?asked Dumbledore .For old times sake ?Slughorn hesitated .All right then one drink he said ungraciously .Dumbledore smiled at Harry and directed him toward a chair not unlike the one that Slughorn had so recently impersonated which stood right beside the newly burning fire and a brightly glowing oil lamp .Harry took the seat with the distinct impression that Dumbledore for some reason wanted to keep him as visible as possible .Certainly when Slughorn who had been busy with decanters and glasses turned to face the room again his eyes fell immediately upon Harry .Hmpf he said looking away quickly as though frightened of hurting his eyes .Here He gave a drink to Dumbledore who had sat down without invitation thrust the tray at Harry and then sank into the cushions of the repaired sofa and a disgruntled silence .His legs were so short they did not touch the floor .Well how have you been keeping Horace ?Dumbledore asked .Not so well said Slughorn at once .Weak chest .Wheezy .Rheumatism too .Cant move like I used to .Well thats to be expected .Old age .Fatigue .And yet you must have moved fairly quickly to prepare such a welcome for us at such short notice said Dumbledore .You cant have had more than three minutes warning ?Slughorn said half irritably half proudly Two .Didnt hear my Intruder Charm go off I was taking a bath .Still he added sternly seeming to pull himself back together again the fact remains that Im an old man Albus .A tired old man whos earned the right to a quiet life and a few creature comforts .He certainly had those thought Harry looking around the room .It was stuffy and cluttered yet nobody could say it was uncomfortable there were soft chairs and footstools drinks and books boxes of chocolates and plump cushions .If Harry had not known who lived there he would have guessed at a rich fussy old lady .Youre not yet as old as I am Horace said Dumbledore .Well maybe you ought to think about retirement yourself said Slughorn bluntly .His pale gooseberry eyes had found Dumbledore s injured hand .Reactions not what they were I see .Youre quite right said Dumbledore serenely shaking back his sleeve to reveal the tips of those burned and blackened fingers the sight of them made the back of Harrys neck prickle unpleasantly .I am undoubtedly slower than I was .But on the other hand .He shrugged and spread his hands wide as though to say that age had its compensations and Harry noticed a ring on his uninjured hand that he had never seen Dumbledore wear before It was large rather clumsily made of what looked like gold and was set with a heavy black stone that had cracked down the middle .Slughorns eyes lingered for a moment on the ring too and Harry saw a tiny frown momentarily crease his wide forehead .So all these precautions against intruders Horace .are they for the Death Eaters benefit or mine ?asked Dumbledore .What would the Death Eaters want with a poor brokendown old buffer like me ?demanded Slughorn .I imagine that they would want you to turn your considerable talents to coercion torture and murder said Dumbledore .Are you really telling me that they havent come recruiting yet ?Slughorn eyed Dumbledore balefully for a moment then muttered I havent given them the chance .Ive been on the move for a year .Never stay in one place more than a week .Move from Muggle house to Muggle house the owners of this place are on holiday in the Canary Islands its been very pleasant Ill be sorry to leave .Its quite easy once you know how one simple Freezing Charm on these absurd burglar alarms they use instead of Sneakoscopes and make sure the neighbors dont spot you bringing in the piano .Ingenious said Dumbledore .But it sounds a rather tiring existence for a brokendown old buffer in search of a quiet life .Now if you were to return to Hogwarts If youre going to tell me my life would be more peaceful at that pestilential school you can save your breath Albus !I might have been in hiding but some funny rumors have reached me since Dolores Umbridge left !If thats how you treat teachers these days Professor Umbridge ran afoul of our centaur herd said Dumbledore .I think you Horace would have known better than to stride into the forest and call a horde of angry centaurs ‘filthy halfbreeds .Thats what she did did she ?said Slughorn .Idiotic woman .Never liked her .Harry chuckled and both Dumbledore and Slughorn looked round at him .Sorry Harry said hastily .Its just I didnt like her either .Dumbledore stood up rather suddenly .Are you leaving ?asked Slughorn at once looking hopeful .No I was wondering whether I might use your bathroom said Dumbledore .Oh said Slughorn clearly disappointed .Second on the left down the hall .Dumbledore strode from the room .Once the door had closed behind him there was silence .After a few moments Slughorn got to his feet but seemed uncertain what to do with himself .He shot a furtive look at Harry then crossed to the fire and turned his back on it warming his wide behind .Dont think I dont know why hes brought you he said abruptly .Harry merely looked at Slughorn .Slughorn s watery eyes slid over Harrys scar this time taking in the rest of his face .You look very like your father .Yeah Ive been told said Harry .Except for your eyes .Youve got My mothers eyes yeah .Harry had heard it so often he found it a bit wearing .Hmpf .Yes well .You shouldnt have favorites as a teacher of course but she was one of mine .Your mother Slughorn added in answer to Harrys questioning look .Lily Evans .One of the brightest I ever taught .Vivacious you know .Charming girl .I used to tell her she ought to have been in my House .Very cheeky answers I used to get back too .Which was your House ?I was Head of Slytherin said Slughorn .Oh now he went on quickly seeing the expression on Harrys face and wagging a stubby finger at him dont go holding that against me !Youll be Gryffindor like her I suppose ?Yes it usually goes in families .Not always though .Ever heard of Sirius Black ?You must have done been in the papers for the last couple of years died a few weeks ago It was as though an invisible hand had twisted Harrys intestines and held them tight .Well anyway he was a big pal of your fathers at school .The whole Black family had been in my House but Sirius ended up in Gryffindor !Shame he was a talented boy .I got his brother Regulus when he came along but Id have liked the set .He sounded like an enthusiastic collector who had been outbid at auction .Apparently lost in memories he gazed at the opposite wall turning idly on the spot to ensure an even heat on his backside .Your mother was Muggleborn of course .Couldnt believe it when I found out .Thought she must have been pureblood she was so good .One of my best friends is Muggleborn said Harry and shes the best in our year .Funny how that sometimes happens isnt it ?said Slughorn .Not really said Harry coldly .Slughorn looked down at him in surprise .You mustnt think Im prejudiced !he said .No no no !Havent I just said your mother was one of my alltime favorite students ?And there was Dirk Cresswell in the year after her too now Head of the Goblin Liaison Office of course another Muggleborn a very gifted student and still gives me excellent inside information on the goingson at Gringotts !He bounced up and down a little smiling in a self satisfied way and pointed at the many glittering photograph frames on the dresser each peopled with tiny moving occupants .All exstudents all signed .Youll notice Barnabas Cuffe editor of the Daily Prophet hes always interested to hear my take on the days news .And Ambrosius Flume of Honeydukes a hamper every birthday and all because I was able to give him an introduction to Ciceron Harkiss who gave him his first job !And at the back youll see her if you just crane your neck thats Gwenog Jones who of course captains the Holyhead Harpies .People are always astonished to hear Im on firstname terms with the Harpies and free tickets whenever I want them !This thought seemed to cheer him up enormously .And all these people know where to find you to send you stuff ?asked Harry who could not help wondering why the Death Eaters had not yet tracked down Slughorn if hampers of sweets Quidditch tickets and visitors craving his advice and opinions could find him .The smile slid from Slughorn s face as quickly as the blood from his walls .Of course not he said looking down at Harry .I have been out of touch with everybody for a year .Harry had the impression that the words shocked Slughorn himself he looked quite unsettled for a moment .Then he shrugged .Still .the prudent wizard keeps his head down in such times .All very well for Dumbledore to talk but taking up a post at Hogwarts just now would be tantamount to declaring my public allegiance to the Order of the Phoenix !And while Im sure theyre very admirable and brave and all the rest of it I dont personally fancy the mortality rate You dont have to join the Order to teach at Hogwarts said Harry who could not quite keep a note of derision out of his voice It was hard to sympathize with Slughorn s cosseted existence when he remembered Sirius crouching in a cave and living on rats .Most of the teachers arent in it and none of them has ever been killed well unless you count Quirrell and he got what he deserved seeing as he was working with Voldemort .Harry had been sure Slughorn would be one of those wizards who could not bear to hear Voldemorts name spoken aloud and was not disappointed Slughorn gave a shudder and a squawk of protest which Harry ignored .I reckon the staff are safer than most people while Dumbledore s headmaster hes supposed to be the only one Voldemort ever feared isnt he ?Harry went on .Slughorn gazed into space for a moment or two He seemed to be thinking over Harrys words .Well yes it is true that HeWhoMustNotBeNamed has never sought a fight with Dumbledore he muttered grudgingly .And I suppose one could argue that as I have not joined the Death Eaters HeWho MustNotBeNamed can hardly count me a friend .in which case I might well be safer a little closer to Albus .I cannot pretend that Amelia Boness death did not shake me .If she with all her Ministry contacts and protection .Dumbledore reentered the room and Slughorn jumped as though he had forgotten he was in the house .Oh there you are Albus he said .Youve been a very long time .Upset stomach ?No I was merely reading the Muggle magazines said Dumbledore .I do love knitting patterns .Well Harry we have trespassed upon Horaces hospitality quite long enough I think it is time for us to leave .Not at all reluctant to obey Harry jumped to his feet .Slughorn seemed taken aback .Youre leaving ?Yes indeed .I think I know a lost cause when I see one .Lost . ?Slughorn seemed agitated .He twiddled his fat thumbs and fidgeted as he watched Dumbledore fasten his traveling cloak and Harry zip up his jacket .Well Im sorry you dont want the job Horace said Dumbledore raising his uninjured hand in a farewell salute .Hogwarts would have been glad to see you back again .Our greatly increased security notwithstanding you will always be welcome to visit should you wish to .Yes .well .very gracious .as I say .Goodbye then .Bye said Harry .They were at the front door when there was a shout from behind them .All right all right 111 do it !Dumbledore turned to see Slughorn standing breathless in the doorway to the sitting room .You will come out of retirement ?Yes yes said Slughorn impatiently .I must be mad but yes .Wonderful said Dumbledore beaming .Then Horace we shall see you on the first of September .Yes I daresay you will grunted Slughorn .As they set off down the garden path Slughorn s voice floated after them 111 want a pay rise Dumbledore !Dumbledore chuckled .The garden gate swung shut behind them and they set off back down the hill through the dark and the swirling mist .Well done Harry said Dumbledore .I didnt do anything said Harry in surprise .Oh yes you did .You showed Horace exactly how much he stands to gain by returning to Hogwarts .Did you like him ?Er .Harry wasnt sure whether he liked Slughorn or not .He supposed he had been pleasant in his way but he had also seemed vain and whatever he said to the contrary much too surprised that a Muggleborn should make a good witch .Horace said Dumbledore relieving Harry of the responsibility to say any of this likes his comfort .He also likes the company of the famous the successful and the powerful .He enjoys the feeling that he influences these people .He has never wanted to occupy the throne himself he prefers the backseat more room to spread out you see .He used to handpick favorites at Hogwarts sometimes for their ambition or their brains sometimes for their charm or their talent and he had an uncanny knack for choosing those who would go on to become outstanding in their various fields .Horace formed a kind of club of his favorites with himself at the center making introductions forging useful contacts between members and always reaping some kind of benefit in return whether a free box of his favorite crystalized pineapple or the chance to recommend the next junior member of the Goblin Liaison Office .Harry had a sudden and vivid mental image of a great swollen spider spinning a web around it twitching a thread here and there to bring its large and juicy flies a little closer .I tell you all this Dumbledore continued not to turn you against Horace or as we must now call him Professor Slughorn but to put you on your guard .He will undoubtedly try to collect you Harry .You would be the jewel of his collection ‘the Boy Who Lived .or as they call you these days ‘the Chosen One .At these words a chill that had nothing to do with the surrounding mist stole over Harry .He was reminded of words he had heard a few weeks ago words that had a horrible and particular meaning to him Neither can live while the other survives .Dumbledore had stopped walking level with the church they had passed earlier .This will do Harry .If you will grasp my arm .Braced this time Harry was ready for the Apparition but still found it unpleasant .When the pressure disappeared and he found himself able to breathe again he was standing in a country lane beside Dumbledore and looking ahead to the crooked silhouette of his second favorite building in the world the Burrow .In spite of the feeling of dread that had just swept through him his spirits could not help but lift at the sight of it .Ron was in there .and so was Mrs Weasley who could cook better than anyone he knew .If you dont mind Harry said Dumbledore as they passed through the gate Id like a few words with you before we part .In private .Perhaps in here ?Dumbledore pointed toward a rundown stone outhouse where the Weasleys kept their broomsticks .A little puzzled Harry followed Dumbledore through the creaking door into a space a little smaller than the average cupboard .Dumbledore illuminated the tip of his wand so that it glowed like a torch and smiled down at Harry .I hope you will forgive me for mentioning it Harry but I am pleased and a little proud at how well you seem to be coping after everything that happened at the Ministry .Permit me to say that I think Sirius would have been proud of you .Harry swallowed his voice seemed to have deserted him .He did not think he could stand to discuss Sirius it had been painful enough to hear Uncle Vernon say His godfathers dead ?and even worse to hear Siriuss name thrown out casually by Slughorn .It was cruel said Dumbledore softly that you and Sirius had such a short time together .A brutal ending to what should have been a long and happy relationship .Harry nodded his eyes fixed resolutely on the spider now climbing Dumbledores hat .He could tell that Dumbledore understood that he might even suspect that until his letter arrived Harry had spent nearly all his time at the Dursleys lying on his bed refusing meals and staring at the misted window full of the chill emptiness that he had come to associate with dementors .Its just hard Harry said finally in a low voice to realize he wont write to me again .His eyes burned suddenly and he blinked .He felt stupid for admitting it but the fact that he had had someone outside Hogwarts who cared what happened to him almost like a parent had been one of the best things about discovering his godfather .and now the post owls would never bring him that comfort again .Sirius represented much to you that you had never known before said Dumbledore gently .Naturally the loss is devastating .But while I was at the Dursleys .interrupted Harry his voice growing stronger I realized I cant shut myself away or or crack up .Sirius wouldnt have wanted that would he ?And anyway lifes too short .Look at Madam Bones look at Emmeline Vance .It could be me next couldnt it ?But if it is he said fiercely now looking straight into Dumbledores blue eyes gleaming in the wandlight Ill make sure I take as many Death Eaters with me as I can and Voldemort too if I can manage it .Spoken both like your mother and fathers son and Siriuss true godson !said Dumbledore with an approving pat on Harrys back .I take my hat off to you or I would if I were not afraid of showering you in spiders .And now Harry on a closely related subject .I gather that you have been taking the Daily Prophet over the last two weeks ?Yes said Harry and his heart beat a little faster .Then you will have seen that there have been not so much leaks as floods concerning your adventure in the Hall of Prophecy ?Yes said Harry again .And now everyone knows that Im the one No they do not interrupted Dumbledore .There are only two people in the whole world who know the full contents of the prophecy made about you and Lord Voldemort and they are both standing in this smelly spidery broom shed .It is true however that many have guessed correctly that Voldemort sent his Death Eaters to steal a prophecy and that the prophecy concerned you .Now I think I am correct in saying that you have not told anybody that you know what the prophecy said ?No said Harry .A wise decision on the whole said Dumbledore .Although I think you ought to relax it in favor of your friends Mr Ronald Weasley and Miss Hermione Granger .Yes he continued when Harry looked startled I think they ought to know .You do them a disservice by not confiding something this important to them .I didnt want to worry or frighten them ?said Dumbledore surveying Harry over the top of his halfmoon spectacles .Or perhaps to confess that you yourself are worried and frightened ?You need your friends Harry .As you so rightly said Sirius would not have wanted you to shut yourself away .Harry said nothing but Dumbledore did not seem to require an answer .He continued On a different though related subject it is my wish that you take private lessons with me this year .Private with you ?said Harry surprised out of his preoccupied silence .Yes .I think it is time that I took a greater hand in your education .What will you be teaching me sir ?Oh a little of this a little of that said Dumbledore airily .Harry waited hopefully but Dumbledore did not elaborate so he asked something else that had been bothering him slightly .If Im having lessons with you I wont have to do Occlumency lessons with Snape will I ?Professor Snape Harry and no you will not .Good said Harry in relief because they were a He stopped careful not to say what he really thought .I think the word ‘fiasco would be a good one here said Dumbledore nodding .Harry laughed .Well that means I wont see much of Professor Snape from now on he said because he wont let me carry on Potions unless I get ‘Outstanding in my O .W .L .which I know I havent .Dont count your owls before they are delivered said Dumbledore gravely .Which now I think of it ought to be some time later today .Now two more things Harry before we part .Firstly I wish you to keep your Invisibility Cloak with you at all times from this moment onward .Even within Hogwarts itself .Just in case you understand me ?Harry nodded .And lastly while you stay here the Burrow has been given the highest security the Ministry of Magic can provide .These measures have caused a certain amount of inconvenience to Arthur and Molly all their post for instance is being searched at the Ministry before being sent on .They do not mind in the slightest for their only concern is your safety .However it would be poor repayment if you risked your neck while staying with them .I understand said Harry quickly .Very well then said Dumbledore pushing open the broom shed door and stepping out into the yard .I see a light in the kitchen .Let us not deprive Molly any longer of the chance to deplore how thin you are .AN EXCESS OF PHLEGM Harry and Dumbledore approached the back door of the Burrow which was surrounded by the familiar litter of old Wellington boots and rusty cauldrons Harry could hear the soft clucking of sleepy chickens coming from a distant shed .Dumbledore knocked three times and Harry saw sudden movement behind the kitchen window .Whos there ?said a nervous voice he recognized as Mrs Weasleys .Declare yourself !It is I Dumbledore bringing Harry .The door opened at once .There stood Mrs Weasley short plump and wearing an old green dressing gown .Harry dear !Gracious Albus you gave me a fright you said not to expect you before morning !We were lucky said Dumbledore ushering Harry over the threshold .Slughorn proved much more persuadable than I had expected .Harrys doing of course .Ah hello Nymphadora !Harry looked around and saw that Mrs Weasley was not alone despite the lateness of the hour .A young witch with a pale heartshaped face and mousy brown hair was sitting at the table clutching a large mug between her hands .Hello Professor she said .Wotcher Harry .Hi Tonks .Harry thought she looked drawn even ill and there was something forced in her smile .Certainly her appearance was less colorful than usual without her customary shade of bubblegumpink hair .Id better be off she said quickly standing up and pulling her cloak around her shoulders .Thanks for the tea and sympathy Molly .Please dont leave on my account said Dumbledore courteously I cannot stay I have urgent matters to discuss with Rufus Scrimgeour .No no I need to get going said Tonks not meeting Dumbledores eyes .Night Dear why not come to dinner at the weekend Remus and MadEye are coming ?No really Molly .thanks anyway .Good night everyone .Tonks hurried past Dumbledore and Harry into the yard a few paces beyond the doorstep she turned on the spot and vanished into thin air .Harry noticed that Mrs Weasley looked troubled .Well I shall see you at Hogwarts Harry said Dumbledore .Take care of yourself .Molly your servant .He made Mrs Weasley a bow and followed Tonks vanishing at precisely the same spot .Mrs Weasley closed the door on the empty yard and then steered Harry by the shoulders into the full glow of the lantern on the table to examine his appearance .Youre like Ron she sighed looking him up and down .Both of you look as though youve had Stretching Jinxes put on you .I swear Rons grown four inches since I last bought him school robes .Are you hungry Harry ?Yeah I am said Harry suddenly realizing just how hungry he was .Sit down dear Ill knock something up .As Harry sat down a furry ginger cat with a squashed face jumped onto his knees and settled there purring .So Hermiones here ?he asked happily as he tickled Crookshanks behind the ears .Oh yes she arrived the day before yesterday said Mrs Weasley rapping a large iron pot with her wand .It bounced onto the stove with a loud clang and began to bubble at once .Everyones in bed of course we didnt expect you for hours .Here you are She tapped the pot again it rose into the air flew toward Harry and tipped over Mrs Weasley slid a bowl neatly beneath it just in time to catch the stream of thick steaming onion soup .Bread dear ?Thanks Mrs Weasley .She waved her wand over her shoulder a loaf of bread and a knife soared gracefully onto the table as the loaf sliced itself and the soup pot dropped back onto the stove Mrs Weasley sat down opposite him .So you persuaded Horace Slughorn to take the job ?Harry nodded his mouth so full of hot soup that he could not speak .He taught Arthur and me said Mrs Weasley .He was at Hogwarts for ages started around the same time as Dumbledore I think .Did you like him ?His mouth now full of bread Harry shrugged and gave a noncommittal jerk of the head .I know what you mean said Mrs Weasley nodding wisely .Of course he can be charming when he wants to be but Arthurs never liked him much .The Ministrys littered with Slughorns old favorites he was always good at giving leg ups but he never had much time for Arthur didnt seem to think he was enough of a highflier .Well that just shows you even Slughorn makes mistakes .I dont know whether Rons told you in any of his letters its only just happened but Arthurs been promoted !It could not have been clearer that Mrs Weasley had been bursting to say this .Harry swallowed a large amount of very hot soup and thought he could feel his throat blistering .Thats great !he gasped .You are sweet beamed Mrs Weasley possibly taking his watering eyes for emotion at the news .Yes Rufus Scrimgeour has set up several new offices in response to the present situation and Arthurs heading the Office for the Detection and Confiscation of Counterfeit Defensive Spells and Protective Objects .Its a big job hes got ten people reporting to him now !What exactly ?Well you see in all the panic about YouKnowWho odd things have been cropping up for sale everywhere things that are supposed to guard against YouKnowWho and the Death Eaters .You can imagine the kind of thing socalled protective potions that are really gravy with a bit of bubotuber pus added or instructions for defensive jinxes that actually make your ears fall off .Well in the main the perpetrators are just people like Mundungus Fletcher whove never done an honest days work in their lives and are taking advantage of how frightened everybody is but every now and then something really nasty turns up .The other day Arthur confiscated a box of cursed Sneakoscopes that were almost certainly planted by a Death Eater .So you see its a very important job and I tell him its just silly to miss dealing with spark plugs and toasters and all the rest of that Muggle rubbish .Mrs Weasley ended her speech with a stern look as if it had been Harry suggesting that it was natural to miss spark plugs .Is Mr Weasley still at work ?Harry asked .Yes he is .As a matter of fact hes a tiny bit late .He said hed be back around midnight .She turned to look at a large clock that was perched awkwardly on top of a pile of sheets in the washing basket at the end of the table .Harry recognized it at once It had nine hands each inscribed with the name of a family member and usually hung on the Weasleys sitting room wall though its current position suggested that Mrs Weasley had taken to carrying it around the house with her .Every single one of its nine hands was now pointing at mortal peril .Its been like that for a while now said Mrs Weasley in an unconvincingly casual voice ever since YouKnowWho came back into the open .I suppose everybodys in mortal danger now .I dont think it can be just our family .but I dont know anyone else whos got a clock like this so I cant check .Oh !With a sudden exclamation she pointed at the clocks face .Mr Weasleys hand had switched to traveling .Hes coming !And sure enough a moment later there was a knock on the back door .Mrs Weasley jumped up and hurried to it with one hand on the doorknob and her face pressed against the wood she called softly Arthur is that you ?Yes came Mr Weasleys weary voice .But I would say that even if I were a Death Eater dear .Ask the question !Oh honestly .Molly !All right all right .What is your dearest ambition ?To find out how airplanes stay up .Mrs Weasley nodded and turned the doorknob but apparently Mr Weasley was holding tight to it on the other side because the door remained firmly shut .Molly !Ive got to ask you your question first !Arthur really this is just silly .What do you like me to call you when were alone together ?Even by the dim light of the lantern Harry could tell that Mrs Weasley had turned bright red he himself felt suddenly warm around the ears and neck and hastily gulped soup clattering his spoon as loudly as he could against the bowl .Mollywobbles whispered a mortified Mrs Weasley into the crack at the edge of the door .Correct said Mr Weasley .Now you can let me in .Mrs Weasley opened the door to reveal her husband a thin balding redhaired wizard wearing horn rimmed spectacles and a long and dusty traveling cloak .I still dont see why we have to go through that every time you come home said Mrs Weasley still pink in the face as she helped her husband out of his cloak .I mean a Death Eater might have forced the answer out of you before impersonating you !I know dear but its Ministry procedure and I have to set an example .Something smells good onion soup ?Mr Weasley turned hopefully in the direction of the table .Harry !We didnt expect you until morning !They shook hands and Mr Weasley dropped into the chair beside Harry as Mrs Weasley set a bowl of soup in front of him too .Thanks Molly .Its been a tough night .Some idiots started selling MetamorphMedals .Just sling them around your neck and youll be able to change your appearance at will .A hundred thousand disguises all for ten Galleons !And what really happens when you put them on ?Mostly you just turn a fairly unpleasant orange color but a couple of people have also sprouted tentaclelike warts all over their bodies .As if St .Mungos didnt have enough to do already !It sounds like the sort of thing Fred and George would find funny said Mrs Weasley hesitantly .Are you sure ?Of course I am !said Mr Weasley .The boys wouldnt do anything like that now not when people are desperate for protection !So is that why youre late MetamorphMedals ?No we got wind of a nasty backfiring jinx down in Elephant and Castle but luckily the Magical Law Enforcement Squad had sorted it out by the time we got there .Harry stifled a yawn behind his hand .Bed said an undeceived Mrs Weasley at once .Ive got Fred and Georges room all ready for you youll have it to yourself .Why where are they ?Oh theyre in Diagon Alley sleeping in the little flat over their joke shop as theyre so busy said Mrs Weasley .I must say I didnt approve at first but they do seem to have a bit of a flair for business !Come on dear your trunks already up there .Night Mr Weasley said Harry pushing back his chair .Crookshanks leapt lightly from his lap and slunk out of the room .Gnight Harry said Mr Weasley .Harry saw Mrs Weasley glance at the clock in the washing basket as they left the kitchen .All the hands were once again at mortal peril .Fred and Georges bedroom was on the second floor .Mrs Weasley pointed her wand at a lamp on the bedside table and it ignited at once bathing the room in a pleasant golden glow .Though a large vase of flowers had been placed on a desk in front of the small window their perfume could not disguise the lingering smell of what Harry thought was gunpowder .A considerable amount of floor space was devoted to a vast number of unmarked sealed cardboard boxes amongst which stood Harrys school trunk .The room looked as though it was being used as a temporary warehouse .Hedwig hooted happily at Harry from her perch on top of a large wardrobe then took off through the window Harry knew she had been waiting to see him before going hunting .Harry bade Mrs Weasley good night put on pajamas and got into one of the beds .There was something hard inside the pillowcase .He groped inside it and pulled out a sticky purpleand orange sweet which he recognized as a Puking Pastille .Smiling to himself he rolled over and was instantly asleep .Seconds later or so it seemed to Harry he was awakened by what sounded like cannon fire as the door burst open .Sitting bolt upright he heard the rasp of the curtains being pulled back The dazzling sunlight seemed to poke him hard in both eyes .Shielding them with one hand he groped hopelessly for his glasses with the other .Wuzzgoinon ?We didnt know you were here already !said a loud and excited voice and he received a sharp blow to the top of the head .Ron dont hit him !said a girls voice reproachfully .Harrys hand found his glasses and he shoved them on though the light was so bright he could hardly see anyway .A long looming shadow quivered in front of him for a moment he blinked and Ron Weasley came into focus grinning down at him .All right ?Never been better said Harry rubbing the top of his head and slumping back onto his pillows .You ?Not bad said Ron pulling over a cardboard box and sitting on it .When did you get here ?Mums only just told us !About one oclock this morning .Were the Muggles all right ?Did they treat you okay ?Same as usual said Harry as Hermione perched herself on the edge of his bed they didnt talk to me much but I like it better that way .Howre you Hermione ?Oh Im fine said Hermione who was scrutinizing Harry as though he was sickening for something .He thought he knew what was behind this and as he had no wish to discuss Siriuss death or any other miserable subject at the moment he said Whats the time ?Have I missed breakfast ?Dont worry about that Mums bringing you up a tray she reckons you look underfed said Ron rolling his eyes .So whats been going on ?Nothing much Ive just been stuck at my aunt and uncles havent I ?Come off it !said Ron .Youve been off with Dumbledore !It wasnt that exciting .He just wanted me to help him persuade this old teacher to come out of retirement .His names Horace Slughorn .Oh said Ron looking disappointed .We thought Hermione flashed a warning look at Ron and Ron changed tack at top speed .we thought itd be something like that .You did ?said Harry amused .Yeah .yeah now Umbridge has left obviously we need a new Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher dont we ?So er whats he like ?He looks a bit like a walrus and he used to be Head of Slytherin said Harry .Something wrong Hermione ?She was watching him as though expecting strange symptoms to manifest themselves at any moment .She rearranged her features hastily in an unconvincing smile .No of course not !So um did Slughorn seem like hell be a good teacher ?Dunno said Harry .He cant be worse than Umbridge can he ?I know someone whos worse than Umbridge said a voice from the doorway .Rons younger sister slouched into the room looking irritable .Hi Harry .Whats up with you ?Ron asked .Its her said Ginny plonking herself down on Harrys bed .Shes driving me mad .Whats she done now ?asked Hermione sympathetically .Its the way she talks to me youd think I was about three !I know said Hermione dropping her voice .Shes so full of herself .Harry was astonished to hear Hermione talking about Mrs Weasley like this and could not blame Ron for saying angrily Cant you two lay off her for five seconds ?Oh thats right defend her snapped Ginny .We all know you cant get enough of her .This seemed an odd comment to make about Rons mother .Starting to feel that he was missing something Harry said Who are you ?But his question was answered before he could finish it .The bedroom door flew open again and Harry instinctively yanked the bedcovers up to his chin so hard that Hermione and Ginny slid off the bed onto the floor .A young woman was standing in the doorway a woman of such breathtaking beauty that the room seemed to have become strangely airless .She was tall and willowy with long blonde hair and appeared to emanate a faint silvery glow .To complete this vision of perfection she was carrying a heavily laden breakfast tray .Arry she said in a throaty voice .Eet as been too long !As she swept over the threshold toward him Mrs Weasley was revealed bobbing along in her wake looking rather cross .There was no need to bring up the tray I was just about to do it myself !Eet was no trouble said Fleur Delacour setting the tray across Harrys knees and then swooping to kiss him on each cheek He felt the places where her mouth had touched him burn .I ave been longing to see im .You remember my seester Gabrielle ?She never stops talking about Ariy Potter .She will be delighted to see you again .Oh .is she here too ?Harry croaked .No no silly boy said Fleur with a tinkling laugh I mean next summer when we but do you not know ?Her great blue eyes widened and she looked reproachfully at Mrs Weasley who said We hadnt got around to telling him yet .Fleur turned back to Harry swinging her silvery sheet of hair so that it whipped Mrs Weasley across the face .Bill and I are going to be married !Oh said Harry blankly .He could not help noticing how Mrs Weasley Hermione and Ginny were all determinedly avoiding one anothers gaze .Wow .Er congratulations !She swooped down upon him and kissed him again .Bill is very busy at ze moment working very ard and I only work parttime at Gringotts for my Eenglish so he brought me ere for a few days to get to know is family properly .I was so pleased to ear you would be coming zere isnt much to do ere unless you like cooking and chickens !Well enjoy your breakfast Arry !With these words she turned gracefully and seemed to float out of the room closing the door quietly behind her .Mrs Weasley made a noise that sounded like tchah !Mum hates her said Ginny quietly .I do not hate her !said Mrs Weasley in a cross whisper .I just think theyve hurried into this engagement thats all !Theyve known each other a year said Ron who looked oddly groggy and was staring at the closed door .Well thats not very long !I know why its happened of course .Its all this uncertainty with YouKnowWho coming back people think they might be dead tomorrow so theyre rushing all sorts of decisions theyd normally take time over .It was the same last time he was powerful people eloping left right and center Including you and Dad said Ginny slyly .Yes well your father and I were made for each other what was the point in waiting ?said Mrs Weasley .Whereas Bill and Fleur .well .what have they really got in common ?Hes a hardworking downto earth sort of person whereas shes A cow said Ginny nodding .But Bills not that downtoearth .Hes a CurseBreaker isnt he he likes a bit of adventure a bit of glamour .I expect thats why hes gone for Phlegm .Stop calling her that Ginny said Mrs Weasley sharply as Harry and Hermione laughed .Well Id better get on .Eat your eggs while theyre warm Harry .Looking careworn she left the room .Ron still seemed slightly punchdrunk he was shaking his head experimentally like a dog trying to rid its ears of water .Dont you get used to her if shes staying in the same house ?Harry asked .Well you do said Ron but if she jumps out at you unexpectedly like then .Its pathetic said Hermione furiously striding away from Ron as far as she could go and turning to face him with her arms folded once she had reached the wall .You dont really want her around forever ?Ginny asked Ron incredulously .When he merely shrugged she said Well Mums going to put a stop to it if she can I bet you anything .Hows she going to manage that ?asked Harry .She keeps trying to get Tonks round for dinner .I think shes hoping Bill will fall for Tonks instead .I hope he does Id much rather have her in the family .Yeah thatll work said Ron sarcastically .Listen no bloke in his right minds going to fancy Tonks when Fleurs around .I mean Tonks is okaylooking when she isnt doing stupid things to her hair and her nose but Shes a damn sight nicer than Phlegm said Ginny And shes more intelligent shes an Auror !said Hermione from the corner .Fleurs not stupid she was good enough to enter the Triwizard Tournament said Harry .Not you as well !said Hermione bitterly .I suppose you like the way Phlegm says ‘Arry do you ?asked Ginny scornfully .No said Harry wishing he hadnt spoken I was just saying Phlegm I mean Fleur Id much rather have Tonks in the family said Ginny .At least shes a laugh .She hasnt been much of a laugh lately said Ron .Every time Ive seen her shes looked more like Moaning Myrtle .Thats not fair snapped Hermione .She still hasnt got over what happened .you know .I mean he was her cousin !Harrys heart sank .They had arrived at Sirius .He picked up a fork and began shoveling scrambled eggs into his mouth hoping to deflect any invitation to join in this part of the conversation .Tonks and Sirius barely knew each other !said Ron .Sirius was in Azkaban half her life and before that their families never met Thats not the point said Hermione .She thinks it was her fault he died !How does she work that one out ?asked Harry in spite of himself .Well she was fighting Bellatrix Lestrange wasnt she ?I think she feels that if only she had finished her off Bellatrix couldnt have killed Sirius .Thats stupid said Ron .Its survivors guilt said Hermione .I know Lupins tried to talk her round but shes still really down .Shes actually having trouble with her Metamorphosing !With her ?She cant change her appearance like she used to explained Hermione .I think her powers must have been affected by shock or something .I didnt know that could happen said Harry .Nor did I said Hermione but I suppose if youre really depressed .The door opened again and Mrs Weasley popped her head in .Ginny she whispered come downstairs and help me with the lunch .Im talking to this lot !said Ginny outraged .Now !said Mrs Weasley and withdrew .She only wants me there so she doesnt have to be alone with Phlegm !said Ginny crossly .She swung her long red hair around in a very good imitation of Fleur and pranced across the room with her arms held aloft like a ballerina .You lot had better come down quickly too she said as she left .Harry took advantage of the temporary silence to eat more breakfast .Hermione was peering into Fred and Georges boxes though every now and then she cast sideways looks at Harry .Ron who was now helping himself to Harrys toast was still gazing dreamily at the door .Whats this ?Hermione asked eventually holding up what looked like a small telescope .Dunno said Ron but if Fred and Georgeve left it here its probably not ready for the joke shop yet so be careful .Your mum said the shops going well said Harry .Said Fred and George have got a real flair for business .Thats an understatement said Ron .Theyre raking in the Galleons !I cant wait to see the place we havent been to Diagon Alley yet because Mum says Dads got to be there for extra security and hes been really busy at work but it sounds excellent .And what about Percy ?asked Harry the third eldest Weasley brother had fallen out with the rest of the family .Is he talking to your mum and dad again ?Nope said Ron .But he knows your dad was right all along now about Voldemort being back Dumbledore says people find it far easier to forgive others for being wrong than being right said Hermione .I heard him telling your mum Ron .Sounds like the sort of mental thing Dumbledore would say said Ron .Hes going to be giving me private lessons this year said Harry conversationally .Ron choked on his bit of toast and Hermione gasped .You kept that quiet !said Ron .I only just remembered said Harry honestly .He told me last night in your broom shed .Blimey .private lessons with Dumbledore !said Ron looking impressed .I wonder why hes . ?His voice tailed away .Harry saw him and Hermione exchange looks .Harry laid down his knife and fork his heart beating rather fast considering that all he was doing was sitting in bed .Dumbledore had said to do it .Why not now ?He fixed his eyes on his fork which was gleaming in the sunlight streaming into his lap and said I dont know exactly why hes going to be giving me lessons but I think it must be because of the prophecy .Neither Ron nor Hermione spoke .Harry had the impression that both had frozen .He continued still speaking to his fork You know the one they were trying to steal at the Ministry .Nobody knows what it said though said Hermione quickly .It got smashed .Although the Prophet says began Ron but Hermione said Shh !The Prophets got it right said Harry looking up at them both with a great effort Hermione seemed frightened and Ron amazed .That glass ball that smashed wasnt the only record of the prophecy .I heard the whole thing in Dumbledore s office he was the one the prophecy was made to so he could tell me .From what it said Harry took a deep breath it looks like Im the one whos got to finish off Voldemort .At least it said neither of us could live while the other survives .The three of them gazed at one another in silence for a moment .Then there was a loud bang and Hermione vanished behind a puff of black smoke .Hermione !shouted Harry and Ron the breakfast tray slid to the floor with a crash .Hermione emerged coughing out of the smoke clutching the telescope and sporting a brilliantly purple black eye .I squeezed it and it it punched me !she gasped .And sure enough they now saw a tiny fist on a long spring protruding from the end of the telescope .Dont worry said Ron who was plainly trying not to laugh Mumll fix that shes good at healing minor injuries Oh well never mind that now !said Hermione hastily .Harry oh Harry .She sat down on the edge of his bed again .We wondered after we got back from the Ministry .Obviously we didnt want to say anything to you but from what Lucius Malfoy said about the prophecy how it was about you and Voldemort well we thought it might be something like this .Oh Harry .She stared at him then whispered Are you scared ?Not as much as I was said Harry .When I first heard it I was .but now it seems as though I always knew Id have to face him in the end .When we heard Dumbledore was collecting you in person we thought he might be telling you something or showing you something to do with the prophecy said Ron eagerly .And we were kind of right werent we ?He wouldnt be giving you lessons if he thought you were a goner wouldnt waste his time he must think youve got a chance !Thats true said Hermione .I wonder what hell teach you Harry ?Really advanced defensive magic probably .powerful countercurses .antijinxes .Harry did not really listen .A warmth was spreading through him that had nothing to do with the sunlight a tight obstruction in his chest seemed to be dissolving .He knew that Ron and Hermione were more shocked than they were letting on but the mere fact that they were still there on either side of him speaking bracing words of comfort not shrinking from him as though he were contaminated or dangerous was worth more than he could ever tell them . .and evasive enchantments generally concluded Hermione .Well at least you know one lesson youll be having this year thats one more than Ron and me .I wonder when our O .W .L .results will come ?Cant be long now its been a month said Ron .Hang on said Harry as another part of last nights conversation came back to him .I think Dumbledore said our O .W .L .results would be arriving today !Today ?shrieked Hermione .Today ?But why didnt you oh my God you should have said She leapt to her feet .Im going to see whether any owls have come .But when Harry arrived downstairs ten minutes later fully dressed and carrying his empty breakfast tray it was to find Hermione sitting at the kitchen table in great agitation while Mrs Weasley tried to lessen her resemblance to half a panda .It just wont budge Mrs Weasley was saying anxiously standing over Hermione with her wand in her hand and a copy of The Healers Helpmate open at Bruises Cuts and Abrasions .This has always worked before I just cant understand it .Itll be Fred and Georges idea of a funny joke making sure it cant come off said Ginny But its got to come off !squeaked Hermione .I cant go around looking like this forever !You wont dear well find an antidote dont worry said Mrs Weasley soothingly .Bill told me ow Fred and George are very amusing !said Fleur smiling serenely .Yes I can hardly breathe for laughing snapped Hermione .She jumped up and started walking round and round the kitchen twisting her fingers together .Mrs Weasley youre quite quite sure no owls have arrived this morning ?Yes dear Id have noticed said Mrs Weasley patiently .But its barely nine theres still plenty of time .I know I messed up Ancient Runes muttered Hermione feverishly I definitely made at least one serious mistranslation .And the Defense Against the Dark Arts practical was no good at all .I thought Transfiguration went all right at the time but looking back Hermione will you shut up youre not the only one whos nervous !barked Ron .And when youve got your eleven ‘Outstanding O .W .L .s .Dont dont dont !said Hermione flapping her hands hysterically .I know Ive failed everything !What happens if we fail ?Harry asked the room at large but it was again Hermione who answered .We discuss our options with our Head of House I asked Professor McGonagall at the end of last term .Harrys stomach squirmed .He wished he had eaten less breakfast .At Beauxbatons said Fleur complacently we ad a different way of doing things .I think eet was better .We sat our examinations after six years of study not five and then Fleurs words were drowned in a scream .Hermione was pointing through the kitchen window .Three black specks were clearly visible in the sky growing larger all the time .Theyre definitely owls said Ron hoarsely jumping up to join Hermione at the window .And there are three of them said Harry hastening to her other side .One for each of us said Hermione in a terrified whisper .Oh no .oh no .oh no .She gripped both Harry and Ron tightly around the elbows .The owls were flying directly at the Burrow three handsome tawnies each of which it became clear as they flew lower over the path leading up to the house was carrying a large square envelope .Oh no squealed Hermione .Mrs Weasley squeezed past them and opened the kitchen window .One two three the owls soared through it and landed on the table in a neat line .All three of them lifted their right legs .Harry moved forward .The letter addressed to him was tied to the leg of the owl in the middle .He untied it with fumbling fingers .To his left Ron was trying to detach his own results to his right Hermiones hands were shaking so much she was making her whole owl tremble .Nobody in the kitchen spoke .At last Harry managed to detach the envelope .He slit it open quickly and unfolded the parchment inside .ORDINARY WIZARDING LEVEL RESULTS Pass Grades Fail Grades Outstanding O Poor P Exceeds Expectations E Dreadful D Acceptable A Troll T Harry James Potter has achieved Astronomy A Care of Magical Creatures E Charms E Defense Against the Dark ArtsO Divination P Herbology E History of Magic D Potions E Transfiguration E Harry read the parchment through several times his breathing becoming easier with each reading .It was all right He had always known that he would fail Divination and he had had no chance of passing History of Magic given that he had collapsed halfway through the examination but he had passed everything else !He ran his finger down the grades .he had passed well in Transfiguration and Herbology he had even exceeded expectations at Potions !And best of all he had achieved Outstanding at Defense Against the Dark Arts !He looked around .Hermione had her back to him and her head bent but Ron was looking delighted .Only failed Divination and History of Magic and who cares about them ?he said happily to Harry .Here swap Harry glanced down Rons grades There were no Outstandings there .Knew youd be top at Defense Against the Dark Arts said Ron punching Harry on the shoulder .Weve done all right havent we ?Well done !said Mrs Weasley proudly ruffling Rons hair .Seven O .W .L .s thats more than Fred and George got together !Hermione ?said Ginny tentatively for Hermione still hadnt turned around .How did you do ?I not bad said Hermione in a small voice .Oh come off it said Ron striding over to her and whipping her results out of her hand .Yep nine ‘Outstandings and one ‘Exceeds Expectations at Defense Against the Dark Arts .He looked down at her halfamused halfexasperated .Youre actually disappointed arent you ?Hermione shook her head but Harry laughed .Well were N .E .W .T .students now !grinned Ron .Mum are there any more sausages ?Harry looked back down at his results .They were as good as he could have hoped for .He felt just one tiny twinge of regret .This was the end of his ambition to become an Auror .He had not secured the required Potions grade .He had known all along that he wouldnt but he still felt a sinking in his stomach as he looked again at that small black E .It was odd really seeing that it had been a Death Eater in disguise who had first told Harry he would make a good Auror but somehow the idea had taken hold of him and he couldnt really think of anything else he would like to be .Moreover it had seemed the right destiny for him since he had heard the prophecy a few weeks ago .Neither can live while the other survives .Wouldnt he be living up to the prophecy and giving himself the best chance of survival if he joined those highly trained wizards whose job it was to find and kill Voldemort ?6 DRACOS DETOUR Harry remained within the confines of the Burrows garden over the next few weeks .He spent most of his days playing twoaside Quidditch in the Weasleys orchard he and Hermione against Ron and Ginny Hermione was dreadful and Ginny good so they were reasonably well matched and his evenings eating triple helpings of everything Mrs Weasley put in front of him .It would have been a happy peaceful holiday had it not been for the stories of disappearances odd accidents even of deaths now appearing almost daily in the Prophet Sometimes Bill and Mr Weasley brought home news before it even reached the paper .To Mrs Weasleys displeasure Harrys sixteenth birthday celebrations were marred by grisly tidings brought to the party by Remus Lupin who was looking gaunt and grim his brown hair streaked liberally with gray his clothes more ragged and patched than ever .There have been another couple of dementor attacks he announced as Mrs Weasley passed him a large slice of birthday cake .And theyve found Igor Karkaroffs body in a shack up north .The Dark Mark had been set over it well frankly Im surprised he stayed alive for even a year after deserting the Death Eaters Siriuss brother Regulus only managed a few days as far as I can remember .Yes well said Mrs Weasley frowning perhaps we should talk about something diff Did you hear about Florean Fortescue Remus ?asked Bill who was being plied with wine by Fleur .The man who ran the icecream place in Diagon Alley ?Harry interrupted with an unpleasant hollow sensation in the pit of his stomach .He used to give me free ice creams .Whats happened to him ?Dragged off by the look of his place .Why ?asked Ron while Mrs Weasley pointedly glared at Bill .Who knows ?He mustve upset them somehow .He was a good man Florean .Talking of Diagon Alley said Mr Weasley looks like Ollivanders gone too .The wandmaker ?said Ginny looking startled .Thats the one .Shops empty .No sign of a struggle .No one knows whether he left voluntarily or was kidnapped .But wands whatll people do for wands ?Theyll make do with other makers said Lupin .But Ollivander was the best and if the other side have got him its not so good for us .The day after this rather gloomy birthday tea their letters and booklists arrived from Hogwarts .Harrys included a surprise He had been made Quidditch Captain .That gives you equal status with prefects !cried Hermione happily .You can use our special bathroom now and everything !Wow I remember when Charlie wore one of these said Ron examining the badge with glee .Harry this is so cool youre my Captain if you let me back on the team I suppose ha ha .Well I dont suppose we can put off a trip to Diagon Alley much longer now youve got these sighed Mrs Weasley looking down Rons booklist .Well go on Saturday as long as your father doesnt have to go into work again .Im not going there without him .Mum dyou honestly think YouKnow Whos going to be hiding behind a bookshelf in Flourish and Blotts ?sniggered Ron .Fortescue and Ollivander went on holiday did they ?said Mrs Weasley firing up at once .If you think securitys a laughing matter you can stay behind and Ill get your things myself No I wanna come I want to see Fred and Georges shop !said Ron hastily .Then you just buck up your ideas young man before I decide youre too immature to come with us !said Mrs Weasley angrily snatching up her clock all nine hands of which were still pointing at mortal peril and balancing it on top of a pile of just laundered towels .And that goes for returning to Hogwarts as well !Ron turned to stare incredulously at Harry as his mother hoisted the laundry basket and the teetering clock into her arms and stormed out of the room .Blimey .you cant even make a joke round here anymore .But Ron was careful not to be flippant about Voldemort over the next few days .Saturday dawned without any more outbursts from Mrs Weasley though she seemed very tense at breakfast .Bill who would be staying at home with Fleur much to Hermione and Ginnys pleasure passed a full money bag across the table to Harry .Wheres mine ?demanded Ron at once his eyes wide .Thats already Harrys idiot said Bill .I got it out of your vault for you Harry because its taking about five hours for the public to get to their gold at the moment the goblins have tightened security so much .Two days ago Arkie Philpott had a Probity Probe stuck up his .Well trust me this ways easier .Thanks Bill said Harry pocketing his gold .E is always so thoughtful purred Fleur adoringly stroking Bills nose .Ginny mimed vomiting into her cereal behind Fleur .Harry choked over his cornflakes and Ron thumped him on the back .It was an overcast murky day .One of the special Ministry of Magic cars in which Harry had ridden once before was awaiting them in the front yard when they emerged from the house pulling on their cloaks .Its good Dad can get us these again said Ron appreciatively stretching luxuriously as the car moved smoothly away from the Burrow Bill and Fleur waving from the kitchen window .He Harry Hermione and Ginny were all sitting in roomy comfort in the wide backseat .Dont get used to it its only because of Harry said Mr Weasley over his shoulder .He and Mrs Weasley were in front with the Ministry driver the front passenger seat had obligingly stretched into what resembled a twoseater sofa .Hes been given top grade security status .And well be joining up with additional security at the Leaky Cauldron too .Harry said nothing he did not much fancy doing his shopping while surrounded by a battalion of Aurors .He had stowed his Invisibility Cloak in his backpack and felt that if that was good enough for Dumbledore it ought to be good enough for the Ministry though now he came to think of it he was not sure the Ministry knew about his cloak .Here you are then said the driver a surprisingly short while later speaking for the first time as he slowed in Charing Cross Road and stopped outside the Leaky Cauldron .Im to wait for you any idea how long you 11 be ?A couple of hours I expect said Mr Weasley .Ah good hes here !Harry imitated Mr Weasley and peered through the window his heart leapt .There were no Aurors waiting outside the inn but instead the gigantic black bearded form of Rubeus Hagrid the Hogwarts gamekeeper wearing a long beaverskin coat beaming at the sight of Harrys face and oblivious to the startled stares of passing Muggles .Harry !he boomed sweeping Harry into a bone crushing hug the moment Harry had stepped out of the car .Buckbeak Witherwings I mean yeh should see him Harry hes so happy ter be back in the open air Glad hes pleased said Harry grinning as he massaged his ribs .We didnt know ‘security meant you !I know jus like old times innit ?See the Ministry wanted ter send a bunch o Aurors but Dumbledore said Id do said Hagrid proudly throwing out his chest and tucking his thumbs into his pockets .Lets get goin then after yeh Molly Arthur The Leaky Cauldron was for the first time in Harrys memory completely empty .Only Tom the landlord wizened and toothless remained of the old crowd .He looked up hopefully as they entered but before he could speak Hagrid said importantly Jus passin through today Tom sure yeh understand Hogwarts business yeh know .Tom nodded gloomily and returned to wiping glasses Harry Hermione Hagrid and the Weasleys walked through the bar and out into the chilly little courtyard at the back where the dustbins stood .Hagrid raised his pink umbrella and rapped a certain brick in the wall which opened at once to form an archway onto a winding cobbled street .They stepped through the entrance and paused looking around .Diagon Alley had changed .The colorful glittering window displays of spellbooks potion ingredients and cauldrons were lost to view hidden behind the large Ministry of Magic posters that had been pasted over them .Most of these somber purple posters carried blownup versions of the security advice on the Ministry pamphlets that had been sent out over the summer but others bore moving blackandwhite photographs of Death Eaters known to be on the loose .Bellatrix Lestrange was sneering from the front of the nearest apothecary .A few windows were boarded up including those of Florean Fortescues Ice Cream Parlor .On the other hand a number of shabbylooking stalls had sprung up along the street .The nearest one which had been erected outside Flourish and Blotts under a striped stained awning had a cardboard sign pinned to its front AMULETS Effective Against Werewolves Dementors and Inferi A seedylooking little wizard was rattling armfuls of silver symbols on chains at passersby .One for your little girl madam ?he called at Mrs Weasley as they passed leering at Ginny .Protect her pretty neck ?If I were on duty .said Mr Weasley glaring angrily at the amulet seller .Yes but dont go arresting anyone now dear were in a hurry said Mrs Weasley nervously consulting a list .I think wed better do Madam Malkins first Hermione wants new dress robes and Rons showing much too much ankle in his school robes and you must need new ones too Harry youve grown so much come on everyone Molly it doesnt make sense for all of us to go to Madam Malkins said Mr Weasley .Why dont those three go with Hagrid and we can go to Flourish and Blotts and get everyones schoolbooks ?I dont know said Mrs Weasley anxiously clearly torn between a desire to finish the shopping quickly and the wish to stick together in a pack .Hagrid do you think ?Don fret theyll be fine with me Molly said Hagrid soothingly waving an airy hand the size of a dustbin lid .Mrs Weasley did not look entirely convinced but allowed the separation scurrying off toward Flourish and Blotts with her husband and Ginny while Harry Ron Hermione and Hagrid set off for Madam Malkins .Harry noticed that many of the people who passed them had the same harried anxious look as Mrs Weasley and that nobody was stopping to talk anymore the shoppers stayed together in their own tightly knit groups moving intently about their business .Nobody seemed to be shopping alone .Migh be a bit of a squeeze in there with all of us said Hagrid stopping outside Madam Malkins and bending down to peer through the window .Ill stand guard outside all right ?So Harry Ron and Hermione entered the little shop together .It appeared at first glance to be empty but no sooner had the door swung shut behind them than they heard a familiar voice issuing from behind a rack of dress robes in spangled green and blue . .not a child in case you havent noticed Mother .I am perfectly capable of doing my shopping alone .There was a clucking noise and a voice Harry recognized as that of Madam Malkin the owner said Now dear your mothers quite right none of us is supposed to go wandering around on our own anymore its nothing to do with being a child Watch where youre sticking that pin will you !A teenage boy with a pale pointed face and white blond hair appeared from behind the rack wearing a handsome set of dark green robes that glittered with pins around the hem and the edges of the sleeves .He strode to the mirror and examined himself it was a few moments before he noticed Harry Ron and Hermione reflected over his shoulder .His light gray eyes narrowed .If youre wondering what the smell is Mother a Mudblood just walked in said Draco Malfoy .I dont think theres any need for language like that !said Madam Malkin scurrying out from behind the clothes rack holding a tape measure and a wand .And I dont want wands drawn in my shop either !she added hastily for a glance toward the door had shown her Harry and Ron both standing there with their wands out and pointing at Malfoy .Hermione who was standing slightly behind them whispered No dont honestly its not worth it .Yeah like youd dare do magic out of school sneered Malfoy .Who blacked your eye Granger ?I want to send them flowers .Thats quite enough !said Madam Malkin sharply looking over her shoulder for support .Madam please Narcissa Malfoy strolled out from behind the clothes rack .Put those away she said coldly to Harry and Ron .If you attack my son again I shall ensure that it is the last thing you ever do .Really ?said Harry taking a step forward and gazing into the smoothly arrogant face that for all its pallor still resembled her sisters .He was as tall as she was now .Going to get a few Death Eater pals to do us in are you ?Madam Malkin squealed and clutched at her heart .Really you shouldnt accuse dangerous thing to say wands away please !But Harry did not lower his wand .Narcissa Malfoy smiled unpleasantly .I see that being Dumbledores favorite has given you a false sense of security Harry Potter .But Dumbledore wont always be there to protect you .Harry looked mockingly all around the shop .Wow .look at that .hes not here now !So why not have a go ?They might be able to find you a double cell in Azkaban with your loser of a husband !Malfoy made an angry movement toward Harry but stumbled over his overlong robe .Ron laughed loudly .Dont you dare talk to my mother like that Potter !Malfoy snarled .Its all right Draco said Narcissa restraining him with her thin white fingers upon his shoulder .I expect Potter will be reunited with dear Sirius before I am reunited with Lucius .Harry raised his wand higher .Harry no !moaned Hermione grabbing his arm and attempting to push it down by his side .Think .You mustnt .Youll be in such trouble .Madam Malkin dithered for a moment on the spot then seemed to decide to act as though nothing was happening in the hope that it wouldnt .She bent toward Malfoy who was still glaring at Harry .I think this left sleeve could come up a little bit more dear let me just Ouch !bellowed Malfoy slapping her hand away .Watch where youre putting your pins woman !Mother I dont think I want these anymore He pulled the robes over his head and threw them onto the floor at Madam Malkins feet .Youre right Draco said Narcissa with a contemptuous glance at Hermione now I know the kind of scum that shops here .Well do better at Twilfitt and Tattings .And with that the pair of them strode out of the shop Malfoy taking care to bang as hard as he could into Ron on the way out .Well reallyl said Madam Malkin snatching up the fallen robes and moving the tip of her wand over them like a vacuum cleaner so that it removed all the dust .She was distracted all through the fitting of Rons and Harrys new robes tried to sell Hermione wizards dress robes instead of witchs and when she finally bowed them out of the shop it was with an air of being glad to see the back of them .Got evrything ?asked Hagrid brightly when they reappeared at his side .Just about said Harry .Did you see the Malfoys ?Yeah said Hagrid unconcerned .Bu they wouldn dare make trouble in the middle o Diagon Alley Harry .Don worry abou them .Harry Ron and Hermione exchanged looks but before they could disabuse Hagrid of this comfortable notion Mr and Mrs Weasley and Ginny appeared all clutching heavy packages of books .Everyone all right ?said Mrs Weasley .Got your robes ?Right then we can pop in at the Apothecary and Eeylops on the way to Fred and Georges stick close now .Neither Harry nor Ron bought any ingredients at the Apothecary seeing that they were no longer studying Potions but both bought large boxes of owl nuts for Hedwig and Pigwidgeon at Eeylops Owl Emporium .Then with Mrs Weasley checking her watch every minute or so they headed farther along the street in search of Weasleys Wizard Wheezes the joke shop run by Fred and George .We really havent got too long Mrs Weasley said .So well just have a quick look around and then back to the car .We must be close thats number ninety two .ninetyfour .Whoa said Ron stopping in his tracks .Set against the dull postermuffled shop fronts around them Fred and Georges windows hit the eye like a firework display .Casual passersby were looking back over their shoulders at the windows and a few rather stunnedlooking people had actually come to a halt transfixed .The lefthand window was dazzlingly full of an assortment of goods that revolved popped flashed bounced and shrieked Harrys eyes began to water just looking at it .The righthand window was covered with a gigantic poster purple like those of the Ministry but emblazoned with flashing yellow letters WHY ARE YOU WORRYING ABOUT YOUKNOWWHO ?YOU SHOULD BE WORRYING ABOUT UNOPOO THE CONSTIPATION SENSATION THATS GRIPPING THE NATION !Harry started to laugh .He heard a weak sort of moan beside him and looked around to see Mrs Weasley gazing dumbfounded at the poster .Her lips moved silently mouthing the name UNoPoo .Theyll be murdered in their beds !she whispered .No they wont !said Ron who like Harry was laughing .This is brilliant !And he and Harry led the way into the shop .It was packed with customers Harry could not get near the shelves .He stared around looking up at the boxes piled to the ceiling Here were the Skiving Snackboxes that the twins had perfected during their last unfinished year at Hogwarts Harry noticed that the Nosebleed Nougat was most popular with only one battered box left on the shelf .There were bins full of trick wands the cheapest merely turning into rubber chickens or pairs of briefs when waved the most expensive beating the unwary user around the head and neck and boxes of quills which came in Self Inking SpellChecking and SmartAnswer varieties .A space cleared in the crowd and Harry pushed his way toward the counter where a gaggle of delighted tenyearolds was watching a tiny little wooden man slowly ascending the steps to a real set of gallows both perched on a box that read REUSABLE HANGMAN SPELL IT OR HELL SWING ! ‘Patented Daydream Charms .Hermione had managed to squeeze through to a large display near the counter and was reading the information on the back of a box bearing a highly colored picture of a handsome youth and a swooning girl who were standing on the deck of a pirate ship . ‘One simple incantation and you will enter a top quality highly realistic thirtyminute daydream easy to fit into the average school lesson and virtually undetectable side effects include vacant expression and minor drooling .Not for sale to undersixteens .You know said Hermione looking up at Harry that really is extraordinary magic !For that Hermione said a voice behind them you can have one for free .A beaming Fred stood before them wearing a set of magenta robes that clashed magnificently with his flaming hair .How are you Harry ?They shook hands .And whats happened to your eye Hermione ?Your punching telescope she said ruefully .Oh blimey I forgot about those said Fred .Here He pulled a tub out of his pocket and handed it to her she unscrewed it gingerly to reveal a thick yellow paste .Just dab it on that bruisell be gone within the hour said Fred .We had to find a decent bruise remover .Were testing most of our products on ourselves .Hermione looked nervous .It is safe isnt it ?she asked .Course it is said Fred bracingly .Come on Harry Ill give you a tour .Harry left Hermione dabbing her black eye with paste and followed Fred toward the back of the shop where he saw a stand of card and rope tricks .Muggle magic tricks !said Fred happily pointing them out .For freaks like Dad you know who love Muggle stuff .Its not a big earner but we do fairly steady business theyre great novelties .Oh heres George .Freds twin shook Harrys hand energetically .Giving him the tour ?Come through the back Harry thats where were making the real money pocket anything you and youll pay in more than GalleonsV he added warningly to a small boy who hastily whipped his hand out of the tub labeled EDIBLE DARK MARKS THEYLL MAKE ANYONE SICK !George pushed back a curtain beside the Muggle tricks and Harry saw a darker less crowded room .The packaging on the products lining these shelves was more subdued .Weve just developed this more serious line said Fred .Funny how it happened .You wouldnt believe how many people even people who work at the Ministry cant do a decent Shield Charm said George .Course they didnt have you teaching them Harry .Thats right .Well we thought Shield Hats were a bit of a laugh you know challenge your mate to jinx you while wearing it and watch his face when the jinx just bounces off .But the Ministry bought five hundred for all its support staff !And were still getting massive orders !So weve expanded into a range of Shield Cloaks Shield Gloves . .I mean they wouldnt help much against the Unforgivable Curses but for minor to moderate hexes or jinxes .And then we thought wed get into the whole area of Defense Against the Dark Arts because its such a money spinner continued George enthusiastically .This is cool .Look Instant Darkness Powder were importing it from Peru .Handy if you want to make a quick escape .And our Decoy Detonators are just walking off the shelves look said Fred pointing at a number of weirdlooking black horntype objects that were indeed attempting to scurry out of sight .You just drop one surreptitiously and itll run off and make a nice loud noise out of sight giving you a diversion if you need one .Handy said Harry impressed .Here said George catching a couple and throwing them to Harry .A young witch with short blonde hair poked her head around the curtain Harry saw that she too was wearing magenta staff robes .Theres a customer out here looking for a joke cauldron Mr Weasley and Mr Weasley she said .Harry found it very odd to hear Fred and George called Mr Weasley but they took it in their stride .Right you are Verity Im coming said George promptly .Harry you help yourself to anything you want all right ?No charge .I cant do that !said Harry who had already pulled out his money bag to pay for the Decoy Detonators .You dont pay here said Fred firmly waving away Harrys gold .But You gave us our startup loan we havent forgotten said George sternly .Take whatever you like and just remember to tell people where you got it if they ask .George swept off through the curtain to help with the customers and Fred led Harry back into the main part of the shop to find Hermione and Ginny still poring over the Patented Daydream Charms .Havent you girls found our special WonderWitch products yet ?asked Fred .Follow me ladies .Near the window was an array of violently pink products around which a cluster of excited girls was giggling enthusiastically .Hermione and Ginny both hung back looking wary .There you go said Fred proudly .Best range of love potions youll find anywhere .Ginny raised an eyebrow skeptically .Do they work ?she asked .Certainly they work for up to twentyfour hours at a time depending on the weight of the boy in question and the attractiveness of the girl said George reappearing suddenly at their side .But were not selling them to our sister he added becoming suddenly stern not when shes already got about five boys on the go from what weve Whatever youve heard from Ron is a big fat lie said Ginny calmly leaning forward to take a small pink pot off the shelf .Whats this ?Guaranteed tensecond pimple vanisher said Fred .Excellent on everything from boils to blackheads but dont change the subject .Are you or are you not currently going out with a boy called Dean Thomas ?Yes I am said Ginny .And last time I looked he was definitely one boy not five .What are those ?She was pointing at a number of round balls of fluff in shades of pink and purple all rolling around the bottom of a cage and emitting highpitched squeaks .Pygmy Puffs said George .Miniature puffskeins we cant breed them fast enough .So what about Michael Corner ?I dumped him he was a bad loser said Ginny putting a finger through the bars of the cage and watching the Pygmy Puffs crowd around it .Theyre really cute !Theyre fairly cuddly yes conceded Fred .But youre moving through boyfriends a bit fast arent you ?Ginny turned to look at him her hands on her hips .There was such a Mrs Weasleyish glare on her face that Harry was surprised Fred didnt recoil .Its none of your business .And Ill thank you she added angrily to Ron who had just appeared at Georges elbow laden with merchandise not to tell tales about me to these two !Thats three Galleons nine Sickles and a Knut said Fred examining the many boxes in Rons arms .Cough up .Im your brother !And thats our stuff youre nicking .Three Galleons nine Sickles .Ill knock off the Knut .But I havent got three Galleons nine Sickles !Youd better put it back then and mind you put it on the right shelves .Ron dropped several boxes swore and made a rude hand gesture at Fred that was unfortunately spotted by Mrs Weasley who had chosen that moment to appear .If I see you do that again Ill jinx your fingers together she said sharply .Mum can I have a Pygmy Puff ?said Ginny at once .A what ?said Mrs Weasley warily .Look theyre so sweet .Mrs Weasley moved aside to look at the Pygmy Puffs and Harry Ron and Hermione momentarily had an unimpeded view out of the window .Draco Malfoy was hurrying up the street alone .As he passed Weasleys Wizard Wheezes he glanced over his shoulder .Seconds later he moved beyond the scope of the window and they lost sight of him .Wonder where his mummy is ?said Harry frowning .Given her the slip by the looks of it said Ron .Why though ?said Hermione .Harry said nothing he was thinking too hard .Narcissa Malfoy would not have let her precious son out of her sight willingly Malfoy must have made a real effort to free himself from her clutches .Harry knowing and loathing Malfoy was sure the reason could not be innocent .He glanced around .Mrs Weasley and Ginny were bending over the Pygmy Puffs .Mr Weasley was delightedly examining a pack of Muggle marked playing cards .Fred and George were both helping customers .On the other side of the glass Hagrid was standing with his back to them looking up and down the street .Get under here quick said Harry pulling his Invisibility Cloak out of his bag .Oh I dont know Harry said Hermione looking uncertainly toward Mrs Weasley .Come on said Ron .She hesitated for a second longer then ducked under the cloak with Harry and Ron .Nobody noticed them vanish they were all too interested in Fred and Georges products .Harry Ron and Hermione squeezed their way out of the door as quickly as they could but by the time they gained the street Malfoy had disappeared just as successfully as they had .He was going in that direction murmured Harry as quietly as possible so that the humming Hagrid would not hear them .Cmon .They scurried along peering left and right through shop windows and doors until Hermione pointed ahead .Thats him isnt it ?she whispered .Turning left ?Big surprise whispered Ron .For Malfoy had glanced around then slid into Knockturn Alley and out of sight .Quick or well lose him said Harry speeding up .Our feetll be seen !said Hermione anxiously as the cloak flapped a little around their ankles it was much more difficult hiding all three of them under the cloak nowadays .It doesnt matter said Harry impatiently .Just hurry !But Knockturn Alley the side street devoted to the Dark Arts looked completely deserted .They peered into windows as they passed but none of the shops seemed to have any customers at all .Harry supposed it was a bit of a giveaway in these dangerous and suspicious times to buy Dark artifacts or at least to be seen buying them .Hermione gave his arm a hard pinch .Ouch !Shh !Look !Hes in there !she breathed in Harrys ear .They had drawn level with the only shop in Knockturn Alley that Harry had ever visited Borgin and Burkes which sold a wide variety of sinister objects .There in the midst of the cases full of skulls and old bottles stood Draco Malfoy with his back to them just visible beyond the very same large black cabinet in which Harry had once hidden to avoid Malfoy and his father .Judging by the movements of Malfoys hands he was talking animatedly .The proprietor of the shop Mr Borgin an oilyhaired stooping man stood facing Malfoy .He was wearing a curious expression of mingled resentment and fear .If only we could hear what theyre saying !said Hermione .We can !said Ron excitedly .Hang on damn He dropped a couple more of the boxes he was still clutching as he fumbled with the largest .Extendable Ears look !Fantastic !said Hermione as Ron unraveled the long fleshcolored strings and began to feed them toward the bottom of the door .Oh I hope the door isnt Imperturbable No !said Ron gleefully .Listen !They put their heads together and listened intently to the ends of the strings through which Malfoys voice could be heard loud and clear as though a radio had been turned on . .you know how to fix it ?Possibly said Borgin in a tone that suggested he was unwilling to commit himself .Ill need to see it though .Why dont you bring it into the shop ?I cant said Malfoy .Its got to stay put .I just need you to tell me how to do it .Harry saw Borgin lick his lips nervously .Well without seeing it I must say it will be a very difficult job perhaps impossible .I couldnt guarantee anything .No ?said Malfoy and Harry knew just by his tone that Malfoy was sneering .Perhaps this will make you more confident .He moved toward Borgin and was blocked from view by the cabinet .Harry Ron and Hermione shuffled sideways to try and keep him in sight but all they could see was Borgin looking very frightened .Tell anyone said Malfoy and there will be retribution .You know Fenrir Greyback ?Hes a family friend .Hell be dropping in from time to time to make sure youre giving the problem your full attention .There will be no need for Ill decide that said Malfoy .Well Id better be off .And dont forget to keep that one safe Ill need it .Perhaps youd like to take it now ?No of course I wouldnt you stupid little man how would I look carrying that down the street ?Just dont sell it .Of course not .sir .Borgin made a bow as deep as the one Harry had once seen him give Lucius Malfoy .Not a word to anyone Borgin and that includes my mother understand ?Naturally naturally murmured Borgin bowing again .Next moment the bell over the door tinkled loudly as Malfoy stalked out of the shop looking very pleased with himself .He passed so close to Harry Ron and Hermione that they felt the cloak flutter around their knees again .Inside the shop Borgin remained frozen his unctuous smile had vanished he looked worried .What was that about ?whispered Ron reeling in the Extendable Ears .Dunno said Harry thinking hard .He wants something mended .and he wants to reserve something in there .Could you see what he pointed at when he said ‘that one ?No he was behind that cabinet You two stay here whispered Hermione .What are you ?But Hermione had already ducked out from under the cloak .She checked her hair in the reflection in the glass then marched into the shop setting the bell tinkling again .Ron hastily fed the Extendable Ears back under the door and passed one of the strings to Harry .Hello horrible morning isnt it ?Hermione said brightly to Borgin who did not answer but cast her a suspicious look .Humming cheerily Hermione strolled through the jumble of objects on display .Is this necklace for sale ?she asked pausing beside a glassfronted case .If youve got one and a half thousand Galleons said Mr Borgin coldly .Oh er no I havent got quite that much said Hermione walking on .And .what about this lovely um skull ?Sixteen Galleons .So its for sale then ?It isnt being .kept for anyone ?Mr Borgin squinted at her .Harry had the nasty feeling he knew exactly what Hermione was up to .Apparently Hermione felt she had been rumbled too because she suddenly threw caution to the winds .The thing is that er boy who was in here just now Draco Malfoy well hes a friend of mine and I want to get him a birthday present but if hes already reserved anything I obviously dont want to get him the same thing so .um .It was a pretty lame story in Harrys opinion and apparently Borgin thought so too .Out he said sharply .Get out !Hermione did not wait to be asked twice but hurried to the door with Borgin at her heels .As the bell tinkled again Borgin slammed the door behind her and put up the closed sign .Ah well said Ron throwing the cloak back over Hermione .Worth a try but you were a bit obvious Well next time you can show me how its done Master of Mystery !she snapped .Ron and Hermione bickered all the way back to Weasleys Wizard Wheezes where they were forced to stop so that they could dodge undetected around a very anxiouslooking Mrs Weasley and Hagrid who had clearly noticed their absence .Once in the shop Harry whipped off the Invisibility Cloak hid it in his bag and joined in with the other two when they insisted in answer to Mrs Weasleys accusations that they had been in the back room all along and that she could not have looked properly .7 THE SLUG CLUB Harry spent a lot of the last week of the holidays pondering the meaning of Malfoys behavior in Knockturn Alley .What disturbed him most was the satisfied look on Malfoys face as he had left the shop .Nothing that made Malfoy look that happy could be good news .To his slight annoyance however neither Ron nor Hermione seemed quite as curious about Malfoys activities as he was or at least they seemed to get bored of discussing it after a few days .Yes Ive already agreed it was fishy Harry said Hermione a little impatiently .She was sitting on the windowsill in Fred and Georges room with her feet up on one of the cardboard boxes and had only grudgingly looked up from her new copy of Advanced Rune Translation .But havent we agreed there could be a lot of explanations ?Maybe hes broken his Hand of Glory said Ron vaguely as he attempted to straighten his broomsticks bent tail twigs .Remember that shriveledup arm Malfoy had ?But what about when he said ‘Dont forget to keep that one safe ?asked Harry for the umpteenth time .That sounded to me like Borgins got another one of the broken objects and Malfoy wants both .You reckon ?said Ron now trying to scrape some dirt off his broom handle .Yeah I do said Harry .When neither Ron nor Hermione answered he said Malfoys fathers in Azkaban .Dont you think Malfoyd like revenge ?Ron looked up blinking .Malfoy revenge ?What can he do about it ?Thats my point I dont know !said Harry frustrated .But hes up to something and I think we should take it seriously .His fathers a Death Eater and Harry broke off his eyes fixed on the window behind Hermione his mouth open .A startling thought had just occurred to him .Harry ?said Hermione in an anxious voice .Whats wrong ?Your scars not hurting again is it ?asked Ron nervously .Hes a Death Eater said Harry slowly .Hes replaced his father as a Death Eater !There was a silence then Ron erupted in laughter .Malfoy ?Hes sixteen Harry !You think YouKnow Who would let Malfoy join ?It seems very unlikely Harry said Hermione in a repressive sort of voice .What makes you think ?In Madam Malkins .She didnt touch him but he yelled and jerked his arm away from her when she went to roll up his sleeve .It was his left arm .Hes been branded with the Dark Mark .Ron and Hermione looked at each other .Well .said Ron sounding thoroughly unconvinced .I think he just wanted to get out of there Harry said Hermione .He showed Borgin something we couldnt see Harry pressed on stubbornly .Something that seriously scared Borgin .It was the Mark I know it he was showing Borgin who he was dealing with you saw how seriously Borgin took him !Ron and Hermione exchanged another look .Im not sure Harry .Yeah I still dont reckon YouKnowWho would let Malfoy join .Annoyed but absolutely convinced he was right Harry snatched up a pile of filthy Quidditch robes and left the room Mrs Weasley had been urging them for days not to leave their washing and packing until the last moment .On the landing he bumped into Ginny who was returning to her room carrying a pile of freshly laundered clothes .I wouldnt go in the kitchen just now she warned him .Theres a lot of Phlegm around .Ill be careful not to slip in it .Harry smiled .Sure enough when he entered the kitchen it was to find Fleur sitting at the kitchen table in full flow about plans for her wedding to Bill while Mrs Weasley kept watch over a pile of selfpeeling sprouts looking badtempered . .Bill and I ave almost decided on only two bridesmaids Ginny and Gabrielle will look very sweet togezzer .I am theenking of dressing zem in pale gold pink would of course be orrible with Ginnys air Ah Harry !said Mrs Weasley loudly cutting across Fleurs monologue .Good I wanted to explain about the security arrangements for the journey to Hogwarts tomorrow .Weve got Ministry cars again and there will be Aurors waiting at the station Is Tonks going to be there ?asked Harry handing over his Quidditch things .No I dont think so shes been stationed somewhere else from what Arthur said .She has let erself go zat Tonks Fleur mused examining her own stunning reflection in the back of a teaspoon .A big mistake if you ask Yes thank you said Mrs Weasley tartly cutting across Fleur again .Youd better get on Harry I want the trunks ready tonight if possible so we dont have the usual lastminute scramble .And in fact their departure the following morning was smoother than usual .The Ministry cars glided up to the front of the Burrow to find them waiting trunks packed Hermiones cat Crookshanks safely enclosed in his traveling basket and Hedwig Rons owl Pigwidgeon and Ginnys new purple Pygmy Puff Arnold in cages .Au revoir Ariy said Fleur throatily kissing him goodbye .Ron hurried forward looking hopeful but Ginny stuck out her foot and Ron fell sprawling in the dust at Fleurs feet .Furious redfaced and dirt spattered he hurried into the car without saying goodbye .There was no cheerful Hagrid waiting for them at Kings Cross Station .Instead two grimfaced bearded Aurors in dark Muggle suits moved forward the moment the cars stopped and flanking the party marched them into the station without speaking .Quick quick through the barrier said Mrs Weasley who seemed a little flustered by this austere efficiency .Harry had better go first with She looked inquiringly at one of the Aurors who nodded briefly seized Harrys upper arm and attempted to steer him toward the barrier between platforms nine and ten .I can walk thanks said Harry irritably jerking his arm out of the Aurors grip .He pushed his trolley directly at the solid barrier ignoring his silent companion and found himself a second later standing on platform nine and threequarters where the scarlet Hogwarts Express stood belching steam over the crowd .Hermione and the Weasleys joined him within seconds .Without waiting to consult his grimfaced Auror Harry motioned to Ron and Hermione to follow him up the platform looking for an empty compartment .We cant Harry said Hermione looking apologetic .Ron and Ive got to go to the prefects carriage first and then patrol the corridors for a bit .Oh yeah I forgot said Harry .Youd better get straight on the train all of you youve only got a few minutes to go said Mrs Weasley consulting her watch .Well have a lovely term Ron .Mr Weasley can I have a quick word ?said Harry making up his mind on the spur of the moment .Of course said Mr Weasley who looked slightly surprised but followed Harry out of earshot of the others nevertheless .Harry had thought it through carefully and come to the conclusion that if he was to tell anyone Mr Weasley was the right person firstly because he worked at the Ministry and was therefore in the best position to make further investigations and secondly because he thought that there was not too much risk of Mr Weasley exploding with anger .He could see Mrs Weasley and the grimfaced Auror casting the pair of them suspicious looks as they moved away .When we were in Diagon Alley Harry began but Mr Weasley forestalled him with a grimace .Am I about to discover where you Ron and Hermione disappeared to while you were supposed to be in the back room of Fred and Georges shop ?How did you ?Harry please .Youre talking to the man who raised Fred and George .Er .yeah all right we werent in the back room .Very well then lets hear the worst .Well we followed Draco Malfoy .We used my Invisibility Cloak .Did you have any particular reason for doing so or was it a mere whim ?Because I thought Malfoy was up to something said Harry disregarding Mr Weasleys look of mingled exasperation and amusement .Hed given his mother the slip and I wanted to know why .Of course you did said Mr Weasley sounding resigned .Well ?Did you find out why ?He went into Borgin and Burkes said Harry and started bullying the bloke in there Borgin to help him fix something .And he said he wanted Borgin to keep something else for him .He made it sound like it was the same kind of thing that needed fixing .Like they were a pair .And .Harry took a deep breath .Theres something else .We saw Malfoy jump about a mile when Madam Malkin tried to touch his left arm .I think hes been branded with the Dark Mark .I think hes replaced his father as a Death Eater .Mr Weasley looked taken aback .After a moment he said Harry I doubt whether YouKnowWho would allow a sixteenyearold Does anyone really know what YouKnowWho would or wouldnt do ?asked Harry angrily .Mr Weasley Im sorry but isnt it worth investigating ?If Malfoy wants something fixing and he needs to threaten Borgin to get it done its probably something Dark or dangerous isnt it ?I doubt it to be honest Harry said Mr Weasley slowly .You see when Lucius Malfoy was arrested we raided his house .We took away everything that might have been dangerous .I think you missed something said Harry stubbornly .Well maybe said Mr Weasley but Harry could tell that Mr Weasley was humoring him .There was a whistle behind them nearly everyone had boarded the train and the doors were closing .Youd better hurry said Mr Weasley as Mrs Weasley cried Harry quickly !He hurried forward and Mr and Mrs Weasley helped him load his trunk onto the train .Now dear youre coming to us for Christmas its all fixed with Dumbledore so well see you quite soon said Mrs Weasley through the window as Harry slammed the door shut behind him and the train began to move .You make sure you look after yourself and The train was gathering speed .be good and She was jogging to keep up now .stay safe !Harry waved until the train had turned a corner and Mr and Mrs Weasley were lost to view then turned to see where the others had got to .He supposed Ron and Hermione were cloistered in the prefects carriage but Ginny was a little way along the corridor chatting to some friends .He made his way toward her dragging his trunk .People stared shamelessly as he approached .They even pressed their faces against the windows of their compartments to get a look at him .He had expected an upswing in the amount of gaping and gawping he would have to endure this term after all the Chosen One rumors in the Daily Prophet but he did not enjoy the sensation of standing in a very bright spotlight .He tapped Ginny on the shoulder .Fancy trying to find a compartment ?I cant Harry I said Id meet Dean said Ginny brightly .See you later .Right said Harry .He felt a strange twinge of annoyance as she walked away her long red hair dancing behind her he had become so used to her presence over the summer that he had almost forgotten that Ginny did not hang around with him Ron and Hermione while at school .Then he blinked and looked around He was surrounded by mesmerized girls .Hi Harry !said a familiar voice from behind him .Neville !said Harry in relief turning to see a round faced boy struggling toward him .Hello Harry said a girl with long hair and large misty eyes who was just behind Neville .Luna hi how are you ?Very well thank you said Luna .She was clutching a magazine to her chest large letters on the front announced that there was a pair of free Spectrespecs inside .Quibbler still going strong then ?asked Harry who felt a certain fondness for the magazine having given it an exclusive interview the previous year .Oh yes circulations well up said Luna happily .Lets find seats said Harry and the three of them set off along the train through hordes of silently staring students .At last they found an empty compartment and Harry hurried inside gratefully .Theyre even staring at us !said Neville indicating himself and Luna .Because were with you !Theyre staring at you because you were at the Ministry too said Harry as he hoisted his trunk into the luggage rack .Our little adventure there was all over the Daily Prophet you mustve seen it .Yes I thought Gran would be angry about all the publicity said Neville but she was really pleased .Says Im starting to live up to my dad at long last .She bought me a new wand look !He pulled it out and showed it to Harry .Cherry and unicorn hair he said proudly .We think it was one of the last Ollivander ever sold he vanished next day oi come back here Trevor !And he dived under the seat to retrieve his toad as it made one of its frequent bids for freedom .Are we still doing D .A .meetings this year Harry ?asked Luna who was detaching a pair of psychedelic spectacles from the middle of The Quibbler .No point now weve got rid of Umbridge is there ?said Harry sitting down .Neville bumped his head against the seat as he emerged from under it .He looked most disappointed .I liked the D .A .I learned loads with you !I enjoyed the meetings too said Luna serenely .It was like having friends .This was one of those uncomfortable things Luna often said and which made Harry feel a squirming mixture of pity and embarrassment .Before he could respond however there was a disturbance outside their compartment door a group of fourthyear girls was whispering and giggling together on the other side of the glass .You ask him !No you !Ill do it !And one of them a boldlooking girl with large dark eyes a prominent chin and long black hair pushed her way through the door .Hi Harry Im Romilda Romilda Vane she said loudly and confidently .Why dont you join us in our compartment ?You dont have to sit with them she added in a stage whisper indicating Nevilles bottom which was sticking out from under the seat again as he groped around for Trevor and Luna who was now wearing her free Spectrespecs which gave her the look of a demented multicolored owl .Theyre friends of mine said Harry coldly .Oh said the girl looking very surprised .Oh .Okay .And she withdrew sliding the door closed behind her .People expect you to have cooler friends than us said Luna once again displaying her knack for embarrassing honesty .You are cool said Harry shortly .None of them was at the Ministry .They didnt fight with me .Thats a very nice thing to say beamed Luna .Then she pushed her Spectrespecs farther up her nose and settled down to read The Quibbler .We didnt face him though said Neville emerging from under the seat with fluff and dust in his hair and a resignedlooking Trevor in his hand .You did .You should hear my gran talk about you . ‘That Harry Potters got more backbone than the whole Ministry of Magic put together .Shed give anything to have you as a grandson .Harry laughed uncomfortably and changed the subject to O .W .L .results as soon as he could .While Neville recited his grades and wondered aloud whether he would be allowed to take a Transfiguration N .E .W .T .with only an Acceptable Harry watched him without really listening .Nevilles childhood had been blighted by Voldemort just as much as Harrys had but Neville had no idea how close he had come to having Harrys destiny .The prophecy could have referred to either of them yet for his own inscrutable reasons Voldemort had chosen to believe that Harry was the one meant .Had Voldemort chosen Neville it would be Neville sitting opposite Harry bearing the lightningshaped scar and the weight of the prophecy .Or would it ?Would Nevilles mother have died to save him as Lily had died for Harry ?Surely she would .But what if she had been unable to stand between her son and Voldemort ?Would there then have been no Chosen One at all ?An empty seat where Neville now sat and a scarless Harry who would have been kissed good bye by his own mother not Rons ?You all right Harry ?You look funny said Neville .Harry started .Sorry I Wrackspurt got you ?asked Luna sympathetically peering at Harry through her enormous colored spectacles .I what ?A Wrackspurt .Theyre invisible .They float in through your ears and make your brain go fuzzy she said .I thought I felt one zooming around in here .She flapped her hands at thin air as though beating off large invisible moths .Harry and Neville caught each others eyes and hastily began to talk of Quidditch .The weather beyond the train windows was as patchy as it had been all summer they passed through stretches of the chilling mist then out into weak clear sunlight .It was during one of the clear spells when the sun was visible almost directly overhead that Ron and Hermione entered the compartment at last .Wish the lunch trolley would hurry up Im starving said Ron longingly slumping into the seat beside Harry and rubbing his stomach .Hi Neville .Hi Luna .Guess what ?he added turning to Harry .Malfoys not doing prefect duty .Hes just sitting in his compartment with the other Slytherins we saw him when we passed .Harry sat up straight interested .It was not like Malfoy to pass up the chance to demonstrate his power as prefect which he had happily abused all the previous year .What did he do when he saw you ?The usual said Ron indifferently demonstrating a rude hand gesture .Not like him though is it ?Well that is he did the hand gesture again but why isnt he out there bullying first years ?Dunno said Harry but his mind was racing .Didnt this look as though Malfoy had more important things on his mind than bullying younger students ?Maybe he preferred the Inquisitorial Squad said Hermione .Maybe being a prefect seems a bit tame after that .I dont think so said Harry .I think hes But before he could expound on his theory the compartment door slid open again and a breathless third year girl stepped inside .Im supposed to deliver these to Neville Longbottom and Harry PPotter she faltered as her eyes met Harrys and she turned scarlet .She was holding out two scrolls of parchment tied with violet ribbon .Perplexed Harry and Neville took the scroll addressed to each of them and the girl stumbled back out of the compartment .What is it ?Ron demanded as Harry unrolled his .An invitation said Harry .Harry I would be delighted if you would join me for a bite of lunch in compartment C .Sincerely Professor H .E .F .Slug horn Whos Professor Slughorn ?asked Neville looking perplexedly at his own invitation .New teacher said Harry .Well I suppose well have to go wont we ?But what does he want me for ?asked Neville nervously as though he was expecting detention .No idea said Harry which was not entirely true though he had no proof yet that his hunch was correct .Listen he added seized by a sudden brain wave lets go under the Invisibility Cloak then we might get a good look at Malfoy on the way see what hes up to .This idea however came to nothing The corridors which were packed with people on the lookout for the lunch trolley were impossible to negotiate while wearing the cloak .Harry stowed it regretfully back in his bag reflecting that it would have been nice to wear it just to avoid all the staring which seemed to have increased in intensity even since he had last walked down the train .Every now and then students would hurtle out of their compartments to get a better look at him .The exception was Cho Chang who darted into her compartment when she saw Harry coming .As Harry passed the window he saw her deep in determined conversation with her friend Marietta who was wearing a very thick layer of makeup that did not entirely obscure the odd formation of pimples still etched across her face .Smirking slightly Harry pushed on .When they reached compartment C they saw at once that they were not Slughorns only invitees although judging by the enthusiasm of Slughorns welcome Harry was the most warmly anticipated .Harry mboy !said Slughorn jumping up at the sight of him so that his great velvetcovered belly seemed to fill all the remaining space in the compartment .His shiny bald head and great silvery mustache gleamed as brightly in the sunlight as the golden buttons on his waistcoat .Good to see you good to see you !And you must be Mr Longbottom !Neville nodded looking scared .At a gesture from Slughorn they sat down opposite each other in the only two empty seats which were nearest the door .Harry glanced around at their fellow guests .He recognized a Slytherin from their year a tall black boy with high cheekbones and long slanting eyes there were also two seventhyear boys Harry did not know and squashed in the corner beside Slughorn and looking as though she was not entirely sure how she had got there Ginny .Now do you know everyone ?Slughorn asked Harry and Neville .Blaise Zabini is in your year of course Zabini did not make any sign of recognition or greeting nor did Harry or Neville Gryffindor and Slytherin students loathed each other on principle .This is Cormac McLaggen perhaps youve come across each other ?No ?McLaggen a large wiryhaired youth raised a hand and Harry and Neville nodded back at him .and this is Marcus Belby I dont know whether ?Belby who was thin and nervouslooking gave a strained smile .and this charming young lady tells me she knows you !Slughorn finished .Ginny grimaced at Harry and Neville from behind Slughorns back .Well now this is most pleasant said Slughorn cozily .A chance to get to know you all a little better .Here take a napkin .Ive packed my own lunch the trolley as I remember it is heavy on licorice wands and a poor old mans digestive system isnt quite up to such things .Pheasant Belby ?Belby started and accepted what looked like half a cold pheasant .I was just telling young Marcus here that I had the pleasure of teaching his Uncle Damocles Slughorn told Harry and Neville now passing around a basket of rolls .Outstanding wizard outstanding and his Order of Merlin most welldeserved .Do you see much of your uncle Marcus ?Unfortunately Belby had just taken a large mouthful of pheasant in his haste to answer Slughorn he swallowed too fast turned purple and began to choke .Anapneo said Slughorn calmly pointing his wand at Belby whose airway seemed to clear at once .Not .not much of him no gasped Belby his eyes streaming .Well of course I daresay hes busy said Slughorn looking questioningly at Belby .I doubt he invented the Wolfsbane Potion without considerable hard work !I suppose .said Belby who seemed afraid to take another bite of pheasant until he was sure that Slughorn had finished with him .Er .he and my dad dont get on very well you see so I dont really know much about .His voice tailed away as Slughorn gave him a cold smile and turned to McLaggen instead .Now you Cormac said Slughorn I happen to know you see a lot of your Uncle Tiberius because he has a rather splendid picture of the two of you hunting nogtails in I think Norfolk ?Oh yeah that was fun that was said McLaggen .We went with Bertie Higgs and Rufus Scrimgeour this was before he became Minister obviously Ah you know Bertie and Rufus too ?beamed Slughorn now offering around a small tray of pies somehow Belby was missed out .Now tell me .It was as Harry had suspected .Everyone here seemed to have been invited because they were connected to somebody wellknown or influential everyone except Ginny .Zabini who was interrogated after McLaggen turned out to have a famously beautiful witch for a mother from what Harry could make out she had been married seven times each of her husbands dying mysteriously and leaving her mounds of gold .It was Nevilles turn next This was a very uncomfortable ten minutes for Nevilles parents well known Aurors had been tortured into insanity by Bellatrix Lestrange and a couple of Death Eater cronies .At the end of Nevilles interview Harry had the impression that Slughorn was reserving judgment on Neville yet to see whether he had any of his parents flair .And now said Slughorn shifting massively in his seat with the air of a compere introducing his star act .Harry Potter !Where to begin ?I feel I barely scratched the surface when we met over the summer !He contemplated Harry for a moment as though he was a particularly large and succulent piece of pheasant then said The Chosen One theyre calling you now !Harry said nothing .Belby McLaggen and Zabini were all staring at him .Of course said Slughorn watching Harry closely there have been rumors for years .I remember when well after that terrible night Lily James and you survived and the word was that you must have powers beyond the ordinary Zabini gave a tiny little cough that was clearly supposed to indicate amused skepticism .An angry voice burst out from behind Slughorn .Yeah Zabini because youre so talented .at posing .Oh dear !chuckled Slughorn comfortably looking around at Ginny who was glaring at Zabini around Slughorn s great belly .You want to be careful Blaise !I saw this young lady perform the most marvelous BatBogey Hex as I was passing her carriage !I wouldnt cross her !Zabini merely looked contemptuous .Anyway said Slughorn turning back to Harry .Such rumors this summer .Of course one doesnt know what to believe the Prophet has been known to print inaccuracies make mistakes but there seems little doubt given the number of witnesses that there was quite a disturbance at the Ministry and that you were there in the thick of it all !Harry who could not see any way out of this without flatly lying nodded but still said nothing .Slughorn beamed at him .So modest so modest no wonder Dumbledore is so fond you were there then ?But the rest of the stories so sensational of course one doesnt know quite what to believe this fabled prophecy for instance We never heard a prophecy said Neville turning geranium pink as he said it .Thats right said Ginny staunchly .Neville and I were both there too and all this ‘Chosen One rubbish is just the Prophet making things up as usual .You were both there too were you ?said Slughorn with great interest looking from Ginny to Neville but both of them sat clamlike before his encouraging smile .Yes .well .it is true that the Prophet often exaggerates of course .Slughorn said sounding a little disappointed .I remember dear Gwenog telling me Gwenog Jones I mean of course Captain of the Holyhead Harpies He meandered off into a longwinded reminiscence but Harry had the distinct impression that Slughorn had not finished with him and that he had not been convinced by Neville and Ginny .The afternoon wore on with more anecdotes about illustrious wizards Slughorn had taught all of whom had been delighted to join what he called the Slug Club at Hogwarts .Harry could not wait to leave but couldnt see how to do so politely .Finally the train emerged from yet another long misty stretch into a red sunset and Slughorn looked around blinking in the twilight .Good gracious its getting dark already !I didnt notice that theyd lit the lamps !Youd better go and change into your robes all of you .McLaggen you must drop by and borrow that book on nogtails .Harry Blaise any time youre passing .Same goes for you miss he twinkled at Ginny .Well off you go off you go !As he pushed past Harry into the darkening corridor Zabini shot him a filthy look that Harry returned with interest .He Ginny and Neville followed Zabini back along the train .Im glad thats over muttered Neville .Strange man isnt he ?Yeah he is a bit said Harry his eyes on Zabini .How come you ended up in there Ginny ?He saw me hex Zacharias Smith said Ginny .You remember that idiot from Hufflepuff who was in the D .A .He kept on and on asking about what happened at the Ministry and in the end he annoyed me so much I hexed him when Slughorn came in I thought I was going to get detention but he just thought it was a really good hex and invited me to lunch !Mad eh ?Better reason for inviting someone than because their mothers famous said Harry scowling at the back of Zabini s head or because their uncle But he broke off .An idea had just occurred to him a reckless but potentially wonderful idea .In a minutes time Zabini was going to reenter the Slytherin sixthyear compartment and Malfoy would be sitting there thinking himself unheard by anybody except fellow Slytherins .If Harry could only enter unseen behind him what might he not see or hear ?True there was little of the journey left Hogsmeade Station had to be less than half an hour away judging by the wildness of the scenery flashing by the windows but nobody else seemed prepared to take Harrys suspicions seriously so it was down to him to prove them .Ill see you two later said Harry under his breath pulling out his Invisibility Cloak and flinging it over himself .But whatre you ?asked Neville .Later !whispered Harry darting after Zabini as quietly as possible though the rattling of the train made such caution almost pointless .The corridors were almost completely empty now .Nearly everyone had returned to their carriages to change into their school robes and pack up their possessions .Though he was as close as he could get to Zabini without touching him Harry was not quick enough to slip into the compartment when Zabini opened the door .Zabini was already sliding it shut when Harry hastily stuck out his foot to prevent it closing .Whats wrong with this thing ?said Zabini angrily as he smashed the sliding door repeatedly into Harrys foot .Harry seized the door and pushed it open hard Zabini still clinging on to the handle toppled over sideways into Gregory Goyles lap and in the ensuing ruckus Harry darted into the compartment leapt onto Zabinis temporarily empty seat and hoisted himself up into the luggage rack .It was fortunate that Goyle and Zabini were snarling at each other drawing all eyes onto them for Harry was quite sure his feet and ankles had been revealed as the cloak had flapped around them indeed for one horrible moment he thought he saw Malfoys eyes follow his trainer as it whipped upward out of sight .But then Goyle slammed the door shut and flung Zabini off him Zabini collapsed into his own seat looking ruffled Vincent Crabbe returned to his comic and Malfoy sniggering lay back down across two seats with his head in Pansy Parkinsons lap .Harry lay curled uncomfortably under the cloak to ensure that every inch of him remained hidden and watched Pansy stroke the sleek blond hair off Malfoys forehead smirking as she did so as though anyone would have loved to have been in her place .The lanterns swinging from the carriage ceiling cast a bright light over the scene Harry could read every word of Crabbes comic directly below him .So Zabini said Malfoy what did Slughorn want ?Just trying to make up to wellconnected people said Zabini who was still glowering at Goyle .Not that he managed to find many .This information did not seem to please Malfoy .Who else had he invited ?he demanded .McLaggen from Gryffindor said Zabini .Oh yeah his uncles big in the Ministry said Malfoy .someone else called Belby from Ravenclaw Not him hes a prat !said Pansy .and Longbottom Potter and that Weasley girl finished Zabini .Malfoy sat up very suddenly knocking Pansys hand aside .He invited Longbottom ?Well I assume so as Longbottom was there said Zabini indifferently .Whats Longbottom got to interest Slughorn ?Zabini shrugged .Potter precious Potter obviously he wanted a look at ‘the Chosen One sneered Malfoy but that Weasley girl !Whats so special about her ?A lot of boys like her said Pansy watching Malfoy out of the corner of her eyes for his reaction .Even you think shes goodlooking dont you Blaise and we all know how hard you are to please !I wouldnt touch a filthy little blood traitor like her whatever she looked like said Zabini coldly and Pansy looked pleased .Malfoy sank back across her lap and allowed her to resume the stroking of his hair .Well I pity Slughorns taste .Maybe hes going a bit senile .Shame my father always said he was a good wizard in his day .My father used to be a bit of a favorite of his .Slughorn probably hasnt heard Im on the train or I wouldnt bank on an invitation said Zabini .He asked me about Notts father when I first arrived .They used to be old friends apparently but when he heard hed been caught at the Ministry he didnt look happy and Nott didnt get an invitation did he ?I dont think Slughorns interested in Death Eaters .Malfoy looked angry but forced out a singularly humorless laugh .Well who cares what hes interested in ?What is he when you come down to it ?Just some stupid teacher .Malfoy yawned ostentatiously .I mean I might not even be at Hogwarts next year whats it matter to me if some fat old hasbeen likes me or not ?What do you mean you might not be at Hogwarts next year ?said Pansy indignantly ceasing grooming Malfoy at once .Well you never know said Malfoy with the ghost of a smirk .I might have er moved on to bigger and better things .Crouched in the luggage rack under his cloak Harrys heart began to race .What would Ron and Hermione say about this ?Crabbe and Goyle were gawping at Malfoy apparently they had had no inkling of any plans to move on to bigger and better things .Even Zabini had allowed a look of curiosity to mar his haughty features .Pansy resumed the slow stroking of Malfoys hair looking dumbfounded .Do you mean Him ?Malfoy shrugged .Mother wants me to complete my education but personally I dont see it as that important these days .I mean think about it .When the Dark Lord takes over is he going to care how many O .W .L .s or N .E .W .T .s anyones got ?Of course he isnt .Itll be all about the kind of service he received the level of devotion he was shown .And you think youll be able to do something for him ?asked Zabini scathingly .Sixteen years old and not even fully qualified yet ?Ive just said havent I ?Maybe he doesnt care if Im qualified .Maybe the job he wants me to do isnt something that you need to be qualified for said Malfoy quietly .Crabbe and Goyle were both sitting with their mouths open like gargoyles .Pansy was gazing down at Malfoy as though she had never seen anything so awe inspiring .I can see Hogwarts said Malfoy clearly relishing the effect he had created as he pointed out of the blackened window .Wed better get our robes on .Harry was so busy staring at Malfoy he did not notice Goyle reaching up for his trunk as he swung it down it hit Harry hard on the side of the head .He let out an involuntary gasp of pain and Malfoy looked up at the luggage rack frowning .Harry was not afraid of Malfoy but he still did not much like the idea of being discovered hiding under his Invisibility Cloak by a group of unfriendly Slytherins .Eyes still watering and head still throbbing he drew his wand careful not to disarrange the cloak and waited breath held .To his relief Malfoy seemed to decide that he had imagined the noise he pulled on his robes like the others locked his trunk and as the train slowed to a jerky crawl fastened a thick new traveling cloak round his neck .Harry could see the corridors filling up again and hoped that Hermione and Ron would take his things out onto the platform for him he was stuck where he was until the compartment had quite emptied .At last with a final lurch the train came to a complete halt .Goyle threw the door open and muscled his way out into a crowd of second years punching them aside Crabbe and Zabini followed .You go on Malfoy told Pansy who was waiting for him with her hand held out as though hoping he would hold it .I just want to check something .Pansy left .Now Harry and Malfoy were alone in the compartment .People were filing past descending onto the dark platform .Malfoy moved over to the compartment door and let down the blinds so that people in the corridor beyond could not peer in .He then bent down over his trunk and opened it again .Harry peered down over the edge of the luggage rack his heart pumping a little faster .What had Malfoy wanted to hide from Pansy ?Was he about to see the mysterious broken object it was so important to mend ?Petrificus Totalusl Without warning Malfoy pointed his wand at Harry who was instantly paralyzed .As though in slow motion he toppled out of the luggage rack and fell with an agonizing floorshaking crash at Malfoys feet the Invisibility Cloak trapped beneath him his whole body revealed with his legs still curled absurdly into the cramped kneeling position .He couldnt move a muscle he could only gaze up at Malfoy who smiled broadly .I thought so he said jubilantly .I heard Goyles trunk hit you .And I thought I saw something white flash through the air after Zabini came back .His eyes lingered for a moment upon Harrys trainers .You didnt hear anything I care about Potter .But while Ive got you here .And he stamped hard on Harrys face .Harry felt his nose break blood spurted everywhere .Thats from my father .Now lets see .Malfoy dragged the cloak out from under Harrys immobilized body and threw it over him .I dont reckon theyll find you till the trains back in London he said quietly .See you around Potter .or not .And taking care to tread on Harrys fingers Malfoy left the compartment .SNAPE VICTORIOUS Harry could not move a muscle .He lay there beneath the Invisibility Cloak feeling the blood from his nose flow hot and wet over his face listening to the voices and footsteps in the corridor beyond .His immediate thought was that someone surely would check the compartments before the train departed again .But at once came the dispiriting realization that even if somebody looked into the compartment he would be neither seen nor heard .His best hope was that somebody else would walk in and step on him .Harry had never hated Malfoy more than as he lay there like an absurd turtle on its back blood dripping sickeningly into his open mouth .What a stupid situation to have landed himself in .and now the last few footsteps were dying away everyone was shuffling along the dark platform outside he could hear the scraping of trunks and the loud babble of talk .Ron and Hermione would think that he had left the train without them .Once they arrived at Hogwarts and took their places in the Great Hall looked up and down the Gryffindor table a few times and finally realized that he was not there he no doubt would be halfway back to London .He tried to make a sound even a grunt but it was impossible .Then he remembered that some wizards like Dumbledore could perform spells without speaking so he tried to summon his wand which had fallen out of his hand by saying the words Accio Wand over and over again in his head but nothing happened .He thought he could hear the rustling of the trees that surrounded the lake and the faroff hoot of an owl but no hint of a search being made or even he despised himself slightly for hoping it panicked voices wondering where Harry Potter had gone .A feeling of hopelessness spread through him as he imagined the convoy of thestraldrawn carriages trundling up to the school and the muffled yells of laughter issuing from whichever carriage Malfoy was riding in where he could be recounting his attack on Harry to Crabbe Goyle Zabini and Pansy Parkinson .The train lurched causing Harry to roll over onto his side .Now he was staring at the dusty underside of the seats instead of the ceiling .The floor began to vibrate as the engine roared into life .The Express was leaving and nobody knew he was still on it .Then he felt his Invisibility Cloak fly off him and a voice overhead said Wotcher Harry .There was a flash of red light and Harrys body unfroze he was able to push himself into a more dignified sitting position hastily wipe the blood off his bruised face with the back of his hand and raise his head to look up at Tonks who was holding the Invisibility Cloak she had just pulled away .Wed better get out of here quickly she said as the train windows became obscured with steam and they began to move out of the station .Come on well jump .Harry hurried after her into the corridor .She pulled open the train door and leapt onto the platform which seemed to be sliding underneath them as the train gathered momentum .He followed her staggered a little on landing then straightened up in time to see the gleaming scarlet steam engine pick up speed round the corner and disappear from view .The cold night air was soothing on his throbbing nose .Tonks was looking at him he felt angry and embarrassed that he had been discovered in such a ridiculous position .Silently she handed him back the Invisibility Cloak .Who did it ?Draco Malfoy said Harry bitterly .Thanks for .well .No problem said Tonks without smiling .From what Harry could see in the darkness she was as mousyhaired and miserablelooking as she had been when he had met her at the Burrow .I can fix your nose if you stand still .Harry did not think much of this idea he had been intending to visit Madam Pomfrey the matron in whom he had a little more confidence when it came to Healing Spells but it seemed rude to say this so he stayed stockstill and closed his eyes .Episkey said Tonks .Harrys nose felt very hot and then very cold .He raised a hand and felt it gingerly .It seemed to be mended .Thanks a lot !Youd better put that cloak back on and we can walk up to the school said Tonks still unsmiling .As Harry swung the cloak back over himself she waved her wand an immense silvery fourlegged creature erupted from it and streaked off into the darkness .Was that a Patronus ?asked Harry who had seen Dumbledore send messages like this .Yes Im sending word to the castle that Ive got you or theyll worry .Come on wed better not dawdle .They set off toward the lane that led to the school .How did you find me ?I noticed you hadnt left the train and I knew you had that cloak .I thought you might be hiding for some reason .When I saw the blinds were drawn down on that compartment I thought Id check .But what are you doing here anyway ?Harry asked .Im stationed in Hogsmeade now to give the school extra protection said Tonks .Is it just you whos stationed up here or ?No Proudfoot Savage and Dawlish are here too .Dawlish that Auror Dumbledore attacked last year ?Thats right .They trudged up the dark deserted lane following the freshly made carriage tracks .Harry looked sideways at Tonks under his cloak .Last year she had been inquisitive to the point of being a little annoying at times she had laughed easily she had made jokes .Now she seemed older and much more serious and purposeful .Was this all the effect of what had happened at the Ministry ?He reflected uncomfortably that Hermione would have suggested he say something consoling about Sirius to her that it hadnt been her fault at all but he couldnt bring himself to do it .He was far from blaming her for Siriuss death it was no more her fault than anyone elses and much less than his but he did not like talking about Sirius if he could avoid it .And so they tramped on through the cold night in silence Tonks s long cloak whispering on the ground behind them .Having always traveled there by carriage Harry had never before appreciated just how far Hogwarts was from Hogsmeade Station .With great relief he finally saw the tall pillars on either side of the gates each topped with a winged boar .He was cold he was hungry and he was quite keen to leave this new gloomy Tonks behind .But when he put out a hand to push open the gates he found them chained shut .Alohomora he said confidently pointing his wand at the padlock but nothing happened .That wont work on these said Tonks .Dumbledore bewitched them himself .Harry looked around .I could climb a wall he suggested .No you couldnt said Tonks flatly .Antiintruder jinxes on all of them .Securitys been tightened a hundredfold this summer .Well then said Harry starting to feel annoyed at her lack of helpfulness I suppose Ill just have to sleep out here and wait for morning .Someones coming down for you said Tonks .Look .A lantern was bobbing at the distant foot of the castle .Harry was so pleased to see it he felt he could even endure Filchs wheezy criticisms of his tardiness and rants about how his timekeeping would improve with the regular application of thumbscrews .It was not until the glowing yellow light was ten feet away from them and Harry had pulled off his Invisibility Cloak so that he could be seen that he recognized with a rush of pure loathing the uplit hooked nose and long black greasy hair of Severus Snape .Well well well sneered Snape taking out his wand and tapping the padlock once so that the chains snaked backward and the gates creaked open .Nice of you to turn up Potter although you have evidently decided that the wearing of school robes would detract from your appearance .I couldnt change I didnt have my Harry began but Snape cut across him .There is no need to wait Nymphadora Potter is quite ah safe in my hands .I meant Hagrid to get the message said Tonks frowning .Hagrid was late for the startofterm feast just like Potter here so I took it instead .And incidentally said Snape standing back to allow Harry to pass him I was interested to see your new Patronus .He shut the gates in her face with a loud clang and tapped the chains with his wand again so that they slithered clinking back into place .I think you were better off with the old one said Snape the malice in his voice unmistakable .The new one looks weak .As Snape swung the lantern about Harry saw fleetingly a look of shock and anger on Tonkss face .Then she was covered in darkness once more .Good night Harry called to her over his shoulder as he began the walk up to the school with Snape .Thanks for .everything .See you Harry .Snape did not speak for a minute or so .Harry felt as though his body was generating waves of hatred so powerful that it seemed incredible that Snape could not feel them burning him .He had loathed Snape from their first encounter but Snape had placed himself forever and irrevocably beyond the possibility of Harrys forgiveness by his attitude toward Sirius .Whatever Dumbledore said Harry had had time to think over the summer and had concluded that Snape s snide remarks to Sirius about remaining safely hidden while the rest of the Order of the Phoenix were off fighting Voldemort had probably been a powerful factor in Sirius rushing off to the Ministry the night that he had died .Harry clung to this notion because it enabled him to blame Snape which felt satisfying and also because he knew that if anyone was not sorry that Sirius was dead it was the man now striding next to him in the darkness .Fifty points from Gryffindor for lateness I think said Snape .And let me see another twenty for your Muggle attire .You know I dont believe any House has ever been in negative figures this early in the term We havent even started pudding .You might have set a record Potter .The fury and hatred bubbling inside Harry seemed to blaze whitehot but he would rather have been immobilized all the way back to London than tell Snape why he was late .I suppose you wanted to make an entrance did you ?Snape continued .And with no flying car available you decided that bursting into the Great Hall halfway through the feast ought to create a dramatic effect .Still Harry remained silent though he thought his chest might explode .He knew that Snape had come to fetch him for this for the few minutes when he could needle and torment Harry without anyone else listening .They reached the castle steps at last and as the great oaken front doors swung open into the vast flagged entrance hall a burst of talk and laughter and of tinkling plates and glasses greeted them through the doors standing open into the Great Hall .Harry wondered whether he could slip his Invisibility Cloak back on thereby gaining his seat at the long Gryffindor table which inconveniently was the farthest from the entrance hall without being noticed .As though he had read Harrys mind however Snape said No cloak .You can walk in so that everyone sees you which is what you wanted Im sure .Harry turned on the spot and marched straight through the open doors anything to get away from Snape .The Great Hall with its four long House tables and its staff table set at the top of the room was decorated as usual with floating candles that made the plates below glitter and glow .It was all a shimmering blur to Harry however who walked so fast that he was passing the Hufflepuff table before people really started to stare and by the time they were standing up to get a good look at him he had spotted Ron and Hermione sped along the benches toward them and forced his way in between them .Whereve you blimey whatve you done to your face ?said Ron goggling at him along with everyone else in the vicinity .Why whats wrong with it ?said Harry grabbing a spoon and squinting at his distorted reflection .Youre covered in blood !said Hermione .Come here She raised her wand said Tergeol and siphoned off the dried blood .Thanks said Harry feeling his now clean face .Hows my nose looking ?Normal said Hermione anxiously .Why shouldnt it ?Harry what happened ?Weve been terrified !Ill tell you later said Harry curtly .He was very conscious that Ginny Neville Dean and Seamus were listening in even Nearly Headless Nick the Gryffindor ghost had come floating along the bench to eavesdrop .But said Hermione .Not now Hermione said Harry in a darkly significant voice .He hoped very much that they would all assume he had been involved in something heroic preferably involving a couple of Death Eaters and a dementor .Of course Malfoy would spread the story as far and wide as he could but there was always a chance it wouldnt reach too many Gryffindor ears .He reached across Ron for a couple of chicken legs and a handful of chips but before he could take them they vanished to be replaced with puddings .You missed the Sorting anyway said Hermione as Ron dived for a large chocolate gateau .Hat say anything interesting ?asked Harry taking a piece of treacle tart .More of the same really .advising us all to unite in the face of our enemies you know .Dumbledore mentioned Voldemort at all ?Not yet but he always saves his proper speech for after the feast doesnt he ?It cant be long now .Snape said Hagrid was late for the feast Youve seen Snape ?How come ?said Ron between frenzied mouthfuls of gateau .Bumped into him said Harry evasively .Hagrid was only a few minutes late said Hermione .Look hes waving at you Harry .Harry looked up at the staff table and grinned at Hagrid who was indeed waving at him .Hagrid had never quite managed to comport himself with the dignity of Professor McGonagall Head of Gryffindor House the top of whose head came up to somewhere between Hagrids elbow and shoulder as they were sitting side by side and who was looking disapprovingly at this enthusiastic greeting .Harry was surprised to see the Divination teacher Professor Trelawney sitting on Hagrids other side she rarely left her tower room and he had never seen her at the startofterm feast before .She looked as odd as ever glittering with beads and trailing shawls her eyes magnified to enormous size by her spectacles .Having always considered her a bit of a fraud Harry had been shocked to discover at the end of the previous term that it had been she who had made the prediction that caused Lord Voldemort to kill Harrys parents and attack Harry himself .The knowledge had made him even less eager to find himself in her company but thankfully this year he would be dropping Divination .Her great beaconlike eyes swiveled in his direction he hastily looked away toward the Slytherin table .Draco Malfoy was miming the shattering of a nose to raucous laughter and applause .Harry dropped his gaze to his treacle tart his insides burning again .What he would not give to fight Malfoy oneonone .So what did Professor Slughorn want ?Hermione asked .To know what really happened at the Ministry said Harry .Him and everyone else here sniffed Hermione .People were interrogating us about it on the train werent they Ron ?Yeah said Ron .All wanting to know if you really are ‘the Chosen One There has been much talk on that very subject even amongst the ghosts interrupted Nearly Headless Nick inclining his barely connected head toward Harry so that it wobbled dangerously on its ruff .I am considered something of a Potter authority it is widely known that we are friendly .I have assured the spirit community that I will not pester you for information however . ‘Harry Potter knows that he can confide in me with complete confidence I told them . ‘I would rather die than betray his trust .Thats not saying much seeing as youre already dead Ron observed .Once again you show all the sensitivity of a blunt axe said Nearly Headless Nick in affronted tones and he rose into the air and glided back toward the far end of the Gryffindor table just as Dumbledore got to his feet at the staff table .The talk and laughter echoing around the Hall died away almost instantly .The very best of evenings to you !he said smiling broadly his arms opened wide as though to embrace the whole room .What happened to his hand ?gasped Hermione .She was not the only one who had noticed .Dumbledore s right hand was as blackened and dead looking as it had been on the night he had come to fetch Harry from the Dursleys .Whispers swept the room Dumbledore interpreting them correctly merely smiled and shook his purpleandgold sleeve over his injury .Nothing to worry about he said airily .Now .to our new students welcome to our old students welcome back !Another year full of magical education awaits you .His hand was like that when I saw him over the summer Harry whispered to Hermione .I thought hed have cured it by now though .or Madam Pomfrey wouldve done .It looks as if its died said Hermione with a nauseated expression .But there are some injuries you cant cure .old curses .and there are poisons without antidotes . .and Mr Filch our caretaker has asked me to say that there is a blanket ban on any joke items bought at the shop called Weasleys Wizard Wheezes .Those wishing to play for their House Quidditch teams should give their names to their Heads of House as usual .We are also looking for new Quidditch commentators who should do likewise .We are pleased to welcome a new member of staff this year .Professor Slughorn Slughorn stood up his bald head gleaming in the candlelight his big waistcoated belly casting the table below into shadow is a former colleague of mine who has agreed to resume his old post of Potions master .Potions ?Potions ?The word echoed all over the Hall as people wondered whether they had heard right .Potions ?said Ron and Hermione together turning to stare at Harry .But you said Professor Snape meanwhile said Dumbledore raising his voice so that it carried over all the muttering will be taking over the position of Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher .No !said Harry so loudly that many heads turned in his direction .He did not care he was staring up at the staff table incensed .How could Snape be given the Defense Against the Dark Arts job after all this time ?Hadnt it been widely known for years that Dumbledore did not trust him to do it ?But Harry you said that Slughorn was going to be teaching Defense Against the Dark Arts !said Hermione .I thought he was !said Harry racking his brains to remember when Dumbledore had told him this but now that he came to think of it he was unable to recall Dumbledore ever telling him what Slughorn would be teaching .Snape who was sitting on Dumbledores right did not stand up at the mention of his name he merely raised a hand in lazy acknowledgment of the applause from the Slytherin table yet Harry was sure he could detect a look of triumph on the features he loathed so much .Well theres one good thing he said savagely .Snape ll be gone by the end of the year .What do you mean ?asked Ron .That jobs jinxed .No ones lasted more than a year . .Quirrell actually died doing it .Personally Im going to keep my fingers crossed for another death .Harry !said Hermione shocked and reproachful .He might just go back to teaching Potions at the end of the year said Ron reasonably .That Slughorn bloke might not want to stay longterm .Moody didnt .Dumbledore cleared his throat .Harry Ron and Hermione were not the only ones who had been talking the whole Hall had erupted in a buzz of conversation at the news that Snape had finally achieved his hearts desire .Seemingly oblivious to the sensational nature of the news he had just imparted Dumbledore said nothing more about staff appointments but waited a few seconds to ensure that the silence was absolute before continuing .Now as everybody in this Hall knows Lord Voldemort and his followers are once more at large and gaining in strength .The silence seemed to tauten and strain as Dumbledore spoke .Harry glanced at Malfoy .Malfoy was not looking at Dumbledore but making his fork hover in midair with his wand as though he found the headmasters words unworthy of his attention .I cannot emphasize strongly enough how dangerous the present situation is and how much care each of us at Hogwarts must take to ensure that we remain safe .The castles magical fortifications have been strengthened over the summer we are protected in new and more powerful ways but we must still guard scrupulously against carelessness on the part of any student or member of staff .I urge you therefore to abide by any security restrictions that your teachers might impose upon you however irksome you might find them in particular the rule that you are not to be out of bed after hours .I implore you should you notice anything strange or suspicious within or outside the castle to report it to a member of staff immediately .I trust you to conduct yourselves always with the utmost regard for your own and others safety .Dumbledores blue eyes swept over the students before he smiled once more .But now your beds await as warm and comfortable as you could possibly wish and I know that your top priority is to be wellrested for your lessons tomorrow .Let us therefore say good night .Pip pip !With the usual deafening scraping noise the benches were moved back and the hundreds of students began to file out of the Great Hall toward their dormitories .Harry who was in no hurry at all to leave with the gawping crowd nor to get near enough to Malfoy to allow him to retell the story of the nosestamping lagged behind pretending to retie the lace on his trainer allowing most of the Gryffindors to draw ahead of him .Hermione had darted ahead to fulfill her prefects duty of shepherding the first years but Ron remained with Harry .What really happened to your nose ?he asked once they were at the very back of the throng pressing out of the Hall and out of earshot of anyone else .Harry told him .It was a mark of the strength of their friendship that Ron did not laugh .I saw Malfoy miming something to do with a nose he said darkly .Yeah well never mind that said Harry bitterly .Listen to what he was saying before he found out I was there .Harry had expected Ron to be stunned by Malfoys boasts .With what Harry considered pure pigheadedness however Ron was unimpressed .Come on Harry he was just showing off for Parkinson .What kind of mission would YouKnow Who have given him ?How dyou know Voldemort doesnt need someone at Hogwarts ?It wouldnt be the first I wish yehd stop sayin tha name Harry said a reproachful voice behind them .Harry looked over his shoulder to see Hagrid shaking his head .Dumbledore uses that name said Harry stubbornly .Yeah well thas Dumbledore innit ?said Hagrid mysteriously .So how come yeh were late Harry ?I was worried .Got held up on the train said Harry .Why were you late ?I was with Grawp said Hagrid happily .Los track o the time .Hes got a new home up in the mountains now Dumbledore fixed it nice big cave .Hes much happier than he was in the forest .We were havin a good chat .Really ?said Harry taking care not to catch Rons eye the last time he had met Hagrids halfbrother a vicious giant with a talent for ripping up trees by the roots his vocabulary had comprised five words two of which he was unable to pronounce properly .Oh yeah hes really come on said Hagrid proudly .Yehll be amazed .Im thinkin o trainin him up as me assistant .Ron snorted loudly but managed to pass it off as a violent sneeze .They were now standing beside the oak front doors .Anyway Ill see yeh tomorrow firs lessons straight after lunch .Come early an yeh can say hello ter Buck I mean Witherwings !Raising an arm in cheery farewell he headed out of the front doors into the darkness .Harry and Ron looked at each other .Harry could tell that Ron was experiencing the same sinking feeling as himself .Youre not taking Care of Magical Creatures are you ?Ron shook his head .And youre not either are you ?Harry shook his head too .And Hermione said Ron shes not is she ?Harry shook his head again .Exactly what Hagrid would say when he realized his three favorite students had given up his subject he did not like to think .9 THE HALFBLOOD PRINCE Harry and Ron met Hermione in the common room before breakfast next morning .Hoping for some support for his theory Harry lost no time in telling Hermione what he had overheard Malfoy saying on the Hogwarts Express .But he was obviously showing off for Parkinson wasnt he ?interjected Ron quickly before Hermione could say anything .Well she said uncertainly I dont know .It would be like Malfoy to make himself seem more important than he is .but thats a big lie to tell .Exactly said Harry but he could not press the point because so many people were trying to listen in to his conversation not to mention staring at him and whispering behind their hands .Its rude to point Ron snapped at a particularly minuscule firstyear boy as they joined the queue to climb out of the portrait hole .The boy who had been muttering something about Harry behind his hand to his friend promptly turned scarlet and toppled out of the hole in alarm .Ron sniggered .I love being a sixth year .And were going to be getting free time this year .Whole periods when we can just sit up here and relax .Were going to need that time for studying Ron !said Hermione as they set off down the corridor .Yeah but not today said Ron .Todays going to be a real doss I reckon .Hold it !said Hermione throwing out an arm and halting a passing fourth year who was attempting to push past her with a limegreen disk clutched tightly in his hand .Fanged Frisbees are banned hand it over she told him sternly .The scowling boy handed over the snarling Frisbee ducked under her arm and took off after his friends .Ron waited for him to vanish then tugged the Frisbee from Hermione s grip .Excellent Ive always wanted one of these .Hermione s remonstration was drowned by a loud giggle Lavender Brown had apparently found Rons remark highly amusing .She continued to laugh as she passed them glancing back at Ron over her shoulder .Ron looked rather pleased with himself .The ceiling of the Great Hall was serenely blue and streaked with frail wispy clouds just like the squares of sky visible through the high mullioned windows .While they tucked into porridge and eggs and bacon Harry and Ron told Hermione about their embarrassing conversation with Hagrid the previous evening .But he cant really think wed continue Care of Magical Creatures !she said looking distressed .I mean when has any of us expressed .you know .any enthusiasm ?Thats it though innit ?said Ron swallowing an entire fried egg whole .We were the ones who made the most effort in classes because we like Hagrid .But he thinks we liked the stupid subject Dyou reckon anyones going to go on to N .E .W .T .Neither Harry nor Hermione answered there was no need .They knew perfectly well that nobody in their year would want to continue Care of Magical Creatures .They avoided Hagrids eye and returned his cheery wave only halfheartedly when he left the staff table ten minutes later .After they had eaten they remained in their places awaiting Professor McGonagalls descent from the staff table .The distribution of class schedules was more complicated than usual this year for Professor McGonagall needed first to confirm that everybody had achieved the necessary O .W .L .grades to continue with their chosen N .E .W .T .s .Hermione was immediately cleared to continue with Charms Defense Against the Dark Arts Transfiguration Herbology Arithmancy Ancient Runes and Potions and shot off to a firstperiod Ancient Runes class without further ado .Neville took a little longer to sort out his round face was anxious as Professor McGonagall looked down his application and then consulted his O .W .L .results .Herbology fine she said .Professor Sprout will be delighted to see you back with an ‘Outstanding O .W .L .And you qualify for Defense Against the Dark Arts with ‘Exceeds Expectations .But the problem is Transfiguration .Im sorry Longbottom but an Acceptable really isnt good enough to continue to N .E .W .T level .I just dont think youd be able to cope with the coursework .Neville hung his head .Professor McGonagall peered at him through her square spectacles .Why do you want to continue with Transfiguration anyway ?Ive never had the impression that you particularly enjoyed it .Neville looked miserable and muttered something about my grandmother wants .Hmph snorted Professor McGonagall .Its high time your grandmother learned to be proud of the grandson shes got rather than the one she thinks she ought to have particularly after what happened at the Ministry .Neville turned very pink and blinked confusedly Professor McGonagall had never paid him a compliment before .Im sorry Longbottom but I cannot let you into my N .E .W .T .class .I see that you have an ‘Exceeds Expectations in Charms however why not try for a N .E .W .T .in Charms ?My grandmother thinks Charms is a soft option mumbled Neville .Take Charms said Professor McGonagall and I shall drop Augusta a line reminding her that just because she failed her Charms O .W .L .the subject is not necessarily worthless .Smiling slightly at the look of delighted incredulity on Nevilles face Professor McGonagall tapped a blank schedule with the tip of her wand and handed it now carrying details of his new classes to Neville .Professor McGonagall turned next to Parvati Patil whose first question was whether Firenze the handsome centaur was still teaching Divination .He and Professor Trelawney are dividing classes between them this year said Professor McGonagall a hint of disapproval in her voice it was common knowledge that she despised the subject of Divination .The sixth year is being taken by Professor Trelawney .Parvati set off for Divination five minutes later looking slightly crestfallen .So Potter Potter .said Professor McGonagall consulting her notes as she turned to Harry .Charms Defense Against the Dark Arts Herbology Transfiguration .all fine .I must say I was pleased with your Transfiguration mark Potter very pleased .Now why havent you applied to continue with Potions ?I thought it was your ambition to become an Auror ?It was but you told me I had to get an ‘Outstanding in my O .W .L .Professor .And so you did when Professor Snape was teaching the subject .Professor Slughorn however is perfectly happy to accept N .E .W .T students with ‘Exceeds Expectations at O .W .L .Do you wish to proceed with Potions ?Yes said Harry but I didnt buy the books or any ingredients or anything Im sure Professor Slughorn will be able to lend you some said Professor McGonagall .Very well Potter here is your schedule .Oh by the way twenty hopefuls have already put down their names for the Gryffindor Quidditch team .I shall pass the list to you in due course and you can fix up trials at your leisure .A few minutes later Ron was cleared to do the same subjects as Harry and the two of them left the table together .Look said Ron delightedly gazing at his schedule weve got a free period now .and a free period after break .and after lunch .excellent .They returned to the common room which was empty apart from a half dozen seventh years including Katie Bell the only remaining member of the original Gryffindor Quidditch team that Harry had joined in his first year .I thought youd get that well done she called over pointing at the Captains badge on Harrys chest .Tell me when you call trials !Dont be stupid said Harry you dont need to try out Ive watched you play for five years .You mustnt start off like that she said warningly .For all you know theres someone much better than me out there .Good teams have been ruined before now because Captains just kept playing the old faces or letting in their friends .Ron looked a little uncomfortable and began playing with the Fanged Frisbee Hermione had taken from the fourthyear student .It zoomed around the common room snarling and attempting to take bites of the tapestry .Crookshankss yellow eyes followed it and he hissed when it came too close .An hour later they reluctantly left the sunlit common room for the Defense Against the Dark Arts classroom four floors below .Hermione was already queuing outside carrying an armful of heavy books and looking putupon .We got so much homework for Runes she said anxiously when Harry and Ron joined her .A fifteen inch essay two translations and Ive got to read these by Wednesday !Shame yawned Ron .You wait she said resentfully .I bet Snape gives us loads .The classroom door opened as she spoke and Snape stepped into the corridor his sallow face framed as ever by two curtains of greasy black hair .Silence fell over the queue immediately .Inside he said .Harry looked around as they entered .Snape had imposed his personality upon the room already it was gloomier than usual as curtains had been drawn over the windows and was lit by candlelight .New pictures adorned the walls many of them showing people who appeared to be in pain sporting grisly injuries or strangely contorted body parts .Nobody spoke as they settled down looking around at the shadowy gruesome pictures .I have not asked you to take out your books said Snape closing the door and moving to face the class from behind his desk Hermione hastily dropped her copy of Confronting the Faceless back into her bag and stowed it under her chair .I wish to speak to you and I want your fullest attention .His black eyes roved over their upturned faces lingering for a fraction of a second longer on Harrys than anyone elses .You have had five teachers in this subject so far I believe .You believe .like you havent watched them all come and go Snape hoping youd be next thought Harry scathingly .Naturally these teachers will all have had their own methods and priorities .Given this confusion I am surprised so many of you scraped an O .W .L .in this subject .I shall be even more surprised if all of you manage to keep up with the N .E .W .T .work which will be much more advanced .Snape set off around the edge of the room speaking now in a lower voice the class craned their necks to keep him in view .The Dark Arts said Snape are many varied ever changing and eternal .Fighting them is like fighting a manyheaded monster which each time a neck is severed sprouts a head even fiercer and cleverer than before .You are fighting that which is unfixed mutating indestructible .Harry stared at Snape .It was surely one thing to respect the Dark Arts as a dangerous enemy another to speak of them as Snape was doing with a loving caress in his voice ?Your defenses said Snape a little louder must therefore be as flexible and inventive as the arts you seek to undo .These pictures he indicated a few of them as he swept past give a fair representation of what happens to those who suffer for instance the Cruciatus Curse he waved a hand toward a witch who was clearly shrieking in agony feel the Dementors Kiss a wizard lying huddled and blankeyed slumped against a wall or provoke the aggression of the Inferius a bloody mass upon the ground .Has an Inferius been seen then ?said Parvati Patil in a highpitched voice .Is it definite is he using them ?The Dark Lord has used Inferi in the past said Snape which means you would be welladvised to assume he might use them again .Now .He set off again around the other side of the classroom toward his desk and again they watched him as he walked his dark robes billowing behind him . .you are I believe complete novices in the use of nonverbal spells .What is the advantage of a nonverbal spell ?Hermiones hand shot into the air .Snape took his time looking around at everybody else making sure he had no choice before saying curtly Very well Miss Granger ?Your adversary has no warning about what kind of magic youre about to perform said Hermione which gives you a splitsecond advantage .An answer copied almost word for word from The Standard Book of Spells Grade Six said Snape dismissively over in the corner Malfoy sniggered but correct in essentials .Yes those who progress to using magic without shouting incantations gain an element of surprise in their spellcasting .Not all wizards can do this of course it is a question of concentration and mind power which some his gaze lingered maliciously upon Harry once more lack .Harry knew Snape was thinking of their disastrous Occlumency lessons of the previous year .He refused to drop his gaze but glowered at Snape until Snape looked away .You will now divide Snape went on into pairs .One partner will attempt to jinx the other without speaking .The other will attempt to repel the jinx in equal silence .Carry on .Although Snape did not know it Harry had taught at least half the class everyone who had been a member of the D .A .how to perform a Shield Charm the previous year .None of them had ever cast the charm without speaking however .A reasonable amount of cheating ensued many people were merely whispering the incantation instead of saying it aloud .Typically ten minutes into the lesson Hermione managed to repel Nevilles muttered JellyLegs Jinx without uttering a single word a feat that would surely have earned her twenty points for Gryffindor from any reasonable teacher thought Harry bitterly but which Snape ignored .He swept between them as they practiced looking just as much like an overgrown bat as ever lingering to watch Harry and Ron struggling with the task .Ron who was supposed to be jinxing Harry was purple in the face his lips tightly compressed to save himself from the temptation of muttering the incantation .Harry had his wand raised waiting on tenterhooks to repel a jinx that seemed unlikely ever to come .Pathetic Weasley said Snape after a while .Here let me show you He turned his wand on Harry so fast that Harry reacted instinctively all thought of nonverbal spells forgotten he yelled Protegol His Shield Charm was so strong Snape was knocked offbalance and hit a desk .The whole class had looked around and now watched as Snape righted himself scowling .Do you remember me telling you we are practicing nonverbal spells Potter ?Yes said Harry stiffly .Yes sir .Theres no need to call me ‘sir Professor .The words had escaped him before he knew what he was saying .Several people gasped including Hermione .Behind Snape however Ron Dean and Seamus grinned appreciatively .Detention Saturday night my office said Snape .I do not take cheek from anyone Potter .not even ‘the Chosen One .That was brilliant Harry !chortled Ron once they were safely on their way to break a short while later .You really shouldnt have said it said Hermione frowning at Ron .What made you ?He tried to jinx me in case you didnt notice !fumed Harry .I had enough of that during those Occlumency lessons !Why doesnt he use another guinea pig for a change ?Whats Dumbledore playing at anyway letting him teach Defense ?Did you hear him talking about the Dark Arts ?He loves them !All that unfixed indestructible stuff Well said Hermione I thought he sounded a bit like you .Like me ?Yes when you were telling us what its like to face Voldemort .You said it wasnt just memorizing a bunch of spells you said it was just you and your brains and your guts well wasnt that what Snape was saying ?That it really comes down to being brave and quickthinking ?Harry was so disarmed that she had thought his words as well worth memorizing as The Standard Book of Spells that he did not argue .Harry !Hey Harry !Harry looked around Jack Sloper one of the Beaters on last years Gryffindor Quidditch team was hurrying toward him holding a roll of parchment .For you panted Sloper .Listen I heard youre the new Captain .Whenre you holding trials ?Im not sure yet said Harry thinking privately that Sloper would be very lucky to get back on the team .Ill let you know .Oh right .I was hoping itd be this weekend But Harry was not listening he had just recognized the thin slanting writing on the parchment .Leaving Sloper in midsentence he hurried away with Ron and Hermione unrolling the parchment as he went .Dear Harry I would like to start our private lessons this Saturday .Kindly come along to my office at 8 p .m .I hope you are enjoying your first day back at school .Yours sincerely Albus Dumbledore P .S .I enjoy Acid Pops .He enjoys Acid Pops ?said Ron who had read the message over Harrys shoulder and was looking perplexed .Its the password to get past the gargoyle outside his study said Harry in a low voice .Ha !Snapes not going to be pleased .I wont be able to do his detention !He Ron and Hermione spent the whole of break speculating on what Dumbledore would teach Harry .Ron thought it most likely to be spectacular jinxes and hexes of the type the Death Eaters would not know .Hermione said such things were illegal and thought it much more likely that Dumbledore wanted to teach Harry advanced Defensive magic .After break she went off to Arithmancy while Harry and Ron returned to the common room where they grudgingly started Snapes homework .This turned out to be so complex that they still had not finished when Hermione joined them for their afterlunch free period though she considerably speeded up the process .They had only just finished when the bell rang for the afternoons double Potions and they beat the familiar path down to the dungeon classroom that had for so long been Snapes .When they arrived in the corridor they saw that there were only a dozen people progressing to N .E .W .T .level .Crabbe and Goyle had evidently failed to achieve the required O .W .L .grade but four Slytherins had made it through including Malfoy .Four Ravenclaws were there and one Hufflepuff Ernie Macmillan whom Harry liked despite his rather pompous manner .Harry Ernie said portentously holding out his hand as Harry approached didnt get a chance to speak in Defense Against the Dark Arts this morning .Good lesson I thought but Shield Charms are old hat of course for us old D .A .lags .And how are you Ron Hermione ?Before they could say more than fine the dungeon door opened and Slughorns belly preceded him out of the door .As they filed into the room his great walrus mustache curved above his beaming mouth and he greeted Harry and Zabini with particular enthusiasm .The dungeon was most unusually already full of vapors and odd smells .Harry Ron and Hermione sniffed interestedly as they passed large bubbling cauldrons .The four Slytherins took a table together as did the four Ravenclaws .This left Harry Ron and Hermione to share a table with Ernie .They chose the one nearest a goldcolored cauldron that was emitting one of the most seductive scents Harry had ever inhaled Somehow it reminded him simultaneously of treacle tart the woody smell of a broomstick handle and something flowery he thought he might have smelled at the Burrow .He found that he was breathing very slowly and deeply and that the potions fumes seemed to be filling him up like drink .A great contentment stole over him he grinned across at Ron who grinned back lazily .Now then now then now then said Slughorn whose massive outline was quivering through the many shimmering vapors .Scales out everyone and potion kits and dont forget your copies of Advanced PotionMaking .Sir ?said Harry raising his hand .Harry mboy ?I havent got a book or scales or anything nors Ron we didnt realize wed be able to do the N .E .W .T .you see Ah yes Professor McGonagall did mention .not to worry my dear boy not to worry at all .You can use ingredients from the store cupboard today and Im sure we can lend you some scales and weve got a small stock of old books here theyll do until you can write to Flourish and Blotts .Slughorn strode over to a corner cupboard and after a moments foraging emerged with two very battered looking copies of Advanced PotionMaking by Libatius Borage which he gave to Harry and Ron along with two sets of tarnished scales .Now then said Slughorn returning to the front of the class and inflating his already bulging chest so that the buttons on his waistcoat threatened to burst off Ive prepared a few potions for you to have a look at just out of interest you know .These are the kind of thing you ought to be able to make after completing your N .E .W .T .s .You ought to have heard of em even if you havent made em yet .Anyone tell me what this one is ?He indicated the cauldron nearest the Slytherin table .Harry raised himself slightly in his seat and saw what looked like plain water boiling away inside it .Hermiones wellpracticed hand hit the air before anybody elses Slughorn pointed at her .Its Veritaserum a colorless odorless potion that forces the drinker to tell the truth said Hermione .Very good very good !said Slughorn happily .Now he continued pointing at the cauldron nearest the Ravenclaw table this one here is pretty well known . .Featured in a few Ministry leaflets lately too .Who can ?Hermiones hand was fastest once more .Its Polyjuice Potion sir she said .Harry too had recognized the slowbubbling mudlike substance in the second cauldron but did not resent Hermione getting the credit for answering the question she after all was the one who had succeeded in making it back in their second year .Excellent excellent !Now this one here .yes my dear ?said Slughorn now looking slightly bemused as Hermiones hand punched the air again .Its Amortentia !It is indeed .It seems almost foolish to ask said Slughorn who was looking mightily impressed but I assume you know what it does ?Its the most powerful love potion in the world !said Hermione .Quite right !You recognized it I suppose by its distinctive motherofpearl sheen ?And the steam rising in characteristic spirals said Hermione enthusiastically and its supposed to smell differently to each of us according to what attracts us and I can smell freshly mown grass and new parchment and But she turned slightly pink and did not complete the sentence .May I ask your name my dear ?said Slughorn ignoring Hermiones embarrassment .Hermione Granger sir .Granger ?Granger ?Can you possibly be related to Hector DagworthGranger who founded the Most Extraordinary Society of Potioneers ?No I dont think so sir .Im Muggleborn you see .Harry saw Malfoy lean close to Nott and whisper something both of them sniggered but Slughorn showed no dismay on the contrary he beamed and looked from Hermione to Harry who was sitting next to her .Oho ! ‘One of my best friends is Muggleborn and shes the best in our yeah Im assuming this is the very friend of whom you spoke Harry ?Yes sir said Harry .Well well take twenty wellearned points for Gryffindor Miss Granger said Slughorn genially .Malfoy looked rather as he had done the time Hermione had punched him in the face .Hermione turned to Harry with a radiant expression and whispered Did you really tell him Im the best in the year ?Oh Harry !Well whats so impressive about that ?whispered Ron who for some reason looked annoyed .You are the best in the year Idve told him so if hed asked me !Hermione smiled but made a shhing gesture so that they could hear what Slughorn was saying .Ron looked slightly disgruntled .Amortentia doesnt really create love of course .It is impossible to manufacture or imitate love .No this will simply cause a powerful infatuation or obsession .It is probably the most dangerous and powerful potion in this room oh yes he said nodding gravely at Malfoy and Nott both of whom were smirking skeptically .When you have seen as much of life as I have you will not underestimate the power of obsessive love .And now said Slughorn it is time for us to start work .Sir you havent told us whats in this one said Ernie Macmillan pointing at a small black cauldron standing on Slughorn s desk .The potion within was splashing about merrily it was the color of molten gold and large drops were leaping like goldfish above the surface though not a particle had spilled .Oho said Slughorn again .Harry was sure that Slughorn had not forgotten the potion at all but had waited to be asked for dramatic effect .Yes .That .Well that one ladies and gentlemen is a most curious little potion called Felix Felicis .I take it he turned smiling to look at Hermione who had let out an audible gasp that you know what Felix Felicis does Miss Granger ?Its liquid luck said Hermione excitedly .It makes you lucky !The whole class seemed to sit up a little straighter .Now all Harry could see of Malfoy was the back of his sleek blond head because he was at last giving Slughorn his full and undivided attention .Quite right take another ten points for Gryffindor .Yes its a funny little potion Felix Felicis said Slughorn .Desperately tricky to make and disastrous to get wrong .However if brewed correctly as this has been you will find that all your endeavors tend to succeed .at least until the effects wear off .Why dont people drink it all the time sir ?said Terry Boot eagerly .Because if taken in excess it causes giddiness recklessness and dangerous overconfidence said Slughorn .Too much of a good thing you know .highly toxic in large quantities .But taken sparingly and very occasionally .Have you ever taken it sir ?asked Michael Corner with great interest .Twice in my life said Slughorn .Once when I was twentyfour once when I was fiftyseven .Two tablespoonfuls taken with breakfast .Two perfect days .He gazed dreamily into the distance .Whether he was playacting or not thought Harry the effect was good .And that said Slughorn apparently coming back to earth is what I shall be offering as a prize in this lesson .There was silence in which every bubble and gurgle of the surrounding potions seemed magnified tenfold .One tiny bottle of Felix Felicis said Slughorn taking a minuscule glass bottle with a cork in it out of his pocket and showing it to them all .Enough for twelve hours luck .From dawn till dusk you will be lucky in everything you attempt .Now I must give you warning that Felix Felicis is a banned substance in organized competitions .sporting events for instance examinations or elections .So the winner is to use it on an ordinary day only .and watch how that ordinary day becomes extraordinary !So said Slughorn suddenly brisk how are you to win my fabulous prize ?Well by turning to page ten of Advanced PotionMaking .We have a little over an hour left to us which should be time for you to make a decent attempt at the Draught of Living Death .I know it is more complex than anything you have attempted before and I do not expect a perfect potion from anybody .The person who does best however will win little Felix here .Off you go !There was a scraping as everyone drew their cauldrons toward them and some loud clunks as people began adding weights to their scales but nobody spoke .The concentration within the room was almost tangible .Harry saw Malfoy riffling feverishly through his copy of Advanced PotionMaking .It could not have been clearer that Malfoy really wanted that lucky day .Harry bent swiftly over the tattered book Slughorn had lent him .To his annoyance he saw that the previous owner had scribbled all over the pages so that the margins were as black as the printed portions .Bending low to decipher the ingredients even here the previous owner had made annotations and crossed things out Harry hurried off toward the store cupboard to find what he needed .As he dashed back to his cauldron he saw Malfoy cutting up valerian roots as fast as he could .Everyone kept glancing around at what the rest of the class was doing this was both an advantage and a disadvantage of Potions that it was hard to keep your work private .Within ten minutes the whole place was full of bluish steam .Hermione of course seemed to have progressed furthest .Her potion already resembled the smooth black currantcolored liquid mentioned as the ideal halfway stage .Having finished chopping his roots Harry bent low over his book again .It was really very irritating having to try and decipher the directions under all the stupid scribbles of the previous owner who for some reason had taken issue with the order to cut up the sopophorous bean and had written in the alternative instruction Crush with flat side of silver dagger releases juice better than cutting .Sir I think you knew my grandfather Abraxas Malfoy ?Harry looked up Slughorn was just passing the Slytherin table .Yes said Slughorn without looking at Malfoy I was sorry to hear he had died although of course it wasnt unexpected dragon pox at his age .And he walked away .Harry bent back over his cauldron smirking .He could tell that Malfoy had expected to be treated like Harry or Zabini perhaps even hoped for some preferential treatment of the type he had learned to expect from Snape .It looked as though Malfoy would have to rely on nothing but talent to win the bottle of Felix Felicis .The sopophorous bean was proving very difficult to cut up .Harry turned to Hermione .Can I borrow your silver knife ?She nodded impatiently not taking her eyes off her potion which was still deep purple though according to the book ought to be turning a light shade of lilac by now .Harry crushed his bean with the flat side of the dagger .To his astonishment it immediately exuded so much juice he was amazed the shriveled bean could have held it all .Hastily scooping it all into the cauldron he saw to his surprise that the potion immediately turned exactly the shade of lilac described by the textbook .His annoyance with the previous owner vanishing on the spot Harry now squinted at the next line of instructions .According to the book he had to stir counterclockwise until the potion turned clear as water .According to the addition the previous owner had made however he ought to add a clockwise stir after every seventh counterclockwise stir .Could the old owner be right twice ?Harry stirred counterclockwise held his breath and stirred once clockwise .The effect was immediate .The potion turned palest pink .How are you doing that ?demanded Hermione who was redfaced and whose hair was growing bushier and bushier in the fumes from her cauldron her potion was still resolutely purple .Add a clockwise stir No no the book says counterclockwise !she snapped .Harry shrugged and continued what he was doing .Seven stirs counterclockwise one clockwise pause .seven stirs counterclockwise one stir clockwise .Across the table Ron was cursing fluently under his breath his potion looked like liquid licorice .Harry glanced around .As far as he could see no one elses potion had turned as pale as his .He felt elated something that had certainly never happened before in this dungeon .And times .up !called Slughorn .Stop stirring please !Slughorn moved slowly among the tables peering into cauldrons .He made no comment but occasionally gave the potions a stir or a sniff .At last he reached the table where Harry Ron Hermione and Ernie were sitting .He smiled ruefully at the tarlike substance in Rons cauldron .He passed over Ernies navy concoction .Hermiones potion he gave an approving nod .Then he saw Harrys and a look of incredulous delight spread over his face .The clear winner !he cried to the dungeon .Excellent excellent Harry !Good lord its clear youve inherited your mothers talent .She was a dab hand at Potions Lily was !Here you are then here you are one bottle of Felix Felicis as promised and use it well !Harry slipped the tiny bottle of golden liquid into his inner pocket feeling an odd combination of delight at the furious looks on the Slytherins faces and guilt at the disappointed expression on Hermiones .Ron looked simply dumbfounded .How did you do that ?he whispered to Harry as they left the dungeon .Got lucky I suppose said Harry because Malfoy was within earshot .Once they were securely ensconced at the Gryffindor table for dinner however he felt safe enough to tell them .Hermiones face became stonier with every word he uttered .I spose you think I cheated ?he finished aggravated by her expression .Well it wasnt exactly your own work was it ?she said stiffly .He only followed different instructions to ours said Ron .Couldve been a catastrophe couldnt it ?But he took a risk and it paid off .He heaved a sigh .Slughorn couldve handed me that book but no I get the one no ones ever written on .Puked on by the look of page fiftytwo but Hang on said a voice close by Harrys left ear and he caught a sudden waft of that flowery smell he had picked up in Slughorns dungeon .He looked around and saw that Ginny had joined them .Did I hear right ?Youve been taking orders from something someone wrote in a book Harry ?She looked alarmed and angry .Harry knew what was on her mind at once .Its nothing he said reassuringly lowering his voice .Its not like you know Riddles diary .Its just an old textbook someones scribbled on .But youre doing what it says ?I just tried a few of the tips written in the margins honestly Ginny theres nothing funny Ginnys got a point said Hermione perking up at once .We ought to check that theres nothing odd about it .I mean all these funny instructions who knows ?Hey !said Harry indignantly as she pulled his copy of Advanced PotionMaking out of his bag and raised her wand .Specialis Revelio she said rapping it smartly on the front cover .Nothing whatsoever happened .The book simply lay there looking old and dirty and dogeared .Finished ?said Harry irritably .Or dyou want to wait and see if it does a few backflips ?It seems all right said Hermione still staring at the book suspiciously .I mean it really does seem to be .just a textbook .Good .Then Ill have it back said Harry snatching it off the table but it slipped from his hand and landed open on the floor .Nobody else was looking .Harry bent low to retrieve the book and as he did so he saw something scribbled along the bottom of the back cover in the same small cramped handwriting as the instructions that had won him his bottle of Felix Felicis now safely hidden inside a pair of socks in his trunk upstairs .This Book is the Property of the HalfBlood Prince .10 THE HOUSE OF GAUNT For the rest of the weeks Potions lessons Harry continued to follow the HalfBlood Princes instructions wherever they deviated from Libatius Borages with the result that by their fourth lesson Slughorn was raving about Harrys abilities saying that he had rarely taught anyone so talented .Neither Ron nor Hermione was delighted by this .Although Harry had offered to share his book with both of them Ron had more difficulty deciphering the handwriting than Harry did and could not keep asking Harry to read aloud or it might look suspicious .Hermione meanwhile was resolutely plowing on with what she called the official instructions but becoming increasingly badtempered as they yielded poorer results than the Princes .Harry wondered vaguely who the HalfBlood Prince had been .Although the amount of homework they had been given prevented him from reading the whole of his copy of Advanced PotionMaking he had skimmed through it sufficiently to see that there was barely a page on which the Prince had not made additional notes not all of them concerned with potionmaking .Here and there were directions for what looked like spells that the Prince had made up himself .Or herself said Hermione irritably overhearing Harry pointing some of these out to Ron in the common room on Saturday evening .It might have been a girl .I think the handwriting looks more like a girls than a boys .The HalfBlood Prince he was called Harry said .How many girls have been Princes ?Hermione seemed to have no answer to this .She merely scowled and twitched her essay on The Principles of Re materialization away from Ron who was trying to read it upside down .Harry looked at his watch and hurriedly put the old copy of Advanced PotionMaking back into his bag .Its five to eight Id better go Ill be late for Dumbledore .Ooooh !gasped Hermione looking up at once .Good luck !Well wait up we want to hear what he teaches you !Hope it goes okay said Ron and the pair of them watched Harry leave through the portrait hole .Harry proceeded through deserted corridors though he had to step hastily behind a statue when Professor Trelawney appeared around a corner muttering to herself as she shuffled a pack of dirtylooking playing cards reading them as she walked .Two of spades conflict she murmured as she passed the place where Harry crouched hidden .Seven of spades an ill omen .Ten of spades violence .Knave of spades a dark young man possibly troubled one who dislikes the questioner She stopped dead right on the other side of Harrys statue .Well that cant be right she said annoyed and Harry heard her reshuffling vigorously as she set off again leaving nothing but a whiff of cooking sherry behind her .Harry waited until he was quite sure she had gone then hurried off again until he reached the spot in the seventhfloor corridor where a single gargoyle stood against the wall .Acid Pops said Harry and the gargoyle leapt aside the wall behind it slid apart and a moving spiral stone staircase was revealed onto which Harry stepped so that he was carried in smooth circles up to the door with the brass knocker that led to Dumbledores office .Harry knocked .Come in said Dumbledores voice .Good evening sir said Harry walking into the headmasters office .Ah good evening Harry .Sit down said Dumbledore smiling .I hope youve had an enjoyable first week back at school ?Yes thanks sir said Harry .You must have been busy a detention under your belt already !Er began Harry awkwardly but Dumbledore did not look too stern .I have arranged with Professor Snape that you will do your detention next Saturday instead .Right said Harry who had more pressing matters on his mind than S napes detention and now looked around surreptitiously for some indication of what Dumbledore was planning to do with him this evening .The circular office looked just as it always did the delicate silver instruments stood on spindle legged tables puffing smoke and whirring portraits of previous headmasters and headmistresses dozed in their frames and Dumbledores magnificent phoenix Fawkes stood on his perch behind the door watching Harry with bright interest .It did not even look as though Dumbledore had cleared a space for dueling practice .So Harry said Dumbledore in a businesslike voice .You have been wondering I am sure what I have planned for you during these for want of a better word lessons ?Yes sir .Well I have decided that it is time now that you know what prompted Lord Voldemort to try and kill you fifteen years ago for you to be given certain information .There was a pause .You said at the end of last term you were going to tell me everything said Harry .It was hard to keep a note of accusation from his voice .Sir he added .And so I did said Dumbledore placidly .I told you everything I know .From this point forth we shall be leaving the firm foundation of fact and journeying together through the murky marshes of memory into thickets of wildest guesswork .From here on in Harry I may be as woefully wrong as Humphrey Belcher who believed the time was ripe for a cheese cauldron .But you think youre right ?said Harry .Naturally I do but as I have already proven to you I make mistakes like the next man .In fact being forgive me rather cleverer than most men my mistakes tend to be correspondingly huger .Sir said Harry tentatively does what youre going to tell me have anything to do with the prophecy ?Will it help me .survive ?It has a very great deal to do with the prophecy said Dumbledore as casually as if Harry had asked him about the next days weather and I certainly hope that it will help you to survive .Dumbledore got to his feet and walked around the desk past Harry who turned eagerly in his seat to watch Dumbledore bending over the cabinet beside the door .When Dumbledore straightened up he was holding a familiar shallow stone basin etched with odd markings around its rim .He placed the Pensieve on the desk in front of Harry .You look worried .Harry had indeed been eyeing the Pensieve with some apprehension .His previous experiences with the odd device that stored and revealed thoughts and memories though highly instructive had also been uncomfortable .The last time he had disturbed its contents he had seen much more than he would have wished .But Dumbledore was smiling .This time you enter the Pensieve with me .and even more unusually with permission .Where are we going sir ?For a trip down Bob Ogdens memory lane said Dumbledore pulling from his pocket a crystal bottle containing a swirling silvery white substance .Who was Bob Ogden ?He was employed by the Department of Magical Law Enforcement said Dumbledore .He died some time ago but not before I had tracked him down and persuaded him to confide these recollections to me .We are about to accompany him on a visit he made in the course of his duties .If you will stand Harry .But Dumbledore was having difficulty pulling out the stopper of the crystal bottle His injured hand seemed stiff and painful .Shall shall I sir ?No matter Harry Dumbledore pointed his wand at the bottle and the cork flew out .Sir how did you injure your hand ?Harry asked again looking at the blackened fingers with a mixture of revulsion and pity .Now is not the moment for that story Harry .Not yet .We have an appointment with Bob Ogden .Dumbledore tipped the silvery contents of the bottle into the Pensieve where they swirled and shimmered neither liquid nor gas .After you said Dumbledore gesturing toward the bowl .Harry bent forward took a deep breath and plunged his face into the silvery substance .He felt his feet leave the office floor he was falling falling through whirling darkness and then quite suddenly he was blinking in dazzling sunlight .Before his eyes had adjusted Dumbledore landed beside him .They were standing in a country lane bordered by high tangled hedgerows beneath a summer sky as bright and blue as a forgetmenot .Some ten feet in front of them stood a short plump man wearing enormously thick glasses that reduced his eyes to molelike specks .He was reading a wooden signpost that was sticking out of the brambles on the lefthand side of the road .Harry knew this must be Ogden he was the only person in sight and he was also wearing the strange assortment of clothes so often chosen by inexperienced wizards trying to look like Muggles in this case a frock coat and spats over a striped one piece bathing costume .Before Harry had time to do more than register his bizarre appearance however Ogden had set off at a brisk walk down the lane .Dumbledore and Harry followed .As they passed the wooden sign Harry looked up at its two arms .The one pointing back the way they had come read GREAT HANGLETON 5 MILES .The arm pointing after Ogden said LITTLE HANGLETON 1 MILE .They walked a short way with nothing to see but the hedgerows the wide blue sky overhead and the swishing frockcoated figure ahead .Then the lane curved to the left and fell away sloping steeply down a hillside so that they had a sudden unexpected view of a whole valley laid out in front of them .Harry could see a village undoubtedly Little Hangleton nestled between two steep hills its church and graveyard clearly visible .Across the valley set on the opposite hillside was a handsome manor house surrounded by a wide expanse of velvety green lawn .Ogden had broken into a reluctant trot due to the steep downward slope .Dumbledore lengthened his stride and Harry hurried to keep up .He thought Little Hangleton must be their final destination and wondered as he had done on the night they had found Slughorn why they had to approach it from such a distance .He soon discovered that he was mistaken in thinking that they were going to the village however .The lane curved to the right and when they rounded the corner it was to see the very edge of Ogdens frock coat vanishing through a gap in the hedge .Dumbledore and Harry followed him onto a narrow dirt track bordered by higher and wilder hedgerows than those they had left behind .The path was crooked rocky and potholed sloping downhill like the last one and it seemed to be heading for a patch of dark trees a little below them .Sure enough the track soon opened up at the copse and Dumbledore and Harry came to a halt behind Ogden who had stopped and drawn his wand .Despite the cloudless sky the old trees ahead cast deep dark cool shadows and it was a few seconds before Harrys eyes discerned the building halfhidden amongst the tangle of trunks .It seemed to him a very strange location to choose for a house or else an odd decision to leave the trees growing nearby blocking all light and the view of the valley below .He wondered whether it was inhabited its walls were mossy and so many tiles had fallen off the roof that the rafters were visible in places .Nettles grew all around it their tips reaching the windows which were tiny and thick with grime .Just as he had concluded that nobody could possibly live there however one of the windows was thrown open with a clatter and a thin trickle of steam or smoke issued from it as though somebody was cooking .Ogden moved forward quietly and it seemed to Harry rather cautiously .As the dark shadows of the trees slid over him he stopped again staring at the front door to which somebody had nailed a dead snake .Then there was a rustle and a crack and a man in rags dropped from the nearest tree landing on his feet right in front of Ogden who leapt backward so fast he stood on the tails of his frock coat and stumbled .Youre not welcome .The man standing before them had thick hair so matted with dirt it could have been any color .Several of his teeth were missing .His eyes were small and dark and stared in opposite directions .He might have looked comical but he did not the effect was frightening and Harry could not blame Ogden for backing away several more paces before he spoke .Er good morning .Im from the Ministry of Magic Youre not welcome .Er Im sorry I dont understand you said Ogden nervously .Harry thought Ogden was being extremely dim the stranger was making himself very clear in Harrys opinion particularly as he was brandishing a wand in one hand and a short and rather bloody knife in the other .You understand him Im sure Harry ?said Dumbledore quietly .Yes of course said Harry slightly nonplussed .Why cant Ogden ?But as his eyes found the dead snake on the door again he suddenly understood .Hes speaking Parseltongue ?Very good said Dumbledore nodding and smiling .The man in rags was now advancing on Ogden knife in one hand wand in the other .Now look Ogden began but too late There was a bang and Ogden was on the ground clutching his nose while a nasty yellowish goo squirted from between his fingers .Morfin !said a loud voice .An elderly man had come hurrying out of the cottage banging the door behind him so that the dead snake swung pathetically .This man was shorter than the first and oddly proportioned his shoulders were very broad and his arms overlong which with his bright brown eyes short scrubby hair and wrinkled face gave him the look of a powerful aged monkey .He came to a halt beside the man with the knife who was now cackling with laughter at the sight of Ogden on the ground .Ministry is it ?said the older man looking down at Ogden .Correct !said Ogden angrily dabbing his face .And you I take it are Mr Gaunt ?Sright said Gaunt .Got you in the face did he ?Yes he did !snapped Ogden .Shouldve made your presence known shouldnt you ?said Gaunt aggressively .This is private property .Cant just walk in here and not expect my son to defend himself .Defend himself against what man ?said Ogden clambering back to his feet .Busybodies .Intruders .Muggles and filth .Ogden pointed his wand at his own nose which was still issuing large amounts of what looked like yellow pus and the flow stopped at once .Mr Gaunt spoke out of the corner of his mouth to Morfin .Get in the house .Dont argue .This time ready for it Harry recognized Parseltongue even while he could understand what was being said he distinguished the weird hissing noise that was all Ogden could hear .Morfin seemed to be on the point of disagreeing but when his father cast him a threatening look he changed his mind lumbering away to the cottage with an odd rolling gait and slamming the front door behind him so that the snake swung sadly again .Its your son Im here to see Mr Gaunt said Ogden as he mopped the last of the pus from the front of his coat .That was Morfin wasnt it ?Ar that was Morfin said the old man indifferently .Are you pureblood ?he asked suddenly aggressive .Thats neither here nor there said Ogden coldly and Harry felt his respect for Ogden rise .Apparently Gaunt felt rather differently .He squinted into Ogdens face and muttered in what was clearly supposed to be an offensive tone Now I come to think about it Ive seen noses like yours down in the village .I dont doubt it if your sons been let loose on them said Ogden .Perhaps we could continue this discussion inside ?Inside ?Yes Mr Gaunt .Ive already told you .Im here about Morfin .We sent an owl Ive no use for owls said Gaunt .I dont open letters .Then you can hardly complain that you get no warning of visitors said Ogden tartly .I am here following a serious breach of Wizarding law which occurred here in the early hours of this morning All right all right all right !bellowed Gaunt .Come in the bleeding house then and much good itll do you !The house seemed to contain three tiny rooms .Two doors led off the main room which served as kitchen and living room combined .Morfin was sitting in a filthy armchair beside the smoking fire twisting a live adder between his thick fingers and crooning softly at it in Parseltongue Hissy hissy little snakey Slither on the floor You be good to Morfin Or hell nail you to the door .There was a scuffling noise in the corner beside the open window and Harry realized that there was somebody else in the room a girl whose ragged gray dress was the exact color of the dirty stone wall behind her .She was standing beside a steaming pot on a grimy black stove and was fiddling around with the shelf of squalidlooking pots and pans above it .Her hair was lank and dull and she had a plain pale rather heavy face .Her eyes like her brothers stared in opposite directions .She looked a little cleaner than the two men but Harry thought he had never seen a more defeatedlooking person .Mdaughter Merope said Gaunt grudgingly as Ogden looked inquiringly toward her .Good morning said Ogden .She did not answer but with a frightened glance at her father turned her back on the room and continued shifting the pots on the shelf behind her .Well Mr Gaunt said Ogden to get straight to the point we have reason to believe that your son Morfin performed magic in front of a Muggle late last night .There was a deafening clang .Merope had dropped one of the pots .Pick it up Gaunt bellowed at her .Thats it grub on the floor like some filthy Muggle whats your wand for you useless sack of muck ?Mr Gaunt please !said Ogden in a shocked voice as Merope who had already picked up the pot flushed blotchily scarlet lost her grip on the pot again drew her wand shakily from her pocket pointed it at the pot and muttered a hasty inaudible spell that caused the pot to shoot across the floor away from her hit the opposite wall and crack in two .Morfin let out a mad cackle of laughter .Gaunt screamed Mend it you pointless lump mend it !Merope stumbled across the room but before she had time to raise her wand Ogden had lifted his own and said firmly Reparo .The pot mended itself instantly .Gaunt looked for a moment as though he was going to shout at Ogden but seemed to think better of it Instead he jeered at his daughter Lucky the nice man from the Ministrys here isnt it ?Perhaps hell take you off my hands perhaps he doesnt mind dirty Squibs .Without looking at anybody or thanking Ogden Merope picked up the pot and returned it hands trembling to its shelf .She then stood quite still her back against the wall between the filthy window and the stove as though she wished for nothing more than to sink into the stone and vanish .Mr Gaunt Ogden began again as Ive said the reason for my visit I heard you the first time !snapped Gaunt .And so what ?Morfin gave a Muggle a bit of what was coming to him what about it then ?Morfin has broken Wizarding law said Ogden sternly . ‘Morfin has broken Wizarding law .Gaunt imitated Ogdens voice making it pompous and singsong .Morfin cackled again .He taught a filthy Muggle a lesson thats illegal now is it ?Yes said Ogden .Im afraid it is .He pulled from an inside pocket a small scroll of parchment and unrolled it .Whats that then his sentence ?said Gaunt his voice rising angrily .It is a summons to the Ministry for a hearing Summons !Summons ?Who do you think you are summoning my son anywhere ?Im Head of the Magical Law Enforcement Squad said Ogden .And you think were scum do you ?screamed Gaunt advancing on Ogden now with a dirty yellow nailed finger pointing at his chest .Scum wholl come running when the Ministry tells em to ?Do you know who youre talking to you filthy little Mudblood do you ?I was under the impression that I was speaking to Mr Gaunt said Ogden looking wary but standing his ground .Thats right !roared Gaunt .For a moment Harry thought Gaunt was making an obscene hand gesture but then realized that he was showing Ogden the ugly black stoned ring he was wearing on his middle finger waving it before Ogdens eyes .See this ?See this ?Know what it is ?Know where it came from ?Centuries its been in our family thats how far back we go and pureblood all the way !Know how much Ive been offered for this with the Peverell coat of arms engraved on the stone ?Ive really no idea said Ogden blinking as the ring sailed within an inch of his nose and its quite beside the point Mr Gaunt .Your son has committed With a howl of rage Gaunt ran toward his daughter .For a split second Harry thought he was going to throttle her as his hand flew to her throat next moment he was dragging her toward Ogden by a gold chain around her neck .See this ?he bellowed at Ogden shaking a heavy gold locket at him while Merope spluttered and gasped for breath .I see it I see it !said Ogden hastily .Slytherinsl yelled Gaunt .Salazar Slytherins !Were his last living descendants what do you say to that eh ?Mr Gaunt your daughter !said Ogden in alarm but Gaunt had already released Merope she staggered away from him back to her corner massaging her neck and gulping for air .So !said Gaunt triumphantly as though he had just proved a complicated point beyond all possible dispute .Dont you go talking to us as if were dirt on your shoes !Generations of purebloods wizards all more than you can say I dont doubt !And he spat on the floor at Ogdens feet .Morfin cackled again .Merope huddled beside the window her head bowed and her face hidden by her lank hair said nothing .Mr Gaunt said Ogden doggedly I am afraid that neither your ancestors nor mine have anything to do with the matter in hand .I am here because of Morfin Morfin and the Muggle he accosted late last night .Our information he glanced down at his scroll of parchment is that Morfin performed a jinx or hex on the said Muggle causing him to erupt in highly painful hives .Morfin giggled .Be quiet boy snarled Gaunt in Parseltongue and Morfin fell silent again .And so what if he did then ?Gaunt said defiantly to Ogden .I expect youve wiped the Muggle s filthy face clean for him and his memory to boot Thats hardly the point is it Mr Gaunt ?said Ogden .This was an unprovoked attack on a defenseless Ar I had you marked out as a Mugglelover the moment I saw you sneered Gaunt and he spat on the floor again .This discussion is getting us nowhere said Ogden firmly .It is clear from your sons attitude that he feels no remorse for his actions .He glanced down at his scroll of parchment again .Morfin will attend a hearing on the fourteenth of September to answer the charges of using magic in front of a Muggle and causing harm and distress to that same Mugg Ogden broke off .The jingling clopping sounds of horses and loud laughing voices were drifting in through the open window .Apparently the winding lane to the village passed very close to the copse where the house stood .Gaunt froze listening his eyes wide .Morfin hissed and turned his face toward the sounds his expression hungry .Merope raised her head .Her face Harry saw was starkly white .My God what an eyesore !rang out a girls voice as clearly audible through the open window as if she had stood in the room beside them .Couldnt your father have that hovel cleared away Tom ?Its not ours said a young mans voice .Everything on the other side of the valley belongs to us but that cottage belongs to an old tramp called Gaunt and his children .The sons quite mad you should hear some of the stories they tell in the village The girl laughed .The jingling clopping noises were growing louder and louder .Morfin made to get out of his armchair .Keep your seat said his father warningly in Parseltongue .Tom said the girls voice again now so close they were clearly right beside the house I might be wrong but has somebody nailed a snake to that door ?Good lord youre right !said the mans voice .Thatll be the son I told you hes not right in the head .Dont look at it Cecilia darling .The jingling and clopping sounds were now growing fainter again . ‘Darling whispered Morfin in Parseltongue looking at his sister . ‘Darling he called her .So he wouldnt have you anyway .Merope was so white Harry felt sure she was going to faint .Whats that ?said Gaunt sharply also in Parseltongue looking from his son to his daughter .What did you say Morfin ?She likes looking at that Muggle said Morfin a vicious expression on his face as he stared at his sister who now looked terrified .Always in the garden when he passes peering through the hedge at him isnt she ?And last night Merope shook her head jerkily imploringly but Morfin went on ruthlessly Hanging out of the window waiting for him to ride home wasnt she ?Hanging out of the window to look at a Muggle ?said Gaunt quietly .All three of the Gaunts seemed to have forgotten Ogden who was looking both bewildered and irritated at this renewed outbreak of incomprehensible hissing and rasping .Is it true ?said Gaunt in a deadly voice advancing a step or two toward the terrified girl .My daughter pureblooded descendant of Salazar Slytherin hankering after a filthy dirtveined Muggle ?Merope shook her head frantically pressing herself into the wall apparently unable to speak .But I got him FatheA cackled Morfin .I got him as he went by and he didnt look so pretty with hives all over him did he Merope ?You disgusting little Squib you filthy little blood traitoA .roared Gaunt losing control and his hands closed around his daughters throat .Both Harry and Ogden yelled No !at the same time Ogden raised his wand and cried Relashiol Gaunt was thrown backward away from his daughter he tripped over a chair and fell flat on his back .With a roar of rage Morfin leapt out of his chair and ran at Ogden brandishing his bloody knife and firing hexes indiscriminately from his wand .Ogden ran for his life .Dumbledore indicated that they ought to follow and Harry obeyed Merope s screams echoing in his ears .Ogden hurtled up the path and erupted onto the main lane his arms over his head where he collided with the glossy chestnut horse ridden by a very handsome darkhaired young man .Both he and the pretty girl riding beside him on a gray horse roared with laughter at the sight of Ogden who bounced off the horses flank and set off again his frock coat flying covered from head to foot in dust running pellmell up the lane .I think that will do Harry said Dumbledore .He took Harry by the elbow and tugged .Next moment they were both soaring weightlessly through darkness until they landed squarely on their feet back in Dumbledore s now twilit office .What happened to the girl in the cottage ?said Harry at once as Dumbledore lit extra lamps with a flick of his wand .Merope or whatever her name was ?Oh she survived said Dumbledore reseating himself behind his desk and indicating that Harry should sit down too .Ogden Apparated back to the Ministry and returned with reinforcements within fifteen minutes .Morfin and his father attempted to fight but both were overpowered removed from the cottage and subsequently convicted by the Wizengamot .Morfin who already had a record of Muggle attacks was sentenced to three years in Azkaban .Marvolo who had injured several Ministry employees in addition to Ogden received six months .Marvolo ?Harry repeated wonderingly .Thats right said Dumbledore smiling in approval .I am glad to see youre keeping up .That old man was ?Voldemorts grandfather yes said Dumbledore .Marvolo his son Morfin and his daughter Merope were the last of the Gaunts a very ancient Wizarding family noted for a vein of instability and violence that flourished through the generations due to their habit of marrying their own cousins .Lack of sense coupled with a great liking for grandeur meant that the family gold was squandered several generations before Marvolo was born .He as you saw was left in squalor and poverty with a very nasty temper a fantastic amount of arrogance and pride and a couple of family heirlooms that he treasured just as much as his son and rather more than his daughter .So Merope said Harry leaning forward in his chair and staring at Dumbledore so Merope was .Sir does that mean she was .Voldemorts mother ?It does said Dumbledore .And it so happens that we also had a glimpse of Voldemorts father .I wonder whether you noticed ?The Muggle Morfin attacked ?The man on the horse ?Very good indeed said Dumbledore beaming .Yes that was Tom Riddle senior the handsome Muggle who used to go riding past the Gaunt cottage and for whom Merope Gaunt cherished a secret burning passion .And they ended up married ?Harry said in disbelief unable to imagine two people less likely to fall in love .I think you are forgetting said Dumbledore that Merope was a witch .I do not believe that her magical powers appeared to their best advantage when she was being terrorized by her father .Once Marvolo and Morfin were safely in Azkaban once she was alone and free for the first time in her life then I am sure she was able to give full rein to her abilities and to plot her escape from the desperate life she had led for eighteen years .Can you not think of any measure Merope could have taken to make Tom Riddle forget his Muggle companion and fall in love with her instead ?The Imperius Curse ?Harry suggested .Or a love potion ?Very good .Personally I am inclined to think that she used a love potion .I am sure it would have seemed more romantic to her and I do not think it would have been very difficult some hot day when Riddle was riding alone to persuade him to take a drink of water .In any case within a few months of the scene we have just witnessed the village of Little Hangleton enjoyed a tremendous scandal .You can imagine the gossip it caused when the squires son ran off with the tramps daughter Merope .But the villagers shock was nothing to Marvolos .He returned from Azkaban expecting to find his daughter dutifully awaiting his return with a hot meal ready on his table .Instead he found a clear inch of dust and her note of farewell explaining what she had done .From all that I have been able to discover he never mentioned her name or existence from that time forth .The shock of her desertion may have contributed to his early death or perhaps he had simply never learned to feed himself .Azkaban had greatly weakened Marvolo and he did not live to see Morfin return to the cottage .And Merope ?She .she died didnt she ?Wasnt Voldemort brought up in an orphanage ?Yes indeed said Dumbledore .We must do a certain amount of guessing here although I do not think it is difficult to deduce what happened .You see within a few months of their runaway marriage Tom Riddle reappeared at the manor house in Little Hangleton without his wife .The rumor flew around the neighborhood that he was talking of being ‘hoodwinked and ‘taken in .What he meant I am sure is that he had been under an enchantment that had now lifted though I daresay he did not dare use those precise words for fear of being thought insane .When they heard what he was saying however the villagers guessed that Merope had lied to Tom Riddle pretending that she was going to have his baby and that he had married her for this reason .But she did have his baby .But not until a year after they were married .Tom Riddle left her while she was still pregnant .What went wrong ?asked Harry .Why did the love potion stop working ?Again this is guesswork said Dumbledore but I believe that Merope who was deeply in love with her husband could not bear to continue enslaving him by magical means .I believe that she made the choice to stop giving him the potion .Perhaps besotted as she was she had convinced herself that he would by now have fallen in love with her in return .Perhaps she thought he would stay for the babys sake .If so she was wrong on both counts .He left her never saw her again and never troubled to discover what became of his son .The sky outside was inky black and the lamps in Dumbledore s office seemed to glow more brightly than before .I think that will do for tonight Harry said Dumbledore after a moment or two .Yes sir said Harry .He got to his feet but did not leave .Sir .is it important to know all this about Voldemorts past ?Very important I think said Dumbledore .And it .its got something to do with the prophecy ?It has everything to do with the prophecy .Right said Harry a little confused but reassured all the same .He turned to go then another question occurred to him and he turned back again .Sir am I allowed to tell Ron and Hermione everything youve told me ?Dumbledore considered him for a moment then said Yes I think Mr Weasley and Miss Granger have proved themselves trustworthy .But Harry I am going to ask you to ask them not to repeat any of this to anybody else .It would not be a good idea if word got around how much I know or suspect about Lord Voldemorts secrets .No sir Ill make sure its just Ron and Hermione .Good night .He turned away again and was almost at the door when he saw it .Sitting on one of the little spindle legged tables that supported so many fraillooking silver instruments was an ugly gold ring set with a large cracked black stone .Sir said Harry staring at it .That ring Yes ?said Dumbledore .You were wearing it when we visited Professor Slughorn that night .So I was Dumbledore agreed .But isnt it .sir isnt it the same ring Marvolo Gaunt showed Ogden ?Dumbledore bowed his head .The very same .But how come ?Have you always had it ?No I acquired it very recently said Dumbledore .A few days before I came to fetch you from your aunt and uncles in fact .That would be around the time you injured your hand then sir ?Around that time yes Harry .Harry hesitated .Dumbledore was smiling .Sir how exactly ?Too late Harry !You shall hear the story another time .Good night .Good night sir .HERMIONES HELPING HAND As Hermione had predicted the sixth years free periods were not the hours of blissful relaxation Ron had anticipated but times in which to attempt to keep up with the vast amount of homework they were being set .Not only were they studying as though they had exams every day but the lessons themselves had become more demanding than ever before .Harry barely understood half of what Professor McGonagall said to them these days even Hermione had had to ask her to repeat instructions once or twice .Incredibly and to Hermione s increasing resentment Harrys best subject had suddenly become Potions thanks to the HalfBlood Prince .Nonverbal spells were now expected not only in Defense Against the Dark Arts but in Charms and Transfiguration too .Harry frequently looked over at his classmates in the common room or at mealtimes to see them purple in the face and straining as though they had overdosed on UNoPoo but he knew that they were really struggling to make spells work without saying incantations aloud .It was a relief to get outside into the greenhouses they were dealing with more dangerous plants than ever in Herbology but at least they were still allowed to swear loudly if the Venomous Tentacula seized them unexpectedly from behind .One result of their enormous workload and the frantic hours of practicing nonverbal spells was that Harry Ron and Hermione had so far been unable to find time to go and visit Hagrid .He had stopped coming to meals at the staff table an ominous sign and on the few occasions when they had passed him in the corridors or out in the grounds he had mysteriously failed to notice them or hear their greetings .Weve got to go and explain said Hermione looking up at Hagrid s huge empty chair at the staff table the following Saturday at breakfast .Weve got Quidditch tryouts this morning !said Ron .And were supposed to be practicing that Aguamenti Charm from Flitwick !Anyway explain what ?How are we going to tell him we hated his stupid subject ?We didnt hate it !said Hermione .Speak for yourself I havent forgotten the skrewts said Ron darkly .And Im telling you now weve had a narrow escape .You didnt hear him going on about his gormless brother wed have been teaching Grawp how to tie his shoelaces if wed stayed .I hate not talking to Hagrid said Hermione looking upset .Well go down after Quidditch Harry assured her .He too was missing Hagrid although like Ron he thought that they were better off without Grawp in their lives .But trials might take all morning the number of people who have applied .He felt slightly nervous at confronting the first hurdle of his Captaincy .I dunno why the teams this popular all of a sudden .Oh come on Harry said Hermione suddenly impatient .Its not Quidditch thats popular its you !Youve never been more interesting and frankly youve never been more fanciable .Ron gagged on a large piece of kipper .Hermione spared him one look of disdain before turning back to Harry .Everyone knows youve been telling the truth now dont they ?The whole Wizarding world has had to admit that you were right about Voldemort being back and that you really have fought him twice in the last two years and escaped both times .And now theyre calling you ‘the Chosen One well come on cant you see why people are fascinated by you ?Harry was finding the Great Hall very hot all of a sudden even though the ceiling still looked cold and rainy .And youve been through all that persecution from the Ministry when they were trying to make out you were unstable and a liar .You can still see the marks on the back of your hand where that evil woman made you write with your own blood but you stuck to your story anyway .You can still see where those brains got hold of me in the Ministry look said Ron shaking back his sleeves .And it doesnt hurt that youve grown about a foot over the summer either Hermione finished ignoring Ron .Im tall said Ron inconsequentially .The post owls arrived swooping down through rain flecked windows scattering everyone with droplets of water .Most people were receiving more post than usual anxious parents were keen to hear from their children and to reassure them in turn that all was well at home .Harry had received no mail since the start of term his only regular correspondent was now dead and although he had hoped that Lupin might write occasionally he had so far been disappointed .He was very surprised therefore to see the snowy white Hedwig circling amongst all the brown and gray owls .She landed in front of him carrying a large square package .A moment later an identical package landed in front of Ron crushing beneath it his minuscule and exhausted owl Pigwidgeon .Ha !said Harry unwrapping the parcel to reveal a new copy of Advanced PotionMaking fresh from Flourish and Blotts .Oh good said Hermione delighted .Now you can give that graffitied copy back .Are you mad ?said Harry .Im keeping it !Look Ive thought it out He pulled the old copy of Advanced PotionMaking out of his bag and tapped the cover with his wand muttering Diffindol The cover fell off .He did the same thing with the brandnew book Hermione looked scandalized .He then swapped the covers tapped each and said Reparo There sat the Princes copy disguised as a new book and there sat the fresh copy from Flourish and Blotts looking thoroughly secondhand .Ill give Slughorn back the new one he cant complain it cost nine Galleons .Hermione pressed her lips together looking angry and disapproving but was distracted by a third owl landing in front of her carrying that days copy of the Daily Prophet .She unfolded it hastily and scanned the front page .Anyone we know dead ?asked Ron in a determinedly casual voice he posed the same question every time Hermione opened her paper .No but there have been more dementor attacks said Hermione .And an arrest .Excellent who ?said Harry thinking of Bellatrix Lestrange .Stan Shunpike said Hermione .What ?said Harry startled . ‘Stanley Shunpike conductor on the popular Wizarding conveyance the Knight Bus has been arrested on suspicion of Death Eater activity .Mr Shunpike 21 was taken into custody late last night after a raid on his Clapham home .Stan Shunpike a Death Eater ?said Harry remembering the spotty youth he had first met three years before .No way !He might have been put under the Imperius Curse said Ron reasonably .You never can tell .It doesnt look like it said Hermione who was still reading .It says here he was arrested after he was overheard talking about the Death Eaters secret plans in a pub .She looked up with a troubled expression on her face .If he was under the Imperius Curse hed hardly stand around gossiping about their plans would he ?It sounds like he was trying to make out he knew more than he did said Ron .Isnt he the one who claimed he was going to become Minister of Magic when he was trying to chat up those veela ?Yeah thats him said Harry .I dunno what theyre playing at taking Stan seriously .They probably want to look as though theyre doing something said Hermione frowning .People are terrified you know the Patil twins parents want them to go home ?And Eloise Midgen has already been withdrawn .Her father picked her up last night .What !said Ron goggling at Hermione .But Hogwarts is safer than their homes bound to be !Weve got Aurors and all those extra protective spells and weve got Dumbledore !I dont think weve got him all the time said Hermione very quietly glancing toward the staff table over the top of the Prophet Havent you noticed ?His seats been empty as often as Hagrids this past week .Harry and Ron looked up at the staff table .The headmasters chair was indeed empty .Now Harry came to think of it he had not seen Dumbledore since their private lesson a week ago .I think hes left the school to do something with the Order said Hermione in a low voice .I mean .its all looking serious isnt it ?Harry and Ron did not answer but Harry knew that they were all thinking the same thing .There had been a horrible incident the day before when Hannah Abbott had been taken out of Herbology to be told her mother had been found dead .They had not seen Hannah since .When they left the Gryffindor table five minutes later to head down to the Quidditch pitch they passed Lavender Brown and Parvati Patil .Remembering what Hermione had said about the Patil twins parents wanting them to leave Hogwarts Harry was unsurprised to see that the two best friends were whispering together looking distressed .What did surprise him was that when Ron drew level with them Parvati suddenly nudged Lavender who looked around and gave Ron a wide smile .Ron blinked at her then returned the smile uncertainly .His walk instantly became something more like a strut .Harry resisted the temptation to laugh remembering that Ron had refrained from doing so after Malfoy had broken Harrys nose Hermione however looked cold and distant all the way down to the stadium through the cool misty drizzle and departed to find a place in the stands without wishing Ron good luck .As Harry had expected the trials took most of the morning .Half of Gryffindor House seemed to have turned up from first years who were nervously clutching a selection of the dreadful old school brooms to seventh years who towered over the rest looking coolly intimidating .The latter included a large wiryhaired boy Harry recognized immediately from the Hogwarts Express .We met on the train in old Sluggys compartment he said confidently stepping out of the crowd to shake Harrys hand .Cormac McLaggen Keeper .You didnt try out last year did you ?asked Harry taking note of the breadth of McLaggen and thinking that he would probably block all three goal hoops without even moving .I was in the hospital wing when they held the trials said McLaggen with something of a swagger .Ate a pound of doxy eggs for a bet .Right said Harry .Well .if you wait over there .He pointed over to the edge of the pitch close to where Hermione was sitting .He thought he saw a flicker of annoyance pass over McLaggens face and wondered whether McLaggen expected preferential treatment because they were both old Sluggys favorites .Harry decided to start with a basic test asking all applicants for the team to divide into groups of ten and fly once around the pitch .This was a good decision The first ten was made up of first years and it could not have been plainer that they had hardly ever flown before .Only one boy managed to remain airborne for more than a few seconds and he was so surprised he promptly crashed into one of the goal posts .The second group was comprised of ten of the silliest girls Harry had ever encountered who when he blew his whistle merely fell about giggling and clutching one another .Romilda Vane was amongst them .When he told them to leave the pitch they did so quite cheerfully and went to sit in the stands to heckle everyone else .The third group had a pileup halfway around the pitch .Most of the fourth group had come without broomsticks .The fifth group were Hufflepuffs .If theres anyone else here whos not from Gryffindor roared Harry who was starting to get seriously annoyed leave now please !There was a pause then a couple of little Ravenclaws went sprinting off the pitch snorting with laughter .After two hours many complaints and several tantrums one involving a crashed Comet Two Sixty and several broken teeth Harry had found himself three Chasers Katie Bell returned to the team after an excellent trial a new find called Demelza Robins who was particularly good at dodging Bludgers and Ginny Weasley who had outflown all the competition and scored seventeen goals to boot .Pleased though he was with his choices Harry had also shouted himself hoarse at the many complainers and was now enduring a similar battle with the rejected Beaters .Thats my final decision and if you dont get out of the way for the Keepers Ill hex you he bellowed .Neither of his chosen Beaters had the old brilliance of Fred and George but he was still reasonably pleased with them Jimmy Peakes a short but broadchested thirdyear boy who had managed to raise a lump the size of an egg on the back of Harrys head with a ferociously hit Bludger and Ritchie Coote who looked weedy but aimed well .They now joined Katie Demelza and Ginny in the stands to watch the selection of their last team member .Harry had deliberately left the trial of the Keepers until last hoping for an emptier stadium and less pressure on all concerned .Unfortunately however all the rejected players and a number of people who had come down to watch after a lengthy breakfast had joined the crowd by now so that it was larger than ever .As each Keeper flew up to the goal hoops the crowd roared and jeered in equal measure .Harry glanced over at Ron who had always had a problem with nerves Harry had hoped that winning their final match last term might have cured it but apparently not Ron was a delicate shade of green .None of the first five applicants saved more than two goals apiece .To Harrys great disappointment Cormac McLaggen saved four penalties out of five .On the last one however he shot off in completely the wrong direction the crowd laughed and booed and McLaggen returned to the ground grinding his teeth .Ron looked ready to pass out as he mounted his Cleansweep Eleven .Good luck !cried a voice from the stands .Harry looked around expecting to see Hermione but it was Lavender Brown .He would have quite liked to have hidden his face in his hands as she did a moment later but thought that as the Captain he ought to show slightly more grit and so turned to watch Ron do his trial .Yet he need not have worried Ron saved one two three four five penalties in a row .Delighted and resisting joining in the cheers of the crowd with difficulty Harry turned to McLaggen to tell him that most unfortunately Ron had beaten him only to find McLaggens red face inches from his own .He stepped back hastily .His sister didnt really try said McLaggen menacingly .There was a vein pulsing in his temple like the one Harry had often admired in Uncle Vernons .She gave him an easy save .Rubbish said Harry coldly .That was the one he nearly missed .McLaggen took a step nearer Harry who stood his ground this time .Give me another go .No said Harry .Youve had your go .You saved four .Ron saved five .Rons Keeper he won it fair and square .Get out of my way .He thought for a moment that McLaggen might punch him but he contented himself with an ugly grimace and stormed away gwhat sounded like threats to thin air .Harry turned around to find his new team beaming at him .Well done he croaked .You flew really well You did brilliantly Ron !This time it really was Hermione running toward them from the stands Harry saw Lavender walking off the pitch arm in arm with Parvati a rather grumpy expression on her face .Ron looked extremely pleased with himself and even taller than usual as he grinned at the team and at Hermione .After fixing the time of their first full practice for the following Thursday Harry Ron and Hermione bade goodbye to the rest of the team and headed off toward Hagrids .A watery sun was trying to break through the clouds now and it had stopped drizzling at last .Harry felt extremely hungry he hoped there would be something to eat at Hagrids .I thought I was going to miss that fourth penalty Ron was saying happily .Tricky shot from Demelza did you see had a bit of spin on it Yes yes you were magnificent said Hermione looking amused .I was better than that McLaggen anyway said Ron in a highly satisfied voice .Did you see him lumbering off in the wrong direction on his fifth ?Looked like hed been Confunded .To Harrys surprise Hermione turned a very deep shade of pink at these words .Ron noticed nothing he was too busy describing each of his other penalties in loving detail .The great gray hippogriff Buckbeak was tethered in front of Hagrids cabin .He clicked his razorsharp beak at their approach and turned his huge head toward them .Oh dear said Hermione nervously .Hes still a bit scary isnt he ?Come off it youve ridden him havent you ?said Ron .Harry stepped forward and bowed low to the hippogriff without breaking eye contact or blinking .After a few seconds Buckbeak sank into a bow too .How are you ?Harry asked him in a low voice moving forward to stroke the feathery head .Missing him ?But youre okay here with Hagrid arent you ?Oi !said a loud voice .Hagrid had come striding around the corner of his cabin wearing a large flowery apron and carrying a sack of potatoes .His enormous boarhound Fang was at his heels Fang gave a booming bark and bounded forward .Git away from him !Hell have yer fingers oh .Its yeh lot .Fang was jumping up at Hermione and Ron attempting to lick their ears .Hagrid stood and looked at them all for a split second then turned and strode into his cabin slamming the door behind him .Oh dear !said Hermione looking stricken .Dont worry about it said Harry grimly .He walked over to the door and knocked loudly .Hagrid !Open up we want to talk to you !There was no sound from within .If you dont open the door well blast it open !Harry said pulling out his wand .Harry !said Hermione sounding shocked .You cant possibly Yeah I can !said Harry .Stand back But before he could say anything else the door flew open again as Harry had known it would and there stood Hagrid glowering down at him and looking despite the flowery apron positively alarming .Im a teacher !he roared at Harry .A teacher Potter !How dare yeh threaten ter break down my door ! ‘Tm sorry sir said Harry emphasizing the last word as he stowed his wand inside his robes .Hagrid looked stunned .Since when have yeh called me ‘sir ?Since when have you called me ‘Potter ?Oh very clever growled Hagrid .Very amusin .Thats me outsmarted innit ?All righ come in then yeh ungrateful little .Mumbling darkly he stood back to let them pass .Hermione scurried in after Harry looking rather frightened .Well ?said Hagrid grumpily as Harry Ron and Hermione sat down around his enormous wooden table Fang laying his head immediately upon Harrys knee and drooling all over his robes .Whats this ?Feelin sorry for me ?Reckon Im lonely or summat ?No said Harry at once .We wanted to see you .Weve missed you !said Hermione tremulously .Missed me have yeh ?snorted Hagrid .Yeah .Righ .He stomped around brewing up tea in his enormous copper kettle muttering all the while .Finally he slammed down three bucketsized mugs of mahoganybrown tea in front of them and a plate of his rock cakes .Harry was hungry enough even for Hagrids cooking and took one at once .Hagrid said Hermione timidly when he joined them at the table and started peeling his potatoes with a brutality that suggested that each tuber had done him a great personal wrong we really wanted to carry on with Care of Magical Creatures you know .Hagrid gave another great snort .Harry rather thought some bogeys landed on the potatoes and was inwardly thankful that they were not staying for dinner .We did !said Hermione .But none of us could fit it into our schedules !Yeah .Righ said Hagrid again .There was a funny squelching sound and they all looked around Hermione let out a tiny shriek and Ron leapt out of his seat and hurried around the table away from the large barrel standing in the corner that they had only just noticed .It was full of what looked like footlong maggots slimy white and writhing .What are they Hagrid ?asked Harry trying to sound interested rather than revolted but putting down his rock cake all the same .Jus giant grubs said Hagrid .And they grow into . ?said Ron looking apprehensive .They won grow inter nuthin said Hagrid .I got em ter feed ter Aragog .And without warning he burst into tears .Hagrid !cried Hermione leaping up hurrying around the table the long way to avoid the barrel of maggots and putting an arm around his shaking shoulders .What is it ?Its .him .gulped Hagrid his beetleblack eyes streaming as he mopped his face with his apron .Its .Aragog .I think hes dyin .He got ill over the summer an hes not gettin better .I don know what Ill do if he .if he .Weve bin tergether so long .Hermione patted Hagrids shoulder looking at a complete loss for anything to say .Harry knew how she felt .He had known Hagrid to present a vicious baby dragon with a teddy bear seen him croon over giant scorpions with suckers and stingers attempt to reason with his brutal giant of a halfbrother but this was perhaps the most incomprehensible of all his monster fancies the gigantic talking spider Aragog who dwelled deep in the Forbidden Forest and which he and Ron had only narrowly escaped four years previously .Is there is there anything we can do ?Hermione asked ignoring Rons frantic grimaces and head shakings .I don think there is Hermione choked Hagrid attempting to stem the flood of his tears .See the rest o the tribe .Aragogs family .theyre gettin a bit funny now hes ill .bit restive .Yeah I think we saw a bit of that side of them said Ron in an undertone . .I don reckon itd be safe fer anyone but me ter go near the colony at the mo Hagrid finished blowing his nose hard on his apron and looking up .But thanks fer offerin Hermione .It means a lot .After that the atmosphere lightened considerably for although neither Harry nor Ron had shown any inclination to go and feed giant grubs to a murderous gargantuan spider Hagrid seemed to take it for granted that they would have liked to have done and became his usual self once more .Ar I always knew yehd find it hard ter squeeze me inter yer timetables he said gruffly pouring them more tea .Even if yeh applied fer TimeTurners We couldnt have done said Hermione .We smashed the entire stock of Ministry TimeTurners when we were there last summer .It was in the Daily Prophet .Ar well then said Hagrid .Theres no way yeh couldve done it .Im sorry Ive bin yeh know Ive jus bin worried abou Aragog .an I did wonder whether if Professor GrubblyPlank had bin teachin yeh At which all three of them stated categorically and untruthfully that Professor GrubblyPlank who had substituted for Hagrid a few times was a dreadful teacher with the result that by the time Hagrid waved them off the premises at dusk he looked quite cheerful .Im starving said Harry once the door had closed behind them and they were hurrying through the dark and deserted grounds he had abandoned the rock cake after an ominous cracking noise from one of his back teeth .And Ive got that detention with Snape tonight I havent got much time for dinner .As they came into the castle they spotted Cormac McLaggen entering the Great Hall .It took him two attempts to get through the doors he ricocheted off the frame on the first attempt .Ron merely guffawed gloatingly and strode off into the Hall after him but Harry caught Hermione s arm and held her back .What ?said Hermione defensively .If you ask me said Harry quietly McLaggen looks like he was Confunded this morning .And he was standing right in front of where you were sitting .Hermione blushed .Oh all right then I did it she whispered .But you should have heard the way he was talking about Ron and Ginny !Anyway hes got a nasty temper you saw how he reacted when he didnt get in you wouldnt have wanted someone like that on the team .No said Harry .No I suppose thats true .But wasnt that dishonest Hermione ?I mean youre a prefect arent you ?Oh be quiet she snapped as he smirked .What are you two doing ?demanded Ron reappearing in the doorway to the Great Hall and looking suspicious .Nothing said Harry and Hermione together and they hurried after Ron .The smell of roast beef made Harrys stomach ache with hunger but they had barely taken three steps toward the Gryffindor table when Professor Slughorn appeared in front of them blocking their path .Harry Harry just the man I was hoping to see !he boomed genially twiddling the ends of his walrus mustache and puffing out his enormous belly .I was hoping to catch you before dinner !What do you say to a spot of supper tonight in my rooms instead ?Were having a little party just a few rising stars Ive got McLaggen coming and Zabini the charming Melinda Bobbin I dont know whether you know her ?Her family owns a large chain of apothecaries and of course I hope very much that Miss Granger will favor me by coming too .Slughorn made Hermione a little bow as he finished speaking .It was as though Ron was not present Slughorn did not so much as look at him .I cant come Professor said Harry at once .Ive got a detention with Professor Snape .Oh dear !said Slughorn his face falling comically .Dear dear I was counting on you Harry !Well now Ill just have to have a word with Severus and explain the situation .Im sure Ill be able to persuade him to postpone your detention .Yes Ill see you both later !He bustled away out of the Hall .Hes got no chance of persuading Snape said Harry the moment Slughorn was out of earshot .This detentions already been postponed once Snape did it for Dumbledore but he wont do it for anyone else .Oh I wish you could come I dont want to go on my own !said Hermione anxiously Harry knew that she was thinking about McLaggen .I doubt youll be alone Ginnyll probably be invited snapped Ron who did not seem to have taken kindly to being ignored by Slughorn .After dinner they made their way back to Gryffindor Tower .The common room was very crowded as most people had finished dinner by now but they managed to find a free table and sat down Ron who had been in a bad mood ever since the encounter with Slughorn folded his arms and frowned at the ceiling .Hermione reached out for a copy of the Evening Prophet which somebody had left abandoned on a chair .Anything new ?said Harry .Not really .Hermione had opened the newspaper and was scanning the inside pages .Oh look your dads in here Ron hes all right !she added quickly for Ron had looked around in alarm .It just says hes been to visit the Malfoys house . ‘This second search of the Death Eaters residence does not seem to have yielded any results .Arthur Weasley of the Office for the Detection and Confiscation of Counterfeit Defensive Spells and Protective Objects said that his team had been acting upon a confidential tipoff Yeah mine !said Harry .I told him at Kings Cross about Malfoy and that thing he was trying to get Borgin to fix !Well if its not at their house he must have brought whatever it is to Hogwarts with him But how can he have done Harry ?said Hermione putting down the newspaper with a surprised look .We were all searched when we arrived werent we ?Were you ?said Harry taken aback .I wasnt !Oh no of course you werent I forgot you were late . .Well Filch ran over all of us with Secrecy Sensors when we got into the entrance hall .Any Dark object would have been found I know for a fact Crabbe had a shrunken head confiscated .So you see Malfoy cant have brought in anything dangerous !Momentarily stymied Harry watched Ginny Weasley playing with Arnold the Pygmy Puff for a while before seeing a way around this objection .Someones sent it to him by owl then he said .His mother or someone .All the owls are being checked too said Hermione .Filch told us so when he was jabbing those Secrecy Sensors everywhere he could reach .Really stumped this time Harry found nothing else to say .There did not seem to be any way Malfoy could have brought a dangerous or Dark object into the school .He looked hopefully at Ron who was sitting with his arms folded staring over at Lavender Brown .Can you think of any way Malfoy ?Oh drop it Harry said Ron .Listen its not my fault Slughorn invited Hermione and me to his stupid party neither of us wanted to go you know !said Harry firing up .Well as Im not invited to any parties said Ron getting to his feet again I think Ill go to bed .He stomped off toward the door to the boys dormitories leaving Harry and Hermione staring after him .Harry ?said the new Chaser Demelza Robins appearing suddenly at his shoulder .Ive got a message for you .From Professor Slughorn ?asked Harry sitting up hopefully .No .from Professor Snape said Demelza .Harrys heart sank .He says youre to come to his office at half past eight tonight to do your detention er no matter how many party invitations youve received .And he wanted you to know youll be sorting out rotten flobberworms from good ones to use in Potions and and he says theres no need to bring protective gloves .Right said Harry grimly .Thanks a lot Demelza .SILVER AND OPALS Where was Dumbledore and what was he doing ?Harry caught sight of the headmaster only twice over the next few weeks .He rarely appeared at meals anymore and Harry was sure Hermione was right in thinking that he was leaving the school for days at a time .Had Dumbledore forgotten the lessons he was supposed to be giving Harry ?Dumbledore had said that the lessons were leading to something to do with the prophecy Harry had felt bolstered comforted and now he felt slightly abandoned .Halfway through October came their first trip of the term to Hogsmeade .Harry had wondered whether these trips would still be allowed given the increasingly tight security measures around the school but was pleased to know that they were going ahead it was always good to get out of the castle grounds for a few hours .Harry woke early on the morning of the trip which was proving stormy and whiled away the time until breakfast by reading his copy of Advanced Potion Making .He did not usually lie in bed reading his textbooks that sort of behavior as Ron rightly said was indecent in anybody except Hermione who was simply weird that way .Harry felt however that the HalfBlood Princes copy of Advanced PotionMaking hardly qualified as a textbook .The more Harry pored over the book the more he realized how much was in there not only the handy hints and shortcuts on potions that were earning him such a glowing reputation with Slughorn but also the imaginative little jinxes and hexes scribbled in the margins which Harry was sure judging by the crossingsout and revisions that the Prince had invented himself .Harry had already attempted a few of the Princes self invented spells .There had been a hex that caused toenails to grow alarmingly fast he had tried this on Crabbe in the corridor with very entertaining results a jinx that glued the tongue to the roof of the mouth which he had twice used to general applause on an unsuspecting Argus Filch and perhaps most useful of all Muffliato a spell that filled the ears of anyone nearby with an unidentifiable buzzing so that lengthy conversations could be held in class without being overheard .The only person who did not find these charms amusing was Hermione who maintained a rigidly disapproving expression throughout and refused to talk at all if Harry had used the Muffliato spell on anyone in the vicinity .Sitting up in bed Harry turned the book sideways so as to examine more closely the scribbled instructions for a spell that seemed to have caused the Prince some trouble .There were many crossingsout and alterations but finally crammed into a corner of the page the scribble Levicorpus nvbl While the wind and sleet pounded relentlessly on the windows and Neville snored loudly Harry stared at the letters in brackets .Nvbl .that had to mean nonverbal .Harry rather doubted he would be able to bring off this particular spell he was still having difficulty with nonverbal spells something Snape had been quick to comment on in every D .A .D .A .class .On the other hand the Prince had proved a much more effective teacher than Snape so far .Pointing his wand at nothing in particular he gave it an upward flick and said Levicorpusl inside his head .aargh !There was a flash of light and the room was full of voices Everyone had woken up as Ron had let out a yell .Harry sent Advanced PotionMaking flying in panic Ron was dangling upside down in midair as though an invisible hook had hoisted him up by the ankle .Sorry !yelled Harry as Dean and Seamus roared with laughter and Neville picked himself up from the floor having fallen out of bed .Hang on Ill let you down He groped for the potion book and riffled through it in a panic trying to find the right page at last he located it and deciphered one cramped word underneath the spell Praying that this was the counterjinx Harry thought Liberacorpus with all his might .There was another flash of light and Ron fell in a heap onto his mattress .Sorry repeated Harry weakly while Dean and Seamus continued to roar with laughter .Tomorrow said Ron in a muffled voice Id rather you set the alarm clock .By the time they had got dressed padding themselves out with several of Mrs Weasleys handknitted sweaters and carrying cloaks scarves and gloves Rons shock had subsided and he had decided that Harrys new spell was highly amusing so amusing in fact that he lost no time in regaling Hermione with the story as they sat down for breakfast . .and then there was another flash of light and I landed on the bed again !Ron grinned helping himself to sausages .Hermione had not cracked a smile during this anecdote and now turned an expression of wintry disapproval upon Harry .Was this spell by any chance another one from that potion book of yours ?she asked .Harry frowned at her .Always jump to the worst conclusion dont you ?Was it ?Well .yeah it was but so what ?So you just decided to try out an unknown handwritten incantation and see what would happen ?Why does it matter if its handwritten ?said Harry preferring not to answer the rest of the question .Because its probably not Ministry of Magic approved said Hermione .And also she added as Harry and Ron rolled their eyes because Im starting to think this Prince character was a bit dodgy .Both Harry and Ron shouted her down at once .It was a laugh !said Ron upending a ketchup bottle over his sausages .Just a laugh Hermione thats all !Dangling people upside down by the ankle ?said Hermione .Who puts their time and energy into making up spells like that ?Fred and George said Ron shrugging its their kind of thing .And er My dad said Harry .He had only just remembered .What ?said Ron and Hermione together .My dad used this spell said Harry .I Lupin told me .This last part was not true in fact Harry had seen his father use the spell on Snape but he had never told Ron and Hermione about that particular excursion into the Pensieve .Now however a wonderful possibility occurred to him .Could the Half Blood Prince possibly be ?Maybe your dad did use it Harry said Hermione but hes not the only one .Weve seen a whole bunch of people use it in case youve forgotten .Dangling people in the air .Making them float along asleep helpless .Harry stared at her .With a sinking feeling he too remembered the behavior of the Death Eaters at the Quidditch World Cup .Ron came to his aid .That was different he said robustly .They were abusing it .Harry and his dad were just having a laugh .You dont like the Prince Hermione he added pointing a sausage at her sternly because hes better than you at Potions Its got nothing to do with that !said Hermione her cheeks reddening .I just think its very irresponsible to start performing spells when you dont even know what theyre for and stop talking about ‘the Prince as if its his title I bet its just a stupid nickname and it doesnt seem as though he was a very nice person to me !I dont see where you get that from said Harry heatedly .If hed been a budding Death Eater he wouldnt have been boasting about being ‘halfblood would he ?Even as he said it Harry remembered that his father had been pureblood but he pushed the thought out of his mind he would worry about that later .The Death Eaters cant all be pureblood there arent enough pureblood wizards left said Hermione stubbornly .I expect most of them are halfbloods pretending to be pure .Its only Muggleborns they hate theyd be quite happy to let you and Ron join up .There is no way theyd let me be a Death Eater !said Ron indignantly a bit of sausage flying off the fork he was now brandishing at Hermione and hitting Ernie Macmillan on the head .My whole family are blood traitors !Thats as bad as Muggleborns to Death Eaters !And theyd love to have me said Harry sarcastically .Wed be best pals if they didnt keep trying to do me in .This made Ron laugh even Hermione gave a grudging smile and a distraction arrived in the shape of Ginny .Hey Harry Im supposed to give you this .It was a scroll of parchment with Harrys name written upon it in familiar thin slanting writing .Thanks Ginny .Its Dumbledores next lesson !Harry told Ron and Hermione pulling open the parchment and quickly reading its contents .Monday evening !He felt suddenly light and happy .Want to join us in Hogsmeade Ginny ?he asked .Im going with Dean might see you there she replied waving at them as she left .Filch was standing at the oak front doors as usual checking off the names of people who had permission to go into Hogsmeade .The process took even longer than normal as Filch was triplechecking everybody with his Secrecy Sensor .What does it matter if were smuggling Dark stuff OUT ?demanded Ron eyeing the long thin Secrecy Sensor with apprehension .Surely you ought to be checking what we bring back IN ?His cheek earned him a few extra jabs with the Sensor and he was still wincing as they stepped out into the wind and sleet .The walk into Hogsmeade was not enjoyable .Harry wrapped his scarf over his lower face the exposed part soon felt both raw and numb .The road to the village was full of students bent double against the bitter wind .More than once Harry wondered whether they might not have had a better time in the warm common room and when they finally reached Hogsmeade and saw that Zonkos Joke Shop had been boarded up Harry took it as confirmation that this trip was not destined to be fun .Ron pointed with a thickly gloved hand toward Honeydukes which was mercifully open and Harry and Hermione staggered in his wake into the crowded shop .Thank God shivered Ron as they were enveloped by warm toffeescented air .Lets stay here all afternoon .Harry mboy !said a booming voice from behind them .Oh no muttered Harry .The three of them turned to see Professor Slughorn who was wearing an enormous furry hat and an overcoat with matching fur collar clutching a large bag of crystalized pineapple and occupying at least a quarter of the shop .Harry thats three of my little suppers youve missed now !said Slughorn poking him genially in the chest .It wont do mboy Im determined to have you !Miss Granger loves them dont you ?Yes said Hermione helplessly theyre really So why dont you come along Harry ?demanded Slughorn .Well Ive had Quidditch practice Professor said Harry who had indeed been scheduling practices every time Slughorn had sent him a little violet ribbonadorned invitation .This strategy meant that Ron was not left out and they usually had a laugh with Ginny imagining Hermione shut up with McLaggen and Zabini .Well I certainly expect you to win your first match after all this hard work !said Slughorn .But a little recreation never hurt anybody .Now how about Monday night you cant possibly want to practice in this weather .I cant Professor Ive got er an appointment with Professor Dumbledore that evening .Unlucky again !cried Slughorn dramatically .Ah well .you cant evade me forever Harry !And with a regal wave he waddled out of the shop taking as little notice of Ron as though he had been a display of Cockroach Clusters .I cant believe youve wriggled out of another one said Hermione shaking her head .Theyre not that bad you know .Theyre even quite fun sometimes . .But then she caught sight of Rons expression .Oh look theyve got deluxe sugar quills those would last hours !Glad that Hermione had changed the subject Harry showed much more interest in the new extralarge sugar quills than he would normally have done but Ron continued to look moody and merely shrugged when Hermione asked him where he wanted to go next .Lets go to the Three Broomsticks said Harry .Itll be warm .They bundled their scarves back over their faces and left the sweetshop .The bitter wind was like knives on their faces after the sugary warmth of Honeydukes .The street was not very busy nobody was lingering to chat just hurrying toward their destinations .The exceptions were two men a little ahead of them standing just outside the Three Broomsticks .One was very tall and thin squinting through his rainwashed glasses Harry recognized the barman who worked in the other Hogsmeade pub the Hogs Head .As Harry Ron and Hermione drew closer the barman drew his cloak more tightly around his neck and walked away leaving the shorter man to fumble with something in his arms .They were barely feet from him when Harry realized who the man was .Mundungus !The squat bandylegged man with long straggly ginger hair jumped and dropped an ancient suitcase which burst open releasing what looked like the entire contents of a junk shop window .Oh ello Arry said Mundungus Fletcher with a most unconvincing stab at airiness .Well dont let me keep ya .And he began scrabbling on the ground to retrieve the contents of his suitcase with every appearance of a man eager to be gone .Are you selling this stuff ?asked Harry watching Mundungus grab an assortment of grubbylooking objects from the ground .Oh well gotta scrape a living said Mundungus .Gimme that !Ron had stooped down and picked up something silver .Hang on Ron said slowly .This looks familiar Thank you !said Mundungus snatching the goblet out of Rons hand and stuffing it back into the case .Well Ill see you all OUCH !Harry had pinned Mundungus against the wall of the pub by the throat .Holding him fast with one hand he pulled out his wand .Harry !squealed Hermione .You took that from Siriuss house said Harry who was almost nose to nose with Mundungus and was breathing in an unpleasant smell of old tobacco and spirits .That had the Black family crest on it .I no what ?spluttered Mundungus who was slowly turning purple .What did you do go back the night he died and strip the place ?snarled Harry .I no Give it to me !Harry you mustnt !shrieked Hermione as Mundungus started to turn blue .There was a bang and Harry felt his hands fly off Mundunguss throat .Gasping and spluttering Mundungus seized his fallen case then CRACK he Disapparated .Harry swore at the top of his voice spinning on the spot to see where Mundungus had gone .COME BACK YOU THIEVING !Theres no point Harry .Tonks had appeared out of nowhere her mousy hair wet with sleet .Mundungus will probably be in London by now .Theres no point yelling .Hes nicked Siriuss stuff !Nicked it !Yes but still said Tonks who seemed perfectly untroubled by this piece of information .You should get out of the cold .She watched them go through the door of the Three Broomsticks .The moment he was inside Harry burst out He was nicking Siriuss stuff .I know Harry but please dont shout people are staring whispered Hermione .Go and sit down Ill get you a drink .Harry was still fuming when Hermione returned to their table a few minutes later holding three bottles of butterbeer .Cant the Order control Mundungus ?Harry demanded of the other two in a furious whisper .Cant they at least stop him stealing everything thats not fixed down when hes at headquarters ?Shh !said Hermione desperately looking around to make sure nobody was listening there were a couple of warlocks sitting close by who were staring at Harry with great interest and Zabini was lolling against a pillar not far away .Harry Id be annoyed too I know its your things hes stealing Harry gagged on his butterbeer he had momentarily forgotten that he owned number twelve Grimmauld Place .Yeah its my stuff !he said .No wonder he wasnt pleased to see me !Well Im going to tell Dumbledore whats going on hes the only one who scares Mundungus .Good idea whispered Hermione clearly pleased that Harry was calming down .Ron what are you staring at ?Nothing said Ron hastily looking away from the bar but Harry knew he was trying to catch the eye of the curvy and attractive barmaid Madam Rosmerta for whom he had long nursed a soft spot .I expect ‘nothings in the back getting more firewhisky said Hermione waspishly .Ron ignored this jibe sipping his drink in what he evidently considered to be a dignified silence .Harry was thinking about Sirius and how he had hated those silver goblets anyway .Hermione drummed her fingers on the table her eyes flickering between Ron and the bar .The moment Harry drained the last drops in his bottle she said Shall we call it a day and go back to school then ?The other two nodded it had not been a fun trip and the weather was getting worse the longer they stayed .Once again they drew their cloaks tightly around them rearranged their scarves pulled on their gloves then followed Katie Bell and a friend out of the pub and back up the High Street .Harrys thoughts strayed to Ginny as they trudged up the road to Hogwarts through the frozen slush .They had not met up with her undoubtedly thought Harry because she and Dean were cozily closeted in Madam Puddifoots Tea Shop that haunt of happy couples .Scowling he bowed his head against the swirling sleet and trudged on .It was a little while before Harry became aware that the voices of Katie Bell and her friend which were being carried back to him on the wind had become shriller and louder .Harry squinted at their indistinct figures .The two girls were having an argument about something Katie was holding in her hand .Its nothing to do with you Leanne !Harry heard Katie say .They rounded a corner in the lane sleet coming thick and fast blurring Harrys glasses .Just as he raised a gloved hand to wipe them Leanne made to grab hold of the package Katie was holding Katie tugged it back and the package fell to the ground .At once Katie rose into the air not as Ron had done suspended comically by the ankle but gracefully her arms outstretched as though she was about to fly .Yet there was something wrong something eerie .Her hair was whipped around her by the fierce wind but her eyes were closed and her face was quite empty of expression .Harry Ron Hermione and Leanne had all halted in their tracks watching .Then six feet above the ground Katie let out a terrible scream .Her eyes flew open but whatever she could see or whatever she was feeling was clearly causing her terrible anguish .She screamed and screamed Leanne started to scream too and seized Katies ankles trying to tug her back to the ground .Harry Ron and Hermione rushed forward to help but even as they grabbed Katies legs she fell on top of them Harry and Ron managed to catch her but she was writhing so much they could hardly hold her .Instead they lowered her to the ground where she thrashed and screamed apparently unable to recognize any of them .Harry looked around the landscape seemed deserted .Stay there !he shouted at the others over the howling wind .Im going for help !He began to sprint toward the school he had never seen anyone behave as Katie had just behaved and could not think what had caused it he hurtled around a bend in the lane and collided with what seemed to be an enormous bear on its hind legs .Hagrid !he panted disentangling himself from the hedgerow into which he had fallen .Harry !said Hagrid who had sleet trapped in his eyebrows and beard and was wearing his great shaggy beaverskin coat .Jus bin visitin Grawp hes cornin on so well yeh wouldn Hagrid someones hurt back there or cursed or something Wha ?said Hagrid bending lower to hear what Harry was saying over the raging wind .Someones been cursed !bellowed Harry .Cursed ?Whos bin cursed not Ron ?Hermione ?No its not them its Katie Bell this way .Together they ran back along the lane .It took them no time to find the little group of people around Katie who was still writhing and screaming on the ground Ron Hermione and Leanne were all trying to quiet her .Get back !shouted Hagrid .Lemme see her !Somethings happened to her !sobbed Leanne .I dont know what Hagrid stared at Katie for a second then without a word bent down scooped her into his arms and ran off toward the castle with her .Within seconds Katies piercing screams had died away and the only sound was the roar of the wind .Hermione hurried over to Katies wailing friend and put an arm around her .Its Leanne isnt it ?The girl nodded .Did it just happen all of a sudden or ?It was when that package tore sobbed Leanne pointing at the now sodden brownpaper package on the ground which had split open to reveal a greenish glitter .Ron bent down his hand outstretched but Harry seized his arm and pulled him back .Dont touch if !He crouched down .An ornate opal necklace was visible poking out of the paper .Ive seen that before said Harry staring at the thing .It was on display in Borgin and Burkes ages ago .The label said it was cursed .Katie must have touched it .He looked up at Leanne who had started to shake uncontrollably .How did Katie get hold of this ?Well thats why we were arguing .She came back from the bathroom in the Three Broomsticks holding it said it was a surprise for somebody at Hogwarts and she had to deliver it .She looked all funny when she said it .Oh no oh no I bet shed been Imperiused and I didnt realize !Leanne shook with renewed sobs .Hermione patted her shoulder gently .She didnt say whod given it to her Leanne ?No .she wouldnt tell me .and I said she was being stupid and not to take it up to school but she just wouldnt listen and .and then I tried to grab it from her .and and Leanne let out a wail of despair .Wed better get up to school said Hermione her arm still around Leanne .Well be able to find out how she is .Come on .Harry hesitated for a moment then pulled his scarf from around his face and ignoring Rons gasp carefully covered the necklace in it and picked it up .Well need to show this to Madam Pomfrey he said .As they followed Hermione and Leanne up the road Harry was thinking furiously .They had just entered the grounds when he spoke unable to keep his thoughts to himself any longer .Malfoy knows about this necklace .It was in a case at Borgin and Burkes four years ago I saw him having a good look at it while I was hiding from him and his dad .This is what he was buying that day when we followed him !He remembered it and he went back for it !I I dunno Harry said Ron hesitantly .Loads of people go to Borgin and Burkes .and didnt that girl say Katie got it in the girls bathroom ?She said she came back from the bathroom with it she didnt necessarily get it in the bathroom itself McGonagall !said Ron warningly .Harry looked up .Sure enough Professor McGonagall was hurrying down the stone steps through swirling sleet to meet them .Hagrid says you four saw what happened to Katie Bell upstairs to my office at once please !Whats that youre holding Potter ?Its the thing she touched said Harry .Good lord said Professor McGonagall looking alarmed as she took the necklace from Harry .No no Filch theyre with me !she added hastily as Filch came shuffling eagerly across the entrance hall holding his Secrecy Sensor aloft .Take this necklace to Professor Snape at once but be sure not to touch it keep it wrapped in the scarf !Harry and the others followed Professor McGonagall upstairs and into her office .The sleetspattered windows were rattling in their frames and the room was chilly despite the fire crackling in the grate .Professor McGonagall closed the door and swept around her desk to face Harry Ron Hermione and the still sobbing Leanne .Well ?she said sharply .What happened ?Haltingly and with many pauses while she attempted to control her crying Leanne told Professor McGonagall how Katie had gone to the bathroom in the Three Broomsticks and returned holding the unmarked package how Katie had seemed a little odd and how they had argued about the advisability of agreeing to deliver unknown objects the argument culminating in the tussle over the parcel which tore open .At this point Leanne was so overcome there was no getting another word out of her .All right said Professor McGonagall not unkindly go up to the hospital wing please Leanne and get Madam Pomfrey to give you something for shock .When she had left the room Professor McGonagall turned back to Harry Ron and Hermione .What happened when Katie touched the necklace ?She rose up in the air said Harry before either Ron or Hermione could speak and then began to scream and collapsed .Professor can I see Professor Dumbledore please ?The headmaster is away until Monday Potter said Professor McGonagall looking surprised .Away ?Harry repeated angrily .Yes Potter away !said Professor McGonagall tartly .But anything you have to say about this horrible business can be said to me Im sure !For a split second Harry hesitated .Professor McGonagall did not invite confidences Dumbledore though in many ways more intimidating still seemed less likely to scorn a theory however wild .This was a lifeanddeath matter though and no moment to worry about being laughed at .I think Draco Malfoy gave Katie that necklace Professor .On one side of him Ron rubbed his nose in apparent embarrassment on the other Hermione shuffled her feet as though quite keen to put a bit of distance between herself and Harry .That is a very serious accusation Potter said Professor McGonagall after a shocked pause .Do you have any proof ?No said Harry but .and he told her about following Malfoy to Borgin and Burkes and the conversation they had overheard between him and Mr Borgin .When he had finished speaking Professor McGonagall looked slightly confused .Malfoy took something to Borgin and Burkes for repair ?No Professor he just wanted Borgin to tell him how to mend something he didnt have it with him .But thats not the point the thing is that he bought something at the same time and I think it was that necklace You saw Malfoy leaving the shop with a similar package ?No Professor he told Borgin to keep it in the shop for him But Harry Hermione interrupted Borgin asked him if he wanted to take it with him and Malfoy said no Because he didnt want to touch it obviously !said Harry angrily .What he actually said was ‘How would I look carrying that down the street ?said Hermione .Well he would look a bit of a prat carrying a necklace interjected Ron .Oh Ron said Hermione despairingly it would be all wrapped up so he wouldnt have to touch it and quite easy to hide inside a cloak so nobody would see it !I think whatever he reserved at Borgin and Burkes was noisy or bulky something he knew would draw attention to him if he carried it down the street and in any case she pressed on loudly before Harry could interrupt I asked Borgin about the necklace dont you remember ?When I went in to try and find out what Malfoy had asked him to keep I saw it there .And Borgin just told me the price he didnt say it was already sold or anything Well you were being really obvious he realized what you were up to within about five seconds of course he wasnt going to tell you anyway Malfoy couldve sent off for it since Thats enough !said Professor McGonagall as Hermione opened her mouth to retort looking furious .Potter I appreciate you telling me this but we cannot point the finger of blame at Mr Malfoy purely because he visited the shop where this necklace might have been purchased .The same is probably true of hundreds of people thats what I said muttered Ron .and in any case we have put stringent security measures in place this year .I do not believe that necklace can possibly have entered this school without our knowledge But and what is more said Professor McGonagall with an air of awful finality Mr Malfoy was not in Hogsmeade today .Harry gaped at her deflating .How do you know Professor ?Because he was doing detention with me .He has now failed to complete his Transfiguration homework twice in a row .So thank you for telling me your suspicions Potter she said as she marched past them but I need to go up to the hospital wing now to check on Katie Bell .Good day to you all .She held open her office door .They had no choice but to file past her without another word .Harry was angry with the other two for siding with McGonagall nevertheless he felt compelled to join in once they started discussing what had happened .So who do you reckon Katie was supposed to give the necklace to ?asked Ron as they climbed the stairs to the common room .Goodness only knows said Hermione .But whoever it was has had a narrow escape .No one could have opened that package without touching the necklace .It couldve been meant for loads of people said Harry .Dumbledore the Death Eaters would love to get rid of him he must be one of their top targets .Or Slughorn Dumbledore reckons Voldemort really wanted him and they cant be pleased that hes sided with Dumbledore .Or Or you said Hermione looking troubled .Couldnt have been said Harry or Katie wouldve just turned around in the lane and given it to me wouldnt she ?I was behind her all the way out of the Three Broomsticks .It would have made much more sense to deliver the parcel outside Hogwarts what with Filch searching everyone who goes in and out .I wonder why Malfoy told her to take it into the castle ?Harry Malfoy wasnt in Hogsmeade !said Hermione actually stamping her foot in frustration .He must have used an accomplice then said Harry .Crabbe or Goyle or come to think of it another Death Eater hell have loads better cronies than Crabbe and Goyle now hes joined up Ron and Hermione exchanged looks that plainly said Theres no point arguing with him .Dilligrout said Hermione firmly as they reached the Fat Lady .The portrait swung open to admit them to the common room .It was quite full and smelled of damp clothing many people seemed to have returned from Hogsmeade early because of the bad weather .There was no buzz of fear or speculation however Clearly the news of Katies fate had not yet spread .It wasnt a very slick attack really when you stop and think about it said Ron casually turfing a first year out of one of the good armchairs by the fire so that he could sit down .The curse didnt even make it into the castle .Not what youd call foolproof .Youre right said Hermione prodding Ron out of the chair with her foot and offering it to the first year again .It wasnt very well thoughtout at all .But since when has Malfoy been one of the worlds great thinkers ?asked Harry .Neither Ron nor Hermione answered him .THE SECRET RIDDLE Katie was removed to St .Mungos Hospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries the following day by which time the news that she had been cursed had spread all over the school though the details were confused and nobody other than Harry Ron Hermione and Leanne seemed to know that Katie herself had not been the intended target .Oh and Malfoy knows of course said Harry to Ron and Hermione who continued their new policy of feigning deafness whenever Harry mentioned his MalfoyIsaDeathEater theory .Harry had wondered whether Dumbledore would return from wherever he had been in time for Monday nights lesson but having had no word to the contrary he presented himself outside Dumbledore s office at eight oclock knocked and was told to enter .There sat Dumbledore looking unusually tired his hand was as black and burned as ever but he smiled when he gestured to Harry to sit down .The Pensieve was sitting on the desk again casting silvery specks of light over the ceiling .You have had a busy time while I have been away Dumbledore said .I believe you witnessed Katies accident .Yes sir .How is she ?Still very unwell although she was relatively lucky .She appears to have brushed the necklace with the smallest possible amount of skin There was a tiny hole in her glove .Had she put it on had she even held it in her ungloved hand she would have died perhaps instantly .Luckily Professor Snape was able to do enough to prevent a rapid spread of the curse Why him ?asked Harry quickly .Why not Madam Pomfrey ?Impertinent said a soft voice from one of the portraits on the wall and Phineas Nigellus Black Siriuss greatgreatgrandfather raised his head from his arms where he had appeared to be sleeping .I would not have permitted a student to question the way Hogwarts operated in my day .Yes thank you Phineas said Dumbledore quellingly .Professor Snape knows much more about the Dark Arts than Madam Pomfrey Harry .Anyway the St .Mungos staff are sending me hourly reports and I am hopeful that Katie will make a full recovery in time .Where were you this weekend sir ?Harry asked disregarding a strong feeling that he might be pushing his luck a feeling apparently shared by Phineas Nigellus who hissed softly .I would rather not say just now said Dumbledore .However I shall tell you in due course .You will ?said Harry startled .Yes I expect so said Dumbledore withdrawing a fresh bottle of silver memories from inside his robes and uncorking it with a prod of his wand .Sir said Harry tentatively I met Mundungus in Hogsmeade .Ah yes I am already aware that Mundungus has been treating your inheritance with lightfingered contempt said Dumbledore frowning a little .He has gone to ground since you accosted him outside the Three Broomsticks I rather think he dreads facing me .However rest assured that he will not be making away with any more of Siriuss old possessions .That mangy old halfblood has been stealing Black heirlooms ?said Phineas Nigellus incensed and he stalked out of his frame undoubtedly to visit his portrait in number twelve Grimmauld Place .Professor said Harry after a short pause did Professor McGonagall tell you what I told her after Katie got hurt ?About Draco Malfoy ?She told me of your suspicions yes said Dumbledore .And do you ?I shall take all appropriate measures to investigate anyone who might have had a hand in Katies accident said Dumbledore .But what concerns me now Harry is our lesson .Harry felt slightly resentful at this If their lessons were so very important why had there been such a long gap between the first and second ?However he said no more about Draco Malfoy but watched as Dumbledore poured the fresh memories into the Pensieve and began swirling the stone basin once more between his longfingered hands .You will remember I am sure that we left the tale of Lord Voldemorts beginnings at the point where the handsome Muggle Tom Riddle had abandoned his witch wife Merope and returned to his family home in Little Hangleton .Merope was left alone in London expecting the baby who would one day become Lord Voldemort .How do you know she was in London sir ?Because of the evidence of one Caractacus Burke said Dumbledore who by an odd coincidence helped found the very shop whence came the necklace we have just been discussing .He swilled the contents of the Pensieve as Harry had seen him swill them before much as a gold prospector sifts for gold .Up out of the swirling silvery mass rose a little old man revolving slowly in the Pensieve silver as a ghost but much more solid with a thatch of hair that completely covered his eyes .Yes we acquired it in curious circumstances .It was brought in by a young witch just before Christmas oh many years ago now .She said she needed the gold badly well that much was obvious .Covered in rags and pretty far along .Going to have a baby see .She said the locket had been Slytherins .Well we hear that sort of story all the time ‘Oh this was Merlins this was his favorite teapot but when I looked at it it had his mark all right and a few simple spells were enough to tell me the truth .Of course that made it near enough priceless .She didnt seem to have any idea how much it was worth .Happy to get ten Galleons for it .Best bargain we ever made !Dumbledore gave the Pensieve an extravigorous shake and Caractacus Burke descended back into the swirling mass of memory from whence he had come .He only gave her ten Galleons ?said Harry indignantly .Caractacus Burke was not famed for his generosity said Dumbledore .So we know that near the end of her pregnancy Merope was alone in London and in desperate need of gold desperate enough to sell her one and only valuable possession the locket that was one of Marvolos treasured family heirlooms .But she could do magic !said Harry impatiently .She could have got food and everything for herself by magic couldnt she ?Ah said Dumbledore perhaps she could .But it is my belief I am guessing again but I am sure I am right that when her husband abandoned her Merope stopped using magic .I do not think that she wanted to be a witch any longer .Of course it is also possible that her unrequited love and the attendant despair sapped her of her powers that can happen .In any case as you are about to see Merope refused to raise her wand even to save her own life .She wouldnt even stay alive for her son ?Dumbledore raised his eyebrows .Could you possibly be feeling sorry for Lord Voldemort ?No said Harry quickly but she had a choice didnt she not like my mother Your mother had a choice too said Dumbledore gently .Yes Merope Riddle chose death in spite of a son who needed her but do not judge her too harshly Harry .She was greatly weakened by long suffering and she never had your mothers courage .And now if you will stand .Where are we going ?Harry asked as Dumbledore joined him at the front of the desk .This time said Dumbledore we are going to enter my memory .I think you will find it both rich in detail and satisfyingly accurate .After you Harry .Harry bent over the Pensieve his face broke the cool surface of the memory and then he was falling through darkness again .Seconds later his feet hit firm ground he opened his eyes and found that he and Dumbledore were standing in a bustling old fashioned London street .There I am said Dumbledore brightly pointing ahead of them to a tall figure crossing the road in front of a horsedrawn milk cart .This younger Albus Dumbledore s long hair and beard were auburn .Having reached their side of the street he strode off along the pavement drawing many curious glances due to the flamboyantly cut suit of plum velvet that he was wearing .Nice suit sir said Harry before he could stop himself but Dumbledore merely chuckled as they followed his younger self a short distance finally passing through a set of iron gates into a bare courtyard that fronted a rather grim square building surrounded by high railings .He mounted the few steps leading to the front door and knocked once .After a moment or two the door was opened by a scruffy girl wearing an apron .Good afternoon .I have an appointment with a Mrs Cole who I believe is the matron here ?Oh said the bewilderedlooking girl taking in Dumbledore s eccentric appearance .Um .just a mo .MRS COLE !she bellowed over her shoulder .Harry heard a distant voice shouting something in response .The girl turned back to Dumbledore .Come in shes on er way .Dumbledore stepped into a hallway tiled in black and white the whole place was shabby but spotlessly clean .Harry and the older Dumbledore followed .Before the front door had closed behind them a skinny harassedlooking woman came scurrying toward them .She had a sharpfeatured face that appeared more anxious than unkind and she was talking over her shoulder to another aproned helper as she walked toward Dumbledore . .and take the iodine upstairs to Martha Billy Stubbs has been picking his scabs and Eric Whalleys oozing all over his sheets chicken pox on top of everything else she said to nobody in particular and then her eyes fell upon Dumbledore and she stopped dead in her tracks looking as astonished as if a giraffe had just crossed her threshold .Good afternoon said Dumbledore holding out his hand .Mrs Cole simply gaped .My name is Albus Dumbledore .I sent you a letter requesting an appointment and you very kindly invited me here today .Mrs Cole blinked .Apparently deciding that Dumbledore was not a hallucination she said feebly Oh yes .Well well then youd better come into my room .Yes .She led Dumbledore into a small room that seemed part sitting room part office .It was as shabby as the hallway and the furniture was old and mismatched .She invited Dumbledore to sit on a rickety chair and seated herself behind a cluttered desk eyeing him nervously .I am here as I told you in my letter to discuss Tom Riddle and arrangements for his future said Dumbledore .Are you family ?asked Mrs Cole .No I am a teacher said Dumbledore .I have come to offer Tom a place at my school .What schools this then ?It is called Hogwarts said Dumbledore .And how come youre interested in Tom ?We believe he has qualities we are looking for .You mean hes won a scholarship ?How can he have done ?Hes never been entered for one .Well his name has been down for our school since birth Who registered him ?His parents ?There was no doubt that Mrs Cole was an inconveniently sharp woman .Apparently Dumbledore thought so too for Harry now saw him slip his wand out of the pocket of his velvet suit at the same time picking up a piece of perfectly blank paper from Mrs Coles desktop .Here said Dumbledore waving his wand once as he passed her the piece of paper I think this will make everything clear .Mrs Coles eyes slid out of focus and back again as she gazed intently at the blank paper for a moment .That seems perfectly in order she said placidly handing it back .Then her eyes fell upon a bottle of gin and two glasses that had certainly not been present a few seconds before .Er may I offer you a glass of gin ?she said in an extrarefined voice .Thank you very much said Dumbledore beaming .It soon became clear that Mrs Cole was no novice when it came to gin drinking .Pouring both of them a generous measure she drained her own glass in one gulp .Smacking her lips frankly she smiled at Dumbledore for the first time and he didnt hesitate to press his advantage .I was wondering whether you could tell me anything of Tom Riddles history ?I think he was born here in the orphanage ?Thats right said Mrs Cole helping herself to more gin .I remember it clear as anything because Id just started here myself .New Years Eve and bitter cold snowing you know .Nasty night .And this girl not much older than I was myself at the time came staggering up the front steps .Well she wasnt the first .We took her in and she had the baby within the hour .And she was dead in another hour .Mrs Cole nodded impressively and took another generous gulp of gin .Did she say anything before she died ?asked Dumbledore .Anything about the boys father for instance ?Now as it happens she did said Mrs Cole who seemed to be rather enjoying herself now with the gin in her hand and an eager audience for her story .I remember she said to me ‘I hope he looks like his papa and I wont lie she was right to hope it because she was no beauty and then she told me he was to be named Tom for his father and Marvolo for her father yes I know funny name isnt it ?We wondered whether she came from a circus and she said the boys surname was to be Riddle .And she died soon after that without another word .Well we named him just as shed said it seemed so important to the poor girl but no Tom nor Marvolo nor any kind of Riddle ever came looking for him nor any family at all so he stayed in the orphanage and hes been here ever since .Mrs Cole helped herself almost absentmindedly to another healthy measure of gin .Two pink spots had appeared high on her cheekbones .Then she said Hes a funny boy .Yes said Dumbledore .I thought he might be .He was a funny baby too .He hardly ever cried you know .And then when he got a little older he was .odd .Odd in what way ?asked Dumbledore gently .Well he But Mrs Cole pulled up short and there was nothing blurry or vague about the inquisitorial glance she shot Dumbledore over her gin glass .Hes definitely got a place at your school you say ?Definitely said Dumbledore .And nothing I say can change that ?Nothing said Dumbledore .Youll be taking him away whatever ?Whatever repeated Dumbledore gravely .She squinted at him as though deciding whether or not to trust him .Apparently she decided she could because she said in a sudden rush He scares the other children .You mean he is a bully ?asked Dumbledore .I think he must be said Mrs Cole frowning slightly but its very hard to catch him at it .There have been incidents .Nasty things .Dumbledore did not press her though Harry could tell that he was interested .She took yet another gulp of gin and her rosy cheeks grew rosier still .Billy Stubbss rabbit .well Tom said he didnt do it and I dont see how he could have done but even so it didnt hang itself from the rafters did it ?I shouldnt think so no said Dumbledore quietly .But Im jiggered if I know how he got up there to do it .All I know is he and Billy had argued the day before .And then Mrs Cole took another swig of gin slopping a little over her chin this time on the summer outing we take them out you know once a year to the countryside or to the seaside well Amy Benson and Dennis Bishop were never quite right afterwards and all we ever got out of them was that theyd gone into a cave with Tom Riddle .He swore theyd just gone exploring but something happened in there Im sure of it .And well there have been a lot of things funny things .She looked around at Dumbledore again and though her cheeks were flushed her gaze was steady .I dont think many people will be sorry to see the back of him .You understand Im sure that we will not be keeping him permanently ?said Dumbledore .He will have to return here at the very least every summer .Oh well thats better than a whack on the nose with a rusty poker said Mrs Cole with a slight hiccup .She got to her feet and Harry was impressed to see that she was quite steady even though twothirds of the gin was now gone .I suppose youd like to see him ?Very much said Dumbledore rising too .She led him out of her office and up the stone stairs calling out instructions and admonitions to helpers and children as she passed .The orphans Harry saw were all wearing the same kind of grayish tunic .They looked reasonably wellcared for but there was no denying that this was a grim place in which to grow up .Here we are said Mrs Cole as they turned off the second landing and stopped outside the first door in a long corridor .She knocked twice and entered .Tom ?Youve got a visitor .This is Mr Dumberton sorry Dunderbore .Hes come to tell you well Ill let him do it .Harry and the two Dumbledores entered the room and Mrs Cole closed the door on them .It was a small bare room with nothing in it except an old wardrobe a wooden chair and an iron bedstead .A boy was sitting on top of the gray blankets his legs stretched out in front of him holding a book .There was no trace of the Gaunts in Tom Riddles face .Merope had got her dying wish He was his handsome father in miniature tall for eleven years old darkhaired and pale .His eyes narrowed slightly as he took in Dumbledores eccentric appearance .There was a moments silence .How do you do Tom ?said Dumbledore walking forward and holding out his hand .The boy hesitated then took it and they shook hands .Dumbledore drew up the hard wooden chair beside Riddle so that the pair of them looked rather like a hospital patient and visitor .I am Professor Dumbledore . ‘Professor ?repeated Riddle .He looked wary .Is that like ‘doctor ?What are you here for ?Did she get you in to have a look at me ?He was pointing at the door through which Mrs Cole had just left .No no said Dumbledore smiling .I dont believe you said Riddle .She wants me looked at doesnt she ?Tell the truth !He spoke the last three words with a ringing force that was almost shocking .It was a command and it sounded as though he had given it many times before .His eyes had widened and he was glaring at Dumbledore who made no response except to continue smiling pleasantly .After a few seconds Riddle stopped glaring though he looked if anything warier still .Who are you ?I have told you .My name is Professor Dumbledore and I work at a school called Hogwarts .I have come to offer you a place at my school your new school if you would like to come .Riddles reaction to this was most surprising .He leapt from the bed and backed away from Dumbledore looking furious .You cant kid me !The asylum thats where youre from isnt it ? ‘Professor yes of course well Im not going see ?That old cats the one who should be in the asylum .I never did anything to little Amy Benson or Dennis Bishop and you can ask them theyll tell you !I am not from the asylum said Dumbledore patiently .I am a teacher and if you will sit down calmly I shall tell you about Hogwarts .Of course if you would rather not come to the school nobody will force you Id like to see them try sneered Riddle .Hogwarts Dumbledore went on as though he had not heard Riddles last words is a school for people with special abilities Im not mad !I know that you are not mad .Hogwarts is not a school for mad people .It is a school of magic .There was silence .Riddle had frozen his face expressionless but his eyes were flickering back and forth between each of Dumbledores as though trying to catch one of them lying .Magic ?he repeated in a whisper .Thats right said Dumbledore .Its .its magic what I can do ?What is it that you can do ?All sorts breathed Riddle .A flush of excitement was rising up his neck into his hollow cheeks he looked fevered .I can make things move without touching them .I can make animals do what I want them to do without training them .I can make bad things happen to people who annoy me .I can make them hurt if I want to .His legs were trembling .He stumbled forward and sat down on the bed again staring at his hands his head bowed as though in prayer .I knew I was different he whispered to his own quivering fingers .I knew I was special .Always I knew there was something .Well you were quite right said Dumbledore who was no longer smiling but watching Riddle intently .You are a wizard .Riddle lifted his head .His face was transfigured There was a wild happiness upon it yet for some reason it did not make him better looking on the contrary his finely carved features seemed somehow rougher his expression almost bestial .Are you a wizard too ?Yes I am .Prove it said Riddle at once in the same commanding tone he had used when he had said Tell the truth .Dumbledore raised his eyebrows .If as I take it you are accepting your place at Hogwarts Of course I am !Then you will address me as ‘Professor or ‘sir .Riddles expression hardened for the most fleeting moment before he said in an unrecognizably polite voice Im sorry sir .I meant please Professor could you show me ?Harry was sure that Dumbledore was going to refuse that he would tell Riddle there would be plenty of time for practical demonstrations at Hogwarts that they were currently in a building full of Muggles and must therefore be cautious .To his great surprise however Dumbledore drew his wand from an inside pocket of his suit jacket pointed it at the shabby wardrobe in the corner and gave the wand a casual flick .The wardrobe burst into flames .Riddle jumped to his feet Harry could hardly blame him for howling in shock and rage all his worldly possessions must be in there .But even as Riddle rounded on Dumbledore the flames vanished leaving the wardrobe completely undamaged .Riddle stared from the wardrobe to Dumbledore then his expression greedy he pointed at the wand .Where can I get one of them ?All in good time said Dumbledore .I think there is something trying to get out of your wardrobe .And sure enough a faint rattling could be heard from inside it .For the first time Riddle looked frightened .Open the door said Dumbledore .Riddle hesitated then crossed the room and threw open the wardrobe door .On the topmost shelf above a rail of threadbare clothes a small cardboard box was shaking and rattling as though there were several frantic mice trapped inside it .Take it out said Dumbledore .Riddle took down the quaking box .He looked unnerved .Is there anything in that box that you ought not to have ?asked Dumbledore .Riddle threw Dumbledore a long clear calculating look .Yes I suppose so sir he said finally in an expressionless voice .Open it said Dumbledore .Riddle took off the lid and tipped the contents onto his bed without looking at them .Harry who had expected something much more exciting saw a mess of small everyday objects a yoyo a silver thimble and a tarnished mouth organ among them .Once free of the box they stopped quivering and lay quite still upon the thin blankets .You will return them to their owners with your apologies said Dumbledore calmly putting his wand back into his jacket .I shall know whether it has been done .And be warned Thieving is not tolerated at Hogwarts .Riddle did not look remotely abashed he was still staring coldly and appraisingly at Dumbledore .At last he said in a colorless voice Yes sir .At Hogwarts Dumbledore went on we teach you not only to use magic but to control it .You have inadvertently I am sure been using your powers in a way that is neither taught nor tolerated at our school .You are not the first nor will you be the last to allow your magic to run away with you .But you should know that Hogwarts can expel students and the Ministry of Magic yes there is a Ministry will punish lawbreakers still more severely .All new wizards must accept that in entering our world they abide by our laws .Yes sir said Riddle again .It was impossible to tell what he was thinking his face remained quite blank as he put the little cache of stolen objects back into the cardboard box .When he had finished he turned to Dumbledore and said baldly I havent got any money .That is easily remedied said Dumbledore drawing a leather moneypouch from his pocket .There is a fund at Hogwarts for those who require assistance to buy books and robes .You might have to buy some of your spellbooks and so on secondhand but Where do you buy spellbooks ?interrupted Riddle who had taken the heavy money bag without thanking Dumbledore and was now examining a fat gold Galleon .In Diagon Alley said Dumbledore .I have your list of books and school equipment with me .I can help you find everything Youre coming with me ?asked Riddle looking up .Certainly if you I dont need you said Riddle .Im used to doing things for myself I go round London on my own all the time .How do you get to this Diagon Alley sir ?he added catching Dumbledore s eye .Harry thought that Dumbledore would insist upon accompanying Riddle but once again he was surprised .Dumbledore handed Riddle the envelope containing his list of equipment and after telling Riddle exactly how to get to the Leaky Cauldron from the orphanage he said You will be able to see it although Muggles around you nonmagical people that is will not .Ask for Tom the barman easy enough to remember as he shares your name Riddle gave an irritable twitch as though trying to displace an irksome fly .You dislike the name Tom ?There are a lot of Toms muttered Riddle .Then as though he could not suppress the question as though it burst from him in spite of himself he asked Was my father a wizard ?He was called Tom Riddle too theyve told me .Im afraid I dont know said Dumbledore his voice gentle .My mother cant have been magic or she wouldnt have died said Riddle more to himself than Dumbledore .It mustve been him .So when Ive got all my stuff when do I come to this Hogwarts ?All the details are on the second piece of parchment in your envelope said Dumbledore .You will leave from Kings Cross Station on the first of September .There is a train ticket in there too .Riddle nodded .Dumbledore got to his feet and held out his hand again .Taking it Riddle said I can speak to snakes .I found out when weve been to the country on trips they find me they whisper to me .Is that normal for a wizard ?Harry could tell that he had withheld mention of this strangest power until that moment determined to impress .It is unusual said Dumbledore after a moments hesitation but not unheard of .His tone was casual but his eyes moved curiously over Riddles face .They stood for a moment man and boy staring at each other .Then the handshake was broken Dumbledore was at the door .Goodbye Tom .I shall see you at Hogwarts .I think that will do said the whitehaired Dumbledore at Harrys side and seconds later they were soaring weightlessly through darkness once more before landing squarely in the presentday office .Sit down said Dumbledore landing beside Harry .Harry obeyed his mind still full of what he had just seen .He believed it much quicker than I did I mean when you told him he was a wizard said Harry .I didnt believe Hagrid at first when he told me .Yes Riddle was perfectly ready to believe that he was to use his word ‘special said Dumbledore .Did you know then ?asked Harry .Did I know that I had just met the most dangerous Dark wizard of all time ?said Dumbledore .No I had no idea that he was to grow up to be what he is .However I was certainly intrigued by him .I returned to Hogwarts intending to keep an eye upon him something I should have done in any case given that he was alone and friendless but which already I felt I ought to do for others sake as much as his .His powers as you heard were surprisingly well developed for such a young wizard and most interestingly and ominously of all he had already discovered that he had some measure of control over them and begun to use them consciously .And as you saw they were not the random experiments typical of young wizards He was already using magic against other people to frighten to punish to control .The little stories of the strangled rabbit and the young boy and girl he lured into a cave were most suggestive . ‘I can make them hurt if I want to .And he was a Parselmouth interjected Harry .Yes indeed a rare ability and one supposedly connected with the Dark Arts although as we know there are Parselmouths among the great and the good too .In fact his ability to speak to serpents did not make me nearly as uneasy as his obvious instincts for cruelty secrecy and domination .Time is making fools of us again said Dumbledore indicating the dark sky beyond the windows .But before we part I want to draw your attention to certain features of the scene we have just witnessed for they have a great bearing on the matters we shall be discussing in future meetings .Firstly I hope you noticed Riddles reaction when I mentioned that another shared his first name Tom ?Harry nodded .There he showed his contempt for anything that tied him to other people anything that made him ordinary .Even then he wished to be different separate notorious .He shed his name as you know within a few short years of that conversation and created the mask of ‘Lord Voldemort behind which he has been hidden for so long .I trust that you also noticed that Tom Riddle was already highly selfsufficient secretive and apparently friendless ?He did not want help or companionship on his trip to Diagon Alley .He preferred to operate alone .The adult Voldemort is the same .You will hear many of his Death Eaters claiming that they are in his confidence that they alone are close to him even understand him .They are deluded .Lord Voldemort has never had a friend nor do I believe that he has ever wanted one .And lastly I hope you are not too sleepy to pay attention to this Harry the young Tom Riddle liked to collect trophies .You saw the box of stolen articles he had hidden in his room .These were taken from victims of his bullying behavior souvenirs if you will of particularly unpleasant bits of magic .Bear in mind this magpielike tendency for this particularly will be important later .And now it really is time for bed .Harry got to his feet .As he walked across the room his eyes fell upon the little table on which Marvolo Gaunts ring had rested last time but the ring was no longer there .Yes Harry ?said Dumbledore for Harry had come to a halt .The rings gone said Harry looking around .But I thought you might have the mouth organ or something .Dumbledore beamed at him peering over the top of his halfmoon spectacles .Very astute Harry but the mouth organ was only ever a mouth organ .And on that enigmatic note he waved to Harry who understood himself to be dismissed .FELIX FELICIS Harry had Herbology first thing the following morning .He had been unable to tell Ron and Hermione about his lesson with Dumbledore over breakfast for fear of being overheard but he filled them in as they walked across the vegetable patch toward the greenhouses .The weekends brutal wind had died out at last the weird mist had returned and it took them a little longer than usual to find the correct greenhouse .Wow scary thought the boy YouKnowWho said Ron quietly as they took their places around one of the gnarled Snargaluff stumps that formed this terms project and began pulling on their protective gloves .But I still dont get why Dumbledores showing you all this .I mean its really interesting and everything but whats the point ?Dunno said Harry inserting a gum shield .But he says its all important and itll help me survive .I think its fascinating said Hermione earnestly .It makes absolute sense to know as much about Voldemort as possible .How else will you find out his weaknesses ?So how was Slughorns latest party ?Harry asked her thickly through the gum shield .Oh it was quite fun really said Hermione now putting on protective goggles .I mean he drones on about famous expupils a bit and he absolutely fawns on McLaggen because hes so wellconnected but he gave us some really nice food and he introduced us to Gwenog Jones .Gwenog Jones ?said Ron his eyes widening under his own goggles .The Gwenog Jones ?Captain of the Holyhead Harpies ?Thats right said Hermione .Personally I thought she was a bit full of herself but Quite enough chat over here !said Professor Sprout briskly bustling over and looking stern .Youre lagging behind everybody else has started and Nevilles already got his first pod !They looked around sure enough there sat Neville with a bloody lip and several nasty scratches along the side of his face but clutching an unpleasantly pulsating green object about the size of a grapefruit .Okay Professor were starting now !said Ron adding quietly when she had turned away again shouldve used Muffliato Harry .No we shouldnt !said Hermione at once looking as she always did intensely cross at the thought of the HalfBlood Prince and his spells .Well come on .wed better get going .She gave the other two an apprehensive look they all took deep breaths and then dived at the gnarled stump between them .It sprang to life at once long prickly bramblelike vines flew out of the top and whipped through the air .One tangled itself in Hermiones hair and Ron beat it back with a pair of secateurs Harry succeeded in trapping a couple of vines and knotting them together a hole opened in the middle of all the tentaclelike branches Hermione plunged her arm bravely into this hole which closed like a trap around her elbow Harry and Ron tugged and wrenched at the vines forcing the hole to open again and Hermione snatched her arm free clutching in her fingers a pod just like Nevilles .At once the prickly vines shot back inside and the gnarled stump sat there looking like an innocently dead lump of wood .You know I dont think Ill be having any of these in my garden when Ive got my own place said Ron pushing his goggles up onto his forehead and wiping sweat from his face .Pass me a bowl said Hermione holding the pulsating pod at arms length Harry handed one over and she dropped the pod into it with a look of disgust on her face .Dont be squeamish squeeze it out theyre best when theyre fresh !called Professor Sprout .Anyway said Hermione continuing their interrupted conversation as though a lump of wood had not just attacked them Slughorns going to have a Christmas party Harry and theres no way youll be able to wriggle out of this one because he actually asked me to check your free evenings so he could be sure to have it on a night you can come .Harry groaned .Meanwhile Ron who was attempting to burst the pod in the bowl by putting both hands on it standing up and squashing it as hard as he could said angrily And this is another party just for Slughorns favorites is it ?Just for the Slug Club yes said Hermione .The pod flew out from under Rons fingers and hit the greenhouse glass rebounding onto the back of Professor Sprouts head and knocking off her old patched hat .Harry went to retrieve the pod when he got back Hermione was saying Look didnt make up the name ‘Slug Club ‘Slug Club repeated Ron with a sneer worthy of Malfoy .Its pathetic .Well I hope you enjoy your party .Why dont you try hooking up with McLaggen then Slughorn can make you King and Queen Slug Were allowed to bring guests said Hermione who for some reason had turned a bright boiling scarlet and I was going to ask you to come but if you think its that stupid then I wont bother !Harry suddenly wished the pod had flown a little farther so that he need not have been sitting here with the pair of them .Unnoticed by either he seized the bowl that contained the pod and began to try and open it by the noisiest and most energetic means he could think of unfortunately he could still hear every word of their conversation .You were going to ask me ?asked Ron in a completely different voice .Yes said Hermione angrily .But obviously if youd rather I hooked up with McLaggen .There was a pause while Harry continued to pound the resilient pod with a trowel .No I wouldnt said Ron in a very quiet voice .Harry missed the pod hit the bowl and shattered it .Reparo he said hastily poking the pieces with his wand and the bowl sprang back together again .The crash however appeared to have awoken Ron and Hermione to Harrys presence .Hermione looked flustered and immediately started fussing about for her copy of FleshEating Trees of the World to find out the correct way to juice Snargaluff pods Ron on the other hand looked sheepish but also rather pleased with himself .Hand that over Harry said Hermione hurriedly .It says were supposed to puncture them with something sharp .Harry passed her the pod in the bowl he and Ron both snapped their goggles back over their eyes and dived once more for the stump .It was not as though he was really surprised thought Harry as he wrestled with a thorny vine intent upon throttling him he had had an inkling that this might happen sooner or later .But he was not sure how he felt about it .He and Cho were now too embarrassed to look at each other let alone talk to each other what if Ron and Hermione started going out together then split up ?Could their friendship survive it ?Harry remembered the few weeks when they had not been talking to each other in the third year he had not enjoyed trying to bridge the distance between them .And then what if they didnt split up ?What if they became like Bill and Fleur and it became excruciatingly embarrassing to be in their presence so that he was shut out for good ?Gotcha !yelled Ron pulling a second pod from the stump just as Hermione managed to burst the first one open so that the bowl was full of tubers wriggling like pale green worms .The rest of the lesson passed without further mention of Slughorns party .Although Harry watched his two friends more closely over the next few days Ron and Hermione did not seem any different except that they were a little politer to each other than usual .Harry supposed he would just have to wait to see what happened under the influence of butterbeer in Slughorns dimly lit room on the night of the party .In the meantime however he had more pressing worries .Katie Bell was still in St .Mungos Hospital with no prospect of leaving which meant that the promising Gryffindor team Harry had been training so carefully since September was one Chaser short .He kept putting off replacing Katie in the hope that she would return but their opening match against Slytherin was looming and he finally had to accept that she would not be back in time to play .Harry did not think he could stand another full House tryout .With a sinking feeling that had little to do with Quidditch he cornered Dean Thomas after Transfiguration one day .Most of the class had already left although several twittering yellow birds were still zooming around the room all of Hermione s creation nobody else had succeeded in conjuring so much as a feather from thin air .Are you still interested in playing Chaser ?Wha ?Yeah of course !said Dean excitedly .Over Deans shoulder Harry saw Seamus Finnigan slamming his books into his bag looking sour .One of the reasons why Harry would have preferred not to have to ask Dean to play was that he knew Seamus would not like it .On the other hand he had to do what was best for the team and Dean had outflown Seamus at the tryouts .Well then youre in said Harry .Theres a practice tonight seven oclock .Right said Dean .Cheers Harry !Blimey I cant wait to tell Ginny !He sprinted out of the room leaving Harry and Seamus alone together an uncomfortable moment made no easier when a bird dropping landed on Seamuss head as one of Hermiones canaries whizzed over them .Seamus was not the only person disgruntled by the choice of Katies substitute .There was much muttering in the common room about the fact that Harry had now chosen two of his classmates for the team .As Harry had endured much worse mutterings than this in his school career he was not particularly bothered but all the same the pressure was increasing to provide a win in the upcoming match against Slytherin .If Gryffindor won Harry knew that the whole House would forget that they had criticized him and swear that they had always known it was a great team .If they lost .well Harry thought wryly he had still endured worse mutterings .Harry had no reason to regret his choice once he saw Dean fly that evening he worked well with Ginny and Demelza .The Beaters Peakes and Coote were getting better all the time .The only problem was Ron .Harry had known all along that Ron was an inconsistent player who suffered from nerves and a lack of confidence and unfortunately the looming prospect of the opening game of the season seemed to have brought out all his old insecurities .After letting in half a dozen goals most of them scored by Ginny his technique became wilder and wilder until he finally punched an oncoming Demelza Robins in the mouth .It was an accident Im sorry Demelza really sorry !Ron shouted after her as she zigzagged back to the ground dripping blood everywhere .I just Panicked Ginny said angrily landing next to Demelza and examining her fat lip .You prat Ron look at the state of her !I can fix that said Harry landing beside the two girls pointing his wand at Demelzas mouth and saying Episkey .And Ginny dont call Ron a prat youre not the Captain of this team Well you seemed too busy to call him a prat and I thought someone should Harry forced himself not to laugh .In the air everyone lets go .Overall it was one of the worst practices they had had all term though Harry did not feel that honesty was the best policy when they were this close to the match .Good work everyone I think well flatten Slytherin he said bracingly and the Chasers and Beaters left the changing room looking reasonably happy with themselves .I played like a sack of dragon dung said Ron in a hollow voice when the door had swung shut behind Ginny .No you didnt said Harry firmly .Youre the best Keeper I tried out Ron .Your only problem is nerves .He kept up a relentless flow of encouragement all the way back to the castle and by the time they reached the second floor Ron was looking marginally more cheerful .When Harry pushed open the tapestry to take their usual shortcut up to Gryffindor Tower however they found themselves looking at Dean and Ginny who were locked in a close embrace and kissing fiercely as though glued together .It was as though something large and scaly erupted into life in Harrys stomach clawing at his insides Hot blood seemed to flood his brain so that all thought was extinguished replaced by a savage urge to jinx Dean into a jelly .Wrestling with this sudden madness he heard Rons voice as though from a great distance away .Oi !Dean and Ginny broke apart and looked around .What ?said Ginny .I dont want to find my own sister snogging people in public !This was a deserted corridor till you came butting in !said Ginny .Dean was looking embarrassed .He gave Harry a shifty grin that Harry did not return as the newborn monster inside him was roaring for Deans instant dismissal from the team .Er .cmon Ginny said Dean lets go back to the common room .You go !said Ginny .I want a word with my dear brother !Dean left looking as though he was not sorry to depart the scene .Right said Ginny tossing her long red hair out of her face and glaring at Ron lets get this straight once and for all .It is none of your business who I go out with or what I do with them Ron Yeah it is !said Ron just as angrily .Dyou think I want people saying my sisters a A what ?shouted Ginny drawing her wand .A what exactly ?He doesnt mean anything Ginny said Harry automatically though the monster was roaring its approval of Rons words .Oh yes he does !she said flaring up at Harry .Just because hes never snogged anyone in his life just because the best kiss hes ever had is from our Auntie Muriel Shut your mouth !bellowed Ron bypassing red and turning maroon .No I will not !yelled Ginny beside herself .Ive seen you with Phlegm hoping shell kiss you on the cheek every time you see her its pathetic !If you went out and got a bit of snogging done yourself you wouldnt mind so much that everyone else does it !Ron had pulled out his wand too Harry stepped swiftly between them .You dont know what youre talking about !Ron roared trying to get a clear shot at Ginny around Harry who was now standing in front of her with his arms outstretched .Just because I dont do it in public !Ginny screamed with derisive laughter trying to push Harry out of the way .Been kissing Pigwidgeon have you ?Or have you got a picture of Auntie Muriel stashed under your pillow ?You A streak of orange light flew under Harrys left arm and missed Ginny by inches Harry pushed Ron up against the wall .Dont be stupid Harrys snogged Cho Chang !shouted Ginny who sounded close to tears now .And Hermione snogged Viktor Krum its only you who acts like its something disgusting Ron and thats because youve got about as much experience as a twelveyearold !And with that she stormed away .Harry quickly let go of Ron the look on his face was murderous .They both stood there breathing heavily until Mrs Norris Filch s cat appeared around the corner which broke the tension .Cmon said Harry as the sound of Filch s shuffling feet reached their ears .They hurried up the stairs and along a seventhfloor corridor .Oi out of the way !Ron barked at a small girl who jumped in fright and dropped a bottle of toadspawn .Harry hardly noticed the sound of shattering glass he felt disoriented dizzy being struck by a lightning bolt must be something like this .Its just because shes Rons sister he told himself .You just didnt like seeing her kissing Dean because shes Rons sister .But unbidden into his mind came an image of that same deserted corridor with himself kissing Ginny instead .The monster in his chest purred .but then he saw Ron ripping open the tapestry curtain and drawing his wand on Harry shouting things like betrayal of trust .supposed to be my friend .Dyou think Hermione did snog Krum ?Ron asked abruptly as they approached the Fat Lady .Harry gave a guilty start and wrenched his imagination away from a corridor in which no Ron intruded in which he and Ginny were quite alone What ?he said confusedly .Oh .er .The honest answer was yes but he did not want to give it .However Ron seemed to gather the worst from the look on Harrys face .Dilligrout he said darkly to the Fat Lady and they climbed through the portrait hole into the common room .Neither of them mentioned Ginny or Hermione again indeed they barely spoke to each other that evening and got into bed in silence each absorbed in his own thoughts .Harry lay awake for a long time looking up at the canopy of his fourposter and trying to convince himself that his feelings for Ginny were entirely elder brotherly .They had lived had they not like brother and sister all summer playing Quidditch teasing Ron and having a laugh about Bill and Phlegm ?He had known Ginny for years now .It was natural that he should feel protective .natural that he should want to look out for her .want to rip Dean limb from limb for kissing her .No .he would have to control that particular brotherly feeling .Ron gave a great grunting snore .Shes Rons sister Harry told himself firmly .Rons sister .Shes outofbounds .He would not risk his friendship with Ron for anything .He punched his pillow into a more comfortable shape and waited for sleep to come trying his utmost not to allow his thoughts to stray anywhere near Ginny .Harry awoke next morning feeling slightly dazed and confused by a series of dreams in which Ron had chased him with a Beaters bat but by midday he would have happily exchanged the dream Ron for the real one who was not only coldshouldering Ginny and Dean but also treating a hurt and bewildered Hermione with an icy sneering indifference .What was more Ron seemed to have become overnight as touchy and ready to lash out as the average Blast Ended Skrewt .Harry spent the day attempting to keep the peace between Ron and Hermione with no success finally Hermione departed for bed in high dudgeon and Ron stalked off to the boys dormitory after swearing angrily at several frightened first years for looking at him .To Harrys dismay Rons new aggression did not wear off over the next few days .Worse still it coincided with an even deeper dip in his Keeping skills which made him still more aggressive so that during the final Quidditch practice before Saturdays match he failed to save every single goal the Chasers aimed at him but bellowed at everybody so much that he reduced Demelza Robins to tears .You shut up and leave her alone !shouted Peakes who was about twothirds Rons height though admittedly carrying a heavy bat .ENOUGH !bellowed Harry who had seen Ginny glowering in Rons direction and remembering her reputation as an accomplished caster of the Bat Bogey Hex soared over to intervene before things got out of hand .Peakes go and pack up the Bludgers .Demelza pull yourself together you played really well today .Ron .he waited until the rest of the team were out of earshot before saying it youre my best mate but carry on treating the rest of them like this and Im going to kick you off the team .He really thought for a moment that Ron might hit him but then something much worse happened Ron seemed to sag on his broom all the fight went out of him and he said I resign .Im pathetic .Youre not pathetic and youre not resigning !said Harry fiercely seizing Ron by the front of his robes .You can save anything when youre on form its a mental problem youve got !You calling me mental ?Yeah maybe I am !They glared at each other for a moment then Ron shook his head wearily .I know you havent got any time to find another Keeper so Ill play tomorrow but if we lose and we will Im taking myself off the team .Nothing Harry said made any difference .He tried boosting Rons confidence all through dinner but Ron was too busy being grumpy and surly with Hermione to notice .Harry persisted in the common room that evening but his assertion that the whole team would be devastated if Ron left was somewhat undermined by the fact that the rest of the team was sitting in a huddle in a distant corner clearly muttering about Ron and casting him nasty looks .Finally Harry tried getting angry again in the hope of provoking Ron into a defiant and hopefully goalsaving attitude but this strategy did not appear to work any better than encouragement Ron went to bed as dejected and hopeless as ever .Harry lay awake for a very long time in the darkness .He did not want to lose the upcoming match not only was it his first as Captain but he was determined to beat Draco Malfoy at Quidditch even if he could not yet prove his suspicions about him .Yet if Ron played as he had done in the last few practices their chances of winning were very slim .If only there was something he could do to make Ron pull himself together .make him play at the top of his form .something that would ensure that Ron had a really good day .And the answer came to Harry in one sudden glorious stroke of inspiration .Breakfast was the usual excitable affair next morning the Slytherins hissed and booed loudly as every member of the Gryffindor team entered the Great Hall .Harry glanced at the ceiling and saw a clear pale blue sky a good omen .The Gryffindor table a solid mass of red and gold cheered as Harry and Ron approached .Harry grinned and waved Ron grimaced weakly and shook his head .Cheer up Ron !called Lavender .I know youll be brilliant !Ron ignored her .Tea ?Harry asked him .Coffee ?Pumpkin juice ?Anything said Ron glumly taking a moody bite of toast .A few minutes later Hermione who had become so tired of Rons recent unpleasant behavior that she had not come down to breakfast with them paused on her way up the table .How are you both feeling ?she asked tentatively her eyes on the back of Rons head .Fine said Harry who was concentrating on handing Ron a glass of pumpkin juice .There you go Ron .Drink up .Ron had just raised the glass to his lips when Hermione spoke sharply .Dont drink that Ron !Both Harry and Ron looked up at her .Why not ?said Ron .Hermione was now staring at Harry as though she could not believe her eyes .You just put something in that drink .Excuse me ?said Harry .You heard me .I saw you .You just tipped something into Rons drink .Youve got the bottle in your hand right now !I dont know what youre talking about said Harry stowing the little bottle hastily in his pocket .Ron I warn you dont drink it !Hermione said again alarmed but Ron picked up the glass drained it in one gulp and said Stop bossing me around Hermione .She looked scandalized .Bending low so that only Harry could hear her she hissed You should be expelled for that .Id never have believed it of you Harry !Hark whos talking he whispered back .Confunded anyone lately ?She stormed up the table away from them .Harry watched her go without regret .Hermione had never really understood what a serious business Quidditch was .He then looked around at Ron who was smacking his lips .Nearly time said Harry blithely .The frosty grass crunched underfoot as they strode down to the stadium .Pretty lucky the weathers this good eh ?Harry asked Ron .Yeah said Ron who was pale and sicklooking .Ginny and Demelza were already wearing their Quidditch robes and waiting in the changing room .Conditions look ideal said Ginny ignoring Ron .And guess what ?That Slytherin Chaser Vaisey he took a Bludger in the head yesterday during their practice and hes too sore to play !And even better than that Malfoys gone off sick too !What ?said Harry wheeling around to stare at her .Hes ill ?Whats wrong with him ?No idea but its great for us said Ginny brightly .Theyre playing Harper instead hes in my year and hes an idiot .Harry smiled back vaguely but as he pulled on his scarlet robes his mind was far from Quidditch .Malfoy had once before claimed he could not play due to injury but on that occasion he had made sure the whole match was rescheduled for a time that suited the Slytherins better .Why was he now happy to let a substitute go on ?Was he really ill or was he faking ?Fishy isnt it ?he said in an undertone to Ron .Malfoy not playing ?Lucky I call it said Ron looking slightly more animated .And Vaisey off too hes their best goal scorer I didnt fancy hey !he said suddenly freezing halfway through pulling on his Keepers gloves and staring at Harry .What ?I .you .Ron had dropped his voice he looked both scared and excited .My drink .my pumpkin juice .you didnt . ?Harry raised his eyebrows but said nothing except Well be starting in about five minutes youd better get your boots on .They walked out onto the pitch to tumultuous roars and boos .One end of the stadium was solid red and gold the other a sea of green and silver .Many Hufflepuffs and Ravenclaws had taken sides too Amidst all the yelling and clapping Harry could distinctly hear the roar of Luna Lovegoods famous liontopped hat .Harry stepped up to Madam Hooch the referee who was standing ready to release the balls from the crate .Captains shake hands she said and Harry had his hand crushed by the new Slytherin Captain Urquhart .Mount your brooms .On the whistle .three .two .one .The whistle sounded Harry and the others kicked off hard from the frozen ground and they were away .Harry soared around the perimeter of the grounds looking around for the Snitch and keeping one eye on Harper who was zigzagging far below him .Then a voice that was jarringly different to the usual commentators started up .Well there they go and I think were all surprised to see the team that Potters put together this year .Many thought given Ronald Weasleys patchy performance as Keeper last year that he might be off the team but of course a close personal friendship with the Captain does help .These words were greeted with jeers and applause from the Slytherin end of the pitch .Harry craned around on his broom to look toward the commentators podium .A tall skinny blond boy with an upturned nose was standing there talking into the magical megaphone that had once been Lee Jordans Harry recognized Zacharias Smith a Hufflepuff player whom he heartily disliked .Oh and here comes Slytherin s first attempt on goal its Urquhart streaking down the pitch and Harrys stomach turned over .Weasley saves it well hes bound to get lucky sometimes I suppose .Thats right Smith he is muttered Harry grinning to himself as he dived amongst the Chasers with his eyes searching all around for some hint of the elusive Snitch .With half an hour of the game gone Gryffindor were leading sixty points to zero Ron having made some truly spectacular saves some by the very tips of his gloves and Ginny having scored four of Gryffindors six goals .This effectively stopped Zacharias wondering loudly whether the two Weasleys were only there because Harry liked them and he started on Peakes and Coote instead .Of course Coote isnt really the usual build for a Beater said Zacharias loftily theyve generally got a bit more muscle Hit a Bludger at him !Harry called to Coote as he zoomed past but Coote grinning broadly chose to aim the next Bludger at Harper instead who was just passing Harry in the opposite direction .Harry was pleased to hear the dull thunk that meant the Bludger had found its mark .It seemed as though Gryffindor could do no wrong .Again and again they scored and again and again at the other end of the pitch Ron saved goals with apparent ease .He was actually smiling now and when the crowd greeted a particularly good save with a rousing chorus of the old favorite Weasley Is Our King he pretended to conduct them from on high .Thinks hes something special today doesnt he ?said a snide voice and Harry was nearly knocked off his broom as Harper collided with him hard and deliberately .Your bloodtraitor pal .Madam Hoochs back was turned and though Gryffindors below shouted in anger by the time she looked around Harper had already sped off .His shoulder aching Harry raced after him determined to ram him back .And I think Harper of Slytherins seen the Snitch !said Zacharias Smith through his megaphone .Yes hes certainly seen something Potter hasnt !Smith really was an idiot thought Harry hadnt he noticed them collide ?But next moment his stomach seemed to drop out of the sky Smith was right and Harry was wrong Harper had not sped upward at random he had spotted what Harry had not The Snitch was speeding along high above them glinting brightly against the clear blue sky .Harry accelerated the wind was whistling in his ears so that it drowned all sound of Smiths commentary or the crowd but Harper was still ahead of him and Gryffindor was only a hundred points up if Harper got there first Gryffindor had lost .and now Harper was feet from it his hand outstretched .Oi Harper !yelled Harry in desperation .How much did Malfoy pay you to come on instead of him ?He did not know what made him say it but Harper did a doubletake he fumbled the Snitch let it slip through his fingers and shot right past it .Harry made a great swipe for the tiny fluttering ball and caught it .YES !Harry yelled .Wheeling around he hurtled back toward the ground the Snitch held high in his hand .As the crowd realized what had happened a great shout went up that almost drowned the sound of the whistle that signaled the end of the game .Ginny where re you going ?yelled Harry who had found himself trapped in the midst of a mass midair hug with the rest of the team but Ginny sped right on past them until with an almighty crash she collided with the commentators podium .As the crowd shrieked and laughed the Gryffindor team landed beside the wreckage of wood under which Zacharias was feebly stirring Harry heard Ginny saying blithely to an irate Professor McGonagall Forgot to brake Professor sorry .Laughing Harry broke free of the rest of the team and hugged Ginny but let go very quickly .Avoiding her gaze he clapped a cheering Ron on the back instead as all enmity forgotten the Gryffindor team left the pitch arm in arm punching the air and waving to their supporters .The atmosphere in the changing room was jubilant .Party up in the common room Seamus said !yelled Dean exuberantly .Cmon Ginny Demelza !Ron and Harry were the last two in the changing room .They were just about to leave when Hermione entered .She was twisting her Gryffindor scarf in her hands and looked upset but determined .I want a word with you Harry .She took a deep breath .You shouldnt have done it .You heard Slughorn its illegal .What are you going to do turn us in ?demanded Ron .What are you two talking about ?asked Harry turning away to hang up his robes so that neither of them would see him grinning .You know perfectly well what were talking about !said Hermione shrilly .You spiked Rons juice with lucky potion at breakfast !Felix Felicis !No I didnt said Harry turning back to face them both .Yes you did Harry and thats why everything went right there were Slytherin players missing and Ron saved everything !I didnt put it in !said Harry grinning broadly .He slipped his hand inside his jacket pocket and drew out the tiny bottle that Hermione had seen in his hand that morning .It was full of golden potion and the cork was still tightly sealed with wax .I wanted Ron to think Id done it so I faked it when I knew you were looking .He looked at Ron .You saved everything because you felt lucky .You did it all yourself .He pocketed the potion again .There really wasnt anything in my pumpkin juice ?Ron said astounded .But the weathers good .and Vaisey couldnt play .I honestly havent been given lucky potion ?Harry shook his head .Ron gaped at him for a moment then rounded on Hermione imitating her voice .You added Felix Felicis to Rons juice this morning thats why he saved every thing See !I can save goals without help Hermione !I never said you couldnt Ron you thought youd been given it too !But Ron had already strode past her out of the door with his broomstick over his shoulder .Er said Harry into the sudden silence he had not expected his plan to backfire like this shall .shall we go up to the party then ?You go !said Hermione blinking back tears .Im sick of Ron at the moment I dont know what Im supposed to have done .And she stormed out of the changing room too .Harry walked slowly back up the grounds toward the castle through the crowd many of whom shouted congratulations at him but he felt a great sense of letdown he had been sure that if Ron won the match he and Hermione would be friends again immediately .He did not see how he could possibly explain to Hermione that what she had done to offend Ron was kiss Viktor Krum not when the offense had occurred so long ago .Harry could not see Hermione at the Gryffindor celebration party which was in full swing when he arrived .Renewed cheers and clapping greeted his appearance and he was soon surrounded by a mob of people congratulating him .What with trying to shake off the Creevey brothers who wanted a blowbyblow match analysis and the large group of girls that encircled him laughing at his least amusing comments and batting their eyelids it was some time before he could try and find Ron .At last he extricated himself from Romilda Vane who was hinting heavily that she would like to go to Slughorns Christmas party with him .As he was ducking toward the drinks table he walked straight into Ginny Arnold the Pygmy Puff riding on her shoulder and Crookshanks mewing hopefully at her heels .Looking for Ron ?she asked smirking .Hes over there the filthy hypocrite .Harry looked into the corner she was indicating .There in full view of the whole room stood Ron wrapped so closely around Lavender Brown it was hard to tell whose hands were whose .It looks like hes eating her face doesnt it ?said Ginny dispassionately .But I suppose hes got to refine his technique somehow .Good game Harry .She patted him on the arm Harry felt a swooping sensation in his stomach but then she walked off to help herself to more butterbeer .Crookshanks trotted after her his yellow eyes fixed upon Arnold .Harry turned away from Ron who did not look like he would be surfacing soon just as the portrait hole was closing .With a sinking feeling he thought he saw a mane of bushy brown hair whipping out of sight .He darted forward sidestepped Romilda Vane again and pushed open the portrait of the Fat Lady .The corridor outside seemed to be deserted .Hermione ?He found her in the first unlocked classroom he tried .She was sitting on the teachers desk alone except for a small ring of twittering yellow birds circling her head which she had clearly just conjured out of midair .Harry could not help admiring her spellwork at a time like this .Oh hello Harry she said in a brittle voice .I was just practicing .Yeah .theyre er really good .said Harry .He had no idea what to say to her .He was just wondering whether there was any chance that she had not noticed Ron that she had merely left the room because the party was a little too rowdy when she said in an unnaturally highpitched voice Ron seems to be enjoying the celebrations .Er .does he ?said Harry .Dont pretend you didnt see him said Hermione .He wasnt exactly hiding it was ?The door behind them burst open .To Harrys horror Ron came in laughing pulling Lavender by the hand .Oh he said drawing up short at the sight of Harry and Hermione .Oops !said Lavender and she backed out of the room giggling .The door swung shut behind her .There was a horrible swelling billowing silence .Hermione was staring at Ron who refused to look at her but said with an odd mixture of bravado and awkwardness Hi Harry !Wondered where youd got to !Hermione slid off the desk .The little flock of golden birds continued to twitter in circles around her head so that she looked like a strange feathery model of the solar system .You shouldnt leave Lavender waiting outside she said quietly .Shell wonder where youve gone .She walked very slowly and erectly toward the door .Harry glanced at Ron who was looking relieved that nothing worse had happened .Oppugno came a shriek from the doorway .Harry spun around to see Hermione pointing her wand at Ron her expression wild The little flock of birds was speeding like a hail of fat golden bullets toward Ron who yelped and covered his face with his hands but the birds attacked pecking and clawing at every bit of flesh they could reach .Gerremoffme !he yelled but with one last look of vindictive fury Hermione wrenched open the door and disappeared through it .Harry thought he heard a sob before it slammed .THE UNBREAKABLE VOW Snow was swirling against the icy windows once more Christmas was approaching fast .Hagrid had already singlehandedly delivered the usual twelve Christmas trees for the Great Hall garlands of holly and tinsel had been twisted around the banisters of the stairs everlasting candles glowed from inside the helmets of suits of armor and great bunches of mistletoe had been hung at intervals along the corridors .Large groups of girls tended to converge underneath the mistletoe bunches every time Harry went past which caused blockages in the corridors fortunately however Harrys frequent nighttime wanderings had given him an unusually good knowledge of the castles secret passageways so that he was able without too much difficulty to navigate mistletoefree routes between classes .Ron who might once have found the necessity of these detours a cause for jealousy rather than hilarity simply roared with laughter about it all .Although Harry much preferred this new laughing joking Ron to the moody aggressive model he had been enduring for the last few weeks the improved Ron came at a heavy price .Firstly Harry had to put up with the frequent presence of Lavender Brown who seemed to regard any moment that she was not kissing Ron as a moment wasted and secondly Harry found himself once more the best friend of two people who seemed unlikely ever to speak to each other again .Ron whose hands and forearms still bore scratches and cuts from Hermiones bird attack was taking a defensive and resentful tone .She cant complain he told Harry .She snogged Krum .So shes found out someone wants to snog me too .Well its a free country .I havent done anything wrong .Harry did not answer but pretended to be absorbed in the book they were supposed to have read before Charms next morning Quintessence A Quest .Determined as he was to remain friends with both Ron and Hermione he was spending a lot of time with his mouth shut tight .I never promised Hermione anything Ron mumbled .I mean all right I was going to go to Slughorns Christmas party with her but she never said .just as friends .Im a free agent .Harry turned a page of Quintessence aware that Ron was watching him .Rons voice tailed away in mutters barely audible over the loud crackling of the fire though Harry thought he caught the words Krum and cant complain again .Hermiones schedule was so full that Harry could only talk to her properly in the evenings when Ron was in any case so tightly wrapped around Lavender that he did not notice what Harry was doing .Hermione refused to sit in the common room while Ron was there so Harry generally joined her in the library which meant that their conversations were held in whispers .Hes at perfect liberty to kiss whomever he likes said Hermione while the librarian Madam Pince prowled the shelves behind them .I really couldnt care less .She raised her quill and dotted an i so ferociously that she punctured a hole in her parchment .Harry said nothing .He thought his voice might soon vanish from lack of use .He bent a little lower over Advanced PotionMaking and continued to make notes on Everlasting Elixirs occasionally pausing to decipher the Princes useful additions to Libatius Borages text .And incidentally said Hermione after a few moments you need to be careful .For the last time said Harry speaking in a slightly hoarse whisper after threequarters of an hour of silence I am not giving back this book Ive learned more from the HalfBlood Prince than Snape or Slughorn have taught me in Im not talking about your stupid socalled Prince said Hermione giving his book a nasty look as though it had been rude to her .Im talking about earlier .I went into the girls bathroom just before I came in here and there were about a dozen girls in there including that Romilda Vane trying to decide how to slip you a love potion .Theyre all hoping theyre going to get you to take them to Slughorn s party and they all seem to have bought Fred and Georges love potions which Im afraid to say probably work Why didnt you confiscate them then ?demanded Harry .It seemed extraordinary that Hermiones mania for upholding rules could have abandoned her at this crucial juncture .They didnt have the potions with them in the bathroom said Hermione scornfully .They were just discussing tactics .As I doubt whether even the Half Blood Prince she gave the book another nasty look could dream up an antidote for a dozen different love potions at once Id just invite someone to go with you thatll stop all the others thinking theyve still got a chance .Its tomorrow night theyre getting desperate .There isnt anyone I want to invite mumbled Harry who was still trying not to think about Ginny any more than he could help despite the fact that she kept cropping up in his dreams in ways that made him devoutly thankful that Ron could not perform Legilimency .Well just be careful what you drink because Romilda Vane looked like she meant business said Hermione grimly .She hitched up the long roll of parchment on which she was writing her Arithmancy essay and continued to scratch away with her quill .Harry watched her with his mind a long way away .Hang on a moment he said slowly .I thought Filch had banned anything bought at Weasleys Wizard Wheezes ?And when has anyone ever paid attention to what Filch has banned ?asked Hermione still concentrating on her essay .But I thought all the owls were being searched .So how come these girls are able to bring love potions into school ?Fred and George send them disguised as perfumes and cough potions said Hermione .Its part of their Owl Order Service .You know a lot about it .Hermione gave him the kind of nasty look she had just given his copy of Advanced PotionMaking .It was all on the back of the bottles they showed Ginny and me in the summer she said coldly .I dont go around putting potions in peoples drinks .or pretending to either which is just as bad .Yeah well never mind that said Harry quickly .The point is Filch is being fooled isnt he ?These girls are getting stuff into the school disguised as something else !So why couldnt Malfoy have brought the necklace into the school ?Oh Harry .not that again .Come on why not ?demanded Harry .Look sighed Hermione Secrecy Sensors detect jinxes curses and concealment charms dont they ?Theyre used to find Dark Magic and Dark objects .Theyd have picked up a powerful curse like the one on that necklace within seconds .But something thats just been put in the wrong bottle wouldnt register and anyway love potions arent Dark or dangerous Easy for you to say muttered Harry thinking of Romilda Vane .so it would be down to Filch to realize it wasnt a cough potion and hes not a very good wizard I doubt he can tell one potion from Hermione stopped dead Harry had heard it too .Somebody had moved close behind them among the dark bookshelves .They waited and a moment later the vulturelike countenance of Madam Pince appeared around the corner her sunken cheeks her skin like parchment and her long hooked nose illuminated unflatteringly by the lamp she was carrying .The library is now closed she said .Mind you return anything you have borrowed to the correct what have you been doing to that book you depraved boy ?It isnt the librarys its mine !said Harry hastily snatching his copy of Advanced PotionMaking off the table as she lunged at it with a clawlike hand .Despoiled !she hissed .Desecrated !Befouled !Its just a book thats been written on !said Harry tugging it out of her grip .She looked as though she might have a seizure Hermione who had hastily packed her things grabbed Harry by the arm and frogmarched him away .Shell ban you from the library if youre not careful .Why did you have to bring that stupid book ?Its not my fault shes barking mad Hermione .Or dyou think she overheard you being rude about Filch ?Ive always thought there might be something going on between them .Oh ha ha .Enjoying the fact that they could speak normally again they made their way along the deserted lamp lit corridors back to the common room arguing about whether or not Filch and Madam Pince were secretly in love with each other .Baubles said Harry to the Fat Lady this being the new festive password .Same to you said the Fat Lady with a roguish grin and she swung forward to admit them .Hi Harry !said Romilda Vane the moment he had climbed through the portrait hole .Fancy a gillywater ?Hermione gave him a whatdidItellyou ?look over her shoulder .No thanks said Harry quickly .I dont like it much .Well take these anyway said Romilda thrusting a box into his hands .Chocolate Cauldrons theyve got firewhisky in them .My gran sent them to me but I dont like them .Oh right thanks a lot said Harry who could not think what else to say .Er Im just going over here with .He hurried off behind Hermione his voice tailing away feebly .Told you said Hermione succinctly .Sooner you ask someone sooner theyll all leave you alone and you can But her face suddenly turned blank she had just spotted Ron and Lavender who were entwined in the same armchair .Well good night Harry said Hermione though it was only seven oclock in the evening and she left for the girls dormitory without another word .Harry went to bed comforting himself that there was only one more day of lessons to struggle through plus Slughorns party after which he and Ron would depart together for the Burrow .It now seemed impossible that Ron and Hermione would make up with each other before the holidays began but perhaps somehow the break would give them time to calm down think better of their behavior .But his hopes were not high and they sank still lower after enduring a Transfiguration lesson with them both next day .They had just embarked upon the immensely difficult topic of human Transfiguration working in front of mirrors they were supposed to be changing the color of their own eyebrows .Hermione laughed unkindly at Rons disastrous first attempt during which he somehow managed to give himself a spectacular handlebar mustache Ron retaliated by doing a cruel but accurate impression of Hermione jumping up and down in her seat every time Professor McGonagall asked a question which Lavender and Parvati found deeply amusing and which reduced Hermione to the verge of tears again .She raced out of the classroom on the bell leaving half her things behind Harry deciding that her need was greater than Rons just now scooped up her remaining possessions and followed her .He finally tracked her down as she emerged from a girls bathroom on the floor below .She was accompanied by Luna Lovegood who was patting her vaguely on the back .Oh hello Harry said Luna .Did you know one of your eyebrows is bright yellow ?Hi Luna .Hermione you left your stuff .He held out her books .Oh yes said Hermione in a choked voice taking her things and turning away quickly to hide the fact that she was wiping her eyes on her pencil case .Thank you Harry .Well Id better get going .And she hurried off without giving Harry any time to offer words of comfort though admittedly he could not think of any .Shes a bit upset said Luna .I thought at first it was Moaning Myrtle in there but it turned out to be Hermione .She said something about that Ron Weasley .Yeah theyve had a row said Harry .He says very funny things sometimes doesnt he ?said Luna as they set off down the corridor together .But he can be a bit unkind .I noticed that last year .I spose said Harry .Luna was demonstrating her usual knack of speaking uncomfortable truths he had never met anyone quite like her .So have you had a good term ?Oh its been all right said Luna .A bit lonely without the D .A .Ginnys been nice though .She stopped two boys in our Transfiguration class calling me ‘Loony the other day How would you like to come to Slughorns party with me tonight ?The words were out of Harrys mouth before he could stop them he heard himself say them as though it were a stranger speaking .Luna turned her protuberant eyes upon him in surprise .Slughorns party ?With you ?Yeah said Harry .Were supposed to bring guests so I thought you might like .I mean .He was keen to make his intentions perfectly clear .I mean just as friends you know .But if you dont want to .He was already half hoping that she didnt want to .Oh no Id love to go with you as friends !said Luna beaming as he had never seen her beam before .Nobodys ever asked me to a party before as a friend !Is that why you dyed your eyebrow for the party ?Should I do mine too ?No said Harry firmly that was a mistake .Ill get Hermione to put it right for me .So Ill meet you in the entrance hall at eight oclock then .AHA !screamed a voice from overhead and both of them jumped unnoticed by either of them they had just passed right underneath Peeves who was hanging upside down from a chandelier and grinning maliciously at them .Potty asked Loony to go to the partyl Potty lurves Loony !Potty luuuuurves LooooooonyV And he zoomed away cackling and shrieking Potty loves Loony !Nice to keep these things private said Harry .And sure enough in no time at all the whole school seemed to know that Harry Potter was taking Luna Lovegood to Slughorns party .You couldve taken anyonel said Ron in disbelief over dinner .Anyonel And you chose Loony Lovegood ?Dont call her that Ron snapped Ginny pausing behind Harry on her way to join friends .Im really glad youre taking her Harry shes so excited .And she moved on down the table to sit with Dean .Harry tried to feel pleased that Ginny was glad he was taking Luna to the party but could not quite manage it .A long way along the table Hermione was sitting alone playing with her stew .Harry noticed Ron looking at her furtively .You could say sorry suggested Harry bluntly .What and get attacked by another flock of canaries ?muttered Ron .What did you have to imitate her for ?She laughed at my mustache !So did I it was the stupidest thing Ive ever seen .But Ron did not seem to have heard Lavender had just arrived with Parvati .Squeezing herself in between Harry and Ron Lavender flung her arms around Rons neck .Hi Harry said Parvati who like him looked faintly embarrassed and bored by the behavior of their two friends .Hi said Harry .Howre you ?Youre staying at Hogwarts then ?I heard your parents wanted you to leave .I managed to talk them out of it for the time being said Parvati .That Katie thing really freaked them out but as there hasnt been anything since .Oh hi Hermione !Parvati positively beamed .Harry could tell that she was feeling guilty for having laughed at Hermione in Transfiguration .He looked around and saw that Hermione was beaming back if possible even more brightly .Girls were very strange sometimes .Hi Parvati !said Hermione ignoring Ron and Lavender completely .Are you going to Slughorns party tonight ?No invite said Parvati gloomily .Id love to go though it sounds like its going to be really good .Youre going arent you ?Yes Im meeting Cormac at eight and were There was a noise like a plunger being withdrawn from a blocked sink and Ron surfaced .Hermione acted as though she had not seen or heard anything .were going up to the party together .Cormac ?said Parvati .Cormac McLaggen you mean ?Thats right said Hermione sweetly .The one who almost she put a great deal of emphasis on the word became Gryffindor Keeper .Are you going out with him then ?asked Parvati wideeyed .Oh yes didnt you know ?said Hermione with a most unHermioneish giggle .No !said Parvati looking positively agog at this piece of gossip .Wow you like your Quidditch players dont you ?First Krum then McLaggen .I like really good Quidditch players Hermione corrected her still smiling .Well see you .Got to go and get ready for the party .She left .At once Lavender and Parvati put their heads together to discuss this new development with everything they had ever heard about McLaggen and all they had ever guessed about Hermione .Ron looked strangely blank and said nothing .Harry was left to ponder in silence the depths to which girls would sink to get revenge .When he arrived in the entrance hall at eight oclock that night he found an unusually large number of girls lurking there all of whom seemed to be staring at him resentfully as he approached Luna .She was wearing a set of spangled silver robes that were attracting a certain amount of giggles from the onlookers but otherwise she looked quite nice .Harry was glad in any case that she had left off her radish earrings her butterbeer cork necklace and her Spectrespecs .Hi he said .Shall we get going then ?Oh yes she said happily .Where is the party ?Slughorns office said Harry leading her up the marble staircase away from all the staring and muttering .Did you hear theres supposed to be a vampire coming ?Rufus Scrimgeour ?asked Luna .I what ?said Harry disconcerted .You mean the Minister of Magic ?Yes hes a vampire said Luna matteroffactly .Father wrote a very long article about it when Scrimgeour first took over from Cornelius Fudge but he was forced not to publish by somebody from the Ministry .Obviously they didnt want the truth to get out !Harry who thought it most unlikely that Rufus Scrimgeour was a vampire but who was used to Luna repeating her fathers bizarre views as though they were fact did not reply they were already approaching Slughorns office and the sounds of laughter music and loud conversation were growing louder with every step they took .Whether it had been built that way or because he had used magical trickery to make it so Slughorns office was much larger than the usual teachers study .The ceiling and walls had been draped with emerald crimson and gold hangings so that it looked as though they were all inside a vast tent .The room was crowded and stuffy and bathed in the red light cast by an ornate golden lamp dangling from the center of the ceiling in which real fairies were fluttering each a brilliant speck of light .Loud singing accompanied by what sounded like mandolins issued from a distant corner a haze of pipe smoke hung over several elderly warlocks deep in conversation and a number of houseelves were negotiating their way squeakily through the forest of knees obscured by the heavy silver platters of food they were bearing so that they looked like little roving tables .Harry mboy !boomed Slughorn almost as soon as Harry and Luna had squeezed in through the door .Come in come in so many people Id like you to meet !Slughorn was wearing a tasseled velvet hat to match his smoking jacket .Gripping Harrys arm so tightly he might have been hoping to Disapparate with him Slughorn led him purposefully into the party Harry seized Lunas hand and dragged her along with him .Harry Id like you to meet Eldred Worple an old student of mine author of Blood Brothers My Life Amongst the Vampires and of course his friend Sanguini .Worple who was a small stout bespectacled man grabbed Harrys hand and shook it enthusiastically the vampire Sanguini who was tall and emaciated with dark shadows under his eyes merely nodded .He looked rather bored .A gaggle of girls was standing close to him looking curious and excited .Harry Potter I am simply delighted !said Worple peering shortsightedly up into Harrys face .I was saying to Professor Slughorn only the other day ‘Where is the biography of Harry Potter for which we have all been waiting ?Er said Harry were you ?Just as modest as Horace described !said Worple .But seriously his manner changed it became suddenly businesslike I would be delighted to write it myself people are craving to know more about you dear boy craving !If you were prepared to grant me a few interviews say in four or fivehour sessions why we could have the book finished within months .And all with very little effort on your part I assure you ask Sanguini here if it isnt quite Sanguini stay here added Worple suddenly stern for the vampire had been edging toward the nearby group of girls a rather hungry look in his eye .Here have a pasty said Worple seizing one from a passing elf and stuffing it into Sanguinis hand before turning his attention back to Harry .My dear boy the gold you could make you have no idea Im definitely not interested said Harry firmly and Ive just seen a friend of mine sorry .He pulled Luna after him into the crowd he had indeed just seen a long mane of brown hair disappear between what looked like two members of the Weird Sisters .Hermione !HermioneV Harry !There you are thank goodness !Hi Luna !Whats happened to you ?asked Harry for Hermione looked distinctly disheveled rather as though she had just fought her way out of a thicket of Devils Snare .Oh Ive just escaped I mean Ive just left Cormac she said .Under the mistletoe she added in explanation as Harry continued to look questioningly at her .Serves you right for coming with him he told her severely .I thought hed annoy Ron most said Hermione dispassionately .I debated for a while about Zacharias Smith but I thought on the whole You considered Smith ?said Harry revolted .Yes I did and Im starting to wish Id chosen him McLaggen makes Grawp look a gentleman .Lets go this way well be able to see him coming hes so tall .The three of them made their way over to the other side of the room scooping up goblets of mead on the way realizing too late that Professor Trelawney was standing there alone .Hello said Luna politely to Professor Trelawney .Good evening my dear said Professor Trelawney focusing upon Luna with some difficulty .Harry could smell cooking sherry again .I havent seen you in my classes lately .No Ive got Firenze this year said Luna .Oh of course said Professor Trelawney with an angry drunken titter .Or Dobbin as I prefer to think of him .You would have thought would you not that now I am returned to the school Professor Dumbledore might have got rid of the horse ?But no .we share classes .Its an insult frankly an insult .Do you know .Professor Trelawney seemed too tipsy to have recognized Harry .Under cover of her furious criticisms of Firenze Harry drew closer to Hermione and said Lets get something straight .Are you planning to tell Ron that you interfered at Keeper tryouts ?Hermione raised her eyebrows .Do you really think Id stoop that low ?Harry looked at her shrewdly .Hermione if you can ask out McLaggen Theres a difference said Hermione with dignity .Ive got no plans to tell Ron anything about what might or might not have happened at Keeper tryouts .Good said Harry fervently .Because hell just fall apart again and well lose the next match Quidditch !said Hermione angrily .Is that all boys care about ?Cormac hasnt asked me one single question about myself no Ive just been treated to ‘A Hundred Great Saves Made by Cormac McLaggen nonstop ever since oh no here he comes !She moved so fast it was as though she had Disapparated one moment she was there the next she had squeezed between two guffawing witches and vanished .Seen Hermione ?asked McLaggen forcing his way through the throng a minute later .No sorry said Harry and he turned quickly to join in Lunas conversation forgetting for a split second to whom she was talking .Harry Potter !said Professor Trelawney in deep vibrant tones noticing him for the first time .Oh hello said Harry unenthusiastically .My dear boy !she said in a very carrying whisper .The rumors !The stories !The Chosen One !Of course I have known for a very long time .The omens were never good Harry .But why have you not returned to Divination ?For you of all people the subject is of the utmost importance !Ah Sybill we all think our subjects most important !said a loud voice and Slughorn appeared at Professor Trelawneys other side his face very red his velvet hat a little askew a glass of mead in one hand and an enormous mince pie in the other .But I dont think Ive ever known such a natural at Potions !said Slughorn regarding Harry with a fond if bloodshot eye .Instinctive you know like his mother !Ive only ever taught a few with this kind of ability I can tell you that Sybill why even Severus And to Harrys horror Slughorn threw out an arm and seemed to scoop Snape out of thin air toward them .Stop skulking and come and join us Severus !hiccuped Slughorn happily .I was just talking about Harrys exceptional potionmaking !Some credit must go to you of course you taught him for five years !Trapped with Slughorns arm around his shoulders Snape looked down his hooked nose at Harry his black eyes narrowed .Funny I never had the impression that I managed to teach Potter anything at all .Well then its natural ability !shouted Slughorn .You should have seen what he gave me first lesson Draught of Living Death never had a student produce finer on a first attempt I dont think even you Severus Really ?said Snape quietly his eyes still boring into Harry who felt a certain disquiet .The last thing he wanted was for Snape to start investigating the source of his newfound brilliance at Potions .Remind me what other subjects youre taking Harry ?asked Slughorn .Defense Against the Dark Arts Charms Transfiguration Herbology .All the subjects required in short for an Auror said Snape with the faintest sneer .Yeah well thats what Id like to do said Harry defiantly .And a great one youll make too !boomed Slughorn .I dont think you should be an Auror Harry said Luna unexpectedly .Everybody looked at her .The Aurors are part of the Rotfang Conspiracy I thought everyone knew that .Theyre working to bring down the Ministry of Magic from within using a combination of Dark Magic and gum disease .Harry inhaled half his mead up his nose as he started to laugh .Really it had been worth bringing Luna just for this .Emerging from his goblet coughing sopping wet but still grinning he saw something calculated to raise his spirits even higher Draco Malfoy being dragged by the ear toward them by Argus Filch .Professor Slughorn wheezed Filch his jowls aquiver and the maniacal light of mischiefdetection in his bulging eyes I discovered this boy lurking in an upstairs corridor .He claims to have been invited to your party and to have been delayed in setting out .Did you issue him with an invitation ?Malfoy pulled himself free of Filch s grip looking furious .All right I wasnt invited !he said angrily .I was trying to gatecrash happy ?No Im not !said Filch a statement at complete odds with the glee on his face .Youre in trouble you are !Didnt the headmaster say that nighttime prowlings out unless youve got permission didnt he eh ?Thats all right Argus thats all right said Slughorn waving a hand .Its Christmas and its not a crime to want to come to a party .Just this once well forget any punishment you may stay Draco .Filch s expression of outraged disappointment was perfectly predictable but why Harry wondered watching him did Malfoy look almost equally unhappy ?And why was Snape looking at Malfoy as though both angry and .was it possible ? .a little afraid ?But almost before Harry had registered what he had seen Filch had turned and shuffled away muttering under his breath Malfoy had composed his face into a smile and was thanking Slughorn for his generosity and Snapes face was smoothly inscrutable again .Its nothing nothing said Slughorn waving away Malfoy s thanks .I did know your grandfather after all .He always spoke very highly of you sir said Malfoy quickly .Said you were the best potionmaker hed ever known .Harry stared at Malfoy .It was not the suckingup that intrigued him he had watched Malfoy do that to Snape for a long time .It was the fact that Malfoy did after all look a little ill .This was the first time he had seen Malfoy close up for ages he now saw that Malfoy had dark shadows under his eyes and a distinctly grayish tinge to his skin .Id like a word with you Draco said Snape suddenly .Oh now Severus said Slughorn hiccuping again its Christmas dont be too hard Im his Head of House and I shall decide how hard or otherwise to be said Snape curtly .Follow me Draco .They left Snape leading the way Malfoy looking resentful .Harry stood there for a moment irresolute then said Ill be back in a bit Luna er bathroom .All right she said cheerfully and he thought he heard her as he hurried off into the crowd resume the subject of the Rotfang Conspiracy with Professor Trelawney who seemed sincerely interested .It was easy once out of the party to pull his Invisibility Cloak out of his pocket and throw it over himself for the corridor was quite deserted .What was more difficult was finding Snape and Malfoy .Harry ran down the corridor the noise of his feet masked by the music and loud talk still issuing from Slughorn s office behind him .Perhaps Snape had taken Malfoy to his office in the dungeons .or perhaps he was escorting him back to the Slytherin common room .Harry pressed his ear against door after door as he dashed down the corridor until with a great jolt of excitement he crouched down to the keyhole of the last classroom in the corridor and heard voices . .cannot afford mistakes Draco because if you are expelled I didnt have anything to do with it all right ?I hope you are telling the truth because it was both clumsy and foolish .Already you are suspected of having a hand in it .Who suspects me ?said Malfoy angrily .For the last time I didnt do it okay ?That Bell girl mustve had an enemy no one knows about dont look at me like that !I know what youre doing Im not stupid but it wont work I can stop you !There was a pause and then Snape said quietly Ah .Aunt Bellatrix has been teaching you Occlumency I see .What thoughts are you trying to conceal from your master Draco ?Im not trying to conceal anything from him I just dont want you butting in !Harry pressed his ear still more closely against the keyhole .What had happened to make Malfoy speak to Snape like this Snape toward whom he had always shown respect even liking ?So that is why you have been avoiding me this term ?You have feared my interference ?You realize that had anybody else failed to come to my office when I had told them repeatedly to be there Draco So put me in detention !Report me to Dumbledore !jeered Malfoy .There was another pause .Then Snape said You know perfectly well that I do not wish to do either of those things .Youd better stop telling me to come to your office then !Listen to me said Snape his voice so low now that Harry had to push his ear very hard against the keyhole to hear .I am trying to help you .I swore to your mother I would protect you .I made the Unbreakable Vow Draco Looks like you 11 have to break it then because I dont need your protection !Its my job he gave it to me and Im doing it Ive got a plan and its going to work its just taking a bit longer than I thought it would !What is your plan ?Its none of your business !If you tell me what you are trying to do I can assist you Ive got all the assistance I need thanks Im not alone !You were certainly alone tonight which was foolish in the extreme wandering the corridors without lookouts or backup these are elementary mistakes I wouldve had Crabbe and Goyle with me if you hadnt put them in detention !Keep your voice down !spat Snape for Malfoys voice had risen excitedly .If your friends Crabbe and Goyle intend to pass their Defense Against the Dark Arts O .W .L .this time around they will need to work a little harder than they are doing at pres What does it matter ?said Malfoy .Defense Against the Dark Arts its all just a joke isnt it an act ?Like any of us need protecting against the Dark Arts It is an act that is crucial to success Draco !said Snape .Where do you think I would have been all these years if I had not known how to act ?Now listen to me !You are being incautious wandering around at night getting yourself caught and if you are placing your reliance in assistants like Crabbe and Goyle Theyre not the only ones Ive got other people on my side better people !Then why not confide in me and I can I know what youre up to !You want to steal my glory !There was another pause then Snape said coldly You are speaking like a child .I quite understand that your fathers capture and imprisonment has upset you but Harry had barely a seconds warning he heard Malfoys footsteps on the other side of the door and flung himself out of the way just as it burst open Malfoy was striding away down the corridor past the open door of Slughorns office around the distant corner and out of sight .Hardly daring to breathe Harry remained crouched down as Snape emerged slowly from the classroom .His expression unfathomable he returned to the party .Harry remained on the floor hidden beneath the cloak his mind racing .A VERY FROSTY CHRISTMAS So Snape was offering to help him ?He was definitely offering to help him ?If you ask that once more said Harry Im going to stick this sprout Im only checking !said Ron .They were standing alone at the Burrows kitchen sink peeling a mountain of sprouts for Mrs Weasley .Snow was drifting past the window in front of them .Yes Snape was offering to help himl said Harry .He said hed promised Malfoys mother to protect him that hed made an Unbreakable Oath or something An Unbreakable Vow ?said Ron looking stunned .Nah he cant have .Are you sure ?Yes Im sure said Harry .Why what does it mean ?Well you cant break an Unbreakable Vow .Id worked that much out for myself funnily enough .What happens if you break it then ?You die said Ron simply .Fred and George tried to get me to make one when I was about five .I nearly did too I was holding hands with Fred and everything when Dad found us .He went mental said Ron with a reminiscent gleam in his eyes .Only time Ive ever seen Dad as angry as Mum .Fred reckons his left buttock has never been the same since .Yeah well passing over Freds left buttock I beg your pardon ?said Freds voice as the twins entered the kitchen .aah George look at this .Theyre using knives and everything .Bless them .Ill be seventeen in two and a bit months time said Ron grumpily and then Ill be able to do it by magic !But meanwhile said George sitting down at the kitchen table and putting his feet up on it we can enjoy watching you demonstrate the correct use of a whoopsadaisy !You made me do that !said Ron angrily sucking his cut thumb .You wait when Im seventeen Im sure youll dazzle us all with hitherto unsuspected magical skills yawned Fred .And speaking of hitherto unsuspected skills Ronald said George what is this we hear from Ginny about you and a young lady called unless our information is faulty Lavender Brown ?Ron turned a little pink but did not look displeased as he turned back to the sprouts .Mind your own business .What a snappy retort said Fred .I really dont know how you think of them .No what we wanted to know was .how did it happen ?What dyou mean ?Did she have an accident or something ?What ?Well how did she sustain such extensive brain damage ?Careful now !Mrs Weasley entered the room just in time to see Ron throw the sprout knife at Fred who had turned it into a paper airplane with one lazy flick of his wand .Ronl she said furiously .Dont you ever let me see you throwing knives again !I wont said Ron let you see he added under his breath as he turned back to the sprout mountain .Fred George Im sorry dears but Remus is arriving tonight so Bill will have to squeeze in with you two .No problem said George .Then as Charlie isnt coming home that just leaves Harry and Ron in the attic and if Fleur shares with Ginny thatll make Ginnys Christmas muttered Fred .everyone should be comfortable .Well theyll have a bed anyway said Mrs Weasley sounding slightly harassed .Percy definitely not showing his ugly face then ?asked Fred .Mrs Weasley turned away before she answered .No hes busy I expect at the Ministry .Or hes the worlds biggest prat said Fred as Mrs Weasley left the kitchen .One of the two .Well lets get going then George .What are you two up to ?asked Ron .Cant you help us with these sprouts ?You could just use your wand and then well be free too !No I dont think we can do that said Fred seriously .Its very characterbuilding stuff learning to peel sprouts without magic makes you appreciate how difficult it is for Muggles and Squibs and if you want people to help you Ron added George throwing the paper airplane at him I wouldnt chuck knives at them .Just a little hint .Were off to the village theres a very pretty girl working in the paper shop who thinks my card tricks are something marvelous .almost like real magic .Gits said Ron darkly watching Fred and George setting off across the snowy yard .Wouldve only taken them ten seconds and then we couldve gone too .I couldnt said Harry .I promised Dumbledore I wouldnt wander off while Im staying here .Oh yeah said Ron .He peeled a few more sprouts and then said Are you going to tell Dumbledore what you heard Snape and Malfoy saying to each other ?Yep said Harry .Im going to tell anyone who can put a stop to it and Dumbledores top of the list .I might have another word with your dad too .Pity you didnt hear what Malfoys actually doing though .I couldnt have done could I ?That was the whole point he was refusing to tell Snape .There was silence for a moment or two then Ron said Course you know what theyll all say ?Dad and Dumbledore and all of them ?Theyll say Snape isnt really trying to help Malfoy he was just trying to find out what Malfoys up to .They didnt hear him said Harry flatly .No ones that good an actor not even Snape .Yeah .Im just saying though said Ron .Harry turned to face him frowning .You think Im right though ?Yeah I do !said Ron hastily .Seriously I do !But theyre all convinced Snapes in the Order arent they ?Harry said nothing .It had already occurred to him that this would be the most likely objection to his new evidence he could hear Hermione now Obviously Harry he was pretending to offer help so he could trick Malfoy into telling him what hes doing .This was pure imagination however as he had had no opportunity to tell Hermione what he had overheard .She had disappeared from Slughorns parry before he returned to it or so he had been informed by an irate McLaggen and she had already gone to bed by the time he returned to the common room .As he and Ron had left for the Burrow early the next day he had barely had time to wish her a happy Christmas and to tell her that he had some very important news when they got back from the holidays .He was not entirely sure that she had heard him though Ron and Lavender had been saying a thoroughly nonverbal goodbye just behind him at the time .Still even Hermione would not be able to deny one thing Malfoy was definitely up to something and Snape knew it so Harry felt fully justified in saying I told you so which he had done several times to Ron already .Harry did not get the chance to speak to Mr Weasley who was working very long hours at the Ministry until Christmas Eve night .The Weasleys and their guests were sitting in the living room which Ginny had decorated so lavishly that it was rather like sitting in a paperchain explosion .Fred George Harry and Ron were the only ones who knew that the angel on top of the tree was actually a garden gnome that had bitten Fred on the ankle as he pulled up carrots for Christmas dinner .Stupefied painted gold stuffed into a miniature tutu and with small wings glued to its back it glowered down at them all the ugliest angel Harry had ever seen with a large bald head like a potato and rather hairy feet .They were all supposed to be listening to a Christmas broadcast by Mrs Weasleys favorite singer Celestina Warbeck whose voice was warbling out of the large wooden wireless set .Fleur who seemed to find Celestina very dull was talking so loudly in the corner that a scowling Mrs Weasley kept pointing her wand at the volume control so that Celestina grew louder and louder .Under cover of a particularly jazzy number called A Cauldron Full of Hot Strong Love Fred and George started a game of Exploding Snap with Ginny .Ron kept shooting Bill and Fleur covert looks as though hoping to pick up tips .Meanwhile Remus Lupin who was thinner and more ragged looking than ever was sitting beside the fire staring into its depths as though he could not hear Celestinas voice .Oh come and stir my cauldron And if you do it right Ill boil you up some hot strong love To keep you warm tonight .We danced to this when we were eighteen !said Mrs Weasley wiping her eyes on her knitting .Do you remember Arthur ?Mphf ?said Mr Weasley whose head had been nodding over the satsuma he was peeling .Oh yes .marvelous tune .With an effort he sat up a little straighter and looked around at Harry who was sitting next to him .Sorry about this he said jerking his head toward the wireless as Celestina broke into the chorus .Be over soon .No problem said Harry grinning .Has it been busy at the Ministry ?Very said Mr Weasley .I wouldnt mind if we were getting anywhere but of the three arrests weve made in the last couple of months I doubt that one of them is a genuine Death Eater only dont repeat that Harry he added quickly looking much more awake all of a sudden .Theyre not still holding Stan Shunpike are they ?asked Harry .Im afraid so said Mr Weasley .I know Dumbledores tried appealing directly to Scrimgeour about Stan .I mean anybody who has actually interviewed him agrees that hes about as much a Death Eater as this satsuma .but the top levels want to look as though theyre making some progress and ‘three arrests sounds better than ‘three mistaken arrests and releases .but again this is all top secret .I wont say anything said Harry .He hesitated for a moment wondering how best to embark on what he wanted to say as he marshaled his thoughts Celestina Warbeck began a ballad called You Charmed the Heart Right Out of Me .Mr Weasley you know what I told you at the station when we were setting off for school ?I checked Harry said Mr Weasley at once .I went and searched the Malfoys house .There was nothing either broken or whole that shouldnt have been there .Yeah I know I saw in the Prophet that youd looked .but this is something different .Well something more .And he told Mr Weasley everything he had overheard between Malfoy and Snape .As Harry spoke he saw Lupins head turn a little toward him taking in every word .When he had finished there was silence except for Celestinas crooning .Oh my poor heart where has it gone ?Its left me for a spell .Has it occurred to you Harry said Mr Weasley that Snape was simply pretending ?Pretending to offer help so that he could find out what Malfoys up to ?said Harry quickly .Yeah I thought youd say that .But how do we know ?It isnt our business to know said Lupin unexpectedly .He had turned his back on the fire now and faced Harry across Mr Weasley .Its Dumbledores business .Dumbledore trusts Severus and that ought to be good enough for all of us .But said Harry just say just say Dumbledores wrong about Snape People have said it many times .It comes down to whether or not you trust Dumbledores judgment .I do therefore I trust Severus .But Dumbledore can make mistakes argued Harry .He says it himself .And you he looked Lupin straight in the eye do you honestly like Snape ?I neither like nor dislike Severus said Lupin .No Harry I am speaking the truth he added as Harry pulled a skeptical expression .We shall never be bosom friends perhaps after all that happened between James and Sirius and Severus there is too much bitterness there .But I do not forget that during the year I taught at Hogwarts Severus made the Wolfsbane Potion for me every month made it perfectly so that I did not have to suffer as I usually do at the full moon .But he ‘accidentally let it slip that youre a werewolf so you had to leave !said Harry angrily .Lupin shrugged .The news would have leaked out anyway .We both know he wanted my job but he could have wreaked much worse damage on me by tampering with the potion .He kept me healthy .I must be grateful .Maybe he didnt dare mess with the potion with Dumbledore watching him !said Harry .You are determined to hate him Harry said Lupin with a faint smile .And I understand with James as your father with Sirius as your godfather you have inherited an old prejudice .By all means tell Dumbledore what you have told Arthur and me but do not expect him to share your view of the matter do not even expect him to be surprised by what you tell him .It might have been on Dumbledores orders that Severus questioned Draco . .and now youve torn it quite apart Ill thank you to give back my heart !Celestina ended her song on a very long highpitched note and loud applause issued out of the wireless which Mrs Weasley joined in with enthusiastically .Eez eet over ?said Fleur loudly .Thank goodness what an orrible Shall we have a nightcap then ?asked Mr Weasley loudly leaping to his feet .Who wants eggnog ?What have you been up to lately ?Harry asked Lupin as Mr Weasley bustled off to fetch the eggnog and everybody else stretched and broke into conversation .Oh Ive been underground said Lupin .Almost literally .Thats why I havent been able to write Harry sending letters to you would have been something of a giveaway .What do you mean ?Ive been living among my fellows my equals said Lupin .Werewolves he added at Harrys look of incomprehension .Nearly all of them are on Voldemorts side .Dumbledore wanted a spy and here I was .readymade .He sounded a little bitter and perhaps realized it for he smiled more warmly as he went on I am not complaining it is necessary work and who can do it better than I ?However it has been difficult gaining their trust .I bear the unmistakable signs of having tried to live among wizards you see whereas they have shunned normal society and live on the margins stealing and sometimes killing to eat .How come they like Voldemort ?They think that under his rule they will have a better life said Lupin .And it is hard to argue with Grey back out there .Whos Grey back ?You havent heard of him ?Lupins hands closed convulsively in his lap .Fenrir Greyback is perhaps the most savage werewolf alive today .He regards it as his mission in life to bite and to contaminate as many people as possible he wants to create enough werewolves to overcome the wizards .Voldemort has promised him prey in return for his services .Greyback specializes in children .Bite them young he says and raise them away from their parents raise them to hate normal wizards .Voldemort has threatened to unleash him upon peoples sons and daughters it is a threat that usually produces good results .Lupin paused and then said It was Greyback who bit me .What ?said Harry astonished .When when you were a kid you mean ?Yes .My father had offended him .I did not know for a very long time the identity of the werewolf who had attacked me I even felt pity for him thinking that he had had no control knowing by then how it felt to transform .But Greyback is not like that .At the full moon he positions himself close to victims ensuring that he is near enough to strike .He plans it all .And this is the man Voldemort is using to marshal the werewolves .I cannot pretend that my particular brand of reasoned argument is making much headway against Greybacks insistence that we werewolves deserve blood that we ought to revenge ourselves on normal people .But you are normal !said Harry fiercely .Youve just got a a problem Lupin burst out laughing .Sometimes you remind me a lot of James .He called it my ‘furry little problem in company .Many people were under the impression that I owned a badly behaved rabbit .He accepted a glass of eggnog from Mr Weasley with a word of thanks looking slightly more cheerful .Harry meanwhile felt a rush of excitement This last mention of his father had reminded him that there was something he had been looking forward to asking Lupin .Have you ever heard of someone called the Half Blood Prince ?The HalfBlood what ?Prince said Harry watching him closely for signs of recognition .There are no Wizarding princes said Lupin now smiling .Is this a title youre thinking of adopting ?I should have thought being ‘the Chosen One would be enough .Its nothing to do with me !said Harry indignantly .The HalfBlood Prince is someone who used to go to Hogwarts Ive got his old Potions book .He wrote spells all over it spells he invented .One of them was Levicorpus Oh that one had a great vogue during my time at Hogwarts said Lupin reminiscently .There were a few months in my fifth year when you couldnt move for being hoisted into the air by your ankle .My dad used it said Harry .I saw him in the Pensieve he used it on Snape .He tried to sound casual as though this was a throwaway comment of no real importance but he was not sure he had achieved the right effect Lupins smile was a little too understanding .Yes he said but he wasnt the only one .As I say it was very popular .You know how these spells come and go .But it sounds like it was invented while you were at school Harry persisted .Not necessarily said Lupin .Jinxes go in and out of fashion like everything else .He looked into Harrys face and then said quietly James was a pureblood Harry and I promise you he never asked us to call him ‘Prince .Abandoning pretense Harry said And it wasnt Sirius ?Or you ?Definitely not .Oh .Harry stared into the fire .I just thought well hes helped me out a lot in Potions classes the Prince has .How old is this book Harry ?I dunno Ive never checked .Well perhaps that will give you some clue as to when the Prince was at Hogwarts said Lupin .Shortly after this Fleur decided to imitate Celestina singing A Cauldron Full of Hot Strong Love which was taken by everyone once they had glimpsed Mrs Weasleys expression to be the cue to go to bed .Harry and Ron climbed all the way up to Rons attic bedroom where a camp bed had been added for Harry .Ron fell asleep almost immediately but Harry delved into his trunk and pulled out his copy of Advanced PotionMaking before getting into bed .There he turned its pages searching until he finally found at the front of the book the date that it had been published .It was nearly fifty years old .Neither his father nor his fathers friends had been at Hogwarts fifty years ago .Feeling disappointed Harry threw the book back into his trunk turned off the lamp and rolled over thinking of werewolves and Snape Stan Shunpike and the HalfBlood Prince and finally falling into an uneasy sleep full of creeping shadows and the cries of bitten children .Shes got to be joking .Harry woke with a start to find a bulging stocking lying over the end of his bed .He put on his glasses and looked around the tiny window was almost completely obscured with snow and in front of it Ron was sitting bolt upright in bed and examining what appeared to be a thick gold chain .Whats that ?asked Harry .Its from Lavender said Ron sounding revolted .She cant honestly think Id wear .Harry looked more closely and let out a shout of laughter .Dangling from the chain in large gold letters were the words My Sweetheart Nice he said .Classy .You should definitely wear it in front of Fred and George .If you tell them said Ron shoving the necklace out of sight under his pillow I I 111 Stutter at me ?said Harry grinning .Come on would I ?How could she think Id like something like that though ?Ron demanded of thin air looking rather shocked .Well think back said Harry .Have you ever let it slip that youd like to go out in public with the words ‘My Sweetheart round your neck ?Well .we dont really talk much said Ron .Its mainly .Snogging said Harry .Well yeah said Ron .He hesitated a moment then said Is Hermione really going out with McLaggen ?I dunno said Harry .They were at Slughorns party together but I dont think it went that well .Ron looked slightly more cheerful as he delved deeper into his stocking .Harrys presents included a sweater with a large Golden Snitch worked onto the front handknitted by Mrs Weasley a large box of Weasleys Wizard Wheezes products from the twins and a slightly damp moldysmelling package that came with a label reading TO MASTER FROM KREACHER .Harry stared at it .Dyou reckon this is safe to open ?he asked .Cant be anything dangerous all our mails still being searched at the Ministry replied Ron though he was eyeing the parcel suspiciously .I didnt think of giving Kreacher anything .Do people usually give their houseelves Christmas presents ?asked Harry prodding the parcel cautiously .Hermione would said Ron .But lets wait and see what it is before you start feeling guilty .A moment later Harry had given a loud yell and leapt out of his camp bed the package contained a large number of maggots .Nice said Ron roaring with laughter .Very thoughtful .Id rather have them than that necklace said Harry which sobered Ron up at once .Everybody was wearing new sweaters when they all sat down for Christmas lunch everyone except Fleur on whom it appeared Mrs Weasley had not wanted to waste one and Mrs Weasley herself who was sporting a brandnew midnight blue witchs hat glittering with what looked like tiny starlike diamonds and a spectacular golden necklace .Fred and George gave them to me !Arent they beautiful ?Well we find we appreciate you more and more Mum now were washing our own socks said George waving an airy hand .Parsnips Remus ?Harry youve got a maggot in your hair said Ginny cheerfully leaning across the table to pick it out Harry felt goose bumps erupt up his neck that had nothing to do with the maggot .Ow orrible said Fleur with an affected little shudder .Yes isnt it ?said Ron .Gravy Fleur ?In his eagerness to help her he knocked the gravy boat flying Bill waved his wand and the gravy soared up in the air and returned meekly to the boat .You are as bad as zat Tonks said Fleur to Ron when she had finished kissing Bill in thanks .She is always knocking I invited dear Tonks to come along today said Mrs Weasley setting down the carrots with unnecessary force and glaring at Fleur .But she wouldnt come .Have you spoken to her lately Remus ?No I havent been in contact with anybody very much said Lupin .But Tonks has got her own family to go to hasnt she ?Hmmm said Mrs Weasley .Maybe .I got the impression she was planning to spend Christmas alone actually .She gave Lupin an annoyed look as though it was all his fault she was getting Fleur for a daughterinlaw instead of Tonks but Harry glancing across at Fleur who was now feeding Bill bits of turkey off her own fork thought that Mrs Weasley was fighting a long lost battle .He was however reminded of a question he had with regard to Tonks and who better to ask than Lupin the man who knew all about Patronuses ?Tonkss Patronus has changed its form he told him .Snape said so anyway .I didnt know that could happen .Why would your Patronus change ?Lupin took his time chewing his turkey and swallowing before saying slowly Sometimes .a great shock .an emotional upheaval .It looked big and it had four legs said Harry struck by a sudden thought and lowering his voice .Hey .it couldnt be ?Arthur !said Mrs Weasley suddenly .She had risen from her chair her hand was pressed over her heart and she was staring out of the kitchen window .Arthur its Percy !What ?Mr Weasley looked around .Everybody looked quickly at the window Ginny stood up for a better look .There sure enough was Percy Weasley striding across the snowy yard his hornrimmed glasses glinting in the sunlight .He was not however alone .Arthur hes hes with the Minister !And sure enough the man Harry had seen in the Daily Prophet was following along in Percys wake limping slightly his mane of graying hair and his black cloak flecked with snow .Before any of them could say anything before Mr and Mrs Weasley could do more than exchange stunned looks the back door opened and there stood Percy .There was a moments painful silence .Then Percy said rather stiffly Merry Christmas Mother .Oh Percy said Mrs Weasley and she threw herself into his arms .Rufus Scrimgeour paused in the doorway leaning on his walking stick and smiling as he observed this affecting scene .You must forgive this intrusion he said when Mrs Weasley looked around at him beaming and wiping her eyes .Percy and I were in the vicinity working you know and he couldnt resist dropping in and seeing you all .But Percy showed no sign of wanting to greet any of the rest of the family .He stood pokerstraight and awkwardlooking and stared over everybody elses heads .Mr Weasley Fred and George were all observing him stonyfaced .Please come in sit down Minister !fluttered Mrs Weasley straightening her hat .Have a little purkey or some tooding .I mean No no my dear Molly said Scrimgeour .Harry guessed that he had checked her name with Percy before they entered the house .I dont want to intrude wouldnt be here at all if Percy hadnt wanted to see you all so badly .Oh Perce !said Mrs Weasley tearfully reaching up to kiss him . .Weve only looked in for five minutes so Ill have a stroll around the yard while you catch up with Percy .No no I assure you I dont want to butt in !Well if anybody cared to show me your charming garden .Ah that young mans finished why doesnt he take a stroll with me ?The atmosphere around the table changed perceptibly .Everybody looked from Scrimgeour to Harry .Nobody seemed to find Scrimgeour s pretense that he did not know Harrys name convincing or find it natural that he should be chosen to accompany the Minister around the garden when Ginny Fleur and George also had clean plates .Yeah all right said Harry into the silence .He was not fooled for all Scrimgeours talk that they had just been in the area that Percy wanted to look up his family this must be the real reason that they had come so that Scrimgeour could speak to Harry alone .Its fine he said quietly as he passed Lupin who had half risen from his chair .Fine he added as Mr Weasley opened his mouth to speak .Wonderful !said Scrimgeour standing back to let Harry pass through the door ahead of him .Well just take a turn around the garden and Percy and Ill be off .Carry on everyone !Harry walked across the yard toward the Weasleys overgrown snowcovered garden Scrimgeour limping slightly at his side .He had Harry knew been Head of the Auror office he looked tough and battlescarred very different from portly Fudge in his bowler hat .Charming said Scrimgeour stopping at the garden fence and looking out over the snowy lawn and the indistinguishable plants .Charming .Harry said nothing .He could tell that Scrimgeour was watching him .Ive wanted to meet you for a very long time said Scrimgeour after a few moments .Did you know that ?No said Harry truthfully .Oh yes for a very long time .But Dumbledore has been very protective of you said Scrimgeour .Natural of course natural after what youve been through .Especially what happened at the Ministry He waited for Harry to say something but Harry did not oblige so he went on I have been hoping for an occasion to talk to you ever since I gained office but Dumbledore has most understandably as I say prevented this .Still Harry said nothing waiting .The rumors that have flown around !said Scrimgeour .Well of course we both know how these stories get distorted .all these whispers of a prophecy .of you being ‘the Chosen One .They were getting near it now Harry thought the reason Scrimgeour was here . .I assume that Dumbledore has discussed these matters with you ?Harry deliberated wondering whether he ought to lie or not .He looked at the little gnome prints all around the flowerbeds and the scuffedup patch that marked the spot where Fred had caught the gnome now wearing the tutu at the top of the Christmas tree .Finally he decided on the truth .or a bit of it .Yeah weve discussed it .Have you have you .said Scrimgeour .Harry could see out of the corner of his eye Scrimgeour squinting at him so he pretended to be very interested in a gnome that had just poked its head out from underneath a frozen rhododendron .And what has Dumbledore told you Harry ?Sorry but thats between us said Harry .He kept his voice as pleasant as he could and Scrimgeours tone too was light and friendly as he said Oh of course if its a question of confidences I wouldnt want you to divulge .no no .and in any case does it really matter whether you are ‘the Chosen One or not ?Harry had to mull that one over for a few seconds before responding .I dont really know what you mean Minister .Well of course to you it will matter enormously said Scrimgeour with a laugh .But to the Wizarding community at large .its all perception isnt it ?Its what people believe thats important .Harry said nothing .He thought he saw dimly where they were heading but he was not going to help Scrimgeour get there .The gnome under the rhododendron was now digging for worms at its roots and Harry kept his eyes fixed upon it .People believe you are ‘the Chosen One you see said Scrimgeour .They think you quite the hero which of course you are Harry chosen or not !How many times have you faced HeWhoMustNotBe Named now ?Well anyway he pressed on without waiting for a reply the point is you are a symbol of hope for many Harry .The idea that there is somebody out there who might be able who might even be destined to destroy HeWhoMustNotBe Named well naturally it gives people a lift .And I cant help but feel that once you realize this you might consider it well almost a duty to stand alongside the Ministry and give everyone a boost .The gnome had just managed to get hold of a worm .It was now tugging very hard on it trying to get it out of the frozen ground .Harry was silent so long that Scrimgeour said looking from Harry to the gnome Funny little chaps arent they ?But what say you Harry ?I dont exactly understand what you want said Harry slowly . ‘Stand alongside the Ministry .What does that mean ?Oh well nothing at all onerous I assure you said Scrimgeour .If you were to be seen popping in and out of the Ministry from time to time for instance that would give the right impression .And of course while you were there you would have ample opportunity to speak to Gawain Robards my successor as Head of the Auror office .Dolores Umbridge has told me that you cherish an ambition to become an Auror .Well that could be arranged very easily .Harry felt anger bubbling in the pit of his stomach So Dolores Umbridge was still at the Ministry was she ?So basically he said as though he just wanted to clarify a few points youd like to give the impression that Im working for the Ministry ?It would give everyone a lift to think you were more involved Harry said Scrimgeour sounding relieved that Harry had cottoned on so quickly .The Chosen One you know .Its all about giving people hope the feeling that exciting things are happening .But if I keep running in and out of the Ministry said Harry still endeavoring to keep his voice friendly wont that seem as though I approve of what the Ministrys up to ?Well said Scrimgeour frowning slightly well yes thats partly why wed like No I dont think thatll work said Harry pleasantly .You see I dont like some of the things the Ministrys doing .Locking up Stan Shunpike for instance .Scrimgeour did not speak for a moment but his expression hardened instantly .I would not expect you to understand he said and he was not as successful at keeping anger out of his voice as Harry had been .These are dangerous times and certain measures need to be taken .You are sixteen years old Dumbledores a lot older than sixteen and he doesnt think Stan should be in Azkaban either said Harry .Youre making Stan a scapegoat just like you want to make me a mascot .They looked at each other long and hard .Finally Scrimgeour said with no pretense at warmth I see .You prefer like your hero Dumbledore to disassociate yourself from the Ministry ?I dont want to be used said Harry .Some would say its your duty to be used by the Ministry !Yeah and others might say its your duty to check that people really are Death Eaters before you chuck them in prison said Harry his temper rising now .Youre doing what Barty Crouch did .You never get it right you people do you ?Either weve got Fudge pretending everythings lovely while people get murdered right under his nose or weve got you chucking the wrong people into jail and trying to pretend youve got ‘the Chosen One working for you !So youre not ‘the Chosen One ?said Scrimgeour .I thought you said it didnt matter either way ?said Harry with a bitter laugh .Not to you anyway .I shouldnt have said that said Scrimgeour quickly .It was tactless No it was honest said Harry .One of the only honest things youve said to me .You dont care whether I live or die but you do care that I help you convince everyone youre winning the war against Voldemort .I havent forgotten Minister .He raised his right fist .There shining white on the back of his cold hand were the scars which Dolores Umbridge had forced him to carve into his own flesh must not tell lies .I dont remember you rushing to my defense when I was trying to tell everyone Voldemort was back .The Ministry wasnt so keen to be pals last year .They stood in silence as icy as the ground beneath their feet .The gnome had finally managed to extricate his worm and was now sucking on it happily leaning against the bottommost branches of the rhododendron bush .What is Dumbledore up to ?said Scrimgeour brusquely .Where does he go when he is absent from Hogwarts ?No idea said Harry .And you wouldnt tell me if you knew said Scrimgeour would you ?No I wouldnt said Harry .Well then I shall have to see whether I cant find out by other means .You can try said Harry indifferently .But you seem cleverer than Fudge so Id have thought youd have learned from his mistakes .He tried interfering at Hogwarts .You might have noticed hes not Minister anymore but Dumbledores still headmaster .Id leave Dumbledore alone if I were you .There was a long pause .Well it is clear to me that he has done a very good job on you said Scrimgeour his eyes cold and hard behind his wirerimmed glasses .Dumbledores man through and through arent you Potter ?Yeah I am said Harry .Glad we straightened that out .And turning his back on the Minister of Magic he strode back toward the house .A SLUGGISH MEMORY Late in the afternoon a few days after New Year Harry Ron and Ginny lined up beside the kitchen fire to return to Hogwarts .The Ministry had arranged this oneoff connection to the Floo Network to return students quickly and safely to the school .Only Mrs Weasley was there to say goodbye as Mr Weasley Fred George Bill and Fleur were all at work .Mrs Weasley dissolved into tears at the moment of parting .Admittedly it took very little to set her off lately she had been crying on and off ever since Percy had stormed from the house on Christmas Day with his glasses splattered with mashed parsnip for which Fred George and Ginny all claimed credit .Dont cry Mum said Ginny patting her on the back as Mrs Weasley sobbed into her shoulder .Its okay .Yeah dont worry about us said Ron permitting his mother to plant a very wet kiss on his cheek or about Percy .Hes such a prat its not really a loss is it ?Mrs Weasley sobbed harder than ever as she enfolded Harry in her arms .Promise me youll look after yourself .Stay out of trouble .I always do Mrs Weasley said Harry .I like a quiet life you know me .She gave a watery chuckle and stood back .Be good then all of you .Harry stepped into the emerald fire and shouted Hogwarts !He had one last fleeting view of the Weasleys kitchen and Mrs Weasleys tearful face before the flames engulfed him spinning very fast he caught blurred glimpses of other Wizarding rooms which were whipped out of sight before he could get a proper look then he was slowing down finally stopping squarely in the fireplace in Professor McGonagalls office .She barely glanced up from her work as he clambered out over the grate .Evening Potter .Try not to get too much ash on the carpet .No Professor .Harry straightened his glasses and flattened his hair as Ron came spinning into view .When Ginny had arrived all three of them trooped out of McGonagalls office and off toward Gryffindor Tower .Harry glanced out of the corridor windows as they passed the sun was already sinking over grounds carpeted in deeper snow than had lain over the Burrow garden .In the distance he could see Hagrid feeding Buckbeak in front of his cabin .Baubles said Ron confidently when they reached the Fat Lady who was looking rather paler than usual and winced at his loud voice .No she said .What dyou mean ‘no ?There is a new password she said .And please dont shout .But weve been away howre we supposed to ?Harry !Ginny !Hermione was hurrying toward them very pinkfaced and wearing a cloak hat and gloves .I got back a couple of hours ago Ive just been down to visit Hagrid and Buck I mean Witherwings she said breathlessly .Did you have a good Christmas ?Yeah said Ron at once pretty eventful Rufus Scrim Ive got something for you Harry said Hermione neither looking at Ron nor giving any sign that she had heard him .Oh hang on password .Abstinence .Precisely said the Fat Lady in a feeble voice and swung forward to reveal the portrait hole .Whats up with her ?asked Harry .Overindulged over Christmas apparently said Hermione rolling her eyes as she led the way into the packed common room .She and her friend Violet drank their way through all the wine in that picture of drunk monks down by the Charms corridor .Anyway She rummaged in her pocket for a moment then pulled out a scroll of parchment with Dumbledores writing on it .Great said Harry unrolling it at once to discover that his next lesson with Dumbledore was scheduled for the following night .Ive got loads to tell him and you .Lets sit down But at that moment there was a loud squeal of Won Won !and Lavender Brown came hurtling out of nowhere and flung herself into Rons arms .Several onlookers sniggered Hermione gave a tinkling laugh and said Theres a table over here .Coming Ginny ?No thanks I said Id meet Dean said Ginny though Harry could not help noticing that she did not sound very enthusiastic .Leaving Ron and Lavender locked in a kind of vertical wrestling match Harry led Hermione over to the spare table .So how was your Christmas ?Oh fine she shrugged .Nothing special .How was it at WonWons ?Ill tell you in a minute said Harry .Look Hermione cant you ?No I cant she said flatly .So dont even ask .I thought maybe you know over Christmas It was the Fat Lady who drank a vat of fivehundred year old wine Harry not me .So what was this important news you wanted to tell me ?She looked too fierce to argue with at that moment so Harry dropped the subject of Ron and recounted all that he had overheard between Malfoy and Snape .When he had finished Hermione sat in thought for a moment and then said Dont you think ?he was pretending to offer help so that he could trick Malfoy into telling him what hes doing ?Well yes said Hermione .Rons dad and Lupin think so Harry said grudgingly .But this definitely proves Malfoys planning something you cant deny that .No I cant she answered slowly .And hes acting on Voldemorts orders just like I said !Hmm .did either of them actually mention Voldemorts name ?Harry frowned trying to remember .Im not sure .Snape definitely said your master and who else would that be ?I dont know said Hermione biting her lip .Maybe his father ?She stared across the room apparently lost in thought not even noticing Lavender tickling Ron .Hows Lupin ?Not great said Harry and he told her all about Lupins mission among the werewolves and the difficulties he was facing .Have you heard of this Fenrir Grey back ?Yes I have !said Hermione sounding startled .And so have you Harry !When History of Magic ?You know full well I never listened .No no not History of Magic Malfoy threatened Borgin with him !said Hermione .Back in Knockturn Alley dont you remember ?He told Borgin that Grey back was an old family friend and that hed be checking up on Borgins progress !Harry gaped at her .I forgot !But this proves Malfoys a Death Eater how else could he be in contact with Greyback and telling him what to do ?It is pretty suspicious breathed Hermione .Unless Oh come on said Harry in exasperation you cant get round this one !Well .there is the possibility it was an empty threat .Youre unbelievable you are said Harry shaking his head .Well see whos right .Youll be eating your words Hermione just like the Ministry .Oh yeah I had a row with Rufus Scrimgeour as well .And the rest of the evening passed amicably with both of them abusing the Minister of Magic for Hermione like Ron thought that after all the Ministry had put Harry through the previous year they had a great deal of nerve asking him for help now .The new term started next morning with a pleasant surprise for the sixth years a large sign had been pinned to the common room notice boards overnight .APPARITION LESSONS If you are seventeen years of age or will turn seventeen on or before the 31st August next you are eligible for a twelveweek course of Apparition Lessons from a Ministry of Magic Apparition instructor .Please sign below if you would like to participate .Cost 12 Galleons .Harry and Ron joined the crowd that was jostling around the notice and taking it in turns to write their names at the bottom .Ron was just taking out his quill to sign after Hermione when Lavender crept up behind him slipped her hands over his eyes and trilled Guess who WonWon ?Harry turned to see Hermione stalking off he caught up with her having no wish to stay behind with Ron and Lavender but to his surprise Ron caught up with them only a little way beyond the portrait hole his ears bright red and his expression disgruntled .Without a word Hermione sped up to walk with Neville .So Apparition said Ron his tone making it perfectly plain that Harry was not to mention what had just happened .Should be a laugh eh ?I dunno said Harry .Maybe its better when you do it yourself I didnt enjoy it much when Dumbledore took me along for the ride .I forgot youd already done it .Id better pass my test first time said Ron looking anxious .Fred and George did .Charlie failed though didnt he ?Yeah but Charlies bigger than me Ron held his arms out from his body as though he was a gorilla so Fred and George didnt go on about it much .not to his face anyway .When can we take the actual test ?Soon as were seventeen .Thats only March for me !Yeah but you wouldnt be able to Apparate in here not in the castle .Not the point is it ?Everyone would know I could Apparate if I wanted .Ron was not the only one to be excited at the prospect of Apparition .All that day there was much talk about the forthcoming lessons a great deal of store was set by being able to vanish and reappear at will .How cool will it be when we can just Seamus clicked his fingers to indicate disappearance .Me cousin Fergus does it just to annoy me you wait till I can do it back .Hell never have another peaceful moment .Lost in visions of this happy prospect he flicked his wand a little too enthusiastically so that instead of producing the fountain of pure water that was the object of todays Charms lesson he let out a hoselike jet that ricocheted off the ceiling and knocked Professor Flitwick flat on his face .Harrys already Apparated Ron told a slightly abashed Seamus after Professor Flitwick had dried himself off with a wave of his wand and set Seamus lines I am a wizard not a baboon brandishing a stick .Dum er someone took him .SideAlong Apparition you know .Whoa !whispered Seamus and he Dean and Neville put their heads a little closer to hear what Apparition felt like .For the rest of the day Harry was besieged with requests from the other sixth years to describe the sensation of Apparition .All of them seemed awed rather than put off when he told them how uncomfortable it was and he was still answering detailed questions at ten to eight that evening when he was forced to lie and say that he needed to return a book to the library so as to escape in time for his lesson with Dumbledore .The lamps in Dumbledore s office were lit the portraits of previous headmasters were snoring gently in their frames and the Pensieve was ready upon the desk once more .Dumbledore s hands lay on either side of it the right one as blackened and burnt looking as ever .It did not seem to have healed at all and Harry wondered for perhaps the hundredth time what had caused such a distinctive injury but did not ask Dumbledore had said that he would know eventually and there was in any case another subject he wanted to discuss .But before Harry could say anything about Snape and Malfoy Dumbledore spoke .I hear that you met the Minister of Magic over Christmas ?Yes said Harry .Hes not very happy with me .No sighed Dumbledore .He is not very happy with me either .We must try not to sink beneath our anguish Harry but battle on .Harry grinned .He wanted me to tell the Wizarding community that the Ministrys doing a wonderful job .Dumbledore smiled .It was Fudges idea originally you know .During his last days in office when he was trying desperately to cling to his post he sought a meeting with you hoping that you would give him your support After everything Fudge did last year ?said Harry angrily .After Umbridge ?I told Cornelius there was no chance of it but the idea did not die when he left office .Within hours of Scrimgeours appointment we met and he demanded that I arrange a meeting with you So thats why you argued !Harry blurted out .It was in the Daily Prophet The Prophet is bound to report the truth occasionally said Dumbledore if only accidentally .Yes that was why we argued .Well it appears that Rufus found a way to corner you at last .He accused me of being ‘Dumbledore s man through and through .How very rude of him .I told him I was .Dumbledore opened his mouth to speak and then closed it again .Behind Harry Fawkes the phoenix let out a low soft musical cry .To Harrys intense embarrassment he suddenly realized that Dumbledore s bright blue eyes looked rather watery and stared hastily at his own knees .When Dumbledore spoke however his voice was quite steady .I am very touched Harry .Scrimgeour wanted to know where you go when youre not at Hogwarts said Harry still looking fixedly at his knees .Yes he is very nosy about that said Dumbledore now sounding cheerful and Harry thought it safe to look up again .He has even attempted to have me followed .Amusing really .He set Dawlish to tail me .It wasnt kind .I have already been forced to jinx Dawlish once I did it again with the greatest regret .So they still dont know where you go ?asked Harry hoping for more information on this intriguing subject but Dumbledore merely smiled over the top of his halfmoon spectacles .No they dont and the time is not quite right for you to know either .Now I suggest we press on unless theres anything else ?There is actually sir said Harry .Its about Malfoy and Snape .Professor Snape Harry .Yes sir .I overheard them during Professor Slughorns party .well I followed them actually .Dumbledore listened to Harrys story with an impassive face .When Harry had finished he did not speak for a few moments then said Thank you for telling me this Harry but I suggest that you put it out of your mind .I do not think that it is of great importance .Not of great importance ?repeated Harry incredulously .Professor did you understand ?Yes Harry blessed as I am with extraordinary brainpower I understood everything you told me said Dumbledore a little sharply .I think you might even consider the possibility that I understood more than you did .Again I am glad that you have confided in me but let me reassure you that you have not told me anything that causes me disquiet .Harry sat in seething silence glaring at Dumbledore .What was going on ?Did this mean that Dumbledore had indeed ordered Snape to find out what Malfoy was doing in which case he had already heard everything Harry had just told him from Snape ?Or was he really worried by what he had heard but pretending not to be ?So sir said Harry in what he hoped was a polite calm voice you definitely still trust ?I have been tolerant enough to answer that question already said Dumbledore but he did not sound very tolerant anymore .My answer has not changed .I should think not said a snide voice Phineas Nigellus was evidently only pretending to be asleep .Dumbledore ignored him .And now Harry I must insist that we press on .I have more important things to discuss with you this evening .Harry sat there feeling mutinous .How would it be if he refused to permit the change of subject if he insisted upon arguing the case against Malfoy ?As though he had read Harrys mind Dumbledore shook his head .Ah Harry how often this happens even between the best of friends !Each of us believes that what he has to say is much more important than anything the other might have to contribute !I dont think what youve got to say is unimportant sir said Harry stiffly .Well you are quite right because it is not said Dumbledore briskly .I have two more memories to show you this evening both obtained with enormous difficulty and the second of them is I think the most important I have collected .Harry did not say anything to this he still felt angry at the reception his confidences had received but could not see what was to be gained by arguing further .So said Dumbledore in a ringing voice we meet this evening to continue the tale of Tom Riddle whom we left last lesson poised on the threshold of his years at Hogwarts .You will remember how excited he was to hear that he was a wizard that he refused my company on a trip to Diagon Alley and that I in turn warned him against continued thievery when he arrived at school .Well the start of the school year arrived and with it came Tom Riddle a quiet boy in his secondhand robes who lined up with the other first years to be sorted .He was placed in Slytherin House almost the moment that the Sorting Hat touched his head continued Dumbledore waving his blackened hand toward the shelf over his head where the Sorting Hat sat ancient and unmoving .How soon Riddle learned that the famous founder of the House could talk to snakes I do not know perhaps that very evening .The knowledge can only have excited him and increased his sense of selfimportance .However if he was frightening or impressing fellow Slytherins with displays of Parseltongue in their common room no hint of it reached the staff .He showed no sign of outward arrogance or aggression at all .As an unusually talented and very goodlooking orphan he naturally drew attention and sympathy from the staff almost from the moment of his arrival .He seemed polite quiet and thirsty for knowledge .Nearly all were most favorably impressed by him .Didnt you tell them sir what hed been like when you met him at the orphanage ?asked Harry .No I did not .Though he had shown no hint of remorse it was possible that he felt sorry for how he had behaved before and was resolved to turn over a fresh leaf .I chose to give him that chance .Dumbledore paused and looked inquiringly at Harry who had opened his mouth to speak .Here again was Dumbledore s tendency to trust people in spite of overwhelming evidence that they did not deserve it !But then Harry remembered something .But you didnt really trust him sir did you ?He told me .the Riddle who came out of that diary said ‘Dumbledore never seemed to like me as much as the other teachers did .Let us say that I did not take it for granted that he was trustworthy said Dumbledore .I had as I have already indicated resolved to keep a close eye upon him and so I did .I cannot pretend that I gleaned a great deal from my observations at first .He was very guarded with me he felt I am sure that in the thrill of discovering his true identity he had told me a little too much .He was careful never to reveal as much again but he could not take back what he had let slip in his excitement nor what Mrs Cole had confided in me .However he had the sense never to try and charm me as he charmed so many of my colleagues .As he moved up the school he gathered about him a group of dedicated friends I call them that for want of a better term although as I have already indicated Riddle undoubtedly felt no affection for any of them .This group had a kind of dark glamour within the castle .They were a motley collection a mixture of the weak seeking protection the ambitious seeking some shared glory and the thuggish gravitating toward a leader who could show them more refined forms of cruelty .In other words they were the forerunners of the Death Eaters and indeed some of them became the first Death Eaters after leaving Hogwarts .Rigidly controlled by Riddle they were never detected in open wrongdoing although their seven years at Hogwarts were marked by a number of nasty incidents to which they were never satisfactorily linked the most serious of which was of course the opening of the Chamber of Secrets which resulted in the death of a girl .As you know Hagrid was wrongly accused of that crime .I have not been able to find many memories of Riddle at Hogwarts said Dumbledore placing his withered hand on the Pensieve .Few who knew him then are prepared to talk about him they are too terrified .What I know I found out after he had left Hogwarts after much painstaking effort after tracing those few who could be tricked into speaking after searching old records and questioning Muggle and wizard witnesses alike .Those whom I could persuade to talk told me that Riddle was obsessed with his parentage .This is understandable of course he had grown up in an orphanage and naturally wished to know how he came to be there .It seems that he searched in vain for some trace of Tom Riddle senior on the shields in the trophy room on the lists of prefects in the old school records even in the books of Wizarding history .Finally he was forced to accept that his father had never set foot in Hogwarts .I believe that it was then that he dropped the name forever assumed the identity of Lord Voldemort and began his investigations into his previously despised mothers family the woman whom you will remember he had thought could not be a witch if she had succumbed to the shameful human weakness of death .All he had to go upon was the single name ‘Marvolo which he knew from those who ran the orphanage had been his mothers fathers name .Finally after painstaking research through old books of Wizarding families he discovered the existence of Slytherins surviving line .In the summer of his sixteenth year he left the orphanage to which he returned annually and set off to find his Gaunt relatives .And now Harry if you will stand .Dumbledore rose and Harry saw that he was again holding a small crystal bottle filled with swirling pearly memory .I was very lucky to collect this he said as he poured the gleaming mass into the Pensieve .As you will understand when we have experienced it .Shall we ?Harry stepped up to the stone basin and bowed obediently until his face sank through the surface of the memory he felt the familiar sensation of falling through nothingness and then landed upon a dirty stone floor in almost total darkness .It took him several seconds to recognize the place by which time Dumbledore had landed beside him .The Gaunts house was now more indescribably filthy than anywhere Harry had ever seen .The ceiling was thick with cobwebs the floor coated in grime moldy and rotting food lay upon the table amidst a mass of crusted pots .The only light came from a single guttering candle placed at the feet of a man with hair and beard so overgrown Harry could see neither eyes nor mouth .He was slumped in an armchair by the fire and Harry wondered for a moment whether he was dead .But then there came a loud knock on the door and the man jerked awake raising a wand in his right hand and a short knife in his left .The door creaked open .There on the threshold holding an oldfashioned lamp stood a boy Harry recognized at once tall pale darkhaired and handsome the teenage Voldemort .Voldemorts eyes moved slowly around the hovel and then found the man in the armchair .For a few seconds they looked at each other then the man staggered upright the many empty bottles at his feet clattering and tinkling across the floor .YOU !he bellowed .YOU !And he hurtled drunkenly at Riddle wand and knife held aloft .Stop .Riddle spoke in Parseltongue .The man skidded into the table sending moldy pots crashing to the floor .He stared at Riddle .There was a long silence while they contemplated each other .The man broke it .You speak it ?Yes I speak it said Riddle .He moved forward into the room allowing the door to swing shut behind him .Harry could not help but feel a resentful admiration for Voldemorts complete lack of fear .His face merely expressed disgust and perhaps disappointment .Where is Marvolo ?he asked .Dead said the other .Died years ago didnt he ?Riddle frowned .Who are you then ?Im Morfin aint 1 ?Marvolo s son ?Course I am then .Morfin pushed the hair out of his dirty face the better to see Riddle and Harry saw that he wore Marvolos blackstoned ring on his right hand .I thought you was that Muggle whispered Morfin .You look mighty like that Muggle .What Muggle ?said Riddle sharply .That Muggle what my sister took a fancy to that Muggle what lives in the big house over the way said Morfin and he spat unexpectedly upon the floor between them .You look right like him .Riddle .But hes older now in e ?Hes oldern you now I think on it .Morfin looked slightly dazed and swayed a little still clutching the edge of the table for support .He come back see he added stupidly .Voldemort was gazing at Morfin as though appraising his possibilities .Now he moved a little closer and said Riddle came back ?Ar he left her and serve her right marrying filth said Morfin spitting on the floor again .Robbed us mind before she ran off !Wheres the locket eh wheres Slytherins locket ?Voldemort did not answer .Morfin was working himself into a rage again he brandished his knife and shouted Dishonored us she did that little slut !And whore you coming here and asking questions about all that ?Its over innit .Its over .He looked away staggering slightly and Voldemort moved forward .As he did so an unnatural darkness fell extinguishing Voldemorts lamp and Morfin s candle extinguishing everything .Dumbledores fingers closed tightly around Harrys arm and they were soaring back into the present again .The soft golden light in Dumbledores office seemed to dazzle Harrys eyes after that impenetrable darkness .Is that all ?said Harry at once .Why did it go dark what happened ?Because Morfin could not remember anything from that point onward said Dumbledore gesturing Harry back into his seat .When he awoke next morning he was lying on the floor quite alone .Marvolos ring had gone .Meanwhile in the village of Little Hangleton a maid was running along the High Street screaming that there were three bodies lying in the drawing room of the big house Tom Riddle Senior and his mother and father .The Muggle authorities were perplexed .As far as I am aware they do not know to this day how the Riddles died for the Avada Kedavra curse does not usually leave any sign of damage .The exception sits before me Dumbledore added with a nod to Harrys scar .The Ministry on the other hand knew at once that this was a wizards murder .They also knew that a convicted Mugglehater lived across the valley from the Riddle house a Mugglehater who had already been imprisoned once for attacking one of the murdered people .So the Ministry called upon Morfin .They did not need to question him to use Veritaserum or Legilimency .He admitted to the murder on the spot giving details only the murderer could know .He was proud he said to have killed the Muggles had been awaiting his chance all these years .He handed over his wand which was proved at once to have been used to kill the Riddles .And he permitted himself to be led off to Azkaban without a fight .All that disturbed him was the fact that his fathers ring had disappeared . ‘Hell kill me for losing it he told his captors over and over again . ‘Hell kill me for losing his ring .And that apparently was all he ever said again .He lived out the remainder of his life in Azkaban lamenting the loss of Marvolos last heirloom and is buried beside the prison alongside the other poor souls who have expired within its walls .So Voldemort stole Morfins wand and used it ?said Harry sitting up straight .Thats right said Dumbledore .We have no memories to show us this but I think we can be fairly sure what happened .Voldemort Stupefied his uncle took his wand and proceeded across the valley to ‘the big house over the way .There he murdered the Muggle man who had abandoned his witch mother and for good measure his Muggle grandparents thus obliterating the last of the unworthy Riddle line and revenging himself upon the father who never wanted him .Then he returned to the Gaunt hovel performed the complex bit of magic that would implant a false memory in his uncles mind laid Morfins wand beside its unconscious owner pocketed the ancient ring he wore and departed .And Morfin never realized he hadnt done it ?Never said Dumbledore .He gave as I say a full and boastful confession .But he had this real memory in him all the time !Yes but it took a great deal of skilled Legilimency to coax it out of him said Dumbledore and why should anybody delve further into Morfins mind when he had already confessed to the crime ?However I was able to secure a visit to Morfin in the last weeks of his life by which time I was attempting to discover as much as I could about Voldemorts past .I extracted this memory with difficulty .When I saw what it contained I attempted to use it to secure Morfins release from Azkaban .Before the Ministry reached their decision however Morfin had died .But how come the Ministry didnt realize that Voldemort had done all that to Morfin ?Harry asked angrily .He was underage at the time wasnt he ?I thought they could detect underage magic !You are quite right they can detect magic but not the perpetrator You will remember that you were blamed by the Ministry for the Hover Charm that was in fact cast by Dobby growled Harry this injustice still rankled .So if youre underage and you do magic inside an adult witch or wizards house the Ministry wont know ?They will certainly be unable to tell who performed the magic said Dumbledore smiling slightly at the look of great indignation on Harrys face .They rely on witch and wizard parents to enforce their offsprings obedience while within their walls .Well thats rubbish snapped Harry .Look what happened here look what happened to Morfin !I agree said Dumbledore .Whatever Morfin was he did not deserve to die as he did blamed for murders he had not committed .But it is getting late and I want you to see this other memory before we part .Dumbledore took from an inside pocket another crystal phial and Harry fell silent at once remembering that Dumbledore had said it was the most important one he had collected .Harry noticed that the contents proved difficult to empty into the Pensieve as though they had congealed slightly did memories go bad ?This will not take long said Dumbledore when he had finally emptied the phial .We shall be back before you know it .Once more into the Pensieve then And Harry fell again through the silver surface landing this time right in front of a man he recognized at once .It was a much younger Horace Slughorn .Harry was so used to him bald that he found the sight of Slughorn with thick shiny strawcolored hair quite disconcerting it looked as though he had had his head thatched though there was already a shiny Galleonsized bald patch on his crown .His mustache less massive than it was these days was gingery blond .He was not quite as rotund as the Slughorn Harry knew though the golden buttons on his richly embroidered waistcoat were taking a fair amount of strain .His little feet resting upon a velvet pouffe he was sitting well back in a comfortable winged armchair one hand grasping a small glass of wine the other searching through a box of crystalized pineapple .Harry looked around as Dumbledore appeared beside him and saw that they were standing in Slughorn s office .Half a dozen boys were sitting around Slughorn all on harder or lower seats than his and all in their midteens .Harry recognized Voldemort at once .His was the most handsome face and he looked the most relaxed of all the boys .His right hand lay negligently upon the arm of his chair with a jolt Harry saw that he was wearing Marvolos goldand black ring he had already killed his father .Sir is it true that Professor Merrythought is retiring ?he asked .Tom Tom if I knew I couldnt tell you said Slughorn wagging a reproving sugarcovered finger at Riddle though ruining the effect slightly by winking .I must say Id like to know where you get your information boy more knowledgeable than half the staff you are .Riddle smiled the other boys laughed and cast him admiring looks .What with your uncanny ability to know things you shouldnt and your careful flattery of the people who matter thank you for the pineapple by the way youre quite right it is my favorite As several of the boys tittered something very odd happened .The whole room was suddenly filled with a thick white fog so that Harry could see nothing but the face of Dumbledore who was standing beside him .Then Slughorn s voice rang out through the mist unnaturally loudly Youll go wrong boy mark my words .The fog cleared as suddenly as it had appeared and yet nobody made any allusion to it nor did anybody look as though anything unusual had just happened .Bewildered Harry looked around as a small golden clock standing upon Slughorns desk chimed eleven oclock .Good gracious is it that time already ?said Slughorn .Youd better get going boys or well all be in trouble .Lestrange I want your essay by tomorrow or its detention .Same goes for you Avery .Slughorn pulled himself out of his armchair and carried his empty glass over to his desk as the boys filed out .Voldemort however stayed behind .Harry could tell he had dawdled deliberately wanting to be last in the room with Slughorn .Look sharp Tom said Slughorn turning around and finding him still present .You dont want to be caught out of bed out of hours and you a prefect .Sir I wanted to ask you something .Ask away then mboy ask away .Sir I wondered what you know about .about Horcruxes ?And it happened all over again The dense fog filled the room so that Harry could not see Slughorn or Voldemort at all only Dumbledore smiling serenely beside him .Then Slughorns voice boomed out again just as it had done before .I dont know anything about Horcruxes and I wouldnt tell you if I did !Now get out of here at once and dont let me catch you mentioning them again Well thats that said Dumbledore placidly beside Harry .Time to go .And Harrys feet left the floor to fall seconds later back onto the mg in front of Dumbledores desk .Thats all there is ?said Harry blankly .Dumbledore had said that this was the most important memory of all but he could not see what was so significant about it .Admittedly the fog and the fact that nobody seemed to have noticed it was odd but other than that nothing seemed to have happened except that Voldemort had asked a question and failed to get an answer .As you might have noticed said Dumbledore reseating himself behind his desk that memory has been tampered with .Tampered with ?repeated Harry sitting back down too .Certainly said Dumbledore .Professor Slughorn has meddled with his own recollections .But why would he do that ?Because I think he is ashamed of what he remembers said Dumbledore .He has tried to rework the memory to show himself in a better light obliterating those parts which he does not wish me to see .It is as you will have noticed very crudely done and that is all to the good for it shows that the true memory is still there beneath the alterations .And so for the first time I am giving you homework Harry .It will be your job to persuade Professor Slughorn to divulge the real memory which will undoubtedly be our most crucial piece of information of all .Harry stared at him .But surely sir he said keeping his voice as respectful as possible you dont need me you could use Legilimency .or Veritaserum .Professor Slughorn is an extremely able wizard who will be expecting both said Dumbledore .He is much more accomplished at Occlumency than poor Morfin Gaunt and I would be astonished if he has not carried an antidote to Veritaserum with him ever since I coerced him into giving me this travesty of a recollection .No I think it would be foolish to attempt to wrest the truth from Professor Slughorn by force and might do much more harm than good I do not wish him to leave Hogwarts .However he has his weaknesses like the rest of us and I believe that you are the one person who might be able to penetrate his defenses .It is most important that we secure the true memory Harry .How important we will only know when we have seen the real thing .So good luck .and good night .A little taken aback by the abrupt dismissal Harry got to his feet quickly .Good night sir .As he closed the study door behind him he distinctly heard Phineas Nigellus say I cant see why the boy should be able to do it better than you Dumbledore .I wouldnt expect you to Phineas replied Dumbledore and Fawkes gave another low musical cry .BIRTHDAY SURPRISES The next day Harry confided in both Ron and Hermione the task that Dumbledore had set him though separately for Hermione still refused to remain in Rons presence longer than it took to give him a contemptuous look .Ron thought that Harry was unlikely to have any trouble with Slughorn at all .He loves you he said over breakfast waving an airy forkful of fried egg .Wont refuse you anything will he ?Not his little Potions Prince .Just hang back after class this afternoon and ask him .Hermione however took a gloomier view .He must be determined to hide what really happened if Dumbledore couldnt get it out of him she said in a low voice as they stood in the deserted snowy courtyard at break .Horcruxes .Horcruxes .Ive never even heard of them .You havent ?Harry was disappointed he had hoped that Hermione might have been able to give him a clue as to what Horcruxes were .They must be really advanced Dark Magic or why would Voldemort have wanted to know about them ?I think its going to be difficult to get the information Harry youll have to be very careful about how you approach Slughorn think out a strategy .Ron reckons I should just hang back after Potions this afternoon .Oh well if WonWon thinks that youd better do it she said flaring up at once .After all when has Won Wons judgment ever been faulty ?Hermione cant you ?iVo !she said angrily and stormed away leaving Harry alone and ankledeep in snow .Potions lessons were uncomfortable enough these days seeing as Harry Ron and Hermione had to share a desk .Today Hermione moved her cauldron around the table so that she was close to Ernie and ignored both Harry and Ron .Whatve you done ?Ron muttered to Harry looking at Hermione s haughty profile .But before Harry could answer Slughorn was calling for silence from the front of the room .Settle down settle down please !Quickly now lots of work to get through this afternoon !Golpalotts Third Law .who can tell me ?But Miss Granger can of course !Hermione recited at top speed GolpalottsThird Lawstatesthattheantidoteforablendedpoison willbeequaltomorethanthesumoftheantidotes foreachoftheseparatecomponents .Precisely !beamed Slughorn .Ten points for Gryffindor !Now if we accept Golpalotts Third Law as true .Harry was going to have to take Slughorn s word for it that Golpalotts Third Law was true because he had not understood any of it .Nobody apart from Hermione seemed to be following what Slughorn said next either . .which means of course that assuming we have achieved correct identification of the potions ingredients by Scarpins Revelaspell our primary aim is not the relatively simple one of selecting antidotes to those ingredients in and of themselves but to find that added component that will by an almost alchemical process transform these disparate elements Ron was sitting beside Harry with his mouth half open doodling absently on his new copy of Advanced PotionMaking .Ron kept forgetting that he could no longer rely on Hermione to help him out of trouble when he failed to grasp what was going on . .and so finished Slughorn I want each of you to come and take one of these phials from my desk .You are to create an antidote for the poison within it before the end of the lesson .Good luck and dont forget your protective gloves !Hermione had left her stool and was halfway toward Slughorn s desk before the rest of the class had realized it was time to move and by the time Harry Ron and Ernie returned to the table she had already tipped the contents of her phial into her cauldron and was kindling a fire underneath it .Its a shame that the Prince wont be able to help you much with this Harry she said brightly as she straightened up .You have to understand the principles involved this time .No shortcuts or cheats !Annoyed Harry uncorked the poison he had taken from Slughorns desk which was a garish shade of pink tipped it into his cauldron and lit a fire underneath it .He did not have the faintest idea what he was supposed to do next .He glanced around at Ron who was now standing there looking rather gormless having copied everything Harry had done .You sure the Prince hasnt got any tips ?Ron muttered to Harry .Harry pulled out his trusty copy of Advanced Potion Making and turned to the chapter on antidotes .There was Golpalotts Third Law stated word for word as Hermione had recited it but not a single illuminating note in the Princes hand to explain what it meant .Apparently the Prince like Hermione had had no difficulty understanding it .Nothing said Harry gloomily .Hermione was now waving her wand enthusiastically over her cauldron .Unfortunately they could not copy the spell she was doing because she was now so good at nonverbal incantations that she did not need to say the words aloud .Ernie Macmillan however was muttering Specialis Reveliol over his cauldron which sounded impressive so Harry and Ron hastened to imitate him .It took Harry only five minutes to realize that his reputation as the best potionmaker in the class was crashing around his ears .Slughorn had peered hopefully into his cauldron on his first circuit of the dungeon preparing to exclaim in delight as he usually did and instead had withdrawn his head hastily coughing as the smell of bad eggs overwhelmed him .Hermiones expression could not have been any smugger she had loathed being outperformed in every Potions class .She was now decanting the mysteriously separated ingredients of her poison into ten different crystal phials .More to avoid watching this irritating sight than anything else Harry bent over the HalfBlood Princes book and turned a few pages with unnecessary force .And there it was scrawled right across a long list of antidotes Just shove a bezoar down their throats .Harry stared at these words for a moment .Hadnt he once long ago heard of bezoars ?Hadnt Snape mentioned them in their firstever Potions lesson ?A stone taken from the stomach of a goat which will protect from most poisons .It was not an answer to the Golpalott problem and had Snape still been their teacher Harry would not have dared do it but this was a moment for desperate measures .He hastened toward the store cupboard and rummaged within it pushing aside unicorn horns and tangles of dried herbs until he found at the very back a small cardboard box on which had been scribbled the word bezoars .He opened the box just as Slughorn called Two minutes left everyone !Inside were half a dozen shriveled brown objects looking more like driedup kidneys than real stones .Harry seized one put the box back in the cupboard and hurried back to his cauldron .Times .UP !called Slughorn genially .Well lets see how youve done !Blaise .what have you got for me ?Slowly Slughorn moved around the room examining the various antidotes .Nobody had finished the task although Hermione was trying to cram a few more ingredients into her bottle before Slughorn reached her .Ron had given up completely and was merely trying to avoid breathing in the putrid fumes issuing from his cauldron .Harry stood there waiting the bezoar clutched in a slightly sweaty hand .Slughorn reached their table last .He sniffed Ernies potion and passed on to Rons with a grimace .He did not linger over Rons cauldron but backed away swiftly retching slightly .And you Harry he said .What have you got to show me ?Harry held out his hand the bezoar sitting on his palm .Slughorn looked down at it for a full ten seconds .Harry wondered for a moment whether he was going to shout at him .Then he threw back his head and roared with laughter .Youve got nerve boy !he boomed taking the bezoar and holding it up so that the class could see it .Oh youre like your mother .Well I cant fault you .A bezoar would certainly act as an antidote to all these potions !Hermione who was sweatyfaced and had soot on her nose looked livid .Her halffinished antidote comprising fiftytwo ingredients including a chunk of her own hair bubbled sluggishly behind Slughorn who had eyes for nobody but Harry .And you thought of a bezoar all by yourself did you Harry ?she asked through gritted teeth .Thats the individual spirit a real potionmaker needs !said Slughorn happily before Harry could reply .Just like his mother she had the same intuitive grasp of potionmaking its undoubtedly from Lily he gets it .Yes Harry yes if youve got a bezoar to hand of course that would do the trick .although as they dont work on everything and are pretty rare its still worth knowing how to mix antidotes .The only person in the room looking angrier than Hermione was Malfoy who Harry was pleased to see had spilled something that looked like catsick over himself .Before either of them could express their fury that Harry had come top of the class by not doing any work however the bell rang .Time to pack up !said Slughorn .And an extra ten points to Gryffindor for sheer cheek !Still chuckling he waddled back to his desk at the front of the dungeon .Harry dawdled behind taking an inordinate amount of time to do up his bag .Neither Ron nor Hermione wished him luck as they left both looked rather annoyed .At last Harry and Slughorn were the only two left in the room .Come on now Harry youll be late for your next lesson said Slughorn affably snapping the gold clasps shut on his dragon skin briefcase .Sir said Harry reminding himself irresistibly of Voldemort I wanted to ask you something .Ask away then my dear boy ask away .Sir I wondered what you know about .about Horcruxes ?Slughorn froze .His round face seemed to sink in upon itself .He licked his lips and said hoarsely What did you say ?I asked whether you know anything about Horcruxes sir .You see Dumbledore put you up to this whispered Slughorn .His voice had changed completely .It was not genial anymore but shocked terrified .He fumbled in his breast pocket and pulled out a handkerchief mopping his sweating brow .Dumbledores shown you that that memory .Well ?Hasnt he ?Yes said Harry deciding on the spot that it was best not to lie .Yes of course said Slughorn quietly still dabbing at his white face .Of course .well if youve seen that memory Harry youll know that I dont know anything anything he repeated the word forcefully about Horcruxes .He seized his dragonskin briefcase stuffed his handkerchief back into his pocket and marched to the dungeon door .Sir said Harry desperately I just thought there might be a bit more to the memory Did you ?said Slughorn .Then you were wrong werent you ?WRONG !He bellowed the last word and before Harry could say another word slammed the dungeon door behind him .Neither Ron nor Hermione was at all sympathetic when Harry told them of this disastrous interview .Hermione was still seething at the way Harry had triumphed without doing the work properly .Ron was resentful that Harry hadnt slipped him a bezoar too .It wouldve just looked stupid if wed both done it !said Harry irritably .Look I had to try and soften him up so I could ask him about Voldemort didnt I ?Oh will you get a grip he added in exasperation as Ron winced at the sound of the name .Infuriated by his failure and by Rons and Hermiones attitudes Harry brooded for the next few days over what to do next about Slughorn .He decided that for the time being he would let Slughorn think that he had forgotten all about Horcruxes it was surely best to lull him into a false sense of security before returning to the attack .When Harry did not question Slughorn again the Potions master reverted to his usual affectionate treatment of him and appeared to have put the matter from his mind .Harry awaited an invitation to one of his little evening parties determined to accept this time even if he had to reschedule Quidditch practice .Unfortunately however no such invitation arrived .Harry checked with Hermione and Ginny Neither of them had received an invitation and nor as far as they knew had anybody else .Harry could not help wondering whether this meant that Slughorn was not quite as forgetful as he appeared simply determined to give Harry no additional opportunities to question him .Meanwhile the Hogwarts library had failed Hermione for the first time in living memory .She was so shocked she even forgot that she was annoyed at Harry for his trick with the bezoar .I havent found one single explanation of what Horcruxes do !she told him .Not a single one !Ive been right through the restricted section and even in the most horrible books where they tell you how to brew the most gruesome potions nothing !All I could find was this in the introduction to Magick Moste Evile listen ‘Of the Horcrux wickedest of magical inventions we shall not speak nor give direction .I mean why mention it then ?she said impatiently slamming the old book shut it let out a ghostly wail .Oh shut up she snapped stuffing it back into her bag .The snow melted around the school as February arrived to be replaced by cold dreary wetness .Purplishgray clouds hung low over the castle and a constant fall of chilly rain made the lawns slippery and muddy .The upshot of this was that the sixth years first Apparition lesson which was scheduled for a Saturday morning so that no normal lessons would be missed took place in the Great Hall instead of in the grounds .When Harry and Hermione arrived in the Hall Ron had come down with Lavender they found that the tables had disappeared .Rain lashed against the high windows and the enchanted ceiling swirled darkly above them as they assembled in front of Professors McGonagall Snape Flitwick and Sprout the Heads of Houses and a small wizard whom Harry took to be the Apparition instructor from the Ministry .He was oddly colorless with transparent eyelashes wispy hair and an insubstantial air as though a single gust of wind might blow him away .Harry wondered whether constant disappearances and reappearances had somehow diminished his substance or whether this frail build was ideal for anyone wishing to vanish .Good morning said the Ministry wizard when all the students had arrived and the Heads of Houses had called for quiet .My name is Wilkie Twycross and I shall be your Ministry Apparition instructor for the next twelve weeks .I hope to be able to prepare you for your Apparition Tests in this time Malfoy be quiet and pay attention !barked Professor McGonagall .Everybody looked around .Malfoy had flushed a dull pink he looked furious as he stepped away from Crabbe with whom he appeared to have been having a whispered argument .Harry glanced quickly at Snape who also looked annoyed though Harry strongly suspected that this was less because of Malfoys rudeness than the fact that McGonagall had reprimanded one of his House .by which time many of you may be ready to take your tests Twycross continued as though there had been no interruption .As you may know it is usually impossible to Apparate or Disapparate within Hogwarts .The headmaster has lifted this enchantment purely within the Great Hall for one hour so as to enable you to practice .May I emphasize that you will not be able to Apparate outside the walls of this Hall and that you would be unwise to try .I would like each of you to place yourselves now so that you have a clear five feet of space in front of you .There was a great scrambling and jostling as people separated banged into each other and ordered others out of their space .The Heads of Houses moved among the students marshaling them into position and breaking up arguments .Harry where are you going ?demanded Hermione .But Harry did not answer he was moving quickly through the crowd past the place where Professor Flitwick was making squeaky attempts to position a few Ravenclaws all of whom wanted to be near the front past Professor Sprout who was chivying the Hufflepuffs into line until by dodging around Ernie Macmillan he managed to position himself right at the back of the crowd directly behind Malfoy who was taking advantage of the general upheaval to continue his argument with Crabbe standing five feet away and looking mutinous .I dont know how much longer all right ?Malfoy shot at him oblivious to Harry standing right behind him .Its taking longer than I thought it would .Crabbe opened his mouth but Malfoy appeared to secondguess what he was going to say .Look its none of your business what Im doing Crabbe you and Goyle just do as youre told and keep a lookout !I tell my friends what Im up to if I want them to keep a lookout for me Harry said just loud enough for Malfoy to hear him .Malfoy spun around on the spot his hand flying to his wand but at that precise moment the four Heads of House shouted Quiet !and silence fell again .Malfoy turned slowly to face the front again .Thank you said Twycross .Now then .He waved his wand .Oldfashioned wooden hoops instantly appeared on the floor in front of every student .The important things to remember when Apparating are the three Ds !said Twycross .Destination Determination Deliberation !Step one Fix your mind firmly upon the desired destination said Twycross .In this case the interior of your hoop .Kindly concentrate upon that destination now .Everybody looked around furtively to check that everyone else was staring into their hoop then hastily did as they were told .Harry gazed at the circular patch of dusty floor enclosed by his hoop and tried hard to think of nothing else .This proved impossible as he couldnt stop puzzling over what Malfoy was doing that needed lookouts .Step two said Twycross focus your determination to occupy the visualized space !Let your yearning to enter it flood from your mind to every particle of your body !Harry glanced around surreptitiously .A little way to his left Ernie Macmillan was contemplating his hoop so hard that his face had turned pink it looked as though he was straining to lay a Quafflesized egg .Harry bit back a laugh and hastily returned his gaze to his own hoop .Step three called Twycross and only when I give the command .Turn on the spot feeling your way into nothingness moving with deliberation !On my command now .one Harry glanced around again lots of people were looking positively alarmed at being asked to Apparate so quickly .two Harry tried to fix his thoughts on his hoop again he had already forgotten what the three Ds stood for .THREE !Harry spun on the spot lost balance and nearly fell over .He was not the only one .The whole Hall was suddenly full of staggering people Neville was flat on his back Ernie Macmillan on the other hand had done a kind of pirouetting leap into his hoop and looked momentarily thrilled until he caught sight of Dean Thomas roaring with laughter at him .Never mind never mind said Twycross dryly who did not seem to have expected anything better .Adjust your hoops please and back to your original positions .The second attempt was no better than the first .The third was just as bad .Not until the fourth did anything exciting happen .There was a horrible screech of pain and everybody looked around terrified to see Susan Bones of Hufflepuff wobbling in her hoop with her left leg still standing five feet away where she had started .The Heads of House converged on her there was a great bang and a puff of purple smoke which cleared to reveal Susan sobbing reunited with her leg but looking horrified .Splinching or the separation of random body parts said Wilkie Twycross dispassionately occurs when the mind is insufficiently determined .You must concentrate continuously upon your destination and move without haste but with deliberation .thus .Twycross stepped forward turned gracefully on the spot with his arms outstretched and vanished in a swirl of robes reappearing at the back of the Hall .Remember the three Ds he said and try again .one two three But an hour later Susans Splinching was still the most interesting thing that had happened .Twycross did not seem discouraged .Fastening his cloak at his neck he merely said Until next Saturday everybody and do not forget Destination .Determination .Deliberation .With that he waved his wand Vanishing the hoops and walked out of the Hall accompanied by Professor McGonagall .Talk broke out at once as people began moving toward the entrance hall .How did you do ?asked Ron hurrying toward Harry .I think I felt something the last time I tried a kind of tingling in my feet .I expect your trainers are too small WonWon said a voice behind them and Hermione stalked past smirking .I didnt feel anything said Harry ignoring this interruption .But I dont care about that now What dyou mean you dont care ?Dont you want to learn to Apparate ?said Ron incredulously .Im not fussed really I prefer flying said Harry glancing over his shoulder to see where Malfoy was and speeding up as they came into the entrance hall .Look hurry up will you theres something I want to do .Perplexed Ron followed Harry back to the Gryffindor Tower at a run .They were temporarily detained by Peeves who had jammed a door on the fourth floor shut and was refusing to let anyone pass until they set fire to their own pants but Harry and Ron simply turned back and took one of their trusted shortcuts .Within five minutes they were climbing through the portrait hole .Are you going to tell me what were doing then ?asked Ron panting slightly .Up here said Harry and he crossed the common room and led the way through the door to the boys staircase .Their dormitory was as Harry had hoped empty .He flung open his trunk and began to rummage in it while Ron watched impatiently .Harry .Malfoy s using Crabbe and Goyle as lookouts .He was arguing with Crabbe just now .I want to know aha .He had found it a folded square of apparently blank parchment which he now smoothed out and tapped with the tip of his wand .I solemnly swear that I am up to no good .or Malfoy is anyway .At once the Marauders Map appeared on the parchments surface .Here was a detailed plan of every one of the castles floors and moving around it the tiny labeled black dots that signified each of the castles occupants .Help me find Malfoy said Harry urgently .He laid the map upon his bed and he and Ron leaned over it searching .There !said Ron after a minute or so .Hes in the Slytherin common room look .with Parkinson and Zabini and Crabbe and Goyle .Harry looked down at the map disappointed but rallied almost at once .Well Im keeping an eye on him from now on he said firmly .And the moment I see him lurking somewhere with Crabbe and Goyle keeping watch outside itll be on with the old Invisibility Cloak and off to find out what hes He broke off as Neville entered the dormitory bringing with him a strong smell of singed material and began rummaging in his trunk for a fresh pair of pants .Despite his determination to catch Malfoy out Harry had no luck at all over the next couple of weeks .Although he consulted the map as often as he could sometimes making unnecessary visits to the bathroom between lessons to search it he did not once see Malfoy anywhere suspicious .Admittedly he spotted Crabbe and Goyle moving around the castle on their own more often than usual sometimes remaining stationary in deserted corridors but at these times Malfoy was not only nowhere near them but impossible to locate on the map at all .This was most mysterious .Harry toyed with the possibility that Malfoy was actually leaving the school grounds but could not see how he could be doing it given the very high level of security now operating within the castle .He could only suppose that he was missing Malfoy amongst the hundreds of tiny black dots upon the map .As for the fact that Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle appeared to be going their different ways when they were usually inseparable these things happened as people got older Ron and Hermione Harry reflected sadly were living proof .February moved toward March with no change in the weather except that it became windy as well as wet .To general indignation a sign went up on all common room notice boards that the next trip into Hogsmeade had been canceled .Ron was furious .It was on my birthday !he said .I was looking forward to that !Not a big surprise though is it ?said Harry .Not after what happened to Katie .She had still not returned from St .Mungos .What was more further disappearances had been reported in the Daily Prophet including several relatives of students at Hogwarts .But now all Ive got to look forward to is stupid Apparition !said Ron grumpily .Big birthday treat .Three lessons on Apparition was proving as difficult as ever though a few more people had managed to Splinch themselves .Frustration was running high and there was a certain amount of illfeeling toward Wilkie Twycross and his three Ds which had inspired a number of nicknames for him the politest of which were Dogbreath and Dunghead .Happy birthday Ron said Harry when they were woken on the first of March by Seamus and Dean leaving noisily for breakfast .Have a present .He threw the package across onto Rons bed where it joined a small pile of them that must Harry assumed have been delivered by houseelves in the night .Cheers said Ron drowsily and as he ripped off the paper Harry got out of bed opened his own trunk and began rummaging in it for the Marauders Map which he hid after every use .He turfed out half the contents of his trunk before he found it hiding beneath the rolledup socks in which he was still keeping his bottle of lucky potion Felix Felicis .Right he murmured taking it back to bed with him tapping it quietly and murmuring I solemnly swear that I am up to no good so that Neville who was passing the foot of his bed at the time would not hear .Nice one Harry !said Ron enthusiastically waving the new pair of Quidditch Keepers gloves Harry had given him .No problem said Harry absentmindedly as he searched the Slytherin dormitory closely for Malfoy .Hey .I dont think hes in his bed .Ron did not answer he was too busy unwrapping presents every now and then letting out an exclamation of pleasure .Seriously good haul this year !he announced holding up a heavy gold watch with odd symbols around the edge and tiny moving stars instead of hands .See what Mum and Dad got me ?Blimey I think Ill come of age next year too .Cool muttered Harry sparing the watch a glance before peering more closely at the map .Where was Malfoy ?He did not seem to be at the Slytherin table in the Great Hall eating breakfast .He was nowhere near Snape who was sitting in his study .He wasnt in any of the bathrooms or in the hospital wing .Want one ?said Ron thickly holding out a box of Chocolate Cauldrons .No thanks said Harry looking up .Malfoys gone again !Cant have done said Ron stuffing a second Cauldron into his mouth as he slid out of bed to get dressed .Come on if you dont hurry up youll have to Apparate on an empty stomach .Might make it easier I suppose .Ron looked thoughtfully at the box of Chocolate Cauldrons then shrugged and helped himself to a third .Harry tapped the map with his wand muttered Mischief managed though it hadnt been and got dressed thinking hard .There had to be an explanation for Malfoys periodic disappearances but he simply could not think what it could be .The best way of finding out would be to tail him but even with the Invisibility Cloak this was an impractical idea Harry had lessons Quidditch practice homework and Apparition he could not follow Malfoy around school all day without his absence being remarked upon .Ready ?he said to Ron .He was halfway to the dormitory door when he realized that Ron had not moved but was leaning on his bedpost staring out of the rainwashed window with a strangely unfocused look on his face .Ron ?Breakfast .Im not hungry .Harry stared at him .I thought you just said ?Well all right Ill come down with you sighed Ron but I dont want to eat .Harry scrutinized him suspiciously .Youve just eaten half a box of Chocolate Cauldrons havent you ?Its not that Ron sighed again .You .you wouldnt understand .Fair enough said Harry albeit puzzled as he turned to open the door .Harry !said Ron suddenly .What ?Harry I cant stand it !You cant stand what ?asked Harry now starting to feel definitely alarmed .Ron was rather pale and looked as though he was about to be sick .I cant stop thinking about her !said Ron hoarsely .Harry gaped at him .He had not expected this and was not sure he wanted to hear it .Friends they might be but if Ron started calling Lavender LavLav he would have to put his foot down .Why does that stop you having breakfast ?Harry asked trying to inject a note of common sense into the proceedings .I dont think she knows I exist said Ron with a desperate gesture .She definitely knows you exist said Harry bewildered .She keeps snogging you doesnt she ?Ron blinked .Who are you talking about ?Who are you talking about ?said Harry with an increasing sense that all reason had dropped out of the conversation .Romilda Vane said Ron softly and his whole face seemed to illuminate as he said it as though hit by a ray of purest sunlight .They stared at each other for almost a whole minute before Harry said This is a joke right ?Youre joking .I think .Harry I think I love her said Ron in a strangled voice .Okay said Harry walking up to Ron to get a better look at the glazed eyes and the pallid complexion okay .Say that again with a straight face .I love her repeated Ron breathlessly .Have you seen her hair its all black and shiny and silky .and her eyes ?Her big dark eyes ?And her This is really funny and everything said Harry impatiently but jokes over all right ?Drop it .He turned to leave he had got two steps toward the door when a crashing blow hit him on the right ear .Staggering he looked around .Rons fist was drawn right back his face was contorted with rage he was about to strike again .Harry reacted instinctively his wand was out of his pocket and the incantation sprang to mind without conscious thought Levicorpus Ron yelled as his heel was wrenched upward once more he dangled helplessly upside down his robes hanging off him .What was that for ?Harry bellowed .You insulted her Harry !You said it was a joke !shouted Ron who was slowly turning purple in the face as all the blood rushed to his head .This is insane !said Harry .Whats got into ?And then he saw the box lying open on Rons bed and the truth hit him with the force of a stampeding troll .Where did you get those Chocolate Cauldrons ?They were a birthday present !shouted Ron revolving slowly in midair as he struggled to get free .I offered you one didnt I ?You just picked them up off the floor didnt you ?Theyd fallen off my bed all right ?Let me go !They didnt fall off your bed you prat dont you understand ?They were mine I chucked them out of my trunk when I was looking for the map theyre the Chocolate Cauldrons Romilda gave me before Christmas and theyre all spiked with love potion !But only one word of this seemed to have registered with Ron .Romilda ?he repeated .Did you say Romilda ?Harry do you know her ?Can you introduce me ?Harry stared at the dangling Ron whose face now looked tremendously hopeful and fought a strong desire to laugh .A part of him the part closest to his throbbing right ear was quite keen on the idea of letting Ron down and watching him run amok until the effects of the potion wore off .But on the other hand they were supposed to be friends Ron had not been himself when he had attacked and Harry thought that he would deserve another punching if he permitted Ron to declare undying love for Romilda Vane .Yeah Ill introduce you said Harry thinking fast .Im going to let you down now okay ?He sent Ron crashing back to the floor his ear did hurt quite a lot but Ron simply bounded to his feet again grinning .Shell be in Slughorns office said Harry confidently leading the way to the door .Why will she be in there ?asked Ron anxiously hurrying to keep up .Oh she has extra Potions lessons with him said Harry inventing wildly .Maybe I could ask if I can have them with her ?said Ron eagerly .Great idea said Harry .Lavender was waiting beside the portrait hole a complication Harry had not foreseen .Youre late WonWon !she pouted .Ive got you a birthday Leave me alone said Ron impatiently .Harrys going to introduce me to Romilda Vane .And without another word to her he pushed his way out of the portrait hole .Harry tried to make an apologetic face to Lavender but it might have turned out simply amused because she looked more offended than ever as the Fat Lady swung shut behind them .Harry had been slightly worried that Slughorn might be at breakfast but he answered his office door at the first knock wearing a green velvet dressing gown and matching nightcap and looking rather blearyeyed .Harry he mumbled .This is very early for a call .I generally sleep late on a Saturday .Professor Im really sorry to disturb you said Harry as quietly as possible while Ron stood on tiptoe attempting to see past Slughorn into his room but my friend Rons swallowed a love potion by mistake .You couldnt make him an antidote could you ?Id take him to Madam Pomfrey but were not supposed to have anything from Weasleys Wizard Wheezes and you know .awkward questions .Id have thought you could have whipped him up a remedy Harry an expert potioneer like you ?asked Slughorn .Er said Harry somewhat distracted by the fact that Ron was now elbowing him in the ribs in an attempt to force his way into the room well Ive never mixed an antidote for a love potion sir and by the time I get it right Ron mightve done something serious Helpfully Ron chose this moment to moan I cant see her Harry is he hiding her ?Was this potion within date ?asked Slughorn now eyeing Ron with professional interest .They can strengthen you know the longer theyre kept .That would explain a lot panted Harry now positively wrestling with Ron to keep him from knocking Slughorn over .Its his birthday Professor he added imploringly .Oh all right come in then come in said Slughorn relenting .Ive got the necessary here in my bag its not a difficult antidote .Ron burst through the door into Slughorn s overheated crowded study tripped over a tasseled footstool regained his balance by seizing Harry around the neck and muttered She didnt see that did she ?Shes not here yet said Harry watching Slughorn opening his potion kit and adding a few pinches of this and that to a small crystal bottle .Thats good said Ron fervently .How do I look ?Very handsome said Slughorn smoothly handing Ron a glass of clear liquid .Now drink that up its a tonic for the nerves keep you calm when she arrives you know .Brilliant said Ron eagerly and he gulped the antidote down noisily .Harry and Slughorn watched him .For a moment Ron beamed at them .Then very slowly his grin sagged and vanished to be replaced by an expression of utmost horror .Back to normal then ?said Harry grinning .Slughorn chuckled .Thanks a lot Professor .Dont mention it mboy dont mention it said Slughorn as Ron collapsed into a nearby armchair looking devastated .Pickmeup thats what he needs Slughorn continued now bustling over to a table loaded with drinks .Ive got butterbeer Ive got wine Ive got one last bottle of this oakmatured mead .hmm .meant to give that to Dumbledore for Christmas .ah well .He shrugged .He cant miss what hes never had !Why dont we open it now and celebrate Mr Weasleys birthday ?Nothing like a fine spirit to chase away the pangs of disappointed love .He chortled again and Harry joined in .This was the first time he had found himself almost alone with Slughorn since his disastrous first attempt to extract the true memory from him .Perhaps if he could just keep Slughorn in a good mood .perhaps if they got through enough of the oakmatured mead .There you are then said Slughorn handing Harry and Ron a glass of mead each before raising his own .Well a very happy birthday Ralph Ron whispered Harry .But Ron who did not appear to be listening to the toast had already thrown the mead into his mouth and swallowed it .There was one second hardly more than a heartbeat in which Harry knew there was something terribly wrong and Slughorn it seemed did not .and may you have many more Ron Ron had dropped his glass he halfrose from his chair and then crumpled his extremities jerking uncontrollably .Foam was dribbling from his mouth and his eyes were bulging from their sockets .Professor !Harry bellowed .Do something !But Slughorn seemed paralyzed by shock .Ron twitched and choked His skin was turning blue .What but spluttered Slughorn .Harry leapt over a low table and sprinted toward Slughorn s open potion kit pulling out jars and pouches while the terrible sound of Rons gargling breath filled the room .Then he found it the shriveled kidneylike stone Slughorn had taken from him in Potions .He hurtled back to Rons side wrenched open his jaw and thrust the bezoar into his mouth .Ron gave a great shudder a rattling gasp and his body became limp and still .ELF TAILS So all in all not one of Rons better birthdays ?said Fred .It was evening the hospital wing was quiet the windows curtained the lamps lit .Rons was the only occupied bed .Harry Hermione and Ginny were sitting around him they had spent all day waiting outside the double doors trying to see inside whenever somebody went in or out .Madam Pomfrey had only let them enter at eight oclock .Fred and George had arrived at ten past .This isnt how we imagined handing over our present said George grimly putting down a large wrapped gift on Rons bedside cabinet and sitting beside Ginny .Yeah when we pictured the scene he was conscious said Fred .There we were in Hogsmeade waiting to surprise him said George .You were in Hogsmeade ?asked Ginny looking up .We were thinking of buying Zonkos said Fred gloomily .A Hogsmeade branch you know but a fat lot of good itll do us if you lot arent allowed out at weekends to buy our stuff anymore .But never mind that now .He drew up a chair beside Harry and looked at Rons pale face .How exactly did it happen Harry ?Harry retold the story he had already recounted it felt like a hundred times to Dumbledore to McGonagall to Madam Pomfrey to Hermione and to Ginny . .and then I got the bezoar down his throat and his breathing eased up a bit Slughorn ran for help McGonagall and Madam Pomfrey turned up and they brought Ron up here .They reckon hell be all right .Madam Pomfrey says hell have to stay here a week or so .keep taking essence of rue .Blimey it was lucky you thought of a bezoar said George in a low voice .Lucky there was one in the room said Harry who kept turning cold at the thought of what would have happened if he had not been able to lay hands on the little stone .Hermione gave an almost inaudible sniff .She had been exceptionally quiet all day .Having hurtled whitefaced up to Harry outside the hospital wing and demanded to know what had happened she had taken almost no part in Harry and Ginnys obsessive discussion about how Ron had been poisoned but merely stood beside them clenchjawed and frightenedlooking until at last they had been allowed in to see him .Do Mum and Dad know ?Fred asked Ginny .Theyve already seen him they arrived an hour ago theyre in Dumbledores office now but theyll be back soon .There was a pause while they all watched Ron mumble a little in his sleep .So the poison was in the drink ?said Fred quietly .Yes said Harry at once he could think of nothing else and was glad for the opportunity to start discussing it again .Slughorn poured it out Would he have been able to slip something into Rons glass without you seeing ?Probably said Harry but why would Slughorn want to poison Ron ?No idea said Fred frowning .You dont think he could have mixed up the glasses by mistake ?Meaning to get you ?Why would Slughorn want to poison Harry ?asked Ginny .I dunno said Fred but there must be loads of people whod like to poison Harry mustnt there ?The Chosen One and all that ?So you think Slughorn s a Death Eater ?said Ginny .Anythings possible said Fred darkly .He could be under the Imperius Curse said George .Or he could be innocent said Ginny .The poison could have been in the bottle in which case it was probably meant for Slughorn himself .Whod want to kill Slughorn ?Dumbledore reckons Voldemort wanted Slughorn on his side said Harry .Slughorn was in hiding for a year before he came to Hogwarts .And .He thought of the memory Dumbledore had not yet been able to extract from Slughorn .And maybe Voldemort wants him out of the way maybe he thinks he could be valuable to Dumbledore .But you said Slughorn had been planning to give that bottle to Dumbledore for Christmas Ginny reminded him .So the poisoner could just as easily have been after Dumbledore .Then the poisoner didnt know Slughorn very well said Hermione speaking for the first time in hours and sounding as though she had a bad head cold .Anyone who knew Slughorn would have known there was a good chance hed keep something that tasty for himself .Ermynee croaked Ron unexpectedly from between them .They all fell silent watching him anxiously but after muttering incomprehensibly for a moment he merely started snoring .The dormitory doors flew open making them all jump Hagrid came striding toward them his hair rainflecked his bearskin coat flapping behind him a crossbow in his hand leaving a trail of muddy dolphinsized footprints all over the floor .Bin in the forest all day !he panted .Aragogs worse I bin readin to him didn get up ter dinner till jus now an then Professor Sprout told me abou Ron !How is he ?Not bad said Harry .They say hell be okay .No more than six visitors at a time !said Madam Pomfrey hurrying out of her office .Hagrid makes six George pointed out .Oh .yes .said Madam Pomfrey who seemed to have been counting Hagrid as several people due to his vastness .To cover her confusion she hurried off to clear up his muddy footprints with her wand .I don believe this said Hagrid hoarsely shaking his great shaggy head as he stared down at Ron .Jus don believe it .Look at him lyin there .Whod want ter hurt him eh ?Thats just what we were discussing said Harry .We dont know .Someone couldn have a grudge against the Gryffindor Quidditch team could they ?said Hagrid anxiously .Firs Katie now Ron .I cant see anyone trying to bump off a Quidditch team said George .Wood mightve done the Slytherins if he couldve got away with it said Fred fairly .Well I dont think its Quidditch but I think theres a connection between the attacks said Hermione quietly .How dyou work that out ?asked Fred .Well for one thing they both ought to have been fatal and werent although that was pure luck .And for another neither the poison nor the necklace seems to have reached the person who was supposed to be killed .Of course she added broodingly that makes the person behind this even more dangerous in a way because they dont seem to care how many people they finish off before they actually reach their victim .Before anybody could respond to this ominous pronouncement the dormitory doors opened again and Mr and Mrs Weasley hurried up the ward .They had done no more than satisfy themselves that Ron would make a full recovery on their last visit to the ward now Mrs Weasley seized hold of Harry and hugged him very tightly .Dumbledores told us how you saved him with the bezoar she sobbed .Oh Harry what can we say ?You saved Ginny .you saved Arthur .now youve saved Ron .Dont be .I didnt .muttered Harry awkwardly .Half our family does seem to owe you their lives now I stop and think about it Mr Weasley said in a constricted voice .Well all I can say is that it was a lucky day for the Weasleys when Ron decided to sit in your compartment on the Hogwarts Express Harry .Harry could not think of any reply to this and was almost glad when Madam Pomfrey reminded them that there were only supposed to be six visitors around Rons bed he and Hermione rose at once to leave and Hagrid decided to go with them leaving Ron with his family .Its terrible growled Hagrid into his beard as the three of them walked back along the corridor to the marble staircase .All this new security an kids are still gettin hurt .Dumbledores worried sick .He don say much but I can tell .Hasnt he got any ideas Hagrid ?asked Hermione desperately .I spect hes got hundreds of ideas brain like his said Hagrid .But he doesn know who sent that necklace nor put poison in that wine or theyd ve bin caught wouldn they ?Wha worries me said Hagrid lowering his voice and glancing over his shoulder Harry for good measure checked the ceiling for Peeves is how long Hogwarts can stay open if kids are bein attacked .Chamber o Secrets all over again isn it ?Therell be panic more parents takin their kids outta school an nex thing yeh know the board o governors .Hagrid stopped talking as the ghost of a longhaired woman drifted serenely past then resumed in a hoarse whisper .the board o governorsll be talkin about shuttin us up fer good .Surely not ?said Hermione looking worried .Gotta see it from their point o view said Hagrid heavily .I mean its always bin a bit of a risk sendin a kid ter Hogwarts hasn it ?Yer expect accidents don yeh with hundreds of underage wizards all locked up tergether but attempted murder thas diffrent .Sno wonder Dumbledores angry with Sn Hagrid stopped in his tracks a familiar guilty expression on what was visible of his face above his tangled black beard .What ?said Harry quickly .Dumbledores angry with Snape ?I never said tha said Hagrid though his look of panic could not have been a bigger giveaway .Look at the time its gettin on fer midnight I need ter Hagrid why is Dumbledore angry with Snape ?Harry asked loudly .Shhhh !said Hagrid looking both nervous and angry .Don shout stuff like that Harry dyeh wan me ter lose me job ?Mind I don suppose yehd care would yeh not now yehve given up Care of Mag Dont try and make me feel guilty it wont work !said Harry forcefully .Whats Snape done ?I dunno Harry I shouldnta heard it at all !I well I was cornin outta the forest the other evenin an I overheard em talking well arguin .Didnt like ter draw attention to meself so I sorta skulked an tried not ter listen but it was a well a heated discussion an it wasn easy ter block it out .Well ?Harry urged him as Hagrid shuffled his enormous feet uneasily .Well I jus heard Snape sayin Dumbledore took too much fer granted an maybe he Snape didn wan ter do it anymore Do what ?I dunno Harry it sounded like Snape was feelin a bit overworked thas all anyway Dumbledore told him flat out hed agreed ter do it an that was all there was to it .Pretty firm with him .An then he said summat abou Snape makin investigations in his House in Slytherin .Well theres nothin strange abou that !Hagrid added hastily as Harry and Hermione exchanged looks full of meaning .All the Heads o Houses were asked ter look inter that necklace business Yeah but Dumbledore s not having rows with the rest of them is he ?said Harry .Look Hagrid twisted his crossbow uncomfortably in his hands there was a loud splintering sound and it snapped in two .I know what yehre like abou Snape Harry an I don want yeh ter go readin more inter this than there is .Look out said Hermione tersely .They turned just in time to see the shadow of Argus Filch looming over the wall behind them before the man himself turned the corner hunchbacked his jowls aquiver .Oho !he wheezed .Out of bed so late thisll mean detention !No it won Filch said Hagrid shortly .Theyre with me aren they ?And what difference does that make ?asked Filch obnoxiously .Im a ruddy teacher aren I yeh sneakin Squib !said Hagrid firing up at once .There was a nasty hissing noise as Filch swelled with fury Mrs Norris had arrived unseen and was twisting herself sinuously around Filchs skinny ankles .Get goin said Hagrid out of the corner of his mouth .Harry did not need telling twice he and Hermione both hurried off Hagrids and Filchs raised voices echoed behind them as they ran .They passed Peeves near the turning into Gryffindor Tower but he was streaking happily toward the source of the yelling cackling and calling When theres strife and when theres trouble Call on Peevsie hell make double !The Fat Lady was snoozing and not pleased to be woken but swung forward grumpily to allow them to clamber into the mercifully peaceful and empty common room .It did not seem that people knew about Ron yet Harry was very relieved He had been interrogated enough that day .Hermione bade him good night and set off for the girls dormitory .Harry however remained behind taking a seat beside the fire and looking down into the dying embers .So Dumbledore had argued with Snape .In spite of all he had told Harry in spite of his insistence that he trusted Snape completely he had lost his temper with him .He did not think that Snape had tried hard enough to investigate the Slytherins .or perhaps to investigate a single Slytherin Malfoy ?Was it because Dumbledore did not want Harry to do anything foolish to take matters into his own hands that he had pretended there was nothing in Harrys suspicions ?That seemed likely .It might even be that Dumbledore did not want anything to distract Harry from their lessons or from procuring that memory from Slughorn .Perhaps Dumbledore did not think it right to confide suspicions about his staff to sixteen yearolds .There you are Potter !Harry jumped to his feet in shock his wand at the ready .He had been quite convinced that the common room was empty he had not been at all prepared for a hulking figure to rise suddenly out of a distant chair .A closer look showed him that it was Cormac McLaggen .Ive been waiting for you to come back said McLaggen disregarding Harrys drawn wand .Mustve fallen asleep .Look I saw them taking Weasley up to the hospital wing earlier .Didnt look like hell be fit for next weeks match .It took Harry a few moments to realize what McLaggen was talking about .Oh .right .Quidditch he said putting his wand back into the belt of his jeans and running a hand wearily through his hair .Yeah .he might not make it .Well then Ill be playing Keeper wont I ?said McLaggen .Yeah said Harry .Yeah I suppose so .He could not think of an argument against it after all McLaggen had certainly performed secondbest in the trials .Excellent said McLaggen in a satisfied voice .So whens practice ?What ?Oh .theres one tomorrow evening .Good .Listen Potter we should have a talk beforehand .Ive got some ideas on strategy you might find useful .Right said Harry unenthusiastically .Well Ill hear them tomorrow then .Im pretty tired now .see you The news that Ron had been poisoned spread quickly next day but it did not cause the sensation that Katies attack had done .People seemed to think that it might have been an accident given that he had been in the Potions masters room at the time and that as he had been given an antidote immediately there was no real harm done .In fact the Gryffindors were generally much more interested in the upcoming Quidditch match against Hufflepuff for many of them wanted to see Zacharias Smith who played Chaser on the Hufflepuff team punished soundly for his commentary during the opening match against Slytherin .Harry however had never been less interested in Quidditch he was rapidly becoming obsessed with Draco Malfoy .Still checking the Marauders Map whenever he got a chance he sometimes made detours to wherever Malfoy happened to be but had not yet detected him doing anything out of the ordinary .And still there were those inexplicable times when Malfoy simply vanished from the map .But Harry did not get a lot of time to consider the problem what with Quidditch practice homework and the fact that he was now being dogged wherever he went by Cormac McLaggen and Lavender Brown .He could not decide which of them was more annoying .McLaggen kept up a constant stream of hints that he would make a better permanent Keeper for the team than Ron and that now that Harry was seeing him play regularly he would surely come around to this way of thinking too he was also keen to criticize the other players and provide Harry with detailed training schemes so that more than once Harry was forced to remind him who was Captain .Meanwhile Lavender kept sidling up to Harry to discuss Ron which Harry found almost more wearing than McLaggens Quidditch lectures .At first Lavender had been very annoyed that nobody had thought to tell her that Ron was in the hospital wing I mean I am his girlfriend !but unfortunately she had now decided to forgive Harry this lapse of memory and was keen to have lots of indepth chats with him about Rons feelings a most uncomfortable experience that Harry would have happily forgone .Look why dont you talk to Ron about all this ?Harry asked after a particularly long interrogation from Lavender that took in everything from precisely what Ron had said about her new dress robes to whether or not Harry thought that Ron considered his relationship with Lavender to be serious .Well I would but hes always asleep when I go and see him !said Lavender fretfully .Is he ?said Harry surprised for he had found Ron perfectly alert every time he had been up to the hospital wing both highly interested in the news of Dumbledore and Snapes row and keen to abuse McLaggen as much as possible .Is Hermione Granger still visiting him ?Lavender demanded suddenly .Yeah I think so .Well theyre friends arent they ?said Harry uncomfortably .Friends dont make me laugh said Lavender scornfully .She didnt talk to him for weeks after he started going out with me !But I suppose she wants to make up with him now hes all interesting .Would you call getting poisoned being interesting ?asked Harry .Anyway sorry got to go theres McLaggen coming for a talk about Quidditch said Harry hurriedly and he dashed sideways through a door pretending to be solid wall and sprinted down the shortcut that would take him off to Potions where thankfully neither Lavender nor McLaggen could follow him .On the morning of the Quidditch match against Hufflepuff Harry dropped in on the hospital wing before heading down to the pitch .Ron was very agitated Madam Pomfrey would not let him go down to watch the match feeling it would overexcite him .So hows McLaggen shaping up ?he asked Harry nervously apparently forgetting that he had already asked the same question twice .Ive told you said Harry patiently he could be worldclass and I wouldnt want to keep him .He keeps trying to tell everyone what to do he thinks he could play every position better than the rest of us .I cant wait to be shot of him .And speaking of getting shot of people Harry added getting to his feet and picking up his Firebolt will you stop pretending to be asleep when Lavender comes to see you ?Shes driving me mad as well .Oh said Ron looking sheepish .Yeah .All right .If you dont want to go out with her anymore just tell her said Harry .Yeah .well .its not that easy is it ?said Ron .He paused .Hermione going to look in before the match ?he added casually .No shes already gone down to the pitch with Ginny .Oh said Ron looking rather glum .Right .Well good luck .Hope you hammer McLag I mean Smith .Ill try said Harry shouldering his broom .See you after the match .He hurried down through the deserted corridors the whole school was outside either already seated in the stadium or heading down toward it .He was looking out of the windows he passed trying to gauge how much wind they were facing when a noise ahead made him glance up and he saw Malfoy walking toward him accompanied by two girls both of whom looked sulky and resentful .Malfoy stopped short at the sight of Harry then gave a short humorless laugh and continued walking .Where re you going ?Harry demanded .Yeah Im really going to tell you because its your business Potter sneered Malfoy .Youd better hurry up theyll be waiting for ‘the Chosen Captain ‘the Boy Who Scored whatever they call you these days .One of the girls gave an unwilling giggle .Harry stared at her .She blushed .Malfoy pushed past Harry and she and her friend followed at a trot turning the corner and vanishing from view .Harry stood rooted on the spot and watched them disappear .This was infuriating he was already cutting it fine to get to the match on time and yet there was Malfoy skulking off while the rest of the school was absent Harrys best chance yet of discovering what Malfoy was up to .The silent seconds trickled past and Harry remained where he was frozen gazing at the place where Malfoy had vanished .Where have you been ?demanded Ginny as Harry sprinted into the changing rooms .The whole team was changed and ready Coote and Peakes the Beaters were both hitting their clubs nervously against their legs .I met Malfoy Harry told her quietly as he pulled his scarlet robes over his head .So ?So I wanted to know how come hes up at the castle with a couple of girlfriends while everyone else is down here .Does it matter right now ?Well Im not likely to find out am I ?said Harry seizing his Firebolt and pushing his glasses straight .Come on then !And without another word he marched out onto the pitch to deafening cheers and boos .There was little wind the clouds were patchy every now and then there were dazzling flashes of bright sunlight .Tricky conditions !McLaggen said bracingly to the team .Coote Peakes youll want to fly out of the sun so they dont see you coming Im the Captain McLaggen shut up giving them instructions said Harry angrily .Just get up by the goal posts !Once McLaggen had marched off Harry turned to Coote and Peakes .Make sure you do fly out of the sun he told them grudgingly .He shook hands with the Hufflepuff Captain and then on Madam Hoochs whistle kicked off and rose into the air higher than the rest of his team streaking around the pitch in search of the Snitch .If he could catch it good and early there might be a chance he could get back up to the castle seize the Marauders Map and find out what Malfoy was doing .And thats Smith of Hufflepuff with the Quaffle said a dreamy voice echoing over the grounds .He did the commentary last time of course and Ginny Weasley flew into him I think probably on purpose it looked like it .Smith was being quite rude about Gryffindor I expect he regrets that now hes playing them oh look hes lost the Quaffle Ginny took it from him I do like her shes very nice .Harry stared down at the commentators podium .Surely nobody in their right mind would have let Luna Lovegood commentate ?But even from above there was no mistaking that long dirtyblonde hair nor the necklace of butterbeer corks .Beside Luna Professor McGonagall was looking slightly uncomfortable as though she was indeed having second thoughts about this appointment . .but now that big Hufflepuff players got the Quaffle from her I cant remember his name its something like Bibble no Buggins Its Cadwallader !said Professor McGonagall loudly from beside Luna .The crowd laughed .Harry stared around for the Snitch there was no sign of it .Moments later Cadwallader scored .McLaggen had been shouting criticism at Ginny for allowing the Quaffle out of her possession with the result that he had not noticed the large red ball soaring past his right ear .McLaggen will you pay attention to what youre supposed to be doing and leave everyone else alone !bellowed Harry wheeling around to face his Keeper .Youre not setting a great example !McLaggen shouted back redfaced and furious .And Harry Potters now having an argument with his Keeper said Luna serenely while both Hufflepuffs and Slytherins below in the crowd cheered and jeered .I dont think thatll help him find the Snitch but maybe its a clever ruse .Swearing angrily Harry spun round and set off around the pitch again scanning the skies for some sign of the tiny winged golden ball .Ginny and Demelza scored a goal apiece giving the redandgoldclad supporters below something to cheer about .Then Cadwallader scored again making things level but Luna did not seem to have noticed she appeared singularly uninterested in such mundane things as the score and kept attempting to draw the crowds attention to such things as interestingly shaped clouds and the possibility that Zacharias Smith who had so far failed to maintain possession of the Quaffle for longer than a minute was suffering from something called Losers Lurgy .Seventyforty to Hufflepuff !barked Professor McGonagall into Lunas megaphone .Is it already ?said Luna vaguely .Oh look !The Gryffindor Keepers got hold of one of the Beaters bats .Harry spun around in midair .Sure enough McLaggen for reasons best known to himself had pulled Peakes s bat from him and appeared to be demonstrating how to hit a Bludger toward an oncoming Cadwallader .Will you give him back his bat and get back to the goal posts !roared Harry pelting toward McLaggen just as McLaggen took a ferocious swipe at the Bludger and mishit it .A blinding sickening pain .a flash of light .distant screams .and the sensation of falling down a long tunnel .And the next thing Harry knew he was lying in a remarkably warm and comfortable bed and looking up at a lamp that was throwing a circle of golden light onto a shadowy ceiling .He raised his head awkwardly .There on his left was a familiarlooking freckly redhaired person .Nice of you to drop in said Ron grinning .Harry blinked and looked around .Of course He was in the hospital wing .The sky outside was indigo streaked with crimson .The match must have finished hours ago .as had any hope of cornering Malfoy .Harrys head felt strangely heavy he raised a hand and felt a stiff turban of bandages .What happened ?Cracked skull said Madam Pomfrey bustling up and pushing him back against his pillows .Nothing to worry about I mended it at once but Im keeping you in overnight .You shouldnt overexert yourself for a few hours .I dont want to stay here overnight said Harry angrily sitting up and throwing back his covers .I want to find McLaggen and kill him .Im afraid that would come under the heading of ‘overexertion said Madam Pomfrey pushing him firmly back onto the bed and raising her wand in a threatening manner .You will stay here until I discharge you Potter or I shall call the headmaster .She bustled back into her office and Harry sank back into his pillows fuming .Dyou know how much we lost by ?he asked Ron through clenched teeth .Well yeah I do said Ron apologetically .Final score was three hundred and twenty to sixty .Brilliant said Harry savagely .Really brilliant !When I get hold of McLaggen You dont want to get hold of him hes the size of a troll said Ron reasonably .Personally I think theres a lot to be said for hexing him with that toenail thing of the Princes .Anyway the rest of the team mightve dealt with him before you get out of here theyre not happy .There was a note of badly suppressed glee in Rons voice Harry could tell he was nothing short of thrilled that McLaggen had messed up so badly .Harry lay there staring up at the patch of light on the ceiling his recently mended skull not hurting precisely but feeling slightly tender underneath all the bandaging .I could hear the match commentary from here said Ron his voice now shaking with laughter .I hope Luna always commentates from now on .Losers Lurgy .But Harry was still too angry to see much humor in the situation and after a while Rons snorts subsided .Ginny came in to visit while you were unconscious he said after a long pause and Harrys imagination zoomed into overdrive rapidly constructing a scene in which Ginny weeping over his lifeless form confessed her feelings of deep attraction to him while Ron gave them his blessing .She reckons you only just arrived on time for the match .How come ?You left here early enough .Oh .said Harry as the scene in his minds eye imploded .Yeah .well I saw Malfoy sneaking off with a couple of girls who didnt look like they wanted to be with him and thats the second time hes made sure he isnt down on the Quidditch pitch with the rest of the school he skipped the last match too remember ?Harry sighed .Wish Id followed him now the match was such a fiasco .Dont be stupid said Ron sharply .You couldnt have missed a Quidditch match just to follow Malfoy youre the Captain !I want to know what hes up to said Harry .And dont tell me its all in my head not after what I overheard between him and Snape I never said it was all in your head said Ron hoisting himself up on an elbow in turn and frowning at Harry but theres no rule saying only one person at a time can be plotting anything in this place !Youre getting a bit obsessed with Malfoy Harry .I mean thinking about missing a match just to follow him .I want to catch him at it !said Harry in frustration .I mean wheres he going when he disappears off the map ?I dunno .Hogsmeade ?suggested Ron yawning .Ive never seen him going along any of the secret passageways on the map .I thought they were being watched now anyway ?Well then I dunno said Ron .Silence fell between them .Harry stared up at the circle of lamplight above him thinking .If only he had Rufus Scrimgeours power he would have been able to set a tail upon Malfoy but unfortunately Harry did not have an office full of Aurors at his command .He thought fleetingly of trying to set something up with the D .A .but there again was the problem that people would be missed from lessons most of them after all still had full schedules .There was a low rumbling snore from Rons bed .After a while Madam Pomfrey came out of her office this time wearing a thick dressing gown .It was easiest to feign sleep Harry rolled over onto his side and listened to all the curtains closing themselves as she waved her wand .The lamps dimmed and she returned to her office he heard the door click behind her and knew that she was off to bed .This was Harry reflected in the darkness the third time that he had been brought to the hospital wing because of a Quidditch injury .Last time he had fallen off his broom due to the presence of dementors around the pitch and the time before that all the bones had been removed from his arm by the incurably inept Professor Lockhart .That had been his most painful injury by far .he remembered the agony of regrowing an armful of bones in one night a discomfort not eased by the arrival of an unexpected visitor in the middle of the Harry sat bolt upright his heart pounding his bandage turban askew .He had the solution at last There was a way to have Malfoy followed how could he have forgotten why hadnt he thought of it before ?But the question was how to call him ?What did you do ?Quietly tentatively Harry spoke into the darkness .Kreacher ?There was a very loud crack and the sounds of scuffling and squeaks filled the silent room .Ron awoke with a yelp .Whats going ?Harry pointed his wand hastily at the door of Madam Pomfreys office and muttered MuffliatoV so that she would not come running .Then he scrambled to the end of his bed for a better look at what was going on .Two houseelves were rolling around on the floor in the middle of the dormitory one wearing a shrunken maroon jumper and several woolly hats the other a filthy old rag strung over his hips like a loincloth .Then there was another loud bang and Peeves the Poltergeist appeared in midair above the wrestling elves .I was watching that Potty !he told Harry indignantly pointing at the fight below before letting out a loud cackle .Look at the ickle creatures squabbling bitey bitey punchy punchy Kreacher will not insult Harry Potter in front of Dobby no he wont or Dobby will shut Kreachers mouth for him !cried Dobby in a highpitched voice .kicky scratchy !cried Peeves happily now pelting bits of chalk at the elves to enrage them further .Tweaky pokey !Kreacher will say what he likes about his master oh yes and what a master he is filthy friend of Mudbloods oh what would poor Kreachers mistress say ?Exactly what Kreachers mistress would have said they did not find out for at that moment Dobby sank his knobbly little fist into Kreachers mouth and knocked out half of his teeth .Harry and Ron both leapt out of their beds and wrenched the two elves apart though they continued to try and kick and punch each other egged on by Peeves who swooped around the lamp squealing Stick your fingers up his nosey draw his cork and pull his earsies Harry aimed his wand at Peeves and said Langlockl Peeves clutched at his throat gulped then swooped from the room making obscene gestures but unable to speak owing to the fact that his tongue had just glued itself to the roof of his mouth .Nice one said Ron appreciatively lifting Dobby into the air so that his flailing limbs no longer made contact with Kreacher .That was another Prince hex wasnt it ?Yeah said Harry twisting Kreachers wizened arm into a half nelson .Right Im forbidding you to fight each other !Well Kreacher youre forbidden to fight Dobby .Dobby I know Im not allowed to give you orders Dobby is a free houseelf and he can obey anyone he likes and Dobby will do whatever Harry Potter wants him to do !said Dobby tears now streaming down his shriveled little face onto his jumper .Okay then said Harry and he and Ron both released the elves who fell to the floor but did not continue fighting .Master called me ?croaked Kreacher sinking into a bow even as he gave Harry a look that plainly wished him a painful death .Yeah I did said Harry glancing toward Madam Pomfreys office door to check that the Muffliato spell was still working there was no sign that she had heard any of the commotion .Ive got a job for you .Kreacher will do whatever Master wants said Kreacher sinking so low that his lips almost touched his gnarled toes because Kreacher has no choice but Kreacher is ashamed to have such a master yes Dobby will do it Harry Potter !squeaked Dobby his tennisballsized eyes still swimming in tears .Dobby would be honored to help Harry Potter !Come to think of it it would be good to have both of you said Harry .Okay then .I want you to tail Draco Malfoy .Ignoring the look of mingled surprise and exasperation on Rons face Harry went on I want to know where hes going who hes meeting and what hes doing .I want you to follow him around the clock .Yes Harry Potter !said Dobby at once his great eyes shining with excitement .And if Dobby does it wrong Dobby will throw himself off the topmost tower Harry Potter !There wont be any need for that said Harry hastily .Master wants me to follow the youngest of the Malfoys ?croaked Kreacher .Master wants me to spy upon the pureblood greatnephew of my old mistress ?Thats the one said Harry foreseeing a great danger and determining to prevent it immediately .And youre forbidden to tip him off Kreacher or to show him what youre up to or to talk to him at all or to write him messages or .or to contact him in any way .Got it ?He thought he could see Kreacher struggling to see a loophole in the instructions he had just been given and waited .After a moment or two and to Harrys great satisfaction Kreacher bowed deeply again and said with bitter resentment Master thinks of everything and Kreacher must obey him even though Kreacher would much rather be the servant of the Malfoy boy oh yes .Thats settled then said Harry .Ill want regular reports but make sure Im not surrounded by people when you turn up .Ron and Hermione are okay .And dont tell anyone what youre doing .Just stick to Malfoy like a couple of wart plasters .LORD VOLDEMORTS REQUEST Harry and Ron left the hospital wing first thing on Monday morning restored to full health by the ministrations of Madam Pomfrey and now able to enjoy the benefits of having been knocked out and poisoned the best of which was that Hermione was friends with Ron again .Hermione even escorted them down to breakfast bringing with her the news that Ginny had argued with Dean .The drowsing creature in Harrys chest suddenly raised its head sniffing the air hopefully .What did they row about ?he asked trying to sound casual as they turned onto a seventhfloor corridor that was deserted but for a very small girl who had been examining a tapestry of trolls in tutus .She looked terrified at the sight of the approaching sixth years and dropped the heavy brass scales she was carrying .Its all right !said Hermione kindly hurrying forward to help her .Here .She tapped the broken scales with her wand and said Reparo .The girl did not say thank you but remained rooted to the spot as they passed and watched them out of sight Ron glanced back at her .I swear theyre getting smaller he said .Never mind her said Harry a little impatiently .What did Ginny and Dean row about Hermione ?Oh Dean was laughing about McLaggen hitting that Bludger at you said Hermione .It mustve looked funny said Ron reasonably .It didnt look funny at all !said Hermione hotly .It looked terrible and if Coote and Peakes hadnt caught Harry he could have been very badly hurt !Yeah well there was no need for Ginny and Dean to split up over it said Harry still trying to sound casual .Or are they still together ?Yes they are but why are you so interested ?asked Hermione giving Harry a sharp look .I just dont want my Quidditch team messed up again !he said hastily but Hermione continued to look suspicious and he was most relieved when a voice behind them called Harry !giving him an excuse to turn his back on her .Oh hi Luna .I went to the hospital wing to find you said Luna rummaging in her bag .But they said youd left .She thrust what appeared to be a green onion a large spotted toadstool and a considerable amount of what looked like cat litter into Rons hands finally pulling out a rather grubby scroll of parchment that she handed to Harry . .Ive been told to give you this .It was a small roll of parchment which Harry recognized at once as another invitation to a lesson with Dumbledore .Tonight he told Ron and Hermione once he had unrolled it .Nice commentary last match !said Ron to Luna as she took back the green onion the toadstool and the cat litter .Luna smiled vaguely .Youre making fun of me arent you ?she said .Everyone says I was dreadful .No Im serious !said Ron earnestly .I cant remember enjoying commentary more !What is this by the way ?he added holding the onionlike object up to eye level .Oh its a Gurdyroot she said stuffing the cat litter and the toadstool back into her bag .You can keep it if you like Ive got a few of them .Theyre really excellent for warding off Gulping Plimpies .And she walked away leaving Ron chortling still clutching the Gurdyroot .You know shes grown on me Luna he said as they set off again for the Great Hall .I know shes insane but its in a good He stopped talking very suddenly .Lavender Brown was standing at the foot of the marble staircase looking thunderous .Hi said Ron nervously .Cmon Harry muttered to Hermione and they sped past though not before they had heard Lavender say Why didnt you tell me you were getting out today ?And why was she with you ?Ron looked both sulky and annoyed when he appeared at breakfast half an hour later and though he sat with Lavender Harry did not see them exchange a word all the time they were together .Hermione was acting as though she was quite oblivious to all of this but once or twice Harry saw an inexplicable smirk cross her face .All that day she seemed to be in a particularly good mood and that evening in the common room she even consented to look over in other words finish writing Harrys Herbology essay something she had been resolutely refusing to do up to this point because she had known that Harry would then let Ron copy his work .Thanks a lot Hermione said Harry giving her a hasty pat on the back as he checked his watch and saw that it was nearly eight oclock .Listen Ive got to hurry or Ill be late for Dumbledore .She did not answer but merely crossed out a few of his feebler sentences in a weary sort of way .Grinning Harry hurried out through the portrait hole and off to the headmasters office .The gargoyle leapt aside at the mention of toffee eclairs and Harry took the spiral staircase two steps at a time knocking on the door just as a clock within chimed eight .Enter called Dumbledore but as Harry put out a hand to push the door it was wrenched open from inside .There stood Professor Trelawney .Aha !she cried pointing dramatically at Harry as she blinked at him through her magnifying spectacles .So this is the reason I am to be thrown unceremoniously from your office Dumbledore !My dear Sybill said Dumbledore in a slightly exasperated voice there is no question of throwing you unceremoniously from anywhere but Harry does have an appointment and I really dont think there is any more to be said Very well said Professor Trelawney in a deeply wounded voice .If you will not banish the usurping nag so be it .Perhaps I shall find a school where my talents are better appreciated .She pushed past Harry and disappeared down the spiral staircase they heard her stumble halfway down and Harry guessed that she had tripped over one of her trailing shawls .Please close the door and sit down Harry said Dumbledore sounding rather tired .Harry obeyed noticing as he took his usual seat in front of Dumbledore s desk that the Pensieve lay between them once more as did two more tiny crystal bottles full of swirling memory .Professor Trelawney still isnt happy Firenze is teaching then ?Harry asked .No said Dumbledore Divination is turning out to be much more trouble than I could have foreseen never having studied the subject myself .I cannot ask Firenze to return to the forest where he is now an outcast nor can I ask Sybill Trelawney to leave .Between ourselves she has no idea of the danger she would be in outside the castle .She does not know and I think it would be unwise to enlighten her that she made the prophecy about you and Voldemort you see .Dumbledore heaved a deep sigh then said But never mind my staffing problems .We have much more important matters to discuss .Firstly have you managed the task I set you at the end of our previous lesson ?Ah said Harry brought up short .What with Apparition lessons and Quidditch and Ron being poisoned and getting his skull cracked and his determination to find out what Draco Malfoy was up to Harry had almost forgotten about the memory Dumbledore had asked him to extract from Professor Slughorn .Well I asked Professor Slughorn about it at the end of Potions sir but er he wouldnt give it to me .There was a little silence .I see said Dumbledore eventually peering at Harry over the top of his halfmoon spectacles and giving Harry the usual sensation that he was being Xrayed .And you feel that you have exerted your very best efforts in this matter do you ?That you have exercised all of your considerable ingenuity ?That you have left no depth of cunning unplumbed in your quest to retrieve the memory ?Well Harry stalled at a loss for what to say next .His single attempt to get hold of the memory suddenly seemed embarrassingly feeble .Well .the day Ron swallowed love potion by mistake I took him to Professor Slughorn .I thought maybe if I got Professor Slughorn in a good enough mood And did that work ?asked Dumbledore .Well no sir because Ron got poisoned which naturally made you forget all about trying to retrieve the memory I would have expected nothing else while your best friend was in danger .Once it became clear that Mr Weasley was going to make a full recovery however I would have hoped that you returned to the task I set you .I thought I made it clear to you how very important that memory is .Indeed I did my best to impress upon you that it is the most crucial memory of all and that we will be wasting our time without it .A hot prickly feeling of shame spread from the top of Harrys head all the way down his body .Dumbledore had not raised his voice he did not even sound angry but Harry would have preferred him to yell this cold disappointment was worse than anything .Sir he said a little desperately it isnt that I wasnt bothered or anything Ive just had other other things .Other things on your mind Dumbledore finished the sentence for him .I see .Silence fell between them again the most uncomfortable silence Harry had ever experienced with Dumbledore it seemed to go on and on punctuated only by the little grunting snores of the portrait of Armando Dippet over Dumbledore s head .Harry felt strangely diminished as though he had shrunk a little since he had entered the room .When he could stand it no longer he said Professor Dumbledore Im really sorry .I should have done more .I should have realized you wouldnt have asked me to do it if it wasnt really important .Thank you for saying that Harry said Dumbledore quietly .May I hope then that you will give this matter higher priority from now on ?There will be little point in our meeting after tonight unless we have that memory .Ill do it sir Ill get it from him he said earnestly .Then we shall say no more about it just now said Dumbledore more kindly but continue with our story where we left off .You remember where that was ?Yes sir said Harry quickly .Voldemort killed his father and his grandparents and made it look as though his Uncle Morfin did it .Then he went back to Hogwarts and he asked .he asked Professor Slughorn about Horcruxes he mumbled shamefacedly .Very good said Dumbledore .Now you will remember I hope that I told you at the very outset of these meetings of ours that we would be entering the realms of guesswork and speculation ?Yes sir .Thus far as I hope you agree I have shown you reasonably firm sources of fact for my deductions as to what Voldemort did until the age of seventeen ?Harry nodded .But now Harry said Dumbledore now things become murkier and stranger .If it was difficult to find evidence about the boy Riddle it has been almost impossible to find anyone prepared to reminisce about the man Voldemort .In fact I doubt whether there is a soul alive apart from himself who could give us a full account of his life since he left Hogwarts .However I have two last memories that I would like to share with you .Dumbledore indicated the two little crystal bottles gleaming beside the Pensieve .I shall then be glad of your opinion as to whether the conclusions I have drawn from them seem likely .The idea that Dumbledore valued his opinion this highly made Harry feel even more deeply ashamed that he had failed in the task of retrieving the Horcrux memory and he shifted guiltily in his seat as Dumbledore raised the first of the two bottles to the light and examined it .I hope you are not tired of diving into other peoples memories for they are curious recollections these two he said .This first one came from a very old houseelf by the name of Hokey .Before we see what Hokey witnessed I must quickly recount how Lord Voldemort left Hogwarts .He reached the seventh year of his schooling with as you might have expected top grades in every examination he had taken .All around him his classmates were deciding which jobs they were to pursue once they had left Hogwarts .Nearly everybody expected spectacular things from Tom Riddle prefect Head Boy winner of the Award for Special Services to the School .I know that several teachers Professor Slughorn amongst them suggested that he join the Ministry of Magic offered to set up appointments put him in touch with useful contacts .He refused all offers .The next thing the staff knew Voldemort was working at Borgin and Burkes .At Borgin and Burkes ?Harry repeated stunned .At Borgin and Burkes repeated Dumbledore calmly .I think you will see what attractions the place held for him when we have entered Hokeys memory .But this was not Voldemorts first choice of job .Hardly anyone knew of it at the time I was one of the few in whom the then headmaster confided but Voldemort first approached Professor Dippet and asked whether he could remain at Hogwarts as a teacher .He wanted to stay here ?Why ?asked Harry more amazed still .I believe he had several reasons though he confided none of them to Professor Dippet said Dumbledore .Firstly and very importantly Voldemort was I believe more attached to this school than he has ever been to a person .Hogwarts was where he had been happiest the first and only place he had felt at home .Harry felt slightly uncomfortable at these words for this was exactly how he felt about Hogwarts too .Secondly the castle is a stronghold of ancient magic .Undoubtedly Voldemort had penetrated many more of its secrets than most of the students who pass through the place but he may have felt that there were still mysteries to unravel stores of magic to tap .And thirdly as a teacher he would have had great power and influence over young witches and wizards .Perhaps he had gained the idea from Professor Slughorn the teacher with whom he was on best terms who had demonstrated how influential a role a teacher can play .I do not imagine for an instant that Voldemort envisaged spending the rest of his life at Hogwarts but I do think that he saw it as a useful recruiting ground and a place where he might begin to build himself an army .But he didnt get the job sir ?No he did not .Professor Dippet told him that he was too young at eighteen but invited him to reapply in a few years if he still wished to teach .How did you feel about that sir ?asked Harry hesitantly .Deeply uneasy said Dumbledore .I had advised Armando against the appointment I did not give the reasons I have given you for Professor Dippet was very fond of Voldemort and convinced of his honesty .But I did not want Lord Voldemort back at this school and especially not in a position of power .Which job did he want sir ?What subject did he want to teach ?Somehow Harry knew the answer even before Dumbledore gave it .Defense Against the Dark Arts .It was being taught at the time by an old Professor by the name of Galatea Merrythought who had been at Hogwarts for nearly fifty years .So Voldemort went off to Borgin and Burkes and all the staff who had admired him said what a waste it was a brilliant young wizard like that working in a shop .However Voldemort was no mere assistant .Polite and handsome and clever he was soon given particular jobs of the type that only exist in a place like Borgin and Burkes which specializes as you know Harry in objects with unusual and powerful properties .Voldemort was sent to persuade people to part with their treasures for sale by the partners and he was by all accounts unusually gifted at doing this .Ill bet he was said Harry unable to contain himself .Well quite said Dumbledore with a faint smile .And now it is time to hear from Hokey the houseelf who worked for a very old very rich witch by the name of Hepzibah Smith .Dumbledore tapped a bottle with his wand the cork flew out and he tipped the swirling memory into the Pensieve saying as he did so After you Harry .Harry got to his feet and bent once more over the rippling silver contents of the stone basin until his face touched them .He tumbled through dark nothingness and landed in a sitting room in front of an immensely fat old lady wearing an elaborate ginger wig and a brilliant pink set of robes that flowed all around her giving her the look of a melting iced cake .She was looking into a small jeweled mirror and dabbing rouge onto her already scarlet cheeks with a large powder puff while the tiniest and oldest house elf Harry had ever seen laced her fleshy feet into tight satin slippers .Hurry up Hokey !said Hepzibah imperiously .He said hed come at four its only a couple of minutes to and hes never been late yet !She tucked away her powder puff as the houseelf straightened up .The top of the elfs head barely reached the seat of Hepzibah s chair and her papery skin hung off her frame just like the crisp linen sheet she wore draped like a toga .How do I look ?said Hepzibah turning her head to admire the various angles of her face in the mirror .Lovely madam squeaked Hokey .Harry could only assume that it was down in Hokeys contract that she must lie through her teeth when asked this question because Hepzibah Smith looked a long way from lovely in his opinion .A tinkling doorbell rang and both mistress and elf jumped .Quick quick hes here Hokey !cried Hepzibah and the elf scurried out of the room which was so crammed with objects that it was difficult to see how anybody could navigate their way across it without knocking over at least a dozen things There were cabinets full of little lacquered boxes cases full of goldembossed books shelves of orbs and celestial globes and many flourishing potted plants in brass containers .In fact the room looked like a cross between a magical antique shop and a conservatory .The houseelf returned within minutes followed by a tall young man Harry had no difficulty whatsoever in recognizing as Voldemort .He was plainly dressed in a black suit his hair was a little longer than it had been at school and his cheeks were hollowed but all of this suited him he looked more handsome than ever .He picked his way through the cramped room with an air that showed he had visited many times before and bowed low over Hepzibah s fat little hand brushing it with his lips .I brought you flowers he said quietly producing a bunch of roses from nowhere .You naughty boy you shouldnt have !squealed old Hepzibah though Harry noticed that she had an empty vase standing ready on the nearest little table .You do spoil this old lady Tom .Sit down sit down .Wheres Hokey ?Ah .The houseelf had come dashing back into the room carrying a tray of little cakes which she set at her mistresss elbow .Help yourself Tom said Hepzibah I know how you love my cakes .Now how are you ?You look pale .They overwork you at that shop Ive said it a hundred times .Voldemort smiled mechanically and Hepzibah simpered .Well whats your excuse for visiting this time ?she asked batting her lashes .Mr Burke would like to make an improved offer for the goblinmade armor said Voldemort .Five hundred Galleons he feels it is a more than fair Now now not so fast or Ill think youre only here for my trinkets !pouted Hepzibah .I am ordered here because of them said Voldemort quietly .I am only a poor assistant madam who must do as he is told .Mr Burke wishes me to inquire Oh Mr Burke phooey !said Hepzibah waving a little hand .Ive something to show you that Ive never shown Mr Burke !Can you keep a secret Tom ?Will you promise you wont tell Mr Burke Ive got it ?Hed never let me rest if he knew Id shown it to you and Im not selling not to Burke not to anyone !But you Tom youll appreciate it for its history not how many Galleons you can get for it .Id be glad to see anything Miss Hepzibah shows me said Voldemort quietly and Hepzibah gave another girlish giggle .I had Hokey bring it out for me .Hokey where are you ?I want to show Mr Riddle our finest treasure .In fact bring both while youre at it .Here madam squeaked the houseelf and Harry saw two leather boxes one on top of the other moving across the room as if of their own volition though he knew the tiny elf was holding them over her head as she wended her way between tables pouffes and footstools .Now said Hepzibah happily taking the boxes from the elf laying them in her lap and preparing to open the topmost one I think youll like this Tom .Oh if my family knew I was showing you .They cant wait to get their hands on this !She opened the lid .Harry edged forward a little to get a better view and saw what looked like a small golden cup with two finely wrought handles .I wonder whether you know what it is Tom ?Pick it up have a good look !whispered Hepzibah and Voldemort stretched out a longfingered hand and lifted the cup by one handle out of its snug silken wrappings .Harry thought he saw a red gleam in his dark eyes .His greedy expression was curiously mirrored on Hepzibahs face except that her tiny eyes were fixed upon Voldemorts handsome features .A badger murmured Voldemort examining the engraving upon the cup .Then this was . ?Helga Hufflepuffs as you very well know you clever boy !said Hepzibah leaning forward with a loud creaking of corsets and actually pinching his hollow cheek .Didnt I tell you I was distantly descended ?This has been handed down in the family for years and years .Lovely isnt it ?And all sorts of powers its supposed to possess too but I havent tested them thoroughly I just keep it nice and safe in here .She hooked the cup back off Voldemorts long forefinger and restored it gently to its box too intent upon settling it carefully back into position to notice the shadow that crossed Voldemorts face as the cup was taken away .Now then said Hepzibah happily wheres Hokey ?Oh yes there you are take that away now Hokey .The elf obediently took the boxed cup and Hepzibah turned her attention to the much flatter box in her lap .I think youll like this even more Tom she whispered .Lean in a little dear boy so you can see . .Of course Burke knows Ive got this one I bought it from him and I daresay hed love to get it back when Im gone .She slid back the fine filigree clasp and flipped open the box .There upon the smooth crimson velvet lay a heavy golden locket .Voldemort reached out his hand without invitation this time and held it up to the light staring at it .Slytherins mark he said quietly as the light played upon an ornate serpentine S .Thats right !said Hepzibah delighted apparently at the sight of Voldemort gazing at her locket transfixed .I had to pay an arm and a leg for it but I couldnt let it pass not a real treasure like that had to have it for my collection .Burke bought it apparently from a raggedlooking woman who seemed to have stolen it but had no idea of its true value There was no mistaking it this time Voldemorts eyes flashed scarlet at the words and Harry saw his knuckles whiten on the lockets chain .I daresay Burke paid her a pittance but there you are .Pretty isnt it ?And again all kinds of powers attributed to it though I just keep it nice and safe .She reached out to take the locket back .For a moment Harry thought Voldemort was not going to let go of it but then it had slid through his fingers and was back in its red velvet cushion .So there you are Tom dear and I hope you enjoyed that !She looked him full in the face and for the first time Harry saw her foolish smile falter .Are you all right dear ?Oh yes said Voldemort quietly .Yes Im very well .I thought but a trick of the light I suppose said Hepzibah looking unnerved and Harry guessed that she too had seen the momentary red gleam in Voldemorts eyes .Here Hokey take these away and lock them up again .The usual enchantments .Time to leave Harry said Dumbledore quietly and as the little elf bobbed away bearing the boxes Dumbledore grasped Harry once again above the elbow and together they rose up through oblivion and back to Dumbledore s office .Hepzibah Smith died two days after that little scene said Dumbledore resuming his seat and indicating that Harry should do the same .Hokey the houseelf was convicted by the Ministry of poisoning her mistresss evening cocoa by accident .No way !said Harry angrily .I see we are of one mind said Dumbledore .Certainly there are many similarities between this death and that of the Riddles .In both cases somebody else took the blame someone who had a clear memory of having caused the death Hokey confessed ?She remembered putting something in her mistresss cocoa that turned out not to be sugar but a lethal and littleknown poison said Dumbledore .It was concluded that she had not meant to do it but being old and confused Voldemort modified her memory just like he did with Morfin !Yes that is my conclusion too said Dumbledore .And just as with Morfin the Ministry was predisposed to suspect Hokey because she was a houseelf said Harry .He had rarely felt more in sympathy with the society Hermione had set up S .P .E .W .Precisely said Dumbledore .She was old she admitted to having tampered with the drink and nobody at the Ministry bothered to inquire further .As in the case of Morfin by the time I traced her and managed to extract this memory her life was almost over but her memory of course proves nothing except that Voldemort knew of the existence of the cup and the locket .By the time Hokey was convicted Hepzibahs family had realized that two of her greatest treasures were missing .It took them a while to be sure of this for she had many hiding places having always guarded her collection most jealously .But before they were sure beyond doubt that the cup and the locket were both gone the assistant who had worked at Borgin and Burkes the young man who had visited Hepzibah so regularly and charmed her so well had resigned his post and vanished .His superiors had no idea where he had gone they were as surprised as anyone at his disappearance .And that was the last that was seen or heard of Tom Riddle for a very long time .Now said Dumbledore if you dont mind Harry I want to pause once more to draw your attention to certain points of our story .Voldemort had committed another murder whether it was his first since he killed the Riddles I do not know but I think it was .This time as you will have seen he killed not for revenge but for gain .He wanted the two fabulous trophies that poor besotted old woman showed him .Just as he had once robbed the other children at his orphanage just as he had stolen his Uncle Morfin s ring so he ran off now with Hepzibahs cup and locket .But said Harry frowning it seems mad .Risking everything throwing away his job just for those .Mad to you perhaps but not to Voldemort said Dumbledore .I hope you will understand in due course exactly what those objects meant to him Harry but you must admit that it is not difficult to imagine that he saw the locket at least as rightfully his .The locket maybe said Harry but why take the cup as well ?It had belonged to another of Hogwartss founders said Dumbledore .I think he still felt a great pull toward the school and that he could not resist an object so steeped in Hogwarts history .There were other reasons I think .I hope to be able to demonstrate them to you in due course .And now for the very last recollection I have to show you at least until you manage to retrieve Professor Slughorns memory for us .Ten years separates Hokeys memory and this one ten years during which we can only guess at what Lord Voldemort was doing .Harry got to his feet once more as Dumbledore emptied the last memory into the Pensieve .Whose memory is it ?he asked .Mine said Dumbledore .And Harry dived after Dumbledore through the shifting silver mass landing in the very office he had just left .There was Fawkes slumbering happily on his perch and there behind the desk was Dumbledore who looked very similar to the Dumbledore standing beside Harry though both hands were whole and undamaged and his face was perhaps a little less lined .The one difference between the presentday office and this one was that it was snowing in the past bluish flecks were drifting past the window in the dark and building up on the outside ledge .The younger Dumbledore seemed to be waiting for something and sure enough moments after their arrival there was a knock on the door and he said Enter .Harry let out a hastily stifled gasp .Voldemort had entered the room .His features were not those Harry had seen emerge from the great stone cauldron almost two years ago They were not as snakelike the eyes were not yet scarlet the face not yet masklike and yet he was no longer handsome Tom Riddle .It was as though his features had been burned and blurred they were waxy and oddly distorted and the whites of the eyes now had a permanently bloody look though the pupils were not yet the slits that Harry knew they would become .He was wearing a long black cloak and his face was as pale as the snow glistening on his shoulders .The Dumbledore behind the desk showed no sign of surprise .Evidently this visit had been made by appointment .Good evening Tom said Dumbledore easily .Wont you sit down ?Thank you said Voldemort and he took the seat to which Dumbledore had gestured the very seat by the looks of it that Harry had just vacated in the present .I heard that you had become headmaster he said and his voice was slightly higher and colder than it had been .A worthy choice .I am glad you approve said Dumbledore smiling .May I offer you a drink ?That would be welcome said Voldemort .I have come a long way .Dumbledore stood and swept over to the cabinet where he now kept the Pensieve but which then was full of bottles .Having handed Voldemort a goblet of wine and poured one for himself he returned to the seat behind his desk .So Tom .to what do I owe the pleasure ?Voldemort did not answer at once but merely sipped his wine .They do not call me Tom anymore he said .These days I am known as I know what you are known as said Dumbledore smiling pleasantly .But to me Im afraid you will always be Tom Riddle .It is one of the irritating things about old teachers .I am afraid that they never quite forget their charges youthful beginnings .He raised his glass as though toasting Voldemort whose face remained expressionless .Nevertheless Harry felt the atmosphere in the room change subtly Dumbledores refusal to use Voldemorts chosen name was a refusal to allow Voldemort to dictate the terms of the meeting and Harry could tell that Voldemort took it as such .I am surprised you have remained here so long said Voldemort after a short pause .I always wondered why a wizard such as yourself never wished to leave school .Well said Dumbledore still smiling to a wizard such as myself there can be nothing more important than passing on ancient skills helping hone young minds .If I remember correctly you once saw the attraction of teaching too .I see it still said Voldemort .I merely wondered why you who are so often asked for advice by the Ministry and who have twice I think been offered the post of Minister Three times at the last count actually said Dumbledore .But the Ministry never attracted me as a career .Again something we have in common I think .Voldemort inclined his head unsmiling and took another sip of wine .Dumbledore did not break the silence that stretched between them now but waited with a look of pleasant expectancy for Voldemort to talk first .I have returned he said after a little while later perhaps than Professor Dippet expected .but I have returned nevertheless to request again what he once told me I was too young to have .I have come to you to ask that you permit me to return to this castle to teach .I think you must know that I have seen and done much since I left this place .I could show and tell your students things they can gain from no other wizard .Dumbledore considered Voldemort over the top of his own goblet for a while before speaking .Yes I certainly do know that you have seen and done much since leaving us he said quietly .Rumors of your doings have reached your old school Tom .I should be sorry to believe half of them .Voldemort s expression remained impassive as he said Greatness inspires envy envy engenders spite spite spawns lies .You must know this Dumbledore .You call it ‘greatness what you have been doing do you ?asked Dumbledore delicately .Certainly said Voldemort and his eyes seemed to burn red .I have experimented I have pushed the boundaries of magic further perhaps than they have ever been pushed Of some kinds of magic Dumbledore corrected him quietly .Of some .Of others you remain .forgive me .woefully ignorant .For the first time Voldemort smiled .It was a taut leer an evil thing more threatening than a look of rage .The old argument he said softly .But nothing I have seen in the world has supported your famous pronouncements that love is more powerful than my kind of magic Dumbledore .Perhaps you have been looking in the wrong places suggested Dumbledore .Well then what better place to start my fresh researches than here at Hogwarts ?said Voldemort .Will you let me return ?Will you let me share my knowledge with your students ?I place myself and my talents at your disposal .I am yours to command .Dumbledore raised his eyebrows .And what will become of those whom you command ?What will happen to those who call themselves or so rumor has it the Death Eaters ?Harry could tell that Voldemort had not expected Dumbledore to know this name he saw Voldemorts eyes flash red again and the slitlike nostrils flare .My friends he said after a moments pause will carry on without me I am sure .I am glad to hear that you consider them friends said Dumbledore .I was under the impression that they are more in the order of servants .You are mistaken said Voldemort .Then if I were to go to the Hogs Head tonight I would not find a group of them Nott Rosier Mulciber Dolohov awaiting your return ?Devoted friends indeed to travel this far with you on a snowy night merely to wish you luck as you attempted to secure a teaching post .There could be no doubt that Dumbledore s detailed knowledge of those with whom he was traveling was even less welcome to Voldemort however he rallied almost at once .You are omniscient as ever Dumbledore .Oh no merely friendly with the local barmen said Dumbledore lightly .Now Tom .Dumbledore set down his empty glass and drew himself up in his seat the tips of his fingers together in a very characteristic gesture .Let us speak openly .Why have you come here tonight surrounded by henchmen to request a job we both know you do not want ?Voldemort looked coldly surprised .A job I do not want ?On the contrary Dumbledore I want it very much .Oh you want to come back to Hogwarts but you do not want to teach any more than you wanted to when you were eighteen .What is it youre after Tom ?Why not try an open request for once ?Voldemort sneered .If you do not want to give me a job Of course I dont said Dumbledore .And I dont think for a moment you expected me to .Nevertheless you came here you asked you must have had a purpose .Voldemort stood up .He looked less like Tom Riddle than ever his features thick with rage .This is your final word ?It is said Dumbledore also standing .Then we have nothing more to say to each other .No nothing said Dumbledore and a great sadness filled his face .The time is long gone when I could frighten you with a burning wardrobe and force you to make repayment for your crimes .But I wish I could Tom .I wish I could .For a second Harry was on the verge of shouting a pointless warning He was sure that Voldemorts hand had twitched toward his pocket and his wand but then the moment had passed Voldemort had turned away the door was closing and he was gone .Harry felt Dumbledore s hand close over his arm again and moments later they were standing together on almost the same spot but there was no snow building on the window ledge and Dumbledores hand was blackened and deadlooking once more .Why ?said Harry at once looking up into Dumbledores face .Why did he come back ?Did you ever find out ?I have ideas said Dumbledore but no more than that .What ideas sir ?I shall tell you Harry when you have retrieved that memory from Professor Slughorn said Dumbledore .When you have that last piece of the jigsaw everything will I hope be clear .to both of us .Harry was still burning with curiosity and even though Dumbledore had walked to the door and was holding it open for him he did not move at once .Was he after the Defense Against the Dark Arts job again sir ?He didnt say .Oh he definitely wanted the Defense Against the Dark Arts job said Dumbledore .The aftermath of our little meeting proved that .You see we have never been able to keep a Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher for longer than a year since I refused the post to Lord Voldemort .THE UNKNOWABLE ROOM Harry wracked his brains over the next week as to how he was to persuade Slughorn to hand over the true memory but nothing in the nature of a brain wave occurred and he was reduced to doing what he did increasingly these days when at a loss poring over his Potions book hoping that the Prince would have scribbled something useful in a margin as he had done so many times before .You wont find anything in there said Hermione firmly late on Sunday evening .Dont start Hermione said Harry .If it hadnt been for the Prince Ron wouldnt be sitting here now .He would if youd just listened to Snape in our first year said Hermione dismissively .Harry ignored her .He had just found an incantation Sectumsempral scrawled in a margin above the intriguing words For Enemies and was itching to try it out but thought it best not to in front of Hermione .Instead he surreptitiously folded down the corner of the page .They were sitting beside the fire in the common room the only other people awake were fellow sixth years .There had been a certain amount of excitement earlier when they had come back from dinner to find a new sign on the notice board that announced the date for their Apparition Test .Those who would be seventeen on or before the first test date the twentyfirst of April had the option of signing up for additional practice sessions which would take place heavily supervised in Hogsmeade .Ron had panicked on reading this notice he had still not managed to Apparate and feared he would not be ready for the test .Hermione who had now achieved Apparition twice was a little more confident but Harry who would not be seventeen for another four months could not take the test whether ready or not .At least you can Apparate though !said Ron tensely .Youll have no trouble come July !Ive only done it once Harry reminded him he had finally managed to disappear and rematerialize inside his hoop during their previous lesson .Having wasted a lot of time worrying aloud about Apparition Ron was now struggling to finish a viciously difficult essay for Snape that Harry and Hermione had already completed .Harry fully expected to receive low marks on his because he had disagreed with Snape on the best way to tackle dementors but he did not care Slughorns memory was the most important thing to him now . ‘Tm telling you the stupid Prince isnt going to be able to help you with this Harry !said Hermione more loudly .Theres only one way to force someone to do what you want and thats the Imperius Curse which is illegal Yeah I know that thanks said Harry not looking up from the book .Thats why Im looking for something different .Dumbledore says Veritaserum wont do it but there might be something else a potion or a spell .Youre going about it the wrong way said Hermione .Only you can get the memory Dumbledore says .That must mean you can persuade Slughorn where other people cant .Its not a question of slipping him a potion anyone could do that How dyou spell ‘belligerent ?said Ron shaking his quill very hard while staring at his parchment .It cant be B U M No it isnt said Hermione pulling Rons essay toward her .And ‘augury doesnt begin O R G either .What kind of quill are you using ?Its one of Fred and Georges SpellCheck ones .but I think the charm must be wearing off .Yes it must said Hermione pointing at the title of his essay because we were asked how wed deal with dementors not ‘Dugbogs and I dont remember you changing your name to ‘Roonil Wazlib either .Ah no !said Ron staring horrorstruck at the parchment .Dont say Ill have to write the whole thing out again !Its okay we can fix it said Hermione pulling the essay toward her and taking out her wand .I love you Hermione said Ron sinking back in his chair rubbing his eyes wearily .Hermione turned faintly pink but merely said Dont let Lavender hear you saying that .I wont said Ron into his hands .Or maybe I will .then shell ditch me .Why dont you ditch her if you want to finish it ?asked Harry .You havent ever chucked anyone have you ?said Ron .You and Cho just Sort of fell apart yeah said Harry Wish that would happen with me and Lavender said Ron gloomily watching Hermione silently tapping each of his misspelled words with the end of her wand so that they corrected themselves on the page .But the more I hint I want to finish it the tighter she holds on .Its like going out with the giant squid .There said Hermione some twenty minutes later handing back Rons essay .Thanks a million said Ron .Can I borrow your quill for the conclusion ?Harry who had found nothing useful in the Half Blood Princes notes so far looked around the three of them were now the only ones left in the common room Seamus having just gone up to bed cursing Snape and his essay .The only sounds were the crackling of the fire and Ron scratching out one last paragraph on dementors using Hermiones quill .Harry had just closed the HalfBlood Princes book yawning when Crack .Hermione let out a little shriek Ron spilled ink all over his freshly completed essay and Harry said Kreacher !The houseelf bowed low and addressed his own gnarled toes .Master said he wanted regular reports on what the Malfoy boy is doing so Kreacher has come to give Crack .Dobby appeared alongside Kreacher his teacozy hat askew .Dobby has been helping too Harry Potter !he squeaked casting Kreacher a resentful look .And Kreacher ought to tell Dobby when he is coming to see Harry Potter so they can make their reports together !What is this ?asked Hermione still looking shocked by these sudden appearances .Whats going on Harry ?Harry hesitated before answering because he had not told Hermione about setting Kreacher and Dobby to tail Malfoy houseelves were always such a touchy subject with her .Well .theyve been following Malfoy for me he said .Night and day croaked Kreacher .Dobby has not slept for a week Harry Potter !said Dobby proudly swaying where he stood .Hermione looked indignant .You havent slept Dobby ?But surely Harry you didnt tell him not to No of course I didnt said Harry quickly .Dobby you can sleep all right ?But has either of you found out anything ?he hastened to ask before Hermione could intervene again .Master Malfoy moves with a nobility that befits his pure blood croaked Kreacher at once .His features recall the fine bones of my mistress and his manners are those of Draco Malfoy is a bad boy !squeaked Dobby angrily .A bad boy who who He shuddered from the tassel of his tea cozy to the toes of his socks and then ran at the fire as though about to dive into it Harry to whom this was not entirely unexpected caught him around the middle and held him fast .For a few seconds Dobby struggled then went limp .Thank you Harry Potter he panted .Dobby still finds it difficult to speak ill of his old masters .Harry released him Dobby straightened his tea cozy and said defiantly to Kreacher But Kreacher should know that Draco Malfoy is not a good master to a houseelf !Yeah we dont need to hear about you being in love with Malfoy Harry told Kreacher .Lets fast forward to where hes actually been going .Kreacher bowed again looking furious and then said Master Malfoy eats in the Great Hall he sleeps in a dormitory in the dungeons he attends his classes in a variety of Dobby you tell me said Harry cutting across Kreacher .Has he been going anywhere he shouldnt have ?Harry Potter sir squeaked Dobby his great orblike eyes shining in the firelight the Malfoy boy is breaking no rules that Dobby can discover but he is still keen to avoid detection .He has been making regular visits to the seventh floor with a variety of other students who keep watch for him while he enters The Room of Requirement !said Harry smacking himself hard on the forehead with Advanced Potion Making .Hermione and Ron stared at him .Thats where hes been sneaking off to !Thats where hes doing .whatever hes doing !And I bet thats why hes been disappearing off the map come to think of it Ive never seen the Room of Requirement on there !Maybe the Marauders never knew the room was there said Ron .I think itll be part of the magic of the room said Hermione .If you need it to be Unplottable it will be .Dobby have you managed to get in to have a look at what Malfoys doing ?said Harry eagerly .No Harry Potter that is impossible said Dobby .No its not said Harry at once .Malfoy got into our headquarters there last year so Ill be able to get in and spy on him no problem .But I dont think you will Harry said Hermione slowly .Malfoy already knew exactly how we were using the room didnt he because that stupid Marietta had blabbed .He needed the room to become the headquarters of the D .A .so it did .But you dont know what the room becomes when Malfoy goes in there so you dont know what to ask it to transform into .Therell be a way around that said Harry dismissively .Youve done brilliantly Dobby .Kreachers done well too said Hermione kindly but far from looking grateful Kreacher averted his huge bloodshot eyes and croaked at the ceiling The Mudblood is speaking to Kreacher Kreacher will pretend he cannot hear Get out of it Harry snapped at him and Kreacher made one last deep bow and Disapparated .Youd better go and get some sleep too Dobby .Thank you Harry Potter sir !squeaked Dobby happily and he too vanished .How goods this ?said Harry enthusiastically turning to Ron and Hermione the moment the room was elffree again .We know where Malfoys going !Weve got him cornered now !Yeah its great said Ron glumly who was attempting to mop up the sodden mass of ink that had recently been an almost completed essay .Hermione pulled it toward her and began siphoning the ink off with her wand .But whats all this about him going up there with a Variety of students ?said Hermione .How many people are in on it ?You wouldnt think hed trust lots of them to know what hes doing .Yeah that is weird said Harry frowning .I heard him telling Crabbe it wasnt Crabbes business what he was doing .so whats he telling all these .all these .Harrys voice tailed away he was staring at the fire .God Ive been stupid he said quietly .Its obvious isnt it ?There was a great vat of it down in the dungeon .He couldve nicked some any time during that lesson .Nicked what ?said Ron .Polyjuice Potion .He stole some of the Polyjuice Potion Slughorn showed us in our first Potions lesson .There arent a whole variety of students standing guard for Malfoy .its just Crabbe and Goyle as usual .Yeah it all fits !said Harry jumping up and starting to pace in front of the fire .Theyre stupid enough to do what theyre told even if he wont tell them what hes up to .but he doesnt want them to be seen lurking around outside the Room of Requirement so hes got them taking Polyjuice to make them look like other people .Those two girls I saw him with when he missed Quidditch ha !Crabbe and Goyle !Do you mean to say said Hermione in a hushed voice that that little girl whose scales I repaired ?Yeah of course !said Harry loudly staring at her .Of course !Malfoy mustve been inside the room at the time so she what am I talking about ?he dropped the scales to tell Malfoy not to come out because there was someone there !And there was that girl who dropped the toadspawn too !Weve been walking past him all the time and not realizing it !Hes got Crabbe and Goyle transforming into girls ?guffawed Ron .Blimey .No wonder they dont look too happy these days .Im surprised they dont tell him to stuff it .Well they wouldnt would they if hes shown them his Dark Mark ?said Harry .Hmmm .the Dark Mark we dont know exists said Hermione skeptically rolling up Rons dried essay before it could come to any more harm and handing it to him .Well see said Harry confidently .Yes we will Hermione said getting to her feet and stretching .But Harry before you get all excited I still dont think youll be able to get into the Room of Requirement without knowing whats there first .And I dont think you should forget she heaved her bag onto her shoulder and gave him a very serious look that what youre supposed to be concentrating on is getting that memory from Slughorn .Good night .Harry watched her go feeling slightly disgruntled .Once the door to the girls dormitories had closed behind her he rounded on Ron .What dyou think ?Wish I could Disapparate like a houseelf said Ron staring at the spot where Dobby had vanished .Id have that Apparition Test in the bag .Harry did not sleep well that night .He lay awake for what felt like hours wondering how Malfoy was using the Room of Requirement and what he Harry would see when he went in there the following day for whatever Hermione said Harry was sure that if Malfoy had been able to see the headquarters of the D .A .he would be able to see Malfoy s .what could it be ?A meeting place ?A hideout ?A storeroom ?A workshop ?Harrys mind worked feverishly and his dreams when he finally fell asleep were broken and disturbed by images of Malfoy who turned into Slughorn who turned into Snape .Harry was in a state of great anticipation over breakfast the following morning he had a free period before Defense Against the Dark Arts and was determined to spend it trying to get into the Room of Requirement .Hermione was rather ostentatiously showing no interest in his whispered plans for forcing entry into the room which irritated Harry because he thought she might be a lot of help if she wanted to .Look he said quietly leaning forward and putting a hand on the Daily Prophet which she had just removed from a post owl to stop her from opening it and vanishing behind it .I havent forgotten about Slughorn but I havent got a clue how to get that memory off him and until I get a brain wave why shouldnt I find out what Malfoys doing ?Ive already told you you need to persuade Slughorn said Hermione .Its not a question of tricking him or bewitching him or Dumbledore could have done it in a second .Instead of messing around outside the Room of Requirement she jerked the Prophet out from under Harrys hand and unfolded it to look at the front page you should go and find Slughorn and start appealing to his better nature .Anyone we know ?asked Ron as Hermione scanned the headlines .Yes !said Hermione causing both Harry and Ron to gag on their breakfast .But its all right hes not dead its Mundungus hes been arrested and sent to Azkaban !Something to do with impersonating an Inferius during an attempted burglary .and someone called Octavius Pepper has vanished .Oh and how horrible a nineyearold boy has been arrested for trying to kill his grandparents they think he was under the Imperius Curse .They finished their breakfast in silence .Hermione set off immediately for Ancient Runes Ron for the common room where he still had to finish his conclusion on Snapes dementor essay and Harry for the corridor on the seventh floor and the stretch of wall opposite the tapestry of Barnabas the Barmy teaching trolls to do ballet .Harry slipped on his Invisibility Cloak once he had found an empty passage but he need not have bothered .When he reached his destination he found it deserted .Harry was not sure whether his chances of getting inside the room were better with Malfoy inside it or out but at least his first attempt was not going to be complicated by the presence of Crabbe or Goyle pretending to be an elevenyearold girl .He closed his eyes as he approached the place where the Room of Requirements door was concealed .He knew what he had to do he had become most accomplished at it last year .Concentrating with all his might he thought I need to see what Malfoy s doing in here .I need to see what Malfoys doing in here .I need to see what Malfoys doing in here .Three times he walked past the door then his heart pounding with excitement he opened his eyes and faced it But he was still looking at a stretch of mundanely blank wall .He moved forward and gave it an experimental push .The stone remained solid and unyielding .Okay said Harry aloud .Okay .I thought the wrong thing .He pondered for a moment then set off again eyes closed concentrating as hard as he could .I need to see the place where Malfoy keeps coming secretly .I need to see the place where Malfoy keeps coming secretly .After three walks past he opened his eyes expectantly .There was no door .Oh come off it he told the wall irritably .That was a clear instruction .Fine .He thought hard for several minutes before striding off once more .I need you to become the place you become for Draco Malfoy .He did not immediately open his eyes when he had finished his patrolling he was listening hard as though he might hear the door pop into existence .He heard nothing however except the distant twittering of birds outside .He opened his eyes .There was still no door .Harry swore .Someone screamed .He looked around to see a gaggle of first years running back around the corner apparently under the impression that they had just encountered a particularly foulmouthed ghost .Harry tried every variation of I need to see what Draco Malfoy is doing inside you that he could think of for a whole hour at the end of which he was forced to concede that Hermione might have had a point The room simply did not want to open for him .Frustrated and annoyed he set off for Defense Against the Dark Arts pulling off his Invisibility Cloak and stuffing it into his bag as he went .Late again Potter said Snape coldly as Harry hurried into the candlelit classroom .Ten points from Gryffindor .Harry scowled at Snape as he flung himself into the seat beside Ron half the class was still on its feet taking out books and organizing their things he could not be much later than any of them .Before we start I want your dementor essays said Snape waving his wand carelessly so that twenty five scrolls of parchment soared into the air and landed in a neat pile on his desk .And I hope for your sakes they are better than the tripe I had to endure on resisting the Imperius Curse .Now if you will all open your books to page what is it Mr Finnigan ?Sir said Seamus Ive been wondering how do you tell the difference between an Inferius and a ghost ?Because there was something in the paper about an Inferius No there wasnt said Snape in a bored voice .But sir I heard people talking If you had actually read the article in question Mr Finnigan you would have known that the socalled Inferius was nothing but a smelly sneak thief by the name of Mundungus Fletcher .I thought Snape and Mundungus were on the same side muttered Harry to Ron and Hermione .Shouldnt he be upset Mundungus has been arrest But Potter seems to have a lot to say on the subject said Snape pointing suddenly at the back of the room his black eyes fixed on Harry Let us ask Potter how we would tell the difference between an Inferius and a ghost .The whole class looked around at Harry who hastily tried to recall what Dumbledore had told him the night that they had gone to visit Slughorn .Er well ghosts are transparent he said .Oh very good interrupted Snape his lip curling .Yes it is easy to see that nearly six years of magical education have not been wasted on you Potter . ‘Ghosts are transparent .Pansy Parkinson let out a highpitched giggle .Several other people were smirking .Harry took a deep breath and continued calmly though his insides were boiling Yeah ghosts are transparent but Inferi are dead bodies arent they ?So theyd be solid A fiveyearold could have told us as much sneered Snape .The Inferius is a corpse that has been reanimated by a Dark wizards spells .It is not alive it is merely used like a puppet to do the wizards bidding .A ghost as I trust that you are all aware by now is the imprint of a departed soul left upon the earth .and of course as Potter so wisely tells us transparent .Well what Harry said is the most useful if were trying to tell them apart !said Ron .When we come facetoface with one down a dark alley were going to be having a shufti to see if its solid arent we were not going to be asking ‘Excuse me are you the imprint of a departed soul ?There was a ripple of laughter instantly quelled by the look Snape gave the class .Another ten points from Gryffindor said Snape .I would expect nothing more sophisticated from you Ronald Weasley the boy so solid he cannot Apparate half an inch across a room .IVo !whispered Hermione grabbing Harrys arm as he opened his mouth furiously .Theres no point youll just end up in detention again leave it !Now open your books to page two hundred and thirteen said Snape smirking a little and read the first two paragraphs on the Cruciatus Curse .Ron was very subdued all through the class .When the bell sounded at the end of the lesson Lavender caught up with Ron and Harry Hermione mysteriously melted out of sight as she approached and abused Snape hotly for his jibe about Rons Apparition but this seemed to merely irritate Ron and he shook her off by making a detour into the boys bathroom with Harry .Snapes right though isnt he ?said Ron after staring into a cracked mirror for a minute or two .I dunno whether its worth me taking the test .I just cant get the hang of Apparition .You might as well do the extra practice sessions in Hogsmeade and see where they get you said Harry reasonably .Itll be more interesting than trying to get into a stupid hoop anyway .Then if youre still not you know as good as youd like to be you can postpone the test do it with me over the summ Myrtle this is the boys bathroom !The ghost of a girl had risen out of the toilet in a cubicle behind them and was now floating in midair staring at them through thick white round glasses .Oh she said glumly .Its you two .Who were you expecting ?said Ron looking at her in the mirror .Nobody said Myrtle picking moodily at a spot on her chin .He said hed come back and see me but then you said youd pop in and visit me too she gave Harry a reproachful look and I havent seen you for months and months .Ive learned not to expect too much from boys .I thought you lived in that girls bathroom ?said Harry who had been careful to give the place a wide berth for some years now .I do she said with a sulky little shrug but that doesnt mean I cant visit other places .I came and saw you in your bath once remember ?Vividly said Harry .But I thought he liked me she said plaintively .Maybe if you two left hed come back again .We had lots in common .Im sure he felt it .And she looked hopefully toward the door .When you say you had lots in common said Ron sounding rather amused now dyou mean he lives in an Sbend too ?No said Myrtle defiantly her voice echoing loudly around the old tiled bathroom .I mean hes sensitive people bully him too and he feels lonely and hasnt got anybody to talk to and hes not afraid to show his feelings and cry !Theres been a boy in here crying ?said Harry curiously .A young boy ?Never you mind !said Myrtle her small leaky eyes fixed on Ron who was now definitely grinning .I promised I wouldnt tell anyone and Ill take his secret to the not the grave surely ?said Ron with a snort .The sewers maybe .Myrtle gave a howl of rage and dived back into the toilet causing water to slop over the sides and onto the floor .Goading Myrtle seemed to have put fresh heart into Ron .Youre right he said swinging his schoolbag back over his shoulder Ill do the practice sessions in Hogsmeade before I decide about taking the test .And so the following weekend Ron joined Hermione and the rest of the sixth years who would turn seventeen in time to take the test in a fortnight .Harry felt rather jealous watching them all get ready to go into the village he missed making trips there and it was a particularly fine spring day one of the first clear skies they had seen in a long time .However he had decided to use the time to attempt another assault on the Room of Requirement .Youd do better said Hermione when he confided this plan to Ron and her in the entrance hall to go straight to Slughorns office and try and get that memory from him .Ive been trying !said Harry crossly which was perfectly true .He had lagged behind after every Potions lesson that week in an attempt to corner Slughorn but the Potions master always left the dungeon so fast that Harry had not been able to catch him .Twice Harry had gone to his office and knocked but received no reply though on the second occasion he was sure he had heard the quickly stifled sounds of an old gramophone .He doesnt want to talk to me Hermione !He can tell Ive been trying to get him on his own again and hes not going to let it happen !Well youve just got to keep at it havent you ?The short queue of people waiting to file past Filch who was doing his usual prodding act with the Secrecy Sensor moved forward a few steps and Harry did not answer in case he was overheard by the caretaker .He wished Ron and Hermione both luck then turned and climbed the marble staircase again determined whatever Hermione said to devote an hour or two to the Room of Requirement .Once out of sight of the entrance hall Harry pulled the Marauders Map and his Invisibility Cloak from his bag .Having concealed himself he tapped the map murmured I solemnly swear that I am up to no good and scanned it carefully .As it was Sunday morning nearly all the students were inside their various common rooms the Gryffindors in one tower the Ravenclaws in another the Slytherins in the dungeons and the Hufflepuffs in the basement near the kitchens .Here and there a stray person meandered around the library or up a corridor .There were a few people out in the grounds .and there alone in the seventhfloor corridor was Gregory Goyle .There was no sign of the Room of Requirement but Harry was not worried about that if Goyle was standing guard outside it the room was open whether the map was aware of it or not .He therefore sprinted up the stairs slowing down only when he reached the corner into the corridor when he began to creep very slowly toward the very same little girl clutching her heavy brass scales that Hermione had so kindly helped a fortnight before .He waited until he was right behind her before bending very low and whispering Hello .youre very pretty arent you ?Goyle gave a highpitched scream of terror threw the scales up into the air and sprinted away vanishing from sight long before the sound of the scales smashing had stopped echoing around the corridor .Laughing Harry turned to contemplate the blank wall behind which he was sure Draco Malfoy was now standing frozen aware that someone unwelcome was out there but not daring to make an appearance .It gave Harry a most agreeable feeling of power as he tried to remember what form of words he had not yet tried .Yet this hopeful mood did not last long .Half an hour later having tried many more variations of his request to see what Malfoy was up to the wall was just as doorless as ever .Harry felt frustrated beyond belief Malfoy might be just feet away from him and there was still not the tiniest shred of evidence as to what he was doing in there .Losing his patience completely Harry ran at the wall and kicked it .OUCH !He thought he might have broken his toe as he clutched it and hopped on one foot the Invisibility Cloak slipped off him .Harry ?He spun around onelegged and toppled over .There to his utter astonishment was Tonks walking toward him as though she frequently strolled up this corridor .Whatre you doing here ?he said scrambling to his feet again why did she always have to find him lying on the floor ?I came to see Dumbledore said Tonks .Harry thought she looked terrible thinner than usual her mousecolored hair lank .His office isnt here said Harry its round the other side of the castle behind the gargoyle I know said Tonks .Hes not there .Apparently hes gone away again .Has he ?said Harry putting his bruised foot gingerly back on the floor .Hey you dont know where he goes I suppose ?No said Tonks .What did you want to see him about ?Nothing in particular said Tonks picking apparently unconsciously at the sleeve of her robe .I just thought he might know whats going on .Ive heard rumors .people getting hurt .Yeah I know its all been in the papers said Harry .That little kid trying to kill his The Prophets often behind the times said Tonks who didnt seem to be listening to him .You havent had any letters from anyone in the Order recently ?No one from the Order writes to me anymore said Harry not since Sirius He saw that her eyes had filled with tears .Im sorry he muttered awkwardly .I mean .I miss him as well .What ?said Tonks blankly as though she had not heard him .Well .Ill see you around Harry .And she turned abruptly and walked back down the corridor leaving Harry to stare after her .After a minute or so he pulled the Invisibility Cloak on again and resumed his efforts to get into the Room of Requirement but his heart was not in it .Finally a hollow feeling in his stomach and the knowledge that Ron and Hermione would soon be back for lunch made him abandon the attempt and leave the corridor to Malfoy who hopefully would be too afraid to leave for some hours to come .He found Ron and Hermione in the Great Hall already halfway through an early lunch .I did it well kind of !Ron told Harry enthusiastically when he caught sight of him .I was supposed to be Apparating to outside Madam Puddifoots Tea Shop and I overshot it a bit ended up near Scrivenshafts but at least I moved !Good one said Harry .Howd you do Hermione ?Oh she was perfect obviously said Ron before Hermione could answer .Perfect deliberation divination and desperation or whatever the hell it is we all went for a quick drink in the Three Broomsticks after and you shouldve heard Twycross going on about her Ill be surprised if he doesnt pop the question soon And what about you ?asked Hermione ignoring Ron .Have you been up at the Room of Requirement all this time ?Yep said Harry .And guess who I ran into up there ?Tonks !Tonks ?repeated Ron and Hermione together looking surprised .Yeah she said shed come to visit Dumbledore .If you ask me said Ron once Harry had finished describing his conversation with Tonks shes cracking up a bit .Losing her nerve after what happened at the Ministry .Its a bit odd said Hermione who for some reason looked very concerned .Shes supposed to be guarding the school whys she suddenly abandoning her post to come and see Dumbledore when hes not even here ?I had a thought said Harry tentatively .He felt strange about voicing it this was much more Hermiones territory than his .You dont think she can have been .you know .in love with Sirius ?Hermione stared at him .What on earth makes you say that ?I dunno said Harry shrugging but she was nearly crying when I mentioned his name .and her Patronus is a big fourlegged thing now .I wondered whether it hadnt become .you know .him .Its a thought said Hermione slowly .But I still dont know why shed be bursting into the castle to see Dumbledore if thats really why she was here .Goes back to what I said doesnt it ?said Ron who was now shoveling mashed potato into his mouth .Shes gone a bit funny .Lost her nerve .Women he said wisely to Harry theyre easily upset .And yet said Hermione coming out of her reverie I doubt youd find a woman who sulked for half an hour because Madam Rosmerta didnt laugh at their joke about the hag the Healer and the Mimbulus mimbletonia .Ron scowled .AFTER THE BURIAL Patches of bright blue sky were beginning to appear over the castle turrets but these signs of approaching summer did not lift Harrys mood .He had been thwarted both in his attempts to find out what Malfoy was doing and in his efforts to start a conversation with Slughorn that might lead somehow to Slughorn handing over the memory he had apparently suppressed for decades .For the last time just forget about Malfoy Hermione told Harry firmly .They were sitting with Ron in a sunny corner of the courtyard after lunch .Hermione and Ron were both clutching a Ministry of Magic leaflet Common Apparition Mistakes and How to Avoid Them for they were taking their tests that very afternoon but by and large the leaflets had not proved soothing to the nerves .Ron gave a start and tried to hide behind Hermione as a girl came around the corner .It isnt Lavender said Hermione wearily .Oh good said Ron relaxing .Harry Potter ?said the girl .I was asked to give you this .Thanks .Harrys heart sank as he took the small scroll of parchment .Once the girl was out of earshot he said Dumbledore said we wouldnt be having any more lessons until I got the memory !Maybe he wants to check on how youre doing ?suggested Hermione as Harry unrolled the parchment but rather than finding Dumbledore s long narrow slanted writing he saw an untidy sprawl very difficult to read due to the presence of large blotches on the parchment where the ink had run .Dear Harry Ron and Hermione Aragog died last night Harry and Ron you met him and you know how special he was .Hermione I know youd have liked him .It would mean a lot to me if youd nip down for the burial later this evening .Im planning on doing it round dusk that was his favorite time of day .I know youre not supposed to be out that late but you can use the cloak .Wouldnt ask but I cant face it alone .Hagrid Look at this said Harry handing the note to Hermione .Oh for heavens sake she said scanning it quickly and passing it to Ron who read it through looking increasingly incredulous .Hes mentaft he said furiously .That thing told its mates to eat Harry and me !Told them to help themselves !And now Hagrid expects us to go down there and cry over its horrible hairy body !Its not just that said Hermione .Hes asking us to leave the castle at night and he knows securitys a million times tighter and how much trouble wed be in if we were caught .Weve been down to see him by night before said Harry .Yes but for something like this ?said Hermione .Weve risked a lot to help Hagrid out but after all Aragogs dead .If it were a question of saving him Id want to go even less said Ron firmly .You didnt meet him Hermione .Believe me being dead will have improved him a lot .Harry took the note back and stared down at all the inky blotches all over it .Tears had clearly fallen thick and fast upon the parchment .Harry you cant be thinking of going said Hermione .Its such a pointless thing to get detention for .Harry sighed .Yeah I know he said .I spose Hagrid ll have to bury Aragog without us .Yes he will said Hermione looking relieved .Look Potions will be almost empty this afternoon with us all off doing our tests .Try and soften Slughorn up a bit then !Fiftyseventh time lucky you think ?said Harry bitterly .Lucky said Ron suddenly .Harry thats it get lucky !What dyou mean ?Use your lucky potion !Ron thats thats it !said Hermione sounding stunned .Of course !Why didnt I think of it ?Harry stared at them both .Felix Felicis ?he said .I dunno .I was sort of saving it .What for ?demanded Ron incredulously .What on earth is more important than this memory Harry ?asked Hermione .Harry did not answer .The thought of that little golden bottle had hovered on the edges of his imagination for some time vague and unformulated plans that involved Ginny splitting up with Dean and Ron somehow being happy to see her with a new boyfriend had been fermenting in the depths of his brain unacknowledged except during dreams or the twilight time between sleeping and waking .Harry ?Are you still with us ?asked Hermione .Wha ?Yeah of course he said pulling himself together .Well .okay .If I cant get Slughorn to talk this afternoon Ill take some Felix and have another go this evening .Thats decided then said Hermione briskly getting to her feet and performing a graceful pirouette .Destination .determination .deliberation .she murmured .Oh stop that Ron begged her I feel sick enough as it is quick hide me !It isnt Lavender !said Hermione impatiently as another couple of girls appeared in the courtyard and Ron dived behind her .Cool said Ron peering over Hermiones shoulder to check .Blimey they dont look happy do they ?Theyre the Montgomery sisters and of course they dont look happy didnt you hear what happened to their little brother ?said Hermione .Im losing track of whats happening to everyones relatives to be honest said Ron .Well their brother was attacked by a werewolf .The rumor is that their mother refused to help the Death Eaters .Anyway the boy was only five and he died in St .Mungos they couldnt save him .He died ?repeated Harry shocked .But surely werewolves dont kill they just turn you into one of them ?They sometimes kill said Ron who looked unusually grave now .Ive heard of it happening when the werewolf gets carried away .What was the werewolfs name ?said Harry quickly .Well the rumor is that it was that Fenrir Greyback said Hermione .I knew it the maniac who likes attacking kids the one Lupin told me about !said Harry angrily .Hermione looked at him bleakly .Harry youve got to get that memory she said .Its all about stopping Voldemort isnt it ?These dreadful things that are happening are all down to him .The bell rang overhead in the castle and both Hermione and Ron jumped to their feet looking terrified .Youll do fine Harry told them both as they headed toward the entrance hall to meet the rest of the people taking their Apparition Test .Good luck .And you too !said Hermione with a significant look as Harry headed off to the dungeons .There were only three of them in Potions that afternoon Harry Ernie and Draco Malfoy .All too young to Apparate just yet ?said Slughorn genially .Not turned seventeen yet ?They shook their heads .Ah well said Slughorn cheerily as were so few well do something fun .I want you all to brew me up something amusing !That sounds good sir said Ernie sycophantically rubbing his hands together .Malfoy on the other hand did not crack a smile .What do you mean ‘something amusing ?he said irritably .Oh surprise me said Slughorn airily .Malfoy opened his copy of Advanced PotionMaking with a sulky expression .It could not have been plainer that he thought this lesson was a waste of time .Undoubtedly Harry thought watching him over the top of his own book Malfoy was begrudging the time he could otherwise be spending in the Room of Requirement .Was it his imagination or did Malfoy like Tonks look thinner ?Certainly he looked paler his skin still had that grayish tinge probably because he so rarely saw daylight these days .But there was no air of smugness excitement or superiority none of the swagger that he had had on the Hogwarts Express when he had boasted openly of the mission he had been given by Voldemort .There could be only one conclusion in Harrys opinion The mission whatever it was was going badly .Cheered by this thought Harry skimmed through his copy of Advanced PotionMaking and found a heavily corrected HalfBlood Princes version of An Elixir to Induce Euphoria which seemed not only to meet Slughorn s instructions but which might Harrys heart leapt as the thought struck him put Slughorn into such a good mood that he would be prepared to hand over that memory if Harry could persuade him to taste some .Well now this looks absolutely wonderful said Slughorn an hour and a half later clapping his hands together as he stared down into the sunshine yellow contents of Harrys cauldron .Euphoria I take it ?And whats that I smell ?Mmmm .youve added just a sprig of peppermint havent you ?Unorthodox but what a stroke of inspiration Harry of course that would tend to counterbalance the occasional side effects of excessive singing and nosetweaking .I really dont know where you get these brain waves my boy .unless Harry pushed the HalfBlood Princes book deeper into his bag with his foot .its just your mothers genes coming out in you !Oh .yeah maybe said Harry relieved .Ernie was looking rather grumpy determined to outshine Harry for once he had most rashly invented his own potion which had curdled and formed a kind of purple dumpling at the bottom of his cauldron .Malfoy was already packing up sourfaced Slughorn had pronounced his Hiccuping Solution merely passable .The bell rang and both Ernie and Malfoy left at once .Sir Harry began but Slughorn immediately glanced over his shoulder when he saw that the room was empty but for himself and Harry he hurried away as fast as he could .Professor Professor dont you want to taste my po ?called Harry desperately .But Slughorn had gone .Disappointed Harry emptied the cauldron packed up his things left the dungeon and walked slowly back upstairs to the common room .Ron and Hermione returned in the late afternoon .Harry !cried Hermione as she climbed through the portrait hole .Harry I passed !Well done !he said .And Ron ?He he just failed whispered Hermione as Ron came slouching into the room looking most morose .It was really unlucky a tiny thing the examiner just spotted that hed left half an eyebrow behind .How did it go with Slughorn ?No joy said Harry as Ron joined them .Bad luck mate but youll pass next time we can take it together .Yeah I spose said Ron grumpily .But half an eyebrow Like that matters !I know said Hermione soothingly it does seem really harsh .They spent most of their dinner roundly abusing the Apparition examiner and Ron looked fractionally more cheerful by the time they set off back to the common room now discussing the continuing problem of Slughorn and the memory .So Harry you going to use the Felix Felicis or what ?Ron demanded .Yeah I spose Id better said Harry .I dont reckon Ill need all of it not twelve hours worth it cant take all night .Ill just take a mouthful .Two or three hours should do it .Its a great feeling when you take it said Ron reminiscently .Like you cant do anything wrong .What are you talking about ?said Hermione laughing .Youve never taken any !Yeah but I thought I had didnt I ?said Ron as though explaining the obvious .Same difference really .As they had only just seen Slughorn enter the Great Hall and knew that he liked to take time over meals they lingered for a while in the common room the plan being that Harry should go to Slughorn s office once the teacher had had time to get back there .When the sun had sunk to the level of the treetops in the Forbidden Forest they decided the moment had come and after checking carefully that Neville Dean and Seamus were all in the common room sneaked up to the boys dormitory .Harry took out the rolledup socks at the bottom of his trunk and extracted the tiny gleaming bottle .Well here goes said Harry and he raised the little bottle and took a carefully measured gulp .What does it feel like ?whispered Hermione .Harry did not answer for a moment .Then slowly but surely an exhilarating sense of infinite opportunity stole through him he felt as though he could have done anything anything at all .and getting the memory from Slughorn seemed suddenly not only possible but positively easy .He got to his feet smiling brimming with confidence .Excellent he said .Really excellent .Right .Im going down to Hagrids .What ?said Ron and Hermione together looking aghast .No Harry youve got to go and see Slughorn remember ?said Hermione .No said Harry confidently .Im going to Hagrids Ive got a good feeling about going to Hagrids .Youve got a good feeling about burying a giant spider ?asked Ron looking stunned .Yeah said Harry pulling his Invisibility Cloak out of his bag .I feel like its the place to be tonight you know what I mean ?No said Ron and Hermione together both looking positively alarmed now .This is Felix Felicis I suppose ?said Hermione anxiously holding up the bottle to the light .You havent got another little bottle full of I dont know Essence of Insanity ?suggested Ron as Harry swung his cloak over his shoulders .Harry laughed and Ron and Hermione looked even more alarmed .Trust me he said .I know what Im doing .or at least he strolled confidently to the door Felix does .He pulled the Invisibility Cloak over his head and set off down the stairs Ron and Hermione hurrying along behind him .At the foot of the stairs Harry slid through the open door .What were you doing up there with her ?shrieked Lavender Brown staring right through Harry at Ron and Hermione emerging together from the boys dormitories .Harry heard Ron spluttering behind him as he darted across the room away from them .Getting through the portrait hole was simple as he approached it Ginny and Dean came through it and Harry was able to slip between them .As he did so he brushed accidentally against Ginny .Dont push me please Dean she said sounding annoyed .Youre always doing that I can get through perfectly well on my own .The portrait swung closed behind Harry but not before he had heard Dean make an angry retort .His feeling of elation increasing Harry strode off through the castle .He did not have to creep along for he met nobody on his way but this did not surprise him in the slightest This evening he was the luckiest person at Hogwarts .Why he knew that going to Hagrids was the right thing to do he had no idea .It was as though the potion was illuminating a few steps of the path at a time He could not see the final destination he could not see where Slughorn came in but he knew that he was going the right way to get that memory .When he reached the entrance hall he saw that Filch had forgotten to lock the front door .Beaming Harry threw it open and breathed in the smell of clean air and grass for a moment before walking down the steps into the dusk .It was when he reached the bottom step that it occurred to him how very pleasant it would be to pass the vegetable patch on his walk to Hagrids .It was not strictly on the way but it seemed clear to Harry that this was a whim on which he should act so he directed his feet immediately toward the vegetable patch where he was pleased but not altogether surprised to find Professor Slughorn in conversation with Professor Sprout .Harry lurked behind a low stone wall feeling at peace with the world and listening to their conversation .I do thank you for taking the time Pomona Slughorn was saying courteously most authorities agree that they are at their most efficacious if picked at twilight .Oh I quite agree said Professor Sprout warmly .That enough for you ?Plenty plenty said Slughorn who Harry saw was carrying an armful of leafy plants .This should allow for a few leaves for each of my third years and some to spare if anybody overstews them .Well good evening to you and many thanks again !Professor Sprout headed off into the gathering darkness in the direction of her greenhouses and Slughorn directed his steps to the spot where Harry stood invisible .Seized with an immediate desire to reveal himself Harry pulled off the cloak with a flourish .Good evening Professor .Merlins beard Harry you made me jump said Slughorn stopping dead in his tracks and looking wary .How did you get out of the castle ?I think Filch mustve forgotten to lock the doors said Harry cheerfully and was delighted to see Slughorn scowl .Ill be reporting that man hes more concerned about litter than proper security if you ask me .But why are you out here Harry ?Well sir its Hagrid said Harry who knew that the right thing to do just now was to tell the truth .Hes pretty upset .But you wont tell anyone Professor ?I dont want trouble for him .Slughorns curiosity was evidently aroused .Well I cant promise that he said gruffly .But I know that Dumbledore trusts Hagrid to the hilt so Im sure he cant be up to anything very dreadful .Well its this giant spider hes had it for years .It lived in the forest .It could talk and everything I heard rumors there were acromantulas in the forest said Slughorn softly looking over at the mass of black trees .Its true then ?Yes said Harry .But this one Aragog the first one Hagrid ever got it died last night .Hes devastated .He wants company while he buries it and I said Id go .Touching touching said Slughorn absentmindedly his large droopy eyes fixed upon the distant lights of Hagrid s cabin .But acromantula venom is very valuable .If the beast only just died it might not yet have dried out .Of course I wouldnt want to do anything insensitive if Hagrid is upset .but if there was any way to procure some .I mean its almost impossible to get venom from an acromantula while its alive .Slughorn seemed to be talking more to himself than Harry now . .seems an awful waste not to collect it .might get a hundred Galleons a pint .To be frank my salary is not large .And now Harry saw clearly what was to be done .Well he said with a most convincing hesitancy well if you wanted to come Professor Hagrid would probably be really pleased .Give Aragog a better sendoff you know .Yes of course said Slughorn his eyes now gleaming with enthusiasm .I tell you what Harry Ill meet you down there with a bottle or two .Well drink the poor beasts well not health but well send it off in style anyway once its buried .And Ill change my tie this one is a little exuberant for the occasion .He bustled back into the castle and Harry sped off to Hagrid s delighted with himself .Yeh came croaked Hagrid when he opened the door and saw Harry emerging from the Invisibility Cloak in front of him .Yeah Ron and Hermione couldnt though said Harry .Theyre really sorry .Don don matter .Hedve bin touched yehre here though Harry .Hagrid gave a great sob .He had made himself a black armband out of what looked like a rag dipped in boot polish and his eyes were puffy red and swollen .Harry patted him consolingly on the elbow which was the highest point of Hagrid he could easily reach .Where are we burying him ?he asked .The forest ?Blimey no said Hagrid wiping his streaming eyes on the bottom of his shirt .The other spiders won let me anywhere near their webs now Aragogs gone .Turns out it was ony on his orders they didn eat me !Can yeh believe that Harry ?The honest answer was yes Harry recalled with painful ease the scene when he and Ron had come facetoface with the acromantulas They had been quite clear that Aragog was the only thing that stopped them from eating Hagrid .Never bin an area o the forest I couldn go before !said Hagrid shaking his head .It wasn easy gettin Aragogs body out o there I can tell yeh they usually eat their dead see .But I wanted ter give im a nice burial .a proper sendoff .He broke into sobs again and Harry resumed the patting of his elbow saying as he did so for the potion seemed to indicate that it was the right thing to do Professor Slughorn met me coming down here Hagrid .Not in trouble are yeh ?said Hagrid looking up alarmed .Yeh shouldn be outta the castle in the evenin I know it its my fault No no when he heard what I was doing he said hed like to come and pay his last respects to Aragog too said Harry .Hes gone to change into something more suitable I think .and he said hed bring some bottles so we can drink to Aragogs memory .Did he ?said Hagrid looking both astonished and touched .Thas thas righ nice of him that is an not turnin yeh in either .Ive never really had a lot ter do with Horace Slughorn before .Cornin ter see old Aragog off though eh ?Well .he dve liked that Aragog would .Harry thought privately that what Aragog would have liked most about Slughorn was the ample amount of edible flesh he provided but he merely moved to the rear window of Hagrid s hut where he saw the rather horrible sight of the enormous dead spider lying on its back outside its legs curled and tangled .Are we going to bury him here Hagrid in your garden ?Jus beyond the pumpkin patch I thought said Hagrid in a choked voice .Ive already dug the yeh know grave .Jus thought wed say a few nice things over him happy memories yeh know His voice quivered and broke .There was a knock on the door and he turned to answer it blowing his nose on his great spotted handkerchief as he did so .Slughorn hurried over the threshold several bottles in his arms and wearing a somber black cravat .Hagrid he said in a deep grave voice .So very sorry to hear of your loss .Thas very nice of yeh said Hagrid .Thanks a lot .An thanks fer not givin Harry detention neither .Wouldnt have dreamed of it said Slughorn .Sad night sad night .Where is the poor creature ?Out here said Hagrid in a shaking voice .Shall we shall we do it then ?The three of them stepped out into the back garden .The moon was glistening palely through the trees now and its rays mingled with the light spilling from Hagrids window to illuminate Aragogs body lying on the edge of a massive pit beside a tenfoothigh mound of freshly dug earth .Magnificent said Slughorn approaching the spiders head where eight milky eyes stared blankly at the sky and two huge curved pincers shone motionless in the moonlight .Harry thought he heard the tinkle of bottles as Slughorn bent over the pincers apparently examining the enormous hairy head .Its not evryone appreciates how beauiful they are said Hagrid to Slughorn s back tears leaking from the corners of his crinkled eyes .I didn know yeh were intrested in creatures like Aragog Horace .Interested ?My dear Hagrid I revere them said Slughorn stepping back from the body .Harry saw the glint of a bottle disappear beneath his cloak though Hagrid mopping his eyes once more noticed nothing .Now .shall we proceed to the burial ?Hagrid nodded and moved forward .He heaved the gigantic spider into his arms and with an enormous grunt rolled it into the dark pit .It hit the bottom with a rather horrible crunchy thud .Hagrid started to cry again .Of course its difficult for you who knew him best said Slughorn who like Harry could reach no higher than Hagrids elbow but patted it all the same .Why dont I say a few words ?He must have got a lot of good quality venom from Aragog Harry thought for Slughorn wore a satisfied smirk as he stepped up to the rim of the pit and said in a slow impressive voice Farewell Aragog king of arachnids whose long and faithful friendship those who knew you wont forget !Though your body will decay your spirit lingers on in the quiet webspun places of your forest home .May your manyeyed descendants ever flourish and your human friends find solace for the loss they have sustained .Tha was .tha was .beauiful !howled Hagrid and he collapsed onto the compost heap crying harder than ever .There there said Slughorn waving his wand so that the huge pile of earth rose up and then fell with a muffled sort of crash onto the dead spider forming a smooth mound .Lets get inside and have a drink .Get on his other side Harry .Thats it .Up you come Hagrid .Well done .They deposited Hagrid in a chair at the table .Fang who had been skulking in his basket during the burial now came padding softly across to them and put his heavy head into Harrys lap as usual .Slughorn uncorked one of the bottles of wine he had brought .I have had it all tested for poison he assured Harry pouring most of the first bottle into one of Hagrid s bucket sized mugs and handing it to Hagrid .Had a houseelf taste every bottle after what happened to your poor friend Rupert .Harry saw in his minds eye the expression on Hermiones face if she ever heard about this abuse of houseelves and decided never to mention it to her .One for Harry .said Slughorn dividing a second bottle between two mugs .and one for me .Well he raised his mug high to Aragog .Aragog said Harry and Hagrid together .Both Slughorn and Hagrid drank deeply .Harry however with the way ahead illuminated for him by Felix Felicis knew that he must not drink so he merely pretended to take a gulp and then set the mug back on the table before him .I had him from an egg yeh know said Hagrid morosely .Tiny little thing he was when he hatched .Bout the size of a Pekingese .Sweet said Slughorn .Used ter keep him in a cupboard up at the school until .well .Hagrid s face darkened and Harry knew why Tom Riddle had contrived to have Hagrid thrown out of school blamed for opening the Chamber of Secrets .Slughorn however did not seem to be listening he was looking up at the ceiling from which a number of brass pots hung and also a long silky skein of bright white hair .Thats never unicorn hair Hagrid ?Oh yeah said Hagrid indifferently .Gets pulled out of their tails they catch it on branches an stuff in the forest yeh know .But my dear chap do you know how much thats worth ?I use it fer bindin on bandages an stuff if a creature gets injured said Hagrid shrugging .Its dead useful .very strong see .Slughorn took another deep draught from his mug his eyes moving carefully around the cabin now looking Harry knew for more treasures that he might be able to convert into a plentiful supply of oak matured mead crystalized pineapple and velvet smoking jackets .He refilled Hagrids mug and his own and questioned him about the creatures that lived in the forest these days and how Hagrid was able to look after them all .Hagrid becoming expansive under the influence of the drink and Slughorn s flattering interest stopped mopping his eyes and entered happily into a long explanation of bowtruckle husbandry .The Felix Felicis gave Harry a little nudge at this point and he noticed that the supply of drink that Slughorn had brought was running out fast .Harry had not yet managed to bring off the Refilling Charm without saying the incantation aloud but the idea that he might not be able to do it tonight was laughable Indeed Harry grinned to himself as unnoticed by either Hagrid or Slughorn now swapping tales of the illegal trade in dragon eggs he pointed his wand under the table at the emptying bottles and they immediately began to refill .After an hour or so Hagrid and Slughorn began making extravagant toasts to Hogwarts to Dumbledore to elfmade wine and to Harry Potter !bellowed Hagrid slopping some of his fourteenth bucket of wine down his chin as he drained it .Yes indeed cried Slughorn a little thickly Parry Otter the Chosen Boy Who well something of that sort he mumbled and drained his mug too .Not long after this Hagrid became tearful again and pressed the whole unicorn tail upon Slughorn who pocketed it with cries of To friendship !To generosity !To ten Galleons a hair !And for a while after that Hagrid and Slughorn were sitting side by side arms around each other singing a slow sad song about a dying wizard called Odo .aargh the good die young muttered Hagrid slumping low onto the table a little crosseyed while Slughorn continued to warble the refrain .Me dad was no age ter go .nor were yer mum an dad Harry .Great fat tears oozed out of the corners of Hagrid s crinkled eyes again he grasped Harrys arm and shook it .Bes wiz and witchard o their age I never knew .terrible thing .terrible thing .And Odo the hero they bore him back home To the place that hed known as a lad sang Slughorn plaintively .They laid him to rest with his hat inside out And his wand snapped in two which was sad . .terrible Hagrid grunted and his great shaggy head rolled sideways onto his arms and he fell asleep snoring deeply .Sorry said Slughorn with a hiccup .Cant carry a tune to save my life .Hagrid wasnt talking about your singing said Harry quietly .He was talking about my mum and dad dying .Oh said Slughorn repressing a large belch .Oh dear .Yes that was was terrible indeed .Terrible .terrible .He looked quite at a loss for what to say and resorted to refilling their mugs .I dont dont suppose you remember it Harry ?he asked awkwardly .No well I was only one when they died said Harry his eyes on the flame of the candle flickering in Hagrids heavy snores .But Ive found out pretty much what happened since .My dad died first .Did you know that ?I I didnt said Slughorn in a hushed voice .Yeah .Voldemort murdered him and then stepped over his body toward my mum said Harry .Slughorn gave a great shudder but he did not seem able to tear his horrified gaze away from Harrys face .He told her to get out of the way said Harry remorselessly .He told me she neednt have died .He only wanted me .She could have run .Oh dear breathed Slughorn .She could have .she neednt .Thats awful .It is isnt it ?said Harry in a voice barely more than a whisper .But she didnt move .Dad was already dead but she didnt want me to go too .She tried to plead with Voldemort .but he just laughed .Thats enough !said Slughorn suddenly raising a shaking hand .Really my dear boy enough .Im an old man .I dont need to hear .I dont want to hear I forgot lied Harry Felix Felicis leading him on .You liked her didnt you ?Liked her ?said Slughorn his eyes brimming with tears once more .I dont imagine anyone who met her wouldnt have liked her .Very brave .Very funny .It was the most horrible thing .But you wont help her son said Harry .She gave me her life but you wont give me a memory .Hagrids rumbling snores filled the cabin .Harry looked steadily into Slughorn s tearfilled eyes .The Potions master seemed unable to look away .Dont say that he whispered .It isnt a question .If it were to help you of course .but no purpose can be served .It can said Harry clearly .Dumbledore needs information .I need information .He knew he was safe Felix was telling him that Slughorn would remember nothing of this in the morning .Looking Slughorn straight in the eye Harry leaned forward a little .I am the Chosen One .I have to kill him .I need that memory .Slughorn turned paler than ever his shiny forehead gleamed with sweat .You are the Chosen One ?Of course I am said Harry calmly .But then .my dear boy .youre asking a great deal .youre asking me in fact to aid you in your attempt to destroy You dont want to get rid of the wizard who killed Lily Evans ?Harry Harry of course I do but Youre scared hell find out you helped me ?Slughorn said nothing he looked terrified .Be brave like my mother Professor .Slughorn raised a pudgy hand and pressed his shaking fingers to his mouth he looked for a moment like an enormously overgrown baby .I am not proud .he whispered through his fingers .I am ashamed of what of what that memory shows .I think I may have done great damage that day .Youd cancel out anything you did by giving me the memory said Harry .It would be a very brave and noble thing to do .Hagrid twitched in his sleep and snored on .Slughorn and Harry stared at each other over the guttering candle .There was a long long silence but Felix Felicis told Harry not to break it to wait .Then very slowly Slughorn put his hand in his pocket and pulled out his wand .He put his other hand inside his cloak and took out a small empty bottle .Still looking into Harrys eyes Slughorn touched the tip of his wand to his temple and withdrew it so that a long silver thread of memory came away too clinging to the wand tip .Longer and longer the memory stretched until it broke and swung silvery bright from the wand .Slughorn lowered it into the bottle where it coiled then spread swirling like gas .He corked the bottle with a trembling hand and then passed it across the table to Harry .Thank you very much Professor .Youre a good boy said Professor Slughorn tears trickling down his fat cheeks into his walrus mustache .And youve got her eyes .Just dont think too badly of me once youve seen it .And he too put his head on his arms gave a deep sigh and fell asleep .HORCRUXES Harry could feel the Felix Felicis wearing off as he crept back into the castle .The front door had remained unlocked for him but on the third floor he met Peeves and only narrowly avoided detection by diving sideways through one of his shortcuts .By the time he got up to the portrait of the Fat Lady and pulled off his Invisibility Cloak he was not surprised to find her in a most unhelpful mood .What sort of time do you call this ?Im really sorry I had to go out for something important Well the password changed at midnight so youll just have to sleep in the corridor wont you ?Youre joking !said Harry .Why did it have to change at midnight ?Thats the way it is said the Fat Lady .If youre angry go and take it up with the headmaster hes the one whos tightened security .Fantastic said Harry bitterly looking around at the hard floor .Really brilliant .Yeah I would go and take it up with Dumbledore if he was here because hes the one who wanted me to He is here said a voice behind Harry .Professor Dumbledore returned to the school an hour ago .Nearly Headless Nick was gliding toward Harry his head wobbling as usual upon his ruff .I had it from the Bloody Baron who saw him arrive said Nick .He appeared according to the Baron to be in good spirits though a little tired of course .Where is he ?said Harry his heart leaping .Oh groaning and clanking up on the Astronomy Tower its a favorite pastime of his Not the Bloody Baron Dumbledore !Oh in his office said Nick .I believe from what the Baron said that he had business to attend to before turning in Yeah he has said Harry excitement blazing in his chest at the prospect of telling Dumbledore he had secured the memory .He wheeled about and sprinted off again ignoring the Fat Lady who was calling after him .Come back !All right I lied !I was annoyed you woke me up !The passwords still ‘tapeworm !But Harry was already hurtling back along the corridor and within minutes he was saying toffee eclairs to Dumbledores gargoyle which leapt aside permitting Harry entrance onto the spiral staircase .Enter said Dumbledore when Harry knocked .He sounded exhausted .Harry pushed open the door .There was Dumbledores office looking the same as ever but with black star strewn skies beyond the windows .Good gracious Harry said Dumbledore in surprise .To what do I owe this very late pleasure ?Sir Ive got it .Ive got the memory from Slughorn .Harry pulled out the tiny glass bottle and showed it to Dumbledore .For a moment or two the headmaster looked stunned .Then his face split in a wide smile .Harry this is spectacular news !Very well done indeed !I knew you could do it !All thought of the lateness of the hour apparently forgotten he hurried around his desk took the bottle with Slughorns memory in his uninjured hand and strode over to the cabinet where he kept the Pensieve .And now said Dumbledore placing the stone basin upon his desk and emptying the contents of the bottle into it .Now at last we shall see .Harry quickly .Harry bowed obediently over the Pensieve and felt his feet leave the office floor .Once again he fell through darkness and landed in Horace Slughorns office many years before .There was the much younger Slughorn with his thick shiny strawcolored hair and his gingeryblond mustache sitting again in the comfortable winged armchair in his office his feet resting upon a velvet pouffe a small glass of wine in one hand the other rummaging in a box of crystalized pineapple .And there were the halfdozen teenage boys sitting around Slughorn with Tom Riddle in the midst of them Marvolos goldandblack ring gleaming on his finger .Dumbledore landed beside Harry just as Riddle asked Sir is it true that Professor Merrythought is retiring ?Tom Tom if I knew I couldnt tell you said Slughorn wagging his finger reprovingly at Riddle though winking at the same time .I must say Id like to know where you get your information boy more knowledgeable than half the staff you are .Riddle smiled the other boys laughed and cast him admiring looks .What with your uncanny ability to know things you shouldnt and your careful flattery of the people who matter thank you for the pineapple by the way youre quite right it is my favorite Several of the boys tittered again .I confidently expect you to rise to Minister of Magic within twenty years .Fifteen if you keep sending me pineapple I have excellent contacts at the Ministry .Tom Riddle merely smiled as the others laughed again .Harry noticed that he was by no means the eldest of the group of boys but that they all seemed to look to him as their leader .I dont know that politics would suit me sir he said when the laughter had died away .I dont have the right kind of background for one thing .A couple of the boys around him smirked at each other .Harry was sure they were enjoying a private joke undoubtedly about what they knew or suspected regarding their gang leaders famous ancestor .Nonsense said Slughorn briskly couldnt be plainer you come from decent Wizarding stock abilities like yours .No youll go far Tom Ive never been wrong about a student yet .The small golden clock standing upon Slughorn s desk chimed eleven oclock behind him and he looked around .Good gracious is it that time already ?Youd better get going boys or well all be in trouble .Lestrange I want your essay by tomorrow or its detention .Same goes for you Avery .One by one the boys filed out of the room .Slughorn heaved himself out of his armchair and carried his empty glass over to his desk .A movement behind him made him look around Riddle was still standing there .Look sharp Tom you dont want to be caught out of bed out of hours and you a prefect .Sir I wanted to ask you something .Ask away then mboy ask away .Sir I wondered what you know about .about Horcruxes ?Slughorn stared at him his thick fingers absentmindedly caressing the stem of his wine glass .Project for Defense Against the Dark Arts is it ?But Harry could tell that Slughorn knew perfectly well that this was not schoolwork .Not exactly sir said Riddle .I came across the term while reading and I didnt fully understand it .No .well .youd be hardpushed to find a book at Hogwarts thatll give you details on Horcruxes Tom thats very Dark stuff very Dark indeed said Slughorn .But you obviously know all about them sir ?I mean a wizard like you sorry I mean if you cant tell me obviously I just knew if anyone could tell me you could so I just thought Id ask It was very well done thought Harry the hesitancy the casual tone the careful flattery none of it overdone .He Harry had had too much experience of trying to wheedle information out of reluctant people not to recognize a master at work .He could tell that Riddle wanted the information very very much perhaps had been working toward this moment for weeks .Well said Slughorn not looking at Riddle but fiddling with the ribbon on top of his box of crystalized pineapple well it cant hurt to give you an overview of course .Just so that you understand the term .A Horcrux is the word used for an object in which a person has concealed part of their soul .I dont quite understand how that works though sir said Riddle .His voice was carefully controlled but Harry could sense his excitement .Well you split your soul you see said Slughorn and hide part of it in an object outside the body .Then even if ones body is attacked or destroyed one cannot die for part of the soul remains earthbound and undamaged .But of course existence in such a form .Slughorn s face crumpled and Harry found himself remembering words he had heard nearly two years before I was ripped from my body I was less than spirit less than the meanest ghost .but still I was alive . .few would want it Tom very few .Death would be preferable .But Riddles hunger was now apparent his expression was greedy he could no longer hide his longing .How do you split your soul ?Well said Slughorn uncomfortably you must understand that the soul is supposed to remain intact and whole .Splitting it is an act of violation it is against nature .But how do you do it ?By an act of evil the supreme act of evil .By committing murder .Killing rips the soul apart .The wizard intent upon creating a Horcrux would use the damage to his advantage He would encase the torn portion Encase ?But how ?There is a spell do not ask me I dont know !said Slughorn shaking his head like an old elephant bothered by mosquitoes .Do I look as though I have tried it do I look like a killer ?No sir of course not said Riddle quickly .Im sorry .I didnt mean to offend .Not at all not at all not offended said Slughorn gruffly .Its natural to feel some curiosity about these things .Wizards of a certain caliber have always been drawn to that aspect of magic .Yes sir said Riddle .What I dont understand though just out of curiosity I mean would one Horcrux be much use ?Can you only split your soul once ?Wouldnt it be better make you stronger to have your soul in more pieces I mean for instance isnt seven the most powerfully magical number wouldnt seven ?Merlins beard Tom !yelped Slughorn .Seven !Isnt it bad enough to think of killing one person ?And in any case .bad enough to divide the soul .but to rip it into seven pieces .Slughorn looked deeply troubled now He was gazing at Riddle as though he had never seen him plainly before and Harry could tell that he was regretting entering into the conversation at all .Of course he muttered this is all hypothetical what were discussing isnt it ?All academic .Yes sir of course said Riddle quickly .But all the same Tom .keep it quiet what Ive told thats to say what weve discussed .People wouldnt like to think weve been chatting about Horcruxes .Its a banned subject at Hogwarts you know .Dumbledores particularly fierce about it .I wont say a word sir said Riddle and he left but not before Harry had glimpsed his face which was full of that same wild happiness it had worn when he had first found out that he was a wizard the sort of happiness that did not enhance his handsome features but made them somehow less human .Thank you Harry said Dumbledore quietly .Let us go .When Harry landed back on the office floor Dumbledore was already sitting down behind his desk .Harry sat too and waited for Dumbledore to speak .I have been hoping for this piece of evidence for a very long time said Dumbledore at last .It confirms the theory on which I have been working it tells me that I am right and also how very far there is still to go .Harry suddenly noticed that every single one of the old headmasters and headmistresses in the portraits around the walls was awake and listening in on their conversation .A corpulent rednosed wizard had actually taken out an ear trumpet .Well Harry said Dumbledore I am sure you understood the significance of what we just heard .At the same age as you are now give or take a few months Tom Riddle was doing all he could to find out how to make himself immortal .You think he succeeded then sir ?asked Harry .He made a Horcrux ?And thats why he didnt die when he attacked me ?He had a Horcrux hidden somewhere ?A bit of his soul was safe ?A bit .or more said Dumbledore .You heard Voldemort What he particularly wanted from Horace was an opinion on what would happen to the wizard who created more than one Horcrux what would happen to the wizard so determined to evade death that he would be prepared to murder many times rip his soul repeatedly so as to store it in many separately concealed Horcruxes .No book would have given him that information .As far as I know as far I am sure as Voldemort knew no wizard had ever done more than tear his soul in two .Dumbledore paused for a moment marshaling his thoughts and then said Four years ago I received what I considered certain proof that Voldemort had split his soul .Where ?asked Harry How ?You handed it to me Harry said Dumbledore .The diary Riddles diary the one giving instructions on how to reopen the Chamber of Secrets .I dont understand sir said Harry .Well although I did not see the Riddle who came out of the diary what you described to me was a phenomenon I had never witnessed .A mere memory starting to act and think for itself ?A mere memory sapping the life out of the girl into whose hands it had fallen ?No something much more sinister had lived inside that book .a fragment of soul I was almost sure of it .The diary had been a Horcrux .But this raised as many questions as it answered .What intrigued and alarmed me most was that that diary had been intended as a weapon as much as a safeguard .I still dont understand said Harry .Well it worked as a Horcrux is supposed to work in other words the fragment of soul concealed inside it was kept safe and had undoubtedly played its part in preventing the death of its owner .But there could be no doubt that Riddle really wanted that diary read wanted the piece of his soul to inhabit or possess somebody else so that Slytherins monster would be unleashed again .Well he didnt want his hard work to be wasted said Harry .He wanted people to know he was Slytherins heir because he couldnt take credit at the time .Quite correct said Dumbledore nodding .But dont you see Harry that if he intended the diary to be passed to or planted on some future Hogwarts student he was being remarkably blase about that precious fragment of his soul concealed within it .The point of a Horcrux is as Professor Slughorn explained to keep part of the self hidden and safe not to fling it into somebody elses path and run the risk that they might destroy it as indeed happened That particular fragment of soul is no more you saw to that .The careless way in which Voldemort regarded this Horcrux seemed most ominous to me .It suggested that he must have made or been planning to make more Horcruxes so that the loss of his first would not be so detrimental .I did not wish to believe it but nothing else seemed to make sense .Then you told me two years later that on the night that Voldemort returned to his body he made a most illuminating and alarming statement to his Death Eaters .who have gone further than anybody along the path that leads to immortality .That was what you told me he said . ‘Further than anybody And I thought I knew what that meant though the Death Eaters did not .He was referring to his Horcruxes Horcruxes in the plural Harry which I do not believe any other wizard has ever had .Yet it fitted Lord Voldemort has seemed to grow less human with the passing years and the transformation he has undergone seemed to me to be only explicable if his soul was mutilated beyond the realms of what we might call ‘usual evil So hes made himself impossible to kill by murdering other people ?said Harry .Why couldnt he make a Sorcerers Stone or steal one if he was so interested in immortality ?Well we know that he tried to do just that five years ago said Dumbledore .But there are several reasons why I think a Sorcerers Stone would appeal less than Horcruxes to Lord Voldemort .While the Elixir of Life does indeed extend life it must be drunk regularly for all eternity if the drinker is to maintain their immortality .Therefore Voldemort would be entirely dependent on the Elixir and if it ran out or was contaminated or if the Stone was stolen he would die just like any other man .Voldemort likes to operate alone remember .I believe that he would have found the thought of being dependent even on the Elixir intolerable .Of course he was prepared to drink it if it would take him out of the horrible partlife to which he was condemned after attacking you but only to regain a body .Thereafter I am convinced he intended to continue to rely on his Horcruxes He would need nothing more if only he could regain a human form .He was already immortal you see .or as close to immortal as any man can be .But now Harry armed with this information the crucial memory you have succeeded in procuring for us we are closer to the secret of finishing Lord Voldemort than anyone has ever been before .You heard him Harry ‘Wouldnt it be better make you stronger to have your soul in more pieces .isnt seven the most powerfully magical number .Isnt seven the most powerfully magical number .Yes I think the idea of a sevenpart soul would greatly appeal to Lord Voldemort .He made seven Horcruxes ?said Harry horror struck while several of the portraits on the walls made similar noises of shock and outrage .But they could be anywhere in the world hidden buried or invisible I am glad to see you appreciate the magnitude of the problem said Dumbledore calmly .But firstly no Harry not seven Horcruxes six .The seventh part of his soul however maimed resides inside his regenerated body .That was the part of him that lived a spectral existence for so many years during his exile without that he has no self at all .That seventh piece of soul will be the last that anybody wishing to kill Voldemort must attack the piece that lives in his body .But the six Horcruxes then said Harry a little desperately how are we supposed to find them ?You are forgetting .you have already destroyed one of them .And I have destroyed another .You have ?said Harry eagerly .Yes indeed said Dumbledore and he raised his blackened burnedlooking hand .The ring Harry .Marvolos ring .And a terrible curse there was upon it too .Had it not been forgive me the lack of seemly modesty for my own prodigious skill and for Professor Snapes timely action when I returned to Hogwarts desperately injured I might not have lived to tell the tale .However a withered hand does not seem an unreasonable exchange for a seventh of Voldemorts soul .The ring is no longer a Horcrux .But how did you find it ?Well as you now know for many years I have made it my business to discover as much as I can about Voldemorts past life .I have traveled widely visiting those places he once knew .I stumbled across the ring hidden in the ruin of the Gaunts house .It seems that once Voldemort had succeeded in sealing a piece of his soul inside it he did not want to wear it anymore .He hid it protected by many powerful enchantments in the shack where his ancestors had once lived Morfin having been carted off to Azkaban of course never guessing that I might one day take the trouble to visit the ruin or that I might be keeping an eye open for traces of magical concealment .However we should not congratulate ourselves too heartily .You destroyed the diary and I the ring but if we are right in our theory of a sevenpart soul four Horcruxes remain .And they could be anything ?said Harry .They could be old tin cans or I dunno empty potion bottles .You are thinking of Portkeys Harry which must be ordinary objects easy to overlook .But would Lord Voldemort use tin cans or old potion bottles to guard his own precious soul ?You are forgetting what I have showed you .Lord Voldemort liked to collect trophies and he preferred objects with a powerful magical history .His pride his belief in his own superiority his determination to carve for himself a startling place in magical history these things suggest to me that Voldemort would have chosen his Horcruxes with some care favoring objects worthy of the honor .The diary wasnt that special .The diary as you have said yourself was proof that he was the Heir of Slytherin I am sure that Voldemort considered it of stupendous importance .So the other Horcruxes ?said Harry .Do you think you know what they are sir ?I can only guess said Dumbledore .For the reasons I have already given I believe that Lord Voldemort would prefer objects that in themselves have a certain grandeur .I have therefore trawled back through Voldemorts past to see if I can find evidence that such artifacts have disappeared around him .The locket !said Harry loudly .Hufflepuffs cup !Yes said Dumbledore smiling I would be prepared to bet perhaps not my other hand but a couple of fingers that they became Horcruxes three and four .The remaining two assuming again that he created a total of six are more of a problem but I will hazard a guess that having secured objects from Hufflepuff and Slytherin he set out to track down objects owned by Gryffindor or Ravenclaw .Four objects from the four founders would I am sure have exerted a powerful pull over Voldemorts imagination .I cannot answer for whether he ever managed to find anything of Ravenclaws .I am confident however that the only known relic of Gryffindor remains safe .Dumbledore pointed his blackened fingers to the wall behind him where a rubyencrusted sword reposed within a glass case .Do you think thats why he really wanted to come back to Hogwarts sir ?said Harry .To try and find something from one of the other founders ?My thoughts precisely said Dumbledore .But unfortunately that does not advance us much further for he was turned away or so I believe without the chance to search the school .I am forced to conclude that he never fulfilled his ambition of collecting four founders objects .He definitely had two he may have found three that is the best we can do for now .Even if he got something of Ravenclaws or of Gryffindors that leaves a sixth Horcrux said Harry counting on his fingers .Unless he got both ?I dont think so said Dumbledore .I think I know what the sixth Horcrux is .I wonder what you will say when I confess that I have been curious for a while about the behavior of the snake Nagini ?The snake ?said Harry startled .You can use animals as Horcruxes ?Well it is inadvisable to do so said Dumbledore because to confide a part of your soul to something that can think and move for itself is obviously a very risky business .However if my calculations are correct Voldemort was still at least one Horcrux short of his goal of six when he entered your parents house with the intention of killing you .He seems to have reserved the process of making Horcruxes for particularly significant deaths .You would certainly have been that .He believed that in killing you he was destroying the danger the prophecy had outlined .He believed he was making himself invincible .I am sure that he was intending to make his final Horcrux with your death .As we know he failed .After an interval of some years however he used Nagini to kill an old Muggle man and it might then have occurred to him to turn her into his last Horcrux .She underlines the Slytherin connection which enhances Lord Voldemorts mystique I think he is perhaps as fond of her as he can be of anything he certainly likes to keep her close and he seems to have an unusual amount of control over her even for a Parselmouth .So said Harry the diarys gone the rings gone .The cup the locket and the snake are still intact and you think there might be a Horcrux that was once Ravenclaws or Gryffindors ?An admirably succinct and accurate summary yes said Dumbledore bowing his head .So .are you still looking for them sir ?Is that where youve been going when youve been leaving the school ?Correct said Dumbledore .I have been looking for a very long time .I think .perhaps .I may be close to finding another one .There are hopeful signs .And if you do said Harry quickly can I come with you and help get rid of it ?Dumbledore looked at Harry very intently for a moment before saying Yes I think so .I can ?said Harry thoroughly taken aback .Oh yes said Dumbledore smiling slightly .I think you have earned that right .Harry felt his heart lift .It was very good not to hear words of caution and protection for once .The headmasters and headmistresses around the walls seemed less impressed by Dumbledores decision Harry saw a few of them shaking their heads and Phineas Nigellus actually snorted .Does Voldemort know when a Horcrux is destroyed sir ?Can he feel it ?Harry asked ignoring the portraits .A very interesting question Harry .I believe not .I believe that Voldemort is now so immersed in evil and these crucial parts of himself have been detached for so long he does not feel as we do .Perhaps at the point of death he might be aware of his loss .but he was not aware for instance that the diary had been destroyed until he forced the truth out of Lucius Malfoy .When Voldemort discovered that the diary had been mutilated and robbed of all its powers I am told that his anger was terrible to behold .But I thought he meant Lucius Malfoy to smuggle it into Hogwarts ?Yes he did years ago when he was sure he would be able to create more Horcruxes but still Lucius was supposed to wait for Voldemorts sayso and he never received it for Voldemort vanished shortly after giving him the diary .No doubt he thought that Lucius would not dare do anything with the Horcrux other than guard it carefully but he was counting too much upon Luciuss fear of a master who had been gone for years and whom Lucius believed dead .Of course Lucius did not know what the diary really was .I understand that Voldemort had told him the diary would cause the Chamber of Secrets to reopen because it was cleverly enchanted .Had Lucius known he held a portion of his masters soul in his hands he would undoubtedly have treated it with more reverence but instead he went ahead and carried out the old plan for his own ends By planting the diary upon Arthur Weasleys daughter he hoped to discredit Arthur and get rid of a highly incriminating magical object in one stroke .Ah poor Lucius .what with Voldemort s fury about the fact that he threw away the Horcrux for his own gain and the fiasco at the Ministry last year I would not be surprised if he is not secretly glad to be safe in Azkaban at the moment .Harry sat in thought for a moment then asked So if all of his Horcruxes are destroyed Voldemort could be killed ?Yes I think so said Dumbledore .Without his Horcruxes Voldemort will be a mortal man with a maimed and diminished soul .Never forget though that while his soul may be damaged beyond repair his brain and his magical powers remain intact .It will take uncommon skill and power to kill a wizard like Voldemort even without his Horcruxes .But I havent got uncommon skill and power said Harry before he could stop himself .Yes you have said Dumbledore firmly .You have a power that Voldemort has never had .You can I know !said Harry impatiently .I can love !It was only with difficulty that he stopped himself adding Big deal !Yes Harry you can love said Dumbledore who looked as though he knew perfectly well what Harry had just refrained from saying .Which given everything that has happened to you is a great and remarkable thing .You are still too young to understand how unusual you are Harry .So when the prophecy says that Ill have ‘power the Dark Lord knows not it just means love ?asked Harry feeling a little let down .Yes just love said Dumbledore .But Harry never forget that what the prophecy says is only significant because Voldemort made it so .I told you this at the end of last year .Voldemort singled you out as the person who would be most dangerous to him and in doing so he made you the person who would be most dangerous to him !But it comes to the same No it doesnt !said Dumbledore sounding impatient now .Pointing at Harry with his black withered hand he said You are setting too much store by the prophecy !But spluttered Harry but you said the prophecy means If Voldemort had never heard of the prophecy would it have been fulfilled ?Would it have meant anything ?Of course not !Do you think every prophecy in the Hall of Prophecy has been fulfilled ?But said Harry bewildered but last year you said one of us would have to kill the other Harry Harry only because Voldemort made a grave error and acted on Professor Trelawneys words !If Voldemort had never murdered your father would he have imparted in you a furious desire for revenge ?Of course not !If he had not forced your mother to die for you would he have given you a magical protection he could not penetrate ?Of course not Harry !Dont you see ?Voldemort himself created his worst enemy just as tyrants everywhere do !Have you any idea how much tyrants fear the people they oppress ?All of them realize that one day amongst their many victims there is sure to be one who rises against them and strikes back !Voldemort is no different !Always he was on the lookout for the one who would challenge him .He heard the prophecy and he leapt into action with the result that he not only handpicked the man most likely to finish him he handed him uniquely deadly weapons !But It is essential that you understand this !said Dumbledore standing up and striding about the room his glittering robes swooshing in his wake Harry had never seen him so agitated .By attempting to kill you Voldemort himself singled out the remarkable person who sits here in front of me and gave him the tools for the job !It is Voldemort s fault that you were able to see into his thoughts his ambitions that you even understand the snakelike language in which he gives orders and yet Harry despite your privileged insight into Voldemorts world which incidentally is a gift any Death Eater would kill to have you have never been seduced by the Dark Arts never even for a second shown the slightest desire to become one of Voldemorts followers !Of course I havent !said Harry indignantly .He killed my mum and dad !You are protected in short by your ability to love !said Dumbledore loudly .The only protection that can possibly work against the lure of power like Voldemorts !In spite of all the temptation you have endured all the suffering you remain pure of heart just as pure as you were at the age of eleven when you stared into a mirror that reflected your hearts desire and it showed you only the way to thwart Lord Voldemort and not immortality or riches .Harry have you any idea how few wizards could have seen what you saw in that mirror ?Voldemort should have known then what he was dealing with but he did not !But he knows it now .You have flitted into Lord Voldemorts mind without damage to yourself but he cannot possess you without enduring mortal agony as he discovered in the Ministry .I do not think he understands why Harry but then he was in such a hurry to mutilate his own soul he never paused to understand the incomparable power of a soul that is untarnished and whole .But sir said Harry making valiant efforts not to sound argumentative it all comes to the same thing doesnt it ?Ive got to try and kill him or Got to ?said Dumbledore .Of course youve got to !But not because of the prophecy !Because you yourself will never rest until youve tried !We both know it !Imagine please just for a moment that you had never heard that prophecy !How would you feel about Voldemort now ?Think !Harry watched Dumbledore striding up and down in front of him and thought .He thought of his mother his father and Sirius .He thought of Cedric Diggory .He thought of all the terrible deeds he knew Lord Voldemort had done .A flame seemed to leap inside his chest searing his throat .Id want him finished said Harry quietly .And Id want to do it .Of course you would !cried Dumbledore .You see the prophecy does not mean you have to do anything !But the prophecy caused Lord Voldemort to mark you as his equal .In other words you are free to choose your way quite free to turn your back on the prophecy !But Voldemort continues to set store by the prophecy .He will continue to hunt you .which makes it certain really that That one of us is going to end up killing the other said Harry .Yes .But he understood at last what Dumbledore had been trying to tell him .It was he thought the difference between being dragged into the arena to face a battle to the death and walking into the arena with your head held high .Some people perhaps would say that there was little to choose between the two ways but Dumbledore knew and so do I thought Harry with a rush of fierce pride and so did my parents that there was all the difference in the world .SECTUMSEMPRA Exhausted but delighted with his nights work Harry told Ron and Hermione everything that had happened during next mornings Charms lesson having first cast the Muffliato spell upon those nearest them .They were both satisfyingly impressed by the way he had wheedled the memory out of Slughorn and positively awed when he told them about Voldemorts Horcruxes and Dumbledores promise to take Harry along should he find another one .Wow said Ron when Harry had finally finished telling them everything Ron was waving his wand very vaguely in the direction of the ceiling without paying the slightest bit of attention to what he was doing .Wow .Youre actually going to go with Dumbledore .and try and destroy .wow .Ron youre making it snow said Hermione patiently grabbing his wrist and redirecting his wand away from the ceiling from which sure enough large white flakes had started to fall .Lavender Brown Harry noticed glared at Hermione from a neighboring table through very red eyes and Hermione immediately let go of Rons arm .Oh yeah said Ron looking down at his shoulders in vague surprise .Sorry .looks like weve all got horrible dandruff now .He brushed some of the fake snow off Hermione s shoulder .Lavender burst into tears .Ron looked immensely guilty and turned his back on her .We split up he told Harry out of the corner of his mouth .Last night .When she saw me coming out of the dormitory with Hermione .Obviously she couldnt see you so she thought it had just been the two of us .Ah said Harry .Well you dont mind its over do you ?No Ron admitted .It was pretty bad while she was yelling but at least I didnt have to finish it .Coward said Hermione though she looked amused .Well it was a bad night for romance all around .Ginny and Dean split up too Harry .Harry thought there was a rather knowing look in her eye as she told him that but she could not possibly know that his insides were suddenly dancing the conga .Keeping his face as immobile and his voice as indifferent as he could he asked How come ?Oh something really silly .She said he was always trying to help her through the portrait hole like she couldnt climb in herself .but theyve been a bit rocky for ages .Harry glanced over at Dean on the other side of the classroom .He certainly looked unhappy .Of course this puts you in a bit of a dilemma doesnt it ?said Hermione .What dyou mean ?said Harry quickly .The Quidditch team said Hermione .If Ginny and Dean arent speaking .Oh oh yeah said Harry .Flitwick said Ron in a warning tone .The tiny little Charms master was bobbing his way toward them and Hermione was the only one who had managed to turn vinegar into wine her glass flask was full of deep crimson liquid whereas the contents of Harrys and Rons were still murky brown .Now now boys squeaked Professor Flitwick reproachfully .A little less talk a little more action .Let me see you try .Together they raised their wands concentrating with all their might and pointed them at their flasks .Harrys vinegar turned to ice Rons flask exploded .Yes .for homework said Professor Flitwick reemerging from under the table and pulling shards of glass out of the top of his hat practice .They had one of their rare joint free periods after Charms and walked back to the common room together .Ron seemed to be positively lighthearted about the end of his relationship with Lavender and Hermione seemed cheery too though when asked what she was grinning about she simply said Its a nice day .Neither of them seemed to have noticed that a fierce battle was raging inside Harrys brain Shes Rons sister .But shes ditched Dean !Shes still Rons sister .Im his best mate !Thatll make it worse .If I talked to him first Hed hit you .What if I dont care ?Hes your best mate Harry barely noticed that they were climbing through the portrait hole into the sunny common room and only vaguely registered the small group of seventh years clustered together there until Hermione cried Katie !Youre back !Are you okay ?Harry stared It was indeed Katie Bell looking completely healthy and surrounded by her jubilant friends .Im really well !she said happily .They let me out of St .Mungos on Monday I had a couple of days at home with Mum and Dad and then came back here this morning .Leanne was just telling me about McLaggen and the last match Harry .Yeah said Harry well now youre back and Rons fit well have a decent chance of thrashing Ravenclaw which means we could still be in the running for the Cup .Listen Katie .He had to put the question to her at once his curiosity even drove Ginny temporarily from his brain .He dropped his voice as Katies friends started gathering up their things apparently they were late for Transfiguration . .that necklace .can you remember who gave it to you now ?No said Katie shaking her head ruefully .Everyones been asking me but I havent got a clue .The last thing I remember was walking into the ladies in the Three Broomsticks .You definitely went into the bathroom then ?said Hermione .Well I know I pushed open the door said Katie so I suppose whoever Imperiused me was standing just behind it .After that my memorys a blank until about two weeks ago in St .Mungos .Listen Id better go I wouldnt put it past McGonagall to give me lines even if it is my first day back .She caught up her bag and books and hurried after her friends leaving Harry Ron and Hermione to sit down at a window table and ponder what she had told them .So it must have been a girl or a woman who gave Katie the necklace said Hermione to be in the ladies bathroom .Or someone who looked like a girl or a woman said Harry .Dont forget there was a cauldron full of Polyjuice Potion at Hogwarts .We know some of it got stolen .In his minds eye he watched a parade of Crabbes and Goyles prance past all transformed into girls .I think Im going to take another swig of Felix said Harry and have a go at the Room of Requirement again .That would be a complete waste of potion said Hermione flatly putting down the copy of Spellmans Syllabary she had just taken out of her bag .Luck can only get you so far Harry .The situation with Slughorn was different you always had the ability to persuade him you just needed to tweak the circumstances a bit .Luck isnt enough to get you through a powerful enchantment though .Dont go wasting the rest of that potion !Youll need all the luck you can get if Dumbledore takes you along with him .She dropped her voice to a whisper .Couldnt we make some more ?Ron asked Harry ignoring Hermione .Itd be great to have a stock of it . .Have a look in the book .Harry pulled his copy of Advanced PotionMaking out of his bag and looked up Felix Felicis .Blimey its seriously complicated he said running an eye down the list of ingredients .And it takes six months .Youve got to let it stew .Typical said Ron .Harry was about to put his book away again when he noticed the corner of a page folded down turning to it he saw the Sectumsempra spell captioned For Enemies that he had marked a few weeks previously .He had still not found out what it did mainly because he did not want to test it around Hermione but he was considering trying it out on McLaggen next time he came up behind him unawares .The only person who was not particularly pleased to see Katie Bell back at school was Dean Thomas because he would no longer be required to fill her place as Chaser .He took the blow stoically enough when Harry told him merely grunting and shrugging but Harry had the distinct feeling as he walked away that Dean and Seamus were muttering mutinously behind his back .The following fortnight saw the best Quidditch practices Harry had known as Captain .His team was so pleased to be rid of McLaggen so glad to have Katie back at last that they were flying extremely well .Ginny did not seem at all upset about the breakup with Dean on the contrary she was the life and soul of the team .Her imitations of Ron anxiously bobbing up and down in front of the goal posts as the Quaffle sped toward him or of Harry bellowing orders at McLaggen before being knocked out cold kept them all highly amused .Harry laughing with the others was glad to have an innocent reason to look at Ginny he had received several more Bludger injuries during practice because he had not been keeping his eyes on the Snitch .The battle still raged inside his head Ginny or Ron ?Sometimes he thought that the postLavender Ron might not mind too much if he asked Ginny out but then he remembered Rons expression when he had seen her kissing Dean and was sure that Ron would consider it base treachery if Harry so much as held her hand .Yet Harry could not help himself talking to Ginny laughing with her walking back from practice with her however much his conscience ached he found himself wondering how best to get her on her own .It would have been ideal if Slughorn had given another of his little parties for Ron would not be around but unfortunately Slughorn seemed to have given them up .Once or twice Harry considered asking for Hermiones help but he did not think he could stand seeing the smug look on her face he thought he caught it sometimes when Hermione spotted him staring at Ginny or laughing at her jokes .And to complicate matters he had the nagging worry that if he didnt do it somebody else was sure to ask Ginny out soon He and Ron were at least agreed on the fact that she was too popular for her own good .All in all the temptation to take another gulp of Felix Felicis was becoming stronger by the day for surely this was a case for as Hermione put it tweaking the circumstances ?The balmy days slid gently through May and Ron seemed to be there at Harrys shoulder every time he saw Ginny .Harry found himself longing for a stroke of luck that would somehow cause Ron to realize that nothing would make him happier than his best friend and his sister falling for each other and to leave them alone together for longer than a few seconds .There seemed no chance of either while the final Quidditch game of the season was looming Ron wanted to talk tactics with Harry all the time and had little thought for anything else .Ron was not unique in this respect interest in the GryffindorRavenclaw game was running extremely high throughout the school for the match would decide the Championship which was still wide open .If Gryffindor beat Ravenclaw by a margin of three hundred points a tall order and yet Harry had never known his team to fly better then they would win the Championship .If they won by less than three hundred points they would come second to Ravenclaw if they lost by a hundred points they would be third behind Hufflepuff and if they lost by more than a hundred they would be in fourth place and nobody Harry thought would ever ever let him forget that it had been he who had captained Gryffindor to their first bottomofthetable defeat in two centuries .The runup to this crucial match had all the usual features members of rival Houses attempting to intimidate opposing teams in the corridors unpleasant chants about individual players being rehearsed loudly as they passed the team members themselves either swaggering around enjoying all the attention or else dashing into bathrooms between classes to throw up .Somehow the game had become inextricably linked in Harrys mind with success or failure in his plans for Ginny .He could not help feeling that if they won by more than three hundred points the scenes of euphoria and a nice loud after match party might be just as good as a hearty swig of Felix Felicis .In the midst of all his preoccupations Harry had not forgotten his other ambition finding out what Malfoy was up to in the Room of Requirement .He was still checking the Marauders Map and as he was unable to locate Malfoy on it deduced that Malfoy was still spending plenty of time within the room .Although Harry was losing hope that he would ever succeed in getting inside the Room of Requirement he attempted it whenever he was in the vicinity but no matter how he reworded his request the wall remained firmly doorless .A few days before the match against Ravenclaw Harry found himself walking down to dinner alone from the common room Ron having rushed off into a nearby bathroom to throw up yet again and Hermione having dashed off to see Professor Vector about a mistake she thought she might have made in her last Arithmancy essay .More out of habit than anything Harry made his usual detour along the seventhfloor corridor checking the Marauders Map as he went .For a moment he could not find Malfoy anywhere and assumed he must indeed be inside the Room of Requirement again but then he saw Malfoys tiny labeled dot standing in a boys bathroom on the floor below accompanied not by Crabbe or Goyle but by Moaning Myrtle .Harry only stopped staring at this unlikely coupling when he walked right into a suit of armor .The loud crash brought him out of his reverie hurrying from the scene lest Filch turn up he dashed down the marble staircase and along the passageway below .Outside the bathroom he pressed his ear against the door .He could not hear anything .He very quietly pushed the door open .Draco Malfoy was standing with his back to the door his hands clutching either side of the sink his white blond head bowed .Dont crooned Moaning Myrtles voice from one of the cubicles .Dont .tell me whats wrong .I can help you .No one can help me said Malfoy .His whole body was shaking .I cant do it .I cant .It wont work .and unless I do it soon .he says hell kill me .And Harry realized with a shock so huge it seemed to root him to the spot that Malfoy was crying actually crying tears streaming down his pale face into the grimy basin .Malfoy gasped and gulped and then with a great shudder looked up into the cracked mirror and saw Harry staring at him over his shoulder .Malfoy wheeled around drawing his wand .Instinctively Harry pulled out his own .Malfoys hex missed Harry by inches shattering the lamp on the wall beside him Harry threw himself sideways thought Levicorpus and flicked his wand but Malfoy blocked the jinx and raised his wand for another No !No !Stop it !squealed Moaning Myrtle her voice echoing loudly around the tiled room .Stop !STOP !There was a loud bang and the bin behind Harry exploded Harry attempted a LegLocker Curse that backfired off the wall behind Malfoys ear and smashed the cistern beneath Moaning Myrtle who screamed loudly water poured everywhere and Harry slipped as Malfoy his face contorted cried Cruci SECTUMSEMPRAl bellowed Harry from the floor waving his wand wildly .Blood spurted from Malfoys face and chest as though he had been slashed with an invisible sword .He staggered backward and collapsed onto the waterlogged floor with a great splash his wand falling from his limp right hand .No gasped Harry .Slipping and staggering Harry got to his feet and plunged toward Malfoy whose face was now shining scarlet his white hands scrabbling at his blood soaked chest .No I didnt Harry did not know what he was saying he fell to his knees beside Malfoy who was shaking uncontrollably in a pool of his own blood .Moaning Myrtle let out a deafening scream MURDER !MURDER IN THE BATHROOM !MURDER !The door banged open behind Harry and he looked up terrified Snape had burst into the room his face livid .Pushing Harry roughly aside he knelt over Malfoy drew his wand and traced it over the deep wounds Harrys curse had made muttering an incantation that sounded almost like song .The flow of blood seemed to ease Snape wiped the residue from Malfoys face and repeated his spell .Now the wounds seemed to be knitting .Harry was still watching horrified by what he had done barely aware that he too was soaked in blood and water .Moaning Myrtle was still sobbing and wailing overhead .When Snape had performed his countercurse for the third time he halflifted Malfoy into a standing position .You need the hospital wing .There may be a certain amount of scarring but if you take dittany immediately we might avoid even that .Come .He supported Malfoy across the bathroom turning at the door to say in a voice of cold fury And you Potter .You wait here for me .It did not occur to Harry for a second to disobey .He stood up slowly shaking and looked down at the wet floor .There were bloodstains floating like crimson flowers across its surface .He could not even find it in himself to tell Moaning Myrtle to be quiet as she continued to wail and sob with increasingly evident enjoyment .Snape returned ten minutes later .He stepped into the bathroom and closed the door behind him .Go he said to Myrtle and she swooped back into her toilet at once leaving a ringing silence behind her .I didnt mean it to happen said Harry at once .His voice echoed in the cold watery space .I didnt know what that spell did .But Snape ignored this .Apparently I underestimated you Potter he said quietly .Who would have thought you knew such Dark Magic ?Who taught you that spell ?I read about it somewhere .Where ?It was a library book Harry invented wildly .I cant remember what it was call Liar said Snape .Harrys throat went dry .He knew what Snape was going to do and he had never been able to prevent it .The bathroom seemed to shimmer before his eyes he struggled to block out all thought but try as he might the HalfBlood Princes copy of Advanced PotionMaking swam hazily to the forefront of his mind .And then he was staring at Snape again in the midst of this wrecked soaked bathroom .He stared into Snapes black eyes hoping against hope that Snape had not seen what he feared but Bring me your schoolbag said Snape softly and all of your schoolbooks .All of them .Bring them to me here .Now !There was no point arguing .Harry turned at once and splashed out of the bathroom .Once in the corridor he broke into a run toward Gryffindor Tower .Most people were walking the other way they gaped at him drenched in water and blood but he answered none of the questions fired at him as he ran past .He felt stunned it was as though a beloved pet had turned suddenly savage what had the Prince been thinking to copy such a spell into his book ?And what would happen when Snape saw it ?Would he tell Slughorn Harrys stomach churned how Harry had been achieving such good results in Potions all year ?Would he confiscate or destroy the book that had taught Harry so much .the book that had become a kind of guide and friend ?Harry could not let it happen .He could not .Where Ve you ?Why are you soaking ?Is that blood ?Ron was standing at the top of the stairs looking bewildered at the sight of Harry .I need your book Harry panted .Your Potions book .Quick .give it to me .But what about the HalfBlood Ill explain later !Ron pulled his copy of Advanced PotionMaking out of his bag and handed it over Harry sprinted off past him and back to the common room .Here he seized his schoolbag ignoring the amazed looks of several people who had already finished their dinner threw himself back out of the portrait hole and hurtled off along the seventhfloor corridor .He skidded to a halt beside the tapestry of dancing trolls closed his eyes and began to walk .I need a place to hide my book .I need a place to hide my book .I need a place to hide my book .Three times he walked up and down in front of the stretch of blank wall .When he opened his eyes there it was at last the door to the Room of Requirement .Harry wrenched it open flung himself inside and slammed it shut .He gasped .Despite his haste his panic his fear of what awaited him back in the bathroom he could not help but be overawed by what he was looking at .He was standing in a room the size of a large cathedral whose high windows were sending shafts of light down upon what looked like a city with towering walls built of what Harry knew must be objects hidden by generations of Hogwarts inhabitants .There were alleyways and roads bordered by teetering piles of broken and damaged furniture stowed away perhaps to hide the evidence of mishandled magic or else hidden by castleproud houseelves .There were thousands and thousands of books no doubt banned or graffitied or stolen .There were winged catapults and Fanged Frisbees some still with enough life in them to hover halfheartedly over the mountains of other forbidden items there were chipped bottles of congealed potions hats jewels cloaks there were what looked like dragon eggshells corked bottles whose contents still shimmered evilly several rusting swords and a heavy bloodstained axe .Harry hurried forward into one of the many alleyways between all this hidden treasure .He turned right past an enormous stuffed troll ran on a short way took a left at the broken Vanishing Cabinet in which Montague had got lost the previous year finally pausing beside a large cupboard that seemed to have had acid thrown at its blistered surface .He opened one of the cupboards creaking doors It had already been used as a hiding place for something in a cage that had long since died its skeleton had five legs .He stuffed the HalfBlood Princes book behind the cage and slammed the door .He paused for a moment his heart thumping horribly gazing around at all the clutter .Would he be able to find this spot again amidst all this junk ?Seizing the chipped bust of an ugly old warlock from on top of a nearby crate he stood it on top of the cupboard where the book was now hidden perched a dusty old wig and a tarnished tiara on the statues head to make it more distinctive then sprinted back through the alleyways of hidden junk as fast as he could go back to the door back out onto the corridor where he slammed the door behind him and it turned at once back into stone .Harry ran flatout toward the bathroom on the floor below cramming Rons copy of Advanced Potion Making into his bag as he did so .A minute later he was back in front of Snape who held out his hand wordlessly for Harrys schoolbag .Harry handed it over panting a searing pain in his chest and waited .One by one Snape extracted Harrys books and examined them .Finally the only book left was the Potions book which he looked at very carefully before speaking .This is your copy of Advanced PotionMaking is it Potter ?Yes said Harry still breathing hard .Youre quite sure of that are you Potter ?Yes said Harry with a touch more defiance .This is the copy of Advanced PotionMaking that you purchased from Flourish and Blotts ?Yes said Harry firmly .Then why asked Snape does it have the name ‘Roonil Wazlib written inside the front cover ?Harrys heart missed a beat .Thats my nickname he said .Your nickname repeated Snape .Yeah .thats what my friends call me said Harry .I understand what a nickname is said Snape .The cold black eyes were boring once more into Harrys he tried not to look into them .Close your mind .Close your mind .But he had never learned how to do it properly .Do you know what I think Potter ?said Snape very quietly .I think that you are a liar and a cheat and that you deserve detention with me every Saturday until the end of term .What do you think Potter ?I I dont agree sir said Harry still refusing to look into Snape s eyes .Well we shall see how you feel after your detentions said Snape .Ten oclock Saturday morning Potter .My office .But sir .said Harry looking up desperately .Quidditch .the last match of the .Ten oclock whispered Snape with a smile that showed his yellow teeth .Poor Gryffindor .fourth place this year I fear .And he left the bathroom without another word leaving Harry to stare into the cracked mirror feeling sicker he was sure than Ron had ever felt in his life .I wont say ‘I told you so said Hermione an hour later in the common room .Leave it Hermione said Ron angrily .Harry had never made it to dinner he had no appetite at all .He had just finished telling Ron Hermione and Ginny what had happened not that there seemed to have been much need .The news had traveled very fast Apparently Moaning Myrtle had taken it upon herself to pop up in every bathroom in the castle to tell the story Malfoy had already been visited in the hospital wing by Pansy Parkinson who had lost no time in vilifying Harry far and wide and Snape had told the staff precisely what had happened .Harry had already been called out of the common room to endure fifteen highly unpleasant minutes in the company of Professor McGonagall who had told him he was lucky not to have been expelled and that she supported wholeheartedly Snape s punishment of detention every Saturday until the end of term .I told you there was something wrong with that Prince person Hermione said evidently unable to stop herself .And I was right wasnt I ?No I dont think you were said Harry stubbornly .He was having a bad enough time without Hermione lecturing him the looks on the Gryffindor teams faces when he had told them he would not be able to play on Saturday had been the worst punishment of all .He could feel Ginnys eyes on him now but did not meet them he did not want to see disappointment or anger there .He had just told her that she would be playing Seeker on Saturday and that Dean would be rejoining the team as Chaser in her place .Perhaps if they won Ginny and Dean would make up during the postmatch euphoria .The thought went through Harry like an icy knife .Harry said Hermione how can you still stick up for that book when that spell Will you stop harping on about the book !snapped Harry .The Prince only copied it out !Its not like he was advising anyone to use it !For all we know he was making a note of something that had been used against him !I dont believe this said Hermione .Youre actually defending Im not defending what I did !said Harry quickly .I wish I hadnt done it and not just because Ive got about a dozen detentions .You know I wouldntve used a spell like that not even on Malfoy but you cant blame the Prince he hadnt written ‘try this out its really good he was just making notes for himself wasnt he not for anyone else .Are you telling me said Hermione that youre going to go back ?And get the book ?Yeah I am said Harry forcefully .Listen without the Prince Id never have won the Felix Felicis .Id never have known how to save Ron from poisoning Id never have got a reputation for Potions brilliance you dont deserve said Hermione nastily .Give it a rest Hermione !said Ginny and Harry was so amazed so grateful he looked up .By the sound of it Malfoy was trying to use an Unforgivable Curse you should be glad Harry had something good up his sleeve !Well of course Im glad Harry wasnt cursed !said Hermione clearly stung .But you cant call that Sectumsempra spell good Ginny look where its landed him !And Id have thought seeing what this has done to your chances in the match Oh dont start acting as though you understand Quidditch snapped Ginny youll only embarrass yourself .Harry and Ron stared Hermione and Ginny who had always got on together very well were now sitting with their arms folded glaring in opposite directions .Ron looked nervously at Harry then snatched up a book at random and hid behind it .Harry however little though he knew he deserved it felt unbelievably cheerful all of a sudden even though none of them spoke again for the rest of the evening .His lightheartedness was shortlived .There were Slytherin taunts to be endured next day not to mention much anger from fellow Gryffindors who were most unhappy that their Captain had got himself banned from the final match of the season .By Saturday morning whatever he might have told Hermione Harry would have gladly exchanged all the Felix Felicis in the world to be walking down to the Quidditch pitch with Ron Ginny and the others .It was almost unbearable to turn away from the mass of students streaming out into the sunshine all of them wearing rosettes and hats and brandishing banners and scarves to descend the stone steps into the dungeons and walk until the distant sounds of the crowd were quite obliterated knowing that he would not be able to hear a word of commentary or a cheer or groan .Ah Potter said Snape when Harry had knocked on his door and entered the unpleasantly familiar office that Snape despite teaching floors above now had not vacated it was as dimly lit as ever and the same slimy dead objects were suspended in colored potions all around the walls .Ominously there were many cobwebbed boxes piled on a table where Harry was clearly supposed to sit they had an aura of tedious hard and pointless work about them .Mr Filch has been looking for someone to clear out these old files said Snape softly .They are the records of other Hogwarts wrongdoers and their punishments .Where the ink has grown faint or the cards have suffered damage from mice we would like you to copy out the crimes and punishments afresh and making sure that they are in alphabetical order replace them in the boxes .You will not use magic .Right Professor said Harry with as much contempt as he could put into the last three syllables .I thought you could start said Snape a malicious smile on his lips with boxes one thousand and twelve to one thousand and fiftysix .You will find some familiar names in there which should add interest to the task .Here you see .He pulled out a card from one of the topmost boxes with a flourish and read ‘James Potter and Sirius Black .Apprehended using an illegal hex upon Bertram Aubrey .Aubreys head twice normal size .Double detention .Snape sneered .It must be such a comfort to think that though they are gone a record of their great achievements remains .Harry felt the familiar boiling sensation in the pit of his stomach .Biting his tongue to prevent himself retaliating he sat down in front of the boxes and pulled one toward him .It was as Harry had anticipated useless boring work punctuated as Snape had clearly planned with the regular jolt in the stomach that meant he had just read his father or Siriuss names usually coupled together in various petty misdeeds occasionally accompanied by those of Remus Lupin and Peter Pettigrew .And while he copied out all their various offenses and punishments he wondered what was going on outside where the match would have just started .Ginny playing Seeker against Cho .Harry glanced again and again at the large clock ticking on the wall .It seemed to be moving half as fast as a regular clock perhaps Snape had bewitched it to go extra slowly ?He could not have been here for only half an hour .an hour .an hour and a half .Harrys stomach started rumbling when the clock showed half past twelve .Snape who had not spoken at all since setting Harry his task finally looked up at ten past one .I think that will do he said coldly .Mark the place you have reached .You will continue at ten oclock next Saturday .Yes sir .Harry stuffed a bent card into the box at random and hurried out of the door before Snape could change his mind racing back up the stone steps straining his ears to hear a sound from the pitch but all was quiet . .It was over then .He hesitated outside the crowded Great Hall then ran up the marble staircase whether Gryffindor had won or lost the team usually celebrated or commiserated in their own common room .Quid agis ?he said tentatively to the Fat Lady wondering what he would find inside .Her expression was unreadable as she replied Youll see .And she swung forward .A roar of celebration erupted from the hole behind her .Harry gaped as people began to scream at the sight of him several hands pulled him into the room .We won !yelled Ron bounding into sight and brandishing the silver Cup at Harry .We won !Four hundred and fifty to a hundred and forty !We won !Harry looked around there was Ginny running toward him she had a hard blazing look in her face as she threw her arms around him .And without thinking without planning it without worrying about the fact that fifty people were watching Harry kissed her .After several long moments or it might have been half an hour or possibly several sunlit days they broke apart .The room had gone very quiet .Then several people wolfwhistled and there was an outbreak of nervous giggling .Harry looked over the top of Ginnys head to see Dean Thomas holding a shattered glass in his hand and Romilda Vane looking as though she might throw something .Hermione was beaming but Harrys eyes sought Ron .At last he found him still clutching the Cup and wearing an expression appropriate to having been clubbed over the head .For a fraction of a second they looked at each other then Ron gave a tiny jerk of the head that Harry understood to mean Well if you must .The creature in his chest roaring in triumph he grinned down at Ginny and gestured wordlessly out of the portrait hole .A long walk in the grounds seemed indicated during which if they had time they might discuss the match .THE SEER OVERHEARD The fact that Harry Potter was going out with Ginny Weasley seemed to interest a great number of people most of them girls yet Harry found himself newly and happily impervious to gossip over the next few weeks .After all it made a very nice change to be talked about because of something that was making him happier than he could remember being for a very long time rather than because he had been involved in horrific scenes of Dark Magic .Youd think people had better things to gossip about said Ginny as she sat on the common room floor leaning against Harrys legs and reading the Daily Prophet Three dementor attacks in a week and all Romilda Vane does is ask me if its true youve got a hippogriff tattooed across your chest .Ron and Hermione both roared with laughter .Harry ignored them .What did you tell her ?I told her its a Hungarian Horntail said Ginny turning a page of the newspaper idly .Much more macho .Thanks said Harry grinning .And what did you tell her Rons got ?A Pygmy Puff but I didnt say where .Ron scowled as Hermione rolled around laughing .Watch it he said pointing warningly at Harry and Ginny .Just because Ive given my permission doesnt mean I cant withdraw it ‘Your permission scoffed Ginny .Since when did you give me permission to do anything ?Anyway you said yourself youd rather it was Harry than Michael or Dean .Yeah I would said Ron grudgingly .And just as long as you dont start snogging each other in public You filthy hypocrite !What about you and Lavender thrashing around like a pair of eels all over the place ?demanded Ginny .But Rons tolerance was not to be tested much as they moved into June for Harry and Ginnys time together was becoming increasingly restricted .Ginnys O .W .L .s were approaching and she was therefore forced to study for hours into the night .On one such evening when Ginny had retired to the library and Harry was sitting beside the window in the common room supposedly finishing his Herbology homework but in reality reliving a particularly happy hour he had spent down by the lake with Ginny at lunchtime Hermione dropped into the seat between him and Ron with an unpleasantly purposeful look on her face .I want to talk to you Harry .What about ?said Harry suspiciously .Only the previous day Hermione had told him off for distracting Ginny when she ought to be working hard for her examinations .The socalled HalfBlood Prince .Oh not again he groaned .Will you please drop it ?He had not dared to return to the Room of Requirement to retrieve his book and his performance in Potions was suffering accordingly though Slughorn who approved of Ginny had jocularly attributed this to Harry being lovesick .But Harry was sure that Snape had not yet given up hope of laying hands on the Princes book and was determined to leave it where it was while Snape remained on the lookout .Im not dropping it said Hermione firmly until youve heard me out .Now Ive been trying to find out a bit about who might make a hobby of inventing Dark spells He didnt make a hobby of it He he who says its a he ?Weve been through this said Harry crossly .Prince Hermione PrinceV Right !said Hermione red patches blazing in her cheeks as she pulled a very old piece of newsprint out of her pocket and slammed it down on the table in front of Harry .Look at that !Look at the picture !Harry picked up the crumbling piece of paper and stared at the moving photograph yellowed with age Ron leaned over for a look too .The picture showed a skinny girl of around fifteen .She was not pretty she looked simultaneously cross and sullen with heavy brows and a long pallid face .Underneath the photograph was the caption EILEEN PRINCE CAPTAIN OF THE HOGWARTS GOBSTONES TEAM .So ?said Harry scanning the short news item to which the picture belonged it was a rather dull story about interschool competitions .Her name was Eileen Prince .Prince Harry .They looked at each other and Harry realized what Hermione was trying to say .He burst out laughing .No way .What ?You think she was the HalfBlood . ?Oh come on .Well why not ?Harry there arent any real princes in the Wizarding world !Its either a nickname a made up title somebodys given themselves or it could be their actual name couldnt it ?No listen !If say her father was a wizard whose surname was Prince and her mother was a Muggle then that would make her a halfblood Prince !Yeah very ingenious Hermione .But it would !Maybe she was proud of being half a Prince !Listen Hermione I can tell its not a girl .I can just tell .The truth is that you dont think a girl would have been clever enough said Hermione angrily .How can I have hung round with you for five years and not think girls are clever ?said Harry stung by this .Its the way he writes I just know the Prince was a bloke I can tell .This girl hasnt got anything to do with it .Where did you get this anyway ?The library said Hermione predictably .Theres a whole collection of old Prophets up there .Well Im going to find out more about Eileen Prince if I can .Enjoy yourself said Harry irritably .I will said Hermione .And the first place Ill look she shot at him as she reached the portrait hole is records of old Potions awards !Harry scowled after her for a moment then continued his contemplation of the darkening sky .Shes just never got over you outperforming her in Potions said Ron returning to his copy of A Thousand Magical Herbs and Fungi .You dont think Im mad wanting that book back do you ?Course not said Ron robustly .He was a genius the Prince .Anyway .without his bezoar tip .He drew his finger significantly across his own throat .I wouldnt be here to discuss it would I ?I mean Im not saying that spell you used on Malfoy was great Nor am I said Harry quickly .But he healed all right didnt he ?Back on his feet in no time .Yeah said Harry this was perfectly true although his conscience squirmed slightly all the same .Thanks to Snape .You still got detention with Snape this Saturday ?Ron continued .Yeah and the Saturday after that and the Saturday after that sighed Harry .And hes hinting now that if I dont get all the boxes done by the end of term well carry on next year .He was finding these detentions particularly irksome because they cut into the already limited time he could have been spending with Ginny .Indeed he had frequently wondered lately whether Snape did not know this for he was keeping Harry later and later every time while making pointed asides about Harry having to miss the good weather and the varied opportunities it offered .Harry was shaken from these bitter reflections by the appearance at his side of Jimmy Peakes who was holding out a scroll of parchment .Thanks Jimmy .Hey its from Dumbledore !said Harry excitedly unrolling the parchment and scanning it .He wants me to go to his office as quick as I can !They stared at each other .Blimey whispered Ron .You dont reckon .he hasnt found . ?Better go and see hadnt I ?said Harry jumping to his feet .He hurried out of the common room and along the seventh floor as fast as he could passing nobody but Peeves who swooped past in the opposite direction throwing bits of chalk at Harry in a routine sort of way and cackling loudly as he dodged Harrys defensive jinx .Once Peeves had vanished there was silence in the corridors with only fifteen minutes left until curfew most people had already returned to their common rooms .And then Harry heard a scream and a crash .He stopped in his tracks listening .How dare you aargh !The noise was coming from a corridor nearby Harry sprinted toward it his wand at the ready hurtled around another corner and saw Professor Trelawney sprawled upon the floor her head covered in one of her many shawls several sherry bottles lying beside her one broken .Professor Harry hurried forward and helped Professor Trelawney to her feet .Some of her glittering beads had become entangled with her glasses .She hiccuped loudly patted her hair and pulled herself up on Harrys helping arm .What happened Professor ?You may well ask !she said shrilly .I was strolling along brooding upon certain dark portents I happen to have glimpsed .But Harry was not paying much attention .He had just noticed where they were standing There on the right was the tapestry of dancing trolls and on the left that smoothly impenetrable stretch of stone wall that concealed Professor were you trying to get into the Room of Requirement ? .omens I have been vouchsafed what ?She looked suddenly shifty .The Room of Requirement repeated Harry .Were you trying to get in there ?I well I didnt know students knew about Not all of them do said Harry .But what happened ?You screamed .It sounded as though you were hurt .I well said Professor Trelawney drawing her shawls around her defensively and staring down at him with her vastly magnified eyes .I wished to ah deposit certain um personal items in the room .And she muttered something about nasty accusations .Right said Harry glancing down at the sherry bottles .But you couldnt get in and hide them ?He found this very odd the room had opened for him after all when he had wanted to hide the HalfBlood Princes book .Oh I got in all right said Professor Trelawney glaring at the wall .But there was somebody already in there .Somebody in ?Who ?demanded Harry .Who was in there ?I have no idea said Professor Trelawney looking slightly taken aback at the urgency in Harrys voice .I walked into the room and I heard a voice which has never happened before in all my years of hiding of using the room I mean .A voice ?Saying what ?I dont know that it was saying anything said Professor Trelawney .It was .whooping .Whooping ?Gleefully she said nodding .Harry stared at her .Was it male or female ?I would hazard a guess at male said Professor Trelawney .And it sounded happy ?Very happy said Professor Trelawney sniffily .As though it was celebrating ?Most definitely .And then ?And then I called out Whos there ?You couldnt have found out who it was without asking ?Harry asked her slightly frustrated .The Inner Eye said Professor Trelawney with dignity straightening her shawls and many strands of glittering beads was fixed upon matters well outside the mundane realms of whooping voices .Right said Harry hastily he had heard about Professor Trelawneys Inner Eye all too often before .And did the voice say who was there ?No it did not she said .Everything went pitch black and the next thing I knew I was being hurled headfirst out of the room !And you didnt see that coming ?said Harry unable to help himself .No I did not as I say it was pitch She stopped and glared at him suspiciously .I think youd better tell Professor Dumbledore said Harry .He ought to know Malfoys celebrating I mean that someone threw you out of the room .To his surprise Professor Trelawney drew herself up at this suggestion looking haughty .The headmaster has intimated that he would prefer fewer visits from me she said coldly .I am not one to press my company upon those who do not value it .If Dumbledore chooses to ignore the warnings the cards show Her bony hand closed suddenly around Harrys wrist .Again and again no matter how I lay them out And she pulled a card dramatically from underneath her shawls .the lightningstruck tower she whispered .Calamity .Disaster .Coming nearer all the time .Right said Harry again .Well .I still think you should tell Dumbledore about this voice and everything going dark and being thrown out of the room .You think so ?Professor Trelawney seemed to consider the matter for a moment but Harry could tell that she liked the idea of retelling her little adventure .Im going to see him right now said Harry .Ive got a meeting with him .We could go together .Oh well in that case said Professor Trelawney with a smile .She bent down scooped up her sherry bottles and dumped them unceremoniously in a large blueandwhite vase standing in a nearby niche .I miss having you in my classes Harry she said soulfully as they set off together .You were never much of a Seer .but you were a wonderful Object Harry did not reply he had loathed being the Object of Professor Trelawneys continual predictions of doom .I am afraid she went on that the nag Im sorry the centaur knows nothing of cartomancy .I asked him one Seer to another had he not too sensed the distant vibrations of coming catastrophe ?But he seemed to find me almost comical .Yes comical !Her voice rose rather hysterically and Harry caught a powerful whiff of sherry even though the bottles had been left behind .Perhaps the horse has heard people say that I have not inherited my greatgreatgrandmothers gift .Those rumors have been bandied about by the jealous for years .You know what I say to such people Harry ?Would Dumbledore have let me teach at this great school put so much trust in me all these years had I not proved myself to him ?Harry mumbled something indistinct .I well remember my first interview with Dumbledore went on Professor Trelawney in throaty tones .He was deeply impressed of course deeply impressed .I was staying at the Hogs Head which I do not advise incidentally bedbugs dear boy but funds were low .Dumbledore did me the courtesy of calling upon me in my room .He questioned me .I must confess that at first I thought he seemed illdisposed toward Divination .and I remember I was starting to feel a little odd I had not eaten much that day .but then .And now Harry was paying attention properly for the first time for he knew what had happened then Professor Trelawney had made the prophecy that had altered the course of his whole life the prophecy about him and Voldemort . .but then we were rudely interrupted by Severus Snape !What ?Yes there was a commotion outside the door and it flew open and there was that rather uncouth barman standing with Snape who was waffling about having come the wrong way up the stairs although Im afraid that I myself rather thought he had been apprehended eavesdropping on my interview with Dumbledore you see he himself was seeking a job at the time and no doubt hoped to pick up tips !Well after that you know Dumbledore seemed much more disposed to give me a job and I could not help thinking Harry that it was because he appreciated the stark contrast between my own unassuming manners and quiet talent compared to the pushing thrusting young man who was prepared to listen at keyholes Harry dear ?She looked back over her shoulder having only just realized that Harry was no longer with her he had stopped walking and they were now ten feet from each other .Harry ?she repeated uncertainly .Perhaps his face was white to make her look so concerned and frightened .Harry was standing stock still as waves of shock crashed over him wave after wave obliterating everything except the information that had been kept from him for so long .It was Snape who had overheard the prophecy .It was Snape who had carried the news of the prophecy to Voldemort .Snape and Peter Pettigrew together had sent Voldemort hunting after Lily and James and their son .Nothing else mattered to Harry just now .Harry ?said Professor Trelawney again .Harry I thought we were going to see the headmaster together ?You stay here said Harry through numb lips .But dear .I was going to tell him how I was assaulted in the Room of You stay here !Harry repeated angrily .She looked alarmed as he ran past her around the corner into Dumbledores corridor where the lone gargoyle stood sentry .Harry shouted the password at the gargoyle and ran up the moving spiral staircase three steps at a time .He did not knock upon Dumbledores door he hammered and the calm voice answered Enter after Harry had already flung himself into the room .Fawkes the phoenix looked around his bright black eyes gleaming with reflected gold from the sunset beyond the windows .Dumbledore was standing at the window looking out at the grounds a long black traveling cloak in his arms .Well Harry I promised that you could come with me .For a moment or two Harry did not understand the conversation with Trelawney had driven everything else out of his head and his brain seemed to be moving very slowly .Come .with you . ?Only if you wish it of course .If I .And then Harry remembered why he had been eager to come to Dumbledores office in the first place .Youve found one ?Youve found a Horcrux ?I believe so .Rage and resentment fought shock and excitement For several moments Harry could not speak .It is natural to be afraid said Dumbledore . ‘Tm not scared !said Harry at once and it was perfectly true fear was one emotion he was not feeling at all .Which Horcrux is it ?Where is it ?I am not sure which it is though I think we can rule out the snake but I believe it to be hidden in a cave on the coast many miles from here a cave I have been trying to locate for a very long time the cave in which Tom Riddle once terrorized two children from his orphanage on their annual trip you remember ?Yes said Harry .How is it protected ?I do not know I have suspicions that may be entirely wrong .Dumbledore hesitated then said Harry I promised you that you could come with me and I stand by that promise but it would be very wrong of me not to warn you that this will be exceedingly dangerous .Im coming said Harry almost before Dumbledore had finished speaking .Boiling with anger at Snape his desire to do something desperate and risky had increased tenfold in the last few minutes .This seemed to show on Harrys face for Dumbledore moved away from the window and looked more closely at Harry a slight crease between his silver eyebrows .What has happened to you ?Nothing lied Harry promptly .What has upset you ?Im not upset .Harry you were never a good Occlumens The word was the spark that ignited Harrys fury .Snape !he said very loudly and Fawkes gave a soft squawk behind them .Snapes whats happened !He told Voldemort about the prophecy it was him he listened outside the door Trelawney told me !Dumbledores expression did not change but Harry thought his face whitened under the bloody tinge cast by the setting sun .For a long moment Dumbledore said nothing .When did you find out about this ?he asked at last .Just now !said Harry who was refraining from yelling with enormous difficulty .And then suddenly he could not stop himself .AND YOU LET HIM TEACH HERE AND HE TOLD VOLDEMORT TO GO AFTER MY MUM AND DAD !Breathing hard as though he was fighting Harry turned away from Dumbledore who still had not moved a muscle and paced up and down the study rubbing his knuckles in his hand and exercising every last bit of restraint to prevent himself knocking things over .He wanted to rage and storm at Dumbledore but he also wanted to go with him to try and destroy the Horcrux he wanted to tell him that he was a foolish old man for trusting Snape but he was terrified that Dumbledore would not take him along unless he mastered his anger .Harry said Dumbledore quietly .Please listen to me .It was as difficult to stop his relentless pacing as to refrain from shouting .Harry paused biting his lip and looked into Dumbledores lined face .Professor Snape made a terrible Dont tell me it was a mistake sir he was listening at the door !Please let me finish .Dumbledore waited until Harry had nodded curtly then went on .Professor Snape made a terrible mistake .He was still in Lord Voldemorts employ on the night he heard the first half of Professor Trelawneys prophecy .Naturally he hastened to tell his master what he had heard for it concerned his master most deeply .But he did not know he had no possible way of knowing which boy Voldemort would hunt from then onward or that the parents he would destroy in his murderous quest were people that Professor Snape knew that they were your mother and father Harry let out a yell of mirthless laughter .He hated my dad like he hated Sirius !Havent you noticed Professor how the people Snape hates tend to end up dead ?You have no idea of the remorse Professor Snape felt when he realized how Lord Voldemort had interpreted the prophecy Harry .I believe it to be the greatest regret of his life and the reason that he returned But hes a very good Occlumens isnt he sir ?said Harry whose voice was shaking with the effort of keeping it steady .And isnt Voldemort convinced that Snapes on his side even now ?Professor .how can you be sure Snapes on our side ?Dumbledore did not speak for a moment he looked as though he was trying to make up his mind about something .At last he said I am sure .I trust Severus Snape completely .Harry breathed deeply for a few moments in an effort to steady himself .It did not work .Well I dont !he said as loudly as before .Hes up to something with Draco Malfoy right now right under your nose and you still We have discussed this Harry said Dumbledore and now he sounded stern again .I have told you my views .Youre leaving the school tonight and Ill bet you havent even considered that Snape and Malfoy might decide to To what ?asked Dumbledore his eyebrows raised .What is it that you suspect them of doing precisely ?I .theyre up to something !said Harry and his hands curled into fists as he said it .Professor Trelawney was just in the Room of Requirement trying to hide her sherry bottles and she heard Malfoy whooping celebrating !Hes trying to mend something dangerous in there and if you ask me hes fixed it at last and youre about to just walk out of school without Enough said Dumbledore .He said it quite calmly and yet Harry fell silent at once he knew that he had finally crossed some invisible line .Do you think that I have once left the school unprotected during my absences this year ?I have not .Tonight when I leave there will again be additional protection in place .Please do not suggest that I do not take the safety of my students seriously Harry .I didnt mumbled Harry a little abashed but Dumbledore cut across him .I do not wish to discuss the matter any further .Harry bit back his retort scared that he had gone too far that he had ruined his chance of accompanying Dumbledore but Dumbledore went on Do you wish to come with me tonight ?Yes said Harry at once .Very well then Listen .Dumbledore drew himself up to his full height .I take you with me on one condition that you obey any command I might give you at once and without question .Of course .Be sure to understand me Harry .I mean that you must follow even such orders as ‘run ‘hide or ‘go back .Do I have your word ?I yes of course .If I tell you to hide you will do so ?Yes .If I tell you to flee you will obey ?Yes .If I tell you to leave me and save yourself you will do as I tell you ?Harry ?They looked at each other for a moment .Yes sir .Very good .Then I wish you to go and fetch your Invisibility Cloak and meet me in the entrance hall in five minutes time .Dumbledore turned back to look out of the fiery window the sun was now a ruby red glare along the horizon .Harry walked quickly from the office and down the spiral staircase .His mind was oddly clear all of a sudden .He knew what to do .Ron and Hermione were sitting together in the common room when he came back .What does he want ?Hermione said at once .Harry are you okay ?she added anxiously .Im fine said Harry shortly racing past them .He dashed up the stairs and into his dormitory where he flung open his trunk and pulled out the Marauders Map and a pair of balledup socks .Then he sped back down the stairs and into the common room skidding to a halt where Ron and Hermione sat looking stunned .Ive got to be quick Harry panted .Dumbledore thinks Im getting my Invisibility Cloak .Listen .Quickly he told them where he was going and why .He did not pause either for Hermione s gasps of horror or for Rons hasty questions they could work out the finer details for themselves later . .so you see what this means ?Harry finished at a gallop .Dumbledore wont be here tonight so Malfoys going to have another clear shot at whatever hes up to .No listen to me !he hissed angrily as both Ron and Hermione showed every sign of interrupting .I know it was Malfoy celebrating in the Room of Requirement .Here He shoved the Marauders Map into Hermiones hands .Youve got to watch him and youve got to watch Snape too .Use anyone else who you can rustle up from the D .A .Hermione those contact Galleons will still work right ?Dumbledore says hes put extra protection in the school but if Snape s involved hell know what Dumbledore s protection is and how to avoid it but he wont be expecting you lot to be on the watch will he ?Harry began Hermione her eyes huge with fear .I havent got time to argue said Harry curtly .Take this as well He thrust the socks into Rons hands .Thanks said Ron .Er why do I need socks ?You need whats wrapped in them its the Felix Felicis .Share it between yourselves and Ginny too .Say goodbye to her for me .Id better go Dumbledore s waiting No !said Hermione as Ron unwrapped the tiny little bottle of golden potion looking awestruck .We dont want it you take it who knows what youre going to be facing ?Ill be fine Ill be with Dumbledore said Harry .I want to know you lot are okay .Dont look like that Hermione Ill see you later .And he was off hurrying back through the portrait hole and toward the entrance hall .Dumbledore was waiting beside the oaken front doors .He turned as Harry came skidding out onto the topmost stone step panting hard a searing stitch in his side .I would like you to wear your cloak please said Dumbledore and he waited until Harry had thrown it on before saying Very good .Shall we go ?Dumbledore set off at once down the stone steps his own traveling cloak barely stirring in the still summer air .Harry hurried alongside him under the Invisibility Cloak still panting and sweating rather a lot .But what will people think when they see you leaving Professor ?Harry asked his mind on Malfoy and Snape .That I am off into Hogsmeade for a drink said Dumbledore lightly .I sometimes offer Rosmerta my custom or else visit the Hogs Head .or I appear to .It is as good a way as any of disguising ones true destination .They made their way down the drive in the gathering twilight .The air was full of the smells of warm grass lake water and wood smoke from Hagrids cabin .It was difficult to believe that they were heading for anything dangerous or frightening .Professor said Harry quietly as the gates at the bottom of the drive came into view will we be Apparating ?Yes said Dumbledore .You can Apparate now I believe ?Yes said Harry but I havent got a license .He felt it best to be honest what if he spoiled everything by turning up a hundred miles from where he was supposed to go ?No matter said Dumbledore I can assist you again .They turned out of the gates into the twilit deserted lane to Hogsmeade .Darkness descended fast as they walked and by the time they reached the High Street night was falling in earnest .Lights twinkled from windows over shops and as they neared the Three Broomsticks they heard raucous shouting .and stay out !shouted Madam Rosmerta forcibly ejecting a grubbylooking wizard .Oh hello Albus .Youre out late .Good evening Rosmerta good evening .forgive me Im off to the Hogs Head .No offense but I feel like a quieter atmosphere tonight .A minute later they turned the corner into the side street where the Hogs Heads sign creaked a little though there was no breeze .In contrast to the Three Broomsticks the pub appeared to be completely empty .It will not be necessary for us to enter muttered Dumbledore glancing around .As long as nobody sees us go .now place your hand upon my arm Harry .There is no need to grip too hard I am merely guiding you .On the count of three .One .two .three .Harry turned .At once there was that horrible sensation that he was being squeezed through a thick rubber tube he could not draw breath every part of him was being compressed almost past endurance and then just when he thought he must suffocate the invisible bands seemed to burst open and he was standing in cool darkness breathing in lungfuls of fresh salty air .THE CAVE Harry could smell salt and hear rushing waves a light chilly breeze ruffled his hair as he looked out at moonlit sea and starstrewn sky .He was standing upon a high outcrop of dark rock water foaming and churning below him .He glanced over his shoulder .A towering cliff stood behind them a sheer drop black and faceless .A few large chunks of rock such as the one upon which Harry and Dumbledore were standing looked as though they had broken away from the cliff face at some point in the past .It was a bleak harsh view the sea and the rock unrelieved by any tree or sweep of grass or sand .What do you think ?asked Dumbledore .He might have been asking Harrys opinion on whether it was a good site for a picnic .They brought the kids from the orphanage here ?asked Harry who could not imagine a less cozy spot for a day trip .Not here precisely said Dumbledore .There is a village of sorts about halfway along the cliffs behind us .I believe the orphans were taken there for a little sea air and a view of the waves .No I think it was only ever Tom Riddle and his youthful victims who visited this spot .No Muggle could reach this rock unless they were uncommonly good mountaineers and boats cannot approach the cliffs the waters around them are too dangerous .I imagine that Riddle climbed down magic would have served better than ropes .And he brought two small children with him probably for the pleasure of terrorizing them .I think the journey alone would have done it dont you ?Harry looked up at the cliff again and felt goose bumps .But his final destination and ours lies a little farther on .Come .Dumbledore beckoned Harry to the very edge of the rock where a series of jagged niches made footholds leading down to boulders that lay halfsubmerged in water and closer to the cliff .It was a treacherous descent and Dumbledore hampered slightly by his withered hand moved slowly .The lower rocks were slippery with seawater .Harry could feel flecks of cold salt spray hitting his face .Lumos said Dumbledore as he reached the boulder closest to the cliff face .A thousand flecks of golden light sparkled upon the dark surface of the water a few feet below where he crouched the black wall of rock beside him was illuminated too .You see ?said Dumbledore quietly holding his wand a little higher .Harry saw a fissure in the cliff into which dark water was swirling .You will not object to getting a little wet ?No said Harry .Then take off your Invisibility Cloak there is no need for it now and let us take the plunge .And with the sudden agility of a much younger man Dumbledore slid from the boulder landed in the sea and began to swim with a perfect breaststroke toward the dark slit in the rock face his lit wand held in his teeth .Harry pulled off his cloak stuffed it into his pocket and followed .The water was icy Harrys waterlogged clothes billowed around him and weighed him down .Taking deep breaths that filled his nostrils with the tang of salt and seaweed he struck out for the shimmering shrinking light now moving deeper into the cliff .The fissure soon opened into a dark tunnel that Harry could tell would be filled with water at high tide .The slimy walls were barely three feet apart and glimmered like wet tar in the passing light of Dumbledore s wand .A little way in the passageway curved to the left and Harry saw that it extended far into the cliff .He continued to swim in Dumbledore s wake the tips of his benumbed fingers brushing the rough wet rock .Then he saw Dumbledore rising out of the water ahead his silver hair and dark robes gleaming .When Harry reached the spot he found steps that led into a large cave .He clambered up them water streaming from his soaking clothes and emerged shivering uncontrollably into the still and freezing air .Dumbledore was standing in the middle of the cave his wand held high as he turned slowly on the spot examining the walls and ceiling .Yes this is the place said Dumbledore .How can you tell ?Harry spoke in a whisper .It has known magic said Dumbledore simply .Harry could not tell whether the shivers he was experiencing were due to his spinedeep coldness or to the same awareness of enchantments .He watched as Dumbledore continued to revolve on the spot evidently concentrating on things Harry could not see .This is merely the antechamber the entrance hall said Dumbledore after a moment or two .We need to penetrate the inner place .Now it is Lord Voldemorts obstacles that stand in our way rather than those nature made .Dumbledore approached the wall of the cave and caressed it with his blackened fingertips murmuring words in a strange tongue that Harry did not understand .Twice Dumbledore walked right around the cave touching as much of the rough rock as he could occasionally pausing running his fingers backward and forward over a particular spot until finally he stopped his hand pressed flat against the wall .Here he said .We go on through here .The entrance is concealed .Harry did not ask how Dumbledore knew .He had never seen a wizard work things out like this simply by looking and touching but Harry had long since learned that bangs and smoke were more often the marks of ineptitude than expertise .Dumbledore stepped back from the cave wall and pointed his wand at the rock .For a moment an arched outline appeared there blazing white as though there was a powerful light behind the crack .Youve ddone it !said Harry through chattering teeth but before the words had left his lips the outline had gone leaving the rock as bare and solid as ever .Dumbledore looked around .Harry Im so sorry I forgot he said he now pointed his wand at Harry and at once Harrys clothes were as warm and dry as if they had been hanging in front of a blazing fire .Thank you said Harry gratefully but Dumbledore had already turned his attention back to the solid cave wall .He did not try any more magic but simply stood there staring at it intently as though something extremely interesting was written on it .Harry stayed quite still he did not want to break Dumbledores concentration .Then after two solid minutes Dumbledore said quietly Oh surely not .So crude .What is it Professor ?I rather think said Dumbledore putting his uninjured hand inside his robes and drawing out a short silver knife of the kind Harry used to chop potion ingredients that we are required to make payment to pass .Payment ?said Harry .Youve got to give the door something ?Yes said Dumbledore .Blood if I am not much mistaken .Blood ?I said it was crude said Dumbledore who sounded disdainful even disappointed as though Voldemort had fallen short of the standards Dumbledore expected .The idea as I am sure you will have gathered is that your enemy must weaken him or herself to enter .Once again Lord Voldemort fails to grasp that there are much more terrible things than physical injury .Yeah but still if you can avoid it .said Harry who had experienced enough pain not to be keen for more .Sometimes however it is unavoidable said Dumbledore shaking back the sleeve of his robes and exposing the forearm of his injured hand .Professor !protested Harry hurrying forward as Dumbledore raised his knife .Ill do it Im He did not know what he was going to say younger fitter ?But Dumbledore merely smiled .There was a flash of silver and a spurt of scarlet the rock face was peppered with dark glistening drops .You are very kind Harry said Dumbledore now passing the tip of his wand over the deep cut he had made in his own arm so that it healed instantly just as Snape had healed Malfoys wounds .But your blood is worth more than mine .Ah that seems to have done the trick doesnt it ?The blazing silver outline of an arch had appeared in the wall once more and this time it did not fade away The bloodspattered rock within it simply vanished leaving an opening into what seemed total darkness .After me I think said Dumbledore and he walked through the archway with Harry on his heels lighting his own wand hastily as he went .An eerie sight met their eyes They were standing on the edge of a great black lake so vast that Harry could not make out the distant banks in a cavern so high that the ceiling too was out of sight .A misty greenish light shone far away in what looked like the middle of the lake it was reflected in the completely still water below .The greenish glow and the light from the two wands were the only things that broke the otherwise velvety blackness though their rays did not penetrate as far as Harry would have expected .The darkness was somehow denser than normal darkness .Let us walk said Dumbledore quietly .Be very careful not to step into the water .Stay close to me .He set off around the edge of the lake and Harry followed close behind him .Their footsteps made echoing slapping sounds on the narrow rim of rock that surrounded the water .On and on they walked but the view did not vary on one side of them the rough cavern wall on the other the boundless expanse of smooth glassy blackness in the very middle of which was that mysterious greenish glow .Harry found the place and the silence oppressive unnerving .Professor ?he said finally .Do you think the Horcrux is here ?Oh yes said Dumbledore .Yes Im sure it is .The question is how do we get to it ?We couldnt .we couldnt just try a Summoning Charm ?Harry said sure that it was a stupid suggestion .But he was much keener than he was prepared to admit on getting out of this place as soon as possible .Certainly we could said Dumbledore stopping so suddenly that Harry almost walked into him .Why dont you do it ?Me ?Oh .okay .Harry had not expected this but cleared his throat and said loudly wand aloft Accio Horcruxl With a noise like an explosion something very large and pale erupted out of the dark water some twenty feet away before Harry could see what it was it had vanished again with a crashing splash that made great deep ripples on the mirrored surface .Harry leapt backward in shock and hit the wall his heart was still thundering as he turned to Dumbledore .What was that ?Something I think that is ready to respond should we attempt to seize the Horcrux .Harry looked back at the water .The surface of the lake was once more shining black glass The ripples had vanished unnaturally fast Harrys heart however was still pounding .Did you think that would happen sir ?I thought something would happen if we made an obvious attempt to get our hands on the Horcrux .That was a very good idea Harry much the simplest way of finding out what we are facing .But we dont know what the thing was said Harry looking at the sinisterly smooth water .What the things are you mean said Dumbledore .I doubt very much that there is only one of them .Shall we walk on ?Professor ?Yes Harry ?Do you think were going to have to go into the lake ?Into it ?Only if we are very unfortunate .You dont think the Horcrux is at the bottom ?Oh no .I think the Horcrux is in the middle .And Dumbledore pointed toward the misty green light in the center of the lake .So were going to have to cross the lake to get to it ?Yes I think so .Harry did not say anything .His thoughts were all of water monsters of giant serpents of demons kelpies and sprites .Aha said Dumbledore and he stopped again this time Harry really did walk into him for a moment he toppled on the edge of the dark water and Dumbledores uninjured hand closed tightly around his upper arm pulling him back .So sorry Harry I should have given warning .Stand back against the wall please I think I have found the place .Harry had no idea what Dumbledore meant this patch of dark bank was exactly like every other bit as far as he could tell but Dumbledore seemed to have detected something special about it .This time he was running his hand not over the rocky wall but through the thin air as though expecting to find and grip something invisible .Oho said Dumbledore happily seconds later .His hand had closed in midair upon something Harry could not see .Dumbledore moved closer to the water Harry watched nervously as the tips of Dumbledore s buckled shoes found the utmost edge of the rock rim .Keeping his hand clenched in midair Dumbledore raised his wand with the other and tapped his fist with the point .Immediately a thick coppery green chain appeared out of thin air extending from the depths of the water into Dumbledore s clenched hand .Dumbledore tapped the chain which began to slide through his fist like a snake coiling itself on the ground with a clinking sound that echoed noisily off the rocky walls pulling something from the depths of the black water .Harry gasped as the ghostly prow of a tiny boat broke the surface glowing as green as the chain and floated with barely a ripple toward the place on the bank where Harry and Dumbledore stood .How did you know that was there ?Harry asked in astonishment .Magic always leaves traces said Dumbledore as the boat hit the bank with a gentle bump sometimes very distinctive traces .I taught Tom Riddle .I know his style .Is .is this boat safe ?Oh yes I think so .Voldemort needed to create a means to cross the lake without attracting the wrath of those creatures he had placed within it in case he ever wanted to visit or remove his Horcrux .So the things in the water wont do anything to us if we cross in Voldemorts boat ?I think we must resign ourselves to the fact that they will at some point realize we are not Lord Voldemort .Thus far however we have done well .They have allowed us to raise the boat .But why have they let us ?asked Harry who could not shake off the vision of tentacles rising out of the dark water the moment they were out of sight of the bank .Voldemort would have been reasonably confident that none but a very great wizard would have been able to find the boat said Dumbledore .I think he would have been prepared to risk what was to his mind the most unlikely possibility that somebody else would find it knowing that he had set other obstacles ahead that only he would be able to penetrate .We shall see whether he is right .Harry looked down into the boat .It really was very small .It doesnt look like it was built for two people .Will it hold both of us ?Will we be too heavy together ?Dumbledore chuckled .Voldemort will not have cared about the weight but about the amount of magical power that crossed his lake .I rather think an enchantment will have been placed upon this boat so that only one wizard at a time will be able to sail in it .But then ?I do not think you will count Harry You are underage and unqualified .Voldemort would never have expected a sixteenyearold to reach this place I think it unlikely that your powers will register compared to mine .These words did nothing to raise Harrys morale perhaps Dumbledore knew it for he added Voldemorts mistake Harry Voldemorts mistake .Age is foolish and forgetful when it underestimates youth .Now you first this time and be careful not to touch the water .Dumbledore stood aside and Harry climbed carefully into the boat .Dumbledore stepped in too coiling the chain onto the floor .They were crammed in together Harry could not comfortably sit but crouched his knees jutting over the edge of the boat which began to move at once .There was no sound other than the silken rustle of the boats prow cleaving the water it moved without their help as though an invisible rope was pulling it onward toward the light in the center .Soon they could no longer see the walls of the cavern they might have been at sea except that there were no waves .Harry looked down and saw the reflected gold of his wandlight sparkling and glittering on the black water as they passed .The boat was carving deep ripples upon the glassy surface grooves in the dark mirror .And then Harry saw it marble white floating inches below the surface .Professor !he said and his startled voice echoed loudly over the silent water .Harry ?I think I saw a hand in the water a human hand !Yes I am sure you did said Dumbledore calmly .Harry stared down into the water looking for the vanished hand and a sick feeling rose in his throat .So that thing that jumped out of the water ?But Harry had his answer before Dumbledore could reply the wandlight had slid over a fresh patch of water and showed him this time a dead man lying faceup inches beneath the surface his open eyes misted as though with cobwebs his hair and his robes swirling around him like smoke .There are bodies in here !said Harry and his voice sounded much higher than usual and most unlike his own .Yes said Dumbledore placidly but we do not need to worry about them at the moment .At the moment ?Harry repeated tearing his gaze from the water to look at Dumbledore .Not while they are merely drifting peacefully below us said Dumbledore .There is nothing to be feared from a body Harry any more than there is anything to be feared from the darkness .Lord Voldemort who of course secretly fears both disagrees .But once again he reveals his own lack of wisdom .It is the unknown we fear when we look upon death and darkness nothing more .Harry said nothing he did not want to argue but he found the idea that there were bodies floating around them and beneath them horrible and what was more he did not believe that they were not dangerous .But one of them jumped he said trying to make his voice as level and calm as Dumbledore s .When I tried to Summon the Horcrux a body leapt out of the lake .Yes said Dumbledore .I am sure that once we take the Horcrux we shall find them less peaceable .However like many creatures that dwell in cold and darkness they fear light and warmth which we shall therefore call to our aid should the need arise .Fire Harry Dumbledore added with a smile in response to Harrys bewildered expression .Oh .right .said Harry quickly .He turned his head to look at the greenish glow toward which the boat was still inexorably sailing .He could not pretend now that he was not scared .The great black lake teeming with the dead .It seemed hours and hours ago that he had met Professor Trelawney that he had given Ron and Hermione Felix Felicis .He suddenly wished he had said a better goodbye to them .and he hadnt seen Ginny at all .Nearly there said Dumbledore cheerfully .Sure enough the greenish light seemed to be growing larger at last and within minutes the boat had come to a halt bumping gently into something that Harry could not see at first but when he raised his illuminated wand he saw that they had reached a small island of smooth rock in the center of the lake .Careful not to touch the water said Dumbledore again as Harry climbed out of the boat .The island was no larger than Dumbledore s office an expanse of flat dark stone on which stood nothing but the source of that greenish light which looked much brighter when viewed close to .Harry squinted at it at first he thought it was a lamp of some kind but then he saw that the light was coming from a stone basin rather like the Pensieve which was set on top of a pedestal .Dumbledore approached the basin and Harry followed .Side by side they looked down into it .The basin was full of an emerald liquid emitting that phosphorescent glow .What is it ?asked Harry quietly .I am not sure said Dumbledore .Something more worrisome than blood and bodies however .Dumbledore pushed back the sleeve of his robe over his blackened hand and stretched out the tips of his burned fingers toward the surface of the potion .Sir no dont touch !I cannot touch said Dumbledore smiling faintly .See ?I cannot approach any nearer than this .You try .Staring Harry put his hand into the basin and attempted to touch the potion .He met an invisible barrier that prevented him coming within an inch of it .No matter how hard he pushed his fingers encountered nothing but what seemed to be solid and inflexible air .Out of the way please Harry said Dumbledore .He raised his wand and made complicated movements over the surface of the potion murmuring soundlessly .Nothing happened except perhaps that the potion glowed a little brighter .Harry remained silent while Dumbledore worked but after a while Dumbledore withdrew his wand and Harry felt it was safe to talk again .You think the Horcrux is in there sir ?Oh yes .Dumbledore peered more closely into the basin .Harry saw his face reflected upside down in the smooth surface of the green potion .But how to reach it ?This potion cannot be penetrated by hand Vanished parted scooped up or siphoned away nor can it be Transfigured Charmed or otherwise made to change its nature .Almost absentmindedly Dumbledore raised his wand again twirled it once in midair and then caught the crystal goblet that he had conjured out of nowhere .I can only conclude that this potion is supposed to be drunk .What ?said Harry .No !Yes I think so Only by drinking it can I empty the basin and see what lies in its depths .But what if what if it kills you ?Oh I doubt that it would work like that said Dumbledore easily .Lord Voldemort would not want to kill the person who reached this island .Harry couldnt believe it .Was this more of Dumbledore s insane determination to see good in everyone ?Sir said Harry trying to keep his voice reasonable sir this is Voldemort were Im sorry Harry I should have said he would not want to immediately kill the person who reached this island Dumbledore corrected himself .He would want to keep them alive long enough to find out how they managed to penetrate so far through his defenses and most importantly of all why they were so intent upon emptying the basin .Do not forget that Lord Voldemort believes that he alone knows about his Horcruxes .Harry made to speak again but this time Dumbledore raised his hand for silence frowning slightly at the emerald liquid evidently thinking hard .Undoubtedly he said finally this potion must act in a way that will prevent me taking the Horcrux .It might paralyze me cause me to forget what I am here for create so much pain I am distracted or render me incapable in some other way .This being the case Harry it will be your job to make sure I keep drinking even if you have to tip the potion into my protesting mouth .You understand ?Their eyes met over the basin each pale face lit with that strange green light .Harry did not speak .Was this why he had been invited along so that he could forcefeed Dumbledore a potion that might cause him unendurable pain ?You remember said Dumbledore the condition on which I brought you with me ?Harry hesitated looking into the blue eyes that had turned green in the reflected light of the basin .But what if ?You swore did you not to follow any command I gave you ?Yes but I warned you did I not that there might be danger ?Yes said Harry but Well then said Dumbledore shaking back his sleeves once more and raising the empty goblet you have my orders .Why cant I drink the potion instead ?asked Harry desperately .Because I am much older much cleverer and much less valuable said Dumbledore .Once and for all Harry do I have your word that you will do all in your power to make me keep drinking ?Couldnt ?Do I have it ?But Your word Harry .I all right but Before Harry could make any further protest Dumbledore lowered the crystal goblet into the potion .For a split second Harry hoped that he would not be able to touch the potion with the goblet but the crystal sank into the surface as nothing else had when the glass was full to the brim Dumbledore lifted it to his mouth .Your good health Harry .And he drained the goblet .Harry watched terrified his hands gripping the rim of the basin so hard that his fingertips were numb .Professor ?he said anxiously as Dumbledore lowered the empty glass .How do you feel ?Dumbledore shook his head his eyes closed .Harry wondered whether he was in pain .Dumbledore plunged the glass blindly back into the basin refilled it and drank once more .In silence Dumbledore drank three gobletsful of the potion .Then halfway through the fourth goblet he staggered and fell forward against the basin .His eyes were still closed his breathing heavy .Professor Dumbledore ?said Harry his voice strained .Can you hear me ?Dumbledore did not answer .His face was twitching as though he was deeply asleep but dreaming a horrible dream .His grip on the goblet was slackening the potion was about to spill from it .Harry reached forward and grasped the crystal cup holding it steady .Professor can you hear me ?he repeated loudly his voice echoing around the cavern .Dumbledore panted and then spoke in a voice Harry did not recognize for he had never heard Dumbledore frightened like this .I dont want .Dont make me .Harry stared into the whitened face he knew so well at the crooked nose and halfmoon spectacles and did not know what to do . .dont like .want to stop .moaned Dumbledore .You .you cant stop Professor said Harry .Youve got to keep drinking remember ?You told me you had to keep drinking .Here .Hating himself repulsed by what he was doing Harry forced the goblet back toward Dumbledore s mouth and tipped it so that Dumbledore drank the remainder of the potion inside .No .he groaned as Harry lowered the goblet back into the basin and refilled it for him .I dont want to . .I dont want to .Let me go .Its all right Professor said Harry his hand shaking .Its all right Im here Make it stop make it stop moaned Dumbledore .Yes .yes thisll make it stop lied Harry .He tipped the contents of the goblet into Dumbledore s open mouth .Dumbledore screamed the noise echoed all around the vast chamber across the dead black water .No no no no I cant I cant dont make me I dont want to .Its all right Professor its all right !said Harry loudly his hands shaking so badly he could hardly scoop up the sixth gobletful of potion the basin was now half empty .Nothings happening to you youre safe it isnt real I swear it isnt real take this now take this .And obediently Dumbledore drank as though it was an antidote Harry offered him but upon draining the goblet he sank to his knees shaking uncontrollably .Its all my fault all my fault he sobbed .Please make it stop I know I did wrong oh please make it stop and Ill never never again .This will make it stop Professor Harry said his voice cracking as he tipped the seventh glass of potion into Dumbledores mouth .Dumbledore began to cower as though invisible torturers surrounded him his flailing hand almost knocked the refilled goblet from Harrys trembling hands as he moaned Dont hurt them dont hurt them please please its my fault hurt me instead .Here drink this drink this youll be all right said Harry desperately and once again Dumbledore obeyed him opening his mouth even as he kept his eyes tight shut and shook from head to foot .And now he fell forward screaming again hammering his fists upon the ground while Harry filled the ninth goblet .Please please please no .not that not that Ill do anything .Just drink Professor just drink .Dumbledore drank like a child dying of thirst but when he had finished he yelled again as though his insides were on fire .No more please no more .Harry scooped up a tenth gobletful of potion and felt the crystal scrape the bottom of the basin .Were nearly there Professor .Drink this drink it .He supported Dumbledores shoulders and again Dumbledore drained the glass then Harry was on his feet once more refilling the goblet as Dumbledore began to scream in more anguish than ever I want to die !I want to die !Make it stop make it stop I want to die !Drink this Professor .Drink this .Dumbledore drank and no sooner had he finished than he yelled KILL ME !This this one will !gasped Harry .Just drink this .Itll be over .all over !Dumbledore gulped at the goblet drained every last drop and then with a great rattling gasp rolled over onto his face .No !shouted Harry who had stood to refill the goblet again instead he dropped the cup into the basin flung himself down beside Dumbledore and heaved him over onto his back Dumbledores glasses were askew his mouth agape his eyes closed .No said Harry shaking Dumbledore no youre not dead you said it wasnt poison wake up wake up Rennervatel he cried his wand pointing at Dumbledores chest there was a flash of red light but nothing happened .Renneruate sir please Dumbledores eyelids flickered Harrys heart leapt .Sir are you ?Water croaked Dumbledore .Water panted Harry .Yes He leapt to his feet and seized the goblet he had dropped in the basin he barely registered the golden locket lying curled beneath it .Aguamenti he shouted jabbing the goblet with his wand .The goblet filled with clear water Harry dropped to his knees beside Dumbledore raised his head and brought the glass to his lips but it was empty .Dumbledore groaned and began to pant .But I had some wait AguamentiV said Harry again pointing his wand at the goblet .Once more for a second clear water gleamed within it but as he approached Dumbledore s mouth the water vanished again .Sir Im trying Im trying !said Harry desperately but he did not think that Dumbledore could hear him he had rolled onto his side and was drawing great rattling breaths that sounded agonizing .Aguamenti Aguamenti A GUAMENTP .The goblet filled and emptied once more .And now Dumbledore s breathing was fading .His brain whirling in panic Harry knew instinctively the only way left to get water because Voldemort had planned it so .He flung himself over to the edge of the rock and plunged the goblet into the lake bringing it up full to the brim of icy water that did not vanish .Sir here !Harry yelled and lunging forward he tipped the water clumsily over Dumbledores face .It was the best he could do for the icy feeling on his arm not holding the cup was not the lingering chill of the water .A slimy white hand had gripped his wrist and the creature to whom it belonged was pulling him slowly backward across the rock .The surface of the lake was no longer mirrorsmooth it was churning and everywhere Harry looked white heads and hands were emerging from the dark water men and women and children with sunken sightless eyes were moving toward the rock an army of the dead rising from the black water .Petrificus Totalusl yelled Harry struggling to cling to the smooth soaked surface of the island as he pointed his wand at the Inferius that had his arm It released him falling backward into the water with a splash he scrambled to his feet but many more Inferi were already climbing onto the rock their bony hands clawing at its slippery surface their blank frosted eyes upon him trailing waterlogged rags sunken faces leering .Petrificus Totalusl Harry bellowed again backing away as he swiped his wand through the air six or seven of them crumpled but more were coming toward him .Impedimental Incarcerousl A few of them stumbled one or two of them bound in ropes but those climbing onto the rock behind them merely stepped over or on the fallen bodies .Still slashing at the air with his wand Harry yelled Sectumsempral SECTUMSEMPRAl But though gashes appeared in their sodden rags and their icy skin they had no blood to spill They walked on unfeeling their shrunken hands outstretched toward him and as he backed away still farther he felt arms enclose him from behind thin fleshless arms cold as death and his feet left the ground as they lifted him and began to carry him slowly and surely back to the water and he knew there would be no release that he would be drowned and become one more dead guardian of a fragment of Voldemorts shattered soul .But then through the darkness fire erupted crimson and gold a ring of fire that surrounded the rock so that the Inferi holding Harry so tightly stumbled and faltered they did not dare pass through the flames to get to the water .They dropped Harry he hit the ground slipped on the rock and fell grazing his arms but scrambled back up raising his wand and staring around .Dumbledore was on his feet again pale as any of the surrounding Inferi but taller than any too the fire dancing in his eyes his wand was raised like a torch and from its tip emanated the flames like a vast lasso encircling them all with warmth .The Inferi bumped into each other attempting blindly to escape the fire in which they were enclosed .Dumbledore scooped the locket from the bottom of the stone basin and stowed it inside his robes .Wordlessly he gestured to Harry to come to his side .Distracted by the flames the Inferi seemed unaware that their quarry was leaving as Dumbledore led Harry back to the boat the ring of fire moving with them around them the bewildered Inferi accompanying them to the waters edge where they slipped gratefully back into their dark waters .Harry who was shaking all over thought for a moment that Dumbledore might not be able to climb into the boat he staggered a little as he attempted it all his efforts seemed to be going into maintaining the ring of protective flame around them .Harry seized him and helped him back to his seat .Once they were both safely jammed inside again the boat began to move back across the black water away from the rock still encircled by that ring of fire and it seemed that the Inferi swarming below them did not dare resurface .Sir panted Harry sir I forgot about fire they were coming at me and I panicked Quite understandable murmured Dumbledore .Harry was alarmed to hear how faint his voice was .They reached the bank with a little bump and Harry leapt out then turned quickly to help Dumbledore .The moment that Dumbledore reached the bank he let his wand hand fall the ring of fire vanished but the Inferi did not emerge again from the water .The little boat sank into the water once more clanking and tinkling its chain slithered back into the lake too .Dumbledore gave a great sigh and leaned against the cavern wall .I am weak .he said .Dont worry sir said Harry at once anxious about Dumbledore s extreme pallor and by his air of exhaustion .Dont worry Ill get us back .Lean on me sir .And pulling Dumbledore s uninjured arm around his shoulders Harry guided his headmaster back around the lake bearing most of his weight .The protection was .after all .welldesigned said Dumbledore faintly .One alone could not have done it .You did well very well Harry .Dont talk now said Harry fearing how slurred Dumbledores voice had become how much his feet dragged .Save your energy sir .Well soon be out of here .The archway will have sealed again .My knife .Theres no need I got cut on the rock said Harry firmly .Just tell me where .Here .Harry wiped his grazed forearm upon the stone Having received its tribute of blood the archway reopened instantly .They crossed the outer cave and Harry helped Dumbledore back into the icy seawater that filled the crevice in the cliff .Its going to be all right sir Harry said over and over again more worried by Dumbledores silence than he had been by his weakened voice .Were nearly there .I can Apparate us both back .Dont worry .I am not worried Harry said Dumbledore his voice a little stronger despite the freezing water .I am with you .THE LIGHTNINGSTRUCK TOWER Once back under the starry sky Harry heaved Dumbledore onto the top of the nearest boulder and then to his feet .Sodden and shivering Dumbledores weight still upon him Harry concentrated harder than he had ever done upon his destination Hogsmeade .Closing his eyes gripping Dumbledores arm as tightly as he could he stepped forward into that feeling of horrible compression .He knew it had worked before he opened his eyes The smell of salt the sea breeze had gone .He and Dumbledore were shivering and dripping in the middle of the dark High Street in Hogsmeade .For one horrible moment Harrys imagination showed him more Inferi creeping toward him around the sides of shops but he blinked and saw that nothing was stirring all was still the darkness complete but for a few streetlamps and lit upper windows .We did it Professor !Harry whispered with difficulty he suddenly realized that he had a searing stitch in his chest .We did it !We got the Horcrux !Dumbledore staggered against him .For a moment Harry thought that his inexpert Apparition had thrown Dumbledore off balance then he saw his face paler and damper than ever in the distant light of a streetlamp .Sir are you all right ?Ive been better said Dumbledore weakly though the corners of his mouth twitched .That potion .was no health drink .And to Harrys horror Dumbledore sank onto the ground .Sir its okay sir youre going to be all right dont worry He looked around desperately for help but there was nobody to be seen and all he could think was that he must somehow get Dumbledore quickly to the hospital wing .We need to get you up to the school sir .Madam Pomfrey .No said Dumbledore .It is .Professor Snape whom I need .But I do not think .I can walk very far just yet .Right sir listen Im going to knock on a door find a place you can stay then I can run and get Madam Severus said Dumbledore clearly .I need Severus .All right then Snape but Im going to have to leave you for a moment so I can Before Harry could make a move however he heard running footsteps .His heart leapt Somebody had seen somebody knew they needed help and looking around he saw Madam Rosmerta scurrying down the dark street toward them on highheeled fluffy slippers wearing a silk dressing gown embroidered with dragons .I saw you Apparate as I was pulling my bedroom curtains !Thank goodness thank goodness I couldnt think what to but whats wrong with Albus ?She came to a halt panting and stared down wide eyed at Dumbledore .Hes hurt said Harry .Madam Rosmerta can he come into the Three Broomsticks while I go up to the school and get help for him ?You cant go up there alone !Dont you realize havent you seen ?If you help me support him said Harry not listening to her I think we can get him inside What has happened ?asked Dumbledore .Rosmerta whats wrong ?The the Dark Mark Albus .And she pointed into the sky in the direction of Hogwarts .Dread flooded Harry at the sound of the words .He turned and looked .There it was hanging in the sky above the school the blazing green skull with a serpent tongue the mark Death Eaters left behind whenever they had entered a building .wherever they had murdered .When did it appear ?asked Dumbledore and his hand clenched painfully upon Harrys shoulder as he struggled to his feet .Must have been minutes ago it wasnt there when I put the cat out but when I got upstairs We need to return to the castle at once said Dumbledore .Rosmerta and though he staggered a little he seemed wholly in command of the situation we need transport brooms Ive got a couple behind the bar she said looking very frightened .Shall I run and fetch ?No Harry can do it .Harry raised his wand at once .Accio Rosmertas Broomsl A second later they heard a loud bang as the front door of the pub burst open two brooms had shot out into the street and were racing each other to Harrys side where they stopped dead quivering slightly at waist height .Rosmerta please send a message to the Ministry said Dumbledore as he mounted the broom nearest him .It might be that nobody within Hogwarts has yet realized anything is wrong .Harry put on your Invisibility Cloak .Harry pulled his Cloak out of his pocket and threw it over himself before mounting his broom Madam Rosmerta was already tottering back toward her pub as Harry and Dumbledore kicked off from the ground and rose up into the air .As they sped toward the castle Harry glanced sideways at Dumbledore ready to grab him should he fall but the sight of the Dark Mark seemed to have acted upon Dumbledore like a stimulant He was bent low over his broom his eyes fixed upon the Mark his long silver hair and beard flying behind him on the night air .And Harry too looked ahead at the skull and fear swelled inside him like a venomous bubble compressing his lungs driving all other discomfort from his mind .How long had they been away ?Had Ron Hermione and Ginnys luck run out by now ?Was it one of them who had caused the Mark to be set over the school or was it Neville or Luna or some other member of the D .A .And if it was .he was the one who had told them to patrol the corridors he had asked them to leave the safety of their beds .Would he be responsible again for the death of a friend ?As they flew over the dark twisting lane down which they had walked earlier Harry heard over the whistling of the night air in his ears Dumbledore muttering in some strange language again .He thought he understood why as he felt his broom shudder when they flew over the boundary wall into the grounds Dumbledore was undoing the enchantments he himself had set around the castle so they could enter at speed .The Dark Mark was glittering directly above the Astronomy Tower the highest of the castle .Did that mean the death had occurred there ?Dumbledore had already crossed the crenellated ramparts and was dismounting Harry landed next to him seconds later and looked around .The ramparts were deserted .The door to the spiral staircase that led back into the castle was closed .There was no sign of a struggle of a fight to the death of a body .What does it mean ?Harry asked Dumbledore looking up at the green skull with its serpents tongue glinting evilly above them .Is it the real Mark ?Has someone definitely been Professor ?In the dim green glow from the Mark Harry saw Dumbledore clutching at his chest with his blackened hand .Go and wake Severus said Dumbledore faintly but clearly .Tell him what has happened and bring him to me .Do nothing else speak to nobody else and do not remove your cloak .I shall wait here .But You swore to obey me Harry go !Harry hurried over to the door leading to the spiral staircase but his hand had only just closed upon the iron ring of the door when he heard running footsteps on the other side .He looked around at Dumbledore who gestured him to retreat .Harry backed away drawing his wand as he did so .The door burst open and somebody erupted through it and shouted Expelliarmus Harrys body became instantly rigid and immobile and he felt himself fall back against the tower wall propped like an unsteady statue unable to move or speak .He could not understand how it had happened Expelliarmus was not a Freezing Charm Then by the light of the Mark he saw Dumbledore s wand flying in an arc over the edge of the ramparts and understood .Dumbledore had wordlessly immobilized Harry and the second he had taken to perform the spell had cost him the chance of defending himself .Standing against the ramparts very white in the face Dumbledore still showed no sign of panic or distress .He merely looked across at his disarmer and said Good evening Draco .Malfoy stepped forward glancing around quickly to check that he and Dumbledore were alone .His eyes fell upon the second broom .Who else is here ?A question I might ask you .Or are you acting alone ?Harry saw Malfoys pale eyes shift back to Dumbledore in the greenish glare of the Mark .No he said .Ive got backup .There are Death Eaters here in your school tonight .Well well said Dumbledore as though Malfoy was showing him an ambitious homework project .Very good indeed .You found a way to let them in did you ?Yeah said Malfoy who was panting .Right under your nose and you never realized !Ingenious said Dumbledore .Yet .forgive me .where are they now ?You seem unsupported .They met some of your guards .Theyre having a fight down below .They wont be long .I came on ahead .I Ive got a job to do .Well then you must get on and do it my dear boy said Dumbledore softly .There was silence .Harry stood imprisoned within his own invisible paralyzed body staring at the two of them his ears straining to hear sounds of the Death Eaters distant fight and in front of him Draco Malfoy did nothing but stare at Albus Dumbledore who incredibly smiled .Draco Draco you are not a killer .How do you know ?said Malfoy at once .He seemed to realize how childish the words had sounded Harry saw him flush in the Marks greenish light .You dont know what Im capable of said Malfoy more forcefully .You dont know what Ive done !Oh yes I do said Dumbledore mildly .You almost killed Katie Bell and Ronald Weasley .You have been trying with increasing desperation to kill me all year .Forgive me Draco but they have been feeble attempts .So feeble to be honest that I wonder whether your heart has been really in it .It has been in it !said Malfoy vehemently .Ive been working on it all year and tonight Somewhere in the depths of the castle below Harry heard a muffled yell .Malfoy stiffened and glanced over his shoulder .Somebody is putting up a good fight said Dumbledore conversationally .But you were saying .yes you have managed to introduce Death Eaters into my school which I admit I thought impossible . .How did you do it ?But Malfoy said nothing He was still listening to whatever was happening below and seemed almost as paralyzed as Harry was .Perhaps you ought to get on with the job alone suggested Dumbledore .What if your backup has been thwarted by my guard ?As you have perhaps realized there are members of the Order of the Phoenix here tonight too .And after all you dont really need help .I have no wand at the moment .I cannot defend myself .Malfoy merely stared at him .I see said Dumbledore kindly when Malfoy neither moved nor spoke .You are afraid to act until they join you .Im not afraid !snarled Malfoy though he still made no move to hurt Dumbledore .Its you who should be scared !But why ?I dont think you will kill me Draco .Killing is not nearly as easy as the innocent believe .So tell me while we wait for your friends .how did you smuggle them in here ?It seems to have taken you a long time to work out how to do it .Malfoy looked as though he was fighting down the urge to shout or to vomit .He gulped and took several deep breaths glaring at Dumbledore his wand pointing directly at the latters heart .Then as though he could not help himself he said I had to mend that broken Vanishing Cabinet that no ones used for years .The one Montague got lost in last year .aah .Dumbledores sigh was half a groan .He closed his eyes for a moment .That was clever .There is a pair I take it ?In Borgin and Burkes said Malfoy and they make a kind of passage between them .Montague told me that when he was stuck in the Hogwarts one he was trapped in limbo but sometimes he could hear what was going on at school and sometimes what was going on in the shop as if the cabinet was traveling between them but he couldnt make anyone hear him .In the end he managed to Apparate out even though hed never passed his test .He nearly died doing it .Everyone thought it was a really good story but I was the only one who realized what it meant even Borgin didnt know I was the one who realized there could be a way into Hogwarts through the cabinets if I fixed the broken one .Very good murmured Dumbledore .So the Death Eaters were able to pass from Borgin and Burkes into the school to help you .A clever plan a very clever plan .and as you say right under my nose .Yeah said Malfoy who bizarrely seemed to draw courage and comfort from Dumbledores praise .Yeah it was !But there were times Dumbledore went on werent there when you were not sure you would succeed in mending the cabinet ?And you resorted to crude and badly judged measures such as sending me a cursed necklace that was bound to reach the wrong hands .poisoning mead there was only the slightest chance I might drink .Yeah well you still didnt realize who was behind that stuff did you ?sneered Malfoy as Dumbledore slid a little down the ramparts the strength in his legs apparently fading and Harry struggled fruitlessly mutely against the enchantment binding him .As a matter of fact I did said Dumbledore .I was sure it was you .Why didnt you stop me then ?Malfoy demanded .I tried Draco .Professor Snape has been keeping watch over you on my orders He hasnt been doing your orders he promised my mother Of course that is what he would tell you Draco but Hes a double agent you stupid old man he isnt working for you you just think he is !We must agree to differ on that Draco .It so happens that I trust Professor Snape Well youre losing your grip then !sneered Malfoy .Hes been offering me plenty of help wanting all the glory for himself wanting a bit of the action What are you doing ? ‘Did you do the necklace that was stupid it could have blown everything But I havent told him what Ive been doing in the Room of Requirement hes going to wake up tomorrow and itll all be over and he wont be the Dark Lords favorite anymore hell be nothing compared to me nothing !Very gratifying said Dumbledore mildly .We all like appreciation for our own hard work of course .But you must have had an accomplice all the same .someone in Hogsmeade someone who was able to slip Katie the the aah .Dumbledore closed his eyes again and nodded as though he was about to fall asleep .of course .Rosmerta .How long has she been under the Imperius Curse ?Got there at last have you ?Malfoy taunted .There was another yell from below rather louder than the last .Malfoy looked nervously over his shoulder again then back at Dumbledore who went on So poor Rosmerta was forced to lurk in her own bathroom and pass that necklace to any Hogwarts student who entered the room unaccompanied ?And the poisoned mead .well naturally Rosmerta was able to poison it for you before she sent the bottle to Slughorn believing that it was to be my Christmas present .Yes very neat .very neat .Poor Mr Filch would not of course think to check a bottle of Rosmertas .Tell me how have you been communicating with Rosmerta ?I thought we had all methods of communication in and out of the school monitored .Enchanted coins said Malfoy as though he was compelled to keep talking though his wand hand was shaking badly .I had one and she had the other and I could send her messages Isnt that the secret method of communication the group that called themselves Dumbledore s Army used last year ?asked Dumbledore .His voice was light and conversational but Harry saw him slip an inch lower down the wall as he said it .Yeah I got the idea from them said Malfoy with a twisted smile .I got the idea of poisoning the mead from the Mudblood Granger as well I heard her talking in the library about Filch not recognizing potions .Please do not use that offensive word in front of me said Dumbledore .Malfoy gave a harsh laugh .You care about me saying ‘Mudblood when Im about to kill you ?Yes I do said Dumbledore and Harry saw his feet slide a little on the floor as he struggled to remain upright .But as for being about to kill me Draco you have had several long minutes now we are quite alone I am more defenseless than you can have dreamed of finding me and still you have not acted .Malfoys mouth contorted involuntarily as though he had tasted something very bitter .Now about tonight Dumbledore went on I am a little puzzled about how it happened .You knew that I had left the school ?But of course he answered his own question Rosmerta saw me leaving she tipped you off using your ingenious coins Im sure .Thats right said Malfoy .But she said you were just going for a drink youd be back .Well I certainly did have a drink .and I came back .after a fashion mumbled Dumbledore .So you decided to spring a trap for me ?We decided to put the Dark Mark over the tower and get you to hurry up here to see whod been killed said Malfoy .And it worked !Well .yes and no .said Dumbledore .But am I to take it then that nobody has been murdered ?Someones dead said Malfoy and his voice seemed to go up an octave as he said it .One of your people .I dont know who it was dark .I stepped over the body .I was supposed to be waiting up here when you got back only your Phoenix lot got in the way .Yes they do that said Dumbledore .There was a bang and shouts from below louder than ever it sounded as though people were fighting on the actual spiral staircase that led to where Dumbledore Malfoy and Harry stood and Harrys heart thundered unheard in his invisible chest .Someone was dead . .Malfoy had stepped over the body .but who was it ?There is little time one way or another said Dumbledore .So let us discuss your options Draco .My options !said Malfoy loudly .Im standing here with a wand Im about to kill you My dear boy let us have no more pretense about that .If you were going to kill me you would have done it when you first disarmed me you would not have stopped for this pleasant chat about ways and means .I havent got any options !said Malfoy and he was suddenly white as Dumbledore .Ive got to do it !Hell kill me !Hell kill my whole family !I appreciate the difficulty of your position said Dumbledore .Why else do you think I have not confronted you before now ?Because I knew that you would have been murdered if Lord Voldemort realized that I suspected you .Malfoy winced at the sound of the name .I did not dare speak to you of the mission with which I knew you had been entrusted in case he used Legilimency against you continued Dumbledore .But now at last we can speak plainly to each other . .No harm has been done you have hurt nobody though you are very lucky that your unintentional victims survived .I can help you Draco .No you cant said Malfoy his wand hand shaking very badly indeed .Nobody can .He told me to do it or hell kill me .Ive got no choice .Come over to the right side Draco and we can hide you more completely than you can possibly imagine .What is more I can send members of the Order to your mother tonight to hide her likewise .Your father is safe at the moment in Azkaban .When the time comes we can protect him too .Come over to the right side Draco .you are not a killer .Malfoy stared at Dumbledore .But I got this far didnt I ?he said slowly .They thought Id die in the attempt but Im here .and youre in my power .Im the one with the wand .Youre at my mercy .No Draco said Dumbledore quietly .It is my mercy and not yours that matters now .Malfoy did not speak .His mouth was open his wand hand still trembling .Harry thought he saw it drop by a fraction But suddenly footsteps were thundering up the stairs and a second later Malfoy was buffeted out of the way as four people in black robes burst through the door onto the ramparts .Still paralyzed his eyes staring unblinkingly Harry gazed in terror upon four strangers It seemed the Death Eaters had won the fight below .A lumpylooking man with an odd lopsided leer gave a wheezy giggle .Dumbledore cornered !he said and he turned to a stocky little woman who looked as though she could be his sister and who was grinning eagerly .Dumbledore wandless Dumbledore alone !Well done Draco well done !Good evening Amycus said Dumbledore calmly as though welcoming the man to a tea party .And youve brought Alecto too .Charming .The woman gave an angry little titter .Think your little jokesll help you on your deathbed then ?she jeered .Jokes ?No no these are manners replied Dumbledore .Do it said the stranger standing nearest to Harry a big rangy man with matted gray hair and whiskers whose black Death Eaters robes looked uncomfortably tight .He had a voice like none that Harry had ever heard a rasping bark of a voice .Harry could smell a powerful mixture of dirt sweat and unmistakably of blood coming from him .His filthy hands had long yellowish nails .Is that you Fenrir ?asked Dumbledore .Thats right rasped the other .Pleased to see me Dumbledore ?No I cannot say that I am .Greyback grinned showing pointed teeth .Blood trickled down his chin and he licked his lips slowly obscenely .But you know how much I like kids Dumbledore .Am I to take it that you are attacking even without the full moon now ?This is most unusual .You have developed a taste for human flesh that cannot be satisfied once a month ?Thats right said Fenrir Greyback .Shocks you that does it Dumbledore ?Frightens you ?Well I cannot pretend it does not disgust me a little said Dumbledore .And yes I am a little shocked that Draco here invited you of all people into the school where his friends live .I didnt breathed Malfoy .He was not looking at Fenrir he did not seem to want to even glance at him .I didnt know he was going to come I wouldnt want to miss a trip to Hogwarts Dumbledore rasped Greyback .Not when there are throats to be ripped out .Delicious delicious .And he raised a yellow fingernail and picked at his front teeth leering at Dumbledore .I could do you for afters Dumbledore .No said the fourth Death Eater sharply .He had a heavy brutallooking face .Weve got orders .Dracos got to do it .Now Draco and quickly .Malfoy was showing less resolution than ever .He looked terrified as he stared into Dumbledore s face which was even paler and rather lower than usual as he had slid so far down the rampart wall .Hes not long for this world anyway if you ask me !said the lopsided man to the accompaniment of his sisters wheezing giggles .Look at him whats happened to you then Dumby ?Oh weaker resistance slower reflexes Amycus said Dumbledore .Old age in short .One day perhaps it will happen to you .if you are lucky .Whats that mean then whats that mean ?yelled the Death Eater suddenly violent .Always the same werent yeh Dumby talking and doing nothing nothing .I dont even know why the Dark Lords bothering to kill yer !Come on Draco do it !But at that moment there were renewed sounds of scuffling from below and a voice shouted Theyve blocked the stairs Reductol REDUCTOl Harrys heart leapt So these four had not eliminated all opposition but merely broken through the fight to the top of the tower and by the sound of it created a barrier behind them Now Draco quickly !said the brutalfaced man angrily .But Malfoys hand was shaking so badly that he could barely aim .Ill do it snarled Fenrir moving toward Dumbledore with his hands outstretched his teeth bared .I said no !shouted the brutalfaced man there was a flash of light and the werewolf was blasted out of the way he hit the ramparts and staggered looking furious .Harrys heart was hammering so hard it seemed impossible that nobody could hear him standing there imprisoned by Dumbledore s spell if he could only move he could aim a curse from under the cloak Draco do it or stand aside so one of us screeched the woman but at that precise moment the door to the ramparts burst open once more and there stood Snape his wand clutched in his hand as his black eyes swept the scene from Dumbledore slumped against the wall to the four Death Eaters including the enraged werewolf and Malfoy .Weve got a problem Snape said the lumpy Amycus whose eyes and wand were fixed alike upon Dumbledore the boy doesnt seem able But somebody else had spoken Snapes name quite softly .Severus .The sound frightened Harry beyond anything he had experienced all evening .For the first time Dumbledore was pleading .Snape said nothing but walked forward and pushed Malfoy roughly out of the way .The three Death Eaters fell back without a word .Even the werewolf seemed cowed .Snape gazed for a moment at Dumbledore and there was revulsion and hatred etched in the harsh lines of his face .Severus .please .Snape raised his wand and pointed it directly at Dumbledore .Avada KedavraV A jet of green light shot from the end of Snapes wand and hit Dumbledore squarely in the chest .Harrys scream of horror never left him silent and unmoving he was forced to watch as Dumbledore was blasted into the air .For a split second he seemed to hang suspended beneath the shining skull and then he fell slowly backward like a great rag doll over the battlements and out of sight .FLIGHT OF THE PRINCE Harry felt as though he too were hurtling through space it had not happened .It could not have happened .Out of here quickly said Snape .He seized Malfoy by the scruff of the neck and forced him through the door ahead of the rest Greyback and the squat brother and sister followed the latter both panting excitedly .As they vanished through the door Harry realized he could move again .What was now holding him paralyzed against the wall was not magic but horror and shock .He threw the Invisibility Cloak aside as the brutalfaced Death Eater last to leave the tower top was disappearing through the door .Petrificus Totalusl The Death Eater buckled as though hit in the back with something solid and fell to the ground rigid as a waxwork but he had barely hit the floor when Harry was clambering over him and running down the darkened staircase .Terror tore at Harrys heart .He had to get to Dumbledore and he had to catch Snape .Somehow the two things were linked .He could reverse what had happened if he had them both together .Dumbledore could not have died .He leapt the last ten steps of the spiral staircase and stopped where he landed his wand raised The dimly lit corridor was full of dust half the ceiling seemed to have fallen in and a battle was raging before him but even as he attempted to make out who was fighting whom he heard the hated voice shout Its over time to go and saw Snape disappearing around the corner at the far end of the corridor he and Malfoy seemed to have forced their way through the fight unscathed .As Harry plunged after them one of the fighters detached themselves from the fray and flew at him It was the werewolf Fenrir .He was on top of Harry before Harry could raise his wand Harry fell backward with filthy matted hair in his face the stench of sweat and blood filling his nose and mouth hot greedy breath at his throat Petrificus Totalusl Harry felt Fenrir collapse against him with a stupendous effort he pushed the werewolf off and onto the floor as a jet of green light came flying toward him he ducked and ran headfirst into the fight .His feet met something squashy and slippery on the floor and he stumbled There were two bodies lying there lying facedown in a pool of blood but there was no time to investigate .Harry now saw red hair flying like flames in front of him Ginny was locked in combat with the lumpy Death Eater Amycus who was throwing hex after hex at her while she dodged them Amycus was giggling enjoying the sport Crucio Crucio you cant dance forever pretty Impedimenta .yelled Harry .His jinx hit Amycus in the chest He gave a piglike squeal of pain was lifted off his feet and slammed into the opposite wall slid down it and fell out of sight behind Ron Professor McGonagall and Lupin each of whom was battling a separate Death Eater .Beyond them Harry saw Tonks fighting an enormous blond wizard who was sending curses flying in all directions so that they ricocheted off the walls around them cracking stone shattering the nearest window Harry where did you come from ?Ginny cried but there was no time to answer her .He put his head down and sprinted forward narrowly avoiding a blast that erupted over his head showering them all in bits of wall .Snape must not escape he must catch up with Snape Take that shouted Professor McGonagall and Harry glimpsed the female Death Eater Alecto sprinting away down the corridor with her arms over her head her brother right behind her .He launched himself after them but his foot caught on something and next moment he was lying across someones legs .Looking around he saw Nevilles pale round face flat against the floor .Neville are you ?Mall right muttered Neville who was clutching his stomach Harry .Snape n Malfoy .ran past .I know Im on it !said Harry aiming a hex from the floor at the enormous blond Death Eater who was causing most of the chaos .The man gave a howl of pain as the spell hit him in the face He wheeled around staggered and then pounded away after the brother and sister .Harry scrambled up from the floor and began to sprint along the corridor ignoring the bangs issuing from behind him the yells of the others to come back and the mute call of the figures on the ground whose fate he did not yet know .He skidded around the corner his trainers slippery with blood Snape had an immense head start .Was it possible that he had already entered the cabinet in the Room of Requirement or had the Order made steps to secure it to prevent the Death Eaters retreating that way ?He could hear nothing but his own pounding feet his own hammering heart as he sprinted along the next empty corridor but then spotted a bloody footprint that showed at least one of the fleeing Death Eaters was heading toward the front doors perhaps the Room of Requirement was indeed blocked He skidded around another corner and a curse flew past him he dived behind a suit of armor that exploded .He saw the brother and sister running down the marble staircase ahead and aimed jinxes at them but merely hit several bewigged witches in a portrait on the landing who ran screeching into neighboring paintings .As he leapt the wreckage of armor Harry heard more shouts and screams other people within the castle seemed to have awoken .He pelted toward a shortcut hoping to overtake the brother and sister and close in on Snape and Malfoy who must surely have reached the grounds by now .Remembering to leap the vanishing step halfway down the concealed staircase he burst through a tapestry at the bottom and out into a corridor where a number of bewildered and pajamaclad Hufflepuffs stood .Harry !We heard a noise and someone said something about the Dark Mark began Ernie Macmillan .Out of the way !yelled Harry knocking two boys aside as he sprinted toward the landing and down the remainder of the marble staircase .The oak front doors had been blasted open there were smears of blood on the flagstones and several terrified students stood huddled against the walls one or two still cowering with their arms over their faces .The giant Gryffindor hourglass had been hit by a curse and the rubies within were still falling with a loud rattle onto the flagstones below .Harry flew across the entrance hall and out into the dark grounds He could just make out three figures racing across the lawn heading for the gates beyond which they could Disapparate by the looks of them the huge blond Death Eater and some way ahead of him Snape and Malfoy .The cold night air ripped at Harrys lungs as he tore after them he saw a flash of light in the distance that momentarily silhouetted his quarry .He did not know what it was but continued to run not yet near enough to get a good aim with a curse Another flash shouts retaliatory jets of light and Harry understood Hagrid had emerged from his cabin and was trying to stop the Death Eaters escaping and though every breath seemed to shred his lungs and the stitch in his chest was like fire Harry sped up as an unbidden voice in his head said not Hagrid .not Hagrid too .Something caught Harry hard in the small of the back and he fell forward his face smacking the ground blood pouring out of both nostrils He knew even as he rolled over his wand ready that the brother and sister he had overtaken using his shortcut were closing in behind him .Impedimenta .he yelled as he rolled over again crouching close to the dark ground and miraculously his jinx hit one of them who stumbled and fell tripping up the other Harry leapt to his feet and sprinted on after Snape .And now he saw the vast outline of Hagrid illuminated by the light of the crescent moon revealed suddenly behind clouds the blond Death Eater was aiming curse after curse at the gamekeeper but Hagrids immense strength and the toughened skin he had inherited from his giantess mother seemed to be protecting him .Snape and Malfoy however were still running they would soon be beyond the gates able to Disapparate Harry tore past Hagrid and his opponent took aim at Snapes back and yelled Stupefy He missed the jet of red light soared past Snapes head Snape shouted Run Draco and turned .Twenty yards apart he and Harry looked at each other before raising their wands simultaneously .Cruc But Snape parried the curse knocking Harry backward off his feet before he could complete it Harry rolled over and scrambled back up again as the huge Death Eater behind him yelled Incendiol Harry heard an explosive bang and a dancing orange light spilled over all of them Hagrids house was on fire .Fangs in there yer evil !Hagrid bellowed .Cruc yelled Harry for the second time aiming for the figure ahead illuminated in the dancing firelight but Snape blocked the spell again .Harry could see him sneering .No Unforgivable Curses from you Potter !he shouted over the rushing of the flames Hagrids yells and the wild yelping of the trapped Fang .You havent got the nerve or the ability Incarc Harry roared but Snape deflected the spell with an almost lazy flick of his arm .Fight back !Harry screamed at him .Fight back you cowardly Coward did you call me Potter ?shouted Snape .Your father would never attack me unless it was four on one what would you call him I wonder ?Stupe Blocked again and again and again until you learn to keep your mouth shut and your mind closed Potter !sneered Snape deflecting the curse once more .Now come !he shouted at the huge Death Eater behind Harry .It is time to be gone before the Ministry turns up Impedi But before he could finish this jinx excruciating pain hit Harry he keeled over in the grass .Someone was screaming he would surely die of this agony Snape was going to torture him to death or madness No !roared Snapes voice and the pain stopped as suddenly as it had started Harry lay curled on the dark grass clutching his wand and panting somewhere overhead Snape was shouting Have you forgotten our orders ?Potter belongs to the Dark Lord we are to leave him !Go !Go !And Harry felt the ground shudder under his face as the brother and sister and the enormous Death Eater obeyed running toward the gates .Harry uttered an inarticulate yell of rage In that instant he cared not whether he lived or died .Pushing himself to his feet again he staggered blindly toward Snape the man he now hated as much as he hated Voldemort himself Sectum !Snape flicked his wand and the curse was repelled yet again but Harry was mere feet away now and he could see Snapes face clearly at last He was no longer sneering or jeering the blazing flames showed a face full of rage .Mustering all his powers of concentration Harry thought Levi No Potter !screamed Snape .There was a loud BANG and Harry was soaring backward hitting the ground hard again and this time his wand flew out of his hand .He could hear Hagrid yelling and Fang howling as Snape closed in and looked down on him where he lay wandless and defenseless as Dumbledore had been .Snapes pale face illuminated by the flaming cabin was suffused with hatred just as it had been before he had cursed Dumbledore .You dare use my own spells against me Potter ?It was I who invented them I the HalfBlood Prince !And youd turn my inventions on me like your filthy father would you ?I dont think so .no !Harry had dived for his wand Snape shot a hex at it and it flew feet away into the darkness and out of sight .Kill me then panted Harry who felt no fear at all but only rage and contempt .Kill me like you killed him you coward DONT screamed Snape and his face was suddenly demented inhuman as though he was in as much pain as the yelping howling dog stuck in the burning house behind them CALL ME COWARD !And he slashed at the air Harry felt a whitehot whiplike something hit him across the face and was slammed backward into the ground .Spots of light burst in front of his eyes and for a moment all the breath seemed to have gone from his body then he heard a rush of wings above him and something enormous obscured the stars .Buckbeak had flown at Snape who staggered backward as the razorsharp claws slashed at him .As Harry raised himself into a sitting position his head still swimming from its last contact with the ground he saw Snape running as hard as he could the enormous beast flapping behind him and screeching as Harry had never heard him screech Harry struggled to his feet looking around groggily for his wand hoping to give chase again but even as his fingers fumbled in the grass discarding twigs he knew it would be too late and sure enough by the time he had located his wand he turned only to see the hippogriff circling the gates .Snape had managed to Disapparate just beyond the schools boundaries .Hagrid muttered Harry still dazed looking around .HAGRID ?He stumbled toward the burning house as an enormous figure emerged from out of the flames carrying Fang on his back .With a cry of thankfulness Harry sank to his knees he was shaking in every limb his body ached all over and his breath came in painful stabs .Yeh all righ Harry ?Yeh all righ ?Speak ter me Harry .Hagrids huge hairy face was swimming above Harry blocking out the stars .Harry could smell burnt wood and dog hair he put out a hand and felt Fangs reassuringly warm and alive body quivering beside him .Im all right panted Harry .Are you ?Course I am .take moren that ter finish me .Hagrid put his hands under Harrys arms and raised him up with such force that Harrys feet momentarily left the ground before Hagrid set him upright again .He could see blood trickling down Hagrids cheek from a deep cut under one eye which was swelling rapidly .We should put out your house said Harry the charms ‘Aguamenti .Knew it was summat like that mumbled Hagrid and he raised a smoldering pink flowery umbrella and said Aguamenti A jet of water flew out of the umbrella tip .Harry raised his wand arm which felt like lead and murmured Aguamenti too Together he and Hagrid poured water on the house until the last flame was extinguished .Snot too bad said Hagrid hopefully a few minutes later looking at the smoking wreck .Nothin Dumbledore won be able to put righ .Harry felt a searing pain in his stomach at the sound of the name .In the silence and the stillness horror rose inside him .Hagrid .I was bindin up a couple o bowtruckle legs when I heard em cornin said Hagrid sadly still staring at his wrecked cabin .Theyllve bin burnt ter twigs poor little things .Hagrid .But what happened Harry ?I jus saw them Death Eaters runnin down from the castle but what the ruddy hell was Snape doin with em ?Wheres he gone was he chasin them ?He .Harry cleared his throat it was dry from panic and the smoke .Hagrid he killed .Killed ?said Hagrid loudly staring down at Harry .Snape killed ?Whatre yeh on abou Harry ?Dumbledore said Harry .Snape killed .Dumbledore .Hagrid simply looked at him the little of his face that could be seen completely blank uncomprehending .Dumbledore wha Harry ?Hes dead .Snape killed him .Don say that said Hagrid roughly .Snape kill Dumbledore don be stupid Harry .Whas made yeh say tha ?I saw it happen .Yeh couldn have .I saw it Hagrid .Hagrid shook his head his expression was disbelieving but sympathetic and Harry knew that Hagrid thought he had sustained a blow to the head that he was confused perhaps by the aftereffects of a jinx .What musta happened was Dumbledore musta told Snape ter go with them Death Eaters Hagrid said confidently .I suppose hes gotta keep his cover .Look lets get yeh back up ter the school .Come on Harry .Harry did not attempt to argue or explain .He was still shaking uncontrollably .Hagrid would find out soon enough too soon .As they directed their steps back toward the castle Harry saw that many of its windows were lit now .He could imagine clearly the scenes inside as people moved from room to room telling each other that Death Eaters had got in that the Mark was shining over Hogwarts that somebody must have been killed .The oak front doors stood open ahead of them light flooding out onto the drive and the lawn .Slowly uncertainly dressinggowned people were creeping down the steps looking around nervously for some sign of the Death Eaters who had fled into the night .Harrys eyes however were fixed upon the ground at the foot of the tallest tower .He imagined that he could see a black huddled mass lying in the grass there though he was really too far away to see anything of the sort .Even as he stared wordlessly at the place where he thought Dumbledore s body must lie however he saw people beginning to move toward it .Whatre they all lookin at ?said Hagrid as he and Harry approached the castle front Fang keeping as close as he could to their ankles .Whas tha lyin on the grass ?Hagrid added sharply heading now toward the foot of the Astronomy Tower where a small crowd was congregating .See it Harry ?Righ at the foot o the tower ?Under where the Mark .Blimey .yeh don think someone got thrown ?Hagrid fell silent the thought apparently too horrible to express aloud .Harry walked alongside him feeling the aches and pains in his face and his legs where the various hexes of the last half hour had hit him though in an oddly detached way as though somebody near him was suffering them .What was real and inescapable was the awful pressing feeling in his chest .He and Hagrid moved dreamlike through the murmuring crowd to the very front where the dumbstruck students and teachers had left a gap .Harry heard Hagrid s moan of pain and shock but he did not stop he walked slowly forward until he reached the place where Dumbledore lay and crouched down beside him .He had known there was no hope from the moment that the full BodyBind Curse Dumbledore had placed upon him lifted known that it could have happened only because its caster was dead but there was still no preparation for seeing him here spreadeagled broken the greatest wizard Harry had ever or would ever meet .Dumbledores eyes were closed but for the strange angle of his arms and legs he might have been sleeping .Harry reached out straightened the half moon spectacles upon the crooked nose and wiped a trickle of blood from the mouth with his own sleeve .Then he gazed down at the wise old face and tried to absorb the enormous and incomprehensible truth that never again would Dumbledore speak to him never again could he help .The crowd murmured behind Harry .After what seemed like a long time he became aware that he was kneeling upon something hard and looked down .The locket they had managed to steal so many hours before had fallen out of Dumbledores pocket .It had opened perhaps due to the force with which it hit the ground .And although he could not feel more shock or horror or sadness than he felt already Harry knew as he picked it up that there was something wrong .He turned the locket over in his hands .This was neither as large as the locket he remembered seeing in the Pensieve nor were there any markings upon it no sign of the ornate S that was supposed to be Slytherins mark .Moreover there was nothing inside but for a scrap of folded parchment wedged tightly into the place where a portrait should have been .Automatically without really thinking about what he was doing Harry pulled out the fragment of parchment opened it and read by the light of the many wands that had now been lit behind him To the Dark Lord I know I will be dead long before you read this but I want you to know that it was I who discovered your secret I have stolen the real Horcrux and intend to destroy it as soon as I can .I face death in the hope that when you meet your match you will be mortal once more .R .A .B .Harry neither knew nor cared what the message meant .Only one thing mattered This was not a Horcrux .Dumbledore had weakened himself by drinking that terrible potion for nothing .Harry crumpled the parchment in his hand and his eyes burned with tears as behind him Fang began to howl .z ?THE PHOENIX LAMENT Cmere Harry .No .Yeh can stay here Harry .Come on now .No .He did not want to leave Dumbledores side he did not want to move anywhere .Hagrids hand on his shoulder was trembling .Then another voice said Harry come on .A much smaller and warmer hand had enclosed his and was pulling him upward .He obeyed its pressure without really thinking about it .Only as he walked blindly back through the crowd did he realize from a trace of flowery scent on the air that it was Ginny who was leading him back into the castle .Incomprehensible voices battered him sobs and shouts and wails stabbed the night but Harry and Ginny walked on back up the steps into the entrance hall .Faces swam on the edges of Harrys vision people were peering at him whispering wondering and Gryffindor rubies glistened on the floor like drops of blood as they made their way toward the marble staircase .Were going to the hospital wing said Ginny .Im not hurt said Harry .Its McGonagalls orders said Ginny .Everyones up there Ron and Hermione and Lupin and everyone Fear stirred in Harrys chest again He had forgotten the inert figures he had left behind .Ginny who else is dead ?Dont worry none of us .But the Dark Mark Malfoy said he stepped over a body He stepped over Bill but its all right hes alive .There was something in her voice however that Harry knew boded ill .Are you sure ?Of course Im sure .hes a a bit of a mess thats all .Greyback attacked him .Madam Pomfrey says he wont wont look the same anymore .Ginny s voice trembled a little .We dont really know what the aftereffects will be I mean Greyback being a werewolf but not transformed at the time .But the others .There were other bodies on the ground .Neville and Professor Flitwick are both hurt but Madam Pomfrey says theyll be all right .And a Death Eaters dead he got hit by a Killing Curse that huge blond one was firing off everywhere Harry if we hadnt had your Felix potion I think wed all have been killed but everything seemed to just miss us They had reached the hospital wing .Pushing open the doors Harry saw Neville lying apparently asleep in a bed near the door .Ron Hermione Luna Tonks and Lupin were gathered around another bed near the far end of the ward .At the sound of the doors opening they all looked up .Hermione ran to Harry and hugged him Lupin moved forward too looking anxious .Are you all right Harry ?Im fine .Hows Bill ?Nobody answered .Harry looked over Hermiones shoulder and saw an unrecognizable face lying on Bills pillow so badly slashed and ripped that he looked grotesque .Madam Pomfrey was dabbing at his wounds with some harshsmelling green ointment .Harry remembered how Snape had mended Malfoys Sectumsempra wounds so easily with his wand .Cant you fix them with a charm or something ?he asked the matron .No charm will work on these said Madam Pomfrey .Ive tried everything I know but there is no cure for werewolf bites .But he wasnt bitten at the full moon said Ron who was gazing down into his brothers face as though he could somehow force him to mend just by staring .Greyback hadnt transformed so surely Bill wont be a a real ?He looked uncertainly at Lupin .No I dont think that Bill will be a true werewolf said Lupin but that does not mean that there wont be some contamination .Those are cursed wounds .They are unlikely ever to heal fully and and Bill might have some wolfish characteristics from now on .Dumbledore might know something thatd work though Ron said .Where is he ?Bill fought those maniacs on Dumbledores orders Dumbledore owes him he cant leave him in this state Ron Dumbledores dead said Ginny .No !Lupin looked wildly from Ginny to Harry as though hoping the latter might contradict her but when Harry did not Lupin collapsed into a chair beside Bills bed his hands over his face .Harry had never seen Lupin lose control before he felt as though he was intruding upon something private indecent .He turned away and caught Rons eye instead exchanging in silence a look that confirmed what Ginny had said .How did he die ?whispered Tonks .How did it happen ?Snape killed him said Harry .I was there I saw it .We arrived back on the Astronomy Tower because thats where the Mark was .Dumbledore was ill he was weak but I think he realized it was a trap when we heard footsteps running up the stairs .He immobilized me I couldnt do anything I was under the Invisibility Cloak and then Malfoy came through the door and disarmed him Hermione clapped her hands to her mouth and Ron groaned .Lunas mouth trembled .more Death Eaters arrived and then Snape and Snape did it .The Avada Kedavra .Harry couldnt go on .Madam Pomfrey burst into tears .Nobody paid her any attention except Ginny who whispered Shh !Listen !Gulping Madam Pomfrey pressed her fingers to her mouth her eyes wide .Somewhere out in the darkness a phoenix was singing in a way Harry had never heard before a stricken lament of terrible beauty .And Harry felt as he had felt about phoenix song before that the music was inside him not without It was his own grief turned magically to song that echoed across the grounds and through the castle windows .How long they all stood there listening he did not know nor why it seemed to ease their pain a little to listen to the sound of their mourning but it felt like a long time later that the hospital door opened again and Professor McGonagall entered the ward .Like all the rest she bore marks of the recent battle There were grazes on her face and her robes were ripped .Molly and Arthur are on their way she said and the spell of the music was broken Everyone roused themselves as though coming out of trances turning again to look at Bill or else to rub their own eyes shake their heads .Harry what happened ?According to Hagrid you were with Professor Dumbledore when he when it happened .He says Professor Snape was involved in some Snape killed Dumbledore said Harry .She stared at him for a moment then swayed alarmingly Madam Pomfrey who seemed to have pulled herself together ran forward conjuring a chair from thin air which she pushed under McGonagall .Snape repeated McGonagall faintly falling into the chair .We all wondered .but he trusted .always .Snape .I cant believe it .Snape was a highly accomplished Occlumens said Lupin his voice uncharacteristically harsh .We always knew that .But Dumbledore swore he was on our side !whispered Tonks .I always thought Dumbledore must know something about Snape that we didnt .He always hinted that he had an ironclad reason for trusting Snape muttered Professor McGonagall now dabbing at the corners of her leaking eyes with a tartan edged handkerchief .I mean .with Snape s history .of course people were bound to wonder .but Dumbledore told me explicitly that Snape s repentance was absolutely genuine .Wouldnt hear a word against him !Id love to know what Snape told him to convince him said Tonks .I know said Harry and they all turned to look at him .Snape passed Voldemort the information that made Voldemort hunt down my mum and dad .Then Snape told Dumbledore he hadnt realized what he was doing he was really sorry hed done it sorry that they were dead .They all stared at him .And Dumbledore believed that ?said Lupin incredulously .Dumbledore believed Snape was sorry James was dead ?Snape hated James .And he didnt think my mother was worth a damn either said Harry because she was Muggleborn . ‘Mudblood he called her .Nobody asked how Harry knew this .All of them seemed to be lost in horrified shock trying to digest the monstrous truth of what had happened .This is all my fault said Professor McGonagall suddenly .She looked disoriented twisting her wet handkerchief in her hands .My fault .I sent Filius to fetch Snape tonight I actually sent for him to come and help us !If I hadnt alerted Snape to what was going on he might never have joined forces with the Death Eaters .I dont think he knew they were there before Filius told him I dont think he knew they were coming .It isnt your fault Minerva said Lupin firmly .We all wanted more help we were glad to think Snape was on his way .So when he arrived at the fight he joined in on the Death Eaters side ?asked Harry who wanted every detail of Snape s duplicity and infamy feverishly collecting more reasons to hate him to swear vengeance .I dont know exactly how it happened said Professor McGonagall distractedly .Its all so confusing .Dumbledore had told us that he would be leaving the school for a few hours and that we were to patrol the corridors just in case .Remus Bill and Nymphadora were to join us .and so we patrolled .All seemed quiet .Every secret passageway out of the school was covered .We knew nobody could fly in .There were powerful enchantments on every entrance into the castle .I still dont know how the Death Eaters can possibly have entered .I do said Harry and he explained briefly about the pair of Vanishing Cabinets and the magical pathway they formed .So they got in through the Room of Requirement .Almost against his will he glanced from Ron to Hermione both of whom looked devastated .I messed up Harry said Ron bleakly .We did like you told us We checked the Marauders Map and we couldnt see Malfoy on it so we thought he must be in the Room of Requirement so me Ginny and Neville went to keep watch on it .but Malfoy got past us .He came out of the room about an hour after we started keeping watch said Ginny .He was on his own clutching that awful shriveled arm His Hand of Glory said Ron .Gives light only to the holder remember ?Anyway Ginny went on he must have been checking whether the coast was clear to let the Death Eaters out because the moment he saw us he threw something into the air and it all went pitchblack Peruvian Instant Darkness Powder said Ron bitterly .Fred and Georges .Im going to be having a word with them about who they let buy their products .We tried everything Lumos Incendio said Ginny .Nothing would penetrate the darkness all we could do was grope our way out of the corridor again and meanwhile we could hear people rushing past us .Obviously Malfoy could see because of that hand thing and was guiding them but we didnt dare use any curses or anything in case we hit each other and by the time wed reached a corridor that was light theyd gone .Luckily said Lupin hoarsely Ron Ginny and Neville ran into us almost immediately and told us what had happened .We found the Death Eaters minutes later heading in the direction of the Astronomy Tower .Malfoy obviously hadnt expected more people to be on the watch he seemed to have exhausted his supply of Darkness Powder at any rate .A fight broke out they scattered and we gave chase .One of them Gibbon broke away and headed up the tower stairs To set off the Mark ?asked Harry .He must have done yes they must have arranged that before they left the Room of Requirement said Lupin .But I dont think Gibbon liked the idea of waiting up there alone for Dumbledore because he came running back downstairs to rejoin the fight and was hit by a Killing Curse that just missed me .So if Ron was watching the Room of Requirement with Ginny and Neville said Harry turning to Hermione were you ?Outside Snapes office yes whispered Hermione her eyes sparkling with tears with Luna .We hung around for ages outside it and nothing happened .We didnt know what was going on upstairs Ron had taken the map .It was nearly midnight when Professor Flitwick came sprinting down into the dungeons .He was shouting about Death Eaters in the castle I dont think he really registered that Luna and I were there at all he just burst his way into Snapes office and we heard him saying that Snape had to go back with him and help and then we heard a loud thump and Snape came hurtling out of his room and he saw us and and What ?Harry urged her .I was so stupid Harry !said Hermione in a high pitched whisper .He said Professor Flitwick had collapsed and that we should go and take care of him while he while he went to help fight the Death Eaters She covered her face in shame and continued to talk into her fingers so that her voice was muffled .We went into his office to see if we could help Professor Flitwick and found him unconscious on the floor .and oh its so obvious now Snape must have Stupefied Flitwick but we didnt realize Harry we didnt realize we just let Snape go !Its not your fault said Lupin firmly .Hermione had you not obeyed Snape and got out of the way he probably would have killed you and Luna .So then he came upstairs said Harry who was watching Snape running up the marble staircase in his minds eye his black robes billowing behind him as ever pulling his wand from under his cloak as he ascended and he found the place where you were all fighting .We were in trouble we were losing said Tonks in a low voice .Gibbon was down but the rest of the Death Eaters seemed ready to fight to the death .Neville had been hurt Bill had been savaged by Greyback .It was all dark .curses flying everywhere .The Malfoy boy had vanished he must have slipped past up the stairs .then more of them ran after him but one of them blocked the stair behind them with some kind of curse .Neville ran at it and got thrown up into the air None of us could break through said Ron and that massive Death Eater was still firing off jinxes all over the place they were bouncing off the walls and barely missing us .And then Snape was there said Tonks and then he wasnt I saw him running toward us but that huge Death Eaters jinx just missed me right afterward and I ducked and lost track of things said Ginny .I saw him run straight through the cursed barrier as though it wasnt there said Lupin .I tried to follow him but was thrown back just like Neville .He must have known a spell we didnt whispered McGonagall .After all he was the Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher .I just assumed that he was in a hurry to chase after the Death Eaters whod escaped up to the tower .He was said Harry savagely but to help them not to stop them .and Ill bet you had to have a Dark Mark to get through that barrier so what happened when he came back down ?Well the big Death Eater had just fired off a hex that caused half the ceiling to fall in and also broke the curse blocking the stairs said Lupin .We all ran forward those of us who were still standing anyway and then Snape and the boy emerged out of the dust obviously none of us attacked them We just let them pass said Tonks in a hollow voice .We thought they were being chased by the Death Eaters and next thing the other Death Eaters and Greyback were back and we were fighting again I thought I heard Snape shout something but I dont know what He shouted ‘Its over said Harry .Hed done what hed meant to do .They all fell silent .Fawkess lament was still echoing over the dark grounds outside .As the music reverberated upon the air unbidden unwelcome thoughts slunk into Harrys mind .Had they taken Dumbledores body from the foot of the tower yet ?What would happen to it next ?Where would it rest ?He clenched his fists tightly in his pockets .He could feel the small cold lump of the fake Horcrux against the knuckles of his right hand .The doors of the hospital wing burst open making them all jump Mr and Mrs Weasley were striding up the ward Fleur just behind them her beautiful face terrified .Molly Arthur said Professor McGonagall jumping up and hurrying to greet them .I am so sorry Bill whispered Mrs Weasley darting past Professor McGonagall as she caught sight of Bills mangled face .Oh Bill .Lupin and Tonks had got up hastily and retreated so that Mr and Mrs Weasley could get nearer to the bed .Mrs Weasley bent over her son and pressed her lips to his bloody forehead .You said Greyback attacked him ?Mr Weasley asked Professor McGonagall distractedly .But he hadnt transformed ?So what does that mean ?What will happen to Bill ?We dont yet know said Professor McGonagall looking helplessly at Lupin .There will probably be some contamination Arthur said Lupin .It is an odd case possibly unique .We dont know what his behavior might be like when he awakens .Mrs Weasley took the nastysmelling ointment from Madam Pomfrey and began dabbing at Bills wounds .And Dumbledore .said Mr Weasley .Minerva is it true .Is he really . ?As Professor McGonagall nodded Harry felt Ginny move beside him and looked at her .Her slightly narrowed eyes were fixed upon Fleur who was gazing down at Bill with a frozen expression on her face .Dumbledore gone whispered Mr Weasley but Mrs Weasley had eyes only for her eldest son she began to sob tears falling onto Bills mutilated face .Of course it doesnt matter how he looks .Its not rreally important .but he was a very handsome little bboy .always very handsome .and he was g going to be married !And what do you mean by zat ?said Fleur suddenly and loudly .What do you mean ‘e was going to be married ?Mrs Weasley raised her tearstained face looking startled .Well only that You theenk Bill will not wish to marry me anymore ?demanded Fleur .You theenk because of these bites he will not love me ?No thats not what I Because e will !said Fleur drawing herself up to her full height and throwing back her long mane of silver hair .It would take more zan a werewolf to stop Bill loving me !Well yes Im sure said Mrs Weasley but I thought perhaps given how how he You thought I would not weesh to marry him ?Or peraps you hoped ?said Fleur her nostrils flaring .What do I care how he looks ?I am goodlooking enough for both of us I theenk !All these scars show is zat my husband is brave !And I shall do zat !she added fiercely pushing Mrs Weasley aside and snatching the ointment from her .Mrs Weasley fell back against her husband and watched Fleur mopping up Bills wounds with a most curious expression upon her face .Nobody said anything Harry did not dare move .Like everybody else he was waiting for the explosion .Our GreatAuntie Muriel said Mrs Weasley after a long pause has a very beautiful tiara goblinmade which I am sure I could persuade her to lend you for the wedding .She is very fond of Bill you know and it would look lovely with your hair .Thank you said Fleur stiffly .I am sure zat will be lovely .And then Harry did not quite see how it happened both women were crying and hugging each other .Completely bewildered wondering whether the world had gone mad he turned around Ron looked as stunned as he felt and Ginny and Hermione were exchanging startled looks .You see !said a strained voice .Tonks was glaring at Lupin .She still wants to marry him even though hes been bitten !She doesnt care !Its different said Lupin barely moving his lips and looking suddenly tense .Bill will not be a full werewolf .The cases are completely But I dont care either I dont care !said Tonks seizing the front of Lupins robes and shaking them .Ive told you a million times .And the meaning of Tonkss Patronus and her mouse colored hair and the reason she had come running to find Dumbledore when she had heard a rumor someone had been attacked by Greyback all suddenly became clear to Harry it had not been Sirius that Tonks had fallen in love with after all .And Ive told you a million times said Lupin refusing to meet her eyes staring at the floor that I am too old for you too poor .too dangerous .Ive said all along youre taking a ridiculous line on this Remus said Mrs Weasley over Fleurs shoulder as she patted her on the back .I am not being ridiculous said Lupin steadily .Tonks deserves somebody young and whole .But she wants you said Mr Weasley with a small smile .And after all Remus young and whole men do not necessarily remain so .He gestured sadly at his son lying between them .This is .not the moment to discuss it said Lupin avoiding everybodys eyes as he looked around distractedly .Dumbledore is dead .Dumbledore would have been happier than anybody to think that there was a little more love in the world said Professor McGonagall curtly just as the hospital doors opened again and Hagrid walked in .The little of his face that was not obscured by hair or beard was soaking and swollen he was shaking with tears a vast spotted handkerchief in his hand .Ive .Ive done it Professor he choked .Mmoved him .Professor Sprouts got the kids back in bed .Professor Flitwicks lyin down but he says hell be all righ in a jiffy an Professor Slughorn says the Ministrys bin informed .Thank you Hagrid said Professor McGonagall standing up at once and turning to look at the group around Bills bed .I shall have to see the Ministry when they get here .Hagrid please tell the Heads of Houses Slughorn can represent Slytherin that I want to see them in my office forthwith .I would like you to join us too .As Hagrid nodded turned and shuffled out of the room again she looked down at Harry .Before I meet them I would like a quick word with you Harry .If youll come with me .Harry stood up murmured See you in a bit to Ron Hermione and Ginny and followed Professor McGonagall back down the ward .The corridors outside were deserted and the only sound was the distant phoenix song .It was several minutes before Harry became aware that they were not heading for Professor McGonagalls office but for Dumbledores and another few seconds before he realized that of course she had been deputy headmistress .Apparently she was now headmistress .so the room behind the gargoyle was now hers .In silence they ascended the moving spiral staircase and entered the circular office .He did not know what he had expected that the room would be draped in black perhaps or even that Dumbledores body might be lying there .In fact it looked almost exactly as it had done when he and Dumbledore had left it mere hours previously the silver instruments whirring and puffing on their spindlelegged tables Gryffindors sword in its glass case gleaming in the moonlight the Sorting Hat on a shelf behind the desk .But Fawkess perch stood empty he was still crying his lament to the grounds .And a new portrait had joined the ranks of the dead headmasters and headmistresses of Hogwarts Dumbledore was slumbering in a golden frame over the desk his half moon spectacles perched upon his crooked nose looking peaceful and untroubled .After glancing once at this portrait Professor McGonagall made an odd movement as though steeling herself then rounded the desk to look at Harry her face taut and lined .Harry she said I would like to know what you and Professor Dumbledore were doing this evening when you left the school .I cant tell you that Professor said Harry .He had expected the question and had his answer ready .It had been here in this very room that Dumbledore had told him that he was to confide the contents of their lessons to nobody but Ron and Hermione .Harry it might be important said Professor McGonagall .It is said Harry very but he didnt want me to tell anyone .Professor McGonagall glared at him .Potter Harry registered the renewed use of his surname in the light of Professor Dumbledores death I think you must see that the situation has changed somewhat I dont think so said Harry shrugging .Professor Dumbledore never told me to stop following his orders if he died .But Theres one thing you should know before the Ministry gets here though .Madam Rosmertas under the Imperius Curse she was helping Malfoy and the Death Eaters thats how the necklace and the poisoned mead Rosmerta ?said Professor McGonagall incredulously but before she could go on there was a knock on the door behind them and Professors Sprout Flitwick and Slughorn traipsed into the room followed by Hagrid who was still weeping copiously his huge frame trembling with grief .Snape !ejaculated Slughorn who looked the most shaken pale and sweating .Snape !I taught him !I thought I knew him !But before any of them could respond to this a sharp voice spoke from high on the wall A sallowfaced wizard with a short black fringe had just walked back into his empty canvas .Minerva the Minister will be here within seconds he has just Disapparated from the Ministry .Thank you Everard said Professor McGonagall and she turned quickly to her teachers .I want to talk about what happens to Hogwarts before he gets here she said quickly .Personally I am not convinced that the school should reopen next year .The death of the headmaster at the hands of one of our colleagues is a terrible stain upon Hogwarts s history .It is horrible .I am sure Dumbledore would have wanted the school to remain open said Professor Sprout .I feel that if a single pupil wants to come then the school ought to remain open for that pupil .But will we have a single pupil after this ?said Slughorn now dabbing his sweating brow with a silken handkerchief .Parents will want to keep their children at home and I cant say I blame them .Personally I dont think were in more danger at Hogwarts than we are anywhere else but you cant expect mothers to think like that .Theyll want to keep their families together its only natural .I agree said Professor McGonagall .And in any case it is not true to say that Dumbledore never envisaged a situation in which Hogwarts might close .When the Chamber of Secrets reopened he considered the closure of the school and I must say that Professor Dumbledores murder is more disturbing to me than the idea of Slytherins monster living undetected in the bowels of the castle .We must consult the governors said Professor Flitwick in his squeaky little voice he had a large bruise on his forehead but seemed otherwise unscathed by his collapse in Snapes office .We must follow the established procedures .A decision should not be made hastily .Hagrid you havent said anything said Professor McGonagall .What are your views ought Hogwarts to remain open ?Hagrid who had been weeping silently into his large spotted handkerchief throughout this conversation now raised puffy red eyes and croaked I dunno Professor .thats fer the Heads of House an the headmistress ter decide .Professor Dumbledore always valued your views said Professor McGonagall kindly and so do I .Well Im stayin said Hagrid fat tears still leaking out of the corners of his eyes and trickling down into his tangled beard .Its me home its bin me home since I was thirteen .An if theres kids who wan me ter teach em Ill do it .But .I dunno .Hogwarts without Dumbledore .He gulped and disappeared behind his handkerchief once more and there was silence .Very well said Professor McGonagall glancing out of the window at the grounds checking to see whether the Minister was yet approaching then I must agree with Filius that the right thing to do is to consult the governors who will make the final decision .Now as to getting students home .there is an argument for doing it sooner rather than later .We could arrange for the Hogwarts Express to come tomorrow if necessary What about Dumbledores funeral ?said Harry speaking at last .Well .said Professor McGonagall losing a little of her briskness as her voice shook .I I know that it was Dumbledores wish to be laid to rest here at Hogwarts Then thats whatll happen isnt it ?said Harry fiercely .If the Ministry thinks it appropriate said Professor McGonagall .No other headmaster or headmistress has ever been No other headmaster or headmistress ever gave more to this school growled Hagrid .Hogwarts should be Dumbledores final resting place said Professor Flitwick .Absolutely said Professor Sprout .And in that case said Harry you shouldnt send the students home until the funerals over .Theyll want to say The last word caught in his throat but Professor Sprout completed the sentence for him .Goodbye .Well said squeaked Professor Flitwick .Well said indeed !Our students should pay tribute it is fitting .We can arrange transport home afterward .Seconded barked Professor Sprout .I suppose .yes .said Slughorn in a rather agitated voice while Hagrid let out a strangled sob of assent .Hes coming said Professor McGonagall suddenly gazing down into the grounds .The Minister .and by the looks of it hes brought a delegation .Can I leave Professor ?said Harry at once .He had no desire at all to see or be interrogated by Rufus Scrimgeour tonight .You may said Professor McGonagall .And quickly .She strode toward the door and held it open for him .He sped down the spiral staircase and off along the deserted corridor he had left his Invisibility Cloak at the top of the Astronomy Tower but it did not matter there was nobody in the corridors to see him pass not even Filch Mrs Norris or Peeves .He did not meet another soul until he turned into the passage leading to the Gryffindor common room .Is it true ?whispered the Fat Lady as he approached her .It is really true ?Dumbledore dead ?Yes said Harry .She let out a wail and without waiting for the password swung forward to admit him .As Harry had suspected it would be the common room was jampacked .The room fell silent as he climbed through the portrait hole .He saw Dean and Seamus sitting in a group nearby This meant that the dormitory must be empty or nearly so .Without speaking to anybody without making eye contact at all Harry walked straight across the room and through the door to the boys dormitories .As he had hoped Ron was waiting for him still fully dressed sitting on his bed .Harry sat down on his own fourposter and for a moment they simply stared at each other .Theyre talking about closing the school said Harry .Lupin said they would said Ron .There was a pause .So ?said Ron in a very low voice as though he thought the furniture might be listening in .Did you find one ?Did you get it ?A a Horcrux ?Harry shook his head .All that had taken place around that black lake seemed like an old nightmare now had it really happened and only hours ago ?You didnt get it ?said Ron looking crestfallen .It wasnt there ?No said Harry .Someone had already taken it and left a fake in its place .Already taken ?Wordlessly Harry pulled the fake locket from his pocket opened it and passed it to Ron .The full story could wait .It did not matter tonight .nothing mattered except the end the end of their pointless adventure the end of Dumbledores life .R .A .B .whispered Ron but who was that ?Dunno said Harry lying back on his bed fully clothed and staring blankly upwards .He felt no curiosity at all about R .A .B .He doubted that he would ever feel curious again .As he lay there he became aware suddenly that the grounds were silent .Fawkes had stopped singing .And he knew without knowing how he knew it that the phoenix had gone had left Hogwarts for good just as Dumbledore had left the school had left the world .had left Harry .THE WHITE TOMB All lessons were suspended all examinations postponed .Some students were hurried away from Hogwarts by their parents over the next couple of days the Patil twins were gone before breakfast on the morning following Dumbledores death and Zacharias Smith was escorted from the castle by his haughtylooking father .Seamus Finnigan on the other hand refused pointblank to accompany his mother home they had a shouting match in the entrance hall that was resolved when she agreed that he could remain behind for the funeral .She had difficulty in finding a bed in Hogsmeade Seamus told Harry and Ron for wizards and witches were pouring into the village preparing to pay their last respects to Dumbledore .Some excitement was caused among the younger students who had never seen it before when a powderblue carriage the size of a house pulled by a dozen giant winged palominos came soaring out of the sky in the late afternoon before the funeral and landed on the edge of the forest .Harry watched from a window as a gigantic and handsome oliveskinned blackhaired woman descended the carriage steps and threw herself into the waiting Hagrids arms .Meanwhile a delegation of Ministry officials including the Minister of Magic himself was being accommodated within the castle .Harry was diligently avoiding contact with any of them he was sure that sooner or later he would be asked again to account for Dumbledores last excursion from Hogwarts .Harry Ron Hermione and Ginny were spending all of their time together .The beautiful weather seemed to mock them Harry could imagine how it would have been if Dumbledore had not died and they had had this time together at the very end of the year Ginnys examinations finished the pressure of homework lifted .and hour by hour he put off saying the thing that he knew he must say doing what he knew was right to do because it was too hard to forgo his best source of comfort .They visited the hospital wing twice a day Neville had been discharged but Bill remained under Madam Pomfreys care .His scars were as bad as ever in truth he now bore a distinct resemblance to MadEye Moody though thankfully with both eyes and legs but in personality he seemed just the same as ever .All that appeared to have changed was that he now had a great liking for very rare steaks . .so eet ees lucky e is marrying me said Fleur happily plumping up Bills pillows because ze British overcook their meat I ave always said this .I suppose Im just going to have to accept that he really is going to marry her sighed Ginny later that evening as she Harry Ron and Hermione sat beside the open window of the Gryffindor common room looking out over the twilit grounds .Shes not that bad said Harry .Ugly though he added hastily as Ginny raised her eyebrows and she let out a reluctant giggle .Well I suppose if Mum can stand it I can .Anyone else we know died ?Ron asked Hermione who was perusing the Evening Prophet .Hermione winced at the forced toughness in his voice .No she said reprovingly folding up the newspaper .Theyre still looking for Snape but no sign .Of course there isnt said Harry who became angry every time this subject cropped up .They wont find Snape till they find Voldemort and seeing as theyve never managed to do that in all this time .Im going to go to bed yawned Ginny .I havent been sleeping that well since .well .I could do with some sleep .She kissed Harry Ron looked away pointedly waved at the other two and departed for the girls dormitories .The moment the door had closed behind her Hermione leaned forward toward Harry with a most Hermioneish look on her face .Harry I found something out this morning in the library .R .A .B .said Harry sitting up straight .He did not feel the way he had so often felt before excited curious burning to get to the bottom of a mystery he simply knew that the task of discovering the truth about the real Horcrux had to be completed before he could move a little farther along the dark and winding path stretching ahead of him the path that he and Dumbledore had set out upon together and which he now knew he would have to journey alone .There might still be as many as four Horcruxes out there somewhere and each would need to be found and eliminated before there was even a possibility that Voldemort could be killed .He kept reciting their names to himself as though by listing them he could bring them within reach the locket .the cup .the snake .something of Gryffindors or Ravenclaws .the locket .the cup .the snake .something of Gryffindors or Ravenclaws .This mantra seemed to pulse through Harrys mind as he fell asleep at night and his dreams were thick with cups lockets and mysterious objects that he could not quite reach though Dumbledore helpfully offered Harry a rope ladder that turned to snakes the moment he began to climb .He had shown Hermione the note inside the locket the morning after Dumbledore s death and although she had not immediately recognized the initials as belonging to some obscure wizard about whom she had been reading she had since been rushing off to the library a little more often than was strictly necessary for somebody who had no homework to do .No she said sadly Ive been trying Harry but I havent found anything .There are a couple of reasonably wellknown wizards with those initials Rosalind Antigone Bungs .Rupert ‘Axebanger Brookstanton .but they dont seem to fit at all .Judging by that note the person who stole the Horcrux knew Voldemort and I cant find a shred of evidence that Bungs or Axebanger ever had anything to do with him .No actually its about .well Snape .She looked nervous even saying the name again .What about him ?asked Harry heavily slumping back in his chair .Well its just that I was sort of right about the Half Blood Prince business she said tentatively .Dyou have to rub it in Hermione ?How dyou think I feel about that now ?No no Harry I didnt mean that !she said hastily looking around to check that they were not being overheard .Its just that I was right about Eileen Prince once owning the book .You see .she was Snape s mother !I thought she wasnt much of a looker said Ron .Hermione ignored him .I was going through the rest of the old Prophets and there was a tiny announcement about Eileen Prince marrying a man called Tobias Snape and then later an announcement saying that shed given birth to a murderer spat Harry .Well .yes said Hermione .So .I was sort of right .Snape must have been proud of being ‘half a Prince you see ?Tobias Snape was a Muggle from what it said in the Prophet Yeah that fits said Harry .Hed play up the pure blood side so he could get in with Lucius Malfoy and the rest of them .Hes just like Voldemort .Pure blood mother Muggle father .ashamed of his parentage trying to make himself feared using the Dark Arts gave himself an impressive new name Lord Voldemort the HalfBlood Prince how could Dumbledore have missed ?He broke off looking out the window .He could not stop himself dwelling upon Dumbledore s inexcusable trust in Snape .but as Hermione had just inadvertently reminded him he Harry had been taken in just the same .In spite of the increasing nastiness of those scribbled spells he had refused to believe ill of the boy who had been so clever who had helped him so much .Helped him .it was an almost unendurable thought now .I still dont get why he didnt turn you in for using that book said Ron .He mustve known where you were getting it all from .He knew said Harry bitterly .He knew when I used Sectumsempra .He didnt really need Legilimency .He might even have known before then with Slughorn talking about how brilliant I was at Potions . .Shouldnt have left his old book in the bottom of that cupboard should he ?But why didnt he turn you in ?I dont think he wanted to associate himself with that book said Hermione .I dont think Dumbledore would have liked it very much if hed known .And even if Snape pretended it hadnt been his Slughorn would have recognized his writing at once .Anyway the book was left in Snapes old classroom and Ill bet Dumbledore knew his mother was called ‘Prince .I shouldve shown the book to Dumbledore said Harry .All that time he was showing me how Voldemort was evil even when he was at school and I had proof Snape was too ‘Evil is a strong word said Hermione quietly .You were the one who kept telling me the book was dangerous !Im trying to say Harry that youre putting too much blame on yourself .I thought the Prince seemed to have a nasty sense of humor but I would never have guessed he was a potential killer .None of us couldve guessed Snape would .you know said Ron .Silence fell between them each of them lost in their own thoughts but Harry was sure that they like him were thinking about the following morning when Dumbledores body would be laid to rest .He had never attended a funeral before there had been no body to bury when Sirius had died .He did not know what to expect and was a little worried about what he might see about how he would feel .He wondered whether Dumbledores death would be more real to him once it was over .Though he had moments when the horrible fact of it threatened to overwhelm him there were blank stretches of numbness where despite the fact that nobody was talking about anything else in the whole castle he still found it difficult to believe that Dumbledore had really gone .Admittedly he had not as he had with Sirius looked desperately for some kind of loophole some way that Dumbledore would come back .He felt in his pocket for the cold chain of the fake Horcrux which he now carried with him everywhere not as a talisman but as a reminder of what it had cost and what remained still to do .Harry rose early to pack the next day the Hogwarts Express would be leaving an hour after the funeral .Downstairs he found the mood in the Great Hall subdued .Everybody was wearing their dress robes and no one seemed very hungry .Professor McGonagall had left the thronelike chair in the middle of the staff table empty .Hagrids chair was deserted too Harry thought that perhaps he had not been able to face breakfast but Snapes place had been unceremoniously filled by Rufus Scrimgeour .Harry avoided his yellowish eyes as they scanned the Hall Harry had the uncomfortable feeling that Scrimgeour was looking for him .Among Scrimgeours entourage Harry spotted the red hair and hornrimmed glasses of Percy Weasley .Ron gave no sign that he was aware of Percy apart from stabbing pieces of kipper with unwonted venom .Over at the Slytherin table Crabbe and Goyle were muttering together .Hulking boys though they were they looked oddly lonely without the tall pale figure of Malfoy between them bossing them around .Harry had not spared Malfoy much thought .His animosity was all for Snape but he had not forgotten the fear in Malfoys voice on that tower top nor the fact that he had lowered his wand before the other Death Eaters arrived .Harry did not believe that Malfoy would have killed Dumbledore .He despised Malfoy still for his infatuation with the Dark Arts but now the tiniest drop of pity mingled with his dislike .Where Harry wondered was Malfoy now and what was Voldemort making him do under threat of killing him and his parents ?Harrys thoughts were interrupted by a nudge in the ribs from Ginny .Professor McGonagall had risen to her feet and the mournful hum in the Hall died away at once .It is nearly time she said .Please follow your Heads of Houses out into the grounds .Gryffindors after me .They filed out from behind their benches in near silence .Harry glimpsed Slughorn at the head of the Slytherin column wearing magnificent long emerald green robes embroidered with silver .He had never seen Professor Sprout Head of the Hufflepuffs looking so clean there was not a single patch on her hat and when they reached the entrance hall they found Madam Pince standing beside Filch she in a thick black veil that fell to her knees he in an ancient black suit and tie reeking of mothballs .They were heading as Harry saw when he stepped out onto the stone steps from the front doors toward the lake .The warmth of the sun caressed his face as they followed Professor McGonagall in silence to the place where hundreds of chairs had been set out in rows .An aisle ran down the center of them There was a marble table standing at the front all chairs facing it .It was the most beautiful summers day .An extraordinary assortment of people had already settled into half of the chairs shabby and smart old and young .Most Harry did not recognize but a few he did including members of the Order of the Phoenix Kingsley Shacklebolt MadEye Moody Tonks her hair miraculously returned to vividest pink Remus Lupin with whom she seemed to be holding hands Mr and Mrs Weasley Bill supported by Fleur and followed by Fred and George who were wearing jackets of black dragon skin .Then there was Madame Maxime who took up two and a half chairs on her own Tom the landlord of the Leaky Cauldron in London Arabella Figg Harrys Squib neighbor the hairy bass player from the Wizarding group the Weird Sisters Ernie Prang driver of the Knight Bus Madam Malkin of the robe shop in Diagon Alley and some people whom Harry merely knew by sight such as the barman of the Hogs Head and the witch who pushed the trolley on the Hogwarts Express .The castle ghosts were there too barely visible in the bright sunlight discernible only when they moved shimmering insubstantially on the gleaming air .Harry Ron Hermione and Ginny filed into seats at the end of a row beside the lake .People were whispering to each other it sounded like a breeze in the grass but the birdsong was louder by far .The crowd continued to swell with a great rush of affection for both of them Harry saw Neville being helped into a seat by Luna .Neville and Luna alone of the D .A .had responded to Hermione s summons the night that Dumbledore had died and Harry knew why They were the ones who had missed the D .A .most .probably the ones who had checked their coins regularly in the hope that there would be another meeting .Cornelius Fudge walked past toward the front rows his expression miserable twirling his green bowler hat as usual Harry next recognized Rita Skeeter who he was infuriated to see had a notebook clutched in her redtaloned hand and then with a worse jolt of fury Dolores Umbridge an unconvincing expression of grief upon her toadlike face a black velvet bow set atop her ironcolored curls .At the sight of the centaur Firenze who was standing like a sentinel near the waters edge she gave a start and scurried hastily into a seat a good distance away .The staff was seated at last .Harry could see Scrimgeour looking grave and dignified in the front row with Professor McGonagall .He wondered whether Scrimgeour or any of these important people were really sorry that Dumbledore was dead .But then he heard music strange otherworldly music and he forgot his dislike of the Ministry in looking around for the source of it .He was not the only one Many heads were turning searching a little alarmed .In there whispered Ginny in Harrys ear .And he saw them in the clear green sunlit water inches below the surface reminding him horribly of the Inferi a chorus of merpeople singing in a strange language he did not understand their pallid faces rippling their purplish hair flowing all around them .The music made the hair on Harrys neck stand up and yet it was not unpleasant .It spoke very clearly of loss and of despair .As he looked down into the wild faces of the singers he had the feeling that they at least were sorry for Dumbledores passing .Then Ginny nudged him again and he looked around .Hagrid was walking slowly up the aisle between the chairs .He was crying quite silently his face gleaming with tears and in his arms wrapped in purple velvet spangled with golden stars was what Harry knew to be Dumbledores body .A sharp pain rose in Harrys throat at this sight For a moment the strange music and the knowledge that Dumbledores body was so close seemed to take all warmth from the day .Ron looked white and shocked .Tears were falling thick and fast into both Ginny s and Hermiones laps .They could not see clearly what was happening at the front .Hagrid seemed to have placed the body carefully upon the table .Now he retreated down the aisle blowing his nose with loud trumpeting noises that drew scandalized looks from some including Harry saw Dolores Umbridge .but Harry knew that Dumbledore would not have cared .He tried to make a friendly gesture to Hagrid as he passed but Hagrids eyes were so swollen it was a wonder he could see where he was going .Harry glanced at the back row to which Hagrid was heading and realized what was guiding him for there dressed in a jacket and trousers each the size of a small marquee was the giant Grawp his great ugly boulderlike head bowed docile almost human .Hagrid sat down next to his halfbrother and Grawp patted Hagrid hard on the head so that his chair legs sank into the ground .Harry had a wonderful momentary urge to laugh .But then the music stopped and he turned to face the front again .A little tuftyhaired man in plain black robes had got to his feet and stood now in front of Dumbledore s body .Harry could not hear what he was saying .Odd words floated back to them over the hundreds of heads .Nobility of spirit .intellectual contribution .greatness of heart .It did not mean very much .It had little to do with Dumbledore as Harry had known him .He suddenly remembered Dumbledore s idea of a few words nitwit oddment blubber and tweak and again had to suppress a grin .What was the matter with him ?There was a soft splashing noise to his left and he saw that the merpeople had broken the surface to listen too .He remembered Dumbledore crouching at the waters edge two years ago very close to where Harry now sat and conversing in Mermish with the Merchieftainess .Harry wondered where Dumbledore had learned Mermish .There was so much he had never asked him so much he should have said .And then without warning it swept over him the dreadful truth more completely and undeniably than it had until now .Dumbledore was dead gone .He clutched the cold locket in his hand so tightly that it hurt but he could not prevent hot tears spilling from his eyes He looked away from Ginny and the others and stared out over the lake toward the forest as the little man in black droned on .There was movement among the trees .The centaurs had come to pay their respects too .They did not move into the open but Harry saw them standing quite still half hidden in shadow watching the wizards their bows hanging at their sides .And Harry remembered his first nightmarish trip into the forest the first time he had ever encountered the thing that was then Voldemort and how he had faced him and how he and Dumbledore had discussed fighting a losing battle not long thereafter .It was important Dumbledore said to fight and fight again and keep fighting for only then could evil be kept at bay though never quite eradicated .And Harry saw very clearly as he sat there under the hot sun how people who cared about him had stood in front of him one by one his mother his father his godfather and finally Dumbledore all determined to protect him but now that was over .He could not let anybody else stand between him and Voldemort he must abandon forever the illusion he ought to have lost at the age of one that the shelter of a parents arms meant that nothing could hurt him .There was no waking from his nightmare no comforting whisper in the dark that he was safe really that it was all in his imagination the last and greatest of his protectors had died and he was more alone than he had ever been before .The little man in black had stopped speaking at last and resumed his seat .Harry waited for somebody else to get to their feet he expected speeches probably from the Minister but nobody moved .Then several people screamed .Bright white flames had erupted around Dumbledores body and the table upon which it lay Higher and higher they rose obscuring the body .White smoke spiraled into the air and made strange shapes Harry thought for one heart stopping moment that he saw a phoenix fly joyfully into the blue but next second the fire had vanished .In its place was a white marble tomb encasing Dumbledores body and the table on which he had rested .There were a few more cries of shock as a shower of arrows soared through the air but they fell far short of the crowd .It was Harry knew the centaurs tribute He saw them turn tail and disappear back into the cool trees .Likewise the merpeople sank slowly back into the green water and were lost from view .Harry looked at Ginny Ron and Hermione Rons face was screwed up as though the sunlight were blinding him .Hermione s face was glazed with tears but Ginny was no longer crying .She met Harrys gaze with the same hard blazing look that he had seen when she had hugged him after winning the Quidditch Cup in his absence and he knew that at that moment they understood each other perfectly and that when he told her what he was going to do now she would not say Be careful or Dont do it but accept his decision because she would not have expected anything less of him .And so he steeled himself to say what he had known he must say ever since Dumbledore had died .Ginny listen .he said very quietly as the buzz of conversation grew louder around them and people began to get to their feet I cant be involved with you anymore .Weve got to stop seeing each other .We cant be together .She said with an oddly twisted smile Its for some stupid noble reason isnt it ?Its been like .like something out of someone elses life these last few weeks with you said Harry .But I cant .we cant .Ive got things to do alone now .She did not cry she simply looked at him .Voldemort uses people his enemies are close to .Hes already used you as bait once and that was just because youre my best friends sister .Think how much danger youll be in if we keep this up .Hell know hell find out .Hell try and get to me through you .What if I dont care ?said Ginny fiercely .I care said Harry .How do you think Id feel if this was your funeral .and it was my fault .She looked away from him over the lake .I never really gave up on you she said .Not really .I always hoped .Hermione told me to get on with life maybe go out with some other people relax a bit around you because I never used to be able to talk if you were in the room remember ?And she thought you might take a bit more notice if I was a bit more myself .Smart girl that Hermione said Harry trying to smile .I just wish Id asked you sooner .We couldve had ages .months .years maybe .But youve been too busy saving the Wizarding world said Ginny half laughing .Well .I cant say Im surprised .I knew this would happen in the end .I knew you wouldnt be happy unless you were hunting Voldemort .Maybe thats why I like you so much .Harry could not bear to hear these things nor did he think his resolution would hold if he remained sitting beside her .Ron he saw was now holding Hermione and stroking her hair while she sobbed into his shoulder tears dripping from the end of his own long nose .With a miserable gesture Harry got up turned his back on Ginny and on Dumbledores tomb and walked away around the lake .Moving felt much more bearable than sitting still just as setting out as soon as possible to track down the Horcruxes and kill Voldemort would feel better than waiting to do it .Harry !He turned .Rufus Scrimgeour was limping rapidly toward him around the bank leaning on his walking stick .Ive been hoping to have a word .do you mind if I walk a little way with you ?No said Harry indifferently and set off again .Harry this was a dreadful tragedy said Scrimgeour quietly .I cannot tell you how appalled I was to hear of it .Dumbledore was a very great wizard .We had our disagreements as you know but no one knows better than I What do you want ?asked Harry flatly .Scrimgeour looked annoyed but as before hastily modified his expression to one of sorrowful understanding .You are of course devastated he said .I know that you were very close to Dumbledore .I think you may have been his favorite pupil ever .The bond between the two of you What do you want ?Harry repeated coming to a halt .Scrimgeour stopped too leaned on his stick and stared at Harry his expression shrewd now .The word is that you were with him when he left the school the night that he died .Whose word ?said Harry .Somebody Stupefied a Death Eater on top of the tower after Dumbledore died .There were also two broomsticks up there .The Ministry can add two and two Harry .Glad to hear it said Harry .Well where I went with Dumbledore and what we did is my business .He didnt want people to know .Such loyalty is admirable of course said Scrimgeour who seemed to be restraining his irritation with difficulty but Dumbledore is gone Harry .Hes gone .He will only be gone from the school when none here are loyal to him said Harry smiling in spite of himself .My dear boy .even Dumbledore cannot return from the I am not saying he can .You wouldnt understand .But Ive got nothing to tell you .Scrimgeour hesitated then said in what was evidently supposed to be a tone of delicacy The Ministry can offer you all sorts of protection you know Harry .I would be delighted to place a couple of my Aurors at your service Harry laughed .Voldemort wants to kill me himself and Aurors wont stop him .So thanks for the offer but no thanks .So said Scrimgeour his voice cold now the request I made of you at Christmas What request ?Oh yeah .the one where I tell the world what a great job youre doing in exchange for for raising everyones morale !snapped Scrimgeour .Harry considered him for a moment .Released Stan Shunpike yet ?Scrimgeour turned a nasty purple color highly reminiscent of Uncle Vernon .I see you are Dumbledores man through and through said Harry .Thats right .Scrimgeour glared at him for another moment then turned and limped away without another word .Harry could see Percy and the rest of the Ministry delegation waiting for him casting nervous glances at the sobbing Hagrid and Grawp who were still in their seats .Ron and Hermione were hurrying toward Harry passing Scrimgeour going in the opposite direction .Harry turned and walked slowly on waiting for them to catch up which they finally did in the shade of a beech tree under which they had sat in happier times .What did Scrimgeour want ?Hermione whispered .Same as he wanted at Christmas shrugged Harry .Wanted me to give him inside information on Dumbledore and be the Ministrys new poster boy .Ron seemed to struggle with himself for a moment then he said loudly to Hermione Look let me go back and hit Percy !No she said firmly grabbing his arm .Itll make me feel better !Harry laughed .Even Hermione grinned a little though her smile faded as she looked up at the castle .I cant bear the idea that we might never come back she said softly .How can Hogwarts close ?Maybe it wont said Ron .Were not in any more danger here than we are at home are we ?Everywheres the same now .Id even say Hogwarts is safer there are more wizards inside to defend the place .What dyou reckon Harry ?Im not coming back even if it does reopen said Harry .Ron gaped at him but Hermione said sadly I knew you were going to say that .But then what will you do ? ‘Tm going back to the Dursleys once more because Dumbledore wanted me to said Harry .But itll be a short visit and then Ill be gone for good .But where will you go if you dont come back to school ?I thought I might go back to Godrics Hollow Harry muttered .He had had the idea in his head ever since the night of Dumbledores death .For me it started there all of it .Ive just got a feeling I need to go there .And I can visit my parents graves Id like that .And then what ?said Ron .Then Ive got to track down the rest of the Horcruxes havent I ?said Harry his eyes upon Dumbledores white tomb reflected in the water on the other side of the lake .Thats what he wanted me to do thats why he told me all about them .If Dumbledore was right and Im sure he was there are still four of them out there .Ive got to find them and destroy them and then Ive got to go after the seventh bit of Voldemorts soul the bit thats still in his body and Im the one whos going to kill him .And if I meet Severus Snape along the way he added so much the better for me so much the worse for him .There was a long silence .The crowd had almost dispersed now the stragglers giving the monumental figure of Grawp a wide berth as he cuddled Hagrid whose howls of grief were still echoing across the water .Well be there Harry said Ron .What ?At your aunt and uncles house said Ron .And then well go with you wherever youre going .No said Harry quickly he had not counted on this he had meant them to understand that he was undertaking this most dangerous journey alone .You said to us once before said Hermione quietly that there was time to turn back if we wanted to .Weve had time havent we ?Were with you whatever happens said Ron .But mate youre going to have to come round my mum and dads house before we do anything else even Godrics Hollow .Why ?Bill and Fleurs wedding remember ?Harry looked at him startled the idea that anything as normal as a wedding could still exist seemed incredible and yet wonderful .Yeah we shouldnt miss that he said finally .His hand closed automatically around the fake Horcrux but in spite of everything in spite of the dark and twisting path he saw stretching ahead for himself in spite of the final meeting with Voldemort he knew must come whether in a month in a year or in ten he felt his heart lift at the thought that there was still one last golden day of peace left to enjoy with Ron and Hermione .I THE DARK LORD ASCENDING The two men appeared out of nowhere a few yards apart in the narrow moonlit lane .For a second they stood quite still wands directed at each others chests then recognizing each other they stowed their wands beneath their cloaks and started walking briskly in the same direction .News ?asked the taller of the two .The best replied Severus Snape .The lane was bordered on the left by wild low growing brambles on the right by a high neatly manicured hedge .The mens long cloaks flapped around their ankles as they marched .Thought I might be late said Yaxley his blunt features sliding in and out of sight as the branches of overhanging trees broke the moonlight .It was a little trickier than I expected .But I hope he will be satisfied .You sound confident that your reception will be good ?Snape nodded but did not elaborate .They turned right into a wide driveway that led off the lane .The high hedge curved with them running off into the distance beyond the pair of impressive wroughtiron gates barring the mens way .Neither of them broke step In silence both raised their left arms in a kind of salute and passed straight through as though the dark metal were smoke .The yew hedges muffled the sound of the mens footsteps .There was a rustle somewhere to their right Yaxley drew his wand again pointing it over his companions head but the source of the noise proved to be nothing more than a purewhite peacock strutting majestically along the top of the hedge .He always did himself well Lucius .Peacocks .Yaxley thrust his wand back under his cloak with a snort .A handsome manor house grew out of the darkness at the end of the straight drive lights glinting in the diamondpaned downstairs windows .Somewhere in the dark garden beyond the hedge a fountain was playing .Gravel crackled beneath their feet as Snape and Yaxley sped toward the front door which swung inward at their approach though nobody had visibly opened it .The hallway was large dimly lit and sumptuously decorated with a magnificent carpet covering most of the stone floor .The eyes of the palefaced portraits on the walls followed Snape and Yaxley as they strode past .The two men halted at a heavy wooden door leading into the next room hesitated for the space of a heartbeat then Snape turned the bronze handle .The drawing room was full of silent people sitting at a long and ornate table .The rooms usual furniture had been pushed carelessly up against the walls .Illumination came from a roaring fire beneath a handsome marble mantelpiece surmounted by a gilded mirror .Snape and Yaxley lingered for a moment on the threshold .As their eyes grew accustomed to the lack of light they were drawn upward to the strangest feature of the scene an apparently unconscious human figure hanging upside down over the table revolving slowly as if suspended by an invisible rope and reflected in the mirror and in the bare polished surface of the table below .None of the people seated underneath this singular sight was looking at it except for a pale young man sitting almost directly below it .He seemed unable to prevent himself from glancing upward every minute or so .Yaxley .Snape said a high clear voice from the head of the table .You are very nearly late .The speaker was seated directly in front of the fireplace so that it was difficult at first for the new arrivals to make out more than his silhouette .As they drew nearer however his face shone through the gloom hairless snakelike with slits for nostrils and gleaming red eyes whose pupils were vertical .He was so pale that he seemed to emit a pearly glow .Severus here said Voldemort indicating the seat on his immediate right .Yaxley beside Dolohov .The two men took their allotted places .Most of the eyes around the table followed Snape and it was to him that Voldemort spoke first .So ?My Lord the Order of the Phoenix intends to move Harry Potter from his current place of safety on Saturday next at nightfall .The interest around the table sharpened palpably Some stiffened others fidgeted all gazing at Snape and Voldemort .Saturday .at nightfall repeated Voldemort .His red eyes fastened upon Snape s black ones with such intensity that some of the watchers looked away apparently fearful that they themselves would be scorched by the ferocity of the gaze .Snape however looked calmly back into Voldemorts face and after a moment or two Voldemorts lipless mouth curved into something like a smile .Good .Very good .And this information comes from the source we discussed said Snape .My Lord .Yaxley had leaned forward to look down the long table at Voldemort and Snape .All faces turned to him .My Lord I have heard differently .Yaxley waited but Voldemort did not speak so he went on Dawlish the Auror let slip that Potter will not be moved until the thirtieth the night before the boy turns seventeen .Snape was smiling .My source told me that there are plans to lay a false trail this must be it .No doubt a Confundus Charm has been placed upon Dawlish .It would not be the first time he is known to be susceptible .I assure you my Lord Dawlish seemed quite certain said Yaxley .If he has been Confunded naturally he is certain said Snape .I assure you Yaxley the Auror Office will play no further part in the protection of Harry Potter .The Order believes that we have infiltrated the Ministry .The Orders got one thing right then eh ?said a squat man sitting a short distance from Yaxley he gave a wheezy giggle that was echoed here and there along the table .Voldemort did not laugh .His gaze had wandered upward to the body revolving slowly overhead and he seemed to be lost in thought .My Lord Yaxley went on Dawlish believes an entire party of Aurors will be used to transfer the boy Voldemort held up a large white hand and Yaxley subsided at once watching resentfully as Voldemort turned back to Snape .Where are they going to hide the boy next ?At the home of one of the Order said Snape .The place according to the source has been given every protection that the Order and Ministry together could provide .I think that there is little chance of taking him once he is there my Lord unless of course the Ministry has fallen before next Saturday which might give us the opportunity to discover and undo enough of the enchantments to break through the rest .Well Yaxley ?Voldemort called down the table the firelight glinting strangely in his red eyes .Will the Ministry have fallen by next Saturday ?Once again all heads turned .Yaxley squared his shoulders .My Lord I have good news on that score .I have with difficulty and after great effort suceeded in placing an Imperius Curse upon Pius Thicknesse .Many of those sitting around Yaxley looked impressed his neighbor Dolohov a man with a long twisted face clapped him on the back .It is a start said Voldemort .But Thicknesse is only one man .Scrimgeour must be surrounded by our people before I act .One failed attempt on the Ministers life will set me back a long way .Yes my Lord that is true but you know as Head of the Department of Magical Law Enforcement Thicknesse has regular contact not only with the Minister himself but also with the Heads of all the other Ministry departments .It will I think be easy now that we have such a highranking official under our control to subjugate the others and then they can all work together to bring Scrimgeour down .As long as our friend Thicknesse is not discovered before he has converted the rest said Voldemort .At any rate it remains unlikely that the Ministry will be mine before next Saturday .If we cannot touch the boy at his destination then it must be done while he travels .We are at an advantage there my Lord said Yaxley who seemed determined to receive some portion of approval .We now have several people planted within the Department of Magical Transport .If Potter Apparates or uses the Floo Network we shall know immediately .He will not do either said Snape .The Order is eschewing any form of transport that is controlled or regulated by the Ministry they mistrust everything to do with the place .All the better said Voldemort .He will have to move in the open .Easier to take by far .Again Voldemort looked up at the slowly revolving body as he went on I shall attend to the boy in person .There have been too many mistakes where Harry Potter is concerned .Some of them have been my own .That Potter lives is due more to my errors than to his triumphs .The company around the table watched Voldemort apprehensively each of them by his or her expression afraid that they might be blamed for Harry Potters continued existence .Voldemort however seemed to be speaking more to himself than to any of them still addressing the unconscious body above him .I have been careless and so have been thwarted by luck and chance those wreckers of all but the best laid plans .But I know better now .I understand those things that I did not understand before .I must be the one to kill Harry Potter and I shall be .At these words seemingly in response to them a sudden wail sounded a terrible drawnout cry of misery and pain .Many of those at the table looked downward startled for the sound had seemed to issue from below their feet .Wormtail said Voldemort with no change in his quiet thoughtful tone and without removing his eyes from the revolving body above have I not spoken to you about keeping our prisoner quiet ?Yes mmy Lord gasped a small man halfway down the table who had been sitting so low in his chair that it had appeared at first glance to be unoccupied .Now he scrambled from his seat and scurried from the room leaving nothing behind him but a curious gleam of silver .As I was saying continued Voldemort looking again at the tense faces of his followers I understand better now .I shall need for instance to borrow a wand from one of you before I go to kill Potter .The faces around him displayed nothing but shock he might have announced that he wanted to borrow one of their arms .No volunteers ?said Voldemort .Lets see .Lucius I see no reason for you to have a wand anymore .Lucius Malfoy looked up .His skin appeared yellowish and waxy in the firelight and his eyes were sunken and shadowed .When he spoke his voice was hoarse .My Lord ?Your wand Lucius .I require your wand .Malfoy glanced sideways at his wife .She was staring straight ahead quite as pale as he was her long blonde hair hanging down her back but beneath the table her slim fingers closed briefly on his wrist .At her touch Malfoy put his hand into his robes withdrew a wand and passed it along to Voldemort who held it up in front of his red eyes examining it closely .What is it ?Elm my Lord whispered Malfoy .And the core ?Dragon dragon heartstring .Good said Voldemort .He drew out his own wand and compared the lengths .Lucius Malfoy made an involuntary movement for a fraction of a second it seemed he expected to receive Voldemorts wand in exchange for his own .The gesture was not missed by Voldemort whose eyes widened maliciously .Give you my wand Lucius ?My wand ?Some of the throng sniggered .I have given you your liberty Lucius is that not enough for you ?But I have noticed that you and your family seem less than happy of late .What is it about my presence in your home that displeases you Lucius ?Nothing nothing my Lord !Such lies Lucius .The soft voice seemed to hiss on even after the cruel mouth had stopped moving .One or two of the wizards barely repressed a shudder as the hissing grew louder something heavy could be heard sliding across the floor beneath the table .The huge snake emerged to climb slowly up Voldemorts chair .It rose seemingly endlessly and came to rest across Voldemorts shoulders its neck the thickness of a mans thigh its eyes with their vertical slits for pupils unblinking .Voldemort stroked the creature absently with long thin fingers still looking at Lucius Malfoy .Why do the Malfoys look so unhappy with their lot ?Is my return my rise to power not the very thing they professed to desire for so many years ?Of course my Lord said Lucius Malfoy .His hand shook as he wiped sweat from his upper lip .We did desire it we do .To Malfoys left his wife made an odd stiff nod her eyes averted from Voldemort and the snake .To his right his son Draco who had been gazing up at the inert body overhead glanced quickly at Voldemort and away again terrified to make eye contact .My Lord said a dark woman halfway down the table her voice constricted with emotion it is an honor to have you here in our familys house .There can be no higher pleasure .She sat beside her sister as unlike her in looks with her dark hair and heavily lidded eyes as she was in bearing and demeanor where Narcissa sat rigid and impassive Bellatrix leaned toward Voldemort for mere words could not demonstrate her longing for closeness .No higher pleasure repeated Voldemort his head tilted a little to one side as he considered Bellatrix .That means a great deal Bellatrix from you .Her face flooded with color her eyes welled with tears of delight .My Lord knows I speak nothing but the truth !No higher pleasure .even compared with the happy event that I hear has taken place in your family this week ?She stared at him her lips parted evidently confused .I dont know what you mean my Lord .Im talking about your niece Bellatrix .And yours Lucius and Narcissa .She has just married the werewolf Remus Lupin .You must be so proud .There was an eruption of jeering laughter from around the table .Many leaned forward to exchange gleeful looks a few thumped the table with their fists .The great snake disliking the disturbance opened its mouth wide and hissed angrily but the Death Eaters did not hear it so jubilant were they at Bellatrix and the Malfoys humiliation .Bellatrixs face so recently flushed with happiness had turned an ugly blotchy red .She is no niece of ours my Lord she cried over the outpouring of mirth .We Narcissa and I have never set eyes on our sister since she married the Mudblood .This brat has nothing to do with either of us nor any beast she marries .What say you Draco ?asked Voldemort and though his voice was quiet it carried clearly through the catcalls and jeers .Will you babysit the cubs ?The hilarity mounted Draco Malfoy looked in terror at his father who was staring down into his own lap then caught his mothers eye .She shook her head almost imperceptibly then resumed her own deadpan stare at the opposite wall .Enough said Voldemort stroking the angry snake .Enough .And the laughter died at once .Many of our oldest family trees become a little diseased over time he said as Bellatrix gazed at him breathless and imploring .You must prune yours must you not to keep it healthy ?Cut away those parts that threaten the health of the rest .Yes my Lord whispered Bellatrix and her eyes swam with tears of gratitude again .At the first chance !You shall have it said Voldemort .And in your family so in the world .we shall cut away the canker that infects us until only those of the true blood remain .Voldemort raised Lucius Malfoys wand pointed it directly at the slowly revolving figure suspended over the table and gave it a tiny flick .The figure came to life with a groan and began to struggle against invisible bonds .Do you recognize our guest Severus ?asked Voldemort .Snape raised his eyes to the upsidedown face .All of the Death Eaters were looking up at the captive now as though they had been given permission to show curiosity .As she revolved to face the firelight the woman said in a cracked and terrified voice Severus !Help me !Ah yes said Snape as the prisoner turned slowly away again .And you Draco ?asked Voldemort stroking the snakes snout with his wandfree hand .Draco shook his head jerkily .Now that the woman had woken he seemed unable to look at her anymore .But you would not have taken her classes said Voldemort .For those of you who do not know we are joined here tonight by Charity Burbage who until recently taught at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry .There were small noises of comprehension around the table .A broad hunched woman with pointed teeth cackled .Yes .Professor Burbage taught the children of witches and wizards all about Muggles .how they are not so different from us .One of the Death Eaters spat on the floor .Charity Burbage revolved to face Snape again .Severus .please .please .Silence said Voldemort with another twitch of Malfoys wand and Charity fell silent as if gagged .Not content with corrupting and polluting the minds of Wizarding children last week Professor Burbage wrote an impassioned defense of Mudbloods in the Daily Prophet Wizards she says must accept these thieves of their knowledge and magic .The dwindling of the purebloods is says Professor Burbage a most desirable circumstance .She would have us all mate with Muggles .or no doubt werewolves .Nobody laughed this time There was no mistaking the anger and contempt in Voldemorts voice .For the third time Charity Burbage revolved to face Snape .Tears were pouring from her eyes into her hair .Snape looked back at her quite impassive as she turned slowly away from him again .Avada Kedavra .The flash of green light illuminated every corner of the room .Charity fell with a resounding crash onto the table below which trembled and creaked .Several of the Death Eaters leapt back in their chairs .Draco fell out of his onto the floor .Dinner Nagini said Voldemort softly and the great snake swayed and slithered from his shoulders onto the polished wood .IN MEMORIAM Harry was bleeding .Clutching his right hand in his left and swearing under his breath he shouldered open his bedroom door .There was a crunch of breaking china He had trodden on a cup of cold tea that had been sitting on the floor outside his bedroom door .What the ?He looked around the landing of number four Privet Drive was deserted .Possibly the cup of tea was Dudleys idea of a clever booby trap .Keeping his bleeding hand elevated Harry scraped the fragments of cup together with the other hand and threw them into the already crammed bin just visible inside his bedroom door .Then he tramped across to the bathroom to run his finger under the tap .It was stupid pointless irritating beyond belief that he still had four days left of being unable to perform magic .but he had to admit to himself that this jagged cut in his finger would have defeated him .He had never learned how to repair wounds and now he came to think of it particularly in light of his immediate plans this seemed a serious flaw in his magical education .Making a mental note to ask Hermione how it was done he used a large wad of toilet paper to mop up as much of the tea as he could before returning to his bedroom and slamming the door behind him .Harry had spent the morning completely emptying his school trunk for the first time since he had packed it six years ago .At the start of the intervening school years he had merely skimmed off the topmost three quarters of the contents and replaced or updated them leaving a layer of general debris at the bottom old quills desiccated beetle eyes single socks that no longer fit .Minutes previously Harry had plunged his hand into this mulch experienced a stabbing pain in the fourth finger of his right hand and withdrawn it to see a lot of blood .He now proceeded a little more cautiously .Kneeling down beside the trunk again he groped around in the bottom and after retrieving an old badge that flickered feebly between Support CEDRIC DIGGORY and POTTER STINKS a cracked and wornout Sneakoscope and a gold locket inside which a note signed R .A .B .had been hidden he finally discovered the sharp edge that had done the damage .He recognized it at once .It was a twoinchlong fragment of the enchanted mirror that his dead godfather Sirius had given him .Harry laid it aside and felt cautiously around the trunk for the rest but nothing more remained of his godfathers last gift except powdered glass which clung to the deepest layer of debris like glittering grit .Harry sat up and examined the jagged piece on which he had cut himself seeing nothing but his own bright green eye reflected back at him .Then he placed the fragment on top of that mornings Daily Prophet which lay unread on the bed and attempted to stem the sudden upsurge of bitter memories the stabs of regret and of longing the discovery of the broken mirror had occasioned by attacking the rest of the rubbish in the trunk .It took another hour to empty it completely throw away the useless items and sort the remainder in piles according to whether or not he would need them from now on .His school and Quidditch robes cauldron parchment quills and most of his textbooks were piled in a corner to be left behind .He wondered what his aunt and uncle would do with them burn them in the dead of night probably as if they were the evidence of some dreadful crime .His Muggle clothing Invisibility Cloak potionmaking kit certain books the photograph album Hagrid had once given him a stack of letters and his wand had been repacked into an old rucksack .In a front pocket were the Marauders Map and the locket with the note signed R .A .B .inside it .The locket was accorded this place of honor not because it was valuable in all usual senses it was worthless but because of what it had cost to attain it .This left a sizable stack of newspapers sitting on his desk beside his snowy owl Hedwig one for each of the days Harry had spent at Privet Drive this summer .He got up off the floor stretched and moved across to his desk .Hedwig made no movement as he began to flick through the newspapers throwing them onto the rubbish pile one by one .The owl was asleep or else faking she was angry with Harry about the limited amount of time she was allowed out of her cage at the moment .As he neared the bottom of the pile of newspapers Harry slowed down searching for one particular issue that he knew had arrived shortly after he had returned to Privet Drive for the summer he remembered that there had been a small mention on the front about the resignation of Charity Burbage the Muggle Studies teacher at Hogwarts .At last he found it .Turning to page ten he sank into his desk chair and reread the article he had been looking for .ALBUS DUMBLEDORE REMEMBERED by Elphias Doge I met Albus Dumbledore at the age of eleven on our first day at Hogwarts .Our mutual attraction was undoubtedly due to the fact that we both felt ourselves to be outsiders .I had contracted dragon pox shortly before arriving at school and while I was no longer contagious my pockmarked visage and greenish hue did not encourage many to approach me .For his part Albus had arrived at Hogwarts under the burden of unwanted notoriety .Scarcely a year previously his father Percival had been convicted of a savage and wellpublicized attack upon three young Muggles .Albus never attempted to deny that his father who was to die in Azkaban had committed this crime on the contrary when I plucked up courage to ask him he assured me that he knew his father to be guilty .Beyond that Dumbledore refused to speak of the sad business though many attempted to make him do so .Some indeed were disposed to praise his fathers action and assumed that Albus too was a Muggle hater .They could not have been more mistaken As anybody who knew Albus would attest he never revealed the remotest antiMuggle tendency .Indeed his determined support for Muggle rights gained him many enemies in subsequent years .In a matter of months however Albuss own fame had begun to eclipse that of his father .By the end of his first year he would never again be known as the son of a Mugglehater but as nothing more or less than the most brilliant student ever seen at the school .Those of us who were privileged to be his friends benefited from his example not to mention his help and encouragement with which he was always generous .He confessed to me in later life that he knew even then that his greatest pleasure lay in teaching .He not only won every prize of note that the school offered he was soon in regular correspondence with the most notable magical names of the day including Nicolas Flamel the celebrated alchemist Bathilda Bagshot the noted historian and Adalbert Waffling the magical theoretician .Several of his papers found their way into learned publications such as Transfiguration Today Challenges in Charming and The Practical Potioneer .Dumbledores future career seemed likely to be meteoric and the only question that remained was when he would become Minister of Magic .Though it was often predicted in later years that he was on the point of taking the job however he never had Ministerial ambitions .Three years after we had started at Hogwarts Albuss brother Aberforth arrived at school .They were not alike Aberforth was never bookish and unlike Albus preferred to settle arguments by dueling rather than through reasoned discussion .However it is quite wrong to suggest as some have that the brothers were not friends .They rubbed along as comfortably as two such different boys could do .In fairness to Aberforth it must be admitted that living in Albuss shadow cannot have been an altogether comfortable experience .Being continually outshone was an occupational hazard of being his friend and cannot have been any more pleasurable as a brother .When Albus and I left Hogwarts we intended to take the then traditional tour of the world together visiting and observing foreign wizards before pursuing our separate careers .However tragedy intervened .On the very eve of our trip Albuss mother Kendra died leaving Albus the head and sole breadwinner of the family .I postponed my departure long enough to pay my respects at Kendras funeral then left for what was now to be a solitary journey .With a younger brother and sister to care for and little gold left to them there could no longer be any question of Albus accompanying me .That was the period of our lives when we had least contact .I wrote to Albus describing perhaps insensitively the wonders of my journey from narrow escapes from chimaeras in Greece to the experiments of the Egyptian alchemists .His letters told me little of his daytoday life which I guessed to be frustratingly dull for such a brilliant wizard .Immersed in my own experiences it was with horror that I heard toward the end of my years travels that yet another tragedy had struck the Dumbledores the death of his sister Ariana .Though Ariana had been in poor health for a long time the blow coming so soon after the loss of their mother had a profound effect on both of her brothers .All those closest to Albus and I count myself one of that lucky number agree that Ariana s death and Albuss feeling of personal responsibility for it though of course he was guiltless left their mark upon him forevermore .I returned home to find a young man who had experienced a much older persons suffering .Albus was more reserved than before and much less light hearted .To add to his misery the loss of Ariana had led not to a renewed closeness between Albus and Aberforth but to an estrangement .In time this would lift in later years they reestablished if not a close relationship then certainly a cordial one .However he rarely spoke of his parents or of Ariana from then on and his friends learned not to mention them .Other quills will describe the triumphs of the following years .Dumbledores innumerable contributions to the store of Wizarding knowledge including his discovery of the twelve uses of dragons blood will benefit generations to come as will the wisdom he displayed in the many judgments he made while Chief Warlock of the Wizengamot .They say still that no Wizarding duel ever matched that between Dumbledore and Grindelwald in 1 945 .Those who witnessed it have written of the terror and the awe they felt as they watched these two extraordinary wizards do battle .Dumbledores triumph and its consequences for the Wizarding world are considered a turning point in magical history to match the introduction of the International Statute of Secrecy or the downfall of He WhoMustNotBeNamed .Albus Dumbledore was never proud or vain he could find something to value in anyone however apparently insignificant or wretched and I believe that his early losses endowed him with great humanity and sympathy .I shall miss his friendship more than I can say but my loss is as nothing compared to the Wizarding worlds .That he was the most inspiring and the best loved of all Hogwarts headmasters cannot be in question .He died as he lived working always for the greater good and to his last hour as willing to stretch out a hand to a small boy with dragon pox as he was on the day that I met him .Harry finished reading but continued to gaze at the picture accompanying the obituary .Dumbledore was wearing his familiar kindly smile but as he peered over the top of his halfmoon spectacles he gave the impression even in newsprint of Xraying Harry whose sadness mingled with a sense of humiliation .He had thought he knew Dumbledore quite well but ever since reading this obituary he had been forced to recognize that he had barely known him at all .Never once had he imagined Dumbledore s childhood or youth it was as though he had sprung into being as Harry had known him venerable and silverhaired and old .The idea of a teenage Dumbledore was simply odd like trying to imagine a stupid Hermione or a friendly BlastEnded Skrewt .He had never thought to ask Dumbledore about his past .No doubt it would have felt strange impertinent even but after all it had been common knowledge that Dumbledore had taken part in that legendary duel with Grindelwald and Harry had not thought to ask Dumbledore what that had been like nor about any of his other famous achievements .No they had always discussed Harry Harrys past Harrys future Harrys plans .and it seemed to Harry now despite the fact that his future was so dangerous and so uncertain that he had missed irreplaceable opportunities when he had failed to ask Dumbledore more about himself even though the only personal question he had ever asked his headmaster was also the only one he suspected that Dumbledore had not answered honestly What do you see when you look in the mirror ??I see myself holding a pair of thick woolen socks .After several minutes thought Harry tore the obituary out of the Prophet folded it carefully and tucked it inside the first volume of Practical Defensive Magic and Its Use Against the Dark Arts .Then he threw the rest of the newspaper onto the rubbish pile and turned to face the room .It was much tidier .The only things left out of place were todays Daily Prophet still lying on the bed and on top of it the piece of broken mirror .Harry moved across the room slid the mirror fragment off todays Prophet and unfolded the newspaper .He had merely glanced at the headline when he had taken the rolledup paper from the delivery owl early that morning and thrown it aside after noting that it said nothing about Voldemort .Harry was sure that the Ministry was leaning on the Prophet to suppress news about Voldemort .It was only now therefore that he saw what he had missed .Across the bottom half of the front page a smaller headline was set over a picture of Dumbledore striding along looking harried DUMBLEDORE THE TRUTH AT LAST ?Coming next week the shocking story of the flawed genius considered by many to be the greatest wizard of his generation .Stripping away the popular image of serene silverbearded wisdom Rita Skeeter reveals the disturbed childhood the lawless youth the lifelong feuds and the guilty secrets that Dumbledore carried to his grave .WHY was the man tipped to be Minister of Magic content to remain a mere headmaster ?WHAT was the real purpose of the secret organization known as the Order of the Phoenix ?HOW did Dumbledore really meet his end ?The answers to these and many more questions are explored in the explosive new biography The Life and Lies of Albus Dumbledore by Rita Skeeter exclusively interviewed by Betty Braithwaite In person Rita Skeeter is much warmer and softer than her famously ferocious quillportraits might suggest .Greeting me in the hallway of her cozy home she leads me straight into the kitchen for a cup of tea a slice of pound cake and it goes without saying a steaming vat of freshest gossip .Well of course Dumbledore is a biographers dream says Skeeter .Such a long full life .Im sure my book will be the first of very very many .Skeeter was certainly quick off the mark .Her nine hundredpage book was completed a mere four weeks after Dumbledore s mysterious death in June .I ask her how she managed this superfast feat .Oh when youve been a journalist as long as I have working to a deadline is second nature .I knew that the Wizarding world was clamoring for the full story and I wanted to be the first to meet that need .I mention the recent widely publicized remarks of Elphias Doge Special Advisor to the Wizengamot and longstanding friend of Albus Dumbledores that Skeeters book contains less fact than a Chocolate Frog card .Skeeter throws back her head and laughs .Darling Dodgy !I remember interviewing him a few years back about merpeople rights bless him .Completely gaga seemed to think we were sitting at the bottom of Lake Windermere kept telling me to watch out for trout .And yet Elphias Doges accusations of inaccuracy have been echoed in many places .Does Skeeter really feel that four short weeks have been enough to gain a full picture of Dumbledores long and extraordinary life ?Oh my dear beams Skeeter rapping me affectionately across the knuckles you know as well as I do how much information can be generated by a fat bag of Galleons a refusal to hear the word ‘no and a nice sharp QuickQuotes Quill !People were queuing to dish the dirt on Dumbledore anyway .Not everyone thought he was so wonderful you know he trod on an awful lot of important toes .But old Dodgy Doge can get off his high hippogriff because Ive had access to a source most journalists would swap their wands for one who has never spoken in public before and who was close to Dumbledore during the most turbulent and disturbing phase of his youth .The advance publicity for Skeeter s biography has certainly suggested that there will be shocks in store for those who believe Dumbledore to have led a blameless life .What were the biggest surprises she uncovered I ask ?Now come off it Betty Im not giving away all the highlights before anybodys bought the book !laughs Skeeter .But I can promise that anybody who still thinks Dumbledore was white as his beard is in for a rude awakening !Lets just say that nobody hearing him rage against YouKnowWho would have dreamed that he dabbled in the Dark Arts himself in his youth !And for a wizard who spent his later years pleading for tolerance he wasnt exactly broadminded when he was younger !Yes Albus Dumbledore had an extremely murky past not to mention that very fishy family which he worked so hard to keep hushed up .I ask whether Skeeter is referring to Dumbledore s brother Aberforth whose conviction by the Wizengamot for misuse of magic caused a minor scandal fifteen years ago .Oh Aberforth is just the tip of the dung heap laughs Skeeter .No no Im talking about much worse than a brother with a fondness for fiddling about with goats worse even than the Mugglemaiming father Dumbledore couldnt keep either of them quiet anyway they were both charged by the Wizengamot .No its the mother and the sister that intrigued me and a little digging uncovered a positive nest of nastiness but as I say youll have to wait for chapters nine to twelve for full details .All I can say now is its no wonder Dumbledore never talked about how his nose got broken .Family skeletons notwithstanding does Skeeter deny the brilliance that led to Dumbledore s many magical discoveries ?He had brains she concedes although many now question whether he could really take full credit for all of his supposed achievements .As I reveal in chapter sixteen Ivor Dillonsby claims he had already discovered eight uses of dragons blood when Dumbledore ‘borrowed his papers .But the importance of some of Dumbledores achievements cannot I venture be denied .What of his famous defeat of Grindelwald ?Oh now Im glad you mentioned Grindelwald says Skeeter with a tantalizing smile .Im afraid those who go dewyeyed over Dumbledores spectacular victory must brace themselves for a bombshell or perhaps a Dungbomb .Very dirty business indeed .All Ill say is dont be so sure that there really was the spectacular duel of legend .After theyve read my book people may be forced to conclude that Grindelwald simply conjured a white handkerchief from the end of his wand and came quietly !Skeeter refuses to give any more away on this intriguing subject so we turn instead to the relationship that will undoubtedly fascinate her readers more than any other .Oh yes says Skeeter nodding briskly I devote an entire chapter to the whole PotterDumbledore relationship .Its been called unhealthy even sinister .Again your readers will have to buy my book for the whole story but there is no question that Dumbledore took an unnatural interest in Potter from the word go .Whether that was really in the boys best interests well well see .Its certainly an open secret that Potter has had a most troubled adolescence .I ask whether Skeeter is still in touch with Harry Potter whom she so famously interviewed last year a breakthrough piece in which Potter spoke exclusively of his conviction that YouKnowWho had returned .Oh yes weve developed a close bond says Skeeter .Poor Potter has few real friends and we met at one of the most testing moments of his life the Triwizard Tournament .I am probably one of the only people alive who can say that they know the real Harry Potter .Which leads us neatly to the many rumors still circulating about Dumbledores final hours .Does Skeeter believe that Potter was there when Dumbledore died ?Well I dont want to say too much its all in the book but eyewitnesses inside Hogwarts castle saw Potter running away from the scene moments after Dumbledore fell jumped or was pushed .Potter later gave evidence against Severus Snape a man against whom he has a notorious grudge .Is everything as it seems ?That is for the Wizarding community to decide once theyve read my book .On that intriguing note I take my leave .There can be no doubt that Skeeter has quilled an instant bestseller .Dumbledores legions of admirers meanwhile may well be trembling at what is soon to emerge about their hero .Harry reached the bottom of the article but continued to stare blankly at the page .Revulsion and fury rose in him like vomit he balled up the newspaper and threw it with all his force at the wall where it joined the rest of the rubbish heaped around his overflowing bin .He began to stride blindly around the room opening empty drawers and picking up books only to replace them on the same piles barely conscious of what he was doing as random phrases from Ritas article echoed in his head An entire chapter to the whole PotterDumbledore relationship .Its been called unhealthy even sinister .He dabbled in the Dark Arts himself in his youth .Ive had access to a source most journalists would swap their wands for .Lies !Harry bellowed and through the window he saw the nextdoor neighbor who had paused to restart his lawn mower look up nervously .Harry sat down hard on the bed .The broken bit of mirror danced away from him he picked it up and turned it over in his fingers thinking thinking of Dumbledore and the lies with which Rita Skeeter was defaming him .A flash of brightest blue .Harry froze his cut finger slipping on the jagged edge of the mirror again .He had imagined it he must have done .He glanced over his shoulder but the wall was a sickly peach color of Aunt Petunias choosing There was nothing blue there for the mirror to reflect .He peered into the mirror fragment again and saw nothing but his own bright green eye looking back at him .He had imagined it there was no other explanation imagined it because he had been thinking of his dead headmaster .If anything was certain it was that the bright blue eyes of Albus Dumbledore would never pierce him again .3 THE DURSLEYS DEPARTING The sound of the front door slamming echoed up the stairs and a voice yelled Oi !You !Sixteen years of being addressed thus left Harry in no doubt whom his uncle was calling nevertheless he did not immediately respond .He was still gazing at the mirror fragment in which for a split second he had thought he saw Dumbledores eye .It was not until his uncle bellowed BOY !that Harry got slowly to his feet and headed for the bedroom door pausing to add the piece of broken mirror to the rucksack filled with things he would be taking with him .You took your time !roared Vernon Dursley when Harry appeared at the top of the stairs .Get down here I want a word !Harry strolled downstairs his hands deep in his jeans pockets .When he reached the living room he found all three Dursleys .They were dressed for traveling Uncle Vernon in a fawn zipup jacket Aunt Petunia in a neat salmoncolored coat and Dudley Harrys large blond muscular cousin in his leather jacket .Yes ?asked Harry .Sit down !said Uncle Vernon .Harry raised his eyebrows .Please !added Uncle Vernon wincing slightly as though the word was sharp in his throat .Harry sat .He thought he knew what was coming .His uncle began to pace up and down Aunt Petunia and Dudley following his movements with anxious expressions .Finally his large purple face crumpled with concentration Uncle Vernon stopped in front of Harry and spoke .Ive changed my mind he said .What a surprise said Harry .Dont you take that tone began Aunt Petunia in a shrill voice but Vernon Dursley waved her down .Its all a lot of claptrap said Uncle Vernon glaring at Harry with piggy little eyes .Ive decided I dont believe a word of it .Were staying put were not going anywhere .Harry looked up at his uncle and felt a mixture of exasperation and amusement .Vernon Dursley had been changing his mind every twentyfour hours for the past four weeks packing and unpacking and repacking the car with every change of heart .Harrys favorite moment had been the one when Uncle Vernon unaware that Dudley had added his dumbbells to his case since the last time it had been unpacked had attempted to hoist it back into the boot and collapsed with roars of pain and much swearing .According to you Vernon Dursley said now resuming his pacing up and down the living room we Petunia Dudley and I are in danger .From from Some of ‘my lot right said Harry .Well I dont believe it repeated Uncle Vernon coming to a halt in front of Harry again .I was awake half the night thinking it all over and I believe its a plot to get the house .The house ?repeated Harry .What house ?This house !shrieked Uncle Vernon the vein in his forehead starting to pulse .Our house !House prices are skyrocketing around here !You want us out of the way and then youre going to do a bit of hocuspocus and before we know it the deeds will be in your name and Are you out of your mind ?demanded Harry .A plot to get this house ?Are you actually as stupid as you look ?Dont you dare !squealed Aunt Petunia but again Vernon waved her down Slights on his personal appearance were it seemed as nothing to the danger he had spotted .Just in case youve forgotten said Harry Ive already got a house my godfather left me one .So why would I want this one ?All the happy memories ?There was silence .Harry thought he had rather impressed his uncle with this argument .You claim said Uncle Vernon starting to pace yet again that this Lord Thing Voldemort said Harry impatiently and weve been through this about a hundred times already .This isnt a claim its fact Dumbledore told you last year and Kingsley and Mr Weasley Vernon Dursley hunched his shoulders angrily and Harry guessed that his uncle was attempting to ward off recollections of the unannounced visit a few days into Harrys summer holidays of two fully grown wizards .The arrival on the doorstep of Kingsley Shacklebolt and Arthur Weasley had come as a most unpleasant shock to the Dursleys .Harry had to admit however that as Mr Weasley had once demolished half of the living room his reappearance could not have been expected to delight Uncle Vernon .Kingsley and Mr Weasley explained it all as well Harry pressed on remorselessly .Once Im seventeen the protective charm that keeps me safe will break and that exposes you as well as me .The Order is sure Voldemort will target you whether to torture you to try and find out where I am or because he thinks by holding you hostage Id come and try to rescue you .Uncle Vernons and Harrys eyes met .Harry was sure that in that instant they were both wondering the same thing .Then Uncle Vernon walked on and Harry resumed Youve got to go into hiding and the Order wants to help .Youre being offered serious protection the best there is .Uncle Vernon said nothing but continued to pace up and down .Outside the sun hung low over the privet hedges .The nextdoor neighbors lawn mower stalled again .I thought there was a Ministry of Magic ?asked Vernon Dursley abruptly .There is said Harry surprised .Well then why cant they protect us ?It seems to me that as innocent victims guilty of nothing more than harboring a marked man we ought to qualify for government protection !Harry laughed he could not help himself .It was so very typical of his uncle to put his hopes in the establishment even within this world that he despised and mistrusted .You heard what Mr Weasley and Kingsley said Harry replied .We think the Ministry has been infiltrated .Uncle Vernon strode to the fireplace and back breathing so heavily that his great black mustache rippled his face still purple with concentration .All right he said stopping in front of Harry yet again .All right lets say for the sake of argument we accept this protection .I still dont see why we cant have that Kingsley bloke .Harry managed not to roll his eyes but with difficulty .This question had also been addressed half a dozen times .As Ive told you he said through gritted teeth Kingsley is protecting the Mug I mean your Prime Minister .Exactly hes the best !said Uncle Vernon pointing at the blank television screen .The Dursleys had spotted Kingsley on the news walking along discreetly behind the Muggle Prime Minister as he visited a hospital .This and the fact that Kingsley had mastered the knack of dressing like a Muggle not to mention a certain reassuring something in his slow deep voice had caused the Dursleys to take to Kingsley in a way that they had certainly not done with any other wizard although it was true that they had never seen him with his earring in .Well hes taken said Harry .But Hestia Jones and Dedalus Diggle are more than up to the job If wed even seen CVs .began Uncle Vernon but Harry lost patience .Getting to his feet he advanced on his uncle now pointing at the TV set himself .These accidents arent accidents the crashes and explosions and derailments and whatever else has happened since we last watched the news .People are disappearing and dying and hes behind it Voldemort .Ive told you this over and over again he kills Muggles for fun .Even the fogs theyre caused by dementors and if you cant remember what they are ask your son !Dudleys hands jerked upward to cover his mouth .With his parents and Harrys eyes upon him he slowly lowered them again and asked There are .more of them ?More ?laughed Harry .More than the two that attacked us you mean ?Of course there are there are hundreds maybe thousands by this time seeing as they feed off fear and despair All right all right blustered Vernon Dursley .Youve made your point I hope so said Harry because once Im seventeen all of them Death Eaters dementors maybe even Inferi which means dead bodies enchanted by a Dark wizard will be able to find you and will certainly attack you .And if you remember the last time you tried to outrun wizards I think you 11 agree you need help .There was a brief silence in which the distant echo of Hagrid smashing down a wooden front door seemed to reverberate through the intervening years .Aunt Petunia was looking at Uncle Vernon Dudley was staring at Harry .Finally Uncle Vernon blurted out But what about my work ?What about Dudleys school ?I dont suppose those things matter to a bunch of layabout wizards Dont you understand ?shouted Harry .They will torture and kill you like they did my parents !Dad said Dudley in a loud voice Dad Im going with these Order people .Dudley said Harry for the first time in your life youre talking sense .He knew that the battle was won .If Dudley was frightened enough to accept the Orders help his parents would accompany him There could be no question of being separated from their Diddykins .Harry glanced at the carriage clock on the mantelpiece .Theyll be here in about five minutes he said and when none of the Dursleys replied he left the room .The prospect of parting probably forever from his aunt uncle and cousin was one that he was able to contemplate quite cheerfully but there was nevertheless a certain awkwardness in the air .What did you say to one another at the end of sixteen years solid dislike ?Back in his bedroom Harry fiddled aimlessly with his rucksack then poked a couple of owl nuts through the bars of Hedwigs cage .They fell with dull thuds to the bottom where she ignored them .Were leaving soon really soon Harry told her .And then youll be able to fly again .The doorbell rang .Harry hesitated then headed back out of his room and downstairs .It was too much to expect Hestia and Dedalus to cope with the Dursleys on their own .Harry Potter !squeaked an excited voice the moment Harry had opened the door a small man in a mauve top hat was sweeping him a deep bow .An honor as ever !Thanks Dedalus said Harry bestowing a small and embarrassed smile upon the darkhaired Hestia .Its really good of you to do this .Theyre through here my aunt and uncle and cousin .Good day to you Harry Potters relatives !said Dedalus happily striding into the living room .The Dursleys did not look at all happy to be addressed thus Harry half expected another change of mind .Dudley shrank nearer to his mother at the sight of the witch and wizard .I see you are packed and ready .Excellent !The plan as Harry has told you is a simple one said Dedalus pulling an immense pocket watch out of his waistcoat and examining it .We shall be leaving before Harry does .Due to the danger of using magic in your house Harry being still underage it could provide the Ministry with an excuse to arrest him we shall be driving say ten miles or so before Disapparating to the safe location we have picked out for you .You know how to drive I take it ?he asked Uncle Vernon politely .Know how to ?Of course I ruddy well know how to drive !spluttered Uncle Vernon .Very clever of you sir very clever I personally would be utterly bamboozled by all those buttons and knobs said Dedalus .He was clearly under the impression that he was flattering Vernon Dursley who was visibly losing confidence in the plan with every word Dedalus spoke .Cant even drive he muttered under his breath his mustache rippling indignantly but fortunately neither Dedalus nor Hestia seemed to hear him .You Harry Dedalus continued will wait here for your guard .There has been a little change in the arrangements What dyou mean ?said Harry at once .I thought MadEye was going to come and take me by Side Along Apparition ?Cant do it said Hestia tersely .MadEye will explain .The Dursleys who had listened to all of this with looks of utter incomprehension on their faces jumped as a loud voice screeched Hurry up Harry looked all around the room before realizing that the voice had issued from Dedaluss pocket watch .Quite right were operating to a very tight schedule said Dedalus nodding at his watch and tucking it back into his waistcoat .We are attempting to time your departure from the house with your familys Disapparition Harry thus the charm breaks at the moment you all head for safety .He turned to the Dursleys .Well are we all packed and ready to go ?None of them answered him .Uncle Vernon was still staring appalled at the bulge in Dedaluss waistcoat pocket .Perhaps we should wait outside in the hall Dedalus murmured Hestia .She clearly felt that it would be tactless for them to remain in the room while Harry and the Dursleys exchanged loving possibly tearful farewells .Theres no need Harry muttered but Uncle Vernon made any further explanation unnecessary by saying loudly Well this is goodbye then boy .He swung his right arm upward to shake Harrys hand but at the last moment seemed unable to face it and merely closed his fist and began swinging it backward and forward like a metronome .Ready Diddy ?asked Aunt Petunia fussily checking the clasp of her handbag so as to avoid looking at Harry altogether .Dudley did not answer but stood there with his mouth slightly ajar reminding Harry a little of the giant Grawp .Come along then said Uncle Vernon .He had already reached the living room door when Dudley mumbled I dont understand .What dont you understand popkin ?asked Aunt Petunia looking up at her son .Dudley raised a large hamlike hand to point at Harry .Why isnt he coming with us ?Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia froze where they stood staring at Dudley as though he had just expressed a desire to become a ballerina .What ?said Uncle Vernon loudly .Why isnt he coming too ?asked Dudley .Well he he doesnt want to said Uncle Vernon turning to glare at Harry and adding You dont want to do you ?Not in the slightest said Harry .There you are Uncle Vernon told Dudley .Now come on were off .He marched out of the room .They heard the front door open but Dudley did not move and after a few faltering steps Aunt Petunia stopped too .What now ?barked Uncle Vernon reappearing in the doorway .It seemed that Dudley was struggling with concepts too difficult to put into words .After several moments of apparently painful internal struggle he said But wheres he going to go ?Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon looked at each other .It was clear that Dudley was frightening them .Hestia Jones broke the silence .But .surely you know where your nephew is going ?she asked looking bewildered .Certainly we know said Vernon Dursley .Hes off with some of your lot isnt he ?Right Dudley lets get in the car you heard the man were in a hurry .Again Vernon Dursley marched as far as the front door but Dudley did not follow .Off with some of our lot ?Hestia looked outraged .Harry had met this attitude before Witches and wizards seemed stunned that his closest living relatives took so little interest in the famous Harry Potter .Its fine Harry assured her .It doesnt matter honestly .Doesnt matter ?repeated Hestia her voice rising ominously .Dont these people realize what youve been through ?What danger you are in ?The unique position you hold in the hearts of the antiVoldemort movement ?Er no they dont said Harry .They think Im a waste of space actually but Im used to I dont think youre a waste of space .If Harry had not seen Dudleys lips move he might not have believed it .As it was he stared at Dudley for several seconds before accepting that it must have been his cousin who had spoken for one thing Dudley had turned red .Harry was embarrassed and astonished himself .Well .er .thanks Dudley .Again Dudley appeared to grapple with thoughts too unwieldy for expression before mumbling You saved my life .Not really said Harry .It was your soul the dementor would have taken .He looked curiously at his cousin .They had had virtually no contact during this summer or last as Harry had come back to Privet Drive so briefly and kept to his room so much .It now dawned on Harry however that the cup of cold tea on which he had trodden that morning might not have been a booby trap at all .Although rather touched he was nevertheless quite relieved that Dudley appeared to have exhausted his ability to express his feelings .After opening his mouth once or twice more Dudley subsided into scarletfaced silence .Aunt Petunia burst into tears .Hestia Jones gave her an approving look that changed to outrage as Aunt Petunia ran forward and embraced Dudley rather than Harry .Sso sweet Dudders .she sobbed into his massive chest .Ssuch a lovely bboy .ssaying thank you But he hasnt said thank you at all !said Hestia indignantly .He only said he didnt think Harry was a waste of space !Yeah but coming from Dudley thats like ‘I love you said Harry torn between annoyance and a desire to laugh as Aunt Petunia continued to clutch at Dudley as if he had just saved Harry from a burning building .Are we going or not ?roared Uncle Vernon reappearing yet again at the living room door .I thought we were on a tight schedule !Yes yes we are said Dedalus Diggle who had been watching these exchanges with an air of bemusement and now seemed to pull himself together .We really must be off .Harry He tripped forward and wrung Harrys hand with both of his own .good luck .I hope we meet again .The hopes of the Wizarding world rest upon your shoulders .Oh said Harry right .Thanks .Farewell Harry said Hestia also clasping his hand .Our thoughts go with you .I hope everythings okay said Harry with a glance toward Aunt Petunia and Dudley .Oh Im sure we shall end up the best of chums said Diggle brightly waving his hat as he left the room .Hestia followed him .Dudley gently released himself from his mothers clutches and walked toward Harry who had to repress an urge to threaten him with magic .Then Dudley held out his large pink hand .Blimey Dudley said Harry over Aunt Petunias renewed sobs did the dementors blow a different personality into you ?Dunno muttered Dudley .See you Harry .Yeah .said Harry taking Dudleys hand and shaking it .Maybe .Take care Big D .Dudley nearly smiled then lumbered from the room .Harry heard his heavy footfalls on the graveled drive and then a car door slammed .Aunt Petunia whose face had been buried in her handkerchief looked around at the sound .She did not seem to have expected to find herself alone with Harry .Hastily stowing her wet handkerchief into her pocket she said Well goodbye and marched toward the door without looking at him .Goodbye said Harry .She stopped and looked back .For a moment Harry had the strangest feeling that she wanted to say something to him She gave him an odd tremulous look and seemed to teeter on the edge of speech but then with a little jerk of her head she bustled out of the room after her husband and son .THE SEVEN POTTERS Harry ran back upstairs to his bedroom arriving at the window just in time to see the Dursleys car swinging out of the drive and off up the road .Dedaluss top hat was visible between Aunt Petunia and Dudley in the backseat .The car turned right at the end of Privet Drive its windows burned scarlet for a moment in the now setting sun and then it was gone .Harry picked up Hedwigs cage his Firebolt and his rucksack gave his unnaturally tidy bedroom one last sweeping look and then made his ungainly way back downstairs to the hall where he deposited cage broomstick and bag near the foot of the stairs .The light was fading rapidly now the hall full of shadows in the evening light .It felt most strange to stand here in the silence and know that he was about to leave the house for the last time .Long ago when he had been left alone while the Dursleys went out to enjoy themselves the hours of solitude had been a rare treat Pausing only to sneak something tasty from the fridge he had rushed upstairs to play on Dudleys computer or put on the television and flicked through the channels to his hearts content .It gave him an odd empty feeling to remember those times it was like remembering a younger brother whom he had lost .Dont you want to take a last look at the place ?he asked Hedwig who was still sulking with her head under her wing .Well never be here again .Dont you want to remember all the good times ?I mean look at this doormat .What memories .Dudley puked on it after I saved him from the dementors .Turns out he was grateful after all can you believe it ? .And last summer Dumbledore walked through that front door .Harry lost the thread of his thoughts for a moment and Hedwig did nothing to help him retrieve it but continued to sit with her head under her wing .Harry turned his back on the front door .And under here Hedwig Harry pulled open a door under the stairs is where I used to sleep !You never knew me then Blimey its small Id forgotten .Harry looked around at the stacked shoes and umbrellas remembering how he used to wake every morning looking up at the underside of the staircase which was more often than not adorned with a spider or two .Those had been the days before he had known anything about his true identity before he had found out how his parents had died or why such strange things often happened around him .But Harry could still remember the dreams that had dogged him even in those days confused dreams involving flashes of green light and once Uncle Vernon had nearly crashed the car when Harry had recounted it a flying motorbike .There was a sudden deafening roar from somewhere nearby .Harry straightened up with a jerk and smacked the top of his head on the low door frame .Pausing only to employ a few of Uncle Vernons choicest swear words he staggered back into the kitchen clutching his head and staring out of the window into the back garden .The darkness seemed to be rippling the air itself quivering .Then one by one figures began to pop into sight as their Disillusionment Charms lifted .Dominating the scene was Hagrid wearing a helmet and goggles and sitting astride an enormous motorbike with a black sidecar attached .All around him other people were dismounting from brooms and in two cases skeletal black winged horses .Wrenching open the back door Harry hurtled into their midst .There was a general cry of greeting as Hermione flung her arms around him Ron clapped him on the back and Hagrid said All righ Harry ?Ready fer the off ?Definitely said Harry beaming around at them all .But I wasnt expecting this many of you !Change of plan growled MadEye who was holding two enormous bulging sacks and whose magical eye was spinning from darkening sky to house to garden with dizzying rapidity .Lets get undercover before we talk you through it .Harry led them all back into the kitchen where laughing and chattering they settled on chairs sat themselves upon Aunt Petunias gleaming work surfaces or leaned up against her spotless appliances Ron long and lanky Hermione her bushy hair tied back in a long plait Fred and George grinning identically Bill badly scarred and long haired Mr Weasley kindfaced balding his spectacles a little awry MadEye battleworn one legged his bright blue magical eye whizzing in its socket Tonks whose short hair was her favorite shade of bright pink Lupin grayer more lined Fleur slender and beautiful with her long silvery blonde hair Kingsley bald black broadshouldered Hagrid with his wild hair and beard standing hunchbacked to avoid hitting his head on the ceiling and Mundungus Fletcher small dirty and hangdog with his droopy basset hounds eyes and matted hair .Harrys heart seemed to expand and glow at the sight He felt incredibly fond of all of them even Mundungus whom he had tried to strangle the last time they had met .Kingsley I thought you were looking after the Muggle Prime Minister ?he called across the room .He can get along without me for one night said Kingsley .Youre more important .Harry guess what ?said Tonks from her perch on top of the washing machine and she wiggled her left hand at him a ring glittered there .You got married ?Harry yelped looking from her to Lupin .Im sorry you couldnt be there Harry it was very quiet .Thats brilliant congrat All right all right well have time for a cozy catchup later !roared Moody over the hubbub and silence fell in the kitchen .Moody dropped his sacks at his feet and turned to Harry .As Dedalus probably told you we had to abandon Plan A .Pius Thicknesse has gone over which gives us a big problem .Hes made it an imprisonable offense to connect this house to the Floo Network place a Portkey here or Apparate in or out .All done in the name of your protection to prevent YouKnowWho getting in at you .Absolutely pointless seeing as your mothers charm does that already .What hes really done is to stop you getting out of here safely .Second problem Youre underage which means youve still got the Trace on you .I dont The Trace the Trace !said MadEye impatiently .The charm that detects magical activity around underseventeens the way the Ministry finds out about underage magic !If you or anyone around you casts a spell to get you out of here Thicknesse is going to know about it and so will the Death Eaters .We cant wait for the Trace to break because the moment you turn seventeen youll lose all the protection your mother gave you .In short Pius Thicknesse thinks hes got you cornered good and proper .Harry could not help but agree with the unknown Thicknesse .So what are we going to do ?Were going to use the only means of transport left to us the only ones the Trace cant detect because we dont need to cast spells to use them brooms thestrals and Hagrids motorbike .Harry could see flaws in this plan however he held his tongue to give MadEye the chance to address them .Now your mothers charm will only break under two conditions when you come of age or Moody gestured around the pristine kitchen you no longer call this place home .You and your aunt and uncle are going your separate ways tonight in the full understanding that youre never going to live together again correct ?Harry nodded .So this time when you leave therell be no going back and the charm will break the moment you get outside its range .Were choosing to break it early because the alternative is waiting for YouKnowWho to come and seize you the moment you turn seventeen .The one thing weve got on our side is that You KnowWho doesnt know were moving you tonight .Weve leaked a fake trail to the Ministry They think youre not leaving until the thirtieth .However this is YouKnowWho were dealing with so we cant just rely on him getting the date wrong hes bound to have a couple of Death Eaters patrolling the skies in this general area just in case .So weve given a dozen different houses every protection we can throw at them .They all look like they could be the place were going to hide you theyve all got some connection with the Order my house Kingsleys place Mollys Auntie Muriels you get the idea .Yeah said Harry not entirely truthfully because he could still spot a gaping hole in the plan .Youll be going to Tonkss parents .Once youre within the boundaries of the protective enchantments weve put on their house youll be able to use a Portkey to the Burrow .Any questions ?Er yes said Harry .Maybe they wont know which of the twelve secure houses Im heading for at first but wont it be sort of obvious once he performed a quick headcount fourteen of us fly off toward Tonkss parents ?Ah said Moody I forgot to mention the key point .Fourteen of us wont be flying to Tonkss parents .There will be seven Harry Potters moving through the skies tonight each of them with a companion each pair heading for a different safe house .From inside his cloak Moody now withdrew a flask of what looked like mud .There was no need for him to say another word Harry understood the rest of the plan immediately .No !he said loudly his voice ringing through the kitchen .No way !I told them youd take it like this said Hermione with a hint of complacency .If you think Im going to let six people risk their lives !because its the first time for all of us said Ron .This is different pretending to be me Well none of us really fancy it Harry said Fred earnestly .Imagine if something went wrong and we were stuck as specky scrawny gits forever .Harry did not smile .You cant do it if I dont cooperate you need me to give you some hair .Well thats that plan scuppered said George .Obviously theres no chance at all of us getting a bit of your hair unless you cooperate .Yeah thirteen of us against one bloke whos not allowed to use magic weve got no chance said Fred .Funny said Harry really amusing .If it has to come to force then it will growled Moody his magical eye now quivering a little in its socket as he glared at Harry .Everyone heres overage Potter and theyre all prepared to take the risk .Mundungus shrugged and grimaced the magical eye swerved sideways to glare at him out of the side of Moodys head .Lets have no more arguments .Times wearing on .I want a few of your hairs boy now .But this is mad theres no need No need !snarled Moody .With YouKnowWho out there and half the Ministry on his side ?Potter if were lucky hell have swallowed the fake bait and hell be planning to ambush you on the thirtieth but hed be mad not to have a Death Eater or two keeping an eye out its what Id do .They might not be able to get at you or this house while your mothers charm holds but its about to break and they know the rough position of the place .Our only chance is to use decoys .Even YouKnowWho cant split himself into seven .Harry caught Hermiones eye and looked away at once .So Potter some of your hair if you please .Harry glanced at Ron who grimaced at him in a just doit sort of way .Now !barked Moody .With all of their eyes upon him Harry reached up to the top of his head grabbed a hank of hair and pulled .Good said Moody limping forward as he pulled the stopper out of the flask of potion .Straight in here if you please .Harry dropped the hair into the mudlike liquid .The moment it made contact with its surface the potion began to froth and smoke then all at once it turned a clear bright gold .Ooh you look much tastier than Crabbe and Goyle Harry said Hermione before catching sight of Rons raised eyebrows blushing slightly and saying Oh you know what I mean Goyle s potion looked like bogies .Right then fake Potters line up over here please said Moody .Ron Hermione Fred George and Fleur lined up in front of Aunt Petunias gleaming sink .Were one short said Lupin .Here said Hagrid gruffly and he lifted Mundungus by the scruff of the neck and dropped him down beside Fleur who wrinkled her nose pointedly and moved along to stand between Fred and George instead .Ive toldjer Id sooner be a protector said Mundungus .Shut it growled Moody .As Ive already told you you spineless worm any Death Eaters we run into will be aiming to capture Potter not kill him .Dumbledore always said YouKnowWho would want to finish Potter in person .Itll be the protectors who have got the most to worry about the Death Eatersll want to kill them .Mundungus did not look particularly reassured but Moody was already pulling half a dozen eggcupsized glasses from inside his cloak which he handed out before pouring a little Polyjuice Potion into each one .Altogether then .Ron Hermione Fred George Fleur and Mundungus drank .All of them gasped and grimaced as the potion hit their throats At once their features began to bubble and distort like hot wax .Hermione and Mundungus were shooting upward Ron Fred and George were shrinking their hair was darkening Hermiones and Fleurs appearing to shoot backward into their skulls .Moody quite unconcerned was now loosening the ties of the large sacks he had brought with him .When he straightened up again there were six Harry Potters gasping and panting in front of him .Fred and George turned to each other and said together Wow were identical !I dunno though I think Im still betterlooking said Fred examining his reflection in the kettle .Bah said Fleur checking herself in the microwave door Bill dont look at me Im ideous .Those whose clothes are a bit roomy Ive got smaller here said Moody indicating the first sack and vice versa .Dont forget the glasses theres six pairs in the side pocket .And when youre dressed theres luggage in the other sack .The real Harry thought that this might just be the most bizarre thing he had ever seen and he had seen some extremely odd things .He watched as his six doppelgangers rummaged in the sacks pulling out sets of clothes putting on glasses stuffing their own things away .He felt like asking them to show a little more respect for his privacy as they all began stripping off with impunity clearly much more at ease with displaying his body than they would have been with their own .I knew Ginny was lying about that tattoo said Ron looking down at his bare chest .Harry your eyesight really is awful said Hermione as she put on glasses .Once dressed the fake Harrys took rucksacks and owl cages each containing a stuffed snowy owl from the second sack .Good said Moody as at last seven dressed bespectacled and luggageladen Harrys faced him .The pairs will be as follows Mundungus will be traveling with me by broom Whym I with you ?grunted the Harry nearest the back door .Because youre the one that needs watching growled Moody and sure enough his magical eye did not waver from Mundungus as he continued Arthur and Fred Im George said the twin at whom Moody was pointing .Cant you even tell us apart when were Harry ?Sorry George Im only yanking your wand Im Fred really Enough messing around !snarled Moody .The other one George or Fred or whoever you are youre with Remus .Miss Delacour Im taking Fleur on a thestral said Bill .Shes not that fond of brooms .Fleur walked over to stand beside him giving him a soppy slavish look that Harry hoped with all his heart would never appear on his face again .Miss Granger with Kingsley again by thestral Hermione looked reassured as she answered Kingsleys smile Harry knew that Hermione too lacked confidence on a broomstick .Which leaves you and me Ron !said Tonks brightly knocking over a mug tree as she waved at him .Ron did not look quite as pleased as Hermione .An youre with me Harry .That all righ ?said Hagrid looking a little anxious .Well be on the bike brooms an thestrals cant take me weight see .Not a lot o room on the seat with me on it though so youll be in the sidecar .Thats great said Harry not altogether truthfully .We think the Death Eaters will expect you to be on a broom said Moody who seemed to guess how Harry was feeling .Snapes had plenty of time to tell them everything about you hes never mentioned before so if we do run into any Death Eaters were betting theyll choose one of the Potters who look at home on a broomstick .All right then he went on tying up the sack with the fake Potters clothes in it and leading the way back to the door I make it three minutes until were supposed to leave .No point locking the back door it wont keep the Death Eaters out when they come looking .Come on .Harry hurried into the hall to fetch his rucksack Firebolt and Hedwigs cage before joining the others in the dark back garden .On every side broomsticks were leaping into hands Hermione had already been helped up onto a great black thestral by Kingsley Fleur onto the other by Bill .Hagrid was standing ready beside the motorbike goggles on .Is this it ?Is this Siriuss bike ?The very same said Hagrid beaming down at Harry .An the last time yeh was on it Harry I could fit yeh in one hand !Harry could not help but feel a little humiliated as he got into the sidecar .It placed him several feet below everybody else Ron smirked at the sight of him sitting there like a child in a bumper car .Harry stuffed his rucksack and broomstick down by his feet and rammed Hedwigs cage between his knees .It was extremely uncomfortable .Arthurs done a bit o tinkerin said Hagrid quite oblivious to Harrys discomfort .He settled himself astride the motorcycle which creaked slightly and sank inches into the ground .Its got a few tricks up its handlebars now .Tha one was my idea .He pointed a thick finger at a purple button near the speedometer .Please be careful Hagrid said Mr Weasley who was standing beside them holding his broomstick .Im still not sure that was advisable and its certainly only to be used in emergencies .All right then said Moody .Everyone ready please I want us all to leave at exactly the same time or the whole point of the diversions lost .Everybody mounted their brooms .Hold tight now Ron said Tonks and Harry saw Ron throw a furtive guilty look at Lupin before placing his hands on either side of her waist .Hagrid kicked the motorbike into life It roared like a dragon and the sidecar began to vibrate .Good luck everyone shouted Moody .See you all in about an hour at the Burrow .On the count of three .One .two .THREE .There was a great roar from the motorbike and Harry felt the sidecar give a nasty lurch He was rising through the air fast his eyes watering slightly hair whipped back off his face .Around him brooms were soaring upward too the long black tail of a thestral flicked past .His legs jammed into the sidecar by Hedwigs cage and his rucksack were already sore and starting to go numb .So great was his discomfort that he almost forgot to take a last glimpse of number four Privet Drive by the time he looked over the edge of the sidecar he could no longer tell which one it was .Higher and higher they climbed into the sky And then out of nowhere out of nothing they were surrounded .At least thirty hooded figures suspended in midair formed a vast circle in the midst of which the Order members had risen oblivious Screams a blaze of green light on every side Hagrid gave a yell and the motorbike rolled over .Harry lost any sense of where they were Streetlights above him yells around him he was clinging to the sidecar for dear life .Hedwigs cage the Firebolt and his rucksack slipped from beneath his knees No HEDWIG !The broomstick spun to earth but he just managed to seize the strap of his rucksack and the top of the cage as the motorbike swung the right way up again .A seconds relief and then another burst of green light .The owl screeched and fell to the floor of the cage .No NO !The motorbike zoomed forward Harry glimpsed hooded Death Eaters scattering as Hagrid blasted through their circle .Hedwig Hedwig But the owl lay motionless and pathetic as a toy on the floor of her cage .He could not take it in and his terror for the others was paramount .He glanced over his shoulder and saw a mass of people moving flares of green light two pairs of people on brooms soaring off into the distance but he could not tell who they were Hagrid weve got to go back weve got to go back !he yelled over the thunderous roar of the engine pulling out his wand ramming Hedwigs cage onto the floor refusing to believe that she was dead .Hagrid TURN AROUND !My jobs ter get you there safe Harry !bellowed Hagrid and he opened the throttle .Stop STOP !Harry shouted but as he looked back again two jets of green light flew past his left ear Four Death Eaters had broken away from the circle and were pursuing them aiming for Hagrid s broad back .Hagrid swerved but the Death Eaters were keeping up with the bike more curses shot after them and Harry had to sink low into the sidecar to avoid them .Wriggling around he cried Stupefy and a red bolt of light shot from his own wand cleaving a gap between the four pursuing Death Eaters as they scattered to avoid it .Hold on Harry thisll do for em !roared Hagrid and Harry looked up just in time to see Hagrid slamming a thick finger into a green button near the fuel gauge .A wall a solid brick wall erupted out of the exhaust pipe .Craning his neck Harry saw it expand into being in midair .Three of the Death Eaters swerved and avoided it but the fourth was not so lucky He vanished from view and then dropped like a boulder from behind it his broomstick broken into pieces .One of his fellows slowed up to save him but they and the airborne wall were swallowed by darkness as Hagrid leaned low over the handlebars and sped up .More Killing Curses flew past Harrys head from the two remaining Death Eaters wands they were aiming for Hagrid .Harry responded with further Stunning Spells Red and green collided in midair in a shower of multicolored sparks and Harry thought wildly of fireworks and the Muggles below who would have no idea what was happening Here we go again Harry hold on !yelled Hagrid and he jabbed at a second button .This time a great net burst from the bikes exhaust but the Death Eaters were ready for it .Not only did they swerve to avoid it but the companion who had slowed to save their unconscious friend had caught up .He bloomed suddenly out of the darkness and now three of them were pursuing the motorbike all shooting curses after it .Thisll do it Harry hold on tight !yelled Hagrid and Harry saw him slam his whole hand onto the purple button beside the speedometer .With an unmistakable bellowing roar dragon fire burst from the exhaust whitehot and blue and the motorbike shot forward like a bullet with a sound of wrenching metal .Harry saw the Death Eaters swerve out of sight to avoid the deadly trail of flame and at the same time felt the sidecar sway ominously Its metal connections to the bike had splintered with the force of acceleration .Its all righ Harry !bellowed Hagrid now thrown flat onto his back by the surge of speed nobody was steering now and the sidecar was starting to twist violently in the bikes slipstream . ‘Tm on it Harry don worry !Hagrid yelled and from inside his jacket pocket he pulled his flowery pink umbrella .Hagrid !No !Let me !REPAROl There was a deafening bang and the sidecar broke away from the bike completely Harry sped forward propelled by the impetus of the bikes flight then the sidecar began to lose height In desperation Harry pointed his wand at the sidecar and shouted Wingardium Leviosal The sidecar rose like a cork unsteerable but at least still airborne He had but a split seconds relief however as more curses streaked past him The three Death Eaters were closing in .Im cornin Harry !Hagrid yelled from out of the darkness but Harry could feel the sidecar beginning to sink again Crouching as low as he could he pointed at the middle of the oncoming figures and yelled Impedimental The jinx hit the middle Death Eater in the chest For a moment the man was absurdly spreadeagled in midair as though he had hit an invisible barrier One of his fellows almost collided with him Then the sidecar began to fall in earnest and the remaining Death Eater shot a curse so close to Harry that he had to duck below the rim of the car knocking out a tooth on the edge of his seat Im cornin Harry Im cornin !A huge hand seized the back of Harrys robes and hoisted him out of the plummeting sidecar Harry pulled his rucksack with him as he dragged himself onto the motorbikes seat and found himself backto back with Hagrid .As they soared upward away from the two remaining Death Eaters Harry spat blood out of his mouth pointed his wand at the falling sidecar and yelled Confringo He knew a dreadful gutwrenching pang for Hedwig as it exploded the Death Eater nearest it was blasted off his broom and fell from sight his companion fell back and vanished .Harry Im sorry Im sorry moaned Hagrid I shouldnta tried ter repair it meself yehve got no room Its not a problem just keep flying !Harry shouted back as two more Death Eaters emerged out of the darkness drawing closer .As the curses came shooting across the intervening space again Hagrid swerved and zigzagged Harry knew that Hagrid did not dare use the dragonfire button again with Harry seated so insecurely .Harry sent Stunning Spell after Stunning Spell back at their pursuers barely holding them off .He shot another blocking jinx at them The closest Death Eater swerved to avoid it and his hood slipped and by the red light of his next Stunning Spell Harry saw the strangely blank face of Stanley Shunpike Stan ExpelliarmusV Harry yelled .Thats him its him its the real one !The hooded Death Eaters shout reached Harry even above the thunder of the motorbikes engine Next moment both pursuers had fallen back and disappeared from view .Harry whats happened ?bellowed Hagrid .Where Ve they gone ?I dont know !But Harry was afraid The hooded Death Eater had shouted Its the real one !how had he known ?He gazed around at the apparently empty darkness and felt its menace .Where were they ?He clambered around on the seat to face forward and seized hold of the back of Hagrid s jacket .Hagrid do the dragonfire thing again lets get out of here !Hold on tight then Harry !There was a deafening screeching roar again and the whiteblue fire shot from the exhaust Harry felt himself slipping backward off what little of the seat he had Hagrid flung backward upon him barely maintaining his grip on the handlebars I think weve lost em Harry I think weve done it !yelled Hagrid .But Harry was not convinced Fear lapped at him as he looked left and right for pursuers he was sure would come .Why had they fallen back ?One of them had still had a wand .Its him .its the real one .They had said it right after he had tried to Disarm Stan .Were nearly there Harry weve nearly made it !shouted Hagrid .Harry felt the bike drop a little though the lights down on the ground still seemed remote as stars .Then the scar on his forehead burned like fire as a Death Eater appeared on either side of the bike two Killing Curses missed Harry by millimeters cast from behind And then Harry saw him .Voldemort was flying like smoke on the wind without broomstick or thestral to hold him his snakelike face gleaming out of the blackness his white fingers raising his wand again Hagrid let out a bellow of fear and steered the motorbike into a vertical dive .Clinging on for dear life Harry sent Stunning Spells flying at random into the whirling night .He saw a body fly past him and knew he had hit one of them but then he heard a bang and saw sparks from the engine the motorbike spiraled through the air completely out of control Green jets of light shot past them again .Harry had no idea which way was up which down His scar was still burning he expected to die at any second .A hooded figure on a broomstick was feet from him he saw it raise its arm NO !With a shout of fury Hagrid launched himself off the bike at the Death Eater to his horror Harry saw both Hagrid and the Death Eater falling out of sight their combined weight too much for the broomstick Barely gripping the plummeting bike with his knees Harry heard Voldemort scream Mine It was over He could not see or hear where Voldemort was he glimpsed another Death Eater swooping out of the way and heard Avada As the pain from Harrys scar forced his eyes shut his wand acted of its own accord .He felt it drag his hand around like some great magnet saw a spurt of golden fire through his halfclosed eyelids heard a crack and a scream of fury .The remaining Death Eater yelled Voldemort screamed No Somehow Harry found his nose an inch from the dragonfire button .He punched it with his wandfree hand and the bike shot more flames into the air hurtling straight toward the ground .Hagrid !Harry called holding on to the bike for dear life .Hagrid Accio Hagridl The motorbike sped up sucked toward the earth .Face level with the handlebars Harry could see nothing but distant lights growing nearer and nearer He was going to crash and there was nothing he could do about it .Behind him came another scream Your wand Selwyn give me your wand He felt Voldemort before he saw him .Looking sideways he stared into the red eyes and was sure they would be the last thing he ever saw Voldemort preparing to curse him once more And then Voldemort vanished .Harry looked down and saw Hagrid spreadeagled on the ground below him .He pulled hard at the handlebars to avoid hitting him groped for the brake but with an earsplitting groundtrembling crash he smashed into a muddy pond .5 FALLEN WARRIOR Hagrid ?Harry struggled to raise himself out of the debris of metal and leather that surrounded him his hands sank into inches of muddy water as he tried to stand .He could not understand where Voldemort had gone and expected him to swoop out of the darkness at any moment .Something hot and wet was trickling down his chin and from his forehead .He crawled out of the pond and stumbled toward the great dark mass on the ground that was Hagrid .Hagrid ?Hagrid talk to me But the dark mass did not stir .Whos there ?Is it Potter ?Are you Harry Potter ?Harry did not recognize the mans voice .Then a woman shouted Theyve crashed Ted !Crashed in the garden !Harrys head was swimming .Hagrid he repeated stupidly and his knees buckled .The next thing he knew he was lying on his back on what felt like cushions with a burning sensation in his ribs and right arm .His missing tooth had been regrown .The scar on his forehead was still throbbing .Hagrid ?He opened his eyes and saw that he was lying on a sofa in an unfamiliar lamplit sitting room .His rucksack lay on the floor a short distance away wet and muddy .A fairhaired bigbellied man was watching Harry anxiously .Hagrids fine son said the man the wifes seeing to him now .How are you feeling ?Anything else broken ?Ive fixed your ribs your tooth and your arm .Im Ted by the way Ted Tonks Doras father .Harry sat up too quickly Lights popped in front of his eyes and he felt sick and giddy .Voldemort Easy now said Ted Tonks placing a hand on Harrys shoulder and pushing him back against the cushions .That was a nasty crash you just had .What happened anyway ?Something go wrong with the bike ?Arthur Weasley overstretch himself again him and his Muggle contraptions ?No said Harry as his scar pulsed like an open wound .Death Eaters loads of them we were chased Death Eaters ?said Ted sharply .What dyou mean Death Eaters ?I thought they didnt know you were being moved tonight I thought They knew said Harry .Ted Tonks looked up at the ceiling as though he could see through it to the sky above .Well we know our protective charms hold then dont we ?They shouldnt be able to get within a hundred yards of the place in any direction .Now Harry understood why Voldemort had vanished it had been at the point when the motorbike crossed the barrier of the Orders charms .He only hoped they would continue to work He imagined Voldemort a hundred yards above them as they spoke looking for a way to penetrate what Harry visualized as a great transparent bubble .He swung his legs off the sofa he needed to see Hagrid with his own eyes before he would believe that he was alive .He had barely stood up however when a door opened and Hagrid squeezed through it his face covered in mud and blood limping a little but miraculously alive .Harry !Knocking over two delicate tables and an aspidistra he covered the floor between them in two strides and pulled Harry into a hug that nearly cracked his newly repaired ribs .Blimey Harry how did yeh get out o that ?I thought we were both goners .Yeah me too .I cant believe Harry broke off .He had just noticed the woman who had entered the room behind Hagrid .You !he shouted and he thrust his hand into his pocket but it was empty .Your wands here son said Ted tapping it on Harrys arm .It fell right beside you I picked it up .And thats my wife youre shouting at .Oh Im Im sorry .As she moved forward into the room Mrs Tonkss resemblance to her sister Bellatrix became much less pronounced Her hair was a light soft brown and her eyes were wider and kinder .Nevertheless she looked a little haughty after Harrys exclamation .What happened to our daughter ?she asked .Hagrid said you were ambushed where is Nymphadora ?I dont know said Harry .We dont know what happened to anyone else .She and Ted exchanged looks .A mixture of fear and guilt gripped Harry at the sight of their expressions if any of the others had died it was his fault all his fault .He had consented to the plan given them his hair .The Portkey he said remembering all of a sudden .Weve got to get back to the Burrow and find out then well be able to send you word or or Tonks will once shes Dorall be okay Dromeda said Ted .She knows her stuff shes been in plenty of tight spots with the Aurors .The Portkey s through here he added to Harry .Its supposed to leave in three minutes if you want to take it .Yeah we do said Harry .He seized his rucksack swung it onto his shoulders .I He looked at Mrs Tonks wanting to apologize for the state of fear in which he left her and for which he felt so terribly responsible but no words occurred to him that did not seem hollow and insincere .Ill tell Tonks Dora to send word when she .Thanks for patching us up thanks for everything .I He was glad to leave the room and follow Ted Tonks along a short hallway and into a bedroom .Hagrid came after them bending low to avoid hitting his head on the door lintel .There you go son .Thats the Portkey .Mr Tonks was pointing to a small silverbacked hairbrush lying on the dressing table .Thanks said Harry reaching out to place a finger on it ready to leave .Wait a moment said Hagrid looking around .Harry wheres Hedwig ?She .she got hit said Harry .The realization crashed over him He felt ashamed of himself as the tears stung his eyes .The owl had been his companion his one great link with the magical world whenever he had been forced to return to the Dursleys .Hagrid reached out a great hand and patted him painfully on the shoulder .Never mind he said gruffly .Never mind .She had a great old life Hagrid !said Ted Tonks warningly as the hairbrush glowed bright blue and Hagrid only just got his forefinger to it in time .With a jerk behind the navel as though an invisible hook and line had dragged him forward Harry was pulled into nothingness spinning uncontrollably his finger glued to the Portkey as he and Hagrid hurtled away from Mr Tonks .Seconds later Harrys feet slammed onto hard ground and he fell onto his hands and knees in the yard of the Burrow .He heard screams .Throwing aside the no longer glowing hairbrush Harry stood up swaying slightly and saw Mrs Weasley and Ginny running down the steps by the back door as Hagrid who had also collapsed on landing clambered laboriously to his feet .Harry ?You are the real Harry ?What happened ?Where are the others ?cried Mrs Weasley .What dyou mean ?Isnt anyone else back ?Harry panted .The answer was clearly etched in Mrs Weasley s pale face .The Death Eaters were waiting for us Harry told her .We were surrounded the moment we took off they knew it was tonight I dont know what happened to anyone else four of them chased us it was all we could do to get away and then Voldemort caught up with us He could hear the selfjustifying note in his voice the plea for her to understand why he did not know what had happened to her sons but Thank goodness youre all right she said pulling him into a hug he did not feel he deserved .Havent go any brandy have yeh Molly ?asked Hagrid a little shakily .Fer medicinal purposes ?She could have summoned it by magic but as she hurried back toward the crooked house Harry knew that she wanted to hide her face .He turned to Ginny and she answered his unspoken plea for information at once .Ron and Tonks should have been back first but they missed their Portkey it came back without them she said pointing at a rusty oil can lying on the ground nearby .And that one she pointed at an ancient sneaker should have been Dad and Freds they were supposed to be second .You and Hagrid were third and she checked her watch if they made it George and Lupin ought to be back in about a minute .Mrs Weasley reappeared carrying a bottle of brandy which she handed to Hagrid .He uncorked it and drank it straight down in one .Mum !shouted Ginny pointing to a spot several feet away .A blue light had appeared in the darkness It grew larger and brighter and Lupin and George appeared spinning and then falling .Harry knew immediately that there was something wrong Lupin was supporting George who was unconscious and whose face was covered in blood .Harry ran forward and seized Georges legs .Together he and Lupin carried George into the house and through the kitchen to the sitting room where they laid him on the sofa .As the lamplight fell across Georges head Ginny gasped and Harrys stomach lurched One of Georges ears was missing .The side of his head and neck were drenched in wet shockingly scarlet blood .No sooner had Mrs Weasley bent over her son than Lupin grabbed Harry by the upper arm and dragged him none too gently back into the kitchen where Hagrid was still attempting to ease his bulk through the back door .Oi !said Hagrid indignantly .Le go of him !Le go of Harry !Lupin ignored him .What creature sat in the corner the first time that Harry Potter visited my office at Hogwarts ?he said giving Harry a small shake .Answer me !A a grindylow in a tank wasnt it ?Lupin released Harry and fell back against a kitchen cupboard .Wha was tha about ?roared Hagrid .Im sorry Harry but I had to check said Lupin tersely .Weve been betrayed .Voldemort knew that you were being moved tonight and the only people who could have told him were directly involved in the plan .You might have been an impostor .So why aren you checkin me ?panted Hagrid still struggling to fit through the door .Youre halfgiant said Lupin looking up at Hagrid .The Polyjuice Potion is designed for human use only .None of the Order would have told Voldemort we were moving tonight said Harry .The idea was dreadful to him he could not believe it of any of them .Voldemort only caught up with me toward the end he didnt know which one I was in the beginning .If hed been in on the plan hed have known from the start I was the one with Hagrid .Voldemort caught up with you ?said Lupin sharply .What happened ?How did you escape ?Harry explained briefly how the Death Eaters pursuing them had seemed to recognize him as the true Harry how they had abandoned the chase how they must have summoned Voldemort who had appeared just before he and Hagrid had reached the sanctuary of Tonkss parents .They recognized you ?But how ?What had you done ?I .Harry tried to remember the whole journey seemed like a blur of panic and confusion .I saw Stan Shunpike .You know the bloke who was the conductor on the Knight Bus ?And I tried to Disarm him instead of well he doesnt know what hes doing does he ?He must be Imperiused !Lupin looked aghast .Harry the time for Disarming is past !These people are trying to capture and kill you !At least Stun if you arent prepared to kill !We were hundreds of feet up !Stans not himself and if I Stunned him and hed fallen hed have died the same as if Id used Avada Kedavra !Expelliarmus saved me from Voldemort two years ago Harry added defiantly .Lupin was reminding him of the sneering Hufflepuff Zacharias Smith who had jeered at Harry for wanting to teach Dumbledores Army how to Disarm .Yes Harry said Lupin with painful restraint and a great number of Death Eaters witnessed that happening !Forgive me but it was a very unusual move then under imminent threat of death .Repeating it tonight in front of Death Eaters who either witnessed or heard about the first occasion was close to suicidal !So you think I should have killed Stan Shunpike ?said Harry angrily .Of course not said Lupin but the Death Eaters frankly most people !would have expected you to attack back !Expelliarmus is a useful spell Harry but the Death Eaters seem to think it is your signature move and I urge you not to let it become so !Lupin was making Harry feel idiotic and yet there was still a grain of defiance inside him .I wont blast people out of my way just because theyre there said Harry .Thats Voldemorts job .Lupins retort was lost Finally succeeding in squeezing through the door Hagrid staggered to a chair and sat down it collapsed beneath him .Ignoring his mingled oaths and apologies Harry addressed Lupin again .Will George be okay ?All Lupins frustration with Harry seemed to drain away at the question .I think so although theres no chance of replacing his ear not when its been cursed off There was a scuffling from outside .Lupin dived for the back door Harry leapt over Hagrids legs and sprinted into the yard .Two figures had appeared in the yard and as Harry ran toward them he realized they were Hermione now returning to her normal appearance and Kingsley both clutching a bent coat hanger .Hermione flung herself into Harrys arms but Kingsley showed no pleasure at the sight of any of them .Over Hermione s shoulder Harry saw him raise his wand and point it at Lupins chest .The last words Albus Dumbledore spoke to the pair of us ? ‘Harry is the best hope we have .Trust him said Lupin calmly .Kingsley turned his wand on Harry but Lupin said Its him Ive checked !All right all right !said Kingsley stowing his wand back beneath his cloak .But somebody betrayed us !They knew they knew it was tonight !So it seems replied Lupin but apparently they did not realize that there would be seven Harrys .Small comfort !snarled Kingsley .Who else is back ?Only Harry Hagrid George and me .Hermione stifled a little moan behind her hand .What happened to you ?Lupin asked Kingsley .Followed by five injured two mightve killed one Kingsley reeled off and we saw YouKnowWho as well he joined the chase halfway through but vanished pretty quickly .Remus he can Fly supplied Harry .I saw him too he came after Hagrid and me .So thats why he left to follow you !said Kingsley .I couldnt understand why hed vanished .But what made him change targets ?Harry behaved a little too kindly to Stan Shunpike said Lupin .Stan ?repeated Hermione .But I thought he was in Azkaban ?Kingsley let out a mirthless laugh .Hermione theres obviously been a mass breakout which the Ministry has hushed up .Traverss hood fell off when I cursed him hes supposed to be inside too .But what happened to you Remus ?Wheres George ?He lost an ear said Lupin .Lost an ?repeated Hermione in a high voice .Snapes work said Lupin .Snape ?shouted Harry .You didnt say He lost his hood during the chase .Sectumsempra was always a specialty of Snapes .I wish I could say Id paid him back in kind but it was all I could do to keep George on the broom after he was injured he was losing so much blood .Silence fell between the four of them as they looked up at the sky .There was no sign of movement the stars stared back unblinking indifferent unobscured by flying friends .Where was Ron ?Where were Fred and Mr Weasley ?Where were Bill Fleur Tonks MadEye and Mundungus ?Harry give us a hand !called Hagrid hoarsely from the door in which he was stuck again .Glad of something to do Harry pulled him free then headed through the empty kitchen and back into the sitting room where Mrs Weasley and Ginny were still tending to George .Mrs Weasley had staunched his bleeding now and by the lamplight Harry saw a clean gaping hole where Georges ear had been .How is he ?Mrs Weasley looked around and said I cant make it grow back not when its been removed by Dark Magic .But it could have been so much worse .Hes alive .Yeah said Harry .Thank God .Did I hear someone else in the yard ?Ginny asked .Hermione and Kingsley said Harry .Thank goodness Ginny whispered .They looked at each other Harry wanted to hug her hold on to her he did not even care much that Mrs Weasley was there but before he could act on the impulse there was a great crash from the kitchen .Ill prove who I am Kingsley after Ive seen my son now back off if you know whats good for you !Harry had never heard Mr Weasley shout like that before .He burst into the living room his bald patch gleaming with sweat his spectacles askew Fred right behind him both pale but uninjured .Arthur !sobbed Mrs Weasley .Oh thank goodness !How is he ?Mr Weasley dropped to his knees beside George .For the first time since Harry had known him Fred seemed to be lost for words .He gaped over the back of the sofa at his twins wound as if he could not believe what he was seeing .Perhaps roused by the sound of Fred and their fathers arrival George stirred .How do you feel Georgie ?whispered Mrs Weasley .Georges fingers groped for the side of his head .Saintlike he murmured .Whats wrong with him ?croaked Fred looking terrified .Is his mind affected ?Saintlike repeated George opening his eyes and looking up at his brother .You see .Im holy .Hole v Fred geddit ?Mrs Weasley sobbed harder than ever .Color flooded Freds pale face .Pathetic he told George .Pathetic !With the whole wide world of earrelated humor before you you go for holey ?Ah well said George grinning at his tearsoaked mother .Youll be able to tell us apart now anyway Mum .He looked around .Hi Harry you are Harry right ?Yeah I am said Harry moving closer to the sofa .Well at least we got you back okay said George .Why arent Ron and Bill huddled round my sickbed ?Theyre not back yet George said Mrs Weasley .Georges grin faded .Harry glanced at Ginny and motioned to her to accompany him back outside .As they walked through the kitchen she said in a low voice Ron and Tonks should be back by now .They didnt have a long journey Auntie Muriels not that far from here .Harry said nothing .He had been trying to keep fear at bay ever since reaching the Burrow but now it enveloped him seeming to crawl over his skin throbbing in his chest clogging his throat .As they walked down the back steps into the dark yard Ginny took his hand .Kingsley was striding backward and forward glancing up at the sky every time he turned .Harry was reminded of Uncle Vernon pacing the living room a million years ago .Hagrid Hermione and Lupin stood shoulder to shoulder gazing upward in silence .None of them looked around when Harry and Ginny joined their silent vigil .The minutes stretched into what might as well have been years .The slightest breath of wind made them all jump and turn toward the whispering bush or tree in the hope that one of the missing Order members might leap unscathed from its leaves And then a broom materialized directly above them and streaked toward the ground Its them !screamed Hermione .Tonks landed in a long skid that sent earth and pebbles everywhere .Remus !Tonks cried as she staggered off the broom into Lupins arms .His face was set and white He seemed unable to speak .Ron tripped dazedly toward Harry and Hermione .Youre okay he mumbled before Hermione flew at him and hugged him tightly .I thought I thought M all right said Ron patting her on the back .M fine .Ron was great said Tonks warmly relinquishing her hold on Lupin .Wonderful .Stunned one of the Death Eaters straight to the head and when youre aiming at a moving target from a flying broom You did ?said Hermione gazing up at Ron with her arms still around his neck .Always the tone of surprise he said a little grumpily breaking free .Are we the last back ?No said Ginny were still waiting for Bill and Fleur and MadEye and Mundungus .Im going to tell Mum and Dad youre okay Ron She ran back inside .So what kept you ?What happened ?Lupin sounded almost angry at Tonks .Bellatrix said Tonks .She wants me quite as much as she wants Harry Remus she tried very hard to kill me .I just wish Id got her I owe Bellatrix .But we definitely injured Rodolphus .Then we got to Rons Auntie Muriels and wed missed our Portkey and she was fussing over us A muscle was jumping in Lupins jaw .He nodded but seemed unable to say anything else .So what happened to you lot ?Tonks asked turning to Harry Hermione and Kingsley .They recounted the stories of their own journeys but all the time the continued absence of Bill Fleur Mad Eye and Mundungus seemed to lie upon them like a frost its icy bite harder and harder to ignore .Im going to have to get back to Downing Street I should have been there an hour ago said Kingsley finally after a last sweeping gaze at the sky .Let me know when theyre back .Lupin nodded .With a wave to the others Kingsley walked away into the darkness toward the gate .Harry thought he heard the faintest pop as Kingsley Disapparated just beyond the Burrows boundaries .Mr and Mrs Weasley came racing down the back steps Ginny behind them .Both parents hugged Ron before turning to Lupin and Tonks .Thank you said Mrs Weasley for our sons .Dont be silly Molly said Tonks at once .Hows George ?asked Lupin .Whats wrong with him ?piped up Ron .Hes lost But the end of Mrs Weasley s sentence was drowned in a general outcry A thestral had just soared into sight and landed a few feet from them .Bill and Fleur slid from its back windswept but unhurt .Bill !Thank God thank God Mrs Weasley ran forward but the hug Bill bestowed upon her was perfunctory .Looking directly at his father he said MadEyes dead .Nobody spoke nobody moved .Harry felt as though something inside him was falling falling through the earth leaving him forever .We saw it said Bill Fleur nodded tear tracks glittering on her cheeks in the light from the kitchen window .It happened just after we broke out of the circle MadEye and Dung were close by us they were heading north too .Voldemort he can fly went straight for them .Dung panicked I heard him cry out MadEye tried to stop him but he Disapparated .Voldemorts curse hit MadEye full in the face he fell backward off his broom and there was nothing we could do nothing we had half a dozen of them on our own tail Bills voice broke .Of course you couldnt have done anything said Lupin .They all stood looking at each other .Harry could not quite comprehend it .MadEye dead it could not be . .MadEye so tough so brave the consummate survivor .At last it seemed to dawn on everyone though nobody said it that there was no point waiting in the yard anymore and in silence they followed Mr and Mrs Weasley back into the Burrow and into the living room where Fred and George were laughing together .Whats wrong ?said Fred scanning their faces as they entered .Whats happened ?Whos ?MadEye said Mr Weasley .Dead .The twins grins turned to grimaces of shock .Nobody seemed to know what to do .Tonks was crying silently into a handkerchief She had been close to MadEye Harry knew his favorite and his protegee at the Ministry of Magic .Hagrid who had sat down on the floor in the corner where he had most space was dabbing at his eyes with his tableclothsized handkerchief .Bill walked over to the sideboard and pulled out a bottle of firewhisky and some glasses .Here he said and with a wave of his wand he sent twelve full glasses soaring through the room to each of them holding the thirteenth aloft .MadEye .MadEye they all said and drank .MadEye echoed Hagrid a little late with a hiccup .The firewhisky seared Harrys throat .It seemed to burn feeling back into him dispelling the numbness and sense of unreality firing him with something that was like courage .So Mundungus disappeared ?said Lupin who had drained his own glass in one .The atmosphere changed at once .Everybody looked tense watching Lupin both wanting him to go on it seemed to Harry and slightly afraid of what they might hear .I know what youre thinking said Bill and I wondered that too on the way back here because they seemed to be expecting us didnt they ?But Mundungus cant have betrayed us .They didnt know there would be seven Harrys that confused them the moment we appeared and in case youve forgotten it was Mundungus who suggested that little bit of skullduggery .Why wouldnt he have told them the essential point ?I think Dung panicked its as simple as that .He didnt want to come in the first place but MadEye made him and YouKnowWho went straight for them .It was enough to make anyone panic .YouKnowWho acted exactly as MadEye expected him to sniffed Tonks .MadEye said hed expect the real Harry to be with the toughest most skilled Aurors .He chased MadEye first and when Mundungus gave them away he switched to Kingsley .Yes and zat eez all very good snapped Fleur but still eet does not explain ow zey knew we were moving Arry tonight does eet ?Somebody must ave been careless .Somebody let slip ze date to an outsider .It is ze only explanation for zem knowing ze date but not ze ole plan .She glared around at them all tear tracks still etched on her beautiful face silently daring any of them to contradict her .Nobody did .The only sound to break the silence was that of Hagrid hiccuping from behind his handkerchief .Harry glanced at Hagrid who had just risked his own life to save Harrys Hagrid whom he loved whom he trusted who had once been tricked into giving Voldemort crucial information in exchange for a dragons egg .No Harry said aloud and they all looked at him surprised The firewhisky seemed to have amplified his voice .I mean .if somebody made a mistake Harry went on and let something slip I know they didnt mean to do it .Its not their fault he repeated again a little louder than he would usually have spoken .Weve got to trust each other .I trust all of you I dont think anyone in this room would ever sell me to Voldemort .More silence followed his words .They were all looking at him Harry felt a little hot again and drank some more firewhisky for something to do .As he drank he thought of MadEye .MadEye had always been scathing about Dumbledores willingness to trust people .Well said Harry said Fred unexpectedly .Yeah ear ear said George with half a glance at Fred the corner of whose mouth twitched .Lupin was wearing an odd expression as he looked at Harry .It was close to pitying .You think Im a fool ?demanded Harry .No I think youre like James said Lupin who would have regarded it as the height of dishonor to mistrust his friends .Harry knew what Lupin was getting at that his father had been betrayed by his friend Peter Pettigrew .He felt irrationally angry .He wanted to argue but Lupin had turned away from him set down his glass upon a side table and addressed Bill Theres work to do .I can ask Kingsley whether No said Bill at once Ill do it Ill come .Where are you going ?said Tonks and Fleur together .MadEyes body said Lupin .We need to recover it .Cant it ?began Mrs Weasley with an appealing look at Bill .Wait ?said Bill .Not unless youd rather the Death Eaters took it ?Nobody spoke .Lupin and Bill said goodbye and left .The rest of them now dropped into chairs all except for Harry who remained standing .The suddenness and completeness of death was with them like a presence .Ive got to go too said Harry .Ten pairs of startled eyes looked at him .Dont be silly Harry said Mrs Weasley .What are you talking about ?I cant stay here .He rubbed his forehead it was prickling again it had not hurt like this for more than a year .Youre all in danger while Im here .I dont want But dont be so silly !said Mrs Weasley .The whole point of tonight was to get you here safely and thank goodness it worked .And Fleurs agreed to get married here rather than in France weve arranged everything so that we can all stay together and look after you She did not understand she was making him feel worse not better .If Voldemort finds out Im here But why should he ?asked Mrs Weasley .There are a dozen places you might be now Harry said Mr Weasley .Hes got no way of knowing which safe house youre in .Its not me Im worried for !said Harry .We know that said Mr Weasley quietly but it would make our efforts tonight seem rather pointless if you left .Yer not goin anywhere growled Hagrid .Blimey Harry after all we wen through ter get you here ?Yeah what about my bleeding ear ?said George hoisting himself up on his cushions .I know that MadEye wouldnt want I KNOW !Harry bellowed .He felt beleaguered and blackmailed Did they think he did not know what they had done for him didnt they understand that it was for precisely that reason that he wanted to go now before they had to suffer any more on his behalf ?There was a long and awkward silence in which his scar continued to prickle and throb and which was broken at last by Mrs Weasley .Wheres Hedwig Harry ?she said coaxingly .We can put her up with Pigwidgeon and give her something to eat .His insides clenched like a fist .He could not tell her the truth .He drank the last of his firewhisky to avoid answering .Wait till it gets out yeh did it again Harry said Hagrid .Escaped him fought him off when he was right on top of yeh !It wasnt me said Harry flatly .It was my wand .My wand acted of its own accord .After a few moments Hermione said gently But thats impossible Harry .You mean that you did magic without meaning to you reacted instinctively .No said Harry .The bike was falling I couldnt have told you where Voldemort was but my wand spun in my hand and found him and shot a spell at him and it wasnt even a spell I recognized .Ive never made gold flames appear before .Often said Mr Weasley when youre in a pressured situation you can produce magic you never dreamed of .Small children often find before theyre trained It wasnt like that said Harry through gritted teeth .His scar was burning He felt angry and frustrated he hated the idea that they were all imagining him to have power to match Voldemorts .No one said anything .He knew that they did not believe him .Now that he came to think of it he had never heard of a wand performing magic on its own before .His scar seared with pain it was all he could do not to moan aloud .Muttering about fresh air he set down his glass and left the room .As he crossed the dark yard the great skeletal thestral looked up rustled its enormous batlike wings then resumed its grazing .Harry stopped at the gate into the garden staring out at its overgrown plants rubbing his pounding forehead and thinking of Dumbledore .Dumbledore would have believed him he knew it .Dumbledore would have known how and why Harrys wand had acted independently because Dumbledore always had the answers he had known about wands had explained to Harry the strange connection that existed between his wand and Voldemorts .But Dumbledore like MadEye like Sirius like his parents like his poor owl all were gone where Harry could never talk to them again .He felt a burning in his throat that had nothing to do with firewhisky .And then out of nowhere the pain in his scar peaked .As he clutched his forehead and closed his eyes a voice screamed inside his head .You told me the problem would be solved by using anothers wand And into his mind burst the vision of an emaciated old man lying in rags upon a stone floor screaming a horrible drawnout scream a scream of unendurable agony .No !No !I beg you I beg you .You lied to Lord Voldemort Ollivander !I did not .I swear I did not .You sought to help Potter to help him escape me !I swear I did not .I believed a different wand would work .Explain then what happened .Luciuss wand is destroyed !I cannot understand .The connection .exists only .between your two wands .Lies !Please .I beg you .And Harry saw the white hand raise its wand and felt Voldemort s surge of vicious anger saw the frail old man on the floor writhe in agony Harry ?It was over as quickly as it had come Harry stood shaking in the darkness clutching the gate into the garden his heart racing his scar still tingling .It was several moments before he realized that Ron and Hermione were at his side .Harry come back in the house Hermione whispered .You arent still thinking of leaving ?Yeah youve got to stay mate said Ron thumping Harry on the back .Are you all right ?Hermione asked close enough now to look into Harrys face .You look awful !Well said Harry shakily I probably look better than Ollivander .When he had finished telling them what he had seen Ron looked appalled but Hermione downright terrified .But it was supposed to have stopped !Your scar it wasnt supposed to do this anymore !You mustnt let that connection open up again Dumbledore wanted you to close your mind !When he did not reply she gripped his arm .Harry hes taking over the Ministry and the newspapers and half the Wizarding world !Dont let him inside your head too !6 THE GHOUL IN PAJAMAS The shock of losing MadEye hung over the house in the days that followed Harry kept expecting to see him stumping in through the back door like the other Order members who passed in and out to relay news .Harry felt that nothing but action would assuage his feelings of guilt and grief and that he ought to set out on his mission to find and destroy Horcruxes as soon as possible .Well you cant do anything about the Ron mouthed the word Horcruxes till youre seventeen .Youve still got the Trace on you .And we can plan here as well as anywhere cant we ?Or he dropped his voice to a whisper dyou reckon you already know where the YouKnowWhats are ?No Harry admitted .I think Hermiones been doing a bit of research said Ron .She said she was saving it for when you got here .They were sitting at the breakfast table Mr Weasley and Bill had just left for work .Mrs Weasley had gone upstairs to wake Hermione and Ginny while Fleur had drifted off to take a bath .The Tracell break on the thirty first said Harry .That means I only need to stay here four days .Then I can Five days Ron corrected him firmly .Weve got to stay for the wedding .Theyll kill us if we miss it .Harry understood they to mean Fleur and Mrs Weasley .Its one extra day said Ron when Harry looked mutinous .Dont they realize how important ?Course they dont said Ron .They havent got a clue .And now you mention it I wanted to talk to you about that .Ron glanced toward the door into the hall to check that Mrs Weasley was not returning yet then leaned in closer to Harry .Mums been trying to get it out of Hermione and me .What were off to do .Shell try you next so brace yourself .Dad and Lupin ve both asked as well but when we said Dumbledore told you not to tell anyone except us they dropped it .Not Mum though .Shes determined .Rons prediction came true within hours .Shortly before lunch Mrs Weasley detached Harry from the others by asking him to help identify a lone mans sock that she thought might have come out of his rucksack .Once she had him cornered in the tiny scullery off the kitchen she started .Ron and Hermione seem to think that the three of you are dropping out of Hogwarts she began in a light casual tone .Oh said Harry .Well yeah .We are .The mangle turned of its own accord in a corner wringing out what looked like one of Mr Weasleys vests .May I ask why you are abandoning your education ?said Mrs Weasley .Well Dumbledore left me .stuff to do mumbled Harry .Ron and Hermione know about it and they want to come too .What sort of ‘stuff ?Im sorry I cant Well frankly I think Arthur and I have a right to know and Im sure Mr and Mrs Granger would agree !said Mrs Weasley .Harry had been afraid of the concerned parent attack .He forced himself to look directly into her eyes noticing as he did so that they were precisely the same shade of brown as Ginnys .This did not help .Dumbledore didnt want anyone else to know Mrs Weasley .Im sorry .Ron and Hermione dont have to come its their choice I dont see that you have to go either !she snapped dropping all pretense now .Youre barely of age any of you !Its utter nonsense if Dumbledore needed work doing he had the whole Order at his command !Harry you must have misunderstood him .Probably he was telling you something he wanted done and you took it to mean that he wanted you I didnt misunderstand said Harry flatly .Its got to be me .He handed her back the single sock he was supposed to be identifying which was patterned with golden bulrushes .And thats not mine I dont support Puddlemere United .Oh of course not said Mrs Weasley with a sudden and rather unnerving return to her casual tone .I should have realized .Well Harry while weve still got you here you wont mind helping with the preparations for Bill and Fleurs wedding will you ?Theres still so much to do .No I of course not said Harry disconcerted by this sudden change of subject .Sweet of you she replied and she smiled as she left the scullery .From that moment on Mrs Weasley kept Harry Ron and Hermione so busy with preparations for the wedding that they hardly had any time to think .The kindest explanation of this behavior would have been that Mrs Weasley wanted to distract them all from thoughts of MadEye and the terrors of their recent journey .After two days of nonstop cutlery cleaning of colormatching favors ribbons and flowers of de gnoming the garden and helping Mrs Weasley cook vast batches of canapes however Harry started to suspect her of a different motive .All the jobs she handed out seemed to keep him Ron and Hermione away from one another he had not had a chance to speak to the two of them alone since the first night when he had told them about Voldemort torturing Ollivander .I think Mum thinks that if she can stop the three of you getting together and planning shell be able to delay you leaving Ginny told Harry in an undertone as they laid the table for dinner on the third night of his stay .And then what does she thinks going to happen ?Harry muttered .Someone else might kill off Voldemort while shes holding us here making volau vents ?He had spoken without thinking and saw Ginnys face whiten .So its true ?she said .Thats what youre trying to do ?I not I was joking said Harry evasively .They stared at each other and there was something more than shock in Ginnys expression .Suddenly Harry became aware that this was the first time that he had been alone with her since those stolen hours in secluded corners of the Hogwarts grounds .He was sure she was remembering them too .Both of them jumped as the door opened and Mr Weasley Kingsley and Bill walked in .They were often joined by other Order members for dinner now because the Burrow had replaced number twelve Grimmauld Place as the headquarters .Mr Weasley had explained that after the death of Dumbledore their SecretKeeper each of the people to whom Dumbledore had confided Grimmauld Places location had become a Secret Keeper in turn .And as there are around twenty of us that greatly dilutes the power of the Fidelius Charm .Twenty times as many opportunities for the Death Eaters to get the secret out of somebody .We cant expect it to hold much longer .But surely Snape will have told the Death Eaters the address by now ?asked Harry .Well MadEye set up a couple of curses against Snape in case he turns up there again .We hope theyll be strong enough both to keep him out and to bind his tongue if he tries to talk about the place but we cant be sure .It would have been insane to keep using the place as headquarters now that its protection has become so shaky .The kitchen was so crowded that evening it was difficult to maneuver knives and forks .Harry found himself crammed beside Ginny the unsaid things that had just passed between them made him wish they had been separated by a few more people .He was trying so hard to avoid brushing her arm he could barely cut his chicken .No news about MadEye ?Harry asked Bill .Nothing replied Bill .They had not been able to hold a funeral for Moody because Bill and Lupin had failed to recover his body .It had been difficult to know where he might have fallen given the darkness and the confusion of the battle .The Daily Prophet hasnt said a word about him dying or about finding the body Bill went on .But that doesnt mean much .Its keeping a lot quiet these days .And they still havent called a hearing about all the underage magic I used escaping the Death Eaters ?Harry called across the table to Mr Weasley who shook his head .Because they know I had no choice or because they dont want me to tell the world Voldemort attacked me ?The latter I think .Scrimgeour doesnt want to admit that YouKnowWho is as powerful as he is nor that Azkabans seen a mass breakout .Yeah why tell the public the truth ?said Harry clenching his knife so tightly that the faint scars on the back of his right hand stood out white against his skin I must not tell lies .Isnt anyone at the Ministry prepared to stand up to him ?asked Ron angrily .Of course Ron but people are terrified Mr Weasley replied terrified that they will be next to disappear their children the next to be attacked !There are nasty rumors going around I for one dont believe the Muggle Studies professor at Hogwarts resigned .She hasnt been seen for weeks now .Meanwhile Scrimgeour remains shut up in his office all day I just hope hes working on a plan .There was a pause in which Mrs Weasley magicked the empty plates onto the work surface and served apple tart .We must decide ow you will be disguised Arry said Fleur once everyone had pudding .For ze wedding she added when he looked confused .Of course none of our guests are Death Eaters but we cannot guarantee zat zey will not let something slip after zey ave ad champagne .From this Harry gathered that she still suspected Hagrid .Yes good point said Mrs Weasley from the top of the table where she sat spectacles perched on the end of her nose scanning an immense list of jobs that she had scribbled on a very long piece of parchment .Now Ron have you cleaned out your room yet ?Why ?exclaimed Ron slamming his spoon down and glaring at his mother .Why does my room have to be cleaned out ?Harry and I are fine with it the way it is !We are holding your brothers wedding here in a few days time young man And are they getting married in my bedroom ?asked Ron furiously .No !So why in the name of Merlins saggy left Dont talk to your mother like that said Mr Weasley firmly .And do as youre told .Ron scowled at both his parents then picked up his spoon and attacked the last few mouthfuls of his apple tart .I can help some of its my mess Harry told Ron but Mrs Weasley cut across him .No Harry dear Id much rather you helped Arthur muck out the chickens and Hermione Id be ever so grateful if youd change the sheets for Monsieur and Madame Delacour you know theyre arriving at eleven tomorrow morning .But as it turned out there was very little to do for the chickens .Theres no need to er mention it to Molly Mr Weasley told Harry blocking his access to the coop but er Ted Tonks sent me most of what was left of Siriuss bike and er Im hiding thats to say keeping it in here .Fantastic stuff Theres an exhaust gaskin as I believe its called the most magnificent battery and itll be a great opportunity to find out how brakes work .Im going to try and put it all back together again when Mollys not I mean when Ive got time .When they returned to the house Mrs Weasley was nowhere to be seen so Harry slipped upstairs to Rons attic bedroom .Im doing it Im doing !Oh its you said Ron in relief as Harry entered the room .Ron lay back down on the bed which he had evidently just vacated .The room was just as messy as it had been all week the only change was that Hermione was now sitting in the far corner her fluffy ginger cat Crookshanks at her feet sorting books some of which Harry recognized as his own into two enormous piles .Hi Harry she said as he sat down on his camp bed .And how did you manage to get away ?Oh Rons mum forgot that she asked Ginny and me to change the sheets yesterday said Hermione .She threw Numerology and Grammatica onto one pile and The Rise and Fall of the Dark Arts onto the other .We were just talking about MadEye Ron told Harry .I reckon he might have survived .But Bill saw him hit by the Killing Curse said Harry .Yeah but Bill was under attack too said Ron .How can he be sure what he saw ?Even if the Killing Curse missed MadEye still fell about a thousand feet said Hermione now weighing Quidditch Teams of Britain and Ireland in her hand .He could have used a Shield Charm Fleur said his wand was blasted out of his hand said Harry .Well all right if you want him to be dead said Ron grumpily punching his pillow into a more comfortable shape .Of course we dont want him to be dead !said Hermione looking shocked .Its dreadful that hes dead !But were being realistic !For the first time Harry imagined MadEyes body broken as Dumbledores had been yet with that one eye still whizzing in its socket .He felt a stab of revulsion mixed with a bizarre desire to laugh .The Death Eaters probably tidied up after themselves thats why no ones found him said Ron wisely .Yeah said Harry .Like Barty Crouch turned into a bone and buried in Hagrids front garden .They probably transfigured Moody and stuffed him Dont !squealed Hermione .Startled Harry looked over just in time to see her burst into tears over her copy of Spellmans Syllabary .Oh no said Harry struggling to get up from the old camp bed .Hermione I wasnt trying to upset But with a great creaking of rusty bedsprings Ron bounded off the bed and got there first .One arm around Hermione he fished in his jeans pocket and withdrew a revoltinglooking handkerchief that he had used to clean out the oven earlier .Hastily pulling out his wand he pointed it at the rag and said Tergeo .The wand siphoned off most of the grease .Looking rather pleased with himself Ron handed the slightly smoking handkerchief to Hermione .Oh .thanks Ron .Im sorry .She blew her nose and hiccuped .Its just so awfful isnt it ?R right after Dumbledore .I jjust nnever imagined MadEye dying somehow he seemed so tough !Yeah I know said Ron giving her a squeeze .But you know what hed say to us if he was here ? ‘Cconstant vigilance said Hermione mopping her eyes .Thats right said Ron nodding .Hed tell us to learn from what happened to him .And what Ive learned is not to trust that cowardly little squit Mundungus .Hermione gave a shaky laugh and leaned forward to pick up two more books .A second later Ron had snatched his arm back from around her shoulders she had dropped The Monster Book of Monsters on his foot .The book had broken free from its restraining belt and snapped viciously at Rons ankle .Im sorry Im sorry !Hermione cried as Harry wrenched the book from Rons leg and retied it shut .What are you doing with all those books anyway ?Ron asked limping back to his bed .Just trying to decide which ones to take with us said Hermione .When were looking for the Horcruxes .Oh of course said Ron clapping a hand to his forehead .I forgot well be hunting down Voldemort in a mobile library .Ha ha said Hermione looking down at Spellmans Syllabary .I wonder .will we need to translate runes ?Its possible .I think wed better take it to be safe .She dropped the syllabary onto the larger of the two piles and picked up Hogwarts A History .Listen said Harry .He had sat up straight .Ron and Hermione looked at him with similar mixtures of resignation and defiance .I know you said after Dumbledores funeral that you wanted to come with me Harry began .Here he goes Ron said to Hermione rolling his eyes .As we knew he would she sighed turning back to the books .You know I think I will take Hogwarts A History .Even if were not going back there I dont think Id feel right if I didnt have it with Listen !said Harry again .No Harry you listen said Hermione .Were coming with you .That was decided months ago years really .But Shut up Ron advised him .are you sure youve thought this through ?Harry persisted .Lets see said Hermione slamming Travels with Trolls onto the discarded pile with a rather fierce look .Ive been packing for days so were ready to leave at a moments notice which for your information has included doing some pretty difficult magic not to mention smuggling MadEyes whole stock of Polyjuice Potion right under Rons mums nose .Ive also modified my parents memories so that theyre convinced theyre really called Wendell and Monica Wilkins and that their lifes ambition is to move to Australia which they have now done .Thats to make it more difficult for Voldemort to track them down and interrogate them about me or you because unfortunately Ive told them quite a bit about you .Assuming I survive our hunt for the Horcruxes Ill find Mum and Dad and lift the enchantment .If I dont well I think Ive cast a good enough charm to keep them safe and happy .Wendell and Monica Wilkins dont know that theyve got a daughter you see .Hermiones eyes were swimming with tears again .Ron got back off the bed put his arm around her once more and frowned at Harry as though reproaching him for lack of tact .Harry could not think of anything to say not least because it was highly unusual for Ron to be teaching anyone else tact .I Hermione Im sorry I didnt Didnt realize that Ron and I know perfectly well what might happen if we come with you ?Well we do .Ron show Harry what youve done .Nah hes just eaten said Ron .Go on he needs to know !Oh all right .Harry come here .For the second time Ron withdrew his arm from around Hermione and stumped over to the door .Cmon .Why ?Harry asked following Ron out of the room onto the tiny landing .Descendo muttered Ron pointing his wand at the low ceiling .A hatch opened right over their heads and a ladder slid down to their feet .A horrible half sucking halfmoaning sound came out of the square hole along with an unpleasant smell like open drains .Thats your ghoul isnt it ?asked Harry who had never actually met the creature that sometimes disrupted the nightly silence .Yeah it is said Ron climbing the ladder .Come and have a look at him .Harry followed Ron up the few short steps into the tiny attic space .His head and shoulders were in the room before he caught sight of the creature curled up a few feet from him fast asleep in the gloom with its large mouth wide open .But it .it looks .do ghouls normally wear pajamas ?No said Ron .Nor have they usually got red hair or that number of pustules .Harry contemplated the thing slightly revolted .It was human in shape and size and was wearing what now that Harrys eyes became used to the darkness was clearly an old pair of Rons pajamas .He was also sure that ghouls were generally rather slimy and bald rather than distinctly hairy and covered in angry purple blisters .Hes me see ?said Ron .No said Harry .I dont .Ill explain it back in my room the smells getting to me said Ron .They climbed back down the ladder which Ron returned to the ceiling and rejoined Hermione who was still sorting books .Once weve left the ghouls going to come and live down here in my room said Ron .I think hes really looking forward to it well its hard to tell because all he can do is moan and drool but he nods a lot when you mention it .Anyway hes going to be me with spattergroit .Good eh ?Harry merely looked his confusion .It is !said Ron clearly frustrated that Harry had not grasped the brilliance of the plan .Look when we three dont turn up at Hogwarts again everyones going to think Hermione and I must be with you right ?Which means the Death Eaters will go straight for our families to see if theyve got information on where you are .But hopefully itll look like Ive gone away with Mum and Dad a lot of Muggleborns are talking about going into hiding at the moment said Hermione .We cant hide my whole family itll look too fishy and they cant all leave their jobs said Ron .So were going to put out the story that Im seriously ill with spattergroit which is why I cant go back to school .If anyone comes calling to investigate Mum or Dad can show them the ghoul in my bed covered in pustules .Spattergroit s really contagious so theyre not going to want to go near him .It wont matter that he cant say anything either because apparently you cant once the fungus has spread to your uvula .And your mum and dad are in on this plan ?asked Harry .Dad is .He helped Fred and George transform the ghoul .Mum .well youve seen what shes like .She wont accept were going till weve gone .There was silence in the room broken only by gentle thuds as Hermione continued to throw books onto one pile or the other .Ron sat watching her and Harry looked from one to the other unable to say anything .The measures they had taken to protect their families made him realize more than anything else could have done that they really were going to come with him and that they knew exactly how dangerous that would be .He wanted to tell them what that meant to him but he simply could not find words important enough .Through the silence came the muffled sounds of Mrs Weasley shouting from four floors below .Ginnys probably left a speck of dust on a poxy napkin ring said Ron .I dunno why the Delacours have got to come two days before the wedding .Fleurs sisters a bridesmaid she needs to be here for the rehearsal and shes too young to come on her own said Hermione as she pored indecisively over Break with a Banshee .Well guests arent going to help Mums stress levels said Ron .What we really need to decide said Hermione tossing Defensive Magical Theory into the bin without a second glance and picking up An Appraisal of Magical Education in Europe is where were going after we leave here .I know you said you wanted to go to Godrics Hollow first Harry and I understand why but .well .shouldnt we make the Horcruxes our priority ?If we knew where any of the Horcruxes were Id agree with you said Harry who did not believe that Hermione really understood his desire to return to Godrics Hollow .His parents graves were only part of the attraction He had a strong though inexplicable feeling that the place held answers for him .Perhaps it was simply because it was there that he had survived Voldemorts Killing Curse now that he was facing the challenge of repeating the feat Harry was drawn to the place where it had happened wanting to understand .Dont you think theres a possibility that Voldemorts keeping a watch on Godrics Hollow ?Hermione asked .He might expect you to go back and visit your parents graves once youre free to go wherever you like ?This had not occurred to Harry .While he struggled to find a counterargument Ron spoke up evidently following his own train of thought .This R .A .B .person he said .You know the one who stole the real locket ?Hermione nodded .He said in his note he was going to destroy it didnt he ?Harry dragged his rucksack toward him and pulled out the fake Horcrux in which R .A .B .s note was still folded . ‘ I have stolen the real Horcrux and intend to destroy it as soon as I can Harry read out .Well what if he did finish it off ?said Ron .Or she interposed Hermione .Whichever said Ron itd be one less for us to do !Yes but were still going to have to try and trace the real locket arent we ?said Hermione to find out whether or not its destroyed .And once we get hold of it how do you destroy a Horcrux ?asked Ron .Well said Hermione Ive been researching that .How ?asked Harry .I didnt think there were any books on Horcruxes in the library ?There werent said Hermione who had turned pink .Dumbledore removed them all but he he didnt destroy them .Ron sat up straight wideeyed .How in the name of Merlins pants have you managed to get your hands on those Horcrux books ?It it wasnt stealing !said Hermione looking from Harry to Ron with a kind of desperation .They were still library books even if Dumbledore had taken them off the shelves .Anyway if he really didnt want anyone to get at them Im sure he would have made it much harder to Get to the point !said Ron .Well .it was easy said Hermione in a small voice .I just did a Summoning Charm .You know Accio .And they zoomed out of Dumbledore s study window right into the girls dormitory .But when did you do this ?Harry asked regarding Hermione with a mixture of admiration and incredulity .Just after his Dumbledores funeral said Hermione in an even smaller voice .Right after we agreed wed leave school and go and look for the Horcruxes .When I went back upstairs to get my things it it just occurred to me that the more we knew about them the better it would be .and I was alone in there .so I tried .and it worked .They flew straight in through the open window and I I packed them .She swallowed and then said imploringly I cant believe Dumbledore would have been angry its not as though were going to use the information to make a Horcrux is it ?Can you hear us complaining ?said Ron .Where are these books anyway ?Hermione rummaged for a moment and then extracted from the pile a large volume bound in faded black leather .She looked a little nauseated and held it as gingerly as if it were something recently dead .This is the one that gives explicit instructions on how to make a Horcrux .Secrets of the Darkest Art its a horrible book really awful full of evil magic .I wonder when Dumbledore removed it from the library .If he didnt do it until he was headmaster I bet Voldemort got all the instruction he needed from here .Why did he have to ask Slughorn how to make a Horcrux then if hed already read that ?asked Ron .He only approached Slughorn to find out what would happen if you split your soul into seven said Harry .Dumbledore was sure Riddle already knew how to make a Horcrux by the time he asked Slughorn about them .I think youre right Hermione that could easily have been where he got the information .And the more Ive read about them said Hermione the more horrible they seem and the less I can believe that he actually made six .It warns in this book how unstable you make the rest of your soul by ripping it and thats just by making one Horcrux !Harry remembered what Dumbledore had said about Voldemort moving beyond usual evil .Isnt there any way of putting yourself back together ?Ron asked .Yes said Hermione with a hollow smile but it would be excruciatingly painful .Why ?How do you do it ?asked Harry .Remorse said Hermione .Youve got to really feel what youve done .Theres a footnote .Apparently the pain of it can destroy you .I cant see Voldemort attempting it somehow can you ?No said Ron before Harry could answer .So does it say how to destroy Horcruxes in that book ?Yes said Hermione now turning the fragile pages as if examining rotting entrails because it warns Dark wizards how strong they have to make the enchantments on them .From all that Ive read what Harry did to Riddles diary was one of the few really foolproof ways of destroying a Horcrux .What stabbing it with a basilisk fang ?asked Harry .Oh well lucky weve got such a large supply of basilisk fangs then said Ron .I was wondering what we were going to do with them .It doesnt have to be a basilisk fang said Hermione patiently .It has to be something so destructive that the Horcrux cant repair itself .Basilisk venom only has one antidote and its incredibly rare □ phoenix tears said Harry nodding .Exactly said Hermione .Our problem is that there are very few substances as destructive as basilisk venom and theyre all dangerous to carry around with you .Thats a problem were going to have to solve though because ripping smashing or crushing a Horcrux wont do the trick .Youve got to put it beyond magical repair .But even if we wreck the thing it lives in said Ron why cant the bit of soul in it just go and live in something else ?Because a Horcrux is the complete opposite of a human being .Seeing that Harry and Ron looked thoroughly confused Hermione hurried on Look if I picked up a sword right now Ron and ran you through with it I wouldnt damage your soul at all .Which would be a real comfort to me Im sure said Ron .Harry laughed .It should be actually !But my point is that whatever happens to your body your soul will survive untouched said Hermione .But its the other way round with a Horcrux .The fragment of soul inside it depends on its container its enchanted body for survival .It cant exist without it .That diary sort of died when I stabbed it said Harry remembering ink pouring like blood from the punctured pages and the screams of the piece of Voldemorts soul as it vanished .And once the diary was properly destroyed the bit of soul trapped in it could no longer exist .Ginny tried to get rid of the diary before you did flushing it away but obviously it came back good as new .Hang on said Ron frowning .The bit of soul in that diary was possessing Ginny wasnt it ?How does that work then ?While the magical container is still intact the bit of soul inside it can flit in and out of someone if they get too close to the object .I dont mean holding it for too long its nothing to do with touching it she added before Ron could speak .I mean close emotionally .Ginny poured her heart out into that diary she made herself incredibly vulnerable .Youre in trouble if you get too fond of or dependent on the Horcrux .I wonder how Dumbledore destroyed the ring ?said Harry .Why didnt I ask him ?I never really .His voice tailed away He was thinking of all the things he should have asked Dumbledore and of how since the headmaster had died it seemed to Harry that he had wasted so many opportunities when Dumbledore had been alive to find out more .to find out everything .The silence was shattered as the bedroom door flew open with a wallshaking crash .Hermione shrieked and dropped Secrets of the Darkest Art Crookshanks streaked under the bed hissing indignantly Ron jumped off the bed skidded on a discarded Chocolate Frog wrapper and smacked his head on the opposite wall and Harry instinctively dived for his wand before realizing that he was looking up at Mrs Weasley whose hair was disheveled and whose face was contorted with rage .Im so sorry to break up this cozy little gathering she said her voice trembling .Im sure you all need your rest .but there are wedding presents stacked in my room that need sorting out and I was under the impression that you had agreed to help .Oh yes said Hermione looking terrified as she leapt to her feet sending books flying in every direction we will .were sorry .With an anguished look at Harry and Ron Hermione hurried out of the room after Mrs Weasley .Its like being a houseelf complained Ron in an undertone still massaging his head as he and Harry followed .Except without the job satisfaction .The sooner this weddings over the happier Ill be .Yeah said Harry then well have nothing to do except find Horcruxes .Itll be like a holiday wont it ?Ron started to laugh but at the sight of the enormous pile of wedding presents waiting for them in Mrs Weasleys room stopped quite abruptly .The Delacours arrived the following morning at eleven oclock .Harry Ron Hermione and Ginny were feeling quite resentful toward Fleurs family by this time and it was with ill grace that Ron stumped back upstairs to put on matching socks and Harry attempted to flatten his hair .Once they had all been deemed smart enough they trooped out into the sunny backyard to await the visitors .Harry had never seen the place looking so tidy .The rusty cauldrons and old Wellington boots that usually littered the steps by the back door were gone replaced by two new Flutterby bushes standing either side of the door in large pots though there was no breeze the leaves waved lazily giving an attractive rippling effect .The chickens had been shut away the yard had been swept and the nearby garden had been pruned plucked and generally spruced up although Harry who liked it in its overgrown state thought that it looked rather forlorn without its usual contingent of capering gnomes .He had lost track of how many security enchantments had been placed upon the Burrow by both the Order and the Ministry all he knew was that it was no longer possible for anybody to travel by magic directly into the place .Mr Weasley had therefore gone to meet the Delacours on top of a nearby hill where they were to arrive by Portkey .The first sound of their approach was an unusually highpitched laugh which turned out to be coming from Mr Weasley who appeared at the gate moments later laden with luggage and leading a beautiful blonde woman in long leafgreen robes who could only be Fleurs mother .Maman !cried Fleur rushing forward to embrace her .Papa !Monsieur Delacour was nowhere near as attractive as his wife he was a head shorter and extremely plump with a little pointed black beard .However he looked goodnatured .Bouncing toward Mrs Weasley on highheeled boots he kissed her twice on each cheek leaving her flustered .You ave been to much trouble he said in a deep voice .Fleur tells us you ave been working very ard .Oh its been nothing nothing !trilled Mrs Weasley .No trouble at all !Ron relieved his feelings by aiming a kick at a gnome who was peering out from behind one of the new Flutterby bushes .Dear lady !said Monsieur Delacour still holding Mrs Weasleys hand between his own two plump ones and beaming .We are most honored at the approaching union of our two families !Let me present my wife Apolline .Madame Delacour glided forward and stooped to kiss Mrs Weasley too .Enchantee she said .Your usband as been telling us such amusing stories !Mr Weasley gave a maniacal laugh Mrs Weasley threw him a look upon which he became immediately silent and assumed an expression appropriate to the sickbed of a close friend .And of course you ave met my leetle daughter Gabrielle !said Monsieur Delacour .Gabrielle was Fleur in miniature eleven years old with waistlength hair of pure silvery blonde she gave Mrs Weasley a dazzling smile and hugged her then threw Harry a glowing look batting her eyelashes .Ginny cleared her throat loudly .Well come in do !said Mrs Weasley brightly and she ushered the Delacours into the house with many No please !s and After you !s and Not at all !s .The Delacours it soon transpired were helpful pleasant guests .They were pleased with everything and keen to assist with the preparations for the wedding .Monsieur Delacour pronounced everything from the seating plan to the bridesmaids shoes Charmanti Madame Delacour was most accomplished at household spells and had the oven properly cleaned in a trice Gabrielle followed her elder sister around trying to assist in any way she could and jabbering away in rapid French .On the downside the Burrow was not built to accommodate so many people .Mr and Mrs Weasley were now sleeping in the sitting room having shouted down Monsieur and Madame Delacours protests and insisted they take their bedroom .Gabrielle was sleeping with Fleur in Percys old room and Bill would be sharing with Charlie his best man once Charlie arrived from Romania .Opportunities to make plans together became virtually nonexistent and it was in desperation that Harry Ron and Hermione took to volunteering to feed the chickens just to escape the overcrowded house .But she still wont leave us alone !snarled Ron as their second attempt at a meeting in the yard was foiled by the appearance of Mrs Weasley carrying a large basket of laundry in her arms .Oh good youve fed the chickens she called as she approached them .Wed better shut them away again before the men arrive tomorrow .to put up the tent for the wedding she explained pausing to lean against the henhouse .She looked exhausted .Millamants Magic Marquees .theyre very good Bills escorting them .Youd better stay inside while theyre here Harry .I must say it does complicate organizing a wedding having all these security spells around the place .Im sorry said Harry humbly .Oh dont be silly dear !said Mrs Weasley at once .I didnt mean well your safetys much more important !Actually Ive been wanting to ask you how you want to celebrate your birthday Harry .Seventeen after all its an important day .I dont want a fuss said Harry quickly envisaging the additional strain this would put on them all .Really Mrs Weasley just a normal dinner would be fine .Its the day before the wedding .Oh well if youre sure dear .Ill invite Remus and Tonks shall I ?And how about Hagrid ?Thatd be great said Harry .But please dont go to loads of trouble .Not at all not at all .Its no trouble .She looked at him a long searching look then smiled a little sadly straightened up and walked away .Harry watched as she waved her wand near the washing line and the damp clothes rose into the air to hang themselves up and suddenly he felt a great wave of remorse for the inconvenience and the pain he was giving her .7 THE WILL OF ALBUS DUMBLEDORE He was walking along a mountain road in the cool blue light of dawn .Far below swathed in mist was the shadow of a small town .Was the man he sought down there the man he needed so badly he could think of little else the man who held the answer the answer to his problem . ?Oi wake up .Harry opened his eyes .He was lying again on the camp bed in Rons dingy attic room .The sun had not yet risen and the room was still shadowy .Pigwidgeon was asleep with his head under his tiny wing .The scar on Harrys forehead was prickling .You were muttering in your sleep .Was I ?Yeah . ‘Gregorovitch .You kept saying ‘Gregorovitch .Harry was not wearing his glasses Rons face appeared slightly blurred .Whos Gregorovitch ?I dunno do I ?You were the one saying it .Harry rubbed his forehead thinking .He had a vague idea he had heard the name before but he could not think where .I think Voldemorts looking for him .Poor bloke said Ron fervently .Harry sat up still rubbing his scar now wide awake .He tried to remember exactly what he had seen in the dream but all that came back was a mountainous horizon and the outline of the little village cradled in a deep valley .I think hes abroad .Who Gregorovitch ?Voldemort .I think hes somewhere abroad looking for Gregorovitch .It didnt look like anywhere in Britain .You reckon you were seeing into his mind again ?Ron sounded worried .Do me a favor and dont tell Hermione said Harry .Although how she expects me to stop seeing stuff in my sleep .He gazed up at little Pigwidgeons cage thinking .Why was the name Gregorovitch familiar ?I think he said slowly hes got something to do with Quidditch .Theres some connection but I cant I cant think what it is .Quidditch ?said Ron .Sure youre not thinking of Gorgovitch ?Who ?Dragomir Gorgovitch Chaser transferred to the Chudley Cannons for a record fee two years ago .Record holder for most Quaffle drops in a season .No said Harry .Im definitely not thinking of Gorgovitch .I try not to either said Ron .Well happy birthday anyway .Wow thats right I forgot !Im seventeen !Harry seized the wand lying beside his camp bed pointed it at the cluttered desk where he had left his glasses and said Accio Glasses !Although they were only around a foot away there was something immensely satisfying about seeing them zoom toward him at least until they poked him in the eye .Slick snorted Ron .Reveling in the removal of his Trace Harry sent Rons possessions flying around the room causing Pigwidgeon to wake up and flutter excitedly around his cage .Harry also tried tying the laces of his trainers by magic the resultant knot took several minutes to untie by hand and purely for the pleasure of it turned the orange robes on Rons Chudley Cannons posters bright blue .Id do your fly by hand though Ron advised Harry sniggering when Harry immediately checked it .Heres your present .Unwrap it up here its not for my mothers eyes .A book ?said Harry as he took the rectangular parcel .Bit of a departure from tradition isnt it ?This isnt your average book said Ron .Its pure gold Twelve FailSafe Ways to Charm Witches .Explains everything you need to know about girls .If only Id had this last year Id have known exactly how to get rid of Lavender and I wouldve known how to get going with .Well Fred and George gave me a copy and Ive learned a lot .Youd be surprised its not all about wandwork either .When they arrived in the kitchen they found a pile of presents waiting on the table .Bill and Monsieur Delacour were finishing their breakfasts while Mrs Weasley stood chatting to them over the frying pan .Arthur told me to wish you a happy seventeenth Harry said Mrs Weasley beaming at him .He had to leave early for work but hell be back for dinner .Thats our present on top .Harry sat down took the square parcel she had indicated and unwrapped it .Inside was a watch very like the one Mr and Mrs Weasley had given Ron for his seventeenth it was gold with stars circling around the face instead of hands .Its traditional to give a wizard a watch when he comes of age said Mrs Weasley watching him anxiously from beside the cooker .Im afraid that one isnt new like Rons it was actually my brother Fabians and he wasnt terribly careful with his possessions its a bit dented on the back but The rest of her speech was lost Harry had got up and hugged her .He tried to put a lot of unsaid things into the hug and perhaps she understood them because she patted his cheek clumsily when he released her then waved her wand in a slightly random way causing half a pack of bacon to flop out of the frying pan onto the floor .Happy birthday Harry !said Hermione hurrying into the kitchen and adding her own present to the top of the pile .Its not much but I hope you like it .What did you get him ?she added to Ron who seemed not to hear her .Come on then open Hermiones !said Ron .She had bought him a new Sneakoscope .The other packages contained an enchanted razor from Bill and Fleur Ah yes zis will give you ze smoothest shave you will ever ave Monsieur Delacour assured him but you must tell it clearly what you want .ozzerwise you might find you ave a leetle less hair zan you would like .chocolates from the Delacours and an enormous box of the latest Weasleys Wizard Wheezes merchandise from Fred and George .Harry Ron and Hermione did not linger at the table as the arrival of Madame Delacour Fleur and Gabrielle made the kitchen uncomfortably crowded .Ill pack these for you Hermione said brightly taking Harrys presents out of his arms as the three of them headed back upstairs .Im nearly done Im just waiting for the rest of your underpants to come out of the wash Ron Rons splutter was interrupted by the opening of a door on the firstfloor landing .Harry will you come in here a moment ?It was Ginny .Ron came to an abrupt halt but Hermione took him by the elbow and tugged him on up the stairs .Feeling nervous Harry followed Ginny into her room .He had never been inside it before .It was small but bright .There was a large poster of the Wizarding band the Weird Sisters on one wall and a picture of Gwenog Jones Captain of the allwitch Quidditch team the Holyhead Harpies on the other .A desk stood facing the open window which looked out over the orchard where he and Ginny had once played twoaside Quidditch with Ron and Hermione and which now housed a large pearly white marquee .The golden flag on top was level with Ginnys window .Ginny looked up into Harrys face took a deep breath and said Happy seventeenth .Yeah .thanks .She was looking at him steadily he however found it difficult to look back at her it was like gazing into a brilliant light .Nice view he said feebly pointing toward the window .She ignored this .He could not blame her .I couldnt think what to get you she said .You didnt have to get me anything .She disregarded this too .I didnt know what would be useful .Nothing too big because you wouldnt be able to take it with you .He chanced a glance at her .She was not tearful that was one of the many wonderful things about Ginny she was rarely weepy .He had sometimes thought that having six brothers must have toughened her up .She took a step closer to him .So then I thought Id like you to have something to remember me by you know if you meet some veela when youre off doing whatever youre doing .I think dating opportunities are going to be pretty thin on the ground to be honest .Theres the silver lining Ive been looking for she whispered and then she was kissing him as she had never kissed him before and Harry was kissing her back and it was blissful oblivion better than firewhisky she was the only real thing in the world Ginny the feel of her one hand at her back and one in her long sweetsmelling hair The door banged open behind them and they jumped apart .Oh said Ron pointedly .Sorry .Ron !Hermione was just behind him slightly out of breath .There was a strained silence then Ginny said in a flat little voice Well happy birthday anyway Harry .Rons ears were scarlet Hermione looked nervous .Harry wanted to slam the door in their faces but it felt as though a cold draft had entered the room when the door opened and his shining moment had popped like a soap bubble .All the reasons for ending his relationship with Ginny for staying well away from her seemed to have slunk inside the room with Ron and all happy forgetfulness was gone .He looked at Ginny wanting to say something though he hardly knew what but she had turned her back on him .He thought that she might have succumbed for once to tears .He could not do anything to comfort her in front of Ron .Ill see you later he said and followed the other two out of the bedroom .Ron marched downstairs through the stillcrowded kitchen and into the yard and Harry kept pace with him all the way Hermione trotting along behind them looking scared .Once he reached the seclusion of the freshly mown lawn Ron rounded on Harry .You ditched her .What are you doing now messing her around ?Im not messing her around said Harry as Hermione caught up with them .Ron But Ron held up a hand to silence her .She was really cut up when you ended it So was I .You know why I stopped it and it wasnt because I wanted to .Yeah but you go snogging her now and shes just going to get her hopes up again Shes not an idiot she knows it cant happen shes not expecting us to to end up married or As he said it a vivid picture formed in Harrys mind of Ginny in a white dress marrying a tall faceless and unpleasant stranger .In one spiraling moment it seemed to hit him Her future was free and unencumbered whereas his .he could see nothing but Voldemort ahead .If you keep groping her every chance you get It wont happen again said Harry harshly .The day was cloudless but he felt as though the sun had gone in .Okay ?Ron looked half resentful half sheepish he rocked backward and forward on his feet for a moment then said Right then well thats .yeah .Ginny did not seek another onetoone meeting with Harry for the rest of the day nor by any look or gesture did she show that they had shared more than polite conversation in her room .Nevertheless Charlies arrival came as a relief to Harry .It provided a distraction watching Mrs Weasley force Charlie into a chair raise her wand threateningly and announce that he was about to get a proper haircut .As Harrys birthday dinner would have stretched the Burrows kitchen to breaking point even before the arrival of Charlie Lupin Tonks and Hagrid several tables were placed end to end in the garden .Fred and George bewitched a number of purple lanterns all emblazoned with a large number 17 to hang in midair over the guests .Thanks to Mrs Weasleys ministrations Georges wound was neat and clean but Harry was not yet used to the dark hole in the side of his head despite the twins many jokes about it .Hermione made purple and gold streamers erupt from the end of her wand and drape themselves artistically over the trees and bushes .Nice said Ron as with one final flourish of her wand Hermione turned the leaves on the crabapple tree to gold .Youve really got an eye for that sort of thing .Thank you Ron !said Hermione looking both pleased and a little confused .Harry turned away smiling to himself .He had a funny notion that he would find a chapter on compliments when he found time to peruse his copy of Twelve FailSafe Ways to Charm Witches he caught Ginnys eye and grinned at her before remembering his promise to Ron and hurriedly striking up a conversation with Monsieur Delacour .Out of the way out of the way !sang Mrs Weasley coming through the gate with what appeared to be a giant beachballsized Snitch floating in front of her .Seconds later Harry realized that it was his birthday cake which Mrs Weasley was suspending with her wand rather than risk carrying it over the uneven ground .When the cake had finally landed in the middle of the table Harry said That looks amazing Mrs Weasley .Oh its nothing dear she said fondly .Over her shoulder Ron gave Harry the thumbsup and mouthed Good one .By seven oclock all the guests had arrived led into the house by Fred and George who had waited for them at the end of the lane .Hagrid had honored the occasion by wearing his best and horrible hairy brown suit .Although Lupin smiled as he shook Harrys hand Harry thought he looked rather unhappy .It was all very odd Tonks beside him looked simply radiant .Happy birthday Harry she said hugging him tightly .Seventeen eh !said Hagrid as he accepted a bucket sized glass of wine from Fred .Six years ter the day since we met Harry dyeh remember it ?Vaguely said Harry grinning up at him .Didnt you smash down the front door give Dudley a pigs tail and tell me I was a wizard ?I forge the details Hagrid chortled .All righ Ron Hermione ?Were fine said Hermione .How are you ?Ar not bad .Bin busy we got some newborn unicorns Ill show yeh when yeh get back Harry avoided Rons and Hermiones gazes as Hagrid rummaged in his pocket .Here Harry couldn think what ter get yeh but then I remembered this .He pulled out a small slightly furry drawstring pouch with a long string evidently intended to be worn around the neck .Mokeskin .Hide anythin in there an no one but the owner can get it out .Theyre rare them .Hagrid thanks !Snothin said Hagrid with a wave of a dustbinlid sized hand .An theres Charlie !Always liked him hey !Charlie !Charlie approached running his hand slightly ruefully over his new brutally short haircut .He was shorter than Ron thickset with a number of burns and scratches up his muscley arms .Hi Hagrid hows it going ?Bin meanin ter write fer ages .Hows Norbert doin ?Norbert ?Charlie laughed .The Norwegian Ridgeback ?We call her Norberta now .Wha Norberts a girl ?Oh yeah said Charlie .How can you tell ?asked Hermione .Theyre a lot more vicious said Charlie .He looked over his shoulder and dropped his voice .Wish Dad would hurry up and get here .Mums getting edgy .They all looked over at Mrs Weasley .She was trying to talk to Madame Delacour while glancing repeatedly at the gate .I think wed better start without Arthur she called to the garden at large after a moment or two .He must have been held up at oh !They all saw it at the same time a streak of light that came flying across the yard and onto the table where it resolved itself into a bright silver weasel which stood on its hind legs and spoke with Mr Weasleys voice .Minister of Magic coming with me .The Patronus dissolved into thin air leaving Fleurs family peering in astonishment at the place where it had vanished .We shouldnt be here said Lupin at once .Harry Im sorry Ill explain another time He seized Tonkss wrist and pulled her away they reached the fence climbed over it and vanished from sight .Mrs Weasley looked bewildered .The Minister but why ?I dont understand But there was no time to discuss the matter a second later Mr Weasley had appeared out of thin air at the gate accompanied by Rufus Scrimgeour instantly recognizable by his mane of grizzled hair .The two newcomers marched across the yard toward the garden and the lantern lit table where everybody sat in silence watching them draw closer .As Scrimgeour came within range of the lantern light Harry saw that he looked much older than the last time they had met scraggy and grim .Sorry to intrude said Scrimgeour as he limped to a halt before the table .Especially as I can see that I am gatecrashing a party .His eyes lingered for a moment on the giant Snitch cake .Many happy returns .Thanks said Harry .I require a private word with you Scrimgeour went on .Also with Mr Ronald Weasley and Miss Hermione Granger .Us ?said Ron sounding surprised .Why us ?I shall tell you that when we are somewhere more private said Scrimgeour .Is there such a place ?he demanded of Mr Weasley .Yes of course said Mr Weasley who looked nervous .The er sitting room why dont you use that ?You can lead the way Scrimgeour said to Ron .There will be no need for you to accompany us Arthur .Harry saw Mr Weasley exchange a worried look with Mrs Weasley as he Ron and Hermione stood up .As they led the way back to the house in silence Harry knew that the other two were thinking the same as he was Scrimgeour must somehow have learned that the three of them were planning to drop out of Hogwarts .Scrimgeour did not speak as they all passed through the messy kitchen and into the Burrows sitting room .Although the garden had been full of soft golden evening light it was already dark in here Harry flicked his wand at the oil lamps as he entered and they illuminated the shabby but cozy room .Scrimgeour sat himself in the sagging armchair that Mr Weasley normally occupied leaving Harry Ron and Hermione to squeeze side by side onto the sofa .Once they had done so Scrimgeour spoke .I have some questions for the three of you and I think it will be best if we do it individually .If you two he pointed at Harry and Hermione can wait upstairs I will start with Ronald .Were not going anywhere said Harry while Hermione nodded vigorously .You can speak to us together or not at all .Scrimgeour gave Harry a cold appraising look .Harry had the impression that the Minister was wondering whether it was worthwhile opening hostilities this early .Very well then together he said shrugging .He cleared his throat .I am here as Im sure you know because of Albus Dumbledores will .Harry Ron and Hermione looked at one another .A surprise apparently !You were not aware then that Dumbledore had left you anything ?Aall of us ?said Ron .Me and Hermione too ?Yes all of But Harry interrupted .Dumbledore died over a month ago .Why has it taken this long to give us what he left us ?Isnt it obvious ?said Hermione before Scrimgeour could answer .They wanted to examine whatever hes left us .You had no right to do that !she said and her voice trembled slightly .I had every right said Scrimgeour dismissively .The Decree for Justifiable Confiscation gives the Ministry the power to confiscate the contents of a will That law was created to stop wizards passing on Dark artifacts said Hermione and the Ministry is supposed to have powerful evidence that the deceaseds possessions are illegal before seizing them !Are you telling me that you thought Dumbledore was trying to pass us something cursed ?Are you planning to follow a career in Magical Law Miss Granger ?asked Scrimgeour .No Im not retorted Hermione .Im hoping to do some good in the world !Ron laughed .Scrimgeour s eyes flickered toward him and away again as Harry spoke .So why have you decided to let us have our things now ?Cant think of a pretext to keep them ?No itll be because the thirtyone days are up said Hermione at once .They cant keep the objects longer than that unless they can prove theyre dangerous .Right ?Would you say you were close to Dumbledore Ronald ?asked Scrimgeour ignoring Hermione .Ron looked startled .Me ?Not not really .It was always Harry who .Ron looked around at Harry and Hermione to see Hermione giving him a stoptalkingnow sort of look but the damage was done Scrimgeour looked as though he had heard exactly what he had expected and wanted to hear .He swooped like a bird of prey upon Rons answer .If you were not very close to Dumbledore how do you account for the fact that he remembered you in his will ?He made exceptionally few personal bequests .The vast majority of his possessions his private library his magical instruments and other personal effects were left to Hogwarts .Why do you think you were singled out ?I .dunno said Ron .I .when I say we werent close .I mean I think he liked me .Youre being modest Ron said Hermione .Dumbledore was very fond of you .This was stretching the truth to breaking point as far as Harry knew Ron and Dumbledore had never been alone together and direct contact between them had been negligible .However Scrimgeour did not seem to be listening .He put his hand inside his cloak and drew out a drawstring pouch much larger than the one Hagrid had given Harry .From it he removed a scroll of parchment which he unrolled and read aloud . ‘The Last Will and Testament of Albus Percival Wulfric Brian Dumbledore .Yes here we are . ‘To Ronald Bilius Weasley I leave my Deluminator in the hope that he will remember me when he uses it .Scrimgeour took from the bag an object that Harry had seen before It looked something like a silver cigarette lighter but it had he knew the power to suck all light from a place and restore it with a simple click .Scrimgeour leaned forward and passed the Deluminator to Ron who took it and turned it over in his fingers looking stunned .That is a valuable object said Scrimgeour watching Ron .It may even be unique .Certainly it is of Dumbledores own design .Why would he have left you an item so rare ?Ron shook his head looking bewildered .Dumbledore must have taught thousands of students Scrimgeour persevered .Yet the only ones he remembered in his will are you three .Why is that ?To what use did he think you would put his Deluminator Mr Weasley ?Put out lights I spose mumbled Ron .What else could I do with it ?Evidently Scrimgeour had no suggestions .After squinting at Ron for a moment or two he turned back to Dumbledores will .To Miss Hermione Jean Granger I leave my copy of The Tales of Beedle the Bard in the hope that she will find it entertaining and instructive .Scrimgeour now pulled out of the bag a small book that looked as ancient as the copy of Secrets of the Darkest Art upstairs .Its binding was stained and peeling in places .Hermione took it from Scrimgeour without a word .She held the book in her lap and gazed at it .Harry saw that the title was in runes he had never learned to read them .As he looked a tear splashed onto the embossed symbols .Why do you think Dumbledore left you that book Miss Granger ?asked Scrimgeour .He .he knew I liked books said Hermione in a thick voice mopping her eyes with her sleeve .But why that particular book ?I dont know .He must have thought Id enjoy it .Did you ever discuss codes or any means of passing secret messages with Dumbledore ?No I didnt said Hermione still wiping her eyes on her sleeve .And if the Ministry hasnt found any hidden codes in this book in thirtyone days I doubt that I will .She suppressed a sob .They were wedged together so tightly that Ron had difficulty extracting his arm to put it around Hermione s shoulders .Scrimgeour turned back to the will . ‘To Harry James Potter he read and Harrys insides contracted with a sudden excitement ‘I leave the Snitch he caught in his first Quidditch match at Hogwarts as a reminder of the rewards of perseverance and skill .As Scrimgeour pulled out the tiny walnutsized golden ball its silver wings fluttered rather feebly and Harry could not help feeling a definite sense of anticlimax .Why did Dumbledore leave you this Snitch ?asked Scrimgeour .No idea said Harry .For the reasons you just read out I suppose .to remind me what you can get if you .persevere and whatever it was .You think this a mere symbolic keepsake then ?I suppose so said Harry .What else could it be ?Im asking the questions said Scrimgeour shifting his chair a little closer to the sofa .Dusk was really falling outside now the marquee beyond the windows towered ghostly white over the hedge .I notice that your birthday cake is in the shape of a Snitch Scrimgeour said to Harry .Why is that ?Hermione laughed derisively .Oh it cant be a reference to the fact Harrys a great Seeker thats way too obvious she said .There must be a secret message from Dumbledore hidden in the icing !I dont think theres anything hidden in the icing said Scrimgeour but a Snitch would be a very good hiding place for a small object .You know why Im sure ?Harry shrugged .Hermione however answered Harry thought that answering questions correctly was such a deeply ingrained habit she could not suppress the urge .Because Snitches have flesh memories she said .What ?said Harry and Ron together both considered Hermione s Quidditch knowledge negligible .Correct said Scrimgeour .A Snitch is not touched by bare skin before it is released not even by the maker who wears gloves .It carries an enchantment by which it can identify the first human to lay hands upon it in case of a disputed capture .This Snitch he held up the tiny golden ball will remember your touch Potter .It occurs to me that Dumbledore who had prodigious magical skill whatever his other faults might have enchanted this Snitch so that it will open only for you .Harrys heart was beating rather fast .He was sure that Scrimgeour was right .How could he avoid taking the Snitch with his bare hand in front of the Minister ?You dont say anything said Scrimgeour .Perhaps you already know what the Snitch contains ?No said Harry still wondering how he could appear to touch the Snitch without really doing so .If only he knew Legilimency really knew it and could read Hermiones mind he could practically hear her brain whirring beside him .Take it said Scrimgeour quietly .Harry met the Ministers yellow eyes and knew he had no option but to obey .He held out his hand and Scrimgeour leaned forward again and placed the Snitch slowly and deliberately into Harrys palm .Nothing happened .As Harrys fingers closed around the Snitch its tired wings fluttered and were still .Scrimgeour Ron and Hermione continued to gaze avidly at the now partially concealed ball as if still hoping it might transform in some way .That was dramatic said Harry coolly .Both Ron and Hermione laughed .Thats all then is it ?asked Hermione making to prise herself off the sofa .Not quite said Scrimgeour who looked bad tempered now .Dumbledore left you a second bequest Potter .What is it ?asked Harry excitement rekindling .Scrimgeour did not bother to read from the will this time .The sword of Godric Gryffindor he said .Hermione and Ron both stiffened .Harry looked around for a sign of the rubyencrusted hilt but Scrimgeour did not pull the sword from the leather pouch which in any case looked much too small to contain it .So where is it ?Harry asked suspiciously .Unfortunately said Scrimgeour that sword was not Dumbledore s to give away .The sword of Godric Gryffindor is an important historical artifact and as such belongs It belongs to Harry !said Hermione hotly .It chose him he was the one who found it it came to him out of the Sorting Hat According to reliable historical sources the sword may present itself to any worthy Gryffindor said Scrimgeour .That does not make it the exclusive property of Mr Potter whatever Dumbledore may have decided .Scrimgeour scratched his badly shaven cheek scrutinizing Harry .Why do you think ?Dumbledore wanted to give me the sword ?said Harry struggling to keep his temper .Maybe he thought it would look nice on my wall .This is not a joke Potter !growled Scrimgeour .Was it because Dumbledore believed that only the sword of Godric Gryffindor could defeat the Heir of Slytherin ?Did he wish to give you that sword Potter because he believed as do many that you are the one destined to destroy HeWhoMustNotBeNamed ?Interesting theory said Harry .Has anyone ever tried sticking a sword in Voldemort ?Maybe the Ministry should put some people onto that instead of wasting their time stripping down Deluminators or covering up breakouts from Azkaban .So is this what youve been doing Minister shut up in your office trying to break open a Snitch ?People are dying I was nearly one of them Voldemort chased me across three counties he killed MadEye Moody but theres been no word about any of that from the Ministry has there ?And you still expect us to cooperate with you !You go too far !shouted Scrimgeour standing up Harry jumped to his feet too .Scrimgeour limped toward Harry and jabbed him hard in the chest with the point of his wand It singed a hole in Harrys T shirt like a lit cigarette .Oi !said Ron jumping up and raising his own wand but Harry said No !Dyou want to give him an excuse to arrest us ?Remembered youre not at school have you ?said Scrimgeour breathing hard into Harrys face .Remembered that I am not Dumbledore who forgave your insolence and insubordination ?You may wear that scar like a crown Potter but it is not up to a seventeenyearold boy to tell me how to do my job !Its time you learned some respect !Its time you earned it said Harry .The floor trembled there was a sound of running footsteps then the door to the sitting room burst open and Mr and Mrs Weasley ran in .We we thought we heard began Mr Weasley looking thoroughly alarmed at the sight of Harry and the Minister virtually nose to nose .raised voices panted Mrs Weasley .Scrimgeour took a couple of steps back from Harry glancing at the hole he had made in Harrys Tshirt .He seemed to regret his loss of temper .It it was nothing he growled .I .regret your attitude he said looking Harry full in the face once more .You seem to think that the Ministry does not desire what you what Dumbledore desired .We ought to be working together .I dont like your methods Minister said Harry .Remember ?For the second time he raised his right fist and displayed to Scrimgeour the scars that still showed white on the back of it spelling I must not tell lies .Scrimgeour s expression hardened .He turned away without another word and limped from the room .Mrs Weasley hurried after him Harry heard her stop at the back door .After a minute or so she called Hes gone !What did he want ?Mr Weasley asked looking around at Harry Ron and Hermione as Mrs Weasley came hurrying back to them .To give us what Dumbledore left us said Harry .Theyve only just released the contents of his will .Outside in the garden over the dinner tables the three objects Scrimgeour had given them were passed from hand to hand .Everyone exclaimed over the Deluminator and The Tales of Beedle the Bard and lamented the fact that Scrimgeour had refused to pass on the sword but none of them could offer any suggestion as to why Dumbledore would have left Harry an old Snitch .As Mr Weasley examined the Deluminator for the third or fourth time Mrs Weasley said tentatively Harry dear everyones awfully hungry we didnt like to start without you .Shall I serve dinner now ?They all ate rather hurriedly and then after a hasty chorus of Happy Birthday and much gulping of cake the party broke up .Hagrid who was invited to the wedding the following day but was far too bulky to sleep in the overstretched Burrow left to set up a tent for himself in a neighboring field .Meet us upstairs Harry whispered to Hermione while they helped Mrs Weasley restore the garden to its normal state .After everyones gone to bed .Up in the attic room Ron examined his Deluminator and Harry filled Hagrids mokeskin purse not with gold but with those items he most prized apparently worthless though some of them were the Marauders Map the shard of Siriuss enchanted mirror and R .A .B .s locket .He pulled the strings tight and slipped the purse around his neck then sat holding the old Snitch and watching its wings flutter feebly .At last Hermione tapped on the door and tiptoed inside .Muffliato she whispered waving her wand in the direction of the stairs .Thought you didnt approve of that spell ?said Ron .Times change said Hermione .Now show us that Deluminator .Ron obliged at once .Holding it up in front of him he clicked it .The solitary lamp they had lit went out at once .The thing is whispered Hermione through the dark we could have achieved that with Peruvian Instant Darkness Powder .There was a small click and the ball of light from the lamp flew back to the ceiling and illuminated them all once more .Still its cool said Ron a little defensively .And from what they said Dumbledore invented it himself !I know but surely he wouldnt have singled you out in his will just to help us turn out the lights !Dyou think he knew the Ministry would confiscate his will and examine everything hed left us ?asked Harry .Definitely said Hermione .He couldnt tell us in the will why he was leaving us these things but that still doesnt explain . .why he couldnt have given us a hint when he was alive ?asked Ron .Well exactly said Hermione now flicking through The Tales of Beedle the Bard .If these things are important enough to pass on right under the nose of the Ministry youd think hed have let us know why .unless he thought it was obvious ?Thought wrong then didnt he ?said Ron .I always said he was mental .Brilliant and everything but cracked .Leaving Harry an old Snitch what the hell was that about ?Ive no idea said Hermione .When Scrimgeour made you take it Harry I was so sure that something was going to happen !Yeah well said Harry his pulse quickening as he raised the Snitch in his fingers .I wasnt going to try too hard in front of Scrimgeour was I ?What do you mean ?asked Hermione .The Snitch I caught in my first ever Quidditch match ?said Harry .Dont you remember ?Hermione looked simply bemused .Ron however gasped pointing frantically from Harry to the Snitch and back again until he found his voice .That was the one you nearly swallowed !Exactly said Harry and with his heart beating fast he pressed his mouth to the Snitch .It did not open .Frustration and bitter disappointment welled up inside him He lowered the golden sphere but then Hermione cried out .Writing !Theres writing on it quick look !He nearly dropped the Snitch in surprise and excitement .Hermione was quite right .Engraved upon the smooth golden surface where seconds before there had been nothing were five words written in the thin slanting handwriting that Harry recognized as Dumbledores I open at the close .He had barely read them when the words vanished again . ‘I open at the close .Whats that supposed to mean ?Hermione and Ron shook their heads looking blank .I open at the close .at the close .I open at the close .But no matter how often they repeated the words with many different inflections they were unable to wring any more meaning from them .And the sword said Ron finally when they had at last abandoned their attempts to divine meaning in the Snitchs inscription .Why did he want Harry to have the sword ?And why couldnt he just have told me ?Harry said quietly .It was there it was right there on the wall of his office during all our talks last year !If he wanted me to have it why didnt he just give it to me then ?He felt as though he were sitting in an examination with a question he ought to have been able to answer in front of him his brain slow and unresponsive .Was there something he had missed in the long talks with Dumbledore last year ?Ought he to know what it all meant ?Had Dumbledore expected him to understand ?And as for this book said Hermione The Tales of Beedle the Bard .Ive never even heard of them !Youve never heard of The Tales of Beedle the Bard ?said Ron incredulously .Youre kidding right ?No Im not !said Hermione in surprise .Do you know them then ?Well of course I do !Harry looked up diverted .The circumstance of Ron having read a book that Hermione had not was unprecedented .Ron however looked bemused by their surprise .Oh come on !All the old kids stories are supposed to be Beedle s arent they ?The Fountain of Fair Fortune .The Wizard and the Hopping Pot . ‘Babbitty Rabbitty and her Cackling Stump .Excuse me ?said Hermione giggling .What was that last one ?Come off it !said Ron looking in disbelief from Harry to Hermione .You mustve heard of Babbitty Rabbitty Ron you know full well Harry and I were brought up by Muggles !said Hermione .We didnt hear stories like that when we were little we heard ‘Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs and ‘Cinderella Whats that an illness ?asked Ron .So these are childrens stories ?asked Hermione bending again over the runes .Yeah said Ron uncertainly I mean thats just what you hear you know that all these old stories came from Beedle .I dunno what theyre like in the original versions .But I wonder why Dumbledore thought I should read them ?Something creaked downstairs .Probably just Charlie now Mums asleep sneaking off to regrow his hair said Ron nervously .All the same we should get to bed whispered Hermione .It wouldnt do to oversleep tomorrow .No agreed Ron .A brutal triple murder by the bridegrooms mother might put a bit of a damper on the wedding .Ill get the lights .And he clicked the Deluminator once more as Hermione left the room .THE WEDDING Three oclock on the following afternoon found Harry Ron Fred and George standing outside the great white marquee in the orchard awaiting the arrival of the wedding guests .Harry had taken a large dose of Polyjuice Potion and was now the double of a redheaded Muggle boy from the local village Ottery St .Catchpole from whom Fred had stolen hairs using a Summoning Charm .The plan was to introduce Harry as Cousin Barny and trust to the great number of Weasley relatives to camouflage him .All four of them were clutching seating plans so that they could help show people to the right seats .A host of whiterobed waiters had arrived an hour earlier along with a goldenjacketed band and all of these wizards were currently sitting a short distance away under a tree Harry could see a blue haze of pipe smoke issuing from the spot .Behind Harry the entrance to the marquee revealed rows and rows of fragile golden chairs set on either side of a long purple carpet .The supporting poles were entwined with white and gold flowers .Fred and George had fastened an enormous bunch of golden balloons over the exact point where Bill and Fleur would shortly become husband and wife .Outside butterflies and bees were hovering lazily over the grass and hedgerow .Harry was rather uncomfortable .The Muggle boy whose appearance he was affecting was slightly fatter than him and his dress robes felt hot and tight in the full glare of a summers day .When I get married said Fred tugging at the collar of his own robes I wont be bothering with any of this nonsense .You can all wear what you like and Ill put a full BodyBind Curse on Mum until its all over .She wasnt too bad this morning considering said George .Cried a bit about Percy not being here but who wants him ?Oh blimey brace yourselves here they come look .Brightly colored figures were appearing one by one out of nowhere at the distant boundary of the yard .Within minutes a procession had formed which began to snake its way up through the garden toward the marquee .Exotic flowers and bewitched birds fluttered on the witches hats while precious gems glittered from many of the wizards cravats a hum of excited chatter grew louder and louder drowning the sound of the bees as the crowd approached the tent .Excellent I think I see a few veela cousins said George craning his neck for a better look .Theyll need help understanding our English customs Ill look after them .Not so fast Your Holeyness said Fred and darting past the gaggle of middleaged witches heading the procession he said Here permettezmoi to assister vous to a pair of pretty French girls who giggled and allowed him to escort them inside .George was left to deal with the middleaged witches and Ron took charge of Mr Weasleys old Ministry colleague Perkins while a rather deaf old couple fell to Harrys lot .Wotcher said a familiar voice as he came out of the marquee again and found Tonks and Lupin at the front of the queue .She had turned blonde for the occasion .Arthur told us you were the one with the curly hair .Sorry about last night she added in a whisper as Harry led them up the aisle .The Ministrys being very antiwerewolf at the moment and we thought our presence might not do you any favors .Its fine I understand said Harry speaking more to Lupin than Tonks .Lupin gave him a swift smile but as they turned away Harry saw Lupins face fall again into lines of misery .He did not understand it but there was no time to dwell on the matter Hagrid was causing a certain amount of disruption .Having misunderstood Freds directions he had sat himself not upon the magically enlarged and reinforced seat set aside for him in the back row but on five seats that now resembled a large pile of golden matchsticks .While Mr Weasley repaired the damage and Hagrid shouted apologies to anybody who would listen Harry hurried back to the entrance to find Ron facetoface with a most eccentriclooking wizard .Slightly cross eyed with shoulderlength white hair the texture of candyfloss he wore a cap whose tassel dangled in front of his nose and robes of an eyewatering shade of eggyolk yellow .An odd symbol rather like a triangular eye glistened from a golden chain around his neck .Xenophilius Lovegood he said extending a hand to Harry my daughter and I live just over the hill so kind of the good Weasleys to invite us .But I think you know my Luna ?he added to Ron .Yes said Ron .Isnt she with you ?She lingered in that charming little garden to say hello to the gnomes such a glorious infestation !How few wizards realize just how much we can learn from the wise little gnomes or to give them their correct name the Gernumbli gardensi .Ours do know a lot of excellent swear words said Ron but I think Fred and George taught them those .He led a party of warlocks into the marquee as Luna rushed up .Hello Harry !she said .Er my names Barny said Harry flummoxed .Oh have you changed that too ?she asked brightly .How did you know ?Oh just your expression she said .Like her father Luna was wearing bright yellow robes which she had accessorized with a large sunflower in her hair .Once you got over the brightness of it all the general effect was quite pleasant .At least there were no radishes dangling from her ears .Xenophilius who was deep in conversation with an acquaintance had missed the exchange between Luna and Harry .Bidding the wizard farewell he turned to his daughter who held up her finger and said Daddy look one of the gnomes actually bit me !How wonderful !Gnome saliva is enormously beneficial !said Mr Lovegood seizing Lunas outstretched finger and examining the bleeding puncture marks .Luna my love if you should feel any burgeoning talent today perhaps an unexpected urge to sing opera or to declaim in Mermish do not repress it !You may have been gifted by the Gernumblies !Ron passing them in the opposite direction let out a loud snort .Ron can laugh said Luna serenely as Harry led her and Xenophilius toward their seats but my father has done a lot of research on Gernumbli magic .Really ?said Harry who had long since decided not to challenge Luna or her fathers peculiar views .Are you sure you dont want to put anything on that bite though ?Oh its fine said Luna sucking her finger in a dreamy fashion and looking Harry up and down .You look smart .I told Daddy most people would probably wear dress robes but he believes you ought to wear sun colors to a wedding for luck you know .As she drifted off after her father Ron reappeared with an elderly witch clutching his arm .Her beaky nose redrimmed eyes and feathery pink hat gave her the look of a badtempered flamingo . .and your hairs much too long Ronald for a moment I thought you were Ginevra .Merlins beard what is Xenophilius Lovegood wearing ?He looks like an omelet .And who are you ?she barked at Harry .Oh yeah Auntie Muriel this is our cousin Barny .Another Weasley ?You breed like gnomes .Isnt Harry Potter here ?I was hoping to meet him .I thought he was a friend of yours Ronald or have you merely been boasting ?No he couldnt come Hmm .Made an excuse did he ?Not as gormless as he looks in press photographs then .Ive just been instructing the bride on how best to wear my tiara she shouted at Harry .Goblinmade you know and been in my family for centuries .Shes a goodlooking girl but still French .Well well find me a good seat Ronald I am a hundred and seven and I ought not to be on my feet too long .Ron gave Harry a meaningful look as he passed and did not reappear for some time When next they met at the entrance Harry had shown a dozen more people to their places .The marquee was nearly full now and for the first time there was no queue outside .Nightmare Muriel is said Ron mopping his forehead on his sleeve .She used to come for Christmas every year then thank God she took offense because Fred and George set off a Dungbomb under her chair at dinner .Dad always says shell have written them out of her will like they care theyre going to end up richer than anyone in the family rate theyre going .Wow he added blinking rather rapidly as Hermione came hurrying toward them .You look great !Always the tone of surprise said Hermione though she smiled .She was wearing a floaty lilaccolored dress with matching high heels her hair was sleek and shiny .Your GreatAunt Muriel doesnt agree I just met her upstairs while she was giving Fleur the tiara .She said ‘Oh dear is this the Muggleborn ?and then ‘Bad posture and skinny ankles .Dont take it personally shes rude to everyone said Ron .Talking about Muriel ?inquired George reemerging from the marquee with Fred .Yeah shes just told me my ears are lopsided .Old bat .I wish old Uncle Bilius was still with us though he was a right laugh at weddings .Wasnt he the one who saw a Grim and died twenty four hours later ?asked Hermione .Well yeah he went a bit odd toward the end conceded George .But before he went loopy he was the life and soul of the party said Fred .He used to down an entire bottle of firewhisky then run onto the dance floor hoist up his robes and start pulling bunches of flowers out of his Yes he sounds a real charmer said Hermione while Harry roared with laughter .Never married for some reason said Ron .You amaze me said Hermione .They were all laughing so much that none of them noticed the latecomer a darkhaired young man with a large curved nose and thick black eyebrows until he held out his invitation to Ron and said with his eyes on Hermione You look vunderful .Viktor !she shrieked and dropped her small beaded bag which made a loud thump quite disproportionate to its size .As she scrambled blushing to pick it up she said I didnt know you were goodness its lovely to see how are you ?Rons ears had turned bright red again .After glancing at Krums invitation as if he did not believe a word of it he said much too loudly How come youre here ?Fleur invited me said Krum eyebrows raised .Harry who had no grudge against Krum shook hands then feeling that it would be prudent to remove Krum from Rons vicinity offered to show him his seat .Your friend is not pleased to see me said Krum as they entered the now packed marquee .Or is he a relative ?he added with a glance at Harrys red curly hair .Cousin Harry muttered but Krum was not really listening .His appearance was causing a stir particularly amongst the veela cousins He was after all a famous Quidditch player .While people were still craning their necks to get a good look at him Ron Hermione Fred and George came hurrying down the aisle .Time to sit down Fred told Harry or were going to get run over by the bride .Harry Ron and Hermione took their seats in the second row behind Fred and George .Hermione looked rather pink and Rons ears were still scarlet .After a few moments he muttered to Harry Did you see hes grown a stupid little beard ?Harry gave a noncommittal grunt .A sense of jittery anticipation had filled the warm tent the general murmuring broken by occasional spurts of excited laughter .Mr and Mrs Weasley strolled up the aisle smiling and waving at relatives Mrs Weasley was wearing a brandnew set of amethystcolored robes with a matching hat .A moment later Bill and Charlie stood up at the front of the marquee both wearing dress robes with large white roses in their buttonholes Fred wolfwhistled and there was an outbreak of giggling from the veela cousins .Then the crowd fell silent as music swelled from what seemed to be the golden balloons .Ooooh !said Hermione swiveling around in her seat to look at the entrance .A great collective sigh issued from the assembled witches and wizards as Monsieur Delacour and Fleur came walking up the aisle Fleur gliding Monsieur Delacour bouncing and beaming .Fleur was wearing a very simple white dress and seemed to be emitting a strong silvery glow .While her radiance usually dimmed everyone else by comparison today it beautified everybody it fell upon .Ginny and Gabrielle both wearing golden dresses looked even prettier than usual and once Fleur had reached him Bill did not look as though he had ever met Fenrir Greyback .Ladies and gentlemen said a slightly singsong voice and with a slight shock Harry saw the same small tuftyhaired wizard who had presided at Dumbledores funeral now standing in front of Bill and Fleur .We are gathered here today to celebrate the union of two faithful souls .Yes my tiara sets off the whole thing nicely said Auntie Muriel in a rather carrying whisper .But I must say Ginevras dress is far too low cut .Ginny glanced around grinning winked at Harry then quickly faced the front again .Harrys mind wandered a long way from the marquee back to afternoons spent alone with Ginny in lonely parts of the school grounds .They seemed so long ago they had always seemed too good to be true as though he had been stealing shining hours from a normal persons life a person without a lightningshaped scar on his forehead .Do you William Arthur take Fleur Isabelle . ?In the front row Mrs Weasley and Madame Delacour were both sobbing quietly into scraps of lace .Trumpetlike sounds from the back of the marquee told everyone that Hagrid had taken out one of his own tableclothsized handkerchiefs .Hermione turned and beamed at Harry her eyes too were full of tears . .then I declare you bonded for life .The tuftyhaired wizard waved his wand high over the heads of Bill and Fleur and a shower of silver stars fell upon them spiraling around their now entwined figures .As Fred and George led a round of applause the golden balloons overhead burst Birds of paradise and tiny golden bells flew and floated out of them adding their songs and chimes to the din .Ladies and gentlemen !called the tuftyhaired wizard .If you would please stand up !They all did so Auntie Muriel grumbling audibly he waved his wand again .The seats on which they had been sitting rose gracefully into the air as the canvas walls of the marquee vanished so that they stood beneath a canopy supported by golden poles with a glorious view of the sunlit orchard and surrounding countryside .Next a pool of molten gold spread from the center of the tent to form a gleaming dance floor the hovering chairs grouped themselves around small whiteclothed tables which all floated gracefully back to earth around it and the golden jacketed band trooped toward a podium .Smooth said Ron approvingly as the waiters popped up on all sides some bearing silver trays of pumpkin juice butterbeer and firewhisky others tottering piles of tarts and sandwiches .We should go and congratulate them !said Hermione standing on tiptoe to see the place where Bill and Fleur had vanished amid a crowd of well wishers .Well have time later shrugged Ron snatching three butterbeers from a passing tray and handing one to Harry .Hermione cop hold lets grab a table .Not there !Nowhere near Muriel Ron led the way across the empty dance floor glancing left and right as he went Harry felt sure that he was keeping an eye out for Krum .By the time they had reached the other side of the marquee most of the tables were occupied The emptiest was the one where Luna sat alone .All right if we join you ?asked Ron .Oh yes she said happily .Daddys just gone to give Bill and Fleur our present .What is it a lifetimes supply of Gurdyroots ?asked Ron .Hermione aimed a kick at him under the table but caught Harry instead .Eyes watering in pain Harry lost track of the conversation for a few moments .The band had begun to play .Bill and Fleur took to the dance floor first to great applause after a while Mr Weasley led Madame Delacour onto the floor followed by Mrs Weasley and Fleurs father .I like this song said Luna swaying in time to the waltzlike tune and a few seconds later she stood up and glided onto the dance floor where she revolved on the spot quite alone eyes closed and waving her arms .Shes great isnt she ?said Ron admiringly .Always good value .But the smile vanished from his face at once Viktor Krum had dropped into Lunas vacant seat .Hermione looked pleasurably flustered but this time Krum had not come to compliment her .With a scowl on his face he said Who is that man in the yellow ?Thats Xenophilius Lovegood hes the father of a friend of ours said Ron .His pugnacious tone indicated that they were not about to laugh at Xenophilius despite the clear provocation .Come and dance he added abruptly to Hermione .She looked taken aback but pleased too and got up .They vanished together into the growing throng on the dance floor .Ah they are together now ?asked Krum momentarily distracted .Er sort of said Harry .Who are you ?Krum asked .Barny Weasley .They shook hands .You Barny you know this man Lovegood veil ?No I only met him today .Why ?Krum glowered over the top of his drink watching Xenophilius who was chatting to several warlocks on the other side of the dance floor .Because said Krum if he vos not a guest of Fleurs I vould duel him here and now for vearing that filthy sign upon his chest .Sign ?said Harry looking over at Xenophilius too .The strange triangular eye was gleaming on his chest .Why ?Whats wrong with it ?Grindelvald .That is Grindelvalds sign .Grindelwald .the Dark wizard Dumbledore defeated ?Exactly .Krums jaw muscles worked as if he were chewing then he said Grindelvald killed many people my grandfather for instance .Of course he vos never poverful in this country they said he feared Dumbledore and rightly seeing how he vos finished .But this he pointed a finger at Xenophilius this is his symbol I recognized it at vunce Grindelvald carved it into a vail at Durmstrang ven he vos a pupil there .Some idiots copied it onto their books and clothes thinking to shock make themselves impressive until those of us who had lost family members to Grindelvald taught them better .Krum cracked his knuckles menacingly and glowered at Xenophilius .Harry felt perplexed .It seemed incredibly unlikely that Lunas father was a supporter of the Dark Arts and nobody else in the tent seemed to have recognized the triangular runelike shape .Are you er quite sure its Grindelwalds ?I am not mistaken said Krum coldly .I valked past that sign for several years I know it veil .Well theres a chance said Harry that Xenophilius doesnt actually know what the symbol means .The Lovegoods are quite .unusual .He could easily have picked it up somewhere and think its a cross section of the head of a CrumpleHorned Snorkack or something .The cross section of a vot ?Well I dont know what they are but apparently he and his daughter go on holiday looking for them .Harry felt he was doing a bad job explaining Luna and her father .Thats her he said pointing at Luna who was still dancing alone waving her arms around her head like someone attempting to beat off midges .Vy is she doing that ?asked Krum .Probably trying to get rid of a Wrackspurt said Harry who recognized the symptoms .Krum did not seem to know whether or not Harry was making fun of him .He drew his wand from inside his robes and tapped it menacingly on his thigh sparks flew out of the end .Gregorovitch !said Harry loudly and Krum started but Harry was too excited to care the memory had come back to him at the sight of Krums wand Ollivander taking it and examining it carefully before the Triwizard Tournament .Vot about him ?asked Krum suspiciously .Hes a wandmaker !I know that said Krum .He made your wand !Thats why I thought Quidditch Krum was looking more and more suspicious .How do you know Gregorovitch made my vand ?I .I read it somewhere I think said Harry .In a a fan magazine he improvised wildly and Krum looked mollified .I had not realized I ever discussed my vand with fans he said .So .er .where is Gregorovitch these days ?Krum looked puzzled .He retired several years ago .I vos one of the last to purchase a Gregorovitch vand .They are the best although I know of course that you Britons set much store by Ollivander .Harry did not answer .He pretended to watch the dancers like Krum but he was thinking hard .So Voldemort was looking for a celebrated wandmaker and Harry did not have to search far for a reason It was surely because of what Harrys wand had done on the night that Voldemort had pursued him across the skies .The holly and phoenix feather wand had conquered the borrowed wand something that Ollivander had not anticipated or understood .Would Gregorovitch know better ?Was he truly more skilled than Ollivander did he know secrets of wands that Ollivander did not ?This girl is very nicelooking Krum said recalling Harry to his surroundings .Krum was pointing at Ginny who had just joined Luna .She is also a relative of yours ?Yeah said Harry suddenly irritated and shes seeing someone .Jealous type .Big bloke .You wouldnt want to cross him .Krum grunted .Vot he said draining his goblet and getting to his feet again is the point of being an international Quidditch player if all the goodlooking girls are taken ?And he strode off leaving Harry to take a sandwich from a passing waiter and make his way around the edge of the crowded dance floor .He wanted to find Ron to tell him about Gregorovitch but Ron was dancing with Hermione out in the middle of the floor .Harry leaned up against one of the golden pillars and watched Ginny who was now dancing with Fred and Georges friend Lee Jordan trying not to feel resentful about the promise he had given Ron .He had never been to a wedding before so he could not judge how Wizarding celebrations differed from Muggle ones though he was pretty sure that the latter would not involve a wedding cake topped with two model phoenixes that took flight when the cake was cut or bottles of champagne that floated unsupported through the crowd .As evening drew in and moths began to swoop under the canopy now lit with floating golden lanterns the revelry became more and more uncontained .Fred and George had long since disappeared into the darkness with a pair of Fleurs cousins Charlie Hagrid and a squat wizard in a purple porkpie hat were singing Odo the Hero in a corner .Wandering through the crowd so as to escape a drunken uncle of Rons who seemed unsure whether or not Harry was his son Harry spotted an old wizard sitting alone at a table .His cloud of white hair made him look rather like an aged dandelion clock and was topped by a motheaten fez .He was vaguely familiar Racking his brains Harry suddenly realized that this was Elphias Doge member of the Order of the Phoenix and the writer of Dumbledores obituary .Harry approached him .May I sit down ?Of course of course said Doge he had a rather highpitched wheezy voice .Harry leaned in .Mr Doge Im Harry Potter .Doge gasped .My dear boy !Arthur told me you were here disguised .I am so glad so honored !In a flutter of nervous pleasure Doge poured Harry a goblet of champagne .I thought of writing to you he whispered after Dumbledore .the shock .and for you I am sure Doges tiny eyes filled with sudden tears .I saw the obituary you wrote for the Daily Prophet said Harry .I didnt realize you knew Professor Dumbledore so well .As well as anyone said Doge dabbing his eyes with a napkin .Certainly I knew him longest if you dont count Aberforth and somehow people never do seem to count Aberforth .Speaking of the Daily Prophet .I dont know whether you saw Mr Doge ?Oh please call me Elphias dear boy .Elphias I dont know whether you saw the interview Rita Skeeter gave about Dumbledore ?Doges face flooded with angry color .Oh yes Harry I saw it .That woman or vulture might be a more accurate term positively pestered me to talk to her .I am ashamed to say that I became rather rude called her an interfering trout which resulted as you may have seen in aspersions cast upon my sanity .Well in that interview Harry went on Rita Skeeter hinted that Professor Dumbledore was involved in the Dark Arts when he was young .Dont believe a word of it !said Doge at once .Not a word Harry !Let nothing tarnish your memories of Albus Dumbledore !Harry looked into Doges earnest pained face and felt not reassured but frustrated .Did Doge really think it was that easy that Harry could simply choose not to believe ?Didnt Doge understand Harrys need to be sure to know everything ?Perhaps Doge suspected Harrys feelings for he looked concerned and hurried on Harry Rita Skeeter is a dreadful But he was interrupted by a shrill cackle .Rita Skeeter ?Oh I love her always read her !Harry and Doge looked up to see Auntie Muriel standing there the plumes dancing on her hat a goblet of champagne in her hand .Shes written a book about Dumbledore you know !Hello Muriel said Doge .Yes we were just discussing You there !Give me your chair Im a hundred and seven !Another redheaded Weasley cousin jumped off his seat looking alarmed and Auntie Muriel swung it around with surprising strength and plopped herself down upon it between Doge and Harry .Hello again Barry or whatever your name is she said to Harry .Now what were you saying about Rita Skeeter Elphias ?You know shes written a biography of Dumbledore ?I cant wait to read it I must remember to place an order at Flourish and Blotts !Doge looked stiff and solemn at this but Auntie Muriel drained her goblet and clicked her bony fingers at a passing waiter for a replacement .She took another large gulp of champagne belched and then said Theres no need to look like a pair of stuffed frogs !Before he became so respected and respectable and all that tosh there were some mighty funny rumors about Albus !Illinformed sniping said Doge turning radish colored again .You would say that Elphias cackled Auntie Muriel .I noticed how you skated over the sticky patches in that obituary of yours !Im sorry you think so said Doge more coldly still .I assure you I was writing from the heart .Oh we all know you worshipped Dumbledore I daresay youll still think he was a saint even if it does turn out that he did away with his Squib sister !Muriell exclaimed Doge .A chill that had nothing to do with the iced champagne was stealing through Harrys chest .What do you mean ?he asked Muriel .Who said his sister was a Squib ?I thought she was ill ?Thought wrong then didnt you Barry !said Auntie Muriel looking delighted at the effect she had produced .Anyway how could you expect to know anything about it ?It all happened years and years before you were even thought of my dear and the truth is that those of us who were alive then never knew what really happened .Thats why I cant wait to find out what Skeeters unearthed !Dumbledore kept that sister of his quiet for a long time !Untrue !wheezed Doge .Absolutely untrue !He never told me his sister was a Squib said Harry without thinking still cold inside .And why on earth would he tell you ?screeched Muriel swaying a little in her seat as she attempted to focus upon Harry .The reason Albus never spoke about Ariana began Elphias in a voice stiff with emotion is I should have thought quite clear .He was so devastated by her death Why did nobody ever see her Elphias ?squawked Muriel .Why did half of us never even know she existed until they carried the coffin out of the house and held a funeral for her ?Where was saintly Albus while Ariana was locked in the cellar ?Off being brilliant at Hogwarts and never mind what was going on in his own house !What dyou mean locked in the cellar ?asked Harry .What is this ?Doge looked wretched .Auntie Muriel cackled again and answered Harry .Dumbledores mother was a terrifying woman simply terrifying .Muggleborn though I heard she pretended otherwise She never pretended anything of the sort !Kendra was a fine woman whispered Doge miserably but Auntie Muriel ignored him .proud and very domineering the sort of witch who would have been mortified to produce a Squib Ariana was not a Squib !wheezed Doge .So you say Elphias but explain then why she never attended Hogwarts !said Auntie Muriel .She turned back to Harry .In our day Squibs were often hushed up though to take it to the extreme of actually imprisoning a little girl in the house and pretending she didnt exist I tell you thats not what happened !said Doge but Auntie Muriel steamrollered on still addressing Harry .Squibs were usually shipped off to Muggle schools and encouraged to integrate into the Muggle community .much kinder than trying to find them a place in the Wizarding world where they must always be second class but naturally Kendra Dumbledore wouldnt have dreamed of letting her daughter go to a Muggle school Ariana was delicate !said Doge desperately .Her health was always too poor to permit her to permit her to leave the house ?cackled Muriel .And yet she was never taken to St .Mungos and no Healer was ever summoned to see her !Really Muriel how you can possibly know whether For your information Elphias my cousin Lancelot was a Healer at St .Mungos at the time and he told my family in strictest confidence that Ariana had never been seen there .All most suspicious Lancelot thought !Doge looked to be on the verge of tears .Auntie Muriel who seemed to be enjoying herself hugely snapped her fingers for more champagne .Numbly Harry thought of how the Dursleys had once shut him up locked him away kept him out of sight all for the crime of being a wizard .Had Dumbledores sister suffered the same fate in reverse imprisoned for her lack of magic ?And had Dumbledore truly left her to her fate while he went off to Hogwarts to prove himself brilliant and talented ?Now if Kendra hadnt died first Muriel resumed Id have said that it was she who finished off Ariana How can you Muriel ?groaned Doge .A mother kill her own daughter ?Think what you are saying !If the mother in question was capable of imprisoning her daughter for years on end why not ?shrugged Auntie Muriel .But as I say it doesnt fit because Kendra died before Ariana of what nobody ever seemed sure Oh no doubt Ariana murdered her said Doge with a brave attempt at scorn .Why not ?Yes Ariana might have made a desperate bid for freedom and killed Kendra in the struggle said Auntie Muriel thoughtfully .Shake your head all you like Elphias !You were at Arianas funeral were you not ?Yes I was said Doge through trembling lips .And a more desperately sad occasion I cannot remember .Albus was heartbroken His heart wasnt the only thing .Didnt Aberforth break Albus s nose halfway through the service ?If Doge had looked horrified before this it was nothing to how he looked now .Muriel might have stabbed him .She cackled loudly and took another swig of champagne which dribbled down her chin .How do you ?croaked Doge .My mother was friendly with old Bathilda Bagshot said Auntie Muriel happily .Bathilda described the whole thing to Mother while I was listening at the door .A coffinside brawl !The way Bathilda told it Aberforth shouted that it was all Albus s fault that Ariana was dead and then punched him in the face .According to Bathilda Albus did not even defend himself and thats odd enough in itself Albus could have destroyed Aberforth in a duel with both hands tied behind his back .Muriel swigged yet more champagne .The recitation of these old scandals seemed to elate her as much as they horrified Doge .Harry did not know what to think what to believe He wanted the truth and yet all Doge did was sit there and bleat feebly that Ariana had been ill .Harry could hardly believe that Dumbledore would not have intervened if such cruelty was happening inside his own house and yet there was undoubtedly something odd about the story .And Ill tell you something else Muriel said hiccuping slightly as she lowered her goblet .I think Bathilda has spilled the beans to Rita Skeeter .All those hints in Skeeters interview about an important source close to the Dumbledores goodness knows she was there all through the Ariana business and it would fit !Bathilda would never talk to Rita Skeeter !whispered Doge .Bathilda Bagshot ?Harry said .The author of A History of Magic ?The name was printed on the front of one of Harrys textbooks though admittedly not one of the ones he had read most attentively .Yes said Doge clutching at Harrys question like a drowning man at a life belt .A most gifted magical historian and an old friend of Albuss .Quite gaga these days Ive heard said Auntie Muriel cheerfully .If that is so it is even more dishonorable for Skeeter to have taken advantage of her said Doge and no reliance can be placed on anything Bathilda may have said !Oh there are ways of bringing back memories and Im sure Rita Skeeter knows them all said Auntie Muriel .But even if Bathildas completely cuckoo Im sure shed still have old photographs maybe even letters .She knew the Dumbledores for years .Well worth a trip to Godrics Hollow Id have thought .Harry who had been taking a sip of butterbeer choked .Doge banged him on the back as Harry coughed looking at Auntie Muriel through streaming eyes .Once he had control of his voice again he asked Bathilda Bagshot lives in Godrics Hollow ?Oh yes shes been there forever !The Dumbledores moved there after Percival was imprisoned and she was their neighbor .The Dumbledores lived in Godrics Hollow ?Yes Barry thats what I just said said Auntie Muriel testily .Harry felt drained empty .Never once in six years had Dumbledore told Harry that they had both lived and lost loved ones in Godrics Hollow .Why ?Were Lily and James buried close to Dumbledore s mother and sister ?Had Dumbledore visited their graves perhaps walked past Lilys and Jamess to do so ?And he had never once told Harry .never bothered to say And why it was so important Harry could not explain even to himself yet he felt it had been tantamount to a lie not to tell him that they had this place and these experiences in common .He stared ahead of him barely noticing what was going on around him and did not realize that Hermione had appeared out of the crowd until she drew up a chair beside him .I simply cant dance anymore she panted slipping off one of her shoes and rubbing the sole of her foot .Rons gone looking to find more butterbeers .Its a bit odd Ive just seen Viktor storming away from Lunas father it looked like theyd been arguing She dropped her voice staring at him .Harry are you okay ?Harry did not know where to begin but it did not matter .At that moment something large and silver came falling through the canopy over the dance floor .Graceful and gleaming the lynx landed lightly in the middle of the astonished dancers .Heads turned as those nearest it froze absurdly in middance .Then the Patronuss mouth opened wide and it spoke in the loud deep slow voice of Kingsley Shacklebolt .The Ministry has fallen .Scrimgeour is dead .They are coming .9 A PLACE TO HIDE Everything seemed fuzzy slow .Harry and Hermione jumped to their feet and drew their wands .Many people were only just realizing that something strange had happened heads were still turning toward the silver cat as it vanished .Silence spread outward in cold ripples from the place where the Patronus had landed .Then somebody screamed .Harry and Hermione threw themselves into the panicking crowd .Guests were sprinting in all directions many were Disapparating the protective enchantments around the Burrow had broken .Ron !Hermione cried .Ron where are you ?As they pushed their way across the dance floor Harry saw cloaked and masked figures appearing in the crowd then he saw Lupin and Tonks their wands raised and heard both of them shout Protego a cry that was echoed on all sides Ron !Ron !Hermione called half sobbing as she and Harry were buffeted by terrified guests Harry seized her hand to make sure they werent separated as a streak of light whizzed over their heads whether a protective charm or something more sinister he did not know And then Ron was there .He caught hold of Hermione s free arm and Harry felt her turn on the spot sight and sound were extinguished as darkness pressed in upon him all he could feel was Hermiones hand as he was squeezed through space and time away from the Burrow away from the descending Death Eaters away perhaps from Voldemort himself .Where are we ?said Rons voice .Harry opened his eyes .For a moment he thought they had not left the wedding after all They still seemed to be surrounded by people .Tottenham Court Road panted Hermione .Walk just walk we need to find somewhere for you to change .Harry did as she asked .They half walked half ran up the wide dark street thronged with latenight revelers and lined with closed shops stars twinkling above them .A doubledecker bus rumbled by and a group of merry pubgoers ogled them as they passed Harry and Ron were still wearing dress robes .Hermione we havent got anything to change into Ron told her as a young woman burst into raucous giggles at the sight of him .Why didnt I make sure I had the Invisibility Cloak with me ?said Harry inwardly cursing his own stupidity .All last year I kept it on me and Its okay Ive got the Cloak Ive got clothes for both of you said Hermione .Just try and act naturally until this will do .She led them down a side street then into the shelter of a shadowy alleyway .When you say youve got the Cloak and clothes .said Harry frowning at Hermione who was carrying nothing except her small beaded handbag in which she was now rummaging .Yes theyre here said Hermione and to Harry and Rons utter astonishment she pulled out a pair of jeans a sweatshirt some maroon socks and finally the silvery Invisibility Cloak .How the ruddy hell ?Undetectable Extension Charm said Hermione .Tricky but I think Ive done it okay anyway I managed to fit everything we need in here .She gave the fragilelooking bag a little shake and it echoed like a cargo hold as a number of heavy objects rolled around inside it .Oh damn thatll be the books she said peering into it and I had them all stacked by subject .Oh well .Harry youd better take the Invisibility Cloak .Ron hurry up and change .When did you do all this ?Harry asked as Ron stripped off his robes .I told you at the Burrow Ive had the essentials packed for days you know in case we needed to make a quick getaway .I packed your rucksack this morning Harry after you changed and put it in here . .I just had a feeling .Youre amazing you are said Ron handing her his bundledup robes .Thank you said Hermione managing a small smile as she pushed the robes into the bag .Please Harry get that Cloak on !Harry threw the Invisibility Cloak around his shoulders and pulled it up over his head vanishing from sight .He was only just beginning to appreciate what had happened .The others everyone at the wedding We cant worry about that now whispered Hermione .Its you theyre after Harry and well just put everyone in even more danger by going back .Shes right said Ron who seemed to know that Harry was about to argue even if he could not see his face .Most of the Order was there theyll look after everyone .Harry nodded then remembered that they could not see him and said Yeah .But he thought of Ginny and fear bubbled like acid in his stomach .Come on I think we ought to keep moving said Hermione .They moved back up the side street and onto the main road again where a group of men on the opposite side was singing and weaving across the pavement .Just as a matter of interest why Tottenham Court Road ?Ron asked Hermione .Ive no idea it just popped into my head but Im sure were safer out in the Muggle world its not where theyll expect us to be .True said Ron looking around but dont you feel a bit exposed ?Where else is there ?asked Hermione cringing as the men on the other side of the road started wolf whistling at her .We can hardly book rooms at the Leaky Cauldron can we ?And Grimmauld Place is out if Snape can get in there .I suppose we could try my parents house though I think theres a chance they might check there .Oh I wish theyd shut up !All right darling ?the drunkest of the men on the other pavement was yelling .Fancy a drink ?Ditch ginger and come and have a pint !Lets sit down somewhere Hermione said hastily as Ron opened his mouth to shout back across the road .Look this will do in here !It was a small and shabby allnight cafe .A light layer of grease lay on all the Formica topped tables but it was at least empty .Harry slipped into a booth first and Ron sat next to him opposite Hermione who had her back to the entrance and did not like it She glanced over her shoulder so frequently she appeared to have a twitch .Harry did not like being stationary walking had given the illusion that they had a goal .Beneath the Cloak he could feel the last vestiges of Polyjuice leaving him his hands returning to their usual length and shape .He pulled his glasses out of his pocket and put them on again .After a minute or two Ron said You know were not far from the Leaky Cauldron here its only in Charing Cross Ron we cant !said Hermione at once .Not to stay there but to find out whats going on !We know whats going on !Voldemorts taken over the Ministry what else do we need to know ?Okay okay it was just an idea !They relapsed into a prickly silence .The gumchewing waitress shuffled over and Hermione ordered two cappuccinos As Harry was invisible it would have looked odd to order him one .A pair of burly workmen entered the cafe and squeezed into the next booth .Hermione dropped her voice to a whisper .I say we find a quiet place to Disapparate and head for the countryside .Once were there we could send a message to the Order .Can you do that talking Patronus thing then ?asked Ron .Ive been practicing and I think so said Hermione .Well as long as it doesnt get them into trouble though they mightve been arrested already .God thats revolting Ron added after one sip of the foamy grayish coffee .The waitress had heard she shot Ron a nasty look as she shuffled off to take the new customers orders .The larger of the two workmen who was blond and quite huge now that Harry came to look at him waved her away .She stared affronted .Lets get going then I dont want to drink this muck said Ron .Hermione have you got Muggle money to pay for this ?Yes I took out all my Building Society savings before I came to the Burrow .Ill bet all the change is at the bottom sighed Hermione reaching for her beaded bag .The two workmen made identical movements and Harry mirrored them without conscious thought All three of them drew their wands .Ron a few seconds late in realizing what was going on lunged across the table pushing Hermione sideways onto her bench .The force of the Death Eaters spells shattered the tiled wall where Rons head had just been as Harry still invisible yelled Stupefyl The great blond Death Eater was hit in the face by a jet of red light He slumped sideways unconscious .His companion unable to see who had cast the spell fired another at Ron Shining black ropes flew from his wandtip and bound Ron head to foot the waitress screamed and ran for the door Harry sent another Stunning Spell at the Death Eater with the twisted face who had tied up Ron but the spell missed rebounded on the window and hit the waitress who collapsed in front of the door .Expulsol bellowed the Death Eater and the table behind which Harry was standing blew up The force of the explosion slammed him into the wall and he felt his wand leave his hand as the Cloak slipped off him .Petrificus TotalusV screamed Hermione from out of sight and the Death Eater fell forward like a statue to land with a crunching thud on the mess of broken china table and coffee .Hermione crawled out from underneath the bench shaking bits of glass ashtray out of her hair and trembling all over .Ddiffindo she said pointing her wand at Ron who roared in pain as she slashed open the knee of his jeans leaving a deep cut .Oh Im so sorry Ron my hands shaking !Diffindol The severed ropes fell away .Ron got to his feet shaking his arms to regain feeling in them .Harry picked up his wand and climbed over all the debris to where the large blond Death Eater was sprawled across the bench .I shouldve recognized him he was there the night Dumbledore died he said .He turned over the darker Death Eater with his foot the mans eyes moved rapidly between Harry Ron and Hermione .Thats Dolohov said Ron .I recognize him from the old wanted posters .I think the big ones Thorfinn Rowle .Never mind what theyre called !said Hermione a little hysterically .How did they find us ?What are we going to do ?Somehow her panic seemed to clear Harrys head .Lock the door he told her and Ron turn out the lights .He looked down at the paralyzed Dolohov thinking fast as the lock clicked and Ron used the Deluminator to plunge the cafe into darkness .Harry could hear the men who had jeered at Hermione earlier yelling at another girl in the distance .What are we going to do with them ?Ron whispered to Harry through the dark then even more quietly Kill them ?Theyd kill us .They had a good go just now .Hermione shuddered and took a step backward .Harry shook his head .We just need to wipe their memories said Harry .Its better like that itll throw them off the scent .If we killed them itd be obvious we were here .Youre the boss said Ron sounding profoundly relieved .But Ive never done a Memory Charm .Nor have I said Hermione but I know the theory .She took a deep calming breath then pointed her wand at Dolohovs forehead and said Obliviate .At once Dolohovs eyes became unfocused and dreamy .Brilliant !said Harry clapping her on the back .Take care of the other one and the waitress while Ron and I clear up .Clear up ?said Ron looking around at the partly destroyed cafe .Why ?Dont you think they might wonder whats happened if they wake up and find themselves in a place that looks like its just been bombed ?Oh right yeah .Ron struggled for a moment before managing to extract his wand from his pocket .Its no wonder I cant get it out Hermione you packed my old jeans theyre tight .Oh Im so sorry hissed Hermione and as she dragged the waitress out of sight of the windows Harry heard her mutter a suggestion as to where Ron could stick his wand instead .Once the cafe was restored to its previous condition they heaved the Death Eaters back into their booth and propped them up facing each other .But how did they find us ?Hermione asked looking from one inert man to the other .How did they know where we were ?She turned to Harry .You you dont think youve still got your Trace on you do you Harry ?He cant have said Ron .The Trace breaks at seventeen thats Wizarding law you cant put it on an adult .As far as you know said Hermione .What if the Death Eaters have found a way to put it on a seventeenyearold ?But Harry hasnt been near a Death Eater in the last twentyfour hours .Whos supposed to have put a Trace back on him ?Hermione did not reply .Harry felt contaminated tainted Was that really how the Death Eaters had found them ?If I cant use magic and you cant use magic near me without us giving away our position he began .Were not splitting up !said Hermione firmly .We need a safe place to hide said Ron .Give us time to think things through .Grimmauld Place said Harry .The other two gaped .Dont be silly Harry Snape can get in there !Rons dad said theyve put up jinxes against him and even if they havent worked he pressed on as Hermione began to argue so what ?I swear Id like nothing better than to meet Snape !But Hermione where else is there ?Its the best chance weve got .Snapes only one Death Eater .If Ive still got the Trace on me well have whole crowds of them on us wherever else we go .She could not argue though she looked as if she would have liked to .While she unlocked the cafe door Ron clicked the Deluminator to release the cafes light .Then on Harrys count of three they reversed the spells upon their three victims and before the waitress or either of the Death Eaters could do more than stir sleepily Harry Ron and Hermione had turned on the spot and vanished into the compressing darkness once more .Seconds later Harrys lungs expanded gratefully and he opened his eyes They were now standing in the middle of a familiar small and shabby square .Tall dilapidated houses looked down on them from every side .Number twelve was visible to them for they had been told of its existence by Dumbledore its Secret Keeper and they rushed toward it checking every few yards that they were not being followed or observed .They raced up the stone steps and Harry tapped the front door once with his wand .They heard a series of metallic clicks and the clatter of a chain then the door swung open with a creak and they hurried over the threshold .As Harry closed the door behind them the old fashioned gas lamps sprang into life casting flickering light along the length of the hallway .It looked just as Harry remembered it eerie cobwebbed the outlines of the houseelf heads on the wall throwing odd shadows up the staircase .Long dark curtains concealed the portrait of Siriuss mother .The only thing that was out of place was the trolls leg umbrella stand which was lying on its side as if Tonks had just knocked it over again .I think somebodys been in here Hermione whispered pointing toward it .That couldve happened as the Order left Ron murmured back .So where are these jinxes they put up against Snape ?Harry asked .Maybe theyre only activated if he shows up ?suggested Ron .Yet they remained close together on the doormat backs against the door scared to move farther into the house .Well we cant stay here forever said Harry and he took a step forward .Severus Snape ?MadEye Moodys voice whispered out of the darkness making all three of them jump back in fright .Were not Snape !croaked Harry before something whooshed over him like cold air and his tongue curled backward on itself making it impossible to speak .Before he had time to feel inside his mouth however his tongue had unraveled again .The other two seemed to have experienced the same unpleasant sensation .Ron was making retching noises Hermione stammered That mmust have b been the TTongueTying Curse MadEye set up for Snape !Gingerly Harry took another step forward .Something shifted in the shadows at the end of the hall and before any of them could say another word a figure had risen up out of the carpet tall dustcolored and terrible Hermione screamed and so did Mrs Black her curtains flying open the gray figure was gliding toward them faster and faster its waistlength hair and beard streaming behind it its face sunken fleshless with empty eye sockets Horribly familiar dreadfully altered it raised a wasted arm pointing at Harry .No !Harry shouted and though he had raised his wand no spell occurred to him .No !It wasnt us !We didnt kill you On the word kill the figure exploded in a great cloud of dust Coughing his eyes watering Harry looked around to see Hermione crouched on the floor by the door with her arms over her head and Ron who was shaking from head to foot patting her clumsily on the shoulder and saying Its all rright .Its ggone .Dust swirled around Harry like mist catching the blue gaslight as Mrs Black continued to scream .Mudbloods filth stains of dishonor taint of shame on the house of my fathers SHUT UP !Harry bellowed directing his wand at her and with a bang and a burst of red sparks the curtains swung shut again silencing her .That .that was .Hermione whimpered as Ron helped her to her feet .Yeah said Harry but it wasnt really him was it ?Just something to scare Snape .Had it worked Harry wondered or had Snape already blasted the horrorfigure aside as casually as he had killed the real Dumbledore ?Nerves still tingling he led the other two up the hall halfexpecting some new terror to reveal itself but nothing moved except for a mouse skittering along the skirting board .Before we go any farther I think wed better check whispered Hermione and she raised her wand and said Homenum revelio .Nothing happened .Well youve just had a big shock said Ron kindly .What was that supposed to do ?It did what I meant it to do !said Hermione rather crossly .That was a spell to reveal human presence and theres nobody here except us !And old Dusty said Ron glancing at the patch of carpet from which the corpsefigure had risen .Lets go up said Hermione with a frightened look at the same spot and she led the way up the creaking stairs to the drawing room on the first floor .Hermione waved her wand to ignite the old gas lamps then shivering slightly in the drafty room she perched on the sofa her arms wrapped tightly around her .Ron crossed to the window and moved the heavy velvet curtain aside an inch .Cant see anyone out there he reported .And youd think if Harry still had a Trace on him theyd have followed us here .I know they cant get in the house but whats up Harry ?Harry had given a cry of pain His scar had burned again as something flashed across his mind like a bright light on water .He saw a large shadow and felt a fury that was not his own pound through his body violent and brief as an electric shock .What did you see ?Ron asked advancing on Harry .Did you see him at my place ?No I just felt anger hes really angry But that could be at the Burrow said Ron loudly .What else ?Didnt you see anything ?Was he cursing someone ?No I just felt anger I couldnt tell Harry felt badgered confused and Hermione did not help as she said in a frightened voice Your scar again ?But whats going on ?I thought that connection had closed !It did for a while muttered Harry his scar was still painful which made it hard to concentrate .I I think its started opening again whenever he loses control thats how it used to But then youve got to close your mind !said Hermione shrilly .Harry Dumbledore didnt want you to use that connection he wanted you to shut it down thats why you were supposed to use Occlumency !Otherwise Voldemort can plant false images in your mind remember Yeah I do remember thanks said Harry through gritted teeth he did not need Hermione to tell him that Voldemort had once used this selfsame connection between them to lead him into a trap nor that it had resulted in Siriuss death .He wished that he had not told them what he had seen and felt it made Voldemort more threatening as though he were pressing against the window of the room and still the pain in his scar was building and he fought it It was like resisting the urge to be sick .He turned his back on Ron and Hermione pretending to examine the old tapestry of the Black family tree on the wall .Then Hermione shrieked Harry drew his wand again and spun around to see a silver Patronus soar through the drawing room window and land upon the floor in front of them where it solidified into the weasel that spoke with the voice of Rons father .Family safe do not reply we are being watched .The Patronus dissolved into nothingness .Ron let out a noise between a whimper and a groan and dropped onto the sofa Hermione joined him gripping his arm .Theyre all right theyre all right !she whispered and Ron half laughed and hugged her .Harry he said over Hermiones shoulder I Its not a problem said Harry sickened by the pain in his head .Its your family course youre worried .Id feel the same way .He thought of Ginny .I do feel the same way .The pain in his scar was reaching a peak burning as it had done in the garden of the Burrow .Faintly he heard Hermione say I dont want to be on my own .Could we use the sleeping bags Ive brought and camp in here tonight ?He heard Ron agree .He could not fight the pain much longer He had to succumb .Bathroom he muttered and he left the room as fast as he could without running .He barely made it Bolting the door behind him with trembling hands he grasped his pounding head and fell to the floor then in an explosion of agony he felt the rage that did not belong to him possess his soul saw a long room lit only by firelight and the great blond Death Eater on the floor screaming and writhing and a slighter figure standing over him wand outstretched while Harry spoke in a high cold merciless voice .More Rowle or shall we end it and feed you to Nagini ?Lord Voldemort is not sure that he will forgive this time .You called me back for this to tell me that Harry Potter has escaped again ?Draco give Rowle another taste of our displeasure .Do it or feel my wrath yourself !A log fell in the fire Flames reared their light darting across a terrified pointed white face with a sense of emerging from deep water Harry drew heaving breaths and opened his eyes .He was spreadeagled on the cold black marble floor his nose inches from one of the silver serpent tails that supported the large bathtub .He sat up .Malfoys gaunt petrified face seemed branded on the inside of his eyes .Harry felt sickened by what he had seen by the use to which Draco was now being put by Voldemort .There was a sharp rap on the door and Harry jumped as Hermiones voice rang out .Harry do you want your toothbrush ?Ive got it here .Yeah great thanks he said fighting to keep his voice casual as he stood up to let her in .10 KREACHERS TALE Harry woke early next morning wrapped in a sleeping bag on the drawing room floor .A chink of sky was visible between the heavy curtains It was the cool clear blue of watered ink somewhere between night and dawn and everything was quiet except for Ron and Hermiones slow deep breathing .Harry glanced over at the dark shapes they made on the floor beside him .Ron had had a fit of gallantry and insisted that Hermione sleep on the cushions from the sofa so that her silhouette was raised above his .Her arm curved to the floor her fingers inches from Rons .Harry wondered whether they had fallen asleep holding hands .The idea made him feel strangely lonely .He looked up at the shadowy ceiling the cobwebbed chandelier .Less than twentyfour hours ago he had been standing in the sunlight at the entrance to the marquee waiting to show in wedding guests .It seemed a lifetime away .What was going to happen now ?He lay on the floor and he thought of the Horcruxes of the daunting complex mission Dumbledore had left him .Dumbledore .The grief that had possessed him since Dumbledores death felt different now .The accusations he had heard from Muriel at the wedding seemed to have nested in his brain like diseased things infecting his memories of the wizard he had idolized .Could Dumbledore have let such things happen ?Had he been like Dudley content to watch neglect and abuse as long as it did not affect him ?Could he have turned his back on a sister who was being imprisoned and hidden ?Harry thought of Godrics Hollow of graves Dumbledore had never mentioned there he thought of mysterious objects left without explanation in Dumbledores will and resentment swelled in the darkness .Why hadnt Dumbledore told him ?Why hadnt he explained ?Had Dumbledore actually cared about Harry at all ?Or had Harry been nothing more than a tool to be polished and honed but not trusted never confided in ?Harry could not stand lying there with nothing but bitter thoughts for company .Desperate for something to do for distraction he slipped out of his sleeping bag picked up his wand and crept out of the room .On the landing he whispered Lumos and started to climb the stairs by wandlight .On the second landing was the bedroom in which he and Ron had slept last time they had been here he glanced into it .The wardrobe doors stood open and the bedclothes had been ripped back .Harry remembered the overturned troll leg downstairs .Somebody had searched the house since the Order had left .Snape ?Or perhaps Mundungus who had pilfered plenty from this house both before and after Sirius died ?Harrys gaze wandered to the portrait that sometimes contained Phineas Nigellus Black Siriuss greatgreatgrandfather but it was empty showing nothing but a stretch of muddy backdrop .Phineas Nigellus was evidently spending the night in the headmasters study at Hogwarts .Harry continued up the stairs until he reached the topmost landing where there were only two doors .The one facing him bore a nameplate reading SIRIUS .Harry had never entered his godfathers bedroom before .He pushed open the door holding his wand high to cast light as widely as possible .The room was spacious and must once have been handsome .There was a large bed with a carved wooden headboard a tall window obscured by long velvet curtains and a chandelier thickly coated in dust with candle stubs still resting in its sockets solid wax hanging in frostlike drips .A fine film of dust covered the pictures on the walls and the beds headboard a spiders web stretched between the chandelier and the top of the large wooden wardrobe and as Harry moved deeper into the room he heard a scurrying of disturbed mice .The teenage Sirius had plastered the walls with so many posters and pictures that little of the walls silverygray silk was visible .Harry could only assume that Siriuss parents had been unable to remove the Permanent Sticking Charm that kept them on the wall because he was sure they would not have appreciated their eldest sons taste in decoration .Sirius seemed to have gone out of his way to annoy his parents .There were several large Gryffindor banners faded scarlet and gold just to underline his difference from all the rest of the Slytherin family .There were many pictures of Muggle motorcycles and also Harry had to admire Siriuss nerve several posters of bikiniclad Muggle girls Harry could tell that they were Muggles because they remained quite stationary within their pictures faded smiles and glazed eyes frozen on the paper .This was in contrast to the only Wizarding photograph on the walls which was a picture of four Hogwarts students standing arm in arm laughing at the camera .With a leap of pleasure Harry recognized his father his untidy black hair stuck up at the back like Harrys and he too wore glasses .Beside him was Sirius carelessly handsome his slightly arrogant face so much younger and happier than Harry had ever seen it alive .To Siriuss right stood Pettigrew more than a head shorter plump and wateryeyed flushed with pleasure at his inclusion in this coolest of gangs with the muchadmired rebels that James and Sirius had been .On Jamess left was Lupin even then a little shabbylooking but he had the same air of delighted surprise at finding himself liked and included .or was it simply because Harry knew how it had been that he saw these things in the picture ?He tried to take it from the wall it was his now after all Sirius had left him everything but it would not budge .Sirius had taken no chances in preventing his parents from redecorating his room .Harry looked around at the floor .The sky outside was growing brighter A shaft of light revealed bits of paper books and small objects scattered over the carpet .Evidently Siriuss bedroom had been searched too although its contents seemed to have been judged mostly if not entirely worthless .A few of the books had been shaken roughly enough to part company with their covers and sundry pages littered the floor .Harry bent down picked up a few of the pieces of paper and examined them .He recognized one as part of an old edition of A History of Magic by Bathilda Bagshot and another as belonging to a motorcycle maintenance manual .The third was handwritten and crumpled .He smoothed it out .Dear Padfoot Thank you thank you for Harrys birthday present !It was his favorite by far .One year old and already zooming along on a toy broomstick he looked so pleased with himself Im enclosing a picture so you can see .You know it only rises about two feet off the ground but he nearly killed the cat and he smashed a horrible vase Petunia sent me for Christmas no complaints there .Of course James thought it was so funny says hes going to be a great Quidditch player but weve had to pack away all the ornaments and make sure we dont take our eyes off him when he gets going .We had a very quiet birthday tea just us and old Bathilda who has always been sweet to us and who dotes on Harry .We were so sorry you couldnt come but the Orders got to come first and Harrys not old enough to know its his birthday anyway !James is getting a bit frustrated shut up here he tries not to show it but I can tell also Dumbledores still got his Invisibility Cloak so no chance of little excursions .If you could visit it would cheer him up so much .Wormy was here last weekend I thought he seemed down but that was probably the news about the McKinnons I cried all evening when I heard .Bathilda drops in most days shes a fascinating old thing with the most amazing stories about Dumbledore Im not sure hed be pleased if he knew !I dont know how much to believe actually because it seems incredible that Dumbledore Harrys extremities seemed to have gone numb .He stood quite still holding the miraculous paper in his nerveless fingers while inside him a kind of quiet eruption sent joy and grief thundering in equal measure through his veins .Lurching to the bed he sat down .He read the letter again but could not take in any more meaning than he had done the first time and was reduced to staring at the handwriting itself .She had made her gs the same way he did He searched through the letter for every one of them and each felt like a friendly little wave glimpsed from behind a veil .The letter was an incredible treasure proof that Lily Potter had lived really lived that her warm hand had once moved across this parchment tracing ink into these letters these words words about him Harry her son .Impatiently brushing away the wetness in his eyes he reread the letter this time concentrating on the meaning .It was like listening to a halfremembered voice .They had had a cat .perhaps it had perished like his parents at Godrics Hollow .or else fled when there was nobody left to feed it .Sirius had bought him his first broomstick .His parents had known Bathilda Bagshot had Dumbledore introduced them ?DumblecLores still got his Invisibility Cloak .There was something funny there .Harry paused pondering his mothers words .Why had Dumbledore taken Jamess Invisibility Cloak ?Harry distinctly remembered his headmaster telling him years before I dont need a cloak to become invisible .Perhaps some less gifted Order member had needed its assistance and Dumbledore had acted as carrier ?Harry passed on .Wormy was here .Pettigrew the traitor had seemed down had he ?Was he aware that he was seeing James and Lily alive for the last time ?And finally Bathilda again who told incredible stories about Dumbledore .It seems incredible that Dumbledore That Dumbledore what ?But there were any number of things that would seem incredible about Dumbledore that he had once received bottom marks in a Transfiguration test for instance or had taken up goatcharming like Aberforth .Harry got to his feet and scanned the floor Perhaps the rest of the letter was here somewhere .He seized papers treating them in his eagerness with as little consideration as the original searcher he pulled open drawers shook out books stood on a chair to run his hand over the top of the wardrobe and crawled under the bed and armchair .At last lying facedown on the floor he spotted what looked like a torn piece of paper under the chest of drawers .When he pulled it out it proved to be most of the photograph Lily had described in her letter .A blackhaired baby was zooming in and out of the picture on a tiny broom roaring with laughter and a pair of legs that must have belonged to James was chasing after him .Harry tucked the photograph into his pocket with Lilys letter and continued to look for the second sheet .After another quarter of an hour however he was forced to conclude that the rest of his mothers letter was gone .Had it simply been lost in the sixteen years that had elapsed since it had been written or had it been taken by whoever had searched the room ?Harry read the first sheet again this time looking for clues as to what might have made the second sheet valuable .His toy broomstick could hardly be considered interesting to the Death Eaters .The only potentially useful thing he could see here was possible information on Dumbledore .It seems incredible that Dumbledore what ?Harry ?Harry !HarryV Im here !he called .Whats happened ?There was a clatter of footsteps outside the door and Hermione burst inside .We woke up and didnt know where you were !she said breathlessly .She turned and shouted over her shoulder Ron !Ive found him !Rons annoyed voice echoed distantly from several floors below .Good !Tell him from me hes a git !Harry dont just disappear please we were terrified !Why did you come up here anyway ?She gazed around the ransacked room .What have you been doing ?Look what Ive just found .He held out his mothers letter .Hermione took it and read it while Harry watched her .When she reached the end of the page she looked up at him .Oh Harry .And theres this too .He handed her the torn photograph and Hermione smiled at the baby zooming in and out of sight on the toy broom .Ive been looking for the rest of the letter Harry said but its not here .Hermione glanced around .Did you make all this mess or was some of it done when you got here ?Someone had searched before me said Harry .I thought so .Every room I looked into on the way up had been disturbed .What were they after do you think ?Information on the Order if it was Snape .But youd think hed already have all he needed I mean he was in the Order wasnt he ?Well then said Harry keen to discuss his theory what about information on Dumbledore ?The second page of this letter for instance .You know this Bathilda my mum mentions you know who she is ?Who ?Bathilda Bagshot the author of A History of Magic said Hermione looking interested .So your parents knew her ?She was an incredible magical historian .And shes still alive said Harry and she lives in Godrics Hollow Rons Auntie Muriel was talking about her at the wedding .She knew Dumbledore s family too .Be pretty interesting to talk to wouldnt she ?There was a little too much understanding in the smile Hermione gave him for Harrys liking .He took back the letter and the photograph and tucked them inside the pouch around his neck so as not to have to look at her and give himself away .I understand why youd love to talk to her about your mum and dad and Dumbledore too said Hermione .But that wouldnt really help us in our search for the Horcruxes would it ?Harry did not answer and she rushed on Harry I know you really want to go to Godrics Hollow but Im scared Im scared at how easily those Death Eaters found us yesterday .It just makes me feel more than ever that we ought to avoid the place where your parents are buried Im sure theyd be expecting you to visit it .Its not just that Harry said still avoiding looking at her .Muriel said stuff about Dumbledore at the wedding .I want to know the truth .He told Hermione everything that Muriel had told him .When he had finished Hermione said Of course I can see why thats upset you Harry Im not upset he lied Id just like to know whether or not its true or Harry do you really think youll get the truth from a malicious old woman like Muriel or from Rita Skeeter ?How can you believe them ?You knew Dumbledore !I thought I did he muttered .But you know how much truth there was in everything Rita wrote about you !Doge is right how can you let these people tarnish your memories of Dumbledore ?He looked away trying not to betray the resentment he felt .There it was again Choose what to believe .He wanted the truth .Why was everybody so determined that he should not get it ?Shall we go down to the kitchen ?Hermione suggested after a little pause .Find something for breakfast ?He agreed but grudgingly and followed her out onto the landing and past the second door that led off it .There were deep scratch marks in the paintwork below a small sign that he had not noticed in the dark .He paused at the top of the stairs to read it .It was a pompous little sign neatly lettered by hand the sort of thing that Percy Weasley might have stuck on his bedroom door Do Not Enter Without the Express Permission of Regulus Arcturus Black Excitement trickled through Harry but he was not immediately sure why .He read the sign again .Hermione was already a flight of stairs below him .Hermione he said and he was surprised that his voice was so calm .Come back up here .Whats the matter ?R .A .B .I think Ive found him .There was a gasp and then Hermione ran back up the stairs .In your mums letter ?But I didnt see Harry shook his head pointing at Reguluss sign .She read it then clutched Harrys arm so tightly that he winced .Siriuss brother ?she whispered .He was a Death Eater said Harry Sirius told me about him he joined up when he was really young and then got cold feet and tried to leave so they killed him .That fits !gasped Hermione .If he was a Death Eater he had access to Voldemort and if he became disenchanted then he would have wanted to bring Voldemort down !She released Harry leaned over the banister and screamed Ron !RON !Get up here quick !Ron appeared panting a minute later his wand ready in his hand .Whats up ?If its massive spiders again I want breakfast before I He frowned at the sign on Reguluss door to which Hermione was silently pointing .What ?That was Siriuss brother wasnt it ?Regulus Arcturus .Regulus .R .A .B .l The locket you dont reckon ?Lets find out said Harry .He pushed the door It was locked .Hermione pointed her wand at the handle and said Alohomora .There was a click and the door swung open .They moved over the threshold together gazing around .Reguluss bedroom was slightly smaller than Siriuss though it had the same sense of former grandeur .Whereas Sirius had sought to advertise his difference from the rest of the family Regulus had striven to emphasize the opposite .The Slytherin colors of emerald and silver were everywhere draping the bed the walls and the windows .The Black family crest was painstakingly painted over the bed along with its motto TOU JOURS PUR .Beneath this was a collection of yellow newspaper cuttings all stuck together to make a ragged collage .Hermione crossed the room to examine them .Theyre all about Voldemort she said .Regulus seems to have been a fan for a few years before he joined the Death Eaters .A little puff of dust rose from the bedcovers as she sat down to read the clippings .Harry meanwhile had noticed another photograph a Hogwarts Quidditch team was smiling and waving out of the frame .He moved closer and saw the snakes emblazoned on their chests Slytherins .Regulus was instantly recognizable as the boy sitting in the middle of the front row He had the same dark hair and slightly haughty look of his brother though he was smaller slighter and rather less handsome than Sirius had been .He played Seeker said Harry .What ?said Hermione vaguely she was still immersed in Voldemorts press clippings .Hes sitting in the middle of the front row thats where the Seeker .Never mind said Harry realizing that nobody was listening Ron was on his hands and knees searching under the wardrobe .Harry looked around the room for likely hiding places and approached the desk .Yet again somebody had searched before them .The drawers contents had been turned over recently the dust disturbed but there was nothing of value there old quills outof date textbooks that bore evidence of being roughly handled a recently smashed ink bottle its sticky residue covering the contents of the drawer .Theres an easier way said Hermione as Harry wiped his inky fingers on his jeans .She raised her wand and said Accio Locked .Nothing happened .Ron who had been searching the folds of the faded curtains looked disappointed .Is that it then ?Its not here ?Oh it could still be here but under counter enchantments said Hermione .Charms to prevent it being summoned magically you know .Like Voldemort put on the stone basin in the cave said Harry remembering how he had been unable to Summon the fake locket .How are we supposed to find it then ?asked Ron .We search manually said Hermione .Thats a good idea said Ron rolling his eyes and he resumed his examination of the curtains .They combed every inch of the room for more than an hour but were forced finally to conclude that the locket was not there .The sun had risen now its light dazzled them even through the grimy landing windows .It could be somewhere else in the house though said Hermione in a rallying tone as they walked back downstairs As Harry and Ron had become more discouraged she seemed to have become more determined .Whether hed managed to destroy it or not hed want to keep it hidden from Voldemort wouldnt he ?Remember all those awful things we had to get rid of when we were here last time ?That clock that shot bolts at everyone and those old robes that tried to strangle Ron Regulus might have put them there to protect the lockets hiding place even though we didnt realize it at .at .Harry and Ron looked at her .She was standing with one foot in midair with the dumbstruck look of one who had just been Obliviated her eyes had even drifted out of focus . .at the time she finished in a whisper .Something wrong ?asked Ron .There was a locket .What ?said Harry and Ron together .In the cabinet in the drawing room .Nobody could open it .And we .we .Harry felt as though a brick had slid down through his chest into his stomach .He remembered He had even handled the thing as they passed it around each trying in turn to prise it open .It had been tossed into a sack of rubbish along with the snuffbox of Wartcap powder and the music box that had made everyone sleepy .Kreacher nicked loads of things back from us said Harry .It was the only chance the only slender hope left to them and he was going to cling to it until forced to let go .He had a whole stash of stuff in his cupboard in the kitchen .Cmon .He ran down the stairs taking two steps at a time the other two thundering along in his wake .They made so much noise that they woke the portrait of Siriuss mother as they passed through the hall .Filth .Mudbloods Scum she screamed after them as they dashed down into the basement kitchen and slammed the door behind them .Harry ran the length of the room skidded to a halt at the door of Kreachers cupboard and wrenched it open .There was the nest of dirty old blankets in which the houseelf had once slept but they were no longer glittering with the trinkets Kreacher had salvaged .The only thing there was an old copy of Natures Nobility A Wizarding Genealogy .Refusing to believe his eyes Harry snatched up the blankets and shook them .A dead mouse fell out and rolled dismally across the floor .Ron groaned as he threw himself into a kitchen chair Hermione closed her eyes .Its not over yet said Harry and he raised his voice and called Kreacherl There was a loud crack and the houseelf that Harry had so reluctantly inherited from Sirius appeared out of nowhere in front of the cold and empty fireplace tiny half humansized his pale skin hanging off him in folds white hair sprouting copiously from his batlike ears .He was still wearing the filthy rag in which they had first met him and the contemptuous look he bent upon Harry showed that his attitude to his change of ownership had altered no more than his outfit .Master croaked Kreacher in his bullfrogs voice and he bowed low muttering to his knees back in my Mistresss old house with the bloodtraitor Weasley and the Mudblood I forbid you to call anyone ‘blood traitor or ‘Mudblood growled Harry .He would have found Kreacher with his snoutlike nose and bloodshot eyes a distinctly unlovable object even if the elf had not betrayed Sirius to Voldemort .Ive got a question for you said Harry his heart beating rather fast as he looked down at the elf and I order you to answer it truthfully .Understand ?Yes Master said Kreacher bowing low again Harry saw his lips moving soundlessly undoubtedly framing the insults he was now forbidden to utter .Two years ago said Harry his heart now hammering against his ribs there was a big gold locket in the drawing room upstairs .We threw it out .Did you steal it back ?There was a moments silence during which Kreacher straightened up to look Harry full in the face .Then he said Yes .Where is it now ?asked Harry jubilantly as Ron and Hermione looked gleeful .Kreacher closed his eyes as though he could not bear to see their reactions to his next word .Gone .Gone ?echoed Harry elation flooding out of him .What do you mean its gone ?The elf shivered .He swayed .Kreacher said Harry fiercely I order you Mundungus Fletcher croaked the elf his eyes still tight shut .Mundungus Fletcher stole it all Miss Bellas and Miss Cissys pictures my Mistresss gloves the Order of Merlin First Class the goblets with the family crest and and Kreacher was gulping for air His hollow chest was rising and falling rapidly then his eyes flew open and he uttered a bloodcurdling scream .and the locket Master Reguluss locket Kreacher did wrong Kreacher failed in his orders !Harry reacted instinctively As Kreacher lunged for the poker standing in the grate he launched himself upon the elf flattening him .Hermiones scream mingled with Kreachers but Harry bellowed louder than both of them Kreacher I order you to stay still !He felt the elf freeze and released him .Kreacher lay flat on the cold stone floor tears gushing from his sagging eyes .Harry let him up !Hermione whispered .So he can beat himself up with the poker ?snorted Harry kneeling beside the elf .I dont think so .Right Kreacher I want the truth How do you know Mundungus Fletcher stole the locket ?Kreacher saw him !gasped the elf as tears poured over his snout and into his mouth full of graying teeth .Kreacher saw him coming out of Kreachers cupboard with his hands full of Kreachers treasures .Kreacher told the sneak thief to stop but Mundungus Fletcher laughed and rran .You called the locket ‘Master Regulus s said Harry .Why ?Where did it come from ?What did Regulus have to do with it ?Kreacher sit up and tell me everything you know about that locket and everything Regulus had to do with it !The elf sat up curled into a ball placed his wet face between his knees and began to rock backward and forward .When he spoke his voice was muffled but quite distinct in the silent echoing kitchen .Master Sirius ran away good riddance for he was a bad boy and broke my Mistresss heart with his lawless ways .But Master Regulus had proper pride he knew what was due to the name of Black and the dignity of his pure blood .For years he talked of the Dark Lord who was going to bring the wizards out of hiding to rule the Muggles and the Muggleborns .and when he was sixteen years old Master Regulus joined the Dark Lord .So proud so proud so happy to serve .And one day a year after he had joined Master Regulus came down to the kitchen to see Kreacher .Master Regulus always liked Kreacher .And Master Regulus said .he said .The old elf rocked faster than ever . .he said that the Dark Lord required an elf .Voldemort needed an elf ?Harry repeated looking around at Ron and Hermione who looked just as puzzled as he did .Oh yes moaned Kreacher .And Master Regulus had volunteered Kreacher .It was an honor said Master Regulus an honor for him and for Kreacher who must be sure to do whatever the Dark Lord ordered him to do .and then to ccome home .Kreacher rocked still faster his breath coming in sobs .So Kreacher went to the Dark Lord .The Dark Lord did not tell Kreacher what they were to do but took Kreacher with him to a cave beside the sea .And beyond the cave there was a cavern and in the cavern was a great black lake .The hairs on the back of Harrys neck stood up .Kreachers croaking voice seemed to come to him from across that dark water .He saw what had happened as clearly as though he had been present . .There was a boat .Of course there had been a boat Harry knew the boat ghostly green and tiny bewitched so as to carry one wizard and one victim toward the island in the center .This then was how Voldemort had tested the defenses surrounding the Horcrux by borrowing a disposable creature a houseelf .There was a bbasin full of potion on the island .The DDark Lord made Kreacher drink it .The elf quaked from head to foot .Kreacher drank and as he drank he saw terrible things .Kreachers insides burned .Kreacher cried for Master Regulus to save him he cried for his Mistress Black but the Dark Lord only laughed .He made Kreacher drink all the potion .He dropped a locket into the empty basin .He filled it with more potion .And then the Dark Lord sailed away leaving Kreacher on the island .Harry could see it happening .He watched Voldemorts white snakelike face vanishing into darkness those red eyes fixed pitilessly on the thrashing elf whose death would occur within minutes whenever he succumbed to the desperate thirst that the burning potion caused its victim .But here Harrys imagination could go no further for he could not see how Kreacher had escaped .Kreacher needed water he crawled to the islands edge and he drank from the black lake .and hands dead hands came out of the water and dragged Kreacher under the surface .How did you get away ?Harry asked and he was not surprised to hear himself whispering .Kreacher raised his ugly head and looked at Harry with his great bloodshot eyes .Master Regulus told Kreacher to come back he said .I know but how did you escape the Inferi ?Kreacher did not seem to understand .Master Regulus told Kreacher to come back he repeated .I know but Well its obvious isnt it Harry ?said Ron .He Disapparated !But .you couldnt Apparate in and out of that cave said Harry otherwise Dumbledore Elf magic isnt like wizards magic is it ?said Ron .I mean they can Apparate and Disapparate in and out of Hogwarts when we cant .There was silence as Harry digested this .How could Voldemort have made such a mistake ?But even as he thought this Hermione spoke and her voice was icy .Of course Voldemort would have considered the ways of houseelves far beneath his notice just like all the purebloods who treat them like animals .It would never have occurred to him that they might have magic that he didnt .The houseelfs highest law is his Masters bidding intoned Kreacher .Kreacher was told to come home so Kreacher came home .Well then you did what you were told didnt you ?said Hermione kindly .You didnt disobey orders at all !Kreacher shook his head rocking as fast as ever .So what happened when you got back ?Harry asked .What did Regulus say when you told him what had happened ?Master Regulus was very worried very worried croaked Kreacher .Master Regulus told Kreacher to stay hidden and not to leave the house .And then .it was a little while later .Master Regulus came to find Kreacher in his cupboard one night and Master Regulus was strange not as he usually was disturbed in his mind Kreacher could tell .and he asked Kreacher to take him to the cave the cave where Kreacher had gone with the Dark Lord .And so they had set off .Harry could visualize them quite clearly the frightened old elf and the thin dark Seeker who had so resembled Sirius .Kreacher knew how to open the concealed entrance to the underground cavern knew how to raise the tiny boat this time it was his beloved Regulus who sailed with him to the island with its basin of poison .And he made you drink the potion ?said Harry disgusted .But Kreacher shook his head and wept .Hermiones hands leapt to her mouth She seemed to have understood something .MMaster Regulus took from his pocket a locket like the one the Dark Lord had said Kreacher tears pouring down either side of his snoutlike nose .And he told Kreacher to take it and when the basin was empty to switch the lockets .Kreachers sobs came in great rasps now Harry had to concentrate hard to understand him .And he ordered Kreacher to leave without him .And he told Kreacher to go home and never to tell my Mistress what he had done but to destroy the first locket .And he drank all the potion and Kreacher swapped the lockets and watched .as Master Regulus .was dragged beneath the water .and .Oh Kreacher !wailed Hermione who was crying .She dropped to her knees beside the elf and tried to hug him .At once he was on his feet cringing away from her quite obviously repulsed .The Mudblood touched Kreacher he will not allow it what would his Mistress say ?I told you not to call her ‘Mudblood !snarled Harry but the elf was already punishing himself He fell to the ground and banged his forehead on the floor .Stop him stop him !Hermione cried .Oh dont you see now how sick it is the way theyve got to obey ?Kreacher stop stop !shouted Harry .The elf lay on the floor panting and shivering green mucus glistening around his snout a bruise already blooming on his pallid forehead where he had struck himself his eyes swollen and bloodshot and swimming in tears .Harry had never seen anything so pitiful .So you brought the locket home he said relentlessly for he was determined to know the full story .And you tried to destroy it ?Nothing Kreacher did made any mark upon it moaned the elf .Kreacher tried everything everything he knew but nothing nothing would work .So many powerful spells upon the casing Kreacher was sure the way to destroy it was to get inside it but it would not open .Kreacher punished himself he tried again he punished himself he tried again .Kreacher failed to obey orders Kreacher could not destroy the locket !And his Mistress was mad with grief because Master Regulus had disappeared and Kreacher could not tell her what had happened no because Master Regulus had ffforbidden him to tell any of the fffamily what happened in the ccave .Kreacher began to sob so hard that there were no more coherent words .Tears flowed down Hermiones cheeks as she watched Kreacher but she did not dare touch him again .Even Ron who was no fan of Kreachers looked troubled .Harry sat back on his heels and shook his head trying to clear it .I dont understand you Kreacher he said finally .Voldemort tried to kill you Regulus died to bring Voldemort down but you were still happy to betray Sirius to Voldemort ?You were happy to go to Narcissa and Bellatrix and pass information to Voldemort through them .Harry Kreacher doesnt think like that said Hermione wiping her eyes on the back of her hand .Hes a slave houseelves are used to bad even brutal treatment what Voldemort did to Kreacher wasnt that far out of the common way .What do wizard wars mean to an elf like Kreacher ?Hes loyal to people who are kind to him and Mrs Black must have been and Regulus certainly was so he served them willingly and parroted their beliefs .I know what youre going to say she went on as Harry began to protest that Regulus changed his mind .but he doesnt seem to have explained that to Kreacher does he ?And I think I know why .Kreacher and Regulus s family were all safer if they kept to the old pureblood line .Regulus was trying to protect them all .Sirius Sirius was horrible to Kreacher Harry and its no good looking like that you know its true .Kreacher had been alone for a long time when Sirius came to live here and he was probably starving for a bit of affection .Im sure ‘Miss Cissy and ‘Miss Bella were perfectly lovely to Kreacher when he turned up so he did them a favor and told them everything they wanted to know .Ive said all along that wizards would pay for how they treat houseelves .Well Voldemort did .and so did Sirius .Harry had no retort .As he watched Kreacher sobbing on the floor he remembered what Dumbledore had said to him mere hours after Siriuss death I do not think Sirius ever saw Kreacher as a being with feelings as acute as a humans .Kreacher said Harry after a while when you feel up to it er .please sit up .It was several minutes before Kreacher hiccuped himself into silence .Then he pushed himself into a sitting position again rubbing his knuckles into his eyes like a small child .Kreacher I am going to ask you to do something said Harry .He glanced at Hermione for assistance .He wanted to give the order kindly but at the same time he could not pretend that it was not an order .However the change in his tone seemed to have gained her approval She smiled encouragingly .Kreacher I want you please to go and find Mundungus Fletcher .We need to find out where the locket where Master Reguluss locket is .Its really important .We want to finish the work Master Regulus started we want to er ensure that he didnt die in vain .Kreacher dropped his fists and looked up at Harry .Find Mundungus Fletcher ?he croaked .And bring him here to Grimmauld Place said Harry .Do you think you could do that for us ?As Kreacher nodded and got to his feet Harry had a sudden inspiration .He pulled out Hagrids purse and took out the fake Horcrux the substitute locket in which Regulus had placed the note to Voldemort .Kreacher Id er like you to have this he said pressing the locket into the elfs hand .This belonged to Regulus and Im sure hed want you to have it as a token of gratitude for what you Overkill mate said Ron as the elf took one look at the locket let out a howl of shock and misery and threw himself back onto the ground .It took them nearly half an hour to calm down Kreacher who was so overcome to be presented with a Black family heirloom for his very own that he was too weak at the knees to stand properly .When finally he was able to totter a few steps they all accompanied him to his cupboard watched him tuck up the locket safely in his dirty blankets and assured him that they would make its protection their first priority while he was away .He then made two low bows to Harry and Ron and even gave a funny little spasm in Hermiones direction that might have been an attempt at a respectful salute before Disapparating with the usual loud crack .THE BRIBE If Kreacher could escape a lake full of Inferi Harry was confident that the capture of Mundungus would take a few hours at most and he prowled the house all morning in a state of high anticipation .However Kreacher did not return that morning or even that afternoon .By nightfall Harry felt discouraged and anxious and a supper composed largely of moldy bread upon which Hermione had tried a variety of unsuccessful Transfigurations did nothing to help .Kreacher did not return the following day nor the day after that .However two cloaked men had appeared in the square outside number twelve and they remained there into the night gazing in the direction of the house that they could not see .Death Eaters for sure said Ron as he Harry and Hermione watched from the drawing room windows .Reckon they know were in here ?I dont think so said Hermione though she looked frightened or theyd have sent Snape in after us wouldnt they ?Dyou reckon hes been in here and had his tongue tied by Moodys curse ?asked Ron .Yes said Hermione otherwise hed have been able to tell that lot how to get in wouldnt he ?But theyre probably watching to see whether we turn up .They know that Harry owns the house after all .How do they ?began Harry .Wizarding wills are examined by the Ministry remember ?Theyll know Sirius left you the place .The presence of the Death Eaters outside increased the ominous mood inside number twelve .They had not heard a word from anyone beyond Grimmauld Place since Mr Weasleys Patronus and the strain was starting to tell .Restless and irritable Ron had developed an annoying habit of playing with the Deluminator in his pocket This particularly infuriated Hermione who was whiling away the wait for Kreacher by studying The Tales of Beedle the Bard and did not appreciate the way the lights kept flashing on and off .Will you stop it !she cried on the third evening of Kreachers absence as all light was sucked from the drawing room yet again .Sorry sorry !said Ron clicking the Deluminator and restoring the lights .I dont know Im doing it !Well cant you find something useful to occupy yourself ?What like reading kids stories ?Dumbledore left me this book Ron and he left me the Deluminator maybe Im supposed to use it !Unable to stand the bickering Harry slipped out of the room unnoticed by either of them .He headed downstairs toward the kitchen which he kept visiting because he was sure that was where Kreacher was most likely to reappear .Halfway down the flight of stairs into the hall however he heard a tap on the front door then metallic clicks and the grinding of the chain .Every nerve in his body seemed to tauten He pulled out his wand moved into the shadows beside the decapitated elf heads and waited .The door opened He saw a glimpse of the lamplit square outside and a cloaked figure edged into the hall and closed the door behind it .The intruder took a step forward and Moodys voice asked Severus Snape ?Then the dust figure rose from the end of the hall and rushed him raising its dead hand .It was not I who killed you Albus said a quiet voice .The jinx broke The dustfigure exploded again and it was impossible to make out the newcomer through the dense gray cloud it left behind .Harry pointed his wand into the middle of it .Dont move !He had forgotten the portrait of Mrs Black At the sound of his yell the curtains hiding her flew open and she began to scream Mudbloods and filth dishonoring my house Ron and Hermione came crashing down the stairs behind Harry wands pointing like his at the unknown man now standing with his arms raised in the hall below .Hold your fire its me Remus !Oh thank goodness said Hermione weakly pointing her wand at Mrs Black instead with a bang the curtains swished shut again and silence fell .Ron too lowered his wand but Harry did not .Show yourself !he called back .Lupin moved forward into the lamplight hands still held high in a gesture of surrender .I am Remus John Lupin werewolf sometimes known as Moony one of the four creators of the Marauders Map married to Nymphadora usually known as Tonks and I taught you how to produce a Patronus Harry which takes the form of a stag .Oh all right said Harry lowering his wand but I had to check didnt I ?Speaking as your exDefense Against the Dark Arts teacher I quite agree that you had to check .Ron Hermione you shouldnt be quite so quick to lower your defenses .They ran down the stairs toward him .Wrapped in a thick black traveling cloak he looked exhausted but pleased to see them .No sign of Severus then ?he asked .No said Harry .Whats going on ?Is everyone okay ?Yes said Lupin but were all being watched .There are a couple of Death Eaters in the square outside We know I had to Apparate very precisely onto the top step outside the front door to be sure that they would not see me .They cant know youre in here or Im sure theyd have more people out there theyre staking out everywhere thats got any connection with you Harry .Lets go downstairs theres a lot to tell you and I want to know what happened after you left the Burrow .They descended into the kitchen where Hermione pointed her wand at the grate .A fire sprang up instantly It gave the illusion of coziness to the stark stone walls and glistened off the long wooden table .Lupin pulled a few butterbeers from beneath his traveling cloak and they sat down .Id have been here three days ago but I needed to shake off the Death Eater tailing me said Lupin .So you came straight here after the wedding ?No said Harry only after we ran into a couple of Death Eaters in a cafe on Tottenham Court Road .Lupin slopped most of his butterbeer down his front .What ?They explained what had happened when they had finished Lupin looked aghast .But how did they find you so quickly ?Its impossible to track anyone who Apparates unless you grab hold of them as they disappear !And it doesnt seem likely they were just strolling down Tottenham Court Road at the time does it ?said Harry .We wondered said Hermione tentatively whether Harry could still have the Trace on him ?Impossible said Lupin .Ron looked smug and Harry felt hugely relieved .Apart from anything else theyd know for sure Harry was here if he still had the Trace on him wouldnt they ?But I cant see how they could have tracked you to Tottenham Court Road thats worrying really worrying .He looked disturbed but as far as Harry was concerned that question could wait .Tell us what happened after we left we havent heard a thing since Rons dad told us the family were safe .Well Kingsley saved us said Lupin .Thanks to his warning most of the wedding guests were able to Disapparate before they arrived .Were they Death Eaters or Ministry people ?interjected Hermione .A mixture but to all intents and purposes theyre the same thing now said Lupin .There were about a dozen of them but they didnt know you were there Harry .Arthur heard a rumor that they tried to torture your whereabouts out of Scrimgeour before they killed him if its true he didnt give you away .Harry looked at Ron and Hermione their expressions reflected the mingled shock and gratitude he felt .He had never liked Scrimgeour much but if what Lupin said was true the mans final act had been to try to protect Harry .The Death Eaters searched the Burrow from top to bottom Lupin went on .They found the ghoul but didnt want to get too close and then they interrogated those of us who remained for hours .They were trying to get information on you Harry but of course nobody apart from the Order knew that you had been there .At the same time that they were smashing up the wedding more Death Eaters were forcing their way into every Orderconnected house in the country .No deaths he added quickly forestalling the question but they were rough .They burned down Dedalus Diggles house but as you know he wasnt there and they used the Cruciatus Curse on Tonkss family .Again trying to find out where you went after you visited them .Theyre all right shaken obviously but otherwise okay .The Death Eaters got through all those protective charms ?Harry asked remembering how effective these had been on the night he had crashed in Tonkss parents garden .What youve got to realize Harry is that the Death Eaters have got the full might of the Ministry on their side now said Lupin .Theyve got the power to perform brutal spells without fear of identification or arrest .They managed to penetrate every defensive spell wed cast against them and once inside they were completely open about why theyd come .And are they bothering to give an excuse for torturing Harrys whereabouts out of people ?asked Hermione an edge to her voice .Well said Lupin .He hesitated then pulled out a folded copy of the Daily Prophet Here he said pushing it across the table to Harry youll know sooner or later anyway .Thats their pretext for going after you .Harry smoothed out the paper .A huge photograph of his own face filled the front page .He read the headline over it WANTED FOR QUESTIONING ABOUT THE DEATH OF ALBUS DUMBLEDORE Ron and Hermione gave roars of outrage but Harry said nothing .He pushed the newspaper away he did not want to read any more He knew what it would say .Nobody but those who had been on top of the tower when Dumbledore died knew who had really killed him and as Rita Skeeter had already told the Wizarding world Harry had been seen running from the place moments after Dumbledore had fallen .Im sorry Harry Lupin said .So Death Eaters have taken over the Daily Prophet too ?asked Hermione furiously .Lupin nodded .But surely people realize whats going on ?The coup has been smooth and virtually silent said Lupin .The official version of Scrimgeours murder is that he resigned he has been replaced by Pius Thicknesse who is under the Imperius Curse .Why didnt Voldemort declare himself Minister of Magic ?asked Ron .Lupin laughed .He doesnt need to Ron .Effectively he is the Minister but why should he sit behind a desk at the Ministry ?His puppet Thicknesse is taking care of everyday business leaving Voldemort free to extend his power beyond the Ministry .Naturally many people have deduced what has happened There has been such a dramatic change in Ministry policy in the last few days and many are whispering that Voldemort must be behind it .However that is the point They whisper .They darent confide in each other not knowing whom to trust they are scared to speak out in case their suspicions are true and their families are targeted .Yes Voldemort is playing a very clever game .Declaring himself might have provoked open rebellion Remaining masked has created confusion uncertainty and fear .And this dramatic change in Ministry policy said Harry involves warning the Wizarding world against me instead of Voldemort ?Thats certainly part of it said Lupin and it is a masterstroke .Now that Dumbledore is dead you the Boy Who Lived were sure to be the symbol and rallying point for any resistance to Voldemort .But by suggesting that you had a hand in the old heros death Voldemort has not only set a price upon your head but sown doubt and fear amongst many who would have defended you .Meanwhile the Ministry has started moving against Muggleborns .Lupin pointed at the Daily Prophet Look at page two .Hermione turned the pages with much the same expression of distaste she had worn when handling Secrets of the Darkest Art ‘Muggleborn Register she read aloud . ‘The Ministry of Magic is undertaking a survey of socalled Muggleborns the better to understand how they came to possess magical secrets . ‘Recent research undertaken by the Department of Mysteries reveals that magic can only be passed from person to person when Wizards reproduce .Where no proven Wizarding ancestry exists therefore the so called Muggleborn is likely to have obtained magical power by theft or force . ‘The Ministry is determined to root out such usurpers of magical power and to this end has issued an invitation to every socalled Muggleborn to present themselves for interview by the newly appointed Muggleborn Registration Commission .People wont let this happen said Ron .It is happening Ron said Lupin .Muggleborns are being rounded up as we speak .But how are they supposed to have ‘stolen magic ?said Ron .Its mental if you could steal magic there wouldnt be any Squibs would there ?I know said Lupin .Nevertheless unless you can prove that you have at least one close Wizarding relative you are now deemed to have obtained your magical power illegally and must suffer the punishment .Ron glanced at Hermione then said What if purebloods and halfbloods swear a Muggleborns part of their family ?Ill tell everyone Hermione s my cousin Hermione covered Rons hand with hers and squeezed it .Thank you Ron but I couldnt let you You wont have a choice said Ron fiercely gripping her hand back .Ill teach you my family tree so you can answer questions on it .Hermione gave a shaky laugh .Ron as were on the run with Harry Potter the most wanted person in the country I dont think it matters .If I was going back to school it would be different .Whats Voldemort planning for Hogwarts ?she asked Lupin .Attendance is now compulsory for every young witch and wizard he replied .That was announced yesterday .Its a change because it was never obligatory before .Of course nearly every witch and wizard in Britain has been educated at Hogwarts but their parents had the right to teach them at home or send them abroad if they preferred .This way Voldemort will have the whole Wizarding population under his eye from a young age .And its also another way of weeding out Muggleborns because students must be given Blood Status meaning that they have proven to the Ministry that they are of Wizard descent before they are allowed to attend .Harry felt sickened and angry At this moment excited elevenyearolds would be poring over stacks of newly purchased spellbooks unaware that they would never see Hogwarts perhaps never see their families again either .Its .its .he muttered struggling to find words that did justice to the horror of his thoughts but Lupin said quietly I know .Lupin hesitated .Ill understand if you cant confirm this Harry but the Order is under the impression that Dumbledore left you a mission .He did Harry replied and Ron and Hermione are in on it and theyre coming with me .Can you confide in me what the mission is ?Harry looked into the prematurely lined face framed in thick but graying hair and wished that he could return a different answer .I cant Remus Im sorry .If Dumbledore didnt tell you I dont think I can .I thought youd say that said Lupin looking disappointed .But I might still be of some use to you .You know what I am and what I can do .I could come with you to provide protection .There would be no need to tell me exactly what you were up to .Harry hesitated .It was a very tempting offer though how they would be able to keep their mission secret from Lupin if he were with them all the time he could not imagine .Hermione however looked puzzled .But what about Tonks ?she asked .What about her ?said Lupin .Well said Hermione frowning youre married !How does she feel about you going away with us ?Tonks will be perfectly safe said Lupin .Shell be at her parents house .There was something strange in Lupins tone it was almost cold .There was also something odd in the idea of Tonks remaining hidden at her parents house she was after all a member of the Order and as far as Harry knew was likely to want to be in the thick of the action .Remus said Hermione tentatively is everything all right .you know .between you and Everything is fine thank you said Lupin pointedly .Hermione turned pink .There was another pause an awkward and embarrassed one and then Lupin said with an air of forcing himself to admit something unpleasant Tonks is going to have a baby .Oh how wonderful !squealed Hermione .Excellent !said Ron enthusiastically .Congratulations said Harry .Lupin gave an artificial smile that was more like a grimace then said So .do you accept my offer ?Will three become four ?I cannot believe that Dumbledore would have disapproved he appointed me your Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher after all .And I must tell you that I believe that we are facing magic many of us have never encountered or imagined .Ron and Hermione both looked at Harry .Just just to be clear he said .You want to leave Tonks at her parents house and come away with us ?Shell be perfectly safe there theyll look after her said Lupin .He spoke with a finality bordering on indifference .Harry Im sure James would have wanted me to stick with you .Well said Harry slowly Im not .Im pretty sure my father would have wanted to know why you arent sticking with your own kid actually .Lupins face drained of color .The temperature in the kitchen might have dropped ten degrees .Ron stared around the room as though he had been bidden to memorize it while Hermione s eyes swiveled backward and forward from Harry to Lupin .You dont understand said Lupin at last .Explain then said Harry .Lupin swallowed .I I made a grave mistake in marrying Tonks .I did it against my better judgment and I have regretted it very much ever since .I see said Harry so youre just going to dump her and the kid and run off with us ?Lupin sprang to his feet His chair toppled over backward and he glared at them so fiercely that Harry saw for the first time ever the shadow of the wolf upon his human face .Dont you understand what Ive done to my wife and my unborn child ?I should never have married her Ive made her an outcast !Lupin kicked aside the chair he had overturned .You have only ever seen me amongst the Order or under Dumbledores protection at Hogwarts !You dont know how most of the Wizarding world sees creatures like me !When they know of my affliction they can barely talk to me !Dont you see what Ive done ?Even her own family is disgusted by our marriage what parents want their only daughter to marry a werewolf ?And the child the child Lupin actually seized handfuls of his own hair he looked quite deranged .My kind dont usually breed !It will be like me I am convinced of it how can I forgive myself when I knowingly risked passing on my own condition to an innocent child ?And if by some miracle it is not like me then it will be better off a hundred times so without a father of whom it must always be ashamed !Remus !whispered Hermione tears in her eyes .Dont say that how could any child be ashamed of you ?Oh I dont know Hermione said Harry .Id be pretty ashamed of him .Harry did not know where his rage was coming from but it had propelled him to his feet too .Lupin looked as though Harry had hit him .If the new regime thinks Muggleborns are bad Harry said what will they do to a halfwerewolf whose fathers in the Order ?My father died trying to protect my mother and me and you reckon hed tell you to abandon your kid to go on an adventure with us ?How how dare you ?said Lupin .This is not about a desire for for danger or personal glory how dare you suggest such a I think youre feeling a bit of a daredevil Harry said .You fancy stepping into Siriuss shoes Harry no !Hermione begged him but he continued to glare into Lupins livid face .Id never have believed this Harry said .The man who taught me to fight dementors a coward .Lupin drew his wand so fast that Harry had barely reached for his own there was a loud bang and he felt himself flying backward as if punched as he slammed into the kitchen wall and slid to the floor he glimpsed the tail of Lupins cloak disappearing around the door .Remus Remus come back !Hermione cried but Lupin did not respond .A moment later they heard the front door slam .Harry !wailed Hermione .How could you ?It was easy said Harry .He stood up he could feel a lump swelling where his head had hit the wall .He was still so full of anger he was shaking .Dont look at me like that !he snapped at Hermione .Dont you start on her !snarled Ron .No no we mustnt fight !said Hermione launching herself between them .You shouldnt have said that stuff to Lupin Ron told Harry .He had it coming to him said Harry .Broken images were racing each other through his mind Sirius falling through the veil Dumbledore suspended broken in midair a flash of green light and his mothers voice begging for mercy .Parents said Harry shouldnt leave their kids unless unless theyve got to .Harry said Hermione stretching out a consoling hand but he shrugged it off and walked away his eyes on the fire Hermione had conjured .He had once spoken to Lupin out of that fireplace seeking reassurance about James and Lupin had consoled him .Now Lupins tortured white face seemed to swim in the air before him .He felt a sickening surge of remorse .Neither Ron nor Hermione spoke but Harry felt sure that they were looking at each other behind his back communicating silently .He turned around and caught them turning hurriedly away from each other .I know I shouldnt have called him a coward .No you shouldnt said Ron at once .But hes acting like one .All the same .said Hermione .I know said Harry .But if it makes him go back to Tonks itll be worth it wont it ?He could not keep the plea out of his voice .Hermione looked sympathetic Ron uncertain .Harry looked down at his feet thinking of his father .Would James have backed Harry in what he had said to Lupin or would he have been angry at how his son had treated his old friend ?The silent kitchen seemed to hum with the shock of the recent scene and with Ron and Hermione s unspoken reproaches .The Daily Prophet Lupin had brought was still lying on the table Harrys own face staring up at the ceiling from the front page .He walked over to it and sat down opened the paper at random and pretended to read .He could not take in the words his mind was still too full of the encounter with Lupin .He was sure that Ron and Hermione had resumed their silent communications on the other side of the Prophet He turned a page loudly and Dumbledores name leapt out at him .It was a moment or two before he took in the meaning of the photograph which showed a family group .Beneath the photograph were the words The Dumbledore family left to right Albus Percival holding newborn Ariana Kendra and Aberforth .His attention caught Harry examined the picture more carefully .Dumbledores father Percival was a goodlooking man with eyes that seemed to twinkle even in this faded old photograph .The baby Ariana was little longer than a loaf of bread and no more distinctivelooking .The mother Kendra had jetblack hair pulled into a high bun .Her face had a carved quality about it .Harry thought of photos of Native Americans hed seen as he studied her dark eyes high cheekbones and straight nose formally composed above a highnecked silk gown .Albus and Aberforth wore matching lacy collared jackets and had identical shoulderlength hairstyles .Albus looked several years older but otherwise the two boys looked very alike for this was before Albus s nose had been broken and before he started wearing glasses .The family looked quite happy and normal smiling serenely up out of the newspaper .Baby Arianas arm waved vaguely out of her shawl .Harry looked above the picture and saw the headline EXCLUSIVE EXTRACT FROM THE UPCOMING BIOGRAPHY OF ALBUS DUMBLEDORE by Rita Skeeter Thinking that it could hardly make him feel any worse than he already did Harry began to read Proud and haughty Kendra Dumbledore could not bear to remain in MouldontheWold after her husband Percivals wellpublicized arrest and imprisonment in Azkaban .She therefore decided to uproot the family and relocate to Godrics Hollow the village that was later to gain fame as the scene of Harry Potters strange escape from YouKnowWho .Like MouldontheWold Godrics Hollow was home to a number of Wizarding families but as Kendra knew none of them she would be spared the curiosity about her husbands crime she had faced in her former village .By repeatedly rebuffing the friendly advances of her new Wizarding neighbors she soon ensured that her family was left well alone .Slammed the door in my face when I went around to welcome her with a batch of homemade Cauldron Cakes says Bathilda Bagshot .The first year they were there I only ever saw the two boys .Wouldnt have known there was a daughter if I hadnt been picking Plangentines by moonlight the winter after they moved in and saw Kendra leading Ariana out into the back garden .Walked her round the lawn once keeping a firm grip on her then took her back inside .Didnt know what to make of it .It seems that Kendra thought the move to Godrics Hollow was the perfect opportunity to hide Ariana once and for all something she had probably been planning for years .The timing was significant .Ariana was barely seven years old when she vanished from sight and seven is the age by which most experts agree that magic will have revealed itself if present .Nobody now alive remembers Ariana ever demonstrating even the slightest sign of magical ability .It seems clear therefore that Kendra made a decision to hide her daughters existence rather than suffer the shame of admitting that she had produced a Squib .Moving away from the friends and neighbors who knew Ariana would of course make imprisoning her all the easier .The tiny number of people who henceforth knew of Arianas existence could be counted upon to keep the secret including her two brothers who deflected awkward questions with the answer their mother had taught them My sister is too frail for school .Next week Albus Dumbledore at Hogwarts the Prizes and the Pretense .Harry had been wrong What he had read had indeed made him feel worse .He looked back at the photograph of the apparently happy family .Was it true ?How could he find out ?He wanted to go to Godrics Hollow even if Bathilda was in no fit state to talk to him he wanted to visit the place where he and Dumbledore had both lost loved ones .He was in the process of lowering the newspaper to ask Rons and Hermiones opinions when a deafening crack echoed around the kitchen .For the first time in three days Harry had forgotten all about Kreacher .His immediate thought was that Lupin had burst back into the room and for a split second he did not take in the mass of struggling limbs that had appeared out of thin air right beside his chair .He hurried to his feet as Kreacher disentangled himself and bowing low to Harry croaked Kreacher has returned with the thief Mundungus Fletcher Master .Mundungus scrambled up and pulled out his wand Hermione however was too quick for him .Expelliarmusl Mundungus s wand soared into the air and Hermione caught it .Wildeyed Mundungus dived for the stairs Ron rugbytackled him and Mundungus hit the stone floor with a muffled crunch .What ?he bellowed writhing in his attempts to free himself from Rons grip .Whave I done ?Setting a bleedin ouseelf on me what are you playing at whave I done lemme go lemme go or Youre not in much of a position to make threats said Harry .He threw aside the newspaper crossed the kitchen in a few strides and dropped to his knees beside Mundungus who stopped struggling and looked terrified .Ron got up panting and watched as Harry pointed his wand deliberately at Mundungus s nose .Mundungus stank of stale sweat and tobacco smoke His hair was matted and his robes stained .Kreacher apologizes for the delay in bringing the thief Master croaked the elf .Fletcher knows how to avoid capture has many hideyholes and accomplices .Nevertheless Kreacher cornered the thief in the end .Youve done really well Kreacher said Harry and the elf bowed low .Right weve got a few questions for you Harry told Mundungus who shouted at once I panicked okay ?I never wanted to come along no offense mate but I never volunteered to die for you an that was bleedin YouKnowWho come flying at me anyone woulda got outta there I said all along I didnt wanna do it For your information none of the rest of us Disapparated said Hermione .Well youre a bunch of bleedin eroes then arent you but I never pretended I was up for killing meself Were not interested in why you ran out on Mad Eye said Harry moving his wand a little closer to Mundunguss baggy bloodshot eyes .We already knew you were an unreliable bit of scum .Well then why the ell am I being unted down by ouseelves ?Or is this about them goblets again ?I aint got none of em left or you could ave em Its not about the goblets either although youre getting warmer said Harry .Shut up and listen .It felt wonderful to have something to do someone of whom he could demand some small portion of truth .Harrys wand was now so close to the bridge of Mundunguss nose that Mundungus had gone cross eyed trying to keep it in view .When you cleaned out this house of anything valuable Harry began but Mundungus interrupted him again .Sirius never cared about any of the junk There was the sound of pattering feet a blaze of shining copper an echoing clang and a shriek of agony Kreacher had taken a run at Mundungus and hit him over the head with a saucepan .Call im off call im off e should be locked up !screamed Mundungus cowering as Kreacher raised the heavybottomed pan again .Kreacher no !shouted Harry .Kreachers thin arms trembled with the weight of the pan still held aloft .Perhaps just one more Master Harry for luck ?Ron laughed .We need him conscious Kreacher but if he needs persuading you can do the honors said Harry .Thank you very much Master said Kreacher with a bow and he retreated a short distance his great pale eyes still fixed upon Mundungus with loathing .When you stripped this house of all the valuables you could find Harry began again you took a bunch of stuff from the kitchen cupboard .There was a locket there .Harrys mouth was suddenly dry He could sense Ron and Hermiones tension and excitement too .What did you do with it ?Why ?asked Mundungus .Is it valuable ?Youve still got it !cried Hermione .No he hasnt said Ron shrewdly .Hes wondering whether he should have asked more money for it .More ?said Mundungus .That wouldnt have been effing difficult .bleedin gave it away din I ?No choice .What do you mean ?I was selling in Diagon Alley and she come up to me and asks if Ive got a license for trading in magical artifacts .Bleedin snoop .She was gonna fine me but she took a fancy to the locket an told me shed take it and let me off that time and to fink meself lucky .Who was this woman ?asked Harry .I dunno some Ministry hag .Mundungus considered for a moment brow wrinkled .Little woman .Bow on top of er head .He frowned and then added Looked like a toad .Harry dropped his wand It hit Mundungus on the nose and shot red sparks into his eyebrows which ignited .Aguamenti screamed Hermione and a jet of water streamed from her wand engulfing a spluttering and choking Mundungus .Harry looked up and saw his own shock reflected in Rons and Hermiones faces .The scars on the back of his right hand seemed to be tingling again .MAGIC IS MIGHT As August wore on the square of unkempt grass in the middle of Grimmauld Place shriveled in the sun until it was brittle and brown .The inhabitants of number twelve were never seen by anybody in the surrounding houses and nor was number twelve itself .The Muggles who lived in Grimmauld Place had long since accepted the amusing mistake in the numbering that had caused number eleven to sit beside number thirteen .And yet the square was now attracting a trickle of visitors who seemed to find the anomaly most intriguing .Barely a day passed without one or two people arriving in Grimmauld Place with no other purpose or so it seemed than to lean against the railings facing numbers eleven and thirteen watching the join between the two houses .The lurkers were never the same two days running although they all seemed to share a dislike for normal clothing .Most of the Londoners who passed them were used to eccentric dressers and took little notice though occasionally one of them might glance back wondering why anyone would wear such long cloaks in this heat .The watchers seemed to be gleaning little satisfaction from their vigil .Occasionally one of them started forward excitedly as if they had seen something interesting at last only to fall back looking disappointed .On the first day of September there were more people lurking in the square than ever before .Half a dozen men in long cloaks stood silent and watchful gazing as ever at houses eleven and thirteen but the thing for which they were waiting still appeared elusive .As evening drew in bringing with it an unexpected gust of chilly rain for the first time in weeks there occurred one of those inexplicable moments when they appeared to have seen something interesting .The man with the twisted face pointed and his closest companion a podgy pallid man started forward but a moment later they had relaxed into their previous state of inactivity looking frustrated and disappointed .Meanwhile inside number twelve Harry had just entered the hall .He had nearly lost his balance as he Apparated onto the top step just outside the front door and thought that the Death Eaters might have caught a glimpse of his momentarily exposed elbow .Shutting the front door carefully behind him he pulled off the Invisibility Cloak draped it over his arm and hurried along the gloomy hallway toward the door that led to the basement a stolen copy of the Daily Prophet clutched in his hand .The usual low whisper of Severus Snape ?greeted him the chill wind swept him and his tongue rolled up for a moment .I didnt kill you he said once it had unrolled then held his breath as the dusty jinxfigure exploded .He waited until he was halfway down the stairs to the kitchen out of earshot of Mrs Black and clear of the dust cloud before calling Ive got news and you wont like it .The kitchen was almost unrecognizable .Every surface now shone Copper pots and pans had been burnished to a rosy glow the wooden tabletop gleamed the goblets and plates already laid for dinner glinted in the light from a merrily blazing fire on which a cauldron was simmering .Nothing in the room however was more dramatically different than the houseelf who now came hurrying toward Harry dressed in a snowywhite towel his ear hair as clean and fluffy as cotton wool Reguluss locket bouncing on his thin chest .Shoes off if you please Master Harry and hands washed before dinner croaked Kreacher seizing the Invisibility Cloak and slouching off to hang it on a hook on the wall beside a number of oldfashioned robes that had been freshly laundered .Whats happened ?Ron asked apprehensively .He and Hermione had been poring over a sheaf of scribbled notes and handdrawn maps that littered the end of the long kitchen table but now they watched Harry as he strode toward them and threw down the newspaper on top of their scattered parchment .A large picture of a familiar hooknosed blackhaired man stared up at them all beneath a headline that read SEVERUS SNAPE CONFIRMED AS HOGWARTS HEADMASTER No !said Ron and Hermione loudly .Hermione was quickest she snatched up the newspaper and began to read the accompanying story out loud . ‘Severus Snape longstanding Potions master at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry was today appointed headmaster in the most important of several staffing changes at the ancient school .Following the resignation of the previous Muggle Studies teacher Alecto Carrow will take over the post while her brother Amycus fills the position of Defense Against the Dark Arts professor .7 welcome the opportunity to uphold our finest Wizarding traditions and values Like committing murder and cutting off peoples ears I suppose !Snape headmaster !Snape in Dumbledores study Merlins pants !she shrieked making both Harry and Ron jump .She leapt up from the table and hurtled from the room shouting as she went Ill be back in a minute ! ‘Merlins pants ?repeated Ron looking amused .She must be upset .He pulled the newspaper toward him and perused the article about Snape .The other teachers wont stand for this .McGonagall and Flitwick and Sprout all know the truth they know how Dumbledore died .They wont accept Snape as headmaster .And who are these Carrows ?Death Eaters said Harry .There are pictures of them inside .They were at the top of the tower when Snape killed Dumbledore so its all friends together .And Harry went on bitterly drawing up a chair I cant see that the other teachers have got any choice but to stay .If the Ministry and Voldemort are behind Snape itll be a choice between staying and teaching or a nice few years in Azkaban and thats if theyre lucky .I reckon theyll stay to try and protect the students .Kreacher came bustling to the table with a large tureen in his hands and ladled out soup into pristine bowls whistling between his teeth as he did so .Thanks Kreacher said Harry flipping over the Prophet so as not to have to look at Snape s face .Well at least we know exactly where Snape is now .He began to spoon soup into his mouth .The quality of Kreachers cooking had improved dramatically ever since he had been given Reguluss locket Todays French onion was as good as Harry had ever tasted .There are still a load of Death Eaters watching the house he told Ron as he ate more than usual .Its like theyre hoping well march out carrying our school trunks and head off for the Hogwarts Express .Ron glanced at his watch .Ive been thinking about that all day .It left nearly six hours ago .Weird not being on it isnt it ?In his minds eye Harry seemed to see the scarlet steam engine as he and Ron had once followed it by air shimmering between fields and hills a rippling scarlet caterpillar .He was sure Ginny Neville and Luna were sitting together at this moment perhaps wondering where he Ron and Hermione were or debating how best to undermine Snape s new regime .They nearly saw me coming back in just now Harry said .I landed badly on the top step and the Cloak slipped .I do that every time .Oh here she is Ron added craning around in his seat to watch Hermione reentering the kitchen .And what in the name of Merlins most baggy Y Fronts was that about ?I remembered this Hermione panted .She was carrying a large framed picture which she now lowered to the floor before seizing her small beaded bag from the kitchen sideboard .Opening it she proceeded to force the painting inside and despite the fact that it was patently too large to fit inside the tiny bag within a few seconds it had vanished like so much else into the bags capacious depths .Phineas Nigellus Hermione explained as she threw the bag onto the kitchen table with the usual sonorous clanking crash .Sorry ?said Ron but Harry understood .The painted image of Phineas Nigellus Black was able to flit between his portrait in Grimmauld Place and the one that hung in the headmasters office at Hogwarts the circular towertop room where Snape was no doubt sitting right now in triumphant possession of Dumbledores collection of delicate silver magical instruments the stone Pensieve the Sorting Hat and unless it had been moved elsewhere the sword of Gryffindor .Snape could send Phineas Nigellus to look inside this house for him Hermione explained to Ron as she resumed her seat .But let him try it now all Phineas Nigellus will be able to see is the inside of my handbag .Good thinking !said Ron looking impressed .Thank you smiled Hermione pulling her soup toward her .So Harry what else happened today ?Nothing said Harry .Watched the Ministry entrance for seven hours .No sign of her .Saw your dad though Ron .He looks fine .Ron nodded his appreciation of this news .They had agreed that it was far too dangerous to try and communicate with Mr Weasley while he walked in and out of the Ministry because he was always surrounded by other Ministry workers .It was however reassuring to catch these glimpses of him even if he did look very strained and anxious .Dad always told us most Ministry people use the Floo Network to get to work Ron said .Thats why we havent seen Umbridge shed never walk shed think shes too important .And what about that funny old witch and that little wizard in the navy robes ?Hermione asked .Oh yeah the bloke from Magical Maintenance said Ron .How do you know he works for Magical Maintenance ?Hermione asked her soupspoon suspended in midair .Dad said everyone from Magical Maintenance wears navy blue robes .But you never told us that !Hermione dropped her spoon and pulled toward her the sheaf of notes and maps that she and Ron had been examining when Harry had entered the kitchen .Theres nothing in here about navy blue robes nothing !she said flipping feverishly through the pages .Well does it really matter ?Ron it all matters !If were going to get into the Ministry and not give ourselves away when theyre bound to be on the lookout for intruders every little detail matters !Weve been over and over this I mean whats the point of all these reconnaissance trips if you arent even bothering to tell us Blimey Hermione I forget one little thing You do realize dont you that theres probably no more dangerous place in the whole world for us to be right now than the Ministry of I think we should do it tomorrow said Harry .Hermione stopped dead her jaw hanging Ron choked a little over his soup .Tomorrow ?repeated Hermione .You arent serious Harry ?I am said Harry .I dont think were going to be much better prepared than we are now even if we skulk around the Ministry entrance for another month .The longer we put it off the farther away that locket could be .Theres already a good chance Umbridge has chucked it away the thing doesnt open .Unless said Ron shes found a way of opening it and shes now possessed .Wouldnt make any difference to her she was so evil in the first place Harry shrugged .Hermione was biting her lip deep in thought .We know everything important Harry went on addressing Hermione .We know theyve stopped Apparition in and out of the Ministry .We know only the most senior Ministry members are allowed to connect their homes to the Floo Network now because Ron heard those two Unspeakables complaining about it .And we know roughly where Umbridges office is because of what you heard that bearded bloke saying to his mate ‘Ill be up on level one Dolores wants to see me Hermione recited immediately .Exactly said Harry .And we know you get in using those funny coins or tokens or whatever they are because I saw that witch borrowing one from her friend But we havent got any !If the plan works we will have Harry continued calmly .I dont know Harry I dont know .There are an awful lot of things that could go wrong so much relies on chance .Thatll be true even if we spend another three months preparing said Harry .Its time to act .He could tell from Rons and Hermiones faces that they were scared he was not particularly confident himself and yet he was sure the time had come to put their plan into operation .They had spent the previous four weeks taking it in turns to don the Invisibility Cloak and spy on the official entrance to the Ministry which Ron thanks to Mr Weasley had known since childhood .They had tailed Ministry workers on their way in eavesdropped on their conversations and learned by careful observation which of them could be relied upon to appear alone at the same time every day .Occasionally there had been a chance to sneak a Daily Prophet out of somebodys briefcase .Slowly they had built up the sketchy maps and notes now stacked in front of Hermione .All right said Ron slowly lets say we go for it tomorrow .I think it should just be me and Harry .Oh dont start that again !sighed Hermione .I thought wed settled this .Its one thing hanging around the entrances under the Cloak but this is different Hermione .Ron jabbed a finger at a copy of the Daily Prophet dated ten days previously .Youre on the list of Muggle borns who didnt present themselves for interrogation !And youre supposed to be dying of spattergroit at the Burrow !If anyone shouldnt go its Harry hes got a tenthousandGalleon price on his head Fine Ill stay here said Harry .Let me know if you ever defeat Voldemort wont you ?As Ron and Hermione laughed pain shot through the scar on Harrys forehead .His hand jumped to it He saw Hermiones eyes narrow and he tried to pass off the movement by brushing his hair out of his eyes .Well if all three of us go well have to Disapparate separately Ron was saying .We cant all fit under the Cloak anymore .Harrys scar was becoming more and more painful .He stood up .At once Kreacher hurried forward .Master has not finished his soup would Master prefer the savory stew or else the treacle tart to which Master is so partial ?Thanks Kreacher but Ill be back in a minute er bathroom .Aware that Hermione was watching him suspiciously Harry hurried up the stairs to the hall and then to the first landing where he dashed into the bathroom and bolted the door again .Grunting with pain he slumped over the black basin with its taps in the form of openmouthed serpents and closed his eyes .He was gliding along a twilit street .The buildings on either side of him had high timbered gables they looked like gingerbread houses .He approached one of them then saw the whiteness of his own longfingered hand against the door .He knocked .He felt a mounting excitement .The door opened A laughing woman stood there .Her face fell as she looked into Harrys face humor gone terror replacing it .Gregorovitch ?said a high cold voice .She shook her head She was trying to close the door .A white hand held it steady prevented her shutting him out .I want Gregorovitch .Er wohnt hier nicht mehr she cried shaking her head .He no live here !He no live here !I know him not !Abandoning the attempt to close the door she began to back away down the dark hall and Harry followed gliding toward her and his longfingered hand had drawn his wand .Where is he ?Das weifi ich nichti He move !I know not I know not !He raised the wand .She screamed .Two young children came running into the hall .She tried to shield them with her arms .There was a flash of green light Harry !HARRY !He opened his eyes he had sunk to the floor .Hermione was pounding on the door again .Harry open up !He had shouted out he knew it .He got up and unbolted the door Hermione toppled inside at once regained her balance and looked around suspiciously .Ron was right behind her looking unnerved as he pointed his wand into the corners of the chilly bathroom .What were you doing ?asked Hermione sternly .What dyou think I was doing ?asked Harry with feeble bravado .You were yelling your head off !said Ron .Oh yeah .I mustve dozed off or Harry please dont insult our intelligence said Hermione taking deep breaths .We know your scar hurt downstairs and youre white as a sheet .Harry sat down on the edge of the bath .Fine .Ive just seen Voldemort murdering a woman .By now hes probably killed her whole family .And he didnt need to .It was Cedric all over again they were just there .Harry you arent supposed to let this happen anymore !Hermione cried her voice echoing through the bathroom .Dumbledore wanted you to use Occlumency !He thought the connection was dangerous Voldemort can use it Harry !What good is it to watch him kill and torture how can it help ?Because it means I know what hes doing said Harry .So youre not even going to try to shut him out ?Hermione I cant .You know Im lousy at Occlumency I never got the hang of it .You never really tried !she said hotly .I dont get it Harry do you like having this special connection or relationship or what whatever She faltered under the look he gave her as he stood up .Like it ?he said quietly .Would you like it ?I no Im sorry Harry I didnt mean I hate it I hate the fact that he can get inside me that I have to watch him when hes most dangerous .But Im going to use it .Dumbledore Forget Dumbledore .This is my choice nobody elses .I want to know why hes after Gregorovitch .Who ?Hes a foreign wandmaker said Harry .He made Krums wand and Krum reckons hes brilliant .But according to you said Ron Voldemorts got Ollivander locked up somewhere .If hes already got a wandmaker what does he need another one for ?Maybe he agrees with Krum maybe he thinks Gregorovitch is better .or else he thinks Gregorovitch will be able to explain what my wand did when he was chasing me because Ollivander didnt know .Harry glanced into the cracked dusty mirror and saw Ron and Hermione exchanging skeptical looks behind his back .Harry you keep talking about what your wand did said Hermione but you made it happen !Why are you so determined not to take responsibility for your own power ?Because I know it wasnt me !And so does Voldemort Hermione !We both know what really happened !They glared at each other Harry knew that he had not convinced Hermione and that she was marshaling counterarguments against both his theory on his wand and the fact that he was permitting himself to see into Voldemorts mind .To his relief Ron intervened .Drop it he advised her .Its up to him .And if were going to the Ministry tomorrow dont you reckon we should go over the plan ?Reluctantly as the other two could tell Hermione let the matter rest though Harry was quite sure she would attack again at the first opportunity .In the meantime they returned to the basement kitchen where Kreacher served them all stew and treacle tart .They did not get to bed until late that night after spending hours going over and over their plan until they could recite it word perfect to each other .Harry who was now sleeping in Siriuss room lay in bed with his wandlight trained on the old photograph of his father Sirius Lupin and Pettigrew and muttered the plan to himself for another ten minutes .As he extinguished his wand however he was thinking not of Polyjuice Potion Puking Pastilles or the navy blue robes of Magical Maintenance he thought of Gregorovitch the wandmaker and how long he could hope to remain hidden while Voldemort sought him so determinedly .Dawn seemed to follow midnight with indecent haste .You look terrible was Rons greeting as he entered the room to wake Harry .Not for long said Harry yawning .They found Hermione downstairs in the kitchen .She was being served coffee and hot rolls by Kreacher and wearing the slightly manic expression that Harry associated with exam review .Robes she said under her breath acknowledging their presence with a nervous nod and continuing to poke around in her beaded bag Polyjuice Potion .Invisibility Cloak .Decoy Detonators .You should each take a couple just in case .Puking Pastilles Nosebleed Nougat Extendable Ears .They gulped down their breakfast then set off upstairs Kreacher bowing them out and promising to have a steakandkidney pie ready for them when they returned .Bless him said Ron fondly and when you think I used to fantasize about cutting off his head and sticking it on the wall .They made their way onto the front step with immense caution They could see a couple of puffy eyed Death Eaters watching the house from across the misty square .Hermione Disapparated with Ron first then came back for Harry .After the usual brief spell of darkness and near suffocation Harry found himself in the tiny alleyway where the first phase of their plan was scheduled to take place .It was as yet deserted except for a couple of large bins the first Ministry workers did not usually appear here until at least eight oclock .Right then said Hermione checking her watch .She ought to be here in about five minutes .When Ive Stunned her Hermione we know said Ron sternly .And I thought we were supposed to open the door before she got here ?Hermione squealed .I nearly forgot !Stand back She pointed her wand at the padlocked and heavily graffitied fire door beside them which burst open with a crash .The dark corridor behind it led as they knew from their careful scouting trips into an empty theater .Hermione pulled the door back toward her to make it look as though it was still closed .And now she said turning back to face the other two in the alleyway we put on the Cloak again and we wait Ron finished throwing it over Hermione s head like a blanket over a birdcage and rolling his eyes at Harry .Little more than a minute later there was a tiny pop and a little Ministry witch with flyaway gray hair Apparated feet from them blinking a little in the sudden brightness the sun had just come out from behind a cloud .She barely had time to enjoy the unexpected warmth however before Hermione s silent Stunning Spell hit her in the chest and she toppled over .Nicely done Hermione said Ron emerging from behind a bin beside the theater door as Harry took off the Invisibility Cloak .Together they carried the little witch into the dark passageway that led backstage .Hermione plucked a few hairs from the witchs head and added them to a flask of muddy Polyjuice Potion she had taken from the beaded bag .Ron was rummaging through the little witchs handbag .Shes Mafalda Hopkirk he said reading a small card that identified their victim as an assistant in the Improper Use of Magic Office .Youd better take this Hermione and here are the tokens .He passed her several small golden coins all embossed with the letters M .O .M .which he had taken from the witchs purse .Hermione drank the Polyjuice Potion which was now a pleasant heliotrope color and within seconds stood before them the double of Mafalda Hopkirk .As she removed Mafaldas spectacles and put them on Harry checked his watch .Were running late Mr Magical Maintenance will be here any second .They hurried to close the door on the real Mafalda Harry and Ron threw the Invisibility Cloak over themselves but Hermione remained in view waiting .Seconds later there was another pop and a small ferretylooking wizard appeared before them .Oh hello Mafalda .Hello !said Hermione in a quavery voice .How are you today ?Not so good actually replied the little wizard who looked thoroughly downcast .As Hermione and the wizard headed for the main road Harry and Ron crept along behind them .Im sorry to hear youre under the weather said Hermione talking firmly over the little wizard as he tried to expound upon his problems it was essential to stop him from reaching the street .Here have a sweet .Eh ?Oh no thanks I insist !said Hermione aggressively shaking the bag of pastilles in his face .Looking rather alarmed the little wizard took one .The effect was instantaneous .The moment the pastille touched his tongue the little wizard started vomiting so hard that he did not even notice as Hermione yanked a handful of hairs from the top of his head .Oh dear !she said as he splattered the alley with sick .Perhaps youd better take the day off !No no !He choked and retched trying to continue on his way despite being unable to walk straight .I must today must go But thats just silly !said Hermione alarmed .You cant go to work in this state I think you ought to go to St .Mungos and get them to sort you out !The wizard had collapsed heaving onto all fours still trying to crawl toward the main street .You simply cant go to work like this !cried Hermione .At last he seemed to accept the truth of her words .Using a repulsed Hermione to claw his way back into a standing position he turned on the spot and vanished leaving nothing behind but the bag Ron had snatched from his hand as he went and some flying chunks of vomit .Urgh said Hermione holding up the skirts of her robe to avoid the puddles of sick .It would have made much less mess to Stun him too .Yeah said Ron emerging from under the cloak holding the wizards bag but I still think a whole pile of unconscious bodies would have drawn more attention .Keen on his job though isnt he ?Chuck us the hair and the potion then .Within two minutes Ron stood before them as small and ferrety as the sick wizard and wearing the navy blue robes that had been folded in his bag .Weird he wasnt wearing them today wasnt it seeing how much he wanted to go ?Anyway Im Reg Cattermole according to the label in the back .Now wait here Hermione told Harry who was still under the Invisibility Cloak and well be back with some hairs for you .He had to wait ten minutes but it seemed much longer to Harry skulking alone in the sicksplattered alleyway beside the door concealing the Stunned Mafalda .Finally Ron and Hermione reappeared .We dont know who he is Hermione said passing Harry several curly black hairs but hes gone home with a dreadful nosebleed !Here hes pretty tall youll need bigger robes .She pulled out a set of the old robes Kreacher had laundered for them and Harry retired to take the potion and change .Once the painful transformation was complete he was more than six feet tall and from what he could tell from his wellmuscled arms powerfully built .He also had a beard .Stowing the Invisibility Cloak and his glasses inside his new robes he rejoined the other two .Blimey thats scary said Ron looking up at Harry who now towered over him .Take one of Mafaldas tokens Hermione told Harry and lets go its nearly nine .They stepped out of the alleyway together .Fifty yards along the crowded pavement there were spiked black railings flanking two flights of steps one labeled GENTLEMEN the other LADIES .See you in a moment then said Hermione nervously and she tottered off down the steps to LADIES .Harry and Ron joined a number of oddly dressed men descending into what appeared to be an ordinary underground public toilet tiled in grimy black and white .Morning Reg !called another wizard in navy blue robes as he let himself into a cubicle by inserting his golden token into a slot in the door .Blooming pain in the bum this eh ?Forcing us all to get to work this way !Who are they expecting to turn up Harry Potter ?The wizard roared with laughter at his own wit .Ron gave a forced chuckle .Yeah he said stupid isnt it ?And he and Harry let themselves into adjoining cubicles .To Harrys left and right came the sound of flushing .He crouched down and peered through the gap at the bottom of the cubicle just in time to see a pair of booted feet climbing into the toilet next door .He looked left and saw Ron blinking at him .We have to flush ourselves in ?he whispered .Looks like it Harry whispered back his voice came out deep and gravelly .They both stood up .Feeling exceptionally foolish Harry clambered into the toilet .He knew at once that he had done the right thing though he appeared to be standing in water his shoes feet and robes remained quite dry .He reached up pulled the chain and next moment had zoomed down a short chute emerging out of a fireplace into the Ministry of Magic .He got up clumsily there was a lot more of his body than he was accustomed to .The great Atrium seemed darker than Harry remembered it .Previously a golden fountain had filled the center of the hall casting shimmering spots of light over the polished wooden floor and walls .Now a gigantic statue of black stone dominated the scene .It was rather frightening this vast sculpture of a witch and a wizard sitting on ornately carved thrones looking down at the Ministry workers toppling out of fireplaces below them .Engraved in foothigh letters at the base of the statue were the words MAGIC IS MIGHT .Harry received a heavy blow on the back of the legs Another wizard had just flown out of the fireplace behind him .Out of the way cant y oh sorry Runcorn !Clearly frightened the balding wizard hurried away .Apparently the man whom Harry was impersonating Runcorn was intimidating .Psst !said a voice and he looked around to see a wispy little witch and the ferrety wizard from Magical Maintenance gesturing to him from over beside the statue .Harry hastened to join them .You got in all right then ?Hermione whispered to Harry .No hes still stuck in the bog said Ron .Oh very funny .Its horrible isnt it ?she said to Harry who was staring up at the statue .Have you seen what theyre sitting on ?Harry looked more closely and realized that what he had thought were decoratively carved thrones were actually mounds of carved humans hundreds and hundreds of naked bodies men women and children all with rather stupid ugly faces twisted and pressed together to support the weight of the handsomely robed wizards .Muggles whispered Hermione .In their rightful place .Come on lets get going .They joined the stream of witches and wizards moving toward the golden gates at the end of the hall looking around as surreptitiously as possible but there was no sign of the distinctive figure of Dolores Umbridge .They passed through the gates and into a smaller hall where queues were forming in front of twenty golden grilles housing as many lifts .They had barely joined the nearest one when a voice said Cattermole !They looked around Harrys stomach turned over .One of the Death Eaters who had witnessed Dumbledores death was striding toward them .The Ministry workers beside them fell silent their eyes downcast Harry could feel fear rippling through them .The mans scowling slightly brutish face was somehow at odds with his magnificent sweeping robes which were embroidered with much gold thread .Someone in the crowd around the lifts called sycophantically Morning Yaxley !Yaxley ignored them .I requested somebody from Magical Maintenance to sort out my office Cattermole .Its still raining in there .Ron looked around as though hoping somebody else would intervene but nobody spoke .Raining .in your office ?Thats thats not good is it ?Ron gave a nervous laugh .Yaxleys eyes widened .You think its funny Cattermole do you ?A pair of witches broke away from the queue for the lift and bustled off .No said Ron no of course You realize that I am on my way downstairs to interrogate your wife Cattermole ?In fact Im quite surprised youre not down there holding her hand while she waits .Already given her up as a bad job have you ?Probably wise .Be sure and marry a pureblood next time .Hermione had let out a little squeak of horror .Yaxley looked at her .She coughed feebly and turned away .I I stammered Ron .But if my wife were accused of being a Mudblood said Yaxley not that any woman I married would ever be mistaken for such filth and the Head of the Department of Magical Law Enforcement needed a job doing I would make it my priority to do that job Cattermole .Do you understand me ?Yes whispered Ron .Then attend to it Cattermole and if my office is not completely dry within an hour your wifes Blood Status will be in even graver doubt than it is now .The golden grille before them clattered open .With a nod and unpleasant smile to Harry who was evidently expected to appreciate this treatment of Cattermole Yaxley swept away toward another lift .Harry Ron and Hermione entered theirs but nobody followed them It was as if they were infectious .The grilles shut with a clang and the lift began to move upward .What am I going to do ?Ron asked the other two at once he looked stricken .If I dont turn up my wife I mean Cattermole s wife Well come with you we should stick together began Harry but Ron shook his head feverishly .Thats mental we havent got much time .You two find Umbridge Ill go and sort out Yaxleys office but how do I stop it raining ?Try Finite Incantatem said Hermione at once that should stop the rain if its a hex or curse if it doesnt somethings gone wrong with an Atmospheric Charm which will be more difficult to fix so as an interim measure try Impervius to protect his belongings Say it again slowly said Ron searching his pockets desperately for a quill but at that moment the lift juddered to a halt .A disembodied female voice said Level four Department for the Regulation and Control of Magical Creatures incorporating Beast Being and Spirit Divisions Goblin Liaison Office and Pest Advisory Bureau and the grilles slid open again admitting a couple of wizards and several pale violet paper airplanes that fluttered around the lamp in the ceiling of the lift .Morning Albert said a bushily whiskered man smiling at Harry .He glanced over at Ron and Hermione as the lift creaked upward once more Hermione was now whispering frantic instructions to Ron .The wizard leaned toward Harry leering and muttered Dirk Cresswell eh ?From Goblin Liaison ?Nice one Albert .Im pretty confident Ill get his job now !He winked .Harry smiled back hoping that this would suffice .The lift stopped the grilles opened once more .Level two Department of Magical Law Enforcement including the Improper Use of Magic Office Auror Headquarters and Wizengamot Administration Services said the disembodied witchs voice .Harry saw Hermione give Ron a little push and he hurried out of the lift followed by the other wizards leaving Harry and Hermione alone .The moment the golden door had closed Hermione said very fast Actually Harry I think Id better go after him I dont think he knows what hes doing and if he gets caught the whole thing Level one Minister of Magic and Support Staff .The golden grilles slid apart again and Hermione gasped .Four people stood before them two of them deep in conversation a longhaired wizard wearing magnificent robes of black and gold and a squat toadlike witch wearing a velvet bow in her short hair and clutching a clipboard to her chest .THE MUGGLEBORN REGISTRATION COMMISSION Ah Mafalda !said Umbridge looking at Hermione .Travers sent you did he ?Yyes squeaked Hermione .Good youll do perfectly well .Umbridge spoke to the wizard in black and gold .Thats that problem solved Minister if Mafalda can be spared for recordkeeping we shall be able to start straightaway .She consulted her clipboard .Ten people today and one of them the wife of a Ministry employee !Tut tut .even here in the heart of the Ministry !She stepped into the lift beside Hermione as did the two wizards who had been listening to Umbridges conversation with the Minister .Well go straight down Mafalda youll find everything you need in the courtroom .Good morning Albert arent you getting out ?Yes of course said Harry in Runcorns deep voice .Harry stepped out of the lift .The golden grilles clanged shut behind him .Glancing over his shoulder Harry saw Hermiones anxious face sinking back out of sight a tall wizard on either side of her Umbridges velvet hairbow level with her shoulder .What brings you up here Runcorn ?asked the new Minister of Magic .His long black hair and beard were streaked with silver and a great overhanging forehead shadowed his glinting eyes putting Harry in mind of a crab looking out from beneath a rock .Needed a quick word with Harry hesitated for a fraction of a second Arthur Weasley .Someone said he was up on level one .Ah said Pius Thicknesse .Has he been caught having contact with an Undesirable ?No said Harry his throat dry .No nothing like that .Ah well .Its only a matter of time said Thicknesse .If you ask me the blood traitors are as bad as the Mudbloods .Good day Runcorn .Good day Minister .Harry watched Thicknesse march away along the thickly carpeted corridor .The moment the Minister had passed out of sight Harry tugged the Invisibility Cloak out from under his heavy black cloak threw it over himself and set off along the corridor in the opposite direction .Runcorn was so tall that Harry was forced to stoop to make sure his big feet were hidden .Panic pulsed in the pit of his stomach .As he passed gleaming wooden door after gleaming wooden door each bearing a small plaque with the owners name and occupation upon it the might of the Ministry its complexity its impenetrability seemed to force itself upon him so that the plan he had been carefully concocting with Ron and Hermione over the past four weeks seemed laughably childish .They had concentrated all their efforts on getting inside without being detected They had not given a moments thought to what they would do if they were forced to separate .Now Hermione was stuck in court proceedings which would undoubtedly last hours Ron was struggling to do magic that Harry was sure was beyond him a womans liberty possibly depending on the outcome and he Harry was wandering around on the top floor when he knew perfectly well that his quarry had just gone down in the lift .He stopped walking leaned against a wall and tried to decide what to do .The silence pressed upon him There was no bustling or talk or swift footsteps here the purplecarpeted corridors were as hushed as though the Muffliato charm had been cast over the place .Her office must be up here Harry thought .It seemed most unlikely that Umbridge would keep her jewelry in her office but on the other hand it seemed foolish not to search it to make sure .He therefore set off along the corridor again passing nobody but a frowning wizard who was murmuring instructions to a quill that floated in front of him scribbling on a trail of parchment .Now paying attention to the names on the doors Harry turned a corner .Halfway along the next corridor he emerged into a wide open space where a dozen witches and wizards sat in rows at small desks not unlike school desks though much more highly polished and free from graffiti .Harry paused to watch them for the effect was quite mesmerizing .They were all waving and twiddling their wands in unison and squares of colored paper were flying in every direction like little pink kites .After a few seconds Harry realized that there was a rhythm to the proceedings that the papers all formed the same pattern and after a few more seconds he realized that what he was watching was the creation of pamphlets that the paper squares were pages which when assembled folded and magicked into place fell into neat stacks beside each witch or wizard .Harry crept closer although the workers were so intent on what they were doing that he doubted they would notice a carpetmuffled footstep and he slid a completed pamphlet from the pile beside a young witch .He examined it beneath the Invisibility Cloak .Its pink cover was emblazoned with a golden title MUDBLOODS and the Dangers They Pose to a Peaceful PureBlood Society Beneath the title was a picture of a red rose with a simpering face in the middle of its petals being strangled by a green weed with fangs and a scowl .There was no authors name upon the pamphlet but again the scars on the back of his right hand seemed to tingle as he examined it .Then the young witch beside him confirmed his suspicion as she said still waving and twirling her wand Will the old hag be interrogating Mudbloods all day does anyone know ?Careful said the wizard beside her glancing around nervously one of his pages slipped and fell to the floor .What has she got magic ears as well as an eye now ?The witch glanced toward the shining mahogany door facing the space full of pamphletmakers Harry looked too and rage reared in him like a snake .Where there might have been a peephole on a Muggle front door a large round eye with a bright blue iris had been set into the wood an eye that was shockingly familiar to anybody who had known Alastor Moody .For a split second Harry forgot where he was and what he was doing there He even forgot that he was invisible .He strode straight over to the door to examine the eye .It was not moving It gazed blindly upward frozen .The plaque beneath it read DOLORES UMBRIDGE SENIOR UNDERSECRETARY TO THE MINISTER Below that a slightly shinier new plaque read HEAD OF THE MUGGLEBORN REGISTRATION COMMISSION Harry looked back at the dozen pamphletmakers Though they were intent upon their work he could hardly suppose that they would not notice if the door of an empty office opened in front of them .He therefore withdrew from an inner pocket an odd object with little waving legs and a rubberbulbed horn for a body .Crouching down beneath the Cloak he placed the Decoy Detonator on the ground .It scuttled away at once through the legs of the witches and wizards in front of him .A few moments later during which Harry waited with his hand upon the doorknob there came a loud bang and a great deal of acrid black smoke billowed from a corner .The young witch in the front row shrieked Pink pages flew everywhere as she and her fellows jumped up looking around for the source of the commotion .Harry turned the doorknob stepped into Umbridges office and closed the door behind him .He felt he had stepped back in time .The room was exactly like Umbridges office at Hogwarts Lace draperies doilies and dried flowers covered every available surface .The walls bore the same ornamental plates each featuring a highly colored beribboned kitten gamboling and frisking with sickening cuteness .The desk was covered with a flouncy flowered cloth .Behind MadEyes eye a telescopic attachment enabled Umbridge to spy on the workers on the other side of the door .Harry took a look through it and saw that they were all still gathered around the Decoy Detonator .He wrenched the telescope out of the door leaving a hole behind pulled the magical eyeball out of it and placed it in his pocket .Then he turned to face the room again raised his wand and murmured Accio Locket .Nothing happened but he had not expected it to no doubt Umbridge knew all about protective charms and spells .He therefore hurried behind her desk and began pulling open the drawers .He saw quills and notebooks and Spellotape enchanted paper clips that coiled snakelike from their drawer and had to be beaten back a fussy little lace box full of spare hair bows and clips but no sign of a locket .There was a filing cabinet behind the desk Harry set to searching it .Like Filch s filing cabinets at Hogwarts it was full of folders each labeled with a name .It was not until Harry reached the bottommost drawer that he saw something to distract him from his search Mr Weasleys file .He pulled it out and opened it .ARTHUR WEASLEY BLOOD STATUS Pureblood but with unacceptable proMuggle leanings .Known member of the Order of the Phoenix .FAMILY Wife pureblood seven children two youngest at Hogwarts .NB Youngest son currently at home seriously ill Ministry inspectors have confirmed .SECURITY STATUS TRACKED .All movements are being monitored .Strong likelihood Undesirable No .1 will contact has stayed with Weasley family previously Undesirable Number One Harry muttered under his breath as he replaced Mr Weasleys folder and shut the drawer .He had an idea he knew who that was and sure enough as he straightened up and glanced around the office for fresh hiding places he saw a poster of himself on the wall with the words undesirable no .1 emblazoned across his chest .A little pink note was stuck to it with a picture of a kitten in the corner .Harry moved across to read it and saw that Umbridge had written To be punished .Angrier than ever he proceeded to grope in the bottoms of the vases and baskets of dried flowers but was not at all surprised that the locket was not there .He gave the office one last sweeping look and his heart skipped a beat .Dumbledore was staring at him from a small rectangular mirror propped up on a bookcase beside the desk .Harry crossed the room at a run and snatched it up but realized the moment he touched it that it was not a mirror at all .Dumbledore was smiling wistfully out of the front cover of a glossy book .Harry had not immediately noticed the curly green writing across his hat The Life and Lies ofAlbus Dumbledore nor the slightly smaller writing across his chest by Rita Skeeter bestselling author of Armando Dippet Master or Moron ?Harry opened the book at random and saw a fullpage photograph of two teenage boys both laughing immoderately with their arms around each others shoulders .Dumbledore now with elbowlength hair had grown a tiny wispy beard that recalled the one on Krums chin that had so annoyed Ron .The boy who roared in silent amusement beside Dumbledore had a gleeful wild look about him .His golden hair fell in curls to his shoulders .Harry wondered whether it was a young Doge but before he could check the caption the door of the office opened .If Thicknesse had not been looking over his shoulder as he entered Harry would not have had time to pull the Invisibility Cloak over himself .As it was he thought Thicknesse might have caught a glimpse of movement because for a moment or two he remained quite still staring curiously at the place where Harry had just vanished .Perhaps deciding that all he had seen was Dumbledore scratching his nose on the front of the book for Harry had hastily replaced it upon the shelf Thicknesse finally walked to the desk and pointed his wand at the quill standing ready in the ink pot .It sprang out and began scribbling a note to Umbridge .Very slowly hardly daring to breathe Harry backed out of the office into the open area beyond .The pamphletmakers were still clustered around the remains of the Decoy Detonator which continued to hoot feebly as it smoked .Harry hurried off up the corridor as the young witch said I bet it sneaked up here from Experimental Charms theyre so careless remember that poisonous duck ?Speeding back toward the lifts Harry reviewed his options .It had never been likely that the locket was here at the Ministry and there was no hope of bewitching its whereabouts out of Umbridge while she was sitting in a crowded court .Their priority now had to be to leave the Ministry before they were exposed and try again another day .The first thing to do was to find Ron and then they could work out a way of extracting Hermione from the courtroom .The lift was empty when it arrived .Harry jumped in and pulled off the Invisibility Cloak as it started its descent .To his enormous relief when it rattled to a halt at level two a soakingwet and wildeyed Ron got in .Mmorning he stammered to Harry as the lift set off again .Ron its me Harry !Harry !Blimey I forgot what you looked like why isnt Hermione with you ?She had to go down to the courtrooms with Umbridge she couldnt refuse and But before Harry could finish the lift had stopped again The doors opened and Mr Weasley walked inside talking to an elderly witch whose blonde hair was teased so high it resembled an anthill . .I quite understand what youre saying Wakanda but Im afraid I cannot be party to Mr Weasley broke off he had noticed Harry .It was very strange to have Mr Weasley glare at him with that much dislike .The lift doors closed and the four of them trundled downward once more .Oh hello Reg said Mr Weasley looking around at the sound of steady dripping from Rons robes .Isnt your wife in for questioning today ?Er whats happened to you ?Why are you so wet ?Yaxleys office is raining said Ron .He addressed Mr Weasleys shoulder and Harry felt sure he was scared that his father might recognize him if they looked directly into each others eyes .I couldnt stop it so theyve sent me to get Bernie Pillsworth I think they said Yes a lot of offices have been raining lately said Mr Weasley .Did you try Meteolojinx Recanto ?It worked for Bletchley .Meteolojinx Recanto ?whispered Ron .No I didnt .Thanks D I mean thanks Arthur .The lift doors opened the old witch with the anthill hair left and Ron darted past her out of sight .Harry made to follow him but found his path blocked as Percy Weasley strode into the lift his nose buried in some papers he was reading .Not until the doors had clanged shut again did Percy realize he was in a lift with his father .He glanced up saw Mr Weasley turned radish red and left the lift the moment the doors opened again .For the second time Harry tried to get out but this time found his way blocked by Mr Weasleys arm .One moment Runcorn .The lift doors closed and as they clanked down another floor Mr Weasley said I hear you laid information about Dirk Cresswell .Harry had the impression that Mr Weasleys anger was no less because of the brush with Percy .He decided his best chance was to act stupid .Sorry ?he said .Dont pretend Runcorn said Mr Weasley fiercely .You tracked down the wizard who faked his family tree didnt you ?I so what if I did ?said Harry .So Dirk Cresswell is ten times the wizard you are said Mr Weasley quietly as the lift sank ever lower .And if he survives Azkaban you 11 have to answer to him not to mention his wife his sons and his friends Arthur Harry interrupted you know youre being tracked dont you ?Is that a threat Runcorn ?said Mr Weasley loudly .No said Harry its a fact !Theyre watching your every move The lift doors opened .They had reached the Atrium .Mr Weasley gave Harry a scathing look and swept from the lift .Harry stood there shaken .He wished he was impersonating somebody other than Runcorn .The lift doors clanged shut .Harry pulled out the Invisibility Cloak and put it back on .He would try to extricate Hermione on his own while Ron was dealing with the raining office .When the doors opened he stepped out into a torchlit stone passageway quite different from the wood paneled and carpeted corridors above .As the lift rattled away again Harry shivered slightly looking toward the distant black door that marked the entrance to the Department of Mysteries .He set off his destination not the black door but the doorway he remembered on the lefthand side which opened onto the flight of stairs down to the court chambers .His mind grappled with possibilities as he crept down them He still had a couple of Decoy Detonators but perhaps it would be better to simply knock on the courtroom door enter as Runcorn and ask for a quick word with Mafalda ?Of course he did not know whether Runcorn was sufficiently important to get away with this and even if he managed it Hermione s nonreappearance might trigger a search before they were clear of the Ministry .Lost in thought he did not immediately register the unnatural chill that was creeping over him as if he were descending into fog .It was becoming colder and colder with every step he took a cold that reached right down into his throat and tore at his lungs .And then he felt that stealing sense of despair of hopelessness filling him expanding inside him .Dementors he thought .And as he reached the foot of the stairs and turned to his right he saw a dreadful scene .The dark passage outside the courtrooms was packed with tall black hooded figures their faces completely hidden their ragged breathing the only sound in the place .The petrified Muggleborns brought in for questioning sat huddled and shivering on hard wooden benches .Most of them were hiding their faces in their hands perhaps in an instinctive attempt to shield themselves from the dementors greedy mouths .Some were accompanied by families others sat alone .The dementors were gliding up and down in front of them and the cold and the hopelessness and the despair of the place laid themselves upon Harry like a curse .Fight it he told himself but he knew that he could not conjure a Patronus here without revealing himself instantly .So he moved forward as silently as he could and with every step he took numbness seemed to steal over his brain but he forced himself to think of Hermione and of Ron who needed him .Moving through the towering black figures was terrifying The eyeless faces hidden beneath their hoods turned as he passed and he felt sure that they sensed him sensed perhaps a human presence that still had some hope some resilience .And then abruptly and shockingly amid the frozen silence one of the dungeon doors on the left of the corridor was flung open and screams echoed out of it .No no Im halfblood Im halfblood I tell you !My father was a wizard he was look him up Arkie Alderton hes a wellknown broomstick designer look him up I tell you get your hands off me get your hands off This is your final warning said Umbridges soft voice magically magnified so that it sounded clearly over the mans desperate screams .If you struggle you will be subjected to the Dementors Kiss .The mans screams subsided but dry sobs echoed through the corridor .Take him away said Umbridge .Two dementors appeared in the doorway of the courtroom their rotting scabbed hands clutching the upper arms of a wizard who appeared to be fainting .They glided away down the corridor with him and the darkness they trailed behind them swallowed him from sight .Next Mary Cattermole called Umbridge .A small woman stood up she was trembling from head to foot .Her dark hair was smoothed back into a bun and she wore long plain robes .Her face was completely bloodless .As she passed the dementors Harry saw her shudder .He did it instinctively without any sort of plan because he hated the sight of her walking alone into the dungeon As the door began to swing closed he slipped into the courtroom behind her .It was not the same room in which he had once been interrogated for improper use of magic .This one was much smaller though the ceiling was quite as high it gave the claustrophobic sense of being stuck at the bottom of a deep well .There were more dementors in here casting their freezing aura over the place they stood like faceless sentinels in the corners farthest from the high raised platform .Here behind a balustrade sat Umbridge with Yaxley on one side of her and Hermione quite as whitefaced as Mrs Cattermole on the other .At the foot of the platform a brightsilver longhaired cat prowled up and down up and down and Harry realized that it was there to protect the prosecutors from the despair that emanated from the dementors That was for the accused to feel not the accusers .Sit down said Umbridge in her soft silky voice .Mrs Cattermole stumbled to the single seat in the middle of the floor beneath the raised platform .The moment she had sat down chains clinked out of the arms of the chair and bound her there .You are Mary Elizabeth Cattermole ?asked Umbridge .Mrs Cattermole gave a single shaky nod .Married to Reginald Cattermole of the Magical Maintenance Department ?Mrs Cattermole burst into tears .I dont know where he is he was supposed to meet me here !Umbridge ignored her .Mother to Maisie Ellie and Alfred Cattermole ?Mrs Cattermole sobbed harder than ever .Theyre frightened they think I might not come home Spare us spat Yaxley .The brats of Mudbloods do not stir our sympathies .Mrs Cattermoles sobs masked Harrys footsteps as he made his way carefully toward the steps that led up to the raised platform .The moment he had passed the place where the Patronus cat patrolled he felt the change in temperature It was warm and comfortable here .The Patronus he was sure was Umbridges and it glowed brightly because she was so happy here in her element upholding the twisted laws she had helped to write .Slowly and very carefully he edged his way along the platform behind Umbridge Yaxley and Hermione taking a seat behind the latter .He was worried about making Hermione jump .He thought of casting the Muffliato charm upon Umbridge and Yaxley but even murmuring the word might cause Hermione alarm .Then Umbridge raised her voice to address Mrs Cattermole and Harry seized his chance .Im behind you he whispered into Hermiones ear .As he had expected she jumped so violently she nearly overturned the bottle of ink with which she was supposed to be recording the interview but both Umbridge and Yaxley were concentrating upon Mrs Cattermole and this went unnoticed .A wand was taken from you upon your arrival at the Ministry today Mrs Cattermole Umbridge was saying .Eightandthreequarter inches cherry unicornhair core .Do you recognize that description ?Mrs Cattermole nodded mopping her eyes on her sleeve .Could you please tell us from which witch or wizard you took that wand ?Ttook ?sobbed Mrs Cattermole .I didnt ttake it from anybody .I bbought it when I was eleven years old .It it it chose me .She cried harder than ever .Umbridge laughed a soft girlish laugh that made Harry want to attack her .She leaned forward over the barrier the better to observe her victim and something gold swung forward too and dangled over the void the locket .Hermione had seen it she let out a little squeak but Umbridge and Yaxley still intent upon their prey were deaf to everything else .No said Umbridge no I dont think so Mrs Cattermole .Wands only choose witches or wizards .You are not a witch .I have your responses to the questionnaire that was sent to you here Mafalda pass them to me .Umbridge held out a small hand She looked so toadlike at that moment that Harry was quite surprised not to see webs between the stubby fingers .Hermione s hands were shaking with shock .She fumbled in a pile of documents balanced on the chair beside her finally withdrawing a sheaf of parchment with Mrs Cattermoles name on it .Thats thats pretty Dolores she said pointing at the pendant gleaming in the ruffled folds of Umbridges blouse .What ?snapped Umbridge glancing down .Oh yes an old family heirloom she said patting the locket lying on her large bosom .The S stands for Selwyn .I am related to the Selwyns .Indeed there are few pureblood families to whom I am not related .A pity she continued in a louder voice flicking through Mrs Cattermoles questionnaire that the same cannot be said for you . ‘Parents professions greengrocers .Yaxley laughed jeeringly .Below the fluffy silver cat patrolled up and down and the dementors stood waiting in the corners .It was Umbridges lie that brought the blood surging into Harrys brain and obliterated his sense of caution that the locket she had taken as a bribe from a petty criminal was being used to bolster her own pureblood credentials .He raised his wand not even troubling to keep it concealed beneath the Invisibility Cloak and said Stupefyl There was a flash of red light Umbridge crumpled and her forehead hit the edge of the balustrade Mrs Cattermoles papers slid off her lap onto the floor and down below the psilver cat vanished .Icecold air hit them like an oncoming wind Yaxley confused looked around for the source of the trouble and saw Harrys disembodied hand and wand pointing at him .He tried to draw his own wand but too late Stupefyl Yaxley slid to the ground to lie curled on the floor .Harry !Hermione if you think I was going to sit here and let her pretend Harry Mrs Cattermole !Harry whirled around throwing off the Invisibility Cloak down below the dementors had moved out of their corners they were gliding toward the woman chained to the chair Whether because the Patronus had vanished or because they sensed that their masters were no longer in control they seemed to have abandoned restraint .Mrs Cattermole let out a terrible scream of fear as a slimy scabbed hand grasped her chin and forced her face back .EXPECTO PATRONUM The silver stag soared from the tip of Harrys wand and leaped toward the dementors which fell back and melted into the dark shadows again .The stags light more powerful and more warming than the cats protection filled the whole dungeon as it cantered around and around the room .Get the Horcrux Harry told Hermione .He ran back down the steps stuffing the Invisibility Cloak back into his bag and approached Mrs Cattermole .You ?she whispered gazing into his face .But but Reg said you were the one who submitted my name for questioning !Did I ?muttered Harry tugging at the chains binding her arms .Well Ive had a change of heart .Diffindol Nothing happened .Hermione how do I get rid of these chains ?Wait Im trying something up here Hermione were surrounded by dementors !I know that Harry but if she wakes up and the lockets gone I need to duplicate it Geminio There .That should fool her .Hermione came running downstairs .Lets see .Relashiol The chains clinked and withdrew into the arms of the chair .Mrs Cattermole looked just as frightened as ever before .I dont understand she whispered .Youre going to leave here with us said Harry pulling her to her feet .Go home grab your children and get out get out of the country if youve got to .Disguise yourselves and run .Youve seen how it is you wont get anything like a fair hearing here .Harry said Hermione how are we going to get out of here with all those dementors outside the door ?Patronuses said Harry pointing his wand at his own The stag slowed and walked still gleaming brightly toward the door .As many as we can muster do yours Hermione .Expec Expecto patronum said Hermione .Nothing happened .Its the only spell she ever has trouble with Harry told a completely bemused Mrs Cattermole .Bit unfortunate really .Come on Hermione .Expecto patronum .A silver otter burst from the end of Hermione s wand and swam gracefully through the air to join the stag .Cmon said Harry and he led Hermione and Mrs Cattermole to the door .When the Patronuses glided out of the dungeon there were cries of shock from the people waiting outside .Harry looked around the dementors were falling back on both sides of them melding into the darkness scattering before the silver creatures .Its been decided that you should all go home and go into hiding with your families Harry told the waiting Muggleborns who were dazzled by the light of the Patronuses and still cowering slightly .Go abroad if you can .Just get well away from the Ministry .Thats the er new official position .Now if youll just follow the Patronuses youll be able to leave from the Atrium .They managed to get up the stone steps without being intercepted but as they approached the lifts Harry started to have misgivings .If they emerged into the Atrium with a silver stag an otter soaring alongside it and twenty or so people half of them accused Muggleborns he could not help feeling that they would attract unwanted attention .He had just reached this unwelcome conclusion when the lift clanged to a halt in front of them .Reg !screamed Mrs Cattermole and she threw herself into Rons arms .Runcorn let me out he attacked Umbridge and Yaxley and hes told all of us to leave the country I think wed better do it Reg I really do lets hurry home and fetch the children and why are you so wet ?Water muttered Ron disengaging himself .Harry they know there are intruders inside the Ministry something about a hole in Umbridges office door I reckon weve got five minutes if that Hermione s Patronus vanished with a pop as she turned a horrorstruck face to Harry .Harry if were trapped here !We wont be if we move fast said Harry .He addressed the silent group behind them who were all gawping at him .Whos got wands ?About half of them raised their hands .Okay all of you who havent got wands need to attach yourself to somebody who has .Well need to be fast before they stop us .Come on .They managed to cram themselves into two lifts .Harrys Patronus stood sentinel before the golden grilles as they shut and the lifts began to rise .Level eight said the witchs cool voice Atrium .Harry knew at once that they were in trouble .The Atrium was full of people moving from fireplace to fireplace sealing them off .Harry !squeaked Hermione .What are we going to ?STOP !Harry thundered and the powerful voice of Runcorn echoed through the Atrium The wizards sealing the fireplaces froze .Follow me he whispered to the group of terrified Muggleborns who moved forward in a huddle shepherded by Ron and Hermione .Whats up Albert ?said the same balding wizard who had followed Harry out of the fireplace earlier .He looked nervous .This lot need to leave before you seal the exits said Harry with all the authority he could muster .The group of wizards in front of him looked at one another .Weve been told to seal all exits and not let anyone Are you contradicting me ?Harry blustered .Would you like me to have your family tree examined like I had Dirk Cresswells ?Sorry !gasped the balding wizard backing away .I didnt mean nothing Albert but I thought .I thought they were in for questioning and .Their blood is pure said Harry and his deep voice echoed impressively through the hall .Purer than many of yours I daresay .Off you go he boomed to the Muggleborns who scurried forward into the fireplaces and began to vanish in pairs .The Ministry wizards hung back some looking confused others scared and resentful .Then Mary !Mrs Cattermole looked over her shoulder .The real Reg Cattermole no longer vomiting but pale and wan had just come running out of a lift .RReg ?She looked from her husband to Ron who swore loudly .The balding wizard gaped his head turning ludicrously from one Reg Cattermole to the other .Hey whats going on ?What is this ?Seal the exit !SEAL IT !Yaxley had burst out of another lift and was running toward the group beside the fireplaces into which all of the Muggleborns but Mrs Cattermole had now vanished .As the balding wizard lifted his wand Harry raised an enormous fist and punched him sending him flying through the air .Hes been helping Muggleborns escape Yaxley !Harry shouted .The balding wizards colleagues set up an uproar under cover of which Ron grabbed Mrs Cattermole pulled her into the stillopen fireplace and disappeared .Confused Yaxley looked from Harry to the punched wizard while the real Reg Cattermole screamed My wife !Who was that with my wife ?Whats going on ?Harry saw Yaxleys head turn saw an inkling of the truth dawn in that brutish face .Come on !Harry shouted at Hermione he seized her hand and they jumped into the fireplace together as Yaxleys curse sailed over Harrys head .They spun for a few seconds before shooting up out of a toilet into a cubicle .Harry flung open the door Ron was standing there beside the sinks still wrestling with Mrs Cattermole .Reg I dont understand Let go Im not your husband youve got to go home !There was a noise in the cubicle behind them Harry looked around Yaxley had just appeared .LETS GO !Harry yelled .He seized Hermione by the hand and Ron by the arm and turned on the spot .Darkness engulfed them along with the sensation of compressing bands but something was wrong .Hermione s hand seemed to be sliding out of his grip .He wondered whether he was going to suffocate he could not breathe or see and the only solid things in the world were Rons arm and Hermione s fingers which were slowly slipping away .And then he saw the door of number twelve Grimmauld Place with its serpent door knocker but before he could draw breath there was a scream and a flash of purple light Hermione s hand was suddenly vicelike upon his and everything went dark again .THE THIEF Harry opened his eyes and was dazzled by gold and green he had no idea what had happened he only knew that he was lying on what seemed to be leaves and twigs .Struggling to draw breath into lungs that felt flattened he blinked and realized that the gaudy glare was sunlight streaming through a canopy of leaves far above him .Then an object twitched close to his face .He pushed himself onto his hands and knees ready to face some small fierce creature but saw that the object was Rons foot .Looking around Harry saw that they and Hermione were lying on a forest floor apparently alone .Harrys first thought was of the Forbidden Forest and for a moment even though he knew how foolish and dangerous it would be for them to appear in the grounds of Hogwarts his heart leapt at the thought of sneaking through the trees to Hagrids hut .However in the few moments it took for Ron to give a low groan and Harry to start crawling toward him he realized that this was not the Forbidden Forest The trees looked younger they were more widely spaced the ground clearer .He met Hermione also on her hands and knees at Rons head .The moment his eyes fell upon Ron all other concerns fled Harrys mind for blood drenched the whole of Rons left side and his face stood out grayish white against the leafstrewn earth .The Polyjuice Potion was wearing off now Ron was halfway between Cattermole and himself in appearance his hair turning redder and redder as his face drained of the little color it had left .Whats happened to him ?Splinched said Hermione her fingers already busy at Rons sleeve where the blood was wettest and darkest .Harry watched horrified as she tore open Rons shirt .He had always thought of Splinching as something comical but this .His insides crawled unpleasantly as Hermione laid bare Rons upper arm where a great chunk of flesh was missing scooped cleanly away as though by a knife .Harry quickly in my bag theres a small bottle labeled ‘Essence of Dittany Bag right Harry sped to the place where Hermione had landed seized the tiny beaded bag and thrust his hand inside it .At once object after object began presenting itself to his touch He felt the leather spines of books woolly sleeves of jumpers heels of shoes Quickly He grabbed his wand from the ground and pointed it into the depths of the magical bag .Accio Dittany A small brown bottle zoomed out of the bag he caught it and hastened back to Hermione and Ron whose eyes were now halfclosed strips of white eyeball all that were visible between his lids .Hes fainted said Hermione who was also rather pale she no longer looked like Mafalda though her hair was still gray in places .Unstopper it for me Harry my hands are shaking .Harry wrenched the stopper off the little bottle Hermione took it and poured three drops of the potion onto the bleeding wound .Greenish smoke billowed upward and when it had cleared Harry saw that the bleeding had stopped .The wound now looked several days old new skin stretched over what had just been open flesh .Wow said Harry .Its all I feel safe doing said Hermione shakily .There are spells that would put him completely right but I darent try in case I do them wrong and cause more damage .Hes lost so much blood already .How did he get hurt ?I mean Harry shook his head trying to clear it to make sense of whatever had just taken place why are we here ?I thought we were going back to Grimmauld Place ?Hermione took a deep breath .She looked close to tears .Harry I dont think were going to be able to go back there .What dyou ?As we Disapparated Yaxley caught hold of me and I couldnt get rid of him he was too strong and he was still holding on when we arrived at Grimmauld Place and then well I think he must have seen the door and thought we were stopping there so he slackened his grip and I managed to shake him off and I brought us here instead !But then wheres he ?Hang on .You dont mean hes at Grimmauld Place ?He cant get in there ?Her eyes sparkled with unshed tears as she nodded .Harry I think he can .I I forced him to let go with a Revulsion Jinx but Id already taken him inside the Fidelius Charms protection .Since Dumbledore died were SecretKeepers so Ive given him the secret havent I ?There was no pretending Harry was sure she was right .It was a serious blow .If Yaxley could now get inside the house there was no way that they could return .Even now he could be bringing other Death Eaters in there by Apparition .Gloomy and oppressive though the house was it had been their one safe refuge even now that Kreacher was so much happier and friendlier a kind of home .With a twinge of regret that had nothing to do with food Harry imagined the houseelf busying himself over the steakandkidney pie that Harry Ron and Hermione would never eat .Harry Im sorry Im so sorry !Dont be stupid it wasnt your fault !If anything it was mine .Harry put his hand in his pocket and drew out Mad Eyes eye .Hermione recoiled looking horrified .Umbridge had stuck it to her office door to spy on people .I couldnt leave it there .but thats how they knew there were intruders .Before Hermione could answer Ron groaned and opened his eyes .He was still gray and his face glistened with sweat .How dyou feel ?Hermione whispered .Lousy croaked Ron wincing as he felt his injured arm .Where are we ?In the woods where they held the Quidditch World Cup said Hermione .I wanted somewhere enclosed undercover and this was the first place you thought of Harry finished for her glancing around at the apparently deserted glade .He could not help remembering what had happened the last time they had Apparated to the first place Hermione had thought of how Death Eaters had found them within minutes .Had it been Legilimency ?Did Voldemort or his henchmen know even now where Hermione had taken them ?Dyou reckon we should move on ?Ron asked Harry and Harry could tell by the look on Rons face that he was thinking the same .I dunno .Ron still looked pale and clammy .He had made no attempt to sit up and it looked as though he was too weak to do so .The prospect of moving him was daunting .Lets stay here for now Harry said .Looking relieved Hermione sprang to her feet .Where are you going ?asked Ron .If were staying we should put some protective enchantments around the place she replied and raising her wand she began to walk in a wide circle around Harry and Ron murmuring incantations as she went .Harry saw little disturbances in the surrounding air It was as if Hermione had cast a heat haze upon their clearing .Salvio Hexia .Protego Totalum .Repello Muggletum .Muffliato .You could get out the tent Harry .Tent ?In the bag !In the .of course said Harry .He did not bother to grope inside it this time but used another Summoning Charm .The tent emerged in a lumpy mass of canvas rope and poles .Harry recognized it partly because of the smell of cats as the same tent in which they had slept on the night of the Quidditch World Cup .I thought this belonged to that bloke Perkins at the Ministry ?he asked starting to disentangle the tent pegs .Apparently he didnt want it back his lumbagos so bad said Hermione now performing complicated figureofeight movements with her wand so Rons dad said I could borrow it .ErectoV she added pointing her wand at the misshapen canvas which in one fluid motion rose into the air and settled fully constructed onto the ground before Harry out of whose startled hands a tent peg soared to land with a final thud at the end of a guy rope .Cave Inimicum Hermione finished with a skyward flourish .Thats as much as I can do .At the very least we should know theyre coming I cant guarantee it will keep out Vol Dont say the name !Ron cut across her his voice harsh .Harry and Hermione looked at each other .Im sorry Ron said moaning a little as he raised himself to look at them but it feels like a a jinx or something .Cant we call him YouKnowWho please ?Dumbledore said fear of a name began Harry .In case you hadnt noticed mate calling YouKnow Who by his name didnt do Dumbledore much good in the end Ron snapped back .Just just show You KnowWho some respect will you ?Respect ?Harry repeated but Hermione shot him a warning look apparently he was not to argue with Ron while the latter was in such a weakened condition .Harry and Hermione half carried half dragged Ron through the entrance of the tent .The interior was exactly as Harry remembered it a small flat complete with bathroom and tiny kitchen .He shoved aside an old armchair and lowered Ron carefully onto the lower berth of a bunk bed .Even this very short journey had turned Ron whiter still and once they had settled him on the mattress he closed his eyes again and did not speak for a while .Ill make some tea said Hermione breathlessly pulling kettle and mugs from the depths of her bag and heading toward the kitchen .Harry found the hot drink as welcome as the firewhisky had been on the night that MadEye had died it seemed to burn away a little of the fear fluttering in his chest .After a minute or two Ron broke the silence .What dyou reckon happened to the Cattermoles ?With any luck theyll have got away said Hermione clutching her hot mug for comfort .As long as Mr Cattermole had his wits about him hell have transported Mrs Cattermole by SideAlong Apparition and theyll be fleeing the country right now with their children .Thats what Harry told her to do .Blimey I hope they escaped said Ron leaning back on his pillows .The tea seemed to be doing him good a little of his color had returned .I didnt get the feeling Reg Cattermole was all that quickwitted though the way everyone was talking to me when I was him .God I hope they made it .If they both end up in Azkaban because of us .Harry looked over at Hermione and the question he had been about to ask about whether Mrs Cattermole s lack of a wand would prevent her Apparating alongside her husband died in his throat .Hermione was watching Ron fret over the fate of the Cattermoles and there was such tenderness in her expression that Harry felt almost as if he had surprised her in the act of kissing him .So have you got it ?Harry asked her partly to remind her that he was there .Got got what ?she said with a little start .What did we just go through all that for ?The locket !Wheres the locket ?You got it ?shouted Ron raising himself a little higher on his pillows .No one tells me anything !Blimey you could have mentioned it !Well we were running for our lives from the Death Eaters werent we ?said Hermione .Here .And she pulled the locket out of the pocket of her robes and handed it to Ron .It was as large as a chickens egg .An ornate letter S inlaid with many small green stones glinted dully in the diffused light shining through the tents canvas roof .There isnt any chance someones destroyed it since Kreacher had it ?asked Ron hopefully .I mean are we sure its still a Horcrux ?I think so said Hermione taking it back from him and looking at it closely .There d be some sign of damage if it had been magically destroyed .She passed it to Harry who turned it over in his fingers .The thing looked perfect pristine .He remembered the mangled remains of the diary and how the stone in the Horcrux ring had been cracked open when Dumbledore destroyed it .I reckon Kreachers right said Harry .Were going to have to work out how to open this thing before we can destroy it .Sudden awareness of what he was holding of what lived behind the little golden doors hit Harry as he spoke .Even after all their efforts to find it he felt a violent urge to fling the locket from him .Mastering himself again he tried to prise the locket apart with his fingers then attempted the charm Hermione had used to open Reguluss bedroom door .Neither worked .He handed the locket back to Ron and Hermione each of whom did their best but were no more successful at opening it than he had been .Can you feel it though ?Ron asked in a hushed voice as he held it tight in his clenched fist .What dyou mean ?Ron passed the Horcrux to Harry .After a moment or two Harry thought he knew what Ron meant .Was it his own blood pulsing through his veins that he could feel or was it something beating inside the locket like a tiny metal heart ?What are we going to do with it ?Hermione asked .Keep it safe till we work out how to destroy it Harry replied and little though he wanted to he hung the chain around his own neck dropping the locket out of sight beneath his robes where it rested against his chest beside the pouch Hagrid had given him .I think we should take it in turns to keep watch outside the tent he added to Hermione standing up and stretching .And well need to think about some food as well .You stay there he added sharply as Ron attempted to sit up and turned a nasty shade of green .With the Sneakoscope Hermione had given Harry for his birthday set carefully upon the table in the tent Harry and Hermione spent the rest of the day sharing the role of lookout .However the Sneakoscope remained silent and still upon its point all day and whether because of the protective enchantments and Mugglerepelling charms Hermione had spread around them or because people rarely ventured this way their patch of wood remained deserted apart from occasional birds and squirrels .Evening brought no change Harry lit his wand as he swapped places with Hermione at ten oclock and looked out upon a deserted scene noting the bats fluttering high above him across the single patch of starry sky visible from their protected clearing .He felt hungry now and a little lightheaded .Hermione had not packed any food in her magical bag as she had assumed that they would be returning to Grimmauld Place that night so they had had nothing to eat except some wild mushrooms that Hermione had collected from amongst the nearest trees and stewed in a billycan .After a couple of mouthfuls Ron had pushed his portion away looking queasy Harry had only persevered so as not to hurt Hermione s feelings .The surrounding silence was broken by odd rustlings and what sounded like crackings of twigs Harry thought that they were caused by animals rather than people yet he kept his wand held tight at the ready .His insides already uncomfortable due to their inadequate helping of rubbery mushrooms tingled with unease .He had thought that he would feel elated if they managed to steal back the Horcrux but somehow he did not all he felt as he sat looking out at the darkness of which his wand lit only a tiny part was worry about what would happen next .It was as though he had been hurtling toward this point for weeks months maybe even years but now he had come to an abrupt halt run out of road .There were other Horcruxes out there somewhere but he did not have the faintest idea where they could be .He did not even know what all of them were .Meanwhile he was at a loss to know how to destroy the only one that they had found the Horcrux that currently lay against the bare flesh of his chest .Curiously it had not taken heat from his body but lay so cold against his skin it might just have emerged from icy water .From time to time Harry thought or perhaps imagined that he could feel the tiny heartbeat ticking irregularly alongside his own .Nameless forebodings crept upon him as he sat there in the dark He tried to resist them push them away yet they came at him relentlessly .Neither can live while the other survives .Ron and Hermione now talking softly behind him in the tent could walk away if they wanted to He could not .And it seemed to Harry as he sat there trying to master his own fear and exhaustion that the Horcrux against his chest was ticking away the time he had left .Stupid idea he told himself dont think that .His scar was starting to prickle again .He was afraid that he was making it happen by having these thoughts and tried to direct them into another channel .He thought of poor Kreacher who had expected them home and had received Yaxley instead .Would the elf keep silent or would he tell the Death Eater everything he knew ?Harry wanted to believe that Kreacher had changed toward him in the past month that he would be loyal now but who knew what would happen ?What if the Death Eaters tortured the elf ?Sick images swarmed into Harrys head and he tried to push these away too for there was nothing he could do for Kreacher He and Hermione had already decided against trying to summon him what if someone from the Ministry came too ?They could not count on elfish Apparition being free from the same flaw that had taken Yaxley to Grimmauld Place on the hem of Hermione s sleeve .Harrys scar was burning now .He thought that there was so much they did not know Lupin had been right about magic they had never encountered or imagined .Why hadnt Dumbledore explained more ?Had he thought that there would be time that he would live for years for centuries perhaps like his friend Nicolas Flamel ?If so he had been wrong .Snape had seen to that .Snape the sleeping snake who had struck at the top of the tower .And Dumbledore had fallen .fallen .Give it to me Gregorovitch .Harrys voice was high clear and cold his wand held in front of him by a longfingered white hand .The man at whom he was pointing was suspended upside down in midair though there were no ropes holding him he swung there invisibly and eerily bound his limbs wrapped about him his terrified face on a level with Harrys ruddy due to the blood that had rushed to his head .He had purewhite hair and a thick bushy beard a trussedup Father Christmas .I have it not I have it no more !It was many years ago stolen from me !Do not lie to Lord Voldemort Gregorovitch .He knows .He always knows .The hanging mans pupils were wide dilated with fear and they seemed to swell bigger and bigger until their blackness swallowed Harry whole And now Harry was hurrying along a dark corridor in stout little Gregorovitch s wake as he held a lantern aloft Gregorovitch burst into the room at the end of the passage and his lantern illuminated what looked like a workshop wood shavings and gold gleamed in the swinging pool of light and there on the window ledge sat perched like a giant bird a young man with golden hair .In the split second that the lanterns light illuminated him Harry saw the delight upon his handsome face then the intruder shot a Stunning Spell from his wand and jumped neatly backward out of the window with a crow of laughter .And Harry was hurtling back out of those wide tunnellike pupils and Gregorovitch s face was stricken with terror .Who was the thief Gregorovitch ?said the high cold voice .I do not know I never knew a young man no please PLEASE !A scream that went on and on and then a burst of green light Harryl He opened his eyes panting his forehead throbbing .He had passed out against the side of the tent had slid sideways down the canvas and was sprawled on the ground .He looked up at Hermione whose bushy hair obscured the tiny patch of sky visible through the dark branches high above them .Dream he said sitting up quickly and attempting to meet Hermione s glower with a look of innocence .Mustve dozed off sorry .I know it was your scar !I can tell by the look on your face !You were looking into Vol Dont say his name !came Rons angry voice from the depths of the tent .Fine retorted Hermione .YouKnowWhos mind then !I didnt mean it to happen !Harry said .It was a dream !Can you control what you dream about Hermione ?If you just learned to apply Occlumency But Harry was not interested in being told off he wanted to discuss what he had just seen .Hes found Gregorovitch Hermione and I think hes killed him but before he killed him he read Gregorovitch s mind and I saw I think Id better take over the watch if youre so tired youre falling asleep said Hermione coldly .I can finish the watch !No youre obviously exhausted .Go and lie down .She dropped down in the mouth of the tent looking stubborn .Angry but wishing to avoid a row Harry ducked back inside .Rons stillpale face was poking out from the lower bunk Harry climbed into the one above him lay down and looked up at the dark canvas ceiling .After several moments Ron spoke in a voice so low that it would not carry to Hermione huddled in the entrance .Whats YouKnowWho doing ?Harry screwed up his eyes in the effort to remember every detail then whispered into the darkness .He found Gregorovitch .He had him tied up he was torturing him .Hows Gregorovitch supposed to make him a new wand if hes tied up ?I dunno .Its weird isnt it ?Harry closed his eyes thinking of all he had seen and heard .The more he recalled the less sense it made . .Voldemort had said nothing about Harrys wand nothing about the twin cores nothing about Gregorovitch making a new and more powerful wand to beat Harrys .He wanted something from Gregorovitch Harry said eyes still closed tight .He asked him to hand it over but Gregorovitch said it had been stolen from him .and then .then .He remembered how he as Voldemort had seemed to hurtle through Gregorovitch s eyes into his memories .He read Gregorovitch s mind and I saw this young bloke perched on a windowsill and he fired a curse at Gregorovitch and jumped out of sight .He stole it he stole whatever YouKnowWhos after .And I .I think Ive seen him somewhere .Harry wished he could have another glimpse of the laughing boys face .The theft had happened many years ago according to Gregorovitch .Why did the young thief look familiar ?The noises of the surrounding woods were muffled inside the tent all Harry could hear was Rons breathing .After a while Ron whispered Couldnt you see what the thief was holding ?No .it mustve been something small .Harry ?The wooden slats of Rons bunk creaked as he repositioned himself in bed .Harry you dont reckon YouKnowWhos after something else to turn into a Horcrux ?I dont know said Harry slowly .Maybe .But wouldnt it be dangerous for him to make another one ?Didnt Hermione say he had pushed his soul to the limit already ?Yeah but maybe he doesnt know that .Yeah .maybe said Harry .He had been sure that Voldemort had been looking for a way around the problem of the twin cores sure that Voldemort sought a solution from the old wandmaker .and yet he had killed him apparently without asking him a single question about wandlore .What was Voldemort trying to find ?Why with the Ministry of Magic and the Wizarding world at his feet was he far away intent on the pursuit of an object that Gregorovitch had once owned and which had been stolen by the unknown thief ?Harry could still see the blondhaired youths face it was merry wild there was a Fred and Georgeish air of triumphant trickery about him .He had soared from the windowsill like a bird and Harry had seen him before but he could not think where .With Gregorovitch dead it was the merryfaced thief who was in danger now and it was on him that Harrys thoughts dwelled as Rons snores began to rumble from the lower bunk and as he himself drifted slowly into sleep once more .THE GOBLINS REVENGE Early next morning before the other two were awake Harry left the tent to search the woods around them for the oldest most gnarled and resilientlooking tree he could find .There in its shadow he buried MadEye Moodys eye and marked the spot by gouging a small cross in the bark with his wand .It was not much but Harry felt that MadEye would have much preferred this to being stuck on Dolores Umbridges door .Then he returned to the tent to wait for the others to wake and discuss what they were going to do next .Harry and Hermione felt that it was best not to stay anywhere too long and Ron agreed with the sole proviso that their next move took them within reach of a bacon sandwich .Hermione therefore removed the enchantments she had placed around the clearing while Harry and Ron obliterated all the marks and impressions on the ground that might show they had camped there .Then they Disapparated to the outskirts of a small market town .Once they had pitched the tent in the shelter of a small copse of trees and surrounded it with freshly cast defensive enchantments Harry ventured out under the Invisibility Cloak to find sustenance .This however did not go as planned .He had barely entered the town when an unnatural chill a descending mist and a sudden darkening of the skies made him freeze where he stood .But you can make a brilliant Patronus !protested Ron when Harry arrived back at the tent empty handed out of breath and mouthing the single word dementors .I couldnt .make one he panted clutching the stitch in his side .Wouldnt .come .Their expressions of consternation and disappointment made Harry feel ashamed .It had been a nightmarish experience seeing the dementors gliding out of the mist in the distance and realizing as the paralyzing cold choked his lungs and a distant screaming filled his ears that he was not going to be able to protect himself .It had taken all Harrys willpower to uproot himself from the spot and run leaving the eyeless dementors to glide amongst the Muggles who might not be able to see them but would assuredly feel the despair they cast wherever they went .So we still havent got any food .Shut up Ron snapped Hermione .Harry what happened ?Why do you think you couldnt make your Patronus ?You managed perfectly yesterday !I dont know .He sat low in one of Perkinss old armchairs feeling more humiliated by the moment .He was afraid that something had gone wrong inside him .Yesterday seemed a long time ago Today he might have been thirteen years old again the only one who collapsed on the Hogwarts Express .Ron kicked a chair leg .What ?he snarled at Hermione .Im starving !All Ive had since I bled half to death is a couple of toadstools !You go and fight your way through the dementors then said Harry stung .I would but my arms in a sling in case you hadnt noticed !Thats convenient .And whats that supposed to ?Of course !cried Hermione clapping a hand to her forehead and startling both of them into silence .Harry give me the locket !Come on she said impatiently clicking her fingers at him when he did not react the Horcrux Harry youre still wearing it !She held out her hands and Harry lifted the golden chain over his head .The moment it parted contact with Harrys skin he felt free and oddly light .He had not even realized that he was clammy or that there was a heavy weight pressing on his stomach until both sensations lifted .Better ?asked Hermione .Yeah loads better !Harry she said crouching down in front of him and using the kind of voice he associated with visiting the very sick you dont think youve been possessed do you ?What ?No !he said defensively .I remember everything weve done while Ive been wearing it .I wouldnt know what Id done if Id been possessed would I ?Ginny told me there were times when she couldnt remember anything .Hmm said Hermione looking down at the heavy gold locket .Well maybe we ought not to wear it .We can just keep it in the tent .We are not leaving that Horcrux lying around Harry stated firmly .If we lose it if it gets stolen Oh all right all right said Hermione and she placed it around her own neck and tucked it out of sight down the front of her shirt .But well take turns wearing it so nobody keeps it on too long .Great said Ron irritably and now weve sorted that out can we please get some food ?Fine but well go somewhere else to find it said Hermione with half a glance at Harry .Theres no point staying where we know dementors are swooping around .In the end they settled down for the night in a far flung field belonging to a lonely farm from which they had managed to obtain eggs and bread .Its not stealing is it ?asked Hermione in a troubled voice as they devoured scrambled eggs on toast .Not if I left some money under the chicken coop ?Ron rolled his eyes and said with his cheeks bulging Ermynee oo worry oo much .Elax !And indeed it was much easier to relax when they were comfortably well fed The argument about the dementors was forgotten in laughter that night and Harry felt cheerful even hopeful as he took the first of the three night watches .This was their first encounter with the fact that a full stomach meant good spirits an empty one bickering and gloom .Harry was least surprised by this because he had suffered periods of near starvation at the Dursleys .Hermione bore up reasonably well on those nights when they managed to scavenge nothing but berries or stale biscuits her temper perhaps a little shorter than usual and her silences rather dour .Ron however had always been used to three delicious meals a day courtesy of his mother or of the Hogwarts houseelves and hunger made him both unreasonable and irascible .Whenever lack of food coincided with Rons turn to wear the Horcrux he became downright unpleasant .So where next ?was his constant refrain .He did not seem to have any ideas himself but expected Harry and Hermione to come up with plans while he sat and brooded over the low food supplies .Accordingly Harry and Hermione spent fruitless hours trying to decide where they might find the other Horcruxes and how to destroy the one they had already got their conversations becoming increasingly repetitive as they had no new information .As Dumbledore had told Harry that he believed Voldemort had hidden the Horcruxes in places important to him they kept reciting in a sort of dreary litany those locations they knew that Voldemort had lived or visited .The orphanage where he had been born and raised Hogwarts where he had been educated Borgin and Burkes where he had worked after completing school then Albania where he had spent his years of exile These formed the basis of their speculations .Yeah lets go to Albania .Shouldnt take more than an afternoon to search an entire country said Ron sarcastically .There cant be anything there .Hed already made five of his Horcruxes before he went into exile and Dumbledore was certain the snake is the sixth said Hermione .We know the snakes not in Albania its usually with Vol Didnt I ask you to stop saying that ?Fine !The snake is usually with YouKnotuWho happy ?Not particularly .I cant see him hiding anything at Borgin and Burkes said Harry who had made this point many times before but said it again simply to break the nasty silence .Borgin and Burke were experts at Dark objects they wouldve recognized a Horcrux straightaway .Ron yawned pointedly .Repressing a strong urge to throw something at him Harry plowed on I still reckon he might have hidden something at Hogwarts .Hermione sighed .But Dumbledore would have found it Harry !Harry repeated the argument he kept bringing out in favor of this theory .Dumbledore said in front of me that he never assumed he knew all of Hogwartss secrets .Im telling you if there was one place Vol Oi !YOUKNOWWHO then !Harry shouted goaded past endurance .If there was one place that was really important to YouKnowWho it was Hogwarts !Oh come on scoffed Ron .His school ?Yeah his school !It was his first real home the place that meant he was special it meant everything to him and even after he left This is YouKnowWho were talking about right ?Not you ?inquired Ron .He was tugging at the chain of the Horcrux around his neck Harry was visited by a desire to seize it and throttle him .You told us that YouKnowWho asked Dumbledore to give him a job after he left said Hermione .Thats right said Harry .And Dumbledore thought he only wanted to come back to try and find something probably another founders object to make into another Horcrux ?Yeah said Harry .But he didnt get the job did he ?said Hermione .So he never got the chance to find a founders object there and hide it in the school !Okay then said Harry defeated .Forget Hogwarts .Without any other leads they traveled into London and hidden beneath the Invisibility Cloak searched for the orphanage in which Voldemort had been raised .Hermione stole into a library and discovered from their records that the place had been demolished many years before .They visited its site and found a tower block of offices .We could try digging in the foundations ?Hermione suggested halfheartedly .He wouldnt have hidden a Horcrux here Harry said .He had known it all along The orphanage had been the place Voldemort had been determined to escape he would never have hidden a part of his soul there .Dumbledore had shown Harry that Voldemort sought grandeur or mystique in his hiding places this dismal gray corner of London was as far removed as you could imagine from Hogwarts or the Ministry or a building like Gringotts the Wizarding bank with its golden doors and marble floors .Even without any new ideas they continued to move through the countryside pitching the tent in a different place each night for security .Every morning they made sure that they had removed all clues to their presence then set off to find another lonely and secluded spot traveling by Apparition to more woods to the shadowy crevices of cliffs to purple moors gorsecovered mountainsides and once a sheltered and pebbly cove .Every twelve hours or so they passed the Horcrux between them as though they were playing some perverse slowmotion game of passtheparcel where they dreaded the music stopping because the reward was twelve hours of increased fear and anxiety .Harrys scar kept prickling .It happened most often he noticed when he was wearing the Horcrux .Sometimes he could not stop himself reacting to the pain .What ?What did you see ?demanded Ron whenever he noticed Harry wince .A face muttered Harry every time .The same face .The thief who stole from Gregorovitch .And Ron would turn away making no effort to hide his disappointment .Harry knew that Ron was hoping to hear news of his family or of the rest of the Order of the Phoenix but after all he Harry was not a television aerial he could only see what Voldemort was thinking at the time not tune in to whatever took his fancy .Apparently Voldemort was dwelling endlessly on the unknown youth with the gleeful face whose name and whereabouts Harry felt sure Voldemort knew no better than he did .As Harrys scar continued to burn and the merry blondhaired boy swam tantalizingly in his memory he learned to suppress any sign of pain or discomfort for the other two showed nothing but impatience at the mention of the thief .He could not entirely blame them when they were so desperate for a lead on the Horcruxes .As the days stretched into weeks Harry began to suspect that Ron and Hermione were having conversations without and about him .Several times they stopped talking abruptly when Harry entered the tent and twice he came accidentally upon them huddled a little distance away heads together and talking fast both times they fell silent when they realized he was approaching them and hastened to appear busy collecting wood or water .Harry could not help wondering whether they had only agreed to come on what now felt like a pointless and rambling journey because they thought he had some secret plan that they would learn in due course .Ron was making no effort to hide his bad mood and Harry was starting to fear that Hermione too was disappointed by his poor leadership .In desperation he tried to think of further Horcrux locations but the only one that continued to occur to him was Hogwarts and as neither of the others thought this at all likely he stopped suggesting it .Autumn rolled over the countryside as they moved through it They were now pitching the tent on mulches of fallen leaves .Natural mists joined those cast by the dementors wind and rain added to their troubles .The fact that Hermione was getting better at identifying edible fungi could not altogether compensate for their continuing isolation the lack of other peoples company or their total ignorance of what was going on in the war against Voldemort .My mother said Ron one night as they sat in the tent on a riverbank in Wales can make good food appear out of thin air .He prodded moodily at the lumps of charred gray fish on his plate .Harry glanced automatically at Rons neck and saw as he had expected the golden chain of the Horcrux glinting there .He managed to fight down the impulse to swear at Ron whose attitude would he knew improve slightly when the time came to take off the locket .Your mother cant produce food out of thin air said Hermione .No one can .Food is the first of the five Principal Exceptions to Gamps Law of Elemental Transfigur Oh speak English cant you ?Ron said prising a fish bone out from between his teeth .Its impossible to make good food out of nothing !You can Summon it if you know where it is you can transform it you can increase the quantity if youve already got some Well dont bother increasing this its disgusting said Ron .Harry caught the fish and I did my best with it !I notice Im always the one who ends up sorting out the food because Im a girl I suppose !No its because youre supposed to be the best at magic !shot back Ron .Hermione jumped up and bits of roast pike slid off her tin plate onto the floor .You can do the cooking tomorrow Ron you can find the ingredients and try and charm them into something worth eating and Ill sit here and pull faces and moan and you can see how you Shut up !said Harry leaping to his feet and holding up both hands .Shut up now Hermione looked outraged .How can you side with him he hardly ever does the cook Hermione be quiet I can hear someone !He was listening hard his hands still raised warning them not to talk .Then over the rush and gush of the dark river beside them he heard voices again .He looked around at the Sneakoscope .It was not moving .You cast the Muffliato charm over us right ?he whispered to Hermione .I did everything she whispered back Muffliato MuggleRepelling and Disillusionment Charms all of it .They shouldnt be able to hear or see us whoever they are .Heavy scuffing and scraping noises plus the sound of dislodged stones and twigs told them that several people were clambering down the steep wooded slope that descended to the narrow bank where they had pitched the tent .They drew their wands waiting .The enchantments they had cast around themselves ought to be sufficient in the near total darkness to shield them from the notice of Muggles and normal witches and wizards .If these were Death Eaters then perhaps their defenses were about to be tested by Dark Magic for the first time .The voices became louder but no more intelligible as the group of men reached the bank .Harry estimated that their owners were fewer than twenty feet away but the cascading river made it impossible to tell for sure .Hermione snatched up the beaded bag and started to rummage after a moment she drew out three Extendable Ears and threw one each to Harry and Ron who hastily inserted the ends of the flesh colored strings into their ears and fed the other ends out of the tent entrance .Within seconds Harry heard a weary male voice .There ought to be a few salmon in here or dyou reckon its too early in the season ?Accio Salmon .There were several distinct splashes and then the slapping sounds of fish against flesh .Somebody grunted appreciatively .Harry pressed the Extendable Ear deeper into his own Over the murmur of the river he could make out more voices but they were not speaking English or any human language he had ever heard .It was a rough and unmelodious tongue a string of rattling guttural noises and there seemed to be two speakers one with a slightly lower slower voice than the other .A fire danced into life on the other side of the canvas large shadows passed between tent and flames .The delicious smell of baking salmon wafted tantalizingly in their direction .Then came the clinking of cutlery on plates and the first man spoke again .Here Griphook Gornuk .Goblins Hermione mouthed at Harry who nodded .Thank you said the goblins together in English .So you three have been on the run how long ?asked a new mellow and pleasant voice it was vaguely familiar to Harry who pictured a roundbellied cheerfulfaced man .Six weeks .seven .I forget said the tired man .Met up with Griphook in the first couple of days and joined forces with Gornuk not long after .Nice to have a bit of company .There was a pause while knives scraped plates and tin mugs were picked up and replaced on the ground .What made you leave Ted ?continued the man .Knew they were coming for me replied mellow voiced Ted and Harry suddenly knew who he was Tonkss father .Heard Death Eaters were in the area last week and decided Id better run for it .Refused to register as a Muggleborn on principle see so I knew it was a matter of time knew Id have to leave in the end .My wife should be okay shes pureblood .And then I met Dean here what a few days ago son ?Yeah said another voice and Harry Ron and Hermione stared at each other silent but beside themselves with excitement sure they recognized the voice of Dean Thomas their fellow Gryffindor .Muggleborn eh ?asked the first man .Not sure said Dean .My dad left my mum when I was a kid .Ive got no proof he was a wizard though .There was silence for a while except for the sounds of munching then Ted spoke again .Ive got to say Dirk Im surprised to run into you .Pleased but surprised .Word was youd been caught .I was said Dirk .I was halfway to Azkaban when I made a break for it Stunned Dawlish and nicked his broom .It was easier than youd think I dont reckon hes quite right at the moment .Might be Confunded .If so Id like to shake the hand of the witch or wizard who did it probably saved my life .There was another pause in which the fire crackled and the river rushed on .Then Ted said And where do you two fit in ?I er had the impression the goblins were for YouKnowWho on the whole .You had a false impression said the highervoiced of the goblins .We take no sides .This is a wizards war .How come youre in hiding then ?I deemed it prudent said the deepervoiced goblin .Having refused what I considered an impertinent request I could see that my personal safety was in jeopardy .What did they ask you to do ?asked Ted .Duties illbefitting the dignity of my race replied the goblin his voice rougher and less human as he said it .I am not a houseelf .What about you Griphook ?Similar reasons said the highervoiced goblin .Gringotts is no longer under the sole control of my race .I recognize no Wizarding master .He added something under his breath in Gobbledegook and Gornuk laughed .Whats the joke ?asked Dean .He said replied Dirk that there are things wizards dont recognize either .There was a short pause .I dont get it said Dean .I had my small revenge before I left said Griphook in English .Good man goblin I should say amended Ted hastily .Didnt manage to lock a Death Eater up in one of the old highsecurity vaults I suppose ?If I had the sword would not have helped him break out replied Griphook .Gornuk laughed again and even Dirk gave a dry chuckle .Dean and I are still missing something here said Ted .So is Severus Snape though he does not know it said Griphook and the two goblins roared with malicious laughter .Inside the tent Harrys breathing was shallow with excitement He and Hermione stared at each other listening as hard as they could .Didnt you hear about that Ted ?asked Dirk .About the kids who tried to steal Gryffindors sword out of Snape s office at Hogwarts ?An electric current seemed to course through Harry jangling his every nerve as he stood rooted to the spot .Never heard a word said Ted .Not in the Prophet was it ?Hardly chortled Dirk .Griphook here told me he heard about it from Bill Weasley who works for the bank .One of the kids who tried to take the sword was Bills younger sister .Harry glanced toward Hermione and Ron both of whom were clutching the Extendable Ears as tightly as lifelines .She and a couple of friends got into Snape s office and smashed open the glass case where he was apparently keeping the sword .Snape caught them as they were trying to smuggle it down the staircase .Ah God bless em said Ted .What did they think that theyd be able to use the sword on YouKnow Who ?Or on Snape himself ?Well whatever they thought they were going to do with it Snape decided the sword wasnt safe where it was said Dirk .Couple of days later once hed got the sayso from YouKnowWho I imagine he sent it down to London to be kept in Gringotts instead .The goblins started to laugh again .Im still not seeing the joke said Ted .Its a fake rasped Griphook .The sword of Gryffindor !Oh yes .It is a copy an excellent copy it is true but it was Wizardmade .The original was forged centuries ago by goblins and had certain properties only goblinmade armor possesses .Wherever the genuine sword of Gryffindor is it is not in a vault at Gringotts bank .I see said Ted .And I take it you didnt bother telling the Death Eaters this ?I saw no reason to trouble them with the information said Griphook smugly and now Ted and Dean joined in Gornuk and Dirks laughter .Inside the tent Harry closed his eyes willing someone to ask the question he needed answered and after a minute that seemed ten Dean obliged he was Harry remembered with a jolt an exboyfriend of Ginnys too .What happened to Ginny and the others ?The ones who tried to steal it ?Oh they were punished and cruelly said Griphook indifferently .Theyre okay though ?asked Ted quickly .I mean the Weasleys dont need any more of their kids injured do they ?They suffered no serious injury as far as I am aware said Griphook .Lucky for them said Ted .With Snapes track record I suppose we should just be glad theyre still alive .You believe that story then do you Ted ?asked Dirk .You believe Snape killed Dumbledore ?Course I do said Ted .Youre not going to sit there and tell me you think Potter had anything to do with it ?Hard to know what to believe these days muttered Dirk .I know Harry Potter said Dean .And I reckon hes the real thing the Chosen One or whatever you want to call it .Yeah theres a lot would like to believe hes that son said Dirk me included .But where is he ?Run for it by the looks of things .Youd think if he knew anything we dont or had anything special going for him hed be out there now fighting rallying resistance instead of hiding .And you know the Prophet made a pretty good case against him The Prophet ?scoffed Ted .You deserve to be lied to if youre still reading that muck Dirk .You want the facts try the Quibbler .There was a sudden explosion of choking and retching plus a good deal of thumping by the sound of it Dirk had swallowed a fish bone .At last he spluttered The Quibbler ?That lunatic rag of Xeno Lovegoods ?Its not so lunatic these days said Ted .You want to give it a look .Xeno is printing all the stuff the Prophets ignoring not a single mention of Crumple Horned Snorkacks in the last issue .How long theyll let him get away with it mind I dont know .But Xeno says front page of every issue that any wizard whos against YouKnowWho ought to make helping Harry Potter their numberone priority .Hard to help a boy whos vanished off the face of the earth said Dirk .Listen the fact that they havent caught him yets one hell of an achievement said Ted .Id take tips from him gladly its what were trying to do stay free isnt it ?Yeah well youve got a point there said Dirk heavily .With the whole of the Ministry and all their informers looking for him Id have expected him to be caught by now .Mind whos to say they havent already caught and killed him without publicizing it ?Ah dont say that Dirk murmured Ted .There was a long pause filled with more clattering of knives and forks .When they spoke again it was to discuss whether they ought to sleep on the bank or retreat back up the wooded slope .Deciding the trees would give better cover they extinguished their fire then clambered back up the incline their voices fading away .Harry Ron and Hermione reeled in the Extendable Ears .Harry who had found the need to remain silent increasingly difficult the longer they eavesdropped now found himself unable to say more than Ginny the sword I know !said Hermione .She lunged for the tiny beaded bag this time sinking her arm in it right up to the armpit .Here .we .are .she said between gritted teeth and she pulled at something that was evidently in the depths of the bag .Slowly the edge of an ornate picture frame came into sight .Harry hurried to help her .As they lifted the empty portrait of Phineas Nigellus free of Hermiones bag she kept her wand pointing at it ready to cast a spell at any moment .If somebody swapped the real sword for the fake while it was in Dumbledores office she panted as they propped the painting against the side of the tent Phineas Nigellus would have seen it happen he hangs right beside the case !Unless he was asleep said Harry but he still held his breath as Hermione knelt down in front of the empty canvas her wand directed at its center cleared her throat then said Er Phineas ?Phineas Nigellus ?Nothing happened .Phineas Nigellus ?said Hermione again .Professor Black ?Please could we talk to you ?Please ? ‘Please always helps said a cold snide voice and Phineas Nigellus slid into his portrait .At once Hermione cried Obscuro A black blindfold appeared over Phineas Nigelluss clever dark eyes causing him to bump into the frame and shriek with pain .What how dare what are you ?Im very sorry Professor Black said Hermione but its a necessary precaution !Remove this foul addition at once !Remove it I say !You are ruining a great work of art !Where am I ?What is going on ?Never mind where we are said Harry and Phineas Nigellus froze abandoning his attempts to peel off the painted blindfold .Can that possibly be the voice of the elusive Mr Potter ?Maybe said Harry knowing that this would keep Phineas Nigelluss interest .Weve got a couple of questions to ask you about the sword of Gryffindor .Ah said Phineas Nigellus now turning his head this way and that in an effort to catch sight of Harry yes .That silly girl acted most unwisely there Shut up about my sister said Ron roughly .Phineas Nigellus raised supercilious eyebrows .Who else is here ?he asked turning his head from side to side .Your tone displeases me !The girl and her friends were foolhardy in the extreme .Thieving from the headmaster !They werent thieving said Harry .That sword isnt Snapes .It belongs to Professor Snapes school said Phineas Nigellus .Exactly what claim did the Weasley girl have upon it ?She deserved her punishment as did the idiot Longbottom and the Lovegood oddity !Neville is not an idiot and Luna is not an oddity !said Hermione .Where am I ?repeated Phineas Nigellus starting to wrestle with the blindfold again .Where have you brought me ?Why have you removed me from the house of my forebears ?Never mind that !How did Snape punish Ginny Neville and Luna ?asked Harry urgently .Professor Snape sent them into the Forbidden Forest to do some work for the oaf Hagrid .Hagrids not an oaf !said Hermione shrilly .And Snape mightve thought that was a punishment said Harry but Ginny Neville and Luna probably had a good laugh with Hagrid .The Forbidden Forest .theyve faced plenty worse than the Forbidden Forest big deal !He felt relieved he had been imagining horrors the Cruciatus Curse at the very least .What we really wanted to know Professor Black is whether anyone else has um taken out the sword at all ?Maybe its been taken away for cleaning or or something ?Phineas Nigellus paused again in his struggles to free his eyes and sniggered .Muggleborns he said .Goblinmade armor does not require cleaning simple girl .Goblins silver repels mundane dirt imbibing only that which strengthens it .Dont call Hermione simple said Harry .I grow weary of contradiction said Phineas Nigellus .Perhaps it is time for me to return to the headmasters office ?Still blindfolded he began groping the side of his frame trying to feel his way out of his picture and back into the one at Hogwarts .Harry had a sudden inspiration .Dumbledore !Cant you bring us Dumbledore ?I beg your pardon ?asked Phineas Nigellus .Professor Dumbledores portrait couldnt you bring him along here into yours ?Phineas Nigellus turned his face in the direction of Harrys voice .Evidently it is not only Muggleborns who are ignorant Potter .The portraits of Hogwarts may commune with each other but they cannot travel outside the castle except to visit a painting of themselves hanging elsewhere .Dumbledore cannot come here with me and after the treatment I have received at your hands I can assure you that I shall not be making a return visit !Slightly crestfallen Harry watched Phineas redouble his attempts to leave his frame .Professor Black said Hermione couldnt you just tell us please when was the last time the sword was taken out of its case ?Before Ginny took it out I mean ?Phineas snorted impatiently .I believe that the last time I saw the sword of Gryffindor leave its case was when Professor Dumbledore used it to break open a ring .Hermione whipped around to look at Harry .Neither of them dared say more in front of Phineas Nigellus who had at last managed to locate the exit .Well good night to you he said a little waspishly and he began to move out of sight again .Only the edge of his hat brim remained in view when Harry gave a sudden shout .Wait !Have you told Snape you saw this ?Phineas Nigellus stuck his blindfolded head back into the picture .Professor Snape has more important things on his mind than the many eccentricities of Albus Dumbledore .Goodbye Potter !And with that he vanished completely leaving behind him nothing but his murky backdrop .Harry !Hermione cried .I know !Harry shouted .Unable to contain himself he punched the air it was more than he had dared to hope for .He strode up and down the tent feeling that he could have run a mile he did not even feel hungry anymore .Hermione was squashing Phineas Nigelluss portrait back into the beaded bag when she had fastened the clasp she threw the bag aside and raised a shining face to Harry .The sword can destroy Horcruxes !Goblinmade blades imbibe only that which strengthen them Harry that swords impregnated with basilisk venom !And Dumbledore didnt give it to me because he still needed it he wanted to use it on the locket and he must have realized they wouldnt let you have it if he put it in his will so he made a copy and put a fake in the glass case and he left the real one where ?They gazed at each other Harry felt that the answer was dangling invisibly in the air above them tantalizingly close .Why hadnt Dumbledore told him ?Or had he in fact told Harry but Harry had not realized it at the time ?Think !whispered Hermione .Think !Where would he have left it ?Not at Hogwarts said Harry resuming his pacing .Somewhere in Hogsmeade ?suggested Hermione .The Shrieking Shack ?said Harry .Nobody ever goes in there .But Snape knows how to get in wouldnt that be a bit risky ?Dumbledore trusted Snape Harry reminded her .Not enough to tell him that he had swapped the swords said Hermione .Yeah youre right !said Harry and he felt even more cheered at the thought that Dumbledore had had some reservations however faint about Snape s trustworthiness .So would he have hidden the sword well away from Hogsmeade then ?What dyou reckon Ron ?Ron ?Harry looked around .For one bewildered moment he thought that Ron had left the tent then realized that Ron was lying in the shadow of a lower bunk looking stony .Oh remembered me have you ?he said .What ?Ron snorted as he stared up at the underside of the upper bunk .You two carry on .Dont let me spoil your fun .Perplexed Harry looked to Hermione for help but she shook her head apparently as nonplussed as he was .Whats the problem ?asked Harry .Problem ?Theres no problem said Ron still refusing to look at Harry .Not according to you anyway .There were several plunks on the canvas over their heads .It had started to rain .Well youve obviously got a problem said Harry .Spit it out will you ?Ron swung his long legs off the bed and sat up .He looked mean unlike himself .All right Ill spit it out .Dont expect me to skip up and down the tent because theres some other damn thing weve got to find .Just add it to the list of stuff you dont know .I dont know ?repeated Harry I dont know ?Plunk plunk plunk .The rain was falling harder and heavier it pattered on the leafstrewn bank all around them and into the river chattering through the dark .Dread doused Harrys jubilation Ron was saying exactly what he had suspected and feared him to be thinking .Its not like Im not having the time of my life here said Ron you know with my arm mangled and nothing to eat and freezing my backside off every night .I just hoped you know after wed been running round a few weeks wed have achieved something .Ron Hermione said but in such a quiet voice that Ron could pretend not to have heard it over the loud tattoo the rain was now beating on the tent .I thought you knew what youd signed up for said Harry .Yeah I thought I did too .So what part of it isnt living up to your expectations ?asked Harry .Anger was coming to his defense now .Did you think wed be staying in five star hotels ?Finding a Horcrux every other day ?Did you think youd be back to Mummy by Christmas ?We thought you knew what you were doing !shouted Ron standing up and his words pierced Harry like scalding knives .We thought Dumbledore had told you what to do we thought you had a real plan !Ron !said Hermione this time clearly audible over the rain thundering on the tent roof but again he ignored her .Well sorry to let you down said Harry his voice quite calm even though he felt hollow inadequate .Ive been straight with you from the start I told you everything Dumbledore told me .And in case you havent noticed weve found one Horcrux Yeah and were about as near getting rid of it as we are to finding the rest of them nowhere effing near in other words !Take off the locket Ron Hermione said her voice unusually high .Please take it off .You wouldnt be talking like this if you hadnt been wearing it all day .Yeah he would said Harry who did not want excuses made for Ron .Dyou think I havent noticed the two of you whispering behind my back ?Dyou think I didnt guess you were thinking this stuff ?Harry we werent Dont lie !Ron hurled at her .You said it too you said you were disappointed you said youd thought he had a bit more to go on than I didnt say it like that Harry I didnt !she cried .The rain was pounding the tent tears were pouring down Hermiones face and the excitement of a few minutes before had vanished as if it had never been a shortlived firework that had flared and died leaving everything dark wet and cold .The sword of Gryffindor was hidden they knew not where and they were three teenagers in a tent whose only achievement was not yet to be dead .So why are you still here ?Harry asked Ron .Search me said Ron .Go home then said Harry .Yeah maybe I will !shouted Ron and he took several steps toward Harry who did not back away .Didnt you hear what they said about my sister ?But you dont give a rats fart do you its only the Forbidden Forest Harry IveFacedWorse Potter doesnt care what happens to her in here well I do all right giant spiders and mental stuff I was only saying she was with the others they were with Hagrid Yeah I get it you dont care !And what about the rest of my family ‘the Weasleys dont need another kid injured did you hear that ?Yeah I Not bothered what it meant though ?Ron !said Hermione forcing her way between them .I dont think it means anything new has happened anything we dont know about think Ron Bills already scarred plenty of people must have seen that George has lost an ear by now and youre supposed to be on your deathbed with spattergroit Im sure thats all he meant Oh youre sure are you ?Right then well I wont bother myself about them .Its all right for you two isnt it with your parents safely out of the way My parents are dead .Harry bellowed .And mine could be going the same way !yelled Ron .Then GO !roared Harry .Go back to them pretend youve got over your spattergroit and Mummyll be able to feed you up and Ron made a sudden movement Harry reacted but before either wand was clear of its owners pocket Hermione had raised her own .Protego she cried and an invisible shield expanded between her and Harry on the one side and Ron on the other all of them were forced backward a few steps by the strength of the spell and Harry and Ron glared from either side of the transparent barrier as though they were seeing each other clearly for the first time .Harry felt a corrosive hatred toward Ron Something had broken between them .Leave the Horcrux Harry said .Ron wrenched the chain from over his head and cast the locket into a nearby chair .He turned to Hermione .What are you doing ?What do you mean ?Are you staying or what ?I .She looked anguished .Yes yes Im staying .Ron we said wed go with Harry we said wed help I get it .You choose him .Ron no please come back come back !She was impeded by her own Shield Charm by the time she had removed it he had already stormed into the night .Harry stood quite still and silent listening to her sobbing and calling Rons name amongst the trees .After a few minutes she returned her sopping hair plastered to her face .Hes gggone !Disapparated !She threw herself into a chair curled up and started to cry .Harry felt dazed .He stooped picked up the Horcrux and placed it around his own neck .He dragged blankets off Rons bunk and threw them over Hermione .Then he climbed onto his own bed and stared up at the dark canvas roof listening to the pounding of the rain .GODRICS HOLLOW When Harry woke the following day it was several seconds before he remembered what had happened .Then he hoped childishly that it had been a dream that Ron was still there and had never left .Yet by turning his head on his pillow he could see Rons deserted bunk .It was like a dead body in the way it seemed to draw his eyes .Harry jumped down from his own bed keeping his eyes averted from Rons .Hermione who was already busy in the kitchen did not wish Harry good morning but turned her face away quickly as he went by .Hes gone Harry told himself .Hes gone .He had to keep thinking it as he washed and dressed as though repetition would dull the shock of it .Hes gone and hes not coming back .And that was the simple truth of it Harry knew because their protective enchantments meant that it would be impossible once they vacated this spot for Ron to find them again .He and Hermione ate breakfast in silence .Hermione s eyes were puffy and red she looked as if she had not slept .They packed up their things Hermione dawdling .Harry knew why she wanted to spin out their time on the riverbank several times he saw her look up eagerly and he was sure she had deluded herself into thinking that she heard footsteps through the heavy rain but no redhaired figure appeared between the trees .Every time Harry imitated her looked around for he could not help hoping a little himself and saw nothing but rainswept woods another little parcel of fury exploded inside him .He could hear Ron saying We thought you knew what you were doing and he resumed packing with a hard knot in the pit of his stomach .The muddy river beside them was rising rapidly and would soon spill over onto their bank .They had lingered a good hour after they would usually have departed their campsite .Finally having entirely repacked the beaded bag three times Hermione seemed unable to find any more reasons to delay She and Harry grasped hands and Disapparated reappearing on a windswept heathercovered hillside .The instant they arrived Hermione dropped Harrys hand and walked away from him finally sitting down on a large rock her face on her knees shaking with what he knew were sobs .He watched her supposing that he ought to go and comfort her but something kept him rooted to the spot .Everything inside him felt cold and tight Again he saw the contemptuous expression on Rons face .Harry strode off through the heather walking in a large circle with the distraught Hermione at its center casting the spells she usually performed to ensure their protection .They did not discuss Ron at all over the next few days .Harry was determined never to mention his name again and Hermione seemed to know that it was no use forcing the issue although sometimes at night when she thought he was sleeping he would hear her crying .Meanwhile Harry had started bringing out the Marauders Map and examining it by wandlight .He was waiting for the moment when Rons labeled dot would reappear in the corridors of Hogwarts proving that he had returned to the comfortable castle protected by his status of pureblood .However Ron did not appear on the map and after a while Harry found himself taking it out simply to stare at Ginnys name in the girls dormitory wondering whether the intensity with which he gazed at it might break into her sleep that she would somehow know he was thinking about her hoping that she was all right .By day they devoted themselves to trying to determine the possible locations of Gryffindors sword but the more they talked about the places in which Dumbledore might have hidden it the more desperate and farfetched their speculation became .Cudgel his brains though he might Harry could not remember Dumbledore ever mentioning a place in which he might hide something .There were moments when he did not know whether he was angrier with Ron or with Dumbledore .We thought you knew what you were doing .We thought Dumbledore had told you what to do .We thought you had a real plan He could not hide it from himself Ron had been right .Dumbledore had left him with virtually nothing .They had discovered one Horcrux but they had no means of destroying it The others were as unattainable as they had ever been .Hopelessness threatened to engulf him .He was staggered now to think of his own presumption in accepting his friends offers to accompany him on this meandering pointless journey .He knew nothing he had no ideas and he was constantly painfully on the alert for any indication that Hermione too was about to tell him that she had had enough that she was leaving .They were spending many evenings in near silence and Hermione took to bringing out Phineas Nigelluss portrait and propping it up in a chair as though he might fill part of the gaping hole left by Rons departure .Despite his previous assertion that he would never visit them again Phineas Nigellus did not seem able to resist the chance to find out more about what Harry was up to and consented to reappear blindfolded every few days or so .Harry was even glad to see him because he was company albeit of a snide and taunting kind .They relished any news about what was happening at Hogwarts though Phineas Nigellus was not an ideal informer .He venerated Snape the first Slytherin headmaster since he himself had controlled the school and they had to be careful not to criticize or ask impertinent questions about Snape or Phineas Nigellus would instantly leave his painting .However he did let drop certain snippets .Snape seemed to be facing a constant low level of mutiny from a hard core of students .Ginny had been banned from going into Hogsmeade .Snape had reinstated Umbridges old decree forbidding gatherings of three or more students or any unofficial student societies .From all of these things Harry deduced that Ginny and probably Neville and Luna along with her had been doing their best to continue Dumbledores Army .This scant news made Harry want to see Ginny so badly it felt like a stomachache but it also made him think of Ron again and of Dumbledore and of Hogwarts itself which he missed nearly as much as his exgirlfriend .Indeed as Phineas Nigellus talked about Snape s crackdown Harry experienced a split second of madness when he imagined simply going back to school to join the destabilization of Snapes regime Being fed and having a soft bed and other people being in charge seemed the most wonderful prospect in the world at that moment .But then he remembered that he was Undesirable Number One that there was a tenthousandGalleon price on his head and that to walk into Hogwarts these days was just as dangerous as walking into the Ministry of Magic .Indeed Phineas Nigellus inadvertently emphasized this fact by slipping in leading questions about Harry and Hermiones whereabouts .Hermione shoved him back inside the beaded bag every time he did this and Phineas Nigellus invariably refused to reappear for several days after these unceremonious goodbyes .The weather grew colder and colder .They did not dare remain in any one area too long so rather than staying in the south of England where a hard ground frost was the worst of their worries they continued to meander up and down the country braving a mountainside where sleet pounded the tent a wide flat marsh where the tent was flooded with chill water and a tiny island in the middle of a Scottish loch where snow half buried the tent in the night .They had already spotted Christmas trees twinkling from several sitting room windows before there came an evening when Harry resolved to suggest again what seemed to him the only unexplored avenue left to them .They had just eaten an unusually good meal Hermione had been to a supermarket under the Invisibility Cloak scrupulously dropping the money into an open till as she left and Harry thought that she might be more persuadable than usual on a stomach full of spaghetti Bolognese and tinned pears .He had also had the foresight to suggest that they take a few hours break from wearing the Horcrux which was hanging over the end of the bunk beside him .Hermione ?Hmm ?She was curled up in one of the sagging armchairs with The Tales of Beedle the Bard .He could not imagine how much more she could get out of the book which was not after all very long but evidently she was still deciphering something in it because Spellmans Syllabary lay open on the arm of the chair .Harry cleared his throat .He felt exactly as he had done on the occasion several years previously when he had asked Professor McGonagall whether he could go into Hogsmeade despite the fact that he had not persuaded the Dursleys to sign his permission slip .Hermione Ive been thinking and Harry could you help me with something ?Apparently she had not been listening to him .She leaned forward and held out The Tales of Beedle the Bard .Look at that symbol she said pointing to the top of a page .Above what Harry assumed was the title of the story being unable to read runes he could not be sure there was a picture of what looked like a triangular eye its pupil crossed with a vertical line .I never took Ancient Runes Hermione .I know that but it isnt a rune and its not in the syllabary either .All along I thought it was a picture of an eye but I dont think it is !Its been inked in look somebodys drawn it there it isnt really part of the book .Think have you ever seen it before ?No .No wait a moment .Harry looked closer .Isnt it the same symbol Lunas dad was wearing round his neck ?Well thats what I thought too !Then its Grindelwalds mark .She stared at him openmouthed .What ?Krum told me .He recounted the story that Viktor Krum had told him at the wedding .Hermione looked astonished .Grindelwalds mark ?She looked from Harry to the weird symbol and back again .Ive never heard that Grindelwald had a mark .Theres no mention of it in anything Ive ever read about him .Well like I say Krum reckoned that symbol was carved on a wall at Durmstrang and Grindelwald put it there .She fell back into the old armchair frowning .Thats very odd .If its a symbol of Dark Magic whats it doing in a book of childrens stories ?Yeah it is weird said Harry .And youd think Scrimgeour would have recognized it .He was Minister he ought to have been expert on Dark stuff .I know .Perhaps he thought it was an eye just like I did .All the other stories have little pictures over the titles .She did not speak but continued to pore over the strange mark .Harry tried again .Hermione ?Hmm ?Ive been thinking .I I want to go to Godrics Hollow .She looked up at him but her eyes were unfocused and he was sure she was still thinking about the mysterious mark on the book .Yes she said .Yes Ive been wondering that too .I really think well have to .Did you hear me right ?he asked .Of course I did .You want to go to Godrics Hollow .I agree I think we should .I mean I cant think of anywhere else it could be either .Itll be dangerous but the more I think about it the more likely it seems its there .Er whats there ?asked Harry .At that she looked just as bewildered as he felt .Well the sword Harry !Dumbledore must have known youd want to go back there and I mean Godrics Hollow is Godric Gryffindors birthplace Really ?Gryffindor came from Godrics Hollow ?Harry did you ever even open A History of Magic ?Erm he said smiling for what felt like the first time in months The muscles in his face felt oddly stiff .I mightve opened it you know when I bought it .just the once .Well as the village is named after him Id have thought you might have made the connection said Hermione .She sounded much more like her old self than she had done of late Harry half expected her to announce that she was off to the library .Theres a bit about the village in A History of Magic wait .She opened the beaded bag and rummaged for a while finally extracting her copy of their old school textbook A History of Magic by Bathilda Bagshot which she thumbed through until finding the page she wanted . ‘Upon the signature of the International Statute of Secrecy in 1689 wizards went into hiding for good .It was natural perhaps that they formed their own small communities within a community .Many small villages and hamlets attracted several magical families who banded together for mutual support and protection .The villages of Tinworth in Cornwall Upper Flagley in Yorkshire and Ottery St .Catchpole on the south coast of England were notable homes to knots of Wizarding families who lived alongside tolerant and sometimes Confunded Muggles .Most celebrated of these halfmagical dwelling places is perhaps Godrics Hollow the West Country village where the great wizard Godric Gryffindor was born and where Bowman Wright Wizarding smith forged the first Golden Snitch .The graveyard is full of the names of ancient magical families and this accounts no doubt for the stories of hauntings that have dogged the little church beside it for many centuries .You and your parents arent mentioned Hermione said closing the book because Professor Bagshot doesnt cover anything later than the end of the nineteenth century .But you see ?Godrics Hollow Godric Gryffindor Gryffindors sword dont you think Dumbledore would have expected you to make the connection ?Oh yeah .Harry did not want to admit that he had not been thinking about the sword at all when he suggested they go to Godrics Hollow .For him the lure of the village lay in his parents graves the house where he had narrowly escaped death and in the person of Bathilda Bagshot .Remember what Muriel said ?he asked eventually .Who ?You know he hesitated He did not want to say Rons name .Ginnys greataunt .At the wedding .The one who said you had skinny ankles .Oh said Hermione .It was a sticky moment Harry knew that she had sensed Rons name in the offing .He rushed on She said Bathilda Bagshot still lives in Godrics Hollow .Bathilda Bagshot murmured Hermione running her index finger over Bathildas embossed name on the front cover of A History of Magic .Well I suppose She gasped so dramatically that Harrys insides turned over he drew his wand looking around at the entrance half expecting to see a hand forcing its way through the entrance flap but there was nothing there .What ?he said half angry half relieved .What did you do that for ?I thought youd seen a Death Eater unzipping the tent at least Harry what if Bathilda s got the sword ?What if Dumbledore entrusted it to her ?Harry considered this possibility .Bathilda would be an extremely old woman by now and according to Muriel she was gaga .Was it likely that Dumbledore would have hidden the sword of Gryffindor with her ?If so Harry felt that Dumbledore had left a great deal to chance Dumbledore had never revealed that he had replaced the sword with a fake nor had he so much as mentioned a friendship with Bathilda .Now however was not the moment to cast doubt on Hermiones theory not when she was so surprisingly willing to fall in with Harrys dearest wish .Yeah he might have done !So are we going to go to Godrics Hollow ?Yes but well have to think it through carefully Harry .She was sitting up now and Harry could tell that the prospect of having a plan again had lifted her mood as much as his .Well need to practice Disapparating together under the Invisibility Cloak for a start and perhaps Disillusionment Charms would be sensible too unless you think we should go the whole hog and use Polyjuice Potion ?In that case well need to collect hair from somebody .I actually think wed better do that Harry the thicker our disguises the better .Harry let her talk nodding and agreeing whenever there was a pause but his mind had left the conversation .For the first time since he had discovered that the sword in Gringotts was a fake he felt excited .He was about to go home about to return to the place where he had had a family .It was in Godrics Hollow that but for Voldemort he would have grown up and spent every school holiday .He could have invited friends to his house .He might even have had brothers and sisters .It would have been his mother who had made his seventeenth birthday cake .The life he had lost had hardly ever seemed so real to him as at this moment when he knew he was about to see the place where it had been taken from him .After Hermione had gone to bed that night Harry quietly extracted his rucksack from Hermione s beaded bag and from inside it the photograph album Hagrid had given him so long ago .For the first time in months he perused the old pictures of his parents smiling and waving up at him from the images which were all he had left of them now .Harry would gladly have set out for Godrics Hollow the following day but Hermione had other ideas .Convinced as she was that Voldemort would expect Harry to return to the scene of his parents deaths she was determined that they would set off only after they had ensured that they had the best disguises possible .It was therefore a full week later once they had surreptitiously obtained hairs from innocent Muggles who were Christmas shopping and had practiced Apparating and Disapparating while underneath the Invisibility Cloak together that Hermione agreed to make the journey .They were to Apparate to the village under cover of darkness so it was late afternoon when they finally swallowed Polyjuice Potion Harry transforming into a balding middleaged Muggle man Hermione into his small and rather mousy wife .The beaded bag containing all of their possessions apart from the Horcrux which Harry was wearing around his neck was tucked into an inside pocket of Hermione s buttonedup coat .Harry lowered the Invisibility Cloak over them then they turned into the suffocating darkness once again .Heart beating in his throat Harry opened his eyes .They were standing hand in hand in a snowy lane under a dark blue sky in which the nights first stars were already glimmering feebly .Cottages stood on either side of the narrow road Christmas decorations twinkling in their windows .A short way ahead of them a glow of golden streetlights indicated the center of the village .All this snow !Hermione whispered beneath the cloak .Why didnt we think of snow ?After all our precautions well leave prints !Well just have to get rid of them you go in front Ill do it Harry did not want to enter the village like a pantomime horse trying to keep themselves concealed while magically covering their traces .Lets take off the Cloak said Harry and when she looked frightened Oh come on we dont look like us and theres no one around .He stowed the Cloak under his jacket and they made their way forward unhampered the icy air stinging their faces as they passed more cottages Any one of them might have been the one in which James and Lily had once lived or where Bathilda lived now .Harry gazed at the front doors their snowburdened roofs and their front porches wondering whether he remembered any of them knowing deep inside that it was impossible that he had been little more than a year old when he had left this place forever .He was not even sure whether he would be able to see the cottage at all he did not know what happened when the subjects of a Fidelius Charm died .Then the little lane along which they were walking curved to the left and the heart of the village a small square was revealed to them .Strung all around with colored lights there was what looked like a war memorial in the middle partly obscured by a windblown Christmas tree .There were several shops a post office a pub and a little church whose stainedglass windows were glowing jewel bright across the square .The snow here had become impacted It was hard and slippery where people had trodden on it all day .Villagers were crisscrossing in front of them their figures briefly illuminated by streetlamps .They heard a snatch of laughter and pop music as the pub door opened and closed then they heard a carol start up inside the little church .Harry I think its Christmas Eve !said Hermione .Is it ?He had lost track of the date they had not seen a newspaper for weeks .Im sure it is said Hermione her eyes upon the church .They .theyll be in there wont they ?Your mum and dad ?I can see the graveyard behind it .Harry felt a thrill of something that was beyond excitement more like fear .Now that he was so near he wondered whether he wanted to see after all .Perhaps Hermione knew how he was feeling because she reached for his hand and took the lead for the first time pulling him forward .Halfway across the square however she stopped dead .Harry look !She was pointing at the war memorial .As they had passed it it had transformed .Instead of an obelisk covered in names there was a statue of three people a man with untidy hair and glasses a woman with long hair and a kind pretty face and a baby boy sitting in his mothers arms .Snow lay upon all their heads like fluffy white caps .Harry drew closer gazing up into his parents faces .He had never imagined that there would be a statue . .How strange it was to see himself represented in stone a happy baby without a scar on his forehead .Cmon said Harry when he had looked his fill and they turned again toward the church .As they crossed the road he glanced over his shoulder the statue had turned back into the war memorial .The singing grew louder as they approached the church .It made Harrys throat constrict it reminded him so forcefully of Hogwarts of Peeves bellowing rude versions of carols from inside suits of armor of the Great Halls twelve Christmas trees of Dumbledore wearing a bonnet he had won in a cracker of Ron in a handknitted sweater .There was a kissing gate at the entrance to the graveyard .Hermione pushed it open as quietly as possible and they edged through it .On either side of the slippery path to the church doors the snow lay deep and untouched .They moved off through the snow carving deep trenches behind them as they walked around the building keeping to the shadows beneath the brilliant windows .Behind the church row upon row of snowy tombstones protruded from a blanket of pale blue that was flecked with dazzling red gold and green wherever the reflections from the stained glass hit the snow .Keeping his hand closed tightly on the wand in his jacket pocket Harry moved toward the nearest grave .Look at this its an Abbott could be some longlost relation of Hannahs !Keep your voice down Hermione begged him .They waded deeper and deeper into the graveyard gouging dark tracks into the snow behind them stooping to peer at the words on old headstones every now and then squinting into the surrounding darkness to make absolutely sure that they were unaccompanied .Harry here !Hermione was two rows of tombstones away he had to wade back to her his heart positively banging in his chest .Is it ?No but look !She pointed to the dark stone .Harry stooped down and saw upon the frozen lichenspotted granite the words KENDRA DUMBLEDORE and a short way below her dates of birth and death AND HER DAUGHTER ARIANA .There was also a quotation Where your treasure is there will your heart be also .So Rita Skeeter and Muriel had got some of their facts right .The Dumbledore family had indeed lived here and part of it had died here .Seeing the grave was worse than hearing about it .Harry could not help thinking that he and Dumbledore both had deep roots in this graveyard and that Dumbledore ought to have told him so yet he had never thought to share the connection .They could have visited the place together for a moment Harry imagined coming here with Dumbledore of what a bond that would have been of how much it would have meant to him .But it seemed that to Dumbledore the fact that their families lay side by side in the same graveyard had been an unimportant coincidence irrelevant perhaps to the job he wanted Harry to do .Hermione was looking at Harry and he was glad that his face was hidden in shadow .He read the words on the tombstone again .Where your treasure is there will your heart be also .He did not understand what these words meant .Surely Dumbledore had chosen them as the eldest member of the family once his mother had died .Are you sure he never mentioned ?Hermione began .No said Harry curtly then lets keep looking and he turned away wishing he had not seen the stone He did not want his excited trepidation tainted with resentment .Here !cried Hermione again a few moments later from out of the darkness .Oh no sorry !I thought it said Potter .She was rubbing at a crumbling mossy stone gazing down at it a little frown on her face .Harry come back a moment .He did not want to be sidetracked again and only grudgingly made his way back through the snow toward her .What ?Look at this !The grave was extremely old weathered so that Harry could hardly make out the name .Hermione showed him the symbol beneath it .Harry thats the mark in the book !He peered at the place she indicated The stone was so worn that it was hard to make out what was engraved there though there did seem to be a triangular mark beneath the nearly illegible name .Yeah .it could be .Hermione lit her wand and pointed it at the name on the headstone .It says Ig Ignotus I think .Im going to keep looking for my parents all right ?Harry told her a slight edge to his voice and he set off again leaving her crouched beside the old grave .Every now and then he recognized a surname that like Abbott he had met at Hogwarts .Sometimes there were several generations of the same Wizarding family represented in the graveyard Harry could tell from the dates that it had either died out or the current members had moved away from Godrics Hollow .Deeper and deeper amongst the graves he went and every time he reached a new headstone he felt a little lurch of apprehension and anticipation .The darkness and the silence seemed to become all of a sudden much deeper .Harry looked around worried thinking of dementors then realized that the carols had finished that the chatter and flurry of churchgoers were fading away as they made their way back into the square .Somebody inside the church had just turned off the lights .Then Hermiones voice came out of the blackness for the third time sharp and clear from a few yards away .Harry theyre here .right here .And he knew by her tone that it was his mother and father this time He moved toward her feeling as if something heavy were pressing on his chest the same sensation he had had right after Dumbledore had died a grief that had actually weighed on his heart and lungs .The headstone was only two rows behind Kendra and Arianas .It was made of white marble just like Dumbledores tomb and this made it easy to read as it seemed to shine in the dark .Harry did not need to kneel or even approach very close to it to make out the words engraved upon it .JAMES POTTER BORN 27 MARCH 1960 LILY POTTER BORN 30 JANUARY 1960 DIED 31 OCTOBER 1981 The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death .Harry read the words slowly as though he would have only one chance to take in their meaning and he read the last of them aloud .The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death .A horrible thought came to him and with it a kind of panic .Isnt that a Death Eater idea ?Why is that there ?It doesnt mean defeating death in the way the Death Eaters mean it Harry said Hermione her voice gentle .It means .you know .living beyond death .Living after death .But they were not living thought Harry They were gone .The empty words could not disguise the fact that his parents moldering remains lay beneath snow and stone indifferent unknowing .And tears came before he could stop them boiling hot then instantly freezing on his face and what was the point in wiping them off or pretending ?He let them fall his lips pressed hard together looking down at the thick snow hiding from his eyes the place where the last of Lily and James lay bones now surely or dust not knowing or caring that their living son stood so near his heart still beating alive because of their sacrifice and close to wishing at this moment that he was sleeping under the snow with them .Hermione had taken his hand again and was gripping it tightly .He could not look at her but returned the pressure now taking deep sharp gulps of the night air trying to steady himself trying to regain control .He should have brought something to give them and he had not thought of it and every plant in the graveyard was leafless and frozen .But Hermione raised her wand moved it in a circle through the air and a wreath of Christmas roses blossomed before them .Harry caught it and laid it on his parents grave .As soon as he stood up he wanted to leave He did not think he could stand another moment there .He put his arm around Hermiones shoulders and she put hers around his waist and they turned in silence and walked away through the snow past Dumbledores mother and sister back toward the dark church and the outofsight kissing gate .BATHILDAS SECRET Harry stop .Whats wrong ?They had only just reached the grave of the unknown Abbott .Theres someone there .Someone watching us .I can tell .There over by the bushes .They stood quite still holding on to each other gazing at the dense black boundary of the graveyard .Harry could not see anything .Are you sure ?I saw something move I could have sworn I did .She broke from him to free her wand arm .We look like Muggles Harry pointed out .Muggles who ve just been laying flowers on your parents grave !Harry Im sure theres someone over there !Harry thought of A History of Magic the graveyard was supposed to be haunted what if ?But then he heard a rustle and saw a little eddy of dislodged snow in the bush to which Hermione had pointed .Ghosts could not move snow .Its a cat said Harry after a second or two or a bird .If it was a Death Eater wed be dead by now .But lets get out of here and we can put the Cloak back on .They glanced back repeatedly as they made their way out of the graveyard .Harry who did not feel as sanguine as he had pretended when reassuring Hermione was glad to reach the gate and the slippery pavement .They pulled the Invisibility Cloak back over themselves .The pub was fuller than before Many voices inside it were now singing the carol that they had heard as they approached the church .For a moment Harry considered suggesting they take refuge inside it but before he could say anything Hermione murmured Lets go this way and pulled him down the dark street leading out of the village in the opposite direction from which they had entered .Harry could make out the point where the cottages ended and the lane turned into open country again .They walked as quickly as they dared past more windows sparkling with multicolored lights the outlines of Christmas trees dark through the curtains .How are we going to find Bathildas house ?asked Hermione who was shivering a little and kept glancing back over her shoulder .Harry ?What do you think ?Harry ?She tugged at his arm but Harry was not paying attention .He was looking toward the dark mass that stood at the very end of this row of houses .Next moment he had sped up dragging Hermione along with him she slipped a little on the ice .Harry Look .Look at it Hermione .I dont .oh !He could see it the Fidelius Charm must have died with James and Lily .The hedge had grown wild in the sixteen years since Hagrid had taken Harry from the rubble that lay scattered amongst the waisthigh grass .Most of the cottage was still standing though entirely covered in dark ivy and snow but the right side of the top floor had been blown apart that Harry was sure was where the curse had backfired .He and Hermione stood at the gate gazing up at the wreck of what must once have been a cottage just like those that flanked it .I wonder why nobodys ever rebuilt it ?whispered Hermione .Maybe you cant rebuild it ?Harry replied .Maybe its like the injuries from Dark Magic and you cant repair the damage ?He slipped a hand from beneath the Cloak and grasped the snowy and thickly rusted gate not wishing to open it but simply to hold some part of the house .Youre not going to go inside ?It looks unsafe it might oh Harry look !His touch on the gate seemed to have done it .A sign had risen out of the ground in front of them up through the tangles of nettles and weeds like some bizarre fastgrowing flower and in golden letters upon the wood it said On this spot on the night of 31 October 1 981 Lily and James Potter lost their lives .Their son Harry remains the only wizard ever to have survived the Killing Curse .This house invisible to Muggles has been left in its ruined state as a monument to the Potters and as a reminder of the violence that tore apart their family .And all around these neatly lettered words scribbles had been added by other witches and wizards who had come to see the place where the Boy Who Lived had escaped .Some had merely signed their names in Everlasting Ink others had carved their initials into the wood still others had left messages .The most recent of these shining brightly over sixteen years worth of magical graffiti all said similar things .Good luck Harry wherever you are .If you read this Harry were all behind you !Long live Harry Potter .They shouldnt have written on the sign !said Hermione indignant .But Harry beamed at her .Its brilliant .Im glad they did .I .He broke off .A heavily muffled figure was hobbling up the lane toward them silhouetted by the bright lights in the distant square .Harry thought though it was hard to judge that the figure was a woman .She was moving slowly possibly frightened of slipping on the snowy ground .Her stoop her stoutness her shuffling gait all gave an impression of extreme age .They watched in silence as she drew nearer .Harry was waiting to see whether she would turn into any of the cottages she was passing but he knew instinctively that she would not .At last she came to a halt a few yards from them and simply stood there in the middle of the frozen road facing them .He did not need Hermiones pinch to his arm .There was next to no chance that this woman was a Muggle She was standing there gazing at a house that ought to have been completely invisible to her if she was not a witch .Even assuming that she was a witch however it was odd behavior to come out on a night this cold simply to look at an old ruin .By all the rules of normal magic meanwhile she ought not to be able to see Hermione and him at all .Nevertheless Harry had the strangest feeling that she knew that they were there and also who they were .Just as he had reached this uneasy conclusion she raised a gloved hand and beckoned .Hermione moved closer to him under the Cloak her arm pressed against his .How does she know ?He shook his head .The woman beckoned again more vigorously .Harry could think of many reasons not to obey the summons and yet his suspicions about her identity were growing stronger every moment that they stood facing each other in the deserted street .Was it possible that she had been waiting for them all these long months ?That Dumbledore had told her to wait and that Harry would come in the end ?Was it not likely that it was she who had moved in the shadows in the graveyard and had followed them to this spot ?Even her ability to sense them suggested some Dumbledoreish power that he had never encountered before .Finally Harry spoke causing Hermione to gasp and jump .Are you Bathilda ?The muffled figure nodded and beckoned again .Beneath the Cloak Harry and Hermione looked at each other .Harry raised his eyebrows Hermione gave a tiny nervous nod .They stepped toward the woman and at once she turned and hobbled off back the way they had come .Leading them past several houses she turned in at a gate .They followed her up the front path through a garden nearly as overgrown as the one they had just left .She fumbled for a moment with a key at the front door then opened it and stepped back to let them pass .She smelled bad or perhaps it was her house Harry wrinkled his nose as they sidled past her and pulled off the Cloak .Now that he was beside her he realized how tiny she was bowed down with age she came barely level with his chest .She closed the door behind them her knuckles blue and mottled against the peeling paint then turned and peered into Harrys face .Her eyes were thick with cataracts and sunken into folds of transparent skin and her whole face was dotted with broken veins and liver spots .He wondered whether she could make him out at all even if she could it was the balding Muggle whose identity he had stolen that she would see .The odor of old age of dust of unwashed clothes and stale food intensified as she unwound a motheaten black shawl revealing a head of scant white hair through which the scalp showed clearly .Bathilda ?Harry repeated .She nodded again .Harry became aware of the locket against his skin the thing inside it that sometimes ticked or beat had woken he could feel it pulsing through the cold gold .Did it know could it sense that the thing that would destroy it was near ?Bathilda shuffled past them pushing Hermione aside as though she had not seen her and vanished into what seemed to be a sitting room .Harry Im not sure about this breathed Hermione .Look at the size of her I think we could overpower her if we had to said Harry .Listen I should have told you I knew she wasnt all there .Muriel called her ‘gaga .Come !called Bathilda from the next room .Hermione jumped and clutched Harrys arm .Its okay said Harry reassuringly and he led the way into the sitting room .Bathilda was tottering around the place lighting candles but it was still very dark not to mention extremely dirty .Thick dust crunched beneath their feet and Harrys nose detected underneath the dank and mildewed smell something worse like meat gone bad .He wondered when was the last time anyone had been inside Bathildas house to check whether she was coping .She seemed to have forgotten that she could do magic too for she lit the candles clumsily by hand her trailing lace cuff in constant danger of catching fire .Let me do that offered Harry and he took the matches from her .She stood watching him as he finished lighting the candle stubs that stood on saucers around the room perched precariously on stacks of books and on side tables crammed with cracked and moldy cups .The last surface on which Harry spotted a candle was a bowfronted chest of drawers on which there stood a large number of photographs .When the flame danced into life its reflection wavered on their dusty glass and silver .He saw a few tiny movements from the pictures .As Bathilda fumbled with logs for the fire he muttered Tergeo The dust vanished from the photographs and he saw at once that half a dozen were missing from the largest and most ornate frames .He wondered whether Bathilda or somebody else had removed them .Then the sight of a photograph near the back of the collection caught his eye and he snatched it up .It was the goldenhaired merryfaced thief the young man who had perched on Gregorovitchs windowsill smiling lazily up at Harry out of the silver frame .And it came to Harry instantly where he had seen the boy before in The Life and Lies of Albus Dumbledore arm in arm with the teenage Dumbledore and that must be where all the missing photographs were in Ritas book .Mrs Miss Bagshot ?he said and his voice shook slightly .Who is this ?Bathilda was standing in the middle of the room watching Hermione light the fire for her .Miss Bagshot ?Harry repeated and he advanced with the picture in his hands as the flames burst into life in the fireplace .Bathilda looked up at his voice and the Horcrux beat faster upon his chest .Who is this person ?Harry asked her pushing the picture forward .She peered at it solemnly then up at Harry .Do you know who this is ?he repeated in a much slower and louder voice than usual .This man ?Do you know him ?Whats he called ?Bathilda merely looked vague .Harry felt an awful frustration .How had Rita Skeeter unlocked Bathildas memories ?Who is this man ?he repeated loudly .Harry what are you doing ?asked Hermione .This picture Hermione its the thief the thief who stole from Gregorovitch !Please !he said to Bathilda .Who is this ?But she only stared at him .Why did you ask us to come with you Mrs Miss Bagshot ?asked Hermione raising her own voice .Was there something you wanted to tell us ?Giving no sign that she had heard Hermione Bathilda now shuffled a few steps closer to Harry .With a little jerk of her head she looked back into the hall .You want us to leave ?he asked .She repeated the gesture this time pointing firstly at him then at herself then at the ceiling .Oh right .Hermione I think she wants me to go upstairs with her .All right said Hermione lets go .But when Hermione moved Bathilda shook her head with surprising vigor once more pointing first at Harry then to herself .She wants me to go with her alone .Why ?asked Hermione and her voice rang out sharp and clear in the candlelit room the old lady shook her head a little at the loud noise .Maybe Dumbledore told her to give the sword to me and only to me ?Do you really think she knows who you are ?Yes said Harry looking down into the milky eyes fixed upon his own I think she does .Well okay then but be quick Harry .Lead the way Harry told Bathilda .She seemed to understand because she shuffled around him toward the door .Harry glanced back at Hermione with a reassuring smile but he was not sure she had seen it she stood hugging herself in the midst of the candlelit squalor looking toward the bookcase .As Harry walked out of the room unseen by both Hermione and Bathilda he slipped the silver framed photograph of the unknown thief inside his jacket .The stairs were steep and narrow Harry was half tempted to place his hands on stout Bathildas backside to ensure that she did not topple over backward on top of him which seemed only too likely .Slowly wheezing a little she climbed to the upper landing turned immediately right and led him into a lowceilinged bedroom .It was pitchblack and smelled horrible Harry had just made out a chamber pot protruding from under the bed before Bathilda closed the door and even that was swallowed by the darkness .Lumos said Harry and his wand ignited .He gave a start Bathilda had moved close to him in those few seconds of darkness and he had not heard her approach .You are Potter ?she whispered .Yes I am .She nodded slowly solemnly .Harry felt the Horcrux beating fast faster than his own heart It was an unpleasant agitating sensation .Have you got anything for me ?Harry asked but she seemed distracted by his lit wandtip .Have you got anything for me ?he repeated .Then she closed her eyes and several things happened at once Harrys scar prickled painfully the Horcrux twitched so that the front of his sweater actually moved the dark fetid room dissolved momentarily .He felt a leap of joy and spoke in a high cold voice Hold him .Harry swayed where he stood The dark foulsmelling room seemed to close around him again he did not know what had just happened .Have you got anything for me ?he asked for a third time much louder .Over here she whispered pointing to the corner .Harry raised his wand and saw the outline of a cluttered dressing table beneath the curtained window .This time she did not lead him .Harry edged between her and the unmade bed his wand raised .He did not want to look away from her .What is it ?he asked as he reached the dressing table which was heaped high with what looked and smelled like dirty laundry .There she said pointing at the shapeless mass .And in the instant that he looked away his eyes raking the tangled mess for a sword hilt a ruby she moved weirdly He saw it out of the corner of his eye panic made him turn and horror paralyzed him as he saw the old body collapsing and the great snake pouring from the place where her neck had been .The snake struck as he raised his wand The force of the bite to his forearm sent the wand spinning up toward the ceiling its light swung dizzyingly around the room and was extinguished Then a powerful blow from the tail to his midriff knocked the breath out of him He fell backward onto the dressing table into the mound of filthy clothing He rolled sideways narrowly avoiding the snakes tail which thrashed down upon the table where he had been a second earlier Fragments of the glass surface rained upon him as he hit the floor .From below he heard Hermione call Harry ?He could not get enough breath into his lungs to call back Then a heavy smooth mass smashed him to the floor and he felt it slide over him powerful muscular No !he gasped pinned to the floor .Yes whispered the voice .Yesss .hold you .hold you .Accio .Accio Wand .But nothing happened and he needed his hands to try to force the snake from him as it coiled itself around his torso squeezing the air from him pressing the Horcrux hard into his chest a circle of ice that throbbed with life inches from his own frantic heart and his brain was flooding with cold white light all thought obliterated his own breath drowned distant footsteps everything going .A metal heart was banging outside his chest and now he was flying flying with triumph in his heart without need of broomstick or thestral .He was abruptly awake in the soursmelling darkness Nagini had released him .He scrambled up and saw the snake outlined against the landing light It struck and Hermione dived aside with a shriek her deflected curse hit the curtained window which shattered .Frozen air filled the room as Harry ducked to avoid another shower of broken glass and his foot slipped on a pencillike something his wand He bent and snatched it up but now the room was full of the snake its tail thrashing Hermione was nowhere to be seen and for a moment Harry thought the worst but then there was a loud bang and a flash of red light and the snake flew into the air smacking Harry hard in the face as it went coil after heavy coil rising up to the ceiling .Harry raised his wand but as he did so his scar seared more painfully more powerfully than it had done in years .Hes coming !Hermione hes comingl As he yelled the snake fell hissing wildly .Everything was chaos It smashed shelves from the wall and splintered china flew everywhere as Harry jumped over the bed and seized the dark shape he knew to be Hermione She shrieked with pain as he pulled her back across the bed The snake reared again but Harry knew that worse than the snake was coming was perhaps already at the gate his head was going to split open with the pain from his scar The snake lunged as he took a running leap dragging Hermione with him as it struck Hermione screamed ConfringoV and her spell flew around the room exploding the wardrobe mirror and ricocheting back at them bouncing from floor to ceiling Harry felt the heat of it sear the back of his hand .Glass cut his cheek as pulling Hermione with him he leapt from bed to broken dressing table and then straight out of the smashed window into nothingness her scream reverberating through the night as they twisted in midair .And then his scar burst open and he was Voldemort and he was running across the fetid bedroom his long white hands clutching at the windowsill as he glimpsed the bald man and the little woman twist and vanish and he screamed with rage a scream that mingled with the girls that echoed across the dark gardens over the church bells ringing in Christmas Day .And his scream was Harrys scream his pain was Harrys pain .that it could happen here where it had happened before .here within sight of that house where he had come so close to knowing what it was to die .to die .The pain was so terrible .ripped from his body .But if he had no body why did his head hurt so badly if he was dead how could he feel so unbearably didnt pain cease with death didnt it go .The night wet and windy two children dressed as pumpkins waddling across the square and the shop windows covered in paper spiders all the tawdry Muggle trappings of a world in which they did not believe .And he was gliding along that sense of purpose and power and rightness in him that he always knew on these occasions .Not anger .that was for weaker souls than he .but triumph yes .He had waited for this he had hoped for it .Nice costume mister !He saw the small boys smile falter as he ran near enough to see beneath the hood of the cloak saw the fear cloud his painted face Then the child turned and ran away .Beneath the robe he fingered the handle of his wand .One simple movement and the child would never reach his mother .but unnecessary quite unnecessary .And along a new and darker street he moved and now his destination was in sight at last the Fidelius Charm broken though they did not know it yet .And he made less noise than the dead leaves slithering along the pavement as he drew level with the dark hedge and stared over it .They had not drawn the curtains he saw them quite clearly in their little sitting room the tall blackhaired man in his glasses making puffs of colored smoke erupt from his wand for the amusement of the small blackhaired boy in his blue pajamas .The child was laughing and trying to catch the smoke to grab it in his small fist .A door opened and the mother entered saying words he could not hear her long darkred hair falling over her face .Now the father scooped up the son and handed him to the mother .He threw his wand down upon the sofa and stretched yawning .The gate creaked a little as he pushed it open but James Potter did not hear .His white hand pulled out the wand beneath his cloak and pointed it at the door which burst open .He was over the threshold as James came sprinting into the hall .It was easy too easy he had not even picked up his wand .Lily take Harry and go !Its him !Go !Run !Ill hold him off !Hold him off without a wand in his hand ! .He laughed before casting the curse .Avada Kedavra !The green light filled the cramped hallway it lit the pram pushed against the wall it made the banisters glare like lightning rods and James Potter fell like a marionette whose strings were cut .He could hear her screaming from the upper floor trapped but as long as she was sensible she at least had nothing to fear .He climbed the steps listening with faint amusement to her attempts to barricade herself in .She had no wand upon her either .How stupid they were and how trusting thinking that their safety lay in friends that weapons could be discarded even for moments .He forced the door open cast aside the chair and boxes hastily piled against it with one lazy wave of his wand .and there she stood the child in her arms .At the sight of him she dropped her son into the crib behind her and threw her arms wide as if this would help as if in shielding him from sight she hoped to be chosen instead .Not Harry not Harry please not Harry !Stand aside you silly girl .stand aside now .Not Harry please no take me kill me instead This is my last warning Not Harry !Please .have mercy .have mercy .Not Harry !Not Harry !Please Ill do anything Stand aside .Stand aside girl !He could have forced her away from the crib but it seemed more prudent to finish them all .The green light flashed around the room and she dropped like her husband .The child had not cried all this time He could stand clutching the bars of his crib and he looked up into the intruders face with a kind of bright interest perhaps thinking that it was his father who hid beneath the cloak making more pretty lights and his mother would pop up any moment laughing He pointed the wand very carefully into the boys face He wanted to see it happen the destruction of this one inexplicable danger .The child began to cry It had seen that he was not James .He did not like it crying he had never been able to stomach the small ones whining in the orphanage Avada Kedavra !And then he broke He was nothing nothing but pain and terror and he must hide himself not here in the rubble of the ruined house where the child was trapped and screaming but far away .far away .No he moaned .The snake rustled on the filthy cluttered floor and he had killed the boy and yet he was the boy .No .And now he stood at the broken window of Bathildas house immersed in memories of his greatest loss and at his feet the great snake slithered over broken china and glass .He looked down and saw something .something incredible .No .Harry its all right youre all right !He stooped down and picked up the smashed photograph .There he was the unknown thief the thief he was seeking .No .I dropped it .I dropped it .Harry its okay wake up wake up !He was Harry .Harry not Voldemort .and the thing that was rustling was not a snake .He opened his eyes .Harry Hermione whispered .Do you feel all all right ?Yes he lied .He was in the tent lying on one of the lower bunks beneath a heap of blankets .He could tell that it was almost dawn by the stillness and the quality of the cold flat light beyond the canvas ceiling .He was drenched in sweat he could feel it on the sheets and blankets .We got away .Yes said Hermione .I had to use a Hover Charm to get you into your bunk I couldnt lift you .Youve been .Well you havent been quite .There were purple shadows under her brown eyes and he noticed a small sponge in her hand She had been wiping his face .Youve been ill she finished .Quite ill .How long ago did we leave ?Hours ago .Its nearly morning .And Ive been .what unconscious ?Not exactly said Hermione uncomfortably .Youve been shouting and moaning and .things she added in a tone that made Harry feel uneasy .What had he done ?Screamed curses like Voldemort cried like the baby in the crib ?I couldnt get the Horcrux off you Hermione said and he knew she wanted to change the subject .It was stuck stuck to your chest .Youve got a mark Im sorry I had to use a Severing Charm to get it away .The snake bit you too but Ive cleaned the wound and put some dittany on it .He pulled the sweaty Tshirt he was wearing away from himself and looked down .There was a scarlet oval over his heart where the locket had burned him .He could also see the halfhealed puncture marks to his forearm .Where Ve you put the Horcrux ?In my bag .I think we should keep it off for a while .He lay back on his pillows and looked into her pinched gray face .We shouldnt have gone to Godrics Hollow .Its my fault its all my fault Hermione Im sorry .Its not your fault .I wanted to go too I really thought Dumbledore might have left the sword there for you .Yeah well .we got that wrong didnt we ?What happened Harry ?What happened when she took you upstairs ?Was the snake hiding somewhere ?Did it just come out and kill her and attack you ?No he said .She was the snake .or the snake was her .all along .Wwhat ?He closed his eyes .He could still smell Bathildas house on him It made the whole thing horribly vivid .Bathilda mustve been dead a while .The snake was .was inside her .YouKnowWho put it there in Godrics Hollow to wait .You were right .He knew Id go back .The snake was inside her ?He opened his eyes again Hermione looked revolted nauseated .Lupin said there would be magic wed never imagined Harry said .She didnt want to talk in front of you because it was Parseltongue all Parseltongue and I didnt realize but of course I could understand her .Once we were up in the room the snake sent a message to YouKnowWho I heard it happen inside my head I felt him get excited he said to keep me there .and then .He remembered the snake coming our of Bathildas neck Hermione did not need to know the details . .she changed changed into the snake and attacked .He looked down at the puncture marks .It wasnt supposed to kill me just keep me there till YouKnowWho came .If he had only managed to kill the snake it would have been worth it all of it .Sick at heart he sat up and threw back the covers .Harry no Im sure you ought to rest !Youre the one who needs sleep .No offense but you look terrible .Im fine .Ill keep watch for a while .Wheres my wand ?She did not answer she merely looked at him .Wheres my wand Hermione ?She was biting her lip and tears swam in her eyes .Harry .Wheres my wand ?She reached down beside the bed and held it out to him .The holly and phoenix wand was nearly severed in two .One fragile strand of phoenix feather kept both pieces hanging together .The wood had splintered apart completely .Harry took it into his hands as though it was a living thing that had suffered a terrible injury .He could not think properly Everything was a blur of panic and fear .Then he held out the wand to Hermione .Mend it .Please .Harry I dont think when its broken like this Please Hermione try !RReparo .The dangling half of the wand resealed itself .Harry held it up .Lumosl The wand sparked feebly then went out .Harry pointed it at Hermione .Expelliarmusl Hermione s wand gave a little jerk but did not leave her hand .The feeble attempt at magic was too much for Harrys wand which split into two again .He stared at it aghast unable to take in what he was seeing .the wand that had survived so much .Harry Hermione whispered so quietly he could hardly hear her .Im so so sorry .I think it was me .As we were leaving you know the snake was coming for us and so I cast a Blasting Curse and it rebounded everywhere and it must have must have hit It was an accident said Harry mechanically .He felt empty stunned .Well well find a way to repair it .Harry I dont think were going to be able to said Hermione the tears trickling down her face .Remember .remember Ron ?When he broke his wand crashing the car ?It was never the same again he had to get a new one .Harry thought of Ollivander kidnapped and held hostage by Voldemort of Gregorovitch who was dead .How was he supposed to find himself a new wand ?Well he said in a falsely matteroffact voice well Ill just borrow yours for now then .While I keep watch .Her face glazed with tears Hermione handed over her wand and he left her sitting beside his bed desiring nothing more than to get away from her .THE LIFE AND LIES OF ALBUS DUMBLEDORE The sun was coming up The pure colorless vastness of the sky stretched over him indifferent to him and his suffering .Harry sat down in the tent entrance and took a deep breath of clean air .Simply to be alive to watch the sun rise over the sparkling snowy hillside ought to have been the greatest treasure on earth yet he could not appreciate it His senses had been spiked by the calamity of losing his wand .He looked out over a valley blanketed in snow distant church bells chiming through the glittering silence .Without realizing it he was digging his fingers into his arms as if he were trying to resist physical pain .He had spilled his own blood more times than he could count he had lost all the bones in his right arm once this journey had already given him scars to his chest and forearm to join those on his hand and forehead but never until this moment had he felt himself to be fatally weakened vulnerable and naked as though the best part of his magical power had been torn from him .He knew exactly what Hermione would say if he expressed any of this The wand is only as good as the wizard .But she was wrong his case was different .She had not felt the wand spin like the needle of a compass and shoot golden flames at his enemy .He had lost the protection of the twin cores and only now that it was gone did he realize how much he had been counting upon it .He pulled the pieces of the broken wand out of his pocket and without looking at them tucked them away in Hagrids pouch around his neck .The pouch was now too full of broken and useless objects to take any more .Harrys hand brushed the old Snitch through the mokeskin and for a moment he had to fight the temptation to pull it out and throw it away .Impenetrable unhelpful useless like everything else Dumbledore had left behind And his fury at Dumbledore broke over him now like lava scorching him inside wiping out every other feeling .Out of sheer desperation they had talked themselves into believing that Godrics Hollow held answers convinced themselves that they were supposed to go back that it was all part of some secret path laid out for them by Dumbledore but there was no map no plan .Dumbledore had left them to grope in the darkness to wrestle with unknown and undreamedof terrors alone and unaided Nothing was explained nothing was given freely they had no sword and now Harry had no wand .And he had dropped the photograph of the thief and it would surely be easy now for Voldemort to find out who he was .Voldemort had all the information now .Harry ?Hermione looked frightened that he might curse her with her own wand .Her face streaked with tears she crouched down beside him two cups of tea trembling in her hands and something bulky under her arm .Thanks he said taking one of the cups .Do you mind if I talk to you ?No he said because he did not want to hurt her feelings .Harry you wanted to know who that man in the picture was .Well .Ive got the book .Timidly she pushed it onto his lap a pristine copy of The Life and Lies of Albus Dumbledore .Where how ?It was in Bathildas sitting room just lying there .This note was sticking out of the top of it .Hermione read the few lines of spiky acidgreen writing aloud . ‘Dear Batty Thanks for your help .Heres a copy of the book hope you like it .You said everything even if you dont remember it .Rita .I think it must have arrived while the real Bathilda was alive but perhaps she wasnt in any fit state to read it ?No she probably wasnt .Harry looked down upon Dumbledore s face and experienced a surge of savage pleasure Now he would know all the things that Dumbledore had never thought it worth telling him whether Dumbledore wanted him to or not .Youre still really angry at me arent you ?said Hermione he looked up to see fresh tears leaking out of her eyes and knew that his anger must have shown in his face .No he said quietly .No Hermione I know it was an accident .You were trying to get us out of there alive and you were incredible .Id be dead if you hadnt been there to help me .He tried to return her watery smile then turned his attention to the book .Its spine was stiff it had clearly never been opened before .He riffled through the pages looking for photographs .He came across the one he sought almost at once the young Dumbledore and his handsome companion roaring with laughter at some longforgotten joke .Harry dropped his eyes to the caption .Albus Dumbledore shortly after his mothers death with his friend Gellert Grindelwald .Harry gaped at the last word for several long moments .Grindelwald .His friend Grindelwald .He looked sideways at Hermione who was still contemplating the name as though she could not believe her eyes .Slowly she looked up at Harry .Grindelwald ?Ignoring the remainder of the photographs Harry searched the pages around them for a recurrence of that fatal name .He soon discovered it and read greedily but became lost It was necessary to go further back to make sense of it all and eventually he found himself at the start of a chapter entitled The Greater Good .Together he and Hermione started to read Now approaching his eighteenth birthday Dumbledore left Hogwarts in a blaze of glory Head Boy Prefect Winner of the Barnabus Finkley Prize for Exceptional SpellCasting British Youth Representative to the Wizengamot Gold Medal Winner for GroundBreaking Contribution to the International Alchemical Conference in Cairo .Dumbledore intended next to take a Grand Tour with Elphias Dogbreath Doge the dimwitted but devoted sidekick he had picked up at school .The two young men were staying at the Leaky Cauldron in London preparing to depart for Greece the following morning when an owl arrived bearing news of Dumbledore s mothers death .Dogbreath Doge who refused to be interviewed for this book has given the public his own sentimental version of what happened next .He represents Kendras death as a tragic blow and Dumbledores decision to give up his expedition as an act of noble selfsacrifice .Certainly Dumbledore returned to Godrics Hollow at once supposedly to care for his younger brother and sister .But how much care did he actually give them ?He were a head case that Aberforth says Enid Smeek whose family lived on the outskirts of Godrics Hollow at that time .Ran wild .Course with his mum and dad gone youd have felt sorry for him only he kept chucking goat dung at my head .I dont think Albus was fussed about him I never saw them together anyway .So what was Albus doing if not comforting his wild young brother ?The answer it seems is ensuring the continued imprisonment of his sister .For though her first jailer had died there was no change in the pitiful condition of Ariana Dumbledore .Her very existence continued to be known only to those few outsiders who like Dogbreath Doge could be counted upon to believe in the story of her ill health .Another such easily satisfied friend of the family was Bathilda Bagshot the celebrated magical historian who has lived in Godrics Hollow for many years .Kendra of course had rebuffed Bathilda when she first attempted to welcome the family to the village .Several years later however the author sent an owl to Albus at Hog warts having been favorably impressed by his paper on transspecies transformation in Transfiguration Today .This initial contact led to acquaintance with the entire Dumbledore family .At the time of Kendras death Bathilda was the only person in Godrics Hollow who was on speaking terms with Dumbledores mother .Unfortunately the brilliance that Bathilda exhibited earlier in her life has now dimmed .The fires lit but the cauldrons empty as Ivor Dillonsby put it to me or in Enid Smeeks slightly earthier phrase Shes nutty as squirrel poo .Nevertheless a combination of triedandtested reporting techniques enabled me to extract enough nuggets of hard fact to string together the whole scandalous story .Like the rest of the Wizarding world Bathilda puts Kendras premature death down to a backfiring charm a story repeated by Albus and Aberforth in later years .Bathilda also parrots the family line on Ariana calling her frail and delicate .On one subject however Bathilda is well worth the effort I put into procuring Veritaserum for she and she alone knows the full story of the bestkept secret of Albus Dumbledores life .Now revealed for the first time it calls into question everything that his admirers believed of Dumbledore his supposed hatred of the Dark Arts his opposition to the oppression of Muggles even his devotion to his own family .The very same summer that Dumbledore went home to Godrics Hollow now an orphan and head of the family Bathilda Bagshot agreed to accept into her home her greatnephew Gellert Grindelwald .The name of Grindelwald is justly famous In a list of Most Dangerous Dark Wizards of All Time he would miss out on the top spot only because YouKnowWho arrived a generation later to steal his crown .As Grindelwald never extended his campaign of terror to Britain however the details of his rise to power are not widely known here .Educated at Durmstrang a school famous even then for its unfortunate tolerance of the Dark Arts Grindelwald showed himself quite as precociously brilliant as Dumbledore .Rather than channel his abilities into the attainment of awards and prizes however Gellert Grindelwald devoted himself to other pursuits .At sixteen years old even Durmstrang felt it could no longer turn a blind eye to the twisted experiments of Gellert Grindelwald and he was expelled .Hitherto all that has been known of Grindelwald s next movements is that he traveled abroad for some months .It can now be revealed that Grindelwald chose to visit his greataunt in Godrics Hollow and that there intensely shocking though it will be for many to hear it he struck up a close friendship with none other than Albus Dumbledore .He seemed a charming boy to me babbles Bathilda whatever he became later .Naturally I introduced him to poor Albus who was missing the company of lads his own age .The boys took to each other at once .They certainly did .Bathilda shows me a letter kept by her that Albus Dumbledore sent Gellert Grindelwald in the dead of night .Yes even after theyd spent all day in discussion both such brilliant young boys they got on like a cauldron on fire Id sometimes hear an owl tapping at Gellerts bedroom window delivering a letter from Albus !An idea would have struck him and he had to let Gellert know immediately !And what ideas they were .Profoundly shocking though Albus Dumbledore s fans will find it here are the thoughts of their seventeenyearold hero as relayed to his new best friend .A copy of the original letter may be seen on Gellert Your point about Wizard dominance being FOR THE MUGGLES OWN GOOD this I think is the crucial point .Yes we have been given power and yes that power gives us the right to rule but it also gives us responsibilities over the ruled .We must stress this point it will be the foundation stone upon which we build .Where we are opposed as we surely will be this must be the basis of all our counterarguments .We seize control FOR THE GREATER GOOD .And from this it follows that where we meet resistance we must use only the force that is necessary and no more .This was your mistake at Durmstrang !But I do not complain because if you had not been expelled we would never have met .Albus Astonished and appalled though his many admirers will be this letter constitutes proof that Albus Dumbledore once dreamed of overthrowing the Statute of Secrecy and establishing Wizard rule over Muggles .What a blow for those who have always portrayed Dumbledore as the Muggleboms greatest champion !How hollow those speeches promoting Muggle rights seem in the light of this damning new evidence !How despicable does Albus Dumbledore appear busy plotting his rise to power when he should have been mourning his mother and caring for his sister !No doubt those determined to keep Dumbledore on his crumbling pedestal will bleat that he did not after all put his plans into action that he must have suffered a change of heart that he came to his senses .However the truth seems altogether more shocking .Barely two months into their great new friendship Dumbledore and Grindelwald parted never to see each other again until they met for their legendary duel for more see chapter 22 .What caused this abrupt rupture ?Had Dumbledore come to his senses ?Had he told Grindelwald he wanted no more part in his plans ?Alas no .It was poor little Ariana dying I think that did it says Bathilda .It came as an awful shock .Gellert was there in the house when it happened and he came back to my house all of a dither told me he wanted to go home the next day .Terribly distressed you know .So I arranged a Portkey and that was the last I saw of him .Albus was beside himself at Arianas death .It was so dreadful for those two brothers .They had lost everybody except each other .No wonder tempers ran a little high .Aberforth blamed Albus you know as people will under these dreadful circumstances .But Aberforth always talked a little madly poor boy .All the same breaking Albuss nose at the funeral was not decent .It would have destroyed Kendra to see her sons fighting like that across her daughters body .A shame Gellert could not have stayed for the funeral . .He would have been a comfort to Albus at least .This dreadful coffin side brawl known only to those few who attended Ariana Dumbledores funeral raises several questions .Why exactly did Aberforth Dumbledore blame Albus for his sisters death ?Was it as Batty pretends a mere effusion of grief ?Or could there have been some more concrete reason for his fury ?Grindelwald expelled from Durmstrang for nearfatal attacks upon fellow students fled the country hours after the girls death and Albus out of shame or fear ?never saw him again not until forced to do so by the pleas of the Wizarding world .Neither Dumbledore nor Grindelwald ever seems to have referred to this brief boyhood friendship in later life .However there can be no doubt that Dumbledore delayed for some five years of turmoil fatalities and disappearances his attack upon Gellert Grindelwald .Was it lingering affection for the man or fear of exposure as his once best friend that caused Dumbledore to hesitate ?Was it only reluctantly that Dumbledore set out to capture the man he was once so delighted he had met ?And how did the mysterious Ariana die ?Was she the inadvertent victim of some Dark rite ?Did she stumble across something she ought not to have done as the two young men sat practicing for their attempt at glory and domination ?Is it possible that Ariana Dumbledore was the first person to die for the greater good ?The chapter ended here and Harry looked up .Hermione had reached the bottom of the page before him .She tugged the book out of Harrys hands looking a little alarmed by his expression and closed it without looking at it as though hiding something indecent .Harry But he shook his head .Some inner certainty had crashed down inside him it was exactly as he had felt after Ron left .He had trusted Dumbledore believed him the embodiment of goodness and wisdom .All was ashes How much more could he lose ?Ron Dumbledore the phoenix wand .Harry .She seemed to have heard his thoughts .Listen to me .It it doesnt make very nice reading Yeah you could say that but dont forget Harry this is Rita Skeeter writing .You did read that letter to Grindelwald didnt you ?Yes I I did .She hesitated looking upset cradling her tea in her cold hands .I think thats the worst bit .I know Bathilda thought it was all just talk but ‘For the Greater Good became Grindelwald s slogan his justification for all the atrocities he committed later .And .from that .it looks like Dumbledore gave him the idea .They say ‘For the Greater Good was even carved over the entrance to Nurmengard .Whats Nurmengard ?The prison Grindelwald had built to hold his opponents .He ended up in there himself once Dumbledore had caught him .Anyway its its an awful thought that Dumbledore s ideas helped Grindelwald rise to power .But on the other hand even Rita cant pretend that they knew each other for more than a few months one summer when they were both really young and I thought youd say that said Harry .He did not want to let his anger spill out at her but it was hard to keep his voice steady .I thought youd say They were young .They were the same age as we are now .And here we are risking our lives to fight the Dark Arts and there he was in a huddle with his new best friend plotting their rise to power over the Muggles .His temper would not remain in check much longer He stood up and walked around trying to work some of it off .Im not trying to defend what Dumbledore wrote said Hermione .All that ‘right to rule rubbish its ‘Magic Is Might all over again .But Harry his mother had just died he was stuck alone in the house Alone ?He wasnt alone !He had his brother and sister for company his Squib sister he was keeping locked up I dont believe it said Hermione .She stood up too .Whatever was wrong with that girl I dont think she was a Squib .The Dumbledore we knew would never ever have allowed The Dumbledore we thought we knew didnt want to conquer Muggles by force !Harry shouted his voice echoing across the empty hilltop and several blackbirds rose into the air squawking and spiraling against the pearly sky .He changed Harry he changed !Its as simple as that !Maybe he did believe these things when he was seventeen but the whole of the rest of his life was devoted to fighting the Dark Arts !Dumbledore was the one who stopped Grindelwald the one who always voted for Muggle protection and Muggleborn rights who fought YouKnowWho from the start and who died trying to bring him down !Ritas book lay on the ground between them so that the face of Albus Dumbledore smiled dolefully at both .Harry Im sorry but I think the real reason youre so angry is that Dumbledore never told you any of this himself .Maybe I am !Harry bellowed and he flung his arms over his head hardly knowing whether he was trying to hold in his anger or protect himself from the weight of his own disillusionment .Look what he asked from me Hermione !Risk your life Harry !And again !And again !And dont expect me to explain everything just trust me blindly trust that I know what Im doing trust me even though I dont trust you !Never the whole truth !Never !His voice cracked with the strain and they stood looking at each other in the whiteness and the emptiness and Harry felt they were as insignificant as insects beneath that wide sky .He loved you Hermione whispered .I know he loved you .Harry dropped his arms .I dont know who he loved Hermione but it was never me .This isnt love the mess hes left me in .He shared a damn sight more of what he was really thinking with Gellert Grindelwald than he ever shared with me .Harry picked up Hermione s wand which he had dropped in the snow and sat back down in the entrance of the tent .Thanks for the tea .Ill finish the watch .You get back in the warm .She hesitated but recognized the dismissal .She picked up the book and then walked back past him into the tent but as she did so she brushed the top of his head lightly with her hand .He closed his eyes at her touch and hated himself for wishing that what she said was true that Dumbledore had really cared .THE SILVER DOE It was snowing by the time Hermione took over the watch at midnight .Harrys dreams were confused and disturbing Nagini wove in and out of them first through a gigantic cracked ring then through a wreath of Christmas roses .He woke repeatedly panicky convinced that somebody had called out to him in the distance imagining that the wind whipping around the tent was footsteps or voices .Finally he got up in the darkness and joined Hermione who was huddled in the entrance to the tent reading A History of Magic by the light of her wand .The snow was still falling thickly and she greeted with relief his suggestion of packing up early and moving on .Well go somewhere more sheltered she agreed shivering as she pulled on a sweatshirt over her pajamas .I kept thinking I could hear people moving outside .I even thought I saw somebody once or twice .Harry paused in the act of pulling on a jumper and glanced at the silent motionless Sneakoscope on the table .Im sure I imagined it said Hermione looking nervous .The snow in the dark it plays tricks on your eyes .But perhaps we ought to Disapparate under the Invisibility Cloak just in case ?Half an hour later with the tent packed Harry wearing the Horcrux and Hermione clutching the beaded bag they Disapparated .The usual tightness engulfed them Harrys feet parted company with the snowy ground then slammed hard onto what felt like frozen earth covered with leaves .Where are we ?he asked peering around at a fresh mass of trees as Hermione opened the beaded bag and began tugging out tent poles .The Forest of Dean she said .I came camping here once with my mum and dad .Here too snow lay on the trees all around and it was bitterly cold but they were at least protected from the wind .They spent most of the day inside the tent huddled for warmth around the useful bright blue flames that Hermione was so adept at producing and which could be scooped up and carried around in a jar .Harry felt as though he was recuperating from some brief but severe illness an impression reinforced by Hermione s solicitousness .That afternoon fresh flakes drifted down upon them so that even their sheltered clearing had a fresh dusting of powdery snow .After two nights of little sleep Harrys senses seemed more alert than usual .Their escape from Godrics Hollow had been so narrow that Voldemort seemed somehow closer than before more threatening .As darkness drew in again Harry refused Hermiones offer to keep watch and told her to go to bed .Harry moved an old cushion into the tent mouth and sat down wearing all the sweaters he owned but even so still shivery .The darkness deepened with the passing hours until it was virtually impenetrable .He was on the point of taking out the Marauders Map so as to watch Ginnys dot for a while before he remembered that it was the Christmas holidays and that she would be back at the Burrow .Every tiny movement seemed magnified in the vastness of the forest .Harry knew that it must be full of living creatures but he wished they would all remain still and silent so that he could separate their innocent scurryings and prowlings from noises that might proclaim other sinister movements .He remembered the sound of a cloak slithering over dead leaves many years ago and at once thought he heard it again before mentally shaking himself .Their protective enchantments had worked for weeks why should they break now ?And yet he could not throw off the feeling that something was different tonight .Several times he jerked upright his neck aching because he had fallen asleep slumped at an awkward angle against the side of the tent .The night reached such a depth of velvety blackness that he might have been suspended in limbo between Disapparition and Apparition .He had just held up a hand in front of his face to see whether he could make out his fingers when it happened .A bright silver light appeared right ahead of him moving through the trees .Whatever the source it was moving soundlessly .The light seemed simply to drift toward him .He jumped to his feet his voice frozen in his throat and raised Hermiones wand .He screwed up his eyes as the light became blinding the trees in front of it pitchblack in silhouette and still the thing came closer .And then the source of the light stepped out from behind an oak .It was a silver white doe moonbright and dazzling picking her way over the ground still silent and leaving no hoofprints in the fine powdering of snow .She stepped toward him her beautiful head with its wide longlashed eyes held high .Harry stared at the creature filled with wonder not at her strangeness but at her inexplicable familiarity .He felt that he had been waiting for her to come but that he had forgotten until this moment that they had arranged to meet .His impulse to shout for Hermione which had been so strong a moment ago had gone .He knew he would have staked his life on it that she had come for him and him alone .They gazed at each other for several long moments and then she turned and walked away .No he said and his voice was cracked with lack of use .Come back !She continued to step deliberately through the trees and soon her brightness was striped by their thick black trunks .For one trembling second he hesitated .Caution murmured it could be a trick a lure a trap .But instinct overwhelming instinct told him that this was not Dark Magic .He set off in pursuit .Snow crunched beneath his feet but the doe made no noise as she passed through the trees for she was nothing but light .Deeper and deeper into the forest she led him and Harry walked quickly sure that when she stopped she would allow him to approach her properly .And then she would speak and the voice would tell him what he needed to know .At last she came to a halt .She turned her beautiful head toward him once more and he broke into a run a question burning in him but as he opened his lips to ask it she vanished .Though the darkness had swallowed her whole her burnished image was still imprinted on his retinas it obscured his vision brightening when he lowered his eyelids disorienting him .Now fear came Her presence had meant safety .Lumos he whispered and the wandtip ignited .The imprint of the doe faded away with every blink of his eyes as he stood there listening to the sounds of the forest to distant crackles of twigs soft swishes of snow .Was he about to be attacked ?Had she enticed him into an ambush ?Was he imagining that somebody stood beyond the reach of the wandlight watching him ?He held the wand higher .Nobody ran out at him no flash of green light burst from behind a tree .Why then had she led him to this spot ?Something gleamed in the light of the wand and Harry spun about but all that was there was a small frozen pool its cracked black surface glittering as he raised the wand higher to examine it .He moved forward rather cautiously and looked down .The ice reflected his distorted shadow and the beam of wandlight but deep below the thick misty gray carapace something else glinted .A great silver cross His heart skipped into his mouth He dropped to his knees at the pools edge and angled the wand so as to flood the bottom of the pool with as much light as possible .A glint of deep red .It was a sword with glittering rubies in its hilt .The sword of Gryffindor was lying at the bottom of the forest pool .Barely breathing he stared down at it .How was this possible ?How could it have come to be lying in a forest pool this close to the place where they were camping ?Had some unknown magic drawn Hermione to this spot or was the doe which he had taken to be a Patronus some kind of guardian of the pool ?Or had the sword been put into the pool after they had arrived precisely because they were here ?In which case where was the person who had wanted to pass it to Harry ?Again he directed the wand at the surrounding trees and bushes searching for a human outline for the glint of an eye but he could not see anyone there .All the same a little more fear leavened his exhilaration as he returned his attention to the sword reposing upon the bottom of the frozen pool .He pointed the wand at the silvery shape and murmured Accio Sword .It did not stir .He had not expected it to .If it had been that easy the sword would have lain on the ground for him to pick up not in the depths of a frozen pool .He set off around the circle of ice thinking hard about the last time the sword had delivered itself to him .He had been in terrible danger then and had asked for help .Help he murmured but the sword remained upon the pool bottom indifferent motionless .What was it Harry asked himself walking again that Dumbledore had told him the last time he had retrieved the sword ?Only a true Gryffindor could have pulled that out of the hat .And what were the qualities that defined a Gryffindor ?A small voice inside Harrys head answered him Their daring nerve and chivalry set Gryffindors apart .Harry stopped walking and let out a long sigh his smoky breath dispersing rapidly upon the frozen air .He knew what he had to do .If he was honest with himself he had thought it might come to this from the moment he had spotted the sword through the ice .He glanced around at the surrounding trees again but was convinced now that nobody was going to attack him .They had had their chance as he walked alone through the forest had had plenty of opportunity as he examined the pool .The only reason to delay at this point was because the immediate prospect was so deeply uninviting .With fumbling fingers Harry started to remove his many layers of clothing .Where chivalry entered into this he thought ruefully he was not entirely sure unless it counted as chivalrous that he was not calling for Hermione to do it in his stead .An owl hooted somewhere as he stripped off and he thought with a pang of Hedwig .He was shivering now his teeth chattering horribly and yet he continued to strip off until at last he stood there in his underwear barefooted in the snow .He placed the pouch containing his wand his mothers letter the shard of Siriuss mirror and the old Snitch on top of his clothes then he pointed Hermiones wand at the ice .Diffindo .It cracked with a sound like a bullet in the silence The surface of the pool broke and chunks of dark ice rocked on the ruffled water .As far as Harry could judge it was not deep but to retrieve the sword he would have to submerge himself completely .Contemplating the task ahead would not make it easier or the water warmer .He stepped to the pools edge and placed Hermiones wand on the ground still lit .Then trying not to imagine how much colder he was about to become or how violently he would soon be shivering he jumped .Every pore of his body screamed in protest The very air in his lungs seemed to freeze solid as he was submerged to his shoulders in the frozen water .He could hardly breathe trembling so violently the water lapped over the edges of the pool he felt for the blade with his numb feet .He only wanted to dive once .Harry put off the moment of total submersion from second to second gasping and shaking until he told himself that it must be done gathered all his courage and dived .The cold was agony It attacked him like fire .His brain itself seemed to have frozen as he pushed through the dark water to the bottom and reached out groping for the sword .His fingers closed around the hilt he pulled it upward .Then something closed tight around his neck .He thought of water weeds though nothing had brushed him as he dived and raised his empty hand to free himself .It was not weed The chain of the Horcrux had tightened and was slowly constricting his windpipe .Harry kicked out wildly trying to push himself back to the surface but merely propelled himself into the rocky side of the pool .Thrashing suffocating he scrabbled at the strangling chain his frozen fingers unable to loosen it and now little lights were popping inside his head and he was going to drown there was nothing left nothing he could do and the arms that closed around his chest were surely Deaths .Choking and retching soaking and colder than he had ever been in his life he came to facedown in the snow .Somewhere close by another person was panting and coughing and staggering around .Hermione had come again as she had come when the snake attacked .Yet it did not sound like her not with those deep coughs not judging by the weight of the footsteps .Harry had no strength to lift his head and see his saviors identity .All he could do was raise a shaking hand to his throat and feel the place where the locket had cut tightly into his flesh .It was gone Someone had cut him free .Then a panting voice spoke from over his head .Are you mental ?Nothing but the shock of hearing that voice could have given Harry the strength to get up .Shivering violently he staggered to his feet .There before him stood Ron fully dressed but drenched to the skin his hair plastered to his face the sword of Gryffindor in one hand and the Horcrux dangling from its broken chain in the other .Why the hell panted Ron holding up the Horcrux which swung backward and forward on its shortened chain in some parody of hypnosis didnt you take this thing off before you dived ?Harry could not answer .The silver doe was nothing nothing compared with Rons reappearance he could not believe it .Shuddering with cold he caught up the pile of clothes still lying at the waters edge and began to pull them on .As he dragged sweater after sweater over his head Harry stared at Ron half expecting him to have disappeared every time he lost sight of him and yet he had to be real He had just dived into the pool he had saved Harrys life .It was yyou ?Harry said at last his teeth chattering his voice weaker than usual due to his nearstrangulation .Well yeah said Ron looking slightly confused .Yyou cast that doe ?What ?No of course not !I thought it was you doing it !My Patronus is a stag .Oh yeah .I thought it looked different .No antlers .Harry put Hagrids pouch back around his neck pulled on a final sweater stooped to pick up Hermiones wand and faced Ron again .How come youre here ?Apparently Ron had hoped that this point would come up later if at all .Well Ive you know Ive come back .If He cleared his throat .You know .You still want me .There was a pause in which the subject of Rons departure seemed to rise like a wall between them .Yet he was here .He had returned .He had just saved Harrys life .Ron looked down at his hands .He seemed momentarily surprised to see the things he was holding .Oh yeah I got it out he said rather unnecessarily holding up the sword for Harrys inspection .Thats why you jumped in right ?Yeah said Harry .But I dont understand .How did you get here ?How did you find us ?Long story said Ron .Ive been looking for you for hours its a big forest isnt it ?And I was just thinking Id have to kip under a tree and wait for morning when I saw that deer coming and you following .You didnt see anyone else ?No said Ron .I But he hesitated glancing at two trees growing close together some yards away .I did think I saw something move over there but I was running to the pool at the time because youd gone in and you hadnt come up so I wasnt going to make a detour to hey !Harry was already hurrying to the place Ron had indicated .The two oaks grew close together there was a gap of only a few inches between the trunks at eye level an ideal place to see but not be seen .The ground around the roots however was free of snow and Harry could see no sign of footprints .He walked back to where Ron stood waiting still holding the sword and the Horcrux .Anything there ?Ron asked .No said Harry .So how did the sword get in that pool ?Whoever cast the Patronus must have put it there .They both looked at the ornate silver sword its rubied hilt glinting a little in the light from Hermiones wand .You reckon this is the real one ?asked Ron .One way to find out isnt there ?said Harry .The Horcrux was still swinging from Rons hand .The locket was twitching slightly .Harry knew that the thing inside it was agitated again .It had sensed the presence of the sword and had tried to kill Harry rather than let him possess it .Now was not the time for long discussions now was the moment to destroy the locket once and for all .Harry looked around holding Hermiones wand high and saw the place a flattish rock lying in the shadow of a sycamore tree .Come here he said and he led the way brushed snow from the rocks surface and held out his hand for the Horcrux .When Ron offered the sword however Harry shook his head .No you should do it .Me ?said Ron looking shocked .Why ?Because you got the sword out of the pool .I think its supposed to be you .He was not being kind or generous .As certainly as he had known that the doe was benign he knew that Ron had to be the one to wield the sword .Dumbledore had at least taught Harry something about certain kinds of magic of the incalculable power of certain acts .Im going to open it said Harry and you stab it .Straightaway okay ?Because whatevers in there will put up a fight .The bit of Riddle in the diary tried to kill me .How are you going to open it ?asked Ron .He looked terrified .Im going to ask it to open using Parseltongue said Harry .The answer came so readily to his lips that he thought that he had always known it deep down Perhaps it had taken his recent encounter with Nagini to make him realize it .He looked at the serpentine S inlaid with glittering green stones It was easy to visualize it as a minuscule snake curled upon the cold rock .No !said Ron .No dont open it !Im serious !Why not ?asked Harry .Lets get rid of the damn thing its been months I cant Harry Im serious you do it But why ?Because that things bad for me !said Ron backing away from the locket on the rock .I cant handle it !Im not making excuses Harry for what I was like but it affects me worse than it affected you and Hermione it made me think stuff stuff I was thinking anyway but it made everything worse I cant explain it and then Id take it off and Id get my head on straight again and then Id have to put the effing thing back on I cant do it Harry !He had backed away the sword dragging at his side shaking his head .You can do it said Harry you can !Youve just got the sword I know its supposed to be you who uses it .Please just get rid of it Ron .The sound of his name seemed to act like a stimulant .Ron swallowed then still breathing hard through his long nose moved back toward the rock .Tell me when he croaked .On three said Harry looking back down at the locket and narrowing his eyes concentrating on the letter S imagining a serpent while the contents of the locket rattled like a trapped cockroach .It would have been easy to pity it except that the cut around Harrys neck still burned .One .two .three .open .The last word came as a hiss and a snarl and the golden doors of the locket swung wide with a little click .Behind both of the glass windows within blinked a living eye dark and handsome as Tom Riddles eyes had been before he turned them scarlet and slit pupiled .Stab said Harry holding the locket steady on the rock .Ron raised the sword in his shaking hands The point dangled over the frantically swiveling eyes and Harry gripped the locket tightly bracing himself already imagining blood pouring from the empty windows .Then a voice hissed from out of the Horcrux .I have seen your heart and it is mine .Dont listen to it !Harry said harshly .Stab it !I have seen your dreams Ronald Weasley and I have seen your fears .All you desire is possible but all that you dread is also possible .Stab !shouted Harry his voice echoed off the surrounding trees the sword point trembled and Ron gazed down into Riddles eyes .Least loved always by the mother who craved a daughter .Least loved now by the girl who prefers your friend .Second best always eternally overshadowed .Ron stab it now !Harry bellowed He could feel the locket quivering in his grip and was scared of what was coming .Ron raised the sword still higher and as he did so Riddles eyes gleamed scarlet .Out of the lockets two windows out of the eyes there bloomed like two grotesque bubbles the heads of Harry and Hermione weirdly distorted .Ron yelled in shock and backed away as the figures blossomed out of the locket first chests then waists then legs until they stood in the locket side by side like trees with a common root swaying over Ron and the real Harry who had snatched his fingers away from the locket as it burned suddenly whitehot .Ron !he shouted but the RiddleHarry was now speaking with Voldemorts voice and Ron was gazing mesmerized into its face .Why return ?We were better without you happier without you glad of your absence .We laughed at your stupidity your cowardice your presumption Presumption ?echoed the RiddleHermione who was more beautiful and yet more terrible than the real Hermione She swayed cackling before Ron who looked horrified yet transfixed the sword hanging pointlessly at his side .Who could look at you who would ever look at you beside Harry Potter ?What have you ever done compared with the Chosen One ?What are you compared with the Boy Who Lived ?Ron stab it STAB IT !Harry yelled but Ron did not move His eyes were wide and the RiddleHarry and the RiddleHermione were reflected in them their hair swirling like flames their eyes shining red their voices lifted in an evil duet .Your mother confessed sneered RiddleHarry while RiddleHermione jeered that she would have preferred me as a son would be glad to exchange .Who wouldnt prefer him what woman would take you you are nothing nothing nothing to him crooned RiddleHermione and she stretched like a snake and entwined herself around RiddleHarry wrapping him in a close embrace Their lips met .On the ground in front of them Rons face filled with anguish .He raised the sword high his arms shaking .Do it Ron !Harry yelled .Ron looked toward him and Harry thought he saw a trace of scarlet in his eyes .Ron ?The sword flashed plunged Harry threw himself out of the way there was a clang of metal and a long drawnout scream .Harry whirled around slipping in the snow wand held ready to defend himself but there was nothing to fight .The monstrous versions of himself and Hermione were gone There was only Ron standing there with the sword held slackly in his hand looking down at the shattered remains of the locket on the flat rock .Slowly Harry walked back to him hardly knowing what to say or do .Ron was breathing heavily His eyes were no longer red at all but their normal blue they were also wet .Harry stooped pretending he had not seen and picked up the broken Horcrux .Ron had pierced the glass in both windows Riddles eyes were gone and the stained silk lining of the locket was smoking slightly .The thing that had lived in the Horcrux had vanished torturing Ron had been its final act .The sword clanged as Ron dropped it .He had sunk to his knees his head in his arms .He was shaking but not Harry realized from cold .Harry crammed the broken locket into his pocket knelt down beside Ron and placed a hand cautiously on his shoulder .He took it as a good sign that Ron did not throw it off .After you left he said in a low voice grateful for the fact that Rons face was hidden she cried for a week .Probably longer only she didnt want me to see .There were loads of nights when we never even spoke to each other .With you gone .He could not finish it was only now that Ron was here again that Harry fully realized how much his absence had cost them .Shes like my sister he went on .I love her like a sister and I reckon she feels the same way about me .Its always been like that .I thought you knew .Ron did not respond but turned his face away from Harry and wiped his nose noisily on his sleeve .Harry got to his feet again and walked to where Rons enormous rucksack lay yards away discarded as Ron had run toward the pool to save Harry from drowning .He hoisted it onto his own back and walked back to Ron who clambered to his feet as Harry approached eyes bloodshot but otherwise composed .Im sorry he said in a thick voice .Im sorry I left .I know I was a a He looked around at the darkness as if hoping a bad enough word would swoop down upon him and claim him .Youve sort of made up for it tonight said Harry .Getting the sword .Finishing off the Horcrux .Saving my life .That makes me sound a lot cooler than I was Ron mumbled .Stuff like that always sounds cooler than it really was said Harry .Ive been trying to tell you that for years .Simultaneously they walked forward and hugged Harry gripping the stillsopping back of Rons jacket .And now said Harry as they broke apart all weve got to do is find the tent again .But it was not difficult .Though the walk through the dark forest with the doe had seemed lengthy with Ron by his side the journey back seemed to take a surprisingly short time .Harry could not wait to wake Hermione and it was with quickening excitement that he entered the tent Ron lagging a little behind him .It was gloriously warm after the pool and the forest the only illumination the bluebell flames still shimmering in a bowl on the floor .Hermione was fast asleep curled up under her blankets and did not move until Harry had said her name several times .Hermionel She stirred then sat up quickly pushing her hair out of her face .Whats wrong ?Harry ?Are you all right ?Its okay everythings fine .More than fine .Im great .Theres someone here .What do you mean ?Who ?She saw Ron who stood there holding the sword and dripping onto the threadbare carpet .Harry backed into a shadowy corner slipped off Rons rucksack and attempted to blend in with the canvas .Hermione slid out of her bunk and moved like a sleepwalker toward Ron her eyes upon his pale face .She stopped right in front of him her lips slightly parted her eyes wide .Ron gave a weak hopeful smile and half raised his arms .Hermione launched herself forward and started punching every inch of him that she could reach .Ouch ow gerroff !What the ?Hermione OW !You complete arse Ronald Weasley !She punctuated every word with a blow Ron backed away shielding his head as Hermione advanced .You crawl back here after weeks and weeks oh wheres my wand ?She looked as though ready to wrestle it out of Harrys hands and he reacted instinctively .Protegol The invisible shield erupted between Ron and Hermione The force of it knocked her backward onto the floor .Spitting hair out of her mouth she leapt up again .Hermione !said Harry .Calm I will not calm down !she screamed .Never before had he seen her lose control like this she looked quite demented .Give me back my wand !Give it back to me Hermione will you please Dont you tell me what to do Harry Potter !she screeched .Dont you dare !Give it back now !And YOU !She was pointing at Ron in dire accusation It was like a malediction and Harry could not blame Ron for retreating several steps .I came running after you !I called you !I begged you to come back !I know Ron said Hermione Im sorry Im really Oh youre sorry !She laughed a highpitched outofcontrol sound Ron looked at Harry for help but Harry merely grimaced his helplessness .You come back after weeks weeks and you think its all going to be all right if you just say sorry ?Well what else can I say ?Ron shouted and Harry was glad that Ron was fighting back .Oh I dont know !yelled Hermione with awful sarcasm .Rack your brains Ron that should only take a couple of seconds Hermione interjected Harry who considered this a low blow he just saved my I dont care !she screamed .I dont care what hes done !Weeks and weeks we could have been dead for all he knew I knew you werent dead !bellowed Ron drowning her voice for the first time and approaching as close as he could with the Shield Charm between them .Harrys all over the Prophet all over the radio theyre looking for you everywhere all these rumors and mental stories I knew Id hear straight off if you were dead you dont know what its been like What its been like for you ?Her voice was now so shrill only bats would be able to hear it soon but she had reached a level of indignation that rendered her temporarily speechless and Ron seized his opportunity .I wanted to come back the minute Id Disapparated but I walked straight into a gang of Snatchers Hermione and I couldnt go anywhere !A gang of what ?asked Harry as Hermione threw herself down into a chair with her arms and legs crossed so tightly it seemed unlikely that she would unravel them for several years .Snatchers said Ron .Theyre everywhere gangs trying to earn gold by rounding up Muggleborns and blood traitors theres a reward from the Ministry for everyone captured .I was on my own and I look like I might be school age they got really excited thought I was a Muggleborn in hiding .I had to talk fast to get out of being dragged to the Ministry .What did you say to them ?Told them I was Stan Shunpike .First person I could think of .And they believed that ?They werent the brightest .One of them was definitely part troll the smell off him .Ron glanced at Hermione clearly hopeful she might soften at this small instance of humor but her expression remained stony above her tightly knotted limbs .Anyway they had a row about whether I was Stan or not .It was a bit pathetic to be honest but there were still five of them and only one of me and theyd taken my wand .Then two of them got into a fight and while the others were distracted I managed to hit the one holding me in the stomach grabbed his wand Disarmed the bloke holding mine and Disapparated .I didnt do it so well Splinched myself again Ron held up his right hand to show two missing fingernails Hermione raised her eyebrows coldly and I came out miles from where you were .By the time I got back to that bit of riverbank where wed been .youd gone .Gosh what a gripping story Hermione said in the lofty voice she adopted when wishing to wound .You must have been simply terrified .Meanwhile we went to Godrics Hollow and lets think what happened there Harry ?Oh yes YouKnow Whos snake turned up it nearly killed both of us and then YouKnow Who himself arrived and missed us by about a second .What ?Ron said gaping from her to Harry but Hermione ignored him .Imagine losing fingernails Harry !That really puts our sufferings into perspective doesnt it ?Hermione said Harry quietly Ron just saved my life .She appeared not to have heard him .One thing I would like to know though she said fixing her eyes on a spot a foot over Rons head .How exactly did you find us tonight ?Thats important .Once we know well be able to make sure were not visited by anyone else we dont want to see .Ron glared at her then pulled a small silver object from his jeans pocket .This .She had to look at Ron to see what he was showing them .The Deluminator ?she asked so surprised she forgot to look cold and fierce .It doesnt just turn the lights on and off said Ron .I dont know how it works or why it happened then and not any other time because Ive been wanting to come back ever since I left .But I was listening to the radio really early on Christmas morning and I heard .I heard you .He was looking at Hermione .You heard me on the radio ?she asked incredulously .No I heard you coming out of my pocket .Your voice he held up the Deluminator again came out of this .And what exactly did I say ?asked Hermione her tone somewhere between skepticism and curiosity .My name . ‘Ron .And you said .something about a wand .Hermione turned a fiery shade of scarlet .Harry remembered It had been the first time Rons name had been said aloud by either of them since the day he had left Hermione had mentioned it when talking about repairing Harrys wand .So I took it out Ron went on looking at the Deluminator and it didnt seem different or anything but I was sure Id heard you .So I clicked it .And the light went out in my room but another light appeared right outside the window .Ron raised his empty hand and pointed in front of him his eyes focused on something neither Harry nor Hermione could see .It was a ball of light kind of pulsing and bluish like that light you get around a Portkey you know ?Yeah said Harry and Hermione together automatically .I knew this was it said Ron .I grabbed my stuff and packed it then I put on my rucksack and went out into the garden .The little ball of light was hovering there waiting for me and when I came out it bobbed along a bit and I followed it behind the shed and then it .well it went inside me .Sorry ?said Harry sure he had not heard correctly .It sort of floated toward me said Ron illustrating the movement with his free index finger right to my chest and then it just went straight through .It was here he touched a point close to his heart I could feel it it was hot .And once it was inside me I knew what I was supposed to do I knew it would take me where I needed to go .So I Disapparated and came out on the side of a hill .There was snow everywhere .We were there said Harry .We spent two nights there and the second night I kept thinking I could hear someone moving around in the dark and calling out !Yeah well that wouldve been me said Ron .Your protective spells work anyway because I couldnt see you and I couldnt hear you .I was sure you were around though so in the end I got in my sleeping bag and waited for one of you to appear .I thought youd have to show yourselves when you packed up the tent .No actually said Hermione .Weve been Disapparating under the Invisibility Cloak as an extra precaution .And we left really early because as Harry says wed heard somebody blundering around .Well I stayed on that hill all day said Ron .I kept hoping youd appear .But when it started to get dark I knew I must have missed you so I clicked the Deluminator again the blue light came out and went inside me and I Disapparated and arrived here in these woods .I still couldnt see you so I just had to hope one of you would show yourselves in the end and Harry did .Well I saw the doe first obviously .You saw the what ?said Hermione sharply .They explained what had happened and as the story of the silver doe and the sword in the pool unfolded Hermione frowned from one to the other of them concentrating so hard she forgot to keep her limbs locked together .But it must have been a Patronus !she said .Couldnt you see who was casting it ?Didnt you see anyone ?And it led you to the sword !I cant believe this !Then what happened ?Ron explained how he had watched Harry jump into the pool and had waited for him to resurface how he had realized that something was wrong dived in and saved Harry then returned for the sword .He got as far as the opening of the locket then hesitated and Harry cut in .and Ron stabbed it with the sword .And .and it went ?Just like that ?she whispered .Well it it screamed said Harry with half a glance at Ron .Here .He threw the locket into her lap gingerly she picked it up and examined its punctured windows .Deciding that it was at last safe to do so Harry removed the Shield Charm with a wave of Hermiones wand and turned to Ron .Did you just say you got away from the Snatchers with a spare wand ?What ?said Ron who had been watching Hermione examining the locket .Oh oh yeah .He tugged open a buckle on his rucksack and pulled a short dark wand out of its pocket .Here .I figured its always handy to have a backup .You were right said Harry holding out his hand .Mines broken .Youre kidding ?Ron said but at that moment Hermione got to her feet and he looked apprehensive again .Hermione put the vanquished Horcrux into the beaded bag then climbed back into her bed and settled down without another word .Ron passed Harry the new wand .About the best you could hope for I think murmured Harry .Yeah said Ron .Couldve been worse .Remember those birds she set on me ?I still havent ruled it out came Hermiones muffled voice from beneath her blankets but Harry saw Ron smiling slightly as he pulled his maroon pajamas out of his rucksack .XEN OPHILIUS LOVEGOOD Harry had not expected Hermiones anger to abate overnight and was therefore unsurprised that she communicated mainly by dirty looks and pointed silences the next morning .Ron responded by maintaining an unnaturally somber demeanor in her presence as an outward sign of continuing remorse .In fact when all three of them were together Harry felt like the only nonmourner at a poorly attended funeral .During those few moments he spent alone with Harry however collecting water and searching the undergrowth for mushrooms Ron became shamelessly cheery .Someone helped us he kept saying .Someone sent that doe .Someones on our side .One Horcrux down mate !Bolstered by the destruction of the locket they set to debating the possible locations of the other Horcruxes and even though they had discussed the matter so often before Harry felt optimistic certain that more breakthroughs would succeed the first .Hermiones sulkiness could not mar his buoyant spirits The sudden upswing in their fortunes the appearance of the mysterious doe the recovery of Gryffindors sword and above all Rons return made Harry so happy that it was quite difficult to maintain a straight face .Late in the afternoon he and Ron escaped Hermiones baleful presence again and under the pretense of scouring the bare hedges for nonexistent blackberries they continued their ongoing exchange of news .Harry had finally managed to tell Ron the whole story of his and Hermiones various wanderings right up to the full story of what had happened at Godrics Hollow Ron was now filling Harry in on everything he had discovered about the wider Wizarding world during his weeks away . .and how did you find out about the Taboo ?he asked Harry after explaining the many desperate attempts of Muggleborns to evade the Ministry .The what ?You and Hermione have stopped saying YouKnow Whos name !Oh yeah .Well its just a bad habit weve slipped into said Harry .But I havent got a problem calling him V NO !roared Ron causing Harry to jump into the hedge and Hermione nose buried in a book at the tent entrance to scowl over at them .Sorry said Ron wrenching Harry back out of the brambles but the names been jinxed Harry thats how they track people !Using his name breaks protective enchantments it causes some kind of magical disturbance its how they found us in Tottenham Court Road !Because we used his name ?Exactly !Youve got to give them credit it makes sense .It was only people who were serious about standing up to him like Dumbledore who ever dared use it .Now theyve put a Taboo on it anyone who says it is trackable quickandeasy way to find Order members !They nearly got Kingsley Youre kidding ?Yeah a bunch of Death Eaters cornered him Bill said but he fought his way out .Hes on the run now just like us .Ron scratched his chin thoughtfully with the end of his wand .You dont reckon Kingsley could have sent that doe ?His Patronus is a lynx we saw it at the wedding remember ?Oh yeah .They moved farther along the hedge away from the tent and Hermione .Harry .you dont reckon it couldve been Dumbledore ?Dumbledore what ?Ron looked a little embarrassed but said in a low voice Dumbledore .the doe ?I mean Ron was watching Harry out of the corners of his eyes he had the real sword last didnt he ?Harry did not laugh at Ron because he understood too well the longing behind the question .The idea that Dumbledore had managed to come back to them that he was watching over them would have been inexpressibly comforting .He shook his head .Dumbledores dead he said .I saw it happen I saw the body .Hes definitely gone .Anyway his Patronus was a phoenix not a doe .Patronuses can change though cant they ?said Ron .Tonkss changed didnt it ?Yeah but if Dumbledore was alive why wouldnt he show himself ?Why wouldnt he just hand us the sword ?Search me said Ron .Same reason he didnt give it to you while he was alive ?Same reason he left you an old Snitch and Hermione a book of kids stories ?Which is what ?asked Harry turning to look Ron full in the face desperate for the answer .I dunno said Ron .Sometimes Ive thought when Ive been a bit hacked off he was having a laugh or or he just wanted to make it more difficult .But I dont think so not anymore .He knew what he was doing when he gave me the Deluminator didnt he ?He well Rons ears turned bright red and he became engrossed in a tuft of grass at his feet which he prodded with his toe he mustve known Id run out on you .No Harry corrected him .He mustve known youd always want to come back .Ron looked grateful but still awkward .Partly to change the subject Harry said Speaking of Dumbledore have you heard what Skeeter wrote about him ?Oh yeah said Ron at once people are talking about it quite a lot .Course if things were different itd be huge news Dumbledore being pals with Grindelwald but now its just something to laugh about for people who didnt like Dumbledore and a bit of a slap in the face for everyone who thought he was such a good bloke .I dont know that its such a big deal though .He was really young when they Our age said Harry just as he had retorted to Hermione and something in his face seemed to decide Ron against pursuing the subject .A large spider sat in the middle of a frosted web in the brambles .Harry took aim at it with the wand Ron had given him the previous night which Hermione had since condescended to examine and had decided was made of blackthorn .Engorgio .The spider gave a little shiver bouncing slightly in the web .Harry tried again .This time the spider grew slightly larger .Stop that said Ron sharply .Im sorry I said Dumbledore was young okay ?Harry had forgotten Rons hatred of spiders .Sorry Reducio .The spider did not shrink .Harry looked down at the blackthorn wand .Every minor spell he had cast with it so far that day had seemed less powerful than those he had produced with his phoenix wand .The new one felt intrusively unfamiliar like having somebody elses hand sewn to the end of his arm .You just need to practice said Hermione who had approached them noiselessly from behind and had stood watching anxiously as Harry tried to enlarge and reduce the spider .Its all a matter of confidence Harry .He knew why she wanted it to be all right She still felt guilty about breaking his wand .He bit back the retort that sprang to his lips that she could take the blackthorn wand if she thought it made no difference and he would have hers instead .Keen for them all to be friends again however he agreed but when Ron gave Hermione a tentative smile she stalked off and vanished behind her book once more .All three of them returned to the tent when darkness fell and Harry took first watch .Sitting in the entrance he tried to make the blackthorn wand levitate small stones at his feet but his magic still seemed clumsier and less powerful than it had done before .Hermione was lying on her bunk reading while Ron after many nervous glances up at her had taken a small wooden wireless out of his rucksack and started to try and tune it .Theres this one program he told Harry in a low voice that tells the news like it really is .All the others are on You Know Whos side and are following the Ministry line but this one .you wait till you hear it its great .Only they cant do it every night they have to keep changing locations in case theyre raided and you need a password to tune in .Trouble is I missed the last one .He drummed lightly on the top of the radio with his wand muttering random words under his breath .He threw Hermione many covert glances plainly fearing an angry outburst but for all the notice she took of him he might not have been there .For ten minutes or so Ron tapped and muttered Hermione turned the pages of her book and Harry continued to practice with the blackthorn wand .Finally Hermione climbed down from her bunk .Ron ceased his tapping at once .If its annoying you 111 stop !he told Hermione nervously .Hermione did not deign to respond but approached Harry .We need to talk she said .He looked at the book still clutched in her hand .It was The Life and Lies of Albus Dumbledore .What ?he said apprehensively .It flew through his mind that there was a chapter on him in there he was not sure he felt up to hearing Ritas version of his relationship with Dumbledore .Hermione s answer however was completely unexpected .I want to go and see Xenophilius Lovegood .He stared at her .Sorry ?Xenophilius Lovegood .Lunas father .I want to go and talk to him !Er why ?She took a deep breath as though bracing herself and said Its that mark the mark in Beedle the Bard .Look at this !She thrust The Life and Lies ofAlbus Dumbledore under Harrys unwilling eyes and he saw a photograph of the original letter that Dumbledore had written Grindelwald with Dumbledore s familiar thin slanting handwriting .He hated seeing absolute proof that Dumbledore really had written those words that they had not been Ritas invention .The signature said Hermione .Look at the signature Harry !He obeyed .For a moment he had no idea what she was talking about but looking more closely with the aid of his lit wand he saw that Dumbledore had replaced the A of Albus with a tiny version of the same triangular mark inscribed upon The Tales of Beedle the Bard .Er what are you ?said Ron tentatively but Hermione quelled him with a look and turned back to Harry .It keeps cropping up doesnt it ?she said .I know Viktor said it was Grindelwald s mark but it was definitely on that old grave in Godrics Hollow and the dates on the headstone were long before Grindelwald came along !And now this !Well we cant ask Dumbledore or Grindelwald what it means I dont even know whether Grindelwalds still alive but we can ask Mr Lovegood .He was wearing the symbol at the wedding .Im sure this is important Harry !Harry did not answer immediately .He looked into her intense eager face and then out into the surrounding darkness thinking .After a long pause he said Hermione we dont need another Godrics Hollow .We talked ourselves into going there and But it keeps appearing Harry !Dumbledore left me The Tales of Beedle the Bard how do you know were not supposed to find out about the sign ?Here we go again !Harry felt slightly exasperated .We keep trying to convince ourselves Dumbledore left us secret signs and clues The Deluminator turned out to be pretty useful piped up Ron .I think Hermiones right I think we ought to go and see Lovegood .Harry threw him a dark look .He was quite sure that Rons support of Hermione had little to do with a desire to know the meaning of the triangular rune .It wont be like Godrics Hollow Ron added Lovegoods on your side Harry The Quibblers been for you all along it keeps telling everyone theyve got to help you !Im sure this is important !said Hermione earnestly .But dont you think if it was Dumbledore would have told me about it before he died ?Maybe .maybe its something you need to find out for yourself said Hermione with a faint air of clutching at straws .Yeah said Ron sycophantically that makes sense .No it doesnt snapped Hermione but I still think we ought to talk to Mr Lovegood .A symbol that links Dumbledore Grindelwald and Godrics Hollow ?Harry Im sure we ought to know about this !I think we should vote on it said Ron .Those in favor of going to see Lovegood His hand flew into the air before Hermiones .Her lips quivered suspiciously as she raised her own .Outvoted Harry sorry said Ron clapping him on the back .Fine said Harry half amused half irritated .Only once weve seen Lovegood lets try and look for some more Horcruxes shall we ?Where do the Lovegoods live anyway ?Do either of you know ?Yeah theyre not far from my place said Ron .I dunno exactly where but Mum and Dad always point toward the hills whenever they mention them .Shouldnt be hard to find .When Hermione had returned to her bunk Harry lowered his voice .You only agreed to try and get back in her good books .Alls fair in love and war said Ron brightly and this is a bit of both .Cheer up its the Christmas holidays Luna ll be home !They had an excellent view of the village of Ottery St .Catchpole from the breezy hillside to which they Disapparated next morning .From their high vantage point the village looked like a collection of toy houses in the great slanting shafts of sunlight stretching to earth in the breaks between clouds .They stood for a minute or two looking toward the Burrow their hands shadowing their eyes but all they could make out were the high hedges and trees of the orchard which afforded the crooked little house protection from Muggle eyes .Its weird being this near but not going to visit said Ron .Well its not like you havent just seen them .You were there for Christmas said Hermione coldly .I wasnt at the Burrow !said Ron with an incredulous laugh .Do you think I was going to go back there and tell them all Id walked out on you ?Yeah Fred and George wouldve been great about it .And Ginny shed have been really understanding .But where have you been then ?asked Hermione surprised .Bill and Fleurs new place .Shell Cottage .Bills always been decent to me .He he wasnt impressed when he heard what Id done but he didnt go on about it .He knew I was really sorry .None of the rest of the family know I was there .Bill told Mum he and Fleur werent going home for Christmas because they wanted to spend it alone .You know first holiday after they were married .I dont think Fleur minded .You know how much she hates Celestina Warbeck .Ron turned his back on the Burrow .Lets try up here he said leading the way over the top of the hill .They walked for a few hours Harry at Hermione s insistence hidden beneath the Invisibility Cloak .The cluster of low hills appeared to be uninhabited apart from one small cottage which seemed deserted .Do you think its theirs and theyve gone away for Christmas ?said Hermione peering through the window at a neat little kitchen with geraniums on the windowsill .Ron snorted .Listen Ive got a feeling youd be able to tell who lived there if you looked through the Lovegoods window .Lets try the next lot of hills .So they Disapparated a few miles farther north .Aha !shouted Ron as the wind whipped their hair and clothes .Ron was pointing upward toward the top of the hill on which they had appeared where a most strangelooking house rose vertically against the sky a great black cylinder with a ghostly moon hanging behind it in the afternoon sky .Thats got to be Lunas house who else would live in a place like that ?It looks like a giant rook !Its nothing like a bird said Hermione frowning at the tower .I was talking about a chess rook said Ron .A castle to you .Rons legs were the longest and he reached the top of the hill first .When Harry and Hermione caught up with him panting and clutching stitches in their sides they found him grinning broadly .Its theirs said Ron .Look .Three handpainted signs had been tacked to a brokendown gate .The first read THE QUIBBLER .EDITOR X .LOVEGOOD the second PICK YOUR OWN MISTLETOE the third KEEP OFF THE DIRIGIBLE PLUMS The gate creaked as they opened it .The zigzagging path leading to the front door was overgrown with a variety of odd plants including a bush covered in the orange radishlike fruit Luna sometimes wore as earrings .Harry thought he recognized a Snargaluff and gave the wizened stump a wide berth .Two aged crab apple trees bent with the wind stripped of leaves but still heavy with berrysized red fruits and bushy crowns of whitebeaded mistletoe stood sentinel on either side of the front door .A little owl with a slightly flattened hawklike head peered down at them from one of the branches .Youd better take off the Invisibility Cloak Harry said Hermione .Its you Mr Lovegood wants to help not us .He did as she suggested handing her the Cloak to stow in the beaded bag .She then rapped three times on the thick black door which was studded with iron nails and bore a knocker shaped like an eagle .Barely ten seconds passed then the door was flung open and there stood Xenophilius Lovegood barefoot and wearing what appeared to be a stained nightshirt His long white candyfloss hair was dirty and unkempt .Xenophilius had been positively dapper at Bill and Fleurs wedding by comparison .What ?What is it ?Who are you ?What do you want ?he cried in a highpitched querulous voice looking first at Hermione then at Ron and finally at Harry upon which his mouth fell open in a perfect comical O .Hello Mr Lovegood said Harry holding out his hand .Im Harry Harry Potter .Xenophilius did not take Harrys hand although the eye that was not pointing inward at his nose slid straight to the scar on Harrys forehead .Would it be okay if we came in ?asked Harry .Theres something wed like to ask you .I .Im not sure thats advisable whispered Xenophilius .He swallowed and cast a quick look around the garden .Rather a shock .My word .I .Im afraid I dont really think I ought to It wont take long said Harry slightly disappointed by this lessthanwarm welcome .I oh all right then .Come in quickly .QuicklyV They were barely over the threshold when Xenophilius slammed the door shut behind them .They were standing in the most peculiar kitchen Harry had ever seen .The room was perfectly circular so that it felt like being inside a giant pepper pot .Everything was curved to fit the walls the stove the sink and the cupboards and all of it had been painted with flowers insects and birds in bright primary colors .Harry thought he recognized Lunas style The effect in such an enclosed space was slightly overwhelming .In the middle of the floor a wroughtiron spiral staircase led to the upper levels .There was a great deal of clattering and banging coming from overhead Harry wondered what Luna could be doing .Youd better come up said Xenophilius still looking extremely uncomfortable and he led the way .The room above seemed to be a combination of living room and workplace and as such was even more cluttered than the kitchen .Though much smaller and entirely round the room somewhat resembled the Room of Requirement on the unforgettable occasion that it had transformed itself into a gigantic labyrinth comprised of centuries of hidden objects .There were piles upon piles of books and papers on every surface .Delicately made models of creatures Harry did not recognize all flapping wings or snapping jaws hung from the ceiling .Luna was not there The thing that was making such a racket was a wooden object covered in magically turning cogs and wheels .It looked like the bizarre offspring of a workbench and a set of old shelves but after a moment Harry deduced that it was an old fashioned printing press due to the fact that it was churning out Quibblers .Excuse me said Xenophilius and he strode over to the machine seized a grubby tablecloth from beneath an immense number of books and papers which all tumbled onto the floor and threw it over the press somewhat muffling the loud bangs and clatters .He then faced Harry .Why have you come here ?Before Harry could speak however Hermione let out a small cry of shock .Mr Lovegood whats that ?She was pointing at an enormous gray spiral horn not unlike that of a unicorn which had been mounted on the wall protruding several feet into the room .It is the horn of a CrumpleHorned Snorkack said Xenophilius .No it isnt !said Hermione .Hermione muttered Harry embarrassed nows not the moment But Harry its an Erumpent horn !Its a Class B Tradeable Material and its an extraordinarily dangerous thing to have in a house !How dyou know its an Erumpent horn ?asked Ron edging away from the horn as fast as he could given the extreme clutter of the room .Theres a description in Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them .Mr Lovegood you need to get rid of it straightaway dont you know it can explode at the slightest touch ?The CrumpleHorned Snorkack said Xenophilius very clearly a mulish look upon his face is a shy and highly magical creature and its horn Mr Lovegood I recognize the grooved markings around the base thats an Erumpent horn and its incredibly dangerous I dont know where you got it I bought it said Xenophilius dogmatically two weeks ago from a delightful young wizard who knew of my interest in the exquisite Snorkack .A Christmas surprise for my Luna .Now he said turning to Harry why exactly have you come here Mr Potter ?We need some help said Harry before Hermione could start again .Ah said Xenophilius .Help .Hmm .His good eye moved again to Harrys scar .He seemed simultaneously terrified and mesmerized .Yes .The thing is .helping Harry Potter .rather dangerous .Arent you the one who keeps telling everyone its their first duty to help Harry ?said Ron .In that magazine of yours ?Xenophilius glanced behind him at the concealed printing press still banging and clattering beneath the tablecloth .Er yes I have expressed that view .However Thats for everyone else to do not you personally ?said Ron .Xenophilius did not answer .He kept swallowing his eyes darting between the three of them .Harry had the impression that he was undergoing some painful internal struggle .Wheres Luna ?asked Hermione .Lets see what she thinks .Xenophilius gulped .He seemed to be steeling himself .Finally he said in a shaky voice difficult to hear over the noise of the printing press Luna is down at the stream fishing for Freshwater Plimpies .She .she will like to see you .Ill go and call her and then yes very well .I shall try to help you .He disappeared down the spiral staircase and they heard the front door open and close .They looked at each other .Cowardly old wart said Ron .Lunas got ten times his guts .Hes probably worried about whatll happen to them if the Death Eaters find out I was here said Harry .Well I agree with Ron said Hermione .Awful old hypocrite telling everyone else to help you and trying to worm out of it himself .And for heavens sake keep away from that horn .Harry crossed to the window on the far side of the room .He could see a stream a thin glittering ribbon lying far below them at the base of the hill .They were very high up a bird fluttered past the window as he stared in the direction of the Burrow now invisible beyond another line of hills .Ginny was over there somewhere .They were closer to each other today than they had been since Bill and Fleurs wedding but she could have no idea he was gazing toward her now thinking of her .He supposed he ought to be glad of it anyone he came into contact with was in danger Xenophiliuss attitude proved that .He turned away from the window and his gaze fell upon another peculiar object standing upon the cluttered curved sideboard a stone bust of a beautiful but austerelooking witch wearing a most bizarrelooking headdress .Two objects that resembled golden ear trumpets curved out from the sides .A tiny pair of glittering blue wings was stuck to a leather strap that ran over the top of her head while one of the orange radishes had been stuck to a second strap around her forehead .Look at this said Harry .Fetching said Ron .Surprised he didnt wear that to the wedding .They heard the front door close and a moment later Xenophilius had climbed back up the spiral staircase into the room his thin legs now encased in Wellington boots bearing a tray of illassorted teacups and a steaming teapot .Ah you have spotted my pet invention he said shoving the tray into Hermiones arms and joining Harry at the statues side .Modeled fittingly enough upon the head of the beautiful Rowena Ravenclaw . ‘Wit beyond measure is mans greatest treasureV He indicated the objects like ear trumpets .These are the Wrackspurt siphons to remove all sources of distraction from the thinkers immediate area .Here he pointed out the tiny wings a billywig propeller to induce an elevated frame of mind .Finally he pointed to the orange radish the Dirigible Plum so as to enhance the ability to accept the extraordinary .Xenophilius strode back to the tea tray which Hermione had managed to balance precariously on one of the cluttered side tables .May I offer you all an infusion of Gurdyroots ?said Xenophilius .We make it ourselves .As he started to pour out the drink which was as deeply purple as beetroot juice he added Luna is down beyond Bottom Bridge she is most excited that you are here .She ought not to be too long she has caught nearly enough Plimpies to make soup for all of us .Do sit down and help yourselves to sugar .Now he removed a tottering pile of papers from an armchair and sat down his Wellingtoned legs crossed how may I help you Mr Potter ?Well said Harry glancing at Hermione who nodded encouragingly its about that symbol you were wearing around your neck at Bill and Fleurs wedding Mr Lovegood .We wondered what it meant .Xenophilius raised his eyebrows .Are you referring to the sign of the Deathly Hallows ?THE TALE OF THE THREE BROTHERS Harry turned to look at Ron and Hermione .Neither of them seemed to have understood what Xenophilius had said either .The Deathly Hallows ?Thats right said Xenophilius .You havent heard of them ?Im not surprised .Very very few wizards believe .Witness that knuckleheaded young man at your brothers wedding he nodded at Ron who attacked me for sporting the symbol of a wellknown Dark wizard !Such ignorance .There is nothing Dark about the Hallows at least not in that crude sense .One simply uses the symbol to reveal oneself to other believers in the hope that they might help one with the Quest .He stirred several lumps of sugar into his Gurdyroot infusion and drank some .Im sorry said Harry .I still dont really understand .To be polite he took a sip from his cup too and almost gagged The stuff was quite disgusting as though someone had liquidized bogeyflavored Every Flavor Beans .Well you see believers seek the Deathly Hallows said Xenophilius smacking his lips in apparent appreciation of the Gurdyroot infusion .But what are the Deathly Hallows ?asked Hermione .Xenophilius set aside his empty teacup .I assume that you are all familiar with The Tale of the Three Brothers ?Harry said No but Ron and Hermione both said Yes .Xenophilius nodded gravely .Well well Mr Potter the whole thing starts with The Tale of the Three Brothers .I have a copy somewhere .He glanced vaguely around the room at the piles of parchment and books but Hermione said Ive got a copy Mr Lovegood Ive got it right here .And she pulled out The Tales of Beedle the Bard from the small beaded bag .The original ?inquired Xenophilius sharply and when she nodded he said Well then why dont you read it aloud ?Much the best way to make sure we all understand .Er .all right said Hermione nervously .She opened the book and Harry saw that the symbol they were investigating headed the top of the page as she gave a little cough and began to read . ‘There were once three brothers who were traveling along a lonely winding road at twilight Midnight our mum always told us said Ron who had stretched out arms behind his head to listen .Hermione shot him a look of annoyance .Sorry I just think its a bit spookier if its midnight !said Ron .Yeah because we really need a bit more fear in our lives said Harry before he could stop himself .Xenophilius did not seem to be paying much attention but was staring out of the window at the sky .Go on Hermione . ‘In time the brothers reached a river too deep to wade through and too dangerous to swim across .However these brothers were learned in the magical arts and so they simply waved their wands and made a bridge appear across the treacherous water .They were halfway across it when they found their path blocked by a hooded figure . ‘And Death spoke to them Sorry interjected Harry but Death spoke to them ?Its a fairy tale Harry !Right sorry .Go on . ‘And Death spoke to them .He was angry that he had been cheated out of three new victims for travelers usually drowned in the river .But Death was cunning .He pretended to congratulate the three brothers upon their magic and said that each had earned a prize for having been clever enough to evade him . ‘So the oldest brother who was a combative man asked for a wand more powerful than any in existence a wand that must always win duels for its owner a wand worthy of a wizard who had conquered Death !So Death crossed to an elder tree on the banks of the river fashioned a wand from a branch that hung there and gave it to the oldest brother . ‘Then the second brother who was an arrogant man decided that he wanted to humiliate Death still further and asked for the power to recall others from Death .So Death picked up a stone from the riverbank and gave it to the second brother and told him that the stone would have the power to bring back the dead . ‘And then Death asked the third and youngest brother what he would like .The youngest brother was the humblest and also the wisest of the brothers and he did not trust Death .So he asked for something that would enable him to go forth from that place without being followed by Death .And Death most unwillingly handed over his own Cloak of Invisibility .Deaths got an Invisibility Cloak ?Harry interrupted again .So he can sneak up on people said Ron .Sometimes he gets bored of running at them flapping his arms and shrieking .sorry Hermione . ‘Then Death stood aside and allowed the three brothers to continue on their way and they did so talking with wonder of the adventure they had had and admiring Deaths gifts . ‘In due course the brothers separated each for his own destination . ‘The first brother traveled on for a week or more and reaching a distant village sought out a fellow wizard with whom he had a quarrel .Naturally with the Elder Wand as his weapon he could not fail to win the duel that followed .Leaving his enemy dead upon the floor the oldest brother proceeded to an inn where he boasted loudly of the powerful wand he had snatched from Death himself and of how it made him invincible . ‘That very night another wizard crept upon the oldest brother as he lay winesodden upon his bed .The thief took the wand and for good measure slit the oldest brothers throat . ‘And so Death took the first brother for his own . ‘Meanwhile the second brother journeyed to his own home where he lived alone .Here he took out the stone that had the power to recall the dead and turned it thrice in his hand .To his amazement and his delight the figure of the girl he had once hoped to marry before her untimely death appeared at once before him . ‘Yet she was sad and cold separated from him as by a veil .Though she had returned to the mortal world she did not truly belong there and suffered .Finally the second brother driven mad with hopeless longing killed himself so as truly to join her . ‘And so Death took the second brother for his own . ‘But though Death searched for the third brother for many years he was never able to find him .It was only when he had attained a great age that the youngest brother finally took off the Cloak of Invisibility and gave it to his son .And then he greeted Death as an old friend and went with him gladly and equals they departed this life .Hermione closed the book .It was a moment or two before Xenophilius seemed to realize that she had stopped reading then he withdrew his gaze from the window and said Well there you are .Sorry ?said Hermione sounding confused .Those are the Deathly Hallows said Xenophilius .He picked up a quill from a packed table at his elbow and pulled a torn piece of parchment from between more books .The Elder Wand he said and he drew a straight vertical line upon the parchment .The Resurrection Stone he said and he added a circle on top of the line .The Cloak of Invisibility he finished enclosing both line and circle in a triangle to make the symbol that so intrigued Hermione .Together he said the Deathly Hallows .But theres no mention of the words ‘Deathly Hallows in the story said Hermione .Well of course not said Xenophilius maddeningly smug .That is a childrens tale told to amuse rather than to instruct .Those of us who understand these matters however recognize that the ancient story refers to three objects or Hallows which if united will make the possessor master of Death .There was a short silence in which Xenophilius glanced out of the window .Already the sun was low in the sky .Luna ought to have enough Plimpies soon he said quietly .When you say ‘master of Death said Ron .Master said Xenophilius waving an airy hand .Conqueror .Vanquisher .Whichever term you prefer .But then .do you mean .said Hermione slowly and Harry could tell that she was trying to keep any trace of skepticism out of her voice that you believe these objects these Hallows actually exist ?Xenophilius raised his eyebrows again .Well of course .But said Hermione and Harry could hear her restraint starting to crack Mr Lovegood how can you possibly believe ?Luna has told me all about you young lady said Xenophilius .You are I gather not unintelligent but painfully limited .Narrow .Closeminded .Perhaps you ought to try on the hat Hermione said Ron nodding toward the ludicrous headdress .His voice shook with the strain of not laughing .Mr Lovegood Hermione began again .We all know that there are such things as Invisibility Cloaks .They are rare but they exist .But Ah but the Third Hallow is a true Cloak of Invisibility Miss Granger !I mean to say it is not a traveling cloak imbued with a Disillusionment Charm or carrying a Bedazzling Hex or else woven from Demiguise hair which will hide one initially but fade with the years until it turns opaque .We are talking about a cloak that really and truly renders the wearer completely invisible and endures eternally giving constant and impenetrable concealment no matter what spells are cast at it .How many cloaks have you ever seen like that Miss Granger ?Hermione opened her mouth to answer then closed it again looking more confused than ever .She Harry and Ron glanced at one another and Harry knew that they were all thinking the same thing .It so happened that a cloak exactly like the one Xenophilius had just described was in the room with them at that very moment .Exactly said Xenophilius as if he had defeated them all in reasoned argument .None of you have ever seen such a thing .The possessor would be immeasurably rich would he not ?He glanced out of the window again .The sky was now tinged with the faintest trace of pink .All right said Hermione disconcerted .Say the Cloak existed .what about the stone Mr Lovegood ?The thing you call the Resurrection Stone ?What of it ?Well how can that be real ?Prove that it is not said Xenophilius .Hermione looked outraged .But thats Im sorry but thats completely ridiculous !How can I possibly prove it doesnt exist ?Do you expect me to get hold of of all the pebbles in the world and test them ?I mean you could claim that anythings real if the only basis for believing in it is that nobodys proved it doesnt exist !Yes you could said Xenophilius .I am glad to see that you are opening your mind a little .So the Elder Wand said Harry quickly before Hermione could retort you think that exists too ?Oh well in that case there is endless evidence said Xenophilius .The Elder Wand is the Hallow that is most easily traced because of the way in which it passes from hand to hand .Which is what ?asked Harry .Which is that the possessor of the wand must capture it from its previous owner if he is to be truly master of it said Xenophilius .Surely you have heard of the way the wand came to Egbert the Egregious after his slaughter of Emeric the Evil ?Of how Godelot died in his own cellar after his son Hereward took the wand from him ?Of the dreadful Loxias who took the wand from Barnabas Deverill whom he had killed ?The bloody trail of the Elder Wand is splattered across the pages of Wizarding history .Harry glanced at Hermione .She was frowning at Xenophilius but she did not contradict him .So where do you think the Elder Wand is now ?asked Ron .Alas who knows ?said Xenophilius as he gazed out of the window .Who knows where the Elder Wand lies hidden ?The trail goes cold with Arcus and Livius .Who can say which of them really defeated Loxias and which took the wand ?And who can say who may have defeated them ?History alas does not tell us .There was a pause .Finally Hermione asked stiffly Mr Lovegood does the Peverell family have anything to do with the Deathly Hallows ?Xenophilius looked taken aback as something shifted in Harrys memory but he could not locate it .Peverell .he had heard that name before .But you have been misleading me young woman !said Xenophilius now sitting up much straighter in his chair and goggling at Hermione .I thought you were new to the Hallows Quest !Many of us Questers believe that the Peverells have everything everything !to do with the Hallows !Who are the Peverells ?asked Ron .That was the name on the grave with the mark on it in Godrics Hollow said Hermione still watching Xenophilius .Ignotus Peverell .Exactly !said Xenophilius his forefinger raised pedantically .The sign of the Deathly Hallows on Ignotus s grave is conclusive proof !Of what ?asked Ron .Why that the three brothers in the story were actually the three Peverell brothers Antioch Cadmus and Ignotus !That they were the original owners of the Hallows !With another glance at the window he got to his feet picked up the tray and headed for the spiral staircase .You will stay for dinner ?he called as he vanished downstairs again .Everybody always requests our recipe for Freshwater Plimpy soup .Probably to show the Poisoning Department at St .Mungos said Ron under his breath .Harry waited until they could hear Xenophilius moving about in the kitchen downstairs before speaking .What do you think ?he asked Hermione .Oh Harry she said wearily its a pile of utter rubbish .This cant be what the sign really means .This must just be his weird take on it .What a waste of time .I spose this is the man who brought us Crumple Horned Snorkacks said Ron .You dont believe it either ?Harry asked him .Nah that storys just one of those things you tell kids to teach them lessons isnt it ? ‘Dont go looking for trouble dont pick fights dont go messing around with stuff thats best left alone !Just keep your head down mind your own business and youll be okay Come to think of it Ron added maybe that storys why elder wands are supposed to be unlucky .What are you talking about ?One of those superstitions isnt it ? ‘Mayborn witches will marry Muggles . ‘Jinx by twilight undone by midnight . ‘Wand of elder never prosper .You mustve heard them .My mums full of them .Harry and I were raised by Muggles Hermione reminded him .We were taught different superstitions .She sighed deeply as a rather pungent smell drifted up from the kitchen .The one good thing about her exasperation with Xenophilius was that it seemed to have made her forget that she was annoyed at Ron .I think youre right she told him .Its just a morality tale its obvious which gift is best which one youd choose The three of them spoke at the same time Hermione said the Cloak Ron said the wand and Harry said the stone .They looked at each other half surprised half amused .Youre supposed to say the Cloak Ron told Hermione but you wouldnt need to be invisible if you had the wand .An unbeatable wand Hermione come on !Weve already got an Invisibility Cloak said Harry .And its helped us rather a lot in case you hadnt noticed !said Hermione .Whereas the wand would be bound to attract trouble Only if you shouted about it argued Ron .Only if you were prat enough to go dancing around waving it over your head and singing ‘Ive got an unbeatable wand come and have a go if you think youre hard enough .As long as you kept your trap shut Yes but could you keep your trap shut ?said Hermione looking skeptical .You know the only true thing he said to us was that there have been stories about extra powerful wands for hundreds of years .There have ?asked Harry .Hermione looked exasperated The expression was so endearingly familiar that Harry and Ron grinned at each other .The Deathstick the Wand of Destiny they crop up under different names through the centuries usually in the possession of some Dark wizard whos boasting about them .Professor Binns mentioned some of them but oh its all nonsense .Wands are only as powerful as the wizards who use them .Some wizards just like to boast that theirs are bigger and better than other peoples .But how do you know said Harry that those wands the Deathstick and the Wand of Destiny arent the same wand surfacing over the centuries under different names ?What and theyre all really the Elder Wand made by Death ?said Ron .Harry laughed The strange idea that had occurred to him was after all ridiculous .His wand he reminded himself had been of holly not elder and it had been made by Ollivander whatever it had done that night Voldemort had pursued him across the skies .And if it had been unbeatable how could it have been broken ?So why would you take the stone ?Ron asked him .Well if you could bring people back we could have Sirius .MadEye .Dumbledore .my parents .Neither Ron nor Hermione smiled .But according to Beedle the Bard they wouldnt want to come back would they ?said Harry thinking about the tale they had just heard .I dont suppose there have been loads of other stories about a stone that can raise the dead have there ?he asked Hermione .No she replied sadly .I dont think anyone except Mr Lovegood could kid themselves thats possible .Beedle probably took the idea from the Sorcerers Stone you know instead of a stone to make you immortal a stone to reverse death .The smell from the kitchen was getting stronger It was something like burning underpants .Harry wondered whether it would be possible to eat enough of whatever Xenophilius was cooking to spare his feelings .What about the Cloak though ?said Ron slowly .Dont you realize hes right ?Ive got so used to Harrys Cloak and how good it is I never stopped to think .Ive never heard of one like Harrys .Its infallible .Weve never been spotted under it Of course not were invisible when were under it Ron !But all the stuff he said about other cloaks and theyre not exactly ten a Knut you know is true !Its never occurred to me before but Ive heard stuff about charms wearing off cloaks when they get old or them being ripped apart by spells so theyve got holes in .Harrys was owned by his dad so its not exactly new is it but its just .perfect !Yes all right but Ron the stone .As they argued in whispers Harry moved around the room only half listening .Reaching the spiral stair he raised his eyes absently to the next level and was distracted at once .His own face was looking back at him from the ceiling of the room above .After a moments bewilderment he realized that it was not a mirror but a painting .Curious he began to climb the stairs .Harry what are you doing ?I dont think you should look around when hes not here !But Harry had already reached the next level .Luna had decorated her bedroom ceiling with five beautifully painted faces Harry Ron Hermione Ginny and Neville .They were not moving as the portraits at Hogwarts moved but there was a certain magic about them all the same Harry thought they breathed .What appeared to be fine golden chains wove around the pictures linking them together but after examining them for a minute or so Harry realized that the chains were actually one word repeated a thousand times in golden ink friends .friends .friends .Harry felt a great rush of affection for Luna .He looked around the room .There was a large photograph beside the bed of a young Luna and a woman who looked very like her .They were hugging .Luna looked rather bettergroomed in this picture than Harry had ever seen her in life .The picture was dusty .This struck Harry as slightly odd .He stared around .Something was wrong .The pale blue carpet was also thick with dust .There were no clothes in the wardrobe whose doors stood ajar .The bed had a cold unfriendly look as though it had not been slept in for weeks .A single cobweb stretched over the nearest window across a bloodred sky .Whats wrong ?Hermione asked as Harry descended the staircase but before he could respond Xenophilius reached the top of the stairs from the kitchen now holding a tray laden with bowls .Mr Lovegood said Harry .Wheres Luna ?Excuse me ?Wheres Luna ?Xenophilius halted on the top step .I Ive already told you .She is down at Bottom Bridge fishing for Plimpies .So why have you only laid that tray for four ?Xenophilius tried to speak but no sound came out .The only noise was the continued chugging of the printing press and a slight rattle from the tray as Xenophilius s hands shook .I dont think Lunas been here for weeks said Harry .Her clothes are gone her bed hasnt been slept in .Where is she ?And why do you keep looking out of the window ?Xenophilius dropped the tray The bowls bounced and smashed .Harry Ron and Hermione drew their wands Xenophilius froze his hand about to enter his pocket .At that moment the printing press gave a huge bang and numerous Quibblers came streaming across the floor from underneath the tablecloth the press fell silent at last .Hermione stooped down and picked up one of the magazines her wand still pointing at Mr Lovegood .Harry look at this .He strode over to her as quickly as he could through all the clutter .The front of The Quibbler carried his own picture emblazoned with the words UNDESIRABLE NUMBER ONE and captioned with the reward money .The Quibblers going for a new angle then ?Harry asked coldly his mind working very fast .Is that what you were doing when you went into the garden Mr Lovegood ?Sending an owl to the Ministry ?Xenophilius licked his lips .They took my Luna he whispered .Because of what Ive been writing .They took my Luna and I dont know where she is what theyve done to her .But they might give her back to me if I if I Hand over Harry ?Hermione finished for him .No deal said Ron flatly .Get out of the way were leaving .Xenophilius looked ghastly a century old his lips drawn back into a dreadful leer .They will be here at any moment .I must save Luna .I cannot lose Luna .You must not leave .He spread his arms in front of the staircase and Harry had a sudden vision of his mother doing the same thing in front of his crib .Dont make us hurt you Harry said .Get out of the way Mr Lovegood .HARRY !Hermione screamed .Figures on broomsticks were flying past the windows .As the three of them looked away from him Xenophilius drew his wand .Harry realized their mistake just in time He launched himself sideways shoving Ron and Hermione out of harms way as Xenophiliuss Stunning Spell soared across the room and hit the Erumpent horn .There was a colossal explosion .The sound of it seemed to blow the room apart Fragments of wood and paper and rubble flew in all directions along with an impenetrable cloud of thick white dust .Harry flew through the air then crashed to the floor unable to see as debris rained upon him his arms over his head .He heard Hermiones scream Rons yell and a series of sickening metallic thuds which told him that Xenophilius had been blasted off his feet and fallen backward down the spiral stairs .Half buried in rubble Harry tried to raise himself He could barely breathe or see for dust .Half of the ceiling had fallen in and the end of Lunas bed was hanging through the hole .The bust of Rowena Ravenclaw lay beside him with half its face missing fragments of torn parchment were floating through the air and most of the printing press lay on its side blocking the top of the staircase to the kitchen .Then another white shape moved close by and Hermione coated in dust like a second statue pressed her finger to her lips .The door downstairs crashed open .Didnt I tell you there was no need to hurry Travers ?said a rough voice .Didnt 1 tell you this nutter was just raving as usual ?There was a bang and a scream of pain from Xenophilius .No .no .upstairs .Potter !I told you last week Lovegood we werent coming back for anything less than some solid information !Remember last week ?When you wanted to swap your daughter for that stupid bleeding headdress ?And the week before another bang another squeal when you thought wed give her back if you offered us proof there are Crumple bang Headed bang Snorkacks ?No no I beg you !sobbed Xenophilius .It really is Potter !Really !And now it turns out you only called us here to try and blow us up !roared the Death Eater and there was a volley of bangs interspersed with squeals of agony from Xenophilius .The place looks like its about to fall in Selwyn said a cool second voice echoing up the mangled staircase .The stairs are completely blocked .Could try clearing it ?Might bring the place down .You lying piece of filth shouted the wizard named Selwyn .Youve never seen Potter in your life have you ?Thought youd lure us here to kill us did you ?And you think youll get your girl back like this ?I swear .I swear .Potters upstairs !Homenum revelio said the voice at the foot of the stairs .Harry heard Hermione gasp and he had the odd sensation that something was swooping low over him immersing his body in its shadow .Theres someone up there all right Selwyn said the second man sharply .Its Potter I tell you its Potter !sobbed Xenophilius .Please .please .give me Luna just let me have Luna .You can have your little girl Lovegood said Selwyn if you get up those stairs and bring me down Harry Potter .But if this is a plot if its a trick if youve got an accomplice waiting up there to ambush us well see if we can spare a bit of your daughter for you to bury .Xenophilius gave a wail of fear and despair .There were scurryings and scrapings Xenophilius was trying to get through the debris on the stairs .Come on Harry whispered weve got to get out of here .He started to dig himself out under cover of all the noise Xenophilius was making on the staircase .Ron was buried deepest Harry and Hermione climbed as quietly as they could over all the wreckage to where he lay trying to prise a heavy chest of drawers off his legs .While Xenophilius s banging and scraping drew nearer and nearer Hermione managed to free Ron with the use of a Hover Charm .All right breathed Hermione as the broken printing press blocking the top of the stairs began to tremble Xenophilius was feet away from them .She was still white with dust .Do you trust me Harry ?Harry nodded .Okay then Hermione whispered give me the Invisibility Cloak .Ron youre going to put it on .Me ?But Harry Please Ron Harry hold on tight to my hand Ron grab my shoulder .Harry held out his left hand .Ron vanished beneath the Cloak .The printing press blocking the stairs was vibrating Xenophilius was trying to shift it using a Hover Charm .Harry did not know what Hermione was waiting for .Hold tight she whispered .Hold tight .any second Xenophiliuss paper white face appeared over the top of the sideboard .Obliviate cried Hermione pointing her wand first into his face then at the floor beneath them .Deprimo She had blasted a hole in the sitting room floor .They fell like boulders Harry still holding onto her hand for dear life there was a scream from below and he glimpsed two men trying to get out of the way as vast quantities of rubble and broken furniture rained all around them from the shattered ceiling .Hermione twisted in midair and the thundering of the collapsing house rang in Harrys ears as she dragged him once more into darkness .THE DEATHLY HALLOWS Harry fell panting onto grass and scrambled up at once .They seemed to have landed in the corner of a field at dusk Hermione was already running in a circle around them waving her wand .Protego Totalum .Salvio Hexia .That treacherous old bleeder !Ron panted emerging from beneath the Invisibility Cloak and throwing it to Harry .Hermione youre a genius a total genius I cant believe we got out of that !Cave Inimicum .Didnt I say it was an Erumpent horn didnt I tell him ?And now his house has been blown apart !Serves him right said Ron examining his torn jeans and the cuts to his legs .What dyou reckon theyll do to him ?Oh I hope they dont kill him !groaned Hermione .Thats why I wanted the Death Eaters to get a glimpse of Harry before we left so they knew Xenophilius hadnt been lying !Why hide me though ?asked Ron .Youre supposed to be in bed with spattergroit Ron !Theyve kidnapped Luna because her father supported Harry !What would happen to your family if they knew youre with him ?But what about your mum and dad ?Theyre in Australia said Hermione .They should be all right .They dont know anything .Youre a genius Ron repeated looking awed .Yeah you are Hermione agreed Harry fervently .I dont know what wed do without you .She beamed but became solemn at once .What about Luna ?Well if theyre telling the truth and shes still alive began Ron .Dont say that dont say it !squealed Hermione .She must be alive she must !Then shell be in Azkaban I expect said Ron .Whether she survives the place though .Loads dont .She will said Harry .He could not bear to contemplate the alternative .Shes tough Luna much tougher than youd think .Shes probably teaching all the inmates about Wrackspurts and Nargles .I hope youre right said Hermione .She passed a hand over her eyes .Id feel so sorry for Xenophilius if if he hadnt just tried to sell us to the Death Eaters yeah said Ron .They put up the tent and retreated inside it where Ron made them tea .After their narrow escape the chilly musty old place felt like home safe familiar and friendly .Oh why did we go there ?groaned Hermione after a few minutes silence .Harry you were right it was Godrics Hollow all over again a complete waste of time !The Deathly Hallows .such rubbish .although actually a sudden thought seemed to have struck her he might have made it all up mightnt he ?He probably doesnt believe in the Deathly Hallows at all he just wanted to keep us talking until the Death Eaters arrived !I dont think so said Ron .Its a damn sight harder making stuff up when youre under stress than youd think .I found that out when the Snatchers caught me .It was much easier pretending to be Stan because I knew a bit about him than inventing a whole new person .Old Lovegood was under loads of pressure trying to make sure we stayed put .I reckon he told us the truth or what he thinks is the truth just to keep us talking .Well I dont suppose it matters sighed Hermione .Even if he was being honest I never heard such a lot of nonsense in all my life .Hang on though said Ron .The Chamber of Secrets was supposed to be a myth wasnt it ?But the Deathly Hallows cant exist Ron !You keep saying that but one of them can said Ron .Harrys Invisibility Cloak The Tale of the Three Brothers is a story said Hermione firmly .A story about how humans are frightened of death .If surviving was as simple as hiding under the Invisibility Cloak wed have everything we need already !I dont know .We could do with an unbeatable wand said Harry turning the blackthorn wand he so disliked over in his fingers .Theres no such thing Harry !You said there have been loads of wands the Deathstick and whatever they were called All right even if you want to kid yourself the Elder Wands real what about the Resurrection Stone ?Her fingers sketched quotation marks around the name and her tone dripped sarcasm .No magic can raise the dead and thats that !When my wand connected with YouKnowWhos it made my mum and dad appear .and Cedric .But they werent really back from the dead were they ?said Hermione .Those kinds of of pale imitations arent the same as truly bringing someone back to life .But she the girl in the tale didnt really come back did she ?The story says that once people are dead they belong with the dead .But the second brother still got to see her and talk to her didnt he ?He even lived with her for a while .He saw concern and something less easily definable in Hermiones expression .Then as she glanced at Ron Harry realized that it was fear He had scared her with his talk of living with dead people .So that Peverell bloke whos buried in Godrics Hollow he said hastily trying to sound robustly sane you dont know anything about him then ?No she replied looking relieved at the change of subject .I looked him up after I saw the mark on his grave if hed been anyone famous or done anything important Im sure hed be in one of our books .The only place Ive managed to find the name ‘Peverell is Natures Nobility A Wizarding Genealogy .I borrowed it from Kreacher she explained as Ron raised his eyebrows .It lists the pureblood families that are now extinct in the male line .Apparently the Peverells were one of the earliest families to vanish . ‘Extinct in the male line ?repeated Ron .It means the names died out said Hermione centuries ago in the case of the Peverells .They could still have descendants though theyd just be called something different .And then it came to Harry in one shining piece the memory that had stirred at the sound of the name Peverell a filthy old man brandishing an ugly ring in the face of a Ministry official and he cried aloud Marvolo Gaunt !Sorry ?said Ron and Hermione together .Marvolo Gaunti You Know Whos grandfather !In the Pensieve !With Dumbledore !Marvolo Gaunt said he was descended from the Peverells !Ron and Hermione looked bewildered .The ring the ring that became the Horcrux Marvolo Gaunt said it had the Peverell coat of arms on it !I saw him waving it in the bloke from the Ministrys face he nearly shoved it up his nose !The Peverell coat of arms ?said Hermione sharply .Could you see what it looked like ?Not really said Harry trying to remember .There was nothing fancy on there as far as I could see maybe a few scratches .I only ever saw it really close up after it had been cracked open .Harry saw Hermione s comprehension in the sudden widening of her eyes .Ron was looking from one to the other astonished .Blimey .You reckon it was this sign again ?The sign of the Hallows ?Why not ?said Harry excitedly .Marvolo Gaunt was an ignorant old git who lived like a pig all he cared about was his ancestry .If that ring had been passed down through the centuries he might not have known what it really was .There were no books in that house and trust me he wasnt the type to read fairy tales to his kids .Hed have loved to think the scratches on the stone were a coat of arms because as far as he was concerned having pure blood made you practically royal .Yes .and thats all very interesting said Hermione cautiously but Harry if youre thinking what I think youre think Well why not ?Why not ?said Harry abandoning caution .It was a stone wasnt it ?He looked at Ron for support .What if it was the Resurrection Stone ?Rons mouth fell open .Blimey but would it still work if Dumbledore broke ?Work ?Work ?Ron it never worked !Theres no such thing as a Resurrection Stone Hermione had leapt to her feet looking exasperated and angry .Harry youre trying to fit everything into the Hallows story Fit everything in ?he repeated .Hermione it fits of its own accord !I know the sign of the Deathly Hallows was on that stone !Gaunt said he was descended from the Peverells !A minute ago you told us you never saw the mark on the stone properly !Where dyou reckon the ring is now ?Ron asked Harry .What did Dumbledore do with it after he broke it open ?But Harrys imagination was racing ahead far beyond Ron and Hermione s .Three objects or Hallows which if united will make the possessor master of Death .Master .Conqueror .Vanquisher .The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death .And he saw himself possessor of the Hallows facing Voldemort whose Horcruxes were no match .Neither can live while the other survives .Was this the answer ?Hallows versus Horcruxes ?Was there a way after all to ensure that he was the one who triumphed ?If he were the master of the Deathly Hallows would he be safe ?Harry ?But he scarcely heard Hermione He had pulled out his Invisibility Cloak and was running it through his fingers the cloth supple as water light as air .He had never seen anything to equal it in his nearly seven years in the Wizarding world .The Cloak was exactly what Xenophilius had described A cloak that really and truly renders the wearer completely invisible and endures eternally giving constant and impenetrable concealment no matter what spells are cast at it .And then with a gasp he remembered Dumbledore had my Cloak the night my parents died !His voice shook and he could feel the color in his face but he did not care .My mum told Sirius that Dumbledore borrowed the Cloak !This is why !He wanted to examine it because he thought it was the third Hallow !Ignotus Peverell is buried in Godrics Hollow .Harry was walking blindly around the tent feeling as though great new vistas of truth were opening all around him .Hes my ancestor !Im descended from the third brother !It all makes sense !He felt armed in certainty in his belief in the Hallows as if the mere idea of possessing them was giving him protection and he felt joyous as he turned back to the other two .Harry said Hermione again but he was busy undoing the pouch around his neck his fingers shaking hard .Read it he told her pushing his mothers letter into her hand .Read it !Dumbledore had the Cloak Hermione !Why else would he want it ?He didnt need a Cloak he could perform a Disillusionment Charm so powerful that he made himself completely invisible without one !Something fell to the floor and rolled glittering under a chair He had dislodged the Snitch when he pulled out the letter .He stooped to pick it up and then the newly tapped spring of fabulous discoveries threw him another gift and shock and wonder erupted inside him so that he shouted out .ITS IN HERE !He left me the ring its in the Snitch !You you reckon ?He could not understand why Ron looked taken aback .It was so obvious so clear to Harry Everything fit everything .His Cloak was the third Hallow and when he discovered how to open the Snitch he would have the second and then all he needed to do was find the first Hallow the Elder Wand and then But it was as though a curtain fell on a lit stage All his excitement all his hope and happiness were extinguished at a stroke and he stood alone in the darkness and the glorious spell was broken .Thats what hes after .The change in his voice made Ron and Hermione look even more scared .YouKnowWhos after the Elder Wand .He turned his back on their strained incredulous faces .He knew it was the truth .It all made sense .Voldemort was not seeking a new wand he was seeking an old wand a very old wand indeed .Harry walked to the entrance of the tent forgetting about Ron and Hermione as he looked out into the night thinking .Voldemort had been raised in a Muggle orphanage .Nobody could have told him The Tales of Beedle the Bard when he was a child any more than Harry had heard them .Hardly any wizards believed in the Deathly Hallows .Was it likely that Voldemort knew about them ?Harry gazed into the darkness .If Voldemort had known about the Deathly Hallows surely he would have sought them done anything to possess them three objects that made the possessor master of Death ?If he had known about the Deathly Hallows he might not have needed Horcruxes in the first place .Didnt the simple fact that he had taken a Hallow and turned it into a Horcrux demonstrate that he did not know this last great Wizarding secret ?Which meant that Voldemort sought the Elder Wand without realizing its full power without understanding that it was one of three .for the wand was the Hallow that could not be hidden whose existence was best known .The bloody trail of the Elder Wand is splattered across the pages of Wizarding history .Harry watched the cloudy sky curves of smokegray and silver sliding over the face of the white moon .He felt lightheaded with amazement at his discoveries .He turned back into the tent .It was a shock to see Ron and Hermione standing exactly where he had left them Hermione still holding Lilys letter Ron at her side looking slightly anxious .Didnt they realize how far they had traveled in the last few minutes ?This is it Harry said trying to bring them inside the glow of his own astonished certainty .This explains everything .The Deathly Hallows are real and Ive got one maybe two He held up the Snitch .and YouKnowWhos chasing the third but he doesnt realize .he just thinks its a powerful wand Harry said Hermione moving across to him and handing him back Lilys letter Im sorry but I think youve got this wrong all wrong .But dont you see ?It all fits No it doesnt she said .It doesnt Harry youre just getting carried away .Please she said as he started to speak please just answer me this If the Deathly Hallows really existed and Dumbledore knew about them knew that the person who possessed all three of them would be master of Death Harry why wouldnt he have told you ?Why ?He had his answer ready .But you said it Hermione !Youve got to find out about them for yourself !Its a Quest !But I only said that to try and persuade you to come to the Lovegoods !cried Hermione in exasperation .I didnt really believe it !Harry took no notice .Dumbledore usually let me find out stuff for myself .He let me try my strength take risks .This feels like the kind of thing hed do .Harry this isnt a game this isnt practice !This is the real thing and Dumbledore left you very clear instructions Find and destroy the Horcruxes !That symbol doesnt mean anything forget the Deathly Hallows we cant afford to get sidetracked Harry was barely listening to her .He was turning the Snitch over and over in his hands half expecting it to break open to reveal the Resurrection Stone to prove to Hermione that he was right that the Deathly Hallows were real .She appealed to Ron .You dont believe in this do you ?Harry looked up .Ron hesitated .I dunno .I mean .bits of it sort of fit together said Ron awkwardly .But when you look at the whole thing .He took a deep breath .I think were supposed to get rid of Horcruxes Harry .Thats what Dumbledore told us to do .Maybe .maybe we should forget about this Hallows business .Thank you Ron said Hermione .Ill take first watch .And she strode past Harry and sat down in the tent entrance bringing the action to a fierce full stop .But Harry hardly slept that night .The idea of the Deathly Hallows had taken possession of him and he could not rest while agitating thoughts whirled through his mind the wand the stone and the Cloak if he could just possess them all .I open at the close .But what was ‘the close ?Why couldnt he have the stone now ?If only he had the stone he could ask Dumbledore these questions in person .and Harry murmured words to the Snitch in the darkness trying everything even Parseltongue but the golden ball would not open .And the wand the Elder Wand where was that hidden ?Where was Voldemort searching now ?Harry wished his scar would burn and show him Voldemorts thoughts because for the first time ever he and Voldemort were united in wanting the very same thing .Hermione would not like that idea of course .But then she did not believe .Xenophilius had been right in a way .Limited .Narrow .Closeminded .The truth was that she was scared of the idea of the Deathly Hallows especially of the Resurrection Stone .and Harry pressed his mouth again to the Snitch kissing it nearly swallowing it but the cold metal did not yield .It was nearly dawn when he remembered Luna alone in a cell in Azkaban surrounded by dementors and he suddenly felt ashamed of himself .He had forgotten all about her in his feverish contemplation of the Hallows .If only they could rescue her but dementors in those numbers would be virtually unassailable .Now he came to think about it he had not yet tried casting a Patronus with the blackthorn wand .He must try that in the morning .If only there was a way of getting a better wand .And desire for the Elder Wand the Deathstick unbeatable invincible swallowed him once more .They packed up the tent next morning and moved on through a dreary shower of rain .The downpour pursued them to the coast where they pitched the tent that night and persisted through the whole week through sodden landscapes that Harry found bleak and depressing .He could think only of the Deathly Hallows .It was as though a flame had been lit inside him that nothing not Hermione s flat disbelief nor Rons persistent doubts could extinguish .And yet the fiercer the longing for the Hallows burned inside him the less joyful it made him .He blamed Ron and Hermione Their determined indifference was as bad as the relentless rain for dampening his spirits but neither could erode his certainty which remained absolute .Harrys belief in and longing for the Hallows consumed him so much that he felt quite isolated from the other two and their obsession with the Horcruxes .Obsession ?said Hermione in a low fierce voice when Harry was careless enough to use the word one evening after Hermione had told him off for his lack of interest in locating more Horcruxes .Were not the ones with an obsession Harry !Were the ones trying to do what Dumbledore wanted us to do !But he was impervious to the veiled criticism .Dumbledore had left the sign of the Hallows for Hermione to decipher and he had also Harry remained convinced of it left the Resurrection Stone hidden in the golden Snitch .Neither can live while the other survives .master of Death .Why didnt Ron and Hermione understand ? ‘The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death Harry quoted calmly .I thought it was YouKnowWho we were supposed to be fighting ?Hermione retorted and Harry gave up on her .Even the mystery of the silver doe which the other two insisted on discussing seemed less important to Harry now a vaguely interesting sideshow .The only other thing that mattered to him was that his scar had begun to prickle again although he did all he could to hide this fact from the other two .He sought solitude whenever it happened but was disappointed by what he saw .The visions he and Voldemort were sharing had changed in quality they had become blurred shifting as though they were moving in and out of focus .Harry was just able to make out the indistinct features of an object that looked like a skull and something like a mountain that was more shadow than substance .Used to images sharp as reality Harry was disconcerted by the change .He was worried that the connection between himself and Voldemort had been damaged a connection that he both feared and whatever he had told Hermione prized .Somehow Harry connected these unsatisfying vague images with the destruction of his wand as if it was the blackthorn wands fault that he could no longer see into Voldemorts mind as well as before .As the weeks crept on Harry could not help but notice even through his new selfabsorption that Ron seemed to be taking charge .Perhaps because he was determined to make up for having walked out on them perhaps because Harrys descent into listlessness galvanized his dormant leadership qualities Ron was the one now encouraging and exhorting the other two into action .Three Horcruxes left he kept saying .We need a plan of action come on !Where havent we looked ?Lets go through it again .The orphanage .Diagon Alley Hogwarts the Riddle House Borgin and Burkes Albania every place that they knew Tom Riddle had ever lived or worked visited or murdered Ron and Hermione raked over them again Harry joining in only to stop Hermione pestering him .He would have been happy to sit alone in silence trying to read Voldemorts thoughts to find out more about the Elder Wand but Ron insisted on journeying to ever more unlikely places simply Harry was aware to keep them moving .You never know was Rons constant refrain .Upper Flagley is a Wizarding village he mightve wanted to live there .Lets go and have a poke around .These frequent forays into Wizarding territory brought them within occasional sight of Snatchers .Some of them are supposed to be as bad as Death Eaters said Ron .The lot that got me were a bit pathetic but Bill reckons some of them are really dangerous .They said on Potterwatch On what ?said Harry .Potterwatch didnt I tell you thats what it was called ?The program I keep trying to get on the radio the only one that tells the truth about whats going on !Nearly all the programs are following YouKnow Whos line all except Potterwatch .I really want you to hear it but its tricky tuning in .Ron spent evening after evening using his wand to beat out various rhythms on top of the wireless while the dials whirled .Occasionally they would catch snatches of advice on how to treat dragon pox and once a few bars of A Cauldron Full of Hot Strong Love .While he tapped Ron continued to try to hit on the correct password muttering strings of random words under his breath .Theyre normally something to do with the Order he told them .Bill had a real knack for guessing them .Im bound to get one in the end .But not until March did luck favor Ron at last .Harry was sitting in the tent entrance on guard duty staring idly at a clump of grape hyacinths that had forced their way through the chilly ground when Ron shouted excitedly from inside the tent .Ive got it Ive got it !Password was Altars !Get in here Harry !Roused for the first time in days from his contemplation of the Deathly Hallows Harry hurried back inside the tent to find Ron and Hermione kneeling on the floor beside the little radio .Hermione who had been polishing the sword of Gryffindor just for something to do was sitting openmouthed staring at the tiny speaker from which a most familiar voice was issuing . .apologize for our temporary absence from the airwaves which was due to a number of house calls in our area by those charming Death Eaters .But thats Lee Jordan !said Hermione .I know !beamed Ron .Cool eh ? .now found ourselves another secure location Lee was saying and Im pleased to tell you that two of our regular contributors have joined me here this evening .Evening boys !Hi .Evening River . ‘River thats Lee Ron explained .Theyve all got code names but you can usually tell Shh !said Hermione .But before we hear from Royal and Romulus Lee went on lets take a moment to report those deaths that the Wizarding Wireless Network News and Daily Prophet dont think important enough to mention .It is with great regret that we inform our listeners of the murders of Ted Tonks and Dirk Cresswell .Harry felt a sick swooping in his belly .He Ron and Hermione gazed at one another in horror .A goblin by the name of Gornuk was also killed .It is believed that Muggleborn Dean Thomas and a second goblin both believed to have been traveling with Tonks Cresswell and Gornuk may have escaped .If Dean is listening or if anyone has any knowledge of his whereabouts his parents and sisters are desperate for news .Meanwhile in Gaddley a Muggle family of five has been found dead in their home .Muggle authorities are attributing the deaths to a gas leak but members of the Order of the Phoenix inform me that it was the Killing Curse more evidence as if it were needed of the fact that Muggle slaughter is becoming little more than a recreational sport under the new regime .Finally we regret to inform our listeners that the remains of Bathilda Bagshot have been discovered in Godrics Hollow .The evidence is that she died several months ago .The Order of the Phoenix informs us that her body showed unmistakable signs of injuries inflicted by Dark Magic .Listeners Id like to invite you now to join us in a minutes silence in memory of Ted Tonks Dirk Cresswell Bathilda Bagshot Gornuk and the unnamed but no less regretted Muggles murdered by the Death Eaters .Silence fell and Harry Ron and Hermione did not speak .Half of Harry yearned to hear more half of him was afraid of what might come next .It was the first time he had felt fully connected to the outside world for a long time .Thank you said Lees voice .And now we turn to regular contributor Royal for an update on how the new Wizarding order is affecting the Muggle world .Thanks River said an unmistakable voice deep measured reassuring .Kingsley !burst out Ron .We know !said Hermione hushing him .Muggles remain ignorant of the source of their suffering as they continue to sustain heavy casualties said Kingsley .However we continue to hear truly inspirational stories of wizards and witches risking their own safety to protect Muggle friends and neighbors often without the Muggles knowledge .Id like to appeal to all our listeners to emulate their example perhaps by casting a protective charm over any Muggle dwellings in your street .Many lives could be saved if such simple measures are taken .And what would you say Royal to those listeners who reply that in these dangerous times it should be Wizards first ?asked Lee .Id say that its one short step from Wizards first to ‘Purebloods first and then to ‘Death Eaters replied Kingsley .Were all human arent we ?Every human life is worth the same and worth saving .Excellently put Royal and youve got my vote for Minister of Magic if ever we get out of this mess said Lee .And now over to Romulus for our popular feature ‘Pals of Potter .Thanks River said another very familiar voice Ron started to speak but Hermione forestalled him in a whisper .We know its Lupin Romulus do you maintain as you have every time youve appeared on our program that Harry Potter is still alive ?I do said Lupin firmly .There is no doubt at all in my mind that his death would be proclaimed as widely as possible by the Death Eaters if it had happened because it would strike a deadly blow at the morale of those resisting the new regime .The Boy Who Lived remains a symbol of everything for which we are fighting the triumph of good the power of innocence the need to keep resisting .A mixture of gratitude and shame welled up in Harry .Had Lupin forgiven him then for the terrible things he had said when they had last met ?And what would you say to Harry if you knew he was listening Romulus ?Id tell him were all with him in spirit said Lupin then hesitated slightly .And Id tell him to follow his instincts which are good and nearly always right .Harry looked at Hermione whose eyes were full of tears .Nearly always right she repeated .Oh didnt I tell you ?said Ron in surprise .Bill told me Lupins living with Tonks again !And apparently shes getting pretty big too . .and our usual update on those friends of Harry Potters who are suffering for their allegiance ?Lee was saying .Well as regular listeners will know several of the more outspoken supporters of Harry Potter have now been imprisoned including Xenophilius Lovegood erstwhile editor of The Quibbler said Lupin .At least hes still alive !muttered Ron .We have also heard within the last few hours that Rubeus Hagrid all three of them gasped and so nearly missed the rest of the sentence wellknown gamekeeper at Hogwarts School has narrowly escaped arrest within the grounds of Hogwarts where he is rumored to have hosted a ‘Support Harry Potter party in his house .However Hagrid was not taken into custody and is we believe on the run .I suppose it helps when escaping from Death Eaters if youve got a sixteenfoothigh half brother ?asked Lee .It would tend to give you an edge agreed Lupin gravely .May I just add that while we here at Potterwatch applaud Hagrids spirit we would urge even the most devoted of Harrys supporters against following Hagrids lead . ‘Support Harry Potter parties are unwise in the present climate .Indeed they are Romulus said Lee so we suggest that you continue to show your devotion to the man with the lightning scar by listening to PotterwatcM And now lets move to news concerning the wizard who is proving just as elusive as Harry Potter .We like to refer to him as the Chief Death Eater and here to give his views on some of the more insane rumors circulating about him Id like to introduce a new correspondent Rodent . ‘Rodent ?said yet another familiar voice and Harry Ron and Hermione cried out together Fred !No is it George ?Its Fred I think said Ron leaning in closer as whichever twin it was said Im not being ‘Rodent no way I told you I wanted to be ‘Rapier !Oh all right then . ‘Rapier could you please give us your take on the various stories weve been hearing about the Chief Death Eater ?Yes River I can said Fred .As our listeners will know unless theyve taken refuge at the bottom of a garden pond or somewhere similar YouKnowWhos strategy of remaining in the shadows is creating a nice little climate of panic .Mind you if all the alleged sightings of him are genuine we must have a good nineteen YouKnowWhos running around the place .Which suits him of course said Kingsley .The air of mystery is creating more terror than actually showing himself .Agreed said Fred .So people lets try and calm down a bit .Things are bad enough without inventing stuff as well .For instance this new idea that You KnowWho can kill with a single glance from his eyes .Thats a basilisk listeners .One simple test Check whether the thing thats glaring at you has got legs .If it has its safe to look into its eyes although if it really is YouKnowWho thats still likely to be the last thing you ever do .For the first time in weeks and weeks Harry was laughing He could feel the weight of tension leaving him .And the rumors that he keeps being sighted abroad ?asked Lee .Well who wouldnt want a nice little holiday after all the hard work hes been putting in ?asked Fred .Point is people dont get lulled into a false sense of security thinking hes out of the country .Maybe he is maybe he isnt but the fact remains he can move faster than Severus Snape confronted with shampoo when he wants to so dont count on him being a long way away if youre planning on taking any risks .I never thought Id hear myself say it but safety first !Thank you very much for those wise words Rapier said Lee .Listeners that brings us to the end of another Potterwatch .We dont know when it will be possible to broadcast again but you can be sure we shall be back .Keep twiddling those dials The next password will be ‘MadEye .Keep each other safe Keep faith .Good night .The radios dial twirled and the lights behind the tuning panel went out .Harry Ron and Hermione were still beaming .Hearing familiar friendly voices was an extraordinary tonic Harry had become so used to their isolation he had nearly forgotten that other people were resisting Voldemort .It was like waking from a long sleep .Good eh ?said Ron happily .Brilliant said Harry .Its so brave of them sighed Hermione admiringly .If they were found .Well they keep on the move dont they ?said Ron .Like us .But did you hear what Fred said ?asked Harry excitedly now the broadcast was over his thoughts turned again toward his allconsuming obsession .Hes abroad !Hes still looking for the Wand I knew it !Harry Come on Hermione why are you so determined not to admit it ?Vol HARRY NO !demorts after the Elder Wand !The names Taboo !Ron bellowed leaping to his feet as a loud crack sounded outside the tent .I told you Harry I told you we cant say it anymore weve got to put the protection back around us quickly its how they find But Ron stopped talking and Harry knew why .The Sneakoscope on the table had lit up and begun to spin they could hear voices coming nearer and nearer rough excited voices .Ron pulled the Deluminator out of his pocket and clicked it Their lamps went out .Come out of there with your hands up !came a rasping voice through the darkness .We know youre in there !Youve got half a dozen wands pointing at you and we dont care who we curse !MALFOY MANOR Harry looked around at the other two now mere outlines in the darkness .He saw Hermione point her wand not toward the outside but into his face there was a bang a burst of white light and he buckled in agony unable to see .He could feel his face swelling rapidly under his hands as heavy footfalls surrounded him .Get up vermin .Unknown hands dragged Harry roughly off the ground .Before he could stop them someone had rummaged through his pockets and removed the blackthorn wand .Harry clutched at his excruciatingly painful face which felt unrecognizable beneath his fingers tight swollen and puffy as though he had suffered some violent allergic reaction .His eyes had been reduced to slits through which he could barely see his glasses fell off as he was bundled out of the tent all he could make out were the blurred shapes of four or five people wrestling Ron and Hermione outside too .Get off her !Ron shouted .There was the unmistakable sound of knuckles hitting flesh Ron grunted in pain and Hermione screamed No !Leave him alone leave him alone !Your boyfriends going to have worse than that done to him if hes on my list said the horribly familiar rasping voice .Delicious girl .What a treat .I do enjoy the softness of the skin .Harrys stomach turned over .He knew who this was Fenrir Grey back the werewolf who was permitted to wear Death Eater robes in return for his hired savagery .Search the tent !said another voice .Harry was thrown facedown onto the ground .A thud told him that Ron had been cast down beside him .They could hear footsteps and crashes the men were pushing over chairs inside the tent as they searched .Now lets see who weve got said Greybacks gloating voice from overhead and Harry was rolled over onto his back .A beam of wandlight fell into his face and Grey back laughed .Ill be needing butterbeer to wash this one down .What happened to you ugly ?Harry did not answer immediately .I said repeated Greyback and Harry received a blow to the diaphragm that made him double over in pain what happened to you ?Stung Harry muttered .Been stung .Yeah looks like it said a second voice .Whats your name ?snarled Greyback .Dudley said Harry .And your first name ?I Vernon .Vernon Dudley .Check the list Scabior said Greyback and Harry heard him move sideways to look down at Ron instead .And what about you ginger ?Stan Shunpike said Ron .Like ell you are said the man called Scabior .We know Stan Shunpike es put a bit of work our way .There was another thud .Ib Bardy said Ron and Harry could tell that his mouth was full of blood .Bardy Weadley .A Weasley ?rasped Greyback .So youre related to blood traitors even if youre not a Mudblood .And lastly your pretty little friend .The relish in his voice made Harrys flesh crawl .Easy Greyback said Scabior over the jeering of the others .Oh Im not going to bite just yet .Well see if shes a bit quicker at remembering her name than Barny .Who are you girly ?Penelope Clearwater said Hermione .She sounded terrified but convincing .Whats your blood status ?Halfblood said Hermione .Easy enough to check said Scabior .But the ole lot of em look like they could still be ogwarts age Weh lebt said Ron .Left ave you ginger ?said Scabior .And you decided to go camping ?And you thought just for a laugh youd use the Dark Lords name ?Nod a laugh said Ron .Aggiden .Accident ?There was more jeering laughter .You know who used to like using the Dark Lords name Weasley ?growled Greyback .The Order of the Phoenix .Mean anything to you ?Doh .Well they dont show the Dark Lord proper respect so the names been Tabooed .A few Order members have been tracked that way .Well see .Bind them up with the other two prisoners !Someone yanked Harry up by the hair dragged him a short way pushed him down into a sitting position then started binding him backtoback with other people .Harry was still half blind barely able to see anything through his puffedup eyes .When at last the man tying them had walked away Harry whispered to the other prisoners .Anyone still got a wand ?No said Ron and Hermione from either side of him .This is all my fault .I said the name Im sorry Harry ?It was a new but familiar voice and it came from directly behind Harry from the person tied to Hermiones left .Dean ?It is you !If they find out who theyve got !Theyre Snatchers theyre only looking for truants to sell for gold Not a bad little haul for one night Greyback was saying as a pair of hobnailed boots marched close by Harry and they heard more crashes from inside the tent .A Mudblood a runaway goblin and three truants .You checked their names on the list yet Scabior ?he roared .Yeah .Theres no Vernon Dudley on ere Greyback .Interesting said Greyback .Thats interesting .He crouched down beside Harry who saw through the infinitesimal gap left between his swollen eyelids a face covered in matted gray hair and whiskers with pointed brown teeth and sores at the corners of his mouth .Greyback smelled as he had done at the top of the tower where Dumbledore had died of dirt sweat and blood .So you arent wanted then Vernon ?Or are you on that list under a different name ?What House were you in at Hogwarts ?Slytherin said Harry automatically .Funny ow they all thinks we wants to ear that jeered Scabior out of the shadows .But none of em can tell us where the common room is .Its in the dungeons said Harry clearly .You enter through the wall .Its full of skulls and stuff and its under the lake so the lights all green .There was a short pause .Well well looks like we really ave caught a little Slytherin said Scabior .Good for you Vernon cause there aint a lot of Mudblood Slytherins .Whos your father ?He works at the Ministry Harry lied .He knew that his whole story would collapse with the smallest investigation but on the other hand he only had until his face regained its usual appearance before the game was up in any case .Department of Magical Accidents and Catastrophes .You know what Greyback said Scabior .I think there is a Dudley in there .Harry could barely breathe Could luck sheer luck get them safely out of this ?Well well said Greyback and Harry could hear the tiniest note of trepidation in that callous voice and knew that Greyback was wondering whether he had indeed just attacked and bound the son of a Ministry official .Harrys heart was pounding against the ropes around his ribs he would not have been surprised to know that Greyback could see it .If youre telling the truth ugly youve got nothing to fear from a trip to the Ministry .I expect your fatherll reward us just for picking you up .But said Harry his mouth bone dry if you just let us Hey !came a shout from inside the tent .Look at this Greyback !A dark figure came bustling toward them and Harry saw a glint of silver in the light of their wands .They had found Gryffindors sword .Veery nice said Greyback appreciatively taking it from his companion .Oh very nice indeed .Looks goblinmade that .Where did you get something like this ?Its my fathers Harry lied hoping against hope that it was too dark for Greyback to see the name etched just below the hilt .We borrowed it to cut firewood ang on a minute Greyback !Look at this in the Propheti As Scabior said it Harrys scar which was stretched tight across his distended forehead burned savagely .More clearly than he could make out anything around him he saw a towering building a grim fortress jet black and forbidding Voldemorts thoughts had suddenly become razorsharp again he was gliding toward the gigantic building with a sense of calmly euphoric purpose .So close .So close .With a huge effort of will Harry closed his mind to Voldemorts thoughts pulling himself back to where he sat tied to Ron Hermione Dean and Griphook in the darkness listening to Greyback and Scabior . ‘ermione Granger Scabior was saying ‘the Mudblood who is known to be traveling with arry Potter .Harrys scar burned in the silence but he made a supreme effort to keep himself present not to slip into Voldemorts mind .He heard the creak of Greybacks boots as he crouched down in front of Hermione .You know what little girly ?This picture looks a hell of a lot like you .It isnt !It isnt me !Hermione s terrified squeak was as good as a confession . ‘.known to be traveling with Harry Potter repeated Grey back quietly .A stillness had settled over the scene .Harrys scar was exquisitely painful but he struggled with all his strength against the pull of Voldemorts thoughts It had never been so important to remain in his own right mind .Well this changes things doesnt it ?whispered Greyback .Nobody spoke Harry sensed the gang of Snatchers watching frozen and felt Hermione s arm trembling against his .Greyback got up and took a couple of steps to where Harry sat crouching down again to stare closely at his misshapen features .Whats that on your forehead Vernon ?he asked softly his breath foul in Harrys nostrils as he pressed a filthy finger to the taut scar .Dont touch it !Harry yelled he could not stop himself he thought he might be sick from the pain of it .I thought you wore glasses Potter ?breathed Greyback .I found glasses !yelped one of the Snatchers skulking in the background .There was glasses in the tent Greyback wait And seconds later Harrys glasses had been rammed back onto his face .The Snatchers were closing in now peering at him .It is !rasped Greyback .Weve caught Potter !They all took several steps backward stunned by what they had done .Harry still fighting to remain present inside his own splitting head could think of nothing to say Fragmented visions were breaking across the surface of his mind He was gliding around the high walls of the black fortress No he was Harry tied up and wandless in grave danger looking up up to the topmost window the highest tower He was Harry and they were discussing his fate in low voices Time to fly . .to the Ministry ?To hell with the Ministry growled Greyback .Theyll take the credit and we wont get a look in .I say we take him straight to YouKnowWho .Will you summon im ?ere ?said Scabior sounding awed terrified .No snarled Greyback I havent got they say hes using the Malfoys place as a base .Well take the boy there .Harry thought he knew why Greyback was not calling Voldemort .The werewolf might be allowed to wear Death Eater robes when they wanted to use him but only Voldemorts inner circle were branded with the Dark Mark Greyback had not been granted this highest honor .Harrys scar seared again and he rose into the night flying straight up to the window at the very top of the tower .completely sure its him ?Cause if it aint Greyback were dead .Whos in charge here ?roared Greyback covering his moment of inadequacy .I say thats Potter and him plus his wand thats two hundred thousand Galleons right there !But if youre too gutless to come along any of you its all for me and with any luck Ill get the girl thrown in !The window was the merest slit in the black rock not big enough for a man to enter .A skeletal figure was just visible through it curled beneath a blanket .Dead or sleeping . ?All right !said Scabior .All right were in !And what about the rest of em Greyback whatll we do with em ?Might as well take the lot .Weve got two Mudbloods thats another ten Galleons .Give me the sword as well .If theyre rubies thats another small fortune right there .The prisoners were dragged to their feet .Harry could hear Hermiones breathing fast and terrified .Grab hold and make it tight .Ill do Potter !said Greyback seizing a fistful of Harrys hair Harry could feel his long yellow nails scratching his scalp .On three !One two three They Disapparated pulling the prisoners with them .Harry struggled trying to throw off Greybacks hand but it was hopeless Ron and Hermione were squeezed tightly against him on either side he could not separate from the group and as the breath was squeezed out of him his scar seared more painfully still as he forced himself through the slit of a window like a snake and landed lightly as vapor inside the celllike room The prisoners lurched into one another as they landed in a country lane .Harrys eyes still puffy took a moment to acclimatize then he saw a pair of wroughtiron gates at the foot of what looked like a long drive .He experienced the tiniest trickle of relief .The worst had not happened yet Voldemort was not here .He was Harry knew for he was fighting to resist the vision in some strange fortresslike place at the top of a tower .How long it would take Voldemort to get to this place once he knew that Harry was here was another matter .One of the Snatchers strode to the gates and shook them .How do we get in ?Theyre locked Greyback I cant blimey !He whipped his hands away in fright .The iron was contorting twisting itself out of the abstract furls and coils into a frightening face which spoke in a clanging echoing voice State your purpose !Weve got Potter !Greyback roared triumphantly .Weve captured Harry Potter !The gates swung open .Come on !said Greyback to his men and the prisoners were shunted through the gates and up the drive between high hedges that muffled their footsteps .Harry saw a ghostly white shape above him and realized it was an albino peacock .He stumbled and was dragged onto his feet by Greyback now he was staggering along sideways tied backto back to the four other prisoners .Closing his puffy eyes he allowed the pain in his scar to overcome him for a moment wanting to know what Voldemort was doing whether he knew yet that Harry was caught .The emaciated figure stirred beneath its thin blanket and rolled over toward him eyes opening in a skull of a face .The frail man sat up great sunken eyes fixed upon him upon Voldemort and then he smiled .Most of his teeth were gone .So you have come .I thought you would .one day .But your journey was pointless .I never had it .You lie As Voldemorts anger throbbed inside him Harrys scar threatened to burst with pain and he wrenched his mind back to his own body fighting to remain present as the prisoners were pushed over gravel .Light spilled out over all of them .What is this ?said a womans cold voice .Were here to see HeWhoMustNotBeNamed !rasped Greyback .Who are you ?You know me !There was resentment in the werewolfs voice .Fenrir Greyback !Weve caught Harry Potter !Greyback seized Harry and dragged him around to face the light forcing the other prisoners to shuffle around too .I know es swollen maam but its im !piped up Scabior .If you look a bit closer youll see is scar .And this ere see the girl ?The Mudblood whos been traveling around with im maam .Theres no doubt its im and weve got is wand as well !Ere maam Through his puffy eyelids Harry saw Narcissa Malfoy scrutinizing his swollen face .Scabior thrust the blackthorn wand at her .She raised her eyebrows .Bring them in she said .Harry and the others were shoved and kicked up broad stone steps into a hallway lined with portraits .Follow me said Narcissa leading the way across the hall .My son Draco is home for his Easter holidays .If that is Harry Potter he will know .The drawing room dazzled after the darkness outside even with his eyes almost closed Harry could make out the wide proportions of the room .A crystal chandelier hung from the ceiling more portraits against the dark purple walls .Two figures rose from chairs in front of an ornate marble fireplace as the prisoners were forced into the room by the Snatchers .What is this ?The dreadfully familiar drawling voice of Lucius Malfoy fell on Harrys ears .He was panicking now He could see no way out and it was easier as his fear mounted to block out Voldemorts thoughts though his scar was still burning .They say theyve got Potter said Narcissas cold voice .Draco come here .Harry did not dare look directly at Draco but saw him obliquely a figure slightly taller than he was rising from an armchair his face a pale and pointed blur beneath whiteblond hair .Greyback forced the prisoners to turn again so as to place Harry directly beneath the chandelier .Well boy ?rasped the werewolf .Harry was facing a mirror over the fireplace a great gilded thing in an intricately scrolled frame .Through the slits of his eyes he saw his own reflection for the first time since leaving Grimmauld Place .His face was huge shiny and pink every feature distorted by Hermiones jinx .His black hair reached his shoulders and there was a dark shadow around his jaw .Had he not known that it was he who stood there he would have wondered who was wearing his glasses .He resolved not to speak for his voice was sure to give him away yet he still avoided eye contact with Draco as the latter approached .Well Draco ?said Lucius Malfoy .He sounded avid .Is it ?Is it Harry Potter ?I cant I cant be sure said Draco .He was keeping his distance from Greyback and seemed as scared of looking at Harry as Harry was of looking at him .But look at him carefully look !Come closer !Harry had never heard Lucius Malfoy so excited .Draco if we are the ones who hand Potter over to the Dark Lord everything will be forgiv Now we wont be forgetting who actually caught him I hope Mr Malfoy ?said Greyback menacingly .Of course not of course not !said Lucius impatiently .He approached Harry himself came so close that Harry could see the usually languid pale face in sharp detail even through his swollen eyes .With his face a puffy mask Harry felt as though he was peering out from between the bars of a cage .What did you do to him ?Lucius asked Greyback .How did he get into this state ?That wasnt us .Looks more like a Stinging Jinx to me said Lucius .His gray eyes raked Harrys forehead .Theres something there he whispered it could be the scar stretched tight .Draco come here look properly !What do you think ?Harry saw Dracos face up close now right beside his fathers .They were extraordinarily alike except that while his father looked beside himself with excitement Dracos expression was full of reluctance even fear .I dont know he said and he walked away toward the fireplace where his mother stood watching .We had better be certain Lucius Narcissa called to her husband in her cold clear voice .Completely sure that it is Potter before we summon the Dark Lord .They say this is his she was looking closely at the blackthorn wand but it does not resemble Ollivanders description .If we are mistaken if we call the Dark Lord here for nothing .Remember what he did to Rowle and Dolohov ?What about the Mudblood then ?growled Greyback .Harry was nearly thrown off his feet as the Snatchers forced the prisoners to swivel around again so that the light fell on Hermione instead .Wait said Narcissa sharply .Yes yes she was in Madam Malkins with Potter !I saw her picture in the Prophett Look Draco isnt it the Granger girl ?I .maybe .yeah .But then thats the Weasley boy !shouted Lucius striding around the bound prisoners to face Ron .Its them Potters friends Draco look at him isnt it Arthur Weasleys son whats his name ?Yeah said Draco again his back to the prisoners .It could be .The drawing room door opened behind Harry .A woman spoke and the sound of the voice wound Harrys fear to an even higher pitch .What is this ?Whats happened Cissy ?Bellatrix Lestrange walked slowly around the prisoners and stopped on Harrys right staring at Hermione through her heavily lidded eyes .But surely she said quietly this is the Mudblood girl ?This is Granger ?Yes yes its Granger !cried Lucius .And beside her we think Potter !Potter and his friends caught at last !Potter ?shrieked Bellatrix and she backed away the better to take in Harry .Are you sure ?Well then the Dark Lord must be informed at once !She dragged back her left sleeve Harry saw the Dark Mark burned into the flesh of her arm and knew that she was about to touch it to summon her beloved master I was about to call him !said Lucius and his hand actually closed upon Bellatrixs wrist preventing her from touching the Mark .I shall summon him Bella Potter has been brought to my house and it is therefore upon my authority Your authority !she sneered attempting to wrench her hand from his grasp .You lost your authority when you lost your wand Lucius !How dare you !Take your hands off me !This is nothing to do with you you did not capture the boy Begging your pardon Mr Malfoy interjected Greyback but its us that caught Potter and its us that 11 be claiming the gold Gold !laughed Bellatrix still attempting to throw off her brotherinlaw her free hand groping in her pocket for her wand .Take your gold filthy scavenger what do I want with gold ?I seek only the honor of his of She stopped struggling her dark eyes fixed upon something Harry could not see .Jubilant at her capitulation Lucius threw her hand from him and ripped up his own sleeve STOP !shrieked Bellatrix .Do not touch it we shall all perish if the Dark Lord comes now !Lucius froze his index finger hovering over his own Mark .Bellatrix strode out of Harrys limited line of vision .What is that ?he heard her say .Sword grunted an outofsight Snatcher .Give it to me .Its not yorn missus its mine I reckon I found it .There was a bang and a flash of red light Harry knew that the Snatcher had been Stunned .There was a roar of anger from his fellows Scabior drew his wand .What dyou think youre playing at woman ?Stupefyl she screamed .Stupefyl They were no match for her even though there were four of them against one of her She was a witch as Harry knew with prodigious skill and no conscience .They fell where they stood all except Greyback who had been forced into a kneeling position his arms outstretched .Out of the corners of his eyes Harry saw Bellatrix bearing down upon the werewolf the sword of Gryffindor gripped tightly in her hand her face waxen .Where did you get this sword ?she whispered to Greyback as she pulled his wand out of his unresisting grip .How dare you ?he snarled his mouth the only thing that could move as he was forced to gaze up at her .He bared his pointed teeth .Release me woman !Where did you find this sword ?she repeated brandishing it in his face .Snape sent it to my vault in Gringotts !It was in their tent rasped Greyback .Release me I say !She waved her wand and the werewolf sprang to his feet but appeared too wary to approach her .He prowled behind an armchair his filthy curved nails clutching its back .Draco move this scum outside said Bellatrix indicating the unconscious men .If you havent got the guts to finish them then leave them in the courtyard for me .Dont you dare speak to Draco like said Narcissa furiously but Bellatrix screamed Be quiet !The situation is graver than you can possibly imagine Cissy !We have a very serious problem !She stood panting slightly looking down at the sword examining its hilt .Then she turned to look at the silent prisoners .If it is indeed Potter he must not be harmed she muttered more to herself than to the others .The Dark Lord wishes to dispose of Potter himself .But if he finds out .I must .I must know .She turned back to her sister again .The prisoners must be placed in the cellar while I think what to do !This is my house Bella you dont give orders in my Do it !You have no idea of the danger we are in !shrieked Bellatrix .She looked frightening mad a thin stream of fire issued from her wand and burned a hole in the carpet .Narcissa hesitated for a moment then addressed the werewolf .Take these prisoners down to the cellar Greyback .Wait said Bellatrix sharply .All except .except for the Mudblood .Greyback gave a grunt of pleasure .No !shouted Ron .You can have me keep me !Bellatrix hit him across the face the blow echoed around the room .If she dies under questioning Ill take you next she said .Blood traitor is next to Mudblood in my book .Take them downstairs Greyback and make sure they are secure but do nothing more to them yet .She threw Greybacks wand back to him then took a short silver knife from under her robes .She cut Hermione free from the other prisoners then dragged her by the hair into the middle of the room while Greyback forced the rest of them to shuffle across to another door into a dark passageway his wand held out in front of him projecting an invisible and irresistible force .Reckon shell let me have a bit of the girl when shes finished with her ?Greyback crooned as he forced them along the corridor .Id say Ill get a bite or two wouldnt you ginger ?Harry could feel Ron shaking .They were forced down a steep flight of stairs still tied backtoback and in danger of slipping and breaking their necks at any moment .At the bottom was a heavy door .Greyback unlocked it with a tap of his wand then forced them into a dank and musty room and left them in total darkness .The echoing bang of the slammed cellar door had not died away before there was a terrible drawnout scream from directly above them .HERMIONE !Ron bellowed and he started to writhe and struggle against the ropes tying them together so that Harry staggered .HERMIONE !Be quiet !Harry said .Shut up Ron we need to work out a way HERMIONE !HERMIONE !We need a plan stop yelling we need to get these ropes off Harry ?came a whisper through the darkness .Ron ?Is that you ?Ron stopped shouting .There was a sound of movement close by them then Harry saw a shadow moving closer .Harry ?Ron ?Luna ?Yes its me !Oh no I didnt want you to be caught !Luna can you help us get these ropes off ?said Harry .Oh yes I expect so .Theres an old nail we use if we need to break anything .Just a moment .Hermione screamed again from overhead and they could hear Bellatrix screaming too but her words were inaudible for Ron shouted again HERMIONE !HERMIONE !Mr Ollivander ?Harry could hear Luna saying .Mr Ollivander have you got the nail ?If you just move over a little bit .I think it was beside the water jug .She was back within seconds .Youll need to stay still she said .Harry could feel her digging at the ropes tough fibers to work the knots free .From upstairs they heard Bellatrixs voice .Im going to ask you again !Where did you get this sword ?Where ?We found it we found it PLEASE !Hermione screamed again Ron struggled harder than ever and the rusty nail slipped onto Harrys wrist .Ron please stay still !Luna whispered .I cant see what Im doing My pocket !said Ron .In my pocket theres a Deluminator and its full of light !A few seconds later there was a click and the luminescent spheres the Deluminator had sucked from the lamps in the tent flew into the cellar Unable to rejoin their sources they simply hung there like tiny suns flooding the underground room with light .Harry saw Luna all eyes in her white face and the motionless figure of Ollivander the wandmaker curled up on the floor in the corner .Craning around he caught sight of their fellow prisoners Dean and Griphook the goblin who seemed barely conscious kept standing by the ropes that bound him to the humans .Oh thats much easier thanks Ron said Luna and she began hacking at their bindings again .Hello Dean !From above came Bellatrixs voice .You are lying filthy Mudblood and I know it !You have been inside my vault at Gringotts !Tell the truth tell the truth Another terrible scream HERMIONE !What else did you take ?What else have you got ?Tell me the truth or I swear I shall run you through with this knife !There !Harry felt the ropes fall away and turned rubbing his wrists to see Ron running around the cellar looking up at the low ceiling searching for a trapdoor .Dean his face bruised and bloody said Thanks to Luna and stood there shivering but Griphook sank onto the cellar floor looking groggy and disoriented many welts across his swarthy face .Ron was now trying to Disapparate without a wand .Theres no way out Ron said Luna watching his fruitless efforts .The cellar is completely escape proof .I tried at first .Mr Ollivander has been here for a long time hes tried everything .Hermione was screaming again The sound went through Harry like physical pain .Barely conscious of the fierce prickling of his scar he too started to run around the cellar feeling the walls for he hardly knew what knowing in his heart that it was useless .What else did you take what else ?ANSWER ME !CRUCIO Hermione s screams echoed off the walls upstairs Ron was half sobbing as he pounded the walls with his fists and Harry in utter desperation seized Hagrids pouch from around his neck and groped inside it He pulled out Dumbledores Snitch and shook it hoping for he did not know what nothing happened he waved the broken halves of the phoenix wand but they were lifeless the mirror fragment fell sparkling to the floor and he saw a gleam of brightest blue Dumbledores eye was gazing at him out of the mirror .Help us !he yelled at it in mad desperation .Were in the cellar of Malfoy Manor help us !The eye blinked and was gone .Harry was not even sure that it had really been there .He tilted the shard of mirror this way and that and saw nothing reflected there but the walls and ceiling of their prison and upstairs Hermione was screaming worse than ever and next to him Ron was bellowing HERMIONE !HERMIONE !How did you get into my vault ?they heard Bellatrix scream .Did that dirty little goblin in the cellar help you ?We only met him tonight !Hermione sobbed .Weve never been inside your vault .It isnt the real sword !Its a copy just a copy !A copy ?screeched Bellatrix .Oh a likely story !But we can find out easily !came Luciuss voice .Draco fetch the goblin he can tell us whether the sword is real or not !Harry dashed across the cellar to where Griphook was huddled on the floor .Griphook he whispered into the goblins pointed ear you must tell them that swords a fake they mustnt know its the real one Griphook please He could hear someone scuttling down the cellar steps next moment Dracos shaking voice spoke from behind the door .Stand back .Line up against the back wall .Dont try anything or Ill kill you !They did as they were bidden as the lock turned Ron clicked the Deluminator and the lights whisked back into his pocket restoring the cellars darkness .The door flew open Malfoy marched inside wand held out in front of him pale and determined .He seized the little goblin by the arm and backed out again dragging Griphook with him .The door slammed shut and at the same moment a loud crack echoed inside the cellar .Ron clicked the Deluminator .Three balls of light flew back into the air from his pocket revealing Dobby the houseelf who had just Apparated into their midst .DOB !Harry hit Ron on the arm to stop him shouting and Ron looked terrified at his mistake .Footsteps crossed the ceiling overhead Draco marching Griphook to Bellatrix .Dobbys enormous tennisballshaped eyes were wide he was trembling from his feet to the tips of his ears .He was back in the home of his old masters and it was clear that he was petrified .Harry Potter he squeaked in the tiniest quiver of a voice Dobby has come to rescue you .But how did you ?An awful scream drowned Harrys words Hermione was being tortured again .He cut to the essentials .You can Disapparate out of this cellar ?he asked Dobby who nodded his ears flapping .And you can take humans with you ?Dobby nodded again .Right .Dobby I want you to grab Luna Dean and Mr Ollivander and take them take them to Bill and Fleurs said Ron .Shell Cottage on the outskirts of Tinworth !The elf nodded for a third time .And then come back said Harry .Can you do that Dobby ?Of course Harry Potter whispered the little elf .He hurried over to Mr Ollivander who appeared to be barely conscious .He took one of the wandmakers hands in his own then held out the other to Luna and Dean neither of whom moved .Harry we want to help you !Luna whispered .We cant leave you here said Dean .Go both of you !Well see you at Bill and Fleurs .As Harry spoke his scar burned worse than ever and for a few seconds he looked down not upon the wandmaker but on another man who was just as old just as thin but laughing scornfully .Kill me then Voldemort I welcome death !But my death will not bring you what you seek .There is so much you do not understand .He felt Voldemorts fury but as Hermione screamed again he shut it out returning to the cellar and the horror of his own present .Go !Harry beseeched Luna and Dean .Go !Well follow just go !They caught hold of the elfs outstretched fingers .There was another loud crack and Dobby Luna Dean and Ollivander vanished .What was that ?shouted Lucius Malfoy from over their heads .Did you hear that ?What was that noise in the cellar ?Harry and Ron stared at each other .Draco no call Wormtail !Make him go and check !Footsteps crossed the room overhead then there was silence .Harry knew that the people in the drawing room were listening for more noises from the cellar .Were going to have to try and tackle him he whispered to Ron .They had no choice The moment anyone entered the room and saw the absence of three prisoners they were lost .Leave the lights on Harry added and as they heard someone descending the steps outside the door they backed against the wall on either side of it .Stand back came Wormtails voice .Stand away from the door .I am coming in .The door flew open .For a split second Wormtail gazed into the apparently empty cellar ablaze with light from the three miniature suns floating in midair .Then Harry and Ron launched themselves upon him .Ron seized Wormtails wand arm and forced it upward Harry slapped a hand to his mouth muffling his voice .Silently they struggled Wormtails wand emitted sparks his silver hand closed around Harrys throat .What is it Wormtail ?called Lucius Malfoy from above .Nothing !Ron called back in a passable imitation of Wormtails wheezy voice .All fine !Harry could barely breathe .Youre going to kill me ?Harry choked attempting to prise off the metal fingers .After I saved your life ?You owe me Wormtail !The silver fingers slackened .Harry had not expected it He wrenched himself free astonished keeping his hand over Wormtails mouth .He saw the ratlike mans small watery eyes widen with fear and surprise He seemed just as shocked as Harry at what his hand had done at the tiny merciful impulse it had betrayed and he continued to struggle more powerfully as though to undo that moment of weakness .And well have that whispered Ron tugging Wormtails wand from his other hand .Wandless helpless Pettigrews pupils dilated in terror .His eyes had slid from Harrys face to something else .His own silver fingers were moving inexorably toward his own throat .No Without pausing to think Harry tried to drag back the hand but there was no stopping it .The silver tool that Voldemort had given his most cowardly servant had turned upon its disarmed and useless owner Pettigrew was reaping his reward for his hesitation his moment of pity he was being strangled before their eyes .No !Ron had released Wormtail too and together he and Harry tried to pull the crushing metal fingers from around Wormtails throat but it was no use .Pettigrew was turning blue .Relashiol said Ron pointing the wand at the silver hand but nothing happened Pettigrew dropped to his knees and at the same moment Hermione gave a dreadful scream from overhead .Wormtails eyes rolled upward in his purple face he gave a last twitch and was still .Harry and Ron looked at each other then leaving Wormtails body on the floor behind them ran up the stairs and back into the shadowy passageway leading to the drawing room .Cautiously they crept along it until they reached the drawing room door which was ajar .Now they had a clear view of Bellatrix looking down at Griphook who was holding Gryffindors sword in his longfingered hands .Hermione was lying at Bellatrixs feet .She was barely stirring .Well ?Bellatrix said to Griphook .Is it the true sword ?Harry waited holding his breath fighting against the prickling of his scar .No said Griphook .It is a fake .Are you sure ?panted Bellatrix .Quite sure ?Yes said the goblin .Relief broke across her face all tension drained from it .Good she said and with a casual flick of her wand she slashed another deep cut into the goblins face and he dropped with a yell at her feet .She kicked him aside .And now she said in a voice that burst with triumph we call the Dark Lord !And she pushed back her sleeve and touched her forefinger to the Dark Mark .At once Harrys scar felt as though it had split open again .His true surroundings vanished He was Voldemort and the skeletal wizard before him was laughing toothlessly at him he was enraged at the summons he felt he had warned them he had told them to summon him for nothing less than Potter .If they were mistaken .Kill me then !demanded the old man .You will not win you cannot win !That wand will never ever be yours And Voldemorts fury broke A burst of green light filled the prison room and the frail old body was lifted from its hard bed and then fell back lifeless and Voldemort returned to the window his wrath barely controllable .They would suffer his retribution if they had no good reason for calling him back .And I think said Bellatrixs voice we can dispose of the Mudblood .Greyback take her if you want her .NOOOOOOOOOOOO !Ron had burst into the drawing room Bellatrix looked around shocked she turned her wand to face Ron instead ExpelliarmusV he roared pointing Wormtails wand at Bellatrix and hers flew into the air and was caught by Harry who had sprinted after Ron .Lucius Narcissa Draco and Greyback wheeled about Harry yelled Stupefy and Lucius Malfoy collapsed onto the hearth .Jets of light flew from Dracos Narcissas and Greybacks wands Harry threw himself to the floor rolling behind a sofa to avoid them .STOP OR SHE DIES !Panting Harry peered around the edge of the sofa .Bellatrix was supporting Hermione who seemed to be unconscious and was holding her short silver knife to Hermione s throat .Drop your wands she whispered .Drop them or well see exactly how filthy her blood is !Ron stood rigid clutching Wormtails wand .Harry straightened up still holding Bellatrixs .I said drop them !she screeched pressing the blade into Hermiones throat Harry saw beads of blood appear there .All right !he shouted and he dropped Bellatrixs wand onto the floor at his feet .Ron did the same with Wormtails .Both raised their hands to shoulder height .Good !she leered .Draco pick them up !The Dark Lord is coming Harry Potter !Your death approaches !Harry knew it his scar was bursting with the pain of it and he could feel Voldemort flying through the sky from far away over a dark and stormy sea and soon he would be close enough to Apparate to them and Harry could see no way out .Now said Bellatrix softly as Draco hurried back to her with the wands Cissy I think we ought to tie these little heroes up again while Greyback takes care of Miss Mudblood .I am sure the Dark Lord will not begrudge you the girl Greyback after what you have done tonight .At the last word there was a peculiar grinding noise from above .All of them looked upward in time to see the crystal chandelier tremble then with a creak and an ominous jingling it began to fall .Bellatrix was directly beneath it dropping Hermione she threw herself aside with a scream .The chandelier crashed to the floor in an explosion of crystal and chains falling on top of Hermione and the goblin who still clutched the sword of Gryffindor .Glittering shards of crystal flew in all directions Draco doubled over his hands covering his bloody face .As Ron ran to pull Hermione out of the wreckage Harry took his chance He leapt over an armchair and wrested the three wands from Dracos grip pointed all of them at Greyback and yelled Stupefyl The werewolf was lifted off his feet by the triple spell flew up to the ceiling and then smashed to the ground .As Narcissa dragged Draco out of the way of further harm Bellatrix sprang to her feet her hair flying as she brandished the silver knife but Narcissa had directed her wand at the doorway .Dobby !she screamed and even Bellatrix froze .You !You dropped the chandelier ?The tiny elf trotted into the room his shaking finger pointing at his old mistress .You must not hurt Harry Potter he squeaked .Kill him Cissy !shrieked Bellatrix but there was another loud crack and Narcissas wand too flew into the air and landed on the other side of the room .You dirty little monkey !bawled Bellatrix .How dare you take a witchs wand how dare you defy your masters ?Dobby has no master !squealed the elf .Dobby is a free elf and Dobby has come to save Harry Potter and his friends !Harrys scar was blinding him with pain .Dimly he knew that they had moments seconds before Voldemort was with them .Ron catch and GO !he yelled throwing one of the wands to him then he bent down to tug Griphook out from under the chandelier .Hoisting the groaning goblin who still clung to the sword over one shoulder Harry seized Dobbys hand and spun on the spot to Disapparate .As he turned into darkness he caught one last view of the drawing room of the pale frozen figures of Narcissa and Draco of the streak of red that was Rons hair and a blur of flying silver as Bellatrixs knife flew across the room at the place where he was vanishing Bill and Fleurs .Shell Cottage .Bill and Fleurs .He had disappeared into the unknown all he could do was repeat the name of the destination and hope that it would suffice to take him there .The pain in his forehead pierced him and the weight of the goblin bore down upon him he could feel the blade of Gryffindors sword bumping against his back Dobbys hand jerked in his he wondered whether the elf was trying to take charge to pull them in the right direction and tried by squeezing the fingers to indicate that that was fine with him .And then they hit solid earth and smelled salty air .Harry fell to his knees relinquished Dobbys hand and attempted to lower Griphook gently to the ground .Are you all right ?he said as the goblin stirred but Griphook merely whimpered .Harry squinted around through the darkness .There seemed to be a cottage a short way away under the wide starry sky and he thought he saw movement outside it .Dobby is this Shell Cottage ?he whispered clutching the two wands he had brought from the Malfoys ready to fight if he needed to .Have we come to the right place ?Dobby ?He looked around .The little elf stood feet from him .DOBBY !The elf swayed slightly stars reflected in his wide shining eyes .Together he and Harry looked down at the silver hilt of the knife protruding from the elfs heaving chest .Dobby no HELP !Harry bellowed toward the cottage toward the people moving there .HELP !He did not know or care whether they were wizards or Muggles friends or foes all he cared about was that a dark stain was spreading across Dobbys front and that he had stretched out his thin arms to Harry with a look of supplication .Harry caught him and laid him sideways on the cool grass .Dobby no dont die dont die The elfs eyes found him and his lips trembled with the effort to form words .Harry .Potter .And then with a little shudder the elf became quite still and his eyes were nothing more than great glassy orbs sprinkled with light from the stars they could not see .THE WANDMAKER It was like sinking into an old nightmare for an instant Harry knelt again beside Dumbledores body at the foot of the tallest tower at Hogwarts but in reality he was staring at a tiny body curled upon the grass pierced by Bellatrixs silver knife .Harrys voice was still saying Dobby .Dobby .even though he knew that the elf had gone where he could not call him back .After a minute or so he realized that they had after all come to the right place for here were Bill and Fleur Dean and Luna gathering around him as he knelt over the elf .Hermione ?he said suddenly .Where is she ?Rons taken her inside said Bill .Shell be all right .Harry looked back down at Dobby .He stretched out a hand and pulled the sharp blade from the elfs body then dragged off his own jacket and covered Dobby in it like a blanket .The sea was rushing against rock somewhere nearby Harry listened to it while the others talked discussing matters in which he could take no interest making decisions .Dean carried the injured Griphook into the house Fleur hurrying with them now Bill was making suggestions about burying the elf .Harry agreed without really knowing what he was saying .As he did so he gazed down at the tiny body and his scar prickled and burned and in one part of his mind viewed as if from the wrong end of a long telescope he saw Voldemort punishing those they had left behind at Malfoy Manor .His rage was dreadful and yet Harrys grief for Dobby seemed to diminish it so that it became a distant storm that reached Harry from across a vast silent ocean .I want to do it properly were the first words of which Harry was fully conscious of speaking .Not by magic .Have you got a spade ?And shortly afterward he had set to work alone digging the grave in the place that Bill had shown him at the end of the garden between bushes .He dug with a kind of fury relishing the manual work glorying in the nonmagic of it for every drop of his sweat and every blister felt like a gift to the elf who had saved their lives .His scar burned but he was master of the pain he felt it yet was apart from it .He had learned control at last learned to shut his mind to Voldemort the very thing Dumbledore had wanted him to learn from Snape .Just as Voldemort had not been able to possess Harry while Harry was consumed with grief for Sirius so his thoughts could not penetrate Harry now while he mourned Dobby .Grief it seemed drove Voldemort out .though Dumbledore of course would have said that it was love .On Harry dug deeper and deeper into the hard cold earth subsuming his grief in sweat denying the pain in his scar .In the darkness with nothing but the sound of his own breath and the rushing sea to keep him company the things that had happened at the Malfoys returned to him the things he had heard came back to him and understanding blossomed in the darkness .The steady rhythm of his arms beat time with his thoughts .Hallows .Horcruxes .Hallows .Horcruxes .Yet he no longer burned with that weird obsessive longing .Loss and fear had snuffed it out He felt as though he had been slapped awake again .Deeper and deeper Harry sank into the grave and he knew where Voldemort had been tonight and whom he had killed in the topmost cell of Nurmengard and why .And he thought of Wormtail dead because of one small unconscious impulse of mercy .Dumbledore had foreseen that .How much more had he known ?Harry lost track of time .He knew only that the darkness had lightened a few degrees when he was rejoined by Ron and Dean .Hows Hermione ?Better said Ron .Fleurs looking after her .Harry had his retort ready for when they asked him why he had not simply created a perfect grave with his wand but he did not need it .They jumped down into the hole he had made with spades of their own and together they worked in silence until the hole seemed deep enough .Harry wrapped the elf more snugly in his jacket .Ron sat on the edge of the grave and stripped off his shoes and socks which he placed upon the elfs bare feet .Dean produced a woolen hat which Harry placed carefully upon Dobbys head muffling his batlike ears .We should close his eyes .Harry had not heard the others coming through the darkness .Bill was wearing a traveling cloak Fleur a large white apron from the pocket of which protruded a bottle of what Harry recognized to be SkeleGro .Hermione was wrapped in a borrowed dressing gown pale and unsteady on her feet Ron put an arm around her when she reached him .Luna who was huddled in one of Fleurs coats crouched down and placed her fingers tenderly upon each of the elfs eyelids sliding them over his glassy stare .There she said softly .Now he could be sleeping .Harry placed the elf into the grave arranged his tiny limbs so that he might have been resting then climbed out and gazed for the last time upon the little body .He forced himself not to break down as he remembered Dumbledores funeral and the rows and rows of golden chairs and the Minister of Magic in the front row the recitation of Dumbledores achievements the stateliness of the white marble tomb .He felt that Dobby deserved just as grand a funeral and yet here the elf lay between bushes in a roughly dug hole .I think we ought to say something piped up Luna .Ill go first shall I ?And as everybody looked at her she addressed the dead elf at the bottom of the grave .Thank you so much Dobby for rescuing me from that cellar .Its so unfair that you had to die when you were so good and brave .Ill always remember what you did for us .I hope youre happy now .She turned and looked expectantly at Ron who cleared his throat and said in a thick voice Yeah .thanks Dobby .Thanks muttered Dean .Harry swallowed .Goodbye Dobby he said .It was all he could manage but Luna had said it all for him .Bill raised his wand and the pile of earth beside the grave rose up into the air and fell neatly upon it a small reddish mound .Dyou mind if I stay here a moment ?he asked the others .They murmured words he did not catch he felt gentle pats upon his back and then they all traipsed back toward the cottage leaving Harry alone beside the elf .He looked around There were a number of large white stones smoothed by the sea marking the edge of the flower beds .He picked up one of the largest and laid it pillowlike over the place where Dobby s head now rested .He then felt in his pocket for a wand .There were two in there .He had forgotten lost track he could not now remember whose wands these were he seemed to remember wrenching them out of someones hand .He selected the shorter of the two which felt friendlier in his hand and pointed it at the rock .Slowly under his murmured instruction deep cuts appeared upon the rocks surface .He knew that Hermione could have done it more neatly and probably more quickly but he wanted to mark the spot as he had wanted to dig the grave .When Harry stood up again the stone read HERE LIES DOBBY A FREE ELF .He looked down at his handiwork for a few more seconds then walked away his scar still prickling a little and his mind full of those things that had come to him in the grave ideas that had taken shape in the darkness ideas both fascinating and terrible .They were all sitting in the living room when he entered the little hall their attention focused upon Bill who was talking .The room was lightcolored pretty with a small fire of driftwood burning brightly in the fireplace .Harry did not want to drop mud upon the carpet so he stood in the doorway listening . .lucky that Ginnys on holiday .If shed been at Hogwarts they could have taken her before we reached her .Now we know shes safe too .He looked around and saw Harry standing there .Ive been getting them all out of the Burrow he explained .Moved them to Muriels .The Death Eaters know Rons with you now theyre bound to target the family dont apologize he added at the sight of Harrys expression .It was always a matter of time Dads been saying so for months .Were the biggest bloodtraitor family there is .How are they protected ?asked Harry .Fidelius Charm .Dads SecretKeeper .And weve done it on this cottage too Im SecretKeeper here .None of us can go to work but thats hardly the most important thing now .Once Ollivander and Griphook are well enough well move them to Muriels too .There isnt much room here but shes got plenty .Griphooks legs are on the mend Fleurs given him SkeleGro we could probably move them in an hour or No Harry said and Bill looked startled .I need both of them here .I need to talk to them .Its important .He heard the authority in his own voice the conviction the sense of purpose that had come to him as he dug Dobbys grave .All of their faces were turned toward him looking puzzled .Im going to wash Harry told Bill looking down at his hands still covered in mud and Dobbys blood .Then 111 need to see them straightaway .He walked into the little kitchen to the basin beneath a window overlooking the sea .Dawn was breaking over the horizon shell pink and faintly gold as he washed again following the train of thought that had come to him in the dark garden .Dobby would never be able to tell them who had sent him to the cellar but Harry knew what he had seen .A piercing blue eye had looked out of the mirror fragment and then help had come .Help will always be given at Hog warts to those who ask for it Harry dried his hands impervious to the beauty of the scene outside the window and to the murmuring of the others in the sitting room .He looked out over the ocean and felt closer this dawn than ever before closer to the heart of it all .And still his scar prickled and he knew that Voldemort was getting there too .Harry understood and yet did not understand .His instinct was telling him one thing his brain quite another .The Dumbledore in Harrys head smiled surveying Harry over the tips of his fingers pressed together as if in prayer .You gave Ron the Deluminator .You understood him .You gave him a way back .And you understood Wormtail too .You knew there was a bit of regret there somewhere .And if you knew them .What did you know about me Dumbledore ?Am I meant to know but not to seek ?Did you know how hard Id find that ?Is that why you made it this difficult ?So Id have time to work that out ?Harry stood quite still eyes glazed watching the place where a bright gold rim of dazzling sun was rising over the horizon .Then he looked down at his clean hands and was momentarily surprised to see the cloth he was holding in them .He set it down and returned to the hall and as he did so he felt his scar pulse angrily and there flashed across his mind swift as the reflection of a dragonfly over water the outline of a building he knew extremely well .Bill and Fleur were standing at the foot of the stairs .I need to speak to Griphook and Ollivander Harry said .No said Fleur .You will ave to wait Arry .Zey are both ill tired Im sorry he said without heat but it cant wait .I need to talk to them now .Privately and separately .Its urgent .Harry what the hells going on ?asked Bill .You turn up here with a dead houseelf and a half conscious goblin Hermione looks as though shes been tortured and Rons just refused to tell me anything We cant tell you what were doing said Harry flatly .Youre in the Order Bill you know Dumbledore left us a mission .Were not supposed to talk about it to anyone else .Fleur made an impatient noise but Bill did not look at her he was staring at Harry .His deeply scarred face was hard to read .Finally Bill said All right .Who do you want to talk to first ?Harry hesitated .He knew what hung on his decision .There was hardly any time left now was the moment to decide Horcruxes or Hallows ?Griphook Harry said .Ill speak to Griphook first .His heart was racing as if he had been sprinting and had just cleared an enormous obstacle .Up here then said Bill leading the way .Harry had walked up several steps before stopping and looking back .I need you two as well !he called to Ron and Hermione who had been skulking half concealed in the doorway of the sitting room .They both moved into the light looking oddly relieved .How are you ?Harry asked Hermione .You were amazing coming up with that story when she was hurting you like that Hermione gave a weak smile as Ron gave her a one armed squeeze .What are we doing now Harry ?he asked .Youll see .Come on .Harry Ron and Hermione followed Bill up the steep stairs onto a small landing .Three doors led off it .In here said Bill opening the door into his and Fleurs room .It too had a view of the sea now flecked with gold in the sunrise .Harry moved to the window turned his back on the spectacular view and waited his arms folded his scar prickling .Hermione took the chair beside the dressing table Ron sat on the arm .Bill reappeared carrying the little goblin whom he set down carefully upon the bed .Griphook grunted thanks and Bill left closing the door upon them all .Im sorry to take you out of bed said Harry .How are your legs ?Painful replied the goblin .But mending .He was still clutching the sword of Gryffindor and wore a strange look half truculent half intrigued .Harry noted the goblins sallow skin his long thin fingers his black eyes .Fleur had removed his shoes His long feet were dirty .He was larger than a house elf but not by much .His domed head was much bigger than a humans .You probably dont remember Harry began .that I was the goblin who showed you to your vault the first time you ever visited Gringotts ?said Griphook .I remember Harry Potter .Even amongst goblins you are very famous .Harry and the goblin looked at each other sizing each other up .Harrys scar was still prickling .He wanted to get through this interview with Griphook quickly and at the same time was afraid of making a false move .While he tried to decide on the best way to approach his request the goblin broke the silence .You buried the elf he said sounding unexpectedly rancorous .I watched you from the window of the bedroom next door .Yes said Harry .Griphook looked at him out of the corners of his slanting black eyes .You are an unusual wizard Harry Potter .In what way ?asked Harry rubbing his scar absently .You dug the grave .So ?Griphook did not answer .Harry rather thought he was being sneered at for acting like a Muggle but it did not much matter to him whether Griphook approved of Dobbys grave or not .He gathered himself for the attack .Griphook I need to ask You also rescued a goblin .What ?You brought me here .Saved me .Well I take it youre not sorry ?said Harry a little impatiently .No Harry Potter said Griphook and with one finger he twisted the thin black beard upon his chin but you are a very odd wizard .Right said Harry .Well I need some help Griphook and you can give it to me .The goblin made no sign of encouragement but continued to frown at Harry as though he had never seen anything like him .I need to break into a Gringotts vault .Harry had not meant to say it so baldly the words were forced from him as pain shot through his lightning scar and he saw again the outline of Hogwarts .He closed his mind firmly .He needed to deal with Griphook first .Ron and Hermione were staring at Harry as though he had gone mad .Harry said Hermione but she was cut off by Griphook .Break into a Gringotts vault ?repeated the goblin wincing a little as he shifted his position upon the bed .It is impossible .No it isnt Ron contradicted him .Its been done .Yeah said Harry .The same day I first met you Griphook .My birthday seven years ago .The vault in question was empty at the time snapped the goblin and Harry understood that even though Griphook had left Gringotts he was offended at the idea of its defenses being breached .Its protection was minimal .Well the vault we need to get into isnt empty and Im guessing its protection will be pretty powerful said Harry .It belongs to the Lestranges .He saw Hermione and Ron look at each other astonished but there would be time enough to explain after Griphook had given his answer .You have no chance said Griphook flatly .No chance at all .If you seek beneath our floors a treasure that was never yours Thief you have been warned beware yeah I know I remember said Harry .But Im not trying to get myself any treasure Im not trying to take anything for personal gain .Can you believe that ?The goblin looked slantwise at Harry and the lightning scar on Harrys forehead prickled but he ignored it refusing to acknowledge its pain or its invitation .If there was a wizard of whom I would believe that they did not seek personal gain said Griphook finally it would be you Harry Potter .Goblins and elves are not used to the protection or the respect that you have shown this night .Not from wand carriers .Wandcarriers repeated Harry The phrase fell oddly upon his ears as his scar prickled as Voldemort turned his thoughts northward and as Harry burned to question Ollivander next door .The right to carry a wand said the goblin quietly has long been contested between wizards and goblins .Well goblins can do magic without wands said Ron .That is immaterial !Wizards refuse to share the secrets of wandlore with other magical beings they deny us the possibility of extending our powers !Well goblins wont share any of their magic either said Ron .You wont tell us how to make swords and armor the way you do .Goblins know how to work metal in a way wizards have never It doesnt matter said Harry noting Griphooks rising color .This isnt about wizards versus goblins or any other sort of magical creature Griphook gave a nasty laugh .But it is it is about precisely that !As the Dark Lord becomes ever more powerful your race is set still more firmly above mine !Gringotts falls under Wizarding rule houseelves are slaughtered and who amongst the wandcarriers protests ?We do !said Hermione .She had sat up straight her eyes bright .We protest !And Im hunted quite as much as any goblin or elf Griphook !Im a Mudblood !Dont call yourself Ron muttered .Why shouldnt I ?said Hermione .Mudblood and proud of it !Ive got no higher position under this new order than you have Griphook !It was me they chose to torture back at the Malfoys !As she spoke she pulled aside the neck of the dressing gown to reveal the thin cut Bellatrix had made scarlet against her throat .Did you know that it was Harry who set Dobby free ?she asked .Did you know that weve wanted elves to be freed for years ?Ron fidgeted uncomfortably on the arm of Hermiones chair .You cant want You KnowWho defeated more than we do Griphook !The goblin gazed at Hermione with the same curiosity he had shown Harry .What do you seek within the Lestranges vault ?he asked abruptly .The sword that lies inside it is a fake .This is the real one .He looked from one to the other of them .I think that you already know this .You asked me to lie for you back there .But the fake sword isnt the only thing in that vault is it ?asked Harry .Perhaps youve seen the other things in there ?His heart was pounding harder than ever .He redoubled his efforts to ignore the pulsing of his scar .The goblin twisted his beard around his finger again .It is against our code to speak of the secrets of Gringotts .We are the guardians of fabulous treasures .We have a duty to the objects placed in our care which were so often wrought by our fingers .The goblin stroked the sword and his black eyes roved from Harry to Hermione to Ron and then back again .So young he said finally to be fighting so many .Will you help us ?said Harry .We havent got a hope of breaking in without a goblins help .Youre our one chance .I shall .think about it said Griphook maddeningly .But Ron started angrily Hermione nudged him in the ribs .Thank you said Harry .The goblin bowed his great domed head in acknowledgement then flexed his short legs .I think he said settling himself ostentatiously upon Bill and Fleurs bed that the SkeleGro has finished its work .I may be able to sleep at last .Forgive me .Yeah of course said Harry but before leaving the room he leaned forward and took the sword of Gryffindor from beside the goblin .Griphook did not protest but Harry thought he saw resentment in the goblins eyes as he closed the door upon him .Little git whispered Ron .Hes enjoying keeping us hanging .Harry whispered Hermione pulling them both away from the door into the middle of the stilldark landing are you saying what I think youre saying ?Are you saying theres a Horcrux in the Lestranges vault ?Yes said Harry .Bellatrix was terrified when she thought wed been in there she was beside herself .Why ?What did she think wed seen what else did she think we might have taken ?Something she was petrified YouKnowWho would find out about .But I thought we were looking for places YouKnow Whos been places hes done something important ?said Ron looking baffled .Was he ever inside the Lestranges vault ?I dont know whether he was ever inside Gringotts said Harry .He never had gold there when he was younger because nobody left him anything .He would have seen the bank from the outside though the first time he ever went to Diagon Alley .Harrys scar throbbed but he ignored it he wanted Ron and Hermione to understand about Gringotts before they spoke to Ollivander .I think he would have envied anyone who had a key to a Gringotts vault .I think hed have seen it as a real symbol of belonging to the Wizarding world .And dont forget he trusted Bellatrix and her husband .They were his most devoted servants before he fell and they went looking for him after he vanished .He said it the night he came back I heard him .Harry rubbed his scar .I dont think hed have told Bellatrix it was a Horcrux though .He never told Lucius Malfoy the truth about the diary .He probably told her it was a treasured possession and asked her to place it in her vault .The safest place in the world for anything you want to hide Hagrid told me .except for Hogwarts .When Harry had finished speaking Ron shook his head .You really understand him .Bits of him said Harry .Bits .I just wish Id understood Dumbledore as much .But well see .Come on Ollivander now .Ron and Hermione looked bewildered but impressed as they followed him across the little landing and knocked upon the door opposite Bill and Fleurs .A weak Come in !answered them .The wandmaker was lying on the twin bed farthest from the window .He had been held in the cellar for more than a year and tortured Harry knew on at least one occasion .He was emaciated the bones of his face sticking out sharply against the yellowish skin .His great silver eyes seemed vast in their sunken sockets .The hands that lay upon the blanket could have belonged to a skeleton .Harry sat down on the empty bed beside Ron and Hermione .The rising sun was not visible here .The room faced the cliff top garden and the freshly dug grave .Mr Ollivander Im sorry to disturb you Harry said .My dear boy .Ollivanders voice was feeble .You rescued us .I thought we would die in that place .I can never thank you .never thank you .enough .We were glad to do it .Harrys scar throbbed .He knew he was certain that there was hardly any time left in which to beat Voldemort to his goal or else to attempt to thwart him .He felt a flutter of panic .yet he had made his decision when he chose to speak to Griphook first .Feigning a calm he did not feel he groped in the pouch around his neck and took out the two halves of his broken wand .Mr Ollivander I need some help .Anything .Anything said the wandmaker weakly .Can you mend this ?Is it possible ?Ollivander held out a trembling hand and Harry placed the two barely connected halves into his palm .Holly and phoenix feather said Ollivander in a tremulous voice .Eleven inches .Nice and supple .Yes said Harry .Can you ?No whispered Ollivander .I am sorry very sorry but a wand that has suffered this degree of damage cannot be repaired by any means that I know of .Harry had been braced to hear it but it was a blow nevertheless .He took the wand halves back and replaced them in the pouch around his neck .Ollivander stared at the place where the shattered wand had vanished and did not look away until Harry had taken from his pocket the two wands he had brought from the Malfoys .Can you identify these ?Harry asked .The wandmaker took the first of the wands and held it close to his faded eyes rolling it between his knobbleknuckled fingers flexing it slightly .Walnut and dragon heartstring he said .Twelve andthreequarter inches .Unyielding .This wand belonged to Bellatrix Lestrange .And this one ?Ollivander performed the same examination .Hawthorn and unicorn hair .Ten inches precisely .Reasonably springy .This was the wand of Draco Malfoy .Was ?repeated Harry .Isnt it still his ?Perhaps not .If you took it I did then it may be yours .Of course the manner of taking matters .Much also depends upon the wand itself .In general however where a wand has been won its allegiance will change .There was silence in the room except for the distant rushing of the sea .You talk about wands like theyve got feelings said Harry like they can think for themselves .The wand chooses the wizard said Ollivander .That much has always been clear to those of us who have studied wandlore .A person can still use a wand that hasnt chosen them though ?asked Harry .Oh yes if you are any wizard at all you will be able to channel your magic through almost any instrument .The best results however must always come where there is the strongest affinity between wizard and wand .These connections are complex .An initial attraction and then a mutual quest for experience the wand learning from the wizard the wizard from the wand .The sea gushed forward and backward it was a mournful sound .I took this wand from Draco Malfoy by force said Harry .Can I use it safely ?I think so .Subtle laws govern wand ownership but the conquered wand will usually bend its will to its new master .So I should use this one ?said Ron pulling Wormtails wand out of his pocket and handing it to Ollivander .Chestnut and dragon heartstring .Nineanda quarter inches .Brittle .I was forced to make this shortly after my kidnapping for Peter Pettigrew .Yes if you won it it is more likely to do your bidding and do it well than another wand .And this holds true for all wands does it ?asked Harry .I think so replied Ollivander his protuberant eyes upon Harrys face .You ask deep questions Mr Potter .Wandlore is a complex and mysterious branch of magic .So it isnt necessary to kill the previous owner to take true possession of a wand ?asked Harry .Ollivander swallowed .Necessary ?No I should not say that it is necessary to kill .There are legends though said Harry and as his heart rate quickened the pain in his scar became more intense he was sure that Voldemort had decided to put his idea into action .Legends about a wand or wands that have passed from hand to hand by murder .Ollivander turned pale .Against the snowy pillow he was light gray and his eyes were enormous bloodshot and bulging with what looked like fear .Only one wand I think he whispered .And YouKnowWho is interested in it isnt he ?asked Harry .I how ?croaked Ollivander and he looked appealingly at Ron and Hermione for help .How do you know this ?He wanted you to tell him how to overcome the connection between our wands said Harry .Ollivander looked terrified .He tortured me you must understand that !The Cruciatus Curse I I had no choice but to tell him what I knew what I guessed !I understand said Harry .You told him about the twin cores ?You said he just had to borrow another wizards wand ?Ollivander looked horrified transfixed by the amount that Harry knew .He nodded slowly .But it didnt work Harry went on .Mine still beat the borrowed wand .Do you know why that is ?Ollivander shook his head as slowly as he had just nodded .I had .never heard of such a thing .Your wand performed something unique that night .The connection of the twin cores is incredibly rare yet why your wand should have snapped the borrowed wand I do not know .We were talking about the other wand the wand that changes hands by murder .When YouKnowWho realized my wand had done something strange he came back and asked about that other wand didnt he ?How do you know this ?Harry did not answer .Yes he asked whispered Ollivander .He wanted to know everything I could tell him about the wand variously known as the Deathstick the Wand of Destiny or the Elder Wand .Harry glanced sideways at Hermione .She looked flabbergasted .The Dark Lord said Ollivander in hushed and frightened tones had always been happy with the wand I made him yew and phoenix feather thirteenandahalf inches until he discovered the connection of the twin cores .Now he seeks another more powerful wand as the only way to conquer yours .But hell know soon if he doesnt already that mines broken beyond repair said Harry quietly .No !said Hermione sounding frightened .He cant know that Harry how could he ?Priori Incantatem said Harry .We left your wand and the blackthorn wand at the Malfoys Hermione .If they examine them properly make them recreate the spells theyve cast lately theyll see that yours broke mine theyll see that you tried and failed to mend it and theyll realize that Ive been using the blackthorn one ever since .The little color she had regained since their arrival had drained from her face .Ron gave Harry a reproachful look and said Lets not worry about that now But Mr Ollivander intervened .The Dark Lord no longer seeks the Elder Wand only for your destruction Mr Potter .He is determined to possess it because he believes it will make him truly invulnerable .And will it ?The owner of the Elder Wand must always fear attack said Ollivander but the idea of the Dark Lord in possession of the Deathstick is I must admit .formidable .Harry was suddenly reminded of how he had been unsure when they first met of how much he liked Ollivander .Even now having been tortured and imprisoned by Voldemort the idea of the Dark wizard in possession of this wand seemed to enthrall him as much as it repulsed him .You you really think this wand exists then Mr Ollivander ?asked Hermione .Oh yes said Ollivander .Yes it is perfectly possible to trace the wands course through history .There are gaps of course and long ones where it vanishes from view temporarily lost or hidden but always it resurfaces .It has certain identifying characteristics that those who are learned in wandlore recognize .There are written accounts some of them obscure that I and other wandmakers have made it our business to study .They have the ring of authenticity .So you you dont think it can be a fairy tale or a myth ?Hermione asked hopefully .No said Ollivander .Whether it needs to pass by murder I do not know .Its history is bloody but that may be simply due to the fact that it is such a desirable object and arouses such passions in wizards .Immensely powerful dangerous in the wrong hands and an object of incredible fascination to all of us who study the power of wands .Mr Ollivander said Harry you told YouKnowWho that Gregorovitch had the Elder Wand didnt you ?Ollivander turned if possible even paler .He looked ghostly as he gulped .But how how do you ?Never mind how I know it said Harry closing his eyes momentarily as his scar burned and he saw for mere seconds a vision of the main street in Hogsmeade still dark because it was so much farther north .You told YouKnowWho that Gregorovitch had the wand ?It was a rumor whispered Ollivander .A rumor years and years ago long before you were born !I believe Gregorovitch himself started it .You can see how good it would be for business that he was studying and duplicating the qualities of the Elder Wand !Yes I can see that said Harry .He stood up .Mr Ollivander one last thing and then well let you get some rest .What do you know about the Deathly Hallows ?The the what ?asked the wandmaker looking utterly bewildered .The Deathly Hallows .Im afraid I dont know what youre talking about .Is this still something to do with wands ?Harry looked into the sunken face and believed that Ollivander was not acting .He did not know about the Hallows .Thank you said Harry .Thank you very much .Well leave you to get some rest now .Ollivander looked stricken .He was torturing me !he gasped .The Cruciatus Curse .you have no idea .I do said Harry .I really do .Please get some rest .Thank you for telling me all of this .He led Ron and Hermione down the staircase .Harry caught a glimpse of Bill Fleur Luna and Dean sitting at the table in the kitchen cups of tea in front of them .They all looked up at Harry as he appeared in the doorway but he merely nodded to them and continued into the garden Ron and Hermione behind him .The reddish mound of earth that covered Dobby lay ahead and Harry walked back to it as the pain in his head built more and more powerfully .It was a huge effort now to close down the visions that were forcing themselves upon him but he knew that he would have to resist only a little longer .He would yield very soon because he needed to know that his theory was right .He must make only one more short effort so that he could explain to Ron and Hermione .Gregorovitch had the Elder Wand a long time ago he said .I saw YouKnowWho trying to find him .When he tracked him down he found that Gregorovitch didnt have it anymore It was stolen from him by Grindelwald .How Grindelwald found out that Gregorovitch had it I dont know but if Gregorovitch was stupid enough to spread the rumor it cant have been that difficult .Voldemort was at the gates of Hogwarts Harry could see him standing there and see too the lamp bobbing in the predawn coming closer and closer .And Grindelwald used the Elder Wand to become powerful .And at the height of his power when Dumbledore knew he was the only one who could stop him he dueled Grindelwald and beat him and he took the Elder Wand .Dumbledore had the Elder Wand ?said Ron .But then where is it now ?At Hogwarts said Harry fighting to remain with them in the clifftop garden .But then lets go !said Ron urgently .Harry lets go and get it before he does !Its too late for that said Harry .He could not help himself but clutched his head trying to help it resist .He knows where it is .Hes there now .Harry !Ron said furiously .How long have you known this why have we been wasting time ?Why did you talk to Griphook first ?We could have gone we could still go No said Harry and he sank to his knees in the grass .Hermiones right .Dumbledore didnt want me to have it .He didnt want me to take it .He wanted me to get the Horcruxes .The unbeatable wand Harry !moaned Ron .Im not supposed to .Im supposed to get the Horcruxes .And now everything was cool and dark The sun was barely visible over the horizon as he glided alongside Snape up through the grounds toward the lake .I shall join you in the castle shortly he said in his high cold voice .Leave me now .Snape bowed and set off back up the path his black cloak billowing behind him .Harry walked slowly waiting for Snape s figure to disappear .It would not do for Snape or indeed anyone else to see where he was going .But there were no lights in the castle windows and he could conceal himself .and in a second he had cast upon himself a Disillusionment Charm that hid him even from his own eyes .And he walked on around the edge of the lake taking in the outlines of the beloved castle his first kingdom his birthright .And here it was beside the lake reflected in the dark waters .The white marble tomb an unnecessary blot on the familiar landscape .He felt again that rush of controlled euphoria that heady sense of purpose in destruction .He raised the old yew wand How fitting that this would be its last great act .The tomb split open from head to foot .The shrouded figure was as long and thin as it had been in life .He raised the wand again .The wrappings fell open .The face was translucent pale sunken yet almost perfectly preserved .They had left his spectacles on the crooked nose He felt amused derision .Dumbledores hands were folded upon his chest and there it lay clutched beneath them buried with him .Had the old fool imagined that marble or death would protect the wand ?Had he thought that the Dark Lord would be scared to violate his tomb ?The spiderlike hand swooped and pulled the wand from Dumbledores grasp and as he took it a shower of sparks flew from its tip sparkling over the corpse of its last owner ready to serve a new master at last .SHELL COTTAGE Bill and Fleurs cottage stood alone on a cliff overlooking the sea its walls embedded with shells and whitewashed .It was a lonely and beautiful place .Wherever Harry went inside the tiny cottage or its garden he could hear the constant ebb and flow of the sea like the breathing of some great slumbering creature .He spent much of the next few days making excuses to escape the crowded cottage craving the clifftop view of open sky and wide empty sea and the feel of cold salty wind on his face .The enormity of his decision not to race Voldemort to the wand still scared Harry .He could not remember ever before choosing not to act .He was full of doubts doubts that Ron could not help voicing whenever they were together .What if Dumbledore wanted us to work out the symbol in time to get the wand ?What if working out what the symbol meant made you ‘worthy to get the Hallows ?Harry if that really is the Elder Wand how the hell are we supposed to finish off YouKnow Who ?Harry had no answers There were moments when he wondered whether it had been outright madness not to try to prevent Voldemort breaking open the tomb .He could not even explain satisfactorily why he had decided against it Every time he tried to reconstruct the internal arguments that had led to his decision they sounded feebler to him .The odd thing was that Hermiones support made him feel just as confused as Rons doubts .Now forced to accept that the Elder Wand was real she maintained that it was an evil object and that the way Voldemort had taken possession of it was repellent not to be considered .You could never have done that Harry she said again and again .You couldnt have broken into Dumbledores grave .But the idea of Dumbledores corpse frightened Harry much less than the possibility that he might have misunderstood the living Dumbledores intentions .He felt that he was still groping in the dark he had chosen his path but kept looking back wondering whether he had misread the signs whether he should not have taken the other way .From time to time anger at Dumbledore crashed over him again powerful as the waves slamming themselves against the cliff beneath the cottage anger that Dumbledore had not explained before he died .But is he dead ?said Ron three days after they had arrived at the cottage .Harry had been staring out over the wall that separated the cottage garden from the cliff when Ron and Hermione had found him he wished they had not having no wish to join in with their argument .Yes he is Ron please dont start that again !Look at the facts Hermione said Ron speaking across Harry who continued to gaze at the horizon .The silver doe .The sword .The eye Harry saw in the mirror Harry admits he could have imagined the eye !Dont you Harry ?I could have said Harry without looking at her .But you dont think you did do you ?asked Ron .No I dont said Harry .There you go !said Ron quickly before Hermione could carry on .If it wasnt Dumbledore explain how Dobby knew we were in the cellar Hermione ?I cant but can you explain how Dumbledore sent him to us if hes lying in a tomb at Hogwarts ?I dunno it couldve been his ghost !Dumbledore wouldnt come back as a ghost said Harry .There was little about Dumbledore he was sure of now but he knew that much .He would have gone on .What dyou mean ‘gone on ?asked Ron but before Harry could say any more a voice behind them said Arry ?Fleur had come out of the cottage her long silver hair flying in the breeze .Arry Gripook would like to speak to you .E eez in ze smallest bedroom e says e does not want to be overeard .Her dislike of the goblin sending her to deliver messages was clear she looked irritable as she walked back around the house .Griphook was waiting for them as Fleur had said in the tiniest of the cottages three bedrooms in which Hermione and Luna slept by night .He had drawn the red cotton curtains against the bright cloudy sky which gave the room a fiery glow at odds with the rest of the airy light cottage .I have reached my decision Harry Potter said the goblin who was sitting crosslegged in a low chair drumming its arms with his spindly fingers .Though the goblins of Gringotts will consider it base treachery I have decided to help you Thats great !said Harry relief surging through him .Griphook thank you were really in return said the goblin firmly for payment .Slightly taken aback Harry hesitated .How much do you want ?Ive got gold .Not gold said Griphook .I have gold .His black eyes glittered there were no whites to his eyes .I want the sword .The sword of Godric Gryffindor .Harrys spirits plummeted .You cant have that he said .Im sorry .Then said the goblin softly we have a problem .We can give you something else said Ron eagerly .Ill bet the Lestranges have got loads of stuff you can take your pick once we get into the vault .He had said the wrong thing .Griphook flushed angrily .I am not a thief boy !I am not trying to procure treasures to which I have no right !The swords ours It is not said the goblin .Were Gryffindors and it was Godric Gryffindors And before it was Gryffindors whose was it ?demanded the goblin sitting up straight .No ones said Ron .It was made for him wasnt it ?No !cried the goblin bristling with anger as he pointed a long finger at Ron .Wizarding arrogance again !That sword was Ragnuk the Firsts taken from him by Godric Gryffindor !It is a lost treasure a masterpiece of goblinwork !It belongs with the goblins !The sword is the price of my hire take it or leave it !Griphook glared at them .Harry glanced at the other two then said We need to discuss this Griphook if thats all right .Could you give us a few minutes ?The goblin nodded looking sour .Downstairs in the empty sitting room Harry walked to the fireplace brow furrowed trying to think what to do .Behind him Ron said Hes having a laugh .We cant let him have that sword .It is true ?Harry asked Hermione .Was the sword stolen by Gryffindor ?I dont know she said hopelessly .Wizarding history often skates over what the wizards have done to other magical races but theres no account that I know of that says Gryffindor stole the sword .Itll be one of those goblin stories said Ron about how the wizards are always trying to get one over on them .I suppose we should think ourselves lucky he hasnt asked for one of our wands .Goblins have got good reason to dislike wizards Ron said Hermione .Theyve been treated brutally in the past .Goblins arent exactly fluffy little bunnies though are they ?said Ron .Theyve killed plenty of us .Theyve fought dirty too .But arguing with Griphook about whose race is most underhanded and violent isnt going to make him more likely to help us is it ?There was a pause while they tried to think of a way around the problem .Harry looked out of the window at Dobbys grave .Luna was arranging sea lavender in a jam jar beside the headstone .Okay said Ron and Harry turned back to face him hows this ?We tell Griphook we need the sword until we get inside the vault and then he can have it .Theres a fake in there isnt there ?We switch them and give him the fake .Ron hed know the difference better than we would !said Hermione .Hes the only one who realized there had been a swap !Yeah but we could scarper before he realizes He quailed beneath the look Hermione was giving him .That she said quietly is despicable .Ask for his help then doublecross him ?And you wonder why goblins dont like wizards Ron ?Rons ears had turned red .All right all right !It was the only thing I could think of !Whats your solution then ?We need to offer him something else something just as valuable .Brilliant .Ill go and get one of our other ancient goblinmade swords and you can gift wrap it .Silence fell between them again .Harry was sure that the goblin would accept nothing but the sword even if they had something as valuable to offer him .Yet the sword was their one indispensable weapon against the Horcruxes .He closed his eyes for a moment or two and listened to the rush of the sea .The idea that Gryffindor might have stolen the sword was unpleasant to him He had always been proud to be a Gryffindor Gryffindor had been the champion of Muggleborns the wizard who had clashed with the purebloodloving Slytherin .Maybe hes lying Harry said opening his eyes again .Griphook .Maybe Gryffindor didnt take the sword .How do we know the goblin version of historys right ?Does it make a difference ?asked Hermione .Changes how I feel about it said Harry .He took a deep breath .Well tell him he can have the sword after hes helped us get into that vault but well be careful to avoid telling him exactly when he can have it .A grin spread slowly across Rons face .Hermione however looked alarmed .Harry we cant He can have it Harry went on after weve used it on all of the Horcruxes .Ill make sure he gets it then .Ill keep my word .But that could be years !said Hermione .I know that but he neednt .I wont be lying .really .Harry met her eyes with a mixture of defiance and shame .He remembered the words that had been engraved over the gateway to Nurmengard FOR THE GREATER GOOD .He pushed the idea away .What choice did they have ?I dont like it said Hermione .Nor do I much Harry admitted .Well I think its genius said Ron standing up again .Lets go and tell him .Back in the smallest bedroom Harry made the offer careful to phrase it so as not to give any definite time for the handover of the sword .Hermione frowned at the floor while he was speaking he felt irritated at her afraid that she might give the game away .However Griphook had eyes for nobody but Harry .I have your word Harry Potter that you will give me the sword of Gryffindor if I help you ?Yes said Harry .Then shake said the goblin holding out his hand .Harry took it and shook .He wondered whether those black eyes saw any misgivings in his own .Then Griphook relinquished him clapped his hands together and said So .We begin !It was like planning to break into the Ministry all over again .They settled to work in the smallest bedroom which was kept according to Griphooks preference in semidarkness .I have visited the Lestranges vault only once Griphook told them on the occasion I was told to place inside it the false sword .It is one of the most ancient chambers .The oldest Wizarding families store their treasures at the deepest level where the vaults are largest and best protected .They remained shut in the cupboardlike room for hours at a time .Slowly the days stretched into weeks .There was problem after problem to overcome not least of which was that their store of Polyjuice Potion was greatly depleted .Theres really only enough left for one of us said Hermione tilting the thick mudlike potion against the lamplight .Thatll be enough said Harry who was examining Griphooks handdrawn map of the deepest passageways .The other inhabitants of Shell Cottage could hardly fail to notice that something was going on now that Harry Ron and Hermione only emerged for mealtimes .Nobody asked questions although Harry often felt Bills eyes on the three of them at the table thoughtful concerned .The longer they spent together the more Harry realized that he did not much like the goblin .Griphook was unexpectedly bloodthirsty laughed at the idea of pain in lesser creatures and seemed to relish the possibility that they might have to hurt other wizards to reach the Lestranges vault .Harry could tell that his distaste was shared by the other two but they did not discuss it They needed Griphook .The goblin ate only grudgingly with the rest of them .Even after his legs had mended he continued to request trays of food in his room like the stillfrail Ollivander until Bill following an angry outburst from Fleur went upstairs to tell him that the arrangement could not continue .Thereafter Griphook joined them at the overcrowded table although he refused to eat the same food insisting instead on lumps of raw meat roots and various fungi .Harry felt responsible It was after all he who had insisted that the goblin remain at Shell Cottage so that he could question him his fault that the whole Weasley family had been driven into hiding that Bill Fred George and Mr Weasley could no longer work .Im sorry he told Fleur one blustery April evening as he helped her prepare dinner .I never meant you to have to deal with all of this .She had just set some knives to work chopping up steaks for Griphook and Bill who had preferred his meat bloody ever since he had been attacked by Greyback .While the knives sliced away behind her her somewhat irritable expression softened .Arry you saved my sisters life I do not forget .This was not strictly speaking true but Harry decided against reminding her that Gabrielle had never been in real danger .Anyway Fleur went on pointing her wand at a pot of sauce on the stove which began to bubble at once Mr Ollivander leaves for Muriels zis evening .Zat will make zings easier .Ze goblin she scowled a little at the mention of him can move downstairs and you Ron and Dean can take zat room .We dont mind sleeping in the living room said Harry who knew that Griphook would think poorly of having to sleep on the sofa keeping Griphook happy was essential to their plans .Dont worry about us .And when she tried to protest he went on Well be off your hands soon too Ron Hermione and I .We wont need to be here much longer .But what do you mean ?she said frowning at him her wand pointing at the casserole dish now suspended in midair .Of course you must not leave you are safe ere !She looked rather like Mrs Weasley as she said it and he was glad that the back door opened at that moment .Luna and Dean entered their hair damp from the rain outside and their arms full of driftwood . .and tiny little ears Luna was saying a bit like a hippos Daddy says only purple and hairy .And if you want to call them you have to hum they prefer a waltz nothing too fast .Looking uncomfortable Dean shrugged at Harry as he passed following Luna into the combined dining and sitting room where Ron and Hermione were laying the dinner table .Seizing the chance to escape Fleurs questions Harry grabbed two jugs of pumpkin juice and followed them . .and if you ever come to our house Ill be able to show you the horn Daddy wrote to me about it but I havent seen it yet because the Death Eaters took me from the Hogwarts Express and I never got home for Christmas Luna was saying as she and Dean relaid the fire .Luna we told you Hermione called over to her .That horn exploded .It came from an Erumpent not a CrumpleHorned Snorkack No it was definitely a Snorkack horn said Luna serenely .Daddy told me .It will probably have re formed by now they mend themselves you know .Hermione shook her head and continued laying down forks as Bill appeared leading Mr Ollivander down the stairs .The wandmaker still looked exceptionally frail and he clung to Bills arm as the latter supported him carrying a large suitcase . ‘Tm going to miss you Mr Ollivander said Luna approaching the old man .And I you my dear said Ollivander patting her on the shoulder .You were an inexpressible comfort to me in that terrible place .So au revoir Mr Ollivander said Fleur kissing him on both cheeks .And I wonder whezzer you could oblige me by delivering a package to Bills Auntie Muriel ?I never returned er tiara .It will be an honor said Ollivander with a little bow the very least I can do in return for your generous hospitality .Fleur drew out a worn velvet case which she opened to show the wandmaker .The tiara sat glittering and twinkling in the light from the lowhanging lamp .Moonstones and diamonds said Griphook who had sidled into the room without Harry noticing .Made by goblins I think ?And paid for by wizards said Bill quietly and the goblin shot him a look that was both furtive and challenging .A strong wind gusted against the cottage windows as Bill and Ollivander set off into the night .The rest of them squeezed in around the table elbow to elbow and with barely enough room to move they started to eat .The fire crackled and popped in the grate beside them .Fleur Harry noticed was merely playing with her food she glanced at the window every few minutes however Bill returned before they had finished their first course his long hair tangled by the wind .Everythings fine he told Fleur .Ollivander settled in Mum and Dad say hello .Ginny sends you all her love .Fred and George are driving Muriel up the wall theyre still operating an OwlOrder business out of her back room .It cheered her up to have her tiara back though .She said she thought wed stolen it .Ah she eez charmante your aunt said Fleur crossly waving her wand and causing the dirty plates to rise and form a stack in midair .She caught them and marched out of the room .Daddys made a tiara piped up Luna .Well more of a crown really .Ron caught Harrys eye and grinned Harry knew that he was remembering the ludicrous headdress they had seen on their visit to Xenophilius .Yes hes trying to recreate the lost diadem of Ravenclaw .He thinks hes identified most of the main elements now .Adding the billywig wings really made a difference There was a bang on the front door .Everyones head turned toward it .Fleur came running out of the kitchen looking frightened Bill jumped to his feet his wand pointing at the door Harry Ron and Hermione did the same .Silently Griphook slipped beneath the table out of sight .Who is it ?Bill called .It is I Remus John Lupin !called a voice over the howling wind .Harry experienced a thrill of fear what had happened ?I am a werewolf married to Nymphadora Tonks and you the SecretKeeper of Shell Cottage told me the address and bade me come in an emergency !Lupin muttered Bill and he ran to the door and wrenched it open .Lupin fell over the threshold .He was whitefaced wrapped in a traveling cloak his graying hair windswept .He straightened up looked around the room making sure of who was there then cried aloud Its a boy !Weve named him Ted after Doras father !Hermione shrieked .Wha ?Tonks Tonks has had the baby ?Yes yes shes had the baby !shouted Lupin .All around the table came cries of delight sighs of relief Hermione and Fleur both squealed Congratulations !and Ron said Blimey a baby !as if he had never heard of such a thing before .Yes yes a boy said Lupin again who seemed dazed by his own happiness .He strode around the table and hugged Harry the scene in the basement of Grimmauld Place might never have happened .Youll be godfather ?he said as he released Harry .Mme ?stammered Harry You yes of course Dora quite agrees no one better I yeah blimey Harry felt overwhelmed astonished delighted now Bill was hurrying to fetch wine and Fleur was persuading Lupin to join them for a drink .I cant stay long I must get back said Lupin beaming around at them all He looked years younger than Harry had ever seen him .Thank you thank you Bill .Bill had soon filled all of their goblets they stood and raised them high in a toast .To Teddy Remus Lupin said Lupin a great wizard in the making !Oo does e look like ?Fleur inquired .I think he looks like Dora but she thinks he is like me .Not much hair .It looked black when he was born but I swear its turned ginger in the hour since .Probably be blond by the time I get back .Andromeda says Tonkss hair started changing color the day that she was born .He drained his goblet .Oh go on then just one more he added beaming as Bill made to fill it again .The wind buffeted the little cottage and the fire leapt and crackled and Bill was soon opening another bottle of wine .Lupins news seemed to have taken them out of themselves removed them for a while from their state of siege Tidings of new life were exhilarating .Only the goblin seemed untouched by the suddenly festive atmosphere and after a while he slunk back to the bedroom he now occupied alone .Harry thought he was the only one who had noticed this until he saw Bills eyes following the goblin up the stairs .No .no .I really must get back said Lupin at last declining yet another goblet of wine .He got to his feet and pulled his traveling cloak back around himself .Goodbye goodbye Ill try and bring some pictures in a few days time theyll all be so glad to know that Ive seen you He fastened his cloak and made his farewells hugging the women and grasping hands with the men then still beaming returned into the wild night .Godfather Harry !said Bill as they walked into the kitchen together helping clear the table .A real honor !Congratulations !As Harry set down the empty goblets he was carrying Bill pulled the door behind him closed shutting out the stillvoluble voices of the others who were continuing to celebrate even in Lupins absence .I wanted a private word actually Harry .It hasnt been easy to get an opportunity with the cottage this full of people .Bill hesitated .Harry youre planning something with Griphook .It was a statement not a question and Harry did not bother to deny it .He merely looked at Bill waiting .I know goblins said Bill .Ive worked for Gringotts ever since I left Hogwarts .As far as there can be friendship between wizards and goblins I have goblin friends or at least goblins I know well and like .Again Bill hesitated .Harry what do you want from Griphook and what have you promised him in return ?I cant tell you that said Harry .Sorry Bill .The kitchen door opened behind them Fleur was trying to bring through more empty goblets .Wait Bill told her .Just a moment .She backed out and he closed the door again .Then I have to say this Bill went on .If you have struck any kind of bargain with Griphook and most particularly if that bargain involves treasure you must be exceptionally careful .Goblin notions of ownership payment and repayment are not the same as human ones .Harry felt a slight squirm of discomfort as though a small snake had stirred inside him .What do you mean ?he asked .We are talking about a different breed of being said Bill .Dealings between wizards and goblins have been fraught for centuries but youll know all that from History of Magic .There has been fault on both sides I would never claim that wizards have been innocent .However there is a belief among some goblins and those at Gringotts are perhaps most prone to it that wizards cannot be trusted in matters of gold and treasure that they have no respect for goblin ownership .I respect Harry began but Bill shook his head .You dont understand Harry nobody could understand unless they have lived with goblins .To a goblin the rightful and true master of any object is the maker not the purchaser .All goblinmade objects are in goblin eyes rightfully theirs .But if it was bought then they would consider it rented by the one who had paid the money .They have however great difficulty with the idea of goblinmade objects passing from wizard to wizard .You saw Griphooks face when the tiara passed under his eyes .He disapproves .I believe he thinks as do the fiercest of his kind that it ought to have been returned to the goblins once the original purchaser died .They consider our habit of keeping goblinmade objects passing them from wizard to wizard without further payment little more than theft .Harry had an ominous feeling now he wondered whether Bill guessed more than he was letting on .All I am saying said Bill setting his hand on the door back into the sitting room is to be very careful what you promise goblins Harry .It would be less dangerous to break into Gringotts than to renege on a promise to a goblin .Right said Harry as Bill opened the door yeah .Thanks .Ill bear that in mind .As he followed Bill back to the others a wry thought came to him born no doubt of the wine he had drunk .He seemed set on course to become just as reckless a godfather to Teddy Lupin as Sirius Black had been to him .GRINGOTTS Their plans were made their preparations complete in the smallest bedroom a single long coarse black hair plucked from the sweater Hermione had been wearing at Malfoy Manor lay curled in a small glass phial on the mantelpiece .And youll be using her actual wand said Harry nodding toward the walnut wand so I reckon youll be pretty convincing .Hermione looked frightened that the wand might sting or bite her as she picked it up .I hate this thing she said in a low voice .I really hate it .It feels all wrong it doesnt work properly for me .Its like a bit of her .Harry could not help but remember how Hermione had dismissed his loathing of the blackthorn wand insisting that he was imagining things when it did not work as well as his own telling him to simply practice .He chose not to repeat her own advice back to her however the eve of their attempted assault on Gringotts felt like the wrong moment to antagonize her .Itll probably help you get in character though said Ron .Think what that wands done !But thats my point !said Hermione .This is the wand that tortured Nevilles mum and dad and who knows how many other people ?This is the wand that killed Sirius !Harry had not thought of that He looked down at the wand and was visited by a brutal urge to snap it to slice it in half with Gryffindors sword which was propped against the wall beside him .I miss my wand Hermione said miserably .I wish Mr Ollivander could have made me another one too .Mr Ollivander had sent Luna a new wand that morning .She was out on the back lawn at that moment testing its capabilities in the late afternoon sun .Dean who had lost his wand to the Snatchers was watching rather gloomily .Harry looked down at the hawthorn wand that had once belonged to Draco Malfoy .He had been surprised but pleased to discover that it worked for him at least as well as Hermione s had done .Remembering what Ollivander had told them of the secret workings of wands Harry thought he knew what Hermione s problem was She had not won the walnut wands allegiance by taking it personally from Bellatrix .The door of the bedroom opened and Griphook entered .Harry reached instinctively for the hilt of the sword and drew it close to him but regretted his action at once He could tell that the goblin had noticed .Seeking to gloss over the sticky moment he said Weve just been checking the lastminute stuff Griphook .Weve told Bill and Fleur were leaving tomorrow and weve told them not to get up to see us off .They had been firm on this point because Hermione would need to transform into Bellatrix before they left and the less that Bill and Fleur knew or suspected about what they were about to do the better .They had also explained that they would not be returning .As they had lost Perkinss old tent on the night that the Snatchers caught them Bill had lent them another one .It was now packed inside the beaded bag which Harry was impressed to learn Hermione had protected from the Snatchers by the simple expedient of stuffing it down her sock .Though he would miss Bill Fleur Luna and Dean not to mention the home comforts they had enjoyed over the last few weeks Harry was looking forward to escaping the confinement of Shell Cottage .He was tired of trying to make sure that they were not overheard tired of being shut in the tiny dark bedroom .Most of all he longed to be rid of Griphook .However precisely how and when they were to part from the goblin without handing over Gryffindors sword remained a question to which Harry had no answer .It had been impossible to decide how they were going to do it because the goblin rarely left Harry Ron and Hermione alone together for more than five minutes at a time He could give my mother lessons growled Ron as the goblins long fingers kept appearing around the edges of doors .With Bills warning in mind Harry could not help suspecting that Griphook was on the watch for possible skulduggery .Hermione disapproved so heartily of the planned doublecross that Harry had given up attempting to pick her brains on how best to do it Ron on the rare occasions that they had been able to snatch a few Griphookfree moments had come up with nothing better than Well just have to wing it mate .Harry slept badly that night .Lying awake in the early hours he thought back to the way he had felt the night before they had infiltrated the Ministry of Magic and remembered a determination almost an excitement .Now he was experiencing jolts of anxiety nagging doubts He could not shake off the fear that it was all going to go wrong .He kept telling himself that their plan was good that Griphook knew what they were facing that they were wellprepared for all the difficulties they were likely to encounter yet still he felt uneasy .Once or twice he heard Ron stir and was sure that he too was awake but they were sharing the sitting room with Dean so Harry did not speak .It was a relief when six oclock arrived and they could slip out of their sleeping bags dress in the semidarkness then creep out into the garden where they were to meet Hermione and Griphook .The dawn was chilly but there was little wind now that it was May .Harry looked up at the stars still glimmering palely in the dark sky and listened to the sea washing backward and forward against the cliff He was going to miss the sound .Small green shoots were forcing their way up through the red earth of Dobbys grave now in a years time the mound would be covered in flowers .The white stone that bore the elfs name had already acquired a weathered look .He realized now that they could hardly have laid Dobby to rest in a more beautiful place but Harry ached with sadness to think of leaving him behind .Looking down on the grave he wondered yet again how the elf had known where to come to rescue them .His fingers moved absentmindedly to the little pouch still strung around his neck through which he could feel the jagged mirror fragment in which he had been sure he had seen Dumbledores eye .Then the sound of a door opening made him look around .Bellatrix Lestrange was striding across the lawn toward them accompanied by Griphook .As she walked she was tucking the small beaded bag into the inside pocket of another set of the old robes they had taken from Grimmauld Place .Though Harry knew perfectly well that it was really Hermione he could not suppress a shiver of loathing .She was taller than he was her long black hair rippling down her back her heavily lidded eyes disdainful as they rested upon him but then she spoke and he heard Hermione through Bellatrixs low voice .She tasted disgusting worse than Gurdyroots !Okay Ron come here so I can do you .Right but remember I dont like the beard too long Oh for heavens sake this isnt about looking handsome Its not that it gets in the way !But I liked my nose a bit shorter try and do it the way you did last time .Hermione sighed and set to work muttering under her breath as she transformed various aspects of Rons appearance .He was to be given a completely fake identity and they were trusting to the malevolent aura cast by Bellatrix to protect him .Meanwhile Harry and Griphook were to be concealed under the Invisibility Cloak .There said Hermione how does he look Harry ?It was just possible to discern Ron under his disguise but only Harry thought because he knew him so well .Rons hair was now long and wavy he had a thick brown beard and mustache no freckles a short broad nose and heavy eyebrows .Well hes not my type but hell do said Harry .Shall we go then ?All three of them glanced back at Shell Cottage lying dark and silent under the fading stars then turned and began to walk toward the point just beyond the boundary wall where the Fidelius Charm stopped working and they would be able to Disapparate .Once past the gate Griphook spoke .I should climb up now Harry Potter I think ?Harry bent down and the goblin clambered onto his back his hands linked in front of Harrys throat .He was not heavy but Harry disliked the feeling of the goblin and the surprising strength with which he clung on .Hermione pulled the Invisibility Cloak out of the beaded bag and threw it over them both .Perfect she said bending down to check Harrys feet .I cant see a thing .Lets go .Harry turned on the spot with Griphook on his shoulders concentrating with all his might on the Leaky Cauldron the inn that was the entrance to Diagon Alley .The goblin clung even tighter as they moved into the compressing darkness and seconds later Harrys feet found pavement and he opened his eyes on Charing Cross Road .Muggles bustled past wearing the hangdog expressions of early morning quite unconscious of the little inns existence .The bar of the Leaky Cauldron was nearly deserted .Tom the stooped and toothless landlord was polishing glasses behind the bar counter a couple of warlocks having a muttered conversation in the far corner glanced at Hermione and drew back into the shadows .Madam Lestrange murmured Tom and as Hermione passed he inclined his head subserviently .Good morning said Hermione and as Harry crept past still carrying Griphook piggyback under the Cloak he saw Tom look surprised .Too polite Harry whispered in Hermiones ear as they passed out of the inn into the tiny backyard .You need to treat people like theyre scum !Okay okay !Hermione drew out Bellatrixs wand and tapped a brick in the nondescript wall in front of them .At once the bricks began to whirl and spin A hole appeared in the middle of them which grew wider and wider finally forming an archway onto the narrow cobbled street that was Diagon Alley .It was quiet barely time for the shops to open and there were hardly any shoppers abroad .The crooked cobbled street was much altered now from the bustling place Harry had visited before his first term at Hogwarts so many years before .More shops than ever were boarded up though several new establishments dedicated to the Dark Arts had been created since his last visit .Harrys own face glared down at him from posters plastered over many windows always captioned with the words UNDESIRABLE NUMBER ONE .A number of ragged people sat huddled in doorways .He heard them moaning to the few passersby pleading for gold insisting that they were really wizards .One man had a bloody bandage over his eye .As they set off along the street the beggars glimpsed Hermione .They seemed to melt away before her drawing hoods over their faces and fleeing as fast as they could .Hermione looked after them curiously until the man with the bloodied bandage came staggering right across her path .My children !he bellowed pointing at her .His voice was cracked highpitched he sounded distraught .Where are my children ?What has he done with them ?You know you know I I really stammered Hermione .The man lunged at her reaching for her throat Then with a bang and a burst of red light he was thrown backward onto the ground unconscious .Ron stood there his wand still outstretched and a look of shock visible behind his beard .Faces appeared at the windows on either side of the street while a little knot of prosperouslooking passersby gathered their robes about them and broke into gentle trots keen to vacate the scene .Their entrance into Diagon Alley could hardly have been more conspicuous for a moment Harry wondered whether it might not be better to leave now and try to think of a different plan .Before they could move or consult one another however they heard a cry from behind them .Why Madam Lestrange !Harry whirled around and Griphook tightened his hold around Harrys neck A tall thin wizard with a crown of bushy gray hair and a long sharp nose was striding toward them .Its Travers hissed the goblin into Harrys ear but at that moment Harry could not think who Travers was .Hermione had drawn herself up to her fullest height and said with as much contempt as she could muster And what do you want ?Travers stopped in his tracks clearly affronted .Hes another Death Eater breathed Griphook and Harry sidled sideways to repeat the information into Hermione s ear .I merely sought to greet you said Travers coolly but if my presence is not welcome .Harry recognized his voice now Travers was one of the Death Eaters who had been summoned to Xenophiliuss house .No no not at all Travers said Hermione quickly trying to cover up her mistake .How are you ?Well I confess I am surprised to see you out and about Bellatrix .Really ?Why ?asked Hermione .Well Travers coughed I heard that the inhabitants of Malfoy Manor were confined to the house after the .ah .escape .Harry willed Hermione to keep her head .If this was true and Bellatrix was not supposed to be out in public The Dark Lord forgives those who have served him most faithfully in the past said Hermione in a magnificent imitation of Bellatrixs most contemptuous manner .Perhaps your credit is not as good with him as mine is Travers .Though the Death Eater looked offended he also seemed less suspicious .He glanced down at the man Ron had just Stunned .How did it offend you ?It does not matter it will not do so again said Hermione coolly .Some of these wandless can be troublesome said Travers .While they do nothing but beg I have no objection but one of them actually asked me to plead her case at the Ministry last week . ‘Im a witch sir Im a witch let me prove it to youV he said in a squeaky impersonation .As if I was going to give her my wand but whose wand said Travers curiously are you using at the moment Bellatrix ?I heard that your own was I have my wand here said Hermione coldly holding up Bellatrixs wand .I dont know what rumors you have been listening to Travers but you seem sadly misinformed .Travers seemed a little taken aback at that and he turned instead to Ron .Who is your friend ?I do not recognize him .This is Dragomir Despard said Hermione they had decided that a fictional foreigner was the safest cover for Ron to assume .He speaks very little English but he is in sympathy with the Dark Lords aims .He has traveled here from Transylvania to see our new regime .Indeed ?How do you do Dragomir ?Ow you ?said Ron holding out his hand .Travers extended two fingers and shook Rons hand as though frightened of dirtying himself .So what brings you and your ah sympathetic friend to Diagon Alley this early ?asked Travers .I need to visit Gringotts said Hermione .Alas I also said Travers .Gold filthy gold !We cannot live without it yet I confess I deplore the necessity of consorting with our longfingered friends .Harry felt Griphooks clasped hands tighten momentarily around his neck .Shall we ?said Travers gesturing Hermione forward .Hermione had no choice but to fall into step beside him and head along the crooked cobbled street toward the place where the snowywhite Gringotts stood towering over the other little shops .Ron sloped along beside them and Harry and Griphook followed .A watchful Death Eater was the very last thing they needed and the worst of it was with Travers marching at what he believed to be Bellatrixs side there was no means for Harry to communicate with Hermione or Ron .All too soon they arrived at the foot of the marble steps leading up to the great bronze doors .As Griphook had already warned them the liveried goblins who usually flanked the entrance had been replaced by two wizards both of whom were clutching long thin golden rods .Ah Probity Probes sighed Travers theatrically so crude but effective !And he set off up the steps nodding left and right to the wizards who raised the golden rods and passed them up and down his body .The Probes Harry knew detected spells of concealment and hidden magical objects .Knowing that he had only seconds Harry pointed Dracos wand at each of the guards in turn and murmured Confundo twice .Unnoticed by Travers who was looking through the bronze doors at the inner hall each of the guards gave a little start as the spells hit them .Hermione s long black hair rippled behind her as she climbed the steps .One moment madam said the guard raising his Probe .But youve just done that !said Hermione in Bellatrixs commanding arrogant voice .Travers looked around eyebrows raised .The guard was confused .He stared down at the thin golden Probe and then at his companion who said in a slightly dazed voice Yeah youve just checked them Marius .Hermione swept forward Ron by her side Harry and Griphook trotting invisibly behind them .Harry glanced back as they crossed the threshold The wizards were both scratching their heads .Two goblins stood before the inner doors which were made of silver and which carried the poem warning of dire retribution to potential thieves .Harry looked up at it and all of a sudden a knifesharp memory came to him standing on this very spot on the day that he had turned eleven the most wonderful birthday of his life and Hagrid standing beside him saying Like I said yehd be mad ter try an rob it .Gringotts had seemed a place of wonder that day the enchanted repository of a trove of gold he had never known he possessed and never for an instant could he have dreamed that he would return to steal .But within seconds they were standing in the vast marble hall of the bank .The long counter was manned by goblins sitting on high stools serving the first customers of the day .Hermione Ron and Travers headed toward an old goblin who was examining a thick gold coin through an eyeglass .Hermione allowed Travers to step ahead of her on the pretext of explaining features of the hall to Ron .The goblin tossed the coin he was holding aside said to nobody in particular Leprechaun and then greeted Travers who passed over a tiny golden key which was examined and given back to him .Hermione stepped forward .Madam Lestrange !said the goblin evidently startled .Dear me !How how may I help you today ?I wish to enter my vault said Hermione .The old goblin seemed to recoil a little .Harry glanced around .Not only was Travers hanging back watching but several other goblins had looked up from their work to stare at Hermione .You have .identification ?asked the goblin .Identification ?I I have never been asked for identification before !said Hermione .They know whispered Griphook in Harrys ear .They must have been warned there might be an impostor !Your wand will do madam said the goblin .He held out a slightly trembling hand and in a dreadful blast of realization Harry knew that the goblins of Gringotts were aware that Bellatrixs wand had been stolen .Act now act now whispered Griphook in Harrys ear the Imperius Cursel Harry raised the hawthorn wand beneath the cloak pointed it at the old goblin and whispered for the first time in his life Imperiol A curious sensation shot down Harrys arm a feeling of tingling warmth that seemed to flow from his mind down the sinews and veins connecting him to the wand and the curse it had just cast .The goblin took Bellatrixs wand examined it closely and then said Ah you have had a new wand made Madam Lestrange !What ?said Hermione .No no thats mine A new wand ?said Travers approaching the counter again still the goblins all around were watching .But how could you have done which wandmaker did you use ?Harry acted without thinking Pointing his wand at Travers he muttered Imperiol once more .Oh yes I see said Travers looking down at Bellatrixs wand yes very handsome .And is it working well ?I always think wands require a little breaking in dont you ?Hermione looked utterly bewildered but to Harrys enormous relief she accepted the bizarre turn of events without comment .The old goblin behind the counter clapped his hands and a younger goblin approached .I shall need the Clankers he told the goblin who dashed away and returned a moment later with a leather bag that seemed to be full of jangling metal which he handed to his senior .Good good !So if you will follow me Madam Lestrange said the old goblin hopping down off his stool and vanishing from sight I shall take you to your vault .He appeared around the end of the counter jogging happily toward them the contents of the leather bag still jingling .Travers was now standing quite still with his mouth hanging wide open .Ron was drawing attention to this odd phenomenon by regarding Travers with confusion .Wait Bogrod !Another goblin came scurrying around the counter .We have instructions he said with a bow to Hermione .Forgive me Madam but there have been special orders regarding the vault of Lestrange .He whispered urgently in Bogrods ear but the Imperiused goblin shook him off .I am aware of the instructions .Madam Lestrange wishes to visit her vault .Very old family .old clients .This way please .And still clanking he hurried toward one of the many doors leading off the hall .Harry looked back at Travers who was still rooted to the spot looking abnormally vacant and made his decision With a flick of his wand he made Travers come with them walking meekly in their wake as they reached the door and passed into the rough stone passageway beyond which was lit with flaming torches .Were in trouble they suspect said Harry as the door slammed behind them and he pulled off the Invisibility Cloak .Griphook jumped down from his shoulders neither Travers nor Bogrod showed the slightest surprise at the sudden appearance of Harry Potter in their midst .Theyre Imperiused he added in response to Hermione and Rons confused queries about Travers and Bogrod who were both now standing there looking blank .I dont think I did it strongly enough I dont know .And another memory darted through his mind of the real Bellatrix Lestrange shrieking at him when he had first tried to use an Unforgivable Curse You need to mean them Potter !What do we do ?asked Ron .Shall we get out now while we can ?If we can said Hermione looking back toward the door into the main hall beyond which who knew what was happening .Weve got this far I say we go on said Harry .Good !said Griphook .So we need Bogrod to control the cart I no longer have the authority .But there will not be room for the wizard .Harry pointed his wand at Travers .Imperio The wizard turned and set off along the dark track at a smart pace .What are you making him do ?Hide said Harry as he pointed his wand at Bogrod who whistled to summon a little cart that came trundling along the tracks toward them out of the darkness .Harry was sure he could hear shouting behind them in the main hall as they all clambered into it Bogrod in front with Griphook Harry Ron and Hermione crammed together in the back .With a jerk the cart moved off gathering speed They hurtled past Travers who was wriggling into a crack in the wall then the cart began twisting and turning through the labyrinthine passages sloping downward all the time .Harry could not hear anything over the rattling of the cart on the tracks His hair flew behind him as they swerved between stalactites flying ever deeper into the earth but he kept glancing back .They might as well have left enormous footprints behind them the more he thought about it the more foolish it seemed to have disguised Hermione as Bellatrix to have brought along Bellatrixs wand when the Death Eaters knew who had stolen it They were deeper than Harry had ever penetrated within Gringotts they took a hairpin bend at speed and saw ahead of them with seconds to spare a waterfall pounding over the track .Harry heard Griphook shout No !but there was no braking They zoomed through it .Water filled Harrys eyes and mouth He could not see or breathe Then with an awful lurch the cart flipped over and they were all thrown out of it .Harry heard the cart smash into pieces against the passage wall heard Hermione shriek something and felt himself glide back toward the ground as though weightless landing painlessly on the rocky passage floor .CCushioning Charm Hermione spluttered as Ron pulled her to her feet but to Harrys horror he saw that she was no longer Bellatrix instead she stood there in overlarge robes sopping wet and completely herself Ron was redhaired and beardless again .They were realizing it as they looked at each other feeling their own faces .The Thiefs Downfall !said Griphook clambering to his feet and looking back at the deluge onto the tracks which Harry knew now had been more than water .It washes away all enchantment all magical concealment !They know there are impostors in Gringotts they have set off defenses against us !Harry saw Hermione checking that she still had the beaded bag and hurriedly thrust his own hand under his jacket to make sure he had not lost the Invisibility Cloak .Then he turned to see Bogrod shaking his head in bewilderment The Thiefs Downfall seemed to have lifted the Imperius Curse .We need him said Griphook we cannot enter the vault without a Gringotts goblin .And we need the Clankers !Imperiol Harry said again his voice echoed through the stone passage as he felt again the sense of heady control that flowed from brain to wand .Bogrod submitted once more to his will his befuddled expression changing to one of polite indifference as Ron hurried to pick up the leather bag of metal tools .Harry I think I can hear people coming !said Hermione and she pointed Bellatrixs wand at the waterfall and cried Protego They saw the Shield Charm break the flow of enchanted water as it flew up the passageway .Good thinking said Harry .Lead the way Griphook !How are we going to get out again ?Ron asked as they hurried on foot into the darkness after the goblin Bogrod panting in their wake like an old dog .Lets worry about that when we have to said Harry .He was trying to listen He thought he could hear something clanking and moving around nearby .Griphook how much farther ?Not far Harry Potter not far .And they turned a corner and saw the thing for which Harry had been prepared but which still brought all of them to a halt .A gigantic dragon was tethered to the ground in front of them barring access to four or five of the deepest vaults in the place .The beasts scales had turned pale and flaky during its long incarceration under the ground its eyes were milkily pink both rear legs bore heavy cuffs from which chains led to enormous pegs driven deep into the rocky floor .Its great spiked wings folded close to its body would have filled the chamber if it spread them and when it turned its ugly head toward them it roared with a noise that made the rock tremble opened its mouth and spat a jet of fire that sent them running back up the passageway .It is partially blind panted Griphook but even more savage for that .However we have the means to control it .It has learned what to expect when the Clankers come .Give them to me .Ron passed the bag to Griphook and the goblin pulled out a number of small metal instruments that when shaken made a loud ringing noise like miniature hammers on anvils .Griphook handed them out Bogrod accepted his meekly .You know what to do Griphook told Harry Ron and Hermione .It will expect pain when it hears the noise It will retreat and Bogrod must place his palm upon the door of the vault .They advanced around the corner again shaking the Clankers and the noise echoed off the rocky walls grossly magnified so that the inside of Harrys skull seemed to vibrate with the din .The dragon let out another hoarse roar then retreated .Harry could see it trembling and as they drew nearer he saw the scars made by vicious slashes across its face and guessed that it had been taught to fear hot swords when it heard the sound of the Clankers .Make him press his hand to the door !Griphook urged Harry who turned his wand again upon Bogrod .The old goblin obeyed pressing his palm to the wood and the door of the vault melted away to reveal a cavelike opening crammed from floor to ceiling with golden coins and goblets silver armor the skins of strange creatures some with long spines others with drooping wings potions in jeweled flasks and a skull still wearing a crown .Search fast !said Harry as they all hurried inside the vault .He had described Hufflepuffs cup to Ron and Hermione but if it was the other unknown Horcrux that resided in this vault he did not know what it looked like .He barely had time to glance around however before there was a muffled clunk from behind them The door had reappeared sealing them inside the vault and they were plunged into total darkness .No matter Bogrod will be able to release us !said Griphook as Ron gave a shout of surprise .Light your wands cant you ?And hurry we have very little time !Lumosl Harry shone his lit wand around the vault Its beam fell upon glittering jewels he saw the fake sword of Gryffindor lying on a high shelf amongst a jumble of chains .Ron and Hermione had lit their wands too and were now examining the piles of objects surrounding them .Harry could this be ?Aargh !Hermione screamed in pain and Harry turned his wand on her in time to see a jeweled goblet tumbling from her grip .But as it fell it split became a shower of goblets so that a second later with a great clatter the floor was covered in identical cups rolling in every direction the original impossible to discern amongst them .It burned me !moaned Hermione sucking her blistered fingers .They have added Gemino and Flagrante Curses !said Griphook .Everything you touch will burn and multiply but the copies are worthless and if you continue to handle the treasure you will eventually be crushed to death by the weight of expanding gold !Okay dont touch anything !said Harry desperately but even as he said it Ron accidentally nudged one of the fallen goblets with his foot and twenty more exploded into being while Ron hopped on the spot part of his shoe burned away by contact with the hot metal .Stand still dont move !said Hermione clutching at Ron .Just look around !said Harry .Remember the cups small and gold its got a badger engraved on it two handles otherwise see if you can spot Ravenclaws symbol anywhere the eagle They directed their wands into every nook and crevice turning cautiously on the spot .It was impossible not to brush up against anything Harry sent a great cascade of fake Galleons onto the ground where they joined the goblets and now there was scarcely room to place their feet and the glowing gold blazed with heat so that the vault felt like a furnace .Harrys wandlight passed over shields and goblin made helmets set on shelves rising to the ceiling higher and higher he raised the beam until suddenly it found an object that made his heart skip and his hand tremble .Its there its up there Ron and Hermione pointed their wands at it too so that the little golden cup sparkled in a threeway spotlight the cup that had belonged to Helga Hufflepuff which had passed into the possession of Hepzibah Smith from whom it had been stolen by Tom Riddle .And how the hell are we going to get up there without touching anything ?asked Ron .Accio Cup cried Hermione who had evidently forgotten in her desperation what Griphook had told them during their planning sessions .No use no use !snarled the goblin .Then what do we do ?said Harry glaring at the goblin .If you want the sword Griphook then youll have to help us more than wait !Can I touch stuff with the sword ?Hermione give it here !Hermione fumbled inside her robes drew out the beaded bag rummaged for a few seconds then removed the shining sword .Harry seized it by its rubied hilt and touched the tip of the blade to a silver flagon nearby which did not multiply .If I can just poke the sword through a handle but how am I going to get up there ?The shelf on which the cup reposed was out of reach for any of them even Ron who was tallest .The heat from the enchanted treasure rose in waves and sweat ran down Harrys face and back as he struggled to think of a way up to the cup and then he heard the dragon roar on the other side of the vault door and the sound of clanking growing louder and louder .They were truly trapped now There was no way out except through the door and a horde of goblins seemed to be approaching on the other side .Harry looked at Ron and Hermione and saw terror in their faces .Hermione said Harry as the clanking grew louder Ive got to get up there weve got to get rid of it She raised her wand pointed it at Harry and whispered Levicorpus .Hoisted into the air by his ankle Harry hit a suit of armor and replicas burst out of it like whitehot bodies filling the cramped space .With screams of pain Ron Hermione and the two goblins were knocked aside into other objects which also began to replicate .Half buried in a rising tide of redhot treasure they struggled and yelled as Harry thrust the sword through the handle of Hufflepuffs cup hooking it onto the blade .Impervius screeched Hermione in an attempt to protect herself Ron and the goblins from the burning metal .Then the worst scream yet made Harry look down Ron and Hermione were waistdeep in treasure struggling to keep Bogrod from slipping beneath the rising tide but Griphook had sunk out of sight and nothing but the tips of a few long fingers were left in view .Harry seized Griphooks fingers and pulled .The blistered goblin emerged by degrees howling .Liberacorpus yelled Harry and with a crash he and Griphook landed on the surface of the swelling treasure and the sword flew out of Harrys hand .Get it !Harry yelled fighting the pain of the hot metal on his skin as Griphook clambered onto his shoulders again determined to avoid the swelling mass of redhot objects .Wheres the sword ?It had the cup on it !The clanking on the other side of the door was growing deafening it was too late There !It was Griphook who had seen it and Griphook who lunged and in that instant Harry knew that the goblin had never expected them to keep their word .One hand holding tightly to a fistful of Harrys hair to make sure he did not fall into the heaving sea of burning gold Griphook seized the hilt of the sword and swung it high out of Harrys reach .The tiny golden cup skewered by the handle on the swords blade was flung into the air .The goblin still astride him Harry dived and caught it and although he could feel it scalding his flesh he did not relinquish it even while countless Hufflepuff cups burst from his fist raining down upon him as the entrance of the vault opened up again and he found himself sliding uncontrollably on an expanding avalanche of fiery gold and silver that bore him Ron and Hermione into the outer chamber .Hardly aware of the pain from the burns covering his body and still borne along on the swell of replicating treasure Harry shoved the cup into his pocket and reached up to retrieve the sword but Griphook was gone .Sliding from Harrys shoulders the moment he could he had sprinted for cover amongst the surrounding goblins brandishing the sword and crying Thieves !Thieves !Help !Thieves !He vanished into the midst of the advancing crowd all of whom were holding daggers and who accepted him without question .Slipping on the hot metal Harry struggled to his feet and knew that the only way out was through .Stupefyl he bellowed and Ron and Hermione joined in Jets of red light flew into the crowd of goblins and some toppled over but others advanced and Harry saw several wizard guards running around the corner .The tethered dragon let out a roar and a gush of flame flew over the goblins The wizards fled doubled up back the way they had come and inspiration or madness came to Harry .Pointing his wand at the thick cuffs chaining the beast to the floor he yelled Relashiol The cuffs broke open with loud bangs .This way !Harry yelled and still shooting Stunning Spells at the advancing goblins he sprinted toward the blind dragon .Harry Harry what are you doing ?cried Hermione .Get up climb up come on The dragon had not realized that it was free Harrys foot found the crook of its hind leg and he pulled himself up onto its back .The scales were hard as steel it did not even seem to feel him .He stretched out an arm Hermione hoisted herself up Ron climbed on behind them and a second later the dragon became aware that it was untethered .With a roar it reared Harry dug in his knees clutching as tightly as he could to the jagged scales as the wings opened knocking the shrieking goblins aside like skittles and it soared into the air .Harry Ron and Hermione flat on its back scraped against the ceiling as it dived toward the passage opening while the pursuing goblins hurled daggers that glanced off its flanks .Well never get out its too big !Hermione screamed but the dragon opened its mouth and belched flame again blasting the tunnel whose floors and ceiling cracked and crumbled .By sheer force the dragon clawed and fought its way through .Harrys eyes were shut tight against the heat and dust Deafened by the crashing of rock and the dragons roars he could only cling to its back expecting to be shaken off at any moment then he heard Hermione yelling Defodiol She was helping the dragon enlarge the passageway carving out the ceiling as it struggled upward toward the fresher air away from the shrieking and clanking goblins Harry and Ron copied her blasting the ceiling apart with more gouging spells .They passed the underground lake and the great crawling snarling beast seemed to sense freedom and space ahead of it and behind them the passage was full of the dragons thrashing spiked tail of great lumps of rock gigantic fractured stalactites and the clanking of the goblins seemed to be growing more muffled while ahead the dragons fire kept their progress clear And then at last by the combined force of their spells and the dragons brute strength they had blasted their way out of the passage into the marble hallway .Goblins and wizards shrieked and ran for cover and finally the dragon had room to stretch its wings Turning its horned head toward the cool outside air it could smell beyond the entrance it took off and with Harry Ron and Hermione still clinging to its back it forced its way through the metal doors leaving them buckled and hanging from their hinges as it staggered into Diagon Alley and launched itself into the sky .THE FINAL HIDING PLACE There was no means of steering the dragon could not see where it was going and Harry knew that if it turned sharply or rolled in midair they would find it impossible to cling onto its broad back .Nevertheless as they climbed higher and higher London unfurling below them like a grayandgreen map Harrys overwhelming feeling was of gratitude for an escape that had seemed impossible .Crouching low over the beasts neck he clung tight to the metallic scales and the cool breeze was soothing on his burned and blistered skin the dragons wings beating the air like the sails of a windmill .Behind him whether from delight or fear he could not tell Ron kept swearing at the top of his voice and Hermione seemed to be sobbing .After five minutes or so Harry lost some of his immediate dread that the dragon was going to throw them off for it seemed intent on nothing but getting as far away from its underground prison as possible but the question of how and when they were to dismount remained rather frightening .He had no idea how long dragons could fly without landing nor how this particular dragon which could barely see would locate a good place to put down .He glanced around constantly imagining that he could feel his scar prickling .How long would it be before Voldemort knew that they had broken into the Lestranges vault ?How soon would the goblins of Gringotts notify Bellatrix ?How quickly would they realize what had been taken ?And then when they discovered that the golden cup was missing ?Voldemort would know at last that they were hunting Horcruxes .The dragon seemed to crave cooler and fresher air It climbed steadily until they were flying through wisps of chilly cloud and Harry could no longer make out the little colored dots which were cars pouring in and out of the capital .On and on they flew over countryside parceled out in patches of green and brown over roads and rivers winding through the landscape like strips of matte and glossy ribbon .What do you reckon its looking for ?Ron yelled as they flew farther and farther north .No idea Harry bellowed back .His hands were numb with cold but he did not dare attempt to shift his grip .He had been wondering for some time what they would do if they saw the coast sail beneath them if the dragon headed for open sea he was cold and numb not to mention desperately hungry and thirsty .When he wondered had the beast itself last eaten ?Surely it would need sustenance before long ?And what if at that point it realized it had three highly edible humans sitting on its back ?The sun slipped lower in the sky which was turning indigo and still the dragon flew cities and towns gliding out of sight beneath them its enormous shadow sliding over the earth like a great dark cloud .Every part of Harry ached with the effort of holding on to the dragons back .Is it my imagination shouted Ron after a considerable stretch of silence or are we losing height ?Harry looked down and saw deep green mountains and lakes coppery in the sunset .The landscape seemed to grow larger and more detailed as he squinted over the side of the dragon and he wondered whether it had divined the presence of fresh water by the flashes of reflected sunlight .Lower and lower the dragon flew in great spiraling circles honing in it seemed upon one of the smaller lakes .I say we jump when it gets low enough !Harry called back to the others .Straight into the water before it realizes were here !They agreed Hermione a little faintly and now Harry could see the dragons wide yellow underbelly rippling in the surface of the water .NOW !He slithered over the side of the dragon and plummeted feetfirst toward the surface of the lake the drop was greater than he had estimated and he hit the water hard plunging like a stone into a freezing green reedfilled world .He kicked toward the surface and emerged panting to see enormous ripples emanating in circles from the places where Ron and Hermione had fallen .The dragon did not seem to have noticed anything It was already fifty feet away swooping low over the lake to scoop up water in its scarred snout .As Ron and Hermione emerged spluttering and gasping from the depths of the lake the dragon flew on its wings beating hard and landed at last on a distant bank .Harry Ron and Hermione struck out for the opposite shore .The lake did not seem to be deep Soon it was more a question of fighting their way through reeds and mud than swimming and at last they flopped sodden panting and exhausted onto slippery grass .Hermione collapsed coughing and shuddering .Though Harry could have happily lain down and slept he staggered to his feet drew out his wand and started casting the usual protective spells around them .When he had finished he joined the others .It was the first time that he had seen them properly since escaping from the vault .Both had angry red burns all over their faces and arms and their clothing was singed away in places .They were wincing as they dabbed essence of dittany onto their many injuries .Hermione handed Harry the bottle then pulled out three bottles of pumpkin juice she had brought from Shell Cottage and clean dry robes for all of them .They changed and then gulped down the juice .Well on the upside said Ron finally who was sitting watching the skin on his hands regrow we got the Horcrux .On the downside no sword said Harry through gritted teeth as he dripped dittany through the singed hole in his jeans onto the angry burn beneath .No sword repeated Ron .That doublecrossing little scab .Harry pulled the Horcrux from the pocket of the wet jacket he had just taken off and set it down on the grass in front of them .Glinting in the sun it drew their eyes as they swigged their bottles of juice .At least we cant wear it this time thatd look a bit weird hanging round our necks said Ron wiping his mouth on the back of his hand .Hermione looked across the lake to the far bank where the dragon was still drinking .Whatll happen to it do you think ?she asked .Will it be all right ?You sound like Hagrid said Ron .Its a dragon Hermione it can look after itself .Its us we need to worry about .What do you mean ?Well I dont know how to break this to you said Ron but I think they might have noticed we broke into Gringotts .All three of them started to laugh and once started it was difficult to stop .Harrys ribs ached he felt lightheaded with hunger but he lay back on the grass beneath the reddening sky and laughed until his throat was raw .What are we going to do though ?said Hermione finally hiccuping herself back to seriousness .Hell know wont he ?You Know Who will know we know about his Horcruxes !Maybe theyll be too scared to tell him ?said Ron hopefully .Maybe theyll cover up The sky the smell of lake water the sound of Rons voice were extinguished Pain cleaved Harrys head like a sword stroke .He was standing in a dimly lit room and a semicircle of wizards faced him and on the floor at his feet knelt a small quaking figure .What did you say to me ?His voice was high and cold but fury and fear burned inside him .The one thing he had dreaded but it could not be true he could not see how .The goblin was trembling unable to meet the red eyes high above his .Say it again !murmured Voldemort .Say it again .Mmy Lord stammered the goblin its black eyes wide with terror mmy Lord .we ttried tto ststop them .Imimpostors my Lord .broke broke into the into the Lestranges vvault .Impostors ?What impostors ?I thought Gringotts had ways of revealing impostors ?Who were they ?It was .it was .the PPotter bboy and ttwo accomplices .And they took ?he said his voice rising a terrible fear gripping him .Tell me !What did they take ?A .a ssmall golden ccup mmy Lord .The scream of rage of denial left him as if it were a strangers He was crazed frenzied it could not be true it was impossible nobody had ever known How was it possible that the boy could have discovered his secret ?The Elder Wand slashed through the air and green light erupted through the room the kneeling goblin rolled over dead the watching wizards scattered before him terrified Bellatrix and Lucius Malfoy threw others behind them in their race for the door and again and again his wand fell and those who were left were slain all of them for bringing him this news for hearing about the golden cup Alone amongst the dead he stormed up and down and they passed before him in vision his treasures his safeguards his anchors to immortality the diary was destroyed and the cup was stolen What if what if the boy knew about the others ?Could he know had he already acted had he traced more of them ?Was Dumbledore at the root of this ?Dumbledore who had always suspected him Dumbledore dead on his orders Dumbledore whose wand was his now yet who reached out from the ignominy of death through the boy the boy But surely if the boy had destroyed any of his Horcruxes he Lord Voldemort would have known would have felt it ?He the greatest wizard of them all he the most powerful he the killer of Dumbledore and of how many other worthless nameless men How could Lord Voldemort not have known if he himself most important and precious had been attacked mutilated ?True he had not felt it when the diary had been destroyed but he had thought that was because he had no body to feel being less than ghost .No surely the rest were safe .The other Horcruxes must be intact .But he must know he must be sure .He paced the room kicking aside the goblins corpse as he passed and the pictures blurred and burned in his boiling brain the lake the shack and Hogwarts A modicum of calm cooled his rage now How could the boy know that he had hidden the ring in the Gaunt shack ?No one had ever known him to be related to the Gaunts he had hidden the connection the killings had never been traced to him The ring surely was safe .And how could the boy or anybody else know about the cave or penetrate its protection ?The idea of the locket being stolen was absurd .As for the school He alone knew where in Hogwarts he had stowed the Horcrux because he alone had plumbed the deepest secrets of that place .And there was still Nagini who must remain close now no longer sent to do his bidding under his protection .But to be sure to be utterly sure he must return to each of his hiding places he must redouble protection around each of his Horcruxes .A job like the quest for the Elder Wand that he must undertake alone .Which should he visit first which was in most danger ?An old unease flickered inside him .Dumbledore had known his middle name .Dumbledore might have made the connection with the Gaunts .Their abandoned home was perhaps the least secure of his hiding places it was there that he would go first .The lake surely impossible .though was there a slight possibility that Dumbledore might have known some of his past misdeeds through the orphanage .And Hogwarts .but he knew that his Horcrux there was safe it would be impossible for Potter to enter Hogsmeade without detection let alone the school .Nevertheless it would be prudent to alert Snape to the fact that the boy might try to reenter the castle .To tell Snape why the boy might return would be foolish of course it had been a grave mistake to trust Bellatrix and Malfoy Didnt their stupidity and carelessness prove how unwise it was ever to trust ?He would visit the Gaunt shack first then and take Nagini with him He would not be parted from the snake anymore .and he strode from the room through the hall and out into the dark garden where the fountain played he called the snake in Parseltongue and it slithered out to join him like a long shadow .Harrys eyes flew open as he wrenched himself back to the present He was lying on the bank of the lake in the setting sun and Ron and Hermione were looking down at him .Judging by their worried looks and by the continued pounding of his scar his sudden excursion into Voldemorts mind had not passed unnoticed .He struggled up shivering vaguely surprised that he was still wet to his skin and saw the cup lying innocently in the grass before him and the lake deep blue shot with gold in the failing sun .He knows .His own voice sounded strange and low after Voldemorts high screams .He knows and hes going to check where the others are and the last one he was already on his feet is at Hogwarts .I knew it .I knew it .What ?Ron was gaping at him Hermione sat up looking worried .But what did you see ?How do you know ?I saw him find out about the cup I I was in his head hes Harry remembered the killings hes seriously angry and scared too he cant understand how we knew and now hes going to check the others are safe the ring first .He thinks the Hogwarts one is safest because Snapes there because itll be so hard not to be seen getting in I think hell check that one last but he could still be there within hours Did you see where in Hogwarts it is ?asked Ron now scrambling to his feet too .No he was concentrating on warning Snape he didnt think about exactly where it is Wait wait cried Hermione as Ron caught up the Horcrux and Harry pulled out the Invisibility Cloak again .We cant just go we havent got a plan we need to We need to get going said Harry firmly .He had been hoping to sleep looking forward to getting into the new tent but that was impossible now .Can you imagine what hes going to do once he realizes the ring and the locket are gone ?What if he moves the Hogwarts Horcrux decides it isnt safe enough ?But how are we going to get in ?Well go to Hogsmeade said Harry and try to work something out once we see what the protection around the schools like .Get under the Cloak Hermione I want to stick together this time .But we dont really fit Itll be dark no ones going to notice our feet .The flapping of enormous wings echoed across the black water The dragon had drunk its fill and risen into the air .They paused in their preparations to watch it climb higher and higher now black against the rapidly darkening sky until it vanished over a nearby mountain .Then Hermione walked forward and took her place between the other two .Harry pulled the Cloak down as far as it would go and together they turned on the spot into the crushing darkness .THE MISSING MIRROR Harrys feet touched road .He saw the achingly familiar Hogsmeade High Street dark shop fronts and the outline of black mountains beyond the village and the curve in the road ahead that led off toward Hogwarts and light spilling from the windows of the Three Broomsticks and with a lurch of the heart he remembered with piercing accuracy how he had landed here nearly a year before supporting a desperately weak Dumbledore all this in a second upon landing and then even as he relaxed his grip upon Rons and Hermiones arms it happened .The air was rent by a scream that sounded like Voldemorts when he had realized the cup had been stolen It tore at every nerve in Harrys body and he knew immediately that their appearance had caused it .Even as he looked at the other two beneath the Cloak the door of the Three Broomsticks burst open and a dozen cloaked and hooded Death Eaters dashed into the street their wands aloft .Harry seized Rons wrist as he raised his wand there were too many of them to Stun Even attempting it would give away their position .One of the Death Eaters waved his wand and the scream stopped still echoing around the distant mountains .Accio Cloak .roared one of the Death Eaters .Harry seized its folds but it made no attempt to escape The Summoning Charm had not worked on it .Not under your wrapper then Potter ?yelled the Death Eater who had tried the charm and then to his fellows Spread out .Hes here .Six of the Death Eaters ran toward them Harry Ron and Hermione backed as quickly as possible down the nearest side street and the Death Eaters missed them by inches .They waited in the darkness listening to the footsteps running up and down beams of light flying along the street from the Death Eaters searching wands .Lets just leave !Hermione whispered .Disapparate now !Great idea said Ron but before Harry could reply a Death Eater shouted We know youre here Potter and theres no getting away !Well find you !They were ready for us whispered Harry .They set up that spell to tell them wed come .I reckon theyve done something to keep us here trap us What about dementors ?called another Death Eater .Let em have free rein theyd find him quick enough !The Dark Lord wants Potter dead by no hand but his an dementors wont kill him !The Dark Lord wants Potters life not his soul .Hell be easier to kill if hes been Kissed first !There were noises of agreement .Dread filled Harry To repel dementors they would have to produce Patronuses which would give them away immediately .Were going to have to try to Disapparate Harry !Hermione whispered .Even as she said it he felt the unnatural cold begin to steal over the street .Light was sucked from the environment right up to the stars which vanished .In the pitchblackness he felt Hermione take hold of his arm and together they turned on the spot .The air through which they needed to move seemed to have become solid They could not Disapparate the Death Eaters had cast their charms well .The cold was biting deeper and deeper into Harrys flesh .He Ron and Hermione retreated down the side street groping their way along the wall trying not to make a sound .Then around the corner gliding noiselessly came dementors ten or more of them visible because they were of a denser darkness than their surroundings with their black cloaks and their scabbed and rotting hands .Could they sense fear in the vicinity ?Harry was sure of it They seemed to be coming more quickly now taking those dragging rattling breaths he detested tasting despair on the air closing in He raised his wand He could not would not suffer the Dementors Kiss whatever happened afterward .It was of Ron and Hermione that he thought as he whispered Expecto Patronum .The silver stag burst from his wand and charged The dementors scattered and there was a triumphant yell from somewhere out of sight .Its him down there down there I saw his Patronus it was a stag !The dementors had retreated the stars were popping out again and the footsteps of the Death Eaters were becoming louder but before Harry in his panic could decide what to do there was a grinding of bolts nearby a door opened on the lefthand side of the narrow street and a rough voice said Potter in here quick !He obeyed without hesitation The three of them hurtled through the open doorway .Upstairs keep the Cloak on keep quiet !muttered a tall figure passing them on his way into the street and slamming the door behind him .Harry had had no idea where they were but now he saw by the stuttering light of a single candle the grubby sawdust strewn bar of the Hogs Head Inn .They ran behind the counter and through a second doorway which led to a rickety wooden staircase that they climbed as fast as they could .The stairs opened onto a sitting room with a threadbare carpet and a small fireplace above which hung a single large oil painting of a blonde girl who gazed out at the room with a kind of vacant sweetness .Shouts reached them from the street below .Still wearing the Invisibility Cloak they crept toward the grimy window and looked down .Their savior whom Harry now recognized as the Hogs Heads barman was the only person not wearing a hood .So what ?he was bellowing into one of the hooded faces .So what ?You send dementors down my street Ill send a Patronus back at em !Im not having em near me Ive told you that Im not having it !That wasnt your Patronus !said a Death Eater .That was a stag it was Potters !Stag !roared the barman and he pulled out a wand .Stag !You idiot Expecto Patronum .Something huge and horned erupted from the wand Head down it charged toward the High Street and out of sight .Thats not what I saw said the Death Eater though with less certainty .Curfews been broken you heard the noise one of his companions told the barman .Someone was out in the street against regulations If I want to put my cat out I will and be damned to your curfew !You set off the Caterwauling Charm ?What if I did ?Going to cart me off to Azkaban ?Kill me for sticking my nose out my own front door ?Do it then if you want to !But I hope for your sakes you havent pressed your little Dark Marks and summoned him .Hes not going to like being called here for me and my old cat is he now ?Dont you worry about us said one of the Death Eaters worry about yourself breaking curfew !And where will you lot traffick potions and poisons when my pubs closed down ?Whatll happen to your little sidelines then ?Are you threatening ?I keep my mouth shut its why you come here isnt it ?I still say I saw a stag Patronus !shouted the first Death Eater .Stag ?roared the barman .Its a goat idiot !All right we made a mistake said the second Death Eater .Break curfew again and we wont be so lenient !The Death Eaters strode back toward the High Street .Hermione moaned with relief wove out from under the Cloak and sat down on a wobblelegged chair .Harry drew the curtains tight shut then pulled the Cloak off himself and Ron .They could hear the barman down below rebolting the door of the bar then climbing the stairs .Harrys attention was caught by something on the mantelpiece a small rectangular mirror propped on top of it right beneath the portrait of the girl .The barman entered the room .You bloody fools he said gruffly looking from one to the other of them .What were you thinking coming here ?Thank you said Harry .We cant thank you enough .You saved our lives .The barman grunted .Harry approached him looking up into the face trying to see past the long stringy wiregray hair and beard .He wore spectacles .Behind the dirty lenses the eyes were a piercing brilliant blue .Its your eye Ive been seeing in the mirror .There was silence in the room .Harry and the barman looked at each other .You sent Dobby .The barman nodded and looked around for the elf .Thought hed be with you .Where Ve you left him ?Hes dead said Harry .Bellatrix Lestrange killed him .The barmans face was impassive .After a few moments he said Im sorry to hear it .I liked that elf .He turned away lighting lamps with prods of his wand not looking at any of them .Youre Aberforth said Harry to the mans back .He neither confirmed nor denied it but bent to light the fire .How did you get this ?Harry asked walking across to Siriuss mirror the twin of the one he had broken nearly two years before .Bought it from Dung bout a year ago said Aberforth .Albus told me what it was .Been trying to keep an eye out for you .Ron gasped .The silver doe !he said excitedly .Was that you too ?What are you talking about ?said Aberforth .Someone sent a doe Patronus to us !Brains like that you could be a Death Eater son .Havent I just proved my Patronus is a goat ?Oh said Ron .Yeah .well Im hungry !he added defensively as his stomach gave an enormous rumble .I got food said Aberforth and he sloped out of the room reappearing moments later with a large loaf of bread some cheese and a pewter jug of mead which he set upon a small table in front of the fire .Ravenous they ate and drank and for a while there was silence but for the crackle of the fire the clink of goblets and the sound of chewing .Right then said Aberforth when they had eaten their fill and Harry and Ron sat slumped dozily in their chairs .We need to think of the best way to get you out of here .Cant be done by night you heard what happens if anyone moves outdoors during darkness Caterwauling Charms set off theyll be onto you like bowtruckles on doxy eggs .I dont reckon Ill be able to pass off a stag as a goat a second time .Wait for daybreak when curfew lifts then you can put your Cloak back on and set out on foot .Get right out of Hogsmeade up into the mountains and youll be able to Disapparate there .Might see Hagrid .Hes been hiding in a cave up there with Grawp ever since they tried to arrest him .Were not leaving said Harry .We need to get into Hogwarts .Dont be stupid boy said Aberforth .Weve got to said Harry .What youve got to do said Aberforth leaning forward is to get as far from here as you can .You dont understand .There isnt much time .Weve got to get into the castle .Dumbledore I mean your brother wanted us The firelight made the grimy lenses of Aberforth s glasses momentarily opaque a bright flat white and Harry remembered the blind eyes of the giant spider Aragog .My brother Albus wanted a lot of things said Aberforth and people had a habit of getting hurt while he was carrying out his grand plans .You get away from this school Potter and out of the country if you can .Forget my brother and his clever schemes .Hes gone where none of this can hurt him and you dont owe him anything .You dont understand said Harry again .Oh dont I ?said Aberforth quietly .You dont think I understood my own brother ?Think you knew Albus better than I did ?I didnt mean that said Harry whose brain felt sluggish with exhaustion and from the surfeit of food and wine .Its .he left me a job .Did he now ?said Aberforth .Nice job I hope ?Pleasant ?Easy ?Sort of thing youd expect an unqualified wizard kid to be able to do without overstretching themselves ?Ron gave a rather grim laugh .Hermione was looking strained .Iits not easy no said Harry .But Ive got to ‘Got to ?Why ‘got to ?Hes dead isnt he ?said Aberforth roughly .Let it go boy before you follow him !Save yourself !I cant .Why not ?I Harry felt overwhelmed he could not explain so he took the offensive instead .But youre fighting too youre in the Order of the Phoenix I was said Aberforth .The Order of the Phoenix is finished .YouKnowWhos won its over and anyone whos pretending differents kidding themselves .Itll never be safe for you here Potter he wants you too badly .So go abroad go into hiding save yourself .Best take these two with you .He jerked a thumb at Ron and Hermione .Theyll be in danger long as they live now everyone knows theyve been working with you .I cant leave said Harry .Ive got a job Give it to someone else !I cant .Its got to be me Dumbledore explained it all Oh did he now ?And did he tell you everything was he honest with you ?Harry wanted with all his heart to say Yes but somehow the simple word would not rise to his lips .Aberforth seemed to know what he was thinking .I knew my brother Potter .He learned secrecy at our mothers knee .Secrets and lies thats how we grew up and Albus .he was a natural .The old mans eyes traveled to the painting of the girl over the mantelpiece .It was now Harry looked around properly the only picture in the room .There was no photograph of Albus Dumbledore nor of anyone else .Mr Dumbledore ?said Hermione rather timidly .Is that your sister ?Ariana ?Yes said Aberforth tersely .Been reading Rita Skeeter have you missy ?Even by the rosy light of the fire it was clear that Hermione had turned red .Elphias Doge mentioned her to us said Harry trying to spare Hermione .That old berk muttered Aberforth taking another swig of mead .Thought the sun shone out of my brothers every orifice he did .Well so did plenty of people you three included by the looks of it .Harry kept quiet .He did not want to express the doubts and uncertainties about Dumbledore that had riddled him for months now .He had made his choice while he dug Dobbys grave he had decided to continue along the winding dangerous path indicated for him by Albus Dumbledore to accept that he had not been told everything that he wanted to know but simply to trust .He had no desire to doubt again he did not want to hear anything that would deflect him from his purpose .He met Aberforth s gaze which was so strikingly like his brothers The bright blue eyes gave the same impression that they were Xraying the object of their scrutiny and Harry thought that Aberforth knew what he was thinking and despised him for it .Professor Dumbledore cared about Harry very much said Hermione in a low voice .Did he now ?said Aberforth .Funny thing how many of the people my brother cared about very much ended up in a worse state than if hed left em well alone .What do you mean ?asked Hermione breathlessly .Never you mind said Aberforth .But thats a really serious thing to say !said Hermione .Are you are you talking about your sister ?Aberforth glared at her His lips moved as if he were chewing the words he was holding back .Then he burst into speech .When my sister was six years old she was attacked set upon by three Muggle boys .Theyd seen her doing magic spying through the back garden hedge She was a kid she couldnt control it no witch or wizard can at that age .What they saw scared them I expect .They forced their way through the hedge and when she couldnt show them the trick they got a bit carried away trying to stop the little freak doing it .Hermione s eyes were huge in the firelight Ron looked slightly sick .Aberforth stood up tall as Albus and suddenly terrible in his anger and the intensity of his pain .It destroyed her what they did She was never right again .She wouldnt use magic but she couldnt get rid of it it turned inward and drove her mad it exploded out of her when she couldnt control it and at times she was strange and dangerous .But mostly she was sweet and scared and harmless .And my father went after the bastards that did it said Aberforth and attacked them .And they locked him up in Azkaban for it .He never said why hed done it because if the Ministry had known what Ariana had become shed have been locked up in St .Mungos for good .Theyd have seen her as a serious threat to the International Statute of Secrecy unbalanced like she was with magic exploding out of her at moments when she couldnt keep it in any longer .We had to keep her safe and quiet .We moved house put it about she was ill and my mother looked after her and tried to keep her calm and happy .I was her favorite he said and as he said it a grubby schoolboy seemed to look out through Aberforths wrinkles and tangled beard .Not Albus he was always up in his bedroom when he was home reading his books and counting his prizes keeping up with his correspondence with ‘the most notable magical names of the day Aberforth sneered .He didnt want to be bothered with her .She liked me best .I could get her to eat when she wouldnt do it for my mother I could get her to calm down when she was in one of her rages and when she was quiet she used to help me feed the goats .Then when she was fourteen .See I wasnt there said Aberforth .If Id been there I could have calmed her down .She had one of her rages and my mother wasnt as young as she was and .it was an accident .Ariana couldnt control it .But my mother was killed .Harry felt a horrible mixture of pity and repulsion he did not want to hear any more but Aberforth kept talking and Harry wondered how long it had been since he had spoken about this whether in fact he had ever spoken about it .So that put paid to Albuss trip round the world with little Doge .The pair of em came home for my mothers funeral and then Doge went off on his own and Albus settled down as head of the family .Ha !Aberforth spat into the fire .Id have looked after her I told him so I didnt care about school Id have stayed home and done it .He told me I had to finish my education and hed take over from my mother .Bit of a comedown for Mr Brilliant theres no prizes for looking after your half mad sister stopping her blowing up the house every other day .But he did all right for a few weeks .till he came .And now a positively dangerous look crept over Aberforths face .Grindelwald .And at last my brother had an equal to talk to someone just as bright and talented as he was .And looking after Ariana took a backseat then while they were hatching all their plans for a new Wizarding order and looking for Hallows and whatever else it was they were so interested in .Grand plans for the benefit of all Wizardkind and if one young girl got neglected what did that matter when Albus was working for the greater good ?But after a few weeks of it Id had enough I had .It was nearly time for me to go back to Hogwarts so I told em both of em facetoface like I am to you now and Aberforth looked down at Harry and it took little imagination to see him as a teenager wiry and angry confronting his elder brother .I told him youd better give it up now .You cant move her shes in no fit state you cant take her with you wherever it is youre planning to go when youre making your clever speeches trying to whip yourselves up a following .He didnt like that said Aberforth and his eyes were briefly occluded by the firelight on the lenses of his glasses They shone white and blind again .Grindelwald didnt like that at all .He got angry .He told me what a stupid little boy I was trying to stand in the way of him and my brilliant brother .Didnt I understand my poor sister wouldnt have to be hidden once theyd changed the world and led the wizards out of hiding and taught the Muggles their place ?And there was an argument .and I pulled out my wand and he pulled out his and I had the Cruciatus Curse used on me by my brothers best friend and Albus was trying to stop him and then all three of us were dueling and the flashing lights and the bangs set her off she couldnt stand it The color was draining from Aberforth s face as though he had suffered a mortal wound .and I think she wanted to help but she didnt really know what she was doing and I dont know which of us did it it could have been any of us and she was dead .His voice broke on the last word and he dropped down into the nearest chair .Hermiones face was wet with tears and Ron was almost as pale as Aberforth .Harry felt nothing but revulsion He wished he had not heard it wished he could wash his mind clean of it .Im so .Im so sorry Hermione whispered .Gone croaked Aberforth .Gone forever .He wiped his nose on his cuff and cleared his throat .Course Grindelwald scarpered .He had a bit of a track record already back in his own country and he didnt want Ariana set to his account too .And Albus was free wasnt he ?Free of the burden of his sister free to become the greatest wizard of the He was never free said Harry .I beg your pardon ?said Aberforth .Never said Harry .The night that your brother died he drank a potion that drove him out of his mind .He started screaming pleading with someone who wasnt there . ‘Dont hurt them please .hurt me instead .Ron and Hermione were staring at Harry .He had never gone into details about what had happened on the island on the lake The events that had taken place after he and Dumbledore had returned to Hogwarts had eclipsed it so thoroughly .He thought he was back there with you and Grindelwald I know he did said Harry remembering Dumbledore whimpering pleading .He thought he was watching Grindelwald hurting you and Ariana .It was torture to him if youd seen him then you wouldnt say he was free .Aberforth seemed lost in contemplation of his own knotted and veined hands .After a long pause he said How can you be sure Potter that my brother wasnt more interested in the greater good than in you ?How can you be sure you arent dispensable just like my little sister ?A shard of ice seemed to pierce Harrys heart .I dont believe it .Dumbledore loved Harry said Hermione .Why didnt he tell him to hide then ?shot back Aberforth .Why didnt he say to him Take care of yourself heres how to survive ?Because said Harry before Hermione could answer sometimes youve got to think about more than your own safety !Sometimes youve got to think about the greater good !This is war !Youre seventeen boy !Im of age and Im going to keep fighting even if youve given up !Who says Ive given up ?The Order of the Phoenix is finished Harry repeated .Tou Know Whos won its over and anyone whos pretending differents kidding themselves .I dont say I like it but its the truth !No it isnt said Harry .Your brother knew how to finish YouKnowWho and he passed the knowledge on to me .Im going to keep going until I succeed or I die .Dont think I dont know how this might end .Ive known it for years .He waited for Aberforth to jeer or to argue but he did not .He merely scowled .We need to get into Hogwarts said Harry again .If you cant help us well wait till daybreak leave you in peace and try to find a way in ourselves .If you can help us well now would be a great time to mention it .Aberforth remained fixed in his chair gazing at Harry with the eyes that were so extraordinarily like his brothers .At last he cleared his throat got to his feet walked around the little table and approached the portrait of Ariana .You know what to do he said .She smiled turned and walked away not as people in portraits usually did out of the sides of their frames but along what seemed to be a long tunnel painted behind her .They watched her slight figure retreating until finally she was swallowed by the darkness .Er what ?began Ron .Theres only one way in now said Aberforth .You must know theyve got all the old secret passageways covered at both ends dementors all around the boundary walls regular patrols inside the school from what my sources tell me .The place has never been so heavily guarded .How you expect to do anything once you get inside it with Snape in charge and the Carrows as his deputies .well thats your lookout isnt it ?You say youre prepared to die .But what . ?said Hermione frowning at Arianas picture .A tiny white dot had reappeared at the end of the painted tunnel and now Ariana was walking back toward them growing bigger and bigger as she came .But there was somebody else with her now someone taller than she was who was limping along looking excited .His hair was longer than Harry had ever seen it He appeared to have suffered several gashes to his face and his clothes were ripped and torn .Larger and larger the two figures grew until only their heads and shoulders filled the portrait .Then the whole thing swung forward on the wall like a little door and the entrance to a real tunnel was revealed .And out of it his hair overgrown his face cut his robes ripped clambered the real Neville Longbottom who gave a roar of delight leapt down from the mantelpiece and yelled I knew youd come !I knew it HarryY THE LOST DIADEM Neville what the how ?But Neville had spotted Ron and Hermione and with yells of delight was hugging them too .The longer Harry looked at Neville the worse he appeared One of his eyes was swollen yellow and purple there were gouge marks on his face and his general air of unkemptness suggested that he had been living rough .Nevertheless his battered visage shone with happiness as he let go of Hermione and said again I knew youd come !Kept telling Seamus it was a matter of time !Neville whats happened to you ?What ?This ?Neville dismissed his injuries with a shake of the head .This is nothing .Seamus is worse .Youll see .Shall we get going then ?Oh he turned to Aberforth Ab there might be a couple more people on the way .Couple more ?repeated Aberforth ominously .What dyou mean a couple more Longbottom ?Theres a curfew and a Caterwauling Charm on the whole village !I know thats why theyll be Apparating directly into the bar said Neville .Just send them down the passage when they get here will you ?Thanks a lot .Neville held out his hand to Hermione and helped her to climb up onto the mantelpiece and into the tunnel Ron followed then Neville .Harry addressed Aberforth .I dont know how to thank you .Youve saved our lives twice .Look after em then said Aberforth gruffly .I might not be able to save em a third time .Harry clambered up onto the mantelpiece and through the hole behind Arianas portrait .There were smooth stone steps on the other side It looked as though the passageway had been there for years .Brass lamps hung from the walls and the earthy floor was worn and smooth as they walked their shadows rippled fanlike across the wall .How longs this been here ?Ron asked as they set off .It isnt on the Marauders Map is it Harry ?I thought there were only seven passages in and out of school ?They sealed off all of those before the start of the year said Neville .Theres no chance of getting through any of them now not with curses over the entrances and Death Eaters and dementors waiting at the exits .He started walking backward beaming drinking them in .Never mind that stuff .Is it true ?Did you break into Gringotts ?Did you escape on a dragon ?Its everywhere everyones talking about it Terry Boot got beaten up by Carrow for yelling about it in the Great Hall at dinner !Yeah its true said Harry .Neville laughed gleefully .What did you do with the dragon ?Released it into the wild said Ron .Hermione was all for keeping it as a pet Dont exaggerate Ron But what have you been doing ?People have been saying youve just been on the run Harry but I dont think so .I think youve been up to something .Youre right said Harry but tell us about Hogwarts Neville we havent heard anything .Its been .well its not really like Hogwarts anymore said Neville the smile fading from his face as he spoke .Do you know about the Carrows ?Those two Death Eaters who teach here ?They do more than teach said Neville .Theyre in charge of all discipline .They like punishment the Carrows .Like Umbridge ?Nah they make her look tame .The other teachers are all supposed to refer us to the Carrows if we do anything wrong .They dont though if they can avoid it .You can tell they all hate them as much as we do .Amycus the bloke he teaches what used to be Defense Against the Dark Arts except now its just the Dark Arts .Were supposed to practice the Cruciatus Curse on people whove earned detentions What ?Harry Ron and Hermiones united voices echoed up and down the passage .Yeah said Neville .Thats how I got this one he pointed at a particularly deep gash in his cheek I refused to do it .Some people are into it though Crabbe and Goyle love it .First time theyve ever been top in anything I expect .Alecto Amycuss sister teaches Muggle Studies which is compulsory for everyone .Weve all got to listen to her explain how Muggles are like animals stupid and dirty and how they drove wizards into hiding by being vicious toward them and how the natural order is being reestablished .I got this one he indicated another slash to his face for asking her how much Muggle blood she and her brother have got .Blimey Neville said Ron theres a time and a place for getting a smart mouth .You didnt hear her said Neville .You wouldnt have stood it either .The thing is it helps when people stand up to them it gives everyone hope .I used to notice that when you did it Harry .But theyve used you as a knife sharpener said Ron wincing slightly as they passed a lamp and Nevilles injuries were thrown into even greater relief .Neville shrugged .Doesnt matter .They dont want to spill too much pure blood so theyll torture us a bit if were mouthy but they wont actually kill us .Harry did not know what was worse the things that Neville was saying or the matteroffact tone in which he said them .The only people in real danger are the ones whose friends and relatives on the outside are giving trouble .They get taken hostage .Old Xeno Lovegood was getting a bit too outspoken in The Quihhler so they dragged Luna off the train on the way back for Christmas .Neville shes all right weve seen her Yeah I know she managed to get a message to me .From his pocket he pulled a golden coin and Harry recognized it as one of the fake Galleons that Dumbledores Army had used to send one another messages .These have been great said Neville beaming at Hermione .The Carrows never rumbled how we were communicating it drove them mad .We used to sneak out at night and put graffiti on the walls Dumbledores Army Still Recruiting stuff like that .Snape hated it .You used to ?said Harry who had noticed the past tense .Well it got more difficult as time went on said Neville .We lost Luna at Christmas and Ginny never came back after Easter and the three of us were sort of the leaders .The Carrows seemed to know I was behind a lot of it so they started coming down on me hard and then Michael Corner went and got caught releasing a firstyear theyd chained up and they tortured him pretty badly .That scared people off .No kidding muttered Ron as the passage began to slope upward .Yeah well I couldnt ask people to go through what Michael did so we dropped those kinds of stunts .But we were still fighting doing underground stuff right up until a couple of weeks ago .Thats when they decided there was only one way to stop me I suppose and they went for Gran .They what ?said Harry Ron and Hermione together .Yeah said Neville panting a little now because the passage was climbing so steeply well you can see their thinking .It had worked really well kidnapping kids to force their relatives to behave I spose it was only a matter of time before they did it the other way around .Thing was he faced them and Harry was astonished to see that he was grinning they bit off a bit more than they could chew with Gran .Little old witch living alone they probably thought they didnt need to send anyone particularly powerful .Anyway Neville laughed Dawlish is still in St .Mungos and Grans on the run .She sent me a letter he clapped a hand to the breast pocket of his robes telling me she was proud of me that Im my parents son and to keep it up .Cool said Ron .Yeah said Neville happily .Only thing was once they realized they had no hold over me they decided Hogwarts could do without me after all .I dont know whether they were planning to kill me or send me to Azkaban either way I knew it was time to disappear .But said Ron looking thoroughly confused arent arent we heading straight back into Hogwarts ?Course said Neville .Youll see .Were here .They turned a corner and there ahead of them was the end of the passage .Another short flight of steps led to a door just like the one hidden behind Arianas portrait .Neville pushed it open and climbed through .As Harry followed he heard Neville call out to unseen people Look who it is !Didnt I tell you ?As Harry emerged into the room beyond the passage there were several screams and yells HARRY !Its Potter its POTTER !Ron !Hermionel He had a confused impression of colored hangings of lamps and many faces .The next moment he Ron and Hermione were engulfed hugged pounded on the back their hair ruffled their hands shaken by what seemed to be more than twenty people They might just have won a Quidditch final .Okay okay calm down !Neville called and as the crowd backed away Harry was able to take in their surroundings .He did not recognize the room at all .It was enormous and looked rather like the interior of a particularly sumptuous tree house or perhaps a gigantic ships cabin .Multicolored hammocks were strung from the ceiling and from a balcony that ran around the dark woodpaneled and windowless walls which were covered in bright tapestry hangings Harry saw the gold Gryffindor lion emblazoned on scarlet the black badger of Hufflepuff set against yellow and the bronze eagle of Ravenclaw on blue .The silver and green of Slytherin alone were absent .There were bulging bookcases a few broomsticks propped against the walls and in the corner a large wooden cased wireless .Where are we ?Room of Requirement of course !said Neville .Surpassed itself hasnt it ?The Carrows were chasing me and I knew I had just one chance for a hideout I managed to get through the door and this is what I found !Well it wasnt exactly like this when I arrived it was a load smaller there was only one hammock and just Gryffindor hangings .But its expanded as more and more of the D .A .have arrived .And the Carrows cant get in ?asked Harry looking around for the door .No said Seamus Finnigan whom Harry had not recognized until he spoke Seamuss face was bruised and puffy .Its a proper hideout as long as one of us stays in here they cant get at us the door wont open .Its all down to Neville .He really gets this room .Youve got to ask it for exactly what you need like ‘I dont want any Carrow supporters to be able to get in and itll do it for you !Youve just got to make sure you close the loopholes !Nevilles the man !Its quite straightforward really said Neville modestly .Id been in here about a day and a half and getting really hungry and wishing I could get something to eat and thats when the passage to the Hogs Head opened up .I went through it and met Aberforth .Hes been providing us with food because for some reason thats the one thing the room doesnt really do .Yeah well foods one of the five exceptions to Gamps Law of Elemental Transfiguration said Ron to general astonishment .So weve been hiding out here for nearly two weeks said Seamus and it just makes more hammocks every time we need them and it even sprouted a pretty good bathroom once girls started turning up and thought theyd quite like to wash yes supplied Lavender Brown whom Harry had not noticed until that point .Now that he looked around properly he recognized many familiar faces .Both Patil twins were there as were Terry Boot Ernie Macmillan Anthony Goldstein and Michael Corner .Tell us what youve been up to though said Ernie .Thereve been so many rumors weve been trying to keep up with you on Potterwatch .He pointed at the wireless .You didnt break into Gringotts ?They did !said Neville .And the dragons true too !There was a smattering of applause and a few whoops Ron took a bow .What were you after ?asked Seamus eagerly .Before any of them could parry the question with one of their own Harry felt a terrible scorching pain in the lightning scar .As he turned his back hastily on the curious and delighted faces the Room of Requirement vanished and he was standing inside a ruined stone shack and the rotting floorboards were ripped apart at his feet a disinterred golden box lay open and empty beside the hole and Voldemorts scream of fury vibrated inside his head .With an enormous effort he pulled out of Voldemorts mind again back to where he stood swaying in the Room of Requirement sweat pouring from his face and Ron holding him up .Are you all right Harry ?Neville was saying .Want to sit down ?I expect youre tired arent ?No said Harry .He looked at Ron and Hermione trying to tell them without words that Voldemort had just discovered the loss of one of the other Horcruxes .Time was running out fast If Voldemort chose to visit Hogwarts next they would miss their chance .We need to get going he said and their expressions told him that they understood .What are we going to do then Harry ?asked Seamus .Whats the plan ?Plan ?repeated Harry .He was exercising all his willpower to prevent himself succumbing again to Voldemorts rage His scar was still burning .Well theres something we Ron Hermione and I need to do and then well get out of here .Nobody was laughing or whooping anymore .Neville looked confused .What dyou mean ‘get out of here ?We havent come back to stay said Harry rubbing his scar trying to soothe the pain .Theres something important we need to do What is it ?I I cant tell you .There was a ripple of muttering at this Nevilles brows contracted .Why cant you tell us ?Its something to do with fighting YouKnowWho right ?Well yeah Then well help you .The other members of Dumbledores Army were nodding some enthusiastically others solemnly .A couple of them rose from their chairs to demonstrate their willingness for immediate action .You dont understand .Harry seemed to have said that a lot in the last few hours .We we cant tell you .Weve got to do it alone .Why ?asked Neville .Because .In his desperation to start looking for the missing Horcrux or at least to have a private discussion with Ron and Hermione about where they might commence their search Harry found it difficult to gather his thoughts .His scar was still searing .Dumbledore left the three of us a job he said carefully and we werent supposed to tell I mean he wanted us to do it just the three of us .Were his army said Neville .Dumbledores Army .We were all in it together weve been keeping it going while you three have been off on your own It hasnt exactly been a picnic mate said Ron .I never said it had but I dont see why you cant trust us .Everyone in this rooms been fighting and theyve been driven in here because the Carrows were hunting them down .Everyone in heres proven theyre loyal to Dumbledore loyal to you .Look Harry began without knowing what he was going to say but it did not matter The tunnel door had just opened behind him .We got your message Neville !Hello you three I thought you must be here !It was Luna and Dean .Seamus gave a great roar of delight and ran to hug his best friend .Hi everyone !said Luna happily .Oh its great to be back !Luna said Harry distractedly what are you doing here ?How did you ?I sent for her said Neville holding up the fake Galleon .I promised her and Ginny that if you turned up Id let them know .We all thought that if you came back it would mean revolution .That we were going to overthrow Snape and the Carrows .Of course thats what it means said Luna brightly .Isnt it Harry ?Were going to fight them out of Hogwarts ?Listen said Harry with a rising sense of panic Im sorry but thats not what we came back for .Theres something weve got to do and then Youre going to leave us in this mess ?demanded Michael Corner .No !said Ron .What were doing will benefit everyone in the end its all about trying to get rid of YouKnowWho Then let us help !said Neville angrily .We want to be a part of it !There was another noise behind them and Harry turned .His heart seemed to fail Ginny was now climbing through the hole in the wall closely followed by Fred George and Lee Jordan .Ginny gave Harry a radiant smile He had forgotten or had never fully appreciated how beautiful she was but he had never been less pleased to see her .Aberforths getting a bit annoyed said Fred raising his hand in answer to several cries of greeting .He wants a kip and his bars turned into a railway station .Harrys mouth fell open .Right behind Lee Jordan came Harrys old girlfriend Cho Chang .She smiled at him .I got the message she said holding up her own fake Galleon and she walked over to sit beside Michael Corner .So whats the plan Harry ?said George .There isnt one said Harry still disoriented by the sudden appearance of all these people unable to take everything in while his scar was still burning so fiercely .Just going to make it up as we go along are we ?My favorite kind said Fred .Youve got to stop this !Harry told Neville .What did you call them all back for ?This is insane Were fighting arent we ?said Dean taking out his fake Galleon .The message said Harry was back and we were going to fight !Ill have to get a wand though You havent got a wand ?began Seamus .Ron turned suddenly to Harry .Why cant they help ?What ?They can help .He dropped his voice and said so that none of them could hear but Hermione who stood between them We dont know where it is .Weve got to find it fast .We dont have to tell them its a Horcrux .Harry looked from Ron to Hermione who murmured I think Rons right .We dont even know what were looking for we need them .And when Harry looked unconvinced You dont have to do everything alone Harry .Harry thought fast his scar still prickling his head threatening to split again .Dumbledore had warned him against telling anyone but Ron and Hermione about the Horcruxes .Secrets and lies thats how we grew up and Albus .he was a natural .Was he turning into Dumbledore keeping his secrets clutched to his chest afraid to trust ?But Dumbledore had trusted Snape and where had that led ?To murder at the top of the highest tower .All right he said quietly to the other two .Okay he called to the room at large and all noise ceased Fred and George who had been cracking jokes for the benefit of those nearest fell silent and all of them looked alert excited .Theres something we need to find Harry said .Something something thatll help us overthrow YouKnowWho .Its here at Hogwarts but we dont know where .It might have belonged to Ravenclaw .Has anyone heard of an object like that ?Has anyone ever come across something with her eagle on it for instance ?He looked hopefully toward the little group of Ravenclaws to Padma Michael Terry and Cho but it was Luna who answered perched on the arm of Ginnys chair .Well theres her lost diadem .I told you about it remember Harry ?The lost diadem of Ravenclaw ?Daddys trying to duplicate it .Yeah but the lost diadem said Michael Corner rolling his eyes is lost Luna .Thats sort of the point .When was it lost ?asked Harry .Centuries ago they say said Cho and Harrys heart sank .Professor Flitwick says the diadem vanished with Ravenclaw herself .People have looked but she appealed to her fellow Ravenclaws nobodys ever found a trace of it have they ?They all shook their heads .Sorry but what is a diadem ?asked Ron .Its a kind of crown said Terry Boot .Ravenclaws was supposed to have magical properties enhance the wisdom of the wearer .Yes Daddys Wrackspurt siphons But Harry cut across Luna .And none of you have ever seen anything that looks like it ?They all shook their heads again .Harry looked at Ron and Hermione and his own disappointment was mirrored back at him .An object that had been lost this long and apparently without trace did not seem like a good candidate for the Horcrux hidden in the castle .Before he could formulate a new question however Cho spoke again .If youd like to see what the diadems supposed to look like I could take you up to our common room and show you Harry ?Ravenclaws wearing it in her statue .Harrys scar scorched again For a moment the Room of Requirement swam before him and he saw instead the dark earth soaring beneath him and felt the great snake wrapped around his shoulders .Voldemort was flying again whether to the underground lake or here to the castle he did not know Either way there was hardly any time left .Hes on the move he said quietly to Ron and Hermione .He glanced at Cho and then back at them .Listen I know its not much of a lead but Im going to go and look at this statue at least find out what the diadem looks like .Wait for me here and keep you know the other one safe .Cho had got to her feet but Ginny said rather fiercely No Luna will take Harry wont you Luna ?Oooh yes Id like to said Luna happily and Cho sat down again looking disappointed .How do we get out ?Harry asked Neville .Over here .He led Harry and Luna to a corner where a small cupboard opened onto a steep staircase .It comes out somewhere different every day so theyve never been able to find it he said .Only trouble is we never know exactly where were going to end up when we go out .Be careful Harry theyre always patrolling the corridors at night .No problem said Harry .See you in a bit .He and Luna hurried up the staircase which was long lit by torches and turned corners in unexpected places .At last they reached what appeared to be solid wall .Get under here Harry told Luna pulling out the Invisibility Cloak and throwing it over both of them .He gave the wall a little push .It melted away at his touch and they slipped outside Harry glanced back and saw that it had resealed itself at once .They were standing in a dark corridor Harry pulled Luna back into the shadows fumbled in the pouch around his neck and took out the Marauders Map .Holding it close to his nose he searched and located his and Lunas dots at last .Were up on the fifth floor he whispered watching Filch moving away from them a corridor ahead .Come on this way .They crept off .Harry had prowled the castle at night many times before but never had his heart hammered this fast never had so much depended on his safe passage through the place .Through squares of moonlight upon the floor past suits of armor whose helmets creaked at the sound of their soft footsteps around corners beyond which who knew what lurked Harry and Luna walked checking the Marauders Map whenever light permitted twice pausing to allow a ghost to pass without drawing attention to themselves .He expected to encounter an obstacle at any moment his worst fear was Peeves and he strained his ears with every step to hear the first telltale signs of the poltergeists approach .This way Harry breathed Luna plucking his sleeve and pulling him toward a spiral staircase .They climbed in tight dizzying circles Harry had never been up here before .At last they reached a door .There was no handle and no keyhole nothing but a plain expanse of aged wood and a bronze knocker in the shape of an eagle .Luna reached out a pale hand which looked eerie floating in midair unconnected to arm or body .She knocked once and in the silence it sounded to Harry like a cannon blast .At once the beak of the eagle opened but instead of a birds call a soft musical voice said Which came first the phoenix or the flame ?Hmm .What do you think Harry ?said Luna looking thoughtful .What ?Isnt there just a password ?Oh no youve got to answer a question said Luna .What if you get it wrong ?Well you have to wait for somebody who gets it right said Luna .That way you learn you see ?Yeah .Trouble is we cant really afford to wait for anyone else Luna .No I see what you mean said Luna seriously .Well then I think the answer is that a circle has no beginning .Well reasoned said the voice and the door swung open .The deserted Ravenclaw common room was a wide circular room airier than any Harry had ever seen at Hogwarts .Graceful arched windows punctuated the walls which were hung with blueandbronze silks By day the Ravenclaws would have a spectacular view of the surrounding mountains .The ceiling was domed and painted with stars which were echoed in the midnightblue carpet .There were tables chairs and bookcases and in a niche opposite the door stood a tall statue of white marble .Harry recognized Rowena Ravenclaw from the bust he had seen at Lunas house .The statue stood beside a door that led he guessed to dormitories above .He strode right up to the marble woman and she seemed to look back at him with a quizzical half smile on her face beautiful yet slightly intimidating .A delicate  looking circlet had been reproduced in marble on top of her head .It was not unlike the tiara Fleur had worn at her wedding .There were tiny words etched into it .Harry stepped out from under the Cloak and climbed up onto Ravenclaws plinth to read them . ‘Wit beyond measure is mans greatest treasure .Which makes you pretty skint witless said a cackling voice .Harry whirled around slipped off the plinth and landed on the floor .The slopingshouldered figure of Alecto Carrow was standing before him and even as Harry raised his wand she pressed a stubby forefinger to the skull and snake branded on her forearm .THE SACKING OF SEVERUS SNAPE The moment her finger touched the Mark Harrys scar burned savagely the starry room vanished from sight and he was standing upon an outcrop of rock beneath a cliff and the sea was washing around him and there was triumph in his heart They have the boy .A loud bang brought Harry back to where he stood Disoriented he raised his wand but the witch before him was already falling forward she hit the ground so hard that the glass in the bookcases tinkled .Ive never Stunned anyone except in our D .A .lessons said Luna sounding mildly interested .That was noisier than I thought it would be .And sure enough the ceiling had begun to tremble .Scurrying echoing footsteps were growing louder from behind the door leading to the dormitories Lunas spell had woken Ravenclaws sleeping above .Luna where are you ?I need to get under the Cloak !Lunas feet appeared out of nowhere he hurried to her side and she let the Cloak fall back over them as the door opened and a stream of Ravenclaws all in their nightclothes flooded into the common room .There were gasps and cries of surprise as they saw Alecto lying there unconscious .Slowly they shuffled in around her a savage beast that might wake at any moment and attack them .Then one brave little first year darted up to her and prodded her backside with his big toe .I think she might be dead !he shouted with delight .Oh look whispered Luna happily as the Ravenclaws crowded in around Alecto .Theyre pleased !Yeah .great .Harry closed his eyes and as his scar throbbed he chose to sink again into Voldemorts mind .He was moving along the tunnel into the first cave .He had chosen to make sure of the locket before coming .but that would not take him long .There was a rap on the common room door and every Ravenclaw froze .From the other side Harry heard the soft musical voice that issued from the eagle door knocker Where do Vanished objects go ?I dunno do I ?Shut it !snarled an uncouth voice that Harry knew was that of the Carrow brother Amycus .Alecto ?Alecto ?Are you there ?Have you got him ?Open the door !The Ravenclaws were whispering amongst themselves terrified .Then without warning there came a series of loud bangs as though somebody was firing a gun into the door .ALECTO If he comes and we havent got Potter dyou want to go the same way as the Malfoys ?ANSWER ME !Amyous bellowed shaking the door for all he was worth but still it did not open .The Ravenclaws were all backing away and some of the most frightened began scampering back up the staircase to their beds .Then just as Harry was wondering whether he ought not to blast open the door and Stun Amycus before the Death Eater could do anything else a second most familiar voice rang out beyond the door .May I ask what you are doing Professor Carrow ?Trying to get through this damned door !shouted Amycus .Go and get Flitwick !Get him to open it now !But isnt your sister in there ?asked Professor McGonagall .Didnt Professor Flitwick let her in earlier this evening at your urgent request ?Perhaps she could open the door for you ?Then you neednt wake up half the castle .She aint answering you old besom !You open it !Garn !Do it now !Certainly if you wish it said Professor McGonagall with awful coldness .There was a genteel tap of the knocker and the musical voice asked again Where do Vanished objects go ?Into nonbeing which is to say everything replied Professor McGonagall .Nicely phrased replied the eagle door knocker and the door swung open .The few Ravenclaws who had remained behind sprinted for the stairs as Amycus burst over the threshold brandishing his wand .Hunched like his sister he had a pallid doughy face and tiny eyes which fell at once on Alecto sprawled motionless on the floor .He let out a yell of fury and fear .Whatve they done the little whelps ?he screamed .Ill Cruciate the lot of em till they tell me who did it and whats the Dark Lord going to say ?he shrieked standing over his sister and smacking himself on the forehead with his fist .We havent got him and theyve gorn and killed her !Shes only Stunned said Professor McGonagall impatiently who had stooped down to examine Alecto .Shell be perfectly all right .No she bludgering well wont !bellowed Amycus .Not after the Dark Lord gets hold of her !Shes gorn and sent for him I felt me Mark burn and he thinks weve got Potter ! ‘Got Potter ?said Professor McGonagall sharply .What do you mean ‘got Potter ?He told us Potter might try and get inside Ravenclaw Tower and to send for him if we caught him !Why would Harry Potter try to get inside Ravenclaw Tower ?Potter belongs in my House !Beneath the disbelief and anger Harry heard a little strain of pride in her voice and affection for Minerva McGonagall gushed up inside him .We was told he might come in here !said Carrow .I dunno why do I ?Professor McGonagall stood up and her beady eyes swept the room .Twice they passed right over the place where Harry and Luna stood .We can push it off on the kids said Amycus his piglike face suddenly crafty .Yeah thats what well do .Well say Alecto was ambushed by the kids them kids up there he looked up at the starry ceiling toward the dormitories and well say they forced her to press her Mark and thats why he got a false alarm .He can punish them .Couple of kids more or less whats the difference ?Only the difference between truth and lies courage and cowardice said Professor McGonagall who had turned pale a difference in short which you and your sister seem unable to appreciate .But let me make one thing very clear .You are not going to pass off your many ineptitudes on the students of Hogwarts .I shall not permit it .Excuse me ?Amycus moved forward until he was offensively close to Professor McGonagall his face within inches of hers .She refused to back away but looked down at him as if he were something disgusting she had found stuck to a lavatory seat .Its not a case of what youll permit Minerva McGonagall .Your times over .Its us whats in charge here now and youll back me up or youll pay the price .And he spat in her face .Harry pulled the Cloak off himself raised his wand and said You shouldnt have done that .As Amycus spun around Harry shouted Crucio The Death Eater was lifted off his feet .He writhed through the air like a drowning man thrashing and howling in pain and then with a crunch and a shattering of glass he smashed into the front of a bookcase and crumpled insensible to the floor .I see what Bellatrix meant said Harry the blood thundering through his brain you need to really mean it .Potter !whispered Professor McGonagall clutching her heart .Potter youre here !What ?How ?She struggled to pull herself together .Potter that was foolish !He spat at you said Harry .Potter I that was very very gallant of you but dont you realize ?Yeah I do Harry assured her .Somehow her panic steadied him .Professor McGonagall Voldemorts on the way .Oh are we allowed to say the name now ?asked Luna with an air of interest pulling off the Invisibility Cloak .This appearance of a second outlaw seemed to overwhelm Professor McGonagall who staggered backward and fell into a nearby chair clutching at the neck of her old tartan dressing gown .I dont think it makes any difference what we call him Harry told Luna .He already knows where I am .In a distant part of Harrys brain that part connected to the angry burning scar he could see Voldemort sailing fast over the dark lake in the ghostly green boat .He had nearly reached the island where the stone basin stood .You must flee whispered Professor McGonagall .Now Potter as quickly as you can !I cant said Harry .Theres something I need to do .Professor do you know where the diadem of Ravenclaw is ?The ddiadem of Ravenclaw ?Of course not hasnt it been lost for centuries ?She sat up a little straighter .Potter it was madness utter madness for you to enter this castle I had to said Harry .Professor theres something hidden here that Im supposed to find and it could be the diadem if I could just speak to Professor Flitwick There was a sound of movement of clinking glass Amycus was coming round .Before Harry or Luna could act Professor McGonagall rose to her feet pointed her wand at the groggy Death Eater and said Imperio .Amycus got up walked over to his sister picked up her wand then shuffled obediently to Professor McGonagall and handed it over along with his own .Then he lay down on the floor beside Alecto .Professor McGonagall waved her wand again and a length of shimmering silver rope appeared out of thin air and snaked around the Carrows binding them tightly together .Potter said Professor McGonagall turning to face him again with superb indifference to the Carrows predicament if HeWhoMustNotBeNamed does indeed know that you are here As she said it a wrath that was like physical pain blazed through Harry setting his scar on fire and for a second he looked down upon a basin whose potion had turned clear and saw that no golden locket lay safe beneath the surface Potter are you all right ?said a voice and Harry came back He was clutching Lunas shoulder to steady himself .Times running out Voldemorts getting nearer .Professor Im acting on Dumbledores orders I must find what he wanted me to find !But weve got to get the students out while Im searching the castle its me Voldemort wants but he wont care about killing a few more or less not now not now he knows Im attacking Horcruxes Harry finished the sentence in his head .Youre acting on Dumbledores orders ?she repeated with a look of dawning wonder .Then she drew herself up to her fullest height .We shall secure the school against HeWhoMust NotBeNamed while you search for this this object .Is that possible ?I think so said Professor McGonagall dryly we teachers are rather good at magic you know .I am sure we will be able to hold him off for a while if we all put our best efforts into it .Of course something will have to be done about Professor Snape Let me and if Hogwarts is about to enter a state of siege with the Dark Lord at the gates it would indeed be advisable to take as many innocent people out of the way as possible .With the Floo Network under observation and Apparition impossible within the grounds Theres a way said Harry quickly and he explained about the passageway leading into the Hogs Head .Potter were talking about hundreds of students I know Professor but if Voldemort and the Death Eaters are concentrating on the school boundaries they wont be interested in anyone whos Disapparating out of the Hogs Head .Theres something in that she agreed .She pointed her wand at the Carrows and a silver net fell upon their bound bodies tied itself around them and hoisted them into the air where they dangled beneath the blueandgold ceiling like two large ugly sea creatures .Come .We must alert the other Heads of House .Youd better put that Cloak back on .She marched toward the door and as she did so she raised her wand .From the tip burst three silver cats with spectacle markings around their eyes .The Patronuses ran sleekly ahead filling the spiral staircase with silvery light as Professor McGonagall Harry and Luna hurried back down .Along the corridors they raced and one by one the Patronuses left them Professor McGonagalls tartan dressing gown rustled over the floor and Harry and Luna jogged behind her under the Cloak .They had descended two more floors when another set of quiet footsteps joined theirs .Harry whose scar was still prickling heard them first He felt in the pouch around his neck for the Marauders Map but before he could take it out McGonagall too seemed to become aware of their company .She halted raised her wand ready to duel and said Whos there ?It is I said a low voice .From behind a suit of armor stepped Severus Snape .Hatred boiled up in Harry at the sight of him He had forgotten the details of Snape s appearance in the magnitude of his crimes forgotten how his greasy black hair hung in curtains around his thin face how his black eyes had a dead cold look .He was not wearing nightclothes but was dressed in his usual black cloak and he too was holding his wand ready for a fight .Where are the Carrows ?he asked quietly .Wherever you told them to be I expect Severus said Professor McGonagall .Snape stepped nearer and his eyes flitted over Professor McGonagall into the air around her as if he knew that Harry was there .Harry held his wand up too ready to attack .I was under the impression said Snape that Alecto had apprehended an intruder .Really ?said Professor McGonagall .And what gave you that impression ?Snape made a slight flexing movement of his left arm where the Dark Mark was branded into his skin .Oh but naturally said Professor McGonagall .You Death Eaters have your own private means of communication I forgot .Snape pretended not to have heard her .His eyes were still probing the air all about her and he was moving gradually closer with an air of hardly noticing what he was doing .I did not know that it was your night to patrol the corridors Minerva .You have some objection ?I wonder what could have brought you out of your bed at this late hour ?I thought I heard a disturbance said Professor McGonagall .Really ?But all seems calm .Snape looked into her eyes .Have you seen Harry Potter Minerva ?Because if you have I must insist Professor McGonagall moved faster than Harry could have believed Her wand slashed through the air and for a split second Harry thought that Snape must crumple unconscious but the swiftness of his Shield Charm was such that McGonagall was thrown off balance .She brandished her wand at a torch on the wall and it flew out of its bracket Harry about to curse Snape was forced to pull Luna out of the way of the descending flames which became a ring of fire that filled the corridor and flew like a lasso at Snape Then it was no longer fire but a great black serpent that McGonagall blasted to smoke which reformed and solidified in seconds to become a swarm of pursuing daggers Snape avoided them only by forcing the suit of armor in front of him and with echoing clangs the daggers sank one after another into its breast Minerva !said a squeaky voice and looking behind him still shielding Luna from flying spells Harry saw Professors Flitwick and Sprout sprinting up the corridor toward them in their nightclothes with the enormous Professor Slughorn panting along at the rear .No !squealed Flitwick raising his wand .Youll do no more murder at Hogwarts !Flitwicks spell hit the suit of armor behind which Snape had taken shelter With a clatter it came to life .Snape struggled free of the crushing arms and sent it flying back toward his attackers Harry and Luna had to dive sideways to avoid it as it smashed into the wall and shattered .When Harry looked up again Snape was in full flight McGonagall Flitwick and Sprout all thundering after him He hurtled through a classroom door and moments later he heard McGonagall cry Coward !COWARD !Whats happened whats happened ?asked Luna .Harry dragged her to her feet and they raced along the corridor trailing the Invisibility Cloak behind them into the deserted classroom where Professors McGonagall Flitwick and Sprout were standing at a smashed window .He jumped said Professor McGonagall as Harry and Luna ran into the room .You mean hes dead ?Harry sprinted to the window ignoring Flitwicks and Sprouts yells of shock at his sudden appearance .No hes not dead said McGonagall bitterly .Unlike Dumbledore he was still carrying a wand .and he seems to have learned a few tricks from his master .With a tingle of horror Harry saw in the distance a huge batlike shape flying through the darkness toward the perimeter wall .There were heavy footfalls behind them and a great deal of puffing Slughorn had just caught up .Harry !he panted massaging his immense chest beneath his emeraldgreen silk pajamas .My dear boy .what a surprise .Minerva do please explain . .Severus .what . ?Our headmaster is taking a short break said Professor McGonagall pointing at the Snapeshaped hole in the window .Professor !Harry shouted his hands at his forehead .He could see the Inferifilled lake sliding beneath him and he felt the ghostly green boat bump into the underground shore and Voldemort leapt from it with murder in his heart Professor weve got to barricade the school hes coming now !Very well .HeWhoMustNotBeNamed is coming she told the other teachers .Sprout and Flitwick gasped Slughorn let out a low groan .Potter has work to do in the castle on Dumbledores orders .We need to put in place every protection of which we are capable while Potter does what he needs to do .You realize of course that nothing we do will be able to keep out YouKnowWho indefinitely ?squeaked Flitwick .But we can hold him up said Professor Sprout .Thank you Pomona said Professor McGonagall and between the two witches there passed a look of grim understanding .I suggest we establish basic protection around the place then gather our students and meet in the Great Hall .Most must be evacuated though if any of those who are over age wish to stay and fight I think they ought to be given the chance .Agreed said Professor Sprout already hurrying toward the door .I shall meet you in the Great Hall in twenty minutes with my House .And as she jogged out of sight they could hear her muttering Tentacula .Devils Snare .And Snargaluff pods .yes Id like to see the Death Eaters fighting those .I can act from here said Flitwick and although he could barely see out of it he pointed his wand through the smashed window and started muttering incantations of great complexity .Harry heard a weird rushing noise as though Flitwick had unleashed the power of the wind into the grounds .Professor Harry said approaching the little Charms master Professor Im sorry to interrupt but this is important .Have you got any idea where the diadem of Ravenclaw is ?Protego Horribilis the diadem of Ravenclaw ?squeaked Flitwick .A little extra wisdom never goes amiss Potter but I hardly think it would be much use in this situation !I only meant do you know where it is ?Have you ever seen it ?Seen it ?Nobody has seen it in living memory !Long since lost boy !Harry felt a mixture of desperate disappointment and panic .What then was the Horcrux ?We shall meet you and your Ravenclaws in the Great Hall Filius !said Professor McGonagall beckoning to Harry and Luna to follow her .They had just reached the door when Slughorn rumbled into speech .My word he puffed pale and sweaty his walrus mustache aquiver .What a todo !Im not at all sure whether this is wise Minerva .He is bound to find a way in you know and anyone who has tried to delay him will be in most grievous peril I shall expect you and the Slytherins in the Great Hall in twenty minutes also said Professor McGonagall .If you wish to leave with your students we shall not stop you .But if any of you attempt to sabotage our resistance or take up arms against us within this castle then Horace we duel to kill .Minerva !he said aghast .The time has come for Slytherin House to decide upon its loyalties interrupted Professor McGonagall .Go and wake your students Horace .Harry did not stay to watch Slughorn splutter He and Luna ran after Professor McGonagall who had taken up a position in the middle of the corridor and raised her wand .Piertotum oh for heavens sake Filch not now The aged caretaker had just come hobbling into view shouting Students out of bed !Students in the corridors !Theyre supposed to be you blithering idiot !shouted McGonagall .Now go and do something constructive !Find Peeves !PPeeves ?stammered Filch as though he had never heard the name before .Yes Peeves you fool Peevesl Havent you been complaining about him for a quarter of a century ?Go and fetch him at once !Filch evidently thought Professor McGonagall had taken leave of her senses but hobbled away hunch shouldered muttering under his breath .And now Piertotum Locomotori cried Professor McGonagall .And all along the corridor the statues and suits of armor jumped down from their plinths and from the echoing crashes from the floors above and below Harry knew that their fellows throughout the castle had done the same .Hogwarts is threatened !shouted Professor McGonagall .Man the boundaries protect us do your duty to our school !Clattering and yelling the horde of moving statues stampeded past Harry some of them smaller others larger than life .There were animals too and the clanking suits of armor brandished swords and spiked balls on chains .Now Potter said McGonagall you and Miss Lovegood had better return to your friends and bring them to the Great Hall I shall rouse the other Gryffindors .They parted at the top of the next staircase Harry and Luna running back toward the concealed entrance to the Room of Requirement .As they ran they met crowds of students most wearing traveling cloaks over their pajamas being shepherded down to the Great Hall by teachers and prefects .That was Potter !Harry Potted It was him I swear I just saw him !But Harry did not look back and at last they reached the entrance to the Room of Requirement .Harry leaned against the enchanted wall which opened to admit them and he and Luna sped back down the steep staircase .Wh ?As the room came into view Harry slipped down a few stairs in shock .It was packed far more crowded than when he had last been in there .Kingsley and Lupin were looking up at him as were Oliver Wood Katie Bell Angelina Johnson and Alicia Spinnet Bill and Fleur and Mr and Mrs Weasley .Harry whats happening ?said Lupin meeting him at the foot of the stairs .Voldemorts on his way theyre barricading the school Snapes run for it What are you doing here ?How did you know ?We sent messages to the rest of Dumbledores Army Fred explained .You couldnt expect everyone to miss the fun Harry and the D .A .let the Order of the Phoenix know and it all kind of snowballed .What first Harry ?called George .Whats going on ?Theyre evacuating the younger kids and everyones meeting in the Great Hall to get organized Harry said .Were fighting .There was a great roar and a surge toward the foot of the stairs he was pressed back against the wall as they ran past him the mingled members of the Order of the Phoenix Dumbledores Army and Harrys old Quidditch team all with their wands drawn heading up into the main castle .Come on Luna Dean called as he passed holding out his free hand she took it and followed him back up the stairs .The crowd was thinning Only a little knot of people remained below in the Room of Requirement and Harry joined them .Mrs Weasley was struggling with Ginny .Around them stood Lupin Fred George Bill and Fleur .Youre underage !Mrs Weasley shouted at her daughter as Harry approached .I wont permit it !The boys yes but you youve got to go home !I wont !Ginnys hair flew as she pulled her arm out of her mothers grip .Im in Dumbledores Army A teenagers gang !A teenagers gang thats about to take him on which no one else has dared to do !said Fred .Shes sixteen !shouted Mrs Weasley .Shes not old enough !What you two were thinking bringing her with you Fred and George looked slightly ashamed of themselves .Mums right Ginny said Bill gently .You cant do this .Everyone underage will have to leave its only right .I cant go home !Ginny shouted angry tears sparkling in her eyes .My whole familys here I cant stand waiting there alone and not knowing and Her eyes met Harrys for the first time .She looked at him beseechingly but he shook his head and she turned away bitterly .Fine she said staring at the entrance to the tunnel back to the Hogs Head .Ill say goodbye now then and There was a scuffling and a great thump Someone else had clambered out of the tunnel overbalanced slightly and fallen .He pulled himself up on the nearest chair looked around through lopsided horn rimmed glasses and said Am I too late ?Has it started ?I only just found out so I I Percy spluttered into silence .Evidently he had not expected to run into most of his family .There was a long moment of astonishment broken by Fleur turning to Lupin and saying in a wildly transparent attempt to break the tension So ow eez leetle Teddy ?Lupin blinked at her startled .The silence between the Weasleys seemed to be solidifying like ice .I oh yes hes fine !Lupin said loudly .Yes Tonks is with him at her mothers Percy and the other Weasleys were still staring at one another frozen .Here Ive got a picture !Lupin shouted pulling a photograph from inside his jacket and showing it to Fleur and Harry who saw a tiny baby with a tuft of bright turquoise hair waving fat fists at the camera .I was a fool !Percy roared so loudly that Lupin nearly dropped his photograph .I was an idiot I was a pompous prat I was a a Ministryloving familydisowning powerhungry moron said Fred .Percy swallowed .Yes I was !Well you cant say fairer than that said Fred holding out his hand to Percy .Mrs Weasley burst into tears .She ran forward pushed Fred aside and pulled Percy into a strangling hug while he patted her on the back his eyes on his father .Im sorry Dad Percy said .Mr Weasley blinked rather rapidly then he too hurried to hug his son .What made you see sense Perce ?inquired George .Its been coming on for a while said Percy mopping his eyes under his glasses with a corner of his traveling cloak .But I had to find a way out and its not so easy at the Ministry theyre imprisoning traitors all the time .I managed to make contact with Aberforth and he tipped me off ten minutes ago that Hogwarts was going to make a fight of it so here I am .Well we do look to our prefects to take a lead at times such as these said George in a good imitation of Percys most pompous manner .Now lets get upstairs and fight or all the good Death Eatersll be taken .So youre my sisterinlaw now ?said Percy shaking hands with Fleur as they hurried off toward the staircase with Bill Fred and George .Ginny !barked Mrs Weasley .Ginny had been attempting under cover of the reconciliation to sneak upstairs too .Molly how about this said Lupin .Why doesnt Ginny stay here then at least shell be on the scene and know whats going on but she wont be in the middle of the fighting ?Thats a good idea said Mr Weasley firmly .Ginny you stay in this room you hear me ?Ginny did not seem to like the idea much but under her fathers unusually stern gaze she nodded .Mr and Mrs Weasley and Lupin headed off for the stairs as well .Wheres Ron ?asked Harry .Wheres Hermione ?They must have gone up to the Great Hall already Mr Weasley called over his shoulder .I didnt see them pass me said Harry .They said something about a bathroom said Ginny not long after you left .A bathroom ?Harry strode across the room to an open door leading off the Room of Requirement and checked the bathroom beyond .It was empty .Youre sure they said bath ?But then his scar seared and the Room of Requirement vanished He was looking through the high wroughtiron gates with winged boars on pillars at either side looking through the dark grounds toward the castle which was ablaze with lights .Nagini lay draped over his shoulders .He was possessed of that cold cruel sense of purpose that preceded murder .THE BATTLE OF HOGWARTS The enchanted ceiling of the Great Hall was dark and scattered with stars and below it the four long House tables were lined with disheveled students some in traveling cloaks others in dressing gowns .Here and there shone the pearly white figures of the school ghosts .Every eye living and dead was fixed upon Professor McGonagall who was speaking from the raised platform at the top of the Hall .Behind her stood the remaining teachers including the palomino centaur Firenze and the members of the Order of the Phoenix who had arrived to fight . .evacuation will be overseen by Mr Filch and Madam Pomfrey .Prefects when I give the word you will organize your House and take your charges in an orderly fashion to the evacuation point .Many of the students looked petrified .However as Harry skirted the walls scanning the Gryffindor table for Ron and Hermione Ernie Macmillan stood up at the Hufflepuff table and shouted And what if we want to stay and fight ?There was a smattering of applause .If you are of age you may stay said Professor McGonagall .What about our things ?called a girl at the Ravenclaw table .Our trunks our owls ?We have no time to collect possessions said Professor McGonagall .The important thing is to get you out of here safely .Wheres Professor Snape ?shouted a girl from the Slytherin table .He has to use the common phrase done a bunk replied Professor McGonagall and a great cheer erupted from the Gryffindors Hufflepuffs and Ravenclaws .Harry moved up the Hall alongside the Gryffindor table still looking for Ron and Hermione .As he passed faces turned in his direction and a great deal of whispering broke out in his wake .We have already placed protection around the castle Professor McGonagall was saying but it is unlikely to hold for very long unless we reinforce it .I must ask you therefore to move quickly and calmly and do as your prefects But her final words were drowned as a different voice echoed throughout the Hall .It was high cold and clear There was no telling from where it came it seemed to issue from the walls themselves .Like the monster it had once commanded it might have lain dormant there for centuries .I know that you are preparing to fight .There were screams amongst the students some of whom clutched each other looking around in terror for the source of the sound .Your efforts are futile .You cannot fight me .I do not want to kill you .I have great respect for the teachers of Hogwarts .I do not want to spill magical blood .There was silence in the Hall now the kind of silence that presses against the eardrums that seems too huge to be contained by walls .Give me Harry Potter said Voldemorts voice and none shall be harmed .Give me Harry Potter and I shall leave the school untouched .Give me Harry Potter and you will be rewarded .You have until midnight .The silence swallowed them all again .Every head turned every eye in the place seemed to have found Harry to hold him frozen in the glare of thousands of invisible beams .Then a figure rose from the Slytherin table and he recognized Pansy Parkinson as she raised a shaking arm and screamed But hes there !Potters there Someone grab him !Before Harry could speak there was a massive movement .The Gryffindors in front of him had risen and stood facing not Harry but the Slytherins .Then the Hufflepuffs stood and almost at the same moment the Ravenclaws all of them with their backs to Harry all of them looking toward Pansy instead and Harry awestruck and overwhelmed saw wands emerging everywhere pulled from beneath cloaks and from under sleeves .Thank you Miss Parkinson said Professor McGonagall in a clipped voice .You will leave the Hall first with Mr Filch .If the rest of your House could follow .Harry heard the grinding of benches and then the sound of the Slytherins trooping out on the other side of the Hall .Ravenclaws follow on !cried Professor McGonagall .Slowly the four tables emptied .The Slytherin table was completely deserted but a number of older Ravenclaws remained seated while their fellows filed out even more Hufflepuffs stayed behind and half of Gryffindor remained in their seats necessitating Professor McGonagalls descent from the teachers platform to chivvy the underage on their way .Absolutely not Creevey go !And you Peakes !Harry hurried over to the Weasleys all sitting together at the Gryffindor table .Where are Ron and Hermione ?Havent you found ?began Mr Weasley looking worried .But he broke off as Kingsley had stepped forward on the raised platform to address those who had remained behind .Weve only got half an hour until midnight so we need to act fast !A battle plan has been agreed between the teachers of Hogwarts and the Order of the Phoenix .Professors Flitwick Sprout and McGonagall are going to take groups of fighters up to the three highest towers Ravenclaw Astronomy and Gryffindor where theyll have a good overview excellent positions from which to work spells .Meanwhile Remus he indicated Lupin Arthur he pointed toward Mr Weasley sitting at the Gryffindor table and I will take groups into the grounds .Well need somebody to organize defense of the entrances of the passageways into the school Sounds like a job for us called Fred indicating himself and George and Kingsley nodded his approval .All right leaders up here and well divide up the troops !Potter said Professor McGonagall hurrying up to him as students flooded the platform jostling for position receiving instructions Arent you supposed to be looking for something ?What ?Oh said Harry oh yeah !He had almost forgotten about the Horcrux almost forgotten that the battle was being fought so that he could search for it The inexplicable absence of Ron and Hermione had momentarily driven every other thought from his mind .Then go Potter go !Right yeah He sensed eyes following him as he ran out of the Great Hall again into the entrance hall still crowded with evacuating students .He allowed himself to be swept up the marble staircase with them but at the top he hurried off along a deserted corridor .Fear and panic were clouding his thought processes .He tried to calm himself to concentrate on finding the Horcrux but his thoughts buzzed as frantically and fruitlessly as wasps trapped beneath a glass .Without Ron and Hermione to help him he could not seem to marshal his ideas .He slowed down coming to a halt halfway along an empty passage where he sat down upon the plinth of a departed statue and pulled the Marauders Map out of the pouch around his neck .He could not see Rons or Hermiones names anywhere on it though the density of the crowd of dots now making its way to the Room of Requirement might he thought be concealing them .He put the map away pressed his hands over his face and closed his eyes trying to concentrate .Voldemort thought Id go to Ravenclaw Tower .There it was a solid fact the place to start .Voldemort had stationed Alecto Carrow in the Ravenclaw common room and there could only be one explanation Voldemort feared that Harry already knew his Horcrux was connected to that House .But the only object anyone seemed to associate with Ravenclaw was the lost diadem .and how could the Horcrux be the diadem ?How was it possible that Voldemort the Slytherin had found the diadem that had eluded generations of Ravenclaws ?Who could have told him where to look when nobody had seen the diadem in living memory ?In living memory .Beneath his fingers Harrys eyes flew open again .He leapt up from the plinth and tore back the way he had come now in pursuit of his one last hope .The sound of hundreds of people marching toward the Room of Requirement grew louder and louder as he returned to the marble stairs .Prefects were shouting instructions trying to keep track of the students in their own Houses there was much pushing and shoving Harry saw Zacharias Smith bowling over firstyears to get to the front of the queue here and there younger students were in tears while older ones called desperately for friends or siblings .Harry caught sight of a pearly white figure drifting across the entrance hall below and yelled as loudly as he could over the clamor .Nick !NICK !I need to talk to you !He forced his way back through the tide of students finally reaching the bottom of the stairs where Nearly Headless Nick ghost of Gryffindor Tower stood waiting for him .Harry !My dear boy !Nick made to grasp Harrys hands with both of his own Harrys felt as though they had been thrust into icy water .Nick youve got to help me .Whos the ghost of Ravenclaw Tower ?Nearly Headless Nick looked surprised and a little offended .The Gray Lady of course but if it is ghostly services you require ?Its got to be her dyou know where she is ?Lets see .Nicks head wobbled a little on his ruff as he turned hither and thither peering over the heads of the swarming students .Thats her over there Harry the young woman with the long hair .Harry looked in the direction of Nicks transparent pointing finger and saw a tall ghost who caught sight of Harry looking at her raised her eyebrows and drifted away through a solid wall .Harry ran after her .Once through the door of the corridor into which she had disappeared he saw her at the very end of the passage still gliding smoothly away from him .Hey wait come back !She consented to pause floating a few inches from the ground .Harry supposed that she was beautiful with her waistlength hair and floorlength cloak but she also looked haughty and proud .Close to he recognized her as a ghost he had passed several times in the corridor but to whom he had never spoken .Youre the Gray Lady ?She nodded but did not speak .The ghost of Ravenclaw Tower ?That is correct .Her tone was not encouraging .Please I need some help .I need to know anything you can tell me about the lost diadem .A cold smile curved her lips .I am afraid she said turning to leave that I cannot help you .WAIT !He had not meant to shout but anger and panic were threatening to overwhelm him .He glanced at his watch as she hovered in front of him It was a quarter to midnight .This is urgent he said fiercely .If that diadems at Hogwarts Ive got to find it fast .You are hardly the first student to covet the diadem she said disdainfully .Generations of students have badgered me This isnt about trying to get better marks !Harry shouted at her .Its about Voldemort defeating Voldemort or arent you interested in that ?She could not blush but her transparent cheeks became more opaque and her voice was heated as she replied Of course I how dare you suggest ?Well help me then !Her composure was slipping .It it is not a question of she stammered .My mothers diadem Your mothers ?She looked angry with herself .When I lived she said stiffly I was Helena Ravenclaw .Youre her daughter ?But then you must know what happened to it !While the diadem bestows wisdom she said with an obvious effort to pull herself together I doubt that it would greatly increase your chances of defeating the wizard who calls himself Lord Havent I just told you Im not interested in wearing it !Harry said fiercely .Theres no time to explain but if you care about Hogwarts if you want to see Voldemort finished youve got to tell me anything you know about the diadem !She remained quite still floating in midair staring down at him and a sense of hopelessness engulfed Harry .Of course if she had known anything she would have told Flitwick or Dumbledore who had surely asked her the same question .He had shaken his head and made to turn away when she spoke in a low voice .I stole the diadem from my mother .You you did what ?I stole the diadem repeated Helena Ravenclaw in a whisper .I sought to make myself cleverer more important than my mother .I ran away with it .He did not know how he had managed to gain her confidence and did not ask he simply listened hard as she went on My mother they say never admitted that the diadem was gone but pretended that she had it still .She concealed her loss my dreadful betrayal even from the other founders of Hogwarts .Then my mother fell ill fatally ill .In spite of my perfidy she was desperate to see me one more time .She sent a man who had long loved me though I spurned his advances to find me .She knew that he would not rest until he had done so .Harry waited .She drew a deep breath and threw back her head .He tracked me to the forest where I was hiding .When I refused to return with him he became violent .The Baron was always a hottempered man .Furious at my refusal jealous of my freedom he stabbed me .The Baron ?You mean ?The Bloody Baron yes said the Gray Lady and she lifted aside the cloak she wore to reveal a single dark wound in her white chest .When he saw what he had done he was overcome with remorse .He took the weapon that had claimed my life and used it to kill himself .All these centuries later he wears his chains as an act of penitence .as he should she added bitterly .And .and the diadem ?It remained where I had hidden it when I heard the Baron blundering through the forest toward me .Concealed inside a hollow tree .A hollow tree ?repeated Harry .What tree ?Where was this ?A forest in Albania .A lonely place I thought was far beyond my mothers reach .Albania repeated Harry .Sense was emerging miraculously from confusion and now he understood why she was telling him what she had denied Dumbledore and Flitwick .Youve already told someone this story havent you ?Another student ?She closed her eyes and nodded .I had .no idea .He was .flattering .He seemed to .to understand .to sympathize .Yes Harry thought Tom Riddle would certainly have understood Helena Ravenclaws desire to possess fabulous objects to which she had little right .Well you werent the first person Riddle wormed things out of Harry muttered .He could be charming when he wanted .So Voldemort had managed to wheedle the location of the lost diadem out of the Gray Lady .He had traveled to that farflung forest and retrieved the diadem from its hiding place perhaps as soon as he left Hogwarts before he even started work at Borgin and Burkes .And wouldnt those secluded Albanian woods have seemed an excellent refuge when so much later Voldemort had needed a place to lie low undisturbed for ten long years ?But the diadem once it became his precious Horcrux had not been left in that lowly tree .No the diadem had been returned secretly to its true home and Voldemort must have put it there the night he asked for a job !said Harry finishing his thought .I beg your pardon ?He hid the diadem in the castle the night he asked Dumbledore to let him teach !said Harry .Saying it out loud enabled him to make sense of it all .He mustve hidden the diadem on his way up to or down from Dumbledore s office !But it was still worth trying to get the job then he mightve got the chance to nick Gryffindors sword as well thank you thanks !Harry left her floating there looking utterly bewildered .As he rounded the corner back into the entrance hall he checked his watch .It was five minutes until midnight and though he now knew what the last Horcrux was he was no closer to discovering where it was .Generations of students had failed to find the diadem that suggested that it was not in Ravenclaw Tower but if not there where ?What hiding place had Tom Riddle discovered inside Hogwarts Castle that he believed would remain secret forever ?Lost in desperate speculation Harry turned a corner but he had taken only a few steps down the new corridor when the window to his left broke open with a deafening shattering crash .As he leapt aside a gigantic body flew in through the window and hit the opposite wall .Something large and furry detached itself whimpering from the new arrival and flung itself at Harry .Hagrid !Harry bellowed fighting off Fang the boarhounds attentions as the enormous bearded figure clambered to his feet .What the ?Harry yer here !Yer here Hagrid stooped down bestowed upon Harry a cursory and ribcracking hug then ran back to the shattered window .Good boy Grawpy !he bellowed through the hole in the window .Ill see yer in a moment theres a good lad !Beyond Hagrid out in the dark night Harry saw bursts of light in the distance and heard a weird keening scream .He looked down at his watch It was midnight .The battle had begun .Blimey Harry panted Hagrid this is it eh ?Time ter fight ?Hagrid where have you come from ?Heard YouKnowWho from up in our cave said Hagrid grimly .Voice carried didn it ?Yeh got till midnight ter gimme Potter .Knew yeh mus be here knew what mus be happenin .Get down Fang .So we come ter join in me an Grawpy an Fang .Smashed our way through the boundary by the forest Grawpy was carryin us Fang an me .Told him ter let me down at the castle so he shoved me through the window bless him .Not exacly what I meant bu wheres Ron an Hermione ?That said Harry is a really good question .Come on .They hurried together along the corridor Fang lolloping beside them .Harry could hear movement through the corridors all around running footsteps shouts through the windows he could see more flashes of light in the dark grounds .Wherere we goin ?puffed Hagrid pounding along at Harrys heels making the floorboards quake .I dunno exactly said Harry making another random turn but Ron and Hermione must be around here somewhere .The first casualties of the battle were already strewn across the passage ahead The two stone gargoyles that usually guarded the entrance to the staffroom had been smashed apart by a jinx that had sailed through another broken window .Their remains stirred feebly on the floor and as Harry leapt over one of their disembodied heads it moaned faintly Oh dont mind me .Ill just lie here and crumble .Its ugly stone face made Harry think suddenly of the marble bust of Rowena Ravenclaw at Xenophiliuss house wearing that mad headdress and then of the statue in Ravenclaw Tower with the stone diadem upon her white curls .And as he reached the end of the passage the memory of a third stone effigy came back to him that of an ugly old warlock onto whose head Harry himself had placed a wig and a battered old tiara .The shock shot through Harry with the heat of firewhisky and he nearly stumbled .He knew at last where the Horcrux sat waiting for him .Tom Riddle who confided in no one and operated alone might have been arrogant enough to assume that he and only he had penetrated the deepest mysteries of Hogwarts Castle .Of course Dumbledore and Flitwick those model pupils had never set foot in that particular place but he Harry had strayed off the beaten track in his time at school here at last was a secret he and Voldemort knew that Dumbledore had never discovered He was roused by Professor Sprout who was thundering past followed by Neville and half a dozen others all of them wearing earmuffs and carrying what appeared to be large potted plants .Mandrakes !Neville bellowed at Harry over his shoulder as he ran .Going to lob them over the walls they wont like this !Harry knew now where to go He sped off with Hagrid and Fang galloping behind him .They passed portrait after portrait and the painted figures raced alongside them wizards and witches in ruffs and breeches in armor and cloaks cramming themselves into each others canvases screaming news from other parts of the castle .As they reached the end of this corridor the whole castle shook and Harry knew as a gigantic vase blew off its plinth with explosive force that it was in the grip of enchantments more sinister than those of the teachers and the Order .Its all righ Fang its all righ !yelled Hagrid but the great boarhound had taken flight as slivers of china flew like shrapnel through the air and Hagrid pounded off after the terrified dog leaving Harry alone .He forged on through the trembling passages his wand at the ready and for the length of one corridor the little painted knight Sir Cadogan rushed from painting to painting beside him clanking along in his armor screaming encouragement his fat little pony cantering behind him .Braggarts and rogues dogs and scoundrels drive them out Harry Potter see them off !Harry hurtled around a corner and found Fred and a small knot of students including Lee Jordan and Hannah Abbott standing beside another empty plinth whose statue had concealed a secret passageway .Their wands were drawn and they were listening at the concealed hole .Nice night for it !Fred shouted as the castle quaked again and Harry sprinted by elated and terrified in equal measure .Along yet another corridor he dashed and then there were owls everywhere and Mrs Norris was hissing and trying to bat them with her paws no doubt to return them to their proper place .Potter !Aberforth Dumbledore stood blocking the corridor ahead his wand held ready .Ive had hundreds of kids thundering through my pub Potter !I know were evacuating Harry said Voldemorts attacking because they havent handed you over yeah said Aberforth Im not deaf the whole of Hogsmeade heard him .And it never occurred to any of you to keep a few Slytherins hostage ?There are kids of Death Eaters youve just sent to safety .Wouldnt it have been a bit smarter to keep em here ?It wouldnt stop Voldemort said Harry and your brother would never have done it .Aberforth grunted and tore away in the opposite direction .Your brother would never have done it .Well it was the truth Harry thought as he ran on again Dumbledore who had defended Snape for so long would never have held students ransom .And then he skidded around a final corner and with a yell of mingled relief and fury he saw them Ron and Hermione both with their arms full of large curved dirty yellow objects Ron with a broomstick under his arm .Where the hell have you been ?Harry shouted .Chamber of Secrets said Ron .Chamber what ?said Harry coming to an unsteady halt before them .It was Ron all Rons idea !said Hermione breathlessly .Wasnt it absolutely brilliant ?There we were after you left and I said to Ron even if we find the other one how are we going to get rid of it ?We still hadnt got rid of the cup !And then he thought of it !The basilisk !What the ?Something to get rid of Horcruxes said Ron simply .Harrys eyes dropped to the objects clutched in Ron and Hermiones arms great curved fangs torn he now realized from the skull of a dead basilisk .But how did you get in there ?he asked staring from the fangs to Ron .You need to speak Parseltongue !He did !whispered Hermione .Show him Ron !Ron made a horrible strangled hissing noise .Its what you did to open the locket he told Harry apologetically .I had to have a few goes to get it right but he shrugged modestly we got there in the end .He was amazing .said Hermione .Amazing !So .Harry was struggling to keep up .So .So were another Horcrux down said Ron and from under his jacket he pulled the mangled remains of Hufflepuffs cup .Hermione stabbed it .Thought she should .She hasnt had the pleasure yet .Genius !yelled Harry .It was nothing said Ron though he looked delighted with himself .So whats new with you ?As he said it there was an explosion from overhead All three of them looked up as dust fell from the ceiling and they heard a distant scream .I know what the diadem looks like and I know where it is said Harry talking fast .He hid it exactly where I hid my old Potions book where everyones been hiding stuff for centuries .He thought he was the only one to find it .Come on .As the walls trembled again he led the other two back through the concealed entrance and down the staircase into the Room of Requirement .It was empty except for three women Ginny Tonks and an elderly witch wearing a motheaten hat whom Harry recognized immediately as Nevilles grandmother .Ah Potter she said crisply as if she had been waiting for him .You can tell us whats going on .Is everyone okay ?said Ginny and Tonks together .S far as we know said Harry .Are there still people in the passage to the Hogs Head ?He knew that the room would not be able to transform while there were still users inside it .I was the last to come through said Mrs Longbottom .I sealed it I think it unwise to leave it open now Aberforth has left his pub .Have you seen my grandson ?Hes fighting said Harry .Naturally said the old lady proudly .Excuse me I must go and assist him .With surprising speed she trotted off toward the stone steps .Harry looked at Tonks .I thought you were supposed to be with Teddy at your mothers ?I couldnt stand not knowing Tonks looked anguished .Shell look after him have you seen Remus ?He was planning to lead a group of fighters into the grounds Without another word Tonks sped off .Ginny said Harry Im sorry but we need you to leave too .Just for a bit .Then you can come back in .Ginny looked simply delighted to leave her sanctuary .And then you can come back in !he shouted after her as she ran up the steps after Tonks .Youve got to come back ini Hang on a moment !said Ron sharply .Weve forgotten someone !Who ?asked Hermione .The houseelves theyll all be down in the kitchen wont they ?You mean we ought to get them fighting ?asked Harry .No said Ron seriously I mean we should tell them to get out .We dont want any more Dobbies do we ?We cant order them to die for us There was a clatter as the basilisk fangs cascaded out of Hermione s arms .Running at Ron she flung them around his neck and kissed him full on the mouth .Ron threw away the fangs and broomstick he was holding and responded with such enthusiasm that he lifted Hermione off her feet .Is this the moment ?Harry asked weakly and when nothing happened except that Ron and Hermione gripped each other still more firmly and swayed on the spot he raised his voice .01 !Theres a war going on here !Ron and Hermione broke apart their arms still around each other .I know mate said Ron who looked as though he had recently been hit on the back of the head with a Bludger so its now or never isnt it ?Never mind that what about the Horcrux ?Harry shouted .Dyou think you could just just hold it in until weve got the diadem ?Yeah right sorry said Ron and he and Hermione set about gathering up fangs both pink in the face .It was clear as the three of them stepped back into the corridor upstairs that in the minutes that they had spent in the Room of Requirement the situation within the castle had deteriorated severely The walls and ceiling were shaking worse than ever dust filled the air and through the nearest window Harry saw bursts of green and red light so close to the foot of the castle that he knew the Death Eaters must be very near to entering the place .Looking down Harry saw Grawp the giant meandering past swinging what looked like a stone gargoyle torn from the roof and roaring his displeasure .Lets hope he steps on some of them !said Ron as more screams echoed from close by .As long as its not any of our lot !said a voice Harry turned and saw Ginny and Tonks both with their wands drawn at the next window which was missing several panes .Even as he watched Ginny sent a well aimed jinx into a crowd of fighters below .Good girl !roared a figure running through the dust toward them and Harry saw Aberforth again his gray hair flying as he led a small group of students past .They look like they might be breaching the north battlements theyve brought giants of their own !Have you seen Remus ?Tonks called after him .He was dueling Dolohov shouted Aberforth havent seen him since !Tonks said Ginny Tonks Im sure hes okay But Tonks had run off into the dust after Aberforth .Ginny turned helpless to Harry Ron and Hermione .Theyll be all right said Harry though he knew they were empty words .Ginny well be back in a moment just keep out of the way keep safe come on !he said to Ron and Hermione and they ran back to the stretch of wall beyond which the Room of Requirement was waiting to do the bidding of the next entrant .I need the place where everything is hidden Harry begged of it inside his head and the door materialized on their third run past .The furor of the battle died the moment they crossed the threshold and closed the door behind them All was silent .They were in a place the size of a cathedral with the appearance of a city its towering walls built of objects hidden by thousands of longgone students .And he never realized anyone could get in ?said Ron his voice echoing in the silence .He thought he was the only one said Harry .Too bad for him Ive had to hide stuff in my time .this way he added I think its down here .He passed the stuffed troll and the Vanishing Cabinet Draco Malfoy had mended last year with such disastrous consequences then hesitated looking up and down aisles of junk he could not remember where to go next .Accio Diadem .cried Hermione in desperation but nothing flew through the air toward them .It seemed that like the vault at Gringotts the room would not yield its hidden objects that easily .Lets split up Harry told the other two .Look for a stone bust of an old man wearing a wig and a tiara !Its standing on a cupboard and its definitely somewhere near here .They sped off up adjacent aisles Harry could hear the others footsteps echoing through the towering piles of junk of bottles hats crates chairs books weapons broomsticks bats .Somewhere near here Harry muttered to himself .Somewhere .somewhere .Deeper and deeper into the labyrinth he went looking for objects he recognized from his one previous trip into the room .His breath was loud in his ears and then his very soul seemed to shiver There it was right ahead the blistered old cupboard in which he had hidden his old Potions book and on top of it the pockmarked stone warlock wearing a dusty old wig and what looked like an ancient discolored tiara .He had already stretched out his hand though he remained ten feet away when a voice behind him said Hold it Potter .He skidded to a halt and turned around .Crabbe and Goyle were standing behind him shoulder to shoulder wands pointing right at Harry .Through the small space between their leering faces he saw Draco Malfoy .Thats my wand youre holding Potter said Malfoy pointing his own through the gap between Crabbe and Goyle .Not anymore panted Harry tightening his grip on the hawthorn wand .Winners keepers Malfoy .Whos lent you theirs ?My mother said Draco .Harry laughed though there was nothing very humorous about the situation .He could not hear Ron or Hermione anymore .They seemed to have run out of earshot searching for the diadem .So how come you three arent with Voldemort ?asked Harry .Were gonna be rewarded said Crabbe His voice was surprisingly soft for such an enormous person Harry had hardly ever heard him speak before .Crabbe was smiling like a small child promised a large bag of sweets .We ung back Potter .We decided not to go .Decided to bring you to im .Good plan said Harry in mock admiration .He could not believe that he was this close and was going to be thwarted by Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle .He began edging slowly backward toward the place where the Horcrux sat lopsided upon the bust .If he could just get his hands on it before the fight broke out .So how did you get in here ?he asked trying to distract them .I virtually lived in the Room of Hidden Things all last year said Malfoy his voice brittle .I know how to get in .We was hiding in the corridor outside grunted Goyle .We can do Disslusion Charms now !And then his face split into a gormless grin you turned up right in front of us and said you was looking for a diedum !Whats a diedum ?Harry ?Rons voice echoed suddenly from the other side of the wall to Harrys right .Are you talking to someone ?With a whiplike movement Crabbe pointed his wand at the fiftyfoot mountain of old furniture of broken trunks of old books and robes and unidentifiable junk and shouted DescendoV The wall began to totter then the top third crumbled into the aisle next door where Ron stood .Ron !Harry bellowed as somewhere out of sight Hermione screamed and Harry heard innumerable objects crashing to the floor on the other side of the destabilized wall He pointed his wand at the rampart cried Finite !and it steadied .No !shouted Malfoy staying Crabbes arm as the latter made to repeat his spell .If you wreck the room you might bury this diadem thing !Whats that matter ?said Crabbe tugging himself free .Its Potter the Dark Lord wants who cares about a diedum ?Potter came in here to get it said Malfoy with ill disguised impatience at the slowwittedness of his colleagues so that must mean ‘Must mean ?Crabbe turned on Malfoy with undisguised ferocity .Who cares what you think ?I dont take your orders no more Draco .You an your dad are finished .Harry ?shouted Ron again from the other side of the junk wall .Whats going on ?Harry ?mimicked Crabbe .Whats going no Potter !Cruciol Harry had lunged for the tiara Crabbes curse missed him but hit the stone bust which flew into the air the diadem soared upward and then dropped out of sight in the mass of objects on which the bust had rested .STOP !Malfoy shouted at Crabbe his voice echoing through the enormous room .The Dark Lord wants him alive So ?Im not killing him am I ?yelled Crabbe throwing off Malfoys restraining arm .But if I can I will the Dark Lord wants him dead anyway whats thediff ?A jet of scarlet light shot past Harry by inches Hermione had run around the corner behind him and sent a Stunning Spell straight at Crabbe s head .It only missed because Malfoy pulled him out of the way .Its that Mudblood !Avada Kedavral Harry saw Hermione dive aside and his fury that Crabbe had aimed to kill wiped all else from his mind .He shot a Stunning Spell at Crabbe who lurched out of the way knocking Malfoys wand out of his hand it rolled out of sight beneath a mountain of broken furniture and boxes .Dont kill him !DONT KILL HIM !Malfoy yelled at Crabbe and Goyle who were both aiming at Harry Their split seconds hesitation was all Harry needed .Expelliarmusl Goyle s wand flew out of his hand and disappeared into the bulwark of objects beside him Goyle leapt foolishly on the spot trying to retrieve it Malfoy jumped out of range of Hermione s second Stunning Spell and Ron appearing suddenly at the end of the aisle shot a full BodyBind Curse at Crabbe which narrowly missed .Crabbe wheeled around and screamed Avada KedavraY again .Ron leapt out of sight to avoid the jet of green light .The wandless Malfoy cowered behind a threelegged wardrobe as Hermione charged toward them hitting Goyle with a Stunning Spell as she came .Its somewhere here !Harry yelled at her pointing at the pile of junk into which the old tiara had fallen .Look for it while I go and help R HARRY !she screamed .A roaring billowing noise behind him gave him a moments warning .He turned and saw both Ron and Crabbe running as hard as they could up the aisle toward them .Like it hot scum ?roared Crabbe as he ran .But he seemed to have no control over what he had done .Flames of abnormal size were pursuing them licking up the sides of the junk bulwarks which were crumbling to soot at their touch .Aguamenti Harry bawled but the jet of water that soared from the tip of his wand evaporated in the air .RUN !Malfoy grabbed the Stunned Goyle and dragged him along Crabbe outstripped all of them now looking terrified Harry Ron and Hermione pelted along in his wake and the fire pursued them .It was not normal fire Crabbe had used a curse of which Harry had no knowledge As they turned a corner the flames chased them as though they were alive sentient intent upon killing them .Now the fire was mutating forming a gigantic pack of fiery beasts Flaming serpents chimaeras and dragons rose and fell and rose again and the detritus of centuries on which they were feeding was thrown up in the air into their fanged mouths tossed high on clawed feet before being consumed by the inferno .Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle had vanished from view Harry Ron and Hermione stopped dead the fiery monsters were circling them drawing closer and closer claws and horns and tails lashed and the heat was solid as a wall around them .What can we do ?Hermione screamed over the deafening roars of the fire .What can we do ?Here !Harry seized a pair of heavylooking broomsticks from the nearest pile of junk and threw one to Ron who pulled Hermione onto it behind him .Harry swung his leg over the second broom and with hard kicks to the ground they soared up into the air missing by feet the horned beak of a flaming raptor that snapped its jaws at them .The smoke and heat were becoming overwhelming Below them the cursed fire was consuming the contraband of generations of hunted students the guilty outcomes of a thousand banned experiments the secrets of the countless souls who had sought refuge in the room .Harry could not see a trace of Malfoy Crabbe or Goyle anywhere He swooped as low as he dared over the marauding monsters of flame to try to find them but there was nothing but fire What a terrible way to die .He had never wanted this .Harry lets get out lets get out !bellowed Ron though it was impossible to see where the door was through the black smoke .And then Harry heard a thin piteous human scream from amidst the terrible commotion the thunder of devouring flame .Its too dangerous !Ron yelled but Harry wheeled in the air .His glasses giving his eyes some small protection from the smoke he raked the firestorm below seeking a sign of life a limb or a face that was not yet charred like wood .And he saw them Malfoy with his arms around the unconscious Goyle the pair of them perched on a fragile tower of charred desks and Harry dived .Malfoy saw him coming and raised one arm but even as Harry grasped it he knew at once that it was no good Goyle was too heavy and Malfoy s hand covered in sweat slid instantly out of Harrys IF WE DIE FOR THEM ILL KILL YOU HARRY !roared Rons voice and as a great flaming chimaera bore down upon them he and Hermione dragged Goyle onto their broom and rose rolling and pitching into the air once more as Malfoy clambered up behind Harry .The door get to the door the door !screamed Malfoy in Harrys ear and Harry sped up following Ron Hermione and Goyle through the billowing black smoke hardly able to breathe and all around them the last few objects unburned by the devouring flames were flung into the air as the creatures of the cursed fire cast them high in celebration cups and shields a sparkling necklace and an old discolored tiara What are you doing what are you doing the doors that way screamed Malfoy but Harry made a hairpin swerve and dived .The diadem seemed to fall in slow motion turning and glittering as it dropped toward the maw of a yawning serpent and then he had it caught it around his wrist Harry swerved again as the serpent lunged at him he soared upward and straight toward the place where he prayed the door stood open Ron Hermione and Goyle had vanished Malfoy was screaming and holding Harry so tightly it hurt .Then through the smoke Harry saw a rectangular patch on the wall and steered the broom at it and moments later clean air filled his lungs and they collided with the wall in the corridor beyond .Malfoy fell off the broom and lay facedown gasping coughing and retching .Harry rolled over and sat up The door to the Room of Requirement had vanished and Ron and Hermione sat panting on the floor beside Goyle who was still unconscious .CCrabbe choked Malfoy as soon as he could speak .CCrabbe .Hes dead said Ron harshly .There was silence apart from panting and coughing .Then a number of huge bangs shook the castle and a great cavalcade of transparent figures galloped past on horses their heads screaming with bloodlust under their arms .Harry staggered to his feet when the Headless Hunt had passed and looked around The battle was still going on all around him .He could hear more screams than those of the retreating ghosts .Panic flared within him .Wheres Ginny ?he said sharply .She was here .She was supposed to be going back into the Room of Requirement .Blimey dyou reckon itll still work after that fire ?asked Ron but he too got to his feet rubbing his chest and looking left and right .Shall we split up and look ?No said Hermione getting to her feet too .Malfoy and Goyle remained slumped hopelessly on the corridor floor neither of them had wands .Lets stick together .I say we go Harry whats that on your arm ?What ?Oh yeah He pulled the diadem from his wrist and held it up .It was still hot blackened with soot but as he looked at it closely he was just able to make out the tiny words etched upon it WIT BEYOND MEASURE IS MANS GREATEST TREASURE .A bloodlike substance dark and tarry seemed to be leaking from the diadem .Suddenly Harry felt the thing vibrate violently then break apart in his hands and as it did so he thought he heard the faintest most distant scream of pain echoing not from the grounds or the castle but from the thing that had just fragmented in his fingers .It must have been Fiendfyre !whimpered Hermione her eyes on the broken pieces .Sorry ?Fiendfyre cursed fire its one of the substances that destroy Horcruxes but I would never ever have dared use it its so dangerous how did Crabbe know how to ?Mustve learned from the Carrows said Harry grimly .Shame he wasnt concentrating when they mentioned how to stop it really said Ron whose hair like Hermiones was singed and whose face was blackened .If he hadnt tried to kill us all Id be quite sorry he was dead .But dont you realize ?whispered Hermione .This means if we can just get the snake But she broke off as yells and shouts and the unmistakable noises of dueling filled the corridor .Harry looked around and his heart seemed to fail Death Eaters had penetrated Hogwarts .Fred and Percy had just backed into view both of them dueling masked and hooded men .Harry Ron and Hermione ran forward to help Jets of light flew in every direction and the man dueling Percy backed off fast Then his hood slipped and they saw a high forehead and streaked hair Hello Minister !bellowed Percy sending a neat jinx straight at Thicknesse who dropped his wand and clawed at the front of his robes apparently in awful discomfort .Did I mention Im resigning ?Youre joking Perce !shouted Fred as the Death Eater he was battling collapsed under the weight of three separate Stunning Spells .Thicknesse had fallen to the ground with tiny spikes erupting all over him he seemed to be turning into some form of sea urchin .Fred looked at Percy with glee .You actually are joking Perce .I dont think Ive heard you joke since you were The air exploded .They had been grouped together Harry Ron Hermione Fred and Percy the two Death Eaters at their feet one Stunned the other Transfigured and in that fragment of a moment when danger seemed temporarily at bay the world was rent apart .Harry felt himself flying through the air and all he could do was hold as tightly as possible to that thin stick of wood that was his one and only weapon and shield his head in his arms He heard the screams and yells of his companions without a hope of knowing what had happened to them And then the world resolved itself into pain and semidarkness He was half buried in the wreckage of a corridor that had been subjected to a terrible attack .Cold air told him that the side of the castle had been blown away and hot stickiness on his cheek told him that he was bleeding copiously .Then he heard a terrible cry that pulled at his insides that expressed agony of a kind neither flame nor curse could cause and he stood up swaying more frightened than he had been that day more frightened perhaps than he had been in his life .And Hermione was struggling to her feet in the wreckage and three redheaded men were grouped on the ground where the wall had blasted apart .Harry grabbed Hermione s hand as they staggered and stumbled over stone and wood .No no no !someone was shouting .No !Fred !No !And Percy was shaking his brother and Ron was kneeling beside them and Freds eyes stared without seeing the ghost of his last laugh still etched upon his face .THE ELDER WAND The world had ended so why had the battle not ceased the castle fallen silent in horror and every combatant laid down their arms ?Harrys mind was in free fall spinning out of control unable to grasp the impossibility because Fred Weasley could not be dead the evidence of all his senses must be lying And then a body fell past the hole blown into the side of the school and curses flew in at them from the darkness hitting the wall behind their heads .Get down !Harry shouted as more curses flew through the night He and Ron had both grabbed Hermione and pulled her to the floor but Percy lay across Freds body shielding it from further harm and when Harry shouted Percy come on weve got to move !he shook his head .Percy !Harry saw tear tracks streaking the grime coating Rons face as he seized his elder brothers shoulders and pulled but Percy would not budge .Percy you cant do anything for him !Were going to Hermione screamed and Harry turning did not need to ask why .A monstrous spider the size of a small car was trying to climb through the huge hole in the wall One of Aragogs descendants had joined the fight .Ron and Harry shouted together their spells collided and the monster was blown backward its legs jerking horribly and vanished into the darkness .It brought friends !Harry called to the others glancing over the edge of the castle through the hole in the wall the curses had blasted More giant spiders were climbing the side of the building liberated from the Forbidden Forest into which the Death Eaters must have penetrated .Harry fired Stunning Spells down upon them knocking the lead monster into its fellows so that they rolled back down the building and out of sight .Then more curses came soaring over Harrys head so close he felt the force of them blow his hair .Lets move NOW !Pushing Hermione ahead of him with Ron Harry stooped to seize Freds body under the armpits .Percy realizing what Harry was trying to do stopped clinging to the body and helped together crouching low to avoid the curses flying at them from the grounds they hauled Fred out of the way .Here said Harry and they placed him in a niche where a suit of armor had stood earlier .He could not bear to look at Fred a second longer than he had to and after making sure that the body was well hidden he took off after Ron and Hermione .Malfoy and Goyle had vanished but at the end of the corridor which was now full of dust and falling masonry glass long gone from the windows he saw many people running backward and forward whether friends or foes he could not tell .Rounding the corner Percy let out a bulllike roar ROOKWOOD !and sprinted off in the direction of a tall man who was pursuing a couple of students .Harry in here !Hermione screamed .She had pulled Ron behind a tapestry They seemed to be wrestling together and for one mad second Harry thought that they were embracing again then he saw that Hermione was trying to restrain Ron to stop him running after Percy .Listen to me LISTEN ROM I wanna help I wanna kill Death Eaters His face was contorted smeared with dust and smoke and he was shaking with rage and grief .Ron were the only ones who can end it !Please Ron we need the snake weve got to kill the snake !said Hermione .But Harry knew how Ron felt Pursuing another Horcrux could not bring the satisfaction of revenge he too wanted to fight to punish them the people who had killed Fred and he wanted to find the other Weasleys and above all make sure make quite sure that Ginny was not but he could not permit that idea to form in his mind We will fight !Hermione said .Well have to to reach the snake !But lets not lose sight now of what were supposed to be ddoing !Were the only ones who can end it !She was crying too and she wiped her face on her torn and singed sleeve as she spoke but she took great heaving breaths to calm herself as still keeping a tight hold on Ron she turned to Harry .You need to find out where Voldemort is because hell have the snake with him wont he ?Do it Harry look inside him !Why was it so easy ?Because his scar had been burning for hours yearning to show him Voldemorts thoughts ?He closed his eyes on her command and at once the screams and the bangs and all the discordant sounds of the battle were drowned until they became distant as though he stood far far away from them .He was standing in the middle of a desolate but strangely familiar room with peeling paper on the walls and all the windows boarded except for one .The sounds of the assault on the castle were muffled and distant .The single unblocked window revealed distant bursts of light where the castle stood but inside the room it was dark except for a solitary oil lamp .He was rolling his wand between his fingers watching it his thoughts on the room in the castle the secret room only he had ever found the room like the Chamber that you had to be clever and cunning and inquisitive to discover .He was confident that the boy would not find the diadem .although Dumbledores puppet had come much farther than he had ever expected .too far .My Lord said a voice desperate and cracked .He turned There was Lucius Malfoy sitting in the darkest corner ragged and still bearing the marks of the punishment he had received after the boys last escape .One of his eyes remained closed and puffy .My Lord .please .my son .If your son is dead Lucius it is not my fault .He did not come and join me like the rest of the Slytherins .Perhaps he has decided to befriend Harry Potter ?No never whispered Malfoy .You must hope not .Arent arent you afraid my Lord that Potter might die at another hand but yours ?asked Malfoy his voice shaking .Wouldnt it be .forgive me .more prudent to call off this battle enter the castle and seek him yyourself ?Do not pretend Lucius .You wish the battle to cease so that you can discover what has happened to your son .And I do not need to seek Potter .Before the night is out Potter will have come to find me .Voldemort dropped his gaze once more to the wand in his fingers .It troubled him .and those things that troubled Lord Voldemort needed to be rearranged .Go and fetch Snape .Snape mmy Lord ?Snape .Now .I need him .There is a service I require from him .Go .Frightened stumbling a little through the gloom Lucius left the room .Voldemort continued to stand there twirling the wand between his fingers staring at it .It is the only way Nagini he whispered and he looked around and there was the great thick snake now suspended in midair twisting gracefully within the enchanted protected space he had made for her a starry transparent sphere somewhere between glittering cage and tank .With a gasp Harry pulled back and opened his eyes at the same moment his ears were assaulted with the screeches and cries the smashes and bangs of battle .Hes in the Shrieking Shack .The snakes with him its got some sort of magical protection around it .Hes just sent Lucius Malfoy to find Snape .Voldemorts sitting in the Shrieking Shack ?said Hermione outraged .Hes not hes not even fighting ?He doesnt think he needs to fight said Harry .He thinks Im going to go to him .But why ?He knows Im after Horcruxes hes keeping Nagini close beside him obviously Im going to have to go to him to get near the thing Right said Ron squaring his shoulders .So you cant go thats what he wants what hes expecting .You stay here and look after Hermione and Ill go and get it Harry cut across Ron .You two stay here Ill go under the Cloak and Ill be back as soon as I No said Hermione it makes much more sense if I take the Cloak and Dont even think about it Ron snarled at her .Before Hermione could get farther than Ron Im just as capable the tapestry at the top of the staircase on which they stood was ripped open .POTTER !Two masked Death Eaters stood there but even before their wands were fully raised Hermione shouted Glisseo The stairs beneath their feet flattened into a chute and she Harry and Ron hurtled down it unable to control their speed but so fast that the Death Eaters Stunning Spells flew far over their heads .They shot through the concealing tapestry at the bottom and spun onto the floor hitting the opposite wall .Duro cried Hermione pointing her wand at the tapestry and there were two loud sickening crunches as the tapestry turned to stone and the Death Eaters pursuing them crumpled against it .Get back !shouted Ron and he Harry and Hermione flattened themselves against a door as a herd of galloping desks thundered past shepherded by a sprinting Professor McGonagall .She appeared not to notice them Her hair had come down and there was a gash on her cheek .As she turned the corner they heard her scream CHARGE !Harry you get the Cloak on said Hermione .Never mind us But he threw it over all three of them large though they were he doubted anyone would see their disembodied feet through the dust that clogged the air the falling stone the shimmer of spells .They ran down the next staircase and found themselves in a corridor full of duelers .The portraits on either side of the fighters were crammed with figures screaming advice and encouragement while Death Eaters both masked and unmasked dueled students and teachers .Dean had won himself a wand for he was facetoface with Dolohov Parvati with Travers .Harry Ron and Hermione raised their wands at once ready to strike but the duelers were weaving and darting around so much that there was a strong likelihood of hurting one of their own side if they cast curses .Even as they stood braced looking for the opportunity to act there came a great Wheeeeeeeeeeee and looking up Harry saw Peeves zooming over them dropping Snargaluff pods down onto the Death Eaters whose heads were suddenly engulfed in wriggling green tubers like fat worms .Argh !A fistful of tubers had hit the Cloak over Rons head the slimy green roots were suspended improbably in midair as Ron tried to shake them loose .Someones invisible there !shouted a masked Death Eater pointing .Dean made the most of the Death Eaters momentary distraction knocking him out with a Stunning Spell Dolohov attempted to retaliate and Parvati shot a BodyBind Curse at him .LETS GO !Harry yelled and he Ron and Hermione gathered the Cloak tightly around themselves and pelted heads down through the midst of the fighters slipping a little in pools of Snargaluff juice toward the top of the marble staircase into the entrance hall .Im Draco Malfoy Im Draco Im on your side !Draco was on the upper landing pleading with another masked Death Eater .Harry Stunned the Death Eater as they passed Malfoy looked around beaming for his savior and Ron punched him from under the Cloak .Malfoy fell backward on top of the Death Eater his mouth bleeding utterly bemused .And thats the second time weve saved your life tonight you twofaced bastard !Ron yelled .There were more duelers all over the stairs and in the hall Death Eaters everywhere Harry looked Yaxley close to the front doors in combat with Flitwick a masked Death Eater dueling Kingsley right beside them .Students ran in every direction some carrying or dragging injured friends .Harry directed a Stunning Spell toward the masked Death Eater it missed but nearly hit Neville who had emerged from nowhere brandishing armfuls of Venomous Tentacula which looped itself happily around the nearest Death Eater and began reeling him in .Harry Ron and Hermione sped down the marble staircase Glass shattered to their left and the Slytherin hourglass that had recorded House points spilled its emeralds everywhere so that people slipped and staggered as they ran .Two bodies fell from the balcony overhead as they reached the ground and a gray blur that Harry took for an animal sped four legged across the hall to sink its teeth into one of the fallen .NO !shrieked Hermione and with a deafening blast from her wand Fenrir Greyback was thrown backward from the feebly stirring body of Lavender Brown .He hit the marble banisters and struggled to return to his feet .Then with a bright white flash and a crack a crystal ball fell on top of his head and he crumpled to the ground and did not move .I have more !shrieked Professor Trelawney from over the banisters .More for any who want them !Here And with a movement like a tennis serve she heaved another enormous crystal sphere from her bag waved her wand through the air and caused the ball to speed across the hall and smash through a window .At the same moment the heavy wooden front doors burst open and more of the gigantic spiders forced their way into the entrance hall .Screams of terror rent the air The fighters scattered Death Eaters and Hogwartians alike and red and green jets of light flew into the midst of the oncoming monsters which shuddered and reared more terrifying than ever .How do we get out ?yelled Ron over all the screaming but before either Harry or Hermione could answer they were bowled aside Hagrid had come thundering down the stairs brandishing his flowery pink umbrella .Dont hurt em dont hurt em !he yelled .HAGRID NO !Harry forgot everything else He sprinted out from under the Cloak running bent double to avoid the curses illuminating the whole hall .HAGRID COME BACK !But he was not even halfway to Hagrid when he saw it happen Hagrid vanished amongst the spiders and with a great scurrying a foul swarming movement they retreated under the onslaught of spells Hagrid buried in their midst .HAGRID !Harry heard someone calling his own name whether friend or foe he did not care He was sprinting down the front steps into the dark grounds and the spiders were swarming away with their prey and he could see nothing of Hagrid at all .HAGRID !He thought he could make out an enormous arm waving from the midst of the spider swarm but as he made to chase after them his way was impeded by a monumental foot which swung down out of the darkness and made the ground on which he stood shudder .He looked up A giant stood before him twenty feet high its head hidden in shadow nothing but its treelike hairy shins illuminated by light from the castle doors .With one brutal fluid movement it smashed a massive fist through an upper window and glass rained down upon Harry forcing him back under the shelter of the doorway .Oh my !shrieked Hermione as she and Ron caught up with Harry and gazed upward at the giant now trying to seize people through the window above .DONT !Ron yelled grabbing Hermiones hand as she raised her wand .Stun him and hell crush half the castle HAGGER ?Grawp came lurching around the corner of the castle only now did Harry realize that Grawp was indeed an undersized giant .The gargantuan monster trying to crush people on the upper floors looked around and let out a roar .The stone steps trembled as he stomped toward his smaller kin and Grawp s lopsided mouth fell open showing yellow halfbrick sized teeth and then they launched themselves at each other with the savagery of lions .RUN !Harry roared the night was full of hideous yells and blows as the giants wrestled and he seized Hermiones hand and tore down the steps into the grounds Ron bringing up the rear .Harry had not lost hope of finding and saving Hagrid he ran so fast that they were halfway toward the forest before they were brought up short again .The air around them had frozen Harrys breath caught and solidified in his chest .Shapes moved out in the darkness swirling figures of concentrated blackness moving in a great wave toward the castle their faces hooded and their breath rattling .Ron and Hermione closed in beside him as the sounds of fighting behind them grew suddenly muted deadened because a silence only dementors could bring was falling thickly through the night and Fred was gone and Hagrid was surely dying or already dead .Come on Harry !said Hermiones voice from a very long way away .Patronuses Harry come on !He raised his wand but a dull hopelessness was spreading through him How many more lay dead that he did not yet know about he felt as though his soul had already half left his body .HARRY COME ON !screamed Hermione .A hundred dementors were advancing gliding toward them sucking their way closer to Harrys despair which was like a promise of a feast .He saw Rons silver terrier burst into the air flicker feebly and expire he saw Hermiones otter twist in midair and fade and his own wand trembled in his hand and he almost welcomed the oncoming oblivion the promise of nothing of no feeling .And then a silver hare a boar and a fox soared past Harry Ron and Hermiones heads The dementors fell back before the creatures approach .Three more people had arrived out of the darkness to stand beside them their wands outstretched continuing to cast their Patronuses Luna Ernie and Seamus .Thats right said Luna encouragingly as if they were back in the Room of Requirement and this was simply spell practice for the D .A .Thats right Harry .come on think of something happy .Something happy ?he said his voice cracked .Were all still here she whispered were still fighting .Come on now .There was a silver spark then a wavering light and then with the greatest effort it had ever cost him the stag burst from the end of Harrys wand .It cantered forward and now the dementors scattered in earnest and immediately the night was mild again but the sounds of the surrounding battle were loud in his ears .Cant thank you enough said Ron shakily turning to Luna Ernie and Seamus you just saved With a roar and an earthquaking tremor another giant came lurching out of the darkness from the direction of the forest brandishing a club taller than any of them .RUN !Harry shouted again but the others needed no telling They all scattered and not a second too soon for next moment the creatures vast foot had fallen exactly where they had been standing .Harry looked round Ron and Hermione were following him but the other three had vanished back into the battle .Lets get out of range !yelled Ron as the giant swung its club again and its bellows echoed through the night across the grounds where bursts of red and green light continued to illuminate the darkness .The Whomping Willow said Harry go !Somehow he walled it all up in his mind crammed it into a small space into which he could not look now Thoughts of Fred and Hagrid and his terror for all the people he loved scattered in and outside the castle must all wait because they had to run had to reach the snake and Voldemort because that was as Hermione said the only way to end it He sprinted half believing he could outdistance death itself ignoring the jets of light flying in the darkness all around him and the sound of the lake crashing like the sea and the creaking of the Forbidden Forest though the night was windless through grounds that seemed themselves to have risen in rebellion he ran faster than he had ever moved in his life and it was he who saw the great tree first the Willow that protected the secret at its roots with whiplike slashing branches .Panting and gasping Harry slowed down skirting the Willows swiping branches peering through the darkness toward its thick trunk trying to see the single knot in the bark of the old tree that would paralyze it .Ron and Hermione caught up Hermione so out of breath she could not speak .How howre we going to get in ?panted Ron .I can see the place if we just had Crookshanks again Crookshanks ?wheezed Hermione bent double clutching her chest .Are you a wizard or what ?Oh right yeah Ron looked around then directed his wand at a twig on the ground and said Wingardium Leviosal The twig flew up from the ground spun through the air as if caught by a gust of wind then zoomed directly at the trunk through the Willows ominously swaying branches .It jabbed at a place near the roots and at once the writhing tree became still .Perfect !panted Hermione .Wait .For one teetering second while the crashes and booms of the battle filled the air Harry hesitated .Voldemort wanted him to do this wanted him to come .Was he leading Ron and Hermione into a trap ?But then the reality seemed to close upon him cruel and plain The only way forward was to kill the snake and the snake was where Voldemort was and Voldemort was at the end of this tunnel .Harry were coming just get in there !said Ron pushing him forward .Harry wriggled into the earthy passage hidden in the trees roots .It was a much tighter squeeze than it had been the last time they had entered it .The tunnel was lowceilinged They had had to double up to move through it nearly four years previously now there was nothing for it but to crawl .Harry went first his wand illuminated expecting at any moment to meet barriers but none came .They moved in silence Harrys gaze fixed upon the swinging beam of the wand held in his fist .At last the tunnel began to slope upward and Harry saw a sliver of light ahead .Hermione tugged at his ankle .The Cloak !she whispered .Put the Cloak on !He groped behind him and she forced the bundle of slippery cloth into his free hand .With difficulty he dragged it over himself murmured Nox extinguishing his wandlight and continued on his hands and knees as silently as possible all his senses straining expecting every second to be discovered to hear a cold clear voice see a flash of green light .And then he heard voices coming from the room directly ahead of them only slightly muffled by the fact that the opening at the end of the tunnel had been blocked up by what looked like an old crate .Hardly daring to breathe Harry edged right up to the opening and peered through a tiny gap left between crate and wall .The room beyond was dimly lit but he could see Nagini swirling and coiling like a serpent underwater safe in her enchanted starry sphere which floated unsupported in midair .He could see the edge of a table and a longfingered white hand toying with a wand .Then Snape spoke and Harrys heart lurched Snape was inches away from where he crouched hidden . .my Lord their resistance is crumbling and it is doing so without your help said Voldemort in his high clear voice .Skilled wizard though you are Severus I do not think you will make much difference now .We are almost there .almost .Let me find the boy .Let me bring you Potter .I know I can find him my Lord .Please .Snape strode past the gap and Harry drew back a little keeping his eyes fixed upon Nagini wondering whether there was any spell that might penetrate the protection surrounding her but he could not think of anything .One failed attempt and he would give away his position .Voldemort stood up .Harry could see him now see the red eyes the flattened serpentine face the pallor of him gleaming slightly in the semidarkness .I have a problem Severus said Voldemort softly .My Lord ?said Snape .Voldemort raised the Elder Wand holding it as delicately and precisely as a conductors baton .Why doesnt it work for me Severus ?In the silence Harry imagined he could hear the snake hissing slightly as it coiled and uncoiled or was it Voldemorts sibilant sigh lingering on the air ?My my Lord ?said Snape blankly .I do not understand .You you have performed extraordinary magic with that wand .No said Voldemort .I have performed my usual magic .I am extraordinary but this wand .no .It has not revealed the wonders it has promised .I feel no difference between this wand and the one I procured from Ollivander all those years ago .Voldemorts tone was musing calm but Harrys scar had begun to throb and pulse Pain was building in his forehead and he could feel that controlled sense of fury building inside Voldemort .No difference said Voldemort again .Snape did not speak .Harry could not see his face He wondered whether Snape sensed danger was trying to find the right words to reassure his master .Voldemort started to move around the room Harry lost sight of him for seconds as he prowled speaking in that same measured voice while the pain and fury mounted in Harry .I have thought long and hard Severus .Do you know why I have called you back from the battle ?And for a moment Harry saw Snape s profile His eyes were fixed upon the coiling snake in its enchanted cage .No my Lord but I beg you will let me return .Let me find Potter .You sound like Lucius .Neither of you understands Potter as I do .He does not need finding .Potter will come to me .I know his weakness you see his one great flaw .He will hate watching the others struck down around him knowing that it is for him that it happens .He will want to stop it at any cost .He will come .But my Lord he might be killed accidentally by one other than yourself My instructions to my Death Eaters have been perfectly clear .Capture Potter .Kill his friends the more the better but do not kill him .But it is of you that I wished to speak Severus not Harry Potter .You have been very valuable to me .Very valuable .My Lord knows I seek only to serve him .But let me go and find the boy my Lord .Let me bring him to you .I know I can I have told you no !said Voldemort and Harry caught the glint of red in his eyes as he turned again and the swishing of his cloak was like the slithering of a snake and he felt Voldemorts impatience in his burning scar .My concern at the moment Severus is what will happen when I finally meet the boy !My Lord there can be no question surely ?but there is a question Severus .There is .Voldemort halted and Harry could see him plainly again as he slid the Elder Wand through his white fingers staring at Snape .Why did both the wands I have used fail when directed at Harry Potter ?I I cannot answer that my Lord .Cant you ?The stab of rage felt like a spike driven through Harrys head He forced his own fist into his mouth to stop himself from crying out in pain .He closed his eyes and suddenly he was Voldemort looking into Snapes pale face .My wand of yew did everything of which I asked it Severus except to kill Harry Potter .Twice it failed .Ollivander told me under torture of the twin cores told me to take anothers wand .I did so but Luciuss wand shattered upon meeting Potters .I I have no explanation my Lord .Snape was not looking at Voldemort now .His dark eyes were still fixed upon the coiling serpent in its protective sphere .I sought a third wand Severus .The Elder Wand the Wand of Destiny the Deathstick .I took it from its previous master .I took it from the grave of Albus Dumbledore .And now Snape looked at Voldemort and Snapes face was like a death mask .It was marble white and so still that when he spoke it was a shock to see that anyone lived behind the blank eyes .My Lord let me go to the boy All this long night when I am on the brink of victory I have sat here said Voldemort his voice barely louder than a whisper wondering wondering why the Elder Wand refuses to be what it ought to be refuses to perform as legend says it must perform for its rightful owner .and I think I have the answer .Snape did not speak .Perhaps you already know it ?You are a clever man after all Severus .You have been a good and faithful servant and I regret what must happen .My Lord The Elder Wand cannot serve me properly Severus because I am not its true master .The Elder Wand belongs to the wizard who killed its last owner .You killed Albus Dumbledore .While you live Severus the Elder Wand cannot be truly mine .My Lord !Snape protested raising his wand .It cannot be any other way said Voldemort .I must master the wand Severus .Master the wand and I master Potter at last .And Voldemort swiped the air with the Elder Wand .It did nothing to Snape who for a split second seemed to think he had been reprieved But then Voldemorts intention became clear .The snakes cage was rolling through the air and before Snape could do anything more than yell it had encased him head and shoulders and Voldemort spoke in Parseltongue .Kill .There was a terrible scream .Harry saw Snape s face losing the little color it had left it whitened as his black eyes widened as the snakes fangs pierced his neck as he failed to push the enchanted cage off himself as his knees gave way and he fell to the floor .I regret it said Voldemort coldly .He turned away there was no sadness in him no remorse .It was time to leave this shack and take charge with a wand that would now do his full bidding .He pointed it at the starry cage holding the snake which drifted upward off Snape who fell sideways onto the floor blood gushing from the wounds in his neck .Voldemort swept from the room without a backward glance and the great serpent floated after him in its huge protective sphere .Back in the tunnel and his own mind Harry opened his eyes He had drawn blood biting down on his knuckles in the effort not to shout out .Now he was looking through the tiny crack between crate and wall watching a foot in a black boot trembling on the floor .Harry !breathed Hermione behind him but he had already pointed his wand at the crate blocking his view .It lifted an inch into the air and drifted sideways silently .As quietly as he could he pulled himself up into the room .He did not know why he was doing it why he was approaching the dying man He did not know what he felt as he saw Snapes white face and the fingers trying to staunch the bloody wound at his neck .Harry took off the Invisibility Cloak and looked down upon the man he hated whose widening black eyes found Harry as he tried to speak .Harry bent over him and Snape seized the front of his robes and pulled him close .A terrible rasping gurgling noise issued from Snapes throat .Take .it .Take .it .Something more than blood was leaking from Snape .Silvery blue neither gas nor liquid it gushed from his mouth and his ears and his eyes and Harry knew what it was but did not know what to do A flask conjured from thin air was thrust into his shaking hands by Hermione .Harry lifted the silvery substance into it with his wand .When the flask was full to the brim and Snape looked as though there was no blood left in him his grip on Harrys robes slackened .Look .at .me .he whispered .The green eyes found the black but after a second something in the depths of the dark pair seemed to vanish leaving them fixed blank and empty .The hand holding Harry thudded to the floor and Snape moved no more .THE PRINCES TALE Harry remained kneeling at Snapes side simply staring down at him until quite suddenly a high cold voice spoke so close to them that Harry jumped to his feet the flask gripped tightly in his hands thinking that Voldemort had reentered the room .Voldemort s voice reverberated from the walls and floor and Harry realized that he was talking to Hogwarts and to all the surrounding area that the residents of Hogsmeade and all those still fighting in the castle would hear him as clearly as if he stood beside them his breath on the back of their necks a deathblow away .You have fought said the high cold voice valiantly .Lord Voldemort knows how to value bravery .Yet you have sustained heavy losses .If you continue to resist me you will all die one by one .I do not wish this to happen .Every drop of magical blood spilled is a loss and a waste .Lord Voldemort is merciful .I command my forces to retreat immediately .You have one hour .Dispose of your dead with dignity .Treat your injured .I speak now Harry Potter directly to you .You have permitted your friends to die for you rather than face me yourself .I shall wait for one hour in the Forbidden Forest .If at the end of that hour you have not come to me have not given yourself up then battle recommences .This time I shall enter the fray myself Harry Potter and I shall find you and I shall punish every last man woman and child who has tried to conceal you from me .One hour .Both Ron and Hermione shook their heads frantically looking at Harry .Dont listen to him said Ron .Itll be all right said Hermione wildly .Lets lets get back to the castle if hes gone to the forest well need to think of a new plan She glanced at Snapes body then hurried back to the tunnel entrance .Ron followed her .Harry gathered up the Invisibility Cloak then looked down at Snape .He did not know what to feel except shock at the way Snape had been killed and the reason for which it had been done .They crawled back through the tunnel none of them talking and Harry wondered whether Ron and Hermione could still hear Voldemort ringing in their heads as he could .You have permitted your friends to die for you rather than face me yourself I shall wait for one hour in the Forbidden Forest .One hour .Small bundles seemed to litter the lawn at the front of the castle .It could only be an hour or so from dawn yet it was pitchblack .The three of them hurried toward the stone steps .A lone clog the size of a small boat lay abandoned in front of them .There was no other sign of Grawp or of his attacker .The castle was unnaturally silent .There were no flashes of light now no bangs or screams or shouts .The flagstones of the deserted entrance hall were stained with blood .Emeralds were still scattered all over the floor along with pieces of marble and splintered wood .Part of the banisters had been blown away .Where is everyone ?whispered Hermione .Ron led the way to the Great Hall .Harry stopped in the doorway .The House tables were gone and the room was crowded .The survivors stood in groups their arms around each others necks .The injured were being treated upon the raised platform by Madam Pomfrey and a group of helpers .Firenze was amongst the injured his flank poured blood and he shook where he lay unable to stand .The dead lay in a row in the middle of the Hall .Harry could not see Freds body because his family surrounded him .George was kneeling at his head Mrs Weasley was lying across Freds chest her body shaking Mr Weasley stroking her hair while tears cascaded down his cheeks .Without a word to Harry Ron and Hermione walked away .Harry saw Hermione approach Ginny whose face was swollen and blotchy and hug her .Ron joined Bill Fleur and Percy who flung an arm around Rons shoulders .As Ginny and Hermione moved closer to the rest of the family Harry had a clear view of the bodies lying next to Fred Remus and Tonks pale and still and peacefullooking apparently asleep beneath the dark enchanted ceiling .The Great Hall seemed to fly away become smaller shrink as Harry reeled backward from the doorway .He could not draw breath .He could not bear to look at any of the other bodies to see who else had died for him .He could not bear to join the Weasleys could not look into their eyes when if he had given himself up in the first place Fred might never have died .He turned away and ran up the marble staircase .Lupin Tonks .He yearned not to feel .He wished he could rip out his heart his innards everything that was screaming inside him .The castle was completely empty even the ghosts seemed to have joined the mass mourning in the Great Hall .Harry ran without stopping clutching the crystal flask of Snapes last thoughts and he did not slow down until he reached the stone gargoyle guarding the headmasters office .Password ?Dumbledore !said Harry without thinking because it was he whom he yearned to see and to his surprise the gargoyle slid aside revealing the spiral staircase behind .But when Harry burst into the circular office he found a change .The portraits that hung all around the walls were empty .Not a single headmaster or headmistress remained to see him all it seemed had flitted away charging through the paintings that lined the castle so that they could have a clear view of what was going on .Harry glanced hopelessly at Dumbledores deserted frame which hung directly behind the headmasters chair then turned his back on it .The stone Pensieve lay in the cabinet where it had always been Harry heaved it onto the desk and poured Snapes memories into the wide basin with its runic markings around the edge .To escape into someone elses head would be a blessed relief .Nothing that even Snape had left him could be worse than his own thoughts .The memories swirled silver white and strange and without hesitating with a feeling of reckless abandonment as though this would assuage his torturing grief Harry dived .He fell headlong into sunlight and his feet found warm ground .When he straightened up he saw that he was in a nearly deserted playground .A single huge chimney dominated the distant skyline .Two girls were swinging backward and forward and a skinny boy was watching them from behind a clump of bushes .His black hair was overlong and his clothes were so mismatched that it looked deliberate too short jeans a shabby overlarge coat that might have belonged to a grown man an odd smocklike shirt .Harry moved closer to the boy .Snape looked no more than nine or ten years old sallow small stringy .There was undisguised greed in his thin face as he watched the younger of the two girls swinging higher and higher than her sister .Lily dont do it !shrieked the elder of the two .But the girl had let go of the swing at the very height of its arc and flown into the air quite literally flown launched herself skyward with a great shout of laughter and instead of crumpling on the playground asphalt she soared like a trapeze artist through the air staying up far too long landing far too lightly .Mummy told you not to !Petunia stopped her swing by dragging the heels of her sandals on the ground making a crunching grinding sound then leapt up hands on hips .Mummy said you werent allowed Lily !But Im fine said Lily still giggling .Tuney look at this .Watch what I can do .Petunia glanced around .The playground was deserted apart from themselves and though the girls did not know it Snape .Lily had picked up a fallen flower from the bush behind which Snape lurked .Petunia advanced evidently torn between curiosity and disapproval .Lily waited until Petunia was near enough to have a clear view then held out her palm .The flower sat there opening and closing its petals like some bizarre manylipped oyster .Stop it !shrieked Petunia .Its not hurting you said Lily but she closed her hand on the blossom and threw it back to the ground .Its not right said Petunia but her eyes had followed the flowers flight to the ground and lingered upon it .How do you do it ?she added and there was definite longing in her voice .Its obvious isnt it ?Snape could no longer contain himself but had jumped out from behind the bushes .Petunia shrieked and ran backward toward the swings but Lily though clearly startled remained where she was .Snape seemed to regret his appearance .A dull flush of color mounted the sallow cheeks as he looked at Lily .Whats obvious ?asked Lily .Snape had an air of nervous excitement .With a glance at the distant Petunia now hovering beside the swings he lowered his voice and said I know what you are .What do you mean ?Youre .youre a witch whispered Snape .She looked affronted .Thats not a very nice thing to say to somebody !She turned nose in the air and marched off toward her sister .No !said Snape .He was highly colored now and Harry wondered why he did not take off the ridiculously large coat unless it was because he did not want to reveal the smock beneath it .He flapped after the girls looking ludicrously batlike like his older self .The sisters considered him united in disapproval both holding on to one of the swing poles as though it was the safe place in tag .You are said Snape to Lily .You are a witch .Ive been watching you for a while .But theres nothing wrong with that .My mums one and Im a wizard .Petunias laugh was like cold water .Wizard !she shrieked her courage returned now that she had recovered from the shock of his unexpected appearance .I know who you are .Youre that Snape boy !They live down Spinners End by the river she told Lily and it was evident from her tone that she considered the address a poor recommendation .Why have you been spying on us ?Havent been spying said Snape hot and uncomfortable and dirtyhaired in the bright sunlight .Wouldnt spy on you anyway he added spitefully youre a Muggle .Though Petunia evidently did not understand the word she could hardly mistake the tone .Lily come on were leaving !she said shrilly .Lily obeyed her sister at once glaring at Snape as she left .He stood watching them as they marched through the playground gate and Harry the only one left to observe him recognized Snape s bitter disappointment and understood that Snape had been planning this moment for a while and that it had all gone wrong .The scene dissolved and before Harry knew it re formed around him .He was now in a small thicket of trees .He could see a sunlit river glittering through their trunks .The shadows cast by the trees made a basin of cool green shade .Two children sat facing each other crosslegged on the ground .Snape had removed his coat now his odd smock looked less peculiar in the half light . .and the Ministry can punish you if you do magic outside school you get letters .But I have done magic outside school !Were all right .We havent got wands yet .They let you off when youre a kid and you cant help it .But once youre eleven he nodded importantly and they start training you then youve got to go careful .There was a little silence .Lily had picked up a fallen twig and twirled it in the air and Harry knew that she was imagining sparks trailing from it .Then she dropped the twig leaned in toward the boy and said It is real isnt it ?Its not a joke ?Petunia says youre lying to me .Petunia says there isnt a Hogwarts .It is real isnt it ?Its real for us said Snape .Not for her .But well get the letter you and me .Really ?whispered Lily .Definitely said Snape and even with his poorly cut hair and his odd clothes he struck an oddly impressive figure sprawled in front of her brimful of confidence in his destiny .And will it really come by owl ?Lily whispered .Normally said Snape .But youre Muggleborn so someone from the school will have to come and explain to your parents .Does it make a difference being Muggleborn ?Snape hesitated .His black eyes eager in the greenish gloom moved over the pale face the dark red hair .No he said .It doesnt make any difference .Good said Lily relaxing It was clear that she had been worrying .Youve got loads of magic said Snape .I saw that .All the time I was watching you .His voice trailed away she was not listening but had stretched out on the leafy ground and was looking up at the canopy of leaves overhead .He watched her as greedily as he had watched her in the playground .How are things at your house ?Lily asked .A little crease appeared between his eyes .Fine he said .Theyre not arguing anymore ?Oh yes theyre arguing said Snape .He picked up a fistful of leaves and began tearing them apart apparently unaware of what he was doing .But it wont be that long and Ill be gone .Doesnt your dad like magic ?He doesnt like anything much said Snape .Severus ?A little smile twisted Snape s mouth when she said his name .Yeah ?Tell me about the dementors again .What dyou want to know about them for ?If I use magic outside school They wouldnt give you to the dementors for that !Dementors are for people who do really bad stuff .They guard the wizard prison Azkaban .Youre not going to end up in Azkaban youre too He turned red again and shredded more leaves .Then a small rustling noise behind Harry made him turn Petunia hiding behind a tree had lost her footing .Tuney !said Lily surprise and welcome in her voice but Snape had jumped to his feet .Whos spying now ?he shouted .What dyou want ?Petunia was breathless alarmed at being caught .Harry could see her struggling for something hurtful to say .What is that youre wearing anyway ?she said pointing at Snapes chest .Your mums blouse ?There was a crack A branch over Petunias head had fallen .Lily screamed The branch caught Petunia on the shoulder and she staggered backward and burst into tears .Tuney !But Petunia was running away .Lily rounded on Snape .Did you make that happen ?No .He looked both defiant and scared .You did !She was backing away from him .You did .You hurt her !No no I didnt !But the lie did not convince Lily After one last burning look she ran from the little thicket off after her sister and Snape looked miserable and confused .And the scene reformed .Harry looked around He was on platform nine and threequarters and Snape stood beside him slightly hunched next to a thin sallowfaced sourlooking woman who greatly resembled him .Snape was staring at a family of four a short distance away .The two girls stood a little apart from their parents .Lily seemed to be pleading with her sister Harry moved closer to listen . .Im sorry Tuney Im sorry !Listen She caught her sisters hand and held tight to it even though Petunia tried to pull it away .Maybe once Im there no listen Tuney !Maybe once Im there Ill be able to go to Professor Dumbledore and persuade him to change his mind !I dont want to go !said Petunia and she dragged her hand back out of her sisters grasp .You think I want to go to some stupid castle and learn to be a a Her pale eyes roved over the platform over the cats mewling in their owners arms over the owls fluttering and hooting at each other in cages over the students some already in their long black robes loading trunks onto the scarlet steam engine or else greeting one another with glad cries after a summer apart .you think I want to be a a freak ?Lilys eyes filled with tears as Petunia succeeded in tugging her hand away .Im not a freak said Lily .Thats a horrible thing to say .Thats where youre going said Petunia with relish .A special school for freaks .You and that Snape boy .weirdos thats what you two are .Its good youre being separated from normal people .Its for our safety .Lily glanced toward her parents who were looking around the platform with an air of wholehearted enjoyment drinking in the scene .Then she looked back at her sister and her voice was low and fierce .You didnt think it was such a freaks school when you wrote to the headmaster and begged him to take you .Petunia turned scarlet .Beg ?I didnt beg !I saw his reply .It was very kind .You shouldnt have read whispered Petunia that was my private how could you ?Lily gave herself away by halfglancing toward where Snape stood nearby .Petunia gasped .That boy found it !You and that boy have been sneaking in my room !No not sneaking Now Lily was on the defensive .Severus saw the envelope and he couldnt believe a Muggle could have contacted Hogwarts thats all !He says there must be wizards working undercover in the postal service who take care of Apparently wizards poke their noses in everywhere !said Petunia now as pale as she had been flushed .Freak .she spat at her sister and she flounced off to where her parents stood .The scene dissolved again .Snape was hurrying along the corridor of the Hogwarts Express as it clattered through the countryside .He had already changed into his school robes had perhaps taken the first opportunity to take off his dreadful Muggle clothes .At last he stopped outside a compartment in which a group of rowdy boys were talking .Hunched in a corner seat beside the window was Lily her face pressed against the windowpane .Snape slid open the compartment door and sat down opposite Lily .She glanced at him and then looked back out of the window .She had been crying .I dont want to talk to you she said in a constricted voice .Why not ?Tuney hhates me .Because we saw that letter from Dumbledore .So what ?She threw him a look of deep dislike .So shes my sister !Shes only a He caught himself quickly Lily too busy trying to wipe her eyes without being noticed did not hear him .But were going !he said unable to suppress the exhilaration in his voice .This is it !Were off to Hogwarts !She nodded mopping her eyes but in spite of herself she half smiled .Youd better be in Slytherin said Snape encouraged that she had brightened a little .Slytherin ?One of the boys sharing the compartment who had shown no interest at all in Lily or Snape until that point looked around at the word and Harry whose attention had been focused entirely on the two beside the window saw his father slight blackhaired like Snape but with that indefinable air of having been wellcaredfor even adored that Snape so conspicuously lacked .Who wants to be in Slytherin ?I think Id leave wouldnt you ?James asked the boy lounging on the seats opposite him and with a jolt Harry realized that it was Sirius .Sirius did not smile .My whole family have been in Slytherin he said .Blimey said James and I thought you seemed all right !Sirius grinned .Maybe Ill break the tradition .Where are you heading if youve got the choice ?James lifted an invisible sword . ‘Gryffindor where dwell the brave at heart !Like my dad .Snape made a small disparaging noise .James turned on him .Got a problem with that ?No said Snape though his slight sneer said otherwise .If youd rather be brawny than brainy Where re you hoping to go seeing as youre neither ?interjected Sirius .James roared with laughter .Lily sat up rather flushed and looked from James to Sirius in dislike .Come on Severus lets find another compartment .Oooooo .James and Sirius imitated her lofty voice James tried to trip Snape as he passed .See ya Snivellus !a voice called as the compartment door slammed .And the scene dissolved once more .Harry was standing right behind Snape as they faced the candlelit House tables lined with rapt faces .Then Professor McGonagall said Evans Lily !He watched his mother walk forward on trembling legs and sit down upon the rickety stool .Professor McGonagall dropped the Sorting Hat onto her head and barely a second after it had touched the dark red hair the hat cried Gryffindoii Harry heard Snape let out a tiny groan .Lily took off the hat handed it back to Professor McGonagall then hurried toward the cheering Gryffindors but as she went she glanced back at Snape and there was a sad little smile on her face .Harry saw Sirius move up the bench to make room for her .She took one look at him seemed to recognize him from the train folded her arms and firmly turned her back on him .The roll call continued .Harry watched Lupin Pettigrew and his father join Lily and Sirius at the Gryffindor table .At last when only a dozen students remained to be sorted Professor McGonagall called Snape .Harry walked with him to the stool watched him place the hat upon his head .Slytherinl cried the Sorting Hat .And Severus Snape moved off to the other side of the Hall away from Lily to where the Slytherins were cheering him to where Lucius Malfoy a prefect badge gleaming upon his chest patted Snape on the back as he sat down beside him .And the scene changed .Lily and Snape were walking across the castle courtyard evidently arguing .Harry hurried to catch up with them to listen in .As he reached them he realized how much taller they both were A few years seemed to have passed since their Sorting . .thought we were supposed to be friends ?Snape was saying .Best friends ?We are Sev but I dont like some of the people youre hanging round with !Im sorry but I detest Avery and Mulciber !Mulciber What do you see in him Sev hes creepy !Dyou know what he tried to do to Mary Macdonald the other day ?Lily had reached a pillar and leaned against it looking up into the thin sallow face .That was nothing said Snape .It was a laugh thats all It was Dark Magic and if you think thats funny What about the stuff Potter and his mates get up to ?demanded Snape .His color rose again as he said it unable it seemed to hold in his resentment .Whats Potter got to do with anything ?said Lily .They sneak out at night .Theres something weird about that Lupin .Where does he keep going ?Hes ill said Lily .They say hes ill Every month at the full moon ?said Snape .I know your theory said Lily and she sounded cold .Why are you so obsessed with them anyway ?Why do you care what theyre doing at night ?Im just trying to show you theyre not as wonderful as everyone seems to think they are .The intensity of his gaze made her blush .They dont use Dark Magic though .She dropped her voice .And youre being really ungrateful .I heard what happened the other night .You went sneaking down that tunnel by the Whomping Willow and James Potter saved you from whatevers down there Snapes whole face contorted and he spluttered Saved ?Saved ?You think he was playing the hero ?He was saving his neck and his friends too !Youre not going to I wont let you Let me ?Let me ?Lilys bright green eyes were slits .Snape backtracked at once .I didnt mean I just dont want to see you made a fool of He fancies you James Potter fancies you !The words seemed wrenched from him against his will .And hes not .everyone thinks .big Quidditch hero Snapes bitterness and dislike were rendering him incoherent and Lilys eyebrows were traveling farther and farther up her forehead .I know James Potters an arrogant toerag she said cutting across Snape .I dont need you to tell me that .But Mulcibers and Averys idea of humor is just evil .Evil Sev .I dont understand how you can be friends with them .Harry doubted that Snape had even heard her strictures on Mulciber and Avery .The moment she had insulted James Potter his whole body had relaxed and as they walked away there was a new spring in Snapes step .And the scene dissolved .Harry watched again as Snape left the Great Hall after sitting his O .W .L .in Defense Against the Dark Arts watched as he wandered away from the castle and strayed inadvertently close to the place beneath the beech tree where James Sirius Lupin and Pettigrew sat together .But Harry kept his distance this time because he knew what happened after James had hoisted Severus into the air and taunted him he knew what had been done and said and it gave him no pleasure to hear it again .He watched as Lily joined the group and went to Snapes defense .Distantly he heard Snape shout at her in his humiliation and his fury the unforgivable word MudbloocL .The scene changed .Im sorry .Im not interested .Im sorry !Save your breath .It was nighttime .Lily who was wearing a dressing gown stood with her arms folded in front of the portrait of the Fat Lady at the entrance to Gryffindor Tower .I only came out because Mary told me you were threatening to sleep here .I was .I would have done .I never meant to call you Mudblood it just Slipped out ?There was no pity in Lilys voice .Its too late .Ive made excuses for you for years .None of my friends can understand why I even talk to you .You and your precious little Death Eater friends you see you dont even deny it !You dont even deny thats what youre all aiming to be !You cant wait to join You Know Who can you ?He opened his mouth but closed it without speaking .I cant pretend anymore .Youve chosen your way Ive chosen mine .No listen I didnt mean to call me Mudblood ?But you call everyone of my birth Mudblood Severus .Why should I be any different ?He struggled on the verge of speech but with a contemptuous look she turned and climbed back through the portrait hole .The corridor dissolved and the scene took a little longer to reform Harry seemed to fly through shifting shapes and colors until his surroundings solidified again and he stood on a hilltop forlorn and cold in the darkness the wind whistling through the branches of a few leafless trees .The adult Snape was panting turning on the spot his wand gripped tightly in his hand waiting for something or for someone .His fear infected Harry too even though he knew that he could not be harmed and he looked over his shoulder wondering what it was that Snape was waiting for Then a blinding jagged jet of white light flew through the air Harry thought of lightning but Snape had dropped to his knees and his wand had flown out of his hand .Dont kill me !That was not my intention .Any sound of Dumbledore Apparating had been drowned by the sound of the wind in the branches .He stood before Snape with his robes whipping around him and his face was illuminated from below in the light cast by his wand .Well Severus ?What message does Lord Voldemort have for me ?No no message Im here on my own account !Snape was wringing his hands He looked a little mad with his straggling black hair flying around him .I I come with a warning no a request please Dumbledore flicked his wand .Though leaves and branches still flew through the night air around them silence fell on the spot where he and Snape faced each other .What request could a Death Eater make of me ?The the prophecy .the prediction .Trelawney Ah yes said Dumbledore .How much did you relay to Lord Voldemort ?Everything everything I heard !said Snape .That is why it is for that reason he thinks it means Lily Evans !The prophecy did not refer to a woman said Dumbledore .It spoke of a boy born at the end of July You know what I mean !He thinks it means her son he is going to hunt her down kill them all If she means so much to you said Dumbledore surely Lord Voldemort will spare her ?Could you not ask for mercy for the mother in exchange for the son ?I have I have asked him You disgust me said Dumbledore and Harry had never heard so much contempt in his voice .Snape seemed to shrink a little .You do not care then about the deaths of her husband and child ?They can die as long as you have what you want ?Snape said nothing but merely looked up at Dumbledore .Hide them all then he croaked .Keep her them safe .Please .And what will you give me in return Severus ?In in return ?Snape gaped at Dumbledore and Harry expected him to protest but after a long moment he said Anything .The hilltop faded and Harry stood in Dumbledores office and something was making a terrible sound like a wounded animal .Snape was slumped forward in a chair and Dumbledore was standing over him looking grim .After a moment or two Snape raised his face and he looked like a man who had lived a hundred years of misery since leaving the wild hilltop .I thought .you were going .to keep her .safe .She and James put their faith in the wrong person said Dumbledore .Rather like you Severus .Werent you hoping that Lord Voldemort would spare her ?Snapes breathing was shallow .Her boy survives said Dumbledore .With a tiny jerk of the head Snape seemed to flick off an irksome fly .Her son lives .He has her eyes precisely her eyes .You remember the shape and color of Lily Evanss eyes I am sure ?DONT !bellowed Snape .Gone .dead .Is this remorse Severus ?I wish .I wish were dead .And what use would that be to anyone ?said Dumbledore coldly .If you loved Lily Evans if you truly loved her then your way forward is clear .Snape seemed to peer through a haze of pain and Dumbledore s words appeared to take a long time to reach him .What what do you mean ?You know how and why she died .Make sure it was not in vain .Help me protect Lilys son .He does not need protection .The Dark Lord has gone The Dark Lord will return and Harry Potter will be in terrible danger when he does .There was a long pause and slowly Snape regained control of himself mastered his own breathing .At last he said Very well .Very well .But never never tell Dumbledore !This must be between us !Swear it !I cannot bear .especially Potters son .I want your word !My word Severus that I shall never reveal the best of you ?Dumbledore sighed looking down into Snapes ferocious anguished face .If you insist .The office dissolved but reformed instantly .Snape was pacing up and down in front of Dumbledore .mediocre arrogant as his father a determined rulebreaker delighted to find himself famous attentionseeking and impertinent You see what you expect to see Severus said Dumbledore without raising his eyes from a copy of Transfiguration Today .Other teachers report that the boy is modest likable and reasonably talented .Personally I find him an engaging child .Dumbledore turned a page and said without looking up Keep an eye on Quirrell wont you ?A whirl of color and now everything darkened and Snape and Dumbledore stood a little apart in the entrance hall while the last stragglers from the Yule Ball passed them on their way to bed .Well ?murmured Dumbledore .Karkaroffs Mark is becoming darker too .He is panicking he fears retribution you know how much help he gave the Ministry after the Dark Lord fell .Snape looked sideways at Dumbledore s crooked nosed profile .Karkaroff intends to flee if the Mark burns .Does he ?said Dumbledore softly as Fleur Delacour and Roger Davies came giggling in from the grounds .And are you tempted to join him ?No said Snape his black eyes on Fleurs and Rogers retreating figures .I am not such a coward .No agreed Dumbledore .You are a braver man by far than Igor Karkaroff .You know I sometimes think we Sort too soon .He walked away leaving Snape looking stricken .And now Harry stood in the headmasters office yet again .It was nighttime and Dumbledore sagged sideways in the thronelike chair behind the desk apparently semiconscious .His right hand dangled over the side blackened and burned .Snape was muttering incantations pointing his wand at the wrist of the hand while with his left hand he tipped a goblet full of thick golden potion down Dumbledore s throat .After a moment or two Dumbledore s eyelids fluttered and opened .Why said Snape without preamble why did you put on that ring ?It carries a curse surely you realized that .Why even touch it ?Marvolo Gaunts ring lay on the desk before Dumbledore .It was cracked the sword of Gryffindor lay beside it .Dumbledore grimaced .I .was a fool .Sorely tempted .Tempted by what ?Dumbledore did not answer .It is a miracle you managed to return here !Snape sounded furious .That ring carried a curse of extraordinary power to contain it is all we can hope for I have trapped the curse in one hand for the time being Dumbledore raised his blackened useless hand and examined it with the expression of one being shown an interesting curio .You have done very well Severus .How long do you think I have ?Dumbledore s tone was conversational he might have been asking for a weather forecast .Snape hesitated and then said I cannot tell .Maybe a year .There is no halting such a spell forever .It will spread eventually it is the sort of curse that strengthens over time .Dumbledore smiled .The news that he had less than a year to live seemed a matter of little or no concern to him .I am fortunate extremely fortunate that I have you Severus .If you had only summoned me a little earlier I might have been able to do more buy you more time !said Snape furiously .He looked down at the broken ring and the sword .Did you think that breaking the ring would break the curse ?Something like that .I was delirious no doubt .said Dumbledore .With an effort he straightened himself in his chair .Well really this makes matters much more straightforward .Snape looked utterly perplexed .Dumbledore smiled .I refer to the plan Lord Voldemort is revolving around me .His plan to have the poor Malfoy boy murder me .Snape sat down in the chair Harry had so often occupied across the desk from Dumbledore .Harry could tell that he wanted to say more on the subject of Dumbledore s cursed hand but the other held it up in polite refusal to discuss the matter further .Scowling Snape said The Dark Lord does not expect Draco to succeed .This is merely punishment for Luciuss recent failures .Slow torture for Dracos parents while they watch him fail and pay the price .In short the boy has had a death sentence pronounced upon him as surely as I have said Dumbledore .Now I should have thought the natural successor to the job once Draco fails is yourself ?There was a short pause .That I think is the Dark Lords plan .Lord Voldemort foresees a moment in the near future when he will not need a spy at Hogwarts ?He believes the school will soon be in his grasp yes .And if it does fall into his grasp said Dumbledore almost it seemed as an aside I have your word that you will do all in your power to protect the students of Hogwarts ?Snape gave a stiff nod .Good .Now then .Your first priority will be to discover what Draco is up to .A frightened teenage boy is a danger to others as well as to himself .Offer him help and guidance he ought to accept he likes you much less since his father has lost favor .Draco blames me he thinks I have usurped Luciuss position .All the same try .I am concerned less for myself than for accidental victims of whatever schemes might occur to the boy .Ultimately of course there is only one thing to be done if we are to save him from Lord Voldemorts wrath .Snape raised his eyebrows and his tone was sardonic as he asked Are you intending to let him kill you ?Certainly not .You must kill me .There was a long silence broken only by an odd clicking noise .Fawkes the phoenix was gnawing a bit of cuttlebone .Would you like me to do it now ?asked Snape his voice heavy with irony .Or would you like a few moments to compose an epitaph ?Oh not quite yet said Dumbledore smiling .I daresay the moment will present itself in due course .Given what has happened tonight he indicated his withered hand we can be sure that it will happen within a year .If you dont mind dying said Snape roughly why not let Draco do it ?That boys soul is not yet so damaged said Dumbledore .I would not have it ripped apart on my account .And my soul Dumbledore ?Mine ?You alone know whether it will harm your soul to help an old man avoid pain and humiliation said Dumbledore .I ask this one great favor of you Severus because death is coming for me as surely as the Chudley Cannons will finish bottom of this years league .I confess I should prefer a quick painless exit to the protracted and messy affair it will be if for instance Greyback is involved I hear Voldemort has recruited him ?Or dear Bellatrix who likes to play with her food before she eats it .His tone was light but his blue eyes pierced Snape as they had frequently pierced Harry as though the soul they discussed was visible to him .At last Snape gave another curt nod .Dumbledore seemed satisfied .Thank you Severus .The office disappeared and now Snape and Dumbledore were strolling together in the deserted castle grounds by twilight .What are you doing with Potter all these evenings you are closeted together ?Snape asked abruptly .Dumbledore looked weary .Why ?You arent trying to give him more detentions Severus ?The boy will soon have spent more time in detention than out .He is his father over again In looks perhaps but his deepest nature is much more like his mothers .I spend time with Harry because I have things to discuss with him information I must give him before it is too late .Information repeated Snape .You trust him .you do not trust me .It is not a question of trust .I have as we both know limited time .It is essential that I give the boy enough information for him to do what he needs to do .And why may I not have the same information ?I prefer not to put all of my secrets in one basket particularly not a basket that spends so much time dangling on the arm of Lord Voldemort .Which I do on your orders !And you do it extremely well .Do not think that I underestimate the constant danger in which you place yourself Severus .To give Voldemort what appears to be valuable information while withholding the essentials is a job I would entrust to nobody but you .Yet you confide much more in a boy who is incapable of Occlumency whose magic is mediocre and who has a direct connection into the Dark Lords mind !Voldemort fears that connection said Dumbledore .Not so long ago he had one small taste of what truly sharing Harrys mind means to him .It was pain such as he has never experienced .He will not try to possess Harry again I am sure of it .Not in that way .I dont understand .Lord Voldemorts soul maimed as it is cannot bear close contact with a soul like Harrys .Like a tongue on frozen steel like flesh in flame Souls ?We were talking of minds !In the case of Harry and Lord Voldemort to speak of one is to speak of the other .Dumbledore glanced around to make sure that they were alone .They were close by the Forbidden Forest now but there was no sign of anyone near them .After you have killed me Severus You refuse to tell me everything yet you expect that small service of me !snarled Snape and real anger flared in the thin face now .You take a great deal for granted Dumbledore !Perhaps I have changed my mind !You gave me your word Severus .And while we are talking about services you owe me I thought you agreed to keep a close eye on our young Slytherin friend ?Snape looked angry mutinous .Dumbledore sighed .Come to my office tonight Severus at eleven and you shall not complain that I have no confidence in you .They were back in Dumbledore s office the windows dark and Fawkes sat silent as Snape sat quite still as Dumbledore walked around him talking .Harry must not know not until the last moment not until it is necessary otherwise how could he have the strength to do what must be done ?But what must he do ?That is between Harry and me .Now listen closely Severus .There will come a time after my death do not argue do not interrupt !There will come a time when Lord Voldemort will seem to fear for the life of his snake .For Nagini ?Snape looked astonished .Precisely .If there comes a time when Lord Voldemort stops sending that snake forth to do his bidding but keeps it safe beside him under magical protection then I think it will be safe to tell Harry .Tell him what ?Dumbledore took a deep breath and closed his eyes .Tell him that on the night Lord Voldemort tried to kill him when Lily cast her own life between them as a shield the Killing Curse rebounded upon Lord Voldemort and a fragment of Voldemorts soul was blasted apart from the whole and latched itself onto the only living soul left in that collapsing building .Part of Lord Voldemort lives inside Harry and it is that which gives him the power of speech with snakes and a connection with Lord Voldemorts mind that he has never understood .And while that fragment of soul unmissed by Voldemort remains attached to and protected by Harry Lord Voldemort cannot die .Harry seemed to be watching the two men from one end of a long tunnel they were so far away from him their voices echoing strangely in his ears .So the boy .the boy must die ?asked Snape quite calmly .And Voldemort himself must do it Severus .That is essential .Another long silence .Then Snape said I thought .all these years .that we were protecting him for her .For Lily .We have protected him because it has been essential to teach him to raise him to let him try his strength said Dumbledore his eyes still tight shut .Meanwhile the connection between them grows ever stronger a parasitic growth Sometimes I have thought he suspects it himself .If I know him he will have arranged matters so that when he does set out to meet his death it will truly mean the end of Voldemort .Dumbledore opened his eyes .Snape looked horrified .You have kept him alive so that he can die at the right moment ?Dont be shocked Severus .How many men and women have you watched die ?Lately only those whom I could not save said Snape .He stood up .You have used me .Meaning ?I have spied for you and lied for you put myself in mortal danger for you .Everything was supposed to be to keep Lily Potters son safe .Now you tell me you have been raising him like a pig for slaughter But this is touching Severus said Dumbledore seriously .Have you grown to care for the boy after all ?For him ?shouted Snape .Expecto Patronuml From the tip of his wand burst the silver doe She landed on the office floor bounded once across the office and soared out of the window .Dumbledore watched her fly away and as her silvery glow faded he turned back to Snape and his eyes were full of tears .After all this time ?Always said Snape .And the scene shifted .Now Harry saw Snape talking to the portrait of Dumbledore behind his desk .You will have to give Voldemort the correct date of Harrys departure from his aunt and uncles said Dumbledore .Not to do so will raise suspicion when Voldemort believes you so well informed .However you must plant the idea of decoys that I think ought to ensure Harrys safety .Try Confunding Mundungus Fletcher .And Severus if you are forced to take part in the chase be sure to act your part convincingly .I am counting upon you to remain in Lord Voldemorts good books as long as possible or Hogwarts will be left to the mercy of the Carrows .Now Snape was head to head with Mundungus in an unfamiliar tavern Mundungus s face looking curiously blank Snape frowning in concentration .You will suggest to the Order of the Phoenix Snape murmured that they use decoys .Polyjuice Potion .Identical Potters .It is the only thing that might work .You will forget that I have suggested this .You will present it as your own idea .You understand ?I understand murmured Mundungus his eyes unfocused .Now Harry was flying alongside Snape on a broomstick through a clear dark night He was accompanied by other hooded Death Eaters and ahead were Lupin and a Harry who was really George . .A Death Eater moved ahead of Snape and raised his wand pointing it directly at Lupins back Sectumsemprcd shouted Snape .But the spell intended for the Death Eaters wand hand missed and hit George instead And next Snape was kneeling in Siriuss old bedroom .Tears were dripping from the end of his hooked nose as he read the old letter from Lily .The second page carried only a few words could ever have been friends with Gellert Grindelwald .I think her minds going personally !Lots of love Lily Snape took the page bearing Lilys signature and her love and tucked it inside his robes .Then he ripped in two the photograph he was also holding so that he kept the part from which Lily laughed throwing the portion showing James and Harry back onto the floor under the chest of drawers .And now Snape stood again in the headmasters study as Phineas Nigellus came hurrying into his portrait .Headmaster !They are camping in the Forest of Dean !The Mudblood Do not use that word !the Granger girl then mentioned the place as she opened her bag and I heard her !Good .Very good !cried the portrait of Dumbledore behind the headmasters chair .Now Severus the sword !Do not forget that it must be taken under conditions of need and valor and he must not know that you give it !If Voldemort should read Harrys mind and see you acting for him I know said Snape curtly .He approached the portrait of Dumbledore and pulled at its side .It swung forward revealing a hidden cavity behind it from which he took the sword of Gryffindor .And you still arent going to tell me why its so important to give Potter the sword ?said Snape as he swung a traveling cloak over his robes .No I dont think so said Dumbledores portrait .He will know what to do with it .And Severus be very careful they may not take kindly to your appearance after George Weasleys mishap Snape turned at the door .Dont worry Dumbledore he said coolly .I have a plan .And Snape left the room .Harry rose up out of the Pensieve and moments later he lay on the carpeted floor in exactly the same room Snape might just have closed the door .THE FOREST AGAIN Finally the truth .Lying with his face pressed into the dusty carpet of the office where he had once thought he was learning the secrets of victory Harry understood at last that he was not supposed to survive .His job was to walk calmly into Deaths welcoming arms .Along the way he was to dispose of Voldemorts remaining links to life so that when at last he flung himself across Voldemorts path and did not raise a wand to defend himself the end would be clean and the job that ought to have been done in Godrics Hollow would be finished Neither would live neither could survive .He felt his heart pounding fiercely in his chest .How strange that in his dread of death it pumped all the harder valiantly keeping him alive .But it would have to stop and soon .Its beats were numbered .How many would there be time for as he rose and walked through the castle for the last time out into the grounds and into the forest ?Terror washed over him as he lay on the floor with that funeral drum pounding inside him .Would it hurt to die ?All those times he had thought that it was about to happen and escaped he had never really thought of the thing itself His will to live had always been so much stronger than his fear of death .Yet it did not occur to him now to try to escape to outrun Voldemort .It was over he knew it and all that was left was the thing itself dying .If he could only have died on that summers night when he had left number four Privet Drive for the last time when the noble phoenixfeather wand had saved him !If he could only have died like Hedwig so quickly he would not have known it had happened !Or if he could have launched himself in front of a wand to save someone he loved .He envied even his parents deaths now .This coldblooded walk to his own destruction would require a different kind of bravery .He felt his fingers trembling slightly and made an effort to control them although no one could see him the portraits on the walls were all empty .Slowly very slowly he sat up and as he did so he felt more alive and more aware of his own living body than ever before .Why had he never appreciated what a miracle he was brain and nerve and bounding heart ?It would all be gone .or at least he would be gone from it .His breath came slow and deep and his mouth and throat were completely dry but so were his eyes .Dumbledores betrayal was almost nothing .Of course there had been a bigger plan Harry had simply been too foolish to see it he realized that now .He had never questioned his own assumption that Dumbledore wanted him alive .Now he saw that his life span had always been determined by how long it took to eliminate all the Horcruxes .Dumbledore had passed the job of destroying them to him and obediently he had continued to chip away at the bonds tying not only Voldemort but himself to life !How neat how elegant not to waste any more lives but to give the dangerous task to the boy who had already been marked for slaughter and whose death would not be a calamity but another blow against Voldemort .And Dumbledore had known that Harry would not duck out that he would keep going to the end even though it was his end because he had taken trouble to get to know him hadnt he ?Dumbledore knew as Voldemort knew that Harry would not let anyone else die for him now that he had discovered it was in his power to stop it .The images of Fred Lupin and Tonks lying dead in the Great Hall forced their way back into his minds eye and for a moment he could hardly breathe Death was impatient .But Dumbledore had overestimated him .He had failed The snake survived .One Horcrux remained to bind Voldemort to the earth even after Harry had been killed .True that would mean an easier job for somebody .He wondered who would do it .Ron and Hermione would know what needed to be done of course .That would have been why Dumbledore wanted him to confide in two others .so that if he fulfilled his true destiny a little early they could carry on .Like rain on a cold window these thoughts pattered against the hard surface of the incontrovertible truth which was that he must die .I must die .It must end .Ron and Hermione seemed a long way away in a far off country he felt as though he had parted from them long ago .There would be no goodbyes and no explanations he was determined of that .This was a journey they could not take together and the attempts they would make to stop him would waste valuable time .He looked down at the battered gold watch he had received on his seventeenth birthday .Nearly half of the hour allotted by Voldemort for his surrender had elapsed .He stood up .His heart was leaping against his ribs like a frantic bird .Perhaps it knew it had little time left perhaps it was determined to fulfill a lifetimes beats before the end .He did not look back as he closed the office door .The castle was empty .He felt ghostly striding through it alone as if he had already died .The portrait people were still missing from their frames the whole place was eerily still as if all its remaining lifeblood were concentrated in the Great Hall where the dead and the mourners were crammed .Harry pulled the Invisibility Cloak over himself and descended through the floors at last walking down the marble staircase into the entrance hall .Perhaps some tiny part of him hoped to be sensed to be seen to be stopped but the Cloak was as ever impenetrable perfect and he reached the front doors easily .Then Neville nearly walked into him .He was one half of a pair that was carrying a body in from the grounds .Harry glanced down and felt another dull blow to his stomach Colin Creevey though underage must have sneaked back just as Malfoy Crabbe and Goyle had done .He was tiny in death .You know what ?I can manage him alone Neville said Oliver Wood and he heaved Colin over his shoulder in a firemans lift and carried him into the Great Hall .Neville leaned against the door frame for a moment and wiped his forehead with the back of his hand .He looked like an old man .Then he set off down the steps again into the darkness to recover more bodies .Harry took one glance back at the entrance of the Great Hall .People were moving around trying to comfort each other drinking kneeling beside the dead but he could not see any of the people he loved no hint of Hermione Ron Ginny or any of the other Weasleys no Luna .He felt he would have given all the time remaining to him for just one last look at them but then would he ever have the strength to stop looking ?It was better like this .He moved down the steps and out into the darkness .It was nearly four in the morning and the deathly stillness of the grounds felt as though they were holding their breath waiting to see whether he could do what he must .Harry moved toward Neville who was bending over another body .Neville .Blimey Harry you nearly gave me heart failure !Harry had pulled off the Cloak The idea had come to him out of nowhere born out of a desire to make absolutely sure .Where are you going alone ?Neville asked suspiciously .Its all part of the plan said Harry .Theres something Ive got to do .Listen Neville Harry !Neville looked suddenly scared .Harry youre not thinking of handing yourself over ?No Harry lied easily .Course not .this is something else .But I might be out of sight for a while .You know Voldemorts snake Neville ?Hes got a huge snake .Calls it Nagini .Ive heard yeah .What about it ?Its got to be killed .Ron and Hermione know that but just in case they The awfulness of that possibility smothered him for a moment made it impossible to keep talking .But he pulled himself together again This was crucial he must be like Dumbledore keep a cool head make sure there were backups others to carry on .Dumbledore had died knowing that three people still knew about the Horcruxes now Neville would take Harrys place There would still be three in the secret .Just in case theyre busy and you get the chance Kill the snake ?Kill the snake Harry repeated .All right Harry .Youre okay are you ?Im fine .Thanks Neville .But Neville seized his wrist as Harry made to move on .Were all going to keep fighting Harry .You know that ?Yeah I The suffocating feeling extinguished the end of the sentence he could not go on .Neville did not seem to find it strange .He patted Harry on the shoulder released him and walked away to look for more bodies .Harry swung the Cloak back over himself and walked on .Someone else was moving not far away stooping over another prone figure on the ground .He was feet away from her when he realized it was Ginny .He stopped in his tracks .She was crouching over a girl who was whispering for her mother .Its all right Ginny was saying .Its okay .Were going to get you inside .But I want to go home whispered the girl .I dont want to fight anymore !I know said Ginny and her voice broke .Its going to be all right .Ripples of cold undulated over Harrys skin .He wanted to shout out to the night he wanted Ginny to know that he was there he wanted her to know where he was going .He wanted to be stopped to be dragged back to be sent back home .But he was home .Hogwarts was the first and best home he had known .He and Voldemort and Snape the abandoned boys had all found home here .Ginny was kneeling beside the injured girl now holding her hand .With a huge effort Harry forced himself on .He thought he saw Ginny look around as he passed and wondered whether she had sensed someone walking nearby but he did not speak and he did not look back .Hagrids hut loomed out of the darkness .There were no lights no sound of Fang scrabbling at the door his bark booming in welcome .All those visits to Hagrid and the gleam of the copper kettle on the fire and rock cakes and giant grubs and his great bearded face and Ron vomiting slugs and Hermione helping him save Norbert .He moved on and now he reached the edge of the forest and he stopped .A swarm of dementors was gliding amongst the trees he could feel their chill and he was not sure he would be able to pass safely through it .He had no strength left for a Patronus .He could no longer control his own trembling .It was not after all so easy to die .Every second he breathed the smell of the grass the cool air on his face was so precious To think that people had years and years time to waste so much time it dragged and he was clinging to each second .At the same time he thought that he would not be able to go on and knew that he must .The long game was ended the Snitch had been caught it was time to leave the air .The Snitch .His nerveless fingers fumbled for a moment with the pouch at his neck and he pulled it out .I open at the close .Breathing fast and hard he stared down at it .Now that he wanted time to move as slowly as possible it seemed to have sped up and understanding was coming so fast it seemed to have bypassed thought .This was the close .This was the moment .He pressed the golden metal to his lips and whispered I am about to die .The metal shell broke open .He lowered his shaking hand raised Dracos wand beneath the Cloak and murmured Lumos .The black stone with its jagged crack running down the center sat in the two halves of the Snitch .The Resurrection Stone had cracked down the vertical line representing the Elder Wand .The triangle and circle representing the Cloak and the stone were still discernible .And again Harry understood without having to think .It did not matter about bringing them back for he was about to join them .He was not really fetching them They were fetching him .He closed his eyes and turned the stone over in his hand three times .He knew it had happened because he heard slight movements around him that suggested frail bodies shifting their footing on the earthy twig strewn ground that marked the outer edge of the forest .He opened his eyes and looked around .They were neither ghost nor truly flesh he could see that .They resembled most closely the Riddle that had escaped from the diary so long ago and he had been memory made nearly solid .Less substantial than living bodies but much more than ghosts they moved toward him and on each face there was the same loving smile .James was exactly the same height as Harry .He was wearing the clothes in which he had died and his hair was untidy and ruffled and his glasses were a little lopsided like Mr Weasleys .Sirius was tall and handsome and younger by far than Harry had seen him in life .He loped with an easy grace his hands in his pockets and a grin on his face .Lupin was younger too and much less shabby and his hair was thicker and darker .He looked happy to be back in this familiar place scene of so many adolescent wanderings .Lilys smile was widest of all .She pushed her long hair back as she drew close to him and her green eyes so like his searched his face hungrily as though she would never be able to look at him enough .Youve been so brave .He could not speak .His eyes feasted on her and he thought that he would like to stand and look at her forever and that would be enough .You are nearly there said James .Very close .We are .so proud of you .Does it hurt ?The childish question had fallen from Harrys lips before he could stop it .Dying ?Not at all said Sirius .Quicker and easier than falling asleep .And he will want it to be quick .He wants it over said Lupin .I didnt want you to die Harry said .These words came without his volition .Any of you .Im sorry He addressed Lupin more than any of them beseeching him .right after youd had your son .Remus Im sorry I am sorry too said Lupin .Sorry I will never know him .but he will know why I died and I hope he will understand .I was trying to make a world in which he could live a happier life .A chilly breeze that seemed to emanate from the heart of the forest lifted the hair at Harrys brow .He knew that they would not tell him to go that it would have to be his decision .Youll stay with me ?Until the very end said James .They wont be able to see you ?asked Harry .We are part of you said Sirius .Invisible to anyone else .Harry looked at his mother .Stay close to me he said quietly .And he set off .The dementors chill did not overcome him he passed through it with his companions and they acted like Patronuses to him and together they marched through the old trees that grew closely together their branches tangled their roots gnarled and twisted underfoot .Harry clutched the Cloak tightly around him in the darkness traveling deeper and deeper into the forest with no idea where exactly Voldemort was but sure that he would find him .Beside him making scarcely a sound walked James Sirius Lupin and Lily and their presence was his courage and the reason he was able to keep putting one foot in front of the other .His body and mind felt oddly disconnected now his limbs working without conscious instruction as if he were passenger not driver in the body he was about to leave .The dead who walked beside him through the forest were much more real to him now than the living back at the castle Ron Hermione Ginny and all the others were the ones who felt like ghosts as he stumbled and slipped toward the end of his life toward Voldemort .A thud and a whisper Some other living creature had stirred close by .Harry stopped under the Cloak peering around listening and his mother and father Lupin and Sirius stopped too .Someone there came a rough whisper close at hand .Hes got an Invisibility Cloak .Could it be ?Two figures emerged from behind a nearby tree Their wands flared and Harry saw Yaxley and Dolohov peering into the darkness directly at the place Harry his mother and father and Sirius and Lupin stood .Apparently they could not see anything .Definitely heard something said Yaxley .Animal dyou reckon ?That head case Hagrid kept a whole bunch of stuff in here said Dolohov glancing over his shoulder .Yaxley looked down at his watch .Times nearly up .Potters had his hour .Hes not coming .And he was sure hed come !He wont be happy .Better go back said Yaxley .Find out what the plan is now .He and Dolohov turned and walked deeper into the forest .Harry followed them knowing that they would lead him exactly where he wanted to go .He glanced sideways and his mother smiled at him and his father nodded encouragement .They had traveled on mere minutes when Harry saw light ahead and Yaxley and Dolohov stepped out into a clearing that Harry knew had been the place where the monstrous Aragog had once lived .The remnants of his vast web were there still but the swarm of descendants he had spawned had been driven out by the Death Eaters to fight for their cause .A fire burned in the middle of the clearing and its flickering light fell over a crowd of completely silent watchful Death Eaters .Some of them were still masked and hooded others showed their faces .Two giants sat on the outskirts of the group casting massive shadows over the scene their faces cruel roughhewn like rock .Harry saw Fenrir skulking chewing his long nails the great blond Rowle was dabbing at his bleeding lip .He saw Lucius Malfoy who looked defeated and terrified and Narcissa whose eyes were sunken and full of apprehension .Every eye was fixed upon Voldemort who stood with his head bowed and his white hands folded over the Elder Wand in front of him .He might have been praying or else counting silently in his mind and Harry standing still on the edge of the scene thought absurdly of a child counting in a game of hideand seek .Behind his head still swirling and coiling the great snake Nagini floated in her glittering charmed cage like a monstrous halo .When Dolohov and Yaxley rejoined the circle Voldemort looked up .No sign of him my Lord said Dolohov .Voldemort s expression did not change .The red eyes seemed to burn in the firelight .Slowly he drew the Elder Wand between his long fingers .My Lord Bellatrix had spoken She sat closest to Voldemort disheveled her face a little bloody but otherwise unharmed .Voldemort raised his hand to silence her and she did not speak another word but eyed him in worshipful fascination .I thought he would come said Voldemort in his high clear voice his eyes on the leaping flames .I expected him to come .Nobody spoke .They seemed as scared as Harry whose heart was now throwing itself against his ribs as though determined to escape the body he was about to cast aside .His hands were sweating as he pulled off the Invisibility Cloak and stuffed it beneath his robes with his wand .He did not want to be tempted to fight .I was it seems .mistaken said Voldemort .You werent .Harry said it as loudly as he could with all the force he could muster He did not want to sound afraid .The Resurrection Stone slipped from between his numb fingers and out of the corner of his eyes he saw his parents Sirius and Lupin vanish as he stepped forward into the firelight .At that moment he felt that nobody mattered but Voldemort .It was just the two of them .The illusion was gone as soon as it had come .The giants roared as the Death Eaters rose together and there were many cries gasps even laughter .Voldemort had frozen where he stood but his red eyes had found Harry and he stared as Harry moved toward him with nothing but the fire between them .Then a voice yelled HARRY !NO !He turned Hagrid was bound and trussed tied to a tree nearby .His massive body shook the branches overhead as he struggled desperate .NO !NO !HARRY WHATRE YEH ?QUIET !shouted Rowle and with a flick of his wand Hagrid was silenced .Bellatrix who had leapt to her feet was looking eagerly from Voldemort to Harry her breast heaving .The only things that moved were the flames and the snake coiling and uncoiling in the glittering cage behind Voldemorts head .Harry could feel his wand against his chest but he made no attempt to draw it .He knew that the snake was too well protected knew that if he managed to point the wand at Nagini fifty curses would hit him first .And still Voldemort and Harry looked at each other and now Voldemort tilted his head a little to the side considering the boy standing before him and a singularly mirthless smile curled the lipless mouth .Harry Potter he said very softly .His voice might have been part of the spitting fire .The Boy Who Lived .None of the Death Eaters moved .They were waiting Everything was waiting .Hagrid was struggling and Bellatrix was panting and Harry thought inexplicably of Ginny and her blazing look and the feel of her lips on his Voldemort had raised his wand .His head was still tilted to one side like a curious child wondering what would happen if he proceeded .Harry looked back into the red eyes and wanted it to happen now quickly while he could still stand before he lost control before he betrayed fear He saw the mouth move and a flash of green light and everything was gone .KINGS CROSS He lay facedown listening to the silence .He was perfectly alone .Nobody was watching .Nobody else was there .He was not perfectly sure that he was there himself .A long time later or maybe no time at all it came to him that he must exist must be more than disembodied thought because he was lying definitely lying on some surface .Therefore he had a sense of touch and the thing against which he lay existed too .Almost as soon as he had reached this conclusion Harry became conscious that he was naked .Convinced as he was of his total solitude this did not concern him but it did intrigue him slightly .He wondered whether as he could feel he would be able to see .In opening them he discovered that he had eyes .He lay in a bright mist though it was not like mist he had ever experienced before .His surroundings were not hidden by cloudy vapor rather the cloudy vapor had not yet formed into surroundings .The floor on which he lay seemed to be white neither warm nor cold but simply there a flat blank something on which to be .He sat up .His body appeared unscathed .He touched his face .He was not wearing glasses anymore .Then a noise reached him through the unformed nothingness that surrounded him the small soft thumpings of something that flapped flailed and struggled .It was a pitiful noise yet also slightly indecent .He had the uncomfortable feeling that he was eavesdropping on something furtive shameful .For the first time he wished he were clothed .Barely had the wish formed in his head than robes appeared a short distance away .He took them and pulled them on They were soft clean and warm .It was extraordinary how they had appeared just like that the moment he had wanted them .He stood up looking around .Was he in some great Room of Requirement ?The longer he looked the more there was to see .A great domed glass roof glittered high above him in sunlight .Perhaps it was a palace .All was hushed and still except for those odd thumping and whimpering noises coming from somewhere close by in the mist .Harry turned slowly on the spot and his surroundings seemed to invent themselves before his eyes .A wideopen space bright and clean a hall larger by far than the Great Hall with that clear domed glass ceiling .It was quite empty .He was the only person there except for He recoiled .He had spotted the thing that was making the noises .It had the form of a small naked child curled on the ground its skin raw and rough flayedlooking and it lay shuddering under a seat where it had been left unwanted stuffed out of sight struggling for breath .He was afraid of it .Small and fragile and wounded though it was he did not want to approach it .Nevertheless he drew slowly nearer ready to jump back at any moment .Soon he stood near enough to touch it yet he could not bring himself to do it .He felt like a coward .He ought to comfort it but it repulsed him .You cannot help .He spun around .Albus Dumbledore was walking toward him sprightly and upright wearing sweeping robes of midnight blue .Harry .He spread his arms wide and his hands were both whole and white and undamaged .You wonderful boy .You brave brave man .Let us walk .Stunned Harry followed as Dumbledore strode away from where the flayed child lay whimpering leading him to two seats that Harry had not previously noticed set some distance away under that high sparkling ceiling .Dumbledore sat down in one of them and Harry fell into the other staring at his old headmasters face .Dumbledore s long silver hair and beard the piercingly blue eyes behind halfmoon spectacles the crooked nose Everything was as he had remembered it .And yet .But youre dead said Harry .Oh yes said Dumbledore matteroffactly .Then .Im dead too ?Ah said Dumbledore smiling still more broadly .That is the question isnt it ?On the whole dear boy I think not .They looked at each other the old man still beaming .Not ?repeated Harry .Not said Dumbledore .But .Harry raised his hand instinctively toward the lightning scar .It did not seem to be there .But I should have died I didnt defend myself !I meant to let him kill me !And that said Dumbledore will I think have made all the difference .Happiness seemed to radiate from Dumbledore like light like fire Harry had never seen the man so utterly so palpably content .Explain said Harry .But you already know said Dumbledore .He twiddled his thumbs together .I let him kill me said Harry .Didnt I ?You did said Dumbledore nodding .Go on !So the part of his soul that was in me .Dumbledore nodded still more enthusiastically urging Harry onward a broad smile of encouragement on his face . .has it gone ?Oh yes !said Dumbledore .Yes he destroyed it .Your soul is whole and completely your own Harry .But then .Harry glanced over his shoulder to where the small maimed creature trembled under the chair .What is that Professor ?Something that is beyond either of our help said Dumbledore .But if Voldemort used the Killing Curse Harry started again and nobody died for me this time how can I be alive ?I think you know said Dumbledore .Think back .Remember what he did in his ignorance in his greed and his cruelty .Harry thought .He let his gaze drift over his surroundings .If it was indeed a palace in which they sat it was an odd one with chairs set in little rows and bits of railing here and there and still he and Dumbledore and the stunted creature under the chair were the only beings there .Then the answer rose to his lips easily without effort .He took my blood said Harry .Precisely !said Dumbledore .He took your blood and rebuilt his living body with it !Your blood in his veins Harry Lilys protection inside both of you !He tethered you to life while he lives !I live .while he lives ?But I thought .I thought it was the other way round !I thought we both had to die ?Or is it the same thing ?He was distracted by the whimpering and thumping of the agonized creature behind them and glanced back at it yet again .Are you sure we cant do anything ?There is no help possible .Then explain .more said Harry and Dumbledore smiled .You were the seventh Horcrux Harry the Horcrux he never meant to make .He had rendered his soul so unstable that it broke apart when he committed those acts of unspeakable evil the murder of your parents the attempted killing of a child .But what escaped from that room was even less than he knew .He left more than his body behind .He left part of himself latched to you the wouldbe victim who had survived .And his knowledge remained woefully incomplete Harry !That which Voldemort does not value he takes no trouble to comprehend .Of houseelves and childrens tales of love loyalty and innocence Voldemort knows and understands nothing .Nothing .That they all have a power beyond his own a power beyond the reach of any magic is a truth he has never grasped .He took your blood believing it would strengthen him .He took into his body a tiny part of the enchantment your mother laid upon you when she died for you .His body keeps her sacrifice alive and while that enchantment survives so do you and so does Voldemorts one last hope for himself .Dumbledore smiled at Harry and Harry stared at him .And you knew this ?You knew all along ?I guessed .But my guesses have usually been good said Dumbledore happily and they sat in silence for what seemed like a long time while the creature behind them continued to whimper and tremble .Theres more said Harry .Theres more to it .Why did my wand break the wand he borrowed ?As to that I cannot be sure .Have a guess then said Harry and Dumbledore laughed .What you must understand Harry is that you and Lord Voldemort have journeyed together into realms of magic hitherto unknown and untested .But here is what I think happened and it is unprecedented and no wandmaker could I think ever have predicted it or explained it to Voldemort .Without meaning to as you now know Lord Voldemort doubled the bond between you when he returned to a human form .A part of his soul was still attached to yours and thinking to strengthen himself he took a part of your mothers sacrifice into himself .If he could only have understood the precise and terrible power of that sacrifice he would not perhaps have dared to touch your blood .But then if he had been able to understand he could not be Lord Voldemort and might never have murdered at all .Having ensured this twofold connection having wrapped your destinies together more securely than ever two wizards were joined in history Voldemort proceeded to attack you with a wand that shared a core with yours .And now something very strange happened as we know .The cores reacted in a way that Lord Voldemort who never knew that your wand was twin of his had never expected .He was more afraid than you were that night Harry .You had accepted even embraced the possibility of death something Lord Voldemort has never been able to do .Your courage won your wand overpowered his .And in doing so something happened between those wands something that echoed the relationship between their masters .I believe that your wand imbibed some of the power and qualities of Voldemorts wand that night which is to say that it contained a little of Voldemort himself .So your wand recognized him when he pursued you recognized a man who was both kin and mortal enemy and it regurgitated some of his own magic against him magic much more powerful than anything Luciuss wand had ever performed .Your wand now contained the power of your enormous courage and of Voldemorts own deadly skill What chance did that poor stick of Lucius Malfoys stand ?But if my wand was so powerful how come Hermione was able to break it ?asked Harry .My dear boy its remarkable effects were directed only at Voldemort who had tampered so illadvisedly with the deepest laws of magic .Only toward him was that wand abnormally powerful .Otherwise it was a wand like any other .though a good one I am sure Dumbledore finished kindly .Harry sat in thought for a long time or perhaps seconds .It was very hard to be sure of things like time here .He killed me with your wand .He failed to kill you with my wand Dumbledore corrected Harry .I think we can agree that you are not dead though of course he added as if fearing he had been discourteous I do not minimize your sufferings which I am sure were severe .I feel great at the moment though said Harry looking down at his clean unblemished hands .Where are we exactly ?Well I was going to ask you that said Dumbledore looking around .Where would you say that we are ?Until Dumbledore had asked Harry had not known .Now however he found that he had an answer ready to give .It looks he said slowly like Kings Cross station .Except a lot cleaner and empty and there are no trains as far as I can see .Kings Cross station !Dumbledore was chuckling immoderately .Good gracious really ?Well where do you think we are ?asked Harry a little defensively .My dear boy I have no idea .This is as they say your party .Harry had no idea what this meant Dumbledore was being infuriating .He glared at him then remembered a much more pressing question than that of their current location .The Deathly Hallows he said and he was glad to see that the words wiped the smile from Dumbledores face .Ah yes he said .He even looked a little worried .Well ?For the first time since Harry had met Dumbledore he looked less than an old man much less .He looked fleetingly like a small boy caught in wrongdoing .Can you forgive me ?he said .Can you forgive me for not trusting you ?For not telling you ?Harry I only feared that you would fail as I had failed .I only dreaded that you would make my mistakes .I crave your pardon Harry .I have known for some time now that you are the better man .What are you talking about ?asked Harry startled by Dumbledores tone by the sudden tears in his eyes .The Hallows the Hallows murmured Dumbledore .A desperate mans dream !But theyre real !Real and dangerous and a lure for fools said Dumbledore .And I was such a fool .But you know dont you ?I have no secrets from you anymore .You know .What do I know ?Dumbledore turned his whole body to face Harry and tears still sparkled in the brilliantly blue eyes .Master of death Harry master of Death !Was I better ultimately than Voldemort ?Of course you were said Harry .Of course how can you ask that ?You never killed if you could avoid it !True true said Dumbledore and he was like a child seeking reassurance .Yet I too sought a way to conquer death Harry .Not the way he did said Harry .After all his anger at Dumbledore how odd it was to sit here beneath the high vaulted ceiling and defend Dumbledore from himself .Hallows not Horcruxes .Hallows murmured Dumbledore not Horcruxes .Precisely .There was a pause .The creature behind them whimpered but Harry no longer looked around .Grindelwald was looking for them too ?he asked .Dumbledore closed his eyes for a moment and nodded .It was the thing above all that drew us together he said quietly .Two clever arrogant boys with a shared obsession .He wanted to come to Godrics Hollow as I am sure you have guessed because of the grave of Ignotus Peverell .He wanted to explore the place the third brother had died .So its true ?asked Harry .All of it ?The Peverell brothers were the three brothers of the tale said Dumbledore nodding .Oh yes I think so .Whether they met Death on a lonely road .I think it more likely that the Peverell brothers were simply gifted dangerous wizards who succeeded in creating those powerful objects .The story of them being Deaths own Hallows seems to me the sort of legend that might have sprung up around such creations .The Cloak as you know now traveled down through the ages father to son mother to daughter right down to Ignotuss last living descendant who was born as Ignotus was in the village of Godrics Hollow .Dumbledore smiled at Harry .Me ?You .You have guessed I know why the Cloak was in my possession on the night your parents died .James had showed it to me just a few days previously .It explained much of his undetected wrongdoing at school !I could hardly believe what I was seeing .I asked to borrow it to examine it .I had long since given up my dream of uniting the Hallows but I could not resist could not help taking a closer look .It was a Cloak the likes of which I had never seen immensely old perfect in every respect .and then your father died and I had two Hallows at last all to myself !His tone was unbearably bitter .The Cloak wouldnt have helped them survive though Harry said quickly .Voldemort knew where my mum and dad were .The Cloak couldnt have made them curseproof .True sighed Dumbledore .True .Harry waited but Dumbledore did not speak so he prompted him .So youd given up looking for the Hallows when you saw the Cloak ?Oh yes said Dumbledore faintly .It seemed that he forced himself to meet Harrys eyes .You know what happened .You know .You cannot despise me more than I despise myself .But I dont despise you Then you should said Dumbledore .He drew a deep breath .You know the secret of my sisters ill health what those Muggles did what she became .You know how my poor father sought revenge and paid the price died in Azkaban .You know how my mother gave up her own life to care for Ariana .I resented it Harry .Dumbledore stated it baldly coldly .He was looking now over the top of Harrys head into the distance .I was gifted I was brilliant .I wanted to escape .I wanted to shine .I wanted glory .Do not misunderstand me he said and pain crossed the face so that he looked ancient again .I loved them .I loved my parents I loved my brother and my sister but I was selfish Harry more selfish than you who are a remarkably selfless person could possibly imagine .So that when my mother died and I was left the responsibility of a damaged sister and a wayward brother I returned to my village in anger and bitterness .Trapped and wasted I thought !And then of course he came .Dumbledore looked directly into Harrys eyes again .Grindelwald .You cannot imagine how his ideas caught me Harry inflamed me .Muggles forced into subservience .We wizards triumphant .Grindelwald and I the glorious young leaders of the revolution .Oh I had a few scruples .I assuaged my conscience with empty words .It would all be for the greater good and any harm done would be repaid a hundredfold in benefits for wizards .Did I know in my heart of hearts what Gellert Grindelwald was ?I think I did but I closed my eyes .If the plans we were making came to fruition all my dreams would come true .And at the heart of our schemes the Deathly Hallows !How they fascinated him how they fascinated both of us !The unbeatable wand the weapon that would lead us to power !The Resurrection Stone to him though I pretended not to know it it meant an army of Inferi !To me I confess it meant the return of my parents and the lifting of all responsibility from my shoulders .And the Cloak .somehow we never discussed the Cloak much Harry .Both of us could conceal ourselves well enough without the Cloak the true magic of which of course is that it can be used to protect and shield others as well as its owner .I thought that if we ever found it it might be useful in hiding Ariana but our interest in the Cloak was mainly that it completed the trio for the legend said that the man who united all three objects would then be truly master of death which we took to mean ‘invincible .Invincible masters of death Grindelwald and Dumbledore !Two months of insanity of cruel dreams and neglect of the only two members of my family left to me .And then .you know what happened .Reality returned in the form of my rough unlettered and infinitely more admirable brother .I did not want to hear the truths he shouted at me .I did not want to hear that I could not set forth to seek Hallows with a fragile and unstable sister in tow .The argument became a fight .Grindelwald lost control .That which I had always sensed in him though I pretended not to now sprang into terrible being .And Ariana .after all my mothers care and caution .lay dead upon the floor .Dumbledore gave a little gasp and began to cry in earnest .Harry reached out and was glad to find that he could touch him He gripped his arm tightly and Dumbledore gradually regained control .Well Grindelwald fled as anyone but I could have predicted .He vanished with his plans for seizing power and his schemes for Muggle torture and his dreams of the Deathly Hallows dreams in which I had encouraged him and helped him .He ran while I was left to bury my sister and learn to live with my guilt and my terrible grief the price of my shame .Years passed .There were rumors about him .They said he had procured a wand of immense power .I meanwhile was offered the post of Minister of Magic not once but several times .Naturally I refused .I had learned that I was not to be trusted with power .But youd have been better much better than Fudge or Scrimgeour !burst out Harry .Would I ?asked Dumbledore heavily .I am not so sure .I had proven as a very young man that power was my weakness and my temptation .It is a curious thing Harry but perhaps those who are best suited to power are those who have never sought it .Those who like you have leadership thrust upon them and take up the mantle because they must and find to their own surprise that they wear it well .I was safer at Hogwarts .I think I was a good teacher You were the best you are very kind Harry .But while I busied myself with the training of young wizards Grindelwald was raising an army .They say he feared me and perhaps he did but less I think than I feared him .Oh not death said Dumbledore in answer to Harrys questioning look .Not what he could do to me magically .I knew that we were evenly matched perhaps that I was a shade more skillful .It was the truth I feared .You see I never knew which of us in that last horrific fight had actually cast the curse that killed my sister .You may call me cowardly You would be right .Harry I dreaded beyond all things the knowledge that it had been I who brought about her death not merely through my arrogance and stupidity but that I actually struck the blow that snuffed out her life .I think he knew it I think he knew what frightened me .I delayed meeting him until finally it would have been too shameful to resist any longer .People were dying and he seemed unstoppable and I had to do what I could .Well you know what happened next .I won the duel .I won the wand .Another silence .Harry did not ask whether Dumbledore had ever found out who struck Ariana dead .He did not want to know and even less did he want Dumbledore to have to tell him .At last he knew what Dumbledore would have seen when he looked in the Mirror of Erised and why Dumbledore had been so understanding of the fascination it had exercised over Harry .They sat in silence for a long time and the whimperings of the creature behind them barely disturbed Harry anymore .At last he said Grindelwald tried to stop Voldemort going after the wand .He lied you know pretended he had never had it .Dumbledore nodded looking down at his lap tears still glittering on the crooked nose .They say he showed remorse in later years alone in his cell at Nurmengard .I hope that it is true .I would like to think he did feel the horror and shame of what he had done .Perhaps that lie to Voldemort was his attempt to make amends .to prevent Voldemort from taking the Hallow . .or maybe from breaking into your tomb ?suggested Harry and Dumbledore dabbed his eyes .After another short pause Harry said You tried to use the Resurrection Stone .Dumbledore nodded .When I discovered it after all those years buried in the abandoned home of the Gaunts the Hallow I had craved most of all though in my youth I had wanted it for very different reasons I lost my head Harry .I quite forgot that it was now a Horcrux that the ring was sure to carry a curse .I picked it up and I put it on and for a second I imagined that I was about to see Ariana and my mother and my father and to tell them how very very sorry I was .I was such a fool Harry .After all those years I had learned nothing .I was unworthy to unite the Deathly Hallows I had proved it time and again and here was final proof .Why ?said Harry .It was natural !You wanted to see them again .Whats wrong with that ?Maybe a man in a million could unite the Hallows Harry .I was fit only to possess the meanest of them the least extraordinary .I was fit to own the Elder Wand and not to boast of it and not to kill with it .I was permitted to tame and to use it because I took it not for gain but to save others from it .But the Cloak I took out of vain curiosity and so it could never have worked for me as it works for you its true owner .The stone I would have used in an attempt to drag back those who are at peace rather than to enable my selfsacrifice as you did .You are the worthy possessor of the Hallows .Dumbledore patted Harrys hand and Harry looked up at the old man and smiled he could not help himself .How could he remain angry with Dumbledore now ?Why did you have to make it so difficult ?Dumbledores smile was tremulous .I am afraid I counted on Miss Granger to slow you up Harry .I was afraid that your hot head might dominate your good heart .I was scared that if presented outright with the facts about those tempting objects you might seize the Hallows as I did at the wrong time for the wrong reasons .If you laid hands on them I wanted you to possess them safely .You are the true master of death because the true master does not seek to run away from Death .He accepts that he must die and understands that there are far far worse things in the living world than dying .And Voldemort never knew about the Hallows ?I do not think so because he did not recognize the Resurrection Stone he turned into a Horcrux .But even if he had known about them Harry I doubt that he would have been interested in any except the first .He would not think that he needed the Cloak and as for the stone whom would he want to bring back from the dead ?He fears the dead .He does not love .But you expected him to go after the wand ?I have been sure that he would try ever since your wand beat Voldemorts in the graveyard of Little Hangleton .At first he was afraid that you had conquered him by superior skill .Once he had kidnapped Ollivander however he discovered the existence of the twin cores .He thought that explained everything .Yet the borrowed wand did no better against yours !So Voldemort instead of asking himself what quality it was in you that had made your wand so strong what gift you possessed that he did not naturally set out to find the one wand that they said would beat any other .For him the Elder Wand has become an obsession to rival his obsession with you .He believes that the Elder Wand removes his last weakness and makes him truly invincible .Poor Severus .If you planned your death with Snape you meant him to end up with the Elder Wand didnt you ?I admit that was my intention said Dumbledore but it did not work as I intended did it ?No said Harry .That bit didnt work out .The creature behind them jerked and moaned and Harry and Dumbledore sat without talking for the longest time yet .The realization of what would happen next settled gradually over Harry in the long minutes like softly falling snow .Ive got to go back havent I ?That is up to you .Ive got a choice ?Oh yes .Dumbledore smiled at him .We are in Kings Cross you say ?I think that if you decided not to go back you would be able to .lets say .board a train .And where would it take me ?On said Dumbledore simply .Silence again .Voldemorts got the Elder Wand .True .Voldemort has the Elder Wand .But you want me to go back ?I think said Dumbledore that if you choose to return there is a chance that he may be finished for good .I cannot promise it .But I know this Harry that you have less to fear from returning here than he does .Harry glanced again at the rawlooking thing that trembled and choked in the shadow beneath the distant chair .Do not pity the dead Harry .Pity the living and above all those who live without love .By returning you may ensure that fewer souls are maimed fewer families are torn apart .If that seems to you a worthy goal then we say goodbye for the present .Harry nodded and sighed .Leaving this place would not be nearly as hard as walking into the forest had been but it was warm and light and peaceful here and he knew that he was heading back to pain and the fear of more loss .He stood up and Dumbledore did the same and they looked for a long moment into each others faces .Tell me one last thing said Harry .Is this real ?Or has this been happening inside my head ?Dumbledore beamed at him and his voice sounded loud and strong in Harrys ears even though the bright mist was descending again obscuring his figure .Of course it is happening inside your head Harry but why on earth should that mean that it is not real ?THE FLAW IN THE PLAN He was lying facedown on the ground again .The smell of the forest filled his nostrils .He could feel the cold hard ground beneath his cheek and the hinge of his glasses which had been knocked sideways by the fall cutting into his temple .Every inch of him ached and the place where the Killing Curse had hit him felt like the bruise of an ironclad punch .He did not stir but remained exactly where he had fallen with his left arm bent out at an awkward angle and his mouth gaping .He had expected to hear cheers of triumph and jubilation at his death but instead hurried footsteps whispers and solicitous murmurs filled the air .My Lord .my Lord .It was Bellatrixs voice and she spoke as if to a lover .Harry did not dare open his eyes but allowed his other senses to explore his predicament .He knew that his wand was still stowed beneath his robes because he could feel it pressed between his chest and the ground .A slight cushioning effect in the area of his stomach told him that the Invisibility Cloak was also there stuffed out of sight .My Lord .That will do said Voldemorts voice .More footsteps Several people were backing away from the same spot .Desperate to see what was happening and why Harry opened his eyes by a millimeter .Voldemort seemed to be getting to his feet .Various Death Eaters were hurrying away from him returning to the crowd lining the clearing .Bellatrix alone remained behind kneeling beside Voldemort .Harry closed his eyes again and considered what he had seen .The Death Eaters had been huddled around Voldemort who seemed to have fallen to the ground .Something had happened when he had hit Harry with the Killing Curse .Had Voldemort too collapsed ?It seemed like it .And both of them had fallen briefly unconscious and both of them had now returned .My Lord let me I do not require assistance said Voldemort coldly and though he could not see it Harry pictured Bellatrix withdrawing a helpful hand .The boy .Is he dead ?There was complete silence in the clearing .Nobody approached Harry but he felt their concentrated gaze it seemed to press him harder into the ground and he was terrified a finger or an eyelid might twitch .You said Voldemort and there was a bang and a small shriek of pain .Examine him .Tell me whether he is dead .Harry did not know who had been sent to verify .He could only lie there with his heart thumping traitorously and wait to be examined but at the same time noting small comfort though it was that Voldemort was wary of approaching him that Voldemort suspected that all had not gone to plan .Hands softer than he had been expecting touched Harrys face pulled back an eyelid crept beneath his shirt down to his chest and felt his heart .He could hear the womans fast breathing her long hair tickled his face .He knew that she could feel the steady pounding of life against his ribs .Is Draco alive ?Is he in the castle ?The whisper was barely audible her lips were an inch from his ear her head bent so low that her long hair shielded his face from the onlookers .Yes he breathed back .He felt the hand on his chest contract her nails pierced him .Then it was withdrawn .She had sat up .He is dead !Narcissa Malfoy called to the watchers .And now they shouted now they yelled in triumph and stamped their feet and through his eyelids Harry saw bursts of red and silver light shoot into the air in celebration .Still feigning death on the ground he understood .Narcissa knew that the only way she would be permitted to enter Hogwarts and find her son was as part of the conquering army .She no longer cared whether Voldemort won .You see ?screeched Voldemort over the tumult .Harry Potter is dead by my hand and no man alive can threaten me now !Watch !CrucioV Harry had been expecting it knew his body would not be allowed to remain unsullied upon the forest floor it must be subjected to humiliation to prove Voldemorts victory .He was lifted into the air and it took all his determination to remain limp yet the pain he expected did not come .He was thrown once twice three times into the air His glasses flew off and he felt his wand slide a little beneath his robes but he kept himself floppy and lifeless and when he fell to the ground for the last time the clearing echoed with jeers and shrieks of laughter .Now said Voldemort we go to the castle and show them what has become of their hero .Who shall drag the body ?No Wait There was a fresh outbreak of laughter and after a few moments Harry felt the ground trembling beneath him .You carry him Voldemort said .He will be nice and visible in your arms will he not ?Pick up your little friend Hagrid .And the glasses put on the glasses he must be recognizable Someone slammed Harrys glasses back onto his face with deliberate force but the enormous hands that lifted him into the air were exceedingly gentle .Harry could feel Hagrid s arms trembling with the force of his heaving sobs great tears splashed down upon him as Hagrid cradled Harry in his arms and Harry did not dare by movement or word to intimate to Hagrid that all was not yet lost .Move said Voldemort and Hagrid stumbled forward forcing his way through the closegrowing trees back through the forest .Branches caught at Harrys hair and robes but he lay quiescent his mouth lolling open his eyes shut and in the darkness while the Death Eaters crowed all around them and while Hagrid sobbed blindly nobody looked to see whether a pulse beat in the exposed neck of Harry Potter .The two giants crashed along behind the Death Eaters Harry could hear trees creaking and falling as they passed they made so much din that birds rose shrieking into the sky and even the jeers of the Death Eaters were drowned .The victorious procession marched on toward the open ground and after a while Harry could tell by the lightening of the darkness through his closed eyelids that the trees were beginning to thin .BANE !Hagrids unexpected bellow nearly forced Harrys eyes open .Happy now are yeh that yeh didn fight yeh cowardly bunch o nags ?Are yeh happy Harry Potters ddead .Hagrid could not continue but broke down in fresh tears .Harry wondered how many centaurs were watching their procession pass he dared not open his eyes to look .Some of the Death Eaters called insults at the centaurs as they left them behind .A little later Harry sensed by a freshening of the air that they had reached the edge of the forest .Stop .Harry thought that Hagrid must have been forced to obey Voldemorts command because he lurched a little .And now a chill settled over them where they stood and Harry heard the rasping breath of the dementors that patrolled the outer trees .They would not affect him now .The fact of his own survival burned inside him a talisman against them as though his fathers stag kept guardian in his heart .Someone passed close by Harry and he knew that it was Voldemort himself because he spoke a moment later his voice magically magnified so that it swelled through the grounds crashing upon Harrys eardrums .Harry Potter is dead .He was killed as he ran away trying to save himself while you lay down your lives for him .We bring you his body as proof that your hero is gone .The battle is won .You have lost half of your fighters .My Death Eaters outnumber you and the Boy Who Lived is finished .There must be no more war .Anyone who continues to resist man woman or child will be slaughtered as will every member of their family .Come out of the castle now kneel before me and you shall be spared .Your parents and children your brothers and sisters will live and be forgiven and you will join me in the new world we shall build together .There was silence in the grounds and from the castle .Voldemort was so close to him that Harry did not dare open his eyes again .Come said Voldemort and Harry heard him move ahead and Hagrid was forced to follow .Now Harry opened his eyes a fraction and saw Voldemort striding in front of them wearing the great snake Nagini around his shoulders now free of her enchanted cage .But Harry had no possibility of extracting the wand concealed under his robes without being noticed by the Death Eaters who marched on either side of them through the slowly lightening darkness .Harry sobbed Hagrid .Oh Harry .Harry .Harry shut his eyes tight again .He knew that they were approaching the castle and strained his ears to distinguish above the gleeful voices of the Death Eaters and their tramping footsteps signs of life from those within .Stop .The Death Eaters came to a halt Harry heard them spreading out in a line facing the open front doors of the school .He could see even through his closed lids the reddish glow that meant light streamed upon him from the entrance hall .He waited .Any moment the people for whom he had tried to die would see him lying apparently dead in Hagrid s arms .NO !The scream was the more terrible because he had never expected or dreamed that Professor McGonagall could make such a sound .He heard another woman laughing nearby and knew that Bellatrix gloried in McGonagalls despair .He squinted again for a single second and saw the open doorway filling with people as the survivors of the battle came out onto the front steps to face their vanquishers and see the truth of Harrys death for themselves .He saw Voldemort standing a little in front of him stroking Naginis head with a single white finger .He closed his eyes again .No !iVo !Harry !HARRY !Rons Hermiones and Ginnys voices were worse than McGonagalls Harry wanted nothing more than to call back yet he made himself lie silent and their cries acted like a trigger the crowd of survivors took up the cause screaming and yelling abuse at the Death Eaters until SILENCE !cried Voldemort and there was a bang and a flash of bright light and silence was forced upon them all .It is over !Set him down Hagrid at my feet where he belongs !Harry felt himself lowered onto the grass .You see ?said Voldemort and Harry felt him striding backward and forward right beside the place where he lay .Harry Potter is dead !Do you understand now deluded ones ?He was nothing ever but a boy who relied on others to sacrifice themselves for him !He beat you !yelled Ron and the charm broke and the defenders of Hogwarts were shouting and screaming again until a second more powerful bang extinguished their voices once more .He was killed while trying to sneak out of the castle grounds said Voldemort and there was relish in his voice for the lie killed while trying to save himself But Voldemort broke off Harry heard a scuffle and a shout then another bang a flash of light and a grunt of pain he opened his eyes an infinitesimal amount .Someone had broken free of the crowd and charged at Voldemort Harry saw the figure hit the ground Disarmed Voldemort throwing the challengers wand aside and laughing .And who is this ?he said in his soft snakes hiss .Who has volunteered to demonstrate what happens to those who continue to fight when the battle is lost ?Bellatrix gave a delighted laugh .It is Neville Longbottom my Lord !The boy who has been giving the Carrows so much trouble !The son of the Aurors remember ?Ah yes I remember said Voldemort looking down at Neville who was struggling back to his feet unarmed and unprotected standing in the noman s land between the survivors and the Death Eaters .But you are a pureblood arent you my brave boy ?Voldemort asked Neville who stood facing him his empty hands curled in fists .So what if I am ?said Neville loudly .You show spirit and bravery and you come of noble stock .You will make a very valuable Death Eater .We need your kind Neville Longbottom .Ill join you when hell freezes over said Neville .Dumbledores Army !he shouted and there was an answering cheer from the crowd whom Voldemorts Silencing Charms seemed unable to hold .Very well said Voldemort and Harry heard more danger in the silkiness of his voice than in the most powerful curse .If that is your choice Longbottom we revert to the original plan .On your head he said quietly be it .Still watching through his lashes Harry saw Voldemort wave his wand .Seconds later out of one of the castles shattered windows something that looked like a misshapen bird flew through the half light and landed in Voldemorts hand .He shook the mildewed object by its pointed end and it dangled empty and ragged the Sorting Hat .There will be no more Sorting at Hogwarts School said Voldemort .There will be no more Houses .The emblem shield and colors of my noble ancestor Salazar Slytherin will suffice for everyone .Wont they Neville Longbottom ?He pointed his wand at Neville who grew rigid and still then forced the hat onto Nevilles head so that it slipped down below his eyes .There were movements from the watching crowd in front of the castle and as one the Death Eaters raised their wands holding the fighters of Hogwarts at bay .Neville here is now going to demonstrate what happens to anyone foolish enough to continue to oppose me said Voldemort and with a flick of his wand he caused the Sorting Hat to burst into flames .Screams split the dawn and Neville was aflame rooted to the spot unable to move and Harry could not bear it He must act And then many things happened at the same moment .They heard uproar from the distant boundary of the school as what sounded like hundreds of people came swarming over the outofsight walls and pelted toward the castle uttering loud war cries .At the same time Grawp came lumbering around the side of the castle and yelled HAGGER !His cry was answered by roars from Voldemorts giants They ran at Grawp like bull elephants making the earth quake .Then came hooves and the twangs of bows and arrows were suddenly falling amongst the Death Eaters who broke ranks shouting their surprise .Harry pulled the Invisibility Cloak from inside his robes swung it over himself and sprang to his feet as Neville moved too .In one swift fluid motion Neville broke free of the BodyBind Curse upon him the flaming hat fell off him and he drew from its depths something silver with a glittering rubied handle The slash of the silver blade could not be heard over the roar of the oncoming crowd or the sounds of the clashing giants or of the stampeding centaurs and yet it seemed to draw every eye .With a single stroke Neville sliced off the great snakes head which spun high into the air gleaming in the light flooding from the entrance hall and Voldemorts mouth was open in a scream of fury that nobody could hear and the snakes body thudded to the ground at his feet Hidden beneath the Invisibility Cloak Harry cast a Shield Charm between Neville and Voldemort before the latter could raise his wand .Then over the screams and the roars and the thunderous stamps of the battling giants Hagrids yell came loudest of all .HARRY !Hagrid shouted .HARRY WHERES HARRY ?Chaos reigned .The charging centaurs were scattering the Death Eaters everyone was fleeing the giants stamping feet and nearer and nearer thundered the reinforcements that had come from who knew where Harry saw great winged creatures soaring around the heads of Voldemorts giants thestrals and Buckbeak the hippogriff scratching at their eyes while Grawp punched and pummeled them and now the wizards defenders of Hogwarts and Death Eaters alike were being forced back into the castle .Harry was shooting jinxes and curses at any Death Eater he could see and they crumpled not knowing what or who had hit them and their bodies were trampled by the retreating crowd .Still hidden beneath the Invisibility Cloak Harry was buffeted into the entrance hall He was searching for Voldemort and saw him across the room firing spells from his wand as he backed into the Great Hall still screaming instructions to his followers as he sent curses flying left and right Harry cast more Shield Charms and Voldemorts wouldbe victims Seamus Finnigan and Hannah Abbott darted past him into the Great Hall where they joined the fight already flourishing inside it .And now there were more even more people storming up the front steps and Harry saw Charlie Weasley overtaking Horace Slughorn who was still wearing his emerald pajamas .They seemed to have returned at the head of what looked like the families and friends of every Hogwarts student who had remained to fight along with the shopkeepers and homeowners of Hogsmeade .The centaurs Bane Ronan and Magorian burst into the hall with a great clatter of hooves as behind Harry the door that led to the kitchens was blasted off its hinges .The houseelves of Hogwarts swarmed into the entrance hall screaming and waving carving knives and cleavers and at their head the locket of Regulus Black bouncing on his chest was Kreacher his bullfrogs voice audible even above this din Fight !Fight !Fight for my Master defender of houseelves !Fight the Dark Lord in the name of brave Regulus !Fight !They were hacking and stabbing at the ankles and shins of Death Eaters their tiny faces alive with malice and everywhere Harry looked Death Eaters were folding under sheer weight of numbers overcome by spells dragging arrows from wounds stabbed in the leg by elves or else simply attempting to escape but swallowed by the oncoming horde .But it was not over yet Harry sped between duelers past struggling prisoners and into the Great Hall .Voldemort was in the center of the battle and he was striking and smiting all within reach .Harry could not get a clear shot but fought his way nearer still invisible and the Great Hall became more and more crowded as everyone who could walk forced their way inside .Harry saw Yaxley slammed to the floor by George and Lee Jordan saw Dolohov fall with a scream at Flitwicks hands saw Walden Macnair thrown across the room by Hagrid hit the stone wall opposite and slide unconscious to the ground .He saw Ron and Neville bringing down Fenrir Greyback Aberforth Stunning Rookwood Arthur and Percy flooring Thicknesse and Lucius and Narcissa Malfoy running through the crowd not even attempting to fight screaming for their son .Voldemort was now dueling McGonagall Slughorn and Kingsley all at once and there was cold hatred in his face as they wove and ducked around him unable to finish him Bellatrix was still fighting too fifty yards away from Voldemort and like her master she dueled three at once Hermione Ginny and Luna all battling their hardest but Bellatrix was equal to them and Harrys attention was diverted as a Killing Curse shot so close to Ginny that she missed death by an inch He changed course running at Bellatrix rather than Voldemort but before he had gone a few steps he was knocked sideways .NOT MY DAUGHTER YOU BITCH !Mrs Weasley threw off her cloak as she ran freeing her arms .Bellatrix spun on the spot roaring with laughter at the sight of her new challenger .OUT OF MY WAY !shouted Mrs Weasley to the three girls and with a swipe of her wand she began to duel .Harry watched with terror and elation as Molly Weasleys wand slashed and twirled and Bellatrix Lestranges smile faltered and became a snarl .Jets of light flew from both wands the floor around the witches feet became hot and cracked both women were fighting to kill .No !Mrs Weasley cried as a few students ran forward trying to come to her aid .Get back !Get back !She is mine !Hundreds of people now lined the walls watching the two fights Voldemort and his three opponents Bellatrix and Molly and Harry stood invisible torn between both wanting to attack and yet to protect unable to be sure that he would not hit the innocent .What will happen to your children when Ive killed you ?taunted Bellatrix as mad as her master capering as Mollys curses danced around her .When Mummys gone the same way as Freddie ?You will never touch our children again !screamed Mrs Weasley .Bellatrix laughed the same exhilarated laugh her cousin Sirius had given as he toppled backward through the veil and suddenly Harry knew what was going to happen before it did .Mollys curse soared beneath Bellatrixs outstretched arm and hit her squarely in the chest directly over her heart .Bellatrixs gloating smile froze her eyes seemed to bulge For the tiniest space of time she knew what had happened and then she toppled and the watching crowd roared and Voldemort screamed .Harry felt as though he turned in slow motion he saw McGonagall Kingsley and Slughorn blasted backward flailing and writhing through the air as Voldemort s fury at the fall of his last best lieutenant exploded with the force of a bomb .Voldemort raised his wand and directed it at Molly Weasley .Protego roared Harry and the Shield Charm expanded in the middle of the Hall and Voldemort stared around for the source as Harry pulled off the Invisibility Cloak at last .The yell of shock the cheers the screams on every side of Harry !HES ALIVE !were stifled at once .The crowd was afraid and silence fell abruptly and completely as Voldemort and Harry looked at each other and began at the same moment to circle each other .I dont want anyone else to try to help Harry said loudly and in the total silence his voice carried like a trumpet call .Its got to be like this .Its got to be me .Voldemort hissed .Potter doesnt mean that he said his red eyes wide .That isnt how he works is it ?Who are you going to use as a shield today Potter ?Nobody said Harry simply .There are no more Horcruxes .Its just you and me .Neither can live while the other survives and one of us is about to leave for good .One of us ?jeered Voldemort and his whole body was taut and his red eyes stared a snake that was about to strike .You think it will be you do you the boy who has survived by accident and because Dumbledore was pulling the strings ?Accident was it when my mother died to save me ?asked Harry .They were still moving sideways both of them in that perfect circle maintaining the same distance from each other and for Harry no face existed but Voldemorts .Accident when I decided to fight in that graveyard ?Accident that I didnt defend myself tonight and still survived and returned to fight again ?Accidents .screamed Voldemort but still he did not strike and the watching crowd was frozen as if Petrified and of the hundreds in the Hall nobody seemed to breathe but they two .Accident and chance and the fact that you crouched and sniveled behind the skirts of greater men and women and permitted me to kill them for you !You wont be killing anyone else tonight said Harry as they circled and stared into each others eyes green into red .You wont be able to kill any of them ever again .Dont you get it ?I was ready to die to stop you from hurting these people But you did not !I meant to and thats what did it .Ive done what my mother did .Theyre protected from you .Havent you noticed how none of the spells you put on them are binding ?You cant torture them .You cant touch them .You dont learn from your mistakes Riddle do you ?You dare Yes I dare said Harry .I know things you dont know Tom Riddle .I know lots of important things that you dont .Want to hear some before you make another big mistake ?Voldemort did not speak but prowled in a circle and Harry knew that he kept him temporarily mesmerized and at bay held back by the faintest possibility that Harry might indeed know a final secret .Is it love again ?said Voldemort his snakes face jeering .Dumbledores favorite solution love which he claimed conquered death though love did not stop him falling from the tower and breaking like an old waxwork ?Love which did not prevent me stamping out your Mudblood mother like a cockroach Potter and nobody seems to love you enough to run forward this time and take my curse .So what will stop you dying now when I strike ?Just one thing said Harry and still they circled each other wrapped in each other held apart by nothing but the last secret .If it is not love that will save you this time said Voldemort you must believe that you have magic that I do not or else a weapon more powerful than mine ?I believe both said Harry and he saw shock flit across the snakelike face though it was instantly dispelled Voldemort began to laugh and the sound was more frightening than his screams humorless and insane it echoed around the silent Hall .You think you know more magic than I do ?he said .Than I than Lord Voldemort who has performed magic that Dumbledore himself never dreamed of ?Oh he dreamed of it said Harry but he knew more than you knew enough not to do what youve done .You mean he was weak !screamed Voldemort .Too weak to dare too weak to take what might have been his what will be mine !No he was cleverer than you said Harry a better wizard a better man .I brought about the death of Albus Dumbledore !You thought you did said Harry but you were wrong .For the first time the watching crowd stirred as the hundreds of people around the walls drew breath as one .Dumbledore is dead Voldemort hurled the words at Harry as though they would cause him unendurable pain .His body decays in the marble tomb in the grounds of this castle I have seen it Potter and he will not return !Yes Dumbledores dead said Harry calmly but you didnt have him killed .He chose his own manner of dying chose it months before he died arranged the whole thing with the man you thought was your servant .What childish dream is this ?said Voldemort but still he did not strike and his red eyes did not waver from Harrys .Severus Snape wasnt yours said Harry .Snape was Dumbledores Dumbledores from the moment you started hunting down my mother .And you never realized it because of the thing you cant understand .You never saw Snape cast a Patronus did you Riddle ?Voldemort did not answer .They continued to circle each other like wolves about to tear each other apart .Snapes Patronus was a doe said Harry the same as my mothers because he loved her for nearly all of his life from the time when they were children .You should have realized he said as he saw Voldemorts nostrils flare he asked you to spare her life didnt he ?He desired her that was all sneered Voldemort but when she had gone he agreed that there were other women and of purer blood worthier of him Of course he told you that said Harry but he was Dumbledores spy from the moment you threatened her and hes been working against you ever since !Dumbledore was already dying when Snape finished him !It matters not !shrieked Voldemort who had followed every word with rapt attention but now let out a cackle of mad laughter .It matters not whether Snape was mine or Dumbledores or what petty obstacles they tried to put in my path !I crushed them as I crushed your mother Snape s supposed great love Oh but it all makes sense Potter and in ways that you do not understand !Dumbledore was trying to keep the Elder Wand from me !He intended that Snape should be the true master of the wand !But I got there ahead of you little boy I reached the wand before you could get your hands on it I understood the truth before you caught up .I killed Severus Snape three hours ago and the Elder Wand the Deathstick the Wand of Destiny is truly mine !Dumbledore s last plan went wrong Harry Potter !Yeah it did said Harry .Youre right .But before you try to kill me Id advise you to think about what youve done .Think and try for some remorse Riddle .What is this ?Of all the things that Harry had said to him beyond any revelation or taunt nothing had shocked Voldemort like this .Harry saw his pupils contract to thin slits saw the skin around his eyes whiten .Its your one last chance said Harry its all youve got left .Ive seen what youll be otherwise .Be a man .try .Try for some remorse .You dare ?said Voldemort again .Yes I dare said Harry because Dumbledores last plan hasnt backfired on me at all .Its backfired on you Riddle .Voldemorts hand was trembling on the Elder Wand and Harry gripped Dracos very tightly .The moment he knew was seconds away .That wand still isnt working properly for you because you murdered the wrong person .Severus Snape was never the true master of the Elder Wand .He never defeated Dumbledore .He killed Arent you listening ?Snape never beat Dumbledorel Dumbledores death was planned between them !Dumbledore intended to die undefeated the wands last true master !If all had gone as planned the wands power would have died with him because it had never been won from him !But then Potter Dumbledore as good as gave me the wand !Voldemorts voice shook with malicious pleasure .I stole the wand from its last masters tomb !I removed it against its last masters wishes !Its power is mine !You still dont get it Riddle do you ?Possessing the wand isnt enough !Holding it using it doesnt make it really yours .Didnt you listen to Ollivander ?The wand chooses the wizard .The Elder Wand recognized a new master before Dumbledore died someone who never even laid a hand on it .The new master removed the wand from Dumbledore against his will never realizing exactly what he had done or that the worlds most dangerous wand had given him its allegiance .Voldemorts chest rose and fell rapidly and Harry could feel the curse coming feel it building inside the wand pointed at his face .The true master of the Elder Wand was Draco Malfoy .Blank shock showed in Voldemorts face for a moment but then it was gone .But what does it matter ?he said softly .Even if you are right Potter it makes no difference to you and me .You no longer have the phoenix wand We duel on skill alone .and after I have killed you I can attend to Draco Malfoy .But youre too late said Harry .Youve missed your chance .I got there first .I overpowered Draco weeks ago .I took this wand from him .Harry twitched the hawthorn wand and he felt the eyes of everyone in the Hall upon it .So it all comes down to this doesnt it ?whispered Harry .Does the wand in your hand know its last master was Disarmed ?Because if it does .I am the true master of the Elder Wand .A redgold glow burst suddenly across the enchanted sky above them as an edge of dazzling sun appeared over the sill of the nearest window .The light hit both of their faces at the same time so that Voldemorts was suddenly a flaming blur .Harry heard the high voice shriek as he too yelled his best hope to the heavens pointing Dracos wand Avada KedavraV Expelliarmus The bang was like a cannon blast and the golden flames that erupted between them at the dead center of the circle they had been treading marked the point where the spells collided .Harry saw Voldemorts green jet meet his own spell saw the Elder Wand fly high dark against the sunrise spinning across the enchanted ceiling like the head of Nagini spinning through the air toward the master it would not kill who had come to take full possession of it at last .And Harry with the unerring skill of the Seeker caught the wand in his free hand as Voldemort fell backward arms splayed the slit pupils of the scarlet eyes rolling upward .Tom Riddle hit the floor with a mundane finality his body feeble and shrunken the white hands empty the snakelike face vacant and unknowing .Voldemort was dead killed by his own rebounding curse and Harry stood with two wands in his hand staring down at his enemys shell .One shivering second of silence the shock of the moment suspended and then the tumult broke around Harry as the screams and the cheers and the roars of the watchers rent the air .The fierce new sun dazzled the windows as they thundered toward him and the first to reach him were Ron and Hermione and it was their arms that were wrapped around him their incomprehensible shouts that deafened him .Then Ginny Neville and Luna were there and then all the Weasleys and Hagrid and Kingsley and McGonagall and Flitwick and Sprout and Harry could not hear a word that anyone was shouting nor tell whose hands were seizing him pulling him trying to hug some part of him hundreds of them pressing in all of them determined to touch the Boy Who Lived the reason it was over at last The sun rose steadily over Hogwarts and the Great Hall blazed with life and light .Harry was an indispensable part of the mingled outpourings of jubilation and mourning of grief and celebration .They wanted him there with them their leader and symbol their savior and their guide and that he had not slept that he craved the company of only a few of them seemed to occur to no one .He must speak to the bereaved clasp their hands witness their tears receive their thanks hear the news now creeping in from every quarter as the morning drew on that the Imperiused up and down the country had come back to themselves that Death Eaters were fleeing or else being captured that the innocent of Azkaban were being released at that very moment and that Kingsley Shacklebolt had been named temporary Minister of Magic .They moved Voldemorts body and laid it in a chamber off the Hall away from the bodies of Fred Tonks Lupin Colin Creevey and fifty others who had died fighting him .McGonagall had replaced the House tables but nobody was sitting according to House anymore All were jumbled together teachers and pupils ghosts and parents centaurs and house elves and Firenze lay recovering in a corner and Grawp peered in through a smashed window and people were throwing food into his laughing mouth .After a while exhausted and drained Harry found himself sitting on a bench beside Luna .Id want some peace and quiet if it were me she said .Id love some he replied .Ill distract them all she said .Use your Cloak .And before he could say a word she had cried Oooh look a Blibbering Humdinger !and pointed out of the window .Everyone who heard looked around and Harry slid the Cloak up over himself and got to his feet .Now he could move through the Hall without interference .He spotted Ginny two tables away she was sitting with her head on her mothers shoulder There would be time to talk later hours and days and maybe years in which to talk .He saw Neville the sword of Gryffindor lying beside his plate as he ate surrounded by a knot of fervent admirers .Along the aisle between the tables he walked and he spotted the three Malfoys huddled together as though unsure whether or not they were supposed to be there but nobody was paying them any attention .Everywhere he looked he saw families reunited and finally he saw the two whose company he craved most .Its me he muttered crouching down between them .Will you come with me ?They stood up at once and together he Ron and Hermione left the Great Hall .Great chunks were missing from the marble staircase part of the balustrade gone and rubble and bloodstains occurred every few steps as they climbed .Somewhere in the distance they could hear Peeves zooming through the corridors singing a victory song of his own composition We did it we bashed them wee Potters the one And Voldys gone moldy so now lets have fun !Really gives a feeling for the scope and tragedy of the thing doesnt it ?said Ron pushing open a door to let Harry and Hermione through .Happiness would come Harry thought but at the moment it was muffled by exhaustion and the pain of losing Fred and Lupin and Tonks pierced him like a physical wound every few steps .Most of all he felt the most stupendous relief and a longing to sleep .But first he owed an explanation to Ron and Hermione who had stuck with him for so long and who deserved the truth .Painstakingly he recounted what he had seen in the Pensieve and what had happened in the forest and they had not even begun to express all their shock and amazement when at last they arrived at the place to which they had been walking though none of them had mentioned their destination .Since he had last seen it the gargoyle guarding the entrance to the headmasters study had been knocked aside it stood lopsided looking a little punchdrunk and Harry wondered whether it would be able to distinguish passwords anymore .Can we go up ?he asked the gargoyle .Feel free groaned the statue .They clambered over him and onto the spiral stone staircase that moved slowly upward like an escalator .Harry pushed open the door at the top .He had one brief glimpse of the stone Pensieve on the desk where he had left it and then an earsplitting noise made him cry out thinking of curses and returning Death Eaters and the rebirth of Voldemort But it was applause .All around the walls the headmasters and headmistresses of Hogwarts were giving him a standing ovation they waved their hats and in some cases their wigs they reached through their frames to grip each others hands they danced up and down on the chairs in which they had been painted Dilys Derwent sobbed unashamedly Dexter Fortescue was waving his eartrumpet and Phineas Nigellus called in his high reedy voice And let it be noted that Slytherin House played its part !Let our contribution not be forgotten !But Harry had eyes only for the man who stood in the largest portrait directly behind the headmasters chair .Tears were sliding down from behind the half moon spectacles into the long silver beard and the pride and the gratitude emanating from him filled Harry with the same balm as phoenix song .At last Harry held up his hands and the portraits fell respectfully silent beaming and mopping their eyes and waiting eagerly for him to speak .He directed his words at Dumbledore however and chose them with enormous care .Exhausted and blearyeyed though he was he must make one last effort seeking one last piece of advice .The thing that was hidden in the Snitch he began I dropped it in the forest .I dont know exactly where but Im not going to go looking for it again .Do you agree ?My dear boy I do said Dumbledore while his fellow pictures looked confused and curious .A wise and courageous decision but no less than I would have expected of you .Does anyone else know where it fell ?No one said Harry and Dumbledore nodded his satisfaction .Im going to keep Ignotuss present though said Harry and Dumbledore beamed .But of course Harry it is yours forever until you pass it on !And then theres this .Harry held up the Elder Wand and Ron and Hermione looked at it with a reverence that even in his befuddled and sleepdeprived state Harry did not like to see .I dont want it said Harry .What ?said Ron loudly .Are you mental ?I know its powerful said Harry wearily .But I was happier with mine .So .He rummaged in the pouch hung around his neck and pulled out the two halves of holly still just connected by the finest thread of phoenix feather .Hermione had said that they could not be repaired that the damage was too severe .All he knew was that if this did not work nothing would .He laid the broken wand upon the headmasters desk touched it with the very tip of the Elder Wand and said Reparo .As his wand resealed red sparks flew out of its end .Harry knew that he had succeeded .He picked up the holly and phoenix wand and felt a sudden warmth in his fingers as though wand and hand were rejoicing at their reunion .Im putting the Elder Wand he told Dumbledore who was watching him with enormous affection and admiration back where it came from .It can stay there .If I die a natural death like Ignotus its power will be broken wont it ?The previous master will never have been defeated .Thatll be the end of it .Dumbledore nodded .They smiled at each other .Are you sure ?said Ron .There was the faintest trace of longing in his voice as he looked at the Elder Wand .I think Harrys right said Hermione quietly .That wands more trouble than its worth said Harry .And quite honestly he turned away from the painted portraits thinking now only of the fourposter bed lying waiting for him in Gryffindor Tower and wondering whether Kreacher might bring him a sandwich there Ive had enough trouble for a lifetime .ayue NINETEEN YEARS LATER Autumn seemed to arrive suddenly that year .The morning of the first of September was crisp and golden as an apple and as the little family bobbed across the rumbling road toward the great sooty station the fumes of car exhausts and the breath of pedestrians sparkled like cobwebs in the cold air .Two large cages rattled on top of the laden trolleys the parents were pushing the owls inside them hooted indignantly and the redheaded girl trailed tearfully behind her brothers clutching her fathers arm .It wont be long and youll be going too Harry told her .Two years sniffed Lily .I want to go now The commuters stared curiously at the owls as the family wove its way toward the barrier between platforms nine and ten .Albuss voice drifted back to Harry over the surrounding clamor his sons had resumed the argument they had started in the car .I wonti I wont be in Slytherin !James give it a rest !said Ginny .I only said he might be said James grinning at his younger brother .Theres nothing wrong with that .He might be in Slyth But James caught his mothers eye and fell silent .The five Potters approached the barrier .With a slightly cocky look over his shoulder at his younger brother James took the trolley from his mother and broke into a run .A moment later he had vanished .Youll write to me wont you ?Albus asked his parents immediately capitalizing on the momentary absence of his brother .Every day if you want us to said Ginny .Not every day said Albus quickly .James says most people only get letters from home about once a month .We wrote to James three times a week last year said Ginny .And you dont want to believe everything he tells you about Hogwarts Harry put in .He likes a laugh your brother .Side by side they pushed the second trolley forward gathering speed .As they reached the barrier Albus winced but no collision came .Instead the family emerged onto platform nine and threequarters which was obscured by thick white steam that was pouring from the scarlet Hogwarts Express .Indistinct figures were swarming through the mist into which James had already disappeared .Where are they ?asked Albus anxiously peering at the hazy forms they passed as they made their way down the platform .Well find them said Ginny reassuringly .But the vapor was dense and it was difficult to make out anybodys faces .Detached from their owners voices sounded unnaturally loud .Harry thought he heard Percy discoursing loudly on broomstick regulations and was quite glad of the excuse not to stop and say hello .I think thats them Al said Ginny suddenly .A group of four people emerged from the mist standing alongside the very last carriage .Their faces only came into focus when Harry Ginny Lily and Albus had drawn right up to them .Hi said Albus sounding immensely relieved .Rose who was already wearing her brandnew Hogwarts robes beamed at him .Parked all right then ?Ron asked Harry .I did .Hermione didnt believe I could pass a Muggle driving test did you ?She thought Id have to Confund the examiner .No I didnt said Hermione I had complete faith in you .As a matter of fact I did Confund him Ron whispered to Harry as together they lifted Albus s trunk and owl onto the train .I only forgot to look in the wing mirror and lets face it I can use a Supersensory Charm for that .Back on the platform they found Lily and Hugo Roses younger brother having an animated discussion about which House they would be sorted into when they finally went to Hogwarts .If youre not in Gryffindor well disinherit you said Ron but no pressure .Ron Lily and Hugo laughed but Albus and Rose looked solemn .He doesnt mean it said Hermione and Ginny but Ron was no longer paying attention .Catching Harrys eye he nodded covertly to a point some fifty yards away .The steam had thinned for a moment and three people stood in sharp relief against the shifting mist .Look who it is .Draco Malfoy was standing there with his wife and son a dark coat buttoned up to his throat .His hair was receding somewhat which emphasized the pointed chin .The new boy resembled Draco as much as Albus resembled Harry .Draco caught sight of Harry Ron Hermione and Ginny staring at him nodded curtly and turned away again .So thats little Scorpius said Ron under his breath .Make sure you beat him in every test Rosie .Thank God you inherited your mothers brains .Ron for heavens sake said Hermione half stern half amused .Dont try to turn them against each other before theyve even started school !Youre right sorry said Ron but unable to help himself he added Dont get too friendly with him though Rosie .Granddad Weasley would never forgive you if you married a pureblood .Hey !James had reappeared he had divested himself of his trunk owl and trolley and was evidently bursting with news .Teddys back there he said breathlessly pointing back over his shoulder into the billowing clouds of steam .Just seen him !And guess what hes doing ?Snogging Victoire He gazed up at the adults evidently disappointed by the lack of reaction .Our Teddy !Teddy Lupin Snogging our Victoire !Our cousin !And I asked Teddy what he was doing You interrupted them ?said Ginny .You are so like Ron and he said hed come to see her off !And then he told me to go away .Hes snogging her !James added as though worried he had not made himself clear .Oh it would be lovely if they got married !whispered Lily ecstatically .Teddy would really be part of the family then !He already comes round for dinner about four times a week said Harry .Why dont we just invite him to live with us and have done with it ?Yeah !said James enthusiastically .I dont mind sharing with A1 Teddy could have my room !No said Harry firmly you and A1 will share a room only when I want the house demolished .He checked the battered old watch that had once been Fabian Prewetts .Its nearly eleven youd better get on board .Dont forget to give Neville our love !Ginny told James as she hugged him .Mum !I cant give a professor love But you know Neville James rolled his eyes .Outside yeah but at school hes Professor Longbottom isnt he ?I cant walk into Herbology and give him love .Shaking his head at his mothers foolishness he vented his feelings by aiming a kick at Albus .See you later Al .Watch out for the thestrals .I thought they were invisible ?You said they were invisible !But James merely laughed permitted his mother to kiss him gave his father a fleeting hug then leapt onto the rapidly filling train .They saw him wave then sprint away up the corridor to find his friends .Thestrals are nothing to worry about Harry told Albus .Theyre gentle things theres nothing scary about them .Anyway you wont be going up to school in the carriages youll be going in the boats .Ginny kissed Albus goodbye .See you at Christmas .Bye Al said Harry as his son hugged him .Dont forget Hagrids invited you to tea next Friday .Dont mess with Peeves .Dont duel anyone till youve learned how .And dont let James wind you up .What if Im in Slytherin ?The whisper was for his father alone and Harry knew that only the moment of departure could have forced Albus to reveal how great and sincere that fear was .Harry crouched down so that Albus s face was slightly above his own .Alone of Harrys three children Albus had inherited Lilys eyes .Albus Severus Harry said quietly so that nobody but Ginny could hear and she was tactful enough to pretend to be waving to Rose who was now on the train you were named for two headmasters of Hogwarts .One of them was a Slytherin and he was probably the bravest man I ever knew .But just say then Slytherin House will have gained an excellent student wont it ?It doesnt matter to us Al .But if it matters to you youll be able to choose Gryffindor over Slytherin .The Sorting Hat takes your choice into account .Really ?It did for me said Harry .He had never told any of his children that before and he saw the wonder in Albuss face when he said it .But now the doors were slamming all along the scarlet train and the blurred outlines of parents were swarming forward for final kisses lastminute reminders .Albus jumped into the carriage and Ginny closed the door behind him .Students were hanging from the windows nearest them .A great number of faces both on the train and off seemed to be turned toward Harry .Why are they all staring ?demanded Albus as he and Rose craned around to look at the other students .Dont let it worry you said Ron .Its me .Im extremely famous .Albus Rose Hugo and Lily laughed .The train began to move and Harry walked alongside it watching his sons thin face already ablaze with excitement .Harry kept smiling and waving even though it was like a little bereavement watching his son glide away from him .The last trace of steam evaporated in the autumn air .The train rounded a corner .Harrys hand was still raised in farewell .Hell be all right murmured Ginny .As Harry looked at her he lowered his hand absentmindedly and touched the lightning scar on his forehead .I know he will .The scar had not pained Harry for nineteen years .All was well . 


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

####-SPECIAL NOTE: 

 
In this reprint several minor inaccuracies, most of them noted by readers, have 
been corrected. For example, the rune text now corresponds exactly with the runes 
on  Thror's  Map.  More  important  is  the  matter  of  Chapter  Five.  There  the  true 
story  of  the  ending  of  the  Riddle  Game,  as  it  was  eventually  revealed  (under 
pressure)  by Bilbo  to Gandalf,  is  now  given  according  to  the Red Book,  in  place 
of  the  version  Bilbo  first  gave  to  his  friends,  and  actually  set  down  in  his  diary. 
This  departure  from  truth  on  the  part  of  a  most  honest  hobbit  was  a  portent  of 
great  significance.  It  does  not,  however,  concern  the  present  story,  and  those who 
in this edition make their first acquaintance with hobbit-lore need not troupe about 
it.  Its  explanation  lies in the history of the Ring, as it was set out in the chronicles 
of the Red Book of Westmarch, and is now told in The Lord of the Rings. 
 
A final note may be added, on a point raised by several students of  the  lore of 
the  period.  On  Thror's  Map  is  written  Here  of  old  was  Thrain  King  under  the 
Mountain;  yet  Thrain  was  the  son  of  Thror,  the  last  King  under  the  Mountain 
before  the  coming  of  the  dragon.  The  Map,  however,  is  not  in  error.  Names  are 
often  repeated  in  dynasties,  and  the  genealogies  show  that  a  distant  ancestor  of 
Thror  was  referred  to,  Thrain  I,  a  fugitive  from  Moria,  who  first  discovered  the 
Lonely Mountain, Erebor, and ruled there for a while, before his people moved on 
to the remoter mountains of the North. 

####-Chapter I <br>

An Unexpected Party

In a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit. Not a nasty, dirty, wet hole, filled with 
the ends of worms and an oozy smell, nor yet a dry, bare, sandy hole with nothing 
in it to sit down on or to eat: it was a hobbit-hole, and that means comfort. 
It  had  a  perfectly  round  door  like  a  porthole,  painted  green,  with  a  shiny 
yellow  brass  knob  in  the  exact middle. The  door  opened  on  to  a  tube-shaped hall 
like  a  tunnel:  a  very  comfortable  tunnel without  smoke, with  panelled walls,  and 
floors  tiled  and  carpeted,  provided with  polished  chairs,  and  lots  and  lots of pegs 
for  hats  and  coats - the hobbit was  fond of visitors. The  tunnel wound on  and on, 
going  fairly  but  not  quite  straight  into  the  side  of  the  hill  -  The  Hill,  as  all  the 
people for many miles round called  it - and many little round doors opened out of 
it,  first  on  one  side  and  then  on  another.  No  going  upstairs  for  the  hobbit: 
bedrooms,  bathrooms,  cellars,  pantries  (lots  of  these),  wardrobes  (he  had  whole 
rooms devoted to clothes), kitchens, dining-rooms, all were on the same floor, and 
indeed  on  the  same  passage. The  best  rooms were  all  on  the  left-hand side (going 
in),  for  these  were  the  only  ones  to  have  windows,  deep-set  round  windows 
looking over his garden and meadows beyond, sloping down to the river.  
This  hobbit  was  a  very  well-to-do  hobbit,  and  his  name  was  Baggins.  The 
Bagginses  had  lived  in  the  neighbourhood  of  The  Hill  for  time  out  of mind,  and 
people considered them very respectable, not only because most of them were rich, 
but  also  because  they  never had  any  adventures or did  anything unexpected: you 
could tell what a Baggins would say on any question without the bother of asking 
him. This  is a story of how a Baggins had an adventure,  found himself doing and 
saying things altogether unexpected. He may have lost the neighbours' respect, but 
he gained-well, you will see whether he gained anything in the end.
The  mother  of  our  particular  hobbit  …  what  is  a  hobbit?  I  suppose  hobbits 
need  some description nowadays,  since  they have become  rare  and  shy of the Big 
People,  as  they  call  us.  They  are  (or  were)  a  little  people,  about  half  our  height, 
and  smaller  than  the  bearded Dwarves. Hobbits  have  no  beards. There  is  little  or 
no  magic  about  them,  except  the  ordinary  everyday  sort  which  helps  them  to 
disappear  quietly  and  quickly  when  large  stupid  folk  like  you  and  me  come 
blundering  along,  making  a  noise  like  elephants  which  they  can  hear  a  mile  off. 
They  are  inclined  to  be    at  in  the  stomach;  they  dress  in  bright  colours  (chiefly 

####-green  and  yellow);  wear  no  shoes,  because  their  feet  grow  natural  leathery  soles 
and thick warm brown hair like the stuff on their heads (which is curly); have long 
clever brown fingers, good-natured faces, and laugh deep fruity laughs (especially 
after  dinner,  which  they  have  twice  a  day when  they  can  get  it). Now  you  know 
enough  to  go  on  with.  As  I  was  saying,  the  mother  of  this  hobbit  -  of  Bilbo 
Baggins, that is  - was  the fabulous Belladonna Took, one of  the  three remarkable 
daughters  of  the  Old  Took,  head  of  the  hobbits  who  lived  across  The Water,  the 
small river that ran at the foot of The Hill. It was often said (in other families) that 
long  ago  one  of  the  Took  ancestors  must  have  taken  a  fairy  wife.  That  was,  of 
course,  absurd,  but  certainly  there  was  still  something  not  entirely  hobbit-like 
about  them,  -  and  once  in  a while members  of  the  Took-clan would go and have 
adventures. They discreetly disappeared, and  the  family hushed  it up; but  the  fact 
remained  that  the  Tooks  were  not  as  respectable  as  the  Bagginses,  though  they 
were undoubtedly richer. Not that Belladonna Took ever had any adventures after 
she  became  Mrs.  Bungo  Baggins.  Bungo,  that  was  Bilbo's  father,  built  the  most 
luxurious  hobbit-hole  for  her  (and  partly  with  her  money)  that  was  to  be  found 
either  under  The  Hill  or  over  The  Hill  or  across  The  Water,  and  there  they 
remained  to  the  end  of  their  days.  Still  it  is  probable  that  Bilbo,  her  only  son, 
although  he  looked  and  behaved  exactly  like  a  second  edition  of  his  solid  and 
comfortable  father,  got  something  a  bit  queer  in  his makeup  from  the Took  side, 
something  that  only  waited  for  a  chance  to  come  out.  The  chance  never  arrived, 
until Bilbo Baggins was grown up, being about fifty years old or so, and living in 
the  beautiful  hobbit-hole  built  by  his  father,  which  I  have  just described  for you, 
until he had in fact apparently settled down immovably.  
By some curious chance one morning long ago in the quiet of the world, when 
there  was  less  noise  and  more  green,  and  the  hobbits  were  still  numerous  and 
prosperous,  and  Bilbo  Baggins  was  standing  at  his  door  after  breakfast  smoking 
an  enormous  long  wooden  pipe  that  reached  nearly  down  to  his  woolly  toes 
(neatly brushed)  - Gandalf  came  by. Gandalf!  If  you  had  heard  only  a  quarter  of 
what  I  have  heard  about  him,  and  I  have  only  heard  very  little  of  all  there  is  to 
hear,  you  would  be  prepared  for  any  sort  I  of  remarkable  tale.  Tales  and 
adventures  sprouted  up  all  over  the  place  wherever  he  went,  in  the  most 
extraordinary  fashion.  He  had  not  been  down  that  way  under  The  Hill  for  ages 
and  ages,  not  since  his  friend  the  Old  Took  died,  in  fact,  and  the  hobbits  had 
almost forgotten what he looked like. He had been away over The Hill and across 
The  Water  on  business  of  his  own  since  they  were  all  small  hobbit-boys  and 
hobbit-girls. 

####-All that the unsuspecting Bilbo saw that morning was an old man with a staff. 
He had a tall pointed blue hat, a long grey cloak, a silver scarf over which a white 
beard hung down below his waist, and immense black boots. 
"Good  morning!"  said  Bilbo,  and  he  meant  it.  The  sun  was  shining,  and  the 
grass was very green. But Gandalf looked at him from under long bushy eyebrows 
that  stuck  out  further  than  the  brim  of  his  shady  hat.  "What  do  you  mean?"  be 
said. "Do you wish me a good morning, or mean that it is a good morning whether 
I  want  not;  or  that  you  feel  good  this  morning;  or  that  it  is  morning  to  be  good 
on?" 
"All  of  them  at  once,"  said  Bilbo.  "And  a  very  fine  morning  for  a  pipe  of 
tobacco out of doors, into the bargain. If you have a pipe about you, sit down  and 
have  a  fill of mine! There's no hurry, we have  all  the day before us!" Then Bilbo 
sat down on a seat by his door, crossed his legs, and blew out a beautiful grey ring 
of  smoke  that  sailed  up  into  the  air without  breaking  and  floated  away  over  The 
Hill. 
"Very  pretty!"  said  Gandalf.  "But  I  have  no  time  to  blow  smoke-rings  this 
morning.  I  am  looking  for  someone  to  share  in  an  adventure  that  I  am  arranging, 
and it's very difficult to find anyone." 
«I should think so  - in these parts! We are plain quiet folk and have no use for 
adventures.  Nasty  .disturbing  uncomfortable  things! Make  you  late  for  dinner!  I 
can’t  think  what  anybody  sees  in  them,»  said  our  Mr.  Baggins,  and  stuck  one 
thumb  behind  his  braces,  and  blew  out  another  even  bigger  smoke-ring. Then he 
took out his morning  letters, and begin  to  read, pretending  to  take no more notice 
of  the old man. He had decided  that he was not quite his  sort,  and wanted him  to 
go away. But  the old man did not move. He stood  leaning on his stick and gazing 
at the hobbit without saying anything, till Bilbo got quite uncomfortable and even 
a little cross. 
"Good  morning!"  he  said  at  last.  "We  don't  want  any  adventures  here,  thank 
you! You might try over The Hill or across The Water." By this he meant that the 
conversation was at an end. 
"What a lot of things you do use Good morning for!" said Gandalf. "Now you 
mean that you want to get rid of me, and that it won't be good till I move off." 
"Not  at  all,  not  at  all,  my  dear  sir!  Let  me  see,  I  don't  think  I  know  your 
name?" 
"Yes,  yes,  my  dear  sir  -  and  I  do  know  your  name, Mr.  Bilbo  Baggins.  And 
you  do  know  my  name,  though  you  don't  remember  that  I  belong  to  it.  I  am 

####-Gandalf,  and  Gandalf  means  me!  To  think  that  I  should  have  lived  to  be  good-
morninged by Belladonna Took's son, as if I was selling buttons at the door!" 
"Gandalf,  Gandalf!  Good  gracious  me!  Not  the  wandering  wizard  that  gave 
Old Took a pair of magic diamond studs that fastened themselves and never came 
undone  till  ordered?  Not  the  fellow  who  used  to  tell  such  wonderful  tales  at 
parties, about dragons and goblins and giants and  the rescue of princesses and  the 
unexpected  luck  of  widows'  sons?  Not  the  man  that  used  to  make  such 
particularly  excellent  fireworks!  I  remember  those!  Old  Took  used  to  have  them 
on  Midsummer's  Eve.  Splendid!  They  used  to  go  up  like  great  lilies  and 
snapdragons and laburnums of fire and hang in the twilight all evening!" You will 
notice already that Mr. Baggins was not quite so prosy as he liked to believe, also 
that  he was  very  fond  of  flowers. "Dear me!" she went on. "Not  the Gandalf who 
was  responsible  for so many quiet  lads and  lasses going off  into  the Blue  for mad 
adventures.  Anything  from  climbing  trees  to  visiting  Elves  -  or  sailing  in  ships, 
sailing  to other  shores! Bless me,  life used  to be quite  inter  - I mean, you used  to 
upset things badly in these parts once upon a time. I beg your pardon, but I had no 
idea you were still in business." 
"Where else  should  I be?"  said  the wizard.  "All  the  same  I am pleased  to  find 
you  remember  something about me. You seem  to  remember my  fireworks kindly, 
at any  rate,  land  that  is not without hope.  Indeed  for your old grand-father Took's 
sake, and for the sake of poor Belladonna, I will give you what you asked for." 
"I beg your pardon, I haven't asked for anything!" 
"Yes, you have! Twice now. My pardon. I give it you. In fact I will go so far as 
to  send  you  on  this  adventure.  Very  amusing  for  me,  very  good  for  you  and 
profitable too, very likely, if you ever get over it." 
"Sorry!  I  don't  want  any  adventures,  thank  you.  Not  today.  Good  morning! 
But please come to tea - any time you like! Why not tomorrow? Come tomorrow! 
Good-bye!" 
With  that  the hobbit  turned and  scuttled  inside his  round green door, and  shut 
it as quickly as he dared, not to seen rude. Wizards after all are wizards. 
"What on earth did I ask him to tea for!" he said to him-self, as he went to the 
pantry. He had only  just had break  fast, but he  thought a cake or  two and a drink 
of  something  would  do  him  good  after  his  fright.  Gandalf  in  the  meantime  was 
still  standing  outside  the  door,  and  laughing  long  but  quietly.  After  a  while  he 
stepped  up,  and  with  the  spike  of  his  staff  scratched  a  queer  sign  on  the  hobbit's 
beautiful  green  front-door.  Then  he  strode  away,  just  about  the  time  when  Bilbo 

####-was  finishing  his  second  cake  and  beginning  to  think  that  he  had  escape 
adventures very well. 
The  next  day  he  had  almost  forgotten  about  Gandalf  He  did  not  remember 
things  very  well,  unless  he  put  them  down  on  his  Engagement  Tablet:  like  this: 
Gandalf ’¥a Wednesday. Yesterday he had been too flustered to do anything of the 
kind. Just before tea-time there came a tremendous ring on the front-door bell, and 
then he remembered! He rushed and put on the kettle, and put out another cup and 
saucer and an extra cake or two, and ran to the door.  
"I am so sorry  to keep you waiting!" he was going  to say, when he saw  that  it 
was not Gandalf at all. It was a dwarf with a blue beard tucked into a golden belt, 
and  very  bright  eyes  under  his  dark-green hood.  As  soon a  the door was opened, 
he pushed inside, just as if he had been expected. 
He hung his hooded cloak on the nearest peg, and "Dwalin at your service!" he 
said with a low bow.  
"Bilbo  Baggins  at  yours!"  said  the  hobbit,  too  surprised  to  ask  any  questions 
for  the  moment.  When  the  silence  that  followed  had  become  uncomfortable,  he 
added:  "I  am  just  about  to  take  tea;  pray  come  and  have  some with me." A  little 
stiff  perhaps,  but  he  meant  it  kindly.  And  what  would  you  do,  if  an  uninvited 
dwarf came and hung his things up in your hall without a word of explanation? 
They had not been at table long, in fact they had hardly reached the third cake, 
when there came another even louder ring at the bell. 
"Excuse me!" said the hobbit, and off he went to the door.  
"So  you  have  got  here  at  last!" was what  he was  going  to  say  to Gandalf  this 
time.  But  it  was  not  Gandalf.  Instead  there  was  a  very  old-looking  dwarf  on  the 
step with a white beard and a scarlet hood; and he too hopped inside as soon as the 
door was open, just as if he had been invited. 
"I  see  they  have  begun  to  arrive  already,"  he  said  when  he  caught  sight  of 
Dwalin's  green  hood  hanging  up.  He  hung  his  red  one  next  to  it,  and  "Balin  at 
your service!" he said with his hand on his breast. 
"Thank  you!"  said  Bilbo with  a  gasp.  It was  not  the  correct  thing  to  say,  but 
they have begun  to  arrive had  flustered him badly. He  liked visitors, but he  liked 
to know  them before  they arrived, and he preferred  to ask  them himself. He had a 
horrible  thought  that  the  cakes might  run  short,  and  then  he-as  the host: he knew 
his duty and stuck to it however painful-he might have to go without. 
"Come  along  in,  and  have  some  tea!"  he  managed  to  say  after  taking  a  deep 
breath. 

####-"A  little  beer  would  suit  me  better,  if  it  is  all  the  same  to  you, my  good  sir," 
said  Balin  with  the  white  beard.  "But  I  don't  mind  some  cake-seed-cake,  if  you 
have any." 
"Lots!"  Bilbo  found  himself  answering,  to  his  own  surprise;  and  he  found 
himself  scuttling  off,  too,  to  the  cellar  to  fill  a  pint  beer-mug, and to the pantry to 
fetch  two  beautiful  round  seed-cakes  which  he  had  baked  that  afternoon  for  his 
after-supper morsel. 
When he got back Balin and Dwalin were  talking at  the  table  like old  friends 
(as  a  matter  of  fact  they  were  brothers).  Bilbo  plumped  down  the  beer  and  the 
cake  in  front  of  them, when  loud  came  a  ring  at  the  bell  again,  and  then  another 
ring. 
"Gandalf for certain this time," he thought as he puffed along the passage. But 
it was not. It was two more dwarves, both with blue hoods, silver belts, and yellow 
beards;  and  each  of  them  carried  a  bag  of  tools  and  a  spade.  In  they  hopped,  as 
soon as the door began to open-Bilbo was hardly surprised at all. 
"What can I do for you, my dwarves?" he said. "Kili at your service!" said the 
one.  "And  Fili!"  added  the  other;  and  they  both  swept  off  their  blue  hoods  and 
bowed. 
"At  yours  and  your  family's!"  replied  Bilbo,  remembering  his  manners  this 
time. 
"Dwalin and Balin here already, I see," said Kili. "Let us join the throng!" 
"Throng!" thought Mr. Baggins. "I don't like the sound of that. I really must sit 
down for a minute and collect my wits, and have a drink." He had only just had a 
sip-in  the  corner,  while  the  four  dwarves  sat  around  the  table,  and  talked  about 
mines  and  gold  and  troubles  with  the  goblins,  and  the  depredations  of  dragons, 
and lots of other things which he did not understand, and did not want to, for they 
sounded much too adventurous-when, ding-dong-a-ling-' dang, his bell rang again, 
as if some naughty little hobbit-boy was trying to pull the handle off. "Someone at 
the  door!"  he  said,  blinking.  "Some  four,  I  should  say  by  the  sound,"  said  Fili. 
"Be-sides, we saw them coming along behind us in the distance." 
The  poor  little  hobbit  sat  down  in  the  hall  and  put  his  head  in  his  hands,  and 
wondered  what  had  happened,  and  what  was  going  to  happen,  and  whether  they 
would all stay  to supper. Then  the bell rang again  louder  than ever, and he had  to 
run  to  the  door.  It  was  not  four  after  all,  t  was  FIVE.  Another  dwarf  had  come 
along while he was wondering in the hall. He had hardly turned the knob, be-x)re 
they were all  inside, bowing and  saying  "at your  service" one after another. Dori, 
Nori,  Ori,  Oin,  and  Gloin  were  their  names;  and  very  soon  two  purple  hoods,  a 

####-grey hood, a brown hood, and a white hood were hanging on the pegs, and off they 
marched  with  their  broad  hands  stuck  in  their  gold  and  silver  belts  to  join  the 
others. Already  it had almost become a  throng. Some called  for ale, and some  for 
porter,  and  one  for  coffee,  and  all  of  them  for  cakes;  so  the hobbit was kept very 
busy for a while. 
A  big  jug  of  coffee  bad  just  been  set  in  the  hearth,  the  seed-cakes were gone, 
and  the  dwarves  were  starting  on  a  round  of  buttered  scones,  when  there  came-a 
loud  knock.  Not  a  ring,  but  a  hard  rat-tat  on  the  hobbit's  beautiful  green  door. 
Somebody was banging with a stick! 
Bilbo  rushed  along  the  passage,  very  angry,  and  altogether  bewildered  and 
bewuthered-this  was  the  most  awkward  Wednesday  he  ever  remembered.  He 
pulled open the door with a jerk, and they all fell in, one on top of the other. More 
dwarves,  four  more!  And  there  was  Gandalf  behind,  leaning  on  his  staff  and 
laughing. He had made quite a dent on the beautiful door; he had also, by the way, 
knocked out the secret mark that he had put there the morning before. 
"Carefully!  Carefully!"  he  said.  "It  is  not  like  you,  Bilbo,  to  keep  friends 
waiting  on  the  mat,  and  then  open  the  door  like  a  pop-gun!  Let  me  introduce 
Bifur, Bofur, Bombur, and especially Thorin!" 
"At your service!" said Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur standing in a row. Then they 
hung  up  two  yellow  hoods  and  a  pale  green  one;  and  also  a  sky-blue one with  a 
long silver tassel. This last belonged to Thorin, an enormously important dwarf, in 
fact  no  other  than  the  great  Thorin  Oakenshield  himself,  who  was  not  at  all 
pleased at falling flat on Bilbo's mat with Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur on top of him. 
For  one  thing  Bombur  was  immensely  fat  and  heavy.  Thorin  indeed  was  very 
haughty,  and  said  nothing  about  service;  but  poor Mr. Baggins  said  he was  sorry 
so  many  times,  that  at  last  he  grunted  "pray  don't  mention  it,"  and  stopped 
frowning. 
"Now we  are  all here!"  said Gandalf,  looking  at  the  row of  thirteen hoods-the 
best  detachable  party  hoods-and his own hat hanging on  the pegs. "Quite a merry 
gathering! 
I hope there is something left for the late-comers to eat and drink! What's that? 
Tea! No thank you! A little red wine, I think, for me." "And for me," said Thorin. 
"And raspberry jam and apple-tart," said Bifur. "And mince-pies and cheese," said 
Bofur.  "And  pork-pie  and  salad,"  said  Bombur.  "And  more  cakes-and  ale-and 
coffee, if you don't mind," called the other dwarves through the door.  

####-"Put  on  a  few  eggs,  there's  a  good  fellow!"  Gandalf  called  after  him,  as  the 
hobbit  stumped  off  to  the  pantries.  "And  just  bring  out  the  cold  chicken  and 
pickles!" 
"Seems  to  know  as  much  about  the  inside  of  my  larders  as  I  do  myself!" 
thought Mr. Baggins, who was  feeling  positively  flummoxed,  and was  beginning 
to wonder whether  a most wretched  adventure  had  not  come  right  into his house. 
By  the  time he had got all  the bottles and dishes and knives and forks and glasses 
and  plates  and  spoons  and  things  piled  up  on  big  trays,  he  was  getting  very  hot, 
and red in the face, and annoyed. 
"Confusticate  and  bebother  these  dwarves!"  he  said  aloud.  "Why  don't  they 
come and lend a hand?" Lo and behold! there stood Balin and Dwalin at the door 
of  the  kitchen,  and  Fili  and Kili  behind  them,  and  before  he  could  say  knife  they 
had  whisked  the  trays  and  a  couple  of  small  tables  into  the  parlour  and  set  out 
everything afresh. 
Gandalf  sat  at  the  head  of  the  party with  the  thirteen,  dwarves  all  round:  and 
Bilbo  sat  on  a  stool  at  the  fireside,  nibbling  at  a  biscuit  (his  appetite  was  quite 
taken away), and trying to look as if this was all perfectly  ordinary and. not in the 
least  an  adventure. The  dwarves  ate  and  ate,  and  talked  and  talked,  and  time  got 
on.  At  last  they  pushed  their  chairs  back,  and  Bilbo  made  a  move  to  collect  the 
plates and glasses. 
"I suppose you will all stay to supper?" he said in his politest unpressing tones. 
"Of  course!"  said Thorin.  "And  after. We  shan't  get  through  the  business  till  late, 
and we must have some music first. Now to clear up!" 
Thereupon  the  twelve  dwarves-not  Thorin,  he  was  too  important,  and  stayed 
talking  to  Gandalf-jumped  to  their  feet  and  made  tall  piles  of  all  the  things.  Off 
they went, not waiting for trays, balancing columns of plates, each with a bottle on 
the  top,  with  one  hand,  while  the  hobbit  ran  after  them  almost  squeaking  with 
fright:  "please  be  careful!"  and  "please,  don't  trouble!  I  can  manage."  But  the 
dwarves only started to sing: 
 

Chip the glasses and crack the plates! 
Blunt the knives and bend the forks! 
That's what Bilbo Baggins hates- 
Smash the bottles and burn the corks! 
 
Cut the cloth and tread on the fat! 
Pour the milk on the pantry floor! 
Leave the bones on the bedroom mat! 

####-Splash the wine on every door! 
 
Dump the crocks in a boiling bawl; 
Pound them up with a thumping pole; 
And when you've finished, if any are whole, 
Send them down the hall to roll ! 
 
That's what Bilbo Baggins hates! 
So, carefully! carefully with the plates! 

 
And  of  course  they  did  none  of  these  dreadful  things,  and  everything  was 
cleaned  and  put  away  safe  as  quick  as  lightning,  while  the  hobbit  was  turning 
round  and  round  in  the middle of  the kitchen  trying  to  see what  they were doing. 
Then  they  went  back,  and  found  Thorin  with  his  feet  on  the  fender  smoking  a 
pipe. He was  blowing  the most  enormous  smoke-rings, and wherever he  told one 
to  go,  it  went-up  the  chimney,  or  behind  the  clock  on  the  man-telpiece,  or  under 
the  table,  or  round  and  round  the  ceiling;  but  wherever  it  went  it  was  not  quick 
enough  to escape Gandalf. Pop! he  sent a  smaller  smoke-ring from his short clay-
pipe  straight  through  each  one  of  Thorin's.  The  Gandalf's  smoke-ring  would  go 
green  and  come  back  to  hover  over  the  wizard's  head.  He  had  quite  a  cloud  of 
them  about  him  already,  and  in  the  dim  light  it  made  him  look  strange  and 
sorcerous. Bilbo stood still and watched-he loved smoke-rings-and then be blushed 
to think how proud he had been yesterday morning of the smoke-rings he had sent 
up the wind over The Hill. 
"Now for some music!" said Thorin. "Bring out the instruments!" 
Kili  and  Fili  rushed  for  their  bags  and  brought  back  little  fiddles; Dori, Nori, 
and Ori brought out flutes from somewhere inside their coats; Bombur produced a 
drum  from  the  hall; Bifur  and Bofur went  out  too,  and  came  back with  clarinets 
that they had left among the walking-sticks Dwalin and Balin said: "Excuse me, I 
left  mine  in  the  porch!"  "Just  bring  mine  in  with  you,"  said  Thorin.  They  came 
back with  viols  as  big  as  themselves,  and with  Thorin’s  harp wrapped  in  a  green 
cloth.  It was  a  beautiful  gold-en harp, and when Thorin struck it the music began 
all  at  once,  so  sudden  and  sweet  that Bilbo  forgot everything else, and was  swept 
away  into dark  lands under  strange moons,  far over The Water and very  far  from 
his hobbit-hole under The Hill. 
The dark came into the room from the little window that opened in the side of 
The  Hill;  the  firelight  flickered-it  was  April-and  still  they  played  on,  while  the 
shadow of Gandalf's beard wagged against the wall. 

####-The  dark  filled  all  the  room,  and  the  fire  died  down,  and  the  shadows  were 
lost,  and  still  they  played  on.  And  suddenly  first  one  and  then  another  began  to 
sing  as  they  played,  deep-throated  singing  of  the  dwarves  in  the  deep  places  of 
their ancient homes; and this is like a fragment of their song, if it can be like their 
song without their music. 
 

Far over the misty mountains cold 
To dungeons deep and caverns old 
We must away ere break of day 
To seek the pale enchanted gold. 
 
The dwarves of yore made mighty spells, 
While hammers fell like ringing bells 
In places deep, where dark things sleep, 
In hollow halls beneath the fells. 
 
For ancient king and elvish lord  
There many a gloaming golden hoard  
They shaped and wrought, and light they caught 
To hide in gems on hilt of sword. 
 
On silver necklaces they strung 
The flowering stars, on crowns they hung 
The dragon-fire, in twisted wire  
They meshed the light of moon and sun. 
 
Far over the misty mountains cold 
To dungeons deep and caverns old 
We must away, ere break of day,  
To claim our long-forgotten gold. 
 
Goblets they carved there for themselves 
And harps of gold; where no man delves 
There lay they long, and many a song 
Was sung unheard by men or elves. 
 
The pines were roaring on the height, 
The winds were moaning in the night. 
The fire was red, it flaming spread; 
The trees like torches biased with light, 
 
The bells were ringing in the dale 
And men looked up with faces pale; 

####-The dragon's ire more fierce than fire  
Laid low their towers and houses frail. 
 
The mountain smoked beneath the moon; 
The dwarves, they heard the tramp of doom. 
They fled their hall to dying -fall 
Beneath his feet, beneath the moon. 
 
Far over the misty mountains grim 
To dungeons deep and caverns dim 
We must away, ere break of day,  
To win our harps and gold from him! 

 
As they sang the hobbit felt the love of beautiful things made by hands and by 
cunning and by magic moving through him, a fierce and jealous love, the desire of 
the  hearts  of  dwarves.  Then  something  Tookish  woke  up  inside  him,  and  he 
wished  to  go  and  see  the  great  mountains,  and  hear  the  pine-trees  and  the 
waterfalls, and explore the caves, and wear a sword instead of a walking-stick. He 
looked  out  of  the  window.  The  stars  were  out  in  a  dark  sky  above  the  trees.  He 
thought  of  the  jewels  of  the  dwarves  shining  in  dark  caverns.  Suddenly  in  the 
wood  beyond  The  Water  a  flame  leapt  up--probably  somebody  lighting  a  wood-
fire-and he thought of plundering dragons settling on his quiet Hill and kindling it 
all  to  flames. He  shuddered;  and  very  quickly  he was  plain Mr.  Baggins  of  Bag-
End, Under-Hill, again. 
He got up trembling. He had less than half a mind to fetch the lamp, and more 
than  half  a  mind  to  pretend  to,  and  go  and  hide  behind  the  beer  barrels  in  the 
cellar,  and  not  come  out  again  until  all  the  dwarves  had  gone  away. Suddenly  he 
found that the music and the singing had stopped, and they were all looking at him 
with eyes shining in the dark. 
"Where  are  you  going?"  said  Thorin,  in  a  tone  that  seemed  to  show  that  he 
guessed both halves of the hobbit's mind. 
"What about a little light?" said Bilbo apologetically.  
"We like the dark," said the dwarves. "Dark for dark business! There are many 
hours before dawn." 
"Of  course!"  said Bilbo,  and  sat down  in  a hurry. He missed  the  stool  and  sat 
in the fender, knocking over the poker and shovel with a crash. 
"Hush!" said Gandalf. "Let Thorin speak!" And this is bow Thorin began. 
"Gandalf,  dwarves  and Mr. Baggins! We  are  not  together  in  the  house  of  our 
friend  and  fellow  conspirator,  this  most  excellent  and  audacious  hobbit-may  the 

####-hair  on  his  toes  never  fall  out!  all  praise  to  his  wine  and  ale!-"  He  paused  for 
breath  and  for  a  polite  remark  from  the  hob-bit,  but  the  compliments were  quite 
lost on-poor Bilbo Baggins, who was wagging his mouth in protest at being called 
audacious  and worst  of  all  fellow  conspirator,  though  no  noise  came  out,  he was 
so flummoxed. So Thorin went on: 
"We  are  met  to  discuss  our  plans,  our  ways,  means,  policy  and  devices.  We 
shall soon before the break of day start on our long journey, a journey from which 
some  of  us,  or  perhaps  all  of  us  (except  our  friend  and  counsellor,  the  ingenious 
wizard Gandalf) may never return. It is a solemn moment. Our object is, I take it, 
well known  to us all. To  the estimable Mr. Baggins, and perhaps  to one or  two of 
the  younger  dwarves  (I  think  I  should  be  right  in  naming  Kili  and  Fili,  for 
instance), the exact situation at the moment may require a little brief explanation-" 
This was  Thorin's  style. He was  an  important  dwarf.  If  he  had  been  allowed, 
he  would  probably  have  gone  on  like  this  until  he  was  out  of  breath,  without 
telling  any  one  there  'anything  that  was  not  known  already.  But  he  was  rudely 
interrupted. Poor Bilbo couldn't bear  it any  longer. At may never  return he began 
to feel a shriek coming up  inside, and very soon  it burst out  like  the whistle of an 
engine coming out of a tunnel. All the dwarves sprang Bp knocking over the table. 
Gandalf struck a blue  light on  the end of his magic staff, and  in  its firework glare 
the poor little hobbit could be seen kneeling on the hearth-rug, shaking like a jelly 
that was melting. Then he fell flat on  the floor, and kept on calling out  "struck by 
lightning,  struck  by  lightning!"  over  and  over  again;  and  that  was  all  they  could 
get  out  of  him  for  a  long  time.  So  they  took  him  and  laid  him  out  of  the way  on 
the drawing-room sofa with a drink at his elbow, and they went back to their dark 
business. 
"Excitable  little  fellow,"  said  Gandalf,  as  they  sat  down  again.  "Gets  funny 
queer  fits,  but  he  is  one  of  the  best,  one  of  the  best-as  fierce  as  a  dragon  in  a 
pinch." 
If  you  have  ever  seen  a  dragon  in  a  pinch,  you will  realize  that  this was  only 
poetical  exaggeration  applied  to  any  hobbit,  even  to Old Took's  great-granduncle 
Bullroarer, who was so huge (for a hobbit)  that he could ride a horse. He charged 
the  ranks  of  the  goblins  of  Mount  Gram  in  the  Battle  of  the  Green  Fields,  and 
knocked  their  king  Gol-firnbul's  head  clean  off  with  a  wooden  club.  It  sailed  a 
hundred  yards  through  the  air  and  went  down  a  rabbit  hole,  and  in  this  way  the 
battle was won and the game of Golf invented at the same moment. 
In the meanwhile, however, Bullroarer's gentler descendant was reviving in the 
drawing-room.  After  a  while  and  a  drink  he  crept  nervously  to  the  door  of  the 

####-parlour. This is what he heard, Gloin speaking: "Humph!" (or some snort more or 
less  like  that).  "Will  he  do,  do  you  think?  It  is  all  very  well  for Gandalf  to  talk 
about  this hobbit being  fierce, but one  shriek  like  that  in a moment of excitement 
would be enough  to wake  the dragon and all his  relatives, and kill  the  lot of us.  I 
think it sounded more like fright than excitement! In fact, if it bad not been for the 
sign  on  the  door,  I  should  have  been  sure  we  had  come  to  the  wrong  house.  As 
soon  as  I  clapped  eyes  on  the  little  fellow  bobbing  and  puffing  on  the mat,  I  had 
my doubts. He looks more like a grocer-than a burglar!" 
Then Mr. Baggins  turned  the handle and went in. The Took side had won. He 
suddenly  felt  he would  go without  bed  and  breakfast  to  be  thought  fierce. As  for 
little  fellow  bobbing  on  the  mat  it  almost  made  him  really  fierce.  Many  a  time 
afterwards  the  Baggins  part  regretted  what  he  did  now,  and  he  said  to  himself: 
"Bilbo, you were a fool; you walked right in and put your foot in it." 
"Pardon me," he said, "if I have overheard words that you were saying. I don't 
pretend  to  understand  what  you  are  talking  about,  or  your  reference  to  burglars, 
but  I  think  I  am  right  in  believing"  (this  is  what  he  called  being  on  his  dignity) 
"that you  think  I am no good.  I will show you.  I have no signs on my door-it was 
painted  a  week  ago-,  and  I  am quite  sure you have  come  to  the wrong house. As 
soon as  I  saw  your  funny  faces  on  the  door-step,  I had my doubts. But  treat  it as 
the right one. Tell me what you want done, and I will try it, if I have to walk from 
here  to  the East of East and fight  the wild Were-worms in the Last Desert. I bad a 
great-great-great-granduncle once, Bullroarer Took, and —" 
"Yes, yes, but  that was  long ago," said Gloin. "I was  talking about you. And I 
assure  you  there  is  a  mark  on  this  door-the  usual  one  in  the  trade,  or used  to be. 
Burglar  wants  a  good  job,  plenty  of  Excitement  and  reasonable  Reward,  that's 
how  it  is  usually  read.  You  can  say  Expert  Treasure-hunter  instead of Burglar  if 
you like. Some of them do. It's all the same to us. Gandalf told us that there was a 
man of  the  sort  in  these parts  looking  for  a  Job  at once,  and  that he had arranged 
for a meeting here this Wednesday tea-time." 
"Of course there is a mark," said Gandalf. "I put it there myself. For very good 
reasons. You asked me to find the fourteenth man for your expedition, and I chose 
Mr. Baggins.  Just  let  any one say I chose the wrong man or the wrong house, and 
you can stop at  thirteen and have all  the bad  luck you  like, or go back  to digging 
coal." 
He  scowled  so  angrily  at Gloin  that  the  dwarf  huddled  back  in  his  chair;  and 
when  Bilbo  tried  to  open  his  mouth  to  ask  a  question,  he  turned  and  frowned  at 
him and stuck oat his bushy eyebrows, till Bilbo shut his mouth tight with a snap. 

####-"That's  right,"  said  Gandalf.  "Let's  have  no  more  argument.  I  have  chosen  Mr. 
Baggins  and  that  ought  to  !6te  enough  for  all  of  you.  If  I  say  he  is  a  Burglar,  a 
Burglar he is, or will be when the time comes. There is a lot more in him than you 
guess,  and  a  deal  more  than  he  has  any  idea  of  himself.  You  may  (possibly)  all 
live to thank me yet. Now Bilbo, my boy, fetch the lamp, and let's have little light 
on this!" 
On  the  table  in  the  light  of  a  big  lamp  with  a  red  shad  he  spread  a  piece  of 
parchment rather like a map. 
"This was made  by  Thror,  your  grandfather,  Thorin,  he  said  in  answer  to  the 
dwarves' excited questions. "It is a plan of the Mountain." 
"I  don't  see  that  this  will  help  us  much,"  said  Thorin  disappointedly  after  a 
glance. "I remember the Mountain well enough and the lands about it. And I know 
where Mirkwood is, and the Withered Heath where the great dragons bred." 
"There  is  a dragon marked  in  red on  the Mountain,  said Balin,  "but  it will be 
easy enough to find him without that, if ever we arrive there." 
"There  is one point  that you haven't noticed,"  said  the wizard,  "and  that  is  the 
secret  entrance.  You  see  that  rune  on  the  West  side,  and  the  hand  pointing  to  it 
from the other runes?** That marks a hidden passage to the Lower Halls. 
"It may  have  been  secret  once,"  said  Thorin,  "but  how  do  we  know  that  it  is 
secret  any  longer?  Old  Smaug  had  lived  there  long  enough  now  to  find  out 
anything there is to know about those caves." 
"He may-but he can't have used it for years and years. "Why?" 
"Because  it  is  too  small.  'Five  feet  high  the  door  and  three may walk  abreast' 
say  the  runes,  but  Smaug  could  not  creep  into  a  hole  that  size,  not even when he 
was  a  young  dragon,  certainly  not  after  devouring  so  many  of  the  dwarves  and 
men of Dale." 
"It  seems  a  great  big  hole  to me,"  squeaked Bilbo  (who  had  no  experience  of 
dragons  and  only  of  hobbit-holes) He was getting excited and  interested  again, so 
that he forgot to keep his mouth shut. He loved maps, and in his hall there hung a 
large  one  of  the  Country  Round with  all  his  favourite walks marked  on  it  in  red 
ink.  "How  could  such  a  large  door  be  kept  secret  from  everybody  outside,  apart 
from the dragon?" he asked. He was only a little hobbit you must remember.  
"In lots of ways," said Gandalf. "But in what way this one has been hidden we 
don't  know  without  going  to  see.  From  what  it  says  on  the  map  I  should  guess 
there  is  a  closed  door  which  has  been  made  to  look  exactly  like  the  side  of  the 

                                                             
** Look at the maps with this book, and you will see the runes there. 

 

####-Mountain. That is the usual dwarves' method- I think that is right, isn't it?" "Quite 
right," said Thorin. 
"Also," went on Gandalf, "I forgot  to mention  that with  the map went a key, a 
small and curious key. Here it is!" he said, and handed to Thorin a key with a long 
barrel and intricate wards, made of silver. "Keep it safe!" 
"Indeed  I  will,"  said  Thorin,  and  he  fastened  it  upon  a  fine  chain  that  hung 
about his neck and under his jacket. "Now things begin to look more hopeful. This 
news alters them much for-the better. So far we have had no clear idea what to do. 
We  thought  of  going  East,  as  quiet  and  careful  as  we  could,  as  far  as  the  Long 
Lake. After that the trouble would begin." 
"A long time before that, if I know anything about the loads East," interrupted 
Gandalf. 
"We might go from there up along the River Running," went on Thorin taking 
no  notice,  "and  so  to  the  ruins  of Dale-the old  town  in  the valley  there, under  the 
shadow  of  the Mountain. But we  none of us liked the idea of the Front Gate. The 
river  runs  right out of  it  through  the great  cliff  at  the South of  the Mountain,  and 
out of it comes the dragon too-far too often, unless he has changed." 
"That  would  be  no  good,"  said  the  wizard,  "not  without  a  mighty  Warrior, 
even  a  Hero.  I  tried  to  find  one;  but  warriors  are  busy  fighting  one  another  in 
distant  lands,  and  in  this  neighbourhood  heroes  are  scarce,  or  simply  lot  to  be 
found.  Swords  in  these  parts  are  mostly  blunt,  and  axes  are  used  for  trees,  and 
shields  as  cradles  or  dish-covers;  and  dragons  are  comfortably  far-off  (and 
therefore  legendary).  That  is  why  I  settled  on  burglary-especially  when  I 
remembered the existence of a Side-door. And here is our little Bilbo Baggins, the 
burglar,  the  chosen  and  selected  burglar.  So  now  let's  get  on  and  make  some 
plans." 
"Very  well  then,"  said  Thorin,  "supposing  the  burglar-expert  gives  us  some 
ideas or suggestions." He turned with mock-politeness to Bilbo. 
"First  I  should  like  to  know  a  bit  more  about  things,"  said  he,  feeling  all 
confused and a bit shaky inside, but so far still lookishly determined to go on with 
things.  "I mean  about  the  gold  and  the  dragon,  and  all  that,  and  how  it  got  there, 
and who it belongs to, and so on and further." 
"Bless  me!"  said  Thorin,  "haven't  you  got  a  map?  and  didn't  you  hear  our 
song? and haven't we been talking about all this for hours?" 
"All  the  same,  I  should  like  it  all plain  and  clear,"  said he obstinately, putting 
on  his  business  manner  (usually  reserved  for  people  who  tried  to  borrow money 
off him),  and doing his best  to  appear wise  and prudent  and professional  and  live 

####-up  to Gandalf's  recommendation. "Also  I  should  like  to know about  risks, out-of-
pocket  expenses,  time  required  and  remuneration,  and  so  forth"-by  which  he 
meant: "What am I going to get out of it? and am I going to come back alive?" 
"O  very  well,"  said  Thorin.  "Long  ago  in  my  grandfather  Thror's  time  our 
family  was  driven  out  of  the  far  North,  and  came  back  with  all  their  wealth  and 
their tools to this Mountain on the map. It had been discovered by my far ancestor, 
Thrain the Old, but now they mined and they tunnelled and they made huger halls 
and greater workshops  -and  in  addition  I  believe  they  found  a  good  deal  of  gold 
and a great many  jewels  too. Anyway they grew immensely rich and famous, and 
my  grandfather  was  King  under  the  Mountain  again  and  treated  with  great 
reverence  by  the  mortal  men,  who  lived  to  the  South,  and  were  gradually 
spreading  up  the  Running  River  as  far  as  the  valley  overshadowed  by  the 
Mountain.  They  built  the merry  town  of  Dale  there  in  those  days.  Kings  used  to 
send  for  our  smiths,  and  reward  even  the  least  skilful most  richly.  Fathers would 
beg  us  to  take  their  sons  as  apprentices,  and  pay  us  handsomely,  especially  in 
food-supplies, which we  never  bothered  to  grow  or  find  for  ourselves. Altogether 
those were good days for us, and the poorest of us had money to spend and to lend, 
and leisure to make beautiful things just for the. fun of it, not to speak of the most 
marvellous  and  magical  toys,  the  like  of  which  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  world 
now-a-days.  So  my  grandfather's  halls  became  full  of  armour  and  jewels  and 
carvings and cups, and the toy-market of Dale was the wonder of the North. 
"Undoubtedly  that  was  what  brought  the  dragon.  Dragons  steal  gold  and 
jewels, you know, from men and elves and dwarves, wherever they can find them; 
and  they  guard  their  plunder  as  long  as  they  live  (which  is  practically  forever, 
unless they are killed), and never enjoy a brass ring of it. Indeed they hardly know 
a  good  bit  of  work  from  a  bad,  though  they  usually  have  a  good  notion  of  the 
current market value; and they can't make a thing for themselves, not even mend a 
little  loose  scale of  their armour. There were  lots of dragons  in  the North  in  those 
days, and gold was probably getting scarce up there, with the dwarves flying south 
or  getting  killed,  and  all  the  general  waste  and  destruction  that  dragons  make 
going  from  bad  to  worse.  There  was  a  most  specially  greedy,  strong  and  wicked 
worm called Smaug. One day he flew up into the air and came south. The first we 
heard of  it was a noise  like a hurricane coming from  the North, and  the pine-trees 
on  the  Mountain  creaking  and  cracking  in  the  wind.  Some  of  the  dwarves  who 
happened  to  be  outside  (I  was  one  luckily  -a  fine  adventurous  lad  in  those  days, 
always wandering about, and it saved my life that day)-well, from a good way off 
we saw the dragon settle on our mountain in a spout of flame. Then he came down 

####-the slopes and when he reached the woods they all went up in fire. By that time all 
the bells were  ringing  in Dale and  the warriors were arming. The dwarves  rushed 
out  of  their  great  gate;  but  there was  the  dragon waiting  for  them. None  escaped 
that way.  The  river  rushed  up  in  steam  and  a  fog  fell  on Dale, and  in  the  fog  the 
dragon came on them and destroyed most of the warriors-the usual unhappy story, 
it was only too common in those days. Then he went back and crept in through the 
Front  Gate  and  routed  out  all  the  halls,  and  lanes,  and  tunnels,  alleys,  cellars, 
mansions  and passages. After  that  there were no dwarves  left  alive  inside,  and he 
took  all  their  wealth  for  himself.  Probably,  for  that  is  the  dragons'  way,  he  has 
piled it all up in a great heap far inside, and sleeps on it for a bed. Later he used to 
crawl  out  of  the  great  gate  and  come  by  night  to  Dale,  and  carry  away  people, 
especially maidens, to eat, until Dale was ruined, and all the people dead or gone. 
What goes on there now I don't know for certain, but I don't suppose anyone lives 
nearer to the Mountain than the far edge of the Long Lake now-a-days. 
"The  few  of  us  that  were  well  outside  sat  and  wept  in  hiding,  and  cursed 
Smaug;  and  there we were unexpectedly  joined by my  father  and my grandfather 
with singed beards. They looked very grim but they said very little. When I asked 
how  they had got away,  they  told me  to hold my  tongue, and said  that one day  in 
the proper time I should know. After that we went away, and we have had to earn 
our  livings  as  best we  could  up  and  down  the  lands,  often enough sinking as  low 
as  blacksmith-work  or  even  coalmining.  But  we  have  never  forgotten  our  stolen 
treasure. And even now, when I will allow we have a good bit laid by and are not 
so  badly  off"-here Thorin  stroked  the gold  chain  round his neck-"we still mean to 
get it back, and to bring our curses home to Smaug-if we can. 
"I  have  often  wondered  about  my  father's  and  my  grandfather's  escape.  I  see 
now  they  must  have  had  a  private  Side-door  which  only  they  knew  about.  But 
apparently  they made a map, and  I  should  like  to know how Gandalf got hold of 
it, and why it did not come down to me, the rightful heir." 
"I did not 'get hold of it,' I was given it," said the wizard. 
"Your grandfather Thror was killed, you  remember,  in  the mines of Moria by 
Azog the Goblin —" 
"Curse his name, yes," said Thorin. 
"And  Thrain  your  father  went  away  on  the  twenty-first  of  April,  a  hundred 
years ago last Thursday, and has never been seen by you since—" 
"True, true," said Thorin. 
"Well,  your  father  gave me  this  to  give  to  you;  and  if  I have  chosen my own 
time and way of handing it over, you can hardly blame me, considering the trouble 

####-I had to find you. Your father could not remember his own name when he gave me 
the  paper,  and  he  never  told  me  yours;  so  on  the  whole  I  think  I  ought  to  be 
praised and thanked. Here it is," said he handing the map to Thorin. 
"I don't understand," said Thorin, and Bilbo felt he would have liked to say the 
same. The explanation did not seem to explain. 
"Your  grandfather,"  said  the  wizard  slowly  and  grimly,  "gave  the map  to  his 
son for safety before he went  to  the mines of Moria. Your father went away  to  try 
his  luck with  the map after your grandfather was killed; and  lots of adventures of 
a  most  unpleasant  sort  he  had,  but  he  never  got  near  the  Mountain. How  he  got 
there  I  don't  know,  but  I  found  him  a  prisoner  in  the  dungeons  of  the 
Necromancer." 
"Whatever  were  you  doing  there?"  asked  Thorin  with  a  shudder,  and  all  the 
dwarves shivered. 
"Never  you  mind.  I  was  finding  things  out,  as  usual;  and  a  nasty  dangerous 
business it was. Even I, Gandalf, only just escaped. I tried to save your father, but 
it  was  too  late.  He  was  witless  and  wandering,  and  had  forgotten  almost 
everything  except  the  map  and  the  key."  "We  have  long  ago  paid  the  goblins  of 
Moria,"  said  Thorin;  "we  must  give  a  thought  to  the  Necromancer."  "Don't  be 
absurd! He is an enemy quite beyond the powers of all the dwarves put together, if 
they could all be collected again from the four corners of the world. The one thing 
your  father  wished  was  for  his  son  to  read  the map  and  use  the  key.  The  dragon 
and the Mountain are more than big enough tasks for you!" 
"Hear, hear!" said Bilbo, and accidentally said  it aloud, "Hear what?"  they all 
said  turning  suddenly  towards  him,  and  he  was  so  flustered  that  he  answered 
"Hear what I have got to say!" "What's that?" they asked. 
"Well, I should say that you ought to go East and have a look round. After all 
there  is  the Side-door, and dragons must sleep sometimes, I suppose. If you sit on 
the  doorstep  long  enough,  I daresay you will  think of  something. And well, don't 
you  know,  I  think  we  have  talked  long  enough  for  one  night,  if  you  see  what  I 
mean.  What  about  bed,  and  an  early  start,  and  all  that?  I  will  give  you  a  good 
breakfast before you go." 
"Before  we  go,  I  suppose  you  mean,"  said  Thorin.  "Aren't  you  the  burglar? 
And isn't sitting on the door-step your job, not to speak of getting inside the door? 
But  I agree about bed and breakfast.  I  like eggs with my ham, when starting on a 
journey: fried not poached, and mind you don't break 'em." 
After  all  the  others  had  ordered  their  breakfasts  without  so  much  as  a  please 
(which  annoyed  Bilbo  very much),  they  all  got  up.  The  hobbit  had  to  find  room 

####-for  them  all,  and  filled  all  his  spare-rooms  and  made  beds  on  chairs  and  sofas, 
before  he  got  them  all  stowed  and  went  to  his  own  little  bed  very  tired  and  not 
altogether  happy. One  thing  he  did make  his mind  up  about was  not  to  bother  to 
get up very early and cook everybody else's wretched breakfast. The Tookishness 
was  wearing  off,  and  he  was  not  now  quite  so  sure  that  he  was  going  on  any 
journey  in  the morning.  As  he  lay  in  bed  he  could  hear  Thorin  still  humming  to 
himself in the best bedroom next to him: 
 

Far over the misty mountains cold  
To dungeons deep and caverns old  
We must away, ere break of day,  
To find our long-forgotten gold. 

 
Bilbo went  to  sleep with  that  in  his  ears,  and  it  gave  him  very  uncomfortable 
dreams. It was long after the break of day, when he woke up. 

####-Chapter 2
<br>
Roast Mutton 
<br>
 
Up jumped Bilbo, and putting on his dressing-gown went into the dining-room. 
There he saw nobody, but all the signs of a large and hurried breakfast. There was 
a  fearful  mess  in  the  room,  and  piles  of  unwashed  crocks  in  the  kitchen.  Nearly 
every pot and pan he possessed seemed to have been used. The washing-up was so 
dismally real that Bilbo was forced to believe the party of the night before had not 
been part of his bad dreams, as he had rather hoped. Indeed he was really relieved 
after  all  to  think  that  they  had  all  gone  without  him,  and  without  bothering  to 
wake him up ("but with never a thank-you" he thought); and yet in a way he could 
not help feeling just a trifle disappointed. The feeling surprised him. 
"Don't be a fool, Bilbo Baggins!" he said  to himself, "thinking of dragons  and 
all  that  outlandish  nonsense  at  your  age!"  So  be  put  on  an  apron,  lit  fires,  boiled 
water,  and  washed  up.  Then  he  had  a  nice  little  breakfast  in  the  kitchen  before 
turning  out  the  dining-room. By  that  time  the sun was shining; and  the front door 
was  open,  letting  in  a  warm  spring  breeze.  Bilbo  began  to  whistle  loudly  and  to 
forget about the night before. In fact he was just sitting down to a nice little second 
breakfast  in  the  dining-room by  the open window, when  in walked Gandalf.  "My 
dear  fellow,"  said  he,  "whenever  are  you  going  to  come?  What  about  an  early 
start?-and here you are having breakfast, or whatever you call  it, at half past  ten! 
They left you the message, because they could not wait." 
"What message?" said poor Mr. Baggins all in a fluster.  
"Great Elephants!" said Gandalf, "you are not at all yourself this morning-you 
have never dusted the mantel- piece!" 
"What's  that  got  to  do  with  it?  I  have  had  enough  to  do  with  washing  up  for 
fourteen!" 
"If  you  had  dusted  the  mantelpiece  you  would  have  found  this  just under  the 
clock,"  said  Gandalf,  handing  Bilbo  a  note  (written,  of  course,  on  his  own  note-
paper). 
This is what he read: 
 

"Thorin and Company to Burglar Bilbo greeting! 
For  your  hospitality  our  sincerest  thanks,  and  for  your  offer  of 
professional assistance our grateful acceptance. Terms: cash on delivery, up to 
and  not  exceeding  one  fourteenth  of  total  profits  (if  any);  all  traveling 

####-expenses  guaranteed  in  any  event;  funeral  expenses  to  be  defrayed  by  us  or 
our representatives, if occasion arises and the matter is not otherwise arranged 
for. 
"Thinking  it  unnecessary  to  disturb  your  esteemed  repose,  we  have 
proceeded  in  advance  to  make  requisite  preparations,  and  shall  await  your 
respected person at the Green Dragon Inn, Bywater, at II a.m. sharp. Trusting 
that you will be punctual. 
 
"We have the honour to remain 
                                  "Yours deeply 
                                              "Thorin& Co." 

 
"That leaves you just ten minutes. You will have to run," said Gandalf. 
"But—" said Bilbo. 
"No time for it," said the wizard. 
"But—"said Bilbo again. 
"No time for that either! Off you go!" 
To  the  end  of  his  days  Bilbo  could  never  remember  how  he  found  himself 
outside,  without  a  hat,  walking-stick  or  say  money,  or  anything  that  he  usually 
took  when  he  went  out;  leaving  his  second  breakfast  half-finished  and  quite 
unwashed-up,  pushing  his  keys  into  Gandalf's  hands,  and  running  as  fast  as  his 
furry  feet  could  carry  him  down  the  lane,  past  the  great Mill,  across  The Water, 
and then on for a whole mile or more. Very puffed he was, when he got to Bywater 
just  on  the  stroke  of  eleven,  and  found  he  had  come  without  a  pocket-
handkerchief! 
"Bravo!" said Balin who was standing at the inn door looking out for him. 
Just  then  all  the  others  came  round  the  corner  of  the  road  from  the  village. 
They were on ponies, and each pony was  slung about with all kinds of baggages, 
packages, parcels, and paraphernalia. There was a very small pony, apparently for 
Bilbo. 
"Up you two get, and off we go!" said Thorin. 
"I'm  awfully  sorry,"  said Bilbo,  "but  I  have  come without my  hat,  and  I  have 
left my pocket-handkerchief behind, and I haven't got any money. I didn't get your 
note until after 10.45 to be precise." 
"Don't  be  precise,"  said  Dwalin,  "and  don't  worry!  You will  have  to manage 
without pocket-handkerchiefs, and a good many other things, before you get to the 
journey's end. As for a hat, I have got a spare hood and cloak in my luggage." 

####-That's  how  they  all  came  to  start,  jogging  off  from  the  inn  one  fine  morning 
just  before  May,  on  laden  ponies;  and  Bilbo  was  wearing  a  dark-green  hood  (a 
little  weather-stained)  and  a  dark-green cloak borrowed  from Dwalin. They were 
too large for him, and he looked rather comic. What his father Bungo would have 
thought of him, I daren't think. His only comfort was he couldn't be mistaken for a 
dwarf, as he had no beard. 
They had not been riding very long when up came Gandalf very splendid on a 
white  horse.  He  had  brought  a  lot  of  pocket-handkerchiefs,  and Bilbo's  pipe  and 
tobacco.  So  after  that  the  party  went  along  very  merrily,  and  they  told  stories  or 
sang  songs  as  they  rode  forward  all  day,  except  of  course  when  they  stopped  for 
meals. These didn't  come quite  as often  as Bilbo would have  liked  them, but  still 
he began to feel that adventures were not so bad after all. At  first they had passed 
through  hobbit-lands,  a  wild  respectable  country  inhabited  by  decent  folk,  with 
good  roads,  an  inn  or  two,  and  now  and  then  a  dwarf  or  a  farmer  ambling  by  on 
business.  Then  they  came  to  lands where people  spoke  strangely,  and  sang  songs 
Bilbo  had  never  heard  before.  Now  they  had  gone  on  far  into  the  Lone-lands, 
where  there were  no  people  left,  no  inns,  and  the  roads  grew  steadily worse. Not 
far  ahead were  dreary  hills,  rising  higher  and  higher, dark with trees. On some of 
them  were  old  castles  with  an  evil  look,  as  if  they  had  been  built  by  wicked 
people.  Everything  seemed  gloomy,  for  the  weather  that  day  had  taken  a  nasty 
turn. Mostly  it  had  been  as  good  as May  can  be,  even  in  merry  tales, but now  it 
was  cold  and  wet.  In  the  Lone-lands  they  had  to  camp  when  they  could,  but  at 
least  it  had  been  dry.  "To  think  it  will  soon  be  June,"  grumbled  Bilbo  as  he 
splashed  along  behind  the  others  in  a  very  muddy  track.  It  was  after  tea-time;  it 
was  pouring with  rain, and had been all day; his hood was dripping  into his eyes, 
his cloak was full of water;  the pony was  tired and stumbled on stones;  the others 
were  too  grumpy  to  talk.  "And  I'm  sure  the  rain  has  got  into  the  dry  clothes  and 
into  the  food-bags," thought Bilbo. "Bother burgling and everything to do with it! 
I wish  I was at home  in my nice hole by  the  fire, with  the kettle  just beginning  to 
sing!" It was not the last time that he wished that! 
Still  the  dwarves  jogged  on,  never  turning  round  or  taking  any  notice  of  the 
hobbit.  Somewhere  behind  the  grey  clouds  the  sun  must  have  gone  down,  for  it 
began  to  get  dark.  Wind  got  up,  and  the  willows  along  the  river-bank  bent  and 
sighed. I don't know what river it was, a rushing red one, swollen with the rains of 
the  last  few  days,  that  came  down  from  the  hills  and mountains  in  front  of  them. 
Soon it was nearly dark. The winds broke up the grey clouds, and a waning moon 
appeared  above  the  hills  between  the  flying  rags.  Then  they  stopped,  and  Thorin 

####-muttered  something  about  supper,  "and  where  shall  we  get  a  dry  patch  to  sleep 
on?" Not until  then did  they notice  that Gandalf was missing. So far he had come 
all  the way with  them, never  saying  if he was  in  the adventure or merely keeping 
them  company  for  a  while.  He  had  eaten  most,  talked  most,  and  laughed  most. 
But now he simply was not there at all! 
"Just  when  a  wizard  would  have  been  most  useful,  too,"  groaned  Dori  and 
Nori  (who  shared  the hobbit's views about  regular meals, plenty and often). They 
decided in  the end that they would have to camp where they were. So far they had 
not  camped  before  on  this  journey,  and  though  they  knew  that  they  soon  would 
have to camp regularly, when they were among the Misty Mountains and far from 
the  lands  of  respectable  people,  it  seemed  a  bad  wet  evening  to  begin,  on.  They 
moved to a clump of trees, and though it was drier under them, the wind shook the 
rain  off  the  leaves,  and  the  drip,  drip,  was  most  annoying.  Also  the  mischief 
seemed to have got into the fire. Dwarves can make a fire almost anywhere out of 
almost anything, wind or no wind; but they could not do it that night, not even Oin 
and Gloin, who were specially good at it. 
Then one of  the ponies  took  fright at nothing and bolted. He got  into  the  river 
before they could catch him; and before they could get him out again, Fili and Kili 
were  nearly  drowned,  and  all  the  baggage  that  he  carried  was  washed  away  off 
him. Of course it was mostly food, and there was mighty little left for supper, and 
less  for  breakfast.  There  they  all  sat  glum  and wet  and muttering, while Oin  and 
Gloin  went  on  trying  to  light  the  fire,  and  quarrelling  about  it.  Bilbo  was  sadly 
reflecting  that  adventures  are  not  all  pony-rides  in  May-sunshine,  when  Balin, 
who was  always  their  look-out man, said:  "There's a light over there!" There was 
a hill  some way off with  trees on  it, pretty  thick  in parts. Out of  the dark mass of 
the  trees  they  could  now  see  a  light  shining,  a  reddish  comfortable-looking light, 
as  it  might  be  a  fire  or  torches  twinkling.  When  they  had  looked  at  it  for  some 
while,  they  fell  to  arguing.  Some  said  "no"  and  some  said  "yes."  Some  said  they 
could but go and see, and anything was better than little supper, less breakfast, and 
wet  clothes  all  the  night. Others  said:  "These  parts  are  none  too well known, and 
are  too  near  the mountains. Travellers  seldom  come  this way  now. The  old maps 
are  no  use:  things  have  changed  for  the  worse  and  the  road  is  unguarded.    They 
have seldom even heard of the king round here, and the less inquisitive you are as 
you  go  along,  the  less  trouble  you  are  likely  to  find."  Some  said:  "After  all  there 
are  fourteen  of  us."  Others  said:  "Where  has  Gandalf  got  to?"  This  remark  was 
repeated  by  everybody.  Then  the  rain  began  to  pour  down  worse  than  ever,  and 
Oin and Gloin began to fight. That settled it. "After all we have got a burglar with 

####-us,"  they said; and so  they made off,  leading  their ponies (with all due and proper 
caution)  in  the  direction  of  the  light.  They  came  to  the  hill  and  were  soon  in  the 
wood.  Up  the  hill  they  went;  but  there  was  no  proper  path  to  be  seen,  such  as 
might  lead  to  a  house  or  a  farm;  and  do  what  they  could  they  made  a  deal  of 
rustling  and  crackling  and  creaking  (and  a good deal of grumbling  and drafting), 
as they went through the trees in the pitch dark. 
Suddenly  the  red  light  shone  out  very  bright  through  the  tree-trunks  not  far 
ahead.  "Now  it  is  the  burglar's  turn,"  they  said, meaning Bilbo.  "You must  go  on 
and  find  out  all  about  that  light,  and what  it  is  for,  and  if  all  is  perfectly  safe and 
canny," said Thorin to the hobbit. "Now scuttle off, and come back quick, if all is 
well.  If  not,  come  back  if  you  can!  It  you  can't,  hoot  twice  like  a  barn-owl and 
once like a screech-owl, and we will do what we can." 
Off Bilbo had  to go, before he  could explain that he could not hoot even once 
like  any  kind  of  owl  any  more  than  fly  like  a  bat.  But  at  any  rate  hobbits  can 
move quietly  in woods,  absolutely quietly. They  take  a pride  in  it,  and Bilbo had 
sniffed  more  than  once  at  what  he  called  "all  this dwarvish  racket," as  they went 
along,  though  I  don't  sup-pose  you  or  I  would  notice  anything  at  all  on  a  windy 
night,  not  if  the  whole  cavalcade  had  passed  two  feet  off.  As  for  Bilbo  walking 
primly  towards  the  red  light,  I  don't  suppose  even  a  weasel  would  have  stirred  a 
whisker  at  it.  So,  naturally,  he  got  right  up  to  the  fire-for  fire  it  was  without 
disturbing anyone. And this is what he saw. Three very large persons sitting round 
a  very  large  fire  of  beech-logs. They were  toasting mutton  on  long  spits of wood, 
and  licking  the  gravy  off  their  fingers.  There  was  a  fine  toothsome  smell.  Also 
there was a barrel of good drink at hand, and  they were drinking out of  jugs. But 
they were  trolls. Obviously  trolls.  Even Bilbo,  in  spite  of  his  sheltered  life,  could 
see  that:  from  the great heavy  faces of  them, and  their size, and  the shape of  their 
legs, not to mention their language, which was not drawing-room fashion at all, at 
all. 
"Mutton yesterday, mutton today, and blimey, if it don't look like mutton again 
tomorrer," said one of the trolls. 
"Never  a  blinking  bit  of  manflesh  have  we  had  for  long  enough,"  said  a 
second.  "What  the  'ell William was  a-thinkin' of to bring us into these parts at all, 
beats me  - and  the drink  runnin'  short, what's more," he  said  jogging the elbow of 
William, who was taking a pull at his jug. 
William  choked.  "Shut  yer  mouth!"  he  said  as  soon  as  he  could.  "Yer  can't 
expect  folk  to stop here  for ever  just  to be et by you and Bert. You've et a village 
and a half between yer, since we come down from the mountains. How much more 

####-d'yer want? And time's been up our way, when yer'd have said 'thank yer Bill' for a 
nice bit o'  fat valley mutton  like what  this  is." He  took a big bite off a  sheep's  leg 
he was toasting, and wiped his lips on his sleeve. 
Yes, I am afraid trolls do behave like that, even those with only one head each. 
After  hearing  all  this  Bilbo  ought  to  have  done  something  at  once.  Either  he 
should  have  gone  back  quietly  and  warned  his  friends  that  there  were  three  fair-
sized  trolls  at  hand  in  a  nasty  mood,  quite  likely  to  try  toasted  dwarf,  or  even 
pony,  for  a  change;  or  else  he  should  have  done  a  bit  of  good  quick  burgling.  A 
really  first-class  and  legendary  burglar would  at  this  point  have  picked  the  trolls' 
pockets-it  is  nearly  always  worthwhile  if  you  can  manage  it-,  pinched  the  very 
mutton off the spite, purloined the beer, and walked off without their noticing him. 
Others more practical but with less professional pride would perhaps have stuck a 
dagger  into  each  of  them  before  they observed  it. Then  the night could have been 
spent cheerily.  
Bilbo knew  it. He had  read of a good many  things he had never seen or done. 
He  was  very  much  alarmed,  as  well  as  disgusted;  he  wished  himself  a  hundred 
miles away, and yet-and yet somehow he could not go straight back to Thorin and 
Company empty-handed. So he stood and hesitated in the shadows. Of the various 
burglarious  proceedings  he  had  heard  of  picking  the  trolls'  pockets  seemed  the 
least difficult, so at last he crept behind a tree just behind William. 
Bert and Tom went off  to  the barrel. William was having another drink. Then 
Bilbo  plucked  up  courage  and  put  his  little  hand  in William's  enormous  pocket. 
There was a purse in it, as big as a bag to Bilbo. "Ha!" thought he warming to his 
new work as he lifted it carefully out, "this is a beginning!" 
It was! Trolls' purses are the mischief, and this was no exception. " 'Ere, 'oo are 
you?"  it  squeaked,  as  it  left  the  pocket;  and  William  turned  round  at  once  and 
grabbed Bilbo by the neck, before he could duck behind the tree. 
"Blimey, Bert, look what I've copped!" said William. 
"What is it?" said the others coming up. 
"Lumme, if I knows! What are yer?" 
"Bilbo  Baggins,  a  bur—  a  hobbit,"  said  poor  Bilbo,  shaking  all  over,  and 
wondering how to make owl-noises before they throttled him. 
"A  burrahobbit?"  said  they  a  bit  startled.  Trolls  are  slow  in  the  uptake,  and 
mighty suspicious about anything new to them. 
"What's a burrahobbit got to do with my pocket, anyways?" said William. 
"And can yer cook 'em?" said Tom. 
"Yer can try," said Bert, picking up a skewer.  

####-"He wouldn't make  above  a mouthful,"  said William, who  had  already  had  a 
fine supper, "not when he was skinned and boned." 
"P'raps  there  are more  like  him  round  about,  and we might make  a  pie,"  said 
Bert.  "Here  you,  are  there  any  more  of  your  sort  a-sneakin'  in  these  here woods, 
yer  nassty  little  rabbit,"  said  he  looking  at  the  hobbit's  furry  feet;  and  he  picked 
him up by the toes and shook him. 
"Yes,  lots,"  said  Bilbo,  before  he  remembered  not  to  give  his  friends  away. 
"No, none at all, not one," he said immediately afterwards. 
"What  d'yer  mean?"  said  Bert,  holding  him  right  away  up,  by  the  hair  this 
time. 
"What I say," said Bilbo gasping. "And please don't cook me, kind sirs! I am a 
good  cook myself,  and  cook  bet-ter  than  I cook,  if you  see what  I mean.  I'll cook 
beautifully for you, a perfectly beautiful breakfast for you, if only you won't have 
me for supper." 
"Poor  little blighter,"  said William. He had  already had  as much  supper  as he 
could hold; also he had had lots of beer. "Poor little blighter! Let him go!" 
"Not  till  he  says  what  he  means  by  lots  and  none  at  all,"  said  Bert.  "I  don't 
want to have me throat cut in me sleep. Hold his toes in the fire, till he talks!" 
"I won't have it," said William. "I caught him anyway." 
"You're a fat fool, William," said Bert, "as I've said afore this evening." 
"And you're a lout!" 
"And  I won't  take  that  from you. Bill Huggins,"  says Bert, and puts his  fist  in 
William's eye. 
Then  there  was  a  gorgeous  row.  Bilbo  had  just  enough  wits  left,  when  Bert 
dropped  him  on  the  ground,  to  scramble  out  of  the way  of  their  feet,  before  they 
were  fighting  like  dogs,  and  calling  one  another  all  sorts  of  perfectly  true  and 
applicable  names  in  very  loud  voices.  Soon  they  were  locked  in  one  another's 
arms,  and  rolling  nearly  into  the  fire  kicking  and  thumping, while Tom whacked 
at  then  both  with  a  branch  to  bring  them  to  their  senses-and  that  of  course  only 
made  them  madder  than  ever.  That  would  have  been  the  time  for  Bilbo  to  have 
left. But his poor  little  feet had been very  squashed  in Bert's big paw,  and he had 
no  breath  in  his  body,  and  his  head was  going  round;  so  there  he  lay  for  a while 
panting, just outside the circle of firelight. 
Right  in  the middle of  the  fight up  came Balin. The dwarves had heard noises 
from  a  distance,  and  after  wait-ing  for  some  time  for  Bilbo  to  come  back,  or  to 
hoot  like  an  owl,  they  started  off  one  by  one  to  creep  towards  the  light  as  quietly 
as  they  could.  No  sooner  did  Tom  see  Balin  come  into  the  light  than he gave an 

####-awful  howl.  Trolls  simply  detest  the  very  sight  of  dwarves  (uncooked).  Bert  and 
Bill  stopped  fighting  immediately,  and  "a  sack,  Tom,  quick!"  they  said,  before 
Balin,  who  was  wondering  where  in  all  this  commotion  Bilbo  was,  knew  what 
was happening, a sack was over his head, and he was down. 
"There's more  to come yet," said Tom, "or I'm mighty mistook. Lots and none 
at  all,  it  is,"  said  he.  "No  burra-  hobbits,  but  lots  of  these  here  dwarves.  That's 
about the shape of it!" 
"I reckon you 're right," said Bert, "and we'd best get out of the light." 
And  so  they  did.  With  sacks  in  their  hands,  that  they  used  for  carrying  off 
mutton and other plunder, they waited in the shadows. As each dwarf came up and 
looked  at  the  fire,  and  the  spilled  jugs,  and  the  gnawed mutton,  in  surprise,  pop! 
went  a  nasty  smelly  sack  over  his  head,  and  he  was  down.  Soon  Dwalin  lay  by 
Balin, and Fili and Kili together, and Dori and Nori and Ori all in a heap, and Oin 
and Gloin and Bifur and Bofur and Bombur piled uncomfortably near the fire. 
"That'll teach 'em," said Tom; for Bifur and Bombur had given a lot of trouble, 
and fought like mad, as dwarves will when cornered. 
Thorin  came  last-and  he  was  not  caught  unawares.  He  came  expecting 
mischief,  and  didn't  need  to  see  his  friends'  legs  sticking  out  of  sacks  to  tell  him 
that  things were  not  all well. He  stood  outside  in  the  shadows  some way  off,  and 
said: "What's all this trouble? Who has been knocking my people about?" 
"It's  trolls!"  said  Bilbo  from  behind  a  tree.  They  had  forgotten  all  about him. 
"They're hiding in the bushes with sacks," said he. 
"O!  are  they?"  said  Thorin,  and  he  jumped  forward  to  the  fire,  before  they 
could  leap on him. He caught up a big branch all on fire at one end; and Bert got 
that  end  in  his  eye before he could step aside. That put him out of  the battle  for a 
bit.  Bilbo  did  his  best.  He  caught  hold  of  Tom's  leg-as  well  as  he  could,  it  was 
thick  as  a  young  tree-trunk  -but  he  was  sent  spinning  up  into  the  top  of  some 
bushes, when Tom kicked the sparks up in Thorin's face. 
Tom got the branch in his teeth for that, and lost one of the front ones. It made 
him  howl,  I  can  tell  you.  But  just  at  that  moment  William  came  up  behind  and 
popped  a  sack  right  over  Thorin's  head  and  down  to  his  toes.  And  so  the  fight 
ended. A  nice  pickle  they were  all  in  now:  all  neatly  tied  up  in  sacks, with  three 
angry trolls (and two with burns and bashes to remember) sitting by them, arguing 
whether  they  should  roast  them  slowly,  or mince  them  fine  and  boil  them,  or  just 
sit on them one by one and squash them into jelly: and Bilbo up in a bush, with his 
clothes and his skin torn, not daring to move for fear they should hear him. 
 

####-It was  just  then  that Gandalf  came  back. But  no  one  saw  him. The  trolls  had 
just  decided  to  roast  the dwarves now and eat  them  later-that was Bert's idea, and 
after a lot of argument they had all agreed to it. 
"No  good  roasting  'em  now,  it’d  take  all  night,"  said  a  voice.  Bert  thought  it 
was William's. 
"Don't  start  the  argument  all  over-again.  Bill,"  he  said,  "or  it  will  take  all 
night." 
"Who's a-arguing?" said William, who thought it was. Bert that had spoken. 
"You are," said Bert. 
"You're  a  liar,"  said William;  and  so  the  argument  beg  all  over  again.  In  the 
end  they  decided  to  mince  them  fine  and  boil  them. So  they got  a black pot,  and 
they took out their knives. 
"No  good  boiling  'em! We  ain't  got  no  water,  and  it's  a  long  way  to  the  well 
and all," said a voice. Bert and William thought it was Tom's. 
"Shut  up!"  said  they,  "or  we'll  never  have  done.  And  yer  can  fetch  the water 
yerself, if yer say any more." 
"Shut  up  yerself!"  said  Tom,  who  thought  it  was  William's  voice.  "Who's 
arguing but you. I'd like to know." 
"You're a booby," said William. 
"Booby yerself!" said Tom. 
And  so  the  argument  began  all  over again, and went on hotter than ever, until 
at last they decided to sit on the sacks one by one and squash them, and boil them 
next time. 
"Who shall we sit on first?" said the voice. 
"Better sit on  the  last fellow first," said Bert, whose eye had been damaged by 
Thorin. He thought Tom was talking. 
"Don't talk to yerself!" said Tom. "But if you wants to sit on the last one, sit on 
him. Which is he?" 
"The one with the yellow stockings," said Bert. 
"Nonsense, the one with the grey stockings," said a voice like William's. 
"I made sure it was yellow," said Bert. 
"Yellow it was," said William. 
"Then what did yer say it was grey for?" said Bert. 
"I never did. Tom said it." 
"That I never did!" said Tom. "It was you." 
"Two to one, so shut yer mouth!" said Bert. 
"Who are you a-talkin' to?" said William. 

####-"Now  stop  it!"  said  Tom  and  Bert  together.  "The  night's  gettin'  on,  and  dawn 
comes early. Let's get on with it!" 
"Dawn  take  you  all,  and  be  stone  to  you!"  said  a  voice  that  sounded  like 
William's. But  it wasn't. For  just  at  that moment  the  light  came over  the hill,  and 
there  was  a  mighty  twitter  in  the  branches.  William  never  spoke  for  he  stood 
turned  to  stone  as  he  stooped;  and  Bert  and  Tom  were  stuck  like  rocks  as  they 
looked at him. And there they stand to this day,  all alone, unless the birds perch on 
them; for trolls, as you probably know, must be underground before dawn, or they 
go  back  to  the  stuff  of  the  mountains  they  are  made  of,  and  never  move  again. 
That is what had happened to Bert and Tom and William. 
"Excellent!"  said Gandalf, as he  stepped  from behind a  tree, and helped Bilbo 
to  climb  down  out  of  a  thorn-bush.  Then  Bilbo  understood.  It  was  the  wizard's 
voice  that  had  kept  the  trolls  bickering  and  quarrelling,  until  the  light  came  and 
made an end of them. 
The  next  thing  was  to  untie  the  sacks  and  let  out  the  dwarves.  They  were 
nearly  suffocated,  and  very  annoyed:  they  had  not  at  all  enjoyed  lying  there 
listening  to  the  trolls  making  plans  for  roasting  them  and  squashing  them  and 
mincing  them.  They  had  to  hear  Bilbo's  account  of  what  had  happened  to  him 
twice over, before they were satisfied.  
"Silly time to go practising pinching and pocket-picking," said Bombur, "when 
what we wanted was fire and food!" 
"And  that's  just  what  you  wouldn't  have  got  of  those  fellows  without  a 
struggle, in any case," said Gandalf. 
"Anyhow you are wasting time now. Don't you realize that the trolls must have 
a cave or a hole dug  somewhere near  to hide  from  the  sun  in? We must  look  into 
it!" 
They  searched  about,  and  soon  found  the  marks  of  trolls'  stony  boots  going 
away  through  the  trees.  They  followed  the  tracks  up  the  hill,  until  hidden  by 
bushes  they  came  on  a  big  door  of  stone  leading  to  a  cave.  But  they  could  not 
open it, not though they all pushed while Gandalf tried various incantations. 
"Would  this  be  any  good?"  asked  Bilbo,  when  they  were  getting  tired  and 
angry.  "I  found  it  on  the  ground  where  the  trolls  had  their  fight."  He  held  out  a 
largish key, though no doubt William had thought it very small and secret. It must 
have fallen out of his pocket, very luckily, before he was turned to stone. 
"Why on earth didn't you mention it before?" they cried. 
Gandalf  grabbed  it  and  fitted  it  into  the  key-hole. Then  the  stone door  swung 
back  with  one  big  push,  and  they  all  went  inside.  There were  bones  on  the  floor 

####-and  a  nasty  smell  was  in  the  air;  but  there  was  a  good  deal  of  food  jumbled 
carelessly  on  shelves  and  on  the  ground,  among  an  untidy  litter  of  plunder,  of  all 
sorts from brass buttons to pots full of gold coins standing in a corner. There were 
lots  of  clothes,  too,  hanging  on  the  walls-too  small  for  trolls,  I  am  afraid  they 
belonged  to  victims-and  among  them  were  several  swords  of  various  makes, 
shapes,  and  sizes.  Two  caught  their  eyes  particularly,  because  of  their  beautiful 
scabbards  and  jewelled  hilts.  Gandalf  and  Thorin  each  took  one  of  these;  and 
Bilbo took a knife in a leather sheath. It would have made only a tiny pocket-knife 
for a troll, but it was as good as a short sword for the hobbit. 
"These look like good blades," said the wizard, half drawing them and looking 
at them curiously. "They were not made by any troll, nor by any smith among men 
in  these  parts  and  days;  but when we  can  read  the  runes  on  them, we  shall  know 
more about them." 
"Let's  get  out  of  this  horrible  smell!"  said  Fili  So  they  carried  out  the  pots  of 
coins, and such food as was un-touched and looked fit to eat, also one barrel of ale 
which  was  still  full.  By  that  time  they  felt  like  breakfast,  and  being  very  hungry 
they  did  not  turn  their  noses  up  at what  they had got  from  the  trolls'  larder. Their 
own  provisions were  very  scanty. Now  they  had  bread  and  cheese,  and  plenty  of 
ale,  and  bacon  to  toast  in  the  embers  of  the  fire.  After  that  they  slept,  for  their 
night had been disturbed; (and they did nothing more till the afternoon. Then they 
I brought up their ponies, and carried away the pots of gold, and buried them very 
secretly not far from the track by the river, putting a great many spells over them, 
just  in  case  they  ever  had  the-chance  to  come  back  and  recover  them. When  that 
was  done,  they  all  mounted  once  more,  and  jogged  along  again  on  the  path 
towards the East. 
"Where  did  you  go  to,  if  I  may  ask?"  said  Thorin  to  Gandalf  as  they  rode 
along. 
"To look ahead," said he. 
"And what brought you back in the nick of time?" 
"Looking behind," said he. 
"Exactly!" said Thorin; "but could you be more plain?" 
"I  went  on  to  spy  out  our  road.  It  will  soon  become  dangerous  and  difficult. 
Also  I  was  anxious  about  replenishing  our  small  stock  of  provisions.  I  had  not 
gone very far, however, when I met a couple of friends of mine from Rivendell." 
"Where's that?" asked Bilbo, 
"Don't interrupt!" said Gandalf. "You will get there in a few days now, if we're 
lucky, and find out all about it As I was saying I met two of Elrond's people. They 

####-were  hurrying  along  for  fear  of  the  trolls.  It  was  they  who  told  me  that  three  of 
them had come down from the mountains and settled in the woods not far from the 
road;  they  had  frightened  everyone  away  from  the  district,  and  they  waylaid 
strangers. 
"I  immediately had  a  feeling  that  I was wanted back. Looking behind  I  saw  a 
fire  in  the  distance  and  made  for  it.  So  now  you  know.  Please  be  more  careful, 
next time, or we shall never get anywhere!" 
"Thank you!" said Thorin. 

####-<h4>Chapter 3 </h4> <br>
<br>
A Short Rest 
<br>
 
They  did  not  sing  or  tell  stories  that  day,  even  though  the weather  improved; 
nor the next day, nor the day after. They had begun to feel that danger was not far 
away on either side. They camped under the stars, and their horses had more to eat 
than  they had; for there was plenty of grass, but there was not much in their bags, 
even with what  they had got  from  the  trolls. One morning  they  forded a  river at a 
wide  shallow  place  full  of  the  noise  of  stones  and  foam.  The  far  bank  was  steep 
and slippery. When they got to the top of it, leading their ponies, they saw that the 
great mountains had marched down very near to them. Already they I seemed only 
a day's easy journey from the feet of the nearest. Dark and drear it looked, though 
there were patches of sunlight on its brown sides, and behind its shoulders the tips 
of snow-peaks gleamed. 
"Is  that  The  Mountain?"  asked  Bilbo  in  a  solemn  voice,  looking  at  it  with 
round eyes. He had never seen a thing that looked so big before. 
"Of  course  not!"  said  Balin.  "That  is  only  the  beginning  of  the  Misty 
Mountains,  and we  have  to  get  through,  or  over,  or  under  those  somehow,  before 
we  can  come  into  Wilderland  beyond.  And  it  is  a  deal  of  a  way  even  from  the 
other  side  of  them  to  the  Lonely Mountain  in  the  East Where  Smaug  lies on our 
treasure." 
"O!"  said  Bilbo,  and  just  at  that  moment  he  felt  more  fared  than  he  ever 
remembered  feeling  before. He was  thinking  once  again  of  his  comfortable  chair 
before  the  fire  in  his  favourite  sitting-room  in  his  hobbit-hole,  and  of  the  kettle 
singing. Not for the last time! 
Now  Gandalf  led  the  way.  "We  must  not  miss  the  road,  or  we  shall  be  done 
for,"  he  said.  "We  need  food,  for  one  thing,  and  rest  in  reasonable  safety-also it is 
very necessary  to  tackle  the Misty Mountains by  the proper path, or else you will 
get  lost  in  them,  and  have  to  come  back  and  start  at  the  beginning  again  (if  you 
ever get back at all)." 
They asked him where he was making for, and he answered: "You are come to 
the very edge of the Wild, as some of you may know. Hidden somewhere ahead of 
us  is  the  fair valley of Rivendell where Elrond  lives  in  the Last Homely House.  I 
sent a message by my friends, and we are expected." 
That  sounded  nice  and  comforting,  but  they  had  not  got  there  yet,  and  it was 
not  so  easy  as  it  sounds  to  find  the  Last  Homely  House  west  of  the  Mountains. 

####-There  seemed  to  be  no  trees  and  no  valleys  and  no  hills  to  break  the  ground  in 
front  of  them,  only  one  vast  slope  going  slowly  up  and  up  to meet  the  feet  of  the 
nearest  mountain,  a  wide  land  the  colour  of  heather  and  crumbling  rock,  with 
patches and slashes of grass-green and moss-green showing where water might be. 
Morning  passed,  afternoon  came;  but  in  all  the  silent waste  there was  no  sign 
of  any  dwelling.  They  were  growing  anxious,  for  they  now  saw  that  the  house 
might be hidden almost anywhere between them and the mountains. They came on 
unexpected valleys, narrow with deep sides, that opened suddenly at their feet, and 
they  looked  down  surprised  to  see  trees  below  them  and  running  water  at  the 
bottom.  There  were  gullies  that  they  could  almost  leap  over;  but  very  deep  with 
waterfalls in them. There were dark ravines that one could neither jump nor climb 
into. There were bogs, some of them green pleasant places to look at with flowers 
growing  bright  and  tall;  but  a  pony  that  walked  there  with  a  pack  on  its  back 
would never have come out again. 
It was indeed a much wider land from the ford to the mountains than ever you 
would have guessed. Bilbo was astonished. The only path was marked with white 
stones  some  of  which  were  small,  and  others  were  half  covered  with  moss  or 
heather.  Altogether  it  was  a  very  slow  business  following  the  track,  even  guided 
by Gandalf, who seemed to know his way about pretty well. 
His head and beard wagged  this way and  that as he looked for the stones, and 
they  followed  his  head,  but  they  seemed  no  nearer  to  the  end  of  the  search when 
the day began to fail. Tea-time had long gone by, and it seemed supper-time would 
soon  do  the  same.  There  were  moths  fluttering  about,  and  the  light  became  very 
dim,  for  the  moon  had  not  risen.  Bilbo's  pony  began  to  stumble  over  roots  and 
stones.  They  came  to  the  edge  of  a  steep  fall  in  the  ground  so  suddenly  that 
Gandalf s horse nearly slipped down the slope. 
"Here  it  is  at  last!"  he  called,  and  the  others  gathered  round  him  and  looked 
over the edge. They saw a valley far below. They could hear the voice of hurrying 
water in rocky bed at the bottom; the scent of trees was in the air; and there was a 
light  on  the  valley-side across the water. Bilbo never forgot the way they slithered 
and  slipped  in  the  dusk  down  the  steep  zig-zag  path  into  the  secret  valley  of 
Rivendell. The air grew warmer as  they got  lower, and  the  smell of  the pine-trees 
made  him  drowsy,  so  that  every  now  and  again  he  nodded  and  nearly  fell off, or 
bumped  his  nose  on  the  pony's  neck.  Their  spirits  rose  as  they  went  down  and 
down. The  trees changed  to beech and oak, and hire was a comfortable  feeling  in 
the  twilight. The  last green had  almost  faded out of  the grass, when  they  came  at 
length to an open glade not far above the banks of the stream. 

####-"Hrnmm!  it  smells  like  elves!"  thought  Bilbo,  and  he  looked  up  at  the  stars. 
They  were  burning  bright  and  blue.  Just  then  there  came  a  burst  of  song  like 
laughter in the trees: 
 

O! What are you doing, 
And where are you going? 
Your ponies need shoeing! 
The river is flowing! 
O! tra-la-la-lally 
here down in the valley! 
 
O! What are you seeking, 
And where are you making? 
The faggots are reeking, 
The bannocks are baking! 
O! tril-lil-lil-lolly 
the valley is jolly,  
ha! ha! 
 
O! Where are you going 
With beards all a-wagging? 
No knowing, no knowing 
What brings Mister Baggins, 
And Balin and Dwalin  
down into the valley 
in June 
ha! ha! 
 
O! Will you be staying, 
Or will you be flying? 
Your ponies are straying! 
The daylight is dying! 
To fly would be folly,  
To stay would be jolly 
And listen and hark 
Till the end of the dark 
to our tune 
ha! ha.'  

 

####-So  they  laughed  and  sang  in  the  trees;  and  pretty  fair  nonsense  I  daresay  you 
think  it. Not  that  they would  care  they would only  laugh  all  the more  if you  told 
them  so.  They  were  elves  of  course.  Soon  Bilbo  caught  glimpses  of  them  as  the 
darkness deepened. He loved elves, though he seldom met them; but he was a little 
frightened of  them  too. Dwarves don't get on well with  them. Even decent enough 
dwarves  like  Thorin  and  his  friends  think  them  foolish  (which  is  a  very  foolish 
thing to think), or get annoyed with them. For some elves tease them and laugh at 
them, and most of all at their beards. 
"Well,  well!"  said  a  voice.  "Just  look!  Bilbo  the  hobbit  on  a  pony,  my  dear! 
Isn't it delicious!" 
"Most astonishing wonderful!" 
Then  off  they  went  into  another  song  as  ridiculous  as  the  one  I  have  written 
down  in  full. At  last one, a  tall young  fellow, came out  from  the  trees and bowed 
to Gandalf and to Thorin. 
"Welcome to the valley!" he said. 
"Thank you!"  said Thorin a bit gruffly; but Gandalf was already off his horse 
and among the elves, talking merrily with them. 
"You  are  a  little  out  of  your way,"  said  the  elf:  "that  is,  if  you  are making for 
the only path across the water and to the house beyond. We will set you right, but 
you had best get on foot, until you are over the bridge. Are you going to stay a bit 
and  sing  with  us,  or  will  you  go  straight  on?  Supper  is  preparing  over  there," he 
said. "I can smell the Wood-fires for the cooking." 
Tired as he was, Bilbo would have liked to stay awhile. Elvish singing is not a 
thing  to  miss,  in  June  under  the  stars,  not  if  you  care  for  such  things.  Also  he 
would  have  liked  to  have  a  few  private  words  with  these  people  that  seemed  to 
know  his  name  and  all  about  him,  although  he  had  never  been  them  before.  He 
thought  their  opinion  of  his  adventure might  be  interesting. Elves  know  a  lot  and 
are wondrous  folk  for news, and know what  is going on among the peoples of the 
land,  as  quick  as water  flows,  or  quicker. But  the  dwarves were  all  for  supper  as 
soon  'as  possible  just  then,  and  would  not  stay.  On  they  all  went,  leading  their 
ponies, till they were brought to a good path and so at last to the very brink of the 
river.  It  was  flowing  fast  and  noisily,  as  mountain-streams  do  of  a  summer 
evening, when  sun  has  been  all  day  on  the  snow  far  up  above.  There was  only  a 
narrow bridge of stone without a parapet, as narrow as a pony could well walk on; 
and  over  that  they had  to go, slow and careful, one by one, each  leading his pony 
by  the  bridle. The  elves  had  brought  bright  lanterns  to  the  shore,  and  they  sang  a 
merry song as the party went across. 

####-"Don't dip your beard in the foam, father!" they cried to Thorin, who was bent 
almost on to his hands and knees. "It is long enough without watering it." 
"Mind  Bilbo  doesn't  eat  all  the  cakes!"  they  called.  "He  is  too  fat  to  get 
through key-holes yet!" 
"Hush,  hush!  Good  People!  and  good  night!"  said  Gandalf,  who  came  last. 
"Valleys have ears, and some elves have over merry tongues. Good night!" 
And  so  at  last  they  all  came  to  the  Last  Homely  House,  and  found  its  doors 
flung wide. 
Now  it  is  a  strange  thing,  but  things  that  are  good  to  have  and  days  that  are 
good  to spend are soon told about, and not much to listen to; while things that are 
uncomfortable, palpitating, and even gruesome, may make a good tale, and take a 
deal of telling anyway. They stayed long in that good house, fourteen days at least, 
and  they  found  it  hard  to  leave.  Bilbo  would  gladly  have  stopped  there  for  ever 
and  ever-even  supposing  a  wish  would  have  taken  him  right  back  to  his  hobbit-
hole without trouble. Yet there is little to tell about their stay.  
The  master  of  the  house  was  an  elf-friend-one  of  those  people whose  fathers 
came  into  the  strange  stories  before  the  beginning  of History,  the wars  of  the  evil 
goblins and the elves and the first men in the North. In those days of our tale there 
were  still  some  people who  had  both  elves  and  heroes  of  the North  for ancestors, 
and Elrond the master of the house was their chief. He was as noble and as fair in 
face  as  an  elf-lord,  as  strong  as  a warrior,  as wise  as  a wizard,  as  venerable  as  a 
king  of  dwarves,  and  as  kind  as  summer. He  comes  into. many  tales, but his part 
in  the  story  of  Bilbo's  great  adventure  is  only  a  small  one,  though  important,  as 
you  will  see,  if  we  ever  get  to  the  end  of  it.  His  house  was  perfect,  whether  you 
liked  food,  or  sleep,  or  work,  or  story-telling,  or  singing,  or  just  sitting  and 
thinking best, or a pleasant mixture of them all. Evil things did not come into that 
valley.  
I wish I had  time  to  tell you even a few of  the  tales or one or  two of  the songs 
that  they  heard  in  that  house. All  of  them,  the  ponies  as well,  grew  refreshed and 
strong  in  a  few  days  there.  Their  clothes  were  mended  as  well  as  their  bruises, 
their tempers and their hopes. Their bags were filled with food and provisions light 
to  carry  but  strong  to  bring  them  over  the  mountain  passes.  Their  plans  were 
improved  with  the  best  advice.  So  the  time  came  to  mid-  summer  eve,  and  they 
were to go on again with the early sun on midsummer morning. 
Elrond  knew  all  about  runes  of  every  kind. That  day  he  looked  at  the  swords 
they had brought from the trolls' lair, and he said: "These are not troll-make. They 
are old swords, very old swords of the High Elves of the West, my kin. They were 

####-made  in  Gondolin  for  the  Goblin-wars.  They  must  have  come  from  a  dragon's 
hoard  or  goblin  plunder,  for  dragons  and  goblins  destroyed  that  city  many  ages 
ago.  This,  Thorin,  the  runes  name  Orcrist,  the  Goblin-cleaver  in  the  ancient 
tongue  of  Gondolin;  it  was  a  famous  blade.  This,  Gandalf,  was  Glamdring,  Foe-
hammer that the king of Gondolin once wore. Keep them well!" 
"Whence  did  the  trolls  get  them,  I wonder?"  said Thorin  looking at his  sword 
with new interest. 
"I  could  not  say,"  said  Elrond,  "but  one  may  guess  that  your  trolls  had 
plundered other plunderers, or come on the remnants of old robberies in some hold 
in  the mountains  of  the North.  I  have heard  that  there are  still  forgotten  treasures 
of  old  to  be  found  in  the  deserted  caverns  of  the mines  of Moria,  since  the  dwarf 
and goblin war." 
Thorin  pondered  these  words.  "I  will  keep  this  sword  in  honour,"  he  said. 
"May it soon cleave goblins once again!" 
"A  wish  that  is  likely  to  be  granted  soon  enough  in  the  mountains!"  said 
Elrond.  "But  show  me  now  your  map!"  He  took  it  and  gazed  long  at  it,  and  he 
shook  his  head;  for  if  he  did  not  altogether  approve  of  dwarves  and  their  love  of 
gold, he hated dragons and their cruel wickedness, and he grieved to remember the 
ruin  of  the  town  of  Dale  and  its  merry  bells,  and  the  burned  banks  of  the  bright 
River Running. The moon was  shining  in  a  broad  silver  crescent. He  held  up  the 
map  and  the  white  light  shone  through  it.  "What  is  this?"  he  said.  "There  are 
moon-letters  here,  beside  the  plain  runes  which  say  'five  feet  high  the  door  and 
three may walk abreast.' " 
"What  are moon-letters?" asked  the hobbit  full of excitement. He  loved maps, 
as  I  have  told  you  before;  and  he  also  liked  runes  and  letters  and  cunning 
handwriting, though when he wrote himself it was a bit thin and spidery.  
"Moon-letters  are  rune-letters,  but  you  cannot  see  them,"  said  Elrond,  "not 
when  you  look  straight  at  them.  They  can  only  be  seen  when  the  moon  shines 
behind  them,  and what  is more, with  the more  cunning  sort  it must  be  a moon  of 
the  same  shape  and  season  as  the  day  when  they  were  written.  The  dwarves 
invented  them  and  wrote  them  with  silver  pens,  as  your  friends  could  tell  you. 
These  must  have  been  written  on  a midsummer's  eve  in  a  crescent moon,  a  long 
while ago." 
"What  do  they  say?"  asked Gandalf  and Thorin  together,  a  bit  vexed  perhaps 
that even Elrond should have found this out first, though really there had not been 
a  chance  before,  and  there  would  not  have  been  another  until  goodness  knows 
when. 

####-"Stand  by  the  grey  stone  when  the  thrush  knocks,"  read  Elrond,  "and  the 
setting sun with the last light of Durin's Day will shine upon the key-hole." 
"Durin,  Durin!"  said  Thorin.  "He  was  the  father  of  the  fathers  of  the  eldest 
race of Dwarves, the Longbeards, and my first ancestor: I am his heir." 
"Then what is Durin's Day?" asked Elrond. 
"The  first day of  the dwarves' New Year," said Thorin, "is as all should know 
the first, day of the last moon of Autumn on the threshold of Winter. We still call it 
Durin's  Day  when  the  last  moon  of  Autumn  and  the  sun  are  in  the  sky  together. 
But this will not help us much, I fear, for it passes our skill in these days to guess 
when such a time will come again." 
"That remains to be seen," said Gandalf. "Is there any more writing?" 
"None  to  be  seen  by  this  moon,"  said  Elrond,  and  he  gave  the  map  back  to 
Thorin; and then they went down to the water to see the elves dance and sing upon 
the midsummer's eve. 
The  next  morning  was  a  midsummer's  morning  as  fair  and  fresh  as  could  be 
dreamed: blue sky and never a cloud, and the sun dancing on the water. Now they 
rode away amid songs of farewell and good speed, with their hearts ready for more 
adventure,  and  with  a  knowledge  of  the  road  they  must  follow  over  the  Misty 
Mountains to the land beyond. 

####-<h4>Chapter 4 </h4> <br>

Over Hill and Under Hill 

 
There  were  many  paths  that  led  up  into  those  mountains,  and  many  passes 
over them. But most of the paths were cheats and deceptions and led nowhere or to 
bad ends; and most of the passes were infested by evil things and dreadful dangers. 
The  dwarves  and  the  hobbit,  helped  by  the  wise  advice  of  Elrond  and  the 
knowledge and memory of Gandalf, took the right road to the right pass. 
Long  days  after  they  had  climbed  out  of  the  valley  and  left  the  Last  Homely 
House  miles  behind,  they  were  still  going  up  and  up  and  up.  It  was  a  hard  path 
and  a  dangerous  path,  a  crooked  way  and  a  lonely  and  a  long.  Now  they  could 
look  back  over  the  lands  they  had  left,  laid  out  behind  them  far  below.  Far,  far 
away in the West, where things were blue and faint, Bilbo knew there lay his own 
country  of  safe  and  comfortable  things,  and  his  little  hobbit-hole. He shivered.  It 
was  getting  bitter  cold  up  here,  and  the  wind  came  shrill  among  the  rocks. 
Boulders,  too,  at  times  came  galloping  down  the  mountain-sides,  let  loose  by 
midday  sun  upon  the  snow,  and  passed  among  them  (which  was  lucky),  or  over 
their heads (which was alarming). The nights were comfortless and chill, and they 
did not dare  to sing or  talk  too  loud,  for  the echoes were uncanny, and  the silence 
seemed  to  dislike  being  broken-except by  the noise of water and  the wail of wind 
and the crack of stone. 
"The  summer  is  getting  on  down  below,"  thought  Bilbo,  "and  haymaking  is 
going  on  and  picnics. They will  be  harvesting  and  blackberrying,  before we  even 
begin to go down the other side at this rate." And the others were thinking equally 
gloomy  thoughts,  although  when  they  had  said  good-bye  to  Elrond  in  the  high 
hope  of  a  midsummer  morning,  they'  had  spoken  gaily  of  the  passage  of  the 
mountains,  and  of  riding  swift  across  the  lands  beyond.  They  had  thought  of 
coming  to  the  secret  door  in  the  Lonely  Mountain,  perhaps  that  very  next  first 
moon  of  Autumn—"  and  perhaps  it  will  be  Durin's  Day"  they  had  said.  Only 
Gandalf had  shaken his head  and  said nothing. Dwarves had not passed  that way 
for  many  years,  but  Gandalf  had,  and  he  knew  how  evil  and  danger  had  grown 
and  thriven  in  the Wild, since  the dragons had driven men from the lands, and the 
goblins had spread  in secret after  the battle of  the Mines of Moria. Even  the good 
plans  of  wise  wizards  like  Gandalf  and  of  good  friends  like  Elrond  go  astray 
sometimes when  you  are  off  on  dangerous  adventures  over  the Edge  of  the Wild; 
and Gandalf was a wise enough wizard to know it. 

####-He  knew  that  something  unexpected  might  happen,  and  he  hardly  dared  to 
hope  that  they  would  pass  without  fearful  adventure  over  those  great  tall 
mountains  with  lonely  peaks  and  valleys  where  no  king  ruled. They did not. All 
was  well,  until  one  day  they  met  a  thunderstorm  -  more  than  a  thunderstorm,  a 
thunder-battle.  You  know  how  terrific  a  really  big  thunderstorm  can  be  down  in 
the  land  and  in  a  river-valley;  especially  at  times  when  two  great  thunderstorms 
meet  and  clash. More  terrible  still  are  thunder  and  lightning  in  the  mountains  at 
night,  when  storms  come  up  from  East  and  West  and  make  war.  The  lightning 
splinters  on  the  peaks,  and  rocks  shiver,  and  great  crashes  split  the  air  and  go 
rolling  and  tumbling  into  every  cave  and  hollow;  and  the  darkness  is  filled  with 
overwhelming noise and sudden light. 
Bilbo had never seen or imagined anything of the kind. They were high up in a 
narrow place, with a dreadful fall into a dim valley at one side of them. There they 
were  sheltering  under  a  hanging  rock  for  the  night,  and  he  lay  beneath  a  blanket 
and  shook  from  head  to  toe. When  he  peeped  out  in  the  lightning-flashes, he saw 
that  across  the  valley  the  stone-giants  were  out  and  were  hurling  rocks  at  one 
another  for a. game, and catching  them, and  tossing  them down  into  the darkness 
where  they  smashed among  the  trees  far below, or  splintered  into  little bits with a 
bang.  Then  came  a  wind  and  a  rain,  and  the  wind  whipped  the  rain  and  the  hail 
about  in  every  direction,  so  that  an  overhanging  rock  was  no  protection  at  all. 
Soon  they were  getting  drenched  and  their  ponies were  standing with  their  heads 
down  and  their  tails  between  their  legs,  and  some  of  them  were  whinnying  with 
fright.  They  could  hear  the  giants  guffawing  and  shouting  all  over  the 
mountainsides. 
"This won't  do  at  all!"  said Thorin.  "If we  don't  get  blown  off  or  drowned,  or 
struck by lightning, we shall be picked up by some giant and kicked sky-high for a 
football." 
"Well,  if  you  know  of  anywhere  better, take us there!" said Gandalf, who was 
feeling very grumpy, and was far from happy about the giants himself. 
The  end of  their  argument was  that  they  sent Fill  and Kili  to  look  for  a better 
shelter. They had very sharp eyes, and being the youngest of the dwarves by some 
fifty  years  they  usually  got  these  sort  of  jobs  (when  everybody  could  see  that  it 
was  absolutely  no  use  sending Bilbo). There  is  nothing  like  looking,  if  you want 
to find something (or so Thorin said to the young dwarves). You certainly usually 
find  something,  if  you  look,  but  it  is  not  always  quite  the  something  you  were 
after. So it proved on this occasion. 

####-Soon  Fili  and  Kili  came  crawling  back,  holding  on  to  the  rocks  in  the  wind. 
"We have  found a dry cave,"  they said, "not  far  round  the next corner; and ponies 
and all could get inside." 
"Have  you  thoroughly  explored  it?"  said  the wizard, who  knew  that  caves  up 
in the mountains were seldom unoccupied. 
"Yes,  yes!"  they  said,  though  everybody  knew  they  could  not  have  been  long 
about  it;  they had come back too quick. "It isn't all that big, and it does not go far 
back." 
That,  of  course,  is  the  dangerous  part  about  caves:  you  don't  know  how  far 
they  go  back,  sometimes,  or  where  a  passage  behind  may  lead  to,  or  what  is 
waiting for you inside. But now Fili and Kill's news seemed good enough. So they 
all  got  up  and  prepared  to  move.  The  wind  was  howling  and  the  thunder  still 
growling, and  they had a business getting  themselves and  their ponies along. Still 
it was not very far to go, and before long they came to a big rock standing out into 
the path. If you stepped behind, you found a low arch in the side of the mountain. 
There was just room to get the ponies through with a squeeze, when they had been 
unpacked  and  unsaddled.  As  they  passed  under  the  arch,  it was  good  to  hear  the 
wind and the rain outside instead of all about them, and to feel safe from the giants 
and their rocks. But the wizard was taking no risks. He lit up his wand  - as he did 
that  day  in Bilbo's  dining-room  that  seemed  so  long ago,  if you remember—, and 
by its light they explored the cave from end to end. 
It seemed quite a fair size, but not  too  large and mysterious. It had a dry floor 
and some comfortable nooks. At one end there was room for the ponies; and there 
they stood (mighty glad of the change) steaming, and champing in their nosebags. 
Oin  and Gloin wanted  to  light  a  fire  at  the  door  to  dry  their  clothes,  but Gandalf 
would not hear of  it. So  they  spread out  their wet  things on  the  floor, and got dry 
ones out of  their bundles;  then they made their blankets comfortable, got out their 
pipes  and  blew  smoke  rings,  which  Gandalf  turned  into  different  colours  and  set 
dancing  up  by  the  roof  to  amuse  them.  They  talked  and  talked,  and  forgot  about 
the  storm, and discussed what each would  do with his share of the treasure (when 
they got it, which at the moment did not seem so impossible); and so they dropped 
off  to  sleep  one  by  one.  And  that  was  the  last  time  that  they  used  the  ponies, 
packages, baggages, tools and paraphernalia that they had brought with them. 
It  turned  out  a  good  thing  that  night  that  they  had  brought  little  Bilbo  with 
them, after all. For somehow, he could not go  to sleep for a  long while; and when 
he did sleep, he had very nasty dreams. He dreamed that a crack in the wall at the 
back  of  the  cave  got  bigger  and  bigger,  and  opened wider  and wider,  and  he was 

####-very  afraid  but  could  not  call  out  or  do  anything  but  lie  and  look.  Then  he 
dreamed  that  the floor of  the cave was giving way, and he was slipping-beginning 
to fall down, down, goodness knows where to. 
At  that he woke up with a horrible start, and found  that part of his dream was 
true. A crack had opened at the back of the cave, and was already a wide passage. 
He  was  just  in  time  to  see  the  last  of  the  ponies'  tails  disappearing  into  it.  Of 
course  he  gave  a  very  loud  yell,  as  loud  a  yell  as  a  hobbit  can  give,  which  is 
surprising for their size. 
Out  jumped  the  goblins,  big  goblins,  great  ugly-looking  goblins,  lots  of 
goblins,  before  you  could  say  rocks  and  blocks.  There were  six  to each dwarf, at 
least,  and  two  even  for Bilbo;  and  they were  all  grabbed  and  carried  through  the 
crack,  before  you  could  say  tinder  and  flint.  But  not  Gandalf.  Bilbo's  yell  had 
done  that  much  good.  It  had  wakened  him  up  wide  in  a  splintered  second,  and 
when  goblins  came  to  grab  him,  there  was  a  terrible  flash  like  lightning  in  the 
cave, a smell like gunpowder, and several of them fell dead. 
The  crack  closed with  a  snap,  and  Bilbo  and  the  dwarves were  on  the wrong 
side  of  it! Where was Gandalf? Of  that neither they nor the goblins had any idea, 
and  the  goblins  did  not  wait  to  find  out.  It  was  deep,  deep,  dark,  such  as  only 
goblins  that  have  taken  to  living  in  the  heart  of  the  mountains  can  see  through. 
The  passages  there  were  crossed  and  tangled  in  all  directions,  but  the  goblins 
knew  their  way,  as  well  as  you  do  to  the  nearest  post-office;  and  the  way  went 
down and down, and it was most horribly stuffy. The goblins were very rough, and 
pinched  unmercifully,  and  chuckled  and  laughed  in  their  horrible  stony  voices; 
and Bilbo was more  unhappy  even  than when  the  troll  had  picked  him  up  by  his 
toes.  He  wished  again  and  again  for  his  nice  bright  hobbit-hole. Not  for  the  last 
time. 
Now  there  came  a  glimmer  of  a  red  light  before  them.  The  goblins  began  to 
sing,  or  croak,  keeping  time  with  the  flap  of  their  flat  feet  on  the  stone,  and 
shaking their prisoners as well. 
 

Clap! Snap! the black crack! 
Grip, grab! Pinch, nab! 
And down down to Goblin -town  
You go, my lad! 
 
Clash, crash! Crush, smash! 
Hammer and tongs! Knocker and gongs! 
Pound, pound, far underground! 

####-Ho, ho! my lad! 
 
Swish, smack! Whip crack! 
Batter and beat! Yammer and bleat! 
Work, work! Nor dare to shirk, 
While Goblins quaff, and Goblins laugh, 
Round and round far underground 
Below, my lad! 

 
It  sounded  truly  terrifying. The walls  echoed  to  the  clap,  snap!  and  the  crush, 
smash!  and  to  the  ugly  laughter  of  their  ho,  ho! my  lad! The  general meaning  of 
the song was only too plain; for now the goblins took out whips and whipped them 
with  a  swish,  smack!,  and set them running as fast as they could in front of them; 
and  more  than  one  of  the  dwarves  were  already  yammering  and  bleating  like 
anything, when they stumbled into a big cavern. 
It was  lit by a great red fire  in  the middle, and by  torches along  the walls, and 
it  was  full  of  goblins.  They  all  laughed  and  stamped  and  clapped  their  hands, 
when  the  dwarves  (with  poor  little  Bilbo  at  the  back  and  nearest  to  the  whips) 
came  running  in,  while  the  goblin-drivers  whooped  and  cracked  their  whips 
behind. The  ponies were already  there huddled  in a corner; and  there were all  the 
baggages  and  packages  lying  broken  open,  and  being  rummaged  by  goblins,  and 
smelt by goblins, and fingered by goblins, and quarreled over by goblins. 
I  am  afraid  that  was  the  last  they  ever  saw  of  those  excellent  little  ponies, 
including  a  jolly  sturdy  little  white  fellow  that  Elrond  had  lent  to  Gandalf,  since 
his  horse  was  not  suitable  for  the  mountain-paths.  For  goblins  eat  horses  and 
ponies  and  donkeys  (and  other much more  dreadful  things),  and  they are always 
hungry.  Just  now  however  the  prisoners  were  thinking  only  of  themselves.  The 
goblins  chained  their  hands  behind  their  backs  and  linked  them  all  together  in  a 
line  and dragged  them  to  the  far  end of  the  cavern with  little Bilbo  tugging  at the 
end of the row.  
There in the shadows on a large flat stone sat a tremendous goblin with a huge 
head,  and  armed  goblins were  standing  round  him  carrying  the  axes  and  the  bent 
swords that they use. Now goblins are cruel, wicked, and bad-hearted. They make 
no beautiful things, but they make many clever ones. They can tunnel and mine as 
well as any but the most skilled dwarves, when they take the trouble, though they 
are  usually  untidy  and  dirty.  Hammers,  axes,  swords,  daggers,  pickaxes,  tongs, 
and  also  instruments of  torture,  they make very well, or get other people  to make 
to  their design, prisoners and  slaves  that have  to work  till  they die  for want of air 

####-and light. It is not unlikely that they invented some of the machines that have since 
troubled  the  world,  especially  the  ingenious  devices  for  killing  large  numbers  of 
people at once, for wheels and engines and explosions always delighted them, and 
also  not  working  with  their  own  hands  more  than  they  could  help;  but  in  those 
days  and  those  wild  parts  they had not  advanced  (as  it  is  called)  so  far. They did 
not  hate  dwarves  especially,  no  more  than  they  hated  everybody  and  everything, 
and  particularly  the  orderly  and  prosperous;  in  some  parts  wicked  dwarves  had 
even  made  alliances  with  them.  But  they  had  a  special  grudge  against  Thorin's 
people,  because  of  the war which  you  have  heard mentioned,  but which  does  not 
come  into  this  tale; and anyway goblins don't care who  they catch, as  long as  it  is 
done smart and secret, and the prisoners are not able to defend themselves. 
"Who are these miserable persons?" said the Great Goblin. 
"Dwarves, and this!" said one of the drivers, pulling at Bilbo's chain so that he 
fell forward onto his knees. 
"We found them sheltering in our Front Porch." 
"What do you mean by it?" said the Great Goblin turning to Thorin. "Up to no 
good, I'll warrant! Spying on the private business of my people, I guess! Thieves, I 
shouldn't  be  surprised  to  learn!  Murderers  and  friends  of  Elves,  not  unlikely! 
Come! What have you got to say?" 
"Thorin  the  dwarf  at  your  service!"  he  replied-it was merely a polite nothing. 
"Of the things which you suspect and imagine we had no idea at all. We sheltered 
from  a  storm  in what  seemed  a  convenient  cave  and  unused;  nothing was  further 
from  our  thoughts  than  inconveniencing goblins  in any way whatever." That was 
true enough! 
"Urn!"  said  the Great Goblin.  "So you  say! Might  I  ask what you were doing 
up in the mountains at all, and where you were coming from, and where you were 
going to? In fact I should like to know all about you. Not that it willdo you much 
good,  Thorin  Oakenshield,  I  know  too  much  about  your  folk  already;  but  let's 
have the truth, or I will prepare something particularly uncomfortable for you!" 
"We were on a journey to visit our relatives, our nephews and nieces, and first, 
second, and third cousins, and the other descendants of our grandfathers, who live 
on  the  East  side  of  these  truly  hospitable  mountains,"  said  Thorin,  not  quite 
knowing  what  to  say  all  at  once  in  a  moment,  when  obviously  the  exact  truth 
would not do at all. 
"He is a liar, O truly tremendous one!" said one of the drivers. "Several of our 
people  were  struck  by  lightning  in  the  cave,  when  we  invited  these  creatures  to 
come  below;  and  they  are  as  dead  as  stones. Also  he  has  not  explained  this!" He 

####-held out the sword which Thorin had worn, the sword which came from the Trolls' 
lair.  
The Great Goblin gave a truly awful howl of rage when he looked at it, and all 
his soldiers gnashed their teeth, clashed their shields, and stamped. They knew the 
sword at once.  It had killed hundreds of goblins  in  its  time, when  the  fair elves of 
Gondolin hunted them in the hills or did battle before their walls. They had called 
it Orcrist, Goblin-cleaver, but the goblins called it simply Biter. They hated it and 
hated worse any one that carried it. 
"Murderers'  and  elf-friends!"  the  Great  Goblin  shouted.  "Slash  them!  Beat 
them! Bite  them! Gnash  them! Take  them  away  to  dark  holes  full  of  snakes,  and 
never  let  them  see  the  light  again!" He was  in  such  a  rage  that he  jumped off his 
seat and himself rushed at Thorin with his mouth open. 
Just  at  that  moment  all  the  lights  in  the  cavern  went  out,  and  the  great  fire 
went  off  poof!  into  a  tower  of  blue  glowing  smoke,  right  up  to  the  roof,  that 
scattered piercing white sparks all among the goblins. 
The  yells  and  yammering,  croaking,  jibbering  and  jabbering;  howls,  growls 
and curses; shrieking and skriking, that followed were beyond description. Several 
hundred wild  cats  and wolves being  roasted  slowly  alive  together would not have 
compared  with  it.  The  sparks  were  burning  holes  in  the  goblins,  and  the  smoke 
that  now  fell  from  the  roof  made  the  air  too  thick  for  even  their  eyes  to  see 
through. Soon they were falling over one another and rolling in heaps on the floor, 
biting and kicking and fighting as if they had all gone mad. 
Suddenly  a  sword  flashed  in  its  own  light.  Bilbo  saw  it  go  right  through  the 
Great Goblin as he stood dumbfounded in the middle of his rage. He fell dead, and 
the goblin soldiers fled before the sword shrieking into the darkness. 
The  sword  went  back  into  its  sheath.  "Follow  me  quick!"  said  a  voice  fierce 
and  quiet;  and  before Bilbo  understood what  had  happened  he was  trotting  along 
again, as fast as he could trot, at the end of the line, down more dark passages with 
the  yells  of  the  goblin-hall  growing  fainter  behind  him.  A  pale  light  was  leading 
them on. 
"Quicker, quicker!" said the voice. "The torches will soon be relit." 
"Half  a  minute!"  said  Dori,  who  was  at  the  back  next  to  Bilbo,  and  a  decent 
fellow.  He  made  the  hobbit  scramble  on  his  shoulders  as  best  he  could  with  his 
tied  hands,  and  then  off  they  all  went  at  a  run,  with  a  clink-clink  of  chains,  and 
many a stumble, since they had no hands to steady themselves with. Not for a long 
while did  they  stop,  and by  that  time  they must have been  right down  in  the very 
mountain's heart. 

####-Then  Gandalf  lit  up  his  wand.  Of  course  it  was  Gandalf;  but  just  then  they 
were  too busy  to ask how he got  there. He  took out his  sword again, and again  it 
flashed  in  the  dark  by  itself.  It  burned  with  a  rage  that  made  it  gleam  if  goblins 
were  about; now  it was bright  as blue  flame  for delight  in  the killing of  the great 
lord of the cave. It made no trouble whatever of cutting through the goblin-chains 
and  setting  all  the  prisoners  free  as  quickly  as  possible.  This  sword's  name  was 
Glamdring  the  Foe-hammer,  if  you  remember.  The  goblins  just  called  it  Beater, 
and hated it worse than Biter if possible. Orcrist, too, had been saved; for Gandalf 
had brought it along as well, snatching it from one of the terrified guards. Gandalf 
thought of most things; and though he could not do everything, he could do a great 
deal for friends in a tight comer.  
"Are we all here?" said he, handing his sword back to Thorin with a bow. "Let 
me see: one-that's Thorin; two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven; 
where  are  Fili  and  Kili?  Here  they  are,  twelve,  thirteen-and  here's Mr.  Baggins: 
fourteen!  Well,  well!  it  might  be  worse,  and  then  again  it  might  be  a  good  deal 
better. No ponies, and no food, and no knowing quite where we are, and hordes of 
angry goblins just behind! On we go!" 
On  they  went.  Gandalf  was  quite  right:  they  began  to  hear  goblin  noises  and 
horrible cries far behind in the passages they had come through. That sent them on 
faster  than  ever,  and  as  poor Bilbo  could  not  possibly  go  half  as  fast-for dwarves 
can roll along at a tremendous pace, I can tell you, when they have to-they took it 
in turn to carry him on their backs. 
Still  goblins  go  faster  than  dwarves,  and  these  goblins  knew  the  way  better 
(they had made the paths themselves), and were madly angry; so that do what they 
could  the  dwarves  heard  the  cries  and  howls  getting  closer  and  closer.  Soon  they 
could  hear  even  the  flap  of  the  goblin  feet,  many  many  feet which  seemed  only 
just  round  the  last  corner.  The  blink  of  red  torches  could  be  seen  behind  them  in 
the tunnel they were following; and they were getting deadly tired. 
"Why,  O  why  did  I  ever  leave  my  hobbit-hole!"  said  poor  Mr.  Baggins 
bumping up and down on Bombur's back. 
"Why, O why did I ever bring a wretched little hobbit on a treasure hunt!" said 
poor Bombur, who was fat, and staggered along with the sweat dripping down his 
nose in his heat and terror.  
At  this  point  Gandalf  fell  behind,  and  Thorin  with  him.  They  turned  a  sharp 
corner. "About turn!" he shouted. "Draw your sword, Thorin!" 
There was nothing else  to be done; and  the goblins did not  like  it. They came 
scurrying  round  the corner  in  full cry, and  found Goblin-cleaver and Foe-hammer 

####-shining  cold  and  bright  right  in  their  astonished  eyes.  The  ones  in  front  dropped 
their  torches  and  gave  one  yell  before  they  were  killed.  The  ones  behind  yelled 
still  more,  and  leaped  back  knocking  over  those  that  were  running  after  them. 
"Biter  and Beater!"  they  shrieked;  and  soon  they were  all  in  confusion,  and most 
of them were hustling back the way they had come. 
It was quite a  long while before any of  them dared  to  turn  that comer. By  that 
time the dwarves had gone on again, a long, long, way on into the dark tunnels of 
the  goblins'  realm.  When  the  goblins  discovered  that,  they  put  out  their  torches 
and they slipped on soft shoes, and they chose out their very quickest runners with 
the sharpest ears and eyes. These ran forward, as swift as weasels in the dark,  and 
with hardly any more noise than bats. 
That  is  why  neither  Bilbo,  nor  the  dwarves,  nor  even  Gandalf  heard  them 
coming. Nor did they see them. But they were seen by the goblins that ran silently 
up  behind,  for  Gandalf  was  letting  his  wand  give  out  a  faint  light  to  help  the 
dwarves as they went along. 
Quite suddenly Dori, now at the back again carrying Bilbo, was grabbed from 
behind in the dark. He shouted and fell; and the hobbit rolled off his shoulders into 
the blackness, bumped his head on hard rock, and remembered nothing more. 
 

####-<h4>Chapter 5 </h4> <br>

Riddles in the Dark 

 
When Bilbo opened his eyes, he wondered  if he had; for  it was  just as dark as 
with them shut. No one was anywhere near him. Just imagine his fright! He could 
hear nothing, see nothing, and he could feel nothing except the stone of the floor.  
Very slowly he got up and groped about on all fours, till he touched the wall of 
the  tunnel;  but  neither  up  nor  down  it  could  he  find  anything:  nothing  at  all,  no 
sign of goblins, no sign of dwarves. His head was swimming, and he was far from 
certain  even  of  the  direction  they  had  been  going  in  when  he  had  his  fall.  He 
guessed  as well  as  he  could,  and  crawled  along  for  a  good way,  till  suddenly  his 
hand met what felt like a tiny ring of cold metal lying on the floor of the tunnel. It 
was  a  turning  point  in  his  career,  but  he  did  not  know  it.  He  put  the  ring  in  his 
pocket  almost without  thinking;  certainly  it  did  not  seem  of  any  particular  use  at 
the moment. He did not go much  further, but sat down on  the cold  floor and gave 
himself  up  to  complete  miserableness,  for  a  long  while.  He  thought  of  himself 
frying bacon and eggs  in his own kitchen at home  - for he could feel inside that it 
was high time for some meal or other; but that only made him miserabler.  
He could not think what to do; nor could he think what had happened; or why 
he  had  been  left  behind;  or  why,  if  he  had  been  left  behind,  the  goblins  had  not 
caught  him;  or  even  why  his  head  was  so  sore.  The  truth  was  he  had  been  lying 
quiet, out of sight and out of mind, in a very dark corner for a long while. 
After some time he felt for his pipe. It was not broken, and that was something. 
Then  he  felt  for  his  pouch,  and  there  was  some  tobacco  in  it,  and  that  was 
something more. Then he felt for matches and he could not find any at all, and that 
shattered his hopes completely. Just as well for him, as he agreed when he came to 
his senses. Goodness knows what the striking of matches and the smell of tobacco 
would  have  brought  on  him  out  of  dark  holes  in  that  horrible  place.  Still  at  the 
moment he felt very crushed. But in slapping all his pockets and feeling all round 
himself  for matches his hand came on  the hilt of his  little sword  - the little dagger 
that he got from the trolls, and that he had quite forgotten; nor do the goblins seem 
to have noticed it, as he wore it inside his breeches. 
Now  he  drew  it  out.  It  shone  pale  and  dim  before  his  eyes.  "So  it  is  an  elvish 
blade, too," he thought; "and goblins are not very near, and yet not far enough." 
But  somehow  he was  comforted.  It was  rather  splendid  to be wearing  a blade 
made  in Gondolin for  the goblin-wars of which so many songs had sung; and also 

####-he  had  noticed  that  such  weapons made  a  great  impression  on  goblins  that  came 
upon them suddenly.  
"Go  back?"  he  thought.  "No  good  at  all!  Go  sideways?  Impossible!  Go 
forward? Only  thing  to  do! On we  go!"  So  up  he  got,  and  trotted  along with  his 
little sword held in front of him and one hand feeling the wall, and his heart all of 
a patter and a pitter.  
 
Now  certainly  Bilbo  was  in  what  is  called  a  tight  place.  But  you  must 
remember  it  was  not  quite  so  tight  for  him  as  it  would  have  been  for  me  or  for 
you. Hobbits are not quite like ordinary people; and after all if their holes are nice 
cheery  places  and  properly  aired,  quite  different  from  the  tunnels  of  the  goblins, 
still they are more used to tunnelling than we are, and they do not easily lose their 
sense  of  direction  underground-not  when  their  heads  have  recovered  from  being 
bumped.  Also  they  can  move  very  quietly,  and  hide  easily,  and  recover 
wonderfully  from  falls  and  bruises,  and  they  have  a  fund  of  wisdom  and  wise 
sayings that men have mostly never heard or have forgotten long ago. 
I  should  not  have  liked  to  have  been  in Mr. Baggins'  place,  all  the  same. The 
tunnel seemed to have no end. All he knew was that it was still going down pretty 
steadily  and  keeping  in  the  same  direction  in  spite  of  a  twist  and  a  turn  or  two. 
There were passages leading off to the side every now and then, as he knew by the 
glimmer of his sword, or  could feel with his hand on the wall. Of these he took no 
notice,  except  to  hurry  past  for  fear  of  goblins  or  half-imagined  dark  things 
coming out of them. On and on he went, and down and down; and still he heard no 
sound of anything except  the occasional  whirr of a bat by his ears, which  startled 
him at first, till it became too frequent to bother about. I do not know how long he 
kept  on  like  this,  hating  to  go  on,  not  daring  to  stop,  on,  on,  until  he was  tireder 
than tired. It seemed like all the way to tomorrow and over it to the days beyond. 
Suddenly  without  any  warning  he  trotted  splash  into  water!  Ugh!  it  was  icy 
cold. That  pulled  him  up  sharp  and  short. He  did  not  know whether  it was  just  a 
pool in the path, or the edge of an underground stream that crossed the passage, or 
the  brink  of  a  deep  dark  subterranean  lake.  The  sword was  hardly  shining  at  all. 
He  stopped,  and  he  could  hear,  when  he  listened  hard,  drops  drip-drip-dripping 
from an unseen roof into the water below; but there seemed no other sort of sound. 
"So  it  is  a  pool  or  a  lake,  and  not  an  underground  river,"  he  thought.  Still  he 
did  not  dare  to  wade  out  into  the  darkness.  He  could  not  swim;  and  he  thought, 
too,  of  nasty  slimy  things,  with  big  bulging  blind  eyes,  wriggling  in  the  water. 
There  are  strange  things  living  in  the  pools  and  lakes  in  the  hearts  of mountains: 

####-fish whose fathers swam in, goodness only knows how many years ago, and never 
swam out again, while their eyes grew bigger and bigger and bigger from trying to 
see  in  the  blackness;  also  there  are other  things more  slimy  than  fish. Even  in  the 
tunnels  and  caves  the  goblins  have  made  for  themselves  there  are  other  things 
living unbeknown to them that have sneaked in from outside to lie up in the dark. 
Some  of  these  caves,  too,  go  back  in  their  beginnings  to  ages  before  the  goblins, 
who  only  widened  them  and  joined  them  up  with  passages,  and  the  original 
owners are still there in odd comers, slinking and nosing about. 
Deep down here by  the dark water  lived old Gollum, a small slimy creature. I 
don't  know where  he  came  from,  nor who  or what  he was. He was Gollum  — as 
dark  as  darkness,  except  for  two  big  round  pale  eyes  in  his  thin  face.  He  had  a 
little boat, and he rowed about quite quietly on the lake; for lake it was, wide and 
deep  and  deadly  cold.  He  paddled  it  with  large  feet  dangling  over  the  side,  but 
never a ripple did he make. Not he. He was looking out of his pale lamp-like eyes 
for  blind  fish,  which  he  grabbed  with  his  long  fingers  as  quick  as  thinking.  He 
liked  meat  too.  Goblin  he  thought  good,  when  he  could  get  it;  but  he  took  care 
they  never  found  him  out.  He  just  throttled  them  from  behind,  if  they  ever  came 
down  alone  anywhere  near  the  edge  of  the  water,  while  he  was  prowling  about. 
They  very  seldom  did,  for  they  had  a  feeling  that  something  unpleasant  was 
lurking down there, down at the very roots of the mountain. They had come on the 
lake, when  they were  tunnelling down  long ago, and  they  found  they could go no 
further;  so  there  their  road  ended  in  that  direction,  and  there was no  reason  to go 
that  way-unless  the  Great  Goblin  sent  them.  Sometimes  he  took  a  fancy  for  fish 
from the lake, and sometimes neither goblin nor fish came back. 
Actually Gollum  lived on a slimy  island of  rock  in  the middle of  the  lake. He 
was  watching  Bilbo  now  from  the  distance  with  his  pale  eyes  like  telescopes. 
Bilbo could not see him, but he was wondering a lot about Bilbo, for he could see 
that he was no goblin at all. 
Gollum got  into his boat  and  shot off  from  the  island, while Bilbo was  sitting 
on  the  brink  altogether  flummoxed  and  at  the  end  of  his  way  and  his  wits. 
Suddenly up came Gollum and whispered and hissed: 
"Bless  us  and  splash  us, my  precioussss!  I  guess  it's  a  choice  feast;  at  least  a 
tasty morsel  it'd make  us,  gollum!" And when  he  said gollum he made a horrible 
swallowing  noise  in  his  throat.  That  is  how  he  got  his  name,  though  he  always 
called himself 'my precious.' 
The  hobbit  jumped  nearly  out  of  his  skin when  the  hiss  came  in  his  ears,  and 
he suddenly saw the pale eyes sticking out at him. 

####-"Who are you?" he said, thrusting his dagger in front of him. 
"What iss he, my preciouss?" whispered Gollum (who always spoke to himself 
through  never  having  anyone  else  to  speak  to). This  is what  he  had  come  to  find 
out,  for  he was  not  really  very  hungry  at  the moment, only  curious; otherwise he 
would have grabbed first and whispered afterwards. 
"I  am Mr. Bilbo Baggins.  I  have  lost  the  dwarves  and  I  have  lost  the wizard, 
and I don't know where I am; and "I don't want to know, if only I can get ,away." 
"What's  he  got  in  his  handses?"  said Gollum,  looking  at  the  sword, which  he 
did not quite like. 
"A sword, a blade which came out of Gondolin!" 
"Sssss,"  said  Gollum,  and  became  quite  polite.  "Praps  ye  sits  here  and  chats 
with  it  a  bitsy,  my  preciousss.  It  like  riddles,  praps  it  does,  does  it?"  He  was 
anxious  to  appear  friendly,  at  any  rate  for  the  moment,  and  until  he  found  out 
more  about  the  sword  and  the  hobbit, whether  he was  quite  alone  really, whether 
he  was  good  to  eat,  and  whether  Gollum  was  really  hungry.  Riddles were  all  he 
could  think  of.  Asking  them,  and  sometimes  guessing  them,  had  been  the  only 
game  he  had  ever  played  with  other  funny  creatures  sitting  in  their  holes  in  the 
long, long ago, before he lost all his friends and was driven away, alone, and crept 
down, down, into the dark under the mountains. 
"Very  well,"  said  Bilbo,  who  was  anxious  to  agree,  until  he  found  out  more 
about  the  creature, whether  he was  quite  alone, whether  he was  fierce  or  hungry, 
and whether he was a friend of the goblins. 
"You ask first," he said, because he had not had time to think of a riddle. 
So Gollum hissed: 
 

What has roots as nobody sees, 
Is taller than trees, 
Up, up it goes, 
And yet never grows?  

 
"Easy!" said Bilbo. "Mountain, I suppose." 
"Does  it  guess  easy?  It  must  have  a  competition  with  us,  my  preciouss!  If 
precious asks, and it doesn't answer, we eats it, my preciousss. If it asks us, and we 
doesn't answer, then we does what it wants, eh? We shows it the way out, yes!" 
"All  right!" said Bilbo, not daring  to disagree, and nearly bursting his brain to 
think of riddles that could save him from being eaten. 
 

Thirty white horses on a red hill, 

####-First they champ, 
Then they stamp, 
Then they stand still. 

 
That was all he could think of to ask-the idea of eating was rather on his mind. 
It was rather an old one, too, and Gollum knew the answer as well as you do. 
"Chestnuts,  chestnuts,"  he  hissed.  "Teeth!  teeth!  my  preciousss;  but  we  has 
only six!" Then he asked his second: 
 

Voiceless it cries, 
Wingless flutters, 
Toothless bites, 
Mouthless mutters. 

 
"Half  a  moment!"  cried  Bilbo,  who  was  still  thinking  uncomfortably  about 
eating.  Fortunately  he  had  once  heard  something  rather  like  this  before,  and 
getting  his  wits  back  he  thought  of  the  answer.  "Wind,  wind  of  course,"  he  said, 
and  he was  so  pleased  that  he made  up  one  on  the  spot.  "This'll  puzzle  the  nasty 
little underground creature," he thought: 
 

An eye in a blue face 
Saw an eye in a green face. 
"That eye is like to this eye"  
Said the first eye, 
"But in low place, 
Not in  high place."  

 
"Ss, ss, ss," said Gollum. He had been underground a long long time, and was 
forgetting  this  sort  of  thing.  But  just  as  Bilbo  was  beginning  to  hope  that  the 
wretch  would  not  be  able  to  answer,  Gollum  brought  up  memories  of  ages  and 
ages and ages before, when he lived with his grandmother in a hole in a bank by a 
river, "Sss, sss, my preciouss," he said. "Sun on the daisies it means, it does." 
But  these  ordinary  aboveground  everyday  sort  of  riddles  were  tiring  for  him. 
Also  they  reminded  him  of  days  when  he  had  been  less  lonely  and  sneaky  and 
nasty, and that put him out of temper. What is more they made him hungry; so this 
time he tried something a bit more difficult and more unpleasant: 
 

It cannot be seen, cannot be felt, 
Cannot be heard, cannot be smelt. 

####-It lies behind stars and under hills, 
And empty holes it fills. 
It comes first and follows after,  
Ends life, kills laughter.  

 
Unfortunately  for  Gollum  Bilbo  had  heard  that  sort  of  thing  before;  and  the 
answer  was  all  round  him  anyway.  "Dark!"  he  said  without  even  scratching  his 
head or putting on his thinking cap. 
 

A box without hinges, key, or lid, 
Yet golden treasure inside is hid, 

 
he asked  to gain  time, until he could  think of a really hard one. This he  thought a 
dreadfully  easy  chestnut,  though  he  had  not  asked  it  in  the  usual  words.  But  it 
proved a nasty poser for Gollum. He hissed to himself, and still he did not answer; 
he whispered and spluttered. 
After  some  while  Bilbo  became  impatient.  "Well,  what  is  it?"  he  said.  "The 
answer's  not  a  kettle  boiling  over,  as  you  seem  to  think  from  the  noise  you  are 
making." 
"Give us a chance; let it give us a chance, my preciouss-ss-ss." 
"Well," said Bilbo, after giving him a long chance, "what about your guess?" 
But  suddenly  Gollum  remembered  thieving  from  nests  long  ago,  and  sitting 
under  the  river bank  teaching his grandmother,  teaching his grandmother  to suck-
"Eggses!" he hissed. "Eggses it is!" Then he asked: 
 

A live without breath, 
As cold as death; 
Never thirsty, ever drinking, 
All in mail never clinking. 

 
He  also  in  his  turn  thought  this  was  a  dreadfully  easy  one,  because  he  was 
always  thinking  of  the  answer. But  he  could  not  remember  anything  better  at  the 
moment,  he was  so  flustered  by  the  egg-question. All  the  same  it was  a poser  for 
poor  Bilbo,  who  never  had  anything  to  do  with  the  water  if  he  could  help  it.  I 
imagine you know the answer, of course, or can guess it as easy as winking, since 
you  are  sitting  comfortably  at  home  and  have  not  the  danger  of  being  eaten  to 
disturb  your  thinking.  Bilbo  sat  and  cleared  his  throat  once  or  twice,  but  no 
answer came. 

####-After  a  while  Gollum  began  to  hiss  with  pleasure  to  himself:  "Is  it  nice,  my 
preciousss? Is it juicy? Is it scrumptiously crunchable?" He began to peer at Bilbo 
out of the darkness. 
"Half  a  moment,"  said  the  hobbit  shivering.  "I  gave  you  a  good  long  chance 
just now." 
"It must make  haste,  haste!"  said Gollum,  beginning  to  climb  out  of  his  boat 
on to the shore to get at Bilbo. But when he put his long webby foot in the water, a 
fish jumped out in a fright and fell on Bilbo's toes. 
"Ugh!"  he  said,  "it  is  cold  and  clammy!"-and  so  he  guessed.  "Fish!  Fish!"  he 
cried. "It is fish!" 
Gollum was  dreadfully  disappointed;  but Bilbo  asked  another  riddle  as  quick 
as ever be could, so that Gollum had to get back into his boat and think. 
 
No-legs lay on one-leg, two-legs sat near on three-legs, four-legs got some. 
 
It was not really the right time for this riddle, but Bilbo was in a hurry. Gollum 
might  have  had  some  trouble  guessing  it,  if  he  had  asked  it  at  another time. As it 
was,  talking  of  fish,  "no-legs" was not so very difficult, and after that the rest was 
easy. "Fish on a  little  table, man at  table sitting on a stool,  the cat has  the bones"-
that  of  course  is  the  answer,  and  Gollum  soon  gave  it.  Then  he  thought  the  time 
had come to ask something hard and horrible. This is what he said: 
 

This thing all things devours:  
Birds, beasts, trees, flowers;  
Gnaws iron, bites steel; 
Grinds hard stones to meal; 
Slays king, ruins town, 
And beats high mountain down. 

 
Poor  Bilbo  sat  in  the  dark  thinking  of  all  the  horrible  names  of  all  the  giants 
and ogres he had ever heard told of in tales, but not one of them had done all these 
things.  He  had  a  feeling  that  the  answer  was  quite  different  and  that  he  ought  to 
know it, but he could not think of it. He began to get frightened, and that is bad for 
thinking.  Gollum  began  to  get  out  of  his  boat.  He  flapped  into  the  water  and 
paddled  to  the  bank;  Bilbo  could  see  his  eyes  coming  towards  him.  His  tongue 
seemed  to  stick  in  his mouth; he wanted  to  shout out:  "Give me more  time! Give 
me time!" But all that came out with a sudden squeal was: 
"Time! Time!" 

####-Bilbo was saved by pure luck. For that of course was the answer.  
Gollum was  disappointed  once more;  and  now  he was  getting  angry,  and also 
tired  of  the  game.  It  had made  him  very  hungry  indeed.  This  time  he  did  not  go 
back  to  the  boat.  He  sat  down  in  the  dark  by  Bilbo.  That  made  the  hobbit  most 
dreadfully uncomfortable and scattered his wits. 
"It's  got  to  ask  uss  a  quesstion, my  preciouss, yes, yess, yesss.  Jusst one more 
quesstion to guess, yes, yess," said Gollum. 
But  Bilbo  simply  could  not  think  of  any  question  with  that  nasty  wet  cold 
thing  sitting  next  to  him,  and  pawing  and  poking  him.  He  scratched  himself,  he 
pinched himself; still he could not think of anything. 
"Ask us! ask us!" said Gollum. 
Bilbo  pinched  himself  and  slapped  himself;  he  gripped  on  his  little  sword;  he 
even felt  in his pocket with his other hand. There he found  the ring he had picked 
up in the passage and forgotten about. 
"What have I got in my pocket?" he said aloud. He was talking to himself, but 
Gollum thought it was a riddle, and he was frightfully upset. 
"Not fair! not fair!" he hissed. "It isn't fair, my precious, is it, to ask us what it's 
got in its nassty little pocketses?" 
Bilbo seeing what had happened and having nothing better  to ask stuck  to his 
question. "What have I got in my pocket?" he said louder.  
"S-s-s-s-s,"  hissed  Gollum.  "It  must  give  us  three  guesseses,  my  preciouss, 
three guesseses." 
"Very well! Guess away!" said Bilbo. 
"Handses!" said Gollum. 
"Wrong," said Bilbo, who had luckily just taken his hand 
out again. "Guess again!" 
"S-s-s-s-s,"  said Gollum more  upset  than  ever. He  thought  of  all  the  things  he 
kept  in  his  own  pockets:  fishbones,  goblins'  teeth, wet  shells,  a  bit  of  bat-wing, a 
sharp stone to sharpen his fangs on, and other nasty things. He tried to think what 
other people kept in their pockets. 
"Knife!" he said at last. 
"Wrong!" said Bilbo, who had lost his some time ago. "Last guess!" 
Now Gollum was  in  a much worse  state  than when  Bilbo  had  asked  him  the 
egg-question.  He  hissed  and  spluttered  and  rocked  himself  backwards  and 
forwards, and slapped his feet on the floor, and wriggled and squirmed; but still he 
did not dare to waste his last guess. 

####-"Come  on!"  said  Bilbo.  "I  am waiting!" He  tried  to  sound  bold  and  cheerful, 
but  he  did  not  feel  at  all  sure  how  the  game  was  going  to  end,  whether  Gollum 
guessed right or not. 
"Time's up!" he said. 
"String,  or  nothing!"  shrieked  Gollum,  which  was  not  quite  fair-working  in 
two guesses at once. 
"Both  wrong,"  cried  Bilbo  very much  relieved;  and  he  jumped  at  once  to  his 
feet,  put  his  back  to  the  nearest  wall,  and  held  out  his  little  sword.  He  knew,  of 
course,  that  the  riddle-game  was  sacred  and  of  immense  antiquity,  and  even 
wicked creatures were afraid  to cheat when  they played at  it. But he  felt he could 
not trust this slimy thing to keep any promise at a pinch. Any excuse would do for 
him to slide out of it. And after all that last question had not been a genuine riddle 
according to the ancient laws. 
But at any  rate Gollum did not at once attack him. He could  see  the  sword  in 
Bilbo's  hand.  He  sat  still,  shivering  and  whispering.  At  last  Bilbo  could  wait  no 
longer.  
"Well?" he said. "What about your  promise? I want to go. You must show me 
the way." 
"Did we say so, precious? Show the nassty little Baggins the way out, yes, yes. 
But what has  it got  in  its pocketses, eh? Not string, precious, but not nothing. Oh 
no! gollum!" 
"Never you mind," said Bilbo. "A promise is a promise." 
"Cross  it  is,  impatient,  precious,"  hissed  Gollum.  "But  it  must  wait,  yes  it 
must. We  can't  go  up  the  tunnels  so  hasty. We must  go  and  get  some  things  first, 
yes, things to help us." 
"Well,  hurry  up!"  said  Bilbo,  relieved  to  think  of  Gollum  going  away.  He 
thought he was just making an excuse and did not mean to come back. What was 
Gollum talking about? What useful thing could he keep out on the dark lake? But 
he  was  wrong.  Gollum  did  mean  to  come  back.  He  was  angry  now  and  hungry.  
And he was a miserable wicked creature, and already he had a plan. 
Not  far  away  was  his  island,  of  which  Bilbo  knew  nothing,  and  there  in  his 
hiding-place he kept a few wretched oddments, and one very beautiful thing, very 
beautiful, very wonderful. He had a ring, a golden ring, a precious ring. 
"My  birthday-present!"  he  whispered  to  himself,  as  he  had  often  done  in  the 
endless dark days. "That's what we wants now, yes; we wants it!" 

####-He  wanted  it  because  it  was  a  ring  of  power,  and  if  you  slipped  that  ring on 
your  finger,  you  were  invisible;  only  in  the  full  sunlight  could  you  be  seen,  and 
then only by your shadow, and that would be shaky and faint. 
"My  birthday-present! It came to me on my birthday, my precious," So he had 
always  said  to  himself.  But  who  knows  how Gollum  came  by  that  present,  ages 
ago  in  the old days when such rings were still at  large  in  the world? Perhaps even 
the Master who ruled them could not have said. Gollum used to wear it at first, till 
it tired him; and then he kept it in a pouch next his skin, till it galled him; and now 
usually he hid it in a hole in the rock on his island, and was always going back to 
look  at  it.  And  still  sometimes  he  put  it  on,  when  he  could  not  bear  to  be  parted 
from  it  any  longer,  or when  he was  very,  very,  hungry, and  tired of  fish. Then he 
would creep along dark passages looking for stray goblins. He might even venture 
into  places  where  the  torches  were  lit  and made  his  eyes  blink  and  smart;  for  he 
would  be  safe.  Oh  yes,  quite  safe.  No  one  would  see  him,  no  one  would  notice 
him,  till  he  had  his  fingers  on  their  throat. Only  a  few  hours  ago  he  had worn  it, 
and caught a small goblin-imp. How it squeaked! He still had a bone or two left to 
gnaw, but he wanted something softer.  
"Quite  safe,  yes,"  he  whispered  to  himself.  "It  won't  see  us,  will  it,  my 
precious? No. It won't see us, and its nassty little sword will be useless, yes quite." 
That is what was in his wicked little mind, as he slipped suddenly from Bilbo's 
side,  and  flapped  back  to  his  boat,  and  went  off  into  the  dark.  Bilbo  thought  he 
had  heard  the  last  of  him. Still  he waited  a while;  for  he  had  no  idea  how  to  find 
his way out alone. 
Suddenly  he  heard  a  screech.  It  sent  a  shiver  down  his  back.  Gollum  was 
cursing and wailing away in the gloom, not very far off by the sound of it. He was 
on his island, scrabbling here and there, searching and seeking in vain. 
"Where is it? Where iss it?" Bilbo heard him crying. "Losst it is, my precious, 
lost, lost! Curse us and crush us, my precious is lost!" 
"What's the matter?" Bilbo called. "What have you lost?" 
"It mustn't  ask  us,"  shrieked Gollum.  "Not  its  business,  no,  gollum!  It's  losst, 
gollum, gollum, gollum." 
"Well,  so  am  I,"  cried  Bilbo,  "and  I want  to  get  unlost. And  I won  the  game, 
and you promised. So come along! Come and let me out, and then go on with your 
looking!" 
Utterly  miserable  as  Gollum  sounded,  Bilbo  could  not  find  much  pity  in  his 
heart, and he had a feeling that anything Gollum wanted so much could hardly be 
something good. 

####-"Come along!" he shouted. 
"No,  not  yet,  precious!"  Gollum  answered.  "We  must  search  for  it,  it's  lost, 
gollum." 
"But you never guessed my last question, and you promised," said Bilbo. 
"Never guessed!"  said Gollum. Then  suddenly out of  the gloom came a  sharp 
hiss. "What has it got in its pocketses? Tell us that. It must tell first." 
As  far  as  Bilbo  knew,  there  was  no  particular  reason  why  he  should  not  tell. 
Gollum's mind had jumped to a guess quicker than his; naturally, for Gollum had 
brooded  for  ages  on  this  one  thing,  and  he  was  always  afraid  of  its  being  stolen. 
But Bilbo was annoyed at  the delay. After all, he had won  the game, pretty fairly, 
at a horrible risk. "Answers were to be guessed not given," he said. 
"But it wasn't a fair question," said Gollum. "Not a riddle, precious, no." 
"Oh  well,  if  it's  a  matter  of  ordinary  questions,"  Bilbo  replied,  "then  I  asked 
one first. What have you lost? Tell me that!" 
"What has it got in its pocketses?" The sound came hissing louder and sharper, 
and as he  looked  towards  it,  to his alarm  Bilbo now saw two small points of light 
peering  at  him. As  suspicion  grew  in Gollum's mind,  the  light  of  his  eyes  burned 
with a pale flame. 
"What have you lost?" Bilbo persisted. But now the light in Gollum's eyes had 
become  a  green  fire,  and  it  was  coming  swiftly  nearer.  Gollum  was  in  his  boat 
again,  paddling  wildly  back  to  the  dark  shore;  and  such  a  rage  of  loss  and 
suspicion was in his heart that no sword had any more terror for him. 
Bilbo  could  not  guess  what  had maddened  the  wretched  creature,  but  he  saw 
that all was up, and that Gollum meant to murder him at any rate. Just in time he 
turned  and  ran  blindly  back  up  the  dark  passage  down  which  he  had  come, 
keeping close to the wall and feeling it with his left hand. 
"What  has  it  got  in  its  pocketses?"  he heard  the hiss  loud behind him, and  the 
splash as Gollum leapt from his boat. 
"What have I, I wonder?" he said to himself, as he panted and stumbled along. 
He put his left hand in his pocket. The ring felt very cold as it quietly slipped on to 
his groping forefinger.  
The  hiss  was  close  behind  him.  He  turned  now  and  saw  Gollum's  eyes  like 
small  green  lamps  coming  up  the  slope.  Terrified  he  tried  to  run  faster,  but 
suddenly he struck his toes on a snag in the floor, and fell flat with his little sword 
under him. 

####-In a moment Gollum was on him. But before Bilbo could do anything, recover 
his breath, pick himself up, or wave his sword, Gollum passed by, taking no notice 
of him, cursing and whispering as he ran. 
What could it mean? Gollum could see in the dark. Bilbo could see the light of 
his  eyes  palely  shining  even  from  behind.  Painfully  he  got  up,  and  sheathed  his 
sword,  which  was  now  glowing  faintly  again,  then  very  cautiously  he  followed. 
There seemed nothing else to do. It was no good crawling back down to Gollum's 
water. Perhaps if he followed him, Gollum might lead him to some way of escape 
without meaning to. 
"Curse  it!  curse  it!  curse  it!"  hissed  Gollum.  "Curse  the  Baggins!  It's  gone! 
What has it got in its pocketses? Oh we guess, we guess, my precious. He's found 
it, yes he must have. My birthday-present." 
Bilbo  pricked  up  his  ears.  He  was  at  last  beginning  to  guess  himself.  He 
hurried  a  little,  getting  as  close  as  he  dared  behind  Gollum,  who  was  still  going 
quickly,  not  looking  back,  but  turning  his  head  from  side  to  side,  as Bilbo  could 
see from the faint glimmer on the walls. 
"My birthday-present! Curse it! How did we lose it, my precious? Yes, that's it. 
When we came  this way  last, when we  twisted  that nassty young squeaker. That's 
it. Curse it! It slipped from us, after all these ages and ages! It's gone, gollum." 
Suddenly Gollum sat down and began to weep, a whistling and gurgling sound 
horrible  to  listen  to.  Bilbo  halted  and  flattened  himself  against  the  tunnel-wall. 
After a while Gollum stopped weeping and began to talk. He seemed to be having 
an argument with himself. 
"It's  no  good  going  back  there  to  search,  no.  We  doesn't  remember  all  the 
places we've  visited. And  it's  no  use.  The  Baggins  has  got  it  in  its  pocketses;  the 
nassty noser has found it, we says." 
"We  guesses,  precious,  only  guesses.  We  can't  know  till  we  find  the  nassty 
creature and squeezes it. But it doesn't know what the present can do, does it? It'll 
just  keep  it  in  its  pocketses.  It  doesn't  know,  and  it  can't  go  far.  It's  lost  itself, the 
nassty nosey thing. It doesn't know the way out It said so." 
"It  said  so, yes; but  it's  tricksy.  It doesn't  say what  it means.  It won't  say what 
it's got in its pocketses. It knows. It knows a way in, it must know a way out, yes. 
It's off to the back-door. To the back-door, that's it." 
"The goblinses will catch it then. It can't get out that way, precious." 
"Ssss,  sss,  gollum!  Goblinses!  Yes,  but  if  it's  got  the  present,  our  precious 
present,  then  goblinses  will  get  it,  gollum!  They'll  find  it,  they'll  find  out what  it 
does. We shan't ever be safe again, never, gollum! One of  the goblinses will put  it 

####-on, and  then no one will  see him. He'll be  there but not  seen. Not even our clever 
eyeses  will  notice  him;  and  he'll  come  creepsy  and  tricksy  and  catch  us,  gollum, 
gollum!" 
"Then let's stop talking, precious, and make haste. If the Baggins has gone that 
way, we must go quick and see. Go! Not far now. Make haste!" 
With  a  spring Gollum got up  and  started  shambling off  at  a great pace. Bilbo 
hurried  after  him,  still  cautiously,  though  his  chief  fear  now  was  of  tripping  on 
another snag and falling with a noise. His head was in a whirl of hope and wonder. 
It  seemed  that  the  ring  he  had  was  a  magic  ring:  it  made  you  invisible!  He  had 
heard  of  such  things,  of  course,  in old old  tales; but  it was hard  to believe  that he 
really  had  found  one,  by  accident.  Still  there  it was: Gollum with  his  bright  eyes 
had passed him by, only a yard to one side. 
On  they  went,  Gollum  flip-flapping  ahead,  hissing  and  cursing;  Bilbo  behind 
going  as  softly  as  a  hobbit  can.  Soon  they  came  to  places  where,  as  Bilbo  had 
noticed  on  the way  down,  side-passages opened, this way and that. Gollum began 
at once to count them. 
"One  left,  yes. One  right,  yes. Two  right,  yes,  yes. Two  left,  yes,  yes." And so 
on and on. 
As  the count grew he slowed down, and he began  to get shaky and weepy; for 
he  was  leaving  the  water  further  and  further  behind,  and  he  was  getting  afraid. 
Goblins  might  be  about,  and  he  had  lost  his  ring.  At  last  he  stopped  by  a  low 
opening, on their left as they went up. 
"Seven  right,  yes.  Six  left,  yes!"  he  whispered.  "This  is  it.  This  is  the  way  to 
the back-door, yes. Here's the passage!" 
He  peered  in,  and  shrank  back.  "But  we  durstn't  go  in,  precious,  no  we 
durstn't. Goblinses down there. Lots of goblinses. We smells them. Ssss!" 
"What shall we do? Curse them and crush them! We must wait here, precious, 
wait a bit and see." 
So  they  came  to  a  dead  stop. Gollum  had  brought  Bilbo  to  the way  out  after 
all,  but  Bilbo  could  not  get  in!  There was Gollum  sitting humped up  right  in  the 
opening,  and his  eyes gleamed  cold  in his head,  as he  swayed  it  from  side  to  side 
between his knees. 
Bilbo  crept  away  from  the  wall  more  quietly  than  a  mouse;  but  Gollum 
stiffened  at  once,  and  sniffed,  and  his  eyes  went  green.  He  hissed  softly  but 
menacingly. He could not see  the hobbit, but now he was on  the alert, and he had 
other senses  that  the darkness had sharpened: hearing and smell. He seemed  to be 
crouched  right  down with  his  flat  hands  splayed  on  the  floor, and his head  thrust 

####-out, nose almost to the stone. Though he was only a black shadow in the gleam of 
his own eyes, Bilbo could see or feel that he was tense as a bowstring, gathered for 
a spring. 
Bilbo  almost  stopped  breathing,  and  went  stiff  himself. He was desperate. He 
must  get  away,  out  of  this  horrible  darkness,  while  he  had  any  strength  left.  He 
must  fight.  He  must  stab  the  foul  thing,  put  its  eyes  out,  kill  it.  It  meant  to  kill 
him.  No,  not  a  fair  fight.  He  was  invisible  now.  Gollum  had  no  sword. Gollum 
had  not  actually  threatened  to  kill  him,  or  tried  to  yet.  And  he  was  miserable, 
alone, lost. A sudden understanding, a pity mixed with horror, welled up in Bilbo's 
heart:  a  glimpse  of  endless  unmarked  days  without  light  or  hope  of  betterment, 
hard stone, cold fish, sneaking and whispering. All these thoughts passed in a flash 
of a second. He  trembled. And  then quite suddenly  in another flash, as  if  lifted by 
a new strength and resolve, he leaped. 
No great leap for a man, but a leap in the dark. Straight over Gollum's head he 
jumped,  seven  feet  forward  and  three  in  the  air;  indeed, had he known  it, he only 
just missed cracking his skull on the low arch of the passage. 
Gollum  threw  himself  backwards,  and  grabbed  as  the  hobbit  flew  over  him, 
but  too  late:  his  hands  snapped  on  thin  air,  and  Bilbo,  falling  fair  on  his  sturdy 
feet, sped off down the new tunnel. He did not turn to see what Gollum was doing. 
There was a hissing and cursing almost at his heels at  first,  then  it stopped. All at 
once  there  came  a  bloodcurdling  shriek,  filled  with  hatred  and  despair.  Gollum 
was defeated. He dared go no  further. He had  lost:  lost his prey, and  lost,  too,  the 
only thing he had ever cared for, his precious. The cry brought Bilbo's heart to his 
mouth,  but  still  he  held  on. Now  faint  as  an  echo,  but menacing,  the  voice  came 
behind: 
"Thief, thief, thief! Baggins! We hates it, we hates it, we hates it for ever!" 
Then  there was  a  silence. But  that  too  seemed menacing  to Bilbo.  "If  goblins 
are  so  near  that  he  smelt  them," he  thought, "then  they'll have heard his shrieking 
and cursing. Careful now, or this way will lead you to worse things." 
The passage was low and roughly made. It was not too difficult for the hobbit, 
except when,  in  spite of all care, he  stubbed his poor  toes again, several times, on 
nasty  jagged  stones  in  the  floor.  "A  bit  low  for  goblins,  at  least  for  the  big  ones," 
thought Bilbo,  not  knowing  that  even  the  big  ones,  the  ores  of  the mountains,  go 
along at a great speed stooping low with their hands almost on the ground. 
Soon the passage that had been sloping down began to go up again, and after a 
while  it  climbed  steeply.  That  slowed  Bilbo  down.  But  at  last  the  slope  stopped, 
the passage  turned a corner, and dipped down again, and  there, at  the bottom of a 

####-short  incline,  he  saw,  filtering  round  another  corner-a  glimpse  of  light.  Not  red 
light,  as  of  fire  or  lantern,  but  a  pale  out-of-doors  sort of  light. Then Bilbo began 
to run. 
Scuttling as fast as his legs would carry him he turned the last corner and came 
suddenly  right  into  an  open  space, where  the  light,  after  all  that  time  in  the  dark, 
seemed  dazzlingly  bright.  Really  it  was  only  a  leak  of  sunshine  in  through  a 
doorway, where a great door, a stone door, was left standing open. 
Bilbo  blinked,  and  then  suddenly  he  saw  the  goblins:  goblins  in  full  armour 
with drawn swords sitting just inside the door, and watching it with wide eyes, and 
watching the passage that led to it. They were aroused, alert, ready for anything. 
They saw him sooner than he saw them. Yes, they saw him. Whether it was .an 
accident,  or  a  last  trick  of  the  ring  before  it  took  a  new master,  it was  not  on  his 
finger. With yells of delight the goblins rushed upon him. 
A  pang  of  fear  and  loss,  like  an  echo  of  Gollum's  misery,  smote  Bilbo,  and 
forgetting even  to draw his sword he struck his hands  into his pockets. And- there 
was  the  ring  still,  in  his  left  pocket,  and  it  slipped  on  his  finger.  The  goblins 
stopped  short.  They  could  not  see  a  sign  of  him.  He  had  vanished.  They  yelled 
twice as loud as before, but not so delightedly.  
"Where is it?" they cried. 
"Go back up the passage!" some shouted. 
"This way!" some yelled. "That way!" others yelled. 
"Look out for the door," bellowed the captain. 
Whistles  blew,  armour  clashed,  swords  rattled,  goblins  cursed  and  swore  and 
ran hither and thither, falling over one another and getting very angry. There was a 
terrible outcry, to-do, and disturbance. 
Bilbo was  dreadfully  frightened,  but  he  had  the  sense  to  understand what  had 
happened and to sneak behind a big barrel which held drink for the goblin-guards, 
and  so  get  out  of  the  way  and  avoid  being  bumped  into,  trampled  to  death,  or 
caught by feel. 
"I must  get  to  the  door,  I must  get  to  the  door!"  he  kept  on  saying  to  himself, 
but  it was  a  long  time  before  he ventured  to  try. Then  it was  like a horrible game 
of  blind-man's  buff.  The  place  was  full  of  goblins  running  about,  and  the  poor 
little  hobbit  dodged  this  way  and  that,  was  knocked  over  by  a  goblin  who  could 
not  make  out  what  he  had  bumped  into,  scrambled  away  on  all  fours,  slipped 
between the legs of the captain just in time, got up, and ran for the door.  
It  was  still  ajar,  but  a  goblin  had  pushed  it  nearly  to.  Bilbo  struggled  but  he 
could  not  move  it.  He  tried  to  squeeze  through  the  crack.  He  squeezed  and 

####-squeezed, and he  stuck!  It was awful. His buttons had got wedged on  the edge of 
the  door  and  the  door-post.  He  could  see  outside  into  the  open  air:  there  were  a 
few  steps  running  down  into  a  narrow  valley  between  tall  mountains;  the  sun 
came  out  from  behind  a  cloud  and  shone  bright  on  the  outside  of  the  door-but he 
could not get through. 
Suddenly  one  of  the  goblins  inside  shouted:  "There  is  a  shadow  by  the  door. 
Something is outside!" 
Bilbo's  heart  jumped  into  his mouth. He  gave  a  terrific  squirm. Buttons burst 
off in all directions. He was through, with a torn coat and waistcoat, leaping down 
the steps  like a goat, while bewildered goblins were still picking up his nice brass 
buttons on the doorstep. 
Of course they soon came down after him, hooting and hallooing, and hunting 
among  the  trees. But  they  don't  like  the  sun:  it makes  their  legs wobble  and  their 
heads giddy. They could not find Bilbo with the ring on, slipping in and out of the 
shadow of  the  trees,  running quick and quiet, and keeping out of  the sun; so soon 
they went back grumbling and cursing to guard the door. Bilbo had escaped. 
 

####-<h4>Chapter 6 </h4> <br>

Out of the Frying-Pan into the Fire 

 
Bilbo had escaped the goblins, but he did not know where he was. He had lost 
hood,  cloak,  food,  pony,  his  buttons  and  his  friends. He wandered  on  and  on,  till 
the  sun  began  to  sink westwards-behind  the mountains. Their shadows fell across 
Bilbo's  path,  and  he  looked  back.  Then  he  looked  forward  and  could  see  before 
him  only  ridges  and  slopes  falling  towards  lowlands  and  plains  glimpsed 
occasionally between the trees. 
"Good  heavens!"  he  exclaimed.  "I  seem  to  have  got  right  to  the  other  side  of 
the Misty Mountains,  right  to  the  edge  of  the Land Beyond! Where  and O where 
can  Gandalf  and  the  dwarves  have  got  to?  I  only  hope  to  goodness  they  are  not 
still back there in the power of the goblins!" 
He  still wandered on, out of  the  little high valley, over  its edge, and down  the 
slopes beyond; but all the while a very uncomfortable thought was growing inside 
him.  He  wondered  whether  he  ought  not,  now  he  had  the magic  ring,  to  go  back 
into  the  horrible,  horrible,  tunnels  and  look  for  his  friends.  He  had  just made  up 
his  mind  that  it  was  his  duty,  that  he  must  turn  back-and  very miserable  he  felt 
about it-when he heard voices. 
He  stopped  and  listened.  It  did  not  sound  like  goblins;  so  he  crept  forward 
carefully. He was  on  a  stony  path winding  downwards with  a  rocky wall.  on  the 
left hand; on the other side the ground sloped away and there were dells below the 
level  of  the  path  overhung with  bushes  and  low  trees.  In  one  of  these  dells  under 
the bushes people were talking. 
He crept still nearer, and suddenly he saw peering between  two big boulders a 
head with a red hood on:  it was Balin doing  look-out. He could have clapped and 
shouted  for  joy,  but  he  did  not.  He  had  still  got  the  ring  on,  for  fear  of  meeting 
something unexpected and unpleasant, and he saw that Balin was looking straight 
at him without noticing him. 
"I will  give  them  all  a  surprise,"  he  thought,  as  he  crawled  into  the  bushes at 
the edge of the dell. Gandalf was arguing with the dwarves. They were discussing 
all  that  had  happened  to  them  in  the  tunnels,  and  wondering  and  debating  what 
they were  to  do  now. The  dwarves were  grumbling,  and Gandalf was  saying  that 
they could not possibly go on with their journey leaving Mr. Baggins in the hands 
of  the  goblins,  without  trying  to  find  out  if  he  was  alive  or  dead,  and  without 
trying to rescue him. 

####-"After  all  he  is  my  friend,"  said  the  wizard,  "and  not  a  bad  little  chap.  I  feel 
responsible for him. I wish to goodness you had not lost him." 
The  dwarves  wanted  to  know  why  he  had  ever  been  brought  at  all,  why  he 
could not  stick  to his  friends  and  come  along with  them,  and why  the wizard had 
not chosen someone with more sense. "He has been more trouble than use so far," 
said  one.  "If  we  have  got  to'  go  back  now  into  those  abominable  tunnels  to  look 
for him, then drat him, I say." 
Gandalf answered angrily: "I brought him, and  I don't bring  things  that are of 
no use. Either you help me to look for him, or I go and leave you here to get out of 
the mess as best you can yourselves. If we can only find him again, you will thank 
me before all is over. Whatever did you want to go and drop him for, Dori?" 
"You would  have  dropped  him,"  said Dori,  "if a goblin had suddenly grabbed 
your  leg  from  behind  in  the  dark,  tripped  up  your  feet,  and  kicked  you  in  the 
back!" 
"Then why didn't you pick him up again?" 
"Good  heavens!  Can  you  ask!  Goblins  fighting  and  biting  in  the  dark, 
everybody falling over bodies  and hitting one another! You nearly chopped off my 
head  with  Glamdring,  and  Thorin Was  stabbing  here  there  and  everywhere  with 
Orcrist.  All  of  a  sudden  you  gave  one  of  your  blinding  flashes,  and  we  saw  the 
goblins running back yelping. You shouted 'follow me everybody!' and everybody 
ought  to  have  followed. We  thought  everybody  had. There was  no  time  to  count, 
as  you  know  quite  well,  till  we  had  dashed  through  the  gate-guards,  out  of  the 
lower  door,  and  helter-skelter  down  here.  And  here  we  are-without  the  burglar, 
confusticate him!" 
"And  here's  the  burglar!"  said  Bilbo  stepping  down  into  the  middle  of  them, 
and slipping off the ring. 
Bless  me,  how  they  jumped!  Then  they  shouted  with  surprise  and  delight. 
Gandalf was as astonished as any of  them, but probably more pleased than all the 
others. He called to Balin and told him what he thought of a look-out man who let 
people  walk  right  into  them  like  that  without  warning.  It  is  a  fact  that  Bilbo's 
reputation  went  up  a  very  great  deal  with  the  dwarves  after  this.  If  they had  still 
doubted  that  he  was  really  a  first-class  burglar,  in  spite  of Gandalf's words,  they 
doubted  no  longer. Balin was  the most  puzzled  of  all;  but  everyone  said  it was  a 
very clever bit of work. 
Indeed Bilbo was  so  pleased with  their  praise  that he just chuckled inside and 
said nothing whatever about  the  ring; and when  they asked him how he did  it, he 
said: "O, just crept along, you know-very carefully and quietly." 

####-"Well,  it  is  the  first  time  that  even  a  mouse  has  crept  along  carefully  and 
quietly  under my  very  nose  and  not  been  spotted,"  said Balin,  "and  I  take  off my 
hood to you." Which he did. 
"Balin at your service," said he. 
"Your servant, Mr. Baggins," said Bilbo. 
Then  they  wanted  to  know  all  about  his  adventures  after  they  had  lost  him, 
and  he  sat  down  and  told  them  everything-except  about  the  finding  of  the  ring 
("not  just  now"  he  thought).  They  were  particularly  interested  in  the  riddle-
competition, and shuddered most appreciatively at his description of Gollum. 
"And  then  I  couldn't  think  of  any  other  question with  him  sitting  beside me," 
ended Bilbo; "so I said  'what's in my pocket?' And he couldn't guess in three goes. 
So I said: 'what about your promise? Show me the way out!' But he came at me to 
kill  me,  and  I  ran,  and  fell  over,  and  he missed me  in  the  dark.  Then  I  followed 
him,  because  I  heard  him  talking  to  himself.  He  thought  I  really  knew  the  way 
out,  and  so  he  was  making  for  it.  And  then  he  sat  down  in  the  entrance,  and  I 
could not get by. So I jumped over him and escaped, and ran down to the gate." 
"What about guards?" they asked. "Weren't there any?" 
"O yes! lots of them; but I dodged 'em. I got stuck in the door, which was only 
open a crack, and  I  lost  lots of buttons," he  said  sadly  looking at his  torn clothes. 
"But I squeezed through all right-and here I am." 
The  dwarves  looked  at  him  with  quite  a  new  respect,  when  he  talked  about 
dodging  guards,  jumping  over  Gollum,  and  squeezing  through,  as  if  it  was  not 
very difficult or very alarming. 
"What  did  I  tell  you?"  said  Gandalf  laughing.  "Mr.  Baggins  has more  about 
him than you guess." He gave Bilbo a queer look from under his bushy eyebrows, 
as he said this, and the hobbit wondered if he guessed at the part of his tale that he 
had left out. 
Then he had questions of his own to ask, for if Gandalf had explained it all by 
now  to  the  dwarves,  Bilbo  had  not  heard  it.  He  wanted  to  know  how  the  wizard 
had turned up again, and where they had all got to now.  
The wizard, to tell the truth, never minded explaining his cleverness more than 
once, so now he had told Bilbo that both he and Elrond had been well aware of the 
presence of evil goblins  in  that part of  the mountains. But  their main gate used  to 
come out on a different pass, one more easy to travel by, so that they often caught 
people  benighted  near  their  gates. Evidently  people  had  given  up  going  that way, 
and  the  goblins  must  have  opened  their  new  entrance  at  the  top  of  the  pass  the 
dwarves had taken, quite recently, because it had been found quite safe up to now.  

####-"I must see if I can't find a more or less decent giant to block it up again," said 
Gandalf, "or soon there will be no getting over the mountains at all." 
As  soon  as Gandalf  had  heard Bilbo's  yell  he  realized what  had  happened.  In 
the flash which killed the goblins that were grabbing him he had nipped inside the 
crack, just as it snapped to. He followed after the drivers and prisoners right to the 
edge  of  the  great  hall,  and  there  he  sat  down  and  worked  up  the  best  magic  he 
could in the shadows. 
"A very ticklish business, it was," he said. "Touch and go!" 
But,  of  course,  Gandalf  had  made  a  special  study  of  bewitchments  with  fire 
and  lights (even  the hobbit had never forgotten  the magic fireworks at Old Took's 
midsummer-eve  parties,  as  you  remember).  The  rest  we  all  know  -  except  that 
Gandalf knew all about  the back-door, as the goblins called the lower gate, where 
Bilbo lost his buttons. As a matter of fact it was well known to anybody who was 
acquainted with this part of the mountains; but it took a wizard to keep his head in 
the tunnels and guide them in the right direction. 
"They made  that  gate  ages  ago,"  he  said,  "partly  for  a way  of  escape,  if  they 
needed one; partly as a way out into the lands beyond, where they still come in the 
dark and do great damage. They guard  it always and no one has ever managed to 
block it up. They will guard it doubly after this," he laughed. 
All  the  others  laughed  too.  After  all  they  had  lost  a  good  deal,  but  they  had 
killed the Great Goblin and a great many others besides, and they had all escaped, 
so they might be said to have had the best of it so far.  
But  the  wizard  called  them  to  their  senses.  "We  must  be  getting  on  at  once, 
now we  are  a  little  rested,"  he  said.  "They will  be  out  after  us  in  hundreds when 
night  comes  on;  and  already  shadows  are  lengthening.  They  can  smell  our 
footsteps  for  hours  and  hours  after  we  have  passed. We  must  be  miles  on  before 
dusk. There will be a bit of moon,  if  it keeps fine, and  that  is  lucky. Not  that  they 
mind the moon much, but it will give us a little light to steer by." 
"O yes!" he said  in answer  to more questions from  the hobbit. "You  lose  track 
of  time  inside  goblin-tunnels.  Today's  Thursday,  and  it  was  Monday  night  or 
Tuesday morning that we were captured. We have gone miles and miles, and come 
right down through the heart of the mountains, and are now on the other side-quite 
a short cut. But we are not at  the point  to which our pass would have brought us; 
we  are  too  far  to  the North,  and  have  some  awkward  country  ahead. And we  are 
still pretty high up. Let's get on!" 
 

####-"I  am  so dreadfully hungry," groaned Bilbo, who was  suddenly  aware  that he 
had  not  had  a meal  since  the  night  before  the  night  before  last.  Just  think  of  that 
for  a  hobbit!  His  stomach  felt  all  empty  and  loose  and  his  legs  all  wobbly,  now 
that the excitement was over.  
"Can't  help  it,"  said Gandalf,  "unless  you  like  to  go  back  and  ask  the  goblins 
nicely to let you have your pony back and your luggage." 
"No thank you!" said Bilbo. 
"Very well  then, we must  just  tighten our belts  and  trudge on  - or  we shall be 
made into supper, and that will be much worse than having none ourselves." 
As  they went  on  Bilbo  looked  from  side  to  side  for  something  to  eat;  but  the 
blackberries were  still  only  in  flower,  and  of  course  there were  no  nuts,  nor  even 
hawthorn-berries. He nibbled a bit of sorrel, and he drank from a small mountain-
stream that crossed the path, and he ate three wild strawberries that he found on its 
bank, but it was not much good. 
They  still  went  on  and  on.  The  rough  path  disappeared.  The  bushes,  and  the 
long  grasses,  between  the  boulders,  the  patches  of  rabbit-cropped  turf,  the  thyme 
and  the  sage  and  the  marjoram,  and  the  yellow  rockroses  all  vanished,  and  they 
found themselves at the top of a wide steep slope of fallen stones, the remains of a 
landslide.  When  they  began  to  go  down  this,  rubbish  and  small  pebbles  rolled 
away  from  their  feet;  soon  larger  bits  of  split  stone  went  clattering  down  and 
started  other  pieces  below  them  slithering  and  rolling;  then  lumps  of  rocks  were 
disturbed and bounded off, crashing down with a dust and a noise. Before long the 
whole  slope  above  them  and  below  them  seemed  on  the  move,  and  they  were 
sliding  away,  huddled  all  together,  in  a  fearful  confusion  of  slipping,  rattling, 
cracking slabs and stones. 
It  was  the  trees  at  the  bottom  that  saved  them.  They  slid  into  the  edge  of  a 
climbing  wood  of  pines  that  here  stood  right  up  the  mountain  slope  from  the 
deeper  darker  forests  of  the  valleys  below.  Some  caught  hold  of  the  trunks  and 
swung  themselves  into  lower  branches,  some  (like  the  little  hobbit)  got  behind  a 
tree to shelter from the onslaught of the rocks. Soon the danger was over, the slide 
had  stopped,  and  the  last  faint  crashes  could  be  heard  as  the  largest  of  the 
disturbed  stones  went  bounding  and  spinning  among  the  bracken  and  the  pine-
roots far below.  
"Well!  that  has  got  us  on  a  bit,"  said  Gandalf;  "and  even  goblins  tracking  us 
will have a job to come down here quietly." 

####-"I  daresay,"  grumbled Bombur;  "but  they won't  find  it  difficult  to  send  stones 
bouncing  down  on  our  heads."  The  dwarves  (and  Bilbo)  were  feeling  far  from 
happy, and were rubbing their bruised and damaged legs and feet. 
"Nonsense!  We  are  going  to  turn  aside  here  out  of  the  path  of  the  slide.  We 
must  be  quick! Look  at  the  light!" The  sun  had  long  gone behind  the mountains. 
Already  the  shadows  were  deepening  about  them,  though  far  away  through  the 
trees and over  the black  tops of  those growing  lower down  they could still see  the 
evening  lights  on  the  plains  beyond. They  limped  along  now  as  fast  as  they were 
able  down  the  gentle  slopes  of  a  pine  forest  in  a  slanting  path  leading  steadily 
southwards. At  times  they were pushing  through a sea of bracken with  tall  fronds 
rising  right  above  the  hobbit's  head;  at  times  they  were  marching  along  quiet  as 
quiet  over  a  floor  of  pine-needles;  and  all  the  while  the  forest-gloom got heavier 
and  the  forest-silence deeper. There was no wind that evening to bring even a sea-
sighing into the branches of the trees. 
 
"Must we go any further?" asked Bilbo, when it was so dark that he could only 
just  see  Thorin's  beard  wagging  beside  him,  and  so  quiet  that  he  could  hear  the 
dwarves'  breathing  like  a  loud  noise.  "My  toes  are  all  bruised  and  bent,  and  my 
legs ache, and my stomach is wagging like an empty sack." 
"A bit further," said Gandalf. 
After  what  seemed  ages  further  they  came  suddenly  to  an  opening  where  no 
trees  grew.  The  moon  was  up  and  was  shining  into  the  clearing.  Somehow  it 
struck  all of  them  as not  at  all  a nice place,  although  there was nothing wrong  to 
see. 
All  of a sudden  they heard a howl away down hill, a  long shuddering howl. It 
was  answered  by  another  away  to  the  right  and  a  good  deal  nearer  to  them;  then 
by  another  not  far  away  to  the  left.  It  was  wolves  howling  at  the  moon,  wolves 
gathering together! 
There were no wolves living near Mr. Baggins' hole at home, but he knew that 
noise.  He  had  had  it  described  to  him  often  enough  in  tales.  One  of  his  elder 
cousins  (on  the  Took  side),  who  had  been  a  great  traveller,  used  to  imitate  it  to 
frighten him. To hear  it  out  in  the forest under  the moon was  too much for Bilbo. 
Even  magic  rings  are  not  much  use  against  wolves-especially  against  the  evil 
packs that lived under the shadow of the goblin-infested mountains, over the Edge 
of  the Wild  on  the  borders  of  the  unknown. Wolves of  that sort smell keener  than 
goblins, and do not need to see you to catch you! 

####-"What  shall  we  do,  what  shall  we  do!"  he  cried.  "Escaping  goblins  to  be 
caught  by wolves!"  he  said,  and  it  became  a  proverb,  though we  now  say  'out  of 
the frying-pan into the fire' in the same sort of uncomfortable situations. 
"Up the trees quick!" cried Gandalf; and they ran to the trees at the edge of the 
glade,  hunting  for  those  that  had  branches  fairly  low,  or  were  slender  enough  to 
swarm  up.  They  found  them  as  quick  as  ever  they  could,  you  can  guess;  and  up 
they went as high as ever  they could  trust  the branches. You would have  laughed 
(from a safe distance), if you had seen the dwarves sitting up in the trees with their 
beards dangling down, like old gentlemen gone cracked and playing at being boys. 
Fili and Kili were at the top of a tall larch like an enormous Christmas tree. Dori, 
Nori,  On,  Oin,  and  Gloin  were  more  comfortable  in  a  huge  pine  with  regular 
branches  sticking  out  at  intervals  like  the  spokes  of  a  wheel.  Bifur,  Bofur, 
Bombur,  and  Thorin  were  in  another.  Dwalin  and  Balin  had  swarmed  up  a  tall 
slender fir with few branches and were  trying  to find a place  to sit  in  the greenery 
of  the  topmost  boughs.  Gandalf,  who  was  a  good  deal  taller  than  the  others,  had 
found  a  tree  into  which  they  could  not  climb,  a  large  pine  standing  at  the  very 
edge  of  the  glade. He was  quite  hidden  in  its  boughs,  but  you  could  see  his  eyes 
gleaming in the moon as he peeped out. 
And Bilbo? He could not get into any tree, and was scuttling about from trunk 
to trunk, like a rabbit that has lost its hole and has a dog after it. 
"You've left the burglar behind again}" said Nori to Dori looking down. 
"I  can't  be  always  carrying  burglars  on  my  back,"  said  Dori,  "down  tunnels 
and up trees! What do you think I am? A porter?" 
"He'll be eaten if we don't 'do something," said Thorin, for there were howls all 
around  them  now,  getting  nearer  and  nearer.  "Dori!"  he  called,  for  Dori  was 
lowest down in the easiest tree, "be quick, and give Mr. Baggins a hand up!" 
Dori was really a decent fellow in spite of his grumbling. Poor Bilbo could not 
reach  his  hand  even  when  he  climbed  down  to  the  bottom  branch  and  hung  his 
arm down as far as ever he could. So Dori actually climbed out of the tree and let 
Bilbo scramble up and stand on his back. 
Just  at  that  moment  the  wolves  trotted  howling  into  the  clearing.  All  of  a 
sudden  there  were  hundreds  of  eyes  looking  at  them.  Still  Dori  did  not  let  Bilbo 
down.  He  waited  till  he  had  clambered  off  his  shoulders  into  the  branches,  and 
then he jumped for the branches himself. Only just in time! A wolf snapped- at his 
cloak as he swung up, and nearly got him. In a minute there was a whole pack of 
them yelping all round  the  tree and  leaping up at  the  trunk, with eyes blazing and 
tongues hanging out. 

####-But  even  the  wild  Wargs  (for  so  the  evil  wolves  over  the  Edge  of  the  Wild 
were named) cannot climb  trees. For a  time  they were  safe.  'Luckily  it was warm 
and not windy. Trees are not very comfortable to sit in for long at any time; but in 
the  cold  and  the wind, with wolves  all  round  below waiting  for  you,  they  can  be 
perfectly miserable places. 
This  glade  in  the  ring  of  trees  was  evidently  a  meeting-place  of  the  wolves. 
More  and  more  kept  coming  in.  They  left  guards  at  the  foot  of  the  tree  in which 
Dori  and  Bilbo  were,  and  then  went  sniffling  about  till  they  had  smelt  out  every 
tree that had anyone in it. These they guarded too, while all the rest (hundreds and 
hundreds  it  seemed) went  and  sat  in  a  great  circle  in  the  glade;  and  in the middle 
of  the circle was a great grey wolf. He  spoke  to  them  in  the dreadful  language of 
the  Wargs.  Gandalf  understood  it.  Bilbo  did  not,  but  it  sounded  terrible  to  him, 
and  as  if  all  their  talk  was  about  cruel  and  wicked  things,  as  it  was.  Every  now 
and then all the Wargs in the circle would answer their grey chief all together, and 
their dreadful clamour almost made the hobbit fall out of his pine-tree. 
I  will  tell  you  what  Gandalf  heard,  though  Bilbo  did  not  understand  it.  The 
Wargs  and  the  goblins  often  helped  one  another  in wicked  deeds. Goblins  do  not 
usually venture very  far  from  their mountains, unless  they  are driven out  and  are 
looking  for  new  homes,  or  are marching  to  war  (which  I  am  glad  to  say  has  not 
happened for a long while). But in those days they sometimes used to go on raids, 
especially to get food or slaves to work for them. Then they often got the Wargs to 
help  and  shared  the  plunder with  them. Sometimes  they  rode  on wolves  like men 
do  on  horses.  Now  it  seemed  that  a  great  goblin-raid  had  been  planned  for  that 
very  night.  The  Wargs  had  come  to  meet  the  goblins  and  the  goblins  were  late. 
The  reason,  no  doubt,  was  the  death  of  the  Great  Goblin,  and  all  the  excitement 
caused  by  the  dwarves  and  Bilbo  and  the  wizard,  for  whom  they  were  probably 
still hunting. 
In spite of  the dangers of  this  far  land bold men had of  late been making  their 
way  back  into  it  from  the  South,  cutting  down  trees,  and  building  themselves 
places to live in among the more pleasant woods in the valleys and along the river-
shores. There were many of  them, and  they were brave and well-armed, and even 
the Wargs dared not attack  them  if  there were many  together, or  in  the bright day. 
But  now  they  had  planned with  the  goblins'  help  to  come  by  night  upon  some  of 
the  villages nearest  the mountains.  If  their plan had been carried out,  there would 
have been none  left  there next day;  all would have been killed  except  the  few  the 
goblins kept from the wolves and carried back as prisoners to their caves. 

####-This was dreadful talk to listen to, not only because of the brave woodmen and 
their  wives  and  children,  but  also  because  of  the  danger  which  now  threatened 
Gandalf  and his  friends. The Wargs were  angry  and puzzled  at  finding  them here 
in  their  very meeting-place. They  thought  they were  friends of  the woodmen, and 
were  come  to  spy  on  them,  and  would  take  news  of  their  plans  down  into  the 
valleys,  and  then  the  goblins  and  the wolves would  have  to  fight  a  terrible  battle 
instead  of  capturing  prisoners  and  devouring  people  waked  suddenly  from  their 
sleep. So  the Wargs  had  no  intention  of  going  away  and  letting  the  people  up  the 
trees escape, at any rate not until morning. And long before that, they said, goblin 
soldiers would be coming down  from  the mountains; and goblins can climb  trees, 
or cut them down. 
Now you can understand why Gandalf, listening to their growling and yelping, 
began  to be dreadfully afraid, wizard  though he was, and  to feel  that  they were  in 
a very bad place, and had not yet escaped at all. All  the same he was not going to 
let them have it all their own way, though he could not do very much stuck up in a 
tall  tree  with  wolves  all  round  on  the  ground  below.  He  gathered  the  huge 
pinecones  from  the  branches  of  his  tree.  Then  he  set  one  alight  with  bright  blue 
fire, and  threw  it whizzing down among  the circle of  the wolves.  It  struck one on 
the back, and  immediately his shaggy coat caught  fire, and he was  leaping  to and 
fro  yelping  horribly.  Then  another  came  and  another,  one  in  blue  flames,  one  in 
red,  another  in  green.  They  burst  on  the  ground  in  the  middle  of  the  circle  and 
went off in coloured sparks and smoke. A specially large one hit the chief wolf on 
the  nose,  and  he  leaped  in  the  air  ten  feet,  and  then  rushed  round  and  round  the 
circle biting and snapping even at the other wolves in his anger and fright. 
The  dwarves  and  Bilbo  shouted  and  cheered.  The  rage  of  the  wolves  was 
terrible  to  see,  and  the  commotion  they  made  filled  all  the  forest.  Wolves  are  
afraid of fire at all times, but this was a most horrible and uncanny fire. If a spark 
got  in  their coats  it stuck and burned  into  them, and unless  they  rolled over quick 
they  were  soon  all  in  flames.  Very  soon  all  about  the  glade  wolves  were  rolling 
over  and over  to put out  the  sparks on  their backs, while  those  that  were burning 
were running about howling and setting others alight, till their own friends chased 
them  away  and  they  fled  off  down  the  slopes  crying  and  yammering  and  looking 
for water.  
 
"What's  all  this  uproar  in  the  forest  tonight?"  said  the  Lord  of  the  Eagles. He 
was  sitting,  black  in  the moonlight,  on  the  top  of  a  lonely  pinnacle  of  rock  at  the 

####-eastern edge of  the mountains. "I hear wolves' voices! Are  the goblins at mischief 
in the woods?" 
He swept up  into  the air, and  immediately  two of his guards  from the rocks at 
either hand  leaped up  to  follow him. They circled up  in  the sky and  looked down 
upon  the  ring  of  the Wargs,  a  tiny  spot  far  far  below.  But  eagles  have  keen  eyes 
and  can  see  small  things  at  a  great  distance.  The  lord  of  the  eagles  of  the  Misty 
Mountains had eyes  that could  look at  the  sun unblinking, and could  see a  rabbit 
moving on the ground a mile below even in the moonlight. So though he could not 
see  the  people  in  the  trees,  he  could make  out  the  commotion  among  the wolves 
and  see  the  tiny  flashes  of  fire,  and  hear  the  howling  and  yelping  come  up  faint 
from far beneath him. Also he could see the glint of the moon on goblin spears and 
helmets,  as  long  lines  of  the wicked  folk  crept  down  the  hillsides  from  their  gate 
and wound into the wood. 
Eagles are not kindly birds. Some are cowardly and cruel. But the ancient race 
of  the  northern  mountains  were  the  greatest  of  all  birds;  they  were  proud  and 
strong and noble-hearted. They did not love goblins, or fear them. When they took 
any  notice  of  them at all (which was seldom, for they did not eat such creatures ), 
they  swooped on  them and drove  them  shrieking back  to  their caves, and  stopped 
whatever  wickedness  they  were  doing.  The  goblins  hated  the  eagles  and  feared 
them, but could not reach their lofty seats, or drive them from the mountains. 
Tonight  the  Lord  of  the  Eagles  was  filled  with  curiosity  to  know  what  was 
afoot;  so  he  summoned  many  other  eagles  to  him,  and  they  flew  away  from  the 
mountains,  and  slowly  circling  ever  round  and  round  they  came  down,  down, 
down towards the ring of the wolves and the meeting-place of the goblins. 
A  very  good  thing  too!  Dreadful  things  had  been  going  on  down  there.  The 
wolves  that  had  caught  fire  and  fled  into  the  forest  had  set  it  alight  in  several 
places.  It  was  high  summer,  and  on  this  eastern  side  of  the  mountains  there  had 
been little rain for some time. Yellowing bracken, fallen branches, deep-piled pine-
needles, and here and there dead trees, were soon in flames. All round the clearing 
of  the  Wargs  fire  was  leaping.  But  the  wolf-guards  did  not  leave  the  trees. 
Maddened and angry they were leaping and howling round the trunks, and cursing 
the  dwarves  in  their  horrible  language,  with  their  tongues  hanging  out,  and  their 
eyes shining as red and fierce as the flames. 
Then  suddenly  goblins  came  running  up  yelling.  They  thought  a  battle  with 
the  woodmen  was  going  on;  but  they  goon  learned  what  had  really  happened. 
Some  of  them  actually  sat  down  and  laughed.  Others  waved  their  spears  and 

####-clashed  the  shafts  against  their  shields.  Goblins  are  not  afraid  of  fire,  and  they 
soon had a plan which seemed to them most amusing. 
Some got all the wolves together in a pack. Some stacked fern and brushwood 
round  the  tree-trunks.  Others  rushed  round  and  stamped  and  beat,  and  beat  and 
stamped,  until  nearly  all  the  flames were  put  out-but  they did not put out  the  fire 
nearest  to  the  trees  where  the  dwarves  were.  That  fire  they  fed  with  leaves  and 
dead  branches  and  bracken.  Soon  they  had  a  ring  of  smoke  and  flame  all  round 
the dwarves, a ring which they kept from spreading outwards; but it closed slowly 
in,  till  the  running  fire  was  licking  the  fuel  piled  under  the  trees.  Smoke  was  in 
Bilbo's  eyes,  he  could  feel  the  heat  of  the  flames;  and  through  the  reek  he  could 
see  the  goblins  dancing  round  and  round  in  a  circle  like  people  round  a 
midsummer  bonfire.  Outside  the  ring  of  dancing  warriors  with  spears  and  axes 
stood the wolves at a respectful distance, watching and waiting. 
He could hear the goblins beginning a horrible song: 
 

Fifteen birds in five firtrees, 
their feathers were fanned in a fiery breeze! 
But, funny little birds, they had no wings! 
O what shall we do with the funny little things?  
Roast 'em alive, or stew them in a pot; 
fry them, boil them and eat them hot?  

 
Then  they  stopped  and  shouted  out:  "Fly  away  little  birds!  Fly  away  if  you 
can! Come down little birds, or you will get roasted in your nests! Sing, sing little 
birds! Why don't you sing?" 
"Go  away!  little  boys!"  shouted Gandalf  in  answer.  "It  isn't  bird-nesting time. 
Also naughty little boys that play with fire get punished." He said it to make them 
angry,  and  to  show  them  he was  not  frightened  of  them-though of course he was, 
wizard though he was. But they took no notice, and they went on singing. 
 

Burn, burn tree and fern! 
Shrivel and scorch! A fizzling torch 
To light the night for our delight, 
Ya hey! 
 
Bake and toast 'em, fry and roast 'em 
till beards blaze, and eyes glaze; 
till hair smells and skins crack, 
fat melts, and bones black 

####-in cinders lie 
beneath the sky! 
 
So dwarves shall die, 
and light the night for our delight, 
Ya hey! 
Ya-harri-heyl 
Ya hoy! 

 
And  with  that  Ya  hoy!  the  flames  were  under  Gandalf’s  tree.  In  a moment  it 
spread to the others. The bark caught fire, the lower branches cracked. 
Then  Gandalf  climbed  to  the  top  of  his  tree.  The  sudden  splendour  flashed 
from  his  wand  like  lightning,  as  he  got  ready  to  spring  down  from  on  high  right 
among  the spears of  the goblins. That would have been  the end of him,  though he 
would  probably  have  killed  many  of  them  as  he  came  hurtling  down  like  a 
thunderbolt. But he never leaped. 
Just at that moment the Lord of the Eagles swept down from above, seized him 
in his talons, and was gone. 
 
There was a howl of anger and surprise from the goblins. Loud cried the Lord 
of  the Eagles,  to whom Gandalf had now  spoken. Back  swept  the great birds  that 
were  with  him,  and  down  they  came  like  huge  black  shadows.  The  wolves 
yammered and gnashed  their  teeth;  the goblins yelled and stamped with  rage, and 
flung their heavy spears in the air in vain. Over them swooped the eagles; the dark 
rush of  their beating wings  smote  them  to  the  floor or drove  them  far  away;  their 
talons  tore  at  goblin  faces.  Other  birds  flew  to  the  tree-tops  and  seized  the 
dwarves, who were scrambling up now as far as ever they dared to go. 
Poor  little Bilbo was  very  nearly  left  behind  again! He  just managed  to  catch 
hold of Dori's legs, as Dori was borne off last of all; and they went together above 
the  tumult  and  the  burning,  Bilbo  swinging  in  the  air  with  his  arms  nearly 
breaking. 
Now  far below  the goblins and  the wolves were  scattering  far and wide  in  the 
woods. A few eagles were still circling and sweeping above the battle-ground. The 
flames about  the  trees sprang suddenly up above  the highest branches. They went 
up  in  crackling  fire.  There  was  a  sudden  flurry  of  sparks  and  smoke.  Bilbo  had 
escaped only just in time! 
Soon the light of the burning was faint below, a red twinkle on the black floor; 
and  they  were  high  up  in  the  sky,  rising  all  the  time  in  strong  sweeping circles. 

####-Bilbo  never  forgot  that  flight,  clinging  onto Dori's  ankles. He moaned  "my  arms, 
my arms!"; but Dori groaned "my poor legs, my poor legs!" 
At  the  best  of  times  heights  made  Bilbo  giddy.  He  used  to  turn  queer  if  he 
looked over the edge of quite a little cliff; and he had never liked ladders, let alone 
trees  (never  having  had  to  escape  from wolves  before).  So  you  can  imagine  how 
his head swam now, when he  looked down between his dangling  toes and saw  the 
dark  lands opening wide underneath him,  touched here and there with the light of 
the moon on a hill-side rock or a stream in the plains. 
The  pale  peaks  of  the mountains were  coming  nearer, moonlit  spikes  of  rock 
sticking  out  of  black  shadows.  Summer  or  not,  it  seemed  very  cold.  He  shut  his 
eyes  and wondered if he could hold on any longer. Then he imagined what would 
happen  if he did not. He  felt  sick. The  flight  ended only  just  in  time  for him,  just 
before  his  arms  gave  way.  He  loosed  Dori's  ankles  with  a  gasp  and  fell  onto  the 
rough  platform  of  an  eagle's  eyrie.  There  he  lay  without  speaking,  and  his 
thoughts were  a mixture  of  surprise  at  being  saved  from  the  fire,  and  fear  lest  he 
fell off that narrow place into the deep shadows on either side. He was feeling very 
queer indeed in his head by this time after the dreadful adventures of the last three 
days with next to nothing to eat, and he found himself saying aloud: "Now I know 
what a piece of bacon feels like when it is suddenly picked out of the pan on a fork 
and put back on the shelf!" 
"No  you  don't!"  be  heard  Dori  answering,  "because  the  bacon  knows  that  it 
will get back in the pan sooner or later; and it is to be hoped we shan't. Also eagles 
aren't forks!" 
"O  no!  Not  a  bit  like  storks-forks,  I mean,"  said Bilbo  sitting up  and  looking 
anxiously  at  the  eagle  who  was  perched  close  by.  He  wondered  what  other 
nonsense he had been  saying, and  if  the eagle would  think  it  rude. You ought not 
to  be  rude  to  an  eagle, when  you  are  only  the  size  of  a  hobbit,  and  are  up  in  his 
eyrie at night! 
The  eagle  only  sharpened  his  beak  on  a  stone  and  trimmed  his  feathers  and 
took no notice. 
Soon  another  eagle  flew  up.  "The  Lord  of  the  Eagles  bids  you  to  bring  your 
prisoners to the Great Shelf," he cried and was off again. The other seized Dori in 
his  claws  and  flew  away  with  him  into  the  night  leaving Bilbo  all  alone. He  had 
just strength  to wonder what  the messenger had meant by  'prisoners,' and  to begin 
to  think  of  being  torn  up  for  supper  like  a  rabbit,  when  his  own  turn  came.  The 
eagle came back, seized him in his talons by the back of his coat, and swooped off. 
This  time  he  flew  only  a  short  way.  Very  soon  Bilbo  was  laid  down,  trembling 

####-with  fear,  on  a wide  shelf  of  rock  on  the mountain-side. There was no path down 
on to it save by flying; and no path down off it except by jumping over a precipice. 
There  he  found  all  the  others  sitting  with  their  backs  to  the  mountain  wall.  The 
Lord of the Eagles also was there and was speaking to Gandalf. 
It  seemed  that  Bilbo  was  not  going  to  be  eaten  after  all.  The  wizard  and  the 
eagle-lord  appeared  to  know  one  another  slightly,  and  even  to  be  on  friendly 
terms. As a matter of fact Gandalf, who had often been in the mountains, had once 
rendered  a  service  to  the  eagles  and  healed  their  lord  from  an  arrow-wound. So 
you  see  'prisoners'  had  meant  'prisoners  rescued  from  the  goblins'  only,  and  not 
captives  of  the  eagles. As Bilbo  listened  to  the  talk  of Gandalf  he  realized  that  at 
last  they  were  going  to  escape  really  and  truly  from  the  dreadful  mountains.  He 
was  discussing  plans  with  the  Great  Eagle  for  carrying  the  dwarves  and  himself 
and Bilbo far away and setting  them down well on  their  journey across  the plains 
below.  
The Lord of  the Eagles would not  take  them anywhere near where men  lived. 
"They  would  shoot  at  us  with  their  great  bows  of yew," he  said,  "for  they would 
think  we  were  after  their  sheep.  And  at  other  times  they  would  be  right.  No!  we 
are  glad  to  cheat  the  goblins  of  their  sport,  and  glad  to  repay  our  thanks  to  you, 
but we will not risk ourselves for dwarves in the southward plains." 
"Very  well,"  said  Gandalf.  "Take  us  where  and  as  far  as  you  will!  We  are 
already deeply obliged to you. But in the meantime we are famished with hunger." 
"I am nearly dead of it," said Bilbo in a weak little voice that nobody heard. 
"That can perhaps be mended," said the Lord of the Eagles. 
Later on you might have seen a bright fire on  the shelf of rock and  the figures 
of the dwarves round it cooking and making a fine roasting smell. The eagles had 
brought  up  dry  boughs  for  fuel,  and  they  had  brought  rabbits, hares, and a  small 
sheep.  The  dwarves  managed  all  the  preparations.  Bilbo  was  too  weak  to  help, 
and  anyway  he was  not much  good  at  skinning  rabbits  or  cutting  up meat,  being 
used  to  having  it  delivered  by  the  butcher  all  ready  to  cook.  Gandalf,  too,  was 
lying  down  after  doing  his  part  in  setting  the  fire  going,  since Oin  and Gloin  had 
lost their tinder-boxes. (Dwarves have never taken to matches even yet.) 
So  ended  the  adventures  of  the  Misty  Mountains.  Soon  Bilbo's  stomach  was 
feeling full and  comfortable  again,  and he  felt he  could  sleep  contentedly,  though 
really  he  would  have  liked  a  loaf  and  butter  better  than  bits  of  meat  toasted  on 
sticks. He slept curled up on the hard rock more soundly than ever he had done on 
his feather-bed in his own  little hole at home. But all night he dreamed of his own 

####-house and wandered in his sleep into all his different rooms looking for something 
that he could not find nor remember what it looked like. 
 

####-<h4>Chapter 7 </h4> <br>

Queer Lodgings 

 
The next morning Bilbo woke up with the early sun in his eyes. He jumped up 
to  look  at  the  time  and  to  go  and  put  his  kettle  on-and  found he was not home at 
all.  So  he  sat  down  and  wished  in  vain  for  a  wash  and  a  brush.  He  did  not  get 
either,  nor  tea  nor  toast  nor  bacon  for  his  breakfast, only cold mutton and  rabbit. 
And after that he had to get ready for a fresh start. 
This time he was allowed to climb on to an eagle's back and cling between his 
wings.  The  air  rushed  over  him  and  he  shut  his  eyes.  The  dwarves  were  crying 
farewells  and  promising  to  repay  the  lord  of  the  eagles  if  ever  they  could,  as  off 
rose  fifteen  great  birds  from  the  mountain's  side.  The  sun  was  still  close  to  the 
eastern  edge  of  things.  The morning was  cool,  and mists were  in  the  valleys  and 
hollows  and  twined  here  and  there  about  the  peaks  and  pinnacles  of  the  hills. 
Bilbo opened  an  eye  to peep  and  saw  that  the birds were  already high up  and  the 
world  was  far  away,  and  the  mountains  were  falling  back  behind  them  into  the 
distance. He shut his eyes again and held on tighter.  
"Don't pinch!" said his eagle. "You need not be frightened like a rabbit, even if 
you  look  rather  like  one.  It  is  a  fair morning  with  little  wind. What  is  finer  than 
flying?" 
Bilbo  would  have  liked  to  say:  "A  warm  bath  and  late  breakfast  on  the  lawn 
afterwards;"  but  he  thought  it  better  to  say  nothing  at  all,  and  to  let  go  his  clutch 
just a tiny bit. 
After  a good while  the  eagles must have  seen  the point  they were making  for, 
'even  from  their  great  height,  for  they  began  to  go  down  circling  round  in  great 
spirals. They did this for a long while, and at last the hobbit opened his eyes again. 
The earth was much nearer, and below  them were  trees  that  looked  like oaks and 
elms, and wide grass lands, and a river running through it all. But cropping out of 
the ground, right in the path of the stream which looped itself about it, was a great 
rock, almost a hill of stone,  like a  last outpost of  the distant mountains, or a huge 
piece cast miles into the plain by some giant among giants. 
Quickly  now  to  the  top  of  this  rock  the  eagles  swooped  one  by  one  and  set 
down their passengers. 
"Farewell!"  they  cried,  "wherever  you  fare,  till  your  eyries  receive  you  at  the 
journey's end!" That is the polite thing to say among eagles. 

####-"May  the  wind  under  your  wings  bear  you  where  the  sun  sails  and  the moon 
walks," answered Gandalf, who knew the correct reply.  
And so they parted. And though the lord of the eagles became in after days the 
King  of  All  Birds  and  wore  a  golden  crown,  and  his  fifteen  chieftains  golden 
collars  (made  of  the  gold  that  the  dwarves  gave  them),  Bilbo  never  saw  them 
again-except high and  far off  in  the battle of Five Armies. But as  that comes  in at 
the end of this tale we will say no more about it just now.  
There was a flat space on the top of the hill of stone and a well worn path with 
many steps leading down it to the river, across which a ford of huge flat stones led 
to  the  grass-land  beyond  the  stream.  There  was  a  little  cave  (a  wholesome  one 
with a pebbly floor) at the foot of the steps and near the end of the stony ford. Here 
the party gathered and discussed what was to be done. 
"I  always meant  to  see you  all  safe  (if possible) over  the mountains,"  said  the 
wizard,  "and  now  by  good management  and  good  luck  I  have  done  it.  Indeed we 
are  now  a  good  deal  further east than I ever meant to come with you, for after all 
this  is not my adventure.  I may  look  in on  it again before  it  is all over, but  in  the 
meanwhile I have some other pressing business to attend to." 
The  dwarves  groaned  and  looked  most  distressed,  and  Bilbo wept.  They  had 
begun to think Gandalf was going in come all the way and would always be there 
to  help  them  out  of  difficulties.  "I  am  not  going  to  disappear  this  very  instant," 
said  he.  "I  can  give  you  a  day  or  two more.  Probably  I  can  help  you  out of your 
present  plight,  and  I  need  a  little  help myself. We  have  no  food,  and  no  baggage, 
and no ponies to ride; and you don't know where you are. Now I can tell you that. 
You are still some miles north of the path which we should have been following, if 
we  had  not  left  the mountain  pass  in  a  hurry.  Very  few people  live  in  these parts, 
unless  they  have  come  here  since  I was  last  down  this way, which  is  some  years 
ago.  But  there  is  somebody  that  I  know  of,  who  lives  not  far  away.  That 
Somebody made the 
steps on the great rock-the Carrock I believe he calls it. He does not come here 
often,  certainly  not  in  the  daytime,  and  it  is  no  good  waiting  for  him.  In  fact  it 
would  be  very  dangerous. We  must  go  and  find  him;  and  if  all  goes  well  at  our 
meeting,  I  think I shall be off and wish you like the eagles  'farewell wherever you 
fare!' " 
They  begged  him  not  to  leave  them. They  offered  him  dragon-gold and silver 
and jewels, but he would not change his mind. 
"We  shall  see, we  shall  see!" he  said,  "and  I  think  I have earned already some 
of your dragon-gold - when you have got it." 

####- 
After that they stopped pleading. Then they took off their clothes and bathed in 
the river, which was shallow and clear and stony at the ford. When they had dried 
in the sun, which was now strong and warm, they were refreshed, if still sore and a 
little  hungry.  Soon  they  crossed  the  ford  (carrying  the  hobbit),  and  then  began  to 
march  through  the  long  green  grass  and  down  the  lines  of  the  wide-armed oaks 
and the tall elms. 
"And  why  is  it  called  the  Carrock?"  asked  Bilbo  as  he  went  along  at  the 
wizard's side. 
"He  called  it  the  Carrock,  because  carrock  is  his  word  for  it.  He  calls  things 
like  that  carrocks,  and  this  one  is  the Carrock  because  it  is  the  only  one  near  his 
home and he knows it well." 
"Who calls it? Who knows it?" 
"The  Somebody  I  spoke  of-a  very  great  person.  You  must  all  be  very  polite 
when  I  introduce  you.  I  shall  introduce  you  slowly,  two  by  two,  I  think;  and  you 
must  be  careful  not  to  annoy  him,  or  heaven  knows what will  happen. He can be 
appalling  when  he  is  angry,  though  he  is  kind  enough  if  humoured.  Still  I  warn 
you he gets angry easily." 
The dwarves all gathered round when they heard the wizard talking like this to 
Bilbo.  "Is  that  the  person  you  are  taking  us  to  now?"  they  asked.  "Couldn't  you 
find someone more easy-tempered? Hadn't you better explain it all a bit clearer?"-
and so on. 
"Yes  it  certainly  is!  No  I  could  not!  And  I  was  explaining  very  carefully," 
answered  the  wizard  crossly.  "If  you  must  know  more,  his  name  is  Beorn. He  is 
very strong, and he is a skin-changer." 
"What!  a  furrier,  a  man  that  calls  rabbits  conies,  when  he  doesn't  turn  their 
skins into squirrels?" asked Bilbo. 
"Good gracious heavens, no, no, NO, NO!" said Gandalf. "Don't be a fool Mr. 
Baggins  if you  can help  it; and  in  the name of all wonder don't mention  the word 
furrier  again  as  long  as  you  are  within  a  hundred  miles  of  his  house,  nor,  rug, 
cape,  tippet, muff, nor any other such unfortunate word! He  is a skin-changer. He 
changes  his  skin;  sometimes  he  is  a  huge  black  bear,  sometimes  he  is  a  great 
strong black-haired man with huge arms and a great beard. I cannot tell you much 
more,  though  that ought  to be enough. Some say  that he  is a bear descended from 
the  great  and  ancient  bears  of  the  mountains  that  lived  there  before  the  giants 
came. Others  say  that he  is  a man descended  from  the  first men who  lived before 
Smaug  or  the  other  dragons  came  into  this  part  of  the  world,  and  before  the 

####-goblins came into the hills out of the North. I cannot say, though I fancy the last is 
the true tale. He is not the sort of person to ask questions of. 
"At any rate he is under no enchantment but his own. He lives in an oak-wood 
and has a great wooden house; and as a man he keeps cattle and horses which are 
nearly  is marvellous  as himself. They work  for him  and  talk  to him. He does not 
eat  them;  neither  does  he  hunt  or  eat  wild  animals.  He  keeps  hives  and  hives  of 
great fierce bees, and  lives most on cream and honey. As a bear he ranges far and 
wide.  I  once  saw  him  sitting all alone on the top of the Carrock at night watching 
the  moon  sinking  towards  the  Misty  Mountains,  and  I  heard  him  growl  in  the 
tongue  of  bears;  'The  day  will  come  when  they  will  perish  and  I  shall  go  back!' 
That is why I believe he once came from the mountains himself." 
 
Bilbo and the dwarves had now plenty to think about, and they asked no more 
questions. They still had a long way to walk before them. Up slope and down dale 
they  plodded.  It  grew  very  hot.  Sometimes  they  rested  under  the  trees,  and  then 
Bilbo felt so hungry that he would have eaten acorns, if any had been ripe enough 
yet to have fallen to the ground. 
It  was  the  middle  of  the  afternoon  before  they  noticed  that  great  patches  of 
flowers had begun to spring up, all the same kinds growing together as if they had 
been  planted.  Especially  there  was  clover,  waving  patches  of  cockscomb  clover, 
and  purple  clover,  and wide  stretches  of  short white  sweet  honey-smelling clover. 
There  was  a  buzzing  and  a  whirring  and  a  droning  in  the  air.  Bees  were  busy 
everywhere. And such bees! Bilbo had never seen anything like them. 
"If one was to sting me," he thought, "I should swell up as big again as I am!" 
They  were  bigger  than  hornets.  The  drones  were  bigger  than  your  thumb,  a 
good  deal,  and  the  bands  of  yellow  on  their  deep  black  bodies  shone  like  fiery 
gold. 
"We are getting near," said Gandalf. "We are on the edge of his bee-pastures." 
After  a  while  they  came  to  a  belt  of  tall  and  very  ancient  oaks,  and  beyond 
these to a high thorn-hedge through which you could neither see nor scramble. 
"You had better wait here," said the wizard to the dwarves; "and when I call or 
whistle  begin  to  come  after  me —  you  will  see  the  way  I  go-but  only  in  pairs, 
mind, about  five minutes between each pair of you. Bombur  is  fattest  and will do 
for two, he had better come alone and last. Come on Mr. Baggins! There is a gate 
somewhere round this way." And with that he went off along the hedge taking the 
frightened hobbit with him. 

####-They  soon  came  to  a wooden  gate,  high  and  broad,  beyond which  they could 
see  gardens  and  a  cluster  of  low  wooden  buildings,  some  thatched  and  made  of 
unshaped logs; barns, stables, sheds, and a long low wooden house. 
Inside  on  the  southward  side  of  the  great  hedge were  rows  and  rows  of  hives 
with  bell-shaped  tops made of  straw. The noise of  the giant bees  flying  to and  fro 
and crawling in and out filled all the air.  
The  wizard  and  the  hobbit  pushed  open  the  heavy  creaking  gate  and  went 
down a wide track towards the house. Some horses, very sleek and well-groomed, 
trotted up across  the grass and  looked at  them  intently with very  intelligent  faces; 
then off they galloped to the buildings. 
"They have gone to tell him of the arrival of strangers," said Gandalf. 
Soon  they  reached  a  courtyard,  three  walls  of  which  were  formed  by  the 
wooden  house  and  its  two  long wings.  In  the middle  there was  lying  a  great  oak-
trunk with many  lopped branches beside  it. Standing near was a huge man with a 
thick black beard and' hair, and great bare arms and legs with knotted muscles. He 
was clothed in a tunic of wool down to his knees, and was leaning on a large axe. 
The horses were standing by him with their noses at his shoulder.  
"Ugh!  here  they  are!"  he  said  to  the  horses.  "They  don't  look  dangerous. You 
can be off!" He laughed a great rolling laugh, put down his axe and came forward. 
"Who  are  you  and what  do  you want?"  he  asked  gruffly,  standing  in  front  of 
them and towering tall above Gandalf. 
As for Bilbo he could easily have  trotted  through his  legs without ducking his 
head to miss the fringe of the man's brown tunic. 
"I am Gandalf," said the wizard. 
"Never  heard  of  him,"  growled  the  man,  "And  what's  this  little  fellow?"  he 
said, stooping down to frown at the hobbit with his bushy eyebrows. 
"That is Mr. Baggins, a hobbit of good family and unimpeachable reputation," 
said Gandalf. Bilbo bowed. He had no hat to take off, and was painfully conscious 
of his many missing buttons. "I am a wizard," continued Gandalf. "I have heard of 
you,  if you have not heard of me; but perhaps you have heard of my good cousin 
Radagast who lives near the Southern borders of Mirkwood?" 
"Yes;  not  a  bad  fellow  as  wizards  go,  I  believe.  I  used  to  see  him  now  and 
again,"  said  Beorn.  "Well,  now  I  know  who  you  are,  or  who  you  say  you  are. 
What do you want?" 
"To  tell  you  the  truth, we  have  lost  our  luggage  and  nearly  lost  our way,  and 
are  rather  in need of help, or  at  least  advice.  I may  say we have had  rather  a bad 
time with goblins in the mountains." 

####-"Goblins?" said the big man less gruffly. "O ho, so you've been  having trouble 
with them have you? What did you go near them for?" 
"We  did  not  mean  to.  They  surprised  us  at  night  in  a  pass  which  we  had  to 
cross, we were coming out of the Lands over West into these countries-it is a long 
tale." 
"Then  you  had  better  come  inside  and  tell  me  some  of  it,  if  it  won't  take  all 
day,"  said  the  man  leading  the  way  through  a  dark  door  that  opened  out  of  the 
courtyard into the house. 
Following  him  they  found  themselves  in  a  wide  hall  with  a  fire-place  in  the 
middle. Though  it was summer there was a wood-fire burning and the smoke was 
rising  to  the blackened  rafters  in  search of  the way out  through  an opening  in  the 
roof. They passed  through  this dim hall,  lit only by  the  fire and  the hole above  it, 
and came  through another smaller door into a sort of veranda propped on wooden 
posts made  of  single  tree-trunks. It faced south and was still warm and filled with 
the  light  of  the westering  sun which  slanted  into  it,  and  fell  golden  on  the  garden 
full of flowers that came right up to the steps. 
Here  they  sat  on  wooden  benches  while  Gandalf  began  his  tale,  and  Bilbo 
swung his dangling  legs and  looked at  the  flowers  in  the garden, wondering what 
their names could be, as he had never seen half of them before. 
"I was coming over the mountains with a friend or two…" said the wizard. 
"Or two? I can only see one, and a little one at that," said Beorn. 
"Well  to  tell you  the  truth,  I did not  like  to bother you with a  lot of us, until  I 
found out if you were busy. I will give a call, if I may." 
"Go on, call away!" 
So  Gandalf  gave  a  long  shrill  whistle,  and  presently  Thorin  and  Dori  came 
round the house by the garden path and stood bowing low before them. 
"One or three you meant, I see!" said Beorn. "But these aren't hobbits, they are 
dwarves!" 
"Thorin  Oakenshield,  at  your  service!  Dori  at  your  service!"  said  the  two 
dwarves bowing again. 
"I  don't  need  your  service,  thank  you,"  said  Beorn,  "but  I  expect  you  need 
mine.  I  am  not  over  fond  of  dwarves;  but  if  it  is  true  you  are  Thorin  (son  of 
Thrain, son of  Thror,  I believe), and  that your companion  is  respectable, and  that 
you  are  enemies  of  goblins  and  are  not  up  to  any  mischief  in  my  lands-what are 
you up to, by the way?" 
"They  are  on  their  way  to  visit  the  land  of  their  fathers,  away  east  beyond 
Mirkwood,"  put  in  Gandalf,  "and  it  is  entirely  an  accident  that  we  are  in  your 

####-lands at all. We were crossing by the High Pass that should have brought us to the 
road  that  lies  to  the  south  of  your  country,  when  we  were  attacked  by  the  evil 
goblins-as I was about to tell you." 
"Go on telling, then!" said Beorn, who was never very polite. 
"There was a terrible storm; the stone-giants were out hurling rocks, and at the 
head  of  the  pass  we  took  refuge  in  a  cave,  the  hob  bit  and  I  and  several  of  our 
companions…" 
"Do you call two several?" 
"Well, no. As a matter of fact there were more than two." 
"Where are they? Killed, eaten, gone home?" 
"Well,  no.  They  don't  seem  all  to  have  come  when  I  whistled.  Shy,  I  expect. 
You see, we are very much afraid that we are rather a lot for you to entertain." 
"Go on, whistle again! I am in for a party, it seems, and one or two more won't 
make much difference," growled Beorn. 
Gandalf  whistled  again;  but  Nori  and  Ori  were  there  almost  before  he  had 
stopped,  for,  if  you  remember, Gandalf  had  told  them  to  come  in pairs  every  five 
minutes. 
"Hullo!"  said  Beorn.  "You  came  pretty  quick-where were  you  hiding? Come 
on my jack-in-the-boxes!" 
"Nori at your service, Ori at . . ." they began; but Beorn interrupted them. 
"Thank you! When I want your help I will ask for it. Sit down, and let's get on 
with this tale, or it will be supper-time before it is ended." 
"As soon as we were asleep," went on Gandalf, "a crack at the back of the cave 
opened;  goblins  came  out  and  grabbed  the  hobbit  and  the  dwarves  and our  troop 
of ponies—" 
"Troop  of  ponies?  What  were  you-a  travelling  circus? Or were  you  carrying 
lots of goods? Or do you always call six a troop?" 
"O  no!  As  a  matter  of  fact  there  were  more  than  six  ponies,  for  there  were 
more  than  six  of  us-and well,  here  are  two more!"  Just  at  that moment Balin  and 
Dwalin appeared and bowed so low that their beards swept the stone floor. The big 
man was frowning at first, but  they did  their very best  to be frightfully polite, and 
kept  on  nodding  and  bending  and  bowing  and  waving  their  hoods  before  their 
knees  (in  proper  dwarf-fashion),  till  he  stopped  frowning  and  burst  into  a 
chuckling laugh; they looked so comical. 
"Troop, was  right,"  he  said.  "A  fine  comic  one.  Come  in my merry men,  and 
what  are  your  names?  I  don't  want  your  service  just  now,  only  your  names;  and 
then sit down and stop wagging!" 

####-"Balin  and  Dwalin,"  they  said  not  daring  to  be  offended,  and  sat  flop  on  the 
floor looking rather surprised. 
"Now go on again!" said Beorn to the wizard. 
"Where  was  1?  O  yes—  I  was  not  grabbed.  I  killed  a  goblin  or  two  with  a 
flash—" 
"Good!" growled Beorn. "It is some good being a wizard, then." 
"—and slipped inside the crack before it closed. I followed down into the main 
hall, which was  crowded with  goblins. The Great Goblin was  there with  thirty or 
forty armed guards. I thought to myself 'even if they were not all chained together, 
what can a dozen do against so many?' " 
"A  dozen!  That's  the  first  time  I've  heard  eight  called  a  dozen.  Or  have  you 
still got some more jacks that haven't yet come out of their boxes?" 
"Well, yes, there seem to be a couple more here now – Fili and Kili, I believe," 
said Gandalf, as these two now appeared and stood smiling and bowing. 
"That's enough!" said Beorn. "Sit down and be quiet! Now go on, Gandalf!" 
So  Gandalf  went  on  with  the  tale,  until  he  came  to  the  fight  in  the  dark,  the 
discovery  of  the  lower  gate,  and  their  horror  when  they  found  that  Mr.  Baggins 
had been mislaid. 
"We  counted  ourselves  and  found  that  there  was  no  hobbit.  There  were  only 
fourteen of us left!" 
"Fourteen!  That's  the  first  time  I've  heard  one  from  ten  leave  fourteen.  You 
mean nine, or else you haven't told me yet all the names of your party." 
"Well, of course you haven't seen Oin and Gloin yet. And, bless me! here they 
are. I hope you will forgive them for bothering you." 
"O  let  'em all come! Hurry up! Come along, you  two, and sit down! But  look 
here, Gandalf, even now we have only got yourself and ten dwarves and the hobbit 
that was  lost. That  only makes  eleven  (plus  one mislaid) and not fourteen, unless 
wizards  count  differently  to  other  people.  But  now  please  get  on  with  the  tale." 
Beorn did not show it more than he could help, but really he had begun to get very 
interested. You  see,  in  the  old  days  he  had  known  the  very  part of  the mountains 
that  Gandalf  was  describing.  He  nodded  and  he  growled,  when  he  heard  of  the 
hobbit's  reappearance  and  of  their  scramble  down  the  stone-slide  and  of  the wolf-
ring m the woods. When Gandalf came to their climbing into trees with the wolves 
all underneath, he got up and strode about and muttered: 
"I wish I had been there! I would have given them more than fireworks!" 
"Well,"  said  Gandalf  very  glad  to  see  that  his  tale  was  making  a  good 
impression,  "I  did  the  best  I  could.  There  we  were  with  the  wolves  going  mad 

####-underneath us  and  the  forest beginning  to blaze  in places, when  the goblins  came 
down  from  the  hills  and  discovered  us.  They  yelled  with  delight  and  sang  songs 
making fun of us. Fifteen birds in five fir-trees…" 
"Good heavens!" growled Beorn. "Don't pretend that goblins can't count. They 
can. Twelve isn't fifteen and they know it." 
"And  so  do  1.  There  were  Bifur  and  Bofur  as  well.  I  haven't  ventured  to 
introduce them before, but here they are." 
In  came  Bifur  and  Bofur.  "And  me!"  gasped  Bombur  pulling  up  behind.  He 
was  fat, and also angry at being  left  till  last. He  refused  to wait  five minutes, and 
followed immediately after the other two. 
"Well, now there are fifteen of you; and since goblins can count, I suppose that 
is  all  that  there  were  up  the  trees.  Now  perhaps  we  can  finish  this  story  without 
any more interruptions." Mr. Baggins saw then how clever Gandalf had been. The 
interruptions had really made Beorn more interested in the story, and the story had 
kept  him  from  sending  the  dwarves off  at once  like  suspicious beggars. He never 
invited people into his house, if he could help it. He had very few friends and they 
lived  a  good  way  away;  and  he  never  invited  more  than  a  couple  of  these  to  his 
house at a time. Now he had got fifteen strangers sitting in his porch! 
By  the  time  the wizard had  finished his  tale  and had  told of  the  eagles'  rescue 
and of how they had all been brought to the Carrock, the sun had fallen behind the 
peaks of the Misty Mountains and the shadows were long in Beorn's garden. 
"A  very  good  tale!"  said  he.  "The  best  I  have  heard  for  a  long  while.  If  all 
beggars  could  tell  such  a  good  one,  they  might  find  me  kinder.  You  may  be 
making  it  all  up,  of  course,  but  you  deserve  a  supper  for  the  story  all  the  same. 
Let's have something to eat!" 
"Yes, please!" they all said together. "Thank you very much!" 
Inside  the  hall  it was  now  quite  dark. Beorn  clapped  his  hands,  and  in  trotted 
four  beautiful  white  ponies  and  several  large  long-bodied  grey  dogs.  Beorn  said 
something  to  them  in  a  queer  language  like  animal  noises  turned  into  talk.  They 
went  out  again  and  soon  came  back  carrying  torches  in  their mouths, which  they 
lit  at  the  fire  and  stuck  in  low brackets on  the pillars of  the hall  about  the  central 
hearth. 
The  dogs  could  stand  on  their  hind-legs  when  they  wished,  and  carry  things 
with  their  fore-feet.  Quickly  they  got  out  boards  and  trestles  from  the  side  walls 
and set them up near the fire. 
Then  baa-baa-baa!  was  heard,  and  in  came  some  snow-white  sheep  led  by  a 
large  coal-black  ram.  One  bore  a  white  cloth  embroidered  at  the  edges  with 

####-figures of animals; others bore on  their broad backs  trays with bowls and platters 
and knives and wooden spoons, which the dogs took and quickly laid on the trestle 
tables.  These  were  very  low,   low  enough  even  for  Bilbo  to  sit  at  comfortably. 
Beside  them  a  pony  pushed  two  low-seated  benches  with  wide  rush-bottoms and 
little  short  thick  legs  for Gandalf  and Thorin, while  at  the  far  end  he  put Beorn's 
big  black  chair  of  the  same  sort  (in which  he  sat with his great  legs  stuck  far out 
under the table). These were all the chairs he had in his hall, and he probably had 
them  low  like  the  tables for  the convenience of  the wonderful animals  that waited 
on him. What did  the  rest sit on? They were not  forgotten. The other ponies came 
in  rolling  round  drum-shaped  sections  of  logs,  smoothed  and  polished,  and  low 
enough  even  for Bilbo;  so  soon  they were  all  seated  at Beorn's  table,  and  the hall 
had not seen such a gathering for many a year.  
There  they  had  a  supper, or  a dinner,  such  as  they had not had  since  they  left 
the Last Homely House  in  the West and  said good-bye to Elrond. The light of the 
torches  and  the  fire  flickered  about  them,  and  on  the  table  were  two  tall  red 
beeswax candles. All the time they ate, Beorn in his deep rolling voice told tales of 
the  wild  lands  on  this  side  of  the  mountains,  and  especially  of  the  dark  and 
dangerous wood,  that  lay  outstretched  far  to North  and  South  a  day's  ride  before 
them, barring their way to the East, the terrible forest of Mirkwood. 
The  dwarves  listened  and  shook  their  beards,  for  they  knew  that  they  must 
soon  venture  into  that  forest  and  that  after  the mountains  it  was  the  worst  of  the 
perils  they  had  to  pass  before  they  came  to  the  dragon's  stronghold. When  dinner 
was  over  they  began  to  tell  tales  of  their  own,  but  Beorn  seemed  to  be  growing 
drowsy  and  paid  little  heed  to  them.  They  spoke  most  of  gold  and  silver  and 
jewels  and  the making  of  things  by  smith-craft,  and Beorn did not  appear  to  care 
for  such  things:  there were no things of gold or silver in his hall, and few save the 
knives were made of metal at all. 
They  sat  long  at  the  table with  their wooden  drinking-bowls filled with mead. 
The dark night came on outside. The fires in the middle of the hall were built with 
fresh logs and the torches were put out, and still they sat in the light of the dancing 
flames with  the pillars of  the house standing  tall behind  them, arid dark at  the  top 
like  trees  of  the  forest.  Whether  it  was  magic  or  not,  it  seemed  to  Bilbo  that he 
heard  a  sound  like  wind  in  the  branches  stirring  in  the  rafters,  and  the  hoot  of 
owls.  Soon  he  began  to  nod  with  sleep  and  the  voices  seemed  to  grow  far  away, 
until he woke with a start. 
The great door had creaked and slammed. Beorn was gone. The dwarves were 
sitting  cross-legged  on  the  floor  round  the  fire,  and  presently  they  began  to  sing. 

####-Some  of  the  verses  were  like  this,  but  there  were  many  more,  and  their  singing 
went on for a long while: 
 

####-The wind was on the withered heath, 
but in the forest stirred no leaf: 
there shadows lay by night and day,  
and dark things silent crept beneath. 
The wind came down from mountains cold, 
and like a tide it roared and rolled; 
the branches groaned, the forest moaned, 
and leaves were laid upon the mould. 
 
The wind went on from West to East ;  
all movement in the forest ceased, 
but shrill and harsh across the marsh  
its whistling voices were released. 
 
The grasses hissed, their tassels bent, 
the reeds were rattling-on it went 
o' er shaken pool under heavens cool 
where racing clouds were torn and rent. 
 
It passed the lonely Mountain bare  
and swept above the dragon's lair :  
there black and dark lay boulders stark 
and flying smoke was in the air.  
 
It left the world and took its flight 
over the wide seas of the night. 
The moon set sail upon the gale, 
and stars were fanned to leaping light. 

 
Bilbo  began  to  nod  again.  Suddenly  up  stood  Gandalf.  "It  is  time  for  us  to 
sleep,"  be  said,  "—for us, but not I think for Beorn. In this hall we can rest sound 
and  safe,  but  I  warn  you  all  not  to  forget what  Beorn  said  before  he  left  us:  you 
must not stray outside until the sun is up, on your peril." 
Bilbo found that beds had already been laid at the side of the hall, on a sort of 
raised  platform  between  the  pillars  and  the  outer  wall.  For  him  there was  a  little 
mattress  of  straw  and  woollen  blankets.  He  snuggled  into  them  very  gladly, 
summertime though it was. The fire burned low and he fell asleep. Yet in the night 
he woke: the fire had now sunk to a few embers; the dwarves and Gandalf were all 
asleep,  to  judge  by  their  breathing;  a  splash  of  white  on  the  floor  came  from  the 
high moon, which was peering down through the smoke-hole in the roof. 

####-There  was  a  growling  sound  outside,  and  a  noise  as  of  some  great  animal 
scuffling  at  the  door. Bilbo .wondered what it was, and whether it could be Beorn 
in enchanted shape, and if he would come in as a bear and kill them. 
He  dived  under  the  blankets  and  hid  his  head,  and  fell  asleep  again  at  last  in 
spite of his fears. 
It was full morning when he awoke. One of the dwarves had fallen over him in 
the shadows where he lay, and had rolled down with a bump from the platform on 
to  the  floor.  It was Bofur,  and he was grumbling  about  it, when Bilbo opened his 
eyes. 
"Get up lazybones," he said, "or there will be no breakfast left for you." 
Up jumped Bilbo. "Breakfast!" he cried. "Where is breakfast?" 
"Mostly  inside us,"  answered  the other dwarves who were moving  around  the 
hall; "but what is left is out on the veranda. We have been about looking for Beorn 
ever  since  the  sun got up; but  there  is no  sign of him anywhere,  though we  found 
breakfast laid as soon as we went out." 
"Where is Gandalf?" asked Bilbo, moving off to find something to eat as quick 
as he could. 
"O!  out  and  about  somewhere,"  they  told  him.  But  he  saw  no  sign  of  the 
wizard  all  that  day  until  the  evening.  Just  before  sunset  he  walked  into  the  hall, 
where  the  hobbit  and  the  dwarves  were  having  supper,  waited  on  by  Beorn's 
wonderful  animals,  as  they  had  been  all  day.  Of  Beorn  they  had  seen  and  heard 
nothing since the night before, and they were getting puzzled. 
"Where is our host, and where have you been all day yourself?" they all cried. 
"One  question  at  a  time-and  none  till  after  supper!  I  haven't  had  a  bite  since 
breakfast." 
At  last  Gandalf  pushed  away  his  plate  and  jug  —  he  had  eaten  two  whole 
loaves  (with masses  of  butter  and  honey  and  clotted  cream)  and  drunk  at  least  a 
quart  of mead  and  he  took  out  his  pipe.  "I will  answer  the  second  question  first," 
he said, "-but bless me! this is a splendid place for smoke rings!" Indeed for a long 
time they could get nothing more out of him, he was so busy sending smoke-rings 
dodging  round  the  pillars  of  the  hall,  changing  them  into  all  sorts  of  different 
shapes and colours, and setting  them at  last chasing one another out of the hole in 
the roof. 
They must have  looked very queer  from outside, popping out  into  the  air one 
after another, green, blue, red, silver-grey, yellow, white; big ones, little ones; little 
ones dodging  through big ones  and  joining  into  figure-eights, and going off like a 
flock of birds into the distance. 

####-"I have been picking out bear-tracks," he said at last. "There must have been a 
regular  bears'  meeting  outside  here  last  night.  I  soon  saw  that  Beorn  could  not 
have  made  them  all:  there  were  far  too many  of  them,  and  they  were  of  various 
sizes  too.  I  should  say  there  were  little  bears,  large  bears,  ordinary  bears,  and 
gigantic big bears, all dancing outside from dark to nearly dawn. They came from 
almost every direction, except from the west over the river, from the Mountains. In 
that  direction  only  one  set  of  footprints  led-none  coming,  only  ones  going  away 
from here. 
I  followed  these  as  far  as  the  Carrock.  There  they  disappeared  into  the  river, 
but  the water was  too  deep  and  strong  beyond  the  rock  for me  to  cross.  It  is  easy 
enough, as you remember, to get from this bank to the Carrock by the ford, but on 
the  other  side  is  a  cliff  standing  up  from  a  swirling  channel.  I  had  to  walk miles 
before  I  found  a  place  where  the  river  was  wide  and  shallow  enough  for  me  to 
wade  and  swim,  and  then  miles  back  again  to  pick  up  the  tracks  again.  By  that 
time  it  was  too  late  for  me  to  follow  them  far.  They  went  straight  off  in  the 
direction of the pine-woods on the east side of the Misty Mountains, where we had 
our  pleasant  little  party  with  the  Wargs  the  night  before  last.  And  now  I  think  I 
have  answered  your  first  question,  too,"  ended  Gandalf,  and  he  sat  a  long  while 
silent. 
Bilbo  thought  he  knew what  the wizard meant.  "What  shall we  do,"  he  cried, 
"if  he  leads  all  the Wargs  and  the  goblins  down  here? We  shall  all  be  caught  and 
killed! I thought you said he was not 9 friend of theirs." 
"So I did. And don't be silly! You had better go to bed, your wits are sleepy." 
The hobbit felt quite crushed, and as there seemed nothing else to do he did go 
to  bed;  and  while  the  dwarves  were  still  singing  songs  he  dropped  asleep,  still 
puzzling his little head about Beorn, till he dreamed a dream of hundreds of black 
bears  dancing  slow  heavy  dances  round  and  round  in  the  moonlight  in  the 
courtyard.  Then  he  woke  up  when  everyone  else  was  asleep,  and  he  heard  the 
same  scraping,  scuffling,  snuffling,  and  growling  as  before.  Next  morning  they 
were all wakened by Beorn himself. 
"So here you all are still!" he said. He picked up the hobbit and laughed: "Not 
eaten  up  by  Wargs  or  goblins  or  wicked  bears  yet  I  see";  and  he  poked  Mr. 
Baggins' waistcoat most disrespectfully. "Little bunny is getting nice and fat again 
on bread and honey," he chuckled. "Come and have some more!" 
 
So  they  all  went  to  breakfast  with  him.  Beorn  was  most  jolly  for  a  change; 
indeed  he  seemed  to  be  in  a  splendidly  good  humour  and  set  them  all  laughing 

####-with his funny stories; nor did they have to wonder long where he had been or why 
he  was  so  nice  to  them,  for he  told  them himself. He had been over  the  river  and 
right  back  up  into  the  mountains-from  which  you  can  guess  that  he  could  travel 
quickly,  in bear's  shape  at  any  rate. From  the burnt wolf-glade he had soon found 
out  that  part  of  their  story  was  true;  but  he  had  found  more  than  that:  he  had 
caught a Warg and a goblin wandering in the woods. From these he had got news: 
the  goblin  patrols  were  still  hunting  with  Wargs  for  the  dwarves,  and  they  were 
fiercely  angry  because  of  the  death  of  the  Great  Goblin,  and  also  because  of  the 
burning of the chief wolf's nose and the death from the wizard's fire of many of his 
chief  servants. So much  they  told him when he  forced  them, but he guessed  there 
was  more  wickedness  than  this  afoot,  and  that  a  great  raid  of  the  whole  goblin 
army with  their wolf-allies  into  the  lands  shadowed by  the mountains might  soon 
be made  to  find  the  dwarves,  or  to  take  vengeance  on  the men  and  creatures  that 
lived there, and who they thought must be sheltering them. 
"It was  a  good  story,  that of yours," said Beorn, "but I like it still better now I 
am sure it is true. You must forgive my not taking your word. If you lived near the 
edge of Mirkwood, you would  take  the word of no one  that you did not know  as 
well  as  your  brother  or  better. As  it is, I can only say that I have hurried home as 
fast  as  I  could  to  see  that  you  were  safe,  and  to  offer  you  any  help  that  I  can.  I 
shall  think more  kindly  of  dwarves  after  this. Killed  the Great Goblin,  killed  the 
Great Goblin!" he chuckled fiercely to himself. 
"What did you do with the goblin and the Warg?" asked Bilbo suddenly.  
"Come  and  see!"  said  Beorn,  and  they  followed  round  the  house.  A  goblin's 
head was  stuck  outside  the  gate  and  a warg-skin was nailed to a tree just beyond. 
Beorn  was  a  fierce  enemy.  But  now  he  was  their  friend,  and  Gandalf  thought  it 
wise  to  tell  him  their  whole  story  and  the  reason  of  their  journey,  so  that  they 
could get the most help he could offer.  
This is what he promised to do for them. He would provide ponies for each of 
them,  and  a  horse  for Gandalf,  for  their  journey  to  the  forest,  and  he would  lade 
them with food to last them for weeks with care, and packed so as to be as easy as 
possible to carry-nuts, flour, sealed jars of dried fruits, and red earthenware pots of 
honey,  and twice-baked cakes that would keep good a long time, and on a little of 
which they could march far. The making of these was one of his secrets; but honey 
was in them, as in most of his foods, and they were good to eat, though they made 
one  thirsty. Water, he said, they would not need to carry this side of the forest, for 
there were streams and springs along  the road. "But your way  through Mirkwood 
is  dark,  dangerous  and  difficult,"  he  said.  "Water  is  not  easy  to  find  there,  nor 

####-food.  The  time  is  not  yet  come  for  nuts  (though  it may  be  past  and  gone  indeed 
before  you  get  to  the  other  side),  and  nuts  are  about  all  that  grows  there  fit  for 
food;  in  there  the wild  things are dark, queer, and savage. I will provide you with 
skins  for  carrying water,  and  I will give you  some bows  and  arrows. But  I doubt 
very much whether anything you find in Mirkwood will be wholesome to eat or to 
drink. There is one stream there, I know, black and strong which crosses the path. 
That  you  should  neither  drink  of,  nor  bathe  in;  for  I  have  heard  that  it  carries 
enchantment and a great drowsiness and forgetfulness. And in the dim shadows of 
that  place  I  don't  think  you  will  shoot  anything,  wholesome  or  unwholesome, 
without straying from the path. That you MUST NOT do, for any reason. "That is 
all  the  advice  I  can  give  you.  Beyond  the  edge  of  the  forest  I  cannot  help  you 
much;  you must  depend  on  your  luck  and  your  courage  and  the  food  I  send with 
you. At the gate of the forest I must ask you to send back my horse and my ponies. 
But I wish you all speed, and my house is open to you, if ever you come back this 
way again." 
They  thanked  him,  of  course,  with  many  bows  and  sweepings  of  their  hoods 
and with many an "at your service, O master of the wide wooden halls!" But their 
spirits  sank  at  his  grave  words,  and  they  all  felt  that  the  adventure  was  far more 
dangerous  than  they  had  thought,  while  all  the  time,  even  if  they  passed  all  the 
perils of the road, the dragon was waiting at the end. 
All that morning they were busy with preparations. Soon after midday they ate 
with  Beorn  for  the  last  time,  and  after  the  meal  they  mounted  the  steeds  he  was 
lending  them, and bidding him many  farewells  they  rode off  through his gate at a 
good pace. 
As  soon as  they  left his high hedges at  the east of his  fenced lands they turned 
north  and  then  bore  to  the  north-west. By his  advice  they were no  longer making 
for  the main  forest-road to the south of his land. Had they followed the pass, their 
path  would  have  led  them  down  the  stream  from  the  mountains  that  joined  the 
great  river miles  south  of  the Carrock. At  that  point  there was  a  deep  ford which 
they might have passed,  if  they had  still had  their ponies, and beyond  that a  track 
led  to  the  skirts of  the wood and  to  the entrance of  the old  forest  road. But Beorn 
had  warned  them  that  that  way  was  now  often  used  by  the  goblins,  while  the 
forest-road itself, he bad heard, was overgrown and disused at the eastern end and 
led  to  impassable marshes where  the paths had  long been  lost.  Its eastern opening 
had also always been far to the south of the Lonely Mountain, and would have left 
them  still  with  a  long  and  difficult  northward  march  when  they  got  to  the  other 
side. 

####-North  of  the Carrock  the  edge  of Mirkwood  drew  closer  to  the  borders  of  the 
Great River, and though here the Mountains too drew down nearer, Beorn advised 
them to take this way; for at a place a few days' ride due north of the Carrock was 
the  gate  of  a  little-known  pathway  through  Mirkwood  that  led  almost  straight 
towards the Lonely Mountain. 
"The  goblins,"  Beorn  had  said,  "will  not  dare  to  cross  the  Great  River  for  a 
hundred  miles  north  of  the  Carrock  nor  to  come  near  my  house  –  it  is  well 
protected  at  night!–  but  I  should  ride  fast;  for  if  they  make  their  raid  soon  they 
will cross the river to the south  and scour all the edge of the forest so as to cut you 
off,  and  Wargs  run  swifter  than  ponies.  Still  you  are  safer  going  north,  even 
though you seem to be going back nearer to their strongholds; for that is what they 
will  least  expect,  and  they  will  have  the  longer  ride  to  catch  you.  Be  off  now  as 
quick as you may!" 
That  is  why  they  were  now  riding  in  silence,  galloping  wherever  the  ground 
was grassy and  smooth, with  the mountains dark on  their  left, and  in  the distance 
the line of the river with its trees drawing ever closer. The sun had only just turned 
west  when  they  started,  and  till  evening  it  lay  golden  on  the  land  about  them.  It 
was  difficult  to  think  of  pursuing  goblins  behind,  and  when  they  had  put  many 
miles between them and Beorn's house they began to talk and to sing again and to 
forget  the  dark  forest-path  that  lay  in  front.  But  in  the  evening  when  the  dusk 
came on and  the peaks of  the mountains glowered against  the  sunset  they made a 
camp and set a guard, and most of them slept uneasily with dreams in which there 
came  the  howl  of  hunting wolves  and  the  cries  of  goblins.  Still  the  next morning 
dawned bright and fair again. 
There  was  an  autumn-like mist  white  upon  the  ground  and  the  air  was  chill, 
but  soon  the  sun  rose  red  in  the  East  and  the  mists  vanished,  and  while  the 
shadows were still long they were off again. So they rode now for two more days, 
and all  the while  they saw nothing save grass and  flowers and birds and scattered 
trees,  and  occasionally  small  herds  of  red  deer  browsing  or  sitting  at noon  in  the 
shade.  Sometimes  Bilbo  saw  the  horns  of  the  harts  sticking  up  out  of  the  long 
grass,  and  at  first  he  thought  they  were  the  dead  branches  of  trees.  That  third 
evening  they were so eager  to press on,  for Beorn had said  that  they should  reach 
the  forest-gate  early  on  the  fourth  day,  that  they  rode  still  forward  after  dusk  and 
into  the night beneath  the moon. As  the  light faded Bilbo  thought he saw away  to 
the  right,  or  to  the  left,  the  shadowy  form  of  a  great  bear  prowling  along  in  the 
same  direction.  But  if  he  dared  to  mention  it  to  Gandalf,  the  wizard  only  said: 
"Hush! Take no notice!" 

####-Next day they started before dawn, though their night had been short. As soon 
as it was light they could see the forest coming as it were to meet them, or waiting 
for  them  like a black and  frowning wall before  them. The  land began  to  slope up 
and  up,  and  it  seemed  to  the  hobbit  that  a  silence  began  to  draw  in  upon  them. 
Birds  began  to  sing  less.  There  were  no  more  deer;  not  even  rabbits  were  to  be 
seen. By  the  afternoon they had reached the eaves of Mirkwood, and were resting 
almost beneath  the great overhanging boughs of  its outer  trees. Their  trunks were 
huge  and  gnarled,  their  branches  twisted,  their  leaves  were  dark  and  long.  Ivy 
grew on them and trailed along the ground. 
"Well,  here  is  Mirkwood!"  said  Gandalf.  "The  greatest  of  the  forests  of  the 
Northern  world.  I  hope  you  like  the  look  of  it.  Now  you  must  send  back  these 
excellent ponies you have borrowed." 
The  dwarves  were  inclined  to  grumble  at  this,  but  the  wizard  told  them  they 
were  fools. "Beorn  is not as  far off as you seem  to  think, and you had better keep 
your promises  anyway,  for he  is  a bad  enemy. Mr. Baggins'  eyes  are  sharper  than 
yours,  if you have not seen each night after dark a great bear going along with us 
or sitting far of in the moon watching our camps. Not only to guard you and guide 
you, but to keep an eye on the ponies too. Beorn may be your friend, but he loves 
his animals as his children. You do not guess what kindness he has  shown you  in 
letting dwarves ride them so far and so fast, nor what would happen to you, if you 
tried to take them into the forest." 
"What  about  the  horse,  then?"  said  Thorin.  "You  don't  mention  sending  that 
back." 
"I don't, because I am not sending it." 
"What about your promise then?" 
"I will look after that. I am not sending the horse back, I am riding it!" 
Then  they  knew  that  Gandalf  was  going  to  leave  them  at  the  very  edge  of 
Mirkwood, and they were in despair.  
But nothing they could say would change his mind. 
"Now we had this all out before, when we landed on the Carrock," he said. "It 
is no use arguing. I have, as I  told you, some pressing business away south; and I 
am already late through bothering with you people. We may meet again before all 
is  over,  and  then  again of  course we may not. That depends on your  luck  and on 
your courage and  sense; and  I am  sending Mr. Baggins with you.  I have  told you 
before  that  he  has  more  about  him  than  you  guess,  and  you  will  find  that  out 
before  long.  So  cheer  up  Bilbo  and  don't  look  so  glum.  Cheer  up  Thorin  and 

####-Company! This  is  your  expedition  after  all. Think  of  the  treasure  at  the  end,  and 
forget the forest and the dragon, at any rate until tomorrow morning!" 
When tomorrow morning came he still said the same. 
So  now  there  was  nothing  left  to  do  but  to  fill  their  water-skins  at  a  clear 
spring they found close to the forest-gate, and unpack the ponies. They distributed 
the  packages  as  fairly  as  they  could,  though  Bilbo  thought  his  lot  was 
wearisomely heavy, and did not at all like  the idea of trudging for miles and miles 
with all that on his back. 
"Don't you worry!" said Thorin. "It will get  lighter all  too soon. Before  long  I 
expect we shall all wish our packs heavier, when the food begins to run short." 
Then  at  last  they  said  good-bye  to  their  ponies  and  turned  their  heads  for 
home.  Off  they  trotted  gaily,  seeming  very  glad  to  put  their  tails  towards  the 
shadow of Mirkwood. As they went away Bilbo could have sworn that a thing like 
a bear left the shadow of the trees and shambled off quickly after them. 
Now Gandalf  too  said  farewell. Bilbo  sat on  the ground  feeling very unhappy 
and wishing he was beside the wizard on his tall horse. He had gone just inside the 
forest  after  breakfast  (a  very  poor  one),  and  it  had  seemed  as  dark  in  there  in  the 
morning  as  at  night,  and  very  secret:  "a  sort  of watching  and waiting  feeling,"  he 
said to himself. 
"Good-bye!"  said  Gandalf  to  Thorin.  "And  good-bye  to  you  all,  good-bye! 
Straight through the forest is your way now. Don't stray off the track!-if you do, it 
is  a  thousand  to one you will never  find  it  again  and never get out of Mirkwood; 
and then I don't suppose I, or any one else, will ever see you again." 
"Do we really have to go through?" groaned the hobbit. 
"Yes, you do!" said the wizard, "if  you want to get to the other side. You must 
either go through or give up your quest. And I am not going to allow you to back 
out  now,  Mr.  Baggins.  I  am  ashamed  of  you  for  thinking  of  it.  You  have  got  to 
look after all these dwarves for me," he laughed. 
"No! no!" said Bilbo. "I didn't mean that. I meant, is there no way round?" 
"There is, if you care to go two hundred miles or so out of your way north, and 
twice  that  south.  But  you  wouldn't  get  a  safe  path  even  then.  There  are  no  safe 
paths  in  this part of  the world. Remember you are over the Edge of the Wild now, 
and in for all sorts of fun wherever you go. Before you could get round Mirkwood 
in  the  North  you  would  be  right  among  the  slopes  of  the  Grey  Mountains,  and 
they  are  simply  stiff  with  goblins,  hobgoblins,  and  rest  of  the  worst  description. 
Before  you  could  get  round  it  in  the  South,  you  would  get  into  the  land  of  the 
Necromancer;  and  even  you.  Bilbo, won't  need me  to  tell  you  tales  of  that  black 

####-sorcerer. I don't advise you to go anywhere near the places overlooked by his dark 
tower! Stick  to  the  forest-track, keep your spirits up, hope for the best, and with a 
tremendous  slice  of  luck  you  may  come  out  one  day  and  see  the  Long  Marshes 
lying  below  you,  and  beyond  them,  high  in  the East,  the Lonely Mountain where 
dear old Smaug lives, though I hope he is not expecting you." 
"Very  comforting  you  are  to  be  sure,"  growled  Thorin.  "Good-bye!  If  you 
won't come with us, you had better get off without any more talk!" 
"Good-bye  then,  and  really  good-bye!"  said  Gandalf,  and  he  turned  his  horse 
and  rode  down  into  the West.  But  he  could  not  resist  the  temptation  to  have  the 
last word. Before he had passed quite out of hearing he turned and put his hands to 
his mouth  and  called  to  them. They  heard  his  voice  come  faintly:  "Good-bye! Be 
good, take care of yourselves-and DON'T LEAVE THE PATH!" 
Then he galloped away and was soon lost to sight. "O good-bye and go away!" 
grunted  the  dwarves,  all  the  more  angry  because  they  were  really  filled  with 
dismay at losing him. Now began the most dangerous part of all the journey.  
They  each  shouldered  the  heavy  pack  and  the  water-skin  which  was  their 
share, and turned from the light that lay on the lands outside and plunged into the 
forest.  
 

####-<h4>Chapter 8 </h4> <br>

Flies and Spiders 

 
They  walked  in  single  file.  The  entrance  to  the  path  was  like  a  sort  of  arch 
leading  into  a  gloomy  tunnel made  by  two  great  trees  that  leant  together,  too  old 
and  strangled  with  ivy  and  hung  with  lichen  to  bear  more  than  a  few  blackened 
leaves. The  path  itself was  narrow and wound in and out among the trunks. Soon 
the  light  at  the  gate  was  like  a  little  bright  hole  far  behind,  and  the  quiet  was  so 
deep that their feet seemed to thump along while all the trees leaned over them and 
listened. As  theft  eyes  became  used  to  the  dimness  they  could  see  a  little way  to 
either  side  in  a  sort  of  darkened  green  glimmer.  Occasionally  a  slender  beam  of 
sun  that had  the  luck  to slip  in  through some opening  in  the  leaves far above, and 
still  more  luck  in  not  being  caught  in  the  tangled  boughs  and  matted  twigs 
beneath,  stabbed  down  thin  and  bright  before  them.  But  this  was  seldom,  and  it 
soon ceased altogether.  
There were  black  squirrels  in  the wood. As  Bilbo's  sharp  inquisitive  eyes  got 
used  to  seeing  things  he  could  catch  glimpses  of  them whisking  off  the  path  and 
scuttling  behind  tree-trunks.  There  were  queer  noises  too,  grunts,  scufflings,  and 
hurryings  in  the undergrowth, and among  the  leaves  that  lay piled endlessly  thick 
in  places  on  the  forest-floor;  but  what  made  the  noises  he  could  not  see.  The 
nastiest  things  they  saw  were  the  cobwebs:  dark  dense  cobwebs  with  threads 
extraordinarily  thick,  often  stretched  from  tree  to  tree,  or  tangled  in  the  lower 
branches  on  either  side  of  them.  There  were  none  stretched  across  the  path,  but 
whether because some magic kept it clear, or for what other reason they could not 
guess. 
It was not long before they grew to hate the forest as heartily as they had hated 
the tunnels of the goblins, and it seemed to offer even less hope of any ending. But 
they had to go on and on, long after they were sick for a sight of the sun and of the 
sky, and  longed for  the feel of wind on  their faces. There was no movement of air 
down under the forest-roof, and it was everlastingly still and dark and stuffy. Even 
the dwarves felt it, who were used to tunnelling, and lived at times for long whiles 
without the light of the sun; but the hobbit, who liked holes to make a house in but 
not to spend summer days in, felt he was being slowly suffocated. 
The nights were the worst. It then became pitch-dark – not what you call pitch-
dark,  but  really  pitch;  so  black  that  you  really  could  see  nothing.  Bilbo  tried 
flapping his hand in front of his nose, but he could not see it at all. Well, perhaps it 

####-is  not  true  to  say  that  they  could  see  nothing:  they  could  see  eyes. They  slept  all 
closely  huddled  together,  and  took  it  in  turns  to  watch;  and  when  it  was  Bilbo's 
turn  he  would  see  gleams  in  the  darkness  round  them,  and  sometimes  pairs  of 
yellow  or  red  or  green  eyes  would  stare  at  him  from  a  little  distance,  and  then 
slowly  fade  and  disappear  and  slowly  shine  out  again  in  another  place.  And 
sometimes  they  would  gleam  down  from  the  branches  just  above  him;  and  that 
was most terrifying. But the eyes that he liked the least were horrible pale bulbous 
sort  of  eyes.  "Insect  eyes"  he  thought,  "not  animal  eyes,  only  they  are  much  too 
big." 
Although  it was  not  yet  very  cold,  they  tried  lighting watch-fires at night, but 
they  soon  gave  that  up.  It  seemed  to  bring  hundreds  and  hundreds  of  eyes  all 
round  them,  though  the  creatures,  whatever  they  were,  were  careful  never  to  let 
their bodies show in the little flicker of the flames. Worse still it brought thousands 
of  dark-grey  and  black  moths,  some  nearly  as  big  as  your  hand,  flapping  and 
whirring  round their ears. They could not stand that, nor the huge bats, black as a 
top-hat,  either;  so  they  gave  up  fires  and  sat  at  night  and  dozed  in  the  enormous 
uncanny darkness. 
All  this  went  on  for  what  seemed  to  the  hobbit  ages  upon  ages;  and  he  was 
always  hungry,  for  they were extremely careful with  their provisions. Even  so, as 
days  followed  days,  and  still  the  forest  seemed  just  the  same,  they  began  to  get 
anxious. The  food would not  last  for  ever:  it was  in  fact  already beginning  to get 
low. They tried shooting at the squirrels, and they wasted many arrows before they 
managed  to  bring  one  down  on  the  path.  But  when  they  roasted  it,  it  proved 
horrible to taste, and they shot no more squirrels. 
They  were  thirsty  too,  for  they  had  none  too  much  water,  and  in  all  the  time 
they  had  seen  neither  spring  nor  stream.  This  was  their  state  when  one  day  they 
found their path blocked by a running water. It flowed fast and strong but not very 
wide right across  the way, and  it was black, or  looked  it  in  the gloom. It was well 
that  Beorn  had  warned  them  against  it,  or  they  would  have  drunk  from  it, 
whatever  its  colour,  and  filled  some  of  their  emptied  skins  at  its  bank. As  it was 
they only thought of how to cross it without wetting themselves in its water. There 
had  been  a  bridge  of  wood  across,  but  it  had  rotted  and  fallen  leaving  only  the 
broken posts near the bank. 
Bilbo kneeling on the brink and peering forward cried: "There is a boat against 
the far bank! Now why couldn't it have been this side!" 
"How far away do you think it is?" asked Thorin, for by now they knew Bilbo 
had the sharpest eyes among them. 

####-"Not at all far. I shouldn't think above twelve yards." 
"Twelve  yards!  I  should  have  thought  it was  thirty  at  least,  but my  eyes  don't 
see  as  well  as  they  used  a  hundred  years  ago.  Still  twelve  yards  is  as  good  as  a 
mile. We can't jump it, and we daren't try to wade or swim." 
"Can any of you throw a rope?" 
"What's the good of that? The boat is sure to be tied up, even if we could hook 
it, which I doubt." 
"I  don't  believe  it  is  tied,"  said Bilbo,  "though of  course  I  can't be  sure  in  this 
light;  but  it  looks  to me  as  if  it was  just  drawn  up  on  the  bank, which  is  low  just 
there where the path goes down into the water." 
"Dori is the strongest, but Fili is the youngest and still  has the best sight," said 
Thorin.  "Come  here  Fili,  and  see  if  you  can  see  the  boat  Mr.  Baggins  is  talking 
about." 
Fili thought he could; so when he had stared a long while to get an idea of the 
direction,  the  others  brought  him  a  rope.  They  had  several with  them, and on  the 
end  of  the  longest  they  fastened  one  of  the  large  iron  hooks  they  had  used  for 
catching  their packs  to  the  straps  about  their  shoulders. Fili  took  this  in his hand, 
balanced it for a moment, and then flung it across the stream. 
Splash  it  fell  in  the  water!  "Not  far  enough!"  said  Bilbo  who  was  peering 
forward.  "A  couple  of  feet  and  you  would  have  dropped  it  on  to  the  boat.  Try 
again.  I don't  suppose  the magic  is  strong  enough  to hurt you,  if you  just  touch  a 
bit of wet rope." 
Fili  picked  up  the  hook when  he  had  drawn  it  back,  rather  doubtfully  all  the 
same. This time he threw it with greater strength. 
"Steady!" said Bilbo, "you have thrown it right into the wood on the other side 
now.  Draw  it  back  gently."  Fili  hauled  the  rope  back  slowly,  and  after  a  while 
Bilbo said: 
"Carefully! It is lying on the boat; let's hope the hook will catch." 
It  did.  The  rope went  taut,  and  Fili  pulled  in  vain. Kili  came  to  his  help,  and 
then  Oin  and  Gloin.  They  tugged  and  tugged,  and  suddenly  they  all  fell  over  on 
their backs. Bilbo was on  the  lockout, however, caught  the rope, and with a piece 
of  stick  fended  off  the  little  black  boat  as  it  came  rushing  across  the  stream. 
"Help!"  he  shouted,  and Balin was  just  in  time  to  seize  the  boat  before  it  floated 
off down the current. 
"It  was  tied  after  all,"  said  he,  looking  at  the  snapped  painter  that  was  still 
dangling  from  it.  "That  was  a  good  pull,  my  lads;  and  a  good  job  that  our  rope 
was the stronger." 

####-"Who'll cross first?" asked Bilbo. 
"I  shall,"  said Thorin,  "and  you will come with me, and Fili and Balin. That's 
as  many  as  the  boat  will  hold  at  a  time.  After  that  Kili  and  Oin  and  Gloin  and 
Don; next On and Nori, Bifur and Bofur; and last Dwalin and Bombur." 
"I'm  always  last  and  I  don't  like  it,"  said  Bombur.  "It's  somebody  else's  turn 
today." 
"You  should  not  be  so  fat. As  you  are,  you must  be with  the  last  and  lightest 
boatload.  Don't  start  grumbling  against  orders,  or  something  bad  will  happen  to 
you." 
"There  aren't  any  oars.  How  are  you  going  to  push  the  boat  back  to  the  far 
bank?" asked the hobbit. 
"Give me  another  length  of  rope  and  another  hook,"  said  Fili,  and when  they 
had got  it  ready, he cast  into  the darkness ahead and as high as he could  throw  it. 
Since  it did not  fall down again,  they saw  that  it must have stuck in the branches. 
"Get  in now," said Fili, "and one of you haul on  the rope  that  is stuck  in a  tree on 
the other  side. One of  the others must keep hold of  the hook we used  at  first,  and 
when we  are  safe  on  the  other  side  he  can  hook  it  on,  and  you  can draw  the boat 
back." 
In  this  way  they  were  all  soon  on  the  far  bank  safe  across  the  enchanted 
stream.  Dwalin  had  just  scrambled  out  with  the  coiled  rope  on  his  arm,  and 
Bombur  (still  grumbling)  was  getting  ready  to  follow,  when  something  bad  did 
happen. There was a  flying  sound of hooves on  the path ahead. Out of  the gloom 
came suddenly  the shape of a  flying deer.  It charged  into  the dwarves and bowled 
them  over,  then  gathered  itself  for  a  leap.  High  it  sprang  and  cleared  the  water 
with  a  mighty  jump.  But  it  did  not  reach  the  other  side  in  safety. Thorin was  the 
only  one  who  had  kept  his  feet  and  his  wits.  As  soon  as  they  had  landed  he  had 
bent his bow and fitted an arrow in case any hidden guardian of the boat appeared. 
Now he  sent  a  swift  and  sure  shot  into the leaping beast. As it reached the further 
bank  it  stumbled.  The  shadows  swallowed  it  up,  but  they  heard  the  sound  of 
hooves quickly falter and then go still. 
Before  they  could  shout  in  praise  of  the  shot,  however,  a  dreadful  wail  from 
Bilbo  put  all  thoughts  of  venison  out  of  their  minds.  "Bombur  has  fallen  in! 
Bombur is drowning!" he cried. It was only too true. Bombur had only one foot on 
the land when the hart bore down on him, and sprang over him. He had stumbled, 
thrusting the boat away from the bank, and then toppled back into the dark water, 
his  hands  slipping  off  the  slimy  roots  at  the  edge,  while  the  boat  span  slowly  off 
and disappeared. 

####-They  could  still  see  his  hood  above  the  water  when  they  ran  to  the  bank. 
Quickly  they  flung  a  rope with  a  hook towards him. His hand caught it, and they 
pulled  him  to  the  shore.  He  was  drenched  from  hair  to  boots,  of  course,  but  that 
was  not  the  worst.  When  they  laid  him  on  the  bank  he  was  already  fast  asleep, 
with one hand clutching the rope so tight that they could not get it from his grasp; 
and  fast asleep he  remained  in  spite of all  they could do. They were  still  standing 
over him,  cursing  their  ill  luck,  and Bombur's  clumsiness,  and  lamenting  the  loss 
of  the  boat  which  made  it  impossible  for  them  to  go  back  and  look  for  the  hart, 
when  they became  aware of  the dim blowing of horns  in  the wood  and  the  sound 
as  of  dogs  baying  far  off.  Then  they  all  fell  silent;  and  as  they  sat  it  seemed  they 
could hear  the noise of a great hunt going by  to  the north of  the path, though they 
saw no sign of it. There they sat for a long while and did not dare to make a move. 
Bombur  slept  on with  a  smile  on  his  fat  face,  as  if  he  no  longer  cared  for  all  the 
troubles that vexed them. 
Suddenly  on  the  path  ahead  appeared  some  white  deer,  a  hind  and  fawns  as 
snowy  white  as  the  hart  had  been  dark.  They  glimmered  in  the  shadows.  Before 
Thorin  could  cry  out  three  of  the  dwarves  had  leaped  to  their  feet  and  loosed  off 
arrows  from  their  bows.  None  seemed  to  find  their  mark.  The  deer  turned  and 
vanished  in  the  trees  as  silently  as  they  had  come,  and  in  vain  the  dwarves  shot 
their arrows after them. 
"Stop!  stop!"  shouted  Thorin;  but  it  was  too  late,  the  excited  dwarves  had 
wasted  their  last  arrows,  and  now  the  bows  that  Beorn  had  given  them  were 
useless. 
They  were  a  gloomy  party  that  night,  and  the  gloom  gathered  still  deeper  on 
them in the following days. They had crossed the enchanted stream; but beyond it 
the  path  seemed  to  straggle  on  just  as  before,  and  in  the  forest  they  could  see  no 
change.  Yet  if  they  had  known  more  about  it  and  considered  the  meaning  of  the 
hunt  and  the  white  deer  that  had  appeared  upon  their  path,  they  would  have 
known  that  they  were  at  last  drawing  towards  the  eastern  edge,  and  would  soon 
have  come,  if  they  could  have  kept  up  their  courage  and  their  hope,  to  thinner 
trees and places where the sunlight came again. 
But  they  did  not  know  this,  and  they  were  burdened  with  the  heavy  body  of 
Bombur,  which  they  had  to  carry  along  with  them  as  best  they  could,  taking  the 
wearisome  task  in  turns  of  four  each while  the  others  shared  their  packs.  If  these 
had not become all too light in the last few days, they would never have managed 
it;  but  a  slumbering  and  smiling  Bombur  was  a  poor  exchange  for  packs  filled 
with  food  however  heavy.  In  a  few  days  a  time  came when  there was  practically 

####-nothing  left  to  eat  or  to  drink. Nothing wholesome  could  they  see  growing  in  the 
woods, only funguses and herbs with pale leaves and unpleasant smell. 
About four days from the enchanted stream they  came to a part where most of 
the trees were beeches. They were at first inclined to be cheered by the change, for 
here  there  was  no  undergrowth  and  the  shadow  was  not  so  deep.  There  was  a 
greenish light about them, and in places they could see some distance to either side 
of  the  path.  Yet  the  light  only  showed  them  endless  lines  of  straight  grey  trunks 
like the pillars of some huge twilight hall. There was a breath of air and a noise of 
wind,  but  it  had  a  sad  sound.  A  few  leaves  came  rustling  down  to  remind  them 
that  outside  autumn was  coming  on.  Their  feet  ruffled  among  the  dead  leaves  of 
countless other  autumns  that drifted over  the banks of  the path  from  the deep  red 
carpets of the forest. 
Still Bombur  slept  and  they grew very weary. At  times  they heard disquieting 
laughter.  Sometimes  there  was  singing  in  the  distance  too.  The  laughter  was  the 
laughter of fair voices not of goblins, and the singing was beautiful, but it sounded 
eerie and  strange, and  they were not comforted,  rather  they hurried on  from  those 
parts with what strength they had left. 
Two  days  later  they  found  their  path  going  downwards  and  before  long  they 
were in a valley filled almost entirely with a mighty growth of oaks. 
"Is there no end to this accursed forest?" said Thorin. 
"Somebody must climb a tree and see if he can get his head above the roof and 
have  a  look  round.  The  only  way  is  to  choose  the  tallest  tree  that  overhangs  the 
path." 
Of course "somebody" meant Bilbo. They chose him because  to be of any use 
the  climber  must  get  his  head  above  the  topmost  leaves,  and  so  he must  be  light 
enough for the highest and slenderest branches to bear him. Poor Mr. Baggins had 
never had much practice in climbing trees, but they hoisted him up into the lowest 
branches of an enormous oak that grew right out into the path, and up he had to go 
as best he could. He pushed his way through the tangled twigs with many a slap in 
the eye; he was greened and grimed from the old bark of the greater boughs; more 
than  once  he  slipped  and  caught  himself  just  in  time; and at  last, after a dreadful 
struggle  in  a  difficult  place  where  there  seemed  to  be  no  convenient  branches  at 
all, he got near the top. All the time he was wondering whether there were spiders 
in the tree, and how he was going to get down again (except by falling). 
In  the  end  he  poked  his  head  above  the  roof  of  leaves,  and  then  he  found 
spiders  all  right.  But  they  were  only  small  ones  of  ordinary  size,  and  they  were 
after  the  butterflies.  Bilbo's  eyes  were  nearly  blinded  by  the  light.  He  could  hear 

####-the dwarves shouting up at him from far below, but he could not answer, only hold 
on  and  blink.  The  sun  was  shining  brilliantly,  and  it  was  a  long  while  before  he 
could  bear  it. When  he  could,  he  saw  all  round  him  a  sea  of  dark  green,  ruffled 
here  and  there  by the breeze; and there were everywhere hundreds of butterflies. I 
expect  they were a kind of  'purple emperor,' a butterfly  that  loves  the  tops of oak-
woods,  but  these  were  not  purple  at  all,  they  were  a  dark  dark  velvety  black 
without any markings to be seen. 
He  looked  at  the  'black  emperors'  for  a  long  time,  and  enjoyed  the  feel  of  the 
breeze in his hair and on his face; but at length the cries of the dwarves, who were 
now  simply  stamping  with  impatience  down  below,  reminded  him  of  his  real 
business.  It  was  no  good.  Gaze  as much  as  he might,  he  could  see  no  end  to  the 
trees  and  the  leaves  in  any  direction.  His  heart,  that  had  been  lightened  by  the 
sight of the sun and the feel of the wind, sank back into his toes: there was no food 
to go back to down below.  
Actually, as I have told you, they were not far off the edge of the forest; and if 
Bilbo had had the sense to see it, the tree that he had climbed, though it was tall in 
itself, was standing near  the bottom of a wide valley, so  that  from  its  top  the  trees 
seemed  to  swell  up  all  round  like  the  edges  of  a  great  bowl,  and  he  could  not 
expect  to  see  how  far  the  forest  lasted.  Still  he  did  not  see  this,  and  he  climbed 
down  full  of  despair.  He  got  to  the  bottom  again  at  last  scratched,  hot,  and 
miserable,  and  he  could  not  see  anything  in  the  gloom  below  when  he  got  there. 
His report soon made the others as miserable as he was. 
"The forest goes on for ever and ever and ever in all directions! Whatever shall 
we do? And what  is  the use of sending a hobbit!"  they cried, as if it was his fault. 
They did not care tuppence about the butterflies, and were only made more angry 
when he told them of the beautiful breeze, which they were too heavy to climb up 
and feel. 
 
That  night  they  ate  their  very  last  scraps  and  crumbs  of  food;  and  next 
morning  when  they  woke  the  first  thing  they  noticed  was  that  they  were  still 
gnawingly  hungry,  and  the  next  thing  was  that  it  was  raining  and  that  here  and 
there  the  drip  of  it  was  dropping  heavily  on  the  forest  floor.  That  only  reminded 
them  that  they  were  also  parchingly  thirsty,  without  doing  anything  to  relieve 
them: you cannot quench a terrible thirst by standing under giant oaks and waiting 
for  a  chance  drip  to  fall  on  your  tongue.  The  only  scrap  of  comfort  there  was, 
came unexpectedly from Bombur.  

####-He woke  up  suddenly  and  sat  up  scratching  his  head. He  could  not make  out 
where  he  was  at  all,  nor  why  he  felt  so  hungry;  for  he  had  forgotten  everything 
that  had  happened  since  they  started  their  journey  that  May  morning  long  ago. 
The  last  thing  that  he  remembered  was  the  party  at  the  hobbit's  house,  and  they 
had  great  difficulty  in  making  him  believe  their  tale  of  all  the  many  adventures 
they had had since. 
When he heard that there was nothing to eat, he sat down and wept, for he felt 
very  weak  and  wobbly  in  the  legs.  "Why  ever  did  I  wake  up!"  he  cried.  "I  was 
having such beautiful dreams. I dreamed I was walking in a forest rather like this 
one,  only  lit with  torches  on  the  trees  and  lamps  swinging  from  the  branches  and 
fires  burning  on  the  ground;  and  there  was  a  great  feast  going  on,  going  on  for 
ever.  A  woodland  king  was  there  with  a  crown  of  leaves,  and  there  was  a merry 
singing, and I could not count or describe the things there were to eat and drink." 
"You need not try," said Thorin. "In fact if you can't talk about something else, 
you  had  better  be  silent.  We  are  quite  annoyed  enough  with  you  as  it  is.  If  you 
hadn't waked up, we should have left you to your idiotic dreams in the forest; you 
are no joke to carry even after weeks of short commons." 
There  was  nothing  now  to  be  done  but  to  tighten  the  belts  round  their  empty 
stomachs,  and  hoist  their  empty  sacks  and  packs,  and  trudge  along  the  track 
without any great hope of ever getting to the end before they lay down and died of 
starvation.  This  they  did  all  that  day,  going  very  slowly  and  wearily,  while 
Bombur  kept  on wailing  that  his  legs would  not  carry  him  and  that  he wanted  to 
lie down and sleep. 
"No you don't!" they said. "Let your legs take their share, we have carried you 
far enough." 
All  the same he suddenly refused  to go a step further and flung himself on  the 
ground.  "Go  on,  if  you  must,"  he  said.  "I'm  just  going  to  lie  here  and  sleep  and 
dream of food, if I can't get it any other way. I hope I never wake up again." 
At that very moment Balin, who was a little way ahead, called out: "What was 
that? I thought I saw a twinkle of light in the forest." 
They  all  looked,  and  a  longish  way  off,  it  seemed,  they  saw  a  red  twinkle  in 
the dark; then another and another sprang out beside it. Even Bombur got up, and 
they hurried along then, not caring if it was trolls or goblins. The light was in front 
of them and to the left of the path, and when at last they had drawn level with it, it 
seemed  plain  that  torches  and  fires were  burning  under  the  trees, but a good way 
off their track. 

####-"It  looks  as  if  my  dreams  were  coming  true,"  gasped  Bombur  puffing  up 
behind. He wanted to rush straight off into the wood after the lights. But the others 
remembered  only  too  well  the  warnings  of  the  wizard  and  of  Beorn.  "A  feast 
would be no good, if we never got back alive from it," said Thorin. 
"But  without  a  feast  we  shan't  remain  alive  much  longer  anyway,"  said 
Bombur, and Bilbo heartily agreed with him. They argued about it backwards and 
forwards for a long while, until they agreed at length to send out a couple of spies, 
to  creep  near  the  lights  and  find  out  more  about  them.  But  then  they  could  not 
agree  on  who  was  to  be  sent:  no  one  seemed  anxious  to  run  the  chance  of  being 
lost  and  never  finding  his  friends  again.  In  the  end,  in  spite  of  warnings,  hunger 
decided  them,  because  Bombur  kept  on  describing  all  the  good  things  that  were 
being eaten, according to his dream, in the woodland feast; so they all left the path 
and plunged into the forest together.  
After  a  good  deal  of  creeping  and  crawling  they  peered  round  the  trunks  and 
looked  into  a  clearing where  some  trees  had  been  felled  and  the  ground  levelled. 
There were many people there, elvish-looking folk, all dressed in green and brown 
and  sitting  on  sawn  rings  of  the  felled  trees  in  a  great  circle.  There was  a  fire  in 
their midst  and  there were  torches  fastened  to  some  of  the  trees  round  about;  but 
most splendid sight of all: they were eating and drinking and laughing merrily.  
The smell of the roast meats was so enchanting that, without waiting to consult 
one  another,  every  one  of  them  got  up  and  scrambled  forwards  into  the  ring with 
the  one  idea  of  begging  for  some  food.  No  sooner  had  the  first  stepped  into  the 
clearing  than all  the  lights went out as  if by magic. Somebody kicked the fire and 
it  went  up  in  rockets  of  glittering  sparks  and  vanished.  They  were  lost  in  a 
completely  lightless dark and  they could not even find one another, not for a  long 
time  at  any  rate.  After  blundering  frantically  in  the  gloom,  falling  over  logs, 
bumping  crash  into  trees,  and  shouting  and  calling  till  they  must  have  waked 
everything  in  the  forest  for miles,  at  last  they managed  to  gather  themselves  in  a 
bundle  and  count  themselves  by  touch.  By  that  time  they  had,  of  course,  quite 
forgotten  in what direction  the path  lay,  and  they were  all hopelessly  lost,  at  least 
till morning. 
There was nothing for it but to settle down for the night where they were; they 
did not  even dare  to  search on  the ground  for  scraps of  food  for  fear of becoming 
separated again. But they had not been lying long, and Bilbo was only just getting 
drowsy, when Dori, whose turn it was to watch first, said in a loud whisper: 
"The  lights  are  coming  out  again  over  there,  and  there  are more  than  ever  of 
them." 

####-Up they all jumped. There, sure enough, not far away were scores of twinkling 
lights, and  they heard  the voices and  the  laughter quite plainly. They crept slowly 
towards  them,  in  a  single  line,  each  touching  the  back  of  the  one  in  front. When 
they  got  near Thorin  said:  "No  rushing  forward  this  time! No  one  is  to  stir  from 
hiding till I say. I shall send Mr. Baggins alone first to talk to them. They won't be 
frightened  of  him-('What  about me  of  them?'  thought  Bilbo)-and any way  I hope 
they won't do anything nasty to him." 
When  they  got  to  the  edge  of  the  circle  of  lights  they  pushed  Bilbo  suddenly 
from behind. Before he had  time  to  slip on his  ring, he  stumbled  forward  into  the 
full blaze of the fire and torches. It was no good. Out went all the lights again and 
complete darkness fell. If  it had been difficult collecting  themselves before,  it was 
far  worse  this  time.  And  they  simply  could  not  find  the  hobbit.  Every  time  they 
counted  themselves  it  only  made  thirteen.  They  shouted  and  called:  "Bilbo 
Baggins!  Hobbit!  You  dratted  hobbit!  Hi!  hobbit,  confusticate  you,  where  are 
you?" and other things of that sort, but there was no answer.  
They were just giving up hope, when Dori stumbled across him by sheer luck. 
In the dark he fell over what he thought was a log, and he found it was the hobbit 
curled  up  fast  asleep.  It  took  a  deal  of  shaking  to  wake  him,  and  when  he  was 
awake he was not pleased at all. 
"I  was  having  such  a  lovely  dream,"  he  grumbled,  "all  about  having  a  most 
gorgeous dinner." 
"Good  heavens!  he  has  gone  like  Bombur,"  they  said.  "Don't  tell  us  about 
dreams. Dream-dinners aren't any good, and we can't share them." 
"They  are  the best  I  am  likely  to get  in  this beastly place," he muttered,  as he 
lay  down  beside  the  dwarves  and  tried  to  go  back  to  sleep  and  find  his  dream 
again.  But  that  was  not  the  last  of  the  lights  in  the  forest.  Later  when  the  night 
must  have  been  getting  old,  Kili  who  was  watching  then,  came  and  roused  them 
all again, saying: 
"There's a regular blaze of light begun not far away – hundreds of torches and 
many fires must have been lit suddenly and by magic. And hark to the singing and 
the harps!" 
After lying and listening for a while, they found they could not resist the desire 
to  go  nearer  and  try  once  more  to  get  help.  Up  they  got  again;  and  this  time  the 
result  was  disastrous.  The  feast  that  they  now  saw  was  greater  and  more 
magnificent  than before;  and  at  the head of  a  long  line of  feasters  sat  a woodland 
king  with  a  crown  of  leaves  upon  his  golden  hair,  very  much  as  Bombur  had 
described the figure in his dream. The elvish folk were passing bowls from hand to 

####-hand  and  across  the  fires,  and  some  were  harping  and many  were  singing.  Their 
gloaming  hair  was  twined  with  flowers;  green  and  white  gems  glinted  on  their 
collars and their belts; and their faces and their songs were filled with mirth. Loud 
and clear and fair were those songs, and out stepped Thorin into their midst. 
Dead  silence  fell  in  the middle of  a word. Out went  all  light. The  fires  leaped 
up  in  black  smokes.  Ashes  and  cinders  were  in  the  eyes  of  the  dwarves,  and  the 
wood  was  filled  again  with  their  clamour  and  their  cries.  Bilbo  found  himself 
running round and round (as he thought) and calling and calling: "Dori, Nori, Ori, 
Oin, Gloin, Fili, Kili, Bombur, Bifur, Bofur, Dwalin, Balin, Thorin Oakenshield," 
while people he could not see or  feel were doing  the same all  round him  (with an 
occasional "Bilbo!" thrown in). But the cries of the others got steadily further and 
fainter,  and  though  after  a while  it  seemed  to  him  they  changed  to  yells and cries 
for help  in  the  far distance, all noise at  last died  right away, and he was  left alone 
in complete silence and darkness. 
 
That was  one  of  his most miserable moments. But  he  soon made  up  his mind 
that  it was no good  trying  to do  anything  till  day came with some  little  light, and 
quite  useless  to  go  blundering  about  tiring  himself  out  with  no  hope  of  any 
breakfast to revive him. So he sat himself down with his back to a tree, and not for 
the  last  time  fell  to  thinking  of  his  far-distant  hobbit-hole  with  its  beautiful 
pantries. He was deep in thoughts of bacon and eggs and toast and butter when he 
felt something touch him. Something like a strong sticky string was against his left 
hand,  and when  he  tried  to move  he  found  that  his  legs were  already wrapped  in 
the same stuff, so that when he got up he fell over.  
Then  the great  spider, who had been busy  tying him up while he dozed, came 
from  behind  him  and  came  at  him.  He  could  only  see  the  things's  eyes,  but  he 
could  feel  its  hairy  legs  as  it  struggled  to wind  its  abominable  threads  round  and 
round him. It was lucky that he had come to his senses in time. Soon he would not 
have  been  able  to  move  at  all.  As  it  was,  he  had  a  desperate  fight  before  he  got 
free.  He  beat  the  creature  off  with  his  hands-it  was  trying  to  poison  him  to  keep 
him  quiet,  as  small  spiders  do  to  flies-until he  remembered his  sword  and drew  it 
out. Then the spider jumped back, and he had time to cut his legs loose. After that 
it was  his  turn  to  attack.  The  spider  evidently was  not  used  to  things  that carried 
such stings at  their sides, or  it would have hurried away quicker. Bilbo came at  it 
before  it  could  disappear  and  struck  it  with  his  sword  right  in  the  eyes.  Then  it 
went mad  and  leaped  and  danced  and  flung  out  its  legs  in  horrible  jerks, until he 

####-killed it with another stroke; and then he fell down and remembered nothing more 
for a long while. 
There was  the usual dim grey  light of  the  forest-day about him when he came 
to  his  senses.  The  spider  lay  dead  beside  him,  and  his  sword-blade  was  stained 
black.  Somehow  the  killing  of  the  giant  spider,  all  alone  by  himself  in  the  dark 
without  the  help  of  the  wizard  or  the  dwarves  or  of  anyone  else,  made  a  great 
difference  to Mr. Baggins. He  felt a different person, and much  fiercer and bolder 
in  spite  of  an  empty  stomach,  as  he wiped  his  sword  on  the  grass  and  put  it  back 
into its sheath. 
"I will give you a name," he said to it, "and I shall call you Sting." 
After  that he  set out  to  explore. The  forest was grim  and  silent, but obviously 
he  had  first  of  all  to  look  for  his  friends,  who  were  not  likely  to  be  very  far  off, 
unless they had been made prisoners by the elves (or worse things). 
Bilbo  felt  that  it was unsafe  to  shout,  and he  stood  a  long while wondering  in 
what direction the path lay,  and in what direction he should go first to look for the 
dwarves.  "O!  why  did  we  not  remember  Beorn's  advice,  and  Gandalf's!"  he 
lamented.  "What  a mess we  are  in  now! We!  I  only wish  it was we:  it  is  horrible 
being all alone." 
In the end he made as good a guess as he could at the direction from which the 
cries for help had come in the night – and by luck (he was born with a good share 
of  it) be guessed more or  less  right, as you will  see. Having made up his mind he 
crept  along  as  cleverly  as  he  could.  Hobbits  are  clever  at quietness,  especially  in 
woods,  as  1.  have  already  told  you;  also  Bilbo  had  slipped  on  his  ring  before  he 
started. That is why the spiders neither saw nor heard him coming. 
He had picked his way stealthily 'for some distance, when he noticed a place of 
dense  black  shadow  ahead  of  him  black  even  for  that  forest,  like  a  patch  of 
midnight  that had never been cleared away. As he drew nearer, he saw  that  it was 
made  by  spider-webs one behind  and over  and  tangled with  another. Suddenly he 
saw,  too,  that  there  were  spiders  huge  and  horrible  sitting  in  the  branches  above 
him,  and  ring  or  no  ring  he  trembled  with  fear  lest  they  should  discover  him. 
Standing behind a tree he watched a group of them for some time, and then in the 
silence  and  stillness  of  the  wood  he  realised  that  these  loathsome  creatures  were 
speaking one to another. Their voices were a sort of thin creaking and hissing, but 
he could make out many of  the words  that  they said. They were  talking about  the 
dwarves! 
"It was  a  sharp  struggle, but worth  it,"  said one.  "What nasty  thick  skins  they 
have to be sure, but I'll wager there is good juice inside." 

####-"Aye, they'll make fine eating, when they've hung a bit," said another.  
"Don't  hang  'em  too  long,"  said  a  third.  "They're  not  as  fat  as  they might  be. 
Been feeding none too well of late, I should guess." 
"Kill'em, I say," hissed a fourth; "kill 'em now and hang 'em dead for a while." 
"They're dead now, I'll warrant," said the first. 
"That they are not. I saw one a-struggling just now. Just coming round again, I 
should say, after a bee-autiful sleep. I'll show you." 
With that one of the fat spiders ran along a rope, till it came to a dozen bundles 
hanging  in  a  row  from  a  high  branch.  Bilbo  was  horrified,  now  that  he  noticed 
them for the first time dangling in the shadows, to see a dwarvish foot sticking out 
of  the bottoms of some of  the bundles, or here and  there  the  tip of a nose, or a bit 
of beard or of a hood. 
To the fattest of these bundles the spider went--"It is poor old Bombur, I'll bet," 
thought Bilbo  –  and  nipped  hard  at  the  nose  that  stuck  out. There was  a muffled 
yelp  inside,  and  a  toe  shot  up  and  kicked  the  spider  straight  and  hard. There was 
life  in  Bombur  still.  There  was  a  noise  like  the  kicking  of  a  flabby  football,  and 
the  enraged spider  fell off  the branch, only catching  itself with  its own  thread  just 
in time. 
The  others  laughed.  "You  were  quite  right,"  they  said,  "the  meat's  alive  and 
kicking!"                        " 
"I'll  soon  put  an  end  to  that,"  hissed  the  angry  spider  climbing  back  onto  the 
branch. 
Bilbo  saw  that  the moment  had  come  when  he must  do  something.  He  could 
not  get  up  at  the  brutes  and  he  had  nothing  to  shoot  with;  but  looking  about  he 
saw  that  in  this place  there were many  stones  lying  in what appeared  to be  a now 
dry little watercourse. Bilbo was a pretty fair shot with a stone, and it did not take 
him long to find a nice smooth egg-shaped one that fitted his hand cosily.  
As  a  boy  he  used  to  practise  throwing  stones  at  things,  until  rabbits  and 
squirrels,  and even birds, got out of his way as quick as  lightning  if  they saw him 
stoop;  and  even  grownup  he  had  still  spent  a  deal  of  his  time  at  quoits,  dart-
throwing,  shooting  at  the  wand,  bowls,  ninepins  and  other  quiet  games  of  the 
aiming  and  throwing  sort-indeed  he  could  do  lots  of  things,  besides  blowing 
smoke-rings, asking riddles and cooking, that I haven't had time to tell you about. 
There  is  no  time  now.  While  he  was  picking  up  stones,  the  spider  had  reached 
Bombur,  and  soon  he  would  have  been  dead.  At  that  moment  Bilbo  threw.  The 
stone struck the spider plunk on the head, and it dropped senseless off the tree, flop 
to the ground, with all its legs curled up. 

####-The  next  stone  went  whizzing  through  a  big  web,  snapping  its  cords,  and 
taking off the spider sitting in the middle of it, whack, dead. After that there was a 
deal  of  commotion  in  the  spider-colony,  and  they  forgot  the  dwarves  for  a  bit,  I 
can  tell  you.  They  could  not  see Bilbo,  but  they  could make  a  good  guess  at  the 
direction  from  which  the  stones  were  coming.  As  quick  as  lightning  they  came 
running  and  swinging  towards  the  hobbit,  flinging  out  their  long  threads  in  all 
directions,  till  the  air  seemed  full  of waving  snares. Bilbo,  however,  soon  slipped 
away to a different place. The idea came to him to lead the furious spiders further 
and further away from the dwarves, if he could; to make them curious, excited and 
angry  all  at  once. When  about  fifty  had  gone  off  to  the  place where  he  had  stood 
before, he threw some more stones at these, and at others that had stopped behind; 
then dancing among  the  trees he began  to  sing a  song  to  infuriate  them and bring 
them all after him, and also to let the dwarves hear his voice. 
This is what he sang: 
 

Old fat spider spinning in a tree! 
Old fat spider can't see me! 
Attercop! Attercop! 
Won't you stop, 
Stop your spinning and look for me! 
 
Old Tomnoddy, all big body,  
Old Tomnoddy can't spy me! 
Attercop! Attercop! 
Down you drop! 
You'll never catch me up your tree! 

 
Not very good perhaps, but then you must remember that he had to make it up 
himself, on  the  spur of  a very  awkward moment.  It did what he wanted  any way. 
As he  sang he  threw  some more  stones  and  stamped. Practically  all  the  spiders  in 
the  place  came  after  him:  some  dropped  to  the  ground,  others  raced  along  the 
branches, swung  from  tree  to  tree, or cast new  ropes across  the dark spaces. They 
made  for his noise  far quicker  than he had expected. They were  frightfully angry. 
Quite  apart  from  the  stones  no  spider  has  ever  liked  being  called  Attercop,  and 
Tomnoddy of course is insulting to anybody.  
Off  Bilbo  scuttled  to  a  fresh  place,  but  several  of  the  spiders  had  run  now  to 
different points in the glade where they lived, and were busy spinning webs across 
all  the  spaces  between  the  tree-stems.  Very  soon  the  hobbit would be  caught  in  a 

####-thick fence of them all round him-that at least was the spiders' idea. Standing now 
in  the  middle  of  the  hunting  and  spinning  insects  Bilbo  plucked  up  his  courage 
and began a new song: 
 

####-Lazy Lob and crazy Cob 
are weaving webs to wind me. 
I am far more sweet than other meat, 
but still they cannot find me! 
 
Here am I, naughty little fly; 
you are fat and lazy.  
You cannot trap me, though you try, 
in your cobwebs crazy.  

 
With  that  he  turned  and  found  that  the  last  space  between  two  tall  trees  had 
been closed with a web-but luckily not a proper web, only great strands of double-
thick  spider-rope  run  hastily  backwards  and  forwards  from  trunk  to  trunk.  Out 
came his little' sword. He slashed the threads to pieces and went off singing. 
The spiders saw the sword, though I don't suppose they knew what it was, and 
at once the whole lot of them came hurrying after the hobbit along the ground and 
the branches, hairy legs waving, nippers and spinners snapping, eyes popping, full 
of froth and rage. They followed him into the forest until Bilbo had gone as far as 
he dared. 
Then quieter than a mouse he stole back. He had precious little time, he knew, 
before  the  spiders were disgusted and came back  to  their  trees where  the dwarves 
were hung. In the meanwhile he had to rescue them. The worst part of the job was 
getting up on to the long branch where the bundles were dangling. I don't suppose 
he would  have managed  it,  if  a  spider  had  not  luckily  left  a  rope  hanging  down; 
with  its  help,  though  it  stuck  to  his  hand  and  hurt  him,  he  scrambled  up-only  to 
meet  an old  slow wicked  fat-bodied spider who had remained behind to guard the 
prisoners, and had been busy pinching them to see which was the juiciest to eat. It 
had  thought of starting  the feast while  the others were away, but Mr. Baggins was 
in  a  hurry,  and  before  the  spider  knew  what  was  happening  it  felt  his  sting  and 
rolled off  the branch dead. Bilbo's next  job was  to  loose  a dwarf. What was he  to 
do?  If  he  cut  the  string  which  hung  him  up,  the  wretched  dwarf  would  tumble 
thump to the ground a good way below. Wriggling along the branch (which made 
all the poor dwarves dance and dangle like ripe fruit) he reached the first bundle. 
"Fili  or  Kili,"  he  thought  by  the  tip  of  a  blue  hood  sticking  out  at  the  top. 
"Most  likely Fili," he  thought by  the  tip of a  long nose poking out of  the winding 
threads. He managed by  leaning over  to cut most of  the strong sticky  threads  that 
bound  him  round,  and  then,  sure  enough, with  a  kick  and  a  struggle most  of  Fili 
emerged.  I  am  afraid  Bilbo  actually  laughed  at  the  sight  of  him  jerking  his  stiff 

####-arms and  legs as he danced on  the  spider-string under his armpits, just like one of 
those funny toys bobbing on a wire. 
Somehow  or  other  Fili  was  got  on  to  the  branch,  and  then  he  did  his  best  to 
help  the hobbit,  although he was  feeling very  sick  and  ill  from  spider-poison, and 
from  hanging  most  of  the  night  and  the  next  day  wound  round  and  round  with 
only his nose to breathe through. It took him ages to get the beastly stuff out of his 
eyes and eyebrows, and as for his beard, he had to cut most of it off. Well, between 
them  they started  to haul up  first one dwarf and  then another and slash  them  free. 
None  of  them were  better  off  than  Fili,  and  some  of  them were worse.  Some  had 
hardly  been  able  to breathe  at  all  (long noses  are  sometimes useful you  see),  and 
some had been more poisoned. 
In  this  way  they  rescued  Kili,  Bifur,  Bofur,  Don  and  Nori.  Poor  old  Bombur 
was  so  exhausted-he was  the  fattest  and  had  been  constantly  pinched  and  poked-
that  he  just  rolled off  the branch  and  fell plop on  to  the ground,  fortunately on  to 
leaves,  and  lay  there.  But  there were  still  five  dwarves  hanging  at  the  end  of  the 
branch  when  the  spiders  began  to  come  back,  more  full  of  rage  than  ever.  Bilbo 
immediately  went  to  the  end  of  the  branch  nearest  the  tree-trunk  and  kept  back 
those that crawled up. He had taken off his ring when he rescued Fili and forgotten 
to put it on again, so now they all began to splutter and hiss: 
"Now  we  see  you,  you  nasty  little  creature!  We  will  eat  you  and  leave  your 
bones and skin hanging on a tree. Ugh! he's got a sting has he? Well, we'll get him 
all the same, and then we'll hang him head downwards for a day or two." 
While  this  was  going  on,  the  other  dwarves  were  working  at  the  rest  of  the 
captives,  and  cutting  at  the  threads  with  their  knives.  Soon  all  would  be  free, 
though  it  was  not  clear  what  would  happen  after  that.  The  spiders  had  caught 
them  pretty  easily  the  night  before,  but  that  had  been  unawares  and  in  the  dark. 
This time there looked like being a horrible battle. 
Suddenly  Bilbo  noticed  that  some  of  the  spiders  had  gathered  round  old 
Bombur on the floor, and had tied him up again and were dragging him away. He 
gave  a  shout  and  slashed  at  the  spiders  in  front  of  him.  They  quickly  gave way, 
and  he  scrambled  and  fell  down  the  tree  right  into  the  middle  of  those  on  the 
ground. His  little sword was something new  in  the way of stings for  them. How  it 
darted  to  and  fro!  It  shone with  delight  as  he  stabbed  at  them. Half  a  dozen were 
killed before the rest drew off and left Bombur to Bilbo. 
"Come  down! Come  down!"  he  shouted  to  the  dwarves  on  the  branch.  "Don't 
stay up  there and be netted!" For he saw spiders swarming up all  the neighboring 
trees, and crawling along the boughs above the heads of the dwarves. 

####-Down the dwarves scrambled or jumped or dropped, eleven all in a heap, most 
of  them  very  shaky  and  little  use  on  their  legs. There  they were  at  last,  twelve  of 
them counting poor old Bombur, who was being propped up on either  side by his 
cousin Bifur, and his brother Bofur; and Bilbo was dancing about and waving his 
Sting;  and  hundreds  of  angry  spiders were  goggling  at  them  all  round  and  about 
and above. It looked pretty hopeless. 
Then  the  battle  began. Some  of  the  dwarves  had  knives,  and some had sticks, 
and  all  of  them  could  get  at  stones;  and  Bilbo  had  his  elvish  dagger.  Again  and 
again  the spiders were beaten off, and many of  them were killed. But  it could not 
go  on  for  long. Bilbo was  nearly  tired  out;  only  four  of  the  dwarves were  able to 
stand firmly, and soon they would all be overpowered like weary flies. Already the 
spiders were beginning to weave their webs all round them again from tree to tree. 
In the end Bilbo could think of no plan except to let the dwarves into the secret of 
his ring. He was rather sorry about it, but it could not be helped. 
"I  am  going  to  disappear,"  he  said.  "I  shall  draw  the  spiders  off,  if  I  can;  and 
you must keep  together  and make  in  the opposite direction. To  the  left  there,  that 
is more or less the way towards the place where we last saw the elf-fires." 
It was difficult to get them to understand, what with their dizzy heads, and the 
shouts, and the whacking of sticks and the throwing of stones; but at last Bilbo felt 
he  could  delay  no  longer-the  spiders  were  drawing  their  circle  ever  closer.  He 
suddenly  slipped  on  his  ring,  and  to  the  great  astonishment  of  the  dwarves  he 
vanished. 
Soon  there  came  the  sound  of  "Lazy  Lob"  and  "Attercop"  from  among  the 
trees  away  on  the  right.  That  upset  the  spiders  greatly. They  stopped  advancing, 
and  some,  went  off  in  the  direction  of  the  voice.  "Attercop" made  them  so  angry 
that  they  lost  their wits. Then Balin, who had grasped Bilbo's plan better  than  the 
rest, led an attack. The dwarves huddled together in a knot, and sending a shower 
of  stones  they  drove  at  the  spiders  on  the  left,  and  burst  through  the  ring.  Away 
behind them now the shouting and singing suddenly stopped. 
Hoping  desperately  that Bilbo  had  not  been  caught  the  dwarves went  on. Not 
fast enough, though. They were sick and weary, and they could not go much better 
than a hobble and a wobble, though many of the spiders were close behind. Every 
now  and  then  they  had  to  turn  and  fight  the  creatures  that were  overtaking  them 
and  already  some  spiders  were  in  the  trees  above  them  and  throwing  down  their 
long clinging threads. 
Things  were  looking  pretty  bad  again,  when  suddenly  Bilbo  appeared  and 
charged into the astonished spiders unexpectedly from the side. 

####-"Go  on!  Go  on!"  he  shouted.  "I  will  do  the  stinging!"  And  he did. He darted 
backwards  and  forwards,  slashing  at  spider-threads,  hacking  at  their  legs,  and 
stabbing  at  their  fat  bodies  if  they  came  too  near.  The  spiders  swelled  with  rage, 
and  spluttered  and  frothed,  and  hissed  out  horrible  curses;  but  they  had  become 
mortally afraid of Sting, and dared not come very near, now that it had come back. 
So curse as  they would,  their prey moved slowly but steadily away. It was a most 
terrible business, and seemed to take hours. But at last, just when Bilbo felt that he 
could  not  lift  his  hand  for  a  single  stroke  more,  the  spiders  suddenly  gave  it  up, 
and followed them no more, but went back disappointed to their dark colony.  
The  dwarves  then  noticed  that  they  had  come  to  the  edge  of  a  ring where  elf-
fires  had  been.  Whether  it  was  one  of  those  they  had  seen  the  night  before,  they 
could  not  tell. But  it  seemed  that  some  good magic  lingered  in  such  spots, which 
the spiders did not like. At any rate here the light was greener, and the boughs less 
thick and threatening, and they had a chance to rest and draw breath. 
There they lay for some time, puffing and panting. put very soon they began to 
ask questions. They had to have the whole vanishing business carefully explained, 
and  the  finding  of  the  ring  interested  them  so  much  that  for  a  while  they  forgot 
their own troubles. Balin in particular insisted on having the Gollum story, riddles 
and  all,  told  all  over  again, with  the  ring  in  its  proper  place. But  after  a  time  the 
light  began  to  fail,  and  then  other  questions  were  asked.  Where  were  they,  and 
where was their path, and where was there any food, and what were they going to 
do  next?  These  questions  they  asked  over  and  over  again,  and  it  was  from  little 
Bilbo  that  they seemed  to expect  to get  the answers. From which you can see  that 
they had changed their opinion of Mr. Baggins very much, and had begun to have 
a  great  respect  for  him  (as  Gandalf  had  said  they  would).  Indeed  they  really 
expected  him  to  think  of  some  wonderful  plan  for  helping  them,  and  were  not 
merely  grumbling.  They  knew  only  too  well  that  they  would  soon  all  have  been 
dead, if it had not been for the hobbit; and they thanked him many times. Some of 
them even got up and bowed right to the ground before him, though they fell over 
with  the  effort,  and  could  not  get  on  their  legs  again  for  some  time. Knowing  the 
truth about  the vanishing did not  lessen  their opinion of Bilbo at all;  for  they saw 
that  he  had  some  wits,  as  well  as  luck  and  a  magic  ring-and  all  three  are  very 
useful possessions. In fact they praised him so much that Bilbo began to feel there 
really  was  something  of  a  bold  adventurer  about  himself  after  all,  though  he  I 
would have felt a lot bolder still, if there had been anything to eat. 
But there was nothing, nothing at all; and none of them Were fit to go and look 
for  anything,  or  to  search  for  the  lost  path.  The  lost  path!  No  other  idea  would 

####-come into Bilbo's tired head. He just sat staring in front of him at the endless trees; 
and  after  a while  they  all  fell  silent  again. All  except Balin. Long  after  the others 
had  stopped  talking  and  shut  their  eyes,  he  kept  on  muttering  and  chuckling  to 
himself. 
"Gollum! Well I'm blest! So that's how he sneaked past me is it? Now I know! 
Just  crept  quietly  along  did  you,  Mr.  Baggins?  Buttons  all  over  the  doorstep? 
Good  old  Bilbo-Bilbo-Bilbo-bo-bo-bo–"  And  then  he  fell  asleep,  and  there  was 
complete silence for a long time. 
All  of  a  sudden Dwalin  opened  an  eye,  and  looked  round  at  them.  "Where  is 
Thorin?"  he  asked.  It  was  a  terrible  shock.  Of  course  there  were  only  thirteen of 
them,  twelve dwarves and  the hobbit. Where  indeed was Thorin? They wondered 
what  evil  fate  had  befallen  him,  magic  or  dark  monsters;  and  shuddered  as  they 
lay  lost  in  the  forest. There  they dropped off one by one  into uncomfortable  sleep 
full  of  horrible  dreams,  as  evening wore  to  black  night;  and  there we must  leave 
them for the present, too sick and weary to set guards or take turns watching. 
Thorin  had  been  caught  much  faster  than  they  had.  You  remember  Bilbo 
falling  like  a  log  into  sleep,  as  he  stepped  into  a  circle  of  light?  The  next  time  it 
had  been  Thorin  who  stepped  forward,  and  as  the  lights  went  out  he  fell  like  a 
stone  enchanted.  All  the  noise  of  the  dwarves  lost  in  the  night,  their  cries  as  the 
spiders caught them and bound them, and all the sounds of the battle next day, had 
passed over him unheard. Then the Wood-elves had come to him, and bound him, 
and carried him away. The feasting people were Wood-elves, of course. These are 
not wicked folk. If they have a fault it is distrust of strangers. Though their magic 
was strong, even in those days they were wary. They differed from the High Elves 
of  the West,  and were more  dangerous  and  less wise.  For most  of  them  (together 
with  their  scattered  relations  in  the hills  and mountains) were  descended from the 
ancient  tribes  that never went  to Faerie  in  the West. There  the Light-elves and the 
Deep-elves  and  the  Sea-elves  went  and  lived  for  ages,  and  grew  fairer  and  wiser 
and more learned, and invented their magic and their cunning craft, in the making 
of  beautiful  and marvellous  things,  before  some  came  back  into  the Wide World. 
In  the Wide World  the Wood-elves  lingered  in  the  twilight of  our Sun  and Moon 
but  loved  best  the  stars;  and  they  wandered  in  the  great  forests  that  grew  tall  in 
lands  that  are  now  lost.  They  dwelt  most  often  by  the  edges  of  the  woods,  from 
which they could escape at times to hunt, or to ride and run over the open lands by 
moonlight or starlight; and after the coming of Men they took ever more and more 
to  the  gloaming  and  the  dusk. Still  elves  they were  and  remain,  and  that  is Good 
People. 

####-In  a  great  cave  some  miles  within  the  edge  of  Mirkwood  on  its  eastern  side 
there  lived  at  this  time  their  greatest  king. Before  his  huge  doors  of  stone  a  river 
ran  out  of  the  heights  of  the  forest  and  flowed on  and out  into  the marshes  at  the 
feet of the high wooded lands. This great cave, from which countless smaller ones 
opened  out  on  every  side,  wound  far  underground  and  had  many  passages  and 
wide  halls;  but  it was  lighter  and more wholesome  than  any  goblin-dwelling, and 
neither so deep nor so dangerous. In fact the subjects of the king mostly lived and 
hunted  in  the  open  woods,  and  had  houses  or  huts  on  the  ground  and  in  the 
branches. The  beeches were  their  favourite  trees. The  king's  cave  was his palace, 
and  the  strong  place  of  his  treasure,  and  the  fortress  of  his  people  against  their 
enemies. 
It was  also  the  dungeon  of  his  prisoners.  So  to  the  cave  they  dragged Thorin-
not  too  gently,  for  they  did  not  love  dwarves,  and  thought  he  was  an  enemy.  In 
ancient days  they had had wars with some of  the dwarves, whom  they accused of 
stealing  their  treasure.  It  is  only  fair  to  say  that  the  dwarves  gave  a  different 
account, and said that they only took what was their due, for the elf-king had bar- 
gained with  them  to  shape  his  raw  gold  and  silver,  and  had  afterwards  refused  to 
give  them  their  pay.  If  the  elf-king had  a weakness  it was  for  treasure,  especially 
for  silver  and  white  gems;  and  though  his  hoard  was  rich,  he  was  ever  eager  for 
more, since he  had not yet  as great  a  treasure  as other  elf-lords of old. His people 
neither mined nor worked metals or jewels, nor did they bother much with trade or 
with  tilling  the  earth.  All  this  was  well  known  to  every  dwarf,  though  Thorin's 
family had had nothing  to do with the old quarrel I have spoken of. Consequently 
Thorin was angry at their treatment of him, when they took their spell off him and 
he came  to his senses; and also he was determined  that no word of gold or  jewels 
should be dragged out of him. 
The  king  looked  sternly  on  Thorin,  when  he  was  brought  before  him,  and 
asked him many questions. But Thorin would only say that he was starving. 
"Why  did  you  and  your  folk  three  times  try  to  attack  my  people  at  their 
merrymaking?" asked the king. 
"We  did  not  attack  them,"  answered  Thorin;  "we  came  to  beg,  because  we 
were starving." 
"Where are your friends now, and what are they doing?" 
"I don't know, but I expect starving in the forest." 
"What were you doing in the forest?" 
"Looking for food and drink, because we were starving." 
"But what brought you into the forest at all?" asked the king angrily.  

####-At that Thorin shut his mouth and would not say another word. 
"Very well!"  said  the  king.  "Take  him  away  and  keep  him  safe,  until  he  feels 
inclined to tell the truth, even if he waits a hundred years.'" 
Then the elves put thongs on him, and shut him in one of the inmost caves with 
strong wooden doors, and left him. They gave him food and drink, plenty of both, 
if  not  very  fine;  for  Wood-elves  were  not  goblins,  and  were  reasonably  well-
behaved even  to  their worst enemies, when  they captured  them. The giant  spiders 
were the only living things that they had no mercy upon. 
There  in  the  king's  dungeon  poor  Thorin  lay;  and  after  he  had  got  over  his 
thankfulness  for bread  and meat and water, he began to wonder what had become 
of  his  unfortunate  friends.  It  was  not  very  long  before  he  discovered;  but  that 
belongs  to  the  next  chapter  and  the  beginning  of  another  adventure  in  which  the 
hobbit again showed his usefulness. 
 

####-<h4>Chapter 9 </h4> <br> <br>

Barrels Out of Bond 

 
The day  after  the battle with  the  spiders Bilbo  and  the dwarves made one  last 
despairing effort  to find a way out before  they died of hunger and  thirst. They got 
up  and  staggered  on  in  the  direction  which  eight  out  of  the  thirteen  of  them 
guessed to be the one in which the path lay; but they never found out if they were 
right.  Such  day  as  there  ever  was  in  the  forest  was  fading  once  more  into  the 
blackness of night, when  suddenly out  sprang  the  light of many  torches  all  round 
them,  like  hundreds  of  red  stars.  Out  leaped  Wood-elves  with  their  bows  and 
spears and called the dwarves to halt. 
There  was  no  thought  of  a  fight.  Even  if  the  dwarves  had  not  been  in  such  a 
state  that  they  were  actually  glad  to  be  captured,  their  small  knives,  the  only 
weapons  they had, would have been of no use against  the arrows of  the elves  that 
could  hit  a  bird's  eye  in  the  dark. So  they  simply  stopped  dead  and  sat  down  and 
waited-all except Bilbo, who popped on his ring and slipped quickly to one side. 
That  is why, when  the  elves bound  the dwarves  in  a  long  line, one behind  the 
other,  and  counted  them,  they  never  found  or  counted  the  hobbit.  Nor  did  they 
hear  or  feel  him  trotting  along  well  behind  their  torch-light  as  they  led  off  their 
prisoners  into  the  forest.  Each  dwarf  was  blindfold,  but  that  did  not  make  much 
difference,  for  even Bilbo with  the  use  of  his  eyes  could  not  see where  they were 
going,  and  neither  he  nor  the  others  knew  where  they  had  started  from  anyway. 
Bilbo  had  all  he  could  do  to  keep  up with  the  torches,  for  the  elves were making 
the dwarves go  as  fast  as  ever  they  could,  sick  and weary  as  they were. The king 
had ordered them to make haste. Suddenly the torches stopped, and the hobbit had 
just  time  to  catch  them  up  before  they  began  to  cross  the  bridge.  This  was  the 
bridge  that  led  across  the  river  to  the  king's  doors.  The  water  flowed  dark  and 
swift and strong beneath; and at the far end were gates before the mouth of a huge 
cave  that  ran  into  the  side  of  a  steep  slope  covered  with  trees.  There  the  great 
beeches came right down to the bank, till their feet were in the stream. Across this 
bridge the elves thrust their prisoners, but Bilbo hesitated in the rear. He did not at 
all  like  the  look  of  the  cavern-mouth  and  he  only made  up  his mind  not  to desert 
his friends just in time to scuttle over at the heels of the fast elves, before the great 
gates of the king closed behind them with a clang. 
Inside  the  passages  were  lit  with  red  torch-light,  and  the  elf-guards  sang  as 
they marched along  the  twisting, crossing, and echoing paths. These were not like 

####-those  of  the  goblin-cities:  they  were  smaller,  less  deep  underground,  and  filled 
with  a  cleaner  air.  In  a  great  hall with  pillars  hewn  out  of  the  living  stone  sat  the 
Elvenking on a chair of carven wood. On his head was a crown of berries and red 
leaves,  for  the  autumn  was  come  again.  In  the  spring  he  wore  a  crown  of 
woodland flowers. In his hand he held a carven staff of oak. 
The prisoners were brought before him; and though he looked grimly at them, 
he  told  his  men  to  unbind  them,  for  they  were  ragged  and  weary.  "Besides  they 
need no ropes in here," said he. "There is no escape from my magic doors for those 
who are once brought inside." 
Long and searchingly he questioned the dwarves about their doings, and where 
they were going to, and where they were coming from; but he got little more news 
out  of  them  than  out  of  Thorin.  They  were  surly  and  angry  and  did  not  even 
pretend to be polite. 
"What  have  we  done,  O  king?"  said  Balin,  who  was  the  eldest  left.  "Is  it  a 
crime  to  be  lost  in  the  forest,  to  be  hungry  and  thirsty,  to  be  trapped  by  spiders? 
Are  the  spiders your  tame beasts or your pets,  if killing  them makes you  angry?" 
Such a question of course made the king angrier than ever, and he answered: "It is 
a crime  to wander  in my  realm without  leave. Do you  forget  that you were  in my 
kingdom,  using  the  road  that  my  people  made?  Did  you  not  three  times  pursue 
and  trouble  my  people  in  the  forest  and  '  rouse  the  spiders  with  your  riot  and 
clamour?  After  all  the  disturbance  you  have  made  I  have  a  right  to  know  what 
brings you here, and if you will not tell me now, I will keep you all in prison until 
you have learned sense and manners!" 
Then he ordered  the dwarves  each  to be put  in  a  separate  cell  and  to be given 
food and drink, but not  to be allowed  to pass  the doors of  their  little prisons, until 
one at  least of  them was willing  to  tell him all he wanted  to know. But be did not 
tell  them  that  Thorin  was  also  a  prisoner  with  him.  It  was  Bilbo  who  found  that 
out. 
 
Poor  Mr.  Baggins  –  it  was  a  weary  long  time  that  he  lived  in  that  place  all 
alone,  and  always  in  hiding,  never  daring  to  take  off  his  ring,  hardly  daring  to 
sleep,  even  tucked  away  in  the  darkest  and  remotest  comers  he  could  find.  For 
something  to  do  he  took  to wandering  about  the  Elven-king's palace. Magic shut 
the  gates,  but  be  could  sometimes  get  out,  if  he  was  quick.  Companies  of  the 
Wood-elves,  sometimes with  the  king  at  their  head, would  from  time  to  time  ride 
out  to hunt, or  to other business  in  the woods and in the lands to the East. Then if 
Bilbo  was  very  nimble,  he  could  slip  out  just  behind  them;  though  it  was  a 

####-dangerous  thing  to do. More  than once he was nearly caught  in  the doors, as  they 
clashed  together  when  the  last  elf  passed;  yet  he  did  not  dare  to  march  among 
them  because  of  his  shadow  (altogether  thin  and wobbly  as  it was  in  torch-light), 
or  for  fear  of  being  bumped  into  and  discovered. And when  he  did  go  out, which 
was  not  very  often,  he  did  no  good.  He  did  not  wish  to  desert  the  dwarves, and 
indeed he did not know where in the world to go without them. He could not keep 
up  with  the  hunting  elves  all  the  time  they  were  out,  so  he  never  discovered  the 
ways  out  of  the wood,  and was  left  to wander miserably  in  the  forest,  terrified  of 
losing  himself,  until  a  chance  came  of  returning. He was  hungry  too  outside,  for 
he was  no  hunter;  but  inside  the  caves  he  could  pick  up  a  living  of  some  sort  by 
stealing  food  from  store  or  table  when  no  one  was  at  hand.  "I  am  like  a  burglar 
that  can't  get  away,  but must  go  on miserably  burgling  the  same  house  day  after 
day,"  he  thought.  "This  is  the  dreariest  and  dullest  part  of  all  this  wretched, 
tiresome,  uncomfortable  adventure!  I  wish  I  was  back  in  my  hobbit-hole  by my 
own warm fireside with the lamp shining!" He often wished, too, that he could get 
a message for help sent to the wizard, but that of course was quite impossible; and 
he soon  realized  that  if anything was  to be done,  it would have  to be done by Mr. 
Baggins, alone and unaided. 
Eventually,  after  a week  or  two  of  this  sneaking  sort  of  life,  by watching  and 
following  the  guards  and  taking  what  chances  he  could,  he  managed  to  find  out 
where each dwarf was kept. He found all their twelve cells in different parts of the 
palace,  and  after  a  time  he  got  to  know  his  way  about  very  well.  What  was  his 
surprise one day to overhear some of the guards talking and to learn that there was 
another dwarf in prison too, in a specially deep dark place. He guessed at once, of 
course,  that  that was  Thorin;  and  after  a while he  found  that his guess was  right. 
At  last  after  many  difficulties  he  managed  to  find  the  place  when  no  one  was 
about, and to have a word with the chief of the dwarves. Thorin was too wretched 
to  be  angry  any  longer  at  his  misfortunes,  and  was  even  beginning  to  think  of 
telling the king all about his treasure and his quest (which shows how low-spirited 
he had become), when he heard Bilbo's little voice at his keyhole. He could hardly 
believe  his  ears.  Soon  however  he  made  up  his  mind  that  he  could  not  be 
mistaken, and he came  to  the door and had a  long whispered  talk with  the hobbit 
on the other side. 
So  it was  that Bilbo was  able  to  take  secretly Thorin's message  to  each of  the 
other  imprisoned  dwarves,  telling  them  that  Thorin  their  chief was  also  in prison 
close  at  hand,  and  that  no  one was  to  reveal  their  errand  to  the  long,  not  yet,  not 
before  Thorin  gave  the  word.  For  Thorin  had  taken  heart  again  hearing  how  the 

####-hobbit  had  rescued  his  companions  from  the  spiders,  and  was  determined  once 
more  not  to  ransom  himself  with  promises  to  the  king  of  a  share  in  the  treasure, 
until  all  hope  of  escaping  in  any  other  way  had  disappeared;  until  in  fact  the 
remarkable Mr. Invisible Baggins (of whom he began to have a very high opinion 
indeed) had altogether failed to think of something clever.  
The  other  dwarves  quite  agreed when  they  got  the message. They  all  thought 
their  own  shares  in  the  treasure  (which  they  quite  regarded  as  theirs,  in  spite  of 
their plight  and  the  still unconquered dragon) would  suffer  seriously if the Wood-
elves  claimed  part  of  it,  and  they  all  trusted  Bilbo.  Just  what  Gandalf  had  said 
would  happen,  you  see.  Perhaps  that  war  part  of  his  reason  for  going  off  and 
leaving them. 
Bilbo,  however,  did  not  feel  nearly  so  hopeful  as  they  did.  He  did  not  like 
being depended on by everyone, and he wished he had the wizard at hand. But that 
was no use: probably all the dark distance of Mirkwood lay between them. He sat 
and  thought  and  thought,  until  his  head  nearly  burst,  but  no  bright  idea  would 
come. One  invisible  ring was  a  very  fine  thing,  but  it was  not much  good  among 
fourteen. But of course, as you have guessed, he did  rescue his  friends  in  the end, 
and  this  is  how  it  happened.  One  day,  nosing  and  wandering  about.  Bilbo 
discovered  a  very  interesting  thing:  the  great  gates  were  not  the  only  entrance  to 
the  caves.  A  stream  flowed  under  part  of  the  lowest  regions  of  the  palace,  and 
joined the Forest River some way further to the east, beyond the steep slope out of 
which  the  main  mouth  opened.  Where  this  underground watercourse  came  forth 
from the hillside there was a water-gate. There the rocky roof came down close to 
the surface of the stream, and from it a portcullis could be dropped right to the bed 
of  the  river  to  prevent  anyone  coming  in  or  out  that way. But  the  portcullis was 
often open,  for a good deal of  traffic went out and  in by  the water-gate. If anyone 
had come in that way, he would have found himself in a dark rough tunnel leading 
deep into the heart of the hill; but at one point where it  passed under the caves the 
roof  had  been  cut  away  and  covered  with  great  oaken  trapdoors.  These  opened 
upwards  into  the  king's  cellars.  There  stood  barrels,  and  barrels,  and  barrels;  for 
the Wood-elves, and especially their king, were very fond of wine, though no vines 
grew in those parts. The wine, and other goods, were brought from far away, from 
their kinsfolk in the South, or from the vineyards of Men in distant lands. 
Hiding  behind  one  of  the  largest  barrels  Bilbo  discovered  the  trapdoors  and 
their  use,  and  lurking  there,  listening  to  the  talk of  the king's  servants, he  learned 
how the wine and other goods came up the rivers, or over land, to the Long Lake. 
It  seemed  a  town of Men  still  throve  there, built out on bridges  far  into  the water 

####-as  a  protection  against  enemies  of  all  sorts,  and  especially  against  the  dragon  of 
the  Mountain.  From  Lake-town  the  barrels  were  brought  up  the  Forest  River. 
Often they were just tied together like big rafts and poled or rowed up the stream; 
sometimes they were loaded on to flat boats. 
When  the  barrels  were  empty  the  elves  cast  them  through  the  trapdoors, 
opened  the  water-gate,  and  out  the  barrels  floated  on  the  stream,  bobbing  along, 
until they were carried by the current to a place far down the river where the bank 
jutted  out,  near  to  the  very  eastern  edge  of Mirkwood. There  they were  collected 
and  tied  together  and  floated  back  to  Lake-town,  which  stood  close  to  the  point 
where the Forest River flowed into the Long Lake. 
 
For  some  time Bilbo  sat and  thought about  this water-gate, and wondered if it 
could  be  used  for  the  escape  of  his  friends,  and  at  last  he  had  the  desperate 
beginnings of a plan. 
The  evening meal had been  taken  to  the prisoners. The guards were  tramping 
away  down  the  passages  taking  the  torch-light  with  them  and  leaving  everything 
in  darkness.  Then  Bilbo  heard  the  king's  butler  bidding  the  chief  of  the  guards 
good-night. 
"Now come with me," he said, "and taste the new wine that has just come in. I 
shall be hard at work tonight clearing the cellars of the empty wood, so let us have 
a drink first to help the labour." 
"Very good," laughed the chief of the guards. "I'll taste with you, and see if it is 
fit for the king's table. There is a feast tonight and it would not do to send up poor 
stuff!" 
 
When  he  heard  this  Bilbo  was  all  in  a  flutter,  for  he  saw  that  luck  was  with 
him  and  he  had  a  chance  at  once  to  try  his  desperate  plan.  He  followed  the  two 
elves, until  they entered a small cellar and sat down at a  table on which  two  large 
flagons were set. Soon they began to drink and laugh merrily. Luck of an unusual 
kind was with Bilbo  then.  It must be potent wine  to make a wood-elf drowsy; but 
this wine, it would seem, was the heady vintage of the great gardens of Dorwinion, 
not  meant  for  his  soldiers  or  his  servants,  but  for  the  king's  feasts  only,  and  for 
smaller bowls, not for the butler's great flagons. 
Very soon the chief guard nodded his head, then he laid it on the table and fell 
fast asleep. The butler went on talking and laughing to himself for a while without 
seeming to notice, but soon his head too nodded to the table, and he fell asleep and 
snored  beside  his  friend.  Then  in  crept  the  hobbit.  Very  soon  the chief guard had 

####-no  keys,  but Bilbo was  trotting  as  fast  as  he  could  along  the  passage  towards  the 
cells. The  great  bunch  seemed  very  heavy  to  his  arms,  and  his  heart was  often  in 
his  mouth,  in  spite  of  his  ring,  for  he  could  not  prevent  the  keys  from  making 
every now and then a loud clink and clank, which put him all in a tremble. 
First  he  unlocked  Balin's  door,  and  locked  it  again  carefully  as  soon  as  the 
dwarf was  outside. Balin was most  surprised,  as  you  can  imagine;  but  glad  as  he 
was  to  get  out  of  his  wearisome  little  stone  room,  he  wanted  to  stop  and  ask 
questions, and know what Bilbo was going to do, and all about it. 
"No  time  now!"  said  the  hobbit.  "You  must  follow  me!  We  must  all  keep 
together  and not  risk getting  separated. All of us must  escape or none,  and  this  is 
our  last  chance.  If  this  is  found out, goodness knows where  the king will put you 
next, with chains on your hands and feet  too, I expect. Don't argue,  there's a good 
fellow!" 
Then  off  he went  from  door  to  door,  until  his  following  had  grown  to  twelve-
none  of  them  any  too  nimble,  what  with  the  dark,  and  what  with  their  long 
imprisonment. Bilbo's heart thumped every time one of them bumped into another, 
or  grunted  or  whispered  in  the  dark.  "Drat  this  dwarvish  racket!"  he  said  to 
himself. But all went well, and they met no guards. As a matter of fact there was a 
great  autumn  feast  in  the woods  that night,  and  in  the halls  above. Nearly  all  the 
king's  folks  were  merrymaking.  At  last  after  much  blundering  they  came  to 
Thorin's  dungeon,  far  down  in  a  deep  place  and  fortunately  not  far  from  the 
cellars. 
"Upon my word!"  said Thorin, when Bilbo whispered to him to come out and 
join his  friends,  "Gandalf  spoke  true,  as usual. A pretty  fine burglar you make,  it 
seems,  when  the  time  comes.  I  am  sure  we  are  all  for  ever  at  your  service, 
whatever happens after this. But what comes next?" 
Bilbo saw that the time had come to explain his idea, as far as he could; but he 
did  not  feel  at  all  sure  bow  the  dwarves  would  take  it.  His  fears  were  quite 
justified, for they did not like it a bit, and started grumbling loudly in spite of their 
danger.  
"We  shall  be  bruised  and  battered  to  pieces,  and  drowned  too,  for  certain!" 
they muttered. "We thought you had got some sensible notion, when you managed 
to get hold of the keys. This is a mad idea!" 
"Very well!" said Bilbo very downcast, and also rather annoyed. "Come  along 
back  to  your  nice  cells,  and  I  will  lock  you  all  in  again,  and  you  can  sit  there 
comfortably  and  think  of  a  better  plan-but  I don't suppose  I shall ever get hold of 
the keys again, even if I feel inclined to try." 

####-"That  was  too  much  for  them,  and  they  calmed  down.  In  the  end,  of  course, 
they had to do just what Bilbo suggested, because it was obviously impossible for 
them  to  try  and  find  their  way  into  the  upper  halls,  or  to  fight  their  way  out  of 
gates  that  closed  by  magic;  and  it  was  no  good  grumbling  in  the  passages  until 
they were caught again. So following the hobbit, down into the lowest cellars they 
crept.  They  passed  a  door  through which  the  chief  guard  and  the  butler  could  be 
seen  still  happily  snoring  with  smiles  upon  their  faces.  The  wine  of Dorwinion 
brings  deep  and  pleasant  dreams.  There  would  be  a  different  expression  on  the 
face of  the  chief guard next day,  even  though Bilbo, before  they went on,  stole  in 
and kindheartedly put the keys back on his belt. 
"That  will  save  him  some  of  the  trouble  he  is  in  for,"  said  Mr.  Baggins  to 
himself.  "He wasn't  a  bad  fellow,  and  quite  decent  to  the  prisoners.  It will  puzzle 
them all too. They will think we had a very strong magic to pass through all those 
locked doors and disappear. Disappear! We have got to get busy very quick, if that 
is to happen!" 
 
Balin was  told  off  to watch  the  guard  and  the  butler  and  give warning  if  they 
stirred. The rest went  into  the adjoining cellar with  the  trapdoors. There was  little 
time  to  lose.  Before  long,  as  Bilbo  knew,  some  elves were  under  orders  to  come 
down and help  the butler get  the empty barrels  through  the doors  into  the  stream. 
These were in fact already standing in rows in the middle of the floor waiting to be 
pushed off. Some of them were wine-barrels, and these were not much use, as they 
could not easily be opened at the end without a deal of noise, nor could they easily 
be  secured  again.  But  among  them  were  several  others  which  had  been  used  for 
bringing other stuffs, butter, apples, and all sorts of things, to the king's palace. 
They  soon  found  thirteen with  room enough  for a dwarf  in each.  In  fact  some 
were  too  roomy,  and  as  they  climbed  in  the  dwarves  thought  anxiously  of  the 
shaking and  the bumping  they would get  inside,  though Bilbo did his best  to  find 
straw  and  other  stuff  to  pack  them  in  as  cosily  as  could  be  managed  in  a  short 
time. At  last  twelve  dwarves were  stowed. Thorin  had  given  a  lot  of  trouble,  and 
turned  and  twisted  in  his  tub  and  grumbled  like  a  large  dog  in  a  small  kennel; 
while Balin, who came last, made a great fuss about his air-holes and said he was 
stifling, even before his lid was on. Bilbo had done what he could to close holes in 
the  sides  of  the  barrels,  and  to  fix  on  all  the  lids  as  safely  as  could  be  managed, 
and  now  he  was  left  alone  again,  running  round  putting  the  finishing  touches-to 
the packing, and hoping against hope that his plan would come off. 

####-It  had  not  been  a-bit too soon. Only a minute or two after Balin's lid had been 
fitted  on  there  came  the  sound  of  voices  and  the  flicker  of  lights.  A  number  of 
elves  came  laughing  and  talking  into  the  cellars  and  singing  snatches  of  song. 
They had  left a merry feast  in one of  the halls and were bent on returning as soon 
as  they  could.  "Where's  old  Galion,  the  butler?"  said  one.  "I  haven't  seen  him  at 
the tables tonight. He ought to be here now to show us what is to be done." 
"I shall be angry  if  the old slowcoach  is  late," said another. "I have no wish  to 
waste time down here while the song is up!" 
"Ha, ha!" came a cry. "Here's  the old villain with his head on a jug! He's been 
having a little feast all to himself and his friend the captain." 
"Shake him! Wake him!" shouted the others impatiently. Gallon was not at all 
pleased at being shaken or wakened, and still  less at being  laughed at.  "You're all 
late," he grumbled. "Here am I waiting and waiting down here, while you fellows 
drink  and  make  merry  and  forget  your  tasks.  Small  wonder  if  I  fall  asleep  from 
weariness!" 
"Small  wonder,"  said  they,  "when  the  explanation  stands  close  at  hand  in  a 
jug! Come  give  us  a  taste  of  your  sleeping-draught before we  fall  to! No need  to 
wake the turnkey yonder. He has had his share by the looks of it." 
Then  they  drank  once  round  and  became  mighty  merry  all  of  a  sudden.  But 
they did not quite  lose  their wits. "Save us, Galion!" cried some, "you began your 
feasting  early  and  muddled  your  wits!  You  have  stacked  some  full  casks  here 
instead of the empty ones, if there is anything in weight." 
"Get on with the work!" growled the butler. "There is nothing in the feeling of 
weight  in  an  idle  toss-pot's  arms. These  are  the ones  to go  and no others. Do  as  I 
say!" 
"Very  well,  very  well,"  they  answered  rolling  the  barrels  to  the  opening.  "On 
your  head  be  it,  if  the  king's  full  buttertubs  and  his  best  wine  is  pushed  into  the 
river for the Lake-men to feast on for nothing!" 
 

Roll-roll-roll-roll, 
roll-roll-rolling down the hole I  
Heave ho! Splash plump ! 
Down they go, down they bump! 

 
So  they  sang as  first one barrel and  then another  rumbled  to  the dark opening 
and  was  pushed  over  into  the  cold  water  some  feet  below.  Some  were  barrels 
really empty, some were  tubs neatly packed with a dwarf each; but down  they all 
went,  one  after  another, with many  a  clash  and  a  bump,  thudding  on  top  of  ones 

####-below,  smacking  into  the water,  jostling against  the walls of  the  tunnel, knocking 
into one another, and bobbing away down the current. 
It was just at this moment that Bilbo suddenly discovered the weak point in his 
plan. Most  likely you  saw  it  some  time  ago  and have been  laughing  at him; but I 
don't suppose you would have done half as well yourselves in his place. Of course 
he was not  in a barrel himself, nor was  there anyone  to pack him  in, even  if  there 
had  been  a  chance!  It  looked  as  if  he  would  certainly  lose  his  friends  this  time 
(nearly  all  of  them  had  already  disappeared  through  the  dark  trap-door), and get 
utterly left behind and have to stay lurking as a permanent burglar in the elf-caves 
for ever. For even if he could have escaped through the upper gates at once, he had 
precious small chance of ever finding the dwarves again. He did not know the way 
by  land  to  the place where  the barrels were collected. He wondered what on earth 
would happen to them without him; for he had not had time to tell the dwarves all 
that  he  had  learned,  or what he had meant  to do, once  they were out of  the wood. 
While  all  these  thoughts  were  passing  through  his  mind,  the  elves  being  very 
merry  began  to  sing  a  song  round  the  river-door. Some had already gone  to haul 
on  the  ropes  which  pulled  up  the  portcullis  at  the  water-gate  so  as  to  let  out  the 
barrels as soon as they were all afloat below.  
 

Down the swift dark stream you go 
Back to lands you once did know! 
Leave the halls and caverns deep, 
Leave the northern mountains steep, 
Where the forest wide and dim 
Stoops in shadow grey and grim! 
Float beyond the world of trees 
Out into the whispering breeze, 
Past the rushes, past the reeds, 
Past the marsh's waving weeds, 
Through the mist that riseth white 
Up from mere and pool at night! 
Follow, follow stars that leap 
Up the heavens cold and steep; 
Turn when dawn comes over land, 
Over rapid, over sand, 
South away! and South away! 
Seek the sunlight and the day,  
Back to pasture, back to mead, 
Where the kine and oxen feed! 

####-Back to gardens on the hills 
Where the berry swells and fills 
Under sunlight, under day! 
South away! and South away! 
Down the swift dark stream you go 
Back to lands you once did know! 

 
Now  the  very  last  barrel  was  being  rolled  to  the  doors!  In  despair  and  not 
knowing what  else  to  do,  poor  little Bilbo  caught hold of  it  and was pushed over 
the edge with it. Down into the water he fell, splash! into the cold dark water with 
the  barrel  on  top  of  him. He  came  up  again  spluttering  and  clinging  to  the wood 
like a  rat, but  for all his efforts he could not scramble on top. Every time he tried, 
the  barrel  rolled  round  and  ducked  him  under  again.  It  was  really  empty,  and 
floated light as a cork. Though his ears were full of water, he could hear the elves 
still  singing  in  the  cellar  above.  Then  suddenly  the  trapdoors  fell  to with a boom 
and  their  voices  faded  away. He was  in  the  dark  tunnel,  floating  in  icy water,  all 
alone-for you cannot count friends that are all packed up in barrels. 
Very  soon a grey patch came up  in  the darkness ahead. He heard  the creak of 
the water-gate being hauled up, and he found that he was in the midst of a bobbing 
and  bumping mass  of  casks  and  tubs  all  pressing  together  to  pass  under  the  arch 
and  get  out  into  the  open  stream.  He  had  as  much  as  he  could  do  to  prevent 
himself  from  being  hustled  and  battered  to  bits;  but  at  last  the  jostling  crowd 
began to break up and swing off, one by one, under the stone arch and away. Then 
he saw  that  it would have been no good even  if he had managed  to get astride his 
barrel,  for  there was  no  room  to  spare, not  even  for  a hobbit, between  its  top  and 
the suddenly stooping roof where the gate was. 
 
Out  they  went  under  the  overhanging  branches  of  the  trees  on  either  bank. 
Bilbo  wondered  what  the  dwarves  were  feeling  and  whether  a  lot  of  water  was 
getting  into  their  tubs.  Some  of  those  that  bobbed  along  by  him  in  the  gloom 
seemed pretty low in the water, and he guessed that these had dwarves inside. 
"I do hope  I put  the  lids on  tight enough!" he  thought, but before  long he was 
worrying  too much  about  himself  to remember  the dwarves. He managed  to keep 
his head  above  the water, but he was  shivering with  the  cold,  and he wondered  if 
he would die of  it before  the  luck  turned, and how much  longer he would be able 
to hang on, and whether he should risk the chance of  letting go and trying to swim 
to the bank. 

####-The  luck  turned  all  right  before  long:  the  eddying  current  carried  several 
barrels  close  ashore  at  one  point  and  there  for  a  while  they  stuck  against  some 
hidden  root.  Then  Bilbo  took  the  opportunity  of  scrambling  up  the  side  of  his 
barrel while it was held steady against another. Up he crawled like a drowned rat, 
and lay on the top spread out to keep the balance as best he could. The breeze was 
cold  but  better  than  the water,  and  he  hoped  he would  not  suddenly  roll off again 
when  they  started  off  once  more.  Before  long  the  barrels  broke  free  again  and 
turned  and  twisted  off  down  the  stream,  and  out  into  the  main  current  Then  he 
found it quite as difficult to stick on as he had feared; but he managed it somehow, 
though  it was miserably uncomfortable. Luckily he was very  light, and  the barrel 
was  a  good  big  one  and  being  rather  leaky  had  now  shipped  a  small  amount  of 
water. All  the  same  it was  like  trying  to  ride, without  bridle  or  stirrups,  a  round-
bellied  pony  that  was  always  thinking  of  rolling  on  the  grass.  In  this  way  at  last 
Mr. Baggins came to a place where the trees on either hand grew thinner. He could 
see the paler sky between them. The dark river opened suddenly wide, and there it 
was  joined  to  the  main  water of  the Forest River  flowing down  in haste  from  the 
king's  great  doors.  There was  a  dim  sheet  of water  no  longer  overshadowed,  and 
on  its  sliding  surface  there were  dancing  and  broken  reflections  of  clouds  and  of 
stars. Then  the hurrying water of  the Forest River swept all the company of casks 
and tubs away to the north bank, in which it had eaten out a wide bay. This had a 
shingly  shore  under  hanging  banks  and  was  walled  at  the  eastern  end  by  a  little 
jutting  cape  of  hard  rock.  On  the  shallow  shore  most  of  the barrels  ran  aground, 
though a few went on to bump against the stony pier.  
There  were  people  on  the  look-out  on  the  banks.  They  quickly  poled  and 
pushed all the barrels together into the shallows, and when they had counted them 
they  roped  them  together and left them till the morning. Poor dwarves! Bilbo was 
not  so  badly  off  now.  He  slipped  from  his  barrel  and  waded  ashore,  and  then 
sneaked  along  to  some huts  that he  could  see near  the water's  edge. He no  longer 
thought  twice  about  picking  up  a  supper  uninvited  if  he  got  the  chance,  he  had 
been  obliged  to  do  it  for  so  long,  and  he  knew  only  too  well  what  it  was  to  be 
really  hungry,  not merely  politely  interested  in  the  dainties  of  a well-filled larder. 
Also he had caught a glimpse of a fire  through  the  trees, and that appealed to him 
with his dripping and ragged clothes clinging to him cold and clammy.  
 
There is no need to tell you much of his adventures that night, for now we are 
drawing  near  the  end  of  the  eastward  journey  and  coming  to  the  last  and  greatest 
adventure,  so  we  must  hurry  on.  Of  course  helped  by  his  magic  ring  he  got  on 

####-very well  at  first,  but  he was  given  away  in  the  end  by  his wet  footsteps  and  the 
trail of drippings that he left wherever he went or sat; and also he began to snivel, 
and  wherever  he  tried  to  hide  he  was  found  out  by  the  terrific  explosions  of  his 
suppressed  sneezes.  Very  soon  there  was  a  fine  commotion  in  the  village  by  the 
riverside; but Bilbo escaped  into  the woods carrying a  loaf and a  leather bottle of 
wine and a pie that did not belong to him. The rest of the night he had to pass wet 
as he was and far from a fire, but the bottle helped him to do that, and he actually 
dozed a little on some dry leaves, even though the year was getting late and the air 
was chilly.  
He woke again with a specially loud sneeze. It was already grey morning, and 
there was a merry racket down by the river. They were making up a raft of barrels, 
and  the  raft-elves  would  soon  be  steering  it  off  down  the  stream  to  Lake-town. 
Bilbo  sneezed  again.  He  was  no  longer  dripping  but  he  felt  cold  all  over.  He 
scrambled down as  fast as his  stiff  legs would  take him and managed  just  in  time 
to get on to the mass of casks without being noticed in the general bustle. Luckily 
there was  no  sun  at  the  time  to  cast  an  awkward  shadow,  and  for  a mercy he did 
not sneeze again for a good while. 
There  was  a  mighty  pushing  of  poles.  The  elves  that  were  standing  in  the 
shallow  .water  heaved  and  shoved.  The  barrels  now  all  lashed  together  creaked 
and fretted.  . 
"This is a heavy load!" some grumbled. "They float too deep-some of these are 
never  empty.  If  they  had  come  ashore  in  the  daylight, we might  have  had  a  look 
inside," they said. 
"No time now!" cried the raftman. "Shove off!" 
And off they went at last, slowly at first, until they had passed the point of rock 
where other elves stood  to fend  them off with poles, and  then quicker and quicker 
as  they  caught  the  main  stream  and  went  sailing  away  down,  down  towards  the 
Lake. 
They  had  escaped  the  dungeons  of  the  king  and  were  through  the wood,  but 
whether alive or dead still remains to be seen. 
 

####-<h4>Chapter 10</h4> <br> 

A Warm Welcome 

 
The day grew lighter and warmer as they floated along. After a while the river 
rounded  a  steep  shoulder  of  land  that  came  down  upon  their  left. Under  its  rocky 
feet  like  an  inland  cliff  the  deepest  stream  had  flowed  lapping  and  bubbling. 
Suddenly  the  cliff  fell  away. The  shores  sank. The  trees  ended. Then Bilbo  saw  a 
sight: The  lands opened wide  about him,  filled with  the waters of  the  river which 
broke  up  and  wandered  in  a  hundred  winding  courses,  or  halted  in  marshes  and 
pools  dotted  with  isles  on  every  side:  but  still  a  strong  water  flowed  on  steadily 
through  the midst. And  far  away,  its  dark  head  in  a  torn  cloud,  there  loomed  the 
Mountain!  Its  nearest  neighbours  to  the  North-East  and  the  tumbled  land  that 
joined it to them could not be seen. All alone it rose and looked across the marshes 
to  the  forest.  The  Lonely  Mountain!  Bilbo  had  come  far  and  through  many 
adventures to see it, and now he did not like the look of it in the least. 
As  he  listened  to  the  talk  of  the  raftmen  and  pieced  together  the  scraps  of 
information  they  let  fall, he  soon  realized  that he was very  fortunate  ever  to have 
seen  it  at  all,  even  from  this  distance.  Dreary  as  had  been  his  imprisonment and 
unpleasant  as  was  his  position  (to  say  nothing  of  the  poor  dwarves  underneath 
him)  still,  he  had  been  more  lucky  than  he  had  guessed.  The  talk  was  all  of  the 
trade  that  came  and  went  on  the  waterways  and  the  growth  of  the  traffic  on  the 
river, as  the  roads out of  the East  towards Mirkwood vanished or  fell  into disuse; 
and of the bickerings of the Lake-men and the Wood-elves about the upkeep of the 
Forest River and the care of the banks. 
Those  lands  had  changed  much  since  the  days  when  dwarves  dwelt  in  the 
Mountain,  days  which  most  people  now  remembered  only  as  a  very  shadowy 
tradition.  They  had  changed  even  in  recent  years,  and  since  the  last  news  that 
Gandalf  had  had  of  them.  Great  floods  and  rains  had  swollen  the  waters  that 
flowed  east;  and  there had been  an  earthquake or  two  (which  some were  inclined 
to attribute to the dragon-alluding to him chiefly with a curse and an ominous nod 
in  the  direction  of  the  Mountain).  The  marshes  and  bogs  had  spread  wider  and 
wider  on  either  side.  Paths  had  vanished,  and many  a  rider  and wanderer  too,  if 
they  had  tried  to  find  the  lost  ways  across.  The  elf-road  through  the wood which 
the dwarves had followed on the advice of Beorn now came to a doubtful and little 
used  end  at  the  eastern  edge  of  the  forest;  only  the  river offered any  longer a safe 

####-way  from  the  skirts  of  Mirkwood  in  the  North  to  the  mountain-shadowed plains 
beyond, and the river was guarded by the Wood-elves' king. 
So  you  see Bilbo  had  come  in  the  end  by  the  only  road  that was  any  good.  It 
might have  been  some  comfort  to Mr. Baggins  shivering on  the barrels,  if he had 
known  that  news  of  this  had  reached  Gandalf  far  away  and  given  him  great 
anxiety, and  that he was  in  fact  finishing his other business  (which does not come 
into this tale) and getting ready to come in search of Thorin's company. But Bilbo 
did not know it. 
All he knew was that the river seemed to go on and on and on for ever, and he 
was  hungry,  and  had  a  nasty  cold  in  the  nose,  and  did  not  like  the  way  the 
Mountain seemed to frown at him and threaten him as it drew ever nearer. After a 
while, however,  the  river  took a more southerly course and  the Mountain  receded 
again,  and  at  last,  late  in  the  day  the  shores  grew  rocky,  the  river  gathered  all  its 
wandering  waters  together  into  a  deep  and  rapid  flood,  and  they  swept  along  at 
great speed. 
The  sun had  set when  turning with another  sweep  towards  the East  the  forest-
river  rushed  into  the  Long  Lake.  There  it  had  a  wide  mouth  with  stony  clifflike 
gates at either side whose feet were piled with shingles. The Long Lake! Bilbo had 
never  imagined  that  any  water  that  was  not  the  sea  could  look  so  big.  It  was  so 
wide  that  the  opposite  shores  looked  small  and  far,  but  it  was  so  long  that  its 
northerly end, which pointed towards the Mountain, could not be  seen at all. Only 
from the map did Bilbo know that away up there, where the stars of the Wain were 
already  twinkling,  the  Running  River  came  down  into  the  lake  from  Dale  and 
with  the  Forest  River  filled  with  deep  waters  what  must  once  have  been  a  great 
deep  rocky  valley. At  the  southern  end  the  doubled waters  poured  out  again  over 
high waterfalls  and  ran  away  hurriedly  to  unknown  lands.  In  the  still  evening  air 
the noise of the falls could be heard like a distant roar.  
Not  far  from  the mouth  of  the Forest River was the strange town he heard the 
elves speak of in the king's cellars. It was not built on the shore, though there were 
a  few  huts  and  buildings  there,  but  right  out  on  the  surface  of  the  lake,  protected 
from  the swirl of  the entering river by a promontory of rock which formed a calm 
bay. A great  . bridge made of wood ran out to where on huge piles made of forest 
trees  was  built  a  busy  wooden  town,  not  a  town  of  elves  but  of  Men,  who  still 
dared  to  dwell  here  under  the  shadow  of  the  distant  dragon-mountain. They  still 
throve  on  the  trade  that  came  up  the  great  river  from  the  South  and  was  carted 
past  the  falls  to  their  town;  but  in  the  great  days  of  old,  when  Dale  in  the  North 
was rich and prosperous, they had been wealthy and powerful, and there had been 

####-fleets  of  boats  on  the  waters,  and  some  were  filled  with  gold  and  some  with 
warriors  in  armour,  and  there  had  been  wars  and  deeds  which  were  now  only  a 
legend.  The  rotting  piles  of  a  greater  town  could  still  be  seen  along  the  shores 
when the waters sank in a drought. 
But men  remembered  little of  all  that,  though  some  still  sang old  songs of  the 
dwarf-kings  of  the Mountain,  Thror  and  Thrain  of  the  race  of  Durin,  and  of  the 
coming of the Dragon, and the fall of the lords of Dale. Some sang too that Thror 
and Thrain would  come  back  one  day  and  gold would  flow  in  rivers  through  the 
mountain-gates, and all that land would be filled with new song and new laughter. 
But this pleasant legend did not much affect their daily business. 
 
As  soon  as  the  raft  of  barrels  came  in  sight boats  rowed out  from  the piles of 
the  town,  and  voices  hailed  the  raft-steerers. Then  ropes were  cast  and oars were 
pulled,  and  soon  the  raft  was  drawn  out  of  the  current  of  the  Forest  River  and 
towed  away  round  the  high  shoulder  of  rock  into  the  little  bay  of  Lake-town. 
There  it  was  moored  not  far  from  the  shoreward  head  of  the  great  bridge.  Soon 
men would come up  from  the South and  take  some of  the casks away, and others 
they would fill with goods they had brought to be taken back up the stream to the 
Wood-elves' home. In the meanwhile the barrels were left afloat while the elves of 
the raft and the boatmen went to feast in Lake-town. 
They would have been surprised, if they could have seen what happened down 
by  the  shore,  after  they  had  gone  and  the  shades  of  night  had  fallen. First  of  all  a 
barrel was  cut  loose  by Bilbo  and  pushed  to  the  shore  and  opened. Groans  came 
from  inside,  and  out  crept  a most  unhappy  dwarf. Wet  straw was  in  his  draggled 
beard;  he  was  so  sore  and  stiff,  so  bruised  and  buffeted  he  could  hardly  stand  or 
stumble through the shallow water to lie groaning on the shore. He had a famished 
and a savage look like a dog that has been chained and forgotten in a kennel for a 
week.  It was Thorin,  but  you  could  only  have  told  it  by his golden chain, and by 
the  colour  of  his  now  dirty  and  tattered  sky-blue  hood  with  its  tarnished  silver 
tassel. It was some time before he would be even polite to the hobbit. 
"Well,  are  you  alive  or  are  you  dead?"  asked  Bilbo  quite  crossly.  Perhaps  he 
had  forgotten  that he had had  at  least one good meal more  than  the dwarves,  and 
also  the use of his  arms  and  legs, not  to  speak of  a greater  allowance of  air.  "Are 
you still in prison, or are you free? If you want food, and if you want to go on with 
this silly adventure- it's yours after all and not mine-you had better slap your arms 
and rub your legs and try and help me get the others out while there is a chance!" 

####-Thorin  of  course  saw  the  sense  of  this,  so  after  a  few  more  groans  he  got  up 
and  helped  the  hobbit as well as he could.  In  the darkness  floundering  in  the cold 
water  they had a difficult and very nasty  job  finding which were  the  right barrels. 
Knocking  outside  and  calling  only  discovered  about  six  dwarves  that  could 
answer.  They  were  unpacked  and  helped  ashore where  they  sat  or  lay muttering 
and  moaning;  they  were  so  soaked  and  bruised  and  cramped  that  they  could 
hardly yet realize their release or be properly thankful for it. 
Dwalin  and  Balin  were  two  of  the most  unhappy,  and  it  was  no  good  asking 
them  to  help.  Bifur  and  Bofur  were  less  knocked  about  and  drier,  but  they  lay 
down  and  would  do  nothing.  Fili  and  Kili,  however,  who  were  young  (for 
dwarves) and had also been packed more neatly with plenty of  straw  into  smaller 
casks, came out more or less smiling, with only a bruise or two and a stiffness that 
soon wore off. 
"I hope I never smell the smell of apples again!" said Fili. "My tub was full of 
it.  To  smell  apples  everlastingly  when  you  can  scarcely  move  and  are  cold  and 
sick  with  hunger  is  maddening.  I  could  eat  anything  in  the  wide  world  now,  for 
hours on end-but not an apple!" 
With  the willing help of Fili  and Kili, Thorin  and Bilbo  at  last discovered  the 
remainder  of  the  company  and  got  them  out.  Poor  fat  Bombur  was  asleep  or 
senseless; Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin and Gloin were waterlogged and seemed only half 
alive; they all had to be carried one by one and laid helpless on the shore. 
"Well! Here we are!" said Thorin. "And I suppose we ought to thank our stars 
and Mr. Baggins. I am sure he has a right to expect it, though I wish he could have 
arranged  a  more  comfortable  journey.  Still-all  very  much  at  your  service  once 
more, Mr. Baggins. No doubt we shall feel properly grateful, when we are fed and 
recovered. In the meanwhile what next?" 
"I suggest Lake-town," said Bilbo, "What else is there?" Nothing else could, of 
course, be suggested; so leaving the others Thorin and Fili and Kili and the hobbit 
went  along  the  shore  to  the  great  bridge. There were  guards  at  the  head  of  it,  but 
they were  not  keeping very careful watch,  for  it was  so  long  since  there had been 
any  real  need. Except  for  occasional  squabbles  about  river-tolls they were friends 
with the Wood-elves. Other folk were far away; and some of the younger people in 
the town openly doubted the existence of any dragon in the mountain, and laughed 
at  the greybeards and gammers who  said  that  they had  seen him  flying  in  the  sky 
in  their  young  days.  That  being  so  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  guards  were 
drinking  and  laughing  by  a  fire  in  their  hut,  and  did  not  hear  the  noise  of  the 

####-unpacking  of  the  dwarves  or  the  footsteps  of  the  four  scouts.  Their  astonishment 
was enormous when Thorin Oakenshield stepped in through the door.  
"Who  are  you  and what  do  you want?"  they  shouted  leaping  to  their  feet  and 
gipping for weapons. 
"Thorin son of Thrain son of Thror King under the Mountain!" said the dwarf 
in  a  loud  voice,  and  he  looked  it,  in  spite  of  his  torn  clothes  and  draggled  hood. 
The  gold  gleamed  on  his  neck  and  waist:  his  eyes  were  dark  and  deep.  "I  have 
come back. I wish to see the Master of your town!" 
Then  there  was  tremendous  excitement.  Some  of  the  more  foolish  ran  out  of 
the  hut  as  if  they  expected  the  Mountain  to  go  golden  in  the  night  and  all  the 
waters  of  the  lake  to  turn  yellow  right  away.  The  captain  of  the  guard  came 
forward. 
"And who are these?" he asked, pointing to Fili and: Kili and Bilbo. 
"The sons of my father's daughter," answered Thorin, "Fili and Kili of the race 
of Durin, and Mr. Baggins who has travelled with us out of the West." 
"If you come in peace lay down your arms!" said the captain. 
"We  have  none,"  said  Thorin,  and  it  was  true  enough:  their  knives  had  been 
taken from them by the wood-elves, and the great sword Orcrist too. Bilbo had his 
short sword, hidden as usual, but he said nothing about that. "We have no need of 
weapons,  who  return  at  last  to  our  own  as  spoken  of  old.  Nor  could  we  fight 
against so many. Take us to your master!" 
"He is at feast," said the captain. 
"Then all the more reason for taking us to him," burst in Fili, who was getting 
impatient at these solemnities. "We are worn and famished after our long road and 
we have sick comrades. Now make haste and  let us have no more words, or your 
master may have something to say to you." 
"Follow me  then,"  said  the  captain,  and with  six men  about  them he  led  them 
over  the bridge  through  the gates and  into  the market-place of the town. This was 
a  wide  circle  of  quiet  water  surrounded  by  the  tall  piles  on  which  were  built  the 
greater  houses,  and  by  long  wooden  quays  with  many  steps  and  ladders  going 
down  to  the  surface  of  the  lake. From  one  great  hall  shone many  lights  and  there 
came  the  sound  of many  voices.  They  passed  its  doors  and  stood  blinking  in  the 
light looking at long tables filled with folk. 
"I  am Thorin  son  of Thrain  son of Thror King under the Mountain! I return!" 
cried Thorin in a loud voice from the door, before the captain could say anything. 
All  leaped  to  their  feet.  The Master  of  the  town  sprang  from  his  great  chair.  But 

####-none  rose  in greater surprise  than  the  raft-men of the elves who were sitting at the 
lower end of the hall. Pressing forward before the Master's table they cried: 
"These  are  prisoners  of  our  king  that  have  escaped,  wandering  vagabond 
dwarves that could not give any good account of themselves, sneaking through the 
woods and molesting our people!" 
"Is  this  true?"  asked  the  Master.  As  a  matter  of  fact  he  thought  it  far  more 
likely than the return of the King under the Mountain, if any such person had ever 
existed. 
"It  is  true  that we were wrongfully waylaid by the Elven-king and imprisoned 
without  cause  as  we  journeyed  back  to  our  own  land,"  answered  Thorin.  "But 
lock  nor  bar  may  hinder  the  homecoming  spoken  of  old.  Nor  is  this  town  in  the 
Wood-elves' realm. I speak to the Master of the town of the Men of the lake, not to 
the raft-men of the king." 
Then  the  Master  hesitated  and  looked  from  one  to  the  other.  The  Elvenking 
was  very  powerful  in  those  parts  and  the Master wished  for  no  enmity with  him, 
nor did he  think much of old songs, giving his mind  to  .trade and tolls, to cargoes 
and  gold,  to  which  habit  he  owed  his  position.  Others  were  of  different  mind, 
however,  and  quickly  the  matter  was  settled  without  him.  The  news  had  spread 
from  the  doors  of  the  hall  like  fire  through  all  the  town.  People  were  shouting 
inside  the  hall  and  outside  it. The  quays were  thronged with  hurrying  feet.  Some 
began  to  sing  snatches  of  old  songs  concerning  the  return  of  the  King  under  the 
Mountain;  that  it was Thror's grandson not Thror himself  that had come back did 
not bother them at all. Others took up the song and it rolled loud and high over the 
lake. 
 

The King beneath the mountains, 
The King of carven stone, 
The lord of silver fountains 
Shall come into his own! 
 
His crown shall be upholden, 
His harp shall be restrung, 
His halls shall echo golden 
To songs of yore re-sung. 
 
The woods shall wave on mountains 
And grass beneath the sun; 
His wealth shall flow in fountains 
And the rivers golden run. 

####- 
The streams shall run in gladness, 
The lakes shall shine and burn, 
And sorrow fail and sadness 
At the Mountain -king's return! 
 
So they sang, or very like that, only there was a great deal more of it, and there 
was much  shouting as well as  the music of harps and of  fiddles mixed up with  it. 
Indeed  such  excitement  had  not  been  known  in  the  town  in  the  memory  of  the 
oldest  grandfather. The Wood-elves  themselves began  to wonder greatly and even 
to  be  afraid.  They  did  not  know  of  course  how  Thorin  had  escaped,  and  they 
began to think their king might have made a serious mistake. As for the Master he 
saw  there was nothing else for  it but  to obey  the general clamour, for  the moment 
at any rate, and to pretend to believe that Thorin was what he said. So he gave up 
to  him  his  own  great  chair  and  set  Fili  and  Kili  beside  him  in  places  of  honour.  
Even  Bilbo  was  given  a  seat  at  the  high  table,  and  no  explanation  of  where  he 
came  in-no  songs  had  alluded  to  him  even  in  the  obscurest way-was asked  for  in 
the general bustle. 
Soon afterwards  the other dwarves were brought  into  the  town amid scenes of 
astonishing enthusiasm. They were all doctored and fed and housed and pampered 
in  the  most  delightful  and  satisfactory  fashion.  A  large  house  was  given  up  to 
Thorin  and  his  company;  boats  and  rowers were  put  at  their  service;  and  crowds 
sat outside and sang  songs all day, or cheered if any dwarf showed so much as his 
nose. 
Some of the songs were old ones; but some of them were quite new and spoke 
confidently  of  the  sudden  death  of  the  dragon  and  of  cargoes  of  rich  presents 
coming  down  the  river  to  Lake-town.  These were  inspired  largely  by  the Master 
and  they  did  not  particularly  please  the  dwarves,  but  in  the  meantime  they  were 
well  contented  and  they  quickly  grew  fat  and  strong  again.  Indeed within  a week 
they  were  quite  recovered,  fitted  out  in  fine  cloth  of  their  proper  colours,  with 
beards combed and trimmed, and proud steps. Thorin looked and walked as if his 
kingdom was already regained and Smaug chopped up into little pieces. 
Then,  as he had  said,  the dwarves' good  feeling  towards  the  little hobbit grew 
stronger  every  day.  There  were  no  more  groans  or  grumbles.  They  drank  his 
health, and they patted him on the back, and they made a great fuss of him; which 
was just as well, for he was not feeling particularly cheerful. He had not forgotten 
the  look  of  the  Mountain,  nor  the  thought  of  the  dragon,  and  he  had  besides  a 

####-shocking  cold.  For  three  days  he  sneezed  and  coughed,  and  he  could  not  go  out, 
and even after that his speeches at banquets were limited to "Thag you very buch." 
 
In the meanwhile the Wood-elves had gone back up the Forest River with their 
cargoes,  and  there  was  great  excitement  in  the  king's  palace.  I  have  never  heard 
what  happened  to  the  chief  of  the  guards  and  the  butler.  Nothing  of  course  was 
ever said about keys or barrels while  the dwarves stayed in Lake-town, and Bilbo 
was careful never to become invisible. Still, I daresay, more was guessed than was 
known, though doubtless Mr. Baggins remained a bit of a mystery. In any case the 
king knew now the dwarves' errand, or thought he did, and he said to himself: 
"Very well! We'll see! No treasure will come back through Mirkwood without 
my having something to say in the matter. But I expect they will all come to a bad 
end, and serve them right!" He at any rate did not believe in dwarves fighting and 
killing  dragons  like  Smaug,  and  he  strongly  suspected  attempted  burglary  or 
something  like  it  which  shows  he  was  a  wise  elf  and  wiser  than  the  men  of  the 
town, though not quite right, as we shall see in the end. He sent out his spies about 
the  shores  of  the  lake  and  as  far northward  towards  the Mountains  as  they would 
go, and waited. 
At  the  end  of  a  fortnight  Thorin  began  to  think  of  departure.  While  the 
enthusiasm  still  lasted  in  the  town was  the  time  to get help.  It would not do  to  let 
everything  cool  down  with  delay.  So  he  spoke  to  the  Master  and  his  councillors 
and said that soon he and his company must go on towards the Mountain. 
Then for  the first  time  the Master was surprised and a  little frightened; and he 
wondered  if  Thorin  was  after  all  really  a  descendant  of  the  old  kings.  He  had 
never  thought  that  the  dwarves  would  actually  dare  to  approach  Smaug,  but 
believed  they were  frauds who would sooner or  later be discovered and be  turned 
out. He was wrong. Thorin, of  course, was  really  the grandson of  the King under 
the  Mountain,  and  there  is  no  knowing  what  a  dwarf  will  not  dare  and  do  for 
revenge or the recovery of his own. But the Master was not sorry at all to let them 
go.  They  were  expensive  to  keep,  and  their  arrival  had  turned  things  into  a  long 
holiday in which business was at a standstill. 
"Let them go and bother Smaug, and see how he welcomes them!" he thought. 
"Certainly,  O  Thorin  Thrain's  son  Thror's  son!"  was  what  he  said.  "You  must 
claim your own. The hour  is at hand, spoken of old. What help we can offer shall 
be yours, and we trust to your gratitude when your kingdom is regained." 
So  one  day,  although  autumn  was  now  getting  far  on,  and  winds  were  cold, 
and  leaves  were  falling  fast,  three  large  boats  left  Lake-town,  laden with  rowers, 

####-dwarves,  Mr.  Baggins,  and  many  provisions.  Horses  and  ponies  had  been  sent 
round  by  circuitous  paths  to  meet  them  at  their  appointed  landing-place.  The 
Master  and  his  councillors  bade  them  farewell  from  the  great  steps  of  the  town-
hall  that  went  down  to  the  lake.  People  sang  on  the  quays  and  out  of  windows. 
The  white  oars  dipped  and  splashed,  and  off  they  went  north  up  the  lake  on  the 
last stage of their long journey. The only person thoroughly unhappy was Bilbo. 
 

####-<h4>Chapter 11</h4> <br> 

On the Doorstep 

 
In  two  days  going  they  rowed  right up  the Long Lake and passed out  into  the 
River  Running,  and  now  they  could  all  see  the  Lonely  Mountain  towering  grim 
and  tall  before  them.  The  stream was  strong  and  their  going  slow. At  the;  end  of 
the third day, some miles up the river, they drew in to the left or western bank and 
disembarked.  Here  they  were  joined  by  the  horses  with  other  provisions  and 
necessaries and the ponies for their own use that had been sent to meet them. They 
packed what  they  could  on  the  ponies  and  the  rest was made  into  a  store under  a 
tent,  but  none  of  the men  of  the  town would  stay with  them  even  for  the  night  so 
near the shadow of the Mountain. 
"Not  at  any  rate  until  the  songs  have  come  true!"  said  they.  It  was  easier  to 
believe in the Dragon and less easy to believe in Thorin in these wild parts. Indeed 
their stores had no need of any guard, for all  the  land was desolate and empty. So 
their escort  left  them, making off  swiftly down  the  river and  the  shoreward paths, 
although the night was already drawing on. 
They spent a cold and  lonely night and  their spirits  fell. The next day  they set 
out  again. Balin  and Bilbo  rode  behind,  each  leading  another  pony  heavily  laden 
beside  him;  the  others  were  some  way  ahead  picking  out  a  slow  road,  for  there 
were no paths. They made north-west, slanting away from the River Running, and 
drawing ever nearer and nearer to a great spur of the Mountain that was flung out 
southwards towards them. 
It was a weary journey, and a quiet and stealthy one. There was no laughter or 
song or sound of harps, and the pride and hopes which had stirred in their hearts at 
the  singing  of  old  songs  by  the  lake  died  away  to  a  plodding  gloom.  They  knew 
that they were drawing near to the end of their journey, and that it might be a very 
horrible end. The land about them grew bleak and barren, though once, as Thorin 
told  them,  it had been green and fair. There was  little grass, and before  long  there 
was neither bush nor tree, and only broken and blackened stumps to speak of ones 
long  vanished.  They  were  come  to  the  Desolation  of  the  Dragon,  and  they  were 
come at the waning of the year.  
 
They  reached  the  skirts  of  the  Mountain  all  the  same  without  meeting  any 
danger or any sign of the Dragon other than the wilderness he had made about his 
lair.  The Mountain  lay  dark  and  silent  before  them  and  ever  higher  above  them. 

####-They made  their  first  camp  on  the western  side  of  the  great  southern  spur, which 
ended  in  a  height  called Ravenhill. On  this  there  had  been  an  old watch-post; but 
they dared not climb it yet, it was too exposed. 
Before  setting  out  to  search  the western  spurs  of  the Mountain  for  the  hidden 
door, on which all their hopes rested, Thorin sent out a scouting expedition to spy 
out  the  land  to  the  South  where  the  Front  Gate  stood.  For  this  purpose  he  chose 
Balin  and Fili  and Kili,  and with  them went Bilbo. They marched under  the grey 
and silent cliffs to the feet of Ravenhill. There the river, after winding a wide loop 
over the valley of Dale, turned from the Mountain on its road to the Lake, flowing 
swift and noisily. Its bank was bare and rocky, tall and steep above the stream; and 
gazing  out  from  it  over  the  narrow  water,  foaming  and  splashing  among  many 
boulders,  they  could  see  in  the wide valley  shadowed by  the Mountain's  arms  the 
grey ruins of ancient houses, towers, and walls. 
"There  lies  all  that  is  left  of  Dale,"  said  Balin.  "The  mountain's  sides  were 
green with woods  and  all  the  sheltered  valley  rich  and  pleasant  in  the  days when 
the  bells  rang  in  that  town." He  looked  both  sad  and  grim  as  he  said  this: he had 
been one of Thorin's companions on the day the Dragon came. 
They did not dare to follow the river much further to. wards the Gate; but they 
went on beyond the end of the southern spur, until lying hidden behind a rock they 
could  look  out  and  see  the  dark  cavernous  opening  in  a  great  cliff-wall between 
the  arms  of  the Mountain. Out  of  it  the waters  of  the Running River  sprang;  and 
out  of  it  too  there  came  a  steam  and  a  dark  smoke. Nothing moved  in  the waste, 
save  the  vapour  and  the  water,  and  every  now  and  again  a  black  and  ominous 
crow. The only sound was  the sound of  the stony water, and every now and again 
the harsh croak of a bird. Balin shuddered. 
"Let us return!" he said. "We can do no good here!– And I don't like these dark 
birds, they look like spies of evil." 
"The dragon is still alive and in the halls under the Mountain then-or I imagine 
so from the smoke," said the hobbit. 
"That  does  not  prove  it,"  said Balin,  "though  I  don't  doubt  you  are  right. But 
he might be gone  away  some  time, or  he might be lying out on the mountain-side 
keeping watch, and still I expect smokes and steams would come out of the gates: 
all the halls within must be filled with his foul reek." 
 
With  such  gloomy  thoughts,  followed  ever  by  croaking  crows  above  them, 
they made  their weary way  back  to  the  camp. Only  in  June  they  had  been  guests 
in  the fair house of Elrond, and  though autumn was now crawling  towards winter 

####-that  pleasant  time  now  seemed  years  ago.  They were  alone  in  the  perilous waste 
without  hope  of  further  help. They were  at  the  end  of  their  journey,  but  as  far  as 
ever, it seemed, from the end of their quest. None of them had much spirit left. 
Now  strange  to  say  Mr.  Baggins  had  more  than  the  others.  He  would  often 
borrow Thorin's map  and  gaze  at  it,  pondering over  the  runes and  the message of 
the  moon-letters  Elrond  had  read.  It  was  he  that  made  the  dwarves  begin  the 
dangerous  search  on  the  western  slopes  for  the  secret  door.  They  moved  their 
camp  then  to  a  long  valley,  narrower  than  the  great  dale  in  the  South where  the 
Gates  of  the  river  stood,  and  walled  with  lower  spurs  of  the  Mountain.  Two  of 
these  here  thrust  forward west  from  the main mass  in  long  steep-sided ridges  that 
fell ever downwards towards the plain. On this western side there were fewer signs 
of  the  dragon's  marauding  feet,  and  there  was  some  grass  for  their  ponies.  From 
this western  camp,  shadowed  all day by  cliff  and wall until  the  sun began  to  sink 
towards  the  forest,  day  by  day  they  toiled  in  parties  searching  for  paths  up  the 
mountain-side. If the map was true, somewhere high above the cliff at the valley's 
head must stand the secret door. Day by day they came back to their camp without 
success. 
But at  last unexpectedly  they  found what  they were seeking. Fili and Kili and 
the  hobbit went  back one day down  the valley and scrambled among  the  tumbled 
rocks  at  its  southern  corner.  About  midday,  creeping  behind  a  great  stone  that 
stood  alone  like  a  pillar,  Bilbo  came  on  what  looked  like  rough  steps  going 
upwards.  Following  these  excitedly  he  and  the dwarves  found  traces of  a narrow 
track,  often  lost,  often  rediscovered,  that  wandered  on  to  the  top  of  the  southern 
ridge and brought them at last to a still narrower ledge, which turned north across 
the  face of  the Mountain. Looking down  they  saw  that they were at the top of the 
cliff  at  the  valley's  head  and  were  gazing  down  on  to  their  own  camp  below. 
Silently, clinging to the rocky wall on their right, they went in single file along the 
ledge,  till  the  wall  opened  and  they  turned  into  a  little  steep-walled  bay,  grassy-
floored,  still  and quiet.  Its  entrance which  they had  found  could not be  seen  from 
below because of  the overhang of  the  cliff, nor  from  further off because  it was  so 
small that it looked like a dark crack and no more. It was not a cave and was open 
to  the  sky  above;  but  at  its  inner  end  a  flat  wall  rose  up  that  in  the  lower  I  part, 
close  to  the  ground,  was  as  smooth  and  upright  as  mason's  work,  but  without  a 
joint or crevice to be seen. 
"No sign was  there of post or  lintel or  threshold, nor any sign of bar or bolt or 
key-hole; yet they did not doubt that they had found the door at last. 

####-They  beat  on  it,  they  thrust  and  pushed  at  it,  they  implored  it  to  move,  they 
spoke  fragments of broken  spells of opening, and nothing  stirred. At  last  tired out 
they.  rested  on  the  grass  at  its  feet,  and  then  at  evening  began,  their  long  climb 
down. 
 
There was excitement  in  the camp  that night.  In  the morning  they prepared  to 
move  once  more.  Only  Bofur  and  Bombur  were  left  behind  to  guard  the  ponies 
and  such  stores  as  they  had  brought  with  them  from  the  river.  The  others  went 
down  the  valley  and  up  the  newly  found  path,  and  so  to  the  narrow  ledge. Along 
this  they could carry no bundles or packs, so narrow and breathless was  it, with a 
fall  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  feet  beside  them  on  to  sharp  rocks  below;  but  each  of 
them  took a good coil of  rope wound  tight about his waist, and  so at  last without 
mishap they reached the little grassy bay.  
There  they  made  their  third  camp,  hauling  up  what  they  needed  from  below 
with  their ropes. Down  the same way  they were able occasionally  to  lower one of 
the more  active  dwarves,  such  as Kili,  to  exchange  such  news  as  there was,  or  to 
take  a  share  in  the  guard  below,  while  Bofur  was  hauled  up  to  the  higher  camp. 
Bombur would not come up either the rope or the path. 
"I am too fat for such fly-walks," he said. "I should turn dizzy and tread on my 
beard, and then you would be thirteen again. And the knotted ropes are too slender 
for my weight." Luckily for him that was not true, as you will see. 
In  the  meanwhile  some  of  them  explored  the  ledge  beyond  the  opening  and 
found a path  that  led higher and higher on  to  the mountain; but  they did not dare 
to venture very  far  that way, nor was  there much use  in  it. Out up  there  a  silence 
reigned,  broken  by  no  bird  or  sound  except  that  of  the  wind  in  the  crannies  of 
stone. They spoke low and never called or sang, for danger brooded in every rock. 
The  others  who  were  busy  with  the  secret  of  the  door  had  no  more  success. 
They  were  too  eager  to  trouble  about  the  runes  or  the  moon-letters,  but  tried 
without  resting  to  discover where  exactly  in  the  smooth  face  of  the  rock  the  door 
was hidden. They had brought picks and tools of many sorts from Lake-town, and 
at  first  they  tried  to  use  these.  But  when  they  struck  the  stone  the  handles 
splintered and jarred their arms cruelly, and the steel heads broke or bent like lead. 
Mining work,  they  saw  clearly was  no  good  against  the magic  that  had  shut  this 
door; and they grew terrified, too, of the echoing noise. 
Bilbo  found  sitting  on  the  doorstep  lonesome  and  wearisome-there was  not  a 
doorstep, of course, really, but they used to call the little grassy space between the 
wall  and  the  opening  the  "doorstep"  in  fun,  remembering Bilbo's words  long  ago 

####-at  the  unexpected  party  in  his  hobbit-hole,  when  he  said  they  could  sit  on  the 
doorstep  till  they  thought  of  something.  And  sit  and  think  they  did,  or  wandered 
aimlessly about, and glummer and glummer they became. 
Their  spirits  had  risen  a  little  at  the  discovery  of  the path, but now  they  sank 
into their boots; and yet they would not give it up and go away. The hobbit was no 
longer much brighter than the dwarves. He would do nothing but sit with his back 
to  the  rock-face  and  stare  away west  through  the opening, over  the cliff, over  the 
wide  lands  to  the black wall of Mirkwood,  and  to  the distances beyond,  in which 
he  sometimes  thought  he  could  catch  glimpses  of  the Misty Mountains  small  and 
far. If the dwarves asked him what he was doing he answered: 
"You  said  sitting  on  the  doorstep  and  thinking  would  be  my  job,  not  to 
mention  getting  inside,  so  I  am  sitting  and  thinking." But  I  am  afraid  he was  not 
thinking  much  of  the  job,  but  of  what  lay  beyond  the  blue  distance,  the  quiet 
Western Land  and  the Hill  and  his  hobbit-hole under  it. A  large grey  stone  lay  in 
the centre of the grass and he stared moodily at it or watched the great snails. They 
seemed  to  love  the  little  shut-in  bay  with  its  walls  of  cool  rock,  and  there  were 
many of them of huge size crawling slowly and stickily along its sides. 
"Tomorrow begins the last week of Autumn," said Thorin one day.  
"And winter comes after autumn," said Bifur.  
"And  next  year  after  that,"  said  Dwalin,  "and  our  beards  will  grow  till  they 
hang  down  the  cliff  to  the  valley  before  anything  happens  here.  What  is  our 
burglar doing for us? 
Since  he  has  got  an  invisible  ring,  and  ought  to  be  a  specially  excellent 
performer  now,  I  am  beginning  to  think  he might  go  through  the  Front Gate  and 
spy things out a bit!" 
Bilbo  heard  this-the  dwarves  were  on  the  rocks  just  :  above  the  enclosure 
where  he  was  sitting-and  "Good Gracious!"  he  thought,  "so  that  is what  they  are 
beginning  to  think,  is  it?  It  is  always  poor  me  that  has  to  get  them  out  :  of  their 
difficulties, at least since the wizard left. Whatever am I going to do? I might have 
known  that  something  dreadful  would  happen  to  me  in  the  end.  I  don't  think  I 
could bear to see the unhappy valley of Dale again, and as for that steaming gate! 
! !" 
That  night  he  was  very  miserable  and  hardly  slept.  Next  day  the  dwarves  all 
went  wandering  off  in  various  directions;  some  were  exercising  the  ponies  down 
below,  some  were  roving  about  the  mountain-side. All day Bilbo  sat gloomily  in 
the  grassy  bay  gazing  at  the  stone,  or  out  west  through  the  narrow  opening. He 

####-had  a  queer  feeling  that  he  was  waiting  for  something.  "Perhaps  the  wizard  will 
suddenly come back today," he thought. 
If  he  lifted  his  head  he  could  see  a  glimpse  of  the  distant  forest.  As  the  sun 
turned west there was a gleam of yellow upon its far roof, as if the light caught the 
last pale  leaves. Soon he  saw  the orange ball of  the  sun  sinking  towards  the  level 
of his eyes. He went  to  the opening and  there pale and faint was a  thin new moon 
above  the  rim  of Earth. At  that  very moment  he  heard  a  sharp crack behind him. 
There on the grey stone in the grass was an enormous thrush, nearly coal black, its 
pale  yellow  breast  freckled  dark  spots.  Crack!  It  had  caught  a  snail  and  was 
knocking it on the stone. Crack! Crack! 
Suddenly  Bilbo  understood.  Forgetting  all  danger  he  stood  on  the  ledge  and 
hailed  the  dwarves,  shouting  and  paying. Those  that were  nearest  came  tumbling 
over the rocks and as fast as they could along the ledge to him, wondering what on 
earth  was  the  matter;  the  others  shouted  to  be  hauled  up  the  ropes  (except 
Bombur, of course: he was asleep). 
Quickly  Bilbo  explained.  They  all  fell  silent:  the  hobbit  standing  by  the  grey 
stone,  and  the  dwarves with wagging  beards watching  impatiently.  The  sun  sank 
lower  and  lower,  and  their  hopes  fell.  It  sank  into  a  belt  of  reddened  cloud  and 
disappeared.  The  dwarves  groaned,  but  still  Bilbo  stood  almost  without  moving. 
The  little  moon  was  dipping  to  the  horizon.  Evening  was  coming  on.  Then 
suddenly  when  their  hope  was  lowest  a  red  ray  of  the  sun  escaped  like  a  finger 
through  a  rent  in  the  cloud.  A  gleam  of  light  came  straight  through  the  opening 
into  the  bay  and  fell  on  the  smooth  rock-face.  The  old  thrush,  who  had  been 
watching from a high perch with beady eyes and head cocked on one side, gave a 
sudden  trill. There was a  loud attack. A  flake of  rock split  from  the wall and  fell. 
A  hole  appeared  suddenly  about  three  feet  from  the  ground.  Quickly,  trembling 
lest the chance should fade, the dwarves rushed to the rock and pushed-in vain. 
"The key! The key!" cried Bilbo. "Where is Thorin?" 
Thorin hurried up. 
"The key!" shouted Bilbo. "The key that went with the map! Try it now while 
there is still time!" 
Then Thorin stepped up and drew the key on its chain from round his neck. He 
put  it  to  the  hole.  It  fitted  and it turned! Snap! The gleam went out, the sun sank, 
the moon was gone, and evening sprang into the sky.  
Now  they  all  pushed  together,  and  slowly  a  part  of  the  rock-wall  gave  way. 
Long straight cracks appeared and widened. A door five feet high and three broad 
was  out-  lined,  and  slowly  without  a  sound  swung  inwards.  It  seemed  as  if 

####-darkness  flowed  out  like  a  vapour  from  the  hole  in  the  mountain-side,  and  deep 
darkness  in  which  nothing  could  be  seen  lay  before  their  eyes  mouth  leading  in 
and down. 
 

####-<h4>Chapter 12</h4> <br> 

Inside Information 

 
For  a  long  time  the  dwarves  stood  in  the  dark  before  the  door  and  debated, 
until at last Thorin spoke: 
"Now  is  the  time  for  our  esteemed  Mr.  Baggins,  who  has  proved  himself  a 
good  companion  on  our  long  road,  and  a  hobbit  full  of  courage and  resource  far 
exceeding  his  size,  and  if  I may  say  so  possessed  of  good  luck  far  exceeding  the 
usual  allowance-now  is  the  time  for  him  to  perform  the  service  for which  he was 
included in our Company; now is the time for him to earn his Reward." 
You are  familiar with Thorin's style on  important occasions, so  I will not give 
you  any  more  of  it,  though  he  went  on  a  good  deal  longer  than  this.  It  certainly 
was an important occasion, but Bilbo felt impatient. By now he was quite familiar 
with Thorin too, and he knew what be was driving at. 
"If you mean you think it is my job to go into the secret passage first, O Thorin 
Thrain's son Oakenshield, may your beard grow ever longer," he said crossly, "say 
so  at  once  and  have  done!  I  might  refuse.  I  have  got  you  out  of  two  messes 
already,  which  were  hardly  in  the  original  bargain,  so  that  I  am,  I  think,  already 
owed  some  reward.  But  ‘third  time  pays  for  all'  as  my  father  used  to  say,  and 
somehow  I don't  think  I  shall  refuse. Perhaps  I have begun  to  trust my  luck more 
than I used to in the old days" – he meant last spring before he left his own house, 
but  it  seemed  centuries  ago  –  "but  anyway  I  think  I  will  go  and  have  a  peep  at 
once and get it over. Now who is coming with me?" 
He  did  not  expect  a  chorus  of  volunteers, so he was not disappointed. Fili and 
Kili  looked uncomfortable and stood on One  leg, but  the others made no pretence 
of offering  –  except  old Balin.  the  look-out man, who was  rather  fond  the hobbit. 
He  said  he would  come  inside  at  least  and  perhaps  a bit of  the way  too,  really  to 
call for help if necessary.  
The most  that  can  be  said  for  the  dwarves  is  this:  they  intended  to  pay  Bilbo 
really  handsomely  for  his  services;  they  had  brought  him  to  do  a  nasty  job  for 
them,  and  they  did  not  mind  the  poor  little  fellow  doing  it  if  he  would;  but  they 
would  all  have  done  their  best  to  get  him  out  of  trouble,  if  he  got  into  it,  as  they 
did in the case of the trolls at the beginning of their adventures before they had any 
particular  reasons  for  being  grateful  to  him.  There  it  is:  dwarves  are  not  heroes, 
but  calculating  folk with  a great  idea of  the value of money;  some  are  tricky  and 

####-treacherous  and  pretty  bad  lots;  some  are  not,  but  are  decent  enough  people  like 
Thorin and Company, if you don't expect too much. 
 
The  stars  were  coming  out  behind  him  in  a  pale  sky  barred  with  black  when 
the hobbit crept through the enchanted door and stole into the Mountain. It was far 
easier going  than he  expected. This was no goblin  entrance, or  rough wood-elves' 
cave.  It  was  a  passage  made  by  dwarves,  at  the  height  of  their  wealth  and  skill: 
straight  as  a  ruler,  smooth-floored  and  smooth-sided,  going  with  a  gentle  never-
varying slope direct-to some distant end in the blackness below.  
After a while Balin bade Bilbo "Good  luck!" and  stopped where he could still 
see the faint outline of the door, and by a trick of, the echoes of the tunnel hear the 
rustle  of  the whispering  voices  of  the  others  just  outside. Then  the  hobbit  slipped 
on  his  ring,  and warned  by  the  echoes  to  take more  than hobbit's care to make no 
sound,  he  crept  noiselessly  down,  down,  down  into  the  dark.  He  was  trembling 
with  fear,  but  his  little  face  was  set  and  grim.  Already  he  was  a  very  different 
hobbit from the one that had run out without a pocket-handkerchief from Bag-End 
long  ago. He had not had  a pocket-handkerchief for ages. He loosened his dagger 
in its sheath, tightened his belt, and went on. 
 
"Now  you  are  in  for  it  at  last, Bilbo Baggins,"  he  said  to  himself.  "You went 
and put your foot right in it that night of the party, and now you have got to pull it 
out and pay for it! Dear me, what a fool I was and am!" said the least Tookish part 
of  him.  "I  have  absolutely  no  use  for  dragon-guarded treasures, and the whole lot 
could  stay  here  for  ever,  if  only  I  could wake up and  find  this beastly  tunnel was 
my own front-hall at home!" 
He did not wake up of course, but went still on and on, till all sign of the door 
behind  had  faded  away.  He  was  altogether  alone.  Soon  he  thought  it  was 
beginning to feel warm. "Is that a kind of a glow I seem to see coming right ahead 
down  there?"  he  thought.  It was. As  he went  forward  it  grew  and  grew,  till  there 
was no doubt about it. It was a red light steadily getting redder and redder. Also it 
was  now  undoubtedly  hot  in  the  tunnel. Wisps of vapour  floated up and past him 
and he began to sweat. A sound, too, began to throb in his ears, a sort of bubbling 
like  the  noise  of  a  large  pot  galloping  on  the  fire,  mixed  with  a  rumble  as  of  a 
gigantic  tom-cat  purring.  This  grew  to  the  unmistakable  gurgling  noise  of  some 
vast animal snoring in its sleep down there in the red glow in front of him. 
  It  was  at  this  point  that  Bilbo  stopped.  Going  on  from  there  was  the  bravest 
thing he ever did. The tremendous things that happened afterward were as nothing 

####-compared  to  it.  He  fought  the  real  battle  in  the  tunnel  alone,  before  he  ever  saw 
the vast danger that lay in wait. At any rate after a short halt go on he did; and you 
can picture him coming to the end of the tunnel, an opening of much the same size 
and shape as the door above. Through it peeps the hobbit's little head. Before him 
lies the great bottommost cellar or dungeon-hall of the ancient dwarves right at the 
Mountain's  root.  It  is  almost  dark  so  that  its  vastaess  can  only  be  dimly  guessed, 
but  rising  from  the near side of  the  rocky  floor  there  is a great glow. The glow of 
Smaug! 
 
There  he  lay,  a  vast  red-golden dragon, fast asleep;  thrumming came from his 
jaws and nostrils, and wisps of smoke, but his  fires were  low  in slumber. Beneath 
him,  under  all  his  limbs  and  his  huge  coiled  tail,  and  about  him  on  all  sides 
stretching  away  across  the  unseen  floors,  lay  countless  piles  of  precious  things, 
gold wrought and unwrought, gems and jewels, and silver red-stained in the ruddy 
light. 
Smaug  lay, with wings  folded  like  an  immeasurable bat,  turned partly on one 
side,  so  that  the  hobbit  could  see  his  underparts  and  his  long  pale  belly  crusted 
with  gems  and  fragments  of  gold  from  his  long  lying  on  his  costly  bed.  Behind 
him  where  the  walls  were  nearest  could  dimly  be  seen  coats  of  mail,  helms  and 
axes,  swords  and  spears  hanging;  and  there  in  rows  stood  great  jars  and  vessels 
filled with a wealth that could not be guessed. To say that Bilbo's breath was taken 
away  is  no  description  at  all.  There  are  no words  left  to express his  staggerment, 
since Men changed the language that they learned of elves in the days when all the 
world was wonderful.  Bilbo  had  heard  tell  and  sing  of  dragon-hoards before, but 
the splendour, the lust, the glory of such treasure had never yet come home to him. 
His heart was filled and pierced with enchantment and with the desire of dwarves; 
and  he  gazed  motionless,  almost  forgetting  the  frightful  guardian,  at  the  gold 
beyond price and count. 
 
He  gazed  for  what  seemed  an  age,  before  drawn  almost  against  his  will,  he 
stole  from  the  shadow  of  the  doorway,  across  the  floor  to  the  nearest  edge  of  the 
mounds of treasure. Above him the sleeping dragon lay, a dire menace even in his 
sleep.  He  grasped  a  great  two-handled  cup,  as  heavy  as  he  could  carry,  and  cast 
one  fearful  eye  upwards. Smaug  stirred  a wing,  opened  a  claw,  the  rumble  of  his 
snoring changed its note. 
Then  Bilbo  fled.  But  the  dragon  did  not  wake-not  yet  but  shifted  into  other 
dreams  of  greed  and  violence,  lying  there  in  his  stolen  hall while  the  little hobbit 

####-toiled back up  the  long  tunnel. His heart was beating and a more  fevered shaking 
was in his legs than when he was going down, but still he clutched the cup, and his 
chief  thought was:  "I've  done  it! This will  show  them.  'More  like  a grocer  than  a 
burglar' indeed! Well, we'll hear no more of that." 
Nor did he. Balin was overjoyed to see the hobbit again, and as delighted as he 
was  surprised.  He  picked  Bilbo  up  and  carried  him  out  into  the  open  air.  It  was 
midnight  and  clouds  had  covered  the  stars,  but  Bilbo  lay  with  his  eyes  shut, 
gasping  and  taking pleasure  in  the  feel of  the  fresh  air  again,  and hardly noticing 
the  excitement  of  the  dwarves,  or  how  they  praised  him  and  patted  him  on  the 
back  and  put  themselves  and  all  their  families  for  generations  to  come  at  his 
service. 
 
The  dwarves  were  still  passing  the  cup  from  hand  to  hand  and  talking 
delightedly of the recovery of their treasure, when suddenly a vast rumbling woke 
in  the mountain underneath as  if  it was an old volcano  that had made up its mind 
to  start  eruptions  once  again.  The  door  behind  them  was  pulled  nearly  to,  and 
blocked  from  closing  with  a  stone,  but  up  the  long  tunnel  came  the  dreadful 
echoes, from far down in the depths, of a bellowing and a trampling that made the 
ground beneath them tremble. 
Then  the  dwarves  forgot  their  joy  and  their  confident  boasts  of  a  moment 
before  and  cowered  down  in  fright.  Smaug was  still  to  be  reckoned with.  It  does 
not  do  to  leave  a  live  dragon  out  of  your  calculations,  if  you  live  near  him. 
Dragons may  not  have much  real  use  for  all  their wealth,  but  they  know  it  to  an 
ounce as a rule, especially after long possession; and Smaug was no exception. He 
had  passed  from  an  uneasy  dream  (in which  a warrior,  altogether  insignificant  in 
size  but  provided  with  a  bitter  sword  and  great  courage,  figured  most 
unpleasantly)  to  a  doze,  and  from  a  doze  to wide waking.  There was  a  breath  of 
strange  air  in  his  cave.  Could  there  be  a  draught  from  that  little  hole?  He  had 
never  felt  quite  happy  about  it,  though  was  so  small,  and  now  he  glared  at  it  in 
suspicion an wondered why he had never blocked it up. Of late he had half fancied 
he had caught the dim echoes of a knocking sound from far above that came down 
through  it  to  his  lair.  He  stirred  and  stretched  forth  his  neck  to  sniff.  Then  he 
missed the cup!                                       
Thieves!  Fire! Murder!  Such  a  thing  had  not  happened  since  first  he  came  to 
the Mountain! His rage passes description – the sort of rage that is only seen when 
rich  folk  that  have  more  than  they  can  enjoy  suddenly  lose  something  that  they 
have  long  had  but  have  never  before  used  or  wanted.  His  fire  belched  forth,  the 

####-hall  smoked,  he  shook  the mountain-roots. He  thrust his head  in vain  at  the  little 
hole,  and  then  coiling  his  length  together,  roaring  like  thunder  underground,  he 
sped  from  his  deep  lair  through  its  great  door,  out  into  the  huge  passages  of  the 
mountain-palace and up towards the Front Gate. 
To  hunt  the  whole  mountain  till  he  had  caught  the  thief  and  had  torn  and 
trampled  him  was  his  one  thought.  He  issued  from  the  Gate,  the  waters  rose  in 
fierce  whistling  steam,  and  up  he  soared  blazing  into  the  air  and  settled  on  the 
mountain-top  in  a  spout of green  and  scarlet  flame. The dwarves heard  the  awful 
rumour  of  his  flight,  and  they  crouched  against  the  walls  of  the  grassy  terrace 
cringing  under  boulders,  hoping  somehow  to  escape  the  frightful  eyes  of  the 
hunting dragon. 
There they would have all been killed, if it had not been for Bilbo once again. 
"Quick! Quick!" he gasped. "The door! The tunnel! It's no good here." 
Roused  by  these  words  they  were  just  about  to  creep  inside  the  tunnel  when 
Bifur gave a cry: "My cousins! Bombur and Bofur – we have forgotten them, they 
are down in the valley!" 
"They will be slain, and all our ponies too, and all out stores lost," moaned the 
others. "We can do nothing." 
"Nonsense!"  said  Thorin,  recovering  his  dignity.  "We  cannot  leave  them.  Get 
inside Mr. Baggins and Balin, and you two Fili and Kili-the dragon shan't have all 
of us. Now you others, where are the ropes? Be quick!" 
Those  were  perhaps  the  worst  moments  they  had  been  through  yet.  The 
horrible sounds of Smaug's anger were echoing  in  the stony hollows  far above; at 
any  moment  he  might  come  blazing  down  or  fly  whirling  round  and  find  them 
there,  near  the  perilous  cliff's  edge  hauling  madly  on  the  ropes.  Up  came  Bofur, 
and  still  all  was  safe.  Up  came  Bombur,  puffing  and  blowing  while  the  ropes 
creaked, and still all was safe. Up came some tools and bundles of stores, and then 
danger was upon them. A whirring noise was heard. A red light touched the points 
of  standing  rocks.  The  dragon  came.  They  had  barely  time  to  fly  back  to  the 
tunnel, pulling and dragging in their bundles, when Smaug came hurtling from the 
North, licking the mountain-sides with flame, beating his great wings with a noise 
like a roaring wind. His hot breath shrivelled  the grass before  the door, and drove 
in  through  the  crack  they  had  left  and  scorched  them  as  they  lay  hid.  Flickering 
fires  leaped  up  and  black  rock-shadows  danced.  Then  darkness  fell  as  he  passed 
again. 
The ponies screamed with terror, burst their ropes and galloped wildly off. The 
dragon swooped and turned to pursue them, and was gone. 

####-"That'll be the end of our poor beasts!" said Thorin. 
"Nothing  can  escape  Smaug  once  he  sees  it.  Here  we  are  and  here  we  shall 
have to stay, unless any one fancies tramping the long open miles back to the river 
with Smaug on the watch!" 
It  was  not  a  pleasant  thought!  They  crept  further  down  the  tunnel,  and  there 
they  lay  and  shivered  though  it  was  warm  and  stuffy,  until  dawn  came  pale 
through  the  crack  of  the  door. Every  now  and  again  through  the  night  they  could 
hear the roar of the flying dragon grow and then pass and fade, as he hunted round 
and round the mountain-sides. 
He  guessed  from  the  ponies,  and  from  the  traces  of  the  camps  he  had 
discovered,  that men had  come up  from  the  river  and  the  lake  and had  scaled  the 
mountain-side  from  the  valley  where  the  ponies  had  been  standing;  but  the  door 
withstood his searching eye, and the little high-walled bay had kept out his fiercest 
flames.  Long  he  had  hunted  in  vain  till  the  dawn  chilled  his  wrath  and  he  went 
back to his golden couch to sleep – and to gather new strength. 
He would not  forget or  forgive  the  theft, not  if a  thousand years turned him to 
smouldering  stone,  but  he  could  afford  to  wait.  Slow  and  silent  he  crept  back  to 
his lair and half closed his eyes. 
When  morning  came  the  terror  of  the  dwarves  grew  less.  They  realized  that 
dangers  of  this  kind  were  inevitable  in  dealing  with  such  a  guardian,  and  that  it 
was  no  good  giving  up  their  quest  yet.  Nor  could  they  get  away  just  now,  as 
Thorin  had  pointed  out. Their  ponies were  lost  or  killed,  and  they would  have  to 
wait  some  time  before  Smaug  relaxed  his  watch  sufficiently  for  them  to dare  the 
long way on  foot. Luckily  they had  saved  enough of  their  stores  to  last  them  still 
for some time. 
They debated  long on what was  to be done, but  they could  think of no way of 
getting  rid  of  Smaug  –  which  had  always  been  a  weak  point  in  their  plans,  as 
Bilbo  felt  inclined  to  point  out.  Then  as  is  the  nature  of  folk  that  are  thoroughly 
perplexed,  they began  to grumble at  the hobbit, blaming him  for what had at  first 
so pleased them: for bringing away a cup and stirring up Smaug's wrath so soon. 
"What else do you suppose a burglar is to do?" asked Bilbo angrily. "I was not 
engaged  to  kill  dragons,  that  is  warrior's  work,  but  to  steal  treasure.  I  made  the 
best  beginning  I  could.  Did  you  expect  me  to  trot  back  with  the  whole  hoard  of 
Thror  on  my  back?  If  there  is  any  grumbling  to  be  done,  I  think  I  might  have  a 
say. You ought to have brought five hundred burglars not one. I am sure it reflects 
great  credit  on  your  grandfather,  but  you  cannot  pretend  that  you  ever  made  the 

####-vast  extent  of  his  wealth  clear  to me.  I  should want  hundreds  of  years  to  bring  it 
all up, if I was fifty times as big, and Smaug as tame as a rabbit." 
After that of course the dwarves begged his pardon. 
"What  then  do  you  propose  we  should  do,  Mr.  Baggins?"  asked  Thorin 
politely.  
"I  have  no  idea  at  the  moment  –  if  you  mean  about  removing  the  treasure. 
That  obviously  depends  entirely  on  some  new  turn  of  luck  and  the  getting  rid  of 
Smaug. 
Getting  rid  of  dragons  is  not  at  all  in  my  line,  but  I  will  do  my  best  to  think 
about it. Personally I have no hopes at all, and wish I was safe back at home." 
"Never mind that for the moment! What are we to do now,  to-day?" 
"Well,  if  you  really want my  advice,  I  should  say we  can  do  nothing  but  stay 
where  we  are.  By  day  we  can  no  doubt  creep  out  safely  enough  to  take  the  air. 
Perhaps before long one or two could be chosen to go back to the store by the river 
and replenish our supplies. But in the meanwhile everyone ought to be well inside 
the tunnel by night. 
"Now  I  will  make  you  an  offer.  I  have  got my  ring  and will  creep  down  this 
very  noon-then  if  ever  Smaug  ought  to  be  napping-and  see  what  he  is  up  to. 
Perhaps something will turn up. 'Every worm has his weak spot,' as my father used 
to say, though I am sure it was not from personal experience." 
Naturally  the  dwarves  accepted  the  offer  eagerly.  Already  they  had  come  to 
respect little Bilbo. Now he had become the real leader in their adventure. He had 
begun  to  have  ideas  and  plans  of  his  own. When  midday  came  he  got  ready  for 
another  journey  down  into  the Mountain. He  did  not  like  it  of  course,  but  it was 
not  so  bad  now  he  knew, more  or  less, what was  in  front  of  him. Had  he  known 
more about dragons and  their wily ways, he might have  teen more  frightened and 
less hopeful of catching this one napping. 
The sun was shining when he started, but it was as dark as night in the tunnel. 
The light from the door, almost closed, soon faded as he went down. So silent was 
his going  that smoke on a gentle wind could hardly have surpasses  it, and he was 
inclined  to  feel  a  bit  proud  of  himself  as  he  drew  near  the  lower  door. There was 
only the very fainter glow to be seen. 
"Old Smaug  is weary and asleep," he  thought.  "He can't,  see me and he won't 
hear  me.  Cheer  up  Bilbo!"  He  had  forgotten  or  had  never  heard  about  dragons' 
sense of smell. 
It is also an awkward fact that they keep half an eye open watching while they 
sleep,  if  they are  suspicious. Smaug certainly  looked  fast asleep, almost dead and 

####-dark, with scarcely a snore more than a whiff of unseen steam, when Bilbo peeped 
once more from the entrance. He was just about to step out on to the floor when he 
caught  a  sudden  thin  and  piercing  ray  of  red  from  under  the  drooping  lid.  of 
Smaug's  left  eye.  He  was  only  pretending  to  sleep!  He  was  watching  the  tunnel 
entrance!  Hurriedly  Bilbo  stepped  back  and  blessed  the  luck  of  his  ring.  Then 
Smaug spoke. 
 
"Well,  thief!  I  smell  you  and  I  feel  your  air.  I  hear  your  breath. Come  along! 
Help yourself again, there is plenty and to spare!" 
But Bilbo was  not  quite  so  unlearned  in  dragon-lore as all  that, and  if Smaug 
hoped to get him to come nearer so easily he was disappointed. 
"No  thank  you,  O  Smaug  the.  Tremendous!"  he  replied.  "I  did  not  come  for 
presents. I only wished  to have a  look at you and see  if you were  truly as great as 
tales say. I did not believe them." 
"Do  you  now?"  said  the  dragon  somewhat  flattered,  even  though  he  did  not 
believe a word of it.                   j 
"Truly  songs  and  tales  fall  utterly  short  of  the  reality,  O  Smaug  the  Chiefest 
and Greatest of Calamities," replied Bilbo.                                               I 
You  have  nice  manners  for  a  thief  and  a  liar,"  said  the  dragon.  "You  seem 
familiar with my  name,  but  I  don't  seem  to  remember  smelling  you  before. Who 
are you and where do you come from, may I ask?" 
"You  may  indeed!  I  come  from  under  the  hill,  and  under  hills  and  over  the 
hills my paths led. And through the air, I am he that walks unseen." 
"So I can well believe," said Smaug, "but that is hardly our usual name." 
"I am  the clue-finder, the web-cutter, the stinging fly. I as chosen for the lucky 
number." 
"Lovely  titles!"  sneered  the  dragon.  "But  lucky  numbers  don't  always  come 
off." 
"I  am  he  that  buries  his  friends  alive  and  drowns  them  and  draws  them  alive 
again from the water. I came from the end of a bag, but no bag went over me." 
"These don't sound so creditable," scoffed Smaug. 
"I  am  the  friend  of  bears  and  the  guest  of  eagles.  I  am  Ringwinner  and 
Luckwearer;  and  I  am  Barrel-rider," went  on Bilbo  beginning  to  be  pleased with 
his riddling. 
"That's  better!"  said  Smaug.  "But  don't  let  your  imagination  run  away  with 
you!" 
 

####-This  of  course  is  the way  to  talk  to  dragons,  if  you  don't want  to  reveal  your 
proper  name  (which  is  wise),  and  don't  want  to  infuriate  them  by  a  flat  refusal 
(which is also very wise). No dragon can resist the fascination of riddling talk and 
of wasting time trying to understand it. There was a lot here which Smaug did not 
understand  at  all  (though  I  expect  you  do,  since  you  know  all  about  Bilbo's 
adventures  to which  he was  referring), but he  thought he understood enough, and 
he chuckled in his wicked inside. 
"I  thought so  last night," he smiled  to himself. "Lake-men, some nasty scheme 
of those miserable tub-trading Lake-men, or I'm a lizard. I haven't been down that 
way for an age and an age; but I will soon alter that!" 
"Very  well,  O  Barrel-rider!"  he  said  aloud.  "Maybe  Barrel  was  your  pony's 
name;  and maybe  not,  though  it was  fat  enough. You may walk  unseen,  but  you 
did  not  walk  all  the  way.  Let  me  tell  you  I  ate  six  ponies  last  night  and  I  shall 
catch and eat all the others before long. In return for the excellent meal I will give 
you  one  piece  of  advice  for  your  good:  don't  have more  to  do with  dwarves  than 
you can help!" 
"Dwarves!" said Bilbo in pretended surprise. 
"Don't talk to me!" said Smaug. "I know the smell (and taste) of dwarf-no one 
better.  Don't  tell  me  that  I  can  eat  a  dwarf-ridden  pony  and  not  know  it!  You'll 
come  to  a  bad  end,  if  you  go with  such  friends. Thief Barrel-rider. I don't mind if 
you go back and tell them so from me." 
But he did not tell Bilbo that there was one smell he could not make out at all, 
hobbit-smell; it was quite outside his experience and puzzled him mightily.  
"I  suppose  you  got  a  fair  price  for  that  cup  last  night?"  he  went  on.  "Come 
now,  did  you? Nothing  at  all! Well,  that's  just  like  them. And  I  suppose  they  are 
skulking  outside,  and  your  job  is  to  do  all  the  dangerous work  and  get what  you 
can  when  I'm  not  looking-for  them?  And  you  will  get  a  fair  share?  Don't  you 
believe it! If you get off alive, you will be lucky." 
 
Bilbo  was  now  beginning  to  feel  really  uncomfortable.  Whenever  Smaug's 
roving  eye,  seeking  for  him  in  the  shadows,  flashed  across  him,  he  trembled,  and 
an unaccountable desire seized hold of him to rush out and reveal himself and tell 
all  the  truth  to  Smaug.  In  fact  he  was  in  grievous  danger  of  coming  under  the 
dragon-spell. But plucking up courage he spoke again. 
"You  don't  know  everything, O  Smaug  the Mighty,"  said  he.  "Not  gold  alone 
brought us hither." 

####-"Ha! Ha! You  admit  the  'us',"  laughed Smaug. "Why not say  'us fourteen' and 
be  done  with  it.  Mr.  Lucky  Number?  I  am  pleased  to  hear  that  you  had  other 
business  in  these  parts  besides  my  gold.  In  that  case  you  may,  perhaps,  not 
altogether waste your time. 
"I don't know if it has occurred to you that, even if you could steal the gold bit 
by bit-a matter of a hundred years or so – you could not get it very far? Not much 
use  on  the  mountain-side? Not much use  in  the  forest? Bless me! Had you never 
thought  of  the  catch?  A  fourteenth  share,  I  suppose,  Or  something  like  it,  those 
were  the  terms,  eh?  But  what  about  delivery? What  about  cartage? What  about 
armed guards and tolls?" And Smaug laughed aloud. He had a wicked and a wily 
heart,  and  he  knew  his  guesses  were  not  far  out,  though  he  suspected  that  the 
Lake-men were at the back of the plans, and that most of the plunder was meant to 
stop  there  in  the  town  by  the  shore  that  in  his  young  days  had  been  called 
Esgaroth. 
You will hardly believe  it, but poor Bilbo was  really very  taken aback. So far 
all  his.  thoughts  and  energies  had  been  concentrated  on  getting  to  the  Mountain 
and  finding  the  entrance. He  had  never  bothered  to wonder  how  the  treasure was 
to be removed, certainly never how any part of it that might fall to his share was to 
be brought back all the way to Bag-End Under-Hill. 
Now  a  nasty  suspicion  began  to  grow  in  his  mind-had  the  dwarves  forgotten 
this important point too, or were they laughing in their sleeves at him all the time? 
That  is  the effect  that dragon-talk has on the inexperienced. Bilbo of course ought 
to have been on his guard; but Smaug had rather an overwhelming personality.  
"I  tell you," he  said,  in  an  effort  to  remain  loyal  to his  friends  and  to keep his 
end up, "that gold was only an afterthought with  us. We came over hill and under 
hill,  by  wave  and  win,  for  Revenge.  Surely, O  Smaug  the  unassessably wealthy, 
you must realize that your success has made you some bitter enemies?" 
Then  Smaug  really  did  laugh-a  devastating  sound  which  shook  Bilbo  to  the 
floor, while  far  up  in  the  tunnel  the  dwarves  huddled  together  and  imagined  that 
the hobbit had come to a sudden and a nasty end. 
"Revenge!"  he  snorted,  and  the  light  of  his  eyes  lit  the  the  hall  from  floor  to 
ceiling like scarlet lightning. "Revenge! The King under the Mountain is dead and 
where are hi kin  that dare  seek  revenge? Girion Lord of Dale  is dead, and  I have 
eaten  his  people  like  a wolf  among  sheep,  and where  are  his  sons'  sons  that  dare 
approach me?  I  kill where  I wish  and  none  dare  resist.  I  laid  low  the warriors of 
old and their like is not in the world today. Then I was but young and tender. Now 
I  am  old  and  strong,  strong  strong.  Thief  in  the  Shadows!"  he  gloated.  "My 

####-armour  is  like  tenfold shields, my  teeth are swords, my claws spears,  the shock of 
my tail a thunderbolt, my wings a hurricane, and my breath death!" 
"I  have  always  understood,"  said  Bilbo  in  a  frightened  squeak,  "that  dragons 
were softer underneath, especially in the region of the–er–chest; but doubtless one 
so fortified has thought of that." 
The dragon stopped short in his boasting. "Your information is antiquated," he 
snapped.  "I  am  armoured  above  and  below  with  iron  scales  and  hard  gems.  No 
blade can pierce me." 
"I might  have  guessed  it,"  said Bilbo.  "Truly  there  can;  nowhere  be found the 
equal of Lord Smaug the Impenetrable. What magnificence to possess a waistcoat 
of fine diamonds!" 
"Yes,  it  is  rare  and wonderful,  indeed,"  said  Smaug  absurdly  pleased. He  did 
not  know  that  the  hobbit  had  already  caught  a  glimpse  of  his  peculiar  under-
covering on his previous visit, and was itching for a closer view for reasons of his 
own. The dragon rolled over. "Look!" he said. "What do you say to that?" 
"Dazzlingly  marvellous!  Perfect!  Flawless!  Staggering!"  exclaimed  Bilbo 
aloud, but what he thought inside was: "Old fool! Why there is a large patch in the 
hollow of his left breast as bare as a snail out of its shell!" 
After  he  had  seen  that Mr. Baggins'  one  idea was  to  get  away.  "Well,  I  really 
must not detain Your Magnificence any longer," he  said, "or keep you from much 
needed  rest.  Ponies  take  some  catching,  I  believe,  after  a  long  start.  And  so  do 
burglars," he added as a parting shot, as he darted back and fled up the tunnel. 
It was an unfortunate remark, for  the dragon spouted  terrific flames after him, 
and  fast  though  he  sped  up  the  slope,  he  had  not  gone  nearly  far  enough  to  be 
comfortable  before  the  ghastly  head  of  Smaug  was  thrust  against  the  opening 
behind.  Luckily  the  whole  head  and  jaws  could  not  squeeze  in,  but  the  nostrils 
sent  forth  fire  and  vapour  to  pursue  him,  and  he  was  nearly  overcome,  and 
stumbled blindly on in great pain and fear. He had been feeling rather pleased with 
the  cleverness  of  his  conversation  with  Smaug,  but  his  mistake  at  the  end  shook 
him into better sense. 
"Never  laugh  at  live  dragons,  Bilbo  you  fool!"  he  said  to  himself,  and  it 
became  a  favourite  saying  of  his  later,  and  passed  into  a  proverb.  "You  aren't 
nearly through this adventure yet," he added, and that was pretty true as well. 
 
The afternoon was turning into evening when he came out again and stumbled 
and  fell  in  a  faint  on  the  'door-step.'  The  dwarves  revived  him,  and  doctored  his 
scorches  as well  as  they  could; but  it was  a  long  time before  the hair on  the back 

####-of  his  head  and  his  heels  grew  properly  again:  it had  all been  singed  and  frizzled 
right down to the skin. In the meanwhile his friends did their best to cheer him up; 
and they were eager for his story, especially wanting to know why the dragon had 
made such an awful noise, and how Bilbo had escaped. 
But  the  hobbit  was  worried  and  uncomfortable,  and  they  had  difficulty  in 
getting anything out of him. On  thinking  things over he was now  regretting  some 
of the things he had said to the dragon, and was not eager to repeat them. The old 
thrush was sitting on a rock near by with his head cocked on one side, listening to 
all  that was  said.  It  shows what  an  ill  temper Bilbo was  in:  he  picked  up  a  stone 
and threw it at the thrush, which merely fluttered aside and came back. 
"Drat  the  bird!"  said  Bilbo  crossly.  "I  believe  he  is  listening,  and  I  don't  like 
the look of him." 
"Leave  him  alone!"  said Thorin.  "The  thrushes  are  good  and  friendly-this is a 
very  old  bird  indeed,  and  is  maybe  the  last  left  of  the  ancient  breed  that  used  to 
live about here, tame to the hands of my father and grandfather. They were a long-
lived and magical race, and this might even be one of those that were alive then, a 
couple of hundreds years or more ago. The Men of Dale used  to have  the  trick of 
understanding  their  language,  and  used  them  for messengers  to  fly  to  the Men of 
the Lake and elsewhere." 
"Well, he'll have news to take to Lake-town all right, if that is what he is after," 
said Bilbo; "though I don't suppose there are any people left there that trouble with 
thrush-language." 
"Why what has happened?" cried the dwarves. "Do get on with your tale!" 
So  Bilbo  told  them  all  he  could  remember,  and  he  confessed  that  he  had  a 
nasty  feeling  that  the  dragon  guessed  too  much  from  his  riddles  added  to  the 
camps  and  the  ponies.  "I  am  sure  he  knows  we  came  from  Lake-town  and  had 
help  from  there;  and  I  have  a  horrible  feeling  that  his  next  move  may  be  in  that 
direction.  I  wish  to  goodness  I  had  never  said  that  about  Barrel-rider;  it  would 
make even a blind rabbit in these parts think of the Lake-men." 
"Well,  well!  It  cannot  be  helped,  and  it  is  difficult  not  to  slip  in  talking  to  a 
dragon,  or  so  I  have  always  heard,"  said  Balin  anxious  to  comfort  him.  "I  think 
you  did  very well,  if  you  ask me-you found out one very useful thing at any rate, 
and got home alive, and  that  is more  than most can say who have had words with 
the likes of Smaug. It may be a mercy and a blessing yet to know of the bare patch 
in the old Worm's diamond waistcoat." 
That  turned  the  conversation,  and  they  all  began  discussing  dragon-slayings 
historical,  dubious,  and  mythical,  and  the  various  sorts  of  stabs  and  jabs  and 

####-undercuts,  and  the  different  arts,  devices  and  stratagems  by which  they  had  been 
accomplished. The general opinion was that catching a dragon napping was not as 
easy as it sounded, and the attempt to stick one or prod one asleep was more likely 
to  end  in  disaster  than  a  bold  frontal  attack.  All  the  while  they  talked  the  thrush 
listened,  till  at  last when  the  stars  began  to  peep  forth,  it  silently  spread  its wings 
and  flew  away.  And  all  the  while  they  talked  and  the  shadows  lengthened  Bilbo 
became more and more unhappy and his foreboding 
At last he interrupted them. "I am sure we are very unsafe here," he said, "and 
I don't see the point of sitting here. The dragon has withered all the pleasant green, 
and  anyway  the  night  has  come  and  it  is  cold.  But  I  feel  it  in my  bones  that  this 
place will be attacked again. Smaug knows now how I came down to his hall, and 
you  can  trust  him  to  guess where  the  other  end  of  the  tunnel  is. He will break all 
this  side  of  the Mountain  to  bits,  if  necessary,  to  stop  up  our  entrance,  and  if  we 
are smashed with it the better he will like it." 
"You  are  very  gloomy,  Mr.  Baggins!"  said  Thorin.  "Why  has  not  Smaug 
blocked  the  lower  end,  then,  if  he  is  so  eager  to  keep  us  out?  He  has  not,  or  we 
should have heard him." 
"I  don't  know,  I  don't  know-because  at  first  he  wanted  to  try  and  lure  me  in 
again, I suppose, and now perhaps because he is waiting till after tonight's hunt, or 
because he does not want to damage his bedroom if he can help it – but I wish you 
would not argue. Smaug will be coming out at any minute now, and our only hope 
is to get well in the tunnel and shut the door." 
He  seemed  so much  in  earnest  that  the  dwarves  at  last  did  as  he said,  though 
they  delayed  shutting  the  door-it  seemed  a  desperate  plan,  for  no  one  knew 
whether  or  how  they  could  get  it  open  again  from  the  inside,  and  the  thought  of 
being  shut  in  a  place  from  which  the  only  way  out  led  through  the  dragon's  lair 
was  not  one  they  liked.  Also  everything  seemed  quite  quiet,  both  outside  and 
down the tunnel. So for a longish while they sat inside not far down from the half-
open  door  and  went  on  talking.  The  talk  turned  to  the  dragon's  wicked  words 
about the dwarves. Bilbo wished he had never heard them, or at least that he could 
feel quite certain that the dwarves now were absolutely honest when they declared 
that they had never thought at all about what would happen after the treasure had 
been won.  
"We  knew  it  would  be  a  desperate  venture,"  said  Thorin,  "and we  know  that 
still; and I still  think  that when we have won  it will be  time enough  to  think what 
to  do  about  it.  As  for  your  share,  Mr.  Baggins,  I  assure  you  we  are  more  than 
grateful and you shall choose you own fourteenth, as soon as we have anything to 

####-divide, am sorry if you are worried about transport, and I admit the difficulties are 
great-the  lands  have  not  become  less  wild  with  the  passing  of  time,  rather  the 
reverse-but  we  will  do  whatever  we  can  for  you,  and  take  our  share  of  the  cost 
when the time comes. Believe me or not as you like!" 
From that the talk turned to the great hoard itself and to the things that Thorin 
and Balin remembered. They wondered if they were still lying there .unharmed in 
the  hall  below:  the  spears  that  were  made  for  the  armies  of  the  great  King 
Bladorthin  (long  since  dead),  each  had  a  thrice-forged head and  their  shafts were 
inlaid with  cunning gold, but  they were never delivered or paid  for;  shields made 
for warriors long dead; the great golden cup of Thror, two-handed, hammered and 
carven with birds and flowers whose eyes and petals were of jewels; coats of mail 
gilded and silvered and  impenetrable;  the necklace of Girion, Lord of Dale, made 
of five hundred emeralds green as grass, which he gave for the arming of his eldest 
son  in  a  coat  of  dwarf-linked rings the like of which had never been made before, 
for  it  was  wrought  of  pure  silver  to  the  power  and  strength  of  triple  steel.  But 
fairest  of  all  was  the  great  white  gem,  which  the  dwarves  had  found  beneath  the 
roots of the Mountain, the Heart of the Mountain, the Arkenstone of Thrain. 
"The  Arkenstone!  The  Arkenstone!"  murmured  Thorin  in  the  dark,  half 
dreaming with his chin upon his knees. "It was like a globe with a thousand facets; 
it shone like silver in the firelight, like water in the sun, like snow under the stars, 
like rain upon the Moon!" 
But  the enchanted desire of  the hoard had  fallen  from Bilbo. All  through  their 
talk  he  was  only  half  listening  to  them.  He  sat  nearest  to  the  door with  one  ear 
cocked  for  any  beginnings  of  a  sound  without,  his  other  was  alert  or  echoes 
beyond  the  murmurs  of  the  dwarves,  for  any  whisper  of  a  movement  from  far 
below.  
Darkness  grew  deeper  and  he  grew  ever  more  uneasy.  "Shut  the  door!"  he 
begged them. "I fear that dragon in my marrow. I like this silence far less than the 
uproar of last night. Shut the door before it is too late!" 
Something  in  his  voice  gave  the  dwarves  an  uncomfortable  feeling.  Slowly 
Thorin shook off his dreams and getting up he kicked away the stone that wedged 
the door. Then they thrust upon it, and it closed with a snap and a clang. No trace 
of a keyhole was there left on the inside. They were shut in the Mountain! 
And  not  a  moment  too  soon.  They  had  hardly  gone  any  distance  down  the 
tunnel  when  a  blow  smote  the  side  of  the  Mountain  like  the  crash  of  battering-
rams  made  of  forest  oaks  and  swung  by  giants.  The  rock  boomed,  the  walls 
cracked and stones fell from the roof on their heads. What would have happened if 

####-the door had still been open I don't like to think. They fled further down the tunnel 
glad to be still alive, while behind them outside they heard the roar and rumble of 
Smaug's  fury.  He  was  breaking  rocks  to  pieces,  smashing  wall  and  cliff  with  the 
lashings  of  his  huge  tail,  till  their  little  lofty  camping ground,  the  scorched grass, 
the thrush's stone, the snail-covered walls, the narrow ledge, and all disappeared in 
a  jumble  of  smithereens,  and  an  avalanche  of  splintered  stones  fell  over  the  cliff 
into the valley below.  
Smaug  had  left  his  lair  in  silent  stealth,  quietly  soared  into  the  air,  and  then 
floated heavy and slow in the dark like a monstrous crow, down the wind towards 
the  west  of  the  Mountain,  in  the  hopes  of  catching  unawares  something  or 
somebody  there,  and  of  spying  the outlet  to  the passage which  the  thief had used. 
This  was  the  outburst  of  his  wrath  when  he  could  find  nobody  and  see  nothing, 
even where he guessed the outlet must actually be. 
After  he  had  let  off  his  rage  in  this  way  he  felt  better  and  he  thought  in  his 
heart that he would not be troubled again from that direction. In-the meanwhile he 
had further vengeance to take. "Barrel-rider!" he snorted. "Your fee came from the 
waterside  and  up  the water  you  came with  out  a  doubt.  I  don't  know  your  smell, 
but if you are not one of those men of the Lake, you had their help. They shall see 
me and remember who is the real King under the Mountain!" 
He rose in fire and went away south towards the Running River.  
 

####-<h4>Chapter 13</h4> <br> 

Not at Home 

 
In  the  meanwhile,  the  dwarves  sat  in  darkness,  and  utter  silence  fell  about 
them.  Little  they  ate  and  little  they  spoke.  They  could  not  count  the  passing  of 
time; and  they  scarcely dared  to move,  for  the whisper of  their voices echoed and 
rustled in the tunnel. If they dozed, they woke still to darkness and to silence going 
on unbroken. At last after days and days of waiting, as it seemed, when they were 
becoming  choked  and  dazed  for  want  of  air,  they  could  bear  it  no  longer.  They 
would  almost  have  welcomed  sounds  from  below  of  the  dragon's  return.  In  the 
silence  they  feared  some  cunning  devilry  of  his,  but  they  could  not  sit  there  for 
ever. 
Thorin spoke: "Let us  try  the door!" he said. "I must feel  the wind on my face 
soon  or  die.  I  think  I  would  rather  be  smashed  by  Smaug  in  the  open  than 
suffocate in here!" 
So several of the dwarves got up and groped back to where the door had been. 
But  they  found  that  the  upper  end  of  the  tunnel  had  been  shattered  and  blocked 
with broken  rock. Neither key nor  the magic  it had once obeyed would ever  open 
that door again. 
"We are trapped!" they groaned. "This is the end. We shall die here." 
But  somehow,  just  when  the  dwarves  were  most  despairing,  Bilbo  felt  a 
strange  lightening  of  the  heart,  as  if  a  heavy  weight  had  gone  from  under  his 
waistcoat. 
"Come, come!" he  said.  "While  there's  life  there's hope!" as my  father used  to 
say,  and  'Third  time  pays  for  all.'  I  am  going  down  the  tunnel  once  again.  I  have 
been  that  way  twice,  when  I  knew  there  was  a  dragon  at  the  other  end,  so  I  will 
risk  a  third  visit  when  I  am  no  longer  sure.  Anyway  the  only  way  out  is  down. 
And I think time you had better all come with me." 
In desperation they agreed, and Thorin was the first go forward by Bilbo's side. 
"Now  do  be  careful!"  whispered  the  hobbit,  "and  quiet  as  you  can  be! There 
may be no Smaug at the bottom but then again there may be. Don't let us take any 
unnecessary risks!" 
Down,  down  they  went.  The  dwarves  could  not,  course,  compare  with  the 
hobbit  in  real  stealth,  and  the made  a  deal  of  puffing  and  shuffling which  echoes 
magnified alarmingly; but  though every now and again Bilbo  in  fear  stopped and 
listened,  not  a  sound  stirred  below  Near  the  bottom,  as  well  as  he  could  judge, 

####-Bilbo slipped on his ring and went ahead. But he did not need it: the darkness was 
complete,  and  they were  all  invisible,  ring  or  no  ring.  In  fact  so  black was  it  that 
the  hobbit  came  to  the  opening  unexpectedly,  put  his  hand  on  air,  stumbled  for 
ward, and rolled headlong into the hall! 
There he  lay face downwards on  the floor and did no dare  to get up, or hardly 
even  to  breathe.  But  nothing  moved.  There  was  not  a  gleam  of  light-unless,  as 
seemed to him, when at last he slowly raised his head, there was a pale white glint, 
above him and far off in the gloom. But certainly it was not a spark of dragon-fire, 
though the wormstench was heavy in the place, and the taste of vapour was on his 
tongue. 
At length Mr. Baggins could bear it no longer. "Come found you, Smaug, you 
worm!"  he  squeaked  aloud.  "Stop  playing  hide-and-seek!  Give  me  a  light,  and 
then eat me if you can catch me!" 
Faint echoes ran round the unseen hall, but there was no answer. Bilbo got up, 
and found that he did not know in what direction to turn. 
"Now  I  wonder  what  on  earth  Smaug  is  playing  at,"  he  said.  "He  is  not  at 
home  today  (or  tonight, or whatever it is), I do believe. If Oin and Gloin have not 
lost  their  time  tinder-boxes,  perhaps  we  can  make  a  little  light,  and  have  a  look 
round before the luck turns." 
"Light!" he cried. "Can anybody make a light?" 
The  dwarves,  of  course, were  very alarmed when Bilbo fell forward down the 
step with a bump into the hall, and they sat huddled just where he had left them at 
the end the tunnel. 
"Sh!  sh!"  they  hissed,  when  they  heard  his  voice:  and  though  that  helped  the 
hobbit  to  find  out where  they  were, was  some  time  before  he  could  get  anything 
else out of  them. But  in  the end, when Bilbo actually began  to stamp  in  the  floor, 
and  screamed  out  light!'  at  the  top  of  his  thrill  voice,  Thorin  gave  way,  and  Oin 
and Gloin were sent back  to  their bundles  at the top of the tunnel. After a while a 
twinkling  gleam  showed  them  returning,  in  with  a  small  pine-torch  alight  in  his 
hand,  and  Gloin  with  a  bundle  of  others  under  his  arm.  Quickly  Bilbo  trotted  to 
the  door  and  took  the  torch;  but  he  could  not  persuade  the  dwarves  to  light  the 
others  or  to  come  and  join  him  yet.  As  Thorin  carefully  explained,  Mr.  Baggins 
was  still  officially  their  expert  burglar  and  investigator.  If  he  liked  to  risk  a  light, 
that was  his  affair.  They would wait  in  the  tunnel  for  his  report. So  they  sat near 
the door and watched. 
They  saw  the  little  dark  shape  of  the  hobbit  start  across  the  floor  holding  his 
tiny  light aloft. Every now and again, while he was still near enough,  they caught 

####-a  glint  and  a  tinkle  as  he  stumbled  on  some  golden  thing. The  light grew  smaller 
as  he wandered  away  into  the  vast  hall;  then  it  began  to  rise  dancing  into  the  air. 
Bilbo was climbing  the great mound of  treasure. Soon he stood upon  the  top, and 
still  went  on.  Then  they  saw  him  halt  and  stoop  for  a  moment;  but  they  did  not 
know  the  reason.  It  was  the  Arkenstone,  the  Heart  of  the  Mountain.  So  Bilbo 
guessed  from  Thorin's  description;  but  indeed  there  could  not  be  two  such  gems, 
even in so marvellous a hoard, even in all the world. Ever as he climbed, the same 
white gleam had shone before him and drawn his feet towards Slowly it grew to a 
little  globe  of  pallid  light.  Now  as  came  near,  it  was  tinged  with  a  flickering 
sparkle  of man  colours  at  the  surface,  reflected  and  splintered  from  the wavering 
light  of  his  torch.  At  last  he  looked  down  upon  it  and  he  caught  his  breath.  The 
great  jewel  shone before he  feet of  its own  inner  light,  and yet,  cut  and  fashioned 
by  the  dwarves, who  had  dug  it  from  the  heart  of  the mountain  long  ago,  it  took 
all light that fell upon it and-changes it into ten thousand sparks of white radiance 
shot with glints of the rainbow.  
Suddenly  Bilbo's  arm  went  towards  it  drawn  by  it  enchantment.  His  small 
hand  would  not  close  about  it  for  it  was  a  large  and  heavy  gem;  but  he  lifted  it, 
shut his eyes, and put it in his deepest pocket. 
"Now  I  am  a  burglar  indeed!"  thought  he.  "But  I  suppose  I  must  tell  the 
dwarves  about  it-some  time. The  did  say  I  could  pick  and  choose my  own  share; 
and  I  think  I would  choose  this,  if  they  took  all  the  rest!" All  the same he had an 
uncomfortable  feeling  that  the picking and choosing had not  really been meant  to 
include  this marvellous gem, and  that  trouble would yet come of  it. Now he went 
on again. Down the other side of the great mound he climbed, and the spark of his 
torch  vanished  from  the  sight  of  the  watching  dwarves.  But  soon  they  saw  it  far 
away in the distance again. Bilbo was crossing the floor of the hall. 
He  went  on,  until  he  came  to  the  great  doors  at  the  further  side,  and  there  a 
draught  of  air  refreshed him, but  it almost puffed out his  light. He peeped  timidly 
through and caught a glimpse of great passages and of the dim beginnings of wide 
stairs  going  up  into  the  gloom. And  still  there was  no  sight  nor  sound  of  Smaug. 
He was  just  going  to  turn  and  go back, when  a black  shape  swooped  at him  and 
brushed his face. He squeaked and started, stumbled backwards and fell. His torch 
dropped head downwards and went out! 
"Only  a  bat,  I  suppose  and  hope!"  he  said  miserably.  But  now  what  am  I  to 
do? Which is East, South, North West?" 

####-"Thorin! Balin! Oin! Gloin! Fill! Kili!"  he  cried  as  loud  he  could-it seemed a 
thin  little  noise  in  the wide  blackness.  "The  light's  gone  out!  Someone  come  and 
find and help me!" For the moment his courage had failed together.  
Faintly  the  dwarves  heard  his  small  cries,  though  the  only  word  they  could 
catch was 'help!' 
"Now what on earth or under it has happened?" said Thorin. "Certainly not the 
dragon, or he would not go on squeaking." 
They waited a moment or two, and still there were no dragon-noises, no sound 
at  all  in  fact  but  Bilbo's  distant  voice.  "Come,  one  of  you,  get  another  light  or 
two!" Thorin ordered. "It seems we have got to go and help our burglar." 
"It  is  about  our  turn  to  help,"  said  Balin,  "and  I  am  quite  willing  to  go. 
Anyway I expect it is safe for the moment." 
Gloin  lit  several  more  torches,  and  then  they  all  crept  out,  one  by  one,  and 
went  along  the  wall  as  hurriedly  as  they  could.  It  was  not  long  before  they  met 
Bilbo  himself  coming  back  towards  them.  His  wits  had  quickly returned soon as 
he saw the twinkle of their lights. 
"Only  a  bat  and  a  dropped  torch,  nothing  worse!"  he  said  in  answer  to  their 
questions.  Though  they  were  much  relieved,  they  were  inclined  to  be  grumpy  at 
being frightened for nothing; but what they would have said, if he had told them at 
that  moment  about  the  Arkenstone,  I  don't  know.  The  mere  fleeting  glimpses  of 
treasure  which  they  had  caught  as  they  went  along  had  rekindled  all  the  fire  of 
their dwarvish hearts; and when the heart of a dwarf, even the most respectable, is 
wakened  by  gold  and  by  jewels,  he  grows  suddenly  bold,  and  he  may  become 
fierce. 
The  dwarves  indeed  no  longer  needed  any  urging.  All  were  now  eager  to 
explore  the  hall  while  they  had  the  chance,  and  willing  to  believe  that,  for  the 
present,  Smaug  was  away  from  home.  Each  now  gripped  a  lighted  torch;  and  as 
they  gazed,  first  on  one  side  and  then  on  another,  they  forgot  fear  and  even 
caution.  They  spoke  aloud,  and  cried  out  to  one  another,  as  they  lifted  old 
treasures from the mound or from the wall and held them in the light caressing and 
fingering them. Fili and Kili were almost in merry mood, and finding still hanging 
there many  golden  harps  strung with  silver  they  took  them  and  struck  them;  and 
being  magical  (and  also  untouched  by  the  dragon,  who  had  small  interests  in 
music)  they  were  still  in  tune.  The  dark  hall  was  filled  with  a  melody  that  had 
long been silent. But most of the dwarves were more practical; they gathered gems 
and stuffed  their pockets, and  let what  they could  not carry far back through their 
fingers  with  a  sigh.  Thorin  was  not  least  among  these;  but  always  he  searched 

####-from side to side for something which he could not find. It was the Arkenstone but 
he spoke of it yet to no one. 
Now  the  dwarves  took  down  mail  and  weapons  from  the  walls,  and  armed 
themselves. Royal indeed did Thorin look, clad in a coat of gold-plated rings, with 
a silver hafted axe in a belt crusted with scarlet stones. 
"Mr.  Baggins!"  he  cried.  "Here  is  the  first  payment  of  your  reward!  Cast  off 
your old coat and put on this!" 
With  that  he  put  on  Bilbo  a  small  coat  of mail,  wrought  for  some  young  elf-
prince long ago. It was of silver-steel which the elves call mithril, and with it went 
a belt of pearls and crystals. A  light helm of  figured  leather, strengthened beneath 
with hoops of steel, and studded about the bring with white gems, was set upon the 
hobbit's head. 
"I  feel magnificent," he  thought;  "but  I expect  I  look  rather absurd. How  they 
would laugh on the Hill at home Still I wish there was a looking-glass handy!" 
All  the  same Mr. Baggins  kept  his  head more  clear  of  the  bewitchment  of  the 
hoard  than  the dwarves did. Long before  the dwarves were  tired of examining  the 
treasures he became wary of it and sat down on the floor; and he began to wonder 
nervously what the end of it all would be 
"I would give a good many of  these precious goblets,    thought, "for a drink of 
something cheering out of one Beorn's wooden bowls!" 
"Thorin!"  he  cried  aloud.  "What  next? We  are  armed,  but what  good  has  any 
armour ever been before against Smaug the Dreadful? This treasure is not yet won 
back.  We  are  not  looking  for  gold  yet,  but  for  a  way  of  escape;  and  we  have 
tempted luck too long!" 
'"You speak the truth!" answered Thorin, recovering his wits. "Let us go! I will 
guide you. Not  in a  thousand years should  I  forget  the ways of  this palace." Then 
he  hailed  the  others,  and  they  gathered  together,  and  holding  their  torches  above 
their  heads  they  passed  through  the  gaping  doors,  not  without many  a  backward 
glance of longing. 
Their  glittering  mail  they  had  covered  again  with  their  old  cloaks  and  their 
bright helms with their tattered hoods, and one by one they walked behind Thorin, 
a  line  of  little  lights  in  the  darkness  that  halted  often,  listening  in  fear  once more 
for any  rumour of  the dragon's coming. Though all  the old adornments were  long 
mouldered  or  destroyed,  and  though  all  was  befouled  and  blasted  with  the 
comings  and  goings  of  the  monster,  Thorin  knew  every  passage  and  every  turn. 
They  climbed  long  stairs,  and  turned  and  went  down  wide  echoing  ways,  and 
turned again and climbed yet more stairs, and yet more' stairs again. 

####-These were  smooth,  cut  out  of  the  living  rock  broad  and  lair;  and  up,  up,  the 
dwarves went, and  they met no sign of any  living  thing, only furtive shadows that 
fled  from  the  approach  of  their  torches  fluttering  in  the  draughts.  The  steps were 
not made, all the same, for hobbit-legs, and Bilbo was just feeling that he could go 
on no longer, when suddenly the roof sprang high and far beyond the reach of their 
torch-light.  A  white  glimmer  could  be  seen  coming  through  some  opening  far 
above,  and  the  air  smelt  sweeter.  Before  them  light  came  dimly  through  great 
doors, that hung twisted on their hinges and half burnt. 
"This  is  the  great  chamber  of Thror,"  said Thorin; "the hall of  feasting and of 
council. Not far off now is the Front Gate." 
They passed through the ruined chamber. Tables were rotting there; chairs and 
benches were lying there overturned, charred and decaying. Skulls and bones were 
upon  the  floor  among  flagons  and  bowls  and  broken  drinking-horns and dust. As 
they  came  through  yet more  doors  at  the  further  end,  a  sound  of  water  fell  upon 
their ears, and the grey light grew suddenly more full. 
"There is the birth of the Running River," said Thorin. "From here it hastens to 
the Gate. Let us follow it!" 
Out  of  a  dark  opening  in  a  wall  of  rock  there  issued  a  boiling  water,  and  it 
flowed  swirling  in  a  narrow  channel,  carved  and  made  straight  and  deep  by  the 
cunning of ancient hands. Beside it ran a stone-paved road, wide enough for many 
men  abreast.  Swiftly  along  this  they  ran,  and  round  a  wide-sweeping  turn-and 
behold!  before  them  stood  the  broad  light  of  day.  In  front  there  rose  a  tall  arch, 
still  showing  the  fragments  of  old  carven  work  within,  worn  and  splintered  and 
blackened  though  it was. A misty  sun  sent  its  pale  light  between  the  arms  of  the 
Mountain, and beams of gold fell on the pavement at the threshold. 
A whirl of bats frightened from slumber by their smoking torches flurried over 
them;  as  they  sprang  forward  their  feet  slithered  on  stones  rubbed  smooth  and 
slimed  by  the  passing  of  the  dragon.  Now  before  them  the  water  fell  noisily 
outward and foamed down towards the valley. They flung their pale torches to the 
ground,  and  stood  gazing  out  with  dazzled  eyes.  They  were  come  to  the  Front 
Gate, and were looking out upon Dale. 
"Well!"  said  Bilbo,  "I  never  expected  to  be  looking  out  of  this  door.  And  I 
never  expected  to  be  so  pleased  to  see  the  sun  again,  and  to  feel  the wind  on my 
face. But, ow! this wind is cold!" 
It  was.  A  bitter  easterly  breeze  blew  with  a  threat  of  oncoming  winter.  It 
swirled  over  and  round  the  arms  of  the  Mountain  into  the  valley,  and  sighed 
among the rocks. After their long time in the stewing depths of the dragon-haunted 

####-caverns,  they  shivered  in  the  sun.  Suddenly  Bilbo  realized  that  he  was  not  only 
tired but also very hungry indeed. "It seems to be late morning," he said, "and so I 
suppose  it  is more  or  less  breakfast-time  –  if  there  is any breakfast  to have. But  I 
don't  feel  that  Smaug's  front  doorstep  is  the  safest  place  for  a  meal.  Do  let's  go 
somewhere where we can sit quiet for a bit!" 
"Quite  right!"  said  Balin.  "And  I  think  I  know  which  way  we  should  go:  we 
ought to make for the old look-out post at the Southwest corner of the Mountain." 
"How far is that?" asked the hobbit. 
"Five  hours march,  I  should  think.  It will  be  rough  going.  The  road  from  the 
Gate along  the  left edge of  the  stream  seems all broken up. But  look down  there! 
The river loops suddenly east across Dale in front of the ruined town. At that point 
there was once a bridge, leading to steep stairs that climbed up the right bank, and 
so to a road running towards Ravenhill. There is (or was) a path that left the road 
and climbed up to the post. A hard climb, too, even if the old steps are still there." 
"Dear  me!"  grumbled  the  hobbit.  "More  walking  and  more  climbing  without 
breakfast! I wonder how many breakfasts, and other meals, we have missed inside 
that nasty clockless, timeless hole?" 
As  a  matter  of  fact  two  nights  and  the  day  between  had  gone  by  (and  not 
altogether without  food)  since  the dragon  smashed  the magic door, but Bilbo had 
quite  lost  count,  and  it  might  have  been  one  night  or  a  week  of  nights  for  all  he 
could tell. 
"Come, come!" said Thorin  laughing – his spirits had begun to rise again, and 
he  rattled  the  precious  stones  in  his  pockets.  "Don't  call  my  place  a  nasty  hole! 
You wait till it has been cleaned and redecorated!" 
"That won't be till Smaug's dead," said Bilbo glumly. "In the meanwhile where 
is he? I would give a good breakfast to know. I hope he is not up on the Mountain 
looking down at us!" 
 
That idea disturbed the dwarves mightily, and they quickly decided that Bilbo 
and Balin were right. 
"We must move  away  from  here,"  said Don.  "I  feel  as  if his  eyes were on  the 
back of my head." 
"It's  a  cold  lonesome  place,"  said Bombur.  "There may  be  drink,  but  I  see  no 
sign of food. A dragon would always be hungry in such parts." 
"Come on! Come on!" cried the others. "Let us follow Balm's path!" 
Under the rocky wall to the right there was no path, so on they trudged among 
the  stones  on  the  left  side  of  the  river,  and  the  emptiness  and  desolation  soon 

####-sobered  even Thorin  again. The  bridge  that Balin  had  spoken  of  they  found  long 
fallen, and most of its stones were now only boulders in the shallow noisy stream; 
but they forded the water without much difficulty, and found the ancient steps, and 
climbed  the  high  bank.  After  going  a  short  way  they  struck  the  old  road,  and 
before  long  came  to  a  deep  dell sheltered among  the rocks;  there  they rested for a 
while and had such a breakfast as they could, chiefly cram and water. (If you want 
to  know  what  cram  is,  I  can  only  say  that  I  don't  know  the  recipe;  but  it  is 
biscuitish,  keeps  good  indefinitely,  is  supposed  to  be  sustaining,  and  is  certainly 
not  entertaining,  being  in  fact  very  uninteresting  except  as  a  chewing  exercise.  It 
was made by the Lake-men for long journeys). 
After  that  they went on again; and now  the road struck westwards and  left  the 
river, and the great shoulder of the south-pointing mountain-spur drew ever nearer. 
At  length  they  reached  the  hill  path.  It  scrambled  steeply  up,  and  they  plodded 
slowly one behind the other, till at last in the late afternoon they came to the top of 
the ridge and saw the wintry sun going downwards to the West. 
Here  they  found  a  flat  place  without  a  wall  on  three  sides,  but  backed  to  the 
North by a  rocky  face  in which  there was an opening  like a door. From  that door 
there was a wide view East and South and West. 
"Here,"  said  Balin,  "in  the  old  days  we  used  always  to  keep  watchmen,  and 
that  door  behind  leads  into  a  rock-hewn  chamber  that  was  made  here  as  a 
guardroom.  There  were  several  places  like  it  round  the  Mountain.  But  there 
seemed small need for watching in the days of our prosperity, and the guards were 
made  over  comfortable,  perhaps  – otherwise we might have had  longer warnings 
of  the coming of  the dragon, and  things might have been different. Still,  "here we 
can now lie hid and sheltered for a while, and can see much without being seen." 
"Not much use, if we have been seen coming here," said Dori, who was always 
looking  up  towards  the Mountain's  peak,  as  if  he  expected  to  see Smaug  perched 
there like a bird on a steeple. 
"We must take our chance of that," said Thorin. "We can go no further to-day." 
"Hear, hear!" cried Bilbo, and flung himself on the ground. 
In the rock-chamber there would have been room for a hundred, and there was 
a  small  chamber  further  in,  more  removed  from  the  cold  outside.  It  was  quite 
deserted; not even wild animals seemed  to have used  it  in all  the days of Smaug's 
dominion. There they laid their burdens; and some threw themselves down at once 
and slept, but the others sat near the outer door and discussed their plans. 
In  all  their  talk  they  came  perpetually  back  to  one  thing: where was  Smaug? 
They  looked West  and  there was  nothing,  and  East  there was  nothing,  and  in  the 

####-South  there  was  no  sign  of  the  dragon,  but  there  was  a  gathering  of  very  many 
birds. At  that  they gazed and wondered; but they were no nearer understanding it, 
when the first cold stars came out. 

####-<h4>Chapter 14</h4> <br> 

Fire and Water 

 
Now  if you wish,  like  the dwarves,  to hear news of Smaug, you must go back 
again  to  the  evening  when  he  smashed  the  door  and  flew  off  in  rage,  two  days 
before. 
The  men  of  the  lake-town  Esgaroth  were  mostly  indoors,  for  the  breeze  was 
from the black East and chill, but a few were walking on the quays, and watching, 
as they were fond of doing, the stars shine out from the smooth patches of the lake 
as  they  opened  in  the  sky.  From  their  town  the  Lonely  Mountain  was  mostly 
screened  by  the  low  hills  at  the  far  end  of  the  lake,  through  a  gap  in  which  the 
Running  River  came  down  from  the North. Only  its  high  peak  could  they  see  in 
clear weather, and they looked seldom at it, for it was ominous and dreary even in 
the light of morning. Now it was lost and gone, blotted in the dark. 
Suddenly it flickered back to view; a brief glow touched it and faded. 
"Look!"  said  one.  "The  lights  again!  Last  night  the watchmen  saw  them start 
and fade from midnight until dawn. Something is happening up there." 
"Perhaps  the  King  under  the  Mountain  is  forging  gold,"  said  another.  "It  is 
long since he went north. It is time the songs began to prove themselves again." 
"Which  king?"  said  another  with  a  grim  voice.  "As  like  as  not  it  is  the 
marauding  fire  of  the  Dragon,  the  only  king  under  the  Mountain  we  have  ever 
known." 
"You  are  always  foreboding  gloomy  things!"  said  the  others.  "Anything  from 
floods to poisoned fish. Think of something cheerful!" 
Then  suddenly  a  great  light  appeared  in  the  low  place  in  the  hills  and  the 
northern end of the lake turned golden. 
"The King  beneath  the Mountain!"  they  shouted.  "His wealth  is  like  the  Sun, 
his silver like a fountain, his rivers golden run! The  river is running gold from the 
Mountain!"  they  cried,  and  everywhere  windows  were  opening  and  feet  were 
hurrying. 
There was once more a  tremendous excitement and enthusiasm. But  the grim-
voiced fellow ran hotfoot to the Master. "The dragon is coming or I am a fool!" he 
cried. "Cut the bridges! To arms! To arms!" 
Then  warning  trumpets  were  suddenly  sounded,  and  echoed  along  the  rocky 
shores.  The  cheering  stopped  and  the  joy was  turned  to  dread.  So  it was  that  the 
dragon  did  not  find  them  quite  unprepared.  Before  long,  so  great was  his  speed, 

####-they  could  see  him  as  a  spark  of  fire  rushing  towards  them  and  growing  ever 
huger  and more  bright,  and  not  the most  foolish  doubted  that  the  prophecies  had 
gone  rather wrong. Still  they had a  little  time. Every vessel  in  the town was filled 
with  water,  every  warrior  was  armed,  every  arrow  and  dart  was  ready,  and  the 
bridge  to  the  land  was  thrown  down  and  destroyed,  before  the  roar  of  Smaug's 
terrible  approach  grew  loud,  and  the  lake  rippled  red  as  fire  beneath  the  awful 
beating of his wings. 
Amid  shrieks  and  wailing  and  the  shouts  of  men  he  came  over  them,  swept 
towards the bridges and was foiled! The bridge was gone, and his enemies were on 
an  island  in  deep  water-too  deep  and  dark  and  cool  for  his  liking.  If  he  plunged 
into  it, a vapour and a steam would arise enough  to cover all  the  land with a mist 
for days; but  the  lake was mightier  than he,  it would quench him before he could 
pass through. 
Roaring  he  swept  back  over  the  town.  A  hail  of  dark  arrows  leaped  up  and 
snapped and  rattled on his  scales and  jewels, and  their  shafts  fell back kindled by 
his  breath  burning  and  hissing  into  the  lake.  No  fireworks  you  ever  imagined 
equalled the sights that night. At the twanging of the bows and the shrilling of the 
trumpets  the  dragon's wrath blazed to its height, till he was blind and mad with it. 
No  one  had  dared  to  give  battle  to  him  for  many  an  age;  nor  would  they  have 
dared  now,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  grim-voiced man  (Bard was his name), who 
ran to and fro cheering on the archers and urging the Master to order them to fight 
to the last arrow.  
Fire leaped from the dragon's jaws. He circled for a while high in the air above 
them lighting all the lake; the trees by the shores shone like copper and like blood 
with  leaping shadows of dense black at their feet. Then down he swooped straight 
through  the  arrow-storm,  reckless  in  his  rage,  taking  no  heed  to  turn  his  scaly 
sides towards his foes, seeking only to set their town ablaze. 
Fire  leaped  from  thatched  roofs  and  wooden  beam-ends  as  he  hurtled  down 
and  past  and  round  again,  though  all  had  been  drenched  with  water  before  he 
came. Once more water was flung by a hundred hands wherever a spark appeared. 
Back  swirled  the  dragon.  A  sweep  of  his  tail  and  the  roof  of  the  Great  House 
crumbled  and  smashed  down.  Flames  unquenchable  sprang  high  into  the  night. 
Another  swoop and another, and another house and  then another  sprang afire and 
fell;  and  still  no  arrow  hindered  Smaug  or  hurt  him  more  than  a  fly  from  the 
marshes.  Already  men  were  jumping  into  the  water  on  every  side.  Women  and 
children  were  being  huddled  into  laden  boats  in  the  market-pool. Weapons were 
flung down. There was mourning and weeping, where but a little time ago the old 

####-songs  of mirth  to  come  had  been  sung  about  the  dwarves. Now men cursed  their 
names.  The  Master  himself  was  turning  to  his  great  gilded  boat,  hoping  to  row 
away  in  the confusion and save himself. Soon all  the  town would be deserted and 
burned down to the surface of the lake. That was the dragon's hope. They could all 
get  into  boats  for  all  he  cared.  There  he  could  have  fine  sport  hunting  them,  or 
they could stop till they starved. Let them try to get to land and he would be ready. 
Soon  he  would  set  all  the  shoreland  woods  ablaze  and  wither  every  field  and 
pasture.  Just  now  he  was  enjoying  the  sport  of  town-baiting  more  than  he  had 
enjoyed anything for years. But there was still a company of archers that held their 
ground among the burning houses. Their captain was Bard, grim-voiced and grim-
faced,  whose  friends  had  accused  him  of  prophesying  floods  and  poisoned  fish, 
though  they  knew  his  worth  and  courage.  He  was  a  descendant  in  long  line  of 
Girion, Lord of Dale, whose wife and child had escaped down  the Running River 
from  the  ruin  long  ago. Now  he  shot with  a  great yew bow,  till all his arrows but 
one were spent. The flames were near him. His companions were leaving him. He 
bent his bow for  the  last  time. Suddenly out of  the dark something fluttered  to his 
shoulder.  He  started-but  it was  only  an  old  thrush. Unafraid  it perched by his ear 
and it brought him news. Marvelling he found he could understand its tongue, for 
he was of the race of Dale. 
"Wait! Wait!"  it  said  to  him.  "The moon  is  rising.  Look  for  the  hollow  of  the 
left  breast  as  he  flies  and  turns  above  you!" And while Bard paused  in wonder  it 
told  him  of  tidings  up  in  the  Mountain  and  of  all  that  it  had  heard.  Then  Bard 
drew his bow-string to his ear. The dragon was circling back, flying low, and as he 
came the moon rose above the eastern shore and silvered his great wings. 
"Arrow!"  said  the  bowman.  "Black  arrow!  I  have  saved  you  to  the  last.  You 
have never  failed me and always  I have  recovered you.  I had you  from my  father 
and  he  from  of  old.  If  ever  you  came  from  the  forges  of  the  true  king  under  the 
Mountain, go now and speed well!" 
The  dragon  swooped  once more  lower  than  ever,  and  as  he  turned  and  dived 
down his belly glittered white with  sparkling  fires of gems  in  the moon-but not in 
one place. The great bow  twanged. The black arrow sped straight from  the string, 
straight  for  the  hollow  by  the  left  breast  where  the  foreleg  was  flung  wide.  In  it 
smote and vanished, barb, shaft and  feather, so  fierce was  its  flight. With a shriek 
that  deafened men,  felled  trees  and  split  stone,  Smaug  shot  spouting  into  the  air, 
turned over and crashed down from on high in ruin. 
Full on  the  town he  fell. His  last  throes splintered  it  to sparks and gledes. The 
lake roared  in. A vast steam  leaped up, white  in  the sudden dark under  the moon. 

####-There  was  a  hiss,  a  gushing  whirl,  and  then  silence.  And  that  was  the  end  of 
Smaug  and  Esgaroth,  but  not  of  Bard.  The waxing moon  rose  higher  and  higher 
and the wind grew loud and cold. It twisted the white fog into bending pillars and 
hurrying  clouds  and  drove  it  off  to  the West  to  scatter  in  tattered  shreds over  the 
marshes before Mirkwood. Then the many boats could be seen dotted dark on the 
surface of  the  lake, and down  the wind came  the voices of  the people of Esgaroth 
lamenting  their  lost  town and goods and  ruined houses. But  they had  really much 
to be  thankful  for, had  they  thought of  it,  though  it  could hardly be  expected  that 
they should just then: three quarters of the people of the town had at least escaped 
alive;  their  woods  and  fields  and  pastures  and  cattle  and  most  of  their  boats 
remained undamaged; and the dragon was dead. What that meant they had not yet 
realized. 
They  gathered  in  mournful  crowds  upon  the  western  shores,  shivering  in  the 
cold wind,  and  their  first  complaints  and  anger were  against  the Master, who had 
left the town so soon, while some were still willing to defend it. 
"He  may  have  a  good  head  for  business-especially  his  own  business,"  some 
murmured, "but he  is no good when anything serious happens!" And  they praised 
the courage of Bard and his last mighty shot. "If only he had not been killed," they 
all  said,  "we  would  make  him  a  king.  Bard  the  Dragon-shooter  of  the  line  of 
Girion! Alas that he is lost!" 
And  in  the very midst of  their  talk, a  tall figure stepped from  the shadows. He 
was drenched with water, his black hair hung wet over his face and shoulders, and 
a fierce light was in his eyes. 
"Bard  is  not  lost!"  he  cried.  "He  dived  from  Esgaroth,  when  the  enemy  was 
slain. I am Bard, of the line of Girion; I am the slayer of the dragon!" 
"King  Bard!  King  Bard!"  they  shouted;  but  the Master  ground  his  chattering 
teeth. 
"Girion was lord of Dale, not king of Esgaroth," he said. "In the Lake-town we 
have  always  elected masters  from  among  the old  and wise,  and have not  endured 
the rule of mere fighting men. Let 'King Bard' go back to his own kingdom-Dale is 
now freed by his valour, and nothing binders his return. And any that wish can go 
with  him,  if  they  prefer  the  cold  shores  under  the  shadow  of  the Mountain  to  the 
green shores of the lake. The wise will stay here and hope to rebuild our town, and 
enjoy again in time its peace and riches." 
"We will have King Bard!" the people near at hand shouted in reply. "We have 
had  enough  of  the  old men  and  the money-counters!" And people further off took 

####-up the cry: "Up the Bowman, and down with Moneybags," till the clamour echoed 
along the shore. 
"I  am  the  last man  to  undervalue  Bard  the  Bowman,"  said  the Master warily 
(for Bard now stood close beside him). "He has tonight earned an eminent place in 
the  roll  of  the  benefactors  of  our  town;  and  he  is  worthy  of  many  imperishable 
songs.  But,  why  O  People?"-and  here  the Master  rose  to  his  feet  and  spoke  very 
loud and clear – "why do I get all your blame? For what fault am I to be deposed? 
Who  aroused  the  dragon  from  his  slumber,  I might  ask? Who obtained of us rich 
gifts  and  ample  help,  and  led  us  to  believe  that  old  songs  could  come  true? Who 
played  on  our  soft  hearts  and  our  pleasant  fancies? What  sort  of  gold  have  they 
sent  down  the  river  to  reward  us?  Dragon-fire  and  ruin!  From  whom  should we 
claim the recompense of our damage, and aid for our widows and orphans?" 
As  you  see,  the Master  had  not  got  his  position  for  nothing.  The  result  of  his 
words  was  that  for  the  moment  the  people  quite  forgot  their  idea  of  a  new  king, 
and  turned  their angry  thoughts  towards Thorin and his company. Wild and bitter 
words were shouted from many sides; and some of those who had before sung the 
old  songs  loudest,  were  now  heard  as  loudly  crying  that  the  dwarves  had  stirred 
the dragon up against them deliberately! 
"Fools!" said Bard. "Why waste words and wrath on those unhappy creatures? 
Doubtless  they  perished  first  in  fire,  before  Smaug  came  to  us."  Then  even  as  he 
was  speaking,  the  thought  came  into  his  heart  of  the  fabled  treasure  of  the 
Mountain lying without guard or owner, and he fell suddenly silent. He thought of 
the Master's  words,  and  of  Dale  rebuilt,  and  filled  with  golden  bells,  if  he  could 
but find the men. 
At  length  he  spoke  again:  "This  is  no  time  for  angry  words.  Master,  or  for 
considering weighty plans of change. There is work to do. I serve you still-though 
after  a  while  I  may  think  again  of  your  words  and  go  North  with  any  that  will 
follow me." 
Then  he  strode  off  to  help  in  the  ordering  of  the  camps  and  in  the  care  of  the 
sick  and  the  wounded.  But  the  Master  scowled  at  his  back  as  he  went,  and 
remained  sitting  on  the  ground. He  thought much  but  said  little,  unless  it was  to 
call  loudly  for  men  to  bring  him  fire  and  food.  Now  everywhere  Bard  went  he 
found  talk  running  like  fire  among  the  people  concerning  the  vast  treasure  that 
was  now  unguarded.  Men  spoke  of  the  recompense  for  all  their  harm  that  they 
would soon get from it, and wealth over and to spare with which to buy rich things 
from  the  South;  and  it  cheered  them  greatly  in  their  plight.  That was as well,  for 
the night was bitter and miserable. Shelters could be contrived for few (the Master 

####-had one)  and  there was  little  food  (even  the Master went  short). Many  took  ill of 
wet  and  cold  and  sorrow  that  night,  and  afterwards  died,  who  had  escaped 
uninjured from the ruin of the town; and in the days that followed there was much 
sickness and great hunger.  
Meanwhile  Bard  took  the  lead,  and  ordered  things  as  he  wished,  though 
always  in  the  Master's  name,  and  he  had  a  hard  task  to  govern  the  people  and 
direct  the  preparations  for  their  protection  and  housing.  Probably  most  of  them 
would  have  perished  in  the winter  that  now  hurried  after  autumn,  if  help  had  not 
been to hand. But help came swiftly; for Bard at once had speedy messengers sent 
up  the  river  to  the Forest  to ask  the aid of  the King of  the Elves of  the Wood, and 
these messengers had found a host already on the move, although it was then only 
the third day after the fall of Smaug. 
The Elvenking had received news from his own messengers and from the birds 
that  loved  his  folk,  and  already  knew  much  of  what  had  happened.  Very  great 
indeed was  the commotion among all  things with wings  that dwelt on  the borders 
of  the Desolation of  the Dragon. The  air was  filled with  circling  flocks,  and  their 
swift-flying messengers  flew  here  and  there  across  the  sky.  Above  the  borders  of 
the  Forest  there  was  whistling,  crying  and  piping.  Far  over  Mirkwood  tidings 
spread: "Smaug is dead!" Leaves rustled and startled ears were lifted. Even before 
the  Elvenking  rode  forth  the  news  had  passed west  right  to  the  pinewoods  of  the 
Misty Mountains; Beorn had heard it in his wooden house, and the goblins were at 
council in their caves. 
"That  will  be  the  last  we  shall  hear  of  Thorin  Oakenshield,  I  fear,"  said  the 
king. "He would have done better to have remained my guest. It is an ill wind, all 
the  same,"  he  added,  "that  blows  no  one  any  good."  For  he  too  had  not  forgotten 
the legend of the wealth of Thror. So it was that Bard's messengers found him now 
marching  with  many  spearmen  and  bowmen;  and  crows  were  gathered  thick, 
above him,  for  they  thought  that war was awakening again,  such as had not been 
in  those parts  for a  long age. But  the king, when he  received  the prayers of Bard, 
had  pity,  for  he  was  the  lord  of  a  good  and  kindly  people;  so  turning  his march, 
which  had  at  first  been  direct  towards  the  Mountain,  he  hastened  now  down  the 
river  to  the  Long  Lake.  He  had  not  boats  or  rafts  enough  for  his  host,  and  they 
were  forced  to  go  the  slower way  by  foot;  but  great  store  of  goods he sent ahead 
by water. Still elves are light–footed, and though they were not in these days much 
used  to  the  marches  and  the  treacherous  lands  between  the  Forest  and  the  Lake, 
their going was swift. Only five days after the death of the dragon they came upon 
the  shores and  looked on  the  ruins of  the  town. Their welcome was good, as may 

####-be expected, and the men and their Master were ready to make any bargain for the 
future in return for the Elvenking's aid. 
Their plans were soon made. With the women and the children, the old and the 
unfit,  the  Master  remained  behind;  and  with  him  were  some  men  of  crafts  and 
many  skilled  elves;  and  they  busied  themselves  felling  trees,  and  collecting  the 
timber  sent  down  from  the  Forest.  Then  they  set  about  raising  many  huts  by  the 
shore  against  the  oncoming  winter;  and  also  under  the  Master's  direction  they 
began  the planning of a new  town, designed more fair and  large even  than before, 
but not  in  the  same place. They  removed northward higher up  the  shore;  for  ever 
after  they  had  a  dread  of  the  water  where  the  dragon  lay.  He  would  never  again 
return to his golden bed, but was stretched cold as stone, twisted upon the floor of 
the  shallows.  There  for  ages  his  huge  bones  could  be  seen  in  calm weather  amid 
the  ruined  piles  of  the old  town. But  few dared  to cross  the cursed spot, and none 
dared  to dive  into  the shivering water or recover  the precious stones  that fell from 
his rotting carcass. 
But  all  the men  of  arms  who  were  still  able,  and  the most  of  the  Elvenking's 
array,  got  ready  to march  north  to  the Mountain.  It  was  thus  that  in  eleven  days 
from the ruin of the town the head of their host passed the rock-gates at the end of 
the lake and came into the desolate lands. 

####-<h4>Chapter 15</h4> <br> 

The Gathering of the Clouds 

 
Now  we  will  return  to  Bilbo  and  the  dwarves.  All  night  one  of  them  had 
watched,  but when morning  came  they  had  not  heard  or  seen  any  sign  of  danger. 
But ever more thickly the birds were gathering. Their companies came flying from 
the  South;  and  the  crows  that  still  lived  about  the Mountain  were  wheeling  and 
crying unceasingly above. 
"Something  strange  is  happening,"  said  Thorin.  "The  time  has  gone  for  the 
autumn  wanderings;  and  these  are  birds  that  dwell  always  in  the  land;  there  are 
starlings  and  flocks  of  finches;  and  far  off  there  are  many  carrion  birds  as  if  a 
battle were afoot!" 
Suddenly Bilbo pointed: "There  is  that old  thrush again!" he cried. "He seems 
to have escaped, when Smaug  smashed  the mountain-side, but I don't suppose the 
snails have!" 
Sure  enough  the  old  thrush was  there,  and  as  Bilbo  pointed,  he  flew  towards 
them  and  perched  on  a  stone  near  by. Then  he  fluttered  his wings  and  sang;  then 
he  cocked  his  head  on  one  side,  as  if  to  listen;  and  again  he  sang,  and  again  he 
listened. 
"I  believe  he  is  trying  to  tell  us  something,"  said  Balin;  "but  I  cannot  follow 
the  speech  of  such  birds,  it  is  very  quick  and  difficult.  Can  you  make  it  out 
Baggins?" 
"Not very well," said Bilbo (as a matter of fact, he could make nothing of it at 
all); "but the old fellow seems .very excited." 
"I only wish he was a raven!" said Balin. 
"I  thought  you  did  not  like  them!  You  seemed  very  shy  of  them,  when  we 
came this way before." 
"Those  were  crows!  And  nasty  suspicious-looking  creatures  at  that,  and  rude 
as  well.  You  must  have  heard  the  ugly  names  they were  calling  after  us. But  the 
ravens  are  different.  There  used  to  be  great  friendship  between  them  and  the 
people  of  Thror;  and  they  often  brought  us  secret  news,  and were  rewarded with 
such bright things as they coveted to hide in their dwellings. 
"They  live many  a  year,  and  their memories  are  long,  and  they  hand  on  their 
wisdom to their children. I knew many among the ravens of the rocks when I was 
a  dwarf-  lad.  This  very  height  was  once  named  Ravenhill,  because  there  was  a 

####-wise  and  famous  pair,  old  Care  and  his  wife,  that  lived  here  above  the  guard-
chamber. But I don't suppose that any of that ancient breed linger here now." 
No  sooner  had  he  finished  speaking  than  the  old  thrush  gave  a  loud  call,  and 
immediately flew away.  
"We may not understand him, but that old bird understands us, I am sure," said 
Balin. "Keep watch now, and see what happens!" 
Before  long  there  was  a  fluttering  of  wings,  and  back  came  the  thrush;  and 
with him came a most decrepit old bird. He was getting blind, he could hardly fly, 
and  the  top of his head was bald. He was an aged raven of great size. He alighted 
stiffly  on  the  ground  before  them,  slowly  flapped  his wings,  and  bobbed  towards 
Thorin. 
"O  Thorin  son  of  Thrain,  and  Balin  son  of  Fundin,"  he  croaked  (and  Bilbo 
could  understand  what  he  said,  for  he  used  ordinary  language  and  not  bird-
speech).  "I  am  Róac  son  of  Carc.  Carc  is  dead,  but  he  was  well  known  to  you 
once. It is a hundred years and three and fifty since I came out of the egg, but I do 
not  forget what my  father  told me. Now  I  am  the  chief  of  the  great  ravens  of  the 
Mountain. We are few, but we remember still the king that was of old. Most of my 
people are abroad, for there are great tidings in the South – some are tidings of joy 
to you, and some you will not think so good. 
"Behold! the birds are gathering back again to the Mountain and to Dale from 
South and East and West, for word has gone out that Smaug is dead!" 
"Dead!  Dead?"  shouted  the  dwarves.  "Dead!  Then  we  have  been  in  needless 
fear-and the treasure is ours!" 
They all sprang up and began to caper about for joy.  
"Yes,  dead,"  said Róac. "The  thrush, may his feathers never fall, saw him die, 
and  we may  trust  his  words.  He  saw  him  fall  in  battle  with  the men  of  Esgaroth 
the third night back from now at the rising of the moon." 
It was some time before Thorin could bring the dwarves to be silent and listen 
to  the  raven's  news. At  length when  he  had  told  all  the  tale  of  the  battle  he went 
on: 
"So  much  for  joy,  Thorin  Oakenshield.  You  may  go  back  to  your  halls  in 
safety;  all  the  treasure  is  yours-for  the  moment.  But  many  are  gathering  hither 
beside  the  birds.  The  news  of  the  death  of  the  guardian  has  already  gone  far  and 
wide, and the legend of the wealth of Thror has not lost in the telling during many 
years; many are eager for a share of the spoil. Already a host of the elves is on the 
way,  and  carrion birds  are with  them hoping  for battle  and  slaughter. By  the  lake 
men murmur  that  their sorrows are due  to  the dwarves; for  they are homeless and 

####-many  have  died,  and  Smaug  has  destroyed  their  town.  They  too  think  to  find 
amends from your treasure, whether you are alive or dead. 
"Your  own wisdom must  decide  your  course,  but  thirteen  is  small  remnant  of 
the great folk of Durin that once dwelt here, and now are scattered far. If you will 
listen to my counsel, you will not trust the Master of the Lake-men, but rather him 
that  shot  the  dragon  with  his  bow.  Bard  is  he,  of  the  race  of  Dale,  of  the  line  of 
Girion; he is a grim man but true. We would see peace once more among dwarves 
and  men  and  elves  after  the  long  desolation;  but  it  may  cost  you  dear  in  gold.  I 
have spoken." 
Then Thorin burst forth in anger: "Our thanks, Róac Carc's son. You and your 
people shall not be forgotten. But none of our gold shall thieves take or the violent 
carry  off  while  we  are  alive.  If  you  would  earn  our  thanks  still  more,  bring  us 
news of any that draw near. Also I would beg of you, if any of you are still young 
and strong of wing, that you would send messengers to our kin in the mountains of 
the  North,  both  west  from  here  and  east,  and  tell  them  of  our  plight.  But  go 
specially to my cousin Dain in the Iron Hills, for he has many people well-armed, 
and dwells nearest to this place. Bid him hasten!" 
"I  will  not  say  if  this  counsel  be  good  or  bad,"  croaked  Róac;  "but  I will  do 
what can be done." Then off he slowly flew.  
"Back now to the Mountain!" cried Thorin. "We have little time to lose." 
"And  little  food  to  use!"  cried  Bilbo,  always  practical  on  such  points.  In  any 
case  he  felt  that  the  adventure was, properly speaking, over  .with  the death of  the 
dragon-in  which  he  was  much  mistaken-and  he  would  have  given  most  of  his 
share of the profits for the peaceful winding up of these affairs. 
"Back  to  the  Mountain!"  cried  the  dwarves  as  if  they  had  not  heard  him;  so 
back he had  to go with  them. As you have heard  some of  the  events  already, you 
will  see  that  the  dwarves  still  had  some  days  before  them.  They  explored  the 
caverns  once  more,  and  found,  as  they  expected,  that  only  the  Front  Gate 
remained  open;  all  the  other  gates  (except,  of  course,  the  small  secret  door)  had 
long  ago  been  broken  and  blocked  by  Smaug,  and  no  sign  of  them  remained.  So 
now  they  began  to  labour  hard  in  fortifying  the  main  entrance,  and  in  remaking 
the  road  that  led  from  it.  Tools  were  to  be  found  in  plenty  that  the  miners  and 
quarriers  and  builders  of  old  had  used;  and  at  such  work  the  dwarves  were  still 
very skilled. 
As  they  worked  the  ravens  brought  them  constant  tidings.  In  this  way  they 
learned  that  the  Elvenking  had  turned  aside  to  the  Lake,  and  they  still  had  a 
breathing  space. Better  still,  they heard  that  three of  their ponies had escaped and 

####-were wandering wild far down the banks of the Running River, not far from where 
the  rest of  their  stores had been  left. So while  the others went on with  their work, 
Fili  and  Kili  were  sent,  guided  by  a  raven,  to  find  the  ponies  and  bring  back  all 
they could. 
They were  four  days  gone,  and  by  that  time  they  knew  that  the  joined  armies 
of  the  Lake-men  and  the  Elves  were  hurrying  towards  the  Mountain.  But  now 
their hopes were higher; for they had food for some weeks with care-chiefly cram, 
of course, and they were very tired of it; but cram is much better than nothing-and 
already the gate was blocked with a wall of squared stones laid dry, but very thick 
and  high  across  the  opening.  There  were  holes  in  the  wall  through  which  they 
could  see  (or  shoot)  but  no  entrance.  They  climbed  in  or  out  with  ladders,  and 
hauled stuff up with ropes. For the issuing of the stream they had contrived a small 
low arch under the new wall; but near the entrance they had so altered the narrow 
bed  that  a wide pool  stretched  from  the mountain-wall to the head of the fall over 
which  the  stream  went  towards  Dale.  Approach  to  the  Gate  was  now  only 
possible, without  swimming,  along  a narrow  ledge of  the  cliff,  to  the  right  as one 
looked  outwards  from  the wall.  The  ponies  they  had  brought  only  to  the  head  of 
the  steps  above  the  old  bridge,  and  unloading  them  there  had  bidden  them  return 
to their masters and sent them back riderless to the South. 
There  came  a  night  when  suddenly  there  were  many  lights  as  of  fires  and 
torches away south in Dale before them. 
"They  have  come!"  called  Balin.  "And  their  camp  is  very  great.  They  must 
have come into the valley under the cover of dusk along both banks of the river." 
That night the dwarves slept little. The morning was still pale when they saw a 
company approaching. From behind  their wall  they watched  them come up  to  the 
valley's head and climb slowly up. Before long they could see that both men of the 
lake  armed  as  if  for  war  and  elvish  bowmen  were  among  them.  At  length  the 
foremost  of  these  climbed  the  tumbled  rocks  and  appeared  at  the  top  of  the  falls; 
and very great was their surprise to see the pool before them and the Gate blocked 
with a wall of new-hewn stone. 
As they stood pointing and speaking to one another Thorin hailed them: "Who 
are  you,"  he  called  in  a  very  loud  voice,  "that  come  as  if  in  war  to  the  gates  of 
Thorin son of Thrain, King under the Mountain, and what do you desire?" 
But  they  answered  nothing.  Some  turned  swiftly  back,  and  the  others  after 
gazing  for  a while  at  the Gate  and  its  defences  soon  followed  them. That  day  the 
camp was moved  and was  brought  right  between  the  arms  of  the Mountain.  The 
rocks echoed then with voices and with song, as they had not done for many a day. 

####-There was  the  sound,  too,  of  elven-harps and of sweet music; and as  it echoed up 
towards  them  it  seemed  that  the  chill  of  the  air  was  warmed,  and  they  caught 
faintly the fragrance of woodland flowers blossoming in spring. 
Then Bilbo longed to escape from the dark fortress and to go down and join in 
the mirth  and  feasting  by  the  fires.  Some  of  the  younger  dwarves were moved  in 
their  hearts,  too,  and  they  muttered  that  they  wished  things  had  fallen  out 
otherwise and that they might welcome such folk as friends; but Thorin scowled. 
Then  the  dwarves  themselves  brought  forth  harps  and  instruments  regained 
from  the  hoard,  and  made  music  to  soften  his  mood;  but  their  song  was  not  as 
elvish song, and was much like the song they had sung long before in Bilbo's little 
hobbit-hole. 
 

Under the Mountain dark and tall 
The King has come unto his hall! 
His foe is dead, the Worm of Dread, 
And ever so his foes shall fall. 
 
The sword is sharp, the spear is long, 
The arrow swift, the Gate is strong; 
The heart is bold that looks on gold; 
The dwarves no more shall suffer wrong. 
 
The dwarves of yore made mighty spells, 
While hammers fell like ringing bells 
In places deep, where dark things sleep, 
In hollow halls beneath the fells. 
 
On silver necklaces they strung 
The light of stars, on crowns they hung 
The dragon-fire, from twisted wire  
The melody of harps they wrung. 
 
The mountain throne once more is freed! 
O! wandering folk, the summons heed! 
Come haste! Come haste! across the waste! 
The king of friend and kin has need. 
 
Now call we over mountains cold, 
'Come hack unto the caverns old'! 
Here at the Gates the king awaits, 

####-His hands are rich with gems and gold. 
 
The king is come unto his hall 
Under the Mountain dark and tall. 
The Worm of Dread is slain and dead, 
And ever so our foes shall fall! 

 
This song appeared to please Thorin, and he smiled again and grew merry; and 
he began reckoning the distance to the Iron Hills and how long it would be before 
Dain  could  reach  the  Lonely Mountain,  if  he  had  set  out  as  soon  as  the message 
reached  him.  But  Bilbo's  heart  fell,  both  at  the  song  and  the  talk:  they  sounded 
much  too  warlike.  The  next  morning  early  a  company  of  spearmen  was  seen 
crossing  the  river,  and  marching  up  the  valley.  They  bore  with  them  the  green 
banner of the Elvenking and the blue banner of the Lake, and they advanced until 
they stood right before the wall at the Gate. 
Again Thorin hailed  them  in a  loud voice: "Who are you  that come armed for 
war to the gates of Thorin son of Thrain, King under the Mountain?" This time he 
was answered. 
A  tall  man  stood  forward,  dark  of  hair  and  grim  of  face,  and  he  cried:  "Hail 
Thorin! Why do you fence yourself like a robber in his hold? We are not yet foes, 
and  we  rejoice  that  you  are  alive  beyond  our  hope.  We  came  expecting  to  find 
none  living  here;  yet  now  that  we  are  met  there  is  matter  for  a  parley  and  a 
council." 
"Who are you, and of what would you parley?" 
"I am Bard, and by my hand was the dragon slain and your treasure delivered. 
Is that not a matter that concerns you? Moreover I am by right descent the heir of 
Girion of Dale,  and  in your hoard  is mingled much of  the wealth of his halls  and 
town,  which  of  old  Smaug  stole.  Is  not  that  a  matter  of  which  we  may  speak? 
Further  in  his  last  battle  Smaug  destroyed  the  dwellings  of  the men  of  Esgaroth, 
and  I  am  yet  the  servant  of  their Master.  I would  speak  for  him  and  ask whether 
you  have  no  thought  for  the  sorrow  and misery  of  his  people.  They  aided  you  in 
your  distress,  and  in  recompense  you  have  thus  far  brought  ruin  only,  though 
doubtless undesigned." 
Now  these were  fair words and  true,  if proudly and grimly  spoken; and Bilbo 
thought  that Thorin would at once admit what  justice was  in  them. He did not, of 
course,  expect  that  any one would remember that it was he who discovered all by 
himself the dragon's weak spot; and that was just as well, for no one ever did. But 
also he did not reckon with the power that gold has upon which a dragon has long 

####-brooded,  nor with  dwarvish  hearts. Long hours  in  the past days Thorin had  spent 
in the treasury, and the lust of it was heavy on him. Though he had hunted chiefly 
for  the Arkenstone, yet he had  an  eye  for many  another wonderful  thing  that was 
lying there, about which were wound old memories of the labours and the sorrows 
of his race. 
"You  put  your worst  cause  last  and  in  the  chief  place," Thorin  answered.  "To 
the treasure of my people no man has a claim, because Smaug who stole it from us 
also  robbed  him  of  life  or  home.  The  treasure  was  not  his  that  his  evil  deeds 
should  be  amended  with  a  share  of  it.  The  price  of  the  goods  and  the  assistance 
that we  received of  the Lake-men we will fairly pay-in due time. But nothing will 
we  give,  not  even  a  loaf's  worth,  under  threat  of  force. While  an  armed host  lies 
before our doors, we look on you as foes and thieves. 
"It is in my mind to ask what share of their inheritance you would have paid to 
our kindred, had you found the hoard unguarded and us slain." 
"A just question," replied Bard. "But you are not dead, and we are not robbers. 
Moreover  the  wealthy  may  have  pity  beyond  right  on  the  needy  that  befriended 
them when they were in want. And still my other claims remain unanswered." 
"I will  not  parley,  as  I  have  said, with  armed men  at my  gate. Nor  at all with 
the people of the Elvenking, whom I remember with small kindness. In this debate 
they have no place. Begone now ere our arrows fly! And if you would speak with 
me  again,  first  dismiss  the  elvish  host  to  the  woods  where  it  belongs,  and  then 
return, laying down your arms before you approach the threshold." 
"The Elvenking  is my  friend,  and  he  has  succoured  the  people  of  the Lake  in 
their need, though they had no claim but friendship on him," answered Bard. "We 
will  give  you  time  to  repent  your  words.  Gather  your  wisdom  ere  we  return!" 
Then he departed and went back to the camp. 
Ere  many  hours  were  past,  the  banner-bearers  returned,  and  trumpeters  stood 
forth and blew a blast: 
"In  the  name  of  Esgaroth  and  the  Forest,"  one  cried,  "we  speak  unto  Thorin 
Thrain's  son  Oakenshield,  calling  himself  the  King  under  the  Mountain,  and  we 
bid him consider well  the claims  that have been urged, or be declared our  foe. At 
the  least  he  shall  deliver  one  twelfth  portion  of  the  treasure  unto  Bard,  as  the 
dragon-slayer,  and  as  the  heir  of  Girion.  From  that  portion  Bard  will  himself 
contribute  to  the  aid  of  Esgaroth;  but  if  Thorin  would  have  the  friendship  and 
honour of the lands about, as his sires had of old, then he will give also somewhat 
of his own  for  the comfort of  the men of  the Lake." Then Thorin seized a bow of 

####-horn  and  shot  an  arrow  at  the  speaker.  It  smote  into  his  shield  and  stuck  there 
quivering. 
'"Since  such  is  your  answer,"  he  called  in  return,  "I  declare  the  Mountain 
besieged. You shall not depart from it, until you call on your side for a truce and a 
parley. We will bear no weapons against you, but we leave you to your gold. You 
may eat that, if you will!" 
With  that  the  messengers  departed  swiftly,  and  the  dwarves  were  left  to 
consider  their  case. So grim had Thorin become, that even if they had wished, the 
others  would  not  have  dared  to  find  fault  with  him;  but  indeed  most  of  them 
seemed  to  share  his mind-except perhaps old fat Bombur and Fili and Kili. Bilbo, 
of course, disapproved of  the whole  turn of affairs. He had by now had more than 
enough of the Mountain, and being besieged inside it was not at all to his taste. 
"The whole place still stinks of dragon," he grumbled to himself, "and it makes 
me sick. And cram is beginning simply to stick in my throat." 

####-<h4>Chapter 16</h4> <br> 

A Thief in the Night 

 
Now the days passed slowly and wearily. Many of the dwarves spent their time 
piling  and  ordering  the  treasure;  and  now  Thorin  spoke  of  the  Arkenstone  of 
Thrain, and bade them eagerly to look for it in every comer.  
"For the Arkenstone of my father," he said, "is worth more than a river of gold 
in  itself,  and  to me  it  is  beyond  price.  That  stone  of  all  the  treasure  I  name  unto 
myself, and I will be avenged on anyone who finds it and withholds it." 
Bilbo heard these words and he grew afraid, wondering what would happen, if 
the stone was found-wrapped in an old bundle of tattered oddments that he used as 
a pillow. All the same he did not speak of it, for as the weariness of the days grew 
heavier, the beginnings of a plan had come into his little head. 
Things had gone on like this for some time, when the ravens brought news that 
Dain and more than five hundred dwarves, hurrying from the Iron Hills, were now 
within about two days' march of Dale, coming from the North-East. 
"But  they  cannot  reach  the  Mountain  unmarked,"  said  Róac,  "and  I  fear  lest 
there  be  battle  in  the  valley.  I  do  not  call  this  counsel  good.  Though  they  are  a 
grim  folk,  they  are  not  likely  to  overcome  the  host  that  besets  you;  and  even  if 
they  did  so, what will  you gain? Winter and snow is hastening behind them. How 
shall you be  fed without  the  friendship and goodwill of  the  lands about you? The 
treasure is likely to be your death, though the dragon is no more!"' 
But  Thorin  was  not moved.  "Winter  and  snow  will  bite both men and elves," 
he said, "and they may find their dwelling in the Waste grievous to bear. With my 
friends behind  them and winter upon  them,  they will perhaps be  in softer mood  to 
parley with." 
That night Bilbo made up his mind. The sky was black and moonless. As soon 
as  it  was  full  dark,  he  went  to  a  corner  of  an  inner  chamber  just  within  the  gate 
and drew from his bundle a rope, and also the Arkenstone wrapped in a rag. Then 
he  climbed  to  the  top  of  the  wall.  Only  Bombur  was  there,  for  it  was  his  turn to 
watch, and the dwarves kept only one watchman at a time. 
"It is mighty cold!" said Bombur. "I wish we could have a fire up here as they 
have in the camp!" 
"It is warm enough inside," said Bilbo. 

####-"I  daresay;  but  I  am  bound  here  till  midnight,"  grumbled  the  fat  dwarf.  "A 
sorry  business  altogether.  Not  that  I  venture  to  disagree  with  Thorin,  may  his 
beard grow ever longer; yet he was ever a dwarf with a stiff neck." 
"Not as stiff as my legs," said Bilbo. "I am tired of stairs and stone passages. I 
would give a good deal for the feel of grass at my toes." 
"I would give a good deal for the feel of a strong drink in my throat, and for a 
soft bed after a good supper!" 
"I  can't  give  you  those,  while  the  siege  is  going  on.  But  it  is  long  since  I 
watched,  and  I  will  take  your  turn  for  you,  if  you  like.  There  is  no  sleep  in  me 
tonight." 
  "You  are  a  good  fellow,  Mr.  Baggins,  and  I  will  take  your  offer  kindly.  If 
there  should  be  anything  to  note,  rouse me  first, mind  you!  I will  lie  in  the  inner 
chamber to the left, not far away." 
"Off you go!" said Bilbo. "I will wake you at midnight, and you can wake the 
next watchman." As soon as Bombur had gone, Bilbo put on his ring, fastened his 
rope,  slipped  down  over  the wall,  and was  gone. He  had  about  five  hours  before 
him.  Bombur  would  sleep  (he  could  sleep  at  any  time,  and  ever  since  the 
adventure  in  the  forest he was  always  trying  to  recapture  the beautiful dreams he 
had then); and all the others were busy with Thorin. It was unlikely that any, even 
Fili  or  Kili,  would  come out on  the wall until  it was  their  turn.  It was very dark, 
and  the  road  after  a  while,  when  he  left  the  newly made  path  and  climbed  down 
towards the lower course of the stream, was strange to him. At last he came to the 
bend  where  he  had  to  cross  the  water,  if  he  was  to  make  for  the  camp,  as  he 
wished. The bed of the stream was there shallow but already broad, and fording it 
in the dark was not easy for the little hobbit. He was nearly across when he missed 
his  footing  on  a  round  stone  and  fell  into  the  cold  water  with  a  splash.  He  had 
barely  scrambled  out  on  the  far  bank,  shivering  and  spluttering,  when  up  came 
elves in the gloom with bright lanterns and searched for the cause of the noise. 
"That  was  no  fish!"  one  said.  "There  is  a  spy  about.  Hide  your  lights! They 
will help him more  than us,  if  it  is  that queer  little creature  that  is said  to be  their 
servant." 
"Servant,  indeed!"  snorted  Bilbo;  and  in  the  middle  of  his  snort  he  sneezed 
loudly, and the elves immediately gathered towards the sound. 
"Let's  have  a  light!"  he  said.  "I  am  here,  if  you want me!"  and  he  slipped  off 
his ring, and popped from behind a rock. 

####-They seized him quickly, in spite of their surprise. "Who are you? Are you the 
dwarves' hobbit? What are you doing? How did you get so far past our sentinels?" 
they asked one after another.  
"I am Mr. Bilbo Baggins," he answered, "companion of Thorin, if you want to 
know. I know your king well by sight, though perhaps he doesn't know me to look 
at. But Bard will remember me, and it is Bard I particularly want to see." 
"Indeed!" said they, "and what may be your business?"  
"Whatever  it  is,  it's my own, my good  elves. But  if you wish  ever  to get back 
to  your  own  woods  from  this  cold  cheerless  place,"  he  answered  shivering,  "you 
will  take me  along  quiet  to a fire, where I can dry-and then you will let me speak 
to your chiefs as quick as may be. I have only an hour or two to spare." 
That is how it came about that some two hours after his escape from the Gate, 
Bilbo  was  sitting  beside  a  warm  fire  in  front  of  a  large  tent,  and  there  sat  too, 
gazing curiously at him, both the Elvenking and Bard. A hobbit in elvish armour, 
partly wrapped in an old blanket, was something new to them. 
"Really you know," Bilbo was  saying  in his best business manner,  "things  are 
impossible. Personally I am tired of the whole affair. I wish I was back in the West 
in  my  own  home,  where  folk  are  more  reasonable.  But  I  have  an  interest  in  this 
matter-one  fourteenth share,  to be precise, according  to a  letter, which  fortunately 
I believe I have kept." He drew from a pocket in his old jacket (which he still wore 
over his mail), crumpled and much folded, Thorin's letter that had been put under 
the clock on his mantelpiece in May! 
"A share in the profits, mind you," he went on. "I am aware of that. Personally 
I am only too ready to consider all your claims carefully, and deduct what is right 
from  the  total  before  putting  in my  own  claim.  However  you  don't  know  Thorin 
Oakenshield as well as I do now. I assure you, he is quite ready to sit on a heap of 
gold and starve, as long as you sit here." 
"Well, let him!" said Bard. "Such a fool deserves to starve." 
"Quite  so,"  said  Bilbo.  "I  see  your  point  of  view.  At  the  same  time  winter  is 
coming  on  fast. Before  long  you will  be  having  snow  and what not, and supplies 
will  be  difficult  –  even  for  elves  I  imagine.  Also  there  will  be  other  difficulties. 
You have not heard of Dain and the dwarves of the Iron Hills?" 
"We have, a long time ago; but what has he got to do with us?" asked the king. 
"I  thought  as much.  I  see  I  have  some  information  you  have  not  got.  Dain,  I 
may  tell  you,  is  now  less  than  two  days' march  off,  and  has  at  least  five  hundred 
grim  dwarves  with  him  –  a  good  many  of  them  have  had  experience  in  the 

####-dreadful  dwarf  and  goblin  wars,  of  which  you  have  no  doubt  heard. When  they 
arrive there may be serious trouble." 
"Why  do  you  tell  us  this?  Are  you  betraying  your  friends,  or  are  you 
threatening us?" asked Bard grimly.  
"My  dear  Bard!"  squeaked  Bilbo.  "Don't  be  so  hasty!  I  never  met  such 
suspicious folk! I am merely trying to avoid trouble for all concerned. Now I will 
make you an offer!!" 
"Let us hear it!" they said. 
"You may  see  it!"  said  he.  "It  is  this!"  and  he  drew  forth  the Arkenstone,  and 
threw away the wrapping. 
The Elvenking himself, whose eyes were used to things of wonder and beauty, 
stood up in amazement. Even Bard gazed marvelling at it in silence. It was as if a 
globe had been  filled with moonlight and hung before  them  in a net woven of  the 
glint of frosty stars. 
"This  is  the  Arkenstone  of  Thrain,"  said  Bilbo,  "the  Heart  of  the  Mountain; 
and  it  is  also  the  heart  of  Thorin.  He  values  it  above  a  river  of  gold.  I  give  it  to 
you.  It  will  aid  you  in  your  bargaining."  Then  Bilbo,  not  without  a  shudder,  not 
without a glance of longing, handed the marvellous stone to Bard, and he held it in 
his hand, as though dazed. 
"But how is it yours to give?" he asked at last with an effort. 
"O  well!"  said  the  hobbit  uncomfortably.  "It  isn't  exactly;  but,  well,  I  am 
willing  to  let  it  stand  against  all my claim, don't you know. I may be a burglar-or 
so  they  say: personally  I never  really  felt  like one-but I am an honest one, I hope, 
more  or  less.  Anyway  I  am  going  back  now,  and  the  dwarves  can  do  what  they 
like to me. I hope you will find it useful." 
The Elvenking looked at Bilbo with a new wonder.  
"Bilbo  Baggins!"  he  said.  "You  are  more  worthy  to  wear  the  armour  of  elf-
princes  than  many  that  have  looked  more  comely  in  it.  But  I  wonder  if  Thorin 
Oakenshield will see it so. I have more knowledge of dwarves  in general than you 
have perhaps. I advise you to remain with us, and here you shall be honoured and 
thrice welcome." 
"Thank you very much I am sure," said Bilbo with a bow. "But I don't think I 
ought to leave my friends like this, after all we have gone through together. And I 
promised  to  wake  old  Bombur  at  midnight,  too!  Really  I  must  be  going,  and 
quickly." 
Nothing  they  could  say  would  stop  him;  so  an  escort  was  provided  for  him, 
and  as  he  went  both  the  king  and  Bard  saluted  him  with  honour.  As  they  passed 

####-through  the  camp  an  old  man  wrapped  in  a  dark  cloak,  rose  from  a  tent  door 
where he was sitting and came towards them. 
"Well  done!  Mr.  Baggins!"  he  said,  clapping  Bilbo  on  the  back.  "There  is 
always more about you than anyone expects!" It was Gandalf. 
For the first time for many a day Bilbo was really delighted. But there was no 
time for all the questions that he immediately wished to ask. 
"All  in  good  time!"  said  Gandalf.  "Things  are  drawing  towards  the  end  now, 
unless  I  am  mistaken.  There  is  an  unpleasant  time  just  in  front  of  you;  but  keep 
your heart up! You may  come  through  all  right. There  is news brewing  that  even 
the ravens have not heard. Good night!" 
Puzzled  but  cheered.  Bilbo  hurried  on.  He  was  guided  to  a  safe  ford  and  set 
across  dry,  and  then  he  said  farewell  to  the  elves  and  climbed  carefully  back 
towards the Gate. Great weariness began to come over him; but it was well before 
midnight when he  clambered up  the  rope  again  –  it was  still where he had  left  it. 
He untied  it and hid  it, and  then he sat down on the wall and wondered anxiously 
what would happen next. 
At  midnight  he  woke  up  Bombur;  and  then  in  turn  rolled  himself  up  in  his 
corner,  without  listening  to  old  dwarfs  thanks  (which  he  felt  he  had  hardly 
earned).  He  was  soon  fast  asleep  forgetting  all  his  worries  till  the  morning.  As 
matter of fact he was dreaming of eggs and bacon. 

####-<h4>Chapter 17</h4> <br> 

The Clouds Burst 

 
Next  day  the  trumpets  rang  early  in  the  camp. Soon  a  single  runner was  seen 
hurrying  along  the  narrow  path.  At  a  distance  he  stood  and  hailed  them,  asking 
whether Thorin would now listen to another embassy, since new tidings had come 
to hand, and matters were changed. 
"That will be Dain!" said Thorin when he heard. "They will have got wind of 
his  coming.  I  thought  that would  alter  their mood! Bid them come few in number 
and weaponless, and I will hear," he called to the messenger.  
About  midday  the  banners  of  the  Forest  and  the  Lake  were  seen  to  be  borne 
forth  again.  A  company  of  twenty  was  approaching.  At  the  beginning  of  the 
narrow  way  they  laid  aside  sword  and  spear,  and  came  on  towards  the  Gate. 
Wondering, the dwarves saw that among them were both Bard and the Elvenking, 
before whom an old man wrapped in cloak and hood bore a strong casket of iron-
bound wood. 
"Hail Thorin!" said Bard. "Are you still of the same mind?" 
"My mind does not change with the rising and setting of a few suns," answered 
Thorin. "Did you come to ask me idle questions? Still the elf-host has not departed 
as  I  bade! Till  then  you  come  in  vain  to  bargain with me."  "Is  there  then nothing 
for which you would yield any of your gold?" 
"Nothing that you or your friends have to offer." 
"What of the Arkenstone of Thrain?" said he, and at the same moment the old 
man  opened  the  casket  and  held  aloft  the  jewel.  The  light  leapt  from  his  hand, 
bright and white in the morning. 
Then Thorin was stricken dumb with amazement and confusion. No one spoke 
for  a  long while. Thorin  at  length broke  the  silence,  and his voice was  thick with 
wrath. "That stone was my father's, and is mine," he said. "Why should I purchase 
my  own?"  But  wonder  overcame  him  and  he  added:  "But  how  came  you  by  the 
heirloom of my house-if there is need to ask such a question of thieves?" 
"We  are  not  thieves," Bard  answered.  "Your  own we will  give  back  in  return 
for our own." 
'How came you by it?" shouted Thorin in gathering rage. 
"I gave it them!" squeaked Bilbo, who was peeping over the wall, by now, in a 
dreadful fright. 

####-"You!  You!"  cried  Thorin,  turning  upon  him  and  grasping  him  with  both 
hands.  "You  miserable  hobbit!  You  undersized-burglar!"  he  shouted  at  a  loss  for 
words, and he shook poor Bilbo like a rabbit. 
"By the beard of Durin! I wish I had Gandalf here! Curse him for his choice of 
you! May his beard wither! As for you I will throw you to the rocks!" he cried and 
lifted Bilbo in his arms. 
"Stay! Your wish is granted!" said a voice. The old man with the casket threw 
aside  his  hood  and  cloak.  "Here  is  Gandalf!  And  none  too  soon  it  seems.  If  you 
don't  like my Burglar, please don't damage him. Put him down,  and  listen first  to 
what he has to say!" 
"You  all  seem  in  league!"  said  Thorin  dropping  Bilbo  on  the  top  of  the wall. 
"Never  again will  I  have  dealings with  any wizard  or  his  friends. What  have  you 
to say, you descendant of rats?" 
"Dear  me!  Dear  me!"  said  Bilbo.  "I  am  sure  this  is  all  very  uncomfortable. 
You may remember saying that I might choose my own fourteenth share? Perhaps 
I took it too literally –1 have been told that dwarves are sometimes politer in word 
than  in  deed.  The  time  was,  all  the  same,  when  you  seemed  to  think  that  I  had 
been of some service. Descendant of rats, indeed! Is this ail the service of you and 
your family that I was promised. Thorin? Take it that I have disposed of my share 
as I wished, and let it go at that!" 
"I will,"  said Thorin  grimly.  "And  I will  let  you  go  at  that-and may we never 
meet again!" Then he turned and spoke over the wall. "I am betrayed," he said. "It 
was rightly guessed that I could not forbear to redeem the Arkenstone, the treasure 
of my house. For it I will give one fourteenth share of the hoard in silver and gold, 
setting  aside  the  gems;  but  that  shall  be  accounted  the  promised  share  of  this 
traitor, and with that reward he shall depart, and you can divide it as you will. He 
will  get  little  enough,  I  doubt  not.  Take  him,  if  you  wish  him  to  live;  and  no 
friendship of mine goes with him. 
"Get down now to your friends!" he said to Bilbo, "or I will throw you down." 
"What about the gold and silver?" asked Bilbo. 
"That shall follow after, as can be arranged," said he. 
"Get down!" 
"Until then we keep the stone," cried Bard. 
"You are not making a very splendid figure as King under the Mountain," said 
Gandalf. "But things may change yet." 

####-"They may indeed," said Thorin. And already, so strong was the bewilderment 
of  the  treasure upon him, he was pondering whether by the help of Dain he might 
not recapture the Arkenstone and withhold the share of the reward. 
And  so  Bilbo  was  swung  down  from  the  wall,  and  departed  with  nothing  for 
all his trouble, except the armour which Thorin had given him already. More than 
one of the dwarves 'in their hearts felt shame and pity at his going. 
"Farewell!" he cried to them. "We may meet again as friends." 
"Be  off!"  called  Thorin.  "You  have  mail  upon  you,  which  was  made  by  my 
folk,  and  is  too  good  for  you.  It  cannot  be  pierced  .by  arrows;  but  if  you  do  not 
hasten, I will sting your miserable feet. So be swift!" 
"Not so hasty!" said Bard. "We will give you until tomorrow. At noon we will 
return,  and  see  if  you  have  brought  from  the  hoard  the  portion  that  is  to  be  set 
against  the  stone.  If  that  is  done  without  deceit,  then  we  will  depart,  and  the  elf-
host will go back to the Forest. In the meanwhile farewell!" 
With  that  they  went  back  to  the  camp;  but  Thorin  sent  messengers  by  Róac 
telling Dain of what had passed, and bidding him come with wary speed. 
That day passed and the night. The next day the wind shifted west, and the air 
was  dark  and  gloomy.  The  morning  was  still  early  when  a  cry  was  heard  in  the 
camp.  Runners  came  in  to  report  that  a  host  of  dwarves  had  appeared  round  the 
eastern spur of  the Mountain and was now hastening  to Dale. Dain had come. He 
had  hurried  on  through  the  night,  and  so  had  come  upon  them  sooner  than  they 
had expected. Each one of his folk was clad in a hauberk of steel mail that hung to 
his  knees,  and  his  legs were  covered with  hose  of  a  fine  and  flexible metal mesh, 
the secret of whose making was possessed by Dain's people. 
The  dwarves  are  exceedingly  strong  for  their  height,  but  most  of  these  were 
strong  even  for  dwarves.  In  battle  they  wielded  heavy  two-handed mattocks;  but 
each of  them had also a  short broad  sword at his  side and a  round  shield  slung at 
his  back.  Their  beards  were  forked  and  plaited  and  thrust  into  their  belts.  Their 
caps  were  of  iron  and  they  were  shod  with  iron,  and  their  faces  were  grim. 
Trumpets  called  men  and  elves  to  arms.  Before  long  the  dwarves  could  be  seen 
coming  up  the  valley  at  a  great  pace.  They  halted  between  the  river  and  the 
eastern  spur;  but  a  few  held  on  their  way,  and  crossing  the  river  drew  near  the 
camp;  and  there  they  laid  down  their weapons  and  held  up  their  hands  in  sign  of 
peace. Bard went out to meet them, and with him went Bilbo. 
"We  are  sent  from  Dain  son  of  Nain,"  they  said  when  questioned.  "We  are 
hastening  to our kinsmen  in  the Mountain, since we learn that the kingdom of old 
is  renewed. But who  are  you  that  sit  in  the  plain  as  foes  before  defended walls?" 

####-This, of. course, in the polite and rather old-fashioned language of such occasions, 
meant simply: "You have no business  here. We are going on, so make way or we 
shall fight you!" They meant to push on between the Mountain and the loop of the 
river, for the narrow land there did not seem to be strongly guarded. 
Bard,  of  course,  refused  to  allow  the  dwarves  to  go  straight  on  to  the 
Mountain. He was  determined  to wait  until  the  gold  and  silver  had  been  brought 
out in exchange for the Arkenstone: for he did not believe that this would be done, 
if  once  the  fortress  was manned  with  so  large  and  warlike  a  company.  They  had 
brought with  them a great store of supplies; for  the dwarves can carry very heavy 
burdens,  and  nearly  all  of  Dain's  folks,  in  spite  of  their  rapid  march,  bore  huge 
packs  on  their  backs  in  addition  to  their  weapons.  They  would  stand  a  siege  for 
weeks,  and  by  that  time yet more dwarves might  come,  and yet more,  for Thorin 
had many relatives. Also they would be able to reopen and guard some other gate, 
so that the besiegers would have to encircle the whole mountain; and for that they 
had not sufficient numbers. 
These  were,  in  fact,  precisely  their  plans  (for  the  raven-messengers  had  been 
busy between Thorin and Dain); but  for  the moment  the way was barred, so after 
angry  words  the  dwarf-messengers  retired  muttering  in  their  beards.  Bard  then 
sent messengers  at  once  to  the Gate; but  they  found no gold or payment. Arrows 
came forth as soon as they were within shot, and they hastened back in dismay. In 
the  camp  all  was  now  astir,  as  if  for  battle;  for  the  dwarves  of  Dain  were 
advancing along the eastern bank. 
"Fools!"  laughed  Bard,  "to  come  thus  beneath  the  Mountain's  arm!  They  do 
not understand war above ground, whatever they may know of battle in the mines. 
There  are many  of  our  archers  and  spearmen  now  hidden  in  the  rocks  upon  their 
right  flank. Dwarf-mail may  be  good,  but  they will  soon be hard put  to  it. Let us 
set on them now from both sides, before they are fully rested!" 
But  the  Elvenking  said:  "Long will  I  tarry,  ere  I  begin  this war  for  gold.  The 
dwarves cannot press us, unless we will, or do anything  that we cannot mark. Let 
us  hope  still  for  something  that  will  bring  reconciliation.  Our  advantage  in 
numbers will be enough, if in the end it must come to unhappy blows." 
But he reckoned without the dwarves. The knowledge that the Arkenstone was 
in  the  hands  of  the  besiegers  burned  in  their  thoughts;  also  they  guessed  the 
hesitation of Bard and his friends, and resolved to strike while they debated. 
Suddenly  without  a  signal  they  sprang  silently  forward  to  attack.  Bows 
twanged and arrows whistled; battle was about to be joined. 

####-Still  more  suddenly  a  darkness  came  on  with  dreadful  swiftness!  A  black 
cloud  hurried  over  the  sky. Winter  thunder  on  a wild wind  rolled  roaring  up  and 
rumbled  in  the  Mountain,  and  lightning  lit  its  peak.  And  beneath  the  thunder 
another  blackness  could  be  seen  whirling  forward;  but  it  did  not  come  with  the 
wind,  it  came  from  the  North,  like  a  vast  cloud  of  birds,  so  dense  that  no  light 
could be seen between their wings. 
"Halt!"  cried  Gandalf,  who  appeared  suddenly,  and  stood  alone,  with  arms 
uplifted, between  the advancing dwarves and  the  ranks awaiting  them. "Halt!" he 
called  in  a  voice  like  thunder,  and  his  staff  blazed  forth  with  a  flash  like  the 
lightning.  "Dread  has  come  upon  you  all!  Alas!  it  has  come  more  swiftly  than  I 
guessed. The Goblins  are upon you! Bolg*  of the North is coming. O Dain! whose 
father  you  slew  in  Moria.  Behold!  the  bats  are  above  his  army  like  a  sea  of 
locusts. They ride upon wolves and Wargs are in their train!" 
Amazement  and  confusion  fell  upon  them  all.  Even  as  Gandalf  had  been 
speaking  the  darkness  grew.  The  dwarves  halted  and  gazed  at  the  sky.  The  elves 
cried out with many voices. 
"Come!" called Gandalf.  "There  is yet  time  for council. Let Dain  son of Nain 
come swiftly to us!" 
 
So  began  a  battle  that  none  had  expected; and  it was called  the Battle of Five 
Armies,  and  it  was  very  terrible.  Upon  one  side  were  the  Goblins  and  the  wild 
Wolves, and upon  the other were Elves and Men and Dwarves. This  is how  it  fell 
out.  Ever  since  the  fall  of  the Great Goblin  of  the Misty Mountains  the hatred of 
their  race  for  the  dwarves  had  been  rekindled  to  fury. Messengers  had  passed  to 
and fro between all their cities, colonies and strongholds; for they resolved now to 
win  the  dominion  of  the  North.  Tidings  they  had  gathered  in  secret  ways; and  in 
all  the  mountains  there  was  a  forging  and  an  arming.  Then  they  marched  and 
gathered by hill  and valley, going  ever by  tunnel or under dark, until  around  and 
beneath the great mountain Gundabad of the North, where was their capital, a vast 
host  was  assembled  ready  to  sweep  down  in  time  of  storm  unawares  upon  the 
South. Then  they  learned of  the death of Smaug,  and  joy was  in  their hearts:  and 
they hastened night  after night  through  the mountains,  and  came  thus  at  last on  a 
sudden  from  the  North  hard  on  the  heels  of  Dain.  Not  even  the  ravens  knew  of 
their  coming  until  they  came  out  in  the  broken  lands  which  divided  the  Lonely 
Mountain from the hills behind. How much Gandalf knew cannot be said, but it is 
plain that he had not expected this sudden assault. 

                                                             
*
 Son of Azog 

####-This is the plan that he made in council with the Elvenking and with Bard; and 
with  Dain,  for  the  dwarf-lord  now  joined  them:  the  Goblins  were  the  foes  of  all, 
and at  their coming all other quarrels were  forgotten. Their only hope was  to  lure 
the  goblins  into  the  valley  between  the  arms  of  the Mountain;  and  themselves  to 
man  the  great  spurs  that  struck  south  and  east. Yet  this would  be  perilous,  if  the 
goblins  were  in  sufficient  numbers  to  overrun  the  Mountain  itself,  and  so  attack 
them also  from behind and above; but there was no time for make any other plan, 
or to summon any help. 
Soon  the  thunder  passed,  rolling  away  to  the  South-East;  but  the  bat-cloud 
came,  flying  lower,  over  the  shoulder  of  the  Mountain,  and  whirled  above  them 
shutting out the light and filling them with dread. 
"To  the  Mountain!"  called  Bard.  "To  the  Mountain!  Let  us  take  our  places 
while there is yet time!" 
On  the Southern spur,  in  its  lower slopes and  in  the  rocks at  its  feet,  the Elves 
were  set;  on  the  Eastern  spur  were men  and  dwarves.  But  Bard  and  some  of  the 
nimblest of men and elves climbed  to  the height of  the Eastern  shoulder  to gain a 
view  to  the North. Soon  they could see  the  lands before  the Mountain's  feet black 
with a hurrying multitude. Ere long the vanguard swirled round the spur's end and 
came  rushing  into  Dale.  These  were  the  swiftest  wolf-riders,  and  already  their 
cries  and  howls  rent  the  air  afar.  A  few  brave  men  were  strung  before  them  to 
make  a  feint  of  resistance,  and many  there  fell  before  the  rest  drew  back  and fled 
to  either  side.  As  Gandalf  had  hoped,  the  goblin  army  had  gathered  behind  the 
resisted  vanguard,  and  poured  now  in  rage  into  the  valley,  driving  wildly  up 
between  the  arms  of  the  Mountain,  seeking  for  the  foe.  Their  banners  were 
countless, black and red, and they came on like a tide in fury and disorder.  
It  was  a  terrible  battle.  The  most  dreadful  of  all  Bilbo's  experiences,  and  the 
one which  at  the  time he hated most  – which is to say it was the one he was most 
proud  of,  and  most  fond  of  recalling  long  afterwards,  although  he  was  quite 
unimportant in it. Actually I must say he put on his ring early in the business, and 
vanished  from  sight,  if  not  from  all  danger.  A  magic  ring  of  that  sort  is  not  a 
complete  protection  in  a  goblin  charge,  nor  does  it  stop  flying  arrows  and  wild 
spears;  but  it  does  help  in  getting  out  of  the way,  and  it  prevents  your  head  from 
being specially chosen for a sweeping stroke by a goblin swordsman. 
The  elves  were  the  first  to  charge.  Their  hatred  for  the  goblins  is  cold  and 
bitter. Their spears and swords shone  in  the gloom with a gleam of chill flame, so 
deadly  was  the  wrath  of  the  hands  that  held  them.  As  soon  as  the  host  of  their 
enemies was dense  in  the valley,  they sent against  it a shower of arrows, and each 

####-flickered  as  it  fled  as  if with  stinging  fire.  Behind  the  arrows  a  thousand  of  their 
spearmen  leapt  down  and  charged.  The  yells  were  deafening.  The  rocks  were 
stained  black  with  goblin  blood.  Just  as  the  goblins  were  recovering  from  the 
onslaught  and  the  elf-charge was halted,  there  rose  from across  the valley a deep-
throated  roar. With  cries  of  "Moria!"  and  "Dain,  Dain!"  the  dwarves  of  the  Iron 
Hills  plunged  in,  wielding  their  mattocks,  upon  the  other  side;  and  beside  them 
came  the  men  of  the  Lake  with  long  swords.  Panic  came  upon  the Goblins;  and 
even as they turned to meet this new attack, the elves charged again with renewed 
numbers. Already many of  the goblins were  flying back down  the  river  to  escape 
from the trap: and many of their own wolves were turning upon them and rending 
the  dead  and  the  wounded.  Victory  seemed  at  hand,  when  a  cry  rang  out  on  the 
heights above. 
Goblins  had  scaled  the Mountain  from  the  other  side  and  already many were 
on the slopes above the Gate, and others were streaming down recklessly, heedless 
of  those  that  fell  screaming  from  cliff  and  precipice,  to  attack  the  spurs  from 
above. Each of these could be reached by paths that ran down from the main mass 
of  the Mountain  in  the  centre;  and  the  defenders  had  too  few  to  bar  the  way  for 
long. Vi ctory now vanished from hope. They had only stemmed the first onslaught 
of the black tide. 
Day drew on. The goblins gathered again  in  the valley. There a host of Wargs 
came  ravening  and  with  them  came  the  bodyguard  of  Bolg,  goblins  of  huge  size 
with scimitars of steel. Soon actual darkness was coming into a stormy sky; while 
still  the great bats  swirled  about  the heads  and  ears of  elves  and men, or  fastened 
vampire-like  on  the  stricken.  Now  Bard  was  fighting  to  defend  the  Eastern  spur, 
and yet giving slowly back; and the elf-lords were at bay about their king upon the 
southern arm, near to the watch-post on Ravenhill. 
Suddenly  there  was  a  great  shout,  and  from  the  Gate  came  a  trumpet  call. 
They had forgotten Thorin! Part of  the wall, moved by  levers, fell outward with a 
crash  into  the  pool. Out  leapt  the King  under  the Mountain,  and  his  companions 
followed  him.  Hood  and  cloak  were  gone;  they  were  in  shining  armour,  and  red 
light  leapt  from  their  eyes.  In  the  gloom  the  great  dwarf  gleamed  like  gold  in  a 
dying fire. 
Rocks were buried down from on high by the goblins above; but they held on. 
leapt  down  to  the  falls'  foot,  and  rushed  forward  to  battle. Wolf  and  rider  fell  or 
fled before them. Thorin wielded his axe with mighty strokes, and nothing seemed 
to harm him. 

####-"To  me!  To  me!  Elves  and  Men!  To  me!  O  my  kinsfolk!"  he  cried,  and  his 
voice shook like a horn in the valley.  
Down, heedless of order, rushed all the dwarves of Dain to his help. Down too 
came  many  of  the  Lake-men,  for Bard  could  not  restrain  them;  and out upon  the 
other  side  came many  of  the  spearmen  of  the  elves. Once  again  the  goblins were 
stricken in the valley; and they were piled in heaps till Dale was dark and hideous 
with  their  corpses.  The  Wargs  were  scattered  and  Thorin  drove  right  against  the 
bodyguards  of  Bolg.  But  he  could  not  pierce  their  ranks.  Already  behind  him 
among the goblin dead lay many men and many dwarves, and many a fair elf that 
should  have  lived  yet  long  ages  merrily  in  the  wood.  And  as  the  valley  widened 
his onset grew ever slower. His numbers were too few. His flanks were unguarded. 
Soon  the  attackers  were  attacked,  and  they  were  forced  into  a  great  ring,  facing 
every  way,  hemmed  all  about  with  goblins  and  wolves  returning  to  the  assault. 
The bodyguard of Bolg came howling against them, and drove in upon their ranks 
like waves  upon  cliffs  of  sand.  Their  friends  could  not  help  them,  for  the  assault 
from  the Mountain was  renewed with  redoubled  force,  and  upon  either  side men 
and elves were being slowly beaten down. 
On  all  this  Bilbo  looked  with  misery.  He  had  taken  his  stand  on  Ravenhill 
among  the Elves-partly because  there was more chance of escape from  that point, 
and partly (with the more Tookish part of his mind) because if he was going to be 
in  a  last  desperate  stand,  he  preferred  on  the  whole  to  defend  the  Elvenking. 
Gandalf,  too,  I  may  say,  was  there,  sitting  on  the  ground  as  if  in  deep  thought, 
preparing,  I  suppose,  some  last  blast  of magic  before  the  end.  That  did  not  seem 
far off. "It will not be  long now,"  thought Bilbo, "before the goblins win the Gate, 
and  we  are  all  slaughtered  or  driven  down  and  captured.  Really  it  is  enough  to 
make  one  weep,  after  all  one  has  gone  through.  I  would  rather  old  Smaug  had 
been left with all the wretched treasure, than that these vile creatures should get it, 
and  poor  old Bombur,  and Balin  and  Fili  and Kili  and  all  the  rest  come  to  a  bad 
end;  and  Bard  too,  and  the  Lake-men  and  the  merry  elves.  Misery  me!  I  have 
heard  songs  of  many  battles,  and  I  have  always  understood  that  defeat  may  be 
glorious. It seems very uncomfortable, not to say distressing. I wish I was well out 
of it." 
The  clouds  were  torn  by  the  wind,  and  a  red  sunset  slashed  the West.  Seeing 
the  sudden  gleam  in  the  gloom  Bilbo  looked  round. He  gave  a  great  cry:  he  had 
seen  a  sight  that  made  his  heart  leap,  dark  shapes  small  yet  majestic  against  the 
distant glow.  
"The Eagles! The Eagles!" he shouted. "The Eagles are coming!" 

####-Bilbo's eyes were seldom wrong. The eagles were coming down the wind, line 
after line, in such a host as must have gathered from all the eyries of the North. 
"The  Eagles!  the  Eagles!"  Bilbo  cried,  dancing  and  waving  his  arms.  If  the 
elves could not see him they could hear him. Soon they too took up the cry, and it 
echoed  across  the  valley. Many wondering  eyes  looked up,  though as yet nothing 
could be seen except from the southern shoulders of the Mountain. 
"The Eagles!" cried Bilbo once more, but at that moment a stone hurtling from 
above smote heavily on his helm, and he fell with a crash and knew no more. 

####-<h4>Chapter 18</h4> <br> 

The Return Journey 

 
When Bilbo came  to himself, he was  literally by himself. He was  lying on  the 
flat stones of Ravenhill, and no one was near. A cloudless day, but cold, was broad 
above him. He was shaking, and as chilled as stone, but his head burned with fire. 
"Now I wonder what has happened?" he said to himself. "At any rate I am not 
yet one of the fallen heroes; but I suppose there is still time enough for that!" 
He  sat  up  painfully.  Looking  into  the  valley  he  could  see  no  living  goblins. 
After  a while as his head cleared a  little, he  thought he could see elves moving  in 
the  rocks  below.  He  rubbed  his  eyes.  Surely  there  was  a  camp  still  in  the  plain 
some  distance  off;  and  there  was  a  coming  and  going  about  the  Gate?  Dwarves 
seemed  to  be  busy  removing  the wall. But  all was deadly  still. There was no  call 
and  no  echo  of  a  song.  Sorrow  seemed  to  be  in  the  air.  "Victory  after  all,  I 
suppose!"  he  said,  feeling  his  aching  head.  "Well,  it  seems  a  very  gloomy 
business." 
Suddenly he was aware of a man climbing up and coming towards him. 
"Hullo there!" he called with a shaky voice. "Hullo there! What news?" 
"What  voice  is  it  that  speaks  among  the  stones?"  said  the  man  halting  and 
peering about him not far from where Bilbo sat. 
Then Bilbo remembered his ring! "Well I'm blessed!" said he. "This invisibility 
has  its  drawbacks  after  all.  Otherwise  I  suppose  I  might  have  spent  a  warm  and 
comfortable night in bed!" 
"It's me, Bilbo Baggins,  companion  of Thorin!"  he  cried,  hurriedly  taking  off 
the ring. 
"It  is  well  that  I  have  found  you!"  said  the  man  striding  forward.  "You  are 
needed and we have looked for you long. You would have been numbered among 
the  dead,  who  are many,  if  Gandalf  the  wizard  had  not  said  that  your  voice  was 
last  heard  in  this  place.  I  have  been  sent  to  look  here  for  the  last  time.  Are  you 
much hurt?" 
"A  nasty  knock  on  the  head,  I  think,"  said  Bilbo.  "But  I  have  a  helm  and  a 
hard skull. All the same I feel sick and my legs are like straws." 
"I  will  carry  you  down  to  the  camp  in  the  valley,"  said  the man,  and  picked 
him lightly up. 
The man was swift and sure-footed. It was not long before Bilbo was set down 
before  a  tent  in Dale;  and  there  stood Gandalf, with  his  arm  in  a  sling.  Even  the 

####-wizard had not escaped without a wound; and  there were  few unharmed in all the 
host. 
When Gandalf saw Bilbo, he was delighted. "Baggins!" he exclaimed. "Well I 
never! Alive after all – 1 am glad! I began to wonder if even your luck would see 
you through! A terrible business, and it nearly was disastrous. But other news can 
wait. Come!" he said more gravely. "You are called for;" and leading the hobbit he 
took him within the tent. 
"Hail! Thorin," he said as he entered. "I have brought him." 
There  indeed  lay  Thorin  Oakenshield,  wounded  with  many  wounds,  and  his 
rent  armour  and  notched  axe  were  cast  upon  the  floor.  He  looked  up  as  Bilbo 
came beside him. 
"Farewell,  good  thief,"  he  said.  "I  go  now  to  the  halls  of waiting  to  sit  beside 
my  fathers,  until  the world  is  renewed. Since  I  leave  now  all  gold  and  silver,  and 
go  where  it  is  of  little  worth,  I  wish  to  part  in  friendship  from  you,  and  I  would 
take back my words and deeds at the Gate." 
Bilbo  knelt  on  one  knee  filled  with  sorrow.  "Farewell,  King  under  the 
Mountain!"  he  said.  "This  is  a  bitter  adventure,  if  it  must  end  so;  and  not  a 
mountain  of  gold  can  amend  it. Yet  I  am  glad  that  I  have  shared  in  your  perils  – 
that has been more than any Baggins deserves." 
"No!" said Thorin. "There  is more  in you of good  than you know, child of  the 
kindly West. Some  courage  and  some wisdom, blended  in measure.  If more of us 
valued food and cheer and song above hoarded gold, it would be a merrier world. 
But sad or merry, I must leave it now. Farewell!" 
Then Bilbo  turned  away,  and  he went  by  himself,  and  sat  alone wrapped  in  a 
blanket, and, whether you believe it or not, he wept until his eyes were red and his 
voice was hoarse. He was a kindly little soul. Indeed it was long before he had the 
heart to make a joke again. "A mercy it is," he said at last to himself, "that I woke 
up when I did. I wish Thorin were living, but I am glad that we parted in kindness. 
You  are  a  fool,  Bilbo  Baggins,  and  you made  a  great mess  of  that  business with 
the stone; and there was a battle, in spite of all your efforts to buy peace and quiet, 
but I suppose you can hardly be blamed for that." 
All  that  had  happened  after  he  was  stunned,  Bilbo  learned  later;  but  it  gave 
him more sorrow than joy, and he was now weary of his adventure. He was aching 
in  his  bones  for  the  homeward  journey. That,  however, was  a  little  delayed, so  in 
the meantime I will tell something of events. The Eagles had long had suspicion of 
the  goblins'  mustering;  from  their  watchfulness  the  movements  in  the  mountains 
could not be altogether hid. So  they  too had gathered  in great numbers, under  the 

####-great  Eagle  of  the Misty Mountains;  and  at  length  smelling  battle  from  afar  they 
had come  speeding down  the gale  in  the nick of  time. They  it was who dislodged 
the  goblins  from  the  mountain-slopes,  casting  them  over  precipices,  or  driving 
them down shrieking and bewildered among their foes. It was not long before they 
had  freed  the  Lonely  Mountain,  and  elves  and  men  on  either  side  of  the  valley 
could come at last to the help of the battle below.  
But even with the Eagles they were still outnumbered. 
In  that  last  hour  Beorn  himself  had  appeared  –  no  one  knew  how  or  from 
where. He  came  alone,  and  in  bear's  shape;  and  he  seemed  to  have  grown  almost 
to  giant-size  in  his wrath. The  roar  of  his  voice was  like  drums  and  guns;  and  he 
tossed  wolves  and  goblins  from  his  path  like  straws  and  feathers.  He  fell  upon 
their  rear,  and  broke  like  a  clap  of  thunder  through  the  ring.  The  dwarves  were 
making  a  stand  still  about  their  lords  upon  a  low  rounded  hill.  Then  Beorn 
stooped and lifted Thorin, who had fallen pierced with spears, and bore him out of 
the  fray.  Swiftly  he  returned  and  his  wrath  was  redoubled,  so  that  nothing  could 
withstand  him,  and  no  weapon  seemed  to  bite  upon  him.  He  scattered  the 
bodyguard,  and  pulled  down Bolg  himself  and  crushed  him. Then  dismay  fell  on 
the  Goblins  and  they  fled  in  all  directions.  But  weariness  left  their  enemies  with 
the  coming  of  new  hope,  and  they  pursued  them  closely,  and  prevented  most  of 
them from escaping where they could. They drove many of them into the Running 
River, and such as fled south or west they hunted into the marshes about the Forest 
River;  and  there  the  greater  part  of  the  last  fugitives  perished,  while  those  that 
came  hardly  to  the Wood-elves'  realm  were  there  slain,  or  drawn  in  to  die  in  the 
trackless  dark  of  Mirkwood.  Songs  have  said  that  three  parts  of  the  goblin 
warriors of the North perished on that day, and the mountains had peace for many 
a year.  
Victory  had  been  assured  before  the  fall  of  night,  but  the  pursuit  was  still  on 
foot, when  Bilbo  returned  to  the  camp;  and not many were  in  the valley  save  the 
more grievously wounded. 
"Where are  the Eagles?" he asked Gandalf  that evening, as he  lay wrapped  in 
many warm blankets. 
"Some  are  in  the  hunt,"  said  the  wizard,  "but  most  have  gone  back  to  their 
eyries.  They  would  not  stay  here,  and  departed  with  the  first  light  of  morning. 
Dain has crowned their chief with gold, and sworn friendship with them for ever." 
"I  am  sorry.  I  mean,  I  should  have  liked  to  see  them  again,"  said  Bilbo 
sleepily;  "perhaps  I  shall  see  them  on  the  way  home.  I  suppose  I  shall  be  going 
home soon?" 

####-"As soon as you like," said the wizard. 
Actually it was some days before Bilbo really set out. 
They buried Thorin deep beneath the Mountain, and Bard laid the Arkenstone 
upon his breast. 
"There let it lie till the Mountain falls!" he said. "May it bring good fortune to 
all his  folk  that dwell here after!" Upon his  tomb  the Elvenking  then  laid Orcrist, 
the  elvish  sword  that  had  been  taken  from  Thorin  in  captivity.  It  is  said  in  songs 
that it gleamed ever in the dark if foes approached, and the fortress of the dwarves 
could  not  be  taken  by  surprise.  There  now  Dain  son  of  Nain  took  up  his  abode, 
and  he  became  King  under  the  Mountain,  and  in  time  many  other  dwarves 
gathered  to  his  throne  in  the  ancient  halls.  Of  the  twelve  companions  of  Thorin, 
ten  remained. Fili  and Kili  had  fallen  defending  him with  shield  and  body,  for  he 
was their mother's elder brother. The others remained with Dain; for Dain dealt his 
treasure well. There was,  of  course,  no  longer  any  question of dividing  the hoard 
in  such  shares  as had been planned,  to Balin  and Dwalin,  and Dori  and Nori  and 
Ori,  and  Oin  and  Gloin,  and  Bifur  and  Bofur  and  Bombur-or  to  Bilbo.  Yet  a 
fourteenth  share of  all  the  silver  and gold, wrought  and unwrought, was given up 
to  Bard;  for  Dain  said:  "We  will  honour  the  agreement  of  the  dead,  and  he  has 
now the Arkenstone in his keeping." 
Even  a  fourteenth  share  was  wealth  exceedingly  great,  greater  than  that  of 
many  mortal  kings.  From  that  treasure  Bard  sent  much  gold  to  the  Master  of 
Lake-town; and he rewarded his followers and friends freely. To the Elvenking he 
gave  the  emeralds  of  Girion,  such  jewels  as  he  most  loved,  which  Dain  had 
restored  to  him.  To  Bilbo  he  said:  "This  treasure  is  as  much  yours  as  it  is  mine; 
though  old  agreements  cannot  stand,  since  so  many  have  a  claim  in  its  winning 
and  defence.  Yet  even  though  you  were  willing  to  lay  aside  all  your  claim,  I 
should wish that the words of Thorin, of which he repented, should not prove true: 
that we should give you little. I would reward you most richly of all." 
"Very  kind  of  you,"  said  Bilbo.  "But  really  it  is  a  relief  to me. How  on  earth 
should  I  have  got  all  that  treasure  home  without  war  and  murder  all  along  the 
way,  I  don't  know. And  I  don't  know what  I  should  have done with  it when  I got 
home. I am sure it is better in your hands." 
In  the end he would only  take  two  small chests, one  filled with  silver, and  the 
other with gold, such as one strong pony could carry. "That will be quite as much 
as I can manage," said he. 
At last the time came for him to say good-bye to his friends. "Farewell, Balin!" 
he  said;  "and  farewell,  Dwalin;  and  farewell  Dori,  Nori,  Ori,  Oin,  Gloin,  Bifur, 

####-Bofur, and Bombur! May your beards never grow  thin!" And  turning  towards  the 
Mountain  he added: "Farewell Thorin Oakenshield! And Fili and Kili! May your 
memory never fade!" 
Then  the  dwarves  bowed  low  before  their  Gate,  but  words  stuck  in  their 
throats.  "Good-bye and good luck, wherever you fare!" said Balin at last. "If ever 
you  visit  us  again,  when  our  halls  are  made  fair  once  more,  then  the  feast  shall 
indeed be splendid!" 
"If  ever  you  are  passing my way,"  said Bilbo,  "don't wait  to  knock!  Tea  is  at 
four; but any of you are welcome at any time!" 
Then he turned away.  
The  elf-host  was  on  the  march;.  and  if  it  was  sadly  lessened,  yet  many  were 
glad,  for  now  the  northern  world  would  be  merrier  for  many  a  long  day.  The 
dragon  was  dead,  and  the  goblins  overthrown,  and  their  hearts  looked  forward 
after winter  to  a  spring  of  joy. Gandalf  and Bilbo  rode behind the Elvenking, and 
beside  them strode Beorn, once again  in man's shape, and he  laughed and sang  in 
a loud voice upon the road. So they went on until they drew near to the borders of 
Mirkwood, to the north of the place where the Forest River ran out. 
Then  they  halted,  for  the  wizard  and  Bilbo  would  not  enter  the  wood,  even 
though the king bade them stay a while in his halls. They intended to go along the 
edge of  the  forest, and  round  its northern end  in  the waste  that  lay between  it and 
the  beginning  of  the  Grey Mountains.  It  was  a  long  and  cheerless  road,  but  now 
that  the goblins were crushed,  it seemed safer  to  them  than  the dreadful pathways 
under the trees. Moreover Beorn was going that way too. 
"Farewell!  O  Elvenking!"  said  Gandalf.  "Merry  be  the  greenwood, while  the 
world is yet young! And merry be all your folk!" 
"Farewell!  O  Gandalf!"  said  the  king.  "May  you  ever  appear  where  you  are 
most  needed  and  least  expected!  The  oftener  you  appear  in  my  halls  the  better 
shall I be pleased!" 
"I beg of  you," said Bilbo stammering and standing on one foot, "to accept this 
gift!" and he brought out a necklace of  silver and pearls  that Dain had given him 
at their parting. 
"In what way have I earned such a gift, O hobbit?" said the king. 
"Well,  er,  I  thought,  don't  you  know,"  said  Bilbo  rather  confused,  "that,  er, 
some  little  return  should  be made  for  your,  er,  hospitality.  I mean  even  a  burglar 
has his feelings. I have drunk much of your wine and eaten much of your bread." 

####-"I will  take your gift, O Bilbo  the Magnificent!" said the king gravely. "And I 
name  you  elf-friend  and  blessed. May  your  shadow  never  grow  less  (or  stealing 
would be too easy)! Farewell!" 
Then  the  elves  turned  towards  the  Forest,  and  Bilbo  started  on  his  long  road 
home. 
He had many hardships and adventures before he got back. The Wild was still 
the Wild, and there were many other things in it in those days besides goblins; but 
he  was  well  guided  and  well  guarded-the  wizard  was  with  him,  and  Beorn  for 
much  of  the way-and  he was  never  in  great danger again. Anyway by mid-winter 
Gandalf  and Bilbo had  come  all  the way back,  along both  edges of  the Forest,  to 
the  doors  of Beorn's  house;  and  there  for  a while  they  both  stayed. Yule-tide was 
warm  and  merry  there;  and  men  came  from  far  and  wide  to  feast  at  Beorn's 
bidding.  The  goblins  of  the  Misty  Mountains  were  now  few  and  terrified,  and 
hidden  in  the deepest holes  they could  find; and  the Wargs had vanished  from  the 
woods,  so  that men went  abroad without  fear. Beorn  indeed became  a great  chief 
afterwards  in  those  regions  and  ruled  a wide  land between  the mountains  and  the 
wood; and it is said that for many generations the men of his line had the power of 
taking bear's shape, and some were grim men and bad, but most were in heart like 
Beorn,  if  less  in  size  and  strength.  In  their  day  the  last  goblins were  hunted  from 
the  Misty  Mountains  and  a  new  peace  came  over  the  edge  of  the  Wild.  It  was 
spring,  and  a  fair  one  with  mild  weathers  and  a  bright  sun,  before  Bilbo  and 
Gandalf  took  their  leave  at  last  of Beorn,  and  though  he  longed  for  home. Bilbo 
left with regret, for the flowers of the gardens of Beorn were m springtime no less 
marvellous  than  in high summer. At  last  they came up  the  long road, and reached 
the  very  pass  where  the  goblins  had  captured  them before. But  they came  to  that 
high  point  at morning,  and  looking  backward  they  saw  a  white  sun  shining  over 
the  out-stretched  lands.  There  behind  lay  Mirkwood,  blue  in  the  distance,  and 
darkly green at the nearer edge even in the spring. There far away was the Lonely 
Mountain  on  the  edge  of  eyesight.  On  its  highest  peak  snow  yet  unmelted  was 
gleaming pale. 
"So  comes  snow  after  fire,  and  even  dragons  have  their  ending!"  said  Bilbo, 
and he  turned his back on his adventure. The Tookish part was getting very tired, 
and  the  Baggins  was  daily  getting  stronger.  "I  wish  now  only  to  be  in  my  own 
arm-chair!" he said. 

####-<h4>Chapter 19</h4> <br> 

The Last Stage 

 
It was on May the First that the two came back at last to the brink of the valley 
of  Rivendell,  where  stood  the  Last  (or  the  First)  Homely  House.  Again  it  was 
evening,  their  ponies were  tired,  especially  the  one  that  carried  the  baggage;  and 
they all felt in need of rest. As they rode down the steep path, Bilbo heard the elves 
still  singing  in  the  trees,  as  if  they  had  not  stopped  since  he  left;  and  as  soon  as 
their riders came down into the lower glades of the wood they burst into a song of 
much the same kind as before. This is something like it: 
 

The dragon is withered, 
His bones are now crumbled; 
His armour is shivered, 
His splendour is humbled! 
Though sword shall be rusted, 
And throne and crown perish  
With strength that men trusted 
And wealth that they cherish, 
Here grass is still growing, 
And leaves are yet swinging, 
The white water flowing, 
And elves are yet singing 
Come! Tra-la-la-lally! 
Come back to the valley! 
 
The stars are far brighter 
Than gems without measure, 
The moon is far whiter 
Than silver in treasure: 
The fire is more shining 
On hearth in the gloaming 
Than gold won by mining, 
So why go a -roaming? 
O! Tra-la-la-lally 
Come back to the Valley.  
 
O! Where are you going, 

####-So late in returning? 
The river is flowing, 
The stars are all burning! 
O! Whither so laden, 
So sad and so dreary? 
Here elf and elf-maiden 
Now welcome the weary 
With Tra-la-la-lally 
Come back to the Va lley,  
Tra-la-la-lally 
Fa-la-la-lally 
Fa-la! 

 
Then  the  elves  of  the  valley  came  out  and  greeted  them  and  led  them  across 
the  water  to  the  house  of  Elrond.  There  a  warm  welcome  was  made  them,  and 
there  were  many  eager  ears  that  evening  to  hear  the  tale  of  their  adventures. 
Gandalf it was who spoke, for Bilbo was fallen quiet and drowsy. Most of the tale 
he  knew,  for  he  had  been  in  it,  and  had  himself  told much  of  it  to  the  wizard  on 
their homeward way or  in  the house of Beorn; but every now and again he would 
open one eye, and listen, when a part of the story which he did not yet know came 
in. It was in this way that he learned where Gandalf had been to; for he overheard 
the  words  of  the  wizard  to  Elrond.  It  appeared  that  Gandalf  had  been  to  a  great 
council of the white wizards, masters of lore and good magic; and that they had at 
last driven the Necromancer from his dark hold in the south of Mirkwood. 
"Ere  long  now,"  Gandalf  was  saying,  "The  Forest  will  grow  somewhat  more 
wholesome. The North will be freed from that horror for many long years, I hope. 
Yet I wish he were banished from the world!" 
"It would be well  indeed," said Elrond; "but I fear  that will not come about  in 
this age of the world, or for many after." 
When  the  tale  of  their  joumeyings  was  told,  there  were  other  tales,  and  yet 
more  tales,  tales of  long ago, and  tales  . of new  things, and  tales of no  time at all, 
till Bilbo's head fell forward on his chest, and he snored comfortably in a corner.  
He woke to find himself in a white bed, and the moon shining through an open 
window.  Below  it  many  elves  were  singing  loud  and  clear  on  the  banks  of  the 
stream. 
 

Sing all ye joyful, now sing all together?  
The wind's in the free-top, the wind's in the heather;  
The stars are in blossom, the moon is in flower,  

####-And bright are the windows of Night in her tower.  
 
Dance all ye joyful, now dance all together! 
Soft is the grass, and let foot be like feather! 
The river is silver, the shadows are fleeting; 
Merry is May-time, and merry our meeting. 
 
Sing we now softly, and dreams let us weave him! 
Wind him in slumber and there let us leave him! 
The wanderer sleepeth. Now soft be his pillow! 
Lullaby! Lullaby! Alder and Willow! 
 
Sigh no more Pine, till the wind of the morn! 
Fall Moon! Dark be the land! 
Hush! Hush! Oak, Ash, and Thorn! 
Hushed be all water, till dawn is at hand! 

 
"Well, Merry People!" said Bilbo looking out. "What time by the moon is this? 
Your lullaby would waken a drunken goblin! Yet I thank you." 
"And  your  snores  would  waken  a  stone  dragon  –  yet  we  thank  you,"  they 
answered  with  laughter.  "It  is  drawing    towards  dawn,  and  you  have  slept  now 
since the night's beginning. Tomorrow, perhaps, you will be cured of weariness." 
"A  little  sleep  does  a  great  cure  in  the  house  of  Elrond,"  said  he;  "but  I  will 
take  all  the  cure  I  can  get.  A  second  good  night,  fair  friends!"  And  with  that  he 
went back to bed and slept till late morning. 
Weariness fell from him soon in that house, and he had many a merry jest and 
dance,  early  and  late,  with  the  elves  of  the  valley.  Yet  even  that  place  could  not 
long  delay  him  now,  and  he  thought  always  of  his  own  home.  After  a  week, 
therefore, he said farewell  to Elrond, and giving him such small gifts as he would 
accept, he  rode  away with Gandalf. Even  as  they  left  the valley  the  sky darkened 
in the West before them, and wind and rain came up to meet them. 
"Merry  is May-time!" said Bilbo, as  the  rain beat  into his  face. "But our back 
is to legends and we are coming home. I suppose this is a first taste of it." 
"There is a long road yet," said Gandalf. 
"But  it  is  the  last  road,"  said  Bilbo.  They  came  to  the  river  that  marked  the 
very  edge  of  the  borderland  of  the Wild,  and  to  the  ford  beneath  the  steep  bank, 
which  you  may  remember.  The  water  was  swollen  both  with  the  melting  of  the 
snows  at  the  approach  of  summer,  and  with  the  daylong  rain;  but  they  crossed 
with some difficulty, and pressed forward, as evening fell, on the last stage of their 

####-journey.  This  was  much  as  it  had  been  before,  except  that  the  company  was 
smaller,  and  more  silent;  also  this  time  there were  no  trolls. At  each  point  on  the 
road Bilbo  recalled  the  happenings  and  the words  of  a  year  ago-it seemed  to him 
more  like  ten-so  that,  of  course,  he  quickly  noted  the  place  where  the  pony  had 
fallen  in  the  river,  and  they  had  turned  aside  for  their  nasty  adventure with  Tom 
and  Bert  and  Bill. Not  far  from  the  road  they  found  the  gold  of  the  trolls, which 
they had buried,  still hidden  and untouched.  "I have  enough  to  last me my  time," 
said Bilbo, when they had dug it up. "You had better take this, Gandalf. I daresay 
you can find a use for it." 
"Indeed I can!" said the wizard. "But share and share alike! You may find you 
have more needs than you expect." 
So they put the gold in bags and slung them on the ponies, who were not at all 
pleased  about  it.  After  that  their  going  was  slower,  for  most  of  the  time  they 
walked.  But  the  land  was  green  and  there  was  much  grass  through  which  the 
hobbit  strolled  along  contentedly.  He  mopped  his  face  with  a  red  silk 
handkerchief-no!  not  a  single  one  of  his own had  survived, he had borrowed  this 
one from Elrond  –for now June had brought summer, and  the weather was bright 
and hot again. 
As  all  things  come  to  an  end,  even  this  story,  a  day  came  at  last  when  they 
were in sight of the country where Bilbo had been born and bred, where the shapes 
of  the  land  and  of  the  trees  were  as  well  known  to  him  as  his  hands  and  toes. 
Coming  to  a  rise  he  could  see  his  own  Hill  in  the  distance,  and  he  stopped 
suddenly and said: 
 

Roads go ever ever on, 
Over rock and under tree, 
By caves where never sun has shone, 
By streams that never find the sea; 
 
Over snow by winter sown, 
And through the merry flowers of June, 
Over grass and over stone, 
And under mountains in the moon. 
 
Roads go ever ever on 
Under cloud and under star,  
Yet feet that wandering have gone 
Turn at last to home afar.  
 

####-Eyes that fire and sword have seen 
And horror in the halls of stone 
Look at last on meadows green 
And trees and hills they long have known. 

 
Gandalf  looked  at  him.  "My  dear  Bilbo!"  he  said.  "Something  is  the  matter 
with you! You are not the hobbit that you were." 
And so they crossed the bridge and passed the mill by the river and came right 
back  to  Bilbo's  own  door.  "Bless  me!  What's  going  on?"  he  cried.  There  was  a 
great  commotion,  and  people  of  all  sorts,  respectable  and  unrespectable,  were 
thick  round  the  door,  and many were  going  in  and  out-not even wiping  their  feet 
on the mat, as Bilbo noticed with annoyance. 
If he was surprised,  they were more surprised still. He had arrived back  in  the 
middle  of an auction! There was a large notice in black and red hung on the gate, 
stating  that  on  June  the  Twenty-second  Messrs.  Grubb,  Grubb,  and  Bun-owes 
would  sell  by  auction  the  effects  of  the  late  Bilbo  Baggins  Esquire,  of  Bag-End, 
Underhill,  Hobbiton.  Sale  to  commence  at  ten  o'clock  sharp.  It  was  now  nearly 
lunch-time,  and most  of  the  things  had  already  been  sold,  for  various  prices  from 
next  to  nothing  to  old  songs  (as  is  not  unusual  at  auctions).  Bilbo's  cousins  the 
Sackville-Bagginses  were,  in  fact,  busy  measuring  his  rooms  to  see  if  their  own 
furniture would  fit.  In  short Bilbo was  "Presumed Dead,"  and not  everybody  that 
said so was sorry to find the presumption wrong. 
The  return  of  Mr.  Bilbo  Baggins  created  quite  a  disturbance,  both  under  the 
Hill  and  over  the Hill, and across  the Water;  it was a great deal more  than a nine 
days' wonder.  The  legal  bother,  indeed,  lasted  for  years.  It was  quite  a  long  time 
before Mr. Baggins was in fact admitted to be alive again. The people who had got 
specially  good  bargains  at  the  Sale  took  a  deal  of  convincing;  and  in  the  end  to 
sav6  time  Bilbo  had  to  buy  back  quite  a  lot  of  his  own  furniture.  Many  of  his 
silver  spoons mysteriously  disappeared  and were  never  accounted  for.  Personally 
he  suspected  the  Sackville-Bagginses.  On  their  side  they  never  admitted  that  the 
returned  Baggins  was  genuine,  and  they  were  not  on  friendly  terms  with  Bilbo 
ever after. They really had wanted to live in his nice hobbit-hole so very much. 
Indeed Bilbo  found he had  lost more  than  spoons  – he had lost his reputation. 
It  is  true  that  for  ever  after  he  remained  an  elf-friend,  and  had  the  honour  of 
dwarves, wizards, and all such folk as ever passed that way; but he was no longer 
quite  respectable.  He  was  in  fact  held  by  all  the  hobbits  of  the  neighbourhood to 
be  'queer'-except by his nephews and nieces on  the Took  side, but even  they were 
not  encouraged  in  their  friendship  by  their  elders.  I  am  sorry  to  say  he  did  not 

####-mind.  He  was  quite  content;  and  the  sound  of  the  kettle  on  his  hearth  was  ever 
after more musical  than  it had been  even  in  the quiet days before  the Unexpected 
Party. His sword he hung over  the mantelpiece. His coat of mail was arranged on 
a  stand  in  the hall  (until he  lent  it  to  a Museum). His gold  and  silver was  largely 
spent in presents, both useful and extravagant – which to a certain extent accounts 
for  the  affection  of  his  nephews  and  his  nieces.  His  magic  ring  he  kept  a  great 
secret,  for  he  chiefly  used  it  when  unpleasant  callers  came.  He  took  to  writing 
poetry  and  visiting  the  elves;  and  though  many  shook  their  heads  and  touched 
their  foreheads  and  said  "Poor  old Baggins!"  and  though  few  believed  any  of  his 
tales,  he  remained  very  happy  to  the  end  of  his  days,  and  those  were 
extraordinarily long. 
One  autumn  evening  some  years  afterwards  Bilbo  was  sitting  in  his  study 
writing  his  memoirs  –  he  thought  of  calling  them  "There  and  Back  Again,  a 
Hobbit's  Holiday"  –  when  there  was  a  ring  at  the  door.  It  was  Gandalf  and  a 
dwarf; and the dwarf was actually Balin. 
"Come  in!  Come  in!"  said  Bilbo,  and  soon  they  were  settled  in  chairs  by  the 
fire. If Balin noticed that Mr. Baggins' waistcoat was more extensive (and had real 
gold buttons), Bilbo also noticed that Balm's beard was several inches longer, and 
his jewelled belt was of great magnificence. 
They  fell  to  talking  of  their  times  together,  of  course,  and  Bilbo  asked  how 
things  were  going  in  the  lands  of  the Mountain.  It  seemed  they  were  going  very 
well.  Bard  had  rebuilt  the  town  in  Dale  and  men  had  gathered  to  him  from  the 
Lake  and  from  South  and  West,  and  all  the  valley  had  become  tilled  again  and 
rich, and the desolation was now filled with birds and blossoms in spring and fruit 
and  feasting  in  autumn. And Lake-town was refounded and was more prosperous 
than  ever,  and much wealth went  up  and down the Running River; and there was 
friendship in those parts between elves and dwarves and men. 
The old Master had come to a bad end. Bard had given him much gold for the 
help  of  the  Lake-people,  but  being  of  the  kind  that  easily  catches  such  disease  he 
fell under the dragon-sickness, and took most of the gold and fled with it, and died 
of starvation in the Waste, deserted by his companions. 
"The  new  Master  is  of  wiser  kind,"  said  Balin,  "and  very  popular,  for,  of 
course,  he  gets  most  of  the  credit  for  the  present  prosperity.  They  are  making 
songs which say that in his day the rivers run with gold." 
"Then  the  prophecies  of  the  old  songs  have  turned  out  to  be  true,  after  a 
fashion!" said Bilbo. 

####-"Of  course!"  said Gandalf.  "And why  should  not  they  prove  true? Surely you 
don't  disbelieve  the  prophecies,  because  you  had  a  hand  in  bringing  them  about 
yourself? You  don't  really  suppose,  do  you,  that  all  your  adventures  and  escapes 
were  managed  by  mere  luck,  just  for  your  sole  benefit?  You  are  a  very  fine 
person,  Mr.  Baggins,  and  I  am  very  fond  of  you;  but  you  are  only  quite  a  little 
fellow in a wide world after all!" 
"Thank goodness!" said Bilbo laughing, and handed him the tobacco-jar.  
 

####-####- 
 

Complete Table of Contents 
 

 Foreword  
     
 Prologue   
Concerning Hobbits  
     1.  
Concerning Pipe-weed  
     2.  
Of the Ordering of the Shire  
     3.  
Of the Finding of the Ring  
     4.  
      
note on the shire records  
      

####-Book I  
     Chapter 1   A Long-expected Party  
     Chapter 2   The Shadow of the Past  
     Chapter 3   Three is Company   
     Chapter 4   A Short Cut to Mushrooms  
     Chapter 5   A Conspiracy Unmasked   
     Chapter 6   The Old Forest  
     Chapter 7   In the House of Tom Bombadil   
     Chapter 8  Fog on the Barrow-Downs  
     Chapter 9   At the Sign of The Prancing Pony  
     Chapter 10  Strider  
     Chapter 11  A Knife in the Dark   
     Chapter 12  Flight to the Ford   
      
Book II  
     Chapter 1   Many Meetings  
     Chapter 2   The Council of Elrond   
     Chapter 3   The Ring Goes South   
     Chapter 4   A Journey in the Dark   
     Chapter 5   The Bridge of Khazad-dym  
     Chapter 6   Lothlurien  
     Chapter 7   The Mirror of Galadriel   
     Chapter 8   Farewell to Lurien   
     Chapter 9   The Great River  
     Chapter 10  The Breaking of the Fellowship  
      

####-Book III  
     Chapter 1   The Departure of Boromir  
     Chapter 2   The Riders of Rohan   
     Chapter 3   The Uruk-Hai  
     Chapter 4   Treebeard  
     Chapter 5   The White Rider  
     Chapter 6   The King of the Golden Hall   
     Chapter 7   Helm's Deep  
     Chapter 8   The Road to Isengard   
     Chapter 9   Flotsam and Jetsam   
     Chapter 10  The Voice of Saruman   
     Chapter 11  The Palantnr  
      
Book IV   
     Chapter 1   The Taming of Smjagol   
     Chapter 2   The Passage of the Marshes  
     Chapter 3   The Black Gate is Closed   
     Chapter 4   Of Herbs and Stewed Rabbit  
     Chapter 5   The Window on the West  
     Chapter 6   The Forbidden Pool   
     Chapter 7   Journey to the Cross-roads  
     Chapter 8   The Stairs of Cirith Ungol   
     Chapter 9   Shelob's Lair  
     Chapter 10  The Choices of Master Samwise   
      

####-Book V   
     Chapter 1   Minas Tirith  
     Chapter 2   The Passing of the Grey Company   
     Chapter 3   The Muster of Rohan  
     Chapter 4   The Siege of Gondor  
     Chapter 5   The Ride of the Rohirrim   
     Chapter 6   The Battle of the Pelennor Fields  
     Chapter 7   The Pyre of Denethor  
     Chapter 8   The Houses of Healing   
     Chapter 9   The Last Debate   
     Chapter 10  The Black Gate Opens  
      
Book VI   
     Chapter 1   The Tower of Cirith Ungo 
     Chapter 2   The Land of Shadow   
     Chapter 3   Mount Doom   
     Chapter 4   The Field of Cormallen   
     Chapter 5   The Steward and the King   
     Chapter 6   Many Partings  
     Chapter 7   Homeward Bound  
     Chapter 8   The Scouring of the Shire   
     Chapter 9   The Grey Havens  

####-Foreword 

 
 
     This  tale grew in the telling, until it became  a history of the Great 
War of the  Ring and included  many glimpses of the yet more ancient history 
that preceded it. It was begun soon after The  Hobbit was written and before 
its publication in 1937; but I did not go  on with this sequel, for I wished 
first  to complete and set in  order the mythology and  legends of the Elder  
Days, which had then been taking shape for some years. I desired to do  this 
for my own satisfaction,  and  I had little hope that other people would  be 
interested  in  this work, especially  since it was primarily  linguistic in 
inspiration and  was begun  in order to provide  the necessary background of 
'history' for Elvish tongues. 
     When  those  whose advice and opinion I sought corrected little hope to 
no hope, I went back to the sequel, encouraged by  requests from readers for  
more information concerning hobbits and their adventures. But the story  was 
drawn  irresistibly  towards the  older world, and became an account,  as it 
were, of its end and passing away  before its beginning and middle had  been 
told. The process  had begun  in the writing  of The Hobbit, in which  there 
were  already  some  references to the older  matter:  Elrond, Gondolin, the 
High-elves, and the  orcs,  as  well as glimpses that had arisen unbidden of 
things higher or deeper  or darker than its surface: Durin,  Moria, Gandalf, 
the Necromancer,  the  Ring.  The  discovery  of the significance  of  these 
glimpses and of  their relation to  the ancient histories revealed the Third 
Age and its culmination in the War of the Ring. 
     Those who  had asked for  more information about hobbits eventually got  
it, but they had to wait a long time; for the composition of The Lord of the 
Rings went on at intervals during the  years 1936 to 1949, a period in which  
I had  many  duties that  I did not neglect, and  many  other interests as a  
learner and teacher  that often absorbed  me. The delay was, of course, also 
increased by the outbreak of war in 1939, by the end of which  year the tale 
had not yet reached  the  end  of Book  One. In spite of the darkness of the 
next  five years I  found that the story could  not now be  wholly abandoned,  
and  I plodded on, mostly  by night, till I stood  by Balin's tomb in Moria. 
There I halted for a long while. It  was almost a  year later when I went on 
and so came to Lothlurien and the Great River late in 1941. In the next year  

####-I  wrote the first drafts of the  matter  that now stands as Book Three, and 
the beginnings of  chapters I and III of Book Five; and there as the beacons 
flared in  Anurien  and Thjoden came to Harrowdale I stopped.  Foresight had 
failed and there was no time for thought. 
     It was  during 1944  that, leaving the loose ends and perplexities of a  
war which it was my task to  conduct, or at least to report, 1 forced myself 
to tackle the journey of Frodo  to  Mordor.  These chapters,  eventually  to 
become  Book Four,  were  written  and  sent  out  as  a  serial  to my son, 
Christopher, then in South Africa with the RAF.  Nonetheless it took another 
five  years before the tale was brought to its present end;  in that  time I 
changed my house, my chair,  and my college,  and the days though  less dark 
were no less laborious.  Then when the 'end' had  at last  been reached  the 
whole story had to be revised, and indeed  largely re-written backwards. And 
it had to be typed, and  re-typed: by me; the cost of professional typing by 
the ten-fingered was beyond my means. 
     The Lord of the  Rings has been read by many  people since  it  finally 
appeared in print; and I should like to say something here with reference to 
the many opinions  or guesses that I  have  received or have read concerning 
the motives  and meaning  of  the tale. The prime motive was the desire of a  
tale-teller  to try  his hand at a  really long  story that would  hold  the 
attention  of  readers, amuse them, delight  them, and at times maybe excite 
them or deeply move them. As a guide I had only my own  feelings for what is 
appealing or moving, and for  many the guide  was inevitably often at fault. 
Some who have read the book, or at  any rate have reviewed it, have found it 
boring, absurd, or contemptible; and I have no  cause  to complain, since  I 
have similar opinions of  their works, or of the kinds  of writing that they 
evidently  prefer. But even from the points of view of many who have enjoyed 
my story there is much that fails to please. It is perhaps not possible in a  
long tale to please everybody at  all  points, nor to displease everybody at 
the same points; for I find from the letters that I have  received  that the 
passages or chapters that are to some a blemish  are all by others specially 
approved. The  most critical  reader of all, myself, now finds many defects,  
minor and major, but  being fortunately under no obligation either to review 
the book  or  to write  it again, he will pass over these in  silence, except 
one that has been noted by others: the book is too short. 
     As for any inner meaning or  'message', it has in the intention  of the 
author none. It is neither allegorical nor topical. As the story grew it put 

####-down roots  (into the past) and threw out unexpected branches: but  its main 
theme was  settled from  the outset by the  inevitable choice of the Ring as 
the link between it and  The Hobbit. The crucial chapter, "The Shadow of the 
Past', is  one of the oldest parts of the tale.  It  was written long before 
the foreshadow  of  1939 had yet become a threat of inevitable disaster, and 
from that  point the  story would have developed along essentially  the same 
lines, if that disaster had been averted. Its sources are things long before 
in mind, or in some  cases already written, and  little or nothing in it was 
modified by the war that began in 1939 or its sequels.  
     The real war  does not resemble the legendary war in its process or its 
conclusion. If it had inspired  or  directed  the development of the legend, 
then certainly the  Ring would have  been seized and used against Sauron; he 
would  not have been annihilated  but enslaved, and Barad-dyr would not have 
been destroyed but occupied. Saruman, failing to get possession of the Ring, 
would m the confusion  and treacheries of the  time have found in Mordor the 
missing links in his own researches into Ring-lore, and before long he would 
have made a Great  Ring  of his  own with which to challenge the self-styled 
Ruler of Middle-earth.  In that conflict both sides would  have held hobbits 
in hatred and contempt: they would not long have survived even as slaves. 
     Other arrangements could be devised according to the tastes or views of 
those  who  like allegory  or  topical reference.  But I  cordially  dislike 
allegory in all its manifestations, and always have done so since I grew old 
and  wary  enough to  detect  its  presence. I  much prefer history, true or  
feigned, with its varied  applicability  to the  thought  and  experience of 
readers. I think that many confuse 'applicability' with 'allegory'; but  the 
one  resides  in the  freedom of the reader, and the  other in  the purposed 
domination of the author. 
     An author cannot of course remain wholly unaffected  by his experience,  
but the ways in which a story-germ uses the soil of experience are extremely  
complex,  and  attempts  to  define  the  process  are at  best guesses from 
evidence  that  is  inadequate  and  ambiguous.  It  is also  false,  though 
naturally  attractive,  when  the  lives  of   an  author  and  critic  have 
overlapped, to  suppose that the movements of thought or the events of times 
common to both were necessarily the most powerful influences. One has 
indeed 
personally to come under the shadow of war to feel fully its oppression; but 
as the years go by it seems now often forgotten that to  be caught  in youth 

####-by  1914 was no less hideous an experience  than to  be involved in 1939 and 
the  following years. By 1918 all but one of my close  friends were dead. Or  
to  take  a less grievous  matter:  it  has been supposed by some  that 'The 
Scouring of  the Shire' reflects the situation in England at the time when I 
was finishing  my tale. It does  not. It is an  essential  part of the plot, 
foreseen from the outset, though in the event  modified  by the character of 
Saruman as  developed  in  the story  without, need I  say,  any allegorical 
significance or contemporary political reference  whatsoever. It has  indeed 
some basis in experience,  though  slender (for the  economic situation  was 
entirely different),  and much further back. The country in which I lived in 
childhood was  being  shabbily  destroyed before  I was  ten, in  days  when 
motor -cars were  rare objects  (I had  never seen  one) and  men wer e  still 
building suburban railways.  Recently I saw in a paper a picture of the last  
decrepitude of  the once  thriving  corn-mill beside its  pool that long ago 
seemed to me so important.  I never liked the looks of the Young miller, but 
his father,  the Old  miller,  had  a  black  beard,  and he  was  not named 
Sandyman. 
     The  Lord  of  the  Rings is  now  issued in  a  new  edition,  and the 
opportunity  has  been  taken  of  revising  it.  A  number  of  errors  and 
inconsistencies that still rema ined in  the text have been corrected, and an 
attempt has been made to provide information on a few points which attentive 
readers have raised. I have considered all their comments and enquiries, and 
if some seem to have been passed over  that  may be because I have failed to  
keep  my  notes in  order;  but many  enquiries  could only  be answered  by  
additional appendices, or indeed  by the  production  of an accessory volume  
containing  much of  the material that I did not  include  in  the  original 
edition, in particular more detailed linguistic information. In the meantime 
this edition offers this Foreword, an  addition to the Prologue, some notes,  
and an index of the names of persons and places. This index is in  intention 
complete in items  but not in references,  since for the present  purpose it 
has been  necessary to reduce its bulk. A complete index, making full use of 
the  material  prepared  for  me  by Mrs.  N. Smith,  belongs  rather to the 
accessory volume. 
 

####-* PROLOGUE * 

 
 

1. Concerning Hobbits 

 
 
     This  book  is largely  concerned  with  Hobbits, and from its pages  a  
reader  may discover  much of their character and a little of their history. 
Further information will also be found in the selection from the Red Book of 
Westmarch  that has already been published, under the  title of The  Hobbit. 
That story  was derived  from the earlier chapters of the Red Book, composed 
by  Bilbo himself, the first Hobbit to become famous in  the world at large, 
and called by him There and  Back Again, since they told of his journey into 
the East and his  return: an adventure  which later involved all the Hobbits 
in the great events of that Age that are here related. 
     Many, however, may wish to know more about  this remarkable people 
from 
the outset, whi le some  may not possess the earlier book. For such readers a  
few notes on the more important points are here  collected from Hobbit-lore,  
and the first adventure is briefly recalled. 
     Hobbits are  an  unobtrusive  but  very  ancient  people, more numerous 
formerly than they are today; for they love peace and quiet and  good tilled 
earth: a well-ordered and well-farmed countryside was their favourite haunt. 
They do not and did not understand or like machines more  complicated than a  
forge-bellows, a water -mill, or a  hand-loom, though  they were skilful with  
tools. Even in ancient days they  were, as a rule, shy of 'the Big Folk', as 
they call us, and now  they avoid us with  dismay and are  becoming hard  to  
find. They are quick of hearing and sharp-eyed, and though they are inclined  
to be  fat  and do not hurry unnecessarily, they are nonetheless  nimble and 
deft  in  their  movements.  They  possessed  from  the  first  the  art  of 
disappearing  swiftly and silently, when large folk whom they do not wish to 
meet come blundering by; and this an they have developed until to Men it may 
seem  magical. But Hobbits have never, in  fact,  studied magic of any kind,  
and their elusiveness  is due  solely to a professional skill  that heredity 
and  practice,  and  a  close  friendship  with  the  earth,  have  rendered 

####-inimitable by bigger and clumsier races.  
     For  they are  a  little people,  smaller  than Dwarves:  less tout and 
stocky, that is, even when they  are not actually much shorter. Their height 
is  variable, ranging between two and  four feet of our measure. They seldom 
now reach three feet; but they hive dwindled, they  say, and in ancient days 
they were  taller. According to the Red Book,  Bandobras Took  (Bullroarer), 
son of Isengrim the Second,  was four foot five and able to ride a  horse. He 
was  surpassed  in all Hobbit records only by two famous characters of  old;  
but that curious matter is dealt with in this book. 
     As for the Hobbits of the  Shire,  with whom these tales are concerned, 
in  the  days  of their peace and prosperity they  were  a  merry folk. They 
dressed in bright colours, being notably fond of yellow and green;  but they 
seldom wore shoes, since  their feet had tough leathery soles  and were clad 
in  a  thick  curling hair, much like  the hair  of  their  heads, which was 
commonly  brown.  Thus,  the  only  craft  little  practised among them  was 
shoe-making; but they had long and skilful fingers and could make many other 
useful and comely  things.  Their faces  were as  a rule good-natured rather  
than  beautiful,  broad,  bright-eyed,  red-cheeked,  with  mouths   apt  to 
laughter,  and to eating and  drinking. And laugh  they  did,  and  eat, and 
drink, often and heartily, being fond  of simple  jests at all times, and of 
six meals  a  day (when  they  could  get them).  They  were  hospitable and 
delighted in  parties, and  in  presents, which  they  gave away freely  and 
eagerly accepted. 
     It  is plain indeed that  in spite  of later  estrangement Hobbits  are 
relatives of ours: far nearer to us than Elves, or even than Dwarves. Of old 
they spoke  the languages  of Men,  after their own fashion,  and liked  and 
disliked much  the same things as Men did. But what exactly our relationship 
is  can no longer be discovered. The  beginning of Hobbits lies  far back in 
the  Elder Days that  are  now  lost and  forgotten.  Only  the Elves  still 
preserve any  records  of  that  vanished  time, and  their  traditions  are 
concerned almost entirely with their own history, in which Men appear seldom 
and Hobbits are not mentioned at  all. Yet it is clear that Hobbits  had, in 
fact, lived quietly in  Middle-earth for  many  long years before other folk  
became  even aware of  them.  And the world being after all  full of strange 
creatures   beyond  count,  these  little  people   seemed  of  very  little 
importance. But in the days of Bilbo, and  of Frodo his  heir, they suddenly 
became, by no wish of  their  own, both important and renowned, and troubled 

####-the counsels of the Wise and  the Great. 
     Those days,  the Third Age of Middle-earth, are now long past, and  the 
shape  of all lands has  been changed; but the regions in which Hobbits then  
lived were doubtless  the  same  as  those  in which  they still linger: the 
North-West  of the  Old World, east of  the Sea. Of their original home  the 
Hobbits in Bilbo's time preserved no  knowledge. A  love  of learning (other  
than genealogical lore) was far from general among them,  but there remained 
still a few  in  the  older families  who  studied their own books, and even 
gathered reports  of old times and distant lands  from Elves,  Dwarves,  and 
Men. Their own  records  began only  after the settlement of the  Shire, and 
their most ancient  legends hardly looked further  back than their Wandering  
Days. It is clear, nonetheless, from these legends, and from the evidence of 
their peculiar words  and customs, that like many other  folk Hobbits had in 
the distant past moved westward. Their earliest tales seem to glimpse a time 
when they dwelt in the upper vales of Anduin, between the eaves of 
Greenwood 
the Great  and the Misty Mountains. Why they  later undertook  the hard  and 
perilous crossing of the mountains into Eriador is no longer  certain. Their 
own  accounts speak  of the multiplying of Men in  the land, and of a shadow 
that fell on the forest,  so that it became  darkened  and its new  name was 
Mirkwood. 
     Before the  crossing  of the  mountains the Hobbits had  already become 
divided  into  three  somewhat   different  breeds:  Harfoots,  Stoors,  and 
Fallohides. The Harfoots were  browner  of skin, smaller,  and  shorter, and 
they were beardless and bootless; their hands and feet were neat and nimble;  
and they preferred highlands and hillsides. The Stoors were broader, heavier  
in build; their feet  and hands were larger,  and they preferred flat  lands 
and riversides.  The Fallohides  were fairer of  skin and also of  hair, and 
they were taller and slimmer than the others; they were lovers of  trees and 
of woodlands.  
     The  Harfoots had  much  to do  with Dwarves in ancient times, and long 
lived in the  foothills  of  the  mountains. They moved westward early,  and 
roamed over Eriador as far as Weathertop while the  others were still in the 
Wilderland. They were the most normal  and representative variety of Hobbit, 
and  far  the most  numerous. They  were the most inclined to settle  in one 
place, and longest preserved their ancestral habit of living in  tunnels and 
holes. 

####-     The Stoors lingered long by  the  banks of  the Great River Anduin, and 
were less shy of Men.  They came west after  the  Harfoots and  followed the 
course of the  Loudwater  southwards;  and  there  many of  them  long dwelt 
between Tharbad and the borders of Dunland before they moved north again. 
     The  Fallohides, the least numerous, were a northerly branch. They were 
more friendly with Elves  than the other Hobbits were, and had more skill in 
language  and song than in handicrafts; and of old they preferred hunting to 
tilling.  They  crossed the mountains north of Rivendell  and came  down the  
River Hoarwell. In  Eriador they soon  mingled with the other kinds that had 
preceded them,  but being somewhat  bolder  and more adventurous, they  were 
often found as leaders or chieftains among clans of Harfoots or Stoors. Even 
in Bilbo's time the strong Fallohidish strain could still be noted among the 
greater families, such as the Tooks and the Masters of Buckland. 
     In the  westlands  of Eriador, between  the  Misty  Mountains  and  the 
Mountains of  Lune, the Hobbits found both Men and Elves. Indeed, a  remnant 
still dwelt there of the D®nedain, the kings of Men that  came over the  Sea  
out of  Westernesse; but  they were  dwindling fast and  the  lands of their 
North Kingdom were falling far and  wide into waste. There was  room and  to 
spare for  incomers, and ere long  the Hobbits began  to  settle in  ordered 
communities. Most of their earlier settlements had long disappeared and been 
forgotten in Bilbo's time;  but  one of the  first to become important still 
endured, though reduced in  size; this  was at Bree and in the Chetwood that 
lay round about, some forty miles east of the Shire. 
     It was in these  early days,  doubtless, that the Hobbits learned their 
letters and  began to write  after  the  manner  of the D®nedain, who had in 
their  turn long before learned  the art from  the Elves. And in  those days 
also they  forgot  whatever languages  they had used before,  and spoke ever  
after the  Common  Speech, the  Westron as it  was  named, that was  current 
through all the lands of the kings  from Arnor to  Gondor, and about all the 
coasts of the Sea from Belfalas to Lune. Yet they kept  a few words of their 
own,  as  well as their own names of months  and days, and  a great store of 
personal names out of the past. 
     About this time legend among  the Hobbits first  becomes history with a  
reckoning  of years. For it was in the  one thousand  six hundred  and first  
year of the  Third Age  that the  Fallohide brothers, Marcho and Blanco, set 
out  from  Bree; and having  obtained  permission  from  the  high  king  at 
Fornost1,  they crossed the brown river Baranduin with a  great following of 

####-Hobbits.  They passed over the Bridge of Stonebows, that had been  built  in 
the  days  of the  power of the North Kingdom,  and they took ail  the  land 
beyond  to  dwell in,  between  the river and  the Far Downs.  All  that was 
demanded of them was  that they should keep the Great Bridge in  repair, and 
all other bridges  and roads,  speed the king's messengers, and  acknowledge 
his lordship. 
     Thus began  the Shire-reckoning, for the year  of  the  crossing of the 
Brandywine (as the  Hobbits turned the name) became  Year One  of the Shire, 
and all later dates were reckoned from it.2 At once the western Hobbits fell 
in love with their new land, and they  remained there, and soon passed  once 
more out  of the history  of Men and of Elves. While there  was still a king 
they  were in name his subjects, but they were, in  fact, ruled by their own 
chieftains  and meddled not at all with events in the world outside. To  the 
last  battle at Fornost with the Witch -lord of Angmar they  sent some bowmen 
to the aid of the king, or so they maintained, though no tales of Men record 
it.  But in that war the North Kingdom ended; and then the  Hobbits took the 
land for their own, and they chose from their own chiefs a Thain to hold the 
authority of the king that  was  gone. There for a thousand years  they were 
little troubled  by wars, and  they prospered and  multiplied after the Dark 
Plague (S.R. 37) until the disaster of  the Long Winter and the famine  that 
followed it. Many thousands then  perished, but the Days of Dearth (1158-60) 
were at the time of this  tale long past and  the Hobbits  had again  become 
accustomed  to plenty. The land  was rich and kindly, and though it had long 
been deserted  when they entered it,  it  had  before been  well tilled, and 
there the king had once had many farms, cornlands, vineyards, and woods.  
     Forty leagues it stretched from the Far Downs to the Brandywine Bridge, 
and fifty from the northern moors to  the marshes in the south. The  Hobbits 
named  it  the Shire, as the region of the  authority of their Thain,  and a  
district of well-ordered  business; and there  in that pleasant  comer of the 
world they plied their well-ordered business of living, and they heeded less 
and less the world outside where dark things moved, until they came to think 
that  peace and  plenty were the rule in Middle-earth and the  right of  all 
sensible folk. They forgot or ignored what little they had ever known of the 
Guardians, and of  the labours of those that made possible the long peace of 
the  Shire. They were, in fact, sheltered, but they had ceased  to  remember  
it. 
     At no  time had Hobbits of any  kind been  warlike, and  they had never  

####-fought  among  themselves. In olden days  they had, of  course,  been  often 
obliged to fight to maintain themselves in a hard world; but in Bilbo's time 
that was very ancient history. The last battle, before this story opens, and 
indeed the  only  one  that had ever been  fought  within the borders of the 
Shire, was beyond  living memory: the Battle  of  Greenfields, S.R. 1147, in  
which Bandobras Took routed an invasion of Orcs. Even the weathers had 
grown 
milder, and the  wolves  that had once  come ravening  out of the  North  in 
bitter white winters were  now only  a grandfather's tale. So,  though there 
was still  some store of  weapons in the  Shire, these were  used  mostly as 
trophies, hanging above hearths or on  walls, or gathered into the museum at 
Michel Delving. The  Mathom-house it was  called; for  anything that Hobbits 
had  no immediate use for, but were unwilling to throw away,  they  called a  
mathom.  Their dwellings were apt to become rather crowded with mathoms, 
and 
many of the presents that passed from hand to hand were of that son. 
     Nonetheless, ease and peace had left this people still curiously tough. 
They were,  if it came to it, difficult to daunt or to kill; and they  were, 
perhaps,  so unwearyingly fond of  good things not least because they could, 
when put to it, do without them,  and could survive rough handling by grief,  
foe,  or weather in  a way that astonished those who did not know them  well 
and  looked  no further than their bellies and their well-fed  faces. Though 
slow to quarrel, and for sport killing nothing that lived, they were doughty 
at bay,  and  at  need could still handle arms. They shot well with the bow,  
for they were keen-eyed and sure at the mark. Not only with bows and arrows.  
If any Hobbit stooped for a stone,  it was well to get  quickly under cover, 
as all trespassing beasts knew very well. 
     All Hobbits had originally  lived in  holes in the  ground, or  so they 
believed,  and in such dwellings they still  felt most at  home; but  in  the 
course of time they had been obliged to adopt other forms of abode. Actually 
in  the Shire in Bilbo's  days it  was, as a rule, only the richest and  the 
poorest Hobbits  that maintained the old custom. The poorest  went on  living 
in burrows  of the  most  primitive  kind,  mere holes indeed, with only one 
window or  none;  while  the  well-to-do  still constructed  more  luxurious 
versions of the simple diggings of old.  But suitable  sites for these large 
and ramifying tunnels (or smials as they called them) were not everywhere to 
be found; and in the flats and the low-lying districts the Hobbits, as  they 

####-multiplied, began to  build above ground. Indeed, even in the hilly  regions 
and the older villages, such  as  Hobbiton or Tuckborough,  or in the  chief 
township of the Shire, Michel Delving  on  the White Downs, there  were  now 
many houses  of wood,  brick, or stone. These  were  specially  favoured  by 
millers, smiths, ropers,  and cartwrights, and others of that sort; for even 
when  they  had holes to live in. Hobbits had long been  accustomed to build 
sheds and workshops. 
     The habit of building farmhouses and barns was said to have begun among 
the inhabitants of the Marish  down by the Brandywine.  The  Hobbits of that 
quarter, the Eastfarthing, were rather large and heavy-legged, and they wore 
dwarf-boots in muddy  weather. But they were well known  to  be Stoors in  a 
large part of their blood, as indeed was shown by the down that many grew on 
their chins. No Har foot  or Fallohide had  any trace of a beard. Indeed, the 
folk  of  the Marish,  and  of Buckland,  east  of  the  River,  which  they 
afterwards  occupied, came for the most  part  later into the Shire  up from 
south-away;  and  they still had many peculiar names and strange  words  not 
found elsewhere in the Shire. 
     It is probable that the craft of building, as many other crafts beside, 
was derived from the D®nedain. But  the Hobbits  may  have learned it direct 
from the Elves, the teachers of  Men  in their  youth. For the Elves of  the 
High Kindred had not yet forsaken Middle-earth, and they dwelt still at that 
time at  the Grey Havens away to the west, and in other  places within reach 
of the  Shire. Three  Elf-towers of immemorial age were still to be seen  on 
the  Tower Hills  beyond the  western marches.  They shone far  off  in  the 
moonlight. The tallest was furthest away, standing alone upon a green mound. 
The Hobbits of the Westfarthing said that one could see the Sea from the lop  
of that tower; but  no  Hobbit had ever  been known to climb it. Indeed, few 
Hobbits  had ever  seen or  sailed  upon the Sea, and fewer  still had  ever  
returned to  report  it. Most Hobbits regarded even  rivers  and small boats 
with deep misgivings, and not  many of  them could swim.  And as the days of 
the Shire lengthened  they  spoke  less and  less with  the  Elves, and grew 
afraid  of them, and distrustful of those  that  had dealings with them; and 
the Sea  became  a word  of fear  among them, and a token of death, and they 
turned their faces away from the hills in the west. 
     The craft  of building may have come from Elves or Men, but the Hobbits 
used it in  their own fashion. They did not go in  for  towers. Their houses 
were usually long, low,  and comfortable. The oldest kind  were,  indeed, no 

####-more than built imitations of smials, thatched with dry  grass or  straw, or  
roofed with turves,  and having walls somewhat  bulged. That stage, however, 
belonged to the early days of the Shire, and hobbit-building had long  since 
been  altered, improved by devices,  learned from Dwarves,  or discovered by 
themselves.  A  preference for round windows, and even round  doors, was the 
chief remaining peculiarity of hobbit -architecture. 
     The houses  and  the  holes   of  Shire-hobbits  were  often  large, and 
inhabited by large families. (Bilbo and Frodo Baggins were as bachelors very 
exceptional,  as they were also in many other ways, such as their friendship 
with the Elves.) Sometimes, as in the case  of the Tooks of Great Smials, or  
the Brandybucks  of  Brandy Hall,  many  generations of  relatives  lived in 
(comparative) peace  together  in one ancestral  and many -tunnelled mansion. 
All Hobbits were, in any case,  clannish and reckoned up their relationships 
with great care. They drew long and elaborate family -trees with  innumerable 
branches. In dealing with Hobbits it is important to remember who is related 
to whom,  and in what degree. It would be impossible in this book to set out 
a  family-tree  that included  even the more  important members of the  more 
important families at  the  time which these tales tell of. The genealogical 
trees  at  the  end  of  the  Red Book of  Westmarch  are  a  small book  in 
themselves,  and all but Hobbits  would find them  exceedingly dull. Hobbits 
delighted in such things, if they  were accurate: they liked  to  have books 
filled with  things that they already knew, set out fair and  square with no 
contradictions.  

####- 

2. Concerning Pipe-weed 

 
 
     There is another astonishing  thing about Hobbits of old  that must  be 
mentioned, an astonishing habit: they imbibed  or inhaled, through pipes  of 
clay or wood, the smoke of the burning leaves of  a herb, which they  called  
pipe-weed or leaf, a variety  probably of Nicotiana. A great deal of mystery 
surrounds the  origin  of this peculiar  custom,  or  'art' as  the  Hobbits 
preferred to call it. All that could be discovered about it in antiquity was 
put together by Meriadoc Brandybuck (later Master of Buckland), and since he 
and  the   tobacco  of the Southfarthing  play  a part in  the  history  that 
follows, his remarks in the introduction to his Herblore of the Shire may be 
quoted. 
     'This,'  he says, 'is the one art that we can certainly claim to be our 
own invention.  When  Hobbi ts  first began  to smoke  is not known,  all the  
legends and family histories take it for granted; for ages folk in the Shire 
smoked various herbs, some fouler, some sweeter. But all accounts agree that 
Tobold Hornblower  of  Longbottom  in the Southfarthing first grew  the true 
pipe-weed in his gardens in  the days of Isengrim the Second, about the year  
1070 of Shire-reckoning. The best home-grown still comes from that district, 
especially the  varieties  now  known  as Longbottom  Leaf,  Old  Toby,  and 
Southern Star. 
     'How Old  Toby came by  the plant is not recorded, for to his dying day 
he would not tell.  He knew much about herbs, but he was no traveller. It is 
said that in his youth he went often to Bree, though he certainly never went 
further fr om the Shire than that.  It is thus quite possible that he learned 
of this plant in Bree, where now, at  any rate,  it grows well on  the south 
slopes of the hill. The  Bree-hobbits  claim to have been the  first  actual 
smokers of the pipe-weed.  They cla im,  of  course, to have done  everything  
before the people of the Shire,  whom they refer  to as "colonists"; but  in 
this case their claim is, I think,  likely to be true. And  certainly it was 
from Bree  that the  art  of smoking  the genuine weed sprea d  in the recent 
centuries among Dwarves and such other folk, Rangers, Wizards, or wanderers,  
as still passed  to and fro through that  ancient road-meeting. The home and 
centre of  the an is thus to be found in  the old inn of  Bree, The Prancing 

####-Pony, that has been kept by the family of Butterbur from time beyond record. 
     'All the same,  observations  that I have made on my own many  journeys 
south have convinced me that the weed itself  is not  native to our parts of 
the  world,  but  came  northward  from the lower Anduin, whither  it was, I 
suspect, originally brought  over  Sea by the Men  of  Westernesse. It grows 
abundantly  in  Gondor, and  there  is richer and  larger than in the North, 
where it is never found wild, and flourishes  only in  warm sheltered places 
like Longbottom. The Men of Gondor call it sweet galenas, and esteem it only 
for the fragrance of its  flowers. From  that land it must have been carried 
up the Greenway  during the long centuries between the coming of Elendil and 
our own day.  But even the D®nedain of  Gondor allow us this credit: Hobbits 
first put it into pipes.  Not even the Wizards first thought of that  before 
we did.  Though one Wizard that I knew took up the art long ago,  and became 
as skilful in it as in all other things that he put his mind to.' 

####- 

3. Of the Ordering of the Shire 

 
 
     The  Shire was  divided  into  four  quarters,  the  Farthings  already 
referred to.  North,  South, East,  and  West;  and  these again each into a  
number of folklands,  which still bore the names of some of  the old leading  
families, although by the time  of this  history these names were no  longer 
found only in their  proper folklands.  Nearly all Tooks  still lived in the 
Tookland,  but that  was not  true  of  many  other  families,  such  as the 
Bagginses  or  the Boffins.  Outside the  Farthings  were the  East and West 
Marches:  the  Buckland  (see  beginning of Chapter  V,  Book  I);  and  the 
Westmarch added to the Shire in S.R. 1462. 
     The Shire at  this time had hardly any 'government'. Families  for  the 
most part  managed their  own affairs. Growing  food and eating  it occupied  
most of their time. In  other matters they were, as a rule, generous and not 
greedy, but  contented and moderate, so  that estates, farms, workshops, and 
small trades tended to remain unchanged for generations.  
     There  remained,  of course, the  ancient tradition concerning the high 
king at  Fornost, or Norbury as they called it, away north of the Shire. But 
there had been no king for nearly  a thousand years,  and even the ruins  of 
Kings' Norbury  were covered with grass. Yet the Hobbits  still said of wild 
folk and wicked things (such as trolls) that they had not heard of the king. 
For they attributed to the king of old all their essential laws; and usually 
they kept the laws of free will, because they were The Rules (as they said), 
both ancient and just. 
     It is true  that  the Took  family had long  been  pre-eminent; for the 
office  of  Thain had  passed  to them  (from the Oldbucks)  some  centuries 
before,  and the chief  Took had borne that title ever since. The  Thain was 
the  master  of  the  Shire-moot, and captain of  the Shire-muster  and  the 
Hobbitry-in-arms,  but  as  muster  and moot  were only  held  in  times  of 
emergency,  which no  longer occurred, the Thainship  had  ceased to be more 
than  a  nominal dignity. The  Took  family was  still,  indeed,  accorded a  
special respect, for it remained  both numerous and exceedingly wealthy, and 
was  liable  to produce in ever y generation strong  characters  of  peculiar 
habits and even adventurous temperament. The latter qualities, however, were 

####-now  rather  tolerated (in  the  rich) than  generally  approved. The custom 
endured, nonetheless, of referring to the head of the  family  as The  Took, 
and of  adding  to  his  name, if  required, a number: such  as Isengrim the 
Second, for instance. 
     The only  real official  in the Shire  at  this date  was the Mayor  of 
Michel Delving (or of the Shire), who was  elected every  seven years at the 
Free Fair on the White  Downs at  the Lithe, that is at Midsummer.  As mayor  
almost   his  only  duty   was  to  preside   at  banquets,  given   on  the 
Shire-holidays,  which occurred at  frequent intervals. But  the  offices of 
Postmaster and First Shirriff were attached  to  the  mayoralty, so that  he 
managed  both the  Messenger Service  and  the  Watch.  These were the  only 
Shire-services,  and the Messengers  were the  most  numerous,  and much the 
busier of the two. By no means a ll Hobbits were lettered, but those who were 
wrote constantly to all their friends (and a  selection  of their relations)  
who lived further off than an afternoon's walk. 
     The Shirriffs was the name  that the  Hobbits gave to  their police, or  
the nearest equivalent that they possessed. They had, of course, no uniforms 
(such things being  quite unknown), only  a feather in their caps;  and they 
were  in  practice rather haywards than policemen,  more concerned  with the 
strayings of  beasts than of people. There were in all the Shire only twelve 
of them, three in  each  Farthing,  for  Inside Work. A  rather larger body, 
varying  at need,  was  employed  to  'beat  the  bounds', and to  see  that 
Outsiders of any kind, great or small, did not make themselves a nuisance. 
     At the time  when this story begins the Bounders, as they were  called, 
had been greatly  increased.  There  were  many reports  and  complaints  of 
strange persons  and creatures prowling about the borders, or over them: the 
first  sign  that all  was not  quite as  it  should be, and always had been 
except  in tales and legends of  long ago. Few heeded the sign, and not even  
Bilbo yet had any notion of what it portended. Sixty years  had passed since 
he set out on his  memorable journey, and he was old  even for Hobbits,  who 
reached a hundred  as often as not; but much evidently still remained of the 
considerable  wealth that he  had brought back. How  much or  how  little he 
revealed to no one,  not even to Frodo  his favourite 'nephew'. And he still 
kept secret the ring that he bad found. 

####- 

4. Of the Finding of the Ring  

 
 
     As is  told in The Hobbit, there came one day to Bilbo's door the great 
Wizard, Gandalf the Grey, and thirteen dwarves with him: none other, indeed, 
than Thorin Oakenshield,  descendant  of kings, and his twelve companions in 
exile. With  them he set  out, to his own lasting astonishment, on a morning 
of  April, it being then  the year 1341 Shire-reckoning, on a quest of great 
treasure, the dwarf-hoards of the Kings under the Mountain,  beneath  Erebor 
in Dale, far off in the East. The quest was  successful, and the Dragon that 
guarded the hoard was destroyed. Yet, though before  all  was won the Battle 
of Five Armies was fought, and Thorin was slain, and  many deeds  of  renown 
were done, the matter would scarcely have concerned later history, or earned 
more than a note in the long annals of the Third Age, but for an  'accident' 
by the way.  The  party was assailed by  Orcs in a  high pass  of  the Misty 
Mountains as they went towards Wilderland; and so it happened that Bilbo was 
lost for a while in the black orc-mines deep under the mountains, and there, 
as he groped  in vain in the dark, he put  his hand on  a ring, lying on the 
floor of a tunnel. He put it in h is pocket. It seemed then like mere luck. 
     Trying to find  his way out. Bilbo went on  down to  the  roots  of the 
mountains, until he could go no further.  At the bottom  of the tunnel lay a  
cold lake far  from the light, and on an island  of rock  in the water lived 
Gollum. He was a loathsome little creature: he paddled a small boat with his 
large  flat feet,  peering with pale luminous eyes  and  catching blind fish 
with his long fingers, and eating  them raw.  He ate  any living thing, even 
orc, if  he could catch it and strangle it without a struggle. He possessed a  
secret treasure that had come to him long ages ago,  when he  still lived in 
the light: a ring  of gold  that made its  wearer invisible. It was the  one 
thing he  loved, his 'precious', and he talked to  it, even when it  was not 
with him. For he kept it hidden safe in a hole on his island, except when he 
was hunting or spying on the ores of the mines. 
     Maybe he would have attacked Bilbo at once, if the ring had been on him 
when they met;  but it was  not, and  the hobbit held  in his hand an Elvish 
knife,  which served him as a sword. So to gain time Gollum challenged Bilbo 
to the Riddle-game,  saying that if he  asked a riddle which Bilbo could not 

####-guess, then  he would kill him and eat him;  but if Bilbo defeated him, then 
he would do as Bilbo wished: he would lead him to a way out of the tunnels.  
     Since he was lost in the dark without hope, and could neither go on nor  
back. Bilbo accepted the challenge; and they asked one another many riddles.  
In the end Bilbo won the game, more by luck (as it seemed) than by wits; for 
he was stumped at last  for a riddle to ask, and cried out, as his hand came 
upon the ring he lad picked up and forgotten:  What  haw I got in my pocket? 
This Gollum failed to answer, though he demanded three guesses. 
     The  Authorities, it is true, differ whether  this last  question was a  
mere  'question' and not  a  'riddle' according to  the strict rules  of the 
Game; but all agree that, after accepting it and trying to guess the answer, 
Gollum was bound by his promise. And Bilbo pressed him to keep his word; 
for 
the  thought  came  to him that  this slimy creature might prove false, even 
though  such  promises  were held sacred, and of old all  but  the wickedest 
things feared to break them. But after ages alone in the dark Gollum's heart 
was black, and  treachery was in it.  He slipped  away, and  returned to the 
island, of which Bilbo knew nothing,  not far off in the dark  water. There, 
he  thought,  lay  his  ring.  He was hungry now,  and angry, and  once  his 
'precious' was with him he would not fear any weapon at all. 
     But the ring was  not on the island; he had  lost it, it was  gone. His 
screech  sent a shiver down Bilbo's back, though he  did not  yet understand 
what  had happened. But Gollum had at last leaped to a guess, too late. What 
has  it got  in its pocketses? he  cried. The light in his eyes  was like  a  
green flame as he sped back to murder the hobbit and recover his 'precious'.  
Just  in  time Bilbo saw his peril,  and he fled blindly up the passage away 
from the water;  and once more he was saved by his luck. For  just as he ran 
he  put  his  hand in his  pocket, and  the ring  slipped  quietly on to his 
finger. So it was that  Gollum passed him  without seeing him, and  went  to  
guard  the  way out, lest the 'thief' should escape.  Warily Bilbo  followed 
him, as he went along, cursing, and talking to himself about his 'precious';  
from which  talk at last even Bilbo guessed the truth,  and hope came to him 
in the darkness: he himself had  found the marvellous  ring and a chance  of 
escape from the orcs and from Gollum. 
     At length they  came to a halt before an unseen opening that led to the 
lower  gates  of  the mines,  on the eastward  side of the mountains.  There 
Gollum  crouched at bay, smelling and listening;  and Bilbo  was  tempted to 

####-slay him with his sword. But  pity stayed him, and though  he kept the ring, 
in  which  his  only hope lay, he  would not  use  it  to  help him kill the 
wretched creature at a disadvantage. In  the  end, gathering his courage, he 
leaped  over  Gollum in the dark, and fled away down the passage, pursued by 
his enemy's cries  of hate and despair: Thief,  thief! Baggins!  We hates it 
for ever! 
     Now it is a curious fact that this is not the story as Bilbo first told 
it to his companions.  To  them his account was  that Gollum had promised to 
give  him a present, if he  won the game;  but when  Gollum went to fetch it  
from his island he found the treasure was gone: a magic ring, which had been 
given to him long ago on his birthday. Bilbo guessed that this was the  very 
ring  that he  had found, and as he had won the game, it was already  his by 
right. But being in a tight place, he said nothing about it, and made Gollum 
show him  the way out, as a reward instead of  a present. This account Bilbo 
set down in  his memoirs, and he seems never to have altered it himself, not  
even after  the  Council of  Elrond.  Evidently  it  still  appeared in  the 
origina l Red Book, as it  did  in several of the  copies  and abstracts. But 
many copies contain the  true account (as an alternative), derived no  doubt 
from notes by Frodo  or Samwise, both of whom learned the truth, though they 
seem to have been unwilling to delete anything  actually written by the  old 
hobbit himself. 
     Gandalf, however,  disbelieved Bilbo's first story, as soon as he heard 
it,  and he continued  to be very curious about the ring. Eventually he  got 
the true  tale  out  of  Bilbo  after much questioning,  which for  a  while 
strained  their  friendship;  but  the  wizard seemed  to  think  the  truth 
important. Though he did not say so to Bilbo, he also thought  it important, 
and disturbing, to find that the good hobbit had not told the truth from the 
first:  quite contrary to his  habit. The idea of a 'present' was  not  mere 
hobbitlike  invention,  all the  same.  It was  suggested  to Bilbo,  as  he 
confessed, by Gollum's talk that he overheard; for Gollum did, in fact, call 
the  ring  his 'birthday  present', many times.  That also  Gandalf  thought 
strange and suspicious; but he did not discover the truth in  this point for  
many more years, as will be seen in this book. 
     Of  Bilbo's  later adventures little  more need be said here. Wi th  the 
help of the ring he escaped from the orc-guards at the gate and rejoined his 
companions. He  used the ring many times on his  quest, chiefly for the help 
of his  friends; but  he kept it secret from them as long as he could. After  

####-his return to his home he never spoke  of  it  again to anyone, save Gandalf 
and Frodo;  and no one else  in the  Shire knew of its  existence,  or so he 
believed. Only to Frodo did he show  the account of  his Journey that he was 
writing. 
     His  sword,  Sting, Bilbo hu ng  over his  fireplace,  and  his coat  of 
marvellous mail, the gift of the Dwarves from the Dragon-hoard, he lent to a  
museum, to the Michel Delving Mathom-house in fact. But he kept in a  drawer  
at Bag  End  the old cloak and hood that he had worn on his travels; and the  
ring, secured by a fine chain, remained in his pocket. 
     He returned to his home at Bag End on June the 22nd in his fifty-second 
year (S.R. 1342),  and nothing very notable occurred in the  Shire until Mr. 
Baggins    began    the   pr eparations   for   the   celebration   of    his 
hundred-and-eleventh birthday  (S.R.  1401).  At  this  point  this  History 
begins. 

####- 

NOTE ON THE SHIRE RECORDS 

 
 
     At the end of the Third Age the part played by the Hobbits in the great 
events that led  to  the  inclusion  of  the Shire  in the  Reunited Kingdom 
awakened among them a  more widespread  interest in  their own  history; and 
many of their traditions, up to that time still  mainly oral, were collected 
and Written down. The  greater families were  also concerned with  events in 
the  Kingdom  at  large,  and  many  of  their members  studied its  ancient 
histories and  legends. By the  end of the  first century of the Fourth  Age 
there were already to be found in the Shire several libraries tha t contained 
many historical books and records. 
     The largest of these collections were probably at Undertowers, at Great 
Smials,  and at Brandy Hall.  This  account of the end of  the Third  Age is 
drawn mainly from the Red Book of Westmarch. That most important  source 
for 
the  history  of  the War  of  the Ring was so  called because it  was  long 
preserved  at  Undertowers,  the  home  of the Fairbairns,  Wardens  of  the 
Westmarch.1  It was in origin Bilbo's private diary, which he took with  him 
to Rivendell.  Frodo brought  it back to the Shire, together with many loose 
leaves of notes, and during S.R. 1420-1 he nearly filled its pages  with his 
account of the War.  But annexed to  it  and preserved with it, probably m a  
single red case, were  the three large  volumes, bound in  red leather, that 
Bilbo gave  to him as a parting gift. To these four  volumes there was added  
in Westmarch a fifth containing commentaries, genealogies, and various other  
matter concerning the hobbit members of the Fellowship. 
     The original Red Book has  not been  preserved, but  many  copies  were 
made,  especially of the first volume, for the use of the descendants of the 
children  of  Master  Samwise.  The  most  important  copy, however,  has  a  
different history.  It  was kept at  Great  Smials,  but it  was written  in 
Condor,  probably at  the  request  of the  great-grandson  of Peregrin, and 
completed in S.R. 1592  (F.A. 172). Its southern scribe appended this  note: 
Findegil,  King's Writer, finished this work in IV 172. It  is an exact copy 
in  all details of the Thain's Book  m Minas Tirith.  That book was  a copy, 
made at the request of King Elessar,  of the Red Book of the Periannath, and 

####-was brought to him by the Thain Peregrin when he retired to Gondor in IV 64 . 
     The Thain's Book was  thus  the first copy made of  the  Red  Book  and 
contained much that was later omitted or lost.  In Minas  Tirith it received 
much  annotation, and  many  corrections, especially  of  names,  words, and 
quotations in the Elvish languages; and there was added to it an abbreviated  
version of those  parts of The  Tale of Aragorn  and Arwen which lie outside 
the  account of the War. The full tale  is  stated  to have been written  by 
Barahir, grandson of the Steward Faramir, some time after the passing of the  
King. But the chief importance of  Findegil's copy is that it alone contains 
the whole  of Bilbo's 'Translations from the  Elvish'. These  three  volumes 
were  found to be a work of great skill and learning in  which, between 1403 
and 1418, he had used all the sources  available to  him  in Rivendell, both 
living and written. But  since they were little used by Frodo, being  almost  
entirely concerned with the Elder Days, no more is said of them here. 
     Since Meriadoc and Peregrin became the  heads  of their great families,  
and  at the  same time kept up their  connexions with Rohan and  Gondor, the 
libraries at Bucklebury and Tuckborough contained much that did  not  appear 
in the Red Book.  In Brandy Hall there were many works dealing  with Eriador  
and the  history of Rohan. Some of these were composed or  begun by 
Meriadoc 
himself, though in the  Shire he was chiefly remembered for  his Herblore of 
the Shire, and for his Reckoning of  Years m which he discussed the relation 
of the calendars of the Shire and Bree  to those of  Rivendell,  Gondor, and 
Rohan. He also wrote a short treatise on Old Words and Names  in the  Shire, 
having special interest  in discovering the kinship with the language of the 
Rohirrim of such 'shire-words' as mathom and old elements in place names. 
     At Great Smials the books were  of less interest to Shire-folk,  though 
more important for larger history. None of them was written by Peregrin, but 
he and  his successors  collected  many manuscripts written  by  scribes  of 
Gondor:  mainly  copies  or  summaries of  histories or legends  relating to 
Elendil  and his heirs. Only  here in the Shire were to  be  found extensive 
materials for  the history  of  N®menor and the  arising of  Sauron.  It was 
probably at Great Smials that The Tale of Years1 was put  together, with the 
assistance of material  collected by Meriadoc. Though  the dates  given  are 
often conjectural, especially for the Second Age, they deserve attention. It 
is   probable  that  Mer iadoc  obtained   assistance  and  information  from 
Rivendell,  which he  visited  more  than  once.  There, though  Elrond  had 

####-departed, his sons long remained, together with some of the High-elven folk. 
It  is  said  that  Celeborn  went  to  dwell  there after the departure  of 
Galadriel; but there is no record of the day when at last he sought the Grey 
Havens,  and  with  him went the last  living  memory  of the  Elder Days in  
Middle-earth. 

####-* BOOK I *  

 
 

Chapter 1. A Long-expected Party 

 
 
     When  Mr. Bilbo Baggins of Bag  End announced that  he would shortly be 
celebrating   his   eleventy-first  birthday   with  a   party  of   special 
magnificence, there was much talk and excitement in Hobbiton. 
     Bilbo  was very rich  and very peculiar, and had been the wonder of the 
Shire  for  sixty   years,  ever  since  his  remarkable  disappearance  and 
unexpected return. The riches  he  had brought back from his travels had now 
become  a local legend, and it was popularly believed, whatever the old folk  
might  say,  that  the Hill  at Bag  End was  full  of tunnels  stuffed with 
treasure. And if that was not enough for  fame, there was also his prolonged  
vigour  to marvel at. Time wore on,  but it seemed to  have little effect on 
Mr. Baggins. At ninety he was much the same as at fifty. At ninety-nine they 
began to  call him well-preserved,  but unchanged would have been nearer the 
mark. There were  some that shook their heads and thought  this was too much 
of  a good thing; it seemed unfair that anyone should  possess  (apparently)  
perpetual youth as well as (reputedly) inexhaustible wealth. 
     'It  will  have  to be  paid for,'  they said. 'It  isn't natural,  and 
trouble will come of it!' 
     But so far trouble had not come;  and as Mr. Baggins was  generous with 
his money, most people were willing to forgive him his oddities and his good 
fortune.  He  remained  on visiting  terms with  his  relatives (except,  of 
course, the Sackville-Bagginses), and he had many devoted admirers among 
the 
hobbits of poor and unimportant families. But he had no close friends, until 
some of his younger cousins began to grow up. 
     The eldest of  these,  and Bilbo's favourite,  was young Frodo Baggins. 
When Bilbo was ninety-nine, he adopted Frodo as his heir, and brought him to 
live  at Bag End;  and the  hopes  of the  Sackville-Bagginses were  finally 
dashed. Bilbo and Frodo happened to have the same  birthday, September 
22nd. 
'You had better come and live here, Frodo my lad,' said  Bilbo one day; 'and 
then we  can  celebrate our birthday-parties  comfortably together.' At that 

####-time Frodo  was still in his tweens, as the hobbits called the irresponsible 
twenties between childhood and coming of age at thirty-three. 
     Twelve more years passed. Each year the Bagginses  had given very lively 
combined  birthday-parties  at  Bag  End;  but  now  it  was understood that 
something  quite  exceptional was being planned  for that autumn.  Bilbo was 
going  to  be  eleventy -one,  111,  a  rather  curious  number  and  a  very 
respectable  age  for a hobbit (the Old Took  himself had only reached 130); 
and Frodo was going to be thirty- three, 33) an important number: the date of 
his 'coming of age'.  
     Tongues began to wag in  Hobbiton and Bywater; and rumour of the coming 
event travelled all  over the Shire. The  history and character of Mr. Bilbo 
Baggins became once again the  chief  topic of  conversation; and the  older  
folk suddenly found their reminiscences in welcome demand. 
     No one  had  a  more attentive audience than old Ham  Gamgee,  commonly 
known as  the  Gaffer. He held forth  at  The Ivy Bush,  a small inn on  the 
Bywater road; and he spoke with some authority, for he had tended the garden 
at Bag End for forty years, and had helped old Holman in the same job befor e 
that. Now that he was himself  growing old  and stiff in the joints, the job 
was mainly  carried on by his youngest son, Sam Gamgee. Both father  and son 
were on very friendly  terms with Bilbo and  Frodo. They  lived  on the Hill  
itself, in Number 3 Bagshot Row just below Bag End. 
     'A very nice  well-spoken  gentlehobbit  is  Mr.  Bilbo, as I've always 
said,' the Gaffer declared. With perfect truth: for Bilbo was very polite to 
him, calling him 'Master Hamfast', and consulting  him  constantly upon  the 
growing  of vegetables  - in the matter of 'roots', especially  potatoes, the 
Gaffer was recognized as the  leading authority  by all in the neighbourhood 
(including himself). 
     'But  what about this Frodo that lives with  him?'  asked Old Noakes of 
Bywater.  'Baggins is his name, but he's more than  half a  Brandybuck, they 
say. It beats me why any Baggins  of  Hobbiton should go looking for a  wife 
away there in Buckland, where folks are so queer.' 
     'And no  wonder they're queer,'  put  in  Daddy  Twofoot  (the Gaffer's 
next-door neighbour),  'if they live  on  the wrong  side of the  Brandywine 
River, and right agin  the Old Forest. That's a dark bad place, if half  the 
tales be true.' 
     'You're right,  Dad!' said  the  Gaffer. 'Not  that  the Brandybucks of 
Buck-land live in the Old Forest; but they're a queer breed, seemingly. They  

####-fool about  with boats on that big  river   - and that  isn't  natural. Small 
wonder that trouble came of  it,  I say. But be that as it may, Mr. Frodo is 
as nice a young hobbit  as you could wish to meet. Very much like Mr. Bilbo, 
and in  more than  looks.  After all his  father  was  a Baggins.  A  decent 
respectable hobbit was Mr. Drogo  Baggins; there  was never much to tell  of 
him, till he was drownded.' 
     'Drownded?' said several  voices. They  had heard this and other darker  
rumours before, of course; but  hobbits have a passion  for  family history, 
and they were ready to hear  it again. 'Well, so they say,' said the Gaffer. 
'You see: Mr. Drogo, he married poor Miss  Primula Brandybuck.  She  was 
our 
Mr. Bilbo's first cousin on the mother's side (her mother being the youngest 
of the Old Took's  daughters); and Mr.  Drogo  was his second cousin. So Mr. 
Frodo is his first and second cousin, once removed either way, as the saying 
is,  if  you  follow me.  And Mr. Drogo was  staying at Brandy Hall with his 
father -in-law, old Master Gorbadoc, as he often  did after his marriage (him 
being partial to  his vittles,  and old  Gorbadoc keeping  a mighty generous 
table); and he went out boating on the Brandywine River; and he and his wife 
were drownded, and poor Mr. Frodo only a child and all. ' 
     'I've heard they went on the water after dinner in the moonlight,' said 
Old Noakes; 'and it was Drogo's weight as sunk the boat.' 
     'And I heard she pushed him in, and  he pulled her in after him,'  said 
Sandyman, the Hobbiton miller. 
     'You shouldn't listen  to all you hear, Sandyman,' said the Gaffer, who 
did not much like the miller. 'There isn't no  call to go ta lking of pushing 
and pulling. Boats are quite tricky enough for those that sit  still without 
looking  further for the cause of trouble. Anyway: there was this  Mr. Frodo  
left  an  orphan  and  stranded,  as  you  might   say,  among  those  queer  
Bucklanders,  being brought  up anyhow  in Brandy Hall. A regular warren, by 
all accounts. Old Master Gorbadoc never had fewer than  a couple  of hundred 
relations in  the place.  Mr. Bilbo  never did  a kinder  deed  than when he 
brought the lad back to live among decent folk. 
     'But I  reckon it was a nasty shock for those Sackville-Bagginses. They  
thought  they were going to get Bag End,  that time when he went off and was 
thought to be dead.  And then he comes back and orders them off; and he goes 
on living and living, and never looking a day older, bless him! And suddenly 
he  produces  an  heir,  and  has  all  the  papers  made  out  proper.  The 

####-Sackville-Bagginses won't never  see the inside of Bag End now, or it  is to 
be hoped not.' 
     'There's a tidy bit of money tucked away up there, I hear tell,' said a  
stranger,  a visitor on  business from  Michel Delving in the  Westfarthing. 
'All the top of  your hill is full of tunnels packed with chests of gold and 
silver, and jools, by what I've heard. ' 
     'Then you've heard  more than I  can speak  to,' answered the Gaffer. I 
know nothing about  jools.  Mr. Bilbo is free with  his money, and there seems 
no lack of it; but I know of no tunnel -making. I  saw Mr. Bilbo when he came 
back, a matter of  sixty  years  ago,  when I was a  lad. I'd  not long come 
prentice to old  Holman (him being my dad's cousin), but he had me up at Bag 
End helping  him  to keep folks from trampling and  trapessing  all over the 
garden while the sale was on. And in the middle of it all Mr. Bilbo comes up 
the Hill  with  a pony and some mighty big  bags and a couple  of  chests. I 
don't  doubt  they were mostly full of treasure  he had picked up in foreign 
parts, where there be mountains of gold, they  say;  but there wasn't enough 
to fill tunnels. But  my lad Sam will know  more about that. He's in and out 
of Bag End. Crazy about stories of the old days he is, and he listens to all 
Mr. Bilbo's  tales. Mr. Bilbo has learned him his letters  - meaning no harm, 
mark you, and I hope no harm will come of it. 
     'Elves and Dragons' I says  to him. 'Cabbages and  potatoes are  better 
for me and  you. Don't go getting mixed up in  the business of your betters, 
or you'll land in trouble  too big for you,' I says  to him. And I might say 
it to others,' he added with a look at the stranger and the miller. 
     But the Gaffer did  not convince  his audience. The  legend  of Bilbo's 
wealth was now too  firmly fixed in the minds  of the  younger generation of  
hobbits. 
     'Ah, but he has likely enough been adding to what he brought at first,' 
argued the miller, voicing common  opinion. 'He's often  away from home. And 
look at the outlandish  folk that visit him:  dwarves  coming at night,  and 
that old wandering conjuror, Gandalf,  and  all. You can say  what you like, 
Gaffer, but Bag End's a queer place, and its folk are queerer.' 
     'And you can say what you like, about what you know no more of than you  
do of boating, Mr. Sandyman,' retorted the Gaffer, disliking the miller even 
more  than usual. If  that's being queer, then we could do  with a bit  more 
queerness in these parts. There's  some  not  far away that wouldn't offer a  
pint of beer to a friend, if they  lived  in  a hole with golden  walls. But 

####-they do things proper at Bag End. Our  Sam says that  everyone's going to be 
invited to the party, and there's  going to be presents, mark you,  presents 
for all - this very month as is.' 
     That very month  was  September, and as fine as you could ask. A day or  
two  later a rumour (probably  started by the knowledgeable Sam)  was spread 
about  that there were going to be fireworks  - fireworks, what is more, such 
as had not been seen in the Shire for nigh  on a  century, not indeed  since 
the Old Took died. 
     Days passed  and The Day drew nearer.  An odd-looking waggon laden with 
odd-looking packages rolled into Hobbiton one evening and toiled up the Hill 
to  Bag End. The startled hobbits peered out of lamplit doors to gape at it. 
It was driven  by outlandish  folk, singing strange songs: dwarves with long 
beards and deep hoods. A few of them remained at Bag End.  At the end of the 
second week in September a cart came in  through Bywater from the  direction 
of the  Brandywine Bridge in  broad daylight. An old  man was driving it all  
alone.  He  wore a tall pointed blue hat,  a  long grey cloak,  and a silver  
scarf. He  had a long white beard and bushy eyebrows  that stuck  out beyond 
the  brim of  his  hat. Small hobbit-children ran after the cart all through 
Hobbiton and right up the hill. It ha d a cargo of fireworks, as they rightly 
guessed. At Bilbo's front door the old man began to unload: there were great 
bundles of fireworks of all sorts and shapes, each labelled with a large red 
G and the elf-rune, . 
     That was Gandalf's mark, of course,  and the  old man  was Gandalf  the 
Wizard,  whose  fame in the Shire  was  due mainly to  his skill with fires,  
smokes, and lights.  His real business was far more difficult and dangerous, 
but  the Shire-folk knew nothing about  it. To them  he was just one  of the 
'attractions'  at the Party. Hence the excitement of the hobbit-children.  'G  
for Grand!' they  shouted, and the old man smiled.  They knew him by  sight, 
though he only appeared in Hobbiton occasionally and never stopped long; but 
neither they nor  any  but  the  oldest of  their elders had seen one of his 
firework displays  - they now belonged to the legendary past. 
     When the old  man,  helped by  Bilbo  and  some  dwarves,  had finished  
unloading. Bilbo gave a few pennies away; but not a single squib or  cracker  
was forthcoming, to the disappointment of the onlookers.  
     'Run  away now!' said  Gandalf.  'You  will  get plenty  when  the time 
comes.' Then he disappeared inside with Bilbo, and the door  was  shut.  The 
young  hobbits  stared at  the door  in vain for a while, and then made off, 

####-feeling that the day of the party would never come. 
     Inside Bag End, Bilbo and Gandalf were sitting at the open window  of a  
small room looking out west on to the garden.  The late afternoon was br ight  
and   peaceful.  The  flowers  glowed   red  and  golden:  snap-dragons  and 
sun-flowers, and nasturtiums trailing all over the turf walls and peeping in 
at the round windows.  
     'How bright your garden looks!' said Gandalf. 
     'Yes,' said Bilbo. I am very fond indeed of it, and of all the dear old 
Shire; but I think I need a holiday.' 
     'You mean to go on with your plan then?' 
     'I do. I made up my mind months ago, and I haven't changed it.' 
     'Very  well.  It is no good saying any  more.  Stick to your plan  - your 
whole plan, mind  - and I hope it will turn out for the best, for  you,  and 
for all of us.' 
     'I hope  so.  Anyway  I mean to enjoy  myself on Thursday, and  have my 
little joke.' 
     'Who will laugh, I wonder?' said Gandalf, shaking his head. 
     'We shall see,' said Bilbo. 
     The next day more carts rolled up the Hill, and still more carts. There 
might have  been  some grumbling about 'dealing locally', but that very week 
orders began to pour out of Bag End for every  kind of provision, commodity, 
or luxury  that  could be obtained in Hobbiton or Bywater or anywhere in the 
neighbourhood.  People  became enthusiastic; and they began to tick off  the 
days on  the calendar; and they watched eagerly for the  postman, hoping for  
invitations.  
     Before long  the  invitations  began  pouring  out,  and  the  Hobbiton 
post-office  was blocked, and the Bywater post -office  was snowed under, and 
voluntary assistant postmen were called for.  There was a constant stream of 
them going up the Hill, carrying hundreds of polite variations on Thank you, 
I shall certainly come. 
     A notice appeared on the gate at Bag End: NO ADMITTANCE EXCEPT 
ON PARTY 
BUSINESS. Even those  who had, or  pretended  to  have  Party  Business were 
seldom allowed inside. Bilbo  was  busy:  writing invitations,  ticking  off 
answers, packing up presents, and making  some  private preparations  of his 
own. From the time of Gandalf's arrival he remained hidden from view.  
     One morning the hobbits woke to find  the large field,  south of Bilbo's 

####-front door, covered with ropes and poles for tents  and pavilions. A special 
entrance  was cut into the bank leading to  the road, and wide steps  and  a  
large white gate were built there. The three hobbit-families of Bagshot Row,  
adjoining the field, were intensely  interested  and  generally envied.  Old 
Gaffer Gamgee stopped even pretending to work in his garden. 
     The tents began to  go up. There was a specially large pavilion, so big 
that the tree that grew in the   field was right inside it, and stood proudly 
near one end, at the head of  the chief table. Lanterns were hung on all its 
branches. More  promising still (to the hobbits' mind): an enormous open-air  
kitchen was erected in the  north corner of  the field. A draught  of cooks, 
from every inn and eating-house  for miles around, arrived to supplement the 
dwarves and other odd  folk  that were quartered at Bag End. Excitement rose 
to its height. 
     Then the weather  clouded  over.  That was on Wednesday the  eve of the  
Party.  Anxiety was  intense. Then Thursday,  September  the 22nd,  actually 
dawned. The sun got up, the clouds vanished, flags were unfurled and the fun 
began. 
     Bilbo  Baggins called it  a  party,  but it  was really  a  variety  of 
entertainments  rolled  into one.  Practically  everybody  living  near  was 
invited. A very few were overlooked  by accident, but  as they turned up all 
the same, that did not matter.  Many people  from other parts of  the  Shire 
were also asked; and there were even  a few from outside the  borders. Bilbo  
met the guests (and additions) at the new white gate in person. He gave away 
presents to all and sundry - the latter were  those  who went out again by a  
back way  and came  in  again by  the gate. Hobbits give   presents  to other  
people  on their own birthdays. Not very expensive ones, as a  rule, and not 
so lavishly  as on this  occasion; but it was  not a bad system. Actually in 
Hobbiton  and Bywater every  day in the year it was somebody's  birthday, so 
that every  hobbit  in those parts had a fair chance of at least one present 
at least once a week. But they never got tired of them. 
     On this occasion the presents were unusually  good. The hobbit-children 
were so excited that for a while they almost forgot  about eating. There were 
toys the like  of which they had  never seen before, all beautiful and  some 
obviously magical.  Many of them had indeed been ordered a year before,  and 
had  come  all  the way  from  the Mountain and from Dale, and  were of real 
dwarf-make. 
     When  every guest had been  welcomed  and was finally inside the  gate,  

####-there were  songs, dances, music, games,  and,  of course,  food  and drink. 
There were  three  official  meals: lunch,  tea, and dinner (or supper). But 
lunch and  tea were marked chiefly by  the fact that at  those times all the 
guests  were sitting  down and eating together. At  other  times  there were 
merely lots  of  people  eating and drinking  -  continuously from elevenses 
until six-thirty, when the fireworks  started. 
     The fireworks were by Gandalf: they were not only brought  by  him, but 
designed and made by  him; and the  special effects, set pieces, and flights 
of rockets were let off by him. But  there was  also a generous distribution 
of  squibs,  crackers,  backarappers,   sparklers,  torches,  dwarf-candles,  
elf-fountains, goblin-barkers  and thunder -claps. They  were all superb. The 
art of Gandalf improved with age. 
     There were  rockets like  a flight  of scintillating birds singing with 
sweet voices. There were green trees with trunks of dark smoke: their leaves  
opened like a whole spring unfolding in a moment, and their shining branches 
dropped glowing flowers down upon the  astonished hobbits, disappearing with 
a  sweet  scent just  before they touched  their  upturned faces. There were 
fountains  of butterflies that flew  glittering into  the trees;  there were 
pillars  of  coloured  fires that rose  and  turned into eagles, or  sailing 
ships,  or  a  phalanx of flying swans; there was a red  thunderstorm  and a  
shower  of  yellow  rain; there was a  forest  of silver spears  that sprang 
suddenly  into the  air with a  yell like an embattled  army, and came  down 
again into the Water with a hiss like a  hundred hot snakes.  And there  was 
also one last surprise,  in  honour of Bilbo,  and  it startled  the hobbits 
exceedingly, as  Gandalf intended. The lights went out. A great  smoke  went 
up. It shaped itself like a mountain seen in the distance, and began to glow 
at  the summit. It spouted green  and scarlet flames. Out flew a  red-golden 
dragon - not life-size, but terribly life-like: fire came from his jaws, his 
eyes glared down; there  was  a  roar, and he whizzed three  times  over the 
heads of the crowd. They all ducked, and  many fell fla t on their faces. The 
dragon passed like an  express train,  turned a  somersault, and  burst over  
Bywater with a deafening explosion. 
     'That is  the  signal for  supper!'  said  Bilbo.  The  pain  and alarm 
vanished at once, and the prostrate hobbits  leaped to their feet. There  was 
a splendid supper for everyone; for everyone, that  is, except those invited 
to the special family dinner -party. This was held in the great pavilion with 
the tree. The invitations were limited to twelve dozen (a number also called 

####-by the hobbits one Gross, though  the  word was not considered proper to use 
of people); and  the  guests were selected  from  all  the families to which 
Bilbo and Frodo were related, with  the addition of a  few special unrelated 
friends (such as Gandalf). Many young hobbits  were included, and present by 
parental permission; for hobbits were easy-going with their children in  the 
matter  of  sitting up late,  especially when there  was a chance of getting 
them a free meal. Bringing up young hobbits took a lot of provender. 
     There  were  many  Bagginses  and  Boffins,  and also  many  Tooks  and 
Brandybucks;  there  were  various  Grubbs   (relations  of  Bilbo  Baggins' 
grandmother), and various Chubbs (connexions of his Took grandfather); and a 
selection  of  Burrowses,  Bolgers, Bracegirdles,  Brockhouses,  Goodbodies, 
Hornblowers and Proudfoots. Some of these were only very distantly 
connected 
with Bilbo, and  some of them  had hardly ever  been in Hobbiton before,  as 
they lived in remote corners of the Shire. The Sackville-Bagginses  were not 
forgotten.  Otho and his wife Lobelia were present. They disliked Bilbo  and 
detested Frodo,  but  so magnificent  was the invitation  card,  written  in 
golden ink, that  they had felt it was impossible to refuse. Besides,  their 
cousin, Bilbo, had been specializing  in  food for many years and  his table 
had a high reputation. 
     All  the  one hundred  and forty-four guests expected a pleasant feast; 
though they  rather  dreaded  the  after -dinner  speech  of their  host  (an 
inevitable item). He was liable to drag  in bits of  what he  called poetry; 
and sometimes, after  a glass or two, would  allude to the absurd adventures 
of his mysterious journey. The guests were not disappointed: they had a very 
pleasant feast, in fact an engrossing entertainment: rich, abundant, varied, 
and prolonged. The  purchase of provisions fell almost to nothing throughout 
the district in the ensuing weeks; but as Bilbo's catering had  depleted the 
stocks of most stores, cellars and warehouses for miles around, that did not 
matter much. 
     After  the feast (more or less) came the  Speech. Most of  the  company 
were, however, now in a tolerant  mood, at that  delightful stage which they 
called 'filling up  the corners'.  They were sipping their favourite drinks,  
and nibbling at  their favourite  dainties, and their fears  were forgotten. 
They were prepared to listen to anything, and to cheer at every full stop. 
     My dear People, began Bilbo, rising in  his  place. 'Hear! Hear! Hear!' 
they shouted,  and  kept on repeating  it  in chorus,  seeming  reluctant to 

####-follow their own advice. Bilbo left  his place and went and stood on a chair 
under the illuminated  tree. The  light of the lanterns fell on his  beaming 
face; the golden buttons shone on his embroidered silk waistcoat. They could 
all see  him standing,  waving  one hand in  the air,  the other  was in his 
trouser-pocket. 
     My dear Bagginses and Boffins, he began again;  and my  dear  Tooks and 
Brandybucks, and Grubbs,  and  Chubbs,  and Burrowses,  and Hornblowers, 
and 
Bolgers, Bracegirdles, Goodbodies, Brockhouses and Proudfoots.  
'ProudFEET!' 
shouted  an  elderly  hobbit  from  the back  of the pavilion.  His name, of 
course, was  Proudfoot, and well merited; his feet were large, exceptionally 
furry, and both were on the table. 
     Proudfoots,  repeated Bilbo. Also my  good  Sackville -Bagginses that  I 
welcome  back at last  to  Bag  End. Today  is my  one  hundred and eleventh  
birthday: I am eleventy -one  today! 'Hurray!  Hurray! Many  Happy  Returns!' 
they  shouted, and they  hammered  joyously  on the tables.  Bilbo was doing 
splendidly. This was the sort of stuff they liked: short and obvious.  
     / hope you  are  all  enjoying yourselves as much as  I  am.  Deafening 
cheers. Cries  of  Yes  (and  No). Noises  of trumpets and horns, pipes  and 
flutes,  and  other musical instruments.  There were, as has been said, many 
young hobbits present. Hundreds of musical crackers had been pulled. Most of 
them bore the  mark DALE  on them; which did not  convey much to most of 
the 
hobbits, but they all agreed they were  marvellous crackers.  They contained 
instruments, small, but of perfect make and enchanting tones. Indeed, in one 
corner some of  the young Tooks and  Brandybucks, supposing Uncle  Bilbo  to 
have finished (since he had plainly said all that was necessary), now got up 
an impromptu orchestra, and began a  merry dance-tune.  Master  Everard Took  
and  Miss Melilot Brandybuck  got on a  table  and with bells in their hands 
began to dance the Springle-ring: a pretty dance, but rather vigorous. 
     But Bilbo had not finished. Seizing a horn from a youngster near by, he 
blew  three loud  hoots. The noise subsided. /  shall not keep you  long, he 
cried. Cheers from all the assembly. /  have called  you all  together for a  
Purpose. Something in  the way  that he said this made an impression.  There 
was almost silence, and one or two of the Tooks pricked up their ears. 
     Indeed,  for  Three  Purposes! First of  all,  to  tell  you that  I am 

####-immensely fond  of  you all, and that eleventy -one years is too short a time 
to live among such  excellent and  admirable hobbits. Tremendous outburst of 
approval. 
     / don't know half of you half as well as I should like; and I like less 
than half of you half as well as you deserve. This was unexpected and rather  
difficult. There  was some scattered clapping, but most of  them were trying 
to work it out and see if it came to a compliment. 
     Secondly,  to  celebrate my birthday.  Cheers again.  / should say: OUR 
birthday.  For it  is, of  course, also the birthday of my  heir and nephew,  
Frodo.  He comes  of  age  and into his inheritance today. Some  perfunctory 
clapping by the  elders;  and some loud  shouts of 'Frodo!  Frodo! Jolly old 
Frodo,' from the juniors. The Sackville-Bagginses scowled, and wondered what 
was  meant by 'coming  into his inheritance'. Together we score one  hundred  
and forty -four.  Your numbers were chosen to  fit this remarkable total: One 
Gross, if I  may use the  expression. No cheers. This was ridiculous. Many of 
his guests, and especially  the Sackville-Bagginses, were insulted,  feeling 
sure they had only been asked to fill up the  required number, like goods in 
a package. 'One Gross, indeed! Vulgar expression.' 
     It is also,  if  I  may be  allowed to  refer to  ancient history,  the 
anniversary of my arrival by barrel at Esgaroth on the Long Lake; though the 
fact that it was  my birthday slipped  my memory on that occasion. I was only  
fifty-one  then,  and birthdays did  not seem so important.  The banquet was  
very splendid, however, though I had a bad cold at the time, I remember, and 
could only say 'thag you very  buch'. I now repeat  it more correctly: Thank 
you  very  much for coming  to my little party. Obstinate  silence. They all  
feared that  a song or some poetry was now imminent;  and they  were getting 
bored. Why couldn't he stop talking and let them drink his health? But Bilbo  
did not sing or recite. He paused for a moment. 
     Thirdly  and finally, he said,  I wish to make an ANNOUNCEMENT. He 
spoke 
this last word so  loudly and suddenly that everyone sat up who still could. 
I regret to announce that - though, as I said, eleventy -one years is far too 
short a time to spend among you - this is the END. I am going. I  am leaving 
NOW. GOOD-BYE! 
     He stepped down and  vanished. There was a blinding flash of light, and 
the guests  all blinked. When they opened their eyes Bilbo was nowhere to be 
seen. One hundred  and forty-four flabbergasted hobbits sat back speechless.  

####-Old  Odo Proudfoot  removed his feet from the table and stamped. Then  there 
was  a  dead  silence,  until  suddenly, after  several deep breaths,  every 
Baggins,  Boffin,   Took,   Brandybuck,   Grubb,  Chubb,  Burrows,   Bolger, 
Bracegirdle,  Brockhouse, Goodbody, Hornblower, and  Proudfoot began to 
talk  
at once. 
     It  was generally agreed that the joke was  in very bad taste, and more 
food and drink were needed to cure the guests  of shock and annoyance. 'He's 
mad. I always said so,'  was probably  the  most  popular comment.  Even the 
Tooks (with a few exceptions) thought  Bilbo's behaviour was absurd. For the 
moment most of  them took it for granted that his disappearance was  nothing 
more than a ridiculous prank. 
     But old Rory Brandybuck was not  so sure. Neither age  nor an  enormous 
dinner  had clouded his wits, and he said to his daughter -in-law, Esmeralda: 
'There's something fishy in this, my dear! I believe that mad Baggins is off 
again. Silly old fool. But why worry? He hasn't taken the vittles with him.' 
He called loudly to Frodo to send the wine round again. 
     Frodo  was the only one present who had said nothing. For some time  he 
had  sat silent  beside  Bilbo's  empty  chair,  and ignored all remarks and 
questions. He had enjoyed the  joke,  of course, even  though he had been in 
the  know. He had  difficulty  in  keeping  from  laughter at the  indignant 
surprise of  the guests.  But  at the  same time he felt deeply troubled: he 
realized  suddenly  that he loved the old hobbit  dearly. Most of the guests 
went on eating and drinking and discussing Bilbo Baggins' oddities, past and 
present;  but the Sackville-Bagginses had already  departed in wrath.  Frodo 
did not want to have any more  to do with the party. He gave orders for more 
wine to be served; then he got up and drained his own glass  silently to the 
health of Bilbo, and slipped out of the pavilion. 
     As for Bilbo Baggins,  even while he was making his speech, he had been 
fingering the golden ring   in his pocket:  his magic ring that he  had  kept 
secret for so many years. As he  stepped  down he slipped it on his  finger, 
and he was never seen by any hobbit in Hobbiton again. 
     He walked  briskly back to his hole, and stood  for a moment  listening 
with a smile to the din in  the pavilion and to the sounds of merrymaking in 
other parts  of the field. Then he  went in.  He took off his party clothes,  
folded up and wrapped  in tissue-paper his  embroidered  silk waistcoat, and 
put it away. Then he put on quickly  some old untidy  garments, and fastened 

####-round his  waist a  worn leather  belt.  On it  he  hung a short sword in  a  
battered  black-leather  scabbard.  From  a  locked  drawer,   smelling   of 
moth-balls, he took out an old cloak and hood . They had been locked up as if 
they were very precious, but they were  so  patched and weatherstained  that 
their  original  colour  could hardly be guessed: it might  have  been  dark 
green. They were rather too large for him. He then  went into his study, and 
from  a  large  strong-box  took out a bundle  wrapped in  old cloths, and a  
leather -bound  manuscript; and  also a large bulky  envelope.  The  book and  
bundle  he stuffed  into  the top  of a heavy  bag  that was standing there, 
already nearly full.  Into the envelope he slipped his  golden ring, and its 
fine chain, and then  sealed it, and addressed it  to Frodo. At first he put 
it  on the mantelpiece,  but  suddenly  he  removed it and  stuck  it in his 
pocket. At that moment the door opened and Gandalf came quickly in. 
     'Hullo!' said Bilbo. 'I wondered if you would turn up.' 
     'I am glad to find you visible,' replied the wizard, sitting down  in a  
chair, 'I wanted to catch you and have a few final words. I suppose you feel 
that everything has gone off splendidly and according to plan?' 
     'Yes,  I do,' said  Bilbo. "Though that flash was surprising: it  quite 
startled  me,  let alone the  others. A  little  addition  of  your  own,  I 
suppose?' 
     It was. You have  wisely kept that ring secret all these  years, and it 
seemed to me necessary to give your guests something else that would seem to 
explain your sudden vanishment.' 
     'And would spoil my joke. You are an interfering old busybody,' laughed 
Bilbo, 'but I expect you know best, as usual.' 
     'I do - when I  know  anything. But I  don't  feel too  sure about this 
whole affair. It has now come  to the  final point. You have had  your joke, 
and alarmed or offended most  of your relations, and  given the whole  Shire 
something to talk about for nine  days, or ninety-nine more  likely. Are you  
going any further?' 
     'Yes, I am. I feel  I  need a holiday, a very  long holiday, as I  have 
told  you before. Probably  a  permanent holiday:  I  don't expect  I  shall 
return. In fact, I don't mean to, and I have made all arrangements. 
     'I  am  old, Gandalf. I don't look it, but I am beginning to feel it in 
my heart  of hearts.  Well-preserved indeed!' he snorted.  'Why, I feel  all 
thin, sort of stretched, if you  know what I mean: like butter that has been 
scraped  over too  much bread.  That can't  be right. I need  a  change,  or  

####-something.' 
     Gandalf  looked curiously  and closely at him.  'No,  it does not  seem 
right,' he said thoughtfully. 'No, after all I believe your plan is probably 
the best.' 
     'Well, I've made  up  my mind,  anyway. I  want to see mountains again, 
Gandalf, mountains, and then  find somewhere where I can  rest. In peace and 
quiet, without a lot  of relatives prying around, and a string of confounded 
visitors hanging on the bell.  I might find somewhere where I  can finish my 
book. I  have thought  of  a nice ending for it:  and he lived happily  ever 
after to the end of his days. ' 
     Gandalf laughed. I hope he will. But nobody will read the book, however  
it ends.' 
     'Oh, they may, in years to come. Frodo has read some already, as far as 
it has gone. You'll keep an eye on Frodo, won't you?' 
     'Yes, I will  - two eyes, as often as I can spare them.' 
     'He would come with  me, of  course, if I asked him. In fact he offered 
to once, just before the party. But he does not really want to, yet.  I want 
to  see  the  wild country again before I die, and  the Mountains; but he is 
still in love with the Shire, with woods and  fields  and  little rivers. He 
ought to  be comfortable here. I  am leaving everything  to him,  of course, 
except a few oddments. I  hope he will be happy,  when he gets used to being 
on his own. It's time he was his own master now.' 
     'Everything?' said Gandalf. 'The ring  as well? You agreed to that, you  
remember.' 
     'Well, er, yes, I suppose so,' stammered Bilbo.  
     'Where is it?' 
     'In an envelope, if you must know,'  said Bilbo impatiently. 'There  on 
the mantelpiece. Well,  no! Here it is in  my  pocket!' He hesitated.  'Isn't 
that odd now?'  he  said  softly  to himself. 'Yet after all,  why  not? Why 
shouldn't it stay there?' 
     Gandalf looked again very hard  at  Bilbo, and there was a gleam in his 
eyes.  'I think, Bilbo,' he said  quietly, 'I should leave  it behind. Don't  
you want to?' 
     'Well yes  - and no. Now it comes to it, I don't like parting with it at 
all, I may say. And I don't really see why I should. Why do you want me to?' 
he asked, and a  curious  change came  over  his voice.  It  was sharp  with 

####-suspicion and annoyance. 'You are always badgering me about my ring; but 
you 
have never bothered me about the other things that I got on my journey.' 
     'No, but I had to  badger  you,'  said Gandalf. 'I wanted the truth. It 
was  important. Magic  rings  are  - well, magical; and  they are  rare  and 
curious. I was  professionally interested in  your ring, you may say;  and I 
still am. I should like to know where it is, if you go wandering again. Also 
I  think you  have had  it quite long  enough. You won't need it  any  more. 
Bilbo, unless I am quite mistaken.' 
     Bilbo  flushed, and there  was an angry light in  his eyes.  His kindly 
face  grew hard. 'Why  not?'  he  cried. 'And what business is it of  yours, 
anyway, to know what I  do with my own things? It is my own. I found  it. It  
came to me.' 
     'Yes, yes,' said Gandalf. 'But there is no need to get angry.' 
     'If I am  it  is your  fault,' said Bilbo. 'It is mine, I  tell you. My 
own. My precious. Yes, my precious.' 
     The wizard's face remained grave and attentive,  and  only a flicker in 
his deep eyes showed that he  was startled and indeed  alarmed. 'It has been 
called that before,' he said,  'but not by you.' 
     'But I say it now. And why not? Even if Gollum said the same once. It's 
not his now, but mine. And I shall keep it, I say.' 
     Gandalf stood  up. He  spoke  sternly. 'You will be  a fool if  you do. 
Bilbo,' he said. 'You make that clearer with every word you say. It has  got 
far  too much  hold on you. Let it go! And then you can go yourself, and  be 
free.' 
     'I'll do as I choose and go as I please,' said Bilbo obstinately. 
     'Now, now, my dear hobbit!  ' said Gandalf. 'All your long life we have 
been  friends, and you owe me something. Come!  Do as you promised: give  it 
up!  ' 
     'Well,  if  you  want my ring yourself, say  so!' cried Bilbo. 'But you  
won't get it.  I won't give my precious away, I tell  you.' His hand strayed 
to the hilt of his small sword. 
     Gandalf's eyes flashed. It will be my turn to get angry soon,' he said. 
If  you  say  that again,  I shall.  Then  you  will  see Gandalf  the  Grey 
uncloaked.'  He took a step towards the hobbit,  and he seemed to  grow tall 
and menacing; his shadow filled the little room. 
     Bilbo backed away  to the  wall, brea thing hard, his hand  clutching at 

####-his pocket. They stood for a while facing one another,  and the  air of  the 
room tingled. Gandalf's  eyes remained bent on the hobbit. Slowly  his hands 
relaxed, and he began to tremble. 
     'I  don't know  what has  come  over  you, Gandalf,' he said. 'You have 
never been like this  before. What is it all  about? It is mine isn't it?  I 
found it, and Gollum would  have killed  me, if I hadn't kept it. I'm not  a  
thief, whatever he said.' 
     'I have  never called  you  one,' Gandalf answered. 'And  I  am not one 
either. I am not trying to rob you,  but to help you. I wish you would trust  
me,  as  you  used.' He turned  away, and the  shadow  passed. He  seemed to 
dwindle again to an old grey man, bent and troubled. 
     Bilbo drew his hand over his eyes. I am sorry,' he said. 'But I felt so 
queer.  And yet it would be a relief in a way not to be bothered with it any 
more. It has been so growing on my mind lately. Sometimes I have felt it was 
like an eye  looking at me.  And  I  am  always  wanting  to put it  on  and 
disappear, don't you know; or wondering if it is safe, and pulling it out to 
make sure. I tried locking it up, but  I found I couldn't rest without it in 
my pocket. I don't know why. And I don't seem able to make up my mind.' 
     'Then  trust mine,'  said Gandalf. 'It is quite  made  up.  Go away and 
leave it behind. Stop possessing it. Give it to Frodo, and I will look after  
him.' 
     Bilbo stood for a moment tense and undecided. Presently he sighed. 'All 
right,' he said with an effort. I will.' Then he shrugged his shoulders, and 
smiled rather ruefully. 'After  all that's what this party business  was all 
about, really: to  give away lots of birthday presents,  and somehow make it  
easier to give it away at the same time. It hasn't made it any easier in the 
end, but it would be  a pity  to waste  all my  preparations. It would quite 
spoil the joke.' 
     'Indeed  it would take  away the only point I ever saw in the  affair,' 
said Gandalf. 
     'Very well,' said Bilbo, 'it goes to Frodo  with all the rest.' He drew 
a  deep breath. 'And  now I  really must be starting, or somebody else  will 
catch  me.  I  have  said good-bye, and I couldn't bear  to  do it  all over  
again.' He picked up his bag and moved to the  door. 
     'You  have  still got the ring in your pocket,' said the wizard. 'Well, 
so I have!' cried Bilbo. 'And my will and  all  the other documents too. You  
had better take it and deliver it for me. That will be safest.' 

####-     'No,  don't give  the  ring  to  me,'  said  Gandalf. 'Put  it  on  the 
mantelpiece. It will be safe enough  there, till Frodo comes.  I  shall wait 
for him.' 
     Bilbo took out the envelope, but just as  he was about to set it by the 
clock, his hand jerked back, and the  packet fell  on  the floor.  Before he 
could pick it up, the wizard stooped and seized it and  set it in its place. 
A spasm  of anger passed swiftly over  the hobbit's  face again. Suddenly it 
gave way to a look of relief and a laugh. 'Well, that's that,' he said.  'Now 
I'm off!' 
     They went out into the hall.  Bilbo chose  his favourite stick from the 
stand; then he  whistled.  Three  dwarves came out of  different rooms where 
they had been busy. 
     'Is everything ready?' asked Bilbo. 'Everything packed and la belled?' 
     'Everything,' they answered. 
     'Well, let's start then!' He stepped out of the front-door. 
     It was a fine night, and the black sky was dotted with stars. He looked 
up,  sniffing  the air. 'What fun! What fun to be off again, off on the  Road 
with dwarves!  This  is  what  I  have  really  been longing for, for years! 
Good-bye!  ' he said, looking  at  his old  home and  bowing  to  the  door. 
'Good-bye, Gandalf!' 
     'Good-bye, for the present,  Bilbo. Take  care of yourself! You are old 
enough, and perhaps wise enough.' 
     'Take care! I  don't care. Don't  you worry about me! I am as happy now 
as I have ever been, and that is saying a great deal. But the time has come. 
I am being swept off my feet at last,' he added, and then in a low voice, as 
if to himself, he sang softly in the dark: 
     The Road goes ever on and on  
     Down from the door where it began. 
     Now far ahead the Road has gone, 
     And I must follow, if I can, 
     Pursuing it with eager feet, 
     Until it joins some larger way 
     Where many paths and errands meet. 
     And whither then? I cannot say. 
     He  paused, silent for a moment.  Then without another  word he  turned 
away from the lights and voices in the fields and tents, and followed by his 
three  companions  went round  into  his garden,  and trotted  down the long  

####-sloping path. He  jumped over  a low place in the hedge  at the bottom,  and  
took to the meadows, passing into the night like a  rustle  of wind  in  the 
grass. 
     Gandalf  remained for a  while  staring  after  him  into the darkness. 
'Goodbye,  my dear Bilbo  - until our next meeting!' he said softly and went 
back indoors. 
     Frodo came  in soon afterwards, and found him sitting in the dark, deep 
in thought. 'Has he gone?' he asked. 
     'Yes,' answered Gandalf, 'he has gone at last.' 
     ' I wish - I mean, I hoped until this evening that it was only a joke,' 
said Frodo. 'But I knew in my heart  that he  really  meant to go. He always 
used to  joke about serious things. I  wish  I had come back sooner, just to 
see him off.' 
     I  think really  he preferred slipping off quietly  in the  end,'  said 
Gandalf. 'Don't be too troubled. He'll be all right -  now. He left a packet 
for you. There it is!' 
     Frodo  took the envelope from the mantelpiece, and  glanced  at it, but 
did not open it. 
     'You'll find  his  will and all the other documents in there, I think,' 
said  the  wizard.  'You  are  the master of Bag End now. And also, I fancy, 
you'll find a golden ring.' 
     'The ring!' exclaimed Frodo. 'Has he left me that? I wonder why. Still, 
it may be useful.' 
     'It may, and it  may  not,' said Gandalf. 'I should not make use of it, 
if I were you. But keep it secret, and keep it safe! Now I am going to bed.' 
     As master of Bag End Frodo felt  it his painful duty to say good-bye to 
the guests. Rumours of strange events had by  now spread all over the field,  
but  Frodo would  only say  no doubt everything will be  cleared  up  in the 
morning.  About  midnight carriages  came for the important folk. One by one 
they rolled away, filled with full but  very  unsatisfied hobbits. Gardeners 
came   by  arrangement,   and  removed  in  wheel-barrows  those   that  had 
inadvertently remained behind. 
     Night slowly  passed.  The  sun  rose. The  hobbits rose  rather later. 
Morning  went  on.  People  came  and began (by  orders) to  clear away  the 
pavilions  and the  tables  and the chairs,  and the  spoons and  knives and 
bottles and plates, and the lanterns, and the flowering shrubs in boxes, and 
the  crumbs  and   cracker -paper,  the  forgotten   bags  and   gloves   and 

####-handkerchiefs,  and  the uneaten food (a very small  item). Then a number of 
other people came (without orders): Bagginses, and Boffins, and Bolgers, and 
Tooks, and other  guests that lived or  were staying near.  By mid-day, when 
even the best -fed were out and about again,  there  was a large crowd at Bag 
End, uninvited but not unexpected. 
     Frodo  was waiting on the step, smiling, but  looking rather  tired and 
worried. He welcomed all  the callers,  but he had not much more to say than 
before. His reply to all inquiries  was simply this: 'Mr. Bilbo  Baggins has 
gone away; as far as I know, for good.'  Some of  the visitors he invited to 
come inside, as Bilbo had left 'messages' for them. 
     Inside in the  hall there  was piled a large assortment of packages and 
parcels and small articles  of furniture.  On  every item there was  a label 
tied. There were several labels of this sort: 
     For ADELARD TOOK, for his VERY OWN, from Bilbo, on an umbrella. 
Adelard 
had carried off many unlabelled ones. 
     For  DORA BAGGINS in  memory  of  a LONG correspondence, with love 
from 
Bilbo, on a large waste-paper basket. Dora was Drogo's sister and the eldest  
surviving female  relative of Bilbo and Frodo; she was ninety-nine,  and had 
written reams of good advice for more than half a century. 
     For  MILO BURROWS,  hoping it will be  useful, from B.B., on a gold pen 
and ink -bottle. Milo never answered letters.  
     For ANGELICA'S use, from Uncle Bilbo, on a round convex mirror. She 
was 
a young Baggins, and too obviously considered her face shapely. 
     For  the  collection  of HUGO BRACEGIRDLE,  from a  contributor,  on an 
(empty) book -case. Hugo was a great borrower of books, and worse than  usual 
at returning them. 
     For LOBELIA SACKVILLE-BAGGINS,  as  a PRESENT,  on  a  case  of  
silver 
spoons. Bilbo  believed that  she had  acquired a good  many of  his spoons,  
while he was away  on his former journey. Lobelia knew that quite well. When 
she arrived later in the day, she took the point  at once, but she also took  
the spoons.  
     This  is  only  a  small  selection of  the assembled presents. Bilbo's 
residence had got rather cluttered up  with things in the course of his long 

####-life.  It was a  tendency of hobbit-holes to get cluttered up: for which the 
custom of giving so many birthday-presents was largely responsible.  Not, of 
course,  that the  birthday-presents  were always new,  there were one or two 
old mathoms  of forgotten uses that had circulated all around  the district; 
but Bilbo had usually given new presents, and  kept  those that he received. 
The old hole was now being cleared a little. 
     Every  one  of  the various  parting  gifts  had  labels,  written  out 
personally  by Bilbo,  and several had some point,  or  some  joke.  But, of 
course,  most  of the  things were  given where  they  would  be  wanted and 
welcome. The  poorer hobbits, and especially  those of Bagshot Row, did very 
well. Old Gaffer  Gamgee got  two sacks of potatoes, a new spade, a  woollen 
waistcoat,  and  a   bottle  of  ointment  for  creaking  joints.  Old  Rory 
Brandybuck,  in  return  for  much  hospitality, got a dozen  bottles of Old 
Winyards: a strong red wine from the Southfarthing, and now quite mature, as 
it had been laid down by Bilbo's father. Rory quite forgave Bilbo, and voted 
him a capital fellow after the first bottle. 
     There was plenty of everything left for Frodo.  And, of course, all the 
chief  treasures, as well  as  the  books,  pictures, and  more than  enough 
furniture,  were  left  in his possession. There was,  however, no sign  nor  
mention of money or jewellery: not a  penny-piece or  a glass bead was given 
away. 
     Frodo had a  very  trying time that afternoon. A fa lse rumour  that the 
whole household was being distributed free spread like wildfire; and  before 
long  the place was packed with  people who had no business there, but could 
not be kept out. Labels got torn off and mixed, and quarrels broke out. Some  
people tried to do swaps and deals in the hall; and others tried to make off 
with minor  items not  addressed to  them,  or  with  anything  that  seemed 
unwanted  or unwatched.  The road to the gate  was blocked  with barrows and 
handcarts.  
     In the middle of  the  commotion the Sackville-Bagginses arrived. Frodo  
had retired for a while and left his  friend Merry Brandybuck to keep an eye 
on things. When Otho loudly demanded to see Frodo, Merry bowed politely.  
     'He is indisposed,' he said. 'He is resting.' 
     'Hiding, you mean,'  said  Lobelia. 'Anyway we want  to see him and  we 
mean to see him. Just go and tell him so!' 
     Merry left them a long while in the hall, and they had time to discover  
their parting gift  of spoons. It did  not improve their tempers. Eventually 

####-they were shown into the study. Frodo was sitting at a  table with a lot  of 
papers in front of him. He looked indisposed - to see Sackville-Bagginses at 
any  rate;  and he stood up,  fidgeting with something in his pocket. But he 
spoke quite politely. 
     The Sackville-Bagginses were  rather offensive. They began  by offering 
him  bad  bargain-prices  (as between  friends)  for  various  valuable  and 
unlabelled  things.  When  Frodo  replied  that  only  the  things specially 
directed by Bilbo were being given away, they said the whole affair was very 
fishy. 
     'Only one thing  is clear to me,' said Otho, 'and that  is that you are 
doing exceedingly well out of it. I insist on seeing the will.' 
     Otho would  have been Bilbo's heir, but for  the  adoption of Frodo. He 
read the will carefully and  snorted. It was,  unfortunately, very clear and 
correct (according to the legal customs of hobbits, which demand among other  
things seven signatures of witnesses in red ink). 
     'Foiled again!' he said  to his  wife. 'And after waiting sixty   years.  
Spoons? Fiddlesticks!' He snapped his fingers under Frodo's nose and slumped 
off. But Lobelia was not so easily got rid of. A little later Frodo came out 
of the study  to see how things were going  on and found her still about the 
place, investigating nooks  and comers and  tapping the  floors. He escorted 
her firmly off the premises, after he had relieved her of several small (but 
rather valuable) articles that had somehow fallen inside  her umbrella.  Her  
face looked as if  she was in the throes of thinking out a  really  crushing 
parting remark; but all she found to say, turning round on the step, was:  
     'You'll live to regret  it, young  fellow! Why  didn't you  go too? You  
don't belong here; you're no Baggins  - you - you're a Brandybuck!' 
     'Did you hear that, Merry? That was an insult, if you like,' said Frodo 
as he shut the door on her. 
     'It was a compliment,' said Merry  Brandybuck, 'and so, of  course, not 
true.' 
     Then they went  round the hole,  and  evicted three  young hobbits (two 
Boffins and a Bolger) who were knocking  holes  in the  walls  of one of the 
cellars.  Frodo  also had a  tussle  with young Sancho  Proudfoot  (old  Odo 
Proudfoot's  grandson),  who had  begun an  excavation in the larger pantry, 
where  he thought there was an echo. The legend of Bilbo's gold excited both 
curiosity  and  hope;  for legendary  gold  (mysteriously obtained,  if  not  
positively ill-gotten), is, as every  one  knows, any one's for  the  finding 

####--unless the search is interrupted. 
     When he had overcome  Sancho and  pushed him out, Frodo  collapsed on a  
chair in the hall. It's time to  close the shop, Merry,'  he said. 'Lock the 
door, and don't open it to anyone today,  not even if they bring a battering 
ram.' Then he went to revive himself with a belated cup of tea. 
     He had hardly sat down, when there came a soft knock at the front-door. 
'Lobelia again most likely,' he thought. 'She must have thought of something 
really nasty, and have come back again to say it. It can wait.' 
     He went on  with his tea.  The knock was repeated,  much louder, but he 
took no notice. Suddenly the wizard's head appeared at the window.  
     'If you don't let me in, Frodo, I  shall blow your door right down your 
hole and out through the hill,' he said. 
     'My dear Gandalf! Half a  minute!' cried Frodo, running out of the room 
to the door. 'Come in! Come in! I thought it was Lobelia.' 
     'Then I  forgive you.  But I saw her some time ago, driving a pony-trap 
towards Bywater with a face that would have curdled new milk.' 
     'She had already nearly curdled me. Honestly, I nearly tried on Bilbo's 
ring. I longed to disappear.' 
     'Don't do that!'  said  Gandalf, sitting down. 'Do be  careful of  that 
ring, Frodo! In fact, it is partly about that that I have come to say a last 
word.' 
     'Well, what about it?' 
     'What do you know already?' 
     'Only  what Bilbo told me. I have heard his story: how he found it, and 
how he used it: on his journey, I mean.' 
     'Which story, I wonder,' said Gandalf.  
     'Oh, not what he told the dwarves and put in his book,' said Frodo. 'He 
told me  the  true story  soon after I  came to live here.  He said  you had 
pestered him till he told you, so I had better know too. "No secrets between 
us,  Frodo,"  he  said;  "but  they are not  to go  any  further. It's  mine 
anyway."' 
     'That's interesting,' said Gandalf.  'Well,  what did  you  think of it 
all?' 
     'If you mean, inventing all that about a "present",  well, I thought the 
true story much more likely, and I  couldn't see the point of altering it at 
all. It was very  unlike Bilbo to do  so,  anyway; and I thought  it  rather  
odd.' 

####-     'So did I. But odd things may happen to people that have such treasures 
- if  they use them. Let it be a warning to you to be very careful  with it. 
It may have other powers than just making you vanish when you wish to.' 
     'I don't understand,' said Frodo. 
     'Neither do I,'  answered  the wizard. 'I have  merely begun  to wonder  
about the ring,  especially since last night. No need to worry.  But if  you  
take my  advice you will use it very  seldom, or not at  all. At least I beg 
you not  to use it in any way that will cause talk or rouse suspicion. I say 
again: keep it safe, and keep it secret!' 
     'You are very mysterious! What are you afraid of?' 
     'I am not certain, so I  will say no  more. I may  be able to  tell you  
something  when I come back. I am going off at once: so this is good-bye for 
the present.' He got up. 
     'At  once!' cried Frodo.  'Why,  I thought  you were staying  on for at 
least a week. I was looking forward to your help.' 
     'I did mean to  - but I have had to change my mind. I  may be away for a  
good while;  but  I'll come and see you again, as soon  as I  can. Expect me 
when you see me! I shall  slip in quietly.  I  shan't often be visiting  the 
Shire openly again.  I find that I have become rather unpopular. They  say I 
am a  nuisance  and  a  disturber  of the  peace. Some people  are  actually 
accusing me of spiriting Bilbo away, or worse. If you want to know, there is 
supposed to be a plot between you and me to get hold of his wealth.' 
     'Some  people!'  exclaimed Frodo.  'You  mean  Otho  and  Lobelia.  How 
abominable!  I would give  them Bag  End and everything else, if I could get  
Bilbo back  and go off tramping in the country with  him. I  love the Shire. 
But I begin to  wish, somehow, that I had gone too. I wonder if I shall ever  
see him again.' 
     'So do I,' said Gandalf. 'And  I wonder many other things. Good-bye now!  
Take  care  of  yourself!  Look out  for  me, especially at  unlikely times!  
Good-bye!' 
     Frodo saw him to the door. He gave a final wave of his hand, and walked 
off at a surprising pace; but Frodo  thought the  old wizard looked unusually 
bent, almost  as if  he was carrying a great weight. The evening was closing 
in, and his cloaked figure quickly vanished into the twilight. Frodo did not 
see him again for a long time. 
 
 

####-<h4>Chapter 2.</h4> <br> The Shadow of the Past 

 
 
     The talk did not die down in nine  or even ninety-nine days. The second 
disappearance of Mr. Bilbo Baggins was discussed in Hobbiton, and indeed all 
over the Shire,  for a year  and a day,  and was remembered much longer than 
that.  It became  a fireside -story for  young  hobbits;  and eventually  Mad 
Baggins,  who used to vanish with a  bang and a flash and reappear with bags 
of jewels and gold, became a favourite character of legend and lived on long  
after all the true events were forgotten. 
     But in the meantime, the general opinion in the  neighbourhood was that 
Bilbo, who  had always been rather cracked, had at  last gone quite mad, and  
had run off into the Blue. There he had  undoubtedly fallen into a pool or a  
river and  come to a tragic,  but  hardly an  untimely, end.  The blame  was 
mostly laid on Gandalf. 
     'If only that  dratted  wizard will leave young  Frodo  alone,  perhaps 
he'll  settle  down  and  grow some  hobbit-sense,'  they said. And  to  all 
appearance the wizard did leave Frodo alone, and he did settle down, but the  
growth of hobbit-sense was not very noticeable. Indeed, he at once  began to  
carry on Bilbo's reputation for oddity. He  refused to go into mourning; and 
the next  year  he gave a party  in  honour of  Bilbo's  hundred-and-twelfth 
birthday, which he  called Hundred-weight Feast. But that was  short  of the 
mark, for twenty guests were invited  and  there were several meals at which  
it snowed food and rained drink, as hobbits say. 
     Some people were rather shocked; but Frodo kept up the custom of giving 
Bilbo's  Birthday Party year after year  until  they got used to it. He said 
that he did not think Bilbo  was dead. When  they asked: 'Where is he then?' 
he shrugged his shoulders. 
     He lived  alone, as Bilbo had done; but he  had  a  good  many friends, 
especially among  the younger hobbits  (mostly descendants  of the Old Took) 
who  had  as children been fond of  Bilbo  and often in and out of Bag  End.  
Folco Boffin and Fredegar  Bolger were two of these; but his closest friends 
were Peregrin Took (usually called Pippin),  and Merry Brandybuck  (his real 
name was Meriadoc, but  that was seldom remembered). Frodo went tramping 
all 
over  the Shire with them; but more often he wandered by himself, and to the 
amazement of  sensible folk he was sometimes  seen far  from home walking in 

####-the hills and woods under the starlight.  Merry and Pippin suspected that he 
visited the Elves at times, as Bilbo had done. 
     As time went on, people began to notice that Frodo also showed signs of 
good 'preservation':  outwardly he retained the appearance  of a  robust and 
energetic hobbit just out of his tweens. 'Some folk have all the luck,' they 
said;  but it was not until Frodo approached the  usually more  sober age of 
fifty that they began to think it queer. 
     Frodo himself, after the first shock, found  that being his  own master  
and the Mr. Baggins of Bag End  was rather  pleasant. For some  years he was 
quite  happy and did not  worry much about the  future. But half unknown  to 
himself the regret that he had not gone with Bilbo was  steadily growing. He 
found himself  wondering at times,  especially in the autumn, about the wild 
lands, and strange visions of mountains that he had never seen came into his 
dreams. He began to sa y to himself: 'Perhaps I shall cross the  River myself 
one day.' To which the other half of his mind always replied: 'Not yet.' 
     So it  went on,  until his forties were  running  out, and his fiftieth 
birthday  was  drawing  near:  fifty  was a number   that he felt was somehow 
significant (or ominous); it was at any  rate at that age that adventure had 
suddenly  befallen  Bilbo. Frodo began to feel  restless, and the  old paths 
seemed too well-trodden. He  looked at maps, and  wondered  what lay  beyond 
their edges: maps made  in the Shire showed  mostly  white spaces beyond its 
borders.  He took to wandering further afield and more often by himself; and 
Merry and his other friends watched him anxiously. Often he was seen walking 
and talking with the strange  wayfarers that began at this time to appear in 
the Shire. 
     There were rumours of  strange things happening in the  world  outside; 
and as Gandalf had not at that time appeared or sent any message for several 
years, Frodo gathered all the news he could. Elves, who seldom walked in the 
Shire, could  now be seen passing westward through the woods in the evening, 
passing and  not returning; but they were leaving Middle-earth and  were  no  
longer concerned with its troubles. There were, however, dwarves on the road 
in  unusual numbers. The ancient East -West Road ran through the Shire to its 
end at the Grey Havens, and dwarves had always used it on their way to their 
mines in the Blue Mountains. They  were the  hobbits' chief  source of  news 
from distant parts  - if they  wanted any: as a rule  dwarves said little and 
hobbits  asked  no  more.  But now Frodo  often met strange dwarves  of  far  
countries, seeking refuge in the West. They were troubled, and some spoke in 

####-whispers of the Enemy and of the Land of Mordor. 
     That name  the hobbits  only knew in legends  of the  dark past, like a  
shadow  in  the  background  of their  memories;  but  it  was  ominous  and 
disquieting. It seemed that the  evil power in Mirkwood had been  driven out 
by the White Council  only  to  reappear  in  greater  strength  in the  old 
strongholds of Mordor. The  Dark Tower had been rebuilt,  it was  said. From 
there the  power was spreading far and  wide,  and away far  east  and south 
there were  wars and  growing  fear.  Orcs were  multiplying  again  in  the  
mountains. Trolls were abroad, no longer dull-witted, but  cunning and armed 
with  dreadful  weapons.  And there  were  murmured  hints of creatures more 
terrible than all these, but they had no name. 
     Little of all this,  of  course, reached the ears of  ordinary hobbits. 
But  even the deafest  and most stay-at-home began to hear queer  tales; and 
those whose business  took  them  to  the  borders  saw strange  things. The 
conversation in The  Green Dragon at Bywater,  one evening in the spring  of 
Frodo's  fiftieth year,  showed that  even in the comfortable  heart of  the 
Shire rumours had been heard, though most hobbits still laughed at them. 
     Sam Gamgee was sitting in one  corner near the fire,  and opposite  him 
was Ted  Sandyman, the  miller's son;  and there  were various  other rustic 
hobbits listening to their talk. 
     'Queer things you do hear these days, to be sure,' said Sam. 
     'Ah,'  said  Ted, 'you do, if you listen. But I can hear fireside-tales 
and children's stories at home, if I want to.' 
     'No doubt you can,' retorted Sam, 'and I daresay  there's more truth in 
some of them than you reckon.  Who invented the stories anyway? Take 
dragons 
now.' 
     'No thank 'ee,' said  Ted, 'I won't.  I heard tell of them when I was a  
youngster, but there's no  call to  believe in  them  now. There's  only one 
Dragon in Bywater, and that's Green,' he said, getting a general laugh. 
     'All  right,' said  Sam, laughing with the rest. 'But  what about these 
Tree-men, these giants, as you might call  them? They do say that one bigger 
than a tree was seen up away beyond the North Moors not long back.' 
     'Who's they?' 
     'My cousin Hal for one. He works for Mr. Boffin at Overhill and goes up 
to the Northfarthing for the hunting. He saw one.' 
     'Says he did, perhaps. Your Hal's always saying  he's seen  things; and 

####-maybe he sees things that ain't there.' 
     'But  this  one was as big  as an elm tree, and walking - walking seven 
yards to a stride, if it was an inch.' 
     'Then I bet it wasn't an inch. What he saw was an elm  tree, as like as 
not.' 
     'But this one was  walking, I tell you; and there  ain't no elm tree on 
the North Moors.' 
     'Then Hal can't have  seen one,' said Ted. There  was some laughing and 
clapping: the audience seemed to think that Ted had scored a point. 
     'All  the same,'  said  Sam,  'you can't deny  that others besides  our 
Halfast have seen  queer  folk crossing the  Shire  - crossing  it, mind you: 
there are more that are turned back at the borders. The Bounders  have never  
been so busy before. 
     'And I've heard tell  that Elves are moving west. They do  say they are 
going to the harbours, out away beyond the  White Towers.' Sam waved his 
arm 
vaguely: neither he nor  any of them knew how far it was to the Sea, past the 
old towers  beyond  the western borders  of the  Shire. But  it was  an  old 
tradition that  away over  there stood the Grey  Havens, from which at times 
elven-ships set sail, never to return. 
     'They are sailing,  sailing, sailing over the Sea,  they are going into 
the West  and  leaving us,' said  Sam, half chanting the words, shaking  his 
head sadly and solemnly. But Ted laughed. 
     'Well,  that isn't anything  new, if you believe the  old tales.   And I 
don't see  what it matters to me or you.  Let  them sail!  But I warrant you  
haven't seen them doing it; nor any one else in the Shire.' 
     'Well I don't  know,' said Sam  thoughtfully. He believed he  had  once 
seen an Elf in the  woods, and still hoped to  see more one  day. Of all the 
legends  that he had heard in his  early  years such fragments of tales  and 
half-remembered  stories  about  the Elves as the hobbits knew,  had  always 
moved him  most deeply. 'There  are some,  even in these parts, as  know the 
Fair Folk and get news  of them,'  he said. 'There's Mr. Baggins now, that I 
work for. He told me  that they were sailing and he knows a bit about Elves.  
And old Mr. Bilbo knew more:  many's the  talk I had with  him  when I was a  
little lad.' 
     'Oh, they're both cracked,' said Ted. 'Leastways old Bilbo was cracked, 
and Frodo's cracking. If that's where  you get your news from, you'll  never  

####-want for moonshine. Well,  friends,  I'm  off home.  Your  good  health!' He 
drained his mug and  went out noisily. 
     Sam sat silent and said no more. He had a good deal to think about. For  
one thing, there was a lot to do up in the Bag End garden, and he would have 
a busy day tomorrow, if the weather cleared. The grass was growing fast. But 
Sam ha d more on his mind than gardening. After a while he sighed, and got up 
and went out. 
     It was  early April and the sky was now clearing after  heavy rain. The 
sun was down,  and  a cool  pale evening was quietly fading  into night.  He 
walked  home  under  the  early stars  through  Hobbiton and  up  the  Hill, 
whistling softly and thoughtfully. 
     It  was  just at  this  time that  Gandalf  reappeared  after his  long 
absence. For three years  after  the Party he had  been away.  Then he  paid 
Frodo a  brief visit,  and after taking a good look at him he went off again. 
During  the  next  year  or  two  he  had  turned  up  fairly often,  coming 
unexpectedly  after  dusk, and going off without warning before sunrise.  He 
would  not  discuss  his  own  business  and  journeys, and  seemed  chiefly 
interested in small news about Frodo's health and doings. 
     Then suddenly his visits had ceased. It was over nine years since Frodo 
had seen or heard of him, and  he had begun  to think that  the wizard would 
never return and  had given up all interest in hobbits. But that evening, as 
Sam was walking home  and twilight was fading, there came the once  familiar 
tap on the study window.  
     Frodo welcomed  his old friend with  surprise  and great delight.  They 
looked hard at one another. 
     'Ah well eh?' said Gandalf. 'You look the same as ever, Frodo!' 
     'So do you,' Frodo replied; but secretly he thought that Gandalf looked 
older and  more careworn. He pressed him for news of himself and of the wide 
world, and  soon they were  deep in talk, and  they stayed  up far into  the 
night. 
     Next morning after a late breakfast, the  wizard was sitting with Frodo 
by the open  window of the  study. A bright fire was on the hearth,  but the 
sun was warm, and  the  wind was in the  South. Everything looked fresh, and 
the new green of Spring  was shimmering in the fields and on the tips of the  
trees' fingers.  
     Gandalf  was thinking of  a  spring,  nearly  eighty years before, when 
Bilbo  had run out  of Bag End without  a handkerchief. His hair was perhaps 

####-whiter  than it  had  been  then,  and his  beard  and eyebrows were perhaps 
longer, and  his face more lined with care and  wisdom; but his eyes were as 
bright as ever, and he smoked and blew smoke-rings with the same vigour  and 
delight. 
     He was  smoking  now in  silence, for  Frodo was sitting still, deep in 
thought. Even in the light of morning he felt the dark shadow of the tidings 
that Gandalf had brought. At last he broke the silence. 
     'Last  night  you  began to  tell  me  strange  things  about  my ring, 
Gandalf,' he said. 'And then you stopped, because you said that such matters 
were best left until  daylight. Don't you think  you  had better finish now?  
You  say the ring  is dangerous,  far mor e  dangerous than  I guess. In what 
way?' 
     'In many  ways,' answered  the wizard. It is far  more powerful than  I 
ever dared to think at first, so powerful that in the  end it  would utterly 
overcome anyone of mortal race who possessed it. It would possess him. 
     'In Eregion long  ago many Elven-rings  were made,  magic  rings as you  
call them, and they were, of course, of various  kinds: some more potent and 
some  less.  The lesser rings were only essays  in the craft before  it  was 
full-grown, and to the Elven-smiths they were but  trifles  - yet still to my 
mind dangerous for mortals. But  the Great Rings,  the Rings of Power,  they 
were perilous.  
     'A  mortal, Frodo, who keeps one of the Great  Rings, does not die, but 
he does not  grow  or obtain more life, he merely continues, until  at  last 
every minute is a weariness. And if he often  uses the Ring  to make himself 
invisible,  he fades: he becomes in the end invisible permanently, and walks 
in the twilight under the eye of the  dark power that rules the Rings.  Yes, 
sooner or  later  - later, if he is strong or well-meaning to begin with, but 
neither strength nor good purpose will last  - sooner or later the dark power  
will devour him.' 
     'How terrifying!' said Frodo. There was another long silence. The sound 
of Sam Gamgee cutting the lawn came in from the garden. 
     'How long have you  known this?'  asked Frodo  at length. 'And how much 
did Bilbo know?' 
     'Bilbo knew no  more than he told you, I  am  sure,' said Gandalf.  'He 
would certainly never have  passed on  to you anything that he thought would 
be a danger, even though I  promised to  look after you. He thought the ring  
was very beautiful, and very  useful at  need;  and if anything was wrong or 

####-queer, it was himself. He said that it was "growing on his mind", and he was 
always worrying about it; but he did not suspect that the ring itself was to 
blame.  Though he had found out that  the thing needed looking after; it did 
not seem always of the same size or weight; it shrank or expanded  in an odd 
way, and might suddenly slip off a finger where it had been tight.' 
     'Yes, he warned me of that in his last letter,' said Frodo,  'so I have 
always kept it on its chain.' 
     'Very wise,'  said Gandalf.  'But  as for  his long life,   Bilbo  never  
connected  it  with the  ring  at all. He took  all  the credit  for that to 
himself,  and he was very  proud of  it. Though  he was getting restless and 
uneasy.  Thin and  stretched  he  said. A  sign  that  the  ring was getting 
control.' 
     'How long have you known all this?' asked Frodo again. 
     'Known?'  said  Gandalf.  'I  have known  much that only the Wise know,  
Frodo. But  if you mean "known about this ring", well,  I still do not know,  
one might say. There is a last test to make. But I no longer doubt my guess.  
     'When did I first begin to guess?' he mused, searching back  in memory. 
'Let me see - it was in the year that the White Council drove the dark power  
from Mirkwood,  just before the Battle of Five  Armies, that Bilbo found his 
ring.  A  shadow  fell on my  heart then, though  I did not know  yet what I 
feared. I wondered often how Gollum came  by a Great Ring, as plainly it was 
- that at least was clear from the first. Then I heard Bilbo's strange story 
of how he had "won" it, and I  could not believe it. When I at last  got the 
truth out of him,  I saw at once that he had been trying to put his claim to 
the  ring beyond  doubt. Much like Gollum  with his "birthday  present". The 
lies were too much alike for my comfort.  Clearly the ring had an unwholesome 
power  that  set to  work on  its keeper at once.  That was the  first  real 
warning I had that all was not well. I told Bilbo often that such rings were 
better left unused; but he resented it, and soon got angry. There was little 
else that I could  do.  I could not take it  from him without doing  greater  
harm; and  I had no right to  do so anyway. I could only watch  and wait.  I 
might perhaps have consulted Saruman the White, but something always held 
me 
back.' 
     'Who is he?' asked Frodo. I have never heard of him before.' 
     'Maybe  not,' answered Gandalf. 'Hobbits  are, or were,  no concern  of 
his. Yet he is great among the Wise.  He  is the  chief of  my order and the 

####-head of the Council. His knowledge is deep, but his pride has grown with it,  
and he takes ill any meddling. The lore of the Elven-rings, great and small, 
is  his province. He  has long studied it, seeking the lost secrets of their 
making; but when the  Rings  were debated  in the Council, all that he would  
reveal to us of his ring-lore told against my fears. So my doubt slept  - but 
uneasily. Still I watched and I waited. 
     'And all  seemed well  with  Bilbo. And  the  years  passed. Yes,  they 
passed, and  they seemed  not to touch him.  He showed no signs of age.  The 
shadow fell  on me  again. But I said  to  myself: "After all he comes of  a  
long-lived family on his mother's side. There is time yet. Wait!" 
     'And  I waited.  Until  that night when he left this house. He said and 
did things then that  filled me with a  fear that no words  of Saruman could 
allay. I knew at last that something dark and deadly was at work. And I have  
spent most of the years since then in finding out the truth of it.' 
     'There  wasn't  any  permanent  harm  done,  was  there?'  asked  Frodo 
anxiously. 'He would  get all right in time, wouldn't he? Be able to rest in 
peace, I mean?' 
     'He felt better at once,' said Gandalf. 'But there is only one Power in 
this world that knows all about the Rings and their effects; and as far as I 
know there is no Power  in the world that knows all about hobbits. Among the 
Wise I  am  the only one that goes in for hobbit-lore: an obscure branch  of 
knowledge, but  full  of surprises.  Soft as  butter  they  can be,  and yet 
sometimes as tough as old  tree-roots.  I  think it likely  that  some would  
resist the  Rings far longer  than most of the Wise  would believe.  I don't 
think you need worry about Bilbo. 
     'Of  course, he possessed the ring  for many years,  and used it,  so it 
might take a long while for the  influence to  wear off  - before it was safe 
for him to see it  again, for  instance.  Otherwise,  he might  live on  for  
years,  quite happily: just stop  as  he was when he parted with  it. For he 
gave it up in the end of his own accord: an important point. No, I  was  not 
troubled about dear Bilbo any more, once he had let the  thing go. It is for  
you that I feel responsible. 
     'Ever  since  Bilbo left  I have been deeply concerned  about you,  and 
about all  these charming, absurd, helpless  hobbits. It would be a grievous 
blow to the world, if  the Dark Power overcame the Shire; if all  your kind, 
jolly, stupid Bolgers, Hornblowers, Boffins, Bracegirdles, and the rest, not 
to mention the ridiculous Bagginses, became enslaved.' 

####-     Frodo shuddered. 'But why  should we be?'  he asked. 'And why should he 
want such slaves?' 
     'To tell you the  truth,' replied Gandalf,  'I  believe that hitherto - 
hitherto,  mark you - he has entirely overlooked the existence  of   hobbits.  
You should be thankful. But your  safety has passed. He does not need you   - 
he  has  many  more useful  servants   -  but  he won't forget you again. And 
hobbits as miserable slaves would please him far more than hobbits happy and 
free. There is  such a thing as malice and revenge.' 
     'Revenge?' said Frodo. 'Revenge for what? I still don't understand what 
all this has to do with Bilbo and myself, and our ring.' 
     'It has everything to do with  it,' said Gandalf. 'You do  not know the 
real peril  yet; but  you shall. I was not sure of it myself when I was last  
here; but the time has come to speak. Give me the ring for a moment.' 
     Frodo took it from his breeches-pocket, where it was clasped to a chain 
that hung  from  his  belt. He unfastened  it  and handed  it slowly  to the 
wizard. It felt suddenly very heavy, as if either it or Frodo himself was in 
some way reluctant for Gandalf to touch it. 
     Gandalf held it up. It looked  to be  made of pure and solid gold. 'Can 
you see any markings  on it?' he asked. 
     'No,'  said  Frodo. 'There  are none. It is quite  plain,  and it never  
shows a scratch or sign of wear.' 
     'Well  then, look!'  To Frodo's  astonishment and  distress  the wizard 
threw it suddenly  into the middle  of a glowing corner  of the fire.  Frodo 
gave a cry and groped for the tongs; but Gandalf held him back. 
     'Wait!' he said in a commanding voice,  giving Frodo a quick  look from 
under his bristling brows. 
     No apparent  change came over the ring. After a  while  Gandalf got up, 
closed  the shutters outside the window,  and drew  the  curtains.  The room 
became dark and silent, though the  clack of Sam's shears, now nearer to the  
windows,  could  still be heard  faintly from the garden. For  a  moment the 
wizard st ood looking at the fire; then he stooped and  removed  the ring  to 
the hearth with the tongs, and at once picked it up. Frodo gasped. 
     It  is quite cool,' said Gandalf. 'Take it!' Frodo received  it  on his 
shrinking palm: it seemed to have become thicker and heavier than ever. 
     'Hold it up!' said Gandalf. 'And look closely!' 
     As  Frodo  did  so,  he  now  saw  fine  lines, finer than  the  finest  
pen-strokes,  running along the ring, outside and inside: lines of fire that 

####-seemed  to  form  the  letters of a flowing  script. They  shone  piercingly 
bright, and yet remote, as if out of a great depth. 
 
     I cannot read the fiery letters,' said Frodo in a quavering voice. 
     'No,' said Gandalf, 'but I can. The  letters are Elvish,  of an ancient 
mode, but the  language is that of Mordor, which I will  not utter here. But 
this in the Common Tongue is what is said, close enough: 
     One Ring to rule them all, One Ring to find them, 
     One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them. 
     It is only two lines of a verse long known in Elven-lore: 
     Three Rings for the Elven-kings under the sky, 
     Seven for the Dwarf- lords in their halls of stone, 
     Nine for Mortal Men doomed to die, 
     One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne 
     In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie. 
     One Ring to rule them all. One Ring to find them, 
     One Ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them 
     In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.' 
     He  paused,  and  then  said  slowly in  a  deep voice:  'This  is  the 
Master-ring, the One  Ring to rule them all.  This is the  One  Ring that he 
lost many ages ago, to the great weakening of  his power. He greatly desires 
it - but he must not get it.' 
     Frodo sat silent  and motionless.  Fear seemed  to stretch out  a  vast  
hand, like a dark  cloud rising in the East and  looming  up  to engulf him. 
'This ring!' he stammered. 'How, how on earth did it come to me?' 
     'Ah!' said Gandalf. 'That is a very long story. The beginnings lie back 
in  the Black Years, which only the lore-masters now remember. If  I were to 
tell  you all  that tale, we should still  be sitting  here when  Spring had 
passed into Winter. 
     'But last  night  I told  you of Sauron the Great,  the Dark  Lord. The 
rumours that you have  heard are  true: he  has indeed arisen again and left 
his hold in Mirkwood and returned to his ancient fastness in the  Dark Tower 
of Mordor. That name even  you  hobbits have heard of, like a  shadow on the 
borders of  old  stories. Always after a  defeat and a  respite, the  Shadow 
takes another shape and grows again.' 
     'I wish it need not have happened in my time,' said Frodo. 
     'So do I,' said Gandalf, 'and so do all who live to see such times. But 

####-that is not for them to decide. All we have to decide is what to do with the 
time that  is given, us. And already, Frodo,  our  time is beginning to look  
black. The Enemy is fast becoming very strong. His plans are  far from ripe,  
I think, but  they are ripening. We shall be hard put to  it.  We  should be 
very hard put to it, even if it were not for this dreadful chance. 
     'The Enemy  still lacks one thing to give him strength and knowledge to 
beat down all resistance,  break the last defences, and cover  all the lands 
in a second darkness. He lacks the One Ring. 
     'The  Three, fairest of all, the Elf-lords hid  from him, and  his hand 
never touched  them or  sullied them. Seven the  Dwarf-kings possessed,  but 
three he  has recovered,  and the others the  dragons have consumed. Nine he 
gave  to  Mortal Men,  proud and great, and so ensnared them. Long ago  they 
fell under  the dominion  of the One, and they became  Ringwraiths,  shadows 
under  his  great Shadow, his most terrible servants. Long ago. It is many a  
year since the Nine walked abroad. Yet who  knows?  As the Shadow grows 
once 
more, they too may walk again. But  come!  We will not speak of such  things 
even in the morning of the Shire. 
     'So it is now: the Nine he has gathered to himself; the Seven also,  or  
else  they are  destroyed.  The Three are hidden still.  But that no  longer  
troubles him. He only  needs the One; for he made  that Ring himself, it  is 
his, and he let a great part of his  own former power pass  into it, so that 
he could rule all the other s.  If he recovers it, then he  will command them 
all again, wherever they be,  even the Three, and  all that has been wrought 
with them will be laid bare, and he will be stronger than ever. 
     'And this  is the dreadful chance, Frodo. He believed that the  One had 
perished; that the Elves had destroyed it, as should have been  done. But he 
knows now that it has not perished, that it has been found. So he is seeking 
it, seeking it, and all his thought is bent  on it. It is his great hope and 
our great fear. ' 
     'Why,  why wasn't it destroyed?'  cried Frodo. 'And how  did  the Enemy  
ever come to lose it, if  he  was so strong, and it was so precious to him?' 
He  clutched  the Ring  in his hand,  as  if  he saw  already  dark  fingers 
stretching out to seize it. 
     'It  was taken from him,' said Gandalf.  'The  strength of the Elves to 
resist  him was greater long ago; and  not all Men were estranged from them. 
The  Men of Westernesse  came  to their aid. That  is a  chapter of  ancient 

####-history which it might be good to recall; for there was sorrow then too, and 
gathering dark, but great valour, and great deeds that were not wholly vain. 
One day, perhaps, I will tell you all the tale, or you shall hear it told in 
full by one who knows it best. 
     'But for the moment, since most of all you need to know how  this thing 
came to  you, and that will be tale enough, this is all that  I will say. It 
was Gil-galad,  Elven-king and Elendil  of Westernesse who overthrew Sauron, 
though they themselves perished in the  deed; and Isildur Elendil's son  cut 
the  Ring  from  Sauron's hand and  took  it  for his own.  Then  Sauron was 
vanquished  and  his  spirit fled and was hidden for long  years,  until his 
shadow took shape again in Mirkwood. 
     'But  the  Ring was  lost. It fell  into  the Great  River, Anduin,  and 
vanished. For Isildur was marching north  along the east banks of the River,  
and near the Gladden Fields he was waylaid by the Orcs of the Mountains, and 
almost all his folk  were slain. He leaped  into the waters,  but  the  Ring 
slipped from his finger as he swam, and then the Orcs saw him and killed him 
with arrows.' 
     Gandalf paused. 'And there in the dark pools amid the  Gladden Fields,' 
he said, 'the Ring passed out  of knowledge and legend; and even so much  of 
its history is known now  only to a few, and the Council of the  Wise  could 
discover no more. But at last I can carry on the story, I think. 
     'Long  after, but  still very long ago, there lived by the banks of the 
Great River  on  the edge of  Wilderland  a  clever -handed  and quiet-footed 
little people. I guess they were of hobbit-kind; akin to the fathers of  the 
fathers  of the Stoors, for they loved  the  River, and often swam in it, or  
made  little  boats  of reeds. There was among them a family of high repute,  
for it was  large and wealthier than most, and it was ruled by a grandmother  
of  the  folk, stern  and  wise  in old lore,  such  as they  had. The  most 
inquisitive and  curious-minded of that  family was called  Smjagol. He  was 
interested in  roots and beginnings; he dived into  deep pools; he  burrowed 
under  trees and  growing plants; he tunnelled  into green  mounds;  and  he 
ceased to  look up at the hill -tops, or the leaves on trees, or  the flowers 
opening in the air: his head and his eyes were downward. 
     'He had a  friend  called Djagol, of similar sort, sharper -eyed but not 
so quick and strong. On a time they took a boat and went down to the Gladden 
Fields, where  there were  great beds  of  iris  and  flowering reeds. There 
Smjagol got out and went nosing about the banks but Deal sat in the boat and 

####-fished. Suddenly a great fish took  his  hook, and before he  knew where  he 
was, he was dragged out and down into the water, to  the bottom. Then he let 
go of his line, for he thought he saw  something shining  in  the river -bed; 
and holding his breath he grabbed at it. 
     'Then up he came spluttering,  with weeds in his  hair and a handful of 
mud; and he swam to the bank. And behold! when he washed the mud away, 
there 
in his  hand lay a beautiful golden ring; and it  shone and glittered in the 
sun, so  that his heart  was glad.  But  Smjagol had  been watching him from 
behind  a tree, and as Deal  gloated  over the  ring, Smjagol came softly up 
behind. 
     '"Give  us  that,  Deal,  my  love,"  said Smjagol,  over  his friend's 
shoulder. 
     '"Why?" said Deal. 
     ' "Because it's my birthday, my love, and I wants it," said Smjagol. 
     '"I don't care," said Deal. "I have  given  you a present already, more 
than I could afford. I found this, and I'm going to keep it." 
     ' "Oh, are you  indeed, my  love," said  Smjagol; and he caught Deal by 
the  throat  and  strangled  him,  because  the gold  looked  so bright  and 
beautiful. Then he put the ring on his finger. 
     'No one  ever found out what had become  of  Deal;  he was murdered far  
from home, and  his body  was cunningly hidden. But  Smjagol returned alone; 
and he found that none of his  family could see him, when he was wearing the 
ring. He was  very  pleased with  his discovery  and he concealed it; and he 
used it  to  find  out secrets, and  he  put  his  knowledge to crooked  and 
malicious  uses.  He became  sharp-eyed and  keen-eared  for  all  that  was 
hurtful. The ring had given him power according to  his stature. It is not to 
be wondered at  that he became very unpopular and was shunned (when 
visible)  
by  all his  relations.  They kicked him, and he  bit their feet. He took to 
thieving, and going about muttering to himself,  and gurgling in his throat. 
So they called him Gollum, and cursed him, and told him to go far  away; and 
his grandmother, desiring peace, expelled him from the family and turned him 
out of her hole. 
     'He wandered in  loneliness, weeping a little for the  hardness  of the 
world, and he journeyed up the River, till  he came to a stream that  flowed 
down from the mountains, and he went that way.  He caught fish in deep pools 

####-with invisible fingers and ate them raw. One day it was very hot, and as  he 
was  bending over a  pool, he felt a burning  on the back of his head) and a  
dazzling light from the water pained his wet eyes. He wondered at it, for he 
had almost forgotten about  the Sun. Then for the last time he looked up and 
shook his fist at her. 
     'But  as  he  lowered his eyes, he saw far above  the tops of the Misty 
Mountains, out of which the stream came.  And he thought suddenly: "It would 
be cool and shady under  those mountains. The Sun could not  watch me there. 
The  roots  of those mountains  must be  roots indeed; there  must be  great 
secrets buried there which have not been discovered since the beginning." 
     'So he journeyed by night up into  the highlands, and he found a little 
cave  out of which the dark stream ran; and  he wormed his way like a maggot 
into the heart of the  hills, and vanished  out  of all  knowledge. The Ring 
went into the shadows with him, and even the maker, when his power had 
begun 
to grow again, could learn nothing of it.' 
     'Gollum!' cried  Frodo. 'Gollum? Do  you mean  that this  is  the  very 
Gollum-creature that Bilbo met? How loathsome!' 
     'I  think  it  is  a sad  story,' said the  wizard, 'and it might  have 
happened to others, even to some hobbits that I have known.' 
     'I  can't  believe  that  Gollum  was  connected with  hobbits, however 
distantly,' said Frodo with some heat. 'What an abominable notion!' 
     'It is  true all  the same,' replied Gandalf. 'About their  origins, at 
any  rate, I know  more than hobbits  do themselves. And even  Bilbo's story 
suggests the kinship. There  was  a  great  deal in the background  of their 
minds  and memories  that was  very  similar.  They  understood one  another 
remarkably well,  very much  better  than a hobbit would  understand, say, a  
Dwarf, or an Orc, or even  an Elf. Think of the riddles they both  knew, for  
one thing.' 
     'Yes,' said Frodo. 'Though other folks besides hobbits ask riddles, and 
of  much the same sort. And hobbits don't cheat.  Gollum  meant to cheat all  
the time. He was just trying to put poor Bilbo  off his  guard. And I daresay 
it amused his wickedness  to  start a game which might end  in providing him 
with an easy victim, but if he lost would not hurt him.' 
     'Only too true, I fear,' said Gandalf. 'But there was something else in 
it, I think, which you don't see yet. Even Gollum was not wholly  ruined. He 
had proved tougher than even one of the Wise would have guessed  -as a hobbit 

####-might. There  was a little  corner of  his mind that was still  his own, and 
light  came  through it, as  through  a  chink in the dark: light out of the 
past.  It was actually  pleasant,  I think,  to  hear  a kindly voice again, 
bringing up memories  of wind,  and trees, and sun  on the  grass, and  such 
forgotten things.  
     'But that, of  course, would only make the evil  part of him angrier in 
the end - unless it could  be conquered.  Unless it could be cured.' Gandalf 
sighed. 'Alas! there is little hope of  that for him. Yet  not  no hope. No, 
not  though  he  possessed  the Ring so  long, almost  as far back as he can 
remember. For it was long since he  had worn it much:  in the black darkness 
it was seldom needed. Certainly he had never "faded".  He is  thin and tough 
still. But the  thing was eating up his mind, of course, and the torment had 
become almost unbearable. 
     'All the "great secrets" under the mountains had turned  out to be just  
empty night: there was  nothing more to find out,  nothing worth doing, only 
nasty furtive eating and resentful remembering.  He was altogether wretched. 
He hated the  dark,  and  he hated light more: he hated  everything, and the 
Ring most of all.' 
     'What  do you mean?' said Frodo. 'Surely the Ring was his  precious and 
the only thing he cared for?  But if he  hated it,  why didn't he get rid of 
it, or go away and leave it?' 
     'You  ought to  begin to understand, Frodo,  after all you have heard,' 
said Gandalf. 'He  hated it and loved it, as he hated and loved  himself. He 
could not get rid of it. He had no will left in the matter. 
     'A  Ring  of  Power  looks   after  itself,  Frodo.  It  may  slip  off 
treacherously, but its keeper never  abandons it. At most he  plays with the 
idea of handing  it on  to someone else's care  - and  that  only at an early 
stage, when it first  begins  to grip. But  as  far as I know Bilbo alone in 
history has ever gone beyond playing, and  really done it.  He needed all my 
help, too. And even  so he would never  have just  forsaken  it, or  cast it 
aside. It  was not Gollum, Frodo, but the  Ring  itself that decided things.  
The Ring left him.' 
     'What, just in time  to meet Bilbo?' said Frodo. 'Wouldn't an  Orc have 
suited it better?' 
     'It  is no laughing  matter,'  said Gandalf. 'Not for you.  It was  the 
strangest event in the  whole history of the  Ring so far:  Bilbo's  arrival 
just at that time, and putting his hand on it, blindly, in the dark. 

####-     'There was more than one power at work, Frodo. The  Ring was  trying to 
get back to its master. It had slipped from Isildur's hand and betrayed him; 
then when a  chance came it caught poor Deal, and he was murdered; and after  
that Gollum,  and it had devoured him. It could make  no further use of him:  
he was too  small and mean; and as long as it stayed with him he would never  
leave his deep pool again. So  now, when its master was awake  once more and 
sending out his dark  thought from Mirkwood, it abandoned Gollum. Only to 
be 
picked up by the most unlikely person imaginable: Bilbo from the Shire!  
     'Behind that there was something else at work, beyond any design of the 
Ring-maker.  I can put it no plainer than by saying that Bilbo was meant  to 
find the Ring, and not by its maker.  In which  case you  also were meant to 
have it. And that maybe an encouraging thought.' 
     It  is  not,' said Frodo. "Though I am not sure  that I understand you. 
But how have you  learned all this about the Ring, and about  Gollum? Do you  
really know it all, or are you just guessing still?' 
     Gandalf looked  at Frodo, and his eyes glinted. I knew much  and I have 
learned much,' he answered. 'But I am not  going to give an account of all my 
doings to you. The history of Elendil and Isildur and the One Ring is  known  
to all the  Wise. Your ring is shown to be that One Ring by the fire-writing 
alone, apart from any  other evidence.' 'And  when  did you discover  that?' 
asked Frodo, interrupting. 'Just  now in this room, of course,' answered the 
wizard sharply.  'But  I expected to  find  it.  I have come back  from dark 
journeys and long search to make that final test. It is the last proof,  and 
all is now only too clear. Making out Gollum's part, and fitting it into the 
gap in the history, required some  thought. I may have  started with guesses 
about Gollum, but I am not guessing now. I know. I have seen him.' 
     'You have seen Gollum?' exclaimed Frodo in amazement. 
     'Yes. The obvious thing to do, of  course, if  one  could. I tried long 
ago; but I have managed it at last.' 
     'Then what happened after Bilbo escaped from him? Do you know that?' 
     'Not so  clearly.  What I  have told you is what Gollum was  willing to 
tell - though not, of course, in the  way  I have  reported it. Gollum  is a  
liar,  and you have to sift his words. For instance, he called the  Ring his 
"birthday  present",  and he  stuck  to  that.  He  said it  came  from  his 
grandmother, who  had lots  of beautiful  things of  that kind. A ridiculous 
story. I have no doubt  that Smjagol's grandmother was a matriarch,  a great 

####-person in her  way,  but to talk of  her  possessing  many  Elven-rings  was 
absurd, and as for giving them away, it was a lie. But a lie with a grain of 
truth. 
     'The  murder  of  Deal haunted  Gollum,  and he had made  up a defence, 
repeating  it  to his "precious" over and  over again, as he gnawed bones in 
the dark, until he almost  believed it. It  was   his birthday. Deal ought to 
have given the ring to him. It had  previously turned up  just so as to be a  
present. It was his birthday present, and so on, and on. 
     I  endured  him  as long  as  I could,  but  the truth  was desperately 
important, and in the end I  had to be harsh. I put the fear of fire on him, 
and wrung  the  true  story  out of  him, bit by  bit,  together  with  much 
snivelling  and snarling. He thought  he was misunderstood and ill-used. But 
when  he  had  at  last  told  me his history,  as  far  as  the end of  the 
Riddle-game  and Bilbo's escape, he would not say any more,  except in  dark 
hints. Some other fear was on him greater than mine. He muttered that he was 
going  to gel his own back. People would see if he would stand being kicked, 
and driven  into  a hole and  then robbed. Gollum had good friends now, good 
friends and very strong. They would help him. Baggins would pay for it. That 
was his chief thought. He hated Bilbo and cursed his name. What  is more, he 
knew where he came from.' 
     'But how did he find that out?' asked Frodo. 
     'Well, as for the  name, Bilbo very foolishly told  Gollum himself; and 
after that  it  would  not be difficult to discover his country, once Gollum 
came out. Oh yes, he came out. His longing for the Ring proved stronger than 
his fear of the Orcs, or even of the light. After a year  or two he left the 
mountains. You  see, though  still  bound  by desire of it, the Ring was  no 
longer devouring him; he began  to revive a little.  He  felt  old , terribly 
old, yet less timid, and he was mortally hungry. 
     'Light, light of Sun and Moon, he still feared and hated, and he always 
will, I think; but he was cunning. He found he could hide  from daylight and 
moonshine,  and make his way swiftly  and softly by dead of night  with  his 
pale cold  eyes,  and  catch  small  frightened or  unwary  things. He  grew 
stronger  and  bolder  with new food  and  new air. He  found  his way  into 
Mirkwood, as one would expect.' 
     'Is that where you found him?' asked Frodo. 
     'I  saw  him there,' answered Gandalf, 'but before that he had wandered 
far, following  Bilbo's trail. It was difficult to  learn anything  from him 

####-for certain, for his talk was constantly interrupted  by curses and threats.  
"What had it  got in its pocketses?" he said. "It wouldn't say, no precious. 
Little cheat. Not a fair  question. It  cheated first, it did. It  broke the 
rules. We ought to have squeezed it, yes precious. And we will, precious!" 
     'That is a sample of his talk. I don't suppose you want any more. I had 
weary days  of it. But from hints dropped among  the snarls I  even gathered 
that his padding feet had  taken him  at last to Esgaroth, and even  to  the 
streets of Dale, listening secretly and peering. Well, the news of the great 
events went far and wide in Wilderland, and many had heard Bilbo's name  and 
knew where he came from.  We had made no secret of our return journey to his 
home in the West. Gollum's sharp ears would soon learn what he wanted.' 
     'Then why didn't  he track Bilbo further?' asked Frodo. 'Why didn't  he 
come to the Shire?' 
     'Ah,' said Gandalf, 'now we come to it. I think Gollum tried to. He set 
out and  came  back westward, as far as the Great River. But  then he turned 
aside. He  was not daunted by  the distance, I am  sure.  No, something else 
drew him away. So my friends think, those that hunted him for me. 
     'The Wood-elves tracked him first, an easy task for them, for his trail 
was  still fresh  then. Through Mirkwood and back again it  led them, though 
they never  caught him. The wood was full of  the  rumour  of  him, dreadful 
tales even among beasts and birds. The  Woodmen said that there was some 
new 
terror abroad, a ghost that drank blood. It climbed trees to  find nests; it 
crept into  holes  to  find  the young; it slipped  through windows  to find 
cradles. 
     'But at the western edge of Mirkwood the trail turned away. It wandered 
off southwards and passed out of the Wood-elves' ken, and was lost. And then 
I made a great mistake. Yes,  Frodo, and not the first; though I fear it may 
prove the  worst. I let the matter be. I let  him go; for I had much else to 
think of at that time, and I still trusted the lore of Saruman. 
     'Well, that was  years ago. I have paid for it since with many dark and 
dangerous days. The trail was long cold when I took it up again, after Bilbo 
left here. And my search would  have been in vain,  but for the  help that I 
had from a friend: Aragorn, the greatest traveller and huntsman of this  age 
of  the world.  Together we  sought  for  Gollum down  the  whole length  of 
Wilderland, without hope, and without success. But at last, when I had given 
up the chase and turned to other parts, Gollum was found. My friend returned 

####-out of the great perils bringing the miserable creature with him. 
     'What he had  been doing  he would not say. He only wept and  called us 
cruel,  with many a gollum in his throat; and when we pressed him he  whined 
and  cringed, and  rubbed his  long hands, licking his  fingers  as if  they 
pained  him, as if he remembered some old torture.  But I am afraid there is 
no possible doubt: he had made his slow, sneaking way, step by step, mile by 
mile, south, down at last to the Land of Mordor.' 
     A heavy silence fell in the room.  Frodo could hear his  heart beating. 
Even outside everything seemed still. No sound of Sam's  shears could now be 
heard. 
     'Yes,  to Mordor,' said Gandalf. 'Alas! Mordor draws all wicked things,  
and the Dark Power was bending all its will to  gather them there.  The Ring 
of the Enemy would leave  its  mark, too, leave him open to the summons. And 
all folk were whispering then of the new Shadow in the South, and its hatred  
of  the  West.  There were his fine  new  friends, who would help him in his 
revenge!  
     'Wretched  fool!  In that land he  would  learn  much, too much for his 
comfort. And sooner or later as he lurked and pried on  the borders he would  
be caught, and taken - for examination. That was the way of it, I fear. When 
he was found he  had already been  there long,  and was on his  way back. On 
some errand  of  mischief. But  that  does  not matter  much now. His  worst  
mischief was done. 
     'Yes, alas! through  him the  Enemy has learned that the One  has  been 
found again. He  knows where Isildur fell. He knows  where  Gollum found his 
ring. He knows that it is a Great Ring, for it gave long life. He knows that 
it is not one of the  Three, for they have  never been lost, and they endure 
no evil. He knows that it is not one of the Seven, or the Nine, for they are 
accounted for.  He  knows that it is  the One.  And he has  at last heard, I 
think, of hobbits and the Shire. 
     'The Shire - he may be seeking for  it now, if he has not already found 
out where it lies. Indeed, Frodo, I fear that  he may  even think  that  the 
long-unnoticed name of Baggins has become important.' 
     'But this is  terrible!' cried Frodo. 'Far  worse than the worst that I 
imagined from your hints and warnings. O Gandalf, best of friends, what am I 
to do? For now I am really afraid. What  am  I to do? What a pity that Bilbo  
did not stab that vile creature, when he had a chance!' 
     'Pity? It was Pity that stayed his hand. Pity, and Mercy: not to strike 

####-without need. And  he has been well rewarded, Frodo. Be sure that he took so 
little hurt from the evil,  and escaped  in  the  end, because he began  his 
ownership of the Ring so. With Pity.' 
     'I am sorry,' said  Frodo.  'But I am frightened; and I do not feel any 
pity for Gollum.' 
     'You have not seen him,' Gandalf broke in. 
     'No,  and I don't  want to,' said Frodo. I can't understand you. Do you  
mean to  say that you, and the Elves, have let him live on  after all  those 
horrible  deeds? Now at any rate he is  as bad as an Orc, and just an enemy. 
He deserves death.' 
     'Deserves it! I daresay he does. Many that live deserve death. And some 
that die deserve life. Can you give it to them? Then do not be too eager  to 
deal out death in judgement.  For  even the very wise cannot see all ends. I 
have not much hope  that Gollum can be cured before  he dies, but there is a  
chance of it. And  he is bound  up with the fate of the Ring. My heart tells 
me that  he  has some part to play yet, for good or ill, before the end; and 
when that comes, the pity  of Bilbo may  rule the fate  of many -  yours not 
least. In any case we did  not kill him:  he is very old  and very wretched. 
The Wood-elves have him in prison, but they treat him with such  kindness as 
they can find in their wise hearts.' 
     'All the same,' said Frodo,  'even if  Bilbo could  not kill  Gollum, I 
wish he had not kept the  Ring. I wish he had never found it, and that I had 
not got it!  Why  did  you  let me keep it? Why didn't you make me  throw it  
away, or, or destroy it?' 
     'Let you? Make you?' sa id the  wizard.  'Haven't you been  listening to 
all  that I  have said? You are not thinking of what you are saying.  But as 
for throwing  it away,  that was  obviously wrong. These Rings have a way of 
being  found. In evil hands it might have done great evil. Worst  of all, it 
might have fallen into the  hands of the Enemy. Indeed  it certainly  would; 
for this is the One, and  he is exerting all his power to find it or draw it 
to himself. 
     'Of  course, my  dear  Frodo,  it  was dangerous  for you; and that has 
troubled me deeply. But there  was so  much at stake that I had to take some 
risk  - though even when  I was far away there has never been a day when the 
Shire has not been guarded by watchful eyes. As long as you never used it, I  
did not think  that the Ring would have  any lasting effect on  you, not for 
evil,  not at any rate for a very long time. And you must remember that nine 

####-years ago, when I last saw you, I still knew little for certain.' 
     'But  why  not destroy  it, as you say should have been done long ago?' 
cried Frodo again. If you had warned me, or even  sent me a message, I would 
have done away with it.' 
     'Would you? How would you do that? Have you ever tried?' 
     'No. But I suppose one could hammer it or melt it.' 
     'Try!' said Gandalf. Try now!' 
     Frodo drew the Ring  out of his pocket again and looked  at it. It  now 
appeared  plain and smooth, without  mark or device that  he  could see. The 
gold looked very fair and pure, and Frodo thought how rich and beautiful was 
its  colour,  how perfect was  its  roundness. It was an admirable thing and 
altogether  precious. When he  took  it out he had intended to fling it from 
him into the very hottest  part of the  fire. But he found now that he could 
not do so, not without a great  struggle. He weighed the  Ring in his  hand, 
hesitating,  and forcing himself to remember all that Gandalf had told  him; 
and then with an effort of will he made a movement, as if to cast  it away - 
but he found that he had put it back in his pocket. 
     Gandalf laughed grimly. 'You see? Already you too, Frodo, cannot easily 
let  it  go,  nor will to damage it. And I  could not "make" you - except by 
force, which would break your mind. But as for breaking  the Ring, force  is 
useless. Even if you  took it and struck it  with a  heavy sledge -hammer,  it 
would make no dint in it. It cannot be unmade by your hands, or by mine. 
     'Your small  fire, of course, would  not melt even ordinary  gold. This 
Ring has already passed through it unscathed,  and even unheated.  But there 
is  no smith's forge in this Shire that could change it at all. Not even the 
anvils and furnaces  of  the Dwarves could do that.  It has been  said  that 
dragon-fire could melt and consume the Rings  of Power, but there is not now 
any dragon left on earth in which the old fire is hot enough; nor was  there 
ever any dragon, not even Ancalagon the Black, who could have harmed the 
One 
Ring,  the Ruling Ring, for  that was  made by Sauron himself. There is only 
one  way:  to  find  the  Cracks  of Doom in  the  depths  of Orodruin,  the 
Fire-mountain, and cast the Ring in there, if you really wish to destroy it, 
to put it beyond the grasp of the Enemy for ever.' 
     'I do  really wish to destroy it!'  cried Frodo. 'Or,  well, to have it 
destroyed. I am not  made for perilous  quests. I wish  I had never seen the 
Ring! Why did it come to me? Why was I chosen?' 

####-     'Such questions cannot be  answered,'  said Gandalf.  'You may be  sure 
that it was not  for any merit that others do not possess: not for  power or  
wisdom,  at any rate. But you have been chosen, and you  must therefore  use 
such strength and heart and wits as you have.' 
     'But I  have so  little of any  of  these  things!  You  are  wise  and 
powerful. Will you not take the Ring?' 
     'No!' cried Gandalf, springing  to  his feet. 'With that power I should 
have power too great and terrible. And over me the Ring  would  gain a power  
still greater and more deadly.' His eyes flashed and his face  was lit as by 
a fire within.  'Do not tempt me! For I do not  wish to become like the  Dark 
Lord  himself. Yet the  way of the  Ring  to  my heart is by pity, pity  for  
weakness and the desire of strength to do good. Do  not tempt me! I dare not  
take it, not even to keep it safe, unused. The wish to wield it would be too 
great, for my  strength.  I shall  have  such  need of it. Great  perils lie 
before me.' 
     He  went to the  window and drew aside the curtains  and the  shutters.  
Sunlight  streamed  back again into  the  room. Sam   passed  along the  path  
outside whistling. 'And now,'  said  the wizard, turning back to Frodo, 'the 
decision lies with you. But  I will always  help you.' He  laid his hand  on 
Frodo's shoulder. 'I will help you bear this  burden, as long as It is yours 
to bear. But we must do something, soon. The Enemy is moving.' 
     There was a long  silence.  Gandalf  sat down again and puffed  at  his 
pipe, as if lost in thought. His eyes  seemed closed, but under the  lids he 
was watching Frodo  intently. Frodo  gazed fixedly at the red embers on  the 
hearth,  until they filled all his vision,  and he seemed to be looking down 
into  profound  wells of fire. He was thinking of the fabled  Cracks of Doom 
and the terror of the Fiery Mountain. 
     'Well!'  said Gandalf at last.  'What are you  thinking about? Have you  
decided what to do?' 
     'No!'  answered Frodo,  coming back to himself  out  of  darkness,  and 
finding to his surprise that it was not dark, and that out of the  window he 
could see the sunlit garden.   'Or perhaps, yes.  As far as I understand what 
you have said, I suppose I must keep the Ring and guard it, at least for the 
present, whatever it may do to me.' 
     'Whatever it may do, it will be slow, slow to evil, if you keep it with 
that purpose,' said  Gandalf.  
     'I hope so,'  said Frodo.  'But I  hope  that  you may  find some other  

####-better  keeper soon. But in the meanwhile it  seems that I  am  a  danger, a  
danger  to all that live near  me.  I cannot  keep the Ring and stay here. I 
ought to leave   Bag End,  leave the Shire, leave everything and go away.' He 
sighed. 
     'I should like to  save  the Shire, if I could  - though there have been 
times when I thought the inhabitants too stupid and dull for words, and have 
felt that an earthquake or  an invasion of dragons might  be good  for them. 
But  I don't feel  like that  now. I feel  that  as  long as the Shire  lies 
behind, safe and comfortable, I shall find  wandering more bearable: I shall 
know that somewhere there is a firm  foothold, even if my feet  cannot stand 
there again. 
     'Of course, I have sometimes thought of going away, but I imagined that 
as a kind of holiday, a series of adventures like Bilbo's  or better, ending 
in  peace. But this  would  mean exile,  a  flight from danger into  danger, 
drawing  it after me. And I suppose I  must go alone, if I am to do that and 
save  the Shire.  But I  feel very  small, and  very  uprooted,  and  well - 
desperate. The Enemy is so strong and terrible.' 
     He did  not tell  Gandalf, but as  he  was speaking a  great desire  to 
follow  Bilbo flamed up in his heart  - to follow Bilbo, and even perhaps  to 
find him again. It was so strong that it overcame his fear: he  could almost  
have run out there and then down the road without his hat, as Bilbo ha d done 
on a similar morning long ago. 
     'My  dear  Frodo!'  exclaimed  Gandalf.  'Hobbits  really  are  amazing 
creatures, as I have said before. You  can learn all that there  is  to know 
about their  ways in a month, and yet after  a hundred  years they can still 
surprise you at a pinch. I hardly expected to get  such  an answer, not even 
from  you. But Bilbo made no mistake in choosing his heir, though  he little 
thought how important it  would prove. I am afraid  you are  right. The Ring 
will not be able to stay hidden in the  Shire much longer; and for  your own 
sake, as  well  as  for others, you  will have to go, and leave the  name of 
Baggins behind you. That name will not be safe to have, outside the Shire or  
in the Wild. I will give  you a travelling name now. When you go, go as  Mr. 
Underhill. 
     'But I don't think you need go alone. Not if you know of anyone you can 
trust, and who would be willing  to go by your side  -  and that you would be 
willing to take  into unknown perils.  But  if you look for a  companion, be 
careful in choosing! And be  careful of what  you say,  even to your closest  

####-friends! The enemy has many spies and many ways of hearing.' 
     Suddenly he  stopped as if  listening.  Frodo became aware that all was 
very quiet,  inside and  outside. Gandalf  crept to one side of  the window.  
Then with  a  dart he  sprang to  the sill,  and thrust a  long arm out  and 
downwards. There was a squawk, and up came Sam Gamgee's curly head 
hauled by 
one ear. 
     'Well, well, bless my beard!' said Gandalf. 'Sam Gamgee is it? Now what 
may you be doing?' 
     'Lor bless  you, Mr. Gandalf, sir!' said Sam. 'Nothing! Leastways I was 
just  trimming the grass-border  under  the window,  if you  follow me.'  He 
picked up his shears and exhibited them as evidence. 
     'I don't,' said Gandalf grimly. It is some time  since I last heard the 
sound of your shears. How long have you been eavesdropping?' 
     'Eavesdropping,  sir? I don't  follow you, begging  your pardon.  There 
ain't no eaves at Bag End, and that's a fact.' 
     'Don't be  a  fool! What  have  you  heard,  and why  did you  listen?' 
Gandalf's eyes flashed and his brows stuck out like bristles.  
     'Mr. Frodo, sir!' cried Sam quaking. 'Don't let him hurt me, sir! Don't  
let  him turn  me  into anything unnatural!  My old  dad would take on so. I 
meant no harm, on my honour, sir!' 
     'He  won't hurt you,' said Frodo,  hardly able to keep  from  laughing, 
although he was himself startled and rather puzzled. 'He knows, as well as I  
do, that you mean no harm. But just you up and answer his questions straight 
away!' 
     'Well, sir,' said Sam dithering a little. 'I heard a deal that I didn't 
rightly  understand,  about an  enemy, and  rings, and  Mr. Bilbo, sir,  and 
dragons, and a  fiery mountain, and - and  Elves, sir. I listened because  I 
couldn't help  myself, if you know what I mean. Lor bless  me, sir, but I do 
love tales of  that sort. And  I believe  them  too,  whatever Ted may  say. 
Elves,  sir! I  would dearly love  to see  them. Cou ldn't you take  me to see 
Elves, sir, when you go?' 
     Suddenly Gandalf laughed. 'Come  inside!' he shouted,  and  putting out 
both his arms he lifted the astonished Sam, shears, grass-clippings and all, 
right through the window and stood him on the floor. 'Take you to see Elves, 
eh?' he  said, eyeing Sam  closely, but with a smile flickering on his face. 
'So you heard that Mr. Frodo is going away?' 

####-     'I  did,  sir.  And that's why I choked:  which  you heard seemingly. I 
tried not to, sir, but it burst out of me: I was so upset.' 
     'It can't be  helped, Sam,' said  Frodo sadly. He had suddenly realized 
that  flying  from the Shire  would mean  more painful partings than  merely 
saying farewell  to  the familiar comforts of Bag End. 'I shall have to  go. 
But' - and  here he looked  hard at Sam  - 'if you really care about me, you  
will keep that dead secret. See? If you don't, if you even breathe a word of 
what you've heard here, then  I  hope  Gandalf will turn you into a  spotted 
toad and fill the garden full of grass-snakes.' 
     Sam fell on his knees,  trembling. 'Get  up, Sam!' said Gandalf. I have 
thought of something better than  that. Something  to shut your  mouth,  and  
punish you properly for listening. You shall go away with Mr. Frodo!' 
     'Me,  sir!' cried Sam, springing up like a dog invited for a walk.  'Me 
go and see Elves and all! Hooray!' he shouted, and then burst into tears.  
 

####- 

Chapter 3. Three is Company 

 
 
     'You ought to go quietly, and you ought to  go soon,' said Gandalf. Two 
or three weeks had passed, and still Frodo made  no sign of getting ready to 
go. 
     'I know. But it is difficult to do both,' he objected. If I just vanish 
like Bilbo, the tale will be all over the Shire in no time.' 
     'Of course you mustn't vanish!' said Gandalf. 'That wouldn't do at all! 
I said soon, not instantly. If  you can think of any way of slipping out  of 
the  Shire  without  its  being generally known, it will  be  worth a little 
delay. But you must not delay too long.' 
     'What  about the  autumn, on  or after  Our Birthday?' asked  Frodo. 'I  
think I could probably make some arrangements by then.' 
     To tell the truth, he was very reluctant to start, now that it had come 
to  the  point. Bag End seemed a more  desirable residence than  i t  had for 
years, and he wanted to savour as much as he could of his last summer in the 
Shire. When autumn came, he knew that part at least of his heart would think 
more kindly  of journeying, as it always did at that season. He  had  indeed 
privately made up his mind to leave on his  fiftieth birthday:  Bilbo's  one 
hundred and twenty-eighth. It  seemed somehow the proper day on which to set 
out and follow him. Following Bilbo was uppermost in his mind, and  the  one 
thing  that made the thought  of leaving  bearable. He  thought as little as 
possible about the Ring, and where it might lead him in  the end. But he did 
not tell all his  thoughts to Gandalf. What the  wizard  guessed  was always 
difficult to tell. 
     He looked at Frodo and smiled. 'Very well,' he said. 'I think that will 
do -  but  it must not  be any  later. I  am getting  very anxious.  In  the 
mean-while, do take care, and don't let out any hint of where you are going!  
And  see  that Sam Gamgee does not talk. If he does, I really shall turn him 
into a toad.' 
     'As for  where I am going,' said Frodo, 'it would be  difficult to give 
that away, for I have no clear idea myself, yet.' 
     'Don't be absurd!' said Gandalf. 'I  am not warning you against leaving 
an  address  at the post -office!  But you are leaving the  Shire   - and that 
should not be known,  until you  are far away. And  you must go, or at least 

####-set  out,  either North,  South,  West  or East  -  and  the direction should 
certainly not be known.' 
     'I have been so  taken up with the thoughts of leaving  Bag End, and of 
saying  farewell, that I have  never even  considered  the  direction,' said 
Frodo. 'For where am I to go? And by  what  shall I  steer? What is to be my  
quest? Bilbo went to find a treasure, there and back aga in; but I go to lose 
one, and not return, as far as I can see.' 
     'But you cannot  see very far,' said Gandalf. 'Neither can I. It may be 
your task to find the Cracks of Doom; but that quest may be for others: I do 
not know. At any rate you are not ready for that long road yet.' 
     'No  indeed!' said  Frodo.  'But  in the  meantime what course am I  to 
lake?' 
     'Towards  danger; but not  too  rashly, nor too straight,' answered the 
wizard. 'If you want my advice, make for Rivendell. That journey  should not 
prove too  perilous, though the  Road is less easy than it was, and it  will 
grow worse as the year fails.' 
     'Rivendell!' said  Frodo. 'Very good:  I will go east, and  I will make 
for Rivendell. I will take Sam to visit the Elves; he will be delighted.' He 
spoke lightly;  but his heart was  moved  suddenly with  a desire to see the 
house of Elrond  Halfelven, and  breathe the  air  of that deep valley where 
many of the Fair Folk still dwelt in peace. 
     One summer's evening an astonishing piece of news  reached the Ivy Bush 
and Green Dragon. Giants and other portents on the borders of the Shire were 
forgotten for more important matters: Mr. Frodo was  selling Bag End, indeed 
he had already sold it - to the Sackville-Bagginses!  
     'For a nice bit, loo,' said some.  'At a bargain price,'  said  others,  
'and that's more likely when Mistress Lobelia's  the  buyer.' (Otho had died 
some years before, at the ripe but disappointed age of 102.) 
     Just  why  Mr.  Frodo  was selling  his  beautiful hole was  even  more 
debatable than the price. A  few held the theory - supported by the nods and  
hints  of Mr. Baggins himself  - that Frodo's money was  running out: he  was 
going to leave Hobbiton and live in a  quiet way on the proceeds of the sale 
down  in  Buckland  among   his  Brandybuck  relations.  'As  far  from  the 
Sackville-Bagginses  as may be,'  some added.  But  so firmly fixed  had the 
notion of  the immeasurable wealth  of the Bagginses of Bag End  become that 
most found this  hard to believe, harder than  any  other reason or unreason 
that  their fancy  could suggest:  to  most  it suggested  a  dark  and  yet 

####-unrevealed plot by Gandalf. Though he kept himself very quiet and did not go 
about by day, it was well known that he was 'hiding up in the  Bag End'. But 
however a removal might  fit in with the  designs of his wizardry, there was 
no doubt about the fact: Frodo Baggins was going back to Buckland. 
     'Yes, I shall be moving  this autumn,' he  said.  'Merry Brandybuck  is 
looking out  for a nice little hole for me, or perhaps a small house.' 
     As a matter of fact with  Merry's help he had already chosen and bought 
a little house  at Crickhollow in the country beyond Bucklebury. To all  but 
Sam he pretended he was going to settle down there permanently. The decision 
to set out eastwards had suggested the idea to him; for Buckland was on  the 
eastern borders  of  the Shire, and as he had lived there  in childhood  his 
going back would at least seem credible. 
     Gandalf  stayed in the Shire for over two months.  Then one evening, at 
the end of  June, soon  after Frodo's  plan  had  been finally  arranged, he 
suddenly  announced that  he was going off  again next morning.  'Only for a 
short  while, I hope,'  he said.  'But  I am  going down beyond the southern 
borders to get some news, if I can. I have been idle longer than I should.' 
     He spoke lightly, but it seemed to Frodo that he looked rather worried. 
'Has anything happened?' he asked. 
     'Well no; but I have heard something that has made me anxious and needs 
looking into. If I think it necessary after all  for you to get off at once, 
I shall come back immediately, or at least send word. In the meanwhile stick  
to your plan; but be more careful than ever, especially of the  Ring.  Let me 
impress on you once more: don't use it!'  
     He  went off at dawn.  'I may be back any day,'  he  said. 'At the very 
latest I shall come back  for  the farewell party. I think after all you may 
need my company on the Road.' 
     At first  Frodo  was a  good deal  disturbed,  and wondered often  what 
Gandalf could  have  heard; but his  uneasiness wore  off, and in  the  fine  
weather  he forgot his  troubles for a  while. The  Shire had seldom seen so 
fair a summer, or so rich an autumn: the trees were laden with apples, honey 
was dripping in the combs, and the corn was tall and full. 
     Autumn was well under  way  before  Frodo began to worry  about Gandalf 
again.  September  was  passing  and there  was  still no  news of him.  The 
Birthday, and the removal, drew  nearer, and still he did not come,  or send 
word.  Bag End began to be busy.  Some of Frodo's friends  came  to stay and 
help  him with the packing: there was Fredegar Bolger and Folco  Boffin, and 

####-of course his special friends Pippin Took and Merry Brandybuck. Between 
them 
they turned the whole place upside-down. 
     On  September  20th  two  covered  carts  went off  laden  to Buckland, 
conveying  the furniture and goods that Frodo had not  sold to his new home, 
by way of the  Brandywine Bridge. The next day Frodo became  really anxious, 
and kept  a constant look -out  for  Gandalf. Thursday, his birthday morning,  
dawned as fair and  clear  as it had long ago for Bilbo's great party. Still 
Gandalf did not appear. In the evening Frodo gave his farewell feast: it was 
quite small, just  a  dinner  for himself  and his four helpers; but  he was 
troubled and fell in no mood for it. The thought  that he would so soon have 
to part  with his young  friends weighed  on his heart. He  wondered how  he 
would break it to them. 
     The four younger  hobbits were, however, in high spirits, and the party 
soon became very cheerful in spite of Gandalf's absence. The dining-room was 
bare except for a table  and  chairs,  but the food  was good, and there was 
good  wine:  Frodo's  wine  had  not  been  included  in  the  sale  to  the 
Sackville-Bagginses. 
     'Whatever happens to  the rest of my stuff, when the S.-B.s  get  their 
claws on  it, at any rate I have found a good home for this!' said Frodo, as 
he drained his glass. It was the last drop of Old Winyards.  
     When they had sung many songs, and talked of  many things they had done 
together,  they toasted  Bilbo's birthday, and  they  drank his  health  and 
Frodo's together according to Frodo's custom. Then they went out for a sniff 
of air, and glimpse of the stars, and then  they went to bed.  Frodo's party 
was over, and Gandalf had not come. 
     The next morning they were busy packing another cart with the remainder 
of the luggage. Merry took charge of this, and drove off with Fatty (that is 
Fredegar  Bolger).  'Someone must get there and  warm the house  before  you  
arrive,' said Merry.  'Well, see you later - the day  after tomorrow,  if you  
don't go to sleep on the way!' 
     Folco went  home  aft er lunch,  but Pippin remained behind.  Frodo  was 
restless and anxious,  listening in vain for a  sound of Gandalf. He decided 
to  wait until  nightfall. After that,  if  Gandalf wanted him urgently,  he 
would go to Crickhollow, and might even get there first. For Frodo was going 
on foot. His plan - for pleasure and a last look at the Shire as much as any 
other reason  -  was to walk from Hobbiton to  Bucklebury  Ferry, taking  it 

####-fairly easy. 
     'I shall  get  myself a bit  into  training,  too,' he said, looking at 
himself  in  a dusty mirror in the  half-empty  hall.  He  had  not done any 
strenuous walking for a long time, and the reflection  looked rather flabby, 
he thought. 
     After lunch, the Sackville-Bagginses, Lobelia and her sandy-haired son, 
Lotho, turned  up, much to Frodo's annoyance. 'Ours at last!' said  Lobelia, 
as she stepped inside. It was not polite; nor strictly true, for the sale of 
Bag  End  did not take effect  until  midnight.  But Lobelia  can perhaps be 
forgiven: she had been obliged to wait about seventy-seven years  longer for  
Bag End  than she once hoped, and she was now  a  hundred years old. 
Anyway, 
she had  come to see that nothing she had paid for had been carried off; and 
she wanted the keys. It took a long while to satisfy her, as she had brought 
a complete inventory  with her and went  right through  it. In  the end  she 
departed with Lotho and  the spare  key and  the promise that the  other key 
would  be  left at  the  Gamgees' in Bagshot Row.  She  snorted, and  showed 
plainly that she  thought the Gamgees  capable of plundering the hole during  
the night. Frodo did not offer her any tea. 
     He took his own tea with Pippin and Sam Gamgee  in the  kitchen. It had 
been  officially announced that Sam was coming to Buckland  'to  do for  Mr. 
Frodo and look after his bit of garden'; an arrangement that was approved by 
the Gaffer, though it did not console him for the prospect of having Lobelia  
as a neighbour. 
     'Our  last meal at  Bag End!'  said Frodo, pushing back his chair. They 
left the washing up  for Lobelia.  Pippin  and Sam  strapped  up their three 
packs and piled them in the porch. Pippin went out for a last  stroll in the 
garden. Sam disappeared. 
     The sun went down. Bag End seemed sad and gloomy and dishevelled. 
Frodo 
wandered round the familiar rooms,  and saw the light  of the sunset fade on 
the walls,  and  shadows  creep out  of  the  corners.  It  grew slowly dark 
indoors. He went out and walked down to  the gate at the bottom of the path,  
and then on a short way down the Hill Road. He half expected to  see Gandalf 
come striding up through the dusk. 
     The sky was clear and the stars were growing bright. 'It's going  to be 
a fine night,'  he  said  aloud.  'That's good for a beginning.  I feel like 

####-walking. I  can't  bear any  more  hanging about. I am going  to start,  and 
Gandalf must follow  me.'  He  turned to go back, and  then  slopped, for he 
heard voices, just round the corner by the end of Bagshot Row. One voice was 
certainly the old Gaffer's;  the other was strange, and  somehow  unpleasant. 
He could not make out what it said, but he heard the Gaffer's answers, which 
were rather shrill. The old man seemed put out. 
     'No, Mr. Baggins has gone away. Went this morning, and my Sam went 
with 
him: anyway all  his stuff went.  Yes, sold out and  gone,  I tell'ee.  Why?  
Why's none of my business, or yours.  Where to?  That ain't no  secret. He's 
moved to Bucklebury or some such place, away down yonder. Yes it is  - a tidy 
way.  I've never been so far myself; they're  queer folks in Buckland. No, I 
can't give no message. Good night to you!' 
     Footsteps went away down the Hill. Frodo wondered vaguely why  the fact 
that they did not  come on up the Hill seemed a  great relief. 'I am sick of 
questions a nd curiosity  about my doings,  I  suppose,' he thought. 'What an 
inquisitive lot they all  are!' He had half a mind to go and ask  the Gaffer  
who the inquirer was; but he thought better (or worse) of it, and turned and 
walked quickly back to Bag End. 
     Pippin was sitting on his pack  in  the porch. Sam was not there. Frodo 
stepped inside the dark door. 'Sam!' he called. 'Sam! Time!' 
     'Coming, sir!' came  the answer  from far within, followed soon by  Sam 
himself, wiping his mouth. He had been saying farewell to the beer -barrel in 
the cellar. 
     'All aboard, Sam?' said Frodo. 
     'Yes, sir. I'll last for a bit now, sir.' 
     Frodo shut and locked the  round door, and  gave the key  to Sam.  'Run 
down with this to your home, Sam!' he said. 'Then cu t along the Row and meet 
us as quick as you can at the gate in the  lane  beyond the meadows.  We are 
not  going  through  the village  tonight.  Too  many ears pricking and eyes 
prying.' Sam ran off at full speed. 
     'Well, now we're off at last!'  said  Frodo. They shouldered their packs 
and took up their sticks, and  walked round the corner to the  west  side of 
Bag End. 'Good-bye!' said Frodo, looking at the dark blank windows. He 
waved 
his hand, and then turned and (following Bilbo, if  he had known it) hurried 
after Peregrin down  the garden-path. They jumped over the low place in  the 

####-hedge at the bottom and took to the fields, passing into the darkness like a  
rustle in the grasses.  
     At the bottom of the  Hill  on its western  side they came  to  the gate 
opening on to a  narrow lane.  There they  halted and adjusted the straps of 
their packs. Presently  Sam  appeared, trotting quickly and  breathing hard; 
his heavy pack was hoisted high on his shoulders, and he had put on his head 
a tall shapeless fell  bag, which  he called  a hat. In the gloom  he looked 
very much like a dwarf. 
     'I am sure you  have given me all the heaviest stuff,'  said Frodo.  'I  
pity snails, and all that carry their homes on their backs.' 
     'I could take a lot  more yet, sir. My packet is quite light,' said Sam 
stoutly and untruthfully. 
     'No, you  don't,  Sam!' said  Pippin.  'It is  good  for him. He's  got 
nothing except what he ordered us to pack. He's been slack lately, and he'll 
feel the weight less when he's walked off some of his own.' 
     'Be kind to a poor old hobbit!' laughed Frodo. 'I shall be as thin as a  
willow-wand, I'm sure, before I get to Buckland. But I was talking nonsense. 
I suspect you have taken more than your share, Sam, and I shall look into  it 
at our next  packing.'  He  picked  up his  stick  again. 'Well, we all like 
walking  in the dark,' he said,  'so let's put  some miles  behind us before 
bed.' 
     For a short way they followed  the lane westwards. Then leaving it they 
turned left and took quietly to  the  fields again. They went in single file 
along hedgerows and the borders of coppices, and night fell dark about them. 
In their  dark cloaks they were as invisible as if they all had magic rings. 
Since they were  all hobbits, and were  trying  to be silent,  they made  no 
noise that even hobbits would  hear. Even the wild things in  the fields and 
woods hardly noticed their passing. 
     After  some  time they crossed the Water, west of Hobbiton, by a narrow 
plank -bridge.  The stream  was  there no more than  a winding  black ribbon,  
bordered with leaning  alder -trees. A mile or two further south they hastily 
crossed the great  road  from  the Brandywine Bridge; they were  now in  the 
Tookland and  bending south-eastwards they made for the  Green Hill Country. 
As they began to climb its first slopes they looked back and  saw the  lamps  
in Hobbiton far off twinkling in  the gentle  valley of  the  Water. Soon it 
disappeared  in the  folds of the darkened land, and was followed by Bywater 
beside  its grey pool. When the  light of  the  last  farm was  far  behind, 

####-peeping among the trees, Frodo turned and waved a hand in farewell. 
     'I wonder if  I shall ever  look down into that valley  again,' he said 
quietly. 
     When they  had walked for about three hours they rested. The night  was 
clear,  cool, and starry, but smoke-like wisps of mist were creeping up  the 
hill-sides from the streams and deep  meadows. Thin-clad birches, swaying in 
a light wind  above their heads, made a black net aga inst the pale sky. They 
ate a  very  frugal supper (for hobbits), and  then went on again. Soon they 
struck a narrow road, that  went rolling  up and down,  fading grey into the 
darkness ahead: the road to Woodhall, and  Stock, and the Bucklebury  Ferry. 
It climbed away from the  main road  in the Water-valley, and wound over the 
skirts  of  the  Green  Hills  towards  Woody-End,  a  wild  corner  of  the 
Eastfarthing. 
     After a while  they plunged into  a deeply  cloven  track  between tall 
trees that rustled their dry leaves in the night. It was very dark. At first  
they  talked,  or hummed a  tune  softly together, being  now far  away from 
inquisitive ears. Then they marched  on in silence,  and Pippin began to lag 
behind.  At  last, as  they began to   climb  a  steep slope, he  stopped and 
yawned. 
     'I  am  so sleepy,' he said,  'that soon I shall fall down on the road. 
Are you going to sleep on your legs? It is nearly midnight.' 
     'I thought you liked walking in the dark,' said Frodo. 'But there is no 
great  hurry.  Merry expects  us some time the day after  tomorrow; but that 
leaves us nearly two days more. We'll halt at the first likely spot.' 
     'The  wind's in  the West,' said Sam. 'If  we get to the other  side of 
this hill,  we shall find  a spot  that  is  sheltered and snug  enough, sir. 
There is  a dry fir-wood just ahead,  if  I  remember rightly.' Sam knew the 
land well  within twenty miles of  Hobbiton, but that was  the  limit of his 
geography. 
     Just  over the  top  of  the  hill they came on  the patch of fir-wood. 
Leaving  the  road  they  went into  the deep resin -scented  darkness of the 
trees, and  gathered  dead  sticks and cones to make a fire. Soon they had a  
merry crackle of flame at the foot of a large fir-tree and they sat round it 
for  a while, until they began to nod. Then, each in an  angle  of the great 
tree's roots, they curled  up  in  their cloaks and blankets, and were  soon 
fast asleep. They set no  watch; even Frodo feared  no danger yet,  for they 
were still in  the heart  of the Shire. A few  creatures came and  looked at 

####-them when the fire had died away. A fox passing through the wood on business 
of his own stopped several minutes and sniffed. 
     'Hobbits!' he thought. 'Well, what next? I have heard of strange doings 
in this land,  but  I have  seldom  heard of a hobbit  sleeping out of doors 
under a tree. Three of them! There's something mighty queer behind this.' He 
was quite right, but he never found out any more about it. 
     The morning came,  pale and clammy. Frodo woke up first, and found that 
a tree-root had made a hole in his back, and that his neck was stiff. 
     'Walking for pleasure! Why didn't  I drive?'  he thought, as he usually 
did at the beginning of an expedition. 'And all  my  beautiful feather  beds 
are sold to the Sackville-Bagginses! These  tree -roots would  do them good.' 
He stretched. 'Wake up, hobbits!' he cried. It's a beautiful morning.' 
     'What's beautiful about it?' said Pippin, peering  over the edge of his 
blanket with one eye. 'Sam! Gel breakfast ready for half-past nine! Have you 
got the bath-water hot?' 
     Sam jumped up,  looking rather  bleary. 'No,  sir, I haven't, sir!'  he 
said. 
     Frodo stripped the blankets from Pippin and  rolled him  over, and then 
walked off to the edge of the wood. Away eastward the sun was rising red out 
of the mists that lay thick  on  the world. Touched  with  gold and red  the 
autumn trees seemed to  be sailing rootless in a shadowy sea. A little below 
him to the left the road ran down steeply into a hollow and disappeared. 
     When  he returned  Sam  and  Pippin had got a good fire going. 'Water!' 
shouted Pippin. 'Where's the water?' 
     'I  don't keep  water in my  pockets,' said  Frodo. 'We thought you had 
gone to find  some,' said Pippin, busy  setting out the food, and cups. 'You  
had better go now.' 
     'You  can come too,'  said  Frodo, 'and  bring  all the water -bottles.' 
There was  a stream at the foot of the hill. They  filled their  bottles and 
the small  camping kettle at a little fall  where the water fell  a few feet 
over an outcrop  of grey stone. It  was  icy cold;  and they spluttered  and 
puffed as they bathed their faces and hands.  
     When their breakfast was over, and their packs all trussed up again, it 
was after  ten o'clock, and the day was beginning to turn fine and hot. They 
went  down the slope, and across the stream where  it  dived under the road,  
and up the next slope, and up and down another shoulder of the hills; and by 
that time their cloaks, blankets, water , food, and other gear already seemed 

####-a heavy burden. 
     The day's march promised to be warm and tiring  work. After some miles, 
however, the road  ceased to roll up and  down: it climbed  to the  top of a  
steep bank in a weary zig-zagging sort of way, and then prepared to  go down 
for  the last time. In front of  them they saw  the lower lands  dotted with 
small clumps of  trees that melted away in  the distance to a brown woodland 
haze. They were looking across the  Woody End towards  the Brandywine 
River. 
The road wound away before them like a piece of string. 
     'The road goes on  for ever,' said Pippin; 'but I can't without a rest. 
It is  high time for lunch.' He sat down on the bank at the side of the road 
and looked  away east into the haze, beyond which lay the River, and the end 
of the Shire in which he had spent all his life. Sam stood by him. His round 
eyes were wide open  - for he was looking across lands he had never seen to a 
new horizon. 
     'Do Elves live in those woods?' he asked. 
     'Not that I ever  heard,' said Pippin.  Frodo  was silent.  He  too was 
gazing eastward along the road, as if he had never seen it  before. Suddenly 
he spoke, aloud but as if to himself, saying slowly: 
     The Road goes ever on and on  
     Down from the door where it began. 
     Now far ahead the Road has gone, 
     And I must follow, if I can, 
     Pursuing it with weary feet, 
     Until it joins some larger way, 
     Where many paths and errands meet. 
     And whither then? I cannot say. 
     'That sounds  like a bit of old Bilbo's rhyming,' said Pippin. 'Or is it 
one of your imitations? It does not sound altogether encouraging.' 
     'I don't know,' said Frodo. It came to me then, as  if I was making  it 
up; but I  may have heard it long ago. Certainly it reminds  me very much of 
Bilbo in the last years, before he went away. He used often to say there was 
only  one  Road;  that it was like a great river: its  springs were at every 
doorstep,  and every path was  its  tributary. "It's  a dangerous  business,  
Frodo, going out of your door," he used to say. "You step into the Road, and 
if you don't keep your feet,  there is no knowing where  you might  be swept  
off to.  Do you realize  that  this  is the  very  path  that  goes  through 

####-Mirkwood,  and that if you  let it, it  might take you to the Lonely Mountain 
or  even  further and to worse places?"  He  used to say  that  on  the path 
outside the  front door at  Bag End, especially  after he had been out for a  
long walk.' 
     'Well,  the Road won't sweep me  a nywhere for an  hour  at least,' said 
Pippin, unslinging his pack. The others followed his example,  putting their 
packs against the bank and their  legs out  into the road. After a rest they 
had a good lunch, and then more rest. 
     The sun was beginning to get  low and the light of afternoon was on the 
land as they went down the hill. So far they had not met a soul on the road. 
This way was not much used, being hardly fit for carts, and there was little 
traffic to  the Woody End. They had been jogging along again for an hour  or 
more when Sam  stopped a  moment as  if  listening. They were  now on  level 
ground,  and  the  road  after  much  winding  lay  straight  ahead  through 
grass-land sprinkled with tall trees, outliers of the approaching woods.  
     'I can hear a pony or a horse coming along the road behind,' said Sam. 
     They  looked back, but the turn of the  road prevented them from seeing 
far. 'I wonder if that  is Gandalf coming after us,' said Frodo; but even as 
he said it, he had a feeling  that it was not so, and a sudden desire to hide 
from the view of the rider came over him. 
     'It  may not matter much,' he  said apologetically, 'but I would rather  
not be seen on the  road  - by anyone. I am  sick of my  doings being noticed  
and discussed. And if  it is Gandalf,' he added as  an afterthought, 'we can 
give him  a little surprise, to pay him out for being so late. Let's get out 
of sight!' 
     The other two ran quickly to the left and down into a little hollow not 
far  from the  road. There  they lay  flat. Frodo  hesitated  for  a second: 
curiosity or some other feeling was struggling with his desire  to hide. The 
sound of hoofs drew nearer. Just in time he threw himself down in a patch of 
long grass behind a tree that overshadowed the road. Then he lifted his head 
and peered cautiously above one of the great roots. 
     Round the  corner came  a black horse, no hobbit-pony  but a full-sized 
horse;  and  on  it sat  a large man,  who seemed to  crouch in  the saddle, 
wrapped in a great black  cloak and  hood, so that only his boots in the high 
stirrups showed below; his face was shadowed and invisible. 
     When it reached the  tree and was level with Frodo  the  horse stopped. 
The riding figure sat quite still with its head bowed, as if listening. From 

####-inside the hood came  a  noise as of  someone sniffing to  catch an  elusive 
scent; the head turned from side to side of the road. 
     A sudden  unreasoning  fear of  discovery laid hold  of Frodo,  and  he 
thought  of his Ring. He hardly dared  to breathe,  and yet the desire to get 
it out of his pocket became so strong that he began slowly to move his hand. 
He felt  that  he had only to  slip  it on, and then he  would  be safe. The 
advice of Gandalf seemed absurd. Bilbo had used the Ring. 'And I am still in 
the Shire,' he thought, as his hand touched the chain on  which  it hung. At  
that moment  the  rider  sat up,  and  shook the  reins.  The  horse stepped 
forward, walking slowly at first, and then breaking into a quick trot. 
     Frodo crawled to  the edge of the road and watched the rider,  until he 
dwindled into the distance. He could not be quite sure, but it seemed to him 
that suddenly, before it  passed out  of sight,  the horse turned aside  and 
went into the trees on the right. 
     'Well, I  call that very queer, and indeed disturbing,' said  Frodo  to 
himself, as he  walked towards his companions. Pippin and  Sam  had remained 
flat  in the  grass, and had seen nothing; so Frodo  described the rider and 
his strange behaviour. 
     'I can't say why, but I felt certain he was looking or smelling for me; 
and also I felt certain that I did  not want him to discover  me. I've never 
seen or fell anything like it in the Shire before.' 
     'But what has  one of the Big  People got  to do with us?' said Pippin. 
'And what is he doing in this part of the world?' 
     'There are some Men about,' said Frodo. 'Down in the Southfarthing they  
have  had trouble  with Big  People,  I believe. But I have  never heard  of 
anything like this rider. I wonder  where he comes from.' 
     'Begging  your  pardon,' put  in Sam  suddenly,  'I know where he comes 
from. It's from Hobbiton that  this here black  rider comes, unless  there's 
more than one. And I know where he's going to.' 
     'What do you mean?' said Frodo sharply, looking at him in astonishment.  
'Why didn't you speak up before?' 
     'I have only just remembered, sir. It was like this: when I got back to 
our  hole yesterday evening with the key, my dad, he says to me: Hello, Sam! 
he says. I thought you were away with Mr. Frodo this morning. There's been a  
strange customer asking for Mr. Baggins of Bag End, and he's only just gone. 
I've sent him on to Bucklebury. Not that I liked the sound of him. He seemed 
mighty put out, when I told him Mr. Baggins had  left his old home for good. 

####-Hissed at me, he did.  It gave me quite a shudder. What sort of a fellow was  
he? says I to the Gaffer. / don't know,  says he; but he wasn't a hobbit. He 
was tall and black-like, and he  stooped aver me. I reckon it was one of the 
Big Folk from foreign parts. He spoke funny. 
     'I  couldn't stay  to  hear more, sir, since  you were  waiting; and  I 
didn't give much heed to it myself. The Gaffer is getting old, and more than 
a bit blind,  and it  must have been  near dark when this fellow come up the 
Hill  and  found him taking the air at the end of our Row. I hope  he hasn't 
done no harm, sir, nor me.' 
     'The Gaffer can't be blamed anyway,' said Frodo. 'As a matter of fact I 
heard him talking to a  stranger, who  seemed to  be inquiring for me, and I 
nearly went and asked him who it was. I wish I had, or you had told me about 
it before. I might have been more careful on the road.' 
     'Still, there may be no connexion between  this rider and the  Gaffer's 
stranger,' said Pippin. 'We left Hobbiton  secretly enough, and  I don't see 
how he could have followed us.' 
     'What about the smelling, sir?' said Sam. 'And the Gaffer said he was a  
black chap.' 
     'I wish  I had  waited  for  Gandalf,' Frodo  muttered. 'But perhaps it 
would only have made matters worse.' 
     'Then you know  or guess something about this  rider?' said Pippin, who 
had caught the muttered words.  
     'I don't know, and I would rather  not guess,'  said Frodo. 'All right, 
cousin Frodo! You can  keep your  secret for the present,  if you want to be 
mysterious. In the meanwhile what are we to do? I should like a  bite and  a  
sup,  but somehow  I think  we had better move on from here.  Your  talk  of 
sniffing riders with invisible noses has unsettled me.' 
     'Yes, I think we  will move on now,' said Frodo;  'but  not on the road 
-in case  that rider comes back, or another  follows him. We  ought to do  a  
good step more today. Buckland is still miles away.' 
     The shadows  of  the trees  were long and  thin  on the  grass, as they 
started off again. They now kept  a stone's throw to  the left of  the road, 
and kept out of sight of it as much  as they  could. But this hindered them; 
for the grass was thick and  tussocky, and the ground uneven, and the  trees 
began to draw together into thickets.  
     The sun had gone down  red behind the hills at their backs, and evening 
was coming on before they came back to the road at the end of the long level 

####-over which  it had run straight for  some miles.  At that point it bent left 
and  went down into the lowlands of  the Yale  making for Stock;  but a lane 
branched right, winding  through a  wood of ancient oak-trees on its way  to 
Woodhall. 'That is the way for us,' said Frodo. 
     Not far from the road-meeting they came on the huge hulk  of a tree: it 
was  still alive  and had leaves  on  the small branches that it had put out 
round the  broken  stumps of its long-fallen limbs; but it  was hollow,  and 
could  be entered  by  a great  crack  on the  side  away from the road. The 
hobbits crept inside, and sat there upon a floor  of old leaves and  decayed 
wood.  They rested and had a light  meal, talking quietly and listening from 
time to time. 
     Twilight  was about  them as they crept back to the lane. The West wind 
was sighing in the branches. Leaves were whispering. Soon the  road began to 
fall gently but steadily into the dusk. A  star  came out above the trees in 
the darkening East before them.  They went  abreast  and in step, to keep up 
their spirits.  After  a time, as the stars  grew thicker and  brighter, the 
feeling of disquiet left them, and they no longer listened  for the sound of 
hoofs. They began to hum softly, as hobbits have a way of doing as they walk 
along,  especially  when  they  are drawing near to home at night. With most  
hobbits  it  is  a supper -song  or a bed-song;  but these  hobbits  hummed a  
walking-song (though not, of course, without any mention of supper and bed). 
Bilbo Baggins had made the words, to a tune  that  was as old as  the hills, 
and taught  it to Frodo as they walked in the  lanes of the Water -valley and 
talked about Adventure. 
     Upon the hearth the fire is red, 
     Beneath the roof there is a bed; 
     But not yet weary are our feet, 
     Still round the corner we may meet 
     A sudden tree or standing stone 
     That none have seen but we alone. 
     Tree and flower and leaf and grass, 
     Let them pass! Let them pass! 
     Hill and water under sky, 
     Pass them by! Pass them by! 
 
     Still round the corner there may  wait 
     A new road or a secret gate, 

####-     And though we pass them by today, 
     Tomorrow we may come this way 
     And take the hidden paths that run 
     Towards the Moon or to the Sun. 
     Apple, thorn, and nut and sloe, 
     Let them go! Let them go! 
     Sand and stone and pool and dell, 
     Fare you well! Fare you well! 
 
     Home is behind, the world ahead, 
     And there are many paths to tread 
     Through shadows to the edge of night, 
     Until the stars are all alight. 
     Then world behind and home ahead, 
     We'll wander back to home and bed. 
     Mist and twilight, cloud and shade, 
     Away shall fade! Away shall fade! 
     Fire and lamp, and meat and bread, 
     And then to bed! And then to bed! 
     The song ended. 'And now to bed! And now to bed!' sang Pippin in a high 
voice. 
     'Hush!' said Frodo. 'I think I hear hoofs again.' 
     They slopped suddenly  and  stood as silent as tree-shadows, listening. 
There was a sound of hoofs in the lane, some way behind, but coming slow and 
clear down the wind. Quickly and quietly they slipped off the path, and  ran 
into the deeper shade under the oak-trees. 
     'Don't let  us go too far!' said Frodo. 'I don't want to be seen, but I 
want to see if it is another Black Rider.' 
     'Very well!' said Pippin. 'But don't forget the sniffing!' 
     The hoofs drew nearer. They had no time to find any hiding-place better  
than the general  darkness under the trees; Sam and Pippin crouched behind a 
large tree-bole, while  Frodo  crept back a few yards  towards  the lane. It 
showed grey and pale, a line  of fading light through the wood. Above it the 
stars were thick in the dim sky, but there was no moon. 
     The sound of hoofs stopped. As Frodo watched he saw something dark pass 
across  the lighter  space between two trees, and then halt. It looked  like 
the  black shade of a horse led by a smaller black  shadow. The black shadow 

####-stood close  to the point where they had left the  path, and it  swayed from 
side to side. Frodo thought he heard the sound of  snuffling. The shadow bent 
to the ground, and then began to crawl towards him. 
     Once more the desire to slip on the Ring came over Frodo; but this time 
it was stronger than before. So strong that, almost before he  realized what 
he was  doing, his hand was groping  in his pocket. But at that moment there 
came  a sound  like mingled song and laughter. Clear voices rose and fell in  
the starlit air. The black shadow straightened up and retreated.  It climbed 
on to the  shadowy  horse  and  seemed  to  vanish  across the lane into the 
darkness on the other side. Frodo breathed again. 
     'Elves!' exclaimed Sam in a hoarse whisper. 'Elves, sir!' He would have 
burst  out of the trees and dashed off towards  the voices, if they  had not 
pulled him back. 
     'Yes,  it  is Elves,' said  Frodo. 'One can meet them sometimes  in the 
Woody End.  They don't live in the Shire, but they  wander into it in Spring 
and  Autumn,  out  of their own  lands away  beyond the  Tower Hills.  I  am 
thankful that they do! You did not  see, but  that Black  Rider stopped just  
here and was actually crawling towards us when the song began. As soon as he 
heard the voices he slipped away.' 
     'What  about the Elves?'  said  Sam, too  excited  to trouble about the 
rider. 'Can't we go and see them?' 
     'Listen! They are coming this way,' said Frodo. 'We have only to wait.' 
The singing drew nearer. One clear voice rose now above  the others.  It was 
singing in the fair elven-tongue, of which Frodo knew only a little, and the 
others knew nothing. Yet  the sound blending with the melody seemed to shape 
itself  in their thought into words which they only partly understood.  This 
was the song as Frodo heard it: 
     Snow-white! Snow-white! O Lady clear! 
     O Queen beyond the Western Seas! 
     O Light to us that wander here 
     Amid the world of woven trees! 
 
     Gilthoniel! O Elbereth! 
     Clear are thy eyes and bright thy breath! 
     Snow-white! Snow-white! We sing to thee 
     In a far land beyond the Sea. 
 

####-     O stars that in the Sunless Year 
     With shining hand by her were sawn, 
     In windy fields now bright and clear 
     We see your silver blossom blown! 
 
     O Elbereth! Gilthoniel! 
     We still remember, we who dwell 
     In this far land beneath the trees, 
     Thy starlight on the Western Seas. 
     The  song  ended.  'These  are High  Elves!  They  spoke  the  name  of 
Elbereth!' said Frodo in amazement,  'Few of that fairest folk are ever seen 
in the Shire. Not many now remain in Middle-earth,  east  of the  Great Sea. 
This is indeed a strange chance!' 
     The hobbits  sat in shadow  by the wayside. Before long the Elves  came 
down the lane towards the valley. They  passed slowly, and the hobbits could 
see the starlight glimmering on their hair and  in their  eyes. They bore no  
lights,  yet as they walked a  shimmer, like the light of the moon above the 
rim of the hills before it rises, seemed to fall about their feet. They were 
now silent, and  as the last Elf  passed  he turned  and looked  towards the 
hobbits and laughed. 
     'Hail,  Frodo!' he  cried. 'You  are  abroad  late. Or are  you perhaps 
lost?'  Then he called aloud  to the others, and all the company stopped and 
gathered round. 
     'This  is indeed  wonderful!'  they  said. 'Three hobbits in  a wood at 
night! We  have not seen  such a thing  since Bilbo went away.  What is  the 
meaning of it?' 
     'The meaning of it, fair people,'  said Frodo, 'is simply that  we seem 
to be going the same  way as you are. I like  walking under the stars. But I 
would welcome your company.' 
     'But we have no need of other company, and hobbits are  so  dull,' they 
laughed. 'And how do you know that we go the same way as you, for you do 
not 
know whither we are going?' 
     'And how do you know my name?' asked Frodo in return. 
     'We know many things,'  they said. 'We have seen you often before  with 
Bilbo, though you may not have seen us.' 
     'Who are you, and who is your lord?' asked Frodo. 

####-     'I am Gildor,' answered their leader, the Elf who had first hailed him. 
'Gildor Inglorion of  the  House  of Finrod. We are Exiles, and most of  our 
kindred have long  ago  departed and  we  too are  now only  tarrying here a  
while, ere we return  over the Great Sea.  But some  of  our kinsfolk  dwell 
still  in peace in Rivendell.  Come now, Frodo, tell us what you  are doing?  
For we see that there is some shadow of fear upon you.' 
     'O Wise  People!' interrupted Pippin eagerly. 'Tell us about  the Black  
Riders!' 
     'Black Riders?' they said  in  low voices. 'Why  do you ask a bout Black  
Riders?' 
     'Because two Black Riders have  overtaken us today,  or one has done so 
twice,' said Pippin;  'only a little while ago  he slipped away as you  drew 
near.' 
     The Elves did not answer at  once, but spoke together  softly  in their 
own tongue.  At length Gildor turned to the  hobbits. 'We  will not speak of 
this here,' he said. 'We think you had  best come now with us. It is not our 
custom, but for this time we will lake you on our road, and  you shall lodge 
with us tonight, if you  will.' 
     'O Fair  Folk!  This is good fortune beyond my hope,' said  Pippin. Sam 
was speechless.  'I  thank you indeed, Gildor Inglorion,' said Frodo bowing. 
'Elen snla l®menn' omentielvo, a star shines on the hour of our meeting,' he 
added in the high-elven speech. 
     'Be careful,  friends!' cried  Gildor laughing. 'Speak no secrets! Here 
is  a  scholar in  the  Ancient  Tongue.  Bilbo  was a  good  master.  Hail, 
Elf-friend!' he said, bowing to Frodo.  'Come now with your friends and join 
our company! You had best walk in the middle so  that you may not stray. You  
may be weary before we halt.' 
     'Why? Where are you going?' asked Frodo. 
     'For tonight we go to the woods on the hills above Woodhall. It is some 
miles, but  you shall have  rest at  the  end of it, and it will shorten your 
journey tomorrow.' 
     They now marched on again in silence, and passed like shadows and faint 
lights: for  Elves  (even  more  than hobbits)  could walk when they  wished  
without sound or footfall.  Pippin soon began  to feel sleepy, and staggered 
once  or twice; but each time a tall Elf at his side  put out  his  arm  and 
saved him from a  fall. Sam walked along at Frodo's side, as if in a  dream, 
with an expression on his face half of fear and half of astonished  joy. 

####-     The  woods on either side became denser; the trees were now younger and 
thicker;  and as the lane went lower, running down into a fold of the hills, 
there were many deep brakes of hazel on the rising slopes at either hand. At  
last the Elves turned aside from the path.  A  green ride  lay almost unseen 
through the  thickets on the right; and this they  followed as it wound away 
back up the  wooded slopes on to the  top of a shoulder of  the  hills  that 
stood out into the lower land of the river -valley. Suddenly they came out of 
the shadow of  the trees, and  before them lay a  wide space of  grass, grey 
under the night. On three sides the woods  pressed upon it; but eastward the 
ground fell steeply and the tops of the dark trees, growing at the bottom of 
the slope,  were  below their feet. Beyond, the  low lands  lay dim and flat 
under the stars.  Nearer  at hand  a few lights twinkled  in the village  of 
Woodhall. 
     The  Elves sat on  the grass  and spoke  together in  soft voices; they 
seemed to take no further  notice of the hobbits.  Frodo and his  companions 
wrapped themselves in cloaks and blankets, and drowsiness stole  over  them. 
The  night grew  on,  and  the  lights in the valley  went out. Pippin  fell 
asleep, pillowed on a green hillock. 
     Away  high  in the East swung Remmirath,  the Netted Stars,  and slowly 
above  the mists red Borgil rose, glowing like a jewel of fire. Then by some 
shift of airs all the mist was drawn away like a veil, and there leaned  up, 
as  he  climbed  over  the  rim  of the  world, the  Swordsman  of  the  Sky, 
Menelvagor with  his shining  belt. The  Elves all burst into song. Suddenly 
under the trees a fire sprang up with a red light. 
     'Come!' the  Elves called to the hobbits. 'Come!  Now is  the time  for 
speech and merriment!' 
     Pippin sat up and rubbed his eyes. He shivered. 'There is a fire in the 
hall, and food for hungry guests,' said an Elf standing before him. 
     At the south  end of the greensward  there  was an opening.  There  the 
green  floor  ran on into the wood, and formed a  wide  space like  a  hall, 
roofed by the boughs of trees. Their great trunks ran like pillars down each 
side. In the middle there was a wood-fire blazing, and upon the tree-pillars 
torches with lights of gold and silver were burning  steadily. The Elves sat 
round the  fire upon the grass or  upon the  sawn  rings of old trunks. Some 
went  to  and  fro bearing cups and  pouring  drink; others brought  food on 
heaped plates and dishes.  
     'This  is poor fare,' they said  to the hobbits; 'for we are lodging in 

####-the greenwood far from  our halls. If ever  you are our guests at  home,  we 
will treat you better.' 
     'It seems to me good enough for a birthday-party,' said Frodo. 
     Pippin afterwards recalled little o f either food or drink, for his mind 
was  filled  with the  light upon the elf-faces, and the  sound of voices so 
various and so beautiful that he felt in a waking  dream.  But he remembered  
that there was bread, surpassing the savour of a fair white  loaf to one who 
is starving;  and fruits  sweet  as  wildberries  and richer than the tended 
fruits of gardens; he drained a cup that was filled with a fragrant draught, 
cool as a clear fountain, golden as a summer afternoon. 
     Sam could never describe in words, nor picture clearly to himself, what 
he felt or thought that  night, though it remained in  his  memory as one of 
the chief  events of his life.  The  nearest he  ever got was to say: 'Well, 
sir, if I could grow  apples like that, I would call  myself a gardener. But 
it was the singing that went to my heart, if you know what I mean.' 
     Frodo sat, eating, drinking, and talking with delight; but his mind was 
chiefly on the words spoken. He knew a little of the elf-speech and listened 
eagerly. Now and again he spoke to those that served him and thanked them in 
their own language. They smiled at  him  and said laughing: 'Here is a jewel 
among hobbits!' 
     After a while Pippin fell fast asleep, and was lifted up and borne away 
to a bower under the trees; there he was laid upon a soft bed and  slept the 
rest  of the night away. Sam refused to  leave  his  master. When Pippin had 
gone, he came and sat curled up at Frodo's feet, where at last he nodded and 
closed his eyes. Frodo remained long awake, talking with Gildor. 
     They  spoke of many things, old  and new,  and Frodo questioned  Gildor  
much about happenings  in the wide world outside the Shire. The tidings were 
mostly  sad and ominous: of  gathering  darkness, the wars  of Men,  and the 
flight of the Elves. At last Frodo asked  the question  that  was nearest to 
his heart: 
     'Tell me, Gildor, have you ever seen Bilbo since he left us?' 
     Gildor  smiled.  'Yes,' he answered.  'Twice. He said farewell to us on 
this very  spot. But I saw  him once again, far  from here.' He would say no 
more about Bilbo, and Frodo fell silent. 
     'You do not ask me or tell me much that concerns yourself, Frodo,' said 
Gildor. 'But I already know a little, and I  can read more in your  face and 
in the thought behind your questions. You are leaving the Shire, and yet you  

####-doubt that you will find  what you seek, or accomplish what  you intend,  or  
that you will ever return. Is not that so?' 
     'It is,' said Frodo; 'but I thought my going was a secret known only to 
Gandalf and my faithful Sam.' He looked down at Sam, who was snoring 
gently. 
     'The secret will not reach the Enemy from us,' said Gildor. 
     'The Enemy?' said Frodo. 'Then you know why I am leaving the Shire?' 
     'I  do not know  for what  reason the Enemy is pursuing you,'  answered 
Gildor; 'but I perceive that he is  - strange indeed though that seems to me. 
And I warn  you  that peril is now both before you  and behind you, and upon 
either side.' 
     'You  mean the Riders? I feared  that  they were servants of the Enemy. 
What are the Black Riders?' 
     'Has Gandalf told you nothing?' 
     'Nothing about such creatures.' 
     'Then I think it  is not  for me to say more  - lest terror should keep 
you from your journey. For it seems to me that you  have set out only just in 
time, if  indeed you are in time. You must now make  haste, and neither stay 
nor turn back; for the Shire is no longer any protection to you.' 
     'I cannot  imagine what information could be more terrifying  than your 
hints  and warnings,' exclaimed Frodo. 'I knew  that  danger lay  ahead,  of 
course; but I did not expect to  meet it in  our  own Shire.  Can't a hobbit 
walk from the Water to the River in peace?' 
     'But  it is not your own Shire,' said Gildor. 'Others dwelt here before 
hobbits were; and others will dwell here again when hobbits are no more. The 
wide world is all about you: you can fence yourselves in, but you cannot for  
ever fence it out.' 
     'I know - and yet it has always seemed so safe and familiar. What can I 
do  now?  My  plan was  to  leave  the Shire  secretly, and  make my  way to 
Rivendell; but now my footsteps are dogged, before ever I get to Buckland.' 
     'I  think you should still follow that  plan,'  said Gildor.  'I do not 
think the Road  will prove too  hard for  your courage. But  if  you  desire 
clearer counsel, you should ask  Gandalf. I do not know the reason  for your  
flight, and therefore I do not know by what means your  pursuers will assail  
you. These things Gandalf must know. I suppose that you  will see him before 
you leave the Shire?' 
     'I hope so. But that is another  thing that  makes  me anxious. I  have 

####-been expecting Gandalf for many days. He was to have come to Hobbiton at 
the 
latest two  nights  ago; but he has  never appeared. Now I am wondering what 
can have happened. Should I wait for him?' 
     Gildor  was silent for a moment. 'I do not like this news,' he said  at 
last.  'That Gandalf should be late, does not  bode well. But it is said: Do 
not meddle  in  the  affairs  o f Wizards, for they  are subtle  and quick to  
anger. The choice is yours: to go or wait.' 
     'And  it  is also  said,'  answered  Frodo:  'Go not  to the  Elves for 
counsel, for they will say both no and yes.' 
     'Is it  indeed?' laughed Gildor. 'Elves  seldom give  unguarded advice, 
for advice is a  dangerous gift,  even from  the  wise to the wise, and  all 
courses may run ill. But what would you? You have not told me all concerning 
yourself; and how then shall  I choose better  than you? But if  you  demand  
advice, I will for friendship's sake give it.  I think you  should now go at 
once, without delay; and if Gandalf does not come before you set out, then I  
also advise  this:  do not  go  alone. Take such friends  as are trusty  and 
willing. Now you should be grateful, for I do  not give this counsel gladly. 
The Elves have their  own labours and their own sorrows, and they are little  
concerned  with the ways of  hobbits,  or of any other creatures upon earth. 
Our  paths cross theirs seldom, by chance or purpose. In this meeting  there 
may be more than chance; but the purpose  is not clear to  me, and I fear to 
say too much.' 
     'I am  deeply grateful,' said  Frodo;  'but  I  wish you would  tell me 
plainly what the  Black  Riders  are. If I  take your  advice I may not  see 
Gandalf for  a  long while,  and I ought to know what  is  the  danger  that 
pursues me.' 
     'Is  it not  enough to  know  that they  are servants  of  the  Enemy?' 
answered Gildor. 'Flee them! Speak no words to them! They are deadly. Ask no 
more of me! But my heart forbodes that, ere all is ended, you,  Frodo son of 
Drogo, will  know more  of  these  fell things than  Gildor  Inglorion.  May 
Elbereth protect you!' 
     'But where shall I find courage?' asked Frodo. 'That is what I  chiefly 
need.' 
     'Courage is found in unlikely places,' said  Gildor. 'Be  of good hope!  
Sleep now! In the morning we shall have gone; but we will send our  messages 

####-through  the lands.  The Wandering Companies shall know of your journey, 
and 
those that have power for good shall be on the watch. I name you Elf-friend; 
and  may the stars shine upon the end  of your road! Seldom have we had such 
delight in strangers,  and it  is  fair to hear words  of the Ancient Speech 
from the lips of other wanderers in the world.' 
     Frodo felt sleep coming upon him, even as Gildor  finished speaking. 'I  
will sleep now,' he said; and the  Elf led him to a bower beside Pippin, and 
he threw himself upon a bed and fell at once into a dreamless slumber. 
 

####- 

Chapter 4. A Short Cut to Mushrooms 

 
 
     In the morning Frodo woke refreshed. He was lying in  a bower made by a 
living tree  with branches laced  and drooping to the ground; his bed was of 
fern and grass,  deep and soft  and  strangely fragrant. The sun was shining 
through  the fluttering leaves,  which were still green  upon the  tree.  He 
jumped up and went out. 
     Sam  was  sitting  on the grass near the  edge  of the wood. Pippin was 
standing studying the sky and weather. There was no sign of the Elves.  
     'They have left us fruit  and drink, and bread,' said Pippin. 'Come and 
have your breakfast. The bread tastes almost as good as it did last night. I 
did not want to leave you any, but Sam insisted.' 
     Frodo  sat  down  beside  Sam and began  to eat. 'Wha t is the  plan for  
today?' asked Pippin. 
     'To  walk  to Bucklebury as  quickly as possible,'  answered Frodo, and 
gave his attention to the food. 
     'Do you think  we shall see  anything  of  those Riders?' asked  Pippin 
cheerfully. Under  the  morning  sun the prospect of seeing a whole troop of 
them did not seem very alarming to him. 
     'Yes, probably,' said Frodo, not liking  the reminder. 'But  I  hope to 
get across the river without their seeing us.' 
     'Did you find out anything about them from Gildor?' 
     'Not much  - only hints and riddles,' said Frodo evasively. 'Did you ask  
about the sniffing?' 
     'We didn't discuss it,' said Frodo with his mouth full. 
     'You should have. I am sure it is very important.' 
     'In that case I am sure Gildor would have refused  to explain it,' said 
Frodo sharply. 'And now leave me in peace  for a bit! I don't want to answer  
a string of questions while I am eating. I want to think!' 
     'Good heavens!' said Pippin. 'At breakfast?' He walked away towards the 
edge of the green. 
     From Frodo's mind the bright morning - treacherously bright, he thought  
- had not banished the fear of pursuit; and he pondered the words of Gildor. 
The merry voice of Pippin came to him. He was running  on the green turf and 
singing. 

####-     'No!  I could  not!' he said  to  himself.  'It is one thing to take my 
young friends walking over the Shire with me, until we are hungry and weary, 
and food  and  bed are  sweet.  To  take them into exile,  where  hunger and 
weariness may ha ve  no cure,  is quite another  - even if they are willing to 
come. The inheritance  is mine  alone.  I don't think I  ought  even to take 
Sam.' He looked at Sam Gamgee, and discovered that Sam was watching him. 
     'Well, Sam!' he said. 'What about it? I am leaving the Shire as soon as 
ever I  can - in fact I  have made up my mind now not even to wait  a day at 
Crickhollow, if it can be helped.' 
     'Very good, sir!' 
     'You still mean to come with me?' 
     'I do.' 
     'It  is going to be very dangerous, Sam. 'It is already dangerous. Most  
likely neither of us will come back.' 
     'If you don't come back, sir, then I shan't, that's certain,' said Sam. 
'Don't you leave him! they said to me. Leave him! I said. I never mean to. I 
am  going  with  him, if   he climbs to the Moon,  and if  any of those Black 
Rulers try to stop him, they'll have Sam Gamgee to reckon with, I said. They 
laughed.' 
     'Who are they, and what are you talking about?' 
     'The  Elves, sir. We had some talk last night; and  they seemed to know 
you were going away, so I didn't see the use of denying  it. Wonderful folk, 
Elves, sir! Wonderful!' 
     'They are,' said Frodo.  'Do you like  them still,  now  you have had a  
closer view?' 
     'They  seem a bit above my likes and dislikes,  so  to speak,' answered 
Sam slowly. 'It don't seem to matter what I think about them. They are quite 
different from what I expected - so old and young, and so gay and sad, as it 
were.' 
     Frodo looked at Sam rather startled, half expecting to see some  outward 
sign of the odd change that seemed  to have come  over him. It did not sound 
like the voice of the old Sam Gamgee that he thought he  knew. But it looked 
like the old  Sam Gamgee sitting  there, except that  his face was unusually 
thoughtful. 
     'Do  you feel any  need to  leave the Shire now  - now that your wish to 
see them has come true already?' he asked. 
     'Yes,  sir. I  don't  know how to  say it, but after last night  I feel 

####-different. I seem to see ahead, in a kind  of way.  I know  we are going  to 
take a very long road, into darkness; but I know I can't turn back. It isn't  
to see Elves now, nor dragons, nor mountains, that  I want  - I don't rightly 
know what I  want: but I  have something to do before the end, and  it  lies 
ahead, not  in the Shire. I must see it through, sir, if you understand me.' 
     'I don't  altogether.  But I  understand  that Gandalf chose me a  good 
companion. I am content. We will go together.' 
     Frodo finished his  breakfast in silence.  Then standing  up he  looked 
over the land ahead, and called to Pippin. 
     'All ready to start?' he said as Pippin ran up. 'We must be getting off 
at once. We slept late; and there are a good many miles to go.' 
     'You slept  late, you mean,' said Pippin. 'I was up long before; and we 
are only waiting for you to finish eating and thinking.' 
     'I  have finished both now. And I am going to make for Bucklebury Ferry 
as quickly  as possible. I am not  going out of the way, back to the road we 
left last night: I am going to  cut straight across country from here.' 
     'Then you are going to fly,'  said Pippin.  'You  won't cut straight on 
foot anywhere in this country.' 
     'We  can  cut  straighter than the road anyway,'  answered  Frodo. 'The 
Ferry is east from Woodhall;  but the hard road curves away to the left  -you  
can see a bend of it away north over there. It goes round  the north  end of 
the Marish so as to  strike  the causeway from  the  Bridge above Stock. But 
that is miles out of the way.  We could save a quarter  of the distance if we 
made a line for the Ferry from where we stand.' 
     'Short cuts make  long delays,' argued  Pippin. 'The  country  is rough 
round  here, and  there are bogs and  all  kinds of difficulties down in the 
Marish -I know the land  in these parts. And if you are worrying about Black 
Riders, I can't  see that it is any worse meeting  them on  a road than in a  
wood or a field.' 
     'It is  less  easy  to find people in the  woods and  fields,' answered 
Frodo. 'And if you are supposed to be on the road, there is some chance that 
you will be looked for on the road and not off it.' 
     'All right!' said Pippin. 'I will follow  you into every bog and ditch. 
But it is  hard! I had counted  on  passing the Golden Perch at Stock before 
sundown. The best beer in the Eastfarthing, or used to be: it is a long time 
since I tasted it.' 
     'That settles it!'  said Frodo. 'Short cuts  make delays, but inns make 

####-longer  ones. At all costs we must  keep  you away from the Golden Perch. We 
want to get to Bucklebury before dark. What do you say, Sam?' 
     'I  will go  along with you, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam (in spite of  private 
misgiving and a deep regret for the best beer in the Eastfarthing). 
     'Then  if we are going to toil  through bog and briar, let's  go  now!' 
said Pippin. 
     It was  already nearly as hot as it had been the day before; but clouds 
were  beginning  to come up from the West. It looked likely to turn to rain. 
The hobbits scrambled down a steep  green  bank and  plunged into the  thick 
trees below. Their course  had been chosen to  leave Woodhall to their left, 
and  to cut slanting through the woods that clustered along the eastern side 
of  the  hills,  until they reached the flats  beyond. Then they  could make 
straight  for the Ferry over country that was open, except for a few ditches 
and fences. Frodo reckoned they had eighteen miles to go in a straight line. 
     He soon found that the thicket was closer and more tangled than it  had 
appeared. There were no paths  in the  undergrowth, and they did not  get on 
very  fast.  When they had struggled to the bottom of the bank, they found a  
stream  running  down from  the hills behind in a deeply dug bed with  steep 
slippery sides overhung with brambles. Most inconveniently it cut across the 
line they had chosen. They could  not jump over it, nor indeed get across it 
at  all without  getting wet, scratched, and muddy.  They  halted, wondering  
what to do.  'First check!' said Pippin, smiling grimly. 
     Sam Gamgee  looked back.  Through an opening  in  the trees he caught a 
glimpse of the top of the green bank from which they had climbed down. 
     'Look!'  he said, clutching  Frodo by the  arm. They all looked, and on 
the edge high above  them they saw against the sky a horse  standing. Beside 
it stooped a black figure. 
     They  at once gave  up any  idea of going back. Frodo led  the way, and 
plunged quickly into the  thick bushes beside the stream. 'Whew!' he said to  
Pippin. 'We were both right! The short cut has gone crooked already; but   we 
got under  cover only just in time. You've got sharp ears, Sam: can you hear  
anything coming?' 
     They  stood still,  almost holding  their breath as  they listened; but 
there was  no sound  of pursuit. 'I  don't fancy  he  would try bringing his 
hor se down that bank,' said Sam. 'But I guess he  knows we came down it.  We 
had better be going on.' 
     Going  on was  not altogether easy.  They had packs  to carry,  and the 

####-bushes and  brambles were reluctant to  let  them through. They were cut off  
from the wind by  the ridge behind, and the air  was still  and stuffy. When 
they forced their way at last into more open ground, they were hot and tired 
and very scratched, and they were also no longer certain of the direction in 
which they  were  going.  The banks of  the stream sank,  as it reached  the 
levels and  became broader  and shallower,  wandering off towards the Marish 
and the River. 
     'Why,  this  is  the Stock-brook!' said Pippin. 'If we are going to try 
and get back on to our course, we must  cross at once and bear right.' 
     They waded  the  stream, and hurried over a wide open space, rush-grown 
and treeless, on the  further side. Beyond that they came again to a belt of 
trees: tall oaks, for the most part, with here  and there an elm tree or  an 
ash. The ground was fairly level, and  there was little undergrowth; but the 
trees were loo close for them to see far  ahead.  The leaves blew upwards in 
sudden gusts of wind, and spots of rain began to fall from the overcast sky. 
Then the wind died  away and the rain came streaming down. They trudged 
along 
as fast as they could, over patches of grass, and through  thick  drifts  of 
old leaves; and all about them the rain pattered  and trickled. They did not 
talk, but kept glancing back, and from side to side. 
     After  half an hour Pippin said: 'I hope  we  have not turned  too much 
towards the south, and are not walking longwise through this wood! It is not  
a very broad belt --I should  have said  no more than a mile at the widest  - 
and we ought to have been through it by now.' 
     'It is no good our starting to go in zig-zags,' said Frodo. 'That won't  
mend  matters. Let us keep on as we  are going! I am not sure that I want to 
come out into the open yet.' 
     They  went on for perhaps another couple of miles. Then the sun gleamed 
out of ragged clouds  again and the rain  lessened. It was now past mid-day,  
and they felt it was high time for lunch. They halted under an elm tree: its 
leaves  though fast turning yellow were still thick, and the  ground at  its 
feel  was fairly dry and sheltered. When  they came to make their meal, they 
found that  the  Elves had  filled their bottles  with  a  clear drink, pale 
golden in colour: it had the scent of a honey made  of many flowers, and was 
wonderfully  refreshing. Very soon they  were  laughing, and snapping  their  
fingers at rain, and at Black Riders.  The last few  miles, they felt, would 
soon be behind them. 

####-     Frodo propped his back against the tree-trunk, and closed his eyes. Sam 
and Pippin sat near, and they began to hum, and then to sing softly: 
     Ho! Ho! Ho! to the bottle I go 
     To heal my heart and drown my woe. 
     Rain may fall and wind may blow,  
     And many miles be still to go, 
     But under a tall tree I will lie, 
     And let the clouds go sailing by. 
     Ho! Ho! Ho! they began again louder. They stopped short suddenly. Frodo 
sprang to his feet. A long-drawn wail came  down the wind, like  the  cry of 
some evil  and  lonely  creature.  It  rose and fell, and  ended  on  a high 
piercing  note. Even as  they sat and stood, as  if suddenly frozen,  it was 
answered by another  cry, fainter and further off, but no less  chilling  to 
the blood. There was then a silence, broken only by the sound of the wind in 
the leaves. 
     'And what do you think that was?' Pippin asked at last, trying to speak 
lightly, but quavering a little. 'If it was a bird, it was  one that I never  
heard in the Shire before.' 
     'It was not bird or beast,' said Frodo. 'It was a call, or  a signal -- 
there were words in that cry, though  I  could not catch them. But no hobbit 
has such a voice.' 
     No more was said about it. They were all thinking of the Riders, but no 
one  spoke of them. They  were now reluctant either to  stay  or go  on; but 
sooner or  later they had got to  get across the  open country to the Ferry, 
and  it was best to go  sooner  and  in daylight.  In a few moments they had 
shouldered their packs again and were off. 
     Before long the wood came  to a  sudden end. Wide grass-lands stretched 
before them. They now saw that  they had, in  fact, turned too much  to  the 
south.  Away over  the  flats  they could glimpse the low hill of Bucklebury 
across the River, but it was now to their left. Creeping cautiously out from 
the edge of the trees,  they set off  across  the  open  as  quickly as they 
could. 
     At first they felt afraid, away from the shelter of  the wood. Far back  
behind them stood the  high place  where  they had  breakfasted.  Frodo half 
expected to see the small distant  figure of  a horseman on  the ridge  dark 
against  the sky; but there was  no sign of  one. The  sun escaping from the 
breaking clouds, as it sank towards the hills they had left, was now shining 

####-brightly again. Their fear left them, though they still felt uneasy. But the 
land  became  steadily  more  tame and  well-ordered.  Soon they  came  into  
well-tended fields and meadows: there were  hedges  and gates  and dikes for 
drainage. Everything seemed quiet and peaceful, just an  ordinary corner  of 
the Shire. Their spirits rose with every step. The  line  of  the River grew 
nearer; and the Black Riders began  to seem  like phantoms of  the woods now 
left far behind. 
     They passed along the edge of a huge turnip-field, and  came to a stout 
gate.  Beyond it a  rutted  lane ran between low well-laid hedges towards  a  
distant clump of trees. Pippin stopped. 
     'I know these fields and this gate!' he said. 'This is Bamfurlong,  old 
Farmer Maggot's land. That's his farm away there in the trees.' 
     'One trouble after  another!' said Frodo, looking nearly as much alarmed 
as if Pippin  had declared the lane was the slot leading to  a dragon's den. 
The others looked at him in surprise. 
     'What's wrong with  old Maggot?' asked Pippin.  'He's a good  friend to 
all the  Brandy  bucks.  Of course he's  a terror to trespassers, and  keeps 
ferocious  dogs  - but after all, folk down here are near the border and have 
to be more on their guard.' 
     'I  know,' said  Frodo. 'But all the same,' he added with  a shamefaced 
laugh,  'I am  terrified of  him and his dogs. I have avoided  his  farm for  
years and  years. He  caught me  several times trespassing after  mushrooms,  
when I was a youngster at Brandy Hall. On the last occasion he beat  me, and 
then took  me  and showed  me to his dogs. "See, lads," he  said, "next time 
this young varmint sets foot on my land, you can eat  him. Now see him off!" 
They chased me all the way to the Ferry. I have never got over the  fright  - 
though I  daresay  the beasts knew their business and  would not really have 
touched me.' 
     Pippin laughed. 'Well, it's time you  made it up. Especially if you are 
coming back to live  in Buckland. Old Maggot is really  a stout fellow -  if 
you leave his mushrooms alone. Let's get into the lane and then we shan't be 
trespassing. If we meet him, I'll do the talking. He is a friend of Merry's,  
and I used to come here with him a good deal at one time.' 
     They went along the lane, until they saw the  thatched roofs of a large 
house and farm-buildings peeping ou t among the trees ahead. The Maggots, 
and 
the Puddifoots of  Stock, and most of  the  inhabitants of  the Marish, were 

####-house-dwellers; and this farm was stoutly built of brick and had a high wall 
all round it. There was a wide wooden gate opening out of the  wall into the  
lane. 
     Suddenly  as they drew nearer  a terrific baying and barking broke out, 
and a loud voice was heard shouting: 'Grip! Fang! Wolf! Come on, lads!' 
     Frodo and Sam stopped dead, but Pippin walked  on a few paces. The gate 
opened and  three  huge dogs came  pelting  out  into  the  lane, and dashed 
towards the travellers, barking fiercely. They took no notice of Pippin; but 
Sam shrank  against the wall, while  two wolvish-looking dogs sniffed at him 
suspiciously, and snarled if he moved. The largest and most ferocious of the 
three halted in front of Frodo, bristling and growling. 
     Through the gate there now appeared  a broad  thick -set  hobbit  with a  
round  red  face. 'Hallo! Hallo!  And who may you  be, and what  may you  be 
wanting?' he asked. 
     'Good afternoon, Mr. Maggot!' said Pippin. 
     The farmer looked at  him closely. 'Well, if it  isn't Master Pippin   - 
Mr. Peregrin Took, I should say!' he cried, changing from a scowl to a grin. 
'It's a long time since I saw you round here. It's lucky for you that I know 
you. I was just going out to  set my dogs  on  any strangers. There are some 
funny things going  on today. Of course, we do get queer folk  wandering  in  
these parts at times. Too near the River,' he said, shaking his  head.  'But 
this fellow was the most outlandish I have ever set eyes  on. He won't cross 
my land without leave a second time, not if I can stop it.' 
     'What fellow do you mean?' asked Pippin. 
     'Then you haven't  seen him?' said  the  farmer. 'H e  went up the  lane 
towards the  causeway not  a  long while back. He  was a funny  customer and 
asking funny questions. But perhaps you'll come along inside, and we'll pass 
the news more comfortable. I've a  drop  of good ale on tap, if you and your  
friends are willing, Mr. Took.' 
     It seemed plain that the  farmer would tell them more, if allowed to do 
it in his own time and  fashion, so they all accepted  the invitation. 'What 
about the dogs?' asked Frodo anxiously. 
     The farmer laughed.  'They  won't harm you - not unless I  tell 'em to. 
Here, Grip! Fang! Heel!' he cried. 'Heel, Wolf!'  To the relief of Frodo and 
Sam, the dogs walked away and let them go free. 
     Pippin introduced  the other two to the farmer. 'Mr. Frodo Baggins,' he 
said.  'You may not remember him, but he used to live at Brandy Hall.' At the 

####-name Baggins the farmer started, and gave Frodo a sharp glance. For a moment 
Frodo thought that the memory of stolen mushrooms had been aroused, and 
that 
the dogs would be  told  to see him   off. But Farmer Maggot took him by  the 
arm. 
     'Well, if that isn't queerer than ever?'  he exclaimed. 'Mr. Baggins is 
it? Come inside! We must have a talk.' 
     They went  into the farmer's  kitchen, and sat by  the wide fire-place. 
Mrs. Maggot brought out  beer in  a huge jug, and filled four large mugs. It 
was a good brew,  and Pippin found himself more than compensated for 
missing 
the  Golden  Perch.  Sam  sipped his  beer  suspiciously.  He had a  natural 
mistrust of the inhabitants of other parts of the Shire; and also he was not 
disposed to be quick  friends with anyone who had beaten his master, however  
long ago. 
     After  a few remarks about  the weather and the agricultural  prospects 
(which were no worse than usual), Farmer Maggot put down his  mug and 
looked 
at them all in turn. 
     'Now, Mr.  Peregrin,' he  said,  'where  might you  be coming from, and 
where might you be going  to?  Were you coming to visit' me? For, if so, you 
had gone past my gate without my seeing you.' 
     'Well, no, '  answered Pippin.  'To tell  you the truth, since  you have 
guessed  it, we got into the lane from the other end: we had come  over your  
fields. But that was quite by accident.  We  lost our way in the woods, back  
near Woodhall, trying to take a short cu t to the Ferry.' 
     'If you were  in a hurry,  the road would have served you better,' said 
the farmer. 'But I wasn't worrying about  that. You have  leave to walk over  
my land, if you have a  mind, Mr.  Peregrin. And you, Mr. Baggins  - though I 
daresay  you  still like mushrooms.'  He laughed.  'Ah yes, I recognized the 
name.  I recollect  the time when young Frodo  Baggins  was one of the worst  
young rascals of Buckland. But it  wasn't mushrooms I was thinking of. I had 
just heard the name Baggins before  you  turned up.  What do you think  that 
funny customer asked me?' 
     They  waited anxiously for  him to go on. 'Well,' the farmer continued, 
approaching his point with slow relish, 'he came riding on a big black horse 
in at  the  gate, which  happened  to be open, and right up to my door.  All 

####-black he was  himself, too, and cloaked and hooded up, as if he did not want 
to be known. "Now what  in the Shire  can  he want?" I thought to myself. We 
don't see many of the Big Folk over the border; and anywa y I had never heard 
of any like this black fellow. 
     ' "Good-day to you!" I says,  going  out to him. "This  lane don't lead 
anywhere,  and wherever  you may be going, your quickest way will be back to 
the road." I didn't like the looks of  him; and when  Grip came out, he took  
one sniff and  let out a  yelp as if he had been slung: he put down his tail 
and bolted off howling. The black fellow sat quite still. 
     ' "I come  from yonder," he  said,  slow  and stiff-like, pointing back  
west, over my  fields, if you please.  "Have you seen Baggins?" he asked in a  
queer voice,  and bent  down towards  me. I could not see any face,  for his 
hood fell down so low; and I felt a sort of shiver down  my back. But  I did 
not see why he should come riding over my land so bold. 
     ' "Be off!" I said. "There are no Bagginses  here.  You're in the wrong 
part of the Shire. You had better go back west to Hobbiton  - but you can  go 
by road this time." 
     ' "Baggins has  left,"  he answered in a whisper. "He is coming. He  is 
not far away. I wish to find him. If he passes will you tell me? I will come 
back with gold." 
     ' "No you won't," I said.  "You'll  go back  where you  belong,  double 
quick. I give you one minute before I call all my dogs." 
     'He gave a sort  of hiss. It might have been laughing, and it might not. 
Then he spurred  his great  horse right  at me, and I jumped  out of the way 
only just in time. I called the dogs, but he swung off, and rode through the 
gate  and up the lane  towards the causeway like a bolt  of thunder. What do  
you think of that?' 
     Frodo sat for a moment looking at  the fire,  but  his only thought was 
how on earth would they  reach the Ferry. 'I don't  know what  to think,' he 
said at last. 
     'Then I'll tell you what to think,' said Maggot. 'You should never have 
gone  mixing yourself up with Hobbiton folk, Mr. Frodo.  Folk  are queer  up 
there.'  Sam  stirred in  his  chair,  and  looked  at  the  farmer  with an 
unfriendly  eye. 'But you were always a  reckless lad. When  I heard you had 
left the Brandybucks  and  gone  off  to that old Mr. Bilbo, I said that you  
were going to find trouble. Mark my words, this  all comes of those  strange 
doings of Mr. Bilbo's. His money was got in some strange fashion  in foreign 

####-parts, they  say. Maybe there is some that want  to know what has  become of 
the gold and jewels that he buried in the hill of Hobbiton, as I hear?' 
     Frodo said  nothing:  the  shrewd  guesses of  the farmer  were  rather  
disconcerting. 
     'Well, Mr. Frodo,' Maggot went  on, 'I'm glad that you've had the sense 
to come back to Buckland. My  advice is: stay  there! And don't get mixed up 
with these outlandish folk.  You'll have  friends  in these parts. If any of 
these black  fellows come after you  again,  I'll  deal with  them. I'll say 
you're dead, or have left the Shire, or anything you like. And that might be 
true enough; for as like as not it is old Mr. Bilbo they want news of.' 
     'Maybe you're right,' said Frodo, avoiding the farmer's eye and staring 
at the fire. 
     Maggot looked at him thoughtfully. 'Well, I see  you have ideas of your 
own,' he said. 'It is as plain as my  nose that no  accident brought you and 
that rider here on the same afternoon; and maybe my  news was no  great news 
to you, after all.  I am not asking you to tell me anything you  have a mind 
to keep to yourself; but I see you are in some kind  of trouble. Perhaps you  
are thinking it won't be too easy to get to the Ferry without being caught?' 
     'I was thinking so,' said Frodo. 'But we have got to try and get there; 
and  it won't  be  done by sitting  and thinking. So I am afraid we must  be 
going.  Thank you very much indeed for your kindness! I've been in terror of 
you and your dogs for over thirty years, Farmer Maggot, though you may laugh 
to hear it. It's a pity: for I've missed a good friend. And now I'm sorry to 
leave so soon. But I'll come back, perhaps, one day  - if I get a chance.' 
     'You'll be welcome when you come,' said Maggot. 'But now I've a notion. 
It's near  sundown  already,  and we are going to  have our  supper; for  we 
mostly go to bed  soon after the Sun. If you and Mr. Peregrin and  all could 
stay and have a bite with us, we would be pleased!' 
     'And so should we!' said  Frodo. 'But  we  must  be going at once,  I'm 
afraid. Even now it will be dark before we can reach the Ferry.' 
     'Ah! but wait a minute! I was going to say: after a bit of supper, I'll 
gel out a small waggon,  and I'll drive you all to the Ferry. That will save 
you a good step, and it might also save you trouble of another sort.' 
     Frodo  now accepted the invitation gratefully, to the relief  of Pippin 
and  Sam. The sun  was  already behind the  western hills, and the light was 
failing.  Two  of  Maggot's  sons  and his  three  daughters came in, and  a  
generous  supper was  laid  on the large table.  The kitchen  was  lit  with 

####-candles and the fire was mended. Mrs. Maggot  hustled in and out. One or two 
other  hobbits  belonging to the farm-household came in.  In  a short  while 
fourteen  sat  down to eat. There  was beer in plenty,  and a mighty dish of 
mushrooms  and bacon, besides much other solid farmhouse fare. The  dogs lay 
by the fire and gnawed rinds and cracked bones. 
     When they had finished, the farmer and his sons went out with a lantern 
and got the waggon ready. It was dark in the yard, when the guests came out. 
They  threw their  packs  on board  and  climbed in. The farmer sat  in  the 
driving-seat,  and whipped up his two stout  ponies. His  wife stood  in the 
light of the open door. 
     'You  be  careful  of yourself. Maggot!' she called. 'Don't  go arguing 
with any foreigners, and come straight back!' 
     'I will!' said he, and drove out  of the gate. There was  now no breath 
of wind stirring; the night was still and quiet, and a chill was in the air. 
They went without  lights and took it  slowly. After  a mile or two the lane 
came to an end, crossing a deep dike,  and climbing a short slope up  on  to 
the high-banked causeway. 
     Maggot got down and took a good look  either way, north and  south, but 
nothing could  be  seen  in the darkness, and  there was not a sound in  the 
still  air.  Thin  strands  of river -mist  were hanging above the dikes, and 
crawling over the fields.  
     'It's going  to be thick,' said Maggot; 'but  I'll not light my lantern 
till I turn for home. We'll hear anything on the road long before we meet it 
tonight.' 
     It was five miles or more from Maggot's lane to the Ferry. The  hobbits 
wrapped themselves  up, but their ears were strained for any sound above the 
creak  of  the wheels and the  slow clop of  the ponies' hoofs.  The  waggon 
seemed slower than a snail to Frodo. Beside him  Pippin was  nodding towards 
sleep; but Sam was staring forwards into the rising fog. 
     They reached the  entrance to the Ferry lane at last. It was marked  by 
two tall white posts  that suddenly loomed up  on their right. Farmer Maggot 
drew  in his  ponies  and the  waggon creaked  to a  halt.  They  were  just 
beginning  lo scramble out, when suddenly they heard what  they had all been 
dreading: hoofs on the road ahead. The sound was coming towards them. 
     Maggot  jumped  down  and stood holding the  ponies' heads, and peering 
forward into the gloom. Clip-clop, clip-clop came the approaching rider. The 
fall of the hoofs sounded loud in the still, foggy air. 

####-     'You'd better be hidden, Mr. Frodo,' said  Sam anxiously. 'You get down 
in the waggon and cover up with  blankets, and we'll send this  rider to the 
rightabouts!'  He climbed out  and went to the  farmer's side.  Black Riders 
would have to ride over him to get near the waggon. 
     Clop-clop, clop-clop. The rider was nearly on them. 
     'Hallo there!' called Farmer Maggot. The advancing hoofs stopped short.  
They thought they could dimly guess a dark cloaked shape in the mist, a yard 
or two ahead. 'Now then!'  said the  farmer, throwing the  reins to  Sam and 
striding forward. 'Don't you come a step nearer! What do you want, and where 
are you going?' 
     'I want Mr. Baggins. Have you seen him?' sa id a muffled voice - but the 
voice was  the voice of Merry Brandybuck.  A dark lantern was uncovered, and 
its light fell on the astonished face of the farmer. 
     'Mr. Merry!' he cried. 
     'Yes, of course! Who  did you think it was?' said Merry coming forward.  
As  he came out of the mist and their fears subsided, he seemed suddenly  to 
diminish to  ordinary  hobbit-size. He was  riding a pony, and a  scarf  was 
swathed round his neck and over his chin to keep out the fog. 
     Frodo  sprang  out of  the waggon to greet  him. 'So  there you are  at 
last!'  said Merry.  'I was beginning to wonder if you would  turn up at all 
today, and I was just going back to supper. When it grew foggy I came across 
and rode up  towards Stock to see if you had fallen in  any ditches. But I'm 
blest  if  I  know  which way  you  have come. Where did you  find them, Mr. 
Maggot? In your duck-pond?' 
     'No,  I  caught 'em trespassing,'  said the farmer, 'and nearly set  my 
dogs on  'em;  but they'll tell  you all the story,  I 've no doubt.  Now, if 
you'll excuse  me, Mr. Merry and Mr. Frodo and  all, I'd best be turning for  
home. Mrs. Maggot will be worriting with the night getting thick.' 
     He backed the waggon into the lane and turned it. 'Well, good  night to 
you all,' he said. 'It's been a queer day, and no mistake. But all's well as 
ends well; though perhaps  we should not say  that  until  we reach  our own 
doors. I'll not deny that I'll be glad now when I  do.' He lit his lanterns,  
and got up.  Suddenly he produced a large basket from under the seat.  'I was 
nearly forgetting,' he said. 'Mrs. Maggot put this up  for Mr. Baggins, with 
her compliments.'  He handed  it down and moved off, followed by a chorus of 
thanks and good-nights. 
     They  watched  the  pale  rings  of  light  round his lanterns as  they 

####-dwindled  into  the  foggy night. Suddenly  Frodo laughed: from the  covered 
basket he held, the scent of mushrooms was rising. 
 

####- 

Chapter 5. A Conspiracy Unmasked 

 
 
     'Now we had  better get home  ourselves,' said  Merry. There's something 
funny about all this, I see; but it must wait till we get in.' 
     They turned down  the Ferry lane, which was straight and well-kept  and  
edged with  large white-washed stones. In a hundred yards  or so  it brought  
them to  the  river -bank,  where there was a broad wooden  landing-stage.  A 
large  flat  ferry-boat was  moored beside it.  The white  bollards near the 
water's edge glimmered in the light of two lamps on high posts. Behind  them 
the mists in the flat fields were now above the hedges; but the water before 
them was dark,  with only  a few curling wisps like steam among the reeds by 
the bank. There seemed to be less fog on the further side. 
     Merry  led the pony  over a gangway  on to  the ferry,  and the  others 
followed.  Merry  then  pushed slowly off with  a  long pole. The Brandywine 
flowed slow and broad before them. On the other side the bank was steep, and 
up it a  winding path climbed from the further landing. Lamps were twinkling 
there. Behind loomed  up the Buck Hill; and out of it, through stray shrouds 
of mist, shone many  round windows, yellow and red. They were the windows 
of 
Brandy Hall, the ancient home of the Brandybucks.  
     Long  ago Gorhendad Oldbuck,  head of the  Oldbuck family,  one of  the 
oldest  in  the Marish or indeed in the Shire, had crossed  the river, which 
was the original  boundary of  the land  eastwards. He built (and excavated)  
Brandy  Hall, changed his name to Brandybuck,  and settled  down  to  become 
master of  what was virtually  a small independent country. His  family grew 
and grew,  and after his days  continued to grow, until Brandy Hall occupied 
the whole of the low hill, and had three large front-doors, many side-doors,  
and about a hundred windows. The  Brandybucks and  their numerous 
dependants 
then  began  to burrow, and later to  build,  all round about. That was  the 
origin  of Buckland, a thickly inhabited strip between the river and the Old 
Forest, a sort  of colony from the Shire. Its  chief village was Bucklebury, 
clustering in the banks and slopes behind Brandy Hall. 
     The people in the Marish were  friendly with the Bucklanders,  and  the 
authority of the Master  of the  Hall (as the head of the Brandybuck  family 

####-was called) was still acknowledged by the farmers between Stock  and Rushey. 
But  most of the folk of the old Shire regarded the Bucklanders as peculiar, 
half foreigners as it were. Though, as a matter  of fact, they were not very 
different from the other hobbits of the Four Farthings. Except in one point: 
they were fond of boats, and some of them could swim. 
     Their land  was originally unprotected from the East; but on  that side 
they had built a hedge: the High Hay. It had been  planted many  generations 
ago, and was now thick and  tail, for it  was constantly tended. It  ran all 
the  way from Brandywine Bridge, in a big loop  curving away from the river, 
to  Haysend  (where  the  Withywindle flowed  out  of  the Forest  into  the 
Brandywine): well over twenty miles from end to  end. But, of course,  it was 
not  a complete  protection.  The Forest  drew  close  to the hedge in  many 
places.  The Bucklanders kept their doors locked after  dark,  and that also 
was not usual in the Shire. 
     The  ferry-boat moved slowly  across the water. The Buckland shore drew 
nearer. Sam was the only member of the party who had not been over the river  
before. He had a strange feeling as the slow gurgling stream slipped by: his 
old life lay behind  in the mists, dark adventure lay in front. He scratched 
his head, and for a moment had a passing wish that Mr. Frodo could have gone 
on living quietly at Bag End. 
     The four  hobbits stepped off the ferry.  Merry was  tying  it up,  and 
Pippin  was already leading  the pony up the  path, when Sam  (who had  been 
looking ba ck, as if to take farewell of the Shire) said in a hoarse whisper: 
     'Look back, Mr. Frodo! Do you see anything?' 
     On the far stage, under the distant lamps, they could just  make  out a  
figure: it looked like a  dark black bundle left behind. But a s they  looked 
it seemed to move and sway this way and that, as if searching the ground. It  
then crawled, or went crouching, back into the gloom beyond the lamps.  
     'What in the Shire is that?' exclaimed Merry. 
     'Something that is following us,' said Frodo. 'But don't ask  any  more 
now!  Let's get away  at once!' They hurried up the path to the top  of  the 
bank,  but when  they  looked  back  the far shore was shrouded in mist, and 
nothing could be seen. 
     'Thank goodness you don't keep any boats on the west -bank!' said Frodo.  
'Can horses cross the river?' 
     'They  can go twenty miles north to Brandywine  Bridge - or they  might 
swim,'  answered  Merry. 'Though  I  never heard of any horse  swimming  the 

####-Brandywine. But what have  horses to do with it?' I'll tell you later. Let's 
get indoors and then we can talk.' 
     'All right! You and Pippin know your way; so I'll just ride on and tell 
Fatty Bolger that you are coming. We'll see about supper and things.' 
     'We had our supper early with Farmer Maggot,' said Frodo;  'but we could 
do with another.' 
     'You shall have it! Give  me that basket!' said  Merry, and  rode ahead 
into the darkness.  
     It  was some distance from  the  Brandywine  to  Frodo's new  house  at 
Crickhollow. They passed Buck Hill and Brandy Hall on their left, and on the 
outskirts of Bucklebury struck the main road of Buckland that ran south from 
the Bridge. Half a mile northward  along this they came to a lane opening on  
their  right. This they followed for a couple of miles as it  climbed up and 
down into the country. 
     At last  they  came to a narrow gate in a thick hedge. Nothing could be 
seen  of the house in the dark: it stood back from the lane in the middle of 
a wide  circle of  lawn surrounded by  a belt of  low trees inside the outer  
hedge. Frodo had chosen it, because it stood in an  out-of-the-way corner of 
the country, and there were  no other dwellings close  by.  You could get in 
and out  without being noticed. It had been built a long while before by the 
Brandybucks, for the use  of guests, or members of the family that wished to 
escape  from  the  crowded  life  of  Brandy  Hall  for a  time.  It  was an 
old-fashioned  countrified house, as much like a hobbit -hole as possible: it 
was long and low,  with no  upper storey; and it had a roof  of  turf, round 
windows, and a large round door. 
     As they walked lip the green path  from  the gate no light was visible; 
the  windows  were dark and shuttered.  Frodo knocked on the door, and Fatty 
Bolger opened it . A friendly light streamed out. They slipped in quickly and 
shut themselves and the light inside. They were in a wide hall with doors on 
either side; in  front  of them a  passage ran back  down the  middle of the 
house. 
     'Well, what do you think of it?' asked Merry coming up the passage. 'We 
have  done our  best in  a short time to make it  look  like home. After all 
Fatty and I only got here with the last cart-load yesterday.' 
     Frodo looked  round.  It did  look like home. Many of his own favourite 
things -  or Bilbo's things (they  reminded  him sharply of him in their new 
selling) - were arranged as nearly as possible as they had been  at Bag End. 

####-It  was  a  pleasant,  comfortable,  welcoming  place;  and he found himself 
wishing  that he was really coming  here to settle down in quiet retirement. 
It  seemed unfair  to have put his friends  to  all  this  trouble;  and  he 
wondered again how he was going to break the news to them that he must leave 
them so soon, indeed at  once. Yet that  would  have  to be  done  that very 
night, before they all went to bed. 
     'It's delightful!' he said with an effort. 'I  hardly feel that I  have 
moved at all.' 
     The  travellers hung  up their  cloaks,  and piled  their packs  on the 
floor. Merry led them down the passage and threw open a door at the far end. 
Firelight came out, and a puff of steam. 
     'A bath!' cried Pippin. 'O blessed Meriadoc!' 
     'Which order  shall we  go in?' said Frodo. 'Eldest  first, or quickest 
first? You'll be last either way, Master Peregrin.' 
     'Trust me to arrange things  better than that!'  said Merry.  'We can't 
begin life  at Crickhollow with a quarrel over baths. In that room there are 
three tubs, and  a copper full of boiling water. There are also towels, mats 
and soap. Get inside, and be quick!' 
     Merry and Fatty went into the kitchen on the other side of the passage, 
and  busied  themselves  with  the  final  preparations  for  a late supper. 
Snatches of competing songs came  from the bathroom mixed  with the sound 
of 
splashing and wallowing.  The voice of Pippin was  suddenly lifted up  above 
the others in one of Bilbo's favourite bath-songs. 
     Sing hey! for the bath at close of day 
     that washes the weary mud away! 
     A loon is he that will not sing: 
     O! Water Hot is a noble thing! 
 
     O! Sweet is the sound of falling rain, 
     and the brook that leaps from hill to plain; 
     but better than rain or rippling streams 
     is Water Hot that smokes and steams. 
 
     O! Water cold we may pour at need 
     down a thirsty throat and be glad indeed; 
     but better is Beer, if drink we lack, 

####-     and Water Hot poured down the back. 
 
     O! Water is fair that leaps on high 
     in a fountain white beneath the sky; 
     but never did fountain sound so sweet 
     as splashing Hot Water with my feet! 
     There  was a terrific  splash, and  a  shout  of  Whoa! from  Frodo. It 
appeared that a lot of Pippin's  bath had imitated a fountain and leaped  on 
high. 
     Merry went  to the door: 'What about supper a nd beer in the throat?' he 
called. Frodo came out drying his hair. 
     'There's so much  water  in the air that I'm coming into the kitchen to 
finish,' he said. 
     'Lawks!' said Merry, looking  in. The  stone floor  was swimming.  'You  
ought to mop all that up before you get anything to eat. Peregrin,' he said. 
'Hurry up, or we shan't wait for you.' 
     They had supper in the kitchen on a table near the fire. 'I suppose you  
three won't want mushrooms again?' said Fredegar without much hope. 
     'Yes we shall!' cried Pippin. 
     'They're mine!'  said Frodo. 'Given to me  by Mrs. Maggot, a queen among 
farmers' wives. Take your greedy hands away, and I'll serve them.' 
     Hobbits have a passion  for mushrooms,  surpassing  even  the greediest  
likings  of Big  People.  A  fact  which  partly explains young Frodo's long 
expeditions  to  the renowned fields of the Marish,  and the  wrath  of  the 
injured Maggot. On this occasion there was plenty for all, even according to 
hobbit standards. There were also many other things to follow, and when they 
had  finished even Fatty Bolger heaved  a sigh  of content. They pushed back 
the table, and drew chairs round the fire. 
     'We'll clear up later,' said Merry. 'Now tell me all  about it! I guess 
that you have been having adventures, which was not quite fair without me. I 
want a full account; and most of all I want to know what was the matter with 
old Maggot, and why he spoke to me like that. He sounded almost as if he was 
scared, if that is possible.' 
     'We  have all been  scared,' said Pippin after a pause,  in which Frodo 
stared at the fire and did not speak. 'You would have been,  too, if you had 
been chased for two days by Black Riders.' 
     'And what are they?' 

####-     'Black figures  riding  on black horses,'  answered Pippin.  'If  Frodo 
won't talk, I will tell you the whole tale from the beginning.' He then gave 
a  full account of their journey from the time  when they left Hobbiton. Sam 
gave various supporting nods and exclamations. Frodo remained silent. 
     'I should  think you were making it all up,'  said Merry, 'if I had not 
seen  that black shape on  the landing-stage - and heard the queer  sound in 
Maggot's voice. What do you make of it all, Frodo?' 
     'Cousin Frodo has been very close,' said Pippin. 'But the time has come 
for  him to open  out. So far we have been given nothing  more to go on than 
Farmer  Maggot's  guess  that  it  has  something  to  do  with  old Bilbo's 
treasure.' 
     'That  was  only  a  guess,' said Frodo hastily. 'Maggot does  not know 
anything.' 
     'Old Maggot is  a shrewd fellow,' said Merry. 'A lot goes on behind his 
round face that does not come out in his talk. I've heard that he used to go 
into the Old Forest at one time, and he has the reputation of knowing a good 
many  strange things. But you can at least tell us, Frodo, whether you think  
his guess good or bad.' 
     'I think,'  answered Frodo slowly, 'that it was a good guess, as  far as 
it  goes. There is a  connexion with Bilbo's  old adventures,  and the Riders 
are looking,  or perhaps one  ought to say  searching,  for him or for me. I 
also fear, if you want to know, that it is no joke at all; and that I am not 
safe here or anywhere else.' He looked round at the windows and walls, as if 
he was afraid  they would  su ddenly give  way.  The others looked at him  in 
silence, and exchanged meaning glances among themselves. 
     'It's coming out in a minute,' whispered Pippin to Merry. Merry nodded. 
     'Well!' said Frodo at  last, sitting  up and straightening his back, as 
if he had made  a  decision.  'I can't keep it dark any  longer.  I have got 
something to tell you all. But I don't know quite how to begin.' 
     'I think I could help you,' said Merry quietly, 'by telling you some of 
it myself.' 
     'What do you mean?' said  Frodo, looking  at him anxiously. 'Just this, 
my  dear old  Frodo: you  are miserable, because you don't know how  to  say 
good-bye.  You  meant to leave the Shire, of course. But danger has come  on 
you sooner  than you expected, and now you are  making up your mind to go at 
once. And you don't want to. We are very sorry for you.' 
     Frodo opened his mouth  and shut it again. His  look of surprise was so 

####-comical that they laughed. 'Dear  old  Frodo!' said Pippin.  'Did you really 
think you had thrown dust in  all our eyes? You have not been nearly careful 
or clever enough for that! You have obviously been planning to go and saying 
farewell  to  all your haunts all this  year since April. We have constantly 
heard you  muttering:  "Shall  I  ever   look  down into that valley again, I 
wonder",  and things like that.  And pretending that you had come to the end  
of  your  money,  and  actually  selling  your  beloved  Bag  End  to  those 
Sackville-Bagginses! And all those close talks with Gandalf.' 
     'Good  heavens!'  said Frodo. 'I thought  I had been  both  careful and 
clever. I don't know what Gandalf would say. Is all  the Shire discussing my  
departure then?' 
     'Oh no!' said Merry. 'Don't worry about that! The secret won't keep for  
long,  of  course;  but  at  present it  is,  I  think,  only  known  to  us 
conspirators. After  all, you must remember  that we know you  well, and are 
often with  you.  We can usually guess what you are thinking. I  knew Bilbo,  
too. To  tell you the truth,  I had been watching you  rather  closely  ever  
since he  left. I thought you would go  after him sooner or  later; indeed I 
expected you  to go sooner, and lately we have  been very  anxious.  We have 
been terrified that you might give us the slip, and go off suddenly,  all on 
your own like he did. Ever since this spring we have kept our eyes open, and  
done a good deal of planning on our own account. You are not going to escape 
so easily!' 
     'But I must go,' said Frodo. 'It cannot be helped, dear friends. It  is 
wretched for us all, but it is no use your trying to keep me. Since you have 
guessed so much, please help me and do not hinder me!' 
     'You  do not understand!' said Pippin. 'You  must go  - and therefore we 
must, too. Merry and I are coming with you. Sam is an excellent fellow,  and 
would jump down a dragon's throat to  save you, if he did not trip over  his 
own feet; but  you  will  need  more than one  companion in  your  dangerous 
adventure.' 
     'My dear  and  most beloved hobbits!'  said Frodo deeply  moved. 'But I 
could not  allow it. I decided that  long ago, too. You speak of danger, but 
you do not understand. This is no treasure-hunt,  no there-and -back journey.  
I am flying from deadly peril into deadly peril.' 
     'Of course  we understand,'  said Merry  firmly.  'That is why we  have 
decided to come. We know the Ring is no laughing-matter; but we are going to 
do our best to help you against the Enemy.' 

####-     'The Ring!' said Frodo, now completely amazed. 
     'Yes, the Ring,' said  Merry. 'My dear old hobbit, you don't  allow for  
the inquisitiveness of friends. I have known about the existence of the Ring 
for years  - before Bilbo went away, in fact; but since he obviously regarded 
it  as  secret,  I  kept  the  knowledge  in  my  head, until we formed  our 
conspiracy. I  did not know Bilbo, of course, as  well as I know you; I  was 
too young, and he was also more careful  - but  he was not careful enough. If 
you want to know how I first found out, I will tell you.' 
     'Go on!' said Frodo faintly. 
     'It was  the  Sackville-Bagginses that were his downfall,  as you might 
expect. One day, a year before the Party, I happened to be walking along the  
road, when I  saw Bilbo ahead. Suddenly in the distance the S.-B.s appeared, 
coming towards us.  Bilbo slowed down, and then hey presto! he  vanished.  I 
was so startled that I hardly had the wits to hide myself in a more ordinary 
fashion; but  I got through the hedge and walked along the  field inside.  I 
was  peeping  through into the road,  after the S.-B.s  had  passed, and was 
looking  straight at Bilbo  when he suddenly reappeared. I caught a glint of 
gold as he put something back in his trouser -pocket. 
     'After that I kept my  eyes open.  In fact, I confess that I spied. But 
you must  admit that it was very  intriguing, and I was only in my teens.  I 
must be the only one in the Shire, besides you Frodo, that has ever seen the 
old fellow's secret book.' 
     'You have read his book!' cried Frodo.  'Good heavens above! Is nothing 
safe?' 
     'Not  too safe, I should say,' said  Merry.  'But  I have  only had one 
rapid glance, and that was difficult to get. He never left the book about. I 
wonder what became  of it. I should  like  another look.  Have you  got  it, 
Frodo?' 
     'No. It was not at Bag End. He must have taken it away.' 
     'Well, as  I  was saying,' Merry  proceeded, 'I  kept my  knowledge  to 
myself,  till  this Spring  when  things got  serious. Then  we  formed  our 
conspiracy;  and  as we were serious, too,  and meant business,  we have not  
been too scrupulous. You are  not a very easy  nut to crack,  and Gandalf is 
worse. But if  you want to be  introduced  to our chief investigator, I  can 
produce him.' 
     'Where is  he?' said  Frodo, looking round, as if he  expected a masked 
and sinister figure to come out of a cupboard. 

####-     'Step forward, Sam!'  said Merry; and  Sam stood up with a face scarlet 
up to  the ears.  'Here's our collector of  information! And he  collected a  
lot, I  can tell you, before he was finally  caught. After which, I may say, 
he seemed to regard himself as on parole, and dried up.' 
     'Sam!' cried  Frodo,  feeling that amazement could  go no  further, and 
quite  unable  to decide whether he felt angry,  amused, relieved, or merely 
foolish. 
     'Yes, sir!' said Sam.  'Begging your pardon, sir! But I meant  no wrong 
to you, Mr.  Frodo, nor to Mr. Gandalf  for that matter. He  has some sense, 
mind you; and when you  said  go alone, he  said no! lake someone as you can 
trust.' 
     'But it does not seem that I can trust anyone,' said Frodo.  Sam looked 
at him unhappily.  'It all depends on what you want,' put in Merry. 'You can 
trust us to stick to you through thick and thin - to the bitter end. And you  
can trust us to keep any secret of yours  - closer than you keep it yourself.  
But you cannot trust us to let you face trouble alone, and go off  without a  
word. We  are your friends, Frodo. Anyway: there it is. We know most of what 
Gandalf has  told you. We know  a good deal about the Ring. We  are horribly 
afraid - but we are coming with you; or following you like hounds.' 
     'And after all, sir,'  added Sam,  'you did  ought to  take the  Elves' 
advice.  Gildor said you should take them as was willing, and you can't deny 
it.' 
     'I don't deny it,' said Frodo, looking at Sam, who was now grinning. 'I 
don't  deny it, but I'll never believe you  are  sleeping again, whether you  
snore or not. I shall kick you hard to make sure. 
     'You are a set  of deceitful  scoundrels!'  he  said,  turning  to  the 
others.  'But bless you!' he laughed, getting up and waving his arms, 'I give 
in. I will take Gildor's  advice.  If the danger were not  so dark, I should 
dance for joy. Even so,  I cannot  help feeling  happy; happier than I  have 
felt for a long time. I had dreaded this evening.' 
     'Good!  That's  settled. Three cheers  for  Captain Frodo and company!' 
they shouted;  and  they  danced round him. Merry and  Pippin  began a song, 
which they had apparently got ready for the occasion. 
     It was made on  the model of the dwarf-song that started Bilbo  on  his 
adventure long ago, and went to the same tune: 
     Farewell we call to hearth and hall! 
     Though wind may blow and rain may fall, 

####-     We must away ere break of day 
     Far over wood and mountain tall. 
 
     To Rivendell, where Elves yet dwell 
     In glades beneath the misty fell, 
     Through moor and waste we ride in haste, 
     And whither then we cannot tell. 
 
     With foes ahead, behind us dread, 
     Beneath the sky shall be our bed, 
     Until at last our toil be passed, 
     Our journey done, our errand sped. 
 
     We must away! We must away! 
     We ride before the break of day! 
     'Very good!' said Frodo. 'But in that case there are a lot of things to 
do before we go to bed - under a roof, for  tonight at any rate.' 
     'Oh! That was poetry!' said Pippin. 'Do you really mean to start before 
the break of day?' 
     'I don't know,' answered  Frodo. 'I fear those  Black Riders, and  I am 
sure it is unsafe to stay in one place long, especially in  a place to which 
it is known  I was going. Also Gildor advised me  not to wait. But I  should 
very  much like  to see  Gandalf. I could see that even Gildor was disturbed 
when  he heard that Gandalf  had never  appeared. It really  depends  on two 
things.  How soon could the Riders get to Bucklebury? And how  soon could 
we 
get off? It will take a good deal of preparation.' 
     'The answer to the  second question,' said Merry, 'is that we could get 
off in an hour. I have prepared practically everything. There are six ponies 
in a stable across the fields; stores and tackle are all packed, except  for  
a few extra clothes, and the perishable food.' 
     'It seems to have been  a  very efficient conspiracy,' said Frodo. 'But 
what about the Black Riders? Would it be safe to wait one day for Gandalf?' 
     'That all depends on  what you think the Riders would do, if they found 
you here,' answered Merry. 'They could  have reached here  by now, of course, 
if they were not stopped at the North-gate, where the Hedge runs down to the 
river -bank, just this side of the Bridge. The gate-guards would not let them 

####-through by night, though they might break through. Even in the daylight they 
would try  to keep them out, I think, at any  rate until  they got a message 
through to the Master of the Hall  - for they would not like the  look of the 
Riders, and would certainly be  frightened by them. But, of course, Buckland 
cannot resist a determined attack for  long. And it  is possible that in the 
morning even a Black Rider that rode  up  and asked for Mr. Baggins would be 
let through. It is pretty generally known that you are coming back  to  live 
at Crickhollow.' 
     Frodo  sat for  a while in thought. 'I have made  up  my mind,' he said 
finally. 'I am starting tomorrow, as soon as it is light. But I am not going 
by road: it  would be safer  to  wait here than  that.  If  I go through the 
North-gate my departure from  Buckland  will  be  known at once, instead  of 
being secret for  several days at least,  as it might be. And  what is more, 
the Bridge and the  East Road  near the  borders  will certainly be watched, 
whether  any Rider gets into  Buckland or not. We don't know  how many there 
are; but there are at least  two, and possibly more. The only thing to do is 
to go off in a qu ite unexpected direction.' 
     'But that  can only mean going  into  the  Old  Forest!'  said Fredegar 
horrified. 'You can't be thinking of doing that. It is quite as dangerous as 
Black Riders.' 
     'Not quite,' said Merry. It sounds very  desperate, but I believe Frodo 
is right. It is the only way of getting off without being followed  at once. 
With luck we might gel a considerable start.' 
     'But you won't have any luck in the Old Forest,' objected Fredegar. 'No 
one ever has luck in there. You'll gel lost. People don't go in there.' 
     'Oh yes they  do!'  said  Merry. 'The Brandybucks go in   - occasionally 
when the fit takes  them. We have  a  private entrance. Frodo  went in once, 
long ago. I have been in several times: usually in daylight, of course, when 
the trees are sleepy and fairly quiet.' 
     'Well, do  as you think best!' said Fredegar. 'I am more afraid of  the 
Old  Forest  than of anything I  know about:  the  stories  about  it  are a  
nightmare; but  my  vote hardly counts,  as I am  not going on the  journey. 
Still, I am very glad  someone is stopping behind, who can tell Gandalf what 
you have done, when he turns up, as I am sure he will before long.' 
     Fond as he was of Frodo, Fatty Bolger had no desire to leave the Shire, 
nor to see what lay  outside it. His family came from the Eastfarthing, from 
Budgeford in Bridgefields in fact, but he had never been over the Brandywine 

####-Bridge.  His task, according to the original plans  of the conspirators, was 
to stay  behind and deal with inquisitive folk,  and  to keep up as long  as 
possible the  pretence that Mr. Baggins  was still living at Crickhollow. He 
had even brought along some old clothes of  Frodo's to help  him  in playing  
the part. They little thought how dangerous that part might prove. 
     'Excellent!' said Frodo,  when he understood the  plan. 'We  could  not  
have  left  any  message behind for Gandalf otherwise.  I don't know whether 
these Riders can read or not, of course, but I should not have dared to risk  
a written message, in case they got in and  searched the house. But if Fatty 
is willing to hold the fort, and I can be sure of Gandalf knowing the way we 
have gone, that  decides me. I am going  into  the Old  Forest  first  thing 
tomorrow.' 
     'Well, that's that,' said Pippin. 'On the whole I would rather have our 
job than Fatty's - waiting here till Black Riders come.' 
     'You wait till you are well inside  the Forest,' said Fredegar. 'You'll 
wish you were back here with me before this time tomorrow.' 
     'It's no  good arguing about it any more,' said Merry.  'We have  still 
got  to tidy up and put the finishing touches to  the packing, before we get 
to bed. I shall call you all before the break of day.' 
     When at last he  had got to bed, Frodo could not sleep for  some  time. 
His  legs ached. He. was  glad that he was riding in the morning. Eventually 
he fell into a  vague dream, in which he seemed to be looking  out of a high 
window over  a dark  sea of tangled trees.  Down below among the roots there 
was the sound of creatures  crawling and snuffling.  He felt sure they would  
smell him out sooner or later. 
     Then  he heard a noise in the distance.  At first he thought  it  was a  
great wind  coming over the leaves of the forest. Then  he knew  that it was 
not leaves, but the sound of the  Sea far-off; a sound he had never heard in 
waking life, though it  had often  troubled his dreams. Suddenly he found he 
was out in the open. There were no trees after all. He was on  a dark heath, 
and there was a strange salt smell in  the air. Looking up he saw before him 
a tall white tower, standing alone on a high ridge. A great desire came over  
him to climb the tower and see the Sea. He started to struggle  up the ridge 
towards the  tower:  but  suddenly a light came in  the sky, and there was a  
noise of thunder. 
 
 

####-<h4>Chapter 6.</h4> <br> The Old Forest 

 
 
     Frodo woke suddenly. It was still dark in  the room. Merry was standing 
there with a candle  in one hand, and banging  on the  door with the  other. 
'All right! What is it?' said Frodo, still shaken and bewildered. 
     'What is it!' cried Merry. 'It is  time to get up. It is half past four 
and very foggy. Come on! Sam is already getting breakfast ready. Even Pippin 
is up. I am just going to saddle the ponies, and fetch the one that is to be 
the  baggage-carrier. Wake that sluggard Fatty! At least he must get up  and  
see us off.' 
     Soon after  six o'clock the  five  hobbits were  ready  to start. Fatty 
Bolger was still yawning. They stole quietly out of the house. Merry went in 
front leading a laden pony, and took his way along a path that  went through 
a spinney behind  the house, and then  cut across several fields. The leaves 
of  trees were  glistening, and every twig  was dripping; the grass was grey 
with  cold dew. Everything was  still,  and far-away  noises seemed near and 
clear:  fowls chattering  in a yard,  someone closing a  door of  a  distant 
house. 
     In their shed they found the ponies;  sturdy  little beasts of the kind 
loved by hobbits, not speedy, but good for  a long day's work. They mounted, 
and  soon  they  were  riding off  into  the  mist,  which  seemed  to  open 
reluctantly before them and close forbiddingly behind them. After riding for  
about  an  hour,  slowly  and without talking,  they  saw  the Hedge looming  
suddenly ahead. It was tall and netted over  with silver cobwebs.  'How  are 
you  going to get  through  this?'  asked Fredegar. 'Follow me!' said Merry, 
'and you will see.' He turned to the  left  along  the Hedge, and  soon they 
came to a point  wher e it bent inwards, running along the lip of a hollow. A 
cutting  had been made, at  some distance from the  Hedge, and  went sloping 
gently down into the ground. It had walls of brick at  the sides, which rose 
steadily,  until suddenly  they arched  over a nd formed a  tunnel that dived 
deep under the Hedge and came out in the hollow on the other side. 
     Here Fatty Bolger halted. 'Good-bye, Frodo!' he  said.  'I wish you were 
not going into the Forest. I only hope you will not need rescuing before the 
day is out. But good luck to you - today and every day!' 
     'If there  are no worse things ahead  than  the Old Forest, I  shall be 
lucky,'  said  Frodo. 'Tell Gandalf to hurry along the  East Road: we  shall 

####-soon be back on it and going as fast as we can.'  'Good-bye!' they cried, and 
rode down the slope and disappeared from Fredegar's sight into the tunnel. 
     It  was  dark and  damp. At the far  end it  was  closed  by  a gate of 
thick -set iron bars. Merry got down and unlocked the gate, and when they had 
all passed through he pushed it to again. It shut with a clang, and the lock  
clicked. The sound was ominous. 
     'There!' said Merry. 'You have left the Shire, and are now outside, and 
on the edge of the Old Forest.' 
     'Are the stories about it true?' asked Pippin. 
     'I don't know what  stories you mean,' Merry answered. 'If you mean the 
old bogey-stories Fatty's nurses  used to tell him, about goblins and wolves 
and things of that sort, I should say no. At any rate I  don't believe them. 
But the  Forest is queer. Everything in it  is very  much more  alive,  more 
aware of what is going on, so to  speak, than things  are in the  Shire. And 
the  trees do not like strangers. They watch  you. They  are usually content 
merely to  watch  you,  as  long  a s  daylight  lasts,  and  don't  do much. 
Occasionally the most unfriendly ones may drop a  branch,  or  stick  a root 
out,  or grasp at you with a long trailer. But at  night things  can be most  
alarming,  or so I am  told. I have  only once or twice  been in here  after  
dark, and then only near the hedge. I thought all the  trees were whispering 
to each  other,  passing news and plots along in an unintelligible language; 
and the branches swayed and groped without any wind. They  do  say the trees 
do  actually move, and can surround strangers and hem them in. In  fact long  
ago they  attacked the Hedge: they came and  planted themselves right by it,  
and leaned over it. But the hobbits came and cut down hundreds of trees, and 
made a great  bonfire in the  Forest, and  burned all the  ground in  a long 
strip east of the Hedge. After that the  trees gave up the attack,  but they 
became very unfriendly.  There  is  still a wide  bare  space not far inside 
where the bonfire was made.' 
     'Is it only the trees that are dangerous?' asked Pippin. 
     'There are  various queer things living deep  in the Forest, and on the 
far  side,' said Merry, 'or at least I have heard so; but I have never  seen 
any of them. But something makes paths. Whenever  one comes inside one 
finds 
open tracks; but they seem to shift and change from time  to time in a queer 
fashion.  Not far from  this tunnel there is, or was for  a  long time,  the 
beginning of quite  a broad path leading to the Bonfire  Glade,  and then on 

####-more  or less in our direction, east and a little  north. That is the path I 
am going to try and find.' 
     The hobbits now left the tunnel -gate and rode across  the  wide hollow.  
On the far side was a faint path leading up on to the floor of the Forest, a  
hundred yards a nd more beyond  the Hedge;  but it  vanished  as  soon as  it 
brought them under the trees.  Looking back they could see the  dark line of 
the  Hedge  through  the stems of trees  that were already thick about them. 
Looking  ahead  they  could  see  only tree-trunks of innumerable sizes  and  
shapes: straight  or bent,  twisted, leaning,  squat  or slender, smooth  or  
gnarled and branched;  and all the stems were green  or grey with  moss  and  
slimy, shaggy growths.  
     Merry alone  seemed fairly cheerful.  'You had  better lead  on and find 
that path,'  Frodo  said to him.  'Don't  let us lose one another, or forget 
which way the Hedge lies!' 
     They picked a  way  among the trees, and  their  ponies plodded  along, 
carefully  avoiding the many  writhing  and interlacing roots. There  was no 
undergrowth. The ground was  rising  steadily,  and as they went  forward it  
seemed  that the trees became  taller, darker,  and  thicker. There  was  no 
sound,  except  an occasional drip  of  moisture falling  through  the still 
leaves.  For  the  moment  there  was no  whispering  or movement  among the 
branches; but  they  all got  an uncomfortable feeling that they were  being 
watched with disapproval, deepening to dislike and even enmity.  The feeling 
steadily  grew, until they found  themselves looking up quickly, or glancing 
back over their shoulders, as if they expected a sudden blow.  
     There was not  as  yet  any  sign  of  a path,  and  the  trees  seemed 
constantly to bar their way. Pippin suddenly  felt that he could not bear it 
any longer, and without warning let out  a shout. 'Oi! Oi!' he  cried. 'I am 
not going to do anything. Just let me pass through, will you!' 
     The others halted startled; but the  cry  fell as if muffled by a heavy 
curtain. There was no echo or answer though the wood  seemed to  become 
more 
crowded and more watchful than before. 
     'I should not shout, if I were you,' said Merry. It does more harm than 
good.' 
     Frodo began to wonder if it were possible to find a way through, a nd if 
he had been right  to make  the others come into this abominable wood. Merry 
was looking from side to side, and seemed already uncertain which way to go. 

####-Pippin noticed it. 'It  has not taken you long to lose  us,' he said. But at 
that moment Merry gave a whistle of relief and pointed ahead. 
     'Well, well!'  he  said. 'These trees do  shift.  There is the  Bonfire 
Glade in front of  us (or I hope so), but the path to it seems to have moved 
away!' 
     The light grew clearer as they  went forward. Suddenly they came out of 
the trees and found themselves in a wide circular space. There was sky above 
them, blue and clear to  their surprise, for down under the Forest -roof they 
had not been able to see the rising morning and the lifting of the mist. The 
sun  was  not,  however,  high  enough  yet to shine down into the clearing, 
though its light was on  the  tree-tops. The  leaves  were  all  thicker and 
greener about  the edges of  the  glade, enclosing  it with  an almost solid 
wall. No tree grew there,  only rough grass and many tall plants: stalky  and 
faded hemlocks  and wood-parsley,  fire-weed seeding into fluffy ashes,  and 
rampant nettles and  thistles.  A dreary place: but it seemed a charming and 
cheerful garden after the close Forest. 
     The hobbits  felt encouraged, and looked up hopefully at the broadening 
daylight in the  sky. At the far side  of the glade there was a break in the 
wall of trees, and a clear path beyond it. They could see it running on into 
the wood, wide  in places  and open  above, though  every  now and again the 
trees drew in and overshadowed it with their dark boughs. Up this path  they 
rode. They were  still climbing gently, but they now  went much quicker, and 
with better heart;  for it seemed to them that the  Forest had relented, and 
was going to let them pass unhindered after all. 
     But after a while the air began to get  hot and stuffy. The  trees drew 
close again  on either side, and they  could  no longer  see far ahead.  Now 
stronger than ever they  felt again  the ill will  of  the  wood pressing on 
them.  So silent was it that  the fall of their ponies'  hoofs, rustling  on 
dead leaves and  occasionally  stumbling on hidden roots, seemed to thud  in 
their ears. Frodo tried to sing a song to encourage them, but his voice sank  
to a murmur. 
     O! Wanderers in the shadowed land 
     despair not! For though dark they stand, 
     all woods there be must end at last, 
     and see the open sun go past: 
     the setting sun, the rising sun, 
     the day's end, or the day begun. 

####-     For east or west all woods must fail... 
     Fail - even as he said the word his voice faded  into  silence. The air 
seemed  heavy and the making  of  words wearisome. Just behind them  a large 
branch fell from an  old overhanging tree with  a crash into  the  path. The 
trees seemed to close in before them. 
     'They  do not  like all that about ending and failing,' said  Merry. 'I  
should not sing any  more  at present. Wait till we do  get to the edge, and 
then we'll turn and give them a rousing chorus!' 
     He spoke cheerfully, and if  he felt any great anxiety, he did not show 
it. The  others did not  answer.  They were depressed.  A heavy  weight  was 
settling steadily  on  Frodo's  heart, and he regretted now with every  step 
forward that he had ever thought of challenging the menace  of the trees. He 
was, indeed,  just  about  to stop and propose going back (if that was still 
possible), when  things took  a  new  turn. The  path  stopped climbing, and 
became for a while nearly  level. The dark trees drew aside, and  ahead they 
could see  the path  going  almost  straight forward.  Before them, but some 
distance off, there stood a  green  hill-top, treeless, rising  like a  bald 
head out of the  encircling wood. The  path seemed to be making directly for  
it. 
     They now hurried forward again,  delighted with the thought of climbing 
out  for  a  while above the roof  of the Forest. The path dipped, and  then 
again began  to climb upwards, leading them at last to the foot of the steep 
hillside.  There  it left the trees and faded into the turf.  The wood stood 
all round the hill like  thick  hair that ended sharply in  a circle round a  
shaven crown. 
     The hobbits  led their  ponies up, winding  round and  round until they 
reached the top. There they stood and gazed about them. The air was gleaming 
and sunlit, but hazy; and they could not see to any great distance. Near  at 
hand the mist was now almost gone;  though here and there it lay  in hollows 
of the wood, and to  the south  of  them, out of a deep  fold cutting  right 
across the Forest, the fog still rose like steam or wisps of white smoke. 
     'That,'  said Merry, pointing  with his hand, 'that  is the line of the 
Withywindle. It comes down out of the Downs and flows south-west through 
the 
midst of the  Forest to join the  Brandywine below Haysend. We don't want to 
go that way! The Withywindle valley is said to be  the  queerest part of the 
whole wood  - the centre from which all the queerness comes, as it were.' 

####-     The others looked in the  direction  that  Merry  pointed out, but they 
could see little but mists over the damp and  deep-cut valley; and beyond it 
the southern half of the Forest faded from view.  
     The sun on the hill-lop was now  getting  hot. It must  have been a bout 
eleven o'clock; but the autumn haze still prevented them from seeing much in 
other directions. In the west they could not make out either the line of the 
Hedge  or  the  valley of  the Brandywine  beyond  it. Northward, where they 
looked most hopefully, they could see nothing that might be the line of  the 
great East Road, for which they were making. They were on an island in a sea  
of trees, and the horizon was veiled. 
     On the south-eastern  side  the ground fell very  steeply,  as  if  the 
slopes  of  the  hill   were  continued  far  down  under  the  trees,  like 
island-shores that really  are the  sides  of a mountain rising  out of deep 
waters. They sat on the green edge and looked out over the woods below them, 
while they ate their  mid-day meal. As  the sun rose  and  passed  noon they 
glimpsed far  off  in  the east the grey-green lines  of the Downs  that lay 
beyond  the Old Forest on that side. That cheered them greatly; for  it  was 
good to see a sight of anything beyond the  wood's border s,  though they did  
not mean to go  that way,  if  they  could help it: the Barrow-downs  had as 
sinister a reputation in hobbit -legend as the Forest itself.  
     At length they made up their minds  to go on again. The path  that  had 
brought them to the hill reappeared on  the northward side; but they had not  
followed it far before they became aware that it was bending steadily to the 
right.  Soon it  began  to descend  rapidly and they  guessed  that  it must 
actually be heading towards the Withywindle va lley: not at all the direction 
they  wished  lo  take. After some  discussion  they decided to  leave  this 
misleading path and strike northward; for although they had not been able to 
see it  from the hill-top, the Road  must lie that way, and it  could not be 
many miles off. Also northward, and to the left of the path, the land seemed  
lo  be drier  and more  open,  climbing up to slopes  where  the  trees were 
thinner,  and pines and firs replaced the oaks and ashes  and other  strange 
and nameless trees  of the denser wood. 
     At first  their  choice  seemed  to  be good: they got along  at a fair 
speed, though whenever they got  a glimpse of the sun  in an open glade they 
seemed  unaccountably to have veered eastwards. But  after a time the  trees 
began to close in again,  just where they had appeared from a distance to be 
thinner and  less tangled. Then  deep  folds  in  the ground were discovered 

####-unexpectedly, like the ruts of great  giant-wheels or  wide moats and sunken 
roads long disused and choked with  brambles. These lay usually right across 
their  line  of march, and could only be crossed  by scrambling down and out 
again, which was troublesome and difficult with their ponies. Each time they 
climbed down they found the  hollow  filled  with  thick bushes  and  matted 
undergrowth, which somehow would not  yield to the  left, but only  gave way 
when they turned to the right; and they  had to go some  distance along  the 
bottom before they could find a  way up  the  further bank.  Each  time they 
clambered out, the trees seemed deeper and  darker;  and always  to the left 
and upwards it was most difficult to find a way, and they were forced to the  
right and downwards.  
     After an hour or two they had lost all clear sense of direction, though 
they knew well enough that they had long ceased to go northward at all. They 
were being headed off,  and were simply following a course chosen for them - 
eastwards and southwards, into the heart of the Forest and not out of it. 
     The afternoon was wearing away when they scrambled and stumbled  into a  
fold that was  wider and  deeper than any they had yet met. It  was so sleep 
and  overhung that  it proved  impossible  to climb out  of it again, either  
forwards  or  backwards, without  leaving  their ponies  and  their  baggage 
behind. All  they could do  was to  follow  the fold - downwards. The ground 
grew soft, and in places boggy; springs appeared in the banks, and soon they  
found themselves following a brook that trickled and babbled through a weedy 
bed. Then the ground began to fall rapidly, and the brook growing strong and 
noisy, flowed and leaped swiftly downhill. They were in a deep dim-lit gully 
over -arched by trees high above them. 
     After stumbling along for some way along  the  stream, they came  quite 
suddenly out of the gloom. As if through a gate they saw the sunlight before 
them.  Coming  to the opening they found  that they had  made their way down 
through a cleft in a high sleep bank, almost a cliff. At its feet was a wide 
space of grass and reeds; and in the distance could be glimpsed another bank  
almost as  steep. A golden  afternoon  of  late sunshine lay warm and drowsy 
upon  the hidden land between. In the midst of it there wound lazily a  dark 
river  of brown  water,  bordered with ancient  willows,  arched  over  with 
willows, blocked  with fallen willows,  and flecked with thousands  of faded 
willow-leaves.  The  air was thick  with  them, fluttering  yellow from  the 
branches;  for there  was a  warm  and gentle breeze blowing  softly   in the  
valley, and the reeds were rustling, and the willow-boughs were creaking. 

####-     'Well, now I have at  least some  notion  of where we are!' said Merry. 
'We have come almost in the opposite direction to which we intended. This is 
the River Withywindle! I will go on and explore.' 
     He passed out into the sunshine and disappeared into the  long grasses.  
After a while he reappeared, and reported that there was fairly solid ground 
between the cliff-foot and the river; in  some places firm turf went down to 
the water's edge. 'What's more,' he  said, 'there seems to be something like 
a footpath  winding  along on  this side  of the river. If  we turn left and 
follow it, we  shall be bound to  come out on the  east side of  the  Forest 
eventually.' 
     'I dare say!' said Pippin. 'That  is, if the  track goes on so far, and 
does not simply lead us into a bog and leave us there.  Who made  the track, 
do you suppose, and why?  I am sure it was not for our benefit. I am getting  
very suspicious  of this Forest and everything in it, and I begin to believe 
all  the stories about it. And have you any idea how far eastward we  should  
have to go?' 
     'No,' said Merry, 'I  haven't. I don't  know in the  least how far down 
the Withywindle we are, or who could possibly come here often enough to 
make 
a path along it. But there is no other way out that I can see or think of.' 
     There being nothing  else for it, they filed out, and Merry led them to 
the path that he had discovered. Everywhere the reeds and  grasses were lush 
and tall, in places far above their heads; but once found, the path was easy 
to  follow, as it  turned  and twisted, picking out the sounder ground among 
the bogs and pools. Here and there it passed  over other rills, running down 
gullies into the Wi thywindle  out of the higher  forest -lands,  and at these 
points there were tree-trunks or bundles of brushwood laid carefully across.  
     The  hobbits began to feel very hot. There were armies of flies  of all 
kinds buzzing round their  ears, and the afternoon sun was burning  on their 
backs.  At last they  came suddenly into a thin shade;  great grey  branches 
reached across  the  path. Each step forward became more  reluctant than the 
last. Sleepiness seemed to be creeping out of the ground and up their  legs, 
and falling softly out of the air upon their heads and eyes. 
     Frodo  felt his  chin go down and  his head nod. Just in front  of  him 
Pippin fell forward on to his knees.  Frodo halted. 'It's no good,' he heard 
Merry saying. 'Can't go another step  without rest. Must have nap. It's cool 
under the willows. Less flies!' 

####-     Frodo did not like the sound of this. 'Come  on!' he  cried. 'We  can't  
have a  nap yet. We must get clear of the Forest first.' But the others were 
too far gone to care. Besi de them Sam stood yawning and blinking stupidly.  
     Suddenly  Frodo  himself  felt  sleep overwhelming him.  His head swam. 
There now seemed  hardly a sound  in the air. The flies had stopped buzzing. 
Only a gentle noise on the edge of hearing,  a soft  fluttering as of a song 
half whispered, seemed to stir in the boughs above. He lifted his heavy eyes 
and  saw leaning over him a  huge willow-tree,  old  and hoary. Enormous  it  
looked,  its  sprawling  branches  going  up like  reaching  arms with  many 
long-fingered hands,  its knotted and twisted trunk gaping  in wide fissures 
that creaked faintly as the boughs  moved. The leaves fluttering against the 
bright sky dazzled  him,  and he toppled over, lying where  he fell upon the 
grass. 
     Merry and Pippin dragged themselves  forward  and  lay down  with their  
backs to  the willow-trunk.  Behind them  the  great  cracks gaped  wide  to 
receive them as the  tree swayed and creaked. They looked up at the grey and 
yellow leaves, moving softly against the light, and singing. They shut their 
eyes, and  then it seemed  that  they  could almost hear words,  cool words,  
saying something about water and sleep. They gave themselves up to the spell 
and fell fast asleep at the foot of the great grey willow. 
     Frodo   lay for  a while  fighting with  the sleep that was overpowering 
him;  then  with  an  effort  he  struggled  to  his feel again. He  felt  a  
compelling  desire for cool water.  'Wait for me,  Sam,' he  stammered.  'Must  
bathe feet a minute.' 
     Half in a dream he wandered forward to the riverward  side of the tree, 
where great winding roots grew out into the stream, like  gnarled  dragonets 
straining down to drink. He straddled one of these, and paddled his hot feel 
in the cool brown water; and there he too suddenly fell asleep with his back  
against the tree. 
     Sam sat down and  scratched his head, and yawned like a  cavern. He was 
worried.  The  afternoon  was  getting late,  and  he  thought  this  sudden 
sleepiness  uncanny.  'There's more  behind this than sun and warm air,'  he 
muttered  to himself.  'I don't like this great big tree. I  don't trust it. 
Hark at it singing about sleep now! This won't do at all!' 
     He pulled himself to his feet, and staggered off to see what had become 
of the ponies. He found that  two had wandered on a good way along the path; 
and he had just  caught them and brought them back towards the others,  when 

####-he  heard two noises; one loud, and the other  soft but very  clear. One was 
the  splash of something heavy falling into the water; the other was a noise 
like the snick of a lock when a door quietly closes fast. 
     He rushed back to the bank. Frodo was  in the water close to the  edge, 
and a great tree-root seemed to be over him and holding him down, but he was 
not struggling. Sam gripped him by the  jacket, and dragged him  from  under 
the root; and then with difficulty hauled him on to the bank. Almost at once 
he woke, and coughed and spluttered. 
     'Do you know, Sam,' he said at length, 'the beastly tree  threw me in! I 
felt it. The big root just twisted round and tipped me in!' 
     'You were dreaming  I expect, Mr. Frodo,'  said Sam. 'You shouldn't sit 
in such a place, if you feel sleepy.' 
     'What  about the  others?' Frodo asked. 'I wonder  what sort of  dr eams 
they are having.' 
     They went round to the other side of the tree, and  then Sam understood 
the click that he had heard. Pippin  had vanished. The crack by which he had 
laid himself had closed together, so that  not  a chink could be seen. Merry 
was trapped: another crack had closed about his waist; his legs lay outside, 
but the  rest of him was inside a dark opening, the edges of  which  gripped 
like a pair of pincers.  
     Frodo and  Sam beat  first upon the  tree-trunk where Pippin had  lain. 
They then struggled frantically to pull open the jaws of the crack that held 
poor Merry. It was quite useless.  
     'What a  foul thing to happen!' cried Frodo  wildly. 'Why  did  we ever  
come into this dreadful  Forest? I wish we were all back at Crickhollow! ' He 
kicked the tree with all his strength, heedless  of  his own  feet. A hardly 
perceptible shiver ran through the stem and up into the branches; the leaves 
rustled and whispered, but with a sound now of faint and far-off laughter. 
     'I suppose we haven't  got an  axe among our luggage, Mr. Frodo?' asked 
Sam. 
     'I  brought a  little hatchet for chopping firewood,' said Frodo. 'That 
wouldn't be much use.' 
     'Wait a minute!'  cried  Sam, struck by an idea suggested by  firewood. 
'We might do something with fire!' 
     'We might,' said Frodo doubtfully. 'We might succeed in roasting Pippin 
alive inside.' 
 

####- 
     'We might try  to hurt or  frighten  this tree to begin with,' said Sam 
fiercely. 'If it don't let them go,  I'll  have it down,  if  I have to gnaw 
it.' He  ran to the ponies and before  long  came back with two tinder -boxes 
and a hatchet. 
     Quickly they gathered dry grass and leaves, and bits  of bark; and made 
a  pile  of broken twigs and chopped sticks. These  they heaped against  the 
trunk  on the far side of the tree from  the prisoners. As soon  as Sam  had 
struck  a spark into  the tinder,  it kindled the dry grass  and a flurry of 
flame and smoke went up. The  twigs crackled. Little fingers  of fire licked 
against  the dry scored rind of  the ancient tree and scorched  it. A tremor  
ran through the whole  willow. The leaves  seemed to hiss above their  heads 
with a sound of pain and anger. A loud  scream came from Merry, and from far 
inside the tree they heard Pippin give a muffled yell. 
     'Put it out! Put it out!' cried Merry. 'He'll squeeze me in two, if you  
don't. He says so!' 
     'Who?  What?' shouted Frodo,  rushing  round  to  the other side of the 
tree. 
     'Put  it out! Put it  out!'  begged Merry.  The  branches of the wi llow 
began to sway violently. There was a sound as of a wind rising and spreading 
outwards  to the branches of all the other trees round about, as though they 
had  dropped a stone into the quiet slumber  of the river -valley and  set up 
ripples  of anger that  ran out  over the  whole  Forest. Sam kicked at  the 
little fire and stamped out the sparks. But Frodo, without any clear idea of 
why he did so, or what he hoped  for, ran  along the path crying help! help! 
help! It seemed to him that he could hardly hear the sound of his own shrill 
voice: it  was  blown away  from  him by  the willow-wind and drowned  in  a  
clamour of leaves,  as soon as the  words left his mouth. He felt desperate: 
lost and witless.  
     Suddenly  he  slopped.  There was an answer, or  so  he  thought; but it 
seemed  to come from  behind him, away down  the  path  further back in  the 
Forest.  He turned round and listened, and soon  there  could  be no  doubt: 
someone was  singing a song; a deep glad voice  was  singing  carelessly and 
happily, but it was singing nonsense: 
     Hey dol! merry dol! ring a dong dillo! 
     Ring a dong! hop along! fal lal the willow! 
     Tom Bom, jolly Tom, Tom Bombadillo! 

####-     Half hopeful and half afraid of some new danger, Frodo and Sam now both 
stood still. Suddenly  out of  a long string of  nonsense-words (or so  they 
seemed) the voice rose up loud and clear and burst into this song: 
     Hey! Come merry dot! derry dol! My darling! 
     Light goes the weather-wind and the feathered starling. 
     Down  along under Hill, shining in the sunlight, 
     Waiting on the doorstep for the cold starlight, 
     There my pretty lady is. River-woman's daughter, 
     Slender as the willow-wand, clearer than the water. 
     Old Tom Bombadil water-lilies bringing 
     Comes hopping home again. Can you hear him singing? 
     Hey! Come merry dol! deny dol! and merry-o, 
     Goldberry, Goldberry, merry yellow berry-o! 
     Poor old Willow-man, you tuck your roots away! 
     Tom's in a hurry now. Evening will follow day. 
     Tom's going home again water-lilies bringing. 
     Hey! Come derry dol! Can you hear me singing?  
     Frodo  and Sam stood as if enchanted. The wind puffed  out. The  leaves 
hung silently again on stiff branches. There was  another burst of song, and 
then suddenly, hopping and dancing along the path, there  appeared above the 
reeds an old battered hat with a tall crown and a long blue feather stuck in 
the band. With another hop and a bound there came into  view a man, or so it 
seemed.  At any rate he wa s  too large and heavy for a hobbit, if not  quite 
tall enough for one of the Big People, though he made noise enough for  one, 
slumping along with  great yellow  boots on  his  thick legs,  and  charging 
through grass and rushes like a cow going down to  drink. He had a blue coat 
and a long brown beard; his eyes  were blue and bright, and his face was red 
as  a ripe apple, but creased into a hundred  wrinkles of laughter.  In  his 
hands  he carried  on a  large  leaf  as  on a tray  a  small pile  of white 
water -lilies.  
     'Help!' cried  Frodo  and  Sam  running  towards  him with their  hands 
stretched out. 
     'Whoa! Whoa! steady there!' cried the old man, holding up one hand, and 
they  stopped  short, as  if  they  had been  struck stiff. 'Now,  my little 
fellows, where be you a -going to, puffing like a  bellows? What's the matter  
here  then?  Do  you  know who I am? I'm  Tom Bombadil.  Tell me what's 
your 

####-trouble! Tom's in a hurry now. Don't you crush my lilies!' 
     'My friends are caught in the willow-tree,' cried Frodo breathlessly. 
     'Master Merry's being squeezed in a crack!' cried Sam. 
     'What?' shouted Tom Bombadil,  leaping up  in the air. 'Old Man Willow? 
Naught  worse than that, eh? That  can soon  be mended. I know the  tune for 
him.  Old  grey Willow-man! I'll freeze his  marrow cold, if he don't behave 
himself. I'll  sing his roots off. I'll sing a  wind up  and blow  leaf  and 
branch  away.  Old Man  Willow!' Setting down his  lilies carefully  on  the 
grass, he  ran to  the tree. There he saw Merry's feet  still sticking out  - 
the rest had already  been  drawn further inside. Tom  put his mouth to  the 
crack  and  began singing  into it in a  low voice. They could not catch the 
words, but  evidently Merry was aroused. His legs began to kick.  Tom sprang 
away,  and breaking off a hanging branch smote  the side of the  willow with  
it. 'You  let  them  out  again, Old  Man Willow!'  he  said. 'What  be  you  
a-thinking  of? You  should not be waking. Eat earth! Dig deep! Drink water! 
Go to sleep! Bombadil is talking!' He then seized  Merry's feet and drew him 
out of the suddenly widening crack. 
     There was a tearing creak and the other crack split open, and out of it 
Pippin sprang, as if he had been kicked. Then  with  a loud snap both cracks 
closed fast again.  A shudder ran  through  the tree  from root to  tip, and 
complete silence fell. 
     'Thank you!' said the hobbits, one after the other. 
     Tom Bombadil burst out  laughing.  'Well,  my little fellows!' said he, 
stooping  so that he peered into their  faces. 'You shall come home with me!  
The  table is  all laden with  yellow cream, honeycomb, and white bread  and 
butter. Goldberry is  waiting. Time  enough  for questions around the supper  
table. You follow after me as quick as you are able!' With that he picked up 
his  lilies, and then with a beckoning  wave  of  his hand  went hopping and 
dancing along the path eastward, still singing loudly and nonsensically. 
     Too surprised and too relieved to talk, the hobbits followed  a fter him 
as fast as they could. But that was not fast enough. Tom soon disappeared in 
front  of them,  and the noise of his singing got fainter  and further away. 
Suddenly his voice came floating back to them in a loud halloo!  
     Hop along, my little friends, up the Withywindle! 
     Tom's going on ahead candles for to kindle. 
     Down west sinks the Sun: soon you will be groping. 
     When the night-shadows fall, then the door will open, 

####-     Out of the window-panes light will twinkle yellow.  
     Fear no alder black! Heed no hoary willow! 
     Fear neither root nor bough! Tom goes on before you. 
     Hey now! merry dot! We'll be waiting for you! 
     After that the hobbits heard  no more. Almost at once the sun seemed to 
sink  into  the  trees  behind them. They thought of the slanting  light  of 
evening glittering on the  Brandywine River, and  the windows  of Bucklebury 
beginning  to gleam with hundreds of lights. Great shadows fell across them; 
trunks and branches of trees hung  dark and threatening over the path. White  
mists began to rise and curl on the surface of the river and stray about the 
roots  of the trees upon its borders. Out of the very ground at their feet a  
shadowy steam arose and mingled with the swiftly falling dusk. 
     It became difficult to follow the path, and they were very tired. Their 
legs seemed leaden. Strange furtive noises ran among the bushes and reeds on 
either  side of them; and if  they looked  up  to the pale sky,  they caught 
sight  of  queer  gnarled  and knobbly  faces that gloomed dark against  the 
twilight,  and leered down at them  from the high bank and the edges of  the 
wood. They  began to feel that  all this  country was unreal,  and that they 
were stumbling through an ominous dream that led to no awakening. 
     Just as they felt their feet slowing down to a standstill, they noticed 
that the  ground  was  gently  rising.  The  water  began to murmur. In  the 
darkness they caught the white glimmer of foam, where the  river flowed over  
a short fall. Then suddenly the trees came to an end and the mists were left  
behind. They  stepped out from the  Forest, and found a wide sweep  of grass 
welling up before them. The  river, now small and swift, was leaping merrily 
down to meet them, glinting here and there in the light of the stars,  which 
were already shining in the sky. 
     The grass under their feet was smooth and short, as if it had been mown 
or shaven. The eaves of the Forest behind were clipped, and trim as a hedge. 
The path was now plain before  them, well-tended and bordered with stone. It 
wound  up on to the top  of a grassy knoll,  now grey under  the pale starry 
night; and there,  still high  above them  on a further slope, they saw  the 
twinkling lights of a house. Down again the path went, and then up aga in, up 
a  long smooth  hillside of  turf, towards the light. Suddenly a wide yellow 
beam  flowed out  brightly  from a  door  that  was  opened.  There  was Tom 
Bombadil's  house  before them, up,  down,  under hill. Behind  it  a  steep 
shoulder of the land  lay grey and bare,  and beyond that the dark shapes of 

####-the Barrow-downs stalked away into the eastern night. 
     They  all hurried  forward,  hobbits  and  ponies. Already  half  their 
weariness  and all their fears  had fallen from them. Hey! Come  merry  dol! 
rolled out the song to greet them. 
     Hey! Come derry dol! Hop along, my hearties! 
     Hobbits! Ponies all! We are fond of parties. 
     Now let the fun begin! Let us sing together! 
     Then  another clear voice, as young and as ancient as Spring, like  the 
song of a glad water flowing  down  into  the night from a bright morning in 
the hills, came falling like silver to meet them: 
     Now let the song begin! Let us sing together 
     Of sun, stars, moon and mist, rain and cloudy weather, 
     Light on the budding leaf, dew on the feather, 
     Wind on the open hill, bells on the heather, 
     Reeds by the shady pool, lilies on the water: 
     Old Tom Bombadil and the River-daughter! 
     And  with that song the hobbits stood upon  the threshold, and a golden 
light was all about them. 
 

####- 

Chapter 7. In the House of Tom Bombadil 

 
 
     The four hobbits stepped  over the  wide  stone  threshold,  and  stood 
still,  blinking. They  were in a  long  low room,  filled with the light of 
lamps swinging from the beams of the roof; and on the table of dark polished 
wood stood many candles, tall and yellow, burning brightly. 
     In a  chair, at the far side of the room  facing  the outer door, sat a  
woman. Her long yellow hair rippled down her shoulders;  her  gown was 
green, 
green as young reeds, shot  with silver like beads  of dew; and her belt was 
of gold, shaped like a chain  of flag-lilies set with the pale-blue  eyes of 
forget-me-nots.  About  her  feel  in  wide   vessels  of  green  and  brown 
earthenware, white water -lilies  were  floating,  so that she  seemed  to be 
enthroned in the midst of a pool. 
     'Enter, good guests!'  she said, and as she spoke they knew that it was 
her  clear voice they had heard singing. They came a few timid steps further  
into  the room,  and  began  to bow  low,  feeling  strangely surprised  and 
awkward,  like folk that, knocking at a  cottage door to  beg for a drink of 
water, have been answered  by a fair young elf-queen clad in living flowers.  
But  before they could  say anything, she  sprang  lightly up  and  over the 
lily-bowls,  and ran  laughing towards them; and as she ran her gown rustled 
softly like the wind in the flowering borders of a river. 
     'Come dear  folk!' she said,  taking Frodo by the hand.  'Laugh  and be  
merry! I am Goldberry, daughter of  the River.' Then lightly she passed them 
and closing the door she turned her back to  it, with her  white arms spread 
out  across  it. 'Let us  shut out the night!'  she said. 'For you are still 
afraid, per haps, of mist and tree-shadows and deep water, and untame things. 
Fear nothing! For tonight you are under the roof of Tom Bombadil.' 
     The hobbits looked at her in wonder; and she looked at each of them and  
smiled. 'Fair lady  Goldberry!' said Frodo at last,  feeling his heart moved 
with  a joy that he did not understand. He stood  as  he had at times  stood 
enchanted by fair elven-voices; but the spell that was now laid upon him was 
different:  less keen and lofty  was the  delight, but deeper and nearer  to 
mortal heart; marvellous and yet not strange. 'Fair lady Goldberry!' he said 
again. 'Now the joy that  was hidden in the songs we heard is  made plain to 

####-me. 
     O slender as a willow-wand! O clearer than clear water! 
     O reed by the living pool! Fair River-daughter! 
     O spring-time and summer-time, and spring again after! 
     O wind on the waterfall, and the leaves' laughter!'  
     Suddenly he  stopped  and  stammered,  overcome  with surprise  to hear  
himself saying such things. But Goldberry laughed. 
     'Welcome!'  she said.  'I had not heard that folk of the  Shire were so 
sweet-tongued. But I see you are an elf-friend; the light  in your eyes  and 
the ring in your voice tells it. This is  a merry meeting! Sit now, and wait 
for the Master   of the house! He will not be long. He is tending  your tired 
beasts.' 
     The hobbits sat down gladly in  low rush-seated chairs, while Goldberry 
busied herself about the table; and their eyes followed her, for the slender  
grace of her movement filled them with quiet delight. From somewhere  behind 
the house came the sound of singing. Every now and again they caught,  among 
many a derry dol and a merry dol and a ring a ding dillo  the repeated words:  
     Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow;  
     Bright blue his jacket is, and his boots are yellow.  
     'Fair  lady!'  said Frodo again after  a  while. 'Tell me, if my asking 
does not seem foolish, who is Tom Bombadil?' 
     'He is,' said Goldberry, staying her swift movements and smiling. 
     Frodo looked a t her questioningly.  'He is, as you  have seen him,' she 
said in answer to his look. 'He is the Master of wood, water, and hill.' 
     'Then all this strange land belongs to him?' 
     'No indeed!' she answered, and her smile faded. 'That would indeed be a 
burden,'  she added  in  a low voice, as if to herself. 'The trees  and  the 
grasses  and  all things growing  or  living  in  the  land belong  each  to 
themselves.  Tom  Bombadil is the Master. No  one has ever  caught  old  Tom 
walking in the forest,  wading in the  water, leaping on the hill-tops under  
light and shadow. He has no fear. Tom Bombadil is master.' 
     A door opened and in came Tom Bombadil. He had now no hat and his 
thick 
brown  hair  was  crowned  with  autumn leaves.  He laughed,  and   going  to 
Goldberry, took her hand. 
     'Here's my pretty  lady!'  he said,  bowing  to the hobbits. 'Here's my 
Goldberry clothed all  in silver -green  with flowers in  her girdle! Is  the 

####-table  laden? I see yellow cream and honeycomb, and white bread, and butter; 
milk, cheese,  and green herbs and ripe berries gathered. Is that enough for  
us? Is the supper ready?' 
     'It is,' said Goldberry; 'but the guests perhaps are not?' 
     Tom clapped his hands and cried:  'Tom, Tom! your guests are tired, and 
you had near forgotten! Come now,  my  merry  friends, and Tom  will refresh 
you! You shall clean  grimy  hands, and wash your weary faces; cast off your 
muddy cloaks and comb out your tangles!' 
     He  opened the door, and they followed  him  down  a short passage  and  
round  a  sharp  turn. They  came  to  a low  room  with a  sloping  roof (a 
penthouse, it  seemed, built on  to  the north end  of the house). Its walls 
were  of clean stone, but they were  mostly covered  with green hanging mats 
and  yellow curtains. The  floor  was flagged, and  strewn with  fresh green 
rushes. There were four deep  mattresses, each  piled  with white  blankets,  
laid on the floor along one side. Against the opposite wall was a long bench  
laden with wide earthenware basins,  and beside it stood  brown ewers filled 
with water, some cold, some steaming hot. There were soft green slippers set 
ready beside each bed. 
     Before long, washed and  refreshed,  the  hobbits  were  seated  at the 
table, two on  each side, while at e ither end sat Goldberry  and the Master. 
It  was  a long and  merry  meal. Though  the hobbits ate, as only  famished 
hobbits can eat, there was no lack. The drink in their drinking-bowls seemed 
to be clear cold water, yet it went to  their hearts like  wi ne and set free 
their  voices.  The guests  became  suddenly aware  that  they were  singing 
merrily, as if it was easier and more natural than talking. 
     At  last Tom  and Goldberry rose and  cleared  the  table  swiftly. The 
guests were  commanded to  sit  quiet,  and were set in chairs,  each with a  
footstool to  his  tired  feet. There was a  fire  in the wide hearth before 
them,  and  it  was  burning with  a  sweet smell, as  if it were  built  of 
apple-wood. When  everything  was set in  order,  a ll the lights in the room 
were put  out, except one  lamp  and  a pair of candles at each  end of  the 
chimney-shelf. Then Goldberry came and  stood before them, holding a candle; 
and she wished them each a good night and deep sleep. 
     'Have peace now,' she said, 'until the morning! Heed no nightly noises! 
For nothing passes door and window here save moonlight and starlight and the 
wind  off the hill-top. Good  night!'  She passed  out  of  the room  with a  
glimmer and  a rustle. The sound  of her footsteps was like a stream falling 

####-gently away downhill over cool stones in the quiet of night. 
     Tom sat on a while beside  them in silence, while each of them tried to 
muster the courage to ask  one of the many questions he had meant to  ask at 
supper. Sleep gathered on their eyelids. At last Frodo spoke: 
     'Did  you  hear me calling, Master, or was  it just chance that brought 
you at that moment?' 
     Tom stirred like a man shaken out of a pleasant dream. 'Eh, what?' said 
he. 'Did I  hear you calling?  Nay, I did not hear: I was busy singing. Just  
chance brought  me then,  if  chance  you call it.  It was no  plan of mine, 
though I was waiting  for you.  We heard  news of you,  and learned that you 
were wandering. We guessed you'd come ere long down to the water:  all paths 
lead  that  way, down to  Withywindle. Old grey  Willow-man, he's  a  mighty 
singer; and it's hard for little folk to escape  his cunning mazes.  But Tom 
had an errand there, that he dared not hinder.' Tom  nodded as if sleep  was 
taking him again; but he went on in a soft singing voice: 
     I had an errand there: gathering water-lilies, 
     green leaves and lilies white to please my pretty lady, 
     the last ere the year's end to keep them from the winter, 
     to flower by her pretty feet tilt the snows are melted. 
     Each year at summer's end I go to find them for her, 
     in a wide pool, deep and clear, far down Withywindle; 
     there they open first in spring and there they linger latest. 
     By that pool long ago I found the River-daughter, 
     fair young Goldberry sitting in the rushes. 
     Sweet was her singing then, and her heart was beating! 
     He opened his eyes and looked at them with a sudden glint of blue: 
     And that proved well for you -- for now I shall no longer 
     go down deep again along the forest-water, 
     not while the year is old. Nor shall I be passing 
     Old Man Willow's house this side of spring-time, 
     not till the merry spring, when the River-daughter 
     dances down the withy-path to bathe in the water. 
     He  fell  silent  again;  but  Frodo  could  not help asking  one  more 
question: the one he most desired to have answered.  'Tell  us, Master,'  he 
said, 'about the Willow-man. What is he? I have never heard of him before.' 
     'No, don't!' said Merry and  Pippin together, sitting suddenly upright. 
'Not now! Not until the morning!' 

####-     'That is right!' said the old man.  'Now  is the time for resting. Some 
things  are  ill  to hear  when  the  world's  in  shadow.  Sleep  till  the 
morning-light, rest on  the  pillow! Heed no nightly  noise!  Fear  no  grey 
willow!' And with that he took down the lamp and blew it out, and grasping a 
candle in either hand he led them out of the room. 
     Their mattresses and  pillows were soft as down, and  the blankets were 
of white  wool. They had hardly laid  themselves on the deep beds and  drawn 
the light covers over them before they were asleep. 
     In the dead night, Frodo lay  in a dream without light. Then he saw the 
young moon rising; under its thin light there loomed before him a black wall 
of  rock, pierced by a  dark arch like a great gate. It seemed to Frodo that 
he was lifted up, and passing over he saw that the rock -wall was a circle of 
hills, and that within it was a plain, and in the midst of the plain stood a  
pinnacle of stone, like a vast tower but not made by hands. On its top stood 
the figure of  a man. The moon as it rose seemed to hang for a  moment above 
his head and glistened in his white hair as the wind stirred it. Up from the 
dark plain below came the crying  of fell voices, and  the  howling of  many  
wolves. Suddenly  a shadow, like the shape of great wings, passed across the 
moon. The figure lifted his arms and a  light flashed from the staff that he 
wielded. A mighty ea gle  swept down and bore him away. The voices wailed 
and 
the wolves yammered. There was a noise like a strong wind blowing, and on it 
was borne the sound of hoofs, galloping, galloping, galloping from the East.  
'Black Riders!'  thought  Frodo as  he wakened, with the  sound of the hoofs 
still  echoing in his  mind.  He wondered if  he would ever  again  have the 
courage to leave the safety  of these stone walls. He lay  motionless, still 
listening;  but all  was now silent, and  at last he turned and fell  asleep 
again or wandered into some other unremembered dream. 
     At his side Pippin lay dreaming pleasantly;  but a change came over his 
dreams and he turned and groaned. Suddenly he woke, or thought he had 
waked, 
and yet still heard in the darkness the sound that had disturbed his  dream: 
tip-tap,  squeak:  the  noise  was  like  branches  fretting  in  the  wind, 
twig-fingers scraping  wall and window: creak, creak, creak. He wondered  if 
there were  willow-trees close  to  the  house; and  then suddenly he  had a  
dreadful feeling that he was not in an ordinary house at all, but inside the 
willow and listening  to that horrible dry  creaking  voice laughing  at him 

####-again. He sat up,  and felt the soft pillows yield to  his hands, and he lay 
down again relieved. He seemed to hear the echo of words in his  ears: 'Fear  
nothing! Have peace until the morning! Heed no nightly noises!' Then he went 
to sleep again. 
     It  was the  sound of  water  that Merry heard falling  into  his quiet 
sleep:   water  streaming  down   gently,  and  then   spreading,  spreading 
irresistibly all round  the  house  into a  dark shoreless pool. It  gurgled 
under the walls, and was  rising slowly but surely. 'I shall be drowned!' he 
thought. It will find its  way in,  and then I shall drown.' He felt that he 
was  lying  in a soft slimy bog,  and  springing up  he set  his fool on the 
corner of  a  cold hard  flagstone. Then he  remembered where he was and lay 
down again. He seemed to hear or remember hearing: 'Nothing passes doors  or 
windows save moonlight  and  starlight  and  the wind off  the  hill-top.' A 
little  breath of sweet air moved  the  curtain. He breathed deep  and  fell 
asleep again. 
     As far  as  he could  remember, Sam slept  through the  night  in  deep 
content, if logs are contented. 
     They woke  up, all four  at  once, in the morning light. Tom was moving 
about the room whistling like a starling. When he heard them stir he clapped 
his hands, and cried:  'Hey! Come merry dol! derry dol! My hearties!' He drew 
back the  yellow curtains, and  the hobbits  saw that these  had covered the 
windows, at either end of the room, one looking east  and the other  looking  
west. 
     They leapt up  refreshed. Frodo  ran  to the eastern window, and  found 
himself looking into a kitchen-garden grey with dew. He had half expected to 
see turf right up to the  walls, turf all pocked  with hoof-prints. Actually 
his view was screened  by a  tall line of beans on poles; but above and  far 
beyond them the grey top of the hill loomed up against the sunrise. It was a  
pale  morning: in the East,  behind long  clouds like lines  of  soiled wool 
stained red at the  edges, lay glimmering deeps of  yellow. The sky spoke of 
rain to come; but the light was broadening quickly,  and the red  flowers on 
the beans began to glow against the wet green leaves.  
     Pippin looked out of  the western window, down into a pool of mist. The  
Forest  was hidden  under a fog. It was  like looking down  on to  a sloping 
cloud-roof from above. There was a fold or channel where the mist was broken 
into many plumes and billows; the valley of  the Withywindle. The stream ran 
down  the hill on the left and vanished into the white shadows. Near at hand 

####-was a flower -garden and a clipped  hedge silver -netted, and beyond that grey 
shaven grass pale with dew-drops. There was no willow-tree to be seen. 
     'Good  morning,  merry  friends!' cried Tom, opening the eastern window 
wide. A cool air flowed in; it had a  rainy smell. 'Sun  won't show her face 
much today. I'm thinking. I have been walking wide, leaping on the hilltops,  
since the grey dawn began, nosing wind and weather, wet grass underfoot, wet 
sky above me.  I wakened Goldberry singing under  window;  but  nought 
wakes 
hobbit-folk in  the early morning. In the night little  folk wake up in  the 
darkness, and sleep after light has come! Ring  a  ding dillo! Wake now,  my  
merry friends! Forget the nightly noises! Ring  a ding dillo del! derry del, 
my  hearties!  If you  come  soon you'll find breakfast on the table. If you  
come late you'll get grass and rain-water!' 
     Needless  to  say - not that Tom's threat  sounded  very  serious  - the 
hobbits came soon, and left the table late and only when it was beginning lo  
look rather empty. Neither Tom nor Goldberry  were there. Tom could be heard 
about  the house, clattering in the kitchen, and up and down the stairs, and 
singing  here  and  there  outside.  The  room  looked   westward  over  the 
mist -clouded valley, and the  window was open. Water dripped  down  from the 
thatched  eaves above. Before  they had  finished  breakfast the  clouds had 
joined into  an  unbroken roof,  and  a  straight grey rain came softly  and 
steadily down. Behind its deep curtain the Forest was completely veiled. 
     As they looked out of  the window there came falling gently as if it was 
flowing down the rain out of the sky, the clear  voice  of Goldberry singing 
up above them. They could hear  few  words, but it seemed plain to them that 
the  song was a rain-song, as sweet as  showers on dry hills,  that told the 
tale  of a river from the  spring in the highlands to the Sea far below. The 
hobbits listened with delight; and Frodo was glad in his  heart, and blessed 
the kindly weather,  because it delayed them from departing. The  thought of 
going had been heavy upon him from  the moment  he awoke; but he guessed 
now 
that they would not go further that day. 
     The upper wind settled in the West and deeper and wetter clouds  rolled 
up  to spill their laden rain on the  bare heads of the Downs. Nothing could 
be seen all round the house but  falling  water.  Frodo  stood near the open 
door and watched the white chalky path turn into a little  river of milk and 

####-go bubbling away down into the  valley. Tom Bombadil came trotting round 
the 
corner of the house, waving his arms as if he was warding off the rain  - and 
indeed when he sprang over the threshold he seemed quite dry, except for his 
boots. These he took off and put in the chimney-corner. Then  he  sat in the 
largest chair and called the hobbits to gather round him. 
     'This is Goldberry's  washing  day,' he said, 'and her autumn-cleaning. 
Too wet for hobbit-folk - let them rest while they are able! It's a good day 
for  long  tales, for  questions and for  answers,  so Tom  will  start  the 
talking.' 
     He  then  told  them many remarkable  stories,  sometimes  half  as  if 
speaking to  himself, sometimes looking at  them suddenly with a bright blue 
eye  under  his deep brows. Often his voice would turn to song, and he would 
get  out of  his chair  and  dance about.  He  told them tales of  bees  and 
flowers,  the ways of trees, and the strange creatures  of the Forest, about 
the  evil things  and good  things,  things  friendly and things unfriendly, 
cruel things and kind things, and secrets hidden under brambles. 
     As they  listened,  they began to  understand  the lives of the Forest, 
apart from themselves, indeed to  feel themselves as the strangers where all 
other things were at home. Moving constantly in and out  of his talk was Old 
Man  Willow, and Frodo learned now enough to content him, indeed  more  
than 
enough, for it was not comfortable lore. Tom's words laid bare the hearts of 
trees and their thoughts, which were often dark and strange, and filled with 
a  hatred of things that go free upon the  earth, gnawing, biting, breaking, 
hacking, burning: destroyers and usurpers. It was not called  the Old Forest  
without reason,  for  it  was indeed ancient,  a survivor  of vast forgotten 
woods;  and  in it there  lived  yet, ageing no quicker than the hills,  the 
fathers of the fathers of trees, remembering times when they were lords. The  
countless  years  had  filled  them with pride  and rooted wisdom,  and with 
malice.  But none were more dangerous  than the Great Willow:  his heart was 
rotten, but his strength was  green; and  he was cunning,  and  a master  of 
winds, and his song and thought ran through the woods  on both sides  of the  
river.  His grey  thirsty spirit drew power out of the earth and spread like 
fine root-threads in the ground, and invisible twig-fingers in the air, till 
it had under its dominion nearly all the trees of the Forest  from the Hedge 
to the Downs.  

####-     Suddenly  Tom's talk  left  the woods and  went leaping  up  the  young 
stream, over  bubbling  waterfalls,  over  pebbles and worn rocks, and among 
small flowers in close  grass and wet crannies, wandering at  last up  on to 
the Downs. They heard of the Great Barrows, and the  green  mounds,  and the 
stone-rings  upon the  hills and in the hollows among the hills.  Sheep were 
bleating in flocks. Green  walls and white walls rose. There were fortresses 
on the heights. Kings of little kingdoms fought together, and the young  Sun 
shone like fire  on the red metal of their  new and greedy swords. There was 
victory and defeat; and towers fell, fortresses were burned, and flames went  
up into the sky. Gold was piled on the  biers of dead kings and queens;  and 
mounds covered them, and the stone  doors were shut; and the grass grew over  
all. Sheep  walked  for a while biting the  grass,  but soon the hills  were 
empty again.  A  shadow came out of dark places far away, and the bones were 
stirred in  the  mounds.  Barrow-wights walked in  the hollow places  with a  
clink of  rings on  cold fingers, and gold chains in the wind.'  Stone rings 
grinned out of the ground like broken teeth in the moonlight. 
     The  hobbits   shuddered.   Even  in  the   Shire  the  rumour  of  the 
Barrow-wights of  the Barrow-downs beyond the Forest had  been heard. But it 
was not a tale that  any  hobbit  liked to listen  to, even by a comfortable 
fireside far away. These  four now  suddenly remembered what the joy of this 
house had  driven from their minds: the  house of Tom Bombadil nestled under 
the very shoulder of those dreaded hills. They   lost the thread of  his tale 
and shifted uneasily, looking aside at one another. 
     When they caught his  words again  they found that he had  now wandered 
into  strange regions beyond their  memory and  beyond their waking thought, 
into  limes when the world was wider, and  the  seas flowed straight to  the 
western  Shore;  and  still on  and back Tom went  singing out  into ancient 
starlight, when only the Elf-sires were awake. Then suddenly he slopped, and 
they saw that he nodded  as if he was falling asleep.  The hobbits sat still 
before  him, enchanted; and it  seemed as if, under the  spell of his words, 
the wind  had gone, and the clouds had  dried  up,  and  the  day  had  been 
withdrawn, and darkness  had  come from  East and West, and all  the sky was 
filled with the light of white stars.  
     Whether the morning and evening of  one  day or of many days had passed 
Frodo could not tell.  He did not feel either hungry  or tired,  only filled 
with  wonder.  The  stars shone through the window and the  silence  of  the  
heavens seemed  to be round  him. He spoke at  last out  of his wonder and a  

####-sudden fear of that silence: 
     'Who are you, Master?' he asked. 
     'Eh, what?' said  Tom sitting up,  and  his eyes glinting in the gloom. 
'Don't you know my name yet? That's the only  answer. Tell me,  who are you, 
alone, yourself and nameless? But you are young and I am old. Eldest, that's 
what I am. Mark my words, my friends: Tom was here before  the river and the 
trees;  Tom remembers the first raindrop and the first  acorn. He made paths 
before  the Big  People,  and saw  the  little People arriving.  He was here 
before the Kings and the graves and the Barrow-wights. When the Elves passed 
westward, Tom was here already, before the  seas were bent. He knew the dark 
under  the stars when it  was  fearless  -  before  the Dark  Lord came  from 
Outside.' 
     A shadow seemed to pass by the  window, and the hobbits glanced hastily 
through  the  panes.  When they  turned again, Goldberry stood  in the  door  
behind,  framed in  light. She held a  candle, shielding its flame  from the 
draught  with her hand;  and the  light  flowed through  it,  like  sunlight 
through a white shell. 
     'The  rain has ended,' she said; 'and new waters are running  downhill, 
under the stars. Let us now laugh and be glad!' 
     'And let us have  food and drink!' cried Tom. 'Long tales are  thirsty. 
And long listening's hungry work, morning, noon,  and evening!' With that he 
jumped  out  of  his  chair,  and  with  a  bound took  a  candle  from  the 
chimney-shelf and lit it  in the flame that Goldberry held;  then he  danced 
about the table. Suddenly he hopped through the door and disappeared. 
     Quickly  he returned, bearing a  large and laden  tray.  Then  Tom  and 
Goldberry  set the table; and  the  hobbits sat  half in  wonder and half in 
laughter: so  fair  was  the grace  of Goldberry  and so  merry and odd  the 
caperings of Tom. Yet in some fashion they  seemed to  weave a single dance, 
neither hindering the other, in  and out of  the  room, and  round about the 
table; and with great speed food and vessels and  lights were set  in order. 
The boards blazed with candles, white and yellow.  Tom bowed to his  guests.  
'Supper is ready,'  said Goldberry; and now the  hobbits  saw that  she  was 
clothed all in silver with  a white girdle, and her  shoes were like fishes' 
mail. But Tom was all in clean blue, blue as rain -washed forget-me-nots, and 
he had green stockings.  
     It was a supper even better than before. The hobbits under the spell of 

####-Tom's words may have  missed one meal or many,  but when the food was 
before 
them it seemed at  least a week  since they had eaten. They did not  sing or  
even speak much for a while, and paid close attention to business. But after  
a time their hearts and spirit rose high again, and their voices rang out in 
mirth and laughter. 
     After they had eaten,  Goldberry  sang many songs for them, songs  that 
began  merrily  in the  hills and fell softly down into  silence; and in the 
silences they saw in their minds pools and  waters wider  than any  they had 
known, and looking into them they  saw the sky below them and the stars like 
jewels in the  depths. Then  once more she wished them  each  good night and 
left them by the fireside. But Tom now seemed wide awake and plied them 
with 
questions.  
     He appeared already to know much about them and all their families, and  
indeed  to know much of  all the history  and doings of  the Shire down from  
days hardly remembered among the hobbits  themselves. It  no longer surprised 
them; but he  made no secret that he owed  his  recent knowledge  largely to 
Farmer Maggot, whom he seemed to regard as a person of more  importance 
than 
they had imagined.  'There's earth under  his  old  feet, and  clay  on  his 
fingers; wisdom in his bones, and both  his eyes are open,' said Tom. It was 
also clear that Tom  had dealings with the Elves, and it seemed that in some  
fashion, news had reached him from Gildor concerning the flight of Frodo. 
     Indeed  so much did Tom know, and so cunning  was his questioning, that 
Frodo found himself telling him more about Bilbo and his own hopes and fears 
than he  had told before even to  Gandalf. Tom wagged  his head up and down, 
and there was a glint in his eyes when he heard of the Riders. 
     'Show me  the  precious  Ring!'  he said suddenly  in the  midst of the 
story: and  Frodo, to his  own astonishment,  drew  out the chain  from  his 
pocket, and unfastening the Ring handed it at once to Tom. 
     It  seemed  to  grow  larger  as  it  lay  for  a  moment  on  his  big 
brown-skinned hand. Then suddenly he put it  to his eye  and laughed.  For a  
second the  hobbits had a vision, both comical and  alarming, of his  bright 
blue  eye gleaming through a circle of gold. Then Tom put the Ring round the 
end of his little finger and held it up to the candlelight. For a moment the 
hobbits noticed nothing strange about this.  Then they gasped. There was  no  

####-sign of Tom disappearing!  
     Tom  laughed again,  and then he  spun  the Ring in  the  air  - and it 
vanished with a flash. Frodo  gave a cry - and Tom leaned forward and handed 
it back to him with a smile. 
     Frodo looked at it closely, and rather  suspiciously (like one  who has 
lent a trinket to a juggler). It was the same Ring, or looked  the same  and 
weighed  the same:  for that  Ring had  always  seemed  to  Frodo  to  weigh 
strangely heavy in the hand. But something prompted him to make sure. He 
was 
perhaps a trifle annoyed with Tom for seeming to make so  light of what even 
Gandalf thought so perilously important. He waited  for an opportunity, when 
the talk was going again, and Tom  was telling an absurd story about badgers 
and their queer ways  - then he slipped the Ring on. 
     Merry turned towards him to say something and gave a start, and checked 
an exclamation.  Frodo was delighted (in a  way):  it was  his own ring  all 
right, for Merry was staring blankly  at his  chair, and obviously could not 
see him. He  got up and  crept  quietly away from  the  fireside towards the 
outer door. 
     'Hey there!' cried Tom, glancing towards him with a most seeing look in 
his shining eyes. 'Hey!  Come  Frodo, there!  Where be you  a -going? Old Tom 
Bombadil's not as blind  as that yet. Take off your golden ring! Your hand's 
more fair without it. Come back! Leave your game and  sit down beside me! 
We 
must  talk a while more, and  think about the  morning.  Tom  must teach the  
right road, and keep your feet from wandering.' 
     Frodo laughed (trying to feel pleased), and taking off the Ring he came 
and  sat down  again. Tom now told them that he reckoned the Sun would shine 
tomorrow, and it would be a glad morning, and setting  out would be hopeful. 
But they  would do well to start early; for weather in  that  country was  a  
thing  that  even Tom could  not be sure  of  for long, and it would  change 
sometimes quicker than he could change his jacket.  'I am no weather -master,' 
he said; 'nor is aught that goes on two legs.' 
     By his  advice  they  decided to make nearly  due North from his house, 
over the western and lower slopes of the Downs: they might hope  in that way 
to strike  the East Road in a day's journey, and avoid the  Barrows. He told 
them not to be afraid  - but to mind their own business.  
     'Keep to  the green grass. Don't you go  a -meddling  with old stone  or  

####-cold Wights or prying in their houses, unless you be strong folk with hearts 
that never falter!' He said this more than once; and he advised them to pass 
barrows  by on the west-side, if  they  chanced to stray near  one.  Then he 
taught them a rhyme to sing, if they should by ill -luck fall into any danger  
or difficulty the next day. 
     Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo! 
     By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow,  
     By fire, sun and moon, harken now and hear us! 
     Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us! 
     When they had sung this  altogether after him, he  clapped them each on 
the shoulder with  a  laugh,  and taking  candles  led them  back  to  their 
bedroom. 

####- 
 

Chapter 8. Fog on the Barrow-Downs 

 
 
     That night  they heard no noises.  But either in his  dreams or  out of 
them,  he could not tell which,  Frodo heard a sweet singing running  in his 
mind;  a  song  that  seemed  to  come  like  a  pale  light behind  a  grey 
rain-curtain, and growing stronger to turn the veil all to glass and silver, 
until at last it was rolled back, and a  far green country opened before him 
under a swift sunrise. 
     The vision  melted  into  waking; and  there  was  Tom whistling like a  
tree-full of birds;  and the  sun was already  slanting  down the  hill  and 
through the open window. Outside everything was green and pale gold. 
     After breakfast, which they  again  ate  alone,  they made ready to say 
farewell, as nearly heavy of heart as was possible on such  a morning: cool, 
bright, and clean under a washed autumn sky of thin blue. The air came fresh 
from the  North-west. Their quiet  ponies were almost  frisky,  sniffing and 
moving  restlessly. Tom came out  of the house and  waved his hat and danced 
upon the doorstep, bidding the hobbits to get up and be off and go with good  
speed. 
     They rode off along a path  that  wound away from behind the house, and  
went slanting  up towards the north  end  of  the hill-brow  under which  it 
sheltered. They had just dismounted to lead their  ponies up the last  steep 
slope, when suddenly Frodo stopped. 
     'Goldberry!' he cried. 'My fair lady, clad all in silver green! We have 
never said  farewell  to her, nor seen  her  since the evening!' He  was  so 
distressed tha t he turned  back;  but at  that  moment  a  clear  call  came 
rippling down. There on the  hill-brow she stood beckoning to them: her hair 
was flying loose,  and as it caught the sun it shone and  shimmered. A light 
like the glint  of  water on dewy grass  flashed from under her  feet as she 
danced. 
     They hastened up the  last slope, and stood breathless beside her. They 
bowed, but with a wave of her arm she bade them look round; and they  looked 
out from the hill-top  over lands under the morning. It was now as clear and  
far-seen as it  had been veiled and misty  when they stood upon the knoll in 
the  Forest,  which could now be seen rising pale and green out of  the dark 
trees in the West. In that direction the land rose in  wooded ridges, green, 

####-yellow,  russet under  the sun, beyond which lay hidden the  valley  of  the 
Brandywine. To the South, over  the  line of  the Withywindle,  there was  a  
distant glint like pale glass where  the Brandywine River  made a great loop  
in the  lowlands  and  flowed   away  out of  the  knowledge of the  hobbits.  
Northward  beyond  the dwindling  downs  the land  ran  away  in  flats  and 
swellings of grey  and green and pale earth -colours, until it  faded  into a  
featureless and  shadowy  distance.  Eastward  the Barrow-downs  rose, ridge 
behind ridge into the morning, and vanished out of eyesight into a guess: it 
was no more  than a guess of  blue and a remote  white glimmer blending with 
the hem of the sky,  but it spoke to them, out of  memory  and old tales, of 
the high and distant mountains. 
     They  took a deep draught  of  the air, and felt that a skip and  a few 
stout strides would  bear  them wherever they wished. It seemed fainthearted  
to go jogging aside over the crumpled skirts of the downs  towards the Road, 
when they  should be leaping,  as lusty as Tom, over the stepping  stones of 
the hills straight towards the Mountains.  
     Goldberry spoke  to them  and recalled their eyes and thoughts.  'Speed 
now, fair guests!'  she said. 'And hold to your purpose! North with the wind 
in  the left eye and a blessing on your footsteps! Make haste while the  Sun 
shines!'  And  to Frodo  she  said:  'Farewell,  Elf-friend, it was a  merry 
meeting!' 
     But Frodo found no words to answer. He bowed low, and mounted his pony, 
and followed by his friends jogged slowly down the gentle slope  behind  the 
hill. Tom Bombadil's house and the valley, and the Forest were lost to view.  
The  air  grew warmer between the green walls of hillside  and hillside, and 
the scent of turf rose strong and sweet as they breathed. Turning back, when 
they reached  the bottom  of the green hollow, they saw Goldberry, now small 
and slender like  a sunlit flower  against the  sky: she  was standing still 
watching them, and her hands were stretched out towards them. As they looked 
she gave a  clear  call,  and lifting  up  her hand she turned  and vanished 
behind the hill. 
     Their way wound along the floor of the hollow, and round the green feet 
of a steep hill into  another deeper and  broader  valley, and then over the 
shoulder of further hills, and down their long  limbs, and  up  their smooth 
sides again, up on to  new hill -tops and down into new valleys. There was no 
tree  nor any visible water: it  was a country  of  grass  and short springy 
turf, silent  except for the whisper of the air over the edges  of the land, 

####-and high lonely cries of  strange birds.  As they journeyed the sun mounted,  
and grew hot. Each time they climbed a ridge the breeze seemed to have grown 
less. When they caught a  glimpse of the country westward the distant  Forest 
seemed to be  smoking, as if the fallen rain was steaming up again from leaf 
and root and mould.  A shadow now lay round the edge of  sight, a dark  haze 
above which the upper sky was like a blue cap, hot and heavy. 
     About mid-day  they  came to  a hill whose top  was wide and flattened, 
like a shallow  saucer with a  green mounded rim. Inside  there was  no  air 
stirring,  and the sky seemed near their heads. They rode  across and looked  
northwards. Then  their hearts rose,  for it seemed plain that they had come 
further already than they had expected. Certainly the distances  had now all 
become hazy and deceptive, but there could  be no doubt that  the Downs were 
coming to  an end. A  long valley  la y below  them winding  away northwards,  
until it  came  to  an opening  between two  steep shoulders. Beyond,  there 
seemed  to be  no more hills. Due north  they faintly glimpsed  a  long dark 
line. That is a line  of trees,' said Merry, 'and that must mark  the  Road. 
All  along it for many leagues  east of the Bridge there are  trees growing. 
Some say they were planted in the old days.' 
     'Splendid!'  said Frodo. 'If we make as good going this afternoon as we 
have done this morning, we shall have left  the Downs before the Sun sets and 
be jogging on in search of a camping place.'  But even as he spoke he turned 
his glance eastwards, and he saw that on that side the hills were higher and 
looked down  upon them; and all those hills were crowned with green  mounds,  
and on some were standing  stones, pointing upwards like jagged teeth out of 
green gums.  
     That view was somehow disquieting; so they  turned  from  the sight and  
went down into  the hollow circle. In  the  midst of it there stood a single 
stone, standing  tall  under  the  sun above,  and at this hour  casting  no 
shadow. It was shapeless and yet significant: like a landmark, or a guarding 
finger, or more like  a  warning. But they were now hungry, and the sun  was 
still at the fearless noon; so they set their backs against the east side of 
the stone. It was cool,  as if the sun had  had no power to warm  it; but at 
that time this seemed pleasant. There they took food and drink,  and made as 
good a noon-meal under the open sky as anyone could wish; for  the food came 
from 'down under Hill'. Tom had provided them with plenty for the comfort of 
the day. Their ponies unburdened strayed upon the grass.  
     Riding over  the hills,  and eating  their fill, the warm  sun and  the 

####-scent  of  turf,  lying a little  too long, stretching  out  their legs  and 
looking at the sky above their noses: these things are,  perhaps,  enough to 
explain  what  happened.  However,  that  may  be:  they  woke  suddenly and 
uncomfortably from a sleep they had never meant  to take. The standing stone 
was cold, and it cast a long pale shadow that stretched eastward  over them. 
The sun, a pale and watery yellow, was gleaming  through the mist just above 
the  west wall  of the  hollow  in which  they lay; north, south, and  east, 
beyond the wall the fog was thick, cold and white. The air was silent, heavy 
and  chill. Their ponies  were standing  crowded together  with their  heads 
down. 
     The hobbits sprang to their feet in alarm,  and ran to the western rim. 
They found that they were upon an island in the fog. Even as they looked out 
in  dismay  towards the setting sun, it sank before their  eyes into a white 
sea, and a cold grey shadow sprang up in the East behind. The fog  rolled up 
to the walls and rose above them, and as it mounted it bent over their heads 
until  it  became a roof: they were shut  in a  hall of  mist  whose central 
pillar was the standing stone. 
     They felt as if a trap was closing about them; but  they did  not quite 
lose heart. They still remembered  the hopeful view they had had of the line  
of the Road ahead,  and they still knew in  which direction it  lay. In  any 
case, they now had so great a dislike for that hollow place  about the stone 
that no  thought  of remaining there  was in their minds.  They packed up as 
quickly as their chilled fingers would work. 
     Soon  they were leading their ponies  in single file  over the  rim and 
down the long northward slope of  the hill,  down into a foggy sea. As  they 
went down the mist  became colder  and damper, and their hair hung lank  and 
dripping  on  their foreheads. When they reached the bottom it  was so  cold  
that  they halted  and got out cloaks and  hoods, which soon became  bedewed 
with  grey drops. Then, mounting  their ponies,  they went  sl owly on again,  
feeling their way by the rise and fall of the ground. They were steering, as 
well as they could guess, for the gate-like opening at the far northward end 
of  the  long valley which  they  had  seen in the  morning.  Once they were 
through the  gap, they had only lo keep on in  anything like a straight line 
and they were bound in the end to strike the Road. Their thoughts did not go 
beyond that, except for a vague hope  that  perhaps  away  beyond the  Downs 
there might be no fog. 
     Their going  was  very slow.  To  prevent their  getting separated  and 

####-wandering in different directions they went in file, with Frodo leading. Sam 
was behind him, and after him came Pippin, and then Merry. The valley 
seemed 
to stretch on endlessly. Suddenly Frodo saw a hopeful sign.  On  either side 
ahead a darkness began  to loom  through  the mist; and he guessed that they 
were  at  last  approaching  the gap in  the hills,  the north-gate  of  the 
Barrow-downs. If they could pass that, they would be free. 
     'Come on! Follow me!' he called back over  his shoulder, and he hurried 
forward.  But  his  hope soon  changed  to bewilderment and alarm. The  dark 
patches  grew darker, but they shrank; and suddenly he saw, towering ominous 
before him and leaning  slightly towards one another like the pillars  of  a  
headless door, two huge  standing  stones. He could not remember having seen 
any sign  of  these in the  valley, when  he looked out from the hill in the 
morning. He had passed  between them almost before he was aware: and even 
as 
he did so  darkness seemed to  fall round him. His pony  reared and snorted,  
and he  fell off. When he looked back he found that he was alone: the others 
had not followed him. 'Sam!' he  called.  'Pippin!  Merry! Come  along!  Why 
don't you keep up?' 
     There was no answer. Fear  took him,  and he ran back  past the  stones 
shouting  wildly: 'Sam!  Sam! Merry! Pippin!' The pony bolted into  the mist  
and vanished. From some way off, or so it seemed, he thought he heard a cry: 
'Hoy!  Frodo! Hoy!' It was away eastward, on his left as he stood  under the 
great  stones, staring and straining into the gloom. He plunged off  in  the 
direction of the call, and found himself going steeply uphill. 
     As he struggled  on he called again,  and kept on calling more and more 
frantically; but he heard no answer for some time, and then it  seemed faint 
and far ahead  and high above him. 'Frodo! Hoy!' came the thin voices out of 
the  mist:  and then  a cry that sounded  like  help, help!  often repeated, 
ending  with a  last help!  that trailed off into a  long wail  suddenly cut 
short.  He stumbled forward  with all the speed he could towards  the cries;  
but the light was now gone, and clinging night had closed about him, so that 
it was impossible to be sure of any direction. He seemed all the time  to be 
climbing up and up. 
     Only the change in the level of the ground at his feet told him when he  
at last came to the top of a ridge or hill. He was  weary, sweating  and yet 
chilled. It was wholly dark. 

####-     'Where are you?' he cried out miserably. 
     There was no reply. He stood listening. He was suddenly aware  that  it 
was getting very cold, and that up here a wind was beginning to blow, an icy  
wind. A change was coming in the weather. The mist  was flowing  past him 
now 
in shreds and  tatters. His breath was smoking, and  the darkness  was  less 
near and  thick. He looked up  and saw with  surprise  that faint stars were 
appearing  overhead amid the  strands of hurrying cloud  and  fog.  The wind 
began to hiss over the grass.  
     He imagined suddenly that he  caught a muffled cry, and he made towards 
it; and even as he went forward the mist was rolled up and thrust aside, and 
the  starry sky  was  unveiled.  A glance showed him  that he was now  facing 
southwards and was on a round hill-top, which he must  have climbed from the 
north.  Out  of the east  the  biting wind was blowing. To his  right  there 
loomed against the westward stars a dark  black  shape. A great barrow stood 
there. 
     'Where are you?' he cried again, both angry and afraid. 
     'Here!'  said a voice, deep and cold,  that seemed  to come out of  the 
ground. 'I am waiting for you!' 
     'No!' said Frodo; but  he did not run away. His knees gave, and he fell 
on the ground. Nothing happened, and there was no sound. Trembling he 
looked 
up,  in time to see a tall dark  figure like a shadow against the stars.  It 
leaned over him. He thought there were two eyes, very cold though lit with a 
pale light  that seemed to come from  some  remote  distance.  Then  a  grip 
stronger and colder than iron seized him. The icy touch froze his bones, and 
he remembered no more. 
     When  he came to  himself again, for a  moment he could  recall nothing 
except a sense  of  dread. Then  suddenly  he  knew  that he was imprisoned, 
caught hopelessly; he was in a barrow. A  Barrow-wight had taken him, and he 
was probably already under the  dreadful  spells of  the Barrow-wights about 
which whispered tales spoke. He dared not move, but lay as he found himself: 
flat on his back upon a cold stone with his hands on his breast. 
     But though his fear was so great that it seemed to be part  of the very 
darkness that was round him, he found himself as he lay thinking about Bilbo 
Baggins and his stories, of their jogging along together in the lanes of the 
Shire and  talking about roads and adventures.  There  is  a seed of courage 

####-hidden (often deeply, it is true) in the heart of the fattest and most timid 
hobbit, wailing for some final  and desperate danger to  make it grow. Frodo 
was neither  very  fat nor very  timid; indeed,  though he did not  know it, 
Bilbo (and Gandalf) had thought him the best hobbit in the Shire. He thought 
he had come to the end of his adventure, and a terrible end, but the thought 
hardened him.  He found himself stiffening,  as if for a final spring; he no 
longer felt limp like a helpless prey. 
     As he lay there, thinking and getting a hold of himself, he noticed all 
at once  that the darkness was slowly giving way:  a pale greenish light was 
growing round him. It did not  at first show him what kind of a place he was 
in, for the light  seemed to be  coming out of himself,  and from  the floor  
beside  him, and had not yet reached the roof or wall. He  turned, and there 
in  the  cold glow he saw lying beside him Sam, Pippin, and Merry. They were 
on their backs, and their faces looked deathly pale;  and they were  clad in 
white. About them lay many treasures, of  gold maybe,  though in that  light  
they  looked cold and unlovely.  On their  heads  were circlets, gold  chains 
were about their waists, and on their fingers were many rings. Swords lay by  
their sides, and shields were  at their feet. But across their  three  necks 
lay one long naked sword. 
     Suddenly a  song began: a cold  murmur, rising and  falling.  The voice 
seemed far away and immeasurably dreary, sometimes high in the air and thin, 
sometimes like a low moan from the ground. Out of the formless stream of sad 
but horrible sounds, strings  of words would now and again shape  themselves:  
grim,  hard,  cold  words,  heartless and miserable. The night  was  railing 
against the morning of  which it was bereaved,  and the cold was cursing the 
warmth for which it hungered. Frodo was chilled to the marrow. After a while 
the song became clearer, and  with  dread in  his heart he perceived that it 
had changed into an incantation: 
     Cold be hand and heart and bone, 
     and cold be sleep under stone: 
     never mare to wake on stony bed, 
     never, till the Sun fails and the Moon is dead. 
     In the black wind the stars shall die, 
     and still on gold here let them lie, 
     till the dark lord lifts his hand 
     over dead sea and withered land. 
     He heard behind his head a creaking and scraping sound. Raising himself 

####-on one arm he looked, and saw now in the pale light that they were in a kind 
of  passage which  behind them turned a corner. Round the corner a long  arm 
was groping, walking on its fingers towards Sam, who was lying nearest,  and 
towards the hilt of the sword that lay upon him. 
     At first Frodo felt as if he  had indeed been turned into stone by  the 
incantation.  Then a wild thought  of escape came to him. He wondered if  he 
put on the Ring, whether the Barrow-wight  would miss him, and he might find 
some way ou t.  He thought  of himself running free  over the grass, grieving 
for Merry, and Sam,  and Pippin,  but free and alive  himself. Gandalf would  
admit that there had been nothing else he could do. 
     But the courage that had been  awakened in  him was now   too strong: he 
could not  leave his friends so easily.  He wavered, groping  in his pocket, 
and then fought with himself again; and as he did so  the arm  crept nearer. 
Suddenly  resolve  hardened  in him,  and  he seized a  short sword that lay 
beside him, and kneeling he stooped  low over the bodies of  his companions.  
With what strength he had he hewed  at the crawling  arm near the wrist, and 
the hand broke off; but at the  same moment the sword  splintered up to  the  
hilt.  There  was a shriek and the light vanished. In  the  dark there was a  
snarling noise. 
     Frodo fell  forward over Merry, and Merry's face felt cold. All at once 
back  into  his mind, from which it had disappeared with the first coming of 
the  fog,  came the  memory  of the house down  under the Hill,  and  of Tom 
singing. He remembered  the rhyme  that  Tom  had taught  them. In  a  small 
desperate voice  he began: Ho!  Tom  Bombadil!  and with that name his voice 
seemed to grow  strong: it had a full and lively sound, and the dark chamber  
echoed as if to drum and trumpet. 
     Ho! Tom Bombadil, Tom Bombadillo! 
     By water, wood and hill, by the reed and willow,  
     By fire, sun and moon, harken now and hear us! 
     Come, Tom Bombadil, for our need is near us! 
     There  was a sudden deep  silence, in which Frodo could hear his  heart 
beating. After a long slow moment he heard plain, but far away, as if it was 
coming down through the  ground or through thick walls,  an  answering voice 
singing: 
     Old Tom Bombadil is a merry fellow,  
     Bright blue his jacket is, and his boots are yellow.  
     None has ever caught him yet, for Tom, he is the master: 

####-     His songs are stronger songs, and his feet are faster. 
     There was a loud rumbling sound, as of stones rolling and  falling, and 
suddenly  light  streamed  in,  real  light, the plain light of  day.  A low 
door -like opening appeared  at the end of the  chamber beyond  Frodo's feet;  
and there was Tom's head (hat, feather, and all) framed against the light of 
the sun  rising red  behind him. The light fell upon the floor, and upon the 
faces of the three  hobbits lying beside Frodo. They  did not stir,  but the 
sickly hue had left them. They  looked now as  if they were only very deeply  
asleep. 
     Tom stooped, removed his hat, and came into the dark chamber, singing:  
     Get out, you old Wight! Vanish in the sunlight! 
     Shrivel like the cold mist, like the winds go wailing, 
     Out into the barren lands far beyond the mountains! 
     Come never here again! Leave your barrow empty! 
     Lost and forgotten be, darker than the darkness, 
     Where gates stand for ever shut, till the world is mended. 
     At these words there was a cry and part of the inner end of the chamber  
fell in  with a crash.  Then  there was  a long trailing shriek, fading away 
into an unguessable distance; and after that silence. 
     'Come, friend Frodo!' said Tom. 'Let us get out on to clean  grass! You  
must help me bear them.' 
     Together  they  carried  out Merry, Pippin, and Sam.  As Frodo left the 
barrow  for the last  time he thought he saw a severed hand wriggling still, 
like  a wounded  spider, in a heap of fallen  earth. Tom went back in again, 
and there was a sound of much thumping and stamping. When he came out he 
was 
bearing in  his  arms a  great  load of  treasure:  things  of  gold, silver, 
copper, and bronze; many beads and chains and jewelled ornaments. He 
climbed 
the green barrow and laid them all on top in the sunshine. 
     There he stood, with his hat in his hand  and the wind in his hair, and 
looked down upon the  three hobbits, that had been  laid on their backs upon 
the grass at the west side of the mound. Raising his right hand he said in a  
clear and commanding voice: 
     Wake now my merry tads! Wake and hear me calling! 
     Warm now be heart and limb! The cold stone is fallen; 
     Dark door is standing wide; dead hand is broken. 

####-     Night under Night is flown, and the Gate is open! 
     To Frodo's great joy the hobbits  stirred, stretched their arms, rubbed 
their eyes, and  then suddenly  sprang up. They  looked  about in amazement, 
first  at Frodo, and then at Tom standing  large  as life on  the barrow-top 
above  them; and then  at  themselves in their thin  white rags, crowned and 
belted with pale gold, and jingling with trinkets.  
     'What in  the name of  wonder?' began Merry, feeling the golden circlet 
that had slipped over  one  eye. Then he stopped, and a shadow came over his 
face, and he closed his eyes. 'Of course, I remember!' he  said. 'The men of 
Carn  Dym came on  us at  night,  and  we were worsted. Ah! the spear  in my 
heart!'  He  clutched at his  breast. 'No! No!'  he said,  opening his eyes.  
'What am I saying? I have been dreaming. Where did you get to, Frodo?' 
     'I thought that I  was lost,' said Frodo; 'but I don't want to speak of 
it. Let us think of what we are to do now! Let us go on!' 
     'Dressed up like this, sir?' said Sam. 'Where are my clothes?' He flung 
his circlet, belt, and  rings on the grass, and looked round helplessly,  as 
if  he  expected  to  find  his  cloak,  jacket,  and  breeches,  and  other  
hobbit-garments lying somewhere to hand. 
     'You won't find  your clothes again,' said  Tom, bounding down from the 
mound, and laughing as he danced round them in the  sunlight. One would have 
thought  that  nothing dangerous  or dreadful  had happened;  and indeed the 
horror faded  out of their  hearts as they looked at him, and saw the  merry 
glint in his eyes. 
     'What do you mean?' asked Pippin, looking at him, half puzzled and half 
amused. 'Why not?' 
     But Tom shook his  head, saying: 'You've found yourselves again, out of 
the deep water. Clothes are but little loss, if you escape from drowning. Be 
glad,  my merry friends, and let the warm sunlight heal now  heart and limb!  
Cast off these cold rags! Run naked on the grass, while Tom goes a -hunting!' 
     He sprang away down hill, whistling and calling. Looking down after him 
Frodo saw him  running away southwards along the green  hollow between 
their 
hill and the next, still whistling and crying: 
     Hey! now! Come hoy now! Whither do you wander? 
     Up, down, near or far, here, there or yonder? 
     Sharp-ears, Wise-nose, Swish-tail and Bumpkin, 
     White-socks my little lad, and old Fatty Lumpkin! 

####-     So he sang, running fast, tossi ng up his hat  and catching it, until he 
was hidden  by a fold of the ground: but for some time his hey now! hoy now! 
came floating back down the wind, which had shifted round towards the south. 
     The air was growing very warm again. The hobbits ran  about for a while 
on the grass,  as he  told them. Then they lay basking  in the  sun with the 
delight of  those  that have been wafted  suddenly  from bitter winter to  a  
friendly clime, or of people that, after  being long ill and bedridden, wake 
one day to find that they are unexpectedly well and the day is again full of 
promise. 
     By the time that Tom returned they were feeling strong (and hungry). He 
reappeared, hat first, over  the brow of the hill, and behind him came in an 
obedient line six  ponies: their own five and one more. The last was plainly 
old Fatty Lumpkin: he was larger, stronger,  fatter  (and older)  than their 
own ponies. Merry, to whom the others belonged, had not, in fact, given them 
any such names, but they answered  to the  new names that Tom had given 
them 
for the rest of  their  lives. Tom called  them one by  one and they climbed 
over the brow and stood in a line. Then Tom bowed to the hobbits.  
     'Here are your ponies, now!' he  said.  'They've  more  sense (in  some 
ways) than you  wandering hobbits have  - more sense in their noses. For they 
sniff  danger ahead which  you walk  right  into; and if  they  run to  save 
themselves, then they run  the  right  way.  You must forgive  them all; for  
though their hearts are faithful,  to  face fear of Barrow-wights is not what 
they were made for. See, here they come again, bringing all their burdens!' 
     Merry, Sam,  and Pippin now clothed themselves  in spare  garments from 
their  packs; and they soon felt too hot, for  they  were  obliged to put on 
some  of  the thicker  and warmer things  that they had  brought against the 
oncoming of winter. 
     'Where  does  that other old  animal, that  Fatty  Lumpkin, come from?' 
asked Frodo. 
     'He's mine,' said  Tom. 'My four-legged  friend;  though I seldom  ride 
him,  and he wanders  often far, free upon the  hillsides. When  your ponies 
stayed with  me, they  got  to know  my Lumpkin;  and they  smelt him in the 
night,  and quickly  ran to meet him. I thought he'd  look for them and with 
his words of wisdom take all their fear away. But now, my jolly Lumpkin, old 
Tom's going to ride. Hey! he's coming with you, just to set you on the road; 
so  he needs a pony. For you  cannot easily talk to hobbits that are riding, 

####-when you're on your own legs trying to trot beside them.' 
     The hobbits were delighted  to  hear this, and thanked  Tom many times;  
but he laughed, and said that they were so good at losing themselves that he  
would  not  feel happy till he had seen them  safe over  the borders  of  his 
land. 'I've got  things to  do,' he  said:  'my  making and  my  singing, my 
talking and my walking, and my watching of the country.  Tom can't be always 
near  to  open doors  and willow-cracks.  Tom  has  his house  to mind,  and  
Goldberry is wait ing.' 
     It was still fairly early  by the sun, something between  nine and ten, 
and the hobbits turned their minds  to food. Their last meal  had been lunch 
beside  the  standing  stone the  day  before. They  breakfasted now off the 
remainder of  Tom's provisions,  meant for their supper, with additions that 
Tom had brought with him. It was  not a large meal (considering hobbits  and 
the circumstances), but they felt much better for it. While they were eating 
Tom went up to the mound, and looked through the treasures. Most of these he 
made into a pile that glistened and  sparkled on the grass. He bade them lie 
there 'free to  all finders,  birds, beasts. Elves  or Men,  and  all kindly 
creatures'; for so the spell of the mound should be broken and scattered and 
no Wight  ever  come back to it. He chose for himself from the pile a brooch  
set  with  blue  stones,  many-shaded like flax-flowers or the wings of blue 
butterflies. He looked long at it, as if stirred by some memory, shaking his 
head, and saying at last:  
     'Here is a pretty toy for  Tom and for his  lady! Fair was she who long 
ago  wore this on her shoulder. Goldberry shall wear it now, and we will not 
forget her!' 
     For each of the hobbits he chose a dagger, long, leaf-shaped, and keen, 
of marvellous workmanship, damasked with serpent-forms in red and gold. 
They 
gleamed as he drew them  from their black sheaths,  wrought of  some strange 
metal,  light and  strong, and set with  many fiery stones.  Whether by some 
virtue in these sheaths or  because of the spell  that lay on the mound, the 
blades seemed untouched by time, unrusted, sharp, glittering in the sun. 
     'Old  knives are long  enough  as  swords for  hobbit-people,' he said. 
'Sharp  blades are good to have, if Shire-folk go walking , east,  south,  or  
far away into dark  and danger.'  Then he told  them that these  blades were 
forged many long years ago by Men of Westernesse: they were foes of the 
Dark 

####-Lord,  but  they were overcome  by the evil king of Carn Dym in  the Land of 
Angmar . 
     'Few now remember them,' Tom murmured,  'yet  still some  go wandering, 
sons of forgotten  kings walking in loneliness,  guarding  from  evil things 
folk that are heedless.' 
     The hobbits  did not understand his  words, but as  he spoke they had a 
vision  as it  were of a  great expanse of  years  behind them,  like a vast  
shadowy  plain over  which there strode  shapes  of Men, tall and grim  with 
bright swords,  and last came  one with a star on his  brow. Then the vision 
faded,  and they were back  in the sunlit world. It was time to start again. 
They made ready,  packing  their  bags  and lading  their  ponies. Their new 
weapons they hung on their  leather belts under  their jackets, feeling them 
very awkward, and  wondering  if they would be of  any use. Fighting had not 
before occurred to any of  them  as one  of the  adventures  in which  their 
flight would land them. 
     At last  they  set off. They led their ponies down the hill;  and  then 
mounting they trotted quickly along the valley. They looked back and saw the 
top of the old mound on the hill, and  from it the sunlight on the gold went 
up like a yellow flame. Then they turned  a shoulder of the Downs and it was 
hidden from view.  
     Though Frodo looked about him on every side he saw no sign of the great 
stones standing like  a gate, and before long they came to the  northern gap 
and rode swiftly through, and the land fell away before them. It was a merry 
journey with  Tom Bombadil trotting gaily  beside them, or  before  them, on 
Fatty Lumpkin, who could move much faster than his girth promised. Tom  
sang 
most of the time, but  it  was chiefly  nonsense, or else  perhaps a strange 
language unknown to the hobbits, an ancient language whose words were 
mainly 
those of wonder and delight. 
     They went forward steadily, but they soon saw that the Road was further  
away  than  they  had  imagined. Even without a fog,  their sleep at mid-day 
would have prevented them from reaching it  until after nightfall on the day 
before.  The dark line they had seen was  not  a line of trees but a line of 
bushes growing on the edge  of a deep dike with  a steep wall on the further  
side.  Tom said that it had once been  the boundary of a kingdom, but a very 
long lime ago. He seemed to remember  something sad about it, and would  not 

####-say much. 
     They climbed down  and out  of the dike and through a gap  in the wall, 
and then  Tom turned due north, for they  had been  bearing  somewhat to the 
west. The land was now open and fairly level, and they quickened their pace, 
but  the  sun was already sinking low when at  last  they saw a line of tall 
trees  ahead,  and they knew that they had come back  to the Road after many 
unexpected adventures.  They galloped their ponies  over  the last furlongs,  
and halted u nder the long shadows of the trees. They  were on  the  top of a  
sloping bank,  and  the Road,  now dim as evening drew on, wound away  
below 
them. At this point  it ran nearly  from South-west  to North-east,  and  on 
their right it  fell quickly down into a wide hollow. It was rutted and bore 
many signs of the recent heavy rain; there were pools and pot-holes  full of 
water. They rode down the  bank and looked up and down. There was nothing 
to 
be  seen. 'Well,  here we  are again at  last!'  said  Frodo.  'I suppose  we 
haven't  lost more than two days  by  my short  cut through the Forest!  But 
perhaps the delay will prove useful  - it may have put them off our trail.' 
     The others looked at  him.  The shadow of the fear of the  Black Riders 
came suddenly over them  again. Ever since they had entered  the Forest they 
had thought chiefly of getting back  to  the  Road;  only  now  when it  lay 
beneath their feet  did they remember the danger which pursued them, and was 
more than likely  to be  lying in wait for  them upon the Road  itself. They 
looked anxiously back towards the setting sun,  but  the Road was  brown and 
empty. 
     'Do you  think,'  asked Pippin hesitatingly,  'do you  think we may  be 
pursued, tonight?' 
     'No, I hope not  tonight,' answered Tom Bombadil; 'nor perhaps the next 
day. But do not trust my guess; for I  cannot tell  for certain. Out east my 
knowledge fails. Tom is not master of  Riders from the Black Land far beyond 
his country.' 
     All the same the hobbits wished he was coming with them. They felt that 
he would know how to deal with Black Riders,  if anyone did. They would 
soon 
now  be going forward  into lands wholly strange to them, and beyond all but 
the  most  vague and  distant  legends  of the Shire, and in  the  gathering 
twilight they longed for home. A  deep  loneliness and sense  of loss was on  

####-them.  They stood  silent,  reluctant to make  the final  parting, and  only 
slowly  became aware that Tom was wishing them farewell, and telling them to 
have good heart and to ride on till dark without halting. 
     'Tom will give you good advice, till this day is over  (after that your 
own  luck must go with you and  guide you): four miles along the Road you'll 
come  upon a village,  Bree under Bree -hill, with  doors  looking  westward.  
There you'll  find an  old inn that  is  called The  Prancing Pony. Barliman 
Butterbur is the worthy keeper. There you can stay the night, and afterwards 
the morning  will speed you upon your way.  Be  bold, but wary! Keep up your 
merry hearts, and ride to meet your fortune!' 
     They begged him to come at least as far as the inn and  drink once more 
with them; but he laughed and refused, saying: 
     Tom's country ends here: he will not pass the borders. 
     Tom has his house to mind, and Goldberry is waiting! 
     Then  he turned, tossed up his hat, leaped on Lumpkin's  back, and rode 
up over the bank and away singing into the dusk. 
     The hobbits climbed up and watched him until he was out of sight. 
     'I  am sorry  to  take  leave of  Master  Bombadil,' said Sam.  'He's a  
caution and  no mistake.  I  reckon  we may go  a  good deal further and see 
naught  better,  nor queerer. But  I  won't deny I'll be  glad to  see  this 
Prancing  Pony he spoke of. I hope  it'll be like The Green Dragon away back  
home! What sort of folk are they in Bree?' 
     'There  are  hobbits in Bree,'  said Merry,  'as well as  Big  Folk.  I 
daresay it will be homelike  enough. The Pony is a good inn by all accounts.  
My people ride out there now and again.' 
     'It may be all we could wish,' said Frodo; 'but it is outside the Shire 
all the same. Don't  make yourselves  too much at home! Please remember -all 
of you - that the name of Baggins must NOT be mentioned. I am Mr. Underhill, 
if any name must be given.' 
     They now mounted  their ponies and rode off  silently into the evening. 
Darkness came down quickly,  as they  plodded slowly  downhill and up again, 
until at last they saw lights twinkling some distance ahead. 
     Before  them rose Bree-hill barring the way,  a dark mass against misty 
stars; and under  its western flank nestled a large village. Towards it they 
now  hurried desiring only to find a fire,  and a door  between them and the 
night. 
 

####- 

Chapter 9. At the Sign of 

 
 
     The Prancing Pony 
     Bree was the chief village of  the Bree-land, a small inhabited region, 
like an island in the empty  lands round about. Besides  Bree  itself, there 
was Staddle on the  other side of the hill, Combe  in a deep valley a little 
further eastward,  and  Archet  on  the  edge of  the Chetwood.  Lying round 
Bree-hill and the  villages was a small country of fields and tamed woodland  
only a few miles broad. 
     The Men of Bree were brown-haired, broad,  and  rather  short, cheerful 
and independent: they belonged to  nobody but themselves; but they were more 
friendly and familiar with Hobbits, Dwarves, Elves, and other inhabitants of 
the world  about them than was (or  is)  usual with Big People. According to 
their own tales  they were the original inhabitants and wer e the descendants 
of the first Men that ever wandered  into the West of the  middle-world. Few 
had survived the turmoils of  the Elder  Days; but  when the  Kings returned 
again over the  Great Sea  they had found the Bree-men still there, and they 
were st ill there now, when the memory  of  the  old Kings had faded into the 
grass. 
     In those days no other Men had settled dwellings so far west, or within 
a hundred leagues of the Shire. But in the wild lands beyond Bree there were 
mysterious wanderers. The Bree-folk called them Rangers, and knew nothing 
of 
their origin. They  were  taller and darker  than the  Men of Bree  and were 
believed  to have strange powers of sight and hearing, and to understand the 
languages of beasts and birds. They roamed at will southwards, and eastwards 
even as far as  the Misty  Mountains; but they were now few and rarely seen. 
When  they appeared they brought news from afar, and told strange  forgotten 
tales which were eagerly listened to; but the Bree-folk did not make friends 
of them. 
     There were  also many families  of hobbits  in the  Bree-land  and they 
claimed to be  the oldest  settlement of Hobbits in the world, one that  was 
founded long before even the Brandywine was crossed and the Shire colonized. 
They  lived  mostly  in  Staddle though  there were  some  in  Bree  itself,  
especially on the  higher slopes of the hill, above the  houses of  the Men. 

####-The  Big  Folk and  the  Little Folk  (as they  called one another) were  on  
friendly  terms,  minding their  own affairs in  their own  ways,  but  both 
rightly regarding  themselves as  necessary parts of the Bree-folk.  Nowhere 
else in the world was this peculiar (but excellent) arrangement to be found. 
     The Bree-folk, Big and Little, did  not themselves travel much; and the 
affairs  of the  four villages  were their  chief concern. Occasionally  the 
Hobbits  of Bree went as far as  Buckland, or the  Eastfarthing; but  though 
their  link land  was not  much  further  than a  day's  riding  east of the 
Brandywine Bridge,  the  Hobbits  of the Shire  now seldom  visited  it.  An 
occasional Bucklander or  adventurous Took would come  out to  the Inn for a  
night  or  two, but  even  that  was  becoming  less  and  less  usual.  The 
Shire-hobbits referred to those of Bree, and to any others that lived beyond 
the  borders,   as  Outsiders,  and  took  very  little  interest  in  them, 
considering them dull  and uncouth. There were probably  many more 
Outsiders 
scattered about in the West  of the World in those days than  the  people of 
the Shire imagined. Some, doubtless, were no  better than  tramps, ready  to  
dig a hole in any bank and  stay only as long as it suited them.  But in the 
Bree-land, at any rate, the hobbits were decent and  prosperous, and no more 
rustic tha n most of their distant relatives Inside. It was not yet forgotten 
that there had been a time when there was much coming and going  between 
the 
Shire and Bree. There was Bree-blood in the Brandybucks by all accounts.  
     The village of Bree had some  hundred  stone houses  of  the Big  Folk, 
mostly above the Road, nestling  on the hillside with  windows looking west. 
On that side, running in  more  than half a circle from the hill and back to 
it, there was a deep dike with a thick hedge on the  inner side.   Over  this 
the Road crossed by a causeway; but where it pierced the hedge it was barred 
by a great gate. There was another gate in the southern comer where the Road 
ran out of the village. The  gates were closed at nightfall; but just inside 
them were small lodges for the gatekeepers.  
     Down on  the Road, where it swept to the right to  go round the foot of 
the hill, there was a large inn. It had been built long ago when the traffic 
on the roads had been far greater. For Bree stood at an old meeting of ways;  
another ancient road  crossed  the  East  Road  just outside (he dike at the 
western end of the village, and in former days Men and other folk of various 
sorts had travelled much on it. Strange as News from Bree was still a saying 

####-in the  Eastfarthing, descending from  those days,  when  news  from  North, 
South, and East could be heard in the inn,  and when  the Shire-hobbits used 
to go more often to hear it.  But the Northern Lands had long been desolate,  
and  the  North  Road  was now  seldom  used: it was  grass-grown,  and  the 
Bree-folk called it the Greenway. 
     The Inn  of Bree  was still  there, however, and  the  innkeeper was an 
important person. His house was a meeting place for the idle, talkative, and 
inquisitive  among the inhabitants, large and  small, of the four  villages;  
and a resort of Rangers and other wanderers, and for such travellers (mostly 
dwarves) as still journeyed on the East Road, to and from the Mountains.  
     It  was  dark,  and  white  stars  were  shining,  when  Frodo and  his 
companions came at last to the Greenway-crossing and drew near the  village. 
They came to the West -gate and found it shut, but  at the door  of the lodge 
beyond it, there was a man sitting. He jumped up and  fetched a lantern  and 
looked over  the gate at them in surprise. 
     'What do you want, and where do you come from?' he asked gruffly. 
     'We are making for  the inn here,' answered Frodo.  'We are  journeying 
east and cannot go further tonight.' 
     'Hobbits! Four  hobbits! And what's more,  out  of  the Shire  by their 
talk,' said the gatekeeper, softly as if  speaking to himself. He  stared at 
them darkly for a moment, and then slowly  opened the gate and let them ride 
through. 
     'We don't  often see Shire-folk riding on the Road  at  night,' he went 
on, as they halted  a moment by his door. 'You'll pardon  my wondering  what 
business takes you away east of Bree! What may your names be, might I ask?' 
     'Our names and our business are our own,  and this does not seem a good  
place  to  discuss them,' said Frodo, not liking the look of  the man or  the 
tone of his voice. 
     'Your  business is  your  own, no doubt,'  said  the man; 'but it's  my 
business to ask questions after nightfall.' 
     'We  are hobbits  from Buckland, and we have a  fancy to travel and  to 
stay at the  inn here,' put  in Merry. 'I am  Mr. Brandybuck. Is that enough 
for  you?  The Bree-folk used  to be fair-spoken to travellers,  or so I had 
heard.' 
     'All right, all right!' said the man.  'I  meant no offence. But you'll 
find  maybe that more  folk  than old Harry  at the  gate will be asking you  
questions. There's queer folk about. If you go  on to  The Pony, you'll find 

####-you're oat the only guests.' 
     He wished  them  good night, and they said no more; but Frodo could see 
in  the lantern-light  that the  man was still eyeing them curiously. He was 
glad to  hear  the gate clang  to  behind  them,  as they rode  forward.  He 
wondered why the man was  so suspicious, and whether any one had been 
asking 
for news of a party of hobbits. Could  it have been Gandalf? He  might  have 
arrived, while they  were delayed in the Forest and the Downs. But there was 
something in the look and the voice of the gatekeeper that made him uneasy.  
     The man stared after the hobbits for a moment, and then he went back to  
his house. As soon as his  back was turned, a dark figure climbed quickly in  
over the gate and melted into the shadows of the village street. 
     The  hobbits rode on up a  gentle slope, passing a few detached  houses, 
and  drew up outside the  inn. The houses looked large  and strange to them.  
Sam stared up at the inn  with its three  storeys and many windows, and felt 
his  heart sink. He  had imagined  himself meeting giants taller than trees, 
and other creatures  even more terrifying, some time or other  in the course 
of his journey; but at the moment he was finding his first sight of  Men and 
their tall houses quite enough, indeed too much for the dark end of a tiring 
day. He  pictured  black horses standing all  saddled in  the shadows of the 
inn-yard, and Black Riders peering out of dark upper windows. 
     'We  surely aren't going  to stay here for the night,  are we, sir?' he 
exclaimed. 'If there are hobbit-folk  in these  pans, why  don't we look for  
some  that would be willing to take us in? It would be more homelike.' 
     'What's wrong with the inn?' said Frodo. 'Tom Bombadil  recommended it. 
I expect it's homelike enough inside.' 
     Even from the outside the inn looked a pleasant house to familiar eyes. 
It had a front on  the Road, and two wings running  back on land partly  cut 
out  of the lower  slopes of the hill, so  that at the rear the second-floor 
windows were level  with the  ground.  There  was a wide  arch  leading to a  
courtyard between the two wings, and on the left under the arch there was  a  
large doorway reached by  a few  broad  steps. The  door  was open and light 
streamed out of it. Above the arch  there was a lamp, and beneath it swung a  
large signboard: a  fat white pony reared up on  its hind legs. Over the door 
was painted in white letters: THE PRANCING PONY by BARLIMAN  
BUTTERBUR. Many 
of the lower windows showed lights behind thick curtains.  

####-     As they hesitated outside in the gloom, someone began singing  a  merry 
song  inside, and many  cheerful voices  joined loudly in the  chorus.  They 
listened  to  this encouraging sound for a moment and  then  got  off  their 
ponies. The song ended and there was a burst of laughter and clapping. 
     They led their ponies under the arch, and leaving  them standing in the 
yard they climbed up  the steps. Frodo went forward and nearly bumped into a  
short fat man with a bald head and a red  face. He had a white apron on, and 
was  bustling out of  one door and in through another, carrying a tray laden 
with full mugs.  
     'Can we--' began Frodo. 
     'Half a minute, if  you please!' shouted the man over his shoulder, and 
vanished into a babel of voices and a cloud of smoke. In a moment he was out 
again, wiping his hands on his apron. 
     'Good  evening, little master!' he said, bending down. 'What may you be 
wanting?' 
     'Beds for four, and stabling for five ponies,  if that can be  managed. 
Are you Mr. Butterbur?' 
     'That's right! Barliman is my name. Barliman Butterbur at your service!  
You 're from the Shire,  eh?' he said, and  then suddenly he clapped his hand  
to  his forehead, as  if  trying to remember something. 'Hobbits!' he cried. 
'Now what does that remind me of? Might I ask your names, sir?' 
     'Mr. Took and Mr. Brandybuck,' said   Frodo; 'and this is Sam Gamgee. My 
name is Underhill.' 
     'There  now!' said  Mr.  Butterbur,  snapping  his fingers. 'It's  gone 
again! But it'll come back, when I have time to  think. I'm run off my feet; 
but I'll see what I can  do for you. We don't often get a party out  of  the 
Shire nowadays, and I should be sorry not to make you welcome. But  there is 
such  a crowd already in the house  tonight  as there  hasn't been for  long 
enough. It never rains but it pours, we say in Bree. 
     'Hi! Nob!' he shouted. 'Where  are  you, you woolly-footed  slow-coach?  
Nob!' 
     'Coming,  sir! Coming!' A cheery-looking hobbit bobbed out  of  a door, 
and  seeing the  travellers, stopped short and stared  at  them  with  great 
interest.  
     'Where's  Bob?'  asked the landlord.  'You don't  know? Well find  him!  
Double sharp! I haven't got six legs, nor six eyes neither! Tell Bob there's 
five ponies that have to be stabled. He must find room somehow.' Nob trotted 

####-off with a grin and a wink. 
     'Well, now, what wa s  I going to  say?' said Mr. Butterbur, tapping his 
forehead. 'One thing drives out another, so to speak. I'm that busy tonight, 
my head is going round. There's  a party that came up the Greenway from 
down 
South last night - and that was strange enough to  begin with. Then there's a  
travelling  company  of dwarves  going  West come  in  this evening. And now 
there's you.  If you weren't  hobbits, I  doubt  if  we could house you. But 
we've  got  a room or two  in the  north wing  that  were made  special  for 
hobbits, when this  place was built.  On  the  ground  floor as they usually 
prefer; round windows and all as they like it. I hope you'll be comfortable. 
You'll be wanting supper, I don't doubt. As soon as may be. This way now!' 
     He led them a short  way  down a passage, and opened a door. 'Here is a  
nice little parlour!' he said. 'I hope it will suit. Excuse me now. I'm that 
busy. No time for talking. I must be trotting. It's hard  work for two legs,  
but I  don't get thinner. I'll look  in again  la ter.  If you want anything, 
ring the hand-bell, and Nob will come. If he don't come, ring and shout!' 
     Off he went at last, and left them feeling rather breathless. He seemed 
capable of  an endless stream of talk, however busy he might be. They  found 
themselves in a small and cosy room. There  was a bit of bright fire burning  
on  the hearth,  and in front of it  were some low  and comfortable  chairs.  
There  was a round table, already spread with a white cloth, and on it was a  
large hand-bell. But  Nob, the  hobbit servant, came bustling in long before 
they thought of ringing. He brought candles and a tray full of plates.  
     'Will you be wanting anything  to drink, masters?' he asked. 'And shall 
I show you the bedrooms, while your supper is got ready? ' 
     They were  washed and in the middle of good deep mugs  of beer when Mr. 
Butterbur and  Nob  came in again. In a twinkling the table was laid.  There 
was hot soup, cold meats, a  blackberry  tart,  new loaves, slabs of butter, 
and half  a ripe  cheese: good plain food, as good  as the Shire could show, 
and homelike enough to  dispel  the last of  Sam's misgivings (already  much 
relieved by the excellence of the beer). 
     The landlord hovered round for a link, and then prepared to leave them. 
'I don't  know whether  you would care  to  join the company, when  you have 
supped,' he said, standing at the door. 'Perhaps you would rather go to your 
beds. Still the company would be very pleased to welcome you , if  you  had a 
mind.  We don't get  Outsiders  -  travellers from the  Shire, I should  say, 

####-begging your pardon - often; and we like to hear a bit of news, or any story 
or song you may have in mind.  But as you please! Ring the bell, if you lack  
anything!' 
     So refreshed and encouraged did  they feel at the end  of  their supper 
(about three quarters of an hour's steady going, not hindered by unnecessary 
talk) that Frodo, Pippin, and Sam decided to join the company. Merry said it  
would be too stuffy. 'I shall sit  here quietly by the fire  for  a bit, and 
perhaps go out later for a sniff of the air. Mind your Ps and Qs, and  don't  
forget that you are supposed to be  escaping in secret, and are still on the 
high-road and not very far from the Shire!' 
     'All right!' said Pippin. 'Mind yourself!  Don't  get  lost,  and don't  
forget that it is safer indoors!' 
     The company  was in the big common-room  of the inn.  The gathering was 
large  and mixed, as Frodo discovered, when his eyes got used  to the light. 
This came chiefly from a blazing  log-fire, for the three lamps hanging from 
the  beams were  dim,  and half  veiled  in smoke.  Barliman  Butterbur  was 
standing  near the  fire, talking  to  a couple  of dwarves and one  or  two 
strange-looking  men.  On the benches were  various  folk:  men  of   Bree, a  
collection of local  hobbits  (sitting  chattering  together),  a  few  more 
dwarves,  and other vague figures difficult to make out away  in the shadows 
and comers.  
     As soon as the Shire-hobbits  entered, there  was  a  chorus of welcome 
from the Bree-landers. The strangers, especially those that  had come up the 
Greenway, stared at them curiously. The landlord introduced the newcomers to 
the Bree-folk, so  quickly  that, though they caught  many  names, they were 
seldom  sure who the names belonged to.  The Men of Bree seemed  all to have 
rather  botanical (and to the Shire-folk rather odd) names,  like Rushlight, 
Goatleaf,  Heathertoes,  Appledore, Thistlewool and  Ferny (not  to  mention  
Butterbur).  Some  of  the hobbits  had  similar  names.  The  Mugworts, for  
instance,  seemed numerous.  But  most of them  had natural  names,  such as 
Banks, Brockhouse, Longholes,  Sandheaver, and Tunnelly,  many of which 
were 
used  in the Shire.  There were several Underhills  from Saddle, and as they 
could not imagine sharing  a name without being  related, they took Frodo to  
their hearts as a long-lost cousin. 
     The Bree-hobbits were,  in fact, friendly  and  inquisitive,  and Frodo 
soon found that  some  explanation  of  what he was doing would  have  to be 

####-given. He gave out that he was interested in history and geography (at which  
there was much wagging of heads, although neither  of these words  were much 
used in the  Bree-dialect). He said  he  was thinking of writing a  book (at 
which there was  silent astonishment), and that he and his friends  wanted to  
collect information about  hobbits living  outside the Shire,  especially in 
the eastern lands. 
     At this  a  chorus of voices broke  out. If Frodo had  really wanted to 
write a  book,  and  had  had  many ears, he  would  have learned enough for  
several chapters  in a few minutes. And if that was not enough, he was given  
a whole list of names, beginning with 'Old Barliman here', to whom he  could 
go for further information. But after a time, a s Frodo did not show any sign 
of writing a book on the spot, the hobbits returned to their questions about 
doings in  the Shire. Frodo did not  prove  very communicative,  and he soon 
found himself sitting alone in a comer, listening and looking around. 
     The Men and  Dwarves were mostly talking of  distant events and telling 
flews of a kind that was becoming only too familiar. There  was trouble away 
in the South, and it seemed that the  Men who had  come up the Greenway 
were 
on  the  move,  looking for   lands  where they  could  find some  peace. The 
Bree-folk were  sympathetic, but plainly  not  very  ready to  take  a large 
number  of  strangers  into  their little land. One  of  the  travellers,  a  
squint-eyed ill-favoured fellow, was foretelling  that more  and more people 
would  be  coming north in  the near future. 'If  room isn't found for them, 
they'll  find it for  themselves.  They've a  right  to live,  same as other 
folk,'  he said  loudly. The  local inhabitants did not look  pleased at the 
prospect. 
     The hobbits  did not pay much attention to all this,  and it did not at 
the moment seem to concern hobbits. Big  Folk could hardly  beg for lodgings 
in hobbit-holes. They were more  interested in Sam and Pippin,  who were now 
feeling quite  at home, and were chatting  gaily about events in the  Shire. 
Pippin roused a good deal of laughter with an account of the collapse of the 
roof of the Town  Hole in Michel Delving: Will Whitfoot, the Mayor,  and the 
fattest hobbit  in the Westfarthing, had  been buried in chalk, and came out 
like a floured  dumpling. But there were several questions asked  that  made 
Frodo a little uneasy. One of  the Bree-landers, who seemed to  have been in 
the Shire  several times, wanted to know where the  Underhills lived and who 
they were related to. 

####-     Suddenly  Frodo  noticed  that  a  strange-looking  weather -beaten man, 
sitting in  the  shadows near the  wall, was  also listening intently to the 
hobbit-talk. He had  a  tall tankard  in  front of him, and  was  smoking  a  
long-stemmed pipe curiously carved. His legs  were stretched out before him, 
showing high boots of supple leather that fitted him well, but had seen much 
wear and were now caked with mud. A travel-stained cloak of heavy dark-
green 
cloth was  drawn  close  about him, and in spite of the heat of the room  he 
wore a hood  that overshadowed his  face; but the gleam of his eyes could be 
seen as he watched the hobbits. 
     'Who is that?' Frodo asked, when he  got  a chance  to  whisper  to Mr. 
Butterbur. 'I don't think you introduced him?' 
     'Him?' said  the  landlord in  an  answering whisper,  cocking  an  eye 
without  turning his head. 'I don't rightly know. He is one of the wandering 
folk -Rangers we call them. He seldom talks: not but what he can tell a rare 
tale when he has the mind. He disappears for a month, or a year, and then he 
pops  up again. He was in and out  pretty  often last spring; but I  haven't  
seen  him about lately. What his  right name is I've  never  heard: but he's 
known round here as Strider. Goes  about at a great pace on his long shanks;  
though  he  don't  tell nobody what cause  he has to hurry.  But there's  no 
accounting for East and West, as we say in Bree, meaning the Rangers and the 
Shire-folk, begging your pardon. Funny you  should  ask about  him.' But  at 
that moment Mr. Butterbur was called away  by a demand for more ale  and his 
last remark remained unexplained. 
     Frodo found that Strider was now looking at him, as if he  had heard or  
guessed  all that had been said.  Presently,  with a wave of his hand and  a  
nod, he invited Frodo to come over  and sit  by  him. As  Frodo drew near be  
threw back his  hood, showing  a shaggy head of dark hair  necked with grey, 
and in a pale stem face a pair of keen grey eyes.  
     'I  am called Strider,'  he said  in a low voice. 'I am very pleased to 
meet you. Master - Underhill, if old Butterbur got your name right.' 
     'He  did,' said  Frodo stiffly. He felt far from comfortable under  the 
stare of those keen eyes.  
     'Well, Master Underhill,' said Strider,  'if I were  you, I should stop 
your  young friends  from talking too much. Drink , fire,  and chance-meeting 
are pleasant enough, but, well - this  isn't the Shire. There are queer folk  
about. Though I  say it as shouldn't, you may  think,'  he  added with a wry 

####-smile, seeing Frodo's glance. 'And  there have been even stranger travellers 
through Bree lately,' he went on, watching Frodo's face. 
     Frodo returned his  gaze but said nothing; and Strider made no  further  
sign.  His  attention  seemed  suddenly to be fixed on Pippin.  To his alarm 
Frodo became aware that the ridiculous young Took, encouraged by his success 
with  the fat  Mayor of  Michel  Delving, was  now actually  giving a  comic 
account of Bilbo's farewell party. He was already giving an imitation of the 
Speech, and was drawing near to the astonishing Disappearance. 
     Frodo was annoyed. It was a harmless enough tale for most  of the local 
hobbits, no doubt: just a  funny story about  those funny people away beyond 
the River;  but some (old Butterbur, for instance)  knew a thing or two, and 
had probably heard rumours long ago about  Bilbo's vanishing. It would bring 
the name of Baggins to their minds,  especially  if there had been inquiries 
in Bree after that name. 
     Frodo  fidgeted,  wondering  what to  do.  Pippin  was  evidently  much 
enjoying  the attention he was getting,  and had  become  quite forgetful of 
their danger. Frodo had a sudden fear that in his present mood he might even 
mention the Ring; and that might well be disastrous.  
     'You had better do something quick!' whispered Strider in his ear. 
     Frodo jumped up and stood on a table, and began to  talk. The attention 
of Pippin's audience was disturbed. Some of the  hobbits looked at Frodo and 
laughed and clapped, thinking that  Mr. Underhill  had taken as  much ale as 
was good for him. 
     Frodo  suddenly felt very foolish,  and found himself (as was his habit 
when making a speech) fingering  the things in his pocket. He felt the  Ring  
on its chain, and quite unaccountably the desire came over him to slip it on 
and vanish out of the silly  situation. It seemed to him,  somehow, as if me 
suggestion came to him from outside,  from someone or  something a the room. 
He resisted the  temptation firmly, and clasped  the Ring in his hand, as if 
to keep a hold on it and prevent it from escaping or doing any mischief.  At 
any rate it  gave him no inspiration. He spoke  'a  few suitable  words', as 
they  would have said  in the  Shire: We  are all  very much gratified by the 
kindness of your reception, and  I  venture to hope that my brief visit will 
help to  renew  the old ties of  friendship between the Shire and Bree;  and 
then he hesitated and coughed. 
     Everyone in the room was now  looking at him. 'A song!' shouted one  of 
the hobbits.  'A song! A song!' shouted all the others.  'Come on now, master, 

####-sing us something that we haven't heard before!' 
     For  a  moment  Frodo  stood gaping. Then  in  desperation he  began  a  
ridiculous song tha t Bilbo had been rather  fond of (and indeed rather proud 
of, for he had made up the words himself). It was about an inn; and that  is 
probably why it came into Frodo's mind just then. Here it is in full. Only a  
few words of it are now, as a rule, remember ed. 
     There is an inn, a merry old inn 
     beneath an old grey hill, 
     And there they brew a beer so brown  
     That the Man in the Moon himself came down  
     one night to drink his fill. 
 
     The ostler has a tipsy cat 
     that plays a five-stringed fiddle; 
     And up and down he runs his bow,  
     Now squeaking high, now purring low,  
     now sawing in the middle. 
 
     The landlord keeps a little dog 
     that is mighty fond of jokes; 
     When there's good cheer among the guests, 
     He cocks an ear at all the jests 
     and laughs until he chokes. 
 
     They also keep a horned cow 
     as proud as any queen; 
     But music turns her head like ale, 
     And makes her wave her tufted tail 
     and dance upon the green. 
 
     And O! the rows of silver dishes 
     and the store of silver spoons! 
     For Sunday* there's a special pair, 
     And these they polish up with care 
     on Saturday afternoons. 
 
     The Man in the Moon was drinking deep, 

####-     and the cat began to wail; 
     A dish and a  spoon on the table danced, 
     The cow in the garden madly pranced, 
     and the little dog chased his tail. 
 
     The Man in the Moon took another mug, 
     and then rolled beneath his chair; 
     And there he dozed and dreamed of ale, 
     Till in the sky the stars were pale, 
     and dawn was in the air. 
 
     Then the ostler said to his tipsy cat: 
     'The white horses of the Moon, 
     They neigh and champ their silver bits; 
     But their master's been and drowned his wits, 
     and the Sun'll be rising soon!'  
 
     So the cat on his fiddle played hey-diddle-diddle, 
     a jig that would wake the dead: 
     He squeaked and sawed and quickened the tune, 
     While the landlord shook the Man in the Moon: 
     'It's after three!' he said. 
 
     They rolled the Man slowly up the hill 
     and bundled him into the Moon, 
     While his horses galloped up in rear, 
     And the cow came capering like a deer, 
     and a dish ran up with the spoon. 
 
     Now quicker the fiddle went deedle -dum-diddle; 
     the dog began to roar, 
     The cow and the horses stood on their heads; 
     The guests all bounded from their beds 
     and danced upon the floor. 
 
     With a ping and a pong the fiddle -strings broke! 
     the cow jumped over the Moon, 

####-     And the little dog laughed to see such fun, 
     And the Saturday dish went off at a run 
     with the silver Sunday spoon. 
 
     The round Moon rolled behind the hill 
     as the Sun raised up her head. 
     She* hardly believed her fiery eyes; 
     For though it was day, to her surprise 
     they all went back to bed! 
     There was loud and long applause. Frodo had a  good voice, and the song  
tickled their fancy.  'Where's old Barley?' they  cried. 'He ought  to  hear 
this. Bob  ought to learn his cat  the fiddle, and then we'd have a  dance.' 
They called for more ale, and  began to shout: 'Let's have it again, master! 
Come on now! Once more!' 
     They made  Frodo have another drink,  and then  begin his  song  again, 
while many of them  joined  in; for the tune was  well known, and  they were 
quick at picking up  words.  It  was now Frodo's turn to feel  pleased  with 
himself. He capered  about on the table; and when he came  a second  time to 
the cow jumped over the Moon, he leaped in the air. Much too vigorously; for  
he came down,  bang, into a  tray full of mugs, and slipped, and  rolled off 
the table with  a crash, clatter, and bump!  The audience  all opened  their 
mouths wide for laughter, and stopped short a gaping silence; for the singer  
disappeared. He simply  vanished, as  if he had  gone slap through the floor  
without leaving a hole!  
     The  local hobbits  stared in  amazement, and then sprang to their feet 
and shouted for Barliman. All the company drew away from Pippin and Sam, 
who 
found themselves left alone in a comer, and eyed darkly and  doubtfully from 
a  distance.  It was  plain  that many  people  regarded  them  now  as  the 
companions of a travelling magician of unknown powers and purpose. But 
there 
was one  swarthy Bree-lander, who stood looking at them with  a knowing  and 
half-mocking expression that made them feel very uncomfortable. Presently he 
slipped out of the door, followed by the squint-eyed southerner: the two had 
been  whispering  together  a  good  deal  during  the  evening.  Harry  the 
gatekeeper also went out just behind them.. 
     Frodo felt  a fool. Not knowing what else  to do, he crawled away under  

####-the tables to the  dark comer by Strider, who sat unmoved, giving no sign of 
his thoughts. Frodo leaned back  against the wall and took off the Ring. How 
it came to be on his finger he could not tell. He could only suppose that he 
had  been handling it in his pocket while he sang, and  that somehow  it had 
slipped on  when he stuck out  his hand with a jerk to save his  fall. For a  
moment he wondered if the Ring itself had not played him a trick; perhaps it 
had tried to reveal itself in response to some wish or command that was felt 
in the room. He did not like the looks of the men that had gone out. 
     'Well?' said Strider, when he rea ppeared.  'Why did you do that?  Worse 
than anything your friends could have said! You have put your foot in it! Or  
should I say your finger?' 
     'I don't know what you mean,' said Frodo, annoyed and alarmed. 
     'Oh yes, you do,' answered Strider; 'but  we had better wait  until the 
uproar has  died down. Then, if you  please, Mr.  Baggins, I should  like  a  
quiet word with you.' 
     'What about?' asked Frodo, ignoring the sudden use of his proper name. 
     'A matter of  some importance  -  to us both,' answered Strider, looking 
Frodo in the eye. 'You may hear something to your advantage.' 
     'Very  well,' said Frodo,  trying to appear unconcerned. 'I'll talk  to 
you later.' 
     Meanwhile an argument was going on by the  fireplace. Mr. Butterbur had 
come trotting  in, and  he was now  trying  to listen to several conflicting 
accounts of the event at the same time. 
     'I saw him, Mr.  Butterbur,' said a hobbit;  'or leastways I didn't see 
him, if you take my meaning. He just vanished  into thin air, in a manner of 
speaking.' 
     'You don't say, Mr. Mugwort!' said the landlord, looking puzzled. 
     'Yes I do!' replied Mugwort. 'And I mean what I say, what's more.' 
     'There's some  mistake  somewhere,' said  Butterbur,  shaking his head. 
There was  too much of  that Mr. Underhill to go vanishing  into thin air; or  
into thick air, as is more likely in this room.' 
     'Well, where is he now?' cried several voices.  
     'How should I  know?  He's welcome to go  where he will, so long as  he  
pays in the  morning. There's Mr. Took, now: he's not vanished.' 
     'Well,  I  saw what I  saw,  and  I saw what I  didn't,'  said  Mugwort 
obstinately. 
     'And I say there's  some mistake,' repeated  Butterbur,  picking up the 

####-tray and gathering up the broken crockery. 
     'Of course there's a mistake!' said Frodo. 'I haven't vanished. Here  I 
am! I've just been having a few words with Strider in the comer.' 
     He  came forward into  the  firelight;  but most of the company  backed 
away,, even more perturbed than before. They were not in the least satisfied 
by his explanation that he had crawled away quickly  under the  tables after  
he  had fallen. Most of the  Hobbits  and the Men of Bree went off then  and 
there in a huff, having no fancy for further entertainment that evening. One 
or two gave Frodo a black look and departed muttering among themselves.  
The 
Dwarves and the two or three strange Men that still remained got up and said 
good night to the landlord, but not to Frodo and his friends. Before long no 
one was left but Strider, who sat on, unnoticed, by the wall. 
     Mr. Butterbur did  not seem  much put out. He reckoned,  very probably,  
that his house would be full again on many future  nights, until the present 
mystery had been  thoroughly discussed. 'N ow what have  you been doing,  Mr. 
Underhill?'  he asked.  'Frightening  my customers and breaking up my crocks 
with your acrobatics!' 
     'I am very sorry to have caused any trouble,' said Frodo. 'It was quite 
unintentional, I assure you. A most unfortunate accident.' 
     'All right, Mr. Underhill! But if you're going to do any more tumbling, 
or conjuring, or whatever it was, you'd best warn folk beforehand  - and warn 
me. We're a bit suspicious round here of anything  out of  the way -uncanny,  
if you understand me; and we don't take to it all of a sudden.' 
     'I shan't be doing anything of the sort again, Mr. Butterbur, I promise 
you.  And now  I think I'll be getting  to bed. We shall be  making an early 
start. Will you see that our ponies are ready by  eight o'clock?' 
     'Very  good! But  before  you go, I  should like  a  word  with you  in 
private, Mr. Underhill. Something has just come back to my mind that I ought 
to tell you. I hope that you'll not take it amiss. When I've seen to a thing 
or two, I'll come along to your room, if you're willing.' 
     'Certainly!'  said Frodo; but his  heart  sank.  He wondered  how  many 
private talks  he would have before  he  got to  bed,  and  what  they would 
reveal. Were  these people  all in league against him?  He  began to suspect 
even old Butterbur's fat face of concealing dark designs. 
 
 

####-<h4>Chapter 10</h4> <br>. Strider 

 
 
     Frodo, Pippin, and Sam made their way back to the parlour. There was no 
light. Merry was not there, and the  fire had burned low.  It  was not until 
they had puffed up the embers into a blaze and thrown on a couple of faggots 
that they discovered Strider had come with them. There he was calmly sitting 
in a chair by the door! 
     'Hallo!' said Pippin. 'Who are you, and what do you want?' 
     'I  am called Strider,' he answered: 'and  though he may have forgotten 
it, your friend promised to have a quiet talk with me.' 
     'You  said  I  might  hear something to my advantage, I  believe,' said 
Frodo. 'What have you to say?' 
     'Several things,' a nswered Strider. 'But, of course, I have my price.' 
     'What do you mean?' asked Frodo sharply. 
     'Don't be alarmed! I mean just this: I will tell you  what I  know, and 
give you some good advice  - but I shall want a reward.' 
     'And what will that be, pray?' said Frodo. He suspected now that he had 
fallen in with a rascal, and he thought uncomfortably  that  he had  brought 
only a little money with him. All of it would hardly satisfy a rogue, and he 
could not spare any of it. 
     'No more than  you  can afford,' answered  Strider with a slow smile, as 
if he guessed Frodo's thoughts. 'Just this: you must take me along with you, 
until I wish to leave you.' 
     'Oh, indeed!' replied Frodo, surprised, but not much relieved. 'Even if 
I wanted another  companion, I should  not  agree to any such thing, until I 
knew a good deal more about you, and your business.' 
     'Excellent!' exclaimed  Strider,  crossing  his legs  and sitting  back  
comfortably. 'You seem to be coming to your senses again, and that is all to 
the good. You have been much too careless so far. Very well! I will tell you  
what I know, and leave the reward to  you. You may be glad to grant it, when 
you have heard me.' 
     'Go on then!' said Frodo. 'What do you know?' 
     'Too much; too many dark things,' said Strider grimly. 'But as for your 
business --' He got  up and went to the door,  opened it quickly  and looked 
out.  Then  he shut it quietly and  sat  down again. 'I have quick ears,' he 
went  on, lowering his voice, 'and  though I cannot disappear, I have hunted 

####-many  wild  and wary  things and I can usually avoid being  seen, if I wish. 
Now, I was behind the hedge this evening on the Road west of Bree, when four 
hobbits  came out  of the Downlands. I need not repeat all that they said to 
old  Bombadil  or  to  one  another, but  one  thing interested  me.  Please 
remember, said one of them,  that the name Baggins  must not be mentioned. I 
am Mr. Underhill, if any name must be given. That interested me so much that 
I followed them here.  I slipped  over the gate just behind them.  Maybe Mr.  
Baggins  has  an  honest reason  for  leaving his name  behind; but if so, I 
should advise him and his friends to be more careful.' 
     'I don't see what interest my name has for any one in Bree,' sa id Frodo 
angrily,  'and I have still to  learn why  it interests you. Mr. Strider may 
have an honest reason  for spying  and eavesdropping;  but  if so,  I should 
advise him to explain it.' 
     'Well answered!' said Strider laughing. 'But the explanation is simple: 
     I was looking for  a Hobbit called Frodo Baggins. I wanted  to find him 
quickly. I had learned that he was carrying out of the Shire, well, a secret 
that concerned me and my friends.  
     'Now, don't mistake me!' he cried, as Frodo rose from his seat, and Sam 
jumped up  with a scowl. 'I shall take more care of  the secret than you do. 
And care  is  needed!' He leaned forward  and  looked at them. 'Watch  every 
shadow!' he said in a  low  voice. 'Black horsemen have passed through Bree. 
On  Monday one came down the Greenway, they say; and another appeared 
later, 
coming up the Greenway from the south.' 
     There was a silence. At last Frodo spoke to Pippin and Sam: 'I ought to 
have guessed  it from the way the gatekeeper greeted us,' he said.  'And  the 
landlord  seems  to  have heard something. Why did  he press us to join  the 
company?  And  why  on  earth  did we  behave so foolishly: we ought to have 
stayed quiet in here.' 
     'It would  have been better,' said Strider. 'I would  have stopped your 
going into  the  common-room, if I could; but the innkeeper would not let me 
in to see you, or take a message.' 
     'Do you think he------' began Frodo. 
     'No,  I  don't  think any  harm  of old Butterbur.  Only  he  does  not 
altogether like  mysterious vagabonds  of my sort.' Frodo gave him a puzzled 
look. 'Well, I have rather a rascally look, have I not?' said Strider with a  
curl of his lip and a  queer gleam in  his eye. 'But I  hope we shall get to 

####-know one another better.  When we do, I hope you will explain  what happened 
at the end of your song. For that little prank ------' 
     'It was sheer accident!' interrupted Frodo. 
     'I wonder,' said Strider. 'Accident, then. That  accident has made your 
position dangerous.' 
     'Hardly more than it  was already,' said Frodo.  'I knew these horsemen 
were pursuing me;  but now  at any rate they seem to  have  missed me and to 
have gone away.' 
     'You  must not count on that!' said Strider sharply. 'They will return. 
And more  are  coming. There are others. I know their  number. I know  these 
Riders.' He paused,  and his  eyes were cold and hard. 'And there  are  some 
folk  in Bree who  are  not to be  trusted,'  he went on.  'Bill  Ferny, for  
instance. He  has an evil name in the Bree-land,  and queer folk call at his 
house.  You  must  have  noticed him among the  company:  a swarthy sneering 
fellow.  He  was very close with  one  of  the Southern  strangers, and they 
slipped  out   together  just  after  your  "accident".  Not  all  of  those 
Southerners mean well; and as for Ferny, he would sell anything  to anybody; 
or make mischief for amusement.' 
     'What  will Ferny sell,  and what has my accident got to do  with him?' 
said Frodo, still determined not to understand Strider's hints.  
     'News  of you,  of  course,'  answered  Strider.  'An  account of  your 
performance would  be very interesting to certain  people.  After that  they 
would hardly  need to be told your real name. It seems to me only too likely  
that they will hear of it befor e this night is over. Is that enough? You can 
do as you like  about my  reward: take me as a guide  or  not. But I may say 
that I know all the lands  between the Shire and  the Misty Mountains, for I 
have  wandered over  them for many years. I  am  older than  I look. I might  
prove useful. You will  have to leave the  open  road after tonight; for the 
horsemen will  watch  it  night and  day. You may  escape from  Bree, and be 
allowed to  go forward while the Sun is up;  but you won't go far. They will 
come on you in the wild, in some dark  place where  there is no help. Do you 
wish them to find you? They are terrible!' 
     The  hobbits looked at him,  and  saw  with surprise that  his face was 
drawn  as if with pain, and  his hands clenched the arms of  his  chair. The 
room was very quiet and still, and the light seemed to have grown dim. For a 
while he sat with unseeing eyes as if walking in distant memory or listening  
to sounds in the Night far away. 

####-     'There!' he  cried  after  a moment, drawing his hand  across his brow.  
'Perhaps I know  more about these pursuers than you  do.  You fear them, but 
you do not fear them enough,  yet. Tomorrow you will  have to escape, if you 
can. Strider can take  you by paths that  are  seldom trodden. Will you have 
him? ' 
     There was a heavy silence. Frodo made no answer, his mind was  confused 
with doubt and fear. Sam frowned,  and looked at his  master; and at last he 
broke out: 
     'With  your leave,  Mr. Frodo, I'd  say no! This Strider here, he warns 
and he says take care; and  I say  yes to that, and let's begin with him. He 
comes out  of  the Wild, and I  never heard no good  of such  folk. He knows 
something, that's  plain,  and more  than  I like; but it's no reason why we 
should let him go leading us out into  some dark place  far from help, as he 
puts it.' 
     Pippin fidgeted and looked uncomfortable. Strider did not reply to Sam, 
but turned his keen eyes  on Frodo. Frodo caught his glance and looked away. 
'No,' he said slowly. 'I don't agree. I think, I think you are not really as 
you  choose to  look. You began  to talk to me like the Bree-folk,  but your 
voice has changed. Still Sam seems right in this: I don't see why you should 
warn us to take care, and yet ask us to take you on trust. Why the disguise?  
Who are  you? What do you really know about - about my business; and how  
do 
you know it?' 
     'The lesson in caution has been well learned,' said Strider with a grim 
smile. 'But caution is one thing and wavering is another. You will never get 
to Rivende ll now on your own, and to trust me is your only chance. You  must  
make up your  mind. I will answer some of your  questions, if that will help 
you to do so.  But  why should you believe  my story, if you do not trust me 
already? Still here it is------' 
     At that  moment  there  came a  knock at the  door.  Mr. Butterbur  had 
arrived with candles, and behind him was Nob with cans of hot water. Strider 
withdrew into a dark corner. 
     'I've come  to bid  you  good night,' said  the  landlord,  putting the 
candles on the table. 'Nob!  Take  the  water to the rooms!' He came in  and 
shut the door. 
     'It's like  this,' he began,  hesitating and looking troubled. 'If I've 
done any harm, I'm sorry indeed. But one thing drives out another, as you'll 

####-admit; and  I'm a busy man.  But first one thing and then another  this week  
have jogged my memory, as the saying goes; and not too late I hope. You see, 
I was asked to look out for hobbits of the Shire, and for one by the name of 
Baggins in particular.' 
     'And what has that got to do with me?' asked Frodo. 
     'Ah! you know best,'  said the landlord, knowingly.  'I won't give  you  
away;  but  I  was  told that  this  Baggins would be going by  the  name of 
Underhill, and I was given a description that fits you  well enough, if I may 
say so.' 
     'Indeed! Let's have it then!' said Frodo, unwisely interrupting. 
     'A stout  little fellow with red cheeks,' said  Mr. Butterbur solemnly. 
Pippin chuckled,  but Sam looked indignant. 'That won't  help  you  much; it 
goes for  most hobbits. Barley, he says to me,' continued Mr. Butterbur with 
a glance at Pippin.  'But this one is taller than some and fairer than most, 
and he  has a cleft in his  chin: perky chap with a bright eye. Begging your 
pardon, but he said it, not me.' 
     'He said it? And who was he?' asked Frodo eagerly. 
     'Ah! That was Gandalf, if you know who I mean. A wizard they say he is, 
but he's a  good  friend of mine, whether or no. But now  I  don't know what 
he'll have to say to me, if I see him again: turn all my ale sour or me into 
a block of  wood, I  shouldn't wonder. He's  a  bit hasty. Still what's done 
can't be undone. ' 
     'Well, what have you done?' said Frodo, getting impatient with the slow 
unravelling of Butterbur's thoughts. 
     'Where was I?' said the landlord,  pausing  and  snapping  his fingers.  
'Ah,  yes!  Old Gandalf. Three  months  back he walked  right  into  my room 
without  a  knock. Barley, he says, I'm off in  the  morning.  Will  you  do 
something for me? You've  only to name it,  I said. I'm in a hurry,  said he, 
and  I've no time myself, but I want  a message took to the Shire. Have  you 
anyone you can send, and trust to go? I can find someone, I  said, tomorrow,  
maybe, or the day after. Make it tomorrow,   he says, and then he gave  me  a  
letter. 
     'It's addressed plain enough,' said Mr.  Butterbur,  producing a letter  
from his pocket,  and reading out the  address slowly and proudly (he valued  
his reputation as a lettered man): 
     Mr FRODO BAGGINS, BAG END, HOBBITON in the SHIRE. 
     'A letter for me from Gandalf!' cried Frodo. 

####-     'Ah!' said Mr. Butterbur. 'Then your right name is Baggins?' 
     'It is,' said Frodo, 'and you had better give me that  letter  at once, 
and explain  why  you  never sent it.  That's  what you came  to tell  me, I 
suppose, though you've taken a long time to come to the point.' 
     Poor Mr. Butterbur looked  troubled.  'You're right, master,' he  said, 
'and I beg  your pardon. And I'm mortal  afraid of what Gandalf will say, if 
harm comes  of it. But I didn't  keep  it back a -purpose. I put  it by safe. 
Then I couldn't find nobody willing to go to the Shire next day, nor the day 
after, and  none of  my own folk were to spare;  and  then  one  thing after  
another drove it out of my mind. I'm a  busy man. I'll do what I can to  set  
matters right, and if there's any help I can give, you've only to name it. 
     'Leaving the letter aside, I  promised Gandalf no less. Barley, he says 
to  me, this friend of mine from the Shire, he may  be coming out  this  way 
before long, him and another. He'll be calling himself Underhill. Mind that! 
But  you need  ask  no  questions.  And if I'm  not with him, he  may  be in  
trouble, and  he  may need  help. Do whatever you can for him,  and I'll  be 
grateful, he says. And here you are, and trouble is not far off, seemingly.' 
     'What do you mean?' asked Frodo. 
     'These  black  men,' said  the landlord lowering  his  voice.  'They're 
looking  for  Baggins, and if they mean well, then  I'm a hobbit. It was  on 
Monday, and all the dogs were yammering and the geese screaming. Uncanny,  
I 
called  it. Nob, he came and told me that two  black  men were  at  the door  
asking  for a  hobbit called Baggins. Nob's hair was all stood on end. I bid 
the  black  fellows be off, and  slammed the door on them; but they've  been 
asking the same  question all the  way to  Archet, I hear. And that  Ranger, 
Strider, he's been asking  questions, too. Tried to get in here  to see you, 
before you'd had bite or sup, he did.' 
     'He did!' said Strider suddenly, coming  forward into  the light.  'And 
much trouble would have been saved, if you had let him in, Barliman.' 
     The landlord  jumped with surprise.  'You!'  he  cried.  'You're always 
popping up. What do you want now?' 
      'He's here with my leave,' said Frodo.  'He came to offer me his help.' 
     'Well, you  know your own business, maybe,' said Mr. Butterbur, looking 
suspiciously  at Strider. 'But if I  was in your plight,  I wouldn't take up 
with a Ranger.' 
     'Then who would  you take up with?' asked Strider. 'A fat innkeeper who 

####-only remembers his own name  because people  shout  it at him  all day? They 
cannot stay in The  Pony for ever, and they cannot go home. They have a long 
road before them. Will you go with them and keep the black men off?' 
     'Me? Leave Bree! I wouldn't do that for any money,' said Mr. Butterbur, 
looking  really scared. 'But why can't you stay here  quiet for  a  bit, Mr. 
Underhill?  What are  all  these  queer goings on? What are these black   men 
after, and where do they come from, I'd like to know?' 
     'I'm sorry I  can't explain it all,' answered  Frodo.  'I  am tired and 
very worried, and it's a long tale. But  if you mean to help me, I  ought to 
warn you  that you will be in  danger  as long as I  am in your house. These 
Black Riders: I am not sure, but I think, I fear they come from------' 
     'They  come from Mordor,'  said  Strider in a low  voice. 'From Mordor, 
Barliman, if that means anything to you.' 
     'Save us!' cried  Mr.  Bu tterbur turning  pale; the  name evidently was 
known to him. 'That is the worst news that has come to Bree in my time.' 'It 
is,' said  Frodo. 'Are  you still  willing to help  me?'  'I  am,'  said Mr. 
Butterbur. 'More than ever. Though I don't know what the likes of me  can do 
against, against ------' he faltered. 
     'Against the Shadow in the  East,' said  Strider  quietly.  'Not  much, 
Barliman, but  every  little  helps. You  can let  Mr. Underhill  stay  here 
tonight, as Mr. Underhill, and you can forget the  name of Baggins,  till he 
is far away.' 
     'I'll do that,' said Butterbur. 'But they'll find out he's here without 
help from me, I'm afraid. It's a pity  Mr. Baggins drew attention to himself 
this evening, to  say no more. The story of that  Mr. Bilbo's  going off has 
been heard before tonight in Bree. Even our Nob has been doing some guessing 
in his slow pate: and there are others in Bree quicker in the uptake than he 
is.' 
     'Well, we can only hope the Riders won't come back yet,' said Frodo. 
     'I hope  not, indeed,' said Butterbur. 'But spooks  or no spooks,  they 
won't get in The Pony so easy.  Don't you worry till the morning. Nob'll say 
no word. No black man shall pass my doors, while  I can stand on my legs. Me 
and my folk'll keep watch  tonight; but you had best get some  sleep, if you  
can.' 
     'In any case we  must be called at  dawn,' said Frodo. 'We must get off 
as early as possible. Breakfast at six-thirty, please.' 
     'Right!  I'll see to the orders,'  said the landlord. 'Good night,  Mr. 

####-Baggins - Underhill, I should say! Good night  -  now, bless me! Where's your 
Mr. Brandybuck?' 
     'I don't know,' said Frodo with sudden anxiety. They had  forgotten all 
about  Merry, and it was  getting late.  'I  am afraid  he is  out. He  said 
something about going for a breath of air.' 
     'Well, you do want looking after and no mistake: your party might be on 
a holiday!' said Butterbur. 'I must go and bar the doors quick, but I'll see 
your friend is let  in when  he comes.  I'd better send Nob to look for him. 
Good  night  to  you all!'  At  last  Mr. Butterbur  went out,  with another  
doubtful look at Strider and  a  shake of his  head. His footsteps retreated 
down the passage. 
     'Well?' said Strider. 'When are  you  going to open that letter?' Frodo 
looked carefully at  the seal before he broke it. It seemed certainly  to be 
Gandalf's. Inside, written in the  wizard's strong but  graceful script, was 
the following message: 
     THE PRANCING PONY, BREE. Midyear's Day, Shire Year, 1418. 
     Dear Frodo, 
     Bad news has reached me here.  I must go  off at  once. You  had better 
leave  Bag End  soon, and get out of the  Shire before  the  end  of July at 
latest. I will return as soon  as I can; and I will follow  you,  if  I find 
that you are gone. Leave a  message for me here,  if you  pass through Bree. 
You can trust the landlord (Butterbur). You may meet a friend of mine on the 
Road: a Man, lean, dark, tall, by some called Strider. He knows our business 
and will help you. Make for  Rivendell. There I hope we may meet again. If I  
do not come, Elrond will advise you. 
     Yours in haste  
     GANDALF. 
     PS. Do NOT use It  again, not far any reason whatever! Do not travel by 
night! 
     PPS. Make  sure that it is the real Strider. There are many strange men 
on the roads. His true name is Aragorn. 
     All that is gold does not glitter, 
     Not all those who wander are lost; 
     The old that is strong does not wither, 
     Deep roots are not reached by the frost. 
     From the ashes a fire shall be woken, 
     A light from the shadows shall spring; 

####-     Renewed shall be blade that was broken, 
     The crownless again shall be king. 
 
 
     PPPS.  I hope  Butterbur  sends  this promptly.  A  worthy man, but his 
memory is  like a lumber-roam: thing wanted always buried. If he  forgets, I  
shall roast him. 
     Fare Well! 
     Frodo read the letter to himself, and then passed it to Pippin and Sam. 
'Really  old Butterbur has  made  a mess of things!' he  said. 'He  deserves 
roasting. If  I  had  got this  at  once,  we  might all have  been safe  in 
Rivendell  by now. But what can have happened to Gandalf? He writes as if he 
was going into great danger.' 
     'He has been doing that for many years,' said Strider. 
     Frodo  turned and looked at him thoughtfully, wondering about Gandalf's 
second postscript. 'Why didn't you tell me that you were Gandalf's friend at 
once?' he asked.  'It would have saved time.' 
     'Would it? Would any of  you have believed me till now?' said  Strider. 
'I knew nothing  of this letter.  For  all I knew I  had  to persuade you to 
trust me without proofs, if I was to help you. In any case, I did not intend 
to tell you  all about myself at once. I had  to study you  first,  and make 
sure of  you. The  Enemy has set traps  for  me before  now. As soon as I had 
made up my  mind, I was  ready to tell you  whatever  you asked.  But I must 
admit,' he added with a queer laugh,  'that I hoped you would take to me for  
my  own  sake. A  hunted  man sometimes  wearies  of distrust  a nd longs for 
friendship. But there, I believe my looks are against me.' 
     'They  are - at first sight at any rate,'  laughed  Pippin with  sudden 
relief after reading Gandalf's letter. 'But handsome is as handsome does, as 
we  say in the Shire; and  I daresay  we  shall all look much the same after  
lying for days in hedges and ditches.' 
     'It  would  take more than a few days, or weeks, or years, of wandering 
in the Wild to make you look like Strider,' he answered. 'And you would  die 
first, unless you are made of sterner stuff than you look to be.' 
     Pippin  subsided; but  Sam was not  daunted, and he  still eyed Strider  
dubiously. 'How do we know you are the  Strider that  Gandalf speaks about?' 
he  demanded. 'You  never  mentioned Gandalf, till this letter came out. You  
might be  a  play-acting spy, for all I can see, trying to get us to go with 

####-you. You might have done in the real Strider and took his clothes. What have 
you to say to that?' 
     'That you are a stout fellow,' answered  Strider;   'but I am  afraid my 
only answer to you, Sam Gamgee, is this. If I had killed the real Strider, I 
could kill you. And I  should have killed you already without  so much talk. 
If I was after the Ring, I could have it - NOW!' 
     He stood up,  and seemed suddenly to grow taller. In his eyes gleamed a  
light, keen and commanding. Throwing back his cloak, he laid his hand on the 
hilt of a sword that had  hung concealed by  his  side. They did not dare to 
move. Sam sat wide-mouthed staring at him dumbly. 
     'But I am the real Strider, fortunately,' he said, looking down at them 
with his face softened by a sudden smile. 'I am Aragorn son of Arathorn; and 
if by life or death I can save you, I will.' 
     There  was  a long silence.  At last Frodo  spoke  with  hesitation.  'I 
believed  that you were  a friend before the letter came,' he  said,  'or at 
least I wished to.  You  have frightened me several times tonight, but never  
in the way that servants of the Enemy would, or so I imagine. I think one of 
his spies would - well, seem fairer and feel fouler, if you understand.' 
     'I see,' laughed Strider. 'I  look foul and feel fair. Is that  it? All 
that is gold does not glitter, not all those who wander are lost.' 
     'Did the  verses apply to you then?' asked Frodo. 'I could not make out 
what they were  about.  But how did  you  know that they  were  in Gandalf's 
letter, if you have never seen it?' 
     'I did not  know,' he answered. 'But I am Aragorn, and  those verses go 
with  that  name.' He  drew out his swor d,  and they saw that  the blade was 
indeed  broken  a  foot  below  the hilt. 'Not much  use is  it, Sam?'  said 
Strider. 'But the time is near when it shall be forged anew.' 
     Sam said nothing. 
     'Well,' said Strider, 'with Sam's permission we will call that settled. 
Strider shall be your guide. We shall have a rough road tomorrow. Even if we 
are allowed  to  leave  Bree unhindered, we can hardly hope now to leave  it  
unnoticed. But  I shall try to get  lost as soon as possible.  I know one or  
two ways out of Bree-land other than the main road. If once we shake off the 
pursuit, I shall make for Weathertop.' 
     'Weathertop?' said Sam. 'What's that?' 
     'It is a hill,  just to the north of the Road, about half way from here 
to Rivendell.  It commands a wide view all round; and there we shall have  a  

####-chance to look about us. Gandalf will make for that point, if he follows us. 
After Weathertop our  journey will become more difficult, and  we shall have 
to choose between various dangers.' 
     'When did you last see Gandalf?' asked Frodo. 'Do you know where he is, 
or what he is doing?' 
     Strider looked  grave. 'I do not know,' he said. 'I came  west with him 
in the spring.  I have often kept watch  on  the borders of the Shire in the 
last few years,  when he was busy elsewhere. He seldom left it unguarded. We 
last met on the first  of May: at  Sam  Ford down the Brandywine. He told me 
that his business with you had gone well, and that you would be starting for  
Rivendell in the last week  of September. As I knew  he  was at your side, I 
went away on a journey of my own. And that has proved ill;  for plainly some 
news reached him, and I was not at hand to help. 
     'I am troubled, for the  first time  since I have known  him. We should 
have had messages, even if he  could not come himself. When I returned, many 
days  ago, I heard the ill  news.  The tidings had gone  far  and wide  that 
Gandalf was missing and the horsemen had been seen. It was the Elven-folk of 
Gildor that told me this;  and  later  they told me that you had  left  your 
home; but there was no news of your leaving Buckland. I  have  been watching 
the East Road anxiously.' 
     'Do  you  think  the Black Riders  have  anything to do  with it  - with 
Gandalf's absence, I mean?' asked Frodo. 
     'I  do  not know of anything else  that could have hindered him, except 
the  Enemy himself,'  said  Strider. 'But do not give  up  hope! Gandalf  is 
greater than you Shire-folk know  -  as a rule you can only see his jokes and 
toys. But this business of ours will be his greatest task.' 
     Pippin yawned. 'I am sorry,' he said, 'but I am dead tired. In spite of 
all  the danger and worry  I must go to  bed, or sleep where I sit. Where is 
that silly fellow, Merry? It would be the last straw, if we had to go out in 
the dark to look for him.' 
     At that moment they heard a door slam; then feet came running along the 
passage. Merry came  in  with a  rush followed  by  Nob.  He shut  the  door  
hastily, and leaned against it. He was out of breath. They  stared at him in 
alarm for  a moment before he gasped: 'I have seen  them, Frodo! I have seen 
them! Black Riders!' 
     'Black Riders!' cried Frodo. 'Where?' 
     'Here. In the village. I  stayed indoors for  an  hour. Then as you did 

####-not  come  back, I  went out  for a  stroll.  I  had come back again and was 
standing just outside the light of the lamp looking at the stars. Suddenly I 
shivered and felt that something horrible was creeping near: there was a son 
of deeper shade among the shadows across the  road, just beyond the edge  of 
the lamplight. It slid away at once into the dark without a sound. There was 
no horse.' 
     'Which  way  did  it  go?'  asked Strider, suddenly  and sharply. Merry 
started, noticing the  stranger for the  first  time. 'Go  on!' said  Frodo. 
'This is a friend of Gandalf's. I will explain later.' 
     'It seemed to make  off  up  the  Road,  eastward,' continued Merry. 'I  
tried to follow. Of course, it vanished almost at once; but I went round the 
corner and on as far as the last house on the Road.' 
     Strider looked at Merry with wonder. 'You have a stout heart,' he said; 
'but it was foolish.' 
     'I don't know,' said Merry. 'Neither brave nor silly, I  think. I could 
hardly  help myself.  I  seemed to be drawn  somehow.  Anyway,  I  went, and 
suddenly I heard voices by the hedge. One was muttering; and the  other  was 
whispering,  or  hissing. I  couldn't hear a word  that was said. I did  not 
creep  any  closer,  because  I  began  to  tremble  all over. Then  I  felt 
terrified,  and I  turned  back,  and was  just  going  to  bolt  home, when 
something came behind me and I... I fell over.' 
     'I  found  him,  sir,'  put in Nob.  'Mr. Butterbur sent me out with  a  
lantern. I went down to West -gate, and then back up towards South-gate. Just 
nigh  Bill Ferny's  house I thought  I could see  something in  the  Road. I  
couldn't swear to  it, but it  looked to me as if two men was  stooping over  
something, lilting  it. I gave a shout, but where I got up to the spot there 
was  no  signs  of them,  and only Mr. Brandybuck lying by  the roadside. He 
seemed to be asleep. "I thought I had  fallen into  deep  water," he says to 
me, when I shook him. Very queer he was, and as soon as I had roused him, he 
got up and ran back here like a hare. ' 
     'I am  afraid that's true,'  said Merry, 'though I  don't know  what  I 
said. I had an ugly dream, which I can't remember. I went to pieces. I don't  
know what came over me.' 
     'I  do,' said Strider.  'The Black Breath. The  Riders  must have  left 
their horses outside, and passed back through the South-gate in secret. They  
will know all the news now, for  they have visited  Bill Ferny; and probably  
that Southerner was a spy as well. Something may happen in the night, before 

####-we leave Bree.' 
     'What  will happen?'  said  Merry.  'Will they attack the inn?'  'No, I 
think not,' said Strider.  'They are not all here yet. And in any  case that 
is not their way. In dark and loneliness  they are strongest; they will  not 
openly attack a house where ther e are lights and many people -not until they 
are desperate, not while all the  long  leagues of Eriador still  lie before 
us.  But their  power  is in  terror, and already some in Bree are in  their 
clutch. They will drive these wretches to some evil work: Ferny, and some of 
the strangers, and, maybe,  the gatekeeper too. They had words with Harry at 
West-gate on Monday. I was watching them. He was white and shaking when 
they 
left him.' 
     'We seem to have enemies all round,' said Frodo. 'What are we to do? ' 
     'Stay here, and do not  go to  your rooms! They are sure  to have found 
out which those  are. The hobbit-rooms  have windows looking north and close 
to the ground. We will all remain together and bar this window and the door. 
But first Nob and I will fetch your luggage.' 
     While Strider was  gone, Frodo gave Merry a  rapid account of all  that 
had happened since supper. Merry was  still reading and  pondering Gandalf's 
letter when Strider and Nob returned. 
     'Well Masters,' said  Nob, 'I've ruffled up  the clothes  and  put in a  
bolster down the  middle of  each bed.  And I made a  nice imitation of your  
head  with a brown woollen mat, Mr. Bag  - Underhill,  sir,' he added with  a  
grin. 
     Pippin laughed. 'Very life-like!'  he said. 'But  wha t will happen when 
they have penetrated the disguise?' 
     'We shall  see,'  said  Strider.  'Let us hope  to hold the  fort  till 
morning.' 
     'Good  night to  you,' said Nob, and went off to take  his part in  the 
watch on the doors.  
     Their bags and gear they piled on the parlour -floor. They pushed a  low 
chair against the door and shut the window. Peering  out, Frodo saw that the 
night was still clear. The Sickle was swinging bright above the shoulders of  
Bree-hill. He then closed and barred  the heavy inside shutters and drew the  
curtains together. Strider built up the fire and blew out all the candles.  
     The  hobbits lay  down  on their blankets  with their feet  towards the 
hearth; but  Strider settled himself  in the chair against  the  door .  They 

####-talked for a little, for Merry still had several questions to ask. 
     'Jumped over  the Moon!'  chuckled  Merry as he rolled himself  in  his 
blanket. 'Very ridiculous of you, Frodo! But I wish I had been there to see. 
The worthies of Bree will be discussing it a hundred years hence.' 
     'I  hope so,' said Strider. Then  they all fell  silent, and one by one 
the hobbits dropped off to sleep. 
 

####- 

Chapter 11. A Knife in the Dark 

 
 
     As  they prepared  for sleep  in  the  inn at  Bree,  darkness  lay  on 
Buckland; a mist strayed in the dells and along the river -bank. The house at 
Crickhollow stood silent. Fatty Bolger opened the door cautiously and peered 
out. A feeling of fear had been growing on him all day, and he was unable to 
rest or go to bed: there was a brooding threat  in the breathless night-air. 
As he  stared out into the gloom, a black shadow moved under the trees;  the 
gate  seemed  to open  of its own  accord and close again without  a  sound. 
Terror seized him. He  shrank  back,  and for a moment he stood trembling in 
the hall. Then he shut and locked the door. 
     The night  deepened.  There  came  the  soft  sound of horses  led with 
stealth  along the  lane.  Outside  the gate  they stopped, and three  black  
figures entered,  like shades of night  creeping across the ground. One went 
to the door, one to the corner of the house on  either side; and there  they 
stood, as  still as the shadows of  stones, while night went slowly on.  The 
house and the quiet trees seemed to be waiting breathlessly. 
     There was a faint stir  in the leaves, and  a cock crowed far away. The 
cold hour before dawn was passing. The figure by the door moved. In the dark 
without moon or stars a drawn blade gleamed,  as  if a chill light had  been 
unsheathed.  There was a blow, soft but heavy, and the door shuddered. 
     'Open, in the name of Mordor!' said a voice thin and menacing. 
     At a second blow the door yielded and fell back, with timbers burst and 
lock broken. The black figures passed swiftly in. 
     At that moment, among the trees nearby,  a  horn rang out.  It rent the 
night like fire on a hill-top. 
     AWAKE! FEAR! FIRE! FOES! AWAKE! 
     Fatty Bolger had not been idle. As soon as he saw the dark shapes creep 
from the garden, he knew that he must run for it, or perish. And run he did, 
out  of the  back door, through  the garden,  and over the  fields.  When he 
reached  the  nearest  house,  more  than a mile  away, he  collapsed on the 
doorstep. 'No, no, no!'  he was  crying. 'No,  not me! I haven't got it!' It 
was  some time  before anyone could make out what he  was babbling about. 
At 
last they got the idea that enemies were in Buckland, some strange  invasion 

####-from the Old Forest. And then they lost no more time. 
     FEAR! FIRE! FOES! 
     The Brandybucks were blowing  the Horn-call of  Buckland,  that had not 
been sounded for  a hundred years, not  since the white wolves came  in  the 
Fell Winter, when the Brandywine was frozen over. 
     AWAKE! AWAKE! 
     Far-away answering horns were heard. The alarm was spreading. The black  
figures fled from the house.  One  of them  let fall a  hobbit-cloak  on the 
step, as he ran. In the lane the noise  of hoofs broke out, and gathering to 
a gallop, went hammering away into the darkness. All about Crickhollow there 
was the sound  of horns blowing, and voices crying and feet running. But the 
Black Riders rode like a gale to the North-gate. Let the little people blow!  
Sauron  would deal  with them later. Meanwhile they had another errand: they 
knew now that the house  was empty and the Ring had gone. They rode down 
the 
guards at the gate and vanished from the Shire. 
     In  the early night  Frodo woke from deep  sleep, suddenly, as if  some 
sound or presence  had disturbed  him. He saw that Strider was sitting alert 
in his  chair: his  eyes gleamed in  the light of the  fire, which had  been 
tended and was burning brightly; but he made no sign or movement. 
     Frodo soon went to sleep again; but his dreams were again troubled with  
the noise  of wind and of ga lloping  hoofs.  The wind  seemed to be  curling  
round the house and shaking it; and far off  he heard a horn blowing wildly.  
He  opened his  eyes,  and  heard a  cock  crowing  lustily in the inn-yard. 
Strider  had  drawn the  curtains and pushed back the shutters with a clang. 
The  first  grey light of day  was in the room, and  a  cold  air was coming 
through the open window.  
     As soon  as  Strider  had roused them  all,  he led  the  way  to their 
bedrooms. When they  saw them they were glad that they had taken his advice: 
the windows had been forced  open and were  swinging, and  the curtains were 
flapping; the beds  were tossed about,  and the bolsters  slashed and  flung 
upon the floor; the brown mat was torn to pieces. 
     Strider  immediately  went  to fetch the landlord. Poor  Mr.  Butterbur 
looked sleepy and frightened. He had hardly closed his eyes all night (so he 
said), but he had never heard a sound. 
     'Never has such  a thing happened  in my  time!' he cried,  raising his 
hands in horror. 'Guests unable to sleep in  their beds,  and good  bolsters 

####-ruined and all! What are we coming to?' 
     'Dark times,' said  Strider. 'But for  the present you  may be left  in 
peace,  when you have got rid of us. We will leave at once. Never mind about 
breakfast: a drink  and a bite standing will have to do. We shall be  packed 
in a few minutes.' 
     Mr. Butterbur hurried off to see that their ponies were  got ready, and 
to fetch them a 'bite'. But very soon he came back in dismay. The ponies had 
vanished!  The stable-doors had all  been opened in the night, and they were 
gone: not only Merry's ponies, but every other horse and beast in the place. 
     Frodo was  crushed by the news. How  could they hope to reach Rivendell 
on foot, pursued  by  mounted enemies? They might as  well  set  out for the 
Moon. Strider sat silent for a while, looking at the hobbits,  as if he  was 
weighing up their strength and courage. 
     'Ponies would  not help  us to  escape  horsemen,'  he  said  at  last, 
thoughtfully, as if he guessed  what Frodo  had in  mind. 'We should  not go 
much slower on foot, not  on the roads that I mean to take.  I was  going to 
walk in any case. It is the food and stores that trouble me. We cannot count 
on getting anything to  eat between here and Rivendell, except  what we take 
with  us; and we ought to take plenty  to spare; for we  may be delayed,  or  
forced  to  go round-about, far out  of  the direct way.  How much  are  you  
prepared to carry on your backs?' 
     'As  much as we must,' said Pippin with  a sinking heart, but trying to 
show that he was tougher than he looked (or felt). 
     'I can carry enough for two,' said Sam defiantly. 
     'Can't  anything be done,  Mr. Butterbur?' asked Frodo. 'Can't we get a  
couple of  ponies in the vi llage, or even one  just for the baggage? I don't  
suppose we  could  hire  them, but we might be able to buy them,' he  added,  
doubtfully, wondering if he could afford it. 
     'I  doubt  it,'  said   the  landlord  unhappily.  'The  two  or  three 
riding-ponies that there were in Bree were stabled  in  my yard, and they're 
gone.  As for other animals, horses or ponies for draught or what not, there 
are very few of them in Bree, and they won't be for sale. But I'll do what I 
can. I'll rout out Bob and send him round as soon as may be.' 
     'Yes,' said Strider reluctantly, 'you  had better do that. I am  afraid 
we  shall have to try  to get  one pony at least. But so ends  all  hope  of 
starting early,  and  slipping away quietly! We might as  well have  blown a  
horn to announce our departure. That was part of their plan, no doubt.' 

####-     'There is one crumb of comfort,' said Merry, 'and more than a  crumb, I 
hope: we  can have  breakfast while we wait  - and sit down to it.  Let's get 
hold of Nob!' 
     In the end there was more  than three hours'  delay. Bob came back with 
the  report  that  no horse or pony was to be got for love  or  money in the 
neighbourhood - except one: Bill Ferny had  one that he might possibly sell.  
'A poor old half-starved creature it is,'  said Bob; 'but he won't part with 
it for less than thrice its worth, seeing how  you're placed, not if I knows 
Bill Ferny.' 
     'Bill  Ferny?'  said Frodo. 'Isn't there some trick? Wouldn't the beast  
bolt back to him with all our stuff, or help in tracking us, or something?' 
     'I wonder,' said Strider. 'But I cannot imagine any animal running home 
to him, once  it got  away.  I  fancy this  is only an  afterthought of kind 
Master  Ferny's: just a  way of increasing his profits  from the affair. The 
chief  danger is that the poor beast is probably at  death's door. But there 
does not seem any choice. What does he want for it?' 
     Bill Ferny's price was twelve  silver pennies; and  that  was indeed at 
least  three times the pony's value in those pans. It  proved to  be a bony, 
underfed, and dispirited  animal; but  it did  not look like dying just yet. 
Mr. Butterbur paid for it himself, and offered Merry  another eighteen pence 
as  some  compensation  for  the  lost animals. He was an  honest  man,   and 
well-off as things were reckoned  in Bree;  but thirty silver pennies was  a  
sore blow to him, and being cheated by Bill Ferny made it harder to bear. 
     As a matter of fact he came out on the right side in the end. It turned 
out later that only one  horse had been actually stolen. The others had been 
driven off, or  had  bolted in terror, and were found wandering in different 
corners  of  the  Bree-land.  Merry's  ponies  had  escaped altogether,  and 
eventually (having a good deal of sense) they made their way to the Downs in 
search of Fatty Lumpkin. So they came under  the care  of Tom Bombadil for a  
while, and were well-off. But when  news of the events at Bree came to Tom's 
ears, he sent them to Mr. Butterbur, who thus got five good beasts at a very 
fair price. They had  to work harder in Bree, but  Bob treated them well; so 
on the whole  they were lucky: they missed a dark and dangerous journey. But 
they never came to Rivendell. 
     However, in the meanwhile for all Mr. Butterbur knew his money was gone 
for  good, or  for bad.  And he had other troubles. For  there  was a  great 
commotion as soon as  the remaining  guests were astir and heard news of the 

####-raid  on the inn. The southern travellers had lost several horses and blamed 
the innkeeper loudly, until it became known that one of their own number had 
also  disappeared  in the  night,  none  other than Bill Ferny's squint-eyed 
companion. Suspicion fell on him at once. 
     'If you pick up with  a  horse-thief, and  bring him to my house,' said 
Butterbur angrily, 'you ought to pay  for all the damage yourselves and  not 
come shouting at me. Go and ask Ferny where your handsome friend is!' But it 
appeared that he was nobody's friend, and nobody could recollect when he had 
joined their party. 
     After  their  breakfast the  hobbits had to re-pack,  and get  together  
further  supplies for  the  longer  journey  they were now expecting. It was 
close on ten o'clock before they at last got off. By  that time the whole of 
Bree was buzzing with excitement. Frodo's vanishing trick; the appearance of 
the black  horsemen; the robbing of the stables; and not least the news that 
Strider  the Ranger  had joined the  mysterious hobbits, made such a tale as 
would last for  many  uneventful years. Most of  the inhabitants of Bree and  
Staddle, and many  even  from Combe and Archet, were crowded in the  road 
to 
see the travellers start. The other  guests in  the inn were at the doors or  
hanging out of the windows. 
     Strider had changed his mind, and  he decided  to leave Bree by the main 
road. Any attempt to set  off across country at once would only make matters 
worse: half the inhabitants would follow them,  to see what they were up to,  
and to prevent them from trespassing. 
     They said farewell to Nob and Bob, and took leave of Mr. Butterbur with 
many thanks. 'I  hope we shall  meet again some  day, when things are  merry 
once more,' said Frodo. 'I  should like nothing better than  to stay in your 
house in peace for a while.' 
     They tramped off, anxious and downhearted, under the eyes of the crowd. 
Not  all  the faces were friendly, nor all the words that were shouted.  But 
Strider seemed to be held in awe by most of the Bree-landers, and those that 
he stared at shut their mouths and drew away. He walked in  front with Frodo; 
next came  Merry  and Pippin; and last came Sam leading the pony,  which was 
laden with as much  of their baggage as  they  had the heart to give it; but 
already it looked less dejected,  as  if  it approved of the  change in  its 
fortunes.  Sam  was chewing an  apple thoughtfully. He had a pocket full  of 
them:  a parting  present from Nob and  Bob. 'Apples for walking, and a pipe 

####-for sitting,' he said. 'But I reckon I'll miss them both before long.' 
     The hobbits took no notice of the inquisitive heads that peeped  out of 
doors,  or  popped over walls and fences,  as they passed. But as they  drew 
near to  the further gate, Frodo saw a  dark  ill-kept  house behind a thick  
hedge: the  last  house  in the village.  In one of the  windows he caught a  
glimpse of a sallow face with sly, slanting eyes; but it vanished at once. 
     'So that's where that southerner is hiding!' he thought. 'He looks more 
than half like a goblin.' 
     Over the hedge  another  man  was  staring boldly.  He  had heavy black  
brows, and  dark scornful eyes; his large mouth curled in  a  sneer.  He was 
smoking a  short black pipe. As they approached he took it out  of his mouth 
and spat. 
     'Morning,  Longshanks!' he  said.  'Off  early?  Found some  friends at 
last?' Strider nodded, but did not answer.  'Morning, my little friends!' he 
said  to the  others. 'I suppose you know who you've taken  up  with? That's 
Stick -at-naught  Strider,  that is!  Though  I've  heard other names not  so 
pretty.  Watch out tonight! And you,  Sammie, don't  go ill-treating my poor  
old pony! Pah!' He spat again. 
     Sam turned quickly. 'And you.  Ferny,' he said, 'put your ugly face out 
of sight, or it will get  hurt.' With a sudden flick, quick as lightning, an 
apple left his hand and hit Bill square on the nose. He ducked too late, and 
curses  came from  behind  the  hedge.  'Waste  of a  good apple,'  said Sam 
regretfully, and strode on. 
     At last  they  left  the  village  behind. The  escort of children  and 
stragglers  that  had  followed  them  got  tired  and  turned  back at  the 
South-gate. Passing through, they kept on along the Road for some  miles. It  
bent to the left, curving back into its eastward line as it rounded the feet 
of  Bree-hill,  and  then  it  began to run  swiftly downwards  into  wooded 
country. To their left they could see some of the houses and hobbit-holes of 
Staddle on the  gentler  south-eastern  slopes of  the hill; down in  a deep 
hollow away north of the Road there were wisps of rising  smoke  that showed 
where Combe lay; 
     Archet was hidden in the trees beyond. 
     After the  Road had run down some way, and  had left Bree-hill standing 
tall and brown behind, they came on a narrow track that led off towards  the 
North. 'This is where we leave  the open and take to cover,' said Strider. 
     'Not a "short cut", I hope,' said  Pippin.  'Our last short cut through 

####-woods nearly ended in disaster.' 
     'Ah, but you had not  got me with you then,' laughed Strider. 'My cuts,  
short  or long, don't go wrong.' He took a look up and down the Road. No one 
was in sight; and he led the way quickly down towards the wooded valley. 
     His  plan, as  far as  they  could understand  it without  knowing  the 
country, was to go towards Archet at first, but to bear right and pass it on 
the  east, and then to steer as straight as he could over the wild lands  to 
Weathertop Hill. In that way they  would, if all went well,  cut off a great 
loop of the Road,  which  further on bent southwards to avoid the Midgewater  
Marshes.  But,  of  course, they  would have  to  pass  through  the marshes 
themselves, and Strider's description of them was not encouraging. 
     However,  in the meanwhile, walking was not unpleasant.  Indeed, if  it 
had not been for the disturbing events  of the night before, they would have 
enjoyed this pan of the journey better than any up to that time. The sun was 
shining, clear but not too hot. The woods in the valley were still leafy and 
full  of  colour, and  seemed  peaceful  and wholesome. Strider   guided them 
confidently among the many crossing paths, although left  to themselves they 
would soon have  been at  a loss. He was taking a wandering course with many 
turns and doublings, to put off any pursuit. 
     'Bill Ferny will have watched where we left the Road, for certain,'  he 
said;  'though I don't think he  will follow  us himself. He  knows the land 
round here well enough, but he knows he is not a  match for me in a wood. It 
is what he may tell others that I am afraid of. I don't suppose they are far 
away. If they think we have made for Archet, so much the better.' 
     Whether because  of Strider's skill or for some other reason,  they saw 
no sign and heard no  sound of any other living thing all  that day: neither  
two-footed,  except  birds;  nor  four-footed,  except  one  fox  and  a  few 
squirrels. The next day  they began to steer a steady  course eastwards; and 
still all was quiet and  peaceful. On  the third day out from Bree they came  
out of  the  Chetwood. The  land  had been falling steadily, ever since they 
turned aside from the  Road,  and they  now  entered a wide flat expanse  of 
country, much more difficult to manage. They were  far beyond the borders of 
the Bree-land,  out in the  pathless  wilderness, and  drawing  near  to the 
Midge-water Marshes.  
     The ground now became damp, and in places boggy and here and there they 
came  upon pools, and  wide  stretches of reeds  and rushes filled with  the 
warbling of little hidden  birds. They  had to pick their  way  carefully to 

####-keep  both  dry-footed and  on  their  proper  course.  At  first  they made 
fan-progress,  but as  they  went on, their passage  became slower  and more 
dangerous.  The marshes were bewildering and  treacherous, and there was  no 
permanent trail even for Rangers  to find through their shifting  quagmires.  
The  flies began  to torment them, and the air was full  of  clouds of  tiny 
midges that crept up their sleeves and breeches and into their hair. 
     'I  am being eaten alive!'  cried  Pippin. 'Midgewater!  There are more 
midges than water!' 
     'What  do  they live  on  when  they  can't  get  hobbit?'  asked  Sam, 
scratching his neck. 
     They spent a miserable day in this lonely and unpleasant country. Their 
camping-place  was  damp, cold,  and uncomfortable;  and the  biting insects 
would not let  them sleep. There were also abominable creatures haunting the 
reeds  and tussocks that from  the sound  of them were evil relatives of the 
cricket.  There  were  thousands  of  them,  and  they  squeaked all  round, 
neek-breek,  breek-neek, unceasingly all the night, until the  hobbits  were 
nearly frantic. 
     The  next day,  the fourth, was little  better, and the night almost as 
comfortless. Though  the Neekerbreekers (as Sam called them)  had been  left  
behind, the midges still pursued them. 
     As Frodo lay, tired but unable to close his eyes, it seemed to him that 
far away  there came  a light in the eastern sky: it  flashed and faded many 
times. It was not the dawn, for that was still some hours off.  
     'What is the  light?'  he said  to  Strider,  who had  risen,  and  was 
standing, gazing ahead into the night. 
     'I do  not know,' Strider answered. 'It is too distant to make  out. It 
is like lightning that leaps up from the hill -tops.' 
     Frodo lay down again, but for a long while he could still see the white 
flashes, and against them the tall dark figure  of Strider,  standing silent 
and watchful. At last he passed into uneasy sleep. 
     They had not  gone  far  on  the  fifth day  when  they  left  the last  
straggling pools and  reed-beds of the marshes  behind them. The land before 
them began steadily  to rise again. Away in the distance eastward they could 
now  see a line of hills. The highest of them was at the  right of  the line 
and  a little  separated from the  others. It  had a  conical top,  slightly 
flattened at the summit. 
     'That  is Weathertop,' said Strider. 'The Old Road,  which we have left  

####-far  away on our right, runs to the south  of it and passes not far from its 
foot. We  might  reach it by noon tomorrow, if we  go straight towards it. I 
suppose we had better do so.' 
     'What do you mean?' asked Frodo. 
     'I mean: when we do get there, it is not certain what we shall find. It 
is close to the Road.' 
     'But surely we wer e hoping to find Gandalf there?' 
     'Yes; but the hope is faint.  If he comes  this way at  all, he may not 
pass through  Bree, and so  he may not know  what we  are doing. And anyway, 
unless by luck we arrive almost together, we shall miss one another; it will 
not be safe for him or for us to wait there long. If the Riders fail to find 
us in the wilderness,  they are likely to make for Weathertop themselves. It 
commands a wide view all round. Indeed, there  are many birds and  beasts in 
this country that  could see us,  as we stand here, from that hill-top.  Not 
all the  birds are to be trusted,  and there are other spies more  evil than 
they are.' 
     The hobbits looked  anxiously at  the distant hills. Sam looked up into 
the pale sky, fearing to see hawks  or eagles hovering over them with bright  
unfriendly eyes. 'You do make me feel uncomfortable  and lonesome, Strider!' 
he said. 
     'What do you advise us to do?' asked Frodo. 
     'I  think,' answered Strider  slowly, as  if he was not quite sure,  'I 
think the best thing is to  go as straight eastward from  here as we can, to 
make for the line of hills, not for Weathertop. There we can strike a path I 
know that runs at their feet; it will  bring us to Weathertop from the north 
and less openly. Then we shall see what we shall see.' 
     All that day they plodded along, until the cold  and early evening came 
down.  The  land  became  drier and more barren;  but  mists and vapours lay 
behind them on the marshes. A few melancholy  birds were piping and wa iling, 
until the round red sun sank slowly into the western shadows; then  an empty 
silence fell.  The hobbits  thought  of  the  soft light of sunset  glancing 
through the cheerful windows of Bag End far away. 
     At  the day's  end  they came to a stream  that wandered  down from the 
hills to lose  itself  in the stagnant marshland, and they went up along its 
banks while the light  lasted. It was already night when at last they halted 
and made  their  camp under some stunted alder -trees  by  the shores of  the 
stream. Ahead there loomed now against the dusky  sky the bleak and treeless 

####-backs of the hills. That night they set a watch, and Strider, it seemed, did 
not  sleep at all. The moon was waxing, and in the early night-hours a  cold 
grey light lay on the land. 
     Next morning they set out  again soon after sunrise.  There was a frost  
in the air, and the  sky was a  pale clear blue. The hobbits felt refreshed, 
as if they had had a night of unbroken sleep. Already they were getting used 
to much walking  on short commons  - shorter  at  any rate than  what in the  
Shire they  would have thought barely enough  to  keep them  on  their legs.  
Pippin declared that Frodo was looking twice the hobbit that he had been. 
     'Very odd,' said Frodo, tightening his belt, 'considering that there is 
actually a good deal less of me. I hope the  thinning process will not go on 
indefinitely, or I shall become a wraith.' 
     'Do  not  speak  of  such  things!'  said  Strider  quickly,  and  with 
surprising earnestness.  
     The  hills drew nearer.  They  made an  undulating  ridge, often rising 
almost to a thousand feet, and here and there falling again to low clefts or  
passes leading into  the eastern land  beyond.  Along the crest of the ridge 
the hobbits could see what looked to be the remains of green-grown walls and 
dikes, and in the clefts there still stood the ruins  of old works of stone. 
By night they had reached  the feet of the westward  slopes, and there  they 
camped. It was the night of the fifth of October, a nd they were six days out 
from Bree. 
     In the morning  they  found, for the first time since they had left the 
Chetwood,  a  track  plain  to  see.  They  turned  right  and  followed  it 
southwards. It ran cunningly, taking a line that seemed chosen so as to keep  
as much hidden as possible from the view, both of the hill -tops above and of 
the  flats to the west. It dived into  dells,  and hugged steep  banks;  and 
where it passed over flatter and more open ground on either side of it there 
were lines of large  boulders and hewn stones that  screened the  travellers 
almost like a hedge. 
     'I wonder who made this path, and what for,' said Merry, as they walked 
along one of  these  avenues, where  the  stones  were unusually  large  and 
closely  set. 'I am  not  sure that I like  it: it  has  a - well, rather  a  
barrow-wightish look. Is there any barrow on Weathertop?' 
     'No. There  is no barrow on  Weathertop, nor  on  any of these  hills,' 
answered Strider. 'The  Men of  the West  did not live here; though in their 
latter days they defended  the hills for a while against  the evil that came 

####-out of Angmar.  This  path was made to serve the  forts along the walls. But 
long before,  in the first  days of  the North  Kingdom, they built  a great 
watch-tower  on  Weathertop,  Amon  Syl  they called  it.  It was burned and 
broken, and nothing remains of it now but a tumbled ring, like a rough crown 
on  the old hill's head.  Yet once it was tall and  fair.  It is  told  that 
Elendil stood there watching for the coming of Gil-galad out of the West, in 
the days of the Last Alliance.' 
     The  hobbits gazed  at Strider. It seemed  that he  was  learned in old 
lore, as well as in  the ways of the wild. 'Who was Gil-galad?' asked Merry; 
but Strider did not answer, and seemed to be lost in thought. Suddenly a low 
voice murmured: 
     Gil-galad was an Elven-king. 
     Of him the harpers sadly sing: 
     the last whose realm was fair and free 
     between the Mountains and the Sea. 
 
     His sword was long, his lance was keen, 
     his shining helm afar was seen; 
     the countless stars of heaven's field  
     were mirrored in his silver shield. 
 
     But long ago he rode away, 
     and where he dwelleth none can say; 
     for into darkness fell his star 
     in Mordor where the shadows are. 
     The others turned in amazement, for the voice was Sam's. 
     'Don't stop!' said Merry. 
     'That's all I know,' stammered  Sam, blushing.  'I learned  it from Mr. 
Bilbo when I was a lad. He used to  tell me tales  like that, knowing  how I 
was always one for  hearing about Elves. It was Mr. Bilbo  as taught  me  my 
letters.  He was  mighty  book -learned was dear  old Mr. Bilbo. And he wrote 
poetry. He wrote what I have just said.' 
     'He did  not make it up,' said Strider. 'It  is pan of the lay  that is 
called The Fall of Gil-galad, which is in an ancient tongue. Bilbo must have 
translated it. I never knew that.' 
     'There was a lot more,' said Sam,  'all about  Mordor.  I  didn't learn 
that part, it gave me the shivers I never thought I should be going that way 

####-myself!' 
     'Going to Mordor!' cried Pippin. 'I hope it won't come to that!' 
     'Do not speak that name so loudly!' said Strider. 
     It was  already  mid-day  when they  drew near the southern end of  the 
path, and saw before them,  in the pale  clear light  of the  October sun, a  
grey-green bank, leading up like a  bridge on to  the northward slope of the 
hill They decided to make for the top at once,  while the daylight was broad 
Concealment was no longer  possible,  and they could only hope that no enemy 
or spy was observing  them. Nothing  was to be seen  moving  on the hill. If 
Gandalf was anywhere about, there was no sign of him. 
     On the western flank  of Weathertop they  found a  sheltered hollow, at 
the  bottom of which  there was  a bowl -shaped dell with grassy sides. There 
they left  Sam  and Pippin with the pony and  their  packs and  luggage. The 
other three went on. After half an hour's plodding climb Strider reached the 
crown  of the hill; Frodo and Merry followed, tired and breathless. The last  
slope had been steep and rocky. 
     On  the top they found,  as  Strider had said,  a wide  ring of ancient 
stonework, now crumbling or covered with age-long grass. But in the centre a  
cairn of broken st ones had been piled. They were blackened as  if with fire. 
About them  the turf  was  burned to the roots and all within the  ring  the 
grass was scorched  and shrivelled, as if flames had swept the hill-top; but 
there was no sign of any living thing. 
     Standing upon the  rim of the ruined circle,  they saw all round  below 
them a  wide  prospect,  for the most pan of  lands empty  and  featureless,  
except for patches of woodland away to the  south, beyond which  they caught 
here and  there  the glint of  distant water. Beneath them  on this southern 
side there  ran  like  a  ribbon  the Old Road,  coming  out of the West and 
winding up and down, until it faded behind a ridge of dark land to the east. 
Nothing was moving on it. Following  its line eastward  with their eyes they  
saw the Mountains: the nearer foothills were brown and sombre; 
     behind them stood taller shapes of  grey, and  behind  those again were 
high white peaks glimmering among the clouds. 
     'Well, here we are!' said Merry. 'And very  cheerless and uninviting it 
looks! There is no water and no shelter. And no sign of Gandalf. But I don't  
blame him for not waiting - if he ever came here.' 
     'I wonder,' said Strider, looking round thoughtfully. 'Even if he was a  
day or two behind us at Bree, he could have arrived here first.  He can ride 

####-very swiftly when need presses.' Suddenly he stooped and looked at the stone 
on the top of the  cairn; it was flatter than the others, and  whiter, as if 
it had escaped the fire. He picked it up and examined it, turning  it in his 
fingers. "This has been  handled recently,' he said.  'What do you  think of 
these marks?' 
     On  the flat under -side Frodo saw  some scratches: 'There seems to he a  
stroke, a dot, and three more strokes,' he said. 
     'The stroke  on the left  might  be a G-rune  with thin branches,' said 
Strider. 'It might be a sign left by Gandalf, though one cannot be sure. The 
scratches are fine, and they certainly look fresh. But the  marks might mean 
something  quite  different, and have  nothing  to do  with us.  Rangers use 
runes, and they come here sometimes.' 
     'What could they mean, even if Gandalf made them?' asked Merry 
     'I  should say,' answered Strider, 'that they stood for G3, and  were a  
sign that Gandalf was here on  October the third: that is three days ago now. 
It would also show that he was in a hurry and danger was at hand, so that he 
had no time or  did not dare to write anything longer or plainer. If that is 
so, we must be wary.' 
     'I wish we could  feel  sure that he made  the marks, whatever they may 
mean,' said Frodo 'It would be a  great  comfort to  know that he was on the 
way, in front of us or behind us.' 
     'Perhaps,' said  Strider. 'For myself, I believe that he was  here, and 
was in danger. There have been scorching flames here; and now the light that 
we saw three  nights ago in the eastern sky comes back to  my  mind. I guess 
that he was attacked on this hill-top,  but with what result  I cannot tell. 
He  is here no longer, and we must now look aft er ourselves and make our own 
way to Rivendell, as best we can ' 
     'How far  is  Rivendell?' asked Merry, gazing round wearily. The  world 
looked wild and wide from Weathertop. 
     'I don't know if the Road has  ever  been measured in miles  beyond the 
Forsaken Inn, a day's  journey east of Bree,' answered Strider. 'Some say it 
is so far, and some say otherwise. It is a strange road,  and folk are  glad 
to reach their  journey's end, whether the time is long or short. But I know 
how long it would  take me on  my  own  feet,  with fair  weather and no ill 
fortune twelve days from here to the Ford of Bruinen, where the Road crosses 
the Loudwater that  runs  out of Rivendell. We  have at  least a fortnight's 
journey before us, for I do not think we shall be able to use the Road.' 

####-     'A fortnight!' said Frodo. 'A lot may happen in that time.' 
     'It may,' said Strider. 
     They stood for a while silent on the hill-top, near its southward edge. 
In  that  lonely  place   Frodo  for  the  first  time  fully  realized  his 
homelessness and danger. He wished bitterly that his fortune had left him in 
the quiet  and beloved Shire.  He  stared down at the hateful Road,  leading 
back westward  - to his  home.  Suddenly he  was aware that  two black specks 
were moving slowly along  it,  going westward; and looking again he saw that 
three others were creeping eastward to meet them. He gave a cry and clutched 
Strider's arm. 
     'Look,' he said, pointing downwards.  
     At once Strider flung  himself on  the ground behind the ruined circle, 
pulling Frodo down beside him. Merry threw himself alongside. 
     'What is it?' he whispered. 
     'I do not know, but I fear the worst,' answered Strider. 
     Slowly  they crawled  up  to the edge of  the  ring  again,  and peered 
through a cleft  between two jagged  stones. The light was no longer bright, 
for the clear morning had faded, and clouds creeping out of the East had now 
overtaken  the sun,  as it  began to go  down.  They could all see the black  
specks, but neither Frodo nor Merry could make out their shapes for certain; 
yet something told them that there, far below, were Black  Riders assembling 
on the Road beyond the foot of the hill. 
     'Yes,'  said  Strider,  whose keener sight left him  in no  doubt. 'The 
enemy is here!' 
     Hastily they crept away  and slipped down the north side of the hill to 
find their companions.  
     Sam and  Peregrin had not been  idle. They  had explored the small dell 
and the surrounding slopes. Not far away they  found a spring of clear water  
in the hillside, and near it footprints not  more than  a day or two old. In 
the dell itself they  found  recent traces of a fire, and  other  signs of a  
hasty camp. There were some fallen rocks on the edge of  the dell nearest to 
the  hill.  Behind  them  Sam  came upon  a  small store of  firewood neatly 
stacked. 
     'I wonder if old Gandalf has been here,' he said to Pippin. 'Whoever it 
was put this stuff here meant to come back it seems.' 
     Strider  was greatly interested in  these discoveries.  'I  wish I  had 
waited and explored the  ground  down here myself,' he said, hurrying off to  

####-the spring to examine the footprints.  
     'It is just as I feared,' he said, when he came back.  'Sam  and Pippin 
have trampled the soft ground, and the marks are spoilt or confused. Rangers 
have been  here lately. It  is  they who left the firewood behind. But there 
are also  several newer tracks  that were not made by Rangers. At least  one  
set was made, only a day or two ago, by  heavy boots. At least one. I cannot  
now be certain, but  I think  there were many booted feet.'  He  paused  and 
stood in anxious thought. 
     Each of the hobbits  saw in his mind a vision of the cloaked and booted 
Riders. If the horsemen had already  found  the dell, the sooner Strider led 
them  somewhere else  the better. Sam viewed  the hollow with great dislike, 
now that he had heard news of their  enemies on the  Road, only a few  miles 
away. 
     'Hadn't we better clear out quick, Mr.  Strider?' he asked impatiently. 
'It  is get ting late,  and  I  don't like this  hole: it makes my heart sink  
somehow.' 
     'Yes,  we certainly must decide what to do  at once,' answered Strider, 
looking up and considering the time and the weather. 'Well, Sam,' he said at 
last,  'I do not  like  th is  place either; but  I  cannot think of anywhere 
better  that we could  reach before nightfall.  At least we are out of sight 
for the  moment, and if we moved we should be much more likely to be seen by 
spies.  All we could  do would be to go right out  of our way back north  on 
this side of the line of hills, where the land is all much the same as it is 
here. The  Road  is watched, but we should have to cross it, if we tried  to 
take cover  in the thickets away to the south. On the north side of the Road 
beyond the hills the country is bare and flat for miles.' 
     'Can the Riders see?' asked Merry. 'I mean, they seem  usually  to have 
used their noses rather than their eyes, smelling for us, if smelling is the 
right word, at least in the daylight. But you made us lie down flat when you  
saw them down below; and now you talk of being seen, if we move.' 
     'I was too careless  on the  hill-top,' answered  Strider. 'I  was very 
anxious to  find some  sign of Gandalf; but it was a mistake for three of us 
to go up and  stand  there  so long.  For the black horses  can see, and the 
Riders can use men and other creatures as  spies, as we found at Bree.  They 
themselves  do not see the  world of light as we  do,  but our  shapes  cast  
shadows in  their  minds, which only the  noon sun destroys; and in the dark 
they perceive many  signs and forms that are hidden from us:  then they  are 

####-most to be feared. And at all times  they smell the blood  of living things,  
desiring and hating it. Senses, too, there are other  than sight or smell. We 
can feel their  presence - it troubled our hearts, as  soon as we came here, 
and before we saw them; they feel ours more keenly. Also,' he added, and his 
voice sank to a whisper, 'the Ring draws them.' 
     'Is there no escape then?' said Frodo, looking round wildly. 'If I move 
I shall be seen and hunted! If I stay, I shall draw them to me!' 
     Strider laid  his hand on his shoulder. 'There is still hope,' he said. 
'You are not alone. Let us take  this wood that is set ready for the fire as 
a sign. There  is little  shelter or defence here,  but fire shall serve for  
both. Sauron can put fire to his evil uses, as he can  all things, but these 
Riders do  not love it, and  fear those who wield  it. Fire is our friend in 
the wilderness. ' 
     'Maybe,'  muttered Sam.  'It  is also as good a way of saying "here  we 
are" as I can think of, bar shouting.' 
     Down in  the  lowest and most  sheltered corner of the dell  they lit a  
fire, and prepared a meal. The shades of  evening began to fall, and it grew 
cold.  They  were  suddenly  aware of great  hunger,  for they had not eaten 
anything since breakfast; but they dared not make more than a frugal supper.  
The  lands ahead were empty of all save birds and beasts, unfriendly  places 
deserted by all the races of the  world. Rangers passed  at times beyond the 
hills, but they were few and did not stay. Other wanderers were rare, and of 
evil sort: trolls might stray down at times  out of  the northern valleys of 
the Misty Mountains. Only on the Road  would travellers be found, most often 
dwarves, hurrying along on business of their  own, and with no help  and few 
words to spare for strangers. 
     'I don't see how our food can be  made  to  last,' said Frodo. 'We have 
been careful  enough in the  last few days, and  this supper is no feast; but 
we have used  more than we ought,  if  we  have two weeks  still to go,  and 
perhaps more.' 
     'There is food in the wild,' said Strider; 'berry,  root, and herb; and 
I have  some skill as  a  hunter at need. You need not be afraid of starving  
before winter comes. But gathering and catching food is long and weary work, 
and  we need haste. So tighten your belts, and think with hope of the tables 
of Elrond's house!' 
     The  cold increased as darkness came  on. Peering out from the  edge of 
the dell they could see nothing but a grey land now  vanishing  quickly into 

####-shadow. The sky above had cleared again and was slowly filled with twinkling 
stars. Frodo and  his companions  huddled  round the fire, wrapped   in every 
garment and  blanket they possessed;  but Strider was  content with a single 
cloak, and sat a little apart, drawing thoughtfully at his pipe. 
     As night fell and the light of the fire began to shine out  brightly he 
began to  tell  them  tales  to keep their minds  from  fear. He  knew  many 
histories and legends  of long ago,  of Elves  and Men and the good and evil  
deeds of the Elder Days. They  wondered how  old he was,  and  where he  had 
learned all this lore. 
     'Tell us of Gil-galad,' said Merry suddenly, when he paused  at the end  
of a story of the Elf-Kingdoms. 'Do you  know any more  of that old lay that 
you spoke of?' 
     'I do indeed,' answered Strider. 'So also does Frodo,  for  it concerns 
us closely.' Merry  and Pippin looked at Frodo,  who  was  staring  into the 
fire. 
     'I know  only the little that Gandalf has  told me,' said Frodo slowly. 
'Gil-galad was the last of the great Elf-kings of Middle-earth. Gil-galad is 
Starlight in their tongue. With Elendil, the Elf-friend, he went to the land 
of------' 
     'No!' said Strider  interrupting, 'I do not think that tale  should  be 
told now with  the servants of the Enemy  at hand. If we  win through to the  
house of Elrond, you may hear it there, told in full.' 
     'Then  tell  u s  some other tale of  the old days,' begged Sam; 'a tale 
about  the Elves before the  fading time.  I would dearly  like to hear more 
about Elves; the dark seems to press round so close.' 
     'I will tell you the tale of Tin®viel,' said  Strider,  'in br ief - for 
it  is a long tale  of which the end is  not known; and  there are none now, 
except  Elrond, that remember it aright as it was told of old.  It is a fair 
tale, though it is sad, as are all the tales of Middle-earth, and yet it may 
lift up your hearts.' He was silent for some  time, and then he began not to 
speak but to chant softly: 
     The leaves were long, the grass was green, 
     The hemlock-umbels tall and fair, 
     And in the glade a light was seen 
     Of stars in shadow shimmering. 
     Tin®viel was dancing there 
     To music of a pipe unseen, 

####-     And light of stars was in her hair, 
     And in her raiment glimmering. 
 
     There Beren came from mountains cold, 
     And lost he wandered under leaves, 
     And where the Elven-river rolled 
     He walked alone and sorrowing. 
     He peered between the hemlock-leaves 
     And saw in wander flowers of gold  
     Upon her mantle and her sleeves, 
     And her hair like shadow following. 
 
     Enchantment healed his weary feet 
     That over hills were doomed to roam; 
     And forth he hastened, strong and fleet, 
     And grasped at moonbeams glistening. 
     Through woven woods in Elvenhome 
     She tightly fled on dancing feet, 
     And left him lonely still to roam 
     In the silent forest listening. 
 
     He heard there oft the flying sound 
     Of feet as light as linden-leaves, 
     Or music welling underground, 
     In hidden hollows quavering. 
     Now withered lay the hemlock-sheaves, 
     And one by one with sighing sound  
     Whispering fell the beechen leaves 
     In the wintry woodland wavering. 
 
     He sought her ever, wandering far 
     Where leaves of years were thickly strewn, 
     By light of moon and ray of star 
     In frosty heavens shivering. 
     Her mantle glinted in the moon, 
     As on a hill-top high and far 
     She danced, and at her feet was strewn  

####-     A mist of silver quivering. 
 
     When winter passed, she came again, 
     And her song released the sudden spring, 
     Like rising lark, and falling rain, 
     And melting water bubbling. 
     He saw the elven-flowers spring 
     About her feet, and healed again  
     He longed by her to dance and sing 
     Upon the grass untroubling. 
 
     Again she fled, but swift he came. 
     Tin®viel! Tin®viel! 
     He called her by her elvish name; 
     And there she halted listening. 
     One moment stood she, and a spell 
     His voice laid on her: Beren came, 
     And doom fell on Tin®viel 
     That in his arms lay glistening. 
 
     As Beren looked into her eyes 
     Within the shadows of her hair, 
     The trembling starlight of the skies 
     He saw there mirrored shimmering. 
     Tin®viel the elven-fair, 
     Immortal maiden elven-wise, 
     About him cast her shadowy hair 
     And arms like silver glimmering. 
 
     Long was the way that fate them bore, 
     O'er stony mountains cold and grey, 
     Through halls of iron and darkling door, 
     And woods of nightshade morrowless. 
     The Sundering Seas between them lay, 
     And yet at last they met once more, 
     And long ago they passed away 
     In the forest singing sorrowless. 

####-     Strider sighed and paused before he spoke again.  'That is a song,'  he 
said, 'in the mode that  is called ann-thennath  among the Elves, but is hard 
to render in our Common Speech, and this is  but a rough echo of it. It tells 
of the meeting of Beren son  of  Barahir and  L®thien Tin®viel. Beren was  a 
mortal man,  but L®thien was the daughter of Thingol,  a King  of Elves upon 
Middle-earth when the world was young; and  she was the fairest  maiden that 
has ever been among all  the children of this world. As  the stars above the 
mists  of  the Northern  lands was her loveliness,  and  in her  face  was a  
shining light. In those days  the Great Enemy, of  whom Sauron of Mordor was 
but a servant, dwelt  in Angband  in the North,  and the  Elves of the  West 
coming back to Middle-earth made  war upon him to regain the Silmarils which 
he had  stolen; and  the fathers of Men aided the Elves. But the  Enemy  was 
victorious  and Barahir  was slain,  and Beren escaping through great  peril 
came over the Mountains of Terror into the hidden Kingdom of Thingol in  the 
forest of Neldoreth.  There he beheld L®thien singing and dancing in a glade 
beside the enchanted  river Esgalduin; and  he named  her Tin®viel,  that is 
Nightingale in the language of old. Many sorrows befell them afterwards, and 
they  were parted long. Tin®viel rescued Beren from  the dungeons of Sauron, 
and together they passed through great dangers, and cast down even the Great 
Enemy  from  his  throne, and took  from  his  iron  crown one of the  three 
Silmarils, brightest of  all jewels, to  be  the  bride-price of L®thien  to 
Thingol her father. Yet  at the last  Beren  was slain by the Wolf that came 
from  the gates  of  Angband, and he died in  the arms of Tin®viel.  But she 
chose mortality, and to die from  the world,  so that  she might follow him; 
and it  is sung that they met again beyond the Sundering  Seas, and  after a  
brief time walking alive once more in the green woods, together they passed, 
long ago, beyond the confines of this  world. So it is that L®thien Tin®viel 
alone of the Elf-kindred has died indeed and left  the  world, and they have 
lost her  whom they most loved. But from her the lineage of the Elf-lords of 
old descended among  Men.  There live  still those of whom  L®thien  was the 
foremother,  and  it  is  said  that  her line shall  never fail.  Elrond of 
Rivendell is of that Kin. For of  Beren and L®thien  was born Dior Thingol's 
heir;  and of him Elwing  the White whom Edrendil wedded, he that sailed his 
ship out of the mists of the world into the seas of heaven with the Silmaril 
upon  his brow.  And  of  Edrendil  came  the  Kings  of  N®menor,  that  is 
Westernesse.' 
     As Strider was speaking  they watched his strange eager face, dimly lit 

####-in the red glow of the wood-fire. His eyes shone, and his voice was rich and 
deep. Above him was a black starry  sky. Suddenly a pale light appeared over  
the crown  of Weathertop behind  him. The  waxing  moon  was climbing 
slowly 
above  the  hill that  overshadowed  them, and the  stars above the hill-top 
faded. 
     The  story ended. The hobbits moved and stretched. 'Look!' said  Merry. 
'The Moon is rising: it must be getting late.' 
     The others looked up. Even as they did so, they saw on the  top of  the 
hill something small and dark  against  the  glimmer of the moonrise. It was 
perhaps only a large stone or jutting rock shown up by the pale light. 
     Sam  and Merry  got up and walked away from the fire. Frodo  and Pippin 
remained seated in silence.  Strider was watching the moonlight on  the hill 
intently.  All seemed quiet and still, but Frodo felt  a cold dread creeping 
over his heart,  now that Strider was  no longer speaking. He huddled closer  
to the fire. At that moment Sam came running back from the edge of the dell. 
     'I don't  know what it is,'  he  said, 'but  I suddenly felt afraid.  I 
durstn't  go  outside this dell  for any money;  I felt that  something  was 
creeping up the slope.' 
     'Did you see anything?' asked Frodo, springing to his feet. 
     'No, sir. I saw nothing, but I didn't stop to look.' 
     'I  saw something,' said Merry; 'or  I thought  I did  -  away westwards 
where  the moonlight was  falling  on  the  flats  beyond the  shadow of the 
hill-tops, I thought there were two or three black shapes. They seemed to be 
moving this way.' 
     'Keep close to the  fire, with your faces outward!' cried Strider. 'Get 
some of the longer sticks ready in your hands!' 
     For a breathless  time  they sat there, silent  and  alert, with  their 
backs  turned to the  wood-fire, each gazing into the shadows that encircled 
them. Nothing happened. There was no sound or  movement in the night.  
Frodo 
stirred,  feeling that he must break the silence:  he longed  to  shout  out 
aloud. 
     'Hush!' whispered Strider.  'What's  that?' gasped Pippin at  the  same 
moment. 
     Over the  lip of the little dell, on the side away  from the hill, they 
felt, rather  than saw, a shadow  rise,  one  shadow or  more than one. They 

####-strained their eyes, and the shadows  seemed to grow. Soon there could be no 
doubt: 
     three or four  tall black  figures  were standing  there  on the slope, 
looking down  on  them. So black were they that they seemed like black holes 
in the deep shade behind them. Frodo  thought that he heard  a faint hiss as 
of venomous breath  and felt a thin  piercing chill. Then the  shapes slowly 
advanced. 
     Terror overcame Pippin and Merry, and they threw themselves flat on the 
ground. Sam shrank to Frodo's side. Frodo was hardly less terrified than his 
companions; he  was quaking  as  if he was bitter cold,  but his  terror was 
swallowed  up in  a sudden temptation  to put on the Ring. The  desire to do  
this laid hold of him, and he could think of nothing else. He did not forget 
the Barrow,  nor  the  message  of  Gandalf;  but  something  seemed  to  be 
compelling  him to disregard  all warnings, and he longed to yield. Not with  
the hope of escape, or of doing anything, either good or bad: he simply felt 
that he must take the Ring and put  it on his finger. He could not speak. He 
felt Sam looking at him, as if  he knew  that  his  master was in some great 
trouble, but  he could not turn  towards him. He shut his eyes and struggled 
for a while; but  resistance became unbearable, and at  last he  slowly drew 
out the chain, and slipped the Ring on the forefinger of his left hand. 
     Immediately, though everything  else remained as before,  dim and dark, 
the shapes became  terribly clear. He was able to  see beneath  their  black  
wrappings. There were  five  tall  figures: two standing on the lip  of  the 
dell, three advancing. In their white faces burned  keen and merciless eyes;  
under their mantles were long grey robes;  upon  their grey hairs were helms 
of silver; in their haggard hands  were  swords of steel. Their eyes fell on 
him and pierced him, as they rushed towards him. Desperate, he  drew his own 
sword, and it seemed to him that it flickered red, as if it was a firebrand. 
Two of the figures  halted. The   third was taller than  the others: his hair 
was long and gleaming and  on his  helm was  a crown.  In one hand he held a  
long sword, and in the other a knife;  both the knife and the hand that held 
it glowed with a pale light. He sprang forward and bore down on Frodo. 
     At that moment Frodo threw himself forward on  the ground, and he heard 
himself crying aloud: O  Elbereth! Gilthoniel! At the same time he struck at 
the feet of his enemy. A shrill  cry rang  out in the night;  and he felt  a  
pain  like  a  dart  of  poisoned ice  pierce his left shoulder. Even  as he 
swooned he caught, as through a swirling mist,  a glimpse of Strider leaping 

####-out of the darkness with a flaming brand of wood in either hand. With a last  
effort Frodo,  dropping  his sword, slipped  the Ring from  his  finger  and 
closed his right hand tight upon it. 
 

####- 

Chapter 12. Flight to the Ford 

 
 
     When Frodo came to himself he was still clutching the Ring desperately.  
He was lying by the fire, which was now piled high and burning br ightly. His 
three companions were bending  over  him.  'What has happened? Where is  the 
pale  king?' he  asked wildly. They were too overjoyed to  hear him speak to  
answer  for  a  while; nor did they  understand  his question.  At length he 
gathered from  Sam that they had seen nothing  but the vague shadowy  shapes 
coming towards them.  Suddenly to his  horror Sam found  that his master had 
vanished; and at that moment a black shadow rushed past him, and he fell. He 
heard  Frodo's  voice, but it seemed to  come from a great distance, or from 
under the earth, crying out strange words. They saw nothing more, until they  
stumbled over the body of Frodo, lying as  if  dead,  face downwards  on the 
grass  with his sword  beneath  him. Strider ordered them to pick him up and 
lay  him near the fire, and then he disappeared. That was now  a  good while 
ago. 
     Sam plainly was beginning to have doubts again about Strider; but while  
they were talking he returned, appearing suddenly out  of the  shadows. They 
started, and Sam drew his sword and stood over Frodo; but Strider knelt down 
swiftly at his side. 
     'I  am not a Black  Rider,  Sam,' he said  gently, 'nor in league  with 
them. I  have been  trying to discover  something of  their movements; but I 
have  found nothing. I cannot  think  why  they have gone and do  not attack  
again. But there is no feeling of their presence anywhere at hand.' 
     When he heard what Frodo had  to tell, he became full  of concern,  and 
shook his head  and sighed. Then he ordered Pippin and Merry to heat as much 
water as they could in their small kettles, and to bathe the wound with  it. 
'Keep the fire going well, and keep Frodo warm!' he said. Then he got up and 
walked  away, and called  Sam to him.  'I think I  understand  things better 
now,' he said in  a low voice.  'There  seem only to  have  been five of the 
enemy. Why they were not all here,  I  don't know;  but I  don't  think they 
expected to  be resisted.  They have drawn off for the  time being. But  not 
far,  I fear. They will come again another night, if we cannot escape.  They 
are  only  waiting,  because  they  think  that   their  purpose  is  almost  
accomplished, and that the  Ring  cannot fly much further. I fear, Sam, that 

####-they believe  your  master has a deadly  wound that will subdue him to their  
will. We  shall see!' Sam choked with tears. 'Don't  despair!' said Strider. 
'You  must trust  me  now. Your  Frodo is made of sterner  stuff  than I had 
guessed, though Gandalf  hinted that it might prove so. He is not slain, and 
I think he will  resist the evil power of the wound longer  than his enemies 
expect. I will do all I can to help and heal him. Guard him well, while I am 
away!' He hurried off and disappeared again into the darkness. 
     Frodo  dozed, though the  pain  of his wound was slowly growing,  and a  
deadly  chill  was spreading  from  his  shoulder to  his arm  and side. His 
friends watched  over him, warming him,  and bathing  his  wound.  The night 
passed  slowly  and wearily.  Dawn was growing in the sky, and the  dell was 
filling with grey light, when Strider at last returned. 
     'Look!' he cried; and stooping he lifted from the  ground a black cloak 
that had lain there hidden by the darkness. A foot above the lower hem there 
was a slash. 'This was  the stroke of Frodo's sword,' he said. 'The only hurt 
that it did to his enemy, I fear; for it is unharmed, but  all blades perish 
that pierce  that  dreadful  King.  More  deadly  to  him  was  the name  of 
Elbereth.' 
     'And  more  deadly to Frodo was this!' He stooped again and lifted up a  
long thin knife. There was a cold gleam in it. As Strider raised it they saw 
that near the end  its edge was notched and  the  point was broken  off. But 
even as he  held it up in the growing light, they gazed in astonishment, for  
the blade seemed to melt, and vanished like a smoke in the air, leaving only  
the hilt in  Strider's hand. 'Alas!' he  cried. 'It was this accursed  knife 
that gave the wound. Few now have the  skill in  healing to match  such evil  
weapons. But I will do what I can.' 
     He sat down on the  ground, and taking  the dagger -hilt laid it  on his 
knees, and he  sang over it a slow song in a strange tongue. Then setting it 
aside, he turned to Frodo  and in  a soft tone  spoke words the others could 
not catch.  From  the pouch at  his  belt he drew  out the  long leaves of a  
plant. 
     'These  leaves,' he said, 'I have  walked far to  find; for  this plant 
does not grow in the bare hills;  but in the thickets away south of the Road 
I found it in the  dark by the scent of its leaves.' He crushed a leaf in his 
fingers,  and it gave out  a  sweet and pungent fragrance. 'It  is fortunate 
that  I could find it, for it is  a healing plant that the  Men of  the West 
brought to Middle-earth. Athelas they  named it,  and it grows  now sparsely 

####-and only near places where they dwelt or camped of old;  and it is not known 
in the  North, except to some of those who wander in the Wild. It  has great 
virtues, but over such a wound as this its healing powers may be small.' 
     He threw the leaves into boiling water and bathed Frodo's shoulder. The 
fragrance of the steam was refreshing, and those that were unhurt felt their 
minds calmed and cleared. The herb had  also some  power over the wound, for  
Frodo felt the pain   and also the  sense of  frozen cold lessen in his side; 
but the life did not return to his arm, and  he could not  raise or  use his 
hand.  He  bitterly  regretted his  foolishness, and reproached himself  for  
weakness of will; for he now perceived that in putting on the Ring he obeyed 
not his own desire but the commanding wish of his enemies. He wondered if he 
would  remain maimed for  life,  and how they would now  manage to  continue 
their journey. He fell too weak to stand. 
     The others were discussing this very question. They  quickly decided to 
leave Weathertop as soon as possible. 'I think now,' said Strider, 'that the 
enemy has been watching this place for some days. If Gandalf ever came here, 
then he  must have been forced to ride away, and  he will not return. In any 
case we are in great peril here after  dark, since the attack of last night, 
and we can hardly meet greater danger wherever we go.' 
     As  soon  as  the  daylight  was  full, they had some hurried food  and 
packed. It was impossible for Frodo  to  walk, so  they divided the  greater  
part of their baggage among the four of them, and put Frodo  on the pony. In 
the last few days the poor beast had improved wonderfully; it already seemed 
fatter and stronger, and had begun to show an a ffection for its new masters, 
especially for Sam. Bill Ferny's treatment must  have been very hard for the 
journey in the wild to seem so much better than its former life. 
     They started off in a southerly direction. This would mean crossing the 
Road,  but. it was the  quickest way to more wooded country. And they needed 
fuel; for Strider said  that Frodo must be kept warm,  especially at  night, 
while fire would be some protection  for them all. It  was also his  plan to 
shorten their journey by cutting  across another great loop of the Road: east  
beyond Weathertop it changed its course and took a wide bend northwards. 
     They made  their  way slowly  and  cautiously  round the  south-western 
slopes  of the  hill, and came in a  little while to the  edge of the  Road. 
There was no sign of the Riders. But  even as they were hurrying across they 
heard far away two  cries: a cold voice calling and  a cold voice answering. 
Trembling they sprang forward, and made for the thickets that lay ahead. The 

####-land before them  sloped  away  southwards, but  it was  wild  and pathless; 
bushes and  stunted trees  grew in dense patches with wide barren  spaces in 
between.  The grass was scanty, coarse,  and grey;  and  the leaves  in  the 
thickets were faded and falling. It was  a cheerless land, and their journey 
was slow and gloomy. They spoke  little as they trudged along. Frodo's heart 
was grieved as he watched them walking beside him with their heads down, 
and 
their  backs bowed  under  their  burdens.  Even  Strider  seemed  tired and 
heavy-hearted. 
     Before the first day's march was over Frodo's pain began to grow again, 
but he did not speak of it for  a long time. Four  days passed,  without the 
ground or the scene changing much, except that behind them Weathertop 
slowly 
sank,  and  before  them the distant mountains loomed a  little nearer.  Yet 
since that far cry they had seen and heard no sign that the enemy had marked 
their  flight or followed them.  They dreaded the dark hours, and kept watch 
in pairs by night, expecting at any time to see black shapes stalking in the 
grey night, dimly lit by the cloud-veiled  moon; but they  saw nothing,  and 
heard no sound but the sigh of withered leaves and grass. Not once  did they 
feel the sense of present  evil that  had assailed them before the attack in 
the dell. It seemed too much to hope that the Riders had already  lost their 
trail again. Perhaps  they  were waiting  to  make  some ambush in  a narrow 
place? 
     At the end of  the fifth day the ground began once more  to rise slowly 
out of the wide  shallow valley into which  they had  descended. Strider now  
turned their course again north-eastwards, and on the sixth day they reached 
the top of a long slow-climbing slope, and saw far  ahead a huddle of wooded 
hills. Away below them they could see the Road sweeping round  the  feet  of 
the hills;  and  to  their  right  a  grey river  gleamed  pale in the  thin 
sunshine. In the  distance they glimpsed yet another river in a stony valley 
half-veiled in mist. 
     "I am  afraid we must  go back  to  the Road  here for  a while,'  said 
Strider.  'We have  now  come to  the  River Hoarwell,  that the Elves  call 
Mitheithel. It  flows down out  of the Ettenmoors, the troll-fells  north of 
Rivendell,  and joins  the Loudwater away in the  South.  Some  call  it the 
Greyflood after that. It is a great water before it finds the  Sea. There is 
no way over  it  below  its sources  in the Ettenmoors, except by  the  Last  

####-Bridge on which the Road crosses.' 
     'What is that other river we can see far away there?' asked Merry. 
     'That is Loudwater,  the Bruinen of Rivendell,'  answered Strider. 'The 
Road runs along the edge of  the hills for many miles from the Bridge to the 
Ford of Bruinen. But I have  not yet thought how  we shall cross that water. 
One river at a time! We shall be fortunate indeed if we do not find the Last  
Bridge held against us.' 
     Next day, early in  the morning, they came down again to the borders of 
the Road.  Sam  and  Strider  went  forward, but they found no  sign of  any 
travellers or riders. Here under the shadow of the hills there had been some 
rain. Strider judged that it had fallen two days before, and had washed away 
all footprints. No horseman had passed since then, as far as he could see. 
     They hurried along with all the speed they could make, and after a mile 
or two they saw the Last Bridge ahead, at the bottom of a short steep slope. 
They dreaded  to see black figures waiting there, but they saw none. Strider 
made them take cover  in a  thicket at  the side of the Road, while  he went 
forward to explore. 
     Before long he came hurrying back. 'I can see no sign of the enemy,' he 
said,  'and I wonder very much what that  means. But  I have found something 
very strange.' 
     He held out his hand, and showed a single pale-green jewel. 'I found it 
in  the  mud in  the  middle of the  Bridge,' he said. 'It  is  a beryl,  an 
elf-stone.  Whether it was set  there, or  let fall by chance, I cannot say; 
but  it brings  hope to  me. I will take it as a sign that we may  pass  the 
Bridge; but beyond that I dare not keep  to  the Road, without some  clearer  
token.' 
     At once they went on again. They crossed  the Bridge in safety, hearing 
no sound  but  the water  swirling  against its three great  arches. A  mile 
further on they came to a narrow ravine that led away northwards through the 
steep  lands  on  the left of the Road.  Here Strider turned aside, and soon 
they were lost in a sombre  country of dark trees winding among the feet  of 
sullen hills. 
     The hobbits were glad  to leave  the  cheerless lands and the  perilous 
Road behind them; but this new country seemed threatening and unfriendly. As 
they went forward the hills about them steadily rose. Here  and  there  upon 
heights  and ridges they caught glimpses of ancient walls  of stone, and the 
ruins of towers: they had an ominous look. Frodo,  who was  not walking, had 

####-time to gaze ahead and to think. He recalled Bilbo's account of his  journey 
and the  threatening towers on  the hills north of  the Road, in the country 
near the Troll's wood where his first serious adventure had  happened. Frodo 
guessed that they were  now in the  same  region, and wondered if by  chance 
they would pass near the spot. 
     'Who lives  in this land?'  he asked.  'And  who built these  towers? Is 
this troll-country?' 
     'No!' said Strider. 'Trolls do  not  build. No one lives in  this land. 
Men once dwelt  here, ages ago;  but  none remain  now. They  became an evil 
people, as legends  tell, for they fell under  the shadow of Angmar. But all 
were destroyed  in the war that  brought the North Kingdom to  its  end. But 
that is now so long ago that the hills  have forgotten them, though a shadow  
still lies on the land.' 
     'Where  did you learn  such  tales,  if  all  the  land  is  empty  and 
forgetful?' asked Peregrin. 'The  birds and beasts do not tell tales of that 
son.' 
     'The  heirs  of Elendil do not forget all  things past,'  said Strider; 
'and  many more things than  I can tell are remembered in  Rivendell.'  'Have  
you often  been to Rivendell?' said  Frodo. 'I have,' said Strider. 'I dwelt 
there once, and still I return when I may. 
     There my heart is;  but  it is not my fate to sit in peace, even in the 
fair house of Elrond.' 
     The hills now began to shut them in. The Road behind held on its way to  
the River Bruinen, but both were  now hidden  from view. The travellers came 
into a long valley; narrow, deeply cloven, dark  and silent.  Trees with old 
and twisted roots hung over cliffs, and piled up behind into mounting slopes 
of pine-wood. 
     The hobbits grew very weary. They advanced slowly, for they had to pick 
their way through a pathless country, encumbered by fallen trees and tumbled 
rocks. As long as they could they avoided  climbing  for  Frodo's  sake, and 
because it was in fact difficult to find any way up out of the narrow dales.  
They had been two days in this country when the weather turned wet. The wind 
began  to blow steadily  out  of  the West and pour the water of the distant 
seas  on the  dark  heads of the hills in fine  drenching rain. By nightfall 
they  were all soaked,  and their camp was cheerless, for they could not get 
any  fire  to burn. The next  day the  hills rose still  higher  and steeper  
before  them, and  they were forced to  turn away  northwards out  of  their 

####-course. Strider seemed to  be getting anxious: they were nearly ten days out 
from Weathertop, and their stock of  provisions was beginning to run low. It  
went on raining. 
     That night they camped on  a stony shelf with a rock -wall  behind them, 
in which  there was a shallow cave,  a  mere scoop in the  cliff.  Frodo was 
restless. The  cold and wet had  made his wound more painful  than ever, and 
the ache and sense of deadly chill took  away all sleep.  He lay tossing and 
turning and listening fearfully to the stealthy night-noises: wind in chinks 
of  rock, water  dripping, a crack, the sudden rattling  fall of  a loosened 
stone. He felt that black shapes  were advancing to smother him; but when he 
sat up he saw  nothing but  the back of  Strider  sitting hunched up, smoking 
his pipe, and watching.  He lay down again and passed into an uneasy  dream, 
in  which he  walked on the grass in his garden in the Shire,  but it seemed 
faint  and dim, less clear  than the  tall black shadows that  stood looking 
over the hedge. 
     In  the morning he  woke to  find that the rain had stopped. The clouds 
were still thick,  but they were breaking, and pale strips of  blue appeared 
between them.  The  wind was  shifting  again.  They  did  not start  early.  
Immediately after  their cold  and  comfortless  breakfast Strider  went off 
alone, telling the others to remain under the shelter of the cliff, until he 
came  back. He was going to climb up, if he could, and get a look at the lie 
of the land. 
     When  he returned he was not reassuring.  'We have come too  far to the 
north,' he said, 'and we must find  some way to  turn back southwards again.  
If we  keep on as we are going we shall get up into the Ettendales far north 
of  Rivendell.  That is  troll -country,  and  little known  to  me. We could 
perhaps find our way through and come round to Rivendell from the north; but 
it would take  too long,  for I  do not know the way, and our food would not  
last. So somehow or other we must find the Ford of Bruinen.' 
     The  rest of that day they  spent  scrambling over  rocky  ground. They 
found  a passage between  two  hills that  led them into  a  valley  running 
south-east, the  direction that they wished  to take; but towards the end of 
the day they found their road again barred by a ridge of high land; its dark 
edge  against  the  sky was  broken  into many bare points like teeth  of  a  
blunted saw. They had a choice between going back or climbing over it. 
     They decided to attempt the climb, but it proved very difficult. Before 
long Frodo was obliged to dismount and struggle along on foot. Even so  they 

####-often  despaired of  getting their pony up, or  indeed of finding a path for  
themselves, burdened as  they were. The light was nearly gone, and they were 
all exhausted, when at last they reached the top. They  had climbed on to  a  
narrow  saddle  between two  higher points, and the  land fell  steeply away 
again, only a short distance ahead. Frodo threw himself down, and lay on the 
ground shivering. His left arm was lifeless, and his side and shoulder  felt 
as if icy claws were  laid upon them.  The trees  and rocks about him seemed 
shadowy and dim. 
     'We  cannot go any further,' said  Merry to Strider. 'I am  afraid this 
has been too much for Frodo. I am dreadfully  anxious about him. What are we 
to do? Do you think they  will be able to cure him in Rivendell,  if we ever 
get there?' 
     'We shall see,'  answered Strider. 'There is nothing more that I can do 
in  the  wilderness;  and  it is chiefly because of  his wound that I am  so 
anxious to press on. But I agree that we can go no further tonight.' 
     'What is the matter with my  master?' asked Sam in a low voice, looking 
appealingly  at Strider.  'His  wound was small, and it is  already  closed. 
There's nothing to be seen but a cold white mark on his shoulder.' 
     'Frodo  has been  touched  by the weapons of  the Enemy,' said Strider, 
'and there is some poison  or evil at work that is beyond my  skill to drive 
out. But do not give up hope, Sam!' 
     Night was cold up on the  high ridge. They lit a small fire  down under 
the gnarled roots of an old pine, that hung over a shallow pit: it looked as 
if stone had once been  quarried there. They sat  huddled together. The wind 
blew chill through the pass, and they heard the tree-tops lower down moaning 
and  sighing.  Frodo lay half in a dream, imagining that endless dark  wings 
were sweeping by above him, and that on the wings rode pursuers that  sought 
him in all the hollows of the hills.  
     The  morning dawned bright  and fair; the air  was clean, and the light 
pale and clear  in a rain-washed sky. Their hearts were encouraged, but (hey 
longed for the  sun to warm their cold stiff limbs. As soon as it was light, 
Strider took Merry  with him and went to survey the country from  the height 
to the east of the pass. The sun had risen and was shining  brightly when he 
returned  with more comforting news. They were now going more or less in the 
right direction. If they went on, down the  further side of the ridge,  they 
would have the Mountains on their left. Some way  ahead Strider had caught a  
glimpse  of the Loudwater again, and he knew that, though it was hidden from 

####-view, the Road to the  Ford was not far from the River  and  lay on the side 
nearest to them. 
     'We must make for  the  Road again,' he said. 'We cannot hope to find a  
path through these hills. Whatever danger may beset it, the Road is our only 
way to the Ford.' 
     As soon as they had eaten they set out again. They climbed  slowly down 
the southern side  of the ridge; but the way  was much easier  than they had 
expected, for the slope  was  far less steep on  this side, and before  long 
Frodo was able  to  ride again. Bill Ferny's poor old pony was developing an 
unexpected talent  for picking out a path, and for sparing its rider as many 
jolts as possible. The  spirits of the  party  rose  again. Even  Frodo felt 
better in  the  morning  light, but every  now  and again  a mist seemed  to 
obscure his sight, and he pa ssed his hands over his eyes.  
     Pippin was a little  ahead of the  others. Suddenly he turned round and 
called to them. 'There is a path here!' he cried. 
     When they came up with him, they saw that he had made no mistake: 
     there were clearly  the beginnings of  a  path, that climbed  with many 
windings  out of  the woods  below and faded away on the hill-top behind. In 
places it was  now faint and overgrown,  or choked  with fallen  stones  and 
trees; but at one time it seemed to have been much used.  It was a path made 
by strong arms  and heavy feet. Here and  there old trees  had  been cut  or  
broken down, and large rocks cloven or heaved aside to make a way. 
     They followed the track for some while, for it offered much the easiest  
way down, but they went cautiously, and their anxiety increased as they came 
into the dark  woods, and the path grew plainer and broader. Suddenly coming 
out  of a belt of fir-trees  it ran steeply down a slope, and turned sharply 
to the left round the comer  of a rocky shoulder of the hill. When they came 
to the comer they  looked round and  saw  that the path ran on  over a level 
strip  under the face of a low  cliff overhung with trees. In the stony wall 
there was a door hanging crookedly ajar upon one great hinge. 
     Outside the door they all  halted. There was  a  cave  or  rock -chamber  
behind, but  in the gloom  inside nothing  could be  seen. Strider, Sam, and 
Merry  pushing with all  their  strength managed  to open  the door a little 
wider, and then Strider  and Merry  went in. They did not go far, for on the 
floor lay many old bones, and nothing else was to be seen  near the entrance 
except some great empty jars and broken pots. 
     'Surely  this  is a troll-hole, if ever there  was one!'  said  Pippin. 

####-'Come out, you two, and let us get away. Now we know  who made the path  -
and 
we had better get off it quick.' 
     'There  is  no  need, I think,'  said  Strider,  coining  out.  'It  is 
certainly a troll-hole,  but it seems  to have  been  long forsaken. I don't 
think we need be afraid. But let us go on down warily, and we shall see.' 
     The  path  went on again from the door, and turning to the right  again 
across the level space plunged down a thick wooded slope. Pippin, not liking 
to show Strider that he was still afraid, went on ahead  with Merry. Sam and 
Strider came behind, one on each side of  Frodo's pony, for the path was now 
broad enough for four or five hobbits to walk abreast. But they had not gone 
very far  before Pippin came  running back,  fol lowed  by Merry.  They  both 
looked terrified. 
     'There are trolls!' Pippin panted. 'Down in a clearing in the woods not 
far below. We  got a sight of them  through  the tree-trunks.  They are very 
large!' 
     'We  will come and  look at them,' said  Strider,  picking  up a stick. 
Frodo said nothing, but Sam looked scared. 
     The  sun was now  high, and  it  shone  down through the  half-stripped 
branches of  the  trees, and lit the clearing with bright patches of  light. 
They halted  suddenly  on the  edge,  and  peered  through the  tree-trunks, 
holding their breath. There stood  the trolls: three large  trolls.  One was 
stooping, and the other two stood staring at him. 
     Strider walked forward unconcernedly. 'Get up, old stone!' he said, and 
brok e his stick upon the stooping troll. 
     Nothing happened. There  was a  gasp  of astonishment from the hobbits,  
and then even Frodo laughed. 'Well!' he said.  'We are forgetting our family 
history!  These  must  be the  very  three  that  were  caught  by  Gandalf,  
quarrelling over the right way to cook thirteen dwarves and one hobbit.' 
     'I had no  idea we were  anywhere near the place!' said Pippin. He knew 
the  story well. Bilbo  and Frodo had told it often; but as a matter of fact 
he had  never mor e than half believed  it. Even now he  looked  at the stone 
trolls with suspicion, wondering if some magic might not suddenly bring them 
to life again. 
     'You are forgetting not only your family history, but all you ever knew 
about  trolls,' said Strider. 'It is broad daylight with  a bright sun,  and 
yet you come back trying to scare me with a tale  of live trolls waiting for  

####-us in this glade! In any case you might have noticed that one of them has an 
old bird's nest behind his ear. That would be a most unusual ornament  for a  
live troll!' 
     They  all laughed.  Frodo felt  his spirits  reviving: the reminder  of 
Bilbo's  first successful adventure  was  heartening. The sun, too, was warm 
and comforting, and the mist before his  eyes seemed to be lifting a little. 
They rested for some time in the glade,  and took  their  mid-day meal right 
under the shadow of the trolls' large legs. 
     'Won't somebody give  us  a bit of a song, while the sun is high?' said 
Merry, when they had finished. 'We haven't ha d a song or a tale for days.' 
     'Not since  Weathertop,' said Frodo. The  others looked at him.  'Don't  
worry about me!' he added. 'I  feel much  better, but I  don't think I could 
sing. Perhaps Sam could dig something out of his memory.' 
     'Come on,  Sam!' said Merry. 'There's more  stored in your head than you  
let on about.' 
     'I don't know about that,' said Sam. 'But how would this suit? It ain't  
what I call proper poetry, if you understand me: just a bit of nonsense. But 
these old images here  brought it to my mind.' Standing  up,  with his hands 
behind his back, as if he was at school, he began to sing to an old tune. 
     Troll sat alone on his seat of stone, 
     And munched and mumbled a bare old bone; 
     For many a year he had gnawed it near, 
     For meat was hard to come by. 
     Done by! Gum by! 
     In a case in the hills he dwelt alone, 
     And meat was hard to come by. 
 
     Up came Tom with his big boots on. 
     Said he to Troll: 'Pray, what is yon? 
     For it looks like the shin o' my nuncle Tim, 
     As should be a -lyin' in graveyard. 
     Caveyard! Paveyard! 
     This many a year has Tim been gone, 
     And I thought he were lyin' in graveyard.' 
 
     'My lad,' said Troll, 'this bone I stole. 
     But what be bones that lie in a  hole? 

####-     Thy nuncle was dead as a lump o' lead, 
     Afore I found his shinbone. 
     Tinbone! Thinbone! 
     He can spare a share for a poor old troll, 
     For he don't need his shinbone.' 
 
     Said Tom: 'I don't see why the likes o' thee 
     Without axin' leave should go makin' free 
     With the shank or the shin o' my father's kin; 
     So hand the old bone over! 
     Rover! Trover! 
     Though dead he be, it belongs to he; 
     So hand the old bone over!'  
 
     'For a couple o' pins,' says Troll, and grins, 
     'I'll eat thee too, and gnaw thy shins. 
     A bit o' fresh meal will go down sweet! 
     I'll try my teeth on thee now.  
     Hee now! See now! 
     I'm tired o' gnawing old bones and skins; 
     I've a mind to dine on thee now.' 
 
     But just as he thought his dinner was caught, 
     He found his hands had hold of naught. 
     Before he could mind, Tom slipped behind 
     And gave him the boot to larn him. 
     Warn him! Darn him! 
     A bump o' the boot on the seat, Tom thought, 
     Would be the way to larn him. 
 
     But harder than stone is the flesh and bone 
     Of a troll that sits in the hills alone. 
     As well set your boot to the mountain's root, 
     For the seat of a troll don't feel it. 
     Peel it! Heal it! 
     Old Troll laughed, when he heard Tom groan, 
     And he knew his toes could feel it. 

####- 
     Tom's leg is game, since home he came, 
     And his bootless foot is lasting lame; 
     But Troll don't care, and he's still there 
     With the bone he boned from its owner. 
     Doner! Boner! 
     Troll's old seat is still the same, 
     And the bone he boned from its owner! 
     'Well, that's a warning to  us all!' laughed Merry. 'It  is as well you  
used a stick, and not your hand, Strider!' 
     'Where did you come  by  tha t, Sam?' asked Pippin.  'I've  never  heard 
those words before.' 
     Sam  muttered  something  inaudible. 'It's  out of  his  own  head,  of 
course,'  said Frodo. 'I am learning a lot about Sam Gamgee on this journey.  
First he was a conspirator, now he's a  jester.  He'll end up  by becoming a  
wizard - or a warrior!' 
     'I hope not,' said Sam. 'I don't want to be neither!' 
     In  the afternoon  they went  on  down  the  woods. They were  probably 
following the very track  that Gandalf, Bilbo, and the dwarves had used many 
years before.  After a  few miles they came  out on the top  of a high  bank  
above the  Road. At this point  the Road had left the Hoarwell far behind in 
its narrow valley, and now clung close to the feet of the hills, rolling and 
winding eastward among woods and heather -covered slopes towards the Ford 
and 
the  Mountains.  Not far  down the bank Strider pointed out a  stone in  the 
grass.  On  it roughly  cut  and  now  much weathered  could  still be  seen 
dwarf-runes and secret marks. 
     'There!' said  Merry.  'That  must be the stone  that marked  the place 
where the  trolls' gold  was  hidden.  How much is  left of Bilbo's share, I 
wonder, Frodo?' 
     Frodo looked at the stone,  and wished that  Bilbo had brought home  no 
treasure more perilous, nor  less easy to pan with. 'None  at all,' he said. 
'Bilbo gave it all away. He told me he did not feel it was really his, as it 
came from robbers.' 
     The Road lay quiet under the long  shadows of early  evening. There was 
no sign of any  other  travellers  to be  seen. As  there  was now no  other  
possible course for them to  take,  they climbed down  the bank, and turning 

####-left went off  as  fast as they could.  Soon a shoulder of the hills cut off 
the  light  of the fast westering sun. A cold wind flowed down to  meet them 
from the mountains ahead. 
     They were beginning  to look out  for a place  off the Road, where they 
could camp for the night, when they heard a sound that  brought  sudden fear 
back  into their hearts: the  noise of  hoofs behind them. They looked back, 
but they could not see far because of  the many windings and rollings of the  
Road. As quickly as they could they scrambled off the beaten way and up into 
the deep heather and bilberry brushwood on the slopes above, u ntil they came 
to a small patch of thick-growing hazels.  As they peered out from among the 
bushes, they could see the Road, faint and  grey in  the failing light, some 
thirty feel  below them. The sound of hoofs  drew  nearer.  They were  going  
fast, with a light clippety-clippely-clip. Then faintly,  as if it was blown 
away from  them by the breeze,  they seemed  to catch a dim  ringing, as  of 
small bells tinkling. 
     'That does not sound like a Black Rider's horse!' said Frodo, listening 
intently. The  other  hobbits agreed hopefully that it did not,  but they all 
remained  full of suspicion.  They had been in  fear of pursuit for  so long 
that any sound from  behind seemed ominous and  unfriendly. But Strider  was 
now leaning forward, stooped to the  ground, with a  hand to  his ear, and a  
look of joy on his face. 
     The light faded, and  the leaves on the bushes  rustled softly. Clearer  
and nearer  now the bells jingled, and clippety -clip  came the quick trotting 
feet. Suddenly into view below came a white  horse, gleaming in the shadows,  
running swiftly. In the dusk its  headstall flickered and flashed,  as if it 
were studded with gems  like living stars. The rider's cloak streamed behind 
him, and his hood was thrown back; his golden hair flowed shimmering in  the 
wind of his  speed. To  Frodo it  appeared  that a  white  light was shining 
through the form and raiment of the rider, as if through a thin veil. 
     Strider sprang from hiding and  dashed  down  towards the Road, leaping 
with a cry through  the heather; but even before he  had moved or called, the 
rider  had  reined in  his horse and halted, looking  up towards the thicket 
where  they stood. When he saw  Strider, he dismounted and  ran to meet  him 
calling out: Ai na vedui D®nadan! Mae govannen! His speech and clear 
ringing 
voice left no doubt in their hearts:  the rider  was  of the Elven-folk.  No 
others that dwelt in the wide  world had voices so  fair  to hear. But there 

####-seemed to be  a note of haste or fear  in his call, and they saw tha t he was 
now speaking quickly and urgently to Strider. 
     Soon Strider  beckoned  to them,  and  the hobbits left  the bushes and 
hurried  down  to the Road. 'This is  Glorfindel, who dwells in the house of 
Elrond,' said Strider. 
     'Hail, and well met  at last!' said the Elf-lord to Frodo. 'I  was sent 
from  Rivendell to look  for you. We feared that you were in danger upon the 
road.' 
     'Then Gandalf has reached Rivendell?' cried Frodo joyfully. 
     'No.  He had not when I departed; but that was nine days ago,' answered 
Glorfindel.  'Elrond received news that  troubled him.  Some of my  kindred,  
journeying  in  your land  beyond the  Baranduin,* learned  that things were 
amiss, and sent  messages as swiftly as they could. They  said that the Nine 
were abroad,  and  that  you  were  astray bearing a  great  burden  without 
guidance, for Gandalf had not returned. There are few even in Rivendell that 
can ride openly  against  the Nine; but such as there were, Elrond  sent out 
north,  west, and south.  It was thought  that you  might  turn far aside to 
avoid pursuit, and become lost in the Wilderness.  
     'It  was  my  lot  to  take the Road,  and  I  came to  the  Bridge  of 
Mitheithel, and  left a  token  there, nigh  on seven days ago. Three of the 
servants of  Sauron were upon the  Bridge, but  they withdrew  and I pursued 
them westward. I came also  upon two others, but they turned away southward. 
Since then I have  searched  for your  trail. Two days  ago I found  it, and 
followed it over the Bridge; and today I marked where you descended from the 
hills again. But come! There is no time for further news. Since you are here 
we must  risk the peril of  the Road and go. There  are five behind us,  and 
when  they find your trail upon the Road  they will   ride after us  like the 
wind.  And they are not all. Where the  other four may be, I  do not know. I 
fear that we may find the Ford is already held against us.' 
     While Glorfindel was speaking  the  shades of evening  deepened.  Frodo 
felt a great weariness come over him. Ever  since the sun began to  sink the 
mist before his eyes had  darkened,  and he  felt  that a  shadow was coming 
between him and the faces of his friends. Now pain assailed him, and he felt  
cold. He swayed, clutching at Sam's arm. 
     'My master  is  sick and  wounded,' said Sam angrily. 'He  can't go  on 
riding after nightfall. He needs rest.' 
     Glorfindel caught Frodo as he sank to the ground, and taking him gently 

####-in his arms he looked in his face with grave anxiety. 
     Briefly Strider told of the attack  on their camp under Weathertop, and 
of  the deadly knife. He drew out the hilt, which he had kept, and handed it 
to the Elf. Glorfindel shuddered as he  took  it, but he looked  intently at 
it. 
     'There  are evil things written  on  this hilt,' he said; 'though maybe 
your  eyes  cannot see  them.  Keep it, Aragorn,  till we reach the house of 
Elrond! But be wary, and handle it as little as you may! Alas! the wounds of 
this weapon are beyond my skill to heal. I will do what I can -  but all the 
more do I urge you now to go on without rest.' 
     He searched the  wound on Frodo's shoulder with  his  fingers, and  his 
face grew graver, as  if what he learned disquieted  him. But Frodo felt the 
chill lessen in  his  side  and arm;  a little  warmth crept  down from  his 
shoulder to his hand, and the pain grew easier. The  dusk of evening  seemed  
to grow lighter  about him, as if  a cloud  had been  withdrawn.  He saw his  
friends'  faces more clearly  again, and a  measure of new hope and strength 
returned. 
     'You  shall  ride my  horse,'  said  Glorfindel.  'I will  shorten  the 
stirrups  up to the saddle-skins, and  you must sit as tight as you can. But 
you need not fear: my horse  will not let any rider  fall that I command him 
to bear. His pace is light and smooth;  and if  danger presses  too near, he 
will  bear  you away with a  speed that even  the black steeds of  the enemy 
cannot rival.' 
     'No, he will not!' said  Frodo. 'I  shall  not ride him, if I am to  be 
carried off  to  Rivendell  or anywhere else, leaving  my friends behind  in 
danger.' 
     Glorfindel smiled. 'I doubt very much,' he said, 'if your friends would 
be  in danger if you were  not  with them! The pursuit  would follow you and 
leave  us in  peace, I  think. It is you, Frodo, and that which you bear that 
brings us all in peril.' 
     To that Frodo had no answer, and he was persuaded to mount Glorfindel's 
white  horse.  The pony  was laden instead with a great part  of the others' 
burdens, so that they   now marched lighter, and  for a time made good speed; 
but the hobbits  began  to find it hard to keep up  with the swift  tireless 
feet of the Elf.  On he led them, into the  mouth of darkness,  and still on 
under the deep clouded night. There was neither  star nor moon. Not until the  
grey of dawn did he allow them to halt. Pippin, Merry, and Sam were  by that 

####-time nearly asleep on their stumbling legs; and  even Strider seemed  by the  
sag of his shoulders to be weary. Frodo sat upon the horse in a dark dream. 
     They  cast  themselves  down  in  the  heather  a  few  yards  from the 
road-side,  and  fell asleep immediately. They seemed hardly to  have closed 
their eyes when Glorfindel, who  had set himself to watch  while they slept, 
awoke  them again.  The sun had  now climbed far into the  morning, and  the 
clouds and mists of the night were gone. 
     'Drink  this!'  said  Glorfindel  to  them, pouring for  each in turn a  
little liquor from his silver -studded flask  of leather.  It  was  clear  as 
spring  water and  had no taste, and it did not feel either  cool or warm in 
the mouth; but  strength  and vigour seemed to flow into all their limbs  as 
they  drank  it. Eaten after that draught the stale  bread  and dried  fruit 
(which was now all that they had left) seemed to satisfy their hunger better  
than many a good breakfast in the Shire had done. 
     They had rested rather less than five hours when they  took to the Road 
again. Glorfindel  still  urged them  on, and  only allowed two brief  halts 
during the day's  march. In this way they covered almost twenty miles before 
nightfall, and  came  to  a  point where the Road bent  right  and  ran down 
towards the  bottom of the valley,  now making  straight for the Bruinen. So  
far there had been no sign or sound of pursuit that the hobbits could see or  
hear; but often  Glorfindel would  halt and  listen  for  a moment, if  they 
lagged behind,  and a look of anxiety  clouded  his face. Once or  twice  he 
spoke to Strider in the elf-tongue. 
     But  however  anxious  their  guides might be,  it  was plain  that the 
hobbits could go no further that night. They were stumbling along dizzy with 
weariness, and unable to think of anything but their feet and legs.  Frodo's 
pain had redoubled, and during the day things about him faded to shadows  of 
ghostly grey.  He almost welcomed the coming of  night,  for  then the world 
seemed less pale and empty. 
     The  hobbits  were still  weary,  when  they  set out  again early next 
morning. There were many miles yet to go between them and the Ford, and 
they 
hobbled forward at the best pace they could manage. 
     'Our  peril  will  be  greatest just  ere  we  reach the  river,'  said 
Glorfindel; 'for my heart warns me that the pursuit is now swift behind  us,  
and other danger may be waiting by the Ford.' 
     The  Road  was still running steadily downhill,  and there  was now  in 

####-places much  grass  at either side, in which  the  hobbits walked when  they 
could, to ease  their tired feet. In the late afternoon they came to a  place 
where the  Road went  suddenly under the dark shadow of tall pine-trees, and 
then plunged into a deep cutting with steep moist walls of red stone. Echoes 
ran  along as they hurried  forward; and there seemed to  be a sound of many  
footfalls following their own.  All at once, as if through a  gate of light, 
the Road ran  out again from the end of the tunnel into  the open.  There at 
the bottom  of a sharp incline  they saw before  them a long  flat mile, and 
beyond that  the  Ford of Rivendell. On  the  further side was a steep brown 
bank,  threaded  by  a  winding  path;  and behind  that the tall  mountains 
climbed, shoulder above shoulder, and peak beyond peak, into the fading sky. 
     There was still an  echo as  of following feet  in  the cutting   behind 
them;  a  rushing noise as  if  a wind were  rising and pouring  through the 
branches of the  pines. One moment Glorfindel turned  and  listened, then he 
sprang forward with a loud cry. 
     'Fly!' he called. 'Fly! The enemy is upon us!' 
     The white  horse  leaped  forward.  The  hobbits ran  down  the  slope. 
Glorfindel and  Strider followed  as  rear -guard.  They were only  half  way 
across the flat, when suddenly there was a noise of horses galloping. Out of 
the gate in the  trees that they had just left rode a Black Rider. He reined 
his horse  in, and halted,  swaying in his saddle. Another followed him, and 
then another; then again two more. 
     'Ride forward! Ride!' cried Glorfindel to Frodo. 
     He did not obey at  once, for a strange reluctance seized him. Checking 
the horse to  a  walk,  he turned and looked  back. The Riders seemed to sit 
upon  their  great steeds  like  threatening  statues  upon a hill, dark and 
solid, while all the woods and land about them  receded as  if into a  mist. 
Suddenly he knew  in  his heart that they were  silently commanding  him  to 
wait. Then at  once  fear  and hatred awoke in him. His hand left the bridle 
and gripped the hilt of his sword, and with a red flash he drew it. 
     'Ride on! Ride on!' cried Glorfindel, and then loud and clear he called 
to the horse in the elf-tongue: noro lim, noro lim, Asfaloth! 
     At once the  white horse sprang away  and  sped like the wind along the 
last lap of  the Road. At the same moment the  black horses leaped  down the 
hill in pursuit, and from  the Riders came a terrible cry, such as Frodo had 
heard filling  the woods with  horror in the Eastfarthing  far away.  It was 
answered; and to the dismay of Frodo and his friends  out from the trees and 

####-rocks  away  on the left four other  Riders came flying.  Two  rode  towards 
Frodo: two  galloped madly towards  the Ford  to  cut  off  his escape. They 
seemed to him to run like the wind and to grow swiftly larger and darker, as 
their courses converged with his.  
     Frodo looked  back for  a moment over  his shoulder. He could no longer  
see  his friends. The Riders  behind  were  falling  back:  even their great 
steeds  were no match  in  speed for the  white elf-horse of  Glorfindel. He 
looked forward again, and hope fa ded. There seemed no chance of reaching the 
Ford before he  was cut off by  the others that had lain in ambush. He could 
see them clearly now: they appeared to have cast aside their hoods and black  
cloaks, and they were robed in  white and  grey. Swords were  naked in their  
pale hands; helms were on their heads. Their cold eyes  glittered,  and they 
called to him with fell voices.  
     Fear now filled all Frodo's mind. He thought no longer of his sword. No 
cry came from him. He shut his eyes  and clung to the horse's mane. The wind 
whistled in his ears, and the bells upon the harness rang wild and shrill. A 
breath of deadly cold pierced him like a spear, as with a last spurt, like a  
flash of  white fire, the  elf-horse  speeding as  if on wings, passed right 
before the face of the foremost Rider. 
     Frodo heard  the splash of water. It foamed about his feet. He felt the 
quick heave and surge as the horse left the river and struggled up the stony 
path. He was climbing the steep bank. He was across the Ford. 
     But the pursuers were close behind. At  the  top of  the bank the horse 
halted and turned  about neighing  fiercely. There were  Nine  Riders at the 
water's edge below, and Frodo's spirit quailed before  the  threat  of their 
uplifted faces. He knew of nothing that would  prevent them from crossing as 
easily as he had done; and he felt that it was useless to try to escape over  
the long uncertain path from the Ford to the edge  of Rivendell, if once the 
Riders crossed. In any case he felt that  he was commanded urgently to halt.  
Hatred again stirred in him, but he had no longer the strength to refuse. 
     Suddenly the foremost  Rider  spurred  his horse forward. It checked at 
the water and  reared  up.  With  a  great  effort  Frodo  sat  upright  and 
brandished his sword. 
     'Go back!' he cried. 'Go  back to  the Land of Mordor, and follow me no 
more! '  His voice sounded  thin and shrill  in his  own  ears.  The  Riders 
halted, but Frodo had not  the power of Bombadil. His enemies laughed at him 
with  a harsh and chilling laughter. 'Come back! Come back!' they called. 'To 

####-Mordor we will take you!' 
     'Go back!' he whispered. 
     'The Ring! The  Ring!'  they cried with  deadly voices; and immediately 
their leader urged his horse forward into the water, followed closely by two 
others. 
     'By Elbereth  and L®thien  the Fair,' said Frodo  with  a last  effort, 
lifting up his sword, 'you shall have neither the Ring nor me!' 
     Then the leader, who was now half across the Ford, stood up menacing in 
his  stirrups, and raised up his hand.  Frodo was stricken dumb. He felt his 
tongue  cleave to  his mouth,  and  his heart labouring. His sword broke and  
fell out of his shaking hand. The elf-horse reared and snorted. The foremost  
of the black horses had almost set foot upon the shore. 
     At that moment there  came a roaring and  a rushing: a  noise  of  loud 
waters rolling many stones. Dimly  Frodo saw the river below him  rise,  and 
down along its course there  came a  plumed cavalry of  waves.  White flames 
seemed to Frodo to  flicker on their crests  and he half fancied that he saw 
amid the water white riders upon white horses with frothing manes. The three 
Riders  that  were still in  the midst of  the  Ford were  overwhelmed: they 
disappeared, buried su ddenly under angry  foam.  Those that were behind drew 
back in dismay. 
     With his  last failing senses Frodo  heard cries,  and it seemed to him 
that he saw, beyond the Riders that hesitated on the shore, a shining figure 
of white light;  and behind it ran small shadowy forms  waving flames,  that 
flared red in the grey mist that was falling over the world. 
     The  black  horses were  filled  with madness, and leaping  forward  in 
terror  they bore their riders  into the rushing flood. Their piercing cries 
were drowned in the roaring of the river as it carried them away. Then Frodo 
felt himself  falling,  and  the  roaring and  confusion seemed  to rise and 
engulf him together with his enemies. He heard and saw no more. 
 

####-* BOOK II *  

 
 

Chapter 1. Many Meetings 

 
 
     Frodo woke and found himself lying in bed. At first he thought that  he 
had slept late, after a long unpleasant dream that still hovered on the edge 
of memory. Or  perhaps he  had been ill? But  the ceiling looked strange; it 
was flat, and it had dark beams richly carved. He lay  a little while longer  
looking at patches of sunlight on the wall, and listening to the  sound of a  
waterfall. 
     `Where am  I, and what is the time?' he said aloud to the  ceiling. 'In 
the  House of Elrond, and it is ten o'clock in  the morning.' said  a voice. 
`It is the morning of October the twenty -fourth, if you want to know.' 
     `Gandalf!'  cried  Frodo, sitting up. There was the old wizard, sitting 
in a chair by the open window.  
     `Yes,' he said, `I am here.  And you  are lucky  to be here, too, after  
all the absurd  things you  have done since  you left home.' Frodo lay  down 
again. He felt too comfortable and peaceful to argue, and in any case he did 
not think he would get the better of  an argument.  He  was fully awake now,  
and  the memory of  his  journey  was returning: the  disastrous `short cut' 
through the Old Forest the `accident' at The Prancing Pony;  and his madness 
in putting  on the Ring  in the dell under Weathertop. While he was thinking 
of all these  things and trying  in  vain to  bring  his memory down to  his 
arriving  in  Rivendell, there  was a long  silence, broken only by the soft  
puffs of Gandalf's pipe, as he blew white smoke-rings out of the window.  
     'Where's Sam?' Frodo asked at length. 'And are the others all right?' 
     'Yes, they are  all  safe  and sound,' answered Gandalf.  `Sam was here 
until I sent him off to get some rest, about half an hour ago.' 
     `What happened at the Ford?' said Frodo. `It all seemed so dim somehow; 
and it still does.' 
     'Yes,  it  would.  You were beginning to fade,' answered  Gandalf. 'The 
wound was overcoming you at last. A few more hours and you  would have  
been 
beyond  our aid.  But you have some strength in you, my dear  hobbit! As you 
showed in the  Barrow. That was touch and  go: perhaps  the  most  dangerous 

####-moment of all. I wish you could have held out at Weathertop.' 
     'You seem to know a great deal already,' said Frodo. `I have not spoken 
to the others about the Barrow. At first it was too horrible; and afterwards 
there were other things to think about. How do you know about it?' 
     'You have talked long  in your sleep, Frodo,' said Gandalf gently, 'and 
it  has not been hard  for me to  read  your mind and memory. Do not  worry! 
Though I said  "absurd" just now, I did not mean it. I think well of you-and 
of the others. It is  no small  feat to have come so far,  and  through such 
dangers, still bearing the Ring.' 
     'We should  never  have done it  without Strider,' said Frodo. `But  we 
needed you. I did not know what to do without you.' 
     'I was delayed,'  said Gandalf, `and that  nearly proved our  ruin. And 
yet I am not sure; it may have been better so.' 
     'I wish you would tell me what happened!' 
     'All in good time! You are not supposed to talk or worry about anything 
today, by Elrond's orders.' 
     `But  talking would stop me thinking and wondering,  which are quite as 
tiring,' said Frodo.  'I am wide awake  now, and  I remember so many  things 
that want explaining. Why  were you delayed?  You  ought to tell me that  at 
least.' 
     'You will soon hear all you wish to know,' said Gandalf. 'We shall have 
a Council, as soon as you are  well enough. At the  moment  I will only  say 
that I was held captive.' 
     'You?' cried Frodo. 
     'Yes, I, Gandalf the Grey,'  said the wizard solemnly.  'There are many 
powers  in  the world,  for good  or for evil. Some are  greater  than I am. 
Against  some  I  have not  yet been measured. But my  time  is  coming. The 
Morgul-lord and his Black Riders have come forth. War is preparing!' 
     `Then you knew of the Riders already -before I met them?' 
     'Yes, I knew of them. Indeed I spoke of them once to you; for the Black  
Riders are the Ringwraiths, the Nine Servants of the Lord of the Rings.  But 
I did not know  that they had arisen again or I should have fled with you at 
once. I heard news  of them only after  I left you in  June; but that  story 
must wait. For the moment we have been saved from disaster, by Aragorn.' 
     'Yes,'  said Frodo, `it was Strider that saved  us. Yet I was afraid of 
him at first. Sam never quite trusted him. I think, not at any rate until we 
met Glorfindel.' 

####-     Gandalf smiled. `I have heard all about  Sam,' he said. 'He has no more 
doubts now.' 
     'I am glad,' said Frodo. 'For I have become very fond of Strider. Well, 
fond is not the right word.  I mean he is dear to me; though he  is strange, 
and grim  at times. In fact, he reminds  me often of you. I didn't know that 
any of the Big People were  like that.  I thought, well, that  they were just 
big, and rather stupid: kind and stupid like Butterbur; or stupid and wicked 
like  Bill Ferny. But then we don't know much about Men in the Shire, except 
perhaps the Breelanders.' 
     `You  don't know  much  even  about them, if you  think old Barliman is 
stupid,' said Gandalf. 'He is wise enough on his  own ground. He thinks less 
than  he talks, and slower; yet he can see through a brick wall  in time (as 
they say in Bree). But there are few left in  Middle-earth  like Aragorn son 
of Arathorn. The race of the Kings from over the Sea is nearly at an end. It 
may be that this War of the Ring will be their last adventure.' 
     'Do  you  really  mean that  Strider is one  of the people of  the  old 
Kings?' said Frodo in wonder.  `I thought  they had all vanished long ago. I 
thought he was only a Ranger.' 
     'Only a Ranger!' cried Gandalf. `My dear Frodo,  that  is just what the 
Rangers are: the last  remnant in the North  of the great people, the Men of 
the  West.  They have helped  me  before; and I shall need their help in the 
days  to come;  for we  have reached Rivendell, but the Ring is  not yet  at 
rest.' 
     'I suppose not,' said Frodo. 'But  so far my  only thought has been  to 
get here; and  I  hope I  shan't have to go any further. It is very pleasant 
just to rest. I have had a month of exile and adventure, and I find that has 
been as much as I want.' 
     He fell silent and shut his eyes. After a while he spoke again. 'I have 
been reckoning,' he said, `and I can't bring  the  total up  to October  the 
twenty-fourth. It ought to  be  the  twenty-first. We  must have reached the 
Ford by the twentieth.' 
     'You have talked and reckoned more than is good for you,' said Gandalf.  
`How do the side and shou lder feel now?' 
     'I don't know.' Frodo  answered. 'They don't feel at all: which  is  an 
improvement, but'--he made  an  effort--'I can move my  arm again a  little. 
Yes, it is coming back to life. It is not cold,' he added, touching his left  
hand with  his right. 

####-     `Good!'  said  Gandalf.  `It is  mending  fast. You will soon be  sound 
again. Elrond has cured you: he has tended you for days, ever since you were 
brought in.' 
     'Days?' said Frodo. 
     `Well, four nights and three days,  to be  exact. The Elves brought you  
from this where you lost  count.  We have been terribly anxious, and Sam has 
hardly left  your  side, day or night, except to run  messages. Elrond is  a  
master of healing, but the weapons of  our Enemy are deadly. To tell you the 
truth, I had very little hope; for  I suspected that there was some fragment 
of the blade still in the closed wound. But it could not be found until last  
night.  Then Elrond  removed a  splinter. It  was deeply  buried. and it was 
working inwards.' 
     Frodo shuddered, remembering the cruel knife  with notched  blade  that 
had vanished in Strider's  hands. `Don't be alarmed!' said Gandalf.  `It  is 
gone  now.  It  has  been  melted.  And  it  seems  that  Hobbits fade  very 
reluctantly.  I  have known strong  warriors of  the Big  People  who  would 
quickly have  been overcome by  that splinter, which you bore  for seventeen 
days.' 
     `What would they have done  to me?' asked Frodo. `What  were the Riders 
trying to do?' 
     'They tried to pierce your heart with a  Morgul-knife  which remains in 
the wound. If they had succeeded, you would  have become like they are, only 
weaker and  under their  command. You  would have became a wraith under  
the 
dominion of  the Dark Lord;  and he would have tormented you   for trying  to 
keep his Ring,  if any greater torment were possible than being robbed of it 
and seeing it on his hand.' 
     'Thank goodness  I  did  not  realize the horrible danger!' said  Frodo 
faintly. I was mortally afraid, of course; but if I had k nown more, I should 
not have dared even to move. It is a marvel that I escaped!' 
     'Yes, fortune or fate have helped you,' said Gandalf,  `not  to mention 
courage. For your heart was not touched, and only your shoulder was pierced; 
and that  was because you resisted to the last. But it was a terribly narrow 
shave, so to  speak. You were in gravest peril while you  wore the Ring, for  
then you were half in the wraith-world yourself, and they might have  seized  
you. You could see them, and they could see you. ' 
     `I know,' said Frodo.  `They were terrible to behold! But why  could we 

####-all see their horses?' 
     `Because  they are real horses; just as the black robes are real  robes 
that they wear to give shape  to their  nothingness when  they have dealings 
with the living.' 
     `Then  why do these black  horses endure such riders? All other animals 
are terrified when  they draw  near, even  the elf-horse of  Glorfindel. The 
dogs howl and the geese scream at them.' 
     `Because these horses are born and bred to the service of the Dark Lord 
in Mordor. Not all his servants and chattels are wraiths! There are orcs and 
trolls, there are wargs  and werewolves; and there have been  and  still are 
many Men,  warriors and kings,  that walk alive under  the  Sun, and yet are 
under his sway. And their number is growing daily.' 
     `What about Rivendell and the Elves? Is Rivendell safe?' 
     `Yes,  at present,  until all else is conquered. The Elves may fear the 
Dark Lord, and they may fly before him, but  never aga in will they listen to 
him or serve him. And here in Rivendell there live  still some of his  chief 
foes: the Elven-wise, lords of the Eldar from beyond the furthest seas. They  
do not fear the Ringwraiths, for those who have dwelt in the  Blessed  Realm 
live at  once in both worlds, and against both the  Seen and the Unseen they 
have great power.' 
     'I  thought that I saw  a white figure that shone and did not  grow dim 
like the others. Was that Glorfindel then?' 
     'Yes, you saw him for a moment as he is upon the other side: one of the 
mighty  of  the Firstborn. He is an Elf-lord  of a  house of princes. Indeed 
there is a power in Rivendell to withstand the might of Mordor, for a while: 
and elsewhere other powers still dwell. There is power, too, of another kind 
in the Shire. But all  such places will soon  become islands under siege, if 
things  go  on  as they are going. The Dark  Lord is  putting forth all  his 
strength. 
     `Still,' he said, standing suddenly up and sticking out his chin. while 
his beard went  stiff and straight like bristling wire, `we must keep up our 
courage. You will  soon be  well, if I do not talk you  to death. You are in 
Rivendell, and you need not worry about anything for the present.' 
     'I haven't any courage to  keep up,'  said Frodo, `but I am not worried 
at  the moment. Just give me news of my friends, and tell  me the end of the  
affair at the  Ford, as I  keep on asking,  and I shall be  content  for the 
present. After that  I  shall have  another sleep, I  think; but I shan't be 

####-able to close my eyes until you have finished the story for me.' 
     Gandalf moved  his chair to the bedside, and took a good look at Frodo. 
The colour  had come  back to his face, and his  eyes were clear, and  fully 
awake  and aware. He was smiling,  and there seemed to be  little wrong with 
him. But to the wizard's eye there was a faint change just a hint as it were 
of transparency,  about  him, and especially  about  the left  hand that lay 
outside upon the coverlet. 
     `Still that must be expected,' said Gandalf to himself. `He is not half 
through  yet,  and to what  he  will  come in the  end  not even  Elrond can 
foretell. Not  to evil, I think. He may become  like a glass filled  with  a  
clear light for eyes to see that can.' 
     `You look splendid,' he  said aloud. `I  will risk a brief tale without 
consulting Elrond. But quite brief, mind you, and then you must sleep again. 
This is what happened, as far  as I can gather. The Riders made straight for  
you, as soon as you fled. They did not need the guidance of their horses any  
longer: you  had become visible to  them, being already on the threshold  of 
their world. And also the Ring drew them. Your friends sprang aside, off the 
road, or they would have been ridden down. They knew that nothing could save 
you,  if  the white horse could  not. The Riders were too swift to overtake, 
and too many to oppose.  On foot even  Glorfindel and Aragorn together could 
not with stand all the Nine at once. 
     `When the Ringwraiths  swept  by, your friends ran up behind.  Close to 
the Ford  there is a small hollow  beside  the  road masked by a few stunted 
trees.  There they hastily  kindled fire; for  Glorfindel knew that a  flood 
would come down, if  the Riders  tried  to cross,  and then he would have to 
deal with any that were left on his side of the river. The moment the  flood 
appeared, he rushed  out, followed by  Aragorn and the. others  with flaming  
brands. Caught between  fire and water, and seeing  an Elf-lord revealed  in 
his wrath, they were dismayed, and their  horses were stricken with madness. 
Three were  carried away by the first assault  of the flood; the others were 
now hurled into the water by their horses and overwhelmed.' 
     'And is that the end of the Black Riders?' asked Frodo. 
     'No,' said Gandalf. 'Their horses must have perished,  and without them 
they  are crippled.  But  the  Ringwraiths  themselves cannot  be  so easily 
destroyed. However, there is nothing more to fear from them at present. Your 
friends crossed after the  flood had passed; and they found you lying on your  
face at the top of the  bank, with  a broken sword under you. The horse  was 

####-standing guard beside you. You were  pale and cold, and they feared that you 
were  dead,  or  worse.  Elrond's folk met them, carrying you slowly towards 
Rivendell.' 
     `Who made the flood?' asked Frodo. 
     'Elrond  commanded it,' answered  Gandalf. `The river of this valley is 
under his power, and it will rise in anger when he has great need to bar the 
Ford.  As soon as the  captain  of the Ringwraiths rode into  the  water the 
flood was released.  If I may say so, I added a few touches of  my  own: you  
may  not have noticed, but some of the waves  took the  form of  great white 
horses with shining  white riders; and there wer e many rolling and  grinding 
boulders. For a moment  I was afraid that  we  had let  loose too  fierce  a  
wrath, and the flood would get out of hand  and  wash you all away. There is 
great vigour  in  the  waters  that come down  from the snows  of  the Misty 
Mountains.' 
     `Yes,  it all  comes  back  to  me now,'  said  Frodo:  'the tremendous 
roaring. I thought I was drowning, with my friends  and enemies and all. But 
now we are safe!' 
     Gandalf  looked quickly at Frodo,  but he had shut his  eyes. 'Yes, you  
are all safe for the present. Soon there will be feasting and merrymaking to 
celebrate the  victory at the Ford  of Bruinen, and you will all be there in 
places of honour.' 
     'Splendid!' said Frodo. `It is  wonderful  that Elrond, and  Glorfindel 
and such great lords, not to  mention Strider, should take so  much  trouble 
and show me so much kindness.' 
     `Well, there  are many reasons why they should,' said Gandalf, smiling. 
`I am one good reason. The Ring is another: you are the Ring-bearer.  And you  
are the heir of Bilbo, the Ring-finder.' 
     `Dear Bilbo!' said Frodo sleepily. `I wonder where he is. I wish he was 
here and could hear  all  about it.  It would have  made  him laugh, The cow 
jumped  over the  Moon!  And  the poor old troll!'  With that he  fell  fast  
asleep. 
     Frodo was now safe in the Last Homely House east of the Sea. That house 
was, as Bilbo had long ago reported, `a perfect house, whether you like food 
or sleep, or story-telling or singing, or just sitting and thinking best, or 
a  pleasant  mixture  of  them all'.  Merely  to  be  there was  a cure  for  
weariness, fear, and sadness.  
     As the evening drew on, Frodo  woke up again, and he found  that  he no 

####-longer felt in need of rest or sleep, but had a mind for food and drink, and 
probably  for singing and story-telling  afterwards. He got  out of  bed and 
discovered that his  arm was  already nearly as useful again as it ever  had 
been. He found  laid ready  clean garments  of  green cloth that  fitted him 
excellently. Looking  in a mirror  he  was  startled to see  a  much thinner  
reflection  of  himself than  he remembered: it  looked remarkably like  the 
young nephew of Bilbo who used to go tramping  with his uncle in  the Shire; 
but the eyes looked out at him thoughtfully. 
     `Yes, you  have seen a thing or two since  you last  peeped  out  of  a  
looking-glass,' he said to his reflection. 'But now for a merry meeting!' 
     He stretched out his arms and whistled a tune. 
     At that moment there  was a knock on the door,  and Sam came in. He ran 
to Frodo and took his left hand,  awkwardly and shyly. He stroked it  gently  
and then he blushed and turned hastily away. 
     `Hullo, Sam!' said Frodo. 
     `It's  warm!' said Sam. `Meaning your hand, Mr.  Frodo. It has  felt so 
cold through  the long nights. But glory  and trumpets!'  he cried,  turning 
round again with shining  eyes and dancing  on  the floor. 'It's fine to see 
you up and yourself again, sir! Gandalf asked me to come and see if you were 
ready to come down, and I thought he was joking.' 
     'I  am ready,' said Frodo.  'Let's  go  and  look  for the rest  of the 
party!' 
     `I can  take you to them,  sir,' said Sam. `It's a  big house this, and 
very  peculiar. Always a bit more to discover,  and no  knowing  what  you'll 
find round a corner. And Elves, sir! Elves  here, and Elves there! Some like 
kings, terrible and splendid;  and some  as merry as children. And the music 
and the singing-not that I have had the time or the heart for much listening 
since we got here. But I'm getting to know some of the ways of the place.' 
     'I know  what you have  been doing,  Sam,' said Frodo,  taking his arm. 
'But you  shall be merry tonight,  and listen to your  heart's content. Come 
on, guide me round the corners!' 
     Sam led him  along several passages and down many steps and out  into a 
high garden above the  steep bank of the river. He found his friends sitting 
in a  porch on the side of the house looking east. Shadows had fallen in the 
valley below,  but there was still a light on the faces of the mountains far 
above. The air was warm. The sound of running  and falling  water  was loud, 
and the evening  was filled with a  faint scent  of trees and flowers, as if 

####-summer still lingered in Elrond's gardens.  
     `Hurray!' cried Pippin, springing  up.  `Here is our noble cousin! Make 
way for Frodo, Lord of the Ring!' 
     'Hush!' said Gandalf from the shadows at the back  of the  porch. `Evil 
things do  not  come into this valley; but all  the same we should not  name 
them. The Lord of the Ring is not Frodo, but the master of the Dark Tower of 
Mordor, whose  power is  again stretching out over the world! We are sitting  
in a fortress. Outside it is getting dark.' 
     `Gandalf  has been saying many cheerful things like that,' said Pippin. 
`He thinks I need keeping in  order.  But it  seems impossible, somehow,  to  
feel  gloomy or depressed in  this place. I feel I could sing, if I knew the 
right song for the occasion.' 
     `I feel  like singing myself,' laughed Frodo. `Thou gh  at the moment  I  
feel more like eating and drinking!' 
     `That  will  soon  be cured,'  said  Pippin. `You have shown your usual 
cunning in getting up just in time for a meal.' 
     `More than meal!  A  feast!'  said  Merry. `As soon as Gandalf reported 
that  you were  recovered, the  preparations began.' He  had hardly finished 
speaking when they were summoned to the hall by the ringing of many bells. 
     The  hall of Elrond's house was filled with folk: Elves  for  the  most  
part,  though there wer e a  few guests of other  sorts.  Elrond, as  was his 
custom, sat in a great chair at the end of the long table upon the dais; and 
next to him on the one side sat Glorfindel, on the other side sat Gandalf.  
     Frodo looked at them in wonder, for he had never before seen Elrond, of 
whom  so many tales spoke; and as they sat upon his right hand and his left,  
Glorfindel, and even Gandalf, whom he thought he knew so well, were 
revealed 
as lords of dignity and power. Gandalf was shorter in stature than the other 
two; but his  long  white  hair, his  sweeping silver beard, and  his  broad 
shoulders, made him look like some wise king of ancient  legend. In his aged 
face under  great snowy brows  his dark eyes  were set like coals that could 
leap suddenly into fire. 
     Glorfindel  was tall and straight;  his  hair was of shining gold,  his 
face fair and young and fearless and full  of  joy; his eyes were bright and 
keen, and his voice like music; on his brow sat wisdom, and  in his hand was 
strength. 
     The face  of Elrond was ageless, neither old nor young, though in it was 

####-written the memory of many things both glad and sorrowful. His hair was dark 
as the shadows of twilight, and upon  it  was set  a circlet  of silver; his 
eyes were grey as a clear evening, and in them was a light like the light of 
stars. Venerable he seemed as a king crowned with many winters, and yet hale 
as  a tried warrior in  the  fulness  of  his strength.  He was the Lord  of 
Rivendell and mighty among both Elves and Men. 
     In  the  middle of the table, against  the  woven cloths upon the wall, 
there  was a chair under  a canopy, and there sat a lady fair to look  upon, 
and so like was she in form of womanhood  to Elrond that Frodo  guessed that 
she was one of his  close kindred. Young she was  and yet not so. The braids 
of her dark  hair were touched  by no frost, her white arms and  clear  face 
were  flawless and smooth,  and the light  of stars was in  her bright eyes,  
grey as a cloudless night; yet queenly she looked, and thought and knowledge 
were in  her  glance, as  of  one  who has known  many things that the years 
bring. Above her brow her head was covered with  a cap of silver lace netted 
with small gems, glittering white; but her soft grey raiment had no ornament 
save a girdle of leaves wrought in silver. 
     So it was  that Frodo saw  her whom few  mortals  had yet seen;  Arwen,  
daughter  of Elrond,  in whom it  was said  that the likeness of L®thien had 
come on earth again; and she was called  Undumiel, for she was  the Evenstar 
of her people. Long she had been in the land of her mother's kin,  in Lurien 
beyond  the mountains,  and  was  but  lately  returned to Rivendell  to her  
father's  house.  But  her  brothers, Elladan and  Elrohir,  were  out  upon 
errantry: for  they rode often far  afield with the  Rangers  of  the North, 
forgetting never their mother's torment in the dens of the orcs.  
     Such loveliness  in  living  thing  Frodo had  never  seen  before  nor  
imagined in his mind; and he was both surprised and abashed to find  that he 
had a seat at  Elrond's table among all these  folk so high and fair. Though 
he had a suitable chair, and was raised upon several  cushions, he felt very 
small, and  rather out of place; but that  feeling quickly passed. The feast  
was  merry and  the food all that his  hunger could desire. It was some time 
before he looked about him again or even turned to his neighbours. 
     He  looked first for his friends. Sam had begged to be  allowed to wait 
on his  master, but had been  told that  for this  time he  was  a  guest of 
honour. Frodo could see him  now, sitting with Pippin and Merry at the upper  
end  of  one of  the side-tables close to  the dais. He could see no sign of 
Strider. 

####-     Next to Frodo  on his right sat a dwarf of important appearance, richly 
dressed. His beard, very long and forked, was  white, nearly as white as the 
snow-white cloth  of his garments. He wore a silver belt, and round his neck  
hung a chain of silver and diamonds. Frodo stopped eating to look at him. 
     'Welcome  and well met!'  said the dwarf, turning towards  him. Then he 
actually rose from his seat and bowed. `Gluin at your service,' he said, and 
bowed still lower. 
     'Frodo  Baggins  at  your  service  and  your   family's,'  said  Frodo 
correctly, rising  in surprise and scattering  his cushions. 'Am I right  in 
guessing that you are the  Gluin, one of the twelve companions of the  great 
Thorin Oakenshield?' 
     `Quite  right,'  answered  the dwarf,  gathering up  the  cushions  and 
courteously assist ing  Frodo back  into his seat. 'And I do  not ask, for  I 
have  already been  told that you  are  the  kinsman and adopted heir of our 
friend Bilbo the renowned. Allow me to congratulate you on your recovery.' 
     `Thank you very much,' said Frodo. 
     'You have had  some very strange  adventures, I hear,'  said  Gluin. 'I  
wonder greatly  what brings  four hobbits  on so long a journey. Nothing like 
it  has happened  since Bilbo came with us. But perhaps I should not inquire 
too closely, since Elrond and Gandalf do not seem disposed to talk of this?' 
     'I  think  we  will not  speak  of it,  at least not  yet,' said  Frodo 
politely. 
     He guessed that  even in Elrond's house the matter of  the Ring was not 
one for casual talk; and in any case he wished to forget his  troubles for a  
time. 'But  I am  equally  curious,'  he  added,  `to learn what  brings  so 
important a dwarf so far from the Lonely Mountain.' 
     Gluin looked at him. 'If you have not heard, I  think we will not speak 
yet  of that either. Master  Elrond will summon us all ere long,  I believe, 
and  then we shall all hear many things. But there is much else that  may be 
told.' 
     Throughout the  rest  of  the  meal  they talked  together,  but  Frodo 
listened more than he spoke; for the news of the Shire, apart from the Ring, 
seemed small and far-away and unimportant. while  Gluin had much to tell  of 
events in the northern regions of Wilderland.  Frodo  learned that Grimbeorn 
the Old, son of  Beorn, was now the lord  of  many sturdy men ,  and to their  
land between the Mountains and Mirkwood neither orc nor wolf dared to go.  
     'lndeed,' said Gluin,  `if it were not for  the  Beornings, the passage 

####-from  Dale  to Rivendell  would long  ago  have become  impossible. They are 
valiant men and keep open  the High Pass  and the Ford of Carrock. But their 
tolls are high,' he added with a shake of his  head;  `and like Beorn of old 
they are not over fond of dwarves. Still, they are trusty,  and that is much 
in these days. Nowhere are there any men so friendly to  us  as the  Men  of 
Dale. They  are  good  folk,  the Bardings. The  grandson of Bard the Bowman 
rules  them,  Brand son of Bain  son of Bard. He is a  strong king.  and his 
realm now reaches far south and east of Esgaroth.' 
     'And what of your own people?' asked Frodo. 
     `There is much  to tell, good and bad,' said  Gluin; 'yet it  is mostly 
good:  we have so far been fortunate, though  we do not escape the shadow of 
these  times. If you  really  wish  to  hear of us, I will tell  you tidings 
gladly.  But stop  me when  you are  weary!  Dwarves'  tongues  run  on when 
speaking of their handiwork, they say.' 
     And with that  Gluin embarked on a long  account of the doings  of  the 
Dwarf-kingdom.  He  was delighted  to have found  so polite a  listener; for  
Frodo showed no sign of weariness and made no attempt to change the subject, 
though  actually he  soon  got rather lost among the strange names of people 
and places that he had never heard of before. He was interested, however, to 
hear that Dbin was  still  King under the  Mountain, and was now old (having 
passed  his two hundred  and fiftieth year), venerable, and fabulously rich. 
Of the ten companions who had survived the Battle of Five Armies  seven were 
still with him: Dwalin, Gluin, Dori, Nori,  Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur. Bombur 
was now so fat that he could not move himself from his couch to his chair at 
table, and it took six young dwarves to lift him. 
     'And what has become of Balin and Ori and Uin?' asked Frodo. 
     A shadow passed  over Gluin's face.  `We do not know,' he answered. 'It 
is largely  on account of  Balin that I have come to ask the advice of those 
that dwell in Rivendell. But tonight let us speak of merrier things!' 
     Gluin began then  to talk  of the works of  his  people,  telling Frodo 
about their  great  labours in Dale  and under the  Mountain. 'We have  done 
well,' he  said. `But  in  metalwork  we cannot rival  our fathers, many  of 
whose. secrets are lost. We make good armour and keen swords, but  we cannot 
again make mail or blade  to match  those  that were  made before the dragon 
came. Only in mining and building have we surpassed the old days. You should 
see  the  waterways of Dale,  Frodo, and the fountains, and  the pools!  You  
should  see  the  stone-paved roads  of  many  colours! And  the  halls  and 

####-cavernous streets under the earth with  arches  carved  like trees;  and the 
terraces and  towers upon the Mountain's  sides! Then you would  see that we 
have not been idle.' 
     'I will come and see them, if  ever I can,' said  Frodo. 'How surprised 
Bilbo would have been to see all the changes in the Desolation of Smaug!' 
     Gluin looked at Frodo and smiled. 'You were very fond of Bilbo were you 
not?' he asked. 
     `Yes,' answered Frodo. 'I would rather see him than all  the towers and 
palaces in the world.' 
     At length the feast came to an end. Elrond and Arwen rose and went down 
the hall, and the company followed them in due  order. The doors were thrown 
open, and they went across a  wide passage and through other doors, and came 
into a further hall.  In it were no tables, but a bright fire was burning in 
a great hearth between the carven pillars upon either side. 
     Frodo found himself  walking with  Gandalf. `This  is the Hall of Fire' 
said the wizard.  `Here you will hear many songs and  tales-if you  can keep 
awake. But except on high days it usually stands empty and quiet, and people 
come here who wish for peace,  and thought. There is always a fire here, all  
the year round, but there is little other light.' 
     As Elrond entered and  went towards  the seat prepared for  him, elvish 
minstrels began to  make sweet  music.  Slowly  the hall  filled,  and Frodo 
looked  with delight upon  the many  fair faces that were gathered together; 
the golden firelight played upon them and shimmered in  their hair. Suddenly 
he noticed, not far from the further  end of  the fire, a small dark  figure 
seated on a stool with his back propped against a pillar. Beside him on  the 
ground was a drinking-cup  and some bread. Frodo wondered whether he was 
ill 
(if people were ever ill in Rivendell), and had been unable  to  come to the 
feast. His head seemed sunk  in sleep on  his breast, and a fold of his dark 
cloak was drawn over his face. 
     Elrond wen t forward and stood beside the  silent figure. 'Awake  little 
master.  he  said, with a smile. Then, turning to Frodo, he beckoned to him. 
'Now  at last  the hour has come that you have wished  for, Frodo,' he said. 
`Here is a friend that you have long missed.' 
     The dark figure raised its head and uncovered its face. 
     `Bilbo!' cried Frodo with sudden recognition, and he sprang forward. 
     `Hullo, Frodo my  lad!' said Bilbo.  `So  you have got here at  last. I 

####-hoped you would manage it. Well,  well! So  all this  feasting  is  in  your 
honour, I hear. I hope you enjoyed yourself?' 
     'Why weren't  you there?' cried Frodo.  `And why haven't I been allowed 
to see you before?' 
     `Because you were asleep. I have seen a good deal of you. I have sat by 
your  side with Sam each day. But as for  the feast` I don't go in  for such 
things much now. And I had something else to do.' 
     `What were you doing?' 
     `Why, sitting and thinking.  I do  a lot of that  nowadays, and this is 
the best place to do it in, as a rule. Wake up, indeed!' he said, cocking an 
eye at Elrond.  There was a  bright  twinkle in it and no sign of sleepiness 
that Frodo could see. `Wake up! I was not asleep. Master Elrond. If you want 
to  know,  you  have  all come  out from your  feast too  soon, and  you have 
disturbed me-in the middle of making up a song. I was stuck  over a line  or  
two, and was thinking  about them; but  now I don't suppose I shall ever get  
them right.  There will  be such a deal of singing  that  the  ideas wi ll be 
driven clean out  of my head.  I  shall have to get my friend the D®nadan to 
help me. Where is he?' 
     Elrond laughed. `He  shall  be found,' he  said. `Then you two shall go 
into a corner  and finish your task, and we will hear it and judge it before 
we end our merrymaking.' Messengers were sent to find Bilbo's friend, though 
none knew where he was, or why he had not been present at the feast. 
     In the meanwhile Frodo and Bilbo sat side by side, and Sam came quickly 
and placed himself near them. They talked together in soft voices, oblivious 
of the mirth and music in the hall about them.  Bilbo had not much to say of 
himself. When  he had left Hobbiton he had wandered off aimlessly, along the 
Road or in the country on either side;  but  somehow  he had steered all the 
time towards Rivendell. `I got here without  much adventure,' he  said, `and 
after  a rest I went on with  the dwarves to Dale: my last journey. I shan't  
travel again.  Old  Balin had gone away. Then I came  back  here, and here I  
have been. I have done this and that. I have  written some more of my  book. 
And, of course, I make  up a few songs. They sing them occasionally: just to 
please  me,  I think; for, of  course,  they aren't really  good  enough for  
Rivendell. And I listen and  I think. Time doesn't seem to pass here: it just  
is. A remarkable place altogether. 
     `I  hear  all kinds of  news,  from  over the Mountains, and out of the 
South,  but  hardly  anything  from the Shire.  I heard  about  the Ring, of 

####-course. Gandalf has been here often. Not  that he has told me a  great deal, 
he has become closer than ever these last few years. The D®nadan has told me 
more. Fancy that ring of mine causing such a disturbance! It  is a pity that 
Gandalf did not find out more sooner. I  could  have brought  the thing here 
myself  long ago without  so much trouble. I have  thought several  times of 
going back to Hobbiton for it; but I am getting old, and they  would not let 
me: Gandalf and Elrond,  I  mean.  They seemed  to  think that the Enemy was 
looking high and low for me, and would make mincemeat of me, if he caught 
me 
tottering about in the Wild. 
     'And Gandalf said: "The Ring has passed on,  Bilbo. It would do no good 
to  you or to others, if you tried to meddle  with it  again." Odd  sort  of 
remark,  just like Gandalf. But he said he was looking after  you, so I  let 
things be. I am frightfully glad to  see  you safe and sound.' He paused and 
looked at Frodo doubtfully. 
     `Have  you got it here?' he asked  in a whisper. `I  ca n't help feeling 
curious,  you know, after all I've heard. I  should very much like  just  to 
peep at it again.' 
     `Yes, I've  got  it,' answered Frodo, feeling a strange reluctance. `It 
looks just the same as ever it did.' 
     `Well, I should just lik e to see it for a moment,' said Bilbo. 
     When he had dressed, Frodo found  that while he slept the Ring had been 
hung about his neck on a new chain, light but strong. Slowly he drew it out. 
Bilbo  put  out  his hand.  But Frodo  quickly drew  back the Ring.  To  his 
distress  and  amazement he found that he was no  longer looking at Bilbo; a  
shadow seemed to  have fallen between them, and through it he found  himself 
eyeing a little wrinkled creature with a hungry face and bony groping hands.  
He felt a desire to strike him. 
     The music  and singing round them seemed  to falter and a silence fell. 
Bilbo looked quickly at Frodo's face and passed his hand across his eyes. `I  
understand  now,' he said. `Put it away! I am sorry: sorry you have  come in 
for this burden: sorry about everything.  Don't adventures ever have an end?  
I suppose not. Someone else always has to carry on the story. Well, it can't  
be helped. I wonder if it's any good  trying  to finish my  book? But  don't 
let's  worry about it now-let 's have some real News! Tell  me all about  the 
Shire!' 
     Frodo hid the Ring away, and the shadow passed leaving hardly  a  shred 

####-of  memory.  The light  and music  of  Rivendell was about  him again. Bilbo 
smiled  and laughed happily. Every  item  of news  from the Shire that Frodo 
could  tell-aided and corrected now and again  by  Sam-was  of the  greatest  
interest to  him, from the felling of  the least tree to the  pranks of  the 
smallest child  in  Hobbiton. They were so deep in  the doings  of  the Four 
Farthings that they did not  notice  the arrival of a man clad in dark green 
cloth. For many minutes he stood looking down at them with a smile. 
     Suddenly  Bilbo  looked  up. 'Ah, there you are  at last,  D®nadan!' he 
cried. 
     `Strider!' said Frodo. `You seem to have a lot of names.' 
     `Well, Strider is one that I haven't heard before, anyway,' said Bilbo. 
`What do you call him that for?' 
     `They call me that in Bree,' said Strider laughing, 'and that is how  I 
was introduced to him.' 
     `And why do you call him D®nadan?' asked Frodo. 
     `The D®nadan,' said Bilbo. `He is often called that here. But I thought 
you  knew  enough  Elvish  at  least to  know  d®n-udan: Man  of  the  West, 
N®menorean. But this is not the time for lessons!' He turned to Strider. 
     `Where have you been, my friend? Why weren't you at the feast? The Lady 
Arwen was there.' 
     Strider looked down at Bilbo gravely. `I  know,'  he said. 'But often I 
must put  mirth aside. Elladan  and Elrohir  have returned  out  of the Wild 
unlooked-for, and they had tidings that I wished to hear at once.' 
     `Well, my  dear fellow,' said  Bilbo, `now you've heard the news, can't  
you spare me  a moment?  I want your help in  something urgent.  Elrond says 
this song of mine is to be finished  before the end of the evening, and I am 
stuck. Let's go off into a corner and polish it up!' 
     Strider smiled. `Come then!' he said. `Let me hear it!' 
     Frodo  was left  to himself  for a while. for Sam had fallen asleep. He 
was  alone and felt rather forlorn`  although  all  about  him  the  folk of 
Rivendell were gathered. But  those near  him were silent,  intent upon  the 
music of the voices and the instruments. and they  gave no heed to  anything 
else. Frodo began to listen. 
     At first the beauty of the  melodies  and  of  the interwoven  words in 
elven-tongues, even though he understood  them little` held him in  a spell, 
as soon as  he began to attend to them. Almost it seemed that the words took  
shape, and  visions of  far la nds  and  bright things that he had  never yet 

####-imagined  opened out before him;  and the firelit  hall became like a golden 
mist above seas of foam that sighed upon the margins of the  world. Then the 
enchantment  became more and more dreamlike, until  he  felt  that an endless 
river of  swelling gold  and  silver was flowing over him, too multitudinous 
for its  pattern to be comprehended;  it  became part of  the throbbing  air 
about him, and  it  drenched and  drowned him. Swiftly  he  sank  under  its 
shining weight into a deep realm of sleep. 
     There  he wandered long in a dream of  music  that turned  into running 
water, and  then suddenly into a  voice. It seemed  to be the voice of Bilbo 
chanting verses. Faint at first and then clearer ran the words. 
     Edrendil was a mariner 
     that tarried in Arvernien; 
     he built a boat of timber felled 
     in Nimbrethil to journey in; 
     her sails he wove of silver fair, 
     of silver were her lanterns made, 
     her prow was fashioned like a swan, 
     and light upon her banners laid. 
 
     In panoply of ancient kings, 
     in chain‚d rings he armoured him; 
     his shining shield was scored with runes 
     to ward all wounds and harm from him; 
     his bow was made of dragon-horn, 
     his arrows shorn of ebony, 
     of silver was his habergeon, 
     his scabbard of chalcedony; 
     his sword of steel was valiant, 
     of adamant his helmet tall, 
     an eagle -plume upon his crest, 
     upon his breast an emerald. 
 
     Beneath the Moon and under star 
     he wandered far from northern strands, 
     bewildered on enchanted ways 
     beyond the days of mortal lands. 
     From gnashing of the Narrow Ice 

####-     where shadow lies on frozen hills, 
     from nether heats and burning waste  
     he turned in haste, and roving still 
     on starless waters far astray 
     at last he came to Night of Naught, 
     and passed, and never sight he saw 
     of shining shore nor light he sought. 
 
     The winds of wrath came driving him, 
     and blindly in the foam he fled 
     from west to east and errandless, 
     unheralded he homeward sped. 
 
     There flying Elwing came to him, 
     and flame was in the darkness lit; 
     more bright than light of diamond 
     the fire upon her carcanet. 
     The Silmaril she bound on him 
     and crowned him with the living light 
     and dauntless then with burning brow 
     he turned his prow; and in the night 
     from Otherworld beyond the Sea 
     there strong and free a storm arose, 
     a wind of power in Tarmenel; 
     by paths that seldom mortal goes 
     his boat it bore with biting breath  
     as might of death across the grey 
     and long-forsaken seas distressed: 
     from east to west he passed away. 
 
     Through Evernight he back was borne 
     on black and roaring wa ves that ran 
     o'er leagues unlit and foundered shores 
     that drowned before the Days began, 
     until he heard on strands of pearl 
     when ends the world the music long, 
     where ever foaming billows roll 

####-     the yellow gold and jewels wan. 
     He saw the Mountain silent rise 
     where twilight lies upon the knees 
     of Valinor, and Eldamar 
     beheld afar beyond the seas. 
     A wanderer escaped from night 
     to haven white he came at last, 
     to Elvenhome the green and fair 
     where keen the air, where pale as glass 
     beneath the Hill of Ilmarin  
     a-glimmer in a valley sheer 
     the lamplit towers of Tirion 
     are mirrored on the Shadowmere. 
 
     He tarried there from errantry, 
     and melodies they taught to him, 
     and sages old him marvels told, 
     and harps of gold they brought to him. 
     They clothed him then in elven-white, 
     and seven lights before him sent, 
     as through the Calacirian 
     to hidden land forlorn he went. 
     He came unto the timeless halls 
     where shining fall the countless years, 
     and endless reigns the Elder King 
     in Ilmarin on Mountain sheer; 
     and words unheard were spoken then 
     of folk of Men and Elven-kin, 
     beyond the world were visions showed 
     forbid to those that dwell therein. 
 
     A ship then new they built for him 
     of mithril and of elven-glass 
     with shining prow; no shaven oar 
     nor sail she bore on silver mast: 
     the Silmaril as lantern light 
     and banner bright with living flame 

####-     to gleam thereon by Elbereth  
     herself was set, who thither came 
     and wings immortal made for him, 
     and laid on him undying doom, 
     to sail the shoreless skies and come 
     behind the Sun and light of Moon. 
 
     From Evereven's lofty hills 
     where softly silver fountains fall 
     his wings him bore, a wandering light, 
     beyond the mighty Mountain Wall. 
     From World's End then he turned away 
     and yearned again to find afar 
     his home through shadows journeying, 
     and burning as an island star 
     on high above the mists he came, 
     a distant flame before the Sun, 
     a wonder ere the waking dawn  
     where grey the Norland waters run. 
 
     And over Middle -earth he passed 
     and heard at last the weeping sore 
     of women and of elven-maids 
     in Elder Days, in years of yore. 
     gut on him mighty doom was laid, 
     till Moon should fade, an orb‚d star 
     to pass, and tarry never more 
     on Hither Shores where mortals are; 
     for ever still a herald on 
     an errand that should never rest 
     to bear his shining lamp afar, 
     the Flammifer of Westernesse. 
     The  chanting  ceased. Frodo opened his eyes  and  saw  that Bilbo  was 
seated  on  his  stool  in  a  circle  of listeners,  who  were smiling   and 
applauding. 
     `Now we had better have it again,' said an Elf. 
     Bilbo got up  and bowed.  `I am  flattered, Lindir,'  he said. 'But  it 

####-would be too tiring to repeat it all.' 
     'Not too  tiring  for you,' the Elves answered laughing.  'You k now you  
are never tired  of reciting  your own verses.  But really  we cannot answer  
your question at one hearing!' 
     `What!' cried Bilbo. 'You can't tell which parts were  mine,  and which 
were the D®nadan's?' 
     'It is not easy for us to tell the difference between two mortals' said 
the Elf.  
     'Nonsense, Lindir,'  snorted Bilbo. 'If you can't distinguish between a  
Man  and a Hobbit,  your  judgement is  poorer than  I  imagined. They're as 
different as peas and apples.' 
     'Maybe.  To  sheep  other sheep no  doubt  appear  different,'  laughed 
Lindir. `Or to shepherds. But Mortals have not been our study. We have other  
business.' 
     'I won't  argue with you,' said Bilbo. 'I am sleepy after so much music 
and singing. I'll leave you to guess, if  you want to.' 
     He got up and came towards Frodo. 'Well, that's over,' he said in a low 
voice. `It went off  better than  I expected. I don't often get asked for  a  
second hearing. What did you think of it?' 
     `I am not going to try and guess,' said Frodo smiling. 
     `You needn't,' said Bilbo. `As a matter of fact it was all mine. Except 
that Aragorn insisted  on my putting in a green stone. He seemed to think it 
important. I don't know  why. Otherwise he obviously thought the whole thing 
rather above my head, and  he  said that if I had  the cheek to make  verses 
about  Edrendil in the house  of  Elrond, it was my affair. I suppose he was 
right.' 
     'I don't know,' said Frodo. `It seemed to  me  to fit somehow, though I 
can't explain. I was half asleep when you began,  and it seemed to follow on  
from  something that I  was dreaming about.  I didn't understand that it was 
really you speaking until near the end.' 
     `It  is  difficult to  keep awake here, until you get used to it;'  said 
Bilbo.  'Not that hobbits  would ever acquire quite  the elvish appetite for  
music and poetry and tales. They seem to like them as much as food, or more. 
They will be going on  for a long time yet. What  do you say to slipping off 
for some more quiet talk?' 
     `Can we?' said Frodo. 
     `Of course. This is merrymaking not business.  Come and go as you like,  

####-as long as you don't make a noise.' 
     They  got  up and withdrew quietly into the shadows, and made  for  the 
doors. Sam they left behind, fast asleep still with a  smile on his face. In 
spite of his delight in  Bilbo's company Frodo felt a tug of  regret as they 
passed  out of the Hall of Fire.  Even as they  stepped over the threshold a  
single clear voice rose in song. 
     A Elbereth Gilthoniel, 
     silivren penna mnriel 
     o menel aglar elenath! 
     Na-chaered palan -dnriel 
     o galadhremmin ennorath, 
     Fanuilos, le linnathon 
     nef aear, sn nef aearon! 
     Frodo halted  for a moment,  looking back. Elrond was in his  chair and 
the  fire was on his face like summer -light upon the trees. Near him sat the 
Lady Arwen. To  his surprise  Frodo saw that Aragorn stood  beside  her; his 
dark cloak was thrown back, and he seemed  to be  clad  in elven-mail, and a  
star shone  on his breast.  They spoke together, and then suddenly it seemed  
to Frodo that Arwen  turned towards him, and the light of  her eyes  fell on 
him from afar and pierced his heart. 
     He  stood still enchanted, while the sweet syllables of the elvish song 
fell like  clear  jewels  of blended  word  and melody. `It  is  a  song  to 
Elbereth,' said Bilbo. `They will sing that, and other songs of the  Blessed 
Realm, many times tonight. Come on!' 
     He led Frodo back to his own little room. It opened on to the  gar dens 
and looked  south across the ravine  of the Bruinen. There they sat for some  
while,  looking  through  the   window   at  the  bright  stars  above   the 
steep-climbing  woods, and  talking softly. They  spoke no more of the small 
news of  the  Shire far  away, nor  of  the dark  shadows  and  perils  that 
encompassed  them,  but  of  the  fair  things  they  had seen in the  world 
together,  of the Elves, of the stars, of trees, and the  gentle fall of the 
bright year in the woods.  
     At last there came  a knock  on the door. `Begging  your pardon,'  said 
Sam,  putting in his head, `but I was just wondering if you would be wanting  
anything.' 
     `And begging yours, Sam Gamgee,' replied  Bilbo. `I guess you mean that 
it is time your master went to bed.' 

####-     `Well, sir,  there is a  Council early tomorrow, I hear and he only got 
up today for the first time.' 
     `Quite right, Sam,'  laughed Bilbo. `You can  trot off and tell Gandalf 
that he  has gone to bed. Good night, Frodo! Bless me, but it  has been good  
to see you again! There are no folk like  hobbits  after all for a real good 
talk. I am getting very  old, and I began to wonder if I should ever live to 
see your chapters of  our story. Good night! I'll take a walk, I  think, and 
look at the stars of Elbereth in the garden. Sleep well!' 
 

####- 

Chapter 2. The Council of Elrond 

 
 
     Next day Frodo woke  early, feeling refreshed and well. He walked along  
the terraces above  the  loud-flowing Bruinen and watched the pale, cool sun 
rise  above the far  mountains, and shine  down. Slanting  through the  thin 
silver mist;  the dew upon the  yellow leaves was glimmering, and  the woven 
nets of  gossamer twinkled  on  every bush.  Sam  walked beside  him, saying 
nothing.  but  sniffing the air, and looking every now and again with wonder  
in his eyes at the great heights in the East. The snow was white upon  their 
peaks. 
     On a seat cut  in  the  stone beside  a turn in the path they came upon 
Gandalf and  Bilbo  deep in  talk. `Hullo!  Good morning!' said Bilbo. `Feel  
ready for the  great council?' 
     `I feel ready  for anything,' answered Frodo. `But most of all I should 
like to go walking  today and  explore the valley. I should like to get into 
those pine-woods up there.' He pointed away far up the side of  Rivendell to  
the north. 
     'You may  have  a chance later,' said Gandalf. `But we cannot  make any 
plans yet. There is much to hear and decide today.' 
     Suddenly as they were talking a  single clear bell rang out.  `That  is 
the warning bell for the Council of Elrond,' cr ied Gandalf. `Come along now! 
Both you and Bilbo are wanted.' 
     Frodo and Bilbo followed the wizard quickly along the winding path back 
to the  house; behind them, uninvited and for the moment forgotten,  trotted 
Sam. 
     Gandalf  led them to the porch where  Frodo had found  his  friends the 
evening before. The light of the clear autumn morning was now glowing in the 
valley. The noise of bubbling  waters  came up  from the foaming  river -bed. 
Birds were singing,  and a  wholesome  peace lay on the  land. To  Frodo his 
dangerous flight, and  the rumours  of  the darkness growing  in  the  world 
outside, already seemed only the memories of a troubled dream; but the faces 
that were turned to meet them as they entered were grave. 
     Elrond was there, and  several others were seated in silence about him. 
Frodo saw Glorfindel and Gluin;  and  in a corner alone Strider was sitting, 
clad in  his old  travel -worn clothes again. Elrond drew Frodo to a seat  by 

####-his side, and presented him to the company, saying: 
     'Here, my friends is the hobbit, Frodo son of Drogo. Few have ever come 
hither through greater peril or on an errand more urgent.' 
     He then  pointed  out  and named those whom Frodo  had  not met before. 
There was a younger dwarf at Gluin's side: his son Gimli. Beside  Glorfindel  
there were several other counsellors of Elrond's household, of  whom Erestor 
was the chief; and with him was Galdor, an Elf  from the Grey Havens who had 
come on an errand from Cnrdan the Shipwright. There  was also a  strange Elf 
clad in green  and  brown,  Legolas, a messenger from his father, Thranduil,  
the King of the  Elves of Northern Mirkwood. And seated a little apart was a  
tall man with a fair and  noble face,  dark-haired and  grey-eyed, proud and 
stern of glance. 
     He was cloaked and booted as if for a  journey on horseback; and indeed  
though his garments were rich,  and his cloak was lined with  fur, they were 
stained with long travel. He had a  collar of silver in which a single white 
stone was set; his locks  were shorn about his shoulders.  On a  baldric  he 
wore  a  great horn tipped with  silver that now was laid upon his knees. He 
gazed at Frodo and Bilbo with sudden wonder. 
     `Here,' said Elrond,  turning  to Gandalf, `is Boromir, a man  from the 
South. He arrived in the grey morning, and seeks for counsel. I  have bidden 
him to be present, for here his questions will be answered.' 
     Not all that was  spoken and debated in the  Council need now  be told. 
Much was said of events in  the  world outside, especially in the South, and 
in  the wide lands east of the Mountains. Of these things Frodo  had already  
heard many rumours; but the tale of Gluin was new to him, and when the dwarf 
spoke he listened attentively. It appeared that amid the splendour  of their 
works  of  hand  the  hearts of  the  Dwarves of  the  Lonely Mountain  were 
troubled. 
     `It is now many years ago,' said Gluin, `that a shadow of disquiet fell 
upon our people. Whence it came we did not at first perceive. Words began to 
be whispered in secret-: it was said that we were hemmed in  a narrow place, 
and  that greater wealth and splendour would be found in a wider world. Some 
spoke of Moria: the mighty works of our fathers  that are called in  our own 
tongue Khazad-dym; and they  declared that now at last  we had the power and 
numbers to return.' 
     Gluin  sighed. `Moria! Moria! Wonder of the Northern world! Too deep we 
delved there, and woke the nameless fear. Long  have  its vast mansions lain 

####-empty since the  children of Durin fled. But now we  spoke of  it again with  
longing, and yet with  dread;  for  no dwarf has dared to pass  the doors of 
Khazad-dym  for many  lives of kings, save Thrur only, and  he  perished. At 
last, however,  Balin  listened to  the whispers,  and resolved   to  go; and 
though Dbin did not  give leave willingly, he took with him  Ori and Uin and 
many of our folk, and they went away south. 
     "That  was  nigh  on thirty  years ago. For a while we had  news and it 
seemed good: messages reported that Moria ha d been entered and a great  work 
begun there.  Then there was silence,  and  no word has ever come from Moria  
since. 
     "Then  about  a  year  ago  a  messenger came  to Dbin,  but  not  from 
Moria -from Mordor: a horseman in the night, who called Dbin to his gate. The 
Lord Sauron the Great, so he said, wished for our friendship. Rings he would 
give for  it, such  as he gave  of  old.  And he  asked urgently  concerning 
hobbits, of what kind they were, and where they dwelt.  "For Sauron  knows," 
said he, "that one of these was known to you on a time." 
     'At this we were greatly troubled, and we gave no answer. And  then his 
fell  voice was lowered,  and he  would have sweetened it if he could. "As a  
small token only of your friendship  Sauron asks this,"  he  said: "that you  
should find this thief," such  was  his word, "and get from him, willing  or  
no, a  little  ring, the least of  rings,  that  once he stole. It  is but a  
trifle that Sauron fancies, and an earnest of your good  will.  Find it, and 
three rings that the Dwarf sires possessed of old shall be  returned to you, 
and the realm of Moria shall be yours for ever. Find only news of the thief,  
whether  he  still lives  and where,  and you  shall  have great  reward and 
lasting friendship from the Lord. Refuse,  and things will not seem so well. 
Do you refuse?" 
     'At that his breath came like  the hiss of snakes, and all who stood by 
shuddered, but  Dbin said: "I say neither yea nor  nay. I must consider this 
message and what it means under its fair cloak." 
     ' "Consider well, but not too long," said he. 
     ` "The time of my thought is my own to spend," answered Dbin. 
     ' "For the present," said he, and rode into the darkness.  
     'Heavy have the  hearts  of our  chieftains  been since that  night. We 
needed not the fell voice of  the messenger to  warn us that his  words held 
both  menace  and  deceit; for  we knew  already that  the  power  that  has 
re-entered Mordor has not changed, and ever it betrayed us of old. Twice the 

####-messenger has returned, and has gone unanswered. The third and last time, so 
he says, is soon to come, before the ending of the year. 
     'And so I  have been  sent at last by Dbin  to warn  Bilbo  that  he is 
sought by the Enemy, and to learn, if may be, why he desires this ring, this 
least of rings. Also we crave the advice of Elrond. For the Shadow grows and 
draws nearer.  We discover that messengers  have come also to King  Brand in 
Dale,  and  that he is  afraid. We  fear  that he may yield. Already war  is 
gathering on  his eastern borders.  If we make no answer, the Enemy may move 
Men of his rule to assail King Brand, and Dbin also.' 
     `You  have done well to come,' said Elrond.  `You will  hear today  all 
that you need in order to  understand  the purposes of the  Enemy. There  is 
naught that you can do, other than to resist, with hope or without  it.  But 
you do not stand alone. You will learn that your  trouble is but part of the 
trouble of all the western world. The Ring! What shall we do  with the Ring, 
the least of rings, the trifle that Sauron fancies? That is the doom that we 
must deem. 
     `That is the  purpose for which you are  called hither. Called, I  say. 
though  I have not called you to me, strangers from distant lands. You  have 
come and are here met, in this very nick  of time, by chance as it may seem.  
Yet it  is not so. Believe rather that it is  so ordered  that  we, who  sit 
here, and none others, must now find counsel for the peril of the world. 
     `Now, therefore, things  shall be  openly spoken that  have been hidden 
from all  but a few  until this  day. And first, so that all  may understand 
what is the  peril, the  Tale  of the Ring shall be told  from the beginning 
even  to this present.  And I will begin that tale, though others  shall end 
it.' 
     Then all listened while  Elrond in his clear voice  spoke of Sauron and 
the Rings of Power,  and  their forging in the  Second Age of the world long 
ago. A part of his tale was known to some there, but the full  tale to none, 
and  many eyes were turned  t= Elrond in  fear and wonder as he  told of the 
Elven-smiths of Eregion and their friendship with Moria, and their eagerness 
for knowledge,  by which Sauron ensnared them. For  in that time he was  not 
yet evil to  behold, and they received his  aid  and  grew mighty in  craft, 
whereas he learned all their secrets, and betrayed them, and forged secretly 
in the Mountain of Fire the One Ring to be their master. But Celebrimbor was 
aware of him, and  hid the  Three which  he had made; and there was war, and 
the land was laid waste, and the gate of Moria was shut. 

####-     Then through all the years that followed he  traced the Ring; but since 
that history is elsewhere recounted, even as Elrond  himself  set it down in 
his books of lore,  it is not   here recalled. For it is a long tale, full of 
deeds great and terrible, and briefly though Elrond spoke,  the sun rode  up 
the sky, and the morning was passing ere he ceased. 
     Of N®menor he spoke, its glory  and its fall,  and the  return  of  the 
Kings of Men to Middle-earth out  of the  deeps of  the Sea, borne  upon the 
wings  of storm.  Then Elendil the  Tall and  his  mighty sons,  Isildur and 
Anbrion, became great lords; and the North-realm they made in Arnor, and the 
South-realm  in  Gondor above  the mouths  of  Anduin. But Sauron of  Mordor  
assailed them, and they made the Last Alliance of  Elves  and  Men,  and the 
hosts of Gil-galad and Elendil were mustered in Arnor. 
     Thereupon  Elrond paused a  while  and  sighed.  `I  remember  well the 
splendour  of  their banners,' he said.  `It recalled to me the glory of the 
Elder  Days  and the hosts of Beleriand, so many great princes and  captains 
were  assembled. And yet not so many, nor so fair, as when Thangorodrim  was 
broken, and the  Elves deemed that evil was ended for ever,  and it was  not 
so.' 
     `You  remember?'  said  Frodo,   speaking  his  thought  aloud  in  his 
astonishment. `But I thought,' he stammered as Elrond turned towards him, 'I 
thought that the fall of Gil-galad was a long age ago.' 
     'So  it was  indeed,' answered  Elrond gravely.  `But my memory reaches 
back even  to the Elder Days. Edrendil was my sire, who was born in Gondolin 
before its fall; and my mother was Elwing, daughter  of Dior, son of L®thien 
of  Doriath .  I  have  seen  three ages in the West of the world,  and  many 
defeats, and many fruitless victories.  
     `I  was the herald of Gil-galad and marched with his host. I was at the 
Battle  of  Dagorlad before  the  Black Gate of  Mordor,  where  we had  the 
mastery: for the Spear  of  Gil-galad and the  Sword of Elendil, Aiglos  and 
Narsil, none could  withstand.  I beheld the  last  combat  on the slopes of 
Orodruin, where Gil-galad  died, and  Elendil fell, and Narsil broke beneath  
him; but Sauron himself  was overthrown, and Isildur  cut the Ring  from his 
hand with the hilt-shard of his father's sword, and took it for his own.' 
     At this the stranger, Boromir, broke in. `So that is what became of the 
Ring!' he  cried. `If ever  such a  tale was told  in the South, it  has long 
been forgotten. I have  heard of  the Great Ring of him that we do not name;  
but we believed  that it  perished from the world in the  ruin of  his first  

####-realm. Isildur took it! That is tidings indeed.' 
     `Alas! yes,' said Elrond. `Isildur took it, as should not have been. It 
should have  been cast then into Orodruin's fire nigh  at hand  where it was 
made. But few marked what Isildur did.  He alone stood by his father in that 
last mortal  contest; and by Gil-galad only Cnrdan stood, and I. But Isildur 
would not listen to our counsel. 
     '  "This  I will have as weregild for  my father, and my  brother,"  he 
said; and  therefore whether we would or no, he took  it to treasure it. But 
soon he was betrayed by  it  to  his death; and so  it is named in the North 
Isildur's Bane. Yet death  maybe  was  better  than  what  else  might  have 
befallen him. 
     'Only to the North did  these tidings come, and  only  to a few.  Small 
wonder  it is that you have not heard them,  Boromir. From the  ruin  of the 
Gladden Fields,  where Isildur perished, three men only came ever back  over 
the mountains  after long wandering. One of these was  Ohtar, the esquire of 
Isildur, who bore the shards of the sword of Elendil; and he brought them to 
Valandil, the heir of Isildur, who being  but a  child had remained  here in 
Rivendell.  But Narsil was broken and its light extinguished, and it has not 
yet been forged again. 
     `Fruitless did I call the victory of the Last  Alliance? Not wholly so, 
yet it  did not achieve  its  end. Sauron was diminished, but not destroyed. 
His  Ring was  lost  but  not  unmade. The Dark  Tower  was broken,  but its 
foundations were not removed; for they were made with the power of the Ring, 
and while it remains  they wi ll endure. Many Elves and many mighty Men,  
and 
many  of  their  friends. had perished  in  the war. Anbrion  was slain, and 
Isildur was slain; and Gil-galad and Elendil were no more. Never again shall  
there  be  any  such  league  of  Elves  and  Men; for  Men  multiply and the 
Firstborn decrease, and the two  kindreds are estranged. And ever since that 
day  the race  of N®menor has decayed,  and  the  span of  their  years  has 
lessened. 
     'In the North after the war and the slaughter of the Gladden Fields the 
Men  of Westernesse were diminished, and their city of Ann®minas beside 
Lake 
Evendim fell  into ruin; and  the heirs  of Valandil  removed and  dwelt  at 
Fornost on the high North Downs, and  that now too is desolate. Men call  it  
Deadmen's  Dike,  and  they  fear  to  tread there.  For the  folk of  Arnor  

####-dwindled, and their  foes devoured them, and their lordship passed,  leaving  
only green mounds in the grassy hills. 
     'In  the South  the  realm of Gondor long endured; and for a while  its 
splendour grew, recalling  somewhat of the might  of N®menor,  ere it  fell. 
High towers  that people built, and strong places. and havens of many ships;  
and the  winged crown of the Kings of  Men was  held in awe by folk of  many 
tongues. Their chief city wa s  Osgiliath, Citadel of the Stars. through  the 
midst of which  the River  flowed. And Minas Ithil they built, Tower  of the  
Rising  Moon,  eastward  upon  a shoulder of the  Mountains  of  Shadow; and 
westward at the feet of the White  Mountains Minas Anor they made, Tower  of 
the Setting Sun. There in the courts of the King grew a white tree, from the 
seed of that tree which Isildur  brought over the  deep waters, and the seed 
of that tree before came from Eressla, and before that  out of the Uttermost  
West in the Day before days when the world was young. 
     `But  in the  wearing of the  swift years  of Middle-earth the line  of 
Meneldil son of Anbrion failed, and the  Tree withered, and the blood of the 
N®menoreans became  mingled with that of lesser men. Then the watch upon 
the 
walls of  Mordor slept, and  dark  things crept back to  Gorgoroth. And on a  
time evil things came  forth, and they took Minas Ithil and abode in it, and 
they made it into a place of dread; and it is called Minas Morgul, the Tower  
of Sorcery. Then Minas Anor was named anew Minas Tirith, the Tower of 
Guard; 
and these two cities  were ever at war, but Osgiliath  which lay between was 
deserted and in its ruins shadows walked. 
     'So it has been  for many lives of men. But  the  Lords of Minas Tirith 
still  fight on, defying our enemies, keeping the passage  of the River from 
Argonath  to the  Sea.  And now that part of the tale that  I shall tell  is 
drawn to its close. For in the days of Isildur the Ruling Ring passed out of 
all knowledge, and the  Three  were  released from  its dominion. But now in 
this latter day they  are  in peril once more, for to our sorrow the One has 
been  found. Others shall speak of its finding,  for  in that I played small 
part.' 
     He ceased, but  at once Boromir  stood up, tall and proud, before them. 
Give  me leave, Master  Elrond, said  he, first  to  say more of Gondor; for  
verily from the land of Gondor I  am come. And  it would  be well for all to 
know what passes there. For few,  I deem, know of  our deeds, and  therefore 

####-guess little of their peril, if we should fail at last. 
     `Believe  not that in the land of Gondor the blood of N®menor is spent, 
nor all its pride  and dignity forgotten. By our valour the wild folk of the 
East are still restrained,  and the terror of Morgul  kept at bay; and  thus 
alone are peace and freedom maintained in the lands behind  us,  bulwark  of 
the West. But if the passages of the River should be won, what then?  
     `Yet  that hour, maybe, is not now far away.  The  Nameless  Enemy  has 
arisen again.  Smoke  rises once more from Orodruin that we call Mount 
Doom. 
The power  of the Black  Land  grows and we are  hard beset. When the  
Enemy 
returned  our folk were driven from  Ithilien, our fair  domain east of  the 
River, though we kept a  foothold there and  strength of arms. But this very 
year,  in  the days of  June, sudden war came  upon us out of Mordor, and we 
were swept away. We were  outnumbered, for Mordor has allied itself with the 
Easterlings  and the cruel Haradrim; but it was not by numbers that we  were 
defeated. A power was there that we have not felt before. 
     `Some said  that it could be seen, like a great  black horseman, a dark 
shadow under the moon. Wherever he came a  madness filled our foes,  but fear 
fell on our boldest, so that horse and man gave way and fled. Only a remnant 
of our eastern force came back, destroying the last bridge that still  stood 
amid the ruins of Osgiliath. 
     'I was in  the company  that  held the  bridge, until it was cast  down 
behind us. Four  only were saved by swimming: my brother and myself and  
two 
others. But still we  fight on, holding all  the  west shores of Anduin; and  
those who shelter behind us give us praise, if ever they hear our name: much  
praise but little help. Only from Rohan  now will any men ride to us when we 
call. 
     `In this evil hour I have come on an errand over many dangerous leagues 
to Elrond: a hundred and ten days I have journeyed all alone. But  I  do not 
seek allies in war. The  might of Elrond is in wisdom not in weapons,  it is 
said. I come  to ask for counsel and  the  unravelling of hard words. For on 
the  eve  of  the  sudden assault a dream came to  my brother in a  troubled 
sleep; and afterwards a like dream came oft to him again, and once to me. 
     'In that  dream I  thought the  eastern sky grew dark  and there  was a  
growing thunder, but  in  the  West a pale light lingered, and out of  it  I 

####-heard a voice, remote but clear, crying: 
     Seek for the Sword that was broken: 
     In Imladris it dwells; 
     There shall be counsels taken 
     Stronger than Morgul-spells. 
     There shall be shown a token 
     That Doom is near at hand, 
     For Isildur's Bane shall waken, 
     And the Halfling forth shall stand. 
     Of these words we could understand little, and we  spoke to our father, 
Denethor, Lord of Minas Tirith, wise in the lore of  Gondor. This only would 
he say, that Imladris was  of old the name among the Elves of a far northern 
dale, where Elrond the Halfelven dwelt, g reatest  of lore-masters. Therefore 
my  brother, seeing how desperate  was our need, was eager to heed the dream 
and seek for  Imladris; but since the  way was full  of doubt and  danger, I 
took the journey upon  myself. Loth was my father to give me leave, and long 
have I  wandered  by roads forgotten, seeking the house of Elrond, of  which  
many had heard, but few knew where it lay.' 
     'And here in the house of Elrond more shall be made clear to you'  said 
Aragorn,  standing up. He cast  his sword upon  the  table  that stood before 
Elrond,  and  the blade  was in  two  pieces.  `Here  is  the Sword that was 
Broken!' he said. 
     `And  who  are you, and what have  you to do with  Minas Tirith?' asked 
Boromir,  looking  in  wonder  at  the  lean face  of   the  Ranger  and  his 
weather-stained cloak. 
     `He is Aragorn  son of Arathorn,'  said Elrond;  `and  he is  descended 
through many fathers from Isildur Elendil's son of  Minas  Ithil. He  is the 
Chief of the D®nedain in the North, and few are now left  of that folk.' 
     `Then  it  belongs to  you,  and not to  me  at all!'  cried  Frodo  in 
amazement, springing to his feet, as if he expected  the Ring to be demanded 
at once. 
     'It does not belong  to either of us,'  said Aragorn; `but it has  been 
ordained that you should hold it for a while.' 
     'Bring out the Ring, Frodo!' said Gandalf solemnly. `The time has come. 
Hold it up, and then Boromir will understand the remainder of his riddle.' 
     There was a hush, and all turned their eyes on Frodo. He was shaken  by 
a sudden shame and fear; and he felt a great reluctance to  reveal the Ring, 

####-and a loathing of its touch. He wished he was far away. The Ring gleamed and 
flickered as he held it up before them in his trembling hand. 
     'Behold Isildur's Bane!' said Elrond. 
     Boromir's eyes glinted as he gazed at the golden thing. `The Halfling!' 
he  muttered.  `Is then the  doom of Minas Tirith come at last? But why then 
should we seek a broken sword?' 
     'The words were not the  doom of Minas Tir ith,' said Aragorn. `But doom 
and great  deeds are indeed at hand.  For the  Sword that  was Broken is the 
Sword of Elendil that broke beneath him when  he fell. It has been treasured 
by  his  heirs when all other heirlooms  were lost; for it was spoken of old 
among  us that it should be made  again when the  Ring, Isildur's  Bane, was 
found. Now you have seen the sword that you have sought, what would you 
ask? 
Do you wish for the House of Elendil to return to the Land of Gondor?' 
     `I was  not  sent to beg  any boon, but to  seek only the meaning  of a  
riddle,' answered Boromir proudly. `Yet we are hard  pressed, and  the Sword 
of  Elendil would be a help beyond  our hope-if  such a  thing could  indeed 
return out of  the  shadows  of  the past.' He look ed again  at Aragorn, and 
doubt was in his eyes. 
     Frodo felt Bilbo stir impatiently at his side. Evidently he was annoyed 
on his friend's behalf. Standing suddenly up he burst out: 
     All that is gold does not glitter, 
     Not all those who wander are lost; 
     The old that is strong does not wither, 
     Deep roots are not reached by the frost. 
 
     From the ashes a fire shall be woken, 
     A light from the shadows shall spring; 
     Renewed shall be blade that was broken: 
     The crownless again shall be king. 
     `Not very good perhaps, but to the point  -- if you need more beyond the 
word  of Elrond. If that  was worth a journey of a hundred  and ten days  to 
hear, you had best listen to it.' He sat down with a snort. 
     `I  made  that  up myself,' he whispered to Frodo, `for the  D®nadan, a  
long  time  ago when  he first told me about  himself. I almost wish that my 
adventures were not over, and that I could go with him when his day comes.' 
     Aragorn smiled at him; then he turned to Boromir again. `For my part  I 

####-forgive your doubt,'  he said. 'Little do I resemble the figures  of Elendil 
and Isildur as they stand carven in their majesty in  the halls of Denethor. 
I  am but the heir of Isildur, not Isildur himself. I  have had  a hard life 
and a long; and  the  leagues that lie between here and  Gondor are a  small 
part  in the count of my journeys.  I have crossed many mountains  and  many 
rivers, and trodden  many  plains, even  into the far  countries of Rhyn and 
Harad where the stars are strange. 
     'But my home, such  as I have, is in the  North. For  here the heirs of 
Valandil have ever dwelt in long line unbroken from father unto son for many 
generations.  Our days have darkened,  and  we  have dwindled; but ever  the 
Sword has passed to a new keeper. And this I will say to you, Boromir, ere I  
end.  Lonely  men are we, Rangers of  the wild, hunters--but hunters ever of 
the servants  of the Enemy; for they are found in many places, not in Mordor 
only. 
     `If Gondor, Boromir, has been a stalwart tower, we  have played another  
part. Many evil things there are that your strong walls and bright swords do 
not  stay. You  know  little  of the  lands beyond  your  bounds.  Peace and 
freedom, do you say? The North would have known them little but for us. Fear 
would  have destroyed them.  But when dark  things come  from the  houseless 
hills, or creep from sunless  woods,  they fly from us. What roads would any 
dare to tread, what safety would there be in quiet lands, or in the homes of 
simple men at night, if the D®nedain were asleep, or were all gone into  the 
grave?  
     `And yet less  thanks  have  we than you. Travellers  scowl at  us, and 
countrymen give us  scornful names. "Strider"  I am to one fat man who lives 
within a day's march  of foes that would  freeze his heart or lay his little 
town in ruin, if he were not guarded ceaselessly. Yet we would  not have  it 
otherwise. If simple folk are free from care and fear, simple  they will be, 
and we must be secret to keep them so. That has been the task of my kindred, 
while the years have lengthened and the grass has grown. 
     `But now  the world is changing once again. A new hour comes. Isildur's 
Bane is found. Battle is at hand. The Sword  shall be reforged. I  will come 
to Minas Tirith.' 
     `Isildur's Bane is found, you say,' said Boromir. `I have seen a bright 
ring in the Halfling's hand; but Isildur perished ere this  age of the world 
began, they say. How do  the Wise know that this ring is his? And how has it 
passed  down  the  years,  until  it  is  brought  hither  by so  strange  a  

####-messenger?' 
     `That shall be told,' said Elrond. 
     `But not  yet, I beg, Master!' said Bilbo. `Already the Sun is climbing 
to noon, and I feel the need of something to strengthen me.' 
     `I  had  not named you,' said Elrond  smiling. `But I do so now.  Come!  
Tell us your tale. And if you have  not yet cast your story  into verse, you  
may tell it in plain words. The briefer, the sooner shall you be refreshed.' 
     `Very well,' said Bilbo. `I will do as you bid. But I will now tell the 
true story, and  if some here have heard  me tell it otherwise'  -- he looked 
sidelong at Gluin -- `I ask them to forget it  and forgive me. I only wished 
to claim the treasure  as my very own  in those days, and to be rid  of  the 
name of thief that was put on me. But  perhaps I understand things a  little 
better now. Anyway, this is what happened.' 
     To  some there  Bilbo's tale was  wholly  new, and they  listened  with 
amazement while  the old  hobbit, actually not  at all displeased, recounted 
his  adventure with Gollum, at full length. He did not omit a single riddle. 
He would have given also  an account of his party and disappearance from the 
Shire, if he had been allowed; but Elrond raised his hand. 
     'Well told, my friend,' he said, `but that  is enough at this time. For  
the moment it suffices to know that the Ring passed to Frodo, your heir. Let  
him now speak!' 
     Then, less willingly  than Bilbo, Frodo  told of all his  dealings with 
the  Ring from the day that  it passed  into his keeping. Every step  of his 
journey from Hobbiton to the Ford  of Bruinen was questioned and considered, 
and  everything  that  he  could  recall  concerning  the  Black Riders  was 
examined. At last he sat down again. 
     `Not bad,' Bilbo said to him. `You  would have made a good story of it, 
if they hadn't kept  on interrupting. I tried to  make  a few notes,  but we 
shall have to  go  over it all again together some time, if I am to write it 
up. There are whole chapters of stuff before you ever got here!' 
     `Yes, it made quite a long tale,' answered Frodo. 'But  the story still 
does not seem complete to  me.  I still want to know a good deal, especially 
about Gandalf.' 
     Galdor of the Havens, who sat near by, overheard him. `You speak for me 
also,'  he cried, and  turning  to  Elrond he  said: `The Wise may have good 
reason to believe that the halfling's trove is indeed the Great Ring of long 
debate, unlikely though that may seem to those who know less. But may we not 

####-hear  the proofs? And I would ask this  also. What of Saruman? He is learned 
in  the lore of the Rings, yet he is not among us. What is his counsel-if he 
knows the things that we have heard?' 
     `The  questions that you ask, Galdor, are bound together,' said Elrond. 
`I had not  overlooked them, and they shall be answered. But these things it 
is the part of Gandalf to make clear;  and I call upon  him last, for it  is 
the place of honour, and in all this matter he has been the chief.' 
     `Some,  Galdor,'   said Gandalf, `would think the tidings of Gluin,  and 
the pursuit of  Frodo,  proof enough that the halfling's trove is a thing of 
great worth to  the Enemy. Yet it is a ring. What then? The Nine the  Nazgyl 
keep. The Seven are taken or destroyed.' At this Gluin stirred, but  did not 
speak. `The Three we know of. What then is this one that he desires so much?  
     'There  is indeed  a  wide  waste of time  between  the River  and  the 
Mountain, between the loss and the finding. But  the gap in the knowledge of 
the Wise  has been  filled at  last. Yet too slowly. For  the Enemy has been 
close  behind, closer even than I feared. And well is it that not until this 
year, this very summer, as it seems, did he learn the full truth. 
     'Some here will remember that many years ago I myself dared to pass the 
doors of the Necromancer in Dol Guldur,  and secretly explored his ways, and 
found thus that our fears  were  true:  he was none other than  Sauron,  our 
Enemy of  old, at  length  taking shape  and power  again.  Some,  too, will 
remember also that Saruman dissuaded us from open deeds against him, and 
for 
long we watched him only.  Yet at last, as his shadow grew, Saruman yielded, 
and the Council put forth its strength  and  drove  the evil out of Mirkwood 
and that was in the very year of the finding of this Ring: a strange chance, 
if chance it was. 
     `But we were  too late, as Elrond foresaw. Sauron  also had watched us,  
and had long prepared against our stroke, governing Mordor from afar through 
Minas Morgu l, where his Nine servants dwelt, until  all  was  ready. Then he  
gave way before us,  but  only feigned to flee,  and soon  after came to the 
Dark Tower and openly declared  himself. Then for the  last time the Council 
met; for now we learned that  he was seeking ever more eagerly for the  One. 
We feared then that  he had some news  of it  that we knew  nothing  of. But 
Saruman said nay, and repeated what  he had  said to us before: that the One 
would never again be found in Middle-earth. 
     `  "At  the worst,"  said he, "our Enemy knows that we have  it not and 

####-that it still is  lost. But what was lost may yet be  found, he thinks. Fear 
not! His hope will cheat him. Have I not earnestly studied this matter? Into 
Anduin the Great it fell; and long ago,  while  Sauron slept, it  was rolled 
down the River to the Sea. There let it lie until the End."' 
     Gandalf fell silent, gazing eastward from the porch to the far peaks of 
the Misty Mountains, at whose great roots the peril of the world had so long 
lain hidden. He sighed. 
     `There  I was at fault,' he said. `I was lulled by the words of Saruman 
the Wise; but I should have sought for the truth sooner, and our peril would 
now be less.' 
     `We were all at  fault,' said Elrond, `and but  for your vigilance  the 
Darkness, maybe, would already be upon us. But say on!' 
     `From the first my heart misgave  me,  against all reason that I knew,' 
said Gandalf, `and I desired  to know how this thing came to Gollum, and how 
long he had possessed it. So I set a wa tch for  him, guessing that he  would 
ere long come forth from his darkness to seek for his treasure. He came, but 
he escaped and was not found. And then alas! I let the matter rest, watching  
and waiting only, as we have too often done. 
     `Time passed  with many cares, until my  doubts were awakened again  to 
sudden  fear. Whence  came the hobbit's  ring?  What,  if my  fear was true, 
should be  done with it? Those  things I must decide. But I spoke yet of  my  
dread to none, knowing the peril of an  untimely whisper, if it went astray. 
In all the long wars with  the Dark Tower treason has ever been our greatest  
foe. 
     'That was seventeen years ago. Soon I became aware  that  spies of many  
sorts, even  beasts and birds,  were gathered round the Shire, and  my  fear 
grew.  I called  for the help of the D®nedain, and their watch  was doubled; 
and I opened my heart to Aragorn, the heir of Isildur.' 
     `And I,' said Aragorn, `counselled that we should hunt  for Gollum. too 
late though it may seem. And since it seemed fit that Isildur's  heir should 
labour to  repair  Isildur's fault, I went  with  Gandalf  on  the  long and 
hopeless search.' 
     Then Gandalf told how they had explored the whole length of Wilderland, 
down even to the Mountains of Shadow and the fences of Mordor. `There we 
had 
rumour of him, and we guess  that he dwelt there long in the dark hills; but 
we never found him,  and  at last  I  despaired. And  then  in my despair  I 

####-thought again of a test that might make the finding of  Gollum unneeded. The 
ring  itself  might  tell if it were the One.  The memory  of  words  at the 
Council came back to me: words of Saruman, half-heeded at the time.  I heard 
them now clearly in my heart. 
     ` "The Nine, the Seven, and the Three," he said, "had each their proper  
gem. Not so the  One.  It  was round  and  unadorned,  as it were one of the 
lesser rings; but its maker set marks upon it that the skilled, maybe, could 
still see and read." 
     `What those  marks were he had not said. Who now would know? The 
maker. 
And Saruman? But great though his lore may be,  it  must have a source. What 
hand  save Sauron's ever  held this  thing, ere  it was  lost?  The hand  of 
Isildur alone. 
     `With that thought, I forsook the chase, and passed swiftly  to Gondor . 
In former days the members  of my order  had been  well received  there, but 
Saruman most of all. Often he had  been for long  the  guest of the Lords of 
the  City. Less welcome  did the Lord Denethor show me then than of old, and 
grudgingly he permitted me to search among his hoarded scrolls and books.  
     ' "If indeed you look only, as  you  say, for records of  ancient days, 
and the beginnings of the City,  read on! " he said.  "For to me what was is 
less dark than what is to come, and that  is  my care.  But unless you  have 
more  skill even  than Saruman,  who has  studied here  long, you  will find 
naught that  is not  well known to  me, who am  master of  the lore of  this 
City." 
     `So said Denethor.  And yet  there lie in his  hoards many records that 
few  now can read,  even of  the lore-masters, for their scripts and tongues 
have become dark  to later  men.  And  Boromir, there lies in  Minas  Tirith 
still, unread, I  guess,  by  any save Saruman  and  myself since the  kings 
failed, a scroll  that Isildur made himself. For Isildur did not  march away 
straight from the war in Mordor, as some have told the tale.' 
     'Some in the North, maybe,' Boromir broke in.  'All know in Gondor that 
he went  first  to Minas Anor and  dwelt a while  with his nephew  Meneldil, 
instructing him,  before he committed to him the  rule of the South Kingdom. 
In  that time he planted there the last sapling of  the White Tree in memory 
of his brother.' 
     `But in that time also he made this scroll,' said Gandalf;  `and that is 
not remembered in Gondor, it would seem. For this scroll concerns  the Ring, 

####-and thus wrote Isildur therein: 
     The Great Ring shall go now to be an heirloom of the North Kingdom; but 
records  of  it  shall  be left  in  Gondor,  where also dwell the  heirs of 
Elendil, lest a time come when the memory of these great  matters shall grow 
dim. 
     `And after these words Isildur described the Ring, such as he found it. 
     It  was  hot  when  I first took it, hot as  a glede,  and my  hand was 
scorched, so that I doubt if ever again I shall be free of the pain  of  it. 
Yet even as I write it is cooled, and it seemeth to shrink, though it loseth  
neither  its  beauty nor its  shape. Already the  writing  upon it, which at 
first was as clear as red flame, fadeth and is now  only barely to be  read. 
It is fashioned in  an elven-script of  Eregion, for they have no letters in  
Mordor for such subtle work; but the language is unknown to me. I deem it to 
be  a tongue of the Black Land, since  it  is foul and uncouth. What evil it  
saith I do  not  know; but I trace here a copy  of it,  lest it fade  beyond 
recall. The Ring misseth,  maybe, the heat of Sauron's hand, which was black 
and yet burned like fire, and so Gil-galad was destroyed; and maybe were the 
gold made hot again, the writing would be refreshed. gut  for my part I will 
risk no hurt to this thing: of all the works of Sauron the only fair. It  is 
precious to me, though I buy it with great pain. 
     'When  I read these words, my quest was  ended. For  the traced writing 
was indeed as Isildur  guessed, in the tongue of Mordor and  the servants of 
the Tower. And what was said therein was already  known. For in the day that 
Sauron first put on  the One, Celebrimbor, maker of the  Three, was aware of 
him, and from afar he  heard him speak these words, and so his evil purposes 
were revealed. 
     `At once  I took my leave of  Denethor, but even as  I went northwards, 
messages came to me out of Lurien that Aragorn had passed that way, and that 
he had found the creature called Gollum. Therefore I went  first to meet him 
and hear his tale.  Into what deadly  perils  he had  gone alone I dared not 
guess.' 
     `There is little need  to tell  of them,' said Aragorn. `If a  man must  
needs walk in sight of the Black Gate, or tread the deadly flowers of Morgul 
Vale, then  perils he will have. I, too, despaired at  last,  and I began my 
homeward  journey.  And then, by fortune, I  came suddenly on what I sought: 
the marks of soft feet beside  a muddy pool. But now the trail was fresh and  
swift, and it  led  not to Mordor but  away. Along  the  skirts  of the Dead 

####-Marshes  I followed  it,  and  then I had him.  Lurking by a  stagnant mere, 
peering in  the water as the dark  eve  fell, I  caught  him, Gollum. He was 
covered  with green slime. He will never love me, I fear; for he bit me, and 
I  was not gentle. Nothing more did I ever get from his mouth than the marks 
of his teeth. I deemed it the worst part of  all  my journey, the road back, 
watching him day and night, making him walk before  me with a halter  on his 
neck, gagged, until he was tamed by lack of drink and food, driving him ever 
towards Mirkwood. I brought him there at last and gave him to the Elves, for 
we had agreed that this should  be  done; and I was  glad to  be  rid of his 
company, for he  stank. For my part I hope never to look upon him again; but 
Gandalf came and endured long speech with him.' 
     `Yes,  long  and weary,' said Gandalf, `but not without profit. For one 
thing, the  tale  he told of his loss agreed  with  that which Bilbo has now 
told openly  for  the  first time; but  that mattered little,  since  I  had 
already guessed it. But I  learned then first that Gollum's ring came out of 
the Great River nigh to the Gladden Fields. And I learned also  that he  had 
possessed  it long. Many lives of his small kind. The power of the ring  had 
lengthened his  years far beyond their span;  but that power only  the Great 
Rings wield. 
     `And if that is  not proof enough, Galdor, there is the other test that 
I spoke of. Upon this very ring  which you have here seen  held aloft, round  
and unadorned, the  letters that Isildur reported may  still be read, if one 
has the strength of will to set the golden thing in the fire a while. That I 
have done, and this I have read: 
     Ash  nazg durbatulyk, ush  nazg  gimbatul,  ash  nazg  thrakatulyk  agh  
burzum-ishi krimpatul.' 
     The change in  the wizard's voice  was  astounding. Suddenly it  became 
menacing,  powerful, harsh as stone.  A  shadow seemed to pass over the high 
sun,  and  the porch for  a moment grew  dark. All trembled,  and the  Elves 
stopped their ears. 
     `Never before has any voice dared to utter the  words of that tongue in 
Imladris,  Gandalf  the Grey,'  said  Elrond, as  the shadow passed  and the 
company breathed once more. 
     `And let us  hope that none  will  ever speak it  here again,' answered 
Gandalf. `Nonetheless I do not ask  your  pardon, Master Elrond. For if that 
tongue is not soon to be heard in every corner of the West , then let all put 
doubt aside  that  this thing is  indeed what the Wise  have  declared:  the 

####-treasure of the Enemy, fraught with all his malice;  and  in it lies a great 
part of his strength  of old. Out of the Black Years come the words that the 
Smiths of Eregion heard, and knew that they had been betrayed: 
     One Ring to  rule them all,  One  Ring to find  them, One Ring to bring 
them all and in the Darkness bind them. 
     `Know  also, my  friends, that I learned more yet from Gollum.  He  was 
loth to speak and his tale was unclear, but it  is beyond all doubt  that he 
went to Mordor, and  there all  that  he knew was forced from him. Thus  the  
Enemy knows now that the  One is found,  that it was  long in the Shire; and 
since his servants have pursued it  almost to our  door, he  soon will know, 
already he may know, even as I speak, that we have it here.' 
     All sat silent for a  while,  until  at length Boromir  spoke. `He is a  
small thing, you say, this Gollum? Small, but great in mischief. What became 
of him? To what doom did you put him?' 
     'He is in prison, but no worse,' said  Aragorn.  `He had suffered much. 
There is no doubt that he  was tormented, and the fear of Sauron  lies black  
on his heart. Still I for one am glad that he is safely kept by the watchful 
Elves of Mirkwood. His malice is great and gives him a strength hardly to be 
believed in one so lean and withered.  He could work much mischief still, if 
he were free. And I do not doubt that he was allowed to leave Mordor on some 
evil errand.' 
     `Alas!  alas!' cried Legolas,  and in  his  fair  elvish face there was 
great distress. `The tidings that I was sent to bring must now be told. They 
are not  good, but only  here have I learned  how evil they may seem to this 
company. Smjagol, who is now called Gollum, has escaped.' 
     'Escaped?' cried Aragorn. 'That is ill news indeed. We shall all rue it 
bitterly, I fear. How came the folk of Thranduil to fail in their trust?' 
     `Not through lack of  watchfulness,' said Legolas; `but perhaps through 
over -kindliness. And we fear that the prisoner had aid from others, and that 
more is known of our doings than we could wish. We guarded this creature day 
and  night, at Gandalf's  bidding,  much  though we wearied of the task. But 
Gandalf  bade us  hope still for his cure, and we had not the  heart to keep  
him ever in dungeons under the earth, where he would fall  back into his old 
black thoughts.' 
     'You were less tender  to me,'  said Gluin with  a flash of his eyes as 
old memories were stirred  of  his imprisonment in  the  deep places of  the 
Elven-king's halls. 

####-     'Now  come!' said Gandalf. `Pray do not interrupt, my good Gluin.  That 
was  a regrettable misunderstanding,  long set right. If  all the grievances 
that stand between Elves and  Dwarves are to  be brought up  here, we may as 
well abandon this Council.' 
     Gluin  rose and bowed, and Legolas  continued.  'In  the days  of  fair 
weather we led Gollum through the  woods; and there was a high tree standing 
alone far from the others which he liked to climb. Often we let him mount up 
to the highest branches, until he felt the free  wind; but we set a guard at 
the tree's foot. One day he refused to come down, and the guards had no mind 
to climb  after him: he had learned the trick of clinging to boughs with his 
feet as well as with his hands; so they sat by the tree far into the night. 
     'It was that very night of summer, yet moonless and starless, that Orcs 
came  on us at unawares. We drove them off after  some time;  they were many 
and  fierce, but they came from over  the mountains, and were unused  to the  
woods. When the battle was  over, we  found  that Gollum was  gone, and  his 
guards were slain  or taken. It then seemed plain to  us that the attack had 
been made for his rescue, and that he knew  of  it beforehand. How that  was 
contrived we cannot guess; but Gollum is cunning, and the spies of the Enemy 
are many. The dark things that were driven  out in  the year of the Dragon's 
fall have returned in greater  numbers, and Mirkwood is again an evil place,  
save where our realm is maintained. 
     `We have failed to  recapture Gollum.  We came on his trail among those 
of many Orcs, and it plunged deep into the Forest, going south. But ere long 
it escaped our  skill,  and  we  dared not  continue the hunt;  for we  were 
drawing nigh to Dol Guldur,  and that  is still a very evil place; we do not 
go that way.' 
     `Well,  well, he  is gone,' said Gandalf. 'We have no time  to seek for  
him again.  He must do what he will. But he may play a part yet that neither  
he nor Sauron have foreseen. 
     'And now  I will answer Galdor's other questions. What of Saruman? What 
are his counsels to us in this need? This tale I must tell in full, for only 
Elrond  has heard it yet, and that in brief, but it will bear on all that we 
must  resolve. It is the last  chapter in the Tale of the Ring, so far as it 
has yet gone. 
     'At the  end of June I was in the Shire, but a cloud of anxiety was  on 
my mind, and I rode to the southern borders of the little land; for I  had a  
foreboding  of some danger, still hidden  from  me but  drawing  near. There 

####-messages reached me telling me of war and defeat in Gondor, and when I heard 
of the Black Shadow  a chill smote my heart. But I found nothing  save a few 
fugitives  from  the South;  yet  it seemed to me that on them sat a fear of 
which they would not speak. I turned then east and north and journeyed along 
the Greenway; and  not  far from Bree  I came upon  a traveller sitting on a  
bank beside the road with his grazing  horse beside him. It was Radagast the 
Brown, who at one time dwelt at Rhosgobel,  near the borders of Mirkwood. 
He 
is one of my order, but I had not seen him for many a year. 
     ` "Gandalf! " he cried.  "I was seeking you. But I  am  a  stranger  in 
these parts. All I knew was that  you might  be found  in a wild region with 
the uncouth name of Shire." 
     ' "Your information was  correct," I said. "But do not put it that way, 
if you meet any of the inhabitants. You are near the  borders of  the  Shire 
now.  And what do you want with me?  It must  be pressing.  You were never a  
traveller, unless driven by great need." 
     ' "I have an urgent errand," he said. "My news is evil." Then he looked 
about him, as if  the hedges  might have ears. "Nazgyl,"  he whispered. "The 
Nine are abroad again. They  have  crossed the River secretly and are moving 
westward. They have taken the guise of riders in black." 
     'I knew then what I had dreaded without knowing it. 
     ` "The enemy must have some great need or purpose," said Radagast; "but 
what it is that makes him look to these distant and desolate parts, I cannot 
guess." 
     ` "What do you mean? " said I. 
     ` "I have been told that wherever they go the Riders ask for news  of a  
land called Shire." 
     ' "The Shire," I said; but my heart sank. For even the  Wise might fear 
to  withstand the  Nine,  when they  are gathered together under  their fell 
chieftain. A great  king and sorcerer he was  of  old,  and now  he wields a  
deadly fear. "Who told  you, and who sent you? " I asked. 
     ' "Saruman the White,"  answered Radagast. "And  he told me to say that 
if you feel the need, he will help; but you must seek his aid at once, or it 
will be too late." 
     'And  that  message  brought  me  hope.  For Saruman the  White is  the 
greatest of my order. Radagast is, of course, a  worthy  Wizard, a master of 
shapes and changes  of hue;  and he has much  lore of herbs  and beasts, and 

####-birds are especially  his friends. But Saruman  has long studied the arts of 
the Enemy himself, and thus we have often been able to forestall him. It was 
by the devices of Saruman  that we drove him  from Dol  Guldur. It might  be 
that he had found some weapons that would drive back the Nine. 
     ' "I will go to Saruman," I sa id. 
     ' "Then  you must go  now," said  Radagast; "for I have  wasted time in 
looking  for you,  and  the  days  are running short. I was told to find you  
before Midsummer, and that is now  here. Even if you set out from this spot, 
you will hardly  reach him before the Nine discover the land that they seek. 
I myself  shall turn back at  once." And with that he mounted and would have 
ridden straight off.  
     ` "Stay a  moment! " I said. "We shall  need your help, and the help of 
all things that will give it. Send out messages  to all the beasts and birds 
that are  your friends.  Tell them to bring news  of anything that bears  on 
this matter to Saruman and Gandalf. Let messages be sent to Orthanc." 
     `  "I will do  that,"  he said, and rode off  as if  the Nine were after  
him. 
     `I could not follow him then and  there. I had ridden  very far already 
that day, and I was as weary as my horse;  and I needed to consider matters.  
I stayed the  night in Bree, and decided that I had no time to return to the 
Shire. Never did I make a greater mistake!  
     `However,  I wrote a message  to Frodo,  and trusted  to  my friend the 
innkeeper to send it to him. I rode away at dawn; and I came at long last to 
the dwelling of Saruman. That is far south in Isengard,  in  the  end  of the 
Misty  Mountains,  not far  from the Gap of Rohan. And Boromir will tell you  
that that is a great open vale that lies between the Misty Mountains and the 
northmost  foothills  of Ered  Nimrais, the White Mountains of his home. But 
Isengard is a  circle of  sheer rocks that enclose a valley as with  a wall, 
and in the midst of that valley is a tower of  stone called Orthanc.  It was 
not made by Saruman, but by the Men of N®menor long ago; and it is very tall 
and has many secrets; yet  it looks not to be  a work of craft. It cannot be 
reached save  by passing the circle of Isengard; and in that circle there is 
only one gate. 
     'Late one evening I came to the gate, like a great arch  in the wall of 
rock; and it was strongly guarded. But the  keepers of the  gate  were on the 
watch for me and told me that Saruman awaited me. I rode under the arch, and 
the gate closed silently behind me, and suddenly I was afraid, though I knew 

####-no reason for it. 
     'But  I rode to the foot of Orthanc,  and came to the stair  of Saruman 
and there he met me and led me up to his high chamber. He wore a ring on his 
finger. 
     `  "So you have come, Gandalf," he said to me gravely; but in  his eyes 
there seemed to be a white light, as if a cold laughter was in his heart. 
     ` "Yes, I have come," I said. "I have  come  for your  aid, Saruman the 
White." And that title seemed to anger him. 
     '  "Have  you indeed, Gandalf the Grey! " he scoffed.  "For aid? It has 
seldom been  heard of that  Gandalf the Grey sought for  aid, one so cunning  
and  so wise, wandering about  the lands,  and concerning  himself in  every 
business, whether it belongs to him or not." 
     'I looked  at him and wondered.  "But if I am  not deceived,"  said  I, 
"things are now moving which will require the union of all our strength." 
     ' "That may be so," he said, "but the thought is late in coming to you. 
How long. I wonder, have  you concealed  from me, the head of the Council, a  
matter  of greatest  import? What brings you now from your lurking-place  in 
the Shire? " 
     ' "The Nine have come forth again," I answered. "They have crossed  the 
River. So Radagast said to me." 
     ` "Radagast  the Brown! " laughed  Saruman, and  he no longer concealed 
his scorn. "Radagast the Bird-tamer! Radagast the Simple! Radagast the Fool! 
Yet he had just the wit to play the part  that I set him. For you have come, 
and that was all the purpose of my message. And here you will stay,  Gandalf 
the Grey,  and rest  from  journeys.  For  I  am  Saruman the Wise,  Saruman 
Ring-maker, Saruman of Many Colours! " 
     'I looked then and saw that his robes, which had seemed white, were not 
so, but  were woven of  all  colours.  and  if  he moved they shimmered  and 
changed hue so that the eye was bewildered. 
     ' "I liked white better," I said. 
     ' "White! "  he sneered. "It serves as a beginning. White  cloth may be 
dyed. The white page can be overwritten; and the white light can be broken." 
     ' "In which case it is  no longer white," said I. "And he that breaks a  
thing to find out what it is has left the path of wisdom." 
     '  "You need  not  speak to me as to one of the fools that you take for  
friends," said he. "I have not brought  you hither  to be instructed by you, 
but to give you a choice." 

####-     'He  drew  himself up then and began to declaim, as if he were making a  
speech  long  rehearsed.  "The Elder Days  are gone.  The  Middle  Days  are 
passing. The Younger Days are  beginning. The time of the Elves is over, but 
our time is at hand: the world of Men, which  we must rule. But we must have 
power, power to order all things as  we  will, for that good  which only the 
Wise can see. 
     '  "And listen, Gandalf,  my old friend and  helper! "  he said, coming 
near and speaking now in a softer voice.  "I said we,  for we it may be,  if 
you will join with me. A new Power is rising. Against it the old  allies and 
policies will not avail us  at all. There is no hope left in Elves  or dying 
N®menor. This then  is  one  choice before you. before us. We may jo in  with 
that Power. It would be wise, Gandalf.  There is hope that way.  Its victory 
is at hand; and  there will be rich reward for those that  aided it.  As the 
Power grows, its proved friends will also  grow; and  the Wise, such  as you  
and I, may with patience come at last to direct its courses,  to control it. 
We  can bide  our time, we can keep our  thoughts in our  hearts,  deploring 
maybe  evils done by the way,  but  approving the high and ultimate purpose: 
Knowledge, Rule, Order; all the  things that  we have so far striven in vain 
to accomplish,  hindered rather than helped by  our weak  or  idle  friends.  
There need not be, there would not be, any  real change in our designs, only  
in our means." 
     ' "Saruman," I said, "I  have  heard  speeches  of this kind before, but 
only in the mouths of emissaries sent from Mordor to deceive the ignorant. I  
cannot think that you brought me so far only to weary my ears." 
     'He looked at me sidelong, and paused a while considering. "Well, I see 
that this wi se course  does  not commend itself to you,"  he said. "Not yet?  
Not if some better way can be contrived? " 
     `He came and laid his long hand on my arm.  "And why not, Gandalf? " he 
whispered. "Why not? The Ruling Ring? If  we could  command that,  then  the 
Power would pass to us. That is in truth why I brought  you here. For I have 
many eyes  in my service, and  I  believe that  you know where this precious 
thing now lies. Is it not so? Or why do the Nine ask for the Shire, and what 
is your  business there? " As he said this a lust which he could not conceal 
shone suddenly in his eyes.  
     ' "Saruman," I  said, standing away from him, "only one hand at  a time 
can wield the One, and you know that well, so do not trouble to say we!  But 
I would not give it, nay, I would not give even news of it to you, now  that 

####-I  learn  your  mind. You  were head of  the Council, but you have  unmasked 
yourself at last. Well, the choices are, it seems, to  submit to  Sauron, or 
to yourself. I will take neither. Have you others to offer? " 
     'He was cold now and perilous. "Yes," he said. "I did not expect you to 
show wisdom, even in your own behalf; but I gave you the chance of aiding me 
willingly. and so saving yourself much trouble and pain. The third choice is 
to stay here, until the end." 
     ' "Until what end? " 
     ' "Until you reveal to me where the One may be found. I may find  means 
to  persuade you. Or until  it is found in your despite, and  the Ruler  has 
time to turn to lighter matters:  to devise, say,  a  fitting reward for the 
hindrance and insolence of Gandalf the Grey." 
     ' "That  may not prove to be one of the lighter matters,"  said  I.  He 
laughed at me, for my words were empty, and he knew it. 
     `They took me and they set me alone  on the p innacle of Orthanc, in the 
place  where Saruman was accustomed to watch the stars.  There is no descent 
save  by a narrow stair of many  thousand steps, and  the valley below seems 
far away. I looked  on it and saw that, whereas it  had once been  green and 
fair, it was now filled with pits and forges. Wolves and orcs were housed in 
Isengard,  for Saruman was mustering a  great force  on his  own account, in 
rivalry of Sauron  and  not  in his service yet. Over  all his works  a dark 
smoke hung  and wrapped itself about the sides  of Orthanc. I stood alone on  
an island  in the clouds; and I had  no  chance  of escape, and my days were 
bitter. I was pierced with cold, and I  had but little room in which to pace 
to and fro, brooding on the coming of the Riders to the North. 
     `That the Nine had indeed arisen I felt  assured, apart from  the words 
of Saruman which might  be  lies.  Long ere I came to  Isengard I had  heard 
tidings by the way that could not be mistaken. Fear was ever in my heart for  
my friends in the Shire; but still I had some  hope.  I hoped that Frodo had 
set forth at once, as my letter had urged, and that he had reached Rivendell 
before  the deadly pursuit  began. And  both  my  fear and  my  hope  proved  
ill-founded. For my  hope  was founded on a fat man in Bree; and my fear was 
founded on the cunning of Sauron. But  fat men  who sell ale have many calls 
to answer; and the power of  Sauron is still less than fear makes it. But in 
the circle of Isengard, trapped and alone, it was not easy to think that the 
hunters before whom all have fled or fallen would falter  in  the  Shire far 
away.' 

####-     `I saw you!' cried Frodo. `You were walking backwards and forwards. The 
moon shone in your hair.' 
     Gandalf paused astonished and looked at him. 'I t was only a dream' said 
Frodo, `but it suddenly came back to me. I had  quite  forgotten it. It came 
some time ago; after I left the Shire, I think.' 
     `Then it was  late in coming,' said Gandalf, 'as you will see. I was in 
an evil plight. And those who know me will agree that I have seldom  been in 
such need, and  do not bear such  misfortune  well. Gandalf the  Grey caught  
like a fly in a spider's treacherous web! Yet  even  the most subtle spiders 
may leave a weak thread. 
     `At first I  feared,  as Saruman  no doubt intended,  that Radagast had 
also fallen. Yet I  had caught no  hint of anything wrong in his voice or in 
his eye at our meeting. If I had, I should never have gone to Isengard, or I 
should  have gone more warily. So Saruman guessed, and he had concealed  his 
mind and deceived his messenger. It would have been  useless in  any case to 
try and  win over  the honest Radagast  to  treachery. He sought me  in good 
faith, and so persuaded me. 
     `That  was the  undoing of Saruman's plot.  For Radagast knew no reason 
why  he should not do as I asked; and he rode away towards Mirkwood where 
he 
had many friends of old. And  the Eagles of the Mountains went far and wide, 
and they saw many things: the gathering of wolves and the mustering of Orcs; 
and  the Nine Riders going hither and thither in the  lands; and  they heard 
news  of the  escape  of  Gollum.  And they sent a messenger to  bring these 
tidings to me. 
     `So it  was  that when summer  waned, there came a night of  moon,  and 
Gwaihir the Windlord,  swiftest of  the  Great Eagles,  came unlooked-for to 
Orthanc; and he found me standing  on the pinnacle. Then I  spoke to him and 
he bore me away, before Saruman was aware.  I was far from Isengard, ere the 
wolves and orcs issued from the gate to pursue me. 
     ` "How far can you bear me? " I said to Gwaihir. 
     ` "Many  leagues," said he,  "but not to  the ends of the earth.  I was 
sent to bear tidings not burdens." 
     ` "Then I must have a steed on land," I said, "and a steed surpassi ngly 
swift, for I have never had such need of haste before." 
     ` "Then I will bear you to Edoras, where the Lord  of Rohan sits in his 
halls," he said; "for that  is not very far off." And I was glad, for in the 

####-Riddermark of Rohan the  Rohirrim, the Horse-lords, dwell, and  there are no 
horses  like  those that  are  bred in  that  great vale  between the  Misty 
Mountains and the White. 
     ` "Are the Men of  Rohan still to be trusted, do you think? " I said to 
Gwaihir, for the treason of Saruman had shaken my faith. 
     ` "They pay a tribute of horses," he answered, "and send many yearly to 
Mordor,  or  so it is said; but they are  not  yet under the  yoke.  But  if 
Saruman  has  become evil,  as  you  say, then  their  doom  cannot  be long 
delayed." 
     `He  set  me down  in  the  land of  Rohan ere  dawn;  and  now I  have 
lengthened my tale over long. The  rest must be more brief. In Rohan I found 
evil already at work:  the lies  of Saruman; and the king  of the land would 
not  listen to my warnings. He bade me take a horse and be gone; and I chose 
one much to my liking. but little to his. I took the best horse in his land, 
and I have never seen the like of him.' 
     'Then  he must be a noble beast indeed,' said Aragorn; 'and  it grieves 
me more than many tidings that might seem worse to  learn that Sauron levies 
such tribute. It was not so when last I was in that land.' 
     `Nor is it now, I  will swear,' said Boromir.  `It  is a lie that comes 
from the Enemy.  I  know  the Men of Rohan;  true  a nd  valiant, our allies,  
dwelling still in the lands that we gave them long ago.' 
     `The  shadow  of  Mordor  lies  on  distant lands,'  answered  Aragorn. 
'Saruman has fallen under  it.  Rohan is beset. Who knows what you will find 
there, if ever you return?' 
     `Not this at least.' said Boromir, 'that they will buy their lives with 
horses. They  love  their horses next  to their kin. And not without reason, 
for the horses of the Riddermark come from the fields of the North, far from 
the Shadow. and their race, as  that of their masters, is descended from the 
free days of old.' 
     'True indeed!'  said Gandalf. `And there is  one among them that  might 
have been foaled in the morning of the world. The horses of  the Nine cannot 
vie with him; tireless,   swift as the  flowing  wind. Shadowfax  they called 
him. By day  his coat glistens like silver; and by night it is like a shade, 
and  he  passes unseen. Light  is his footfall!  Never  before had  any  man 
mounted him, but I took him and I tamed him, and  so speedily he bore me that 
I  reached the Shire when  Frodo  was on the  Barrow-downs, though I set out 
from Rohan only when he set out from Hobbiton. 

####-     'But fear grew in me as I rode. Ever as I came north I heard tidings of 
the Riders, and though I gained  on them day by day,  they were  ever before 
me.  They had divided their  forces, I learned: some remained on the eastern 
borders,  not far  from the Greenway. and  some  invaded the Shire  from the  
south.  I came  to  Hobbiton  and Frodo  had gone; but I had words with  old 
Gamgee.  Many  words and  few to  the  point. He  had much to  say about the 
shortcomings of the new owners of Bag End. 
     ` "I can't abide changes," said he, "not  at my time of life, and least  
of all changes  for  the worst." "Changes for the  worst," he repeated  many 
times. 
     ' "Worst is a bad word," I said to him, "and I hope you do not  live to 
see it." But amidst his talk I gathered at last that Frodo had left Hobbiton 
less than a week before, and that a  black horseman had come to the Hill the 
same  evening. Then I rode  on  in  fear. I came to Buckland and found it in 
uproar, as busy as a hive of ants that has been stirred with a stick. I came 
to  the house at  Crickhollow, and  it was broken open and empty; but on the 
threshold there lay a  cloak  that had  been Frodo's. Then for a while  hope 
left me, and I did not wait  to gather news, or I might have been comforted; 
but I rode on the trail of the Riders. It was  hard to  follow, for  it went 
many ways, and  I was at a loss. But  it  seemed  to me that one  or two had 
ridden towards Bree; and that way I went, for I thought  of words that might  
be said to the innkeeper. 
     ' "Butterbur they call him," thought I. "If this delay was his fault, I 
will melt  all the butter in him. I  will roast the  old  fool  over a  slow 
fire."  He expected no  less, and when he saw  my face he fell down flat and 
began to melt on the spot.' 
     `What did you  do  to  him?' cried  Frodo in alarm. 'He was really very 
kind to us and did a ll that he could.' 
     Gandalf laughed.  'Don't be afraid!' he  said. `I  did not bite,  and I 
barked very little. So  overjoyed was I by  the news that I got out of  him, 
when he stopped  quaking, that I embraced  the old fellow. How it happened I 
could  not  then  guess, but I  learned  that you had been in Bree the night 
before, and had gone off that morning with Strider. 
     ` "Strider! " I cried, shouting for joy. 
     `  "Yes,  sir, I am afraid so, sir," said Butterbur, mistaking me.  "He 
got  at them,  in spite of all that I could do, and  they took  up with him. 
They behaved very queer all the time they were here: wilful, you might say." 

####-     ` "Ass! Fool! Thrice worthy and beloved Barliman!  " said I. "It's  the 
best news I have had since midsummer: it's worth a gold piece at  the least. 
May  your  beer be  laid under an enchantment of surpassing  excellence  for  
seven years! " said  I. "Now I can take a night's  rest, the first  since  I 
have forgotten when." 
     `So I  stayed  there that  night, wondering much what had become of the 
Riders; for only of two had there yet been any news in Bree, it seemed.  But 
in the night we heard more. Five at least came from the west, and they threw 
down  the gates  and passed  through Bree  like  a  howling  wi nd;  and  the 
Bree-folk are still shivering and  expecting the end of the world. I got  up 
before dawn and went after them. 
     'I do not  know, but it seems clear  to me that this is  what happened. 
Their  Captain remained  in secret away  south of Bree, while two rode ahead 
through the village,  and four more  invaded the Shire. But when these  were 
foiled  in Bree  and  at Crickhollow, they  returned to their  Captain  with 
tidings, and so left the Road unguarded for  a while, except by their spies. 
The Captain then sent some eastward straight across country, and he  himself 
with the rest rode along the Road in great wrath. 
     'I galloped to Weathertop like  a gale, and I reached it before sundown 
on  my  second day from  Bree-and they were there befor e me.  They drew 
away 
from  me, for  they  felt the coming of my anger and they dared not  face it 
while the Sun  was  in the sky.  But they closed  round at  night, and I was 
besieged on the hill-top, in the old ring of Amon Syl. I was hard  put to it 
indeed:  such light and flame  cannot have been seen on Weathertop since the 
war-beacons of old. 
     `At sunrise I  escaped and fled towards the north. I  could not hope to 
do  more. It was impossible to  find you, Frodo, in  the wilderness, and  it 
would ha ve been folly  to try  with all the Nine  at  my heels. So I  had to 
trust  to Aragorn.  But I  hoped  to draw  some  of them  off, and yet reach 
Rivendell ahead of you  and send out help. Four Riders did indeed follow me, 
but they turned back  after a  wh ile and made  for the Ford,  it seems. That 
helped a  little,  for there  were only five, not  nine,  when your camp was 
attacked. 
     'I  reached here at last  by  a long  hard  road,  up the Hoarwell  and 
through the  Ettenmoors, and down from the north . It took me nearly fourteen 
days  from  Weathertop,  for  I  could  not  ride  among  the rocks  of  the 

####-troll-fells, and  Shadowfax departed.  I sent  him back to his master; but a  
great friendship has grown between us, and if I have need he will come at my 
call.  But so it  was  that I  came to Rivendell  only three days before the 
Ring, and news of  its peril had already been brought here-which proved well 
indeed. 
     `And  that, Frodo, is  the end of my account. May Elrond and the others 
forgive  the length of  it.  But such a thing has not happened  before, that 
Gandalf broke tryst and did not come  when  he  promised. An account to  the 
Ring-bearer of so strange an event was required, I think. 
     'Well, the  Tale is now  told, from first to last. Here we all are, and 
here is the Ring. But we have not yet come any  nearer to our  purpose. What 
shall we do with it?' 
     There was silence. At last Elrond spoke again. 
     `This  is grievous news concerning Saruman,' he  said; `for  we trusted 
him and he  is deep in  all our counsels. It is perilous to study too deeply 
the arts of the Enemy, for  good  or  for ill. But such falls and betrayals,  
alas, have happened before. Of  the tales that  we have heard  this  day the 
tale  of  Frodo was most strange  to me. I have known few hobbits, save Bilbo 
here; and it seems to me that he is  perhaps  not so alone and singular as I 
had thought him. The world has changed much since I last was on the 
westward 
roads. 
     `The  Barrow-wights we know by  many names; and of the Old Forest  
many 
tales have been told: all that now remains is but an outlier of its northern 
march. Time was when a squirrel could go from tree to tree from what  is now 
the  Shire to Dunland west of Isengard. In those lands I journeyed once, and 
many things wild and strange I knew. But I had forgotten Bombadil, if indeed 
this is still the same that walked the woods and  hills long  ago, and  even 
then was older than the old. That was not then his name. Iarwain Ben -adar we 
called  him,  oldest and  fatherless. But many another name he has since been  
given by other folk:  Forn by the Dwarves,  Orald by Northern Men, and other  
names beside. He is a strange creature, but maybe I should have summoned 
him 
to our Council.' 
     `He would not have come,' said Gandalf. 
     `Could  we not still send messages to him  and obtain his help?'  asked 

####-Erestor. `It seems that he has a power even over the Ring.' 
     `No, I should not put  it so,'  said Gandalf. `Say rather that the Ring 
has no power over him. He is  his own master.  But he  cannot alter  the Ring 
itself,  nor break its  power over  others.  And now he is withdrawn  into a  
little  land,  within  bounds that  he  has set, though none  can  see them, 
waiting perhaps for a change of days, and he will not  step beyond them.' 
     `But within those bounds nothing seems to  dismay him,'  said  Erestor. 
`Would he not take the Ring and keep it there, for ever harmless?' 
     `No,' said Gandalf, `not willingly. He might  do so,  if all  the  free 
folk of the world begged  him, but he would not understand the need. And  if 
he were given  the Ring,  he would soon  forget  it, or most likely throw it 
away. Such  things  have  no hold on his mind. He  would  be  a  most unsafe 
guardian; and that alone is answer enough. ' 
     `But in any case,' said Glorfindel, `to send the Ring to him would only 
postpone the day of evil. He  is far away. We could not now take  it back to 
him, unguessed, unmarked by any spy.  And even if we could, soon or late the 
Lord of  the Rings wou ld learn of  its hiding place and  would bend  all his 
power towards it. Could that power be defied by Bombadil alone? I think not. 
I think that in the end, if all  else is conquered, Bombadil will fall, Last 
as he was First; and then Night will come.' 
     `I know little of Iarwain save the name,' said Galdor; `but Glorfindel, 
I think, is right. Power to defy our Enemy is not in him, unless  such power  
is  in the earth itself. And yet we see that Sauron  can torture and destroy 
the very hills. What power still remains lies with us,  here in Imladris, or  
with Cirdan at the Havens, or in Lurien. But have they the strength, have we 
here the strength to withstand the Enemy, the  coming of Sauron at the last, 
when all else is overthrown?' 
     `I have not the strength,' said Elrond; `neither have they.' 
     `Then if the  Ring cannot be  kept  from him for ever by strength' said 
Glorfindel, `two things only remain  for  us to attempt: to send it over the 
Sea, or to destroy it.' 
     `But Gandalf has revealed to u s that  we cannot destroy it by any craft  
that we here possess,' said Elrond. `And they who dwell beyond the Sea would 
not receive it: for good or ill it belongs to Middle-earth; it is for us who 
still dwell here to deal with it.' 
     'Then, said Glorfindel, 'let us cast it into the deeps, and so make the 
lies of Saruman come true. For it is clear now that  even at the Council his 

####-feet were already on a crooked path. He knew that the Ring  was not lost for  
ever, but wished us to think so; for  he began to lust  for  it for himself. 
Yet oft in lies truth is hidden: in the Sea it would be safe.' 
     `Not safe  for ever,' said Gandalf. `There are many things in the  deep 
waters; and seas and lands may  change. And it is not our part here to  take 
thought only for a  season, or for a few lives  of Men, or for a passing age 
of the world.  We should seek a final  end of this menace, even if we do not 
hope to make one.' 
     'And that we shall not find on the roads to the  Sea,' said Galdor. 'If 
the  return to Iarwain be  thought too dangerous, then  flight to the S‚a is 
now fraught with gravest peril. My heart tells me that Sauron will expect us 
to take the western way, when he learns what has befallen. He soon will. The 
Nine have been unhorsed indeed but that is  but a respite, ere they find  new 
steeds and  swifter. Only the waning might of Gondor stands  now between him 
and a march  in power along the  coasts into  the  North;  and if  he comes, 
assailing the White Towers and the  Havens, hereafter the Elves may  have no 
escape from the lengthening shadows of Middle-earth.' 
     'Long yet will that march be delayed,' said Boromir. 'Gondor wanes, you  
say.  But  Gondor stands,  and even the end  of its strength  is  still very 
strong.' 
     'And yet its vigilance can no longer keep back  the Nine,' said Galdor. 
'And other roads he may find that Gondor does not guard.' 
     'Then,' said Erestor, `there are but two courses, as Glorfindel already 
has declared:  to hide  the Ring  for ever;  or to  unmake it.  But both are 
beyond our power. Who will read this riddle for us?' 
     'None here can do so,' said Elrond gravely. `At least none can foretell 
what will come to pass, if we take this road or that. But it seems to me now 
clear which is the road that  we must take. The westward road seems easiest.  
Therefore it must  be shunned. It will be watched. Too  often the Elves have 
fled that way. Now at this last we must take a hard road, a road unforeseen. 
There  lies our hope, if hope it be. To walk into  peril-to  Mordor. We must 
send the Ring to the Fire.' 
     Silence fell again. Frodo, even in that fair house,  looking out upon a  
sunlit valley filled with the noise of clear waters, felt a dead darkness in 
his heart. Boromir  stirred, and Frodo looked at him. He  was finger ing  his 
great horn and frowning. At length he spoke. 
     'I do not understand all this,' he said. `Saruman is a traitor, but did 

####-he not have  a  glimpse of  wisdom?  Why  do  you speak  ever of  hiding and 
destroying? Why should we not think  that the  Great Ring  has come into our 
hands to serve us in the very  hour of need? Wielding  it the Free  Lords of 
the Free may surely defeat the Enemy. That is what he most fears, I deem. 
     'The  Men of Gondor are valiant, and they  will never  submit; but they 
may be  beaten down. Valour needs first strength, and then a weapon. Let the 
Ring be  your  weapon, if it has such power as you say. Take it and go forth  
to victory!' 
     'Alas, no,' said  Elrond. 'We cannot use  the Ruling  Ring. That we now 
know  too well.  It belongs to  Sauron and was  made by  him  alone,  and is 
altogether evil. Its strength, Boromir, is too great for anyone  to wield at 
will, save only those who have already a great power  of their own.  But for 
them it holds an  even deadlier peril.  The very  desire of it  corrupts the 
heart. Consider  Saruman. If any of the Wise should with this Ring overthrow 
the  Lord  of Mordor,  using  his own arts,  he  would then  set  himself on 
Sauron's throne, and yet another Dark Lord would appear. And that is another  
reason  why the  Ring should be destroyed: as long as it is in the  world it 
will be a danger  even to  the Wise. For nothing  is evil in the  beginning. 
Even Sauron was not so. I fear to  take the Ring to hide it. I will not take 
the Ring to wield it.' 
     `Nor I,' said Gandalf. 
     Boromir looked at  them doubtfully,  but he bowed his head. `So be it,' 
he said. `Then in Gondor we must trust  to  such weapons as we have.  And at 
the least, while the Wise ones guard this Ring, we will fight on. Mayhap the 
Sword-that-was-Broken may still stem the tide --  if the hand that wields it 
has inherited not an heirloom only, but the sinews of the Kings of Men.' 
     `Who can tell?' said Aragorn. `But we will put it to the test one day.' 
     `May the  day not be too long delayed,' said Boromir. 'For though  I do 
not ask for aid, we need it. It would comfort  us to know that others fought 
also with all the means that they have.' 
     `Then  be comforted,'  said  Elrond.  `For  there are  other powers and 
realms that  you know not, and  they are hidden from you.  Anduin  the Great 
flows past many shores, ere it comes to Argonath and the Gates of Gondor.' 
     'Still it might be  well for all,' said Gluin the Dwarf,  'if all these 
strengths were joined, and  the powers  of each  were used in  league. Other  
rings there may be, less treacherous, that might be  used in  our need.  The 
Seven are lost  to us  -- if Balin has not found the ring of Thrur which  was 

####-the last; naught has been heard of it since Thrur  perished in Moria. Indeed 
I  may  now reveal that it was partly in  hope to find that  ring that Balin 
went away.' 
     `Balin will find no  ring in  Moria,'  said  Gandalf. `Thrur gave it to 
Thrbin his  son,  but not Thrbin to Thorin. It was taken  with  torment from 
Thrbin in the dungeons of Dol Guldur. I came too late.' 
     'Ah, alas!' cried Gluin.  'When will  the day come of our  revenge? But 
still there are the Three. What of the Three Rings of the Elves? Very mighty 
Rings, it is said. Do not the Elf-lords keep them? Yet they too were made by 
the Dark  Lord long ago. Are  they idle? I see Elf-lords here. Will they not 
say?' 
     The  Elves returned  no answer.  `Did you not  hear  me,  Gluin?'  said 
Elrond.  `The Three were not made by Sauron, nor did he ever touch them. But 
of them it  is not permitted to speak. So much only in this' hour of doubt I 
may now say. They are not idle. But they were  not made as weapons of war or  
conquest:  that is  not  their power.  Those who  made  them did  not desire 
strength or  domination or  hoarded wealth, but understanding,  making,  and 
healing,  to preserve  all  things  unstained.  These things  the  Elves  of 
Middle-earth have in  some measure gained,  though with sorrow. But all that 
has  been wrought  by those who wield the Three will turn  to their undoing,  
and their minds and hearts will become revealed to Sauron, if he regains the 
One. It would be better if the Three had never been. That is his purpose.' 
     `But what then would happen, if the Ruling Ring  were  destroyed as you  
counsel?' asked Gluin. 
     'We know not for certain,' answered  Elrond sadly. `Some hope that  the 
Three Rings,  which Sauron  has never touched,  would  then become free, and 
their  rulers might heal  the  hurts of  the world that he has wrought.  But 
maybe  when the One has gone, the Three will fail, and many fair things will 
fade and be forgotten. That is my belief.' 
     `Yet all  the Elves are willing to endure this chance,' said Glorfindel 
'if by it the power of Sauron may be broken, and the fear of his dominion be  
taken away for ever.' 
     'Thus we return once more to the destroying of the Ring,' said Erestor, 
`and  yet we come  no  nearer. What  strength have we for the finding of the 
Fire in which  it was made? That  is  the path of despair. Of folly I  would  
say, if the long wisdom of Elrond did not forbid me.' 
     'Despair, or folly?' said Gandalf.  `It is not  despair, for despair is 

####-only for those who see the end beyond all doubt. We do not.  It is wisdom to 
recognize  necessity,  when all  other courses have been  weighed, though as 
folly it may appear to those who cling to false hope. Well, let folly be our 
cloak, a veil before the eyes of the  Enemy! For he is very wise, and weighs 
all  things to a nicety in  the scales  of his malice. But the only  measure 
that he knows is desire, desire for power; and so he judges all hearts. Into 
his  heart  the thought will not enter that any will refuse it, that  having 
the Ring we may seek to destroy it. If we seek this, we shall put him out of 
reckoning.' 
     'At  least  for a while,' said  Elrond. `The road must  be trod, but it 
will  be very hard. And neither strength nor  wisdom will  carry us far upon 
it. This quest may be attempted by the weak with as much hope as the strong. 
Yet such is oft the course of deeds that move the wheels of the world: small  
hands do them because they must, while the eyes of the great are elsewhere.' 
     'Very  well,  very well,  Master Elrond!'  said Bilbo suddenly. 'Say no 
more! It  is plain  enough  what you are  pointing at. Bilbo the silly hobbit 
started this  affair, and Bilbo had better finish it, or himself. I was very 
comfortable here, and getting  on  with my  book.  If you want to know, I am 
just  writing  an  ending  for it.  I had   thought of putting: and  he lived 
happily ever afterwards  to the end of  his days.  It is a  good ending, and 
none the worse for having been used before. Now  I shall have to alter that: 
it does not look  like coming true;  and anyway there will evidently have to 
be  several  more chapters, if  I live to  write  them.  It  is  a frightful 
nuisance. When ought I to start?  
     ' Boromir  looked  in surprise  at Bilbo, but the laughter died  on his 
lips  when he saw that  all the others regarded  the  old  hobbit with grave 
respect. Only Gluin smiled, but his smile came from old memories.  
     `Of course,  my dear Bilbo,' said Gandalf. `If  you had  really started 
this affair,  you might be expected to finish  it. But you know  well enough 
now that starting is too great a claim for  any, and that only  a small part 
is played in  great deeds by any hero. You need not bow! Though the word was 
meant, and we do not doubt that under jest you  are  making a valiant offer. 
But one beyond your strength, Bilbo. You cannot take this thing back. It has 
passed on. If you need my advice any longer, I should say that your  part is 
ended,  unless  as a  recorder.  Finish  your book,  and  leave  the  ending 
unaltered! There is still hope for it. But get ready to write a sequel, when 
they come back.' 

####-     Bilbo laughed. `I have never known you give me pleasant advice before.' 
he said.  `As  all your  unpleasant  advice has been  good, I wonder if this 
advice is not  bad. Still, I don't suppose I have the strength  or luck left  
to deal with the Ring. It has  grown, and I have  not.  But tell me: what do 
you mean by they?' 
     `The messengers who are sent with the Ring.' 
     `Exactly! And who are  they to be?  That seems to me  what this Council  
has to decide, and all  that  it has to decide. Elves  may  thrive on speech 
alone, and Dwarves endure great weariness;  but I am only an old hobbit, and 
I miss  my meal at noon. Can't you think of some  names  now?  Or put it off 
till after dinner?' 
     No one answered. The  noon-bell rang. Still no one spoke. Frodo glanced 
at all the faces, but they were not  turned to him. All the Council sat with 
downcast eyes,  as if in deep  thought. A great dread fell on him,  as if he 
was  awaiting  the pronouncement of some doom that he had long  foreseen  and 
vainly  hoped might after all never be spoken.  An  overwhelming longing  to 
rest and remain at peace by Bilbo's side in Rivendell filled all  his heart. 
At last with an effort  he spoke, and wondered to hear his  own words, as if 
some other will was using his small voice. 
     `I will take the Ring,' he said, `though I do not know the way.' 
     Elrond raised  his eyes and looked  at  him, and Frodo felt  his  heart 
pierced by the sudden keenness  of the glance. `If  I understand aright  all 
that I  have heard,' he said, `I think that this task  is appointed for you, 
Frodo; and that if you do not find a way, no  one will. This is the hour  of 
the Shire-folk, when they arise from  their quiet fields to shake the towers 
and counsels of the Great. Who of all the Wise  could  have foreseen it? Or,  
if they are wise, why  should they expect  to know it,  until  the hour  has 
struck? 
     `But it is a heavy burden. So heavy that  none could lay it on another. 
I do not lay it  on  you. But  if you  take it freely, I  will say that your 
choice  is right;  and though all the mighty elf-friends of  old, Hador, and 
H®rin, and T®rin, and Beren himself were assembled together your seat 
should 
be among them.' 
     `But you won't send him off alone surely, Mast er?' cried Sam, unable to 
contain himself any longer, and jumping up from the corner where he had been 
quietly sitting on the floor. 

####-     `No indeed!'  said Elrond, turning towards  him with a smile.  `You  at 
least shall go with him. It  is  hardly  possi ble to separate  you from him, 
even when he is summoned to a secret council and you are not.' 
     Sam sat  down, blushing and muttering.  `A nice  pickle we  have landed  
ourselves in, Mr. Frodo!' he said, shaking his head. 
 

####- 

Chapter 3. The Ring Goes South 

 
 
     Later that day the hobbits held a meeting of their own in Bilbo's room. 
Merry  and Pippin were indignant when they heard that Sam had crept into the 
Council, and had been chosen as Frodo's companion. 
     `It's most  unfair,' said  Pippin. `Instea d of  throwing  him out,  and 
clapping him in chains, Elrond goes and rewards him for his cheek!' 
     `Rewards!'  said Frodo.  'I can't imagine a more severe punishment. You  
are not  thinking what  you  are saying:  condemned  to  go on this hopeless 
journey, a  reward? Yesterday I dreamed that my  task  was done, and I could 
rest here, a long while, perhaps for good.' 
     'I don't wonder,' said Merry, 'and I wish you could. But we are envying 
Sam, not you. If you have to go, then it will be  a punishment for any of us 
to  be left behind, even in Rivendell. We have  come a long way with you and 
been through some stiff times. We want to go on.' 
     `That's  what  I  meant,'  said  Pippin. `We  hobbits  ought  to  stick  
together, and  we will. I shall go,  unless they chain me up.  There must be 
someone with intelligence in the party.' 
     'Then  you certainly will not  be chosen, Peregrin Took!' said Gandalf, 
looking in through  the window, which was  near the ground. `But you are all 
worrying yourselves unnecessarily. Nothing is decided yet.' 
     `Nothing  decided!' cried Pippin. 'Then what  were  you  all doing? You  
were shut up for hours.' 
     "Talking,' said Bilbo. `There was a deal  of  talk, and everyone had an 
eye-opener. Even old Gandalf.  I think  Legolas's  bit  of news  about Gollum 
caught even him on the hop, though he passed it off.' 
     `You were wrong,'  said Gandalf. 'You  were  inattentive. I had already 
heard of it from Gwaihir. If you want to know, the only real eye-openers, as 
you put  it,  were you  and Frodo;  and  I was  the  only  one  that was not 
surprised.' 
     `Well,  anyway,'  said Bilbo, 'nothing was decided beyond choosing poor  
Frodo  and Sam. I was  afraid all  the time that it might come to that, if I 
was let off. But if you ask me, Elrond will send out a fair number, when the 
reports come in. Have they started yet, Gandalf?' 
     'Yes,' said the wizard. `Some of the scouts have been sent out already. 

####-More will go  tomorrow.  Elrond is sending Elves, and they will get in touch 
with the Rangers, and maybe  with  Thranduil's folk in Mirkwood. And 
Aragorn 
has gone with Elrond's  sons. We shall have to scour the lands all round for  
many long  leagues before any  move is  made. So cheer  up, Frodo! You  will 
probably make quite a long stay here.' 
     'Ah!' said  Sam gloomily.  'We'll  just wait long enough for  winter to 
come.' 
     'That can't be  helped,' said Bilbo.  'It's your fault partly, Frodo my 
lad: insisting on waiting  for my  birthday. A  funny way of honouring it, I 
can't help thinking. Not the day I should have chosen for letting the S.-B .s 
into Bag End. But there it is: you can't wait now fill spring; and you can't  
go till the reports come back. 
     When winter first begins to bite  
     and stones crack in the frosty night, 
     when pools are black and trees are bare, 
     'tis evil in the Wild to fare. 
     But that I am afraid will be just your luck.' 
     'I am  afraid  it  will,' said Gandalf. 'We  can't start until  we have 
found out about the Riders.' 
     `I thought they were all destroyed in the flood,' said Merry. 
     'You cannot destroy Ringwraiths like that,' said Gandalf. `The power of 
their master  is in them, and  they stand or fall by  him. We hope that they 
were all unhorsed and unmasked, and so made  for a while less dangerous;  but 
we must find out for certain. In the meantime you should try and forget your  
troubles, Frodo. I do not know if I can do anything to  help you; but I will 
whisper this in your ears. Someone said that intelligence would be needed in  
the party. He was right. I think I shall come with you.' 
     So great was Frodo's delight at this announcement that Gandalf left the 
window-sill, where he  had been sitting, and took off his hat and  bowed. 'I  
only said I think I shall come. Do not count on anything yet. In this matter  
Elrond will have much to say, and your friend the Strider. Which reminds me, 
I want to see Elrond. I must be off.' 
     `How long  do you  think I  shall have here?' said  Frodo to Bilbo when 
Gandalf had gone. 
     `Oh,  I don't know. I can't count  days in Rivendell,' said Bilbo. 'But 
quite long, I should think. We can have many a good talk. What about helping 

####-me with my book, and making a  start  on the next?  Have you  thought of  an 
ending?' 
     'Yes, several, a nd all are dark and unpleasant,' said Frodo. 
     'Oh, that won't do!' said Bilbo. `Books ought to have good endings. How 
would this do:  and they all  settled  down and  lived together happily ever 
after?' 
     `It will do well, if it ever comes to that,' said Frodo. 
     'Ah!' said Sam. 'And where will they live? That's what I often wonder.' 
     For a while the hobbits continued to talk and think of the past journey 
and of the perils  that  lay ahead; but such  was the  virtue of the land of 
Rivendell that soon all  fear  and anxiety was lifted  from their minds. The 
future, good or  ill, was not forgotten, but ceased to have  any  power over  
the present. Health and hope grew strong in them, and they were content with 
each good day as it came, taking plea sure in every  meal,  and in every word 
and song. 
     So the days slipped away, as  each morning dawned  bright and fair, and 
each evening followed cool and clear. But autumn was waning fast; slowly the 
golden light  faded to pale silver, and the  lingering leaves fell  from the 
naked trees. A wind began to  blow  chill  from  the  Misty Mountains to the 
east. The Hunter's Moon waxed round in the  night sky, and put to flight all 
the  lesser stars. But low  in the South one star shone red. Every night, as 
the  Moon  waned  again,  it shone brighter and brighter. Frodo could see it 
from his window, deep in the heavens burning like a watchful eye that glared 
above the trees on the brink of the valley. 
     The hobbits had been nearly  two  months  in the House  of  Elrond, and 
November  had  gone by  with the  last  shreds  of autumn, and  December was 
passing, when the scouts  began to  return. Some  had  gone north beyond the 
springs of the Hoarwell into the Ettenmoors;  and others had gone west,  and  
with the help of Aragorn and the Rangers had searched the lands far down the 
Greyflood, as far as Tharbad, where the old North Road crossed  the river by 
a ruined town. Many had gone east and south; and some  of these had  crossed 
the Mountains and entered Mirkwood, while others had climbed the pass at the 
source of the Gladden River, and had come  down into Wilderland and over the 
Gladden  Fields  and so at  length had reached the old  home  of Radagast at 
Rhosgobel. Radagast was not there; and they had  returned over the high pass 
that was called the Dimrill Stair. The sons of Elrond, Elladan and  Elrohir, 
were the  last  to return;  they had  made a great journey, passing down the 

####-Silverlode into  a strange country, but of their errand they would not speak 
to any save to Elrond. 
     In no region had the messengers discovered any signs or tidings  of the 
Riders  or other  servants of the  Enemy. Even from the Eagles of the  Misty 
Mountains they had learned no fresh news. Nothing had been seen  or heard of 
Gollum; but the wild wolves were still gathering, and were hunting again far  
up the Great River. Three of the black horses had been found at once drowned 
in  the flooded Ford.  On  the  rocks  of  the  rapids  below  it  searchers 
discovered the bodies of five more, and also a long black cloak, slashed and 
tattered. Of the Black Riders no other trace was to be seen, and nowhere was 
their presence to be felt. It seemed that they had vanished from the North.  
     'Eight  out of the Nine are  accounted for at least, ' said Gandalf. 'It 
is  rash  to  be  too  sure,  yet I think that  we  may hope  now  that  the 
Ringwraiths  were  scattered,  and  have been obliged to return as best they 
could to their Master in Mordor, empty and shapeless.  
     `If that  is so,  it wi ll be some time before they  can begin the  hunt 
again. Of course the Enemy has other servants, but they will have to journey 
all the way to  the borders of Rivendell before they can pick  up our trail. 
And  if we are  careful that  will be  hard to find.  But  we  must delay no 
longer.' 
     Elrond  summoned the hobbits to him.  He looked gravely  at Frodo. 'The 
time has  come,' he said.  `If the Ring is to set out, it  must go soon. But 
those who go with it must  not  count on their  errand being aided by  war or 
force.  They  must pass into the domain of  the Enemy far from  aid. Do  you  
still hold to your word, Frodo, that you will be the Ring-bearer?' 
     'I do,' said Frodo. `I will go with Sam.' 
     `Then  I cannot help you  much, not even with counsel,' said Elrond. `I  
can foresee very little of your road; and how your task is to be achieved  I 
do not know. The  Shadow has  crept now  to the  feet  of the Mountains, and 
draws nigh even  to  the  borders of Greyflood; and  under the Shadow all is 
dark to me. You will meet many foes, some open, and some disguised; and  
you 
may find friends upon your way when you  least look for it. I will send  out 
messages, such  as I can contrive, to  those  whom I know in the wide world;  
but so  perilous are the  lands now become that some  may well  miscarry, or  
come no quicker than you yourself.  
     `And I will choose you companions to go with  you, as far as  they will 

####-or fortune  allows. The number must be  few, since your hope is in speed and 
secrecy. Had  I a host of Elves  in armour of the Elder Days, it would avail 
little, save to arouse the power of Mordor. 
     `The Company of the Ring  shall be Nine;  and the Nine Walkers shall be 
set  against  the  Nine Riders  that are  evil. With you and  your  faithful 
servant, Gandalf will go;  for this shall be his  great task,  and maybe the 
end of his labours.  
     `For  the  rest, they  shall represent the  other  Free Peoples  of the 
World:  Elves, Dwarves, and  Men. Legolas  shall be for the Elves; and Gimli 
son of Gluin for the Dwarves. They are willing to go at least  to the passes 
of the  Mountains,  and maybe beyond. For men you shall have  Aragorn son of 
Arathorn, for the Ring of Isildur concerns him closely.' 
     `Strider!' said Frodo. 
     'Yes,' he  said  with  a  smile.  `I ask  leave  once again to be  your 
companion, Frodo.' 
     `I would have begged you to come,' said Frodo, 'only I thought you were 
going to Minas Tirith with Boromir.' 
     `I am,' said  Aragorn. `And the Sword-that-was-Broken shall be reforged 
ere I  set out to  war. But your road  and our  road  lie  together for many 
hundreds  of  miles. Therefore Boromir  will also be in the Company. He is a 
valiant man.' 
     'There remain  two more  to  be  found,'  said  Elrond.  "These  I will 
consider. Of my household I may find some that it seems good to me to send.' 
     `But  that will leave  no place for  us!'  cried Pippin in  dismay. `We 
don't want to be left behind. We want to go with Frodo.' 
     `That  is  because  you do not understand a nd cannot imagine what  lies 
ahead,' said Elrond. 
     `Neither  does Frodo,'  said  Gandalf,  unexpectedly supporting Pippin. 
'Nor do  any of us see clearly. It is true that  if these hobbits understood 
the danger, they would  not dare to go. But they wou ld  still wish to go, or  
wish that  they dared, and be shamed  and unhappy.  I think, Elrond, that in 
this matter it  would be well to  trust  rather  to their friendship than to 
great wisdom. Even if you chose for us an elf-lord,  such as  Glorfindel, he 
could not storm the Dark Tower, nor open the road  to the Fire by the  power 
that is in him.' 
     `You  speak  gravely,'  said Elrond, `but  I am in doubt. The Shire,  I 
forebode,  is not free now from peril;  and these two I had thought to  send 

####-back there as messengers, to do what they could, according to the fashion of 
their country, to warn the people of their danger. In any case, I judge that 
the younger of these two, Peregrin Took,  should remain. My heart is against 
his going.' 
     `Then, Master Elrond, you will have to  lock  me in prison,  or send me 
home  tied in  a  sack,'  said  Pippin. `For  otherwise  I shall follow  the 
Company.' 
     `Let it be so then. You shall go,' said Elrond, and he sighed. 'Now the 
tale of Nine is filled. In seven days the Company must depart.' 
     The Sword of Elendil was forged anew by Elvish smiths, and on its blade 
was traced  a device  of seven  stars set between the crescent Moon and  the 
rayed Sun,  and  about  them  was written  many  runes; for  Aragorn son  of 
Arathorn  was going to war upon the marches of Mordor. Very bright was  that 
sword  when it was made whole again; the light of the sun shone redly in it, 
and the light of the  moon shone cold, and its edge  was hard and  keen. And 
Aragorn gave it a new name and called it And®ril, Flame of the West. 
     Aragorn and Gandalf walked together  or sat speaking of  their road and 
the  perils they  would meet; and they pondered the storied and figured maps 
and books of lore that were in the house of Elrond. Sometimes Frodo was with 
them; but  he was content to  lean on their guidance,  and he spent  as much 
time as he could with Bilbo. 
     In those  last days the hobbits sat together in the evening in the Hall 
of Fire, and there among many tales they heard told in full the lay of Beren 
and L®thien and the winning of the  Great Jewel; but in the day, while Merry 
and Pippin were out and about, Frodo and Sam were  to be found with Bilbo in 
his  own small  room.  Then Bilbo would  read  passages from his book (which 
still seemed very incomplete). or scraps of his verses, or  would take notes 
of Frodo's adventures.  
     On the morning of the last day Frodo  was alone with Bilbo, and the old 
hobbit  pulled  out from under his bed a wooden box.  He lifted  the lid and 
fumbled inside. 
     'Here  is your sword,' he said. 'But it was broken, you know. I took it 
to  keep it safe but I've  forgotten to ask if the smiths  could mend it. No 
time now..  So I thought, perhaps,  you would care to have this,  don't  you  
know?' 
     He took from the box  a small sword in an old shabby leathern scabbard.  
Then he drew it, and  its polished and well -tended blade glittered suddenly, 

####-cold  and bright. 'This is Sting,' he said, and thrust it with little effort 
deep into a wooden beam. `Take it, if  you like.  I shan't want  it again, I 
expect.' 
     Frodo accepted it gratefully. 
     'Also there is this!' said Bilbo, bringing out a parcel which seemed to 
be rather  heavy for  its size. He unwound several folds of  old cloth,  and 
held up a  small shirt of  mail. It was close-woven of many  rings, as supple 
almost as linen, cold as ice,  and  harder than steel. It shone like moonlit 
silver,  and  was studded  with white gems. With it  was a belt of pearl and 
crystal. 
     'It's  a pretty thing,  isn't it?'  said Bilbo, moving it in the light. 
`And  useful.  It  is my dwarf-mail that  Thorin gave me. I got it back from 
Michel Delving before I started,  and packed  it with my  luggage: I brought  
all the mementoes of my Journey away with me, except the Ring. But I did not 
expect to use this, and I don't need it  now, except to  look  at sometimes. 
You hardly feel any weight when you put it on.' 
     `I  should look -- well, I don't think I should look right in it,' said 
Frodo. 
     `Just what I sa id myself,' said Bilbo. 'But never mind about looks. You  
can wear it under your  outer clothes.  Come  on! You must share this secret  
with me. Don't tell anybody else! But I should  feel happier  if I knew  you  
were wearing it.  I have a fancy it would turn even the  knives of the Black  
Riders,' he ended in a low voice. 
     `Very  well, I will take  it,' said  Frodo. Bilbo  put  it  on him, and 
fastened Sting upon the glittering belt; and then Frodo put over the top his 
old weather -stained breeches, tunic, and jacket. 
     'Just a  plain hobbit you  look,' said Bilbo.  'But there is more about 
you now than  appears  on the surface. Good luck to you!' He turned away and 
looked out of the window, trying to hum a tune. 
     'I cannot thank you as I should, Bilbo,  for this, and for all our past  
kindnesses,' said Frodo. 
     'Don't try!' said the old hobbit, turning round and slapping him on the 
back.  `Ow!' he cried. `You are  too  hard  now  to slap! But there you are: 
Hobbits must stick together, and especially  Bagginses. All I  ask in return 
is: take  as much care of yourself as you can. and  bring  back all the news 
you can, and  any old  songs and  tales you can come by. I'll do  my best to 
finish my book before you return. I should like to write the second book, if 

####-I am spared.' He broke off and turned to the window again, singing softly. 
 
     I sit beside the fire and think 
     of all that I have seen, 
     of meadow-flowers and butterflies 
     in summers that have been; 
 
     Of yellow leaves and gossamer 
     in autumns that there were, 
     with morning mist and silver sun 
     and wind upon my hair. 
 
     I sit beside the fire and think 
     of how the world will be 
     when winter comes without a spring 
     that I shall ever see. 
 
     For still  there are so many things 
     that I have never seen: 
     in every wood in every spring 
     there is a different green. 
 
     I sit beside the fire and think 
     of people long ago, 
     and people who will see a world  
     that I shall never know.  
 
     But all the while I sit and think 
     of times there were before, 
     I listen for returning feet 
     and voices at the door. 
 
     It was  a  cold grey  day near the end of  December.  The East Wind was 
streaming through  the  bare branches of the trees, and seething in the dark 
pines on the hills. Ragged clouds  were hurrying overhead,  dark and low. As 
the cheerless shadows  of the early evening began  to  fall the Company made 
ready to set out. They were to start at dusk, for Elrond  counselled them to 

####-journey  under cover  of night as often as  they could,  until they were far 
from Rivendell. 
     `You should fear the many eyes  of the servants of Sauron,' he said. 'I  
do not doubt that news of the discomfiture of the Riders has already reached 
him,  and he will be filled with wrath. Soon now his spies on foot  and  wing  
will be abroad in the northern lands. Even of the  sky above you must beware 
as you go on your way.' 
     The Company took little gear of war,  for their hope was in secrecy not 
in battle. Aragorn had And®ril  but no other weapon, and he went  forth clad 
only in rusty green and brown. as a  Ranger of the wilderness. Boromir had a 
long sword,  in fashion like And®ril but of less  lineage and he bore also a  
shield and his war-horn. 
     'Loud and  clear it sounds  in the valleys of the hills,' he said, `and 
then  let all the foes  of Gondor  flee!' Putting  it to  his lips he blew a  
blast, and the echoes leapt from rock to rock, and all that heard that voice 
in Rivendell sprang to their feet. 
     Slow  should you  be to  wind  that  horn again,  Boromir, said Elrond. 
'until you stand once more on the  borders of your land, and dire need is on 
you.' 
     `Maybe,' said Boromir.  'But always I have let my  horn cry  at setting 
forth, and though thereafter we may walk in the shadows, I will not go forth 
as a thief in the night.' 
     Gimli the  dwarf alone wore  openly  a short shirt of steel-rings,  for  
dwarves make  light  of burdens;  and in  his  belt was a  broad-bladed axe. 
Legolas had  a bow and a  quiver,  and  at his belt a long  white knife. The 
younger  hobbits wore the swords that they had  taken  from the  barrow; but 
Frodo took only Sting;  and his mail-coat, as Bilbo wished, remained hidden. 
Gandalf bore his staff, but girt at his side was  the elven-sword Glamdring, 
the mate of Orcrist that lay now upon  the breast of Thorin under the Lonely 
Mountain. 
     All were well furnished by Elrond with thick warm clothes, and they had 
jackets and cloaks lined with  fur. Spare food and clothes  and blankets and 
other needs were laden on a  pony, none other  than the poor beast that they 
had brought from Bree. 
     ?he stay  in Rivendell had  worked a  great wonder of change on him: he 
was  glossy and seemed  to  have  the vigour of youth.  It  was  Sam who had 
insisted on choosing him, declaring that Bill (as he called him) would pine, 

####-if he did not come. 
     `That  animal can nearly talk,' he said, `and  would talk, if he stayed 
here  much longer. He gave me a  look as plain as Mr. Pippin could speak it: 
if you don't  let me go  with you, Sam, I'll follow  on my own.' So Bill was 
going as the beast of burden, yet he was the only member of the Company that 
did not seem depressed. 
     Their  farewells had been  said in the great hall by the  fire, and they 
were only waiting now for  Gandalf, who had not yet come out of the house. A 
gleam of firelight came from the open doors, and soft lights were glowing in 
many windows. Bilbo  huddled in a cloak stood silent  on the doorstep beside 
Frodo.  Aragorn sat with his head bowed to his knees; only Elrond knew fully 
what this hour meant to him. The others could be seen as grey  shapes in the 
darkness.  
     Sam was  standing by the  pony, sucking  his teeth, and staring moodily 
into  the  gloom  where  the  river  roared  stonily below;  his  desire for  
adventure was at its lowest ebb. 
     `Bill,  my lad,' he said,  `you oughtn't to have took up  with us.  You  
could have stayed here and et the best hay  till the  new grass comes.' Bill 
swished his tail and said nothing. 
     Sam  eased the pack on  his shoulders, and  went over anxiously  in his 
mind all the things that he had stowed in it,  wondering if he had forgotten 
anything: his chief treasure, his cooking gear; and the  little  box of salt 
that he  always carried  and  refilled  when he  could;  a  good  supply  of 
pipe-weed (but not near enough,  I'll  warrant); flint  and tinder;  woollen 
hose:  linen;  various  small  belongings  of his  master's that  Frodo  had 
forgotten and Sam had  stowed to  bring them out in  triumph when they  were 
called for. He went through them all. 
     'Rope!'  he  muttered. `No  rope!  And  only  last night  you  said  to 
yourself: "Sam, what about a bit of rope? You'll want it, if you haven't got 
it:" Well, I'll wa nt it. I can't get it now.' 
     At that moment Elrond came out with  Gandalf, and he called the Company 
to him. 'This is my last  word,' he said in a low voice. 'The Ring-bearer is 
setting  out on the Quest  of  Mount Doom. On him  alone is any charge laid: 
neither to cast away the Ring, nor to deliver it to any servant of the Enemy 
nor  indeed to  let any  handle  it,  save  members of  the Company  and the 
Council,  and  only then in  gravest need. The others  go  with him  as free 
companions,  to help him on his way.  You may tarry,  or come back, or  turn 

####-aside into other paths, as chance allows. The further you  go, the less easy 
will it be  to  withdraw; yet  no oath or bond is  laid on you to go further  
than you will. For you do not yet know the strength of  your hearts, and you  
cannot foresee what each may meet upon the road.' 
     `Faithless is he that says farewell when the road darkens,' said Gimli. 
     'Maybe,' said Elrond, `but let him not vow to walk in the dark, who has 
not seen the nightfall. ' 
     'Yet sworn word may strengthen quaking heart,' said Gimli. 
     `Or  break it,' said Elrond. `Look  not too far ahead! But  go now with 
good hearts!  Farewell, and may the  blessing of Elves and Men and  all Free 
Folk go with you. May the stars shine upon your faces!' 
     'Good . . . good luck!' cried Bilbo, stuttering with the cold. 'I don't 
suppose you will be able to keep a diary, Frodo my lad, but I shall expect a  
full account when you get back. And don't be too long! Farewell!' 
     Many other s of Elrond's household stood in the shadows and watched them 
go, bidding them farewell  with soft  voices. There was no laughter, and  no  
song or music. At last they turned away and faded silently into the dusk. 
     They crossed  the bridge and wound slowly up the long steep paths  that 
led out of the cloven vale of Rivendell; and they came at length to the high 
moor where the wind hissed through the  heather. Then with one glance at the 
Last Homely House twinkling below them they strode away far into the night. 
     At  the  Ford of Bruinen they left the Road and turning southwards went 
on  by  narrow paths  among the folded lands. Their purpose was to hold this 
course west of the Mountains  for many  miles and days. The country was 
much 
rougher  and  mor e barren  than  in  the  green vale of the  Great River  in 
Wilderland  on the other side of the range,  and  their going would be slow;  
but  they hoped  in  this way to  escape the notice of unfriendly  eyes. The 
spies of Sauron had hitherto seldom been seen in this empty country, and the 
paths were little known except to the people of Rivendell.  
     Gandalf walked in front, and with him went Aragorn, who knew this  land 
even  in the dark.  The  others were in file behind, and  Legolas whose eyes 
were keen was the rearguard.  The first  part of their  journey was hard and 
dreary, and Frodo remembered little  of it, save the wind. For many  sunless 
days an icy blast came from the Mountains in the east, and no garment seemed 
able  to keep out its searching fingers.  Though the Company was  well clad, 
they  seldom felt warm, either moving or at rest. They slept uneasily during 

####-the middle of  the day,  in some  hollow of the land,  or  hidden under  the 
tangled  thorn-bushes  that  grew in  thickets in many places. In  the  late 
afternoon they were roused by the watch, and took their chief meal: cold and 
cheerless as  a rule, for they could seldom risk the lighting of a  fire. In 
the  evening  they went on again, always  as nearly  southward as they could 
find a  way. 
     At  first  it seemed  to  the hobbits  that  although  they walked  and 
stumbled until  they were weary, they were creeping forward like snails, and  
getting nowhere. Each  day  the land looked much the same as  it had the day 
before. Yet steadily the  mountains were drawing nearer. South  of Rivendell 
they rose ever higher, and bent westwards; and about the  feet  of the  main 
range there was tumbled an ever  wider land of bleak hills, and deep valleys 
filled with turbulent waters. Paths were few and winding, and led them often  
only to the edge of some sheer fall, or down into treacherous swamps.  
     They had been a fortnight on the way when the weather changed. The wind 
suddenly fell and then  veered round to  the south. The swift -flowing clouds 
lifted and melted away, and the sun came out,  pale and bright. There came a 
cold clear dawn  at the  end of a long stumbling night-march. The travellers 
reached a low ridge crowned with ancient holly -trees whose grey-green trunks 
seemed to have  been  bu ilt  out of the very  stone of the hills. Their dark 
leaves shone and their berries glowed red in the light of the rising sun. 
     Away  in the  south Frodo could  see the  dim shapes of lofty mountains 
that seemed now to stand across the path that the Company was taking. At the 
left of this high  range rose three peaks; the  tallest and nearest stood up 
like a tooth tipped with snow; its great, bare, northern precipice was still 
largely  in the  shadow, but where the sunlight slanted upon  it,  it glowed 
red. 
     Gandalf stood  at Frodo's side and  looked out under his hand. `We have 
done well,' he said.  `We have reached the borders of the country  that  Men 
call Hollin; many Elves lived here  in happier  days,  when Eregion was  its 
name.  Five-and-forty leagues as the crow flies we  have come,  though  many 
long miles further our feet  have walked. The land and the weather  will  be 
milder now, but perhaps all the more dangerous.' 
     `Dangerous or  not, a  real sunrise  is  mighty  welcome,'  said Frodo, 
throwing back his hood and letting the morning light fall on his face. 
     'But the mountains  are ahead of us,' said Pippin. `We must have turned 
eastwards in the night.' 

####-     'No,'  said Gandalf. 'But you  see further ahead in  the  clear  light. 
Beyond those peaks the range bends round south-west. There are  many maps 
in 
Elrond's house, but I suppose you never thought to look at them?' 
     `Yes I did, sometimes,' said Pippin, `but I don't remember them.  Frodo 
has a better head for that sort of thing.' 
     `I need no map,' said  Gimli, who  had come  up  with Legolas,  and was 
gazing out before him with a strange  light in his deep eyes. `There is  the 
land where our fathers worked of old, and we have wrought the image of those 
mountains  into many works of metal  and of  stone, and into  many songs and 
tales. They stand tall in our dreams: Baraz, Zirak, Shathyr. 
     `Only once before have I seen them from afar in waking life, but I know 
them and their names, for under them lies  Khazad-dym, the Dwarrowdelf, that 
is  now  called  the Black Pit,  Moria in the Elvish  tongue.  Yonder stands 
Barazinbar, the  Redhorn, cruel Caradhras; and beyond him are Silvertine and 
Cloudyhead: Celebdil  the  White,  and  Fanuidhol  the Grey,  that  we  call 
Zirak-zigil and Bundushathyr. 
     `There the  Misty  Mountains  divide, and between  their  arms lies the 
deep-shadowed valley  which we cannot forget: Azanulbizar, the Dimrill Dale, 
which the Elves call Nanduhirion.' 
     `It is for the Dimrill Dale  that we are  making,' said Gandalf. `If we 
climb  the  pass that  is called the Redhorn Gate, under  the  far  side  of 
Caradhras, we shall come down by the Dimrill Stair into the deep vale of the  
Dwarves. There lies the Mirrormere, and there the River Silverlode rises  in 
its icy springs.' 
     `Dark is  the water  of  Kheled-zvram,' said Gimli, `and  cold are  the 
springs of Kibil-nvla. My  heart trembles at the thought that I may see them 
soon.' 
     `May you have  joy of the sight, my good  dwarf  l' said  Gandalf.   'But 
whatever you may do, we at least cannot stay in that valley. We must go down 
the Silverlode into the secret woods, and so  to the Great  River,  and then  
--' 
     He paused. 
     'Yes, and where then?' asked Merry. 
     'To the end of the  journey -- in the  end,' said  Gandalf.  'We cannot 
look too  far ahead. Let us be glad that  the first stage is safely over.  I 
think we  will rest here, not only today but  tonight as  well. There  is  a  

####-wholesome air about Hollin. Much evil must befall a country before it wholly 
forgets the Elves, if once they dwelt there.' 
     'That is true,' said Legolas. `But  the Elves of  this land  were of  a  
race strange to  us  of the  silvan folk, and the trees and the grass do not 
now remember them: Only I hear the stones  lament them: deep they delved us, 
fair  they wrought  us,  high they  builded us;  but they are gone. They are 
gone. They sought the Havens long ago.' 
     That morning they lit a fire in a deep  hollow shrouded by great bushes 
of holly, and their supper -breakfast was merrier than it had been since they 
set out. They did not hurry to bed afterwards, for they expected to have all 
the  night  to sleep  in, and they  did not  mean to go  on again until  the 
evening of the next day. Only Aragorn was silent and restless. After a while 
he left the Company  and  wandered on  to the ridge; there he stood  in  the 
shadow of a tree, looking out southwards and  westwards, with his head posed 
as if he was listening. Then he returned to the brink of the dell and look ed 
down at the others laughing and talking. 
     `What  is the  matter, Strider?' Merry called up. 'What are you looking 
for? Do you miss the East Wind?' 
     'No  indeed,' he answered. `But I miss  something. I  have been in  the 
country  of  Hollin in many seasons. No folk  dwell here now, but many other  
creatures live here at  all times, especially birds. Yet now all  things but 
you are silent. I  can feel it.  There is no sound for miles about  us,  and 
your voices seem to make the ground echo. I do not understand it.' 
     Gandalf looked  up with  sudden interest. `But what do you guess is the 
reason?' he asked.  `Is  there  more  in  it  than  surprise  at seeing four 
hobbits, not to mention  the rest of us, where people are so seldom seen  or  
heard?' 
     `I  hope  that  is  it,'  answered Aragorn.  `But I  have  a  sense  of 
watchfulness, and of fear, that I have never had here before.' 
     "Then we  must be more careful,' said Gandalf.  'If you bring a  Ranger  
with you, it  is well  to pay attention to  him, especially if the Ranger is 
Aragorn. We must stop talking aloud, rest quietly, and set the watch.' 
     It was Sam's turn that day  to take the first watch, but Aragorn joined 
him. The others  fell asleep. Then the silence grew until even  Sam felt it. 
The breathing  of  the  sleepers could be  plainly heard.  The swish  of the 
pony's tail and the occasional movements of his feet became loud noises. Sam 
could hear his own joints creaking, if  he  stirred. Dead silence was around 

####-him, and  over all  hung a  clear blue sky, as the Sun rode up from the East. 
Away  in the South  a dark patch appeared,  and grew,  and  drove north like 
flying smoke in the wind. 
     `What's  that, Strider? It don't look  like  a  cloud,' said  Sam  in a  
whisper to  Aragorn. He made no  answer, he was gazing  intently at the sky; 
but  before long  Sam could see for himself what was  approaching. Flocks of 
birds, flying at great speed, were wheeling and circling, and traversing all 
the  land as if they  were searching for  something; and they  were steadily 
drawing nearer. 
     `Lie  flat and still!' hissed  Aragorn, pulling Sam down into the shade 
of a holly-bush; for a whole regiment of birds had broken away suddenly from 
the main host, and came, flying low, straight towards the ridge. Sam thought 
they were a kind of crow of large size. As they passed overhead, in so dense 
a throng that their shadow followed them  darkly over the  ground below, one 
harsh croak was heard. 
     Not until they had  dwindled into the distance, north and west, and the 
sky was again  clear  would  Aragorn rise. Then he  sprang  up and  went and 
wakened Gandalf. 
     `Regiments of  black  crows  are  flying over all  the land between the 
Mountains  and the Greyflood,'  he said, `and  they have passed over Hollin.  
They are not natives here; they are crebain  out of Fangorn and Dunland. I do 
not know what they are about: possibly there is some trouble away south from 
which they are  fleeing; but  I  think  they are spying out the land. I have 
also glimpsed many hawks flying high up in the sky. I think we ought to move 
again this  evening.  Hollin is no  longer wholesome  for  us: it  is  being 
watched.' 
     `And in that case so is the Redhorn  Gate,' said Gandalf;  `and how  we 
can get over that withou t being seen, I cannot imagine. But we will think of 
that when we must. As for moving as soon as it is dark, I am afraid that you  
are right.' 
     `Luckily our fire made  little smoke,  and  had  burned  low before the 
crebain  came,' said Aragorn. `It must be put out and not lit again.' 
     `Well if that isn't a plague and a nuisance!' said Pippin. The news: no 
fire, and a move again  by night, had been broken to him, as soon as he woke 
in the late afternoon. 'All because of a pack of crows! I had looked forward 
to a real good meal tonight: something hot.' 
     `Well, you can go on looking forward,' said Gandalf. `There may be many 

####-unexpected feasts ahead for you. For myself I should like a pipe to smoke in 
comfort,  and warmer feet. However, we are certain of one thing at any rate: 
it will get warmer as we get south.' 
     'Too  warm, I  shouldn't  wonder,'  muttered  Sam  to  Frodo. 'But  I'm 
beginning to think it's time we got  a sight of that Fiery Mountain  and saw 
the end of the Road, so to speak. I thought at first that this here Redhorn, 
or  whatever its  name is, might  be it, till Gimli spoke his piece.  A fair 
jaw-cracker dwarf-language  must be!' Maps  conveyed nothing  to Sam's mind, 
and all  distances in  these strange lands  seemed so vast that he was quite 
out of his reckoning. 
     All that day the Company remained in hiding. The dark birds passed over  
now  and  again;  but  as  the  westering  Sun  grew  red  they  disappeared 
southwards. At dusk  the  Company set out, and  turning  now half  east they 
steered their course towards  Caradhras, which far away still glowed faintly 
red  in the last  light of the vanished Sun. One  by one  white stars sprang 
forth as the sky faded. 
     Guided by Aragorn they struck a good path. It looked to Frodo   like the 
remains of an ancient road, that had once been broad and  well planned, from 
Hollin to the  mountain -pass.  The  Moon, now  at the  full,  rose  over the 
mountains, and cast a pale light in which the shadows of stones were  black. 
Many  of  them looked  to  have been worked by hands, though  now  they  lay 
tumbled and ruinous in a bleak, barren land. 
     It  was the cold chill hour before the first stir of dawn, and the moon 
was low. Frodo looked  up at the sky. Suddenly  he saw or felt a shadow  pass 
over the high  stars, as  if for a  moment they faded  and  then flashed out 
again. He shivered. 
     `Did you see anything pass over?' he whispered to Gandalf, who was just  
ahead. 
     `No, but I felt it, whatever  it was,' he answered. `It may be nothing, 
only a wisp of thin cloud.' 
     `It was moving fast then,' muttered Aragorn, `and not with the wind.' 
     Nothing  further  happened  that  night.  The next morning  dawned even  
brighter  than  before.  But the air was chill  again; already  the wind was 
turning back towards the east. For two more nights they marched on, climbing 
steadily but ever more slowly as their road wound up into the hills, and the 
mountains towered up, nearer and nearer. On the third morning Caradhras rose 
before  them, a mighty peak, tipped with  snow  like silver, but with  sheer  

####-naked sides, dull red as if stained with blood. 
     There was a  black look in the sky, and  the sun was wan. The  wind had 
gone now round to the north-east. Gandalf snuffed the air and looked ba ck. 
     `Winter deepens behind us,' he said quietly to  Aragorn.  'The  heights 
away  north  are whiter  than  they  were;  snow  is  lying far  down  their 
shoulders. Tonight we shall be on our way high up  towards the Redhorn Gate. 
We  may well be seen  by watchers  on that narrow path,  and waylaid by some 
evil;  but the weather may prove a  more deadly enemy than any. What  do you  
think of your course now, Aragorn?' 
     Frodo overheard  these  words, and understood that  Gandalf and Aragorn 
were  continuing  some  debate  that  had  begun  long before.  He  listened 
anxiously. 
     'I think no good of our course from beginning to end, as you know well, 
Gandalf,' answered Aragorn. `And perils known and unknown will grow as we 
go 
on. But we must  go on; and it is no good our  delaying  the passage  of the 
mountains. Further south  there are no passes, till one comes to the Gap  of 
Rohan.  I do not trust  that way since your news of Saruman. Who knows 
which 
side now the marshals of the Horse-lords serve?' 
     'Who knows indeed!' said Gandalf. `But there is another way, and not by  
the pass of Caradhras: the dark and secret way that we have spoken of.' 
     'But let us not speak of it again! Not yet. Say nothing to the others I 
beg, not until it is plain tha t there is no other way.' 
     'We must decide before we go further,' answered Gandalf. 
     'Then let us weigh  the matter in our  minds, while the others rest and 
sleep,' said Aragorn. 
     In the late afternoon, while the others were finishing their breakfast, 
Gandalf and Aragorn  went aside together and stood looking at Caradhras. Its 
sides  were now dark  and sullen, and  its head  was in  grey  cloud.  Frodo 
watched them, wondering which way the debate would go. When they returned 
to 
the Company Ganda lf spoke, and then he knew that it had been decided to face 
the weather and the high  pass. He was relieved. He could not guess what was 
the other dark and secret way, but the very mention of it had seemed to fill 
Aragorn with dismay, and Frodo was glad that it had been abandoned. 
     `From signs that we have  seen lately,' said Gandalf,  'I fear that the 

####-Redhorn Gate may be  watched; and also  I have doubts of the weather that is 
coming up behind. Snow may come. We must go  with all the speed that we 
can. 
Even so it will take us more than two marches before we reach the top of the  
pass.  Dark will come early this evening. We must leave  as  soon as you can 
get ready.' 
     'I will  add a  word of  advice, if I  may,'  said Boromir. 'I was born 
under the shadow of the White Mountains and  know  something of journeys  
in 
the high places. We shall meet bitter cold, if no worse, before we come down 
on the other side. It will not help  us to keep so secret that we are frozen 
to death. When we leave here, where  there are still a few trees and bushes,  
each of us should carry a faggot of wood, as large as he can bear.' 
     'And Bill could take a bit more, couldn't  you lad?' said Sam. The pony 
looked at him mournfully. 
     'Very well,' said Gandalf. `But we must not  use the wood -- not unless 
it is a choice between fire and death.' 
     The Company set out again with good speed at first; but soon their  way 
became steep  and  difficult.  The twisting  and climbing road  had  in many  
places almost disappeared, and was  blocked  with  many fallen  stones.  The 
night grew deadly dark under great clouds. A  bitter wind swirled among  the 
rocks. By midnight they had climbed to the knees of the great mountains. The 
narrow path now wound  under a sheer wall of cliffs to the left, above which  
the grim flanks of Caradhras towered up invisible in the gloom; on the right  
was a gulf of darkness where the land fell suddenly into a deep ravine. 
     Laboriously they climbed a  sharp slope and halted for a  moment at the 
top. Frodo felt a soft touch on his face. He put out his arm and saw the dim 
white flakes of snow settling on his sleeve. 
     They went on. But before  long the snow was falling fast,  filling  all 
the air, and swirling into Frodo's eyes. The dark bent shapes of Gandalf and 
Aragorn only a pace or two ahead could hardly be seen. 
     'I don't like this at all,' panted Sam  just behind.  'Snow's all right 
on a fine morning,  but I like to be in  bed while it's falling. I wish this 
lot would  go off to Hobbiton! Folk  might  welcome  it there.' Except on the 
high moors of the Northfarthing a heavy fall was rare in the Shire,  and was 
regarded as  a pleasant event and  a chance for fun. No  living hobbit (save 

####-Bilbo) could remember the Fell Winter of 1311, when the white wolves 
invaded 
the Shire over the frozen Brandywine. 
     Gandalf  halted. Snow  was  thick on  his  hood and  shoulders;  it was 
already ankle-deep about his boots.  
     "This is what I feared,' he said. `What do you say now, Aragorn?' 
     'That I feared  it too,' Aragorn answered, `but less than other things. 
I knew the  risk of  snow, though it seldom falls heavily so far south, save 
high up in the mountains. But we are not  high yet;  we are still  far down, 
where the paths are usually open all the winter.' 
     'I wonder if this  is a contrivance  of the Enemy,' said Boromir. "They 
say in my land that he can govern the storms in the Mountains of Shadow that 
stand upon the borders of Mordor. He has strange powers and many allies.' 
     'His arm  has grown long indeed,' said Gimli, `if he can draw snow down 
from the North to trouble us here three hundred leagues away.' 
     'His arm has grown long,' said Gandalf. 
     While  they  were halted,  the wind died  down, and the snow  slackened 
until  it almost ceased. They tramped on again.  But they had not  gone more 
than a  furlong when the storm returned with fresh  fury. The  wind whistled 
and  the snow became a blinding blizzard. Soon even Boromir found it hard to 
keep going. The hobbits, bent nearly double, toiled along behind  the taller 
folk, but it was  plain  that they could not  go much  further,  if the snow 
continued.  Frodo's  feet felt like lead. Pippin  was dragging behind.  Even 
Gimli, as stout as any dwarf could be, was grumbling as he trudged. 
     The Company  halted  suddenly, as if  they  had  come  to  an agreement 
without any words  being  spoken. They  heard eerie noises in  the  darkness 
round them.  It may have been only a  trick of  the wind in  the cracks  and 
gullies  of the  rocky wall, but the sounds were those of shrill  cries, and 
wild  howls  of  laughter.  Stones  began  to  fall  from the mountain-side, 
whistling over  their heads, or crashing on the path beside them. Every  now 
and  again they heard a dull  rumble,  as a gr eat  boulder rolled  down from 
hidden heights above. 
     `We cannot go further  tonight,' said Boromir. `Let those  call it  the 
wind who will; there are fell voices on the  air; and these stones are aimed 
at us.' 
     `I do call it the wind,' said Aragor n. `But that does not make what you  
say untrue. There are many evil and unfriendly things in the world that have 

####-little  love for those that go on two legs, and  yet are not in  league with 
Sauron, but have purposes of  their own. Some have been in this world longer  
than he.' 
     'Caradhras was called the Cruel, and had an ill name, said Gimli, `long 
years ago, when rumour of Sauron had not been heard in these lands.' 
     `It matters little who is the enemy, if we cannot beat off  his attack; 
said Gandalf. 
     'But what can we do?'  cried Pippin miserably. He  was leaning on Merry 
and Frodo, and he was shivering. 
     `Either stop where we are, or  go back,' said Gandalf.  'It is no  good 
going on. Only a little higher, if I remember rightly,  this path leaves the 
cliff  and  runs into  a wide  shallow trough at the bottom of a  long  hard 
slope. We should  have no shelter there  from snow, or stones  -- or anything  
else.' 
     `And it is no good going back while the storm holds,' said Aragorn. `We 
have  pa ssed  no place on the way up that  offered  more  shelter  than this 
cliff-wall we are under now.' 
     `Shelter!' muttered Sam. `If this is shelter, then one wall and no roof 
make a house.' 
     The Company now gathered together  as close to the cliff as  they could. 
It faced  southwards, and near the bottom it leaned  out  a little, so  that 
they hoped it would give  them some protection  from  the northerly wind and 
from the falling  stones. But eddying blasts swirled  round them from  every 
side, and the snow flowed down in ever denser clouds. 
     They huddled together with their backs to the wall. Bill the pony stood 
patiently but dejectedly in  front  of  the  hobbits,  and  screened  them a  
little; but before long the  drifting snow was above his  hocks, and it went 
on mounting. If they had had no  larger companions the  hobbits  would  soon 
have been entirely buried. 
     A great sleepiness came over Frodo; he felt himself sinking fast into a  
warm and hazy dream. He thought a fire was heating his toes,  and out of the 
shadows on the other side of the hearth he heard Bilbo's voice  speaking.  I 
don't think much of your diary , he  said. Snowstorms on January the twelfth: 
there was no need to come back to report that! 
     But I wanted rest and sleep, Bilbo, Frodo answered with an effort, when 
he  felt  himself shaken, and he came back painfully to wakefulness. Boromir 
had lifted him off the ground out of a nest of snow. 

####-     `This will be the death  of the halflings, Gandalf,'  said Boromir. `It 
is useless  to sit  here until the  snow goes  over  our heads.  We must  do 
something to save ourselves.' 
     `Give them this,' said Gandalf, searching in his pack and drawing out a  
leathern flask. `Just a mouthful each -- for all of us. It is very precious. 
It is miruvor, the cordial of Imladris. Elrond gave it to me at our parting. 
Pass it round!' 
     As soon as Frodo had swallowed a little of the warm and fragrant liquor  
he felt a new strength of heart, and the  heavy drowsiness  left  his limbs.  
The  others a lso  revived and found fresh hope and vigour. But the snow  did  
not  relent. It whirled about  them thicker  than  ever, and the  wind  blew 
louder. 
     'What do  you say to fire?' asked Boromir  suddenly. 'The  choice seems 
near now between fire and death, Gandalf. Doubtless we shall be hidden  from 
all unfriendly eyes when the  snow has covered us,  but that  will not  help 
us.' 
     'You may make a fire,  if you can,' answered Gandalf. 'If there are any 
watchers that can endure this storm, then they  can see us, fire or no.' But 
though they had  brought wood and kindlings by  the  advice  of Boromir,  it  
passed the skill of Elf or even Dwarf to strike a flame that would hold amid 
the swirling wind or catch  in  the  wet fuel.  At  last reluctantly Gandalf 
himself took a hand. Picking  up a faggot he held it aloft for a moment, and 
then with a word of command, naur an edraith ammen! he thrust the end of his 
staff into  the midst of it.  At once a great spout  of green and blue flame 
sprang out, and the wood flared and sputtered. 
     `If there  are any  to  see, then I at  least am revealed to  them,' he 
said. 'I have  written Gandalf  is  here  in signs  that all  can  read from 
Rivendell to the mouths of Anduin.' 
     But the Company cared no longer for watchers or unfriendly  eyes. Their  
hearts were rejoiced to see  the light of the fire. The wood burned merrily; 
and though  all round it  the  snow  hissed, and pools of  slush crept under  
their feet, they warmed  their hands gladly at the  blaze. There they stood,  
stooping  in  a circle round the little  dancing and  blowing flames. A  red 
light was on their tired and anxious faces; behind them the night was like a  
black wall. 
     But the wood was burning fast, and the snow still fell. 
     The fire burned low. and the last faggot was thrown on. 

####-     The night is getting old,' said Aragorn. "The dawn is not far off.' 
     `If any dawn can pierce these clouds,' said Gimli. 
     Boromir  stepped  out of the  circle and stared up into  the blackness.  
'The snow is growing less,' he said, `and the wind is quieter.' 
     Frodo gazed wearily at the flakes  still  falling out of the dark to be 
revealed white  for a moment in the light of the dying fire;  but for a long 
time he could see no sign of their slackening. Then suddenly,  as sleep  was 
beginning to creep over him again, he  was aware that  the  wind had  indeed  
fallen,  and the flakes were  becoming larger and fewer. Very slowly  a  dim 
light began to grow. At last the snow stopped altogether. 
     As the   light grew stronger  it showed  a silent shrouded world.  Below 
their refuge  were white  humps and domes and shapeless deeps beneath  which 
the path  that they had trodden was  altogether lost;  but the heights above 
were hidden in great clouds still heavy with the threat of snow.  
     Gimli looked up and shook his head. `Caradhras has not forgiven us.' he 
said.  `He has more snow yet to fling at  us, if we go on.  The sooner we go 
back and down the better.' 
     To this all agreed, but their retreat  was  now difficult. It might well 
prove impossible. Only a few paces from the ashes of their fire the snow lay 
many feet deep, higher than the heads of the hobbits; in places it  had been 
scooped and piled by the wind into great drifts against the cliff. 
     `If  Gandalf  would go before us with  a bright  flame, he might melt a  
path for you,' said Legolas. The storm had troubled him little, and he alone 
of the Company remained still light of heart. 
     `If Elves could fly over mountains, they  might fetch  the Sun  to save  
us,' answered Gandalf. `But I must have something to work on.  I cannot burn 
snow.' 
     `Well,' said Boromir, `when heads are  at a  loss bodies must serve, as 
we say in my  country. The strongest of us must seek a  way. See! Though all 
is  now snow-clad,  our path, as  we came up, turned about that shoulder  of 
rock down yonder. It was there that the snow first began to burden us. If we 
could  reach that point, maybe it would prove easier  beyond. It  is no more 
than a furlong off, I guess. ' 
     `Then let us force a path thither, you and I!' said Aragorn. 
     Aragorn was the  tallest of the  Company, but  Boromir, little less  in 
height, was  broader and heavier  in  build.  He led  the  way,  and Aragorn 
followed  him.  Slowly  they  moved off, and were soon  toiling heavily.  In 

####-places the snow was breast -high, and often Boromir  seemed to bc swimming 
or 
burrowing with his great arms rather than walking. 
     Legolas watched  them for a while with a smile upon his lips,  and then 
he turned to the others. `The strongest must seek a way, say you? But I say: 
let a ploughman plough,  but choose an otter for swimming, and  for  running 
light over grass and leaf or over snow-an Elf.' 
     With that he sprang forth nimbly, and  then Frodo noticed as if for the 
first time, though he had long known it, that the Elf had no boots, but wore 
only light shoes, as he always did, and his feet made little imprint  in the 
snow. 
     'Farewell!' he said to Gandalf. `I go to find the Sun!' Then swift as a  
runner over  firm sand he shot away, and quickly overtaking the toiling men,  
with a  wave of his hand he passed them,  and  sped into  the  distance, and 
vanished round the rocky turn. 
     The others  waited huddled together, watching until Boromir and Aragor n 
dwindled into black specks  in the whiteness. At length they too passed from  
sight. The time dragged on. The clouds lowered, and now a few flakes of snow 
came curling down again. 
     An hour, maybe,  went by, though it seemed far longer, and then at last 
they  saw  Legolas  coming  back.  At  the  same time  Boromir  and  Aragorn 
reappeared round the bend far behind him and came labouring up the slope. 
     `Well,' cried Legolas as he ran up, `I have not brought the Sun. She is 
walking in the blue fields of the South, and a little wreath of snow on this 
Redhorn hillock troubles her not at all. But I have brought back a gleam  of 
good hope for  those who are doomed  to  go on feet. There  is  the greatest  
wind-drift of all just beyond the turn, and there our Strong Men were almost  
buried. They despaired, until I  returned and told them  that the  drift was 
little wider  than  a wall. And on  the  other  side the snow suddenly grows 
less,  while further down  it  is no  more than  a white coverlet  to cool a  
hobbit's toes.' 
     `Ah, it is as I  said,' growled Gimli. 'It was no ordinary storm. It is 
the  ill  will of Caradhras. He  does not love Elves and  Dwarves, and  that 
drift was laid to cut off our escape.' 
     'But happily your Caradhras has forgotten that you  have Men with you,' 
said Boromir, who came up at that moment. `And doughty Men too, if I may 
say 

####-it; though lesser  men with spades might have served you  better.  Still, we 
have thrust a lane through the  drift; and for that all here may be grateful 
who cannot run as light as Elves.' 
     `But  how are we  to get down there, even  if  you have cut through the 
drift?' said Pippin, voicing the thought of all the hobbits.  
     'Have  hope!' said Boromir. 'I am weary, but I still have some strength 
left, and  Aragorn too. We  will  bear the  little folk. The others no doubt 
will make shift  to tread the path behind  us. Come, Master Peregrin! I will 
begin with you.' 
     He lifted  up  the hobbit. 'Cling to  my back! I shall need my arms' he 
said and  strode forward. Aragorn with Merry came behind. Pippin marvelled at 
his  strength, seeing the passage that he had already forced with  no  other  
tool than his great limbs. Even now, burdened as he was, he was widening the 
track for those who followed, thrusting the snow aside as he went. 
     They  came  at length  to  the  great drift.  It  was  flung across the 
mountain-path like a  sheer  and sudden  wall, and  its  crest, sharp as  if 
shaped with  knives,  reared up more than twice the  height of  Boromir; but 
through the middle  a passage had been  beaten, rising  and falling  like  a  
bridge.  On  the  far  side Merry  and Pippin were set down, and there  they 
waited with Legolas for the rest of the Company to arrive. 
     After a  while Boromir returned carrying Sam. Behind in  the narrow but 
now well-trodden track came Gandalf,  leading  Bill with Gimli perched among 
the baggage. Last came Aragorn carrying Frodo. They passed through the lane; 
but hardly had Frodo touched the ground when with a deep rumble there rolled 
down a fall of stones and slithering  snow. The spray of it half blinded the 
Company as they crouched against the cliff,  and  when the air cleared again 
they saw that the path was blocked behind them. 
     `Enough, enough!' cried Gimli.  'We are departing as quickly as we may!' 
And  indeed with that  last stroke the malice  of  the mountain seemed to be 
expended, as if Caradhras was  satisfied  that the invaders had been  beaten 
off  and  would not  dare to  return. The threat of snow lift ed; the  clouds 
began to break and the light grew broader. 
     As Legolas had reported, they found that the snow  became steadily more 
shallow as they went down, so that even the hobbits could trudge along. Soon 
they  all stood once more on the  flat shelf at the head of the steep  slope 
where they had felt the first flakes of snow the night before. 
     The morning was now far advanced. From  the high place they looked back  

####-westwards over the lower lands.  Far away in the tumble of country  that lay 
at the foot of the  mountain  was  the  dell  from which they had started to 
climb the pass.  
     Frodo's legs ached. He was chilled to the bone and hungry; and his head 
was dizzy as he thought of the long and painful march downhill. Black specks 
swam  before his eyes. He rubbed them, but the black specks remained. In the 
distance below him, but still high above the lower foothills, dark dots were 
circling in the air. 
     `The birds again!' said Aragorn, pointing down. 
     'That cannot be helped  now,' said Gandalf.  `Whether they are good  or  
evil,  or have nothing to do with us at  all, we must go  down at  once. Not 
even on the knees of Caradhras will we wait for another night-fall!' 
     A cold  wind flowed down behind them, as they turned their backs on the 
Redhorn Gate,  and stumbled  wearily down the  slope. Caradhras had defeated 
them. 

####- 
 

Chapter 4. A Journey in the Dark 

 
 
     It was  evening, and the  grey light  was again  waning fast, when they 
halted  for the night. They were very  weary.  The mountains were veiled  in 
deepening dusk, and the wind was cold. Gandalf spared them one more 
mouthful 
each of the miruvor  of Rivendell. When they had eaten some food he called a  
council.  
     'We cannot, of  course, go on again  tonight,' he said. `The attack   on 
the Redhorn Gate has tired us out, and we must rest here for a while.' 
     `And then where are we to go? ' asked Frodo. 
     'We still have our journey and our errand before us,' answered Gandalf.  
`We have no choice but to go on, or to return to Rivendell.' 
     Pippin's  face brightened visibly at the  mere  mention  of  return  to 
Rivendell; Merry and Sam looked  up hopefully. But Aragorn  and Boromir 
made 
no sign. Frodo looked troubled.  
     `I wish I was back there,' he said. `But how can I return without shame 
-- unless there is indeed no other way, and we are already defeated? ' 
     `You  are right, Frodo,'  said Gandalf:  `to go back is to admit defeat 
and face worse defeat to come. If we go  back now, then the Ring must remain 
there: we shall not be able to set out again. Then sooner or later Rivendell 
will be  besieged,  and after a  brief and bitter time it will be destroyed. 
The  Ringwraiths  are deadly  enemies, but they are only shadows  yet of the 
power and terror they would possess if the Ruling Ring was on their master's 
hand again.' 
     'Then  we must  go on, if there is a way,' said  Frodo with a sigh. Sam 
sank back into gloom. 
     `There is a way that we may attempt,' said Gandalf. `I thought from the 
beginning, when  first I considered this journey, that we should try it. But 
it is not a pleasant way, and I have not spoken of it to the Company before. 
Aragorn was against it, until the pass over the mountains had  at least been 
tried.' 
     `If  it  is a worse road  than the  Redhorn Gate,  then it must be evil 

####-indeed,' said Merry. `But you had better tell us about it, and  let  us know 
the worst at once.' 
     'The road  that I speak  of leads to the Mines of Moria,' said Gandalf.  
Only  Gimli lifted  up his head; a smouldering fire  was in his eyes. On all 
the others a dread fell at  the mention of that name. Even to the hobbits it 
was a legend of vague fear: 
     `The road  may lead  to Moria,  but how can  we  hope that it will lead 
through Moria? ' said Aragorn darkly. 
     `It  is a name of ill omen,' said Boromir. `Nor do I see the need to go 
there. If we cannot cross the mountains, let us journey southwards, until we 
come  to the Gap of Rohan, where men  are friendly to  my people, taking the 
road that  I followed on my way  hither. Or we might  pass by  and cross the 
Isen into Langstrand and  Lebennin,  and so come to Gondor from the  regions 
nigh to the sea.' 
     'Things have changed since you came  north, Boromir,' answered Gandalf.  
'Did you not hear what I  told you  of Saruman? With him I may have business 
of my own ere all is over. But the Ring must not come near Isengard, if that 
can by any means be prevented. The Gap of Rohan is closed to  us while we go 
with the Bearer. 
     'As  for the longer road:  we cannot  afford the time. We might spend a  
year in such a journey, and we should pass through many lands that are empty 
and  harbourless.  Yet  they would not  be safe. The watchful  eyes  both of 
Saruman and of the Enemy are on them. When you came north, Boromir, you 
were 
in the  Enemy's eyes only one stray wanderer from the South and a matter  of 
small concern to  him: his  mind was busy with the pursuit of the  Ring. But 
you return now as  a member of the Ring's  Company, and you  are in peril as 
long as you remain with us. The danger will increase  with every league that 
we go south under the naked sky. 
     `Since our open attempt on the mountain-pass our plight has become more 
desperate, I  fear. I  see now little  hope, if  we  do not soon vanish from 
sight for a while, and cover our trail. Therefore I advise that we should go 
neither over the mountains, nor round them, but  under them. That  is a road 
at any rate that the Enemy will least expect us to take.' 
     `We do not  know what  he expects,' said  Boromir. `He  may  watch  all 
roads, likely and  unlikely. In  that case to enter  Moria would  be to walk  
into  a  trap, hardly better than knocking at  the  gates of  the Dark Tower  

####-itself. The name of Moria is black.' 
     `You speak  of  what  you do not  know,  when you  liken  Moria to  the 
stronghold of Sauron,' answered Gandalf.  `I alone of you  have ever been in 
the dungeons of the Dark Lord, and only in  his older and lesser dwelling in  
Dol Guldur. Those who pass the gates of Barad-dyr do not return. But I wou ld 
not lead you into Moria if there  were no hope of coming out again. If there 
are Orcs there,  it may prove ill for us, that is true. But most of the Orcs 
of the Misty Mountains were  scattered or  destroyed  in the Battle  of Five 
Armies. The Eagles report that Orcs are gathering again from afar; but there 
is a hope that Moria is still free. 
     `There is  even a chance that Dwarves are  there, and that in some deep 
hall of his fathers, Balin son of Fundin may be found. However it may prove, 
one must tread the path that need chooses!' 
     'I will tread the  path with you, Gandalf! ' said Gimli. 'I will go and 
look on  the halls of Durin, whatever may  wait  there-if  you can  find the 
doors that are shut.' 
     'Good,  Gimli!  '  said  Gandalf.  `You encourage me. We  will seek the 
hidden  doors together.  And  we will come  through.  In  the  ruins of  the 
Dwarves, a dwarf's head  will be less easy to bewilder than Elves or Men  or  
Hobbits. Yet it  will not  be the first time  that  I have been to  Moria. I 
sought  there long for Thrbin son of  Thrur  after  he  was  lost.  I passed 
through, and I came out again alive! ' 
     `I too once passed the Dimrill Gate,' said Aragorn quietly; 'but though 
I also came out again, the memory is very evil. I do not wish to enter Moria  
a second time.' 
     'And I don't wish to enter it even once,' said Pippin. 
     'Nor me,' muttered Sam. 
     `Of course not!  ' said Gandalf.  'Who would? But  the question is: who 
will follow me, if I lead you there? ' 
     'I will,' said Gimli eagerly. 
     'I  will,' said  Aragorn  heavily.  `You  followed  my  lead almost  to 
disaster in  the  snow, and have said no  word of  blame. I will follow your 
lead  now  -- if this last warning does not move you. It is  not of the Ring, 
nor of  us others that  I am thinking now, but of you, Gandalf. And I say to 
you: if you pass the doors of Moria, beware! ' 
     `I  will not go,' said Boromir;  'not  unless  the vote  of  the  whole 
company  is  against me.  What  do  Legolas and  the  little  folk  say? The 

####-Ring-bearer's voice surely should be heard? ' 
     'I do not wish to go to Moria,' said Legolas.  
     The  hobbits said nothing. Sam looked at Frodo. At last Frodo spoke. `I  
do  not wish to go,' he said; `but neither do I wish to refuse the advice of 
Gandalf. I  beg that there should be  no vote,  until we  have slept on  it. 
Gandalf will get votes easier in the light of the morning than in this  cold 
gloom. How the wind howls! ' 
     At  these  words  all fell  into silent thought. They  heard  the  wind 
hissing among the rocks and trees, and there was a howling and wailing round 
them in the empty spaces of the night. 
     Suddenly  Aragorn leapt to  his feet. 'How the wind howls! '  he cried. 
'It is howling with wolf-voices. The  Wargs have  come west of the Mountains!  
' 
     'Need we wait until morning then? ' said Gandalf. `It is as I said. The 
hunt  is  up! Even if  we live to see the dawn, who now will wish to journey  
south by night with the wild wolves on his trail? ' 
     'How far is Moria? ' asked Boromir. 
     `There was a door south-west  of Caradhras,  some  fifteen miles as the 
crow flies, and maybe twenty as the wolf runs,' answered Gandalf grimly. 
     'Then let  us start as soon as it is light tomorrow, if  we can,'  said 
Boromir. 'The wolf that one hears is worse than the orc that one fears.' 
     `True!' said Aragorn, loosening his sword in its sheath. `But where the 
warg howls, there also the orc prowls.' 
     `I  wish I had taken Elrond's advice,' muttered Pippin to Sam. `I am no 
good after all. There is not enough of the breed of Bandobras the Bullroarer  
in  me:  these  howls  freeze my  blood.  I  don't ever  remember feeling so 
wretched.' 
     'My heart's  right  down  in my  toes, Mr. Pippin,' said Sam.  'But  we 
aren't etten yet,  and there are some stout folk here with  us. Whatever may 
be in store for old Gandalf, I'll wager it isn't a wolf's belly.' 
     For their defence in the  night the Company  climbed to the  top of the 
small hill under which they had been sheltering. it was crowned  with a knot  
of old and twisted trees, about which lay a broken circle of boulder stones. 
In the midst of  this they lit a fire,  for there was  no hope that darkness 
and silence would keep their trail from discovery by the hunting packs.  
     Round the  fire  they  sat,  and those  that  were  not on  guard dozed 
uneasily.  Poor  Bill the  pony  trembled  and sweated where he  stood.  The  

####-howling of the wolves was now all round them, sometimes nearer and 
sometimes 
further off.  In the dead  of the night many shining eyes were  seen peering 
over the brow of the  hill. Some advanced almost to the ring of stones. At a  
gap  in the circle a great  dark wolf-shape  could be seen halted, gazing at 
them.  A shuddering howl  broke from him, as if he  were a captain summoning 
his pack to the assault. 
     Gandalf stood  up and strode forward, holding his staff aloft. 'Listen, 
Hound of Sauron! ' he cried. `Gandalf is here.  Fly, if you value  your foul 
skin! I will shrivel you from tail to snout, if you come within this ring.' 
     The wolf snarled and  sprang towards  them  with a great leap.  At that 
moment  there was a sharp twang. Legolas  had  loosed his bow.  There  was a  
hideous yell, and the leaping shape thudded to  the ground; the elvish arrow 
had  pierced  its  throat. The  watching  eyes were  suddenly  extinguished. 
Gandalf  and  Aragorn strode forward, but the hill was deserted; the hunting 
packs had fled. All about them  the darkness grew silent, and no cry came on 
the sighing wind. 
     The  night was  old, and westward the waning moon was setting. gleaming 
fitfully  through the breaking clouds.  Suddenly  Frodo started  from sleep. 
Without warning  a  storm of  howls broke out fierce and wild all  about the 
camp. A great host of Wargs ha d gathered silently and was now attacking them 
from every side at once. 
     `Fling  fuel on the  fire!' cried  Gandalf to  the  hobbits. `Draw your 
blades, and stand back to back!' 
     In the leaping light, as  the fresh wood blazed up, Frodo saw many gr ey 
shapes spring over  the  ring of stones. More and more followed. Through the 
throat of one  huge  leader  Aragorn passed his sword with a thrust; with  a  
great sweep Boromir hewed the head off another. Beside them Gimli stood 
with 
his  stout  legs apart,  wielding  his  dwarf-axe.  The  bow of  Legolas was 
singing. 
     In the wavering firelight  Gandalf seemed suddenly to grow: he rose up, 
a  great menacing shape like the monument of some ancient king of  stone set 
upon a hill. Stooping like a cloud, he lifted a burning branch and strode to 
meet the wolves. They gave  back before him. High in  the air he  tossed the 
blazing  brand.  It flared with a  sudden white radiance like lightning; and 
his voice rolled like thunder. 

####-     `Naur an edraith ammen! Naur dan i ngaurhoth!' he cried. 
     There was a roar and a crackle, and  the  tree above him  burst  into a  
leaf and bloom of blinding flame. The fire leapt  from tree-top to tree-top. 
The whole hill was crowned with dazzling light. The swords and knives of the 
defenders shone and flickered. The last arrow of Legolas kindled in  the air 
as it flew, and  plunged burning into the  heart of a  great wolf-chieftain. 
All the others fled. 
     Slowly the fire died till nothing was left but falling ash  and sparks;  
a bitter smoke curled above the burned tree-stumps, and blew darkly from the 
hill, as the first  light of dawn came dimly in the  sky. Their enemies were 
routed and did not return. 
     `What did I  tell  you,  Mr. Pippin?  ' said Sam, she/thing his  sword. 
`Wolves won't get him. That was an eye-opener, and no mistake! Nearly singed 
the hair off my head!' 
     When  the full light of the morning came no signs of the wolves were to 
be found, and they  looked in vain for the  bodies of the  dead. No trace of 
the fight remained but the  charred trees and the arrows of Legolas lying on 
the hill-top. All were undamaged save one of which only the point was left. 
     `It is as  I feared,'  said Gandalf.  `These  were no  ordinary  wolves 
hunting for food in the wilderness. Let us eat quickly and go!' 
     That day  the weather changed again, almost as if it was at the command  
of some power that had no longer  any use for snow, since they had retreated 
from the pass, a power that wished now to have a clear light in  which things 
that  moved  in the  wild could be  seen from far away.  The  wind  had been 
turning through north to north-west during the night, and now it failed. The 
clouds  vanished southwards and the sky was opened, high and blue.  As  they 
stood upon the hill-side, ready to depart, a pale sunlight gleamed over  the 
mountain-tops.  
     `We must reach  the doors before sunset,' said Gandalf,  'or I  fear we 
shall not reach them at all. It is not far, but our path may be winding, for  
here Aragorn cannot guide us; he has seldom walked in this country, and only 
once have I been under the west wall of Moria, and that was long ago. 
     `There  it lies,' he said,  pointing away south-eastwards to where  the 
mountains' sides fell sheer into the shadows at their feet.  In the distance 
could  be dimly seen a line of bare cliffs,  and in their midst, taller than 
the rest, one great grey wall. `When we left the pass I  led you southwards,  
and not  back to  our starting point, as some of you may have noticed. It is 

####-well that I  did so, for now we have several miles less to cross, and  haste 
is needed. Let us go! ' 
     `I do not know which to hope,' said  Boromir grimly: `that Gandalf will 
find what he seeks, or that coming to the cliff we shall find the gates lost 
for ever. All choices seem ill, and to be caught between wolves and the wall  
the likeliest chance. Lead on!' 
     Gimli now walked ahead by the wizard's side, so eager was he to come to 
Moria. Together they led  the Company back towards the  mountains. The  only 
road of old  to Moria from the  west  had lain along the course of a stream, 
the Sirannon,  that ran out from the feet of the cliffs near where the doors 
had stood.  But either Gandalf was astray,  or  else the land had changed in 
recent years; for he  did not strike the stream where he  looked to  find it, 
only a few miles southwards from their start. 
     The morning was  passing towards noon,  and still the  Company wandered 
and scrambled in a barren country  of red stones. Nowhere could they see any 
gleam of  water or hear any sound of it. All was bleak and dry. Their hearts 
sank.  They saw no living thing, and not a bird was in the sky; but what the 
night  would bring, if it caught them in that  lost land, none of them cared 
to think. 
     Suddenly Gimli, who  had pressed on ahead, called back  to them. He was 
standing  on a knoll and pointing to the  right. Hurrying up they saw  below 
them  a  deep and narrow channel. It was  empty and  silent,  and  hardly  a  
trickle of water flowed among the  brown and red-stained  stones of its bed;  
but  on the  near side there was a path, much broken and decayed, that wound 
its way among the ruined walls and paving -stones of an ancient highroad. 
     'Ah! Here it is at last! ' said Gandalf. `This is where the stream ran: 
Sirannon, the  Gate-stream, they used  to call  it. But what has happened to 
the water,  I cannot guess; it used  to  be swift  and noisy.  Come! We must  
hurry on. We are late.' 
     The Company were  footsore and tired; but they  trudged  doggedly along 
the rough and winding track for many miles. The sun turned from the noon and 
began  to go west. After  a brief halt  and a hasty meal they went on again. 
Before them the  mountains frowned, but  their path lay in a deep  trough of 
land  and  they  could  see only  the higher shoulders and the  far eastward 
peaks. 
     At length they came  to a sharp  bend. There  the road, which had  been 
veering southwards between the brink of the channel and  a steep fall of the 

####-land to the left, turned and went due east again. Rounding  the corner  they 
saw  before them a  low  cliff, some  five fathoms  high, with a  broken and 
jagged  top. Over  it  a trickling water  dripped, through a wide cleft that 
seemed to have been carved out by a fall that had once been  strong and full.  
     `Indeed things have changed! ' said Gandalf. `But there is no mistaking 
the  place.  There  is  all  that remains of the  Stair Falls. If I remember  
right, there was  a flight of steps cut  in the  rock at their side, but the 
main road  wound away left and climbed with several  loops  up  to the level 
ground at  the top. There used to be a shallow valley beyond the falls right 
up to the Walls of  Moria, and the Sirannon flowed  through it with the road 
beside it. Let us go and see what things are like now! ' 
     They found the stone steps without difficulty, and Gimli sprang swiftly 
up them,  followed by Gandalf and Frodo.  When they reached the top they saw 
that  they could go no further that way, and the reason for the drying up of 
the Gate-stream was revealed. Behind  them the sinking Sun filled  the  cool  
western sky with glimmering  gold. Before them stretched a dark still  lake. 
Neither sky nor sunset was reflected on its sullen surface. The Sirannon had 
been dammed  and had filled  all the valley.  Beyond the  ominous water were 
reared vast cliffs, their stern faces pallid in  the fading light: final and 
impassable. No sign of gate or entrance,  not a fissure or crack could Frodo 
see in the frowning stone. 
     `There  are  the  Walls  of  Moria,' said Gandalf,  pointing across the 
water. `And there the Gate stood once upon a time, the Elven Door at the end 
of the road from Hollin by which we have come. But this way is blocked. None 
of  the Company, I guess, will wish to swim this  gloomy water at the end  of 
the day. It has an unwholesome look.' 
     `We  must find a way round the northern  edge,' said Gimli. `The  first  
thing for the  Company to  do is to climb up  by the main path and see where 
that  will lead us.  Even  if  there were  no  lake,  we could not  get  our 
baggage-pony up this stair.' 
     `But in any  case we cannot take the poor  beast  into the Mines,' said 
Gandalf. `The road under the mountains is a dark road, and there are  places 
narrow and steep which he cannot tread, even if we can.' 
     `Poor old Bill! ' said Frodo. `I had not thought of that. And poor Sam!  
I wonder what he will say?  ' 
     `I am sorry,' said Gandalf. `Poor Bill has  been a useful companion and 
it goes  to  my heart to turn him adrift now. I would have travelled lighter  

####-and brought no animal, least of  all  this one that Sam is fond of, if I had 
had my way. I feared all along that we should be obliged to take this road.' 
     The day was drawing to its end, and cold stars were glinting in the sky 
high above the sunset, when the  Company,  with all  the speed  they  could,  
climbed up the slopes and reached the side of the lake. In breadth it looked 
to be no  more  than two or three furlongs at the widest point.  How far  it 
stretched  away  southward they could  not see in the failing light; but its 
northern end was no more than half a mile from where they stood, and between 
the  stony ridges  that enclosed the valley and the water's edge there was a  
rim of open ground. They hurried forward, for they had still  a mile  or two 
to go  before they could reach the point on the  far shore that  Gandalf was 
making for; and then he had still to find the doors. 
     When  they came to the northernmost corner of  the  lake  they  found a  
narrow creek that  barred their way. It was green and stagnant,  thrust  out 
like  a  slimy  arm  towards  the  enclosing  hills.  Gimli  strode  forward 
undeterred, and found that the water was shallow, no more than ankle-deep at 
the edge. Behind him they walked in file, threading their way with care, for  
under  the  weedy  pools were sliding  and  greasy  stones, and footing  was 
treacherous. Frodo shuddered  with disgust at  the touch of the dark unclean 
water on his feet. 
     As  Sam,  the last of the Company, led Bill up  on to the dry ground on 
the  far side, there came a soft sound: a swish, followed by a plop, as if a  
fish had disturbed the still surface of  the water. Turning quickly they saw 
ripples, black -edged  with shadow in  the  waning  light: great  rings  were 
widening outwards from  a point far out in the lake.  There  was  a bubbling  
noise, and then silence.  The  dusk  deepened, and  the  last gleams of  the 
sunset were veiled in cloud. 
     Gandalf  now  pressed on  at  a great pace, and the  others followed as 
quickly as they could. They reached the strip of dry  land between  the lake 
and the cliffs: it  was  narrow,  often  hardly  a  dozen yards  across, and 
encumbered  with fallen  rock  and stones; but they found a way, hugging the 
cliff,  and  keeping  as  far  from the  dark water as  they might.  A  mile 
southwards  along  the shore  they  came upon holly trees.  Stumps  and dead 
boughs were rotting  in the shallows, the remains it seemed of old thickets,  
or of a hedge that had once lined the  road  across the drowned valley.  But 
close under the cliff  there  stood,  still strong and  living,  . two  tall 
trees, larger than any trees of holly that Frodo  had ever seen or imagined. 

####-Their  great  roots spread  from the  wall to the  water. Under the   looming 
cliffs  they had looked like mere bushes, when seen  far off from the top of 
the Stair; but now they  towered overhead, stiff, dark, and silent, throwing 
deep night-shadows about their feet,  standing  like sentinel pillars at the 
end of the road. 
     `Well, here  we are at last!  ' said  Gandalf. 'Here the Elven-way from 
Hollin ended. Holly  was  the  token  of the  people of that land, and  they 
planted it here to mark the end of their  domain; for the West -door was made 
chiefly for their  use in their traffic with the Lords of Moria. Those  were 
happier days, when there was still close friendship at times between folk of 
different race, even between Dwarves and Elves.' 
     'It was not  the fault of the Dwarves that the friendship  waned,' said 
Gimli. 
     'I have not heard that it was the fault of the Elves,' said Legolas. 
     'I have heard both,' said Gandalf; 'and I will not give judgement  now. 
But I beg you two, Legolas  and Gimli, at least  to  be friends, and to help 
me. I need you  both.  The  doors are shut and hidden, and the sooner we find  
them the better. Night is at hand! ' 
     Turning to  the others he said:  'While I  am  searching, will you each 
make ready to enter the  Mines? For here I fear we  must say farewell to our  
good  bea st of burden. You must lay aside much  of the stuff that we brought 
against  bitter weather:  you will  not need it inside, nor, I hope, when we 
come through  and journey on down  into the South.  Instead each of us  must  
take  a  share  of  what  the pony   carried,  especially  the food  and  the 
water -skins.' 
     'But you can't  leave poor old Bill behind in this forsaken  place, Mr. 
Gandalf! ' cried Sam,  angry and  distressed.  `I won't have  it, and that's 
flat. After he has come so far and all! ' 
     'I am sorry, Sam,'  said the wizard. `But when the  Door opens I do not 
think  you will  be able  to  drag your Bill  inside, into  the long dark of 
Moria. You will have to choose between Bill and your master.' 
     'He'd  follow Mr. Frodo into  a dragon's  den, if I led him,' protested 
Sam.  `It'd  be nothing short  of murder  to turn  him loose with  all these 
wolves about.' 
     'It will be short of murder, I hope,' said Gandalf. He laid his hand on 
the pony's head, and spoke  in  a  low voice. `Go with  words  of  guard and 
guiding on you,' he said. `You are a wise  beast, and  have  learned much in 

####-Rivendell. Make your ways to places where you can find grass, and so come in 
time to Elrond's house, or wherever you wish to go. 
     `There, Sam! He will have quite as  much chance of escaping wolves  and 
getting home as we have.' 
     Sam stood sullenly by the pony and returned no answer. Bill, seeming to  
understand well what  was going on, nuzzled up to  him,  putting his nose to 
Sam's  ear. Sam burst into tears, and  fumbled with the straps, unlading all 
the pony's packs and throwing them on the ground. The others  sorted out the 
goods, making a  pile of all that could be left behind,  and dividing up the 
rest. 
     When this was  done  they turned to watch Gandalf. He  appeared to have 
done nothing. He was standing between the two trees gazing at the blank wall 
of the cliff, as if he  would bore a hole  into it  with his eyes. Gimli was 
wandering about, tapping the stone here  and there with his axe. Legolas was 
pressed against the rock, as if listening. 
     'Well, here  we are and all ready,'  said  Merry;  `but  where  are the 
Doors? I can't see any sign of them.' 
     'Dwarf-doors are  not made to be seen when shut,' said Gimli. `They are 
invisible, and their own  masters cannot  find them or  open them,  if their 
secret is forgotten.' 
     'But this Door was not made to be a secret known only to Dwarves,' said 
Gandalf, coming  suddenly to  life and turning  round.  `Unless  things  are 
altogether changed, eyes that know what to look for may discover the signs.' 
     He walked forward  to the wall. Right  between the shadow  of the trees 
there  was a smooth space,  and over this he passed  his  hands to and  fro, 
muttering words under his breath. Then he stepped back. 
     'Look!' he said. `Can you see anything now?' 
     The Moon  now shone upon the grey face of the  rock; but they could see 
nothing else for a  while.  Then slowly on the surface, where  the  wizard's 
hands had passed, faint lines appeared, like slender veins of silver running 
in the stone. At first they were no more than pale gossamer -threads, so fine 
that they only twinkled fitfully where the Moon  caught  them,  but steadily 
they grew broader and clearer, until their design could be guessed. 
 
     At the top, as high as Gandalf could reach, was  an arch of interlacing 
letters in an Elvish  character. Below,  though  the threads were in  places 
blurred  or  broken,  the  outline could be seen of an  anvil  and  a hammer  

####-surmounted by a crown with seven  stars. Beneath these again were two trees,  
each bearing crescent moons. More clearly than all else there shone forth in 
the middle of the door a single star with many rays.  
     `There are the emblems of Durin!' cried Gimli. 
     `And there is the Tree of the High Elves!' said Legolas.  
     `And the Star of the House of Flanor,' said Gandalf. `They  are wrought 
of  ithildin  that mirrors only starlight  and moonlight, and sleeps until it 
is touched by one who speaks words now long forgotten in Middle-earth. It is 
long since I heard them, and I thought deeply  before I could recall them to 
my mind.' 
     'What does the writing  say?' asked  Frodo, who was trying  to decipher  
the inscription on the arch. 'I thought I knew the elf-letters but  I cannot 
read these.' 
     `The words are in  the elven-tongue of the West of  Middle-earth in the 
Elder Days,' answered Gandalf.  'But they do not say anything  of importance 
to us.  They say only: The Doors of Durin, Lord of Moria. Speak, friend, and 
enter.  And  underneath  small and faint  is written:  I, Narvi,  made them. 
Celebrimbor of Hollin drew these signs.' 
     `What does it mean by speak, friend, and enter?' asked Merry. 
     'That is plain enough,'  said  Gimli. `If  you are a friend,  speak the 
password, and the doors will open, and you can enter.' 
     'Yes,' said Gandalf, 'these doors are probably  governed by words. Some 
dwarf-gates will open only at special times, or for  particular persons; and 
some have locks and keys that  are still needed when all necessary times and  
words are known. These doors have no key. In the days of Durin they were not 
secret. They usually  stood  open  and doorwards sat here. But  if they were 
shut, any who  knew the opening word could speak it and pass in. At lea st so 
it is recorded, is it not, Gimli? ' 
     'It is,' said the dwarf. `But what the  word  was  is  not  remembered. 
Narvi and his craft and all his kindred have vanished from the earth.' 
     'But do not you know the word, Gandalf? ' asked Boromir in surprise. 
     `No! ' said the wizard. 
     The others looked  dismayed;  only  Aragorn,  who  knew  Gandalf  well, 
remained silent and unmoved. 
     'Then  what was  the use of bringing us to this  accursed spot?'  cried 
Boromir, glancing back with a shudder at  the dark water. `You  told us that 
you had  once passed  through the  Mines. How  could that be, if you did not 

####-know how to enter? ' 
     `The answer to your first question, Boromir,' said the wizard, `is that 
I do not know the word-yet. But we shall  soon see.  And,' he added,  with  a  
glint in his eyes under their bristling brows, 'you may ask what  is the use 
of my deeds when they are proved useless. As for your other question: do you 
doubt  my  tale? Or have you no wits left? I did  not enter this way. I came 
from the East. 
     `If you wish to know, I will tell you that these doors  open  outwards.  
From the inside you may thrust them open with  your  hands. From the outside 
nothing  will move  them  save  the spell of command.  They cannot be forced 
inwards.' 
     `What  are  you going  to do  then? '  asked  Pippin, undaunted  by the 
wizard's bristling brows.  
     `Knock on  the doors with your head, Peregrin Took,' said Gandalf. `But 
if that does not shatter them, and I  am allowed a little peace from foolish 
questions, I will seek for the opening words. 
     `I  once knew every spell in all the tongues  of Elves or  Men  or Orcs 
that was  ever  used for such a purpose. I can still  remember  ten score of 
them  without searching in  my mind. But on ly a few trials, I think, will be 
needed;  and I  shall not  have  to call on  Gimli for  words  of the secret 
dwarf-tongue  that  they  teach to none. The opening words were Elvish, like 
the writing on the arch: that seems certain.' 
     He stepped up to the rock again, and lightly touched with his staff the 
silver star in the middle beneath the sign of the anvil. 
     Annon edhellen, edro hi ammen! 
     Fennas nogothrim, lasto beth lammen! 
     he said  in a commanding voice.  The silver lines faded, but the  blank  
grey stone did not stir. 
     Many times he  repeated these words in different order, or varied them. 
Then  he tried other spells.  one  after another,  speaking  now faster  and 
louder, now soft and slow. Then he spoke many single words of Elvish speech. 
Nothing happened. The cliff towered into the night, the countless stars were 
kindled, the wind blew cold, and the doors stood fast. 
     Again Gandalf approached the  wall, and lifting up his arms he spoke in 
tones of command and rising wrath. Edro, edro! he cried, and struck the rock 
with  his  staff.  Open,  open! he shouted, and followed  it with  the  same 
command  in  every  language that had  ever  been  spoken  in  the  West  of 

####-Middle-earth.  Then he  threw  his  staff  on the  ground, and  sat down  in 
silence. 
     At that moment from far off the  wind bore to their listening ears  the 
howling of wolves. Bill the pony started in fear, and Sam sprang to his side 
and whispered softly to him. 
     'Do not let him run away! ' said Boromir. 'It seems that we  shall need 
him still, if the wolves do not  find us. How  I  hate  this foul pool! ' He 
stooped and picking up a large stone he cast it far into the dark water. 
     The stone vanished with a soft slap; but at  the same instant there was 
a swish and a bubble. Great rippling rings formed on the surface  out beyond  
where the stone had fallen, and they moved slowly towards  the  foot  of the 
cliff. 
     'Why did  you do  that, Boromir? ' said Frodo. `I hate this place, too, 
and I am afraid. I don't know of what: not of wolves, or the dark behind the 
doors, but of something else. I am afraid of the pool. Don't disturb it! ' 
     'l wish we could get away! ' said Merry. 
     'Why doesn't Gandalf do something quick? ' said Pippin. 
     Gandalf took no notice of them. He sat  with his head bowed,  either in 
despair or in anxious thought. The mournful howling of the wolves was  heard 
again. The ripples  on the water  grew and came  closer;  some were  already  
lapping on the shore. 
     With a suddenness that startled them all the wizard sprang to his feet. 
He was laughing! `I have it! '  he  cried. 'Of  course, of  course! Absurdly 
simple, like most riddles when you see the answer.' 
     Picking up  his  staff he  stood before  the rock and  said  in  a clear 
voice: Mellon! 
     The  star  shone  out briefly  and faded again.  Then silently  a great 
doorway was  outlined, though not a  crack or joint had been visible before. 
Slowly it divided in the middle and swung outwards inch  by inch, until both  
doors lay back against the wall.  Through the opening a shadowy stair  could  
be seen climbing steeply up; but  beyond the  lower  steps the darkness  was 
deeper than the night. The Company stared in wonder. 
     `I was wrong after all,' said  Gandalf, 'and Gimli  too. Merry, of  all 
people, was on  the  right track.  The  opening word  was  inscribed on  the 
archway  all the time!  The translation  should have been:  Say "Friend" and 
enter. I had only to speak the Elvish word for friend and the  doors opened. 
Quite simple. Too simple for a learned lore-master in these suspicious days.  

####-Those were happier times. Now let us go!' 
     He strode  forward  and  set his foot  on the lowest  step. But at that 
moment several things happened. Frodo felt something seize  him by the ankle, 
and he fell with a cry. Bill  the pony gave a wild neigh of fear, and turned 
tail and dashed away along the lakeside into the darkness. Sam leaped  after  
him, and  then hearing Frodo's cry  he ran back again, weeping  and cursing.  
The others swung round and saw the waters of the lake seething, as if a host  
of snakes were swimming up from the southern end. 
     Out  from  the  water  a  long sinuous  tentacle had  crawled;  it  was 
pale-green  and luminous and wet.  Its fingered end had ho ld of Frodo's foot  
and was dragging him into the water. Sam on his knees was now slashing at it 
with a knife. 
     The arm  let go of Frodo, and Sam pulled him away, crying out for help. 
Twenty others arms came rippling out. The dark water boiled, and there was a  
hideous stench. 
     `Into  the gateway!  Up  the stairs!  Quick! ' shouted Gandalf  leaping 
back. Rousing them from the horror that seemed to have rooted all but Sam to 
the ground where they stood, he drove them forward. 
     They were  just in time. Sam and  Frodo were  only  a few steps up, and 
Gandalf had just  begun to climb, when the groping tentacles writhed  across 
the  narrow  shore  and  fingered  the cliff-wall  and  the  doors. One came 
wriggling over  the  threshold, glistening in  the starlight. Gandalf turned 
and paused. If he  was considering what word would close the gate again from 
within, there  was no  need. Many  coiling  arms seized the  doors on either  
side, and with horrible strength, swung them round.  With a shattering  echo 
they slammed,  and all  light was lost. A noise of rending and crashing came 
dully through the ponderous stone. 
     Sam,  clinging  to  Frodo's arm, collapsed  on  a  step  in  the  black  
darkness.  `Poor old  Bill!  ' he said in a choking  voice. `Poor   old Bill! 
Wolves  and snakes! But the snakes were too much for him.  I  had to choose, 
Mr. Frodo. I had to come with you.' 
     They heard Gandalf go back down  the steps and thrust his staff against 
the doors. There was a quiver in the stone and the stairs trembled, .but the 
doors did  not open. `Well, well! ' said the wizard. `The passage is blocked 
behind  us now  and there is only one  way  out--on  the other  side  of the 
mountains. I fear from the sounds that  boulders have been piled up, and the 
trees  uprooted and thrown across the gate. I  am sorry; for the trees  were 

####-beautiful, and had stood so long.' 
     `I felt that  something horrible was near from  the moment that my foot 
first  touched the water,'  said Frodo. 'What  was the  thing, or were there 
many of them? ' 
     'I do not know,' answered Gandalf, 'but the arms were all guided by one 
purpose.  Something has  crept, or has  been driven out of dark waters under  
the mountains.  There  are  older and  fouler things  than  Orcs in the deep 
places of  the world.'  He did not speak aloud his thought that whatever  it 
was  that dwelt  in the lake, it had  seized  on Frodo  first among  all the 
Company. 
     Boromir muttered under  his breath, but the echoing stone magnified the 
sound to a  hoarse  whisper  that all could hear: `In the deep places of the 
world!  And thither we are going against my wish.  Who will lead  us  now in 
this deadly dark? ' 
     'I will,' said Gandalf, 'and Gimli shall walk with me. Follow my staff!  
' 
     As  the wizard passed  on ahead up  the great steps, he held  his staff 
aloft, and from its tip there came  a faint radiance. The wide  stairway was 
sound and undamaged. Two hundred steps they counted, broad and shallow;  
and 
at the top they found  an arched  passage with  a level floor leading on into 
the dark. 
     `Let us  sit and rest and  have  something to eat, here on the landing, 
since  we can't find a dining-room! ' said  Frodo. He had begun to shake off 
the terror of the clutching arm, and suddenly he felt extremely hungry. 
     The proposal was welcomed by all; and they sat down on the upper steps,  
dim figures  in the gloom. After they had eaten,  Gandalf gave  them each  a  
third sip of the miruvor of Rivendell. 
     `It will not last much longer, I am  afraid,' he said; 'but I  think we 
need it after that horror at  the gate. And unless we have  great  luck,  we 
shall need all that is left before we see the other side! Go  carefully with 
the water, too!  There are  many streams  and wells in  the Mines,  but they 
should not be touched. We  may  not  have a chance of filling  our skins and 
bottles till we come down into Dimrill Dale.' 
     'How long is that going to take us? ' asked Frodo. 
     'I  cannot  say,'  answered Gandalf.  'It depends  on many chances. But 
going straight,  without mishap  or  losing our  way, we shall take three or  

####-four marches, I expect. It cannot be less than forty miles from West -door to 
East -gate in a direct line, and the road may wind much.' 
     After only a brief rest they started on their way again. All were eager  
to  get the journey over as quickly  as possible, and were willing, tired as 
they  were, to go on  marching  still for  several hours. Gandalf  walked in 
front as before. In his left hand he held up his glimmering staff, the light 
of which just showed the ground before  his feet; in his right he  held  his 
sword Glamdring.  Behind him came Gimli, his eyes glinting in  the dim light 
as he turned his head from side to side. Behind the dwarf  walked Frodo, and 
he had drawn the short sword, Sting. No gleam came from the blades of  Sting 
or of  Glamdring;  and  that was some comfort, for being the work of  Elvish 
smiths in  the Elder  Days these swords shone with a cold light, if any Orcs 
were near  at hand. Behind Frodo went Sam, and after  him  Legolas,  and the 
young hobbits, and Boromir. In the dark at the rear, grim and silent, walked 
Aragorn. 
     The passage  twisted  round a few  turns, and then began to descend. It 
went steadily down for  a long while before it became level once again.  The  
air grew  hot and  stifling, but  it was  not  foul, and at times they  felt 
currents of cooler air upon  their faces, issuing from half-guessed openings 
in the walls.  There  were  many of  these. In the  pale ray of the wizard's 
staff, Frodo caught glimpses of stairs and arches and of  other passages and 
tunnels, sloping  up,  or  running steeply down, or opening  blankly dark on 
either side. It was bewildering beyond hope of remembering. 
     Gimli aided Gandalf very little, except by h is stout  courage. At least  
he  was not,  as  were most of the  others, troubled by the mere darkness in 
itself. Often the wizard consulted him at points where the choice of way was 
doubtful; but it was  always  Gandalf who had the final word. The  Mines  of 
Moria were vast and intricate beyond the imagination  of Gimli, Gluin's son,  
dwarf of the mountain-race though he was. To Gandalf the far -off memories of 
a  journey long  before were now of little help, but  even  in the gloom and 
despite all windings of the road he knew whither he wished to go, and he did 
not falter, as long as there was a path that led towards his goal. 
     `Do not be afraid! ' said Aragorn. There was a pause longer than usual, 
and Gandalf and Gimli were  whispering  together; the  others  were  crowded 
behind, waiting anxiously. `Do not be afraid! I have been with him on many a  
journey,  if  never on  one so dark; and  there  are tales  of  Rivendell of 
greater  deeds  of his than any that I have seen. He  will  not go astray-if 

####-there is any path to find. He has  led us in here  against our fears, but he 
will lead us out again, at whatever cost to himself. He is  surer of finding 
the way home in a blind night than the cats of Queen Ber®thiel.' 
     It was well for  the Company that  they  had such  a guide. They had no 
fuel nor any means of making torches; in the desperate scramble at the doors 
many things had been left behind. But without any light they would soon have 
come  to grief. There  were not only  many roads  to choose from, there were 
also  in many places holes and pitfalls, and dark wells beside  the  path in 
which their passing feet echoed. There were fissures and chasms in the walls 
and floor, and  every  now  and  then  a crack would open right before their 
feet.  The widest was more than seven  feet across, and it  was long  before 
Pippin could summon enough courage to leap over the dreadful gap.  The noise 
of churning water came  up from  far below, as if  some great mill-wheel was 
turning in the depths.  
     `Rope! ' muttered Sam. `I knew I'd want it, if I hadn't got it! ' 
     As  these  dangers  became  more frequent  their  march became  slower.  
Already  they  seemed  to  have  been  tramping  on, on,  endlessly  to  the 
mountains' roots. They were more than weary, and yet there seemed no comfort 
in  the thought of halting anywhere. Frodo's  spirits had risen  for a while 
after his escape, and  after food and a draught  of the  cordial; but  now a  
deep uneasiness, growing to  dread, crept over him again. Though he had been 
healed  in  Rivendell  of the  knife-stroke,  that grim  wound had  not been 
without effect. His senses were sharper and more aware  of things that could 
not be seen. One sign of change that he soon had noticed  was that he  could 
see more in the  dark  than any of his companions, save perhaps Gandalf. And 
he was  in any case  the bearer of the Ring: it hung upon its chain  against 
his breast, and at whiles it seemed a heavy weight. He felt the certainty of 
evil ahead and of evil following; but he said nothing. He gripped tighter on 
the hilt of his sword and went on doggedly. 
     The Company behind him spoke seldom, and then only in hurried whispers.  
There  was  no  sound  but  the  sound of  their own feet; the dull stump of 
Gimli's dwarf-boots; the heavy tread of Boromir; the  light step of Legolas; 
the soft, scarce-heard patter of hobbit-feet; and in the rear  the slow firm 
footfalls of  Aragorn with his  long stride.  When they halted  for a moment 
they  heard nothing  at all, unless it were occasionally a faint trickle and 
drip of unseen water. Yet Frodo began to hear, or to imagine  that he heard, 
something else:  like the faint  fall of soft bare feet. It  was  never loud 

####-enough, or near  enough, for him to  feel certain that he heard it; but once 
it had started it never stopped, while  the Company was moving. But  it  was 
not an echo, for when they halted it pattered on for a little all by itself,  
and then grew still. 
     It was after nightfall when they had  entered the  Mines. They had been 
going for several hours with only  brief  halts,  when Gandalf came  to  his 
first serious check.  Before  him stood a wide dark arch  opening into three 
passages: all  led  in  the  same  general  direction,  eastwards;  but  the 
left -hand  passage plunged  down, while the right-hand climbed up,  and  the  
middle way seemed to run on, smooth and level but very narrow. 
     'I  have no  memory of this  place  at all! '  said  Gandalf,  standing 
uncertainly under the arch. He held up his staff in the hope of finding some 
marks or inscription that might help his choice; but nothing of the kind was 
to be seen. `I am too  weary to decide,'  he said, shaking his head. `And  I 
expect  that you are all as weary  as I  am, or wearier.  We had better halt 
here for what is left of the night. You know what I mean! In here it is ever  
dark; but outside the late Moon is riding westward and  the middle-night has 
passed.' 
     `Poor old Bill! ' said Sam. 'I wonder where he is. I hope  those wolves 
haven't got him yet.' 
     To the  left of  the great arch  they  found a stone door:  it was half 
closed, but swung back easily to a gentle thrust. Beyond there seemed to lie 
a wide chamber cut in the rock. 
     `Steady! Steady!  ' cried  Gandalf as Merry and  Pippin pushed forward, 
glad to find a place where  they could  rest  with  at least more feeling of 
shelter than  in  the open passage. `Steady! You do  not know what is inside  
yet. I will go first.' 
     He went in cautiously, and the others filed behind. `There! '  he said, 
pointing with his staff to the middle of the floor. Before his feet they saw 
a large round hole like the  mouth of a well. Broken and rusty chains lay at 
the edge and trailed down into the black pit. Fragments of stone lay near. 
     'One of you might have fallen in and  still be wondering  when you were 
going to strike the bottom,' said Aragorn to Merry. 'Let  the guide go first  
while you have one.' 
     'This seems  to  have been a guardroom, made for  the  watching  of the 
three passages,'  said Gimli. `That hole was plainly a  well for the guards' 
use, covered with a stone lid. But the  lid is broken, and we  must all take 

####-care in the dark.' 
     Pippin  felt  curiously attracted by  the  well. While the  others were 
unrolling  blankets and making beds against the walls of the chamber, as far  
as  possible from the hole in  the floor, he crept  to the  edge  and peered 
over. A chill air seemed to  strike his face,  rising from invisible depths. 
Moved by  a sudden impulse he groped for a loose  stone, and let it drop. He 
felt  his heart beat many times before there was any sound. Then  far below,  
as if  the stone had fallen into deep water in  some cavernous place,  there 
came a plunk, very distant, but magnified and repeated in the hollow shaft. 
     `What's that? ' cried Gandalf.  He was relieved  when  Pippin confessed 
what he had done; but he was angry, and Pippin could see  his  eye glinting.  
'Fool  of a Took!  '  he growled. 'This  is a serious journey,  not a hobbit 
walking-party. Throw yourself in next time, and  then you will be no further  
nuisance. Now be quiet! ' 
     Nothing more was heard for several  minutes; but then there came out of 
the depths faint knocks: tom-tap, tap-tom. They stopped, and when the echoes 
had  died away, they  were repeated:  tap-tom,  tom-tap, tap-tap, tom.  They  
sounded  disquietingly  like signals of  some  sort;  but after a  while the 
knocking died away and was not heard again. 
     'That  was  the  sound of a  hammer, or I have never heard  one,'  said 
Gimli. 
     `Yes,' said  Gandalf, 'and I do not like it. It may  have nothing to do 
with Peregrin's  foolish  stone; but  probably something  has been disturbed 
that would have been better left quiet.  Pray, do nothing of the kind again!  
Let us hope we shall get some rest without further trouble. You, Pippin, can 
go on the first watch, as a  reward,' he growled, as he  rolled himself in a  
blanket.  
     Pippin  sat  miserably  by  the door in  the pitch dark; but he kept on 
turning  round, fearing  that some unknown thing would  crawl  up out of the 
well.  He  wished he could cover  the  hole,  if only with a blanket, but he 
dared not move or go near it, even though Gandalf seemed to be asleep. 
     Actually Gandalf was awake, though  lying still and silent. He was deep 
in  thought,  trying  to recall  every memory of  his former journey in  the 
Mines,  and considering  anxiously  the next  course  that he should take; a  
false turn now might be disastrous.  After an hour  he rose up and came over  
to Pippin. 
     `Get into a corner  and have a sleep, my lad,' he said in a kindly tone. 

####-'You want to sleep, I expect. I cannot get a wink, so  I may  as well do the 
watching.' 
     'I know what is the matter with me,' he muttered, as he sat down by the 
door.  'I  need  smoke!  I have not tasted  it since the morning  before the 
snowstorm.' 
     The  last thing that Pippin saw, as sleep took  him, was a dark glimpse 
of  the  old  wizard huddled on  the floor,  shielding a glowing chip in his 
gnarled hands  between his knees.  The flicker for  a moment showed his sharp 
nose. and the puff of smoke. 
     It was  Gandalf who roused them all from sleep. He  had sat and watched 
all alone for  about six hours, and had let  the others  rest.  `And  in the 
watches I have  made up my mind,' he  said. `I  do  not  like the feel of the 
middle way; and  I do not like the smell of the left-hand way: there is foul 
air down there, or I am no guide. I shall take the right -hand passage. It is 
time we began to climb up again.' 
     For eight dark hours, not counting two brief  halts,  they marched  on;  
and they met no  danger, and heard nothing, and  saw nothing  but the  faint 
gleam  of  the wizard's  light, bobbing like  a will-o'-the-wisp in front of 
them. The passage  they  had  chosen wound steadily upwards. As  far as they 
could judge it went in great mounting curves, and as it rose it grew loftier  
and wider.  There  were  now no openings  to  other galleries or  tunnels on 
either side, and the floor  was level  and sound,  without  pits or  cracks. 
Evidently  they had struck  what once had  been an important road; and  they 
went forward quicker than they had done on their first march. 
     In this way they advanced some fifteen miles, measured in a direct line 
east, though  they must have actually walked twenty miles  or  more. As  the 
road climbed  upwards`  Frodo's spirits rose  a little;  but he  still  felt 
oppressed, and still at times he heard, or thought he heard, away behind the 
Company and beyond the fall and patter of  their feet, a following  footstep 
that was not an echo. 
     They had marched as far as the hobbits could endure without a rest, and 
all were thinking of a place where they could sleep, when suddenly the walls 
to  right and left vanished. They seemed to have passed through some  arched 
doorway into a black and empty space. There  was  a great draught of  warmer  
air behind them, and before  them the darkness was cold on their faces. They 
halted and crowded anxiously together. 
     Gandalf seemed pleased. `I chose the right way,'  he said.  `At  last we 

####-are  coming to the habitable parts, and I guess that we are not far now from 
the eastern side. But we are  high up, a good deal higher than  the  Dimrill 
Gate, unless I am mistaken. From the feeling of the air we must be in a wide 
hall. I will now risk a little real light.' 
     He  raised his staff,  and for a  brief instant there was blaze  like a  
flash  of lightning. Great shadows sprang up and fled, and for a second they  
saw a vast roof  far above their heads upheld by many mighty pillars hewn of 
stone. Before them and on either side stretched a huge empty hall; its black  
walls, polished  and smooth  as  glass, flashed and glittered.  Three  other  
entrances  they saw, dark black  arches: one straight before them eastwards,  
and one on either side. Then the light went out. 
     `That  is all that I shall venture on for the  present,' said  Gandalf. 
'There used to be great windows on the mountain-side, and shafts leading out 
to the light in the upper reaches of the Mines. I think we have reached  them 
now, but it is  night outside again, and we  cannot tell until morning. If I 
am right, tomorrow we may  actually see  the morning peeping  in. But in the 
meanwhile we had better go  no further. Let  us rest, if we can. Things have 
gone well  so far, and the greater part of the dark road is over. But we are 
not through yet, and it is a long way down to the  Gates  that open  on  the 
world.' 
     The Company spent that night in the great cavernous hall, huddled close 
together  in a corner  to escape  the draught:  there seemed  to be a steady 
inflow of chill air through the eastern archway. All about them as  they lay 
hung the darkness,  hollow and  immense,  and  they  were  oppressed by  the 
loneliness and vastness of  the dolven halls and endlessly branching  stairs 
and passages. The wildest imaginings  that dark rumour had ever suggested to 
the hobbits fell altogether short of the actual dread and wonder of Moria. 
     `There must have been a mighty crowd of dwarves here at one time ' said 
Sam; `and every one  of them busier  than badgers for five  hundred years to 
make all this, and most in hard rock too! What did they do it all for?  They 
didn't live in these darksome holes surely? ' 
     `These are not holes,' said Gimli. `This is the great realm and city of 
the Dwarrowdelf. And  of  old  it was  not  darksome, but  full of light and 
splendour, as is still remembered in our songs.' 
     He rose  and standing in the dark he  began to  chant in a  deep voice, 
while the echoes ran away into the roof.  
     The world was young, the mountains green, 

####-     No stain yet on the Moon was seen, 
     No words were laid on stream or stone 
     When Durin woke and walked alone. 
     He named the nameless hills and dells; 
     He drank from yet untasted wells; 
     He stooped and looked in Mirrormere, 
     And saw a crown of stars appear, 
     As gems upon a silver thread, 
     Above the shadow of his head. 
 
     The world was fair, the mountains tall, 
     In Elder Days before the fall 
     Of mighty kings in Nargothrond 
     And Gondolin, who now beyond 
     The Western Seas have passed away: 
     The world was fair in Durin's Day. 
 
     A king he was on carven throne 
     In many-pillared halls of stone 
     With golden roof and silver floor, 
     And runes of power upon the door. 
     The light of sun and star and moon  
     In shining lamps of crystal hewn  
     Undimmed by cloud or shade of night 
     There shone for ever fair and bright. 
 
     There hammer on the anvil smote, 
     There chisel clove, and graver wrote; 
     There forged was blade, and bound was hilt; 
     The delver mined, the mason built. 
     There beryl, pearl, and opal pale, 
     And metal wrought like fishes' mail, 
     Buckler and corslet, axe and sword, 
     And shining spears were laid in hoard. 
 
     Unwearied then were Durin's folk  
     Beneath the mountains music woke: 

####-     The harpers harped, the minstrels sang, 
     And at the gates the trumpets rang. 
 
     The world is grey, the mountains old, 
     The forge's fire is ashen-cold  
     No harp is wrung, no hammer falls: 
     The darkness dwells in Durin's halls 
     The shadow lies upon his tomb 
     In Moria, in Khazad-dym. 
     But still the sunken stars appear 
     In dark and windless Mirrormere; 
     There lies his crown in water deep, 
     Till Durin wakes again from sleep. 
     `I like  that! ' said Sam. `I  should  like  to learn it. In Moria,  in  
Khazad-dym!  But it makes the darkness seem heavier, thinking  of all  those  
lamps. Are there piles of jewels and gold lying about here st ill?  ' 
     Gimli was silent. Having sung his song he would say no more. 
     `Piles  of jewels? ' said  Gandalf. `No. The Orcs have often  plundered 
Moria; there is nothing left in the upper halls. And since the dwarves fled, 
no one dares to seek the shafts and treasuries down in the deep places: they 
are drowned in water --or in a shadow of fear.' 
     `Then what do the dwarves want to come back for? ' asked Sam. 
     'For mithril,' answered  Gandalf. `The  wealth of Moria was not in gold 
and jewels, the toys of the Dwarves; nor in iron, their servant. Such things 
they found here, it is true, especially iron; but they did not need to delve 
for  them:  all things that they  desired they could obtain in  traffic. For  
here alone in the world was found Moria -silver, or true-silver as some  have 
called it: mithril is the Elvish name. The Dwarves have a name which they do 
not tell. Its worth was  ten times that of gold, and now it is beyond price; 
for little is left above  ground, and even the Orcs dare not  delve here for 
it. The lodes lead away  north towards  Caradhras, and down to darkness. The 
Dwarves  tell  no tale;  but  even as  mithril  was the  foundation of their 
wealth, so  also it was their destruction: they delved too greedily and  too 
deep,  and disturbed that from which they fled,  Durin's  Bane. Of what they 
brought to light the Orcs  have gathered nearly all, and given it in tribute 
to Sauron, who covets it. 
     `Mithril!  All  folk desired it.  It could be  beaten  like copper, and 

####-polished like glass; and the Dwarves could make of it a metal, light and yet 
harder  than tempered steel. Its beauty  was like to  that of common silver, 
but  the  beauty  of mithril  did not tarnish  or grow dim.  The Elves dearly 
loved it, and among many uses they  made of it ithildin , starmoon, which you 
saw  upon  the doors. Bilbo had a  corslet of mithril-rings that Thorin gave 
him. I wonder what has become of it? Gathering dust  still in Michel Delving 
Mathom-house, I suppose.' 
     `What?  ' cried  Gimli,  startled  out of  his  silence. `A  corslet of 
Moria -silver? That was a kingly gift! ' 
     'Yes,' said  Gandalf. `I never told him, but its worth was greater than 
the value of the whole Shire and everything in it.' 
     Frodo said nothing, but he put his hand under his tunic and touched the 
rings of his mail-shirt. He felt staggered to think that he had been walking 
about with the price of the Shire under his jacket. Had Bilbo known? He felt 
no doubt that Bilbo knew quite  well.  It was indeed a kingly gift. But  now 
his thoughts  had been carried away  from the dark  Mines, to  Rivendell, to 
Bilbo,  and to Bag  End in  the days while Bilbo was  still there. He wished 
with  all his  heart  that he was back  there, and in those days, mowing the  
lawn, or pottering among the flowers, and that he had never heard  of Moria, 
or mithril --  or the Ring. 
     A deep silence fell.  One by one the others  fell  asleep. Frodo was on 
guard. As if it were a breath that came in through unseen doors  out of deep 
places,  dread  came  over him. His hands were cold  and his  brow  damp. He 
listened. All his mind was given to listening and  nothing else for two slow 
hours; but he heard no sound, not even the imagined echo of a footfall. 
     His  watch  was nearly over, when, far  off  where he guessed  that the 
western  archway stood,  he  fancied  that he could  see two pale points  of 
light, almost  like  luminous eyes. He started. His head had nodded. `I must  
have  nearly fallen asleep on guard,' he thought. `I  was on  the edge  of a 
dream.' He stood up and rubbed his eyes, and remained standing, peering into 
the dark, until he was relieved by Legolas. 
     When he lay down  he quickly went to  sleep, but  it seemed to him that 
the  dream went on: he  heard whispers, and saw the two pale points of light  
approaching, slowly. He woke and  found that the others were speaking softly 
near him, and that a  dim light  was falling on his face. High  up above the 
eastern  archway through a shaft near  the roof came  a long pale gleam; and 
across the hall  through  the  northern  arch light also glimmered faint and 

####-distantly. 
     Frodo sat up. `Good morning!  ' said  Gandalf: `For morning it is again 
at last. I was right,  you see.  We  are high up on the east  side of Moria. 
Before today is over we ought to find the Great  Gates and see the waters of 
Mirrormere lying in the Dimrill Dale before us.' 
     'I shall be glad,' said Gimli. `I have looked on  Moria, and it is very 
great, but it has become dark and dreadful; and we have found no  sign  of my 
kindred. I doubt now that Balin ever came here.' 
     After they had breakfasted Gandalf decided to go on again at  once. `We 
are tired, but we shall rest better  when we are outside,' he said. `I think  
that none of us will wish to spend another night in Moria.' 
     `No indeed! '  said Boromir. `Which way shall we take?  Yonder eastward 
arch?  ' 
     'Maybe,' said  Gandalf. `But  I du not know yet exactly  where  we are. 
Unless I am quite astray, I guess that  we are above and to the north of the 
Great Gates; and it may not be easy to find the right road down to them. The 
eastern arch will probably prove to be the way that we must take; but before 
we make up our minds we ought to look about us. Let us go towards that light 
in the north door. If we cou ld find a window it would help,  but I fear that 
the light comes only down deep shafts.' 
     Following  his  lead the Company  passed under the  northern arch. They 
found themselves in a wide corridor. As they went along it the  glimmer grew 
stronger, and they saw that it came through a doorway on their right. It was 
high and flat-topped, and the stone door was still upon its hinges, standing 
half open.  Beyond it was a large square  chamber. It was  dimly lit, but to 
their eyes, after so long  a time in the dark, it seemed dazzlingly  bright, 
and they blinked as they entered. 
     Their  feet  disturbed  a deep dust upon the floor,  and stumbled among 
things  lying in the doorway whose shapes they could not at first  make out. 
The chamber was lit  by a  wi de shaft high in the  further  eastern wall; it 
slanted  upwards and, far  above,  a small square patch of blue sky could be 
seen. The light of the  shaft fell directly  on a table in the middle of the 
room:  a single  oblong block, about two  feet high,  upon  which was laid a  
great slab of white stone. 
     `It  looks  like  a tomb,' muttered  Frodo,  and  bent forwards with  a  
curious  sense  of foreboding,  to  look more  closely  at it.  Gandalf came 
quickly to his side. On the slab runes were deeply graven: 

####- 
     'These  are Daeron's Runes,  such as were used  of  old in Moria,' said 
Gandalf. 'Here is written in the tongues of Men and Dwarves:  
     balin son of fundin 
     lord of moria.' 
     'He  is  dead then,' said  Frodo. `I feared it was  so.' Gimli cast his 
hood over his face. 
 

####- 

Chapter 5. The Bridge of Khazad-dym 

 
 
     The Company  of the Ring stood silent beside the  tomb of  Balin. Frodo 
thought  of  Bilbo  and his long friendship with the  dwarf,  and of Balin's 
visit to the  Shire long  ago. In  that dusty  chamber  in the mountains  it 
seemed a thousand years ago and on the other side of the world. 
     At length they stirred and looked up, and began  to search for anything 
that would give them tidings of Balin's fate, or show what had become of his 
folk. There was another smaller door on the other side of the chamber, under  
the shaft.  By both the doors they could now see that many bones were lying, 
and among  them  were  broken swords and axe-heads,  and cloven  shields and 
helms. Some of the swords were crooked: orc-scimitars with blackened blades.  
     There were many recesses cut in the rock of the walls, and in them were 
large iron-bound chests  of  wood. All had  been  broken and plundered;  but 
beside the shattered lid of one there lay the remains of a book. It had been 
slashed  and stabbed and partly burned, and it was so stained with black and 
other  dark  marks like old blood that little of  it could be  read. Gandalf 
lifted it carefully, but the leaves crackled and broke as he laid it  on the 
slab.  He  pored over it  for  some time  without  speaking. Frodo and Gimli 
standing  at his side could see, as he gingerly turned the leaves, that they 
were  written by many different hands, in runes, both of Moria  and of Dale,  
and here and  there in Elvish script. 
     At last Gandalf looked  up. 'It seems to be a record of the fortunes of 
Balin's folk,' he said. `I guess  that it began with their coming to Dimrill 
Dale nigh on thirty years ago: the  pages seem to have numbers referring  to 
the years  after their arrival. The top page is marked  one -- three, so  at 
least two are missing from the beginning. Listen to this!  
     'We drove out orcs from the great gate and  guard --  I think; the next 
word is blurred and burned; probably room -- we slew many in the bright -- I  
think -- sun in the dale. Flui was killed by  an arrow.  He slew the  great. 
Then there is a blur followed by Flui under grass near Mirror mere. The next 
line or two I cannot  read. Then comes We have taken the twentyfirst hall of 
North end  to  dwell in. There is I cannot read what. A shaft is  mentioned. 
Then Balin has set up his seat in the Chamber of Mazarbul. ' 
     'The Chamber of  Records,' said Gimli. `I  guess that is  where we  now 

####-stand.' 
     `Well, I can read no more for a long way,'  said  Gandalf, 'except  the 
word  gold , and Durin's Axe and something  helm. Then  Balin is now  lord of 
Moria . That seems to  end a  chapter. After some  stars another hand begins,  
and I can see we found  truesilver,  and  later the  word wellforged and then  
something, I have it! mithril; and  the last two  lines Uin to  seek for the 
upper  armouries of  Third  Deep,  something go westwards, a blur, to Hollin 
gate .' 
     Gandalf paused and set a few leaves  aside. 'There are several pages of 
the same sort, rather hastily  written and much damaged, he said; `but I can 
make little of  them in  this light.  Now  there must  be a number of leaves 
missing, because they  begin  to  be numbered  five,  the fifth year  of the 
colony,  I suppose. Let  me see! No, they  are too cut and stained; I cannot 
read them. We might do  better  in the sunlight.  Wait! Here is something: a  
large bold hand using an Elvish script.' 
     'That would be Ori's hand,' said Gimli, looking  over the wizard's arm. 
`He could write well and speedily, and often used the Elvish characters.' 
     `I  fear  he had  ill tidings to record in a  fair hand,' said Gandalf.  
'The first clear word is sorrow, but the rest of the line is lost, unless it 
ends in estre. Yes, it  must  be  yestre followed by day being  the tenth of 
novembre Balin lord of Moria fell in Dimrill Dale. He went alone  to look in  
Mirror mere.  an orc shot him from behind a stone. we slew the orc, hut many 
more  ... up  from  east up  the Silverlode. The remainder of the page is so 
blurred that I can hardly make anything out, but I think  I can read we have 
barred the gates, and then can  hold them long if , and then perhaps horrible  
and  suffer. Poor Balin! He seems to have kept  the  title that he  took for  
less than five years. I wonder  what happened afterwards;  but there  is  no 
time to  puzzle  out the last few pages. Here  is the last page of  all.' He 
paused and sighed. 
     `It  is grim reading,' he said. 'I fear their end was cruel. Listen! We 
cannot get  out.  We cannot get out. They have  taken the  Bridge and second 
hall. Frbr and Luni and  Nbli fell there. Then there are four lines  smeared 
so  that I can only read went 5 days  ago. The last lines run the pool is up 
to  the wall  at Westgate. The Wa tcher in  the Water took Uin. We cannot get 
out. The  end comes, and then  drums, drums in the deep. I wonder what  that 
means. The last thing written is in a  trailing  scrawl of elf-letters: they 
are coming.  There is  nothing more.'  Gandalf paused  and stood  in  silent 

####-thought. 
     A sudden dread and a horror  of  the chamber fell on  the  Company. `We  
cannot get out,' muttered Gimli. 'It was  well for us that the pool had sunk  
a little, and that the Watcher was sleeping down at the southern end.' 
     Gandalf raised  his  head and  looked  round. `They seem to have made a  
last  stand by both doors,'  he  said; 'but there were not many left by that 
time. So ended the  attempt to retake Moria! It was valiant but foolish. The 
time is not come yet. Now,  I fear, we must say  farewell  to  Balin  son of 
Fundin.  Here  he must  lie in the halls of his  fathers.  We will take this 
book,  the Book  of Mazarbul, and look at  it  more  closely  later. You had 
better keep it, Gimli, and take it  back  to Dbin, if  you get a chance.  It 
will interest him, though it will grieve  him deeply. Come, let  us  go! The 
morning is passing.' 
     'Which way shall we go? ' asked Boromir. 
     'Back to the hall,' answered  Gandalf. 'But  our visit to this room has 
not been  in vain. I now know where we are. This must be, as Gimli says, the 
Chamber of Mazarbul; and the hall must be the twenty-first of the North-end. 
Therefore we  should leave by  the  eastern arch of the hall, and bear right 
and south, and go downwards. The Twenty-first  Hall should be on the Seventh 
Level, that is six above the level of the Gates. Come now! Back to the hall! 
' 
     Gandalf had hardly spoken these words, when there came a great noise: a  
rolling  Boom that seemed  to come  from depths far below, and to tremble in 
the stone at their feet. They sprang towards  the door  in alarm. Doom, doom 
it rolled  again, as  if huge  hands were turning the very caverns  of Moria  
into a vast drum. Then there came an echoing blast: a great  horn  was blown 
in  the hall,  and answering horns  and harsh cries  were heard further off. 
There was a hurrying sound of many feet. 
     `They are coming! ' cried Legolas.  
     'We cannot get out,' said Gimli. 
     `Trapped! ' cried Gandalf. `Why  did I delay? Here we are, caught, just 
as they were before. But I was not here then. We will see what ----' 
     Doom, doom came the drum-beat and the walls shook. 
     'Slam the doors and wedge them! ' shouted Aragorn. 'And keep your packs 
on as long as you can: we may get a chance to cut our way out yet.' 
     `No! ' said Gandalf. 'We must not get shut in. Keep the east door ajar! 
We will go that way, if we get a chance.' 

####-     Another  harsh  horn-call and shrill cries  rang out.  Feet were coming 
down the corridor.  There was a  ring and clatter  as the Company drew their 
swords. Glamdring shone  with a  pale light, and Sting glinted at the edges.  
Boromir set his shoulder against the western door. 
     `Wait a  moment! Do not close it yet! ' said Gandalf. He sprang forward 
to Boromir 's side and drew himself up to his full height. 
     'Who  comes hither  to disturb the rest of  Balin Lord of Moria?  '  he 
cried in a loud voice. 
     There was a  rush of  hoarse laughter, like the fall  of sliding stones 
into a pit; amid the clamour a deep voice was raised in command. Doom, 
boom, 
doom went the drums in the deep. 
     With a quick movement Gandalf stepped before  the narrow opening of the 
door and thrust forward his staff:  There was a dazzling flash that  lit the 
chamber  and the  passage  outside. For an instant  the wizard  looked  out. 
Arrows whined and whistled down the corridor as he sprang back. 
     'There are  Orcs, very many of them,' he said. `And some are  large and 
evil: black Uruks of Mordor. For the moment they are hanging back, but there 
is something else there. A great  cave-troll,  I  think,  or more than  one. 
There is no hope of escape that way.' 
     'And no hope at all, if they  come at the other  door  as  well,'  said 
Boromir. 
     'There is no sound outside here yet,' said Aragorn, who was standing by 
the eastern door listening. `The passage on  this side plunges straight down 
a stair: it plainly does not lead back towards the hall. But it  is  no good 
flying blindly  this way with the  pursuit  just behind. We cannot block the 
door. Its key is gone and the lock is broken, and it  opens inwards. We must  
do something to delay the enemy first. We will make them fear the Chamber of 
Mazarbul!' he said grimly feeling the edge of his sword, And®ril. 
     Heavy feet  were  heard in the corridor. Boromir  flung himself against  
the door  and heaved it to; then  he wedged it  with broken sword-blades and 
splinters of wood. The Company retreated  to the other  side of the chamber. 
But they had no chance to fly yet. There was a b low on the door that made it 
quiver;  and then it began  to grind slowly open, driving back the wedges. A 
huge  arm and shoulder, with  a  dark skin of  greenish scales,  was  thrust  
through  the  widening  gap.  Then a  great,  flat,  toeless foot was for ced 
through below. There was a dead silence outside. 

####-     Boromir leaped forward and hewed at the arm with all his might; but his 
sword  rang, glanced  aside, and  fell  from his shaken  hand. The blade was 
notched. 
     Suddenly, and to his  own surprise,  Frodo  felt a hot wrath blaze up in 
his heart. `The Shire! ' he cried, and springing beside Boromir, he stooped, 
and stabbed with Sting at the hideous foot. There was a bellow, and the foot  
jerked back, nearly  wrenching  Sting from Frodo's arm.  Black dr ops dripped 
from the blade and smoked on the floor. Boromir  hurled  himself against the 
door and slammed it again. 
     `One for the Shire! '  cried  Aragorn. `The hobbit's bite is  deep! You  
have a good blade, Frodo son of Drogo! ' 
     There was a crash  on the door, followed by crash after crash. Rams  and 
hammers were  beating against it.  It cracked  and staggered  back,  and the 
opening grew  suddenly  wide.  Arrows  came  whistling  in, but  struck  the  
northern wall, and fell harmlessly to the floor . There  was a horn-blast and 
a rush of feet, and orcs one after another leaped into the chamber. 
     How many there were the Company could  not count. The affray was sharp, 
but the orcs were dismayed by the fierceness of  the  defence. Legolas  shot 
two  through the throat.  Gimli hewed the legs from  under another that  had 
sprung up on Balin's  tomb. Boromir and Aragorn slew many. When thirteen 
had 
fallen the rest fled shrieking. leaving the  defenders unharmed, except  for  
Sam who had  a scratch along the scalp.  A  quick duck had saved him; and he 
had  felled  his  orc:  a sturdy  thrust with his  Barrow-blade. A  fire was 
smouldering  in his  brown  eyes  that would  have  made  Ted Sandyman  step 
backwards, if he had seen it. 
     `Now  is  the  time! ' cried  Gandalf.  `Let us  go,  before the  troll 
returns!' 
     But even as they retreated, and before Pippin and Merry had reached the 
stair  outside,  a  huge orc-chieftain, almost man-high, clad in black  mail 
from  head  to foot,  leaped  into  the chamber;  behind  him his  followers 
clustered in the doorway. His broad flat  face was swart, his eyes were like 
coals, and  his tongue  was red; he wielded a great  spear. With a thrust of 
his  huge hide shield he  turned  Boromir's  sword  and  bore him backwards,  
throwing him to  the ground. Diving under Aragorn's blow with the speed of a  
striking  snake  he  charged  into  the Company  and  thrust with  his spear 
straight  at  Frodo.  The blow caught  him  on the right side, and Frodo was 

####-hurled  against  the  wall and  pinned.  Sam,  with  a  cry, hacked  at  the 
spear-shaft, and it broke. But  even as the orc flung down the truncheon and  
swept  out his scimitar, And®ril came down upon his helm. There  was a flash 
like flame and the helm burst  asunder.  The orc fell with cloven  head. His 
followers fled howling, as Boromir and Aragorn sprang at them. 
     Doom, doom went  the drums  in the  deep.  The  great voice  rolled out 
again. 
     'Now! ' shouted Gandalf. 'Now is the last chance. Run for it! ' 
     Aragorn picked up Frodo  where  he lay by the  wall and  made  for  the 
stair, pushing Merry and Pippin in  front  of him. The others followed;  but 
Gimli had  to be dragged away  by Legolas: in spite of the peril he lingered 
by  Balin's tomb  with his head bowed.  Boromir hauled the eastern  door to,  
grinding upon its hinges: it  had great iron rings on either side, but could 
not be fastened. 
     'I am all right,' gasped Frodo. `I can walk. Put me down! ' 
     Aragorn nearly dropped him in his  amazement. 'I thought you were dead! 
' he cried. 
     'Not yet! '  said Gandalf. 'But there is time  for wonder.  Off you go, 
all of you, down the stairs! Wait a few minutes for me at the bottom, but if 
I  do  not come soon, go on!  Go  quickly and choose paths leading right and 
downwards.' 
     'We cannot leave you to hold the door alone! ' said Aragorn. 
     `Do as I say! ' said Gandalf fiercely.  `Swords are no  more use  here. 
Go!' 
     The passage was lit by no shaft and was utterly dark. They groped their 
way down  a long  flight  of steps, and then looked back; but they could see 
nothing, except high above them the faint glimmer  of the wizard's staff. He 
seemed  to  be still  standing on guard by  the closed door.  Frodo breathed 
heavily  and  leaned  aga inst Sam, who  put his arms  about him.  They stood 
peering up  the  stairs  into the darkness. Frodo thought he could hear  the 
voice of  Gandalf above, muttering words that ran down the sloping roof with 
a sighing  echo. He could not catch  what was said .  The  walls seemed to be 
trembling.  Every  now and again the drum-beats  throbbed and rolled:  doom, 
doom. 
     Suddenly at the top of the stair there was a stab of white  light. Then 
there  was a dull rumble and a heavy thud. The drum-beats broke  out wildly: 

####-doom-boom, doom-boom, and then  stopped. Gandalf came flying down the  
steps 
and fell to the ground in the midst of the Company. 
     `Well, well! That's over!  ' said the wizard struggling to his feet. `I  
have done  all that I  could. But I have met my  match, and have nearly been 
destroyed. But don't stand here! Go  on! You  will have to  do without light 
for a  while: I am rather  shaken. Go on! Go on! Where are  you, Gimli? Come 
ahead with me! Keep close behind, all of you!' 
     They stumbled a fter him  wondering what had happened.  Doom,  doom 
went 
the drum-beats  again: they now sounded muffled and  far away, but they were 
following. There was no  other sound  of pursuit, neither tramp of feet, nor 
any  voice. Gandalf took  no turns, right or left, for the passage seemed to 
be  going in the direction that he desired. Every now and again it descended  
a  flight of steps, fifty or more, to a  lower level. At the moment that was 
their chief danger; for in the dark they could not see a descent, until they 
came on it, and put their feet out into  emptiness.  Gandalf felt the ground 
with his staff like a blind man. 
     At the end of an hour they had gone a mile, or maybe a little more, and 
had descended many flights of stairs. There was still  no sound  of pursuit. 
Almost  they  began to hope that they  would  escape. At the  bottom  of the  
seventh flight Gandalf halted. 
     `It is getting hot! ' he  gasped. `We ought to  be down at least to the 
level of the Gates now.  Soon I think we should look for  a left -hand turn to 
take us  east. I  hope  it is not far. I am very weary. I  must  rest here a  
moment, even if all the orcs ever spawned are after us.' 
     Gimli took  his arm and  helped  him down to a seat on the step.  `What 
happened away up there a t the  door? ' he asked. `Did you meet the beater of 
the drums?  ' 
     'I  do not know,' answered Gandalf. `But I found myself suddenly  faced 
by something  that I have not met before. I could think of nothing to do but 
to try and  put a  shutting-spell on the door. I know many; but to do things 
of that kind rightly requires time,  and even then the door can be broken by 
strength. 
     `As  I stood there  I could hear orc-voices on  the other  side: at any 
moment  I thought they would burst it open. I could not hear  what was said; 
they seemed to be talking in their  own hideous language.  All  I caught was 

####-ghvsh;  that is  "fire". Then something came into the chamber  --  I felt it 
through  the door, and the orcs themselves were  afraid and fell  silent. It 
laid hold of the iron ring, and then it perceived me and my spell. 
     'What it was  I cannot guess, but I have  never felt such  a challenge. 
The counter -spell was  terrible. It nearly broke me. For an instant the door  
left  my control and began to open!  I had  to speak a word of Command. That 
proved too great a strain.  The door burst in pieces.  Something  dark  as a  
cloud was blocking out all the light inside, and I was thrown backwards down 
the stairs. All the wall gave way, and  the roof of  the  chamber as well, I 
think. 
     `I  am afraid Balin is buried deep, and maybe something  else is buried 
there too. I  cannot say. But at least the passage behind  us was completely 
blocked.  Ah! I have never  felt  so spent, but it  is passing. And now what 
about  you, Frodo? There was not time to say  so, but I have never been more 
delighted in my life than when you spoke.  I feared that it was  a brave but 
dead hobbit that Aragorn was carrying.' 
     `What about me?  ' said  Frodo. 'I am  alive,  and whole I think. I  am 
bruised and in pain, but it is not too bad.' 
     `Well,' said Aragorn, `I can only say that hobbits are made of  a stuff 
so tough  that I  have  never met the like of it. Had  I known, I would have 
spoken softer in the  Inn at  Bree! That spear-thrust would have  skewered a  
wild boar! ' 
     'Well, it did not skewer me, I am glad  to say,'  said Frodo; `though I 
feel  as  if I had been caught between  a hammer  and an anvil.' He  said no 
more. He found breathing painful. 
     'You take  after Bilbo,' said  Gandalf.  `There is  more about you than 
meets the  eye, as I said  of  him long ago.'  Frodo wondered  if the remark 
meant more than it said. 
     They  now went  on again. Before long Gimli spoke.  He had keen eyes in 
the dark. `I think,' he said, `that there  is a light  ahead. But it  is not 
daylight. It is red. What can it be? ' 
     `Ghvsh!' muttered  Gandalf. `I wonder if that is what they meant:  that 
the lower levels are on fire? Still, we can only go on.' 
     Soon the light became  unmistakable,  and could be  seen by all. It was 
flickering and glowing  on the walls away down the passage before them. They 
could now see their way: in front the road sloped down swiftly, and some way 
ahead there stood  a low archway; through it the glowing light came. The air 

####-became very hot. 
     When they came to the  arch  Gandalf  went through,  signing to them to 
wait.  As  he  stood just beyond the opening they saw his face  lit by a red 
glow. Quickly he stepped back. 
     `There is some new devi lry here,' he said, 'devised for our welcome  no 
doubt.  But I know now  where we are:  we  have reached the First Deep,  the 
level immediately below the Gates. This is the Second Hall of Old Moria; and 
the Gates are near: away beyond  the eastern end, on  the left, not more than 
a quarter of a mile. Across the Bridge, up a broad stair,  along a wide road 
through the First Hall, and out! But come and look! ' 
     They peered out. Before them was another cavernous hall. It was loftier  
and far  longer than the one in which they had  slept. They  were  near  its 
eastern  end; westward it ran away into darkness. Down the  centre stalked a  
double line of towering pillars. They were carved like boles of mighty trees 
whose boughs upheld  the roof with a branching tracery of stone. Their stems 
were smooth and black, but a  red glow was  darkly mirrored  in their sides. 
Right  across the  floor, close  to the feet  of two  huge  pillars  a great 
fissure  had opened. Out of it a fierce  red light came,  and  now and aga in 
flames licked  at the brink and curled about the bases of the columns. Wisps 
of dark smoke wavered in the hot air. 
     'If we had come by  the  main road down from the upper halls, we should  
have been trapped here,' said Gandalf.  `Let  us hope that the fire now lies 
between us and pursuit. Come! There is no time to lose.' 
     Even as he  spoke they heard again  the pursuing drum-beat: Doom, doom, 
doom.  Away  beyond the  shadows  at the western end of the  hall there came 
cries  and  horn-calls. Doom,  doom:  the pillars seemed  to tremble and the 
flames to quiver. 
     `Now for the  last race! ' said Gandalf. 'If the sun is shining outside 
we may still escape. After me!  ' 
     He  turned left  and  sped  across the smooth  floor of the  hall.  The 
distance was greater than it had looked. As they ran they heard the beat and 
echo  of  many  hurrying feet behind.  A shrill  yell went up: they had been 
seen. There was a  ring and clash of steel. An arrow  whistled over  Frodo's 
head. 
     Boromir laughed. `They did not expect this,' he said. `The fire has cut 
them off. We are on the wrong side! ' 
     `Look ahead! ' called Gandalf. `The Bridge is near. It is dangerous and 

####-narrow.' 
     Suddenly Frodo saw before him a black chasm. At the end of the hall the 
floor vanished and fell to an unknown  depth. The outer door  could only  be 
reached by a slender bridge of stone, without kerb or rail, that spanned the 
chasm with one curving  spring  of fifty feet. It was  an ancient defence of 
the Dwarves against  any enemy that  might  capture  the  First Hall and the 
outer passages. They  could only pass across it in single file. At the brink  
Gandalf halted and the others came up in a pack behind. 
     'Lead  the way,  Gimli! ' he said. 'Pippin and  Merry next. Straight on 
and up the stair beyond the door! ' 
     Arrows  fell  among them. One  struck Frodo  and  sprang  back. Another  
pierced Gandalf's hat  and stuck there  like a black feather.  Frodo  looked 
behind. Beyond  the fire  he saw swarming black figures: there seemed to  be 
hundreds of orcs. They brandished spears and scimitars which  shone  red  as 
blood in the firelight. Doom, doom rolled the drum-beats, growing louder and 
louder, doom, doom. 
     Legolas  turned and set an arrow to the  string, though it  was  a long 
shot for his small bow. He drew, but his hand fell, and the arrow slipped to 
the ground. He  gave a cry of  dismay and  fear.  Two great trolls appeared; 
they bore  great slabs  of stone, and flung  them down to serve as  gangways 
over  the fire.  But  it was not the  trolls that  had filled the  Elf  with 
terror. The  ranks of the orcs had opened, and they crowded away, as if they 
themselves  were afraid.  Something was coming  up behind them.  What it was 
could not be seen:  it was like a grea t shadow, in the middle of which was a  
dark form, of man-shape maybe, yet greater; and a power and terror seemed to 
be in it and to go before it. 
     It came to the edge of the fire and the  light faded as if a cloud  had 
bent  over it. Then with  a rush it leaped  across the fissure.  The  flames 
roared up to greet  it, and  wreathed about it; and a black smoke swirled in 
the air. Its streaming mane kindled, and blazed behind it. In its right hand 
was  a  blade like a stabbing tongue of fire;  in its left  it held a whip of 
many thongs. 
     'Ai! ai! ' wailed Legolas. 'A Balrog! A Balrog is come! ' 
     Gimli stared with wide eyes. `Durin's Bane! ' he cried, and letting his 
axe fall he covered his face. 
     'A  Balrog,' muttered  Gandalf.  `Now I  understand.'  He  faltered and 
leaned heavily on his staff. `What an evil fortune! And I am already weary.' 

####-     The dark figure streaming with fire raced towards them. The orcs yelled 
and  poured over the stone gangways.  Then Boromir raised his horn and blew.  
Loud  the challenge rang and bellowed, like the shout of many  throats under 
the  cavernous  roof. For a  moment the orcs  quailed  and the  fiery shadow 
halted.  Then the  echoes died as suddenly as  a  flame blown out by a  dark 
wind, and the enemy advanced again. 
     'Over the bridge!' cried Gandalf, recalling his strength. `Fly! This is 
a foe beyond any  of you. I  must hold the narrow  way.  Fly! '  Aragorn and 
Boromir did not heed the command, but still held their ground, side by side,  
behind Gandalf a t the  far end of the bridge. The others halted  just within 
the doorway  at the hall's end, and turned, unable to leave their  leader to 
face the enemy alone. 
     The Balrog reached the bridge. Gandalf stood in the middle of the span, 
leaning on  the sta ff  in his left hand,  but  in his other  hand  Glamdring 
gleamed,  cold and white. His enemy halted again, facing him, and the shadow 
about it reached out like two vast wings. It raised the whip, and the thongs 
whined and cracked. Fire came from its nostrils. But Gandalf stood firm. 
     `You cannot  pass,' he  said. The  orcs stood still, and a dead silence 
fell. `I  am a servant of the Secret Fire, wielder of the flame of Anor. You  
cannot pass. The dark fire will not avail you, flame of Udyn. Go back to  the 
Shadow! You cannot pass.' 
     The  Balrog made  no  answer.  The fire in  it seemed to die,  but  the 
darkness grew. It  stepped forward slowly on to  the bridge, and suddenly it 
drew  itself  up to a  great height, and its wings were spread from wall  to 
wall;  but still Gandalf could  be seen,  glimmering in the gloom; he seemed  
small, and altogether alone: grey  and bent, like a  wizened tree before the 
onset of a storm. 
     From out of the shadow a red sword leaped flaming. 
     Glamdring glittered white in answer. 
     There was a ringing clash and  a stab  of  white fire. The Balrog  fell 
back  and its  sword flew  up in molten  fragments. The wizard swayed on the 
bridge, stepped back a pace, and then again stood still. 
     'You cannot pass! ' he said. 
     With a bound the  Balrog leaped full  upon the bridge. Its whip whirled 
and hissed. 
     'He cannot stand alone! ' cried Aragorn suddenly and ran back along the 
bridge.  'Elendil!' he shouted. 'I am with you, Gandalf! ' 

####-     `Gondor! ' cried Boromir and leaped after him. 
     At that moment Gandalf  lifted his staff, and crying aloud he smote the 
bridge  before  him.  The  staff broke asunder and  fell  from  his  hand. A 
blinding sheet of white  flame sprang  up. The  bridge cracked. Right at the 
Balrog's  feet it broke, and the stone  upon which it stood crashed into the 
gulf,  while the  rest  remained, poised,  quivering  like a tongue  of rock  
thrust out into emptiness.  
     With  a terrible  cry the Balrog fell  forward, and  its shadow plu nged 
down and vanished.  But  even as it  fell it swung  its whip, and the thongs 
lashed and curled  about the wizard's  knees, dragging him to the brink.  He 
staggered  and fell, grasped vainly at the stone, and slid  into the  abyss. 
'Fly, you fools!  ' he cried, and was gone. 
     The fires went  out, and blank darkness  fell. The Company stood rooted 
with  horror staring  into the pit. Even  as Aragorn and Boromir came flying 
back, the rest  of the bridge cracked and  fell.  With a  cry Aragorn roused 
them. 
     'Come!  I  will lead you now!  '  he  called.  'We  must  obey his last  
command. Follow me!  ' 
     They  stumbled  wildly  up the great stairs beyond  the  door.  Aragorn 
leading, Boromir at the  rear. At the top was a  wide echoing passage. Along 
this they  fled. Frodo heard Sam at his side weeping, and then he found that 
he himself was  weeping as  he ran. Doom, doom,  doom the  drum-beats rolled 
behind, mournful now and slow; doom! 
     They ran on. The light grew before them; great shafts pierced the roof.  
They ran  swifter. They passed into  a  hall, bright with daylight from  its 
high windows in the east. They fled across it. Through its huge broken doors 
they passed,  and  suddenly before  them the Great Gates opened,  an arch of 
blazing ligh t. 
     There  was a guard of  orcs crouching in the  shadows behind the  great 
door posts towering on either  side,  but the gates were shattered and  cast 
down.  Aragorn smote to the ground the  captain that stood  in his path, and 
the rest fled in terror of his wrath. The Company swept  past them  and took  
no  heed  of them.  Out of the Gates they ran and sprang down  the  huge and 
age-worn steps, the threshold of Moria. 
     Thus, at last, they came beyond hope under the sky and felt the wind on 
their faces.  
     They did not  halt  until  they were  out  of bowshot from  the  walls.  

####-Dimrill  Dale lay about them. The shadow of the Misty Mountains lay upon it, 
but  eastwards there was a golden  light  on the land.  It was but one  hour 
after noon. The sun was shining; the clouds were white and high. 
     They looked  back.  Dark yawned  the  archway  of  the Gates  under the 
mountain-shadow. Faint and far beneath the earth rolled the slow drum-beats:  
doom. A thin black smoke trailed out. Nothing else was to be seen; the  dale 
all  around was empty.  Doom. Grief  at last  wholly overcame them, and they 
wept long: some standing and silent, some  cast upon the ground. Doom, doom. 
The drum-beats faded. 
 

####- 

Chapter 6. Lothlurien 

 
 
     'Alas! I  Fear  we cannot  stay here longer,'  said  Aragorn. He looked 
towards the mountains and held up his sword. `Farewell, Gandalf! ' he cried.  
'Did I  not say to you: if  you pass the doors of Moria, beware? Alas that I 
spoke true! What hope have we without you?  ' 
     He turned to the Company. `We must do without hope,' he said. `At least  
we may yet be avenged. Let us gird ourselves and weep no more! Come! We 
have 
a long road, and much to do.' 
     They rose and looked about  them. Northward the dale ran up into a glen  
of shadows between  two great arms of the mountains, above which three white 
peaks were shining:  Celebdil, Fanuidhol, Caradhras. the Mountains of Moria. 
At the head of  the glen a torrent flowed  like a white lace over an endless 
ladder  of short  falls,  and  a   mist of foam  hung in the  air  about  the 
mountains' feet. 
     `Yonder is the Dimrill  Stair,'  said  Aragorn,  pointing to the falls. 
'Down  the  deep-cloven way that climbs beside  the torrent  we should  have 
come, if fortune had been kinder.' 
     `Or Caradhras less cruel,' said Gimli. `There he stands smiling in  the 
sun! ' He shook his fist at the furthest of the snow-capped peaks and turned 
away. 
     To the east the outflung arm of  the mountains marched to a sudden end, 
and far lands  could be  descried beyond  them, wide and vague. To the south 
the Misty Mountains receded endlessly as far as sight could reach. Less than 
a  mile away, and a  little below them, for they still stood high up on  the 
west side of the dale, there lay a mere. It was long and oval, shaped like a  
great spear-head thrust  deep  into the northern glen; but its  southern end 
was  beyond the  shadows under the sunlit sky. Yet  its  waters were dark: a  
deep blue  like  clear evening sky seen from  a lamp-lit room. Its face  was 
still and unruffled. About it lay a smooth sward, shelving down on all sides 
to its bare unbroken rim. 
     `There lies the Mirrormere, deep Kheled -zvram! ' said  Gimli sadly.  `I  
remember that he said: "May you have joy of  the sight! But we cannot linger 
there."  Now long shall I journey ere  I have  joy again. It is  I that must 

####-hasten away, and he that must remain.' 
     The  Company now went down  the road from the Gates.  It was  rough and 
broken,  fading to a winding track between heather and whin  that thrust amid 
the cracking stones. But still it could  be seen  that once long ago a great 
paved way  had  wound upwards from  the lowlands of  the  Dwarf-kingdom.  
In 
places there were ruined works of stone beside the path, and mounds of green 
topped with slender birches, or fir-trees sighing in  the wind. An  eastward 
bend led them  hard by the sward of  Mirrormere,  and there not far from the 
roadside stood a single column broken at the top. 
     'That  is Durin's Stone! ' cried Gimli. `I cannot  pass without turning 
aside for a moment to look at the wonder of the dale! ' 
     `Be swift  then! ' said  Aragorn, looking back towards the Gates.  `The 
Sun sinks early. The Orcs will  not, maybe, come out till after dusk, but we 
must be far away before nightfall. The Moon is almost spent, and it will  be 
dark tonight.' 
     'Come with me,  Frodo! ' cried the dwarf,  springing from the  road. `I  
would not have  you  go without  seeing Kheled-zvram.'  He ran down the long 
green slope. Frodo followed slowly,  drawn by the still blue water in  spite 
of hurt and weariness; Sam came up behind. 
     Beside  the  standing stone Gimli halted and looked up. It  was cracked 
and weather -worn, and the faint runes upon its side could not be read. `This 
pillar marks the spot where Durin first looked  in the Mirrormere,' said the 
dwarf. 'Let us look ourselves once, ere we go!' 
     They stooped over the dark water. At first they could see nothing. Then 
slowly they saw the forms of the encircling mountains mirrored in a profou nd 
blue, and the peaks were like plumes of white flame above them; beyond there 
was a space of sky. There like jewels sunk in the deep shone glinting stars,  
though sunlight was in  the sky above. Of their own stooping forms no shadow 
could be seen. 
     'O Kheled-zvram fair and wonderful! ' said Gimli. `There lies the Crown  
of Durin till he wakes.  Farewell! ' He bowed, and turned away, and hastened 
back up the green-sward to the road again. 
     `What  did  you see?  '  said Pippin to Sam, but  Sam was  too deep  in 
thought to answer. 
     The road now  turned south and went quickly downwards, running out from 
between the arms of  the dale. Some  way  below the mere they came on a deep 

####-well of water, clear as crystal,  from which a freshet fell over a stone lip 
and ran glistening and gurgling down a steep rocky channel. 
     'Here is  the spring from  which the Silverlode rises.' said Gimli. `Do 
not drink of it! It is icy cold.' 
     'Soon it becomes a swift river, and  it  gathers water from  many other  
mountain-streams,' said Aragorn.  `Our road leads beside it for  many miles.  
For I  shall take you  by the road that  Gandalf chose, and first I hope  to 
come to  the woods  where  the  Silverlode  flows into the  Great  River -out 
yonder.'  They looked as  he  pointed,  and before  them  they  could see the 
stream  leaping  down to the trough of the  valley, and then  running on and 
away into the lower lands, until it was lost in a golden haze. 
     `There  lie  the  woods of Lothlurien! '  said  Legolas. `That  is  the 
fairest of all the dwellings of my people. There are no trees like the trees 
of that land. For in the autumn their leaves fall not, but turn to gold. Not 
till the  spring comes and  the  new green opens  do they fall, and then the 
boughs are  laden with yellow flowers; and the floor of the  wood is golden,  
and golden is the  roof, and its  pillars are of silver, for the bark of the 
trees is smooth and grey. So still our songs in Mirkwood say. My heart would 
be glad if I were beneath the eaves of that wood, and it were springtime! ' 
     `My heart will be glad, even in the winter,' said Aragorn. 'But it lies 
many miles away. Let us hasten! ' 
     For some  time Frodo and Sam managed to keep up with  the  others;  but 
Aragorn was  leading them at  a great  pace,  and  after a while they lagged 
behind.  They  had eaten nothing  since  the  early morning.  Sam's cut  was 
burning like fire, and his head felt light.  In spite of the shining sun the 
wind seemed chill after the warm darkness of Moria.  He shivered. Frodo felt 
every step more painful and he gasped for breath. 
     At last Legolas turned, and seeing  them  now far behind,  he spoke  to 
Aragorn. The others halted, and Aragorn ran back, calling to Boromir to come 
with him. 
     'I am sorry,  Frodo!  ' he cried, full of concern. `So much has happened 
this day and we have such need of haste, that I have forgotten that you were 
hurt; and Sam too. You should have spoken. We have done nothing to ease 
you, 
as we ought, though all the orcs of Moria were after  us. Come now! A little 
further on there is a place  where we can rest for a little. There I will do 
what I can for you. Come, Boromir! We will carry them.' 

####-     Soon afterwards they came  upon another stream that ran down  from  the 
west, and joined  its  bubbling water with the hurrying Silverlode. Together  
they plunged over a fall of green-hued  stone, and foamed  down into a dell.  
About  it stood fir-trees, short and bent,  and  its  sides were  steep  and 
clothed with harts-tongue  and shrubs of whortle-berry. At the  bottom there 
was  a level  space  through  which the stream flowed  noisily  over shining 
pebbles. Here they rested.  It was now  nearly three hours  after noon,  and 
they  had  come  only  a few  miles  from  the  Gates. Already  the sun  was 
westering. 
     While Gimli and the two  younger hobbits kindled a  fire of brush-  and 
fir-wood, and drew  water, Aragorn tended Sam and Frodo. Sam's wound was 
not 
deep, but  it looked ugly, and  Aragorn's face  was grave as he examined it. 
After a moment he looked up with relief.  
     'Good luck, Sam! '  he said. 'Many  have received worse  than  this  in 
payment for the slaying of their first orc. The  cut is not poisoned, as the 
wounds of orc-blades too often are. It should  heal well when  I have tended 
it. Bathe it when Gimli has heated water.' 
     He opened his pouch  and drew out  some withered leaves.  `They are dry 
and some of their virtue has one, he said, but here I have still some of the 
leaves of athelas that I gathered near Weather top. Crush  one in the  water, 
and wash the wound clean, and I will bind it. Now it is your turn. Frodo! ' 
     'I am all right,'  said Frodo, reluctant  to have his garments touched. 
`AII I needed was some food and a little rest.' 
     `No! ' said Aragorn. `We must have a  look and see what the  hammer and 
the  anvil have  done  to you. I still marvel  that  you are  alive at all.' 
Gently he stripped off Frodo's old jacket and worn tunic, and gave a gasp of 
wonder. Then he laughed. The silver corslet shimmered  before his eyes  like 
the light upon a rippling sea. Carefully he took it  off and held it up, and 
the gems on it glittered like stars.  and the sound of the shaken rings  was 
like the tinkle of rain in a pool. 
     `Look, my friends!' he called.  `H ere's a pretty hobbit -skin to wrap an 
elven-princeling in! If it were known that  hobbits had  such hides, all the 
hunters of Middle-earth would be riding to the Shire.' 
     `And all the arrows of all the hunters  in the world would be in vain,' 
said  Gimli, gazing at the mail in wonder. `It is a mithril-coat. Mithril! I 
have never seen or  heard tell of one so fair. Is this the coat that Gandalf 

####-spoke of? Then he undervalued it. But it was well given! ' 
     `I have  often wondered what you and Bilbo  wer e doing, so close in his 
little room,'  said Merry. 'Bless the old hobbit! I love him more than ever. 
I hope we get a chance of telling him about it! ' 
     There was a dark and blackened bruise on Frodo's right side and breast. 
Under the mail there was a shirt of soft leather, but at one point the rings 
had been driven through it into the flesh. Frodo's left side also was scored 
and bruised where he had been hurled against the  wall. While the others set  
the  food ready.  Aragorn  bathed the hurts  with wa ter in which athelas was 
steeped. The pungent fragrance filled  the dell, and all  those who  stooped 
over the steaming water felt refreshed and strengthened. Soon Frodo felt the 
pain leave him,  and his breath grew  easy: though he was stiff and sore  to 
the touch for many days. Aragorn bound some soft pads of cloth at his side.  
     `The mail is marvellously light,' he said. `Put it on again, if you can 
bear it. My heart is glad  to know that you have  such a coat. Do not lay it 
aside, even  in sleep,  unless fortune brings you where you  are safe for  a  
while; and that will seldom chance while your quest lasts.' 
     When they  had eaten, the Company got ready to go on. They  put out the  
fire and hid all  traces of it. Then climbing out of the dell they  took  to 
the  road  again.  They  had  not  gone far before the sun  sank  behind the 
westward  heights  and  great  shadows crept down  the mountain-sides.  Dusk  
veiled their  feet,  and  mist  rose in the hollows. Away  in  the east  the 
evening light lay pale upon the dim lands of distant plain and wood. Sam and 
Frodo  now  feeling eased  and greatly refreshed were  able  to go at a fair 
pace,  and  with only one brief halt Aragorn  led the Company on  for nearly 
three more hours.  
     It was  dark. Deep  night had fallen. There  were  many clear stars, hut 
the fast -waning moon  would not be seen till late. Gimli  and  Frodo were at 
the rear, walking softly and not speaking, listening for any sound  upon the 
road behind. At length Gimli broke the silence. 
     'Not a sound but the wind,' he  said. `There are no goblins near, or my 
ears are made of wood. It is to be  hoped that the Orcs will be content with 
driving us from Moria. And maybe that was  all their  purpose, and  they had 
nothing else to do with u s-with the Ring. Though Orcs will often pursue foes 
for many leagues into the plain, if they have a fallen captain to avenge.' 
     Frodo  did not answer. He looked at Sting, and the blade  was dull. Yet 
he had heard something, or thought he had. As soon a s the shadows had fallen 

####-about them and the  road behind was dim, he had heard again the quick patter 
of feet. Even now he heard it. He turned swiftly. There were two tiny gleams 
of light behind, or for a moment he thought he  saw  them, but at once  they 
slipped aside and vanished. 
     `What is it? ' said the dwarf.  
     `I don't know.' answered Frodo. 'I thought I heard feet,  and I thought 
I saw a light -like  eyes. I  have thought so  often, since we first  entered 
Moria.' 
     Gimli  halted and  stooped  to  the  ground. 'I  hear  nothing but  the 
night-speech of plant  and stone,'  he said. 'Come! Let us hurry! The others 
are out of sight.' 
     The  night-wind  blew  chill up the valley to  meet them. Before them a  
wide  grey shadow loomed, and  they heard an endless  rustle of leaves  like 
poplars in the breeze. 
     `Lothlurien! ' cried Legolas. 'Lothlurien! We have come to the eaves of 
the Golden Wood. Alas that it is winter! ' 
     Under  the night the trees stood tall before them, arched over the road 
and stream that  ran suddenly  beneath their  spreading  boughs. In  the dim 
light of  the stars their stems were grey, and their quivering leaves a hint 
of fallow gold. 
     'Lothlurien! '  said  Aragorn. 'Glad I am to hear again the wind in the 
trees! We are still little more than five leagues from the Gates, but we can 
go no further. Here  let  us hope that the virtue of the Elves will  keep us 
tonight from the peril that comes behind.' 
     `If Elves indeed still dwell here in the darkening world,' said Gimli. 
     'It is long since any  of my own folk journeyed hither back to the land 
whence we wandered in ages long ago,' said Legolas, 'but we hear that Lurien 
is not yet deserted, for there is a  secret power here  that holds evil from 
the land.  Nevertheless its folk are seldom  seen, and maybe they  dwell now  
deep in the woods and far from the northern border.' 
     'Indeed deep  in the  wood they dwell,' said Aragorn, and sighed as  if 
some memory stirred in him. `We must fend for ourselves tonight.  We will go 
forward a short way, until the trees are all about us, and then we will turn 
aside from the path and seek a place to rest in.' 
     He stepped forward; but Boromir  stood irresolute and did  not  follow.  
'Is there no other way?  ' he said. 
     `What other fairer way would you desire? ' said Aragorn. 

####-     `A plain road, though it  led through a hedge of swords,' said Boromir. 
`By  strange  paths has this Company been  led, and so far  to evil fortune. 
Against my will we passed under the shades of Moria, to our loss. And now we 
must enter the Golden Wood, you say. But of that perilous land we have heard 
in  Gondor, and it is said that few come out who once go in; and of that few  
none have escaped unscathed.' 
     `Say not unscathed, but if you say unchanged, then maybe you will speak 
the truth said Aragorn. But lore wanes in Gondor, Boromir, if in the city of 
those who once were wise they now speak evil of Lothlurien. Believe what you  
will,  there  is no other  way  for  us  --  unless  you  would  go  back  to 
Moria -gate, or  scale the pathless mountains, or swim the  Great  River  all 
alone.' 
     `Then lead on! ' said Boromir. `But it is perilous.' 
     `Perilous indeed,' said Aragorn, 'fair and perilous; but only evil need 
fear it, or those who bring some evil with them. Follow me!  ' 
     They  had gone  little more than a mile into the  forest when they came 
upon  another  stream flowing  down swiftly from  the tree-clad  slopes that 
climbed back westward towards the mountains.  They heard it splashing over a  
fall away among the shadows on  their  right. Its dark  hurrying waters  ran 
across the path before  them, and joined  the Silverlode in a  swirl  of dim 
pools among the roots of trees.  
     `Here is Nimrodel! ' said  Legolas.  'Of this stream  the Silvan  Elves 
made  many songs long ago, and still we sing them  in the North, remembering 
the rainbow on its falls, and the  golden flowers  that floated in its foam. 
All is  dark now  and the Bridge of Nimrodel is broken down. I will bathe my 
feet, for it  is said that  the water is  healing to  the  weary.'  He  went 
forward and climbed down the deep-cloven bank and stepped into the stream. 
     `Follow me!' he  cried. 'The water is not deep. Let us wade  across! On 
the  further bank we can rest. and  the sound of the falling water may bring 
us sleep and forgetfulness of grief.' 
     One by one they  climbed down and followed Legolas. For  a moment Frodo 
stood near the brink and let the water flow over his tired feet. It was cold 
but its touch was clean, and  as he went on and it  mounted to his knees, he 
felt that the stain of travel and all weariness was washed from his limbs.  
     When all  the Company had crossed, they sat and rested and ate a little 
food; and Legolas  told them  tales of Lothlurien that the Elves of Mirkwood  
still  kept  in their  hearts, of sunlight and starlight upon the meadows by 

####-the Great River before the world was grey. 
     At  length  a  silence fell, and they  heard the music of the waterfall 
running sweetly  in the shadows. Almost Frodo fancied that he  could  hear a 
voice singing, mingled with the sound of the water. 
     `Do you hear the voice of Nimrodel? ' asked Legolas. 'I will sing you a  
song  of the maiden Nimrodel, who bore the same  name  as the stream  besi de 
which she lived lung ago. It is a fair song in our woodland tongue; but this 
is how it runs in the  Westron Speech, as some in Rivendell now sing it.' In 
a soft voice hardly to be heard amid the rustle of the leaves above them  he 
began: 
     An Elven-maid there was of old, 
     A shining star by day: 
     Her mantle white was hemmed with gold, 
     Her shoes of silver-grey. 
 
     A star was bound upon her brows, 
     A light was on her hair 
     As sun upon the golden boughs 
     In Lurien the fair. 
 
     Her hair was long, her limbs were white, 
     And fair she was and free; 
     And in the wind she went as light 
     As leaf of linden-tree. 
 
     Beside the falls of Nimrodel, 
     By water clear and cool, 
     Her voice as falling silver fell 
     Into the shining pool. 
 
     Where now she wanders none can tell, 
     In sunlight or in shade; 
     For lost of yore was Nimrodel 
     And in the mountains strayed. 
 
     The elven-ship in haven grey 
     Beneath the mountain -lee 

####-     Awaited her for many a day 
     Beside the roaring sea. 
 
     A wind by night in Northern lands 
     Arose, and loud it cried, 
     And drove the ship from elven-strands 
     Across the streaming tide. 
 
     When dawn came dim the land was lost, 
     The mountains sinking grey 
     Beyond the heaving waves that tossed 
     Their plumes of blinding spray. 
 
     Amroth beheld the fading shore 
     Now low beyond the swell, 
     And cursed the faithless ship that bore 
     Him far from Nimrodel. 
 
     Of old he was an Elven-king, 
     A lord of tree and glen, 
     When golden were the boughs in spring 
     In fair Lothlurien. 
 
     From helm to sea they saw him leap, 
     As arrow from the string, 
     And dive into the water deep, 
     As mew upon the wing. 
 
     The wind was in his flowing hair, 
     The foam about him shone; 
     Afar they saw him strong and fair 
     Go riding like a swan. 
 
     But from the West has come no word, 
     And on the Hither Shore 
     No tidings Elven-folk have heard 
     Of Amroth evermore. 

####-     The voice of Legolas faltered, and the  song ceased. 'I cannot sing any 
more,' he said. 'That is  but a part, for I have forgotten much.  It is long 
and  sad,  for  it  tells  how sorrow came  upon Lothlurien,  Lurien  of the 
Blossom, when the Dwarves awakened  evil in the mountains.' 
     `But the Dwarves did not make the evil,' said Gimli. 
     `I said not  so; yet evil came,' answered Legolas sadly.  `Then many of 
the Elves  of  Nimrodel's kindred left their dwellings and departed  and she 
was  lost far in  the South, in  the passes of the White Mountains;  and she 
came  not to  the ship where  Amroth her  lover waited for  her. But  in the 
spring when the wind is in the new leaves the echo of her voice may still be  
heard by the falls that bear her name. And when the wind is in the South the 
voice  of Amroth comes up from the sea; for  Nimrodel flows into Silverlode, 
that Elves call Celebrant, and Celebrant into Anduin  the Great. and  Anduin 
flows into  the  Bay of Belfalas  whence the  Elves of Lurien set  sa il. But 
neither Nimrodel nor Amroth ever came back. 
     'It is told  that she had a house built in the branches  of a tree that 
grew  near the falls; for that  was the custom  of the  Elves of  Lurien, to 
dwell in the trees, and maybe it is so still. Ther efore they were called the 
Galadhrim, the Tree-people. Deep  in  their forest the trees are very great. 
The people of the woods did not delve in the  ground like Dwarves, nor build 
strong places of stone before the Shadow came.' 
     `And even in  these la tter days dwelling in the trees might  be thought 
safer than sitting on the  ground,' said  Gimli. He looked across the stream 
to the road that led back to Dimrill Dale, and then up into the roof of dark 
boughs above. 
     `Your  words bring good counsel, Gimli,' said Aragorn. `We cannot build 
a house, but  tonight we  will do as the Galadhrim  and seek  refuge  in the 
tree-tops, if we can. We have sat here beside  the road  already longer than 
was wise.' 
     The Company now turned aside from the path, and  went into the shadow of 
the deeper woods,  westward along  the mountain-stream away from 
Silverlode. 
Not  far from the falls of Nimrodel they  found a cluster of trees,  some of 
which overhung the stream. Their great grey trunks were of mighty girth, but 
their height could not be guessed. 
     `I will climb up,' said  Legolas. `I am at home among trees, by root or  
bough, though  these  trees are of a kind strange to  me, save as  a name in 

####-song.  Mellyrn  they are called, and are those that bear the yellow blossom, 
but I have never climbed in one. I will see now what is  their shape and way 
of growth.' 
     `Whatever  it may be,'  said Pippin,  `they  will be  marvellous  trees 
indeed if they can offer any rest at night, except to birds. I cannot  sleep 
on a perch! ' 
     'Then dig a hole in the  ground,' said Legolas, `if that  is more after 
the fashion of your kind. But  you  must dig swift and deep, if you  wish to 
hide from Orcs.' He sprang  lightly up from the ground  and  caught a branch 
that grew from the trunk high above his head. But even as he swung there for 
a moment, a voice spoke suddenly from the tree-shadows above him. 
     `Daro!'  it said in commanding tone, and Legolas dropped back to  earth 
in surprise and fear. He shrank against the bole of the tree. 
     'Stand still! ' he whispered to the others. `Do not move or speak! ' 
     There  was a sound  of soft laughter over their heads, and then another  
clear voice spoke in an  elven-tongue. Frodo could understand little of what 
was  said, for the speech that the  Silvan folk east of the  mountains  used 
among themselves was unlike that of the West. Legolas looked up and 
answered 
in the same language.* 
     `Who are they, and what do they say? ' asked Merry. 
     `They're Elves,' said Sam. `Can't  you hear their voices? ' 
     `Yes, they are Elves,'  said Legolas; `and they say that you breathe so 
loud that they could  shoot you in the dark.' Sam  hastily put his hand over 
his mouth.  'But they say also that  you need have  no fear. They have  been 
aware of us for a long while. They heard  my  voice across the Nimrodel, and 
knew that I  was one of their  Northern kindred, and therefore they did  not 
hinder our  crossing; and  afterwards  they  heard  my song. Now they bid me 
climb up  with Frodo;  for they seem  to have had some tidings of him and of 
our journey. The others they ask to wait a little and to keep  watch at  the 
foot of the tree, until they have decided what is to be done.' 
     Out of  the  shadows a  ladder  was  let  down:  it  was made  of rope, 
silver -grey and  glimmering  in the dark, and  though it looked  slender  it 
proved  strong enough to bear  many men. Legolas ran  lightly up, and  Frodo 
followed slowly; behind  came Sam trying not to breathe loudly. The branches 
of the mallorn-tree grew  out nearly straight from the trunk, and then swept 
upward; but near the top the main stem divided into a crown  of many boughs,  

####-and  among these they  found that there had been built a wooden platform, or 
flet as such things were called in those days: the  Elves called it a talan. 
It  was  reached  by a round hole in  the  centre  through  which the ladder  
passed. 
     When Frodo came at last up on to the flet he found Legolas seated  with 
three other Elves. They were clad  in  shadowy-grey, and could  not  be seen 
among  the tree-stems, unless they moved suddenly. They stood up, and one of 
them uncovered a small lamp that  gave out a slender silver beam. He held it 
up,  looking at Frodo's face,  and Sam's. Then he shut  off the light again, 
and  spoke words of welcome in  his elven-tongue.  Frodo  spoke haltingly in 
return. 
     `Welcome!' the Elf then said  again in the  Common  Language,  speaking 
slowly. 'We seldom use any tongue but our own; for we dwell now in the heart 
of the forest, and do not willingly have dealings  with any other folk. Even 
our own kindred in the North are sundered from us. But there  are some of us 
still  who  go  abroad  for  the gathering  of news and the watching  of our 
enemies, and they speak the languages of other lands. I am one. Haldir is my  
name. My brothers, R®mil and Orophin, speak little of your tongue. 
     `But we have heard rumours of your coming, for the messengers of Elrond 
passed by Lurien on their way home up the Dimrill Stair. We had not heard of 
hobbits, or halflings, for many a long year,  and did not know  that any yet 
dwelt in Middle-earth. You do not  look evil! And since you come with an Elf 
of our  kindred, we are willing to befriend you, as  Elrond asked; though it 
is not our custom to lead strangers through our land. But you must stay here 
tonight. How many are you? ' 
     `Eight,' said Legolas. `Myself, four hobbits; and two men, one of whom, 
Aragorn, is an Elf-friend of the folk of Westernesse.' 
     `The  name of Aragorn son of Arathorn is known in Lurien,' said Haldir, 
`and  he  has the favour of  the  Lady. All then is  well.  But you have yet 
spoken only of seven.' 
     `The eighth is a dwarf,' said Legolas. 
     `A dwarf! '  said Haldir. `That  is not well. We have not had  dealings 
wi th  the Dwarves since the Dark Days. They are not permitted in our land. I  
cannot allow him to pass.' 
     `But  he is from the Lonely Mountain, one of  Dbin's trusty people, and 
friendly to Elrond,' said Frodo. `Elrond himself  chose him to be one of our 
companions, and he has been brave and faithful.' 

####-     The  Elves  spoke together in  soft  voices, and questioned Legolas  in 
their own tongue. 'Very good,' said Haldir at last. `We will do this, though 
it is against our liking. If  Aragorn and Legolas will guard him, and answer  
for him, he shall pass; but he must go blindfold through Lothlurien. 
     `But now  we must debate  no  longer. Your folk  must not remain on the 
ground. We have been keeping watch on the rivers, ever since we saw a  great 
troop of Orcs  going north toward Moria, along  the skirts of the mountains,  
many days ago. Wolves  are howling on the wood's borders. If you have indeed 
come from Moria, the peril cannot  be far behind. Tomorrow early you must go 
on. 
     'The four hobbits shall c limb up here  and  stay with us-we do not fear 
them! There is  another talan in  the next tree.  There the others must take 
refuge.  You, Legolas, must answer to us for them. Call  us, if  anything is 
amiss! And have an eye on that dwarf!' 
     Legolas at once went down the ladder to take Haldir's message; and soon  
afterwards Merry and Pippin  clambered up on to the high flet. They were out 
of breath and seemed rather scared. 
     `There!' said Merry  panting. `We  have lugged up your blankets as well 
as  our own. Strider has hidden all the rest of  the baggage in a deep drift 
of leaves.' 
     `You had no  need  of your burdens,' said  Haldir. `It is  cold in  the 
tree-tops in  winter, though the wind tonight is  in the  South; but we have 
food and drink to give you that will drive away the night -chill, and we have 
skins and cloaks to spare.' 
     The  hobbits accepted this  second (and far better) supper very gladly. 
Then they  wrapped themselves warmly,  not only  in  the fur-cloaks  of  the 
Elves, but in their own blankets as well, and  tried  to  go  to  sleep. But 
weary  as  they  were only  Sam found that  easy to  do. Hobbits do not like 
heights, and do not sleep upstairs, even when they have any stairs. The flet 
was not at  all to their liking as a  bedroom.  It had  no walls. not even a  
rail; only on one side  was there a  light  plaited  screen,  which could be 
moved and fixed in different places according to the wind. 
     Pippin went on  talking for a while. `I  hope, if I  do  go to sleep in 
this bed-loft, that I shan't roll off,' he said. 
     `Once I do get to sleep,' said Sam, 'i  shall go on sleeping, whether I 
roll off or no. And the less said,  the sooner I'll drop off, if you take my 
meaning.' 

####-     Frodo  lay  for some  time awake,  and looked up  at the stars glinting 
through the pale roof of quivering leaves. Sam was snoring at his  side long 
before he himself closed his eyes. He could dimly see  the grey forms of two  
elves  sitting motionless  with their  arms about  their  knees, speaking in 
whispers. The other had  gone down to take up  his watch on one of the lower  
branches. At  last lulled by the wind in the  boughs above,  and  the  sweet 
murmur of the falls of Nimrodel below,  Frodo  fell  asleep with the song of 
Legolas running in his mind. 
     Late in the  night he awoke. The  other hobbits were  asleep. The Elves 
were gone. The sickle Moon was gleaming dimly among the leaves. The wind 
was 
still. A little way off he heard a harsh laugh and the tread of many feet on 
the ground below. There was a ring of  metal. The sounds died  slowly  away, 
and seemed to go southward, on into the wood. 
     A head  appeared suddenly through the hole in the flet. Frodo sat up in  
alarm and saw that it was a grey-hooded Elf. He looked towards the hobbits. 
     `What is it? ' said Frodo. 
     `Yrch!' said  the Elf in a hissing whisper, and cast on to the flet the 
rope-ladder rolled up. 
     'Orcs! ' said Frodo. `What are they doing? ' But the Elf had gone. 
     There were  no more  sounds. Even the leaves were silent,  and the very 
falls  seemed  to  be hushed.  Frodo sat and  shivered in his wraps. He  was 
thankful that they had not been  caught on the ground; but he felt  that the 
trees offered little  protection, except concealment.  Orcs were  as keen as 
hounds on  a scent, it  was  said, but they could  also climb.  He drew  out 
Sting: it flashed and glittered  like a  blue  flame  and then  slowly faded 
again and grew dull. In  spite  of the  fading of his  sword  the feeling of 
immediate danger did no t leave Frodo, rather it grew stronger. He got up and 
crawled to the opening and peered  down. He was almost certain that he could 
hear stealthy movements at the tree's foot far below. 
     Not Elves; for  the  woodland folk were  altogether noiseless in  their 
movements. Then he heard faintly a sound like sniffing: and something seemed 
to  be  scrabbling on the bark of  the tree-trunk. He  stared down into  the 
dark, holding his breath. 
     Something was now  climbing slowly, and  its breath  came  like a   soft 
hissing through closed teeth. Then coming  up, close  to the stem, Frodo saw 

####-two pale eyes. They stopped and gazed upward unwinking. Suddenly they 
turned 
away, and a shadowy figure slipped round the trunk of the tree and vanished. 
     Immediately  afterwards Haldir  came  climbing swiftly  up through  the 
branches. `There was something in this tree that I have never seen  before,' 
he said. `It was not an orc. It fled as  soon as I touched the tree-stem. It 
seemed to be wary, and to have some skill in trees, or I  might have thought  
that it was one of you hobbits.  
     'I did not  shoot, for I  dared not arouse any  cries:  we cannot  risk  
battle. A strong company of Orcs has passed. They crossed the Nimrodel-curse 
their foul feet in its clean water!-and went on down the old road beside the 
river. They seemed to pick up some scent, and they searched the ground for a 
while near the place where you halted. The three of us could not challenge a  
hundred,  so we went ahead and spoke  with feigned  voices, leading  them on 
into the wood. 
     `Orophin  has  now  gone in haste  back  to our  dwellings  to warn our 
people. None of the Orcs will  ever return out of  Lurien. And there will be 
many Elves hidden on the northern border before another night falls. Bu t you 
must take the road south as soon as it is fully light.' 
     Day came pale from the East. As the light grew  it filtered through the 
yellow leaves of  the mallorn, and  it  seemed to the hobbits that the early 
sun of a  cool summer's morning was  shining. Pale-blue sky peeped among the 
moving branches. Looking  through an opening on the south side  of the  flet  
Frodo saw all the valley of the Silverlode lying  like a  sea of fallow gold 
tossing gently in the breeze. 
     The  morning was  still  young and cold when the Company set out again, 
guided now  by Haldir and his  brother  R®mil. `Farewell,  sweet Nimrodel! ' 
cried Legolas. Frodo looked back and  caught a gleam of white foam among 
the 
grey tree-stems.  `Farewell,' he said. It seemed to him  tha t he would never  
hear again  a running water so beautiful, for  ever blending its innumerable 
notes in an endless changeful music. 
     They went back to the path that  still  went on along the west side  of 
the  Silverlode, and for some way they followed it southward. There were the 
prints of orc-feet in the earth. But soon Haldir turned aside into the trees 
and halted on the bank of the river under their shadows. 
     `There is one of my  people yonder across the stream,' he said  `though 

####-you may not see him.' He gave a call like the low whistle of a bird, and out 
of a thicket of  young trees an Elf stepped, clad in grey, but with his hood 
thrown back; his hair glinted like gold in the morning sun. Haldir skilfully 
cast over the stream a coil of grey rope, and he caught it and bound the end 
about a tree near the bank. 
     `Celebrant is  already  a  strong stream here, as you see,' said Haldir 
'and it runs both swift and deep, and is very cold. We do not set foot in it 
so far  north, unless  we must. But  in these days of watchfulness we do not 
make bridges. This is how we cross! Follow me!' He  made his end of the rope 
fast about another tree,  and then ran lightly along it, over the  river and 
back again, as if he were on a road. 
     `I  can walk  this path,' said  Legolas; `but the others have not  this 
skill. Must they swim?' 
     `No!' said Haldir. `We have two  more ropes. We  will fasten them above 
the other, one shoulder-high,  and another half-high, and holding these  the 
strangers should be able to cross with care.' 
     When this  slender bridge had been made, the Company passed  over, some 
cautiously and slowly, others more easily. Of  the hobbits Pippin proved the 
best for he was  sure-footed, and he walked  over quickly, holding only with 
one hand;  but he kept his eyes on the bank ahead and did not look down. Sam 
shuffled along, clutching hard, and looking down into the pale eddying water 
as if it was a chasm in the mountains.  
     He breathed with relief when he was safely across. `Live and  learn! as 
my gaffer used to say. Though he was thinking of gardening,  not of roosting 
like a bird,  nor  of trying  to walk like a spider. Not even my  uncle Andy 
ever did a trick like that! ' 
     When  at length  all the Company was gathered on the  east  bank of the 
Silverlode,  the Elves untied the ropes and  coiled two of them.  R®mil, who 
had remained  on  the  other side, drew back the last  one, slung  it on his 
shoulder, and  with a wave of his hand went away,  back to  Nimrodel to keep 
watch. 
     `Now, friends,'  said  Haldir, `you have entered the Naith of Lurien or  
the  Gore, as you would  say, for it is the land that lies like a spear -head 
between the arms of Silverlode  and Anduin the Great. We  allow no strangers 
to spy  out the secrets of the  Naith. Few indeed  are permitted even to set 
foot there. 
     `As was agreed, I shall here blindfold the eyes of Gimli the Dwarf. The 

####-other may walk free for a while, until we come nearer to our dwellings, down 
in Egladil, in the Angle between the waters. ' 
     This was not at  all to the liking of  Gimli.  `The  agreement was made 
without my consent,' he said. `I will not walk blindfold, like a beggar or a  
prisoner. And I am no spy.  My folk  have never had dealings with any of the 
servants of the Enemy. Neither have we  done harm to the Elves. I am no more 
likely to betray you than Legolas, or any other of my companions.' 
     'I  do not doubt you,' said Haldir. 'Yet this is our law. I am  not the 
master of the law, and cannot set it aside. I  have done much in letting you  
set foot over Celebrant.' 
     Gimli was  obstinate. He  planted his feet  firmly apart, and laid  his 
hand upon the haft of his axe. 'I will go forward free,' he said, 'or I will 
go back and seek my own land,  where I am known to be true of word, though I 
perish alone in the wilderness.' 
     `You cannot go back,' said Haldir sternly. 'Now you have come thus far, 
you must be  brought before the Lord and the Lady. They shall judge  you, to 
hold  you or to  give you leave, as they  will. You cannot cross the  rivers 
again, and behind you  there are now secret sentinels  that you cannot pass.  
You would be slain before you saw them.' 
     Gimli  drew  his axe from his belt. Haldir and his companion bent their 
bows. 'A plague on Dwarves and their stiff necks! ' said Legolas.  
     'Come!'  said Aragorn. `If I am still to lead this Company, you must do 
as I bid. It is hard upon  the Dwarf to be thus singled  out. We will all be 
blindfold, even Legolas. That will be best, though it will make  the journey 
slow and dull.' 
     Gimli laughed  suddenly. `A  merry  troop of fools we  shall look! Will 
Haldir lead us all on a string, like  many blind beggars with one dog? But I 
will be content, if only Legolas here shares my blindness.' 
     `I am an Elf and a  kinsman here,' said Legolas, becoming angry  in his 
turn. 
     `Now let us cry: "a plague on the stiff necks of Elves!"' said Aragorn. 
`But the Company shall all fare alike. Come, bind our eyes Haldir! ' 
     `I shall claim  full amends for every fall and  stubbed  toe, if you do 
not lead us well,' said Gimli as they bound a cloth about his eyes.  
     'You will have no claim,' said  Haldir. `I shall lead you well, and the 
paths are smooth and straight.' 
     `Alas for  the  folly  of these  days! '  said Legolas.  'Here  all  are 

####-enemies of the one Enemy, and yet I must  walk blind, while the sun is merry 
in the woodland under leaves of gold!  ' 
     `Folly it  may seem,' said Haldir. 'Indeed  in nothing is the power  of 
the Dark Lord more clearly shown  than in the estrangement that  divides all  
those who still oppose him.  Yet so little faith and trust do we find now in 
the world beyond Lothlurien, unless maybe in  Rivendell, that we dare not by 
our own  trust  endanger our  land. We live  now  upon  an island  amid many 
perils, and our hands are more often upon the bowstring than upon the harp.  
     `The rivers long defended us, but they are a sure guard no more for the 
Shadow has crept northward  all about  us. Some speak of departing, yet  for  
that it already seems too  late. The mountains to the west are growing evil; 
to the east the lands are waste, and full of Sauron's creatures; and  it  is 
rumoured  that we cannot  now safely pass southward  through  Rohan, and the 
mouths of the Great River are watched by the Enemy. Even if we could come 
to 
the shores of the Sea, we  should  find no  longer any shelter there. It  is 
said that there are still havens of. the High Elves, but they are  far north 
and west, beyond the land of  the Halflings.  But where  that may be, though 
the Lord and Lady may know, I do not.' 
     `You ought  at  least to guess,  since you have seen  us,' said  Merry. 
`There are Elf-havens west of my land, the Shire where Hobbits live.' 
     `Happy folk  are  Hobbits to dwell  near  the shores of the sea! ' said 
Haldir. 'It is long indeed since any of my folk have looked on it, yet still 
we remember it in song. Tell me of these havens as we walk.' 
     `I cannot,' said Merry. `I have never seen them.  I have never been out 
of my own la nd before. And if I had known what the world outside was like. I 
don't think I should have had the heart to leave it.' 
     `Not even to see fair Lothlurien? '  said Haldir.  'The world is indeed 
full of peril, and in it there are many dark places; but still there is much 
that is fair, and  though in all lands love is  now  mingled with  grief, it 
grows perhaps the greater. 
     `Some there are among us  who sing that  the Shadow  will draw back and 
peace shall come again.  Yet I do not believe  that  the world about us will 
ever again be as it was of old, or the light of the Sun as it was aforetime. 
For the Elves, I fear, it will prove at best a truce, in which they may pass 
to  the  Sea  unhindered  and  leave the Middle-earth  for  ever.  Alas  for  
Lothlurien that I  love! It would be a  poor life in a land where no mallorn 

####-grew.  But  if  there  are  mallorn-trees beyond  the Great Sea,  none  have 
reported it.' 
     As they spoke  thus, the  Company filed slowly along the  paths  in the 
wood, led by Hald ir, while the other Elf walked behind. They felt the ground 
beneath their  feet smooth and  soft, and  after  a while they  walked  more 
freely, without fear of hurt or  fall. Being deprived of sight, Frodo  found 
his hearing and  other senses  sharpened. He could smell the  trees and  the 
trodden  grass.  He could hear many  different notes in  the  rustle  of the 
leaves overhead, the river murmuring away on  his right, and  the thin clear 
voices of birds in  the sky. He  felt the sun upon his face  and hands  when 
they passed through an open glade. 
     As  soon  as he  set  foot  upon the  far  bank of Silverlode a strange 
feeling had come upon  him, and it  deepened as he walked on into the Naith: 
it seemed to him that  he had stepped over a bridge of time into a corner of 
the  Elder Days, and  was  -now walking  in  a world that  was  no  more.  In 
Rivendell  there was memory of  ancient things; in Lurien the ancient things 
still lived on  in the waking world. Evil had been  seen  and  heard  there, 
sorrow had been known; the Elves  feared and  distrusted the world  outside: 
wolves  were howling on  the wood's borders: but  on  the land  of Lurien no 
shadow lay. 
     All that day the  Company marched on, until  they felt the cool evening 
come and heard  the early night-wind whispering among many leaves. Then 
they 
rested and slept without fear upon the ground;  for  their guides would  not 
permit  them to unbind their eyes, and they could  not climb. In the morning 
they went  on again,  walking without  hast e. At noon they halted, and Frodo  
was aware that they had  passed out under the shining Sun. Suddenly he heard 
the sound of many voices all around him. 
     A marching host of Elves  had  come up silently:  they  were  hastening 
toward the northern borders to guard against any attack from Moria; and they 
brought news,  some of  which Haldir reported. The marauding orcs  had  been 
waylaid and  almost all destroyed; the remnant had fled westward towards the 
mountains, and were being pursued.  A strange creature also  had  been seen, 
running with bent back and  with hands near the ground, like a beast and yet  
not of beast-shape. It  had eluded  capture, and  they had not  shot it, not 
knowing whether it was good or ill, and  it had vanished down the Silverlode 
southward. 

####-     `Also,' said Haldir, `they bring me a message from the Lord and Lady of 
the Galadhrim. You are all to walk free, even the dwarf Gimli. It seems that 
the  Lady knows who and what is each member of  your  Company.  New 
messages 
have come from Rivendell perhaps.' 
     He  removed the  bandage  first from Gimli's eyes.  'Your pardon! '  he 
said, bowing low. `Look on  us now with friendly eyes! Look and be glad, for  
you are the  first  dwarf to behold the  trees of the Naith of  Lurien since 
Durin's Day! ' 
     When  his eyes were in  turn uncovered, Frodo looked up  and caught his 
breath.  They were  standing  in an  open  space. To the  left stood a great 
mound, covered with  a sward of grass as  green as Spring-time in the  Elder  
Days.  Upon it , as a double crown, grew two circles of trees: the  outer had 
bark  of  snowy white,  and  were leafless  but  beautiful in  their shapely 
nakedness;  the inner were mallorn-trees of great height,  still arrayed  in 
pale  gold. High  amid  the branches of a  towering  tree that stood in  the 
centre of all there gleamed a white flet. At the feet of  the trees, and all 
about  the  green hillsides the grass was studded with small golden  flowers 
shaped  like  stars.  Among them,  nodding  on  slender  stalks,  were  other  
flowers, white and palest green: they glimmered  as a mist amid the rich hue 
of  the  grass. Over all the sky was blue, and  the sun  of afternoon glowed 
upon the hill and cast long green shadows beneath the trees.  
     'Behold! You  are come to Cerin Amroth,' said Haldir. `For this is  the 
heart  of the ancient realm  as it  was long ago, and here is the  mound  of 
Amroth, where in  happier days his high house was built. Here ever bloom the 
winter  flowers  in the  unfading grass:  the  yellow  elanor, and the  pale 
niphredil. Here we will stay awhile, and  come  to the city of the Galadhrim 
at dusk.' 
     The  others  cast themselves down  upon the  fragrant grass,  but Frodo 
stood  awhile still lost in wonder.  It seemed  to him that  he  had stepped 
through a high window  that looked on a vanished world. A light was  upon it 
for which his language  had no  name.  All that  he saw was shapely, but the 
shapes  seemed at once clear cut, as  if they had  been first conceived  and 
drawn at the uncovering of  his eyes, and ancient as if they had endured for  
ever. He saw no colour but those he knew, gold and white and blue and green, 
but  they were  fresh  and poignant,  as if  he  had  at  that  moment first  

####-perceived them and made for them names new and wonderful. In winter  here 
no 
heart  could  mourn for summer  or  for spring.  No  blemish  or sickness or  
deformity could be seen in anything that grew upon the earth. On the land of 
Lurien there was no stain. 
     He  turned  and saw that Sam was now standing beside him, looking round 
with a  puzzled expression, and rubbing his eyes as  if he was not sure that 
he was  awake. `It's  sunlight  and bright  day, right enough,'  he said. `I  
thought that Elves were all for moon and stars: but this is more elvish than 
anything I ever heard tell of. I feel as if I was  inside a song. if you take 
my meaning.' 
     Haldir looked at them, and he seemed indeed to take the meaning of both 
thought  and  word.  He  smiled. `You  feel the  power of  the  Lady of  the 
Galadhrim,' he said. `Would it please you  to climb with me up Cerin Amroth?  
' 
     They followed  him  as  he stepped lightly up  the  grass-clad  slopes.  
Though he walked and  breathed, and about him living leaves and flowers were 
stirred by the same cool wind as fanned his face, Frodo felt that  he was in 
a timeless land that did not fade or change or fall into forgetfulness. When 
he had gone and passed again into  the outer world, still Frodo the wanderer  
from the Shire would walk there, upon the  grass among  elanor and niphredil 
in fair Lothlurien. 
     They entered the circle of white trees. As they did so the  South  Wind 
blew  upon Cerin Amroth and  sighed among the  branches. Frodo  stood still, 
hearing far off_ great seas upon beaches that had long ago been washed away, 
and sea -birds crying whose race had perished from the earth. 
     Haldir  had gone on and was  now  climbing to the high  flet. As  Frodo 
prepared to follow him,  he laid his hand  upon the  tree beside the ladder: 
never before had  he been  so  suddenly and so keenly aware of the  feel and 
texture of a tree's skin and of the life within  it. He  felt  a  delight in 
wood and  the touch of it, neither  as forester nor as carpenter; it was the 
delight of the living tree itself. 
     As he stepped out at last upon the lofty platform, Haldir took his hand 
and turned him toward the South. `Look this way first! ' he said. 
     Frodo looked  and saw, still at some  distance, a  hill of many  mighty 
trees, or a city of green towers: which it was he could not tell. Out of it, 
it seemed  to him that the  power and light came that held all the  land  in 

####-sway. He longed suddenly to fly like a bird to rest in the  green city. Then  
he looked  eastward and  saw all the land of Lurien running down to  the pale  
gleam of Anduin, the Great  River.  He lifted his  eyes across the river and 
all the light went out, and he  was back again in the world he knew.  Beyond 
the river  the land  appeared flat and empty,  formless and vague, until far 
away  it  rose  again  like  a  wall, dark  and drear.  The sun that lay  on 
Lothlurien had no power to enlighten the shadow of that distant height. 
     `There  lies  the fastness of  Southern  Mirkwood,' said Haldir. `It is 
clad in a forest of dark fir, where the trees strive one against another and 
their branches rot and wither. In the midst upon a  stony height  stands Dol 
Guldur, where long the hidden Enemy had his dwelling. We fear that now it is 
inhabited again,  and with power sevenfold. A black cloud lies often over it 
of  late. In this high place you may see the two powers that are opposed one  
to another;  and ever  they  strive now  in thought,  but whereas the  light 
perceives  the very  heart of  the darkness,  its  own  secret has not  been 
discovered. Not yet.' He turned and climbed swiftly down, and  they followed 
him. 
     At the hill's foot Frodo found Aragorn, standing still  and silent as a  
tree; but in his hand was a small golden bloom of elanor, and a light was in 
his eyes. He was wrapped in some fair memory: and as Frodo looked  at him he 
knew that he beheld things as they once had been in this same place. For the 
grim years were removed from the  face of Aragorn, and he  seemed clothed in 
white, a  young lord  tall and fair; and he spoke words in the Elvish tongue 
to one whom Frodo could not see . Arwen vanimelda, nambril! he said, and then 
he drew a breath, and returning  out  of his thought  he looked at Frodo and 
smiled. 
     `Here  is the  heart of Elvendom on earth,' he said, `and here my heart 
dwells  ever,  unless there  be a light beyond the dark roads that  we still 
must tread, you and I. Come with  me!  ' And taking Frodo's hand in  his, he 
left the hill of Cerin Amroth and came there never again as living man. 
 

####- 

Chapter 7. The Mirror of Galadriel 

 
 
     The  sun  was  sinking  behind  the  mountains,  and the  shadows  were 
deepening in the woods, when  they went on again.  Their paths now went into 
thickets  where  the dusk had already gathered. Night came beneath the trees 
as they walked, and the Elves uncovered their silver lamps.  
     Suddenly they came out into the open again and found themselves under a 
pale evening sky pricked by a  few early  stars.  There  was a wide treeless 
space  before  them, running in a  great circle  and bending  away on  either  
hand. Beyond it was a deep fosse lost in soft shadow, but the grass upon its 
brink was green, as if it  glowed still in memory of the sun that  had gone. 
Upon the further side there rose to a great height a green wall encircling a  
green hill thronged with mallorn-trees taller than any they had yet seen  in 
all the land. Their height  could not be  guessed,  but they stood up in the 
twilight like living towers. In  their, many-tiered branches and amid  their 
ever -moving  leaves  countless  lights were  gleaming,  green and  gold  and  
silver. Haldir turned towards the Company. 
     `Welcome to  Caras  Galadhon!  ' he  said. 'Here  is the  city  of  the 
Galadhrim where dwell  the Lord Celeborn  and Galadriel  the Lady of Lurien. 
But we  cannot enter here,  for  the gates do not look northward. We must go  
round to the  southern side,  and the  way is  not  short,  for the city  is 
great.' 
     There was a road  paved with white stone  running on the outer brink of 
the  fosse. Along this  they wen t westward, with the city  ever  climbing up 
like  a  green cloud upon their left; and as the night deepened  more lights 
sprang forth, until all the  hill seemed afire with stars. They came at last 
to  a white  bridge, and crossing found  the  great gates of the  city: they 
faced south-west, set between the  ends of the  encircling  wall  that  here 
overlapped, and they were tall and strong, and hung with many lamps.  
     Haldir knocked  and  spoke,  and the gates  opened soundlessly; but  of 
guards Frodo could see no sign. The  travellers passed within, and the gates 
shut behind them. They were in a deep lane between the ends of the wall, and 
passing quickly through it they entered the City of the Trees. No folk could 
they  see, nor  hear  any feet upon the paths;  but  there were many voices,  
about them, and  in the air  above. Far away up  on the hill they could hear 

####-the sound of singing falling from on high like soft rain upon leaves.  
     They went along many paths and climbed many  stairs, until they came to 
the high places and saw before them amid a wide  lawn a fountain shimmering. 
It was lit by silver lamps that swung from the boughs of trees,  and it fell 
into a  basin of silver, from which a white stream spilled.  Upon the  south 
side of the lawn  there stood the mightiest  of  all  the trees;  its  great 
smooth  bole  gleamed  like  grey  silk, and up it  towered, until its first 
branches, far above, opened their huge limbs under shadowy clouds of leaves.  
Beside it  a  broad white ladder stood, and   at  its foot three  Elves  were 
seated. They sprang up as the travellers approached, and Frodo saw that they 
were tall and  clad in grey  mail, and from their shoulders hung long  white 
cloaks. 
     'Here dwell Celeborn and Galadriel,'  said Haldir.  `It is  their  wish 
that you should ascend and speak with them.' 
     One of the  Elf-wardens then blew a clear note on a small horn, and  it 
was answered  three times from far  above. `I will  go first,' said  Haldir. 
'Let Frodo come  next and  with him  Legolas. The others may follow  as they 
wish. It is a  long climb for those that are not  accustomed to such stairs,  
but you may rest upon the way.' 
     As he climbed slowly up Frodo passed many flets: some on one side, some 
on  another,  and some set about  the  bole of the tree,  so that the ladder  
passed through them. At a  great height above the ground he came to  a  wide 
talan, like the deck of a great ship. On it was built a house, so large that 
almost  it would have served  for  a hall of Men upon the earth. He  entered 
behind  Haldir, and found that he was  in a chamber of oval  shape,  in  the 
midst of which grew the trunk of the great mallorn, now tapering towards its 
crown, and yet making still a pillar of wide girth. 
     The chamber was  filled with a  soft  light; its walls were  green  and 
silver and  its roof  of gold. Many Elves were  seated there.  On two chairs 
beneath the  bole of the tree and canopied by a living bough there sat, side 
by side, Celeborn and Galadriel.  They stood up to greet  their guests, after  
the  manner  of Elves, even those who were accounted mighty kings. Very tall 
they were, and the Lady no less tall than the Lord; and they were grave  and 
beautiful.  They were clad wholly  in white; and the hair of the Lady was of 
deep gold, and the hair of the  Lord Celeborn was of silver long and bright; 
but no sign  of  age was upon  them, unless it were  in  the depths of their 
eyes; for these were keen as lances in the starlight, and yet  profound, the 

####-wells of deep memory. 
     Haldir led  Frodo  before them, and the  Lord welcomed  him in his  own 
tongue. The Lady Galadriel said no word but looked long upon his face. 
     `Sit  now beside  my chair, Frodo of the Shire!  ' said Celeborn. `When 
all have come we will speak together.' 
     Each of the companions he greeted courteously by name  as they entered.  
`Welcome Aragorn son  of Arathorn! ' he said. `It is eight  and thirty years 
of the world outside since you came to this land;  and those years lie heavy 
on you. But the end is near, for good or ill. Here lay aside your burden for  
a while! ' 
     'Welcome son of Thranduil! Too seldom do my kindred journey hither from 
the North.' 
     `Welcome Gimli  son of  Gluin!  It is long indeed since  we  saw one of 
Durin's folk in Caras Galadhon. But today we have broken our  long  law. May 
it be a sign that though  the world is now dark better days are at hand, and 
that friendship shall be renewed between our peoples.' Gimli bowed low. 
     When all  the guests were seated before his chair   the  Lord  looked at 
them again. 'Here there  are eight,' he said. `Nine were to set out: so said 
the messages. But maybe  there has been some  change of counsel that we have 
not heard. Elrond is far away, and darkness gathers between us, and all this 
year the shadows have grown longer.' 
     `Nay, there was no change of counsel,' said the Lady Galadriel speaking 
for the first time. Her voice was clear and musical, but deeper than woman's 
wont. `Gandalf the Grey  set out  with the Company, but he did  not pass the 
borders of this land.  Now tell us where he is; for  I much desired to speak 
with him again. But  I cannot see him from afar,  unless he comes within the 
fences of Lothlurien: a grey mist is about him, and the ways of his feet and 
of his mind are hidden from me.' 
     'Alas! ' said Aragorn. `Gandalf the Grey fell into  shadow. He remained 
in Moria and did not escape.' 
     At these words  all the  Elves in the  hall  cried aloud  in grief  and 
amazement. `These are evil tidings,' said Celeborn, `the most evil that have 
been spoken here in long years full of grievous deeds.' He turned to Haldir. 
`Why  has nothing  of  this  been  told  to me before?  '  he  asked in  the 
Elven-tongue. 
     'We  have  not spoken  to  Haldir of  our  deeds or our purpose,'  said 
Legolas. `At  first  we were  weary and  danger  was  too close  behind  and 

####-afterwards we almost forgot our grief for a time,  as  we walked in gladness 
on the fair paths of Lurien.' 
     `Yet our grief  is  great  and our loss  cannot be mended ,' said Frodo. 
'Gandalf was our guide, and he led us  through  Moria; and when  our  escape 
seemed beyond hope he saved us, and he fell.' 
     'Tell us now the full tale! ' said Celeborn: 
     Then  Aragorn  recounted  all  that  had  happened  upon  the  pass  of 
Caradhras, and in  the  days that followed;  and  he spoke  of Balin and his 
book, and the fight in the Chamber of Mazarbul, and the fire, and the narrow 
bridge, and  the  coming of the Terror.  'An  evil  of  the Ancient World it 
seemed,  such as  I have  never seen before,' said  Aragorn. `It  was both a  
shadow and a flame, strong and terrible.' 
     'It was a Balrog of Morgoth,' said Legolas; `of  all elf-banes the most  
deadly, save the One who sits in the Dark Tower.' 
     `Indeed I saw  upon  the bridge that  which haunts our darkest dreams l 
saw Durin's Bane,' said Gimli in a low voice, and dread was in his eyes. 
     'Alas!  ' said Celeborn.  `We long have feared that  under Caradhras  a  
terror slept.  But had  I known that the Dwarves had st irred up this evil in 
Moria again,  l  would have forbidden you to pass the  northern borders, you  
and all that went with you. And  if it were possible, one would  say that at 
the last  Gandalf fell from wisdom into folly, going needlessly into the net 
of Moria.' 
     `He would be rash indeed that said that thing,' said Galadriel gravely. 
`Needless were none of the deeds of Gandalf in life. Those that followed him 
knew not  his mind and cannot report his full purpose. But however it may be 
with the  guide, the followers are blameless.  Do not repent of your welcome  
to the Dwarf. If our folk had been exiled long  and far from Lothlurien, who 
of the Galadhrim, even Celeborn the Wise, would pass nigh and would not 
wish 
to look upon their ancient home, though it  had become an abode of dragons?  
     'Dark  is  the  water  of  Kheled-zvram, and cold  are the  springs  of 
Kibil-nvla,  and  fair were  the many-pillared halls  of Khazad-dym in Elder  
Days before  the fall of mighty  kings beneath  the stone.' She looked  upon 
Gimli, who sat glowering and sad, and she smiled. And the Dwarf, hearing the 
names given in his own ancient tongue,  looked up and met her  eyes;  and it 
seemed  to him that he looked  suddenly  into the heart of  an enemy and saw 
there love and understanding. Wonder came into his face, and then  he smiled 

####-in answer. 
     He rose clumsily and bowed  in dwarf-fashion, saying: `Yet more fair is 
the living land of  Lurien, and the Lady Galadriel is above  all the  jewels 
that lie beneath the earth! ' 
     There was  a silence.  At length Celeborn spoke again. `I did  not know 
that your plight was so evil,' he said. `Let Gimli  forget my harsh words: I 
spoke in  the trouble of  my heart. I will do what I  can  to aid you,  each 
according  to his wish and need, but especially  that one of the little folk  
who bears the burden.' 
     'Your quest is known to us,' said Galadriel, looking at Frodo. `But  we 
will not here speak of it more openly. Yet not in vain will it prove, maybe, 
that you came to this land seeking aid, as Gandalf himself plainly purposed.  
For  the  Lord of  the  Galadhrim is  accounted the wisest of  the Elves  of 
Middle-earth, and a giver of  gifts beyond  the power of kings. He has dwelt  
in  the  West  since  the days of  dawn, and  I have dwelt  with  him  years 
uncounted;  for  ere the fall of Nargothrond or Gondolin  I  passed over the 
mountains, and together through ages  of  the world we have fought  the long 
defeat. 
     'I it was who first summoned  the White Council. And  if my designs had 
not  gone amiss, it would  have been  governed by Gandalf the Grey, and then 
mayhap things would have  gone otherwise. But even now there is hope left. I 
will not give you  counsel, saying do this,  or do that. For not in doing or  
contriving, nor  in  choosing between this course and another, can  I avail; 
but  only in knowing what was  and is, and in part also  what shall  be. But 
this I will  say to you: your Quest  stands upon the edge of a knife.  Stray 
but a little and it will fail, to the ruin  of  all. Yet hope remains  while 
all the Company is true.' 
     And  with that word  she held them with her eyes, and in silence looked 
searchingly at  each  of them  in turn. None save  Legolas and Aragorn could 
long endure her glance. Sam quickly blushed and hung his head. 
     At  length  the  Lady Galadriel  released them from her  eyes,  and she 
smiled. `Do not let your hearts be troubled,' she said. 'Tonight  you  shall 
sleep in peace.' Then they sighed and felt suddenly weary, as those who have 
been questioned long and deeply, though no words had been spoken openly.  
     `Go now! ' said Celeborn. `You are worn with sorrow and much toil. Even 
if  your Quest did  not concern us  closely, you should  have refuge in this 
City, until you were  healed and refreshed. Now  you shall rest, and we will 

####-not speak of your further road for a while.' 
     That night the Company slept upon the ground, much  to the satisfaction 
of the hobbits. The Elves spread for them a pavilion  among  the trees  near 
the fountain, and in it they laid soft couches; then speaking words of peace 
with fair  elvish voices they left  them.  For a little while the travellers 
talked of their night  before in the tree-tops, and of  their day's journey, 
and of the Lord and  Lady;  for they had not yet the  heart to  look further  
back. 
     `What  did you  blush for, Sam?  ' said  Pippin. `You soon  broke down. 
Anyone would have thought you had a guilty conscience. I hope it was nothing 
worse than a wicked plot to steal one of my blankets.' 
     `I never thought no such thing,' answered Sam, in no mood for jest. 'If 
you  want to know, I felt as if I hadn't  got nothing on,  and I didn't like 
it. She seemed to be looking inside  me and asking me what I would do if she 
gave me the chance of  flying back home to the Shire to a nice  little  hole 
with-with a bit of garden of my own.' 
     `That's funny,' said Merry. 'Almost  exactly what I felt  myself; only, 
only well, I don't think I'II say any more,' he ended lamely. 
     All  of them, it seemed, had fared  alike:  each  had felt that  he was 
offered a choice between a shadow full of fear that lay ahead, and something 
that he greatly  desired: clear before his mind it lay, and to get it he had 
only to  turn  aside from the road and  leave the Quest and  the war against 
Sauron to others.  
     `And it seemed  to me, too,'  said Gimli, `that my choice  would remain 
secret and known only to myself.' 
     'To me it seemed exceedingly strange,' said Boromir. `Maybe it was only 
a test,  and she thought to read our thoughts  for her own good purpose; but 
almost I  should  have said that she was tempting us, and offering  what she 
pretended to have the power to give. It  need not be  said that I refused to 
listen. The Men of Minas Tirith are true to their word.' But what he thought 
that the Lady had offered him Boromir did not tell. 
     And as for Frodo, he would  not speak, though  Boromir pressed him with 
questions. `She held you long in her gaze, Ring-bearer,' he said. 
     `Yes,'  said Frodo; `but whatever  came into my  mind  then I will keep 
there.' 
     `Well, have a care!  ' said  Boromir.  `I do not feel too sure  of this 
Elvish Lady and her purposes.' 

####-     `Speak no evil of the Lady Galadriel! ' said Aragorn sternly. 'You know 
not what you say.  There is in her  and in  this land no evil, unless a  man 
bring  it  hither himself.  Then let him beware!  But  tonight I shall sleep 
without  fear  for the first time  since  I left Rivendell. And may  I sleep 
deep, and forget for a while my grief! I am weary in body and in  heart.' He 
cast himself down upon his couch and fell at once into a long sleep. 
     The others soon did the same, and no sound  or  dream  disturbed  their 
slumber. When they woke they found that the light of day  was broad upon the 
lawn before the pavilion.  and  the fountain rose and fell glittering in the 
sun. 
     They remained some  days in Lothlurien, so  far as they could  tell  or 
remember. All the while that they dwelt there the sun  shone clear, save for  
a gentle  rain that fell at times, and passed away leaving all  things fresh 
and clean. The air was cool and  soft, as if it were  early spring, yet they 
felt about them the deep  and thoughtful quiet of winter.  It seemed to them 
that they did little but  eat and drink and  rest, and walk among the trees;  
and it was enough. 
     They had not seen  the Lord and Lady  again, and they had little speech 
with the Elven-folk; for few of these  knew or would use the Westron tongue. 
Haldir  had  bidden them  farewell and gone back again to the  fences of the 
North, where great watch was  now kept since the tidings of Moria  that  the 
Company had  brought. Legolas  was away much among the Galadhrim,  and 
after 
the  first  night  he  did not sleep with  the  other companions,  though he 
returned  to  eat and talk with them. Often he  took Gimli with him  when he 
went abroad in the land, and the others wondered at this change. 
     Now as the companions sat or walked together they spoke of Gandalf, and 
all  that  each had  known and seen of  him came clear before their minds. As 
they  were healed of hurt and weariness of body the grief of their loss grew 
more keen. Often they heard nearby Elvish voices singing, and knew that they 
were making songs  of  lamentation  for his fall,  for they caught  his name 
among the sweet sad words that they could not understand. 
     Mithrandir, Mithrandir  sang  the Elves, O Pilgrim Grey!  For  so  they 
loved  to  call  him.  But if Legolas was with  the  Company,  he would  not 
interpret the songs for them, saying that he had not the skill, and that for  
him the grief was still too near, a matter for tears and not yet for song. 
     It was Frodo who first put something of his sorrow into  halting words.  

####-He was seldom moved to make song or rhyme; even in Rivendell he had 
listened 
and had not sung himself, though his memory was stored with many things that 
others had made before him. But now as he sat beside the  fountain in Lurien 
and heard  about  him the  voices of the Elves, his thought took shape  in a  
song that seemed fair to him;  yet  when he  tried to repeat it to Sam  only 
snatches remained, faded as a handful of withered leaves. 
     When evening in the Shire was grey 
     his footsteps on the Hill were heard; 
     before the dawn he went away 
     on journey long without a word. 
 
     From Wilderland to Western shore, 
     from northern waste to southern hill, 
     through dragon-lair and hidden door 
     and darkling woods he walked at will. 
 
     With Dwarf and Hobbit, Elves and Men, 
     with mortal and immortal folk, 
     with bird on bough and beast in den, 
     in their own secret tongues he spoke. 
 
     A deadly sword, a healing hand, 
     a back that bent beneath its load; 
     a trumpet-voice, a burning brand, 
     a weary pilgrim on the road. 
 
     A lord of wisdom throned he sat, 
     swift in anger, quick to laugh; 
     an old man in a battered hat 
     who leaned upon a thorny staff. 
 
     He stood upon the bridge alone 
     and Fire and Shadow both defied; 
     his staff was broken on the stone, 
     in Khazad-dym his wisdom died. 
     `Why, you'll be beating Mr. Bilbo next! ' said Sam. 

####-     'No, I am afraid not,' said Frodo. 'But that is the best I can do yet.' 
     'Well, Mr. Frodo, if  you  do have another go, I hope you'll say a word 
about his fireworks,' said Sam. `Something like this:  
     The finest rockets ever seen: 
     they burst in stars of blue and green, 
     or after thunder golden showers 
     came falling like a rain of flowers. 
     Though that doesn't do them justice by a long road.' 
     `No,  I'll  leave that  to  you,  Sam. Or perhaps to Bilbo. But-well. I 
can't talk of  it any more. I can't bear to think  of bringing  the news  to 
him.' 
     One  evening Frodo and Sam were walking  together in the cool twilight.  
Both of them  felt restless again. On  Frodo suddenly the  shadow of parting  
had fallen: he  knew somehow that the time was very near when  he must leave 
Lothlurien. 
     `What do you think of Elves now, Sam?  ' he said. `I asked you the same 
question once before-it   seems a very long while ago; but you have seen more 
of them since then.' 
     'I  have  indeed!  ' said Sam. 'And I reckon  there's  Elves and Elves.  
They're  all  elvish enough,  but they're not all the same. Now  these  folk  
aren't wanderers or homeless, and seem a bit nearer to the likes of us: they 
seem to belong here, more even than Hobbits do in the Shire. Whether they've 
made the land, or  the  land's  made them, it's hard to say,  if you take my 
meaning. It's  wonderfully  quiet here.  Nothing seems to  be going on,  and 
nobody  seems to  want it to. If  there's any magic  about,  it's right down 
deep, where I can't lay my hands on it, in a manner of speaking.' 
     'You can see and feel it everywhere,' said Frodo. 
     'Well,' said Sam, 'you can't  see nobody working  it. No  fireworks like 
poor Gandalf used to  show. I  wonder  we  don't see nothing of the Lord and 
Lady in all these days. I fancy now that she could do some wonderful things, 
if she had a mind. I'd dearly love to see some Elf-magic, Mr. Frodo!  ' 
     'I  wouldn't,' said Frodo.  `I am content.  And I don't  miss Gandalf's 
fireworks, but his bushy eyebrows, and his quick temper, and his voice.' 
     `You're right,'  said  Sam.  `And don't think I'm  finding  fault. I've 
often wanted to  see a  bit of magic like what it tells of in old tales, but 
I've never heard of a  better land than this. It's like being at home and on 
a holiday at the same time, if you understand me. I don't want to leave. All 

####-the same,  I'm beginning to feel that if we've got to go on,  then we'd best 
get it over. 
     'It's the  job that's never started as takes longest  to finish, as  my 
old gaffer used to say. And I don't reckon that these folk  can do much more 
to  help us, magic or no. It's  when we leave  this land that we shall  miss 
Gandalf worse, I'm thinking.' 
     'I  am afraid that's only too  true, Sam,' said Frodo. `Yet I hope very 
much that before we leave we shall see the Lady of the Elves again.' 
     Even as he spoke, they saw,  as if she  came in answer to their  words,  
the  Lady Galadriel  approaching. Tall and white and fair she walked beneath 
the trees. She spoke no word, but beckoned to them. 
     Turning aside, she led them  toward  the southern slopes of the hill of 
Caras Galadhon,  and passing through  a high green  hedge they  came into an 
enclosed  garden. No trees  grew there,  and it  lay open  to the  sky.  The 
evening star had risen and  was  shining with white  fire above  the western 
woods.  Down a long flight of steps the Lady went into   a deep green hollow, 
through which ran murmuring the silver stream that issued from the  fountain 
on  the hill.  At the bottom, upon a  low  pedestal  carved like a branching 
tree, stood a basin  of silver.  wide  and shallow, and beside  it  stood  a  
si lver ewer. 
     With water from the stream Galadriel  filled the basin to the brim, and 
breathed  on it, and when the water  was still again she spoke. `Here is the 
Mirror  of Galadriel,'  she said.  'I have  brought you here so that you may 
look in it, if you will.' 
     The air was very still, and the dell  was dark, and the Elf-lady beside 
him was tall and pale. 'What shall we  look  for,  and what shall we  see? ' 
asked Frodo, filled with awe. 
     `Many things I can command the Mirror to reveal,' she a nswered, `and to  
some I can  show  what  they desire  to see. But the  Mirror will  also show 
things unbidden,  and those  are  often stranger  and more  profitable  than 
things which we  wish  to behold. What you will see, if you leave the Mirror  
free to work, I cannot tell.  For it shows things that were, and things that 
are,  things  that yet may be. But which it is that he sees, even the wisest  
cannot always tell. Do you wish to look? ' 
     Frodo did not answer. 
     `And you? ' she said, turning to Sam.  'For this is what your folk would 
call magic. I  believe;  though I  do not understand clearly what they mean; 

####-and  they seem also to use  the  same word of the  deceits of the Enemy. But 
this, if you will, is  the  magic of Galadriel. Did  you not  say  that  you  
wished to see Elf-magic?  ' 
     'I did,' said Sam, trembling a little between fear and curiosity. `I'll 
have a peep, Lady, if you're willing.' 
     `And I'd not mind  a glimpse of what's going on at home,' he said in an 
aside to  Frodo.  'It seems a terrible  long time that  I've been  away. But 
there, like  as  not I'll only  see the  stars,  or something that  I  won't  
understand.' 
     'Like as not,' said the Lady with a gentle laugh. `But come,  you shall 
look and see what you may. Do not touch the water! ' 
     Sam climbed up  on  the foot of the pedestal and leaned over the basin. 
The water looked hard and dark. Stars were reflected in it. 
     `There's only stars, as I thought,'  he said. Then he gave a  low gasp, 
for  the stars went out. As if  a dark  veil had  been withdrawn, the Mirror  
grew grey, and then clear. There was sun shining, and the branches  of trees 
were waving and tossing in the  wind. But before Sam could make  up his mind 
what it  was that he saw, the  light faded; and  now he thought he saw Frodo 
with  a pale face lying fast asleep under a great dark cliff. Then he seemed 
to see  himself going along  a dim passage, and climbing an endless  winding 
stair. It came to him suddenly that he was looking urgently  for  something, 
but what it was he  did not know. Like a dream the vision  shifted and  went  
back, and he  saw the trees again. But this time they were not so close, and  
he could see what was  going on: they were not waving in the wind, they were 
falling, crashing to the ground. 
     `Hi!' cried Sam  in  an  outraged  voice.  'There's  that Ted  Sandyman 
a-cutting down trees as he  shouldn't. They didn't ought to be  felled: it's 
that avenue beyond the Mill that shades the road to Bywater. I  wish I could  
get at Ted, and I'd fell him ! ' 
     But  now  Sam  noticed  that the Old  Mill had  vanished,  and  a large 
red-brick building was being put up  where it had stood. Lots of  folk  were 
busily  at work. There was a tall red chimney nearby.  Black smoke seemed to 
cloud the surface of the Mirror. 
     'There's some devilry at work in the Shire,' he said. 'Elrond knew what 
he  was about when he wanted to send Mr. Merry back.' Then suddenly Sam 
gave 
a cry and sprang away. 'I can't stay here,' he said wildly. `I must go home. 

####-They've dug up Bagshot Row, and there's the  poor old gaffer  going down the 
Hill with his bits of things on a barrow. I must go home! ' 
     'You cannot go home alone,' said the Lady. 'You did not wish to go home 
without your master before you looked in the Mirror, and  yet  you knew that 
evil things might well be happening in the  Shire.  Remember that the Mirror 
shows many things, and not all have yet come to pass. Some never come to be, 
unless those that behold the visions turn aside  from their path to  prevent 
them. The Mirror is dangerous as a guide of deeds.' 
     Sam  sat on  the  ground and  put his head in his hands. `I  wish I had 
never come  here, and I don't want to see  no  more magic,' he said and fell 
silent. After a moment he spoke again thickly, as if struggling with  tears. 
`No, I'll go home by the long road with Mr. Frodo, or  not at all,' he said. 
`But I hope I  do  get  back some  day. If  what  I've  seen turns out true, 
somebody's going to catch it hot! ' 
     `Do you now  wish to look , Frodo? '  said  the Lady Galadriel. `You did 
not wish to see Elf-magic and were content.' 
     `Do you advise me to look? ' asked Frodo. 
     'No,' she said. `I do not counsel you one way or the other. I am  not a  
counsellor.  You may  learn something, a nd  whether what you  see be fair or 
evil, that  may be profitable,  and yet it may not. Seeing is both good  and 
perilous. Yet  I think, Frodo, that you have courage and  wisdom enough  for 
the venture, or I would not have brought you here. Do as you will!   ' 
     `I will look,' said Frodo, and he climbed on the pedestal and bent over  
the  dark  water.  At once the Mirror  cleared  and  he  saw  a twilit land. 
Mountains  loomed dark in the distance against a pale sky. A  long grey road 
wound back out of sight.  Far away a figure came slowly down the road, faint 
and  small at  first,  but  growing  larger and  clearer  as it  approached. 
Suddenly Frodo realized that it reminded  him  of Gandalf. He  almost called 
aloud the wizard's name, and then he saw that  the figure was clothed not in 
grey but in  white, in  a white  that shone faintly in the dusk; and  in its 
hand  there was  a white staff. The  head was so bowed that he could see  no 
face,  and  presently the figure turned aside round  a bend in the road  and 
went out  of  the Mirror's  view. Doubt came into Frodo's  mind:  was this a  
vision of Gandalf on one of his  many  lonely  journeys long  ago, or was it 
Saruman?  
     The vision now  changed. Brief and  small but  very vivid  he  caught a  
glimpse of  Bilbo  walking restlessly about his room. The table was littered 

####-with disordered papers; rain was beating on the windows. 
     Then there  was a pause, and after  it many swift scenes followed  that 
Frodo in some way knew to be parts of a great history in which he had become 
involved. The mist cleared and he saw a sight which he had never seen before 
but knew at once: the Sea. Darkness fell. The sea rose  and raged in a great 
storm. Then  he saw  against  the  Sun, sinking  blood-red into a  wrack  of 
clouds,  the black outline  of a tall ship with torn sails riding up  out of 
the  West.  Then a wide river flowing through a  populous city. Then a white  
fortress with seven towers. And then again a ship with  black sails, but now 
it was morning again, and the water rippled with light, and a banner bearing  
the  emblem of a white tree shone in the sun. A smoke  as of fire and battle 
arose, and again the  sun went  down in a burning red that faded into a grey 
mist; and into the mist a small  ship passed away, twinkling with lights. It 
vanished, and Frodo sighed and prepared to draw away. 
     But suddenly the Mirror went altogether dark, as dark as  if a hole had 
opened in the world  of sight, and Frodo looked into emptiness. In the black  
abyss there appeared a single Eye  that slowly grew. until it  filled nearly 
all  the  Mirror. So terrible was it that Frodo stood rooted, unable to  cry 
out  or  to withdraw his gaze. The Eye was rimmed with fire, but  was itself 
glazed, yellow as a cat's, watchful  and  intent, and  the black slit of its 
pupil opened on a pit, a window into nothing. 
     Then the Eye began to rove, searching this way and that; and Frodo knew 
with certainty  and  horror that  among  the  many things that it sought  he 
himself  was one. But  he also knew that  it could not see him-not yet,  not 
unless he willed it. The Ring that hung upon its  chain  about his neck grew 
heavy, heavier than a great stone,  and his  head was dragged downwards. The 
Mirror  seemed  to be growing hot and  curls  of steam were rising  from the 
water. He was slipping forward. 
     `Do not touch the water!' said the  Lady  Galadriel softly. The  vision 
faded,  and Frodo found that he was  looking  at the cool stars twinkling in 
the silver basin. He stepped back shaking all over and looked at the Lady. 
     `I know what it was that you  last saw,' she said; `for that is also in 
my mind. Do not be  afraid! But do  not think that only by singing  amid the 
trees, nor  even by  the  slender arrows of  elven-bows,  is  this  land  of 
Lothlurien maintained and defended against its  Enemy. I say  to you, Frodo, 
that  even as I speak to you, I perceive the Dark Lord and know his mind, or  
all of his mind that concerns the Elves. And he gropes ever to see me and my 

####-thought. But still the door is closed! ' 
     She lifted up her white arms, and spread out her hands towards the East 
in a  gesture of  rejection  and  denial. Edrendil, the Evening  Star,  most  
beloved of the Elves, shone clear above. So bright was it that the figure of 
the Elven-lady cast a dim shadow on the ground. Its rays glanced upon a ring 
about  her  finger; it  glittered like  polished  gold overlaid  with silver 
light, and a white stone in it twinkled as if the Even -star had come down to 
rest upon her hand. Frodo gazed at the ring with awe; for suddenly it seemed  
to him that he understood. 
     `Yes,' she said, divining his thought, `it is not permitted to speak of 
it,  and  Elrond  could  not  do  so.  But  it  cannot  be  hidden from  the 
Ring-bearer,  and  one who has seen  the Eye.  Verily it is in the  land  of 
Lurien upon  the finger of Galadriel  that one of the Three remains. This is 
Nenya, the Ring of Adamant, and I am its keeper. 
     `He suspects, but  he  does not  know  --  not  yet. Do you not see now 
wherefore your  coming is to us as  the footstep  of  Doom? For if you fail, 
then we are  laid  bare to the Enemy.  Yet if you succeed, then our power is 
diminished, and Lothlurien will fade, and the  tides  of  Time will sweep it 
away. We must depart into the  West, or dwindle to a rustic folk of dell  and 
cave, slowly to forget and to be forgotten.' 
     Frodo bent his head. `And what do you wish? ' he said at last. 
     `That  what should be shall be,' she answered.  `The love of the  Elves 
for  their land  a nd  their works is deeper than the deeps of  the Sea,  and 
their regret  is  undying and cannot ever  wholly be assuaged. Yet they will 
cast all away rather than submit to Sauron: for they know him  now.  For the 
fate of Lothlurien you are not answerable but only for the doing of your own  
task. Yet I  could wish, were it of any avail, that the One  Ring had  never 
been wrought, or had remained for ever lost.' 
     'You are wise  and fearless  and fair, Lady  Galadriel,' said Frodo. `I  
will give  you the One Ring, if you ask for it. It is too great a matter for  
me.' 
     Galadriel laughed  with a sudden clear laugh. `Wise the  Lady Galadriel 
may be,' she said, `yet here she has met her match in  courtesy. Gently  are 
you revenged for my testing of your heart at our first meeting. You begin to  
see with a keen eye. I do not deny that my heart has greatly desired to  ask  
what you offer. For many long  years I  had pondered what I might do, should 
the  Great  Ring come  into my hands, and behold!  it was brought  within my 

####-grasp. The evil that was devised long ago  works on  in many  ways,  whether 
Sauron himself stands or falls. Would not that have been a noble deed to set  
to the credit of his Ring, if I had taken it by force or fear from my guest?  
     `And now a t last  it comes. You will give me the Ring  freely! In place  
of  the Dark Lord  you will set up  a  Queen. And I shall  not  be dark, but 
beautiful and terrible as the Morning and the Night! Fair as the Sea and the 
Sun and the Snow upon the Mountain! Drea dful as the Storm and the 
Lightning!  
Stronger than the foundations of the earth. All shall love me and despair! ' 
     She  lifted up her hand and from the  ring that she wore there issued a  
great  light that  illuminated her  alone  and left all else dark. She stood 
before  Frodo seeming  now  tall beyond  measurement, and  beautiful  beyond 
enduring, terrible and worshipful. Then she let her hand fall, and the light 
faded, and suddenly she laughed again, and  lo! she was  shrunken: a slender  
elf-woman, clad in simple white, whose gentle voice was soft and sad. 
     'I pass the test,' she said. `I will diminish, and go into the West and 
remain Galadriel.' 
     They stood for a long while in silence. At length the Lady spoke again. 
`Let us return! ' she  said. `In the morning you must depart for now we have 
chosen, and the tides of fate are flowing.' 
     `I  would  ask  one thing before we go,'  said Frodo, `a  thing which I 
often meant to  ask  Gandalf in Rivendell. I  am permitted to  wear  the One 
Ring: why  cannot I see all the others  and know the thoughts  of those that 
wear them? ' 
     `You have not tried,' she said. `Only thrice have you set the Ring upon 
your finger since you knew what you possessed. Do not try!  It would destroy 
you.  Did not Ganda lf tell  you that  the rings give power  according to the 
measure of each possessor? Before you could use that power you would need 
to 
become far stronger, and to train your will to the domination of others. Yet 
even so, as Ring-bearer and as one that has borne it on finger and seen that 
which is hidden, your sight is grown keener. You  have perceived  my thought 
more clearly than many  that are accounted wise. You saw the Eye of him that 
holds the  Seven and the Nine.  And  did  you not see and recognize the ring 
upon my finger? Did you see my ring? ' she asked turning again to Sam. 
     'No, Lady,' he  answered. `To tell you the truth, I  wondered what  you  
were talking about.  I  saw a star through your finger. But if you'll pardon 

####-my speaking  out,  I think my master was right. I  wish you'd take his Ring. 
You'd  put things  to  rights.  You'd  stop them digging up the  gaffer  and 
turning him adrift. You'd make some folk pay for their dirty work.' 
     `I would,' she said. `That is how it would begin. Bu t it would not stop 
with that, alas! We will not speak more of it. Let us go!' 

####- 
 

Chapter 8. Farewell to Lurien 

 
 
     That  night  the Company was again summoned to the chamber of Celeborn, 
and there the Lord and Lady greeted them with fair words. At length Celeborn 
spoke of their departure. 
     `Now is the time,' he  said, `when those who wish to continue the Quest  
must harden their hearts to leave this land.  Those who no longer wish to go  
forward may remain here, for a while. But whether they stay or go, none  can 
be sure of  peace.  For we are come now to  the edge of doom. Here those who 
wish  may await  the oncoming of the hour till either the ways of  the world 
lie open again. or we summon them to the  last need of Lurien. Then they may 
return to their own lands, or else go to the long home of those that fall in 
battle.' 
     There was a silence. `They all resolved to  go forward,' said Galadriel 
looking in their eyes. 
     `As for me,' said Boromir, `my way home lies onward and not back.' 
     `That is true,' said Celeborn, `but is all this Company  going with you  
to Minas Tirith? ' 
     `We have not decided our course,' said Aragorn. 'Beyond Lothlurien I do 
not know what Gandalf intended to do. Indeed I do not think that even he had 
any clear purpose. ' 
     `Maybe not,' said  Celeborn, `yet when you leave this land, you  can no 
longer  forget  the Great  River.  As  some of you  know well, it  cannot be 
crossed  by travellers with baggage between Lurien and Gondor, save by boat. 
And are not the bridges  of Osgiliath broken down  and all the landings held 
now by the Enemy?  
     `On which side will you journey? The way to Minas Tirith lies upon this 
side, upon  the  west; but the straight road of the Quest  lies east of  the 
River, upon the darker shore. Which shore will you now take?  ' 
     `If my advice  is heeded, it will be the western shore,  and the way to 
Minas Tirith,' answered Boromir.  `But I  am not the leader of the Company.' 
The others said nothing, and Aragorn looked doubtful and troubled. 
     `I see that you do not yet know  what to do,' said Celeborn. `It is not 
my  part to choose for you; but I will help you as  I  may.  There are  some 

####-among  you who can handle  boats: Legolas, whose folk know  the swift Forest  
River; and Boromir of Gondor; and Aragorn the traveller.' 
     `And  one Hobbit! ' cried Merry. `Not all of us look on  boats as  wild 
horses. My people live by the banks of the Brandywine.' 
     `That is  well,' said Celeborn. `Then I will furnish  your Company with 
boats. They must be small and light, for  if you go far  by water, there are 
places where you will be forced to  carry them. You will come to  the rapids 
of Sarn  Gebir,  and maybe at  last to the  great falls of  Rauros where the 
River thunders down from Nen Hithoel; and there  are other perils. Boats may 
make your journey less toilsome for  a while.  Yet they  will  not  give you  
counsel:  in the  end  you must leave  them and the River, and turn  west -or 
east.' 
     Aragorn  thanked  Celeborn  many times. The gift of boats comforted him 
much, not least because there would now be no  need to decide his course for 
some days. The others, too, looked more hopeful. Whatever perils  lay ahead, 
it seemed better to float down the broad tide of Anduin to meet them than to 
plod   forward  with  bent backs. Only Sam was doubtful: he at any rate still 
thought boats as bad as wild horses, or worse, and not  all the dangers that 
he had survived made him think better of them. 
     `All shall be prepared for you and await you  at the  haven before noon 
tomorrow,'  said  Celeborn.  'I will send my people to you in the morning to 
help you make ready for the journey. Now we will  wish  you all a fair night  
and untroubled sleep.' 
     'Good  night,  my friends!  ' said Galadriel.  'Sleep in peace! Do  not 
trouble your  hearts overmuch with thought of  the road tonight.  Maybe  the 
paths that  you each  shall tread are  already laid before your feet, though 
you do not see them. Good night! ' 
     The  Company  now  took  their leave  and  returned to their  pavilion. 
Legolas  went with them, for this  was to be their last night in Lothlurien, 
and in spite of the words of Galadriel they wished to take counsel together. 
     For a  long time they debated what they should do, and  how it would be 
best to attempt the fulfilling of their purpose with the Ring: but they came 
to no decision. It was plain that most of them desired to go  first to Minas 
Tirith, and to  escape at least for a while from  the  terror of  the Enemy. 
They would have been willing to follow a leader  over the River and into the  
shadow of Mordor; but Frodo spoke  no word, and Aragorn was still divided in 
his mind. 

####-     His  own  plan, while Gandalf remained with  them, had been to go  with 
Boromir, and with his sword help to deliver Gondor. For he believed that the 
message of the dreams was a summons, and that the hour had come at last 
when 
the  heir of  Elendil  should  come  forth and  strive with  Sauron  for the 
mastery. But in Moria  the burden of Gandalf had been laid  on  him; and  he  
knew that he could not now forsake the Ring, if Frodo refused in  the end to  
go with  Boromir. And  yet what help could he or any of the Company give  to 
Frodo, save to walk blindly with him into the darkness?  
     `I shall go to Minas Tirith,  alone if need be, for it is my duty,' said 
Boromir; and after  that he was  silent  for a while,  sitting with his eyes 
fixed  on Frodo, as if  he was trying  to  read the Halfling's thoughts.  At 
length he spoke  again, softly, as if he was debating  with himself. `If you  
wish only to destroy  the Ring,' he said,  `then there is little use in  war 
and weapons; and the Men of Minas  Tirith  cannot  help.  But if you wish to  
destroy the armed might  of the  Dark Lord,  then it is folly  to go without 
force into his domain; and folly  to throw away.' He  paused suddenly, as if 
he had  become aware that he was  speaking his thoughts aloud. `It  would be 
folly  to  throw  lives away,  I  mean,' he ended. `It is  a choice  between 
defending a  strong place  and   walking openly  into the arms  of death.  At  
least, that is how I see it.' 
     Frodo caught something  new  and strange  in  Boromir's glance, and  he 
looked hard at  him.  Plainly Boromir's thought was different from his final 
words. It would be folly to throw away: what? The Ring of Power? He had said 
something like this  at the Council, but then he had accepted the correction 
of Elrond. Frodo looked at Aragorn,  but he seemed  deep in  his own thought 
and made no sign that he  had  heeded Boromir's wor ds.  And so  their debate 
ended. Merry and Pippin were  already asleep, and Sam was nodding. The 
night 
was growing old. 
     In the  morning, as they were  beginning  to  pack their slender goods,  
Elves that could speak their tongue came to them and brought them many gifts 
of food and clothing for the  journey.  The food was  mostly in the  form of 
very thin cakes, made of a meal that was baked a light brown on the outside, 
and inside  was  the colour of  cream. Gimli took  up one  of  the cakes and 
looked at it with a doubtful eye. 
     `Cram,' he said  under his breath,  as he broke off a crisp corner  and 

####-nibbled at it. His expression quickly changed, and  he ate  all the rest  of 
the cake with relish. 
     `No more,  no  more!' cried the  Elves laughing.  `You have eaten enough 
already for a long day's march.' 
     `I thought  it was  only a kind of cram, such as  the Dale-men make for 
journeys in the wild,' said the Dwarf.  
     `So it is,' they answered.  `But we call it   lembas or waybread, and it 
is mor e strengthening than any food made  by Men, and  it  is more  pleasant  
than cram, by all accounts.' 
     `Indeed it is,' said Gimli.  'Why it is better than  the honey-cakes of 
the Beornings,  and  that  is great praise,  for the Beornings  are the best 
bakers that I know of; but they are none too willing to deal out their cakes 
to travellers in these days. You are kindly hosts! ' 
     'All the same, we bid you spare the food,' they  said. 'Eat little at a  
time,  and only at need. For these things  are given to  serve  you when all  
else fails.  The  cakes  will keep sweet  for  many many  days, if  they are 
unbroken and left in their leaf-wrappings, as we have brought them. One will 
keep a traveller on his feet for a day of  long labour, even if he be one of 
the tall Men of Minas Tirith.' 
     The  Elves next unwrapped  and gave to each  of the Company the clothes 
they  had  brought.  For  each they  had  provided a  hood  and cloak,  made 
according to his size, of the light but warm silken stuff that the Galadhrim 
wove. It was  hard to say of what  colour they were:  grey with  the hue  of 
twilight under  the trees they seemed  to be; and yet if they were moved, or  
set in another light, they were green as shadowed leaves, or brown as fallow 
fields by  night, dusk -silver  as  water under  the  stars. Each  cloak  was 
fastened about the neck with a brooch like a green leaf veined with silver. 
     `Are these magic cloaks? ' asked Pippin, looking at them with wonder. 
     `I do  not  know what you mean by  that,' answered  the  leader  of the 
Elves. `They are fair garments, and the web is good, for it was made in this 
land. They are elvish robes certainly, if that is what  you  mean. Leaf  and  
branch, water and  stone: they have the hue and beauty  of all  these things 
under the twilight of Lurien that we  love; for  we  put the thought of  all 
that we love into all that  we make. Yet they  are garments, not armour, and 
they  will not turn shaft or blade. But they should serve you well: they are 
light to wear, and warm enough  or cool enough at  need.  And  you will find 
them a great aid in keeping out of the sight of unfriendly eyes, whether you  

####-walk among the stones or the trees. You are indeed high in the favour of the 
Lady! For she herself and her maidens wove this stuff; and never before have 
we clad strangers in the garb of our own people.' 
     After  their morning meal the Company said farewell to  the lawn by the 
fountain.  Their  hearts  were  heavy;  for it was a fair  place, and it had 
become like home to  them,  though they could not count the days and  nights 
that they had passed there. As they stood for a moment looking at the  white 
water in the sunlight, Haldir came walking towards them over the green grass 
of the glade. Frodo greeted him with delight. 
     'I have  returned from the  Northern  Fences,'  said the Elf, `and I am 
sent  now  to be your guide again.  The Dimrill Dale is  full of vapour  and 
clouds of  smoke,  and the  mountains are troubled. There are noises in  the 
deeps  of the  earth. If any of you had thought  of returning northwards  to 
your homes, you would not have been able to pass  that  way. But come!  Your 
path now goes south.' 
     As they walked through Caras Galadhon the green ways were empty; but in 
the trees above them many voices were murmuring and singing. They 
themselves 
went  silently. At last Haldir  led them down the  southward  slopes  of the 
hill, and they came again  to  the great  gate hung with  lamps, and to  the 
white  bridge; and so they  passed out and left the city of the Elves.  Then 
they turned  away from the paved road  and took  a path that went off into a  
deep  thicket  of  mallorn-trees,  and passed  on,  winding through  rolling 
woodlands  of  silver  shadow,  leading   them  ever  down,  southwards  and 
eastwards, towards the shores of the River. 
     They had gone  some ten miles and noon  was at hand when they came on a  
high green  wall. Passing through  an opening they came  suddenly out of the 
trees. Before them  lay a  long  lawn of shining grass, studded  with golden 
elanor  that  glinted  in the sun.  The lawn ran  out  into a narrow  tongue 
between  bright margins:  on  the  right  and  west  the  Silverlode  flowed 
glittering; on the left and  east the Great River  rolled its broad  waters, 
deep and  dark.  On  the  further  shores the  woodlands  still  marched  on 
southwards as far as the eye could see, but  all the banks  were  bleak  and 
bare. No mallorn lifted its gold-hung boughs beyond the Land of Lurien. 
     On  the bank of the Silverlode, at some distance up from the meeting of 
the  streams,  there was a hythe of white stones and  white wood. By it were 
moored many boats and  barges.  Some were  brightly painted, and shone  with 

####-silver and gold  and green, but most were either  white or grey. Three small 
grey boats had been made ready for  the travellers, and  in  these the Elves 
stowed their goods. And they added  also coils of rope, three  to each boat. 
Slender they looked, but strong,  silken  to the touch, grey of hue like the 
elven-cloaks.  
     `What  are  these?  '  asked  Sam,  handling  one  that  lay  upon  the 
greensward. 
     `Ropes indeed! ' answered an Elf  from the  boats.  'Never  travel  far 
without  a rope! And one that is long and strong and light. Such  are these. 
They may be a help in many needs.' 
     'You don't  need to  tell me  that! ' said Sam. `I came without any and 
I've been worried ever since. But I was wondering  what these  were made of,  
knowing a bit about rope -making: it's in the family as you might say.' 
     `They are made of hithlain ,' said the Elf, `but there is no time now to 
instruct  you  in  the  art of their making. Had we  known that  this  craft  
delighted  you, we  could  have taught  you  much. But  now alas! unless you 
should at some time return hither, you must be content with our gift. May it 
serve you well! ' 
     `Come! ' said Haldir.  `All is now ready  for you. Enter the boats! But 
take care at first! ' 
     'Heed the words! ' said the other  Elves. 'These boats are light-built, 
and they are crafty and  unlike the boats of other folk. They will not sink, 
lade them as you will; but they are wayward if mishandled. It would be  wise 
if you accustomed yourselves to stepping  in and out,  here where there is a  
landing-place, before you set off downstream.' 
     The Company  was  arranged in this way: Aragorn, Frodo, and Sam were in 
one boat; Boromir,  Merry,  and Pippin  in another; and  in the  third  were 
Legolas and Gimli, who  had now become fast friends. In this last boat  most 
of  the goods and packs were  stowed. The boats were moved and  steered with 
short-handled paddles that had broad leaf-shaped blades. When all  was ready 
Aragorn led them  on a trial up  the Silverlode. The current  was  swift and 
they went  forward slowly. Sam sat  in the  bows,  clutching the  sides, and 
looking back wistfully to  the  shore. The sunlight  glittering on the water  
dazzled his eyes.  As they passed beyond the green field of the Tongue,  the 
trees  drew down to the  river's  brink. Here and there golden lea ves tossed 
and floated on the  rippling stream.  The air was very bright and still, and 
there was a silence, except for the high distant song of larks. 

####-     They turned a sharp bend in  the river, and there, sailing proudly down 
the stream toward them, they saw a  swan of great size. The water rippled on  
either  side of the white  breast beneath its curving neck. Its  beak  shone 
like burnished gold, and its eyes glinted like jet set in yellow stones; its 
huge white wings  were half lifted.  A music came down the river as it  drew 
nearer; and suddenly they perceived that it was  a ship, wrought  and carved 
with elven-skill in the likeness of  a bird. Two elves clad in white steered 
it  with  black paddles. In the midst of the vessel sat Celeborn, and behind 
him  stood Galadriel, tall and white; a circlet of golden flowers was in her  
hair, and in her hand she held a harp, and  she sang. Sad and  sweet was the 
sound of her voice in the cool clear air: 
     I sang of leaves, of leaves of gold, and leaves of gold  there grew:  
     Of wind I sang, a wind there came and in the branches blew.  
     Beyond the Sun, beyond the Moon, the foam was on the Sea, 
     And by the strand of Ilmarin there grew a golden Tree. 
     Beneath the stars of Ever-eve in Eldamar it shone, 
     In Eldamar beside the walls of Elven Tirion. 
     There long the golden leaves have grown upon the branching years, 
     While here beyond the Sundering Seas now fall the Elven-tears. 
     O Lurien! The Winter comes, the bare and leafless Day; 
     The leaves are falling in the stream, the River flows away. 
     O Lurien! Too long I have dwelt upon this Hither Shore 
     And in a fading crown have twined the golden elanor. 
     But if of ships I now should sing, what ship would come to me, 
     What ship would bear me ever back across so wide a Sea? 
     Aragorn stayed his boat as the Swan-ship drew alongside. The Lady ended 
her  song and greeted them. `We have come to bid you our last farewell,' she 
said, `and to speed you with blessings from our land . ' 
     `Though  you have  been our guests,'  said Celeborn, `you have  not yet 
eaten with  us, and we  bid you, therefore, to a parting feast, here between 
the flowing waters that will bear you far from Lurien.' 
     The Swan passed on slowly to the hythe, and they turned their boats and 
followed it. There in the last  end  of  Egladil  upon  the  green grass the 
parting feast was held;  but Frodo ate  and drank  little,  heeding only the 
beauty of the Lady and her voice. She seemed no longer perilous or terrible,  
nor  filled with hidden power. Already she seemed to him, as by men of later 
days Elves still  at times are seen: present and yet remote, a living vision 

####-of that  which has already been left far behind by  the  flowing  streams of 
Time. 
     After they had eaten and drunk,  sitting upon the grass, Celeborn spoke 
to them again of their journey, and lifting his hand he pointed south to the 
woods beyond the Tongue. 
     `As you go down the water,' he said, `you will find that the trees will 
fail, and you  will come to a barren country. There the River flows in stony 
vale amid  high moors, until at last after many leagues it comes to the tall 
island  of the Tindrock,  that we call Tol Brandir. There it casts its  arms 
about the steep shores of the  isle, and falls then  with a  great noise and 
smoke  over the cataracts of Rauros down into the Nindalf, the Wetwang as it 
is called in your  tongue.  That  is a wide region of sluggish fen where the 
stream becomes tortuous and much divided. There the Entwash flows in by 
many 
mouths from the Forest of  Fangorn  in the west. About that stream, on  this 
side of the Great River, lies Rohan. On the further side are the bleak hills 
of the Emyn Muil. The wind blows from the East there, for they look out over  
the Dead Marshes and the Noman-lands to Cirith Gorgor and the black gates of 
Mordor. 
     'Boromir, and any  that go with him seeking  Minas Tirith, will do well 
to leave the Great River  above Rauros and cross the Entwash before it finds 
the marshes.  Yet  they  should  not  go too far  up  that  stream, nor risk  
becoming entangled in the  Forest of Fangorn. That is a strange land, and is 
now  little  known. But  Boromir  and Aragorn  doubtless  do  not  need this 
warning.' 
     'Indeed we have heard  of Fangorn in  Minas Tirith,' said Boromir. `But 
what I have heard seems to me for the most part old wives' tales, such as we  
tell to our children. All that lies north of Rohan is now  to us so far away 
that fancy can wander freely there. Of old Fangorn lay  upon the  borders of 
our realm; but it is now many lives of men since  any of  us  visited it, to 
prove or disprove the legends that have come down from distant years. 
     `I have myself  been at whiles in Rohan, but I have  never  crossed  it 
northwards. When I  was sent out as a messenger, I passed through the Gap by 
the skirts  of the White Mountains,  and crossed the Isen  and the Greyflood  
into Northerland.  A  long and wearisome  journey.  Four  hundred  leagues I 
reckoned it, and it took me many  months; for  I lost my horse at Tharbad, at 
the fording  of  the  Greyflood. After that  journey,  and  the road  I have 

####-trodden  with  this Company, I  do  not much doubt  that I shall find a  way 
through Rohan, and Fangorn too, if need be.' 
     `Then  I need say no more,' said Celeborn. 'But do not despise the lore 
that has come down from distant years; for oft it may chance  that old wives 
keep in memory word of things that once were needful for the wise to know.' 
     Now Galadriel rose  from the grass, and taking a  cup  from one  of her  
maidens she filled it with white mead and gave it to Celeborn. 
     'Now it is time  to drink the cup of  farewell,' she said. `Drink, Lord 
of  the Galadhrim!  And let not your heart be  sad though night  must follow 
noon, and already our evening draweth nigh.' 
     Then  she brought  the  cup to each of the Company, and bade them drink  
and farewell. But when they had drunk she commanded them to sit again on the 
grass,  and  chairs were set  for her and  for Celeborn.  Her maidens   stood 
silent about her, and a while  she looked upon her guests. At last she spoke 
again. 
     'We have drunk  the cup of  parting,' she  said, `and the  shadows fall 
between us. But  before you go,  I have brought in  my ship gifts  which the 
Lord and Lady of the Galadhrim now offer  you in memory of Lothlurien.' 
Then 
she called to each in turn. 
     `Here is  the gift  of Celeborn  and  Galadriel to the  leader  of your 
Company,' she  said to Aragorn, and she gave him a sheath that had been made 
to fit his sword.  It was  overlaid  with  a  tracery of flowers  and leaves 
wrought of silver and gold, and on it were set in elven runes formed of many 
gems the name And®ril and the lineage of the sword. 
     `The  blade  that  is  drawn from  this  sheath shall  not be stained or  
broken  even in  defeat,' she said. `But is there aught else that you desire 
of me at our parting? For  darkness will flow between us, and it may be that 
we shall  not meet  again, unless it be far  hence upon  a  road that has no 
returning.' 
     And Aragorn answered: 'Lady, you know  all my desire, and  long held in 
keeping the only  treasure that I seek. Yet it is not yours to give me, even 
if you would; and only through darkness shall I come to it.' 
     `Yet maybe this will lighten  your heart,' said Galadriel;  `for it was 
left in my care to be given to you, should you pass through this land.' Then 
she lifted from  her lap  a  great stone  of a clear green, set in  a silver  
brooch that  was wrought in the likeness of an eagle with  outspread  wings;  

####-and as  she held  it  up  the gem flashed  like the sun shining through  the 
leaves  of spring. `This  stone I  gave to Celebrnan my daughter, and she to 
hers; and now it comes to you as a token of hope. In this hour take the name 
that was foretold for you, Elessar, the Elfstone of the house of Elendil! ' 
     Then Aragorn took  the stone and pinned the brooch upon his breast, and 
those  who  saw  him wondered; for they  had  not marked before how tall and 
kingly  he stood, and it seemed to  them that many years of toil  had  fallen 
from his shoulders. `For the  gifts that you have  given me I thank you,' he 
said, 'O Lady of  Lurien of whom were sprung Celebrnan  and Arwen  
Evenstar. 
What praise could I say more? ' 
     The Lady bowed her hea d, and she turned then to Boromir, and to him she 
gave a belt of gold; and to  Merry  and Pippin  she gave small silver belts, 
each  with a  clasp wrought like a golden flower. To Legolas she  gave a bow 
such as  the Galadhrim used,  longer and  stouter than the bows of Mirkwood, 
and strung with a string of elf-hair. With it went a quiver of arrows.  
     `For you little gardener and lover of trees,' she said to  Sam, `I have 
only a small gift.' She put into his hand a little box of plain  grey  wood, 
unadorned save for  a single silver rune upon the lid.  `Here  is set  G for  
Galadriel,' she said; `but  also it may stand  for garden in your tongue. In 
this box there is earth from my orchard, and such blessing  as Galadriel has 
still to bestow  is upon it. It will not keep  you on your  road, nor defend 
you  against any peril; but if you keep it and see your  home again at last, 
then perhaps it may reward  you.  Though you should find all barren and laid 
waste, there will be  few gardens in  Middle-earth that will bloom like your 
garden, if you sprinkle this earth there. Then you may  remember  Galadriel, 
and catch a glimpse  far off  of Lurien,  that you  have  seen  only  in our 
winter.  For our spring and our summer are gone  by,  and they will never be 
seen  on earth again save in memory.' 
     Sam  went  red  to  the  ears  and muttered something inaudible, as  he 
clutched the box and bowed as well as he could. 
     `And what gift would a Dwarf ask of the Elves? ' said Galadriel turning 
to Gimli. 
     `None,   Lady,' answered Gimli. `It is  enough for  me  to have seen the 
Lady of the Galadhrim, and to have heard her gentle words.' 
     `Hear all ye Elves! ' she cried to those about her. `Let none say again 
that Dwarves  are grasping  and ungracious! Yet surely, Gimli son of  Gluin, 

####-you desire something that I could give? Name it, I bid you! You shall not be 
the only guest without a gift.' 
     `There  is  nothing,  Lady  Galadriel,'  said  Gimli,  bowing  low  and 
stammering. `Nothing, unless it might be-unless it is permitted to ask. nay, 
to name a single strand of your hair, which  surpasses the gold of the earth 
as the stars surpass the gems of the mine. I do not ask for such a gift. But 
you commanded me to name my desire.' 
     The Elves stirred and murmured with astonishment, and Celeborn gazed at 
the Dwarf in wonder, but the Lady smiled. 'It is said that the  skill of the 
Dwarves is in their hands rather than in their tongues ' she said; `yet that 
is not true of Gimli. For  none have ever  made to me a request  so bold and 
yet so  courteous. And  how shall I  refuse, since I commanded him to speak? 
But tell me, what would you do with such a gift? ' 
     `Treasure it, Lady,' he answered, `in memory of your words to me at our 
first meeting. And if ever I return to the  smithies of my home, it shall be 
set in imperishable crystal to  be an heirloom of my house, and a  pledge of 
good will between the Mountain and the Wood until the end of days.' 
     Then the  Lady unbraided  one  of her long tresses, and  cut o ff  three 
golden hairs, and laid them in Gimli's hand. `These words shall  go with the 
gift,' she said. `I do not foretell, for all foretelling is now vain: on the 
one hand lies darkness, and on the other only hope. But if  hope  should not 
fail, then I sa y to you, Gimli son of Gluin, that your hands shall flow with 
gold, and yet over you gold shall have no dominion. 
     `And you, Ring-bearer,' she said, turning to Frodo. `I come to you last 
who are not last in my thoughts. For you I have prepared  this.'  She held up 
a small crystal phial: it glittered as she moved it, and rays of white light 
sprang from  her hand.  'In this  phial,' she said, `is  caught the light of 
Edrendil's  star,  set amid  the  waters of my fountain. It will shine still 
brighter when night is  about you. May it be a  light to you in dark places, 
when all other lights go out. Remember Galadriel and her Mirror! ' 
     Frodo took the phial, and for a moment as it shone between them, he saw 
her  again  standing  like a  queen,  great and  beautiful,  but  no  longer  
terrible. He bowed, but found no words to say. 
     Now the Lady arose, and Celeborn led them back to  the  hythe. A yellow 
noon lay  on the  green land  of  the Tongue, and  the water  glittered with 
silver. All at last was  made  ready. The Company took  their places in  the 
boats as  before. Crying farewell, the Elves of Lurien with long  grey poles 

####-thrust them out into the flowing stream, and  the rippling waters bore  them 
slowly  away. The  travellers  sat still  without moving or speaking. On the 
green  bank near to the very point  of the Tongue  the  Lady Galadriel stood 
alone and silent. As they passed her they  turned and their eyes watched her  
slowly  floating away  from  them.  For  so it seemed  to  them:  Lurien was 
slipping  backward, like a bright ship masted with enchanted trees,  sailing 
on to forgotten shores, while they sat  helpless upon the margin of the grey 
and leafless world. 
     Even as they gazed,  the Silverlode passed out into the currents of the 
Great River, and their boats turned  and began to speed southwards. Soon the 
white form of the Lady  was small and  distant. She  shone like a window  of 
glass  upon a far hill in the westering sun, or as a remote lake seen from a  
mountain: a  crystal fallen in the lap of the land. Then  it seemed to Frodo 
that she lifted her arms in a  final farewell, and far but piercing-clear on 
the following wind came the sound of her voice singing. But now she  sang in 
the  ancient tongue of the Elves  beyond the Sea, and he  did not understand  
the words: fair was the music, but it did not comfort him. 
     Yet as is the way of Elvish words, they remained  graven in his memory,  
and long afterwards he interpreted  them, as well as he could:  the language 
was that of Elven -song and spoke of things little known on Middle-earth. 
     Ai! lauril lantar lassi s®rinen, 
     Yjni ®nutiml ve rbmar aldaron! 
     Yjni ve lintl yuldar avbnier 
     mi oromardi lisse-miruvureva 
     And®nl pella, Vardo tellumar 
     nu luini yassen tintilar i eleni 
     umaryo airetbri-lnrinen. 
 
     Sn man i yulma nin enquantuva? 
 
     An sn Tintalll Varda Oiolosslo  
     ve fanyar mbryat Elentbri ortanl 
     ar ilyl tier undulbvl lumbull; 
     ar sindanuriello caita mornil 
     i falmalinnar imbl met, ar hnsil 
     unt®pa Calaciryo mnri oiall. 
     Si vanwa nb, Rumello vanwa, Valimar! 

####-     Nambril! Nai hiruvalyl Valimar. 
     Nai elyl hiruva. Nambril! 
     `Ah! like gold fall the leaves in the  wind,  long years numberless  as 
the  wings of trees!  The long years have passed like  swift draughts of the 
sweet mead in lofty halls beyond the West, beneath the blue  vaults of Varda  
wherein the stars  tremble  in the  song of her voice, holy and queenly. Who  
now shall refill  the cup for me? For now the Kindler, Varda,  the  Queen of 
the Stars,  from Mount Everwhite has uplifted her hands like clouds, and all  
paths are drowned deep in shadow; and out of a grey country darkness lies on 
the foaming waves between  us, and mist  covers the jewels of Calacirya  for  
ever. Now lost, lost to those from the East is Valimar! Farewell! Maybe thou 
shalt find Valimar. Maybe even thou shalt find it. Farewell!  ' Varda is the 
name of that Lady whom the Elves in these lands of exile name Elbereth. 
     Suddenly the River  swept round a bend, and the banks rose  upon either 
side, and the light of Lurien was hidden. To that fair land Frodo never came 
again. 
     The travellers  now  turned their faces  to  the journey;  the  sun was 
before  them, and their  eyes were dazzled, for all were  filled with tears. 
Gimli wept openly. 
     `I have  looked  the  last  upon that which was  fairest,' he  said  to 
Legolas his companion. `Henceforward I will call  nothing fair, unless it be 
her gift.' He put his hand to his breast. 
     `Tell me,  Legolas, why  did I  come on this Quest?  Little did I  know 
where  the  chief peril  lay!  Truly Elrond spoke, saying that we  could not 
foresee what we might meet upon our road. Torment in the dark was the danger 
that I feared, and it did not hold me back. But I would not have come, had I 
known the  danger of light and joy. Now I have taken my worst wound in  this 
parting, even if I were to go this night straight to the Dark Lord. Alas for 
Gimli son of Gluin! ' 
     `Nay! ' said Legolas. `Alas for us all! And for all that walk the world 
in these after -days. For  such is the  way of  it:  to find and lose,  as it 
seems to those whose boat is on the running stream. But I count you blessed, 
Gimli son of Gluin: for your loss you suffer of your own  free will, and you  
might have chosen otherwise. But you have not forsaken  your companions, 
and 
the least reward that you shall have is that  the memory of Lothlurien shall 
remain ever clear  and unstained in your heart, and  shall neither  fade nor  

####-grow stale.' 
     `Maybe,' said  Gimli;  `and  I  thank you  for  your words.  True words 
doubtless; yet all  such  comfort  is cold.  Memory  is not  what  the heart 
desires. That is only a mirror, be it clear as Kheled-zvram. Or  so says the 
heart  of Gimli  the Dwarf. Elves  may see  things otherwise.  Indeed I have 
heard that for them memory is more like to the waking world than to a dream. 
Not so for Dwarves.  
     'But let us talk no more of it. Look to the boat! She is too low in the 
water with all this baggage, and  the Great River is swift. I do not wish to 
drown my grief in cold water.' He took up  a paddle, and steered towards the 
western bank, following Aragorn's boat ahead, which had already moved out of 
the middle stream. 
     So the  Company went on their long way, down the wide  hurrying waters,  
borne ever  southwards. Bare woods stalked along either bank, and they could 
not see any glimpse of the lands behind. The breeze died  away and the River 
flowed without a sound. No voice  of  bird broke the silence.  The  sun grew 
misty as the day grew old, until it gleamed in a pale sky  like a high white 
pearl. Then it faded into the West, and dusk came  early, followed by a grey 
and  starless night. Far into the dark quiet hours they  floated on, guiding 
their boats under the overhanging shadows  of the western woods. Great trees 
passed  by like ghosts, thrusting their twisted thirsty  roots  through  the 
mist down into the water. It was dreary and cold. Frodo sat and  listened to 
the  faint lap and  gurgle  of  the River fretting among the  tree-roots and 
driftwood near the shore, until  his  head nodded and he fell into an uneasy 
sleep. 
 

####- 

Chapter 9. The Great River 

 
 
     Frodo  was roused  by Sam. He found  that  he was  lying, well wrapped,  
under tall grey-skinned trees in a quiet corner of the woodlands on the west 
bank of the  Great River, Anduin. He had slept the night  away, and the grey 
of morning was dim among the bare branches. Gimli was busy with a small fire 
near at hand. 
     They started  again  before   the day  was broad.  Not that most of  the 
Company were eager to hurry southwards: they were content that the decision, 
which they must make at  latest  when they came  to  Rauros and the Tindrock  
Isle, still lay some days ahead; and they let the River  bear them on at its 
own  pace,  having no desire to hasten  towards  the perils that lay beyond, 
whichever course they  took in  the end. Aragorn  let  them  drift with  the 
stream as they wished, husbanding their  strength against weariness to come.  
But he insisted that at least they should  start early  each day and journey 
on  far into the evening; for he felt  in his heart that  time was pressing, 
and he  feared that the Dark Lord  had not been idle while  they lingered in 
Lurien. 
     Nonetheless  they saw no sign of  an enemy that  day, nor the next. The 
dull grey hours passed without event. As the third  day of their voyage wore 
on the lands changed slowly: the trees  thinned and  then failed altogether. 
On  the eastern bank to their left  they saw long formless slopes stretching 
up and away toward the sky; brown and withered they  looked, as  if fire had 
passed  over them, leaving no  living  blade of green:  an  unfriendly waste 
without even a broken tree or a  bold  stone to relieve the  emptiness. They 
had come to  the Brown Lands  that lay, vast and  desolate, between Southern 
Mirkwood and the hills of the Emyn Muil. What pestilence or war or evil deed 
of the Enemy had so blasted all that region even Aragorn could not tell. 
     Upon the west to their  right the land was treeless  also,  but it  was 
flat, and  in many places green  with wide plains of grass. On this side  of 
the River they passed forests of great reeds, so tall that they shut out all 
view to  the  west,  as  the  little  boats  went   rustling by  along  their 
fluttering borders. Their dark withered plumes bent and tossed in  the light 
cold airs, hissing softly and sadly. Here and there through  openings  Frodo 
could catch sudden  glimpses of rolling meads, and far  beyond them hills in 

####-the  sunset, and  away on  the edge of sight a dark line, where marched  the 
southernmost ranks of the Misty Mountains.  
     There was no sign of living moving  things,  save birds. Of these there 
were many: small  fowl whistling  and  piping in  the reeds,  but  they were 
seldom seen.  Once  or  twice the  travellers  heard  the rush  and whine of 
swan-wings, and looking up they saw a great phalanx streaming along the sky. 
     `Swans! ' said Sam. `And mighty big ones too! ' 
     `Yes,' said Aragorn, 'and they are black swans.' 
     `How wide and empty and mournful all this country looks! '  said Frodo.  
`I  always imagined  that as one journeyed  south it got warmer and merrier,  
until winter was left behind for ever.' 
     'But we  have not journeyed  far south yet,'  answered Aragorn. `It  is 
still winter, and we are far from the sea. Here the world  is cold until the 
sudden spring, and we  may yet have snow again. Far away down in the Bay  of 
Belfalas, to which Anduin runs, it is warm and merry, maybe, or would be but 
for the  Enemy. But here we are  not above sixty  leagues, I guess, south of 
the Southfarthing away in your Shire, hundreds of long miles yonder. You are 
looking now south-west across the north  plains of the Riddermark, Rohan the 
land of the Horse-lords. Ere long we shall come to the mouth of the Limlight 
that runs  down from Fangorn to join  the  Great  River. That  is  the north 
boundary  of Rohan; and  of old all that lay between  Limlight and the White 
Mountains belonged to the Rohirrim. It  is a rich and pleasant land, and its 
grass has no rival; but in these evil days folk do not dwell by the River or  
ride often  to its shores.  Anduin  is  wide, yet  the orcs  can shoot their 
arrows  far across  the stream; and of late, it is said,  they have dared to 
cross the water and raid the herds and studs of Rohan.' 
     Sam looked from bank to  bank  uneasily. The trees had  seemed  hostile 
before, as if they harboured secret eyes and  lurking dangers; now he wished  
that  the trees were still  there. He felt  that the  Company was too naked, 
afloat in  little open  boats  in  the midst of shelterless  lands, and on a  
river that was the frontier of war. 
     In  the  next day  or two, as they went on, borne  steadily southwards, 
this feeling  of insecurity grew  on  all the Company. For  a whole day they 
took to  their  paddles  and  hastened forward. The banks  slid by. Soon the 
River broadened and grew more shallow; long stony beaches lay upon the east, 
and  there were  gravel-shoals  in  the water, so that  careful steering was 
needed. The Brown Lands rose into bleak wolds, over which flowed a chill air 

####-from  the  East. On  the  other  side the meads had  become rolling downs of 
withered grass amidst a land of fen and tussock. Frodo shivered, thinking of 
the lawns and fountains, the clear sun and gentle rains of Lothlurien. There 
was little speech and  no laughter  in any of  the boats. Each member of the 
Company was busy with his own thoughts.  
     The heart of  Legolas was running under  the stars of a summer night in 
some  northern glade amid  the beech-woods; Gimli  was fingering gold in his 
mind, and wondering if it were  fit to be  wrought into the  housing  of the 
Lady's gift.  Merry and  Pippin in the middle  boat  were  ill at  ease, for  
Boromir sat muttering  to himself, sometimes biting his nails,  as  if  some 
restlessness or doubt consumed him, sometimes  seizing a paddle and  driving 
the boat  close behind Aragorn's. Then Pippin, who sat  in  the bow  looking 
back, caught a queer gleam in his eye, as he peered forward gazing at Frodo.  
Sam had  long  ago  made up his mind  that,  though boats were maybe  not as 
dangerous  as  he  had been  brought  up  to  believe,  they were  far  more 
uncomfortable  than even  he had  imagined. He was   cramped  and  miserable, 
having nothing to do but stare at the winter -lands crawling by and the  grey 
water on either side of him. Even when the paddles were in use they  did not 
trust Sam with one. 
     As dusk drew down on the fourth day, he was looking back over the bowed 
heads of Frodo and Aragorn and the following boats; he was drowsy and 
longed 
for camp and the feel of earth under his toes. Suddenly something caught his 
sight: at first he stared  at it listlessly, then  he sat  up and rubbed his 
eyes; but when he looked again he could not see it any more. 
     That night they camped  on a small eyot close to  the western bank. Sam 
lay rolled  in  blankets  beside Frodo. `I had a funny dream an hour or  two 
before we  stopped, Mr.  Frodo,' he said. `Or maybe it wasn't a dream. Funny 
it was anyway.' 
     `Well,  what was it? ' said  Frodo,  knowing that  Sam would not settle 
down until he had told his tale, whatever it was. 'I haven't seen or thought 
of anything to make me smile since we left Lothlurien.' 
     `It wasn't funny that way, Mr. Frodo.  It was  queer.  All wrong, if it 
wasn't a dream. And you had best hear it. It was like this: I saw a log with 
eyes!  ' 
     `The log's  all right,' said Frodo.  `There are  many in the River. But 
leave out the eyes!  ' 

####-     `That I won't,'  said Sam. ` 'Twas  the eyes as made me sit  up,  so to 
speak. I saw what I took to be a log floating along in the half-light behind 
Gimli's boat; but I didn't  give much heed to it. Then  it seemed as if  the 
log  was slowly  catching us  up. And  that  was peculiar, as you might say, 
seeing as we were all  floating on  the stream together. Just then I saw the 
eyes: two pale sort of points, shiny-like, on a hump at the  near end of the 
log. What's  more, it  wasn't a  log, for it had  paddle-feet, like a swan's 
almost, only they seemed bigger, and kept dipping in and out of the water. 
     'That's when  I sat right up  and rubbed  my  eyes,  meaning  to give a  
shout,  if  it was still there  when I had rubbed the drowse out of my head.  
For the whatever -it-was was coming along fast now and  getting close  behind 
Gimli. But whether those two lamps spotted me moving and staring, or whether 
I came to my senses, I don't know. When I looked again, it wasn't there. Yet  
I  think I caught a glimpse with  the tail  of-my eye, as the saying  is, of 
something dark shooting under the shadow of the bank. I couldn't see no more 
eyes though. 
     `I said to myself: "dreaming again, Sam Gamgee," I said: and  I said no 
more just then. But  I've been  thinking since. and now I'm not so sure. What 
do you make of it, Mr. Frodo? ' 
     'I  should make nothing of it  but a log and the dusk and sleep in your 
eyes Sam, said  Frodo, if this was the  first  time that those eyes had been 
seen. But it isn't. I saw them away back north before we reached Lurien. And 
I saw  a strange creature with eyes climbing to the  flet that night. Haldir 
saw it too. And do you remember the report of the  Elves that went after the  
orc-band?  ' 
     `Ah,'  said  Sam. `I  do;  and  I remember  more too.  I don't  like my 
thoughts; but thinking of one thing and another, and Mr. Bilbo's stories and 
all, I fancy I  could put a name on the creature,  at a guess. A nasty name. 
Gollum, maybe?  ' 
     `Yes, that  is what  I  have feared for  some  time,' said  Frodo. `Ever  
since  the night on the flet. I suppose he was lurking in Moria, and  picked 
up our trail then;  but I hoped that our stay in Lurien would throw  him off 
the scent again. The miserable creature must  have  been hiding in the woods 
by the Silverlode, watching us start off! ' 
     `That's about it,'  said Sam. `And  we'd better be a  bit more watchful 
ourselves,  or we'll  feel some  nasty fingers  round our necks one of these 
nights, if we ever wake up to feel anything. And   that's what I  was leading 

####-up to. No need to trouble  Strider or the others tonight. I'll keep watch. I 
can sleep tomorrow, being no more than luggage in a boat, as you might say.' 
     `I might,' said Frodo, `and I might say "luggage with eyes".  You shall 
watch; but only if  you promise  to  wake me  halfway  towards  morning,  if 
nothing happens before then.' 
     In the  dead hours Frodo came out  of a  deep dark  sleep  to find  Sam 
shaking him. `It's a shame to wake you,' whispered Sam, `but that's what you 
said. There's  nothing  to  tell,  or not much. I thought I heard  some soft  
plashing and a sniffing noise, a while  back;  but  you hear  a lot  of such 
queer sounds by a river at night.' 
     He lay down, and Frodo sat up, huddled in his blankets,   and fought off 
his sleep. Minutes or hours passed  slowly, and  nothing happened. Frodo was 
just yielding  to the temptation to lie down again when a dark shape, hardly 
visible, floated close to one of the moored boats. A long whitish hand could  
be dimly seen as it shot out and grabbed the gunwale; two pale lamplike eyes 
shone coldly as  they peered inside, and then they  lifted  and gazed up  at 
Frodo  on the eyot. They were not more than a yard or  two  away,  and Frodo 
heard  the  soft hiss of intaken breath. He stood up, drawing Sting from its 
sheath, and faced the eyes. Immediately their light was shut  off. There was 
another hiss and a splash, and the dark log-shape shot away downstream  into 
the night. Aragorn stirred in his sleep, turned over, and sat up` 
     'What is it? ' he whispered, springing  up and coming to Frodo. `I felt 
something in my sleep. Why have you drawn your sword? ' 
     `Gollum,' answered Frodo. 'Or at least, so I guess.' 
     `Ah! '  said Aragorn. `So you know about our little footpad, do you? He 
padded after us all through Moria and right down to Nimrodel. Since we  took  
to boats,  he has been lying on a  log  and paddling with  hands and feet. I 
have tried  to catch him once or twice at night; but he is slier than a fox, 
and a s slippery as a  fish. I hoped the river -voyage would beat him, but  he 
is too clever a waterman. 
     `We  shall have to  try going faster tomorrow. You lie down  now, and I 
will keep watch for what is left of the night.  I wish I could  lay my hands 
on the wretch.  We might make him useful. But if I cannot, we shall have  to 
try  and lose him. He is very dangerous. Quite apart from murder by night on 
his own account, he may put any enemy that is about on our track.' 
     The night  passed without  Gollum showing  so  much as  a shadow again. 
After that the Company kept a sharp look -out, but they saw no more of Gollum 

####-while  the voyage lasted.  If he  was still following, he  was very wary and 
cunning.  At Aragorn's bidding they paddled now  for  long  spells, and  the 
banks went  swiftly  by.  But  they  saw little  of the  country,  for  they 
journeyed mostly by night and  twilight, resting by day, and lying as hidden  
as the  land  allowed.  In this way the  time passed without event until the 
seventh day. 
     The weather was still grey and overcast,  with  wind from the East, but 
as evening drew into night the sky away westward cleared, and pools of faint 
light,  yellow and pale green, opened under  the grey shores of cloud. There 
the white rind of the new Moon could be seen glimmering in the remote lakes.  
Sam looked at it and puckered his brows.  
     The next  day the  country on either side began to change  rapidly. The 
banks began to rise and grow stony.  Soon they were passing through a  hilly 
rocky land, and on both shores there were steep slopes buried in deep brakes 
of thorn and sloe, tangled with brambles and creepers. Behind them stood low 
crumbling  cliffs, and  chimneys of  grey weathered stone dark with ivy; and 
beyond  these again there  rose high ridges crowned with wind-writhen  firs.  
They were  drawing near to  the  grey  hill-country of  the  Emyn  Muil, the 
southern march of Wilderland. 
     There were many birds about the cliffs and  the  rock -chimneys, and all 
day high in  the  air flocks of  birds  had been circling, black against the 
pale sky. As  they  lay  in their  camp that day Aragorn watched the flights 
doubtfully, wondering if Gollum had been doing some mischief and the news 
of 
their voyage was now moving in the wilderness. Later as the sun was setting, 
and the Company was stirring and getting ready to start again, he descried a  
dark  spot against the  fading light:  a  great bird high  and far  off, now 
wheeling, now flying on slowly southwards. 
     'What is that, Legolas? ' he  asked, pointing to the northern sky.  'Is 
it, as I think. an eagle? ' 
     'Yes.' said  Legolas.  `It is an eagle, a hunting  eagle. I wonder what 
that forebodes. It is far from the mountains.' 
     `We will not start until it is fully dark,' said Aragorn. 
     The eighth night of their journey came. It was silent and windless; the 
grey east wind had passed away. The thin  crescent  of the  Moon had  fallen  
early into the pale sunset, but the sky was clear above, and though far away 
in the South there were great ranges of cloud that still  shone faintly,  in 

####-the West stars glinted bright. 
     `Come! ' said Aragorn. `We will  venture one more journey  by night. We 
are coming to reaches of the River that I do not know well: for I have never  
journeyed by water  in these parts before, not between here and the rapids of 
Sarn  Gebir. But if I am right in my reckoning, those are  still many  miles 
ahead. Still there are dangerous places even before we come there: rocks and 
stony  eyots in the stream. We must keep a sharp watch and not try to paddle  
swiftly.' 
     To Sam in  the leading  boat  was given the  task  of watchman. He  lay 
forward peering into the  gloom.  The night grew dark,  but the stars  above 
were strangely bright, and there was a glimmer On the face of the River.  It 
was close  on  midnight,  and they had been drifting for  some while. hardly  
using the paddles, when suddenly Sam cried out.  Only a few yards ahead dark 
shapes loomed up in the stream and he heard the swirl of racing water. There 
was  a swift  current which swung left,  towards the eastern shore where the 
channel was clear. As they were swept aside  the travellers could  see,  now 
very close, the pale foam of the River lashing against sharp rocks that were 
thrust out  far  into the stream like a  ridge of  teeth. The boats were all 
huddled together. 
     `Hoy  there, Aragorn! '  shouted Boromir, as his boat bumped  into  the 
leader.  `This is madness! We cannot  dare the Rapids  by night! But no boat 
can live in Sarn Gebir, be it night or  day.' 
     `Back,  back! ' cried Aragorn. 'Turn! Turn if you can!  '  He drove his 
paddle into the water, trying to hold the boat and bring it round. 
     'I am  out of my reckoning,' he said to Frodo.  'I did not know that we 
had come so  far: Anduin  fl ows faster  than I thought.  Sarn Gebir must  be 
close at hand already.' 
     With  great  efforts  they  checked  the boats and slowly brought  them 
about; but at first they  could make only small headway against the current, 
and all  the time they were  carried nearer and  nearer to the eastern bank. 
Now dark and ominous it loomed up in the night. 
     'All together,  paddle!  '  shouted  Boromir. 'Paddle! Or  we  shall be 
driven on the  shoals.' Even as  he  spoke  Frodo felt the  keel beneath him 
grate upon stone. 
     At that moment there was a twang of bowstrings: several arrows whistled  
over  them, and some fell among them. One smote Frodo between the  
shoulders 

####-and he lurched forward with a cry, letting go his paddle: but the arrow fell 
back. foiled by his hidden  coat of mail. Another passed  through  Aragorn's 
hood; and a  third  stood fast in the gunwale of  the  second boat, close by 
Merry's hand. Sam thought he could glimpse black  figures running to and fro 
upon the long  shingle-banks that lay under  the eastern shore.  They seemed 
very near. 
     `Yrch!' said Legolas, falling into his own tongue. 
     `Orcs! ' cried Gimli. 
     `Gollum's doing, I'll be bound.' said  Sam to Frodo. `And  a nice place 
to choose, too. The River seems set on taking us right into their arms! ' 
     They all leaned forward straining at the paddles: even Sam took a hand. 
Every moment they expected to feel the bite  of black -feathered arrows. Many 
whined overhead or struck the  water nearby; but there were no more hits. It  
was dark,  but  not  too  dark  for  the  night-eyes of  Orcs,  and  in  the 
star-glimmer they must have offered  their cunning foes some mark, unless it 
was that  the grey cloaks Of Lurien and  the grey timber of the  elf-wrought 
boats defeated the malice of the archers of Mordor. 
     Stroke by  stroke they  laboured on. In the darkness it  was hard to be 
sure that they were indeed moving at  all; but slowly the swirl of the water  
grew less, and the  shadow of the eastern bank faded back into the night . At 
last, as far as they  could judge, they had reached the middle of the stream 
again and had driven their boats back some distance above the jutting rocks.  
Then  half turning they  thrust them  with all  their  strength towards  the 
western shore. Under  the  shadow Of bushes leaning  out  over the water they 
halted and drew breath. 
     Legolas laid down his paddle and took  up the  bow that he had  brought 
from  Lurien. Then he  sprang ashore  and climbed  a few paces up  the bank. 
Stringing the bow  and  fitting an arrow  he turned, peering back  over  the 
River into  the darkness.  Across  the water  there were  shrill  cries, but 
nothing could be seen. 
     Frodo looked up at the Elf  standing tall above him, as he  gazed  into 
the night, seeking a mark to shoot at. His head was dark, crowned with sharp 
white  stars that glittered in  the  black pools  of the sky behind. But now 
rising and sailing up from the South the great clouds advanced, sending  out 
dark outriders into the starry fields. A sudden dread fell on the Company. 
     `Elbereth Gilthoniel!' sighed Legolas as he  looked up.  Even as he did 
so,  a dark shape, like a cloud and yet  not a cloud, for it moved far  more 

####-swiftly,  came out  of the blackness in  the  South,  and  sped towards  the 
Company, blotting out  all  light as it approached. Soon  it  appeared as  a  
great  winged creature, blacker  than the pits in  the night. Fierce  voices 
rose up to greet it from across the water. Frodo felt a sudden chill running 
through him and clutching  at his heart;  there was  a deadly cold, like the 
memory of an old wound, in his shoulder. He crouched down, as if to hide. 
     Suddenly  the great bow of  Lurien sang. Shrill went the arrow from the 
elven-string.  Frodo looked up. Almost above  him the  winged shape swerved. 
There was a harsh croaking scream, as it fell out of the air, vanishing down 
into the gloom of  the eastern  shore. The sky was clean again.  There was a  
tumult  of many voices far away, cursing and  wailing in  the darkness,  and  
then silence. Neither shaft nor cry came again from the east that night. 
     After a while Aragorn led the boats back upstream. They felt  their way 
along  the water's edge for some distance, until they  found a small shallow 
bay. A  few low  trees grew there close to the water, and behind them rose a  
steep  rocky  bank. Here the Company decided to stay and await the  dawn: it 
was useless  to attempt to move further by night.  They made no camp and lit 
no fire, but lay huddled in the boats, moored close together. 
     'Praised be  the bow  of Galadriel, and the  hand and eye of Legolas! ' 
said Gimli, as he munched a wafer of lembas. 'That was a mighty shot in  the 
dark, my friend!' 
     'But who can say what it hit?' said Legolas. 
     'I cannot,' said Gimli. `But  I am glad that the shadow came no nearer. 
I liked it not at all. Too much it reminded me of the shadow in Moria -- the 
shadow of the Balrog,' he ended in a whisper. 
     'It  was not a Balrog,' said Frodo, still shivering with the chill that 
had come upon him.  'It was  something  colder.  I think it was   --' Then he 
paused and fell silent. 
     'What do you think? ' asked Boromir eagerly, leaning  from his boat, as 
if he was trying to catch a glimpse of Frodo's face. 
     `I think -- No, I will not say,' answered Frodo. `Whatever it was,  its 
fall has dismayed our enemies.' 
     `So  it seems,' said Aragorn. `Yet where they  are,  and how many,  and 
what they will do next, we do not know. This night we must all be sleepless!  
Dark hides  us now. Bu t what the  day  will  show  who can tell?  Have  your 
weapons close to hand! ' 
     Sam  sat tapping the hilt of his sword as if he  were  counting on  his 

####-fingers, and looking up at  the sky. `It's very strange,' he  murmured. `The  
Moon's the same in the Shire  and  in  Wilderland, or  it  ought  to be. But 
either it's out of its running, or  I'm all  wrong  in my  reckoning. You'll 
remember,  Mr. Frodo, the  Moon was waning as we lay on the  flet up in that 
tree: a  week from the full,  I reckon. And we'd been a week on the way last  
night, when up pops  a New Moon as thin as a nail -paring, as if we had never 
stayed no time in the Elvish country. 
     `Well, I can  remember three  nights  there for certain,  and I seem to 
remember several more, but I would   take my oath it was never a whole month. 
Anyone would think that time did not count in there! ' 
     `And perhaps that was the way of it,' said Frodo. `In that land, maybe, 
we  were in  a time that has elsewhere long gone by. It was  not,  I  think, 
until Silverlode bore us  back to Anduin that we returned  to the time  that 
flows through mortal lands to the Great Sea. And I don't  remember any moon, 
either new or old, in Caras Galadhon: only stars by night and sun by day.' 
     Legolas stirred in his boa t. `Nay, time does  not tarry ever,' he said; 
`but change and growth is not in all  things and places alike. For the Elves 
the world moves, and it  moves both very swift and very slow. Swift, because 
they  themselves change little,  and all else  fleets by:  it is a  grief to 
them. Slow, because they do not count the running years, not for themselves. 
The  passing seasons are but ripples ever repeated in  the long long stream. 
Yet beneath the Sun all things must wear to an end at last.' 
     `But the wearing is slow in Lurien,' said Frodo. `The power of the Lady 
is on it.  Rich are  the hours,  though short they  seem, in Caras Galadhon, 
where Galadriel wields the Elven -ring.' 
     'That should not have  been said  outside Lurien, not even to me,' said 
Aragorn. `Speak no more of it! But so it is, Sam: in that land you lost your 
count.  There time  flowed swiftly by  us,  as  for the Elves. The  old moon 
passed,  and  a new  moon waxed  and waned  in  the world  outside, while we 
tarried there. And yestereve a  new  moon came again.  Winter is nearly gone. 
Time flows on to a spring of little hope.' 
     The night passed silently. No voice or call was heard again  across the 
water. The  travellers  huddled  in  their  boats  felt the  changing of the 
weather. The air grew  warm and very still under the great moist clouds that 
had floated up from the South and the distant seas. The rushing of the River  
over the rocks of the rapids seemed to grow  louder and closer. The twigs of 
the trees above them began to drip. 

####-     When the day came the mood of the world about them had become soft  and 
sad. Slowly  the dawn grew  to a  pale light, diffused and shadowless. There 
was mist on the River, and white fog  swathed the shore; the far  bank could 
not be seen. 
     `I can't abide fog,' said  Sam; `but this  seems to be a lucky one. Now 
perhaps we can get away without those cursed goblins seeing us.' 
     `Perhaps so,'  said Aragorn. `But it  will  be  hard to find  the  path 
unless the fog lifts a little later on. And we must find the path, if we are 
to pass Sarn Gebir and come to the Emyn Muil.' 
     'I  do  not see why we should pass the Rapids or follow the  River  any 
further,' said Boromir. `If the Emyn Muil lie before us, then we can abandon 
these cockle-boats, and strike westward and southward, until we come to  the 
Entwash and cross into my own land.' 
     `We can, if we are making for Minas Tirith,' said Aragorn, `but that is 
not yet agreed. And such a course  may be more perilous than  it sounds. The 
vale of Entwash is flat and fenny, and fog is a deadly peril there for those 
on foot and laden. I would not abandon our boats until we must. The River is 
at least a path that cannot be missed.' 
     `But the Enemy holds the eastern bank,' objected  Boromir. `And even if 
you pass the Gates  of  Argonath and come  unmolested  to the Tindrock, what 
will you do then? Leap down the Falls and land in the marshes? ' 
     `No! ' answered Aragorn. `Say rather that we will bear our boats by the 
ancient  way to  Rauros-foot, and  there take to the water again. Do you not 
know, Boromir, or do you choose to forget the North Stair, and the high seat 
upon  Amon Hen,  that were made in the  days of the great  kings? I at least 
have a mind  to stand in that high place again,  before I decide  my further  
course. There, maybe, we shall see some sign that will guide us.' 
     Boromir held out  long  against this choice;  but  when it became plain 
that Frodo  would  follow Aragorn, wherever he went, he gave  in. 'It is not 
the  way  of the  Men of Minas Tirith to  desert their friends at  need,' he 
said, `and you will need my strength, if ever you are to reach the Tindrock. 
To the tall isle I will go, but no further. There  I shall  turn to my home, 
alone if my help has not earned the reward of any companionship.' 
     The day  was  now  growing,  and  the fog  had lifted a  little. It was 
decided that Aragorn and Legolas should at once go forward along the  shore, 
while the  others remained  by the  boats. Aragorn hoped to find some way by 
which they could carry  both  their boats and their  baggage to the smoother  

####-water beyond the Rapids.  
     `Boats of the Elves would not sink, maybe,' he said, `but that does not 
say that  we should come through Sarn  Gebir  alive.  None have ever done so 
yet. No road was made by the Men of Gondor in this region, for even in their 
great  days  their realm did not reach up  Anduin beyond the Emyn  Muil; but 
there is a portage-way somewhere on  the western shore, if I can find it. It 
cannot yet have perished; for light boats used to journey  out of Wilderland 
down to Osgiliath, and still did so until a few years ago, when the Orcs  of 
Mordor began to multiply.' 
     'Seldom in my life has any boat come  out of  the North,  and  the Orcs 
prowl on the east-shore,' said Boromir. `If you go forward, peril  will grow 
with every mile, even if you find a path.' 
     `Peril lies ahead on every southward road,' answered Aragorn. `Wait for  
us one day.  If we do  not return in that time, you will know that  evil has 
indeed befa llen us. Then you must take a new leader  and follow him as  best 
you can.' 
     It was with a heavy heart that Frodo saw Aragorn and Legolas climb  the 
steep bank and vanish into the  mists; but his fears proved groundless. Only 
two or three hours had passed, and it  was barely mid-day, when  the shadowy 
shapes of the explorers appeared again. 
     `All is well,' said Aragorn, as he clambered down the bank. 'There is a  
track,  and  it leads  to  a good landing  that  is still  serviceable.  The 
distance is not great: the head of the Rapids is but half  a mile below  us,  
and  they  are little more than a mile long.  Not far beyond them the stream 
becomes clear  and  smooth again,  though it runs  swiftly. Our hardest task  
will be to get our boats and baggage   to the old  portage-way. We have found 
it, but it lies well  back from  the water -side here, and runs under the lee 
of  a rock -wall, a furlong or more from the shore. We did not find where the 
northward  landing  lies. If it  still  remains,  we  must  have  passed  it 
yesterday night. We might labour far upstream and yet miss it in the  fog. I 
fear we must leave the River now, and make  for the  portage-way  as best we 
can from here.' 
     `That would not be easy, even if we were all Men,' said Boromir. 
     `Yet such as we are we will try it,' said Aragorn. 
     'Aye, we  will,' said Gimli. `The legs of Men will lag on a rough road, 
while a Dwarf goes on, be the burden twice his own weight, Master Boromir! ' 
     The task proved hard indeed, yet in the end it was done. The goods were 

####-taken out of the boats and brought to the top of the bank, where there was a  
level space. Then the boats were drawn out of the water and carried up. They 
were  far less heavy than any  had  expected.  Of what  tree growing in  the 
elvish country  they were made not even Legolas knew; but the wood was 
tough 
and yet strangely light. Merry and Pippin alone could  carry their boat with 
ease  along the  flat. Nonetheless it  needed the strength of the two Men to 
lift  and haul them  over the ground that the  Company  now had to cross. It 
sloped up away from the River, a tumbled waste of  grey  limestone-boulders,  
with many hidden holes  shrouded with weeds and bushes;  there were thickets 
of brambles,  and sheer dells;  and here and there boggy pools fed by waters 
trickling from the terraces further inland. 
     One  by  one  Boromir and  Aragorn  carried the boats, while the others 
toiled  and scrambled after them with the baggage. At last  all was  removed 
and laid  on the  portage-way. Then with little further hindrance, save from 
sprawling briars and many fallen  stones, they  moved forward all  together.  
Fog still hung in veils upon the crumbling rock -wall, and to their left mist 
shrouded the River: they  could hear it  rushing  and foaming over the sharp 
shelves and stony teeth of Sarn Gebir, but they could not see it. Twice they 
made the journey, before all was brought safe to the southern landing. 
     There the portage-way, turning back  to the water -side, ran gently down 
to the shallow edge of a little pool. It seemed to have been  scooped in the 
river -side, not by hand,  but by the  water  swirling  down  from Sarn Gebir 
against a low pier of  rock that jutted out some way into the stream. Beyond  
it the shore rose sheer into a grey  cliff, and there was no further passage 
for those on foot. 
     Already the short afternoon was past, and a dim cloudy dusk was closing 
in. They sat beside the water listening to the confused rush and roar of the 
Rapids hidden in the mist; they wer e tired and sleepy, and their hearts were 
as gloomy as the dying day. 
     'Well, here we are, and here we must pass another night,' said Boromir. 
`We need sleep, and even if Aragorn had a mind to pass the Gates of Argonath 
by night, we are all too tired-except, no doubt, our sturdy dwarf.' 
     Gimli made no reply: he was nodding as he sat. 
     `Let us rest as much  as  we can now,' said  Aragorn. `Tomorrow we must 
journey by day again. Unless the weather changes once more and cheats us, we 
shall have  a good chance  of slipping through, unseen  by any eyes  on  the 

####-eastern shore. But tonight two must watch together in turns: three hours off 
and one on guard.' 
     Nothing happened that night  worse than a brief drizzle of rain an hour 
before dawn. As soon as it was fully light they started. Already the fog was 
thinning. They kept as  close as they could  to  the western  side, and they 
could see the dim shapes of the low cliffs rising ever higher, shadowy walls 
with  their  feet in the hurrying river. In the mid-morning the  clouds drew 
down  lower,  and it began to rain heavily. They drew  the  skin-covers over  
their boats to prevent them from being flooded, and drifted on: little could 
be seen before them or about them through the grey falling curtains. 
     The rain,  however, did  not  last  long.  Slowly  the  sky above  grew 
lighter,  and  then  suddenly the clouds broke,  and  their draggled fringes 
trailed away northward up the  River. The  fogs and mists were  gone. Before 
the travellers  lay  a wide ravine, with  great rocky sides to which  clung, 
upon  shelves  and in narrow crevices, a few thrawn  trees. The channel grew 
narrower and the River swifter. Now  they were speeding  along  with  little  
hope of stopping or turning, whatever they might meet ahead. Over them was a  
lane of pale-blue sky, around them  the dark overshadowed  River, and before 
them  black, shutting out  the  sun,  the hills of  Emyn Muil, in  which  no 
opening could be seen. 
     Frodo peering  forward saw in the distance two great rocks approaching:  
like  great pinnacles or pillars  of stone  they seemed.  Tall and sheer and 
ominous they stood upon either  side of the  stream. A  narrow  gap appeared 
between them, and the River swept the boats towards it. 
     `Behold the Argonath, the Pillars  of  the Kings! ' cried  Aragorn. `We 
shall pass them soon. Keep the boats  in  line, and as far apart as you can!  
Hold the middle of the stream! ' 
     As Frodo was  borne towards them the great  pillars rose like towers to 
meet  him.  Giants  they  seemed  to  him,  vast  grey  figures  silent  but 
threatening. Then  he saw that they were  indeed shaped and  fashioned:  the 
craft and power  of  old had  wrought  upon them,  and  still they preserved 
through the suns and rains of forgotten years the mighty likenesses in which 
they  had been hewn. Upon great pedestals founded  in the deep  waters stood 
two great kings  of stone: still with blurred eyes and  crannied  brows they 
frowned upon  the North. The left hand of each  was raised  palm outwards in 
gesture of  warning;  in each  right  hand there  was an axe; upon each head 
there  was a crumbling helm  and crown. Great  power and majesty they  still 

####-wore, the silent wardens  of a long-vanished kingdom. Awe and fear fell upon 
Frodo,  and he  cowered down, shutting his eyes and not daring to look up as 
the boat drew  near. Even Boromir bowed  his head  as  the boats whirled by. 
frail and  fleeting  as little  leaves,  under  the  enduring  shadow of the 
sentinels of N®menor. So they passed into the dark chasm of the Gates. 
     Sheer rose the dreadful cliffs to unguessed heights on either side. Far 
off was the dim sky. The black waters roared and echoed, and a wind screamed 
over them.  Frodo crouching over his knees heard Sam in front  muttering and 
groaning: `What a place! What a horrible place! Just let me get out of  this 
boat, and I'll never wet my toes in a puddle again, let alone a river! ' 
     `Fear  not! ' said a  strange voice behind him.  Frodo  turned and  saw 
Strider, and  yet  not Strider; for  the  weatherworn Ranger  was  no longer  
there.  In the  stern  sat Aragorn son of Arathorn, proud and erect, guiding 
the boat with skilful strokes; his hood was cast back, and his dark hair was 
blowing in the wind, a light was in his eyes:  a king returning from exile to 
his own land. 
     'Fear not!  ' he said. `Long have I desired to look upon the likenesses 
of  Isildur and Anbrion, my sires of old.  Under  their shadow  Elessar, the 
Elfstone son of  Arathorn of the House  of  Valandil  Isildur's  son heir of 
Elendil, has nought to dread! ' 
     Then the light of  his eyes faded, and he spoke to himself: `Would that 
Gandalf were  here! How my  heart yearns  for Minas Anor and the walls of my 
own city! But whither now shall I go? ' 
     The  chasm was long and  dark,  and filled  with the noise of wind  and 
rushing water and echoing stone. It  bent somewhat  towards the west so that 
at first all was dark  ahead; but soon Frodo  saw a tall gap of light before 
him,  ever  growing.  Swiftly it  drew  near,  and  suddenly the  boats shot 
through, out into a wide clear light. 
     The sun, already long fallen from the noon, was shining in a windy sky. 
The pent  waters spread out into a long oval lake, pale  Nen Hithoel, fenced 
by  steep grey hills whose sides were clad with trees, but  their heads were 
bare,  cold-gleaming in  the sunlight. At  the far  southern end  rose three 
peaks.  The midmost stood somewhat forward from the others and sundered 
from 
them, an island  in the waters,  about  which   the flowing River  flung pale 
shimmering arms. Distant but deep there came up on the wind a  roaring sound 
like the roll of thunder heard far away. 

####-     `Behold Tol Brandir! ' said Aragorn,  pointing south to  the tall peak. 
'Upon the left stands Amon Lhaw, and upon the right is Amon Hen the Hills of 
Hearing and of Sight. In the days  of the  great kings there were high seats 
upon  them, and watch was kept there. But it is said that no foot of  man or 
beast has ever been set upon Tol Brandir. Ere  the shade of  night  falls we 
shall come to them. I hear the endless voice of Rauros calling.' 
     The Company rested now for a while,  drifting south on the current that 
flowed through the middle  of  the lake. They  ate  some food, and then they 
took  to their paddles and  hastened on their way. The sides of the westward 
hills fell into shadow, and  the Sun  grew round and  red.  Here and there a  
misty  star peered out. The three peaks loomed before  them, darkling in the 
twilight. Rauros was roaring with a grea t voice.  Already  night was laid on 
the flowing waters when the travellers came at  last under the shadow of the 
hills. 
     The tenth  day of their journey  was over.  Wilderland was behind them. 
They could go no further without choice between the  east -way and  the west. 
The last stage of the Quest was before them. 
 

####- 

Chapter 10. The Breaking of the Fellowship 

 
 
     Aragorn led them to  the right  arm of the River. Here upon its western 
side under the shadow of Tol Brandir a green lawn ran down to the water from 
the feet of Amon Hen.  Behind it rose the first gentle  slopes  of  the hill 
clad with trees, and trees marched away westward along the curving shores of 
the lake. A little spring fell tumbling down and fed the grass.  
     'Here  we will rest tonight,' said Aragorn. `This is the lawn  of Parth 
Galen: a fair place in the summer days of old. Let us hope  that no evil has 
yet come here.' 
     They drew up their boats on the green banks, and  beside them they made  
their camp.  They set  a watch, but had no sight nor sound of their enemies.  
If Gollum had contrived  to follow  them,  he  remained  unseen and unheard. 
Nonetheless as the night  wore on Aragorn grew uneasy, tossing often in  his 
sleep and waking. In the small hours he got up and came to Frodo, whose turn 
it was to watch. 
     `Why are you waking? ' asked Frodo. `It is not your watch.' 
     `I do  not know,' answered Aragorn; `but a shadow and a threat has been 
growing in my sleep. It would be well to draw your sword.' 
     `Why? ' said Frodo. `Are enemies at hand? ' 
     `Let us see what Sting may show,' answered Aragorn. 
     Frodo  then drew the elf-blade from its sheath. To his dismay the edges 
gleamed  dimly in  the night. `Orcs! ' he said. `Not very  near, and yet too 
near, it seems.' 
     `I feared as much,' said Aragorn. `But maybe they are  not on this side 
of the River. The light of  Sting is faint, and it may point to no more than 
spies of Mordor  roaming on the  slopes  of  Amon  Lhaw.  I have never heard 
before of Orcs  upon Amon Hen. Yet who  knows what may happen in  these 
evil 
days, now  that Minas Tirith no longer holds secure the passages of  Anduin.  
We must go warily tomorrow.' 
     The day came like fire and smoke. Low in the East there were black bars 
of cloud  like the fumes of a great burning. The  rising  sun  lit them from 
beneath  with flames of  murky red; but  soon  it climbed above  them into a  
clear sky. The summit of Tol Brandir was tipped with  gold. Frodo looked out 

####-eastward and  gazed at the tall island.  Its  si des  sprang sheer out of the 
running  water. High up above the  tall cliffs were  steep slopes upon which 
trees climbed, mounting  one  head above another; and  above them again were 
grey  faces of inaccessible rock, crowned by  a great spire  of  stone. Many 
birds were  circling  about it, but no sign of  other living things could be 
seen. 
     When they had eaten, Aragorn called the Company together. `The  day has 
come at last,' he said: 'the day of choice which we have  long delayed. What 
shall  now become  of our Company that has  travelled  so far in fellowship?  
Shall we turn  west with  Boromir and go to the wars of Gondor; or turn east  
to the Fear and Shadow; or shall we break our fellowship and go this way and 
that as each may choose? Whatever  we do  must  be done soon. We  cannot 
long 
halt here. The  enemy is on the eastern shore, we know; but I  fear that the 
Orcs may already be on this side of the water.' 
     There was a long silence in which no one spoke or moved. 
     'Well,  Frodo,'  said Aragorn at last. `I fear that  the burden is laid 
upon  you. You are the  Bearer  appointed by the  Council. Your  own way you  
alone  can choose. In this matter I cannot advise you. I am not Gandalf, and 
though I have tried to  bear his part, I do not know what design or hope  he 
had  for this hour,  if indeed he had any. Most  likely it seems that if  he 
were here now the choice would still wait on you. Such is your fate.' 
     Frodo did not answer at once. Then he spoke slowly. `I  know that haste 
is needed, yet I cannot choose. The burden is heavy. Give me an hour longer, 
and I will speak. Let me be alone! ' 
     Aragorn looked  at  him with  kindly  pity. `Very  well,  Frodo  son of 
Drogo,' he  said. `You shall have an hour, and  you  shall be alone. We will 
stay here for a while. But do not stray far or out of call.' 
     Frodo sat for a moment with his head bowed. Sam, who had  been watching 
his master with  great  concern, shook his  head and  muttered:  'Plain as a  
pikestaff it is, but it's no good Sam Gamgee putting in his spoke just now.' 
, 
     Presently Frodo  got  up and  walked away;  and Sam saw that  while the  
others restrained  themselves and did not stare at him,  the eyes of Boromir 
followed Frodo  intently, until he passed  out of sight in the  trees at the 
foot of Amon Hen. 
     Wandering  aimlessly at first in the  wood, Frodo found  that his  feet 

####-were leading  him up towards the  slopes of the hill. He came to a path, the 
dwindling ruins of a  road of long  ago. In steep places stairs of stone had 
been hewn,  but now they were  cracked  and worn, and split by the  roots of 
trees.  For some while he climbed, not caring which  way  he  went, until he 
came  to a  grassy place. Rowan-trees grew about it, and  in the midst was a  
wide  flat stone.  The  little upland lawn  was  open upon the  East and was 
filled now with  the early  sunlight. Frodo halted  and looked  out over the 
River, far  below  him, to Tol  Brandir and the birds wheeling in the  great 
gulf of air between  him and the untrodden isle.  The voice of Rauros was  a  
mighty roaring mingled with a deep throbbing boom. 
     He  sat  down upon the stone  and cupped his chin in his hands, staring 
eastwards but seeing little with his eyes. All that had happened since Bilbo 
left the Shire was passing through his mind,  and he  recalled and  pondered  
everything  that he could  remember  of Gandalf's words.  Time went on,  and 
still he was no nearer to a choice. 
     Suddenly he awoke from his thoughts: a strange feeling came to him that 
something was behind him, that unfriendly eyes were upon  him. He sprang  up 
and turned; but all that  he saw to his  surprise was Boromir, and his  face 
was smiling and kind. 
     `I was afraid for  you, Frodo,' he said, coming forward. `If Aragorn is 
right and Orcs are near,  then none of us should wander alone, and you least  
of all: so much depends on you. And my heart too  is heavy. May  I  stay now 
and talk for a  while,  since  I have found  you? It would comfort me. Where 
there are so many, all speech becomes a debate without end. But two together  
may perhaps find wisdom.' 
     `You are kind,'  answered Frodo. 'But  I do not think  that  any speech 
will help me.  For  I know what I should do, but I  am  afraid of doing  it, 
Boromir: afraid.' 
     Boromir stood  silent. Rauros roared endlessly on. The wind murmured in 
the branches of the trees. Frodo shivered. 
     Suddenly Boromir came and sat beside him. `Are you sure that you do not 
suffer needlessly? ' he said. `I wish to help you. You need counsel in  your 
hard choice. Will you not take mine? ' 
     'I  think I know already  what counsel you would  give, Boromir,'  said 
Frodo. 'And it would seem like wisdom but for the warning of my heart.' 
     `Warning? Warning against what? ' said Boromir sharply. 
     'Against  delay. Against the  way that seems easier. Against refusal of 

####-the  burden  that  is laid on me. Against -well,  if it must be said, against  
trust in the strength and truth of Men.' 
     `Yet that  strength has  long  protected you far  away  in  your little 
country, though you knew it not.' 
     'I do not doubt the valour of  your  people. But the world is changing. 
The  walls of Minas Tirith may be strong, but they are not strong enough. If 
they fail, what then? ' 
     'We shall fall in battle valiantly.  Yet there is still hope  that they 
will not fail.' 
     'No hope while the Ring lasts,' said Frodo. 
     'Ah! The Ring! '  said Boromir, his eyes lighting. 'The Ring! Is it not 
a strange fate that we should suffer so much fear and doubt  for so  small a  
thing? So small a thing! And I have seen it only for an instant in the House 
of Elrond. Could I not have a sight of it again? ' 
     Frodo looked  up. His heart went suddenly cold.  He caught the  strange 
gleam in  Boromir's eyes, yet his face was still kind  and friendly.  'It is 
best that it should lie hidden,' he answered. 
     'As you wish. I care  not,' said Boromir.  'Yet may I not even speak of 
it? For you seem ever to think only of its power in the hands  of the Enemy:  
of  its evil  uses not  of its good.  The  world is changing, you say. Minas 
Tirith will fall,  if the Ring lasts. But why?  Certainly, if the  Ring were 
with the Enemy. But why, if it were with us? ' 
     'Were you not at the Council?  ' answered Frodo. `Because we cannot use  
it, and what is done with it turns to evil.' 
     Boromir got up and walked about impatiently. 'So you go  on,' he cried. 
'Gandalf, Elrond -- all these folk have taught you to say so. For themselves 
they may be right. These  elves and half-elves and  wizards, they would come 
to grief perhaps.  Yet often I  doubt if they are wise and not merely timid. 
But each to his own kind. True-hearted Men, they  will  not be corrupted. We 
of Minas Tirith have been  staunch  through long years  of trial. We do  not 
desire  the  power  of  wizard-lords,  only  strength  to  defend ourselves, 
strength in a just cause. And behold! in our need chance brings to light the 
-Ring of Power. It is a gift, I say; a gift to the foes of Mordor. It is mad 
not to use it, to  use the power of the Enemy against him. The fearless, the 
ruthless, these alone will  achieve victory.  What could not a warrior do in 
this  hour, a great leader? What could not Aragorn do? Or if he refuses, why 

####-not Boromir? The Ring would give  me power of Command. How I would 
drive the 
hosts of Mordor, and all men would flock to my banner!' 
     Boromir strode up and down, speaking ever more loudly: Almost he seemed 
to have forgotten Frodo, while  his talk dwelt on walls and weapons, and the 
mustering  of  men;  and he drew  plans  for  great alliances  and  glorious 
victories to be; and he cast down Mordor, and became himself  a mighty king, 
benevolent and wise. Suddenly he stopped and waved his arms.  
     'And  they tell  us to throw it away!' he cried. `I do not sa y  destroy 
it. That might be  well, if  reason could show any hope of doing so. It does 
not. The only  plan that  is proposed  to us  is that a halfling should walk  
blindly into  Mordor and offer  the Enemy every chance of recapturing it for  
himself. Folly! 
     'Surely you see it, my friend?' he said, turning  now suddenly to Frodo 
again. `You say that you are afraid. If it is so, the boldest should  pardon 
you. But is it not really your good sense that revolts?' 
     'No, I am afraid,' said Frodo.  'Simply  afraid. But I am glad  to have 
heard you speak so fully. My mind is clearer now.' 
     `Then  you  will come to  Minas Tirith? ' cried Boromir.  His eyes were 
shining and his face eager. 
     `You misunderstand me,' said Frodo. 
     'But you will come, at least for a while? ' Boromir persisted. 'My city 
is not far  now;  and it is little further  from  there to  Mordor than from 
here.  We have  been long in the  wilderness, and you need  news of what the 
Enemy is doing  before you make a move. Come with me, Frodo,' he  said. 
`You 
need  rest before your venture. if  go you must.' He laid  his  hand on  the 
hobbit's  shoulder in friendly fashion;  but Frodo  felt  the hand trembling 
with suppressed excitement. He stepped quickly away, and eyed with alarm the 
tall Man, nearly twice his height and many times his match in strength. 
     `Why are you  so unfriendly? '  said Boromir. `I am a true man, neither  
thief nor tracker. I  need your Ring: that you know now; but  I give  you my  
word  that I do not  desire to keep it.  Will you not at least  let me  make 
trial of my plan? Lend me the Ring! ' 
     `No! no! ' cried Frodo. 'The Council laid it upon me to bear it.' 
     `It is by our own folly that the Enemy will  defeat us,' cried Boromir. 
`How it  angers  me!   Fool!  Obstinate fool!  Running wilfully to  death and 

####-ruining our cause.  If any mortals have claim  to the Ring, it is the men of 
N®menor, and not Halflings. It is not yours save by unhappy chance. It might 
have been mine. It should be mine. Give it to me!  ' 
     Frodo  did not answer, but moved away  till the great  flat stone stood 
between them. `Come, come, my friend! ' said Boromir in a softer voice. 'Why 
not get rid of it? Why not be free of your  doubt and  fear? You can lay the 
blame on me, if you  will.  You  can say that I was too strong and took it by 
force. For I am  too strong for you, halfling,' he cried;  and  suddenly  he 
sprang  over the stone  and leaped at Frodo. His fair and pleasant face  was 
hideously changed; a raging fire was in his eyes. 
     Frodo dodged aside and again put the stone between them. There was only 
one thing he could do: trembling  he pulled  out the Ring upon its chain and 
quickly slipped it on his finger, even as Boromir sprang at him  again.  The 
Man  gasped, stared for a  moment amazed, and then ran wildly about, seeking 
here and there among the rocks and trees. 
     'Miserable trickster!' he shouted. `Let me  get my  hands on you! Now I 
see your mind. You  will take the Ring  to Sauron and  sell us all. You have 
only waited  your  chance to  leave  us  in  the  lurch. Curse  you and  all 
halflings to death  and darkness! ' Then, catching his foot on  a stone,  he 
fell sprawling and  lay upon his face. For a while he was as still as if his 
own curse had struck him down; then suddenly he wept. 
     He rose and  passed  his  hand  over his eyes, dashing away  the tears.  
'What have I said? ' he cried. `What have I done? Frodo, Frodo! ' he called.  
'Come back! A madness took me, but it has passed. Come back! ' 
     There was no answer. Frodo did not even hear his cries. He was  already 
far  away, leaping  blindly up  the path to the hill -top. Terror  and  grief 
shook  him, seeing in  his thought the  mad fierce face of Boromir,  and his 
burning eyes. 
     Soon  he came out alone on the summit of Amon Hen, and halted,  gasping 
for breath. He saw as through a mist a  wide  flat circle, paved with mighty 
flags, and surrounded with  a crumbling battlement;  and in the middle,  set 
upon four carven pillars, was a high seat, reached by a stair of many steps. 
Up  he went and sat upon the ancient chair, feeling like  a lost  child that 
had clambered upon the throne of mountain-kings.  
     At first he could see little. He seemed  to be in a  world of  mist  in 
which  there were only shadows: the Ring  was upon him.  Then here and there 
the mist gave way and he saw  many visions: small and clear as if they  were 

####-under his eyes upon a table, and yet remote. There was no sound, only bright 
living images.  The world  seemed to have shrunk  and  fallen silent. He was 
sitting upon the Seat of Seeing, on Amon Hen, the Hill of the Eye of the Men 
of  N®menor. Eastward he looked into  wide uncharted lands, nameless plains,  
and forests unexplored. Northward he looked, and the Great  River lay like a 
ribbon beneath him, and the  Misty Mountains stood small and hard  as broken 
teeth. Westward he looked and saw  the broad pastures of Rohan; and Orthanc, 
the pinnacle of Isengard, like a black spike. Southward he looked, and below 
his very feet the  Great River curled  like a toppling wave and plunged over 
the falls of Rauros into a foaming pit; a glimmering rainbow played upon the 
fume. And Ethir Anduin he saw, the mighty delta of the River, and myriads of 
sea -birds whirling like a white dust  in the  sun, and  beneath them a green 
and silver sea, rippling in endless lines.  
     But everywhere he looked he saw  the signs of  war. The Misty Mountains 
were  crawling  like anthills:  orcs were  issuing out  of a thousand holes.  
Under the  boughs of  Mirkwood there was  deadly strife of Elves and Men and 
fell  beasts. The  land of the Beornings was aflame; a cloud was over Moria; 
smoke rose on the borders of Lurien. 
     Horsemen  were  galloping on  the grass of  Rohan;  wolves poured  from  
Isengard. From the  havens of Harad ships of war  put out to sea; and out of 
the East Men were moving endlessly: swordsmen, spearmen, bowmen upon 
horses, 
chariots of chieftains  and laden wains. All  the power of the Dark Lord was 
in  motion. Then turning south  again  he  beheld Minas Tirith. Far away  it 
seemed. and beautiful: white-walled,  many-towered, proud  and fair upon its 
mountain-seat;  its battlements  glittered with  steel, and its turrets were 
bright with many banners. Hope leaped in his heart. But against Minas Tirith 
was  set  another  fortress,  greater and more  strong.  Thither,  eastward, 
unwilling his eye was drawn.  It passed the ruined bridges of Osgiliath, the 
grinning  gates of  Minas Morgul. and the  haunted Mountains, and it  looked 
upon Gorgoroth,  the  valley of terror  in the  Land  of Mordor. Darkness lay 
there under the Sun. Fire glowed amid the smoke. Mount Doom was burning, 
and 
a  great  reek  rising.  Then at last  his  gaze was held: wall  upon  wall, 
battlement  upon  battlement, black, immeasurably strong,  mountain of iron, 
gate of steel, tower of adamant, he saw  it: Barad-dyr,  Fortress of Sauron. 
All hope left him. 

####-     And suddenly he felt the  Eye. There was an eye  in the Dark Tower that 
did not sleep. He knew that it had become aware of his gaze.  A fierce eager  
will  was there.  It leaped  towards him; almost  like a finger he  felt it, 
searching for him. Very soon it would nail him down, know just exactly where 
he was. Amon  Lhaw it touched. It glanced  upon Tol Brandir he threw himself 
from the seat, crouching, covering his head with his grey hood. 
     He heard himself crying out: Never, never! Or was it: Verily I  come, I 
come to  you? He could not tell. Then  as a flash  from some other point  of 
power there  came  to  his mind another thought: Take it off!  Take  it off! 
Fool, take it off! Take off the Ring! 
     The two powers strove in him. For a moment,  perfectly balanced between 
their piercing  points,  he  writhed,  tormented. Suddenly  he was aware  of 
himself  again. Frodo, neither  the  Voice nor the Eye: free to choose,  and 
with  one  remaining  instant in  which to  do so. He  took the Ring off his 
finger. He  was kneeling in clear  sunlight before  the  high  seat. A black  
shadow seemed to  pass like an arm above him; it  missed Amon Hen and 
groped 
out west,  and faded. Then all the sky was  clean and blue and birds sang in 
every tree. 
     Frodo rose to his feet. A great weariness was on him,  but his will was 
firm and his heart lighter. He spoke aloud to himself. `I  will do now what I 
must,' he said.  'This at least is plain: the evil of the Ring is already at 
work even in the Company,  and the Ring must leave them before it  does more 
harm. I will go alone. Some I cannot  trust, and  those I  can trust are too 
dear  to me: poor old  Sam,  and Merry and  Pippin. Strider,  too: his heart 
yearns for Minas Tirith, and he will be needed there, now Boromir has fallen 
into evil. I will go alone. At once.' 
     He went quickly  down the path and came back to the lawn where  Boromir 
had found him. Then he halted, listening. He thought he could hear cries and  
calls from the woods near the shore below.  
     'They'll be hunting  for  me,' he  said. `I wonder how long I have been 
away. Hours, I should think.' He hesitated. 'What can  I  do? ' he muttered. 
'I must go now or I shall never go.  I shan't  get  a  chance  again. I hate 
leaving them, and like  this without  any explanation. But surely  they will 
understand. Sam will. And what else can I do?' 
     Slowly he  drew out the Ring and put it  on  once more. He vanished and  
passed down the hill, less than a rustle of the wind. 

####-     The others remained long by the river -side. For some time they had been 
silent, moving restlessly about; but now they  were sitting in a circle, and 
they  were talking. Every now  and again they made efforts to speak of other  
things,  of  their  long road and many  adventures;  they questioned Aragorn 
concerning the realm of Gondor and its ancient  history, and the remnants of 
its great works that could still be seen in this strange border -land  of the 
Emyn  Muil: the stone kings and  the  seats of Lhaw and Hen, and  the  great 
Stair  beside  the falls  of  Rauros. But always  their  thoughts  and words 
strayed back to Frodo and the Ring. What would Frodo choose  to do? Why  
was 
he hesitating?  
     `He is  debating  which course  is  the most desperate, I think,'  said 
Aragorn. 'And well he may. It is now more hopeless than ever for the Company 
to  go east, since we have  been tracked by Gollum,  and  must fear that the 
secret of our journey is already betrayed.  But Minas Tirith is no nearer to 
the Fire and the destruction of the Burden. 
     `We may remain there for a while  and make  a brave stand; but the Lord 
Denethor and all his men cannot hope to do what even Elrond  said was beyond 
his power: either to keep the Burden  secret. or to hold  off the full might 
of the Enemy when he comes  to take it.  Which way would any of us choose in 
Frodo's place? I do not know. Now indeed we miss Gandalf most.' 
     'Grievous is our loss,'  said Legolas.  'Yet we must needs make up  our 
minds without his aid.  Why cannot we decide, and so help Frodo? Let us call 
him back and then vote! I should vote for Minas Tirith.' 
     `And so should I,'  said Gimli. 'We, of course, were only sent  to help 
the  Bearer along the  road, to go no further than we wished; and none of us 
is under any oath or  command to  seek Mount Doom.  Hard was my parting 
from 
Lothlurien. Yet I have come so far, and I say this: now we  have reached the 
last  choice, it  is clear to  me that I  cannot leave Frodo. I would choose 
Minas Tirith, but if he does not, then I follow him.' 
     `And I  too will go with him,' said Legolas. `It would be faithless now 
to say farewell.' 
     'It would indeed be a betrayal, if we all left him,' said Aragorn. 'But 
if  he goes east,  then all need not go  with him; nor  do I think that  all 
should. That venture is desperate: as much so for eight as for three or two, 
or  one alone.  If  you  would let me choose,  then  I should  appoint three 

####-companions:  Sam, who  could not  bear it otherwise; and  Gimli; and myself.  
Boromir  will return to his own city,  where his father and his  people need 
him; and with him the others should go, or at  least Meriadoc  and Peregrin , 
if Legolas is not willing to leave us.' 
     `That won't do at all! ' cried Merry. 'We can't leave Frodo! Pippin and 
I  always intended to go wherever he went,  and we still  do. But we did not 
realize what that would mean. It  seemed different so far away, in the Shire 
or in Rivendell. It  would  be mad and cruel to let Frodo go  to Mordor. Why  
can't we stop him?' 
     'We must stop  him,'  said Pippin.  `And  that is what  he  is worrying 
about, I am sure. He knows we shan't agree to his going east. And  he doesn't  
like to ask anyone to go with him, poor old fellow. Imagine it: going off to 
Mordor  alone! ' Pippin shuddered. 'But the dear silly  old hobbit, he ought 
to know that he  hasn't got to ask.  He ought  to know that if we can't stop 
him, we shan't leave him.' 
     'Begging  your  pardon,'  said  Sam. 'I don't  think you understand  my 
master  at all.  He isn't hesitating about which way  to  go. Of course not! 
What's the good of Minas Tirith anyway? To him, I mean, begging your 
pardon, 
Master Boromir,' he added, and turned. It was then that they discovered that 
Boromir, who at first had been sitting silent on  the outside of the circle, 
was no longer there. 
     `Now where's he got to? ' cried Sam, looking worried.  'He's been a bit 
queer lately, to my mind. But anyway he's  not in this business. He's off to 
his  home, as he always said;  and no blame to  him. But Mr. Frodo, he knows 
he's got to find the Cracks of Doom,  if  he can. But he's  afraid . Now it's 
come to the point, he's just plain terrified. That's what his trouble is. Of 
course  he's had  a bit of schooling, so to speak-we  all have-since we left 
home, or  he'd be so terrified he'd just  fling  the Ring in the  River  and 
bolt. But he's still too frightened to start. And he isn't worrying about us 
either: whether we'll  go along with him or no. He knows we mean to.  That's 
another thing that's  bothering  him. If  he  screws himself up to go, he'll 
want to go alone. Mark my words!  We're going to  have trouble when he 
comes 
back. For he'll screw himself up all right, as sure as his name's Baggins.' 
     'I believe  you speak more  wisely than any of us,  Sam,' said Aragorn. 
`And what shall we do, if you prove right? ' 

####-     'Stop him! Don't let him go! ' cried Pippin. 
     'I wonder?  '  said Aragorn.  `He is  the Bearer, and  the fate  of the 
Burden is on him. I do not think that it is our part to drive him one way or 
the  other. Nor  do I  think that we  should succeed, if we tried. There are 
other powers at work far stronger.' 
     `Well, I wish  Frodo would "screw himself up" and come back. and let us 
get it over,' said Pippin. `This waiting is horrible! Surely the time is up?  
' 
     `Yes,' said Aragorn. 'The hour  is long passed. The morning is  wearing 
away. We must call for him.' 
     At  that  moment Boromir  reappeared.  He  came out from the  trees and 
walked  towards them  without speaking.  His  face  looked grim and sad.  He 
paused as if counting those that were present, and then sat down aloof, with 
his eyes on the ground. 
     `Where have you been, Boromir? ' asked Aragorn. `Have you seen Frodo? ' 
     Boromir hesitated for  a second.  `Yes,  and no,'  he  answered slowly. 
`Yes: I found him some way up the hill,  and I spoke to  him. I urged him to  
come to  Minas Tirith and  not to go  east. I grew angry and he  left me. He 
vanished. I have  never seen such a thing happen before. though I have heard 
of it in tales. He must have put the Ring on. I could not  find him again. I 
thought he would return to you.' 
     'Is that all that you have to say? ' said Aragorn, looking hard and not 
too kindly at Boromir. 
     `Yes,' he answered. `I will say no more yet.' 
     `This is  bad!' cried Sam, jumping up. `I don't know  what this Man has 
been up to. Why should Mr. Frodo put  the thing on? He didn't ought to have; 
and if he has, goodness knows what may have happened!' 
     'But he wouldn't keep it on`' said Merry. `Not when he had  escaped the 
unwelcome visitor, like Bilbo used to.' 
     `But where did he go? Where is he? ' cried Pippin. 'He's been away ages 
now.' 
     `How long is it since you saw Frodo last, Boromir? ' asked Aragorn. 
     `Half  an hour, maybe,' he answered.  `Or it  might be an hour. I  have 
wandered for  some time since.  I do not  know! I do not know! ' He  put his 
head in his hands, and sat as if bowed with grief.  
     `An hour since he vanished! ' shouted Sam. `We must try and find him at 
once. Come on! ' 

####-     `Wait  a moment!  ' cried Aragorn. `We must  divide up into pairs,  and 
arrange-here, hold on! Wait! ' 
     It was no good. They took no notice of him. Sam had dashed  off  first. 
Merry  and Pippin  had followed, and were already disappearing westward into 
the trees  by  the  shore,  shouting:  Frodo! Frodo!  in  their clear,  high 
hobbit-voices. Legolas and  Gimli were running.  A  sudden  panic or madness 
seemed to have fallen on the Company. 
     `We  shall all be scattered and lost,' groaned Aragorn. `Boromir!  I do 
not know what part you have played in this mischief, but help  now! Go after 
those  two  young hobbits,  and guard them at  the least, even if you cannot 
find Frodo. Come back to this spot, if you find him, or any traces of him. I 
shall return soon.' 
     Aragorn  sprang swiftly away and  went in pursuit of  Sam. Just  as  he 
reached the  little lawn among the rowans  he  overtook him, toiling uphill, 
panting and calling, Frodo! 
     `Come with me, Sam! '  he said.  `None of us should be alone.  There is 
mischief about. I feel it.  I am going to the top, to  the Seat of Amon Hen, 
to  see what may be   seen. And look! It is  as  my heart guessed, Frodo went  
this way. Follow me, and keep your eyes open! ' He sped up the path. 
     Sam did his best, but he could not keep up with Strider the Ranger, and 
soon fell behind. He had not gone far before Aragorn was out of sight ahead. 
Sam stopped and puffed. Suddenly he clapped his hand to his head. 
     `Whoa,  Sam  Gamgee! ' he said aloud. `Your legs are too short, so  use 
your head! Let me  see now! Boromir isn't lying, that's not  his way; but he 
hasn't  told  us everything. Something scared Mr.  Frodo  badly.  He screwed 
himself up  to the point,  sudden. He made up his mind  at last to go. Where 
to? Off East. Not without Sam? Yes, without even his Sam. That's hard, cruel 
hard.' 
     Sam passed his hand over  his eyes, brushing  away the  tears. 'Steady, 
Gamgee!  ' he said. `Think,  if you can!  He can't fly across rivers, and he 
can't  jump  waterfalls. He's got no gear. So he's  got  to get back to  the 
boats. Back to the boats! Back to the boats, Sam, like lightning!  ' 
     Sam turned and bolted back down the path. He fell and cut his knees. Up 
he  got and ran on.  He  came to the edge of the lawn of Parth Galen  by the 
shore, where the boats were  drawn up out  of the  water.  No one was there.  
There  seemed to be cries in  the woods behind, but he did not heed them. He 
stood gazing for a moment. stock -still, gaping.  A boat was sliding down the 

####-bank  all by itself.  With  a shout Sam raced  across  the  grass. The  boat 
slipped into the wat 
 
128d 
 
er. 
     `Coming, Mr. Frodo!  Coming! ' called  Sam, and flung himself  from the 
bank, clutching at the departing boat. He missed it by a  yard. With  a  cry 
and a  splash he fell face  downward into deep swift water. Gurgling he went 
under, and the River closed over his curly head. 
     An exclamation of dismay came from the empty boat. A paddle swirled and 
the boat put about. Frodo was  just  in time to grasp Sam by  the hair as he 
came up, bubbling and struggling. Fear was staring in his round brown eyes.  
     `Up you come, Sam my lad! ' said Frodo. `Now take my hand! ' 
     `Save me, Mr. Frodo! ' gasped Sam.  `I'm  drownded.  I can't  see  your 
hand.' 
     `Here it is. Don't  pinch, lad! I  won't  let you  go. Tread water  and 
don't flounder, or  you'll upset the boat. There now, get hold of  the side, 
and let me use the paddle! ' 
     With a few strokes Frodo brought the boat back to the bank. and Sam was 
able to scramble out, wet  as a  water -rat.  Frodo  took off  the  Ring  and 
stepped ashore again. 
     `Of all the confounded nuisances you are the worst, Sam! ' he said. 
     'Oh, Mr. Frodo, that's hard! ' said Sam shivering. `That's hard, trying 
to  go without me and all. If I hadn't a guessed right, where  would you  be 
now?  ' 
     `Safely on my way.' 
     `Safely! ' said Sam. `All alone and without me to help you? I  couldn't  
have a borne it, it'd have been the death of me.' 
     'It would be the death of you to come  with me, Sam,' said  Frodo and I 
could not have borne that.' 
     `Not as certain as being left behind,' said Sam. 
     `But I am going to Mordor.' 
     `I know that well enough, Mr. Frodo. Of course  you are. And I'm coming 
with you.' 
     `Now, Sam,'  said Frodo, `don't  hinder me!  The  others will be coming 
back  at any  minute.  If  they  ca tch me here. I  shall have  to argue  and 

####-explain, and I shall never have  the heart  or  the chance to get off. But I 
must go at once. It's the only way.' 
     `Of course  it is,' answered  Sam.  'But not alone. I'm  coming too, or  
neither of us isn't going. I'll knock holes in all the boats first.' 
     Frodo actually laughed. A sudden warmth and gladness touched his heart. 
`Leave one! 'he said. `We'll need it. But you  can't come like  this without 
your gear or food or anything.' 
     'Just  hold on a moment, and  I'll  get my stuff!' cried  Sam  eagerly. 
'It's all ready. I thought we should be off today.' He rushed to the camping 
place,  fished out  his pack from the pile where Frodo had laid it  when  he 
emptied the boat of his companions' goods grabbed a  spare blanket, and some 
extra packages of food, and ran back. 
     `So all my  plan is spoilt!  ' said Frodo.  `It is  no good  trying  to 
escape you. But I'm glad, Sam. I cannot tell you how glad. Come along! It is 
plain that we were meant to go together. We will go, and may the others find 
a safe road! Strider will look after them. I don't suppose we shall see them 
again.' 
     `Yet we may, Mr Frodo. We may,' said Sam. 
     So Frodo and Sam set off on the last stage of the Quest together. Frodo 
paddled away from the shore, and the River  bore them swiftly away. down the 
western arm, and past  the frowning cliffs  of Tol  Brandir. The roar of the 
great falls drew nearer. Even with such help  as Sam could give, it was hard 
work to pass across the current at the southward end of the island and drive 
the boat eastward towards the far shore. 
     At  length  they  came to land  again  upon the southern slopes of Amon 
Lhaw. There  they found a shelving shore, and they  drew the  boat out, high 
above the water ,  and hid it as well  as  they could behind a great boulder. 
Then  shouldering their  burdens,  they set off, seeking a  path  that would  
bring them over  the grey hills of the Emyn Muil, and  down into the Land of 
Shadow. 
  

####-     
Here ends the first part of the history of the War of the Ring. 
     The second part is called THE TWO TOWERS, since the events recounted 
in it are dominated by ORTHANC,  the citadel  of  Saruman, and  the fortress 
of MINAS MORGUL  that guards the secret entrance  to Mordor;  it  tells  of 
the deeds and  perils of  all  the members of the now sundered fellowship, until 
the coming of the Great Darkness. 
     The  third part tells of the  last defence against the Shadow,  and the 
end of the mission of the Ring-bearer in  THE RETURN OF THE KING. 
 

####-####- 

 
 

 * BOOK III *  

Chapter 1. The Departure of Boromir 

 
 
     Aragorn sped on up the hill. Every now and again he bent to the ground. 
Hobbits go light, and  their  footprints are not  easy  even for a Ranger to 
read, but not  far from the top a spring  crossed  the path, and in the  wet 
earth he saw what he was seeking. 
     'I read the  signs  aright,'  he  said  to himself. 'Frodo  ran  to the 
hill-top. I wonder what he  saw there? But he returned by  the same way, and 
went down the hill again.' 
     Aragorn hesitated. He desired to go to the high seat himself, hoping to 
see there something that  would guide him in his perplexities; but  time was 
pressing. Suddenly he leaped  forward, and  ran to the  summit,  across  the 
great flag-stones, and up the steps. Then sitting in the high seat he looked 
out. But the  sun seemed darkened,  and the world dim and remote.  He turned 
from the North back again to North, and saw nothing save  the distant hills,  
unless it were  that far away he could see again  a great bird like an eagle 
high in the air, descending slowly in wide circles down towards the earth. 
     Even as he  gazed his  quick ears caught sounds in the woodlands below,  
on the west  side  of the River. He stiffened.  There were  cries, and among 
them, to  his  horror, he  could distinguish the harsh voices of  Orcs. Then 
suddenly with  a deep-throated call a great horn blew, and the  blasts of it 
smote the hills and  echoed  in the hollows, rising  in a mighty shout above 
the roaring of the falls. 
     'The horn of  Boromir!' he cried. 'He is  in need!' He  sprang down the 
steps and away, leaping down the path. 'Alas! An ill fate is on me this day, 
and all that I do goes amiss. Where is Sam?' 
     As he ran the cries  came louder, but fainter  now and  desperately the 
horn was blowing. Fierce and shrill rose the yells of the Orcs, and suddenly 
the horn-calls  ceased.  Aragorn  raced  down the last slope,  but before he 
could reach  the hill's foot, the sounds died away;  and as he turned to the 
left and ran towards them  they  retreated, until at last he could hear them 
no more. Drawing  his bright sword and crying Elendil!  Elendil!  he crashed 
through the trees.  

####-     A mile, maybe, from Parth Galen in a little glade not far from the lake 
he found Boromir. He was sitting with his back to a great tree, as if he was 
resting.  But  Aragorn saw  that he was pierced  with  many  black -feathered 
arrows; his sword  was still in his hand, but it  was  broken near the hilt; 
his horn cloven in two was at his side. Many Orcs lay slain, piled all about 
him and at his feet. 
     Aragorn knelt beside him.  Boromir opened his eyes and strove to speak. 
At last slow  words came. 'I tried to take the Ring from Frodo ' he said. 'I  
am sorry. I have paid.' His glance strayed to his fallen enemies;  twenty at 
least lay there. 'They have gone: the Halflings: the Orcs have taken them. I 
think they  are  not  dead. Orcs bound them.' He paused and  his eyes closed 
wearily. After a moment he spoke again. 
     'Farewell, Aragorn!  Go to  M inas Tirith  and  save my  people!  I have 
failed.' 
     'No!'  said  Aragorn,  taking his hand and kissing  his brow. 'You have 
conquered. Few  have gained such a  victory. Be at peace! Minas Tirith shall  
not fall!' 
     Boromir smiled. 
     'Which way did they go? Was Frodo there?' said Aragorn. 
     But Boromir did not speak again. 
     'Alas!' said  Aragorn. 'Thus  passes the  heir of Denethor, Lord of the 
Tower of Guard! This is a bitter end. Now the Company is all  in ruin. It is 
I that  have failed. Vain was Gandalf's  trust in me.  What  shall I do now?  
Boromir has laid it on  me  to go  to Minas Tirith, and my heart desires it; 
but where are the  Ring and the Bearer? How shall I  find them  and save the  
Quest from disaster?' 
     He knelt for a while, bent with weeping, still clasping Boromir's hand. 
So it  was  that Legolas  and  Gimli  found him.  They came from the western 
slopes of the hill, silently, creeping  through  the  trees as if  they were 
hunting. Gimli had  his axe in hand,  and  Legola s  his long knife:  all his 
arrows were spent. When  they came into the  glade they halted in amazement; 
and  then they stood a moment with heads bowed  in  grief,  for it seemed to 
them plain what had happened. 
     'Alas!'  said Legolas, coming to  Aragorn's  side. 'We have  hunted and 
slain many  Orcs in the woods, but we should have been of more use  here. We 
came when we heard the horn-but too late, it  seems. I  fear  you have taken 
deadly hurt.' 

####-     'Boromir  is dead,' said Aragorn. 'I am unscathed,  for  I was not here 
with him. He fell defending the hobbits, while I was away upon the hill.' 
     'The hobbits!' cried Gimli 'Where are they then? Where is Frodo?' 
     'I do not know,' answered Aragorn wearily. 'Before he died Boromir told 
me that the Orcs had  bound them;  he  did not think that they were  dead. I 
sent him  to follow  Merry and Pippin; but I did not ask him if Frodo or Sam 
were with him: not until it was too  late.  All  that I have done  today has 
gone amiss. What is to be done now?' 
     'First  we must tend the fallen,'  said Legolas. 'We  cannot  leave him 
lying like carrion among these foul Orcs.' 
     'But we must be swift,' said Gimli. 'He would not wish us to linger. We 
must follow the Orcs, if there is hope  that  any of our Company are  living 
prisoners.' 
     'But we do not know whether the Ring-bearer is with them  or not ' said 
Aragorn.  'Are we to abandon him? Must we not seek him first? An evil choice 
is now before us!' 
     'Then let us do first what we must do,' said  Legolas. 'We have not the 
time or the tools to bury our comrade fitly, or to raise a mound over him. A 
cairn we might build.' 
     'The labour would be hard and long:  there are no stones that we  could 
use nearer than the water -side,' said Gimli. 
     'Then  let us lay him in a boat with his weapons, and the weapons of his 
vanquished foes,' said Aragorn. 'We will send him to the Falls of Rauros and  
give him to Anduin. The River of Gondor will take care at least that no evil 
creature dishonours his bones.' 
     Quickly  they searched the bodies of  the Orcs, gathering  their swords 
and cloven helms and shields into  a  heap. 'See!' cried  Aragorn. 'Here  we 
find  tokens!' He picked  out  from the  pile  of grim weapons  two  knives,  
leaf-bladed, damasked  in go ld and red;  and searching further he found also 
the sheaths,  black, set with small red gems. 'No orc-tools these!' he said. 
'They were  borne by  the hobbits.  Doubtless the  Orcs despoiled them,  but 
feared  to keep  the knives,  knowing  them  for  wha t  they  are:  work  of 
Westernesse, wound about with spells  for the  bane of Mordor. Well, now, if 
they still  live,  our  friends are  weaponless. I will  take these  things,  
hoping against hope, to give them back.' 
     'And  I,' said Legolas,  'will take all the arrows that I can find, for  
my quiver is empty.' He  searched  in the  pile  and on the ground about and 

####-found not a few that were undamaged and longer in the shaft than such arrows 
as the Orcs were accustomed to use. He looked at them closely. 
     And  Aragorn looked on the slain, and he said: 'Here  lie many that are 
not folk of Mordor. Some are from the North, from the Misty  Mountains, if I 
know  anything of Orcs and their kinds.  And here are others  strange to me.  
Their gear is not after the manner of Orcs at all!' 
     There were four goblin-soldiers of greater  stature, swart, slant-eyed, 
with thick  legs and  large hands. They  were armed with short  broad-bladed 
swords, not with  the curved scimitars usual with Orcs: and they had bows  of 
yew, in length and shape like the bows of Men.  Upon their shields they bore 
a strange device: a small white hand in the centre of a black field; on  the 
front of their iron helms was set an S-rune, wrought of some white metal. 
     'I have not seen  these tokens  before,'  said Aragorn.  'What  do they 
mean?' 
     'S is for Sauron,' said Gimli. 'That is easy to read.' 
     'Nay!' said Legolas. 'Sauron does not use the Elf-runes.' 
     'Neither  does he  use  his right name,  nor permit it  to be  spelt or 
spoken,' said Aragorn. 'And he does  not use white. The  Orcs in the service 
of Barad-dyr use the sign of the Red Eye.' He stood for a moment in thought. 
'S is for Saruman, I  guess,'  he  said at length. 'There  is evil afoot  in 
Isengard,  and the West is no longer safe. It is  as Gandalf feared: by some 
means the traitor Saruman has had news of our journey. It is likely too that 
he  knows  of  Gandalf's  fall.  Pursuers  from Moria may  have escaped  the 
vigilance of Lurien, or they may have avoided that land and come to Isengard 
by other  paths. Orcs travel  fast.  But  Saruman has many  ways of learning 
news. Do you remember the birds?' 
     'Well,  we  have no time to ponder riddles,' said  Gimli. 'Let us  bear 
Boromir away!' 
     'But  after that  we  must guess  the riddles, if we  are to choose our 
course rightly,' answered Aragorn. 
     'Maybe there is no right choice,' said Gimli. 
     Taking his axe the  Dwarf now  cut  several branches. These they lashed 
together with bowstrings, and spread their  cloaks upon the frame. Upon this 
rough bier they carried the  body of  their companion to the shore, together  
with such trophies of  his last battle as they chose to send forth with him. 
It was only a short way, yet they found it no easy task, for  Boromir was  a  
man both tall and strong. 

####-     At the water -side Aragorn  remained, watching the  bier. while  Legolas 
and Gimli hastened back on foot to Parth  Galen. It was  a mile or more, and 
it was some time before they came back, paddling two boats swiftly along the 
shore. 
     'There is a strange tale  to tell!'  said Legolas. 'There are  only two 
boats upon the bank. We could find no trace of the other.' 
     'Have Orcs been there?' asked Aragorn. 
     'We saw no signs of  them,' answered Gimli. 'And Orcs  would have taken 
or destroyed all the boats, and the baggage as well.' 
     'I will look at the ground when we come there,' said Aragorn. 
     Now they laid  Boromir  in the middle of the boat that  was to bear him 
away. The grey hood and elven-cloak they folded and placed beneath his head. 
They combed his long dark hair and arrayed it upon his shoulders. The golden 
belt of Lurien gleamed  about  his waist. His helm they set beside  him, and 
across  his lap  they laid the  cloven horn and  the hilts and shards of his 
sword; beneath his  feet  they put the swords of his enemies. Then fastening  
the  prow to the stern of the other boat,  they drew him out into the water. 
They rowed sadly along the shore, and turning into the swift -running channel 
they passed the green sward of Parth Galen. The steep  sides of  Tol Brandir  
were  glowing:  it  was now  mid-afternoon.  As they  went south the fume of 
Rauros rose and  shimmered before them, a haze of gold. The rush and thunder 
of the falls shook the windless air . 
     Sorrowfully  they  cast loose  the funeral  boat:  there  Boromir  lay, 
restful, peaceful, gliding upon  the bosom of the  flowing water. The stream 
took him while they  held their own boat back with their paddles. He floated 
by  them, and slowly  his  boat departed, waning to  a dark spot against the 
golden  light;  and then suddenly it vanished. Rauros  roared on unchanging. 
The River  had taken Boromir  son of Denethor,  and he was not seen again in 
Minas  Tirith,  standing as he used to  stand  upon  the  White Tower in the 
morning. But  in Gondor in after -days it long  was said that  the elven-boat 
rode  the falls  and the foaming pool, and bore him down  through Osgiliath, 
and  past the many mouths of Anduin, out  into the Great Sea at night  under  
the stars. 
     For a  while  the three companions remained  silent,  gazing after him. 
Then  Aragorn spoke. 'They will look for him from the White Tower,' he said, 
'but he will not return from mountain or from  sea.' Then slowly he began to 
sing: 

####-     Through Rohan over fen and field where the long grass grows 
     The West Wind comes walking, and about the walls it goes. 
     'What news from the West, O wandering wind, do you bring to me tonight?  
     Have you seen Boromir the Tall by moon or by starlight?' 
     'I saw him ride over seven streams, over waters wide and grey; 
     I saw him walk in empty lands, until he passed away 
     Into the shadows of the North. I saw him then no more. 
     The North Wind may have heard the horn of the son of Denethor.'  
     'O Boromir! From the high walls westward I looked afar, 
     But you came not from the empty lands where no men are.'  
      
Then Legolas sang: 
 
     From the mouths of the Sea the South Wind flies, from the sandhills and the stones; 
     The wailing of the gulls it bears, and at the gate it moans. 
     'What news from the South, O sighing wind, do you bring to me at eve? 
     Where now is Boromir the Fair? He tarries and I grieve.'  
     'Ask not of me where he doth dwell-so many bones there lie 
     On the white shores and the dark shores under the stormy sky; 
     So many have passed down Anduin to find the flowing Sea. 
     Ask of the North Wind news of them the North Wind sends to me!'  
     'O Boromir! Beyond the gate the seaward road runs south, 
     But you came not with the wailing gulls from the grey sea's mouth.'  
     Then Aragorn sang again: 
     From the  Gate  of Kings  the  North Wind rides,  and past the  roaring falls;  
     And clear and cold about the tower its loud horn calls. 
     'What news from the North, O mighty wind, do you bring to me today? 
     What news of Boromir the Bold? For he is long away.'  
     'Beneath Amon Hen I heard his cry. There many foes he fought. 
     His cloven shield, his broken sword, they to the water brought. 
     His head so proud, his face so fair, his limbs they laid to rest; 
     And Rauros, golden Rauros-falls, bore him upon its breast.'  
     'O Boromir! The Tower of Guard shall ever northward gaze 
     To Rauros, golden Rauros-falls, until the end o f days.'  
 
     So they ended. Then they  turned  their boat and drove it with all  the 
speed they could against the stream back to Parth Galen. 
     'You left the  East Wind to  me,' said Gimli, 'but I will say naught of 
it.' 
     'That is as it should be,' said Aragorn. 'In  Minas Tirith  they endure 
the East Wind, but they do not ask it for tidings. But now Boromir has taken 

####-his road. and we must make haste to choose our own.' 
     He surveyed the green  lawn, quickly but  thoroughly, stooping often to 
the earth. 'The Orcs have been on this ground,' he  said. 'Otherwise nothing 
can be made  out for certain. All  our  footprints  are  here, crossing  and 
re-crossing. I cannot  tell  whether any of the hobbits have come back since 
the search for  Frodo  began.'  He returned  to the bank, close to where the 
rill  from the  spring  trickled  out into  the River. 'There are some clear 
prints here,' he  said. 'A hobbit waded out into the water and  back; but  I 
cannot say how long ago.' 
     'How then do you read this riddle?' asked Gimli. 
     Aragorn did not answer at once, but went back to the  camping-place and 
looked  at  the baggage. 'Two  packs  are  missing.' he  said, 'and  one  is 
certainly Sam's:  it was rather large and heavy.  This  then  is the answe r: 
Frodo  has gone by boat, and his servant has  gone with him. Frodo must have 
returned while we were all away. I met Sam going up the hill and told him to 
follow me;  but plainly he  did  not do so. He guessed his master s mind and  
came  back here before Frodo had gone. He did  not find it easy to leave Sam 
behind!' 
     'But why should  he leave  us behind, and without  a word?' said Gimli. 
'That was a strange deed!' 
     'And a  brave deed,' said Aragorn. 'Sam was right,  I think.  Frodo did 
not wish to  lead any friend to death with him in Mordor. But he knew that he 
must go himself. Something happened after he left us that  overcame his fear 
and doubt.' 
     'Maybe hunting Orcs came on him and he fled,' said Legolas.  
     'He fled, certainly,' said Aragorn, 'but not, I think, from Orcs.' What 
he  thought was  the cause of Frodo's  sudden resolve and flight Aragorn did  
not say. The last words of Boromir he long kept secret. 
     'Well,  so much  at  least  is now clear,'  said Legolas:  'Frodo is no 
longer on this side of the  River:  only he can have taken the boat. And Sam 
is with him; only he would have taken his pack.' 
     'Our  choice then,' said Gimli, 'is either to take the  remaining  boat 
and follow Frodo, or else to follow  the Orcs on foot. There is little  hope 
either way. We have already lost precious hours.' 
     'Let me  think!' said Aragorn. 'And now  may I make a  right choice and 
change the  evil fate of this unhappy day!' He stood silent for a moment. 'I  
will follow the Orcs,' he said at last. 'I would have guided Frodo to Mordor  

####-and  gone with  him to the end; but if I  seek him now  in the wilderness, I 
must abandon the captives to torment  and death.  My heart speaks clearly at 
last: the fate  of the Bearer  is in  my  hands no  longer .  The Company has 
played  its part. Yet we that  remain cannot forsake our companions while we 
have strength left.  Come!  We  will go  now. Leave  all  that can be spared 
behind! We will press on by day and dark!' 
     They drew up the  last  boat  and carried  it to  the trees.  They laid 
beneath  it such of their goods  as  they did not  need  and could not carry 
away. Then they left Parth Galen. The afternoon was fading as they came back  
to the glade where Boromir had fallen. There they picked up the trail of the 
Orcs. It needed little skill to find. 
     'No other folk  make such  a trampling,' said Legolas. 'It seems  their 
delight to slash and beat down  growing  things that are not even  in  their 
way.' 
     'But they go with a great  speed for all that,' said Aragorn, 'and they 
do not  tire. And later we  may have  to  search for our  path  in hard bare 
lands.' 
     'Well, after  them!' said Gimli. 'Dwarves too can  go swiftly, and they 
do not tire sooner  than Orcs. But it will be a long chase: they have a long 
start.' 
     'Yes,' said Aragorn, 'we  shall all need the endurance of  Dwarves. But 
come! With hope or without hope we will follow the trail of our enemies. And 
woe to them, if we prove the swifter! We  will make such a chase as shall be  
accounted a marvel among the Three Kindreds µ Elves. Dwarves, and Men. 
Forth 
the Three Hunters!' 
     Like a deer he sprang away. Through the trees he sped. On and on he led 
them,  tireless and swift, now that his mind  was at last made up. The woods 
about the lake they left behind. Long slopes  they climbed, dark, hard-edged 
against the  sky already red with sunset. Dusk came. They passed away,  grey 
shadows in a stony land. 
 

####- 

Chapter 2. The Riders of Rohan 

 
 
     Dusk deepened. Mist lay behind them among the trees below, and  brooded 
on  the pale margins of the Anduin, but the  sky was clear. Stars  came out. 
The waxing  moon  was riding in the West, and the shadows of the rocks  were 
black. They had come to  the feet of stony hills, and their pace was slower, 
for the trail was no longer easy to  follow. Here the highlands of the  Emyn 
Muil ran from North to South in two long tumbled ridges. The western side of 
each ridge was steep  and difficult, but  the  eastward slopes were gentler, 
furrowed  with  many  gullies  and  narrow  ravines.  All  night  the  three 
companions scrambled in  this bony land, climbing to the  crest of the first  
and tallest ridge, and down again into the darkness of a deep winding valley 
on the other side. 
     There in the still cool hour before dawn they rested for a brief space. 
The moon had long gone down before them, the stars glittered above them; the 
first light  of day had not  yet come over the dark  hills behind.  For  the 
moment Aragorn was at a loss:  the  orc-trail had descended into the valley, 
but there it had vanished. 
     'Which way would they turn, do you  think?' said Legolas. 'Northward to 
take a straighter road to Isengard,  or Fangorn, if that is their aim as you  
guess? Or southward to strike the Entwash?' 
     'They will not make  for  the  river,  whatever mark they aim at'' said 
Aragorn. 'And unless there is much amiss  in Rohan and  the power of Saruman 
is greatly increased;  they will take  the  shortest way that they  can find 
over the fields of the Rohirrim. Let us search northwards!' 
     The  dale  ran like  a stony  trough between  the  ridged  hills, and a  
trickling stream flowed among the boulders  at the  bottom. A cliff  frowned 
upon their right; to their left rose  grey  slopes, dim  and shadowy in  the 
late night.  They  went  on  for  a  mile  or  more northwards. Aragorn  was 
searching. bent towards  the ground,  among the folds and gullies leading up 
into  the western ridge. Legolas was some way ahead. Suddenly the Elf gave a  
cry and the others came running towards him. 
     'We have already overtaken some of those that we are hunting,' he said. 
'Look!' He pointed, and they saw that  what they had  at  first  taken to be 
boulders lying at the foot of the slope were huddled  bodies. Five dead Orcs 

####-lay there. They had  been hewn  with many  cruel strokes, and  two had  been 
beheaded. The ground was wet with their dark blood. 
     'Here is another riddle!' said Gimli.  'But it needs the light  of  day 
and for that we cannot wait.' 
     'Yet however you  read it,  it  seems  not  unhopeful,'  said  Legolas.  
'Enemies  of the  Orcs  are  likely to  be our friends. Do any folk dwell in 
these hills?' 
     'No,' said Aragorn. 'The Rohirrim seldom come  here, and it is far from 
Minas Tirith. It might be that some  company of  Men  were  hunting here for 
reasons that we do not know. Yet I think not.' 
     'What do you think?' said Gimli. 
     'I think that  the  enemy  brought his  own enemy  with  him,' answered 
Aragorn. 'These are Northern Orcs from far away. Among the slain are none of 
the great  Orcs with the strange badges. There was a quarrel, I guess: it is 
no uncommon thing with these foul  folk. Maybe there was some  dispute about 
the road.' 
     'Or about the  captives,' said  Gimli. 'Let us hope that they, too, did 
not meet their end here.' 
     Aragorn  searched the ground in a wide  circle,  but no other traces of 
the fight could be found. They went on. Already the eastward sky was turning 
pale; the  stars were fading, and a grey light was  slowly growing. A little 
further  north they  came  to  a fold  in which a tiny stream,  falling  and 
winding, had cut a stony path down into  the valley. In it some bushes grew,  
and there were patches of grass upon its sides. 
     'At last!'  said Aragorn.  'Here are  the tracks that  we seek! Up this 
water -channel: this is the way that the Orcs went after their debate.' 
     Swiftly now the pursuers turned and followed the new path.  As if fresh 
from a  night's rest they sprang  from stone to stone. At last  they reached 
the  crest of  the  grey hill,  and a  sudden breeze blew in  their hair and 
stirred their cloaks: the chill wind of dawn. 
     Turning  back they saw across  the  River  the  far hills kindled.  Day 
leaped into the sky. The red rim of the  sun rose over  the shoulders of the 
dark  land. Before them in the West the world lay still, formless  and grey; 
but even  as they looked,  the shadows of night melted, the  colours  of the 
waking earth returned: green flowed over the wide meads  of Rohan; the white 
mists shimmered in  the watervales;  and far off to the left, thirty leagues 
or more, blue  and purple stood the  White Mountains,  rising  into peaks of 

####-jet, tipped with glimmering snows, flushed with the rose of morning. 
     'Gondor! Gondor!' cried  Aragorn. 'Would that I looked on  you again in 
happier hour! Not yet does my road lie southward to your bright streams.  
     Gondor! Gondor, between the Mountains and the Sea! 
     West Wind blew there; the light upon the Silver Tree 
     Fell like bright rain in gardens of the Kings of old. 
     O proud walls! White towers! O winged crown and throne of gold! 
     O Gondor, Gondor! Shall Men behold the Silver Tree, 
     Or West Wind blow again between the Mountains and the Sea?  
     Now  let  us go!' he said , drawing his  eyes away from  the South,  and 
looking out west and north to the way that he must tread. 
     The ridge upon  which the companions  stood  went down  steeply  before 
their feet. Below it twenty  fathoms or  more, there was  a wide and  rugged 
shelf which ended suddenly in the brink  of a sheer  cliff: the East Wall of 
Rohan.  So  ended  the  Emyn Muil, and  the  green plains  of  the  Rohirrim 
stretched away before them to the edge of sight. 
     'Look!' cried Legolas, pointing up into the pale sky above them. 'There 
is the eagle  again! He is very high. He seems  to be flying now away,  from 
this land back to the North. He is going with great speed. Look!' 
     'No, not even my eyes can  see him, my good Legolas,' said Aragorn. 'He 
must  be far aloft indeed. I wonder  what  is his errand, if he is the  same 
bird that I have seen before. But look! I  can  see something nearer at hand 
and more urgent; there is something moving over the plain!' 
     'Many  things,'  said  Legolas. 'It is a great company on foot;  but  I 
cannot  say  more,  nor see what kind of folk they  may  be. They  are  many 
leagues  away: twelve,  I  guess; but  the flatness of the plain is hard  to 
measure.' 
     'I think,  nonetheless, that we no longer  need any  trail  to  tell us 
which  way  to go,' said Gimli. 'Let  us find a path down to  the  fields as 
quick as may be.' 
     'I  doubt  if you will  find a path quicker  than the one that the Orcs 
chose,' said Aragorn. 
     They  followed their enemies now  by the clear light  of day. It seemed 
that the Orcs had  pressed on with all possible speed. Every  now  and again 
the pursuers found things that had been dropped or cast away: food-bags, the 
rinds and crusts of hard grey bread. a torn black cloak, a heavy iron-nailed 
shoe  broken on the stones. The trail  led them  north along the top  of the 

####-escarpment, and at length they  came to a deep cleft carved in the rock by a  
stream  that  splashed  noisily down.  In the  narrow  ravine  a rough  path 
descended like a steep stair into the plain. 
     At  the bottom  they came with  a strange  suddenness  on the grass  of 
Rohan. It swelled like a green sea up to the very foot of the Emyn Muil. The 
falling stream vanished into a deep growth of cresses and water -plants,  and  
they could  hear it tinkling away in green tunnels, down long gentle  slopes 
towards the fens of Entwash Vale far  away.  They seemed to have left winter  
clinging  to  the  hills  behind. Here  the air was softer  and warmer,  and 
faintly  scented,  as if spring was already stirring and the sap was flowing 
again in  herb and leaf. Legolas took a deep breath,  like one that drinks a  
great draught after long thirst in barren places. 
     'Ah!  the green smell!'  he said. 'It is better than much sleep. Let us 
run! ' 
     'Light feet may run swiftly here,' said Aragorn.  'More swiftly, maybe, 
than iron-shod Orcs. Now we have a chance to lessen their lead!' 
     They went in single file, running like hounds on a strong scent, and an 
eager  light was  in their eyes.  Nearly due  west the  broad  swath  of the 
marching Orcs  tramped  its  ugly slot;  the sweet  grass of  Rohan had been 
bruised and  blackened as  they  passed. Presently  Aragorn  gave a cry  and  
turned aside. 'Stay!' he shouted. 'Do not follow me yet!'  He ran quickly to 
the right, away  from the  main trail; for he had seen  footprints that went 
that way, branching off  from the  others,  the  marks of small unshod feet. 
These, however, did  not go far before they were crossed by orc-prints, also 
coming out  from the main  trail behind and in  front, and then  they curved 
sharply back  again  and were lost  in the  trampling. At the furthest point 
Aragorn stooped and picked up something from the grass; then he ran back. 
     'Yes,' he said, 'they are quite plain:  a hobbit's footprints. Pippin's 
I think. He is smaller than the other. And look at this! He held up a  thing 
that glittered in  the sunlight. It  looked  like  the new-opened leaf of  a  
beech-tree, fair and strange in that treeless plain. 
     'The brooch of an elven-cloak!' cried Legolas and Gimli together. 
     'Not idly do the leaves of Lurien  fall,' said  Aragorn.  'This did not 
drop by chance: it  was  cast away as  a token to  any that  might follow. I 
think Pippin ran away from the trail for that purpose.' 
     'Then he at least was alive,'  said  Gimli. 'And he  had the use of his 
wits, and of his legs too. That is heartening. We do not pursue in vain.' 

####-     'Let us hope that  he  did not pay  too dearly for his  boldness,' said 
Legolas.  'C ome! Let us  go on! The thought of those merry young folk  driven 
like cattle burns my heart.' 
     The  sun climbed to  the noon and then rode slowly  down the sky. Light 
clouds  came up out of the sea in the distant South and were blown away upon 
the breeze. The sun sank. Shadows rose behind and reached out long arms from 
the East. Still the hunters held on.  One day  now had  passed since Boromir  
fell, and  the Orcs were yet far ahead. No longer could any sight of them be 
seen in the level plains.  
     As nightshade was closing about  them Aragorn halted. Only twice in the 
day's  march had they rested for a brief  while, and twelve leagues  now lay 
between them and the eastern wall where they had stood at dawn. 
     'We have  come at last  to  a hard choice,' he said.  'Shall we  rest by 
night, or shall we go on while our will and strength hold?' 
     'Unless  our enemies rest also, they  will  leave us far  behind, if we 
stay to  sleep.' said Legolas. 'Surely even Orcs must pause on  the  march?' 
said Gimli. 'Seldom will  Orcs journey in the open under the sun.  yet these 
have done so,' said Legolas. 'Certainly they will not rest by night.' 
     'But if we walk by night, we cannot follow their trail,' said Gimli. 
     'The trail is straight, and turns  neither right nor left, as far as my 
eyes can see,' said Legolas.  
     'Maybe,  I could  lead you  at guess in the darkness  and  hold  to the 
line,'  said  Aragorn;  'but  if we strayed, or they turned aside, then when 
light came there might be long delay before the trail was found again.' 
     'And  there  is  this also,' said Gimli: 'only by day can we see if any 
tracks lead away.  If a prisoner should escape, or if one should be  carried 
off, eastward,  say, to the Great River,  towards Mordor, we might pass  the 
signs and never know it.' 
     'That  is true,'  said Aragorn. 'But if I  read  the signs back  yonder  
rightly, the Orcs of the White Hand prevailed, and the whole company  is now 
bound for Isengard. Their present course bears me out.' 
     'Yet it would  be rash to be sure of  their counsels,' said Gimli. 'And 
what of escape? In the dark we  should have passed the signs that led you to 
the brooch.' 
     'The Orcs will  be doubly on their  guard since then, and the prisoners 
even wearier,' said Legolas. 'There will  be no  escape again, if we  do not 
contrive  it. How  that is to be done cannot  be guessed, but first we  must  

####-overtake them.' 
     'And yet even I,  Dwarf of many journeys, and not the least hardy of my 
folk, cannot run all the way to Isengard without any pause ' said Gimli. 'My 
heart burns me too, and I would  have  started sooner but now I must  rest a  
little to run the  better. And if we  rest, then the blind night is the time 
to do so.' 
     'I said that  it  was a  hard  choice,' said Aragorn.  'How shall we end 
this debate?' 
     'You are our guide,' said Gimli, 'and you are skilled in the chase. You  
shall choose.' 
     'My heart  bids me go on,'  said Legolas. 'But we must hold together. I 
will follow your counsel.' 
     'You give the choice to an ill chooser,' said Aragorn. 'Since we passed 
through the Argonath  my  choices have  gone amiss.' He  fell  silent gazing 
north and west into the gathering night for a long while. 
     'We will  not walk in  the dark,'  he  said at length.   'The  peril  of 
missing the trail  or  signs  of  other  coming and  going seems to  me  the 
greater. If the  Moon gave enough  light, we would use it, but alas! he sets 
early and is yet young and pale.' 
     'And  tonight he is shrouded anyway,' Gimli murmured.  'Would  that the 
Lady had given us a light, such a gift as she gave to Frodo!' 
     'It will be more needed  where it is bestowed,' said Aragorn. 'With him 
lies  the true Quest.  Ours is but a small matter in the great deeds of this 
time. A vain pursuit from its beginning, maybe, which no  choice of mine can 
mar or mend. Well, I have chosen. So let us use the time as best we may!' 
     He  cast himself on the ground and fell at once into sleep, for he  had 
not slept since their night under the shadow of Tol Brandir. Before dawn was 
in the sky he woke and rose.  Gimli  was still deep in slumber,  but Legolas 
was standing,  gazing northwards into the darkness, thoughtful and silent as 
a young tree in a windless night.  
     'They are  far far away,' he said sadly, turning to Aragorn. 'I know in 
my heart that they have not rested this night.  Only an eagle could overtake 
them now.' 
     'Nonetheless we will still follow as we may,' said Aragorn. Stooping he 
roused the Dwarf. 'Come! We must go,' he said. 'The scent is growing cold.' 
     'But it is still dark,' said Gimli. 'Even Legolas on a  hill-top  could 
not see them till the Sun is up.' 

####-     'I fear they have passed beyond my sight from hill or plain, under moon 
or sun,' said Legolas.  
     'Where sight fails the earth may  bring us rumour,' said  Aragorn. 'The 
land  must  groan under  their hated  feet.' He stretched  himself  upon the 
ground with his ear pressed against the turf. He lay  there  motionless, for  
so long a time that Gimli wondered if he had swooned or fallen asleep again. 
Dawn came glimmering, and  slowly a grey  light grew about them.  At last he 
rose, and now his friends could see his face: it was pale and drawn, and his 
look was troubled. 
     'The rumour of the earth is dim and confused,' he said. 'Nothing  walks 
upon it for many miles about  us. Faint and far are the feet of our enemies.  
But loud are the hoofs of the horses. It comes to my mind that I heard them,  
even  as  I lay on the ground in sleep, and they troubled my dreams:  hor ses 
galloping, passing  in the West. But now they are  drawing ever further from 
us, riding northward. I wonder what is happening in this land!' 
     'Let us go!' said Legolas.  
     So the third day of their pursuit began. During  all its long  hours of 
cloud and fitful sun they hardly paused, now striding, now running, as if no 
weariness could quench the  fire that burned them.  They seldom spoke.  Over  
the  wide solitude they  passed  and their elven-cloaks  faded  against  the 
background of the grey-green fields; even  in the cool  sunlight  of mid-day 
few but elvish eyes would have marked them, until they  were close  at hand. 
Often  in their  hearts  they thanked the Lady  of  Lurien for  the gift  of 
lembas, for they could eat of it and find new strength even as they ran. 
     All day the track of  their enemies led  straight  on, going north-west 
without a break or turn. As once again the  day wore to its end they came to  
long treeless slopes, where the land rose, swelling up towards a line of low 
humpbacked downs ahead. The orc-trail grew fainter  as it bent north towards 
them, for  the ground became harder  and the grass  shorter. Far away to the 
left  the river Entwash wound, a silver thread in a green floor.  No  moving 
thing could be seen. Often Aragorn wondered  that they saw no sign  of beast 
or  man. The dwellings of the  Rohirrim were for the most  part many leagues 
away to the South, under the wooded eaves of the White Mountains, now 
hidden 
in mist and cloud;  yet  the Horse-lords  had formerly  kept  many  herds and  
studs  in  the Eastemnet, this easterly region of their realm, and there the 
herdsmen had wandered much, living  in  camp  and tent, even in winter -time. 

####-But now  all the land was empty, and there was silence  that did not seem to  
be the quiet of peace. 
     At  dusk they halted  again. Now twice twelve  leagues  they had passed 
over  the plains of Rohan  and  the wall of  the Emyn Muil was  lost in  the 
shadows  of the East. The  young moon  was glimmering in a misty sky, but it 
gave small light, and the stars were veiled. 
     'Now  do I most  grudge  a time of rest or any halt in our chase ' said 
Legolas. 'The Orcs have run before us, as if  the very whips  of Sauron were 
behind them. I fear they have already reached the forest and  the dark hills, 
and even now are passing into the shadows of the trees.' 
     Gimli ground his  teeth. 'This  is a bitter end to our  hope and to all 
our toil!' he said. 
     'To  hope, maybe, but  not to  toil,'  said Aragorn. 'We shall not turn 
back here. Yet I am weary.' He gazed  back along the  way that they had come 
towards the night gathering in the East. 'There is something strange at work 
in this land.  I distrust the  silence. I  distrust even  the pale Moon. The 
stars are  faint; and I am weary a s I have  seldom been before,  weary as no 
Ranger should be with a clear trail to follow. There is some will that lends 
speed  to our foes and sets an unseen barrier before us: a weariness that is 
in the heart more than in the limb.' 
     'Truly!' said Legolas. 'That I have known since first we came down from 
the Emyn Muil. For the will is not behind us but before us.' He pointed away 
over the  land  of  Rohan  into  the darkling West  under  the sickle  moon. 
'Saruman!'  muttered Aragorn. 'But he shall not  turn  us back!  Halt we must  
once more; for,  see! even the  Moon  is falling  into gathering  cloud. But 
north lies our road between down and fen when day returns.' 
     As before Legolas was first afoot, if indeed he had ever slept. 'Awake!  
Awake!' he cried. 'It is a red dawn. Strange things await us by the eaves of 
the forest. Good or evil, I do not know; but we are called. Awake!' 
     The others sprang up, and almost at once they set off again. Slowly the 
downs  drew near. It was still an hour before  noon when they  reached them: 
green slopes rising to bare ridges  that ran in a line straight  towards the 
North. At their feet the ground was dry and the turf short, but a long strip 
of  sunken  land,  some  ten  miles  wide, lay  between them  and the  river  
wandering deep in  dim  thickets of reed  and rush. Just to  the West of the 
southernmost slope there was a great ring, where  the turf had been torn and 
beaten by many trampling feet. From it  the orc-trail ran out again, turning 

####-north along the  dr y  skirts  of the hills. Aragorn halted and examined  the 
tracks closely. 
     'They rested here a  while,' he said,  'but even the outward  trail  is 
already  old. I  fear  that your  heart  spoke truly,  Legolas: it is thrice 
twelve hours, I guess, since the Orcs stood where we now stand. If they held 
to their pace,  then  at sundown  yesterday they would reach  the borders of 
Fangorn.' 
     'I can see nothing  away north or west but  grass dwindling into mist,' 
said Gimli. 'Could we see the forest, if we climbed the hills?' 
     'It is  still  far  away,'  said Aragorn. 'If I remember rightly, these 
downs run  eight leagues  or  more to the north, and then north-west to  the 
issuing of the Entwash there lies still a wide land. another fifteen leagues 
it may be.' 
     'Well, let  us go on,' said Gimli. 'My legs must forget the miles. They 
would be more willing, if my heart were less heavy.' 
     The sun was sinking when at last they drew near to the  end of the line 
of  downs.  For many  hours they had  marched without rest. They  were going 
slowly now, and Gimli's back was bent.  Stone-hard are the Dwarves in labour 
or journey, but this endless  chase began to tell on him, as all hope failed 
in his heart. Aragorn walked behind  him, grim and silent,  stooping now and 
again to scan some print or mark upon the ground. Only Legolas still stepped 
as  lightly as ever,  his feet hardly seeming to press the grass. leaving no 
footprints  as he passed; but in  the waybread of the Elves he found all the 
sustenance tha t he needed, and  he could sleep, if sleep it  could be called 
by Men, resting his mind in the strange  paths of elvish dreams,  even as he 
walked open-eyed in the light of this world. 
     'Let us go  up on to this green hill!' he said.  Wearily they  fol lowed 
him, climbing the long slope, until  they  came out upon the  top. It  was a  
round hill smooth and  bare, standing by itself,  the  most northerly of the 
downs. The sun sank  and  the  shadows of evening fell  like a curtain. They  
were alone  in a gr ey formless world without mark or measure. Only  far away 
north-west  there  was  a  deeper darkness  against  the  dying  light:  the 
Mountains of Mist and the forest at their feet. 
     'Nothing can  we see to guide us here,' said Gimli. 'Well, now we  must  
halt again and wear the night away. It is growing cold!' 
     'The wind is north from the snows,' said Aragorn. 
     'And ere morning  it will be in  the East,' said Legolas.  'But rest if 

####-you must. Yet  do  not cast all hope away. Tomorrow is unknown.  Rede oft is 
found at the rising of the Sun.' 
     'Three  suns already have risen on  our  chase and brought no counsel ' 
said Gimli. 
     The  night  grew  ever  colder.  Aragorn  and Gimli slept fitfully, and 
whenever they awoke they saw Legolas standing beside them, or walking to 
and 
fro, singing softly to  himself in his own tongue, and as  he sang the white 
stars  opened in  the hard black vault above. So the  night passed. Together  
they watched the dawn grow slowly in the  sky, now bare and cloudless, until 
at  last the sunrise came. It was pale and clear. The  wind was  in the East  
and  all the mists had rolled away;  wide lands lay bleak about them in  the 
bitter light. 
     Ahead and eastward they saw the windy uplands of the Wold of Rohan that 
they had already glimpsed many days ago from the Great River. North-
westward 
stalked the dark forest of Fangorn; still ten leagues away stood its shadowy 
eaves, and its  further  slopes  faded into  the distant blue. Beyond  there 
glimmered far away, as if floating  on a  grey cloud, the white head of tall 
Methedras, the  last  peak  of  the  Misty Mountains. Out of  the forest the 
Entwash flowed to meet them, its  stream now swift and narrow, and its banks 
deep-cloven. The orc-trail turned from the downs towards it. 
     Following with his keen eyes the trail to the river, and then the river  
back towards the forest,  Aragorn saw a shadow on the distant green,  a dark  
swift-moving  blur.  He cast  himself upon  the  ground  and  listened again 
intently.  But Legolas stood beside him, shading  his bright elven-eyes with 
his long slender hand, and he saw not a  shadow, nor  a blur, but the  small 
figures  of horsemen, many horsemen, and the glint of morning on the tips of 
their spears was  like the twinkle of minute stars beyond the edge of mortal 
sight. Far behind them a dark smoke rose in thin curling threads.  
     There was a silence  in the empty fields, arid Gimli could hear the air 
moving in the grass.  
     'Riders!' cried Aragorn, springing to  his feet.  'Many riders on swift 
steeds are coming towards us!' 
     'Yes,' said Legolas, 'there are one hundred  and five. Yellow is  their 
hair, and bright are their spears. Their leader is very tall.' 
     Aragorn smiled. 'Keen are the eyes of the Elves,' he said. 

####-     'Nay!  The  riders are little  more  than  five leagues distant,'  said 
Legolas.  
     'Five leagues or  one,' said Gimli; 'we cannot escape them in this bare 
land. Shall we wait for them here or go on our way?' 
     'We will wait,' said Aragorn. 'I  am weary, and our hunt has failed. Or 
at least  others were before us; for these horsemen are riding back down the 
orc-trail. We may get new s from them.' 
     'Or spears,' said Gimli. 
     'There are three empty saddles, but I see no hobbits,' said Legolas. 
     'I did not say that we should hear good news,' said  Aragorn. 'But evil 
or good we will await it here.' 
     The three companions now left the hill-top, where they might be an easy  
mark against the pale sky, and they walked slowly down the northward  slope. 
A little  above the hill's foot they halted, and wrapping their cloaks about 
them, they sat huddled together upon the faded grass. The time passed slowly 
and heavily. The wind was thin and searching. Gimli was uneasy. 
     'What do you know of these horsemen, Aragorn?' he said. 'Do we sit here 
waiting for sudden death?' 
     'I have been among them,' answered Aragorn. 'They are proud and wilful, 
but they are true-hearted, generous in thought and deed; bold but not cruel; 
wise but unlearned,  writing no books  but  singing many  songs,  after  the 
manner of the children of Men before the Dark Years. But I do not know  what 
has happened here of late, nor in what mind the Rohirrim may now  be between 
the traitor  Saruman and the threat of  Sauron.  They  have  long  been  the 
friends of the people of Gondor, though they are not akin to them. It was in 
forgotten years long ago that Eorl the Young brought them out of  the North,  
and  their  kinship  is rather  with  the  Bardings  of  Dale, and with  the 
Beornings of the Wood,  among whom may still be seen many men tall and 
fair, 
as are the Riders of Rohan. At least they will not love the Orcs.' 
     'But Gandalf spoke of a  rumour that they pay tribute to Mordor '  said 
Gimli. 
     'I believe it no more than did Boromir,' answered Aragorn. 
     'You will soon learn the truth,' said Legolas. 'Already they approach.' 
     At length even Gimli could  hear the distant  beat of  galloping hoofs. 
The horsemen,  following  the trail, had  turned  from the  river,   and were 
drawing near the downs. They were riding like the wind. 

####-     Now the  cries  of clear strong voices  came ringing over  the  fields. 
Suddenly they swept up with a noise like thunder, and  the foremost horseman 
swerved, passing by  the  foot  of  the  hill,  and  leading  the  host  back  
southward along the western skirts of the downs. After him they rode: a long 
line of mail-clad men. swift, shining, fell and fair to look upon. 
     Their horses were of great stature, strong and clean-limbed; their grey 
coats  glistened, their  long tails flowed  in the  wind, their  manes  were 
braided on their proud necks. The Men that rode them matched them well: tall 
and long-limbed; their hair, flaxen -pale,  flowed under  their  light helms,  
and streamed in long braids behind them; their faces were stern and keen. In 
their  hands were tall  spears of ash,  painted  shields were slung at their 
backs, long swords were at their belts, their burnished skirts of  mail hung 
down upon their knees.  
     In pairs  they galloped  by, and though every now  and then one rose in 
his  stirrups  and  gazed ahead  and to  either side, they appeared  not  to 
perceive  the three strangers sitting silently and  watching them. The  host  
had almost passed  when  suddenly Aragorn  st ood  up, and  called in a  loud 
voice: 
     'What news from the North, Riders of Rohan?' 
     With astonishing speed and  skill they  checked  their steeds, wheeled, 
and came charging round.  Soon the three companions  found  themselves  in a  
ring of horsemen  moving in a running circle, up the hill -slope  behind them 
and down,  round and round  them, and  drawing  ever inwards. Aragorn  stood 
silent, and  the other two  sat  without  moving, wondering what  way things 
would turn. 
     Without a word or cry, suddenly, the Riders halted. A thicket of spears 
were  pointed towards the strangers; and some  of the  horsemen had bows  in 
hand, and their  arrows were  already fitted  to the  string. Then one  rode 
forward, a tall man, taller than  all the rest; from  his helm as a crest  a  
white horsetail flowed. He advanced  until the point of his spear was within 
a foot of Aragorn's breast. Aragorn did not stir. 
     'Who are  you,  and what are you doing  in this  land?' said the Rider, 
using the  Common Speech of the West, in manner and tone like  to the speech 
of Boromir, Man of Gondor. 
     'I am called Strider,' answered Aragorn. 'I came out of the North. I am 
hunting Orcs.' 
     The Rider leaped from  his horse. Giving his spear to another  who rode 

####-up and dismounted at his side, he drew his sword and stood face to face with  
Aragorn, surveying him keenly, and not  without wonder. At  length  he spoke 
again. 
     'At first I thought that you yourselves were Orcs,' he said; 'but now I 
see that it is  not so. Indeed  you know  little of Orcs, if  you go hunting 
them  in this  fashion.  They were swift and well-armed, and they were many. 
You would have changed from hunters to prey, if ever you had overtaken them. 
But there is something strange about you, Strider.' He bent his clear bright 
eyes again upon the Ranger. 'That  is  no name for a Man that  you give. And 
strange too is your raiment.  Have you sprung out of the  grass? How did you 
escape our sight? Are you elvish folk?' 
     'No,'  said  Aragorn.  'One  only of us  is an  Elf, Legolas  from  the 
Woodland Realm in  distant Mirkwood. But we have  passed through 
Lothlurien, 
and the gifts and favour of the Lady go with us.' 
     The Rider looked at them  with  renewed wonder, but  his eyes hardened. 
'Then there  is a Lady in the Golden Wood, as old tales tell!' he said. 'Few 
escape  her  nets, they  say. These are  strange days! But if  you  have her  
favour, then you  also are  net -weavers and  sorcerers,  maybe.' He turned a  
cold glance suddenly upon Legolas and Gimli.  'Why do you  not speak, silent 
ones?' he demanded. 
     Gimli  rose and  planted  his feet  firmly apart: his hand gripped  the 
handle  of  his  axe,  and  his  dark  eyes flashed.  'Give  me  your  name, 
horse-master, and I will give you mine, and more besides,' he said. 
     'As for that,' said the Rider, staring down at the Dwarf, 'the stranger  
should declare  himself first. Yet I am named  Jomer  son of Jomund,  and am 
called the Third Marshal of Riddermark.' 
     'Then Jomer son  of Jomund,  Third Marshal of Riddermark, let Gimli the 
Dwarf  Gluin's son warn you against foolish  words.  You speak evil of  that 
which is fair  beyond the  reach  of your  thought, and only little  wit can 
excuse you.' 
     Jomer's eyes  blazed, and the Men of Rohan murmured angrily, and closed 
in, advancing  their  spears. 'I  would cut  off your  head, beard and  all, 
Master Dwarf, if it stood but a little higher from the ground ' said Jomer. 
     'He stands not  alone,'  said Legolas,  bending his bow and fitting  an 
arrow with hands that moved quicker than sight. 'You would  die before  your 
stroke fell.' 

####-     Jomer  raised  his sword, and things might  have  gone ill, but Aragorn 
sprang  between them, and raised his hand. 'Your pardon,  Jomer!' he  cried.  
'When you know more you will understand why  you have angered my 
companions.  
We intend no  evil to Rohan,  nor to any of its folk, neither to man  nor to 
horse. Will you not hear our tale before you strike?' 
     'I  will,'  said  Jomer  lowering  his  blade. 'Bu t  wanderers  in  the 
Riddermark  would be  wise to be less haughty in these days of doubt.  First  
tell me your right name.' 
     'First tell me whom you serve,' said Aragorn. 'Are you friend or foe of 
Sauron, the Dark Lord of Mordor?' 
     'I serve only the Lord  of the  Mark, Thjoden  King  son  of  Thengel,' 
answered Jomer. 'We do  not serve the Power of the Black Land far away,  but 
neither are we yet at open war with him; and  if you  are fleeing  from him, 
then you had best leave this  land. There is  trouble now on all our borders,  
and we are threatened; but we desire only to be free, and to live as we have 
lived, keeping  our  own, and  serving  no  foreign  lord,  good or evil. We 
welcomed guests kindly in the better days, but in  these  times the unbidden 
stranger finds us swift and hard. Come! Who are you?  Whom do you serve?  
At 
whose command do you hunt Orcs in our land?' 
     'I serve no man,' said  Aragorn;  'but the servants of  Sauron I pursue 
into whatever land they may go. There are few among mortal Men who know 
more 
of Orcs; and I do not hunt them in this fashion out of choice. The Orcs whom 
we pursued  took captive two of my friends. In such need a man  that  has no  
horse  will go on foot, and he will  not ask for leave to  follow the trail. 
Nor will  he  count  the heads  of  the enemy save  with a  sword.  I am not 
weaponless.' 
     Aragorn  threw back his cloak. The elven-sheath glittered as he grasped 
it, and the bright blade of And®ril shone like a sudden flame as he swept it 
out.   'Elendil!'  he cried. 'I  am  Aragorn son  of Arathorn and  am  called 
Elessar, the Elfstone, D®nadan, the heir of Isildur Elendil's son of Gondor. 
Here is the Sword  that was  Broken and is forged again! Will you aid  me or 
thwart me? Choose swiftly!' 
     Gimli  and Legolas looked at their companion in amazement, for they had 
not seen him  in this  mood before. He seemed to have grown in stature while 

####-Jomer had shrunk; and in his  living face they caught a brief vision of  the  
power and majesty of the  kings  of stone. For a moment it seemed to the eyes 
of Legolas  that a white flame  flickered  on the  brows  of Aragorn  like a  
shining crown. 
     Jomer stepped back and a look of awe was in his face. He cast down  his 
proud  eyes.  'These  are  indeed  strange days,'  he  muttered. 'Dreams and 
legends spring to life out of the grass.  
     'Tell  me,  lord,' he said,  'what  brings you  here?  And what was the 
meaning  of the dark  words?  Long  has  Boromir  son of Denethor  been gone 
seeking an answer, and the  horse that we lent him  came back riderless. What 
doom do you bring out of the North?' 
     'The doom of choice,' said Aragorn. 'You may say this to Thjoden son of 
Thengel: open war lies before him, with Sauron or against him. None may live 
now as they ha ve lived, and few  shall keep what they call their own. But of 
these  great  matters we  will speak  later. If  chance allows, I will  come 
myself to the king. Now I am in great need, and I ask for help,  or at least  
for tidings. You heard that we are pursuing an orc-host that carried off our 
friends. What can you tell us?' 
     'That  you  need not  pursue  them further,' said Jomer. 'The  Orcs are 
destroyed.' 
     'And our friends?' 
     'We found none but Orcs.' 
     'But that is strange indeed,' said Aragorn. 'Did you search the  slain?  
Were there no bodies other than those of orc-kind? They would be small. Only 
children to your eyes, unshod but clad in grey.' 
     'There  were no dwarves  nor children,' said Jomer. 'We counted all the 
slain and despoiled them, and then we piled the carcases and burned them, as 
is our custom. The ashes are smoking still.' 
     'We do not speak of dwarves or children,' said Gimli. 'Our friends were 
hobbits.' 
     'Hobbits?' said Jomer. 'And what may they be? It is a strange name.' 
     'A strange name  for a strange folk,' said Gimli. 'But these were  very 
dear to us. It seems that you have heard in Rohan of the words that troubled  
Minas Tirith. They spoke of the Halfling. These hobbits are Halflings.' 
     'Halflings!' laughed the Rider that stood beside Jomer. 'Halflings! But 
they are  only  a little people in old songs and children's tales out of the 
North. Do we walk in legends or on the green earth in the daylight?' 

####-     'A man may do both,' said Aragorn. 'For not we bu t those who come after  
will make the  legends  of  our time. The green earth, say you?  That  is  a  
mighty matter of legend, though you tread it under the light of day!' 
     'Time is  pressing,'  said the  Rider, not  heeding  Aragorn. 'We  must  
hasten south, lord. Let us leave these wild folk to their fancies. Or let us 
bind them and take them to the king.' 
     'Peace, Jothain!' said Jomer in his own tongue. 'Leave me a while. Tell 
the jored to assemble on the path' and make ready to ride to the Entwade. ' 
     Muttering Jothain retired, and spoke to  the others. Soon they drew off 
and left Jomer alone with the three companions. 
     'All  that you say  is strange,  Aragorn.' he said. 'Yet you speak  the 
truth, that is plain: the Men of the Mark do not lie, and therefore they are 
not easily deceived. But you have not told  all. Will you not now speak more 
fully of your errand, so that I may judge what to do?' 
     'I set out from Imladris, as it is named in the rhyme, many weeks ago,' 
answered Aragorn.  'With me went Boromir of Minas Tirith. My errand was to 
go 
to that city with the son of Denethor,  to aid his folk in their war against 
Sauron. But the Company that I journeyed with had other  business. Of that I 
cannot speak now. Gandalf the Grey was our leader.' 
     'Gandalf!' Jomer exclaimed. 'Gandalf Greyhame is known in the Mark: but 
his name, I warn  you, is no longer a password to the king's favour.  He has 
been a guest in the land many times in the memory of men, coming as he will, 
after  a season,  or  after  many  years. He is  ever the  herald of strange 
events: a bringer of evil, some now say. 
     'Indeed since his last coming in the summer all things have gone amiss.  
At that  time our trouble with Saruman began. Until then we counted  Saruman 
our  friend,  hut Gandalf  came  then  and  warned us that  sudden  war  was 
preparing  in  Isengard.  He  said that  he himself had  been  a prisoner in 
Orthanc and had hardly escaped, and  he  begged  for help. But Thjoden would 
not listen to him, and he went away. Speak not the name of Gandalf loudly in 
Thjoden's ears! He is  wroth.  For  Gandalf took  the  horse  that is called 
Shadowfax, the most precious of all the king's steeds, chief  of the Mearas, 
which only the Lord of the Mark may ride. For the sire of their race was the 
great horse of Eorl that knew the speech of Men. Seven  nights ago Shadowfax 
returned; but  the king's  anger is not less, for  now the horse is wild and 
will let no man handle him.' 

####-     'Then  Shadowfax  has found  his  way alone from  the far North,'  said 
Aragorn; 'for  it  was there that he and Gandalf  parted. But  alas! Gandalf 
will  ride no longer. He fell into darkness in the Mines  of Moria and comes 
not again.' 
     'That  is heavy  tidings,'  said Jomer.  'At least to  me, and to many; 
though not to all, as you may find, if you come to the king.' 
     'It  is  tidings more grievous than any in  this  land can  understand, 
though it may touch them  sorely  ere the year is much older,' said Aragorn. 
'But when  the great fall,  the less must lead. My  part it has been to guide 
our Company on the long  road from Moria. Through Lurien we came -- of 
which 
it were well that you should learn  the truth  ere you speak of it  again  -- 
and thence down the leagues of the Great River to the falls of Rauros. There 
Boromir was slain by the same Orcs whom you destroyed.' 
     'Your  news is all of woe!' cried Jomer in dismay. 'Great harm is  this 
death to  Minas  Tirith, and to us all. That was a worthy man! All spoke his 
praise.  He  came  seldom to the Mark, for he  was ever  in the wars on  the 
East -borders; but I have seen him. More like to the swift sons of Eorl  than 
to the  grave Men  of Gondor  he seemed  to me, and likely to  prove a great 
captain of  his  people when  his time came. But we have had no word of this 
grief out of Gondor. When did he fall?' 
     'It is now the fourth day since he was slain,' answered  Aragorn,  'and 
since the evening of  that day  we  have  journeyed from the shadow  of  Tol  
Brandir.' 
     'On foot?' cried Jomer. 
     'Yes, even as you see us.' 
     Wide wonder came into Jomer's eyes. 'Strider is too poor a name, son of 
Arathorn,' he  said. 'Wingfoot I name  you.  This deed of the  three friends 
should be sung in many a hall. Forty leagues and five  you have measured ere 
the fourth day is ended! Hardy is the race of Elendil! 
     'But  now, lord, what would you  have me do! I must return in  haste to 
Thjoden. I spoke warily  before  my  men. It is true that  we are not yet at 
open  war with the Black Land, and there are some, close to the  king's ear, 
that speak craven counsels; but war is coming. We shall  not forsake our old 
alliance  with Gondor, and while they fight we shall aid them: so say  I and 
all  who  hold  with me. The East-mark is my charge. the  ward  of  the Third 
Marshal, and I have  removed  all our  herds  and herdfolk, withdrawing them 

####-beyond Entwash, and leaving none here but guards and swift scouts.' 
     'Then you do not pay tribute to Sauron?' said Gimli. 
     'We do not and we never have.'  said Jomer  with  a flash  of his eyes; 
'though it comes to my  ears that that lie has been told. Some years ago the 
Lord of the Black Land wished to  purchase horses of us at  great price, but 
we  refused him.  for he puts  beasts  to evil use. Then he sent  plundering 
Orcs, and  they carry  off what they can, choosing always the  black horses: 
few of these are now left. For that reason our feud with the Orcs is bitter. 
     'But at this  time our chief concern  is  with Saruman. He has  claimed 
lordship over  all this  land,  and there  has been war  between us for many 
months.  He has taken Orcs into his service,  and Wolf-riders, and evil Men,  
and he has closed the Gap against us, so that we are likely to be beset both 
east and west. 
     'It is ill dealing with such a  foe:  he  is a wizard both cunning  and 
dwimmer -crafty, having many guises. He walks here and there, they say, as an 
old  man hooded and cloaked, very like  to Gandalf, as many now recall.  His 
spies  slip  through every net, and his birds  of ill omen are abroad in the 
sky. I do not  know how it will all end, and  my heart  misgives me;  for it 
seems to  me that his friends do not all dwell in Isengard. But  if you come 
to the king's  house, you shall see for  yourself. Will  you not come? Do  I 
hope in vain that you have been sent to me for a help in doubt and need?' 
     'I will come when I may,' said Aragorn. 
     'Come now!' said Jomer. 'The Heir of Elendil would be a strength indeed 
to the  Sons of Eorl  in this evil tide.  There  is battle even  now upon the 
Westemnet, and I fear that it may go ill for us. 
     'Indeed in this riding north I went without the king's leave, for in my 
absence his  house  is left with little guard. But scouts warned me  of  the 
orc-host coming down out of the East  Wall  three nights ago, and among them 
they reported that some bore the white badges of Saruman. So suspecting what 
I  most fear, a league between  Orthanc  and  the Dark Tower, I led forth my 
jored,  men of  my own household; and  we overtook the Orcs at nightfall two 
days  ago, near to the borders of the Entwood. There we surrounded them, and 
gave battle yesterday at dawn. Fifteen of my men  I lost, and  twelve horses 
alas! For the  Orcs were greater in number than we counted on. Others joined 
them. coming out of the East across the Great River: their trail is plain to 
see a little north of this spot.  And  others, too, came out  of the forest. 
Great Orcs, who  also bore the White Hand of Isengard: that kind is stronger  

####-and more fell than all  others.  
     'Nonetheless we put an end to them.  But we have been too long away. We 
are needed south and west. Will you not come? There are  spare horses as you  
see. There is work for  the  Sword to do.  Yes, and we could find a  use for 
Gimli's axe  and  the bow of Legolas, if  they  will  pardon  my  rash  words 
concerning  the Lady of the Wood. I spoke only as do all men in my land, and 
I would gladly learn better.' 
     'I thank you for your fair words,' said Aragorn, 'and  my heart desires 
to come with you; but I cannot desert my friends while hope remains.' 
     'Hope does not remain,'  said Jomer. 'You will not find your friends on 
the North-borders.' 
     'Yet my friends are not behind. We found a clear token not far from the 
East Wall that one  at least of  them was still alive there. But between the 
wall and the downs  we  have found no  other trace of them, and no trail has 
turned aside, this way or that, unless my skill has wholly left me.' 
     'Then what do you think has become of them?' 
     'I do not know. They may have been slain and burned among the Orcs; but 
that you  will say  cannot be, and I do not fear it. I  can only think  that 
they were  carried off into the forest before the  battle,  even  before you  
encircled your foes, maybe. Can you swear that none escaped your net in such 
a way?' 
     'I would swear that no Orc  escaped after we sighted them,' said Jomer. 
'We reached the forest -eaves before them, and if after that any living thing 
broke through our ring, then it was no Orc and had some elvish power.' 
     'Our  friends  were  attired  even as we  are,' said Aragorn; 'and  you  
passed us by under the full light of day.' 
     'I had forgotten that,' said Jomer. 'It is  hard to be sure of anything 
among  so many  marvels. The  world is  all grown strange. Elf and Dwarf  in 
company walk in our daily  fields; and folk speak with the  Lady of the Wood 
and yet live; and the Sword comes  back to war  that was broken in  the long 
ages  ere  the  fathers of our fathers rode into the Mark!  How  shall a man 
judge what to do in such times?' 
     'As he ever has judged,' said Aragorn.  'Good and  ill have not changed 
since  yesteryear;  nor  are  they one thing among  Elves and  Dwarves µ and 
another among Men. It is a man's part to discern them, as much in the Golden 
Wood as in his own house.' 
     'True indeed,' said Jomer. 'But I do not doubt you, nor the  deed which 

####-my heart would do. Yet I am not free to do all as I would. It is against our 
law to let strangers wander  at  will  in our land, until the  king  himself 
shall  give them leave,  and  more strict is  the command in  these days  of 
peril. I have begged you to come back willingly with  me, and you will  not.  
Loth am I to begin a battle of one hundred against three.' 
     'I do not  think your law was  made  for such a chance,' said  Aragorn. 
'Nor  indeed am I a stranger; for I have been in this land before, more than 
once,  and ridden with the host of the Rohirrim, though under other name and 
in other guise. You  I have  not seen before,  for you are young, but I have 
spoken with Jomund your father, and with Thjoden  son  of Thengel.  Never in 
former days  would  any high lord of  this land  have  constrained a man  to 
abandon such a quest as mine. My duty at least is clear, to go on. Come now, 
son of Jomund, the choice must be made at last. Aid us,  or at the worst let 
us go free. Or seek to carry  out your law. If you do so there will be fewer  
to return to your war or to your king.' 
     Jomer was silent for a  moment,  then he  spoke. 'We both have need  of 
haste,' he said. 'My  company chafes to be away, and every hour lessens your 
hope. This  is my choice.  You  may go;  and  what  is more, I will lend you  
horses. This  only I ask: when  your quest is achieved, or  is  proved vain, 
return  with  the horses over the  Entwade  to Meduseld,  the high house  in 
Edoras  where Thjoden now sits. Thus you shall prove to him that I  have not 
misjudged. In this I place myself, and maybe my very life, in the keeping of 
your good faith. Do not fail.' 
     'I will not,' said Aragorn. 
     There  was great wonder, and many dark  and doubtful glances, among his 
men, when Jomer gave orders that  the  spare horses were to be  lent to  the 
strangers; but only Jothain dared to speak openly. 
     'It  may be  well enough  for this lord  of the race of Gondor,  as  he 
claims,' he said, 'but who has heard of a horse of the Mark being given to a  
Dwarf?' 
     'No one,' said Gimli. 'And do not trouble: no one will ever hear of it. 
I would sooner  walk  than si t  on the back  of any beast so great,  free or 
begrudged.' 
     'But you must ride now, or you will hinder us,' said Aragorn. 
     'Come, you shall sit  behind me, friend  Gimli, said Legolas.  Then all 
will be well, and you need neither borrow a horse nor be troubled by one.' 
     A great dark-grey horse  was  brought to  Aragorn, and  he  mounted it. 

####-'Hasufel is  his name,'  said  Jomer.  'May he bear  you well and to  better  
fortune than Gbrulf, his late master!' 
     A  smaller and lighter  horse, but  restive and fiery,  was brought  to 
Legolas. Arod was his  name.  But Legolas asked them to take  off saddle and 
rein. 'I need them not,' he said, and leaped lightly up, and to their wonder  
Arod was  tame and willing  beneath  him, moving  here and there  with but a 
spoken word: such was the elvish way with all good beasts.  Gimli was lifted 
up behind  his friend. and  he clung to him, not much more at ease than  Sam 
Gamgee in a boat. 
     'Farewell, and may you find what  you  seek!' cried Jomer. 'Return with 
what speed you may, and let our swords hereafter shine together!' 
     'I will come,' said Aragorn. 
     'And I will come, too,' said Gimli. 'The matter  of the  Lady Galadriel 
lies still between us. I have yet to teach you gentle speech. ' 
     'We  shall see,' said Jomer. 'So many strange things  have chanced that 
to learn the praise of a fair lady under the loving strokes of a Dwarf's axe 
will seem no great wonder. Farewell!' 
     With that they parted.  Very swift were the horses of Rohan. When aft er 
a little Gimli looked back, the company of Jomer were  already small and far 
away. Aragorn did not look  back: he was watching the  trail as they sped on 
their way, bending low with his head beside the neck of Hasufel. Before long 
they came to the  borders of the Entwash, and there they met the other trail 
of which Jomer had spoken, coming down from the East out of the Wold. 
     Aragorn dismounted and surveyed the ground, then  leaping back into the  
saddle, he rode  away for  some distance  eastward, keeping to one side  and 
taking care not  to override  the footprints. Then he again  dismounted  and 
examined the ground, going backwards and forwards on foot. 
     'There  is  little  to  discover,'  he said when he returned. 'The main 
trail is all confused with the passage of  the  horsemen  as they came back; 
their outward  course  must have lain nearer  the river. But  this  eastward 
trail is fresh and clear. There is no sign there of any feet going the other  
way, back towards  Anduin. Now  we  must ride slower, and make sure  that no 
trace or footstep branches off on either side. The Orcs must have been aware 
from this point that they were  pursued; they may have made some  attempt to 
get their captives away before they were overtaken.' 
     As they rode forward the  day  was overcast.  Low grey clouds came over  
the  Wold.  A  mist  shrouded the sun. Ever nearer  the  tree-clad slopes of 

####-Fangorn loomed, slowly darkling as the sun  went west. They  saw no  sign of 
any  trail to  right or  left, but here  a nd  there they passed single Orcs,  
fallen in  their tracks as they  ran, with grey-feathered arrows sticking in 
back or throat. 
     At  last  as the  afternoon was  waning they came  to  the eaves of the 
forest, and in  an open  glade among the first trees they found the place of 
the great burning:  the ashes were  still hot  and smoking. Beside it was  a  
great pile of  helms and mail, cloven shields, and broken swords,  bows  and 
darts  and other gear of war. Upon  a stake in  the  middle was set a  great 
goblin head;  upon its shattered helm the  white badge could  still be seen. 
Further away, not far from the river, where  it  came streaming out from the 
edge of  the wood, there was a mound. It was newly raised: the raw earth was 
covered with fresh-cut turves: about it were planted fifteen spears.  
     Aragorn and  his  companions  searched far and wide about  the field of 
battle,  but  the light faded, and evening soon drew down, dim and misty. By 
nightfall they had discovered no trace of Merry and Pippin. 
     'We can  do no more,' said Gimli sadly. 'We have been set  many riddles 
since we  came to Tol Brandir, but this  is the hardest to  unravel. I would 
guess  that the burned bones of  the hobbits are now mingled with the Orcs'.  
It will be hard news for Frodo, if he lives to hear it; and hard too for the 
old hobbit who waits in Rivendell. Elrond was against their coming.' 
     'But Gandalf was not,' said Legolas.  
     'But Gandalf chose  to come himself, and he was the first to be  lost ' 
answered Gimli. 'His foresight failed him.' 
     'The counsel of Gandalf was not founded on foreknowledge of safety, for  
himself  or for  others,' said Aragorn. 'There are some  things that  it  is 
better to begin than to refuse, even though the end may be dark. But I shall 
not  depart  from  this  place yet.  In  any  case  we  must  here await the 
morning-light.' 
     A little way  beyond  the battle-field they  made  their  camp under  a  
spreading tree: it looked  like a chestnut, and yet it still bore many broad 
brown leaves  of a former year,  like dry  hands with long splayed  fingers;  
they rattled mournfully in the night-breeze. 
     Gimli shivered. They had brought only one blanket apiece. 'Let us light 
a fire,'  he said. 'I  care  no longer for the  danger. Let the Orcs come as 
thick as summer-moths round a candle!' 
     'If those  unhappy hobbits are astray in the woods, it  might draw them 

####-hither,' said Legolas.  
     'And it might draw other things, neither Orc nor Hobbit,' said Aragorn. 
'We are  near to the mountain-marches of the traitor Saruman. Also we are on 
the  very edge of Fangorn,  and  it is  perilous to touch  the trees of that 
wood, it is said.' 
     'But  the Rohirrim  made a  great burning here yesterday,'  said Gimli, 
'and  they felled  trees for the fire, as can be seen.  Yet they passed  the 
night after safely here, when their labour was ended.' 
     'They were  many,' said  Aragorn,  'and they  do not heed the wrath  of 
Fangorn, for they come here seldom, and they do not go under  the trees. But 
our paths are likely to lead us into the very forest itself. So have a care!  
Cut no living wood!' 
     'There  is no need,' said  Gimli. 'The Riders have  left chip and bough 
enough, and there is dead wood lying in plenty.' He went off to gather fuel, 
and busied himself with building and kindling a fire; but Aragorn sat silent 
with his back to the great tree, deep in thought; and Legolas stood alone in 
the open, looking towards the profound  shadow of the wood, leaning forward, 
as one who listens to voices calling from a distance. 
     When the  Dwarf had  a  small bright blaze going, the three  companions 
drew close  to  it and sat together,  shrouding  the light with their hooded 
forms. Legolas looked up at the boughs of the tree reaching out above them.  
     'Look!' he said. 'The tree is glad of the fire!' 
     It  may  have  been  that the dancing  shadows tricked their eyes,  but 
certainly to each  of the companions the  boughs appeared to be bending this 
way and that so as to come  above the flames, wh ile  the upper branches were 
stooping down; the brown  leaves  now stood  out  stiff, and rubbed together  
like many cold cracked hands taking comfort in the warmth. 
     There was a silence, for suddenly the dark  and unknown forest, so near 
at hand,  made  itself  felt  as  a great  brooding presence, full  of secret 
purpose. After a while Legolas spoke again. 
     'Celeborn warned us not to go far into Fangorn,' he said. 'Do you  know 
why, Aragorn? What are the fables of the forest that Boromir had heard?' 
     'I have heard many  tales  in Gondor and elsewhere,' said Aragorn, 'but 
if it were not for the words of Celeborn I should deem them only fables that 
Men have made as true knowledge fades. I had thought of  asking you what 
was 
the truth of the  matter . And if an Elf of the Wood does not know, how shall  

####-a Man answer?' 
     'You  have  journeyed  further  than  I,'  said Legolas. 'I  have heard 
nothing of this in my own land, save only songs that  tell how the  Onodrim,  
that Men  call Ents,  dwelt there  long ago; for Fangorn is old, old  even as 
the Elves would reckon it.' 
     'Yes,  it  is  old,'  said  Aragorn,  'as  old  as the  forest  by  the 
Barrow-downs, and it is  far greater. Elrond says that the two are akin, the 
last  strongholds  of  the  mighty  woods of the  Elder Days, in  which  the  
Firstborn roamed while Men still slept. Yet Fangorn holds some secret of its 
own. What it is I do not know.' 
     'And  I  do not wish to know,' said Gimli. 'Let nothing that  dwells in 
Fangorn be troubled on my account!' 
     They  now drew  lots for the watches, and the lot for  the first  watch 
fell to Gimli. The others lay down. Almost at once sleep laid hold  on them. 
'Gimli!' said  Aragorn drowsily. 'Remember, it is perilous  to  cut bough or  
twig from  a living tree  in Fangorn. But do not stray far in search of dead 
wood. Let the fire die rather! Call me at need!' 
     With  that  he  fell asleep.  Legolas already lay motionless, his  fair 
hands folded upon  his breast,  his eyes unclosed, blending living night and 
deep dream, as is the way with Elves. Gimli sat hunched by the fire, running 
his thumb  thoughtfully along  the edge of  his axe. The tree rustled. There 
was no other sound. 
     Suddenly  Gimli looked up, and there just on the edge of the fire-light 
stood an old bent man, leaning on a staff, and wrapped in a great cloak; his 
wide-brimmed hat was pulled  down over his eyes. Gimli sprang up, too 
amazed 
for the moment to  cry out, though at once the thought flashed into his mind  
that Saruman had caught them. Both Aragorn and Legolas, roused by his 
sudden 
movement, sat up and stared. The old man did not speak or make, sign. 
     'Well, father,  what can we do  for you?'  said Aragorn, leaping to his 
feet. 'Come and be warm, if you are cold!'  He strode  forward, but the  old 
man was gone. There  was  no trace of him to be found near at hand, and they 
did not dare to wander far. The moon had set and the night was very dark. 
     Suddenly Legolas gave a cry. 'The horses! The horses!' 
     The horses wer e gone.  They had dragged their pickets and  disappeared.  
For  me time the three companions stood still  and silent, troubled  by this 

####-new stroke of ill fortune. They were under the eaves of Fangorn, and endless 
leagues lay  between them and the Men of  Rohan,  their only friends in this 
wide  and dangerous land. As they stood, it seemed to  them that they heard,  
far off in the night. the sound of horses whinnying and  neighing. Then  all 
was quiet again, except for the cold rustle of the wind. 
     'Well, they are gone,' said  Aragorn at last. 'We cannot  find  them or  
catch  them;  so that  if they do not return of their  own will, we must  do 
without. We started on our feet, and we have those still.' 
     'Feet!' said Gimli. 'But we cannot eat them as well  as walk on  them ' 
He threw some fuel on the fire and slumped down beside it. 
     'Only a few hours ago  you were unwilling  to sit on a horse of Rohan,' 
laughed Legolas. 'You will make a rider yet.' 
     'It seems unlikely that I shall have the chance,' said Gimli. 
     'If you wish  to know what I think,'  he began  again after  a while 'I  
think it was Saruman. Who else? Remember  the words of Jomer: he walks 
about 
like an old man hooded and cloaked. Those were  the words.  He has gone  off 
with our horses, or scared them away, and here we are. There is more trouble 
coming to us, mark my words!' 
     'I mark them,' said Aragorn. 'But I marked also that this old man had a  
hat not a hood. Still I do not  doubt that  you guess right, and that we are 
in peril here, by night or day. Yet in the meantime there is nothing that we 
can do but  rest, while we may. I will  watch for a while now, Gimli. I have 
more need of thought than of sleep.' 
     The night  passed  slowly. Legolas followed Aragorn, and Gimli followed 
Legolas, and their watches wore away. But nothing  happened. The old man did 
not appear again, and the horses did not return. 
 

####- 

Chapter 3. The Uruk-Hai 

 
 
     Pippin lay in a dark and troubled dream:  it seemed that he could  hear 
his own small  vo ice  echoing in black tunnels,  calling  Frodo, Frodo!  But 
instead of Frodo hundreds of hideous  orc-faces grinned  at  him  out of the 
shadows, hundreds of hideous arms grasped at him from  every side. Where 
was 
Merry? 
     He  woke. Cold air blew on his  face. He was lying on his back. Evening  
was coming and  the sky above was growing dim. He turned and found that  the 
dream  was little worse than  the  waking. His wrists, legs, and ankles were 
tied with cords.  Beside him Merry lay,  white-faced, with a  dirty rag bound  
across his brows. All about them sat or stood a great company of Orcs. 
     Slowly in Pippin's aching head memory pieced itself together and became 
separated from dream-shadows. Of course: he and  Merry had run off into  the 
woods. What had come over them? Why had they dashed off like that, taking 
no 
notice  of  old  Strider? They  had  run a  long  way shouting--he could not 
remember how far or how long; and then suddenly they had crashed  right into 
a  group  of Orcs: they  were standing listening, and they did not appear to 
see Merry and Pippin until they were  almost in their arms. Then they yelled 
and  dozens of other goblins had sprung out  of the  trees. Merry and he had 
drawn their swords, but the  Orcs did not wish to fight, and had tried  only 
to lay  hold of them, even when Merry had cut off several  of their arms and 
hands. Good old Merry!  
     Then  Boromir  had come  leaping through  the  trees. He had made  them 
fight. He slew many of them and the rest fled.  But they had not gone far on  
the way back when they were attacked again. by a hundred Orcs at least, some 
of  them very large, and they shot  a rain of  arrows:  always  at  Boromir. 
Boromir had blown his great horn till the woods rang,  and at first the Orcs 
had  been dismayed and  had  drawn back; but when no  answer but the  echoes 
came, they had attacked more fierce  than ever. Pippin did not remember much 
more.  His last memo was of Boromir  leaning against a tree, plucking out an 
arrow; then darkness fell suddenly. 
     'I suppose I was knocked on the head,' he said to himself. 'I wonder if 

####-poor Merry is much hurt. What has happened to  Boromir? Why  didn't the 
Orcs 
kill us? Where are we, and where are we going?' 
     He could  not  answer the questions. He felt  cold and  sick.  'I  wish 
Gandalf  had never persuaded Elrond to let  us come,' he thought. 'What good 
have I been? Just a  nuisance: a  passenger, a piece  of luggage. And now  I 
have been stolen  and I am  just  a piece of  luggage for the  Orcs.  I hope 
Strider or someone will come and claim us! But ought I to hope for it? Won't 
that throw out all the plans? I wish I could get free!' 
     He  struggled  a little, quite  uselessly. One of the Orcs sitting near 
laughed and said something to a companion in their abominable  tongue. 'Rest  
while  you  can, little fool!' he said then to Pippin, in the Common Speech, 
which he made almost  as hideous as  his own language.  'Rest while you can!  
We'll find  a use for your  legs before  long. You'll wish you had  got none 
before we get home.' 
     'If I had my way, you'd  wish you  were dead now,' said the other. 'I'd 
make you squeak,  you miserable rat.' He stooped over  Pippin  bringing  his 
yellow fangs close to his face.  He had  a  black  knife  with a long jagged 
blade  in  his hand.  'Lie quiet, or  I'll tickle you with this,' he hissed. 
'Don't  draw attention  to yourself,  or  I may forget my orders.  Curse the 
Isengarders! Ugl®k  u  bagronk sha  pushdug Saruman -glob  b®bhosh skai':   
he 
passed into a long angry speech in his own tongue that slowly died away into 
muttering and snarling. 
     Terrified  Pippin lay still, though the pain at  his wrists  and ankles 
was  growing, and the stones beneath him were boring into his back.  To take 
his mind off himself he listened intently to all that  he could  hear. There 
were many  voices round about, and though orc-speech  sounded  at all  times 
full  of hate and anger, it  seemed plain  that something like a quarrel had 
begun, and was getting hotter. 
     To Pippin's  surpr ise he  found that much of the  talk was intelligible 
many of the Orcs were using ordinary language. Apparently the members of 
two 
or three quite different tribes  were present, and they could not understand 
one another's orc-speech. There  was  an angry  debate concerning  what they 
were to do now: which way they were to take and what should be done with the 
prisoners. 

####-     'There's no time to kill them properly,' said one. 'No time for play on 
this trip.' 
     'That  can't  be helped,' said another. 'But why not kill  them  quick, 
kill them  now? They're  a cursed  nuisance, and we're in a hurry. Evening's 
coming on, and we ought to get a move on.' 
     'Orders.' said a third  voice in  a  deep growl. 'Kill all but  NOT the 
Halfings;  they are to be brought back ALIVE  as quickly as possible . That's 
my orders.' 
     'What are they wanted for?'  asked  several voices. 'Why alive? Do they 
give good sport?' 
     'No!  I  heard that  one of them has  got something,  something  that's 
wanted for  the  War,  some   elvish plot  or other.  Anyway they'll both  be 
questioned.' 
     'Is that all you know? Why don't  we search them and find out? We might  
find something that we could use ourselves.' 
     'That is a very interesting remark,' sneered a  voice,  softer than the 
others but more evil. 'I may have to report that. The prisoners  are  NOT to 
be searched or plundered: those are my orders.' 
     'And  mine  too,'  said  the  deep  voice. 'Alive and as  captured;  no 
spoiling. That's my orders.' 
     'Not our order s!' said one of the earlier voices. 'We have come all the 
way from the Mines to kill, and avenge our folk. I wish to kill, and then go 
back north.' 
     'Then you can wish  again,' said the  growling voice. 'I  am  Ugl®k.  I 
command. I return to Isengard by the shortest road.' 
     'Is Saruman the  master  or the Great Eye?'  said the  evil  voice. 'We 
should go back at once to Lugb®rz.' 
     'If we could cross the Great River, we might,' said another voice. 'But 
there are not enough of us to venture down to the bridges.' 
     'I came  across,'  said  the evil  voice.  'A winged  Nazgyl awaits  us 
northward on the east -bank.' 
     'Maybe, maybe! Then you'll fly off with our prisoners, and get  all the 
pay and praise in Lugb®rz,  and leave  us to foot it as best we  can through 
the Horse-country.  No, we must  stick together.  These lands are dangerous:  
full of foul rebels and brigands.' 
     'Aye, we must stick together,' growled Ugl®k. 'I don't trust you little 
swine. You've no guts outside your own sties. But for us you'd all  have run 

####-away. We are the fighting  Uruk-hai! We slew the  great warrior. We took the 
prisoners. We are the servants of Saruman the Wise, the White Hand: the Hand 
that gives us man's-flesh to eat. We came out of Isengard, and led you here, 
and we shall lead you back by the way we choose. I am Ugl®k. I have spoken.' 
     'You have  spoken more than enough,  Ugl®k,' sneered the evil voice. 'I  
wonder how  they would like  it  in  Lugb®rz. They might think  that Ugl®k's 
shoulders  needed relieving  of a  swollen head. They might  ask  where  his 
strange ideas came  from. Did they come  from Saruman, perhaps? Who  does 
he 
think he is, setting up on his own with his  filthy white badges? They might 
agree with me, with  Grishnbkh their trusted messenger; and I  Grishnbkh say 
this: Saruman is a fool. and a dirty treacherous fool. But the  Great Eye is 
on him. 
     'Swine  is  it? How  do  you  folk  like  being  called  swine  by  the 
muck -rakers  of  a  dirty  little  wizard?  It's  orc-flesh  they  eat, I'll 
warrant.' 
     Many loud yells  in orc-speech  answered him, and the ringing  clash of 
weapons being drawn. Cautiously Pippin rolled over, hoping to see what would 
happen.  His guards had gone to  join in the  fray. In the twilight he saw a  
large  black  Orc,  probably  Ugl®k,  standing  facing  Grishnbkh,  a  short 
crook -legged creature, very broad and with long arms that hung almost to the 
ground. Round  them  were many smaller  goblins. Pippin supposed that  these 
were the ones from the  North. They had drawn  their knives and swords,  but 
hesitated to attack Ugl®k. 
     Ugl®k  shouted, and a  number of other Orcs of  nearly his own size ran 
up. Then suddenly, without  warning, Ugl®k sprang  forwards,  and  with  two 
swift strokes swept  the heads  off two of his opponents.  Grishnbkh stepped 
aside and  vanished  into the  shadows. The others gave way, and one stepped 
backwards  and fell  over Merry's  prostrate  form with  a  curse. Yet  that 
probably saved his life, for Ugl®k's followers leaped over him and  cut down 
another with their broad-bladed swords. It was the yellow-fanged  guard. His 
body fell right on top of Pippin, still clutching its long saw-edged knife. 
     'Put up your weapons!' shouted Ugl®k. 'And let's have no more nonsense! 
We go straight west  from here, and down the stair.  From  there straight to 
the  downs, then along the  river to the forest. And we march day and night. 
That clear?' 
     'Now,' thought  Pippin,  'if  only it takes  that ugly  fellow a little 

####-while to get his  troop under control, I've got  a chance.' A gleam of  hope 
had come to him. The edge  of the black knife had snicked his arm, and  then 
slid down to his wrist.  He  felt the blood trickling on to his hand, but he 
also felt the cold touch of steel against his skin. 
     The Orcs were getting ready to march again, but some of the Northerners 
were still unwilling, and the Isengarders slew two more before the rest were 
cowed.  There  was  much  cursing  and confusion. For  the moment Pippin was 
unwatched. His legs were  securely bound, but his arms were  only tied about 
the wrists,  and his hands were  in front  of  him. He could  move them both 
together, though the bonds were cruelly tight. He pushed the dead Orc to one 
side, then hardly daring to  breathe, he drew the  knot of the wrist -cord up 
and down against the blade of the knife. It was sharp and the dead hand held 
it fast. The cord was cut! Quickly Pippin took it in his fingers and knotted  
it again into a loose  bracelet of two loops and slipped it  over his hands.  
Then he lay very still. 
     'Pick up those prisoners!' shouted Ugl®k.  'Don't play any  tricks with 
them! If they are not alive when we get back, someone else will die too.' 
     An Orc  seized Pippin like a sack. put its head between his tied hands,  
grabbed his arms and  dragged them  down, until  Pippin's  face was  crushed 
against its neck; then it jolted off  with him. Another treated Merry in the 
same way. The Orc's clawlike hand gripped Pippin's arms like iron; the nails 
bit into him. He shut his eyes and slipped back into evil dreams.  
     Suddenly he was thrown on to the stony floor again. It was early night, 
but the  slim moon was already falling westward. They were on the  edge of a 
cliff that seemed to look out  over a sea of pale mist. There was a sound of 
water falling nearby. 
     'The scouts have come back at last,' said an Orc close at hand. 
     'Well, what did you discover?' growled the voice of Ugl®k. 
     'Only a single horseman, and he made off westwards. All's clear now.' 
     'Now,  I  daresay. But how  long? You fools! You should  have shot him.  
He'll  raise the alarm. The cursed horsebreeders will hear of us by morning. 
Now we'll have to leg it double quick.' 
     A shadow bent over  Pippin. It  was Ugl®k. 'Sit up! ' said the  Orc. 'My 
lads are tired of lugging you about. We have got to climb down and you  must  
use your legs. Be  helpful now. No  crying out, no trying to escape. We have 
ways of paying for tricks that you won't like, though they won't spoil  your 
usefulness for the Master.' 

####-     He cut the thongs round Pippin's legs and ankles, picked him  up by his 
hair  and stood him  on his feet. Pippin fell down, and Ugl®k dragged him up 
by  his hair again. Several Orcs  laughed. Ugl®k thrust a  flask between his 
teeth and poured some burning liquid down  his  throat: he felt a hot fierce 
glow  flow through  him.  The pain in his legs and ankles vanished. He could 
stand. 
     'Now for  the other!' said Ugl®k.  Pippin saw him go  to Merry, who was 
lying  close  by,  and kick  him. Merry groaned.  Seizing him roughly  Ugl®k 
pulled  him into a sitting position, and tore the bandage off his head. Then 
he smeared the wound with some dark  stuff out of a small wooden  box. Merry 
cried out and struggled wildly. 
     The Orcs clapped and  hooted. 'Can't take his medicine,'  they  jeered. 
'Doesn't know what's good for him. Ai! We shall have some fun later.' 
     But  at the moment Ugl®k was not engaged in  sport. He needed speed and 
had to humour  unwilling followers. He was healing Merry in orc-fashion; and 
his treatment worked swiftly. When he had forced a drink from his flask down 
the  hobbit's throat, cut his leg-bonds, and dragged him to  his feet, Merry 
stood up, looking pale but grim  and defiant, and very  much alive. The gash 
in his forehead gave him  no  more trouble, but he bore a  brown scar to the 
end of his days.  
     'Hullo, Pippin!' he said.  'So you've come on  this  little expedition, 
too? Where do we get bed and breakfast?' 
     'Now then!' said Ugl®k.  'None of that!  Hold your tongues. No  talk to 
one another. Any  trouble will be  reported at the other end, and He'll know 
how to pay  you. You'll  get bed and breakfast  all right: more than you can 
stomach.' 
     The orc-band  began to descend a  narrow ravine  leading down into  the 
misty plain below.  Merry and  Pippin,  separated by a  dozen  Orcs or more, 
climbed down with  them. At the  bottom  they  stepped on to  grass, and the 
hearts of the hobbits rose. 
     'Now  straight on!'  shouted Ugl®k. 'West  and a  little  north. Follow 
Lugdush.' 
     'But what are we going to do at sunrise?' said some of the Northerners.  
     'Go on running,' said Ugl®k. 'What do you think? Sit  on the  grass and 
wait for the Whiteskins to join the picnic?' 
     'But we can't run in the sunlight.' 
     'You'll run with me  behind you,' said Ugl®k. 'Run! Or you'll never see 

####-your beloved  holes again. By  the White Hand! What's the use of sending out 
mountain-maggots  on  a trip, only half trained. Run, curse  you! Run  while 
night lasts!' 
     Then the whole  company  began to  run  with the long loping strides of 
Orcs. They kept  no order, thrusting, jostling, and cursing; yet their speed 
was very great. Each hobbit had a guard of three. Pippin was far back in the 
line. He  wondered how long he would be able to  go on at this pace: he  had 
had no food since the morning. One of  his guards had a whip. But at present 
the orc-liquor was still hot in him. His wits, too, were wide-awake. 
     Every now and again there  came  into his mind unbidden a vision of the  
keen face of Strider bending over a dark trail, and running, running behind. 
But  what  could even a Ranger see except a confused  trail of orc-feet? His 
own  little prints  and Merry's  were overwhelmed by  the  trampling of  the 
iron-shod shoes before them and behind them and about them. 
     They had  gone  only a mile  or so from the cliff when the  land sloped 
down into a wide shallow depression, where the ground was soft and wet. Mist 
lay there, pale-glimmering in the  last rays of  the  sickle moon.  The dark 
shapes of the Orcs in front grew dim, and then were swallowed up. 
     'Ai! Steady now!' shouted Ugl®k from the rear. 
     A sudden thought leaped into Pippin's mind, and he acted on it at once. 
He  swerved aside to the right, and  dived out of the reach of his clutching 
guard, headfirst into the mist; he landed sprawling on the grass.  
     'Halt!' yelled Ugl®k. 
     There was for a moment turmoil and confusion. Pippin sprang up and ran. 
But the Orcs were after him. Some suddenly loomed up right in front of him. 
     'No hope  of escape!' thought Pippin. 'But there is a hope  that I have 
left  some of  my own marks unspoilt on the  wet ground.' He groped with his 
two tied hands at his throat, and unclasped the brooch of his cloak. Just as 
long arms and  hard claws seized him. he  let it fall. 'There  I  suppose it 
will lie until the end of time,' he thought. 'I don't  know why I did it. If 
the others have escaped, they've probably all gone with Frodo.' 
     A whip-thong curled round his legs, and he stifled a cry. 
     'Enough!' shouted Ugl®k running  up. 'He's still got to run a long  way 
yet. Make 'em both run! Just use the whip as a reminder.' 
     'But that's not  all,' he snarled, turning to Pippin. 'I shan't forget. 
Payment is only put off. Leg it!' 
     Neither  Pippin nor Merry remembered  much  of the later  part  of  the 

####-journey. Evil  dreams and evil  waking were blended  into  a  long tunnel of 
misery,  with hope  growing ever fainter behind.  They  ran, and  they  ran, 
striving to keep up the  pace set by  the Orcs, licked  every now  and again 
with a cruel thong cunningly  handled. If they halted or stumbled, they were 
seized and dragged for some distance. 
     The  warmth  of  the orc-draught  had  gone. Pippin felt cold and  sick  
again. Suddenly  he  fell face downward on the turf. Hard hands with rending 
nails  gripped  and lifted him. He was  carried like a  sack  once more, and 
darkness  grew about him:  whether the  darkness  of  another  night,  or  a  
blindness of his eyes, he could not tell. 
     Dimly he became aware of voices clamouring: it seemed that  many of the 
Orcs were demanding a halt. Ugl®k was shouting. He felt himself flung to the 
ground,  and he lay as he fell, till black dreams  took  him. But he did not 
long  escape from  pain; soon  the iron grip of  merciless hands was on  him 
again.  For  a  long  time  he was  tossed and shaken, and then  slowly  the 
darkness  gave way, and he came  back to the waking  world and found that it 
was morning. Orders were shouted and he was thrown roughly on the grass.  
     There  he  lay for a while, fighting  with despair. His head  swam, but 
from the heat in his body he guessed that he had been given another draught.  
An Orc stooped over him, and flung him some bread  and a strip of raw  dried 
flesh. He ate  the  stale grey  bread hungrily, but  not the  meat.  He  was 
famished but not yet so famished as to eat flesh flung to him by an Orc, the 
flesh of he dared not guess what creature. 
     He sat up and  looked about.  Merry was not  far away. They were by  the 
banks  of a swift narrow  river.  Ahead mountains  loomed: a tall  peak  was 
catching the first rays of the sun. A dark smudge of forest lay on the lower  
slopes before them. 
     There was much shou ting and debating among  the Orcs; a  quarrel seemed 
on  the  point  of  breaking  out again  between  the  Northerners  and  the 
Isengarders. Some  were  pointing back  away south, and  some were  pointing 
eastward. 
     'Very  well,' said Ugl®k. 'Leave them  to me then! No killing,  as I've 
told you before; but if you want to  throw away  what we've come all the way 
to get, throw it  away! I'll look after it. Let the fighting Uruk-hai do the 
work, as usual. If you're afraid of the Whiteskins, run!  Run!  There's  the 
forest,' he  shouted, pointing ahead. 'Get to it! It's your  best hope.  Off 
you go!  And quick,  before I knock a few more heads off, to  put some sense 

####-into the others.' 
     There was some cursing and scuffling, and  then most of the Northe rners 
broke away and dashed off, over a hundred of  them, running wildly along the 
river towards the mountains.  The hobbits were left with the  Isengarders: a  
grim  dark  band, four score at  least of large, swart, slant-eyed Orcs with 
great bows and shor t  broad-bladed swords. A  few  of the larger and  bolder  
Northerners remained with them. 
     'Now we'll deal with  Grishnbkh,'  said Ugl®k; but some even of his own 
followers were looking uneasily southwards.  
     'I  know,' growled Ugl®k.  'The cursed horse-boys have got  wind of us. 
But  that's all your  fault,  Snaga. You and the  other scouts ought to have 
your ears cut  off. But we are the fighters. We'll feast  on horseflesh yet, 
or something better.' 
     At  that moment Pippin  saw why some  of the  troop  had been  pointing  
eastward. From  that  direction there  now came hoarse cries, and  there was 
Grishnbkh again, and  at his  back a  couple  of  score of others like  him: 
long-armed  crook -legged Orcs. They  had a red eye painted on their shields.  
Ugl®k stepped forward to meet them. 'So you've come back?' he said. 'Thought 
better of it, eh?' 
     'I've returned to  see  that  Orders are  carried out and the prisoners 
safe,' answered Grishnbkh. 
     'Indeed!'  said Ugl®k.  'Waste  of  effort.  I'll see that  orders  are 
carried out in my command. And what else did you  come back for? You went 
in 
a hurry. Did you leave anything behind?' 
     'I left a  fool,' snarled Grishnbkh. 'But there were some stout fellows 
with him that are too good to lose. I knew you'd lead them into a mess. I've 
come to help them.' 
     'Splendid!'  laughed  Ugl®k.  'But  unless  you've  got some  guts  for  
fighting, you've taken the wrong way. Lugb®rz was your road.  The 
Whiteskins 
are coming. What's happened to your  precious  Nazgyl?  Has  he had  another  
mount shot under him? Now, if you'd brought him along, that might have  been 
useful-if these Nazgyl are all they make out.' 
     'Nazgyl, Nazgyl,' said Grishnbkh, shivering and licking his lips, as if 
the word had a foul taste that he savoured painfully. 'You  speak of what is 
deep beyond the  reach of your muddy  dreams,  Ugl®k,' he said. 'Nazgyl! Ah! 

####-All that  they make  out! One day  you'll  wish that you  had not said that. 
Ape!' he snarled fiercely.  'You ought to know that they're the apple of the 
Great Eye. But the winged  Nazgyl: not  yet, not yet. He won't let them show 
themselves across the Great River yet, not too soon. They're for the War -and 
other purposes.' 
     'You seem  to know a lot,' said  Ugl®k. 'More   than is good for you,  I 
guess.  Perhaps those  in  Lugb®rz  might wonder how, and  why. But  in  the 
meantime the  Uruk -hai of Isengard can do the dirty  work,  as usual.  Don't  
stand slavering there! Get your rabble together! The other swine are legging 
it to the forest. You'd better  follow.  You wouldn't get  back to the Great 
River alive. Right off the mark! Now! I'll be on your heels.' 
     The Isengarders seized Merry and  Pippin again  and slung them on their  
backs. Then the troop started off. Hour after hour they ran, pausing now and 
again only to sling the hobbits to fresh  carriers. Either because they were 
quicker and hardier, or because of some plan of Grishnbkh's, the Isengarders 
gradually passed through the Orcs of Mordor,  and Grishnbkh's folk closed in 
behind. Soon they  were  gaining also on  the Northerners ahead.  The forest  
began to draw nearer. 
     Pippin was bruised and torn,  his aching  head was grated by the filthy 
jowl and hairy ear of the Orc that held him. Immediately in front were bowed 
backs, and tough thick legs going up and down, up and down, unresting, as if 
they were made of wire and horn,  beating out  the nightmare seconds  of  an 
endless time. 
     In  the  afternoon Ugl®k's  troop overtook the  Northerners.  They were 
flagging in the rays  of the  bright sun, winter sun shining in  a pale cool 
sky though it was; their heads were down and their tongues lolling out. 
     'Maggots!' jeered the Isengarders. 'You're cooked. The Whiteskins  will 
catch you and eat you. They're coming!' 
     A cry  from Grishnbkh  showed that  this was  not mere jest.  Horsemen, 
riding very swiftly, had indeed been sighted: still  far behind, but gaining 
on the Orcs, gaining on  them like a tide over the flats on folk straying in 
a quicksand. 
     The  Isengarders  began  to run with a redoubled  pace that  astonished 
Pippin, a terrific spurt it seemed  for the end of  a race. Then he saw that 
the  sun was sinking, falling behind the  Misty Mountains;  shadows  reached 
over the land. The soldiers  of Mordor lifted their heads and  also began to 
put on  speed. The forest was dark and close. Already they had passed a  few 

####-outlying trees.  The land was beginning to slope upwards. ever more steeply; 
but the  Orcs did not halt. Both Ugl®k and Grishnbkh  shouted, spurring them 
on to a last effort. 
     'They will  make it yet. They will escape,' thought Pippin. And then he 
managed  to twist  his neck.  so  as  to  glance back with  one eye over his 
shoulder. He saw that riders away eastward were already level with the Orcs, 
galloping over  the plain.  The sunset gilded their spears  and helmets, and 
glinted  in  their  pale  flowing  hair.  They  were  hemming the  Orcs  in, 
preventing them  from  scattering, and  driving them along the  line of  the 
river. 
     He wondered  very much what kind of folk they were. He wished  now that 
he had learned more in Rivendell, and looked more at maps and things; but in 
those days the plans for the journey seemed to be  in  more competent hands, 
and he had never reckoned with being cut off from Gandalf, or from  Strider, 
and  even  from Frodo. All  that he  could remember  about  Rohan  was  that 
Gandalf's horse, Shadowfax,  had come from  that land. That sounded hopeful, 
as far as it went. 
     'But how will  they know that  we are not  Orcs?' he thought. 'I  don't  
suppose they've ever  heard  of hobbits down  here. I suppose I  ought to be 
glad that the beastly Orcs  look like being destroyed, but I would rather be 
saved  myself.' The chances were that  he and Merry wou ld be killed together 
with their captors, before ever the Men of Rohan were aware of them. 
     A few of  the riders appeared to be bowmen,  skilled at shooting from a  
running horse. Riding swiftly into  range they shot arrows at  the Orcs that 
straggled behind, and several of them fell; then the riders wheeled away out 
of the range of the answering  bows  of their  enemies, who shot wildly, not 
daring to halt. This  happened many  times, and on one  occasion arrows fell 
among  the Isengarders. One  of them, just  in front of Pippin, stumbled and  
did not get up again. 
     Night came down without the Riders closing in for battle. Many Orcs had 
fallen,  but fully two hundred remained. In the early darkness the Orcs came 
to a hillock. The eaves of the forest were very near, probably  no more than 
three  furlongs  away,  but  they  could go no  further.  The  horsemen  had 
encircled them. A small band  disobeyed  Ugl®k's command, and ran on 
towards 
the forest: only three returned. 
     'Well,  here  we are,' sneered Grishnbkh. 'Fine  leadership! I hope the 

####-great Ugl®k will lead us out again.' 
     'Put  those  Halflings  down!'  ordered  Ugl®k,  taking  no  notice  of 
Grishnbkh. 'You, Lugdush, get two others  and stand guard over them! They're 
not to be killed, unless the filthy Whiteskins break through. Understand? As 
long  as I'm alive, I want 'em. But they're not to cry out, and  they're not 
to be rescued. Bind their legs!' 
     The last  part  of  the order was  carried  out mercilessly. But Pippin 
found that for the first time he was close to  Merry. The Orcs were making a  
great deal of noise,  shouting and  clashing  their weapons, and the hobbits 
managed to whisper together for a while. 
     'I don't think much of this,' said Merry. 'I feel nearly done in. Don't 
think I could crawl away far, even if I was free.' 
     'Lembas!' whispered Pippin.  'Lembas: I've got some. Have  you? I  don't  
think they've taken anything but our swords.' 
     'Yes,  I  had a packet in  my pocket,'  answered Merry, 'but it must be 
battered to crumbs. Anyway I can't put my mouth in my pocket!' 
     'You won't have to. I've--'; but just then  a savage kick warned Pippin 
that the noise had died down, and the guards were watchful. 
     The night was  cold  and still. All round the knoll  on which  the  Orcs 
were gathered little watch-fires sprang up,  golden-red  in the  darkness, a  
complete ring  of them. They were within a long bowshot.  but the riders did 
not  show themselves against  the light,  and the  Orcs wasted  many  arrows 
shooting at the  fires, until Ugl®k  stopped them. The riders made no sound.  
Later  in the night when the moon came  out of the  mist,  then occasionally 
they could be seen, shadowy  shapes that glinted now and again in the  white 
light, as they moved in ceaseless patrol. 
     'They'll wait for the Sun, curse them!' growled one of the guards. 'Why 
don't we get together and charge through? What's old Ugl®k think he's doing, 
I should like to know?' 
     'I daresay you would,' snarled Ugl®k stepping up from behind.   'Meaning 
I don't think at all, eh? Curse you! You're as bad as the  other rabble: the 
maggots and the apes of Lugb®rz. No good trying  to charge with them. They'd 
just squeal  and bolt,  and  there  are  more than  enough of  these  filthy 
horse-boys to mop up our lot on the flat. 
     'There's only one thing those maggots can do: they can see like gimlets 
in the dark. But these Whiteskins have better night-eyes than most Men, from 
all  I've   heard;  and  don't  forget  their  horses!   They  can  see  the 

####-night-breeze,  or  so it's  said. Still  there's  one thing the fine fellows 
don't know: Mauh®r and his lads are  in the forest, and they  should turn up 
any time now.' 
     Ugl®k's words were enough, apparently, to satisfy  the Isengarders; but 
the  other Orcs  were  both  dispirited  and  rebellious.  They posted a few 
watchers,  but  most of them lay  on  the ground,  resting  in the  pleasant 
darkness. It did indeed become very dark again; for the moon passed westward 
into thick cloud, and  Pippin could not  see anything  a few feet away.  The 
fires brought no light to the hillock. The riders were not, however, content 
merely to wait  for  the dawn and let their enemies rest. A sudden outcry on 
the  east side of the  knoll showed that something was wrong. It seemed that 
some of the Men  had ridden in  close, slipped  off their horses, crawled to 
the edge of the camp and killed several Orcs, and then had faded away again. 
Ugl®k dashed off to stop a stampede. 
     Pippin  and  Merry sat up.  Their guards,  Isengarders,  had  gone with 
Ugl®k. But  if the hobbits  had any thought of escape, it was soon dashed. A 
long hairy arm took each of them by the neck and drew  them close  together. 
Dimly they were  aware of  Grishnbkh's great head and hideous  face  between 
them; his foul breath  was on their cheeks. He began  to paw  them  and feel  
them. Pippin shuddered as hard cold fingers groped down his back. 
     'Well,  my little  ones!' said Grishnbkh  in a soft whisper.  'Enjoying 
your nice rest? Or not? A little awkwardly placed, perhaps: swords and whips 
on one side, and nasty spears on  the other! Little people should not meddle 
_in  affairs that  are too big for them.'  His  fingers continued  to grope. 
There was a light like a pale but hot fire behind his eyes. 
     The  thought came suddenly into Pippin's mind, as if caught direct from 
the urgent  thought  of his enemy:  'Grishnbkh  knows about  the  Ring! He's 
looking for it, while Ugl®k is busy: he probably wants it for himself.' Cold 
fear was in Pippin's heart,  yet at the  same time he was wondering what use 
he could make of Grishnbkh's desire. 
     'I don't think you will find it that way,' he whispered. 'It isn't easy 
to find.' 
     'Find  it? ' said Grishnbkh:  his  fingers  stopped crawling and gripped 
Pippin's shoulder. 'Find what? What are you talking about, little one?'. For  
a moment Pippin was silent. Then suddenly in the darkness he made a noise in 
his throat: gollum, gollum. 'Nothing, my precious,' he added. 
     The hobbits felt Grishnbkh's fingers  twitch. 'O ho!' hissed the goblin 

####-softly. 'That's what he means, is it? O  ho! Very ve-ry dangerous, my little 
ones.' 
     'Perhaps,' said Merry, now alert and aware of Pippin's guess. 'Perhaps;  
and not only  for us. Still you know your own business best. Do you want it,  
or not? And what would you give for it?' 
     'Do I  want it? Do I want it?' said Grishnbkh, as if  puzzled;  but his 
arms were trembling. 'What would I give for it? What do you mean?' 
     'We  mean,'  said Pippin, choosing his  wor ds carefully,  'that it's no 
good groping in  the dark. We could save you  time and trouble. But you must  
untie our legs first, or we'll do nothing, and say nothing.' 
     'My dear tender  little fools,' hissed Grishnbkh, 'everything you have, 
and everything you  know, will be got  out of you  in due  time: everything!  
You'll wish there was more  that  you could tell to  satisfy the Questioner, 
indeed you will:  quite soon. We shan't hurry the enquiry. Oh dear no!  What 
do  you think you've  been kept alive  for? My dear  little  fellows, please 
believe me when I say that it was  not out of kindness: that's not  even one 
of Ugl®k's faults.' 
     'I find it quite  easy to  believe,' said Merry.  'But you haven't  got 
your  prey  home yet. And it doesn't seem  to  be going  your  way,  whatever  
happens. If we come  to  Isengard,  it won't  be the  great  Grishnbkh  that 
benefits: Saruman will take all  that he can find.  If you want anything for  
yourself, now's the time to do a deal.' 
     Grishnbkh  began  to  lose his  temper.  The  name  of  Saruman  seemed  
specially  to enrage him.  Time  was passing  and the disturbance was  dying 
down. Ugl®k or the Isengarders might return at any minute. 
     'Have you got it -- either of you?' he snarled. 
     'Gollum, gollum!' said Pippin. 
     'Untie our legs!' said Merry. 
     They felt the Orc's arms  trembling violently. 'Curse  you, you  filthy 
little vermin!' he hissed. 'Untie your legs? I'll untie every string in your 
bodies. Do you think I can't search you to the  bones? Search  you! I'll cut 
you both to quivering shreds. I don't need the help  of your legs to get you  
away-and have you all to myself!' 
     Suddenly  he seized them. The strength in  his  long arms and shoulders 
was  terrifying. He  tucked  them one under  each  armpit, and crushed  them 
fiercely to his sides; a great stifling hand was clapped  over each of their 
mouths. Then he sprang forward,  stooping low. Quickly and silently he went, 

####-until he  came to the edge  of the knoll. There, choosing a gap  between the 
watchers, he passed like an evil shadow out into the  night, down  the slope 
and away westward  towards the river that  flowed out of the forest. In that 
direction there was a wide open space with only one fire. 
     After going  a  dozen yards he  halted,  peering and listening. Nothing 
could be  seen or heard. He crept  slowly  on, bent almost  double. Then  he 
squatted and listened  again. Then he stood up, as if to risk a sudden dash. 
At that very moment the  dark form of a  rider loomed up  right  in front of 
him. A horse snorted and reared. A man called out. 
     Grishnbkh flung himself on the ground flat,  dragging the hobbits under  
him; then he drew his sword.  No doubt he meant to kill his captives, rather  
than allow them  to escape or to  be rescued;  but  it  was his undoing. The 
sword  rang faintly, and glinted a  little in the light of the fire away  to 
his left. An arrow came whistling out of the gloom: it was aimed with skill, 
or guided by fate, and it pierced his right hand. He dr opped the  sword  and 
shrieked. There was a quick beat of hoofs, and  even as  Grishnbkh leaped up 
and  ran,  he  was ridden down and  a spear  passed through  him.  He gave a  
hideous shivering cry and lay still. 
     The hobbits remained flat on  the  ground, as  Grishnbkh had left them. 
Another  horseman came riding swiftly  to his comrade's aid. Whether because 
of some special keenness of sight, or because of some other sense, the horse 
lifted  and sprang lightly over them; but its rider did  not see them, lying 
covered in their elven-cloaks, too crushed for the moment, and too afraid to 
move. 
     At  last  Merry stirred and whispered softly: 'So  far so good: but how 
are we to avoid being spitted?' 
     The answer came almost immediately. The cries of Grishnbkh  had  roused 
the Orcs. From the yells  and screeches that came from the knoll the hobbits 
guessed  that their  disappearance had been discovered:  Ugl®k  was probably 
knocking  off  a  few  more  heads.  Then suddenly  the answering  cries  of 
orc-voices came from the  right, outside the circle of watch-fires, from the 
direction of the forest and the mountains. Mauh®r had apparently arrived and 
was attacking the besiegers. There was  the sound  of galloping  horses. The 
Riders  were  drawing  in  their  ring  close  round the  knoll, risking the 
orc-arrows, so as  to prevent any sortie, while a company  rode off to  deal 
with the newcomers.  Suddenly Merry and Pippin realized  that without moving 
they were now outside the circle: there was nothing between them and escape. 

####-     'Now,' said Merry,  'if only we had our legs  and hands free,  we might 
get away. But I can't touch the knots, and I can't bite them.' 
     'No need to  try,'  said Pippin. 'I was going to tell you: I've managed 
to free  my  hands. These loops are only  left for show. You'd better have a  
bit of lembas first.' 
     He slipped the cords off his wrists, and fished out a packet. The cakes 
were broken, but good,  still in their leaf-wrappings. The  hobbits each ate 
two  or three  pieces.  The  taste brought  back  to them the memory of fair 
faces,  and laughter, and wholesome food in  quiet  days now far away. For a 
while they ate thoughtfully, sitting in the dark, heedless  of the cries and 
sounds of battle nearby. Pippin was the first to come back to the present. 
     'We must be off,' he said. 'Half a moment!' Grishnbkh's sword was lying 
close at hand, but it was too heavy and clumsy for him to use; so he crawled 
forward, and finding the body of the goblin  he  drew from its sheath a long 
sharp knife. With this he quickly cut their bonds.  
     'Now for it!' he said. 'When we've warmed up a bit, perhaps we shall be 
able  to stand again, and  walk.  But  in any case  we  had better start  by 
crawling.' 
     They crawled. The turf was deep and yielding, and that helped them: but 
it seemed a long slow business. They gave the watch-fire a wide  berth,  and 
wormed their way  forward bit  by  bit, until  they came to the edge  of the 
river, gurgling away in  the black shadows under its deep   banks. Then  they 
looked back. 
     The sounds  had  died away.  Evidently  Mauh®r  and his 'lads' had been 
killed or driven off. The Riders had returned to their silent ominous vigil. 
It would not last very much longer. Already  the night was old. In the East, 
which had remained unclouded, the sky was beginning to grow pale. 
     'We must get under cover,' said  Pippin, 'or we  shall be seen. It will 
not  be any  comfort  to us, if  these riders discover that we are  not Orcs 
after we are dead.' He got up and stamped his feet. 'Those cords have cut me 
like wires; but my feet are getting warm again. I could stagger on now. What 
about you, Merry?' 
     Merry got up. 'Yes,' he said, 'I can  manage it. Lembas does put  heart 
into  you! A more  wholesome sort  of  feeling, too, than  the heat  of that 
orc-draught.  I  wonder  what it was made of. Better not to  know, I expect. 
Let's get a drink of water to wash away the thought of it!' 
     'Not here, the banks are too steep,' said Pippin. 'Forward now!' 

####-     They turned and walked side by side slowly along the line of the river. 
Behind them the light grew in the East. As they  walked they compared notes,  
talking  lightly in  hobbit-fashion of the things  that  had happened  since 
their capture. No listener would  have guessed from their words that they had 
suffered cruelly, and been in dire peril, going without hope towards torment  
and death; or that even now, as they knew  well,  they had  little chance of 
ever finding friend or safety again. 
     'You seem to  have been doing well, Master Took,' said Merry.  'You will 
get  almost  a chapter in old Bilbo's book, if ever I get a chance to report 
to him. Good work: especially guessing that hairy villain's little game, and 
playing up to him. But I wonder if anyone will  ever pick up your trail  and 
find that brooch. I should hate to lose mine, but I am afraid  yours is gone 
for good. 
     'I  shall have  to brush up my  toes,  if I am to  get level  with you. 
Indeed Cousin Brandybuck is going in front now. This is wher e he comes in. I 
don't  suppose  you have much notion  where we are;  but I spent  my time at 
Rivendell rather better. We are walking west along the Entwash. The butt-end 
of the Misty Mountains is in front, and Fangorn Forest.' 
     Even as he spoke the da rk edge of the  forest loomed up straight before 
them. Night seemed to have taken refuge under its great trees, creeping away 
from the coming Dawn. 
     'Lead on, Master  Brandybuck!' said Pippin. 'Or lead back! We have been 
warned against Fangorn. But one so knowing will not have forgotten that.' 
     'I have  not,' answered Merry; 'but the forest seems better to  me, all 
the same, than turning back into the middle of a battle.' 
     He  led the way  in under the  huge branches  of  the trees. Old beyond 
guessing, they  seemed. Great  trailing  beards of lichen  hung  from  them, 
blowing and swaying in  the breeze. Out of the  shadows the  hobbits peeped, 
gazing back down the slope: little  furtive  figures  that in the  dim light 
looked like elf-children  in the deeps  of time peering out of the Wild Wood  
in wonder at their first Dawn. 
     Far  over the  Great  River,  and the  Brown  Lands,  leagues upon grey 
leagues away, the Dawn came,  red as flame.  Loud rang the hunting-horns  to 
greet it.  The Rider s of Rohan sprang suddenly  to life. Horn  answered horn 
again. 
     Merry and  Pippin heard,  clear  in  the  cold  air,  the  neighing  of 
war-horses, and  the  sudden singing of many men. The Sun's limb was lifted, 

####-an  arc of  fire,  above the margin of the world. Then with a great  cry the 
Riders charged from  the East; the red  light gleamed on mail and spear. The 
Orcs yelled  and shot all the arrows that remained to  them. The hobbits saw 
several horsemen fall; but their line held on up  the hill  and  over it, and 
wheeled round and charged  again. Most  of the raiders that were  left alive 
then broke and fled, this way and that, pursued one by one to the death. But 
one band, holding together in a black wedge, drove forward resolutely in the  
direction  of  the  forest.  Straight up the slope they charged  towards the 
watchers. Now they were drawing near,  and it seemed certain that they would 
escape: they had already hewn down three Riders that barred their way. 
     'We have watched too long,' said Merry. 'There's Ugl®k! I don't want to 
meet him again.' The hobbits turned and  fled deep into the  shadows of  the 
wood. 
     So it  was  that  they did not sec  the  last  stand,  when  Ugl®k  was 
overtaken and brought to bay at the very edge of Fangorn. There he was slain 
at last by Jomer,  the Third Marshal  of the Mark, who dismounted and fought 
him  sword to sword.  And over  the  wide fields the keen-eyed Riders hunted 
down the few Orcs that had escaped and still had strength to fly. 
     Then when they had  laid their fallen comrades in a  mound and had sung 
their praises, the Riders made a great fire and scattered the ashes of their 
enemies.  So ended  the raid, and no  news  of  it came ever back either  to 
Mordor or to Isengard; but the smoke of  the burning rose high to heaven and 
was seen by many watchful eyes.  
 

####-<h4>Chapter 4.</h4> <br> Treebeard 

 
 
     Meanwhile the hobbits went with  as much speed as  the dark and tangled  
forest allowed, following  the line of the  running  stream, westward and up 
towards the slopes of the mountains, deeper and deeper into  Fangorn. Slowly 
their fear of the Orcs died away, and their pace slackened. A queer stifling 
feeling came  over  them,  as  if the air were  too thin or too  scanty  for  
breathing. 
     At last Merry halted.  'We can't go on like this,' he  panted.  'I want 
some air.' 
     'Let's have  a  drink  at any rate,'  said  Pippin. 'I'm  parched.'  He 
clambered on to a  great tree-root that  wound  down  into the  stream,  and 
stooping drew up some water in his cupped hands. It was clear and  cold, and 
he  took many draughts.  Merry followed  him.  The water refreshed them  and 
seemed  to cheer their hearts; for a while they sat together on the brink of 
the  stream,  dabbling  their  sore feet and legs, and peering round at  the 
trees that  stood silently about them, rank upon rank, until they faded away 
into grey twilight in every direction. 
     'I suppose you  haven't  lost us already?'  said  Pippin,  leaning back  
against  a great tree-trunk.  'We  can  at  least follow the  course of this 
stream, the Entwash or whatever you call  it, and get  out again  the way we 
came.' 
     'We could, if  our legs  would  do it,' said  Merry;  'and if  we could 
breathe properly.' 
     'Yes, it is  all  very  dim,  and stuffy,  in   here,' said Pippin.  'It 
reminds me, somehow, of the  old room in the  Great Place of  the Tooks away 
back in the  Smials at Tuckborough:  a huge place,  where  the furniture has 
never been moved or changed for generations. They say  the Old Took lived in 
it  year  after  year,  while  he  and  the  room  got  older  and  shabbier  
together -and  it has  never changed since  he  died, a century ago.  And Old 
Gerontius was my great-great-grandfather: that  puts it back a bit. But that 
is  nothing  to the old feeling of  this  wood.  Look at  all those weeping, 
trailing,  beards and whiskers of lichen! And  most of the trees seem  to be 
half covered with ragged dry  leaves that have never fallen. Untidy. I can't  
imagine what spring  would look  like here, if  i t ever comes; still  less a  
spring-cleaning.' 

####-     'But the Sun at any  rate must peep in sometimes.' said Merry. 'It does 
not look or feel at all like Bilbo's  description of Mirkwood.  That was all 
dark and black,  and the home  of dark black  things. This is just dim,  and 
frightfully  tree-ish.  You  can't imagine animals  living here  at all,  or 
staying for long.' 
     'No, nor hobbits,' said Pippin. 'And I don't like the thought of trying 
to get through  it  either.  Nothing to cat  for a  hundred  miles, I should 
guess. How are our supplies?' 
     'Low,'  said Merry.  'We ran  off  with nothing but a  couple of  spare 
packets  of  lembas, and  left everything else behind.' They  looked at what 
remained of the  elven-cakes:  broken  fragments for abou t five meagre days, 
that  was all. 'And not a wrap or a blanket,' said Merry.  'We shall be cold 
tonight, whichever way we go.' 
     'Well, we'd  better decide on  the way now,' said  Pippin. 'The morning 
must be getting on.' 
     Just then they became  aware of a yellow light that  had appeared, some 
way further  on into the  wood: shafts  of sunlight seemed  suddenly to have  
pierced the forest -roof. 
     'Hullo!' said Merry.  'The Sun must have run into a cloud  while  we've 
been under these  trees, and now she  has  run  out  again; or  else she has 
climbed high enough to look down through some opening. It isn't far let's go 
and investigate!' 
     They  found  it was  further than  they thought. The  ground was rising 
steeply  still,  and  it was becoming  increasingly stony.  The  light  grew 
broader as they went on, and soon they saw that there was a rock -wall before 
them: the side of a hill, or the abrupt end of  some long root thrust out by 
the distant mountains.  No trees grew on it, and the sun was falling full on 
its stony face. The twigs of the trees at  its foot were stretched out stiff 
and still, as if reaching out to the warmth. Where  all had looked so shabby 
and grey before, the wood now gleamed with rich browns, and with the  
smooth 
black-greys  of bark  like polished leather.  The boles of the trees  glowed 
with a soft green like young grass: early spring or  a fleeting vision of it 
was about them. 
     In the face of the stony wall there was something like a stair: natural 
perhaps, and  made by the weathering  and splitting  of the rock, for it was 
rough and uneven. High up, almost level with the tops of forest -trees, there 

####-was a shelf under a cliff. Nothing grew there but a few grasses and weeds at 
its edge, and  one old stump of a tree  with only two bent branches left: it 
looked almost  like the figure  of some gnarled  old  man,  standing  there, 
blinking in the morning-light. 
     'Up  we go!' said Merry joyfully. 'Now for a breath of air, and a sight 
of the land!' 
     They climbed  and scrambled up the rock. If the  stair had been made it 
was for bigger feet and longer legs than theirs. They were  too eager to  be 
surprised at the  remarkable  way  in  which the  cuts  and  sores of  their 
captivity  had healed and their  vigour had returned. They came at length to 
the edge  of the shelf almost at the feet of the old stump; then they sprang 
up  and  turned  round  with their backs  to the  hill, breathing  deep, and 
looking  out eastward. They saw  that they had  only come some three or four 
miles  into the  forest:  the heads  of the  trees marched  down  the slopes 
towards the  plain. There, near the fringe  of  the forest,  tall spires  of 
curling black smoke went up, wavering and floating towards them. 
     'The wind's changing,'  said Merry.  'It's  turned east again. It feels 
cool up here.' 
     'Yes,'  said Pippin; 'I'm  afraid this is only a passing  gleam, and it 
will  all go grey  again. What a  pity! This  shaggy  old  forest  looked so 
different in the sunlight. I almost felt I liked the place.' 
     'Almost felt you liked the  Forest! That's good! That's uncommonly kind 
of you,' said  a strange voice.  'Turn round and let  me have a look at your 
faces. I almost feel that  I dislike you  both, but do  not let us be hasty. 
Turn round!' A large knob-knuckled hand was laid on each of their shoulders,  
and they  were twisted round,  gently but irresistibly; then  two great arms 
lifted them up. 
     They  found that they  were looking  at a  most extraordinary face.  It 
belonged to a  large  Man-like, almost Troll-like, figure, at least fourteen 
foot high,  very sturdy, with a tall  head,  and hardly any neck. Whether it 
was clad in stuff like green  and grey  bark, or  whether that was its hide, 
was  difficult to say. At any  rate the  arms, at a short distance from  the 
trunk, were not wrinkled,  but covered  with a brown smooth skin.  The large 
feet had seven toes each. The lower part of the long face was covered with a  
sweeping grey beard, bushy, almost twiggy  at the roots,  thin and mossy  at 
the  ends. But  at  the moment the hobbits noted little but the eyes.  These 
deep  eyes  were now  surveying them, slow and solemn, but very penetrating. 

####-They were brown, shot  with a green light. Often  afterwards Pippin tried to 
describe his first impression of them. 
     'One felt  as if there was an enormous well behind them, filled up with 
ages of  memory  and long, slow,  steady  thinking;  but  their surface  was 
sparkling with  the present: like sun shimmering on the  outer  leaves of  a  
vast tree, or on the ripples of a very deep lake.  I don't know but it  felt 
as  if  something  that grew  in the  ground-asleep, you might say, or  just  
feeling itself  as  something between  roof-tip  and leaf-tip, between  deep 
earth  and sky had suddenly waked up, and was  considering you with the same 
slow care that it had given to its own inside affairs for endless years.' 
     'Hrum, Hoom,'  murmured  the  voice,  a deep  voice  like a  very  deep 
woodwind  instrument. 'Very odd indeed! Do  not  be hasty, that is my motto. 
But if I had seen you,  before I heard your voices-I liked them: nice little 
voices: they reminded me of something I cannot  remember ---if I had seen you  
before I heard you, I should have just trodden on you, taking you for little 
Orcs, and found out my mistake  afterwards. Very odd  you  are, indeed. Root 
and twig, very odd!' 
     Pippin, though still amazed, no longer felt afraid. Under those eyes he 
felt a curious suspense, but  not fear. 'Please.' he said, 'who are you? And 
what are you?' 
     A queer look came into the old eyes, a kind of wariness; the deep wells 
were covered over.  'Hrum, now,' answered the voice;  'well,  I am an Ent, or  
that's  what  they call me.  Yes, Ent is the word. The Ent, I am,  you might 
say,  in your  manner  of  speaking. Fangorn is  my name according to  some, 
Treebeard others make it. Treebeard will do.' 
     'An Ent?' said  Merry.  'What's  that? But  what do you  call yourself?  
What's your real name?' 
     'Hoo now!' replied  Treebeard. 'Hoo! Now that would be  telling! Not so 
hasty.  And I  am doing the  asking. You are  in my country. What are you,  I  
wonder? I cannot place you. You do not  seem to come in the old lists that I  
learned when I was young. But  that was a long, long time ago, and  they may 
have made new lists. Let me see! Let me see! How did it go?  
     Learn now the lore of Living Creatures! 
     First name the four, the free peoples: 
     Eldest of all, the elf-children; 
     Dwarf the delver, dark are his houses; 
     Ent the earthborn, old as mountains; 

####-     Man the mortal, master of horses: 
     Hm, hm, hm. 
     Beaver the builder, buck the leaper, 
     Bear bee-hunter, boar the fighter; 
     Hound is hungry, hare is fearful... 
     hm, hm. 
     Eagle in eyrie, ox in pasture, 
     Hart horn-crowned; hawk is swiftest 
     Swan the whitest, serpent coldest... 
     Hoom, hm; hoom. hm. how did it go? Room tum, room tum, roomty toom 
tum. 
It was a long list. But anyway you do not seem to fit in anywhere!' 
     'We  always seem  to have got   left out of the  old lists, and the  old 
stories,' said  Merry.  'Yet we've been about for quite a long  time.  We're 
hobbits.' 
     'Why not make a new line?' said Pippin. 
     'Half-grown hobbits, the hole -dwellers. 
     Put us in amongst the four, next to Man (the Big People) and you've got 
it.' 
     'Hm! Not bad, not bad,' said Treebeard.  'That would do. So you live in 
holes, eh? It  sounds very right and proper. Who calls  you hobbits, though?  
That does not sound elvish to me. Elves made all  the old   words: they began 
it.' 
     'Nobody else calls us hobbits; we call ourselves that,' said Pippin. 
     'Hoom, hmm! Come  now!  Not so hasty!  You call yourselves hobbits? But 
you should not go telling just anybody. You'll be letting out your own right 
names if you're not careful.' 
     'We aren't careful about  that,' said Merry. 'As a matter of fact I'm a  
Brandybuck, Meriadoc Brandybuck, though most people call me just Merry.' 
     'And I'm a Took, Peregrin Took,  but  I'm generally called  Pippin,  or  
even Pip.' 
     'Hm, but you are hasty folk, I see,' said Treebeard. 'I  am honoured by 
your confidence; but you should not be too free all at once.  There are Ents 
and  Ents, you know; or there  are Ents and things that look like  Ents  but 
ain't, as you  might say. I'll call you  Merry and Pippin if you please-nice 
names. For I am not going to tell you my name, not yet at any rate.' A queer  
half-knowing,  half-humorous look came with  a green flicker into his  eyes.  

####-'For one thing it would  take a long while: my name is growing all the time, 
and I've lived a  very  long, long time; so my  name is like  a story.  Real 
names tell you the story of the things they belong to in my language, in the 
Old  Entish  as you might say. It is a lovely  language, but it takes a very 
long  time to say  anything in it, because  we do  not  say anything  in it. 
unless it is worth taking a long time to say, and to listen to. 
     'But  now,' and  the  eyes became very bright and 'present', seeming to 
grow smaller and almost sharp, 'what is  going  on? What are you doing in it  
all? I can see and hear  (and smell and feel) a great deal from  this,  from 
this, from this  a-lalla-lalla-rumba-kamanda-lind-or-bur®ml. Excuse me: that 
is a part of my name for it; I do not know what  the word is  in the outside 
languages: you know, the thing we are on, where I stand and look out on fine 
mornings, and  think about  the Sun, and the grass beyond the wood,  and the 
horses, and the clouds, and the  unfolding of the world. What  is going  on?  
What is Gandalf up  to? And these -- burbrum,' he made a deep rumbling noise 
like a discord on a great organ --  'these Orcs, and young Saruman  down  at 
Isengard? I like news. But not too quick now.' 
     'There is quite a lot going on,' said Merry:  'and even if we tried  to 
be quick, it  would  take a  long time to tell.  But you  told  us not to be 
hasty. Ought we to tell you anything so soon? Would you think it rude, if we  
asked what you are  going to do with us, and  which side you are on? And did 
you know Gandalf?' 
     'Yes, I do know  him: the only wizard that really cares  about  trees ' 
said Treebeard. 'Do you know him?' 
     'Yes,'  said Pippin  sadly, 'we did. He  was a great friend, and he was 
our guide.' 
     'Then I  can answer your other  questions,' said  Treebeard. 'I  am not 
going to do anything with you: not if you mean by that 'do something  to you ' 
without your  leave. We might  do  some things together. I don't  know about 
sides. I go my own way; but your way may go along with mine for a while. But 
you speak of Master  Gandalf,  as if he was  in a story that had come  to an 
end.' 
     'Yes, we do,' said Pippin sadly. 'The story seems to be going on, but I 
am afraid Gandalf has fallen out of it.' 
     'Hoo,  come  now!'  said  Treebeard.   'Hoom, hm, ah  well.'  He paused, 
looking long at the hobbits: 'Hoom, ah, well I do not know what to say. Come 
now!' 

####-     'If you  would like to hear more. said Merry, 'we will tell you. But it 
will take some time. Wouldn't you like to put us  down? Couldn't we sit here 
together in the sun, while it lasts? You must be getting tired of holding us 
up.' 
     'Hm,  tired? No. I am not tired. I do not easily get tired. And I do not 
sit down. I am not very. hm, bendable. But there.  the  Sun is  going in. Let 
us leave this  -- did you say what you call it?' 
     'Hill?' suggested Pippin. 'Shelf? Step?' suggested Merry. 
     Treebeard repeated the words thoughtfully. 'Hill. Yes, that was it. But 
it is a hasty word  for  a thing that has stood here ever since this part of 
the world was shaped. Never mind. Let us leave it, and go.' 
     'Where shall we go?' asked Merry. 
     'To my home, or one of my homes,' answered Treebeard. 
     'Is it far?' 
     'I do not  know.  You might  call it far, perhaps.  But what does  tha t 
matter?' 
     'Well,  you see, we have lost all our belongings,' said Merry. 'We have 
only a little food.' 
     'O!  Hm! You need not  trouble about that,' said Treebeard. 'I can give 
you a drink that will keep you green and growing for a long, long while. And 
if we decide to part company, I can  set you down outside my  country at any 
point you choose. Let us go!' 
     Holding the hobbits gently but firmly, one  in  the crook of each  arm, 
Treebeard lifted up first one large foot and then the  other, and  moved them 
to the  edge  of  the  shelf. The  rootlike  toes grasped  the  rocks.  Then 
carefully  and solemnly, he  stalked down from step to step, and reached the 
floor of the Forest. 
     At once he set off with  long  deliberate strides  through  the  trees, 
deeper  and  deeper into  the  wood, never  far  from  the  stream, climbing 
steadily up  towards  the slopes of the mountains. Many of the  trees seemed 
asleep, or as unaware of him as of any other creature that merely passed by;  
but  some quivered, and some  raised up  their branches above his head as he 
approached.  All  the  while, as he walked, he  talked to  himself in a long 
running stream of musical sounds.  
     The hobbits  were silent for some time. They  felt, oddly  enough, safe 
and  comfortable, and they had a great deal  to think and wonder  about.  At  
last Pippin ventured to speak again. 

####-     'Please, Treebeard,' he said,  'could I  ask  you  something?  Why  did 
Celeborn  warn  us  against  your forest?  He  told us  not to  risk getting 
entangled in it.' 
     'Hmm,  did he now?' rumbled  Treebeard. 'And I might have said much the 
same, if you had been going the other way. Do  not risk getting entangled in 
the  woods of  Laurelindurenan ! That  is what the Elves used to call it, but 
now they  make the  name  shorter: Lothlurien they call it. Perhaps they are 
right: maybe it is fading;  not growing. Land of the Valley of Singing Gold, 
that was it, once upon a time. Now it is the Dreamflower. Ah well! But it is 
a queer  place, and  not for just any one to venture in. I am surprised that 
you ever got out, but much more surprised that you ever got in: that has not 
happened to strangers for many a year. It is a queer land. 
     'And  so is  this. Folk have  come  to grief here. Aye, they  have ,  to 
grief.  Laurelindurenan lindelorendor malinornjlion ornemalin ,' he hummed to 
himself. 'They are falling rather  behind  the world in  there, I guess,' he 
said 'Neither  this country, nor anything else  outside the Golden  Wood, is 
what it was when Celeborn was young. Still: 
     Taurelilumla-tumbalemorna Tumbaletaurla Lumlanor,1 
     that is what  they used to say.  Things have  changed, but it is  still 
true in places.' 
     'What do you mean?' said Pippin. 'What is true?' 
     'The trees and the Ents,' said Treebeard. 'I do not understand all that 
goes  on myself, so I cannot explain it  to  you. Some of us are  still true 
Ents, and  lively enough  in our fashion, but many are growing sleepy, going 
tree-ish, as you might say. Most of the trees are ju st trees, of course; but 
many are half  awake. Some  are quite wide awake, and a  few are,  well, ah,  
well getting Entish. That is going on all the time. 
     'When that happens to  a  tree,  you find that  some have  bad  hearts.  
Nothing to do with their wood: I do not mean that. Why, I knew some good old 
willows  down  the Entwash, gone  long ago,  alas!  They were  quite hollow, 
indeed  they were falling all to pieces, but as quiet and  sweet-spoken as a  
young  leaf.  And  then  there are  some  trees  in  the  valleys  under the 
mountains, sound as a bell, and bad right through.  That sort of thing seems 
to spread. There used to be some very dangerous parts in this country. There 
are still some very black patches.' 
     'Like the Old Forest away to the north, do you mean?' asked Merry. 
     'Aye, aye. something like, but much worse. I do not doubt there is some 

####-shadow of the Great Darkness  lying there still away north; and bad memories 
are handed down. But there are hollow dales in this land where the  Darkness 
has never been lifted, and the trees are older  than I am. Still, we do what 
we can. We keep off strangers and the  foolhardy; and we train and we teach, 
we walk and we weed. 
     'We are tree-herds, we old  Ents. Few  enough of us are left now. Sheep 
get  like shepherd, and shepherds like  sheep, it is said;  but  slowly, and 
neither have  long in the world. It  is quicker and  closer with  trees  and 
Ents, and they walk down the  ages  together. For Ents are more like  Elves:  
less interested  in   themselves than Men are,  and  better at getting inside 
other things.  And yet again  Ents are more like Men,  more  changeable than 
Elves are, and  quicker at taking the colour of the outside,  you might say.  
Or  better than both:  for they are steadier a nd keep their  minds on things 
longer. 'Some of my kin look just  like trees now, and need something  great 
to  rouse them; and they speak  only in whispers. But  some  of my trees are 
limb-lithe, and many can talk to me. Elves began it, of course, waking trees 
up  and  teaching  them to speak and  learning their  tree-talk. They always 
wished to talk to everything, the old Elves did. But then the Great Darkness 
came, and they passed away  over the Sea, or fled into far  valleys, and hid 
themselves,  and made  songs  about days that would never come again.  Never 
again. Aye,  aye, there was all  one wood once upon a time: from here to the 
Mountains of Lune, and this was just the East End. 
     'Those were the broad days! Time was when I could walk and sing a ll day 
and  hear no more  than  the echo of my own  voice in the hollow hills.  The 
woods were like the woods of Lothlurien. only thicker stronger, younger. And 
the smell of the air! I used to spend a week just breathing.' 
     Treebeard  fell silent, striding along, and yet  making  hardly a sound 
with his great feet. Then he began to hum again, and passed into a murmuring 
chant. Gradually the hobbits became aware that he was chanting to them: 
     In the willow-meads of Tasarinan I walked in the Spring. 
     Ah! the sight and the smell of the Spring in Nan-tasarion! 
     And I said that was good. 
     I wandered in Summer in the elm-woods of Ossiriand. 
     Ah! the light and the music in the Summer by the Seven Rivers of Ossir! 
     And I thought that was best. 
     To the beeches of Neldoreth I came in the Autumn. 
     Ah!  the  gold and the red  and the sighing of leaves  in the Autumn in  

####-Taur-na-neldor! 
     It was more than my desire. 
     To the pine-trees upon the  highland of  Dorthonion  I climbed  in  the 
Winter. 
     Ah! the wind and the whiteness and the black  branches  of  Winter upon 
Orod-na-Thfn! 
     My voice went up and sang in the sky. 
     And now all those lands lie under the wave. 
     And I walk in Ambaruna, in Tauremorna, in Aldaluml. 
     In my own land, in the country of Fangorn, 
     Where the roots are long, 
     And the years lie thicker than the leaves 
     In Tauremornaluml. 
     He  ended, and strode on silently, and in all  the wood, as far  as ear 
could reach, there was not a sound. 
     The day  waned,  and dusk was twined about  the boles of  the trees. At  
last  the hobbits saw, rising dimly before them, a steep dark land: they had 
come to the feet of the mountains, and to the green roots of tall Methedras.  
Down the hillside  the young Entwash,  leaping  from its springs  high above,  
ran noisily from step to step to meet them. On the right of the stream there 
was  a long slope, clad with grass, now  grey in the twilight. No trees grew 
there  and  it  was  open  to  the sky;  stars were shining already in lakes 
between shores of cloud.  
     Treebeard  strode  up the slope,  hardly  slackening his pace. Suddenly 
before them the hobbits saw a wide opening. Two great trees stood there, one 
on  either side, like living gate-posts; bu t  there was  no gate  save their 
crossing and interwoven boughs. As  the old Ent approached, the trees lifted 
up their branches, and all  their leaves quivered and rustled. For they were 
evergreen trees, and their leaves were dark and polished, and gleamed in the 
twilight. Beyond them was a wide level space, as though the floor of a great 
hall had been cut  in the side of the hill. On either hand the  walls sloped 
upwards, until they were fifty feet high  or more, and along each wall stood 
an aisle of trees that also increased in height as they marched inwards.  
     At the far end the rock -wall was sheer,  but at  the bottom it had been 
hollowed back into a  shallow bay with an arched roof: the only roof of  the 
hall, save the branches  of  the trees, which  at the inner end overshadowed 
all the ground leaving only a broad open path in the middle. A little stream 

####-escaped from  the springs above,  and leaving the main  water, fell tinkling 
down  the  sheer face  of the wall, pouring in silver  drops,  like  a   fine 
curtain  in front  of the arched bay. The water was  gathered  again into  a  
stone basin in the floor between the trees, and thence it spilled and flowed 
away beside the open path, out  to rejoin the Entwash in its journey through 
the forest. 
     'Hm! Here we are!' said Treebeard, breaking his  long silence.  'I have 
brought you about  seventy  thousand  ent-strides, but what that comes to in 
the measurement of your land I do not know. Anyhow we are near the roots  of 
the  Last Mountain.  Part of the name of this place might be Wellinghall, if 
it were turned into your language. I like it. We will stay here tonight.' He 
set them  down  on  the  grass  between  the aisles  of the  trees, and they 
followed  him  towards the great arch. The  hobbits  now  noticed that as he 
walked his  knees  hardly bent, but  his  legs opened in  a great stride. He 
planted  his big toes (and they  were indeed  big, and very  broad)  on  the 
ground first, before any other part of his feet. 
     For a moment Treebeard stood under the rain of the falling  spring, and 
took a deep breath;  then he laughed, and passed inside. A great stone table 
stood there, but  no chairs. At  the back of the  bay  it was already  quite 
dark. Treebeard lifted two  great  vessels and stood them on the table. They 
seemed to  be  filled with water;  but he  held  his  hands over  them,  and 
immediately they began to glow,  one with a golden and the other with a rich 
green light; and  the blending of the two lights lit the bay; as  if the sun 
of  summer  was  shining through a roof of young  leaves. Looking back,  the 
hobbits saw that the trees in  the court had also begun to glow,  faintly at 
first, but steadily quickening, until  every leaf was edged with light: some 
green,  some gold, some red as  copper; while  the  tree-trunks  looked like 
pillars moulded out of luminous stone. 
     'Well, well, now we can talk again,' said Treebeard. 'You are thirsty I 
expect. Perhaps you are also tired. Drink this!' He went to the  back of the 
bay, and  then they saw that several tall stone jars stood there, with heavy 
lids. He removed  one of the lids, and dipped  in a great ladle, and with it 
filled three bowls, one very large bowl, and two smaller ones.  
     'This is an ent-house,' he said, 'and there are no seats, I  fear.  But 
you may sit on the table.'  Picking  up the hobbits he set them on the great 
stone  slab, six feet  above the  ground, and there they  sat dangling their 
legs, and drinking in sips. 

####-     The  drink was  like water, indeed very like  the taste of the draughts 
they had drunk from the  Entwash near, the borders  of the  forest,  and yet 
there was  some scent or savour in  it which they could not describe: it was 
faint, but it reminded them of  the smell of a distant wood borne  from afar 
by a cool breeze at night. The effect of the  draught began at the toes, and 
rose  steadily  through every limb, bringing  refreshment  and vigour  as it 
coursed upwards, right to the tips of the hair. Indeed the hobbits felt that 
the  hair  on  their heads was actually standing up,  waving and curling and 
growing. As for Treebeard, he first laved his feet  in the basin beyond  the 
arch, and then he  drained his bowl at one draught, one long, slow  draught. 
The hobbits thought he would never stop. 
     At last he  set the bowl down again. 'Ah -- ah,' he sighed. 'Hm,  hoom, 
now we can talk easier. You can sit on the floor, and  I will lie down; that 
will prevent this drink from rising to my head and sending me to sleep.' 
     On the right side of  the  bay there  was a great bed on low legs;  not 
more than a couple of feet high,  covered  deep in dried grass  and bracken. 
Treebeard lowered himself slowly on to this (with only the slightest sign of 
bending at his  middle),  until he lay at full  length, with his arms behind 
his head, looking up at the ceiling. upon which lights were flickering, like 
the  play of leaves  in the sunshine. Merry  and Pippin  sat  beside him  on 
pillows of grass.  
     'Now tell me your tale, and do not hurry!' said Treebeard. 
     The hobbits began to tell him the story of their  adventures ever since 
they left Hobbiton. They followed  no very clear order, for they interrupted 
one another continually, and Treebeard often stopped the  speaker, and  went 
back to some earlier point, or  jumped forward asking questions  about later  
events. They said  nothing whatever about the Ring, and did not tell him why 
they set  out or  where they  were going to;  and he  did not  ask  for  any 
reasons.  
     He  was  immensely interested in  everything: in  the  Black Riders, in 
Elrond, and Rivendell, in the Old Forest, and  Tom Bombadil, in the Mines of 
Moria, and in Lothlurien  and Galadriel. He made them describe the Shire and 
its country over and over  again. He  said an odd thing at  this point.  'You 
never see any, hm, any Ents round  there do you?' he asked. 'Well, not Ents,  
Entwives I should really say.' 
     'Entwives?' said Pippin. 'Are they like you at all?' 
     Yes,  hm,  well   no:  I  do  not  really  know   now,  said  Treebeard 

####-thoughtfully. 'But they would like your country, so I just wondered.' 
     Treebeard  was  however   especially  interested   in  everything  that 
concerned Gandalf;  and  most  interested of  all  in Saruman's  doings. The 
hobbits  regretted  very much that  they  knew so little  about them: only a  
rather  vague report by Sam of what Gandalf had told  the Council.  But they  
were clear  at  any rate that  Ugl®k and  his troop  came from Isengard, and 
spoke of Saruman as their master. 
     'Hm, hoom!'  said  Treebeard,  when at last  their story  had wound and 
wandered  down to the battle of the Orcs  and  the Riders  of Rohan.  'Well, 
well! That is a bundle of news and no mistake. You have not told me  all, no 
indeed, not by a long way. But I do not doubt that you a re  doing as Gandalf 
would wish. There is something very  big going on, that I can see, and  what 
it is maybe I shall learn  in good time, or in bad time. By  root  and twig, 
but  it  is a strange business: up sprout a  little folk that are not in the 
old lists,  and behold  the Nine forgotten Riders reappear to hunt them, and 
Gandalf takes them  on a great journey, and Galadriel harbours them in Caras 
Galadhon, and Orcs pursue them down all the  leagues  of Wilderland:  indeed 
they seem to be caught up in a great storm. I hope they weather it!' 
     'And what about yourself?' asked Merry. 
     'Hoom, hm, I have not troubled  about the  Great Wars,' said Treebeard; 
'they mostly concern Elves and Men. That is the business of Wizards: Wizards 
are always troubled  about the future.  I  do not like  worrying  about  the 
future. I am not  altogether on anybody's side, because nobody is altogether  
on my  side, if you understand me: nobody cares  for the woods as I care for  
them, not even  Elves nowadays. Still,  I  take more kindly to Elves than  to 
others: it was the Elves that cured us of  dumbness long ago, and that was a  
great gift that cannot be forgotten, though our  ways have parted since. And 
there are  some things, of  course, whose side I am altogether not  on; I am 
against  them altogether: these -- burbrum' (he again  made a deep rumble of 
disgust)' -- these Orcs, and their masters.  
     'I  used to  be  anxious  when the shadow lay on Mirkwood, but when  it 
removed to Mordor, I did not trouble for a while : Mordor is a long way away. 
But it seems that the wind is setting  East,  and the withering of all woods 
may  be  drawing near.  There is naught that an old Ent can  do to hold back  
that storm: he must weather it or crack. 
     'But Saruman now! Saruman is a neighbour: I cannot overlook him. I must  
do something. I suppose. I have often wondered lately what I should do about 

####-Saruman.' 
     'Who is  Saruman?'  asked  Pippin.  'Do  you know  anything  about  his 
history?'  'Saruman is  a  Wizard,' answered Treebeard.  'More  than  that I 
cannot say. I do not know the history of Wizards. They  appeared first after  
the Great Ships came over the Sea; but if they came with  the Ships  I never  
can tell. Saruman was  reckoned great among them.  I  believe.  He  gave  up 
wandering  about and minding the  affairs of Men and Elves, some time ago -- 
you would call it a very long time ago: and he settled down at Angrenost, or  
Isengard  as the Men of Rohan call  it. He was very quiet to begin with, but 
his fame began to gr ow. He was  chosen to be head of the White Council, they 
say; but that did not turn out too well. I wonder now  if even  then Saruman 
was not turning to evil ways. But at any  rate he used to give no trouble to 
his neighbours. I used to talk to him.  There was a time when  he was always 
walking about my woods. He was polite in  those days, always asking my leave 
(at  least when he  met me); and always  eager  to  listen. I told him  many 
things that he would never have found out by himself; but he never repaid me 
in like kind. I  cannot remember that he ever told.  me anything. And he got 
more and more like that; his face, as I remember  it-I  have not seen it for  
many  a  day-became  like windows  in  a stone  wall: windows with  shutters 
inside. 
     'I think  that I now understand  what he is  up  to. He  is plotting to 
become a Power. He has a mind of metal and wheels;  and he does not care for  
growing things, except as far as they serve him for the  moment.  And now it 
is clear that he is a  black traitor. He has taken up  with  foul folk, with 
the Orcs. Brm,  hoom! Worse than that: he  has been doing something to them; 
something dangerous. For these Isengarders are more like wicked Men. It is a 
mark of evil things that came in the Great  Darkness  that they cannot abide 
the Sun;  but Saruman's  Orcs  can endure it, even if they hate it. I wonder  
what he has done? Are they Men he has ruined, or has he blended the races of 
Orcs and Men? That would be a black evil!' 
     Treebeard  rumbled for a moment, as if he  were pronouncing some  deep, 
subterranean Entish malediction. 'Some  time ago I began to wonder  how Orcs 
dared to pass  through my woods so  freely,'  he went on. 'Only lately did I 
guess that  Saruman was to blame, and that  long ago he had been spying  out 
all the ways, and discovering  my secrets. He and his  foul folk are  making 
havoc now. Down on the borders  they are  felling  trees-good trees. Some of 
the trees they just cut down and leave to rot -- orc-mischief that; but most  

####-are hewn up and  carried off to feed  the fires of Orthanc. There is always a  
smoke rising from Isengard these days.  
     'Curse  him, root and branch!  Many  of those  trees  were  my  friends 
creatures I had known from nut and acorn; many had voices of their  own that 
are lost for ever now. And there are wastes of stump  and bramble where once 
there were singing groves. I have been idle. I have let things slip. It must 
stop!' 
     Treebeard raised  himself  from  his  bed  with a jerk,  stood  up, and 
thumped his hand on the table. The vessels of light trembled and sent up two  
jets  of  flame.  There  was a flicker like green fire in his  eyes, and his 
beard stood out stiff as a great besom. 
     'I will  stop it!' he boomed. 'And  you shall come  with me. You may be 
able  to help me. You will be helping your own friends that way, too; for if 
Saruman is not checked Rohan and Gondor will have an enemy behind as well 
as 
in front. Our roads go together -- to Isengard!' 
     'We will come with you,' said Merry. 'We will do wha t we can.' 
     'Yes!' said  Pippin. 'I should like to see the White Hand overthrown. I 
should like  to be there, even if I could not  be of much use: I shall never  
forget Ugl®k and the crossing of Rohan.' 
     'Good! Good!'  said  Treebeard. 'But I spoke   hastily. We must  not  be 
hasty. I have become too hot. I must cool myself and think; fur it is easier 
to shout stop! than to do it.' 
     He strode to the archway and stood for some time under the falling rain 
of the spring. Then he laughed and shook himself, and wherever the  drops of 
water fell glittering from him to the ground they glinted like red and green 
sparks. He came back and laid himself on the bed again and was silent. 
     After some time the hobbits heard him murmuring  again. He seemed to be 
counting  on his fingers. 'Fangorn,  Finglas, Fladrif, aye, aye,' he sighed. 
'The trouble is  that there are so  few of us left,' he said turning towards 
the hobbits. 'Only  three remain of the first Ents that walked in the  woods 
before  the  Darkness: only myself, Fangorn, and  Finglas  and Fladrif  -- to 
give them their Elvish names; you may call them Leaflock and Skinbark if you  
like that better. And of us three Leaflock and Skinbark are not much use for  
this business. Leaflock has grown sleepy. almost  tree-ish, you might say: he 
has taken to standing by himself half-asleep all through the summer with the 
deep grass of the meadows round his knees. Covered with leafy hair he is. He 

####-used to rouse up in winter; but of late he has been  too drowsy to walk   far 
even then.  Skinbark  lived on the mountain-slopes west of Isengard. That is 
where the worst  trouble  has been. He was wounded by the Orcs,  and many of 
his folk and his tree-herds have been murdered and destroyed. He has gone up 
into the high places, among the birches that he loves  best, and he will not 
come down. Still,  I  daresay I  could get  together a fair company  of  our 
younger folks-if  I could make  them understand the  need: if I could  rouse 
them: we are not a hasty folk. What a pity the re are so few of us!' 
     'Why are there so few  when  you  have  lived in this country so long?' 
asked Pippin. 'Have a great many died?' 
     'Oh, no!' said Treebeard. 'None  have died from  inside, as  you  might 
say. Some have  fallen in the evil chances of the long years, of course: and 
more have  grown tree-ish. But  there were never many of us and we have  not 
increased. There have been no Entings  -- no children, you would say, not for  
a terrible long count of years. You see, we lost the Entwives.' 
     'How very sad!' said Pippin. 'How was it that they all died?' 
     'They did not die!' said Treebeard. 'I never said died. We lost them, I 
said. We lost them and we cannot find them.' He sighed. 'I thought most folk  
knew that. There were songs about the hunt of the Ents for the Entwives sung 
among  Elves  and  Men  from  Mirkwood  to  Gondor.  They  cannot  be  quite 
forgotten.' 
     'Well, I  am  afraid the songs have not come west over the Mountains to 
the Shire,'  said Merry. 'Won't you tell us some more, or sing us one of the 
songs?' 
     'Yes, I will indeed,' said Treebeard, seeming pleased with the request. 
'But  I  cannot  tell it properly, only in short; and then  we  must end our 
talk: tomorrow we have councils to call, and work to do, and maybe a journey 
to begin.' 
     'It is rather a strange and sad story,' he went on after a pause. 'When 
the  world  was young, and the woods were  wide  and wild,  the Ents and the 
Entwives  --  and  there  were  Entmaidens  then:  ah!   the  loveliness  of 
Fimbrethil, of Wandlimb the  lightfooted, in the days of our  youth! -- they 
walked  together  and they  housed together.  But our  hearts did not  go on 
growing in the same way: the Ents gave their love to things that they met in 
the world, and the Entwives gave their thought to other things, for the Ents 
loved the great trees; and the wild woods, and the slopes of the high hills; 
and they drank of the mountain-streams, and ate only such fruit as the trees 

####-let fall in their path;  and they learned of  the Elves and  spoke  with the 
Trees. But  the Entwives gave their  minds to the  lesser trees, and to  the 
meads in the sunshine  beyond the feet of the forests; and they saw the sloe 
in the thicket, and  the wild apple and the cherry blossoming in spring, and 
the green herbs in the waterlands in summer, and the seeding grasses in  the 
autumn  fields. They  did  not desire  to  speak with these things; but they 
wished  them to  hear and obey what was said to  them. The  Entwives ordered 
them to  grow  according to  their wishes, and bear leaf and fruit to  their 
liking; for the Entwives desired order, and plenty, and peace (by which they 
meant that things should remain  where they had set them).  So the  Entwives 
made gardens to live in. But  we Ents went on wandering, and we only came to 
the gardens  now and again. Then when the  Darkness came  in  the North, the 
Entwives crossed  the Great  River, and made new  gardens,  and  tilled  new 
fields, and  we saw  them more seldom. After the Darkness was overthrown the 
land of the Entwives blossomed richly,  and their  fields were full of corn. 
Many men learned the crafts of  the  Entwives and honoured them greatly; but 
we were only a legend to them, a secret in the heart of the forest. Yet here 
we still are,  while  all  the gardens of the Entwives are  wasted: Men call 
them the Brown Lands now. 
     'I remember it was  long ago --  in the time of  the war between Sauron 
and the Men of the Sea -- desire came over me to see Fimbrethil  again. Very 
fair she was still in my eyes, when I had last seen her, though  little like 
the  Entmaiden  of old.  For  the Entwives were bent  and  browned  by their  
labour; their hair  parched  by the sun to the hue  of ripe corn  and  their 
cheeks  like  red apples.  Yet their eyes were still  the eyes  of  our  own 
people.  We  crossed  over Anduin and came to  their  land:  but  we found a  
desert: it was all  burned and uprooted, for war had passed over it. But the 
Entwives were not there. Long  we called, and long we searched; and we asked 
all  folk  that  we  met which way the Entwives had gone. Some said they had 
never seen them;  and  some said that they had seen them walking  away west, 
and some said east, and others south. But nowhere that we went could we find 
them. Our sorrow was very great. Yet the wild  wood called, and we  returned 
to it. For many years we used to go out every now and again and look for the 
Entwives.  walking far and wide and  calling  them by their beautiful names.  
But as time passed we went  more  seldom and  wandered less far. And now the 
Entwives are only a memory for us, and our  beards  are  long and  grey. The 
Elves made many songs concerning the Search of  the  Ents,  and some of  the 

####-songs passed into the tongues of  Men. But we made  no songs about it, being 
content to chant  their beautiful names when we thought of the Entwives.  We 
believe that we may meet again in  a time to come, and perhaps we shall find 
somewhere  a  land where we can live together and both be content. But it is 
foreboded  that tha t will only be  when we have  both  lost all  that we now 
have.  And  it may  well be that that time is  drawing near at last. For  if 
Sauron of old destroyed the gardens, the Enemy today seems likely  to wither 
all the woods.  
     'There  was  an Elvish  song  that  spoke  of this, or at  least  so  I 
understand  it. It used to be sung up and down the Great River. It was never 
an Entish song, mark you: it would have been a very long song in Entish! But 
we  know it by heart, and  hum it now and again. This  is how it runs in your 
tongue: 
     ENT. 
     When Spring unfolds the beechen leaf, and sap is in the bough; 
     When light is on the wild-wood stream, and wind is on the brow;  
     When stride is long, and breath is deep, and keen the mountain -air, 
     Come back to me! Come back to me, and say my land is fair! 
 
     entwife. 
     When Spring is come to garth and field, and corn is in the blade; 
     When blossom like a shining snow is on the orchard laid; 
     When shower and Sun upon the Earth with fragrance fill the air, 
     I'll linger here, and will not come, because my land is fair. 
 
     ent. 
     When Summer lies upon the world, and in a noon of gold  
     Beneath the roof of sleeping leaves the dreams of trees unfold; 
     When woodland halls are green and cool, and wind is in the West, 
     Come back to me! Come back to me, and say my land is best! 
 
     entwife. 
     When Summer warms the hanging fruit and burns the berry brown; 
     When straw is gold, and ear is white, and harvest comes to town ; 
     When honey spills, and apple swells, though wind be in the West, 
     I'll linger here beneath the Sun, because my land is best! 
 

####-     ent. 
     When Winter comes, the winter wild that hill and wood shall slay; 
     When trees shall fall and starless night devour the sunless day; 
     When wind is in the deadly East, then in the bitter rain  
     I'll look for thee, and call to thee; I'll come to thee again! 
 
     entwife. 
     When Winter comes, and singing ends; when darkness falls at last; 
     When broken is the barren bough, and light and labour past; 
     I'll look for thee, and wait for thee, until we meet again: 
     Together we will take the road beneath the bitter rain! 
 
     both. 
     Together we will take the road that leads into the West, 
     And far away will find a land where both our hearts may rest.' 
 
     Treebeard ended  his song.  'That  is  how it goes,'  he  said.  'It is 
Elvish, of course: lighthearted, quickworded, and soon over. I daresay it is 
fair  enough. But the Ents could say  more on their side,  if they had time! 
But now I am going to stand  up  and  take  a little sleep.  Where  will you  
stand?' 
     'We usually  lie down to  sleep,' said Merry.  'We  shall  be all right 
where we are.' 
     'Lie down to sleep!' said Treebeard. 'Why of course you do! Hm, hoom: I  
was  forgetting:  singing that song  put  me in mind  of  old times;  almost  
thought that I was talking to young Entings, I did. Well, you can lie on the 
bed. I am going to stand in the rain. Good night!' 
     Merry  and Pippin climbed on to the bed and curled up in the soft grass 
and fern. It was fresh,  and sweet-scented, and warm. The lights died  down, 
and the glow of the trees faded; but outside  under  the arch they could see 
old Treebeard standing, motionless, with his arms raised above his head. The 
bright stars peered out of the sky, and lit the falling water as  it spilled 
on to his fingers  and head,  and  dripped, dripped, in  hundreds  of silver 
drops on to  his  feet. Listening to the tinkling of  the drops  the hobbits 
fell asleep. 
     They  woke to find a cool sun  shining into the great court, and on  to 
the floor of the bay. Shreds of high cloud were overhead, running on a stiff 

####-easterly wind. Treebeard was not to be seen; but while Merry and Pippin were 
bathing in the basin by the arch, they heard him humming and  singing, as he 
came up the path between the trees.  
     'Hoo, ho! Good morning, Merry and Pippin!' he boomed, when he saw 
them. 
'You  sleep long. I have  been many a hundred  strides already today. Now we 
will have a drink, and go to Entmoot.' 
     He  poured  them  out two  full bowls  from a  stone  jar;  but  from a  
different jar. The taste was not the same  as it  had been the night before: 
it was earthier and  richer, more sustaining and  food-like,  so  to  speak. 
While the hobbits drank, sitting on the edge of  the bed, and nibbling small 
pieces of elf-cake (more because they felt that eating was a  necessary part 
of breakfast than  because they  felt  hungry), Treebeard stood,  humming in 
Entish or Elvish or some strange tongue, and looking up at the sky. 
     'Where is Entmoot?' Pippin ventured to ask. 
     'Hoo, eh? Entmoot?' said Treebeard, turning round. 'It is not a  place, 
it  is a  gathering of Ents  --  which does not often happen nowadays.  But I 
have  managed  to make a fair number  promise to come.  We shall meet in the 
place  where we have always met: Derndingle  Men  call it.  It is away south 
from here. We must be there before noon.' 
     Before long they set off. Treebeard carried the  hobbits in his arms as 
on the previous day. At  the entrance to  the court he turned  to the right, 
stepped over the stream, and strode away southwards along  the feet of great 
tumbled slopes where trees were scanty. Above these the hobbits saw thickets 
of birch and rowan, and beyond them dark climbing pinewoods.  Soon 
Treebeard 
turned a little away from the hills and plunged into deep groves,  where the 
trees were  larger, taller, and  thicker  than any that the hobbits had ever 
seen before. For a  while they felt faintly the sense of stifling which they 
had  noticed when  they  first ventured into Fangorn,  but it  soon  passed. 
Treebeard  did   not  talk  to  them.  He   hummed  to  himself  deeply  and 
thoughtfully,  but Merry and Pippin caught no proper words: it sounded  like 
boom, boom, rumboom, boorar, boom, boom, dahrar boom boom, dahrar 
boom,  and 
so on with  a constant change of note and rhythm. Now and again they thought 
they heard an answer, a hum or a quiver of sound, that seemed  to come out of 
the earth, or  from boughs above  their heads, or perhaps  from the boles of 

####-the trees; but Treebeard did not stop or turn his head to either side. 
     They had been going for a  long while  -- Pippin had tried to keep count 
of the 'ent-strides' but had failed, getting lost at about three thousand -- 
when  Treebeard  began to  slacken his pace. Suddenly he  stopped,  put  the 
hobbits down, and raised his curled  hands to his mouth so that they  made a  
hollow tube; then he blew or called through them. A great hoom, hom rang out 
like a deep-throated horn in the woods, and seemed  to echo  from the trees.  
Far off there came from  several directions  a similar  hoom, hom, hoom that 
was not an echo but an answer. 
     Treebeard  now perched Merry and Pippin on his shoulders  and strode on 
again, every now and then sending out another horn-call,  and each time  the 
answers came louder and nearer. In this way they came at last to what looked 
like an impenetrable  wall of dark evergreen trees, trees of a kind that the 
hobbits had never seen  before:  they branched out right from the roots, and 
were densely clad in dark glossy leaves like thornless holly, and  they bore 
many stiff upright flower -spikes with large shining olive-coloured buds.  
     Turning to the  left and skirting this huge hedge  Treebeard  came in a  
few strides to a  narrow entrance. Through it a  worn path passed  and dived 
suddenly down  a long steep slope. The hobbits saw that they were descending 
into a great  dingle, almost as round as a bowl, very wide and deep, crowned  
at the rim with the high dark evergreen hedge. It  was smooth and  grassclad 
inside,  and  there were no  trees  except  three  very tall  and  beautiful 
silver -birches that stood at the  bottom  of the bowl.  Two  other paths led 
down into the dingle: from the west and from the east. 
     Several Ents had already arrived.  More were coming  in down the  other  
paths, and  some were now following Treebeard. As they drew near the hobbits 
gazed  at them.  They had expected to see a number of creatures as much like 
Treebeard as  one hobbit is like another (at any  rate to a stranger's eye); 
and they were very much surprised to see nothing of the  kind. The Ents were 
as different from  one another as trees from trees: some as different as one 
tree  is  from  another of the  same  name  but  quite  different growth and 
history; and some as different  as one tree-kind from another, as birch from 
beech; oak from fir. There were a few older Ents,  bearded and gnarled  like 
hale  but  ancient trees (though none looked  as ancient as Treebeard);  and 
there   were  tall  strong  Ents,   clean-limbed  and  smooth-skinned   like 
forest -trees  in  their  prime; but  there were no young Ents, no  saplings. 
Altogether there were about two  dozen standing on the wide grassy  floor of 

####-the dingle, and as many more were marching in. 
     At first Merry and Pippin were struck chiefly by the variety  that they 
saw: the many shapes, and colours, the differences in girth; and height, and 
length of leg and arm; and in the number of toes  and fingers (anything from 
three to nine). A few seemed more or less related to Treebeard, and reminded 
them of beech-trees  or oaks. But  there were other kinds. Some recalled the 
chestnut: brown-skinned Ents with large splayfingered hands, and short thick 
legs. Some recalled  the  ash:  tall straight grey  Ents  with many-fingered 
hands and long legs; some  the fir (the tallest Ents), and others the birch, 
the  rowan, and the linden.  But when the Ents all gather ed round Treebeard, 
bowing their  heads  slightly, murmuring in  their  slow musical voices, and 
looking long  and intently at the strangers, then the hobbits saw  that they 
were all of the same kindred, and all had  the same eyes: not all so old  or  
so  deep  as Treebeard's,  but  all  with the  same slow, steady, thoughtful 
expression, and the same green flicker. 
     As soon as the  whole company was assembled,  standing in a wide circle  
round  Treebeard, a curious and unintelligible conversation began.  The Ents 
began to murmur slowly: first  one joined and then  another, until they were 
all chanting together in a long rising and falling rhythm, now louder on one 
side  of  the ring, now dying away there and rising to a great boom  on  the 
other  side. Though he could not catch or  understand any of the words  -- he 
supposed the language was Entish  -- Pippin found the  sound very pleasant to 
listen to at first;  but gradually his attention wavered.  After a long time 
(and the  chant showed no signs  of  sla ckening) he found himself wondering, 
since  Entish  was  such  an 'unhasty'  language,  whether they had yet  got 
further than Good Morning; and if  Treebeard  was to call the roll, how many 
days it would take to sing all their names. 'I wonder what the Entish is for  
yes or no,' he thought. He yawned. 
     Treebeard  was immediately  aware  of him. 'Hm, ha, hey, my Pippin!' he 
said,  and the other Ents all stopped their chant. 'You are a hasty folk,  I 
was forgetting; and anyway it is  wearisome listening to a speech you do not 
understand. You may get down now. I have told your names to the Entmoot, 
and 
they have seen you, and they have agreed that you are not Orcs, and  that  a  
new line shall be put in the old lists. We have got no further yet, but that 
is quick work for an Entmoot. You and Merry  can stroll about in the dingle, 
if you like.  There is  a well of  good water, if you  need refreshing, away 

####-yonder in the north bank.  There are still  some  words  to speak before the 
Moot really begins.  I will come  and see you again, and tell you how things 
are going.' 
     He put the hobbits down. Before they walked away, they bowed  low. This 
feat  seemed  to amuse  the Ents very much, to judge by the  tone  of  their 
murmurs, and the flicker of their  eyes; but they soon turned  back to their 
own  business. Merry  and Pippin  climbed up the path that came in from  the 
west, and looked  through the opening in the  great  hedge.  Long  tree-clad 
slopes  rose  from  the  lip of  the dingle, and away beyond them, above the 
fir-trees of the furthest  ridge there rose, sharp and white, the peak of  a  
high  mountain.  Southwards to their left they could see the forest  falling 
away  down  into  the  grey distance. There far  away there was a pale green 
glimmer that Merry guessed to be a glimpse of the plains of Rohan. 
     'I wonder where Isengard is?' said Pippin. 
     'I  don't  know quite where  we are,'  said  Merry;  'but that peak  is 
probably Methedras. and as far  as I can remember the  ring of Isengard lies 
in a  fork or deep cleft  at the end of the  mountains. It  is probably down 
behind this  great ridge. There seems to be a smoke or haze over there, left 
of the peak, don't you think?' 
     'What  is Isengard like?' said Pippin. 'I wonder what Ents can do a bout 
it anyway.'  'So do I,' said Merry.  'Isengard is a sort of ring of rocks or  
hills, I think, with a flat space inside and an island or pillar of rock  in 
the  middle, called Orthanc. Saruman has  a tower  on  it. There  is a gate, 
perhaps  more  than   one, in the encircling wall,  and I  believe there is a  
stream running  through it; it  comes  out  of  the  mountains, and flows on 
across the Gap  of  Rohan. It does not seem the  sort  of place for  Ents to 
tackle.  But I  have an odd feeling  about these Ents: somehow I don't think  
they are quite as safe and, well funny as  they seem. They seem slow, queer, 
and  patient, almost  sad; and yet I believe  they could  be roused.  If that 
happened, I would rather not be on the other side.' 
     'Yes!' said  Pippin.  'I  know  what you mean.  There might be  all the 
difference between an old cow sitting and  thoughtfully chewing, and a  bull  
charging; and the change might come  suddenly.  I wonder  if  Treebeard will 
rouse them. I am sure he means to  try.  Bu t they don't like  being  roused. 
Treebeard got roused himself last night, and then bottled it up again.' 
     The hobbits turned back.  The voices of the Ents were still  rising and 
falling in their  conclave. The sun had now risen high  enough to look  over 

####-the high hedge: it gleamed on the tops of  the birches and lit the northward 
side of the  dingle  with  a  cool yellow  light.  There they  saw  a little 
glittering fountain. They walked along the rim of the great bowl at the feet 
of the evergreens-it was pleasant to feel cool grass about their toes again, 
and  not to  be in a hurry-and then they climbed down  to the gushing water.  
They drank a little,  a clean, cold, sharp  draught, and sat down on a mossy 
stone,  watching the  patches of  sun  on the grass and the shadows  of  the 
sailing clouds passing over the  floor of the dingle. The murmur of the Ents 
went on. It seemed a very strange and remote place, outside their world, and 
far from everything  that had ever  happened  to  them. A great longing  came 
over them for the faces and voices of their companions. especially for Frodo 
and Sam, and for Strider. 
     At last there came  a pause in the  Ent-voices; and looking up they saw 
Treebeard coming towards them. with another Ent at his side. 
     'Hm, hoom, here I am again,' said Treebeard. 'Are you getting weary, or 
feeling  impatient,  hmm,  eh? Well, I  am  afraid  that  you  must  not get 
impatient yet. We have finished the first stage now; but I have still got to 
explain things again to those that live a  long  way off, far from Isengard, 
and those that I could not get round to before the Moot, and  after that  we 
shall have to decide  what to do. However, deciding what to do does not take 
Ents so  long as going over all the facts  and events that  they have to make 
up their  minds  about. Still, it is no use denying, we shall be here a long 
time yet: a couple of  days very likely. So I  have brought you a companion.  
He  has an ent-house nearby.  Bregalad  is his  Elvish name. He says  he has 
already made up his mind and does not need to remain at the Moot. Hm, hm, he 
is the nearest thing among us to a hasty Ent. You ought  to get on together. 
Good-bye!' Treebeard turned and left them. 
     Bregalad  stood for some  time surveying the hobbits solemnly; and they  
looked at him, wondering when he would show any signs of 'hastiness'. He was 
tall, and seemed to be one of the  younger Ents;  he had smooth shining skin 
on  his arms and legs; his lips  were ruddy, and his hair was grey-green. He 
could bend and  sway like a slender tree in the wind. At last  he spoke, and 
his voice though resonant was higher and clearer than Treebeard's.  
     'Ha, hmm, my friends, let us go  for a walk!' he said. 'I  am Bregalad, 
that  is Quickbeam in your language. But it is on ly  a  nickname, of course. 
They have called me that ever since I said yes to an elder Ent before he had 
finished his question. Also I drink quickly, and go out while some are still 

####-wetting their beards. Come with me!' 
     He reached down two shapely arms and gave a long -fingered hand to  each 
of  the hobbits. All that day  they  walked  about in  the  woods with  him, 
singing, and laughing; for Quickbeam  often  laughed. He laughed if the  sun 
came out from  behind  a cloud, he laughed  if  they came upon a  stream  or  
spring: then  he stooped  and  splashed  his  feet  and head with water;  he 
laughed sometimes  at some sound or whisper in  the trees. Whenever he saw a  
rowan-tree he halted a  while  with  his  arms stretched out,  and sang, and 
swayed as he sang. 
     At  nightfall  he  brought  them to his ent-house:  nothing more than a  
mossy stone set upon turves under a green bank. Rowan-trees grew in a circle 
about it, and there was water  (as in all ent-houses), a spring bubbling out 
from the bank. They  talked for a while as darkness fell on  the forest. Not 
far away  the voices of  the Entmoot  could be heard still going on; but now 
they seemed deeper and less  leisurely,  and every  now  and again one great 
voice would rise in a high and  quickening music,  while all the others died 
away.  But beside them Bregalad  spoke gently  in their  own  tongue, almost 
whispering; and they learned that  he belonged to Skinbark's people, and the  
country where they had lived had been ravaged. That  seemed  to the  hobbits 
quite enough to explain his 'hastiness', at least in the matter of Orcs. 
     'There were rowan-trees in my home,'  said Bregalad,  softly and sadly, 
'rowan-trees that took root when I was an Enting, many many years ago in the 
quiet of the  world. The  oldest were planted by the Ents to try  and please 
the Entwives;  but  they looked at them and smiled and  said  that they knew 
where  whiter blossom and richer fruit were growing. Yet there are no  trees 
of all  that race, the people of the Rose, that are  so beautiful to me. And 
these trees grew and grew, till the  shadow of each  was like a  green hall, 
and  their red  berries in the  autumn  were  a burden,  and a beauty  and a  
wonder. Birds used to flock there. I like birds, even when they chatter; and 
the  rowan has enough  and  to  spare. But  the birds became  unfriendly and 
greedy  and tore at the trees, and threw  the fruit down and did not eat it. 
Then  Orcs came  with axes and cut down my trees. I came  and called them by 
their long names, but they did not quiver, they did not hear or answer: they 
lay dead. 
     O Orofarnl, Lassemista, Carnimnril! 
     O rowan fair, upon your hair how white the blossom lay! 
     O rowan mine, I saw you shine upon a summer's day, 

####-     Your rind so bright, your leaves so light, your voice so cool and soft: 
     Upon your head how golden-red the crown you bore aloft! 
     O rowan dead, upon your head your hair is dry and grey; 
     Your crown is spilled, your voice is stilled for ever and a day. 
     O Orofarnl, Lassemista, Carnimnril! 
     The hobbits  fell asleep to the sound of  the soft singing of Bregalad, 
that seemed to lament in many tongues the fall of trees that he had loved. 
     The next day they spent also in his company,  but they  did not  go far 
from his 'house'. Most of the time they sat silent under the shelter  of the 
bank; for  the wind was colder, and  the clouds closer and greyer; there was 
little sunshine,  and in the  distance the voices  of  the Ents at the  Moot 
still  rose  and  fell, sometimes  loud  and strong, sometimes low  and sad, 
sometimes  quickening, sometimes slow and solemn as a dirge. A  second night 
came and  still  the  Ents  held conclave under hurrying  clouds  and fitful 
stars. 
     The third day broke, bleak and windy.   At sunrise the Ents' voices rose 
to a great clamour and then died down again. As the morning wore on the wind 
fell  and  the  air grew  heavy with expectancy. The hobbits could  see that 
Bregalad  was now listening intently, although to them,  down in the dell of 
his ent-house, the sound of the Moot was faint. 
     The afternoon came, and the sun, going west towards the mountains. sent 
out  long  yellow beams  between the  cracks  and  fissures of  the  clouds.  
Suddenly they were aware  that  everything wa s very quiet; the  whole forest  
stood in listening silence. Of course, the Ent -voices had stopped.  What did 
that mean? Bregalad was standing up erect and tense, looking back northwards 
towards Derndingle. 
     Then with  a crash came  a great ringing shou t:  ra-hoom-rah! The trees 
quivered and bent as if a gust had struck them. There was another pause, and 
then a  marching  music began like solemn drums, and above the rolling beats 
and booms there welled voices singing high and strong. 
     We come, we come with roll of drum: ta -runda runda runda rom! 
     The Ents were coming: ever nearer and louder rose their song: 
     We come, we come with horn and drum: ta -ryna ryna ryna rom! 
     Bregalad picked up the hobbits and strode from his house. 
     Before  long  they  saw the  marching  line approaching: the Ents  were 
swinging along with great strides down the slope towards them. Treebeard was 
at  their head,  and  some  fifty followers  were  behind him,  two abreast, 

####-keeping step with their feet  and beating time  with  their hands upon their 
flanks. As they drew near the flash and flicker of their eyes could be seen. 
     'Hoom, hom! Here we  come with a  boom, here  we come at last!'  called  
Treebeard when he caught sight of Bregalad  and the hobbits. 'Come, join the 
Moot! We are off. We are off to Isengard!' 
     'To Isengard!' the Ents cried in many voices.  
     'To Isengard!' 
     To Isengard! Though Isengard be ringed and barred with doors of stone; 
     Though Isengard be strong and hard, as cold as stone and bare as bone, 
     We go, we go, we go to war, to hew the stone and break the door; 
     For bole and bough are burning now, the furnace roars -- we go to war! 
     To land of gloom with tramp  of doom, with  roll  of drum, we come,  we  
come; 
     To Isengard with doom we come! 
     With doom we come, with doom we come! 
     So they sang as they marched southwards. 
     Bregalad, his eyes shining, swung into  the  line beside Treebeard. The 
old Ent  now took the hobbits back, and set them on his shoulders again, and 
so they rode proudly at the head of  the sin ng  company with beating hearts 
and heads held high. Though they ad expected something to happen eventually, 
they were amazed at the change that had come over the Ents. It seemed now as 
sudden  as the bursting of a flood that had long been held back by a dike. 
     'The Ents made up  their minds rather quickly, after all, didn't they?' 
Pippin  ventured to  say  after  some time, when  for a  moment  the singing 
paused, and only the beating of hands and feet was heard. 
     'Quickly?' said Treebeard. 'Hoom! Yes, indeed. Quicker than I expected. 
Indeed I have not seen them roused like this for many an age. We Ents do not 
like being roused; and we never are roused unless it is clear to us that our 
trees  and our  lives  are in  great  danger. That has not happened  in this 
Forest since the wars of Sauron and the Men of the Sea.  It is the orc-work, 
the wanton hewing  -- rbrum --  without even the  bad excuse of  feeding the 
fires, that has so angered us; and the  treachery of a neighbour, who should 
have helped us. Wizards ought to know better: they do know  better. There is 
no curse in  Elvish, Entish, or  the  tongues  of Men bad  enough  for  such 
treachery. Down with Saruman!' 
     'Will you really break the doors of Isengard?' asked Merry. 
     'Ho, hm, well, we could, you know! You do not know, perhaps. how strong 

####-we are. Maybe you have heard  of Trolls? They  are mighty strong. But Trolls 
are only counterfeits. made by the  Enemy in the Great  Darkness, in mockery 
of Ents, as Orcs were of Elves. We are stronger than Trolls.  We are made of 
the  bones  of  the earth. We can split stone like  the roots of trees, only 
quicker, far quicker, if our minds are roused!  If we  are not hewn down, or  
destroyed  by  fire  or blast  of  sorcery,  we could  split  Isengard  into 
splinters and crack its walls into rubble.' 
     'But Saruman will try to stop you. won't he?' 
     'Hm,  ah, yes, that is so. I  have  not  forgotten  it.  Indeed  I have 
thought long about it. But. you see, many of the Ents are younger than I am.  
by many lives of trees. They  are all  roused now. and  their mind is all on  
one  thing: breaking Isengard.  But they will  start  thinking  again before 
long; they  will  cool down a little.  when we take our evening drink. What a  
thirst we shall have! But let them march now and sing! We have a long way to 
go, and there is time ahead for thought. It is something to have started.' 
     Treebeard marched on, singing with the others for a  while.  But after a  
time his voice died to a murmur and fell silent again. Pippin could see that 
his old  brow was wrinkled and  knotted.  At  last he  looked up, and Pippin 
could see a sad look in his eyes,  sad but not unhappy. There was a light in 
them, as if   the green  flame had  sunk deeper into the  dark  wells of  his 
thought. 
     'Of course, it  is likely  enough, my friends,' he said slowly, 'likely 
enough that we are going to  our doom: the last march of the Ents. But if we 
stayed at home  and did noth ing, doom would find us anyway, sooner or later. 
That thought has long been  growing in our hearts;  and that is  why we  are 
marching now. It was not a hasty resolve. Now at least the last march of the 
Ents may  be worth a song.  Aye,'  he sighed, 'we may help the other peoples 
before we pass away. Still, I should have liked to see the  songs come  true 
about the Entwives. I should dearly have liked to  see Fimbrethil again. But 
there, my friends, songs  like trees bear fruit  only  in their own time and 
their own way: and sometimes they are withered untimely.' 
     The Ents  went  striding  on at a great pace. They had descended into a  
long fold of the land that fell away southward;  now they began to climb up,  
and up, on to the high western  ridge. The woods fell  away and they came to 
scattered groups of birch, and  then  to bare slopes where only  a few gaunt 
pine-trees grew. The sun  sank behind the dark hill -back in front. Grey dusk  
fell. 

####-     Pippin looked behind. The number of  the Ents had grown -- or  what was 
happening? Where  the dim bare  slopes that  they had crossed should lie, he 
thought he saw groves of trees. But they were  moving! Could it be  that the 
trees of  Fangorn  were awake, and the  forest was rising, marching over the 
hills to war? He rubbed his  eyes wondering if sleep and shadow had deceived 
him; but the great grey shapes moved steadily onward. There was a noise like 
wind  in many branches. The Ents were  drawing  near the  crest of the ridge 
now, and all song had ceased. Night fell, and there was silence: nothing was 
to be  heard save a faint quiver of the earth beneath the  feet of the Ents,  
and a rustle, the shade of a whisper as of  many  drifting  leaves. At  last  
they stood upon the summit, and looked down into a dark pit: the great cleft  
at the end of the mountains: Nan Curunnr, the Valley of Saruman. 
     'Night lies over Isengard,' said Treebeard. 
 

####- 

Chapter 5. The White Rider 

 
 
     'My very bones are chilled,' said Gimli, flapping his arms and stamping 
his  feet.  Day  had  come at last.  At dawn  the companions  had made  such 
breakfast as they could; now in the growing light they were getting ready to  
search the ground again for signs of the hobbits. 
     'And do not forget that old man!' said Gimli. 'I should be happier if I 
could see the print of a boot.' 
     'Why would that make you happy?' said Legolas.  
     'Because an old man with feet that leave marks might be no more than he 
seemed,' answered the Dwarf.  
     'Maybe,' said the Elf; 'but a heavy boot might leave no print here: the 
grass is deep and springy.' 
     'That would not  baffle a Ranger,' said Gimli.  'A bent blade is enough 
for Aragorn to read.  But I do not expect  him to find any traces. It was an 
evil phantom of Saruman that we saw last night.  I am sure of it, even under  
the light of morning. His eyes are looking out on us from Fangorn even  now,  
maybe.' 
     'It is likely enough,' said  Aragorn; 'yet I am not sure. I am thinking 
of the horses. You said last night, Gimli, that they were scared away. Bu t I 
did not think so. Did  you hear  them, Legolas? Did they  sound to you  like 
beasts in terror?' 
     'No,' said Legolas. 'I heard them clearly. But for the darkness and our 
own  fear I should have guessed that they  were beasts wild with some sudden 
gladness.  They spoke as horses will when they meet a friend  that they have 
long missed.' 
     'So I thought,'  said  Aragorn; 'but I  cannot  read the riddle, unless 
they return. Come! The  light  is growing fast. Let  us look first and guess 
later! We should  begin here,  near  to  our own  camping-ground,  searching  
carefully all about, and working  up  the slope  towards the forest. To find 
the  hobbits is  our  errand, whatever we may think of  our  visitor in  the 
night. If  they  escaped by some chance,  then they  must have hidden in the 
trees, or they would have been seen. If we find nothing between here and the 
eaves of the wood, then we will make a last search upon the battle-field and  
among the ashes. But there  is little hope there:  the horsemen  of Rohan did 

####-their work too well.' 
     For some  time the companions crawled and groped upon  the  ground. The 
tree stood  mournfully above  them, its  dry  leaves now hanging  limp,  and  
rattling in the chill  easterly wind. Aragorn moved  slowly away. He came to  
the ashes of the watch-fire  near the river -bank, and then  began to retrace 
the ground back towards the knoll where the battle had been fought. Suddenly 
he stooped and bent low with his face almost in the grass. Then he called to 
the others. They came running up. 
     'Here at  last we find  news!' said Aragorn. He lifted up a broken leaf 
for them  to see,  a large  pale leaf of golden  hue, now fading and turning 
brown. 'Here is a mallorn-leaf  of Lurien, and there are small crumbs on it, 
and a  few more crumbs in the grass.  And  see! there are  some pieces of cut 
cord lying nearby!' 
     'And here is  the knife that cut them!' said Gimli. He stooped and drew 
out of a tussock, into which some heavy foot had trampled it, a short jagged  
blade. The  haft from  which it  had  been snapped was beside it. 'It was an 
orc-weapon,'  he said,  holding it gingerly, and looking with disgust at the 
carved handle: it  had been shaped like  a hideous  head with squinting eyes 
and leering mouth. 
     'Well, here is  the strangest riddle that we have yet found!' exclaimed 
Legolas.  'A  bound  prisoner  escapes  both from  the  Orcs  and  from  the 
surrounding horsemen.  He  then stops, while still in the open, and cuts his 
bonds with an orc-knife. But how and why?  For if his legs were tied, how did 
he walk? And if his arms were tied, how did he use the knife? And if neither  
were tied, why did he cut the cords at all? Being pleased with his skill, he 
then sat down and quietly ate some waybread! That at least is enough to show 
that he was a hobbit, without the mallorn-leaf. After that,  I  suppose,  he 
turned his arms into  wings and flew away singing into the trees. It  should 
be easy to find him: we only need wings ourselves!' 
     'There was sorcery here right enough,' said  Gimli. 'What was that  old 
man doing? What have you to say, Aragorn, to the reading of Legolas. Can you  
better it?' 
     'Maybe,  I could,' said Aragorn, smiling.  'There are  some other signs 
near at hand  that  you have not considered. I agree that the prisoner was a  
hobbit and must have had either legs  or hands free, before he came  here. I 
guess that it was  hands, because the riddle then becomes easier,  and  also 
because, as I read the marks, he was carried to this point by  an Orc. Blood 

####-was spilled  there,  a few paces away, orc-blood. There  are  deep prints of 
hoofs  all about this  spot, and signs that a heavy thing was  dragged away. 
The Orc  was slain by horsemen, and later  his body  was hauled to the fire. 
But the hobbit  was not seen: he was not "in the open", for it was night and 
he still had his elven-cloak. He was exhausted and  hungry, and it is not to 
be wondered at  that, when he had cut his bonds with the knife of his fallen 
enemy, he rested and ate a little  before he crept away. But it is a comfort 
to  know  that he had some lembas in  his  pocket, even though  he  ran away 
without gear  or pack;  that, perhaps, is  like a hobbit. I say he, though I 
hope and guess  that both  Merry and  Pippin were  here together. There  is, 
however, nothing to show that for certain.' 
     'And how do you suppose that either of  our friends came to have a hand 
free?' asked Gimli. 
     'I do  not know how it happened,' answered Aragorn. 'Nor  do I know why 
an Orc was carrying them  away. Not  to help  them to escape, we may be sure. 
Nay, rather I think that I now begin to understand a matter that has puzzled 
me  from  the beginning: why when  Boromir had fallen  were the Orcs content 
with the capture  of Merry and Pippin? They did not seek out  the rest of us,  
nor attack our camp;  but instead they went with all speed towards Isengard.  
Did they suppose they had captured the Ring-bearer and his faithful comrade?  
I think not. Their masters would not dare to give such plain orders to Orcs,  
even if they knew so much themselves; they would not speak openly to them of 
the  Ring: they  are not trusty servants. But  I  think  the  Orcs had  been 
commanded  to capture hobbits, alive, at all costs.  An attempt was made  to 
slip out with the precious prisoners  before the  battle. Treachery perhaps, 
likely  enough with such folk; some large and bold Orc may have  been trying 
to  escape with the  prize  alone, for his own ends. There, that is my tale. 
Others might  be devised. But on this we may count in any case: one at least  
of our  friends escaped. It is our task to find him and help  him  before we 
return to Rohan.  We  must not  be  daunted by Fangorn, since need drove him 
into that dark place.' 
     'I  do  not  know  which daunts me more: Fangorn, or the thought of the 
long road through Rohan on foot,' said Gimli. 
     'Then let us go to the forest,' said Aragorn. 
     It was  not  long before Aragorn found fresh signs. At one point,  near 
the bank  of the Entwash, he came upon  footprints:  hobbit-prints, but  too 
light for  much to  be made of  them. Then again beneath the bole of a great 

####-tree on the very edge of the wood more prints were discovered. The earth was 
bare and dry, and did not reveal much. 
     'One hobbit at least stood  here for a while and looked  back; and then 
he turned away into the forest,' said Aragorn. 
     'Then we must go  in, too,' said Gimli. 'But I do not like the look  of 
this Fangorn: and  we  were  warned  against  it. I  wish the chase had  led 
anywhere else!' 
     'I do  not think  the wood feels evil,  whatever  tales  may say,' said 
Legolas. He stood under the  eaves of the forest, stooping forward, as if he 
were listening, and peering with wide eyes into the shadows. 'No, it is  not 
evil; or what evil is in it is far away. I catch only the faintest echoes of 
dark places where the hearts of the trees are black. There is no malice near 
us; but there is watchfulness, and anger.' 
     'Well, it has no cause to be angry with me,'  said Gimli.  'I have done 
it no harm. ' 
     'That is just as well,' said Legolas. 'But nonetheless it has  suffered 
harm. There  is something  happening inside, or  going to happen. Do you not 
feel the tenseness? It takes my breath.' 
     'I feel  the air is stuffy,' said the Dwarf. 'This wood is lighter than 
Mirkwood, but it is musty and shabby.' 
     'It is old, very old,' said the Elf. 'So old that almost  I  feel young 
again, as I have not felt since I journeyed with you children. It is old and 
full of memory. I  could have been happy  here,  if  I  had come in days  of 
peace.' 
     'I dare say  you could,'  snorted Gimli. 'You are a  Wood-elf,  anyway, 
though Elves of any kind are strange folk. Yet you comfort me. Where you go, 
I will go. But keep your bow ready to  hand, and I will keep my axe loose in 
my belt. Not  for  use on trees,' he  added hastily, looking  up at the tree 
under which they  stood.  'I do not  wish to meet that  old  man at unawares 
without an argument ready to hand, that is all. Let us go!' 
     With that the three hunters plunged into the forest of Fangorn. Legolas 
and Gimli left the tracking to Aragorn. There was little for him to see. The 
floor of the forest was dry and covered with a drift of leaves; but guessing 
that the fugitives would stay near the water, he returned oft en to the banks 
of the stream.  So it was that he came upon the place where Merry and Pippin 
had  drunk  and  bathed  their  feet.  There plain for all  to see were  the 
footprints of two hobbits, one somewhat smaller than the other. 

####-     'This is good tidings,' said Aragorn. 'Yet  the marks are  two days old 
And it seems that at this point the hobbits left the water -side.' 
     'Then what shall we do now?' said Gimli. 'We cannot pursue them through 
the whole fastness of Fangorn. We have come ill supplied. If we do  not find  
them soon, we shall be of no use to them, except to sit down beside them and 
show our friendship by starving together.' 
     'If that is indeed all we can do, then we must do that,'  said Aragorn. 
'Let us go on.' 
     They  came at  length  to the steep abrupt  end of Treebeard's Hill and 
looked  up at the rock -wall with its rough  steps leading to the high shelf.  
Gleams of sun were  striking through the hurrying clouds, and the forest now 
looked less grey and drear. 
     'Let  us go up a nd look about us!' said Legolas. 'I will feel my breath 
short. I should like to taste a freer air for a while.' 
     The  companions climbed  up. Aragorn came last,  moving slowly: he  was 
scanning the steps and ledges closely. 
     'I am almost sure that the  hobbits  have been up here,'  he said. 'But 
there  are  other marks,  very strange marks,  which  I do not understand. I 
wonder if  we can see anything from this ledge which  will help us to  guess 
which way they went next?' 
     He  stood up and looked about,  but he saw nothing that was of any use. 
The shelf  faced southward  and  eastward; but only on the east was the view 
open. There he could see the heads  of the trees descending in ranks towards 
the plain from which they had come. 
     'We have journeyed a long way round,' said Legolas.  'We could have all 
come here safe together, if  we had left  the  Great River  on the second or  
third day and  struck  west.  Few  can foresee whither their road  will lead 
them, till they come to its end.' 
     'But we did not wish to come to Fangorn,' said Gimli. 
     'Yet here we are-and nicely caught in the net,' said Legolas. 'Look!' 
     'Look at what?' said Gimli. 
     'There in the trees.' 
     'Where? I have not elf-eyes.' 
     'Hush! Speak more softly! Look!'  said Legolas  pointing. 'Down in  the 
wood, back in the Way  that we have just come. It is he. Cannot you see him, 
passing from tree to tree?' 
     'I  see, I see  now!' hissed Gimli. 'Look, Aragorn! Did I not warn you? 

####-There is the old man.  All in dirty  grey  rags: that is why I could not see 
him at first.' 
     Aragorn  looked and beheld a  bent figure moving slowly. It was not far 
away. It looked like  an old beggar-man, walking wearily, leaning on a rough 
staff. His head was bowed,  and he did not look towards them. In other lands 
they would have greeted him with kind words; but now they stood silent, each 
feeling a strange expectancy: something was  approaching that  held a hidden 
power -or menace. 
     Gimli gazed with wide eyes for a while, as step by step the figure drew 
nearer. Then suddenly, unable to contain himself longer, he burst out: 'Your  
bow,  Legolas! Bend  it!  Get ready! It is Saruman. Do not let him speak, or 
put a spell upon us! Shoot first!' 
     Legolas  took  his  bow and bent  it, slowly  and  as if some other will 
resisted him. He held an arrow loosely in his hand but did not fit it to the 
string. Aragorn stood silent, his face was watchful and intent. 
     'Why are  you waiting? What is the  matter with  you?' said Gimli in  a  
hissing whisper. 
     'Legolas is right,' said Aragorn quietly. 'We may not  shoot an old man 
so, at unawares and unchallenged, whatever fear or doubt be on us. Watch and 
wait!' 
     At that moment the old man quickened  his pace and came with surprising 
speed to the  foot of the  rock -wall. Then suddenly he looked up, while they  
stood motionless looking down. There was no sound. 
     They  could not see his face: he was hooded, and above the hood he wore 
a wide-brimmed hat, so that all his  features were over -shadowed, except for  
the end  of his  nose and his grey beard. Yet it seemed  to  Aragorn that he 
caught the gleam  of  eyes keen and bright  from  within  the shadow  of the 
hooded brows.  
     At last the old man  broke the silence.  'Well met indeed , my friends,' 
he said  in  a soft  voice. 'I wish to  speak to you. Will  you come down or  
shall I come up?' Without waiting for an answer he began to climb. 
     'Now!' said Gimli. 'Stop him, Legolas!' 
     'Did I not say that I wished to speak to you?'  said the old man.  'Put 
away that bow, Master Elf!' 
     The bow  and arrow fell from Legolas' hands, and his arms hung loose at 
his sides. 
     'And you, Master Dwarf, pray  take your hand from your axe-haft, till I 

####-am up! You will not need such arguments. ' 
     Gimli started and then stood still as stone, staring, while the old man 
sprang up the rough steps as nimbly as a  goat. All weariness seemed to have 
left him. As he stepped up on to the shelf there was a  gleam, too brief for 
certainty, a quick glint  of  white, as if some garment shrouded by the grey 
rags had been for an instant revealed The intake  of Gimli's breath could be 
heard as a loud hiss in the silence. 
     'Well met, I say again!' said the old man, coming towards them. When he 
was a few feet away, he stood, stooping over his staff, with his head thrust  
forward, peering at them from under  his hood. 'And what may you be doing in 
these  parts? An Elf, a Man, and  a Dwarf. all  clad  in  elvish fashion. No 
doubt there is a tale worth hearing behind it all. Such things are not often 
seen here.' 
     'You speak as one that knows Fangorn well,' said Aragorn. 'Is that so?' 
     'Not well,' said  the  old man: 'that would be the study of many lives.  
But I come here now and again.' 
     'Might we know your name, and then hear what it is that you have to say 
to us?'  said Aragorn. 'The morning passes, and we have an errand  that will 
not wait.' 
     'As  for what I wished to say, I  have said it: What  may you be doing, 
and  what  tale can  you tell of yourselves? As for my name!'  He broke off,  
laughing  long  and  softly. Aragorn  felt a shudder run  through him at the 
sound, a  strange  cold  thrill; and yet  it was not  fear or terror that he 
felt: rather it was  like  the  sudden bite of a keen air,  or the slap of a  
cold rain that wakes an uneasy sleeper. 
     'My name!' said the  old  man again. 'Have you not guessed it  already?  
You have heard  it before, I  think. Yes, you have heard it before. But come 
now, what of your tale?' 
     The three companions stood silent and made no answer. 
     'There are some who would begin to doubt whether your  errand is fit to 
tell,' said the  old man. 'Happily I know something of it.  You are tracking 
the footsteps of two young hobbits, I believe. Yes, hobbits. Don't stare, as 
if you had  never heard the strange  name before. You have,  and so have  I. 
Well, they climbed up  here  the day before yesterday; and  they met someone 
that they did not expect. Does that comfort you? And  now  you would like to 
know where they were taken? Well, well, maybe I can give you some news 
about 

####-that.  But why are we standing? Your errand, you see, is no longer as urgent  
as you thought. Let us sit down and be more at ease.' 
     The old man turned away  and went  towards a heap of fallen stones  and 
rock at the  foot of the cliff  behind. Immediately, as  if a spell had been 
removed, the others relaxed and  stirred. Gimli's  hand  went at once to his 
axe-haft. Aragorn drew his sword. Legolas picked up his bow. 
     The old man took no notice,  but stooped and sat himself on  a low flat 
stone. Then  his grey cloak  drew apart, and they saw, beyond doubt, that he 
was clothed beneath all in white. 
     'Saruman!' cried Gimli, springing towards him with axe in hand. 'speak! 
Tell  us where you have  hidden  our friends! What  have you done with them?  
Speak, or  I will  make a dint in your hat that even  a wizard will find  it 
hard to deal with!' 
     The old  man was too quick for him. He sprang to his feet and leaped to 
the top of a large rock. There he stood, grown suddenly tall, towering above 
them. His hood and his grey rags were flung away. His  white garments shone. 
He  lifted up  his staff, and  Gimli's axe leaped from his  grasp  and  fell 
ringing on the ground. The sword of Aragorn,  stiff in his motionless  hand, 
blazed with a sudden fire. Legolas gave a great shout and shot an arrow high  
into the air: it vanished in a flash of flame. 
     'Mithrandir!' he cried. 'Mithrandir!' 
     'Well met, I say to you again. Legolas!' said the old man. 
     They all gazed at him. His hair was white as snow in  the sunshine; and 
gleaming  white  was his robe;  the eyes under  his deep  brows were bright,  
piercing as the rays of the sun; power was in his hand. Between wonder, joy,  
and fear they stood and found no words to say. 
     At  last  Aragorn stirred.  'Gandalf!'  he said.  'Beyond all hope  you  
return to us in our  need! What veil was over my sight? Gandalf!' Gimli said  
nothing, hut sank to his knees, shading his eyes.  
     'Gandalf,' the old man repeated, as if recalling from old memory a long 
disused word. 'Yes, that was the name. I was Gandalf.' 
     He stepped down from the rock, and picking up his grey cloak wrapped it  
about him: it seemed as if  the  sun had been  shining, but now was  hid  in 
cloud again.  'Yes, you may  still call me Gandalf,'  he said, and the voice 
was the  voice  of their old friend  and guide. 'Get  up, my  good Gimli! No 
blame to  you, and no harm done to  me. Indeed my friends,  none of you have 
any weapon that could  hurt me. Be merry! We meet  again. At the turn of the 

####-tide. The great storm is coming, but the tide has turned.' 
     He laid  his hand on  Gimli's head, and the Dwarf looked up and laughed 
suddenly. 'Gandalf!' he said. 'But you are all in white!' 
     'Yes, I am white  now,' said Gandalf.  'Indeed I am  Saruman, one might 
almost  say,  Saruman  as  he  should have  been. But come  now, tell me  of 
yourselves! I  have passed through fire and  deep water,  since we parted. I 
have forgotten much that I thought I knew, and learned again much that I had 
forgotten. I can see  many things far off, but many things that are close at 
hand I cannot see. Tell me of yourselves!' 
     'What do  you wish to know?' said Aragorn. 'All that has happened since 
we parted on  the bridge would be a long tale.  Will you  not first give  us 
news of the hobbits? Did you find them, and are they safe?' 
     'No, I did not find them,' said Gandalf. 'There was a darkness over the 
valleys of the  Emyn Muil, and I did not know  of their captivity, until the 
eagle told me.' 
     'The eagle!' said  Legolas. 'I have seen an eagle high and far off: the 
last time was three days ago, above the Emyn Muil.' 
     'Yes,'  said Gandalf,  'that  was Gwaihir the Windlord,  who rescued me 
from Orthanc.  I sent him before me to watch the River and  gather  tidings. 
His sight is keen, but he cannot see all  that passes under hill  and  tree. 
Some things he has  seen, and  others I  have seen myself.  The Ring now has 
passed beyond my help, or  the help of any of  the Company that set out from 
Rivendell. Very nearly it was revealed to  the Enemy, but it escaped.  I had 
some part in that: for I sat  in a  high place, and I strove  with the  Dark 
Tower; and  the Shadow passed. Then  I  was weary, very weary; and I  walked 
long in dark thought.' 
     'Then you know about Frodo!' said Gimli. 'How do things go with him?' 
     'I cannot say. He was saved from a great peril, but many lie before him 
still. He resolved to go alone to Mordor, and he set out: that is all that I 
can say.' 
     'Not alone,' said Legolas. 'We think that Sam went with him.' 
     'Did he!' said Gandalf, and there was a gleam in his eye and a smile on 
his face. 'Did  he indeed? It is news to  me, yet  it does not  surprise me. 
Good! Very good! You lighten  my heart. You must tell me more. Now sit by 
me 
and tell me the tale of your journey.' 
     The companions  sat on the ground at his  feet, and Aragorn took up the 

####-tale. For a long  while Gandalf said nothing, and he asked no quest ions. His 
hands were  spread upon his knees, and his eyes  were closed. At  last  when 
Aragorn spoke of the death of Boromir and of his last journey upon the Great 
River, the old man sighed. 
     'You have not said  all  that you know or guess, Aragorn my  friend,' he 
said quietly. 'Poor Boromir! I could not see what happened to him. It was  a  
sore trial  for such a man: a warrior, and a  lord of men. Galadriel told me 
that he was in peril. But  he escaped in the end.  I am glad. It was  not in 
vain that  the  young hobbits  came with us, if only for Boromir's sake. But 
that is not the  only part they have to play. They were brought  to Fangorn, 
and  their coming  was like  the  falling  of  small stones  that starts  an 
avalanche  in  the  mountains. Even  a s  we talk  here,  I  hear  the  first 
rumblings. Saruman  had  best  not be caught  away  from  home  when the dam 
bursts!' 
     'In one thing you  have not changed, dear friend,' said  Aragorn:  'you  
still speak in riddles.' 
     'What?  In riddles?'  sa id  Gandalf. 'No!  For I was talking  aloud  to 
myself. A habit of the old: they choose  the wisest  person present to speak 
to; the long explanations needed by the young are wearying.' He laughed, but 
the sound now seemed warm and kindly as a gleam of sunshine. 
     'I am  no longer  young even  in the  reckoning of  Men of the  Ancient 
Houses,' said Aragorn. 'Will you not open your mind more clearly to me?' 
     'What  then shall  I say?'  said Gandalf, and  paused  for a  while  in 
thought. 'This in brief is how  I  see things at the moment, if you wish  to 
have a piece of my mind as plain as possible. The Enemy, of course, has long 
known that the Ring  is abroad, and that it is  borne by a  hobbit. He knows 
now the number  of our  Company that set out fr om Rivendell, and the kind of 
each of us.  But he does  not yet  perceive our purpose clearly. He supposes 
that we were all going  to Minas Tirith; for that is what he  would  himself 
have done in our  place. And according to  his wisdom  it would have  been a 
heavy stroke against his power. Indeed he is in great fear, not knowing what 
mighty  one  may suddenly  appear, wielding the Ring, and assailing him with 
war, seeking to cast him  down and take his  place. That we  should wish  to 
cast him down and have no one in his place is not a thought that  occurs  to 
his  mind. That we should try to destroy the Ring itself has not yet entered 
into his darkest dream. In which no doubt you will see our good fortune  and  
our hope. For imagining war he has let loose war,  believing  that he has no 

####-time to  waste; for he  that  strikes the  first blow, if he strikes it hard 
enough, may need  to strike no  more.  So the forces that he has  long  been 
preparing he is now  setting in motion, sooner than he intended.  Wise  fool. 
For if he had used all his power to guard Mordor,  so that none could enter, 
and bent  all his guild  to the hunting of the  Ring, then indeed hope would 
have faded: neither  Ring nor Bearer could long have eluded him. But now his 
eye gazes abroad rather than near at home; and mostly he looks towards Minas 
Tirith. Very soon now his strength will fall upon it like a storm. 
     'For  already he knows that the messengers that  he  sent to waylay the 
Company have  failed again. They have not  found the Ring. Neither have they 
brought away any hobbits as hostages. Had they done even so much as that, it 
would have been a heavy blow to us, and it might have been fatal. But let us 
not darken  our hearts by imagining the trial of their gentle loyalty in the 
Dark Tower. For the Enemy has failed-so far. Thanks to Saruman:' 
     'Then is not Saruman a traitor?' said Gimli. 
     'Indeed yes,' said Gandalf.  'Doubly. And is  not that strange? Nothing 
that  we have endured of  late has seemed  so grievous  as  the  treason  of 
Isengard. Even reckoned as a lord and captain Saruman has grown very strong. 
He threatens the Men of  Rohan and draws  off their help from Minas  Tirith, 
even as the main blow is approaching from the East. Yet a treacherous weapon 
is ever a danger to the hand.  Saruman also had a mind to capture  the Ring, 
for  himself,  or  at least to snare  some hobbits for his evil purposes. So 
between them our enemies have contrived only to  bring Merry and Pippin with 
marvellous speed, and in the  nick of time, to Fangorn, where otherwise they  
would never have come at all! 
     'Also they have  filled  themselves with new doubts that  disturb their 
plans. No tidings of  the battle will come to Mordor, thanks to the horsemen  
of Rohan;  but the Dark Lord knows that two hobbits were  taken in the  Emyn 
Muil  and borne away  towards Isengard against the will of his own servants. 
He now has Isengard to fear as  well as Minas Tirith. If Minas Tirith falls,  
it will go ill with Saruman.' 
     'It is a pity that our  friends lie in between,' said Gimli. 'If no land 
divided Isengard  and Mordor, then  they could  fight  while we watched  and 
waited.' 
     'The victor would emerge  stronger  than either, and  free from doubt,' 
said  Gandalf.  'But  Isengard  cannot  figh t  Mordor,  unless Saruman first  
obtains the Ring. That he will never do now. He does not yet know his peril. 

####-There is much that he does not know. He was so eager to lay his hands on his 
prey that he could not wait at home, and he came forth to meet and to spy on  
his messengers. But he came too late, for once,  and the battle was over and 
beyond his help before he reached these parts. He did not  remain here long.  
I  look into  his mind and I see his doubt. He has no woodcraft. He believes 
that the horsemen slew and burned all  upon the field of battle; but he does 
not know whether  the Orcs were bringing any  prisoners or not. And  he does 
not know of  the  quarrel between his  servants and the Orcs  of Mordor; nor  
does he know of the Winged Messenger.' 
     'The Winged  Messenger!' cried  Legolas. 'I shot at him with the bow of 
Galadriel above Sarn Gebir, and I felled  him from the sky. He filled us all 
with fear. What new terror is this?' 
     'One that you cannot slay with arrows,'  said  Gandalf. 'You on ly  slew 
his steed.  It was a good deed; but the Rider was soon horsed again.  For he 
was a Nazgyl, one of  the Nine, who ride now upon winged  steeds. Soon their 
terror will overshadow the last armies of  our friends, cutting off the sun. 
But they have not yet been allowed to cross the River, and  Saruman does not 
know of this new shape  in which the Ringwraiths have been clad. His thought 
is ever on  the Ring.  Was  it  present in the battle? Was it found? What if 
Thjoden, Lord of the Mark, should come by  it and learn of its power? That is 
the danger that he  sees,  and  he  has fled  back to Isengard to double and 
treble his assault on Rohan. And all the time there is another danger, close 
at  hand,  which  he does  not  see, busy  with his fiery  thoughts. He  has 
forgotten Treebeard.' 
     'Now  you  speak  to  yourself  again,'  said  Aragorn  with  a  smile. 
'Treebeard is not known to me. And I have guessed part of  Saruman's  double 
treachery; yet I do not see in what way the coming of two hobbits to Fangorn 
has served, save to give us a long and fruitless chase.' 
     'Wait a minute!'  cried Gimli. 'There  is another  thing that  I should 
like to know first. Was it you, Gandalf, or Saruman that we saw last night?' 
     'You  certainly did  not see me, '  answered Gandalf,  'therefore I must  
guess that you saw Saruman. Evidently we look so much alike that your desire 
to make an incurable dent in my hat must be excused.' 
     'Good, good!' said Gimli. 'I am glad that it was not you.' 
     Gandalf laughed again. 'Yes, my good Dwarf,' he said, 'it is a  comfort 
not to  be mistaken at all  points. Do I not know  it only too well! But, of 
course, I  never blamed you for your welcome of me. How  could I  do so, who 

####-have so  often  counselled  my friends to suspect even their  own hands when 
dealing  with  the Enemy. Bless you, Gimli, son of Gluin! Maybe you will see 
us both together one day and judge between us!' 
     'But  the hobbits!' Legolas broke in. 'We have  come far to seek  them, 
and you seem to know where they are. Where are they now?' 
     'With Treebeard and the Ents,' said Gandalf.  
     'The Ents!' exclaimed  Aragorn. 'Then there is truth in the old legends 
about the dwellers in the deep forests and the giant shepherds of the trees?  
Are  there  still  Ents in the  world? I thought they were  only a memory of 
ancient days, if indeed they were ever more than a legend of Rohan.' 
     'A legend  of Rohan!' cried  Legolas. 'Nay, every Elf in Wilderland has 
sung songs of the old Onodrim and their long sorrow. Yet even among us  they 
are only a memory. If I were to meet one  still walking in this  world, then 
indeed I should feel young again! But Treebeard: that is only a rendering of 
Fangorn into the Common Speech; yet you seem  to  speak of a  person. Who is 
this Treebeard?' 
     'Ah! now you are asking much,' said Gandalf. 'The little that I know of 
his long  slow  story would  make  a  tale for which we  have no  time  now.  
Treebeard  is Fangorn, the  guardian of the  forest; he is the oldest of the 
Ents, the oldest living thing that still  walks  beneath the Sun  upon  this 
Middle-earth. I  hope indeed,  Legolas, that you may yet meet him. Merry and 
Pippin have been fortunate: they  met  him here, even where  we sit. For  he  
came here  two days ago  and bore  them away to his  dwelling far off by the  
roots of the  mountains. He often  comes here, especially  when  his mind is 
uneasy, and rumours of  the world outside trouble him. I  saw him  four days 
ago striding among the trees, and  I  think he saw me, for he  paused; but I 
did not  speak,  for I was heavy with  thought, and  weary after my struggle 
with the Eye of Mordor; and he did not speak either, nor call my name.' 
     'Perhaps  he also thought that you were  Saruman,' said Gimli. 'But you  
speak of  him as if he was a friend. I thought Fangorn was dangerous.' 
     'Dangerous!'  cried  Gandalf.  'And  so  am  I,  very  dangerous:  more 
dangerous than anything you  will  ever meet,  unless you are  brought alive 
before  the seat of the Dark Lord. And Aragorn is dangerous, and Legolas  is 
dangerous. You  are  beset with  dangers,  Gimli  son  of Gluin; for you are 
dangerous yourself,  in your own fashion. Certainly the forest of Fangorn is 
perilous-not  least to those that are too ready with their axes; and Fangorn 
himself, he  is perilous too; yet he is wise and kindly nonetheless. But now 

####-his long slow wrath is brimming over, and all the forest is filled  with it. 
The coming of the hobbits and the tidings that they brought have spilled it: 
it will soon be running like a flood; but its tide is turned against Saruman 
and the axes of Isengard.  A thing is about to happen which has not happened 
since the Elder  Days: the Ents are going to wake up and find that they  are 
strong.' 
     'What will they do?' asked Legolas in astonishment. 
     'I do not know,' said Gandalf. 'I do not think  they know themselves. I 
wonder.' He fell silent, his head bowed in thought. 
     The  others looked  at him. A gleam of sun through fleeting clouds fell 
on his hands, which lay now  upturned on his  lap: they seemed to  be filled 
with light as  a  cup is with water. At last he looked up and gazed straight 
at the sun. 
     'The morning is wearing away,' he said. 'Soon we must go.' 
     'Do we go to find our friends and to see Treebeard?' asked Aragorn. 
     'No,' said Gandalf. 'That is not  the road that  you must take. I  have 
spoken words of hope. But only of hope. Hope is not victory. War is 
     upon us and all  our friends, a war in which only the use  of  the Ring 
could give us surety of victory. It fills me with great sorrow and great 
     fear: for much shall be destroyed and all may be lost. I am Gandalf, 
     Gandalf the White, but Black is mightier still.' 
     He rose and gazed out  eastward, shading his eyes, as if he  saw things 
far away that none of them could see. Then he shook his head. 'No,' he  said 
in  a soft voice, 'it has gone beyond our reach. Of that at least let  us be 
glad. We can no longer be tempted to use the Ring. We must go down to face a  
peril near despair, yet that deadly peril is removed.' 
     He turned. 'Come, Aragorn son of  Arathorn!'  he said. 'Do  not  regret 
your choice in the valley of the Emyn Muil,  nor call it a vain pursuit. You  
chose amid doubts the path that seemed right: the  choice  was just,  and it 
has  been rewarded. For so we have met in time, who otherwise might have met 
too late. But the quest  of  your companions is over. Your  next  journey is 
marked by your given word. You must go to Edoras and seek out Thjoden in 
his 
hall. For you are needed. The  light of And®ril must now be uncovered in the 
battle for  which it has so long waited. There is  war in  Rohan,  and worse 
evil: it goes ill with Thjoden.' 
     'Then are we not to see the merry young hobbits again?' said Legolas. 

####-     'I  did not say so,' said Gandalf. 'Who knows?  Have patience. Go where 
you must go, and hope! To Edoras! I go thither also.' 
     'It is a long  way for  a man to walk, young or old,'  said Aragorn. 'I 
fear the battle will be over long ere I come there. ' 
     'We shall  see,  we  shall see,' said  Gandalf. 'Will you come now with 
me?' 
     'Yes, we will set out together,' said Aragorn. 'But I do not doubt that 
you  will  come  there before me, if you wish.' He rose and  looked  long at 
Gandalf. The others gazed at them in silence as they stood there facing  one 
another. The grey figure of the Man, Aragorn son of Arathorn,  was tall, and 
stern as stone, his hand upon the hilt of his sword; he  looked  as  if some 
king out of the mists of the sea had stepped upon the  shores of lesser men. 
Before him stooped the old figure, white; shining now as if with some  light  
kindled within,  bent, laden  with  years,  but holding a  power beyond  the 
strength of kings.  
     'Do I not say truly, Gandalf,' said Aragorn at last, 'that you could go 
whithersoever you wished quicker  than  I?  And this I also say: you are our 
captain and our banner.  The Dark Lord  has Nine. But we have One,  mightier  
than  they: the White Rider. He  has passed through the fire and  the abyss, 
and they shall fear him. We will go where he leads.' 
     'Yes, together we will  follow you,' said Legolas. 'But first, it would 
ease my heart, Gandalf, to hear what befell you  in Moria. Will you not tell 
us? Can you not stay even to tell your friends how you were delivered?' 
     'I have stayed already too long,' answered Gandalf. 'Time is short. But 
if there were a year to spend, I would not tell you all.' 
     'Then  tell  us what  you will, and  time allows!'  said  Gimli. 'Come, 
Gandalf, tell us how you fared with the Balrog!' 
     'Name him  not!' said Gandalf,  and for a moment it seemed that a cloud 
of pain passed over his face, and he sat silent, looking old as death. 'Long 
time I fell,' he said at last, slowly, as if thinking back with  diffi culty. 
'Long I fell, and he fell with me. His fire was about me. I was burned. Then 
we plunged into the deep water and all was  dark. Cold it was as the tide of 
death: almost it froze my heart.' 
     'Deep  is the abyss  that is spanned by Durin's  Bridge, and  none  has 
measured it,' said Gimli. 
     'Yet  it has  a  bottom, beyond  light  and  knowledge,'  said Gandalf. 
'Thither I came at last, to the  uttermost foundations of stone. He was with 

####-me still.  His fire was  quenched, but now he was a thing of slime, stronger  
than a strangling snake. 
     'We fought far under the living earth, where time is  not counted. Ever  
he clutched  me,  and  ever I  hewed  him,  till at last he  fled into  dark 
tunnels. They were not made by Durin's  folk, Gimli  son of   Gluin. Far, far 
below the  deepest delving  of the Dwarves, the world is gnawed  by nameless 
things.  Even Sauron  knows them not. They  are  older  than  he. Now I have 
walked there, but I will bring no report to darken the light of day. In that 
despair my enemy was my only hope, and I pursued him, clutching at his heel. 
Thus he brought me back at last to the secret  ways of Khazad-dym: too  well 
he knew them all. Ever up now we went, until we came to the Endless Stair.' 
     'Long has that  been lost,' said  Gimli. 'Many have  said  that it  was 
never made save in legend, but others say that it was destroyed.' 
     'It  was made, and it had not been destroyed,'  said Gandalf. 'From the 
lowest dungeon to the highest peak  it climbed. ascending in unbroken spiral 
in many thousand steps, until it issued at last in  Durin's Tower  carved in 
the living rock of Zirak-zigil, the pinnacle of the Silvertine. 
     'There upon Celebdil was a lonely window in the snow, and before it lay 
a  narrow space, a dizzy eyrie above the mists of the world.  The  sun shone 
fiercely there, but all below was wrapped in cloud.  Out he sprang, and even 
as I came behind, he burst into new flame. There was none to see, or perhaps 
in after ages songs would still be sung of the Battle of the Peak.' Suddenly 
Gandalf laughed. 'But what would they say in song? Those that looked up from 
afar thought that  the  mountain was crowned with storm. Thunder they heard, 
and lightning, they said, smote upon  Celebdil,  and leaped back broken into 
tongues of fire. Is not that enough? A great smoke rose about us, vapour and 
steam. Ice fell like  rain. I threw down my enemy, and he fell from the high 
place  and broke the  mountain-side  where  he  smote it  in his ruin.  Then 
darkness took me; and I strayed out  of thought and time, and I wandered far  
on roads that I will not tell. 
     'Naked I was sent back -- for a brief time, until my task  is done. And 
naked I lay upon  the mountain-top. The tower behind was crumbled into dust, 
the window gone; the ruined stair was choked with burned and broken stone. I 
was alone, forgotten, without escape upon the hard horn  of the world. There 
I lay staring upward, while the stars wheeled over, and each day was as long 
as a life-age of the earth. Faint to my ears came the gathered rumour of all 
lands: the springing and the dying,  the song  and the weeping, and the slow 

####-everlasting  groan  of  overburdened stone. And  so  at the last Gwaihir the 
Windlord found me again, and he took me up and bore me away. 
     ' 'Ever am I fated to be your burden, friend at need,' I said. 
     ' 'A burden  you have been,'  he answered, 'but not so  now. Light as a  
swan's feather in my claw you are. The Sun shines  through you. Indeed  I do 
not think you need me any more: were  I to let you fall you would float upon  
the wind.' 
     ' 'Do not let me fall!' I gasped, for I felt life in me again. 'Bear me 
to Lothlurien!' 
     ' 'That indeed is the command of the Lady Galadriel who sent me to look  
for you,' he answered. 
     'Thus  it was  that  I  came to Caras Galadhon and found you but lately 
gone. I tarried  there  in  the  ageless time of that  land where days bring 
healing  not  decay. Healing I found, and I was clothed  in white. Counsel I 
gave and counsel took. Thence by strange roads I came, and messages I  bring 
to some of you. To Aragorn I was bidden to say this:  
     Where now are the D®nedain, Elessar, Elessar? 
     Why do thy kinsfolk wander afar? 
     Near is the hour when the Lost should come forth, 
     And the Grey Company ride from the North. 
     But dark is the path appointed for thee: 
     The Dead watch the road that leads to the Sea. 
     To Legolas she sent this word: 
     Legolas Greenleaf long under tree 
     In joy thou hast lived. Beware of the Sea! 
     If thou hearest the cry of the gull on the shore, 
     Thy heart shall then rest in the forest no more.' 
     Gandalf fell silent and shut his eyes.  
     'Then she sent me no message?' said Gimli and bent his head. 
     'Dark are her words,'  said Legolas, 'and little  do they mean to those 
that receive them.' 
     'That is no comfort,' said Gimli. 
     'What then?' said Legolas. 'Would  you  have her speak openly to you of 
your death?' 
     'Yes. if she had nought else to say.' 
     'What  is that?' said Gandalf, opening his  eyes. 'Yes,  I think I  can 
guess  what her  words  may  mean.  Your pardon,  Gimli! I was pondering the 

####-messages once again. But indeed she sent words to you, and  neither dark nor 
sad. 
     '  "To  Gimli son  of  Gluin," she  said,  "give  his   Lady's greeting. 
Lock -bearer, wherever thou goest  my thought goes with thee. But have a care 
to lay thine axe to the right tree!" ' 
     'In  happy hour  you  have returned to  us, Gandalf,'  cried the Dwarf,  
capering  as  he sang  loudly in the  strange dwarf-tongue. 'Come, come!' he 
shouted, swinging his axe. 'Since Gandalf's head is now sacred, let us  find  
one that it is right to cleave!' 
     'That  will  not  be far to seek,' said  Gandalf, rising from his seat. 
'Come!  We have  spent all  the time that is allowed to a meeting  of parted 
friends. Now there is need of haste.' 
     He wrapped himself again  in his old  tattered cloak, and led the  way. 
Following  him they descended quickly from the high shelf and made their way 
back through the forest, down the bank  of the Entwash. They  spoke no  more 
words,  until they stood again upon the grass  beyond the eaves of  Fangorn.  
There was no sign of their horses to be seen. 
     'They have not returned,' said Legolas. 'It will be a weary walk!' 
     'I shall not  walk. Time presses,' said  Gandalf.  Then lifting up  his 
head he gave  a long whistle. So clear and  piercing was  the  note that the 
others  stood  amazed to hear such a sound come from those old bearded lips. 
Three times he whistled; and then  faint and far off it seemed to  them that 
they heard the whinny  of a horse borne up from the plains upon the  eastern 
wind.  They waited wondering. Before long there came  the sound of hoofs, at 
first hardly more than a tremor of the ground perceptible only to Aragorn as 
he lay upon the  grass, then  growing steadily louder and clearer to a quick  
beat. 
     'There is more than one horse coming,' said Aragorn. 
     'Certainly,' said Gandalf. 'We are too great a burden for one.' 
     'There are three,'  sa id Legolas, gazing out  over the plain.  'See how 
they run!  There is Hasufel, and  there is my  friend Arod  beside  him! But 
there is another that strides ahead: a very great horse. I have not seen his 
like before.' 
     'Nor will you again,' said Gandalf. 'That is Shadowfax. He is the chief 
of the  Mearas, lords  of horses, and not even Thjoden, King  of  Rohan, has 
ever looked on  a better. Does he not shine like silver, and run as smoothly 
as a swift stream? He has come for me: the horse of the White  Rider. We are 

####-going to battle together.' 
     Even  as the old wizard  spoke,  the great horse  came striding up  the 
slope towards them; his coat was glistening and his mane flowing in the wind 
of his speed. The two others followed, now  far behind. As soon as Shadowfax 
saw Gandalf, he checked his  pace and  whinnied loudly; then trotting gently  
forward he stooped his proud head and nuzzled his great nostrils against the 
old man's neck. 
     Gandalf caressed him. 'It is a  long way from Rivendell, my friend,' he 
said;  'but you are wise and swift and  come at need.  Far let us  ride  now 
together, and part not in this world again!' 
     Soon  the other horses  came up  and stood quietly  by, as if  awaiting 
orders. 'We go at once to Meduseld, the  hall of your master, Thjoden,' said 
Gandalf, addressing them gravely. They bowed their heads.  'Time presses, so 
with your leave, my friends, we  will ride. We beg you to use  all the speed 
that  you can. Hasufel shall bear Aragorn and Arod Legolas. I will set Gimli  
before me, and by  his leave  Shadowfax shall bear us both. We will wait now 
only to drink a little.' 
     'Now I understand a part of last night's  riddle,' said Legolas  as  he 
sprang lightly  upon Arod's back.  'Whether they  fled  at first in fear, or 
not,  our horses met  Shadowfax, their chieftain, and greeted him with  joy. 
Did you know that he was at hand, Gandalf?' 
     'Yes, I knew,'  said the wizard.  'I bent  my thought upon him, bidding 
him to  make haste; for yesterday he was far away in the south of this land. 
Swiftly may he bear me back again!' 
     Gandalf spoke  now to Shadowfax, and  the horse set off at a good pace, 
yet  not  beyond the measure of the  others. After a little while  he turned 
suddenly, and  choosing  a place where the ba nks  were  lower, he waded  the 
river, and then led them away due south into a flat land, treeless and wide. 
The wind went like grey waves through the endless miles of  grass. There was 
no sign of road or track, but Shadowfax did not stay or falter. 
     'He is  steering a straight course now for  the halls of Thjoden  under  
the slopes of the White  Mountains,' said  Gandalf. 'It will be  quicker so. 
The ground is firmer in the Eastemnet, where the chief northward track lies,  
across the river, but Shadowfax knows the way through every fen and hollow.' 
     For many hours they rode on through the meads and riverlands. Often the  
grass was so high  that it  reached above the knees of the riders, and their 

####-steeds seemed to be swimming in a grey-green sea. They came upon many 
hidden 
pools, and broad acres of sedge waving above wet and  treacherous bogs;  but 
Shadowfax found the way, and the  other horses followed in his swath. Slowly 
the sun  fell from the sky down into the  West. Looking  out  over the great 
plain,  far away the riders saw it for a moment like a red fire sinking into 
the grass. Low upon the edge of sight shoulders of the mountains glinted red 
upon either side. A smoke seemed to rise up and darken the sun's disc to the 
hue of blood, as if it had kindled the grass as it passed down under the rim 
of earth. 
     'There lies the Gap of Rohan,' said Gandalf. 'It is now almost due west  
of us. That way lies Isengard.' 
     'I see a great smoke,' said Legolas. 'What may that be?' 
     'Battle and war!' said  Gandalf. 'Ride on!' 
 

####- 

Chapter 6. The King of the Golden Hall 

 
 
     They rode on  through sunset,  and slow dusk, and gathering night. When 
at last they  halted  and  dismounted,  even  Aragorn  was stiff and  weary. 
Gandalf only allowed  them a few  hou rs' rest. Legolas and  Gimli  slept and  
Aragorn lay flat, stretched upon his back; but Gandalf stood, leaning on his 
staff, gazing  into the darkness, east and  west.  All was silent, and there 
was no sign or sound of living thing. The night was barred with long clouds,  
fleeting on a  chill wind, when  they  arose again. Under the cold moon they 
went on once more, as swift as by the light of day. 
     Hours passed and still they rode on. Gimli nodded and would have fallen 
from his seat, if Gandalf had not clutched and shaken him. Hasufel and Arod, 
weary but proud, followed their  tireless leader, a grey shadow before  them 
hardly to he seen. The miles went by. The waxing moon  sank into the  cloudy 
West. 
     A bitter chill came into the air. Slowly in the East the dark  faded to 
a  cold grey. Red  shafts of light leapt  above  the black walls of the Emyn 
Muil  far  away upon  their  left. Dawn came clear and bright; a wind  swept  
across  their path,  rushing through the  bent  grasses.  Suddenly Shadowfax 
stood still and neighed. Gandalf pointed ahead. 
     'Look!' he  cried, and  they lifted their tired eyes. Before them stood 
the mountains  of  the South:  white-tipped  and  streaked  with black.  The 
grass-lands  rolled against  the  hills  that clustered  at their feet,  and 
flowed up into many valleys still  dim and  dark, untouched  by the light of 
dawn,  winding  their way into the heart of the great mountains. Immediately 
before  the travellers the widest of these  glens  opened  like a  long gulf 
among the hills. Far inward they  glimpsed a tumbled mountain -mass with  one 
tall peak;  at the mouth of  the  vale there  stood  like  sentinel a lonely 
height. About its feet  there flowed, as a thread of silver, the stream that 
issued from the dale; upon its brow they caught, still  far away, a glint in 
the rising sun, a  glimmer of gold. 'Speak, Legolas!' said Gandalf. 'Tell us 
what you see there before us!' 
     Legolas  gazed  ahead, shading  his eyes from the  level shafts  of the 
new-risen  sun. 'I see a  white stream  that comes down from  the snows,' he  
said. 'Where it issues  from the shadow  of the vale a green hill rises upon 

####-the east. A dike and mighty wall and thorny fence encircle it. Within  there 
rise the  roofs of houses; and in the midst, set upon a green terrace, there 
stands  aloft  a  great  hall of Men. And it  seems to  my eyes  that it  is 
thatched with gold. The light  of it shines  far over the land. Golden, too, 
are the posts of its  doors. There men  in bright  mail stand; but all  else 
within the courts are yet asleep.' 
     'Edoras  those courts are called,' said Gandalf, 'and Meduseld  is that 
golden hall. There dwells Thjoden son of Thengel, King of the Mark of Rohan. 
We  are come  with the  rising  of  the day.  Now the road lies plain to see 
before us.  But  we  must  ride  more  warily; for  war  is abroad,  and the 
Rohirrim, the Horse-lords, do not sleep, even if it seem so from afar.  Draw 
no  weapon, speak no  haughty  word,  I  counsel you all, until we  are come 
before Thjoden's seat.' 
     The  morning was  bright and clear about them, and birds were  singing, 
when the  travellers came to the stream. It ran down swiftly into the plain, 
and beyond the feet  of  the hills  turned across their path in a wide bend, 
flowing away east to  feed the Entwash far off in  its reed-choked beds. The 
land was green: in the wet meads and along  the grassy borders of the stream 
grew many willow-trees. Already in this southern land they were blushing red 
at  their fingertips. Feeling  the approach of spring. Over the stream there 
was a ford  between low banks  much trampled by the  passage of horses.  The 
travellers passed over and came upon a wide rutted track leading towards the 
uplands.  
     At the  foot of the  walled  hill the  way ran under the shadow of many 
mounds, high and green. Upon their western sides the grass was white as with 
a drifted snow: small flowers  sprang there like  countless stars  amid  the 
turf. 
     'Look!' said  Gandalf. 'How fair are  the  bright  eyes  in  the grass!  
Evermind they  are called,  simbelmynl in this land of Men, for they blossom 
in all the seasons of the year, and grow where dead men rest. Behold! we are 
come to the great barrows  where the sires of  Thjoden sleep.' 'Seven mounds 
upon the left,  and nine upon the right,' said Aragorn. 'Many long  lives of 
men it is since the golden hall was built.' 
     'Five hundred times  have the  red leaves fallen in Mirkwood in my home 
since then,' said Legolas, 'and but a little while does that seem to us.' 
     'But  to the Riders of  the Mark it  seems  so long ago,' said Aragorn, 
'that  the  raising of this  house  is but a memory of  song, and  the years 

####-before are lost in the mist of time.  Now  they  call this land their  home, 
their own, and  their speech is sundered  from their northern  kin.' Then he 
began  to chant softly in a  slow tongue unknown to the  Elf  and Dwarf; yet  
they listened, for there was a strong music in it. 
     'That, I guess, is the language of the Rohirrim,' said Legolas; 'for it 
is like  to  this land itself; rich and rolling in part,  and else  hard and 
stern as the mountains.  But I cannot guess what it  means, save  that it is 
laden with the sadness of Mortal Men.' 
     'It runs thus  in  the Common Speech,' said Aragorn, 'as near as  I can 
make it. 
     Where now the horse and the rider? Where is the horn that was blowing?  
     Where is the helm and the hauberk, and the bright hair flowing? 
     Where is the hand on the harpstring, and the red fire glowing? 
     Where is the spring and the harvest and the tall corn growing? 
     They have passed like rain on the mountain, like a wind in the meadow;  
     The days have gone down in the West behind the hills into shadow.  
     Who shall gather the smoke of the dead wood burning, 
     Or behold the flowing years from the Sea returning? 
     Thus spoke a  forgotten poet long ago in Rohan, recalling how tall  and 
fair  was Eorl the Young,  who rode  down out  of the  North; and there were 
wings upon the feet  of  his steed, Felaruf, father   of horses. So men still 
sing in the evening.' 
     With these words the travellers passed the silent mounds. Following the 
winding way  up the  green shoulders  of the hills, they came at last to the 
wide wind-swept walls and the gates of Edoras.  
     There sat many men in bright mail, who sprang at once to their feet and 
barred  the  way with spears.  'Stay, strangers here unknown!' they cried in 
the tongue  of  the  Riddermark,  demanding  the  names and  errand  of  the  
strangers. Wonder was in their eyes but little friendliness; and they looked 
darkly upon Gandalf.  
     'Well do I  understand your speech,' he answered  in the same language; 
'yet few strangers do so. Why then do you not speak in the Common Tongue, 
as 
is the custom in the West, if you wi sh to be answered?' 
     'It is the will of Thjoden King that  none should enter his gates, save 
those who know our tongue and are our friends,'  replied one of the  guards.  
'None are welcome here in days of war but our  own folk, and those that come 

####-from Mundburg in the land of Gondor. Who are you that come heedless over 
the 
plain thus strangely clad, riding horses like to our own  horses? Long  have 
we kept  guard here,  and we  have watched you from afar. Never have we seen 
other riders so strange, nor any horse more proud than is  one of these that 
bear  you.  He is One  of the  Mearas, unless our eyes  are cheated  by some 
spell. Say, are you not a wizard,  some spy from Saruman, or phantoms of his 
craft? Speak now and be swift!' 
     'We are  no phantoms,' said Aragorn,  'nor do your  eyes  cheat you. For  
indeed these are your own horses  that  we ride, as  you  knew well are  you  
asked, I  guess. But seldom  does thief  ride  home to the  stable. Here are 
Hasufel and Arod, that Jomer,  the  Third Marsha l  of the Mark,  lent to us,  
only two  days ago. We bring them back now, even as we promised him. Has 
not 
Jomer then returned and given warning of our coming?' 
     A troubled look came  into the guard's eyes. 'Of Jomer I have naught to 
say,' he answered. 'If  what you tell me  is  truth,  then doubtless Thjoden 
will  have heard of it. Maybe your coming was not wholly unlooked-for. It is 
but two nights ago that Wormtongue came to us and  said that by  the will of  
Thjoden no stranger should pass these gates. ' 
     'Wormtongue?' said Gandalf, looking sharply at the guard. 'Say no more!  
My errand is not to Wormtongue, but to the Lord of the Mark himself. I am in 
haste. Will you not go or send to say  that  we  are come?' His eyes glinted 
under his deep brows as he bent his gaze upon the man. 
     'Yes,  I will go,' he answered  slowly. 'But what names shall I report?  
And what  shall I say of you? Old  and weary you seem now, and yet  you  are 
fell and grim beneath, I deem' 
     'Well do you see and speak,' said the wizard. 'For I am Gandalf. I have 
returned. And behold! I too bring back a horse. Here is Shadowfax the Great, 
whom no other hand can tame. And here beside me  is Aragorn son of 
Arathorn, 
the heir of Kings, and it is to Mundburg that he goes. Here also are Legolas 
the Elf and Gimli the  Dwarf, our  comrades. Go now and  say to your  master  
that we are at  his gates and  would have speech with him, if he will permit 
us to come into his hall.' 'Strange names you give indeed! But I will report 
them as you  bid and learn my master's will,' said  the  guard. 'Wait here a  
little  while, and f will bring you such answer as seems good to him. Do not 

####-hope  too much!  These are dark  days.' He  went  swiftly away,  leaving the 
strangers  in the  watchful  keeping of his  comrades. After  some  time  he 
returned. 'Follow me!'  he said. 'Thjoden gives you leave  to enter; but any 
weapon that  you bear; be it only a  staff, you must leave on the threshold. 
The doorwardens will keep them.' 
     The dark gates were swung open. The travellers entered, walking in file 
behind their guide. They found  a broad path, paved  with hewn  stones,  now 
winding  upward,  now climbing in  short  flights of well-laid  steps.  Many 
houses  built of wood and many dark doors they passed.  Beside the  way in  a 
stone  channel a stream of clear water flowed,  sparkling and chattering. At  
length they came to the crown of the hill. There stood a high platform above 
a  green terrace,  at the foot of which a bright  spring gushed from a stone 
carved in the likeness of a  horse's  head;  beneath was  a  wide basin from 
which the  water. spilled and fed the  falling stream. Up the  green terrace 
went a stair of stone, high  and  broad, and  on either side of the  topmost  
step were stone-hewn  sea,  There sat other  guards,  with drawn swords laid 
upon their  knees. Their golden hair was braided on their shoulders the  sun 
was blazoned upon  their green shields, their  long  corslets were burnished 
bright, and when they rose taller they seemed than mortal men. 
     'There are the doors before you,' said the guide. 'I must return now to 
my duty at the gate. Farewell! And  may the Lord  of the Mark be gracious to 
you!' 
     He turned and went swiftly  back down  the road. The others climbed the 
long stair under the eyes of the tall  watchmen. Silent they stood now above  
and spoke no  word, until Gandalf stepped  out upon the paved terrace at the 
stairs head. Then suddenly with clear voices they spoke a courteous greeting  
in their own tongue. 
     Hail, corners from afar!' they said, and they turned the hilts of their 
swords towards the travellers in token of  peace. Green  gems flashed in the 
sunlight.  Then one of the guards stepped forward  and  spoke in  the Common 
Speech. 
     'I am the Doorward of Thjoden,' he said. 'Hbma is my name. Here  I must  
bid you lay aside your weapons before you enter.' 
     Then Legolas gave into his hand his silver -hafted knife, his quiver and 
his bow. 'Keep these well,' he said, 'for they come from the Golden Wood and 
the Lady of Lothlurien gave them to me.' 
     Wonder came into the man's eyes, and he laid the weapons hastily by the  

####-wall, as if he feared to handle them.  'No  man  will  touch them  I promise 
you,' he said. 
     Aragorn stood a while hesitating. 'It is not my will,' he said,  'to put 
aside my sword or to deliver And®ril to the hand of any other man.' 
     'It is the will of Thjoden,' said Hbma. 
     'It is not clear to  me that the  will of Thjoden son of  Thengel  even 
though  he be lord of the  Mark, should  prevail over the will of Aragorn son  
of Arathorn, Elendil's heir of Gondor.' 
     'This  is the house of  Thjoden, not of Aragorn, even  were  he King of 
Gondor in  the seat of  Denethor,' said Hbma, stepping  swiftly  before  the 
doors  and barring the  way. His sword  was now  in  his  hand and the point  
towards the strangers. 
     'This is idle talk,' said  Gandalf. 'Needless is Thjoden's demand,  but 
it is useless to refuse. A king will have his  way  in his own hall,  be  it 
folly or wisdom.' 
     'Truly,' said Aragorn. 'And I would do as  the master of the house bade 
me, were this only a woodman's cot, if I bore now any sword but And®ril.' 
     'Whatever its name may be,' said Hbma, 'here you shall lay it,  if  you  
would not fight alone against all the men in Edoras.' 
     'Not alone!' said Gimli, fingering  the blade of his axe,  and  looking 
darkly up at the  guard, as if he were a young tree that Gimli had a mind to 
fell. 'Not alone!' 
     'Come, come!' said Gandalf. 'We are all friends here. Or should be; for  
the laughter  of Mordor will be our only reward, if we quarrel. My errand is 
pressing.  Here at least is  my sword, goodman Hbma. Keep it well. Glamdring 
it  is  called,  for the Elves made  it long ago.  Now  let me  pass.  Come, 
Aragorn!' 
     Slowly Aragorn unbuckled  his belt  and  himself set  his sword upright 
against the wall. 'Here I set it,' he  said; 'but I command you not to touch 
it, nor to  permit any other to lay hand on  it. In this elvish heath dwells 
the Blade  that was Broken and has been made again. Telchar first wrought it 
in the deeps of time. Death shall come to any man that draws Elendil's sword 
save Elendil's heir.' 
     The guard stepped back and looked with  amazement on Aragorn. 'It seems 
that you are come on the wings  of song out of the forgotten days he said. It 
shall be, lord, as you command. 
     'Well,' said Gimli, 'if it  has And®ril to keep it company, my  axe may 

####-stay here, too, without shame'; and  he laid it on the floor. 'Now then,  if 
all is as you wish, let us go and speak with your master.' 
     The guard still  hesitated. 'Your staff,' he  said to Gandalf. 'Forgive 
me, but that too must be left at the doors.' 
     'Foolishness!' said Gandalf. 'Prudence is one thing, but discourtesy is 
another. I am old. If I may  not  lean on my stick  as I go, then I will sit 
out here, until it pleases Thjoden to hobble out himself to speak with me.' 
     Aragorn laughed. 'Every man has something too dear to trust to another. 
But  would you  part an old  man from his suppor t? Come, will you not let us 
enter?' 
     'The staff  in the hand of a wizard may  be more  than a prop for  age' 
said Hbma. He looked hard at  the ash -staff on which Gandalf leaned. 'Yet in 
doubt a man of worth will trust to his own wisdom. I believe you are friends 
and folk worthy of honour, who have no evil purpose. You may go in.' 
     The guards now lifted the heavy bars of the doors and swung them slowly 
inwards grumbling on  their great hinges. The travellers entered. Inside  it 
seemed  dark and warm after the clear air  upon the hill.  The hall was long 
and wide and filled  with shadows and half lights; mighty pillars upheld its 
lofty roof. But  here and there bright  sunbeams fell  in glimmering  shafts 
from  the  eastern windows, high under the deep eaves. Through the louver in 
the roof, above the thin wisps  of  issuing smoke,  the sky showed  pale and 
blue.  As their  eyes changed, the travellers  perceived  that the floor was 
paved  with  stones  of  many  hues;  branching  runes  and strange  devices 
intertwined  beneath their feet. They  saw now that  the pillars were richly 
carved,  gleaming dully with gold and half-seen  colours.  Many woven cloths 
were hung upon  the  walls,  and over their  wide spaces  marched figures of 
ancient legend, some  dim with years,  some darkling in the shade. But  upon 
one form the sunlight fell: a young man upon a white horse. He was blowing a  
great horn, and his yellow hair was flying in the wind. The horse's head was 
lifted,  and its  nostrils were wide and red  as it neighed, smelling battle 
afar. Foaming water, green and white, rushed and curled about its knees. 
     'Behold  Eorl the Young!'  said Aragorn. 'Thus he rode out of the North 
to the Battle of the Field of Celebrant.' 
     Now the four companions  went forward, past the clear wood-fire burning 
upon the long hearth in  the midst of the hall. Then they halted. At the far 
end of the house, beyond the hearth and facing north towards  the doors, was 
a dais with three steps; and  in the  middle of the dais was a great  gilded 

####-chair. Upon it sat a man so bent with age that he seemed almost a dwarf; but 
his white  hair was  long and thick and fell  in great braids from beneath a  
thin golden circle set upon his brow.  In the centre upon his forehead shone 
a single white diamond. His beard was laid like snow upon his knees; but his 
eyes  still  burned  with  a bright  light,  glinting  as  he  gazed at  the 
strangers. Behind his  chair  stood  a woman clad in white. At his feet upon 
the  steps sat  a  wizened  figure of a  man,  with  a  pale  wise face  and 
heavy-lidded eyes.  
     There was a silence. The old  man  did not move in his chair. At length 
Gandalf spoke.  'Hail, Thjoden son of Thengel!  I have returned. For behold!  
the  storm  comes,  and now all  friends should  gather together,  lest each 
singly be destroyed.' 
     Slowly the old man rose to his feet, leaning heavily upon a short black  
staff  with a handle of  white bone; and now  the strangers  saw that,  bent 
though he was, he was still tall and must in youth  have been high and proud 
indeed. 
     'I greet you,'  he said,  'and maybe you look for welcome. But truth to 
tell your welcome is  doubtful here,  Master Gandalf.  You have ever  been a  
herald  of  woe. Troubles follow you like crows,  and ever  the oftener  the 
worse. I will  not deceive  you: when I heard that Shadowfax had  come  back 
riderless, I rejoiced at the return of the horse, but still more at the lack  
of the rider; and when Jomer brought the  tidings that you  had gone at last 
to your long home, I did not mourn. But news from afar is seldom sooth. Here 
you  come  again! And with you come  evils  worse  than before, as  might be 
expected. Why should I welcome you, Gandalf Stormcrow? Tell me that.' 
Slowly  
he sat down again in his cha ir. 
     'You speak justly, lord,'  said the pale man sitting upon the steps  of 
the  dais. 'It is not  yet five  days since  the  bitter  tidings  came that 
Thjodred your son was slain upon  the West  Marches: your right hand, Second 
Marshal Of the Mark. In Jomer  there  is little trust. Few men would be left  
to guard your walls, if  he had been allowed to rule.  And even now we learn 
from Gondor that the Dark Lord is stirring in the East. Such  is the hour in 
which this wanderer chooses to return. Why indeed  should  we  welcome  you, 
Master Stormcrow?  Lbthspell I  name you,  Ill-news; and ill news is  an ill 
guest they say.' He laughed grimly, as he lifted his heavy lids for a moment 
and gazed on the strangers with dark eyes.  

####-     'You are  held wise, my friend Wormtongue,  and are  doubtless a  great 
support to your master,' answered Gandalf in a soft voice. 'Yet in two  ways 
may a man  come with evil tidings. lie may be a worker of evil; or he may be 
such as leaves well alone, and comes only to bring aid in time of need.' 
     'That  is so,' said Wormtongue; 'but there is a  third kind: pickers of 
bones, meddlers in other men's sorrows, carrion-fowl  that grow fat  on war. 
What aid have you ever brought, Stormcrow? And what aid do you bring now? 
It 
was  aid from  us that you sought last time that you were here. Then my lord 
bade you  Choose any horse that you would and be gone; and  to the wonder of 
all you took Shadowfax in your insolence. My lord was sorely grieved; yet to 
some it seemed that to speed you from the land the price was not  too great. 
I guess that it is  likely to turn out the same once more: you will seek aid 
rather than  render  it. Do  you  bring men?  Do you bring  horses,  swords,  
spears? That I  would call aid; that is our present need. But  who are these 
that  follow at your tail? Three ragged wanderers in grey,  and you yourself 
the most beggar-like of the four!' 
     'The courtesy of your hall is somewhat lessened of late, Thjoden son of 
Thengel,' said  Gandalf. 'Has not the  messenger from your gate reported the 
names of my companions? Seldom  has any lord of  Rohan received  three  
such 
guests. Weapons they have  laid at your doors  that  are worth many a mortal 
man, even the mightiest. Grey is their raiment, for the Elves clad them, and 
thus they have passed through the shadow of great perils to your hall.' 
     'Then it  is true, as  Jomer reported, that  you are in league with the 
Sorceress of the Golden Wood?'  said Wormtongue. 'It  is not  to be wondered 
at: webs of deceit were ever woven in Dwimordene.' 
     Gimli  strode  a pace forward, but felt  suddenly  the hand  of Gandalf 
clutch him by the shoulder, and he halted, standing stiff as stone. 
     In Dwimordene, in Lurien 
     Seldom have walked the feet of Men, 
     Few mortal eyes have seen the light 
     That lies there ever, long and bright. 
     Galadriel! Galadriel! 
     Clear is the water of your well; 
     White is the star in your white hand; 
     Unmarred, unstained is leaf and land 

####-     In Dwimordene, in Lurien 
     More fair than thoughts of Mortal Men. 
     Thus Gandalf softly  sang, and then suddenly  he changed.  Casting  his 
tattered cloak aside, he stood up and leaned  no longer on his staff; and he 
spoke in a clear cold voice.  'The wise speak only  of what they know, Grnma 
son of Gblmud. A witless worm have you become. Therefore be silent, and 
keep 
your forked tongue behind  your  teeth.  I  have not passed through fire and 
death to bandy crooked words  with a serving-man till the  lightning falls.' 
He raised his staff.  There was a roll of thunder. The  sunlight was blotted 
out from the eastern  windows; the whole hall became suddenly dark as night. 
The fire faded to sullen embers. Only Gandalf could be seen,  standing white 
and tall before the blackened hearth. 
     In the gloom they heard  the hiss  of  Wormtongue's voice:  'Did I  not 
counsel you, lord, to forbid  his  staff? That fool, Hbma, has betrayed us!' 
There was  a flash as if lightning had cloven the roof. Then all was silent. 
Wormtongue sprawled on his face. 
     'Now Thjoden son of Thengel, will you hearken to me?' said Gandalf. 'Do 
you ask for help?' He lifted his staff and pointed to a  high  window. There 
the darkness  seemed  to clear, and  through the opening could be seen, high 
and far, a patch of shining sky. 'Not all is dark. Take courage, Lord of the 
Mark; for better help you will not  find. No counsel have I to give to those 
that despair. Yet counsel I could give, and words I could speak to you. Will 
you  hear them? They are not for all  ears.  I bid you come out  before your 
doors  and look abroad.  Too  long have  you sat in  shadows and  trusted to 
twisted tales and crooked promptings.' 
     Slowly  Thjoden left his  chair. A faint light  grew in the hall again. 
The  woman hastened to  the king's side, taking his arm, and with  faltering 
steps the old man came down from the dais and paced softly through the hall. 
Wormtongue remained lying on the floor. They came to  the  doors and 
Gandalf 
knocked. 
     'Open!' he cried. 'The Lord of the Mark comes forth!' 
     The doors rolled  back  and a keen air  came whistling in.  A wind  was 
blowing  on  the  hill.  'Send your guards down  to the stairs  foot,'  said 
Gandalf. 'And you, lady, leave him a while with me. I will care for him.' 
     'Go, Jowyn sister -daughter!' said the  old king. 'The time for  fear is 

####-past.' 
     The woman turned  and went slowly into  the house. As  she  passed  the  
doors  she turned and looked back. Grave  and thoughtful  was her glance, as 
she looked on the king with cool  pity in her eyes. Very fair was  her face, 
and her long hair was like a river of gold. Slender and tall  she was in her  
white  robe girt with  silver; but strong she seemed and  stern as steel,  a  
daughter of kings. Thus Aragorn for the first time in the  full light of day 
beheld  Jowyn, Lady of Rohan, and thought her fair, fair  and cold,  like  a  
morning of  pale spring that  is not yet come to womanhood. And she  now was 
suddenly  aware  of  him:  tall  heir  of kings,  wise  with  many  winters, 
greycloaked.  Hiding a power that yet she felt.  For a moment still as stone 
she stood, then turning swiftly she was gone. 
     'Now, lord,' said Gandalf, 'look out upon  your land!  Breathe the free 
air again!' 
     From  the porch upon the top  of the high terrace they could see beyond 
the stream the green fields of Rohan fading  into distant grey.  Curtains of 
wind-blown rain were slanting down. The sky above and  to the west was still 
dark with thunder, and lightning far away flickered among the tops of hidden 
hills. But the wind had shifted to the north, and already the storm that had 
come  out of  the  East  was  receding, rolling away  southward to  the sea. 
Suddenly through a rent  in  the clouds behind them a shaft  of sun  stabbed 
down. The falling  showers  gleamed  like  silver,  and  far away the  river  
glittered like a shimmering glass. 
     'It is not so dark here,' said Thjoden. 
     'No,' said Gandalf. 'Nor does age lie so  heavily on your  shoulders as 
some would have you think. Cast aside your prop!' 
     From the  king's hand the black staff fell clattering on the stones. He 
drew himself up, slowly, as a man  that is stiff from long bending over some 
dull toil.  Now tall  and straight he stood,  and his  eyes were blue as  he 
looked into the opening sky. 
     'Dark have  been  my  dreams  of late,' he said,  'but  I  feel as  one 
new-awakened. I would now that you had come before, Gandalf. For I fear that 
already  you have come  too late, only to see the last days of my house. Not 
long now shall stand the high hall which Brego son of Eorl built. Fire shall 
devour the high seat. What is to be done?' 
     'Much,' said Gandalf. 'But first send for Jomer. Do I not guess rightly 
that  you hold him prisoner,  by the counsel of Grnma, of him that all  save 

####-you name the Wormtongue?' 
     'It is  true,' said Thjoden. 'He  had rebelled against my commands, and 
threatened death to Grnma in my hall.' 
     'A man  may love you  and yet not love Wormtongue or his counsels' said 
Gandalf. 
     'That may be. I will  do as you ask. Call  Hbma to  me. Since he proved 
untrusty  as a  doorward, let him  become an errand -runner. The guilty shall  
bring the guilty to judgement,' said Thjoden, and his voice was grim, yet he 
looked  at  Gandalf and  smiled and  as  he did so many lines  of care  were 
smoothed away and did not return. 
     When  Hbma  had  been  summoned and had  gone, Gandalf led Thjoden to 
a 
stone seat, and then sat  himself before  the  king upon  the topmost stair. 
Aragorn and his companions stood nearby. 
     'There is no time to tell all that you should hear,' said Gandalf. 'Yet 
if my  hope is not cheated, a time will come ere  long when I can speak more 
fully. Behold! you  are  come into  a peril  greater  even  than the wit  of 
Wormtongue could weave into your dreams. But see!  you  dream no longer. 
You 
live.  Gondor and  Rohan do not stand alone. The enemy  is strong beyond our 
reckoning, yet we have a hope at which he has not guessed.' 
     Quickly now Gandalf spoke. His voice  was low and secret, and none save 
the  king heard what he said. But  ever as he spoke the light shone brighter  
in Thjoden's eye, and at  the last he rose from his seat to his full height, 
and  Gandalf  beside him, and  together  they looked out from the high place 
towards the East. 
     'Verily,' said Gandalf, now in a loud voice,  keen and clear, 'that way 
lies our hope,  where sits our greatest  fear. Doom hangs still on a thread. 
Yet  hope  there  is  still, if we can  but  stand  unconquered for a little 
while.' 
     The others  too  now  turned their  eyes eastward.  Over the  sundering 
leagues of land, far away they gazed to the edge of sight, and hope and fear 
bore their thoughts  still on, beyond dark  mountains to the Land of Shadow.  
Where now was the  Ring-bearer? How thin  indeed was  the thread  upon 
which 
doom  still hung! It seemed to Legolas, as he  strained his farseeing  eyes, 
that he caught a  glint  of white: far away perchance the sun twinkled on  a  

####-pinnacle of the  Tower of Guard. And further still, endlessly remote and yet 
a present threat, there was a tiny tongue of flame. 
     Slowly  Thjoden  sat  down again,  as if  weariness still struggled  to 
master  him against the will  of Gandalf.  He turned and looked at his great 
house. 'Alas!'  he said, 'that these evil days  should  be  mine, and should 
come in my old  age instead of that peace  which  I  have earned.  Alas  for  
Boromir  the  brave!  The young  perish and the old  linger,  withering.' He 
clutched his knees with his wrinkled hands. 
     'Your fi ngers would remember their old strength better, if they grasped 
a sword-hilt,' said Gandalf. 
     Thjoden rose and put his  hand to his  side;  but no sword hung at  his 
belt. 'Where has Grnma stowed it?' he muttered under his breath. 
     'Take this,  dear lord!'  said  a  clear  voice.  'It  was ever at your 
service.' Two  men had  come softly up the  stair and stood now a few  steps  
from the top. Jomer was there. No helm was on his head, no  mail  was on his 
breast, but in  his hand he  held a drawn sword; and as he knelt  he offered 
the hilt to his master. 
     'How comes this?' said Thjoden sternly. He turned towards Jomer and the  
men looked in wonder at him, standing now proud and erect. Where was the 
old 
man whom they had left crouching in his chair or leaning on his stick? 
     'It is my doing,  lord,' said Hbma,  trembling. I understood that Jomer  
was  to be set free. Such  joy was in my heart that maybe I have erred. Yet, 
since  he was free again, and he  a  Marshal of  the Mark,!  brought him his 
sword as he bade me.' 
     'To lay at your feet, my lord,' said Jomer. 
     For a moment of silence Thjoden stood looking down at Jomer as he knelt 
still before him. Neither moved. 
     'Will you not take the sword?' said Gandalf.  
     Slowly Thjoden stretched forth his hand. As his fingers  took the hilt, 
it seemed  to the watchers that  firmness  and strength returned to his thin 
arm. Suddenly he  lifted the blade  and swung it shimmering and whistling in 
the air. Then he gave a great cry. His voice rang clear as he chanted in the 
tongue of Rohan a call to arms. 
     Arise now, arise, Riders of Thjoden! 
     Dire deeds awake, dark is it eastward. 
     Let horse be bridled, horn be sounded! 

####-     Forth Eorlingas! 
     The guards, thinking that they were summoned, sprang up the stair. They 
looked at  their lord  in amazement, and  then  as one  man they  drew their 
swords and laid them at his feet. 'Command us!' they said. 
     'Westu Thjoden hbl!' cried Jomer. 'It  is a joy to us to see you return 
into your  own.  Never  again  shall it be said, Gandalf, that you come only 
with grief!' 
     'Take  back your sword, Jomer, sister -son!'  said  the king. 'Go, Hbma, 
and  seek my own sword!  Grnma has it in his keeping. Bring him to  me also. 
Now, Gandalf,  you said   that  you had counsel to  give, if I would hear it.  
What is your counsel?' 
     'You have yourself already  taken it,' answered Gandalf.  'To put  your 
trust in Jomer, rather than in a man of crooked mind.  To cast aside  regret 
and fear.  To do the deed at hand. Every  man that can ride should  be  sent 
west at once, as  Jomer counselled you: we must first destroy the  threat of 
Saruman, while we have time. If we fail, we  fall. If we succeed  -- then  we 
will  face the next task. Meanwhile your people tha t are left, the women and 
the children and the old, should stay  to the refuges  that  you have in the 
mountains. Were they not prepared against just such an evil day as this? Let  
them  take  provision, but delay not, nor burden themselves  with treasures,  
great or small. It is their lives that are at stake.' 
     'This counsel seems good to me now,' said Thjoden. 'Let all my folk get 
ready! But  you my guests-truly you  said, Gandalf, that the  courtesy of my  
hall is  lessened. You have ridden through the night,  and the morning wears 
away.  You have had  neither  sleep nor food. A  guest -house  shall be  made  
ready: there you shall sleep, when you have eaten.' 
     'Nay, lord,' said Aragorn. 'There is no rest yet for the weary. The men 
of Rohan must ride forth today, and we  will ride with them, axe, sword, and  
bow. We did not bring them to rest against your wall, Lord  of the Mark. And 
I promised Jomer that my sword and his should be drawn together.' 
     'Now indeed there is hope of victory!' said Jomer. 
     'Hope,  yes,' said Gandalf. 'But Isengard  is strong. And  other perils 
draw ever nearer. Do not delay, Thjoden,  when we are gone. Lead your people 
swiftly to the Hold of Dunharrow in the hills!' 
     'Nay,  Gandalf!' said  the king.  'You do not know your  own  skill  in 
healing. It shall not be so. I myself will go to war, to fall  in  the front 
of the battle, if it must be. Thus shall I sleep better.' 

####-     'Then even the defeat of Rohan will be glorious in song,' said Aragorn. 
The armed men that st ood  near clashed their weapons, crying:  'The  Lord of 
the Mark will ride! Forth Eorlingas!' 
     'But  your  people  must  not be  both  unarmed and shepherdless'  said 
Gandalf. 'Who shall guide them and govern them in your place?' 
     'I will take thought for that  ere I go,' answered Thjoden. 'Here comes 
my counsellor.' 
     At  that moment  Hbma  came  again from  the hall. Behind him  cringing  
between two other men, came Grnma  the  Wormtongue. His face was very 
white. 
His eyes blinked in the sunlight. Hbma knelt and presented to Thjoden a long 
sword in a scabbard clasped with gold and  set with green gems. 'Here, lord,  
is Herugrim, your  ancient blade,' he said. 'It was found in his chest. Loth 
was  he to render up  the  keys. Many other things are there which  men have 
missed.' 
     'You lie,'  said Wormtongue.  'And  this sword your master himself gave 
into my keeping.' 
     'And  he  now  requires  it  of  you again,' said  Thjoden. 'Does  that 
displease you?' 
     'Assuredly not. lord,' said  Wormtongue. 'I care for you and  yours  as 
best I may. But do not weary yourself, or tax too heavily your strength. Let 
others deal  with these irksome guests. Your meat is  about to be set on the 
board. Will you not go to it?' 
     'I will,' said Thjoden. 'And let food for my guests be set on the board 
beside me. The host rides today. Send the heralds forth! Let them summon all 
who dwell nigh!  Every  man and strong lad able to bear  arms,  all who have 
horses, let them be ready in the saddle at the gate ere the second hour from 
noon!' 
     'Dear  lord!'  cried Wormtongue.  'It  is as I feared. This wizard  has 
bewitched  you.  Are  none  to  be  left to defend  the  Golden Hall of your 
fathers, and all your treasure? None to guard the Lord of the Mark?' 
     'If this is bewitchment,' said Thjoden, 'it seems to me more  wholesome 
than your whisperings. Your leechcraft ere long would have had me walking on 
all  fours like  a beast.  No, not  one shall be left, not even Grnma. Grnma  
shall ride too. Go! You have ye t time to clean the rust from your sword.' 
     'Mercy, lord!' whined Wormtongue,  grovelling on the ground. 'Have pity 
on one worn out in your service. Send me not from your side! I at least will 

####-stand by you  when all  others have gone.  Do  not send your  faithful Grnma  
away!' 
     'You have my pity,' said Thjoden. 'And I do not send you from my  side. 
I  go myself to  war with my  men.  I  bid  you come with me and prove  your 
faith.' 
     Wormtongue looked from face to face. In his eyes was the hunted look of 
a beast seeking some gap in the ring of his enemies. He licked his lips with 
a  long pale tongue. 'Such a resolve  might be expected  from a lord of  the 
House  of Eorl,  old though  he be,' he  said. 'But those who truly love him 
would spare his failing years. Yet I  see that I come too late. Others, whom 
the death of my lord would perhaps grieve less, have already persuaded  him. 
If I cannot undo their work,  hear me at least in  this, lord! One who knows 
your mind  and honours your  commands shou ld  be  left in  Edoras. Appoint a  
faithful  steward.  Let your  counsellor Grnma  keep  all  things till  your 
return-and  I pray  that we  may  see it,  though no  wise man  will deem it 
hopeful.' 
     Jomer  laughed. 'And if  that plea does not excuse you  from war,  most  
noble Wormtongue,' he said, what office of less honour would you accept?  To 
carry a sack of meal up  into the mountains-if any man would trust you  with  
it?' 
     'Nay,  Jomer,  you  do  not  fully  understand   the  mind   of  Master  
Wormtongue,' said Gandalf, turning his piercing glance upon him. 'He is bold 
and cunning. Even now he plays a game with  peril and wins a throw. Hours of 
my precious time he has wasted already. 'Down snake!' he said suddenly in  a 
terrible voice. 'Down on  your belly!  How long is it  since  Saruman bought 
you? What was  the promised price? When all the  men were  dead, you were to 
pick your  share of  the treasure, and take the woman  you  desire? Too long 
have you watched her under your eyelids and haunted her steps.' 
     Jomer grasped his sword. 'That I knew  already,' he muttered. 'For that 
reason I would  have slain him  before,  forgetting the law of the hall. But 
there are other reasons.' He  stepped forward,  but Gandalf stayed him  with 
his hand. 
     'Jowyn is safe now,' he said. 'But you, Wormtongue,  you have done what 
you could for  your  true master.  Some reward you have earned at least. Yet 
Saruman is apt to  overlook his bargains. I should advise you  to go quickly 
and remind him, lest he forget your faithful service.' 
     'You lie,' said Wormtongue. 

####-     'That word comes too oft and easy from  your lips,' said Gandalf. 'I do 
not lie. See, Thjoden, here is a snake! With  safety you cannot take it with 
you,  nor can you leave it behind. To slay it  would be just. But it was not 
always as it now is. Once it was a man,  and did you service in its fashion. 
Give him a horse and  let him go at once, wherever he chooses. By his choice 
you shall judge him.' 
     'Do  you hear this, Wormtongue?' said Thjoden. 'This is your choice: to 
ride with me to war, and let us see in battle whether you are true; or to go 
now,  whither  you will. But  then, if ever we  meet again, I  shall not  be 
merciful.' 
     Slowly Wormtongue rose. He  looked  at them with half-closed eyes. Last 
of all he scanned Thjoden's face and opened his mouth  as if  to speak. Then  
suddenly he drew  himself up.  His  hands  worked. His eyes glittered.  Such 
malice was in them that men stepped  back from  him. He bared his teeth; and 
then with a  hissing breath he spat before the king's feet, and  darting  to 
one side, he fled down the stair. 
     'After him!' said Thjoden. 'See that he does no harm to any, but do not 
hurt him or hinder him. Give him a horse, if he wishes it.' 
     'And if any will bear him,' said Jomer. 
     One of the guards ran down the stair.  Another went to the  well at the 
foot of  the terrace and in his helm drew water. With it he washed clean the 
stones that Wormtongue had defiled. 
     'Now my guests, come!' said Thjoden. 'Come and take such refreshment as 
haste allows.' 
     They passed back into the great house. Already they heard below them in  
the town the heralds crying and the  war -horns  blowing. For the king was to 
ride forth as soon as the  men of the  town and those dwelling near could be 
armed and assembled. 
     At the  king's  board sat  Jomer  and  the four guests, and there  also 
waiting  upon  the king was  the lady Jowyn. They ate and drank swiftly. The 
others were silent while Thjoden questioned Gandalf concerning Saruman. 
     'How far back his treachery goes, who can guess?' said Gandalf. 'He was 
not always evil. Once  I  do not doubt that he  was the friend of Rohan; and 
even when his heart grew colder, he found you useful still. But for long now 
he  has plotted  your  ruin, wearing the  mask of Friendship,  until  he was 
ready. In those years Wormtongue's task was easy, and all that  you did  was 
swiftly known in Isengard; for your  land  was  open, and strangers came and 

####-went. And  ever Wormtongue's  whispering was  in your ears,  poisoning  your 
thought, chilling your heart, weakening your limbs, while others watched and 
could do nothing, for your will was in his keeping. 
     'But  when I escaped and  warned you, then the mask was torn, for those 
who would see. After  that Wormtongue played dangerously, always  seeking 
to 
delay  you, to  prevent  your full strength being gathered.  He  was crafty: 
dulling men's  wariness, or working on their fears,  as served the occasion. 
Do you not remember how eagerly  he urged  that no man should be spared on 
a 
wildgoose  chase  northward,  when  the  immediate  peril was  westward?  He 
persuaded you  to  forbid Jomer to pursue the raiding Orcs. If Jomer had not  
defied  Wormtongue's voice speaking  with your mouth, those Orcs would  
have 
reached Isengard by now,  bearing a great prize. Not indeed that prize which  
Saruman desires  above all else, but at the least two members of my Company, 
sharers of a  secret hope, of  which even  to you,  lord, I cannot yet speak 
openly. Dare you think of what they might now be  suffering, or what Saruman 
might now have learned to our destruction?' 
     'I owe much to  Jomer,' said Thjoden. 'Faithful heart  may have forward 
tongue.' 'Say also,' said  Gandalf,  'that to crooked  eyes truth may wear a  
wry face.' 
     'Indeed my eyes were almost blind,' said Thjoden. 'Most of all I owe to 
you, my guest. Once again you have come in time. I would give you a gift ere 
we  go, at your own  choosing. You  have only to name aught  that is mine. I 
reserve now only my sword!' 
     'Whether I came in time or not is yet  to be  seen,' said Gandalf. 'But 
as for your gift, lord, I will choose  one that will fit my need: swift  and 
sure. Give me Shadowfax! He was  only lent  before, if loan we may  call it.  
But now shall ride  him into great hazard,  setting silver against  black: I 
would not risk anything that is not my own.  And already there is  a bond of 
love between us.' 
     'You choose  well,' said Thjoden; 'and I give him now gladly. Yet it  is 
a great  gift. There  is none like  to Shadowfax. In him  one of  the mighty 
steeds of old  has returned. None  such shall  return again. And  to you  my 
other guests I  will offer such things as may be found in my armoury. Swords 
you  do  not need,  but there  are helms and coats  of mail of cunning work, 

####-gifts to my fathers out of Gondor. Choose from these ere we go, and may they 
serve you well!' 
     Now men came bearing  raiment  of  war from  the  king's hoard and they 
arrayed Aragorn and Legolas in shining mail. Helms too they chose, and round 
shields: their bosses were  overlaid with gold and set with gems,  green and 
red  and white.  Gandalf took no armour; and Gimli needed no coat of  rings, 
even if one had been found to match his stature, for there was no hauberk in 
the hoards of Edoras  of  better make than his short corslet forged  beneath 
the Mountain  in the North.  But he  chose a  cap of iron  and leather  that 
fitted well upon his  round head; and  a small  shield he also took. It bore 
the  running  horse,  white upon green, that was the emblem of  the House of 
Eorl. 
     'May it keep you well!' said Thjoden.  'It was made for me in Thengel's 
day, while still I was a boy.' 
     Gimli bowed.  'I am proud, Lord  of the Mark, to bear your  device,' he 
said. 'Indeed  sooner would I bear a  horse than be borne by one. I  love my 
feet better. But, maybe, I shall come yet where I can stand and fight.' 
     'It may well be so,' said Thjoden. 
     The king now rose, and at once Jowyn came forward bearing wine.  'Ferthu 
Thjoden hbl!' she  said. 'Receive  now this  cup  and drink  in happy  hour. 
Health be with thee at thy going and coming!' 
     Thjoden drank from the cup, and she then proffered it to the guests. As 
she stood before  Aragorn she paused suddenly and  looked  upon him, and her 
eyes were shining. And he  looked down upon her fair face and smiled; but as 
he took the cup, his hand  met hers,  and he knew  that she trembled at  the 
touch. 'Hail  Aragorn son of Arathorn!' she said. 'Hail Lady of  Rohan!'  he 
answered, but his face now was troubled and he did not smile. 
     When  they had  all drunk, the king went  down  the hall to  the doors.  
There  the  guards awaited him, and  heralds  stood, and all  the  lords and 
chiefs were gathered together that remained in Edoras or dwelt nearby. 
     'Behold! I  go forth, and  it  seems like to be  my last riding,'  said 
Thjoden. 'I have  no  child. Thjodred  my  son  is  slain.  I name Jomer  my 
sister -son to be my heir. If neither of us return, then choose a new lord as 
you will. But to some one I must now entrust my people that I  leave behind,  
to rule them in my place. Which of you will stay?' 
     No man spoke. 
     'Is there none whom you would name? In whom do my people trust?' 

####-     'In the House of Eorl,' answered Hbma. 
     'But Jomer I cannot spare, nor  would he stay,'  said the king; 'and he 
is the last of that House.' 
     'I  said not Jomer,'  answered Hbma. 'And he is not the  last. There is 
Jowyn, daughter of Jomund, his sister. She is fearless and high-hearted. All 
love her. Let her be as lord to the Eorlingas, while we are gone.' 
     'It shall be so,' said Thjoden. 'Let the heralds  announce to  the folk  
that the Lady Jowyn will lead them!' 
     Then the king sat upon a seat before his doors, and  Jowyn knelt before 
him   and  received  from   him  a  sword  and  a  fair  corslet.  'Farewell 
sister -daughter!' he said. 'Dark is the hour, yet maybe we shall  return  to 
the Golden Hall. But in Dunharrow the people may long defend themselves, 
and 
if the battle go ill, thither will come all who escape.' 'Speak not so!' she 
answered.  'A  year shall I endure  for every  day  that passes  until  your 
return.' But as she spoke her eyes went to Aragorn who stood nearby. 
     'The king shall come again,' he said.  'Fear not! Not West but East does 
our doom await us.' 
     The  king now went down  the stair  with Gandalf beside him. The others 
followed. Aragorn looked back  as they  passed towards the gate. Alone Jowyn 
stood before the  doors of the house at the stair's head; the  sword was set 
upright before her, and her hands were laid upon the hilt. She was  clad now 
in mail and shone like silver in the sun. 
     Gimli walked with Legolas. his axe on his  shoulder. 'Well, at last  we 
set off!' he said. 'Men need many words before deeds. My  axe is restless in 
my  hands.  Though I doubt not that these Rohirrim are fell -handed when they 
come  to it. Nonetheless this is not the warfare  that suits me. How shall I 
come to  the battle?  I  wish  I  could  walk and  not  bump like a sack  at 
Gandalf's saddlebow.' 
     'A safer seat than many, I guess,' said Legolas. 'Yet doubtless Gandalf 
will  gladly put you  down  on  your  feet  when  blows  begin; or Shadowfax 
himself. An axe is no weapon for a rider.' 
     'And a Dwarf is no horseman. It is orc-necks I would hew, not shave the 
scalps of Men,' said Gimli, patting the haft of his axe. 
     At the gate they found a great host of men, old and young, all ready in 
the saddle. More than a thousand were there mustered. Their spears were like 
a springing wood. Loudly and  joyously  they shouted as  Thjoden came forth. 

####-Some  held in  readiness the  king's horse, Snowmane,  and  others  held the 
horses of  Aragorn and Legolas. Gimli stood ill at ease, frowning, bu t Jomer  
came up to him, leading his horse. 
     'Hail,  Gimli Gluin's  son!' he cried.  'I have  not had  time to learn 
gentle speech under your  rod, as you promised. But  shall  we not put aside  
our quarrel? At least I will speak no evil again of the Lady of the Wood.' 
     'I will forget my wrath for  a while, Jomer son of Jomund,' said Gimli; 
'but if ever you chance to  see the Lady Galadriel with your eyes, then  you  
shall  acknowledge her  the fairest of  ladies, or our friendship will end.' 
'So be  it!' said Jomer.  'But  until that  time pardon me, and  in token of 
pardon ride with me, I beg. Gandalf will be at the head with the Lord of the 
Mark; but Firefoot, my horse, will bear us both, if you will.' 
     'I thank  you  indeed,' said Gimli  greatly   pleased. 'I will gladly go 
with you, if Legolas, my comrade, may ride beside us.' 
     'It shall he so,'  said Jomer. 'Legolas upon  my left, and Aragorn upon 
my right, and none will dare to stand before us!' 
     'Where is Shadowfax?' said Gandalf.  
     'Running  wild  over the grass,' they  answered.  'He  will let  no man 
handle him. There he goes, away down by the  ford, like a  shadow among  the 
willows.' 
     Gandalf  whistled  and called aloud the horse's  name,  and far away he 
tossed  his head and neighed,  and  turning sped  towards the host  like  an 
arrow. 
     'Were the breath of the West Wind to take a body visible, even so would 
it appear,' said Jomer, as the great horse ran up, until he stood before the 
wizard. 
     'The gift seems already to be  given,'  said Thjoden. 'But hearken all! 
Here  now I name my  guest, Gandalf  Greyhame,  wisest of  counsellors; most  
welcome of wanderers, a lord of the Mark, a chieftain of the Eorlingas while  
our kin shall last; and I give to him Shadowfax, prince of horses.' 
     'I thank you, Thjoden King,' said Gandalf. Then suddenly he threw  back  
his grey cloak, and cast aside his hat, and leaped to horseback. He  wore no 
helm nor mail. His snowy hair  flew free in the wind, his  white robes shone 
dazzling in  the sun. 
     'Behold the White Rider!' cried Aragorn, and all took up the words.  
     'Our King and the White Rider!' they shouted. 'Forth Eorlingas!' 
     The trumpets sounded. The horses reared and neighed.  Spear  clashed on  

####-shield. Then the king raised his hand, and with a rush like the sudden onset 
of a great wind  the  last host of Rohan rode thundering into  the West. Far 
over  the  plain Jowyn saw the glitter of their spears, as she stood  still, 
alone before the doors of the silent house. 
 

####- 

Chapter 7. Helm's Deep 

 
 
     The sun was  already westering as they rode  from Edoras, and the light 
of it was in their eyes, turning all the rolling fields of Rohan to a golden 
haze. There was  a beaten way,  north-westward  along the foot-hills  of the 
White Mountains,  and  this they  followed, up and  down in a green country, 
crossing small swift streams by many fords. Far ahead and to their right the 
Misty Mountains  loomed; ever darker  and taller they grew as the miles went 
by. The sun went slowly down before them. Evening came behind. 
     The  host rode on. Need drove them. Fearing to come too late, they rode 
with all the speed they  could, pausing seldom. Swift and  enduring were the 
steeds of Rohan, but there were many leagues to go. Forty  leagues  and more 
it was,  as  a bird flies, from Edoras to the fords of  the Isen, where they 
hoped to find the king's men that held back the hosts of Saruman. 
     Night closed about them. At last they  halted  to make their camp. They 
had ridden for some five hours and  were far out upon the western plain, yet  
more than half their journey lay still before them. In a great circle, under  
the starry sky and the waxing moon, they now made their bivouac. They lit no 
fires, for they  were  uncertain  of events; but they set a ring of  mounted 
guards about them, and  scouts  rode out far ahead, passing like shadows  in  
the folds  of  the land. The  slow night passed without tidings or alarm. At  
dawn the horns sounded, and within an hour they took the road again. 
     There were no clouds overhead yet,  but a  heaviness was in the air; it 
was hot for the season of the year. The rising sun was  hazy, and behind it, 
following it slowly up the sky, there was a growing darkness, as of a  great 
storm moving out of the East. And   away in the North-west there seemed to be 
another  darkness brooding about  the feet of the Misty Mountains,  a shadow 
that crept down slowly from the Wizard's Vale. 
     Gandalf dropped back to where Legolas rode beside Jomer.  'You have the 
keen  eyes  of  your fair  kindred, Legolas,' he said; 'and they  can tell  a  
sparrow from a finch a league off. Tell me, can you sec anything away yonder  
towards Isengard?' 
     'Many miles  lie between,' said Legolas, gazing thither and shading his 
eyes with his long hand. 'I can see a darkness. There  are shapes moving  in 
it,  great shapes  far away upon the bank of the river; but  what they are I 

####-cannot tell. It  is  not  mist  or  cloud that defeats  my  eyes: there is a  
veiling shadow that  some power lays upon   the  land, and  it marches slowly 
down  stream.  It  is as  if the twilight under  endless trees were  flowing 
downwards from the hills.' 
     'And behind us comes a very storm of Mordor,' said Gandalf. 'It will be 
a black night.' 
     As  the second day  of their riding drew on, the  heaviness in the  air 
increased. In the afternoon the dark clouds began to overtake them: a sombre 
canopy with great billowing  edges flecked with dazzling light. The sun went 
down, blood-red in a smoking haze. The spears of  the Riders were tipped with 
fire as  the  last shafts of light kindled the steep  faces  of the peaks of 
Thrihyrne: now very near they stood  on the  northernmost arm of  the  White 
Mountains, three jagged horns staring at  the  sunset. In the last red  glow 
men in the vanguard saw a black speck, a horseman  riding back towards them. 
They halted awaiting him. 
     He came, a  weary man  with dinted helm  and cloven shield.  Slowly  he 
climbed from his horse and stood there a while gasping. At  length he spoke.  
'Is  Jomer  here?' he asked. 'You come at last, but too late,  and with  too 
little strength. Things have gone evilly since Thjodred fell. We were driven 
back yesterday over the Isen with great loss; many perished at the crossing. 
Then at  night fresh   forces  came  over  the river  against  our camp.  All 
Isengard  must  be  emptied;  and Saruman has  armed the  wild  hillmen  and 
herd-folk of Dunland beyond the rivers, and these also he loosed upon us. We 
were overmastered. The  shield-wall was  broken. Erkenbrand of  Westfold has 
drawn off those men he could gather towards his fastness in Helm's Deep. The 
rest are scattered. 
     'Where is Jomer? Tell him there is no hope ahead.  He should  return to 
Edoras  before  the wolves of Isengard come there.' Thjoden  had sat silent, 
hidden from  the  man's sight behind his  guards; now  he  urged  his  horse 
forward. 'Come, stand before me, Ceorl!'  he said. 'I am here. The last host  
of the Eorlingas has ridden forth. It will not return without battle.' 
     The man's face lightened with joy and wonder.  He drew himself up. Then 
he knelt,  offering his  notched sword to the king. 'Command  me, lord!'  he 
cried. 'And pardon me! I thought--' 
     'You thought I remained  in Meduseld bent like an old tree under winter  
snow. So  it was  when you  rode  to war. But  a  west  wind has shaken  the  
boughs,' said Thjoden. 'Give this man a fresh horse! Let us ride to the help 

####-of Erkenbrand!' 
     While Thjoden was speaking, Gandalf  rode a short way ahead, and he sat 
there  alone, gazing north  to Isengard and west to  the setting sun. Now he 
came back. 
     'Ride,  Thjoden!' he said. 'Ride to Helm's Deep! Go not to the Fords of 
Isen, and do not tarry in the plain! I must leave you for a while. Shadowfax 
must  bear me now on a swift errand.'  Turning to Aragorn and Jomer  and the 
men of the king's household, he cried: 'Keep well the Lord of the Mark, till 
I return. Await me at Helm's Gate! Farewell!' 
     He spoke a word to Shadowfax, and like an arrow  from the bow the gr eat 
horse sprang away. Even as they looked he was gone: a flash of silver in the 
sunset, a wind over the  grass, a shadow that fled  and  passed  from sight. 
Snowmane  snorted and reared,  eager to follow; but only a swift bird on the 
wing could have overtaken him. 
     'What does that mean?' said one of the guard to Hbma. 
     'That Gandalf Greyhame has need of haste,' answered Hbma. 'Ever he goes 
and comes unlooked-for:' 
     'Wormtongue, were he here, would not find it hard to explain  'Said the 
other. 
     'True  enough,'  said Hbma; 'but for myself, I will  wait  until I  see 
Gandalf again.' 
     'Maybe you will wait long,' said the other. 
     The host turned away now from  the  road to the  Fords of Isen and bent 
their course southward. Night fell,  a nd still they rode on. The hills  drew 
near, but the tall peaks of Thrihyrne were already dim against the darkening 
sky.  Still  some miles away, on  the far side of the Westfold  Vale,  lay a  
green coomb, a great bay in  the mountains,  out of which  a gorge opened in  
the hills. Men of that land called it Helm's  Deep, after a hero of old wars 
who  had  made  his refuge there. Ever steeper and narrower it wound  inward 
from  the  north  under the shadow  of the Thrihyrne, till the  crow-haunted 
cliffs rose  like mighty towers on either side, shutting out the light. 
     At Helm's Gate, before the  mouth of the Deep, there was a heel of rock  
thrust outward by the northern cliff. There  upon its spur stood  high walls 
of  ancient stone, and within them was a lofty  tower. Men said that  in the 
far-off  days of  the glory  of  Gondor  the  sea -kings  had built here this 
fastness with the hands of giants. The Hornburg it was called, for a trumpet 
sounded  upon   the   tower  echoed  in  the  Deep  behind,  as   i f  armies 

####-long-forgotten  were issuing to war from  caves beneath the  hills. A  wall, 
too,  the men  of old  had made  from the  Hornburg to  the  southern cliff,  
barring  the  entrance  to  the gorge.  Beneath  it by a  wide  culvert  the 
Deeping-stream passed out.  About the  feet  of  the Hornrock it wound,  and  
flowed  then in  a gully through the  midst of a wide  green  gore,  sloping 
gently  down  from  Helm's Gate  to  Helm's Dike.  Thence it  fell into  the 
Deeping-coomb and  out into  the Westfold  Vale.  There  in the  Hornburg at 
Helm's Gate Erkenbrand, master  of Westfold on the borders of the  Mark, now 
dwelt. As the days darkened with threat of war, being  wise, he had repaired 
the wall and made the fastness strong. 
     The Riders were still  in the low valley before the  mouth of the Coomb, 
when cries and  hornblasts were heard  from their scouts that went in front. 
Out of the  darkness arrows whistled. Swiftly a scout rode back and reported  
that wolf-riders were abroad in the valley, and tha t a host of Orcs and wild 
men were hurrying southward from the Fords of  Isen and seemed  to be 
making 
for Helm's Deep. 
     'We have found many of our folk lying slain as they fled thither,' said 
the scout. 'And we  have met scattered companies, going  this way  and that,  
leaderless. What has become of Erkenbrand  none seem to  know.  It is likely 
that  he  will be  overtaken  ere he can  reach Helm's Gate, if  he  has not 
already perished.' 
     'Has aught been seen of Gandalf?' asked Thjoden. 
     'Yes,   lord. Many have seen an old man in white upon a  horse,  passing 
hither and thither over the  plains like wind in  the grass. Some thought he 
was Saruman. It  is said  that he went away ere  nightfall towards Isengard. 
Some say also  that  Wormtongue was  seen  earlier,  going northward  with a 
company of Orcs.' 
     'It  will  go ill  with Wormtongue,  if  Gandalf  comes  upon  him said 
Thjoden.  'Nonetheless I miss now both my  counsellors, the old and the new.  
But in this need we have no better choice than to go on, as Gandalf said, to 
Helm's Gate, whether Erkenbrand be there or no. Is it known how great is the 
host that comes from the North?' 
     'It is very great,' said the scout. 'He  that flies counts every foeman 
twice, yet I have spoken  to stouthearted  men, and I do not doubt that  the 
main strength of the enemy is many times as great as all that we have here.' 
     'Then let us be swift,' said Jomer. 'Let us drive through such foes  as 

####-are  already  between  us  and the  fastness. There are caves in Helm's Deep 
where hundreds may lie hid; and secret ways lead thence up on to the hills.  
     'Trust not to secret ways,' said the king. 'Saruman  has long spied out 
this land. Still in that place our defence may last long. Let us go!' 
     Aragorn and  Legolas went now with Jomer in the van. On through the dark 
night they rode, ever  slower as the darkness deepened and their way climbed 
southward, higher and higher into the  dim folds about the  mountains' feet. 
They  found  few of the  enemy before  them. Here and  there they came  upon 
roving bands of Orcs; but they fled ere the Riders could take or slay them. 
     'It will not be long I fear,' said Jomer, 'ere the coming of the king's 
host will be known to the leader of our enemies, Saruman or whatever captain 
he has sent forth.' 
     The rumour of war grew behind them. Now they could hear, borne over the 
dark,  the  sound  of harsh  singing.  They  had  climbed far  up  into  the 
Deeping-coomb  when they looked back. Then they saw torches countless 
points 
of fiery light upon the  black fields behind, scattered like red flowers, or  
winding  up from  the lowlands in  long flickering lines.  Here and  there a  
larger blaze leapt up. 
     'It is a great host and follows us hard,' said Aragorn. 
     'They br ing fire,' said Thjoden,  'and they are  burning as  they come, 
rick, cot, and tree. This was  a rich vale and had many homesteads. Alas for  
my folk!' 
     'Would that day  was here and we might ride down upon them like a storm 
out of the mountains!' said Aragorn. 'It grieves me to fly before them.' 
     'We need not  fly much further,' said Jomer.  'Not  far ahead now  lies 
Helm's  Dike,  an  ancient trench  and rampart scored across the  coomb, two 
furlongs below Helm's Gate. There we can turn and give ba ttle.' 
     'Nay, we are too  few to defend the Dike,' said Thjoden. 'It  is a mile 
long or more, and the breach in it is wide.' 
     'At  the breach our  rearguard  must  stand,  if we  are pressed,' said 
Jomer. 
     There was neither star  nor moon when  the Riders came  to the breach in  
the Dike, where the stream from above passed out, and the road beside it ran 
down from  the  Hornburg. The  rampart loomed suddenly  before  them, a high 
shadow beyond a dark pit. As they rode up a sentinel challenged them. 
     'The Lord of the Mark rides  to Helm's Gate,' Jomer answered. 'I, Jomer  

####-son of Jomund, speak.' 
     'This  is good  tidings beyond hope,' said  the  sentinel. 'Hasten! The 
enemy is on your heels.' 
     The host  passed  through the breach  and halted  on the sloping  sward 
above. They now learned to their joy  that Erkenbrand  had left  many men to 
hold Helm's Gate, and more had since escaped thither. 
     'Maybe, we have a thousand fit  to fight on foot,' said Gamling, an old 
man, the leader of those that watched the Dike. 'But  most of them have seen 
too many winters, as I have,  or too few, as my son's son here. What news of 
Erkenbrand? Word came yesterday that he was retreating hither with all  that 
is left of the best Riders of Westfold. But he has not come.' 
     'I fear that he will not come now,' said Jomer. 'Our scouts have gained 
no news of him, and the enemy fills all the valley behind us.' 
     'I would that he had  escaped,'  said Thjoden. 'He was a mighty man. In 
him lived again the  valour of Helm the Hammerhand.  But we cannot await 
him 
here. We must draw all our forces now behind the walls. Are you well stored?  
We bring  little  provision,  for we  rode forth  to open  battle,  not to a  
siege.' 
     'Behind us  in the caves  of the Deep  are  three  parts of the folk  of 
Westfold, old and young, children and women,' said Gamling. 'But great store 
of food, and many beasts and their fodder, have also been gathered there.' 
     'That is well,' said Jomer. 'They are burning or despoiling all that is 
left in the vale.' 
     'If they come to  bargain for our goods at Helm's Gate, they will pay a  
high price,' said Gamling. 
     The king and his Riders passed on. Before the causeway that crossed the  
stream they dismounted. In a long file they led their horses up the ramp and 
passed within the gates of the Hornburg. There they were welcomed again with 
joy and renewed hope; for now there were men enough to man both the burg 
and 
the barrier wall. 
     Quickly  Jomer set his  men in readiness. The king and  the men of  his 
household  were  in  the   Hornburg,  and  there  also  were   many  of  the  
Westfold-men.  But on  the Deeping  Wall and its tower, and behind it, Jomer  
arrayed most of  the strength that he had, for here the  defence seemed more 
doubtful, if the assault were determined and in great force. The horses were 

####-led far up the Deep under such guard as could be spared. 
     The Deeping Wall was twenty feet high, and so thick that four men could  
walk abreast along the top, sheltered by a parapet  over  which  only a tall  
man could look. Here and there were clefts  in the  stone  through which men 
could shoot. This battlement could be reached by a stair running down from a 
door in the outer court of the Hornburg; three flights of steps led  also up 
on to the wall  from the Deep  behind; but in front  it  was smooth, and the 
great stones of it were set with such  skill that no foothold could be found 
at their joints, and at the top they hung over like a sea -delved cliff.  
     Gimli  stood  leaning  against the breastwork upon the wall. Legolas sat 
above on the parapet, fingering his bow, and peering out into the gloom. 
     'This  is more to my liking,' said the dwarf, stamping  on  the stones.  
'Ever my heart rises as we draw near the mountains. There is good rock here. 
This country has tough bones. I felt them in my feet as we came  up from the 
dike. Give  me  a year and a hundred of my kin and I would make this a place 
that armies would break upon like water.' 
     'I do not doubt  it,'  said Legolas.  'But you are a dwarf, and dwarves 
are strange folk. I do not like this  place, and I shall like it no more  by 
the light of  day.  But you  comfort me, Gimli, and I  am  glad  to have you  
standing nigh with your stout legs and your hard axe. I wish there were more 
of your kin among us. But even more would I give  for a hundred good archers 
of Mirkwood. We shall need  them.  The Rohirrim have good bowmen after 
their 
fashion, but there are too few here, too few.' 
     'It is dark for archery,'  said  Gimli. 'Indeed it is  time  for sleep. 
Sleep! I feel the need of it, as never  I thought any dwarf could. Riding is 
tiring  work. Yet my axe is restless in my hand. Give  me a row of orc-necks 
and room to swing and all weariness will fall from me!' 
     A  slow time  passed.  Far down  in  the valley  scattered  fires still 
burned. The hosts of Isengard were  advancing in  silence now. Their torches 
could be seen winding up the coomb in many lines.  
     Suddenly from the Dike yells  and screams,  and the fierce battle-cries 
of  men  broke  out. Flaming  brands  appeared over  the brink and clustered 
thickly at the  breach. Then they scattered and vanished. Men came galloping 
back  over the  field and  up the ramp to  the  gate of  the  Hornburg.  The 
rearguard of the Westfolders had been driven in. 
     'The enemy is at hand!' they said. 'We loosed every arrow  that we had, 

####-and  filled the Dike with Orcs. But it will not halt them long. Already they 
are  scaling the bank at many  points,  thick as marching ants. But we  have 
taught them not to carry torches.' 
     It was  now past  midnight. The sky was utterly dark, and the stillness 
of the  heavy  air foreboded storm.  Suddenly  the  clouds were  seared by a  
blinding flash. Branched lightning smote down upon the eastward hills. For a 
staring moment the watchers  on the walls saw all the space between them and 
the  Dike lit with white  light: it  was  boiling  and  crawling  with black  
shapes. some squat and broad, some  tall and grim, with high helms and sable 
shields. Hundreds and hundreds more  were pouring over the Dike and  through 
the breach.  The dark tide flowed  up to  the  walls  from  cliff  to cliff. 
Thunder rolled in the valley. Rain came lashing down. 
     Arrows thick  as the rain came whistling over the battlements, and fell 
clinking  and glancing on the stones. Some  found  a  mark.  The  assault on  
Helm's Deep  had  begun, but  no  sound  or challenge  was heard within;  no 
answering arrows came. 
     The  assailing  hosts halted, foiled  by the silent menace  of rock and 
wall. Ever and again  the lightning  tore aside the darkness.  Then the Orcs 
screamed, waving spear and sword, and shooting a cloud of arrows at any that 
stood  revealed upon the battlements;  and the men of the Mark amazed looked 
out,  as it seemed  to them, upon a great field of  dark corn, tossed  by  a  
tempest of war, and every ear glinted with barbed light. 
     Brazen trumpets sounded.  The enemy surged  forward,  some against  the 
Deeping Wall,  other  towards the causeway a nd  the ramp that led up to  the  
Hornburg-gates. There the hugest Orcs were mustered, and the wild men of the 
Dunland fells. A moment they hesitated and then  on they came. The lightning 
flashed,  and blazoned  upon  every helm  and  shield  the  ghastly  hand of 
Isengard was seen: They reached the summit of the  rock;  they drove towards 
the gates.  
     Then at last an answer came: a storm of arrows met them,  and a hail of 
stones. They  wavered, broke, and fled  back; and  then charged again, broke 
and charged  again; and each time, like  the incoming sea, they  halted at a  
higher point. Again trumpets rang, and a press of roaring  men leaped forth.  
They held their great shields  above them like a roof, while in  their midst 
they  bore two trunks of  mighty  trees.  Behind  them orc-archers  crowded,  
sending a hail  of  darts against the bowmen on the walls. They  gained  the 
gates. The  trees, swung by  strong  arms, smote the timbers  with a rending 

####-boom. If any man fell,  crushed by a stone hurtling  from above,  two others 
sprang to take his place. Again and again the great rams swung and crashed. 
     Jomer and Aragorn stood  together on  the Deeping Wall. They heard  the 
roar  of voices and the thudding of  the rams; and then in a sudden flash of 
light they beheld the peril of the gates.  
     'Come!' said Aragorn. 'This is the hour when we draw swords together!' 
     Running  like fire, they  sped along  the  wall, and up the  steps, and 
passed  into the  outer  court  upon the Rock.  As they  ran they gathered a  
handful of stout swordsmen. There was a small postern-door that opened in an 
angle of the burg-wall on the west, where the cliff  stretched  out to  meet 
it. On that side a narrow path ran round towards the great gate, between the 
wall and the  sheer brink of  the Rock.  Together Jomer  and Aragorn  sprang 
through the door, their men close behind. The swords flashed from the sheath 
as one. 
     'G®thwinl!' cried Jomer. 'G®thwinl for the Mark!' 
     'And®ril!' cried Aragorn. 'And®ril for the D®nedain!' 
     Charging  from  the side,  they  hurled themselves  upon the  wild men. 
And®ril rose and fell,  gleaming with white fire. A shout went  up from wall 
and tower: 'And®ril! And®ril goes to  war. The Blade that  was Broken shines 
again!' 
     Dismayed  the  rammers let fall the trees and turned to fight;  but the 
wall of their shields  was broken as by  a  lightning-stroke, and  they were 
swept  away, hewn down,  or cast over the Rock into the stony stream  below.  
The orc-archers shot wildly and then fled. 
     For a moment Jomer and Aragorn halted before the gates. The thunder was 
rumbling in  the distance now.  The lightning flickered still, far off among 
the mountains  in the  South. A keen wind was blowing from  the North again. 
The clouds were torn and drifting, and stars peeped out; and above the hills 
of  the  Coomb-side  the  westering  moon  rode,  glimmering yellow  in  the 
storm-wrack. 
     'We  did not come too soon,' said Aragorn, looking  at the gates. Their 
great  hinges and  iron bars were  wrenched and bent; many  of their timbers 
were cracked. 
     'Yet we cannot stay here beyond  the walls to defend them,' said Jomer. 
'Look!'  He pointed to the causeway. Already a great press of Orcs  and  Men 
were  gathering again beyond the stream. Arrows whined, and  skipped on  the 
stones about  them. 'Come! We must get  back and see what we  can do to pile 

####-stone and beam across the gates within. Come now!' 
     They  turned  and ran. At  that  moment some dozen Orcs that  had  lain 
motionless among  the slain  leaped  to their feet,  and  came  silently and 
swiftly behind. Two flung themselves to the ground at Jomer's heels, tripped 
him,  and in a moment they were on top of him. But a  small dark figure that 
none had observed sprang out of the shadows  and gave a hoarse  shout: Baruk 
Khazvd! Khazvd ai-mknu! An axe swung and swept back. Two Orcs fell 
headless.  
The rest fled. 
     Jomer struggled to his feet, even as Aragorn ran back to his aid. 
     The postern was closed again, the iron door was barred and piled inside 
with  stones. When all  were safe  within, Jomer turned: 'I thank you, Gimli 
son of Gluin!' he said. 'I did not know that you were with us in the sortie. 
But oft the unbidden guest proves the best company. How came you there?' 
     'I followed you to shake off sleep,'  said Gimli; 'but I looked on  the 
hillmen  and they seemed over large for me, so  I sat  beside a stone to see 
your sword-play.' 
     'I shall not find it easy to repay you,' said Jomer. 
     'There may be many a chance ere the night is over,' laughed the  Dwarf.  
'But I am content. Till now I have hewn naught but wood since I left Moria.' 
     'Two!' said Gimli, patting his axe. He had returned to his place on the 
wall. 
     'Two?' said Legolas. 'I have done  better, though  now I must grope for  
spent arrows; all mine are gone. Yet I make my tale twenty at the least. But 
that is only a few leaves in a forest.' 
     The  sky  now  was  quickly clearing and the sinking  moon was  shining  
brightly. But the light brought little hope to  the Riders  of the Mark. The 
enemy before them seemed to  have  grown rather than diminished,  still more 
were  pressing up from  the valley through  the breach. The sortie  upon the 
Rock gained  only a  brief respite. The  assault on the gates was redoubled. 
Against the Deeping Wall the hosts of Isengard roared like a  sea.  Orcs and 
hillmen swarmed about  its feet from end  to end. Ropes with grappling hooks 
were hurled over the  parapet faster  than men could cut them  or fling them 
back.  Hundreds of long ladders were lifted up. Many were cast down in ruin, 
but many more replaced  them, and Orcs sprang up them like  apes in the dark 
forests of the South. Before the wall's foot  the dead and broken were piled 
like shingle in  a storm; ever higher rose the hideous mounds, and still the  

####-enemy came on. 
     The men of Rohan grew weary.  All their arrows  were  spent, and  every 
shaft  was shot;  their swords were notched, and their shields  were  riven. 
Three  times Aragorn and Jomer  rallied them, and three times And®ril flamed 
in a desperate charge that drove the enemy from the wall. 
     Then  a  clamour arose  in the Deep  behind. Orcs had crept  like  rats 
through the culvert  through  which the stream  flowed out. There  they  had 
gathered in the  shadow of the cliffs, until  the assault  above was hottest  
and  nearly all  the men of the defence had rushed to  the  wall's top. Then 
they sprang out. Already some had passed into the jaws of  the Deep and were 
among the horses, fighting with the guards.  
     Down from  the wall leapt Gimli with a fierce  cry  that echoed in  the 
cliffs.  'Khazvd! Khazvd!' He soon had work enough. 
     'Ai -oi!'  he  shouted.  'The  Orcs are  behind  the  wall. Ai -oi! Come, 
Legolas! There are enough for us both. Khazvd ai-mknu!' 
     Gamling the Old looked down  from the Hornburg, hearing the great voice 
of the  dwarf above all the  tumult.  'The Orcs are in  the Deep!' he cried. 
'Helm! Helm!  Forth Helmingas. he shouted as he leaped  down the  stair from 
the Rock with many men of Westfold at his back. 
     Their  onset was fierce and sudden, and the Orcs gave way before  them.  
Ere long they were hemmed in in the narrows of the gorge, and all were slain 
or driven shrieking into the chasm of the Deep to fall before the  guardians 
of the hidden caves. 
     'Twenty-one!'  cried  Gimli. He  hewed a two -handed stroke and laid the 
last Orc before his feet. 'Now my count passes Master Legolas again.' 
     'We must stop this rat-hole,' said Gamling.  'Dwarves  are  said  to be 
cunning folk with stone. Lend us your aid, master!' 
     'We do  not shape stone with battle-axes,  nor with our  finger -nails,' 
said Gimli. 'But I will help as I may.' 
     They  gathered such small boulders and broken stones as they could find  
to hand, and under  Gimli's direction  the Westfold-men blocked up the inner 
end  of  the  culvert,  until  only  a  narrow  outlet  remained.  Then  the 
Deeping-stream, swollen by the rain, churned and fretted in its choked path,  
and spread slowly in cold pools from cliff to cliff. 
     'It will  be drier above,' said  Gimli. 'Come, Gamling, let us see  how 
things go on the wall!' 
     He  climbed up and  found Legolas beside Aragorn and Jomer. The elf was 

####-whetting his long knife. There was  for a while a lull in the assault, since 
the attempt to break in through the culvert had been foiled. 
     'Twenty-one!' said Gimli. 
     'Good!' said  Legolas.  'But my count  is  now  two  dozen. It has been 
knife-work up here.' 
     Jomer  and Aragorn  leant wearily on their swo rds. Away on the left the 
crash  and  clamour  of the battle  on the Rock rose  loud  again.  But  the 
Hornburg still held fast, like an island in the sea.  Its gates lay in ruin; 
but over  the  barricade of  beams and  stones  within no  enemy  as yet had 
passed. 
     Aragorn  looked at the pale stars, and  at the moon, now sloping behind 
the  western  hills that enclosed  the valley. 'This is a  night  as long as 
years,' he said. 'How long will the day tarry?' 
     'Dawn is not far off,' said Gamling, who had now climbed up beside him. 
'But dawn will not help us, I fear.' 
     'Yet dawn is ever the hope of men,' said Aragorn. 
     'But these creatures of  Isengard, these half-orcs and  goblin-men that 
the foul craft of Saruman  has bred, they will not quail at the  sun,'  said 
Gamling. 'And neither will  the wild men of the hills. Do you not hear their 
voices?' 
     'I  hear them,' said  Jomer; 'but they are only the scream of birds and 
the bellowing of beasts to my ears.' 
     'Yet  there  are many that cry in the Dunland tongue,' said Gamling. 'I  
know that tongue.  It is an ancient speech  of men, and  once  was spoken in  
many western valleys of the Mark. Hark! They hate us, and they are glad; for 
our doom seems certain to them. 'The king the king!' they cry. 'We will take 
their king.  Death to the Forgoil!  Death  to the Strawheads! Death  to  the  
robbers of the North!'  Such names they have for  us. Not in half a thousand 
years have they forgotten their  grievance that the lords of Gondor gave the 
Mark to  Eorl the  Young and  made alliance with him. That old hatred Saruman 
has  inflamed. They are fierce folk when roused. They  will not give way now 
for dusk or dawn, until Thjoden is taken, or they themselves are slain.' 
     'Nonetheless day will bring hope to me,' said Aragorn.  'Is it not said 
that no foe has ever taken the Hornburg, if men defended it?' 
     'So the minstrels say,' said Jomer. 
     'Then let us defend it, and hope!' said Aragorn. 
     Even as they  spoke there came a blare  of trumpets. Then there  was  a  

####-crash  and a flash of  flame and  smoke. The waters  of  the  Deeping-stream 
poured out  hissing and  foaming: they were choked no longer, a gaping  hole 
was blasted in the wall. A host of dark shapes poured in. 
     'Devilry of Saruman! ' cried  Aragorn.  'They have crept  in the culvert 
again, while  we talked, and  they have  lit the fire of Orthanc beneath our 
feet. Elendil, Elendil!' he shouted, as he leaped down into  the breach; but 
even as he  did  so  a hundred ladders were raised  against the  battlements.  
Over the wall and under  the wall the last assault came sweeping like a dark 
wave upon a hill of  sand. The  defence  was  swept away. Some of the Riders 
were driven back, further and further into the Deep, falling and fighting a s 
they gave way, step  by step, towards the caves.  Others cut  their way back  
towards the citadel. 
     A  broad  stairway,  climbed  from  the Deep  up  to the  Rock and  the 
rear-gate of the Hornburg. Near the bottom stood  Aragorn. In his hand still 
And®ril gleamed,  and  the terror of  the sword  for a while  held  back the 
enemy,  as one by one all who  could  gain the  stair passed up  towards the 
gate. Behind  on the upper  steps knelt Legolas. His bow  was  bent, but one  
gleaned arrow  was all that he had left,  and he  peered out now,  ready  to 
shoot the first Orc that should dare to approach the stair. 
     'All  who  can  have now got safe  within, Aragorn,' he  called.  'Come 
back!' 
     Aragorn turned and sped up the stair; but as  he ran he stumbled in his 
weariness. At once  his  enemies  leapt forward. Up  came the Orcs, yelling,  
with  their  long arms stretched out to  seize  him. The foremost  fell with 
Legolas' last  arrow in his  throat. but the rest sprang  over  him.  Then a  
great boulder, cast from the outer wall above,  crashed down upon the stair, 
and hurled them back into the Deep.  Aragorn gained the door, and swiftly it 
clanged to behind him. 
     'Things go ill,  my friends,'  he said, wiping the sweat  from his brow 
with his arm. 
     'Ill enough,' said Legolas,  'but not yet hopeless, while  we have  you  
with us. Where is Gimli?' 
     'I do not  know.' said Aragorn. 'I last saw  him fighting on the ground 
behind the wall, but the enemy swept us apart.' 
     'Alas! That is evil news,' said Legolas. 
     'He is  stout and strong,'  said Aragorn. 'Let  us  hope  that he  will 
escape back to the caves. There he would be safe for a while. Safer than we. 

####-Such a refuge would be to the liking of a dwarf.' 
     'That must be my hope'' said Legolas. 'But I wish that he had come this 
way. I desired to tell Master Gimli that my tale is now thirty-nine.' 
     'If he wins back to the caves, he will pass your  count again,' laughed 
Aragorn. 'Never did I see an axe so wielded.' 
     'I must go  a nd seek some arrows,' said Legolas. 'Would that this night 
would end, and I could have better light for shooting.' 
     Aragorn  now  passed into the  citadel. There to his  dismay he learned 
that Jomer had not reached the Hornburg. 
     'Nay,  he did not come to the Rock,'  said one  of the Westfold-men,  'I 
last saw him gathering men about him and fighting  in the mouth of the Deep. 
Gamling was with him, and the dwarf; but I could not come to them.' 
     Aragorn strode  on  through  the  inner court,  and  mounted to a  high 
chamber in  the tower. There stood  the king, dark  against a narrow window, 
looking out upon the vale. 
     'What is the news, Aragorn?' he said. 
     'The Deeping Wall is taken, lord, and  all the  defence swept away; but 
many have escaped hither to the Rock.' 
     'Is Jomer here?' 
     'No, lord. But many  of your men  retreated into the Deep; and some say 
that Jomer was amongst them. In the narrows they may hold back the enemy 
and 
come within the caves. What hope they may have then I  do not know.' 
     'More than we.  Good  provision,  it is said. And  the air is wholesome 
there because of  the outlets through fissures  in the rock  far above. None 
can force an entrance against determined men. They may hold out long.' 
     'But the Orcs have brought a devilry from Orthanc,' said Aragorn. 'They 
have a blasting fire, and with it they took the Wall. If they cannot come in 
the caves, they may seal up those that are inside.  But now we must turn all 
our thoughts to our own defence.' 
     'I fret in this prison,'  said Thjoden. 'If I could have set a spear in 
rest, riding before my men upon the field, maybe I could have felt again the  
joy of battle, and so ended. But I serve little purpose here.' 
     'Here at least you are guarded in the  strongest fastness of the Mark,' 
said Aragorn.  'More  hope we  have to defend you  in  the Hornburg than  in 
Edoras, or even at Dunharrow in the mountains.' 
     'It  is said  that the Hornburg  has  never  fallen  to  assault,' said 

####-Thjoden; 'but now my heart is doubtful. The world changes, and all that once 
was strong now proves unsure. How shall any tower withstand such numbers 
and 
such reckless  hate? Had I known that the strength  of Isengard was grown so 
great, maybe  l should  not so rashly have ridden forth to  meet it, for all 
the arts of Gandalf. His counsel  seems  not now so good as it did under the 
morning sun.' 
     'Do not judge  the counsel  of  Gandalf, until all is over, lord,' said 
Aragorn. 
     'The  end will not be  long,'  said the king. 'But I will not end here, 
taken like an old badger  in a trap. Snowmane and Hasufel  and the horses of 
my guard are  in the inner court.  When  dawn comes, I  will bid  men  sound 
Helm's horn,  and I  will ride forth.  Will  you ride  with me then, son  of 
Arathorn? Maybe we shall cleave a road, or make such an end as will be worth 
a song-if any be left to sing of us hereafter.' 
     'I will ride with you,' said Aragorn. 
     Taking  his leave, he returned to the walls, and passed round all their 
circuit, enheartening the men, and lending aid wherever the assault was hot.  
Legolas  went with  him.  Blasts of  fire leaped up from  below  shaking the 
stones. Grappling-hooks were hurled, and ladders raised. Again and again the 
Orcs gained the  summit of the outer wall, and again the defenders cast them 
down. 
     At last Aragorn stood above the great gates, heedless  of the darts  of 
the  enemy. As  he  looked forth he  saw the eastern sky grow  pale. Then he 
raised his empty hand, palm outward in token of parley. 
     The Orcs yelled and jeered. 'Come down! Come down!' they cried. 'If you 
wish  to speak  to us, come down! Bring out your  king!  We are the fighting 
Uruk-hai.  We will fetch him from his hole,  if  he does not come. Bring out 
your skulking king!' 
     'The king stays or comes at his own will,' said Aragorn. 
     'Then what are you doing here?' they answered. 'Why do you look out? Do 
you wish to see the greatness of our army? We are the fighting Uruk-hai.' 
     'I looked out to see the dawn,' said Aragorn. 
     'What of the dawn?' they jeered. 'We are the Uruk-hai:  we  do not stop  
the fight for night or day, for fair  weather or for storm. We come to kill, 
by sun or moon. What of the dawn?' 
     'None knows what the  new day shall bring him,' said  Aragorn. 'Get you  

####-gone, ere it turn to your evil.' 
     'Get down or  we will shoot you from the wall,' they cried. 'This is no 
parley. You have nothing to say.' 
     'I have still this to say,' answered Aragorn. 'No  enemy has  yet taken 
the Hornburg. Depart, or not one of you will be spared. Not one will be left 
alive to take back tidings to the North. You do not know your peril.' 
     So great a power and royalty was revealed in Aragorn, as he stood there 
alone  above the ruined gates before  the host of  his  enemies, that many of 
the wild men paused, and looked back over their shoulders to the valley, and  
some looked up doubtfully at the sky. But the Orcs laughed with loud voices; 
and a  hail of darts and arrows whistled over  the  wall, as  Aragorn leaped 
down. 
     There  was a roar and a blast of  fire. The archway  of the gate  above 
which he had stood a moment before crumbled and crashed  in smoke  and 
dust. 
The  barricade was  scattered as if  by  a thunderbolt. Aragorn  ran to  the 
king's tower. 
     But even as the gate fell, and the Orcs  about it yelled,  preparing to 
charge, a murmur arose behind them. like a wind in the distance, and it grew 
to a clamour of many voices crying strange news  in the dawn.  The Orcs upon 
the Rock, hearing the  rumour of dismay, wavered and looked back.  And then, 
sudden and terrible, from the  tower above, the sound  of the great horn  of 
Helm rang out. 
     All that heard that sound trembled. Many of the Orcs cast themselves on 
their faces and covered their ears  with their claws. Back from the Deep the 
echoes came, blast upon blast, as if on every cliff and hill a mighty herald 
stood. But on the walls men looked up, listening with wonder; for the echoes 
did not die. Ever the  horn-blasts wound on among the hills; nearer now  and  
louder they answered one to another, blowing fierce and free. 
     'Helm!  Helm!' the Riders  shouted.  'Helm is arisen  and comes back to 
war. Helm for Thjoden King!' 
     And with that shout the king came. His horse  was white as snow, golden 
was  his shield,  and his  spear was long. At his  right  hand  was Aragorn, 
Elendil's  heir, behind him rode the lords of the  House of Eorl the  Young. 
Light sprang in the sky. Night departed. 
     'Forth Eorlingas!' With a cry and a great noise they charged. Down from 
the gates they roared, over the causeway they swept, and they drove  through 

####-the hosts of Isengard as a wind among grass. Behind them  from the Deep came 
the stern cries of' men issuing from the caves, driving forth the enemy. Out 
poured  all the men that were left upon  the Rock.  And  ever the  sound  of 
blowing horns echoed in the hills.  
     On they rode, the king and his companions. Captains  and champions fell  
or fled before them. Neither orc nor man withstood them. Their backs were to 
the swords  and  spears of the Riders and their  faces to  the  valley. They 
cried  and  wailed,  for fear and great wonder had  come upon  them with the  
rising of the day. 
     So King Thjoden rode from Helm's Gate and clove his path to  the  great 
Dike. There the company  halted. Light grew bright about them. Shafts of the 
sun flared above the  eastern hills and  glimmered on their spears. But they 
sat silent on their horses, and they gazed down upon the Deeping-coomb. 
     The land had changed. Where before the green dale had  lain, its grassy 
slopes lapping  the ever -mounting hills,  there  now a forest  loomed. Great 
trees, bare and  silent,  stood, rank on  rank, with tangled bough and hoary 
head;  their twisted roots were buried in the long green grass. Darkness was 
under them. Between the  Dike and the eaves of that  nameless wood only  two 
open furlongs lay.  There now cowered  the proud hosts of Saruman, in terror 
of the  king and in terror of the trees. They streamed down from Helm's Gate 
until all above the Dike was  empty  of them, but below it they were  packed 
like swarming flies.  Vainly they crawled and clambered about  the walls  of 
the coomb. seeking to escape.  Upon the  east  too sheer and stony  was  the 
valley's side; upon the left, from the west, their final doom approached. 
     There suddenly upon a ridge appeared a rider, clad in white, shining in 
the rising  sun.  Over  the low hills  the horns were  sounding. Behind him, 
hastening down the long slopes,  were a  thousand  men on foot; their swords 
were in their hands. Amid them strode a man tall and strong.  His shield was 
red. As he came to the valley's brink, he set to his lips a great black horn 
and blew a ringing blast. 
     'Erkenbrand!' the Riders shouted. 'Erkenbrand!' 
     'Behold the White Rider!' cried Aragorn. 'Gandalf is come again!' 
     'Mithrandir, Mithrandir!' said Legolas. 'This is wizardry indeed! Come!  
I would look on this forest, ere the spell changes.' 
     The  hosts  of Isengard roared, swaying this way and that, turning from 
fear to fear. Again the horn sounded from the tower. Down through the breach 
of  the  Dike  charged  the  king's  company.  Down  from  the hills  leaped 

####-Erkenbrand, lord  of Westfold. Down leaped Shadowfax, like a  deer that runs 
surefooted  in  the mountains. The White Rider was upon them, and the terror  
of  his coming filled  the enemy with  madness. The  wild men fell on  their 
faces before him. The Orcs reeled and screamed and cast aside both sword and 
spear. Like  a black smoke driven by a mounting wind they fled. Wailing they 
passed under the waiting shadow of the trees; and from that shadow none ever  
came again. 
 

####- 

Chapter 8. The Road to Isengard 

 
 
     So it was that in the  light of a fair morning King Thjoden and Gandalf 
the White Rider met again  upon the green  grass beside the  Deeping -stream. 
There was also Aragorn son of Arathorn, and Legolas  the Elf, and Erkenbrand 
of Westfold, and the lords of the Golden House. About them were gathered the 
Rohirrim, the Riders of  the Mark: wonder overcame their joy in victory, and 
their eyes were turned towards the wood. 
     Suddenly there was a great shout, and down from the Dike came those who 
had been driven back into the  Deep. There came  Gamling  the Old, and Jomer  
son of Jomund, and  beside them walked Gimli the dwarf. He had  no helm, 
and 
about his head was a linen band stained  with blood; but his voice  was loud 
and strong. 
     'Forty-two,  Master Legolas!' he cried. 'Alas! My  axe is  notched: the 
forty-second had an iron collar on his neck. How is it with you?' 
     'You have passed my  score  by  one,' answered Legolas. 'But  I  do not  
grudge you the game, so glad am I to see you on your legs!' 
     'Welcome, Jomer, sister -son!' said Thjoden. 'Now that I see you safe, I 
am glad indeed.' 
     'Hail, Lord  of the Mark!' said Jomer. 'The dark night has  passed  and 
day has come again. But  the day has brought strange tidings.' He turned and 
gazed in wonder, first at the  wood and then at Gandalf. 'Once more you come 
in the hour of need, unlooked-for,' he said. 
     'Unlooked-for?' said Gandalf. 'I said that I would return and  meet you  
here.' 
     'But you did not name the hour, nor foretell the manner of your coming. 
Strange help you bring. You are mighty in wizardry, Gandalf the White!' 
     'That may be. But if so, I have not shown it yet. I have but given good 
counsel in peril, and made  use of the  speed of Shadowfax. Your  own valour 
has done more, and  the stout legs of the Westfold-men  marching through the 
night.' 
     Then  they all gazed  at Gandalf with still greater wonder. Some glanced 
darkly  at the wood,  and  passed their  hands  over their brows, as if they 
thought their eyes saw otherwise than his.  

####-     Gandalf laughed long and merrily. 'The trees?' he said. 'Nay, I see the 
wood as plainly as do you. But that is no deed of mine. It is a thing beyond 
the counsel of the wise. Better than my design, and better even than my hope 
the event has proved.' 
     'Then  if  not  yours,  whose  is  the  wizardry?'  said Thjoden.   'Not 
Saruman's, that is plain. Is there some mightier sage, of  whom  we have yet 
to learn?' 
     'It is  not  wizardry, but a power far older,' said  Gandalf:  'a power  
that walked the earth, ere elf sang or hammer rang. 
     Ere iron was found or tree was hewn, 
     When young was mountain under moon; 
     Ere ring was made, or wrought was woe, 
     It walked the forests long ago.' 
     'And what may be the answer to your riddle?' said Thjoden. 
     'If you  would  learn  that,  you  should come  with me  to  Isengard ' 
answered Gandalf.  
     'To Isengard?' they cried. 
     'Yes,'  said Gandalf. 'I shall  return to  Isengard, and those who will 
may come with me. There we may see strange things.' 
     'But  there  are  not men  enough  in  the Mark,  not if  they were all 
gathered  together and  healed  of  wounds  and  weariness, to  assault  the 
stronghold of Saruman,' said Thjoden. 
     'Nevertheless  to Isengard I go,' said Gandalf. 'I shall not stay there 
long. My way lies now eastward. Look for me in Edoras, ere the waning of the 
moon!' 
     'Nay!' said Thjoden.  'In  the dark hour  before dawn I doubted, but we 
will not part now. I will come with you, if that is your counsel.' 
     'I  wish to speak with Saruman, as soon as may be  now,' said  Gandalf, 
'and since he  has done you  great injury, it  would  be fitting if you were 
there. But how soon and how swiftly will you ride?' 
     'My  men  are weary with battle,' said the King; 'and  I am weary also. 
For I have ridden far and slept little. Alas! My  old age is not feigned nor  
due only to the  whisperings  of  Wormtongue. It is an ill that no leech can 
wholly cure, not even Gandalf.' 
     'Then let all who are to ride with me rest now,' said Gandalf. 'We will 
journey under the shadow of evening. It is  as well;  for  it is my  counsel 
that all our comings and goings should be as  secret as may  be, henceforth. 

####-But do not command many  men to go with you, Thjoden. We go to  a parley 
not 
to a fight.' 
     The King then chose  men that  were unhurt and had swift horses, and he 
sent them forth with tidings of the victory into every vale of the Mark; and 
they bore his summons also, bidding all men, young and old, to come in haste 
to Edoras. There the Lord of the Mark  would  hold an  assembly  of all that 
could bear arms, on the second day after the full moon. To  ride with him to  
Isengard the King chose Jomer and twenty men of his household. With  
Gandalf 
would go  Aragorn, and Legolas, and Gimli. In spite  of his hurt  the  dwarf 
would not stay behind. 
     'It  was only a  feeble blow and the cap turned it;' he said. 'It would 
take more than such an orc-scratch to keep me back.' 
     'I will tend it, while you rest,' said Aragorn. 
     The king now returned to the Hornburg, and slept, such a sleep of quie t 
as he had not known for many years,  and the remainder of his chosen company 
rested also. But the others, all that  were not  hurt  or wounded,  began  a  
great labour; for many had fallen  in the battle and lay dead upon the field 
or in the Deep. 
     No  Orcs remained alive; their bodies were uncounted. But  a great many 
of the hillmen had given themselves up; and they were afraid,  and cried for  
mercy. 
     The Men of the Mark took their weapons from them, and set them to work. 
     'Help  now  to  repa ir  the  evil  in  which  you  have  joined,'  said 
Erkenbrand;  'and afterwards you  shall take an oath never again to pass the 
Fords of Isen in arms, nor to march  with the  enemies of Men;  and then you 
shall go free back to your land. For you have been deluded  by Saruman. Many 
of  you  have got  death  as  the  reward  of your trust in him; but had you  
conquered, little better would your wages have been.' 
     The men of Dunland were amazed, for Saruman had told  them that the men 
of Rohan were cruel and burned their captives alive. 
     In the  midst of  the field before the Hornburg two mounds were raised, 
and  beneath them  were laid  all  the Riders of the Mark who  fell  in  the 
defence, those of the  East Dales upon one side, and  those of Westfold upon  
the  other. In a_ grave alone  under the shadow  of  the Hornburg  lay Hbma, 
captain of the King's guard. He fell before the Gate. 

####-     The Orcs  were piled in great heaps, away  from the mounds  of Men, not 
far  from  the eaves of the forest. And the people  were  troubled in  their 
minds; for the  heaps of carrion were too great  for burial or for  burning. 
They had little wood for firing, and none would have dared to take an axe to 
the strange trees, even if Gandalf had not warned them to hurt  neither bark 
nor bough at their great peril. 
     'Let the Orcs lie,' said Gandalf. 'The morning may bring new counsel.' 
     In  the  afternoon the King's company prepared  to depart.  The work of 
burial was then but beginning; and Thjoden mourned for the loss of Hbma, his 
captain,  and cast the first earth upon  his grave. 'Great injury indeed has 
Saruman  done  to me and all  this land,' he said; 'and  I will remember it, 
when we meet.' 
     The sun was already drawing near the hills upon the west  of the Coomb,  
when  at last  Thjoden and Gandalf and their companions  rode down from  the 
Dike. Behind them were gathered a great host,  both of the Riders and of the 
people of Westfold, old and young, women and children, who had come out 
from 
the caves. A song of victory they sang with clear voices; and then they fell 
silent, wondering what would chance,  for their  eyes were on the trees  and 
they feared them. 
     The Riders came to the wood, and they halted; horse and  man, they were 
unwilling  to  pass in. T he trees were grey and menacing, and a shadow  or a  
mist  was about them. The ends of their long  sweeping boughs hung down like 
searching  fingers, their roots  stood up from the ground like the  limbs of 
strange monsters,  and  dark  caverns opened benea th them.  But Gandalf went 
forward, leading the company, and where the road from  the Hornburg  met the 
trees they saw now an opening like an arched gate  under mighty  boughs; and 
through  it  Gandalf passed,  and they followed him. Then to their amazement 
they  found that the road ran on, and the Deeping-stream  beside it; and the 
sky was open above  and  full of golden light. But on either side the  great 
aisles  of the  wood  were  already  wrapped in  dusk,  stretching away into 
impenetrable shadows; and there  they  heard the  creaking  and  groaning of  
boughs, and far cries, and a rumour of  wordless  voices, murmuring angrily.  
No Orc or other living creature could be seen. 
     Legolas  and  Gimli were now riding  together  upon one horse; and they  
kept close beside Gandalf, for Gimli was afraid of the wood. 
     'It is hot in  here,'  said Legolas  to Gandalf. 'I feel  a great wrath 

####-about me. Do you not feel the air throb in your ears?' 
     'Yes,' said Gandalf.  
     'What has become of the miserable Orcs?' said Legolas.  
     'That, I think, no one will ever know,' said Gandalf. 
     They  rode  in silence for a while; but  Legolas was ever glancing from 
side to side, and would often have halted  to  listen to  the  sounds of the 
wood, if Gimli had allowed it. 
     'These are the strangest trees that ever I saw,'  he said; 'and  I have 
seen many  an  oak grow from acorn  to ruinous age.  I wish that  there were 
leisure now to walk among  them: they have voices, and  in time I might come 
to understand their thought.' 
     'No, no!'  said  Gimli.  'Let  us leave  them!  I guess  their  thought 
already: hatred of all that go on two legs; and their  speech is of crushing 
and strangling.' 
     'Not of all that go on two legs,' said  Legolas. 'There I think you are 
wrong.  It is Orcs that they hate.  For they  do not  belong  here and  know 
little of Elves and  Men. Far away  are the valleys where they sprang.  From 
the deep dales of Fangorn, Gimli, that is whence they come, I guess.' 
     'Then that is the most  perilous wood in Middle-earth,'  said Gimli. 'I  
should  be grateful for  the part they have played, but I  do not love them. 
You may think them wonderful, but I have seen a greater wonder in this land, 
more beautiful than any grove or glade that  ever   grew: my  heart  is still 
full of ft. 'Strange are the ways of Men, Legolas! Here they have one of the 
marvels of the Northern  World, and what do they say of it? Caves, they say! 
Caves! Holes to fly to in time of  war, to store fodder in! My good Legolas, 
do you  know that the caverns of Helm's Deep  are vast and beautiful?  There 
would  be an  endless pilgrimage of Dwarves, merely to gaze at them, if such 
things  were known  to be. Aye indeed, they would pay pure gold  for a brief 
glance!' 
     'And I would give  gold to be excused,' said Legolas; 'and double to be 
let out, if I strayed in!' 
     'You have not seen, so I forgive your jest,' said Gimli. 'But you speak 
like a fool. Do you think those halls are fair, where your King dwells under  
the hill in Mirkwood, and Dwarves helped in their making long  ago? They are 
but hovels compared with  the caverns I have  seen here: immeasurable halls, 
filled with an everlasting music  of  water that tinkles into pools, as fair 
as Kheled-zvram in the starlight. 

####-     'And, Legolas,  when the torches are kindled and men walk  on the sandy  
floors  under  the echoing domes, ah! then, Legolas,  gems  and crystals and  
veins of  precious ore  glint  in the polished  walls; and  the  light glows 
through folded marbles, shell-like, translucent as the living hands of Queen 
Galadriel.  There are  columns of white and saffron and dawn-rose,  Legolas, 
fluted  and twisted into dreamlike forms;  they spring up from many-coloured 
floors to meet the glistening pendants  of  the roof:  wings, ropes, curtains 
fine as  frozen  clouds; spears,  banners, pinnacles  of suspended  palaces!  
Still lakes mirror them: a glimmering world looks up from dark pools covered 
with clear glass;  cities.  such as  the  mind  of Durin  could  scarce have 
imagined in his sleep,  stretch  on through avenues and pillared  courts, on 
into  the dark recesses  where no light can come.  And  plink! a silver drop 
falls,  and the round wrinkles in  the glass make all  the  towers  bend and 
waver like weeds and corals in a grotto of the sea. Then evening comes: they 
fade  and twinkle out; the torches pass on into another  chamber and another  
dream. There is chamber after chamber, Legolas;  hall opening  out of  hall, 
dome after  dome,  stair beyond  stair; and still  the winding paths lead on 
into the mountains' heart.  Caves! The Caverns of Helm's Deep! Happy was the 
chance that drove me there! It makes me weep to leave them.' 
     'Then I  will wish you this fortune for your  comfort, Gimli,' said the 
Elf, 'that you may come safe from war and return to  see  them again. But do 
not tell all your kindred! There seems little left for them to do, from your 
account. Maybe the men of  this land  are wise  to say little: one family of 
busy dwarves with hammer and chisel might mar more than they made.' 
     'No, you do not understand,' said Gimli. 'No dwarf could be  unmoved by 
such loveliness. None  of Durin's race would mine those  caves for stones or  
ore, not if diamonds and gold could be got there.  Do you cut down groves  of 
blossoming trees in the spring-time for firewood? We would tend these glades 
of flowering  stone, not  quarry them. With cautious skill, tap  by tap  -- a 
small  chip of rock and no  more, perhaps, in a whole  anxious  day  -- so we 
could work,  and  as the  years went  by, we  should open  up new  ways, and 
display far chambers that  are still dark, glimpsed  only as a  void  beyond 
fissures in the rock. And lights, Legolas! We should make lights, such lamps 
as once shone  in Khazad-dym; and when  we  wished  we  would drive away 
the 
night  that has  lain there  since the hills were made; and when we  desired 
rest, we would let the night return.' 

####-     'You  move me, Gimli,' said Legolas. 'I have never heard you speak like 
this  before. Almost you make  me regret that  I  have not seen these caves.  
Come! Let us make this bargain-if we both return safe out of the perils that 
await us, we will journey for a while together. You shall visit Fangorn with 
me, and then I will come with you to see Helm's Deep.' 
     'That would not be the way of return that I should choose,' said Gimli. 
'But I will endure Fangorn, if I have your promise to come back to the caves 
and share their wonder with me.' 
     'You have  my promise,' said Legolas. 'But  alas!  Now  we  must  leave 
behind both cave and wood for a while: See! We  are coming to the end of the 
trees. How far is it to Isengard, Gandalf?' 
     'About fifteen leagues, as the crows of Saruman make it.' said Gandalf:  
'five from the mouth of Deeping-coomb to  the Fords: and ten more from there 
to the gates of Isengard. But we shall not ride all the way this night.' 
     'And  when we come there,  what shall  we see?'  asked Gimli. 'You  may 
know, but I cannot guess.' 
     'I do  not know myself for certain,'  answered the wizard. 'I was there 
at  nightfall yesterday, but much may have happened since. Yet  I think that 
you will not say that the journey was  in vain  -- not though the Glittering 
Caves of Aglarond be left behind.' 
     At last the company passed  through  the trees, and found that they had 
come to the bottom of the Coomb, where  the road from Helm's  Deep 
branched, 
going one way east to  Edoras,  and the other north to the Fords of Isen. As 
they  rode from under the eaves of the wood, Legolas  halted and looked back 
with regret. Then he gave a sudden cry. 
     'There are eyes!' he said.  'Eyes looking out  from the shadows  of the 
boughs! I never saw such eyes before.' 
     The others,  surprised  by  his cry,  halted  and turned;  but  Legolas 
started to ride back. 
     'No, no!' cried Gimli. 'Do  as  you please in your madness,  but let me 
first get  down  from  this horse! I wish  to see  no eyes!' 'Stay,  Legolas 
Greenleaf!' said Gandalf. 'Do not go back into the wood, not yet! Now is not 
your time.' 
     Even as he spoke,  there came forward out of  the  trees three  strange 
shapes.  As  tall as trolls they were, twelve feet  or more in height; their 
strong bodies, stout as  young trees, seemed to be clad with raiment or with 

####-hide of close-fitting grey and br own. Their limbs were long, and their hands 
had many fingers; their hair was stiff, and their beards grey-green as moss.  
They gazed out with solemn  eyes, but they were not  looking at the  riders:  
their eyes were bent northwards.  Suddenly they  lifted their long  hands to 
their  mouths, and  sent forth ringing calls, clear as notes  of a horn, but 
more musical and various.  The calls  were answered; and turning  again, the  
riders  saw other creatures of the same  kind approaching, striding  through 
the grass. They came swiftly from the North, walking  like wading herons  in 
their gait,  but not in their speed; for their legs in their long paces beat 
quicker than the heron's  wings.  The riders cried aloud in wonder, and some 
set their hands upon their swor d-hilts. 
     'You need no  weapons,' said Gandalf. 'These are but herdsmen. They are 
not enemies, indeed they are not concerned with us at all.' 
     So  it  seemed to be;  for  as  he spoke the tall creatures,  without a  
glance at the riders, strode into the wood and vanished. 
     'Herdsmen!'  said  Thjoden. 'Where  are their  flocks? What  are  they, 
Gandalf? For it is plain that to you, at any rate, they are not strange.' 
     'They are the shepherds of the trees,' answered Gandalf. 'Is it so long 
since you listened to tales by the fireside? There are children in your land 
who, out  of the twisted  threads of story, could pick the  answer  to  your 
question. You have seen  Ents, O King, Ents out of  Fangorn Forest, which in 
your tongue you call the Entwood. Did you think that the name was given only 
in  idle  fancy?  Nay, Thjoden,  it is otherwise: to  them  you are  but the 
passing tale;  all the years from Eorl the Young to Thjoden  the  Old are of 
little count to them; and all the deeds of your house but a small matter.' 
     The king was silent. 'Ents!' he said at  length. 'Out of the shadows of 
legend I  begin a little to  understand the marvel  of the trees, I think. I 
have  lived  to see  strange  days. Long  we have tended our beasts  and our 
fields, built our houses, wrought  our tools, or ridden away to help in  the 
wars  of  Minas Tirith. And that we called  the life of Men,  the way of the 
world. We cared little for what lay beyond the borders of our land. Songs we 
have that  tell of these things, but we are forgetting them,  teaching  them 
only  to children, as  a careless custom. And now  the  songs have come down 
among us out of strange places, and walk visible under the Sun.' 
     'You should  be  glad, Thjoden  King,' said Gandalf. 'For not only  the 
little  life  of Men is  now endangered, but the  life also of  those things 
which you have deemed the matter of legend. You are not without allies, even 

####-if you know them not.' 
     'Yet  also I should  be sad,' said Thjoden. 'For however the fortune of 
war shall go, may it not so end  that much that was fair and wonderful shall 
pass for ever out of Middle-earth?' 
     'It may,' said Gandalf. 'The evil of Sauron cannot be wholly cured, nor  
made as if it had not been. But to such days we are doomed. Let us now go on 
with the journey we have begun!' 
     The company turned then away from the  Coomb and from the wood and 
took  
the  road  towards the Fords. Legolas followed reluctantly. The sun had set, 
already  it had sunk behind the rim of the world; but  as they rode out from 
the shadow of  the  hills  and looked west to the  Gap  of Rohan the sky was 
still  red, and a burning light was under the  floating clouds. Dark against  
it there wheeled and flew many black -winged birds. Some passed overhead 
wi th 
mournful cries, returning to their homes among the rocks. 
     'The carrion-fowl have been busy about the battle-field,' said Jomer. 
     They rode now at an easy pace and dark came  down upon the plains about 
them. The slow moon mounted,  now  waxing towards the full, and  in its cold 
silver light the swelling grass-lands  rose and fell  like a wide  grey sea. 
They  had ridden for  some four  hours from  the branching of the roads when 
they drew near to the Fords. Long slopes ran swiftly down to where the river  
spread  in stony shoals  between high grassy terraces. Borne upon  the  wind 
they heard the howling of  wolves. Their hearts were heavy,  remembering the 
many men that had fallen in battle in this place. 
     The  road dipped between rising turf-banks, carving its way through the 
terraces to the river's edge, and up again upon the further side. There were 
three  lines of flat stepping-stones  across  the  stream,  and between them 
fords for horses, that went from either brink to a  bare  eyot in the midst. 
The riders looked down upon the crossings,  and  it seemed strange to  them;  
for the Fords had ever been a place full  of the rush  and  chatter of water  
upon stones; but now they  were  silent. The beds of the  stream were almost  
dry, a bare wast e of shingles and grey sand. 
     'This  is  become  a  dreary  place,'  said Jomer. 'What  sickness  has 
befallen the river? Many fair things Saruman has  destroyed: has he devoured 
the springs of Isen too?' 'So it would seem,' said Gandalf. 
     'Alas!'  said Thjoden. 'Must we pass this way,  where the carrion-beasts 

####-devour so many good Riders of the Mark?' 
     'This is our way,' said Gandalf. 'Grievous is the fall of your men; but 
you shall see that at least the wolves  of the mountains do not devour them. 
It is with their friends, the Orcs, that they hold their feast:  such indeed 
is the friendship of their kind. Come!' 
     They rode down to the river,  and as  they came the wolves ceased their 
howling and  slunk away. Fear  fell on them seeing Gandalf in the moon,  and 
Shadowfax his horse shining like  silver.  The  riders  passed  over to  the 
islet, and glittering eyes watched them wanly from the shadows of the banks. 
     'Look!' said Gandalf. 'Friends have laboured here.' 
     And they saw that  in  the midst  of the eyot  a mound was piled, ringed 
with stones, and set about with many spears. 
     'Here  lie  all the  Men of the Mark that fell  near this place,'  said 
Gandalf. 
     'Here let them rest!' said Jomer. 'And when  their  spears  have rotted 
and rusted, long still may their mound stand and guard the Fords of Isen!' 
     'Is  this  your work  also, Gandalf,  my  friend?'  said Thjoden.  'You  
accomplished much in an evening and a night!' 
     'With  the help of Shadowfax  -- and others,' said Gandalf. 'I rode fast  
and  far.  But here beside the  mound I will say this for your comfort: many 
fell in the battles of the Fords, but fewer than rumour made them. More were 
scattered than were slain;  I gathered together all that I  could find. Some 
men I sent with Grimbold of Westfold  to join Erkenbrand. Some I set to make 
this burial. They  have now followed your marshal,  Elfhelm. I sent him with 
many Riders  to Edoras.  Saruman  I  knew had  despatched  his full strength 
against you, and his  servants  had turned aside from all  other errands and 
gone to Helm's Deep: the  lands seemed empty  of enemies; yet I  feared that 
wolf-riders and plunderers might ride nonetheless  to Meduseld, while it was 
undefended. But now I  think you need not fear:  you will find your house to 
welcome your return.' 
     'And glad shall I be to see it again,' said Thjoden, 'though brief now, 
I doubt not, shall be my abiding there.' 
     With that the  company said  farewell to the island  and the mound, and 
passed over the river, and climbed the further bank. Then they rode on, glad 
to have left the mournful  Fords. As they  went  the  howling of the  wolves 
broke out anew. 
     There  was an  ancient highway that  ran  down  from  Isengard  to  the 

####-crossings. For some way i t took its course beside the river, bending with it 
east  and  then north; but at  the last it  turned away  and  went  straight 
towards the gates of Isengard; and these were under the mountain-side in the  
west of the valley, sixteen miles  or more from its mouth.  This  road  they 
followed but they  did not ride upon it;  for the ground beside it  was firm 
and level, covered for many miles about with short springing turf. They rode  
now more swiftly, and by midnight the Fords were nearly five leagues behind. 
Then they halted, ending their night's journey, for the King was weary. They 
were come to  the feet  of the  Misty  Mountains, and the long  arms of  Nan 
Curunnr stretched down to  meet them. Dark lay the vale before them, for the 
moon had  passed  into  the West, and its light was hidden by the hills. But 
out of the deep shadow of the dale rose a vast spire of smoke and vapour; as 
it mounted, it caught the rays of the sinking moon, and spread in shimmering 
billows, black and silver, over the starry sky. 
     'What do you  think  of that,  Gandalf?' asked Aragorn.  'One would say 
that all the Wizard's Vale was burning.' 
     'There  is ever a fume above  that  valley in these  days,' said Jomer: 
'but I have never seen aught like this before. These are  steams rather than 
smokes. Saruman is brewing some devilry to greet us. Maybe he is boiling all 
the waters of Isen, and that is why the river runs dry.' 
     'Maybe he is,' said Gandalf. 'Tomorrow we shall learn what he is doing. 
Now let us rest for a while,  if we can.' 
     They camped  beside  the bed of the Isen river; it was still silent and 
empty. Some of them slept a little. But late in the night the watchmen cried 
out, and all awoke. The moon was gone.  Stars were  shining  above; but over 
the ground there crept a darkness blacker than the night.  On both  sides of 
the river it rolled towards them, going northward. 
     'Stay where you are!' said Gandalf. 'Draw no weapons! Wait! and it will 
pass you by!' 
     A mist gathered about  them. Above  them a  few stars  still  glimmered 
faintly;  but  on either side there arose  walls of impenetrable gloom; they 
were in a narrow  lane between moving towers of shadow. Voices  they  heard, 
whisperings  and groanings and an  endless  rustling sigh;  the  earth shook 
under them. Long  it  seemed to them that they sat  and  were afraid; but at 
last the darkness and the rumour passed, and vanished between the mountain's 
arms. 
     Away south upon the Hornburg, in the  middle  night  men heard a  great 

####-noise, as a wind  in the valley, and the ground trembled; and all were afraid 
and no one ventured to go forth. But in the morning  they went  out and were 
amazed; for  the slain Orcs were gone, and the trees also. Far down into the 
valley of the Deep  the grass was crushed   and trampled brown,  as if  giant 
herdsmen had  pastured  great droves of  cattle there;  but a mile below the 
Dike a huge pit had  been delved in the earth, and over it stones were piled 
into  a  hill.  Men believed that the Orcs whom they had  slain  were buried 
there;  but whether those  who had  fled into  the wood were with them, none 
could say, for no man  ever  set foot upon that hill. The Death Down it  was 
afterwards called, and no grass would grow there. But the strange trees were 
never seen in Deeping-coomb again; they had  returned at night, and had gone 
far  away to the dark dales  of  Fangorn.  Thus they were  revenged upon the 
Orcs. 
     The king  and his company slept  no more that  night;  but they saw and 
heard  no other strange thing,  sa ve one: the voice of the river beside them 
suddenly  awoke. There  was a  rush of water hurrying down among the stones;  
and when it had  passed, the Isen flowed and bubbled in its bed again, as it 
had ever done. 
     At  dawn  they made ready to go on. The light came grey  and pale,  and 
they  did  not see  the rising of the sun. The air above was heavy with fog, 
and a reek lay on the land about them. They went slowly, riding now upon the 
highway.  It  was broad and  hard, and  well -tended. Dimly through the mists 
they could  descry the long arm of the mountains rising on  their left. They 
had passed into Nan Curunnr, the Wizard's Vale. That was a sheltered valley, 
open only to the South. Once  it had been fair and green, and through it the 
Isen flowed, already deep and strong before it found  the plains; for it was 
fed by many springs and lesser streams among  the rain-washed hills. and all  
about it there had lain a pleasant, fertile land. 
     It was not so now. Beneath the walls of Isengard there still were acres 
tilled  by  the  slaves  of Saruman;  but  most  of the valley had  become a  
wilderness of  weeds and  thorns.  Brambles  trailed  upon  the  ground,  or 
clambering over bush and  bank, made shaggy caves where small beasts 
housed. 
No  trees grew there; but among  the rank  grasses  could still be  seen the 
burned and axe-hewn stumps of ancient groves. It  was  a sad country, silent  
now  but for the stony noise  of quick  waters. Smokes and steams drifted in  
sullen clouds and lurked  in the  hollows.  The  riders did  not speak.  Many 

####-doubted in their hearts, wondering to what dismal end their journey led. 
     After they had ridden for some miles, the highway became a wide street,  
paved with great flat stones, squared and laid with skill; no blade of  grass 
was seen in any joint. Deep  gutters, filled with  trickling water. ran down 
on either side. Suddenly  a tall pillar loomed up before them. It was black; 
and set upon it was a great stone, carved and painted in the likeness  of  a  
long  White Hand. Its finger pointed north. Not far now they knew  that  the 
gates of Isengard  must stand, and  their hearts  were heavy; but their eyes 
could not pierce the mists ahead. 
     Beneath  the  mountain's  arm within  the  Wizard's Vale through  years 
uncounted had stood that ancient place that  Men called Isengard.  Partly it 
was shaped  in  the making of  the mountains, but  mighty works  the  Men of 
Westernesse had wrought there of  old; and Saruman  had dwelt there long and 
had not been idle. 
     This  was  its fashion,  while Saruman was at  his height, accounted by 
many the chief of Wizards. A great ring-wall of stone, like towering cliffs, 
stood out from the shelter of the mountain-side, from which it ran  and then 
returned again. One entrance only was there made in  it, a great arch delved 
in the  southern wall. Here  through the black  rock a long  tunnel had been 
hewn, closed at either end with mighty  doors of iron.  They were so wrought 
and poised upon their  huge hinges, posts of  steel driven  into the  living 
stone, that  when unbarred they could  be moved with  a light  thrust of the 
arms, noiselessly. One who passed in and came at length out of  the  echoing  
tunnel,  beheld a  plain,  a great  circle, somewhat  hollowed  like a  vast  
shallow bowl: a mile it measured from rim to rim. Once it had been green and 
filled  with avenues, and  groves of fruitful trees, watered by streams that 
flowed  from the mountains to  a lake. But no green thing grew there  in the 
latter  days of Saruman. The  roads wer e  paved with stone-flags,  dark  and 
hard;  and beside their borders instead of trees there marched long lines of 
pillars, some of marble, some of copper and of iron. joined by heavy chains.  
     Many  houses  there  were,  chambers,  halls,  and  passages,  cut  and 
tunnelled back into the  walls upon their  inner side, so that all  the open 
circle  was overlooked by countless windows and dark doors. Thousands  could 
dwell  there,  workers, servants, slaves, and warriors with  great  store of 
arms; wolves  were fed and stabled in deep dens beneath. The plain, too, was 
bored and delved. Shafts were driven deep into the  ground; their upper ends  
were  covered by low mounds and domes of stone, so that in the moonlight the 

####-Ring  of Isengard looked like a  graveyard  of  unquiet dead. For the ground  
trembled. The shafts  ran  down by many slopes and  spiral stairs to caverns 
far under; there Saruman had treasuries,  store-houses, armouries, smithies,  
and  great  furnaces.  Iron  wheels  revolved  there endlessly, and  hammers 
thudded. At night plumes of vapour steamed from the vents, lit  from beneath 
with red light, or blue, or venomous green. 
     To the  centre  all the roads ran between  their chains. There stood  a  
tower of  marvellous shape.  It  was  fashioned by  the builders of old, who 
smoothed  the  Ring of Isengard, and yet it seemed  a thing not  made by the 
craft  of Men, but riven from the bones of the  earth in the ancient torment 
of the hills. A peak and isle of rock  it was. black and gleaming hard: four 
mighty piers of many-sided stone were  welded  into one, but near the summit 
they  opened  into gaping  horns. their  pinnacles sharp  as the  points  of 
spears, keen-edged as  knives. Between  them was a narrow  space,  and there 
upon a floor of   polished stone,  written  with  strange signs,  a man might  
stand  five  hundred feet above the plain. This was Orthanc,  the citadel of 
Saruman, the  name of which had (by design or chance) a twofold meaning; for  
in the Elvish  speech orthanc  signifies Mount Fang,  but in the language of 
the Mark of old the Cunning Mind. 
     A strong  place  and wonderful  was  Isengard,  and  long  it had  been 
beautiful;  and there great lords had dwelt, the wardens of  Gondor upon the 
West, and wise men that watched the stars.  But Saruman had slowly shaped it 
to  his  shifting  purposes,  and made  it  better.  as  he  thought,  being 
deceived-for  all  those arts and  subtle devices, for which  he forsook his 
former  wisdom, and which fondly  he imagined  were his own. came  but  
from 
Mordor; so that what he made was naught, only a little copy, a child's model  
or a slave's  flattery, of that  vast fortress. armoury, prison,  furnace of 
great power, Barad-dyr, the Dark Tower, which suffered no rival, and laughed 
at  flattery, biding its  time, secure  in  its pride and  its  immeasurable 
strength. 
     This  was  the stronghold of  Saruman, as  fame reported it; for within 
living memory the men of Rohan had not passed its gates, save perhaps a few,  
such as Wormtongue, who came in secret and told no man what they saw.  
     Now Gandalf rode to the great pillar of the Hand, and passed it: and as 
he did so the Riders  saw to  their wonder that  the Hand appeared no longer  
white. It was stained as with dried blood; and looking closer they perceived 

####-that its  nails were red.  Unheeding  Gandalf rode  on  into  the mist,  and 
reluctantly  they followed him. All about them now,  as if  there had been a  
sudden flood.  wide pools of water lay beside the road, filling the hollows.  
and rills went trickling down among the stones.  
     At last Gandalf  halted  and beckoned to them; and they  came, and  saw 
that beyond him  the mists  had cleared, and a pale sunlight shone. The hour  
of noon had passed. They were come to the doors of Isengard. 
     But the  doors lay  hurled and twisted  on the ground.  And  all about, 
stone, cracked  and  splintered into  countless jagged shards, was scattered 
far and wide, or piled in ruinous heaps. The great arch  still stood, but it 
opened now upon a roofless chasm: the tunnel was laid bare.  and through the 
cliff-like walls  on  either side great  rents  and  breaches had been torn; 
their towers were beaten into  dust. If the Great Sea had risen in wrath and 
fallen on the hills with storm. it could ha ve worked no greater ruin. 
     The ring beyond was filled with steaming water: a bubbling cauldron, in 
which  there heaved  and floated  a wreckage of beams and  spars, chests and 
casks and broken  gear. Twisted and leaning pillars reared their  splintered 
stems above the  flood. but all the roads were drowned. Far off, it  seemed, 
half veiled in  winding cloud, there loomed the  island rock. Still dark and 
tall, unbroken by the storm,  the tower of Orthanc stood. Pale waters lapped  
about its feet. 
     The  king and all his company  sat silent on  their horses, marvelling, 
perceiving  that the power of Saruman was overthrown; but how they could not 
guess.  And  now they turned their eyes towards the archway  and  the ruined 
gates. There they  saw close  beside  them a great rubble-heap; and suddenly 
they were aware  of two small figures  lying on it at their ease, grey-clad, 
hardly  to  be seen  among  the  stones. There were  bottles and  bowls  and 
platters  laid beside them, as if  they had just eaten  well, and now rested 
from their labour. One seemed asleep; the other, with crossed legs  and arms 
behind his head,  leaned  back against a broken rock and sent from his mouth 
long wisps and little rings of thin blue smoke. 
     For  a  moment Thjoden  and Jomer  and all  his men  stared at  them in 
wonder.  Amid all the  wreck  of Isengard  this seemed to them the strangest  
sight.  But  before the king could speak,  the  small smoke-breathing figure 
became suddenly aware of them, as they sat there silent  on the edge of  the 
mist. He sprang to his feet. A young man he looked, or like one, though  not  
much  more than half a man  in height; his head  of  brown curling hair  was 

####-uncovered,  but he was  clad in a  travel-stained cloak of the same  hue and 
shape a s the companions  of Gandalf had worn when  they rode  to Edoras.  He 
bowed very low. putting  his  hand upon  his breast.  Then,  seeming not  to 
observe the wizard and his friends, he turned to Jomer and the king. 
     'Welcome, my lords,  to  Isengard!' he said. 'We  are  the doorwardens. 
Meriadoc,  son  of  Saradoc  is  my  name; and my  companion, who,  alas! is 
overcome with  weariness'  -- here he gave the other a dig with  his  foot -- 
'is Peregrin, son of Paladin, of the house of Took. Far in the North  is our 
home. The Lord Saruman  is within; but at the moment he is closeted with one 
Wormtongue,  or  doubtless  he  would be here  to  welcome  such  honourable 
guests.' 
     'Doubtless he would!' laughed Gandalf. 'And was it Saruman that ordered 
you to  guard his  damaged  doors, and watch for the arrival of guests, when 
your attention could be spared from plate and bottle?' 
     'No, good sir, the matter escaped him,' answered Merry gravely 'He  has 
been much occupied. Our orders came from Treebeard, who  has taken  over 
the 
management of Isengard. He  commanded me to  welcome  the Lord of Rohan 
with 
fitting words. I have done my best.' 
     'And  what about  your companions?  What about  Legolas  and me?' cried 
Gimli, unable to contain himself longer .  'You rascals, you woolly-footed and 
wool-pated truants!  A fine  hunt you  have  led  us! Two  hundred  leagues,  
through  fen and forest, battle  and death, to  rescue you! And here we find 
you feasting and  idling-and smoking!  Smoking! Where did  you  come  by the 
weed, you villains?  Hammer and  tongs!  I am so torn between  rage and joy, 
that if I do not burst. it will be a marvel!' 
     'You  speak  for  me, Gimli,' laughed Legolas.  'Though I would  sooner  
learn how they came by the wine.' 
     'One thing you  have  not found  in your hunting,  and that's  brighter 
wits,' said  Pippin, opening an eye. 'Here you find us sitting on a field of 
victory, amid  the plunder of armies, and  you wonder how we  came by  a few 
well-earned comforts!' 
     'Well-earned?' said Gimli. 'I cannot believe that!' 
     The  Riders laughed. 'It cannot be doubted  that we witness the meeting 
of dear friends,' said Thjoden. 'So these are the lost ones of your company, 
Gandalf? The days are fated  to  be filled with marvels.  Already I have seen  

####-many since I left my house; and now here before my eyes stand yet another of 
the folk of legend. Are not these the Halflings, that some among us call the 
Holbytlan?' 
     'Hobbits, if you please, lord,' said Pippin. 
     'Hobbits?'  said Thjoden. 'Your  tongue is  strangely changed; but  the 
name sounds  not  unfitting so.  Hobbits! No report that I have  heard  does 
justice to the truth.' 
     Merry  bowed; and Pippin got up and bowed low. 'You are gracious, lord; 
or I hope  that I may so take your words,'  he said.  'And  here is  another  
marvel! I have wandered in  many lands, since I left my home, and never till 
now have I found people that knew any story concerning hobbits.' 
     'My people came out of the North long  ago,' said  Thjoden. 'But I will 
not deceive  you: we know no tales  about hobbits. All that is said among us 
is that far away, over many hills and  rivers, live  the halfling folk  that 
dwell in holes in sand-dunes. But there are no legends of their  deeds.  for 
it  is said that they do little, and avoid the sight of  men, being able  to 
vanish in  a  twinkling: and they  can change their voices  to  resemble the 
piping of birds. But it seems that more could be said.' 
     'It could indeed, lord,' said Merry. 
     'For one thing,' said Thjoden, 'I had not heard that they spouted smoke 
from their mouths.' 
     'That is not surprising,'  answered Merry; 'for  it is an art which  we 
have  not  practised  for  more  than  a  few  generations.  It  was  Tobold 
Hornblower,  of Longbottom  in the Southfarthing,  who  first grew  the true 
pipe-weed  in his gardens, about  the year  1070 according to our reckoning.  
How old Toby came by the plant...' 
     'You do  not  know your  danger,  Thjoden,' interrupted Gandalf. 'These 
hobbits will sit on the edge of ruin and discuss the pleasures of the table, 
or the small doings of  their fathers, grandfathers, and great-grandfathers,  
and  remoter cousins to the ninth degree,  if  you encourage them with undue 
patience. Some  other time wou ld be more fitting for the history of smoking. 
Where is Treebeard, Merry?' 
     'Away on the north side, I believe. He went to  get  a  drink-of  clean 
water. Most of the other Ents are with him, still busy at their work -- over  
there.' Merry waved his hand towards the steaming lake; and as  they looked, 
they heard a  distant rumbling and rattling, as if an avalanche was  falling 
from  the  mountain-side.  Far  away  came a  hoom-hom, as of  horns blowing 

####-triumphantly. 
     'And is Orthanc then left unguarded?' asked Gandalf.  
     'There is  the water,' said Merry. 'But Quickbeam and  some  others are 
watching it. Not all those posts and pillars in the plain  are of  Saruman's 
planting. Quickbeam, I think, is by the rock, near the foot of the stair.' 
     'Yes, a tall grey Ent is there,' said Legolas, 'but his arms are at his 
sides, and he stands as still as a door -tree.' 
     'It is  past  noon,'  said Gandalf, 'and we at any  rate have not eaten 
since early morning. Yet I wish  to  see Treebeard as soon as may be. Did he  
leave me no message, or has plate and bottle driven it from your mind?' 
     'He left a message,' said  Merry, 'and  I was coming to  it, but I have 
been hindered by many other questions. I was to say that, if the Lord of the 
Mark and Gandalf  will ride  to  the northern wall  they will find Treebeard 
there,  and he will welcome them. I may add that they will also find food of 
the best there, it  was discovered and selected by your humble servants.' He 
bowed. 
     Gandalf laughed. 'That is  better!' he  said. 'Well,  Thjoden. will you  
ride with me  to find Treebeard?  We must go round about, but it is not far. 
When you see Treebeard,  you will learn much. For  Treebeard is Fangorn, and 
the eldest and chief of the  Ents, and when you speak with him you will hear  
the speech of the oldest of all living things.' 
     'I  will come with you,' said  Thjoden. 'Farewell, my hobbits!  May  we 
meet again in my house! There  you shall sit beside me and tell  me all that 
your hearts desire: the deeds of your grandsires,  as far as  you can reckon 
them; and we will speak also of Tobold the Old and his herb-lore. Farewell!' 
     The hobbits bowed low. 'So that  is the King of Rohan!'  said Pippin in 
an undertone.  'A fine old fellow. Very polite.' 

####- 

Chapter 9. Flotsam and Jetsam 

 
 
     Gandalf and the King's  company rode away, turning eastward to make the 
circuit of the ruined  walls of Isengard.  But  Aragorn, Gimli,  and Legolas 
remained behind. Leaving Arod and Hasufel to  stray in search of grass, they 
came and sat beside the hobbits. 
     'Well, well! The hunt is over, and we meet again at last, where none of 
us ever thought to come,' said Aragorn. 
     'And now  that the  great ones have gone to discuss high matters,' said 
Legolas,  'the hunters  can  per haps learn the  answers  to  their own small 
riddles. We tracked you  as  far  as  the forest, but there  are  still many 
things that I should like to know the truth of.' 
     'And there is a great deal, too, that we want to  know about you ' said 
Merry.  'We have learnt a few things through Treebeard, the Old Ent, but that 
is not nearly enough.' 
     'All  in good time,' said Legolas. 'We were the hunters, and you should 
give an account of yourselves to us first.' 
     'Or  second,' said Gimli. 'It would  go better after a meal. t  have  a  
sore head; and it is past mid-day. You truants might make  amends by finding 
us some of the plunder that you spoke  of. Food and drink would pay off some 
of my score against you.' 
     'Then you shall  have  it,' said Pippin.  'Will you have it here, or in 
more  comfort in what's left of Saruman's guard-house--over  there under the 
arch? We had to picnic out here, so as to keep an eye on the road.' 
     'Less than an eye!' said Gimli. 'But  I will not go into  any orc-house 
nor touch Orcs' meat or anything that they have mauled.' 
     'We wouldn't  ask  you  to,' said Merry. 'We have had  enough  of  Orcs 
ourselves to last a life-time. But there  were  many other folk in Isengard. 
Saruman  kept enough wisdom not  to  trust his Orcs. He had Men to guard his 
gates:  some of his  most faithful  servants,  I  suppose. Anyway  they were 
favoured and got good provisions.' 
     'And pipe-weed?' asked Gimli. 
     'No,  I  don't  think  so,' Merry laughed. 'But that  is another story, 
which can wait until after lunch.' 
     'Well let us go and have lunch then!' said the Dwarf. 

####-     The hobbits led the way; and they  passed under the arch  and came to a  
wide  door upon the  left, at  the  top of a stair. It opened  direct into a  
large chamber,  with other smaller  doors  at the far end,  and a hearth and 
chimney at one side. The chamber was hewn out of the stone; and it must once 
have  been dark, for its windows looked out only into the  tunnel. But light 
came in now through the broken roof. On the hearth wood was burning. 
     'I  lit a  bit of fire,' said Pippin. 'It cheered us up  in  the  fogs.  
There were few faggots about, and  most of the  wood we could find was  wet. 
But  there  is  a great draught in  the  chimney:  it seems  to wind away up 
through the rock, and fortunately it has not been blocked. A fire  is handy. 
I  will  make you some toast. The bread is  three  or four days  old,  I  am 
afraid.' 
     Aragorn and his  companions sat  themselves down at  one  end of a long 
table,  and  the  hobbits  disappeared  through  one  of  the  inner  doors. 
'Store-room  in there,  and above  the woods, luckily,' said Pippin, as they 
came back laden with dishes, bowls, cups, knives, and food of various sorts.  
     'And  you need not  turn up your nose at the provender,  Master Gimli,' 
said Merry. 'This is  not orc-stuff, but  man-food, as  Treebeard calls  it. 
Will you have wine or beer? There's a barrel  inside there -- very passable. 
And this is first-rate salted pork. Or  I can cut you  some rashers of bacon 
and  broil them,  if you like.  I am  sorry there  is no  green  stuff:  the 
deliveries have been rather interrupted in the last few days! I cannot offer  
you  anything  to follow  but butter and  honey  for  your  bread.  Are  you  
content?' 
     'Indeed yes,' said Gimli. 'The score is much reduced.' 
     The  three  were  soon  busy  with  their meal;  and the  two  hobbits, 
unabashed,  set  to  a second time. 'We  must keep our guests company,' they  
said. 
     'You  are full of courtesy this  morning,' laughed Legolas.  'But maybe. 
if  we  had  not arrived, you  would already have been keeping  one  another  
company again.' 
     'Maybe; and why not?' said Pippin. 'We had foul fare with the Orcs, and 
little enough for days before that. It seems a long while since we could eat 
to heart's content.' 
     'It does not seem to have done you any harm,' said Aragorn. 'Indeed you  
look in the bloom of health.' 
     'Aye, you do indeed,' said Gimli, looking them up and down over the top  

####-of his cup. 'Why,  your hair is twice as thick and curly  as when we parted; 
and I would swear that you have both grown somewhat, if that is possible for 
hobbits of your age. This Treebeard at any rate has not starved you.' 
     'He has not,' said Merry. 'But Ents on ly drink, and drink is not enough 
for content. Treebeard's draughts may be nourishing,  but one feels the need 
of something solid. And even lembas is none the worse for a change.' 
     'You have drunk of  the waters of the  Ents, have  you?'  said Legolas.  
'Ah, then I think it is likely that Gimli's eyes do not deceive him. Strange 
songs have been sung of the draughts of Fangorn.' 
     'Many strange tales  have been told about that land,' said Aragorn.  'I  
have never entered it. Come, tell me more about it, and about the Ents!' 
     'Ents,'  said Pippin,  'Ents are -- well  Ents are all different for on 
thing. But their eyes now, their eyes are very odd.' He tried a few fumbling 
words that trailed  off into silence. 'Oh, well,' he went on, 'you have seen 
some at a distance, already -they saw you  at any rate, and reported that you  
were on  the way-and you  will see many others,  I  expect, before you leave 
here. You must form your own ideas.' 
     'Now,  now!' said Gimli. 'We are beginning the story  in the middle.  I 
should like a tale in the  right order,  starting with that strange day when 
our fellowship was broken.' 
     'You  shall have it, if there  is time,'  said Merry. 'But first -if you  
have finished eating-you shall fill  your pipes and light up. And  then for a  
little while we can pretend that we are all back safe  at Bree again,  or in 
Rivendell.' 
     He produced a small leather bag full of tobacco. 'We have heaps of it,' 
he said; 'and you can all pack as much as you wish, when we go. We  did some 
salvage-work  this morning, Pippin and I. There are lots of things  floating 
about. It  was Pippin who found two  small barrels,  washed up  out of  some  
cellar  or  store-house, I suppose. When we opened them, we found they  were 
filled with this:  as fine  a  pipe-weed  as  you could  wish  for, and quite 
unspoilt.' 
     Gimli  took some  and rubbed it in his  palms and sniffed it. 'It feels 
good, and it smells good,' he said. 
     'It is good!' said  Merry. 'My dear Gimli, it is Longbottom Leaf! There 
were  the  Hornblower brandmarks on the barrels, as  plain as plain.  How it  
came here, I can't imagine. For Saruman's private use. I fancy. I never knew 
that it went so far abroad. But it comes in handy now?' 

####-     'It  would,' said Gimli, 'if I had a pipe to go  with it. Alas, I  lost 
mine in Moria, or before. Is there no pipe in all your plunder?' 
     'No, I am  afraid  not,' said Merry. 'We have  not found any, not  even 
here in the guardrooms. Saruman kept this dainty to himself. it seems. And I  
don't think it would be any use knocking on the doors of  Orthanc  to beg  a  
pipe of him! We shall have to share pipes. as good friends must at a pinch.' 
     'Half a moment!' said Pippin. Putting his hand inside the breast of his 
jacket he pulled out a little soft wallet on a string. 'I keep a treasure or  
two near my  skin, as precious as  Rings  to  me.  Here's one: my old wooden 
pipe.  And  here's another: an unused one. I have carried  it  a  long way,, 
though  I don't know why.  I never really expected to find  any pipe-weed on 
the journey, when my own ran  out. But now it comes in useful after all.' He 
held  up a small  pipe with a wide  flattened bowl, and handed it to  Gimli. 
'Does that settle the score between  us?' he said. 'Settle it!' cried Gimli. 
'Most noble hobbit, it leaves me deep in your debt.' 
     'Well, I am going back into the  open air, to see what the wind and sky 
are doing!' said Legolas.  
     'We will come with you,' said Aragorn. 
     They went  out and seated themselves  upon the piled stones before  the 
gateway. They could see far down into the valley now; the mists were lifting  
and floating away upon the breeze. 
     'Now let  us take our ease  here for a little!' said Aragorn.  'We will 
sit  on the  edge  of  ruin and talk,  as Gandalf  says,  while  he  is busy 
elsewhere. I feel a weariness such as I have seldom felt before.' He wrapped  
his grey cloak about him, hiding  his mail-shirt, and stretched out his long 
legs. Then he lay back and sent from his lips a thin stream of smoke. 
     'Look!' said Pippin. 'Strider the Ranger has come back!' 
     'He has never been away,' said Aragorn.  'I am Strider and D®nadan too,  
and I belong both to Gondor and the North.' 
     They smoked in silence for a while, and the sun shone on them; slanting 
into the valley from among white clouds high in the West. Legolas lay still, 
looking  up at  the  sun and  sky with steady eyes,  and singing  softly  to 
himself.  At last he sat  up. 'Come  now!' he said. 'Time  wears on, and the 
mists  are  blowing away, or  would  if  you  strange folk did  not  wreathe 
yourselves in smoke. What of the tale?' 
     'Well, my tale begins with waking up in the dark and finding myself all 
strung-up in an orc-camp,' said Pippin. 'Let me see, what is today?' 

####-     'The fifth of March  in the Shire-reckoning,' said Aragorn. Pippin made 
some calculations on his fingers. 'Only nine days ago!' he  said.1 'It seems 
a year since we were caught. Well, though half of it was like a bad dream, I 
reckon that three  very horrible days  followed. Merry will correct me, if I 
forget anything important: I am not going into details:  the  whips and  the 
filth  and stench  and all that; it does not bear remembering.' With that he 
plunged  into an account of Boromir's last fight and the orc-march from Emyn 
Muil to the Forest.  The others  nodded as the various points were fitted in 
with their guesses.  
     'Here are some treasures that you let fall,' said Aragorn. 'You will be 
glad to have them back.' He loosened his belt from under his cloak  and took  
from it the two sheathed knives.  
     'Well!' said  Merry. 'I  never expected  to see those again! I marked a  
few orcs with mine; but Ugl®k  took them from us. How he glared! At first  I 
thought he  was going to  stab me, but he threw the  things away as if  they 
burned him.' 
     'And here also is  your brooch, Pippin,' said Aragorn. 'I have kept  it 
safe, for it is a very precious thing.' 
     'I know,'  said Pippin.  'It was a  wrench  to let it go; but what else 
could I do?' 
     'Nothing else,' answered Aragorn. 'One who cannot cast away  a treasure 
at need is in fetters. You did rightly.' 
     'The cutting of the bands on your wrists,  that was smart  work!'  said 
Gimli. 'Luck  served you there; but you seized your chance with both  hands, 
one might say. ' 
     'And set us a  pretty  riddle,' said  Legolas. 'I  wondered  if you had 
grown wings!' 
     'Unfortunately  not,'  said  Pippin.  'But  you  did   not  know  about 
Grishnbkh.' He shuddered and said  no more, leaving  Merry to tell of  those  
last horrible moments: the  pawing hands, the hot  breath, and  the dreadful 
strength of Grishnbkh's hairy arms.  
     'All this about the  Orcs of Barad-dyr, Lugb®rz as  they call it, makes 
me uneasy,' said  Aragorn.  'The  Dark Lord  already knew  too much and  his 
servants also; and Grishnbkh  evidently sent some message  across  the River 
after the quarrel. The Red Eye will be looking towards Isengard. But Saruman 
at any rate is in a cleft stick of his own cutting.' 
     'Yes, whichever side  wins, his outlook is poor,'  said  Merry. 'Things 

####-began to go all wrong for him from the moment his Orcs set foot in Rohan.' 
     'We caught  a glimpse  of  the old villain, or so Gandalf  hints,' said 
Gimli. 'On the edge of the Forest.' 
     'When was that?' asked Pippin. 
     'Five nights ago,' said Aragorn. 
     'Let me see,' said Merry: 'five nights ago-now we come to a part of the 
story  you  know nothing  about.  We met  Treebeard that morning  after  the  
battle; and that night we were  at Wellinghall,  one of his ent-houses.  The 
next  morning  we  went to  Entmoot, a gathering of Ents, that is,  and  the 
queerest thing  I have ever seen in my life. It lasted all that  day and the 
next; and we spent the nights with an Ent called Quickbeam. And then late in 
the afternoon in the third day of their moot,  the Ents suddenly blew up. It 
was amazing. The Forest had  felt as tense as if a  thunderstorm was brewing 
inside it: then  all at once  it exploded. I wish you could have heard their 
song as they marched.' 
     'If Saruma n had heard it, he would be a hundred miles away by now, even 
if he had had to run on his own legs,' said Pippin. 
     'Though Isengard be strong and hard, as cold as stone and bare as bone, 
     We go, we go, we go to war, to hew the stone and break the door! 
     There was  very much more. A  great deal  of the song had no words, and  
was like a music of horns and drums.  It was very exciting. But I thought it 
was only marching music and no more, just a song  -- until I got here. I know 
better now.' 
     'We came down  over  the last  ridge  into Nan Curunnr, after night had 
fallen,' Merry continued. 'It was then that I first had the feeling that the 
Forest itself  was  moving  behind  us. I thought  I was dreaming  an entish 
dream, but  Pippin had noticed  it too. We were both frightened; but  we did  
not find out more about it until later. 
     'It  was  the  Huorns,  or so the Ents call them  in "short  language". 
Treebeard  won't say much about them,  but  I think they are Ents that  have 
become almost  like trees, at least to look at. They stand here and there in 
the wood or under its eaves, silent, watching endlessly over the trees;  but 
deep  in the  darkest  dales there  are hundreds and  hundreds  of  them,  I 
believe. 
     'There is a great power in  them, and they seem able to wrap themselves 
in shadow: it  is difficult to see  them moving. But  they do. They can move 
very quickly, if  they are angry.  You  stand still  looking at the weather, 

####-maybe, or listening to the rustling of  the wind, and then  suddenly you find 
that  you  are in the middle of a wood with great  groping trees  all around 
you. They still have voices, and can speak with the Ents  -- that is why they 
are called Huorns, Treebeard says  -- but they  have  become queer and  wild.  
Danger ous. I should be terrified of meeting them, if there were no true Ents 
about to look after them. 
     'Well, in the early night  we crept  down a  long ravine into the upper  
end of the Wizard's Vale, the Ents with all their rustling Huorns behind. We 
could  not see them, of course,  but the whole air  was full of creaking. It 
was very dark, a  cloudy  night. They moved at a great speed as soon as they 
had left  the hills,  and made a noise like a rushing wind. The Moon did not 
appear through the clouds, and  not long after midnight there was a tall wood 
all round  the north side of Isengard. There was  no  sign of enemies nor of 
any  challenge. There was a light gleaming from  a high window in the tower, 
that was all. 
     'Treebeard and a few more Ents crept  on, right round to within sight of 
the great gates. Pippin  and I were with him. We were sitting on Treebeard's 
shoulders, and  I could feel the quivering tenseness  in  him. But even when 
they are roused, Ents can be very cautious and patient. They stood  still  as 
carved stones, breathing and listening. 
     'Then all at once there was  a tremendous stir. Trumpets blared and the 
walls of Isengard  echoed. We thought that we had  been discovered, and that 
battle was  going to  begin. But nothing of  the sort.  All Saruman's people 
were marching away. I  don't know much about this war, or about the 
Horsemen 
of Rohan, but Saruman seems to have meant to finish off the king and all his 
men with one final blow. He emptied Isengard. I  saw  the  enemy go: endless 
lines  of marching Orcs; and troops  of  them mounted on  great wolves.  And 
there were battalions of Men, too. Many  of them carried torches, and in the 
flare I could see  their faces. Most of them were ordinary men,  rather tall 
and dark-haired, and grim but not particularly  evil -looking. But there were 
some  others that were  horrible: man-high, but  with goblin-faces,  sallow,  
leering,  squint-eyed.  Do  you  know,  they  reminded  me at  once of  that 
Southerner at Bree: only he was not  so obviously orc-like as  most of these 
were.' 
     'I  thought of him too,' said Aragorn.  'We had many of these half-orcs 
to deal with at Helm's  Deep. It seems plain  now that that Southerner was a  

####-spy of Saruman's; but whether he was working  with the Black Riders,  or for 
Saruman alone, I do not know.  It is difficult with these  evil folk to know 
when they are in league, and when they are cheating one another.' 
     'Well, of all sorts together, there must have  been ten thousand at the 
very least,' said Merry.  'They took an hour to  pass out of the gates. Some 
went off down the highway  to the  Fords, and some turned  away µ  and  went 
eastward. A bridge has  been built down there, about  a mile away, where the 
river  runs in a very deep channel. You could see i t  now, if  you stood up. 
They were all singing with harsh voices, and laughing, making a hideous din. 
I thought things looked very black for Rohan. But Treebeard did not move. He 
said: 'My business is with Isengard tonight, with rock and stone.' 
     'But, though I could not see what was happening  in the dark, I believe 
that Huorns began to move south, as soon as the gates were shut again. Their 
business  was with Orcs I think.  They  were  far  down  the valley  in  the 
morning; or any rate there was a shadow there that one couldn't see through.  
     'As soon as Saruman had sent off all his army, our turn came. Treebeard 
put us down, and went up to the gates, and began hammering on the doors, and 
calling for Saruman. There was no answer, except arrows  and stones from the 
walls. But arrows are no  use against Ents. They hurt  them, of  course, and 
infuriate them:  like stinging flies. But an  Ent  can  be  stuck as full of 
orc-arrows  as  a pin -cushion,  and take no serious  harm.  They  cannot  be 
poisoned,  for one thing; and their skin seems to be very thick, and tougher  
than bark.  It takes a  very  heavy axe-stroke to wound them seriously. They 
don't like axes. But there would have to be a great many axe -men to one Ent: 
a man  that hacks once at  an  Ent  never  gets a chance of a second blow. A 
punch from an Ent-fist crumples up iron like thin tin. 
     'When Treebeard had got a few  arrows  in  him, he began to warm up, to  
get positively "hasty", as he would say. He let  out a great hoom-hom, and a  
dozen more Ents came striding up. An angry Ent is terrifying. Their fingers,  
and  their toes,  just  freeze  on  to  rock;  and  they  tear  it  up  like 
bread-crust. It was like watching the work of  great tree-roots in a hundred 
years, all packed into a few moments. 
     'They pushed,  pulled,  tore,  shook,  and  hammered;  and  clang-bang, 
crash-crack,  in five minutes they had these huge gates just lying in  ruin; 
and  some were  already beginning to eat into  the walls,  like rabbits in a  
sand-pit. I don't know what Saruman thought was happening; but anyway he 
did 

####-not know how to deal with it. His wizardry may have been falling off lately,  
of course;  but anyway  I think he has not much grit, not much plain courage 
alone in a tight place without a lot of  slaves and machines  and things, if 
you  know what I mean. Very different from old Gandalf. I wonder if his fame 
was not all along mainly due to his cleverness in settling at Isengard.' 
     'No,'  said  Aragorn. 'Once he was as  great as his fame made h im.  His 
knowledge  was deep,  his thought  was  subtle,  and his hands  marvellously  
skilled; and  he  had  a power  over the  minds of others. The wise he could 
persuade, and the smaller folk he could daunt. That power he certainly still 
keeps. There are not  many in Middle-earth that I  should  say were safe, if 
they were  left  alone to talk with him,  even now  when he  has suffered  a  
defeat. Gandalf, Elrond, and Galadriel, perhaps, now that his wickedness has 
been laid bare, but very few others.' 
     'The Ents are safe,' said Pippin. 'He seems  at one  time to  have  got 
round them, but never again. And anyway  he did  not understand them; and he 
made  the great mistake of  leaving them out of his  calculations. He had no 
plan for them, and there was no time to make any, once they had set to work. 
As  soon  as  our  attack began,  the few remaining rats in Isengard started 
bolting through  every  hole that the Ents  made.  The Ents  let the Men go, 
after they had questioned them, two or three dozen only down  at this end. I 
don't think many orc-folk, of any size, escaped. Not  from the Huorns: there 
was a wood  full of them all round Isengard by  that time, as well as  those 
that had gone down the valley. 
     'When  the  Ents  had reduced a large part  of  the  southern walls  to 
rubbish,  and  what was  left of his people  had  bolted  and  deserted him, 
Saruman fled in a panic. He seems to have been at the gates when we arrived: 
I expect he came  to watch his splendid army march out. When the  Ents broke 
their  way in,  he  left in a hurry. They did not spot him at first. But the 
night had opened out, and there was a great light of stars, quite enough for  
Ents to see by,  and suddenly  Quickbeam  gave a  cry  "The tree-killer, the 
tree-killer!"  Quickbeam is a gentle creature, but he  hates Saruman all the 
more fiercely for that: his people suffered cruelly from orc-axes. He  leapt 
down the path from the inner gate, and he  can  move like a wind when  he is 
roused. There was a pale figure hurrying away  in and out of the  shadows of 
the pillars, and it had nearly reached the stairs  to the tower -door. But it 
was a near thing. Quickbeam was so hot after  him, that he was within a step 
or two of being caught and strangled when he slipped in through the door. 

####-     'When Saruman  was  safe back in Orthanc, it was not long before he set 
some of  his precious machinery to work. By  that time there were  many Ents 
inside  Isengard: some  had followed Quickbeam, and others had burst in from 
the  north  and  east ; they were roaming  about and  doing a great  deal  of 
damage. Suddenly up came fires and foul fumes: the vents and shafts all over 
the  plain began to spout  and belch. Several of the Ents  got scorched  and 
blistered.  One of them,  Beechbone  I  think he was  called,  a  very  tall 
handsome Ent,  got caught in a spray of some  liquid fire and burned like  a  
torch: a horrible sight. 
     'That sent them mad. I thought that they had been really roused before; 
but  I  was wrong. I saw  what it was like at last.  It was staggering. They 
roared and boomed and trumpeted, until stones began to crack and fall at the  
mere noise of them. Merry  and  I lay on  the  ground and stuffed our cloaks 
into our ears. Round  and  round the  rock of Orthanc the Ents went striding 
and  storming like a howling gale, breaking pillars,  hurling avalanches  of 
boulders  down the shafts, tossing up huge slabs of stone into the air  like 
leaves.  The tower was in the  middle  of a spinning  whirlwind. I  saw iron 
posts  and blocks of  masonry go rocketing  up hundreds  of feet, and  smash 
against the windows  of Orthanc. But Treebeard kept his head. He had not had 
any burns, luckily. He  did not want  his  folk to hurt themselves in  their 
fury,  and  he  did  not  want  Saruman to  escape out of some hole  in  the  
confusion.   Many  of  the   Ents   were   hurling  themselves  against  the 
Orthanc-rock;  but that defeated  them.  It  is very  smooth  and hard. Some 
wizardry is in it, perhaps, older and stronger than  Saruman's.  Anyway they 
could  not get a grip on it, or make a crack in  it; and they  were bruising 
and wounding themselves against it. 'So Treebeard went out into the ring and 
shouted.  His  enormous voice  rose above  all the din.  There  was  a  dead 
silence, suddenly. In it we  heard a shrill  laugh from a high window in the 
tower.  That had a queer effect on the Ents. They had been boiling over; now 
they became cold, grim as  ice, and quiet.  They left the plain and gathered 
round Treebeard,  standing quite still.  He  spoke  to  them for a little in 
their own language; I think he was telling them of a plan he had made in his 
old head long before. Then they just faded silently away in  the grey light. 
Day was dawning by that time. 
     'They set a  watch on the tower,   I believe,  but  the watchers were so 
well hidden in  shadows  and kept so  still, that  I could not see them. The 
others went away north. All  that day they were busy, out of  sight. Most of 

####-the time  we were left  alone. It  was a dreary day; and we wandered about a  
bit, though we kept out of the view of the windows of Orthanc, as much as we 
could: they stared at us so threateningly. A good deal of the time  we spent 
looking for something to eat. And also we sat and talked, wondering what was 
happening away south in Rohan,  and what had  become of all the rest  of our 
Company. Every  now  and  then we could hear in the distance the rattle  and 
fall of stone, and thudding noises echoing in the hills.  
     'In the afternoon we walked round the circle,  and  went  to have a look  
at what was going on. There was  a great shadowy  wood of Huorns at the head 
of the  valley, and  another round the northern wall. We  did not dare to go 
in. But there was a rending, tearing noise of work going on inside. Ents and 
Huorns were  digging great  pits  and  trenches, and making  great pools and 
dams, gathering all the waters of the Isen and every other spring and stream 
that they could find. We left them to it. 
     'At dusk Treebeard came back to the gate. He was humming a nd booming to 
himself, and seemed pleased. He stood and stretched  his great arms and legs 
and breathed deep. I asked him if he was tired. 
     ' "Tired?" he said, "tired? Well  no, not tired, but stiff.  I  need  a  
good  draught  of  Entwash.  We  have   worked  hard;   we  have  done  more 
stone-cracking and earth-gnawing today than we have done in many a long 
year 
before. But it is nearly finished. When night falls do not  linger near this 
gate or in the  old tunnel! Water may come through-and it will be  foul water  
for a while, until all the filth  of Saruman  is washed away. Then  Isen can 
run clean  again." He began  to pull  down  a bit  more of  the walls,  in a  
leisurely sort of way, just to amuse himself. 
     'We were just  wondering where  it  wou ld  be  safe to lie and get some 
sleep, when the most amazing thing of all happened. There was the sound of a  
rider coming swiftly  up the road. Merry  and I lay quiet, and Treebeard hid 
himself in the shadows under the arch. Suddenly  a great horse came striding 
up, like a flash of silver. It was already dark. but I could see the rider's 
face clearly: it seemed to shine, and all his clothes were white. I just sat 
up, staring, with my mouth open. I tried to call out, and couldn't. 
     'There  was no  need.  He  halted  just by  us and looked down  at  us. 
'Gandalf!' I said  at last.  but my voice  was only  a whisper. Did he  say: 
"Hullo, Pippin! This is a pleasant surprise!"? No, indeed! He said: "Get up, 
you tom-fool  of a Took! Where, in the name of wonder, in  all  this ruin is 

####-Treebeard? I want him. Quick!" 
     'Treebeard heard his voice  and  came out of the shadows  at once;  and 
there was a strange meeting. I was surprised, because neither of them seemed 
surprised at all.  Gandalf obviously  expected to find  Treebeard  here; and 
Treebeard  might almost have been loitering about near the  gates on purpose 
to  meet  him. Yet we  had  told  the old  Ent all  about  Moria. But then I 
remembered a queer look he gave us  at the time. I can only suppose that  he 
had  seen Gandalf or  had some  news of him, but would not say anything in a 
hurry. "Don't  be hasty" is  his motto; but nobody, not even Elves, will say 
much about Gandalf's movements when he is not there. 
     '"Hoom! Gandalf!" said Treebeard.  "I  am  glad  you have come. Wood and 
water, stock and stone, I can master; but there is a Wizard to manage here." 
     '"Treebeard," said Gandalf. "I need your help. You have done much,  but 
I need more. I have about ten thousand Orcs to manage." 
     'Then those two went off and had a council  together in some corner. It 
must have seemed very  hasty  to  Treebeard, for Gandalf was in a tremendous 
hurry, and was already talking  at a great  pace,  before they passed out of 
hearing.  They were only away a matter of minutes, perhaps  a quarter  of an 
hour. Then Gandalf came back to us, and he seemed relieved, almost merry. He 
did say he was glad to see us, then. 
     '"But Gandalf," I cried, "where have you  been?  And have you seen  the 
others?" 
     '"Wherever  I have been, I am back,"  he answered in the genuine Gandalf 
manner. "Yes, I have seen some of the others. But news must wait.  This is a  
perilous night,  and I  must ride fast. But the dawn may be brighter; and if 
so, we shall  meet  again.  Take  care  of  yourselves,  and keep away  from 
Orthanc! Good-bye!" 
     'Treebeard was very thoughtful after Gandalf had gone. He had evidently 
learnt a lot in a short time and was digesting it. He looked at us and said: 
"Hm, well, I find you are not such  hasty  folk as I thought. You  said much 
less than you might, and  not more than you should. Hm, this is  a bundle of 
news and no mistake! Well, now Treebeard must get busy again." 
     'Before he went, we got a little news out of him; and it  did not cheer  
us  up at all. But for the moment we thought more about you three than about 
Frodo and Sam, or about poor Boromir. For we gathered that there was a great 
battle going on, or soon would be, and that  you were in it, and might never  
come out of it. 

####-     '"Huorns will help,"  said Treebeard. Then he went  away and we did not  
see him again until this morning. 
     'It was deep night. We lay  on  top of a pile  of stone,  and could see 
nothing beyond  it.  Mist  or shadows  blotted out  everything like  a great 
blanket  all  round us. The air seemed hot and  heavy; and it  was  full  of 
rustlings,  creakings,  and  a  murmur  like voices  passing. I  think  that 
hundreds more of the Huorns must have been passing by to help in the battle. 
Later  there was  a  great  rumble  of  thunder away south, and  flashes  of 
lightning   far  away  across  Rohan.  Every  now  and  then  we  could  see 
mountain-peaks, miles and miles away, stab  out suddenly,  black  and white, 
and then vanish. And behind us there were  noises like thunder in hills, but 
different. At times the whole valley echoed. 
     'It  must have been  about midnight when  the Ents broke  the  dams and 
poured all the gathered waters through a gap in the northern wall, down into 
Isengard. The  Huorn-dark had passed,  and the  thunder had rolled away. The 
Moon was sinking behind the western mountains.  
     'Isengard began to fill up with black  creeping streams and pools. They 
glittered  in the  last  light of the Moon,  as  they spread over the plain. 
Every now and  then the waters  found their  way down  into  some  shaft  or  
spouthole. Great  white steams hissed up. Smoke rose in billows.  There were 
explosions and gusts  of fire. One great  coil of  vapour  went whirling up, 
twisting round and round Orthanc, until it looked like a tall peak of cloud, 
fiery underneath and moonlit above. And still more water poured in, until at 
last Isengard looked like a huge flat saucepan, all steaming and bubbling.' 
     'We saw  a cloud of smoke and steam from  the  south last night when we 
came to the mouth of Nan Curunnr,' said Aragorn. 'We feared that Saruman 
was 
brewing some new devilry for us.' 
     'Not he!' said Pippin. 'He was probably  choking and  not laughing  any 
more. By  the morning, yesterday morning, the water  had sunk down  into all 
the holes,  and there was a dense fog. We took refuge in that guardroom over 
there; and we had  rather a fright. The lake began  to overflow and pour out 
through the old  tunnel,  and the  water was rapidly rising up the steps. We 
thought we were  going to get caught  like  Orcs in a  hole; but we  found a  
winding stair at the back of  the  store-room that brought  us out on top of 
the arch. It was a squeeze to get  out, as the passages had been cracked and 
half blocked with fallen stone  near the top. There  we sat high up above the 

####-floods  and watched the drowning of Isengard. The  Ents kept  on pouring  in 
more water, till all the fires were quenched and every cave filled. The fogs 
slowly gathered together  and steamed up into  a huge umbrella of  cloud: it 
must have been  a mile high. In the evening there  was a great rainbow  over  
the eastern hills; and then the sunset was blotted out by a thick drizzle on 
the mountain-sides. It  all went very quiet. A few wolves howled mournfully, 
far away. The Ents stopped the  inflow in the  night, and sent the Isen back  
into its old course. And that was the end of it all. 
     'Since then  the water has  been sinking  again. There  must be outlets 
somewhere from the caves underneath, I think. If Saruman peeps out of any of 
his  windows, it must look an untidy, dreary mess. We  felt very lonely. Not  
even  a visible Ent  to talk to in all the ruin;  and no  news. We spent the 
night up on top there above the arch,  and it was cold and  damp and we  did 
not sleep.  We  had a feeling  that anything  might  happen  at  any minute. 
Saruman  is  still in his tower. There was a noise in the  night like a wind 
coming  up the valley. I think the Ents  and Huorns that had been away  came 
back  then; but where they have all gone to  now, I  don't  know. It  was  a  
misty,  moisty morning  when we  climbed down  and  looked  round again, 
and 
nobody was about. And that is  about all there  is  to tell. It seems almost 
peaceful  now after all  the turmoil. And safer too, somehow,  since Gandalf 
came back. I could sleep!' 
     They  all fell silent  for a while. Gimli re-filled his pipe. 'There is 
one thing I wonder about,' he  said as he lit it with his  flint and tinder: 
'Wormtongue. You told Thjoden he was with Saruman. How did he get there?' 
     'Oh yes,  I forgot about him,'  said Pippin. 'He did not get here  till 
this morning. We had just lit the fire and had some breakfast when Treebeard 
appeared again. We heard him hooming and calling our names outside. 
     '"I have just come round to see how  you are faring, my lads,' he said; 
'and to give you some news. Huorns have come back. All's well; aye very well 
indeed!" he laughed, and slapped his  thighs. "No more Orcs  in Isengard, no 
more axes! And there will be folk  coming up from the South before the day is 
old; some that you may be glad to see." 
     'He had hardly said that, when we heard the sound of hoofs on the road. 
We rushed out  before the gates, and  I stood and stared,  half expecting to 
see Strider  and Gandalf come riding up at the head of  an army. But  out of 
the  mist there  rode a man on  an old tired  horse; and he  looked  a queer  

####-twisted sort of creature  himself. There was no one  else. When he came. out 
of the  mist and suddenly saw  all the ruin and wreckage in front of him, he 
sat and gaped, and his face went almost green. He was so bewildered that  he 
did not seem to notice us at first. When he did, he gave a cry, and tried to 
turn his horse round and ride off. But Treebeard took three strides,  put out 
a long  arm, and  lifted him out  of the saddle. His horse bolted in terror, 
and he grovelled  on the ground. He said he was Grnma, friend and counsellor  
of  the  king,  and had  been sent  with important messages  from Thjoden to 
Saruman. 
     '"No one else would dare to ride through the open land, so full of foul 
Orcs," he said,  "so I was sent. And I have had a perilous journey, and I am 
hungry and weary. I fled far north out of my way, pursued by wolves." 
     'I caught the sidelong looks he gave to Treebeard, and I said to myself 
"liar".  Treebeard looked at him in  his long slow  way for several minutes, 
till the wretched man was squirming on the floor. Then at last he said: "Ha, 
hm, I was expecting  you, Master Wormtongue." The man  started a t that name. 
"Gandalf got  here first. So I know as much about you  as I need, and I know 
what to do with you. Put all the rats in one trap, said Gandalf; and I will. 
I am the master of Isengard now, but Saruman is locked in his tower; and you 
can go there and give him all the messages that you can think of." 
     '"Let me go, let me go!" said Wormtongue. "I know the way." 
     '"You knew the way, I  don't doubt,"  said Treebeard. "But  things have 
changed here a little. Go and see!" 
     'He let Wormtongue go, and he limped off through the arch with us close  
behind, until he came inside  the ring and could see all the floods that lay 
between him and Orthanc. Then he turned to us. 
     '"Let me go away!" he whined. "Let  me go away! My messages are useless 
now." 
     '"They are indeed," said Treebeard. "But you have only two  choices: to 
stay  with me until  Gandalf and your master arrive; or to  cross the water. 
Which will you have?" 
     'The man shivered at the mention of his master, and put a foot into the 
water; but he drew back. "I cannot swim," he said. 
     '"The  water is not deep," said Treebeard. "It is dirty,  but that will 
not harm you, Master Wormtongue. In you go now!" 
     'With that the wretch  floundered off into the flood. It rose up nearly 
to his neck before  he got too far away for me to see him. The last I saw of 

####-him was clinging to some old barrel or  piece of  wood. But  Treebeard waded 
after him, and watched his progress.  
     '"Well, he has gone in," he said when he returned. "I saw  him crawling 
up  the steps like a draggled  rat. There is someone  in  the tower still: a  
hand came out and pulled him in. So there he is, and I  hope  the welcome is 
to  his liking. Now  I  must go and wash myself clean  of the slime. I'll be 
away  up on the north side,  if anyone wants to see  me. There  is no  clean 
water down here  fit for an  Ent to drink. or to bathe in. So I will ask you  
two lads to keep a watch at  the gate for the folk that are coming. There'll 
be the Lord of the Fields of Rohan, mark you! You must welcome  him as  well 
as you know how: his men have fought a great fight with the Orcs. Maybe, you  
know the right fashion  of Men's words  for such a  lord,  better than Ents.  
There have been many  lords in the green fields in my time, and I have never 
learned their speech or their  names. They will be wanting man-food, and you 
know all  about that, I guess.  So find what you think  is fit for a king to 
eat,  if you can." And that is the end of the story. Though I should like to 
know who this Wormtongue is. Was he really the king's counsellor?' 
     'He was,' said  Aragorn; 'and also  Saruman's spy and servant in Rohan. 
Fate has not been  kinder to him than he deserves. The sight of the  ruin of 
all  that  he  thought  so  strong and  magnificent  must  have  been almost 
punishment enough. But I fear that worse awaits him.' 
     'Yes, I  don't suppose Treebeard sent him to Orthanc out of  kindness,' 
said Merry.  'He seemed rather grimly delighted  with the business  and  was 
laughing to himself when he went to get his bathe and drink. We spent a busy 
time after that, searching the flotsam, and rummaging about. We found two or  
three  store-rooms  in different  places nearby,  above the flood-level. But 
Treebeard  sent  some  Ents down, and they  carried off  a great deal of the 
stuff. 
     '"We want man-food for twenty-five," the Ents said, so you can see that 
somebody  had  counted your  company carefully before you arrived. You three 
were  evidently meant to go  with the  great people. But you  would  not have  
fared any better. We kept as good as we sent, I promise you. Better, because 
we sent no drink. 
     '"What about drink?" I said to the Ents.  
     '"There is water of Isen," they said, "and that is good enough for Ents 
and Men." But I hope that the Ents may have found time to brew some of their 
draughts from the mountain-springs, and we shall see Gandalf's beard curling 

####-when he returns. After the Ents had gone, we felt tired,  and hungry. But we 
did not grumble  -- our labours  had  been well rewarded. It was through our  
search  for  man-food that Pippin  discovered the prize of  all the flotsam, 
those  Hornblower  barrels.  "Pipe-weed  is better after food," said Pippin; 
that is how the situation arose.' 
     'We understand it all perfectly now,' said Gimli. 
     'All except one thing,' said  Aragorn: 'leaf  from the Southfarthing in 
Isengard.  The more  I consider it, the more curious I find it. I have never  
been in Isengard,  but I have journeyed  in this  land, and I know  well the 
empty countries that lie between Rohan and the Shire. Neither goods nor folk 
have passed that  way for  many a long year, not openly. Saruman  had secret 
dealings with someone  in  the Shire, I  guess. Wormtongues may  be found in 
other houses than King Thjoden's. Was there a date on the barrels?' 
     'Yes,' said Pippin. 'It was the 1417 crop, that is last year's; no, the 
year before, of course, now: a good year.' 
     'Ah well, whatever evil  was  afoot is over now, I  hope; or else it is 
beyond our reach  at pr esent,' said Aragorn. 'Yet I think I shall mention it 
to Gandalf, small matter though it may seem among his great affairs.' 
     'I wonder what he is doing,' said Merry. 'The  afternoon is getting on. 
Let us go and look round! You can enter Isengard now at  any rate,  Strider,  
if you want to. But it is not a very cheerful sight.' 

####- 
 

Chapter 10. The Voice of Saruman 

 
 
     They passed through the ruined tunnel and stood upon a heap of  stones, 
gazing at the  dark rock of Orthanc, and its many windows, a menace still in 
the  desolation  that  lay  all about  it.  The waters  had  now  nearly all 
subsided.  Here  and  there  gloomy pools  remained,  covered with  scum and 
wreckage; but most of the wide circle was bare again, a  wilderness of slime 
and tumbled  rock, pitted with  blackened holes, and  dotted  with posts and 
pillars  leaning  drunkenly this  way and that. At the rim of the  shattered 
bowl  there lay vast mounds and slopes, like the shingles cast up by a great 
storm; and  beyond them the  green and  tangled valley  ran up into the long  
ravine  between the  dark arms  of  the mountains. Across the waste they saw 
riders picking their way; they were coming from the north  side, and already 
they were drawing near to Orthanc. 
     'There is  Gandalf, and Thjoden and his men!' said Legolas. 'Let  us go 
and meet them!' 
     'Walk warily!' said Merry. 'There are loose  slabs that may tilt up and 
throw you down into a pit, if you don't take care.' 
     They  followed what was  left of  the road from  the gates  to Orthanc, 
going slowly,  for  the flag-stones  were cracked  and  slimed.  The riders,  
seeing them approach, halted under the  shadow of  the  rock and  waited for  
them. Gandalf rode forward to meet them. 
     'Well, Treebeard and I have had some interesting  discussions, and made 
a few plans,' he said; 'and we have  all had  some much-needed  rest. Now we 
must  be going  on again.  I hope  you companions  have all rested, too, and 
refreshed yourselves?' 
     'We have,' said Merry. 'But  our discussions began and ended in  smoke. 
Still we feel less ill-disposed towards Saruman than we did.' 
     'Do you indeed?' said Gandalf.  'Well, I do not. I have now a last task  
to do  before I  go: I must pay Saruman  a  farewell visit.  Dangerous,  and 
probably  u seless; but it must be done.  Those of you who wish may come with 
me -- but beware! And do not jest! This is not the time for it.' 
     'I will  come,' said Gimli. 'I wish to see him and  learn  if he really 
looks like you.' 
     'And how will you learn  that,  Master Dwarf?'  said  Gandalf. 'Saruman 

####-could  look like me in your eyes, if it suited his purpose with you. And are 
you yet wise enough  to detect  all  his  counterfeits? Well, we shall  see, 
perhaps.  He  may  be  shy  of  showing himself before many  different  eyes 
together. But I have ordered all  the Ents to remove  themselves from sight, 
so perhaps we shall persuade him to come out.' 
     'What's the danger?' asked Pippin. 'Will he shoot at  us, and pour fire 
out of the windows; or can he put a spell on us from a distance?' 
     'The last is most likely, if you ride to his door with a light  heart,' 
said Gandalf. 'But there is no knowing what he can do, or may choose to try.  
A wild beast cornered is not safe to approach. And Saruman has powers you do 
not guess. Beware of his voice!' 
     They  came  now to  the foot of Orthanc.  It  was black, and  the  rock  
gleamed as if it were wet. The  many  faces of the  stone had sharp edges as 
though they had been newly chiselled. A  few  scorings. and small flake-like 
splinters near the base, were all the marks that it bore of the fury  of the 
Ents. 
     On the eastern side, in the angle of two piers, there was a great door, 
high above the  ground; and over it was a  shuttered window, opening upon  a 
balcony hedged with iron bars. Up to the threshold of the door there mounted 
a flight of twenty-seven broad stairs, hewn  by some unknown art of the same 
black stone. This was the only entrance to the tower;  but many tall windows 
were cut with deep embrasures in the climbing walls: far up they peered like 
little eyes in the sheer faces of the horns. 
     At the  foot of the  stairs Gandalf and the king dismounted. 'I will go 
up,' said Gandalf. 'I have been in Orthanc and I know my peril.' 
     'And I too will go up,' said the king. 'I am old, and fear no peril any 
more.  I wish to speak with the enemy who has  done me so  much wrong. 
Jomer 
shall come with me, and see that my aged feet do not falter.' 
     'As you  will,' said  Gandalf. 'Aragorn shall  come with  me.  Let  the 
others await us at the foot of the stairs. They will hear and see enough, if 
there is anything to hear or see.' 
     'Nay!' said Gimli. 'Legolas and I wish for a closer view. We alone here 
represent our kindred. We also will come behind.' 
     'Come  then!' said Gandalf, and  with that  he climbed the  steps,  and 
Thjoden went beside him. 
     The Riders of Rohan sat  uneasily upon their horses,  on either side of 

####-the stair,  and  looked  up darkly  at  the great  tower, fearing what might 
befall their lord.  Merry and  Pippin  sat on the bottom step,  feeling both 
unimportant and unsafe. 
     'Half a sticky mile from here to the gate!' muttered Pippin.  'I wish I 
could slip off back to the guardroom unnoticed! What did we come for? We are 
not wanted.' 
     Gandalf stood before the door of Orthanc and beat on it with his staff.  
It  rang  with  a  hollow  sound.  'Saruman, Saruman!'  he  cried in a  loud 
commanding voice.  'Saruman come forth!' 
     For  some time there was no answer.  At  last the window above the door  
was unbarred, hut no figure could be seen at its dark opening. 
     'Who is it?' said a voice. 'What do you wish?' 
     Thjoden started.  'I know that  voice,' he said, 'and I  curse  the day 
when I first listened to it.' 
     'Go  and  fetch Saruman,  since  you  have  become  his footman,  Grnma  
Wormtongue!' said Gandalf.  'And do not waste our time!' 
     The window closed. They  waited.  Suddenly another voice spoke, low and 
melodious, its very sound  an enchantment.  Those who  listened  unwarily to 
that voice could seldom  report the words that they heard;  and if they did, 
they wondered,  for  little power remained  in them. Mostly they  remembered 
only that it was a delight to  hear the  voice  speaking, all  that it  said 
seemed wise and  reasonable, and desire awoke in them  by swift agreement to 
seem  wise themselves.  When others  spoke  they seemed harsh and uncouth 
by 
contrast; and if they gainsaid the voice, anger was kindled in the hearts of 
those under the spell. Fur some the spell lasted only while the voice  spoke 
to them, and when it spake to another they smiled, as men do who see through 
a  juggler's trick while others gape at it. For many the sound  of the voice 
alone was enough  to hold  them enthralled; but for those whom it  conquered 
the  spell endured when they were  far away. and ever  they heard that  soft  
voice whispering and  urging them. But none  were unmoved; none rejected its 
pleas and its commands without  an effort  of mind and will, so long as  its 
master had control of it.  
     'Well?' it  said now with  gentle  question. 'Why  must  you disturb my 
rest? Will you give me no peace  at  all by night or day?' Its tone was that 
of a kindly heart aggrieved by injuries undeserved. 
     They  looked up, astonished, for they had heard no sound of his coming; 

####-and they saw a figure standing at the  rail, looking  down upon them: an old 
man, swathed in a great cloak, the colour of which was not easy to tell, for  
it changed if they  moved  their eyes or if  he stirred. His  face was long, 
with  a high forehead, he had deep darkling eyes, hard to fathom, though the 
look  that they now  bore was grave and benevolent, and a  little weary. His 
hair and beard were white, but strands of black still showed about his  lips 
and ears. 
     'Like, and yet unlike,' muttered Gimli. 
     'But come now,' said the  soft voice. 'Two  at least of  you I know  by 
name.  Gandalf  I know too  well to  have much  hope that  he seeks help  or  
counsel here. But you, Thjoden Lord  of  the Mark  of Rohan are  declared by 
your noble devices, and still more by  the fair  countenance of the House of 
Eorl.  O worthy son of  Thengel the  Thrice-renowned! Why have you not  
come 
before, and as a friend? Much  have  I desired to see you, mightiest king of 
western lands, and especially  in these latter years, to  save you from  the 
unwise and evil counsels that beset  you!  Is it yet  too late? Despite  the 
injuries that have been done to me, in  which the  men of Rohan, alas!  have 
had some part, still  I  would save you, and deliver you from the ruin  that 
draws nigh inevitably,  if you  ride  upon this  road which you have  taken. 
Indeed I alone can aid you now.' 
     Thjoden opened his mouth as if to speak, but he said nothing. He looked 
up  at the face of Saruman with its dark solemn eyes bent down upon him, and 
then to Gandalf at his  side; and  he  seemed to hesitate. Gandalf  made  no  
sign; but stood silent as stone, as one waiting patiently for some call that 
has not  yet  come. The Riders stirred at first, murmuring with approval  of 
the words of Saruman; and then they too were silent,  as men spell-bound. It  
seemed to them that Gandalf had never spoken so  fair and fittingly to their 
lord.  Rough and proud  now seemed all his  dealings with  Thjoden. And over  
their hearts crept a shadow, the fear of a great danger: the end of the Mark 
in a  darkness to which Gandalf was driving them, while Saruman stood beside 
a door of  escape, holding it half open so that a ray of light came through. 
There was a heavy silence. 
     It was Gimli the dwarf who broke in suddenly. 'The words of this wizard 
stand on their heads,'  he growled, gripping  the handle of his axe. 'In the 
language  of  Orthanc  help  means ruin, and  saving means  slaying, that is 
plain. But we do not come here to beg.' 

####-     'Peace!'  said Saruman, and for  a  fleeting  moment his voice was less 
suave, and a  light flickered in his eyes and was gone.  'I do not  speak to 
you  yet,  Gimli  Gluin's son,' he said. 'Far  away  is  your home and small 
concern of yours are the  troubles of this land. But it was not by design of 
your own that  you  became  embroiled in them, and so I will  not blame such 
part as you have played-a valiant one, I doubt not. But I pray you, allow me  
first to speak with the King of Rohan, my neighbour, and once my friend. 
     'What  have you to say,  Thjoden King? Will you have peace with me, and 
all  the aid that my  knowledge, founded in  long years, can bring? Shall we 
make our counsels together  against  evil days, and repair our injuries with 
such good will that our  estates  shall both come to fairer flower than ever 
before?' 
     Still Thjoden  did not  answer.  Whether he strove with anger or  doubt 
none could say. Jomer spoke. 
     'Lord, hear me!'  he said.  'Now  we feel the peril that we  were warned 
of. Have we ridden forth to victory, only to stand at last amazed  by an old 
liar with honey on his forked tongue? So would the trapped wolf speak to the 
hounds,  if he could. What aid can he give  to you, forsooth? All he desires 
is  to  escape  from  his plight. But will you  parley  with this dealer  in 
treachery and murder? Remember Thjodred at  the Fords, and the grave of 
Hbma  
in Helm's Deep!' 
     'If  we speak of  poisoned tongues what  shall  we say of  yours, young 
serpent?' said Saruman,  and the  flash of  his  anger was now plain to see. 
'But  come,  Jomer, Jomund's  son!' he went on in his soft  voice again.  To 
every man h part. Valour in  arms is yours, and you win high honour thereby. 
Slay whom your lord names as enemies, and be content. Meddle not in policies 
which you do not understand. But maybe. if you become  a king, you Will find 
that he must choose his friends with care. The friendship of Saruman and the 
power  of Orthanc  cannot be lightly thrown aside, whatever grievances, real 
or fancied, may lie behind. You have won  a battle  but  not a  war and that 
with help on  which you cannot count again.  You may  find the Shadow of the 
Wood at your  own door next:  it is wayward, and senseless, and  has no love 
for Men. 
     'But  my  lord of  Rohan, am I to be called a murderer, because valiant 
men have fallen in battle?  If  you go to war,  needlessly,  for  I did  not 
desire  it, then men will be slain. But  if I am a murderer on that account, 

####-then all the House of Eorl is stained with murder; for they have fought many 
wars, and assailed many who defied  them. Yet with some they have afterwards 
made peace, none the worse for being politic. I say, Thjoden King:  shall we 
have peace and friendship, you and I? It is ours to command ' 
     'We will have peace,' said Thjoden  at last thickly and with an effort. 
Several of the  Riders  cried out gladly. Thjoden held up his hand. 'Yes, we 
will have peace,'  he said, now in a clear voice,  'we will have peace, when 
you and all your works have perished -- and the works of your dark master to 
whom you would deliver us. You are a liar. Saruman, and a corrupter of men's 
hearts.  You hold out your hand to me,  and  I perceive only a finger of the 
claw of  Mordor. Cruel  and cold! Even if your war on me was just as  it was 
not, for were you ten times as wise you  would have no right  to rule me and 
mine  for your own profit  as  you desired  --  even so, what will you say of 
your torches in Westfold  and  the children  that lie dead  there?  And they 
hewed Hbma's body before the gates of the Hornburg, after he  was dead. 
When 
you hang from  a  gibbet at  your  window for the sport of your own crows, I 
will have peace with you and  Orthanc.  So  much  for  the House  of  Eorl. A 
lesser son of great sires am I, but I do not need to lick your fingers. Turn 
elsewhither. But I fear your voice has lost its charm.' 
     The Riders gazed up at Thjoden like men startled  out of a dream. Harsh 
as an old raven's their master's  voice sounded in their ears after the music 
of Saruman. But Saruman for a while was beside himself with wrath. He leaned 
over the rail as if he would smite the King with his staff. To some suddenly 
it seemed that they saw a snake coiling itself to strike. 
     'Gibbets  and crows!'  he  hissed,  and they shuddered  at  the hideous 
change.  'Dotard!  What is  the house of  Eorl but  a  thatched  barn  where 
brigands  drink  in the reek,  and  their brats roll on the floor among  the 
dogs? Too long have they escaped the gibbet themselves. But the noose comes,  
slow in the  drawing,  tight and hard in the end. Hang if you will!' Now his 
voice changed, as he slowly mastered himself. 'I know not why I have had the 
patience  to speak  to you.  For I need  you not, nor  your  little band  of 
gallopers,  as swift to fly  as to  advance, Thjoden Horsemaster. Long ago I 
offered you a state beyond your merit and your wit. I have offered it again, 
so that those whom you mislead may clearly see the choice of roads. You give 
me brag and abuse. So be it. Go back to your huts!  
     'But you, Gandalf!  For  you  at  least I am grieved,  feeling for your 

####-shame. How comes  it  that you  can  endure such company? For you are proud, 
Gandalf-and not  without reason, having a noble mind and eyes that look both 
deep and far. Even now will you not listen to my counsel?' 
     Gandalf stirred, and looked up. 'What have you to say that you did  not 
say at our last meeting?' he asked. 'Or, perhaps, you have things to unsay?' 
     Saruman paused. 'Unsay?' he mused, as if puzzled. 'Unsay? I endeavoured 
to advise you for your own good, but  you scarcely listened. You  are  proud 
and  do not love advice,  having  indeed  a store of your own wisdom. But on 
that occasion  you erred, I think, misconstruing my  intentions wilfully.  I 
fear that in my eagerness to persuade you, I  lost  patience.  And  indeed I 
regret it. For I bore you no ill-will; and even now  I bear none, though you  
return to me in the company  of the violent and  the ignorant. How should I?  
Are  we not both members of  a high  and  ancient order, most  excellent  in 
Middle-earth? Our friendship would profit us both alike. Much we could still 
accomplish together, to heal the disorders of the  world.  Let us understand 
one another,  and  dismiss from thought these lesser folk! Let  them wait on 
our decisions! For the common good I am  willing to redress the past, and to 
receive you. Will you not consult with me? Will you not come up?' 
     So  great was the power that Saruman  exerted in this  last effort that 
none that stood  within hearing were unmoved. But  now the  spell was wholly 
different.  They  heard the  gentle remonstrance  of  a kindly  king with an 
erring but much-loved minister. But they were shut out, listening at a  door 
to  words  not  meant for  them: ill-mannered  children  or  stupid servants 
overhearing the  elusive discourse  of their  elders, and wondering  how  it 
would  affect their lot. Of  loftier mould these two were made: reverend and 
wise. It was inevitable that they should make alliance. Gandalf would ascend 
into  the  tower, to discuss  deep  things beyond their comprehension in the 
high chambers of  Orthanc. The door would be closed, and they would  be left  
outside, dismissed to await allotted work or punishment. Even in the mind of 
Thjoden the thought took shape, like a shadow of doubt: 'He will betray  us;  
he will go -- we shall be lost.' 
     Then Gandalf laughed. The fantasy vanished like a puff of smoke. 
     'Saruman, Saruman!' said Gandalf still  laughing.  'Saruman, you  missed 
your path  in life. You  should have been the king's jester  and earned your 
bread, and stripes  too, by  mimicking  his counsellors. Ah me!'  he paused, 
getting the better of his mirth. 'Understand one another? I fear I am beyond 
your comprehension. But you, Saruman, I understand  now too well.  I keep  a  

####-clearer memory of your arguments, and deeds, than  you  suppose. When last I 
visited you, you were the jailor of Mordor, and there I was to be sent. Nay, 
the guest who has escaped from the roof,  will think  twice  before he comes 
back  in  by the door.  Nay,  I do  not think  I  will come  up. But listen, 
Saruman, for the last time! Will you not come down? Isengard has proved less 
strong than  your hope  and fancy made it. So may other  things in which you 
still have trust.  Would it not be well to leave it for  a while? To turn to 
new things, perhaps? Think well, Saruman! Will you not come down?' 
     A shadow passed over Saruman's face; then it went deathly white. Before 
he could  conceal  it, they saw  through the mask the anguish of  a  mind in 
doubt, loathing to  stay and dreading to leave  its refuge. For a second  he 
hesitated, and no one breathed. Then he spoke,  and his voice was shrill and  
cold. Pride and hate were conquering him. 
     'Will I come down?' he mocked. 'Does an unarmed man come down to  
speak 
with  robbers out of doors? I can  hear you w ell enough here. I am no fool, 
and I do not trust you, Gandalf. They  do not stand openly on my stairs, but 
I know where the wild wood-demons are lurking, at your command.' 
     'The treacherous are ever distrustful,' answered  Gandalf wearily. 'But 
you need not fear for your skin.  I do not wish to kill you, or hurt you, as 
you would know, if you really understood me. And I have the power to protect 
you. I  am giving you  a last chance. You can leave Orthanc, free --  if you  
choose.' 
     'That sounds  well,' sneered Saruman.  'Very  much  in  the  manner  of 
Gandalf  the Grey: so condescending, and  so very  kind. I do not doubt that 
you would find Orthanc  commodious,  and  my  departure convenient. But  
why 
should  I  wish  to  leave?  And  what  do you  mean  by  'free'?  There are 
conditions, I presume?' 
     'Reasons for leaving you can see from your  windows.' answered Gandalf. 
'Others  will  occur to  your  thought.  Your  servants  are  destroyed  and 
scattered; your neighbours you have made your enemies; and you  have cheated 
your new  master. or tried to do so. When his eye turns  hither,  it will be 
the red eye of wrath. But when I say  'free',  I mean  'free': free from bond, 
of chain or command: to go where you will, even, even to Mordor, Saruman, if 
you desire. But  you will first surrender to me the Key of Orthanc, and your 
staff. They shall be pledges of your conduct, to be returned later,  if  you  

####-merit them.' 
     Saruman's face  grew  livid, twisted  with rage,  and a  red light  was 
kindled in his eyes.  He  laughed wildly. 'Later!' he  cried, and his  voice 
rose to a scream.  'Later! Yes,  when you  also  have the Keys  of Barad-dyr 
itself, I suppose; and the crowns of  seven kings. and the rods of  the Five 
Wizards, and have purchased yourself a pair  of boots many sizes larger than 
those  that you  wear now.  A modest plan.  Hardly one in which  my help  is 
needed! I have other things to do. Do not be a fool. If you  wish  to  treat 
with me, while you have a chance, go away, and come back when you are 
sober! 
And leave behind  these cut-throats and small  rag-tag that  dangle at  your 
tail! Good day!' He turned and left the balcony. 
     'Come back,  Saruman!' said  Gandalf  in  a  commanding  voice. To  the  
amazement of the others, Saruman turned again. and as if dragged against his 
will, he  came slowly back to the  iron rail, leaning on it, breathing hard. 
His  face was lined and  shrunken.  His hand clutched  his heavy black staff 
like a claw. 
     'I did  not give you leave to  go,'  said Gandalf sternly. 'I have  not 
finished. You have become a fool, Saruman, and yet pitiable. You might still 
have turned away  from  folly and  evil, and  have been of  service. But you  
choose to  stay  and gnaw the ends of your old plots. Stay then!  But I warn 
you. you will not easily come out again.  Not  unless the  dark hands of the 
East stretch out to  take you. Saruman!'  he  cried, and his voice  grew  in 
power and authority. 'Behold, I am not Gandalf the Grey,  whom you betrayed. 
I am Gandalf the White, who has returned from death. You have no colour 
now, 
and I cast you from the order and from the Council.' 
     He raised his hand, and spoke slowly in  a clear cold voice.  'Saruman, 
your  staff is broken.' There was  a  crack, and the staff  split asunder in 
Saruman's hand, and the head  of  it fell down at Gandalf's feet. 'Go!' said 
Gandalf. With a  cry Saruman fell back  and crawled away.  At that  moment a  
heavy shining thing  came hurtling down from  above. It glanced off the iron  
rail, even as Saruman left it, and passing close to Gandalf's head, it smote 
the stair on which  he  stood. The rail  rang and snapped . The stair cracked 
and splintered in glittering sparks. But the ball was unharmed: it rolled on  
down the steps, a globe of crystal, dark,  but glowing with a heart of fire. 
As it bounded away towards a pool Pippin ran after it and picked it up. 

####-     'The murderous rogue!' cried Jomer.  But Gandalf was unmoved.  No, that 
was not thrown b Saruman, he said; nor even at his bidding, I think. It came  
from a window far above. A parting shot from Master Wormtongue, I fancy, 
but 
ill aimed.' 
     'The aim was poor, maybe, because he could  not make up  his mind which 
he hated more, you or Saruman,' said Aragorn. 
     'That may  be so,' said Gandalf.  'Small comfort will those two have in 
their  companionship:  they  will  gnaw  one  another  with  words.  But the 
punishment is just.  If Wormtongue ever comes out of Orthanc alive,  it will  
be more than he deserves.  
     'Here, my  lad, I'll take that!  I did not ask  you  to handle it,'  he 
cried,  turning sharply and seeing Pippin coming up the steps, slowly, as if 
he  were bearing a great  weight. He went  down to meet him and hastily took 
the dark  globe from the hobbit,  wrapping it in the folds of his cloak.  'I  
will take care of this,' he  said. 'It is not a thing, I guess, that Saruman 
would have chosen to cast away.' 
     'But he may have other things to cast,' said Gimli. 'If that is the end 
of the debate, let us go out of stone's throw, at least!' 
     'It is the end,' said Gandalf. 'Let us go.' 
     They turned  their  backs on  the doors of Orthanc, and  went down. The 
riders  hailed the king with joy, and saluted Gandalf. The  spell of Saruman 
was broken: they had seen him come at call, and crawl away, dismissed. 
     'Well, that is done,' said Gandalf. 'Now I must find Treebeard and tell 
him how things have gone.' 
     'He will have guessed,  surely?'  said  Merry. 'Were they likely to end 
any other way?' 
     'Not likely,' answered Gandalf, 'though  they came to  the balance of a  
hair. But I had reasons for  trying; some  merciful and some less so.  First  
Saruman was shown that the power  of his voice was waning. He cannot be 
both 
tyrant  and counsellor. When the plot  is ripe it remains  no longer secret. 
Yet he  fell into the trap, and tried to deal  with  his victims piece-meal, 
while  others listened. Then I  gave him a last choice and  a  fair  one: to 
renounce both Mordor and his private schemes, and  make amends by helping 
us 
in our need.  He knows our need,  none better.  Great service he could  have 

####-rendered. But he  has chosen to withhold it, and  keep the power of Orthanc. 
He will not  serve, only command. He  lives now  in  terror of the shadow of 
Mordor, and yet he still dreams of riding  the storm. Unhappy fool!  He will  
be devoured, if the power of the East stretches out its arms to Isengard. We 
cannot  destroy  Orthanc from without, but  Sauron  -- who knows  what he can 
do?' 
     'And what  if Sauron does  not conquer? What will you do to him?' asked 
Pippin. 
     'I? Nothing!' said Gandalf. 'I will do nothing  to him. I  do  not wish 
for mastery. What w ill become of him? I  cannot say. I grieve that so  much 
that was good now festers in the  tower. Still  for us things have  not gone 
badly. Strange are the turns of fortune!  Often does  hatred hurt  itself! I 
guess that, even if we had entered in, we  could have found few treasures in 
Orthanc more precious than the thing which Wormtongue threw down at us.' 
     A shrill shriek; suddenly cut off, came from an open window high above. 
     'It seems  that  Saruman  thinks  so too,' said Gandalf.  'Let us leave 
them!' 
     They returned now to the ruins of the  gate. Hardly had they passed out 
under the arch, when, from among the shadows of the piled stones where  they 
had stood, Treebeard and a dozen other Ents came striding up. Aragorn, Gimli 
and Legolas gazed at them in wonder. 
     'Here  are three of my  companions,  Treebeard,' said Gandalf. 'I  have 
spoken of them, but you have not yet seen them.' He named them one by one. 
     The Old Ent looked at them  long and searchingly, and spoke to  them in 
turn.  Last  he  turned  to Legolas.  'So  you  have  come  all the way from 
Mirkwood, my good Elf? A very great forest it used to be!' 
     'And still is,' said Legolas. 'But not so great that we who dwell there 
ever tire of seeing new trees. I  should dearly love to journey in Fangorn's 
Wood. I  scarcely passed beyond the eaves of it, and  I did not wish to turn 
back.' 
     Treebeard's eyes gleamed with pleasure. 'I hope you may have your wish,  
ere the hills be much older,' he said. 
     'I will come,  if  I  have the fortune,' said  Legolas.  'I have made a  
bargain  with  my friend  that, if  all  goes well,  we  will  visit Fangorn 
together -- by your leave.' 
     'Any Elf that comes with you will be welcome,' said Treebeard. 
     'The  friend I speak of  is not an Elf,' said Legolas; 'I  mean  Gimli, 

####-Gluin's son here.' Gimli bowed  low,  and the  axe slipped from his belt and 
clattered on the ground. 
     'Hoom, hm! Ah now,' said Treebeard, looking dark-eyed at him. 'A  dwarf 
and  an axe-bearer! Hoom! I have good  will to Elves; but you ask much. This 
is  a strange  friendship!' 'Strange it  may seem,' said Legolas; 'but while 
Gimli lives I shall not come to Fangorn alone. His axe is not for trees, but 
for  orc-necks, O Fangorn, Master of Fangorn's  Wood.  Forty-two he hewed in 
the battle.' 
     'Hoo! Come now!' said Treebeard.  'That is a better  story! Well, well, 
things will go as they will; and there is no need to hurry to meet them. But 
now we must part for a while. Day is drawing to an end, yet Gandalf says you 
must go ere nightfall, and the Lord of the Mark is eager for his own house.' 
     'Yes,  we must go, and go  now,' said Gandalf. 'I fear that I must take 
your gatekeepers from you. But you will manage well enough without them.' 
     'Maybe I shall,' said Treebeard. 'But I shall miss them. We have become 
friends in so short a while that I think I must be getting  hasty  -- growing 
backwards towards youth, perhaps. But there,  they  are the first  new thing 
under  Sun or Moon that I  have seen  for many a long,  long day. I shall not 
forget them. I have put their names into the Long List.  Ents will  remember  
it. 
     Ents the earthborn, old as mountains, 
     the wide-walkers, water drinking; 
     and hungry as hunters, the Hobbit children, 
     the laughing-folk, the little people, 
     they shall remain friends as long as leaves are renewed. Fare you well! 
But if you hear news up in your pleasant land,  in the Shire,  send me word!  
You  know what I mean: word or sight of the Entwives. Come yourselves if 
you 
can!' 
     'We  will!'  said Merry  and  Pippin together,  and  they  turned  away 
hastily.  Treebeard looked at them, and was silent for a while, shaking  his 
head thoughtfully. Then he turned to Gandalf.  
     'So Saruman would not leave?' he said. 'I did  not think  he would. His 
heart is as rotten as a black Huorn's. Still, if  I were overcome and all my 
trees destroyed, I would not come  while I had one dark  hole  left to  hide 
in.' 
     'No,'  said Gandalf.  'But  you have not plotted to  cover all the world 

####-with your trees and choke all other living things. But there  it is, Saruman 
remains to nurse his hatred and weave again such webs as he can.  He has the 
Key of Orthanc. But he must not be allowed to escape.' 
     'Indeed no!  Ents will see to that,' said Treebeard. 'Saruman shall not 
set foot beyond the rock, without my leave. Ents will watch over him.' 
     'Good!' said  Gandalf. 'That is what I  hoped. Now I can go and turn to 
other matters with one care the less.  But you must be wary. The waters have 
gone down. It will not be enough to put sentinels round the tower, I fear. I 
do  not  doubt  that  there were  deep ways  delved under Orthanc,  and that 
Saruman hopes to go and come  unmarked, before long.  If you  will undertake 
the labour, I beg you to pour in the waters again; and do so, until Isengard 
remains  a  standing  pool,  or  you  discover  the outlets.  When  all  the 
underground places are drowned, and  the outlets blocked, then  Saruman must  
stay upstairs and look out of  the windows.' 
     'Leave it to  the Ents!' said Treebeard.  'We shall  search the  valley 
from head to foot and peer under every pebble. Trees are coming back to live 
here, old  trees,  wild trees. The Watchwood we will call it. Not a squirrel 
will go her e, but  I shall  know of it. Leave  it to Ents! Until seven times 
the years  in  which  he tormented  us  have passed,  we shall  not  tire of 
watching him.' 

####- 
 

Chapter 11. The Palantnr 

 
 
     The sun was sinking  behind the long  western arm of the mounta ins when 
Gandalf and his companions, and the king with his Riders, set out again from 
Isengard. Gandalf took Merry behind him, and Aragorn took Pippin. Two of 
the 
king's men  went on ahead, riding swiftly, and passed soon out of sight down 
into the valley. The others followed at an easy pace. 
     Ents in a  solemn  row stood like  statues at the gate, with their long 
arms  uplifted, but they made  no sound. Merry and  Pippin looked back, when 
they had passed some way down the winding road.  Sunlight was  still shining 
in the sky, but long shadows reached over Isengard: grey  ruins falling into 
darkness. Treebeard stood alone  there now, like the distant stump of an old 
tree: the hobbits thought of their first meeting, upon  the  sunny ledge far  
away on the borders of Fangorn. 
     They  came  to the pillar  of  the  White  Hand.  The  pillar was still 
standing,  but the graven hand had  been thrown  down  and broken into small 
pieces. Right in the middle  of the road  the long forefinger lay,  white in 
the dusk, its red nail darkening to black. 
     'The Ents pay attention to every detail!' said Gandalf.  
     They rode on, and evening deepened in the valley. 
     'Are we riding far tonight,  Gandalf?'  asked  Merry after  a while. 'I  
don't  know  how you feel with small rag-tag  dangling  behind you; but  the 
rag-tag is tired and will be glad to stop dangling and lie down.' 
     'So you heard that?' said Gandalf. 'Don't let it rankle! Be thankful no 
longer words were aimed at you. He had his eyes on you. If it  is any comfort  
to your pride,  I should say that, at the moment, you and Pippin are more in 
his thoughts than all the rest of us.  Who you are; how  you came there, and 
why; what  you know;  whether you were captured,  and if so, how you escaped 
when all the Orcs perished -- it is with those little riddles that the great 
mind ¢f Saruman is troubled. A sneer from him, Meriadoc, is a compliment, if 
you feel honoured by his concern.' 
     'Thank  you!' said Merry. 'But it is a greater honour to dangle at your 
tail, Gandalf. For one thing, in that position one has a chance of putting a  

####-question a second time. Are we riding far tonight?' 
     Gandalf laughed. 'A most unquenchable hobbit! All Wizards should have a  
hobbit or two in their care -- to teach them the meaning of the word, and to 
correct them. I  beg your pardon.  But  I have given  thought even to  these 
simple matters.  We will ride for a few  hours, gently, until we come to the 
end of the valley. Tomorrow we must ride faster. 
     'When we came, we meant to go straight from Isengard back to the king's 
house  at Edoras over the  plains, a ride  of  some days. But we have  taken 
thought and changed the plan. Messengers have gone ahead to Helm's  Deep, to 
warn them that  the king is returning tomorrow. He will ride from there with 
many men to Dunharrow by paths among the hills. From now on no more than 
two 
or  three together are to go openly over the land,  by day or night, when it 
can be avoided.' 
     'Nothing or a double helping is  your way!'  said Merry. 'I am afraid I 
was not looking beyond tonight's bed. Where and what are Helm's Deep and all 
the rest of it? I don't know anything about this country.' 
     'Then you'd best learn  something, if you  wish to  understand  what is 
happening.  But  not just  now, and not from  me: I have too  many  pressing 
things to think about.' 
     'All right, I'll tackle Strider by the camp-fire: he's less  testy. But 
why all this secrecy? I thought we'd won the battle!' 
     Yes,  we  have  won,  but  only  the first victor  and  that  in itself 
increases our danger. There was some link between Isengard and Mordor, 
which 
I have not yet fathomed. How they exchanged news I am not sure; but they did 
so.  The Eye  of Barad-dyr will be looking impatiently towards  the Wizard's 
Vale, I think; and towards Rohan. The less it sees the better.' 
     The road passed  slowly, winding down the valley. Now  further, and now 
nearer Isen flowed in its stony bed. Night came down from the mountains. All 
the mists were gone. A  chill wind blew. The moon, now  waxing round, filled 
the eastern sky with a pale cold sheen.  The  shoulders of  the mountain  to 
their  right  sloped down to bare hills.  The wide plains opened grey before 
them. 
     At  last they halted. Then they turned aside,  leaving the highway  and 
taking to the sweet upland turf again. Going westward a mile or so they came 
to a dale. It  opened southward,  leaning back into the slope  of  round Dol 

####-Baran,  the last  hill of  the northern ranges,  greenfooted,  crowned  with 
heather. The sides of the glen were shaggy with last  year's bracken,  among  
which the tight -curled  fronds of  spring  were just  thrusting through  the 
sweet-scented earth. Thornbushes grew thick  upon the low banks,  and  under  
them they made their camp,  two hours  or so before  the middle of the night.  
They lit a fire in a hollow, down among the roots of  a spreading  hawthorn,  
tall as a tree, writhen with age; but hale in every limb. Buds were swelling 
at each twig's tip. 
     Guards were  set,  two at a watch.  The  rest, after  they had  supped, 
wrapped  themselves in a cloak and blanket and  slept. The  hobbits lay in a  
corner by themselves  upon a pile  of old  bracken.  Merry was  sleepy,  but 
Pippin now seemed curiously restless. The bracken cracked and rustled, as he 
twisted and turned. 
     'What's the matter?' asked Merry. 'Are you lying on an ant-hill?' 
     'No,'  said Pippin, 'but  I'm not  comfortable. I wonder how long it is 
since I slept in a bed?' 
     Merry  yawned. 'Work  it out on your fingers!' he said.  'But you  must  
know how long it is since we left Lurien.' 
     'Oh, that!' said Pippin. 'I mean a real bed in a bedroom.' 
     'Well,  Rivendell  then,'  said  Merry.  'But  I could  sleep  anywhere 
tonight.' 
     'You had the luck, Merry,' said Pippin softly, after a long pause. 'You  
were riding with Gandalf.' 
     'Well, what of it?' 
     'Did you get any news, any information out of him?' 
     'Yes, a good deal. More than usual. But you heard it all or most of it: 
you were close by,  and we were talking no secrets. But you  can go with him 
tomorrow, if you think you can get more out of him-and if he'll have you.' 
     'Can I? Good! But he's close, isn't he? Not changed at all.' 
     'Oh  yes, he is!'  said Merry,  waking  up  a little, and  beginning to 
wonder what was bothering his companion. 'He has grown, or something. He 
can 
be  both  kinder  and  more alarming, merrier and more solemn than before, I 
think. He has changed; but  we have not had a chance to see  how  much, yet. 
But th ink of the last part of that  business  with Saruman! Remember Saruman 
was  once Gandalf's superior: head  of  the  Council, whatever  that  may be 

####-exactly. He was Saruman the White. Gandalf is the  White  now.  Saruman 
came 
when he was told, and  his rod was taken;  and then he was just told  to go, 
and he went!' 
     'Well, if Gandalf has changed at all, then he's closer than ever that's 
all,' Pippin argued. 'That-glass  ball, now. He seemed mighty  pleased  with 
it. He knows or  guesses something about i t. But does he tell  us  what? No, 
not  a word. Yet I picked it up, and I saved  it  from rolling into  a pool. 
Here, I'll take that, my lad -- that's all. I wonder what it  is? It felt so 
very heavy.' Pippin's voice fell very low as if he was talking to h imself.  
     'Hullo!' said  Merry. 'So that's what is bothering you? Now, Pippin  my 
lad, don't  forget Gildor's  saying  --  the one Sam  used to quote:  Do  not 
meddle in the at Fairs of Wizards, for they are subtle and quick to anger.' 
     'But  our  whole  life for  months  has been  one long meddling  in the 
affairs  of Wizards,' said Pippin.  'I  should like a bit  of information as 
well as danger. I should like a look at that ball.' 
     'Go to  sleep!'  said Merry. 'You'll  get information enough, sooner or 
later. My  dear Pippin, no Took ever beat a  Brandybuck for inquisitiveness;  
but is this the time, I ask you?' 
     'All right! What's the harm in my  telling you  what  I should like:  a  
look  at that stone? I know I can't have it, with old Ganda lf sitting on it, 
like a hen on an egg. But it doesn't help much to get no more from you  than 
a you-can't-have-it so-go-to-sleep!' 
     'Well, what else could  I say?' said Merry. 'I'm sorry, Pippin, but you  
really must wait  till the  morning.  I'll  be as curious as you  like after  
breakfast, and I'll  help in any  way I can at wizard-wheedling. But I can't  
keep awake  any  longer. If I yawn any more, I shall split at the ears. Good  
night!' 
     Pippin said no more. He lay still now, but sleep remained far away; and 
it was not  encouraged by  the  sound of Merry breathing softly, asleep in a  
few minutes  after saying good night. 'The thought of  the dark globe seemed 
to grow stronger as all grew quiet.  Pippin felt  again its  weight  in  his 
hands, and saw again the mysterious red depths into which he had  looked for 
a moment. He tossed and turned and tried to think of something else. 
     At last he could stand it no longer. He got up and looked round. It was 
chilly, and he wrapped  his cloak about him.   The  moon was shining cold and 
white, down into  the  dell, and  the shadows of the bushes were black.  All 

####-about lay sleeping shapes. The  two guards were not in view: they were up on 
the hill, perhaps, or hidden in the bracken. Driven by some  impulse that he 
did not understand,  Pippin  walked  softly to  where Gandalf lay. He looked 
down at him. The wizard seemed asleep, but with lids not fully closed: there 
was a  glitter  of eyes under his long  lashes. Pippin stepped back hastily. 
But  Gandalf  made no sign;  and drawn forward once more, half  against  his 
will, the hobbit crept up again from behind the wizard's head. He was rolled 
in  a blanket, with  his cloak  spread over  the  top; and close beside him, 
between his right  side and  his  bent arm,  there was a hummock,  something 
round wrapped in a dark cloth; his hand seemed only just to have slipped off  
it to the ground. 
     Hardly breathing, Pippin  crept nearer, foot by  foot. At last he knelt 
down. Then he put his hands out  stealthily, and slowly  lifted the lump up: 
it did not  seem quite  so heavy as he  had  expected. 'Only some  bundle of 
oddments, perhaps, after all,'  he thought  with  a strange sense of relief;  
but he did not put the bundle down again. He stood for a moment clasping it . 
Then an idea came into his mind.  He  tiptoed away, found a large stone, and  
came back. 
     Quickly now he drew off the cloth, wrapped the stone in it and kneeling 
down, laid it back by the wizard's hand. Then at last he looked at the thing 
that he had uncovered. There it was: a smooth globe of crystal, now dark and 
dead, lying bare before his knees. Pippin lifted it, covered it hurriedly in 
his own cloak, and half turned to go back to his bed. At that moment Gandalf 
moved in his sleep, and muttered some words: they seemed  to be in a strange 
tongue; his hand groped  out  and clasped the  wrapped stone, then he sighed  
and did not move again. 
     'You  idiotic fool!' Pippin muttered  to himself. 'You're going  to get 
yourself into frightful  trouble. Put it back quick!'  But he found now that 
his knees  quaked, and he did not  dare to  go  near enough to the wizard to 
reach  the  bundle.  'I'll never get  it back  now without  waking  him,' he 
thought, 'not till I'm a bit calmer. S¢ I may as well have a look first. Not 
just  here though!'  He stole away, and sat down on a green hillock not  far 
from his bed. The moon looked in over the edge of the dell. 
     Pippin sat with his knees drawn up and the ball  between  them. He bent 
low over it, looking like a greedy  child stooping over a bowl of food, in a  
corner away from  others. He drew his cloak aside and gazed at  it. The  air 
seemed still and tense about him. At first the globe was dark, black as jet, 

####-with the moonlight gleaming on its surface. Then ther e came a faint glow and 
stir in the heart of it, and it held his eyes, so that now he could not look  
away. Soon all  the inside  seemed on fire;  the ball  was spinning,  or the 
lights within were  revolving. Suddenly the lights went out.  He gave a gasp  
and struggled; but  he  remained bent,  clasping the ball  with  both hands.  
Closer and closer he bent, and then became rigid; his lips moved soundlessly 
for a while. Then with a strangled cry he fell back and lay still. 
     The cry was  piercing. The guards  leapt down from  the banks.  All the 
camp was soon astir. 
     'So this is the thief!' said Gandalf.  Hastily  he cast his  cloak over  
the  globe where  it lay.  'But  you, Pippin!  This is a  grievous  turn  to 
things!' He knelt by  Pippin's body: the hobbit was lying on his back rigid, 
with unseeing eyes staring up at the sky. 'The devilry! What mischief has he  
done-to himself, and to all of us?' The wizard's face was drawn and haggard.  
     He took Pippin's hand and bent over his face, listening for his breath; 
then he laid  his hands on his brow.  The hobbit shuddered. His eyes closed.  
He cried  out;  and sat  up. staring in bewilderment at all the  faces round 
him, pale in the moonlight. 
     'It is not for you, Saruman!' he  cried in a shrill and toneless  voice 
shrinking away from Gandalf. 'I will send for it at once. Do you understand?  
Say just that!' Then he struggled to get up and escape but Gandalf held  him 
gently and firmly. 
     'Peregrin Took!' he said. 'Come back!' 
     The  hobbit relaxed  and  fell  back,  clinging  to  the wizard's hand. 
'Gandalf!' he cried. 'Gandalf! Forgive me!' 
     'Forgive you?' said the wizard. 'Tell me first what you have done!' 
     'I, I  took  the  ball  and looked at it,' stammered Pippin; 'and I saw 
things that frightened me. And I wanted to go away, but I couldn't. And then 
he came  and questioned  me; and  he looked  at me, and,  and  that is all I 
remember.' 
     'That won't  do,' said Gandalf sternly. 'What did you see, and what did 
you say?' 
     Pippin shut his eyes and shivered, but said nothing. They all stared at 
him in  silence, except Merry who turned away. But  Gandalf's face was still  
hard.  'Speak!' he said. 
     In a low hesitating voice Pippin began again, and slowly his words grew 
clearer  and  stronger. 'I saw a  dark sky, and tall battlements,' he  said. 

####-'And tiny  stars. It seemed very far away and long ago, yet hard and  clear. 
Then the stars went in and out-they were  cut off by things with wings. Very 
big, I think, really; but  in the glass they looked like bats wheeling round 
the tower. I  thought  there  were nine of them.  One  began to fly straight 
towards  me, getting bigger and bigger. It had a horrible -- no, no! I can't  
say. 
     'I tried to get  away, because I thought  it would fly out; but when it 
had covered all the globe, it disappeared. Then he came. He did not speak so  
that I could hear words. He just looked, and I understood. 
     '"So you have come back? Why have you neglected to report for so long?" 
     'I did not answer. He said: "Who are you?" I still did not answer,  but 
it hurt me horribly; and he pressed me, so I said: "A hobbit." 
     'Then suddenly he seemed to see me, and he laughed at me. It was cruel. 
It was like being  stabbed with knives. I struggled.  But  he sa id: "Wait  a  
moment!  We shall meet again soon. Tell Saruman  that this dainty is not for  
him. I will send for it at once. Do you understand? Say just that!" 
     'Then  he gloated over me. I felt  I was  falling  to pieces. No, no! I 
can't say any more. I  don't remember anything else.' 
     'Look at me!' said Gandalf. 
     Pippin looked up straight into his eyes. The wizard held his gaze for a  
moment  in silence. Then  his face grew  gentler, and the shadow  of a smile 
appeared. He laid his hand softly on Pippin's head. 
     'All right!' he said. 'Say no more! You have taken no harm. There is no 
lie in your eyes, as I feared. But  he did not speak long with you.  A fool, 
but an honest  fool,  you remain, Peregrin Took. Wiser ones might  have done 
worse  in such  a  pass. But mark this!  You  have  been saved, and all your 
friends too, mainly by good fortune, as it is called. You cannot count on it 
a second  time. If he had  questioned  you, then and there, almost certainly 
you would have told all that you know, to the ruin of us all. But he was too 
eager. He did not want information only: he wanted you,  quickly, so that he 
could deal with you in the  Dark Tower, slowly.  Don't shudder! If  you will 
meddle  in  the affairs  of Wizards, you  must  be prepared  to think of such 
things. But come! I forgive you. Be comforted! Things have not turned out as 
evilly as they might.' 
     He  lifted  Pippin  gently  and  carried  him  back to  his bed.  Merry 
followed, and sat down beside him. Lie there and rest, if you can,  Pippin!' 
said Gandalf. 'Trust me. If you feel an itch in your palms again, tell me of 

####-it!  Such things can be cured. But anyway, my dear hobbit, don't put  a lump  
of  rock  under  my  elbow  again! Now, I will leave you  two together for a  
while.' 
     With  that Gandalf  returned to the others, who  were still standing by 
the  Orthanc-stone in troubled thought. 'Peril comes in the night when least 
expected,' he said. 'We have had a narrow escape!' 
     'How is the hobbit, Pippin?' asked Aragorn. 
     'I think all  will  be well  now,' answered  Gandalf. 'He was  not held 
long, and  hobbits have  an  amazing power of  recovery. The memory, or  the 
horror of it, will probably fade  quickly. Too  quickly, perhaps. Will  you, 
Aragorn, take the Orthanc-stone and guard it? It is a dangerous charge.' 
     'Dangerous indeed, but not to all,' said Aragorn. 'There is one who may 
claim it by right.  For this assuredly  is the palantnr of Orthanc  from the 
treasury  of  Elendil, set here by  the Kings  of Gondor. Now my hour  draws 
near. I will take it.' 
     Gandalf looked  at Aragorn, and then, to the surprise of the others, he 
lifted the covered Stone, and bowed as he presented it. 
     'Receive it,  lord!' he said: 'in earnest of other things that shall be 
given back. But if I may counsel you in the use  of your own, do not use  it 
-- yet! Be wary!' 
     'When have I been hasty or unwary, who have  waited and prepared for so 
many long years?' said Aragorn. 
     'Never  yet.  Do not then  stumble at the end  of the  road,'  answered 
Gandalf. 'But  at the least keep this thing secret. You, and all others that 
stand  here! The hobbit, Peregrin,  above  all should not know  where it  is 
bestowed.  The evil fit may come on him again. For alas! he  has  handled it  
and  looked in it, as should never have  happened. He ought  never  to  have  
touched it in Isengard,  and  there I should have been quicker. But my  mind 
was bent  on Saruman, and I did not at once  guess the  nature of the Stone. 
Then I was weary, and as I lay pondering it, sleep overcame me. Now I know!' 
     'Yes, there can  be no doubt,' said Aragorn. 'At last we know the link' 
between Isengard and Mordor, and how it worked. Much is explained.' 'Strange 
powers have our enemies, and strange  weaknesses!' said Thjoden. 'But it has 
long been said: oft evil will shall evil mar. ' 
     'That many times is seen,' said Gandalf. 'But at this time we have been 
strangely fortunate. Maybe, I  have been  saved by this  hobbit from a grave 
blunder. I  had considered whether or not to probe this Stone myself to find 

####-its uses. Had I done so, I should have been revealed to him myself. I am not  
ready for such a  trial, if indeed I  shall ever be so:  But even if I found 
the power to withdraw myself, it would be disastrous for  him to see me, yet  
-- until the hour comes when secrecy will avail no longer.' 
     'That hour is now come, I think,' said Aragorn. 
     'Not yet,' said Gandalf. 'There remains a short while of doubt which we 
must use. The Enemy, it is clear, thought that  the Stone was in  Orthanc  -- 
why should he not? And that therefore the hobbit  was captive there,  driven 
to look in the  glass for his  torment by  Saruman.  That dark mind will  be 
filled  now with  the voice  and face of the hobbit and with expectation: it 
may take some time before he  learns his error. We must snatch that time. We 
have been too leisurely. We must  move. The neighbourhood of  Isengard is no 
place now  to  linger in. I will  ride ahead at once with Peregrin  Took. It 
will be better for him than lying in the dark while others sleep.' 
     'I will keep  Jomer and ten Riders,'  said the  king. 'They shall  ride 
with me at early day.  The rest may go with Aragorn and ride as soon as they 
have a mind.' 
     'As you  will,'  said Gandalf. 'But  make all  the speed you may to the 
cover of the hills, to Helm's Deep!' 
     At that moment  a shadow fell over them. The bright moonlight seemed to 
be suddenly cut  off. Several of the Riders cried out, and crouched, holding 
their  arms above  their hea ds, as if to ward off a blow from above: a blind 
fear and a deadly  cold fell on them. Cowering they looked up. A vast winged 
shape  passed over the moon like a  black cloud. It wheeled and went  north, 
flying at a speed greater than any wind of Middle-earth. The  stars  fainted 
before it. It was gone. 
     They stood up, rigid as stones. Gandalf was gazing up, his arms out and 
downwards, stiff, his hands clenched. 
     'Nazgyl!' he cried.  'The messenger of Mordor. The storm is coming. The  
Nazgyl have crossed the River!  Ride, ride! Wait  not for the  dawn! Let not  
the swift wait for the slow! Ride!' 
     He  sprang  away, calling Shadowfax  as  he ran.  Aragorn followed him.  
Going  to Pippin, Gandalf picked him up in his arms. 'You shall come with me 
this  time,' he said.  'Shadowfax shall show you his  paces.' Then he ran to 
the place  where he had slept. Shadowfax  stood there  already. Slinging the  
small bag which was all his luggage  across his  shoulders, the wizard leapt 
upon the  horse's back. Aragor n lifted Pippin and set him in Gandalf's arms,  

####-,wrapped in cloak and blanket. 
     'Farewell! Follow fast!' cried Gandalf. 'Away, Shadowfax!' 
     The  great  horse  tossed his  head. His  flowing tail  flicked in  the 
moonlight. Then he leapt forward, spurning the  earth, and was gone like the 
north wind from the mountains.  
     'A beautiful, restful  night!' said  Merry to Aragorn. 'Some folk  have 
wonderful luck. He did not want to sleep, and he wanted to ride with Gandalf 
-- and there he goes! Instead of being turned into  a stone himself to stand 
here for ever as a warning.' 
     'If  you had been the first to lift the Orthanc-stone, and not  he, how 
would it be now?' said Aragorn. 'You might have done worse. Who can say? 
But 
now it is your luck to come with me, I fear. At  once. Go and get ready, and  
bring anything that Pippin left behind. Make haste!' 
     Over the  plains  Shadowfax  was  flying,  needing  no  urging  and  no 
guidance. Less than  an hour  had  passed, and they had reached the Fords of 
Isen and crossed  them. The Mound of the Riders and its cold spears lay grey 
behind them. 
     Pippin was recovering. He  was warm, but the wind in his  face was keen 
and refreshing. He was  with  Gandalf. The horror of  the stone  and  of the 
hideous shadow over the  moon was fading, things left behind in the mists of 
the mountains or in a passing dream. He drew a deep breath. 
     'I did not know  you rode bare-back, Gandalf,' he said. 'You  haven't a  
saddle or a bridle!' 
     'I  do not ride elf-fashion,  except on Shadowfax,' said Gandalf.  'But 
Shadowfax will have no harness. You do not ride Shadowfax:  he is willing to 
carry you -or not. If he is willing, that is enough. It  is then his business 
to see that you remain on his back, unless you jump off into the air.' 
     'How  fast is  he going?'  asked Pippin. 'Fast  by  the  wind, but very 
smooth. And how light his footfalls are!' 
     'He  is  running  now  as  fast  as  the swiftest horse could  gallop,' 
answered Gandalf; 'but that is not fast for him. The land is rising a little 
here, and is more broken than it was beyond the river. But see how the White 
Mountains are  drawing near under the stars! Yonder are the  Thrihyrne peaks 
like black spears. It will not  be long before we reach the  branching roads 
and come to the Deeping-coomb, where the battle was fought two nights ago.' 
     Pippin was silent again for a while. He heard Gandalf singing softly to 

####-himself, murmuring brief snatches of rhyme in many tongues, as the miles ran 
under them. At last the wizard passed into a song of which the hobbit caught  
the  words: a few lines came clear  to his  ears  through the rushing of the 
wind: 
     Tall ships and tall kings 
     Three times three, 
     What brought they from the foundered land  
     Over the flowing sea? 
     Seven stars and seven stones 
     And one white tree. 
     'What are you saying, Gandalf?' asked Pippin. 
     'I was  just  running over  some of the  Rhymes  of  Lore in  my mind ' 
answered  the wizard. 'Hobbits,  I suppose, have forgotten  them, even those  
that they ever knew.' 
     'No, not  all,'  said  Pippin.  'And  we have many  of our  own,  which 
wouldn't interest you, perhaps. But I have never heard  this one. What is it 
about -- the seven stars and seven stones?' 
     'About the palantnri of the Kings of Old,' said Gandalf. 
     'And what are they?' 
     'The name meant  that which looks far away. The Orthanc-stone was one.' 
     'Then it was not made, not made'  -- Pippin hesitated -- 'by the Enemy?' 
     'No,' said Gandalf. 'Nor by  Saruman. It is  beyond his art, and beyond  
Sauron's too. The palantnri came from beyond Westernesse  from Eldamar.  
The 
Noldor made  them. Flanor himself,  maybe, wrought them, in days so long ago 
that the time cannot be measured in years. But there is  nothing that Sauron 
cannot turn to evil uses. Alas for  Saruman! It was his downfall,  as  I now 
perceive.  Perilous to us all  are the devices  of an  art  deeper  than  we 
possess ourselves. Yet he must bear the blame. Fool!  to keep it secret, for  
his own  profit. No word did he ever  speak of it to any of the  Council. We 
had not yet given  thought  to the fate of  the palantnri of Gondor  in  its 
ruinous wars. By Men they were almost forgotten. Even  in Gondor they were a  
secret known only to a few; in Arnor they were remembered only in a rhyme of 
lore among the D®nedain.' 
     'What  did  the Men of old use  them for?' asked Pippin, delighted  and 
astonished at getting answers to  so  many questions, and wondering how long 
it would last. 

####-     'To  see far  off, and to converse in thought with  one  another,' said 
Gandalf. 'In that way they long guarded and united the realm of Gondor. They 
set up Stones at Minas Anor, and at  Minas Ithil, and at Orthanc in the ring 
of Isengard. The  chief  and master of these was under  the Dome of Stars at 
Osgiliath before  its ruin. The three others were far  away in the North. In 
the house  of Elrond  it is told that they were at Ann®minas, and  Amon Syl, 
and Elendil's Stone was on the Tower Hills that look towards M ithlond in the 
Gulf of Lune where the grey ships lie. 
     'Each palantnr replied to each, but all those in Gondor were  ever open 
to the view of Osgiliath.  Now  it appears that,  as the rock of Orthanc has 
withstood  the  storms of time, so  there  the palantnr  of  that tower  has 
remained.  But alone  it could do nothing but see small images of things far 
off  and days remote. Very  useful, no doubt, that  was  to Saruman;  yet it 
seems that he was not content. Further and further abroad he gazed, until  he 
cast his gaze upon Barad-dyr. Then he was caught! 
     'Who knows where the lost Stones of Arnor and Gondor now lie buried, or  
drowned deep? But  one. at least Sauron  must have obtained and  mastered to 
his purposes. I guess that  it was the Ithil-stone,  for he took Minas Ithil 
long ago and turned it into an evil place: Minas Morgul, it has become. 
     'Easy  it  is  now to guess how quickly the roving  eye of Saruman  was 
trapped and held; and how  ever  since he has been persuaded  from afar, and 
daunted when persuasion  would not serve. The biter bit, the  hawk under the 
eagle's foot, the spider  in a  steel web!  How long, I  wonder, has he been 
constrained to  come often to his glass for inspection and instruction,  and 
the Orthanc-stone so bent towards Barad-dyr  that, if  any  save  a will  of 
adamant now looks into it,  it will bear his mind and sight swiftly thither? 
And  how it draws  one to itself! Have I  not  felt it?  Even now  my  heart 
desires to test my will  upon it,  to see if I could not wrench it from  him 
and turn it where I  would-to look across the wide seas of water and of time 
to Tirion the Fair, and perceive the unimaginable hand and mind of Flanor at 
their work, while both  the  White Tree and the  Golden were  in flower!' He 
sighed and fell silent. 
     'I wish I had known all this before,' said Pippin. 'I had  no notion of 
what I was doing.' 
     'Oh yes,  you had,' said  Gandalf. 'You  knew you were behaving wrongly 
and  foolishly;  and you told yourself so,  though you did not listen. I did 
not tell you all this before, because  it is only by  musing on all that has 

####-happened that I have at last  understood, even as we ride together. But if I  
had spoken sooner, it would not have lessened your desire, or made it easier  
to  resist.  On the  contrary! No, the burned hand teaches best. After  that 
advice about fire goes to the heart.' 
     'It does,' said  Pippin. 'If all the seven  stones were laid out before 
me now, I should shut my eyes and put my hands in my pockets.' 
     'Good!' said Gandalf. 'That is what I hoped.' 
     'But I should like to know--' Pippin began. 
     'Mercy!' cried Gandalf. 'If the giving of information is to be the cure 
of your inquisitiveness, I shall spend all the rest of my  days in answering 
you. What more do you want to know?' 
     'The  names  of all the stars, and of all living  things, and the whole 
history of Middle-earth and Over -heaven and of  the Sundering Seas ' laughed 
Pippin. 'Of  course!  What less? But I  am  not in  a hurry tonight.  At the 
moment  I was  just wondering about the  black  shadow. I  heard  you  shout 
"messenger of Mordor". What was it? What could it do at Isengard?' 
     'It was a Black Rider on wings, a Nazgyl,' said Gandalf. 'It could have 
taken you away to the Dark Tower . ' 
     'But it was not  coming  for me, was  it?' faltered Pippin. 'I mean, it 
didn't know that I had... ' 
     'Of course not,' said  Gandalf. 'It is two hundred  leagues or  more in 
straight  flight  from Barad-dyr to Orthanc, and even a Nazgyl  would take a  
few hours to fly between  them.  But Saruman certainly looked  in  the Stone  
since the orc-raid, and more of his secret thought, I do not doubt, has been 
read than he  intended. A  messenger has  been sent  to  find out what he is 
doing. And  after what has happened tonight another will come, I think,  and 
swiftly. So Saruman will come to  the last pinch of the vice that he has put 
his  hand in. He has  no captive to  send. He has no Stone to see  with, and 
cannot answer the summons. Sauron will  only  believe that he  is withholding 
the captive and refusing to use the Stone. It will not  help Saruman to tell 
the truth to the messenger. For Isengard may be ruined, yet he is still safe 
in Orthanc. So  whether  he  will  or  no,  he  will appear a rebel. Yet  he 
rejected  us, so as  to  avoid  that very thing! What he will  do in such  a  
plight,  I  cannot guess.  He has power still, I think, while in Orthanc, to 
resist the Nine Riders. He may try to do so. He may try to trap  the Nazgyl, 
or  at least to slay the thing on which it now rides the  air. In  that case 
let Rohan look to its horses!  

####-     'But I cannot tell how it will fall out, well or ill for us. It may  be 
that the counsels of the Enemy will  be confused,  or hindered by  his wrath 
with Saruman. It  may be that he will learn that  I was there and stood upon 
the stairs of Orthanc-with  hobbits at my tail. Or that  an heir  of Elendil 
lives and stood beside  me. If Wormtongue was not deceived by the  armour of 
Rohan, he would remember Aragorn and the title that he claimed. That is what 
I fear. And so we fly  -- not  from  danger but  into  greater danger.  Every 
stride of Shadowfax bears you nearer to the Land of Shadow, Peregrin Took.' 
     Pippin made no answer, but clutched his cloak, as if a sudden chill had 
struck him. Grey land passed under them. 
     'See now!' said Gandalf. 'The Westfold dales  are  opening  before  us.  
Here we come back to the eastward  road. The dark shadow yonder is the 
mouth 
of the  Deeping-coomb. That way lies Aglarond a nd the  Glittering Caves.  Do 
not ask  me about them. Ask Gimli, if you meet again, and for the first time 
you  may  get an answer  longer than you wish.  You  will not see the  caves 
yourself, not on this journey. Soon they will be far behind.' 
     'I thought you were going to stop  at Helm's Deep!' said Pippin. 'Where 
are you going then?' 
     'To Minas Tirith, before the seas of war surround it.' 
     'Oh! And how far is that?' 
     'Leagues  upon  leagues,'  answered  Gandalf.  'Thrice as  far  as  the 
dwellings of King Thjoden, and they are more than a hundred  miles east from 
here, as  the  messengers of  Mordor fly. Shadowfax must run  a longer road.  
Which will prove the swifter? 
     'We  shall ride  now till  daybreak, and that is  some hours away.  Then 
even Shadowfax must  rest, in some hollow of the  hills: at Edoras, I  hope. 
Sleep, if  you can! You  may see the first  glimmer of dawn upon the  golden  
roof of  the house of Eorl. And in two days thence you shall see the  purple 
shadow  of Mount Mindolluin and the  walls of the tower of Denethor white in 
the morning. 
     'Away  now,  Shadowfax!  Run,  greatheart,  run as  you have never  run 
before! Now we are come to the lands  where you were foaled  and every stone 
you know. Run now! Hope is in speed!' 
     Shadowfax tossed his head and cried aloud, as if a trumpet had summoned 
him to battle. Then he sprang forward. Fire flew from his feet; night rushed 
over him. 

####-     As he  fell  slowly into  sleep, Pippin had a  strange feeling:  he and 
Gandalf  were  still as stone, seated  upon the  statue of a running  horse, 
while the world rolled away beneath his feet with a great noise of wind. 
 
 

####- * BOOK IV *  

 

 
 
 

Chapter 1. The Taming of Smjagol 

 
 
     'Well, master,  we're in  a fix and  no mistake,'  sa id Sam  Gamgee. He 
stood despondently with hunched shoulders beside Frodo, and peered out  with 
puckered eyes into the gloom. 
     It was the third evening since they had fled from  the Company,  as far 
as they could  tell:  they had  almost lost count of  the  hours during which 
they had climbed and laboured among the barren slopes and stones of the 
Emyn 
Muil,  sometimes retracing  their  steps  because  they could  find  no  way 
forward,  sometimes discovering  that they  had wandered in a circle back to 
where they  had been hours before. Yet on the whole they had worked steadily 
eastward, keeping as near as they could find a way to the outer edge of this 
strange  twisted  knot of hills. But  always  they  found its  outward faces 
sheer,  high  and  impassable, frowning  over  the plain  below;  beyond its 
tumbled skirts lay livid festering marshes where nothing moved and not  even 
a bird was to be seen. 
     The hobbits stood now on the brink of a tall cliff, bare and bleak, its 
feet wrapped in mist; and behind them rose the broken highlands crowned with 
drifting  cloud. A chill wind` blew from the East. Night was gathering  over  
the shapeless  lands before them; the sickly  green of them was fading  to a  
sullen brown. Far away to the right the Anduin, that had gleamed fitfully in 
sun-breaks during the day, was now  hidden in shadow. But their eyes did not 
look beyond the  River,  back to Gondor, to  their friends, to the lands  of 
Men. South and east they stared to where, at the edge of the oncoming night,  
a dark line hung, like distant mountains  of motionless smoke. Every now and 
again a  tiny red gleam far away  flickered upwards on the rim of earth  and 
sky. 
     `What a fix! ' said Sam.  `That's the one place  in all the lands we've 
ever heard of that we  don't want to see any closer; and that's the one place 
we're trying  to  get  to! And  that's just where we can't get, nohow. We've 
come the wrong way altogether, seemingly. We can't get down;  and if  we did 

####-get down, we'd find all that green land a nasty bog, I'll warrant. Phew! Can 
you smell it?' He sniffed at the wind. 
     'Yes, I can smell  it,'  said Frodo, but he did not move,  and his eyes 
remained fixed, staring out towards the  dark line and the flickering flame. 
`Mordor! ' he muttered under his breath. 'If I  must go there I wish I could 
come there quickly and make an  end! ' He shuddered. The wind was chilly and 
yet heavy with an odour of cold decay.  `Well,' he said, at last withdrawing 
his eyes, `we cannot stay here all night, fix or no fix. We must find a more 
sheltered spot,  and camp once more; and perhaps another  day will show us a 
path.' 
     'Or another and another and another,' muttered Sam.  `Or  maybe no day.  
We've come the wrong way.' 
     'I wonder,' said Frodo. 'It's my  doom, I think, to go  to  that Shadow 
yonder, so that a way will  be found.  But will good or evil show it to  me?  
What hope we had was in speed. Delay plays into the Enemy's hands-and here I 
am: delayed. Is it the will of the Dark Tower that steers us? All my choices 
have proved ill. I should have  left the Company long  before, and come down 
from the North, east of the River and of the Emyn Muil, and so over the hard 
of Battle Plain  to the passes of Mordor. But now it isn't possible  for you  
and me alone to find a way back, and the Orcs are prowling on the east bank. 
Every  day that passes is a precious day lost. I am tired, Sam. I don't know 
what is to be done. What food have we got left?' 
     'Only those, what d'you call 'em, lembas, Mr. Frodo. A fair supply. But 
they are better than naught, by a long bite. I never thought, though, when I 
first set tooth in them, that I should ever come to wish for a change. But I 
do now: a bit of plain bread, and a mug -- aye, half  a mug  -- of beer would 
go down proper. I've lugged my cooking-gear all the way from the last  camp, 
and what use  has  it been? Naught  to  make a fire with, for  a start;  and 
naught to cook, not even grass!' 
     They turned  away and went down into a  stony hollow. The westering sun 
was caught into clouds,  and night came swiftly. They slept as  well as they 
could  for the  cold, turn and  turn about,  in a  nook among  great  jagged 
pinnacles of weathered rock; at  least they were sheltered from the easterly 
wind. 
     `Did you see them  again, Mr . Frodo?' asked Sam, as they sat, stiff and 
chilled, munching wafers of  lembas, in the cold grey of early morning. 
     'No,' said Frodo. `I've heard nothing, and seen nothing, for two nights 

####-now.' 
     `Nor me,' said  Sam. `Grrr!  Those eyes did give me a  turn! But perhaps 
we've shaken  him off at  last, the miserable slinker. Gollum! I'll give him 
gollum in his throat, if ever I get my hands on his neck.' 
     'I  hope  you'll never need to,'  said  Frodo.  `I don't  know  how  he 
followed us; but it may be that  he's lost us again, as you say. In this dry 
bleak  land we  can't leave  many  footprints, nor much scent, even  for his 
snuffling nose.' 
     'I hope that's the way of it,' said Sam. 'I wish we could be rid of him 
for good!' 
     'So do I,' said Frodo; 'but he's not my chief trouble. I wish we  could 
get away from these hills! I hate them. I feel all naked on  the  east side, 
stuck up here with  nothing but  the  dead  flats between me and that Shadow 
yonder. There's an Eye in it. Come on! We've got to get down today somehow.' 
     But  that day wore on, and  when  afternoon faded towards evening  they 
were still scrambling along the ridge and had found no way of escape. 
     Sometimes in the silence of that barren country they fancied  that they 
heard faint sounds behind  them, a stone falling,  or the  imagined step  of 
flapping feet on the rock. But if they halted  and  stood  still  listening, 
they heard  no more,  nothing but  the  wind sighing over  the  edges of the 
stones -- yet even that reminded them of breath softly hissing through sharp 
teeth. 
     All that  day  the  outer  ridge of the  Emyn  Muil  had  been  bending 
gradually northward,  as  they  struggled  on.  Along  its  brink there  now 
stretched  a wide tumbled flat of scored and  weathered rock,  cut  every now  
and again by trench-like gullies that sloped steeply down to deep notches in  
the cliff-face. To find a path in  these clefts, which  were becoming deeper 
and more  frequent, Frodo  and Sam were driven to their left, well away from 
the edge, and they did not notice that for several miles they had been going 
slowly but steadily downhill: the cliff-top was sinking towards the level of 
the lowlands. 
     At last  they were brought to a  halt.  The ridge took  a  sharper bend 
nor thward and was gashed by  a deeper  ravine. On the further side it reared 
up again,  many fathoms at a single  leap: a great grey cliff  loomed before 
them, cut sheer down  as if by  a  knife stroke.  They could  go  no further 
forwards, and must turn now either west or east. But west  would  lead  them 
only  into more labour and delay, back towards the  heart of the hills; east 

####-would take them to the outer precipice. 
     `There's nothing for it but  to scramble down  this gully,  Sam,'  said 
Frodo. `Let's see what it leads to!' 
     'A nasty drop, I'll bet,' said Sam. 
     The  cleft  was  longer and deeper  than it seemed. Some way down  they 
found a  few gnarled and stunted  trees,  the first they  had seen for days: 
twisted birch for  the  most part, with here and there a fir -tree. Many were 
dead and gaunt, bitten to the core by the eastern winds. Once in milder days 
there must have been a fair thicket in the ravine, but now, after some fifty 
yards,  the  trees  came to  an end, though  old broken stumps  straggled on 
almost to the cliff's brink. The bottom of  the  gully, which  lay along the 
edge of a rock -fault, was rough with broken stone and slanted steeply  down. 
When they came at last to the end of it, Frodo stooped and leaned out. 
     `Look!' he said. `We must have come down a  long way, or else the cliff 
has sunk. It's much lower here than it was, and it looks easier too.' 
     Sam knelt beside  him  and peered  reluctantly over the  edge.  Then he 
glanced up at the great  cliff rising up, away on  their left. `Easier! ' he 
grunted. `Well, I  suppose it's always easier getting down than up. Those as 
can't fly can jump!' 
     `It would be a big jump still,' said Frodo. `About, well'  --  he  stood 
for a moment measuring it with his eyes  -- `about eighteen  fathoms I should  
guess. Not more.' 
     'And that's enough! ' said Sam. `Ugh! How I do hate looking down from a 
height! But looking's better than climbing.' 
     `All the same,' said Frodo, `I think  we could climb here; and  I think  
we shall have to try. See -- the rock is quite different from  what it was a  
few miles back. It has slipped and cracked.' 
     The outer fall  was  indeed no  longer  sheer,  but  sloped outwards  a  
little. It looked  like a great rampart or  sea -wall whose  foundations  had 
shifted, so that  its courses were all twisted and disordered, leaving great 
fissures  and  long  slanting edges that were in places  almost as  wide  as 
stairs. 
     `And if we're going to try and  get down, we had better  try  at  once. 
It's getting dark early. I think there's a storm coming.' 
     The smoky  blur of the mountains  in the  East  was  lost  in a  deeper  
blackness that was already reaching out  westwards with long arms. There was 
a distant  mutter of  thunder borne on the rising breeze. Frodo sniffed  the 

####-air and looked up  doubtfully at the  sky. He strapped his belt  outside his 
cloak  and  tightened it, and settled  his  light pack on  his back; then he 
stepped towards the edge. `I'm going to try it,' he said. 
     `Very good! ' said Sam gloomily. `But I'm going first.' 
     'You? ' said Frodo. `What's made you change your mind about climbing?' 
     'I haven't changed my mind.  But it's only sense: put the one lowest as 
is most  likely to slip. I don't want to come down atop of you a nd knock you  
off no sense in killing two with one fall.' 
     Before Frodo  could  stop  him,  he  sat down,  swung his legs over the 
brink,  and twisted round, scrabbling with  his toes for a  foothold.  It is 
doubtful if he ever did anything braver in cold blood, or more unwise. 
     'No,  no! Sam, you  old ass! ' said Frodo.  `You'll kill  yourself  for  
certain going  over like that without  even a look to see what  to make for. 
Come back! '  He took Sam under  the armpits and hauled him up  again. 'Now,  
wait a bit and be patient! ' he said. Then he lay on the ground, leaning out 
and looking  down: but the light  seemed to be fading quickly, although  the  
sun had not yet set. 'I think we  could manage this,' he  said presently. `I  
could at any rate; and you could too. if you kept your  head and followed me  
carefully.' 
     `I don't know how you can be so sure,' said Sam. `Why! You can't see to 
the bottom in this light. What if you comes to a place where there's nowhere 
to put your feet or your hands?' 
     'Climb back, I suppose,' said Frodo. 
     'Easy said,' objected Sam. 'Better wait till morning and more light.' 
     `No! Not if I can help it,' said Frodo with a sudden strange vehemence. 
`I grudge every hour, every minute. I'm  going down to try it out.  Don't you  
follow till I come back or call!' 
     Gripping  the stony lip of  the  fall with  his fingers he  let himself 
gently down, until when his arms were almost at full stretch, his toes found 
a ledge.  'On_ e step down!  ' he  said. 'And this ledge broadens out to the 
right. I could stand there without a hold. I'll--' his words were cut short. 
     The  hurrying  darkness, now gathering  great speed, rushed up from the 
East and swallowed the sky. There was a dry splitting crack of thunder right  
overhead. Searing  lightning smote down into the hills. Then came a blast of 
savage wind, and with  it, mingling with its  roar, there came a high shrill 
shriek. The hobbits had heard just such a cry far away in the Marish as they 
fled  from Hobbiton, and even there  in the woods of the Shire it had frozen 

####-their blood.  Out  here  in the waste its terror was far greater: it pierced 
them  with cold blades of horror and despair, stopping heart and breath. Sam 
fell flat on his face. Involuntarily Frodo loosed his hold and put his hands 
over his head and ears. He swayed,  slipped,  and slithered downwards with a 
wailing cry. 
     Sam  heard him and crawled with an effort to the edge. 'Master, master! 
' he called.  'Master!'.  
     He heard no answer.  He  found he was  shaking all over, but he gathered  
his breath, and once again he shouted: 'Master!' The wind seemed to blow his 
voice back into his throat, but as it passed, roaring up  the gully and away 
over the hills, a faint answering cry came to his ears:  
     'All right, all right! I'm here. But I can't see.' 
     Frodo  was  calling with a  weak voice. ,He  was not actually very  far 
away. He had slid and not fallen, and had come up with a jolt to his feet on 
a wider ledge not  many yards lower down. Fortunately  the  rock -face at this 
point leaned well back and  the  wind had pressed him against the  cliff, so 
that he had not toppled  over. He steadied himself a little, laying his face 
against the cold stone, feeling  his heart pounding. But either the darkness 
had  grown  complete, or else  his eyes had lost  their sight. All was black  
about him. He wondered if he had been struck blind. He took a deep breath.  
     `Come  back!  Come  back! '  he heard Sam's voice out  of the blackness 
above. 
     `I can't,' he said. `I  can't see. I can't find any hold. I can't  move 
yet.' 
     `What  can  I do, Mr. Frodo? What can I do?  ' shouted Sam, leaning out 
dangerously far.  Why could not his master see?  It was dim, certainly,  but 
not as dark as all that. He could see Frodo below him, a grey forlorn figure 
splayed against  the cliff. But  he was far out of the  reach of any helping 
hand. 
     There  was another crack  of  thunder;  and then  the  rain came.  In a  
blinding sheet, mingled with hail, it drove against the cliff, bitter cold. 
     'I'm  coming  down to you,' shouted Sam, though how he hoped to help in 
that way he could not have said. 
     `No,  no!  wait!  ' Frodo  called back, more strongly now. `I  shall be 
better  soon. I feel  better already. Wait! You can't do anything  without a  
rope.' 
     `Rope!'  cried  Sam, talking wildly to himself  in  his  excitement and 

####-relief. `Well, if I don't deserve  to be hung on the end of one as a warning 
to numbskulls!  You're nowt  but a ninnyhammer, Sam Gamgee: that's  what 
the 
Gaffer said to me often enough, it being a word of his. Rope!' 
     `Stop  chattering!' cried  Frodo,  now  recovered  enough to feel  both 
amused and annoyed. 'Never mind your Gaffer! Are you trying to tell yourself 
you've got some rope in your pocket? If so, out with it! 
     `Yes, Mr. Frodo, in my pack and  all.  Carried it hundreds of miles and 
I'd clean forgotten it!' 
     `Then get busy and let an end down!' 
     Quickly  Sam  unslung  his pack and rummaged in it. There indeed at the 
bottom was a coil  of the silken-grey rope made by the folk  of  Lurien.  He 
cast an end to his master. The darkness seemed to lift from Frodo's eyes, or  
else his sight was returning. He could see the grey line as it came dangling 
down, and he thought it had a faint silver sheen. Now that he had some point  
in the darkness to  fix his eyes on, he felt less giddy. Leaning  his weight 
forward, he made the  end fast round his waist, and then he grasped the line 
with both hands.  
     Sam stepped back and braced his feet against a stump a yard or two from 
the edge.  Half hauled, half scrambling. Frodo came up  and threw himself on 
the ground. 
     Thunder growled  and  rumbled in the distance,  and the rain was  still 
falling heavily. The hobbits crawled away back into the gully; but  they did 
not find  much shelter there.  Rills of water began  to run down;  soon they 
grew to a spate that splashed and fumed on the  stones, and spouted out over  
the cliff like the gutters of a vast roof. 
     `I should have been half drowned down there, or washed clean off,' said 
Frodo. 'What a piece of luck you had that rope!' 
     `Better  luck  if  I'd thought  of  it sooner,'  said Sam.  'Maybe  you  
remember them putting the  ropes in the boats,  as we started  off:  in  the 
elvish country. I took a fancy to it, and  I stowed a coil in my pack. Years 
ago, it seems.  "It may be a help in many needs," he said: Haldir, or one of 
those folk. And he spoke right.' 
     `A  pity I didn't think of bringing another length,' said Frodo; `but I 
left  the  Company in such a hurry and confusion. If  only  we had enough we 
could use it to get down. How long is your rope, I wonder?' 
     Sam paid it out slowly, measuring it with his arms: 'Five, ten, twenty, 

####-thirty ells, more or less,' he said. 
     'Who'd have  thought it!' Frodo exclaimed. 
     `Ah! Who would? ' said Sam. `Elves are wonderful folk. It looks  a  bit 
thin, but it's tough; and soft as milk to the  hand. Packs close too, and as 
light as light. Wonderful folk to be sure!' 
     `Thirty ells! '  said Frodo considering. 'I believe it would be enough. 
If the storm passes before nightfall, I'm going to try it.' 
     `The rain's nearly  given over already,'  said Sam;  'but  don't you go 
doing anything risky in the  dim again, Mr.  Frodo! And I  haven't  got over 
that shriek on the wind yet, if you have. Like a Black Rider it  sounded-but 
one up in the air, if they can fly.  I'm  thinking we'd  best lay up in this 
crack till night's over.' 
     'And I'm  thinking that I won't spend a moment longer than I need stuck  
up on this edge with the eyes of the Dark Country looking over the marshes,' 
said Frodo. 
     With  that he stood up and went  down to the bottom of the gully again. 
He looked out.  Clear sky  was  growing in the East once more. The skirts of 
the  storm were lifting, ragged and wet, and the  main  battle had passed to 
spread its great wings over the Emyn  Muil; upon which  the dark thought  of 
Sauron brooded for a  while.  Thence it turned, smiting  the Vale of  Anduin 
with hail  and lightning,  and  casting its shadow upon  Minas  Tirith  with 
threat  of  war.  Then,  lowering in the mountains,  and gathering its great 
spires,  it rolled on slowly over Gondor  and the skirts of Rohan, until far 
away the Riders on  the plain saw its black towers mov ing behind the sun, as 
they  rode into the West. But here, over the desert and the  reeking marshes 
the  deep  blue sky of  evening  opened once  more, and  a few  pallid stars 
appeared, like small white holes in the canopy above the crescent moon. 
     `It's good  to be able to see again,' said Frodo,  breathing  deep. `Do 
you know, I thought for a  bit that I had lost my sight? From  the lightning 
or something else worse. I could see nothing, nothing at all, until the grey 
rope came down. It seemed to shimmer somehow.' 
     `It does look  sort of silver in the dark,' said Sam. `Never noticed it 
before, though I can't remember as I've ever had it out since I first stowed 
it. But if you're so set on climbing, Mr. Frodo,  how  are you  going to use 
it?  Thirty ells, or  say, about eighteen fathom: that's  no  more than your 
guess at the height of the cliff.' 
     Frodo thought for a while. `Make it fast to that stump, Sam! ' he said. 

####-`Then I think  you  shall have your wish this time and go first. I'll  lower  
you, and you need do no more than use  your feet and hands  to fend yourself 
off the rock. Though, if you put your weight on  some of the ledges and give 
me a  rest, it will help. When you're down, I'll follow. I feel quite myself 
again now.' 
     'Very well,' said Sam heavily. `If it must be, let's get it  over! ' He 
took up the rope and made it fast over the stump nearest  to the brink; then 
the  other  end  he tied about  his own waist.  Reluctantly  he  turned  and 
prepared to go over the edge a second time. 
     It did not, however, turn  out half as bad as he had expected. The rope 
seemed  to give him confidence, though he  shut his eyes more than once when 
he looked down between his feet. There was one awkward spot, where there 
was 
no ledge and the wa ll was sheer and even undercut for  a short  space; there 
he slipped and  swung  out on the silver  line. But Frodo lowered him slowly 
and steadily, and  it was over at  last. His  chief  fear had been  that the 
rope-length would give out while he was still high up, but there was still a  
good bight in Frodo's hands, when Sam came to the bottom and called up: `I'm 
down! ' His voice came up clearly from below,  but Frodo could not see  him; 
his grey elven-cloak had melted into the twilight. 
     Frodo took rather  more time to follow him. He had the  rope  about his 
waist and  it was fast above, and he had shortened it so that it  would pull 
him up before  he  reached the ground; still he did not want to risk a fall, 
and he had not quite  Sam's faith in  this   slender grey line.  He found two 
places, all  the  same,  where he had to trust wholly to it: smooth surfaces 
where there was no hold even  for  his strong hobbit  fingers and the ledges 
were far apart. But at last he too was down. 
     `Well!' he cried.  `We've done it! We've escaped from the Emyn Muil! And 
now what next, I  wonder? Maybe we shall soon  be sighing for good hard rock  
under foot again.' 
     But   Sam  did   not  answer:  he  was   staring  back  up  the  cliff.  
`Ninnyhammers!  ' he said. `Noodles! My beautiful rope! There it is tied to a  
stump,  and  we're  at the  bottom.  Just  as  nice a little stair for  that 
slinking Gollum as we could leave. Better put up a signpost to say which way 
we've gone! I thought it seemed a bit too easy.' 
     `If you can think of any way  we could have both used the rope and  yet 
brought  it down with  us, then you  can  pass on to me ninnyhammer, or  any 

####-other name your Gaffer gave you,' said Frodo. `Climb up and untie it and let  
yourself down, if you want to! ' 
     Sam scratched his head. `No,  I can't think how, begging  your pardon,' 
he  said. `But I don't like leaving it, and that's  a fact.' He  stroked the 
rope's  end  and  shook  it  gently.  `It goes  hard parting with anything I 
brought  out  of  the  Elf-country. Made  by Galadriel herself, too,  maybe. 
Galadriel,' he murmured  nodding his head  mournfully. He looked up and gave 
one last pull to the rope as if in farewell. 
     To  the  complete surprise of both the hobbits it came loose. Sam  fell 
over, and the long grey coils slithered silently down  on top  of him. Frodo 
laughed. `Who  tied the rope? ' he said. `A good thing it held as long as it 
did! To think that I trusted all my weight to your knot!' 
     Sam did not laugh. `I may not be much good at climbing, Mr.  Frodo,' he 
said in injured tones, `but I do know something  about rope and about knots.  
It's in the family, as you might  say. Why, my grand-dad, and my  uncle Andy 
after him, him that  was the Gaffer's eldest brother he had a rope-walk over 
by Tighfield many a year.  And I put as fast a hitch  over the  stump as any 
one could have done, in the Shire or out of it.' 
     `Then the rope must have broken  -- frayed on the rock -edge, I expect,' 
said Frodo. 
     `I bet it didn't! ' said Sam in an  even more injured voice. He stooped 
and examined the ends. `Nor it hasn't neither. Not a strand!' 
     'Then I'm afraid it must have been the knot,' said Frodo. 
     Sam shook his  head and did not answer. He was passing the rope through 
his  fingers  thoughtfully. `Have it  your own way, Mr.  Frodo,' he  said at 
last, `but I think the  rope came off itself  -- when I called.' He coiled it 
up and stowed it lovingly in his pack. 
     'It certainly came,' said Frodo, `and that's the  chief thing.  But now 
we've got to think of our next move. Night will be on us soon. How beautiful 
the stars are, and the Moon!' 
     'They do cheer  the heart, don't they?  ' said Sam looking up.  'Elvish 
they  are. somehow. And the Moon's growing. We haven't  seen him for a night 
or two in this cloudy weather. He's beginning to give quite a light.' 
     'Yes,' said Frodo; `but he  won't be full for some  days. I don't think  
we'll try the marshes by the light of half a moon.' 
     Under the first shadows of night they started  out on the next stage of 
their journey. After  a while Sam turned and looked back at the way they had 

####-come. The mouth  of the gully was a black notch in the  dim cliff. `I'm glad 
we've got  the rope,' he said. 'We've set a little puzzle for  that footpad, 
anyhow. He can try his nasty flappy feet on those ledges!' 
     They  picked  their  steps away from the  skirts of the cliff,  among a  
wilderness of boulders  and  rough stones, wet  and slippery with the  heavy  
rain.  The ground still fell  away  sharply. They had not gone very far when 
they came upon a great fissure that yawned suddenly black before their feet. 
It was not wide,  but it was too wide to  jump across in the dim light. They 
thought they  could hear water  gurgling in  its  depths. It curved  away  on 
their  left  northward, back  towards the hills. and so barred their road in 
that direction, at any rate while darkness lasted. 
     'We had better try a way back southwards along the line of the cliff, I 
think,'  said  Sam.  `We might  find some  nook  there, or  even  a cave  or  
something.' 
     'I  suppose so,'  said  Frodo.  'I'm tired.  and  I don't  think I  can 
scramble among stones much  longer tonight --  though  I grudge the delay. I 
wish there was a clear path in front of us: then I'd go on till my legs gave 
way.' 
     They did not find the going  any easier at the  broken feet of the Emyn 
Muil. Nor did Sam find any nook  or hollow  to shelter in: only  bare  stony 
slopes frowned  over  by the  cliff, which  now rose again, higher  and more 
sheer as they went back. In the end, worn out, they  just cast themselves on 
the ground  under the lee  of a boulder lying not far  from the foot of  the 
precipice. There  for some time  they sat huddled mournfully together in the 
cold stony night, while sleep crept  upon them in spite of all they could do 
to hold it off.  The moon now rode high and  clear. Its thin white light lit 
up the faces of the rocks and drenched the cold frowning walls of the cliff, 
turning  all the wide  looming darkness into a   chill  pale grey scored with 
black shadows. 
     'Well! '  said  Frodo, standing up and drawing  his cloak more  closely 
round him.  `You  sleep for a bit Sam and take my blanket.  I'll walk up and 
down on sentry for a while.' Suddenly he stiffened,  and stooping he gripped  
Sam by the  arm. `What's  that?  '  he whispered. `Look  over  there on  the 
cliff!' 
     Sam looked and breathed in  sharply through his teeth. `Ssss!' he said. 
'That's what it is. It's that Gollum! Snakes and adders! And to think tha t I 
thought that  we'd puzzle him with our bit of a climb! Look at  him!  Like a  

####-nasty crawling spider on a wall.' 
     Down the face of a precipice, sheer  and almost smooth it seemed in the 
pale moonlight, a small black shape was moving with its thin  limbs  splayed 
out. Maybe its soft clinging  hands and toes were finding crevices and holds 
that no hobbit could ever have seen or used, but it looked as if it was just  
creeping down on sticky pads, like some large prowling thing of insect-kind.  
And it was coming down  head  first, as  if it was smelling its way. Now and 
again it lifted its head slowly, turning  it  right back on  its long skinny 
neck, and the hobbits  caught  a glimpse of two small pale gleaming  lights,  
its eyes that blinked at the moon  for a moment and then were quickly lidded  
again. 
     `Do you think he can see us? ' said Sam. 
     `I don't know,' said Frodo  quietly, `but I think not. It  is hard even 
for friendly eyes to see these elven-cloaks: I cannot  see you in the shadow 
even at a  few paces. And I've heard that he doesn't like Sun or Moon.' 
     `Then why is he coming down just here? ' asked Sam. 
     'Quietly, Sam! ' said Frodo. `He can smell us, perhaps. And he can hear 
as keen as  Elves, I believe. I think he has heard something  now: our voices 
probably. We did a lot of shouting  away back there; and we were talking far 
too loudly until a minute ago.' 
     `Well, I'm sick of him,' said Sam. `He's come once too often for me and 
I'm going to have a word with him, if I can. I don't suppose  we  could give 
him the slip  now anyway.' Drawing his grey  hood well  over  his  face, Sam 
crept stealthily towards the cliff.  
     `Careful!' whispered Frodo coming behind.  `Don't  alarm him! He's much 
more dangerous than he looks.' 
     The black crawling shape was now three-quarters  of  the way down,  and 
perhaps fifty feet or less above the cliff's  foot. Crouching stone-still in 
the shadow of a large  boulder the hobbits watched him.  He seemed  to  have 
come  to a  difficult passage or  to be troubled about something. They could  
hear him snuffling, and now and again there was a harsh  hiss of breath that 
sounded like  a curse. He lifted his head, and they  thought  they heard him 
spit. Then  he  moved on again. Now they could hear  his voice creaking  and 
whistling. 
     `Ach,  sss! Cautious, my precious! More haste  less speed.  We musstn't 
rissk our neck, musst we, precious? No, precious  -- gollum!'  He lifted his 
head again, blinked at the moon, and quickly shut his eyes. `We hate it,' he 

####-hissed.  `Nassty,  nassty shivery light it is  -- sss  --  it  spies on  us,  
precious -- it hurts our eyes.' 
     He was getting  lower now and the  hisses became  sharper  and clearer. 
'Where iss it, where iss it: my Precious, my Precious? It's ours, it is, and 
we wants it. The thieves, the thieves, the filthy  little thieves. Where are 
they with my Precious? Curse them! We hates them.' 
     `It doesn't sound as if he knew we were here, does it? ' whispered Sam. 
`And what's his Precious? Does he mean the' 
     `Hsh!  ' breathed  Frodo. 'He's getting near now, near enough to hear a  
whisper.' 
     Indeed Gollum  had suddenly paused again,  and his  large  head on  its 
scrawny neck was  lolling from side to side as if he was listening. His pale 
eyes were  half  unlidded. Sam restrained  himself, though his fingers  were 
twitching. His  eyes,  filled with anger  and  disgust,  were  fixed  on the 
wretched  creature as  he  now  began  to  move again,  still whispering and 
hissing to himself.  
     At last he wa s no more than a  dozen  feet from the ground, right above 
their  heads. From that  point  there  was a sheer  drop, for  the cliff was 
slightly undercut,  and  even Gollum could not find a hold of any  kind.  He 
seemed to be trying to twist round, so  as to go legs  first, when  suddenly 
with a shrill whistling shriek he fell. As he did so, he curled his legs and 
arms up round him, like a spider whose descending thread is snapped. 
     Sam was out of his hiding in a flash and crossed the  space between him 
and the cliff foot in  a couple of leaps. Before Gollum could get up, he was 
on top of him.  But he  found Gollum more than he bargained for, even  taken 
like that,  suddenly, off  his guard after  a  fall. Before Sam  could get a  
hold, long legs  and arms  were  wound round  him  pinning  his  arms, and a  
clinging grip, soft  but  horribly  strong, was  squeezing  him  like slowly  
tightening  cords;  clammy fingers were feeling for  his throat.  Then sharp 
teeth bit into his shoulder. All he could do was to butt his hard round head 
sideways into  the creature's face. Gollum hissed and spat, but  he did  not 
let go. 
     Things  would have gone  ill with  Sam, if he had been alone. But Frodo 
sprang  up, and drew  Sting from its sheath. With his left hand he drew back  
Gollum's head by his thin lank hair, stretching  his long neck, and  forcing 
his pale venomous eyes to stare up at the sky. 
     `Let go! Gollum,' he said. `This is Sting. You have seen it before once 

####-upon a time. Let go, or you'll feel it this time! I'll cut your throat.' 
     Gollum collapsed and went as loose as wet string. Sam got up, fingering 
his  shoulder.  His eyes  smouldered  with  anger, but  he could  not avenge 
himself: his miserable enemy lay grovelling on the stones whimpering. 
     `Don't hurt  us! Don't let them hurt us,  precious! They won't hurt  us 
will they, nice little hobbitses?  We didn't mean no harm, but they jumps on 
us like cats on poor mices, they did, precious. And we're so lonely, gollum. 
We'll be nice to them, very nice, if they'll be  nice to  us, won't we, yes, 
yess.' 
     `Well, what's to be done with it? '  said  Sam.  `Tie  it up, so  as it 
can't come sneaking after us no more, I say.' 
     `But  that would kill  us, kill  us,'  whimpered  Gollum. `Cruel little 
hobbitses. Tie us up in the cold hard lands  and leave us,  gollum, gollum. ' 
Sobs welled up in his gobbling throat. 
     `No,'  said Frodo. `If we kill him, we  must kill him outright. But  we 
can't do that, not as things are. Poor wretch! He has done us no harm.' 
     `Oh hasn't  he! ' said Sam rubbing his  shoulder.  `Anyway he meant to, 
and he means to, I'll warrant. Throttle us in our sleep, that's his plan.' 
     'I daresay,' said Frodo. `But what he means  to  do is another matter.' 
He paused for  a while in thought. Gollum lay still, but stopped whimpering. 
Sam stood glowering over him. 
     It seemed  to Frodo  then  that he  heard,  quite  plainly but far off,  
voices out of the past: 
     What a pity Bilbo did not stub the vile creature, when he had a chance! 
     Pity? It was Pity that stayed his hand. Pity, and  Mercy: not to strike 
without need. 
     I do not feel any pity for Gollum. He deserves death. 
     Deserves  death! I daresay  he does. Many that live  deserve death. And 
some die that deserve life. Can you give that to them? Then be not too eager 
to  deal out death in the name of justice, fearing for your own safety. Even 
the wise cannot see all ends. 
     `Very well,' he answered aloud, lowering  his  sword. 'But  still  I am 
afraid. And yet, as you see,  I will not touch  the creature. For now that I 
see him, I do pity him.' 
     Sam stared at his master, who seemed to be speaking to some one who was 
not there. Gollum lifted his head. 
     'Yess,  wretched we are,  precious,' he whined. 'Misery misery! Hobbits 

####-won't kill us, nice hobbits.' 
     'No,  we won't,'  said Frodo. `But we won't  let you go, either. You're 
full  of  wickedness and  mischief, Gollum. You will  have to come with  us,  
that's all, while we keep an eye on you. But you must help us, if  you  can. 
One good turn deserves another.' 
     'Yess, yes indeed,' said Gollum sitting up. 'Nice hobbits! We will come 
with them. Find them safe paths in the dark, yes we will. And where are they 
going in these cold hard  lands, we  wonders, yes we wonders? ' He looked up 
at them, and a faint  light of cunning  and eagerness flickered for a second 
in his pale blinking eyes. 
     Sam scowled at him,  and sucked his  teeth; but he seemed to sense that 
there was  something  odd  about his master's  mood and that the  matter was 
beyond argument. All the same he was amazed at Frodo's reply. 
     Frodo  looked straight into Gollum's eyes  which  flinched  and twisted 
away. `You know that, or  you guess  well enough, Smjagol,' he said. quietly 
and sternly. `We are going to Mordor, of course. And you know the way there, 
I believe.' 
     `Ach! sss! ' said Gollum, covering his  ears with his hands, as if such 
frankness, and the open speaking of the names, hurt him. `We guessed, yes we 
guessed,' he  whispered;  `and we didn't  want  them  to  go,  did  we?  No, 
precious, not the nice hobbits. Ashes, ashes, and dust, and thirst there is;  
and pits, pits, pits, and Orcs, thousands of Orcses. Nice hobbits mustn't go 
to -- sss  -- those places.' 
     `So you have been there?  ' Frodo insisted. `And you're being drawn back  
there, aren't you?' 
     `Yess. Yess. No! ' shrieked Gollum. `Once, by  accident it  was, wasn't  
it, precious? Yes, by accident. But we won't go back, no, no!' Then suddenly  
his voice and language changed,  and he sobbed in his throat,  and spoke but 
not to them. `Leave me alone, gollum! You hurt me.  O my poor hands, gollum! 
I,  we, I don't want  to come back. I can't find it. I am tired. I, we can't  
find it, gollum, gollum,  no, nowhere. They 're always awake.  Dwarves,  Men, 
and Elves, terrible Elves  with  bright eyes. I can't find it. Ach! ' He got 
up and clenched his long hand into a bony fleshless knot, shaking it towards 
the East. 'We  won't! ' he  cried. 'Not for  you.' Then he collapsed   again. 
'Gollum, gollum,' he whimpered with his face  to the  ground. 'Don't look at 
us! Go away! Go to sleep!' 
     `He will not go  away or go to sleep at  your  command, Smjagol,'  said 

####-Frodo. `But if you  really wish to be free of  him again. then you  must help 
me. And that I fear means finding us a path towards him. But you need not go 
all the way, not beyond the gates of his land.' 
     Gollum sat up  again  and looked at him under  his eyelids. 'He's  over  
there,' he cackled. `Always there. Orcs  wi ll take you all the  way. Easy to 
find Orcs east of  the River. Don't ask Smjagol. Poor, poor Smjagol, he went  
away long ago. They took his Precious, and he's lost now.' 
     `Perhaps we'll find him again, if you come with us,' said Frodo. 
     'No, no, never! He's lost his Precious,' said Gollum. 
     'Get up! ' said Frodo. 
     Gollum stood up and backed away against the cliff. 
     `Now! '  said Frodo. 'Can  you find  a path easier by day or by  night?  
We're tired; but if you choose the night, we'll star t tonight.' 
     `The big lights hurt our eyes, they do,' Gollum whined. `Not  under the 
White  Face, not  yet. It will go behind  the  hills soon, yess. Rest  a bit 
first, nice hobbits!' 
     `Then sit down,' said Frodo, `and don't move!' 
     The  hobbits  seated themselves  beside  him, one on  either side. with 
their backs to the stony wall, resting their legs. There was no need for any 
arrangement by word: they knew that they must not sleep for a moment. Slowly 
the moon went by. Shadows fell down from the hills, and all grew dark before 
them. The stars grew thick  and bright in  the sky  above.  No one  stirred. 
Gollum  sat  with his legs drawn up, knees  under chin, flat hands  and feet 
splayed on the ground,  his eyes closed; but he seemed tense, as if thinking 
or listening. 
     Frodo looked across at Sam. Their eyes met and  they  understood.  They 
relaxed,  leaning  their heads back, and  shutting their eyes or seeming to. 
Soon  the sound of  their  soft  breathing  could be  heard. Gollum's  hands 
twitched  a little. Hardly perceptibly his head moved  to  the left  and the 
right, and  first one eye and then the other opened a slit. The hobbits made 
no sign. 
     Suddenly,  with startling agility and  speed, straight  off  the ground 
with a jump like a  grasshopper or a frog. Gollum  bounded  forward into the  
darkness. But that was just what Frodo and Sam had expected.  Sam was on 
him 
before he had gone two paces after  his spring. Frodo coming behind  grabbed 
his leg and threw him. 

####-     'Your rope might prove useful again, Sam.' he said. 
     Sam  got  out the  rope. 'And  where were you  off  to in the cold hard 
lands, Mr. Gollum?' he growled. 'We wonders.  aye,  we wonders. To find 
some 
of  your orc-friends,  I warrant. You nasty treacherous creature. It's round 
your neck this rope ought to go, and a tight noose too.' 
     Gollum lay quiet and tried  no further tricks.  He did not  answer Sam, 
but gave him a swift venomous look. 
     `All we need is something to keep a hold on him,' said Frodo. 'We  want 
him  to walk, so it's  no good  tying his legs-or his arms. he seems to  use 
them nearly as much. Tie one end to his  ankle, and keep a grip on the other  
end.' 
     He  stood over Gollum, while Sam  tied the  knot. The  result surprised 
them both. Gollum  began to scream, a thin, tearing sound, very  horrible to 
hear. He writhed, and tried to get his mouth to his ankle and bite the rope.  
He kept on screaming. 
     At last Frodo was  convinced that  he really was  in pain; but it could 
not be from the knot. He examined it  and found that  it was not too  tight, 
indeed  hardly  tight  enough. Sam was gentler than his words.  'What's  the 
matter with you? ' he said. `If you will try to run away. you must  be tied;  
but we don't wish to hurt you.' 
     'It hurts us, it hurts us,' hissed Gollum. `It freezes, it bites! Elves 
twisted it,  curse them! Nasty cruel hobbits! That's why we tries to escape, 
of course  it is, precious.  We guessed they were cruel hobbits. They visits 
Elves, fierce Elves with bright eyes. Take it off us! It hurts us.' 
     `No, I will not take it off you,' said Frodo, `not unless' -- he paused 
a  moment in thought -- `not unless there is any promise you can make that I  
can trust.' 
     'We  will swear to  do what he wants,  yes, yess,  said  Gollum,  still 
twisting and grabbling at his ankle. `It hurts us.' 
     `Swear? ' said Frodo. 
     'Smjagol,' said  Gollum suddenly and clearly, opening his eyes wide and 
staring at Frodo with a strange light. 'Smjagol will swear on the Precious.' 
     Frodo drew himself up, and again  Sam was startled by his words and his 
stern voice. 'On the Precious? How dare you? ' he said. 'Think! 
     One Ring to rule them all and in the Darkness bind them. 
     Would you  commit your promise to that, Smjagol? It  will hold you. But 

####-it is more treacherous than you are. It may twist your words. Beware!' 
     Gollum cowered. 'On the Precious. on the Precious! ' he repeated. 
     `And what would you swear? ' asked Frodo. 
     `To be very very good,' said Gollum.  Then crawling to Frodo's  feet he 
grovelled before him, whispering hoarsely: a shudder ran over him, as if the 
words shook his very  bones with fear. 'Smjagol will swear never,  never, to 
let Him  have  it.  Never! Smjagol will save  it. But  he  must swear on the 
Precious.' 
     'No! not on it,' said Frodo, looking  down at him with stern pity. 'All 
you wish is  to see it and touch it, if  you can,  though you know  it would 
drive you mad. Not on it. Swear by it,  if you  will. For you know  where it 
is. Yes,  you know, Smjagol. It is before you.' 
     For  a moment it appeared to Sam that  his master had  grown and Gollum 
had shrunk: a  tall stern shadow, a mighty lord  who hid  his  brightness in 
grey cloud, and at his feet  a little whining  dog. Yet the two were in some 
way akin and not alien: they could reach one another's  minds. Gollum raised 
himself and began pawing at Frodo, fawning at his knees. 
     'Down! down! ' said Frodo. `Now speak your promise!' 
     `We promises, yes I promise!' said Gollum. 'I  will serve the  master of 
the Precious. Good master, good Smjagol, gollum, gollum!' Suddenly he  began 
to weep and bite at his ankle again. 
     'Take the rope off, Sam!' said Frodo. 
     Reluctantly Sam obeyed. At once Gollum got up and began prancing about, 
like a whipped cur  whose master  has patted it. From  that moment a change, 
which lasted for some time,  came over him. He spoke  with less  hissing and 
whining, and he spoke to his companions direct, not to his precious self. He 
would  cringe and  flinch,  if  they stepped  near  him or  made any  sudden 
movement,  and  he  avoided  the  touch of  their elven-cloaks; but  he  was 
friendly,  and  indeed pitifully anxious  to  please.  He would cackle  with 
laughter and caper, if any jest was made, or even  if Frodo  spoke kindly to 
him, and weep if Frodo rebuked  him. Sam said little to  him of any sort. He 
suspected him more  deeply than ever,  and if possible liked the new Gollum, 
the Smjagol, less than the old. 
     'Well, Gollum, or whatever it is we're to call you,' he  said. 'now for 
it! The Moon's gone. and the night's going. We'd better start.' 
     'Yes, yes,' agreed Gollum, skipping about. 'Off we go! There's only one 
way across between the North-end and the South-end. I found it, I  did. Orcs 

####-don't use it,  Orcs  don't know  it.  Orcs don't cross the  Marshes, they go 
round for miles and  miles. Very  lucky  you  came  this way. Very lucky you 
found Smjagol, yes. Follow Smjagol!' 
     He took  a few  steps away  and  looked  back  inquiringly,  like a dog 
inviting  them for  a  walk. 'Wait a bit, Gollum!'  cried Sam. `Not too  far 
ahead now! I'm going to be at your tail, and I've got the rope handy.' 
     'No, no! ' said Gollum. 'Smjagol promised.' 
     In the  deep of night under hard  clear stars they set  off. Gollum led 
them back northward for a while along the way they had come; then he slanted 
to  the right away from  the steep edge  of the Emyn Muil,  down  the broken 
stony slopes towards the vast fens below. They faded swiftly and softly into  
the darkness. Over all the leagues of waste before the gates of Mordor there 
was a black silence. 
 

####- 

Chapter 2. The Passage of the Marshes 

 
 
     Gollum moved  quickly,  with his  head and  neck  thrust forward, often 
using  his hands as well as his  feet. Frodo  and  Sam were hard put to it to 
keep up with  him; but he seemed  no longer to have any thought of escaping, 
and if they fell  behind, he  would turn and wait for  them. After a time he 
brought  them to the brink of the narrow gully that they   had struck before; 
but they were now further from the hills. 
     `Here it  is!'  he cried.  'There is  a  way down inside, yes.  Now  we 
follows it  -- out,  out away over there.' He pointed south and east  towards 
the marshes. The reek of them came to their nostrils, heavy and foul even in 
the cool night air. . 
     Gollum  cast up and down along the  brink,  and at length he  called to 
them.  `Here! We can get down here. Smjagol went  this way once: I went this 
way, hiding from Orcs.' 
     He led the way, and following him  the  hobbits climbed  down into  the 
gloom. It  was  not difficult,  for  the  rift was at this  point only  some 
fifteen feet deep and about  a dozen across. There  was running water at the 
bottom: it was in fact the bed of one of the many small rivers that trickled 
down  from the  hills to feed  the  stagnant pools and mires beyond.  Gollum 
turned to the  right, southward  more  or less, and splashed  along with his 
feet in the  shallow  stony stream. He seemed greatly  delighted to feel the 
water, and chuckled to himself, sometimes even croaking in a sort of song. 
     The cold hard lands, 
     they bites our hands, 
     they gnaws our feet. 
     The rocks and stones 
     are like old bones 
     all bare of meat. 
     But stream and pool 
     is wet and cool: 
     so nice for feet! 
     And now we wish -- 
     'Ha! ha! What does we wish?' he said,  looking sidelong at the hobbits.  
'We'll tell you.' he croaked. `He  guessed it long ago, Baggins guessed it.' 
A glint  came  into his  eyes, and Sam  catching the gleam in  the  darkness 

####-thought it far from pleasant. 
     Alive without breath; 
     as cold as death; 
     never thirsting, ever drinking; 
     clad in mail, never clinking. 
     Drowns on dry land, 
     thinks an island 
     is a  mountain; 
     thinks a fountain  
     is a puff of air. 
     So sleek, so fair! 
     What a joy to meet! 
     We only wish 
     to catch a fish, 
     so juicy-sweet! 
     These  words only made  more pressing to Sam's mind a problem that  had 
been  troubl ing him  from the moment when he  understood that hir master was 
going  to adopt Gollum as a guide: the problem of food. It  did not occur to 
him that his master might also  have thought of  it. hut he  supposed Gollum 
had.  Indeed how had Gollum kept  himself  in all his lonely wandering? 'Not 
too well,'  thought Sam. 'He looks fair famished. Not too dainty to try what 
hobbit tastes like  if there ain't  no  fish, I'll wager -- supposing  as he 
could catch us napping. Well, he won't: not Sam Gamgee for one. ' 
     They stumbled along in the dark winding gully for a long time, or so it 
seemed to the tired feet of Frodo and Sam. The gully turned eastward, and as 
they went on it broadened and got gradually shallower. At last the sky above  
grew faint with the  first  grey  of morning. Gollum  had shown  no signs of 
tiring, but now he looked up and halted. 
     `Day  is near,'  he whispered,  as  if  Day  was  something  that might 
overhear  him and spring on  him. `Smjagol will stay here: I will stay here, 
and the Yellow Face won't see me.' 
     `We should be glad to see the Sun;' said Frodo, `but we will stay here: 
we are too tired to go any further at present.' 
     `You are not  wise  to  be glad of the  Yellow Face,' said  Gollum. `It 
shows you up. Nice sensible hobbits stay with Smjagol. Orcs and nasty things 
are about. They can see a long way. Stay and hide with me! ' 
     The three of them settled down to rest at the foot of the rocky wall of 

####-the gully.  It was not much more than a  tall man's  height now,  and at its 
base there were wide flat shelves  of dry stone; the water ran in a  channel 
on  the  other side. Frodo and Sam sat  on one of  the  flats, resting their 
backs. Gollum paddled and scrabbled in the stream. 
     `We must  take a little food,' said Frodo. `Are you hungry, Smjagol? We 
have very little to share, but we will spare you what we can.' 
     At the word hungry a greenish light  was kindled in Gollum's pale eyes,  
and they seemed to protrude further than ever from his thin sickly face. For  
a  moment  he  relapsed into his old  Gollum-manner. 'We are famisshed,  yes 
famisshed we are. precious,' he  said. `What is it they eats? Have they nice 
fisshes? ' His tongue lolled out between his sharp yellow teeth. licking his 
colourless lips.  
     `No, we have  got no fish,' said Frodo. `We have only  got this'  -- he 
held up a wafer of lembas -- 'and water, if the water here is fit to drink.' 
     `Yess,  yess,  nice water,' said  Gollum. `Drink it, drink it, while we 
can! But what is it they've got, pr ecious? Is it crunchable? Is it tasty? ' 
     Frodo  broke  off a portion  of a wafer  and handed it  to him  on  its 
leaf-wrapping. Gollum  sniffed at the leaf and  his face changed: a spasm of 
disgust came over it, and a hint of his old malice. `Smjagol smells it! ' he 
said. `Leaves out of the elf-country,  gah! They stinks. He climbed in those 
trees,  and  he  couldn't  wash  the  smell  off  his hands, my nice hands.' 
Dropping the leaf, he took a corner of the   lembas  and nibbled it. He spat, 
and a fit  of coughing shook him. 
     `Ach! No!  '  he spluttered. `You try to  choke poor Smjagol.  Dust and 
ashes, he can't eat that. He must  starve. But  Smjagol  doesn't  mind. Nice 
hobbits! Smjagol has promised.  He will  starve. He can't eat hobbits' food. 
He will starve. Poor thin Smjagol! ' 
     `I'm sorry,' said Frodo; `but I can't help  you, I'm  afraid.  I  think  
this  food would do you good, if  you would try. But perhaps  you can't even  
try, not yet anyway.' 
     The hobbits munched their  lembas in silence. Sam thought that it tasted 
far better, somehow, than  it had for a  good while: Gollum's behaviour  had 
made him  attend to its flavour  again.  But  he did  not  feel comfortable. 
Gollum  watched every morsel from  hand to mouth, like an expectant dog by a  
diner's  chair. Only  when they had finished and were preparing to rest, was 
he apparently convinced that they had no hidden dainties that he could share 
in. Then he went and sat by himself a few paces away and whimpered a little. 

####-     'Look here!  ' Sam whispered to Frodo, not too softly: he did not really 
care whether Gollum heard him or  not. `We've got to get some sleep; but not 
both together with that hungry villain nigh, promise or no  promise. Smjagol 
or Gollum,  he won't change  his habits in a hurry, I'll warrant. You  go to 
sleep, Mr. Frodo, and I'll call you when I can't keep my eyelids propped up. 
Turn and about, same as before, while he's loose.' 
     'Perhaps you're right, Sam,'  said Frodo  speaking openly. 'There is  a 
change  in him, but  just what kind of a change  and  how deep, I'm not sure 
yet.  Seriously though,  I  don't think  there is any  need  for fear --  at 
present.  Still watch if you wish.  Give me about  two hours, not more,  and 
then call me.' 
     So  tired was Frodo that his head  fell forward  on his  breast  and he 
slept. almost as soon as he had spoken the words. Gollum seemed no longer to 
have any fears. He curled  up and  went quickly to sleep, quite unconcerned. 
Presently his breath was hissing softly through his clenched  teeth,  hut he 
lay still as stone.  After a while, fearing that he would  drop off himself, 
if he sat listening  to his two companions breathing, Sam  got up and gently 
prodded  Gollum.  His  hands  uncurled  and  twitched, but he made  no other 
movement.  Sam bent  down and said  fissh close to his ear, but there was  no 
response, not even a catch in Gollum's breathing. 
     Sam scratched his head. `Must really be asleep,' he muttered. `And if I 
was  like Gollum,  he wouldn't  wake up  never  aga in.'  He  restrained  the 
thoughts of his sword and the rope that sprang to his mind, and went and sat 
down by his master. 
     When he woke up the sky above was dim, not lighter but darker than when 
they had breakfasted. Sam leapt to his feet. Not least from  his own feeling 
of  vigour and hunger, he suddenly understood that he had slept the daylight  
away,  nine hours at least. Frodo was still fast asleep, lying now stretched 
on  his  side. Gollum  was  not to be seen. Various  reproachful  names  for  
himself  came  to  Sam's  mind,  drawn  from  the  Gaffer's  large  paternal 
word-hoard; then  it  also occurred to him that his  master had been  right:  
there  had  for the present been nothing  to guard against. They were at any 
rate both alive and unthrottled. 
     'Poor wretch! ' he said half remorsefully. 'Now I wonder where he's got 
to?  ' 
     'Not far, not far! ' said a  voice  above him. He looked up and saw the 
shape of Gollum's large head and ears against the evening sky. 

####-     'Here, what are  you doing? ' cried Sam, his suspicions coming back  as 
soon as he saw that shape. 
     `Smjagol is hungry,' said Gollum. `Be back soon.' 
     'Come back now!' shouted Sam. 'Hi! Come back!' But Gollum had vanished. 
     Frodo  woke  at  the sound of Sam's shout and sat up, rubbing his eyes. 
'Hullo!' he said. 'Anything wrong? What's the time?' 
     'I dunno,' said Sam. 'After sundown, I  reckon. And he's gone off. Says 
he's hungry.' 
     `Don't worry!'  said Frodo. `There's  no help  for it. But  he'll  come 
back, you'll see. The promise will hold  yet a while. And he won't leave his 
Precious, anyway.' 
     Frodo made  light of it when he learned that they had slept soundly for 
hours with Gollum, and a very  hungry Gollum too, loose beside  them. `Don't  
think of any of your  Gaffer's hard names,' he said. 'You were worn out, and 
it has  turned out well: we are now  both rested. And  we  have a hard  road 
ahead, the worst road of all.' 
     `About the  food,' said Sam. 'How long's it going to take us to do this 
job? And  when it's done, what are we  going to do then? This waybread keeps 
you on  your legs in a wonderful way, though  it doesn't satisfy the innards 
proper, as you might say: not to my feeling anyhow, meaning no disrespect to 
them  as made it.  But you have  to eat some of it every day, and it doesn't  
grow. I  reckon we've got  enough to last, say,  three weeks or so, and that 
with a tight belt and a light tooth, mind you. We've been a bit free with it 
so far.' 
     `I  don't know how long we shall take to -- to finish,' said Frodo. `We 
were miserably delayed  in the hills. But Samwise Gamgee,  my dear hobbit  -- 
indeed, Sam my dearest  hobbit, friend of friends  --  I do not think we need 
give thought  to what comes after that. To  do the job as you put it  -- what 
hope is  there that we ever shall? And if we do, who knows what will come of 
that? If the One goes into the Fire, and we are at hand? I ask you, Sam, are 
we ever likely to need bread again? I think not. If  we can nurse  our limbs 
to bring  us to Mount Doom, that is  all we can do. More than I can, I begin 
to feel.' 
     Sam nodded silently. He took his master's hand and bent over it. He did 
not kiss it,  though his  tears fell on it. Then  he turned away,  drew  his 
sleeve  over his nose, and got up, a nd stamped about, trying to whistle, and 
saying between the efforts: 'Where's that dratted creature?' 

####-     It was actually not long before Gollum returned; but he came so quietly 
that they did not hear him till  he stood before them. His  fingers and face 
were soiled with black mud. He was still chewing  and slavering. What he was 
chewing, they did not ask or like to think. 
     'Worms  or beetles or something slimy out of holes,' thought Sam. 'Brr! 
The nasty creature; the poor wretch! ' 
     Gollum  said  nothing to  them,  until he had  drunk deeply  and washed 
himself in the  stream. Then he  came up to them, licking  his lips. 'Better 
now,' he said. `Are we  rested? Ready to  go  on? Nice  hobbits,  they sleep 
beautifully. Trust Smjagol now? Very, very good.' 
     The next stage of their journey was much the same as the  last. As they 
went  on the gully became ever shallower and  the slope  of its  floor  more 
gradual. Its  bottom  was less stony and  more earthy, and slowly its  sides 
dwindled to mere ba nks. It began  to wind and wander. That night drew to its 
end, but clouds were now over moon and star, and they  knew of the coming of 
day only by the slow spreading of the thin grey light. 
     In  a chill hour they came  to the end of  the water-course. The  banks 
became moss-grown mounds. Over the  last shelf of rotting  stone the  stream 
gurgled  and fell  down into a brown bog and was lost. Dry  reeds hissed and  
rattled though they could feel no wind. 
     On either  side and in front wide  fens and  m ires now lay,  stretching 
away southward and eastward into the dim half-light. Mists curled and smoked 
from dark and noisome pools. The reek of  them hung  stifling  in the  still 
air.  Far away, now almost  due  south, the mountain-walls of Mordor loomed, 
like a black bar of rugged clouds floating above a dangerous fog-bound sea. 
     The hobbits were now wholly in the hands of  Gollum. They did now know,  
and  could not guess in that misty light. that they  were in  fact only just  
within the northern  borders of the marshes. the  main expanse of  which lay 
south of them. They could, if they had known the lands, with some delay have 
retraced their steps  a little, and then turning east have come  round  over  
hard roads  to the bare plain of Dagorlad: the field of  the  ancient battle 
before  the gates of Mordor. Not that there was great hope in such a course. 
On that stony  plain  there was no cover,  and across it ran the highways of 
the Orcs and the soldiers of the Enemy. Not even the cloaks of  Lurien would 
have concealed them there. 
     'How do we shape our course now, Smjagol? ' asked Frodo. 'Must we cross 
these evil-smelling fens?  ' 

####-     `No need,  no  need at all,' said Gollum. 'Not if hobbits want to reach 
the dark mountains and go to see Him very quick.  Back a little, and round a  
little' -- his skinny arm waved north and  east -- `and you can come on hard 
cold roads to the  very gates of  His country.  Lots  of  His people will be 
there looking out for guests, very pleased to  take them straight  to Him, O 
yes. His Eye watches  that way all the  time. It caught  Smjagol there, long 
ago.' Gollum shuddered. 'But Smjagol has used his eyes since then, yes, yes:  
I've used  eyes  and feet  and  nose since then. l  know  other  ways.  More 
difficult, not so quick; but  better, if  we  don't want  Him to see. Follow 
Smjagol! He can take you through  the marshes, through the mists. nice thick 
mists. Follow  Smjagol very carefully, and you  may go  a long  way. quite a  
long way, before He catches you, yes perhaps. ' 
     It was already day, a windless and sullen morning, and the  marsh-reeks 
lay in heavy banks. No sun pierced the low  clouded  sky, and Gollum  seemed 
anxious to continue the journey at once. So after a brief  rest they set out 
again and were soon lost in a shadowy silent world, cut off from all view of 
the lands about, either the hills  that they  had left or the mountains that 
they sought. They went slowly in single file: Gollum, Sam, Frodo. 
     Frodo seemed the most weary of the three, and slow though they went. he 
often lagged. The hobbits soon  found that what had looked like one vast fen  
was  really  an  endless  network  of  pools,  and soft  mires. and  winding 
half-strangled water-courses.  Among  these  a cunning eye  and  foot  could 
thread  a wandering path. Gollum  certainly had that cunning, and needed all  
of it. His head on its long  neck  was ever turning this way and that, while 
he sniffed and muttered all the time to himself. Sometimes he would  hold up 
his  hand and halt  them, while he went forward a little, crouching, testing 
the ground with fingers or toes. or merely listening with one ear pressed to 
the earth. 
     It was dreary and wearisome. Cold clammy winter still held sway in this 
forsaken country. The only green was the scum  of  livid weed  on  the  dark  
greasy surfaces of the sullen waters. Dead grasses  and rotting reeds loomed 
up in the mists like ragged shadows of long-forgotten summers.  
     As the day wore on the light increased a little, and the mists  lifted, 
growing thinner and more  transparent. Far above  the rot and vapours of the 
world the Sun was riding high and golden now in a serene country with floors 
of dazzling  foam, but  only a  passing  ghost of her could they  see below, 
bleared,  pale, giving  no  colour  and  no  warmth. But even at this  faint 

####-reminder of  her  presence  Gollum  scowled and  flinched. He  halted  their 
journey,  and they  rested,  squatting  like  little hunted animals, in  the 
borders  of  a  great  brown  reed-thicket. There was  a   deep silence, only 
scraped on its surfaces by the faint quiver of empty seed-plumes, and broken  
grass-blades trembling in small air -movements that they could not feel. 
     'Not a bird! ' said Sam mournfully. 
     `No, no birds,' said  Gollum.  `Nice birds! ' He licked his  teeth. 'No 
birds  here.  There  are snakeses,  wormses,  things in the  pools. Lots  of 
things,  lots  of nasty things. No birds,' he ended sadly. Sam looked at him 
with distaste. 
     So passed  the  third day  of  their  journey with  Gollum.  Before the 
shadows of evening were long in happier lands, they went on again, always on 
and  on with only brief halts. These  they made not  so much for rest as  to 
help Gollum;  for now  even he had to go forward with great care, and he was 
sometimes at a loss for a while. They had come to the very midst of the Dead 
Marshes, and it was dark. 
     They  walked   slowly,  stooping,  keeping  close  in  line,  following 
attentively  every move that  Gollum made.  The fens grew more  wet, opening 
into  wide stagnant meres, among which it grew  more and more  difficult  to 
find the firmer places where feet could tread without sinking  into gurgling 
mud. The travellers were  light, or maybe none of them would ever have found 
a way through. 
     Presently it  grew  altogether  dark: the air  itself seemed  black and 
heavy to breathe. When lights appeared Sam  rubbed his eyes: he  thought his 
head was going  queer. He first  saw one with the corner of his  left eye, a  
wisp  of pale sheen that faded away;  but  others appeared soon  after: some 
like dimly shining smoke,  some  like  misty flames flickering  slowly above 
unseen candles; here and there they twisted like ghostly sheets  unfurled by 
hidden hands. But neither of his companions spoke a word. 
     At  last  Sam could bear it  no longer. `What's all this, Gollum? '  he 
said in a whisper. `These lights? They're all  round us now. Are we trapped?  
Who are they? ' 
     Gollum looked up. A  dark water was before him, and he was crawling  on 
the ground, this way and that, doubtful of the way. 'Yes, they are all round 
us,' he whispered. 'The tricksy lights. Candles  of corpses, yes, yes. Don't 
you heed them! Don't look! Don't follow them! Where's the master? ' 
     Sam looked back and found that Frodo had lagged again. He could not see 

####-him. He went some paces back into the darkness,  not daring to move far,  or  
to call in more than a  hoarse  whisper. Suddenly he stumbled against Frodo, 
who was standing lost in thought, looking at the pale lights. His hands hung 
stiff at his sides; water and slime were dripping from them. 
     `Come,  Mr. Frodo!  ' said Sam.  'Don't look at  them!  Gollum says  we 
mustn't. Let's keep up with him and get out of this cursed place as quick as 
we can -- if we can!  ' 
     `All right,' said Frodo,  as if returning out of a dream.  'I'm coming. 
Go on!  ' 
     Hurrying forward again, Sam tripped, catching his foot in some old root 
or  tussock.  He fell  and came heavily on  his hands, which  sank deep into 
sticky ooze,  so that his  fa ce was brought close to the surface of the dark 
mere. There was a faint hiss, a noisome smell went up, the  lights flickered 
and danced and swirled.  For a moment the water  below him  looked like some 
window, glazed with grimy glass, through which he was  peering. Wrenching 
his 
hands out  of the  bog, he sprang  back  with a cry. 'There are dead things,  
dead faces in the water,' he said with horror. 'Dead faces! ' 
     Gollum laughed. 'The Dead Marshes,  yes, yes: that is their names,'  he 
cackled. `You should not look in when the candles are lit.' 
     `Who are they? What are they? ' asked Sam shuddering, turning to Frodo, 
who was now behind him. 
     'I don't know,' said Frodo in a dreamlike voice. 'But I have seen  them 
too. In the pools when the candles were lit. They lie in all the pools, pale 
faces, deep deep under the dark water. I saw  them: grim faces and evil, and 
noble faces and sad. Many faces  proud and fair, and weeds  in their  silver  
hair.  But all foul, all rotting, all  dead. A fell light is in them.' Frodo 
hid  his eyes in his hands.  'I  know not who they are; but I thought I  saw 
there Men and Elves, and Orcs beside them.' 
     `Yes, yes,' said Gollum. `All dead, all rotten. Elves and Men and Orcs.  
The  Dead  Marshes. There was a great battle long ago, yes, so they told him 
when Smjagol was young, when I was young  before the Precious came. It was 
a 
great  battle. Tall  Men with long swords, and terrible  Elves,  and  Orcses 
shrieking. They fought on  the plain for days and months at the Black Gates.  
But  the  Marshes have grown since  then,  swallowed up the  graves;  always 
creeping, creeping.' 

####-     'But that is an age and more ago,'  said Sam. 'The Dead can't be really 
there! Is it some devilry hatched in the Dark Land? ' 
     `Who knows?  Smjagol doesn't  know,'  answered Gollum. 'You cannot reach 
them,  you  cannot touch them. We tried once, .yes,  precious. I tried once; 
but you cannot reach them. Only  shapes  to see, perhaps, not  to  touch. No 
precious! All dead.' 
     Sam  looked darkly at him and shuddered again, thinking that he guessed 
why Smjagol  had tried to touch them. `Well, I don't  want to  see them,' he 
said. 'Never again! Can't we get on and get away? ' 
     `Yes,  yes,' said  Gollum. `But slowly, very slowly. Very carefully! Or 
hobbits go  down to  join the Dead  ones  and light  little  candles. Follow 
Smjagol! Don't look at lights! ' 
     He  crawled away to the  right, seeking for a path round the mere. They  
came close behind, stooping, often using their hands even as he  did. 'Three 
precious  little Gollums in a row we shall be, if this goes on much longer,' 
thought Sam. 
     At last they came to the  end of the black  mere, and  they crossed it, 
perilously,  crawling  or hopping  from  one  treacherous island tussock  to 
another. Often they floundered, stepping or  falling hands-first into waters 
as  noisome as a cesspool,  till  they were slimed and  fouled almost  up to 
their necks and stank in one another's nostrils. 
     It was late  in the night  when at  length  they reached  firmer ground 
again.  Gollum hissed  and whispered to himself, but it appeared that he was 
pleased: in some mysterious way,  by some blended  sense of feel, and smell, 
and uncanny memory for shapes  in  the dark, he seemed to know just where he 
was again, and to be sure of his road ahead. 
     `Now on we  go!  ' he  said.  'Nice  hobbits! Brave  hobbits! Very very 
weary, of course; so we are, my precious, all of us. But we must take master  
away from the wicked lights, yes, yes, we must.' With these words he started 
off again, almost  at a trot,  down what  appeared to be a long lane between 
high reeds, and they  stumbled after him  as quickly as they could. But in a  
little while he stopped suddenly and sniffed the  air doubtfully, hissing as 
if he was troubled or displeased again. 
     'What is it? ' growled Sam, misinterpreting the signs. `What's the need 
to  sniff? The stink nearly knocks me down with my nose held. You stink, and 
master stinks; the whole place stinks.' 
     'Yes, yes, and Sam stinks! ' answered Gollum. `Poor Smjagol  smells it, 

####-but good  Smjagol bears  it. Helps nice master. But  that's no  matter.  The 
air's moving, change is coming. Smjagol wonders; he's not happy.' 
     He went on again, but his uneasiness grew, and  every  now and again he 
stood  up to his full height, craning his neck eastward and  southward.  For 
some  time the hobbits could not  hear  or feel what was troubling him. Then 
suddenly all  three  halted, stiffening and listening. To Frodo  and  Sam it 
seemed that  they  heard, far away, a  long  wailing cry, high and  thin and 
cruel.  They shivered. At  the same  moment the stirring  of the  air became 
perceptible to them; and it grew  very cold. As they  stood  straining their 
ears,  they heard a noise  like a  wind coming  in  the distance.  The misty 
lights wavered, dimmed, and went out. 
     Gollum would not move. He stood shaking and gibbering to himself, until 
with a rush the wind came upon  them, hissing and snarling over the marshes.  
The  night became less  dark,  light enough  for them to  see, or  half see, 
shapeless drifts of fog,  curling and  twisting  as it rolled over them  and 
passed them. Looking up they saw the clouds breaking and shredding; and then 
high in the south the moon glimmered out, riding in the flying wrack. 
     For a moment the sight of  it  gladdened the hearts of the hobbits; but 
Gollum cowered down, muttering curses on the White Face. Then Frodo and  
Sam 
staring at  the sky, breathing deeply of the  fresher  air, saw  it come:  a  
small  cloud  flying from the  accursed hills; a  black  shadow loosed  from 
Mordor;  a vast shape winged and ominous. It  scudded  across the  moon, and 
with a deadly cry went away westward, outrunning the wind in its fell speed. 
     They fell  forward, grovelling  heedlessly on the cold earth.  But  the 
shadow of horror wheeled and returned, passing  lower now, right above them, 
sweeping the  fen-reek with its ghastly wings. And then  it was gone, flying 
back to Mordor with the speed of the wrath of Sauron; and behind it the wind 
roared away, leaving the  Dead Marshes bare and bleak. The naked  waste,  as 
far  as the eye could pierce, even to the  distant  menace of the mountains,  
was dappled with the fitful moonlight. 
     Frodo and Sam got up, rubbing their eyes, like children wakened from an 
evil dream to find the familiar  night still over the world. But Gollum  lay 
on the ground as if  he had been stunned. They  roused him  with difficulty, 
and for some time  he  would not  lift  his  face, but knelt forward on  his 
elbows, covering the back of his head with his large flat hands.  
     `Wraiths!'  he wailed. `Wraiths on wings! The Precious is their master. 

####-They see everything, everything. Nothing can hide from them. Curse the White 
Face! And they tell  H im everything. He sees, He knows. Ach, gollum, gollum, 
gollum!  '  It was not until  the moon had  sunk, westering  far  beyond Tol 
Brandir, that he would get up or make a move. 
     From that time on Sam thought that he  sensed a change in Gollum again.  
He was more  fawning and would-be  friendly; but Sam  surprised some strange 
looks  in his eyes at times, especially towards Frodo; and he went back more 
and  more  into his  old  manner  of  speaking. And Sam  had another growing 
anxiety. Frodo seemed to be weary, weary to the point of exhaustion. He said 
nothing.  indeed he  hardly  spoke  at all; and  he did not complain, but he 
walked like one who carries a load, the  weight of which is ever increasing; 
and he dragged along, slower and slower, so that Sam had often to beg Gollum 
to wait and not to leave their master behind. 
     In fact with every step towards the gates of Mordor Frodo felt the Ring 
on  its chain about his neck grow  more burdensome.  He was now beginning to 
feel  it as an actual  weight  dragging him earthwards.  But far more he was 
troubled by the Eye: so he called it to  himself. It was that more  than the 
drag of the Ring that made him cower  and stoop as he walked. The Eye:  that 
horrible  growing sense of a  hostile will  that  strove with great power to 
pierce all shadows of  cloud, and earth, and  flesh, and to see you: to  pin 
you under its deadly gaze, naked, immovable. So thin, so frail and thin, the 
veils  were become  that still warded  it  off. Frodo  knew just  where  the 
present habitation and heart of that will now was: as certainly as a man can 
tell the  direction of the sun with his eyes shut. He was facing it, and its 
potency beat upon his brow.  
     Gollum probably felt something of the same sort.  But  what went  on in 
his wretched heart between the pressure of the Eye, and the lust of the Ring 
that was so near, and his grovelling  promise made half in the fear of  cold 
iron, the hobbits did not guess: Frodo gave no thought to it. Sam's mind was 
occupied  mostly  with his  master hardly  noticing the  dark cloud that had 
fallen on his own  heart. He put Frodo  in front  of  him  now, and  kept  a  
watchful eye on every movement of  his,  supporting him if  he stumbled, and 
trying to encourage him with clumsy words.  
     When day came at last the hobbits were surprised to see how much closer 
the ominous mountains had already drawn. The air was now clearer and colder, 
and though still far off, the walls of Mordor were no longer a cloudy menace 
on the edge of sight, but as  gr im black towers they frowned across a dismal 

####-waste. The marshes were at an end, dying away into dead peats and wide flats 
of  dry cracked mud. The land ahead rose in long shallow  slopes, barren and 
pitiless, towards the desert that lay at Sauron's gate. 
     While the  grey light lasted,  they cowered under a  black  stone  like 
worms,  shrinking, lest the winged terror should pass  and spy them with its 
cruel eyes. The  remainder of that journey  was a shadow of growing  fear in  
which  memory could  find   nothing  to  rest upon.  For two more nights they 
struggled on through the weary pathless land. The air, as it seemed to them, 
grew harsh, and filled  with  a  bitter  reek that caught their  breath  and 
parched their mouths.  
     At last,  on the  fifth morning since  they took the road  with Gollum, 
they halted once  more. Before  them  dark in  the dawn the great  mountains 
reached up to roofs of smoke and cloud. Out from  their feet were flung huge 
buttresses  and  broken hills  that were now at the nearest  scarce a  dozen 
miles away. Frodo looked round  in horror. Dreadful as the Dead  Marshes had 
been, and  the  arid moors  of the  Noman-lands, more loathsome  far was the 
country that the  crawling day now  slowly  unveiled  to his shrinking eyes.  
Even to the  Mere  of Dead Faces some haggard phantom of  green spring 
would 
come; but here neither spring nor summer would ever come again. Here 
nothing 
lived,  not  even the  leprous growths that feed on rottenness. The  gasping 
pools were choked  with ash and crawling muds, sickly white and grey, as  if 
the mountains had vomited the filth of  their entrails upon the lands about. 
High  mounds of crushed and powdered rock, great cones of earth fire-blasted 
and  poison-stained, stood like an obscene graveyard in endless rows, slowly  
revealed in the reluctant light. 
     They  had come to  the desolation that lay  before Mordor:  the lasting 
monument to the dark labour of its slaves that should  endure when all their 
purposes were  made  void; a  land defiled,  diseased beyond  all healing -- 
unless the Great  Sea should enter in and  wash  it with oblivion.  `I  feel 
sick,' said Sam. Frodo did not speak. 
     For a while  they stood there, like men on the edge  of a  sleep  where 
nightmare lurks, holding it off, though they know that they can only come to 
morning  through the  shadows. The light broadened and hardened. The 
gasping 
pits and  poisonous mounds grew hideously clear.  The  sun  was up,  walking 

####-among clouds and long flags of smoke, but even the sunlight was defiled. The 
hobbits had no welcome for that light; unfriendly  it seemed, revealing them 
in their helplessness  --  little squeaking ghosts that  wandered among  the 
ash-heaps of the Dark Lord. 
     Too weary  to go  further  they sought for some place where they  could 
rest. For a while  they sat without speaking  under the shadow of a mound of 
slag; but foul fumes  leaked out of it, catching their  throats and  choking 
them. Gollum was the first to get up. Spluttering  and  cursing he rose, and 
without  a  word or  a glance at the hobbits  he crawled  away on all fours.  
Frodo and Sam crawled  after him, until  they came to a wide almost circular 
pit, high-banked upon the west. It was  cold and dead, and  a foul  sump  of 
oily many-coloured ooze lay at its bottom.  In  this evil hole they cowered, 
hoping in its shadow to escape the attention of the Eye. 
     The  day passed  slowly. A  great thirst troubled  them, but they drank  
only a few  drops from their bottles-last filled in  the gully, which now as 
they looked back in thought seemed to  them a place of peace and beauty. The 
hobbits  took it in turn to watch. At first, tired as they  were, neither of 
them could sleep at all; but as the sun far away was climbing down into slow 
moving cloud, Sam dozed. It was Frodo's turn to bc on  guard. He lay back on 
the slope of the pit, but that did not ease the sense  of burden that was on 
him. He looked  up at the  smoke-streaked sky and saw strange phantoms, dark 
riding shapes, and  faces  out of the past. He  lost count of time, hovering 
between sleep and waking, until forgetfulness came over him. 
     Suddenly Sam woke up thinking that he heard his master calling.  It was 
evening. Frodo could not have called, for he had fallen asleep, and had slid 
down nearly to the  bottom of  the pit. Gollum was by  him. For a moment Sam 
thought that he was trying to  rouse Frodo; then he saw that it was  not so. 
Gollum was talking to himself. Smjagol was holding a  debate with some other 
thought  that used the same voice but  made it squeak and hiss. A pale light 
and a green light alternated in his eyes as he spoke. 
     `Smjagol promised,' said the first thought. 
     `Yes,  yes, my precious,' came  the  answer, 'we promised: to  save our 
Precious, not to let Him have it -- never. But it's going to Him yes, nearer  
every step.  What's the hobbit going  to  do  with it,  we wonders,  yes  we 
wonders.' 
     `I don't know. I can't help it. Master's  got it. Smjagol  promised  to 
help the master.' 

####-     `Yes,  yes, to  help the master: the  master of the Precious. But if we 
was master, then we could help ourselfs, yes, and still keep promises.' 
     `But Smjagol said  he  would be very  very good.  Nice  hobbit! He took  
cruel rope off Smjagol's leg. He speaks nicely to me.' 
     'Very very good, eh, my precious? Let's be  good,  good as fish,  sweet  
one, but to ourselfs. Not hurt the nice hobbit, of course, no, no.' 
     `But the Precious holds the promise,' the voice of Smjagol objected. 
     `Then take it,' said  the other,  `and let's hold it ourselfs!  Then we 
shall be master, gollum! Make the other hobbit, the nasty suspicious hobbit, 
make him crawl, yes, gollum!' 
     `But not the nice hobbit? ' 
     `Oh no, not if it doesn't please us. Still he's a Baggins, my precious,  
yes,  a  Baggins.  A  Baggins  stole it. He  found it  and  he said nothing, 
nothing. We hates Bagginses.' 
     'No, not this Baggins.' 
     'Yes, every Baggins. All peoples  that  keep the Precious. We must have 
it!  ' 
     `But He'll see, He'll know. He'll take it from us! ' 
     'He sees.  He knows.  He  heard us make silly  promises   -- against His 
orders, yes. Must take it. The Wraiths are searching. Must take it.' 
     'Not for Him! ' 
     'No, sweet  one. See, my precious: if  we  has it, then we  can escape, 
even from Him, eh? Perhaps we grows very strong, stronger than Wraiths. Lord 
Smjagol? Gollum  the Great?  The Gollum! Eat fish every day,  three times  a 
day; fresh from the sea. Most Precious Gollum! Must have it. We wants it, we 
wants it, we wants it!  ' 
     'But there's two of them. They'll wake too quick and kill  us,'  whined 
Smjagol in a last effort. `Not now. Not yet.' 
     'We  wants  it! But'  -- and here there  was a  long  pause, as if a new 
thought had wakened.  `Not yet,  eh? Perhaps not. She might help. She might, 
yes.' 
     `No, no! Not that way! ' wailed Smjagol. 
     `Yes! We wants it! We wants it! ' 
     Each time that  the second thought spoke, Gollum's  long hand crept out 
slowly, pawing towards Frodo, and then was drawn back with a jerk as 
Smjagol 
spoke  again. Finally  both  arms,  with long fingers  flexed and twitching, 

####-clawed towards his neck. 
     Sam had lain  still, fascinated by this debate, but watching every move 
that Gollum made  from under  his half-closed eye-lids.  To  his simple mind 
ordinary  hunger, the desire to eat hobbits, had seemed the chief  danger in 
Gollum. He realized  now that it was not so: Gollum was feeling the terrible 
call  of the Ring. The Dark Lord was He, of course; but Sam wondered who 
She 
was. One of  the nasty friends the little wretch had made in his wanderings, 
he supposed.  Then he  forgot the  point, for things had  plainly  gone  far 
enough, and were getting dangerous. A great heaviness  was in all his limbs,  
but he roused  himself with an effort and sat up. Something warned him to be 
careful  and  not to reveal that he had overheard  the debate. He let  out a  
loud sigh and gave a huge yawn. 
     `What's the time? ' he said sleepily. 
     Gollum sent  out a  long  hiss  through his  teeth. He stood  up  for a  
moment, tense and menacing; and then he collapsed, falling forward on to all 
fours and  crawling  up the bank  of the pit. 'Nice hobbits! Nice Sam! '  he 
said. 'Sleepy heads,  yes, sleepy  heads! Leave good  Smjagol to watch!  But 
it's evening. Dusk is creeping. Time to go.' 
     `High time!  ' thought Sam. 'And time we parted,  too.' Yet it  crossed 
his mind to wonder if indeed Gollum was not now as dangerous turned loose as 
kept with them. 'Curse him! I wish he was choked!' he muttered.  He stumbled 
down the bank and roused his master. 
     Strangely enough, Frodo felt  refreshed. He had been dreaming. The dark  
shadow  had  passed,  and  a  fair  vision  had visited him in  this land of 
disease. Nothing remained  of it in his  memory, yet  because of it he  felt 
glad and lighter of heart. His burden was less heavy on him. Gollum welcomed 
him  with  dog-like delight. He  chuckled and  chattered,  cracking his long 
fingers, and pawing at Frodo's knees. Frodo smiled at him. 
     'Come! ' he said. `You  have guided us well and faithfully. This is the 
last stage. Bring us to the Gate, and then I will not ask you to go further. 
Bring us to  the Gate,  and you  may  go where you wish  --  only not to our 
enemies.' 
     'To  the Gate, eh?' Gollum squeaked, seeming surprised  and frightened. 
'To the Gate, master  says! Yes, he says so.  And  good Smjagol does what he 
asks, O yes. But when we gets closer, we'll  see perhaps we'll  see then. It 
won't look nice at all. O no! O no!' 

####-     'Go on with you! ' said Sam. `Let's get it over! ' 
     In the falling dusk they  scrambled out of the pit and slowly  threaded 
their way through the dead land. They had not gone far before they felt once 
more the fear that had fallen on them  when  the winged shape swept over the 
marshes.  They  halted, cowering  on the evil -smelling ground; but  they saw 
nothing  in the gloomy evening sky above, and soon the  menace  passed, high 
overhead, going maybe  on some swift errand  from Barad-dyr.  After  a while 
Gollum got up and crept forward again, muttering and shaking. 
     About an hour after midnight the fear fell on them a third time, but it 
now seemed more remote, as if it were passing far above the clouds,  rushing 
with terrible  speed  into  the  West.  Gollum,  however,  was helpless with 
terror, and was convinced that they were  being hunted, that  their approach 
was known. 
     `Three times! ' he  whimpered.  'Three times is  a threat. They feel us 
here, they feel the Precious. The Precious is their master. We cannot go any  
further this way, no. It's no use, no use! ' 
     Pleading and  kind words were no longer of any  avail. It was not until 
Frodo commanded him angrily and  laid a hand on  his sword-hilt  that Gollum 
would get up again. Then at last he rose with  a snarl, and went before them 
like a beaten dog. 
     So they stumbled on through  the weary end  of the night, and until the 
coming  of another  day of  fear they walked  in silence with  bowed  heads,  
seeing nothing, and hearing nothing but the wind hissing in their ears. 
 

####- 

Chapter 3. The Black Gate is Closed 

 
 
     Before  the  next day dawned  their journey to  Mordor  was  over.  The 
marshes and the desert  were  behind them. Before  them, darkling  against a  
pallid sky, the great mountains reared their threatening heads.  
     Upon the west of  Mordor marched the gloomy range  of  Ephel D®ath, the 
Mountains of Shadow, and upon the north  the broken peaks and barren  ridges 
of  Ered  Lithui, grey as ash. But as these ranges  approached one  another, 
being indeed  but  parts  of  one  great  wall about  the mournful plains of 
Lithlad and of Gorgoroth, and the bitter inland sea of N®rnen amidmost, they 
swung out  long arms northward;  and between  these arms  there  was a  deep 
defile.  This was Cirith Gorgor,  the Haunted Pass, the entrance to the land 
of the Enemy. High cliffs lowered upon either side, and thrust forward  from 
its mouth were two  sheer  hills, black -boned and bare. Upon  them stood the 
Teeth  of  Mordor, two towers strong and  tall. In days long past they  were 
built by the Men of Gondor in their pride and power,  after the overthrow of 
Sauron and his flight, lest he  should seek to return to his old realm.  But 
the strength of Gondor  failed, and men slept, and for long years the towers 
stood  empty.  Then Sauron returned. Now  the watch-towers, which  had fallen 
into  decay,  were  repaired, and  filled  with arms,  and  garrisoned  with 
ceaseless vigilance. Stony-faced they were, with  dark  window-holes staring 
north and east and west, and each window was full of sleepless eyes. 
     Across the  mouth of the pass, from cliff to cliff,  the Dark Lord  had 
built a rampart of stone. In it  there  was a single gate of  iron, and upon 
its battlement sentinels paced unceasingly. Beneath the hills on either side 
the  rock  was bored into  a hundred caves and maggot -holes: there a host of 
orcs lurked, ready at a signal to issue forth like black ants going to  war. 
None could pass the  Teeth of  Mordor and not feel  their bite, unless  they 
were summoned by Sauron, or knew the  secret  passwords  that would open 
the 
Morannon, the black gate of his land. 
     The two hobbits  gazed at the towers and the wall in despair. Even from 
a distance they could see  in the dim light the movement of the black guards 
upon the wall,  and  the patrols before the gate. They lay now peering  over  
the edge of a rocky hollow beneath the out-stretched shadow of the northmost  

####-buttress of Ephel D®ath. Winging  the heavy air in a straight flight a crow, 
maybe, would have flown  but a furlong from  their hiding-place to the  black 
summit  of  the  nearer  tower. A faint smoke curled  above it, as  if  fire 
smouldered in the hill beneath. 
     Day  came, and the fallow sun blinked over the lifeless  ridges of Ered 
Lithui.  Then su ddenly the cry of brazen-throated  trumpets was  heard: from 
the watch-towers they blared, and far away from hidden holds and outposts in 
the  hills  came  answering calls; and  further  still, remote but  deep and 
ominous, there echoed in  the hollow land  beyond the mighty horns  and drums 
of Barad-dyr. Another dreadful day of fear and toil had come to Mordor;  and 
the night-guards were  summoned to their dungeons and  deep  halls, and  the 
day-guards, evil-eyed and fell,  were marching to their posts. Steel gleamed 
dimly on the battlement. 
     `Well, here we are! ' said Sam. `Here's the Gate, and it looks to me as 
if that's about as far as we are ever going  to get. My word, but the Gaffer  
would have a thing or two to say, if he saw me now! Often said I'd come to a 
bad  end, if I didn't watch my step, he  did. But  now I don't suppose  I'll 
ever see  the  old fellow again. He'll miss his chance of  I told'ee so, Sam: 
more's the  pity. He could go on telling me as  long as he'd got breath,  if 
only I could see his old face again. But I'd have to get a wash first, or he 
wouldn't know me. 
     `I suppose it's no good asking "what way do we go now?" We  can't go no 
further -unless we want to ask the orcs for a lift.' 
     `No, no! ' said Gollum. `No use. We can't  go further. Smjagol  said so. 
He said: we'll go to the Gate, and then we'll see. And we do see. O yes.  my 
precious, we do see. Smjagol  knew  hobbits  could  not  go this way. O yes.  
Smjagol knew ' 
     'Then  what the plague  did you  bring  us here  for? '  said  Sam, not 
feeling in the mood to be just or reasonable. 
     `Master said so. Master says:  Bring  us to the  Gate. So  good Smjagol 
does so. Master said so, wise master.' 
     'I did,' said  Frodo. His face  was grim  and set. but resolute. He was 
filthy, haggard, and pinched with weariness,  but he cowered  no longer, and 
his eyes were clear. `I  said so, because  I purpose  to enter Mordor, and I 
know no other way. Therefore I shall go this  way. I do not ask anyone to go 
with me.' 
     `No, no,  master! ' wailed  Gollum; pawing at him, and seeming in great 

####-distress.  `No use  that way! No use! Don't take  the Precious to Him! He'll 
eat us all,  if He gets it,  eat all the world. Keep it, nice master, and be 
kind to Smjagol. Don't let  Him have  it. Or go away.  go to nice places, and 
give it back to little Smjagol. Yes, yes, master: give  it back, eh? Smjagol 
will  keep it  safe;  he will do  lots of good, especially to nice  hobbits.  
Hobbits go home. Don't go to the Gate! ' 
     'I am commanded  to go to the land of Mordor, and therefore I shall go,' 
said Frodo. 'If there is only one way, then I must take it. What comes after  
must come.' 
     Sam said nothing.  The look on Frodo's face was enough for him  he knew 
that words of his were useless. And after all he never had any real hope  in 
the affair from the beginning; but being a cheerful hobbit he had not needed 
hope, as  long as  despair could  be  postponed. Now they  were come to  the 
bitter end. But he had stuck to his master all the way; that was what he had 
chiefly come  for, and he would  still stick to him. His master would not go 
to Mordor alone. Sam would go with him-and at any rate they would get rid of 
Gollum. 
     Gollum, however, did not  intend to  be  got rid  of, yet. He knelt  a t 
Frodo's feet, wringing his hands and  squeaking. 'Not this way, master! ' he 
pleaded, 'There is another way. O  yes indeed there is. Another way. darker, 
more difficult to find, more secret. But  Smjagol knows it. Let Smjagol show 
you!  ' 
     'Another wa y!  ' said Frodo  doubtfully, looking down  at  Gollum  with 
searching eyes. 
     'Yess! Yess indeed! There was another  way. Smjagol found it. Let's  go 
and see if it's still there! ' 
     `You have not spoken of this before.' 
     `No.  Master did not ask.  Master did not say what he  meant  to do. He 
does not  tell poor  Smjagol. He says: Smjagol, take me to  the Gate  -- and 
then good bye! Smjagol can run away and  be good. But now he says: I purpose 
to enter Mordor this way.  So  Smjagol is very  afraid. He does not  want to 
lose  nice  master.  And he promised, master made  him promise,  to save the 
Precious. But master is going to take it to Him, straight to the Black Hand, 
if master will go this way. So Smjagol must save them both, and he thinks of 
another  way  that there was, once upon a  time.  Nice  master. Smjagol very 
good, always helps.' 
     Sam frowned. If he could have  bored holes in Gollum  with his eyes, he 

####-would have done. His  mind was full of doubt.  To all appearances Gollum was 
genuinely  distressed  and anxious to  help Frodo. But  Sam, remembering the 
overheard debate, found it hard  to believe that the long submerged  Smjagol  
had come out on top: that voice at any rate had not had the last word in the 
debate. Sam's  guess was that  the Smjagol and Gollum halves (or what in his 
own mind he called Slinker  and Stinker) had made  a  truce and a  temporary 
alliance: neither  wanted  the Enemy to get the Ring;  both  wished to  keep 
Frodo from capture, and under their  eye, as long as possible -- at any rate 
as long as Stinker still had  a  chance  of laying hands  on his 'Precious'. 
Whether there really was another way into Mordor Sam doubted. 
     `And it's a good thing neither half  of the old villain don't know what 
master means to do ,' he thought. `If he knew that Mr. Frodo is trying to put 
an end  to his Precious for good and all, there'd be trouble pretty quick, I 
bet.  Anyhow old Stinker  is so frightened  of the Enemy  --  and  he's under 
orders  of some kind from him, or was  -- that he'd give us away rather than 
be caught helping us; and rather than let his  Precious be melted, maybe. At 
least  that's my idea. And I hope  the master will  think it  out carefully. 
He's  as wise as any,  but he's soft -hearted, that's what he is. It's beyond 
any Gamgee to guess what he'll do next.' 
     Frodo did not answer  Gollum at once.  While these  doubts were passing 
through Sam's slow  but  shrewd  mind, he  stood gazing out towards the dark 
cliff of Cirith Gorgor. The hollow in which they had taken refuge was delved 
in the side of a  low  hill, at some  little height above  a long trenchlike 
valley that lay between it and the outer buttresses of the mountains. In the  
midst of the valley stood the black foundations of the western  watch-tower.  
By morning-light the roads that converged upon the  Gate of Mordor could 
now 
be clearly  seen,  pale  and  dusty; one  winding  back  northwards; another  
dwindling eastwards into the mists that clung about the feet of Ered Lithui; 
and  a  third that ran towards him. As  it bent sharply round  the tower, it 
entered a narrow defile and passed not far below the hollow where  he stood. 
Westward, to his  right, it turned, skirting the shoulders of the mountains,  
and  went off southwards into  the deep shadows that mantled all the western 
sides of Ephel D®ath; beyond his sight it journeyed on  into the narrow land 
between the mountains and the Great River. 
     As he gazed Frodo became aware that there was a great stir and movement 
on the plain. It seemed as if whole armies were on the march, though for the 

####-most part they were hidden by the reeks and fumes drifting from the fens and 
wastes beyond. But here and there he caught the gleam of spears and helmets;  
and over the levels beside  the roads horsemen could be seen  riding in many  
companies.  He  remembered his  vision from afar upon Amon Hen,  so few 
days 
before, though now it seemed many years ago. Then he knew that the hope that 
had for one wild  moment stirred in his heart was vain. The trumpets had not  
rung in challenge but in greeting. This was no assault upon the Dark Lord by 
the men of Gondor, risen like avenging ghosts from the graves of valour long 
passed away. These were Men  of  other  race, out  of  the  wide  Eastlands, 
gathering  to the summons of their Overlord; armies that had encamped before 
his  Gate by  night  and  now marched in to swell  his mounting power. As if 
suddenly made fully  aware of the  peril  of their  position, alone,  in the 
growing light of day, so near  to this  vast menace, Frodo quickly drew  his 
frail grey hood close upon his head, and stepped down into the dell. Then he 
turned to Gollum. 
     `Smjagol,' he said, `I will trust you once more. lndeed it seems that I 
must do so,  and that it is my fate to receive help from you. where  I least  
looked  for  it, and  your  fate to help me whom you long  pursued with evil 
purpose.  So far  you have deserved well  of me  and have kept your  promise 
truly. Truly, I say and mean,' he added with a glance at Sam, 'for twice now 
we have been in your  power, and  you have  done no harm to us. Nor have you  
tried to take  from  me what you once sought.  May the third time  prove the 
best! But I warn you, Smjagol, you are in danger.' 
     `Yes, yes,  master!  '  said Gollum. `Dreadful  danger! Smjagol's bones 
shake to think of it. but he doesn't run away. He must help nice master.' 
     'I  did not mean  the danger that we all  share,' said Frodo. 'I mean a  
danger to yourself alone. You swore a promise by what you call the Precious.  
Remember tha t! It will hold you to it; but it will seek a way to twist it to 
your own undoing. Already you are being twisted. You revealed yourself to me 
just  now, foolishly.  Give it back  to  Smjagol you  said. Do  not say that 
again! Do not let that thought grow in you! You will  never get it back. But 
the desire of it may betray you to a bitter end. You will never get it back. 
In  the last need, Smjagol, I should put  on the Precious; and the  Precious 
mastered you  long ago. If  I,  wearing  it, were to  command you, you would 
obey, even if it were to leap from a precipice  or to cast yourself into the 
fire. And such would be my command. So have a care, Smjagol!' 

####-     Sam looked at his  master with approval, but also with surprise:  there 
was a look in his face and a tone in his voice that he had not known before. 
It had  always been a notion  of his that the kindness of dear Mr. Frodo was 
of  such a high  degree that it  must imply a fair measure of  blindness. Of 
course, he  also  firmly held the incompatible belief that Mr. Frodo was the 
wisest person in the world (with the possible exception of Old Mr. Bilbo and 
of Gandalf). Gollum in  his  own  way,  and with  much  more excuse  as  his 
acquaintance was  much briefer, may have _made a  similar mistake, confusing 
kindness and blindness.  At any rate  this speech abashed and terrified him. 
He grovelled on the ground and could speak no clear words but nice master. 
     Frodo waited patiently for a while,  then he spoke again less  sternly. 
`Come now, Gollum  or Smjagol if  you wish, tell  me of this other way,  and 
show me,  if you can,  what hope  there is in  it,  enough to justify me  in 
turning aside from my plain path. I am in haste.' 
     But  Gollum  was in  a  pitiable state, and  Frodo's  threat  had quite 
unnerved  him. It was not easy to get any clear account out of him, amid his 
mumblings and squeakings, and the frequent interruptions in which he crawled 
on the floor and begged them both to be kind to `poor little Smjagol'. After  
a  while he grew a  little calmer, and Frodo gathered bit by bit that, if  a  
traveller followed the road  that turned west of Ephel D®ath,  he would come 
in  time to a  crossing in a circle of  dark trees. On the right a road went 
down to Osgiliath and the bridges of the Anduin; in the middle the road went 
on southwards.  
     `On,  on,  on,'  said Gollum. `We  never went that way, but they say it 
goes a  hundred leagues, until  you  can  see the Great Water that is  never  
still. There are lots of fishes there, and big birds eat fishes: nice birds:  
but we never  went there, alas no! we never had a chance. And further  still 
there are more  lands, they say, but the Yellow Face is very hot  there, and 
there are seldom any clouds, and the men are  fierce and have dark faces. We 
do not want to see that land.' 
     `No! ' said Frodo. `But do not wander from your road. What of the third 
turning?  ' 
     `O yes, O yes, there is a third way,' said Gollum. `That is the road to 
the  left.  At  once it begins to climb up,  up, winding  and climbing  back 
towards the tall shadows. When it turns round the black rock, you'll see it. 
suddenly you'll see it above you, and you'll want to hide.' 
     `See it, see it? What will you see? ' 

####-     `The  old fortress, very old, very horrible now. We used  to hear tales 
from the South, when Smjagol was young, long  ago. O yes. we  used  to  tell 
lots of  tales in the evening, sitting by the  banks  of the Great River, in 
the willow-lands, when the River was younger too, gollum, gollum.' He  began 
to weep and mutter. The hobbits waited patiently. 
     `Tales  out  of  the South,' Gollum went on again, `about  the tall Men 
with the shining eyes, and their houses like hills  of stone, and the silver  
crown of their King and his White Tree:  wonderful  tales.  They  built very 
tall towers,  and one they raised was silver -white,  and in it there  was  a  
stone like the Moon, and round it were great  white walls. O yes, there were 
many tales about the Tower of the Moon.' 
     `That would be Minas Ithil that Isildur the son of Elendil built ' said 
Frodo. `It was Isildur who cut off the finger of the Enemy.' 
     `Yes, He has only four  on the Black Hand,  but they are enough,'  said 
Gollum shuddering. 'And He hated Isildur's city.' 
     'What does he not  hate?  '  said Frodo. 'But what has the Tower of the 
Moon to do with us? ' 
     'Well, master, there  it  was and there it is: the  tall tower  and the 
white houses and the wall; but not nice now, not beautiful.  He conquered it  
long ago. It is a very terrible place  now. Travellers shiver  when they see 
it, they creep out of sight, they  avoid its shadow. But master will have to 
go that way. That is the  only other way, For the mountains are lower there, 
and the old road goes up and up, until it reaches  a dark  pass at  the top, 
and then it goes down,  down, again  --  to Gorgoroth.'  His voice sank  to a  
whisper and he shuddered. 
     `But how will  that help us?  ' asked  Sam. `Surely the Enemy knows all 
about his own mountains, and that road will be guarded as close as th is? The  
tower isn't empty, is it? ' 
     `O no, not empty!  ' whispered Gollum. `It seems empty, but it isn't, O 
no!  Very  dreadful things  live  there.  Orcs. yes always  Orcs; but  worse 
things, worse things live  there too. The road climbs right under the shadow  
of the walls and passes the gate. Nothing moves on the  road that they don't  
know about. The things inside know: the Silent Watchers.' 
     `So  that's your advice  is it,' said Sam, 'that  we  should go another  
long march south, to find ourselves in the same fix or a worse one,  when we 
get there, if we ever do? ' 
     `No,   no  indeed,'  said  Gollum.  `Hobbits  must  see,  must  try  to 

####-understand. He does not expect attack that way. His Eye is all round, but it 
attends more to some places than to  others. He can't see everything  all at 
once, not yet. You see, He has conquered all the country west of the Shadowy 
Mountains down to  the River, and He holds the bridges now. He thinks no one 
can  come  to the  Moontower without fighting big battle at the  bridges, or  
getting lots of boats which they cannot hide and He will know about.' 
     'You seem to know a lot about what He's doing and  thinking,' said Sam. 
`Have you been talking to Him lately? Or just hobnobbing with Orcs? ' 
     'Not  nice  hobbit,  not sensible,'  said Gollum, giving Sam  an  angry 
glance  and turning to Frodo. 'Smjagol has talked  to Orcs,  yes  of course, 
before he met master, and to many peoples:  he has walked very far. And what 
he says now many peoples  are saying.  It's here  in the North that  the big 
danger is for Him, and for us. He will come  out of the Black  Gate one day,  
one  day soon. That is the only  way big armies can come. But away down west  
He is not afraid, and there are the Silent Watchers.' 
     `Just so! ' said Sam, not to be put off. `And so we are to walk up  and 
knock at  their gate  and ask if we're on the right road  for Mordor? Or are 
they too silent to answer? It's not. sense. We might as well do it here, and 
save ourselves a long tramp.' 
     'Don't make jokes about it,' hissed Gollum.  `It isn't funny, O no! Not 
amusing. It's  nut sense to try  and get into  Mordor at all. But  if master  
says I must go  or I will go, then he  must try some way. But he must not go 
to the terrible city, O no, of course not. That is where Smjagol helps. nice 
Smjagol. though no one tells him what it is  all about. Smjagol helps again. 
He found it. He knows it.' 
     'What did you find? ' asked Frodo. 
     Gollum crouched down and his voice  sank to a whisper again. 'A  little 
path leading up into the mountains: and then a stair, a narrow stair, O yes,  
very long and narrow. And then more stairs. And then'  -- his voice sank even 
lower  -- `a tunnel, a dark tunnel; and at last  a little cleft, and  a path 
high  above  the  main pass. It was that way  that  Smjagol got  out  of the 
darkness. But it was years ago. The path may  have vanished now; but perhaps 
not, perhaps not.' 
     `I  don't  like the sound of it at  all,' said Sam. `Sounds too easy at 
any rate in the telling. If that path is still there, it'll be guarded  too. 
Wasn't it guarded, Gollum? ' As he said this, he caught or fancied he caught  
a green gleam in Gollum's eye. Gollum muttered but did not reply. 

####-     'Is  it not guarded? ' asked Frodo sternly. `And did you escape out  of 
the  darkness,  Smjagol? Were you  not rather  permitted  to  depart upon an 
errand? That at  least is w hat Aragorn  thought,  who found you by the Dead 
Marshes some years ago.' 
     'It's  a lie! ' hissed Gollum, and an evil light came into  his eyes at 
the  naming of Aragorn. `He lied on me, yes he did. I did  escape, all by my 
poor  self.  Indeed I was told to seek for the Precious; and I have searched 
and searched, of course I have. But not for the  Black One. The Precious was 
ours, it was mine I tell you. I did escape.' 
     Frodo felt a  strange certainty that in this matter Gollum was for once 
not so far from the truth as might be suspected; that he had somehow found a 
way out of Mordor, and at least believed that it was by his own cunning. For  
one thing,  he noted  that Gollum used  I, and that  seemed usually to be  a  
sign, on its rare appearances. that some remnants of old truth and sincerity 
were  for  the moment on top. But even  if Gollum  could  be trusted on this 
point, Frodo did not forget the wiles  of the  Enemy. The 'escape' may  have  
been allowed  or arranged, and well known in the Dark Tower. And in any case 
Gollum was plainly keeping a good deal back. 
     'I ask you again,' he said: `is not this secret way guarded? ' 
     But the name of Aragorn had put Gollum into a sullen  mood. He had  all 
the injured air of a liar suspected when for once  he has told the truth. or  
part of it. He did not answer. 
     'Is it not guarded? ' Frodo repeated. 
     `Yes, yes,  perhaps.  No safe places  in  this  country,'  said  Gollum 
sulkily.  'No safe  places. But  master must try it or  go home.  . No other  
way.' They could not get him to say more. The name of the perilous place and 
the high pass he could not tell, or would not. 
     Its  name was Cirith Ungol, a name of dreadful  rumour.  Aragorn  could  
perhaps have told them that name  and its  significance: Gandalf  would have 
warned  them. But they  were  alone, and Aragorn was  far away, and  Gandalf 
stood amid the ruin of Isengard and strove with Saruman, delayed by treason. 
Yet even  as he spoke his last words to Saruman, and the palantnr crashed in 
fire upon the steps of Orthanc. his thought was ever upon Frodo and Samwise, 
over the long leagues his mind sought for them in hope and pity. 
     Maybe Frodo  felt  it,  not knowing it, as he  had upon Amon  Hen, even 
though he believed that Gandalf was  gone, gone  for ever into the shadow in 
Moria far  away. He  sat upon the ground for a long while, silent, his  head 

####-bowed, striving  to recall  all that Gandalf had  said to him. But  for this 
choice he could recall no counsel. Indeed Gandalf's guidance had  been taken 
from them too  soon, too  soon, while the Dark Land was still very far away. 
How they should enter it at the last  Gandalf had not said. Perhaps he could 
not say. Into the stronghold of  the Enemy in the North, into Dol Guldur, he 
had  once  ventured.  But  into  Mordor,  to  the Mountain  of  Fire and  to 
Barad-dyr, since the Dark Lord  rose in power again, had  he ever   journeyed 
there?  Frodo did not think  so. And here he was  a little halfling from the 
Shire, a simple hobbit of the quiet countryside expected to find a way where 
the  great ones could  not go, or dared not go. It was an evil  fate. But he 
had  taken it   on himself in his  own sitting-room in the far-off spring  of 
another  year,  so remote now that it was like a chapter  in a story  of the 
world's  youth, when the Trees  of Silver and Gold were still in bloom. This 
was  an evil choice. Which way should  he choose? And if both  led to terror  
and death, what good lay in choice?  
     The day drew on. A deep silence fell upon the little  grey hollow where 
they lay,  so  near to the borders of the land of fear: a silence that could 
be felt, as if it  were a  thick veil that cut  them off from all the  world 
about them. Above them was a dome  of pale sky  barred  with fleeting smoke, 
but it seemed high and far away. as if seen through great deeps of air heavy 
with brooding thought. 
     Not even an eagle  poised  against the sun would have marked the hobbits 
sitting there, under  the weight of doom, silent, µ not moving, shrouded  in 
their  thin  grey  cloaks. For a moment he  might  have  paused  to consider  
Gollum,  a  tiny  figure sprawling  on  the ground:  there  perhaps  lay the 
famished skeleton of some child of Men, its ragged garment still clinging to  
it, its long arms and legs almost bone -white and bone-thin: no flesh worth a  
peck. 
     Frodo's head  was bowed over his knees, but Sam leaned back, with hands 
behind  his head, staring  out of his hood at the empty sky.  At least for a  
long while it was empty. Then presently Sam thought he saw a  dark bird-like 
figure wheel into the circle of his  sight, and hover, and  then wheel  away 
again.  Two more followed,  and then a fourth. They were very  small to look 
at,  yet  he knew,  somehow, that  they  were huge,  with a  vast stretch of 
pinion,  flying  at a great height.  He covered his eyes and  bent  forward, 
cowering. The same warning fear was on him as he had felt in the presence of 
the Black Riders, the helpless horror that had come with the cry in the wind 

####-and the shadow on the moon, though now it was not so crushing or compelling: 
the menace  was  more  remote.  But menace  it was. Frodo  felt it  too. His 
thought was broken. He stirred and shivered, but he did not look up.  Gollum 
huddled  himself together like a cornered spider. The winged shapes wheeled, 
and stooped swiftly down, speeding back to Mordor. 
     Sam took a deep breath. `The Riders are a bout again, up in the air,' he 
said in a hoarse whisper. 'I saw them. Do you think they  could see us? They 
were very  high up. And if  they are Black Riders same as  before, then they 
can't see much by daylight, can they?  ' 
     'No, perhaps not,' said Frodo.  `But their steeds  could see. And these 
winged creatures that they ride on now, they can probably  see more than any 
other  creature.  They are like great  carrion birds. They  are  looking for  
something: the Enemy is on the watch, I fear.' 
     The feeling of dread passed, but the enfolding  silence was broken. For  
some  time  they had been cut  off  from  the  world, as if  in an invisible 
island; now they were laid bare again, peril had returned.  But  still Frodo 
did not  speak to Gollum or make h is choice. His eyes were closed, as if  he 
were dreaming, or looking  inward into his  heart  and memory.  At  last  he 
stirred  and  stood up,  and  it seemed that  he was  about to  speak and to 
decide. But `hark!' he said. `What is that?' 
     A new  fear  was upon  them. They heard singing and hoarse shouting. At 
first it seemed a long way off,  but it drew  nearer:  it was coming towards 
them. It leaped into all their minds that the Black Wings had spied them and 
had sent armed soldiers to seize  them: no speed seemed too great  for these 
terrible servants of Sauron.  They  crouched, listening.  The voices and the 
clink  of weapons and harness were very close.  Frodo and Sam loosened their 
small swords in their sheaths. Flight was impossible. 
     Gollum  rose slowly and crawled insect-like to the  lip of  the hollow. 
Very cautiously he raised himself inch by inch,  until he could peer over it 
between  two  broken points of stone. He remained there without  moving  for  
some time, making no sound.  Presen tly the voices began to recede again, and 
then they slowly faded away. Far off  a  horn  blew on  the ramparts of  the 
Morannon. Then quietly Gollum drew back and slipped down into the hollow.  
     'More  Men  going to Mordor,' he said in a low  voice. `Dark faces.  We 
have not seen Men like  these before, no, Smjagol has not.  They are fierce. 
They have  black  eyes, and long  black hair, and gold rings in  their ears;  
yes, lots  of beautiful gold. And  some have  red paint on their cheeks, and 

####-red cloaks;  and their  flags are red, and the tips of their spears; and they 
have round shields,  yellow and black with big  spikes. Not nice; very cruel 
wicked Men they look. Almost as bad as Orcs, and much bigger. Smjagol 
thinks 
they have come out of the South beyond the Great River's end:  they came  up 
that  road. They have passed  on  to the  Black Gate; but  more may  follow.  
Always  more  people  coming  to Mordor.  One  day  all the peoples  will be 
inside.' 
     `Were there any oliphaunts?' asked  Sam,  forgetting his  fear  in  his 
eagerness for news of strange places.  
     `No, no oliphaunts. What are oliphaunts? ' said Gollum. 
     Sam stood up, putting his hands  behind his back (as he always did when  
'speaking poetry'), and began: 
     Grey as a mouse, 
     Big as a house. 
     Nose like a snake, 
     I make the earth shake, 
     As I tramp through the grass; 
     Trees crack as I pass. 
     With horns in my mouth  
     I walk in the South, 
     Flapping big ears. 
     Beyond count of years 
     I stump round and round, 
     Never lie on the ground, 
     Not even to die. 
     Oliphaunt am I, 
     Biggest of all, 
     Huge, old, and tall. 
     If ever you'd met me 
     You wouldn't forget me. 
     If you never do, 
     You won't think I'm true; 
     But old O liphaunt am I, 
     And I never lie. 
     'That,'  said Sam, when he  had finished  reciting, `that's a rhyme  we 
have in the Shire. Nonsense maybe, and maybe not. But we have our tales too, 

####-and news out of the South, you know.  In the old days hobbits used  to go on 
their travels now and again. Not that many ever came back,  and not that all 
they said  was believed: news from Bree,  and not sure  as Shiretalk , as the 
sayings  go. But I've heard tales of the big folk down away in the Sunlands.  
Swertings we call 'em in our tales;  and they ride on oliphaunts, 'tis said, 
when they fight. They put houses and towers  on  the oliphauntses backs  and 
all,  and  the oliphaunts throw rocks and trees at one another. So  when you  
said  "Men out of the  South, all  in red and gold;" I said  "were there any 
oliphaunts? " For if there was, I was going to  take a look, risk or no. But 
now I don't suppose I'll ever see  an oliphaunt. Maybe there ain't no such a  
beast.' He sighed. 
     `No, no oliphaunts,' said Gollum again.   'Smjagol has not heard of them. 
He does not want to see them. He does not want  them to be. Smjagol wants to 
go away from here and hide somewhere safer. Smjagol wants master to go. 
Nice 
master, won't he come with Smjagol? ' 
     Frodo stood up. He had laughed in the midst  of  all his cares when Sam 
trotted out the old fireside rhyme  of Oliphaunt, and the laugh had released 
him from hesitation. `I  wish we had a thousand oliphaunts with Gandalf on a 
white one at their head,' he  said.  `Then  we'd break  a way into this evil 
land,  perhaps.  But  we've not; just our  own tired legs, that's all. Well, 
Smjagol, the third turn may turn the best. I will come with you.' 
     'Good  master,  wise master,  nice master!'  cried  Gollum in  delight, 
patting Frodo's knees. `Good master! Then rest  now, nice hobbits, under the 
shadow of  the stones, close under the stones! Rest and lie quiet, till  the 
Yellow Face goes away. Then we can go quickly. Soft  and quick as shadows 
we 
must be!' 

####-<h4>Chapter 4.</h4> <br> Of Herbs and Stewed Rabbit 

 
 
     For the few hours of daylight that were left they rested, shifting into 
the shade as the sun moved, until  at last the shadow of the western  rim of 
their  dell grew long, and darkness filled all  the hollow. Then they ate  a  
little,  and drank  sparingly.  Gollum  ate nothing, but  he  accepted water  
gladly. 
     `Soon get more now,' he said, licking  his lips. `Good water  runs down 
in  streams to  the Great River,  nice water in the lands  we are  going to. 
Smjagol will get food there too, perhaps. He's very hungry, yes, gollum! ' He 
set his two large flat hands on his  shrunken belly, and a pale  green light 
came into his eyes. 
     The  dusk was deep  when at length  they  set  out,  creeping over  the 
westward rim of the  dell, and fading like ghosts into the broken country on 
the borders of the road: The moon was now three nights from the full, but it  
did not climb over the mountains until nearly midnight, and the  early night 
was very dark. A single red light burned high up in the Tower s of the Teeth,  
but  otherwise no sign could be seen or heard of the sleepless watch  on the 
Morannon. 
     For  many  miles the red eye  seemed  to  stare at  them as they  fled, 
stumbling through a barren  stony country.  They did not dare  to  take  the 
road, but they  kept  it  on their left, following its line as  well as they 
could at a little distance.  At last, when  night  was growing old and  they 
were already weary, for they had taken only one short rest, the eye dwindled  
to a small fiery point a nd then vanished: they had turned the dark  northern 
shoulder of the lower mountains and were heading southwards. 
     With hearts  strangely  lightened they  now rested again, but  not  for  
long. They were  not going  quick enough for Gollum. By his reckoning it was 
nearly thirty leagues from the  Morannon to the cross-roads above Osgiliath, 
and he hoped to cover that distance in four journeys. So soon they struggled 
on once  more,  until the  dawn  began  to  spread  slowly in the wide  grey 
solitude. They had then  walked almost eight leagues; and the hobbits  could 
not have gone any further, even if they had dared. 
     The  growing  light revealed to them  a  land already, less  barren and 
ruinous. The mountains still loomed up ominously on their  left, but near at 
hand  they could  see the southward road,  now  bearing away  from the black 

####-roots of the  hills and  slanting  westwards.  Beyond it were slopes covered 
with  sombre trees  like  dark clouds. but  all about  them  lay  a  tumbled 
heathland, grown with ling and broom  and cornel, and other shrubs that they 
did not know. Here and there they saw knots  of tall pine-trees.  The hearts 
of the hobbits rose again a little in spite of weariness: the  air was fresh 
and  fragrant, and it reminded them  of the uplands of the Northfarthing far 
away. It seemed good to be reprieved, to  walk in a land that had  only been 
for a few years  under the dominion of  the Dark Lord and was not yet fallen 
wholly into  decay. But they did not forget their danger, nor the Black Gate 
that was still all too near, hidden though it was behind the gloomy heights. 
They looked about for a hiding-place where they could shelter from evil eyes 
while the light lasted. 
     The  day passed uneasily. They lay deep  in the heather and counted out 
the  slow hours, in which  there seemed  little  change; for they were still 
under the shadows of the Ephel D®ath, and the sun was veiled. Frodo slept at 
times, deeply and peacefully, either trusting Gollum or too tired to trouble 
about him; but Sam found it difficult to do more than doze, even when Gollum 
was plainly fast  asleep,  whiffling  and twitching in  his  secret  dreams.  
Hunger,  perhaps,  more than mistrust kept him wakeful: he had begun to long 
for a good homely meal, `something hot out of the pot'. 
     As soon as the land faded into a formless grey under coming night, they 
started  out  again. In  a little while  Gollum led  them  down  on  to  the 
southward road; and after that they went  on more quickly, though the danger 
was greater. Their ears were strained  for the sound of hoof or  foot on the 
road  ahead, or following them  from behind;  but the night passed, and they 
heard no sound of walker or rider. 
     The  road had been made in  a long lost  time:  and  for perhaps thirty 
miles below  the  Morannon it had been  newly repaired, but as it went south  
the wild encroached upon it. The handiwork of Men of old could still be seen 
in its straight sure  flight and level course:  now and again it cut its way 
through hillside slopes, or leaped over a stream upon a wide shapely arch of 
enduring masonry; but at  last  all signs  of stonework faded,  save  for  a  
broken pillar  here and  there,  peering out of bushes  at  the side, or old 
paving-stones still  lurking  amid weeds  and  moss.  Heather  and  trees and 
bracken  scrambled down  and  overhung  the banks, or sprawled out over  the 
surface. It dwindled at last to a country cart -road little  used; but it did 
not wind:  it held on its  own sure course and  guided them by  the swiftest  

####-way. 
     So  they  passed into the  northern marches  of that land that Men once 
called Ithilien, a fair country of climbing woods and swift -falling streams.  
The  night  became  fine  under  star and round moon, and  it seemed  to the 
hobbits that the  fragrance  of the air grew as they went  forward; and from 
the  blowing and muttering of Gollum it  seemed that he noticed it  too, and 
did not relish it. At the first signs  of day  they halted  again.  They had 
come to the end of a long cutting, deep, and sheer -sided in  the middle,  by 
which the road clove its way through a stony  ridge. Now they climbed up the 
westward bank and looked abroad. 
     Day  was  opening in the sky, and they saw  that the mountains were now  
much further  off, receding ea stward in  a long curve  that was lost in  the 
distance. Before them, as they turned west, gentle slopes ran  down into dim 
hazes far  below. All about them were small woods of resinous trees, fir and 
cedar  and cypress. and other  kinds  unknown in the Shire, with wide glades 
among them; and  everywhere there was a wealth  of sweet -smelling  herbs and 
shrubs. The long journey from Rivendell had brought them far south of  their 
own  land,  but not until now in this more sheltered region had the  hobbits 
felt the change of clime.  Here Spring was  already busy about them:  fronds 
pierced  moss  and mould,  larches were  green-fingered, small flowers  were 
opening in the turf,  birds were singing. Ithilien, the garden of Gondor now 
desolate kept still a dishevelled dryad loveliness.  
     South  and  west  it looked  towards  the  warm lower vales  of Anduin, 
shielded  from   the  east  by  the  Ephel  D®ath  and  yet  not  under  the 
mountain-shadow,  protected  from the north  by the  Emyn Muil, open  to the 
southern  airs and the moist winds from the Sea far  away.  Many great trees 
grew there,  planted  long ago,  falling  into untended age amid a  riot  of 
careless descendants;  and groves and  thickets there  were of tamarisk  and 
pungent terebinth, of olive and of bay; and there were junipers and myrtles; 
and  thymes that grew in  bushes, or with their woody creeping stems mantled 
in deep tapestries the hidden stones; sages of many kinds putting forth blue 
flowers, or  red,  or pale green; and  marjorams and new-sprouting parsleys,  
and many  herbs of forms and scents beyond the garden-lore of Sam. The grots 
and  rocky  walls were  already  starred  with  saxifrages  and  stonecrops.  
Primeroles  and anemones were awake in the  filbert -brakes; and asphodel and 
many  lily-flowers  nodded their half-opened heads in the grass: deep  green 
grass beside  the pools,  where  falling streams  halted  in cool hollows on 

####-their journey down to Anduin. 
     The  travellers  turned their backs on the road and  went downhill.  As 
they walked, brushing their  way through bush  and herb,  sweet  odours rose 
about  them. Gollum coughed and retched; but the hobbits  breathed deep, and 
suddenly Sam laughed, for heart's ease not for jest. They followed a  stream 
that went  quickly down before them. Presently  it  brought them to a  small 
clear lake in a shallow dell: it lay in the broken ruins of an ancient stone 
basin, the carven rim of  which was  almost wholly  covered  with mosses and 
rose-brambles;  iris-swords stood in  ranks about it. and water -lily  leaves 
floated on  its dark gently-rippling surface; but it was deep and fresh, and 
spilled ever softly out over a stony lip at the far end. 
     Here they washed  themselves and  drank  their  fill at  the in-falling 
freshet. Then they sought for a resting-place, and a hiding-place: for  this 
land, fair-seeming  still, was nonetheless now territory of  the Enemy. They 
had not come  very far from the road, and yet even  in so short a space they 
had seen  scars of  the  old wars, and the newer wounds made by the Orcs and 
other foul servants of the Dark Lord:  a  pit of uncovered filth and refuse; 
trees hewn down wantonly  and  left to die, with evil runes or the fell sign 
of the Eye cut in rude strokes on their bark. 
     Sam scrambling below the outfall of the lake. smelling and touching the 
unfamiliar  plants  and  trees,  forgetful for  the moment  of  Mordor,  was 
reminded suddenly  of their ever -present peril. He  stumbled on a ring still 
scorched by fire,  and in the midst of it  he  found  a pile  of charred and 
broken  bones  and skulls.  The  swift growth  of the wild  with  briar  and 
eglantine and trailing  clematis was already drawing a veil  over this place 
of dreadful feast and slaughter;  but it was not ancient. He hurried back to  
his companions, but he said nothing: the bones  were best  left in peace and 
not pawed and routed by Gollum. 
     `Let's  find a place to lie up in,' he said. 'Not lower down. Higher up 
for me.' 
     A  little way back above the lake they found a  deep brown bed  of last  
year's fern. Beyond it was a thicket of dark-leaved  bay-trees climbing up a  
steep bank  that was crowned with old cedars. Here they  decided to rest and 
pass  the day, which already promised to be  bright and warm. A good day for 
strolling  on their way along the groves and glades of Ithilien; but  though 
Orcs may shun the sunlight. there were too many places here where they could 
lie hid  and  watch;  and  other  evil  eyes were  abroad:  Sauron had  many 

####-servants. Gollum, in any case, would not move under  the  Yellow. Face. Soon 
it  would look over the dark  ridges of the Ephel D®ath, and he would  faint 
and cower in the light and heat. 
     Sam had  been giving earnest thought to food as they  marched. Now that 
the despair  of  the  impassable Gate was behind  him,  he did  not feel  so 
inclined as his master  to take no thought  for  their livelihood beyond the 
end of their errand;  and anyway it seemed wiser to him to save the waybread 
of the  Elves for worse times ahead.  Six  days or more had  passed since he 
reckoned that they had only a bare supply for three weeks. 
     'If we  reach the Fire in  that time, we'll be lucky at this rate! ' he 
thought. `And we might be wanting to get back. We might! ' 
     Besides,  at  the  end  of a  long  night -march, and  after bathing and 
drinking, he felt even more hungry than usual. A supper,  or a breakfast, by 
the fire  in  the old kitchen  at  Bagshot Row was what he really wanted. An  
idea struck him and he turned to Gollum. Gollum had just begun  to sneak off 
on his own, and he was crawling away on all fours through the fern. 
     `Hi! Gollum! ' said Sam. `Where are you going?  Hunting? Well see here, 
old  noser, you don't like our  food,  and I'd  not  be sorry  for  a change 
myself.  Your new motto's always ready to help . Could you find anything  fit 
for a hungry hobbit? ' 
     `Yes, perhaps,  yes,' said Gollum. `Smjagol always helps, if they  asks 
-- if they asks nicely.' 
     `Right!' said Sam `I does ask. And if that isn't nice enough, I begs.' 
     Gollum disappeared.  He  was away some  time, and  Frodo  after  a  few 
mouthfuls of lembas settled deep into the brown  fern and went to sleep. Sam 
looked  at  him. The early  daylight  was only just creeping  down into  the 
shadows u nder the trees, but he saw his master's face very clearly, and  his 
hands, too, lying at rest on the ground beside him. He was reminded suddenly 
of Frodo as he had lain, asleep in  the  house of Elrond,  after his  deadly 
wound. Then as  he  had  kept watch Sam  had  noticed that at times  a light 
seemed to be shining faintly within; but now the light  was even clearer and  
stronger. Frodo's face was peaceful, the marks of fear and care had left it; 
but it looked old,  old and beautiful, as  if the  chiselling of the shaping 
years was now revealed  in  many  fine lines  that  had before  been hidden, 
though the  identity of the face was not changed. Not that Sam Gamgee put it 
that  way to himself.  He shook  his  head, as if finding words useless, and 
murmured:  `I  love  him. He's  like that, and  sometimes it shines through, 

####-somehow. But I love him, whether or no.' 
     Gollum returned quietly  and  peered over  Sam's  shoulder.  Looking at 
Frodo, he shut his eyes  and crawled away without a sound. Sam came  to him a  
moment later and found him  chewing something  and muttering  to himself. 
On 
the ground beside him lay two small rabbits, which he was  beginning to  eye 
greedily. 
     'Smjagol always helps,' he said. `He has brought rabbits, nice rabbits.  
But ma ster has gone  to sleep,  and perhaps Sam wants to sleep. Doesn't want 
rabbits now?  Smjagol  tries  to help,  but he can't catch  things all in  a  
minute.' 
     Sam,  however, had no objection to rabbit at all, and said so. At least 
not to cooked rabbit. All hobbits, of  course,  can cook, for they  begin to 
learn the art before their letters (which  many never reach):  but Sam was a  
good  cook, even by  hobbit  reckoning,  and he had  done a good deal of the 
camp-cooking on their travels, when there was a  chance. He  still  hopefully 
carried some of his gear in his pack: a  small tinder -box, two small shallow 
pans,  the smaller fitting into  the  larger; inside them  a wooden spoon, a  
short  two-pronged  fork and  some skewers were  stowed;  and hidden  at the 
bottom of the pack in a flat wooden box a dwindling treasure, some salt. But 
he needed a  fire, and other things besides. He thought for  a bit, while he 
took out his  knife, cleaned and whetted it, and began to dress the rabbits.  
He was not going to leave Frodo alone asleep even for a few minutes. 
     'Now,  Gollum,'  he said, 'I've  another job for you. Go and fill these 
pans with water, and bring  'em back!  ' 
     'Smjagol will fetch water, yes,' said Gollum. 'But what does the hobbit 
want all that water for? He has drunk, he has washed.' 
     'Never you mind,' said Sam. `If you  can't guess, you'll soon find out. 
And  the  sooner you fetch the  water,  the  sooner you'll  learn. Don't you  
damage one of my pans, or I'll carve you into mincemeat.' 
     While Gollum was  away Sam took  another look  at Frodo.  He  was still 
sleeping quietly, but Sam was now struck  most  by the leanness  of his face 
and hands. 'Too thin and drawn he is,' he muttered. 'Not right for a hobbit. 
If I can get these coneys cooked, I'm going to wake him up.' 
     Sam gathered a pile of the driest fern, and then scrambled  up the bank  
collecting a  bundle of twigs and broken wood; the fallen branch of a  cedar 
at the top gave him a good supply. He cut out some turves at the foot of the 

####-bank just outside the fern-brake, and made a shallow hole and laid  his fuel 
in it. Being handy with flint and tinder he soon had a small blaze going. It  
made little or no smoke but gave off an aromatic scent. He was just stooping  
over  his  fire,   shielding it and  building  it up with heavier  wood, when 
Gollum returned, carrying the pans carefully and grumbling to himself.  
     He set the pans down, and then suddenly saw what Sam was doing. He gave 
a thin hissing shriek, and seemed to be both frightened and angry. `Ach! Sss 
-- no!' he cried. `No! Silly  hobbits, foolish, yes foolish! They mustn't do 
it!' 
     `Mustn't do what?' asked Sam in surprise. 
     `Not make  the nassty  red  tongues,'  hissed Gollum. `Fire, fire! It's 
dangerous, yes it is.  It burns, it kills. And it will  bring enemies, yes it 
will.' 
     'I don't think so,' said  Sam. `Don't see  why it  should, if you don't 
put wet stuff on it and make a  smother.  But if it does, it does. I'm going 
to risk it, anyhow. I'm going to stew these coneys.' 
     'Stew the rabbits!'  squealed Gollum in  dismay. `Spoil  beautiful meat 
Smjagol  saved for  you,  poor  hungry  Smjagol! What for? What  for,  silly 
hobbit? They are young, they are tender, they are nice. Eat them, eat them!' 
He clawed a t the nearest rabbit, already skinned and lying by the fire. 
     `Now, now! ' said Sam. `Each to his own fashion. Our bread chokes  you, 
and raw  coney chokes me. If you give  me a coney, the coney's mine, see, to 
cook,  if  I have  a mind. And  I have.  You needn't watch me.  Go and catch  
another  and eat it as you  fancy  -- somewhere private  and out o' my sight. 
Then you  won't see the  fire, and  I shan't see you, and we'll both  be the 
happier. I'll see the fire don't smoke, if that's any comfort to you.' 
     Gollum withdrew grumbling,  and  crawled  into  the  fern.  Sam  busied 
himself with his pans. `What a hobbit needs with coney,' he said to himself,  
`is some  herbs and roots,  especially taters -- not to mention bread. Herbs 
we can manage, seemingly.' 
     `Gollum!'  he  called softly. `Third  time pays  for all. I  want  some 
herbs.' Gollum's head peeped out of the  fern,  but  his looks  were neither  
helpful  nor friendly.  `A few  bay-leaves, some  thyme and sage, will do  -- 
before the water boils,' said Sam. 
     `No! ' said  Gollum. `Smjagol is  not pleased. And Smjagol doesn't like 
smelly leaves. He doesn't eat  grasses or roots,  no precious, not till he's 
starving or very sick, poor Smjagol. ' 

####-     `Smjagol'll get  into real true hot water , when this water boils, if he 
don't do  as  he's  asked,' growled  Sam.  `Sam'll put  his head in it,  yes 
precious. And I'd make him look for turnips  and carrots, and taters too, if 
it was  the time o'  the  year. I'll bet there's all sorts  of  good  things 
running wild in this country. I'd give a lot for half a dozen taters.' 
     `Smjagol won't  go, O no precious, not this time,' hissed Gollum. `He's 
frightened, and  he's very tired, and this hobbit's  not nice,  not nice  at 
all.  Smjagol won't  grub for roots and  carrotses  and  --  taters.  What's 
taters, precious, eh, what's taters?  
     `Po-ta -toes,' said Sam. 'The  Gaffer's delight, and  rare  good ballast  
for an empty belly. But you won't find any, so you needn't look. But be good  
Smjagol  and  fetch me the herbs, and I'll think better of you. What's more, 
if you turn  over a new leaf, and keep it turned, I'll cook you  some taters 
one of  these days. I will: fried fish  and chips served by  S.  Gamgee. You  
couldn't say no to that.' 
     `Yes, yes we could. Spoiling nice fish, scorching it. Give me fish now, 
and keep nassty chips! ' 
     `Oh you're hopeless,' said Sam. 'Go to sleep!' 
     In  the end he had to find what  he wanted for himself;  but he did not 
have to  go far, not out  of sight of the  place where his master lay, still 
sleeping. For a while  Sam sat musing, and  tending the fire till  the water  
boiled. The daylight grew  and the  air became  warm; the dew faded off turf 
and leaf. Soon  the  rabbits  cut  up  lay simmering in their pans with  the 
bunched herbs. Almost Sam fell asleep as the  time went by. He let them stew 
for close on an hour, testing them now and again with  his fork, and tasting 
the broth. 
     When  he thought  all  was ready he lifted the pans off  the  fire, and 
crept along to Frodo. Frodo  half opened his eyes as Sam stood over him, and 
then he  wakened from  his  dreaming: another gentle, unrecoverable dream of 
peace. 
     `Hullo, Sam! ' he said. `Not resting? Is  anything wrong?  What  is the 
time?  ' 
     `About a couple of hours after daybreak,' said  Sam, `and  nigh on half 
past  eight  by  Shire  clocks, maybe. But nothing's wrong. Though  it ain't  
quite what I'd call right: no stock, no onions, no taters. I've got a bit of 
a stew for you, and some broth, Mr. Frodo.  Do you good. You'll have  to sup 
it in your mug; or straight from the pan, when it's  cooled a bit. I haven't  

####-brought no bowls, nor nothing proper.' 
     Frodo  yawned and stretched.  'You  should  have been  resting Sam,' he 
said. 'And lighting   a fire  was dangerous  in these  parts.  But I do  feel 
hungry. Hmm! Can I smell it from here? What have you stewed? ' 
     'A  present from Smjagol,' said Sam: `a brace o' young coneys; though I 
fancy Gollum's regretting them now. But there's nought to go with them but a 
few herbs.' 
     Sam and  his master sat just within  the  fern-brake and ate their stew 
from the pans, sharing the  old fork and spoon. They allowed themselves half 
a piece of the Elvish waybread each. It seemed a feast. 
     'Wheew!  Gollum! ' Sam called and whistled softly. 'Come on! Still time 
to  change your  mind.  There's some left, if you want to try stewed coney.' 
There was no answer. 
     `Oh  well, I suppose he's gone off to find something for himself. We'll 
finish it,' said Sam. 
     `And then you must take some sleep,' said Frodo. 
     `Don't you drop off, while  I'm nodding, Mr. Frodo. I  don't  feel  too 
sure  of  him.  There's  a  good  deal  of  Stinker -the bad  Gollum, if  you  
understand me-in him still, and it's getting stronger again. Not but what  I 
think he'd try to throttle  me first  now. We don't see eye to eye, and he's 
not pleased with Sam, O no precious, not pleased at all.' 
     They finished, and Sam went off to the stream to rinse his  gear. As he 
stood  up to return, he looked back up the  slope. At that moment he saw the 
sun  rise out of the reek, or haze, or dark shadow, or whatever it was, that 
lay  ever to the east, and it sent its  golden beams down upon the trees and 
glades about him. Then  he noticed a thin spiral of blue-grey,  smoke, plain 
to see as it  caught  the sunlight, rising  from a thicket above him. With a  
shock  he realized that  this was the smoke  from  his  little cooking-fire, 
which he had neglected to put out. 
     `That won't do! Never thought  it  would show like that! ' he muttered, 
and  he started to hurry back. Suddenly he halted and listened. Had he heard 
a whistle  or not? Or was  it the  call of some strange  bird?  If it was  a  
whistle, it did  not  come from Frodo's direction. There it went again  from 
another place! Sam began to run as well as he could uphill. 
     He found that a small brand, burning away to its outer end, had kindled 
some  fern  at  the edge  of the fire,  and the fern blazing  up had set the 
turves  smouldering.  Hastily he stamped  out  what  was left of  the  fire, 

####-scattered the ashes, and laid the turves on the hole.  Then he crept back to 
Frodo. 
     'Did  you hear a whistle, and  what sounded like an answer? ' he asked. 
`A few minutes back. I hope  it was  only a bird,  but it didn't  sound quite 
like that: more like  somebody mimicking  a  bird-call, I  thought.  And I'm 
afraid my bit of fire's been smoking. Now if I've gone  and brought trouble, 
I'll never forgive myself. Nor won't have a chance, maybe! ' 
     `Hush! ' whispered Frodo. `I thought I heard voices.' 
     The  two  hobbits  trussed their  small packs,  put  them  on ready for  
flight,  and  then  crawled  deeper  into  the  fern.  There  they  crouched 
listening. 
     There was no doubt of the voices. They were speaking low and furtively,  
but they were near, and coming nearer. Then quite suddenly one spoke clearly 
close at hand. 
     `Here! Here is where the smoke came from! ' it said. `'Twill be nigh at 
hand. In the fern, no  doubt. We shall have it like  a coney in a trap. Then 
we shall learn what kind of thing it is.' 
     `Aye, and what it knows! ' said a second voice. 
     At  once  four  men  came  striding  through  the  fern from  different 
directions. Since flight and hiding  were no longer  possible, Frodo and Sam 
sprang  to their  feet,  putting  back to back and whipping out  their small 
swords. 
     If they were astonished at what they saw, their captors were even  more 
astonished.  Four tall Men  stood there. Two  had spears in their hands with 
broad  bright heads. Two  had great bows,  almost of their  own height,  and  
great quivers of long green-feathered arrows. All had swords at their sides,  
and were clad in green  and  brown of varied hues, as if the better  to walk  
unseen in the glades of Ithilien. Green  gauntlets covered  their hands, and 
their faces were hooded and  masked with green, except for their eyes, which 
were very keen and bright. At once  Frodo thought of  Boromir, for these Men 
were like him in stature and bearing, a nd in their manner of speech. 
     `We have  not found what we sought,' said one. `But what have we found? 
' 
     'Not Orcs,' said another, releasing the hilt of his sword, which he had 
seized when he saw the glitter of Sting in Frodo's hand. 
     `Elves? ' said a third, doubtfully. 
     `Nay! Not Elves,'  said the fourth, the tallest, and as it appeared the 

####-chief among them. `Elves do not  walk in Ithilien in these  days.  And Elves  
are wondrous fair to look upon, or so 'tis said.' 
     'Meaning  we're not, I take you,' said Sam. `Thank you kindly. And when  
you've finished discussing us,  perhaps you'll say who you are, and  why you  
can't let two tired travellers rest.' 
     The tall  green man laughed grimly.  `I am Faramir, Captain of Gondor,' 
he said. `But there are no travellers in this land: only the servants of the 
Dark Tower, or of the White.' 
     `But  we are  neither,' said Frodo.  `And  travellers  we are, whatever  
Captain Faramir may say.' 
     'Then make  haste to declare yourselves and your errand,' said Faramir. 
'We  have  a  work  to  do,  and this is  no time or place  for riddling  or  
parleying. Come! Where is the third of your company? ' 
     `The third? ' 
     'Yes, the skulking fellow that  we saw with his  nose in  the pool down 
yonder. He had an ill-favoured look. Some spying breed of Orc, I guess, or a  
creature of theirs. But he gave us the slip by some fox-trick.' 
     'I do not know where he is,' said Frodo. 'He is only a chance companion 
met  upon our road; and I  am  not answerable for  him. If you  come on him, 
spare  him. Bring him  or send him  to  us.  He is  only  a wretched gangrel 
creature, but I have  him under my care for a while. But as for  us,  we are 
Hobbits of the Shire,  far to  the North and West, beyond many rivers. Frodo 
son of Drogo is my name, and with  me is  Samwise son  of Hamfast, a  worthy 
hobbit in my  service.  We  have come  by long ways  --  out of Rivendell, or  
Imladris as some call  it.'  Here  Faramir started  and grew  intent. 'Seven 
companions we had: one we lost at Moria, the others we left  at  Parth Galen 
above Rauros:  two of  my kin; a  Dwarf there was also,  and an Elf, and two  
Men.  They were  Aragorn;  and Boromir, who said  that he came out of  Minas 
Tirith, a city in the South.' 
     'Boromir! ' all the four men exclaimed. 
     'Boromir son of  the Lord Denethor?' said  Faramir, and a strange stern 
look came into his  face. 'You came with  him? That is news indeed, if it be 
true. Know, little strangers, that Boromir  son of Denethor was High  Warden 
of  the White Tower, and our Captain-General: sorely do we miss him. Who are 
you then,  and  what had you  to do  with  him?  Be swift, for  the  Sun  is 
climbing!' 
     'Are the riddling words known to you that Boromir brought to Rivendell?  

####-' Frodo replied. 
     Seek for the Sword that was Broken. 
     In Imladris it dwells. 
     'The words are known indeed,' said Faramir in astonishment. `It is some 
token of your truth that you also know them.' 
     `Aragorn whom I named is the bearer of the Sword that was Broken,' said 
Frodo. 'And we are the Halflings that the rhyme spoke of.' 
     `That I see,' said Faramir thoughtfully. `Or I see that it might be so. 
And what is Isildur's Bane? ' 
     `That is hidden,'  answered  Frodo. `Doubtless it will be made clear in 
time.' 
     `We must  learn more of this,' said Faramir, `and know  what brings you  
so far east under the shadow of yonder --,' he pointed and said no name. 'But 
not now. We have business in hand. You are in peril.  and you would not have 
gone far  by field or road this day.  There will be hard handstrokes nigh at 
hand ere the day is full. Then death, or swift flight bark to Anduin. I will 
leave two to guard you, for your  good and for mine. Wise  man trusts not to 
chance-meeting on the road in this land. If I return, I will speak more with 
you.' 
     'Farewell!' said Frodo, bowing low. `Think what you will, I am a friend 
of  all enemies of the One Enemy. We  would go with you, if we halfling folk 
could hope to serve  you, such doughty men and strong  as you seem, and if my 
errand permitted it. May the light shine on your swords!' 
     'The  Halflings  are  courteous  folk,  whatever  else  they  be,' said 
Faramir. `Farewell!' 
     The hobbits  sat  down  again, but  they said nothing to one another of 
their thoughts and doubts. Close by, just  under the dappling  shadow of the 
dark bay-trees, two men remained on guard. They took off their masks now and 
again  to cool them,  as the  day-heat grew,  and Frodo  saw that  they were 
goodly  men, pale-skinned, dark of hair, with  grey eyes and  faces sad  and 
proud. They spoke together in soft voices, at first using the Common Speech, 
but after the manner of older days, and then changing to another language of 
their own. To his amazement, as he listened Frodo   became aware that  it was 
the Elven-tongue that they spoke, or one but little different; and he looked 
at  them with wonder, for he  knew  then that  they must be D®nedain  of the 
South, men of the line of the Lords of Westernesse. 
     After a  while  he spoke to  them; but they were slow  and  cautious in 

####-answering. They named themselves Mablung and Damrod, soldiers of Gondor, 
and 
they were Rangers of Ithilien; for they  were descended  from folk who lived 
in Ithilien  at  one time, before  it  was overrun. From  such  men the Lord 
Denethor chose his forayers, who  crossed the Anduin secretly (how or where, 
they would not say) to harry  the Orcs and other enemies that roamed between 
the Ephel D®ath and the River. 
     `It  is close on  ten leagues hence to the east -shore of Anduin,'  said 
Mablung, 'and we seldom come so far afield. But we have a new errand on this 
journey: we come to ambush the Men of Harad. Curse them! ' 
     'Aye, curse the Southrons! ' said Damrod.  ` 'Tis  said that there were 
dealings  of  old between Gondor  and the kingdoms of the  Harad in  the Far 
South; though there was never friendship. In those days our bounds were away 
south beyond the mouths of Anduin, and Umbar, the nearest  of  their realms,  
acknowledged our sway. But that is long since. 'Tis many lives of  Men since 
any passed to or  fro between us. Now of late we have learned that the Enemy 
has been among them, and they are gone over to Him, or back to Him-they 
were 
ever ready to His  will -as have so many also  in the East .  I doubt not that 
the days of Gondor are numbered, and the  walls of Minas Tirith are  doomed, 
so great is His strength and malice.' 
     `But still we will not sit idle  and  let Him do all as He would,' said 
Mablung. `These cursed Southrons  come  now marching up the ancient roads 
to 
swell the hosts of  the Dark Tower.  Yea, up  the very roads  that  craft of 
Gondor made.  And they go  ever more heedlessly, we learn, thinking that the 
power of their new  master is great enough, so that the mere shadow  of  His 
hills  will  protect  them.  We  come  to teach  them  another lesson. Great 
strength of them was  reported  to us  some days ago, marching north. One of 
their regiments is due by our reckoning to pass by, some time ere noon-up on 
the road  above, where it passes through  the cloven way. The road may pass, 
but  they  shall  not! Not  while Faramir  is Captain.  He  leads now in all 
perilous  ventures.  But his life is charmed, or fate  spares him  for  some 
other end.' 
     Their talk  died down into a listening silence.  All  seemed  still and 
watchful. Sam, crouched by the edge of the fern-brake, peered  out. With his 

####-keen hobbit-eyes  he  saw that many  more Men were about. He  could see 
them 
stealing up the slopes, singly or in long files, keeping always to the shade 
of  grove or thicket, or crawling, hardly visible  in their brown and  green 
raiment, through  grass and  brake. All were  hooded  and  masked,  and  had 
gauntlets on  their hands, and  were  armed like Faramir and his companions. 
Before  long they had  all passed and  vanished. The sun rose till it neared 
the South. The shadows shrank. 
     `I wonder where that dratted Gollum is?  '  thought Sam, as  he crawled 
back into deeper shade. `He  stands  a fair chance of being spitted  for  an 
Orc,  or of being roasted  by the Yellow Face. But I  fancy he'll look after  
himself.' He lay down beside Frodo and began to doze. 
     He woke,  thinking that he had heard horns blowing. He sat up.  It  was 
now high noon.  The guards stood alert and tense in the shadow of the trees.  
Suddenly the horns rang out louder and beyond  mistake from  above, over the 
top  of  the slope. Sam thought that he heard cries and wild  shouting also, 
but  the sound was faint,  as  if  it came out  of some  distant  cave. Then 
presently the noise of  fighting broke  out  near at hand, just  above their 
hiding-place. He could hear plainly the ringing grate of steel on steel, the 
clang  of sword on iron  cap, the  dull beat of blade on  shield;  men  were 
yelling and screaming, and one clear loud voice was calling Gondor! Gondor! 
     `It sounds like a hundred blacksmiths all smithying together,' said Sam 
to Frodo. 'They're as near as I want them now.' 
     But the noise grew closer. `They are  coming!' cried Damrod. `See! Some 
of  the Southrons have broken  from the trap  and are flying  from the road. 
There they go! Our men after them, and the Captain leading.' 
     Sam,  eager to see more, went now and joined the guards. He scrambled a 
little  way  up into one of  the  larger of the bay-trees. For  a  moment he 
caught a glimpse of swarthy men in red running  down the slope  some way off 
with green-clad warriors leaping after them, hewing them down  as they fled. 
Arrows  were thick in the air. Then suddenly straight over  the rim of their 
sheltering bank, a man fell, crashing through  the slender trees,  nearly on 
top of them. He came to  rest in the  fern a  few feet away,  face downward, 
green arrow-feathers  sticking from  his neck  below  a  golden collar.  His 
scarlet robes  were tattered, his  corslet of overlapping brazen  plates was 
rent and hewn, his black plaits of hair braided with gold were drenched with 
blood. His brown hand still clutched the hilt of a broken sword. 

####-     It was Sam's  first view of a battle of Men against Men, and he did not 
like it much. He was  glad that he could not see the dead  face. He wondered 
what the man's name was and where he came from; and if he was really evil of 
heart, or what lies or threats had  led him on the long march from his home; 
and if  he would not really rather have stayed there in peace-all in a flash 
of  thought which  was  quickly driven  from his mind. For  just as  Mablung 
stepped towards the  fallen  body, there was a  new noise.  Great crying and 
shouting. Amidst it Sam heard a shrill bellowing or trumpeting.  And  then a  
great thudding and bumping. like huge rams dinning on the ground. 
     'Ware! Ware!' cried Damrod  to his  companion. 'May the Valar turn  him 
aside! Mymak! Mymak!' 
     To his  astonishment and terror,  and lasting delight,  Sam  saw a vast  
shape crash out of  the trees  and come careering down the  slope. Big as  a  
house, much bigger than a house, it looked to him, a grey-clad moving  hill.  
Fear and wonder, maybe, enlarged him in the hobbit's eyes, but the  Mymak of 
Harad was indeed a beast of vast bulk, and the like of him does not walk now 
in Middle-earth; his kin that  live still in latter days are but memories of 
his girth and majesty. On  he came, straight towards  the watchers, and then 
swerved  aside in the nick of time,  passing only  a few yards away, rocking  
the ground beneath their feet: his great legs like trees, enormous sail-like 
ears  spread out, long  snout upraised like a huge serpent  about to strike. 
his small red eyes raging. His upturned hornlike tusks were bound with bands 
of  gold and dripped with blood. His trappings of  scarlet and  gold flapped 
about him in wild tatters. The  ruins  of  what seemed a very war -tower  lay 
upon his heaving back, smashed in his furious passage thr ough the woods; and 
high upon  his  neck still desperately clung a  tiny  figure-the  body  of a  
mighty warrior, a giant among the Swertings. 
     On the great  beast  thundered, blundering  in blind wrath through pool 
and thicket. Arrows skipped and snapped harmlessly about  the triple hide of 
his flanks. Men of  both sides  fled before him,  but  many  he overtook and 
crushed  to  the  ground. Soon he was lost  to  view, still  trumpeting  and 
stamping far away. What became of him Sam never heard: whether  he escaped 
to 
roam the wild for a time, until he perished far from his home or was trapped 
in some deep pit; or whether he raged on until he plunged in the Great River  
and was swallowed up. 
     Sam drew a  deep breath. 'An Oliphaunt it  was!' he said. `S o there are 

####-Oliphaunts, and I have seen one.  What a life! But no one  at home will ever  
believe me. Well, if that's over, I'll have a bit of sleep.' 
     'Sleep while you  may,' said Mablung. `But  the Captain will return, if 
he is unhurt; and when he comes we shall depart swiftly. We shall be pursued 
as soon as news of our deed reaches the Enemy, and that will not be long.' 
     `Go quietly when you must!' said Sam.  `No need  to disturb my sleep. I 
was walking all night.' 
     Mablung  laughed.  `I  do not  think  the Captain will leave you  here, 
Master Samwise,' he said. 'But you shall see.' 
 

####- 

Chapter 5. The Window on the West 

 
 
     It seemed to Sam that he had only dozed for a few minutes when he awoke 
to find that it was late afternoon and Faramir had come back. He had brought 
many men  with him; indeed all the survivors of the foray  were now gathered 
on the  slope nearby, two  or  three  hundred  strong.  They sat in  a  wide 
semicircle,  between the  arms  of which Faramir was  seated  on the ground,  
while  Frodo  stood  before him.  It looked strangely  like the  trial  of a  
prisoner. 
     Sam crept out from the fern, but no one paid any  attention to him, and 
he placed himself at the end of the rows of men, where he could see and hear 
all that wa s  going on. He  watched and listened  intently, ready to dash to 
his  master's  aid if needed. He  could see  Faramir's face,  which  was now 
unmasked:  it  was  stern  and commanding, and  a keen  wit lay  behind  his 
searching glance. Doubt was in the grey eyes that gazed steadily at Frodo. 
     Sam soon became aware that  the Captain was not satisfied  with Frodo's 
account of  himself at several  points:  what part  he  had  to  play in the 
Company  that set out from Rivendell; why he had  left Boromir; and where he 
was now going. In particular he returned often to Isildur's Bane. Plainly he 
saw that Frodo was concealing from him some matter of great importance. 
     'But  it  was at the coming of the Halfling  that Isildur's Bane should 
waken,  or so  one must  read the words,' he  insisted. `If then you are the 
Halfling that was  named,  doubtless you brought this thing, whatever it may 
be, to the Council of which you speak, and there Boromir saw it. Do you deny 
it?  ' 
     Frodo made no answer. 'So! ' said Faramir. `I  wish then  to learn from 
you more of it; for  what  concerns Boromir concerns  me. An orc-arrow  slew 
Isildur, so far as old tales tell. But orc-arrows are plenty,  and the sight 
of one would not be taken as a  sign of Doom by Boromir of  Gondor.  Had you  
this thing  in keeping?  It is hidden, you say;  but is not that because you  
choose to hide it? ' 
     'No, not because I choose,' answered Frodo. `It  does not belong to me. 
It does not belong to any mortal, great or small; though if any  could claim 
it, it would  be Aragorn son  of Arathorn, whom  I named, the  leader of our 
Company from Moria to Rauros.' 

####-     'Why so, and not  Boromir, prince of the City that the  sons of Elendil 
founded?  ' 
     'Because Aragorn is descended in direct lineage, father to father, from 
Isildur  Elendil's son  himself. And the sword  that he  bears was Elendil's 
sword.' 
     A  murmur of  astonishment ran through all the ring  of men. Some cried  
aloud: 'The sword of Elendil! The  sword  of Elendil comes  to Minas Tirith!  
Great tidings! ' But Faramir's face was unmoved. 
     `Maybe,' he said. `But so great a claim will need to be established and 
clear proofs  will  be  required,  should this  Aragorn ever  come  to Minas 
Tirith. He  had not come,  nor any of your  Company, when I set out six days 
ago.' 
     'Boromir was satisfied of that claim,' said Frodo. `Indeed, if  Boromir 
were here, he would answer all your  questions. And since  he was already at 
Rauros many days back, and intended then to go straight to your city, if you  
return, you may  soon learn the  answers  there. My part in the  Company was 
known to him, as  to all the others. for it was appointed to me by Elrond of 
Imladris  himself before the  whole Council. On that errand I came into this 
country, but it is not mine to reveal to any  outside the Company. Yet those 
who claim to oppose the Enemy would do well not to hinder it.' 
     Frodo's tone was  proud, whatever he felt, and Sam approved of it;  but 
it did not appease Faramir. 
     `So!' he said. `You bid me mind my own  affairs,  and get me back home,  
and let  you be.  Boromir  will tell all, when he comes. When he comes,  say 
you! Were you a friend of Boromir?' 
     Vividly before Frodo's  mind came the memory  of Boromir's assault upon 
him, and for a moment he hesitated. Faramir's eyes watching him grew harder. 
'Boromir was a valiant member of our Company ' said Frodo at length. 'Yes, I 
was his friend, for my part.' 
     Faramir smiled grimly. `Then you would grieve to learn that  Boromir is 
dead?  ' 
     'I  would  grieve  indeed,'  said  Frodo.  Then catching  the  look  in 
Faramir's eyes, he faltered. 'Dead?'  he said. `Do you mean that he is dead, 
and that you knew it? You have been trying to trap me in words, playing with 
me? Or are you now trying to snare me with a falsehood?' 
     `I would not snare even an orc with a falsehood,' said Faramir. 
     `How then did  he die, and how do  you know of  it? Since  you say that 

####-none of the Company had reached the city when you left.' 
     'As to the  manner  of  his death, I  had  hoped that  his  friend  and 
companion would tell me how it was.' 
     `But he was alive and strong when we parted. And he lives still for all 
that I know. Though surely there are many perils in the world.' 
     `Many indeed,' said Faramir, `and treachery not the least.' 
     Sam  had  been  getting more  and  more  impatient  and  angry at  this 
conversation. These last words were  more  than he  could bear, and bursting  
into the middle of the ring, he strode up to his master's side. 
     'Begging  your pardon, Mr. Frodo,' he  said, `but this has gone on long 
enough. He's no right to talk to you so.  After all you've gone  through, as 
much for his good and all these great Men as for anyone else. 
     'See here,  Captain! ' He  planted himself squarely in front of Faramir 
his  hands  on his hips,  and a look on his  face as  if he was addressing a  
young  hobbit who  had offered him what  he  called `sauce'  when questioned 
about  visits to the orchard. There was some  murmuring, but also some grins 
on the faces  of the men looking on: the  sight of  their Captain sitting on 
the ground  and  eye to eye with  a young hobbit, legs well apart, bristling 
with wrath, was one beyond their experience. `See here! ' he said. `What are 
you driving at? Let's come to  the point before all the Orcs of  Mordor come 
down on us! If  you think my master murdered this Boromir and then ran away, 
you've got no sense; but say it, and have done!  And then  let us  know what 
you mean to do  about it. But it's a pity that folk as talk  about  fighting 
the  Enemy  can't  let  others  do  their  bit  in  their  own  way  without 
interfering. He'd be mighty pleased, if he could see you now. Think he'd got  
a new friend, he would.' 
     `Patience!' said Faramir, but without anger.  `Do not speak before your 
master, whose wit is  greater than yours. And I do not need any to teach  me 
of our peril. Even  so, I  spare a brief time, in order to judge justly in a  
hard matter. Were I as hasty as you, I might have slain you long ago.  For I 
am commanded  to slay all whom I find in this land without the leave of  the 
Lord of Gondor.  But I do not slay man  or beast needlessly, and  not gladly 
even when it is needed. Neither do  I talk  in vain. So be comforted. Sit by 
your master, and be silent! ' 
     Sam  sat down heavily with a red face.  Faramir turned to Frodo  again: 
'You asked how do I know that the son of Denethor is dead. Tidings of  death 
have many wings.  Night oft brings news to  near kindred, 'tis said. Boromir  

####-was my brother.' 
     A  shadow  of sorrow passed  over his face.  `Do you remember  aught of  
special mark that the Lord Boromir bore with him among his gear?' 
     Frodo  thought for a moment,  fearing some further trap, and  wondering  
how this debate would turn in the end. He had hardly saved the Ring from the 
proud grasp of Boromir, and how he would fare now among so many men, 
warlike 
and  strong, he did not know.  Yet he felt in his heart that Faramir, though 
he was much like his brother  in  looks, was a man less self-regarding, both 
sterner and wiser. 'I remember that Boromir bore a horn,' he said at last. 
     `You remember  well, and  as  one  who has  in  truth  seen  him,' said 
Faramir. `Then maybe you can see it in your mind's eye: a great horn  of the  
wild ox of the East, bound with silver, and written with ancient characters. 
That horn the eldest son of our house has borne for many generations; and it  
is said that if it be blown at need anywhere within the bounds of Gondor, as 
the realm was of old, its voice will not pass unheeded. 
     'Five days ere I set out on this venture, eleven days ago at about this 
hour of  the  day, I heard  the blowing of that horn: from the northward  it 
seemed, but  dim, as if  it were but an echo in the mind. A boding of ill we 
thought it, my father and I, for no tidings had we heard of Boromir since he 
went away, and no watcher on our borders had seen him pass. And on the third 
night after another and a stranger thing befell me. 
     'I sat at night by  the waters of Anduin,  in the grey dark  under  the 
young pale moon, watching the ever -moving  stream;  and the  sad  reeds were 
rustling. So do we  ever watch the shores  nigh Osgiliath, which our enemies 
now partly hold,  and issue from it to harry our lands. Bu t  that night  all 
the world slept at the midnight hour. Then I saw, or it seemed that I saw, a  
boat floating  on  the water, glimmering  grey,  a small  boat  of a strange 
fashion with a high prow. and there was none to row or steer it. 
     `An awe fell on me, for  a pale light was round it. But I rose and went 
to the bank, and began to walk out into the stream,  for I was drawn towards 
it. Then the boat turned towards me, and stayed its pace, and floated slowly 
by  within my hand's reach, yet I durst not handle it. It waded  deep, as if 
it were heavily burdened,  and it  seemed to me  as it passed under  my gaze 
that it was  almost filled with clear water, from which came the light;  and 
lapped in the water a warrior lay asleep. 
     `A broken  sword  was on his knee. I saw  many wounds on  him.  It  was 

####-Boromir, my brother, dead. I knew his gear, his sword, his beloved face. One 
thing only I missed: his horn. One thing only I knew not: a fair belt, as it 
were  of linked golden leaves, about his waist. Boromir!  I cried.  Where is 
thy  horn? Whither  goest  thou? O Boromir! But he was gone. The boat turned 
into the stream and passed  glimmering on into the night. Dreamlike  it was.  
and yet no dream, for there  was  no waking. And I do  not  doubt that he is 
dead and has passed down the River to the Sea.' 
     'Alas!' said  Frodo. 'That was indeed Boromir as I  knew  him. For  the 
golden belt was given to him in Lothlurien by the Lady Galadriel. She it was 
that clothed us as  you see  us, in elven-grey. This   brooch is of  the same 
workmanship.' He touched the green and silver leaf that  fastened  his cloak 
beneath his throat. 
     Faramir looked  closely at it.  `It is beautiful,' he  said. 'Yes, 'tis 
work of  the same  craft. So  then  you passed through the Land  of  Lurien?  
Laurelindurenan  it  was named of  old, but long now it  has lain beyond the  
knowledge of Men,' he added softly, regarding Frodo with a new wonder in his 
eyes. `Much  that was strange about you  I begin now to understand. Will you 
not tell me more? For it is a bitter thought that Boromir died, within sight 
of the land of his home.' 
     'No more can I say than I have said,' answered Frodo. `Though your tale 
fills me with foreboding. A  vision it was that  you saw, I  think,  and  no 
more, some shadow of evil fortune that has been or will be. Unless indeed it  
is some lying trick of the Enemy. I have  seen the faces of fair warriors of 
old laid in  sleep beneath the  pools of the Dead Marshes, or seeming so  by 
his foul arts.' 
     'Nay, it was not so,' said Faramir.  'For his works  fill the heart with 
loathing; but my heart was filled with grief and pity.' 
     `Yet how could such a thing have happened in truth? ' asked Frodo. 'For  
no boat could have been carried  over the stony hills from  Tol Brandir; and 
Boromir purposed to  go home across the Entwash and the fields of Rohan. 
And 
yet how could any vessel ride the foam of the great falls and not founder in 
the boiling pools, though laden with water? ' 
     'I know not,' said Faramir. 'But whence came the boat? ' 
     `From Lurien,' said Frodo. 'In three such boats we rowed down Anduin to 
the Falls. They also were of elven-work.' 
     'You passed through the Hidden Land,' said  Faramir, `but it seems that 

####-you little  understood its power. If  Men have dealings with the Mistress of 
Magic who dwells in the Golden  Wood, then they may look for  strange things 
to follow. For it  is perilous  for mortal man  to walk  out of the world of 
this Sun, and few of old came thence unchanged, 'tis said. 
     `Boromir, O Boromir!' he cried. `What did she say to you, the Lady that 
dies not? What did she see? What woke in your heart then? Why went you  ever 
to Laurelindurenan, and came not by your own road,  upon the horses of 
Rohan 
riding home in the morning? ' 
     Then turning again to  Frodo, he spoke in a quiet voice  once more. 'To 
those questions I guess that you could make some answer, Frodo son of Drogo. 
But  not  here  or now.  maybe. But lest you  still should  think my  tale a  
vision, I  will tell  you this.  The horn of Boromir at  least  returned  in 
truth, and not in seeming. The horn came,  but it was  cloven  in two, as it 
were  by axe or  sword. The shards  came severally to  shore: one was  found 
among the reeds where watchers of  Gondor lay,  northwards below the infalls 
of the Entwash;  the other was found spinning on the flood by one who had an 
errand in the water. Strange chances, but murder will out, 'tis said. 
     'And now the horn of the elder  son lies in two pieces upon the lap  of 
Denethor,  sitting in his high chair, waiting for news. And you  can tell me 
nothing of the cleaving of the horn? ' 
     'No, I did not know of it,' said Frodo. `But the day when you  heard it 
blowing, if your reckoning is true, was  the day when we parted, when  I and  
my servant left the Company.  And now your  tale fills me with dread. For if 
Boromir was then in peril and was slain, I  must fear that all my companions 
perished too. And they were my kindred and my friends. 
     `Will you not put aside your dou bt of me and let me go? I am weary, and 
full of grief, and  afraid. But I have a deed to do, or to attempt, before I 
too am slain. And the more need of haste, if  we two halflings are  all that 
remain of our fellowship. 
     'Go back, Faramir,  valiant Captain of  Gondor,  and  defend  your city 
while you may, and let me go where my doom takes me.' 
     `For me there is no comfort in our speech together,' said Faramir; `but 
you surely draw from it more dread than need be. Unless the people of Lurien 
themselves came  to him,  who arrayed Boromir  as for a funeral? Not Orcs or  
servants of the Nameless. Some of your Company, I guess, live still. 
     `But whatever befell on the North March, you, Frodo, I doubt no longer. 

####-If  hard days  have made  me  any judge of Men's words and faces, then I may 
make a guess at Halflings! Though,' and  now he  smiled, `there is something 
strange about you, Frodo, an elvish air, maybe. But more lies upon our words 
together than I thought at first. I should now take you back to Minas Tirith 
to answer  there to Denethor, and my  life will justly be forfeit, if  I now 
choose a course that  proves ill for my city. So I will not  decide in haste 
what is to be done. Yet we must move hence without more delay.' 
     He  sprang to his feet and issued some orders. At once the men who were 
gathered round  him broke up into small  groups, and went off  this way  and  
that, vanishing quickly into the shadows of the  rocks and  trees. Soon only 
Mablung and Damrod remained. 
     'Now you,  Frodo  and Samwise, will come  with me  and my guards,' said 
Faramir. `You cannot go along the road southwards, if that was your purpose. 
It will be unsafe for some days, and always more closely watched after  this 
affray than it has been yet. And  you cannot,  I  think, go far today in any 
case, for you are weary. And so are we.  We are going  now to a secret place  
we  have, somewhat less than ten  miles from here. The Orcs and spies of the 
Enemy have not found  it yet, and if they did, we  could  hold  it long even 
against many. There we may lie up and rest for  a while, and you with us. In 
the morning I will decide what is best for me to do, and for you.' 
     There was nothing for Frodo to do but to  fall in with this request, or  
order. It seemed in any case a  wise course for the moment, since this  foray 
of the men  of  Gondor had made a  journey  in Ithilien more  dangerous than 
ever. 
     They set out  at once: Mablung and  Damrod  a little ahead, and Faramir 
with Frodo  and Sam  behind.  Skirting the hither  side of the pool where the 
hobbits had bathed, they crossed the stream, climbed a long bank, and passed 
into  green-shadowed woodlands that marched  ever downwards  and  
westwards.  
While they walked, as swiftly as the hobbits could go, they talked in hushed 
voices. 
     'I broke off our speech together,' said Faramir, 'not only because time 
pressed, as Master Samwise had reminded me, but also because we were 
drawing 
near to matters that were better not debated openly  before many men. It was 
for that  reason that I turned rather to the matter of my brother and let be 
Isildur's Bane. You were not wholly frank with me, Frodo.' 

####-     `I told no lies, and of the truth all I could,' said Frodo. 
     `I do  not blame you,'  said Faramir. 'You spoke  with skill  in  a hard 
place, and wisely,  it seemed to me. But I learned or  guessed more from you  
than your words said. You  were  not friendly with Boromir, or  you  did not  
part  in  friendship.  You, and  Master  Samwise,  too,  I  guess have  some 
grievance. Now I  loved him dearly, and would gladly avenge his death, yet I 
knew  him well. Isildur's  Bane  -- I would hazard that  Isildur's Bane  lay 
between you and was a cause of contention in  your Company. Clearly it is  a 
mighty  heirloom  of some sort,  and such  things do not  breed  peace among 
confederates, not if aught may be  learned from  ancient tales. Do I not hit 
near the mark?' 
     `Near,' said Frodo,  'but  not in the gold.  There was no contention in 
our Company, though there was doubt: doubt which way we should take from 
the 
Emyn  Muil. But be that as it may, ancient  tales teach us also the peril of 
rash words concerning such things as  -- heirlooms.' 
     'Ah,  then it is as I  thought: your trouble was with Boromir alone. He 
wished this  thing  brou ght to Minas Tirith. Alas! it is a crooked fate that 
seals  your lips who saw him  last, and holds from me that  which I  long to 
know: what  was  in his  heart and  thought  in his latest hours. Whether he 
erred or no, of this I am sure: he died well, achieving some good thing. His 
face was more beautiful even than in life. 
     `But, Frodo, I pressed you hard at first about Isildur's  Bane. Forgive 
me! It was unwise in such an hour and place. I had not had time for thought. 
We had had a hard fight, and there was more than enough to fill my mind. But 
even as  I spoke  with you, I drew  nearer to the mark, and so  deliberately 
shot wider.  For you must know that much is still preserved  of ancient lore 
among the Rulers of the city  that is not spread abroad. We of  my house are 
not  of the line  of  Elendil.  though the blood of N®menor is in us. For we 
reckon back our line  to  Mardil,  the good steward, who ruled in the king's 
stead when he went away to war. And  that was King Edrnur, last  of the line 
of Anbrion, and  childless, and  he  came never back. And the stewards  have 
governed the city since that day, though it was many generations of Men ago. 
     'And this I remember of Boromir as a boy,  when we together learned the 
tale of our sires and the history of our city, that always it displeased him 
that his father was not king. "How many hundreds of years needs it to make a 
steward a king, if the king  returns not? " he asked. "Few years, maybe,  in 

####-other places of less  royalty," my father  answered. "In Gondor ten thousand  
years  would not  suffice."  Alas!  poor Boromir. Does  that  not  tell  you  
something of him?  ' 
     'It does,' said Frodo. `Yet always he treated Aragorn with honour.' 
     'I doubt it  not,' said  Faramir. `If he  were satisfied  of  Aragorn's 
claim  as you say, he would greatly reverence him. But the pinch has not yet 
come. They had not yet reached Minas Tirith or become rivals in her wars.  
     `But I  stray. We in  the house of Denethor  know much  ancient lore by 
long  tradition,  and  there  are  moreover in  our  treasuries many  things 
preserved: books and tablets writ on withered parchments, yea, and on stone, 
and on leaves of silver and of gold, in divers characters. Some none can now 
read; and for the rest,  few ever unlock them. I can  read a little in them, 
for I have had teaching. It was these  records that brought the Grey Pilgrim 
to  us. I first saw him when I was a child,  and he has been twice or thrice 
since then.' 
     'The Grey Pilgrim? ' said Frodo. 'Had he a name?' 
     'Mithrandir we  called  him in  elf-fashion,' said Faramir,  'and he was 
content. Many are my names in many countries,  he said. Mithrandir among the 
Elves, Tharkyn to the  Dwarves; Olurin I was in my youth in the West that is  
forgotten, in  the  South Incbnus, in  the North Gandalf;  to the East  I go 
not.' 
     'Gandalf!' said Frodo. 'I thought it was he.  Gandalf  the Grey dearest 
of counsellors. Leader of our Company. He was lost in Moria.' 
     'Mithrandir  was  lost!  '  said Faramir.  'An  evil fate seems to have 
pursued your fellowship. It is hard indeed to believe that one  of so  great 
wisdom, and of  power -- for many wonderful things he  did among us  -- could 
perish, and so much lore be taken from the world. Are you sure of  this, and  
that he did not just leave you and depart where he would? ' 
     'Alas! yes,' said Frodo. `I saw him fall into the abyss.' 
     'I see that there  is some great tale of dread in  this.' said  Faramir 
`which perhaps  you may  tell me in the evening-time. This Mithrandir was, I 
now guess, more than a lore-master: a great mover of the deeds that are done 
in our  time. Had he been  among us to  consult concerning the hard words of 
our  dream, he could have  made them clear to  us without need of messenger. 
Yet, maybe,  he would  not  have done  so,  and  the journey of Boromir  was 
doomed.  Mithrandir never spoke to us  of what was to  be, nor did he reveal 
his purposes. He got leave of Denethor, how I  do  not  know, to look at the 

####-secrets of our treasury, and I learned a little of him, when he would  teach 
(and that was seldom). Ever he would search and would  question us above all 
else  concerning  the  Great  Battle  that was fought  upon Dagorlad  in the 
beginning of Gondor, when He whom we do not name was over thrown.  And 
he was 
eager for stories of Isildur, though of him we had less to tell; for nothing 
certain was ever known among us of his end.' 
     Now Faramir's voice  sank  to  a whisper. 'But  this much  I learned or  
guessed, and I have kept it ever secr et in my heart since: that Isildur took  
somewhat from the hand of the Unnamed, ere he  went away  from Gondor, 
never 
to be  seen among  mortal  men  again. Here  I  thought  was  the answer  to 
Mithrandir's questioning. But  it seemed then a  matter that concerned  only 
the seekers after ancient learning. Nor when the riddling words of our dream 
were  debated  among us,  did I think of Isildur's  Bane as being  this same 
thing. For Isildur was ambushed and  slain by  orc-arrows, according  to the  
only legend that we knew, and Mithrandir had never told me more. 
     `What in truth  this Thing is I cannot yet guess; but some heirloom  of 
power and peril it must be.  A  fell weapon, perchance, devised by  the Dark  
Lord. If it were  a thing that gave advantage in battle. I can  well believe 
that  Boromir,  the  proud  and fearless,  often rash, ever anxious for  the 
victory of  Minas  Tirith (and  his own glory therein), might desire  such a  
thing and be allured by  it. Alas that ever he went on that errand! I should 
have been chosen by my  father and the elders but he put himself forward. as 
being the older and the hardier (both true), and he would not be stayed. 
     'But  fear no more!  I would not take  this  thing,  if it  lay by  the 
highway. Not were Minas Tirith  falling in ruin and  I alone could save her, 
so, using the  weapon of the Dark Lord for her  good and my glory.  No. I do 
not wish for such triumphs, Frodo son of Drogo.' 
     'Neither did the Council,' said Frodo. 'Nor do  I. I would have nothing 
to do with such matters.' 
     `For myself,' said Faramir, 'I would see the White Tree in flower again 
in the courts of the kings, and the Silver Crown return, and Minas Tirith in 
peace:  Minas  Anor again as of old, full of light, high and fair, beautiful 
as a queen among other queens: not a mistress of many  slaves, nay, not even 
a kind mistress of willing slaves.  War  must  be, while we defend our lives 
against a destroyer who would devour all; but I do not love the bright sword 

####-for its sharpness, nor the arrow for  its swiftness, nor the warrior for his 
glory. I love only that which they defend: the city of the Men  of  N®menor;  
and I would have  her loved for her memory,  her ancientry, her  beauty, and  
her present wisdom. Not feared, save  as men may fear the  dignity of a man, 
old and wise. 
     'So  fear me not! I do not ask you to tell me  more.  I do not even ask  
you to tell me  whether I now speak nearer the  mark. But if you  will trust  
me,  it may  be that I can advise  you in your present  quest, whatever that 
be-yes, and even aid you.' 
     Frodo made no  answer. Almost he  yielded to  the  desire for  help and 
counsel, to tell this grave young man, whose words  seemed so wise and fair, 
all that was in his mind. But something  held him back. His heart  was heavy  
with fear and sorrow: if he and Sam  were indeed, as seemed likely, all that 
was now left of the Nine Walkers, then he was  in sole command of the secret 
of their errand. Better mistrust undeserved  than rash words. And the memory 
of Bor omir, of the dreadful change that the  lure of the Ring had  worked in 
him, was very present to his mind, when he looked at Faramir and listened to 
his voice: unlike they were, and yet also much akin. 
     They walked on in  silence for a  while,  passing  like grey and  green 
shadows under  the old trees,  their feet  making no  sound; above them many 
birds sang, and the sun glistened on the polished roof of dark leaves in the 
evergreen woods of Ithilien. 
     Sam had taken no part in  the conversation, though he had listened; and 
at the same time he had attended with his keen hobbit ears to  all  the soft  
woodland noises about them. One thing he had noted, that in all the talk the 
name of Gollum had not once come up. He was glad, though he felt that it was 
too much to hope that he would never  hear  it again. He soon  became  aware 
also that though they  walked alone, there  were many men close at hand: not 
only Damrod and Mablung flitting in and out of the shadows ahead, but others 
on either side, all making their swift secret way to some appointed place. 
     Once,  looking suddenly back,  as if some prickle of the skin told  him 
that he  was watched from behind, he  thought he caught a brief glimpse of a  
small dark shape slipping behind a  tree-trunk. He opened his mouth to speak 
and shut it again. `I'm not sure of it,' he said to himself, 'and why should 
I remind them of the old villain, if  they choose to  forget  him? I wish  I 
could!' 
     So they passed on,  until the woodlands grew thinner and the land began 

####-to fall more steeply.  Then they turned aside again, to the right,  and came 
quickly  to a  small river in a narrow  gorge:  it was the  same stream that 
trickled  far  above out of  the round pool, now grown  to  a swift torrent, 
leaping down over many stones in a deep-cloven bed,  overhung  with ilex and 
dark box-woods. Looking west they could see,  below them in a haze of light, 
lowlands and broad meads, and glinting far off in the westering sun the wide  
waters of the Anduin. 
     'Here, alas! I must do you  a discourtesy,' said  Faramir.  "I hope you  
will pardon it to one who has so far made his orders give way to courtesy as 
not  to  slay you or to bind  you. But it is a command that no stranger, not 
even one of Rohan that fights  with  us, sha ll  see the path we now  go with 
open eyes. I must blindfold you.' 
     `As you will,' said  Frodo. 'Even the Elves  do  likewise  at need, and 
blindfolded we crossed the borders of fair Lothlurien. Gimli  the dwarf took  
it ill, but the hobbits endured it.' 
     `It is to no place so fair that I shall lead you,' said Faramir. 'But I 
am glad that you will take this willingly and not by force.' 
     He called softly  and immediately Mablung and Damrod stepped out of the 
trees  and  came  back  to  him.  'Blindfold  these guests,'  said  Faramir. 
`Securely, but not so as to discomfort  them. Do not  tie  their hands. They 
will  give their word not to try and see.  I  could trust them to shut their 
eyes of their  own accord, but  eyes will blink, if  the  feet stumble. Lead 
them so that they do not falter.' 
     With green scarves the  two guards  now bound up the hobbits'  eyes and 
drew their hoods down almost  to their mouths; then  quickly  they took each 
one by  the hand and went on their way. All that Frodo and Sam knew of  this 
last mile of the road they learned from guessing in the dark. After a little 
they found that  they were  on a  path descending  steeply; soon  it grew so 
narrow that they went in  single file, brushing a stony wall on either side; 
their  guards steered them  from  behind with  hands  laid  firmly on  their 
shoulders. Now and again they came  to  rough  places  and were  lifted from 
their feet for a  while,  and then  set down again. Always  the noise of the 
running water  was  on their right hand, and it grew  nearer and louder.  At 
length  they  were  halted.  Quickly Mablung and  Damrod turned them  about, 
several times, and they lost all sense of direction. They climbed  upwards a  
little: it seemed cold and the noise  of the stream had become  faint.  Then 
they were picked up  and carried down, down many steps, and round a  corner. 

####-Suddenly they heard  the water again, loud now,  rushing and  splashing. All 
round them it seemed, and  they felt a fine rain  on their hands and cheeks. 
At last they were set on their  feet once  more. For a moment they stood so, 
half fearful, blindfold, not knowing where they were; and no one spoke. 
     Then came the voice of Faramir close behind. `Let  them see! ' he said. 
The scarves  were  removed and  their hoods drawn back, and they blinked and 
gasped. 
     They stood on a wet floor of polished  stone, the doorstep, as it were, 
of a rough-hewn gate of rock opening dark behind them. But  in  front a thin 
veil  of water was hung, so  near that Frodo cou ld  have put an outstretched 
arm into it. It  faced westward. The level shafts  of the setting sun behind 
beat  upon it, and the red  light was broken  into many flickering  beams of 
ever -changing  colour. It  was as if  they  stood  at  the  window  of  some 
elven-tower, curtained with threaded  jewels  of silver and  gold, and ruby, 
sapphire and amethyst, all kindled with an unconsuming fire. 
     'At least by good chance we  came at the  right hour  to reward you for  
your patience,' said Faramir.  `This is the  Window  of the Sunset,  Henneth 
Annyn,  fairest  of all the falls of Ithilien, land  of  many fountains. Few 
strangers have ever seen it. But there is no kingly hall behind to match it. 
Enter now and see! ' 
     Even as he spoke the sun sank, and the fire faded in the flowing water.  
They  turned and passed under  the low forbidding  arch. At  once they found 
themselves in a rock -chamber, wide and rough, with an  uneven stooping roof.  
A  few torches were kindled  and cast a dim  light on the  glisten ing walls.  
Many men were already there. Others were  still coming in by twos and threes 
through a dark narrow door on one side. As their eyes grew accustomed to the 
gloom the hobbits saw that the cave was larger than they had guessed and was 
filled with gr eat store of arms and victuals.  
     'Well, here is  our refuge,'  said Faramir. `Not a place of  great ease 
but here you may pass  the night in peace. It is dry at least,  and there is 
food, though no fire. At one  time the water flowed  down  through this cave 
and out  of the  arch, but its  course was changed further  up the gorge, by 
workmen  of old, and the stream sent down in a fall  of  doubled height over  
the rocks  far above.  All the ways  into this grot were then sealed against  
the entry of water   or aught else, all save one. There are now but  two ways 
out:  that passage yonder by which you entered  blindfold,  and  through the  
Window-curtain into  a deep  bowl  filled  with knives of  stone. Now rest a  

####-while, until the evening meal is set.' 
     The hobbits  were taken to a corner and given a  low bed to lie on,  if 
they wished. Meanwhile  men busied themselves about the cave, quietly and in 
orderly  quickness. Light  tables  were taken from the walls and  set  up on 
trestles and laden  with gear .  This was plain and unadorned  for  the  most 
part,  but  all well and fairly,  made:  round platters, bowls and dishes of 
glazed brown clay or turned box-wood, smooth and clean. Here and there was a  
cup or basin of polished bronze; and a goblet of plain  silver was set by the 
Captain's seat in the middle of the inmost table. 
     Faramir went about  among the men, questioning each as he came in, in a  
soft  voice. Some came back from the pursuit of  the Southrons; others, left  
behind as scouts near the roa d, came in latest. All  the Southrons  had been 
accounted for, save  only the  great mymak:  what happened to him none could 
say. Of the enemy no movement could be seen; not even an orc-spy was 
abroad. 
     'You saw and heard nothing, Anborn?' Faramir asked of the latest comer. 
     `Well, no, lord,' said the man. `No Orc at least. But I saw, or thought 
I saw,  something a little strange. It was getting deep dusk, when the  eyes 
make things greater than they should be. So perhaps it may have been no more 
than a squirrel.' Sam pricked up  his ears at this.  'Yet if  so,  it  was a  
black squirrel, and I saw no tail. 'Twas like a shadow on the ground, and it 
whisked behind a tree-trunk when  I drew  nigh and went up aloft as swift as 
any squirrel could.  You wi ll not have us  slay wild  beasts for no purpose, 
and it  seemed  no  more, so I  tried  no arrow.  It was too  dark for  sure 
shooting anyway, and the creature was gone into the gloom of the leaves in a 
twinkling.  But  I stayed  for a  while, for  it seemed strange, and then  I 
hastened back. I  thought I heard the thing hiss at me from high above as  I 
turned away.  A large squirrel,  maybe.  Perhaps  under  the  shadow of  the 
Unnamed  some of the beasts of Mirkwood are  wandering hither to our  
woods. 
They have black squirrels there, 'tis said.' 
     `Perhaps,' said Faramir. `But that would be an ill omen, if it were so. 
We do  not want the  escapes of Mirkwood in Ithilien.'  Sam  fancied that he  
gave a swift glance towards the hobbits as he  spoke; but Sam  said nothing.  
For a  while he and Frodo lay back and watched the torchlight, and  the  men 
moving  to and  fro  speaking in  hushed  voices. Then  suddenly  Frodo fell  
asleep. 

####-     Sam  struggled with himself, arguing this  way and that. `He may be a ll 
right,' he  thought, 'and then  he  may  not.  Fair  speech may hide  a foul 
heart.' He yawned. `I could sleep for a week, and I'd be better  for it. And 
what  can  I do, if I do  keep  awake, me all alone, and all these great Men 
about? Nothing, Sam Gamgee; but you've got to keep awake  all the same.' And 
somehow he managed it. The light faded from the cave door, and the grey veil 
of falling water grew dim and was lost in gathering shadow. Always the sound 
of the water went on, never changing its note, morning or evening  or night.  
It murmured and whispered of sleep. Sam stuck his knuckles in his eyes. 
     Now more torches  were being  lit. A cask of wine was broached. Storage 
barrels were being opened. Men were  fetching water from the fall. Some were 
laving  their hands  in  basins. A  wide copper bowl and  a white cloth were 
brought to Faramir and he washed. 
     `Wake our guests,' he said, `and take them water. It is time to eat.' 
     Frodo sat  up and yawned and  stretched.  Sam, not used to being waited 
on, looked with some surprise at the tall man who bowed, holding a basin  of 
water before him. 
     'Put it on the ground, master, if you please! ' he said. 'Easier for me 
and you.' Then to  the astonishment and amusement of  the Men he plunged his 
head into the cold water and splashed his neck and ears.  
     'Is it the custom  in  your land to wash the head before supper? ' said 
the man who waited on the hobbits.  
     `No, before  breakfast,' said Sam. `But  if  you're short of sleep cold 
water on the neck's like  rain  on a wilted lettuce.  There! Now  I can keep 
awake long enough to eat a bit.' 
     They were led then to seats beside Faramir: barrels  covered with pelts 
and high enough above the  benches of the Men  for their convenience. Before 
they ate,  Faramir  and all  his  men turned  and faced west in  a moment of 
silence. Faramir signed to Frodo and Sam that they should do likewise. 
     'So we always do.' he  said, as they sat down: `we look towards N®menor 
that  was,  and beyond to  Elvenhome that is, and  to  that which  is beyond 
Elvenhome and will ever be. Have you no such custom at meat? ' 
     `No,' said  Frodo,  feeling  strangely rustic and untutored. `But if we 
are guests, we bow to  our host, and  after we have eaten we rise  and thank 
him.' 
     'That we do also,' said Faramir. 
     After so long  journeying  and  camping, and  days spent ¤n  the lonely 

####-wild, the evening meal seemed a feast  to the hobbits:  to drink pale yellow 
wine, cool and  fragrant,  and eat bread  and butter, and salted  meats, and 
dried fruits,  and good red cheese, with clean  hands and clean  knives  and 
plates. Neither Frodo  nor  Sam  refused  anything that was  offered,  nor a  
second, nor indeed a  third helping.  The  wine coursed in their  veins  and 
tired limbs, and they felt glad and easy of heart as they had not done since 
they left the land of Lurien. 
     When all was done Faramir led them to a recess at the back of the cave, 
partly screened by curtains; and a chair and two stools were brought  there. 
A little earthenware lamp burned in a niche. 
     `You may soon desire to sleep,' he said, 'and especially good  Samwise, 
who would not close his eyes before he ate -- whether for  fear  of blunting 
the edge of  a noble hunger, or for fear of me, I do not know. But it is not 
good to sleep too soon after meat, and that following a fast. Let  us talk a  
while. On your journey from  Rivendell there must have  been many  things to 
tell.  And you, too,  would perhaps wish to learn  something of  us and  the 
lands where  you  now  are.  Tell me  of  Boromir my  brother,  and  of  old 
Mithrandir, and of the fair people of Lothlurien.' 
     Frodo no longer felt  sleepy and he was willing to talk. But though the 
food and wine had put  him at his ease, he had not lost all his caution. Sam 
was beaming  and humming  to himself, but when  Frodo  spoke he was at first  
content to  listen,  only occasionally venturing  to  make an exclamation of 
agreement. 
     Frodo told many tales,  yet always he  steered the matter away from the 
quest of the Company and from the Ring, enlarging rather on the valiant part 
Boromir had played in all their adventures. with the  wolves of the wild, in 
the snows  under Caradhras, and in  the  mines of Moria  where Gandalf fell.  
Faramir was most moved by the story of the fight on the bridge. 
     `It must have irked Boromir to  run  from Orcs,' he said, `or even from 
the  fell thing you name,  the  Balrog  -- even  though he was the  last  to 
leave.' 
     `He was the last,' said  Frodo, 'but Aragorn was forced to lead us.  He 
alone  knew the way after  Gandalf's fall. But had there  not been us lesser  
folk to care for, I do not think that either he or Boromir would have fled.' 
     `Maybe, it  would  have been  better  had  Boromir  fallen  ther e  with 
Mithrandir,' said Faramir,  `and not gone on  to  the fate that waited above 
the falls of Rauros.' 

####-     'Maybe. But tell me  now of your own fortunes,' said Frodo, turning the 
matter  aside  once  again.  `For I  would  learn more  of Minas  Ithil  and 
Osgiliath, and  Minas Tirith the long-enduring. What  hope have you for that 
city in your long war? ' 
     'What hope have we? '  said Faramir. 'It is long since we had any hope. 
The  sword  of Elendil, if it  returns indeed, may rekindle it, but I do not 
think  that it will  do  more than put off the evil  day,  unless other help 
unlooked-for also comes, from Elves or  Men.  For the Enemy increases and we 
decrease. We are a failing people, a springless autumn. 
     `The Men of N®menor were settled far and wide on the shores and seaward 
regions  of the Great Lands, but for the  most part they fell into evils and 
follies. Many became enamoured of the Darkness and the black arts; some 
were 
given over wholly to  idleness and  ease, and some fought among  themselves,  
until they were conquered in their weakness by the wild men. 
     `It is not  said  that evil arts were ever practised in Gondor, or that 
the Nameless One  was ever named in  honour there;  and the  old wisdom  and 
beauty brought  out of  the West remained long in the realm of  the sons  of 
Elendil  the Fair, and they linger  there still.  Yet even so  it was Gondor  
that brought  about  its  own decay,  falling by  degrees  into dotage,  and 
thinking that the Enemy was asleep, who was only banished not destroyed. 
     'Death was ever present, because the N®menoreans still,  as they had in 
their old kingdom,  and so lost it,  hungered after endless life unchanging. 
Kings made tombs more  splendid than  houses of the living. and counted  old 
names in the rolls of their descent dearer than the names of sons. Childless 
lords sat in aged halls musing on heraldry; in  secret chambers withered men  
compounded  strong  elixirs, or  in high cold  towers asked questions of the 
stars. And the last king of the line of Anbrion had no heir. 
     `But  the  stewards  were wiser  and more  fortunate. Wiser,  for  they 
recruited the strength  of our people from the sturdy folk of the sea -coast, 
and from the hardy mountaineers of Ered  Nimrais. And they made a truce with 
the proud peoples of the  North,  who  often had assailed us, men of  fierce 
valour, but our kin from afar  off, unlike the wild Easterlings or the cruel 
Haradrim. 
     'So it came to  pass in the days of Cirion the Twelfth Steward  (and my 
father is the sit and twentieth) that they rode  to our aid and at the great 
Field  of Celebrant they  destroyed our enemies that had seized our northern 

####-provinces. These are the Rohirrim,  as we name them, masters  of horses, and 
we ceded to them the fields of Calenardhon  that are since called Rohan; for  
that province  had  long been sparsely peopled. And they became  our allies,  
and have  ever  proved true  to us,  aiding us  at  need,  and  guarding our 
northern marches and the Gap of Rohan. 
     `Of our  lore and manners they have learned what they would,  and their 
lords speak our speech at need; yet for  the most part they hold by the ways 
of their  own  fathers and  to their  own  memories, and  they  speak  among 
themselves  their own North  tongue. And  we  love them: tall men  and  fair  
women,  valiant  both  alike, golden-haired, bright-eyed,  and strong;  they 
remind us of the youth of Men, as they were in the  Elder Days. Indeed it is 
said by our lore-masters that they  have from of  old  this affinity with us 
that they  are  come  from those same  Three  Houses  of  Men  as  were  the 
N®menoreans  in  their  beginning  not  from  Hador  the  Goldenhaired,  the 
Elf-friend, maybe, yet from such of his sons and people as went not over Sea 
into the West, refusing the call. 
     'For so we reckon Men in our lore, calling them the High, or Men of the 
West, which  were N®menoreans; and  the Middle Peoples, Men of the 
Twilight, 
such as are  the Rohirrim and their kin  that  dwell still far in the North; 
and the Wild, the Men of Darkness.  
     `Yet  now,  if the  Rohirrim are  grown in  some  ways more like to us, 
enhanced in arts and gentleness, we too  have become more like  to them, and 
can scarce claim any longer the title High. We are become Middle Men, of the 
Twilight, but with memory of other things.  For  as the Rohirrim do, we  now 
love  war  and valour as things good in themselves, both a sport and an end;  
and  though  we still  hold  that  a  warrior  should have more  skills  and 
knowledge than only the craft of weapons  and slaying, we esteem a  warrior, 
nonetheless, above men  of other  crafts.  Such is the need  of our days. So 
even was  my brother,  Boromir:  a  man of  prowess,  and for  that  he  was 
accounted the best man in Gondor. And very valiant indeed he was: no heir of 
Minas  Tirith has  for long  years  been so hardy  in  toil, so  onward into 
battle, or blown a mightier note on the Great Horn.' Faramir sighed and fell 
silent for a while. 
     `You don't say much in all your tales  about the Elves, sir,' said Sam, 
suddenly plucking up courage. He  had noted that Faramir seemed  to refer to 
Elves with reverence, and this even more than his courtesy, and his food and  

####-wine, had won Sam's respect and quieted his suspicions. 
     `No indeed, Master Samwise,' said Faramir, `for  I  am  not  learned in 
Elven-lore. But there you touch upon another point in which we have changed, 
declining from N®menor to  Middle -earth. For as you may know, if  
Mithrandir 
was  your companion and you have spoken with Elrond, the Edain,  the Fathers 
of the  N®menoreans,  fought  beside the  Elves in the first  wars, and were 
rewarded by the gift of the kingdom in the midst of the Sea, within sight of 
Elvenhome. But in Middle-earth Men and Elves became estranged in the days 
of 
darkness, by the arts of the Enemy, and by the slow changes of time in which 
each  kind  walked  further down  their sundered  roads. Men  now  fear  and  
misdoubt the Elves, and yet know little of them. And we of  Gondor grow like 
other  Men, like  the men of  Rohan; for even they, who are the  foes of the 
Dark Lord, shun the Elves and speak of the Golden Wood with dread. 
     `Yet there are among us still  some  who have dealings  with the  Elves 
when they may, and  ever and anon one will go in secret to  Lurien, seldom to 
return. Not I.  For I deem it perilous now for  mortal man  wilfully to seek  
out the Elder People. Yet I envy you that have spoken with the White Lady.' 
     `The Lady of Lurien!  Galadriel!' cried Sam. `You should see her indeed 
you should, sir. I am only a hobbit, and gardening's my job at home, sir, if 
you understand me, and I'm  not much good at poetry  -- not  at making  it: a  
bit of  a comic rhyme, perhaps. now and again, you know, but not real poetry 
-- so I can't tell you what I mean. It ought to  be sung. You'd have  to get 
Strider,  Aragorn that is, or  old Mr. Bilbo, for that.  But I wish  I could 
make a song about her. Beautiful she is, sir! Lovely! Sometimes like a great 
tree  in flower,  sometimes like a white  daffadowndilly,  small and  slender  
like. Hard  as di'monds, soft as moonlight. Warm as sunlight,  cold as frost  
in the stars. Proud and far-off as a snow-mountain, and as merry as any lass 
I  ever saw with daisies  in  her hair in  springtime.  But that's a lot  o' 
nonsense, and all wide of my mark.' 
     'Then she must be lovely indeed,' said Faramir. `Perilously fair.' 
     `I don't know about perilous,' said Sam. `It strikes me that folk takes 
their  peril  with them into Lurien,  and finds  it  there  because  they've 
brought it. But perhaps you could call her perilous, because she's so strong 
in herself. You, you could dash yourself to pieces on her, like a ship on  a  
rock;  or drownd  yourself, like a hobbit in a  river. But  neither rock nor  

####-river would be to blame. Now Boro -- ' He stopped and went red in the face.  
     `Yes? Now Boromir you would say?  ' said Faramir. `What would  you say?  
He took his peril with him? ' 
     `Yes sir, begging your pardon, and a  fine man as your brother was if I 
may say  so.  But  you've  been  warm on  the scent all along. Now I watched 
Boromir  and listened to him, from Rivendell  all down the  road --  looking  
after my master, as you'll understand,  and not meaning any harm to  Boromir 
-- and it's my  opinion that  in Lurien he first  saw clearly what I guessed 
sooner: what  he  wanted.  From the  moment he  first  saw it he  wanted the 
Enemy's Ring! ' 
     `Sam!  '  cried Frodo  aghast. He had fallen deep into his own thoughts 
for a while, and came out of them suddenly and too late. 
     'Save me! ' said Sam turning white, and then flushing scarlet. `There I 
go  again!  When ever  you open your big mouth you put your foot  in it  the 
Gaffer used to say to me, and right enough. O dear, O dear! 
     `Now look here,  sir!  ' He turned, facing up  to Faramir with  all the 
courage  that he  could muster. `Don't you go taking advantage of my  master 
because his servant's no better than a fool. You've spoken very handsome all  
along,  put me off my  guard,  talking of Elves and all. But  handsome is as 
handsome does we say. Now's a chance to show your quality.' 
     'So  it seems,' said Faramir,  slowly and  very  softly, with a strange 
smile.  `So that  is the answer  to all the riddles! The One Ring  that  was 
thought to  have perished  fr om  the world. And Boromir tried to take  it by 
force? And you escaped? And ran all the way -- to me! And here in the wild I 
have  you:  two halflings,  and a host of men at  my  call, and the  Ring of 
Rings. A pretty stroke of fortune!  A chance for Faramir, Captain of Gondor, 
to show his quality! Ha!'  He stood up,  very tall and stern, his  grey eyes 
glinting. 
     Frodo and Sam sprang from their stools and set themselves  side by side 
with their backs  to the wall, fumbling for their sword-hilts.  There was  a 
silence.  All the men in the cave stopped talking and looked towards them in 
wonder. But Faramir sat down  again in his chair and began to laugh quietly,  
and then suddenly became grave again. 
     'Alas  for Boromir! It was too sore a trial!  ' he said. `How you  have 
increased my sorrow, you two  strange wanderers from a  far country, bearing 
the peril of Men! But you are less judges of Men than I of Halflings. We are 
truth-speakers, we men  of Gondor. We boast seldom, and then perform, or die 

####-in the attempt. Not if  I found it  on the  highway would I take it  I said. 
Even if I were such a man as  to desire this thing, and  even though I  knew 
not clearly what  this thing was  when  I spoke, still I should  take  those 
words as a vow, and be held by them. 
     'But I am not such a man. Or I am wise enough  to  know that  there are 
some  perils from which a  man  must  flee.  Sit at peace! And be comforted, 
Samwise. If  you seem to have stumbled, think  that it was  fated to  be so. 
Your heart is shr ewd as  well  as  faithful, and saw clearer than your eyes.  
For  strange though it  may seem,  it was safe to declare this to me. It may 
even help the  master that you love. It shall turn to his good, if it is  in 
my power. So be comforted. But do not even name this thing again aloud. Once 
is enough.' 
     The hobbits came back  to  their seats and sat very  quiet. Men  turned 
back to  their drink and their talk, perceiving  that their captain had  had 
some jest or other with the little guests, and that it was over. 
     'Well, Frodo, now at last we understand one another,' said Faramir. 'If 
you took this thing on yourself, unwilling, at others' asking, then you have 
pity and honour from me. And I marvel at you: to keep  it hid and not to use 
it.  You  are a   new people and a new world to me. Are  all your kin of like 
sort? Your  land  must  be a realm  of peace  and content,  and  there  must  
gardeners be in high honour.' 
     `Not all  is  well  there,'  said Frodo, `but  certainly gardeners  are 
honoured.' 
     `But folk  must  grow weary  there, even  in their  gardens, as  do all 
things under the Sun  of this world. And you are far from  home and wayworn. 
No more tonight. Sleep, both  of you -- in peace, if you can. Fear not! I do 
not wish to  see it, or  touch  it, or know more of it than I know (which is 
enough), lest peril perchance waylay  me and I  fall lower  in the test than 
Frodo son of Drogo. Go now to rest -- but  first tell  me only, if you will, 
whither you wish to go,  and  what  to do.  For I  must watch, and  wait, and 
think.  Time passes.  In the morning  we  must each  go swiftly  on the ways 
appointed to us.' 
     Frodo had felt himself trembling as the first shock of fear passed. Now 
a great  weariness came  down on him like  a  cloud. He could dissemble  and 
resist no longer. 
     'I was going to find a way into Mordor,' he said faintly. `I  was going 
to Gorgoroth. I must  find  the Mountain of Fire and cast the thing into the 

####-gulf of Doom. Gandalf said so. I do not think I shall ever get there.' 
     Faramir stared at him for a moment in grave astonishment. Then suddenly 
he caught him as he swayed, and lifting him gently, carried him  to the  bed 
and laid  him there,  and covered him warmly.  At  once he fell into a  deep 
sleep. 
     Another bed  was  set beside him for his  servant. Sam hesitated for  a  
moment, then bowing very low: `Good night, Captain, my lord,' he said.  `You  
took the chance, sir.' 
     `Did I so?' said Faramir. 
     `Yes sir, and showed your quality: the very highest.' 
     Faramir smiled. 'A pert servant, Master Samwise. But nay: the praise of 
the  praiseworthy is above all rewards.  Yet  there  was naught  in  this to 
praise. I had no lure or desire to do other than I have done.' 
     `Ah  well,  sir,' said Sam, `you said  my master had an elvish air  and 
that was good and true. But I can say this:  you have an air too, sir,  that 
reminds me of, of  -- well, Gandalf, of wizards.  
     'Maybe,'  said  Faramir. `Maybe you discern from  far away the  air  of 
N®menor. Good n ight!' 
 

####- 

Chapter 6. The Forbidden Pool 

 
 
     Frodo  woke to  find  Faramir bending over him. For a  second old fears 
seized him and he sat up and shrank away. 
     `There is nothing to fear,' said Faramir. 
     'Is it morning already? ' said Frodo yawning. 
     `Not yet, but night is drawing to an end, and the full moon is setting. 
Will  you  come and see it?  Also there  is a matter on which I desire  your 
counsel. I am sorry to rouse you from sleep, but will you come? ' 
     `I will,' said Frodo, rising and shivering a little as he left the warm 
blanket and pelts. It seemed cold in the  fireless  cave. The  noise of  the 
water was loud in the stillness. He put on his cloak and followed Faramir. 
     Sam, waking  suddenly  by some instinct of watchfulness,  saw first his 
master's empty  bed  and  leapt to his feet. Then  he saw  two dark figures, 
Frodo  and a  man, framed  against the archway, which was now filled with  a 
pale  white  light. He  hurried after  them,  past rows of men  sleeping  on 
mattresses along the  wall. As he went by  the  cave-mouth  he saw  that the 
Curtain was now become a dazzling veil of silk and pearls and silver thread: 
melting icicles of moonlight. But he did not pause to admire it, and turning 
aside he followed his  master thr ough the narrow  doorway in the wall of the 
cave. 
     They went first  along a black passage, then up  many wet steps, and so 
came to a small flat  landing cut in the stone  and  lit  by  the pale  sky, 
gleaming  high  above through a  long deep shaft.  From here two flights  of 
steps led: one going on, as it seemed, up on to the high bank of the stream; 
the other turning away to the left. This they  followed. It wound its way up 
like a turret-stair. 
     At last they came out of the stony darkness and looked about. They were 
on a wide  flat rock without rail or parapet. At their right, eastwards, the 
torrent fell, splashing over many terraces, and then,  pouring down  a steep 
race, it filled  a smooth-hewn channel with  a  dark  force of water flecked 
with  foam,  and curling and rushing almost at  their  feet it  plunged sheer  
over the  edge that  yawned  upon their left.  A man  stood  there, near the  
brink, silent, gazing down. 
     Frodo turned to  watch the sleek necks of the  water as they curved and 

####-dived.  Then he lifted his  eyes and gazed far away. The world was quiet and  
cold,  as if dawn were near. Far off in  the West the full moon was sinking, 
round and white. Pale mists shimmered in the  great vale below:  a wide gulf 
of silver fume,  beneath which rolled the cool night-waters of the Anduin. A 
black  darkness  loomed beyond,  and  in  it glinted, here and  there, cold, 
sharp, remote, white as  the teeth of ghosts, the peaks of Ered Nimrais, the 
White Mountains of the Realm of Gondor, tipped with everlasting snow. 
     For a while Frodo  stood  there on  the  high stone, and  a shiver  ran 
through him,  wondering if anywhere in  the vastness  of the night -lands his 
old companions walked  or slept,  or lay dead  shrouded in  mist. Why was he 
brough t here out of forgetful sleep?  
     Sam was eager for  an answer to the same question and could not refrain 
himself from muttering, for  his master's ear alone as  he thought: 'It's  a  
fine view, no doubt, Mr. Frodo, but chilly to the heart, not to mention   the 
bones! What's going on? ' 
     Faramir heard and answered. `Moonset over Gondor. Fair Ithil as he goes 
from Middle-earth,  glances upon  the white  locks of old Mindolluin.  It is 
worth a few shivers. But that is not what I brought you to see-though as for 
you,  Samwise,  you  were not  brought, and  do but pay  the penalty of your  
watchfulness. A draught of wine shall amend it. Come, look now! ' 
     He  stepped  up beside the silent sentinel on the dark  edge. and Frodo 
followed.  Sam  hung back. He already felt insecure enough on this high  wet 
platform. Faramir and Frodo looked down. Far below them they  saw  the white 
waters pour into  a foaming  bowl, and then  swirl darkly about  a deep oval 
basin in the rocks. until they found  their  way out  again through a narrow 
gate, and  flowed away, fuming  and  chattering, into  calmer and more level 
reaches. The moonlight still slanted down to the  fall's foot and gleamed on 
the ripples of the basin. Presently Frodo was aware of a small dark thing on 
the  near bank,  but  even as he  looked at  it, it  dived and vanished just  
beyond the boil and bubble of the fall, cleaving the  black  water as neatly 
as an arrow or an edgewise stone. 
     Faramir turned to the man at his side. `Now what would you  say that it 
is,  Anborn? A squirrel, or a kingfisher? Are there black kingfishers in the 
night-pools of Mirkwood?  ' 
     `'Tis not a bird, whatever else it  be,' answered  Anborn. `It has four 
limbs and  dives manwise; a pretty mastery of the craft it  shows, too. What 
is it at? Seeking a way  up behind  the Curtain to our hidings?  It seems we 

####-are discovered at last. I have my bow here, and I have posted other archers, 
nigh  as good  marksmen  as myself, on  either bank.  We  wait only for your 
command to shoot , Captain.' 
     `Shall we shoot? ' said Faramir, turning quickly to Frodo. 
     Frodo did not answer  for a moment. Then `No! ' he said. `No! I beg you  
not to.' If Sam had dared, he  would have said `Yes,' quicker and louder. He 
could not see, but  he guessed well  enough from  their words what they were 
looking at. 
     'You  know,  then, what this thing is? '  said Faramir.  `Come, now you  
have  seen,  tell me why it should be  spared. In all our words together you  
have not once  spoken  of your gangrel companion, and I  let him be for  the 
time.  He could  wait till he  was  caught and  brought before me. I sent my 
keenest huntsmen to seek  him, but he slipped them, and they had no sight of 
him till now, save Anborn here, once  at dusk yesterevening. But now  he has 
done worse trespass than  only  to go  coney-snaring in the uplands: he  has 
dared to come to Henneth  Annyn,  and his life is forfeit.  I marvel at  the 
creature: so secret and so sly as he is, to come sporting in the pool before 
our very window. Does he think  that men sleep without watch all  night? Why 
does he so?' 
     'There are two answers, I think,' said  Frodo. `For one thing, he knows 
little of Men, and sly though he  is, your refuge is so  hidden that perhaps 
he  does  not know that Men are concealed here.  For another, I think  he is 
allured here by a mastering desire, stronger than his caution.' 
     `He is lured here, you  say? ' said  Faramir in  a low voice. `Can  he, 
does he then know of your burden? ' 
     `Indeed yes. He bore it himself for many years.' 
     'He  bore  it? ' said Faramir, breathing sharply in  his wonder.  `This 
matter winds itself ever in new riddles. Then he is pursuing it? ' 
     'Maybe. It is precious to him. But I did not speak of that.' 
     `What then does the creature seek? ' 
     `Fish,' said Frodo. `Look! ' 
     They peered down at the dark pool. A little black head  appeared at the 
far end of the basin,  just out of the deep shadow of the rocks. There was a  
brief silver glint, and a swirl  of tiny ripples. It swam to  the side,  and 
then with  marvellous agility a froglike figure climbed out of the water and 
up the bank. At once it sat down and began to gnaw at the small silver thing  
that glittered  as it  turned:  the  last rays of the moon  were now  falling 

####-behind the stony wall at the pool's end. 
     Faramir  laughed softly.  `Fish! '  he said.  `It  is  a less  perilous 
hunger. Or maybe not: fish from  the pool of Henneth Annyn  may cost him all 
he has to give.' 
     `Now I have him at the arrow-point,' said Anborn. `Shall  I not  shoot, 
Captain? For coming unbidden to this place death is our law.' 
     `Wait, Anborn,'  said Faramir.  `This is a harder matter than it seems. 
What have you to say now, Frodo? Why should we spare? ' 
     `The creature is wretched and hungry,' said Frodo, `and unaware of  his 
danger. And Gandalf, your Mithrandir, he  would have  bidden you not to slay 
him for that reason, and for others. He forbade the Elves to do so. I do not 
know clearly why, and  of what I guess I cannot  speak openly out  here. But 
this creature is in some way bound up with my errand. Until you found us and 
took us, he was my guide.' 
     `Your guide! ' said Faramir. `The matter becomes ever stranger. I would 
do much for you, Frodo, but this I cannot grant: to let this sly wanderer go 
free at his own will from here, to join you later if it please him, or to be 
caught by  Orcs and tell all he knows under threat of pain. He must be slain 
or taken. Slain, if he be not taken very swiftly. But how can  this slippery 
thing of many guises be caught, save by a feathered shaft?  ' 
     `Let me go  down quietly to him,' said Frodo. `You  may keep  your bows 
bent, and shoot me at least, if I fail. I shall not run away.' 
     `Go  then and be swift! ' said Faramir. `If  he  comes  off  alive,  he 
should be your faithful servant for the rest of his unhappy days. Lead Frodo  
down to the bank, Anborn, and go softly. The thing has a nose and ears. Give 
me your bow.' 
     Anborn grunted and led the way down the winding  sta ir to the  landing, 
and then up the other stair, until  at  last they  came to a narrow  opening 
shrouded with thick bushes. Passing silently through, Frodo found himself on 
the top of  the southern bank above the pool. It  was now dark and the falls 
were  pale and grey,  reflecting only the lingering moonlight of the western 
sky. He could not see Gollum. He went forward  a  short way and Anborn  
came 
softly behind him. 
     `Go on!  ' he breathed in  Frodo's ear.  `Have a care to your right. If 
you  fall in the pool, then no one but your fishing friend can help you. And 
forget not that there are bowmen near at hand, though you may not see them.' 

####-     Frodo crept forward, using his hands Gollum-like to feel his way and to 
steady himself.  The rocks  were  for  the  most part  flat  and smooth  but 
slippery.  He halted listening.  At first he  could  hear  no sound but  the 
unceasing  rush of  the  fall behind him. Then presently he  heard,  not far 
ahead, a hissing murmur. 
     'Fissh, nice fissh. White Face has vanished, my precious, at last, yes.  
Now we can eat fish in  peace. No, not in peace,  precious. For Precious  is 
lost; yes, lost. Dirty hobbits, nasty hobbits. Gone and left us, gollum; and 
Precious is gone.  Only poor  Smjagol all  alone.  No Preciou s.  Nasty  Men,  
they'll  take  it,  steal my Precious. Thieves.  We  hates them. Fissh, nice 
fissh: Makes  us  strong.  Makes eyes bright,  fingers  tight, yes. Throttle 
them, precious. Throttle them all, yes, if we gets chances. Nice fissh. Nice 
fissh!  ' 
     So it went on, almost as unceasing as the waterfall,  only  interrupted 
by  a faint noise of slavering and gurgling. Frodo  shivered, listening with 
pity and disgust. He wished it would stop, and that he  never need hear that 
voice again. Anborn  was  not far behind. He  could creep back and ask him to 
get the huntsmen  to shoot.  They  would probably get  close  enough,  while 
Gollum was gorging and off his guard. Only one true shot, and Frodo would be 
rid of the miserable voice  for ever. But no, Gollum had a claim on him now. 
The  servant has a  claim on the master  for service, even  service in fear. 
They  would have foundered  in the Dead Marshes but for  Gollum. Frodo 
knew, 
too, somehow, quite clearly that Gandalf would not have wished it. 
     `Smjagol! ' he said softly. 
     `Fissh, nice fissh,' said the voice. 
     `Smjagol! ' he said, a little louder. The voice stopped. 
     `Smjagol,  Master  has come to  look  for  you. Master  is here.  Come, 
Smjagol! ' There was no answer but a soft hiss, as of intaken breath. 
     'Come, Smjagol! ' said Frodo. `We are in danger.  Men will kill you, if 
they find  you  here. Come quickly, if you  wish  to escape  death.  Come to 
Master!' 
     'No!' said the  voice.  `Not nice Master. Leaves  poor Smjagol and goes 
with new friends. Master can wait. Smjagol hasn't finished.' 
     `There's no time,' said Frodo. `Bring fish with you. Come! ' 
     `No! Must finish fish.' 
     'Smjagol! ' said Frodo desperately. 'Precious  will be angry.  I  shall 

####-take Precious, and I shall say: make  him swallow the bones and choke. Never  
taste fish again. Come, Precious is waiting! ' 
     There  was  a sharp  hiss.  Presently  out of  the darkness Gollum came 
crawling  on all  fours,  like  an  erring  dog  called  to  heel. He had   a 
half-eaten fish  in  his  mouth  and another  in his hand. He came  close to 
Frodo, almost nose to nose, and sniffed at him.  His pale eyes were shining. 
Then he took the fish out of his mouth and stood up. 
     `Nice Master! ' he whispered. `Nice  hobb it, come back to poor Smjagol. 
Good Smjagol comes. Now let's go, go quickly, yes. Through the  trees, while 
the Faces are dark. Yes, come let's go! ' 
     `Yes,  we'll go soon,' said Frodo. `But not at once. I will go with you  
as  I promised. I promise aga in.  But  not now. You are not safe yet. I will  
save you, but you must trust me.' 
     `We  must trust  Master? ' said Gollum doubtfully.  'Why? Why not go at 
once? Where is the other one, the cross rude hobbit? Where is he?' 
     'Away up there,' said Frodo, pointing to the waterfall. 'I am not going 
without him. We must go back to him.' His heart sank. This was too much like 
trickery.  He did not  really fear that  Faramir would allow  Gollum  to  be 
killed, but  he would probably make him prisoner and bind him; and certainly 
what Frodo did would seem a treachery to  the poor  treacherous creature. It  
would  probably be impossible ever to  make  him understand  or believe that 
Frodo had saved his life in the only way he could. What else could he do? -- 
to keep faith,  as  near  as might be, with both sides. `Come!' he said. `Or 
the Precious will be angry. We are  going back now, up the stream. Go on, go 
on, you go in front! ' 
     Gollum crawled along close to the brink for a little way, snuffling and 
suspicious. Presently he stopped and raised his head. `Something's  there! ' 
he  said.  `Not a  hobbit.'  Suddenly  he turned  back.  A  green  light was 
flickering in  his  bulging  eyes.  `Masster, masster!'  he hissed. 'Wicked!  
Tricksy! False!' He spat and stretched out his long arms with white snapping 
fingers.  
     At that moment the great black shape of Anborn loomed up behind him and 
came down  on him. A large strong hand took him in the nape of the neck  and 
pinned him. He  twisted round  like lightning,   all wet and slimy as he was,  
wriggling like an eel, biting  and  scratching like  a cat. But two more men 
came up out of the shadows. 
     'Hold still!  '  said one. `Or we'll stick  you  as full  of pins as  a  

####-hedgehog. Hold still!' 
     Gollum  went limp, and began to whine and weep. They tied him, none too 
gently. 
     `Easy, easy! ' said Frodo. `He has no strength to match you. Don't hurt 
him, if you can help it. He'll be quieter, if you don't. Smjagol! They won't  
hurt you. I'll go with you, and you shall  come to no  harm. Not unless they 
kill me too. Trust Master! ' 
     Gollum turned and spat at him. The men picked  him up, put  a hood over  
his eyes, and carried him off. 
     Frodo  followed them, feeling  very wretched.  They  went  through  the 
opening behind the bushes. and back, down the stairs  and passages, into the 
cave. Two or three  torches  had been lit. Men were stirring. Sam was there,  
and he gave a queer look at the limp bundle that the men carried. `Got him?' 
he said to Frodo. 
     'Yes. Well no, I didn't get him. He  came to me, because  he trusted me 
at  first, I'm afraid.  I did not want him tied up like this. I hope it will 
be all right; but I hate the whole business.' 
     `So  do I,' said Sam. `And nothing will ever  be all  right  where that 
piece of misery is.' 
     A man came and beckoned to the  hobbits, and took them to the recess at 
the back of the cave. Faramir was sitting there in  his  chair, and the lamp 
had been  rekindled  in its  niche above his head. He signed to them  to  sit 
down  on the  stools beside him. `Bring wine for the guests,'  he said. `And 
bring the prisoner to me.' 
     The wine was brought, and then  Anborn came carrying Gollum. He 
removed 
the cover from  Gollum's head and set him on his feet standing behind him to 
support him. Gollum blinked, hooding the malice of his eyes with their heavy 
pale lids. A  very miserable creature he looked, dripping and dank, smelling  
of fish (he still clutched one in his  hand); his sparse locks were  hanging 
like rank weed over his bony brows, his nose was snivelling. 
     `Loose us! Loose us! '  he said.  `The  cord hurts us, yes it does,  it 
hurts us, and we've done nothing.' 
     `Nothing? ' said  Faramir, looking at the wretched creature with a keen 
glance, but  without any expression in his face either of anger, or pity, or 
wonder. 'Nothing? Have you never done anything worthy of binding or of 
worse 

####-punishment? However, that  is not for me to judge, happily. But tonight  you  
have  come  where  it  is  death to come. The fish of this  pool  are dearly 
bought.' 
     Gollum dropped the fish from his hand. `Don't want fish,' he said. 
     'The  price  is not set on the fish,' said  Faramir. `Only to come here 
and look on the pool bears the penalty of death. I have spared you so far at 
the  prayer  of Frodo here, who says that  of him at least you have deserved 
some thanks. But you must also satisfy me. What is  your name? Whence do 
you 
come? And whither do you go? What is your business?  ' 
     `We are  lost, lost,' said  Gollum. 'No name, no business, no Precious, 
nothing. Only empty. Only hungry; yes, we  are hungry. A  few little fishes,  
nasty bony little fishes, for a  poor creature, and they say  death. So wise 
they are; so just, so very just.' 
     'Not very wise,' said Faramir.  'But just: yes perhaps, as just  as our 
little wisdom allows. Unloose him Frodo! ' Faramir  took a small  nail-knife 
from his belt and  handed it to Frodo. Gollum misunderstanding  the gesture,  
squealed and fell down. 
     'Now, Smjagol! ' said Frodo.  'You must trust me. I will not desert you. 
Answer truthfully, if you can.  It will  do you  good not  harm.' He cut the 
cords on Gollum's wrists and ankles and raised him to his feet. 
     'Come hither! ' said Faramir. `Look at me! Do you know the name of this 
place? Have you been here before? ' 
     Slowly Gollum  raised his eyes and  looked  unwillingly into Faramir's.  
All light went out of them, and they stared bleak and pale for a moment into 
the clear unwavering  eyes of the man of Gondor. There  was a still silence. 
Then Gollum dropped his  head and shrank down, until he was squatting on the 
floor,  shivering.  'We  doesn't  know  and we  doesn't want  to  know,'  he  
whimpered. `Never came here; never come again.' 
     `There are locked doors and closed windows in your mind, and dark rooms 
behind them,' said Faramir. `But in this I judge  that you speak  the truth. 
It is well  for you. What oath will  you swear never to return; and never to 
lead any living creature hither by word or sign?' 
     `Master knows,'  said Gollum with a  sidelong glance at Frodo. `Yes, he 
knows. We will promise Master, if he saves us. We'll promise to It, yes.' He 
crawled  to Frodo's feet.  'Save  us,  nice Master!  '  he whined.  `Smjagol 
promises to Precious, promises faithfully. Never come again, never speak, no 

####-never! No, precious, no!' 
     `Are you satisfied? ' said Faramir. 
     `Yes,' said Frodo.  'At least, you must  either  accept this promise or 
carry out your law. You will get no more. But I promised that if he came  to  
me, he should not be harmed. And I would not be proved faithless.' 
     Faramir sat for a moment in thought. `Very good,' he  said at last.  `I  
surrender you to your master, to Frodo son of Drogo. Let him declare what he 
will do with you! ' 
     'But, Lord Faramir,' said Frodo bowing, `you have not yet declared your 
will  concerning  the said Frodo, and until  that is  made known, he  cannot 
shape his plans for himself  or his companions. Your judgement was postponed 
until the morning; but that is now at hand.' 
     `Then I  will declare my doom,' said Faramir. `As for you, Frodo, in so 
far as lies in me under higher  authority, I declare you  free in  the realm 
of, Gondor to the furthest of its ancient bounds; save only that neither you  
nor any that go with you have leave to come  to  this  place unbidden.  This 
doom  shall  stand for a  year and a day, and  then cease,  unless you shall 
before that term come to Minas Tirith and present yourself to  the  Lord and  
Steward of the City. Then I will entreat him to confirm what I have done and 
to make  it  lifelong.  In the  meantime,  whomsoever  you  take  under your  
protection shall be under my protection  and under the shield of Gondor. Are 
you answered? ' 
     Frodo bowed low. 'I am answered,' he  said, `and I place myself at your 
service, if that is of any worth to one so high and honourable.' 
     `It is  of  great  worth,' said  Faramir.  'And  now, do you  take this 
creature, this Smjagol, under your protection? ' 
     `I  do  take  Smjagol under  my  protection,' said  Frodo.  Sam  sighed 
audibly;  and  not  at  the courtesies, of which, as  any  hobbit  would, he 
thoroughly approved. Indeed in the Shire such a matter would have required a  
great many more words and bows.  
     'Then I say  to you,'  said Faramir, turning to  Gollum, 'you  are under  
doom of  death; but while you walk with Frodo you are safe for our part. Yet 
if ever you be found by any man of Gondor astray without him, the doom shall 
fall. And may death find  you swiftly, within Gondor  or  without,  if you do 
not well serve him. Now answer me: whither would you go? You were his 
guide, 
he says. Whither were you leading him? ' Gollum made no reply. 

####-     `This I will not  have secret,'  said Faramir. `Answer me,  or  I  will 
reverse my judgement! ' Still Gollum did not answer. 
     `I will answer for him,' said Frodo. `He brought  me to the Black Gate, 
as I asked; but it was impassable.' 
     `There is no open gate into the Nameless Land,' said Faramir. 
     `Seeing this, we  turned aside and came by  the Southward road '  Frodo 
continued; 'for he said that there is, or there may be, a path near to Minas 
Ithil.' 
     `Minas Morgul,' said Faramir. 
     `I do not know clearly,' said Frodo; `but the path  climbs, I think, up 
into  the mountains  on the  northern side of that vale  where  the old city 
stands. It goes up to a high cleft and so down to -- that which is beyond.' 
     `Do you know the name of that high pass? ' said Faramir. 
     'No,' said Frodo. 
     'It is  called Cirith Ungol.' Gollum hissed sharply and began muttering 
to himself. `Is not that its name? ' said Faramir turning to him. 
     `No! '  said  Gollum, and then he squealed, as if something had stabbed 
him. 'Yes, yes, we heard the name once. But what does the name matter to us? 
Master  says he must get in. So we must try some way. There is no  other way 
to try, no.' 
     'No  other way?  ' said  Faramir. `How do  you  know  that? And who has 
explored  all  the  confines  of  that  dark  realm? '  He  looked long  and 
thoughtfully at Gollum. Presently he spoke  again. `Take this creature away, 
Anborn. Treat  him gently, but watch  him.  And do not you,  Smjagol, try to 
dive into the falls.  The rocks  have such  teeth  there  as would  slay you  
before your time. Leave us now and take your fish! ' 
     Anborn  went out  and Gollum went cringing before him.  The curtain was 
drawn across the recess.  
     `Frodo, I think you do very unwisely in this,' said Faramir.  `I do not 
think you should go with this creature. It is wicked.' 
     'No, not altogether wicked,' said Frodo. 
     'Not wholly, perhaps,' said Faramir; 'but malice eats it like a canker, 
and the  evil is growing. He will lead you to no good. If you will part with 
him, I will give him safe-conduct and guidance to  any  point on the borders 
of Gondor that he may name.' 
     `He would not take  it,' said  Frodo.  'He would  follow after me as he 
long  has  done.  And I  have  promised  many  times  to  take him under  my  

####-protection  and to go where he led. You would not ask me to break faith with 
him?' 
     'No,'  said  Faramir. `But my  heart would. For it  seems less  evil to 
counsel another man to break troth than to do so oneself, especially if  one 
sees a friend bound unwitting to his own  harm. But no  -- if he will go with 
you, you must  now endure him. But I do not think  you are  holden to go  to 
Cirith  Ungol, of which  he has told you  less than  he  knows. That much  I 
perceived clearly in his mind. Do not go to Cirith Ungol!' 
     `Where then shall  I  go?  ' said   Frodo.  `Back  to the Black Gate and 
deliver  myself  up  to the guard? What do  you know against this place that 
makes its name so dreadful? ' 
     `Nothing certain,' said Faramir. 'We of Gondor do not ever pass east of 
the Road in these days, and none of us younger men has ever done so, nor has 
any  of us  set foot upon the  Mountains of Shadow. Of them we know only old 
report and the  rumour of bygone  days. But there  is some  dark terror that 
dwells in the  passes above Minas Morgul. If Cirith Ungol  is named, old men 
and masters of lore will blanch and fall silent. 
     ,The valley  of Minas Morgul passed into evil very long ago, and it was 
a menace  and  a  dread while the banished  Enemy dwelt  yet far  away,  and 
Ithilien was still for the most par t in our keeping.  As you know, that city 
was once a strong place, proud and fair, Minas Ithil, the twin sister of our 
own city.  But it was taken by fell men whom the Enemy in his first strength 
had dominated, and who wandered homeless and masterless  aft er his fall.  It 
is said  that  their lords  were  men of  N®menor  who had fallen  into dark 
wickedness; to them the Enemy had  given rings of power, and he had 
devoured 
them: living ghosts  they were become, terrible  and  evil. After  his going 
they took Minas  Ithil and  dwelt  there,  and they  filled  it, and all the 
valley about, with decay: it seemed empty  and was  not so,  for a shapeless 
fear  lived  within the ruined walls. Nine Lords there  were, and after  the 
return  of their Master, which they aided and prepared  in secret, they grew 
strong again.  Then the Nine Riders issued forth from  the  gates of horror, 
and we could not withstand them. Do not approach their  citadel. You will be 
espied. It  is a place of  sleepless malice, full of lidless eyes. Do not go 
that way!  ' 
     'But where else will you direct me? ' said Frodo. 'You cannot yourself,  
you say, guide me to the mountains, nor over  them. But over the mountains I 

####-am bound, by solemn  undertaking to the  Council, to find a way or perish in 
the seeking. And if  I turn back, refusing the road in its bitter end, where 
then  shall I go  among Elves or Men? Would you have  me come to Gondor 
with 
this Thing, the Thing  that drove your  brother mad with  desire? What spell  
would it work in Minas Tirith?  Shall  there be two  cities of Minas Morgul,  
grinning at each other across a dead land filled with rottenness? ' 
     `I would not have it so,' said Faramir. 
     `Then what would you have me do? ' 
     `I know not. Only I would not have you go to death or to torment. And I 
do not think that Mithrandir would have chosen this way.' 
     'Yet since he is gone, I must take such paths as I can find.  And there 
is no time for long searching,' said Frodo. 
     `It is a hard doom and a hopeless errand,'  said  Faramir.  'But at the 
least,  remember my  warning:  beware  of this guide,  Smjagol.  He has done 
murder before now. I read it in him.' He sighed. 
     `Well, so we meet and  part,  Frodo son of Drogo. You have no  need  of 
soft words: I do  not hope to see you again on any other day under this Sun. 
But you shall go  now with my blessing upon you,  and upon  all your people. 
Rest a little while food is prepared for you. 
     'I would gladly learn how this creeping Smjagol became possessed of the 
Thing of which we speak, and how he lost it, but I will not trouble you now.  
If ever beyond  hope you return to the lands of the living and we retell our 
tales, sitting by a wall in the sun, laughing at  old  grief, you shall tell 
me  then.  Until  that  time, or some  other time beyond the vision  of  the 
Seeing-stones of N®menor, farewell! ' 
     He rose and bowed low to Frodo, and drawing the curtain passed out into 
the cave. 
 

####- 

Chapter 7. Journey to the Cross-roads 

 
 
     Frodo and Sam returned  to their  beds and lay there in silence resting 
for a little,  while men bestirred themselves  and  the business of the  day 
began. After a while water was brought to them,  and then they were led to a  
table where food was set for three. Faramir broke his fast with them. He had 
not slept since the battle on the day before, yet he did not look weary. 
     When they had finished they stood up. `May no hunger trouble you on the 
road,'  said  Faramir. `You  have little provision, but some small  store of 
food fit for travellers I have ordered to be stowed  in your packs. You will 
have  no lack  of  water as you walk in Ithilien,  but  do not  drink of any 
stream that flows from Imlad Morgul, the Valley of Living Death. This also I 
must tell you. My scouts and watchers  have all returned, even some that have 
crept within sight of the Morannon. They all find  a strange thing. The land 
is empty.  Nothing  is  on the  road,  and  no sound  of foot, or  horn,  or  
bowstring is anywhere  to be  heard.  A  waiting  silence broods  above  the 
Nameless Land.  I do not know what this portends. But the time draws swiftly 
to some great conclusion. Storm is coming. Hasten while you may! If  you are 
ready, let us go. The Sun will soon rise above the shadow.' 
     The hobbits' packs were brought to them (a little heavier than they had 
been), and  also two stout staves of polished wood, shod with iron, and with  
carven heads through which ran plaited leathern thongs.  
     'I  have no fitting  gifts  to  give you at our parting,' said Faramir ; 
`but take these staves. They may be of service to those who walk or climb in 
the wild.  The  men of  the White Mountains use them; though these have been 
cut  down to your  height and  newly  shod. They  are made of the fair  tree 
lebethron, beloved of   the woodwrights of Gondor, and a  virtue has been set 
upon them of finding  and returning.  May that virtue not wholly  fail under  
the Shadow into which you go!' 
     The hobbits  bowed low. `Most  gracious host,' said Frodo, 'it was said 
to me by Elrond Halfelven that I should find friendship upon the way, secret 
and unlooked  for. Certainly I looked  for no such  friendship  as you  have 
shown. To have found it turns evil to great good.' 
     Now they made ready to depart. Gollum was brought out of some corner or  
hiding-hole,  and he seemed  better pleased with himself  than he had  been,  

####-though he kept close to Frodo and avoided the glance of Faramir.  
     'Your  guide  must  be  blindfolded,' said Faramir, 'but  you and  your 
servant Samwise I release from this, if you wish.' 
     Gollum squealed, and squirmed, and clutched at Frodo, when they came to 
bind his eyes; and Frodo said: 'Blindfold us all three, and cover up my eyes 
first, and then perhaps he will see that no harm  is meant.' This  was done, 
and they were led from the cave of Henneth Annyn. After they  had passed the 
passages  and stairs they felt the cool morning air, fresh and sweet,  about 
them. Still blind they went on for  some  little time,  up  and  then gently 
down. At last the voice of Faramir ordered them to be uncovered. 
     They stood under the boughs  of the woods again. No noise  of the falls 
could be heard,  for  a  long  southward slope lay now  between them and the 
ravine in which the stream flowed. To the west they could  see light through 
the trees, as if the  world came there  to a sudden end, at a  brink looking 
out only on to sky. 
     'Here  is the last parting of our ways,' said Faramir. 'If you take  my 
counsel, you will not turn eastward yet. Go  straight on, for  thus you will 
have the cover of the woodland for many miles. On your west is an edge where 
the land falls into the great vales, sometimes suddenly and sheer, sometimes 
in  long  hillsides. Keep near to this edge and the skirts of the forest. In 
the beginning of your journey you may walk under daylight, I think. The land 
dreams in  a false peace, and  for a while  all evil is  withdrawn. Fare you  
well, while you may!' 
     He embraced the hobbits then, after the manner of his people, stooping, 
and placing his hands upon their shoulders, and kissing their foreheads. 'Go 
with the good will of all good men!' he said. 
     They bowed to the ground. Then he  turned and without  looking back  he 
left them  and went to his  two guards that stood at a little distance away. 
They marvelled  to  see  with  what speed  these green-clad men  now  moved, 
vanishing almost in the twinkling of an  eye.  The forest  where Faramir had 
stood seemed empty and drear, as if a dream had passed. 
     Frodo sighed and turned back southward. As if to  mark his disregard of 
all such courtesy, Gollum was scrabbling in the mould at the foot of a tree. 
`Hungry again already?' thought Sam. `Well, now for it again!' 
     'Have they  gone at last? ' said Gollum. `Nassty wicked Men!  Smjagol's 
neck still hurts him, yes it does. Let's go! ' 
     `Yes, let  us go,' said Frodo. `But  if you can only speak ill of those 

####-who showed you mercy, keep silent! ' 
     `Nice Master! ' said Gollum. `Smjagol was only joking. Always forgives,  
he  does, yes, yes, even nice Master's little trickses. Oh yes, nice Master, 
nice Smjagol! ' 
     Frodo and Sam did not  answer.  Hoisting their packs and  taking  their 
staves in hand, they passed on into the woods of Ithilien. 
     Twice that day they  rested  and took a little of the food provided  by 
Faramir:  dried fruits and  salted  meat, enough for  many  days;  and bread 
enough to last while it was still fresh. Gollum ate nothing. 
     The sun rose and  passed  overhead unseen, and began to sink,  and  the 
light through  the trees to the west grew golden; and always they  walked in 
cool green  shadow, and all about  them was silence. The birds seemed all to 
have flown away or to have fallen dumb. 
     Darkness came early  to the silent  woods, and before the fall of night 
they halted, weary, for they had walked  seven leagues or more  from Henneth 
Annyn. Frodo lay and  slept  away  the  night  on the  deep mould beneath an 
ancient tree. Sam beside  him was more uneasy: he woke many times, but there 
was never a sign of Gollum, who had slipped off as  soon as  the others  had 
settled to rest. Whether he had slept by himself in some hole nearby, or had 
wandered  restlessly prowling through  the  night, he did  not say;  but  he 
returned with the first glimmer of light, and roused his companions.  
     `Must get up, yes  they must!'  he  said. 'Long ways to go still, south 
and east. Hobbits must make haste!' 
     That day passed  much  as the  day  before had  gone,  except that  the 
silence seemed deeper; the air grew heavy, and it began to be stifling under  
the trees. It felt as if thunder was  brewing. Gollum often paused, sniffing 
the air, and then he would mutter to himself and urge them to greater speed.  
     As the third stage of  their day's  march drew on  and afternoon wa ned, 
the forest opened out, and the trees became larger and more scattered. Great 
ilexes of  huge girth stood  dark  and solemn in  wide glades with  here and 
there among  them  hoary ash-trees. and  giant oaks  just putting  out their 
brown-green  buds.  About them  lay long launds of green  grass dappled with 
celandine and anemones, white and blue, now folded for sleep; and there were 
acres  populous with  the leaves of  woodland hyacinths: already their sleek  
bell-stems were  thrusting through the  mould . No  living creature, beast or  
bird, was to be seen, but in these open places Gollum grew afraid, and  they  
walked now with caution, flitting from one long shadow to another. 

####-     Light  was fading fast when they came to the forest -end. There they sat 
under  an old gnarled oak that  sent its roots twisting like snakes  down  a  
steep crumbling bank. A deep dim valley lay before them. On its further side 
the  woods gathered  again,  blue  and grey under  the  sullen  evening, and 
marched on southwards. To the  right the Mountains of Gondor  glowed, 
remote 
in  the  West,  under  a fire-flecked  sky. To  the left  lay darkness:  the 
towering walls of Mordor;  and  out of  that darkness the long valley  came, 
falling steeply in an ever -widening trough towards the Anduin. At its bottom 
ran a hurrying stream:  Frodo could  hear its stony voice coming  up through 
the silence; and beside  it on the hither side a road went winding down like 
a pale ribbon, down into chill grey mists that  no  gleam of sunset touched. 
There it seemed to  Frodo that he descried far off, floating as it were on a  
shadowy sea, the high  dim  tops and broken pinnacles of old  towers forlorn 
and dark. 
     He turned to Gollum. `Do you know where we are? ' he said. 
     'Yes,  Master. Dangerous places. This is the road from the Tower of the 
Moon, Master, down to the ruined city by the shores of the River. The ruined 
city, yes, very nasty place, full of  enemies. We shouldn't have taken Men's 
advice. Hobbits have come a long way out of the path. Must go east now, away 
up there.' He waved his skinny arm  towards  the darkling mountains. `And we 
can't  use  this  road. Oh  no!  Cruel peoples come this way, down  from the 
Tower.' 
     Frodo looked down on to the road. At any rate nothing was moving  on it  
now. It appeared lonely  and forsaken, running  down to empty  ruins  in the 
mist. But there was an evil feeling in the air, as if things might indeed be 
passing up and down that  eyes could  not see. Frodo shuddered  as he looked 
again  at the distant pinnacles now dwindling into  night, and the  sound of 
the water  seemed  cold  and cruel: the voice  of Morgulduin,  the  polluted 
stream that flowed from the Valley of the Wraiths.  
     'What shall we do?  ' he said.  'We have walked long  and far. Shall we 
look for some place in the woods behind where we can lie hidden? ' 
     'No good  hiding in the  dark,' said Gollum. 'It's in day that  hobbits 
must hide now, yes in day.' 
     `Oh come! ' said Sam.  'We must rest for a bit, even if we get up again 
in the middle of the night. There'll still be hours of dark then time enough 
for you to take us a long march, if you know the way.' 

####-     Gollum  reluctantly agreed  to  this, and  he  turned  back towards the 
trees, working eastward for a  while along the straggling edges of the wood.  
He would not rest on the ground so near the evil road, and after some debate 
they  all climbed  up into  the  crotch of  a  large  holm-oak, whose  thick  
branches springing together from  the trunk made a good  hiding-place and  a 
fairly comfortable refuge.  Night fell and it grew altogether dark under the 
canopy of the  tree.  Frodo and Sam drank a  little water and ate some bread 
and dried fruit, but Gollum at once curled up and went to sleep. The hobbits 
did not shut their eyes. 
     It must have been a little after midnight when Gollum woke up: suddenly 
they were aware of his pale eyes unlidded gleaming at them. He  listened and 
sniffed,  which seemed,  as  they had noticed before,  his  usual method  of 
discovering the time of night. 
     'Are we rested? Have we had beautiful sleep?' he said. 'Let's go!' 
     'We aren't, and we haven't,' growled Sam. 'But we'll go if we must.' 
     Gollum dropped at once  from  the branches of the tree on to all fours,  
and the hobbits followed more slowly. 
     As  soon  as they  were down they  went  on again  with Gollum leading,  
eastwards, up the  dark sloping  land. They could see little,  for the night 
was  now so deep that  they were  hardly aware of the  stems of trees before 
they stumbled  against them. The ground  became more broken  and walking 
was 
more  difficult, but Gollum seemed in no  way troubled. He  led them through 
thickets and wastes of brambles; sometimes round  the lip of a deep cleft or  
dark pit, sometimes down into black bush-shrouded hollows and out again; but 
if ever they went a little downward, always the further slope was longer and 
steeper. They were climbing steadily. At their first  halt they looked back, 
and they could  dimly perceive the roofs of the forest they   had left behind 
lying like  a  vast  dense shadow, a darker night under the  dark blank sky. 
There seemed to be a great  blackness looming slowly out of the East, eating  
up the faint blurred stars. Later the sinking moon escaped from the pursuing 
cloud, but it was ringed all about with a sickly yellow glare. 
     At last  Gollum  turned  to the hobbits. 'Day soon,' he  said. 'Hobbits 
must hurry. Not safe to stay in the open in these places. Make haste! ' 
     He quickened his pace, and they  followed him wearily.  Soon they began 
to climb up on to a great hog-back of land. For the most part it was covered 
with a thick growth of gorse and whortleberry, and  low tough thorns, though 

####-here and there clearings opened, the scars of recent fires. The gorse-bushes 
became  more frequent  as they  got nearer the  top; very old and  tall they 
were, gaunt and leggy below but thick above, and already  putting out yellow 
flowers  that  glimmered in the gloom and gave a faint  sweet scent. So tall 
were the spiny  thickets that the  hobbits could  walk upright  under  them, 
passing through long dry aisles carpeted with a deep prickly mould. 
     On the further edge of this broad hill-back they stayed their march and  
crawled for hiding  underneath a  tangled  knot  of  thorns.  Their  twisted 
boughs, stooping to the ground, were overridden  by a clambering maze of old 
briars. Deep inside there  was  a hollow hall, raftered with dead branch and 
bramble, and roofed with the first leaves and  shoots  of spring. There they 
lay for a  while, too tired yet to eat; and peering out through the holes in 
the covert they watched for the slow growth of day. 
     But no  day  came, only a dead brown twilight. In the East  there was a  
dull red glare under the lowering cloud: it  was not the red of dawn. Across 
the tumbled lands between, the mountains of the Ephel D®ath frowned at 
them, 
black and shapeless below where night lay thick and did not pass away, above 
with  jagged  tops  and edges outlined  hard and  menacing against the fiery 
glow. Away to their right a great shoulder of the mountains  stood out, dark 
and black amid the shadows, thrusting westward. 
     `Which way do we go from here?' asked Frodo. `Is that the opening of-of 
the Morgul Valley, away over there beyond that black mass? ' 
     `Need we think about it yet?' said Sam, `Surely we're not going to move 
any more today, if day it is?' 
     `Perhaps not, perhaps not,' said Gollum.  `But we must go soon, to  the 
Cross-roads.  Yes,  to  the  Cross-roads. That's the  way  over  ther e  yes, 
Master.' 
     The red glare over Mordor  died  away. The twilight deepened  as  great 
vapours rose in the East and crawled above them. Frodo and Sam took a little 
food and then  lay down,  but Gollum was restless.  He would  not eat any of 
their food, but  he  drank  a little water and  then crawled about under the 
bushes, sniffing and muttering. Then. suddenly he disappeared. 
     `Off hunting, I suppose,' said Sam and yawned. It was his turn to sleep 
first, and  he  was soon deep in a dream. He thought he was back in the  Bag 
End garden looking for something; but he had a heavy pack on his back, which 
made him stoop.  It  all seemed very weedy and rank  somehow, and thorns and 

####-bracken were invading the beds down near the bottom hedge. 
     `A job of work for me, I can see; but I'm so tired,' he kept on saying. 
Presently  he remembered what he was looking  for. `My  pipe!'  he said, and 
with that he woke up. 
     `Silly!' he said  to himself, as he opened his eyes and wondered why he 
was lying  down under the hedge. `It's in  your pack all the time!'  Then he 
realized, first that the pipe might  be in his pack but he had  no leaf, and 
next that he was hundreds of miles from  Bag End. He sat up. It seemed to be 
almost dark. Why had his master let him sleep  on out of turn, right on till 
evening?  
     `Haven't you had no sleep, Mr. Frodo?' he said. 'What's the time? Seems 
to be getting late!' 
     'No it isn't,' said Frodo.  `But  the day is getting darker instead  of 
lighter: darker and  darker. As far as I  can tell, it isn't midday yet, and 
you've only slept for about three hours.' 
     'I wonder what's up,' said  Sam. 'Is there  a storm coming? If  so it's 
going  to  be the  worst there ever was. We shall  wish  we were down a deep 
hole, not just stuck  under a hedge.' He listened. `What's that? Thunder, or  
drums, or what is it? ' 
     'I don't know,' said  Frodo. `It's been going on for a good while  now.  
Sometimes the ground seems  to  tremble, sometimes it seems to be  the heavy 
air throbbing in your ears.' 
     Sam looked  round.  `Where's Gollum?  ' he said. 'Hasn't he  come  back  
yet?' 
     `No,' said Frodo. `There's not been a sign or sound of him.' 
     `Well,  I  can't abide  him,'  said  Sam.  `In fact,  I've  never taken 
anything on a journey that I'd have been less sorry to lose  on the way. But 
it  would be just like him, after coming all these miles, to go and get lost  
now, just when we shall need him most  --  that is, if he's ever going  to be 
any use, which I doubt.' 
     `You forget the Marshes,' said Frodo.  `I hope nothing has happened  to 
him.' 
     `And I hope he's  up to  no  tricks. And anyway I  hope he doesn't fall 
into other hands, as you might say. Because if he does, we  shall soon be in 
for trouble.' 
     At that moment a rolling and rumbling noise was heard again, louder now 
and deeper. The ground seemed to quiver under their feet. 'I think we are in 

####-for trouble anyhow,' said Frodo. `I'm  afraid our journey  is  drawing to an 
end.' 
     'Maybe,' said Sam;  `but  where there's life there's hope, as my Gaffer  
used to say;  and need of vittles, as he  mostways used to  add. You  have a  
bite, Mr. Frodo, and then a bit of sleep.' 
     The  afternoon, as Sam supposed it must be called, wore on. Looking out 
from the  covert he  could see only a dun, shadowless  world,  fading slowly 
into a featureless,  colourless gloom.  It felt stifling but not warm. Frodo 
slept  unquietly,  turning and  tossing,  and sometimes murmuring. Twice Sam 
thought  he heard him speaking  Gandalf's  name.  The  time  seemed  to drag 
interminably. Suddenly Sam heard a hiss behind him, and  there was Gollum 
on 
all fours, peering at them with gleaming eyes.  
     `Wake up, wake up! Wake up, sleepies!' he whispered. `Wake up!  No time 
to lose. We must go, yes, we must go at once. No time to lose!' 
     Sam stared  at him suspiciously: he  seemed frightened or excited.  `Go 
now? What's your little game?  It isn't time yet. It can't be tea -time even, 
leastways not in decent places where there is tea -time.' 
     `Silly!  ' hissed Gollum. `We're not in  decent places.  Time's running 
short, yes, running fast. No time to lose. We must go. Wake up. Master, wake 
u He clawed at Frodo; and  Frodo, startled out of sleep, sat up suddenly and 
seized him by the arm. Gollum tore h imself loose and backed away. 
     'They mustn't  be silly,' he hissed. `We must go. No time to lose!' And 
nothing more could  they  get  out of him. Where he  had been, and  what  he 
thought was brewing to make  him in  such a hurry, he would not say. Sam was 
filled with deep suspicion,  and showed it; but  Frodo gave no sign  of what 
was passing in his mind. He sighed, hoisted his pack, and prepared to go out 
into the ever -gathering darkness.  
     Very stealthily  Gollum led them down the hillside, keeping under cover  
wherever it was possible, and running, almost bent to the ground, across any 
open space; but the light was now so dim that even  a keen-eyed beast of the 
wild could scarcely have seen the hobbits, hooded, in their grey cloaks, nor  
heard them,  walking as warily as the little people can. Without the crack of 
a twig or the rustle of a leaf they passed and vanished. 
     For about an hour they went on, silently, in  single file, oppressed by 
the gloom and by the  absolute stillness  of the land,  broken only now  and 
again  by the  faint rumbling as  of thunder far away or  drum-beats in some  

####-hollow  of  the hills.  Down  from their hiding-place  they  went,  and then 
turning  south they steered as straight a course as Gollum could find across 
a long broken slope that leaned up towards the mountains. Presently, not far  
ahead, looming up  like a black wall, they saw a belt of trees. As they drew 
nearer they  became aware  that  these were of vast  size,  very  ancient it 
seemed, and still towering high, though their tops were gaunt and broken, as 
if tempest and lightning-blast had swept across them, but had failed to kill 
them or to shake their fathomless roots.  
     'The Cross-roads, yes,' whispered Gollum, the first words that had been 
spoken  since they left  their hiding-place. 'We must go  that way.' Turning 
eastward  now, he led them up  the slope;  and  then suddenly  there  it was 
before them: the Southward Road, winding its way about the outer feet of the 
mountains, until presently it plunged  into the great ring of trees.  
     'This is the only way,' whispered Gollum. 'No paths beyond the road. No 
paths. We must go to the Cross-roads. But make haste! Be silent! ' 
     As furtively as scouts within the campment of their enemies, they crept 
down on to the road, and stole along its westward edge under the stony bank, 
grey as the stones themselves,  and soft -footed  as hunting cats.  At length 
they reached the trees, and found that they stood in a great  roofless ring, 
open in  the middle to the sombre sky; and the spaces between  their immense 
boles  were  like the great  dark arches of  some  ruined  hall. In the very 
centre four ways met. Behind them lay the road to the  Morannon; before them 
it ran out again upon its  long journey south; to their right the road  from 
old  Osgiliath  came  climbing up,  and crossing,  passed out eastward  into 
darkness: the fourth way, the road they were to take. 
     Standing there for a moment filled with dread Frodo became aware that a  
light was shining;  he  saw it  glowing  on  Sam's face beside  him. Turning 
towards it, he saw, beyond an arch of boughs, the road to  Osgiliath running  
almost as straight  as  a stretched ribbon down, down, into the West. There, 
far away, beyond sad Gondor now overwhelmed in shade,  the  Sun was 
sinking, 
finding at last the hem of the great slow-rolling pall of cloud, and falling 
in an ominous fire towards the yet unsullied Sea. The brief glow fell upon a  
huge sitting  figure, still and solemn as the great stone kings of Argonath. 
The years had gnawed it, and violent hands had maimed it. Its head was gone, 
and in its place was set in mockery a round rough-hewn stone, rudely painted 
by savage hands in the likeness of a grinning face with one large red eye in 

####-the midst  of  its forehead. Upon its knees and mighty chair,  and all about 
the pedestal,  were idle  scrawls  mixed  with  the foul  symbols  that  the 
maggot-folk of Mordor used. 
     Suddenly, caught by the level beams,  Frodo saw the old king's head: it 
was lying rolled away by the  roadside. `Look, Sam!' he cried, startled into 
speech. `Look! The king has got a crown again!' 
     The eyes  were hollow and the  carven  beard was  broken, but about the 
high stern forehead there was a coronal of silver and gold. A trailing plant 
with flowers like small white stars had bound  itself across the brows as if 
in reverence for the fallen king,  and in the crevices  of  his  stony  hair 
yellow stonecrop gleamed. 
     'They cannot conquer for ever!' said Frodo. And then suddenly the brief 
glimpse was gone. The Sun dipped and vanished, and  as if at the  shuttering 
of a lamp, black night fell. 
 

####- 

Chapter 8. The Stairs of Cirith Ungol 

 
 
     Gollum  was  tugging  at  Frodo's  cloak  and  hissing  with  fear  and 
impatience. `We must go,' he said. `We mustn't stand here. Make haste!' 
     Reluctantly Frodo turned his back on the West and followed as his guide 
led  him, out into the darkness of the East. They left the ring of trees and 
crept along the road towards the mountains. This road, too, ran straight for  
a while,  but  soon it began to  bend  away southwards,  until it came right 
under the great shoulder of rock that they had seen from the distance. Black  
and  forbidding  it  loomed  above them, darker  than the  dark  sky behind. 
Crawl ing  under  its shadow the road  went on,  and rounding it sprang  east  
again and began to climb steeply. 
     Frodo and Sam were  plodding along with heavy hearts, no longer able to  
care greatly  about  their  peril. Frodo's head  was  bowed; his burden  was 
dragging him down again. As soon as the great  Cross-roads  had been passed, 
the weight of it, almost forgotten in Ithilien, had begun to grow once more. 
Now, feeling the way become steep before his feet, he looked wearily up; and 
then he  saw  it, even  as Gollum  had said  that he would: the city of  the 
Ringwraiths. He cowered against the stony bank. 
     A long-tilted  valley, a  deep gulf of shadow,  ran back far  into  the 
mountains. Upon the further side, some way  within the valley's arms high on 
a  rocky seat upon the black knees  of  the Ephel D®ath, stood the walls and  
tower of Minas Morgul. All was dark about it, earth and sky, but it  was lit 
with light. Not the imprisoned moonlight welling through the marble walls of 
Minas  Ithil long ago, Tower of the  Moon, fair and radiant in the hollow of 
the hills. Paler  indeed than  the moon ailing in some  slow eclipse was the 
light of it now, wavering and blowing like a  noisome exhalation of decay, a  
corpse-light, a light that  illuminated  nothing.  In  the  walls  and tower  
windows showed, like countless black holes  looking inward  into  emptiness;  
but  the topmost course of the tower revolved slowly, first one way and then 
another, a huge ghostly head  leering into the night. For a moment the three 
companions  stood there, shrinking,  staring  up with unwilling eyes. Gollum 
was the first to recover. Again he pulled  at their cloaks urgently,  but he 
spoke no word. Almost he dragged them forward. Every step was reluctant, and 
time seemed to slow its pace. so that between the raising of a foot  and the 

####-setting of it down minutes of loathing passed. 
     So they came  slowly  to the  white  bridge.  Here  the  road, gleaming 
faintly,  passed over the  stream  in the midst of the valley, and went  on, 
winding  deviously up towards the city's gate: a black  mouth opening in the 
outer circle of the  northward walls. Wide flats lay on either bank, shadowy 
meads filled with pale white flowers. Luminous these were too, beautiful and 
yet horrible of shape, like the demented  forms in an uneasy dream; and they  
gave forth a  faint sickening charnel-smell; an  odour  of rottenness filled 
the  air. From  mead to mead  the  bridge sprang. Figures stood there at its 
head, carven  with cunning  in forms human  and bestial, but all corrupt and  
loathsome.  The water flowing  beneath was  silent, and  it steamed, but the 
vapour that  rose from it, curling and twisting about the bridge, was deadly 
cold. Frodo felt his senses  reeling and his mind darkening. Then  suddenly, 
as if some force were  at work other than his own will, he began  to  hurry, 
tottering forward, his groping hands held out, his head lolling from side to 
side. Both Sam and Gollum ran after him. Sam caught his  master in his arms,  
as he stumbled and almost fell, right on the threshold of the bridge. 
     `Not  that way! No, not that  way! '  whispered  Gollum, but the breath 
between  his teeth seemed to tear the heavy stillness like a whistle, and he 
cowered to the ground in terror. 
     `Hold  up,  Mr. Frodo! ' muttered Sam  in  Frodo's ear. 'Come back! Not 
that way. Gollum says not, and for once I agree with him.' 
     Frodo passed his hand over his brow and wrenched his eyes away from the 
city  on the  hill.  The luminous  tower fascinated him,  and he fought  the 
desire that was on him to run up the gleaming road towards its gate. At last  
with an effort he turned back, and as  he did so, he felt the Ring resisting 
him, dragging  at the chain about his  neck; and his  eyes too, as he looked 
away, seemed for the moment to  have  been blinded.  The darkness before him 
was impenetrable. 
     Gollum, crawling on  the ground like  a frightened animal, was  already 
vanishing into the gloom. Sam, supporting and guiding his  stumbling master, 
followed after him as quickly as he could. Not far from the near bank of the  
stream there was a gap in the stone-wall beside the road. Through this  they 
passed, and Sam saw that they were on a narrow  path that gleamed faintly at 
first, as  the main road  did,  until  climb ing  above  the meads of  deadly 
flowers it faded and went dark, winding its crooked way up into the northern 
sides of the valley. 

####-     Along this path the hobbits trudged, side by side, unable to see Gollum 
in front of  them, except when  he turned back to  beckon them  on. Then his 
eyes  shone  with  a green-white light, reflecting  the noisome Morgul-sheen 
perhaps, or kindled by some answering mood within. Of that deadly gleam  and 
of  the dark eyeholes Frodo  and Sam  were  always conscious,  ever glancing 
fearfully over their shoulders,  and  ever dragging their eyes  back to find 
the darkening path. Slowly  they laboured on. As they rose  above the stench  
and vapours of  the poisonous stream their  breath  became easier and  their 
heads clearer; but now their limbs were deadly tired, as  if they had walked 
all night under a burden, or had been swimming long against a heavy  tide of 
water. At last they could go no further without a halt. 
     Frodo stopped and  sat down on a stone. They had now climbed up  to the 
top  of  a  great  hump of bare rock.  Ahead of them  there was a bay in the 
valley-side, and  round the  head of this  the path  went on, no more than a  
wide ledge with a chasm on the right; across the sheer southward face of the 
mountain it crawled upwards, until it disappeared into the blackness above. 
     `I  must rest a  while, Sam,' whispered Frodo. `It's heavy  on me,  Sam 
lad, very heavy. I wonder how far I can carry  it? Anyway I must rest before 
we venture on to that.' He pointed to the narrow way ahead. 
     `Sssh! ssh! ' hissed Gollum hurrying back to them. `Sssh! ' His fingers 
were on his lips and he shook his head urgently. Tugging  at Frodo's sleeve,  
he pointed towards the path; but Frodo would not move. 
     `Not  yet,' he  said,  'not  yet.' Weariness and  more  than  weariness 
oppressed him; it seemed as if a heavy spell was laid on his mind  and body. 
`I must rest,' he muttered. 
     At  this  Gollum's fear  and  agitation became so  great that he  spoke 
again,  hissing  behind  his hand, as  if to  keep  the  sound  from  unseen 
listeners  in the air. `Not here, no. Not rest here. Fools! Eyes can see us. 
When they come  to the  bridge they will see  us. Come away!  Climb,  climb!  
Come!  ' 
     `Come, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. `He's right, again. We can't stay here.' 
     'All  right,'  said Frodo  in a  remote voice, as of one  speaking half 
asleep. `I will try.' Wearily he got to his feet. 
     But  it  was too  late.  At that moment the rock quivered  and trembled 
beneath them. The  great rumbling noise, louder than ever before, rolled  in 
the ground and echoed in the mountains.  Then  with searing suddenness there 
came a great red flash. Far beyond the eastern  mountains it leapt into  the 

####-sky and splashed the lowering clouds with cr imson.  In that valley of shadow 
and  cold deathly light it  seemed  unbearably violent  and fierce. Peaks of 
stone and ridges like notched knives sprang out in staring black against the 
uprushing flame in Gorgoroth. Then came a great crack of thunder. 
     And Minas Morgul answered. There was a flare of livid lightnings: forks 
of blue flame springing up from the tower and from the encircling hills into 
the sullen clouds. The earth groaned; and out of the city there came  a cry. 
Mingled  with harsh high voices as of birds of prey, and the shrill neighing 
of horses wild with rage  and fear, there came a rending screech, shivering, 
rising swiftly to a piercing pitch beyond the range of hearing.  The hobbits 
wheeled round towards it, and cast themselves down, holding their hands upon 
their ears. 
     As the terrible cry ended, falling back  through a long sickening  wail 
to  silence, Frodo slowly  raised his head.  Across the  narrow  valley, now 
almost on  a level with his eyes, the walls of the evil city stood ,  and its 
cavernous  gate, shaped like an open mouth with gleaming  teeth,  was gaping 
wide. And out of the gate an army came. 
     All that  host  was clad in  sable, dark  as the night. Against the wan 
walls and  the luminous pavement  of  the  road Frodo could  see them, small 
black figures in rank upon rank,  marching  swiftly  and  silently,  passing 
outwards in  an endless stream. Before them went a great cavalry of horsemen 
moving like  ordered shadows, and at their head was one greater than all the 
rest: a Rider, all black, save that on his  hooded head he had a helm like a  
crown that  flickered with  a  perilous  light.  Now he was drawing near the 
bridge below,  and Frodo's staring eyes followed him,  unable to  wink or to 
withdraw. Surely there was the Lord of the  Nine Riders returned to earth to 
lead his ghastly  host to battle? Here, yes here indeed was the haggard king 
whose cold  hand had smitten down the Ring-bearer with his deadly knife. The 
old wound throbbed with pain and a great chill spread towards Frodo's heart. 
     Even  as these thoughts  pierced him with dread  and held him  bound as 
with a  spell, the Rider halted suddenly, right  before the  entrance of the 
bridge, and behind him all the host stood still. There was  a pause, a  dead 
silence. Maybe it was  the Ring that called  to the  Wraith-lord, and for  a  
moment he was troubled, sensing some other power within his valley. This way 
and that turned the dark head helmed  and  crowned  with  fear, sweeping the 
shadows with its unseen eyes. Frodo waited, like a bird at the approach of a  
snake,  unable to move.  And  as  he  waited, he felt, more urgent than ever  

####-before,  the command  that  he  should  put on  the Ring.  But great as  the 
pressure was, he felt no  inclination now to yield to it. He  knew that  the 
Ring would only betray him, and that he had not, even if  he  put it on, the 
power  to face the  Morgul-king-not yet. There was no  longer any  answer to 
that command in his own will,  dismayed by terror though it was, and he  felt 
only the  beating upon him of a  great power from outside. It took his hand, 
and as Frodo watched with his mind, not willing it but in suspense (as if he 
looked on some  old story far  away), it moved the hand inch by inch towards 
the chain upon his neck. Then his  own will stirred;  slowly  it forced  the 
hand  back. and  set it to find another thing, a thing lying hidden near his 
breast. Cold and  hard it  seemed as  his  grip closed on it:  the  phial of 
Galadriel, so long  treasured, and  almost forgotten till  that hour.  As he 
touched it, for a while all thought of the Ring was banished from his  mind. 
He sighed and bent his head. 
     At  that moment the Wraith-king  turned and spurred  his horse and rode 
across the bridge, and all his dark host followed him. Maybe the elven-hoods 
defied his unseen eyes, and the mind of his small enemy; being strengthened, 
had turned  aside his thought.  But  he  was  in haste. Already the hour had 
struck,  and at his great Master's  bidding he must march with  war into the 
West. 
     Soon he had passed, like a shadow  into shadow, down  the winding road, 
and  behind  him still the black ranks crossed the bridge. So great an  army 
had never issued from that vale since the  days of  Isildur's might; no host  
so fell and strong in arms had yet assailed the fords of Anduin; and yet  it 
was but one and not the greatest of the hosts that Mordor now sent forth. 
     Frodo  stirred. And suddenly  his heart went out to Faramir. 'The storm 
has burst at last,' he thought. `This great  array of spears  and  swords is 
going to Osgiliath. Will Faramir get across in time? He  guessed it, but did 
he know the hour? And  who can now hold  the fords when the King of the 
Nine 
Riders comes? And  other armies will  come.  I  am too late. All is lost.  I 
tarried on the way. All is lost. Even if my errand is performed, no one will 
ever know. There will be  no one  I can  tell. It will be in vain.' Overcome 
with weakness he wept. And still the host of Morgul crossed the bridge. 
     Then at a  great distance, as if it  came out of memories of  the Shire, 
some sunlit early morning,  when  the  day called and doors were opening, he 
heard  Sam's voice  speaking. `Wake up, Mr. Frodo!  Wake up! ' Had the voice 

####-added:  `Your breakfast is  ready,' he  would hardly  have  been  surprised. 
Certainly Sam was urgent. `Wake up, Mr. Frodo! They're gone,' he said. 
     There was  a dull clang. The gates of Minas Morgul had closed. The last 
rank of spears had  vanished down  the road. The tower still grinned  across 
the valley, but the light was fading  in it. The whole city was falling back  
into  a  dark brooding  shade,  and  silence.  Yet still it was filled  with 
watchfulness.  
     'Wake  up,  Mr. Frodo!  They're gone, and  we'd better  go too. There's 
something still alive in that place, something with eyes,  or a seeing mind, 
if you take  me; and the  longer we stay in one spot, the sooner it will get 
on to us. Come on, Mr. Frodo! ' 
     Frodo raised his head, and then stood up. Despair had not left him, but 
the weakness had  passed. He even smiled grimly, feeling now as clearly as a 
moment before he had  felt the opposite,  that  what he had to do, he had to 
do, if he could, and that whether  Faramir or Aragorn or Elrond or Galadriel  
or Gandalf or anyone e lse ever knew about it was beside the purpose. He took 
his staff in one hand and the phial in his other. When he saw that the clear 
light was already welling through his fingers, he  thrust it into his  bosom 
and held it against his heart. Then turning from the city of Morgul,  now no 
more  than a grey glimmer across a dark gulf, he prepared to take the upward 
road. 
     Gollum, it  seemed,  had  crawled off along the ledge into the darkness 
beyond, when the  gates  of Minas  Morgul  opened, leaving the hobbits where 
they  lay. He now came creeping back, his  teeth chattering and his  fingers 
snapping. `Foolish!  Silly!  '  he hissed. `Make haste!  They  mustn't think  
danger has passed. It hasn't. Make haste!  ' 
     They did not answer, but they followed him on to the climbing ledge. It 
was little to the liking of either of  them, not even  after facing so  many 
other perils; but it did not  last  long.  Soon the  path reached a  rounded 
angle  where  the  mountain-side  swelled out  again, and  there it suddenly 
entered a narrow  opening in the rock. They had come to the first stair that 
Gollum had spoken of. The  darkness  was almost complete, and they could see 
nothing  much  beyond their hands' stretch; but  Gollum's  eyes shone  pale, 
several feet above, as he turned back towards them. 
     `Careful! ' he whispered. `Steps. Lots of steps. Must be careful! ' 
     Care was certainly needed. Frodo and  Sam at  first felt easier, having 
now a wall on either side, but the stairway was almost as steep as a ladder , 

####-and as they climbed up and  up, they became more  and more aware of the long 
black fall  behind them.  And the steps  were narrow,  spaced unevenly,  and 
often treacherous: they  were worn and  smooth at  the  edges, and some were 
broken, and  some cracked  as foot was set  upon them. The hobbits struggled 
on,  until at last they  were  clinging with  desperate fingers to the steps 
ahead, and forcing their  aching knees  to bend and  straighten; and ever as 
the stair cut its way deeper  into the  sheer mountain the rocky walls  rose 
higher and higher above their heads.  
     At  length, just as they felt that they could endure no more, they  saw 
Gollum's  eyes peering  down at them again. `We're up,' he whispered. 'First  
stair's past. Clever hobbits to  climb so high, very  clever hobbits. Just a  
few more little steps and that's all, yes.' 
     Dizzy and very  tired Sam, and Frodo following him, crawled up the last  
step, and sat down rubbing their legs  and knees. They were in  a  deep dark 
passage that seemed still to go  up before  them,  though at a gentler slope 
and without steps. Gollum did not let them rest long. 
     'There's another stair still,' he said. `Much  longer stair. Rest  when 
we get to the top of next stair. Not yet.' 
     Sam groaned. 'Longer, did you say? ' he asked. 
     'Yes, yess, longer,' said Gollum. `But not  so  difficult. Hobbits have 
climbed the Straight Stair. Next comes the Winding Stair.' 
     'And what after that? ' said Sam. 
     `We shall see,' said Gollum softly. `O yes, we shall see!  ' 
     'I thought you said there  was  a  tunnel,' said  Sam.  `Isn't  there a  
tunnel or something to go through? ' 
     'O yes,  there's a tunnel,' said Gollum. `But hobbits  can rest  before 
they try that. If they get through that,  they'll be nearly at the top. Very 
nearly, if they get through. O yes! ' 
     Frodo shivered. The climb had made him sweat, but now  he felt cold and 
clammy, and there was a chill draught in the dark passage, blowing down from 
the invisible  heights above. He got up and shook himself.  `Well, let's  go 
on! ' he said. `This is no place to sit in.' 
     The passage seemed to go on  for miles, and always the chill air flowed 
over them, rising as they went on to  a bitter wind. The mountains seemed to 
be trying with their deadly breath to daunt them, to turn them back from the  
secrets of the high places,  or to blow them away  into the darkness behind. 
They only knew  that  they had come  to the end, when suddenly  they felt no 

####-wall at their right hand. They  could see very little. Great black shapeless 
masses and deep  grey shadows loomed above  them and about them, but now 
and 
again a dull  red light flickered up under  the lowering  clouds, and for  a  
moment  they were aware of  tall peaks, in  front  and on  either side, like 
pillars holding up a vast sagging roof. They  seemed to have climbed up many 
hundreds of feet, on to a wide shelf. A cliff was on their  left and a chasm 
on their right. 
     Gollum led the way close under the cliff.  For the present they were no 
longer climbing, but the  ground  was now more broken  and  dangerous in the 
dark, and there  were blocks and  lumps of fallen stone  in the  way.  Their 
going  was slow and  cautious.  How  many hours  had  passed  since they had 
entered the  Morgul Vale  neither Sam nor Frodo could  any longer guess. The 
night seemed endless. 
     At length they were once more aware of a wall looming up, and once more 
a stairway opened before them. Again  they halted, and  again they  began to  
climb. It was a long and weary ascent; but this  stairway did not delve into 
the  mountain-side. Here  the huge cliff face sloped backwards, and the path 
like  a  snake wound  to and fro across it. At one point it crawled sideways 
right to the  edge of the dark chasm, and Frodo  glancing down saw below him 
as  a vast deep pit the great ravine at the head of the Morgul Valley.  Down 
in  its depths glimmered like  a glow-worm thread the  wraith-road from  the 
dead city to the Nameless Pass. He turned hastily away. 
     Still  on and up the  stairway bent and  crawled, until  at last with a  
final flight, short  and straight, it climbed out again on to another level. 
The  path had veered away from the main pass in the great ravine, and it now 
followed  its own  perilous course at the bottom of a lesser cleft among the 
higher  regions  of  the Ephel D®ath. Dimly  the hobbits could  discern tall 
piers and jagged pinnacles of stone on either side, between which were great 
crevices  and fissures blacker than  the night, where  forgotten winter s had 
gnawed and carved the sunless stone. And now the red light in the sky seemed 
stronger; though they could not tell whether a  dreadful morning were indeed 
coming to this place of shadow, or whether  they saw only the flame of  some 
great violence  of  Sauron in  the torment  of Gorgoroth  beyond.  Still far 
ahead, and still high above, Frodo, looking up, saw, as he guessed, the very 
crown of  this  bitter road. Against the sullen redness of the eastern sky a  
cleft was outlined  in  the topmost ridge,  narrow, deep-cloven between  two 

####-black shoulders; and on either shoulder was a horn of stone. 
     He paused  and looked more attentively. The horn upon the left was tall 
and slender; and in it burned a red light, or else the red light in the land 
beyond was shining through a hole. He saw now: it  was a black  tower poised 
above the outer pass. He touched Sam's arm and pointed. 
     'I  don't like the look of that! ' said Sam.  `So  this secret  way  of 
yours is guarded after all,' he growled, turning to Gollum. 'As you knew all 
along, I suppose? ' 
     'All ways  are watched, yes,' said Gollum.  `Of  course they  are.  But 
hobbits must  try  some way. This may  be least watched. Perhaps they've all  
gone away to big battle, perhaps! ' 
     'Perhaps,' grunted Sam.  'Well, it  still  seems a long  way off, and a  
long way  up before we get there. And there's still the tunnel. I think  you  
ought to rest now,  Mr. Frodo. I don't know what time of day or night it is, 
but we've kept going for hours and hours.' 
     `Yes, we must  rest,' said Frodo. 'Let us find some corner out  of  the 
wind, and gather our  strength-for  the last lap.' For so  he felt it to be. 
The  terrors of  the land  beyond, and  the deed to  be  done there,  seemed 
remote, too  far off yet to  trouble  him. All his mind  was bent on getting 
through or over this impenetrable wall and guard.  If once he could do  that 
impossible thing, then  somehow the errand would be  accomplished, or so  it 
seemed to him in that  dark hour of weariness, still  labouring in the stony 
shadows under Cirith Ungol. 
     In a dark crevice between two great piers of rock they sat down:  Frodo 
and  Sam a  little  way within. and Gollum crouched upon the ground near the 
opening. There the hobbits took what  they expected would be their last meal 
before they went down into the Nameless Land, maybe the last meal they 
would 
ever  eat together. Some of the food  of Gondor they ate, and  wafers of the 
waybread of the Elves. and they drank a little. But of their water they were 
sparing and took only enough to moisten their dry mouths. 
     `I wonder when we'll find water again? ' said Sam. 'But I suppose  even 
over there they drink? Orcs drink, don't they? ' 
     'Yes,  they drink,' said Frodo. 'But do not let  us speak of that. Such 
drink is not for us.' 
     `Then  all  the  more need  to fill our bottles,' said  Sam. `But there 
isn't any water up here: not  a sound or a trickle  have I heard. And anyway 

####-Faramir said we were not to drink any water in Morgul.' 
     'No water flowing out of Imlad Morgul, were his words,' said Frodo. `We 
are not in that valley now, and if we came  on a spring  it would be flowing 
into it and not out of it.' 
     'I  wouldn't  trust  it,' said Sam, 'not  till  I was dying  of thirst. 
There's a  wicked feeling  about this  place.' He  sniffed. 'And  a smell, I 
fancy. Do you notice it? A queer kind of a smell, stuffy. I don't like it.' 
     'I don't like anything here at all.' said Frodo, `step or stone, breath 
or bone. Earth, air and water all seem accursed. But so our path is laid.' 
     'Yes, that's so,'  said Sam. `And we shouldn't be here at all,  if we'd 
known more about it before we started. But I  suppose  it's often  that way. 
The brave things  in the old  tales and songs,  Mr. Frodo: adventures,  as I 
used to call them. I used to think that they were things  the wonderful folk  
of the stories  went out and looked  for,  because they wanted them, because 
they were exciting and  life was a bit dull, a kind of a sport, as you might 
say. But that's not the  way of it with the tales  that  really mattered, or  
the  ones that stay in the mind. Folk seem to have been just landed in them, 
usually -- their paths were laid that way, as you put it. But  I expect they 
had lots of chances, like us, of turning back, only they didn't. And if they 
had, we  shouldn't know, because they'd have  been  forgotten. We hear about 
those as just went on  -- and not all to a  good end, mind you; at least not 
to what  folk  inside a story and not outside it call a good  end. You know,  
coming home, and finding things all right, though not quite the same  -- like 
old Mr Bilbo.  But those aren't always  the best tales to  hear, though they 
may be the  best tales to get landed in! I wonder what sort of a tale  we've 
fallen into?  ' 
     `I wonder,' said Frodo. 'But I don't know. And that's the way of a real 
tale. Take any one that you're fond of. You may know, or guess, what kind of 
a  tale it is, happy -ending or sad-ending, but the people  in it don't know.  
And you don't want them to.' 
     'No, sir, of course not. Beren now,  he  never thought he was  going to 
get that Silmaril from the  Iron Crown in Thangorodrim, and yet he did,  and 
that was a worse place and a blacker danger than ours.  But  that's  a  long 
tale, of course, and goes on past the happiness and into grief and beyond it 
-- and the  Silmaril  went  on and  came to Edrendil. And why, sir, I  never  
thought of that before! We've got  -- you've got some  of  the light of it in 
that star-glass  that the Lady gave you! Why,   to  think of it, we're in the 

####-same tale still! It's going on. Don't the great tales never end? ' 
     'No, they  never  end  as  tales,' said Frodo.  `But the people in them 
come, and go when their part's ended. Our part will end later  -- or sooner.' 
     'And then we can have some rest and  some sleep,' said Sam.  He laughed  
grimly.  'And I  mean just  that, Mr. Frodo. I mean plain ordinary rest, and 
sleep, and  waking up  to a morning's work in the garden. I'm afraid  that's 
all I'm hoping for all the time. All the big important  plans are not for my 
sort. Still, I wonder if we shall ever be put into songs  or tales. We're in 
one,  or course; but I mean: put into words, you know, told by the fireside, 
or read out of a great big book with red  and black letters, years and years 
afterwards. And people will say: "Let's hear about Frodo and the Ring! " And 
they'll say: "Yes, that's one of my favourite stories. Frodo was very brave. 
wasn't he, dad?"  "Yes, my boy, the  famousest of  the hobbits,  and  that's 
saying a lot."' 
     `It's saying a lot too much,' said Frodo, and he laughed,  a long clear 
laugh from  his heart. Such a sound had not been heard in those places since 
Sauron came to Middle-earth. To Sam suddenly it seemed as if all the  stones 
were listen ing and the  tall rocks leaning over them. But Frodo did not heed 
them;  he laughed again. 'Why, Sam,' he said, 'to hear you somehow makes  me 
as merry as if the story was already written. But you've left out one of the 
chief characters: Samwise the stouthearted. "I  want to hear more about Sam, 
dad. Why  didn't they put  in more of his talk, dad? That's  what I like, it 
makes me laugh. And Frodo wouldn't have  got far without Sam, would he, 
dad? 
"  ' 
     `Now, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, 'you shouldn't make fun. I was serious. ' 
     `So  was I,' said Frodo, 'and so I am. We're  going on a bit  too fast. 
You and I, Sam, are still stuck in the worst places of the story, and it  is 
all too likely that some will say at this point: "Shut the book now, dad; we 
don't want to read any more." ' 
     `Maybe,' said Sam, 'but I wouldn't be one to say that.  Things done and 
over and made into part of the great  tales are  different. Why, even Gollum 
might be  good in a  tale,  better than he is to have by you, anyway. And he 
used to like  tales himself once, by his own  account. I wonder if he thinks 
he's the hero or the villain?  
     `Gollum!' he called. `Would  you like to be the hero  -- now where's  he 
got to again?' 

####-     There was no  sign of  him at  the mouth  of their shelter nor  in  the 
shadows near. He had refused their food, though he had, as usual, accepted a  
mouthful of water; and then  he had seemed to curl up for a sleep:  They had 
supposed that one at any  rate of his objects  in his  long absence  the day 
befor e had been to hunt for food to his own liking; and now he had evidently 
slipped off again while they talked. But what for this time?  
     `I don't like his sneaking off without saying,' said Sam. 'And least of 
all now. He can't  be looking for food up here, not unless there's some kind 
of rock he fancies. Why, there isn't even a bit of moss! ' 
     `It's no  good worrying about him now,'  said  Frodo. `We couldn't have 
got so  far,  not even within  sight of the pass, without  him, and so we'll 
have to put up with his ways. If he's false, he's false.' 
     'All the same, I'd  rather have  him under  my eye,' said Sam. 'All the 
more so, if  he's false. Do you remember he never would say if this pass was 
guarded or no? And now we see a  tower there -- and it may be deserted,  and 
it may  not. Do  you think he's gone to fetch  them, Orcs  or  whatever they 
are?' 
     `No,  I  don't  think  so,'  answered Frodo.  'Even if he's up  to some 
wickedness, and I suppose that's not unlikely, I don't think it's  that: no t 
to  fetch Orcs,  or  any servants of the  Enemy.  Why wait till now,  and go 
through all the labour of the climb, and come so near the land  he fears? He 
could probably have  betrayed us to Orcs many times since we met him. No, if 
it's  anything,  it wil l  be some  little private trick of  his  own-that he 
thinks is quite secret.' 
     `Well,  I suppose  you're  right, Mr.  Frodo,'  said Sam.  'Not that it 
comforts me mightily. I don't make no  mistake:  I  don't doubt he'd hand me  
over  to Orcs  as  gladly  as kiss  his hand.  But  I was forgetting --  his 
Precious. No, I  suppose the  whole  time it's  been The  Precious for  poor 
Smjagol. That's the one idea in  all his little schemes, if he has any.  But 
how bringing us up here will help him in that is more than I can guess.' 
     'Very  likely  he can't guess himself,' said Frodo. `And I don't  think  
he's got just  one plain scheme in his muddled head. I think he really is in 
part trying to save the Precious from the Enemy. as long as he can. For that 
would be the last  disaster for himself too. if the Enemy got it. And in the 
other part, perhaps, he's just biding his time and waiting on chance.' 
     'Yes, Slinker  and Stinker, as I've said before,'  said  Sam.  'But the 
nearer they get to the  Enemy's land the more like Stinker Slinker will get. 

####-Mark my words: if ever we get to the pass, he  won't let us really take  the 
precious thing over the border without making some kind of trouble.' 
     `We haven't got there yet,' said Frodo. 
     'No, but we'd better keep our eyes skinned till we do.  If we're caught 
napping, Stinker will come out on top pretty quick. Not but what it would be 
safe for you to have a wink now, master.  Safe, if you lay close  to me. I'd 
be dearly glad to see you have a sleep. I'd keep watch over you; and anyway, 
if you lay near, with my arm round you, no one could come pawing you 
without 
your Sam knowing it.' 
     `Sleep!'  said  Frodo and sighed, as if out of  a desert  he had seen a  
mirage of cool green. 'Yes, even here I could sleep.' 
     `Sleep then, master! Lay your head in my lap.' 
     And so Gollum found  them hours later, when  he returned,  crawling and  
creeping down the path out  of the gloom ahead. Sam sat  propped against the 
stone, his head dropping  sideways and his   breathing heavy. In his  lap lay 
Frodo's head,  drowned deep in  sleep; upon his white  forehead lay  one  of 
Sam's brown hands, and the  other lay softly upon his master's breast. Peace 
was in both their faces.  
     Gollum looked at them. A strange expression passed over his lean hungry 
face.  The gleam faded from his eyes,  and they went dim and grey,  old  and  
tired. A spasm of pain seemed to twist him, and he turned away, peering back 
up towards  the  pass,  shaking  his head, as  if engaged in  some   interior  
debate. Then he came back, and  slowly  putting out  a trembling  hand, very 
cautiously he touched Frodo's knee  -- but almost the touch was a caress. For  
a fleeting moment,  could one of the sleepers have seen him, they would have 
thought that they beheld an old weary hobbit, shrunken by the years that had 
carried him far beyond his time, beyond friends and kin,  and the fields and 
streams of youth, an old starved pitiable thing. 
     But at that touch Frodo stirred and cried out softly in  his sleep, and 
immediately Sam was wide awake. The first thing he saw was Gollum  -- 
`pawing 
at master,' as he thought. 
     `Hey you!' he said roughly. `What are you up to?' 
     'Nothing, nothing,' said Gollum softly. `Nice Master!' 
     `I daresay,' said Sam. 'But where have you been to  -- sneaking off and 
sneaking back, you old villain? ' 

####-     Gollum withdrew himself, and a green glint  flickered under  his  heavy 
lids. Almost  spider -like  he  looked now, crouched  back on his bent limbs, 
with his  protruding eyes. The fleeting  moment  had  passed, beyond recall.  
`Sneaking,  sneaking!'  he  hissed.  'Hobbits always  so polite, yes. O nice 
hobbits! Smjagol brings them  up secret  ways that  nobody else  could find.  
Tired he is, thirsty  he is, yes thirsty; and he guides them and he searches 
for paths, and they say sneak, sneak. Very nice friends,  O yes my precious,  
very nice.' 
     Sam felt  a bit remorseful, though not more trustful. 'Sorry.' he said. 
'I'm sorry, but you startled me out of my sleep. And I  shouldn't  have been 
sleeping, and that made me a bit sharp.  But Mr.  Frodo.  he's that tired, I 
asked him to have a wink; and well,  that's how it is. Sorry. But where have 
you been to? ' 
     `Sneaking,' said Gollum, and the green glint did not leave his  eyes. 
     'O very well,' said Sam, `have it your own way! I don't suppose it's so 
far  from the truth. And now  we'd  better all  be  sneaking along together. 
What's the time? Is it today or tomorrow? ' 
     'It's tomorrow,' said Gollum, 'or this  was  tomorrow when hobbits went 
to sleep. Very foolish, very dangerous-if poor Smjagol wasn't sneaking about 
to watch.' 
     `I think we shall  get tired  of that word soon,' said Sam. 'But  never  
mind.  I'll  wake master up.' Gently he smoothed the hair back  fr om Frodo's 
brow, and bending down spoke softly to him. 
     `Wake up, Mr. Frodo! Wake up! ' 
     Frodo stirred  and  opened  his  eyes,  and  smiled, seeing Sam's  face 
bending over him.  `Calling me early  aren't you,  Sam?' he said. `It's dark 
still!  ' 
     'Yes  it's  always  dark here,' said  Sam. `But Gollum's come  back Mr. 
Frodo, and he says it's tomorrow. So we must be walking on. The last lap.' 
     Frodo drew a deep breath  and sat up. `The last lap! ' he said. 'Hullo, 
Smjagol! Found any food? Have you had any rest? ' 
     `No food, no rest, nothing for Smjagol,' said Gollum. `He's a sneak.' 
     Sam clicked his tongue, but restrained himself. 
     'Don't  take  names to  yourself,  Smjagol,'  said Frodo. 'It's  unwise 
whether they are true or false.' 
     `Smjagol has to take what's given  him,' answered Gollum. 'He was given 
that name by kind Master Samwise, the hobbit that knows so much.' 

####-     Frodo looked at Sam. 'Yes sir,' he said. `I did use the word, waking up 
out of my sleep sudden and all  and finding him at hand. I said I was sorry, 
but I soon shan't be.' 
     'Come, let it pass then,' said Frodo. 'But now we seem to have  come to 
the point, you and  I, Smjagol. Tell me. Can we  find the rest of the way by 
ourselves?  We're in sight of  the pass, of a way in, and  if we can find it 
now, then I suppose our agreement can be said to be over. You have done what 
you promised,  and  you're free: free to go back to food  and rest, wherever  
you wish to  go, except to servants  of the Enemy. And one   day I may reward 
you, I or those that remember me.' 
     `No,  no,  not  yet,'  Gollum whined. `O no!  They  can't  find the way 
themselves, can they? O no indeed. There's the tunnel coming.  Smjagol  must  
go on. No rest. No food. Not yet.' 
 

####- 

Chapter 9. Shelob's Lair 

 
 
     It  may indeed have been  daytime now, as Gollum said, but the  hobbits 
could see little difference, unless, perhaps, the heavy sky above  was  less 
utterly  black,  more like  a  great roof  of smoke; while  instead  of  the 
darkness  of deep night, which lingered still in  cracks and  holes, a  grey 
blurring shadow shrouded the stony world  about them. They passed on, 
Gollum 
in front and the hobbits  now side by side, up the long  ravine  between the 
piers  and columns of torn and wea thered  rock, standing like huge  unshapen 
statues on  either hand. There was no  sound. Some way ahead, a mile  or so,  
perhaps,   was  a  great  grey  wall,  a   last  huge  upthrusting  mass  of 
mountain-stone. Darker it loomed, and steadily it rose as  they  approached, 
until it towered up high above them, shutting  out the view of all that  lay 
beyond. Deep shadow lay before its feet. Sam sniffed the air. 
     `Ugh! That smell!' he said. `It's getting stronger and stronger.' 
     Presently they were under the shadow, and there in the midst of it they 
saw the  opening  of a cave. `This is the way in,' said Gollum softly. `This 
is  the entrance to the tunnel.' He did  not speak its name:  Torech  Ungol, 
Shelob's Lair. Out of it came a stench, not the sickly odour of decay in the 
meads  of  Morgul, but a foul  reek,  as if filth  unnameable were piled and 
hoarded in the dark within. 
     `Is this the only way, Smjagol? ' said Frodo. 
     'Yes, yes,' he answered. 'Yes, we must go this way now.' 
     'D'you mean to say you've been through this hole?' said Sam. `Phew! But 
perhaps you don't mind bad smells.' 
     Gollum's  eyes  glinted. `He  doesn't  know  what  we  minds,  does  he 
precious? No,  he  doesn't.  But Smjagol  can  bear things.  Yes.  He's been 
through. O yes, right through. It's the only way.' 
     `And what makes the smell, I  wonder,'  said Sam. `It's like  -- well, I 
wouldn't  like to say. Some beastly  hole of the  Orcs, I'll warrant, with a  
hundred years of their filth in it.' 
     'Well,'  said Frodo, 'Orcs or  no, if  it's the only  way, we must take 
it.' 
     Drawing a  deep breath they passed inside. In  a few steps they were in 

####-utter and impenetrable dark. Not since the lightless passages  of  Moria had 
Frodo or  Sam known such darkness, and if  possible  here it was  deeper and 
denser. There,  there were airs moving,  and echoes,  and a sense  of space. 
Here the air was still, stagnant, heavy, and sound fell dead. They walked as 
it were  in a black vapour wrought of veritable darkness itsel f that, as  it 
was breathed,  brought blindness not only  to the  eyes but to the mind,  so 
that even the memory of colours and of  forms and of any light faded out  of 
thought. Night always had been, and always would be, and night was all. 
     But for a while  they could still feel, and  indeed the senses of their 
feet and fingers at first seemed sharpened almost painfully. The walls felt, 
to their surprise, smooth, and the floor, save for a step now and again, was 
straight and even, going ever  up  at the  same stiff slope. The  tunnel was 
high  and  wide,  so wide  that,  though  the hobbits  walked abreast,  only 
touching the side-walls with their  outstretched hands, they were separated, 
cut off alone in the darkness.  
     Gollum had gone in first and seemed to be only a few steps ahead. While 
they were still able to give heed to such things, they could hear his breath 
hissing and  gasping just in  front of them.  But  after a time their senses 
became duller, both touch and hearing seemed to grow numb, and they kept on, 
groping, walking, on and on, mainly by the force of the will with which they 
had  entered, will to go through and desire to come at last to the high gate 
beyond.  
     Before  they  had gone  very far, perhaps, but time and  distance  soon 
passed out of  his reckoning, Sam on the right, feeling  the wall, was aware 
that there was an opening at the side: for a moment he caught a faint breath 
of some air less heavy, and then they passed it by. 
     'There's more  than one passage here,'  he whispered with an effort: it 
seemed hard to make his breath give any  sound. `It's as orc-like a place as 
ever there could be! ' 
     After that, first he on  the right, and  then Frodo on the left, passed 
three or four such openings, some wider, some smaller; but  there was as yet 
no doubt of  the main way,  for it was straight, and did not turn, and still 
went steadily up. But how long was it, how much more of this would they have 
to  endure, or could they  endure? The breathlessness of the air was growing 
as they climbed; and now they seemed often  in the  blind dark to sense some 
resistance  thicker  than  the  foul air. As they  thrust forward they  felt 
things brush against their heads, or against their hands, long tentacles, or  

####-hanging growths perhaps:  they could not tell what  they were. And still the 
stench grew. It grew, until almost it seemed to them that smell was the only 
clear sense left t¢  them. and  that was for their torment.  One  hour,  two 
hours,  three  hours: how many  had  they  passed  in  this  lightless  hole?  
Hours-days, weeks rather. Sam left the tunnel -side and shrank towards Frodo, 
and their hands met and clasped. and so together they still went on. 
     At length Frodo, groping along the  left-hand  wall, came suddenly to a  
void. Almost he fell sideways  into the emptiness. Here was some  opening in 
the rock far  wider than any  they had yet passed; and out of it came a reek  
so foul, and a sense of lurking malice so intense, that Frodo reeled. And at 
that moment Sam too lurched and fell forwards.  
     Fighting off both the sickness and  the fear, Frodo gripped Sam's hand. 
`Up!  ' he said in  a hoarse breath without  voice. 'It all comes from here, 
the stench and the peril. Now for it! Quick! ' 
     Calling up his remaining strength and resolution, he dragged Sam to his 
feet, and  forced his own limbs to move. Sam  stumbled beside him. One step, 
two steps, three steps-at last six steps. Maybe they had passed the dreadful 
unseen opening, but  whether  that was so  or not, suddenly it was easier to 
move,  as if  some  hostile will  for the moment  had  released  them.  They 
struggled on, still hand in hand. 
     But almost at once they came to a new difficulty. The tunnel forked, or  
so it  seemed, and in the dark they could  not tell wh ich was the wider way, 
or  which kept nearer to the straight. Which should they take, the  left, or  
the  right? They knew of  nothing  to guide  them, yet a false choice  would 
almost certainly be fatal. 
     `Which way has Gollum gone? ' panted Sam. 'And why didn't he wait? ' 
     `Smjagol!  ' said  Frodo,  trying  to  call. 'Smjagol! '  But his voice 
croaked, and the  name fell dead almost as  it left his lips.  There  was no 
answer, not an echo, not even a tremor of the air. 
     `He's really gone this time, I  fancy,'  muttered Sam. `I guess this is 
just exactly where  he meant to bring us. Gollum! If ever I lay hands on you  
again, you'll be sorry for it.' 
     Presently,  groping  and fumbling  in  the  dark, they  found  that the 
opening on the left wa s blocked: either it was  a blind, or else  some great 
stone had fallen in  the passage. 'This can't be the way,'  Frodo whispered. 
'Right or wrong, we must take the other.' 
     'And quick! ' Sam panted. 'There's something worse than Gollum about. I  

####-can feel something looking at us.' 
     They had not gone  more than a  few yards  when from behind them came a  
sound,  startling and horrible in  the  heavy  padded  silence: a  gurgling, 
bubbling noise, and  a  long  venomous hiss. They wheeled round, but nothing 
could be seen. Still as stones they stood, staring, waiting for they did not 
know what. 
     `It's  a trap!' said Sam, and he  laid his hand upon  the  hilt  of his 
sword; and  as he did so, he thought of the darkness of the barrow whence it  
came. 'I   wish  old  Tom was near us  now!' he  thought.  Then  as he stood, 
darkness  about him and a  blackness of  despair and  anger in his heart. it 
seemed  to him that he saw a  light:  a light in his mind, almost unbearably 
bright at first, as a sun-ray to the eyes of one long hidden in a windowless  
pit. Then  the light became colour: green,  gold, silver, white. Far off, as 
in  a  little  picture drawn  by  elven-fingers  he  saw  the Lady Galadriel 
standing on the  grass  in  Lurien,  and gifts  were  in her hands. And you, 
Ring-bearer, he  heard her say,  remote  but clear, for you  I have prepared  
this. 
     The bubbling hiss  drew nearer,  and there  was a  creaking as  of some 
great jointed thing that moved with slow purpose in the dark. A reek came on 
before it. 'Master, master!' cried Sam, and the  life and  urgency came back  
into his voice. 'The Lady's  gift! The star-glass! A light  to you  in  dark 
places, she said it was to be. The star-glass!  ' 
     `The star-glass?' muttered Frodo, as one answering out of sleep, hardly 
comprehending.  `Why  yes! Why had  I forgotten it? A  light when all  other 
lights go out! And now indeed light alone can help us.' 
     Slowly his hand went to his bosom, and slowly he held  aloft the  Phial 
of Galadriel. For a moment it glimmered, faint as  a rising star  struggling 
in heavy earthward  mists,  and then as its power waxed,  and hope  grew  in 
Frodo's  mind, it  began to  burn, and kindled to a  silver flame, a  minute 
heart of dazzling light, as though Edrendil  had himself come down  from the 
high sunset paths with the last Silmaril upon his brow. The darkness receded 
from it until it seemed to shine in the  centre of a globe of  airy crystal, 
and the hand that held it sparkled with white fire. 
     Frodo gazed  in   wonder at this marvellous  gift  that  he  had so long 
carried, not guessing its full  worth and potency. Seldom had  he remembered 
it on the road, until they came to Morgul Vale, and never had he used it for  
fear of its revealing  light.  Aiya Edrendil Elenion Ancalima! he cried, and 

####-knew  not what he had spoken; for it seemed that another voice spoke through 
his, clear, untroubled by the foul air of the pit. 
     But other  potencies  there are in  Middle-earth, powers of night,  and 
they are  old and strong. And She that  walked in the darkness had heard the 
Elves cry that cry far back in the deeps of time, and she had not heeded it, 
and it did  not daunt her now. Even as Frodo spoke he  felt  a great  malice 
bent upon him, and a deadly regard considering him. Not far down the tunnel, 
between them  and the  opening where  they  had reeled and stumbled, he  was 
aware of eyes  growing visible, two great clusters  of many-windowed eyes  -- 
the  coming menace was unmasked at last.  The radiance of the star -gla ss was 
broken and thrown back from their thousand  facets, but behind the glitter a  
pale deadly fire began steadily to glow within, a flame kindled in some deep 
pit of  evil thought. Monstrous and  abominable eyes they were, bestial  and  
yet filled with purpose  and with  hideous delight, gloating over their prey 
trapped beyond all hope of escape. 
     Frodo  and  Sam, horror -stricken, began slowly to back away,  their own 
gaze held by the dreadful stare of those baleful eyes; but as they backed so  
the eyes  advanced. Frodo's hand wavered, and slowly the Phial drooped. Then 
suddenly,  released from  the  holding spell to run  a little while  in vain 
panic for the amusement of the eyes, they both turned and fled together; but 
even as they ran Frodo looked back and saw with terror that at once the eyes 
came leaping up behind. The stench of death was like a cloud about him. 
     'Stand! stand! ' he cried desperately. `Running is no use.' 
     Slowly the eyes crept nearer. 
     `Galadriel! ' he called, and  gathering his  courage  he  lifted up the 
Phial once more. The eyes  halted. For a moment  their regard relaxed, as if 
some hint of doubt troubled them. Then Frodo's heart flamed  within him, and 
without thinking what he did, whether it was folly or despair or  courage, he 
took the Phial in  his left  hand,  and  with his right hand drew his sword. 
Sting flashed out, and the sharp elven-blade  sparkled in the silver  light, 
but at  its edges a  blue fire  flicked. Then holding the star aloft and the 
bright sword advanced,  Frodo,  hobbit of the Shire, walked steadily down to 
meet the eyes. 
     They wavered. Doubt  came into them as the light approached. One by one 
they dimmed,  and  slowly they drew back. No brightness so  deadly  had ever  
afflicted  them  before. From sun  and  moon and star  they  had  been  safe 
underground,  but now a star  had descended  into  the  very earth. Still it 

####-approached, and the eyes began to quail. One by one they all went dark; they 
turned  away, and a great bulk,  beyond  the light's reach,  heaved its huge 
shadow in between. They were gone. 
     'Master, master!' cried Sam. He was close behind,  his own  sword drawn 
and ready. 'Stars  and glory!  But the Elves would make a song  of  that, if 
ever they heard of it! And may I live   to tell them and hear them sing.  But 
don't go  on, master. Don't go down to that den! Now's our only chance.  Now 
let's get out of this foul hole!' 
     And  so back they turned once more, first walking and then running; for  
as they  went the  floor  of   the tunnel rose steeply, and with every stride 
they climbed higher  above  the stenches  of  the  unseen lair, and strength 
returned  to  limb and  heart.  But still the hatred of  the  Watcher lurked 
behind  them, blind for a while,  perhaps,  but undefeated,  still  bent  on 
death. And  now there came  a  flow of air  to meet them, cold and thin. The 
opening, the tunnel's end, at last it was before them. Panting, yearning for  
a roofless place, they flung themselves forward, and  then in amazement they 
staggered, tumbling back. The outlet was blocked  with some barrier, but not 
of  stone: soft  and a  little  yielding  it  seemed,  and  yet  strong  and 
impervious; air filtered through, hut not a  glimmer of any light. Once more 
they charged and were hurled back. 
     Holding aloft the Phial Frodo looked and  before him he  saw a greyness 
which the radiance of the star-glass did not pierce  and did not illuminate, 
as  if it  were  a  shadow that  being cast  by  no  light,  no  light could 
dissipate. Across the  width and height of the  tunnel a  vast web was spun, 
orderly as the web of some huge spider,  but  denser -woven  and far greater,  
and each thread was as thick as rope. 
     Sam  laughed grimly.  `Cobwebs! '  he said. `Is that all?  Cobwebs! But 
what a spider! Have at 'em, down with 'em! ' 
     In a fury he  hewed at  them with his  sword,  but  the thread  that he 
struck did  not break.  It gave a little and then sprang back like a plucked 
bowstring,  turning the blade and tossing up both sword and a rm. Three times 
Sam struck with all  his  force, and  at last  one single cord  of  all  the 
countless  cords snapped and twisted, curling and whipping through  the air.  
One end of it lashed Sam's hand, and he cried out in pain, starting back and 
drawing h is hand across his mouth. 
     `It will take days to clear the road like this,' he said. `What's to be 
done? Have those eyes come back? ' 

####-     `No, not  to be seen,' said  Frodo.  `But  I still  feel  that they are 
looking at me,  or  thinking about me: making some  other plan,  perhaps. If 
this light were lowered, or if it failed, they would quickly come again.' 
     `Trapped in the end!  ' said Sam bitterly, his anger rising again above 
weariness and despair. `Gnats  in a net. May the curse of Faramir bite  that 
Gollum and bite him quick! ' 
     'That would not help us now,' said Frodo. `Come! Let us see what  Sting 
can  do. It is an elven-blade. There were webs of horror in the dark ravines 
of  Beleriand where it was forged.  But you must be the  guard and hold back 
the eyes. Here,  take  the  star -glass.  Do  not be afraid. Hold  it  up and 
watch!' 
     Then Frodo stepped up to the great grey  net, and hewed it  with a wide 
sweeping stroke,  drawing  the  bitter  edge  swiftly  across  a  ladder  of 
close-strung cords, and  at  once  springing  away. The  blue-gleaming blade 
shore through them like a scythe through grass, and they  leaped and writhed 
and then hung loose. A great rent was made. 
     Stroke  after  stroke he dealt, until at last  all the  web within  his 
reach was shattered, and the upper portion blew and swayed like a loose veil  
in the incoming wind. The trap was broken. 
     `Come! ' cried Frodo. `On! On! ' Wild joy at their escape from the very 
mouth  of despair suddenly filled  all his mind. His head whirled as  with a  
draught of potent wine. He sprang out, shouting as he came. 
     It seemed light in that  dark land to his eyes  that had passed through 
the den of night. The great smokes had risen and grown thinner, and the last  
hours of a  sombre day were passing; the red glare of Mordor had died away in 
sullen gloom. Yet it seemed to Frodo that he looked upon a morning of sudden 
hope. Almost he had reached  the  summit of the  wall. Only  a little higher  
now. The Cleft,  Cirith  Ungol, was before him, a dim  notch  in  the  black  
ridge, and the horns of rock darkling  in  the sky on either side.  A  short 
race, a sprinter's course and he would be through!  
     `The pass,  Sam! ' he  cried, not heeding the shrillness of  his voice, 
that  released  from  the choking airs of the  tunnel  rang out now high and 
wild. 'The  pass! Run, run, and we'll be  through-through before any one can 
stop us! ' 
     Sam came  up  behind as fast as he could  urge his legs; but glad as he 
was  to be free, he was uneasy, and as he ran, he kept on  glancing back  at 
the dark  arch of the tunnel, fearing to see eyes, or some  shape beyond his 

####-imagining,  spring out in  pursuit. Too little did he or  his master know of 
the craft of Shelob. She had many exits from her  lair. 
     There agelong she had dwelt, an evil thing in spider -form, even such as 
once of old had lived in the Land of the Elves in the West that is now under  
the Sea, such as Beren fought in the Mountains of Terror  in Doriath, and so 
came to L®thien upon the green sward amid the hemlocks in the moonlight 
long 
ago. How Shelob came there, flying from ruin, no tale tells, for out  of the 
Dark  Years  few tales  have come. But still she was  there, who  was  there 
before Sauron, and before the first  stone of Barad-dyr; and she served none 
but herself, drinking the blood of Elves and Men, bloated and grown fat with 
endless  brooding on her  feasts,  weaving  webs of shadow;  for all  living 
things  were  her  food,  and her  vomit  darkness.  Far and wide her lesser  
broods, bastards  of the miserable mates, her own offspring,  that she slew,  
spread from  glen to glen, from the Ephel D®ath to the eastern hills, to Dol 
Guldur and the fastnesses of Mirkwood. But none could  rival her, Shelob the 
Great, last child of Ungoliant to trouble the unhappy world. 
     Already,  years before, Gollum had beheld her, Smjagol  who  pried into 
all dark  holes, and in past days he had  bowed  and worshipped her, and the 
darkness of  her evil will  walked through  all  the ways of  his  weariness 
beside him, cutting  him off from light and from regret. And he had promised 
to bring  her food. But her lust was  not his lust. Little  she  knew of  or  
cared for towers, or  rings, or  anything devised by mind  or hand, who only  
desired death for all others, mind and body, and for herself a glut of life. 
alone,  swollen  till  the  mountains  could no longer  hold her up and  the 
darkness could not contain her. 
     But that  desire  was yet far  away, and long  now had she been hungry, 
lurking  in  her den, while the power of  Sauron grew, and light and  living 
things forsook his borders; and the city in the valley was dead, and  no Elf 
or Man came near, only the unhappy Orcs. Poor  food  and  wary. But she must  
eat, and however busily  they delved new winding passages from  the pass and 
from their tower, ever she found  some way to snare them. But she lusted for  
sweeter meat. And Gollum had brought it to her. 
     `We'll see, we'll see,'  he  said often to himself, when the evil  mood 
was on him, as he walked the  dangerous road from  Emyn Muil to Morgul 
Vale, 
'we'll see. It may well be, O yes, it may well be  that when She throws away 

####-the bones  and the empty garments, we  shall find it, we  shall  get it, the 
Precious, a reward for poor Smjagol who brings nice food. And we'll save the 
Precious, as we promised. O yes.  And when we've  got  it  safe, then She'll 
know  it,  O  yes,  then we'll  pay  Her back,  my precious. Then  we'll pay 
everyone back! ' 
     So he thought in an inner chamber of  his cunning, which he still hoped 
to hide from  her,  even when he  had come  to her  again and had bowed  low 
before her while his companions slept. 
     And as for Sauron: he  knew where she lurked. It pleased  him that  she 
should dwell there hungry but unabated in  malice,  a more  sure  watch upon 
that  ancient  path into his land than any  other  that his skill could have 
devised. And Orcs, they were useful  slaves, but he  had them in  plenty. If 
now and again Shelob caught them to stay  her  appetite, she was welcome: he 
could spare them. And sometimes as  a man may cast a dainty to  his cat (his  
cat he calls her, but she owns him not) Sauron would send her prisoners that 
he had no better uses for: he would have them driven to her hole, and  report  
brought back to him of the play she made. 
     So  they  both lived, delighting in  their  own devices,  and feared no 
assault, nor wrath,  nor any end of their wickedness. Never yet had any  fly 
escaped from Shelob's webs, and the greater now was her rage and hunger. 
     But  nothing of this evil which they had stirred  up against  them  did 
poor Sam  know, except that a  fear  was growing on him, a menace  which  he 
could not see; and such a weight  did it  become that it was a burden to him 
to run, and his feet seemed leaden. 
     Dread was round him, and enemies before him in the pass, and his master 
was in a fey mood  running  heedlessly to meet them. Turning  his  eyes away 
from the shadow behind and the deep  gloom  beneath the cliff upon his left, 
he looked  ahead, and he saw two things  that increased his  dismay.  He saw 
that the sword  which  Frodo still held unsheathed was glittering  with blue 
flame; and he saw that though the sky behind was now dark. still the  window 
in the tower was g lowing red. 
     `Orcs! '  he muttered. `We'll never rush  it  like  this.  There's Orcs 
about, and  worse than Orcs.' Then  returning  quickly to his  long habit of 
secrecy, he closed  his  hand about the precious Phial  which he still bore. 
Red  with his own living blood  his  hand  shone for  a moment, and then  he 
thrust  the revealing light deep into  a pocket near his breast and drew his 
elven-cloak about him.  Now he tried  to  quicken his pace.  His master  was 

####-gaining on him; already he was some twenty strides ahead, flitting on like a  
shadow; soon he would be lost to sight in that grey world. 
     Hardly had  Sam hidden the light  of  the star -glass  when she came.  A 
little way ahead and to his left he saw suddenly, issuing  from a black hole 
of  shadow under the cliff, the most loathly  shape that he had ever beheld, 
horrible beyond the horror of an evil dream. Most like a spider she was, but 
huger than  the great hunting beasts, and more terrible than they because of 
the evil  purpose  in her remorseless eyes.  Those  same  eyes  that  he had 
thought daunted and defeated, there  they were lit with a fell light  again, 
clustering in her out-thrust head. Great horns she had, and behind her short 
stalk -like neck was her huge swollen body,  a vast bloated bag, swaying  and 
sagging  between  her legs; its great  bulk was black,  blotched  with livid 
marks, but  the belly underneath  was pale  and  luminous  and  gave forth a  
stench. Her legs were bent, with great  knobbed joints high  above her back, 
and hairs that stuck out like steel spines, and at each leg's end  there was 
a claw. 
     As soon as she had  squeezed her  soft  squelching  body and its folded 
limbs out of the upper exit from her lair, she moved with a  horrible speed, 
now running on her creaking legs, now making a sudden bound. She was 
between 
Sam  and his master. Either she did  not see Sam, or she avoided him for the 
moment as  the bearer of the  light` and fixed all her intent upon one prey, 
upon Frodo,  bereft of  his Phial, running heedless up the path, unaware yet 
of his  peril. Swiftly he ran, but Shelob was  swifter;  in a few  leaps she 
would have him. 
     Sam gasped and gathered  all his  remaining breath  to shout. 'Look out 
behind!  ' he yelled.  'Look  out  master!  I'm'  -- but suddenly his cry was 
stifled. 
     A long clammy hand went over his mouth and  another caught  him  by the 
neck, while something wrapped itself about his leg.  Taken off  his guard he 
toppled backwards into the arms of his attacker. 
     `Got him! ' hissed Gollum in his ear. `At  last, my precious, we've got 
him, yes, the nassty hobbit. We takes this one. She'll get the other. O yes, 
Shelob will get him,  not Smjagol: he promised; he won't hurt Master at all. 
But he's got you, you nassty filthy little sneak!' He spat on Sam's neck. 
     Fury at the treachery, and desperation at the delay when his master was 
in  deadly  peril, gave  to Sam  a sudden violence and strength that was far 

####-beyond anything that Gollum had expected from this slow stupid hobbit, as he 
thought him.  Not Gollum  himself  could have twisted  more quickly  or more 
fiercely. His hold on Sam's mouth slipped, and Sam ducked and lunged 
forward 
again, trying to tear away from the grip on his neck. His sword was still in 
his hand, and on his   left arm,  hanging by  its thong, was Faramir's staff.  
Desperately  he tried to turn and stab his enemy. But Gollum  was too quick. 
His long right arm shot out, and he  grabbed  Sam's wrist:  his fingers were 
like a vice; slowly and relentlessly he bent the hand down and forward, till 
with a cry of pain Sam released the sword and it fell to the ground; and all 
the while Gollum's other hand was tightening on Sam's throat. 
     Then Sam played his last trick. With all his  strength  he  pulled away 
and got his feet firmly planted; then suddenly he drove his legs against the 
ground and with his whole force hurled himself backwards. 
     Not  expecting  even this simple trick from Sam, Gollum fell  over with 
Sam on top, and he received the weight of the sturdy hobbit in  his stomach.  
A sharp hiss came out  of him, and  for a second his hand upon  Sam's throat 
loosened;  but his  fingers still gripped the sword-hand. Sam  tore  himself 
forward  and  away,  and stood up, and then  quickly he wheeled away  to his 
right,  pivoted on the  wrist held by Gollum.  Laying hold of the staff with 
his  left hand,  Sam swung it up, and down it came with a whistling crack on 
Gollum's outstretched arm, just below the elbow.  
     With a squeal Gollum let go. Then  Sam  waded in; not waiting to change  
the staff from left to right he dealt another savage blow. Quick as  a snake 
Gollum slithered  aside. and the stroke aimed at his head  fell  across  his 
back. The staff  cracked and broke.  That was  enough for him. Grabbing from 
behind  was an old game of his,  and  seldom  had he failed in it.  But this 
time,  misled by spite,  he  had made the  mistake  of speaking and gloating 
before he had  both hands on his  victim's  neck. Everything  had gone wrong 
with  his beautiful plan,  since that horrible  light  had  so  unexpectedly 
appeared in the darkness. And now he was face to face with a furious  enemy, 
little less than his own size. This fight was not for him. Sam  swept up his 
sword from the ground and raised it. Gollum squealed , and springing aside on 
to all fours, he  jumped away in one big bound like a frog. Before Sam could 
reach him, he was off, running with amazing speed back towards the tunnel.  
     Sword in  hand  Sam  went  after him.  For the  moment he had forgotten  
everything else but the red fury in his brain and the desire to kill Gollum. 

####-But before he could overtake him, Gollum  was gone. Then  as the  dark  hole 
stood before him and the stench came out to meet him, like a clap of thunder  
the thought of Frodo  and the monster  smote upon Sam's mind. He spun round, 
and rushed wildly up the path, calling and calling his master's name. He was 
too late. So far Gollum's plot had succeeded. 
 

####- 

Chapter 10. The Choices of Master Samwise 

 
 
     Frodo was lying face upward  on the ground and the monster  was bending 
over  him, so intent  upon her victim  that she took  no heed of Sam and his 
cries, until  he was close at  hand. As he rushed up he  saw that Frodo  was 
already  bound  in  cords, wound about him from ankle to  shoulder,  and the  
monster with her great forelegs was beginning half to lift, half to drag his 
body away. 
     On  the near side of him lay, gleaming on  the ground, his elven-blade,  
where it had fallen useless from his grasp. Sam did not wait to  wonder wha t  
was to be  done, or whether he was brave, or loyal, or filled with rage.  He 
sprang  forward with a yell, and seized his master's sword in his left hand. 
Then he charged.  No onslaught more fierce was ever seen in the savage world 
of beasts; where  some  desperate  small creature  armed with  little  teeth 
alone,  will  spring  upon a tower of horn and  hide that  stands above  its 
fallen mate. 
     Disturbed as if out of some gloating dream by his small yell she turned 
slowly the dreadful malice of her glance upon him. But almost before she was 
aware that a fury was upon her greater than any she  had known in  countless 
years,  the shining sword  bit upon her  foot  and shore away  the claw. Sam 
sprang in, inside the arches of  her legs, and  with a quick  upthrust of his 
other hand stabbed at  the clustered eyes upon her lowered  head. One  great 
eye went dark. 
     Now  the miserable creature was right under her, for the  moment out of 
the reach of her  sting and of her claws.  Her vast belly was above him with 
its putrid light, and the stench of it almost smote him down. Still his fury 
held for  one more blow, and  before she could sink upon him, smothering him 
and all his little impudence of courage, he  slashed  the bright elven-blade 
across her with desperate strength. 
     But Shelob was not as dragons are, no softer spot had she save only her 
eyes.  Knobbed  and pitted  with corruption  was her  age-old hide, but ever  
thickened from within with  layer on layer of evil  growth. The blade scored 
it with a dreadful gash, but those hideous folds could not be pierced by any 
strength of men, not though Elf or Dwarf should  forge the steel or the hand  
of Beren or of T®rin wield it. She yielded to the stroke, and then heaved up 

####-the great bag of her belly high above Sam's head. Poison frothed and bubbled 
from  the wound. Now splaying her legs she drove her huge  bulk down  on 
him 
again.  Too  soon.  For Sam still stood upon his feet, and dropping  his own 
sword, with both hands he  held the  elven-blade  point upwards, fending off  
that ghastly roof; and  so  Shelob, with  the driving force of her own cruel 
will, with  strength greater than  any warrior's hand, thrust herself upon a  
bitter  spike.  Deep,  deep it pricked, as Sam was  crushed  slowly  to  the 
ground. 
     No such anguish  had  Shelob ever known, or dreamed of knowing, in  all 
her long  world of wickedness. Not the doughtiest soldier of old Gondor, nor  
the most savage Orc  entrapped, had ever thus  endured  her, or set blade to 
her beloved flesh. A shudder  went through her.  Heaving up again, wrenching 
away  from the  pain,  she  bent her writhing limbs  beneath  her and sprang 
backwards in a convulsive leap. 
     Sam had fallen to his knees by Frodo's head, his senses  reeling in the 
foul stench, his two hands still gripping the hilt of the sword. Through the 
mist before his eyes he was  aware  dimly of Frodo's face  and stubbornly he 
fought to  master himself and to drag himself out of the swoon that was upon 
him.  Slowly  he raised his head and saw her, only  a few paces away, eyeing 
him, her beak drabbling a spittle of venom,  and a green ooze trickling from 
below her wounded eye. There she crouched, her shuddering belly splayed 
upon 
the ground,  the great bows of her legs quivering, as she  gather ed  herself 
for another spring-this time to crush  and sting to death: no little bite of 
poison to  still the struggling of  her meat; this time  to slay and then to 
rend. 
     Even  as Sam himself crouched, looking at her, seeing  his death in her  
eyes,  a  thought came  to him, as  if some remote voice had  spoken. and he 
fumbled in his breast with his left hand, and found what he sought: cold and 
hard  and  solid  it seemed to  his touch  in a phantom world of horror, the 
Phial of Galadriel. 
     'Galadr iel!  ' he said  faintly, and  then he heard voices far off  but 
clear: the crying of the Elves as they walked under the stars in the beloved 
shadows of the  Shire, and  the music  of the Elves as  it came  through his 
sleep in the Hall of Fire in the house of Elrond. 
     Gilthoniel A Elbereth! 

####-     And then his tongue was loosed and  his voice cried in a language which  
he did not know:  
     A Elbereth Gilthoniel 
     o menel palan-diriel, 
     le nallon sn di'nguruthos! 
     A tiro nin, Fanuilos! 
     And  with  that  he staggered  to  his feet and was Samwise the hobbit, 
Hamfast's son, again. 
     `Now come, you filth!' he cried. `You've hurt my master, you brute, and 
you'll pay for it. We're going on; but we'll settle with you first. Come on, 
and taste it again!' 
     As  if his indomitable spirit had set  its potency in motion, the glass 
blazed  suddenly like a white torch in his  hand. It flamed like a star that 
leaping from the firmament sears  the  dark  air with  intolerable light. No 
such terror out of heaven had ever burned in Shelob's face before. The beams 
of it entered into her wounded head  and scored it with unbearable pain, and 
the  dreadful  infection of light  spread  from  eye to  eye. She  fell back  
beating  the air with her  forelegs, her   sight blasted by inner lightnings,  
her  mind  in agony. Then turning her maimed head away, she rolled aside and 
began to crawl, claw by claw, towards the opening in the dark cliff behind. 
     Sam came  on. He was reeling like a drunken man,  but he came  on.  And 
Shelob cowed at last, shrunken in defeat, jerked and quivered  as she  tried 
to  hasten from him. She  reached  the hole,  and  squeezing down, leaving a  
trail of green-yellow slime, she slipped in, even as Sam hewed a last stroke 
at her dragging legs. Then he fell to the ground. 
     Shelob was  gone; and  whether she lay  long in her  lair, nursing  her  
malice  and her misery, and  in slow years of darkness  healed  herself from 
within, rebuilding her clustered eyes, until with hunger like death she spun 
once more her dreadful snares in the glens of the Mountains of  Shadow, this 
tale does not tell. 
     Sam was left alone. Wearily, as the evening  of the Nameless Land  fell 
upon the place of battle, he crawled back to his master. 
     'Master, dear master,' he said, but Frodo did not  speak. As he had run 
forward, eager, rejoicing  to be  free,  Shelob  with hideous speed had come 
behind and with one swift stroke had stung him in the neck. He lay now pale, 
and heard no voice. and did not move. 
     `Master, dear  master! ' said Sam, and through  a long  silence waited. 

####-listening in vain. 
     Then as quickly as he could he  cut away the binding cords and laid his 
head upon  Frodo's  breast and to his mouth, but  no stir of life  could  he 
find, nor  feel  the  faintest flutter of  the  heart. Often  he chafed  his 
master's hands and feet, and touched his brow, but all were cold. 
     `Frodo, Mr. Frodo! ' he called. 'Don't leave me here alone!  It's  your 
Sam calling. Don't go  where I can't follow! Wake up, Mr. Frodo!  O wake up, 
Frodo, me dear, me dear. Wake up!' 
     Then anger surged over hint,  and he ran  about his master's body in  a  
rage,  stabbing the air,  and smiting the  stones, and shouting  challenges.  
Presently he came back, and bending looked at Frodo's face, pale beneath him 
in the  dusk.  And  suddenly  he  saw that he was  in the  picture  that was 
revealed to him in the mirror of Galadriel in Lurien: Frodo with a pale face 
lying fast asleep under  a great  dark cliff. Or fast asleep he had  thought 
then. `He's dead! ' he said. 'Not asleep, dead! ' And  as he  said it, as if 
the words had set the venom to its work again. it seemed to him that the hue 
of the face grew livid green. 
     And  then black despair came down  on him, and Sam bowed to the ground, 
and drew his grey hood over his head, and night came into  his heart, and he 
knew no more. 
     When at last the blackness passed, Sam looked up and shadows were about 
him; but for how many  minutes or  hours the world had  gone dragging on  he 
could not  tell. He was still in  the  same place,  and still his master lay 
beside him dead. The mountains had not crumbled  nor  the earth fallen  into 
ruin. 
     'What shall I do, what shall I do? ' he said.  `Did I come all this way 
with h im for  nothing? ' And then he remembered his own voice speaking 
words 
that at the time he  did not  understand  himself, at the beginning of their 
journey: I have something to do before the end. I must see  it through, sir, 
if you understand . 
     `But what can I do? Not leave  Mr. Frodo dead, unburied on  the  top of 
the mountains, and go home? Or go on? Go on?' he repeated, and for  a 
moment 
doubt and fear  shook him. `Go on?  Is  that what I've  got to do? And leave 
him?' 
     Then at last he began to weep; and going to Frodo he composed his body, 

####-and folded his cold hands upon his breast,  and wrapped his cloak about him; 
and he laid  his own sword at one side, and the staff that Faramir had given 
at the other. 
     'If I'm  to  go on,' he  said,  `then  I must take your sword,  by your 
leave, Mr. Frodo, but I'll put this one to lie by you, as it lay by the  old 
king in the barrow; and you've got your beautiful mithril coat from  old Mr. 
Bilbo. And  your star-glass, Mr. Frodo, you did lend it to me and I'll  need 
it, for I'll be  always in the dark now. It's too good  for me, and the Lady 
gave it  to you, but maybe she'd understand. Do  you  understand, Mr. Frodo? 
I've got to go on.' 
     But he could not  go, not yet. He knelt and held Frodo's hand and could 
not release it. And time went  by and  still he knelt, holding  his master's 
hand, and in his heart keeping a debate. 
     Now he tried to find strength to tear himself  away and go  on a lonely 
journey -- for vengeance. If once he could go, his anger  would bear him down 
all the roads of the world, pursuing, until he had him at last: Gollum. Then 
Gollum would die in a corner. But that was not what he had set out to do. It 
would  not be  worth while to leave his master for  that. It would not bring 
him back. Nothing would. They had better both be dead together. And that too 
would be a lonely journey. 
     He  looked on  the bright point of the sword. He thought  of the places 
behind where there  was a black brink  and an  empty  fall into nothingness.  
There  was no  escape  that way. That was to do nothing, not even to grieve.  
That was not what he had set  out to do. 'What am  I to  do then? ' he cried 
again,  and now he seemed  plainly to know the hard  answer: see it through. 
Another lonely journey, and the worst. 
     `What? Me, alone, go  to the Crack of Doom and all? ' He quailed still, 
but the resolve grew. `What? Me take  the Ring from him? The Council gave it 
to him.' 
     But the answer came at  once: `And the  Council gave him companions, so 
that  the errand  should not fail.  And you are the last of all the Company. 
The errand must not fail.' 
     `I wish I wasn't the last,' he groaned. `I wish old Gandalf was hare or  
somebody. Why am I left all alone to make up my mind?  I'm sure to go wrong. 
And it's not for me to go taking the Ring, putting myself forward.' 
     'But you haven't put yourself forward; you've been  put forward. And as 
for  not  being the right and proper person,  why,  Mr. Frodo wasn't as  you  

####-might say, nor Mr. Bilbo. They didn't choose themselves.' 
     `Ah well, I must make up my  own mind. I  will  make it up. But I'll be 
sure to go wrong: that'd be Sam Gamgee all over. 
     'Let  me see  now:  if we're found here, or Mr. Frodo's found, and that 
Thing's on him,  well, the Enemy  will  get it. And that's the end of all of 
us, of Lorien, and  Rivendell, and the Shire and all. And there s no time to 
lose,  or it'll  be the end anyway.  The war's begun, and  more than  likely 
things are all going the Enemy's way  already. No  chance to go back with It  
and  get advice or permission.  No, it's sit here till they come and kill me 
over master's body, and gets It: or take It and go.'  He drew a deep breath. 
'Then take It, it is! ' 
     He stooped. Very gently he undid  the clasp at the neck and slipped his 
hand inside Frodo's tunic;  then with his other  hand raising the  head,  he 
kissed the cold forehead, and softly drew the chain over  it.  And  then the 
head lay quietly back again in rest. No change came over the still face, and 
by that  more than by all  other tokens Sam was convinced at last that Frodo  
had died and laid aside the Quest. 
     `Good-bye, master,  my dear! ' he  murmured. 'Forgive  your Sam.  He'll 
come back to  this spot when  the job's done  -- if  he manages it. And then 
he'll  not leave  you again. Rest  you quiet  till  I  come; and may no foul 
creature come anigh you! And if the Lady could hear me and give me one wish, 
I would wish to come back and find you again. Good-bye!  ' 
     And then he bent his own  neck and put the chain upon  it, and  at once 
his head was bowed to the ground with the weight of  the Ring, as if a great 
stone  had been strung on him. But slowly, as if the weight became  less, or  
new strength grew in him, he raised his  head, and then with a  great effort 
got to his feet and found that  he could walk and bear his burden. And for a  
moment he lifted up the Phial  and looked down at his master,  and the light  
burned gently  now with the soft radiance of the evening-star in summer, and 
in that light Frodo's face was fair of hue again, pale but beautiful with an 
elvish beauty,  as of one who has  long  passed the  shadows. And  with  the  
bitter comfort of that last sight Sam  turned and hid the light and stumbled 
on into the growing dark. 
     He  had not far to go.  The  tunnel was some way  behind;  the  Cleft a  
couple of hundred yards ahead, or less. The path was visible in  the dusk` a  
deep rut worn in  ages of  passage,  running  now gently up in a long trough 
with cliffs on either side. The trough narrowed rapidly. Soon Sam came  to a  

####-long flight of broad shallow steps. Now the orc-tower  was right  above him, 
frowning black, and in it the red eye  glowed. Now he was hidden in the dark 
shadow under it. He was coming to the top of  the steps and was in the Cleft  
at last. 
     'I've made up  my  mind,' he kept saying to himself.  But  he  had not. 
Though  he  had done his best  to  think it  out,  what  he  was  doing  was 
altogether against the grain  of his nature.  `Have  I  got it  wrong? '  he 
muttered. `What ought I to have done? ' 
     As the sheer sides of the Cleft closed about him, before he reached the 
actual summit,  before  he looked  at last on the  path descending into  the 
Nameless Land. he turned. For a moment, motionless  in intolerable doubt, he 
looked back. He could still see, like a small blot in  the gathering  gloom, 
the mouth  of the tunnel; and he thought he could see or  guess where  Frodo  
lay. He fancied there was a glimmer on the ground  down there, or perhaps it 
was some trick of his tears, as he peered out at that high stony place where 
all his life had fallen in ruin. 
     'If only I could have my wish, my one wish,' he sighed, `to go back and 
find him! '  Then  at last he turned to  the  road in front and took  a  few 
steps: the heaviest and the most reluctant he had ever taken. 
     Only a few steps; and now only a  few more and  he would be going  down 
and would never see that high place again. And then suddenly  he heard cries 
and voices. He stood still as  stone.  Orc-voices. They were behind him  and 
before him.  A noise of tramping feet and harsh shouts:  Orcs were coming up 
to  the  Cleft from the  far side, from  some entry to  the tower,  perhaps.  
Tramping feet and shouts behind. He  wheeled round. He saw small red lights, 
torches, winking away below there as they  issued  from the tunnel. At  last  
the hunt was up. The red eye of the tower had not been blind. He was caught. 
     Now the flicker of approaching torches and the clink of steel ahead was 
very near. In a  minute they would reach the top and be on  him. He had taken 
too long in making up his mind, and now it was no good. How could he escape, 
or save himself, or save the Ring? The Ring. He was not aware of any thought 
or  decision. He simply found himself drawing  out the  chain and taking the 
Ring in his hand.  The head of  the  orc-company appeared in the Cleft right  
before him. Then he put it on. 
     The world changed, and a single moment of time was filled with an  hour  
of thought. At once he was aware that  hearing was sharpened while sight was 
dimmed, but otherwise than in  Shelob's  lair. All things about him now were 

####-not dark but vague; while he himself was there in  a grey hazy world, alone,  
like a small black solid rock and the Ring, weighing down his left hand, was 
like an orb of hot gold. He did not feel invisible at  all, but horribly and 
uniquely visible; and he knew that somewhere an Eye was searching for him. 
     He heard the  crack of stone, and the murmur of water far off in Morgul 
Vale;  and down away under the rock the bubbling misery  of Shelob, groping, 
lost in some blind passage; and voices in the dungeons of the tower; and the 
cries of the Orcs  as they came out of the tunnel; and deafening, roaring in 
his ears, the crash of the feet  a nd the  rending clamour of the Orcs before 
him.  He  shrank  against the cliff. But  they marched  up  like  a  phantom 
company,  grey distorted  figures in a mist, only  dreams of  fear with pale 
flames in their hands. And they passed him  by. He  cowered , trying to creep  
away into some cranny and to hide. 
     He listened.  The Orcs from the tunnel and the others marching down had 
sighted one another,  and  both parties were now hurrying  and  shouting. He 
heard them both clearly, and he understood what they  said. Perhaps the Ring 
gave understanding of tongues,  or simply  understanding, especially  of the  
servants  of  Sauron  its maker, so that if he gave heed,  he understood and 
translated  the thought  to himself. Certainly the Ring had grown greatly in 
power  as it approached the places of its forging; but one  thing it did not 
confer, and that  was courage. At present Sam  still thought only of hiding, 
of lying low till all  was quiet again; and he listened anxiously. He  could 
not tell how near the voices were, the words seemed almost in his ears.  
     'Hola! Gorbag! What are you doing up here? Had enough of war already? ' 
     'Orders, you lubber. And what are  you doing, Shagrat? Tired of lurking 
up there? Thinking of coming down to fight? ' 
     'Orders to  you.  I'm in command  of this pass.  So speak civil. What's 
your report?  ' 
     'Nothing.' 
     `Hai!  hai! yoi!'  A yell  broke into the exchanges of the leaders. The 
Orcs lower down  had  suddenly seen something. They began to run. So did the 
others. 
     `Hai! Hola! Here's something! Lying right in  the road. A spy, a spy! ' 
There was a hoot of snarling horns and a babel of baying voices.  
     With a dreadful stroke Sam was wakened from his cowering mood. They 
had 
seen  his master. What would they do? He had heard tales of the Orcs to make 

####-the blood run cold. It could not be borne. He  sprang up. He flung the Quest  
and all his decisions away, and fear and doubt with them.  He knew now where 
his place was  and had been: at  his master's side, though what he  could do 
there  was not clear. Back  he  ran down the  steps, down the  path  towards 
Frodo. 
     `How many are there?'  he  thought. `Thirty or forty  from the tower at 
least, and  a  lot more than  that  from down below, I guess. How many can I 
kill before they get  me? They'll see the flame of  the  sword, as soon as I 
draw it, and they'll get me  sooner or later. I wonder if any song will ever  
mention it: How Samwise  fell  in  the High Pass and made  a wall of  bodies 
round his master. No,  no song. Of course not, for the Ring'll be found, and 
there'll be  no more songs. I can't help it. My place is  by Mr. Frodo. They 
must understand that  --  Elrond  and the Council, and  the  great Lords and 
Ladies with all their wisdom. Their plans  have gone wrong. I can't be their 
Ring-bearer. Not without Mr. Frodo.' 
     But the  Orcs were  out  of his dim sight now. He  had  had no  time to 
consider himself, but now he  realized  that he was  weary, weary almost  to  
exhaustion: his legs would not carry him as he wished. He was  too slow. The 
path seemed miles long. Where had they all got to in the mist?  
     There they were  again!  A good way  ahead still. A cluster of  figures 
round something lying on the ground; a few seemed to be darting this way and 
that, bent like dogs on a trail. He tried to make a spurt. 
     'Come on, Sam!  ' he said, `or you'll be too late  again.' He  loosened 
the sword in its sheath. In a minute he would draw it, and then-- 
     There was a wild clamour, hooting and laughing, as something was lifted 
from the ground. 'Ya hoi! Ya harri hoi! Up! Up! ' 
     Then a  voice shouted: `Now off! The quick way. Back to  the Undergate! 
She'll  not  trouble us  tonight  by  all  the signs.'  The  whole  band  of 
orc-figures  began  to move. Four in the middle were carrying a body high on 
their shoulders. `Ya hoi!  ' 
     They had taken Frodo's body. They were off. He could not catch them up. 
Still he laboured on. The Orcs reached the tunnel and were passing in. Those 
with the  burden  went  first, and  behind them  there  was a  good  deal of 
struggling  and  jostling. Sam came on. He drew the sword, a flicker of blue 
in his  wavering hand, but they did not see it. Even as  he came panting up, 
the last of them vanished into the black hole. 
     For a moment he stood, gasping,  clutching his breast. Then he drew his 

####-sleeve across his face, wiping away the grime, and sweat, and tears.  'Curse 
the filth! ' he said, and sprang after them into the darkness.  
     It no longer seemed very dark to him in the tunnel, rather it was as if 
he  had  stepped out of  a thin mist into  a heavier fog. His  weariness was 
growing but his will  hardened  all the more. He thought  he  could  see the 
light of torches a little way ahead, but try as he would, he could not catch 
them up. Orcs go fast in tunnels, and this  tunnel  they  knew well.; for in 
spite of Shelob they were forced  to use it  often as the swiftest  way from 
the Dead City over the mountains. In  what far -off time  the main tunnel and 
the great round  pit had been  made, where Shelob had  taken up her abode in 
ages past. they did not  know: but many byways they  had  themselves  delved 
about in on either side, so as to escape the lair in their goings to and fro 
on  the business of their masters.  Tonight they  did not intend to  go  far 
down. but  were  hastening to find  a side-passage  that  led back  to their 
watch-tower on  the cliff. Must of  them were gleeful,  delighted with  what 
they had found and seen, and as they ran they gabbled and yammered after the 
fashion of their kind. Sam heard the  noise  of their harsh voices, flat and 
hard in the dead air, and he could distinguish two voices from among all the 
rest: they were louder, and nearer to him. The  captains of the  two parties 
seemed to  be bringing up the rear, debating as they went. 
     'Can't you  stop your rabble  making such a racket, Shagrat? '  grunted 
the one. `We don't want Shelob on us.' 
     `Go on, Gorbag! Yours are  making  more than half the noise,'  said the 
other.  `But let the  lads play! No need to worry about  Shelob for a bit, I 
reckon. She's sat on a nail, it  seems, and we shan't cry about that. Didn't  
you see: a nasty  mess all the way  back to  that cursed crack  of  hers? If 
we've stopped it once, we've stopped it  a  hundred times. So let 'em laugh. 
And we've struck a bit of luck at last: got something that Lugb®rz wants.' 
     'Lugb®rz wants it, eh? What is it, d'you think? Elvish it looked to me, 
but undersized. What's the danger in a thing like that? ' 
     'Don't know till we've had a look.' 
     'Oho! So they  haven't  told you what to expect? They don't tell us all 
they  know, do  they? Not by  half. But they can make mistakes, even the Top 
Ones can.' 
     `Sh, Gorbag!'  Shagrat's voice  was  lowered, so  tha t  even  with  his 
strangely sharpened hearing Sam could only just  catch  what was said. 'They 
may, but they've got eyes and ears everywhere; some among my lot, as like as 

####-not.  But there's no  doubt about it, they're troubled about something.  The 
Nazgyl  down below are, by your account; and Lugb®rz is too. Something 
nearly 
slipped.' 
     `Nearly, you say! ' said Gorbag. 
     `All right,' said Shagrat, `but we'll  talk of that later: Wait till we 
get to the Under -way.  There's a place there where  we can talk a bit, while 
the lads go on.' 
     Shortly  afterwards  Sam saw the  torches  disappear. Then there  was a  
rumbling noise, and just as he hurried up, a bump. As far as  he could guess 
the Orcs  had turned and gone into the very opening which Frodo  and  he  had 
tried and found blocked. It was still blocked. 
     There  seemed to be a  great stone  in  the  way,  but the Orcs had got 
through somehow, for he could hear their voices on the other side. They were 
still running  along, deeper and deeper into the mountain,  back towards the 
tower. Sam felt desperate. They were carrying off his master's body for some 
foul purpose and he could not follow. He thrust and pushed at the block, and 
he  threw himself against it, but it did not  yield. Then not far inside, or 
so he thought,  he  heard the two captains' voices talking  again.  He stood 
still  listening  for a little  hoping  perhaps  to learn something  useful. 
Perhaps Gorbag, who seemed to belong to Minas Morgul, would come out, and 
he 
could then slip in. 
     `No,  I  don't  know,' said  Gorbag's voice. `The messages  go  through 
quicker  than anything could fly, as a rule. But I  don't  enquire how  it's 
done. Safest not to. Grr! Those Nazgyl give me the creeps. And they skin the 
body off you as soon as  look at you, and leave  you all cold in the  dark on 
the  other side. But He likes 'em;  they're His favourites nowadays, so it's 
no use grumbling. I tell you, it's no game serving down in the city.' 
     `You should try being up here with Shelob for company,' said Shagrat. 
     'I'd like to try somewhere where there's  none of 'em. But the war's on 
now, and when that's over things may be easier.' 
     `It's going well, they say.' 
     'They would.' grunted  Gorbag. `We'll  see. But anyway, if  it does  go 
well,  there should  be  a lot more  room. What d'you  say?   -- if we get  a 
chance, you and me'll slip  off  and set up somewhere on our  own with a few 
trusty lads, somewhere  where there's good  loot nice and handy, and no  big  

####-bosses.' 
     'Ah! ' said Shagrat. `Like old times.' 
     `Yes,' said Gorbag. 'But don't count on it. I'm not easy in my mind. As 
I  said, the Big Bosses, ay,' his voice  sank almost to a whisper, `ay, even 
the  Biggest,  can  make mistakes. Something  nearly slipped you say. I say, 
something has slipped. And we've got to  look out. Always the poor  Uruks to 
put slips right, and small thanks. But don't forget: the enemies don't  love 
us  any more than they love Him, and if they get topsides on Him, we're done 
too. But see here: when were you ordered out? ' 
     `About an hour ago,  just  before you  saw us.  A message  came: Nazgyl 
uneasy. Spies feared on Stairs. Double vigilance. Patrol to  head of Stairs. 
I came at once.' 
     'Bad business,'  said Gorbag.  `See  here  -- our Silent  Watchers were 
uneasy more than two days ago. that I know. But my patrol wasn't ordered out 
for another  day, nor any message sent to Lugb®rz either: owing to the Great 
Signal going up, and the High Nazgyl going off to the war, and all that. And 
then they couldn't get Lugb®rz to pay attention for a good while, I'm told.' 
     `The Eye  was busy elsewhere,  I  suppose,'  said Shagrat.  `Big things 
going on away west, they say.' 
     'I daresay,' growled Gorbag.  `But in the meantime enemies  have got up 
the Stairs. And what were you up to? You're  supposed to  keep watch, aren't 
you, special orders or no? What are you for?' 
     `That's enough! Don't try and teach me my job. We were awake all right.  
We knew there were funny things going on.' 
     `Very funny!  ' 
     `Yes, very funny: lights  and  shouting and all. But Shelob was on  the 
go. My lads saw her and her Sneak.' 
     `Her Sneak? What's that? ' 
     `You  must  have  seen  him:  little thin  black  fellow; like a spider  
himself, or perhaps more lik e a starved frog. He's  been  here  before. Came 
out of Lugb®rz the first time, years  ago,  and  we had word from High Up to 
let  him pass.  He's been up the Stairs once  or twice since then, but we've 
left him  alone: seems  to  have some  understanding with  Her  Ladyship.  I  
suppose he's no good to eat:  she wouldn't  worry about words from High  Up. 
But a  fine guard you keep in the valley:  he  was up here a day  before all 
this racket. Early last  night we  saw him. Anyway my lads reported that Her  
Ladyship was having some fun, and that seemed good  enough for me, until the 

####-message came.  I thought  her  Sneak had  brought her a toy. or  that  you'd 
perhaps  sent  her a present,  a  prisoner  of  war  or  something. I  don't 
interfere  when  she's pla ying.  Nothing gets by  Shelob  when  she's on the 
hunt.' 
     'Nothing, say you! Didn't you use your eyes back there? I tell you  I'm 
not easy in my mind. Whatever came up the Stairs, did  get by. It cut her web  
and got clean out of the hole. That's something to think about! ' 
     `Ah well, but she got him in the end, didn't she? ' 
     `Got him? Got who? This little fellow? But if  he was the only one then 
she'd have had him off to her larder long before, and there he'd be now. And 
if Lugb®rz wanted him, you'd  have to go and get him. Nice for you. But there 
was more than one.' 
     At this point Sam began to listen  more attentively and pressed his ear 
against the stone. 
     'Who cut the cords she'd  put round  him, Shagrat? Same one  as cut the 
web. Didn't you see that? And who stuck a pin into Her Ladyship? Same one, I 
reckon. And where is he? Where is he, Shagrat? ' 
     Shagrat made no reply. 
     `You may  well put  your  thinking cap on,  if you've  got one. It's no 
laughing matter. No  one, no one  has ever stuck a  pin in Shelob before, as 
you  should  know well enough.  There's no  grief in that; but think -there's 
someone  loose hereabouts  as is more dangerous than any other  damned rebel 
that ever  walked since the bad old times, since the  Great Siege. Something  
has slipped.' 
     `And what is it then? ' growled Shagrat. 
     `By all the  signs, Captain  Shagrat, I'd say there's  a  large warrior  
loose,  Elf most likely, with an elf-sword anyway, and an axe as well maybe: 
and he's loose in your bounds, too, and you've never spotted him. Very funny 
indeed! ' Gorbag spat. Sam smiled grimly at this description of himself.  
     'Ah well, you always did take a gloomy  view.'  said  Shagrat. 'You can 
read the signs how you like, but there  may be  other   ways to explain them. 
Anyhow. I've  got watchers  at every point, and  I'm  going to deal with one 
thing at a  time. When  I've had  a look at the fellow we have caught,  then 
I'll begin to worry  
 
1cb2 
 

####-about something else.' 
     `It's my guess you won't find much in that little fellow,' said Gorbag. 
'He may have had nothing to  do  with the real mischief. The big fellow with 
the sharp sword doesn't seem to have thought him  worth much  anyhow  -- just  
left him lying: regular elvish trick.' 
     `We'll see. Come on now! We've talked enough. Let's go  and have a look 
at the prisoner! 
     `What  are  you going to do with him? Don't forget I spotted him first. 
If there's any game, me and my lads must be in it.' 
     'Now, now,' growled  Shagrat. 'I  have my  orders. And it's more than my 
belly's worth, or yours, to break 'em. Any trespasser found by the  guard is 
to  be held at the  tower. Prisoner is  to be stripped. Full description  of 
every  article, garment, weapon,  letter,  ring. or trinket is to be sent to 
Lugb®rz at once, and to  Lugb®rz only . And  the prisoner is to be  kept safe  
and intact,  under pain  of death for every member  of  the guard, until  He 
sends or comes Himself. That's plain enough,  and that's what I'm  going  to 
do.' 
     'Stripped, eh? ' said Gorbag. 'What, teeth, nails, hair, and all? ' 
     `No,  none of that. He's for Lugb®rz,  I tell you. He's wanted safe and 
whole.' 
     'You'll find that difficult,' laughed Gorbag. 'He's nothing but carrion 
now. What Lugb®rz will do with such  stuff I can't guess. He might as well go 
in the pot.' 
     'You  fool,'  snarled Shagrat.  'You've been talking very  clever,  but 
there's a lot you don't  know, though most other folk do. You'll be  for the 
pot or for Shelob, if you don't take  care. Carrion! Is that all you know of 
Her Ladyship? When she binds with cords,  she's after meat. She  doesn't eat 
dead meat, nor suck cold blood. This fellow isn't dead! ' 
     Sam reeled, clutching at the stone. He felt as if  the whole dark world 
was turning upside  down. So great was the shock that he almost swooned, but 
even as he fought to keep a hold on his senses, deep inside him he was aware 
of the  comment: 'You  fool, he  isn't dead, and your heart  knew  it. Don't  
trust your head, Samwise, it is not the best part  of you. The  trouble with 
you is that you never really had any hope. Now what is to be done? ' Fur the  
moment nothing, but to prop himself against the  unmoving  stone and listen, 
listen to the vile orc-voices. 
     `Garn!'  said  Shagrat. 'She's got more than  one  poison.  When  she's 

####-hunting, she just gives 'em a dab in the neck and  they go as limp as  boned 
fish, and then she has her way with them. D'you remember old Ufthak? We lost  
him for days.  Then we found him in a corner;  hanging up he was, but he was 
wide awake  and glaring. How we laughed! She'd  forgotten him, maybe, but 
we 
didn't  touch him-no  good interfering with Her. Nar  -- this  little filth, 
he'll wake up, in  a few hours; and  beyond feeling a  bit sick for  a  hit, 
he'll be  all right. Or would  be,  if Lugb®rz  would let him alone. And  of 
course, beyond wondering where he is and what's happened to him.' 
     'And what's going to happen to him,' laughed Gorbag. 'We can tell him a  
few stories at  any rate, if we can't do a nything else. I don't suppose he's 
ever been in lovely Lugb®rz, so he may  like to know what to expect. This is 
going to be more funny than I thought. Let's go!' 
     `There's going to be no fun, I tell  you,' said Shagrat.  'And he's got 
to be kept safe, or we're all as good as dead.' 
     `AII  right! But if I  were you, I'd catch the  big one  that's  loose, 
before you send in any report to Lugb®rz. It  won't sound too pretty  to say 
you've caught the kitten and let the cat escape.' 
     The voices began to move away. Sam heard the sound of feet receding. He 
was recovering from his shock, and now a wild fury was on him. `I got it all  
wrong!  ' he cried. `I knew I  would. Now they've  got him, the  devils! the 
filth! Never leave your master, never,  never: that was my right rule. And I 
knew  it in my heart. May  I be forgiven!  Now I've got to get  back to him. 
Somehow, somehow!  ' 
     He  drew his sword again and  beat on the stone with the  hilt, but  it 
only gave out a dull sound. The sword, however, bla zed so brightly now  that 
he could see dimly  in its light. To his surprise he noticed  that the great 
block was shaped like a heavy door, and  was less than twice his own height. 
Above it was a  dark blank  space between the top and the  low  arch of  the 
opening.  It was probably only meant to be a stop against the  intrusion  of 
Shelob, fastened on the inside with some latch or bolt  beyond the reach  of 
her cunning. With  his  remaining  strength  Sam leaped and caught the  top,  
scrambled up, and dropped;  and  then he ran  madly, sword blazing in  hand, 
round a bend and up a winding tunnel. 
     The news  that his master was still alive roused him  to a  last effort 
beyond thought  of weariness. He could not see anything  ahead. for this new 
passage twisted and turned constantly; but  he thought  he was  catching the  

####-two Orcs up: their  voices were growing  nearer again. Now they seemed quite 
close. 
     `That's what I'm going  to do,'  said Shagrat in angry tones.  'Put him 
right up in the top chamber.' 
     `What for? ' growled Gorbag. `Haven't you any lock -ups down below? ' 
     `He's  going out of harm's way,  I  tell  you,' answered Shagrat. 'See?  
He's  precious.  I  don't trust  all  my lads,  and  none of yours;  nor you  
neither, when you're mad for fun. He's going where I want him, and where you  
won't come,  if you  don't keep civil. Up to the top,  I  say. He'll be safe 
there.' 
     `Will  he?'  said Sam. 'You're  forgetting the great big elvish warrior  
that's loose!' And with that he raced  round   the last corner, only to  find 
that by some trick of the tunnel, or of the hearing which the Ring gave him, 
he had misjudged the distance. 
     The two orc-figures were still some way ahead. He could  see  them now,  
black and squat against a red glare. The passage ran straight at last, up an 
incline;  and  at  the  end, wide open,  were  great  double doors,  leading 
probably to deep  chambers far below the high horn of the tower. Already the 
Orcs  with their burden  had  passed inside. Gorbag and Shagrat were drawing 
near the gate. 
     Sam  heard a burst  of hoarse singing, blaring of horns  and banging of 
gongs, a hideous clamour. Gorbag and Shagrat were already on the threshold. 
     Sam yelled  and brandished Sting, but his little  voice was  drowned in 
the tumult. No one heeded him. 
     The  great  doors slammed to. Boom.  The bars  of iron fell  into place 
inside. Clang.  The gate was  shut.  Sam  hurled  himself against the bolted 
brazen plates and fell senseless to the ground. He  was out in the darkness. 
Frodo was alive but taken by the Enemy. 
  

####- 
    Here ends the second part of the history of the War of the Ring. 
 
     The third  part tells of  the  last defence against the Shadow, and the 
end of the mission of the Ring-bearer in  THE RETURN OF THE KING . 
 
 
 
 

####-####- 

 
 

 * BOOK V *  

Chapter 1. Minas Tirith 

 
 
     Pippin  looked out from  the shelter of Gandalf's cloak. He wondered if 
he was awake or still sleeping, still in the  swift-moving dream in which he 
had  been  wrapped so long since the  great  ride  began. The dark world was 
rushing by and  the wind sang loudly in his ears. He could  see nothing  but 
the wheeling stars, and away to his right vast shadows against the sky where 
the mountains of the  South  marched past.  Sleepily he tried  to reckon the 
times and stages of their journey, but his memory was drowsy and uncertain. 
     There  had been the first  ride at terrible speed without  a  halt, and 
then in the dawn he had  seen a pale gleam of gold, and they had come to the 
silent  town  and the great empty house on  the  hill.  And  hardly had they 
reached its shelter when the winged shadow  had passed  over once again, and 
men wilted with fear. But Gandalf had spoken  soft words to him,  and he had 
slept in a corner, tired but uneasy, dimly aware of  comings  and goings and  
of men talking and Gandalf giving orders. And then  again riding, riding  in 
the  night. This was the second, no, the third night since  he had looked in 
the Stone. And with that hideous memory he woke fully, and shivered, and the 
noise of the wind became filled with menacing voices.  
     A light kindled in the sky, a blaze of yellow fire behind dark barriers 
Pippin  cowered back, afraid for  a  moment,  wondering  into what  dreadful 
country Gandalf was bearing him. He rubbed his eyes, and then he saw that it 
was the moon rising above the eastern shadows, now  almost at  the full.  So 
the night was not  yet  old and  for hours the dark journey  would go on. He 
stirred and spoke. 
     'Where are we, Gandalf?' he asked. 
     'In the realm of Gondor,' the wizard answered. 'The land  of Anurien is 
still passing by.' 
     There was a silence again  for a  while. Then,  'What  is that?'  cried 
Pippin  suddenly,  clutching at Gandalf's cloak.  'Look! Fire, red fire! Are 
there dragons in this land?  Look, there is another!' 
     For  answer  Gandalf  cried aloud to his horse. 'On, Shadowfax! We must  

####-hasten. Time is  short.  See! The beacons of Gondor are  alight, calling for  
aid. War  is  kindled.  See,  there is the  fire  on Amon  Don, and flame on 
Eilenach;  and  there they go speeding  west:  Nardol,  Erelas,  Min-Rimmon, 
Calenhad, and the Halifirien on the borders of Rohan.' 
     But Shadowfax  paused in  his stride, slowing  to  a  walk, and then he 
lifted up his head and neighed. And out of the  darkness the answering neigh  
of other  horses came; and  presently the  thudding of hoofs was heard,  and 
three riders swept up and passed like flying ghosts in the moon and vanished  
into the West. Then Shadowfax gathered himself together and sprang away, 
and 
the night flowed over him like a roaring wind. 
     Pippin became drowsy again and paid little attention to Gandalf telling 
him of the customs of Gondor, and how the Lord of the City had beacons built 
on the tops  of  outlying hills along both border s  of the great  range, and 
maintained posts at these points where fresh horses were always in readiness 
to bear  his errand-riders to  Rohan in the North,  or  to Belfalas  in  the 
South. 'It is long since the beacons of the North  were lit,' he said;  'and 
in the ancient days of  Gondor they were not needed, for  they had the Seven  
Stones.' Pippin stirred uneasily. 
     'Sleep  again, and do  not be  afraid!' said Gandalf. 'For you are  not 
going like Frodo to  Mordor, but  to Minas Tirith, and there you  will be as 
safe as you can  be anywhere in these days. If Gondor falls, or  the Ring is 
taken, then the Shire will be no refuge.' 
     'You do not comfort me,' said Pippin, but nonetheless  sleep crept over  
him. The last  thing that he remembered before he fell into deep dream was a 
glimpse of high white peaks, glimmering like floating isles above the clouds 
as they caught the light of the westering moon. He wondered where Frodo was,  
and if he was already in Mordor, or if he was dead; and he did not know that 
Frodo from far away looked on that same moon as it set beyond Gondor ere the 
coming of the day. 
     Pippin woke  to  the sound of voices. Another day of hiding and a night 
of journey had fleeted by. It was twilight: the cold dawn was at hand again, 
and chill grey mists were about them.  Shadowfax stood  steaming with sweat, 
but he held his neck proudly and showed  no sign of weariness. Many tall men 
heavily cloaked  stood beside him, and behind them in the mist loomed a wall 
of stone. Partly ruinous  it seemed, but already before the night was passed 
the sound  of  hurried labour  could  be heard:  beat  of hammers,  clink of 

####-trowels,  and the creak of wheels. Torches and flares glowed dully here  and 
there in the fog. Gandalf was speaking  to the men that  barred his way, and 
as he listened Pippin became aware that he himself was being discussed. 
     'Yea truly, we know you, Mithrandir,' said the leader  of the men, 'and 
you know the pass-words of the  Seven  Gates and are free to go forward. But 
we do not know your companion. What  is he?  A dwarf out of the mountains 
in 
the North? We wish for no strangers in the land at this time, unless they be 
mighty men of arms in whose faith and help we can trust.' 
     'I will vouch  for him before the seat of Denethor,' said Gandalf. 'And 
as  for valour,  that  cannot be computed by stature. He has  passed through 
more  battles and  perils than you have,  Ingold, though  you  be twice  his 
height; and  he comes  now  from the storming of Isengard,  of which we bear 
tidings,  and great weariness is  on him, or  I would wake him. His name  is 
Peregrin, a very valiant man.' 
     'Man?' said Ingold dubiously; and the others laughed. 
     'Man!' cried Pippin,  now  thoroughly roused.  'Man! Indeed not! I am a  
hobbit and no more valiant  than I am a man,  save perhaps  now and again by 
necessity. Do not let Gandalf deceive you!' 
     'Many a doer of great deeds might say no more,' said Ingold.  'But what 
is a hobbit?' 
     'A Halfling,' answered Gandalf. 'Nay,  not the one that was spoken of,' 
he added seeing  the  wonder  in the  men's  faces. 'Not  he, yet one of his 
kindred.' 
     'Yes, and one  who  journeyed  with him,' said Pippin. 'And  Boromir of 
your City was with us, and he saved me in the snows of the North, and at the  
last he was slain defending me from many foes.' 
     'Peace!'  said Gandalf.  'The news of that grief should have  been told 
first to the father.' 
     'It  has  been  guessed  already,' said  Ingold;  'for there have  been 
strange portents here  of late. But pass  on now  quickly! For  the  Lord of 
Minas Tirith  will be eager to see any that bear the  latest tidings of  his 
son, be he man or --' 
     'Hobbit,' said Pippin.  'Little  service  can I offer to your lord, but 
what I can do, I would do, remembering Boromir the brave.' 
     'Fare you well!' said  Ingold; and the men made way for Shadow fax, and 
he  passed through a narrow gate in the wall. 'May you bring good counsel to 

####-Denethor  in his need, and  to us all, Mithrandir!' Ingold  cried.  'But you  
come with tidings of grief and danger, as is your wont, they say.' 
     'Because I come seldom but  when my help  is needed,' answered Gandalf.  
'And as for counsel, to you I would  say that you are over -late in repairing 
the wall of the Pelennor. Courage will  now be your best defence against the 
storm that is at  hand - that and such  hope as  I  bring. For not  all  the 
tidings that I  bring are  evil.  But leave your  trowels  and  sharpen your 
swords!' 
     'The work will be finished ere evening, ' said Ingold. 'This is the last  
portion of  the wall  to be put in defence: the least open to attack, for it 
looks  towards our  friends of Rohan.  Do  you know aught of them? Will they 
answer the summons, think you?' 
     'Yes,  they will come. But  they have fought many battles at your back. 
This road and no road looks towards safety  any longer. Be vigilant! But for  
Gandalf Stormcrow you would have seen a host  of foes coming  out of 
Anurien 
and no Riders of Rohan. And you may yet. Fare you well, and sl eep not!' 
     Gandalf passed now into  the wide land  beyond the Rammas Echor. So the 
men of Gondor  called the out  wall that they had  built with great  labour, 
after Ithilien fell under the shadow of their Enemy. For ten leagues or more 
it ran from the  mountains' feet  and so back again, enclosing in its  fence 
the fields of the Pelennor:  fair and fertile townlands  on  the long slopes 
and terraces falling to the deep levels of the Anduin. At its furthest point 
from the  Great Gate of the City, north-eastward, the wall  was four leagues 
distant, and there from a frowning bank  it overlooked the long flats beside 
the river,  and men had  made it high and strong; for at  that point, upon a  
walled causeway, the  road came in from  the fords and bridges  of Osgiliath 
and passed  through a guarded gate between embattled towers. At its  nearest 
point the  wall was little more than one league from the  City, and that was 
south-eastward. There Anduin, going in a  wide knee about the  hills of Emyn 
Arnen in South Ithilien, bent sharply west, and  the out-wall rose  upon its 
very  brink; and beneath  it lay  the quays and  landings of the Harlond for  
craft that came upstream from the southern fiefs.  
     The  townlands  were rich,  with  wide  tilth  and many  orchards,  and 
homesteads there  were with oast  and garner, fold and byre, and  many rills 
rippling through  the  green from the  highlands  down  to Anduin.  Yet  the 

####-herdsmen and husbandmen that dwelt there were not many, and the most part 
of 
the people of Gondor lived in the seven circles of the  City, or in the high 
vales of  the  mountain-borders,  in Lossarnach,  or  further south  in fair 
Lebennin with its five swift streams. There dwelt  a  hardy folk between the 
mountains and the sea. They were reckoned men of Gondor, yet their blood 
was 
mingled, and there were short  and swarthy  folk among them whose sires came 
more from the forgotten men who  housed in  the  shadow  of the hills in the 
Dark  Years  ere the coming of the kings. But  beyond,  in the great fief of 
Belfalas, dwelt Prince Imrahil  in  his castle of Dol Amroth by the sea, and 
he was of high blood,  and  his folk also, tall  men and proud with sea -grey 
eyes. 
     Now after Gandalf had ridden for some time the light of day grew in the 
sky, and Pippin roused himself and looked up. To his left lay a sea of mist, 
rising  to a  bleak  shadow  in the  East;  but to his right great mountains 
reared their heads, ranging  from the West  to a steep and sudden end, as if 
in  the  making of the land the  River  had burst  through a great  barrier, 
carving  out a mighty valley to be a  land  of battle and debate in times to 
come. And there where the White Mountains of Ered Nimrais  came to their 
end 
he saw, as Gandalf had promised, the dark mass of Mount  Mindolluin, the deep 
purple  shadows of its high glens, and its tall face whitening in the rising 
day. And upon its out-thrust knee was the Guarded City, with its seven walls 
of stone  so  strong and  old that  it seemed to have been  not builded  but 
carven by giants out of the bones of the earth. 
     Even  as Pippin gazed in wonder the walls  passed from  looming grey to 
white, blushing faintly in  the dawn;  and suddenly the sun climbed over the 
eastern shadow and sent forth a shaft that  smote the face of the City. Then 
Pippin cried aloud, for the Tower  of  Ecthelion, standing high  within  the 
topmost walls' shone  out against the  sky, glimmering like a spike of pearl 
and silver, tall and fair and shapely, and its pinnacle  glittered as if  it 
were wrought of crystals;  and white  banners  broke and  fluttered from the 
battlements in the morning breeze' and high and far he heard a clear ringing 
as of silver trumpets. 
     So Gandalf and Peregrin rode to the Great Gate  of the Men of Gondor at 
the rising of the sun, and its iron doors rolled back before them. 

####-     'Mithrandir!  Mithrandir!' men  cried. 'Now we know that  the  storm is 
indeed nigh!' 
     'It is upon you,' said  Gandalf. 'I  have  ridden  on its wings. Let me 
pass!  I  must come  to  your  Lord Denethor, while his  stewardship  lasts.  
Whatever betide, you have come to the end of the Gondor that you have 
known. 
Let me pass!' 
     Then men  fell back before the command of his voice  and questioned him 
no further, though  they gazed in wonder  at the hobbit that sat before  him 
and at the horse that bore him. For the people of  the City used horses very 
little and they were seldom seen in their streets, save only those ridden by  
the errand-riders of their  lord. And they said: 'Surely that is one  of the 
great steeds of the  King  of  Rohan?  Maybe  the Rohirrim will come soon to 
strengthen us.' But Shadowfax walked proudly up the long winding road. 
     For the  fashion  of  Minas Tirith was such that it was built on  seven 
levels,  each  delved into the hill, and about each  was set a  wall, and in 
each wall was a  gate. But the gates were not set in a line:  the Great Gate 
in the City Wall was at  the  east  point of the circuit, but the next faced 
half south, and the third half north, and so to and fro upwards; so that the 
paved  way that climbed towards  the Citadel turned  first this way and then 
that across the face of  the hill. And each  time that it passed the line of 
the  Great Gate it went through an  arched  tunnel, piercing a  vast pier of 
rock whose  huge out-thrust bulk  divided in two all the circles of the City 
save the first. For partly in  the  primeval shaping  of the hill, partly by 
the mighty craft and labour of old, there stood up from the rear of the wide 
court behind the  Gate a  towering  bastion  of stone, its edge sharp  as  a  
ship-keel facing east. Up it rose, even to the level of the  topmost circle, 
and there was crowned  by  a battlement; so that those in the Citadel might, 
like mariners in a mountainous ship, look  from  its peak sheer down upon the 
Gate  seven  hundred  feet  below.  The entrance  to the Citadel also looked 
eastward,  but  was delved in the  heart of the rock; thence a long lamp-lit 
slope ran up to the seventh gate. Thus  men reached  at last the High Court, 
and the Place of the  Fountain before the feet of the  White Tower: tall and 
shapely,  fifty fathoms from its  base to the pinnacle, where the banner  of 
the Stewards floated a thousand feet above the plain. 
     A  strong citadel  it was indeed,  and  not to be taken  by  a  host of 
enemies, if  there were any within that could hold weapons;  unless some foe 

####-could come behind and scale the lower skirts of Mindolluin, and so come upon 
the narrow shoulder that joined the Hill of Guard to the mountain  mass. But 
that shoulder, which rose to  the height of the fifth wall, was hedged  with 
great ramparts right up to the precipice that overhung its western end;  and 
in that  space stood the houses and  domed tombs of bygone kings  and lords, 
for ever silent between the mountain and the tower. 
     Pippin gazed in growing wonder at the great stone city, vaster and more 
splendid  than  anything that he had dreamed of;  greater and  stronger than 
Isengard, and far more beautiful.  Yet it was in truth falling year by  year 
into decay; and already it lacked half the men that could have dwelt at ease 
there. In  every street they passed  some  great house or  court  over whose 
doors and arched gates were carved many fair letters  of strange and ancient  
shapes: names Pippin  guessed of great men and kindreds that had once  dwelt 
there;  and  yet now they were silent,  and no footsteps rang  on their wide 
pavements, nor voice was heard in their halls, nor any face looked out  from 
door or empty window.  
     At last they came out of  shadow to the seventh gate,  and the warm sun 
that shone down beyond the river, as Frodo walked in the glades of Ithilien, 
glowed here on the smooth walls and rooted pillars, and the great arch  with  
keystone  carven  in  the  likeness of a crowned and  kingly  head.  Gandalf 
dismounted, for no horse was allowed in the Citadel,  and Shadowfax suffered 
himself to be led away at the soft word of his master. 
     The Guards of the gate  were robed  in black, and  their helms  were of 
strange  shape, high-crowned,  with long cheek -guards  close-fitting to  the 
face,  and above the cheek -guards were set the white wings of sea -birds; but 
the helms gleamed with a  flame of silver, for they were indeed  wrought  of 
mithril, heirlooms from the glory of old days. Upon  the black surcoats were 
embroidered in white a tree blossoming like  snow beneath a silver crown and 
many-pointed  stars. This  was the livery of the heirs of  Elendil, and none 
wore it now in all Gondor,  save the Guards of the Citadel  before the Court 
of the Fountain where the White Tree once had grown. 
     Already it  seemed that word of their coming had  gone before them: and 
at once they were admitted,  silently, and without question. Quickly Gandalf 
strode across  the white-paved court.  A  sweet fountain played there in the 
morning sun,  and a  sward of bright green  lay about it; but in the  midst. 
drooping over the pool,  stood  a dead  tree, and  the falling drops dripped 
sadly from its barren and broken branches back into the clear water. 

####-     Pippin glanced at  it  as he hurried after Gandalf. It looked mournful, 
he thought, and he wondered why the dead tree was  left in  this place where 
everything else was well tended. 
     Seven stars and seven stones and one white tree. 
     The words that Gandalf had murmured came back into  his mind. And  then 
he found himself at the doors of  the great hall beneath the gleaming tower; 
and behind the wizard he passed the tall silent door -wardens and entered the 
cool echoing shadows of the house of stone. 
     They walked  down  a paved passage, long and  empty, and  as  they went 
Gandalf spoke softly to Pippin. 'Be careful of your  words, Master Peregrin!  
This is  no time for  hobbit pertness. Thjoden is a kindly old man. Denethor  
is of another  sort, proud and subtle,  a  man  of far  greater  lineage and 
power, though  he is  not called a king. But he will  speak most to you, and 
question you much, since you  can tell him  of his son Boromir. He loved him 
greatly: too much  perhaps; and the more  so because they  were  unlike. But 
under cover  of  this love he will think it easier to  learn what he witches 
from you rather than  from me. Do not tell him more than you need, and leave 
quiet  the matter of Frodo's errand. I will deal with that in due  time. And 
say nothing about Aragorn either, unless you must.' 
     'Why  not? What is wrong with Strider?' Pippin  whispered. 'He meant to 
come here, didn't he? And he'll be arriving soon himself anyway.' 
     'Maybe,  maybe,' said Gandalf. 'Though if he comes, it is likely  to be 
in some way that no one expects, not even Denethor. It will be better so. At 
least he should come unheralded by us.' 
     Gandalf halted  before a  tall  door of  polished  metal. 'See,  Master  
Pippin,  there  is no  t ime to instruct  you now in  the history of  Gondor; 
though it might have been  better, if you  had learned something of it, when 
you were  still birds-nesting and playing truant in the woods  of the Shire. 
Do as I bid! It  is scarcely wise when bringing the news of the death of his 
heir to a mighty lord to speak over much of the  coming of one who  will, if 
he comes, claim the kingship. Is that enough?' 
     'Kingship?' said Pippin amazed. 
     'Yes,' said  Gandalf.  'If you  have  walked all these days with closed 
ears and mind asleep, wake up now!' He knocked on the door. 
     The door opened,  but no one could be  seen  to open it.  Pippin looked 
into a great hall. It was  lit by deep windows in the wide aisles at  either  
side, beyond  the rows of tall  pillars that upheld the  roof. Monoliths  of 

####-black marble, they  rose to great capitals carved in many strange figures of 
beasts and leaves; and far above in  shadow  the wide  vaulting gleamed with 
dull  gold, inset with  flowing traceries of  many colours. No  hangings nor  
storied webs, nor  any things of woven stuff or  of wood, were to be seen in 
that long solemn hall; but between the pillars there stood  a silent company 
of tall images graven in cold stone. 
     Suddenly Pippin was  reminded  of  the hewn rocks of  Argonath, and awe 
fell on him, as he looked down  that  avenue of kings  long dead. At the far 
end upon a dais of many steps was set a high throne under a canopy of marble 
shaped like a crowned helm; behind  it was carved upon the wall and set with 
gems an image of a tree  in flower. But the throne was empty. At the foot of 
the dais, upon the lowest step which was broad and deep, there  was  a stone 
chair,  black and unadorned, and on it sat an  old man gazing at his lap. In 
his hand was a  white rod  with a  golden knob. He did not look up. Solemnly 
they paced the long floor towards him, until they stood three paces from his 
footstool. Then Gandalf spoke. 
     'Hail, Lord  and Steward of Minas Tirith,  Denethor son of Ecthelion! I 
am come with counsel and tidings in this dark hour.' 
     Then  the old  man looked up. Pippin saw his carven face with its proud 
bones  and skin like ivory, and the long  curved nose between  the dark deep 
eyes; and he was reminded not so much of Boromir as of Aragor n.  'Dark 
indeed 
is the hour,' said  the old  man, 'and  at such times you are  wont to come, 
Mithrandir.  But though all  the  signs forebode that the  doom of Gondor is 
drawing  nigh, less now to me is  that darkness than my own darkness. It has 
been told to me that you bring with you one who saw my son die. Is this he?' 
     'It is,' said Gandalf. 'One  of the twain. The other is with Thjoden of 
Rohan and may come hereafter.  Halflings  they are,  as you see, yet this is 
not he of whom the omens spoke.' 
     'Yet  a  Halfling still,' said Denethor  grimly, 'and little love do  I 
bear the name, since those  accursed words  came to trouble our counsels and 
drew away my son on the  wild errand to his  death. My Boromir!  Now we 
have 
need of you. Faramir should have gone in his stead.' 
     'He would  have  gone,' said  Gandalf.  'Be not unjust  in your  grief!  
Boromir claimed the errand and would not suffer any other to have it. He was 
a masterful man, and one  to take what he desired. I journeyed far  with him 

####-and learned much of  his mood. But you speak of his death. You have had news 
of that ere we came?' 
     'I  have received  this,'  said Denethor, and laying  down his  rod  he 
lifted from his lap the  thing that  he had been gazing at.  In each hand he 
held up one half  of a great  horn cloven through the middle: a wild-ox horn 
bound with silver. 
     'That is the horn that Boromir always wore!' cried Pippin. 
     'Verily,'  said  Denethor. 'And in  my turn  I bore it, and so did each 
eldest son of our house, far back into the vanished years before the failing 
of the kings, since  Vorondil father  of Mardil hunted the wild kine of Araw 
in the  far fields of Rhyn. I heard it blowing dim upon the northern marches 
thirteen  days ago, and the River brought  it to me, broken: it will wind no 
more.' He paused and there was a heavy silence. Suddenly he turned his black 
glance upon Pippin. 'What say you to that, Halfling?' 
     'Thirteen, thirteen days,' faltered Pippin. 'Yes, I think that would be 
so. Yes, I stood beside him,  as he blew the  horn. But  no help  came. Only 
more orcs.' 
     'So,' said  Denethor, looking keenly at Pippin's face. 'You were there?  
Tell me more! Why did no help  come? And how  did you escape, and yet he 
did 
not, so mighty a man as he wa s, and only orcs to withstand him?' 
     Pippin flushed and forgot his fear. 'The mightiest man may be slain  by 
one arrow,'  he said; 'and Boromir was pierced by  many. When last I saw him 
he sank  beside  a tree and plucked a black -feathered shaft  from  his side. 
Then I swooned  and was made  captive. I saw him no more, and know  no 
more. 
But I honour his memory,  for he was very  valiant.  He died to save  us, my 
kinsman Meriadoc and myself, waylaid in the woods by  the  soldiery  of  the 
Dark Lord; and though he fell and failed, my gratitude is none the less.' 
     Then Pippin looked the old man in  the eye, for pride stirred strangely 
within  him, still stung  by  the scorn  and suspicion in that  cold  voice. 
'Little service, no  doubt, will so great a lord of Men  think to  find in a  
hobbit, a halfling from the northern Shire; yet such as it is, I  will offer  
it,  in payment  of my  debt.'  Twitching  aside his grey cloak, Pippin drew 
forth his small sword and laid it at Denethor's feet. 
     A pale smile, like a gleam of  cold sun  on a winter's evening,  passed 
over the old man's face; but he  bent his head and held out his hand, laying 

####-the shards of the horn aside. 'Give me the weapon!' he said. 
     Pippin lifted it  and presented the hilt  to him.   'Whence  came this?' 
said Denethor.  'Many, many years lie on it.  Surely this is a blade wrought 
by our own kindred in the North in the deep past?' 
     'It came out of the mounds that lie on the borders of my country ' said 
Pippin.  'But only evil wights dwell there now, and I will not willingly tell  
more of them.' 
     'I see that strange tales  are woven about you,'  said  Denethor,  'and 
once again it  is shown  that looks may belie the man  -  or the  halfling. I 
accept  your  service.  For you  are not  daunted  by  words;  and you  have 
courteous  speech, strange though the sound of it may be to us in the South. 
And we shall have  need of all folk of courtesy, be they great  or small, in 
the days to come. Swear to me now!' 
     'Take the hilt,' said Gandalf,  'and speak after the Lord, if  you  are 
resolved on this.' 
     'I am,' said Pippin. 
     The  old man laid  the  sword along his lap, and Pippin put his hand to 
the hilt, and said slowly after Denethor: 
     'Here do I swear  fealty and  service  to  Gondor, and  to the Lord and 
Steward of the realm, to  speak and to be silent,  to do and  to let be,  to 
come and to go, in need or plenty, in peace or war, in living or dying, from 
this hour  henceforth, until my  lord  release me, or death take me , or  the 
world end. So say I, Peregrin son of Paladin of the Shire of the Halflings.' 
     And this do I hear, Denethor son of Ecthelion, Lord  of Gondor, Steward 
of the High King, and I will not forget it, nor fail to reward that which is 
given: fealty with love, valour with honour, oath - breaking with vengeance.' 
Then Pippin received back his sword and put it in its sheath. 
     'And now,' said  Denethor, 'my first command  to you: speak and be  not 
silent! Tell me your full tale, and see that you recall all that  you can of 
Boromir, my son. Sit now and begin!' As he  spoke  he  struck a small silver  
gong  that  stood  near his footstool,  and at  once  servants came forward. 
Pippin saw then that they had been standing in alcoves on either side of the 
door, unseen as he and Gandalf entered. 
     'Bring wine and food and seats for the guests,' said Denethor, 'and see 
that none trouble us for one hour.' 
     'It is all that  I have to spare,  for there is  much else to heed,' he 
said  to Gandalf.  'Much of more import,  it  may seem,  and yet to  me less 

####-pressing. But maybe we can speak again at the end of the day.' 
     'And earlier, it is to  be hoped,' said Gandalf. 'For I have not ridden 
hither from Isengard, one hundred and fifty leagues, with the speed of wind,  
only to bring you one small warrior, however courteous.  Is it naught to you  
that Thjoden has fought a great battle and  that Isengard is overthrown, and 
that I have broken the staff of Saruman?' 
     'It is much to me. But I know already  sufficient of these deeds for my 
own  counsel  against  the menace of the East.' He turned his  dark  eyes on 
Gandalf, and now  Pippin  saw a likeness between  the  two, and he  felt the 
strain between them,  almost as if  he saw a line of smouldering fire, drawn 
from eye to eye, that might suddenly burst into flame. 
     Denethor  looked indeed much more like a great wizard than Gandalf did, 
more kingly,  beautiful, and powerful; and older. Yet  by a sense other than 
sight  Pippin perceived that  Gandalf had  the greater power and the  deeper 
wisdom, and a majesty that  was veiled.  And he was  older, far older.  'How 
much older?' he wondered, and  then  he thought  how odd it was that he  had 
never thought about it before. Treebeard had  said  something about wizards, 
but even  then  he  had  not  thought of Gandalf as  one  of them. What  was 
Gandalf? In what  far  time and place did he come  into  the world, and when 
would he leave it? And  then his musings broke off, and he saw that Denethor  
and Gandalf  still looked each other in the eye, as if  reading the  other's 
mind. But it was Denethor who first withdrew his gaze. 
     'Yea,' he  said; 'for though  the Stones  be lost, they say,  still the 
lords of Gondor have keener sight than lesser men, and many messages come 
to 
them. But sit now!' 
     Then men came bearing a chair and a low stool, and one brought a salver  
with  a  silver flagon  and cups,  and  white cakes. Pippin sat down, but he 
could  not  take his eyes  from  the  old lord.  Was it so, or  had  he only 
imagined it, that  as he spoke of the Stones a sudden gleam  of his  eye had 
glanced upon Pippin's face?  
     'Now tell  me your tale,  my  liege,' said Denethor, half  kindly; half 
mockingly. 'For the words  of one whom my son so befriended will be  
welcome 
indeed.' 
     Pippin never forgot that hour in the great  hall under the piercing eye 
of the Lord of  Gondor,  stabbed ever and anon by his  shrewd questions, and 

####-all the while conscious of  Gandalf at his side, watching and listening, and 
(so Pippin felt) holding  in check a rising  wrath and impatience.  When the 
hour was  over and Denethor again rang  the gong, Pippin felt worn out.  'It 
cannot  be  more  than  nine o'clock,'  he thought.  'I  could now eat three 
breakfasts on end.' 
     'Lead  the  Lord  Mithrandir  to  the housing prepared for  him,'  said 
Denethor, 'and his companion may lodge with him for the present, if he will.  
But  be it known that  I have  now sworn him to  my service, and he shall be 
known as Peregrin son of Paladin and taught the lesser pass-words. Send word 
to the Captains that they shall wait on me here, as soon as may be after the 
third hour has rung. 
     'And  you,  my Lord  Mithrandir, shall come too, as and when  you will. 
None shall hinder your coming to me at any time, save only in my brief hours 
of sleep. Let your wrath at an old man's folly run off and then return to my 
comfort!' 
     'Folly?'  said  Gandalf. 'Nay,  my lord, when you are a dotard you will 
die. You can  use  even your grief as  a cloak.  Do you  think that I do not 
understand your purpose in  questioning for an hour one who knows the least, 
while I sit by?' 
     'If you understand  it,  then  be  content,' returned  Denethor. 'Pride 
would  be  folly that disdained help and counsel  at need; but you deal  out 
such gifts according to your own designs. Yet  the Lord of Gondor  is not to  
be made the tool  of other men's purposes, however worthy. And to  him there 
is no purpose higher  in the world as it now stands than the good of Gondor;  
and the rule  of Gondor, my lord, is mine and no other man's, unless the king  
should come again.' 
     'Unless  the  king  should  come  again?' said Gandalf. 'Well,  my lord 
Steward,  it is  your task  to keep some  kingdom still against  that event, 
which few now look to see. In that task you shall have all  the aid that you  
are pleased to ask for.  But  I will say this: the rule of no realm is mine, 
neither of Gondor nor any other, great or small.  But all worthy things that 
are in peril as the world now stands,  those are my care. And for my part, I 
shall  not wholly  fail of my task, though Gondor should perish, if anything 
passes through this night that  can still grow fair or bear fruit and flower  
again in days to come. For I also am a steward.  Did you not know?' And with 
that he turned and strode from the hall with Pippin running at his side. 
     Gandalf  did not  look  at Pippin or  speak a word to him as they went. 

####-Their  guide brought them from  the doors  of  the hall, and  then  led them 
across  the  Court  of the  Fountain into a lane  between  tall buildings of 
stone. After  several turns  they came to a house close to the wall  of  the 
citadel upon the north side, not far from the shoulder that linked the  hill 
with  the mountain. Within, upon the first floor above the street, up a wide 
carven  stair,  he showed  them to a fair room, light  and airy, with goodly  
hangings of dull gold sheen unfigured. It  was sparely furnished, having but 
a  small table,  two chairs and a  bench;  but  at  either side  ther e  were 
curtained alcoves  and  well -clad beds  within with  vessels  and basins for  
washing. There were three high narrow windows that looked northward over 
the 
great  curve of  Anduin, still shrouded in  mists, towards the Emyn Muil and 
Rauros  far away.  Pippin had to climb on the bench to look out over the deep 
stone sill. 
     'Are you angry with me, Gandalf?' he  said, as their guide went out and 
closed the door. 'I did the best I could.' 
     'You did  indeed!' said Gandalf,  laughing suddenly; and  he  came  and 
stood beside Pippin, putting his arm about the hobbit's shoulders and gazing 
out  of the window.  Pippin glanced in  some  wonder  at the face now  close 
beside his own, for the  sound of that laugh had been gay and merry.  Yet in  
the wizard's  face he saw  at first only lines of care and sorrow; though as 
he looked more intently he perceived that under all there was a great joy: a  
fountain of mirth enough to set a kingdom laughing, were it to gush forth. 
     'Indeed you did your best,' said the wizard; 'and I hope that it may be 
long  before you find yourself in such a tight corner again between two such 
terrible old  men.  Still the Lord of Gondor  learned more from you than you  
may have  guessed, Pippin. You  could not hide the fact that Bor omir did not 
lead the Company from Moria, and that there was one among you of high 
honour 
who was coming  to Minas Tirith;  and that  he had a famous sword. Men think  
much about the stories of  old  days in Gondor;  and Denethor has given long 
thought  to the rhyme and to  the words  Isildur's  Bane, since Boromir went 
away. 
     'He  is not as other  men  of  this  time,  Pippin, and whatever be his 
descent  from  father  to son, by some chance the blood  of Westernesse runs 
nearly true in him; as it does in his other son, Faramir, and yet did not in 
Boromir whom he  loved best. He has long sight. He can perceive, if he bends 

####-his will thither, much of what is passing in the minds of men, even of those 
that dwell far off. It is difficult to deceive him, and dangerous to try. 
     'Remember that! For you  are  now  sworn to his  service. I do not know 
what put it into your head, or your heart, to do that. But it was well done. 
I  did not hinder  it,  for  generous deed should  not  be  checked  by cold 
counsel.  It  touched  his  heart,  as  well (may I  say it) as pleasing his 
humour. And at least you are free  now  to move  about as  you will in Minas 
Tirith - when you are not on  duty. For there is another side to it. You are 
at his command; and he will not  forget. Be wary still!' 
     He fell silent and sighed. 'Well, no need to brood on what tomorrow may 
bring. For  one thing, tomorrow will  be certain to bring  worse than today, 
for many days  to  come. And there is nothing more that I can do to help it. 
The board is set, and the pieces are moving. One piece that I greatly desire 
to find is Faramir, now the heir of Denethor.  I do not think  that he is in 
the City; but I have had no  time to gather news. I must go.  Pippin. I must  
go to this lords' council and learn what I  can. But the Enemy has the move, 
and he is about to open his full game.  And pawns are likely to see  as much  
of it  as  any,  Peregrin son of Paladin,  soldier  of  Gondor. Sharpen your 
blade!' 
     Gandalf went to the door, and there he turned. 'I  am in haste Pippin,' 
he said. 'Do  me a favour when you go out. Even before you rest, if you  are 
not too weary. Go and find Shadowfax and see how  he is housed. These 
people 
are kindly to beasts, for they are a good  and wise folk, but they have less 
skill with horses than some.' 
     With that Gandalf went out;  and as he did so, there came the note of a  
clear sweet bell ringing in  a tower of  the citadel. Three strokes it rang, 
like silver in  the  air, and ceased: the third hour from the rising of  the 
sun. 
     After a minute Pippin went to  the door and  down the stair  and looked 
about the street. The sun was now  shining warm and bright,  and the  towers 
and tall houses cast long  clear-cut shadows westward.  High in the blue air 
Mount Mindolluin lifted its  white helm and snowy cloak.  Armed men  went to 
and fro in the ways of  the City, as if going at the striking of the hour to 
changes of post and duty. 
     'Nine o'clock we'd call it in the Shire,' said Pippin aloud to himself.  
'Just  the time for a nice breakfast by the open window in spring  sunshine. 

####-And  how I  should like  breakfast! Do these  people ever  have it, or is it 
over? And when do they have dinner, and where?' 
     Presently he noticed a man, clad  in  black and white, coming along the 
narrow street from the centre of the citadel towards him. Pippin felt lonely 
and made up his mind to speak as the man passed; but he had no need. The man 
came straight up to him. 
     'You are Peregrin the Halfling?' he said. 'I am told that you have been 
sworn to the  service of the  Lord and of the City. Welcome! He held out his 
hand and Pippin took it. 
     'I am named Beregond son of Baranor. I have no duty this morning, and I  
have been sent  to you to teach you the pass-words, and to  tell you some of 
the many things that  no doubt you  will  wish to know. And  for my part,  I 
would learn of you also.  For  never before have  we seen a halfling in this 
land and though we have heard rumour of them, little is said of them in  any 
tale that we know. Moreover you are a friend of Mithrandir.  Do you know him 
well?' 
     'Well,' said Pippin.  'I  have known of  him all my short  life, as you  
might say; and lately  I have travelled far with him. But there  is  much to 
read in that book, and I cannot claim to have seen more  than a page or two.  
Yet perhaps I know him as well as any but a few. Aragorn was the only one of 
our Company, I think, who really knew him.' 
     'Aragorn?' said Beregond. 'Who is he?' 
     'Oh,' stammered  Pippin, 'he was a  man who went  about with us. I think  
he is in Rohan now.' 
     'You have  been in Rohan, I hear. There is much that I would ask you of 
that land also;  for we put much of what little hope we have  in its people. 
But I am forgetting my errand, which was first to answer what you would ask. 
What would you know, Master Peregrin?' 
     'Er well,' said Pippin, 'if I may venture to  say so, rather  a burning 
question  in my mind at present is, well, what about breakfast and all that?  
I mean, what  are  the  meal-times, if you  understand me, and where is  the 
dining-room, if there is one?  And the inns? I looked, but never a one could 
I see as we rode up, though I had been borne up by the hope of a draught  of 
ale as soon as we came to the homes of wise and courtly men.' 
     Beregond looked at him  gravely. 'An old campaigner,  I see,'  he said. 
'They say that men who go warring afield look ever to the next  hope of food 
and of drink; though I am not a travelled man myself. Then you have not  yet 

####-eaten today?' 
     'Well, yes,  to speak in courtesy, yes,' said Pippin. 'But no more than 
a cup of wine  and a white cake or two by the kindness of your lord; but  he 
racked me for it with an hour of questions, and that is hungry work.' 
     Beregond laughed. 'At the table small men may  do the greater deeds, we 
say. But you  have broken  your fast  as well as any man in the Citadel, and 
with  greater honour. This is a fortress and a tower  of guard and is now in 
posture  of war. We rise ere the Sun, and take  a morsel in the grey  light, 
and go  to our duties  at  the opening hour. But do not despair!' He laughed 
again,  seeing the  dismay in Pippin's  face. 'Those who have had heavy duty 
take somewhat  to refresh  their strength  in the mid-morning. Then there is 
the  nuncheon,  at noon or  after as  duties allow; and men  gather for  the 
daymeal, and such mirth as there still may be, about the hour of sunset. 
     'Come! We will walk a little and then go find us  some refreshment, and 
eat and drink on the battlement, and survey the fair morning.' 
     'One moment!' said Pippin blushing. 'Greed, or hunger by your courtesy,  
put it out of my mind. But Gandalf, Mithrandir as you call  him, asked me to 
see to his horse  - Shadowfax,  a  great steed of Rohan, and the apple of the 
king's  eye, I  am told, though he  has  given  him  to  Mithrandir  for his 
services. I think his new master loves the beast  better than  he loves many 
men, and if his  good  will is  of  any value to this  city,  you will treat 
Shadowfax with all honour: with greater  kindness than you have treated this 
hobbit, if it is possible.' 
     'Hobbit?' said Beregond. 
     'That is what we call ourselves,' said Pippin. 
     'I am glad to learn it,' said Beregond, 'for now I may say that strange 
accents  do not   mar fair speech,  and hobbits are  a  fair-spoken folk. But 
come! You shall make me acquainted with this good  horse. I love beasts, and 
we  see  them  seldom  in this  stony city;  for my  people  came  from  the 
mountain-vales, and before that from Ithilien. But fear not! The visit shall 
be short, a mere call of courtesy, and we will go thence to the butteries.' 
     Pippin found that Shadowfax had been well housed and tended. For in the 
sixth circle, outside the walls of the citadel, there were some fair stables 
where  a   few  swift  horses  were  kept,  hard  by  the  lodgings  of  the 
errand-riders of  the  Lord: messengers always ready  to  go at  the  urgent 
command of Denethor or his  chief  captains. But  now all the horses and the  
riders were out and away. 

####-     Shadowfax  whinnied as Pippin  entered the stable and  turned his head. 
'Good morning!'  said Pippin.  'Gandalf will come  as soon as  he may. He is 
busy, but he sends greetings, and I am to see that all is well with you; and 
you resting, I hope, after your long labours.' 
     Shadowfax  tossed  his  head  and  stamped. But he allowed  Beregond to 
handle his head gently and stroke his great flanks. 
     'He looks  as if he were spoiling for a race, and not newly come from a  
great journey,' said Beregond. 'How  strong and proud  he is!  Where  is his 
harness? It should be rich and fair.' 
     'None is  rich  and fair  enough for him,' said Pippin.  'He will  have 
none. If he will consent to bear you, bear you he does; and if not, well, no 
bit, bridle,  whip,  or  thong  will  tame  him.  Farewell, Shadowfax!  Have 
patience. Battle is coming.' 
     Shadowfax lifted up his head and neighed, so that the stable shook, and 
they covered their ears.  Then they took their leave, seeing that the manger  
was well filled. 
     'And now for our  manger,' said Beregond, and he led Pippin back to the 
citadel, and so  to a door in the north side of the great tower. There  they 
went  down a  long  cool stair into a  wide alley lit with lamps. There were 
hatches in the walls at the side, and one of these was open. 
     'This  is the storehouse and buttery of my company of the  Guard.' said 
Beregond.  'Greetings,  Targon!' he called through the hatch.  'It  is early 
yet, but here is a newcomer that the Lord has taken into his service. He has 
ridden long and far with a tight belt, and has had sore labour this morning, 
and he is hungry. Give us what you have!' 
     They got there bread, and butter, and cheese  and  apples:  the last of 
the  winter store,  wrinkled but  sound and sweet;  and a leather flagon  of 
new-drawn ale, and  wooden platters  and cups. They put  all into  a  wicker  
basket and climbed back into the sun; and Beregond brought Pippin to a place 
at  the  east  end of  the  great out-thrust battlement where  there was  an 
embrasure in  the walls with a stone seat beneath the sill. From there  they 
could look out on the morning over the world. 
     They  ate  and drank; and they  talked now of  Gondor and its  ways and 
customs, now  of the Shire and the strange countries that  Pippin  had seen. 
And ever as they talked Beregond  was more amazed,  and looked with  greater  
wonder  at the  hobbit, swinging his short  legs as he sat  on the seat,  or  
standing tiptoe upon it to peer over the sill at the lands below. 

####-     'I will not hide from you, Master Peregrin,' said Beregond, 'that to us 
you look almost as one of our children, a lad of nine summers or so; and yet  
you have endured  perils  and seen marvels that few of our  greybeards could 
boast of. I thought  it was the whim of  our Lord to take him  a noble page, 
after the manner of the kings of old, they say. But I see that it is not so, 
and you must pardon my foolishness.' 
     'I do,' said Pippin. 'Though you are  not far  wrong. I am still little 
more than a boy in the reckoning of my own people, and it will be four years 
yet  before I "come of age", as we say in the Shire: But do not bother about 
me. Come and look and tell me what I can see.' 
     The  sun was now  climbing, and the  mists in the  vale below  had been 
drawn up. The last of them  were  floating away, just  overhead, as wisps of 
white cloud borne  on  the  stiffening breeze from  the East,  that  was now 
flapping and tugging the flags and white standards of the citadel. Away down 
in the valley-bottom, five leagues or  so as  the eye leaps, the Great River  
could now  be seen grey  and glittering, coming  out of the  north-west, and 
bending in a mighty sweep south and west again, till it was lost to  view in 
a haze and shimmer, far beyond which lay the Sea fifty leagues away. 
     Pippin could see all the  Pelennor laid out before him, dotted into the 
distance with farmsteads  and little  walls, barns  and  byres, but  nowhere 
could he see any kine  or other  beasts.  Many  roads and tracks crossed the 
green fields,  and there  was much coming and going: wains moving  in  lines 
towards the Great Gate, and  others passing  out.  Now and again  a horseman 
would ride up, and leap from  the saddle  and hasten into the City. But most  
of the traffic went out along the chief highway,  and that turned south, and 
then  bending  swifter than the River skirted the hills and passed soon from 
sight.  It was wide  and well-paved, and along its eastern  edge ran a broad 
green riding-track, and beyond that a wall . On the ride horsemen galloped to  
and  fro, but all the  street seemed to be  choked with great  covered wains 
going  south.  But  soon Pippin  saw that  all was in fact well-ordered: the 
wains were  moving in  three  lines,  one swifter  drawn  by horses; another  
slower, great waggons with fair housings of many colours, drawn by oxen; and 
along the west rim of the road many smaller carts hauled by trudging men. 
     'That is the  road  to the  vales of  Tumladen and  Lossarnach, and the 
mountain-villages,  and then on  to Lebennin,' said  Beregond. 'There  go the 
last  of  the  wains that bear away to refuge the aged the children, and the 
women that must go  with them.  They must all  be gone from the Gate and the 

####-road  clear for a league  before  noon: tha t was the  order.  It  is  a  sad 
necessity.'  He sighed. 'Few, maybe, of those now sundered will meet  again.  
And there  were  always too few children  in  this  city; but now there  are 
none-save some young lads  that will not depart,  and may  find some task to 
do: my own son is one of them.' 
     They fell silent for a while. Pippin gazed anxiously eastward, as if at 
any moment he might see thousands of orcs pouring over the fields. 'What can 
I see there?' he asked, pointing down to the  middle of the great  curve  of 
the Anduin. 'Is that another city, or what is it?' 
     'It was  a city,'  said Beregond, 'the chief city of Gondor,  of  which 
this  was only a fortress. For that is the ruin of Osgiliath  on either side 
of Anduin, which our enemies took and burned long ago. Yet we won it back in 
the  days of  the youth  of Denethor: not to dwell in,  but  to  hold as  an 
outpost, and  to rebuild  the  bridge for the  passage of our arms. And then 
came the Fell Riders out of Minas Morgul.' 
     'The Black R iders?' said Pippin, opening his eyes,  and they  were wide 
and dark with an old fear re-awakened. 
     'Yes,  they  were  black,' said  Beregond,  'and  I  see  that you know 
something of them, though you have not spoken of them in any of your tales.' 
     'I know of them,' said  Pippin softly,  'but I will not  speak of  them 
now, so near, so near.' He  broke  off  and lifted his eyes above the River, 
and  it  seemed to  him that  all  he could  see was  a vast and threatening 
shadow. Perhaps it was mountains looming on the verge of sight, their jagged 
edges softened by wellnigh twenty leagues of misty air; perhaps it was but a  
cloud-wall, and beyond that again a yet deeper gloom. But  even as he looked 
it seemed to his eyes that the gloom was growing and gathering, very slowly, 
slowly rising to smother the regions of the sun. 
     'So  near to Mordor?' said  Beregond quietly.  'Yes,  there it lies. We 
seldom name it; but we have dwelt ever in sight of that shadow: sometimes it 
seems fainter and more distant;  sometimes nearer and darker. It  is growing 
and  darkening now; and  therefore  our fear  and disquiet grow too. And the 
Fell Riders, less  than a year ago they won back the crossings, and  many of 
our best men were  slain.  Boromir it  was that drove  the enemy at last back  
from this western shore, and we hold still the near half of Osgiliath. For a  
little  while. But  we  await  now  a new onslaught there.  Maybe the  chief 
onslaught of the war that comes.' 
     'When?' said Pippin. 'Have  you a  guess?  For I saw the  beacons  last 

####-night and  the errand-riders; and  Gandalf said that it was a sign that  war 
had begun. He seemed in a desperate hurry. But now everything seems to  have 
slowed up again.' 
     'Only because  everything is now ready,' said Beregond. 'It  is but the 
deep breath before the plunge.' 
     'But why were the beacons lit last night?' 
     'It is  over-late  to  send  for aid  when you  are  already besieged,' 
answered Beregond. 'But I  do  not  know the  counsel of  the  Lord  and his 
captains. They have many ways of gathering news.  And  the Lord Denethor  is 
unlike  other men: he sees far. Some  say that as he sits alone in his  high 
chamber  in the Tower at night, and bends his thought  this way and that, he  
can read somewhat of the future; and that he  will  at times search even the 
mind of the  Enemy, wrestling  with  him. And so it  is that he is old, worn 
before his  time. But however that may be, my lord Faramir is abroad, beyond 
the River on some perilous errand, and he may have sent tidings.  
     'But if you would know what I think set  the beacons ablaze, it was the 
news  that came yestereve  out of Lebennin. There is a great  fleet  drawing 
near to the mouths of Anduin, manned by  the corsairs of Umbar in the South. 
They have long ceased to fear the might of Gondor, and they have allied them 
with the Enemy, and now  make  a heavy stroke in  his cause. For this attack  
will draw off much of the help  that  we looked  to  have  from Lebennin and  
Belfalas, where folk are hardy a nd numerous. All the more do our thoughts go 
north to Rohan; and the more glad are we for these tidings  of  victory that 
you bring. 
     'And yet'  - he paused and stood up, and looked round, north,  east, and 
south - 'the doings at Isengard  should warn us that we are  caught now in a  
great net and strategy. This is no longer a  bickering at the fords, raiding 
from Ithilien and from Anurien, ambushing and pillaging. This is a great war 
long-planned, and we are but one piece in it, whatever pride may say. Things 
move  in the  far  East beyond the  Inland Sea, it is reported; and north in 
Mirkwood and beyond; and south in Harad. And now all  realms shall be put to 
the test, to stand, or fall  - under the Shadow. 
     'Yet, Master Peregrin, we have this honour:  ever we bear  the brunt of 
the  chief  hatred  of the Dark Lord, for that hatred comes down out of  the 
depths of  time and over the deeps  of the Sea. Here will the  hammer -stroke 
fall hardest. And for that reason Mithrandir came  hither in such haste. For 
if we fall, who shall stand? And, Master  Peregrin, do you see any hope that 

####-we shall stand?' 
     Pippin did not answer. He looked at the great walls, and the towers and 
brave banners, and  the sun in the high sky, and then at the gathering gloom 
in the East; and he thought of the long fingers of that Shadow: of  the orcs 
in  the woods and the mountains, the treason of Isengard,  the birds of evil 
eye, and the Black Riders even in the lanes of the Shire - and of the winged 
terror,  the Nazgyl. He  shuddered, and hope seemed  to wither. And even  at 
that moment the sun for a second faltered and was obscured, as though a dark 
wing had  passed across it. Almost beyond hearing he thought he caught, high 
and far up in the heavens, a cry: faint, but heart-quelling, cruel and cold. 
He blanched and cowered against the wall. 
     'What was that?' asked Beregond. 'You also felt something?' 
     'Yes,' muttered Pippin. 'It is the  sign of our fall, and the shadow of 
doom, a Fell Rider of the air.' 
     'Yes, the  shadow of doom,' said Beregond. 'I fear  that  Minas  Tirith 
shall fall. Night comes. The very warmth of my blood seems stolen away.' 
     For a time they  sat together with bowed heads and did  not speak. Then 
suddenly Pippin looked up and  saw  that  the  sun was still shining and the 
banners still streaming in the breeze. He shook  himself. 'It is passed,' he 
said. 'No, my  heart will not yet despair. Gandalf fell and has returned and 
is with us. We may stand, if only on one leg, or at least be left still  upon 
our knees.' 
     'Rightly said!' cried Beregond, rising and striding to and  fro.  'Nay, 
though all things  must come  utterly to an  end  in  time, Gondor shall not 
perish yet. Not though  the walls be taken by a reckless foe that will build 
a hill of carrion before them. There  are still other fastnesses, and secret 
ways of escape  into the mountains. Hope and memory shall live still in some 
hidden valley where the grass is green.' 
     'All the same, I  wish it was over for good or ill.' said Pippin. 'I am 
no warrior at all and dislike any thought of battle; but waiting on the edge 
of one  that  I  can't escape  is  worst  of all.  What a long  day it seems 
already! I should  be happier, if we  were not obliged  to stand and  watch, 
making  no move, striking nowhere first. No stroke would have been struck in 
Rohan, I think, but for Gandalf.' 
     'Ah, there  you  lay  your finger on  the  sore  that  many feel!' said 
Beregond. 'But things may change when Faramir returns. He is bold, more bold 
than many deem; for in these days men are slow to believe that a captain can 

####-be wise and learned in the scrolls of lore and song, as he is, and yet a man 
of hardihood  and swift  judgement in the field. But such is  Faramir.  Less 
reckless and eager than Boromir, but  not less resolute. Yet what indeed can 
he do? We cannot assault  the mountains of  -  of yonder  realm. Our reach is 
shortened, and we cannot strike till some foe comes within it. Then our hand  
must be heavy!' He smote the hilt of his sword. 
     Pippin looked at  him: tall and proud and noble, as all the men that he 
had yet seen in that land; and  with  a glitter in  his eye as he thought of 
the battle. 'Alas! my own hand feels as light as a feather,' he thought, but 
he  said nothing.  'A  pawn did  Gandalf  say?  Perhaps  but  on  the  wrong 
chessboard.' 
     So they  talked  until the  sun  reached  its height, and suddenly  the 
noon-bells were rung, and there was a  stir in the citadel; for all save the 
watchmen were going to their meal. 
     'Will you come with me?' said Beregond. 'You may join my  mess for this 
day. I do not know to  what  company  you will be  assigned; or the Lord may 
hold you at his own command. But you will be welcome. And it will be well to 
meet as many men as you may, while there is yet time.' 
     'I shall be glad  to come,' said Pippin. 'I am  lonely, to tell you the 
truth. I left my best friend behind in Rohan, and I have had  no one to talk  
to  or jest with. Perhaps  I could  really join your  company?  Are  you the  
captain? If so, you could take me on, or speak for me?' 
     'Nay, nay,' Beregond laughed, 'I am no captain. Neither office nor rank  
nor lordship  have I,  being but a plain man of arms of the Third Company of 
the Citadel. Yet, Master Peregrin, to be only a man of arms of the  Guard of 
the Tower of Gondor  is held worthy in the City, and such men have honour in 
the land.' 
     'Then it is far beyond me,' said Pippin. 'Take me back to our room, and 
if Gandalf is not there, I will go where you like  - as your guest. ' 
     Gandalf was not in the lodging and had sent no message; so  Pippin went  
with Beregond and was made known  to  the  men of the  Third Company. And 
it 
seemed that Beregond got as much honour from it as his guest, for Pippin was 
very welcome.  There  had  already  been  much talk  in  the  citadel  about 
Mithrandir's companion and his  long  closeting with the  Lord;  and  rumour 
declared that a Prince  of the Halflings had  come out of the North to offer  
allegiance to Gondor and five  thousand  swords.  And some said that when the 

####-Riders came from Rohan each would bring behind him a halfling warrior, small 
maybe, but doughty. 
     Though Pippin had regretfully to destroy this  hopeful  tale,  he could 
not be rid of his new  rank, only fitting, men thought, to one befriended by 
Boromir and honoured by  the Lord Denethor; and they thanked him for  
coming 
among them, and  hung on his words and stories of the outlands, and gave him 
as much food and ale as he could  wish. Indeed his  only  trouble was to  be 
'wary' according  to the counsel of Gandalf, and  not to let  his tongue wag 
freely after the manner of a hobbit among friends. 
     At length  Beregond  rose. 'Farewell for  this time!'  he said. 'I have 
duty now till sundown, as have all the others here, I think. But if you  are 
lonely, as you  say, maybe  you would like a  merry guide about the City. My 
son would go with you gladly. A good lad, I may say. If that pleases you, go 
down to  the  lowest  circle and ask for  the Old  Guesthouse  in  the  Rath 
Celerdain, the Lampwrights' Street. You will find him  there with other lads 
that are remaining in the City. There may be things worth seeing down at the 
Great Gate ere the closing.' 
     He went out, and soon after all the  others followed. The day was st ill 
fine, though  it  was  growing hazy,  and it was  hot for March, even so far 
southwards. Pippin felt sleepy,  but  the  lodging seemed cheerless, and  he 
decided to go down and  explore the City. He took a few morsels that he  had 
saved to Shadowfax,  and  they were  graciously accepted,  though the  horse 
seemed to have no lack. Then he walked on down many winding ways.  
     People  stared  much  as  he  passed. To  his  face  men  were  gravely 
courteous, saluting him after the manner of Gondor with bowed head and hands 
upon the breast; but  behind him he heard many calls,  as those out of doors 
cried to others within  to come  and see the Prince  of the  Halflings,  the 
companion of Mithrandir. Many used some other tongue than the Common 
Speech, 
but  it  was not long before he  learned at least what was meant by  Ernil i 
Pheriannath  and knew that his title had gone down before him into the City. 
     He came at last by arched streets and many fair alleys and pavements to 
the lowest and widest circle, a nd there  he was directed to the Lampwrights' 
Street, a broad way running towards  the  Great Gate. In it he found the Old 
Guesthouse, a large building of grey weathered stone with  two wings running 

####-back from the street, and between them a narrow greensward, behind which 
was 
the many-windowed house, fronted along its whole  width by  a pillared porch 
and  a flight of steps down on  to  the grass.  Boys were playing  among the 
pillars,  the only children  that Pippin had  seen  in Minas Tirith,  and he 
stopped to look at them. Presently one of them caught sight of him, and with 
a  shout  he sprang across  the grass and  came into the street, followed by 
several others. There he stood in front of Pippin, looking him up and down. 
     'Greetings!' said  the la d. 'Where do you come from? You are a stranger  
in the City.' 
     'I was,' said Pippin; 'but they say I have become a man of Gondor.' 
     'Oh  come!' said the lad. 'Then we are all men  here.  But how old  are 
you, and what is your name? I am ten  years a lready, and  shall soon be five 
feet.  I am  taller  than you. But then my father  is  a  Guard, one of  the 
tallest. What is your father?' 
     'Which question  shall  I  answer first?' said Pippin. 'My father farms 
the  lands  round Whitwell  near  Tuckborough in  the  Shire.  I  am  nearly 
twenty-nine, so I pass you there; though I am but four feet, and  not likely 
to grow any more, save sideways.' 
     'Twenty-nine!' said the lad  and whistled. 'Why, you are  quite old! As 
old as my  uncle Iorlas. Still,' he added hopefully, 'I  wager I could stand 
you on your head or lay you on your back.' 
     'Maybe you could, if I let you,' said Pippin with a laugh. 'And maybe I 
could  do  the  same  to  you: we know some  wrestling tricks in  my  little 
country.  Where,  let  me tell  you,  I am considered  uncommonly large  and 
strong; and I have never allowed anyone  to stand me  on  my  head. So if it 
came to a trial and nothing else would serve, I might have  to kill you. For  
when you  are older, you will learn that folk are not always what they seem;  
and though  you may have taken me for a soft stranger -lad and easy prey, let  
me  warn you: I am not,  I  am a halfling,  hard, bold,  and wicked!' Pippin 
pulled such  a  grim face  that the boy stepped  back a pace, but at once he 
returned with clenched fists and the light of battle in his eye. 
     'No!'  Pippin laughed. 'Don't  believe what strangers say of themselves 
either! I am  not a fighter.  But it  would be politer in any  case for  the 
challenger to say who he is.' 
     The boy drew himself  up  proudly.  'I am Bergil son of Beregond of the 
Guards,' he said. 

####-     'So I thought,' said Pippin, 'for you look like your father. I know him 
and he sent me to find you.' 
     'Then why did you not say so at once?' said Bergil, and suddenly a look  
of dismay came over his face. 'Do not  tell me that he has changed his mind,  
and will send me away with the maidens! But no, the last wains have gone.' 
     'His message is less bad than that, if not good.' said Pippin. 'He says 
that if you would  prefer it to standing me  on  my head, you might show  me 
round the  City for  a while  and cheer my loneliness. I can  tell  you some 
tales of far countries in return.' 
     Bergil  clapped his hands,  and laughed with relief.  'All is well,' he 
cried. 'Come then! We were  soon going to the  Gate  to look  on. We will go 
now.' 
     'What is happening there?' 
     'The  Captains  of the  Outlands  are  expected up the South  Road  ere 
sundown. Come with us and you will see.' 
     Bergil proved a good comrade, the best company Pippin had had  since he 
parted from Merry, and soon they  were laughing and  talking  gaily  as they 
went about  the streets, heedless of the many  glances  that men gave  them. 
Before long they found themselves in  a throng going towards the Great Gate. 
There Pippin went  up  much in  the esteem of Bergil,  for when he spoke his 
name and the pass-word the guard saluted  him and let  him pass through; and 
what was more, he allowed him to take his companion with him. 
     'That is good!' said Bergil. 'We boys are no longer allowed to pass the 
Gate without an elder. Now we shall see better.' 
     Beyond the Gate there was a crowd of men  along  the  verge of the road 
and of the great paved space into  which all the wa ys to  Minas Tirith  ran. 
All eyes were turned southwards, and soon a murmur rose: 'There is dust away 
there! They are coming!' 
     Pippin and Bergil  edged their way  forward to the front of the  crowd, 
and waited. Horns sounded at some distance, and the noise of cheering rolled 
towards them like a gathering wind. Then there was a loud trumpet-blast, and 
all about them people were shouting. 
     'Forlong! Forlong!' Pippin  heard men calling.  'What do  they say?' he 
asked. 
     'Forlong  has come,' Bergil answered; 'old Forlong the Fat, the Lord of 
Lossarnach. That is where  my grandsire  lives. Hurrah! Here he is. Good old 
Forlong!' 

####-     Leading the line there came walking a big thick -limbed horse, and on it 
sat a man of  wide  shoulders and  huge girth, but old and grey-bearded, yet 
mail-clad and  black-helmed and  bearing  a  long heavy  spear.  Behind  him 
marched  proudly  a  dusty  line  of  men,   well-armed  and  bearing  great 
battle-axes; grim-faced they were, and shorter  and  somewhat swarthier  than 
any men that Pippin had yet seen in Gondor. 
     'Forlong!' men shouted.  'True heart, true friend!  Forlong!'  But when 
the men of Lossarnach  had passed they muttered: 'So few! Two hundreds, 
what 
are they? We hoped for ten times the number. That will be the new tidings of 
the  black fleet.  They  are sparing only a tithe  of  their strength. Still 
every little is a gain.' 
     And  so  the  companies  came and  were hailed and  cheered  and passed 
through  the Gate, men of the Outlands marching to defend the City of Gondor  
in a dark hour; but always too few, always less than hope looked for or need 
asked. The  men of  Ringlu  Vale  behind the  son  of  their  lord, Dervorin 
striding  on foot: three hundreds. From  the uplands of  Morthond, the great 
Blackroot Vale,  tall Duinhir with  his sons, Duilin and  Derufin,  and five 
hundred bowmen. From the  Anfalas, the Langstrand far away,  a  long line of 
men of many sorts, hunters and herdsmen and men of little villages, scantily 
equipped  save for the hou sehold of Golasgil their lord. From Lamedon, a few 
grim hillmen without a  captain.  Fisher -folk of the Ethir, some hundred  or  
more spared from the ships. Hirluin the Fair of the Green Hills from Pinnath 
Gelin with three hundreds  of gallant green-clad men. And last and proudest,  
Imrahil,  Prince  of Dol Amroth,  kinsman of the  Lord, with  gilded banners 
bearing his token of the Ship and  the Silver Swan, and a company of knights 
in full harness riding grey horses; and behind them seven hundreds of men at 
arms, tall as lords, grey-eyed, dark-haired, singing as they came. 
     And  that was  all, less than  three thousands full told. No more would 
come. Their cries and the tramp of their feet passed into  the City and died 
away. The onlookers stood silent for a while. Dust hung  in the air, for the 
wind had  died and  the  evening  was heavy. Already  the  closing  hour was 
drawing nigh, and the red sun had gone behind  Mindolluin. Shadow  came 
down 
on the City. 
     Pippin  looked  up,  and  it  seemed to  him that  the  sky  had  grown 
ashen-grey, as  if a vast dust  and  smoke hung above  them, and  light came 

####-dully  through it. But in the West  the dying  sun had  set all  the fume on 
fire, and now Mindolluin stood black against a burning smoulder flecked  with 
embers. 'So ends a  fair day in wrath!' he said forgetful of the lad  at his 
side. 
     'So it  will, if  I  have not returned before the sundown-bells,'  said 
Bergil. 'Come! There goes the trumpet for the closing of the Gate.' 
     Hand  in hand they went  back into the City, the last to  pass the Gate 
before it  was  shut;  and as they  reached the Lampwrights'  Street all the 
bells in the towers tolled solemnly. Lights sprang in many windows, and from 
the houses and wards of the men at arms along the walls there came the sound 
of song. 
     'Farewell  for  this  time,'  said  Bergil.  'Take  my  greetings to my 
:father, and thank him for the company that he sent. Come again soon, I beg.  
Almost  I wish now that there was no war,  for we might have  had some merry 
times. We might have journeyed to Lossarnach, to my grandsire's house; it is 
good to be  there in Spring, the  woods and fields are  full of flowers. But 
maybe we will go thither together  yet.  They will never overcome our  Lord, 
and my father is very valiant. Farewell and return!' 
     They  parted and Pippin hurried back towards the citadel.  It seemed  a  
long way, and he  grew hot and  very hungry; and night closed down swift and 
dark.  Not a star pricked the sky. He  was late for the daymeal in the mess, 
and Beregond greeted him gladly, and sat him at his side to hear news of his 
son.  After the  meal Pippin stayed a while,  and then took his leave, for a  
strange gloom was on him, and now he desired very much to see Gandalf 
again. 
     'Can you find your way?' said Beregond at  the door of the  small hall, 
on the north side of the citadel, where  they had sat. 'It is a black night, 
and all the blacker  since  orders came that lights are  to be dimmed within 
the City, and none are to shine out from  the walls. And I can give you news 
of another order: you will be summoned to the Lord Denethor  early tomorrow.  
I  fear you will not  be for the Third  Company. Still we may  hope  to meet 
again. Farewell and sleep in peace!' 
     The lodging was   dark,  save  for a  little lantern  set  on the table. 
Gandalf was  not there.  Gloom settled  still  more  heavily  on Pippin.  He 
climbed on the bench  and tried  to  peer out of a window,  but it was  like 
looking  into a pool of ink. He  got down and closed the shutter and went to 
bed.  For a  while he lay and listened for  sounds  of Gandalf's return, and 

####-then he fell into an uneasy sleep. 
     In  the  night he was wakened by  a light, and he saw that  Gandalf had 
come and was pacing to and fro in the room beyond the curtain of the alcove. 
There were candles on the  table and rolls of parchment. He heard the wizard 
sigh, and mutter: 'When will Faramir return?' 
     'Hullo!' said Pippin, poking his head round the curtain. 'I thought you  
had forgotten  all about me. I am  glad  to see you back. It has been a long 
day.' 
     'But the night  will be too  short,' said  Gandalf.  'I have  come back  
here, for I  must have a  little peace,  alone. You should sleep,  in  a bed 
while you still  may. At the sunrise I  shall take you to the  Lord Denethor  
again. No, when the  summons  comes, not at sunrise. The Darkness has begun. 
There will be no dawn.' 
 

####- 

Chapter 2. The Passing of the Grey Company 

 
 
     Gandalf was gone, and the thudding  hoofs of Shadowfax were lost in the  
night, when Merry came  back to Aragorn. He  had only a light bundle, for he 
had lost his pack at Parth  Galen, and all he had was a few useful things he 
had picked up among the wreckage of  Isengard. Hasufel was  already saddled. 
Legolas and Gimli with their horse stood close by. 
     'So four of the Company still remain,'  said Aragorn. 'We  will ride on 
together.  But  we  shall  not  go alone,  as  I  thought. The  king is  now 
determined  to set out at  once.  Since the coming of the winged  shadow, he 
desires to return to the hills under cover of night.' 
     'And then whither?' said Legolas.  
     'I cannot say yet,' Aragorn answered. 'As for the king, he will  go  to 
the muster that he commanded at Edoras,  four  nights from now. And there, I 
think, he will hear tidings of war, and the Riders of Rohan  will go down to 
Minas Tirith. But for myself, and any that will go with me . . .' 
     'I for one!' cried Legolas. 'And Gimli with him!' said the Dwarf. 
     'Well, for myself,' said Aragorn, 'it is dark before me. I must go down 
also to Minas Tirith, but I  do not yet see the  road. An hour long prepared 
approaches.' 
     'Don't leave me behind!'  said Merry. 'I have not been of much use yet; 
but I don't want to be laid aside, like baggage to be called for when all is 
over. I don't think the Riders will want to be bothered with me now. Though, 
of  course, the  king did say that I was to sit by  him when  he came to his 
house and tell him all about the Shire.' 
     'Yes,' said Aragorn, 'and your road lies with him, I  think, Merry. But 
do  not  look for mirth at  the ending. It will be long, I fear, ere Thjoden 
sits  at ease  again  in  Meduseld.  Many hopes will wither  in this  bitter  
Spring.' 
     Soon all were ready  to depart:  twenty -four horses, with Gimli  behind 
Legolas,  and Merry  in front of Aragorn. Presently they were riding swiftly  
through the night. They had not long passed the mounds at the Fords of Isen, 
when a Rider galloped up from the rear of their line. 
     'My  lord,'  he said to  the king, 'there are horsemen behind us. As we 
crossed the fords I thought that  I heard them. Now we  are sure.  They  are 

####-overtaking us, riding hard.' 
     Thjoden at once called a halt. The Riders turned about and seized their 
spears.  Aragorn  dismounted and  set Merry on the  ground, and drawing  his 
sword he stood by the king's stirrup. Jomer and his esquire rode back to the 
rear. Merry felt more  like unneeded baggage than  ever, and he wondered, if 
there was a fight, what  he should do. Supposing the king's small escort was 
trapped and overcome, but  he escaped into the darkness  - alone in the wild  
fields of Rohan  with no idea of where he was in all the  endless miles? 'No 
good!' he thought. He drew his sword and tightened his belt. 
     The sinking moon was obscured by a great sailing cloud, but suddenly it 
rode  out clear  again. Then they all  heard the sound of  hoofs, and at the 
same moment they saw dark shapes coming  swiftly on the path from the fords.  
The moonlight glinted here and  there  on the points of spears. The number of 
the pursuers could  not be told, but they seemed  no fewer than  the  king's 
escort, at the least. 
     When they were some  fifty paces off,  Jomer  cried  in  a  loud voice: 
'Halt! Halt! Who rides in Rohan?' 
     The  pursuers  brought  their  steeds  to  a sudden  stand.  A  silence 
followed: and  then in the  moonlight, a  horseman could be seen dismounting 
and walking  slowly  forward. His hand  showed white as  he held it up, palm 
outward, in token of pea ce; but the king's men gripped their weapons. At ten 
paces the man stopped. He was  tall,  a dark standing shadow. Then his clear 
voice rang out. 
     'Rohan? Rohan did you say?  That is  a glad word.  We seek that land in 
haste from long afar.' 
     'You have found it,' said Jomer. 'When you crossed the fords yonder you  
entered it. But it is the realm of Thjoden  the King. None ride here save by 
his leave. Who are you? And what is your haste?' 
     'Halbarad D®nadan, Ranger  of the North I am,' cried the man. 'We  seek  
one Aragorn son of Arathorn, and we heard that he was in Rohan.' 
     'And  you have  found  him also!' cried  Aragorn. Giving his  reins  to 
Merry, he ran  forward and embraced  the newcomer. 'Halbarad!' he said.  'Of 
all joys this is the least expected!' 
     Merry breathed a sigh of relief. He had thought that this was some last 
trick of Saruman's, to waylay  the king  while he  had  only a few men about 
him;  but it seemed that there would be no need to die in Thjoden's defence,  
not yet at any rate. He sheathed his sword. 

####-     'All is well,' said Aragorn, turning back. 'Here are some of my own kin 
from  the far land where I dwelt. But why they come, and how many  they  be, 
Halbarad shall tell us.' 
     'I  have thirty  with me,' said Halbarad. 'That is  all  of our kindred 
that could be gathered in  haste; but the  brethren Elladan and Elrohir have 
ridden with us, desiring to go to  the  war. We rode as swiftly as we  might 
when your summons came.' 
     'But  I  did  not summon you,' said Aragorn,  'save  only  in wish.  My 
thoughts have often turned to you, and seldom more than tonight; yet I  have 
sent  no  word. But come! All such matters must wait. You find us riding  in 
haste and danger. Ride with us now, if the king will give his leave. ' 
     Thjoden was indeed glad of the news. 'It  is well!' he said.  'If these 
kinsmen be in any way like to yourself, my lord Aragorn, thirty such knights 
will be a strength that cannot be counted by heads.' 
     Then the Riders  set out again, and Aragor n  for a while rode with  the 
D®nedain; and when they had spoken of tidings in the North and in the South, 
Elrohir said to him: 
     'I bring word to you from my father: The days are short. If thou art in  
haste, remember the Paths of the Dead. ' 
     'Always my days  have seemed  to me  too short to  achieve  my desire,' 
answered Aragorn. 'But great indeed will be my haste ere I take that road.' 
     'That  will soon  be seen,' said Elrohir. 'But let us speak  no more of 
these things upon the open road!' 
     And  Aragorn said to Halbarad: 'What is  that that  you bear, kinsman?' 
For  he  saw that instead  of a  spear he bore a  tall  staff, as it were  a  
standard, but it was close-furled  in a black cloth  bound about  with  many 
thongs. 
     'It is a gift that  I bring  you  from the Lady of Rivendell,' answered 
Halbarad.  'She wrought it in secret,  and long was the making. But she also 
sends word  to you: The days now are short.  Either our hope cometh, or  all  
hopes end. Therefore I  send  thee what I have  made  for  thee. Fare  well, 
Elfstone!' 
     And Aragorn said:  'Now I  know  what you bear. Bear it still for  me a  
while!' And  he turned and  looked away to the North under  the great stars,  
and then he fell silent and spoke no more while the night's journey lasted. 
     The night  was old  and the East grey  when  they rode  up at last from 
Deeping-coomb and came back to the Hornburg. There they were to lie and rest  

####-for a brief while and take counsel. 
     Merry  slept  until  he was  roused by Legolas and  Gimli.  'The Sun is 
high,'  said Legolas. 'All others are  up and doing.  Come, Master Sluggard, 
and look at this place while you may!' 
     'There  was a  battle here  three  nights ago,' said Gimli,  'and  here 
Legolas and  I  played a game that I won only  by a single orc. Come and see 
how it was!  And there  are caves, Merry, caves of  wonder!  Shall we  visit 
them, Legolas, do you think?' 
     'Nay!  There is no  time,' said the Elf. 'Do  not spoil the wonder with 
haste! I have given you my wor d to return hither with you, if a day of peace 
and  freedom comes  again. But it is now near to noon, and  at that hour  we 
eat, and then set out again, I hear.' 
     Merry  got up  and yawned. His few hours'  sleep  had not  been  nearly 
enough; he was  t ired and rather dismal. He missed Pippin,  and felt that he 
was only a burden, while everybody was making plans for  speed in a business 
that he did not fully understand. 'Where is Aragorn?' he asked. 
     'In a  high chamber of the Burg,' said  Legolas. 'He has neither rested 
nor slept, I think. He went thither some hours ago, saying that he must take 
thought, and only his kinsman, Halbarad, went with him;  but some dark doubt 
or care sits on him.' 
     'They are a strange company, these  newcomers,'  said Gimli. 'Stout men 
and lordly  they are,  and the  Riders  of Rohan look  almost as boys beside 
them; for they are grim men  of face, worn like weathered rocks for the most  
part, even as Aragorn himself; and they are silent.' 
     'But even as Aragorn they  are courteous, if they break  their silence.' 
said  Legolas. 'And have  you marked  the brethren Elladan and Elrohir? Less 
sombre is their  gear than  the  others', and  they are fair and  gallant as 
Elven-lords;  and that  is not  to be wondered  at in the sons of  Elrond of 
Rivendell.' 
     'Why have  they come? Have you heard?' asked Merry. He had now dressed, 
and he flung  his grey cloak about his shoulders; and  the  three passed out 
together towards the ruined gate of the Burg. 
     'They answered  a  summons,  as you  heard,'  said Gimli. 'Word  came to 
Rivendell, they  say: Aragorn has need of his kindred. Let the D®nedain ride 
to him in Rohan! But whence this message came they are now in doubt. 
Gandalf 
sent it, I would guess.' 

####-     'Nay, Galadriel,' said  Legolas. 'Did she not speak  through Gandalf of 
the ride of the Grey Company from the North?' 
     'Yes,  you have it,' said Gimli. 'The Lady of  the Wood! She  read many 
hearts and  desires. Now why did  not we wish for some  of our own kinsfolk, 
Legolas?' 
     Legolas stood before the gate and turned his bright eyes away north and 
east, and his fair face was troubled. 'I do not  think that any would come,' 
he answered. 'They have no need to ride to war; war already marches on their 
own lands.' 
     For  a while the three companions walked together, speaking of this and 
that turn of the battle, and they went down from the broken gate, and passed 
the mounds of the fallen on the greensward beside the road, until they stood  
on  Helm's  Dike  and  looked into the Coomb. The Death Down  already  stood 
there, black and  tall and stony, and the great trampling and scoring of the 
grass by the Huorns could be  plainly  seen. The Dunlendings and many men of 
the garrison of the Burg were at work on the Dike or in the fields and about 
the battered walls behind;  yet all seemed  strangely  quiet: a weary valley 
resting after a  great storm. Soon they turned  back and went  to the midday 
meal in the hall of the Burg. 
     The  king was already there, and as soon as they  entered he called for  
Merry and  had a seat set for him at his side. 'It is not  as I  would  have 
it,' said Thjoden; 'for this is little like  my  fair  house  in Edoras. And 
your friend is gone, who should also be here. But it may be long ere we si t, 
you and I, at the high table in Meduseld; there will be no time for feasting 
when  I return  thither. But  come  now!  Eat and drink,  and  let us  speak 
together while we may. And then you shall ride with me.' 
     'May I?' said Merry, surprised and delighted.  'That would be splendid!' 
He had never felt more grateful for any kindness in words. 'I am afraid I am 
only in everybody's way,' he stammered; 'but  I should like to do anything I 
could, you know.' 
     'I doubt  it not,' said the king.  'I have had  a  good  hill -pony made 
ready for you. He will  bear you as swift as any horse by the  roads that we 
shall  take. For I will ride  from the  Burg  by mountain paths, not  by the 
plain, and so come to Edoras by way of Dunharrow where the Lady Jowyn 
awaits 
me. You shall  be  my esquire,  if you  will.  Is  there gear of war in this 
place, Jomer, that my sword-thain could use?' 

####-     'There are no great weapon -hoards here, lord.' answered Jomer. 'Maybe a  
light helm might be found to fit him; but  we have no   mail or sword for one 
of his stature.' 
     'I have a sword,' said Merry, climbing from his  seat, and drawing from 
its black sheath his small bright blade. Filled suddenly with love  for this 
old man, he knelt on one knee,  and took  his hand and kissed it. 'May I lay 
the  sword  of  Meriadoc of the Shire on your lap Thjoden  King?' he  cried. 
'Receive my service, if you will!' 
     'Gladly will I take it,' said the king; and laying his  long old  hands 
upon  the brown hair  of the hobbit;  he blessed  him. 'Rise  now, Meriadoc, 
esquire  of Rohan of the household of  Meduseld!' he said.  'Take your sword 
and bear it unto good fortune!' 
     'As a father you shall be to me,' said Merry. 
     'For a little while,' said Thjoden. 
     They talked then together as they ate, until presently Jomer spoke. 'It 
is near the hour that we set for our going, lord,' he said. 'Shall I bid men 
sound the horns? But where is  Aragorn?  His place is empty and  he  has not 
eaten.' 
     'We  will make ready to ride,'  said Thjoden; 'but let  word be sent to 
the Lord Aragorn that the hour is nigh.' 
     The king with his guard and Merry at his side passed down from the gate 
of  the Burg to  where the Riders were assembling  on  the green.  Many were 
already mounted. It would be a   great company; for the king was leaving only 
a small garrison in the Burg, and all who could be spared were riding to the 
weapontake at  Edoras. A  thousand spears  had indeed already ridden away at 
night; but still there would be some five hundred more  to go  with the king, 
for the most part men from the fields and dales of Westfold. 
     A little  apart  the Rangers sat, silent,  in an ordered company, armed 
with  spear and bow  and sword. They were  clad in  cloaks of dark grey, and 
their hoods were ca st now over helm  and head. Their  horses were strong and 
of  proud  bearing, but rough-haired; and  one stood there without  a rider, 
Aragorn's own horse that they  had  brought from the North; Roheryn  was his 
name. There was no gleam  of stone  or gold, nor any fair thing in all their 
gear and harness: nor did their  riders bear any badge  or  token, save only 
that each  cloak was  pinned  upon the  left shoulder by a brooch of  silver  
shaped like a rayed star. 
     The  king mounted his horse, Snowmane,  and Merry sat beside him on his 

####-pony: Stybba was his name. Presently Jomer came out from the gate, and  with 
him was Aragorn, and Halbarad bearing the great staff close-furled in black, 
and two tall men, neither young nor old So much alike were they, the  sons of 
Elrond,  that few could tell  them apart: dark-haired,  grey-eyed, and their 
faces elven-fair,  clad  alike in bright mail beneath cloaks of silver -grey. 
Behind them walked Legolas and  Gimli. But Merry had eyes only for  
Aragorn, 
so startling  wa s the  change that he saw  in  him, as if in one  night many 
years had fallen on his head. Grim was his face, grey-hued and weary. 
     'I  am troubled in mind, lord,'  he said, standing by the king's horse. 
'I have  heard strange words,  and I see new per ils far off. I have laboured 
long  in thought, and  now  I fear that I must change my  purpose. Tell  me, 
Thjoden, you ride now to Dunharrow, how long will it be ere you come there?' 
     'It is now a full hour past noon,' said Jomer. 'Before the night of the 
third day  from  now we should  come to the Hold. The Moon will then be  one 
night past his full, and the muster that the king commanded will be held the 
day after. More  speed we cannot make, if  the strength of  Rohan  is to  be 
gathered.' 
     Aragorn  was  silent for a moment. 'Three days,' he murmured, 'and  the 
muster  of Rohan will  only  be begun. But  I  see  that  it  cannot now  be 
hastened.'  He looked up, and it seemed that  he had made some decision; his 
face  was less troubled. Then, by  our leave, lord, I must take new  counsel 
for myself  and my  kindred. We must  ride  our  own road, and  no longer in  
secret. For me  the time of stealth  has  passed.  I  will ride east by  the 
swiftest way, and I will take the Paths of the Dead.' 
     'The Paths of the Dead!' said Thjoden, and trembled. 'Why do  you speak 
of them?' Jomer turned and gazed at Aragorn, and it seemed to Merry that the 
faces of  the Riders  that sat within  hearing turned pale at the words. 'If 
there be in  truth  such paths, ' said Thjoden, 'their gate  is in Dunharrow;  
but no living man may pass it.' 
     'Alas! Aragorn my friend!' said Jomer. 'I had hoped that we should ride 
to war together; but if you seek the  Paths of the Dead, then our parting is 
come, and it is little likely that we shall ever meet again under the Sun.' 
     'That road  I will take, nonetheless,' said Aragorn. 'But I say to you, 
Jomer, that in battle  we may yet meet again, though all the hosts of Mordor  
should stand between.' 
     'You will do as you wi ll, my lord Aragorn,' said Thjoden.  'It  is your 

####-doom, maybe,  to  tread  strange paths that  others  dare not.  This parting 
grieves  me, and  my strength  is  lessened by it; but now  I must take  the 
mountain-roads and delay no longer. Farewell!' 
     'Farewell,  lord!' said  Aragorn.  'Ride unto great  renown!  Farewell, 
Merry! I leave you in  good hands,  better  than we hoped when we hunted the 
orcs to Fangorn. Legolas and Gimli  will still hunt with me,  I hope; but we 
shall not forget you.' 
     'Good-bye!'  said  Merry.  He could find no more to say.  He  felt very 
small, and he was puzzled and depressed by all these gloomy words. More than 
ever he  missed the  unquenchable cheerfulness  of Pippin.  The  Riders were 
ready, and their horses were fidgeting;  he wished they would start arid get 
it over. 
     Now Thjoden  spoke to Jomer, and he lifted up his hand and cried aloud,  
and  with that word the Riders set forth. They  rode over the Dike  and down 
the  Coomb,  and  then,  turning swiftly  eastwards, they  took  a path that 
skirted  the foothills for a  mile or so, until bending south it passed back  
among the hills  and disappeared from view.  Aragorn  rode  to  the Dike and 
watched till  the king's men  were far down  the  Coomb.  Then he turned  to 
Halbarad. 
     'There go three that I love, and the  smallest not the least,' he said. 
'He knows not to what end he rides; yet if he knew, he still would go on.' 
     'A  little  people,  but  of  great worth  are  the  Shire-folk,'  said 
Halbarad.  'Little do they  know of  our long  labour  for the safekeeping of 
their borders, and yet I grudge it not.' 
     'And now our fates are  woven together,' said Aragorn. 'And yet,  alas!  
here we must  part. Well, I must eat a little, and  then we also must hast en 
away. Come, Legolas and Gimli! I must speak with you as I eat.' 
     Together they went back into  the  Burg; yet for some  time Aragorn sat 
silent at  the  table in the  hall, and the others waited  for him to speak. 
'Come!'  said  Legolas  at last. 'Speak and be  comforted, and shake off the 
shadow! What has happened since we came  back to this grim place in the grey 
morning?' 
     'A  struggle  somewhat grimmer  for  my  part than  the  battle of  the 
Hornburg,' answered  Aragorn. 'I have  looked  in  the Stone of  Orthanc,  my  
friends.' 
     'You have  looked in that accursed stone of  wizardry!' exclaimed Gimli 
with  fear  and astonishment in his face. 'Did  you say aught to  - him? Even 

####-Gandalf feared that encounter.' 
     'You  forget  to whom  you speak,' said  Aragorn sternly, and his  eyes 
glinted. 'Did I not openly proclaim  my  title before  the doors  of Edoras?  
What do you fear that I should say to him? Nay, Gimli,' he said  in a softer  
voice,  and  the grimness left  his face, and  he looked   like  one who  has 
laboured  in sleepless pain for many nights.  'Nay, my  friends,  I  and the 
lawful master of the Stone, and I had both the right and the strength to use 
it, or so I judged. The right cannot be doubted.  The strength was  enough  - 
barely . ' 
     He drew a deep breath. 'It was  a bitter struggle, and the weariness is 
slow to pass. I spoke no word to him, and in the end I wrenched the Stone to 
my own  will. That alone he will find hard to endure. And he beheld me. Yes,  
Master Gimli, he saw me, but in other guise than you  see  me here. If  that 
will aid him, then I  have  done ill. But I do not think so. To  know that I 
lived  and walked the earth was a blow  to his heart, I deem; for he knew it 
not till now. The eyes in Orthanc did not see through the armour of Thjoden;  
but Sauron has not  forgotten Isildur and the  sword of  Elendil. Now in the 
very  hour  of  his  great  designs the  heir of  Isildur and the  Sword are 
revealed; for l showed the blade re-forged  to him. He is not so mighty   yet 
that he is above fear; nay, doubt ever gnaws him.' 
     'But he wields  great dominion, nonetheless,' said Gimli;  'and now  he 
will strike more swiftly.' 
     'The hasty  stroke  goes oft astray,' said Aragorn. 'We must press  our 
Enemy, and no longer wait upon him  for the move. See my friends, when I had 
mastered  the  Stone,  I  learned many things.  A grave peril I  saw  coming 
unlooked-for upon Gondor  from the  South that will  draw off great strength 
from the defence of Minas Tirith. If  it  is not countered  swiftly,  I deem 
that the City will be lost ere ten days be gone.' 
     'Then lost it must be,'  said Gimli. 'For  what  help is  there to send 
thither, and how could it come there in time?' 
     'I have  no help  to send,  therefore I must  go myself,'  said Aragorn. 
'But there is only one way through the mountains  that will  bring me to the 
coastlands before all is lost. That is the Paths of the Dead.' 
     'The Paths of the Dead!' said Gimli.  'It is a fell name; and little to 
the liking to the Men of Rohan, as I saw. Can the living use such a road and  
not perish? And even if you pass that way, what will so few avail to counter  
the strokes of Mordor?' 

####-     'The  living  have  never  used that  road  since  the  coming  of  the 
Rohirrim,' said Aragorn, 'for it is closed to  them.  But  in this dark hour 
the heir of Isildur may use  it, if he  dare. Listen! This is the word  that 
the sons of  Elrond bring  to  me  from their father in Rivendell, wisest in 
lore: Bid  Aragorn remember  the words  of the  seer,  and the Paths of  the 
Dead.' 
     'And what may be the words of the seer?' said Legolas.  
     "Thus spoke  Malbeth the  Seer,  in the days of  Arvedui,  last king at 
Fornost,' said Aragorn: 
     Over the land there lies a long shadow,  
     westward reaching wings of darkness. 
     The Tower trembles; to the tombs of kings 
     doom approaches. The Dead awaken; 
     for the hour is come for the oathbreakers; 
     at the Stone of Erech they shall stand again  
     and hear there a horn in the hills ringing. 
     Whose shall the horn be? Who shall call them 
     from the prey twilight, the forgotten people? 
     The heir of him to whom the oath they swore. 
     From the North shall he come, need shall drive him: 
     he shall pass the Door to the Paths of the Dead. 
     'Dark ways doubtless, said  Gimli, but no darker than these staves  are 
to me.' 
     'If you  would  understand them better, then I bid  you  come with me,' 
said Aragorn; 'for that way I now shall take. But I do  not go  gladly; only 
need drives me. Therefore, only of your free will would I have you come, for 
you will find both toil and great fear, and maybe worse.' 
     'I will go with you even on the Paths of the Dead, and to whatever, end 
they may lead,' said Gimli. 
     'I also will come,' said Legolas, 'for I do not fear the Dead.' 
     'I  hope  that the  forgotten people  will  not have  forgotten how  to 
fight,' said Gimli; 'for otherwise I see not why we should trouble them.' 
     'That we shall know if ever  we come to Erech,' said  Aragorn. 'But the 
oath  that  they broke  was  to  fight  against Sauron, and they must  fight 
therefore,  if  they are to fulfil it. For at Erech there stands yet a black  
stone that was brought, it was said, from N®menor by Isildur; and it was set 
upon a hill, and  upon it  the King of the Mountains swore allegiance to him 

####-in  the beginning of the realm of Gondor. But when Sauron returned and  grew 
in might again, Isildur summoned the  Men of  the Mountains to  fulfil their 
oath, and they would not: for they had worshipped Sauron in the Dark Years. 
     'Then Isildur said to  their king: "Thou shalt be the last king. And if 
the West prove mightier than thy  Black Master, this curse  I  lay upon thee 
and thy folk: to rest never until your oath is  fulfilled. For this war will 
last through years uncounted, and you  shall be summoned once again ere  the 
end."  And they fled  before  the  wrath of  Isildur, and did not dare to go 
forth to war on  Sauron's  part; and they hid themselves in secret places in 
the mountains and had no dealings with other men, but slowly dwindled in the 
barren hills. And the  terror of the Sleepless Dead lies  about  the Hill of 
Erech and all places  where that people  lingered. But that  way I  must go, 
since there are none living to help me.' 
     He stood up.  'Come!' he  cried, and drew his sword, and it  flashed in 
the twilit hall of the Burg. 'To the Stone of Erech! I seek the Paths of the 
Dead. Come with me who will!' 
     Legolas  and Gimli  made no answer,  but they rose and followed Aragorn 
from the  hall.  On  the green  there waited,  still and silent, the  hooded 
Rangers.  Legolas  and Gimli  mounted.  Aragorn  sprang upon  Roheryn.  
Then 
Halbarad lifted a great horn, and the blast of it echoed in Helm's Deep; and 
with that they leapt away, riding down the Coomb like thunder, while all the 
men that were left on Dike or Burg stared in amaze. 
     And  while Thjoden  went  by slow paths in the hills, the Grey  Company 
passed  swiftly  over the plain, and on the next day  in the  afternoon they 
came to Edoras;  and there they halted only briefly, ere they passed up  the 
valley, and so came to Dunharrow as darkness fell. 
     The  Lady  Jowyn greeted  them  and  was  glad of  their coming; for no 
mightier men had she seen than the D®nedain and the fair sons of Elrond; but 
on Aragorn most of  all her eyes rested.  And when  they sat at supper  with 
her, they talked  together, and  she heard  of  all that  had  passed  since 
Thjoden rode away, concerning which only hasty tidings  had yet reached her; 
and when  she  heard of the battle in Helm's Deep and the great slaughter of 
their foes,  and of  the charge of  Thjoden and  his knights, then  her eyes 
shone. 
     But at last she said:  'Lords, you are weary and  shall now  go to  your 
beds  with  such ease  as can  be contrived in  haste.  But  tomorrow fairer  

####-housing shall be found for you.' 
     But Aragorn said:  'Nay, lady, be  not troubled  for  us! If we may lie 
here tonight and break our fast tomorrow, it  will be enough. For  I ride on 
an errand most urgent, and with the first light of morning we must go.' 
     She smiled  on him and said: 'Then it was kindly done, lord, to ride so 
many miles out of your  way to bring tidings to Jowyn, and to speak with her 
in her exile.' 
     'Indeed no man would count such a  journey  wasted,' said Aragorn; 'and 
yet, lady, I could not have come hither, if  it were not that the road which 
I must take leads me to Dunharrow.' 
     And she answered  as one  that likes not what is said: "Then, lord, you  
are astray; for out of  Harrowdale no road  runs east or south; and  you had 
best return as you came.' 
     'Nay, lady,' said  he, 'I am  not astray; for I walked in this land ere 
you were born to grace it. There is a road out of this valley, and that road 
I shall take. Tomorrow I shall ride by the Paths of the Dead.' 
     Then she stared at him as one that is stricken,  and her face blanched, 
and  for long she  spoke no more, while all sat silent. 'But, Aragorn,'  she 
said at last,  'is it  then your errand to  seek death? For that  is all that 
you will find on that road. They do not suffer the living to pass.' 
     'They may suffer me  to pass,' said Aragorn; 'but at the  least I  will 
adventure it. No other road will serve.' 
     'But  this  is  madness,' she  said.  'For  here are  men of renown and 
prowess, whom you should not take into the shadows, but  should lead to war, 
where men are needed. I beg you to remain and ride with my brother; for then 
all our hearts will be gladdened, and our hope be the brighter.' 
     'It is  not madness, lady,' he answered; 'for I go on a path appointed. 
But those who follow  me do so of  their free will; and if they wish now  to 
remain and ride  with the  Rohirrim,  they  may do so. But  I shall take the 
Paths of the Dead, alone, if needs be.' 
     Then they said no more, and they ate in silence; but her eyes were ever  
upon Aragorn, and the others  saw that she  was in great torment of mind. At  
length they arose, and took their leave of the Lady, and thanked her for her  
care, and went to their rest. 
     But as Aragorn came to the booth where he was to lodge with Legolas and 
Gimli, and  his companions had  gone in. there came the Lady Jowyn after him 
and called to him. He turned and saw her  as a glimmer in  the night, for she 

####-was clad in white; but her eyes were on fire. 
     'Aragorn,' she said, 'why will you go on this deadly road?' 
     'Because I must,' he said. 'Only so can I see any hope of doing my part 
in the war against Sauron. I do not choose paths of peril, Jowyn. Were I  to 
go where my  heart dwells, far  in the North I would now be wandering in the 
fair valley of Rivendell.' 
     For a while she was silent, as if pondering what this  might mean. Then 
suddenly she laid her hand on his arm. 'You are  a stern lord and resolute,' 
she said; 'and thus  do  men  win renown.' She paused. 'Lord.' she said, 'if 
you must go, then let me ride in your  following. For I am weary of skulking 
in the hills, and wish to face peril and battle.' 
     'Your duty is wi th your people,' he answered. 
     'Too often have I heard of duty,' she cried. 'But am I not of the House 
of Eorl, a shieldmaiden and not a dry-nurse? I have waited on faltering feet 
long enough.  Since they falter no longer, it seems, may I not  now spend my 
life as I will?' 
     'Few may do that with honour,' he answered.  'But as for you, lady: did 
you not accept the charge to govern the people until their lord's return? If 
you had not been chosen, then some marshal or captain would have been set in 
the same place, and he could not ride away from his charge, were he weary of 
it or no.' 
     'Shall I always be chosen?' she  said bitterly. 'Shall I always be left  
behind when the Riders depart, to mind the house while they  win renown, and 
find food and beds when they return?' 
     'A time may come  soon,' said he, 'when none  will return.  Then  there 
will be need of valour  without  renown,  for none shall remember the  deeds 
that  are done in  the last defence of your homes. Yet the deeds will not be 
less valiant because they are unpraised.' 
     And she answered: 'All  your words are but to say: you are a woman, and 
your part is in the house. But when  the men have died in battle and honour,  
you have leave to  be burned in the house, for the men will need it no more. 
But I  am of the House of Eorl and not a serving-woman. I can ride and wield 
blade, and I do not fear either pain or death.' 
     'What do you fear, lady?' he asked. 
     'A cage,' she said. 'To stay behind bars, until use and old age  accept 
them, and all chance of doing great deeds is gone beyond recall or desire.' 
     'And  yet you  counselled  me  not  to adventure on the road that I had 

####-chosen, because it is perilous?' 
     'So may one counsel another,' she said. 'Yet I do not bid you flee from  
peril, but to ride to battle where your sword may win renown and victory.  I 
would not see a thing that is high and excellent cast away needlessly.' 
     'Nor would I,' he  said. 'Therefore  I  say to you, lady: Stay! For you  
have no errand to the South.' 
     'Neither have those others who go with thee. They go  only because they 
would not be parted from thee  - because they love thee.' Then she turned and 
vanished into the night. 
     When the light of day was come into the  sky  but  the sun was  not yet 
risen above the high  ridges in the East,  Aragorn made ready to depart. His 
company was all mounted, and he was  about to leap into the saddle, when the 
Lady  Jowyn came to bid them farewell. She was clad as a Rider and girt with 
a sword. In her hand she bore a cup, and  she set it to her lips and drank a  
little, wishing them  good speed; and then she gave the cup to Aragorn,  and 
he drank, and he said:  'Farewell, Lady of Rohan! I drink to the fortunes of 
your House, and of you, and of all  your people. Say to your brother: beyond  
the shadows we may meet again!' 
     Then it seemed to Gimli  and Legolas who were nearby that she wept, and 
in one  so  stern and proud that seemed  the  more grievous.  But  she said: 
'Aragorn, wilt thou go?' 
     'I will,' he said. 
     'Then wilt thou not let me ride with this company, as I have asked?' 
     'I will not, lady,' he said. 'For that I  could not grant without leave 
of the king and  of  your brother; and they will not return until  tomorrow.  
But I count now every hour, indeed every minute. Farewell!' 
     Then she fell on her knees, saying: 'I beg thee!' 
     'Nay, lady,' he said, and taking her by the hand he raised her. Then he 
kissed her hand, and sprang into the saddle, and rode away, and did not look  
back; and only  those who knew  him well and were  near to him saw  the pain 
that he bore. 
     But Jowyn stood still as  a figure carven in stone,  her hands clenched 
at her sides, and she watched  them until they passed into the shadows under  
the  black Dwimorberg,  the Haunted Mountain, in which was  the Gate of  the 
Dead.  When they were lost  to view, she turned,  stumbling  as  one that is 
blind, and went back to her lodging. But none of her folk  saw this parting, 
for they hid themselves in fear and would not come forth until  the  day was 

####-up, and the reckless strangers were gone. 
     And some  said: 'They are Elvish wights. Let them go where they belong,  
into the dark places, and never return. The times are evil enough.' 
     The light was  still grey as they rode, for the sun had not yet climbed 
over the black ridges of the Haunted Mountain before  them. A dread  fell on 
them, even as they passed between the lines of ancient stones and so came to 
the Dimholt.  There under the  gloom of  black  trees  that not even Legolas 
could long  endure they found a hollow place opening at the mountain's root, 
and right in their path stood a single mighty stone like a finger of doom. 
     'My blood runs chill,'  said Gimli, but the others were silent, and his 
voice fell dead on  the  dank fir-needles at his feet. The horses  would not 
pass the threatening stone, until the riders dismounted and led them  about. 
And so they came at last deep into the glen; and there stood a sheer wall of 
rock, and in  the wall the Dark  Door  gaped  before them like  the mouth of 
night.  Signs and figures were  carved above its  wide arch too dim to read, 
and fear flowed from it like a grey vapour. 
     The company halted, and there was  not a  heart among them that did not  
quail, unless it were the heart of Legolas of the Elves, for whom the ghosts 
of Men have no terror. 
     'This is an  evil door,' said Halbarad, 'and my death lies beyond it. I 
will dare to pass it nonetheless; but no horse will enter.' 
     'But  we must go  in,  and therefore  the horses  must  go  too,'  said 
Aragorn.  'For if ever  we  come  through this  darkness,  many  leagues lie 
beyond, and every hour  that is lost there will bring the triumph  of Sauron 
nearer. Follow me!' 
     Then Aragorn led the way, and such was the strength of his will in that 
hour  that all the D®nedain and  their horses  followed him. And  indeed the 
love that the horses of the Rangers bore for their riders was  so great that 
they were willing  to face even the  terror  of the Door, if  their masters' 
hearts were steady as they walked beside them. But Arod, the horse of Rohan, 
refused  the  way, and he stood sweating and trembling  in a  fear  that was 
grievous to see. Then Legolas laid his hands on his eyes and sang some words 
that  went  soft in the  gloom, until he  suffered himself  to  be  led, and 
Legolas passed in. And there stood Gimli the Dwarf left all alone. 
     His knees shook,  and  he  was wroth  with himself.  'Here is  a  thing 
unheard of!' he said. 'An  Elf  will go underground and a  Dwarf  dare not!' 
With that he plunged in. But it seemed to him  that he dragged his feet like 

####-lead over the threshold; and at once a blindness  came  upon him,  even upon 
Gimli Gluin's son who had walked unafraid in many deep places of the world. 
     Aragorn  had  brought  torches from Dunharrow,  and  now he went  ahead 
bearing one  aloft; and Elladan with  another went  at the rear, and  Gimli, 
stumbling behind, strove to overtake him. He could  see nothing  but the dim 
flame  of the tor ches; but  if the company halted, there  seemed  an endless 
whisper of voices all about him, a murmur of words in no tongue  that he had 
ever heard before. 
     Nothing assailed  the  company  nor  withstood  their passage,  and yet 
steadily fear grew on the Dwarf as  he went on:  most of all because he knew 
now that there could be no  turning back; all the paths behind were thronged 
by an unseen host that followed in the dark. 
     So time unreckoned passed, until Gimli  saw a  sight that he  was  ever 
afterwards loth to recall. The road was  wide, as far as he could judge, but 
now the company came  suddenly  into a great empty space, and there  were no 
longer any walls upon either side. The dread  was  so  heavy on him  that he 
could  hardly walk. Away  to the  left  something glittered  in the gloom as 
Aragorn's  torch drew near.  Then Aragorn halted and  went  to look  what it  
might be. 
     'Does  he  feel no fear?' muttered the  Dwarf. 'In any other cave Gimli 
Gluin's son would have been  the first to run to the gleam of gold.  But not 
here! Let it lie!' 
     Nonetheless he drew near,  and saw Aragorn kneeling, while Elladan held 
aloft both torches. Before him were the bones of  a  mighty man. He had been 
clad  in  mail, and still his harness lay there  whole; for the cavern's air 
was as dry as dust, and his  hauberk  was gilded. His belt  was  of gold and 
garnets, and rich with gold was the helm upon his bony head face downward on 
the floor. He  had fallen  near the far  wall  of the cave, as now could  be 
seen, and before  him stood a  stony door closed fast: his finger -bones were 
still clawing at the cracks. A notched and broken sword lay by him, as if he 
had hewn at the rock in his last despair. 
     Aragorn did  not touch him, but after gazing silently for  a  while  he 
rose  and sighed. 'Hither  shall the flowers of  simbelmynl come never  unto 
world's  end,' he murmured. 'Nine mounds and seven there are now  green with 
grass, and through all the long years he has lain at the door that  he could 
not unlock. Whither does it lead? Why would he pass? None shall ever know!  
     'For that is not my errand!' he cried, turning back and speaking to the 

####-whispering darkness behind. 'Keep your hoards and your secrets hidden in the 
Accursed Years! Speed only we ask.  Let us pass, and then come! I summon 
you 
to the Stone of Erech!' 
     There was no answer, unless it were an utter silence more dreadful than 
the whispers  before;  and  then  a chill  blast came in  which  the torches 
flickered and  went  out,  and could not be  rekindled.  Of  the  time  that 
followed, one hour  or many, Gimli remembered little. The others pressed on, 
but  he  was ever hindmost, pursued  by a groping horror that  seemed always 
just  about to seize  him; and a rumour came after him lik e the shadow-sound 
of many feet. He  stumbled  on until he  was  crawling  like a beast on  the 
ground and felt that he could endure no more: he  must either find an ending 
and escape or run back in madness to meet the following fear. 
     Suddenly he  heard the  tinkle of water, a sound hard and  clear  as  a  
stone falling into a dream of dark shadow. Light  grew, and lo! the  company 
passed  through another  gateway, high-arched and broad, and a rill  ran out 
beside  them;  and  beyond, going  steeply  down, was  a road between  sheer 
cliffs, knife-edged against the sky  far above.  So deep and narrow was that 
chasm  that  the sky was  dark, and in it small stars  glinted. Yet as Gimli 
after learned it was still two hours ere sunset of the day on which they had 
set out from Dunharrow; though for all that he could then tell it might have 
been twilight in some later year, or in some other world. 
     The Company now mounted again, and Gimli returned to Legolas. They 
rode 
in  file, and evening came on and a  deep blue  dusk; and still fear pursued 
them. Legolas turning to speak to Gimli looked back and the Dwarf saw before 
his face  the glitter in the Elf's  bright  eyes. Behind them rode  Elladan, 
last of the Company, but not the last of those that took the downward road. 
     'The  Dead are following,'  said Legolas. 'I  see shapes  of Men and of 
horses,  and  pale  banners  like   shreds   of   cloud,  and   spears  like 
winter -thickets on a misty night. The Dead are following.' 
     'Yes, the Dead ride behind. They have been summoned,' said Elladan. 
     The Company  came at last out of the ravine, as suddenly as it they had 
issued  from  a crack in a wall; and there  lay the uplands  of a great vale 
before them,  and the stream  beside them went down with a  cold  voice over 
many falls.  
     'Where  in Middle-earth are we?' said Gimli; and Elladan answered:  'We 

####-have descended  from the uprising of the Morthond, the long chill river that 
flows at last to the sea that washes the  walls of Dol Amroth. You  will not 
need to ask hereafter how comes its name: Blackroot men call it.' 
     The  Morthond Vale made a  great  bay that beat up  against  the  sheer  
southern faces of the  mountains. Its steep slopes were grass-grown; but all 
was grey in that  hour, for the  sun had gone, and  far below lights twinkled 
in the homes of Men. The vale was rich and many folk dwelt there. 
     Then without  turning  Aragorn  cried aloud so  that  all  could  hear: 
'Friends, forget your weariness! Ride now, ride!  We  must come to the Stone 
of Erech ere this day passes, and long still is the way.' So without looking 
back they rode  the mountain-fields, until they came to  a  bridge over  the 
growing torrent and found a road that went down into the land. 
     Lights went out in house  and hamlet as they came, and doors  were shut, 
and folk that were  afield cried in terror and ran  wild  like  hunted deer. 
Ever there rose the same cry in the gathering  night: 'The King of the Dead!  
The King of the Dead is come upon us!' 
     Bells  wer e ringing far  below, and all men  fled  before  the face  of 
Aragorn; but the Grey  Company in their haste rode like hunters, until their 
horses were stumbling  with weariness. And thus, just ere midnight, and in a  
darkness  as black as the caverns in the  mountains, they came at last to the 
Hill of Erech. 
     Long had the terror of  the Dead lain upon that hill and upon the empty 
fields about it. For upon  the  top stood  a  black stone, round  as a great 
globe,  the  height  of a man, though its  half  was buried  in the  ground. 
Unearthly it looked, as though it had fallen from the sky, as some believed; 
but those who remembered still the lore of Westernesse told that it had been 
brought out of the ruin of N®menor and there  set by Isildur at his landing . 
None of the people of the valley dared to approach it, nor would  they dwell  
near;  for  they said  that it was a trysting-place  of  the Shadow-men, and 
there  they would  gather in  times  of fear, thronging round  the Stone and 
whispering. 
     To tha t Stone  the Company came and halted in the  dead  of night. Then  
Elrohir gave to Aragorn a silver horn, and he blew upon it and  it seemed to 
those that stood near  that they heard a sound of answering  horns, as if it 
was  an echo in deep caves far away. No other sound they heard, and yet they 
were aware of a great host gathered  all about the hill on which they stood; 
and a chill wind like the breath of ghosts came down from the mountains. But 

####-Aragorn dismounted, and standing by the Stone he cried in a great voice: 
     'Oathbreakers, why have ye come?' 
     And a voice  was heard  out of the  night that answered him, as if from 
far away: 
     'To fulfil our oath and have peace.' 
     Then Aragorn said: 'The hour is come at last. Now I go to Pelargir upon 
Anduin, and ye shall come after  me. And when all this land is clean  of the 
servants  of Sauron, I will hold the oath fulfilled, and ye shall have peace 
and depart for ever. For I am Elessar, Isildur's heir of Gondor.' 
     And with that he  bade Halbarad unfurl  the great standard which he had 
brought; and behold! it was black, and if  there was any device upon  it, it 
was hidden in the darkness. Then there was silence, and  not a whisper nor a  
sigh  was heard  again all the long  night.  The  Company camped  beside the 
Stone,  but  they slept little, because  of the dread  of  the Shadows  that 
hedged them round. 
     But when the dawn came, cold and pale, Aragorn rose at once, and he led  
the Company forth upon the journey of greatest haste and  weariness that any 
among them  had known, save he  alone, and only his will held them to go on. 
No  other mortal Men  could  have endured it, none but the  D®nedain  of the 
North, and with them Gimli the Dwarf and Legolas of the Elves.  
     They  passed Tarlang's Neck and came  into Lamedon; and the Shadow 
Host 
pressed behind and  fear went on  before them,  until they  came to Calembel 
upon Ciril,  and the sun  went down like  blood behind Pinnath Gelin away in 
the West  behind them.  The township  and  the  fords  of  Ciril  they found 
deserted,  for many men had gone away to war, and all that were left fled to  
the hills at the  rumour of the coming of the King of the Dead. But the next 
day there  came no dawn, and the Grey Company passed on into the darkness 
of 
the Storm  of  Mordor and were lost  to  mortal sight; but the Dead followed 
them. 
 

####- 

Chapter 3. The Muster of Rohan 

 
 
     Now all roads were running together to  the  East to meet the coming of 
war and the onset of the Shadow. And even as Pippin  stood at the Great Gate 
of the City  and saw the Prince of Dol Amroth ride in with  his banners, the 
King of Rohan came down out of the hills. 
     Day  was waning. In  the last  rays  of the  sun  the Riders  cast long 
pointed shadows that went on before them. Darkness had already crept beneath 
the murmuring fir-woods that clothed the steep mountain-sides. The king rode 
now  slowly at the end  of  the day. Presently the  path turned round a huge 
bare  shoulder of rock and plunged into the  gloom  of  soft -sighing  trees.  
Down, down they went in a long winding file. When  at last they came  to the 
bottom of  the gorge they  found that evening had fallen in the deep places.  
The sun was gone. Twilight lay upon the waterfalls. 
     All day far below them a leaping stream had run down from the high pass 
behind, cleaving its narrow way between pine-clad  walls; and now  through a  
stony  gate it flowed out and passed into a wider vale. The Riders  followed 
it, and suddenly Harrowdale lay before  them, loud with  the noise of waters 
in the evening. There the white Snowbourn, joined by the lesser stream, went 
rushing, fuming on  the  stones,  down to Edoras and the green hills and the 
plains. Away to the right at the head of the great dale the mighty Starkhorn 
loomed up above its  vast buttresses swathed in cloud; but  its jagged peak, 
clothed in everlasting snow, gleamed far above the world, blue-shadowed upon 
the East, red-stained by the sunset in the West. 
     Merry looked out in wonder upon this strange country,  of which he  had 
heard many tales upon their long road.  It was a skyless world, in which his 
eye; through dim gulfs of shadowy  air, saw only ever-mounting slopes, great 
walls of  stone behind  great  walls, and  frowning precipices wreathed with 
mist.  He sat  for a moment half dreaming, listening to  the noise of water, 
the  whisper of dark trees, the crack of stone, and the vast waiting silence 
that brooded  behind all sound. He  loved  mountains,  or he had  loved  the 
thought of them marching  on the edge of  stories brought from far away;  but 
now he was borne down by the insupportable weight of Middle-earth. He 
longed 
to shut out the immensity in a quiet room by a fire. 
     He was very tired, for though they had  ridden slowly, they had  ridden 

####-with very  little  rest. Hour after  hour for nearly three weary days he had 
jogged  up  and down, over passes, and through long dales,  and  across many 
streams. Sometimes where the way  was  broader he  had ridden at  the king's 
side, not noticing that many  of the Riders smiled to see  the two together: 
the  hobbit  on his little shaggy grey pony,  and the Lord of  Rohan on  his 
great white horse. Then he had talked to Thjoden, telling him about his home 
and the doings of  the Shire-folk, or listening in turn to tales of the Mark 
and its  mighty  men of old.  But most of the time, especially  on this last 
day, Merry had ridden  by himself just behind the  king, saying nothing, and 
trying to understand the slow sonorous speech of Rohan that he heard the men 
behind him using. It was  a  language in which there seemed to be many words 
that he  knew, though spoken more richly and strongly than in the Shire, yet  
he could not piece the words together. At times some Rider would lift up his 
clear voice in stirring song,  and Merry felt his heart leap, though he  did 
not know what it was about. 
     All the  same  he had been lonely, and  never more so  than now at  the 
day's end.  He wondered where  in all this strange world  Pippin had got to; 
and what would become of Aragorn and Legolas and Gimli. Then suddenly 
like a 
cold touch on his heart he thought of Frodo and Sam. 'I am forgetting them!' 
he said  to himself reproachfully. 'And yet they are more important than all 
the  rest of us. And I  came to help them; but now  they must be hundreds of 
miles away, if they are still alive.' He shivered. 
     'Harrowdale at  last!' said Jomer. 'Our journey  is almost at  an end.' 
They halted. The paths out of the narrow gorge fell steeply. Only a glimpse,  
as  through a tall window, could be seen of the great valley in the gloaming 
below. A single small light could be seen twinkling by the river. 
     'This journey is over, maybe,' said Thjoden, 'but I have far yet to go. 
Last night the  moon was full, and in the morning I shall ride to Edoras  to 
the gathering of the Mark.' 
     'But if you would take my  counsel,'  said  Jomer  in a low voice, 'you  
would then return hither, until the war is over, lost or won.' 
     Thjoden smiled.  'Nay,  my son, for  so I will call you, speak  not the 
soft words of Wormtongue in my old ears!' He drew himself up and looked 
back 
at the long line of his men fading into the dusk behind. 'Long years  in the 
space of days it seems since I rode west;  but never  will I lean on a staff 

####-again. If the war is lost, what good will be my hiding in the hills? And  if 
it is won, what grief will it be, even if I fall, spending my last strength?  
But we will leave this now. Tonight I will lie in the Hold of Dunharrow. One 
evening of peace at least is left us. Let us ride on! ' 
     In  the  deepening  dusk  they came  down  into  the  valley. Here  the 
Snowbourn flowed near  to the western walls of  the dale, and soon the  path 
led them to a ford where the shallow  waters murmured  loudly on the stones. 
The ford was guarded.   As the king approached many men sprang up out of  the 
shadow of the rocks; and when they saw the king they cried with glad voices:  
'Thjoden King! Thjoden King! The King of the Mark returns!' 
     Then one blew a long call on  a horn.  It  echoed in the  valley. Other  
horns answered it, and lights shone out across the river. 
     And suddenly  there  rose a great chorus of  trumpets from high  above, 
sounding from some hollow  place, as  it seemed, that gathered  their  notes 
into one voice and sent it rolling and beating on the walls of stone. 
     So the  King  of  the Mark came back  victorious  out  of the  West  to 
Dunharrow  beneath  the feet  of  the White  Mountains. There he  found  the 
remaining  strength  of  his people  already assembled; for as soon  as  his 
coming was known captains rode to  meet  him at  the ford,  bearing messages 
from Gandalf. D®nhere,  chieftain of  the  folk of Harrowdale, was at  their 
head. 
     'At dawn three  days ago,  lord,' he  said. 'Shadowfax came like a wind 
out of  the West to  Edoras, and Gandalf brought  tidings of your victory to 
gladden  our  hearts.  But  he  brought also  word from you  to  hasten  the 
gathering of the Riders. And then came the winged Shadow.' 
     'The winged Shadow?' said Thjoden. 'We saw it also, but that was in the 
dead of night before Gandalf left us.' 
     'Maybe, lord,' said D®nhere. 'Yet the same, or  another like to  it,  a  
flying darkness in  the shape of a  monstrous bird, passed  over Edoras that 
morning, and all men were  shaken with fear. For it  stooped  upon Meduseld, 
and  as it came low, almost to the gable,  there came a cry that stopped our 
hearts.  Then  it was that  Gandalf  counselled  us  not to  assemble in the 
fields, but to meet you here in the valley under the mounta ins. And  he bade 
us to kindle no more lights or fires than  barest need asked. So it has been 
done. Gandalf spoke with great authority. We trust that it is as  you  would 
wish. Naught has been seen in Harrowdale of these evil things.' 
     'It is well,' said Thjoden. 'I  will ride  now  to  the Hold, and there 

####-before  I go to rest I will meet the marshals and captains. Let them come to 
me as soon as may be!' 
     The road now led eastward straight across the valley, which was at that 
point little more than half a mile in width. Flats and meads of rough grass,  
grey now in the falling night,  lay all about, but  in front on the far side 
of the dale Merry saw a frowning wall, a last outlier of the great  roots of 
the Starkhorn, cloven by the river in ages past . 
     On all the level spaces there was great concourse of men. Some thronged 
to the  roadside, hailing  the king and the riders  from the West with  glad 
cries; but stretching away into the distance behind there  were ordered rows 
of tents and booths, and lines of picketed horses,  and great store of arms, 
and piled spears bristling like  thickets of new-planted trees. Now  all the 
great assembly was falling into shadow, and yet, though the night -chill blew 
cold  from  the heights  no  lanterns  glowed, no fires  were  lit. Watchmen 
heavily cloaked paced to and fro. 
     Merry wondered  how many Riders there  were. He  could  not guess their 
number in the gathering gloom, but it  looked to him like a great army, many 
thousands strong. While  he was  peering from side  to side the king's party 
came up under the looming cliff on the eastern side of the valley; and there 
suddenly the path began to climb, and Merry looked up in  amazement.  He 
was 
on a road the like of which he had never seen before,  a great work of men's 
hands in years beyond the  reach of  song. Upwards it wound, coiling  like a  
snake, boring its way across the  sheer slope of rock.  Steep as a stair, it 
looped  backwards and forwards as it  climbed. Up it horses  could walk, and 
wains  could be slowly hauled; but no  enemy could come that way, except out 
of the air,  if it was defended from above. At each turn  of the road  there 
were great standing stones that had been carved in the likeness of men, huge 
and clumsy-limbed, squatting cross-legged  with  their stumpy arms folded on 
fat bellies. Some in the wearing of the years had lost all features save the 
dark  holes of  their eyes that  still stared  sadly  at the passers-by. The 
Riders hardly glanced at them.  The  P®kel-men they  called them, and heeded 
them little:  no power or terror was left in them; but  Merry  gazed at them 
with wonder  and a feeling almost of pity,  as they loomed up  mournfully in 
the dusk. 
     After a while he looked back and found that he had already climbed some 
hundreds of feet  above the valley, but still far below he could dimly see a  

####-winding  line of Riders crossing the ford and filing along the  road towards 
the camp prepared for  them. Only the king  and his guard were going up into 
the Hold. 
     At last the king's company came to a sharp brink, and the climbing road 
passed into a cutting between walls of rock, and  so went  up a  short slope 
and  out  on  to a  wide  upland.  The  Firienfeld  men called it,  a  green 
mountain-field of grass and heath, high above the deep -delved courses of the 
Snowbourn,  laid upon the lap of the great mountains  behind:  the Starkhorn 
southwards, and northwards the saw-toothed mass of  Irensaga, between  which 
there faced the riders, the  grim black wall  of the Dwimorberg, the Haunted 
Mountain rising out of  steep slopes of  sombre  pines. Dividing the  upland 
into  two  there  marched  a double  line of unshaped standing  stones  that 
dwindled into the dusk and vanished in the  trees. Those who dared to follow 
that road came soon to the black Dimholt under Dwimorberg, and the menace 
of 
the pillar of stone, and the yawning shadow of the forbidden door. 
     Such was the dark Dunharrow, the work of long -forgotten men. Their name 
was lost and no song or legend remembered it. For what purpose they had 
made 
this place,  as a town  or secret temple or a tomb of kings, none could say. 
Here they laboured in the Dark Years, before ever a ship came to the western 
shores, or Gondor of the D®nedain was built; and now  they had vanished, and 
only the old P®kel -men were left, still sitting at the turnings of the road. 
     Merry stared at the lines of marching stones: they were worn and black; 
some  were  leaning, some were  fallen,  some cracked or broken; they looked 
like  rows  of old  and hungry teeth. He wondered what they could be, and he 
hoped  that the king was not going to follow  them into the darkness beyond.  
Then  he saw that there were  clusters of tents and booths on either side of 
the stony way; but these were not set near the  trees, and seemed rather  to 
huddle  away  from them towards the  brink of the  cliff. The greater number  
were on the right, where the Firienfeld was wider; and on the left there was 
a smaller camp, in the midst of which stood a  tall pavilion. From this side 
a rider now came out to meet them, and they turned from the road. 
     As  they drew near  Merry  saw  that  the rider was a  woman  with long 
braided hair gleaming  in the twilight,  yet she wore a helm and was clad to 
the waist like a warrior and girded with a sword. 
     'Hail,  Lord of  the  Mark!'  she  cried. 'My  heart  is  glad  at your 

####-returning.' 
     'And you, Jowyn,' said Thjoden, 'is all well with you?' 
     'All  is well,' she  answered; yet it  seemed to  Merry  that her voice 
belied her,  and he would have  thought that she had  been weeping, if  that 
could be believed of one so stern of face. 'All is well. It was a weary road 
for  the people to  take,  torn suddenly  from their homes.  There were hard 
words, for it is long since war  has driven  us from  the green fields;  but 
there have been no evil deeds.  All  is now ordered, as  you  see. And  your 
lodging is prepared for you; for I have had full tidings of you and knew the 
hour of your coming.' 
     'So Aragorn has come then,' said Jomer. 'Is he still here?' 
     'No, he is gone,' said Jowyn turning away and  looking at the mountains 
dark against the East and South. 
     'Whither did he go?' asked Jomer. 
     'I  do not  know,'  she answered.  'He  came at  night,  and rode  away 
yestermorn, ere the Sun had climbed over the mountain-tops. He is gone.' 
     'You are grieved, daughter,' said Thjoden. 'What has happened? Tell me, 
did  he speak  of  that road?' He pointed  away along the darkening lines of 
stones towards the Dwimorberg. 'Of the Paths of the Dead?' 
     'Yes, lord,' said Jowyn. 'And he has passed into the shadows from which 
none have returned. I could not dissuade him. He is gone.' 
     'Then our paths are sundered,' said  Jomer. 'He is  lost.  We must ride 
without him, and our hope dwindles.' 
     Slowly they  passed through the short heath and  upland grass, speaking 
no  more, until they  came to the king's pavilion.  There  Merry  found that 
everything  was made ready, and that he himself was not forgotten. A  little 
tent had been pitched for  him beside the king's  lodging; and there he  sat 
alone,  while men passed to and fro, going in to the king and taking counsel 
with him. Night came on, and the half-seen heads of  the mountains  westward 
were  crowned  with  stars, but the East was dark  and  blank.  The marching 
stones  faded slowly  from sight,  but still beyond them,  blacker than  the 
gloom, brooded the vast crouching shadow of the Dwimorberg. 
     'The  Paths  of the Dead,'  he muttered to himself. 'The  Paths  of the 
Dead? What does all this mean? They have all left me now. They have all gone 
to some doom:  Gandalf and Pippin to  war in the East; and  Sam and Frodo to 
Mordor; and  Strider and  Legolas and Gimli to the Paths of the Dead. But my 
turn will come  soon enough, I suppose. I  wonder what they are all  talking 

####-about, and what the king means to do. For I must go where he goes now.' 
     In the midst of these  gloomy  thoughts  he suddenly remembered that he 
was very hungry, and he got  up to go and see if anyone else in this strange 
camp felt the  same.  But at  that very moment a trumpet sounded, and  a man 
came summoning him, the king's esquire, to wait at the king's board. 
     In the inner part of the pavilion was a small space, curtained off with 
broidered  hangings, and strewn  with skins:  and there at a small table sat 
Thjoden with Jomer and Jowyn, and D®nhere,  lord of  Harrowdale. Merry 
stood 
beside the king's stool and waited on him till presently the old man, coming 
out of deep thought, turned to him and smiled. 
     'Come, Master Meriadoc!'  he said. 'You shall  not stand. You shall sit 
beside me, as long  as I remain  in my own lands, and lighten my heart  with 
tales.' 
     Room was made for the hobbit at the king's left hand, but no one called 
for any tale. There was indeed little speech, and they ate and drank for the 
most  part in silence, until at last, plucking up courage,  Merry  asked the 
question that was tormenting him. 
     'Twice  now, lord, I have heard  of the  Paths of the  Dead,'  he  said. 
'What are  they? And where has Strider, I mean the Lord Aragorn where has he 
gone?' 
     The king sighed, but no one answered, until at last Jomer spoke. 'We do 
not know, and our hearts are heavy,' he  said. 'But as  for the Paths of the 
Dead, you have yourself walked on their  first steps. Nay. I speak no  words 
of  ill  omen! The road that  we have  climbed is  the approach to the Door, 
yonder in the Dimholt. But what lies beyond no man knows.' 
     'No man knows,' said  Thjoden:  'yet ancient legend, now seldom spoken,  
has  somewhat to  report. If these old  tales speak true that have come down 
from father to son in the House  of  Eorl, then  the  Door  under Dwimorberg 
leads to a  secret way that goes beneath the mountain to some forgotten end.  
But none  have ever  ventured in to search its secrets, since Baldor, son of 
Brego, passed the  Door  and was  never seen among men again. A rash  vow 
he 
spoke,  as he drained  the  horn  at that feast which  Brego made  to hallow 
new-built Meduseld,  and he came never to the  high seat of which he was the 
heir. 
     'Folk say that Dead Men  out of the Dark Years guard  the way  and will 

####-suffer no living man to come to their  hidden halls;  but at whiles they may 
themselves  be seen passing out of the door  like shadows and down  the stony 
road. Then the people of Harrowdale  shut fast  their doors and shroud their 
windows and are afraid. But the Dead come seldom forth and only  at times of 
great unquiet and coming death.' 
     'Yet it is said in Harrowdale,' said Jowyn in a low voice. 'that in the 
moonless nights but little  while ago  a great host in  strange array passed 
by. Whence they came none knew, but they went up the stony road and 
vanished 
into the hill, as if they went to keep a tryst.' 
     'Then why  has Aragorn  gone that  way?'  asked Merry. 'Don't you  know 
anything that would explain it?' 
     'Unless  he has  spoken  words  to  you as his friend that we  have not 
heard,'  said  Jomer,  'none now  in  the land of the  living  can tell  his 
purpose.' 
     'Greatly  changed he seemed to  me since I saw him first  in the king's 
house,' said Jowyn: 'grimmer, older.  Fey I thought  him, and  like one whom 
the Dead call.' 
     'Maybe  he was called,' said  Thjoden;  'and my  heart  tells me that I 
shall  not see him again.  Yet he is a kingly man of high  destiny. And take 
comfort in this,  daughter, since comfort you seem to need in your grief for  
this guest.  It is said  that  when the Eorlingas  came out of the North and 
passed  at length up the  Snowbourn, seeking strong places of refuge in time 
of need, Brego and his son Baldor climbed the Stair of the  Hold and so came 
before  the Door.  On  the threshold sat an  old man, aged beyond  guess  of 
years; tall and kingly he had been, but now he was withered as an old stone.  
Indeed for stone they took him, for he moved not, and he said no word, until 
they sought to pass him  by and enter. And then a  voice came out of him, as 
it were out  of  the ground,  and  to  their amaze  it spoke in  the western 
tongue: The way is shut. 
     'Then they halted and looked at him and saw that he lived still; but he 
did not  look at them.  The way is shut, his voice said again It was made by 
those who  are Dead,  and the Dead keep it, until the time comes. The way is  
shut. 
     'And  when  will that time be? said Baldor. But  no answer  did he ever  
get. For the old man died in that hour  and fell upon his face; and no other  
tidings of the ancient dwellers in the mountains have our folk ever learned. 

####-Yet maybe at last the time foretold has come, and Aragorn may pass.' 
     'But how  shall a man discover whether that time be come or no, save by 
daring the Door?' said  Jomer. 'And that way  I would not go  though all the 
hosts of Mordor stood before me, and  I were alone and had no other  refuge. 
Alas that a fey mood should  fall  on a  man so greathearted in this hour of 
need! Are there not evil things enough abroad without seeking them under the 
earth? War is at hand.' 
     He  paused, for at that moment there was a noise outside, a man's voice 
crying the name of Thjoden, and the challenge of the guard. 
     Presently the captain of the Guard thrust aside the curtain. 'A  man is 
here, lord,' he  said, 'an errand-rider of Gondor. He wishes to come  before 
you at once.' 
     'Let him come!' said Thjoden. 
     A tall man entered, and Merry choked back a cry; for a moment it seemed 
to him that Boromir was alive  again and  had returned. Then he saw  that it 
was not so; the man was a stranger, though as like  to Boromir as if he were 
one of his kin, tall and grey-eyed  and proud. He was clad as a rider with a  
cloak of  dark  green over a coat of fine mail; on the front of his helm was 
wrought  a  small  silver  star.  In  his  hand  he  bore  a  single  arrow, 
black-feathered and barbed with steel, but the point was painted red. 
     He sank on one knee and  presented the  arrow to Thjoden. 'Hail Lord of 
the  Rohirrim, friend  of Gondor!' he said.  'Hirgon I  am,  errand-rider of 
Denethor,  who bring you this token  of  war. Gondor is in great need. Often 
the Rohirrim have  aided us,  but now the  Lord  Denethor asks for  all your 
strength and all your speed; lest Gondor fall at last.' 
     'The  Red  Arrow!' said  Thjoden, holding  it, as  one  who receives  a  
summons  long expected and  yet  dreadful  when it comes. His hand trembled. 
'The Red  Arrow has not been seen in the Mark in all my years! Has it indeed 
come  to that? And what does the Lord Denethor reckon that  all  my strength 
and all my speed may be?' 
     'That is best known  to yourself,  lord,' said Hirgon. 'But ere long it 
may  well come to pass that Minas Tirith is surrounded,  and unless you have 
the strength to  break a siege of many powers, the Lord Denethor bids me say 
that he judges that the  strong arms of the Rohirrim would  be better within 
his walls than without.' 
     'But he knows that we are a people  who fight rather upon horseback and 
in  the open, and that we are also a scattered people and time is needed for  

####-the gathering of our Riders.  Is it not true, Hirgon, that the Lord of Minas 
Tirith knows more than he sets in his message? For we are already at war, as 
you may have seen, and you do not find us all  unprepared. Gandalf the  Grey 
has been among us, and even now we are mustering for battle in the Ea st.' 
     'What  the Lord Denethor may know or guess of all these things I cannot  
say,' answered Hirgon. 'But indeed our  case is desperate. My  lord does not  
issue any command  to  you, he begs  you only to remember old friendship and 
oaths  long spoken, and  for your  own  good to do  all that you may. It  is 
reported to us that many kings have ridden in from the  East  to the service 
of Mordor. From the  North to  the field  of Dagorlad there is skirmish  and 
rumour of war. In the  South the Haradrim are moving, and fear has fallen on 
all our  coastlands, so that little help will come to us thence. Make haste! 
For it is before the walls of Minas Tirith that the doom of our time will be 
decided,  and if the tide be not stemmed there, then  it will flow  over all 
the fair fields of Rohan, and even in this Hold among the hills  there shall 
be no refuge.' 
     'Dark  tidings,'  said Thjoden,  'yet  not  all  unguessed. But say  to 
Denethor that even if Rohan itself felt no peril, still we would come to his 
aid. But we have suffered much loss in our battles with Saruman the traitor, 
and we must  still  think of our frontier to the  north and east, as his own 
tidings make  clear.  So great a power as the  Dark Lord seems  now to wield 
might well  contain us in  battle before the City and yet  strike with great 
force across the River away beyond the Gate of Kings. 
     'But  we  will  speak no longer counsels of prudence. We will come. The 
weapontake was set for the morrow.  When all is ordered we will set out. Ten 
thousand spears I might  have sent  riding over  the plain to the dismay  of 
your foes. It will be less  now, I fear; for I will not leave my strongholds 
all unguarded. Yet six thousands at the  least shall ride behind me. For say 
to Denethor that in this hour the King of the Mark himself will come down to 
the land  of Gondor, though  maybe  he will not ride back. But it is a  long 
road, and man and beast must reach the end with strength to fight. A week it 
may be from tomorrow's morn  ere you hear the cry of the Sons of Eorl coming 
from the North. 
     'A week!' said Hirgon. 'If it must be so, it must. But you are like  to 
find  only  ruined  walls  in  seven  days  from  now,   unless  other  help 
unlooked-for comes. Still, you may at the least disturb the Orcs and Swarthy 
Men from their feasting in the White Tower.' 

####-     'At the least we will do that,' said Thjoden. 'But I myself am new-come 
from  battle and long  journey, and I will  now go to rest. Tarry here  this 
night. Then you shall  look on the muster of Rohan and ride away the gladder 
for  the sight, and the swifter for the  rest.  In the morning counsels  are 
best, and night changes many thoughts.  
     With  that the king stood up, and they all rose.  'Go  now each to your 
rest.'  he said, 'and  sleep well. And you, Master Meriadoc, I  need no more 
tonight. But be ready to my call as soon as the Sun is risen.' 
     'I will be ready,' said Merry, 'even if you bid me ride with you on the 
Paths of the Dead.' 
     'Speak not words  of omen!' said the k ing. 'For there may be more roads 
than one that could  bear  that name. But I did not say that I would bid you  
ride with me on any road. Good night!' 
     'I won't be left behind,  to be called for on return!'  said  Merry. 'I  
won't be  left, I won't.' And repeating this over and  over again to himself 
he fell asleep at last in his tent. 
     He  was  wakened by  a  man  shaking him.  'Wake up,  wake  up.  Master 
Holbytla!' he cried; and at length Merry came out of  deep dreams and sat up 
with a start. It still seemed very dark, he thought. 
     'What is the matter?' he asked. 
     'The king calls for you.' 
     'But the Sun has not risen, yet,' said Merry. 
     'No, and will not rise  today,  Master Holbytla. Nor  ever  again,  one 
would think under this cloud. But time  does not stand still, though the Sun 
be lost. Make haste!' 
     Flinging on some clothes, Merry looked outside. The world was darkling. 
The very air seemed brown, and  all things  about were  black  and grey  and 
shadowless; there was  a great stillness. No shape  of cloud could be  seen, 
unless it were far away  westward, where the furthest groping fingers of the 
great gloom  still crawled  onwards  and a little light leaked through them. 
Overhead there hung a heavy  roof, sombre and  featureless, and light seemed 
rather to be failing than growing. 
     Merry saw many folk standing, looking up and muttering: all their faces 
were grey and sad, and some  were afraid. With a sinking heart  he made  his 
way to the king. Hirgon the rider of Gondor  was there before him, and beside 
him  stood now another man, like  him and  dressed alike,  but  shorter  and 
broader. As Merry entered he was speaking to the king. 

####-     'It comes from Mordor,  lord,' he said. 'It began last night at sunset. 
From the hills in the Eastfold of your realm I saw it rise  and creep across 
the sky, and all night as I rode it came behind eating up the stars. Now the 
great cloud hangs  over all  the  land between  here  and  the Mountains  of 
Shadow; and it is deepening. War has a lready begun.' 
     For a while the king sat silent. At last he spoke. 'So we come to it in 
the end,' he said: 'the great battle of our time, in which many things shall 
pass away. But at least there is no longer need for hiding. We will ride the 
straight  way  and  the  open road and with all our  speed. The muster shall 
begin  at once, and wait for none that tarry. Have  you good  store in Minas 
Tirith? For if we must ride now in all haste, then we must  ride light, with 
but meal and water enough to last u s into battle.' 
     'We have very great store long prepared,' answered  Hirgon. Ride now as 
light and as swift as you may!' 
     'Then call  the  heralds,  Jomer,' said  Thjoden. 'Let  the  Riders  be 
marshalled!' 
     Jomer  went out, and presently  the trumpets rang  in the Hold and were 
answered by many others from below; but their voices no longer sounded clear 
and brave as they had seemed to Merry the night before. Dull they seemed and 
harsh in the heavy air, braying ominously. 
     The  king  turned to Merry. 'I am going  to  war,  Master Meriadoc,' he 
said.  'In  a  little while I shall take  the  road.  I release you from  my 
service, but not from my friendship.  You shall abide here, and if you will, 
you shall serve the Lady Jowyn, who will govern the folk in my stead.' 
     'But, but, lord,' Merry  stammered, 'I offered you my sword.  I do  not 
want  to be parted  from you like this, Thjoden King. And as all my  friends 
have gone to the battle' I should be ashamed to stay behind.' 
     'But we ride on horses tall and swift,' said Thjoden; 'and great though 
your heart be, you cannot ride on such beasts.' 
     'Then tie me on  to the back of one,  or let me hang  on a  stirrup, or  
something,' said Merry. 'It  is a long way to  run; but  run  I shall, if  I 
cannot ride, even if I wear my feet off and arrive weeks too late.' 
     Thjoden smiled.  'Rather  than  that  I  would  bear  you  with  me  on 
Snowmane,'  he said. 'But at the least you shall ride with me to  Edoras and 
look on Meduseld;  for that way I  shall go. So far Stybba can bear you: the 
great race will not begin till we reach the plains.' 
     Then Jowyn rose  up. 'Come now,  Meriadoc!' she said. 'I will show  you  

####-the gear that  I have  prepared  fur  you.' They  went out  together.  'This 
request only did  Aragorn make to me,' said Jowyn, as  they passed among the 
tents, 'that you should be armed for battle. I have  granted it, as I could. 
For my heart tells me that you will need such gear ere the end.' 
     Now she led Merry to a booth among the lodges of the king's  guard  and 
there an armourer brought out to her a  small  helm, and a round shield, and 
other gear. 
     'No mail have we to fit you,' said Jowyn, 'nor any time for the forging 
of such a hauberk; but here is also a stout jerkin of leather, a belt, and a  
knife. A sword you have.' 
     Merry bowed,  and  the lady showed  him  the shield, which was like the 
shield that had  been given  to Gimli, and  it bore on  it the device of the 
white horse. 'Take  all  these things,' she  said, 'and  bear  them  to good 
fortune! Farewell now, Master  Meriadoc! Yet maybe we  shall meet again, you  
and I.' 
     So  it was that amid a  gathering gloom the King of the Mark made ready 
to lead  all  his  Riders on  the eastward road. Hearts were heavy  and  many 
quailed  in the shadow. But they were  a stern people, loyal to  their lord, 
and  little weeping or  murmuring was heard, even in  the  camp in  the Hold 
where the exiles from Edoras  were housed, women and children  and old  men. 
Doom hung over  them, but they faced it silently. 
     Two  swift hours passed, and now the king  sat  upon  his  white horse, 
glimmering in the half light. Proud and tall he seemed, though the hair that 
flowed beneath his high helm was  like  snow; and  many marvelled a t him and 
took heart to see him unbent and unafraid. 
     There on the wide  flats beside the noisy river were marshalled in many 
companies well nigh five and fifty  hundreds of Riders fully armed, and many 
hundreds of other men  with spare  horses lightly burdened. A single trumpet 
sounded. The king raised his  hand, and then silently  the host  of the Mark 
began to  move. Foremost went twelve of the king's household-men,  Riders of 
renown. Then the king followed with Jomer on his right. He had said farewell 
to Jowyn above in  the Hold, and the  memory was grievous; but now he turned 
his mind to the  road that lay ahead. Behind him Merry  rode  on Stybba with 
the errand riders of Gondor, and behind them again twelve more of the king's 
household. They passed  down  the long ranks of  waiting  men with stern  and 
unmoved faces.  But when they had  come  almost  to the end of  the line one 
looked up  glancing  keenly at the hobbit. A young man,  Merry thought as he 

####-returned the glance, less in height and girth than most. He caught the glint 
of clear grey eyes; and then he  shivered, for  it came suddenly to him that 
it was the face of one without hope who goes in search of death. 
     On  down  the grey road they went beside  the  Snowbourn rushing on its 
stones; through the hamlets of Underharrow and Upbourn, where many sad 
faces 
of women looked out from dark doors; and so without horn or harp or music of 
men's voices the great  ride into the East  began with  which  the songs  of 
Rohan were busy for many long lives of men thereafter. 
     From dark Dunharrow in the dim morning 
     with thane and captain rode Thengel's son: 
     to Edoras he came, the ancient halls 
     of the Mark-wardens mist-enshrouded; 
     golden timbers were in gloom mantled. 
     Farewell he bade to his free people, 
     hearth and high-seat, and the hallowed places, 
     where long he had feasted ere the light faded. 
     Forth rode the king, fear behind him, 
     fate before him. Fealty kept he; 
     oaths he had taken, all fulfilled them. 
     Forth rode Thjoden. Five nights and days 
     east and onward rode the Eorlingas 
     through Folde and Fenmarch and the Firienwood, 
     six thousand spears to Sunlending, 
     Mundburg the mighty under Mindolluin, 
     Sea-kings' city in the South -kingdom 
     foe-beleaguered, fire-encircled. 
     Doom drove them on. Darkness took them, 
     Horse and horseman; hoofbeats afar 
     sank into silence: so the songs tell us. 
     It was indeed in deepening gloom that the king came to Edoras, although 
it  was then but noon by the  hour. There  he halted only  a short while and 
strengthened his host by some three  score  of Riders that  came late to the 
weapontake. Now having eaten he made ready to set out  again, and  he wished 
his esquire  a kindly farewell. But Merry begged for the last time not to be 
parted from him. 
     'This is no journey for  such steeds  as  Stybba,  as I have told you ' 

####-said  Thjoden.  'And  in such a battle as we think to  make on the fields of 
Gondor what  would  you do, Master   Meriadoc, sword-thain though you be, 
and 
greater of heart than of stature?' 
     'As  for that,  who can tell?' answered Merry. 'But why, lord,  did you  
receive me as sword-thain, if not to stay by your side? And I would not have 
it said of me in song only that I was always left behind!' 
     'I  received you for your safe-keeping,' answered Thjoden; 'and also to 
do  as I might bid. None of my Riders can  bear you as burden. If the battle 
were before my gates, maybe your deeds would be remembered by the 
minstrels; 
but it  is a  hundred leagues and two to Mundburg  where Denethor is lord. I  
will say no more.' 
     Merry  bowed and  went  away  unhappily,  and  stared  at the lines  of 
horsemen. Already the companies were preparing to start: men were tightening 
girths, looking  to saddles, caressing their horses; some gazed uneasily  at 
the lowering sky. Unnoticed a Rider came up and spoke softly in the hobbit's 
ear. 
     'Where will wants not, a way opens, so we say,' he whispered; 'and so I 
have found myself.' Merry looked up and saw that it was the young Rider 
whom 
he had  noticed in the morning. 'You wish to go whither the Lord of the Mark 
goes: I see it in your face.' 
     'I do,' said Merry. 
     'Then you  shall go with me,'  said the Rider. 'I will bear  you before 
me, under my cloak until we are far afield, and this darkness is yet darker. 
Such good will should not be denied. Say no more to any man, but come!' 
     'Thank you indeed!' said Merry. 'Thank you, sir, though I  do not  know 
your name.' 
     'Do you not?' said the Rider softly. 'Then call me Dernhelm.' 
     Thus it  came to pass that  when the  king set out, before Dernhelm sat 
Meriadoc the hobbit, and the great  grey steed  Windfola  made little of the 
burden; for Dernhelm  was  less in  weight than many men, though  lithe  and 
well-knit in frame. 
     On  into the shadow they  rode. In  the willow-thickets where Snowbourn 
flowed into Entwash, twelve leagues east of Edoras,  they camped that night. 
And  then on  again  through the Folde; and through  the  Fenmarch, where to 

####-their  right great  oakwoods climbed on the skirts of the  hills  under  the 
shades of dark Halifirien by the borders of Gondor; but  away  to their left  
the mists lay on the marshes fed by the mouths of Entwash. And as they  rode 
rumour came of war in the North. Lone men, riding wild, brought word of foes 
assailing their east -borders, of orc-hosts marching in the Wold of Rohan. 
     'Ride on! Ride on!'  cried Jomer. 'Too late now to turn aside. The fens 
of Entwash must guard our flank. Haste now we need. Ride on!' 
     And  so King Thjoden departed from his own realm, and mile  by mile the 
long  road  wound  away,  and  the  beacon  hills  marched  past:  Calenhad, 
Min-Rimmon, Erelas, Nardol. But  their fires  were  quenched. All  the lands 
were grey and still;  and  ever the shadow  deepened before them,  and  hope  
waned in every heart. 
 

####- 

Chapter 4. The Siege of Gondor 

 
 
     Pippin was  roused by Gandalf. Candles  were lit in their chamber,  for  
only  a dim  twilight came  through the  windows; the air  was  heavy as with 
approaching thunder. 
     'What is the time?' said Pippin yawning. 
     'Past the second hour,' said Gandalf. 'Time to get up and make yourself 
presentable.  You  are summoned to  the Lord  of the City to learn your  new 
duties.' 
     'And will he provide breakfast?' 
     'No! I have provided  it: all that you will get till noon. Food  is now 
doled out by order.' 
     Pippin  looked  ruefully  at  the  small  loaf  and  (he  thought) very 
inadequate  pat of   butter which was set out for him,  beside  a cup of thin 
milk.  'Why did you bring me here?' he said. 
     'You know quite well,' said Gandalf. 'To keep you out  of mischief; and 
if you do  not  like being here, you can remember  that  you  brought it  on 
yourself.' Pippin said no more. 
     Before  long  he was  walking  with  Gandalf  once  more down  the cold  
corridor to the  door of the Tower Hall. There Denethor sat in a grey gloom,  
like an old patient spider, Pippin  thought: he  did not seem  to have moved 
since the day before. He beckoned Gandalf to a seat, but Pippin was left for  
a while standing unheeded. Presently the old man turned to him: 
     'Well, Master Peregrin,  I hope that you used yesterday to your profit, 
and to your liking? Though  I fear that the board is barer in this city than 
you could wish.' 
     Pippin had  an uncomfortable feeling that most  of what he had said  or  
done was somehow known to the Lord of the City, and much was guessed of 
what 
he thought as well. He did not answer. 
     'What would you do in my service?' 
     'I thought, sir, that you would tell me my duties.' 
     'I will, when I learn what you are fit for,' said Denethor. 'But that I 
shall learn soonest,  maybe,  if  I  keep you beside  me. The esquire of  my 
chamber  has begged leave to  go to the out-garrison, so  you shall take his 

####-place for a while. You shall wait  on me, bear errands,  and talk to me,  if 
war and council leave me any leisure. Can you sing?' 
     'Yes,' said Pippin.  'Well, yes, well enough for my  own people. But we 
have no songs  fit for  great halls and evil times, lord. We seldom  sing of 
anything more terrible  than wind  or rain. And most  of  my songs are about 
things that make us laugh; or about food and drink, of course.' 
     'And why should such songs be unfit for my halls, or for such  hours as 
these? We who have lived long under the  Shadow may surely listen to  echoes 
from  a land  untroubled  by  it? Then we may  feel that our  vigil was  not 
fruitless, though it may have been thank less.' 
     Pippin's heart sank. He did not  relish the idea of singing any song of 
the Shire to the Lord of Minas Tirith, certainly not the comic  ones that he 
knew best; they were too, well, rustic for such an  occasion. He was however 
spared the ordeal  for  the present. He  was not commanded  to sing. Denethor 
turned to Gandalf, asking questions about  the Rohirrim and  their policies,  
and the position of Jomer, the king's nephew. Pippin marvelled at the amount 
that the Lord seemed to  know about a people that  lived far away, though it  
must, he thought, be many years since Denethor himself had ridden abroad. 
     Presently Denethor waved to Pippin and dismissed him again for a while. 
'Go to the armouries of the Citadel,' he said, 'and get you there the livery 
and gear of the  Tower. It will be ready. It was commanded yesterday. Return 
when you are clad!' 
     It was  as he said; and Pippin soon  found himself  arrayed in  strange 
garments, all of black and silver. He  had a small hauberk, its rings forged 
of steel,  maybe,  yet black  as  jet; and a high-crowned  helm  with  small 
raven-wings on  either  side, set with  a  silver star in the centre of  the 
circlet.  Above the mail was a short surcoat  of black, but broidered on the 
breast in silver with the token of the Tree. His old clothes were folded and 
put away, but he was permitted to  keep the grey cloak of Lurien, though not  
to wear it  when  on duty.  He looked now, had he  known it, verily Ernil  i 
Pheriannath , the Prince of  the Halflings, that folk had  called him; but he 
felt uncomfortable. And the gloom began to weigh on his spirits.  
     It  was  dark and dim all day. From the sunless dawn until evening  the 
heavy shadow  had deepened,  and all hearts in the City were oppressed.  Far 
above  a great cloud streamed slowly westward from the Black Land, 
devouring 
light, borne upon a wind of war; but below the air was still and breathless,  

####-as if all the Vale of Anduin waited for the onset of a ruinous storm. 
     About  the eleventh hour, released  at  last for  a while from service. 
Pippin came  out and  went  in search  of food and  drink to cheer his heavy 
heart  and make his task of waiting more  supportable. In  the messes he met 
Beregond again, who  had just  come from an errand over the Pelennor  out to 
the Guard-towers upon the Causeway. Together they strolled out to the walls;  
for  Pippin felt imprisoned indoors, and stifled even in the  lofty citadel. 
Now  they sat  side by side again  in the embrasure  looking eastward, where 
they had eaten and talked the day before. 
     It was the sunset-hour, but  the great pall had  now stretched far into 
the  West, and  only  as it sank at last into the Sea did the Sun escape  to 
send  out a brief farewell  gleam before  the night, even as Frodo saw it a t 
the Cross-roads touching the head of the fallen king. But  to  the fields of 
the Pelennor, under the shadow of Mindolluin, there came no gleam: they were 
brown and drear. 
     Already it  seemed years to  Pippin  since he had sat  there before, in 
some half-forgotten time when he had still  been a hobbit,  a  light-hearted 
wanderer touched little by the perils he had passed through. Now  he was one 
small soldier in a city preparing for a great assault, clad in the proud but 
sombre manner of the Tower of Guard. 
     In some  other time and place Pippin  might have been pleased with  his 
new array,  but he knew  now  that he was taking part in no  play; he was in 
deadly  earnest the servant of  a grim  master  in the  greatest  peril. The 
hauberk was burdensome, and the helm weighed upon his head. His cloak he 
had 
cast aside  upon the seat. He turned his tired  gaze away from  the darkling 
fields below and yawned, and then he sighed. 
     'You are weary of this day?' said Beregond. 
     'Yes,'  said Pippin,  'very: tired out with idleness and waiting. I have 
kicked my  heels  at the door of my master's  chamber  for many  slow hours, 
while  he  has  debated with Gandalf and the Prince and other great persons.  
And I'm not  used,  Master Beregond, to waiting hungry on others while  they 
eat. It is a sore trial for a hobbit, that. No doubt you will think I should 
feel the honour more  deeply. But  what is the good  of such honour?  Indeed 
what is the  good even of  food  and  drink under this creeping shadow? What 
does it  mean?  The very air seems thick and brown! Do  you often  have such 
glooms when the wind is in the East?' 

####-     'Nay,'  said  Beregond, 'this is no weather of the world. This  is some 
device  of his  malice; some broil of fume from the Mountain of Fire that he 
sends  to darken hearts and counsel. And so it doth indeed. I wish the  Lord 
Faramir would  return. He  would not be dismayed. But now,  who  knows if he 
will ever come back across the River out of the Darkness?' 
     'Yes,' said Pippin, 'Gandalf, too, is anxious.  He was disappointed.  I 
think, not  to  find Faramir here. And where has he  got to himself? He left 
the  Lord's council before the noon -meal,  and  in  no good  mood either,  I 
thought. Perhaps he has some foreboding of bad news.' 
     Suddenly as they talked  they were  stricken dumb, frozen as it were to 
listening  stones. Pippin cowered down  with his hands pressed to his  ears;  
but Beregond, who  had been  looking out from the battlement  as he spoke of 
Faramir, remained  there, stiffened, staring  out with starting eyes. Pippin 
knew the shuddering cry that he had heard: it was the same that he had heard 
long  ago  in  the Marish  of the Shire, but now it was grown  in  power and 
hatred, piercing the heart with a poisonous despair . 
     At last Beregond spoke with an effort. 'They have come!' he said. 'Take 
courage and look! There are fell things below.' 
     Reluctantly Pippin climbed on to the seat and looked out over the wall. 
The Pelennor lay dim  beneath him, fading away to the scarce guessed line of 
the  Great  River. But  now  wheeling  swiftly across  it,  like  shadows of 
untimely  night, he  saw in  the middle airs  below him five birdlike forms, 
horrible as carrion-fowl  yet greater than  eagles, cruel as death. Now they 
swooped near, venturing almost within bowshot of the walls, now they circled 
away. 
     'Black Riders!'  muttered Pippin.  'Black  Riders  of the air! But see, 
Beregond!' he cried. 'They are  looking for something, surely? See  how they 
wheel and swoop,  always down to that  point over  there!  And  can  you see 
something moving on the ground? Dark little things. Yes, men on horses: four 
or five. Ah! I cannot stand it! Gandalf! Gandalf save us!' 
     Another  long screech rose and fell,  and  he threw  himself back again 
from the  wall, panting like  a  hunted  animal.  Faint and seemingly remote 
through that shuddering cry he  heard  winding  up from below the sound of a 
trumpet ending on a long high note. 
     'Faramir!  The  Lord Faramir! It is  his call!' cried  Beregond. 'Brave 
heart! But how can he win to the  Gate, if these  foul hell-hawks have other  
weapons than fear? But look! They hold on. They will make the Gate.  No! the 

####-horses are running mad. Look! the men are thrown; they are running  on foot. 
No,  one is  still  up, but he  rides  back to the others. That will be  the 
Captain: he can master both beasts and men. Ah! there one of the foul things 
is stooping on him. Help! help! Will no one go out to him? Faramir!' 
     With  that Beregond sprang  away  and ran off into the gloom. Ashamed of 
his terror, while Beregond of the Guard thought first of the captain whom he 
loved,  Pippin got up and peered out.  At that  moment he caught  a flash of 
white and silver coming from the  North, like a small star down on the dusky 
fields. It moved with the speed of an arrow and grew as it came,  converging  
swiftly with  the flight of  the four men  towards the  Gate.  It seemed  to 
Pippin that a  pale light was spread about it and the heavy shadows gave way 
before it; and then as  it drew near he thought that he heard, like  an echo 
in the walls, a great voice calling. 
     'Gandalf!' he  cried. 'Gandalf!  He always  turns  up  when things  are 
darkest.  Go on!  Go on,  White Rider! Gandalf, Gandalf!' he shouted wildly, 
like  an  onlooker  at  a  great race urging on a runner who is  far  beyond 
encouragement. 
     But now  the dark  swooping shadows  were  aware  of  the newcomer. One 
wheeled towards  him; but it seemed to Pippin that he raised  his hand,  and 
from  it a  shaft of  white light  stabbed upwards.  The Nazgyl  gave a long 
wailing  cry  and swerved away; and with  that the  four others wavered, and 
then rising in swift spirals they  passed away  eastward  vanishing into the 
lowering cloud  above; and down  on the Pelennor it seemed for a  while less 
dark. 
     Pippin watched,  and he  saw the  horseman and the White Rider meet and 
halt, waiting for those on foot. Men now hurried out to them from the  City;  
and soon they all passed from sight under the  outer walls, and he knew that 
they were  entering the Gate. Guessing  that they would  come at once to the 
Tower and the Steward, he  hurried to the entrance of the citadel.  There he 
was  joined by  many others who had watched the race and the rescue from the 
high walls.  
     It was not long before a clamour  was heard  in the streets leading  up 
from the outer circles, and there was much cheering and crying of  the names 
of Faramir  and Mithrandir. Presently Pippin saw torches, and followed by  a 
press of people two horsemen riding slowly:  one was in white but shining no 
longer, pale in the twilight as if his  fire was spent  or veiled; the other  
was dark  and his  head  was  bowed.  They  dismounted, and  as  grooms took  

####-Shadowfax and the  other  horse,  they walked forward to the sentinel at the 
gate: Gandalf  steadily,  his  grey  cloak  flung  back,  and  a fire  still 
smouldering in his eyes; the  other,  clad all in green, slowly,  swaying  a  
little as a weary or a wounded man. 
     Pippin pressed  forward  as  they passed  under the  lamp  beneath  the 
gate-arch, and when he saw the pale face of Faramir he caught his breath. It  
was the face  of one who has been assailed by a great fear  or anguish,  but 
has  mastered it and now is quiet. Proud and grave he stood for  a moment as 
he spoke to the guard, and Pippin gazing at him saw how closely he resembled 
his brother  Boromir - whom Pippin had liked from  the  first,  admiring the 
great man's lordly but kindly manner. Yet suddenly for Faramir his heart was 
strangely moved with a feeling that  he had  not known before. Here was  one 
with  an  air of high nobility such as  Aragorn at times revealed, less high 
perhaps, yet also less incalculable and remote: one of the Kings of Men born 
into a  later time,  but touched with the  wisdom  and sadness of  the Elder  
Race. He knew  now  why Beregond spoke his name with love. He was a  
captain 
that  men would follow, that he would follow, even under  the shadow  of the 
black wings. 
     'Faramir!'  he  cried aloud  with the others.  'Faramir!'  And  Faramir 
catching his strange voice among the clamour  of the men of the City, turned  
and looked down at him and was amazed. 
     'Whence  come  you?'  he said. 'A halfling,  and in the  livery  of the 
Tower! Whence...? ' 
     But  with that Gandalf stepped  to his side and spoke. 'He came with me 
from  the land of the Halflings,' he said. 'He came with  me. But let us not 
tarry here. There is much to say and to do, and you are weary. He shall come 
with  us. Indeed  he  must,  for if he  does not forget his new  duties more 
easily than I do, he must attend on his  lord  again within this hour. Come, 
Pippin, follow us!' 
     So at length they came to the private chamber of the Lord of the  City. 
There deep seats were set about a brazier of charcoal; and wine was brought; 
and there Pippin,  hardly noticed, stood behind  the  chair of Denethor  and 
felt his weariness little, so eagerly did he listen to all that was said. 
     When Faramir had  taken white bread and drunk a draught of wine, he sat 
upon a low chair  at his father's left hand. Removed a little upon the other  
side sat Gandalf in a  chair of  carven  wood; and he seemed  at first to be 

####-asleep. For at the beginning Faramir spoke only of the errand  upon which he 
had been sent out ten days before, and he brought tidings of Ithilien and of 
movements of the Enemy and his allies; and he told of the  fight on the road 
when  the  men of Harad  and their  great beast were overthrown:  a  captain 
reporting  to his master  such matters as had often been heard before, small 
things of  border -war that  now seemed useless  and  petty,  shorn of  their 
renown. 
     Then suddenly  Faramir looked at Pippin. 'But now  we  come  to strange  
matters,' he said.  'For this  is not the first  halfling that  I  have seen 
walking out of northern legends into the Southlands.' 
     At that Gandalf sat up and gripped the arms of his chair;  but  he said 
nothing, and  with a look stopped the exclamation on Pippin's lips. Denethor  
looked at their faces  and  nodded his head, as though  in sign  that he had 
read much  there before it  was spoken. Slowly, while the  others sat silent 
and  still,  Faramir  told  his tale, with  his  eyes  for the most part  on 
Gandalf, though now and again his glance strayed to Pippin, as if to refresh 
his memory of others that he had seen. 
     As his story was unfolded of his meeting with Frodo and his servant and 
of  the events  at Henneth  Annyn, Pippin became aware that  Gandalf's hands 
were  trembling as they clutched the carven wood. White they seemed now  
and 
very old,  and as  he looked at them,  suddenly with a thrill of fear Pippin 
knew  that Gandalf, Gandalf himself, was troubled, even afraid.  The  air of 
the room was close and still. At last when Faramir spoke of his parting with  
the travellers, and of their resolve to go to Cirith Ungol,  his voice fell, 
and he shook his head and sighed. Then Gandalf sprang up. 
     'Cirith Ungol?  Morgul Vale?'  he said. 'The  time,  Faramir, the time?  
When did you part with them? When would they reach that accursed valley?' 
     'I parted with them in  the morning two days ago,' said Faramir. 'It is 
fifteen leagues thence to the vale  of the Morgulduin, if they went straight 
south; and then they would  be  still five leagu es westward of  the accursed 
Tower.  At  swiftest they could not come  there before today, and maybe they 
have not come there yet. Indeed I see what you fear. But the darkness is not 
due to their venture.  It began yestereve, and all Ithilien was under sha dow 
last night.  It is clear to me that the Enemy has long planned an assault on 
us, and its hour had already been determined before ever the travellers left 
my keeping.' 

####-     Gandalf paced the floor. 'The  morning  of two days ago,  nigh on three 
days of journey! How far is the place where you parted?' 
     'Some  twenty-five leagues as a  bird flies,' answered  Faramir. 'But I 
could not  come more swiftly.  Yestereve I lay at Cair Andros, the long isle 
in the River  northward which we hold in defence; and horses are kept on the 
hither bank. As the dark drew on I  knew that  haste was  needed,  so I rode 
thence with three others that could also be horsed. The rest of my company I  
sent south to strengthen the garrison at the fords of Osgiliath. I hope that 
I have not done ill?' He looked at his father. 
     'Ill?' cried Denethor,  and his eyes flashed suddenly. 'Why do you ask? 
The men were under your command. Or do you ask for my  judgement on all 
your 
deeds? Your bearing is lowly in my presence,  yet it is long  now  since you  
turned from your own way at my counsel. See, you have  spoken  skilfully, as 
ever; but  I, have I not seen your  eye fixed on Mithrandir, seeking whether  
you said well or too much? He has long had your heart in his keeping. 
     'My son, your  father is old but not yet dotard. I can see and hear, as 
was  my wont; and  little of what you have half said  or left unsaid  is now 
hidden from me. I know the answer to many riddles. Alas, alas for Boromir!' 
     'If what I have done  displeases you, my father,' said Faramir quietly, 
'I wish I had known your counsel before the burden of so weighty a judgement 
was thrust on me.' 
     'Would that have availed to change your judgement?' said Denethor. 'You 
would still have done just so, I deem.  I k now you well. Ever your desire is 
to  appear lordly and generous as  a king of old, gracious, gentle. That may 
well befit one of high race, if he sits in power and peace. But in desperate 
hours gentleness may be repaid with death.' 
     'So be it,' said Faramir. 
     'So  be  it!' cried  Denethor.  'But  not  with your  death  only, Lord 
Faramir: with the death also of your father, and of all your people, whom it 
is your part to protect now that Boromir is gone.' 
     'Do you wish then,' said Faramir, 'that our places had been exchanged?' 
     'Yes,  I wish that indeed,' said Denethor. 'For Boromir was loyal to me 
and no wizard's pupil. He would have remembered his father's need, and would 
not  have squandered what  fortune gave.  He would have brought me  a  mighty 
gift.' 
     For a moment Faramir's restraint gave way. 'I would ask you, my father, 

####-to remember why it was that I,  not he, was in Ithilien. On  one occasion at 
least your counsel has prevailed, not long ago. It  was the Lord of the City 
that gave the errand to him.' 
     'Stir not the  bitterness in  the cup that  I mixed  for myself,'  said 
Denethor.  'Have I  not tasted it now  many nights upon my tongue foreboding 
that worse yet lay in the dregs? As now indeed I find. Would it were not so!  
Would that this thing had come to me!' 
     'Comfort yourself!'  said Gandalf.  'In  no  case  would  Boromir  have 
brought it to you. He is dead, and died well; may he sleep in peace! Yet you  
deceive yourself. He would have stretched out  his hand to this  thing,  and 
taking it he would have fallen. He would have kept it  for his own, and when  
he returned you would not have known your son.' 
     The face of Denethor set  hard and cold. 'You found Boromir less apt to 
your hand, did you not?' he said softly.  'But I who  was his father say that 
he would have  brought it to me.  You are wise,  maybe, Mithrandir, yet with 
all your subtleties you have not all wisdom.  Counsels may be found that are 
neither the  webs  of wizards  nor the haste of fools. I have in this matter 
more lore and wisdom than you deem. ' 
     'What then is your wisdom?' said Gandalf. 
     'Enough to  perceive  that there are two follies to avoid. To  use this 
thing is  perilous. At  this  hour, to send it  in  the hands  of a  witless 
halfling into the land of the Enemy himself, as you  have done, and this son 
of mine, that is madness.' 
     'And the Lord Denethor what would he have done?' 
     'Neither. But most surely  not  for any argument would he have set this 
thing at a hazard beyond all bu t a  fool's hope, risking our utter ruin,  if 
the  Enemy  should  recover what he lost. Nay, it  should  have  been  kept, 
hidden, hidden  dark and deep. Not used, I say, unless  at the uttermost end 
of need, but set beyond his grasp, save by a victory so  final that what then 
befell would not trouble us, being dead.' 
     'You  think,  as  is your wont, my lord, of Gondor only,' said Gandalf. 
'Yet there are other men and other lives, and time still to be.  And for me, 
I pity even his slaves.' 
     'And wher e  will other  men look for help, if  Gondor  falls?' answered 
Denethor. 'If I had this thing  now in  the deep  vaults of this citadel, we 
should not then  shake with  dread  under this gloom, fearing the worst, and 
our counsels would  be  undisturbed. If you do not trust  me  to endure  the 

####-test, you do not know me yet.' 
     'Nonetheless I do not trust you,' said Gandalf. 'Had I done so, I could 
have sent this thing hither to  your keeping  and  spared myself and  others 
much  anguish.  And now hearing  you speak  I trust you  less, no  more than 
Boromir. Nay, stay your wrath! I do  not trust myself in this, and I refused 
this thing, even as  a  freely given gift. You  are strong and can still  in 
some matters govern  yourself, Denethor; yet if you had received this thing,  
it  would  have  overthrown  you.  Were  it  buried  beneath  the  roots  of 
Mindolluin, still it would burn  your mind away, as the darkness grows,  and 
the yet worse things follow that soon shall come upon us.' 
     For a moment the eyes of Denethor glowed again as he faced Gandalf, and 
Pippin felt  once  more the  strain between  their wills;  but now almost it 
seemed  as if their glances were like blades  from eye to eye, flickering as 
they  fenced. Pippin trembled fearing  some  dreadful  stroke.  But suddenly  
Denethor relaxed and grew cold again. He shrugged his shoulders.  
     'If I had! If you had!' he said. 'Such words and ifs are  vain.  It has 
gone into the Shadow, and only time will show  what  doom awaits it  and us.  
The time will not  be long. In what is left, let all who fight  the Enemy in 
their fashion be at one, and keep hope while they may, and after hope  still 
the hardihood to die  free.' He turned to  Faramir.  'What think  you of the 
garrison at Osgiliath?' 
     'It is not strong,'  said Faramir. 'I have sent the company of Ithilien 
to strengthen it, as I have said.' 
     'Not enough, I deem,' said Denethor. 'It is  there that the first  blow 
will fall. They will have need of some stout captain there.' 
     'There  and  elsewhere  in many places,' said Faramir, and sighed. 'Alas 
for my brother, whom I too loved!' He rose. 'May I have your leave, father?' 
And then he swayed and leaned upon his father's chair. 
     'You are weary, I see,' said Denethor.  'You  have ridden  fast and far, 
and under shadows of evil in the air, I am told.' 
     'Let us not speak of that!' said Faramir. 
     'Then  we  will  not,'  said  Denethor. 'Go  now and  rest as you  may. 
Tomorrow's need will be sterner.' 
     All now took leave of the Lor d of the City and went to rest  while they 
still could.  Outside there  was a starless blackness as Gandalf with Pippin 
beside  him bearing a small torch, made  his way to their  lodging. They did  
not speak until they were behind closed  doors. Then  at  last  Pippin  took  

####-Gandalf's hand. 
     'Tell me,' he  said, 'is there any hope? For Frodo, I mean; or at least 
mostly for Frodo.' 
     Gandalf put his hand on Pippin's head. 'There never was much  hope,' he 
answered.  'Just a  fool's hope,  as  I have  been told. And when I heard of 
Cirith Ungol------' He broke  off and  strode to  the window as if his  eyes 
could pierce the night  in the East. 'Cirith Ungol!' he  muttered. 'Why that 
way, I wonder?' He turned.  'Just now, Pippin,  my heart almost  failed  me, 
hearing that name.  And yet  in truth  I believe that  the news that Faramir 
brings has some hope in it. For it seems clear that our Enemy has opened his 
war at last and made the first  move while Frodo was still free. So  now for  
many days  he will have his eye turned this way and that, away  from his own 
land. And yet, Pippin, I  feel from afar his haste and  fear.  He  has begun 
sooner than he would. Something has happened to stir him.' 
     Gandalf  stood for a moment in thought.  'Maybe,'  he  muttered.  'Maybe 
even your foolishness helped,  my lad. Let me see: some five days ago now he 
would discover that  we had thrown  down  Saruman and had  taken the  Stone. 
Still  what of that?  We could  not use it to much  purpose, or without  his 
knowing. Ah! I wonder. Aragorn? His time  draws  near. And he  is strong and 
stern underneath, Pippin; bold, determined, able to take his own counsel and 
dare great risks  at  need. That may be it. He may have used  the  Stone and 
shown  himself  to the  Enemy,  challenging  him, for  this very purpose.  I 
wonder. Well, we shall not know the answer till the Riders of Rohan come, if 
they do not come  too  late.  There are evil days ahead.  To sleep  while we 
may!' 
     'But,' said Pippin. 
     'But what?' said Gandalf. 'Only one but will I allow tonight.' 
     'Gollum,' said  Pippin. 'How  on  earth could they  be going about with 
him, even following him? And I could see that Faramir did not like the place  
he was taking them to any more than you do. What is wrong?' 
     'I cannot answer  that now,' said Gandalf. 'Yet  my heart guessed  that 
Frodo and Gollum  would  meet  before the end. For good, or for evil. But of 
Cirith  Ungol  I  will  not speak  tonight.  Treachery,  treachery  I  fear; 
treachery  of  that  miserable creature. But so it must be. Let us  remember  
that a traitor may betray himself and  do good that he does not  intend.  It 
can be so, sometimes. Good night! ' 
     The next day came with a morning like  a brown  dusk, and the hearts of 

####-men, lifted for a while by the return of Faramir, sank low again. The winged 
Shadows were  not  seen again  that day,  yet  ever and anon, high above the 
city, a faint cry would come,  and  many who heard  it  would stand stricken 
with a passing dread, while the less stout-hearted quailed and wept. 
     And now Faramir was gone again. 'They give him no rest,' some murmured. 
'The Lord drives his son too hard, and  now he must do the duty of  two, for  
himself  and  for  the  one that  will  not return.'  And  ever  men  looked 
northward, asking: 'Where are the Riders of Rohan?' 
     In truth Faramir did not  go  by  his own choosing. But the Lord of the 
City  was master of his  Council,  and he was in no mood that day  to bow to 
others. Early in the morning the  Council had been summoned.  There  all the 
captains judged that because of the threat in the South their force  was too 
weak  to  make any stroke of  war on  their own part,  unless perchance  the 
Riders of Rohan yet should come. Meanwhile they must man the walls and 
wait. 
     'Yet,'  said  Denethor,  'we  should  not  lightly  abandon  the  outer  
defences,  the Rammas made with so  great  a  labour. And the Enemy must 
pay 
dearly for the crossing of the River. That he cannot do, in  force to assail 
the City, either north of Cair Andros because of  the marshes, or southwards 
towards Lebennin because of the breadth of the River, that needs many boats.  
It  is at  Osgiliath that he  will  put his weight, as before  when  Boromir 
denied him the passage.' 
     'That was but a trial,' said Faramir. 'Today we may make  the Enemy pay 
ten times our  loss at  the passage and yet  rue  the  exchange.  For he can 
afford  to lose a host better  than we to lose a company. And the retreat of 
those  that we  put out  far afield  will  be per ilous, if he wins across in 
force.' 
     'And what of Cair Andros?' said the Prince. 'That, too, must  be  held, 
if Osgiliath  is defended.  Let  us  not forget  the danger on our left. The 
Rohirrim may  come,  and  they may not. But  Faramir  has  told us  of great 
strength drawing ever  to the Black Gate. More than  one host may issue from 
it, and strike for more than one passage.' 
     'Much must be risked in war,' said Denethor. 'Cair Andros is manned and  
no more  can be sent so far. But I will not yield the River and the Pelennor  
unfought  - not if there  is a captain  here who has still the courage to do 
his lord's will.' 

####-     Then all were silent, but at length Faramir said: 'I do not oppose your 
will, sire. Since you are robbed of Boromir, I will go and do what  I can in 
his stead  - if you command it.' 
     'I do so,' said Denethor. 
     'Then farewell!' said Faramir. 'But if I should return, think better of 
me!' 
     'That depends on the manner of your return,' said Denethor. 
     Gandalf it was that  last spoke  to Faramir ere he  rode east. 'Do  not 
throw your live away rashly or in bitterness,' he said. 'You  will be needed 
here,  for other things  than war. Your  father loves you, Faramir, and will 
remember it ere the end. Farewell!' 
     So now the Lord Faramir had gone  forth again, and had taken  with  him 
such strength of men as were willing to go  or could be spared. On the walls 
some gazed through the gloom towards the ruined city, and they wondered 
what 
chanced there, for nothing could be seen.  And others, as ever, looked north 
and counted the leagues to Thjoden in Rohan. 'Will he come? Will he 
remember  
our old alliance?' they said. 
     'Yes, he will  come,'  said  Gandalf, 'even  if  he comes too late. But 
think! At best the Red Arrow cannot have reached him more than two days 
ago, 
and the miles are long from Edoras.' 
     It was night again ere news came. A  man rode in  haste from the fords, 
saying that a host had issued from Minas Morgul and was already drawing nigh 
to Osgiliath; and it had been joined  by regiments from the South, Haradrim, 
cruel and tall. 'And we have learned ' said the messenger, 'that  the  Black  
Captain  leads  them once again,  and the fear of him  has passed before him 
over the River.' 
     With those ill-boding words the third day closed since  Pippin came  to 
Minas Tirith. Few went to rest, for small hope had any now that even Faramir 
could hold the fords for long. 
     The next day,  though the darkness  had reached  its  full and grew  no 
deeper, it weighed heavier  on men's  hearts, and a great dread was on them.  
Ill  news came soon  again.  The  passage of  Anduin was won  by  the Enemy. 
Faramir was retreating to the wall of  the Pelennor, rallying his men to the 
Causeway Forts; but he was ten times outnumbered. 

####-     'If he wins back at all across the Pelennor, his enemies will be on his 
heels,' said  the messenger. 'They have paid dear for the  crossing but less 
dearly than we  hoped.  The plan has been well laid. It is now  seen that in 
secret  they have long been building  floats and barges in great numbers  in 
East  Osgiliath.  They  swarmed across  like  beetles.  But  it is the Black  
Captain  that  defeats us. Few  will stand and abide even the  rumour of his 
coming.  His own folk quail at him,  and they would  slay themselves  at his 
bidding.' 
     'Then I am needed  there more than here,' said Gandalf, and rode off at 
once,  and the glimmer  of him  faded soon  from  sight. And  all that night 
Pippin alone and sleepless stood upon the wall and gazed eastward. 
     The bells  of  day had  scarcely  rung  out again,  a  mockery  in  the 
unlightened dark, when  far  away he saw  fires spring up, across in the dim 
spaces where the walls of the Pelennor stood. The  watchmen cried aloud, and 
all men in the City stood to arms. Now ever and anon there was a  red flash,  
and slowly through the heavy air dull rumbles could be heard. 
     'They have taken the wall!' men cried. 'They are blasting  breaches  in 
it. They are coming!' 
     'Where  is Faramir?'  cried  Beregond in dismay.  'Say not  that he has 
fallen!' 
     It was  Gandalf that  brought the  first  tidings.  With  a  handful of 
horsemen he came in the middle morning, riding as escort to a line of wains.  
They were filled with wounded men, all that could be sa ved from the wreck of 
the Causeway Forts. At  once he went  to Denethor.  The Lord of the City sat 
now in a high chamber above the Hall of the White Tower  with Pippin  at his 
side;  and through  the dim windows, north and  south and east,  he bent his 
dark eyes, as if to pierce the shadows of doom that  ringed him  round. Most  
to the north  he looked, and would  pause at whiles to listen as  if by some 
ancient art his ears might hear the thunder of hoofs on the plains far away. 
     'Is Faramir come?' he a sked. 
     'No,' said Gandalf.  'But he still  lived when I  left him. Yet  he  is 
resolved  to stay  with the rearguard,  lest  the retreat over  the Pelennor  
become a rout.  He may,  perhaps, hold  his men  together long enough, but I  
doubt it.  He  is  pitted against a foe too great.  For one has come  that I 
feared.' 
     'Not -  the  Dark  Lord?'  cried Pippin, forgetting  his place  in  his 
terror. 

####-     Denethor laughed bitterly. 'Nay, not  yet, Master Peregrin! He will not 
come save  only to triumph over me when all is  won. He uses  others as  his 
weapons. So do  all great lords, if they  are wise,  Master Halfling. Or why 
should I sit here in  my tower and think, and watch, and wait, spending even 
my sons? For I can still wield a brand.' 
     He stood up and cast open his long black cloak, and behold! he was clad 
in mail beneath,  and girt  with a  long sword, great-hilted in a sheath  of 
black and silver. 'Thus have I walked, and thus  now  for many years  have I  
slept,' he said, 'lest with age the body should grow soft and timid.' 
     'Yet now under the Lord of Barad-dyr the most  fell of all his captains 
is already master of your outer  walls,'  said Gandalf. 'King of Angmar long 
ago, Sorcerer, Ringwraith, Lord of the Nazgyl, a spear of terror in the hand 
of Sauron, shadow of despair.' 
     'Then, Mithrandir, you  had a  foe to  match you,'  said Denethor. 'For  
myself, I  have long known who is the chief captain of the hosts of the Dark 
Tower. Is this all that you have returned to say? Or can it be that you have 
withdrawn because you are overmatched?' 
     Pippin  trembled, fearing  that Gandalf would be stung to sudden wrath, 
but his fear was needless.  'It  might be so,' Gandalf answered softly. 'But 
our trial of strength is not yet come. And if words  spoken  of old be true, 
not by the hand of man  shall he fall, and hidden from the Wise  is the doom 
that awaits him.  However that may be, the Captain of Despair does not press 
forward,  yet.  He rules rather according to  the  wisdom that you have just 
spoken, from the rear, driving his slaves in madness on before. 
     'Nay, I came  rather to guard the hurt men that can yet be  healed; for 
the Rammas is  breached far and wide, and soon the host of Morgul will enter  
in at many points. And I came chiefly to say this. Soon there will be battle 
on  the  fields. A sortie must be made  ready.  Let it be of mounted men. In 
them lies our  brief hope, for in one thing only is  the enemy  still poorly 
provided: he has few horsemen.' 
     'And we also have few. Now  would the coming of Rohan be in the nick of 
time,' said Denethor. 
     'We are likely to see other newcomers first,' said  Gandalf. 'Fugitives 
from Cair Andros have  already reached us. The isle has fallen. Another army 
is come from the Black Gate, crossing from the north-east.' 
     'Some have accused  you, Mithrandir,  of  delighting to bear ill news,' 
said Denethor, 'but to  me  this is  no longer news: it  was known to mw ere 

####-nightfall yesterday. As for the sortie,  I had already given thought to  it. 
Let us go down.' 
     Time  passed. At length watchers on the walls could  see the retreat of 
the  out-companies. Small bands of weary  and  often wounded  men came first  
with  little  order; some  were running wildly  as if  pursued. Away to  the 
ea stward the distant fires flickered; and  now it seemed that here and there 
they crept across the plain. Houses and barns were burning.  Then from  many 
points little  rivers of red flame  came  hurrying on,  winding through  the 
gloom,  converging  towards   the line of  the broad  road that  led from the 
City-gate to Osgiliath. 
     'The enemy,' men  murmured. 'The  dike is  down. Here they come pouring 
through the  breaches! And they carry  torches,  it seems. Where are our own 
folk?' 
     It drew now to evening by the hour, and  the light was so dim that even 
far-sighted men upon the  Citadel could  discern little clearly out upon the 
fields, save only the  burnings that ever multiplied, and the lines  of fire 
that grew in length and speed.  At last, less than a mile  from  the City, a  
more ordered mass of men came into view, marching not running, still holding 
together. 
     The watchers held their breath. 'Faramir must be there,' they said. 'He 
can govern man and beast. He will make it yet.' 
     Now  the  main retreat  was scarcely  two furlongs distant. Out of  the 
gloom behind a small company of horsemen galloped, all that was  left of the 
rearguard. Once again they turned at bay, facing the oncoming lines of fire. 
Then  suddenly  there was a tumult of   fierce cries. Horsemen of  the  enemy  
swept up. The lines of fire became flowing torrents,  file upon file of Orcs 
bearing flames, and wild Southron men with red banners, shouting with  harsh 
tongues, surging up, overtaking the retreat. And with a  piercing cry out of 
the dim sky fell the winged shadows, the Nazgyl stooping to the kill. 
     The retreat became a rout. Already men were breaking away, flying  wild  
and witless here and there, flinging away their weapons, crying out in fear, 
falling to the ground. 
     And then a trumpet rang from the Citadel, and Denethor at last released 
the sortie. Drawn up  within  the shadow of the  Gate and under the  looming 
walls outside they had waited for his signal: all the  mounted men that were 
left in the City.  Now they  sprang forward, formed, quickened to  a gallop, 
and charged with a great shout. And  from the walls an answering  shout went 

####-up; for foremost on the field rode the swan-knights of Dol Amroth with their  
Prince and his blue banner at their head. 
     'Amroth for Gondor!' they cried. 'Amroth to Faramir!' 
     Like thunder they broke  upon the enemy on either flank of the retreat; 
but  one rider outran  them  all, swift as the  wind in the grass: Shadowfax 
bore him, shining,  unveiled  once  more, a light starting from his upraised 
hand. 
     The Nazgyl screeched and swept away, for their Captain was not yet come 
to challenge the  white fire of his foe. The hosts of Morgul intent on their 
prey,  taken at  unawares in wild career, broke, scattering like sparks in a  
gale. The out-companies with a great cheer turned and smote their  pursuers.  
Hunters  became the hunted. The retreat  became  an onslaught. The field was 
strewn with stricken orcs and  men, and a  reek arose of torches cast  away, 
sputtering ou t in swirling smoke. The cavalry rode on. 
     But  Denethor  did not  permit them to  go  far.  Though the enemy  was 
checked, and for the moment driven back, great forces  were flowing  in from 
the East.  Again  the  trumpet rang,  sounding the retreat.  The cavalry  of 
Gondor halted. Behind their screen the out-companies re-formed. Now steadily 
they  came marching  back. They  reached the  Gate  of the City and entered,  
stepping  proudly:  and  proudly the people of the  City looked  on them and 
cried their praise, and  yet they were troubled in heart. For the  companies 
were grievously reduced. Faramir had lost a third of his men. And  where was 
he? 
     Last of all he came. His men passed in. The  mounted knights  returned, 
and at their rear  the banner  of Dol Amroth, and the Prince. And in his arms 
before him on  his  horse  he bore  the body of his kinsman, Faramir  son of 
Denethor, found upon the stricken field. 
     'Faramir! Faramir!' men cried, weeping in the  streets.  But he did not 
answer, and they  bore him away up the winding  road to the Citadel  and his 
father. Even  as the Nazgyl had swerved aside  from the  onset of  the White 
Rider,  there came flying a deadly dart, and Faramir,  as he  held at bay  a  
mounted champion of Harad, had  fallen to the earth.  Only the charge of Dol 
Amroth had saved him from the red southland swords that would have hewed 
him 
as he lay. 
     The Prince Imrahil brought  Faramir to  the White Tower, and  he  said: 
Your son has returned, lord, after  great deeds, and he told all that he had 

####-seen. But Denethor rose  and looked on the face  of his  son and was silent. 
Then he  bade  them make a bed  in the  chamber and lay Faramir  upon it and 
depart. But  he himself went up alone into the  secret room under the summit 
of the Tower; and many who looked  up thither  at that time saw a pale light  
that gleamed and  flickered from the  narrow  windows for a while,  and then 
flashed and  went  out. And when Denethor descended again he went to 
Faramir 
and sat beside him withou t speaking, but the face of the Lord was grey, more 
deathlike than his son's.  
     So now at last the  City was besieged, enclosed in a ring  of foes. The 
Rammas  was broken, and all the Pelennor  abandoned  to the Enemy.  The last  
word  to  come  from outside the  walls  was  brought by men flying down the 
northward road ere the  Gate was  shut. They were the remnant of  the  guard 
that was kept  at that point where the way from Anurien and  Rohan  ran into 
the townlands: Ingold led them, the same who had admitted Gandalf and Pippin 
less than five days before,  while the sun still rose and there was hope  in 
the morning. 
     'There is no  news of the Rohirrim,' he said. 'Rohan will not come now.  
Or if they come, it will not avail us. The new host that we had  tidings  of 
has come first, from over  the River by way of Andros, it is said.  They are 
strong: battalions of Orcs of the Eye, and  countless companies of Men of  a  
new sort that  we have not met before. Not tall, but broad and grim, bearded 
like dwarves, wielding great axes. Out of some savage land in the  wide East  
they come, we  deem. They hold  the northward road; and  many have passed 
on 
into Anurien. The Rohirrim cannot come.' 
     The Gate was shut. All night watchmen on the  walls heard the rumour of 
the enemy that roamed outside,  burning field  and tree, and  hewing any man 
that they found abroad, living or  dead. The numbers that had already passed  
over the River  could not be guessed  in the darkness, but when  morning, or  
its  dim shadow,  stole over the plain, it was seen that  even fear by night 
had  scarcely over -counted them.  The plain was  dark  with  their  marching 
companies, and as far as eyes could strain in the  mirk there sprouted, like 
a  foul fungus-growth, all about the beleaguered  city great camps of tents, 
black or sombre red. 
     Busy as ants hurrying orcs were digging, digging lines of deep trenches 
in a huge ring, just out of bowshot from the walls; and as the trenches were 

####-made each was filled with fire, though how it was  kindled or fed, by art or  
devilry, none could see.  All day the labour  went forward, while the men of 
Minas Tirith  looked  on, unable to hinder it. And as each  length of trench 
was  completed,  they  could see great wains approaching; and soon yet  more 
companies of the enemy were swiftly setting up, each behind  the cover of  a  
trench, great engines for the casting of missiles. There were  none upon the 
City walls large enough to reach so far or to stay the work. 
     At  first  men laughed and did   not greatly fear  such devices. For the 
main  wall of  the City was of great height and  marvellous thickness, built 
ere the power and craft of N®menor waned in exile; and its outward  face was 
like  to the Tower  of  Orthanc,  hard and dark and smooth, unconquerable by 
steel or  fire, unbreakable except  by some  convulsion that would rend  the 
very earth on which it stood. 
     'Nay,'  they said,  'not if  the Nameless One himself should come,  not 
even he could enter here while  we yet live.'  But some answered: 'While  we 
yet live? How long? He has  a weapon that has brought low many strong places 
since the world began. Hunger. The roads are cut. Rohan will not come.' 
     But the engines did not waste shot upon the indomitable wall. It was no 
brigand or orc-chieftain that ordered the assault upon the Lord  of Mordor's 
greatest  foe. A  power and mind of malice guided  it. As soon as  the great 
catapults were set, with many yells and the creaking of rope and winch, they 
began to throw  missiles marvellou sly high, so that they passed  right above 
the  battlement and fell thudding  within the first circle of  the City; and 
many of them by some secret art burst into flame as they came toppling down. 
     Soon there  was great peril of fire behind the wall,  and all who could 
be spared  were busy quelling the flames that sprang up in many places. Then 
among the greater casts  there  fell  another hail, less  ruinous  but  more 
horrible. All about the streets and lanes behind the Gate  it tumbled  down, 
small round shot that did not burn. But when men ran  to learn what it might  
be, they cried aloud or wept.  For the enemy was flinging into  the City all 
the heads of  those who had  fallen fighting at Osgiliath, or on the Rammas,  
or  in the fields. They were grim to look on; for though some  were  crushed 
and shapeless, and some had  been cruelly hewn, yet  many had  features that 
could be told,  and  it  seemed that  they  had  died in pain;  and all were 
branded with  the foul token of the Lidless Eye. But marred  and dishonoured 
as  they were, it often chanced  that thus a man would see again the face of 
someone  that he had known, who had  walked proudly once in arms,  or tilled 

####-the fields, or ridden in upon a holiday from the green vales in the hills.  
     In vain men shook  their fists at the pitiless foes that swarmed before 
the Gate. Curses they heeded not, nor understood the tongues of western men; 
crying with harsh voices like beasts and  carrion-birds. But soon there were 
few left in Minas Tirith who had the heart to stand up and defy the hosts of 
Mordor.  For yet another weapon, swifter than hunger,  the Lord of the  Dark 
Tower had: dread and despair. 
     The Nazgyl came again, and  as  their  Dark Lord now grew and put forth  
his strength, so their voices, which uttered only his  will and  his malice, 
were filled with  evil and  horror. Ever they circled  above the  City, like 
vultures that expect their fill of doomed men's flesh. Out of sight and shot 
they  flew, and yet were ever present, and their deadly voices rent the air. 
More unbearable they became, not  less, at each new cry.  At length even the 
stout-hearted would  fling  themselves to the  ground as the  hidden  menace 
passed  over  them,  or they would  stand, letting  their  weapons fall from 
nerveless hands while into their minds a blackness came, and they thought no 
more of war, but only of hiding and of crawling, and of death. 
     During all this black day Faramir  lay  upon his bed  in the chamber of 
the White Tower, wandering  in  a  desperate fever; dying someone  said, and 
soon  'dying' all men were saying upon  the walls and in the streets. And by 
him his father sat, and said nothing, but watched, and gave  no  longer  any 
heed to the defence. 
     No  hours  so dark had  Pippin known, not  even in the clutches  of the 
Uruk-hai. It was  his duty to wait upon the Lord, and wait he did, forgotten 
it seemed, standing by  the  door of the unlit  chamber, mastering  his  own 
fears as best he could. And as  he  watched, it seemed to him that  Denethor  
grew old before his eyes, as if something had snapped in his proud will, and 
his stern mind was  overthrown. Grief maybe had wrought it, and  remorse. He 
saw tears on that once tearless face, more unbearable than wrath. 
     'Do not weep, lord,' he stammered. 'Perhaps he will get well. Have  you  
asked Gandalf?' 
     'Comfort me  not  with wizards!' said Denethor.  'The  fool's  hope has 
failed.  The Enemy has  found it, and now his power waxes; he sees  our very 
thoughts, and all we do is ruinous. 
     'I sent my  son forth,  unthanked, unblessed, out  into needless peril, 
and here he lies with poison in his veins. Nay, nay, whatever may now betide 
in war, my line too is  ending, even the House  of the Stewards  has failed. 

####-Mean  folk shall rule  the last remnant of the Kings of Men, lurking in  the 
hills until all are hounded out.' 
     Men came to the  door crying for the Lord of the City. 'Nay, I will not 
come down,' he said. 'I must stay beside my son. He might still speak before 
the end. But that is near. Follow whom you will,  even the Grey Fool, though 
his hope has failed. Here I stay.' 
     So it was that Gandalf took command of the last defence of the City  of 
Gondor.  Wherever he came  men's  hearts would  lift  again,  and the winged 
shadows pass from memory. Tirelessly he strode  from Citadel to  Gate,  from 
north to south about the wall; and with him went the Prince of Dol Amroth in 
his shining mail. For he and his knights still held themselves like lords in 
whom the race  of N®menor  ran   true. Men that  saw them  whispered  saying: 
'Belike the old tales speak well; there is Elvish blood in the veins of that 
folk, for the people of Nimrodel dwelt in that land once long ago.' And then 
one would sing amid the gloom  some staves of the Lay of Nimrodel, or  other  
songs of the Vale of Anduin out of vanished years.  
     And  yet  - when they had  gone, the shadows closed  on  men  again, and  
their hearts  went cold, and the valour of Gondor  withered into ash. And so 
slowly  they passed out of  a  dim  day  of  fears  into  the darkness of  a  
desperate night. Fires  now raged unchecked in the first circle of the City, 
and the garrison upon the outer wall was already in many places cut off from 
retreat.  But the  faithful who remained there at their  posts were few; most  
had fled beyond the second gate. 
     Far behind the  battle the  River had been swiftly bridged, and all day 
more  force  and  gear of  war had poured across. Now at last  in the middle 
night  the  assault was loosed. The vanguard  passed through the trenches of 
fire by many devious paths that had been  left between  them. On  they came, 
reckless of their loss as they  approached, still bunched and herded, within 
the  range of  bowmen on the  wall. But indeed  there were too few  now  left  
there to do them great damage, though the  light of the fires showed up many 
a mark for archers of such skill as Gondor once had boasted. Then perceiving 
that the valour of the City was already beaten down, the  hidden Captain put 
forth his strength. Slowly the great siege-towers  built in Osgiliath rolled 
forward through the dark. 
     Messengers came again to the chamber in the White Tower, and Pippin let 
them enter,  for  they were  urgent. Denethor  turned  his head slowly  from 
Faramir's face, and  looked at them silently. 

####-     'The first circle of  the City is burning, lord,'  they said. 'What are 
your  commands?  You are  still  the  Lord and Steward.  Not all will follow 
Mithrandir. Men are flying from the walls and leaving them unmanned.' 
     'Why? Why do the fools fly?' said Denethor. 'Better to burn sooner than 
late, for burn we must. Go back to your bonfire! And I? I will go now to  my  
pyre. To my  pyre! No tomb for Denethor  and Faramir. No tomb! No  long 
slow 
sleep of death embalmed. We wil l burn like heathen kings before  ever a ship 
sailed hither from the West. The West has failed. Go back and burn!' 
     The messengers without bow or answer turned and fled. 
     Now Denethor  stood up and released the fevered hand of Faramir that he 
had held. 'He is burning, already burning,' he said sadly. 'The house of his 
spirit crumbles.' Then stepping softly towards Pippin he looked down at him. 
     'Farewell!' he said. 'Farewell, Peregrin  son of Paladin!  Your service 
has  been short,  and now  it is drawing to an end.  I release you from  the 
little that remains. Go now, and die in what way seems best to you. And with 
whom you will, even that friend whose  folly brought you to this death. Send 
for my servants and then go. Farewell!' 
     'I will  not say  farewell, my  lord,' said  Pippin kneeling.  And then 
suddenly  hobbit-like  once more, he stood up  and looked the old man in the  
eyes. 'I will  take your leave, sir,' he said;  'for  I want to  see Gandalf 
very much indeed. But he is no fool; and I will  not think of dying until he 
despairs of life.  But  from my word  and your service I do  not  wish to be 
released while you live. And if they come at last to the Citadel,  I hope to 
be here and stand beside you and earn  perhaps the arms that you have  given 
me.' 
     'Do as  you  will,  Master  Halfling,' said Denethor.  'But  my life is 
broken. Send for my servants!' He turned back to Faramir. 
     Pippin left him and called for the servants, and they came: six  men of 
the household, strong and fair; yet they trembled  at the summons. But in  a  
quiet voice  Denethor bade them lay warm coverlets on Faramir's bed and take 
it up. And they  did  so, and  lifting  up the  bed  they  bore it from  the 
chamber. Slowly they paced to trouble the fevered man as little as might be,  
and Denethor, now bending on a staff, followed them; and last came Pippin.  
     Out from the White Tower they walked, as if to a funeral,  out into the 
darkness,  where the overhanging cloud was lit beneath with flickers of dull  
red.  Softly they paced the  great  courtyard,  and  at a word from Denethor  

####-halted beside the Withered Tree. 
     All was silent, save for the rumour of war in the City down  below, and 
they heard the  water  dripping sadly  from  the dead branches into the  dark 
pool. Then they went on through the Citadel gate, where the  sentinel stared  
at  them in wonder and dismay as they passed by.  Turning westward they came 
at length to  a door in the rearward wall of the sixth circle. Fen Hollen it 
was called, for it was kept ever shut save at times of funeral, and only the 
Lord of  the  City might use that  way, or those who  bore the token of  the 
tombs and tended the houses of the  dead. Beyond it went a winding road that 
descended in  many curves down  to the  narrow  land  under  the  shadow  of 
Mindolluin's  precipice  where stood the mansions of the dead Kings  and  of 
their Stewards.  
     A porter  sat in a  little house beside  the way,  and with fear in his 
eyes he came  forth bearing  a lantern in his hand. At the Lord's command he 
unlocked the door, and  silently it  swung  back; and  they passed  through, 
taking  the lantern from his  hand. It was dark on the climbing road between 
ancient  walls  and   many -pillared   balusters   looming  in  the   swaying 
lantern-beam. Their  slow feet echoed as  they walked down,  down, until  at 
last they came to  the Silent Street,  Rath  Dnnen, between  pale  domes and 
empty halls and images of men long dead;  and they entered into the House of 
the Stewards and set down their burden. 
     There  Pippin,  staring uneasily about  him, saw that he was in  a wide 
vaulted chamber,  draped as it  were with the great shadows that  the little 
lantern threw upon its shrouded  walls. And dimly to  be seen were many rows 
of tables, carved of marble;  and upon each table lay a sleeping form, hands 
folded, head pillowed upon stone. But one table near at hand stood broad and 
bare. Upon it at a sign from Denethor they laid Faramir  and his father side 
by side, and covered them with one covering, and stood then with bowed heads 
as mourners beside a bed of death. Then Denethor spoke in a low voice. 
     'Here we will wait,' he said. 'But send not for the embalmers. Bring us 
wood quick to  burn, and lay it all about us, and beneath; and pour oil upon 
it. And when I bid you thrust in  a torch. Do this and speak no more to  me. 
Farewell!' 
     'By your leave, lord!' said Pippin and turned and fled  in terror  from 
the  deathly house. 'Poor Faramir!' he thought.  'I must find Gandalf.  Poor 
Faramir!  Quite likely he needs medicine  more than  tears.  Oh, where can I  
find Gandalf? In the thick of things, I suppose; and he will have no time to 

####-spare for dying men or madmen.' 
     At the door he turned to one  of the servants who had remained on guard 
there.  'Your master is not himself,' he  said. 'Go slow! Bring  no fire  to 
this place while Faramir lives! Do nothing until Gandalf comes!' 
     'Who is  the  master  of  Minas  Tirith?' the  man  answered. 'The Lord 
Denethor or the Grey Wanderer?' 
     'The Grey Wanderer or no one, it would seem,' said Pippin, and he  sped 
back and up the winding way as swiftly as his feet would carry him, past the 
astonished porter, out through  the door, and on, till he came near the gate 
of the Citadel. The sentinel hailed him as he went by, and he recognized the 
voice of Beregond. 
     'Whither do you run, Master Peregrin?' he cried. 
     'To find Mithrandir,' Pippin answered. 
     'The Lord's errands are urgent and should not be hindered by me,'  said 
Beregond;  'but tell  me quickly, if you may:  what goes forward? Whither has 
my  Lord gone? I have just come on duty, but I  heard that he passed towards 
the Closed Door, and men were bearing Faramir before him.' 
     'Yes,' said Pippin, 'to the Silent Street.' 
     Beregond bowed his  head  to  hide his tears.  'They said that  he  was 
dying,' he sighed, 'and now he is dead.' 
     'No,' said Pippin, 'not yet. And even now his death might be prevented, 
I think. But the Lord of  the City, Beregond,  has fallen before his city is 
taken. He is fey and dangerous.' Quickly he told of Denethor's strange words 
and deeds. 'I must find Gandalf at once.' 
     'Then you must go down to the battle.' 
     'I  know. The Lord has given me  leave. But,  Beregond, if you can,  do 
someth ing to stop any dreadful thing happening.' 
     'The Lord  does not permit those who wear the black and silver to leave 
their post for any cause, save at his own command.' 
     'Well,  you  must  choose between orders and the life of Faramir,' said 
Pippin.   'And as for orders,  I think you  have a madman to deal with, not a  
lord. I must run. I will return if I can.' 
     He ran on,  down, down towards the outer city. Men flying back from the 
burning passed him, and some  seeing his livery turned  and shouted, but  he 
paid no heed. At last he was through  the Second Gate,  beyond  which  great 
fires  leaped up between the walls. Yet it seemed strangely silent. No noise 
or shouts of battle or din of arms could be heard. Then suddenly there was a  

####-dreadful cry a nd a great shock,  and a deep echoing boom. Forcing himself on 
against a gust of fear and horror that shook him almost to his knees. Pippin 
turned a  corner opening on the wide place behind  the City Gate. He stopped 
dead. He had found Gandalf; but he shrank back, cowering into a shadow.  
     Ever since the middle  night the  great assault had gone  on. The drums 
rolled. To the  north and to the  south company upon company  of  the  enemy 
pressed to the walls. There came great beasts, like moving houses in the red  
and fitful light, the mymakil  of  the Harad dragging through the lanes  amid 
the fires huge towers and engines. Yet their Captain cared not  greatly what 
they  did or how many might be slain:  their purpose was  only to  test  the 
strength of the defence and to  keep the men  of Gondor busy in many places.  
It was against the Gate that he would throw his heaviest weight. Very strong 
it might be, wrought of steel and iron, and guarded with towers and bastions 
of indomitable stone, yet it was the key, the weakest point in all that high 
and impenetrable wall. 
     The drums  rolled louder. Fires leaped up. Great engines crawled across 
the field; and in the midst was a huge ram, great as a forest -tree a hundred 
feet in length,  swinging on mighty chains. Long had  it been forging in the 
dark smithies  of Mordor, and  its hideous head, founded of black steel, was 
shaped in  the likeness of a ravening wolf; on it spells of  ruin lay. Grond 
they named it,  in memory of  the Hammer of the  Underworld  of  old.  Great 
beasts drew it,  Orcs surrounded  it, and  behind  walked mountain-trolls to 
wield it. 
     But about the Gate resistance still was stout, and there the knights of 
Dol Amroth and the hardiest of the garrison stood at bay. Shot and dart fell 
thick; siege-towers crashed or blazed  suddenly like torches. All before the 
walls on either side of the Gate the  ground was choked  with wreck and with 
bodies of the slain; yet still driven as by a madness more and more came up.  
     Grond crawled on. Upon  its housing no fire would catch; and though now 
and again some great beast that  hauled it would go  mad and spread stamping 
ruin among  the  orcs  innumerable  that guarded  it, their bodies were cast  
aside from its path and others took their place. 
     Grond crawled on. The drums  rolled wildly. Over the  hills of slain  a  
hideous shape appeared: a horseman, tall,  hooded, cloaked in black. Slowly, 
trampling the fallen,  he rode forth, heeding no  longer any dart. He halted 
and held up  a long pale sword. And as he did so a great  fear  fell on all, 
defender  and foe alike; and the hands of men drooped to their sides, and no  

####-bow sang. For a moment all was still. 
     The drums rolled and rattled. With a vast rush Grond was hurled forward 
by  huge hands. It reached the Gate. It  swung. A  deep boom rumbled through 
the City like thunder running in the clouds. But the doors of iron and posts 
of steel withstood the stroke. 
     Then  the  Black Captain rose  in  his  stirrups and  cried  aloud in a  
dreadful voice, speaking in some forgotten tongue words of power and  terror 
to rend both heart and stone. 
     Thrice he cried.  Thrice  the great ram boomed.  And suddenly  upon the 
last  stroke the Gate of Gondor broke. As if stricken by some blasting spell 
it burst asunder:  there  was  a flash of searing  lightning, and the  doors 
tumbled in riven fragments to the ground. 
     In rode the Lord  of the Nazgyl. A great black  shape against the fires 
beyond he loomed up, grown  to a vast menace of despair. In rode the Lord of 
the Nazgyl, under  the  archway that no  enemy ever yet had  passed, and all  
fled before his face. 
     All save one. There waiting,  silent and still in the  space before the 
Gate, sat Gandalf upon Shadowfax: Shadowfax who alone  among the free 
horses 
of  the earth endured the terror, unmoving,  steadfast as  a graven image in 
Rath Dnnen. 
     'You  cannot enter here,' said Gandalf, and the huge shadow halted. 'Go 
back to the abyss prepared  for you! Go back! Fall into the nothingness that 
awaits you and your Master. Go!' 
     The Black Rider flung back his hood, and behold! he had a kingly crown;  
and yet upon no head visible was it set. The red fires  shone between it and 
the mantled shoulders vast and dark. From a mouth unseen there came a deadly 
laughter. 
     'Old fool!' he  said. 'Old fool! This is my hour. Do you not know Death 
when you see it? Die  now and curse in vain!' And  with that he lifted  high 
his sword and flames ran down the blade. 
     Gandalf did  not move.  And in that  very moment,  away  behind in some 
courtyard  of the City, a cock crowed. Shrill and clear  he crowed,  recking 
nothing of wizardry or war, welcoming  only  the morning that in the sky far  
above the shadows of death was coming with the dawn. 
     And  as  if in  answer there  came from far away  another note.  Horns,  
horns, horns. In dark Mindolluin's sides  they dimly  echoed. Great horns of 

####-the North wildly blowing. Rohan had come at last. 

####- 
 

Chapter 5. The Ride of the Rohirrim 

 
 
     It was dark and Merry could see  nothing as he lay on the ground rolled 
in a blanket; yet  though the night was airless and windless, all  about him 
hidden  trees were sighing  softly. He lifted  his  head.  Then he heard  it 
again: a  sound like faint drums in the wooded hills and mountain-steps. The 
throb would cease suddenly and then be taken up again  at some other  point, 
now nearer, now further off. He wondered if the watchmen had heard it. 
     He  could not see  them,  but he  knew  that  all  round  him were  the 
companies of the Rohirrim. He could smell the horses in  the dark, and could 
hear their shiftings  and their soft stamping on  the needle-covered ground. 
The host  was bivouacked in  the  pine-woods that  clustered about  Eilenach  
Beacon, a tall  hill standing up from  the long ridges of the Dr®adan Forest  
that lay beside the great road in East Anurien. 
     Tired as he was Merry could not sleep. He had ridden now  for four days 
on end,  and the ever -deepening gloom had slowly  weighed down his heart. He 
began to wonder   why he had been so  eager to come,  when he had  been given 
every excuse, even his lord's command, to  stay behind. He wondered, too, if 
the  old  King knew  that he had been disobeyed and  was angry. Perhaps not. 
There seemed  to be  some understanding   between Dernhelm  and Elfhelm,  
the 
Marshal  who commanded  the  jored in which they were riding. He and all  his 
men ignored Merry and  pretended not to hear if he spoke. He might have been 
just  another bag that  Dernhelm was  carrying. Dernhelm was  no comfort: he 
never spoke to anyone. Merry felt small, unwanted, and  lonely. Now the time 
was anxious, and  the host was in peril.  They were less than a  day's  ride 
from the out-walls of Minas Tirith  that encircled the townlands. Scouts had 
been sent ahead. Some  had not returned.  Others hastening back had reported 
that the  road was  held in  force against  them.  A  host  of the enemy was 
encamped upon it, three miles west of Amon Don, and some strength of men 
was 
already  thrusting along the road  and  was no more than three  leagues away.  
Orcs were roving in  the hills  and  woods along the  roadside. The king and  
Jomer held council in the watches of the night. 
     Merry  wanted somebody to  talk to, and he thought of Pippin.  But that 

####-only increased his  restlessness. Poor Pippin, shut up in the great city  of 
stone,  lonely and  afraid. Merry wished he was a tall Rider  like Jomer and 
could  blow  a horn or something and go galloping to his rescue.  He sat up, 
listening  to the  drums  that  were  beating again,  now  nearer  at  hand. 
Presently  he  heard  voices  speaking  low, and  he  saw  dim half-shrouded  
lanterns passing  through the trees. Men nearby began to move uncertainly in 
the dark. 
     A tall figure loomed up and stumbled over  him, cu rsing the tree-roots.  
He recognized the voice of the Marshal, Elfhelm. 
     'I am not a tree-root, Sir,' he said, 'nor a bag, but a bruised hobbit. 
The least you can do in amends is to tell me what is afoot.' 
     'Anything that  can keep so  in this  devi l's mirk,' answered  Elfhelm. 
'But my lord sends word that we must  set ourselves in readiness: orders may 
come for a sudden move.' 
     'Is  the enemy coming then?' asked Merry  anxiously.  'Are those  their 
drums? I began to think I was  imagining them, as no one else seemed to take 
any notice of them.' 
     'Nay, nay,' said  Elfhelm, 'the enemy  is on the road not in the hills.  
You hear the Woses, the Wild Men of the Woods: thus they talk together  from 
afar. They still haunt Dr®adan Forest, it is said. Remnants of an older time 
they be, living few and  secretly, wild and wary as the beasts. They go  not 
to war with Gondor or  the Mark; but  now they  are troubled by the darkness 
and the  coming of the orcs:  they fear lest the Dark Years be returning, as 
seems  likely enough.  Let us be thankful that they are  not hunting us: for  
they use poisoned  arrows,  it is  said,  and  they  are  woodcrafty  beyond 
compare. But  they have offered their services to  Thjoden. Even now one  of 
their headmen is being taken to  the king. Yonder  go the lights.  So much I 
have heard but no more. And now I must busy myself with my  lord's 
commands. 
Pack yourself up, Master Bag!' He vanished into the shadows.  
     Merry did not like this talk of wild men  and poisoned darts, but quite 
apart from that a great weight of dread  was on him. Waiting was unbearable. 
He  longed to know  what was going to happen. He got up and soon was 
walking 
warily in pursuit of the last lantern before it disappeared among the trees.  
     Presently he came to an open  space  where a small tent had been set up 
for the king under a great tree. A large lantern, covered above, was hanging 

####-from a bough and cast  a  pale circle of  light below. There sat Thjoden and 
Jomer, and before  them  on the ground sat a strange  squat shape of a  man,  
gnarled as an old  stone, and the hairs of his scanty beard straggled on his 
lumpy chin like  dry  moss.  He was  short-legged and fat-armed,  thick  and 
stumpy, and  clad only  with grass about his waist. Merry  felt  that he  had 
seen  him  before  somewhere, and suddenly  he remembered  the  P®kel-men 
of 
Dunharrow. Here  was one of those old  images  brought to life, or  maybe  a 
creature descended  in true line through endless years from the models  used 
by the forgotten craftsmen long ago. 
     There was  a silence as Merry crept nearer, and then the Wild Man began 
to speak, in answer to some  question, it  seemed.  His  voice  was deep and 
guttural,  yet to Merry's  surprise he spoke  the Common Speech, though in a 
halting fashion, and uncouth words were mingled with it. 
     'No, father of  Horse-men,' he  said,  'we fight not. Hunt  only.  Kill 
gorgyn  in woods, hate orc-folk. You hate gorgyn too. We help as we can. Wild 
Men have long ears and long eyes; know all  paths. Wild Men live here before 
Stone-houses; before Tall Men come up out of Water.' 
     'But our need is for aid in battle,' said Jomer. 'How will you and your 
folk help us?' 
     'Bring news,' said  the Wild Man. 'We look out from hills. We climb big 
mountain  and look down.  Stone-city is shut. Fire burns there  outside; now 
inside too. You  wish to come there? Then you must be  quick. But gorgyn and 
men out  of  far-away,'  he waved a  short gnarled  arm  eastward,  'sit  on 
horse-road. Very many, mor e than Horse-men.' 
     'How do you know that?' said Jomer. 
     The old man's flat face and dark eyes showed nothing, but his voice was 
sullen  with displeasure.  'Wild  men are wild, free, but not  children,' he 
answered. 'I am great headman, Ghvn-buri-Ghvn. I count many things: stars in 
sky, leaves  on trees, men in  the dark. You have a score of scores  counted 
ten  times and five. They  have more.  Big fight, and who will win? And many 
more walk round walls of Stone-houses.' 
     'Alas! he speaks all too shrewdly,' said  Thjoden. 'And our scouts  say 
that they have  cast trenches  and  stakes across the road.  We cannot sweep 
them away in sudden onset.' 
     'And yet we need great haste,' said Jomer. 'Mundburg is on fire!' 
     'Let Ghvn-buri-Ghvn finish!' said the Wild Man. 'More than one road  he  

####-knows. He will lead you by road where no pits are, no gorgyn walk, only Wild 
Men  and  beasts. Many paths were  made  when Stonehouse-folk were 
stronger. 
They carved  hills as  hunters carve beast -flesh.  Wild  Men  think they ate 
stone for food. They  went through Dr®adan  to Rimmon with great wains. 
They 
go  no longer. Road is forgotten, but not by Wild  Men. Over hill and behind 
hill it  lies still  under grass and tree, there behind Rimmon  and down  to 
Don, and back at the  end to  Horse -men's road. Wild Men will show  you that 
road. Then you will kill gorgyn  and drive away bad dark  with  bright iron, 
and Wild Men can go back to sleep in the wild woods.' 
     Jomer  and  the king  spoke  together  in their  own  tongue. At length 
Thjoden turned to the Wild Man.   'We will receive your offer,' he said.  'For  
though we leave a host of foes behind, what matter? If the Stone-city falls, 
then we shall  have  no returning. If it  is saved, then the orc-host itself 
will be cut off. If you are faithful, Ghvn-buri-Ghvn, then we will  give you  
rich reward, and you shall have the friendship of the Mark for ever.' 
     'Dead  men are not friends to living men, and give them no gifts,' said 
the Wild Man.  'But if you live after the Darkness, then leave Wild Men alone 
in the woods and do  not hunt them like beasts any more. Ghvn-buri-Ghvn will 
not lead  you into trap. He will go himself with father of Horse-men, and if 
he leads you wrong, you will kill him.' 
     'So be it!' said Thjoden. 
     'How long will it take to pass by the enemy and come back to the road?' 
asked Jomer. 'We must go at foot-pace, if you guide us; and  I doubt not the 
way is narrow.' 
     'Wild Men go quick on feet,' said Ghvn. 'Way is wide for four horses in 
Stonewain  Valley  yonder,'  he waved his hand southwards;  'but  narrow  at 
beginning and at end.  Wild  Man could walk from here to Don between sunrise 
and noon.' 
     'Then we must allow at least seven hours for the leaders,' said  Jomer; 
'but  we must reckon rather on some ten hours for all. Things unforeseen may 
hinder us, and if our host is all strung out, it will be long  ere it can be 
set in order when we issue from the hills. What is the hour now?' 
     'Who knows?' said Thjoden. 'All is night now.' 
     'It is all dark, but  it is not all night.' said Ghvn.  'When Sun comes 
we   feel   her,  even  when  she   is  hidden.   Already  she  climbs  over  

####-East -mountains. It is the opening of day in the sky-fields.' 
     'Then  we must  set  out  as soon as may be,' said Jomer.  'Even so  we 
cannot hope to come to Gondor's aid today.' 
     Merry waited to  hear  no  more, but slipped away to get ready for  the 
summons to the march. This was  the last stage before the battle. It did not 
seem  likely to him  that  many of them would survive it. But he thought  of 
Pippin and the flames in Minas Tirith and thrust down his own dread. 
     All  went well that day, and no sight  or sound had  they  of the enemy 
waiting to waylay them. The Wild Men had put  out a screen  of wary hunters,  
so that no orc or roving spy should learn of the movements in the hills. The 
light was more dim  than ever as they drew nearer to  the  beleaguered city, 
and the Riders  passed  in long files like dark shadows  of men and  hor ses. 
Each  company  was guided by  a wild woodman; but old Ghvn walked beside 
the 
king. The  start had been slower than was  hoped, for it had  taken time for  
the Riders, walking and leading their horses, to find paths over the thickly 
wooded ridges behind   their camp  and down into the hidden Stonewain Valley. 
It was  late in the afternoon  when the leaders came  to wide  grey thickets 
stretching beyond the eastward side of  Amon Don, and masking a great gap in 
the line of hills that from Nardol to Don ran east and west. Through the gap 
the forgotten wain-road long ago had run down,  back into the main horse -way 
from the City  through Anurien; but now for many lives of men  trees had had 
their way with  it, and it had vanished, broken and buried under  the leaves 
of uncounted years. But  the  thickets offered to the Riders their last hope 
of cover before they went into open battle; for beyond them lay the road and 
the plains  of Anduin,  while east and southwards  the slopes  were bare and  
rocky,  as the writhen hills  gathered  themselves  together and climbed up, 
bastion upon bastion, into the great mass and shoulders of Mindolluin. 
     The leading company was halted, and as those behind filed up out of the 
trough of the Stonewain Valley they spread out  a nd passed to camping-places 
under the grey trees. The king  summoned the captains to council. Jomer sent 
out scouts to spy upon the road; but old Ghvn shook his head. 
     'No good to send Horse-men,' he said. 'Wild Men  have already  seen all 
that can be seen in the bad air. They will come soon and speak to me here.' 
     The  captains came;  and  then  out of  the  trees crept  warily  other  
p®kel-shapes so like old Ghvn that Merry  could hardly tell them apart. They 
spoke to Ghvn in a strange throaty language. 

####-     Presently Ghvn turned to the king. 'Wild Men say many things ' he said. 
'First, be wary! Still many  men in camp beyond Don, an hour's walk yonder,' 
he waved  his arm west  towards the black beacon. 'But  none  to see between 
here and Stone-folk's new walls. Many busy  there. Walls stand up no longer: 
gorgyn  knock them down with earth -thunder and with clubs of black iron. They 
are unwary and do not  look about  them. They think  their friends watch all  
roads!' At that old  Ghvn made a curious gurgling noise, and it seemed  that 
he was laughing. 
     'Good tidings!' cried Jomer. 'Even in this gloom hope gleams again. Our 
Enemy's devices  oft serve us in his  despite.  The accursed darkness itself 
has been a cloak to us. And now, lusting to destroy Gondor and throw it down 
stone from stone, his  orcs have  taken away  my greatest fear. The out-wall 
could have been held long against us. Now we  can sweep through - if once we 
win so far.' 
     'Once again I thank you, Ghvn-buri-Ghvn of  the woods,'  said  Thjoden.  
'Good fortune go with you for tidings and for guidance!' 
     'Kill  gorgyn! Kill orc-folk! No other words please Wild Men ' answered  
Ghvn. 'Drive away bad air and darkness with bright iron!' 
     'To do these things we have ridden far,'  said the king,  'and we shall 
attempt them. But what we shall achieve only tomorrow will show.' 
     Ghvn-buri-Ghvn  squatted down and touched the earth with his horny brow 
in token of farewell. Then he got up as if to depart.  But suddenly he stood 
looking u p like some startled  woodland  animal snuffling  a  strange air. A 
light came in his eyes.  
     'Wind  is  changing!' he cried, and  with  that, in a  twinkling as  it 
seemed, he and his fellows had vanished into the glooms, never to be seen by 
any Rider of Rohan again. Not long after far away  eastward  the faint drums 
throbbed again. Yet  to no heart in all the host came any fear that the Wild 
Men were unfaithful, strange and unlovely though they might appear. 
     'We need  no further  guidance,' said E lfhelm; 'for there are riders in 
the host who have ridden down to Mundburg in days of peace. I for  one. When 
we come to  the road it will veer south, and there will lie before  us still 
seven leagues ere we reach the wall of the townlands. Along most of that way 
there  is  much  grass  on  either side  of  the road. On that  stretch  the 
errand-riders of  Gondor reckoned to  make their greatest speed. We may ride 
it swiftly and without great rumour.' 
     'Then  since we  must  look  for  fell deeds and  the  need  of all our 

####-strength,' said Jomer,  'I  counsel that we  rest now, and set out hence  by 
night, and so  time our going that we come upon the fields  when tomorrow is 
as light as it will be, or when our lord gives the signal.' 
     To this the king  assented, and the captains departed. But soon Elfhelm 
returned.  'The scouts  have found naught  to  report beyond  the grey wood, 
lord,' he said, 'save two men only: two dead men and two dead horses.' 
     'Well?' said Jomer. 'What of it?' 
     'This, lord: they were errand-riders  of  Gondor; Hirgon was one maybe. 
At least his hand  still clasped  the Red Arrow, but his head was  hewn off. 
And this  also:  it would  seem by the signs that they were fleeing westward 
when they fell. As I read it, they found the enemy already on the  out-wall, 
or assailing it, when they  returned - and that would  be two nights ago, if 
they  used  fresh  horses  from the posts, as is their wont. They  could not 
reach the City and turned back.' 
     'Alas!' said  Thjoden. 'T hen  Denethor has heard  no news of our riding 
and will despair of our coming.' 
     'Need brooks no delay, yet late is better than never,' said Jomer. 'And 
mayhap in this time shall the old saw be proved truer than ever before since  
men spoke with mouth.' 
     It was night. On either side of the  road the  host of Rohan was moving 
silently.  Now  the  road  passing  about the skirts  of  Mindolluin  turned 
southward. Far away and almost straight ahead there was a red glow under the 
black sky and  the sides of the great mountain  loomed dark against it. They  
were drawing near the Rammas of the Pelennor; but the day was not yet come. 
     The  king rode in the  midst  of the leading company, his household-men 
about him. Elfhelm's  jored came  next; and now Merry noticed  that  Dernhelm 
had left his place and in the darkness was moving steadily forward, until at 
last he was riding  just  in rear of the  king's guard. There came  a check. 
Merry  heard voices  in front speaking softly.  Out-riders had come back who 
had ventured forward almost to the wall. They came to the king. 
     'There are great  fires, lord,'  said one. 'The City is  all set  about 
with flame, and the field  is full of foes.  But all seem drawn off  to  the 
assault. As well as we could guess, there  are  few left  upon the out-wall, 
and they are heedless, busy in destruction.' 
     'Do you remember the  Wild Man's words,  lord?' said another.  'I  live 
upon the open Wold in days of peace;  Wndfara is my name, and to me also the 
air brings messages. Already the  wind  is turning. There comes a breath out 

####-of the South;  there  is a sea -tang in it, faint  though it be.  The morning 
will bring new things.  Above  the reek  it will  be dawn  when you pass the 
wall.' 
     'If  you speak truly, Wndfara, then  may  you live beyond  this day  in 
years of blessedness!' said Thjoden.  He turned to the  men of his household 
who were  near, and he spoke now  in a clear voice  so that many also of the 
riders of the first jored heard him: 
     'Now is the hour come, Riders of the Mark, sons  of Eorl! Foes and fire 
are before you,  and your homes far  behind.  Yet, though you fight upon  an 
alien field, the glory that you reap there shall be your own for ever. Oaths 
ye  have  taken:  now fulfil them  all,  to  lord  and  land  and league  of 
friendship!' 
     Men clashed spear upon shield. 
     'Jomer, my son! You  lead the first jored,' said Thjoden; 'and it shall 
go behind the king's banner in the centre. Elfhelm, lead your company to the 
right when we pass the wall.  And  Grimbold shall lead his towards the left. 
Let  the other companies behind follow these three that lead,  as  they have 
chance.  Strike wherever the  enemy gathers. Other plans we cannot make, for  
we know  not  yet  how things  stand upon the field.  Forth now, and fear no  
darkness!' 
     The leading company rode off as swiftly as they could, for it was still 
deep dark,  whatever change Wndfara  might forebode. Merry was riding 
behind 
Dernhelm,  clutching  with the  left hand  while  with the other he tried to 
loosen his sword in its sheath. He felt now  bitterly  the  truth of the old 
king's  words: in such  a battle what would you do Meriadoc?  Just this,' he 
thought: 'encumber a rider, and hope at best to stay in my  seat and  not be 
pounded to death by galloping hoofs!' 
     It was no  more than a  league  to where the out-walls had stood.  They 
soon reached them; too soon for  Merry. Wild cries broke out, and  there was 
some clash of arms, but it was brief. The orcs busy about the walls were few  
and amazed, and they were quickly  slain or driven off. Before the  ruin  of 
the north-gate  in the Rammas the king halted again. The first  jored drew up 
behind  him and about him on either side.  Dernhelm kept close to the  king,  
though Elfhelm's company was away on  the right. Grimbold's men turned 
aside 
and passed round to a great gap in the wall further eastward. 

####-     Merry peered from behind Dernhelm's  back. Far away, maybe ten miles or  
more, there was a great burning, but between it and the Riders lines of fire 
blazed in  a vast crescent, at the nearest point less than a league distant. 
He could make out little more on the dark plain,  and as yet he  neither saw 
any hope of morning, nor felt any wind, changed or unchanged. 
     Now silently the host of Rohan moved forward  into the field of Gondor,  
pouring in slowly but steadily, like the rising  tide through breaches in  a  
dike  that men  have  thought secure.  But  the  mind  and will of the Black  
Captain were bent wholly on the falling city, and   as yet no tidings came to 
him warning that his designs held any flaw. 
     After a while the  king led  his  men away somewhat  eastward, to  come 
between  the  fires  of  the siege  and the outer  fields. Still  they  were 
unchallenged,  and  still Thjoden gave  no signal. At last  he  halted  once 
again. The City was now nearer. A smell of burning was in the air and a very 
shadow  of  death.  The horses were uneasy. But the king sat upon  Snowmane, 
motionless, gazing upon the agony of Minas Tirith,  as i f  stricken suddenly 
by  anguish, or by  dread.  He  seemed to shrink  down, cowed by  age. Merry 
himself  felt as  if a great weight of horror and doubt had settled  on him. 
His  heart  beat slowly. Time  seemed poised in  uncertainty. They  were too 
late! Too late was worse  than never! Perhaps Thjoden would  quail,  bow his 
old head, turn, slink away to hide in the hills.  
     Then suddenly Merry felt  it at  last, beyond doubt: a change. Wind was 
in his face! Light was glimmering. Far, far  away, in  the  South the clouds 
could be dimly seen as remote grey shapes, rolling up, drifting: morning lay 
beyond them. 
     But at that same moment  there was a flash, as if lightning  had sprung 
from the earth beneath the City. For a searing second it stood dazzling  far 
off in black and white, its topmost tower like a glittering needle: and then 
as the darkness closed  again  there came rolling over  the fields  a  great 
boom. 
     At that sound  the bent shape  of the king sprang suddenly  erect. Tall 
and  proud he seemed again; and  rising in his  stirrups he  cried in a loud 
voice, more clear than any there had ever heard a mortal man achieve before: 
     Arise, arise, Riders of Thjoden! 
     Fell deeds awake: fire and slaughter! 
     spear shall be shaken, shie ld be splintered, 
     a sword-day, a red day, ere the sun rises! 

####-     Ride now, ride now! Ride to Gondor! 
     With that he seized a great horn from Guthlbf his banner -bearer, and he 
blew such a blast  upon it  that it burst asunder. And  straightway all  the 
horns in the host were lifted up in music, and the  blowing  of the horns of 
Rohan  in that  hour was like a  storm  upon the plain and  a thunder in the 
mountains.  
     Ride now, ride now! Ride to Gondor! 
     Suddenly the king cried to Snowmane and the  horse sprang away.  Behind 
him his banner  blew in the wind,  white horse upon a field of green, but he 
outpaced it. After  him thundered the knights of his house,  but he was ever  
before them.  Jomer rode there, the white horsetail on his  helm floating in 
his speed, and the front of the first jored roared like a breaker foaming to 
the shore, but Thjoden  could  not  be overtaken.  Fey  he  seemed,  or  the 
battle-fury of his fathers ran  like new tire in his veins, and he was borne 
up on Snowmane lik e a god of old, even as Oroml the  Great in the battle  of 
the Valar when the world was young. His golden shield was uncovered, and lo!  
it shone like an image of the Sun, and the grass flamed into green about the 
white feet of his steed. For morning came, morning and a  wind from the sea; 
and  the darkness was  removed, and the hosts  of Mordor wailed,  and terror  
took them, and they fled,  and died, and the hoofs of  wrath rode over them. 
And then all the host of Rohan burst into song, and they sang  as they slew,  
for the  joy of battle was on  them, and the sound of their singing that was 
fair and terrible came even to the City. 
 

####- 

Chapter 6. The Battle of the Pelennor 
Fields 

 
 
     But  it was  no  orc-chieftain or  brigand that led  the  assault  upon 
Gondor. The darkness was breaking too soon, before the date  that his Master 
had set for it:  fortune had betrayed him for  the moment, and the world had 
turned against him; victory was slipping from his grasp even as he stretched 
out his  hand  to seize it.  But  his arm was long. He was still  in command, 
wielding  great  powers. King, Ringwraith,  Lord of the Nazgyl, he  had many 
weapons. He left the Gate and vanished. 
     Thjoden  King of  the  Mark  had reached the road from the Gate to  the 
River, and he turned towards the City that was now less than a mile distant. 
He slackened his speed  a little, seeking new foes,  and  his  knights  came 
about him, and Dernhelm was with  them. Ahead nearer the walls Elfhelm's 
men 
were among the  siege-engines, hewing, slaying, driving their foes into  the 
fire-pits. Well nigh all the northern half of the Pelennor was overrun,  and 
there camps were  blazing, orcs were  flying towards  the  River like  herds 
before the hunters; and the Rohirrim went hither  and thither at their will. 
But they had not yet overthrown the siege, nor won the Gate. Many foes stood 
before  it, and on the  further  half of the  plain were  other hosts  still 
unfought. Southward beyond the road lay  the main force of the Haradrim, and 
there  their  horsemen were gathered about the standard of  their chieftain. 
And he looked  out, and in the growing light he saw the banner of  the king,  
and that  it was far  ahead of the battle with few men about it. Then he was 
filled with a  red wrath  and shouted aloud, and  displaying  his  standard, 
black serpent upon  scarlet, he  came against the white  horse and the green 
with great press of men; and  the  drawing of the scimitars of the Southrons 
was like a glitter of stars.  
     Then Thjoden was  aware of  him, and  would not wait for his onset, but 
crying to Snowmane he  charged headlong to greet him. Great was the clash of 
their  meeting. But the white fury  of the Northmen burned the  hotter,  and 
more skilled  was  their knighthood with long spears  and bitter. Fewer were 
they  but they  clove through the Southrons  like a fire-bolt  in  a forest. 
Right  through the press  drove  Thjoden Thengel's son,  and  his  spear was 

####-shivered as he threw down  their chieftain.  Out  swept  his sword,  and  he 
spurred  to  the  standard,  hewed staff  and bearer;  and the black serpent 
foundered. Then all that was left unslain of  their cavalry  turned and fled 
far away. 
     But  lo! suddenly in  the  midst of the glory  of the  king his  golden 
shield was dimmed. The new morning was blotted from the sky. Dark fell 
about 
him. Horses reared and screamed. Men cast  from the saddle lay grovelling on 
the ground. 
     'To  me!  To me!' cried Thjoden. 'Up Eorlingas!  Fear no darkness!' But 
Snowmane wild with terror stood up  on high, fighting with the air, and then 
with a great scream he crashed upon his side: a black dart had pierced  him. 
The king fell beneath him. 
     The great shadow  descended like a falling cloud. And behold!  it was a  
winged  creature: if bird, then  greater than all  other  birds, and it  was 
naked, and neither quill nor  feather did it bear, and its vast pinions were 
as webs of hide between horned fingers; and it stank. A creature of an older  
world maybe it  was,  whose  kind,  fingering  in  forgotten mountains  cold 
beneath the Moon,  outstayed their day,  and in hideous eyrie bred this last 
untimely brood, apt to evil. And the Dark  Lord took it, and nursed it  with 
fell meats, until  it grew beyond the measure of all  other things that fly; 
and he gave it to his servant to be his steed. Down, down it came, and then, 
folding its fingered webs, it gave a croaking cry, and settled upon the body 
of Snowmane, digging in its claws, stooping its long naked neck. 
     Upon it  sat a shape, black -mantled , huge and threatening. A  crown  of 
steel he bore, but between rim and robe naught was there to see, save only a  
deadly  gleam of eyes: the Lord  of the  Nazgyl. To the air he had returned, 
summoning  his  steed ere the darkness failed,  and now he was  come  again, 
bringing ruin,  turning hope to despair, and victory to death. A great black  
mace he wielded. 
     But Thjoden  was  not utterly forsaken. The  knights of  his house  lay 
slain about him, or else mastered by the madness of  their steeds were borne 
far away. Yet one stood  there still:  Dernhelm  the  young, faithful beyond 
fear; and he wept, for he had  loved his lord as a father. Right through the 
charge Merry had  been borne unharmed behind him, until the Shadow came; 
and 
then  Windfola  had thrown  them in his terror, and now  ran  wild upon  the 

####-plain. Merry crawled on all fours like a dazed beast, and  such a horror was 
on him that he was blind and sick. 
     'King's man! King's man!' his heart cried within him. 'You must stay by 
him. As a father you shall be to me, you said.' But his will made no answer, 
and his body shook. He dared not open his eyes or look up. 
     Then out of the blackness in his mind he thought that he heard Dernhelm 
speaking; yet now the voice seemed strange, recalling  some other voice  that 
he had known. 
     'Begone, foul dwimmerlaik, lord of carrion! Leave the dead in peace!' 
     A cold voice answered: 'Come not between the Nazgyl and his prey! Or he 
will not slay thee  in thy turn. He  will  bear  thee away to the houses  of 
lamentation, beyond all darkness, where thy flesh shall be devoured, and thy 
shrivelled mind be left naked to the Lidless Eye.' 
     A sword rang as it was drawn. 'Do what you will; but  I will hinder it, 
if I may.' 
     'Hinder me? Thou fool. No living man may hinder me!' 
     Then  Merry heard of all sounds in that  hour the  strangest. It seemed 
that Dernhelm laughed, and the clear voice was like the  ring of steel. 'But 
no living man am I! You look upon a  woman.  Jowyn I am, Jomund's  
daughter. 
You  stand  between me and my lord and kin. Begone, if you be not deathless!  
For living or dark undead, I will smite you, if you touch him.' 
     The winged creature screamed at her, but the Ringwraith made no answer, 
and was silent, as if in sudden doubt. Very amazement for a moment conquered 
Merry's fear. He  opened his  eyes  and the  blackness was lifted from them. 
There some paces from him sat the great beast, and all seemed dark about it, 
and above  it loomed the  Nazgyl Lord like a shadow of despa ir.  A little to 
the left facing them stood she whom he had called Dernhelm. But the  helm of 
her  secrecy,  had fallen from  her, and her bright  hair, released from its 
bonds, gleamed with pale gold upon  her shoulders. Her eyes  grey as the sea 
were  hard  and fell, and yet tears were  on  her cheek. A sword was in  her  
hand, and she raised her shield against the horror of her enemy's eyes.  
     Jowyn  it  was,  and  Dernhelm  also. For into Merry's mind flashed the 
memory of the face that he saw at the riding from Dunharrow: the face of one 
that goes seeking death, having no  hope. Pity  filled his heart  and  great 
wonder, and suddenly the slow-kindled courage of his race awoke. He clenched 
his hand. She should not die, so fair, so desperate At  least she should not 

####-die alone, unaided. 
     The face of their enemy was not turned towards him, but still he hardly 
dared  to move,  dreading lest  the deadly eyes should fall  on him. Slowly, 
slowly he began to crawl aside; but the Black  Captain, in doubt  and malice 
intent upon the woman before him, heeded him no more than a worm in the 
mud. 
     Suddenly the great beast beat its hideous  wings, and the  wind of them 
was foul.  Again it  leaped into the  air, and then  swiftly fell  down upon 
Jowyn, shrieking, striking with beak and claw.  
     Still  she  did  not blench:  maiden of  the Rohirrim, child of  kings,  
slender but as a steel -blade, fair but terrible.  A  swift stroke she dealt, 
skilled and deadly.  The outstretched neck she clove asunder,  and the  hewn 
head fell like a stone.  Backward she sprang  as the huge  shape  crashed to 
ruin, vast wings outspread,  crumpled on the  earth; and with  its fall  the 
shadow passed  away. A light  fell about her,  and  her  hair  shone  in the 
sunrise. 
     Out of the  wreck rose the Black  Rider, tall and threatening, towering 
above her. With  a cry of hatred that stung the very ears  like venom he let 
fall  his mace. Her  shield was  shivered  in  many pieces, and her  arm was 
broken; she stumbled to her knees. He bent  over  her like  a cloud, and his 
eyes glittered; he raised his mace to kill. 
     But suddenly he too stumbled forward with a cry of bitter pain, and his 
stroke went  wide,  driving into the ground.  Merry's  sword had stabbed him 
from behind, shearing  through  the black mantle, and passing up beneath the 
hauberk had pierced the sinew behind his mighty knee. 
     'Jowyn! Jowyn!'  cried  Merry.  Then tottering, struggling up, with her  
last strength she drove her sword between  crown and  mantle, as  the  great 
shoulders bowed before her. The sword broke sparkling into many shards.  The 
crown rolled away with  a clang. Jowyn fell forward upon her fallen foe. But 
lo! the mantle and hauberk were empty. Shapeless they lay now on the ground, 
torn and tumbled; and a cry went up into the shuddering air, and faded  to a  
shrill wailing, passing with  the wind, a voice bodiless and thin that died,  
and was swallowed up, and was never heard again in that age of this world. 
     And there stood Meriadoc the hobbit in the midst of the slain, blinking 
like an owl in  the daylight, for  tears blinded him; and through  a mist he 
looked on Jowyn's fair head, as  she lay and did not move; and  he looked on 
the face of the king, fallen in the midst  of his glory, For Snowmane in his 

####-agony had rolled away from him again; yet he was the bane of his master. 
     Then  Merry stooped and  lifted his hand to kiss  it,  and  lo! Thjoden 
opened  his eyes, and they were clear, and he spoke in a quiet voice  though  
laboured. 
     'Farewell, Master Holbytla!'  he said. 'My body  is broken. I go to  my 
fathers.  And  even  in their mighty  company  I shall not now be ashamed. I  
felled the black serpent. A grim morn, and a glad day, and a golden sunset!' 
     Merry could  not speak, bu t wept anew. 'Forgive me,  lord,' he  said at 
last, 'if  I broke  your command, and  yet have done no more in your service 
than to weep at our parting.' 
     The old king smiled. 'Grieve not! It is forgiven. Great  heart will not 
be denied. Live now  in blessedness; and when  you  sit  in peace with  your  
pipe, think  of  me! For  never now shall I  sit with you in Meduseld,  as I 
promised, or listen to your herb-lore.' He closed his eyes, and Merry  bowed  
beside him. Presently  he spoke again. 'Where is  Jomer? For my eyes darken, 
and I would see him ere I go.  He must be  king after  me. And  I would send  
word to Jowyn. She, she would not have me leave her, and now I shall not see 
her again, dearer than daughter.' 
     'Lord,  lord,' began Merry brokenly, 'she  is--';  but  at that  moment 
there  was  a  great clamour, and all  about  them horns and  trumpets  were 
blowing. Merry looked round:  he had forgotten  the war, and  all  the world 
beside, and many hours it  seemed since the king rode to his fall, though in 
truth it was only a little while. But now he saw that they were in danger of 
being caught  in  the  very midst  of the great  battle that would  soon  be 
joined. 
     New forces of the enemy were hastening up the road from the River;  and  
from  u nder the walls came  the  legions of Morgul; and  from  the southward 
fields came footmen of Harad with horsemen before them, and behind them 
rose 
the huge backs of the mymakil with war-towers  upon them. But  northward the 
white crest of Jomer led the great front of  the Rohirrim which he had again 
gathered and marshalled;  and out of the City  came all the  strength of men 
that  was in  it, and  the silver swan of Dol Amroth was borne  in  the van, 
driving the enemy from the Gate. 
     For  a  moment  the thought flitted through  Merry's  mind:  'Where  is 
Gandalf? Is he not here? Could he not  have saved the  king and Jowyn?'  But 
thereupon Jomer rode  up  in haste, and with him  came the  knights  of  the 

####-household that still lived and had now mastered their horses. They looked in 
wonder  at  the carcase of the fell  beast that lay there:  and their steeds 
would  not go near. But Jomer leaped from the  saddle, and  grief and dismay 
fell upon him as he came to the king's side and stood there in silence. 
     Then one of the knights took the king's banner from the hand of Guthlbf 
the banner -bearer who  lay  dead, and he lifted it up. Slowly Thjoden opened 
his eyes. Seeing the banner he made a sign that it should be given to Jomer. 
     'Hail, King of  the Mark!' he said.  'Ride now  to  victory!  Bid Jowyn 
farewell!' And so he died,  and knew  not that Jowyn lay near him. And those 
who stood by wept, crying: 'Thjoden King! Thjoden King!' 
     But Jomer said to them: 
     Mourn not overmuch! Mighty was the fallen, 
     meet was his ending. When his mound is raised, 
     women then shall weep. War now calls us! 
     Yet  he himself wept  as he spoke.  'Let  his knights remain  here,' he 
said; 'and bear his body in honour from the field, lest the battle ride over  
it! Yea, and all these other of the king's men that lie here.' And he looked 
at  the  slain,  recalling their  names. Then suddenly he beheld  his sister  
Jowyn as she lay, and he knew her. He stood a moment as a man who is 
pierced 
in the midst of a cry by  an arrow through the heart;  and then his face went 
deathly white;  and a cold  fury rose in him, so that  all speech failed him 
for a while. A fey mood took him. 
     'Jowyn,  Jowyn!'  he  cried at last:  'Jowyn,  how come you  here? What 
madness or devilry is this? Death, death, death! Death take us all!' 
     Then without taking  counsel or waiting for the approach of  the men of 
the City, he spurred headlong back  to the front of the great host, and blew 
a horn, and cried  aloud for  the onset. Over the field rang his clear voice 
calling: 'Death! Ride, ride to ruin and the world's ending!' 
     And with that the host  began to move. But the Rohirrim sang  no  more. 
Death  they cried with one voice loud and terrible, and gathering speed  like 
a  great tide their battle swept about their fallen king and passed, roaring 
away southwards.  
     And still  Meriadoc  the hobbit stood there blinking through  his tears 
and no one spoke to him, indeed none seemed to heed him. He brushed away 
the 
tears, and stooped to pick up the green shield that Jowyn had given him; and 

####-he slung it at his back.  Then he looked for his sword that he had let fall; 
for even as he struck his blow his arm was numbed, and now he could only use 
his left hand. And behold! there  lay his weapon, but the blade  was smoking  
like a dry branch that has been thrust in  a fire; and as  he watched it, it 
writhed and withered and was consumed. 
     So passed the sword  of the Barrow-downs, work of Westernesse. But glad 
would  he have been  to know its fate who wrought  it slowly long ago in the  
North-kingdom when the D®nedain were young,  and chief among  their foes 
was 
the dread realm of Angmar and its sorcerer king. No other blade, not  though 
mightier hands had wielded it, would have dealt that foe a wound  so bitter, 
cleaving the undead flesh, breaking the spell that knit his unseen sinews to 
his will. 
     Men now raised the  king, and laying cloaks upon  spear -truncheons they 
made shift to bear him away towards the City; and others lifted Jowyn gently 
up and bore her after him.  But  the  men of the king's household they could 
not yet bring from  the  field; for seven of the king's knights  had  fallen 
there, and Djorwine their chief was among them. So they laid them apart from 
their foes and the fell beast and set spears about them. And afterwards when 
all was over men returned  and  made a fire there  and burned the carcase of 
the beast; but for Snowmane  they dug a grave and set up a stone  upon which 
was carved in the tongues of Gondor and the Mark: 
     Faithful servant yet master's bane 
     Lightfoot's foal, swift Snowmane. 
     Green and long  grew the grass  on  Snowmane's Howe, but ever black and 
bare was the ground where the beast was burned. 
     Now slowly and sadly Merry  walked beside the bearers,  and he gave  no 
more  heed to  the battle.  He was weary and  full  of  pain, and  his limbs 
trembled as  with  a chill. A great  rain came out of the Sea, and it seemed 
that all things wept for Thjoden and  Jowyn, quenching the fires in the City 
with grey tears.  It was through a mist that presently he saw the van of the 
men of Gondor  approaching. Imrahil,  Prince of Dol Amroth, rode up and 
drew 
rein before them. 
     'What burden do you bear, Men of Rohan?' he cried. 
     'Thjoden King,' they answered. 'He is dead. But Jomer King now rides in  
the battle: he with the white crest in the wind.' 

####-     Then the prince went from his horse, and knelt by the bier in honour of 
the  king and  his  great onset; and  he wept. And  rising he looked then on 
Jowyn and  was amazed. 'Surely,  here  is a  woman?' he said. 'Have even the 
women of the Rohirrim come to war in our need?' 
     'Nay!  One only,'  they  answered.  'The Lady Jowyn is  she, sister  of 
Jomer; and we knew naught of her riding  until this hour, and greatly we rue 
it.' 
     Then the prince seeing her beauty, though her face  was pale  and cold, 
touched her hand as he bent to look more  closely on her. 'Men of Rohan!' he 
cried. 'Are there no leeches among you? She is hurt to the death  maybe, but 
I deem that  she yet lives.' And  he held the bright-burnished vambrace that 
was upon his arm before her cold tips, and behold! a little mist was laid on 
it hardly to be seen. 
     'Haste now is needed,'  he said, and he sent one riding back swiftly to 
the City to bring aid. But he bowing low to the fallen, bade  them farewell, 
and mounting rode away into battle. 
     And now  the  fighting waxed furious on the fields of the Pelennor; and 
the din of arms rose upon  high, with  the crying of men and the neighing of 
horses. Horns were blown  and trumpets  were  braying, and  the mymakil were 
bellowing as they  were goaded to war. Under the south walls of the City the  
footmen of Gondor now  drove against the legions  of Morgul that were  still  
gathered there in strength. But the horsemen rode eastward to the succour of 
Jomer:  H®rin the Tall Warden of  the Keys, and the Lord of  Lossarnach, and 
Hirluin of the Green Hills, and Prince Imrahil the fair with his knights all 
about him. 
     Not too  soon came  their  aid to  the Rohirrim; for fortune had turned 
against Jomer,  and his fury had betrayed him.  The great wrath of his onset 
had  utterly  overthrown the front of  his enemies, and  great wedges of his 
Riders had passed clear through  the ranks of  the   Southrons,  discomfiting 
their  horsemen and riding their footmen to ruin.  But  wherever the mymakil 
came  there the horses would not go, but  blenched and swerved away; and the 
great  monsters were  unfought, and  stood  like towers of defence,  and the 
Haradrim rallied about them. And if the Rohirrim at  their onset were thrice 
outnumbered by  the Haradrim alone,  soon their case  became  worse; for new 
strength came  now streaming to the field  out of  Osgiliath. There they had 
been mustered for the sack of  the City and the rape of Gondor,  waiting  on  
the call of their Captain. He  now was destroyed; but Gothmog the lieutenant 

####-of  Morgul had flung them into the fray; Easterlings  with axes, and Variags 
of  Khand. Southrons  in  scarlet, and  out  of  Far  Harad  black  men  like 
half-trolls with white eyes and red tongues. Some now hastened up behind the 
Rohirrim, others  held westward to hold off the forces of Gondor and prevent 
their joining with Rohan. 
     It was even as the day thus began to turn against Gondor and their hope 
wavered that a new cry went up in the City, it being  then midmorning, and a 
great wind blowing,  and the rain flying north, and the sun shining. In that 
clear air watchmen on the walls saw afar a new sight of fear, and their last 
hope left them. 
     For Anduin, from the bend at  the Harlond, so flowed that from the City 
men  could look down it lengthwise for  some leagues,  and  the  far-sighted  
could  see  any  ships  that  approached. And looking thither they cried  in  
dismay; for black against the glittering stream they beheld a fleet borne up 
on the wind: dromunds, and  ships  of great draught with many oars, and with 
black sails bellying in the breeze. 
     'The Corsairs of Umbar!' men shouted. 'The Corsairs of Umbar! Look! The 
Corsairs of Umbar  are  coming!  So  Belfalas is  taken, and the  Ethir, and 
Lebennin is gone. The Corsairs are upon us! It is the last stroke of doom!' 
     And some without order, for none could he found to command them  in the 
City,  ran to  the bells and tolled the alarm;  and  some blew the  trumpets 
sounding the retreat. 'Back to the walls!' they  cried. 'Back to the  walls!  
Come back to the City before all are overwhelmed!' But the  wind  that  sped 
the ships blew all their clamour away. 
     The Rohirrim indeed had no  need  of news or  alarm.  All too well they 
could  see for themselves the black sails. For Jomer was now scarcely a mile  
from the Harlond, and a great press of  his first  foes was between  him and 
the haven  there, while new  foes came swirling behind, cutting him off from 
the Prince. Now he looked to the River,  and hope died in his heart, and the 
wind  that he had blessed  he  now  called accursed. But the hosts of Mordor  
were enheartened, and filled  with a new lust  and fury they came yelling to 
the onset. 
     Stern now  was Jomer's mood, and  his mind clear again. He let blow the 
horns to rally all men to his banner that could come thither; for he thought 
to make a great shield-wall at the last, and stand, and  fight there on foot 
till all fell, and do deeds of song on the fields of Pelennor, though no man 
should be left in the West to remember the last King of the Mark. So he rode  

####-to  a green hillock and  there  set  his banner,  and  the  White Horse  ran 
rippling in the wind. 
     Out of doubt, out of dark to the day's rising 
     I came singing in the sun, sword unsheathing. 
     To hope's end I rode and to heart's breaking: 
     Now for wrath, now for ruin and a red nightfall! 
     These staves  he spoke, yet he laughed as  he  said them. For once more 
lust of battle was on him; and he was still unscathed, and he was young, and 
he was king:  the  lord  of a  fell  people. And lo! even  as he  laughed at 
despair he looked  out  again on the black ships, and he lifted up his sword 
to defy them. 
     And then wonder took him, and a great joy; and he cast  his sword up in 
the sunlight  and sang as he caught it. And all eyes followed his gaze,  and 
behold!  upon  the  foremost  ship  a great  standard  broke,  and the  wind 
displayed it as she turned towards the Harlond. There flowered a White Tree, 
and that  was for Gondor; but Seven Stars were  about it,  and  a high crown 
above it,  the  signs of  Elendil  that no lord had  borne  for years beyond 
count. And the  stars flamed in the  sunlight, for they were wrought of gems 
by Arwen daughter of Elrond; and the crown was bright in the morning, for it 
was wrought of mithril and gold. 
     Thus came Aragorn son of Arathorn, Elessar, Isildur's heir, out  of the 
Paths of the Dead, borne upon a wind from the Sea to the  kingdom of Gondor; 
and the mirth  of the Rohirrim was a  torrent  of laughter and a flashing of 
swords, and the  joy and wonder of the  City  was a music of trumpets and  a  
ringing of bells. But the hosts of Mordor wer e seized with bewilderment, and 
a  great  wizardry  it seemed to  them that their own ships should be filled 
with their foes; and a black dread  fell on them, knowing  that the tides of 
fate had turned against them and their doom was at hand. 
     East rode the  knights of  Dol Amroth driving the  enemy  before  them: 
troll-men and Variags  and orcs that hated  the sunlight. South strode Jomer  
and men fled  before his face, and  they were caught between the  hammer and 
the anvil. For now men leaped from the ships to the quays of the Harlond and 
swept north like  a storm. There  came Legolas, and  Gimli wielding his axe, 
and Halbarad with the standard, and Elladan  and Elrohir with stars on their 
brow,  and the  dour-handed D®nedain, Rangers of the North,  leading a great 
valour of the folk of Lebennin  and Lamedon and  the fiefs of the South. But 
before all went Aragorn with the Flame of the West, And®ril  like a new fire 

####-kindled, Narsil  re-forged  as deadly as of old: and upon his  brow  was the 
Star of Elendil. 
     And so at length Jomer and Aragorn met in  the midst of the battle, and 
they leaned on their swords and looked on one another and were glad. 
     'Thus we  meet again, though  all the hosts of Mordor lay between  us,' 
said Aragorn. 'Did I not say so at the Hornburg?' 
     'So you spoke,' said Jomer, 'but hope oft deceives, and I knew not then 
that you were a man foresighted. Yet twice blessed is help unlooked for, and  
never was a meeting of friends more joyful.' And they  clasped hand in hand. 
'Nor  indeed more timely,'  said Jomer. 'You come none too soon,  my friend. 
Much loss and sorrow has befallen us.' 
     'Then let us avenge it, ere  we speak  of it!'  said Aragorn,  and they 
rode back to battle together. 
     Hard  fighting and long  labour they had  still; for the Southrons were 
bold  men and grim, and fierce in despair; and  the Easterlings  were strong 
and war-hardened and asked for no quarter. And so in this place and that, by 
burned  homestead or  barn,  upon hillock or mound, under wa ll or on  field,  
still they gathered and rallied and fought until the day wore away. 
     Then the Sun went at last behind Mindolluin and filled all the sky with 
a great  burning, so  that  the hills and the mountains were  dyed  as  with 
blood; fire  glowed in  the  River, and the grass of the Pelennor lay red in 
the nightfall. And in that hour the great Battle of  the field of Gondor was 
over; and not one living foe was left within  the circuit of the Rammas. All 
were slain  save those who fled  to die, or to drown  in the red foam of the 
River. Few ever came  eastward to Morgul or Mordor; and  to the land of  the 
Haradrim came only a tale from far off: a rumour of  the wrath and terror of 
Gondor. 
     Aragorn and  Jomer and Imrahil rode back towards  the Gate of the City,  
and they  were now weary beyond joy  or sorrow. These three were  unscathed, 
for such was their  fortune and the skill  and might of their  arms, and few 
indeed had dared  to abide them or  look on their faces in the hour of their 
wrath. But many others were hurt or  maimed or dead upon the field. The axes 
hewed Forlong  as he fought  alone and unhorsed; and both Duilin of Morthond 
and his  brother  were  trampled  to death  when they assailed the  mymakil, 
leading  their  bowmen  close  to shoot at the eyes of the monsters. Neither 
Hirluin the  fair would return to Pinnath Gelin, nor Grimbold  to Grimslade,  
nor Halbarad  to  the Northlands,  dour -handed  Ranger.  No few  had fallen, 

####-renowned or nameless, captain or  soldier; for it was a great battle and the 
full count of it  no tale has told. So long afterward a maker in Rohan  said 
in his song of the Mounds of Mundburg: 
     We heard of the horns in the hills ringing, 
     the swords shining in the South -kingdom. 
     Steeds went striding to the Stoningland 
     as wind in the morning. War was kindled. 
     There Thjoden fell, Thengling mighty, 
     to his golden halls and green pastures 
     in the Northern fields never returning, 
     high lord of the host. Harding and Guthlbf 
     D®nhere and Djorwine, doughty Grimbold, 
     Herefara and Herubrand, Horn and Fastred, 
     fought and fell there in a far country: 
     in the Mounds of Mundburg under mould they lie  
     with their league-fellows, lords of Gondor. 
     Neither Hirluin the Fair to the hills by the sea, 
     nor Forlong the old to the flowering vales 
     ever, to Arnach, to his own country 
     returned in triumph; nor the tall bowmen, 
     Derufin and Duilin, to their dark waters, 
     meres of Morthond under mountain -shadows. 
     Death in the morning and at day's ending  
     lords took and lowly. Long now they sleep 
     under grass in Gondor by the Great River. 
     Grey now as tears, gleaming silver, 
     red then it rolled, roaring water: 
     foam dyed with blood flamed a t sunset; 
     as beacons mountains burned at evening; 
     red fell the dew in Rammas Echor. 
 

####- 

Chapter 7. The Pyre of Denethor 

 
 
     When the dark shadow at the Gate withdrew Gandalf still sat motionless.  
But Pippin rose to his  feet, as if a great weight had been lifted from him; 
and  he stood listening to  the horns, and it seemed to  him that they would 
break his  heart  with joy. And  never in after years could  he  hear a horn 
blown in the distance  without tears starting in  his eyes. But now suddenly 
his errand  returned  to  his memory,  and  he  ran forward.  At that moment 
Gandalf stirred and spoke to Shadowfax, and was  about to  ride through  the 
Gate. 
     'Gandalf, Gandalf! ' cried Pippin, and Shadowfax halted. 
     'What are you  doing here?'  said Gandalf. 'Is it not a law in the City 
that  those who  wear the black and  silver must stay in the Citadel, unless 
their lord gives them leave?' 
     'He has,' said Pippin. 'He sent me away. But I am frightened. Something 
terrible may happen up  there. The  Lord is  out of his  mind, I think. I am 
afraid he will kill himself, and kill Faramir too. Can't you do something?' 
     Gandalf looked through the  gaping  Gate, and already  on the fields he 
heard the gathering sound of  battle. He clenched his  hand. 'I must go ' he 
said. 'The Black Rider is abroad, and he will yet  bring ruin on  us. I have 
no time.' 
     'But Faramir!' cried Pippin.  'He is  not dead, and they will  burn him 
alive, if someone does not stop them.' 
     'Burn him alive?' said Gandalf. 'What is this tale? Be quick!' 
     'Denethor  has gone  to  the  Tombs,'  said Pippin, 'and  he has  taken 
Faramir, and  he says we are all to burn, and he will not wait, and they are 
to make a pyre and  burn him on it, and Faramir as well. And he has sent men 
to fetch  wood and  oil.  And I have told Beregond, but I'm afraid  he won't  
dare  to  leave his post: he is on  guard. And what can  he  do  anyway?' So 
Pippin poured out  his tale, reaching up  and  touching  Gandalf's knee with 
trembling hands. 'Can't you save Faramir?' 
     'Maybe I can,' said Gandalf;  'but  if  I do, then  others will die,  I 
fear. Well, I must come, since no  other  help can  reach  him. But evil and 
sorrow will come of this. Even in the heart of our stronghold the Enemy  has 
power to strike us: for his will it is that is at work.' 

####-     Then  having made up  his mind he acted swiftly; and catching up Pippin 
and setting him before him, he turned Shadowfax with a word. Up the climbing 
streets of Minas  Tirith they clattered, while the noise of  war rose behind 
them. Everywhere men were rising from their despair and dread, seizing their 
weapons, crying  one to another: 'Rohan  has come!'  Captains were shouting, 
companies were mustering; many already were marching down to the Gate. 
     They  met  the Prince Imrahil,  and  he called  to them: 'Whither  now, 
Mithrandir?  The Rohirrim are  fighting  on  the  fields  of Gondor! We must  
gather all the strength that we can find.' 
     'You will need every man and more,' said  Gandalf.  'Make  all haste. I 
will come when I can. But I  have  an errand to the  Lord Denethor that will 
not wait. Take command in the Lord's absence!' 
     They passed on; and  as they climbed and drew near to the Citadel  they 
felt the wind blowing in their faces, and they caught the glimmer of morning  
far away, a light growing in the southern sky. But it brought little hope to 
them, not knowing what evil lay before them, fearing to come too late. 
     'Darkness is passing,' said Gandalf, 'but it still lies heavy  on  this 
City.' 
     At the  gate  of the  Citadel they found no guard.  'Then Beregond  has 
gone,' said  Pippin  more hopefully. They turned away and hastened along the 
road to  the Closed Door. It stood wide open,  and the porter lay before it. 
He was slain and his key had been taken. 
     'Work of the Enemy!' said Gandalf. 'Such  deeds he loves: friend at war 
with friend; loyalty divided in  confusion of hearts.' Now he dismounted and 
bade  Shadowfax return to his stable. 'For, my friend,' he said, 'you and  I 
should have ridden to  the fields long  ago, but other matters delay me. Yet 
come swiftly if I call!' 
     They passed the Door  and walked on down the steep winding  road. Light 
was  growing, and the tall columns and carven  figures beside the  way  went 
slowly by like grey ghosts.  
     Suddenly the silence was broken,  and  they  heard below them cries and  
the ringing of swords: such  sounds as had not been  heard in  the  hallowed 
places since the building of  the City. At  last they came to Rath Dnnen and 
hastened towards the  House of the Stewards,  looming in the  twilight under  
its great dome. 
     'Stay!  Stay!'  cried Gandalf,  springing  forward  to the stone  stair 
before the door. 'Stay this madness!' 

####-     For there were  the servants of  Denethor with  swords and  torches  in 
their hands; but  alone in the  porch upon  the topmost step stood Beregond, 
clad in the black and silver of  the  Guard;  and he held  the door  against 
them. Two of them had already fallen to his sword, staining the hallows with 
their blood;  and the others cursed  him, calling him outlaw and  traitor to 
his master. 
     Even  as Gandalf and  Pippin  ran forward,  they heard from  within the 
house of the dead  the voice of Denethor crying: 'Haste, haste! Do as I have 
bidden!  Slay me this renegade! Or must I do so myself?' Thereupon  the door  
which Beregond held  shut  with  his left  hand was wrenched open, and there 
behind him stood the Lord of the City, tall and fell; a light like flame was 
in his eyes, a nd he held a drawn sword. 
     But Gandalf sprang up  the steps, and  the men fell  back from  him and 
covered their eyes; for his  coming  was like the incoming of a  white light 
into  a dark place, and he came with great anger. He lifted up his hand, and 
in  the very stroke, the sword of Denethor flew  up and left  his  grasp and 
fell  behind him in the shadows of the house; and  Denethor stepped backward 
before Gandalf as one amazed. 
     'What is this, my lord?' said the wizard. 'The houses  of the  dead are 
no  places for the living.  And why  do men  fight here in the  Hallows when 
there  is  war enough before  the  Gate? Or has our  Enemy come even to Rath 
Dnnen?' 
     'Since  when  has  the Lord  of  Gondor been answerable to thee?'  said 
Denethor.  'Or may I not command my own servants?' 
     'You may,' said Gandalf.  'But others may contest your will, when it is 
turned to madness and evil. Where is your son, Faramir?' 
     'He lies  within,' said Denethor, 'burning, already burning. They  have 
set a fire in his flesh. But soon all shall be burned. The  West has failed. 
It shall  all  go up in a  great fire, and all shall be  ended. Ash! Ash and 
smoke blown away on the wind!' 
     Then  Gandalf  seeing the madness  that was on  him feared that he  had 
already done some evil deed, and he thrust forward, with Beregond and Pippin 
behind him, while Denethor gave back until he stood beside the table within. 
But  there they found Faramir,  still dreaming in  his fever, lying upon the 
table. Wood was piled under it, and high all about it, and all  was drenched 
with oil, even the garments of Faramir and the coverlets; but as yet no fire 
had been set to the fuel. Then Gandalf revealed the strength that lay hid in 

####-him; even as the light of  his  power was hidden u nder his  grey mantle.  He 
leaped up on to the faggots, and raising the sick man lightly he sprang down 
again, and bore him towards the door. But as he did  so  Faramir moaned  and 
called on his father in his dream. 
     Denethor started as one waking from a trance, and the flame died in his 
eyes,  and he wept; and he said: 'Do not take my son from me!  He calls  for  
me.' 
     'He calls,' said Gandalf, 'but you cannot come to him yet.  For he must  
seek healing on the threshold of death, and maybe find it no t. Whereas  your  
part is to go out to  the battle of your City, where maybe death awaits you. 
This you know in your heart.' 
     'He will not wake again,' said Denethor. 'Battle is vain. Why should we 
wish to live longer? Why should we not go to death side by side?' 
     'Authority is not given to you, Steward of Gondor, to order the hour of 
your  death,'  answered  Gandalf.  'And only the  heathen  kings, under  the 
domination of the Dark Power, did  thus,  slaying  themselves  in pride  and 
despair, murdering their kin to ease their  own death.' Then passing through 
the door he took  Faramir from the deadly house and laid him  on the bier on  
which he had been brought, and which had now been set in the porch. Denethor  
followed him, and  stood trembling,  looking with longing on the face of his 
son. And for a moment, while all were silent and still, watching the Lord in 
his throes, he wavered. 
     'Come!' said  Gandalf.  'We  are needed. There is much that you can yet 
do.' 
     Then suddenly Denethor laughed . He stood up  tall  and proud again, and 
stepping swiftly back to the table he lifted from it the pillow on which his 
head  had lain.  Then coming to the  doorway he drew aside the covering, and 
lo! he had between his hands  a palantnr. And as he held it up, it seemed to 
those that  looked on that the  globe began to  glow with an inner flame, so 
that the lean face of the Lord was lit as with a red fire, and it seemed cut 
out of hard stone, sharp with black shadows, noble, proud, and terrible. His 
eyes glittered. 
     'Pride and despair!' he cried.  'Didst thou  think that the eyes of the 
White  Tower were blind? Nay, I have seen more than thou knowest, Grey 
Fool. 
For  thy hope is  but ignorance. Go then and labour in healing! Go forth and  
fight! Vanity. For a little space you may triumph  on the field, for a  day. 

####-But against the Power that now arises there is no victory. To this City only 
the first finger of its hand has yet been stretched. All the East is moving. 
And even now the  wind of thy  hope cheats thee and wafts up Anduin a  fleet 
with black  sails. The West has failed. It is  time for all  to  depart  who 
would not be slaves.' 
     'Such  counsels  will make the  Enemy's victory  certain  indeed,' said 
Gandalf. 
     'Hope on then!' laughed Denethor. 'Do  I not know thee, Mithrandir? Thy  
hope is to rule in my stead, to stand behind every throne,  north, south, or  
west. I  have read  thy  mind  and  its  policies.  Do I  not  know that you  
commanded this halfling here to keep silence? That you brought him hither to 
be a spy  within  my  very  chamber?  And yet  in our speech together I have 
learned  the names and purpose of all thy companions. So! With the left hand 
thou wouldst use me  for a little while as a shield against Mordor, and with 
the right bring up this Ranger of the North to supplant me. 
     'But  I say to thee, Gandalf Mithrandir, I will not  be  thy tool! I am 
Steward of the  House  of Anbrion.  I will not step  down  to be  the dotard 
chamberlain of an upstart. Even  were his claim proved to me, still he comes 
but of the line of Isildur. I will not bow to such a  one, last of  a ragged 
house long bereft of lordship and dignity.' 
     'What then would  you have,' said Gandalf, 'if your will could have its 
way?' 
     'I would have things as they were in all the days of my life,' answered 
Denethor,  'and in the days of  my  longfathers before me: to be the Lord of 
this City in peace,  and leave my chair to  a son after me, who would be his 
own master and no wizard's pupil. But if doom denies this to me, then I will 
have naught: neither life diminished, nor love halved, nor honour abated.' 
     'To me it would  not seem that a Steward who  faithfully surrenders his 
charge is diminished in love  or in honour,' said Gandalf. 'And at the least 
you shall not rob your son of his choice while his death is still in doubt.' 
     At those words Denethor's eyes flamed again, and taking the Stone under  
his arm  he drew a knife and  strode towards the  bier. But  Beregond sprang 
forward and set himself before Faramir. 
     'So!' cried Denethor. 'Thou hadst  already  stolen  half my son's love. 
Now thou stealest the hearts of  my knights also, so that they rob me wholly  
of my son at the last. But in this at least thou shalt not defy  my will: to 
rule my own end.' 

####-     'Come  hither!'  he cried  to his servants. 'Come,  if you are  not all 
recreant!'  Then two of them ran up the steps to  him. Swiftly he snatched a  
torch from the hand of  one  and  sprang back into the house. Before Gandalf 
could hinder him he  thrust the brand amid the fuel, and at once it crackled 
and roared into flame. 
     Then Denethor  leaped upon  the  table, and  standing there wreathed in 
fire and smoke he took up the staff  of his stewardship that lay at his feet 
and broke  it on his  knee.  Casting the pieces into  the blaze he bowed and 
laid himself  on  the table, clasping the palantnr with both hands upon  his 
breast. And  it was said that ever after, if  any man  looked in that Stone, 
unless he had a great strength of will to  turn it to other purpose, he  saw 
only two aged hands withering in flame. 
     Gandalf in grief and horror turned his face away  and closed the  door. 
For  a  while  he stood in thought,  silent  upon the threshold, while those 
outside heard the greedy roaring of  the fire within. And then Denethor gave 
a great cry, and afterwards spoke no more, nor was ever again seen by mortal 
men. 
     'So passes Denethor, son of Ecthelion,' said Gandalf: Then he turned to 
Beregond and the Lord's servants that stood there aghast.  'And so pass also 
the days of Gondor that you have known; for good or evil they are ended. Ill 
deeds  have been done here; but let now  all enmity that lies between you be 
put away, for  it  was contrived by the Enemy and works  his  will. You have 
been  caught  in a net of warring duties that  you did not weave. But think, 
you servants of the Lord, blind in your obedience, that but  for the treason 
of Beregond Faramir, Captain of the White Tower, would now also be burned. 
     'Bear away  from this unhappy place your comrades who  have fallen. And 
we  will bear  Faramir, Steward of Gondor, to  a place where he can sleep in 
peace, or die if that be his doom.' 
     Then Gandalf and Beregond taking  up the bier bore  it away towards the 
Houses of  Hea ling,  while behind them walked Pippin with downcast head. 
But 
the servants of the Lord  stood gazing as stricken  men  at the house of the 
dead; and even  as Gandalf  came to the end of Rath Dnnen there was a  great 
noise. Looking back  they  saw the  dome of the house crack and smokes issue 
forth; and then with a rush and rumble of stone it fell in a flurry of fire; 
but still unabated the flames danced and  flickered among the ruins. Then in 
terror the servants fled and followed Gandalf.  

####-     At length they came back  to  the Steward's Door,  and  Beregond looked  
with grief  at  the porter. 'This deed I  shall  ever rue,'  he said; 'but a  
madness of haste was on  me, and he would not listen, but drew sword against  
me.' Then  taking  the key that he had  wr ested from the slain man he closed 
the door and locked it.  'This should now be given to the Lord  Faramir,' he 
said. 
     'The Prince  of Dol Amroth is in  command in the absence of  the Lord,' 
said Gandalf; 'but since he is not here,  I must take this on  myself. I bid 
you keep the key and guard it, until the City is set in order again.' 
     Now  at last they passed  into the high circles of the City, and in the 
light of morning  they went their way towards  the  Houses  of Healing;  and 
these were  fair houses set apart, for the care of those who were grievously 
sick, but now  they were prepared  for the tending of men  hurt in battle or  
dying. They stood not far from  the  Citadel-gate, in the sixth circle, nigh 
to  its southward  wall, and about  them was a  garden and a greensward with 
trees,  the only such place in the City. There dwelt the few women  that had 
been permitted to remain in Minas Tirith, since they were skilled in healing 
or in the service of the healers.  
     But even  as Gandalf and his companions came  carrying the bier  to the 
main door of the  Houses, they heard a great cry that went up from the field 
before the Gate and rising shrill and piercing into the sky passed, and died 
away on the wind. So terrible was the cry that for a moment all stood still, 
and  yet when it  had passed, suddenly their hearts were lifted up in such a  
hope as they had not known  since the darkness came  out of the East; and it  
seemed  to them that  the  light grew  clear and the sun  broke  through the 
clouds. 
     But Gandalf's  face was  grave and sad, and bidding Beregond and Pippin 
to take  Faramir into the Houses  of Healing, he  went  up on  to  the walls 
nearby; and there like a figure carven in white he stood  in the new sun and 
looked out. And he beheld with the sight that was given to him all that  had 
befallen; and when Jomer rode out from the forefront of his battle and stood 
beside those who lay upon the field, he sighed, and he cast  his cloak about 
him again,  and went  from  the  walls.  And Beregond  and  Pippin found him 
standing in thought before the door of the Houses when they came out. 
     They looked at him, and for  a  while he was  silent. At last he spoke. 
'My friends,' he  said, 'and all you people of this city and of the  Western 
lands! Things of great sorrow and renown have come to pass. Shall we weep or  

####-be glad? Beyond hope the Captain  of  our foes has been  destroyed,  and you 
have heard the echo of his last despair. But he has not gone without woe and 
bitter loss. And that I might have averted but for the madness of  Denethor. 
So long  has the reach of our Enemy become! Alas! but now I perceive how his 
will was able to enter into the very heart of the City. 
     'Though  the  Stewards  deemed  that  it  was  a secret  kept  only   by 
themselves, long ago I guessed that here in the White Tower, one at least of 
the Seven Seeing  Stones was preserved. In  the days of his  wisdom Denethor  
did not presume to  use it,  nor to  challenge Sauron, knowing the limits of 
his own strength. But his wisdom failed; and I fear that as the peril of his 
realm grew he looked in the Stone and was deceived: far too often, I  guess,  
since Boromir departed.  He was too great to  be subdued  to the will of the 
Dark Power, he saw nonetheless only those things which  that Power permitted 
him to see. The knowledge which he obtained was, doubtless, often of service 
to  him; yet the vision of the great might  of Mordor that was  shown to him 
fed the despair of his heart until it overthrew his mind.' 
     'Now I understand what seemed so strange to me!' said Pippin shuddering 
at his memories as he spoke. 'The Lord went away from the room where 
Faramir 
lay; and it was only when  he  returned that I first thought he was changed, 
old and broken.' 
     'It was  in the very hour  that  Faramir was brought to the Tower  that 
many of us saw  a strange light in the topmost chamber,' said Beregond. 'But 
we have  seen that light before, and it has  long been rumoured in the City, 
that the Lord would at times wrestle in thought with his Enemy.' 
     'Alas!  then I  have guessed rightly,' said Gandalf. 'Thus  the will of 
Sauron entered into Minas  Tirith; and thus  I  have  been delayed here. And 
here I shall still be forced to remain, for I shall soon have other charges,  
not Faramir only. 
     'Now I must go down to meet those  who come. I have seen  a  sight upon 
the field that is very grievous to my heart, and greater sorrow may yet come 
to  pass.  Come  with me, Pippin! But you,  Beregond,  should  return to the 
Citadel and tell the chief of the Guard there what has befallen. It  will be 
his duty, I fear, to withdraw you from the Guard; but  say to him that, if I 
may give him counsel, you should be sent to the Houses of Healing, to be the 
guard and servant of your captain, and to be at his side when he awakes  - if 
that shall ever be again. For by you  he  was saved from the fire. Go now! I 

####-shall return soon.' 
     With  that  he  turned away and went with Pippin down towards the lower 
city. And even as they  hastened on their way the wind brought  a grey rain,  
and all the fires sank, and there arose a great smoke before them. 
 

####- 

Chapter 8. The Houses of Healing 

 
 
     A mist was in Merry's eyes of tears  and weariness when they  drew near  
the  ruined  Gate of  Minas Tirith. He gave  little  heed to the  wreck  and 
slaughter that lay about all. Fire and smoke and  stench was in the air; for  
many engines  had been burned  or cast into  the fire-pits, and many  of the 
slain also, while here  and there lay  many  carcases of the great  Southron 
monsters, half-burned, or broken by stone-cast, or shot through  the eyes by 
the  valiant archers of Morthond. The flying rain had ceased for a time, and 
the sun  gleamed  up above;  but all the lower city  was still  wrapped in a  
smouldering reek. 
     Already men were labouring to clear a way through the jetsam of battle; 
and now out from the Gate came some bearing litters. Gently  they laid Jowyn 
upon soft pillows; but the king's body  they covered  with a great  cloth of 
gold,  and  they bore  torches about  him, and  their flames,  pale  in  the 
sunlight, were fluttered by the wind. 
     So Thjoden and Jowyn came  to  the City of Gondor, and all who saw them 
bared their heads and bowed; and they passed through the ash and fume of the 
burned circle, and went on and up  along the  streets of stone. To Merry the 
ascent seemed  agelong,  a  meaningless journey in a hateful dream, going on 
and on to some dim ending that memory cannot seize. 
     Slowly the  lights of  the torches in front of  him flickered  and went 
out,  and he was walking in  a darkness; and he  thought: 'This  is a tunnel 
leading to a tomb; there we shall stay forever.' But suddenly into his dream 
there fell a living voice. 
     'Well, Merry! Thank goodness I have found you!' 
     He looked up  and the mist before his eyes  cleared a little. There was 
Pippin! They were face  to face in a narrow lane,  and but for themselves it 
was empty. He rubbed his eyes.  
     'Where is the  king?' he said.  'And Jowyn?' Then he stumbled  and  sat 
down on a doorstep and began to weep again. 
     'They have gone up  into the Citadel,'  said  Pippin. 'I think you must  
have fallen  asleep on your  feet and taken the wrong turning. When we found 
that you were  not  with them,  Gandalf sent me to  look  for you.  Poor old 
Merry! How glad  I am to see you again!  But  you are worn out, and  I won't 

####-bother you with any talk. But tell me, are you hurt, or wounded?' 
     'No,' said Merry. 'Well, no, I don't think so. But I can't use my right 
arm, Pippin, not since I stabbed  him.  And my  sword burned all away like a 
piece of wood.' 
     Pippin's face was anxious. 'Well, you had better come with me  as quick  
as you can,' he said. 'I wish I could carry you. You aren't fit to walk  any 
further. They shouldn't have let you walk at all; but you must forgive them. 
So  many dreadful things have  happened  in the  City, Merry, that  one poor  
hobbit coming in from the battle is easily overlooked.' 
     'It's not  always  a misfortune being overlooked,' said Merry.  'I  was 
overlooked just now by  - no, no, I can't speak of it.  Help me, Pippin! It's 
all going dark again, and my arm is so cold.' 
     'Lean on me, Merry lad!' said Pippin. 'Come now! Foot by foot. It's not 
far.' 
     'Are you going to bury me?' said Merry. 
     'No, indeed!' said Pippin, trying  to sound cheerful, though  his heart 
was wrung with fear and pity. 'No, we are going to the Houses of Healing.' 
     They turned out of the lane that ran  between tall houses and the outer  
wall of the fourth circle, and they  regained the main street climbing up to 
the Citadel. Step by step they  went, while Merry swayed and murmured as one 
in sleep. 
     'I'll never  get him there,' thought  Pippin. 'Is there  no one to help 
me? I can't leave him here.' Just then to his surprise a boy came running up 
behind, and as he passed he recognized Bergil Beregond's son. 
     'Hullo,  Bergil!' he  called.  'Where  are you going?  Glad to  see you  
again, and still alive!' 
     'I am running errands for the Healers,' said Bergil.  'I cannot stay.' 
     'Don't!'  said  Pippin.  'But  tell  them up  there that I have a  sick  
hobbit, a perian  mind you, come from the battle-field. I don't think he can 
walk so far. If Mithrandir is there, he will be glad of the message.' Bergil 
ran on. 
     'I'd better wait here,'  thought  Pippin. So he let Merry  sink  gently 
down on to the pavement in a patch of sunlight,  and then he sat down beside 
him, laying Merry's head  in his lap. He felt his body and limbs gently, and 
took his friend's hands in his own. The right hand felt icy to the touch. 
     It was  not long  before Gandalf himself  came  in  search  of them. He 
stooped over Merry and caressed  his brow; then he lifted him carefully. 'He 

####-should have  been  borne in  honour  into this  city,' he said.  'He has well 
repaid my trust; for  if Elrond had  not yielded to me, neither of you would 
have  set  out; and then far more grievous would the  evils of this day have 
been.' He sighed. 'And yet here is another charge on my hands, while all the 
time the battle hangs in the balance.' 
     So at last  Faramir and  Jowyn and Meriadoc  were laid  in  beds in the 
Houses of  Healing; and there they were tended well. For though all lore was 
in  these latter days fallen  from its  fullness  of old, the  leechcraft of 
Gondor was still wise, and skilled in the healing of wound and hurt, and all 
such  sickness as east of  the Sea mortal men  were subject to. Save old age 
only. For that  they had  found no  cure; and indeed the span of their lives 
had now waned to little more than that of  other men, and those  among  them 
who passed the tale of  five score years with vigour were grown few, save in  
some houses of purer blood.  But now their art and  knowledge were  baffled; 
for there  were  many sick of a  malady that  would not  be healed; and  they 
called it the Black Shadow, for it came from the Nazgyl.  And those who were 
stricken with it fell slowly into an ever deeper  dream, and  then passed to 
silence and a deadly cold, and so died. And it seemed to  the tenders  of the 
sick that on the Halfling and  on the Lady of Rohan this malady lay heavily.  
Still  at whiles as  the  morning wore away  they would speak,  murmuring in 
their  dreams; and  the  watchers  listened  to all that  they said,  hoping 
perhaps  to learn something that  would help them to understand their hurts.  
But  soon they  began to fall down into the darkness, and as the sun  turned 
west a  grey shadow crept over  their faces. But Faramir burned with a fever  
that would not abate. 
     Gandalf  went  from one to the other full of care, and he was told  all 
that the watchers could hear. And so  the day passed, while the great battle 
outside went on with shifting  hopes and strange  tidings; and still Gandalf 
waited and watched and did not  go forth; till at last the red sunset filled 
all the sky, and the light through the windows fell on the grey faces of the  
sick.  Then  it seemed to those  who  stood by that  in the glow  the  faces 
flushed softly as with health returning, but it was only a mockery of hope. 
     Then an old  wife, Ioreth, the eldest  of the women who  served in that 
house, looking on the fair  face  of Faramir, wept, for all the people loved 
him. And  she said: 'Alas! if he should die. Would that there  were kings in 
Gondor , as there were once  upon a time,  they  say! For  it is said in  old 
lore: The hands of the king  are  the hands of a healer. And so the rightful 

####-king could ever be known.' 
     And Gandalf,  who  stood by, said:  'Men  may long remember your words,  
Ioreth! For  there  is hope  in them. Maybe a king has  indeed  returned  to 
Gondor; or  have  you not  heard the strange tidings that  have come to  the 
City?' 
     'I  have been  too busy with this and that  to  heed all the crying and 
shouting,' she answered. 'All  I hope is that those murdering devils  do not 
come to this House and trouble the sick.' 
     Then Gandalf went  out in haste, and already  the fire  in  the sky was 
burning out, and the smouldering  hills were  fading, while ash-grey evening 
crept over the fields.  
     Now  as  the sun went down  Aragorn and Jomer and Imrahil drew near the 
City  with their captains and knights; and  when they came  before the  Gate 
Aragorn said: 
     'Behold the  Sun setting in  a  great fire! It is a sign of the end and 
fall of many things, and a change in the tides of  the world.  But this City 
and realm has rested in the charge of the  Stewards for many long years, and 
I  fear that if I enter it unbidden, then doubt and debate may  arise, which 
should not be while this war is  fought.  I will not enter in, nor  make any 
claim, until  it be seen whether we or Mordor shall prevail. Men shall pitch 
my tents upon  the field,  and here  I will await the welcome of the Lord of 
the City.' 
     But Jomer  said: 'Already you have raised the banner  of the Kings  and 
displayed  the  tokens  of  Elendil's  House.  Will you suffer  these to  be 
challenged?' 
     'No,' said Aragorn. 'But I deem the time unripe; and I have no mind for 
strife except with our Enemy and his servants. ' 
     And the Prince  Imrahil said. Your words, lord, are wise, if one who is 
a kinsman of  the  Lord Denethor  may counsel  you  in  this  matter. He  is 
strong-willed  and proud, but old; and  his mood has been strange  since his 
son was stricken down. Yet I would not have  you remain like a beggar at the 
door.' 
     'Not  a beggar,' said Aragorn. 'Say a captain  of the Rangers, who  are 
unused to  cities and  houses of  stone.' And he commanded  that  his banner  
should be furled;  and he did off the Star of the  North Kingdom and gave it 
to the keeping of the sons of Elrond. 
     Then the Prince Imrahil and Jomer of Rohan left him and passed  through 

####-the City and the tumult of the people,  and mounted to the Citadel; and they 
came to the Hall of the Tower, seeking the Steward. But they found his chair 
empty, and before the dais lay Thjoden King of the Mark upon a bed of state; 
and twelve torches stood about it, and twelve  guards, knights both of Rohan 
and Gondor. And the hangings  of  the bed were of  green and white, but upon 
the king  was laid the great cloth  of gold up  to his breast, and upon that 
his  unsheathed sword, and at his  feet his shield, The light of the torches 
shimmered in  his  white hair like  sun in the spray of a fountain,  but his 
face  was fair  and young, save that  a peace lay on it beyond the reach  of 
youth; and it seemed that he slept. 
     When they had stood silent  for a time  beside  the king, Imrahil said: 
'Where is the Steward? And where also is Mithrandir?' 
     And one of the guards answered: 'The Steward of Gondor is in the Houses 
of Healing.' 
     But  Jomer said: 'Where is the  Lady Jowyn,  my sister; for surely  she 
should be lying beside the  king, and  in no  less  honour? Where  have they 
bestowed her?' 
     And Imrahil said: 'But the Lady Jowyn was yet living when they bore her  
hither. Did you not know?' 
     Then hope unlooked-for came so  suddenly to Jomer's  heart, and with it 
the bite of care and fear renewed, that he said no more, but turned and went 
swiftly from the hall; and the Prince followed him. And when they came forth 
evening had fallen and many stars were in the sky. And there came Gandalf on 
foot and with him one cloaked in grey; and they met before the doors of  the 
Houses of Healing. And they greeted Gandalf and said: 'We  seek the Steward, 
and men say that  he is in  this House.  Has any hurt befallen him? And  the 
Lady Jowyn, where is she?' 
     And Gandalf answered: 'She lies  within and is not  dead, but  is  near 
death. But the Lord Faramir was wounded by an evil dart,  as you have heard, 
and he  is  now the Steward; for Denethor has departed, and his house is  in 
ashes.' And they were filled with grief and wonder at the tale that he told. 
     But Imrahil  said: 'So victory is shorn of gladness,  and  it is bitter  
bought, if both Gondor and Rohan are in one day bereft of their lords. Jomer  
rules the Rohirrim. Who shall rule the City meanwhile? Shall we not send now 
for the Lord Aragorn?' 
     And the cloaked man spoke and said:  'He is  come.' And they saw  as he 
stepped  into the  light of  the lantern  by the  door that  it was Aragorn, 

####-wrapped in the grey cloak  of  Lurien above his mail, and bearing  no  other 
token  than the green stone of Galadriel. 'I  have come because Gandalf begs 
me  to do so,'  he  said. 'But for the present I am but the  Captain  of the 
D®nedain of Arnor;  and the Lord  of  Dol Amroth  shall rule the City  until  
Faramir awakes. But it is my counsel that Gandalf should rule us  all in the 
days  that follow and in our  dealings with the Enemy.' And they agreed upon 
that. 
     Then Gandalf  said:  'Let us not  stay  at the door,  for the  time  is 
urgent. Let us enter! For  it is only in the coming of Aragorn that any hope 
remains for the sick that lie in the House. Thus spake Ioreth, wise-woman of  
Gondor: The hands of the  king are  the hands of a healer, and  so shall the 
rightful king be known .' 
     Then  Aragorn entered first and the  others followed. And there  at the 
door were two guards in the  livery of the  Cita del: one tall, but the other  
scarce the height of a boy; and when he saw them he cried  aloud in surprise 
and joy. 
     'Strider! How splendid! Do you know, I guessed  it was you in the black  
ships. But  they were all  shouting  corsairs and wouldn't listen to me. How 
did you do it?' 
     Aragorn laughed, and took the hobbit by the hand. 'Well met indeed!' he 
said. 'But there is not time yet for travellers' tales.' 
     But Imrahil said to Jomer: 'Is it  thus that we speak to our kings? Yet 
maybe he will wear his crown in some other name!' 
     And Aragorn hearing  him,  turned and  said: 'Verily, for  in the  high 
tongue of old I am Elessar, the Elfstone, and  Envinyatar, the Renewer': and  
he lifted from his breast the green stone that lay there. 'But Strider shall 
be the name of my house, if that be ever established.  In the high tongue it 
will not  sound  so ill,  and  Telcontar I will be and all  the heirs  of my 
body.' 
     And with that they passed into the House; and as  they went towards the 
rooms  where the  sick were tended  Gandalf told of the deeds  of  Jowyn and 
Meriadoc. 'For,' he said, 'long have I stood by them and at first they spoke 
much in their dreaming, before they sank into  the deadly darkness. Also  it 
is given to me to see many things  far off.' 
     Aragorn  went first to Faramir, and then to the Lady Jowyn, and last to 
Merry. When  he had looked on the faces of the sick  and seen their hurts he 
sighed. 'Here I must  put forth all such power and skill as is given to me,' 

####-he said.  'Would that Elrond were here, for he is the eldest of all our race, 
and has the greater power.' 
     And Jomer seeing  that he was sorrowful and weary said: 'First you must  
rest, surely, and at the least eat a little?' 
     But Aragorn answered: 'Nay, for these  three, and most soon for Faramir,  
time is running out. All speed is needed.' 
     Then he called to Ioreth and he said: 'You have store  in this House of 
the herbs of healing?' 
     'Yes, lord,' she answered; 'but not enough, I reckon, for all that will 
need  them. But I am sure I  do  not know  where we shall find more; for all 
things are amiss in these dreadful days, what with  fires and  burnings, and 
the lads that run errands so few, and all the roads blocked. Why, it is days 
out of count since ever a carrier came in from Lossarnach to the market! But 
we do our best in this  House with what we have, as  I am sure your lordship 
will know.' 
     'I will judge that when I see,' said Aragorn.  'One thing also is short 
time for speech. Have you athelas?' 
     'I do not know,  I am  sure, lord,' she answered, 'at least not by that 
name. I will go and ask of the herb-master; he knows all the old names.' 
     'It is also called kingsfoil,' said Aragorn; 'and maybe you  know it by 
that name, for so the country-folk call it in these latter days.' 'Oh that!' 
said Ioreth. 'Well, if your lordship had named it at first I could have told 
you. No, we have none of it, I am sure. Why, I have  never heard that it had 
any great virtue;  and indeed I  have often said to  my sisters when we came 
upon it growing in the woods: "kingsfoil" I said, " 'tis a strange name, and 
I  wonder why 'tis called so; for if I were a king, I would have plants more 
bright in  my garden". Still it smells sweet  when bruised,  does it not? If 
sweet is the right word: wholesome, maybe, is nearer.' 
     'Wholesome verily,' said Aragorn. 'And now,  dame, if you love the Lord 
Faramir, run  as quick as your  tongue and get me kingsfoil, if  there  is a  
leaf in the City.' 
     'And if  not,' said Gandalf,  'I  will  ride  to Lossarnach with  Ioreth 
behind me, and she  shall take me to the woods, but not  to her sisters. And 
Shadowfax shall show her the meaning of haste.' 
     When Ioreth was  gone, Aragorn bade the other  women to make water hot. 
Then he took  Faramir's hand in  his, and laid the other hand  upon the sick  
man's brow. It was drenched with sweat; but Faramir did not move or make any 

####-sign, and seemed hardly to breathe. 
     'He is nearly spent,' said Aragorn turning to Gandalf. 'But  this comes 
not from  the wound. See! that  is healing. Had he been smitten by some dart  
of the Nazgyl,  as you thought, he would have died that night. This hurt was 
given  by  some  Southron arrow,  I  would guess.  Who drew it forth? Was it 
kept?' 
     'I drew it forth,'  said  Imrahil, 'and staunched the wound. But I  did 
not keep the arrow, for we had much to  do. It was, as I remember, just such 
a  dart as the Southrons use. Yet I  believed  that it came from the Shadows 
above, for else his fever and sickness were not  to be understood; since the 
wound was not deep or vital. How then do you read the matter?' 
     'Weariness,  grief for his father's  mood,  a  wound,  and over all the 
Black Breath,' said  Aragorn.  'He is a man of  staunch will, for already he 
had  come close  under  the Shadow  before  ever  he  rode to battle on  the 
out-walls.  Slowly the dark must have crept  on  him,  even as he fought and 
strove to hold his outpost. Would that I could have been here sooner!' 
     Thereupon the herb-master enter ed.  'Your lordship asked for kingsfoil, 
as the rustics name it, he said; or athelas in the noble tongue, or to those 
who know somewhat of the Valinorean. . .' 
     'I  do  so,'  said Aragorn, 'and I care  not  whether you say  now asla  
aranion or kingsfoil, so long as you have some.' 
     'Your  pardon lord!' said the  man. 'I see  you  are a lore-master, not 
merely  a captain of  war. But alas! sir, we do not keep  this  thing in the 
Houses of Healing, where  only the  gravely hurt or sick  are tended. For it 
has no virtue that we know of, save perhaps  to sweeten a fouled air, or  to 
drive away  some passing  heaviness.  Unless,  of  course, you  give heed to 
rhymes of old days which women such as our good Ioreth still repeat  without 
understanding. 
     When the black breath blows  
     and death's shadow grows  
     and all lights pass, 
     come athelas! come athelas! 
     Life to the dying 
     In the king's hand lying! 
     It is but  a doggrel, I fear, garbled  in the  memory of old wives. Its 
meaning I leave to your judgement, if indeed it has any. But  old folk still 
use an infusion of the herb for headaches.' 

####-     'Then in the name of the  king, go  and find some old man  of less lore 
and more wisdom who keeps some in his house!' cried Gandalf.  
     Now  Aragorn knelt beside Faramir,  and held a hand  upon his brow. And 
those that watched felt that some great struggle was going on. For Aragorn's 
face  grew grey  with weariness; and ever and anon  he  called the  name  of 
Faramir, but each time more fa intly to their hearing, as  if Aragorn himself 
was removed from them, and walked afar  in some dark vale,  calling  for one 
that was lost. 
     And at last Bergil came running in, and he bore six  leaves in a cloth. 
'It is kingsfoil,  Sir,' he  said; 'but not fresh, I fear. It must have been 
culled two weeks ago at the least. I hope it will  serve, Sir?' Then looking 
at Faramir he burst into tears. 
     But Aragorn smiled. 'It  will serve,' he said. 'The worst is  now over. 
Stay and be comforted!'  Then taking two leaves,  he  laid them on his hands 
and breathed on them,  and then  he crushed them, and straightway  a  living 
freshness filled the room, as if the air itself awoke and tingled, sparkling 
with joy. And then he cast the leaves into the bowls  of steaming water that 
were brought  to  him,  and  at  once all hearts  were  lightened.  For  the 
fragrance that came to each was like a memory of dewy mornings of 
unshadowed 
sun in some land of which the fair world in Spring is itself but  a fleeting 
memory.  But  Aragorn  stood  up as one refreshed, and his eyes smiled as he 
held a bowl before Faramir's dreaming face. 
     'Well now!  Who would have believed  it?'  said Ioreth to  a woman that 
stood beside her. 'The weed is  better than I thought. It reminds me  of the 
roses of Imloth Melui when I was a lass, and no king could ask for better.' 
     Suddenly Faramir  stirred, and he  opened  his eyes,  and he looked  on 
Aragorn who  bent over him; and a light of knowledge and love was kindled in 
his  eyes, and he spoke softly.  'My  lord, you called  me. I come. What does 
the king command?' 
     'Walk no more in the shadows, but awake!' said Aragorn. 'You are weary. 
Rest a while, and take food, and be ready when I return.' 
     'I will, lord,' said Faramir. 'For who would lie idle when the king has 
returned?' 
     'Farewell then  for a while!' said Aragorn.  'I must go  to  others who 
need me.' And he left the chamber with Gandalf and Imrahil; but Beregond and 
his son remained behind, unable to contain their joy. As he followed Gandalf 

####-and shut the door Pippin heard Ioreth exclaim: 
     'King! Did you hear  that? What  did I say? The  hands  of  a healer, I 
said.'  And  soon the word had  gone  out  from the House  that the king was 
indeed  come among  them, and after war he brought healing; and the news ran 
through the City. 
     But Aragorn came to Jowyn, and he said: 'Here there is a  grievous hurt 
and a  heavy blow. The arm that  was broken  has been tended with due skill, 
and it will  mend in time, if she  ha s  the  strength  to live:  It  is  the 
shield-arm  that is maimed; but the chief evil comes through the  sword-arm.  
In that there now seems no life, although it is unbroken. 
     'Alas! For she was pitted against a foe beyond the strength of her mind 
or body. And those who  will take a weapon to such an enemy must  be sterner 
than  steel,  if the very shock shall  not destroy them. It was an evil doom 
that set her in his path. For she is a fair maiden, fairest  lady of a house 
of queens. And yet I know not how I should speak of her. When I first looked 
on her  and  perceived  her unhappiness, it seemed to me that I saw a  white 
flower standing straight and proud, shapely as a lily, and yet knew  that it 
was  hard, as if  wrought by elf-wrights out of steel. Or  was  it, maybe, a  
frost that had turned  its sap to ice, and  so it stood, bitter-sweet, still 
fair to see, but stricken, soon  to fall and die? Her malady begins far back  
before this day, does it not, Jomer?' 
     'I marvel that you should  ask me,  lord,' he answered. 'For I hold you  
blameless  in  this  matter, as in  all else; yet  I knew not that Jowyn, my 
sister, was touched by any  frost, until  she first looked on you.  Care and 
dread she had,  and shared with me, in the days of Wormtongue and the king's 
bewitchment; and she tended the king in growing fear. But that did not bring  
her to this pass!' 
     'My friend,' said Gandalf,  'you had horses, and deeds of arms, and the 
free fields; but she, born  in the body of a maid, had  a spirit and courage 
at least the match of yours.  Yet  she  was doomed to wait  upon an old man, 
whom she  loved as a father, and watch him falling  into a  mean dishonoured 
dotage; and her part seemed to her more ignoble  than that  of the  staff he 
leaned on. 
     'Think you that Wormtongue  had poison only for Thjoden's ears? Dotard! 
What is the  house of Eorl but a thatched barn where brigands  drink  in the 
reek, and their brats roll on the floor among their dogs? Have you not heard 

####-those words before? Saruman spoke them, the teacher of Wormtongue. Though  
I 
do  not doubt that Wormtongue at home  wrapped their  meaning in terms  
more 
cunning. My lord,  if your sister's love for you, and her will still bent to 
her duty, had not restrained her lips; you might have heard even such things 
as these  escape them. But who knows what she spoke to  the darkness, alone, 
in the bitter watches of the night, when all her  life seemed shrinking, and 
the walls of her bower closing in  about her,  a hutch  to trammel some wild  
thing in? ' 
     Then Jomer was  silent, and looked on  his sister, as if pondering anew 
all the days of their past life together. But Aragorn said: 'I saw also what 
you saw,  Jomer. Few other  griefs amid the  ill  chances of this world have 
more  bitterness and shame for a man's heart than  to  behold the  love of a  
lady so fair and brave that cannot be returned Sorrow and pity have followed 
me ever since I left her desperate in Dunharrow and rode to the Paths of the 
Dead;  and no  fear upon  that way was so present as the fear for what might  
befall her. And yet, Jomer, I  say to you that she loves you more truly than 
me; for you she loves and knows; but  in me  she loves  only a shadow and  a 
thought: a hope of glory and  great deeds, and lands far from  the fields of 
Rohan. 
     'I have, maybe, the power to heal her body, and to recall  her from the 
dark valley. But to what she will awake: hope, or forgetfulness, or despair, 
I do  not know. And if to despair, then  she will die, unless  other healing 
comes  which  I cannot bring. Alas!  for  her  deeds have  set her among  the 
queens of great renown.' 
     Then Aragorn stooped and looked in her face, and it was indeed white as 
a lily, cold as frost, and hard as graven stone.  But he bent and kissed her  
on the brow, and called her softly, saying: 
     'Jowyn Jomund's daughter, awake! For your enemy has passed away!' 
     She did not stir,  but now she began again  to  breathe deeply, so that 
her breast rose  and  fell  beneath the white linen of  the sheet. Once more 
Aragorn bruised two leaves of athelas and cast them into steaming water; and 
he laved her brow with it, and her right arm lying cold and nerveless on the 
coverlet. 
     Then,  whether Aragorn had indeed some forgotten  power of Westernesse, 
or whether it was but his words  of the Lady Jowyn that  wrought on them, as 

####-the sweet influence of the herb  stole about the chamber it seemed to  those 
who stood by that a keen wind blew through the window, and it bore no scent, 
but was an air wholly fresh  and  clean  and young, as if it had not  before 
been  breathed  by any  living thing and came  new-made from snowy 
mountains 
high beneath a  dome of stars,  or from shores of silver far away  washed by 
seas of foam. 
     'Awake, Jowyn, Lady of  Rohan!'  said  Aragor n again,  and he  took her 
right hand in his and  felt it  warm with life returning. 'Awake! The shadow 
is gone and all darkness is washed  clean!' Then he laid her hand in Jomer's 
and  stepped  away. 'Call  her!' he said, and  he passed  silently  from the 
chamber. 
     'Jowyn, Jowyn!' cried Jomer amid his tears. But she opened her eyes and  
said: 'Jomer! What  joy is this? For they said that you were slain. Nay, but 
that was only the dark voices in my dream. How long have I been dreaming?' 
     'Not long, my sister,' said Jomer. 'But think no more on it!' 
     ' I am  strangely weary,' she said. 'I must rest a little. But tell me, 
what of the Lord of the Mark? Alas! Do not tell me that that was a dream for  
I know that it was not. He is dead as he foresaw.' 
     'He is dead,' said Jomer, 'but he bade me say farewell to  Jowyn dearer  
than daughter. He lies now in great honour in the Citadel of Gondor.' 
     'That is grievous,' she said. 'And yet  it  is  good beyond all  that I 
dared hope in the dark  days, when it seemed that the House of Eorl was sunk 
in honour less than  any shepherd's cot. And what of the king's esquire, the 
Halfling? Jomer, you shall make him a knight  of  the Riddermark, for he  is 
valiant!' 
     'He lies nearby  in this  House,  and I will go  to him,' said Gandalf.  
'Jomer  shall stay here for a while. But do  not  speak  yet of  war or woe, 
until you are made whole  again. Great gladness  it is to see you wake again  
to health and hope, so valiant a lady!' 
     'To health?' said  Jowyn. 'It  may  be so. At  least  while there is an 
empty saddle of some  fallen Rider that I can  fill, and there  are deeds to 
do. But to hope? I do not know.' 
     Gandalf and Pippin came to Merry's room, and there  they found  Aragorn 
standing by  the  bed.   'Poor  old Merry!' cried Pippin, and  he ran to  the 
bedside, for it seemed to  him that  his friend looked worse, and a greyness 
was in his face, as if a weight of years of sorrow  lay on him; and suddenly 

####-a fear seized Pippin that Merry would die. 
     'Do not be afraid,'  said Aragorn. 'I came in  time, and  I have called 
him back. He  is weary now, and grieved, and  he has taken a hurt  like  the 
Lady Jowyn, daring  to  smite  that deadly  thing. But  these  evils can  be 
amended, so strong and gay a sp irit is in him. His grief he will not forget; 
but it will not darken his heart, it will teach him wisdom.' 
     Then Aragorn laid his hand on Merry's head, and passing his hand gently  
through the brown curls, he touched the eyelids, and called him by name. And 
when  the fragrance  of athelas stole through the room, like  the  scent  of 
orchards, and of heather in the sunshine full of bees, suddenly Merry awoke,  
and he said: 
     'I am hungry. What is the time?' 
     'Past supper -time  now,' said Pippin; 'though I daresay  I could  bring 
you something, if they will let me.' 
     'They will indeed,' said Gandalf. 'And anything else that this Rider of 
Rohan  may desire, if it can be found in Minas Tirith, where  his name is in 
honour.' 
     'Good!' said Merry.  'Then I  would  like supper first, and after that a  
pipe.' At that his face clouded. 'No, not a pipe.  I don't think I'll  smoke 
again.' 
     'Why not?' said Pippin. 
     'Well,' answered Merry slowly. 'He is dead. It  has brought it all back  
to me.  He said he was sorry he  had never had a chance of talking herb-lore 
with me. Almost the last thing he ever said. I shan't ever be able to  smoke 
again without  thinking of  him, and  that day, Pippin, when he  rode up  to 
Isengard and was so polite.' 
     'Smoke then, and  think of  him!' said  Aragorn.  'For he  was a gentle 
heart and a great king and kept his oaths; and he rose out of the shadows to 
a last fair  morning.  Though your  service to him was brief, it should be a  
memory glad and honourable to the end of your days.' 
     Merry  smiled. 'Well then,' he said, 'if  Strider will  provide what is 
needed, I will smoke and think. I had some of Saruman's best in my pack, but 
what became of it in the battle, I am sure I don't know.' 
     'Master  Meriadoc,'  said  Aragorn,  'if  you  think that  I have passed 
through the  mountains and the realm of Gondor with  fire and sword to bring 
herbs to a  careless soldier who throws away his gear,  you are mistaken. If 
your pack has not been found, then you must send for the herb-master of this 

####-House. And he will tell you that he  did  not know that the herb  you desire 
had  any  virtues, but  that it is  called westmansweed by  the vulgar,  and 
galenas by the  noble,  and  other names  in other tongues more learned, and 
after adding  a few half-forgotten  rhymes that he  does not understand,  he 
will regretfully inform  you  that there is none in the  House, and  he will 
leave you  to reflect  on  the history of tongues.  And so now must I. For I 
have not slept in such a bed as this, since I rode from Dunharrow, nor eaten 
since the dark before dawn.' 
     Merry seized his hand and kissed it. 'I am frightfully sorry,' he said. 
'Go at once!  Ever since that night at Bree we have been  a nuisance to you. 
But it is the way of my people to use light words at such times and say less 
than they mean. We fear to say too much. It robs us of the  right words when  
a jest is out of place.' 
     'I  know that well, or I would not deal with you in the same way ' said 
Aragorn. 'May the Shire live for ever unwithered!' And kissing Merry he went 
out, and Gandalf went with him.  
     Pippin  remained behind. 'Was  there  ever any one like him?'  he said. 
'Except Gandalf, of course. I think they  must be related. My dear ass, your 
pack is lying by your bed, and you  had  it on your back when I  met you. He 
saw it all the time, of course. And anyway I have some stuff of my own. Come 
on now! Longbottom Leaf it is.  Fill up while I run and see about some food. 
And  then let's be  easy for  a bit. Dear me!  We Tooks  and Brandybucks, we 
can't live long on the heights.' 
     'No,' said Merry. 'I can't. Not yet, at any rate. But at least, Pippin, 
we can now see them, and honour them. It is best to  love first what you are 
fitted to love, I suppose: you must start somewhere and have some roots, and 
the soil of the Shire is deep. Still there are things deeper and higher; and 
not a gaffer could tend his garden  in  what he calls  peace  but  for them, 
whether  he knows about them or not.  I am  glad that   I know about them,  a  
little. But I don't know why I am talking like this. Where is that leaf? And 
get my pipe out of my pack, if it isn't broken.' 
     Aragorn and  Gandalf went now to the  Warden of the  Houses of Healing, 
and they counselled him that Faramir and Jowyn should remain there and still 
be tended with care for many days. 
     'The Lady Jowyn,' said Aragorn, 'will wish soon to rise and depart; but 
she should not be  permitted to do so,  if you  can in any way restrain her, 
until at least ten days be passed.' 

####-     'As for Faramir,' said Gandalf, 'he must soon  learn that his father is 
dead. But the full  tale of the  madness  of Denethor should  not be told to 
him, until  he is quite  healed and has duties to do. See  that Beregond and 
the perian who were present do not speak to him of these things yet!' 
     And the other perian Meriadoc who is  under my care, what of him?' said 
the Warden. 
     'It  is likely that  he will  be  fit  to arise tomorrow, for  a  short 
while,' said Aragorn.  'Let him do so, if he  wishes. He may walk a little in 
the care of his friends.' 
     'They are a remarkable race,' said the Warden, nodding his head.  'Very 
tough in the fibre, I deem.' 
     At the  doors of the Houses many were already gathered to  see Aragorn,  
and they  followed  after him; and when at last he  had supped, men came and 
prayed that he would heal their kinsmen or their friends whose lives were in 
peril through hurt or wound, or who lay under the Black  Shadow. And 
Aragorn 
arose and went out, and he sent for  the sons of  Elrond,  and together they 
laboured  far into the  night. And word went through the City: 'The  King is 
come again indeed.' And they named  him Elfstone, because of the green stone 
that  he wore, and so  the name  which it was for etold at his  birth that he 
should bear was chosen for him by his own people. 
     And when he  could labour no  more,  he cast his  cloak  about him, and 
slipped out of the City, and went to his tent just ere dawn and  slept for a  
little. And in the morning the banner of  Dol Amroth, a  white ship  like  a  
swan upon blue water, floated from the Tower, and men looked up and 
wondered 
if the coming of the King had been but a dream. 
 

####- 

Chapter 9. The Last Debate 

 
 
     The morning came after  the  day of battle, and it was fair with  light 
clouds and the wind turning  westward. Legolas and  Gimli were early abroad, 
and  they  begged leave to go up  into the City; for  they were eager to see 
Merry and Pippin. 
     'It is good to learn that they are still alive,' said Gimli;  'for they 
cost us great pains in our march over Rohan, and I would not have such pains 
all wasted.' 
     Together the  Elf and the Dwarf entered Minas Tirith, and folk that saw 
them  pass  marvelled to see such companions; for Legolas was fair  of  face 
beyond the measure of Men, and  he sang an elven-song in a clear voice as he 
walked in the morning; but Gimli stalked  beside him, stroking his beard and 
staring about him. 
     'There is  some  good  stone-work here,'  he said as he  looked  a t the 
walls;  'but also  some that is  less good, and  the streets could be better  
contrived. When Aragorn comes into his own, I shall offer him the service of 
stonewrights of the Mountain, and we will make this a town to be proud of.' 
     'They need more gardens,' said Legolas. 'The houses are dead, and there 
is too little  here that grows and is glad.  If Aragorn comes into his  own, 
the people of the Wood shall bring him birds that sing and trees that do not 
die.' 
     At  length they came to the Prince  Imrahil, and  Legolas  looked at him 
and bowed  low; for he  saw that here  indeed was one who had elven-blood in 
his veins. 'Hail, lord!' he said.  'It is long since the people  of Nimrodel 
left the woodlands of Lurien, and yet still one may see that  no t all sailed 
from Amroth's haven west over water.' 
     'So it is said in the lore of my land,' said the Prince; 'yet never has 
one of the fair folk been seen there for years beyond count. And I marvel to 
see one here now in the midst of sorrow and war. What do you seek?' 
     'I  am  one of the Nine  Companions  who  set  out with Mithrandir from 
Imladris, said Legolas and with  this Dwarf, my friend, I came with the Lord 
Aragorn. But now we wish to see  our friends. Meriadoc and Peregrin, who are 
in your keeping, we are told.' 
     'You  will  find them  in  the Houses of Healing, and  I will  lead you  

####-thither,' said Imrahil. 
     'It will be  enough if you send one to guide  us,  lord,' said Legolas.  
'For Aragorn sends this message to you. He does not wish  to  enter the City 
again at this  time. Yet there is need  for the captains to hold  council at 
once, and he prays that you and Jomer of  Rohan will come down to his tents,  
as soon as may be. Mithrandir is already there.' 
     'We will come,' said Imrahil; and they parted with courteous words. 
     'That  is  a  fair lord and a great captain of men,'  said Legolas. 'If 
Gondor has such men still in these  days of fading, great must have been its 
glory in the days of its rising.' 
     'And doubtless the good stone-work is the older and  was wrought in the 
first building,' said  Gimli. 'It is ever so with the things that Men begin: 
there  is a frost  in Spring, or a blight in Summer, and they  fail of their 
promise.' 
     'Yet seldom do they fail of their seed,' said  Legolas. 'And that  will 
lie in the dust and rot to spring up again in times and places unlooked-for. 
The deeds of Men will outlast us, Gimli.' 
     'And yet come to naught in the end but might-have-beens, I guess,' said 
the Dwarf. 
     'To that the Elves know not the answer,' said Legolas.  
     With that the servant of the  Prince came and led them to the Houses of 
Healing; and there they found their friends in the garden, and their meeting 
was a merry one.  For a while  they walked and talked, rejoicing for a brief 
space in peace  and rest under  the morning high up in the windy  circles of 
the City. Then when Merry became weary, they went and sat upon the wall 
with 
the  greensward of  the  Houses of Healing behind them; and  away  southward 
before  them was the Anduin glittering in the sun, as it flowed away, out of 
the  sight even  of Legolas, into the wide  flats and green haze of Lebennin 
and South Ithilien. 
     And now Legolas fell silent, while the others talked, and he looked out 
against the sun,  and as  he  gazed he  saw white sea -birds  beating  up the 
River. 
     'Look!' he cried. 'Gulls! They are flying far inland. A wonder they are 
to me and a trouble to my heart. Never in  all my life had I met them, until 
we came to  Pelargir, and  there I heard them crying in the air as we rode to 
the battle of the ships. Then I stood still, forgetting war in Middle-earth; 

####-for their wailing  voices spoke to me of the Sea. The Sea!  Alas! I have not 
yet  beheld  it.  But  deep  in  the  hearts  of  a ll  my  kindred lies  the 
sea -longing,  which it is perilous  to stir. Alas! for the  gulls. No  peace 
shall I have again under beech or under elm.' 
     'Say not so!' said Gimli. 'There are  countless things still to see  in 
Middle-earth, and great works  to  do. But if  all  the fair folk take to the 
Havens, it will be a duller world for those who are doomed to stay.' 
     'Dull and dreary indeed!' said Merry: 'You must  not go to the  Havens, 
Legolas. There will always  be some folk, big or little, and even a few wise 
dwarves like Gimli, who need you. At least I  hope so. Though I feel somehow 
that the worst of this war is still to come. How I wish it was all over, and 
well over!' 
     'Don't  be  so gloomy!' cried Pippin.  'The Sun is shining, and here we 
are  together  for a day or two at least. I want to hear more about you all. 
Come, Gimli!  You  and  Legolas have mentioned  your  strange  journey  with 
Strider about a dozen times  already  this  morning. But you haven't told me 
anything about it.' 
     'The Sun may  shine here,' said Gimli, 'but  there are memories of that 
road  that I do not wish to recall out of the darkness. Had I known what was 
before me, I think  that not for any friendship would I have taken the Paths 
of the Dead.' 
     'The Paths of the Dead?' said Pippin.  'I heard Aragorn say  that and I 
wondered what he could mean. Won't you tell us some more?' 
     'Not willingly,' said Gimli.  'For upon that road  I  was put to shame: 
Gimli Gluin's son, who had deemed  himself  more tough than Men, and 
hardier 
under  earth than  any Elf. But neither did  I prove;  and I was held to the 
road only by the will of Aragorn.' 
     'And by the love of him also,' said Legolas. 'For all those who come to 
know him come to love him after his own fashion,  even the cold maiden of the 
Rohirrim. It was at early morn of the day ere you came there, Merry, that we 
left Dunharrow, and such a fear was  on all the folk that none would look on 
our going,  save the Lady Jowyn, who lies now hurt in the House below. There 
was grief at that parting, and I was grieved to behold it.' 
     'Alas! I had heart only for myself,' said Gimli. 'Nay! I will not speak 
of that journey.' 
     He fell silent;  but Pippin and  Merry were  so eager for news that  at 

####-last  Legolas  said:  'I will tell you enough for your peace;  for I felt not 
the  horror, and I feared not the shadows of  Men, powerless and frail  as I 
deemed them.' 
     Swiftly then he told of  the haunted  road under the mountains, and the 
dark tryst at Erech, and the gr eat ride thence, ninety leagues and three, to 
Pelargir on Anduin. 'Four days and nights, and on into a fifth, we rode from 
the Black Stone,' he said.  'And lo! in the darkness of Mordor my hope rose;  
for in that  gloom the Shadow Host seemed to grow stronger and more terrible 
to look upon. Some I saw riding, some striding, yet all moving with the same 
great speed. Silent they were, but there was a gleam in  their eyes. In  the 
uplands of Lamedon they overtook our horses, and  swept round us, and  would 
have passed us by, if Aragorn had not forbidden them. 
     'At his command they fell back. "Even the shades of Men are obedient to 
his will," I thought. "They may serve his needs yet! " 
     'One day of light  we  rode, and then  came the  day  without dawn, a nd 
still we rode on, and  Ciril and Ringlu we crossed; and on  the third day we 
came to  Linhir above  the mouth  of  Gilrain.  And  there  men  of  Lamedon 
contested the fords with fell folk  of Umbar and Harad who had sailed up the 
river. But  defenders   and  foes alike gave up  the battle and fled  when we 
came,  crying out that the King of the Dead was upon them. Only Angbor, Lord 
of Lamedon, had the heart to abide us; and Aragorn bade  him gather his folk 
and come behind, if they dared, when the Grey Host had passed. 
     ' "At Pelargir the Heir of Isildur will have need of you," he said. 
     'Thus we crossed  over Gilrain,  driving the allies  of  Mordor in rout 
before us; and then we rested a while. But soon Aragorn  arose, saying: "Lo!  
already  Mina s Tirith is assailed. I  fear that it  will fall ere we come to 
its aid." So  we mounted again before  night had passed and went on with all  
the speed that our horses could endure over the plains of Lebennin.' 
     Legolas paused  and  sighed,  and turning his eyes southward softly  he 
sang: 
     Silver flow the streams from Celos to Erui 
     In the green fields of Lebennin! 
     Tall grows the grass there. In the wind from the Sea 
     The white lilies sway, 
     And the golden bells are shaken of mallos and alfirin  
     In the green fields of Lebennin, 
     In the wind from the Sea! 

####-     'Green are those  fields in the songs of my people; but  they were dark 
then,  grey  wastes  in  the blackness  before  us. And over  the wide land, 
trampling unheeded the grass and  the flowers, we hunted our foes through  a 
day and a night, until we came at the bitter end to the Great River at last. 
     'Then I thought in my heart that we drew near to the  Sea; for wide was 
the  water in the darkness, and sea -birds innumerable cried on its,  shores.  
Alas  for  the wailing of the  gulls! Did  not the Lady tell me to beware of 
them? And now I cannot forget them.' 
     'For my part  I heeded them not,' said Gimli; 'for we came then at last  
upon battle in earnest. There at Pelargir lay the main fleet of Umbar, fifty 
great ships and smaller  vessels beyond count. Many of those that we pursued 
had reached the havens before us, and brought their fear with them; and some 
of  the ships had put off, seeking to escape down the River  or to reach  the 
far shore; and many of  the  smaller  craft were  ablaze.  But the Haradrim, 
being  now  driven  to the brink, turned at  bay,  and they were  fierce  in 
despair; and they laughed when they looked on us, for they were a great army 
still. 
     'But Aragorn  halted and cried with a great voice:  "Now  come!  By the 
Black Stone I call you! " And suddenly the Shadow Host that had hung back at 
the last  came up like a grey tide, sweeping all away before it. Faint cries 
I heard, and  dim horns b lowing, and a murmur as of countless far voices: it  
was like the echo of  some forgotten battle in the Dark Years long ago. Pale  
swords were drawn; but I know not whether their blades would still bite, for  
the Dead needed no longer any weapon but fear. None would withstand them. 
     'To every  ship they came that was drawn up, and then  they passed over  
the water to those that were anchored; and all the mariners were filled with 
a madness  of  terror and leaped  overboard, save the  slaves chained to the 
oars. Reckless  we rode among  our fleeing foes,  driving them  like leaves,  
until  we  came to  the  shore. And then to each  of  the  great  ships that 
remained Aragorn sent one of the D®nedain,  and  they comforted the captives 
that were aboard, and bade  them put aside fear and be free. 
     'Ere  that dark day ended none of the  enemy were left to resist us all 
were drowned, or were flying  south in the hope to find their own lands upon 
foot.  Strange and wonderful I thought it that  the designs of Mordor should 
be overthrown by such wraiths of fear and darkness. With its own weapons was 
it worsted!' 
     'Strange indeed,' said Legolas. 'In that  hour I  looked on Aragorn and 

####-thought how  great and terrible a Lord he might have become in the  strength 
of his  will, had he taken the Ring to  himself.  Not for naught does Mordor  
fear him. But nobler is his spirit than  the understanding of Sauron; for is 
he not of  the children of  L®thien? Never shall that  line fail, though the 
years may lengthen beyond count.' 
     'Beyond  the eyes of the Dwarves are  such  foretellings,'  said Gimli. 
'But mighty indeed was  Aragorn that day. Lo! all the black fleet was in his 
hands; and he chose the greatest ship to be his own, and he went up into it. 
Then he  let sound a great concourse  of trumpets taken  from the enemy; and 
the Shadow Host withdrew to the shore. There they stood silent, hardly to be  
seen, save for a red gleam in their eyes that caught the glare of the  ships 
that were  burning.  And Aragorn  spoke  in a  loud voice  to  the Dead Men, 
crying: 
     ' "Hear  now the words of the Heir of Isildur!  Your oath is fulfilled. 
Go back and trouble not the valleys ever again! Depart and be at rest! " 
     'And thereupon the King of the Dead stood out before the host and broke 
his spear and cast it down. Then he bowed low and  turned away; and  swiftly 
the whole grey host drew off and vanished like a mist that is driven back by  
a sudden wind; and it seemed to me that I awoke from a dream. 
     'That  night  we  rested  while  others  laboured.  For there were many 
captives set  free,  and many slaves released who  had  been folk  of Gondor  
taken in raids; and  soon also  there  was  a great gathering  of men out of 
Lebennin and the  Ethir, and Angbor of Lamedon came u p with all the 
horsemen 
that he could muster. Now that the fear of the Dead was removed they came to 
aid us and to look on  the Heir of Isildur; for the  rumour of that name had 
run like fire in the dark. 
     'And  that  is near the end  of our tale.  For  during  that evening and 
night many ships were  made ready and  manned; and in the morning the  fleet 
set forth. Long  past it now seems,  yet it was but the morn of  the day ere 
yesterday, the  sixth  since  we rode  from Dunharrow. But still Aragorn was 
driven by fear that time was too short. 
     '  "It is forty leagues and  two from Pelargir to  the  landings at the 
Harlond,"  he  said.  "Yet to  the  Harlond we must  come tomorrow  or  fail  
utterly." 
     'The oars were now wielded by free men, and manfully they laboured; yet 
slowly we passed up  the Great River, for  we strove against its stream, and 

####-though that is not swift down in  the South,  we had no help  of wind. Heavy 
would my heart have been, for all our victory at the  havens, if Legolas had 
not laughed suddenly. 
     ' "Up  with your beard, Durin's son! " he said. "For thus is it spoken: 
Oft hope is  born, when  all is forlorn." But what hope  he saw from afar he 
would  not tell. When  night came it  did  but deepen  the darkness, and our 
hearts were  hot, for away in  the North we saw a red glow under the  cloud,  
and Aragorn said: "Minas Tirith is burning." 
     'But at midnight hope was indeed born anew. Sea -crafty men of the Ethir  
gazing southward spoke  of a change coming  with a fresh  wind from the Sea. 
Long  ere day the masted ships  hoisted sail; and our speed grew, until dawn 
whitened the foam at our prows. And so it was, as  you know, that we came in 
the third  hour of the morning with a fair wind and the Sun unveiled, and we 
unfurled the great standard in battle. It was a great  day and a great hour, 
whatever may come after.' 
     'Follow what may, great deeds are not lessened in worth,' said Legolas.  
'Great  deed was the riding of  the Paths  of the Dead, and great  it  shall 
remain, though none be left  in Gondor to sing of it in the days that are to 
come.' 
     'And  that may well befall,' said Gimli.  'For the faces of Aragorn and 
Gandalf are grave. Much I  wonder what counsels they are taking in the tents 
there below. For my part, like Merry, I wish that with our victory  the  war 
was now over.  Yet whatever is still to do, I hope to have a part in it, for  
the honour of the folk of the Lonely Mountain.' 
     'And I for the folk of the Great Wood,' said Legolas, 'and for the love 
of the Lord of the White Tree.' 
     Then the companions fell silent, but a while they sat there in the high 
place, each busy with his own thoughts, while the Captains debated. 
     When the Prince Imrahil had parted  from Legolas and Gimli, at once  he 
sent  for Jomer; and he went down with him  from the  City, and they came to 
the tents  of Aragorn that were set up on the field not  far  from the place 
where King Thjoden had  fallen.  And there they took  counsel together  with 
Gandalf and Aragorn and the sons of Elrond. 
     'My lords,' said Gandalf, 'listen to the words of the Steward of Gondor  
before he died: You may triumph on the fields of the Pelennor for a day, but 
against the Power that has  now arisen there is no victory. I do not bid you  
despair, as he did, but to ponder the truth in these words. 

####-     'The  Stones of Seeing do  not lie, and not even  the Lord of Barad-dyr 
can make  them do so. He can, maybe, by his will choose what things shall be 
seen by weaker minds, or cause them to mistake the meaning of what they see. 
Nonetheless it cannot be doubted that when Denethor saw great forces arrayed 
against him  in Mordor,  and more  still being gathered, he  saw  that which 
truly is. 
     'Hardly has our strength sufficed to beat off the first  grea t assault. 
The next will be greater.  This war  then is without final hope, as Denethor  
perceived. Victory  cannot be  achieved by  arms, whether  you sit  here  to 
endure siege after siege, or  march  out to be overwhelmed beyond the River. 
You  have  only a  choice  of  evils;  and prudence  would  counsel  you  to 
strengthen such strong places as you have, and there await the onset; for so 
shall the time before your end be made a little longer.' 
     'Then you would have  us retreat to Minas Tirith, or Dol  Amroth, or to 
Dunharrow, and  there sit  like children on  sand-castles when  the tide  is 
flowing?' said Imrahil. 
     'That would  be no new  counsel,' said Gandalf. 'Have you not done this 
and  little more in all the  days of Denethor?  But no! I sa id this would be 
prudent. I do not counsel prudence. I said  victory could not be achieved by 
arms. I still hope for victory, but not by arms.  For into the midst  of all 
these policies comes the Ring of Power, the foundation of Barad-dyr, and the 
hope of Sauron. 
     'Concerning  this  thing,  my  lords, you now  all know enough for  the 
understanding of our plight, and of  Sauron's. If he regains it, your valour 
is  vain, and his victory will be swift and complete: so  complete that none 
can foresee the  end of it while this world lasts. If it is destroyed,  then 
he will fall; and his  fall will be so low that none can foresee his arising 
ever again. For he will lose the best part of the  strength  that was native 
to him in his beginning, and all that was made or begun with that power will  
crumble, and he will  be maimed  for ever, becoming a mere  spirit of malice 
that  gnaws itself in the shadows, but cannot again grow  or take shape. And 
so a great evil of this world will be removed. 
     'Other evils there are  that may come;  for  Sauron  is  himself  but a  
servant or emissary.  Yet it is  not our part to master all the tides of the 
world, but to do what is in us for the succour of those years wherein we are 
set, uprooting the  evil in the fields that we know, so  that those who live 
after may have clean earth to till. What weather they shall have is not ours 

####-to rule. 
     'Now Sauron knows all this, and he knows that this precious thing which 
he lost has been found again; but he does not yet know where it is, or so we 
hope. And therefore he is now  in great doubt. For  if we  have  found  this 
thing, there are some among us with strength enough to wield it. That too he 
knows. For do I not guess rightly, Aragorn, that you have shown  yourself to 
him in the Stone of Orthanc?' 
     'I did so  ere I rode from the Hornburg,' answered  Aragorn. 'I  deemed 
that the time was ripe, and that the  Stone had  come to me  for just such a  
purpose. It was  then ten  days since the Ring-bearer went east from Rauros,  
and the Eye of Sauron, I thought, should be drawn out from his own land. Too 
seldom has he been challenged since he  returned to his  Tower. Though if  I 
had foreseen how swift would be his onset in answer, maybe I should not have 
dared to show myself. Bare time was given me to come to your aid.' 
     'But how is  this?' asked Jomer. 'All is  vain, you say,  if he has the 
Ring. Why should he think it not vain to assail us, if we have it?' 
     'He is not yet sure,' said Gandalf, 'and  he has not built up his power 
by waiting until his enemies are secure,  as we have done. Also we could not  
learn how to wield the  full  power all in a day. Indeed it can be used only 
by one master alone, not by many; and he will look for a time of strife, ere 
one  of the great among us makes himself master and puts down the others. In 
that time the Ring might aid him, if he were sudden. 
     'He  is  watching. He sees  much and hears much.  His Nazgyl  are still 
abroad. They passed over this field ere the sunrise, though few of the  weary 
and sleeping were aware of them. He studies the signs: the Sword that robbed 
him of his treasure re-made; the winds of fortune turning in our favour, and 
the defeat unlooked-for of his first assault the fall of his great Captain. 
     'His doubt will  be  growing, even  as we  speak here. His  Eye is  now 
straining towards us,  blind  almost to all  else that is moving. So we must 
keep it. Therein  lies all our hope. This, then, is my  counsel. We have not 
the Ring. In wisdom or  great folly it has been sent away  to be  destroyed, 
lest it destroy  us. Without it we  cannot by force defeat his force. But we 
must  at all  costs  keep his Eye  from his true  peril. We  cannot  achieve 
victory  by  arms, but by arms we can give the Ring-bearer his  only chance, 
frail though it be. 
     'As Aragorn has begun, so  we must go  on. We must push  Sauron  to his 
last throw. We must call out his hidden strength, so that he shall empty his 

####-land. We must march out to meet him at  once.  We  must  make ourselves  the 
bait, though his jaws  should close  on us. He will take that bait,  in hope 
and in  greed, for he will think that in  such rashness he sees the pride of 
the new Ringlord: and he will say: "So!  he pushes out his neck too soon and 
too far. Let him come on, and behold I will have him in a trap from which he 
cannot escape.  There  I  will  crush  him, and  what he  has taken  in  his 
insolence shall be mine again for ever." 
     'We must walk open-eyed into that  trap, with courage,  but small  hope 
for ourselves.  For, my  lords,  it may  well prove  that we ourselves shall 
perish utterly in  a black battle far from the living lands; so that even if 
Barad-dyr  be thrown down, we shall not live to  see a new age.  But this, I 
deem, is our  duty. And better so than  to perish nonetheless - as we surely 
shall, if we sit here  - and know as we die that no new age shall be.' 
     They were  silent for a while.  At  length Aragorn  spoke.  'As  I have 
begun, so I  will go on.  We  come  now  to the  very brink, where hope  and 
despair are akin. To waver is to fall.  Let none  now reject the counsels of 
Gandalf,  whose long labours against  Sauron come at last to their test. But 
for him all would long ago have been lost. Nonetheless I do not yet claim to  
command any man. Let others choose as they will.' 
     Then said Elrohir: 'From the North we came with this purpose,  and from 
Elrond our father we brought this very counsel. We will not turn back.' 
     'As for  myself,'  said Jomer, 'I have little knowledge of  these  deep 
matters; but I need it not. This I know, and it is enough, that as my friend 
Aragorn succoured  me and my people, so I will aid him when he calls. I will 
go.' 
     'As  for  me,'  said  Imrahil,  'the  Lord  Aragorn  I  hold to  be  my 
liege-lord, whether he  claim it or no. His wish  is to me a command. I will 
go also. Yet for a  while I stand in the place of the Steward of Gondor, and 
it is mine to think first of its people. To prudence some heed must still be 
given. For we must prepare against  all chances, good as well as  evil. Now,  
it may be that we shall triumph, and while there is any hope of this, Gondor  
must be protected.  I  would not have us return  with victory  to a City  in 
ruins and a land ravaged behind us. And yet we learn from the  Rohirrim that 
there is an army still unfought upon our northern flank.' 
     'That is true,' said Gandalf. 'I  do not  counsel you to leave the City 
all unmanned.  Indeed  the force that  we lead east need not be great enough 
for any  assault in earnest   upon Mordor, so  long as it be great enough  to 

####-challenge battle. And it must move soon.  Therefore I ask the Captains: what 
force could we muster and lead out in two days' time at the latest? And they 
must be hardy men that go willingly, knowing their peril.' 
     'All are weary,  and very  many have  wounds  light  or grievous,' said 
Jomer,  'and  we have suffered  much loss of our horses, and that  is ill to 
bear. If we must ride soon, then I cannot  hope to  lead even two thousands, 
and yet leave as ma ny for the defence of the City.' 
     'We have not only to reckon with those who fought  on this field ' said 
Aragorn.  'New strength is on the way from the southern fiefs, now  that the 
coasts have been  rid. Four thousands I sent marching from Pelargir  through  
Lossarnach two days  ago; and  Angbor the fearless rides  before them. If we 
set out in two days  more,  they will draw nigh ere we depart. Moreover many 
were bidden to  follow me up the River  in  any craft they could gather; and 
with this wind they  will soon be at hand, indeed several ships have already 
come to the Harlond. I judge that we could lead out seven thousands of horse 
and foot, and yet  leave the City  in better defence  than it  was  when the 
assault began.' 
     'The Gate  is destroyed,' said Imrahil, 'and where now is the skill  to 
rebuild it and set it up anew?' 
     'In Erebor  in  the Kingdom of Dbin there is such skill,' said Aragorn; 
'and  if all our hopes do not perish, then in time I will send Gimli Gluin's 
son to ask for wrights of  the Mountain. But  men are better than gates, and 
no gate will endure against our Enemy if men desert it.' 
     This then was the end of the debate  of the lords: that they should set 
forth on the  second  morning from that day with  seven thousands, if  these 
might  be found; and the great part of this force should be on foot, because 
of the  evil lands  into which they would go. Aragorn  should  find some two 
thousands  of those that he  had  gathered to him  in the South; but Imrahil 
should find  three  and  a half thousands;  and Jomer  five  hundreds  of the 
Rohirrim who  were unhorsed but themselves warworthy, and he himself  
should 
lead five hundreds of his  best Riders on horse; and another company of five 
hundred horse there  should be,  among which should ride the sons  of Elrond 
with  the D®nedain and the knights of Dol Amroth: all told six thousand foot 
and a thousand horse. But the main strength  of the  Rohirrim  that remained 
horsed and able to  fight, some three thousand under the command of Elfhelm, 
should waylay the West Road against  the enemy that was in  Anurien. And  at 

####-once swift riders were sent out to gather  what news they could  northwards;  
and eastwards from Osgiliath and the road to Minas Morgul. 
     And when they  had reck oned up all their strength and taken thought for  
the  journeys  they should  make  and the  roads they should choose, Imrahil  
suddenly laughed aloud. 
     'Surely,' he cried, 'this is  the greatest jest  in  all the history of 
Gondor:  that  we should  ride with seven thousands,  scarce  as many as the 
vanguard of its army in  the days of its power, to assail the mountains  and 
the impenetrable  gate  of the  Black Land!  So  might  a  child  threaten a  
mail-clad knight with a bow of string and green  willow! If  the  Dark  Lord 
knows so  much as you say, Mithrandir,  will  he not rather smile than fear, 
and with his little finger crush us like a fly that tries to sting him?' 
     'No, he  will try to  trap  the fly  and take the sting,' said Gandalf. 
'And there are names among us that are worth more than a thousand  mail -clad 
knights apiece. No, he will not smile.' 
     'Neither  shall  we,'  said Aragorn. 'If this be  jest, then it is  too 
bitter for laughter.  Nay, it is the last  move in a great jeopardy, and for 
one  side or  the other  it  will bring the end of the game.' Then  he  drew 
And®ril and  held it up glittering  in the sun. 'You shall  not  be sheathed 
again until the last battle is fought;' he said. 
 

####- 

Chapter 10. The Black Gate Opens 

 
 
     Two days later the army of the West was all assembled on the  Pelennor.  
The host of Orcs and Easterlings had turned back out of Anurien, but harried 
and scattered by the Rohirrim they had  broken and fled with little fighting 
towards Cair  Andros;  and with  that  threat  destroyed  and  new  strength 
arriving out of the South the City  was as well  manned  as might be. Scouts 
reported  that  no  enemies remained  upon the  roads  east  as  far  as the 
Cross-roads of the Fallen King. All now was ready for the last throw.  
     Legolas and Gimli were to ride again together in the company of Aragorn 
and Gandalf, who went in the  van with the D®nedain  and the sons of Elrond. 
But Merry to his shame was not to go with them. 
     'You are  not fit for  such a  journey,' said  Aragorn. 'But  do not be 
ashamed.  If  you do no  more  in  this  war, you have already earned  great 
honour. Peregrin shall go and represent the Shirefolk; and do not grudge him 
his chance of peril, for  though  he has done as well as his fortune allowed 
him, he has yet to match your deed. But in truth all now are in like danger. 
Though it may be our part to  find bitter end before the  Gate of Mordor, if 
we do so,  then you will come also to a last  stand, either here or wherever  
the black tide overtakes you. Farewell!' 
     And  so  despondently Merry now  stood and watched the mustering of the 
army. Bergil was with him, and  he  also was downcast; for his father was to 
march leading a company of the  Men  of the City:  he could not  rejoin  the 
Guard until his case was judged. In that same company Pippin was also to go, 
as a soldier of Gondor. Merry could see him not far off, a small but upright 
figure among the tall men of Minas Tirith. 
     At last the  trumpets  rang and the army began to move. Troop by troop, 
and company by company,  they wheeled and went off  eastward. And long 
after 
they had passed away out of sight down the great road to the Causeway, Merry 
stood there. The  last glint of the morning sun  on  spear and helm twinkled 
and was lost, and still he remained with bowed head and heavy heart, feeling 
friendless  and  alone. Everyone  that  he cared for had  gone away into the 
gloom  that  hung over the distant eastern sky;  and little  hope at all was 
left in his heart that he wou ld ever see any of them again. 

####-     As if recalled by his mood of despair,  the  pain in his arm  returned, 
and he felt weak and old, and the sunlight seemed thin. He was roused by the 
touch of Bergil's hand. 
     'Come, Master Perian!' said the lad. 'You are still  in pain, I see.  I 
will help you back to the Healers. But do not fear! They will come back. The 
Men  of  Minas Tirith  will never be overcome. And  now they  have the  Lord 
Elfstone, and Beregond of the Guard too.' 
     Ere  noon the army  came  to  Osgiliath.  There  all  the  workers  and 
craftsmen  that  could  be  spared were  busy. Some were  strengthening  the 
ferries and boat-bridges that the  enemy had made and in part destroyed when 
they fled; some  gathered  stores and booty; and others  on the eastern side 
across the River were throwing up hasty works of defence. 
     The vanguard passed on through the ruins  of  Old Gondor, and  over the 
wide River, and  on up the long straight road that in the high days had been 
made to run  from the fair  Tower of the Sun to the tall  Tower of the Moon,  
which now was Minas Morgul in its accursed vale. Five miles beyond Osgiliath 
they halted, ending their first day's march. 
     But  the  horsemen  pressed  on  and  ere  evening  they  came  to  the 
Cross-roads and the great ring of trees, and all was silent. No sign of  any 
enemy  had they seen, no cry or  call had been heard, no shaft had sped from 
rock or  thicket by the  way, yet  ever as they went  forward  they felt the 
watchfulness  of  the land  increase. Tree and stone,  blade  and leaf  were 
listening. The darkness had been dispelled, and far away westward sunset was 
on the  Vale of  Anduin, and the white peaks of the mountains blushed in the  
blue air; but a shadow and a gloom brooded upon the Ephel D®ath. 
     Then Aragorn set trumpeters at each of the four roads that ran into the 
ring  of trees,  and they blew a great fanfare, and the heralds cried aloud: 
'The Lords  of Gondor have returned  and all this  land  that is theirs they 
take back.'  The  hideous orc-head that  was  set upon the carven figure was 
cast down and  broken in pieces, and the old king's head was raised  and set 
in its place once more, still crowned with white and golden flowers: and men 
laboured  to wash and pare away all the foul scrawls that orcs  had put upon  
the stone. 
     Now in their debate  some had counselled that Minas Morgul should first  
be assailed, and if  they  might take  it,  it should  be utterly destroyed. 
'And, maybe,'  said Imrahil, 'the road that leads thence to  the pass  above 
will prove  an easier way of  assault upon the Dark Lord  than  his northern 

####-gate.' 
     But against this Gandalf had spoken urgently, because of  the evil that 
dwelt in the valley, where the minds of living men would turn to madness and 
horror, and because also of the  news  that Faramir had brought.  For if the 
Ring-bearer had indeed attempted that  way,  then above  all they should not 
draw the Eye of Mordor thither.  So the next day when the main host came up, 
they set a strong guard upon the Cross-roads to make some defence, if Mordor  
should send a force  over the Morgul Pass, or should bring  more men up from 
the South. For that guard  they chose mostly archers  who knew  the ways  of 
Ithilien and would lie hid in the woods and slopes about the meeting  of the 
ways. But Gandalf and Aragorn rode with the  vanguard  to  the  entrance  of 
Morgul Vale and looked on the evil city. 
     It was dark and  lifeless; for the Orcs and lesser creatures of  Mordor  
that  had  dwelt  there had been destroyed in  battle,  and the  Nazgyl were 
abroad. Yet the air of the valley was heavy  with fear and enmity. Then they 
broke the evil bridge and set red flames in the noisome fields and departed. 
     The  day  after, being the  third day  since they  set  out  from Minas 
Tirith, the army  began its  northward  march along  the  road.  It was some 
hundred  miles by that  way  from the  Cross-roads to the Morannon, and what 
might befall  them before they  came so  far  none knew They went openly but 
heedfully, with mounted scouts before them  on the road, and others on  foot 
upon either  side, especially  on  the  eastward flank;  for there lay  dark 
thickets, and  a tumbled  land of rocky ghylls  and crags,  behind which the 
long  grim slopes of the Ephel D®ath clambered up. The weather of  the world 
remained fair and the wind held in the west, but nothing could waft away the 
glooms  and the sad  mists  that clung  about  the Mountains of  Shadow; and 
behind them at whiles great smokes would arise and hover in the upper winds.  
     Ever and anon Gandalf let blow the trumpets, and the heralds would cry:  
"The  Lords of Gondor are come! Let  all leave this land  or yield them up!' 
But Imrahil said: 'Say not  The Lords of Gondor.  Say The King Elessar.  For 
that is true, even though he has  not yet  sat  upon the throne; and it will 
give the Enemy more thought, if  the  heralds use that name.' And thereafter  
thrice a day the heralds proclaimed the coming of the King Elessar. But none 
answered the challenge. 
     Nonetheless, though they marched in seeming  peace,  the hearts  of all 
the army, from the highest to the lowest, were downcast, and with every mile 
that they went  north foreboding  of evil grew heavier  on them. It was near 

####-the  end of the second day of their  march  from  the Cross-roads  that they 
first met any offer  of battle.  For a strong force  of Orcs and Easterlings 
attempted to  take their leading companies in an ambush; and that was in the 
very place where Faramir  had waylaid the men of Harad, and the road went in 
a deep cutting through an out-thrust of the eastward hills. But the Captains 
of the West were well warned by their scouts, skilled men from Henneth 
Annyn 
led by Mablung; and so the ambush was itself trapped. For horsemen went 
wide 
about westward and  came  up on the flank of  the enemy and from behind, and 
they were destroyed or driven east into the hills. 
     But  the victory did  little to  enhearten the captains.  'It  is but a  
feint,' said Aragorn; 'and its chief purpose, I  deem, was  rather to draw us 
on by a false guess of our Enemy's weakness than to  do us much hurt,  yet.' 
And from that evening onward the Nazgyl came and followed every move  of 
the 
army. They still  flew  high and out  of sight of all  save Legolas, and  yet 
their presence could  be felt, as a deepening of shadow and a dimming of the  
sun; and though the Ringwraiths did not  yet stoop low upon  their foes  and  
were silent, uttering no cry, the dread of them could not be shaken off. 
     So time and  the hopeless  journey wore away. Upon the fourth day  from  
the Cross-roads and the sixth from Minas Tirith they came at last to the end 
of  the living lands,  and began to pass into the desolation that lay before 
the gates of the Pass of Cirith Gorgor; and  they could  descry the  marshes 
and the desert that  stretched north and west to  the Emyn Muil. So desolate 
were those places and so  deep  the horror that lay on them that some of the 
host were unmanned, and they could neither walk nor ride further north. 
     Aragorn looked  at them,  and there was pity  in his  eyes  rather than 
wrath;  for  these were young men from Rohan,  from Westfold  far  away,  or  
husbandmen  from  Lossarnach, and to them Mordor had been  from childhood  
a 
name  of evil,  and yet  unreal, a  legend that had no part in  their simple 
life; and now  they walked like men in a  hideous dream made true,  and they 
understood not this war nor why fate should lead them to such a pass.  
     'Go!' said Aragorn. 'But  keep what honour you may, and do not run! And 
there is a task which you may attempt and so be not wholly shamed. Take your 
way  south-west till you come to Cair Andros, and  if that is still  held by  

####-enemies, as I think, then re-take it, if you can; and hold it to the last in 
defence of Gondor and Rohan!' 
     Then some being shamed by  his mercy  overcame their fear and  went on, 
and the others took new hope, hearing of a manful  deed within their measure 
that  they  could turn to, and they  departed.  And so,  since many men  had 
already  been left  at the Cross-roads,  it was with less than six thousands 
that the Captains of the West came at last  to challenge the  Black Gate and 
the might of Mordor. 
     They advanced  now slowly, expecting at every hour some answer to their 
challenge, and they drew together, since it was but waste of men to send out 
scouts or small parties from the main host. At nightfall of the fifth day of 
the march from Morgul Vale they made their last camp, and set fires about it  
of such dead wood and  heath as they  could find. They  passed the hours  of 
night  in  wakefulness  and they were aware  of many things  half-seen  that 
walked and prowled all about them, and they heard the howling of wolves. The 
wind had  died  and all  the air  seemed still. They  could see  little, for  
though it was cloudless and the waxing moon was four nights  old, there were 
smokes  and  fumes  that rose  out of the earth and  the white  crescent was 
shrouded in the mists of Mordor. 
     It grew cold. As morning came the wind bega n to stir again,  but now it 
came from  the North,  and  soon it  freshened to a  rising breeze. All  the 
night-walkers were gone, and the land seemed empty. North amid their 
noisome 
pits lay the first of the great heaps and hills of slag and broken  rock and 
blasted earth,  the vomit of the maggot-folk of Mordor;  but south  and  now 
near loomed the great rampart of Cirith Gorgor, and the Black Gate amidmost, 
and the two Towers of the Teeth tall and dark upon either side. For in their 
last march  the Capta ins had turned away from the old road as it  bent east,  
and avoided the peril of the lurking hills, and so now they were approaching 
the Morannon from the north-west, even as Frodo had done. 
     The two  vast iron doors of the Black Gate under its frowning arch were 
fast closed. Upon the battlement nothing could be seen. All was  silent  but 
watchful. They  were come to the last end of their folly, and stood  forlorn 
and chill in the grey light of early day before towers and walls which their 
army could not assault with hope, not even if it had brought thither engines 
of great power, and  the Enemy had no more force than would suffice  for the 
manning of  the gate  and wall alone. Yet  they  knew that all the hills and 

####-rocks  about  the Morannon  were filled with hidden  foes, and  the  shadowy 
defile beyond was bored and tunnelled  by teeming broods of evil things. And 
as they stood they saw all the Nazgyl gathered together, hovering  above the 
Towers of the Teeth like vultures; and they knew that they were watched. But 
still the Enemy made no sign. 
     No  choice was left them but to play their part  to  its end. Therefore 
Aragorn now set the host in such array as could  best be contrived; and they  
were drawn up on two great  hills of blasted stone and earth  that orcs  had 
piled in years of labour. Before them towards Mordor lay like a moat a great 
mire  of  reeking  mud and foul-smelling  pools. When all  was  ordered, the 
Captains rode  forth towards the Black Gate with  a great  guard of horsemen 
and  the  banner and heralds  and  trumpeters.  There  was Gandalf as  chief 
herald,  and  Aragorn  with  the sons of Elrond,  and  Jomer  of Rohan,  and 
Imrahil; and Legolas and Gimli and Peregrin were bidden to  go also, so that 
all the enemies of Mordor should have a witness. 
     They came within cry of the Morannon, and unfurled the banner, and blew 
upon their trumpets; and the heralds stood out and sent their voices up over  
the battlement of Mordor. 
     'Come forth!'  they cried. 'Let the Lord of the Black   Land come forth!  
Justice shall be done upon  him. For wrongfully he  has made war upon Gondor  
and  wrested its lands. Therefore the King  of Gondor demands that he should 
atone for his evils, and depart then for ever. Come forth!' 
     There was  a long  silence, and from wall and gate no cry or sound  was 
heard in  answer. But Sauron had already laid his plans,  and he had a  mind  
first to play these mice cruelly before he struck to kill.  So  it was that, 
even  as  the  Captains were about to  turn  away, the  silence  was  broken 
suddenly.  There came  a  long rolling  of great  drums like thunder in  the 
mountains,  and  then  a  braying  of horns that  shook the very  stones and 
stunned men's ears.  And thereupon the  middle  door  of the Black Gate  was 
thrown open with a great clang, and out of it there came an embassy from the 
Dark Tower. 
     At its  head there rode a  tall  and evil  shape, mounted  upon a black  
horse, if  horse it was;  for it was huge  and hideous,  and its face was  a  
frightful mask, more like a skull than a living head,  and in the sockets of 
its eyes and in its nostrils there burned a flame. The  rider was robed  all 
in  black, and black was his lofty helm;  yet this  was  no Ringwraith but a  
living man. The Lieutenant of the Tower of Barad-dyr he was, and his name is 

####-remembered  in no  tale; for he himself had forgotten it, and he said: 'I am 
the Mouth of Sauron.' But it is told that he was a renegade, who came of the 
race of those  that are named the Black  N®menureans;  for   they established 
their dwellings in Middle-earth during the years of Sauron's domination, and 
they worshipped him, being enamoured  of evil knowledge.  And he entered the 
service of the  Dark Tower when it  first rose again,  and  because  of  his 
cunning  he grew  ever  higher  in the Lord's favour;  and  he learned  great 
sorcery, and knew much of the mind of Sauron; and he was more cruel than 
any 
orc. 
     He it was that now rode out, and with him came only a small company  of 
black-harnessed soldiery, a nd a  single  banner, black but  bearing on it in 
red the Evil Eye. Now halting a few paces before the Captains of the West he 
looked them up and down and laughed. 
     'Is  there  anyone in this rout  with authority to treat  with me?'  he 
asked. 'Or indeed with wit to  understand me? Not thou at least!' he mocked, 
turning to Aragorn with scorn. 'It needs more to make a king than a piece of 
elvish glass, or a rabble  such as this. Why, any brigand  of the  hills can 
show as good a following!' 
     Aragorn said naught in answer, but he took the other's eye and held it, 
and for a moment they strove thus; but soon, though Aragorn did not stir nor  
move hand to weapon, the other  quailed and  gave back as if menaced with  a  
blow. 'I am a herald and ambassador, a nd may not be assailed!' he cried. 
     'Where such  laws hold,'  said  Gandalf, 'it is  also  the  custom  for  
ambassadors to use less insolence. But  no one  has threatened you. You have 
naught to fear  from us,  until your errand is done. But unless  your master  
has  come  to new  wisdom, then with all  his servants  you will be in great 
peril.' 
     'So!' said the  Messenger. 'Then thou art the spokesman, old greybeard?  
Have we not  heard of  thee at whiles, and  of thy wanderings, ever hatching 
plots a nd mischief at a safe distance? But this time thou hast stuck out thy 
nose too far, Master Gandalf; and thou shalt see what comes to him  who sets 
his foolish webs before  the feet of Sauron the Great. I have  tokens that I 
was bidden  to show to thee -  to thee in especial, if thou shouldst dare to 
come.' He signed to  one of his guards, and he came forward bearing a bundle 
swathed in black cloths.  
     The Messenger put  these  aside, and there to the wonder and  dismay of 

####-all the Captains he held up first the short sword that Sam had carried,  and 
next a grey  cloak with  an elven-brooch,  and last the coat of mithril-mail 
that  Frodo  had  worn  wrapped  in  his tattered garments. A blackness came  
before their eyes,  and it seemed  to  them in a moment of  silence that the 
world  stood  still,  but their  hearts were dead and their last  hope gone. 
Pippin who stood behind Prince Imrahil sprang forward with a cry of grief.  
     'Silence!' said Gandalf sternly, thrusting him back;  but the Messenger  
laughed aloud. 
     'So you  have yet another of these imps  with you!' he cried. 'What use 
you  find in them I cannot guess; but to send them as  spies into Mordor  is 
beyond even your  accustomed folly. Still, I thank him, for it is plain that 
this brat  at  least has seen these tokens  before, and it would be vain for 
you to deny them now.' 
     'I do not wish to  deny  them,' said Gandalf. 'Indeed, I know them  all 
and all  their history,  and despite your scorn,  foul Mouth of  Sauron, you  
cannot say as much. But why do you bring them here?' 
     'Dwarf-coat,  elf-cloak, blade of the downfallen West, and spy from the 
little rat-land  of the Shire-nay; do not  start! We know it well - here are 
the marks  of a  conspiracy. Now,  maybe  he that bore  these  things was  a  
creature that you would not grieve to lose, and maybe otherwise: one dear to  
you, perhaps? If so, take swift counsel with what little wit is left to you. 
For  Sauron does not love  spies, and what his fate  shall be depends now on 
your choice.' 
     No one answered him;  but he  saw their faces  grey with  fear and  the 
horror  in their eyes, and he laughed again, for it  seemed to him  that his 
sport went well. 'Good, good!' he  said. 'He was dear to you, I see. Or else 
his  errand was one that you did not wish to fail? It  has. And now he shall 
endure the slow torment of years, as long and  slow as our arts in the Great 
Tower can contrive, and never  be released,  unless maybe when he is changed 
and  broken,  so  that  he may come  to you, and you  shall see what you have  
done. This shall surely be-unless you accept my Lord's terms.' 
     'Name  the  terms,'  said Gandalf steadily,  but  those nearby  saw the 
anguish in  his  face,  and now he  seemed an  old and wizened man, crushed, 
defeated at la st. They did not doubt that he would accept. 
     'These are the terms,' said the  Messenger, and smiled as he eyed  them 
one by one. 'The rabble of  Gondor and  its deluded allies shall withdraw at 
once beyond the Anduin, first taking oaths never  again to assail Sauron the 

####-Great  in arms, open or  secret. All lands east of Anduin  shall be Sauron's 
for  ever, solely. West of the Anduin as  far as the Misty Mountains and the 
Gap of Rohan  shall  be tributary to  Mordor,  and men  there  shall bear no 
weapons, but shall  have leave to govern  their own affairs. But  they shall 
help  to rebuild Isengard which they have wantonly destroyed, and that shall 
be Sauron's, and there his lieutenant shall dwell: not Saruman, but one more 
worthy of trust.' 
     Looking in  the Messenger's  eyes they read his thought.  He was to  be  
that lieutenant, and gather all that remained of the West under his sway; he 
would be their tyrant and they his slaves.  
     But Gandalf said:  'This is much  to demand for  the  delivery  of  one 
servant: that your Master should receive in exchange what he must else fight  
many a war to gain! Or has the field of Gondor destroyed his hope in war, so 
that  he falls to haggling? And  if indeed we rated this  prisoner  so high, 
what  surety have we that Sauron the Base Master of Treachery, will keep his 
part? Where  is this prisoner?  Let him be brought forth and yielded to  us,  
and then we will consider these demands.' 
     It  seemed then to Gandalf,  intent, watching  him as a  man engaged in 
fencing with a deadly foe, that for the taking of a breath the Messenger was 
at a loss; yet swiftly he laughed again. 
     'Do  not bandy words in  your  insolence with  the Mouth of Sauron!' he 
cried. 'Surety you crave! Sauron gives none. If you sue for his clemency you  
must first do his bidding. These are his terms. Take them or leave them!' 
     'These  we will take!' said Gandalf suddenly. He cast  aside  his cloak 
and a white  light shone forth like a sword in that black  place. Before his 
upraised hand   the  foul Messenger recoiled, and  Gandalf  coming seized and 
took from him  the tokens: coat,  cloak, and sword. 'These we  will take  in 
memory of our friend,' he cried.  'But  as for your  terms, we  reject  them 
utterly. Get you gone, for your embassy is over and death is near to you. We 
did not  come here  to waste words in treating  with Sauron,  faithless  and 
accursed; still less with one of his slaves. Begone!' 
     Then the Messenger of Mordor laughed no more. His face was twisted with 
amazement and anger to the  likeness of some wild beast that, as it crouches 
on  its  prey, is smitten on the muzzle with a stinging rod. Rage filled him 
and his mouth  slavered, and shapeless  sounds of fury came  strangling from 
his throat. But he looked at the fell faces of the Captains and their deadly 
eyes, and fear overcame his wrath. He  gave a great cry, and  turned, leaped 

####-upon his  steed, and with his company galloped madly back to  Cirith Gorgor. 
But  as they went his soldiers blew their horns in signal long arranged; and 
even before they came to the gate Sauron sprang his trap. 
     Drums rolled and fires leaped up.  The  great doors  of the  Black Gate 
swung  back wide. Out  of  it streamed a great host  as  swiftly as swirling 
waters when a sluice is lifted. 
     The Captains mounted  again  and rode back, and from the host of Mordor 
there went up a jeering yell. Dust  rose smothering the air,  as from nearby 
there marched up an army of Easterlings  that  had  waited for the signal in 
the shadows of Ered Lithui beyond the further Tower.  Down from the hills on 
either side of  the  Morannon poured Orcs innumerable. The men of  the  West  
were  trapped, and soon. all about  the grey mounds where they stood, forces 
ten times and more than ten times  their  match  would ring them in a sea of 
enemies. Sauron had taken the proffered bait in jaws of steel. 
     Little  time was left to Aragorn for the ordering  of  his battle. Upon 
the one hill he  stood with Gandalf, and there fair and desperate was raised 
the  ba nner of  the  Tree and  Stars.  Upon the other hill hard by stood the 
banners of Rohan and Dol Amroth, White Horse and Silver Swan. And about 
each 
hill a ring was made facing all ways, bristling with spear and sword. But in 
the front  towards Mordor  where the  first bitter  assault would come there 
stood the sons of Elrond on  the left with the D®nedain  about them,  and on 
the right  the  Prince Imrahil with the men of Dol Amroth tall and fair, and 
picked men of the Tower of Guard. 
     The  wind blew, and the trumpets sang, and  arrows whined; but the  sun 
now  climbing  towards  the South was  veiled  in the reeks  of Mordor,  and 
through a threatening haze it  gleamed, remote, a  sullen red, as if it were 
the ending of the day, or the  end maybe of all the world of  light. And out 
of the gathering  mirk the Nazgyl came with. their  cold voices crying words 
of death; and then all hope was quenched. 
     Pippin had bowed crushed with horror when  he  heard Gandalf reject the  
terms and  doom Frodo  to the torment  of  the  Tower;  but  he had mastered  
himself, and now he  stood beside Beregond in the front  rank of Gondor with 
Imrahil's men. For  it seemed best to him to die  soon and  leave the bitter  
story of his life, since all was in ruin. 
     'I wish Merry  was here,' he  heard himself saying, and quick  thoughts 
raced  through his mind, even as he watched  the enemy  come charging to the 

####-assault. 'Well, well, now at  any rate  I understand  poor Denethor a little 
better. We might die together, Merry and  I, and since die we must, why not? 
Well, as he is not  here, I hope he'll find an easier end. But now I must do 
my best.' 
     He drew  his sword and looked at it, and the intertwining shapes of red 
and gold; and  the flowing characters of N®menor glinted like fire upon  the 
blade. 'This was made for just  such an hour,' he thought. 'If only  I could 
smite that foul Messenger with  it, then almost I should draw level with old 
Merry.  Well, I'll smite some of this beastly brood before the end. I wish I 
could see cool sunlight and green grass again!' 
     Then  even  as he thought  these things the  first assault crashed into 
them.  The orcs hindered by the  mires that  lay before the hills halted and 
poured their arrows into the defending ranks.  But through them  there  came 
striding  up,  roaring  like beasts, a  great company of  hill-trolls out of 
Gorgoroth. Taller and broader than Men they were, and they were clad only in 
close-fitting mesh of  horny  scales, or maybe  that was their hideous hide; 
but they bore round  bucklers  huge and black and wielded heavy  hammers  in 
their  knotted hands.  Reckless they sprang into the pools and waded across,  
bellowing as they came. Like a  storm they broke upon the line of the men of 
Gondor, and beat upon helm and head, and arm and shield as smiths hewing the 
hot bending iron. At Pippin's  side Beregond was stunned  and overborne, and 
he fell;  and the great  troll-chief that  smote  him  down  bent over  him, 
reaching out  a  clutching  claw; for  these  fell creatures would bite  the 
throats of those that they threw down. 
     Then  Pippin  stabbed  upwards, and  the  written blade of  Westernesse 
pierced through the hide and went deep into the vitals of the troll, and his 
black blood came gushing out. He toppled forward and came crashing down 
like 
a falling rock, burying those beneath him. Blackness and stench and crushing 
pain came upon Pippin, and his mind fell away into a great darkness. 
     'So  it ends  as I  guessed  it  would,' his  thought said,  even as it 
fluttered away; and  it laughed a little within him ere it fled, almost  gay 
it seemed to  be  casting off at last all doubt and care and  fear. And then 
even as  it  winged away into forgetfulness it heard voices, and they seemed 
to be crying in some forgotten world far above: 
     'The Eagles are coming! The Eagles are coming!' 
     For one moment more Pippin's thought hovered.  'Bilbo!'  it  said. 'But 

####-no! That came in his tale, long long  ago. This is my  tale, and it is ended 
now. Good-bye!' And his thought fled far away and his eyes saw no more. 
 
 

####- 

 
 

 * BOOK VI *  

Chapter 1. The Tower of Cirith Ungol 

 
 
     Sam roused himself painfully from the ground. For a  moment he wondered 
where he was, and then all the misery and despair returned to him. He was in 
the deep dark outside the  under -gate of the orcs'  stronghold;  its  brazen 
doors were shut. He must have fallen  stunned when he hurled himself against  
them; but  how  long he had lain there he did not know. Then he  had been on 
fire, desperate and furious;  now he was shivering and cold. He crept to the 
doors and pressed his ears against them. 
     Far  within  he  could hear  faintly the voices of ores clamouring, but 
soon they stopped or  passed out of hearing,  and  all was still.  His  head 
ached and his eyes saw phantom lights in  the  darkness, but he struggled to 
steady  himself and  think. It  was clear at any rate that he had no hope of 
getting into the orc-hold by that gate; he might wait  there for days before 
it was opened, and he could  not wait: time  was  desperately precious. He no 
longer had any doubt about his duty: he must rescue  his master or perish in 
the attempt. 
     'The  perishing is more  likely, and will be a lot  easier  anyway,' he 
said grimly to  himself,  as  he sheathed Sting and turned  from  the brazen 
doors. Slowly  he  groped his  way back in  the dark along  the  tunnel, not 
daring to  use the elven -light; and as  he went he tried to fit together the 
events since Frodo and he  had left  the  Cross-roads. He  wondered what the 
time  was. Somewhere between one day and the next, he supposed;  but even of 
the days he had  quite lost count. He  was in a  land  of darkness where the 
days of the world seemed forgotten, and where all who entered were forgotten 
too. 
     'I wonder if they  think of us at all,' he said, 'and what is happening 
to them all away there.' He  waved his  hand vaguely  in the air before him; 
but  he  was  in fact now facing southwards,  as  he  came back to  Shelob's 
tunnel, not  west. Out westward in the world it was drawing to noon upon the 
fourteenth day of  March in the  Shire-reckoning. And  even now  Aragorn was 
leading  the  black  fleet  from  Pelargir,  and  Merry was riding with  the 

####-Rohirrim down the Stonewain Valley, while in Minas Tirith flames were rising 
and Pippin watched the madness growing in the eyes of Denethor. Yet amid all 
their cares and  fear  the thoughts of  their friends  turned  constantly to 
Frodo and Sam. They were not forgotten. But they were far beyond aid, and no 
thought could yet  bring any help to Samwise  Hamfast's son; he was  utterly 
alone. 
 
     He came back at last to the  stone door of the  orc-passage, and  still 
unable to  discover the catch  or bolt that held it,  he scrambled  over  as 
before and dropped softly to  the ground. Then he made his way stealthily to 
the  outlet of Shelob's tunnel, where the rags  of  her great web were still 
blowing and swaying in the  cold airs. For cold they seemed to Sam after the  
noisome darkness behind;  but the  breath of  them  revived  him.  He  crept 
cautiously out. 
     All was ominously quiet.  The light was no more than that of dusk  at a  
dark day's end. The vast vapours that  arose in  Mordor and  went  streaming 
westward passed  low overhead,  a  great  welter of cloud and smoke now  lit 
again beneath with a sullen glow of red. 
     Sam  looked up  towards the orc-tower, and  suddenly  from  its  narrow 
windows lights stared out like small red eyes. He wondered if they were some 
signal.  His fear  of  the orcs,  forgot ten  for  a  while  in his wrath and 
desperation,  now returned. As  far  as he  could  see, there  was only  one 
possible course  for him to take: he  must go on  and try to find  the  main 
entrance to  the dreadful tower; but his knees  felt weak, and he  found that 
he was trembling. Drawing his eyes  down from the tower and the horns of the 
Cleft  before  him, he forced  his unwilling  feet  to obey him, and slowly, 
listening  with all  his  ears, peering into the dense shadows of  the rocks 
beside the way, he  retraced his steps, past the place where Frodo fell, and 
still the  stench of Shelob lingered,  and  then  on  and up, until he stood 
again in the very  cleft where  he had  put  on the Ring  and seen Shagrat's 
company go by. 
     There he halted and sat down. For the moment he could drive himself  no 
further. He  felt that if once he went beyond the crown of the pass and took  
one  step  veritably  down  into the land  of  Mordor, that  step  would  be 
irrevocable. He could never come back. Without a ny clear purpose he drew out 
the  Ring  and put it  on again. Immediately he felt the great burden of its 
weight, and  felt afresh,  but  now more  strong  and urgent than ever,  the 

####-malice of the Eye of Mordor, searching, trying to pierce the shadows that it 
had made for its own defence, but which now  hindered it in its  unquiet and 
doubt. 
     As before, Sam found  that his  hearing was sharpened, but  that to his 
sight the things of this world seemed thin and vague. The rocky walls of the 
path were pale , as if seen through  a mist, but still at a distance he heard 
the bubbling of Shelob in her misery: and harsh and clear, and very close it 
seemed, he  heard cries  and the clash of metal. He sprang to his  feet, and 
pressed himself against the wall beside  the road. He was glad of the  Ring, 
for here was  yet another company of orcs on  the  march. Or so  at first he 
thought.  Then suddenly  he realized that  it  was not so,  his  hearing had 
deceived him: the orc-cries came from the tower, whose topmost  horn was 
now 
right above him, on the left hand of the Cleft. 
     Sam shuddered and tried  to force  himself to  move.  There was plainly 
some devilry going on. Perhaps in spite of all  orders  the  cruelty of  the 
orcs  had mastered them, and  they were tormenting Frodo,  or  even savagely 
hacking  him  to pieces. He listened; and as he did  a gleam of hope came to  
him. There could  not  be much  doubt: there was fighting in  the tower, the 
orcs  must be at war among themselves, Shagrat and Gorbag had come to 
blows. 
Faint as was the  hope that his  guess brought him, it  was enough to  rouse 
him.  There might be just a  chance. His love for Frodo rose above all other  
thoughts, and forgetting his peril he cried aloud: 'I'm coming, Mr. Frodo!' 
     He ran  forward to  the  climbing path, and  over it.  At once the road 
turned left and plunged steeply down. Sam had crossed into Mordor. 
 
     He took off  the  Ring, moved  it may be  by some  deep premonition  of 
danger,  though  to  himself he  thought  only that  he wished  to see  more 
clearly. `Better have a look at the worst,' he muttered. `No good blundering 
about in a fog!' 
     Hard and cruel and bitter  was the land  that met his gaze.  Before his 
feet the highest ridge  of the Ephel D®ath fell steeply in great cliffs down 
into a  dark trough, on the further side  of which there rose another ridge, 
much lower, its edge notched and jagged with crags like fangs that stood out 
black  against the red light  behind them: it was the grim Morgai, the inner  
ring of the fences  of  the land. Far  beyond it, but almost straight ahead, 

####-across a wide  lake  of darkness dotted  with  tiny fires, there was a great 
burning glow; and from it rose  in huge columns a swirling smoke,  dusty red 
at the  roots, black above  where it merged into the  billowing canopy  that 
roofed in all the accursed land. 
     Sam was looking  at Orodruin,  the Mountain of  Fire. Ever and anon the  
furnaces far  below  its ashen  cone would grow hot and with a great surging 
and  throbbing pour  forth rivers of  molten rock from chasms  in its sides.  
Some would  flow blazing towards  Barad-dyr down  great channels; some 
would 
wind their way into the  stony plain, until they cooled and lay like twisted 
dragon-shapes vomited from  the tormented earth .  In such an hour of  labour 
Sam beheld  Mount Doom, and the light  of it, cut off by the high  screen of 
the Ephel D®ath from those who climbed up the path from the West, now 
glared 
against the stark rock faces, so that they seemed to be drenched with blood. 
     In that dreadful light Sam stood aghast, for now, looking to his  left, 
he could see the Tower of Cirith Ungol in all its strength. The horn that he 
had  seen from the other side was only its topmost turret. Its  eastern face 
stood up  in three great tiers from a shelf in the mountain-wall far  below; 
its back was to a  great  cliff behind, from which it  jutted out in pointed 
bastions, one above the other, diminishing as they rose, with sheer sides of 
cunning  masonry  that looked north-east  and   south-east. About the  lowest  
tier, two hundred feet below where Sam now  stood, there was a  battlemented 
wall  enclosing a narrow court.  Its gate, upon the near south-eastern side, 
opened  on a broad road,  the outer parapet of which ran upon the brink of a  
precipice, until it turned southward and went winding down into the darkness 
to  join the road that came  over the Morgul Pass. Then on it went through a  
jagged  rift in the  Morgai  out  into the  valley of Gorgoroth  and away to 
Barad-dyr.  The  narrow upper way on which  Sam stood leapt  swiftly down 
by 
stair and steep path to meet the main road under the frowning walls close to  
the Tower -gate. 
     As he gazed at it  suddenly Sam understood, almost  with a shock,  that 
this stronghold had been  built  not to  keep enemies out of  Mordor, but to 
keep them in. It was indeed one  of the works of Gondor long ago, an eastern 
outpost of the defences of Ithilien, made when, after the Last Alliance, Men  
of  Westernesse kept  watch on  the evil land of  Sauron where his creatures 

####-still lurked. But as with Narchost and Carchost, the Towers of the Teeth, so 
here too the vigilance had failed, and treachery had yielded up the Tower to  
the Lord of the Ringwraiths, and now for long years it had been held by evil  
things. Since his return to Mordor, Sauron had found  it useful; for he  had 
few servants but many slaves of fear, and still its chief  purpose as of old 
was to prevent escape from Mordor. Though if an enemy were so rash as to try 
to  enter that  land  secretly, then it  was also  a  last  unsleeping guard 
against any that might pass the vigilance of Morgul and of Shelob. 
     Only too clearly Sam saw how hopeless it would be for him to creep down 
under those many-eyed  walls and pass the watchful gate. And  even  if he did 
so, he  could not go  far  on  the guarded road beyond:  not even  the black  
shadows,  lying  deep where  the red glow could not reach, would shield  him 
long from the night-eyed orcs. But desperate as that road might be, his task  
was now  far worse: not to avoid the gate and escape, but to enter it, alone. 
 
     His  thought turned to the Ring, but there was  no  comfort there, only 
dread and danger. No  sooner had he come in sight of Mount Doom, burning 
far 
away, than he was aware of a cha nge in his burden. As it drew near the great 
furnaces  where,  in the deeps of time, it had been shaped  and forged,  the 
Ring's power grew, and  it became more fell, untameable  save by some mighty 
will. As Sam stood there, even though the Ring was not on  him but hanging by 
its chain about his neck, he felt himself enlarged, as if he were robed in a  
huge distorted shadow of  himself, a vast and ominous threat halted upon the 
walls of  Mordor. He  felt  that he had  from now on  only two  choices:  to 
forbear the Ring, though it would torment him; or to claim it, and challenge 
the Power that sat in  its dark hold beyond the valley  of  shadows. Already 
the Ring tempted him, gnawing at his will and  reason.  Wild fantasies arose 
in his mind; and he saw Samwise the Strong, Hero of the Age, striding with a 
flaming sword across the darkened land, and armies flocking  to  his call as 
he  marched to the  overthrow of  Barad-dyr. And then all the  clouds rolled 
away,  and the white sun  shone, and  at his command the  vale of  Gorgoroth 
became a garden of flowers and trees and brought forth fruit. He had only to 
put on the Ring and claim it for his own, and all this could be. 
     In that hour of trial it was the love of his master that helped most to 
hold  him firm; but also deep  down in him lived still unconquered his plain 
hobbit-sense: he  knew in the core of his heart that he was not large enough 

####-to bear such a burden, even  if such visions were not a mere cheat to betray 
him. The one small garden of a free gardener was all his need and due, not a  
garden swollen to a realm; his own hands to  use, not the hands of others to 
command. 
     'And  anyway all these notions  are only a trick,' he said  to himself. 
'He'd spot me and cow me, before I could so much as shou t out. He'd spot me, 
pretty  quick, if I put the Ring  on now, in Mordor. Well, all I can say is:  
things look  as hopeless  as  a frost in spring.  Just when being  invisible 
would be really useful, I can't use the Ring! And if ever I get any further, 
it's going to be nothing but a drag and a burden every step. So what's to be 
done?' 
     He was not  really  in any doubt. He knew  that he must go  down to the 
gate and not linger any more. With a shrug of his shoulders,  as if to shake 
off the shadow and dismiss  the phantoms, he began  slowly  to descend. With 
each  step he seemed to  diminish. He had not gone far  before he had shrunk 
again to a  very small and  frightened hobbit. He was now  passing under the  
very walls of the Tower, and the cries and sounds of fighting could be heard 
with his unaided ears. At the moment the  noise seemed to be coming from the 
court behind the outer wall. 
 
     Sam was about half way down the path when out of the dark gateway  into 
the red  glow there  came two orcs running . They  did not turn towards  him. 
They were  making for the main road; but  even as they ran they stumbled and 
fell  to the ground  and lay still.  Sam had seen no  arrows, but he guessed 
that the orcs had  been shot down by others on  the battlements or hidden in 
the shadow of the gate. He  went on, hugging  the wall on his left. One look  
upward had  shown him that there was no hope of  climbing it. The stone-work 
rose  thirty  feet, without  a crack  or ledge, to  overhanging courses like 
inverted steps. The gate was the only way. 
     He crept on;  and  as he went  he wondered how many  orcs lived  in the 
Tower with Shagrat, and how many Gorbag had, and what they  were 
quarrelling 
about, if  that was  what was  happening. Shagrat's company had seemed to be 
about forty, and  Gorbag's more than twice as large; but of course Shagrat's 
patrol  had  only been a part of his  garrison. Almost  certainly  they were 
quarrelling  about  Frodo,  and the  spoil.  For  a second  Sam  halted, for 
suddenly things seemed clear to him, almost as if he had seen them with  his 

####-eyes. The mithril coat! Of course, Frodo was wearing it, and they would find 
it. And from what Sam had heard Gorbag would covet it. But the orders of the 
Dark  Tower  were at present Frodo's  only  protection, and if they were set 
aside, Frodo might be killed out of hand at any moment. 
     'Come on, you miserable sluggard!' Sam cried to  himself. `Now for it!' 
He drew Sting and ran towards the  open gate. But  just as he was  about  to 
pass under its great arch he felt a  shock: as if  he had run into some  web 
like Shelob's, only invisible. He could see no obstacle,  but  something too 
strong for his will to  overcome barred  the way. He  looked about, and then  
within the shadow of the gate he saw the Two Watchers. 
     They were like great figures seated upon thrones. Each had three joined 
bodies,  and three heads facing outward, and inward, and across the gateway. 
The  heads had vulture-faces, and on  their  great knees were  laid clawlike 
hands. They seemed to be carved out of huge blocks  of stone, immovable, and 
yet they were aware: some dreadful  spirit of evil vigilance  abode in them. 
They knew  an  enemy.  Visible or  invisible none  could pass unheeded. They 
would forbid his entry, or his escape. 
     Hardening his  will  Sam thrust forward once again, and  halted  with a  
jerk, staggering  as if from a blow  upon his  breast and head. Then greatly 
daring, because he could  think  of nothing  else to do, answering  a sudden 
thought that came to him, he drew slowly out the phial of Galadriel and held 
it up.  Its white light quickened swiftly, and  the shadows under  the  dark 
arch fled. The monstrous Watchers sat there cold and still, revealed  in all 
their hideous shape. For a moment  Sam caught a  glitter in  the black stones  
of their  eyes, the very malice of which made  him quail; but slowly he felt 
their will waver and crumble into fear. 
     He sprang past them; but even as he  did so, thrusting the  phial  back  
into his bosom, he was aware, as plainly as if a bar of steel had snapped to 
behind  him,  that their vigilance was  renewed. And  from  those evil heads 
there came  a high shrill cry that echoed  in the towering walls before him. 
Far up above,  like  an answering signal,  a  harsh bell  clanged  a  single 
stroke. 
 
     'That's done it!'  said Sam. `Now I've rung  the front-door bell! Well, 
come   on  somebody!'  he  cried.  `Tell  Captain  Shagrat  that  the  great 
Elf-warrior has called, with his elf-sword too!' 
     There  was no answer. Sam  strode forward. Sting glittered  blue in his 

####-hand. The courtyard lay in  deep shadow, but he could see that  the pavement 
was strewn with bodies. Right at his feet were  two  orc-archers with knives 
sticking  in their backs. Beyond lay many  more shapes;  some singly as they 
had been hewn  down or shot;  others in pairs, still  grappling one another, 
dead  in  the very  throes  of stabbing, throttling, biting. The stones were 
slippery with dark blood. 
     Two liveries Sam noticed, one  marked  by the  Red  Eye, the other by a  
Moon disfigured with a ghastly  face of death;  but he did not  stop to look  
more closely.  Across the court a  great door at the foot of the Tower stood 
half  open,  and a red light came through; a large  orc  lay dead  upon  the 
threshold. Sam sprang over the body and went in; and then he peered about at 
a loss. 
     A  wide  and  echoing  passage led  back  from  the  door  towards  the 
mountain-side. It  was  dimly  lit with torches flaring  in  brackets on the 
walls, but its distant end was lost in gloom. Many doors  and openings could 
be seen on this  side and  that; but it was empty save for two or three more 
bodies sprawling on the  floor. From what he had heard of the captains' talk  
Sam knew that, dead  or alive, Frodo would most likely be found in a chamber  
high up  in the turret far above; but he  might search for  a day  before he 
found the way. 
     'It'll  be near  the back, I  guess,' Sam  muttered.  `The  whole Tower  
climbs backwards-like. And anyway I'd better follow these lights.' 
     He advanced down the passage, but slowly now, each step more reluctant. 
Terror  was beginning to grip him again. There was no sound save the  rap of 
his feet, which seemed to  grow to  an echoing noise,  like  the slapping of 
great hands upon  the stones. The dead bodies: the emptiness; the dank black 
walls  that in the torchlight seemed to drip with blood; the  fear of sudden 
death lurking in doorway or  shadow;  and behind all  his mind  the  waiting  
watchful malice at the gate: it  was almost more than he could  screw himself 
to  face. He would have welcomed a fight-with not too many enemies at a time 
- rather than this hideous brooding uncertainty. He forced himself to  think  
of Frodo,  lying bound or  in pain or dead somewhere in this dreadful place.  
He went on. 
     He had passed  beyond  the torchlight, almost to a great arched door at 
the end  of  the passage, the inner side of  the under gate, as  he  rightly 
guessed,  when  there  came  from high above a dreadful  choking shriek.  He 
stopped short. Then he heard feet coming. Someone was running in great haste 

####-down an echoing stairway overhead. 
     His  will was too weak and slow to restrain his hand. It dragged at the 
chain and  clutched  the Ring. But Sam did  not put  it  on; for even as  he 
clasped it to his breast, an orc came clattering down. Leaping out of a dark 
opening at the right, it ran towards him. It was no more than six paces from 
him  when,  lifting its head, it  saw him;  and  Sam  could hear its gasping 
breath and see the glare in its bloodshot eyes. It stopped short aghast. For  
what it saw was not a small frightened hobbit trying to hold a steady sword:  
it saw a great silent shape, cloaked in  a grey shadow, looming against  the 
wavering light behind; in one hand it held a sword, the very  light of which 
was a bitter pain, the other was clutched  at its breast, but held concealed 
some nameless menace of power and doom. 
     For a moment the orc crouched, and then with a hideous yelp  of fear it 
turned and fled back as it had come. Never  was  any dog more heartened when 
its  enemy turned  tail  than Sam at this unexpected flight. With a shout he 
gave chase. 
     `Yes! The Elf-warrior is loose!'  he  cried. 'I'm coming. Just you show 
me the way up, or I'll skin you! ' 
     But  the orc  was  in its own haunts,  nimble  and  well -fed. Sam was a  
stranger, hungry and weary.  The stairs  were  high  and  steep and winding.  
Sam's breath began to come in gasps. The orc had soon passed  out  of sight,  
and now only faintly   could be  heard the slapping of its feet as it went on 
and  up. Every now  and again it gave  a yell, and  the  echo  ran along the 
walls. But slowly all sound of it died away. 
     Sam plodded on.  He felt that he was on the right road, and his spirits 
had risen a  good  deal.  He thrust  the Ring away  and tightened his  belt. 
`Well, well!'  he said. `If only  they all take such a  dislike to me and my 
Sting, this  may  turn out  better than  I hoped. And anyway it looks  as if 
Shagrat, Gorbag, and company  have done nearly all my job for me. Except for  
that little frightened rat, I do believe  there's  nobody left alive  in the 
place!' 
     And with  that  he stopped, brought up  hard, as if he had hit his head 
against the stone wall. The full meaning of what he had said struck him like 
a  blow. Nobody  left alive!  Whose had  been that  horrible  dying  shriek? 
`Frodo, Frodo! Master!' he cried half sobbing. 'If they've killed you,  what 
shall I do? Well, I'm coming at last, right to the top, to see what I must.' 
 

####-     Up, up he went. It was dark save  for an occasional torch  flaring at a  
turn, or beside some opening  that  led into the higher levels of the Tower. 
Sam tried to count the  steps, but  after two hundred he lost his reckoning. 
He  was moving quietly  now: for  he thought that he could hear the sound of 
voices talking, still  some way above. More than  one rat remained alive, it 
seemed. 
     All  at  once, when he felt that he could pump out no more  breath, nor  
force  his knees to bend again, the stair ended. He stood still. The  voices 
were  now loud and near. Sam  peered about. He had climbed right to the flat 
roof of the third and highest tier of the Tower: an open space, about twenty 
yards across, with  a low parapet. There the  stair was covered by  a  small 
domed chamber in the midst of the roof, with low doors facing east and west. 
Eastward Sam  could  see the plain  of Mordor vast  and  dark below, and the 
burning mountain  far away. A  fresh turmoil was surging in its  deep wells,  
and the rivers of fire blazed so fiercely that even at this distance of many 
miles the light  of them  lit the tower -top with a red glare.  Westward  the 
view was blocked  by the base of the great turret that stood at the  back of 
this upper court and reared its  horn high above the crest of the encircling 
hills. Light gleamed in a window-slit. Its door was not ten yards from where 
Sam stood. It  was open but dark, and from just within its shadow the voices 
came. 
     At first Sam did not listen; he took a pace  out  of the  eastward door  
and  looked  about.  At  once he saw  that up  here the  fighting  had  been 
fiercest. All the  court was  choked with  dead orcs  or their  severed  and 
scattered heads  and limbs. The place stank of death. A snarl  followed by  a 
blow  and  a  cry  sent him darting back into hiding. An  orc-voice rose  in 
anger,  and he knew  it again  at once, harsh, brutal, cold. It was  Shagrat 
speaking, Captain of the Tower. 
     `You won't  go again,  you say? Curse you, Snaga, you little maggot! If 
you think  I'm so damaged  that it's safe  to flout me, you're mistaken Come 
here, and I'll  squeeze  your  eyes out, like I did to Radbug just now.  And 
when some new lads come, I'll deal with you: I'll send you to Shelob.' 
     `They  won't  come,  not before  you're dead  anyway,'  answered  Snaga  
surlily. 'I've told you twice that Gorbag's swine got to the gate first, and 
none of ours  got out. Lagduf and Muzgash ran through, but they were shot. I 
saw it from a window, I tell you. And they wer e the last.' 
     'Then you  must go. I must stay here anyway. But  I'm  hurt.  The Black  

####-Pits take  that filthy  rebel  Gorbag!' Shagrat's  voice trailed off into  a  
string of foul  names and curses. `I  gave  him  better  than  I got, but he 
knifed me, the dung,  before I throttled him. You must go, or  I'll eat you. 
News must  get through to Lugb®rz, or we'll both be for the Black Pits. Yes, 
you too. You won't escape by skulking here.' 
     `I'm not going down those stairs again,' growled Snaga, `be you captain 
or no. Nar! Keep your hands off your knife,  or I'll  put  an arrow  in your 
guts. You won't be a captain  long when They hear about all these goings-on. 
I've  fought for the  Tower against those  stinking Morgul-rats,  but a nice 
mess you two precious captains have made of things, fighting over the swag.' 
     'That's enough  from you,'  snarled  Shagrat. `I had my orders. It  was 
Gorbag started it, trying to pinch that pretty shirt.' 
     `Well, you put  his back up, being so high and mighty. And he had  more 
sense than you anyway. He told you more than once that the most dangerous of 
these spies was still loose, and you wouldn't  listen. And you  won't listen 
now. Gorbag  was right, I tell you. There's  a great fighter  about,  one of 
those bloody-handed  Elves, or one of the filthy tarks.1 He's coming here, I 
tell you. You heard the bell.  He's got past the Watchers, and that's tark's 
work.  He's on the stairs. And until he's off them, I'm not going  down. Not 
if you were a Nazgyl, I wouldn't.' 
     `So  that's it, is it?' yelled Shagrat. 'You'll do this, and you'll not 
do  that? And  when he does come, you'll bolt  and leave me? No, you  won't! 
I'll put red maggot-holes in your belly first.' 
     Out of the turret-door the  smaller  orc came flying.  Behind  him came 
Shagrat, a large orc with long  arms that,  as  he ran crouching, reached to 
the  ground. But one  arm hung  limp and seemed to be  bleeding;  the  other  
hugged  a  large black bundle.  In the red  glare  Sam, cowering behind  the 
stair-door, caught a glimpse of his evil face as it passed: it was scored as 
if  by  rending  claws and  smeared  with blood;  slaver  dripped  from  its 
protruding fangs; the mouth snarled like an animal. 
     As far as Sam could see, Shagrat  hunted  Snaga round  the roof,  until 
ducking and eluding  him the  smaller  orc with a yelp darted back  into the 
turret  and  disappeared. Then  Shagrat halted. Out of the eastward door Sam 
could see  him now  by the parapet, panting,  his  left claw  clenching  and 
unclenching feebly. He put  the bundle on the floor and with  his right claw 
drew out a long red knife and spat on it.  Going to  the  parapet he  leaned 
over, looking down into  the outer court far below.  Twice he shouted but no 

####-answer came. 
     Suddenly,  as Shagrat was stooped over the battlement, his back to  the 
roof-top, Sam to  his amazement  saw  that one  of the  sprawling bodies was 
moving. It  was  crawling. It  put out  a  claw and clutched the  bundle. It 
staggered up. In its  other hand it  held a broad-headed spear  with a short 
broken haft. It was poised for a stabbing thrust. But at that  very moment a  
hiss  escaped  its teeth, a gasp of  pain or hate. Quick as a snake  Shagrat 
slipped aside, twisted round, and drove his knife into his enemy 's throat. 
     `Got you, Gorbag!' he cried. 'Not quite dead, eh? Well, I'll finish  my 
job now.' He sprang on to the  fallen  body, and stamped and trampled it  in 
his  fury, stooping  now and  again to  stab and  slash  it with his  knife. 
Satisfied  at last, he threw back  his head and let out a  horrible gurgling 
yell of triumph. Then he licked his knife, and put it between his teeth, and 
catching up the bundle he came loping towards the near door of the stairs.  
     Sam had no time  to think. He might have slipped out of the other door, 
but  hardly without  being seen;  and he could not have played hide-and-seek 
with this  hideous  orc for long. He did what was probably the best thing he 
could have  done.  He sprang  out to  meet  Shagrat with a shout. He was  no 
longer holding the Ring, but it was there, a hidden power, a  cowing  menace 
to the slaves of Mordor; and in his hand was Sting, and its  light smote the 
eyes  of  the   orc  like  the  glitter  of  cruel  stars  in  the  terrible 
elf-countries,  the  dream  of which was a  cold fear to all  his  kind.  And 
Shagrat could not  both fight and  keep hold  of his treasure.  He  stopped, 
growling, baring his fangs. Then once more, orc-fashion, he leapt aside, and 
as Sam  sprang at  him, using the heavy bundle as both shield and weapon, he 
thrust it  hard into his  enemy's face. Sam staggered, and before  he  could 
recover, Shagrat darted past and down the stairs.  
     Sam ran after him, cursing, but he did not go far.  Soon the thought of 
Frodo returned  to him, and he remembered that the other  orc  had gone back 
into the turret. Here was another  dreadful  choice, and he  had  no time to 
ponder it. If Shagrat got away, he would soon get help and come back. But if 
Sam  pursued him,  the  other orc might  do some horrible deed up there. And 
anyway Sam might miss Shagrat or be killed by him. He turned quickly and ran 
back up the  stairs. `Wrong again, I expect,' he sighed. `But it's my job to 
go right up to the top first, whatever happens afterwards.' 
     Away below Shagrat went leaping  down the stairs and out over the court 
and  through the gate,  bearing his precious burden. If Sam could have  seen 

####-him and known the grief that  his escape would bring, he might have quailed. 
But now his mind was set on the last stage of his search. He came cautiously  
to the turret-door and stepped inside. It opened into darkness. But soon his 
staring  eyes were aware of a dim light at  his right hand. It came  from an 
opening that led  to another stairway,  dark  and narrow: it appeared  to go 
winding up the turret along the inside of its round outer wall. A  torch was 
glimmering from somewhere up above. 
     Softly Sam began to climb. He came  to the guttering torch, fixed above 
a door on his left that faced a window-slit looking out westward: one of the 
red eyes that he and Frodo  had  seen from down below by the tunnel's mouth. 
Quickly Sam passed the door and hurried on to the second storey, dreading at 
any  moment to he  attacked and to feel throttling fingers seize  his throat 
from behind. He came  next to a window looking east and another torch  above 
the door to a passage through the middle  of the turret. The door  was open, 
the passage  dark  save for the glimmer of  the torch and the red glare from 
outside filtering through  the window-slit.  But here  the stair stopped and 
climbed  no further. Sam crept into the passage.  On either side there was a  
low door; both were closed and locked. There was no sound at all. 
     `A dead end,'  muttered Sam; `and after all my climb! This can't be the  
top of the tower. But what can I do now?' 
     He ran back to the lower  storey and tried the door. It would not move. 
He ran up again, and sweat began to trickle down his face. He felt that even 
minutes were precious, but one by one they escaped; and he could do nothing. 
He  cared  no  longer for Shagrat or Snaga  or any  other orc that  was ever 
spawned. He longed  only for his master,  for one  sight of his face  or one 
touch of his hand. 
     At last, weary and feeling finally defeated, he sat on a step below the 
level of the passage-floor and bowed his head into his hands. It  was quiet, 
horribly quiet.  The torch,  that was already burning  low  when he arrived, 
sputtered and went out; and he felt the darkness cover him like a tide.  And 
then softly, to his own  surprise, there at the vain end of his long journey 
and his  grief, moved by what thought in his  heart he could  not  tell, Sam 
began to sing. 
     His voice sounded thin and  quavering in the cold dark tower: the voice 
of a forlorn and  weary hobbit  that no listening orc could possibly mistake 
for the  clear song of an Elven-lord. He murmured  old childish tunes out of 
the Shire, and snatches of Mr.  Bilbo's  rhymes that came into his mind like 

####-fleeting glimpses of the country of his home. And then suddenly new strength 
rose in him, and his voice rang out, while words of his own came unbidden to 
fit the simple tune. 
     In western lands beneath the Sun  
     the flowers may rise in Spring, 
     the trees may bud, the wa ters run, 
     the merry finches sing. 
     Or there maybe 'tis cloudless night 
     and swaying beeches bear 
     the Elven-stars as jewels white  
     amid their branching hair. 
 
     Though here at journey's end I lie  
     in darkness buried deep, 
     beyond all towers strong and high, 
     beyond all mountains steep, 
     above all shadows rides the Sun 
     and Stars for ever dwell: 
     I will not say the Day is done, 
     nor bid the Stars farewell. 
     `Beyond  all towers strong  and high,'  he began  again,  and  then  he 
stopped short. He thought that he had heard a faint voice answering him. But 
now he could  hear nothing. Yes, he  could hear something,  but not a voice.  
Footsteps were  approaching.  Now  a  door was being opened  quietly in  the 
passage above; the hinges  creaked. Sam crouched  down  listening.  The door  
closed with a dull thud; and then a snarling orc-voice rang out. 
     'Ho la! You up  there, you dunghill rat! Stop your  squeaking,  or I'll 
come and deal with you. D'you hear?' 
     There was no answer. 
     'All right,' growled Snaga.  `But I'll come and  have a look at you all 
the same, and see what you're up to.' 
     The hinges creaked again, and Sam, now  peering over  the corner of the 
passage-threshold, saw a flicker  of light in an open doorway, and  the  dim 
shape of an orc  coming out. He seemed to be carrying a ladder. Suddenly the 
answer dawned on Sam: the topmost chamber was reached  by a trap-door in 
the 
roof of the passage. Snaga thrust the ladder  upwards, steadied it, and then 

####-clambered  out  of  sight. Sam heard  a bolt drawn back.  Then he  heard the 
hideous voice speaking again. 
     `You  lie quiet, or  you'll pay for it! You've not got long to live  in 
peace, I guess; but if you don't want the fun to begin right now, keep  your 
trap shut, see? There's a reminder  for you!'  There was  a sound  like  the 
crack of a whip. 
     At that rage blazed in Sam's heart to a sudden fury. He sprang up, ran, 
and went up  the ladder  like a cat. His head came out in the middle of  the 
floor of a large  round chamber. A red lamp hung from its roof; the westward 
window-slit was high and dark. Something  was lying on the floor by the wall 
under the window,  but over it a black  orc-shape was straddled. It raised a  
whip a second time, but the blow never fell. 
     With a cry Sam  leapt across  the floor, Sting in hand. The orc wheeled 
round, but before it could make a move Sam slashed  its  whip-hand  from its 
arm.  Howling with pain and fear but desperate the orc charged head-down  at 
him.  Sam's  next  blow  went wide,  and  thrown  off  his balance  he  fell 
backwards, clutching at  the  orc as it  stumbled over him.  Before he could 
scramble up he heard a cry and a thud. The orc in its wild haste had tripped 
on the ladder -head  and  fallen through the open trap-door. Sam gave no more 
thought to it. He ran to the figure huddled on the floor. It was Frodo. 
 
     He was  naked, lying as if in a swoon on a heap of filthy rags: his arm 
was  flung up,  shielding his head,  and  across his side there ran an  ugly 
whip-weal. 
     `Frodo! Mr. Frodo,  my dear!'  cried Sam,  tears  almost  blinding him. 
`It's Sam, I've come!' He  half  lifted  his  master and hugged  him to  his 
breast. Frodo opened his eyes. 
     `Am  I  still  dreaming?'  he  muttered.  `But  the other  dreams  were 
horrible.' 
     `You're not dreaming at all, Master,'  said  Sam. `It's real. It's  me. 
I've come.' 
     `I can hardly believe it,' said Frodo, clutching him. `There was an orc 
with a whip, and then  it  turns into Sam! Then I wasn't  dreaming after all 
when I heard that singing down below, and I tried to answer? Was it you?' 
     'It was indeed, Mr.  Frodo. I'd given up  hope, almost. I couldn't find 
you. 
     Well, you have now, Sam, dear Sam, said Frodo, and he la back  in Sam's 

####-gentle arms,  closing his eyes, like  a child at rest  when night-fears  are 
driven away by some loved voice or hand. 
     Sam  felt that he  could sit like that in endless happiness; but it was 
not allowed. It was not  enough for him to find his master, he  had still to 
try and save him. He kissed Frodo's forehead. `Come!  Wake up Mr. Frodo!' he 
said, trying to sound as cheerful  as he had when  he drew back the curtains 
at Bag End on a summer's morning. 
     Frodo sighed and sat up. `Where are we? How did I get here?' he asked. 
     'There's no time for tales till we get somewhere else, Mr. Frodo,' said 
Sam. `But you're in the top of that tower you and me saw from away  down  by 
the tunnel before the orcs got you. How long ago that wa s I don't know. More 
than a day, I guess.' 
     `Only that?' said  Frodo. `It seems weeks. You  must  tell me all about 
it,  if  we get  a  chance. Something  hit me, didn't  it?  And I fell  into 
darkness and foul dreams,  and  woke and found that  waking was worse.  Orcs 
were all round me. I think they had just been  pouring some horrible burning  
drink  down my throat. My head grew clear, but I was  aching and weary. They 
stripped me of everything; and then two great brutes came and questioned me, 
questioned  me until I thought I should go mad, standing  over me, gloating,  
fingering their knives. I'll never forget their claws and eyes.' 
     `You won't,  if you talk about them, Mr.  Frodo,' said Sam.  'And if we 
don't want to see them  again, the sooner we   get going  the better. Can you  
walk?' 
     `Yes,  I can walk,' said Frodo, getting up slowly. 'I am not hurt  Sam. 
Only  I feel very tired, and I've a pain here.' He put  his hand to the back  
of his neck above his left shoulder. He stood up, and it looked to Sam as if 
he was clothed in flame: his naked skin was scarlet in the light of the lamp 
above. Twice he paced across the floor. 
     `That's better!' he said,  his spirits rising a  little. `I didn't dare 
to move when I was left alone, or  one of the guards came. Until the yelling 
and fighting began. The two big  brutes:  they quarrelled, I think. Over  me 
and my  things. I lay  here  terrified. And then all  went deadly quiet, and 
that was worse.' 
     `Yes, they  quarrelled, seemingly,'  said Sam. (There must  have been a  
couple  of  hundred of the dirty creatures  in  this place.  A bit of a tall 
order for Sam Gamgee, as  you might say. But they've done all the killing of 
themselves. That's lucky, but it's too long to make a song about, till we're 

####-out of  here. Now what's to be done? You can't go walking  in the Black Land 
in naught but your skin, Mr. Frodo.' 
     `They've  taken everything, Sam,' said Frodo. `Everything I had. Do you  
understand?  Everything!'  He cowered on the floor again with bowed head, as 
his own words brought home to  him the fullness of the disaster, and despair  
overwhelmed him.  'The quest  has failed Sam. Even if we get out of here, we 
can't escape. Only  Elves  can escape. Away,  away out  of Middle-earth, far  
away over the Sea. If even that is wide enough to keep the Shadow out.' 
     `No,  not everything, Mr. Frodo. And it  hasn't failed, not yet. I took  
it, Mr. Frodo, begging your pardon.  And I've kept  it safe.  It's round  my 
neck  now, and a terrible  burden it is, too.'  Sam fumbled for the Ring and 
its chain. `But I suppose you must take it back.' Now it had come to it, Sam 
felt reluctant to give up the Ring and burden his master with it again. 
     `You've  got it?' gasped  Frodo. `You've  got  it  here? Sam, you're  a  
marvel!'  Then quickly and strangely his tone changed. `Give it to  me!'  he 
cried, standing up, holding out  a trembling hand. `Give it  me at once! You  
can't have it!' 
     'All right, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, rather startled. 'Here it is!' Slowly 
he drew the Ring out and passed the chain over his head.  `But you're in the 
land of Mordor now, sir; and when you get out, you'll see the Fiery Mountain 
and all. You'll find the Ring very dangerous now, and very hard to bear.  If 
it's too hard a job, I could share it with you, maybe?' 
     `No, no!'  cried Frodo, snatching the  Ring and chain from Sam's hands.  
`No you won't,  you thief!'  He panted, staring at Sam  with eyes wide  with 
fear and enmity. Then  suddenly, clasping the Ring in one clenched  fist, he 
stood aghast. A mist seemed  to  clear from his eyes, and  he passed a  hand 
over  his  aching brow. The hideous vision had  seemed so real to  him, half 
bemused as he was still with wound and fear. Sam had changed before his very 
eyes  into an orc again, leering and pawing  at his  treasure, a foul little 
creature with  greedy  eyes  and  slobbering  mouth. But  now the vision had 
passed.  There was Sam kneeling before him, his face wrung with pain,  as if 
he had been stabbed in the heart; tears welled from his eyes. 
     'O Sam!' cried Frodo. `What have I said? What have I done? Forgive  me! 
After all you have done. It is the horrible power of the Ring. I wish it had 
never, never, been found. But don't mind me, Sam. I must carry the burden to 
the end. It can't be altered. You can't come between me and this doom.' 
     'That's all right, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, rubbing  his sleeve across his 

####-eyes. `I understand. But I can still help, can't I? I've got to get  you out 
of  here. At  once, see! But first you want  some clothes  and gear and then 
some food.  The clothes will be the  easiest part. As we're in Mordor, we'd, 
best  dress up Mordor -fashion;  and anyway there isn't no choice. It'll have 
to  be orc-stuff  for you, Mr.  Frodo,  I'm afraid. And for me too. If we go 
together, we'd best match. Now put this round you!' 
     Sam unclasped his grey cloak and cast it about Frodo's  shoulders. Then 
unslinging his pack he laid  it on the floor. He drew Sting from its sheath. 
Hardly a flicker was to be seen upon  its blade. `I was forgetting this, Mr. 
Frodo,' he said.  `No, they didn't get everything! You lent me Sting, if you  
remember, and the Lady's glass. I've  got them both still. But  lend them to 
me a little longer, Mr. Frodo. I must go  and see what  I can find. You stay 
here. Walk about a bit and ease your legs. I shan't be long.  I shan't  have 
to go far.' 
     `Take  care,  Sam!'  said Frodo. `And be quick! There may be orcs still 
alive, lurking in wait.' 
     'I've  got to chance  it,' said  Sam. He  stepped to the  trap-door and 
slipped down the ladder. In a  minute  his head reappeared. He threw  a long 
knife on the floor. 
     `There's something that might be  useful,' he said. 'He's dead: the one 
that  whipped  you. Broke his neck, it seems, in his hurry. Now you draw  up 
the ladder, if  you can, Mr. Frodo;  and don't you let it down till you hear 
me call the password. Elbereth   I'll call. What  the Elves say. No orc would 
say that.' 
 
     Frodo sat  for a while and shivered, dreadful fears chasing one another 
through his mind. Then he  got up, drew the grey elven-cloak about him,  and 
to keep his mind occupied, began to walk to and fro, prying and peering into 
every corner of his prison. 
     It was not very long, though fear made it seem an hour at least, before 
he  heard Sam's voice calling softly from  below:  Elbereth, Elbereth . Frodo 
let  down the light ladder. Up  came Sam, puffing, heaving a great bundle on  
his head. He let it fall with a thud. 
     `Quick now. Mr.  Frodo!' he said. `I've had a  bit of  a search to find 
anything  small enough for the likes of us.  We'll have  to make do.  But we 
must hurry. I've met nothing alive, and  I've seen nothing but I'm not easy. 
I think this place is being watched. I can't explain it, but well: it  feels 

####-to me as  if  one of those foul flying Riders was about, up in the blackness 
where he can't be seen.' 
     He opened  the  bundle. Frodo  looked in  disgust at  the contents, but 
there was nothing for it: he had to put the  things on, or go  naked.  There 
were  long hairy breeches of some unclean beast -fell,  and a  tunic of dirty 
leather. He  drew them on. Over the  tunic  went a coat  of stout ring-mail, 
short for  a  full-sized  orc,  too long for  Frodo  and heavy. About it  he 
clasped  a belt, at which there hung a  short  sheath holding a broad-bladed 
stabbing-sword.  Sam  had brought  several  orc-helmets. One of  them fitted  
Frodo well enough, a black  cap with iron rim, and  iron  hoops covered with 
leather  upon  which  the  evil  Eye was  painted  in red above the beaklike 
nose-guard. 
     `The Morgul-stuff,  Gorbag's gear,  was  a better fit and better made,' 
said Sam;  `but it  wouldn't do,  I  guess, to go  carrying his  tokens into 
Mordor,  not  after  this  business here. Well,  there you are, Mr. Frodo. A 
perfect little orc, if I may make so bold-at least you would be, if we could 
cover your face with a mask,  give you longer arms, and make you bow-legged. 
This  will  hide some of the tell-tales.' He put a large  black cloak  round 
Frodo's shoulders. `Now you're ready! You can pick up a shield as we go.' 
     'What about you, Sam?' said Frodo. `Aren't we going to match?' 
     `Well, Mr. Frodo, I've been  thinking,' said Sam. 'I'd best  not  leave 
any of my stuff behind, and we can't destroy it.  And  I can't wear orc-mail 
over all my clothes, can I? I'll just have to cover up.' 
     He knelt  down  and  carefully  folded his elven-cloak. It went  into a  
surprisingly small roll. This  he  put into his pack  that lay on the floor. 
Standing up, he slung  it behind his back,  put an orc-helm on  his head, and 
cast another  black cloak about  his  shoulders. `There!' he  said. `Now  we 
match, near enough. And now we must be off!' 
     'I can't go all the way at a run, Sam,' said Frodo with a wry smile. 'I  
hope you've made inquiries about inns along the road? Or  have you forgotten 
about food and drink?' 
     `Save me,  but so  I had!' said Sam.  He whistled in dismay. 'Bless me, 
Mr. Frodo, but you've gone and made me that hungry and thirsty! I don't know 
when   drop or  morsel last passed my lips. I'd forgotten it,  trying to find 
you.  But let  me  think!  Last time I looked  I'd got about enough of  that 
waybread, and of  what Captain Faramir gave us, to keep  me on my legs for a  
couple of weeks at a pinch. But if there's a drop left in my bottle, there's 

####-no more. That's  not going to be enough for two, nohow. Don't ores eat,  and 
don't they drink? Or do they just live on foul air and poison?' 
     `No, they eat and drink, Sam. The Shadow that  bred them can only mock, 
it cannot make:  not real new things of its own. I  don't think it gave life 
to the ores, it only  ruined them and twisted them; and if they are  to live 
at all, they have to live like  other living creatures. Foul waters and foul 
meats  they'll  take, if they can get no better, but not poison. They've fed 
me, and so I'm better off than you. There must be food and  water  somewhere 
in this place.' `But there's no time to look for them,' said Sam. 
     `Well, things are a bit better than you think,' said Frodo. 'I have had 
a bit of luck while you were away. Indeed they did not take everything. I've 
found my food-bag among some  rags  on  the  floor.  They've rummaged it, of 
course. But I  guess  they disliked  the very look and smell of  the lembas, 
worse than Gollum did. It's scattered about  and some  of it is trampled and 
broken,  but I've gathered  it  together. It's not far short of  what you've 
got.   But  they've   taken  Faramir's  food,  and  they've  slashed  up  my 
water -bottle.' 
     `Well,  there's no more  to  be said,' said  Sam. `We've got enough  to 
start  on.  But the water's going to be a  bad business. But come Mr. Frodo!  
Off we go, or a whole lake of it won't do us any good!' 
     'Not  till you've  had  a mouthful,  Sam,' said Frodo. `I won't  budge. 
Here, take this elven-cake, and  drink that last drop in  your  bottle!  The 
whole thing is quite hopeless, so it's no good worrying  about  tomorrow. It 
probably won't come.' 
 
     At last they started. Down the ladder  they climbed, and then Sam  took  
it and laid it in the passage beside the huddled body of the fallen orc. The 
stair was dark, but on the roof-top the glare of the Mountain could still be 
seen, though it  was dying down  now to  a  sullen red.  They  picked up two 
shields to complete their disguise and then went on. 
     Down  the great stairway they plodded. The  high chamber of the  turret 
behind, where they had met again, seemed almost homely: they were out in the 
open again  now,  and terror ran along  the walls. All might be  dead in the 
Tower of Cirith Ungol, but it was steeped in fear and evil still. 
     At length they came to the door upon the outer court, and they  halted. 
Even  from where they stood they felt the malice  of the Watchers beating on 
them, black silent shapes on either side of the gate through which the glare 

####-of Mordor dimly showed. As they threaded their way among the hideous  
bodies 
of the  ores each step became more  difficult. Before they  even reached the 
archway they were brought to a stand. To move an inch further was a pain and 
weariness to will and limb. 
     Frodo  had no  strength  for such a  battle. He sank  to the ground. `I  
can't go  on, Sam,' he  murmured. `I'm  going  to faint. I don't know what's 
come over me.' 
     `I  do, Mr.  Frodo. Hold up  now! It's  the gate.  There's some devilry 
there. But  I got  through,  and  I'm going to  get  out.  It can't be  more 
dangerous than before. Now for it!' 
     Sam drew  out the elven-glass of Galadriel again. As if to do honour to 
his hardihood, and to grace with  splendour  his faithful  brown hobbit-hand  
that had done such  deeds, the  phial blazed forth suddenly, so that all the 
shadowy  court  was  lit with  a  dazzling  radiance  like lightning; but it 
remained steady and did not pass.  
     'Gilthoniel, A  Elbereth!' Sam  cried. For, why he  did  not know,  his 
thought sprang back suddenly to  the Elves in the Shire,  and the song  that 
drove away the Black Rider in the trees.  
     'Aiya elenion ancalima!' cried Frodo once again behind him. 
     The will of the Watchers was broken with a suddenness like the snapping  
of a cord, and Frodo and Sam stumbled  forward. Then they  ran.  Through the 
gate and past the great seated figures with their glittering eyes. There was 
a crack.  The keystone of the  arch  crashed almost on  their heels, and the 
wall  above crumbled, and fell in ruin. Only  by a  hair did  they escape. A 
bell clanged; and from the Watchers there went up  a high and dreadful wail.  
Far  up above in  the darkness it was answered . Out of the  black  sky there 
came dropping like a bolt a winged shape, rending the clouds with  a ghastly  
shriek. 
 

####- 

Chapter 2. The Land of Shadow 

 
 
     Sam had just wits enough left to thrust the phial back into his breast. 
'Run, Mr. Frodo!' he cried.  'No, not that way! There's a sheer drop over the 
wall. Follow me!' 
     Down the  road from the  gate they  fled. In fifty paces, with a  swift  
bend  round  a jutting bastion  of the cliff, it took them out of sight from 
the Tower.  They had escaped for the moment. Cowering back  against the rock  
they drew breath, and then they clutched at their  hearts.  Perching  now on 
the wall  beside the ruined  gate the Nazgyl sent out its  deadly cries. All 
the cliffs echoed. 
     In terror they  stumbled  on. Soon the road bent sharply eastward again 
and exposed them  for  a dreadful  moment  to view from  the Tower. As  they 
flitted  across they  glanced  back  and saw the  great black shape upon the 
battlement; then they plunged down between high rock -walls in a cu tting that 
fell steeply to join  the  Morgul-road. They came to  the way-meeting. There 
was still  no sign of orcs, nor  of  an answer to the cry of the Nazgyl; but 
they  knew that the silence would not last  long. At any moment now the hunt 
would begin. 
     'This won't do, Sam,' said Frodo. 'If we were real orcs, we ought to be 
dashing back  to the  Tower, not running away. The  first enemy we meet will 
know us. We must get off this road somehow.' 
     'But we can't,' said Sam, 'not without wings.' 
     The eastern faces of the Ephel D®ath  were  sheer, falling in cliff and 
precipice to the black trough that lay between  them  and the inner ridge. A 
short way beyond the  way-meeting,  after another  steep  incline,  a flying 
bridge  of stone  leapt over the chasm  and  bore  the road  across into the 
tumbled slopes and glens of the Morgai. With a desperate spurt Frodo and Sam 
dashed along the bridge;  but  they had  hardly reached its further end when 
they  heard  the hue and cry begin. Away  behind them, now high above on the 
mountain-side, loomed  the  Tower of Cirith Ungol, its stones glowing dully. 
Suddenly its harsh bell clanged  again, and  then broke  into  a  shattering 
peal.  Horns sounded.  And now  from beyond  the  bridge-end came  
answering 
cries. Down in the dark trough,  cut off from the dying  glare of  Orodruin, 

####-Frodo  and  Sam  could not see ahead, but  already  they heard the  tramp of 
iron-shod feet, and upon the road there rang the swift clatter of hoofs. 
     'Quick, Sam!  Over we  go!'  cried Frodo. They scrambled  on to  the low 
parapet of the  bridge. Fortunately there  was no  longer any dreadful  drop 
into the  gulf, for the slopes of the Morgai had already risen almost to the 
level of the road;  but it was too dark for them to  guess  the depth of the 
fall. 
     'Well, here goes, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. 'Good-bye!' 
     He let go. Frodo followed. And even as they fell they heard the rush of 
horsemen sweeping over  the bridge  and  the rattle  of orc-feet  running up 
behind. But Sam would have laughed, if he had dared. Half fearing a breaking 
plunge down on to unseen rocks the hobbits landed, in a drop of no more than 
a dozen feet, with a thud  and  a crunch  into the last  thing that they had 
expected: a tangle of thorny bushes.  There Sam  lay still, softly sucking a  
scratched hand. 
     When  the sound of  hoof  and foot  had passed  he ventured a  whisper. 
'Bless me, Mr. Frodo, but I didn't know as anything grew in Mordor! But if I 
had a'known, this is just what I'd have  looked  for. These thorns must be a  
foot long by the feel of them; they've stuck through everything I've got on. 
Wish I'd a'put that mail -shirt on!' 
     'Orc-mail  doesn't keep  these thorns out,'  said Frodo.  'Not  even  a  
leather jerkin is any good.' 
     They had a  struggle  to get out of the thicket. The thorns  and briars 
were as tough as wire and as  clinging as  claws. Their cloaks were rent and 
tattered before they broke free at last. 
     'Now down we  go, Sam,' Frodo whispered. 'Down into  the  valley quick , 
and then turn northward, as soon as ever we can.' 
     Day was coming again in the world outside, and far beyond the glooms of 
Mordor the Sun  was climbing over the eastern  rim of Middle-earth; but here 
all was still dark as night. The Mountain smoulder ed and its fires went out. 
The glare  faded from the cliffs.  The easterly wind that  had  been blowing 
ever since  they  left  Ithilien now seemed dead.  Slowly and painfully they 
clambered down, groping, stumbling, scrambling among rock and briar and 
dead 
wood in the blind shadows, down and down until they could go no further. 
     At  length they stopped, and sat  side  by  side, their backs against a  
boulder. Both were sweating.  'If Shagrat himself was to offer me a glass of 

####-water, I'd shake his hand,' said Sam. 
     'Don't say such things!' said Frodo. 'It only makes it  worse.' Then he 
stretched himself out, dizzy and weary, and he spoke no more for a while. At 
last with a struggle he got up again. To his amazement he found that Sam was 
asleep.  'Wake  up,  Sam!'  he  said. 'Come on! It's time  we  made  another 
effort.' 
     Sam scrambled  to  his feet.  'Well I  never!' he  said.  'I  must have 
dropped off. It's a long time, Mr. Frodo, since I had a proper sleep, and my 
eyes just closed down on their own.' 
     Frodo now led the way, northward as near as he could  guess,  among the 
stones  and boulders lying thick at  the bottom of  the  great  ravine.  But 
presently he stopped again. 
     'It's no good, Sam,' he said. 'I  can't  manage  it. This mail-shirt, I 
mean. Not in my present state. Even my mithril-coat seemed heavy when I  was 
tired. This is far heavier. And what's the use of it? We shan't win  through 
by fighting.' 
     'But we may  have some to do,' said  Sam. 'And there's knives and stray 
arrows. That  Gollum isn't dead, for one thing. I don't like to think of you  
with naught but a bit of leather between you and a stab in the dark.' 
     'Look here, Sam dear lad,' said Frodo: 'I am tired, weary,  I haven't a  
hope left.  But I have to go on trying to get  to the Mountain, as long as I 
can move. The  Ring is enough. This extra  weight is killing me. It must go. 
But don't think  I'm ungrateful. I hate  to think of the foul work  you must  
have had among the bodies to find it for me.' 
     'Don't talk about it, Mr. Frodo. Bless you! I'd  carry you  on my back, 
if I could. Let it go then!' 
     Frodo laid aside his cloak and took off the orc-mail and flung it away. 
He shivered a little. 'What I really need is something warm,' he said. 'It's 
gone cold, or else I've caught a chill.' 
     'You can have my cloak,  Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. He unslung his  pack and  
took out the elven-cloak. 'How's  this, Mr.  Frodo?' he said. 'You wrap that 
orc-rag close round you, and  put the belt outside it. Then this can go over 
all.  It  don't  look quite orc-fashion, but it'll  keep you  warmer; and  I 
daresay it'll  keep you from harm better than any other gear. It was made by 
the Lady.' 
     Frodo took the cloak and fastened the brooch. 'That's better!' he said. 
'I feel much lighter. I  can go  on now.  But this  blind dark  seems to  be 

####-getting into my  heart.  As I lay in  prison,  Sam. I tried to  remember the 
Brandywine, and  Woody  End,  and  The  Water  running  through  the mill at 
Hobbiton. But I can't see them now.' 
     'There  now, Mr.  Frodo, it's you  that's  talking of water this time!' 
said Sam. 'If only the  Lady could see us or hear us, I'd say to  her: (Your 
Ladyship,  all  we  want is  light  and  water:  just clean water and  plain 
daylight, better than any jewels,  begging your pardon.( But it's a long way 
to Lurien.' Sam sighed and waved his  hand towards the heights of the  Ephel 
D®ath, now only to be guessed as a deeper blackness against the black sky. 
 
     They  started  off again. They  had not gone  far  when  Frodo  paused.  
'There's a Black Rider over us,' he said. 'I can feel it. We had better keep 
still for a while.' 
     Crouched under  a great  boulder they sat facing back  westward and did 
not speak  for some  time. Then  Frodo  breathed  a  sigh of  relief.  'It's 
passed,' he said.  They  stood up, and then they both stared in wonder. Away 
to their left, southward, against a sky that was turning grey, the peaks and 
high  ridges  of  the great range began  to appear  dark and black,  visible 
shapes. Light  was growing behind them.  Slowly it crept towards the  North. 
There  was battle far above  in  the high spaces of the  air. The  billowing 
clouds of Mordor were being driven back, their edges tattering as a wind out 
of  the living world came up and swept the fumes and smokes towards the dark 
land of their home. Under  the lifting skirts of the dreary canopy dim light 
leaked into Mordor like pale morning through the grimed window of a prison. 
     'Look at it, Mr. Frodo!'  said  Sam. 'Look  at it!  The wind's changed. 
Something's happening. He's not having it all  his own way.  His darkness is 
breaking up out in the world there. I wish I could see what is going on!' 
     It was  the morning  of the fifteenth of  March,  and over the  Vale of 
Anduin the Sun was rising  above the eastern shadow, and the south-west wind 
was blowing. Thjoden lay dying on the Pelennor Fields.  
     As Frodo and Sam stood and gazed, the rim of light spread all along the 
line  of the Ephel D®ath, and then they saw a shape, moving at a great speed 
out of  the West, at first only a  black speck against  the glimmering strip 
above the mountain-tops, but  growing, until it plunged like a bolt into the 
dark canopy and passed high above them. As it went it sent out a long shrill  
cry, the voice of a Nazgyl; but this cry no longer held any terror for them: 
it was a cry of woe and dismay, ill tidings for the Dark Tower. The Lord  of 

####-the Ring-wraiths had met his doom. 
     'What did I tell you? Something's happening!'  cried Sam. '  (The  war's 
going well,(  said Shagrat; but Gorbag he  wasn't so sure. And  he was right 
there too. Things are looking up, Mr. Frodo. Haven't you got some hope now?' 
     'Well  no,  not much,  Sam,'  Frodo  sighed. 'That's  away  beyond  the 
mountains.  We're going east not west. And I'm  so tired. And the Ring  is so  
heavy, Sam.  And  I begin to  see it in my mind  all the time, like a  great 
wheel of fire.' 
     Sam's  quick  spirits  sank again  at  once. He  looked  at  his master  
anxiously, and he took his hand.  'Come, Mr.  Frodo!' he said. 'I've got one 
thing  I  wanted: a bit of light. Enough  to help  us, and yet I guess  it's 
dangerous too. Try a bit further,  and then we'll lie close and have a rest. 
But take a morsel to eat now, a bit of the E lves' food; it may hearten you.' 
     Sharing  a  wafer of   lembas, and  munching it as  best they could with 
their parched  mouths. Frodo and Sam  plodded on. The light,  though no more 
than a grey  dusk, was now enough for them to see that they were deep in the 
valley  between  the mountains. It sloped  up gently  northward,  and at its 
bottom  went the bed  of a now dry  and  withered stream.  Beyond  its stony 
course  they saw a beaten  path that  wound  its way under the  feet of  the 
westward cliffs. Had they known,  they could have reached it quicker, for it 
was a track that  left the main Morgul-road at the  western  bridge-end  and 
went down  by  a long stair cut in the rock to the valley's  bottom.  It was 
used  by  patrols  or  by  messengers going  swiftly  to  lesser  posts  and 
strongholds north-away, between Cirith Ungol and the narrows of  Isenmouthe, 
the iron jaws of Carach Angren. 
     It was  perilous for the hobbits to use  such  a path,  but they needed 
speed, and  Frodo felt that he could not face the  toil of  scrambling among 
the boulders or in the trackless glens  of  the Morgai. And  he  judged that 
northward was, maybe, the way that their hunters would least expect them  to 
take.  The  road east  to the plain, or the pass back westward,  those  they 
would first search most thoroughly. Only when he was well north of the Tower  
did he mean to turn and seek for some way to take him east, east on the last 
desperate  stage of his journey. So now  they crossed the stony bed and took  
to  the orc-path, and  for some time  they  marched along  it. The cliffs at 
their left  were overhung, and they could  not be seen  from above; but  the 
path made many bends, and at each  bend they  gripped their  sword-hilts and 
went forward cautiously. 

####-     The  light grew no stronger,  for  Orodruin was still belching forth  a  
great  fume that, beaten  upwards by  the  opposing airs, mounted higher and  
higher,  until it  reached  a  region  above  the  wind  and  spread  in  an 
immeasurable roof, whose central pillar rose out of the shadows beyond their 
view. They had  trudged for more than an hour  when they heard a sound  that 
brought them to a halt. Unbelievable, but unmistakable. Water trickling. Out 
of a gully on the left, so sharp  and narrow  that it look ed as if the black  
cliff had been cloven by some  huge  axe, water came dripping down: the last 
remains, maybe, of some sweet rain gathered  from sunlit seas, but ill-fated 
to  fall at last upon the walls of  the Black Land and wander fruitless down 
into  the dust. Here it came out of  the rock in a little falling streamlet, 
and  flowed  across the path, and turning south  ran away swiftly to be lost  
among the dead stones.  
     Sam sprang towards it. 'If ever I see the Lady again, I will tell her!' 
he cried . 'Light  and now  water!' Then he stopped. 'Let me  drink first Mr. 
Frodo,' he said. 
     'All right, but there's room enough for two.' 
     'I didn't  mean  that,'  said  Sam.  'I  mean:  if it's  poisonous,  or  
something  that will  show  its  badness quick, well,  better me  than  you, 
master, if you understand me.' 
     'I do. But I think we'll trust our luck together, Sam; or our blessing. 
Still, be careful now, if it's very cold!' 
     The water was cool but not icy, and it had an unpleasant taste, a t once 
bitter and  oily, or  so they would have said at home. Here it seemed beyond 
all  praise, and beyond fear  or  prudence. They  drank their  fill, and Sam 
replenished his water -bottle. After that Frodo felt easier, and they went on 
for several miles, until the broadening of the road and  the beginnings of a  
rough wall along its edge warned them that they were drawing near to another  
orc-hold. 
     'This  is  where  we  turn aside, Sam,' said  Frodo. 'And we  must turn 
east.'  He  sighed as he looked a t  the gloomy ridges across the  valley. 'I  
have just about  enough strength left to find  some hole  away up there. And  
then I must rest a little.' 
     The river -bed  was now some way  below the path. They scrambled down to 
it,  and began to cross  it. To their surprise they came upon dark pools fed 
by  threads  of water trickling down from some source  higher up the valley.  

####-Upon its  outer marges under the westward mountains Mordor was a dying 
land, 
but it was not yet dead. And here things still grew, harsh, twisted, bitter, 
struggling  for life. In  the glens of the Morgai on the other  side  of the 
valley low scrubby trees lurked and clung, coarse grey grass-tussocks fought  
with the stones,  and withered mosses crawled on them; and  everywhere great 
writhing, tangled brambles sprawled. Some  had  long stabbing  thorns,  some 
hooked barbs that rent like knives. The sullen shrivelled leaves of  a  past  
year  hung on  them,  grating  and  rattling  in  the  sad airs,  but  their 
maggot-ridden buds were  only  just  opening. Flies,  dun or grey, or black, 
marked like ores with a red  eye-shaped blotch, buzzed and stung;  and above 
the briar-thickets clouds of hungry midges danced and reeled. 
     'Orc-gear's no  good,' said Sam, waving his  arms. 'I  wish I'd  got  an 
orc's hide!' 
     At  last Frodo  could  go  no further.  They had  climbed  up  a narrow 
shelving ravine, but  they still had a long way to go before they could even 
come in sight of the last craggy ridge. 'I must rest  now, Sam, and sleep if 
I can.' said Frodo.  He looked  about, but there seemed  nowhere even for an 
animal to crawl into  in this  dismal  country.  At length,  tired out, they 
slunk  under a  curtain  of brambles that hung  down  like a  mat over a low 
rock-face. 
     There  they sat and  made such a meal as they could. Keeping  back  the 
precious  lembas for the evil days ahead, they ate the half of what remained 
in Sam's bag of Faramir's provision: some  dried fruit, and a small  slip of 
cured meat; and they sipped some water. They  had drunk again from the pools 
in the valley, but they were very, thirsty again. There was a bitter tang in 
the air of Mordor  that dried the mouth. When Sam thought of water  even his 
hopeful spirit quailed.  Beyond  the Morgai there was the dreadful plain  of 
Gorgoroth to cross.  
     'Now  you go to  sleep first, Mr. Frodo,' he said.  'It's getting  dark 
again. I reckon this day is nearly over.' 
     Frodo sighed and was  asleep almost before  the words were  spoken. Sam 
struggled with his own weariness, and he took Frodo's hand; and there he sat 
silent till deep night fell. Then at last, to keep himself awake, he crawled 
from  the hiding-place and looked out. The land seemed full of creaking  and 
cracking and sly noises, but there was  no  sound of  voice or  of foot. Far 
above the  Ephel D®ath  in the West  the night-sky  was still dim and  pale. 

####-There,  peeping among the cloud-wrack  above  a  dark  tor high  up  in  the 
mountains, Sam saw a white star twinkle for  a while. The beauty of it smote  
his heart, as he looked  up  out  of the forsaken land, and hope returned to 
him. For like  a shaft, clear and cold, the thought pierced  him that in the 
end the Shadow was  only a small and passing thing: there was light and high 
beauty for ever beyond  its reach. His song in  the Tower had been  defiance 
rather  than hope;  for  then he was thinking of himself. Now, for a moment,  
his own fate,  and even his masters, ceased to trouble him. He crawled  back  
into the  brambles and  laid  himself by Frodo's side ,  and putting away all 
fear he cast himself into a deep untroubled sleep. 
     They woke  together, hand in  hand.  Sam was  almost fresh,  ready  for  
another day; but Frodo sighed.  His sleep had been uneasy, full of dreams of 
fire, and  waking  brought  him no comfort.  Still  his sleep  had not  been 
without  all healing virtue: he was stronger, more able  to  bear his burden 
one stage further. They did not know the time, nor how long  they had slept;  
but after a morsel of food and a sip of water  they went  on up  the ravine, 
until it ended in a sharp slope of screes and sliding stones. There the last  
living things gave up their struggle; the tops of the Morgai were grassless,  
bare, jagged, barren as a slate. 
     After much wandering and search they found a way that they could climb, 
and with a last hundred feet  of clawing scramble they were up. They came to 
a cleft between two dark crags, and passing through found  themselves on the 
very edge of the last  fence of Mordor. Below them, at the  bottom of a fall 
of  some fifteen hundred feet,  lay  the inner plain stretching away into  a  
formless gloom beyond their sight. The wind  of the world blew now from  the 
West, and  the great clouds  were lifted  high,  floating away eastward; but 
still only a grey  light came to the dreary fields of Gorgoroth. There smokes 
trailed on the ground and lurked in hollows, and fumes  leaked from fissures 
in the earth. 
     Still far away, forty  miles  at least,  they  saw Mount Doom, its feet 
founded in  ashen ruin, its huge cone rising  to  a great height,  where its 
reeking  head was swathed in cloud. Its fires were now  dimmed, and it stood 
in smouldering slumber, as threatening and  dangerous as a  sleeping  beast.  
Behind it there hung a vast shadow, ominous as a thunder-cloud, the veils of 
Barad-dyr  that was  reared far  way upon a long spur of the Ashen Mountains 
thrust down from the North. The Dark Power was deep in  thought, and the Eye 
turned inward, pondering tidings of doubt and danger: a  bright sword, and a  

####-stern  and kingly face  it  saw, and for  a while it gave  little thought to 
other things;  and  all its great  stronghold, gate on  gate,  and tower  on 
tower, was wrapped in a brooding gloom. 
     Frodo and Sam gazed out in  mingled loathing and wonder on this hateful 
land. Between them and  the smoking mountain, and about  it north and south, 
all seemed ruinous and dead, a  desert burned  and choked. They wondered 
how 
the Lord of  this realm maintained  and  fed his  slaves and his armies. Yet 
armies he had.  As far as their  eyes could reach, along the  skirts  of the 
Morgai and away southward,  there were camps, some  of tents,  some  ordered 
like small towns. One of the largest of these was right below them. Barely a  
mile  out into  the  plain it clustered like some huge nest of insects, with 
straight dreary streets of huts  and  long low drab buildings. About it  the 
ground  was  busy  with folk  going  to and  fro; a  wide  road  ran from it 
south-east to join the  Morgul-way, and along it  many  lines of small black  
shapes were hurrying. 
     'I don't like the look of things at all,' said Sam. 'Pretty hopeless, I 
call it  - saving that where there's such  a lot of folk  there must be wells 
or water, not to mention  food. And these  are Men not Orcs,  or  my eyes are 
all wrong.' 
     Neither  he nor Frodo knew  anything of  the great slave-worked  fields 
away south  in this wide realm, beyond the fumes of the Mountain by the dark 
sad waters  of Lake  N®rnen; nor of  the great roads that ran away  east and 
south to tributary lands, from which the soldiers of the Tower  brought long  
waggon-trains of goods  and booty and fresh  slaves. Here  in  the northward 
regions were the mines and forges, and the musterings of  long-planned  war; 
and  here the  Dark  Power, moving its armies like pieces on the  board, was 
gathering them together. Its first moves, the first feelers of its strength, 
had been  checked  upon  its western  line, southward and northward. For the 
moment  it withdrew  them,  and  brought  up new forces, massing  them about 
Cirith Gorgor for an avenging stroke. And if it had also been its purpose to 
defend the Mountain against all approach, it could scarcely have done more. 
     'Well!' Sam went on. 'Whatever they have to eat and drink, we can't get 
it. There's no way down that I can see. And we couldn't cross  all that open 
country crawling with enemies, even if we did get down.' 
     'Still  we  shall  have to  try,'  said  Frodo.  'It's  no worse than I 
expected. I never hoped to get across. I can't see any  hope  of it now. But 

####-I've  still  got  to do the best I can. At  present that  is to avoid  being 
captured  as long as possible.  So we must still go northwards, I think, and 
see what it is like where the open plain is narrower.' 
     'I guess what it'll be like,' said  Sam. 'Where it's narrower the  Orcs 
and Men will just be packed closer. You'll see, Mr. Frodo.' 
     'I dare say I shall, if  we ever get so  far,'  said  Frodo  and turned 
away. 
     They  soon  found that it was impossible  to  make their way  along the 
crest of  the Morgai, or anywhere along its  higher levels, pathless as they 
were  and scored with deep ghylls. In the end they were  forced to  go  back  
down the ravine that they had  climbed and seek for a way  along the valley. 
It was  rough going,  for  they  dared not  cross  over  to the  path on the 
westward side. After a mile or more  they  saw,  huddled in a  hollow at the 
cliff's foot,  the orc-hold that  they had guessed  was near at hand: a wall 
and a cluster of stone huts set about the dark mouth of a cave. There was no  
movement to be seen, but the hobbits crept by cautiously, keeping as much as 
they  could  to the thorn-brakes that  grew thickly at this point along both 
sides of the old water -course. 
     They went two or three miles further, and  the orc-hold was hidden from 
sight behind them; but  they had hardly begun  to breathe  more freely again 
when harsh and loud they heard orc-voices. Quickly  they  slunk out of sight 
behind a brown and stunted bush.  The voices drew nearer. Presently two orcs 
came  into view. One was  clad in ragged  brown and was armed with a  bow of 
horn;  it was of  a small  breed, black -skinned,  with  wide  and  snuffling 
nostrils:  evidently  a   tracker  of  some  kind.  The  other  was   a  big 
fighting-orc, like those of Shagrat's company, bearing the token of the Eye. 
He  also had  a  bow at his back and carried  a short broad-headed spear. As 
usual they  were  quarrelling, and  being of  different breeds they used the 
Common Speech a fter their fashion. 
     Hardly  twenty  paces  from where the  hobbits  lurked  the  small  orc 
stopped. 'Nar!' it snarled. 'I'm going  home.' It  pointed across the valley 
to  the orc-hold. 'No good wearing my nose out  on  stones any more. There's 
not a  trace left, I say. I've lost the scent through  giving way to you. It 
went up into the hills, not along the valley, I tell you.' 
     'Not  much use  are you,  you little snufflers?' said the  big  orc. 'I  
reckon eyes are better than your snotty noses.' 
     'Then what  have  you  seen with them?' snarled the  other.  'Garn! You  

####-don't even know what you're looking for.' 
     'Whose  blame's that?'  said the  soldier. 'Not mine. That  comes  from 
Higher Up.  First they  say  it's a great Elf in bright armour, then  it's a  
sort of small dwarf-man, then it must be a pack of rebel Uruk -hai; or  maybe  
it's all the lot together.' 
     'Ar!' said the tracker. 'They've lost their  heads, that's what it  is.  
And some of the bosses are going to lose their skins too, I guess, if what I 
hear is true: Tower raided and all, and hundreds of your  lads done in,  and 
prisoner got  away.  If that's  the  way you fighters  go on,  small  wonder 
there's bad news from the battles.' 
     'Who says there's bad news?' shouted the soldier. 
     'Ar! Who says there isn't?' 
     'That's cursed rebel-talk, and I'll  stick  you, if  you don't shut  it 
down, see?' 
     'All right, all right!' said  the tracker. 'I'll say  no more and go on 
thinking.  But what's  the black  sneak got to do with  it all? That gobbler  
with the flapping hands?' 
     'I  don't know. Nothing, maybe.  But he's up to no good, nosing around, 
I'll  wager. Curse him! No sooner had  he slipped us and run  off than  word 
came he's wanted alive, wanted quick.' 
     'Well,  I hope they  get  him and  put him  through  it,'  growled  the 
tracker.  'He  messed up  the  scent  back  there,  pinching  that  cast -off 
mail-shirt  that he  found,  and paddling all round the place before I could 
get there.' 
     'It  saved his  life anyhow,' said  the soldier. 'Why, before I knew he 
was wanted I shot him, as neat as neat, at fifty  paces  right in the  back; 
but he ran on.' 
     'Garn!  You missed him,' said the  tracker. 'First you shoot wild, then 
you run too  slow, and then you  send for the poor trackers. I've had enough 
of you.' He loped off. 
     'You come back,' shouted the soldier, 'or I'll report you!' 
     'Who to? Not to your precious Shagrat. He won't be captain any more.' 
     'I'll  give  your  name and  number  to the Nazgyl,'  said  the soldier  
lowering his voice to a hiss. 'One of them's in charge at the Tower now.' 
     The other halted, and his voice was  full of fear and rage. 'You cursed 
peaching sneakthief!' he yelled. 'You can't do  your job, and you can't even 
stick by your own folk. Go to your filthy Shriekers, and may they freeze the 

####-flesh off you! If the enemy  doesn't get them  first. They've done in Number  
One, I've heard, and I hope it's true!' 
     The big orc, spear in hand, leapt after him. But the tracker, springing 
behind  a  stone,  put an arrow in  his eye as he ran up, and he fell with a  
crash. The other ran off across the valley and disappeared. 
     For a while the hobbits sat in silence. At length  Sam stirred. 'Well I 
call  that  neat as neat,'  he said. 'If this nice friendliness would spread 
about in Mordor, half our trouble would be over.' 
     'Quietly,  Sam,' Frodo whispered. 'There  may be  others about. We have 
evidently had  a very narrow escape,  and the  hunt was hotter on our tracks 
than we guessed. But that is the spirit of Mordor, Sam; and it has spread to 
every corner of it. Orcs have always behaved like that, or so all tales say, 
when they are on their own. But you can't get much hope out of it. They hate 
us far  more,  altogether  and all the time. If  those two had seen us, they 
would have dropped all their quarrel until we were dead.' 
     There was another long silence. Sam broke it again,  but with a whisper  
this time.  'Did you hear what they  said  about  that gobbler, Mr.  Frodo? I 
told you Gollum wasn't dead yet, didn't I?' 
     'Yes, I remember. And I wondered  how you knew,' said Frodo. 'Well come 
now!  I think we had better not move out from here again,  until it has gone 
quite dark. So  you shall tell me how you know, a nd all about what happened. 
If you can do it quietly.' 
     'I'll try,' said Sam, 'but when I think of  that Stinker I get so hot l 
could shout.' 
     There the hobbits sat under the  cover  of  the  thorny bush, while the 
drear light of  Mordor faded slowly into a deep and starless night; and  Sam 
spoke into Frodo's  ear  all  that he  could  find  words  for  of  Gollum's 
treacherous  attack, the  horror of Shelob, and his  own adventures with the 
orcs. When  he  had finished,  Frodo said nothing  but  took  Sam's hand and  
pressed it. At length he stirred. 
     'Well, I  suppose  we  must be going on  again,' he said. 'I wonder how 
long it will be before  we really are  caught  and all the  toiling and  the 
slinking will be over, and in vain.'  He stood up. 'It's dark, and we cannot 
use the  Lady's glass. Keep it safe  for me, Sam. I  have nowhere to keep it 
now, except in my hand, and  I shall need both hands in the blind night. But 
Sting I give to you. I have  got an orc-blade, but I do not think it will be 
my part to strike any blow again.' 

####-     It  was difficult and dangerous moving in  the  night  in the  pathless 
land; but slowly and with much  stumbling the two hobbits  toiled on hour by 
hour northward along the eastern edge of the stony valley. When a grey light 
crept back over the western  heights, long after day had opened in the lands 
beyond, they went into hiding again and slept a little, turn by turn. In his 
times  of waking  Sam  was busy  with thoughts  of food. At  last when Frodo 
roused himself and spoke of eating and making ready for yet  another effort, 
he asked the question that was troubling him most. 
     'Begging your pardon, Mr. Frodo,' he said, 'but have you any notion how 
far there is still to go?' 
     'No, not any clear notion, Sam, ' Frodo answered. 'In Rivendell before I 
set out I was shown a map of Mordor that was made before the Enemy came 
back 
here; but I only remember it  vaguely. I remember clearest  that there was a  
place in the north where the western  range and the  northern range send out 
spurs that nearly meet. That must be twenty leagues at least from the bridge  
back by the  Tower.  It might be  a  good point at which  to cross.  But  of 
course, if we get there, we shall be further than we were from the Mountain, 
sixty miles from it,  I should think. I guess that we have gone about twelve 
leagues  north from the bridge now.  Even if  all goes  well, I could hardly 
reach  the Mountain in  a week. I am afraid, Sam, that the  burden  will get 
very heavy, and I shall go still slower as we get nearer.' 
     Sam  sighed. 'That's just as I feared,' he said. 'Well,  to say nothing 
of water, we've got to eat less, Mr.  Frodo,  or else move a bit quicker, at 
any rate while we're still in this valley. One more bite  and all the food's 
ended, save the Elves' waybread.' 
     'I'll try  and be  a  bit  quicker, Sam,'  said  Frodo,  drawing a deep 
breath. 'Come on then! Let's start another march!' 
     It was not yet quite dark again. They plodded along, on into the night. 
The hours passed in  a weary stumbling trudge with a few brief halts. At the 
first  hint of grey light  under the skirts of the canopy of shadow they hid 
themselves again in a dark hollow under an overhanging stone. 
     Slowly  the  light  grew, until it  was clearer than it yet had been. A 
strong wind from the West was now driving the fumes of Mordor from the 
upper 
airs. Before long the hobbits could make out the shape of the land for  some 
miles  about  them.  The trough  between the  mountains  and  the Morgai had 

####-steadily dwindled as it climbed upwards, and the inner ridge was now no more 
than a shelf in the steep faces of the Ephel D®ath; but to  the east it fell 
as  sheerly as  ever down into Gorgoroth. Ahead the water -course came  to an 
end in broken steps of rock; for out from the main range there sprang a high 
barren spur, thrusting  eastward like a wall. To meet it there stretched out 
from the grey and misty  northern  range  of Ered Lithui a long jutting arm; 
and between the ends there  was a narrow gap: Carach Angren, the Isenmouthe, 
beyond  which lay the deep  dale of Udyn.  In that dale  behind the Morannon 
were the tunnels and deep armouries that the servants of Mordor had made for  
the defence of the Black Gate of their  land; and there now  their  Lord was 
gathering in haste great forces to meet the onslaught of the Captains of the 
West. Upon the out-thrust spurs forts and towers were built, and watch-fires 
burned;  and all  across  the gap an earth-wall had been  raised, and a deep 
trench delved that could be crossed only by a single bridge. 
     A few miles north, high up in the angle where the western spur branched 
away from the main range, stood the old castle  of Durthang, now one of  the 
many orc-holds  that  clustered about  the dale of  Udyn.  A  road,  already 
visible in the growing light, came winding  down from it, until only a  mile 
or two from where the hobbits  lay it turned east and ran along a  shelf cut 
in the side of the  spur, and so went  down  into the plain,  and  on to the 
Isenmouthe. 
     To  the hobbits as  they  looked  out it seemed that all their  journey 
north had been useless. The plain to their right was dim and smoky, and they 
could  see  there  neither camps nor troops moving; but all  that region was 
under the vigilance of the for ts of Carach Angren. 
     'We have  come to a dead end, Sam,'  said Frodo. 'If we go on, we shall 
only come up to that orc-tower, but the only  road to take is that road that 
comes down from it - unless we go back. We can't climb up westward, or climb 
down eastward.' 
     'Then we must take the road, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam. 'We must take it and 
chance our luck,  if there is  any  luck in  Mordor. We  might as  well give 
ourselves up as wander  about any more,  or try  to go back. Our  food won't  
last. We've got to make a dash for it!' 
     'All right, Sam,' said Frodo. 'Lead me! As long as  you've got any hope 
left. Mine is gone. But I can't dash, Sam. I'll just plod along after you.' 
     'Before  you start  any more  plodding,  you need  sleep and food,  Mr. 
Frodo. Come and take what you can get of them!' 

####-     He gave  Frodo  water  and an additional wafer of the  waybread, and he 
made  a pillow of his cloak for his master's  head. Frodo  was too  weary to 
debate the matter, and Sam did not tell  him that he had drunk the last drop 
of  their water, and eaten Sam's share of the food as well as  his own. When 
Frodo was asleep Sam bent over him and listened to his breathing and scanned 
his  face. It  was  lined and thin, and yet in  sleep it looked  content and 
unafraid. 'Well, here goes, Master!' Sam muttered  to himself. 'I'll have to 
leave you for a bit  and trust to luck. Water we must have, or we'll  get no 
further.' 
     Sam  crept  out,  and flitting  from  stone to  stone  with  more  than 
hobbit-care, he went down to the water -course, and then followed it for some 
way as it climbed  north, until he came to the rock -steps where long ago, no  
doubt,  its spring had come gushing  down  in  a little  waterfall. All  now 
seemed dry and silent; but refusing to despair Sam stooped and listened, and 
to his  delight he caught the sound of  trickling. Clambering a few steps up 
he found a tiny stream of dark water that came out  from the  hill -side  and 
filled a  little bare pool,  from which again it spilled, and vanished  then 
under the barren stones. 
     Sam tasted the water, and it seemed good enough. Then  he drank deeply,  
refilled the  bottle,  and turned  to go back.  At that  moment he caught  a  
glimpse of a black form or shadow flitting among the rocks away near Frodo's 
hiding-place.  Biting  back  a cry, he leapt  down from the spring and  ran, 
jumping from stone to stone. It was  a  wary creature, difficult to see, but 
Sam had little doubt about it: he longed to get  his hands on its  neck. But 
it heard him coming and  slipped quickly away.  Sam  thought he  saw a  last  
fleeting  glimpse  of  it,  peering  back  over  the  edge  of the  eastward 
precipice, before it ducked and disappeared. 
     'Well, luck did not let me  down,' muttered Sam,  'but that was a  near 
thing! Isn't it enough  to have orcs by the  thousand  without that stinking 
villain coming nosing round? I wish he had been  shot!' He sat down by Frodo 
and did not rouse him; but he did not dare to  go to  sleep himself. At last  
when he felt his eyes closing and knew that his struggle to keep awake could 
not go on much longer, he wakened Frodo gently. 
     'That  Gollum's  about   again,  I'm  afraid,  Mr.  Frodo,'   he  said. 
'Leastways, if  it wasn't  him, then there's two of him. I went away to find 
some water and  spied  him nosing  round just as I  turned back. I reckon it 
isn't safe  for us  both to sleep  together,  and begging your pardon, but I 

####-can't hold up my lids much longer.' 
     'Bless you, Sam!' said Frodo. 'Lie down  and take your pr oper turn! But 
I'd rather have Gollum than orcs. At any rate he  won't give us away to them 
- not unless he's caught himself.' 
     'But he might do a bit of robbery and murder on  his own,' growled Sam.  
'Keep your eyes open,  Mr. Frodo! There's  a bottle full of water. Drink up. 
We can fill it again when we go on.' With that Sam plunged into sleep. 
     Light was fading when  he  woke.  Frodo sat  propped  against  the rock  
behind, but he  had fallen asleep. The water-bottle  was empty. There was no 
sign of Gollum. 
     Mordor -dark  had returned, and the watch-fires on  the  heights  burned 
fierce and red, when the hobbits  set out  again on the most dangerous stage 
of all  their  journey.  They  went first  to  the  little  spring, and then 
climbing warily up they  came to the road at the  point  where it swung east  
towards  the Isenmouthe  twenty miles away. It was not a broad road, and  it  
had  no wall  or parapet along the edge and as it ran on the sheer drop from 
its brink became deeper and deeper. The hobbits could hear no movements, and 
after listening for a while they set off eastward at a steady pace. 
     After doing some twelve miles, they halted. A short  way back the  road 
had  bent a  little northward and  the stretch that they had passed over was 
now screened  from  sight.  This proved  disastrous. They  rested  for  some 
minutes and then went on; but they had not taken many steps when suddenly in 
the stillness of  the  night they  heard the  sound that all along  they had 
secretly dreaded: the   noise of marching feet. It was still some way  behind 
them, but looking  back they could see  the twinkle of torches  coming round 
the  bend less  than  a mile away,  and they  were moving fast: too fast for  
Frodo to escape by flight along the road ahead. 
     'I feared  it, Sam,' said Frodo. 'We've  trusted to luck,  and  it  has 
failed  us.  We're trapped.' He looked wildly up at the frowning wall, where 
the road-builders of old had cut the rock sheer for many fathoms above their  
heads. He ran to the other side and looked over the brink into a dark pit of 
gloom.  'We're trapped at last!' he said He sank to the  ground beneath  the 
wall of rock and bowed his head. 
     'Seems so,' said Sam. 'Well, we can but wait and see.' And with that he 
sat down beside Frodo under the shadow of the cliff. 
     They did  not have  to wait long. The orcs were going at a  great pace. 
Those in the foremost files  bore torches.  On they  came, red flames in the 

####-dark, swiftly growing. Now Sam too bowed his head, hoping that it  would hide 
his face when the  torches reached  them; and he  set  their  shields before 
their knees to hide their feet. 
     'If only  they  are in a hurry and will let a couple of tired  soldiers 
alone and pass on!' he thought. 
     And so it  seemed that they would. The leading  orcs came loping along, 
panting, holding their  heads down. They  were  a gang of the smaller breeds 
being driven unwilling to their Dark Lord's wars; all they cared for  was to 
get the march over and escape the whip. Beside them, running up and down the 
line, went two of the large fierce uruks, cracking lashes and shouting. File 
after file passed, and the tell-tale torchlight was  already some way ahead. 
Sam held his  breath. Now more than half the line had gone by. Then suddenly 
one of the slave-drivers spied the two figures  by the road-side. He flicked 
a whip at them and yelled:  'Hi, you! Get up!' They did not answer, and with 
a shout he halted the whole company. 
     'Come on, you slugs!' he cried.  'This is  no time  for  sl ouching.' He 
took a step towards them, and even in the gloom he recognized the devices on 
their shields.  'Deserting,  eh?'  he snarled.  'Or thinking of it? All your 
folk  should  have been inside Udyn before yesterday evening. You know that. 
Up you get and fall in, or I'll have your numbers and report you.' 
     They  struggled to their  feet, and keeping bent, limping like footsore 
soldiers, they shuffled back towards the rear  of  the line. 'No, not at the 
rear!' the slave-driver shouted.  'Three files up. And stay there, or you'll 
know it,  when I come down the line!' He sent his  long  whip-lash  cracking  
over their heads; then with another crack  and a yell he started the company 
off again at a brisk trot. 
     It was hard enough for poor Sam, tired a s he was;  but for Frodo it was 
a torment, and soon a nightmare. He set his teeth and tried to stop his mind 
from  thinking, and he struggled  on. The stench of the sweating  orcs about 
him was stifling, and he began to gasp with thirst. On, on they went, and he 
bent  all  his will to draw his breath and to make  his legs keep going; and 
yet to  what evil end  he toiled and endured he did not dare to think. There 
was no hope of falling out  unseen: Now and  again the orc-driver fell  back  
and jeered at them. 
     'There now!' he laughed, flicking at their  legs. 'Where there's a whip 
there's a  will, my slugs. Hold up! I'd give you a nice freshener  now, only 
you'll get  as much lash as your skins will  carry when you come in late  to 

####-your camp. Do you good. Don't you know we're at war?' 
     They had gone some miles, and the road was at  last running down a long  
slope into the plain, when  Frodo's  strength began to give out and his will 
wavered. He lurched and stumbled. Desperately Sam tried to help him and hold 
him up,  though  he felt  that he could  himself hardly  stay  the pace much 
longer.  At any moment now he knew that the end would come: his master 
would 
faint or fall, and  all would be discovered, and  their bitter efforts be in 
vain.  'I'll have that big slave-driving devil anyway,' he thought. 
     Then just as  he  was putting his hand  to the hilt of his sword, there 
came an unexpected relief.  They were out on the plain now and drawing  near 
the entrance to Udyn. Some  way in  front  of it,  before  the  gate  at the 
bridge-end, the  road  from the  west converged with others coming from  the 
south, and from Barad-dyr.  Along all the roads troops were moving; for  the  
Captains  of  the  West  were  advancing  and the Dark Lord was speeding his 
forces  north.  So it  chanced that  several companies came together at  the 
road-meeting, in the dark beyond the light of  the watch-fires on the  wall. 
At once there was great  jostling  and  cursing as  each troop  tried to get 
first to the gate and the ending of  their march.  Though the drivers yelled 
and plied  their whips, scuffles broke out and  some blades  were  drawn.  A 
troop of heavy-armed uruks from Barad-dyr charged into the Durthang line and 
threw them into confusion. 
     Dazed as he  was with  pain and weariness, Sam woke up, grasped quickly 
at his chance, and  threw  himself to the  ground, dragging Frodo down  with  
him. Orcs fell over them, snarling and  cursing. Slowly on hand and knee the 
hobbits  crawled  away  out of  the  turmoil, until  at last unnoticed  they 
dropped  over the  further edge of the road. It  had a  high kerb  by  which 
troop-leaders could  guide  themselves  in black night or  fog,  and it  was 
banked up some feet above the level of the open land. 
     They  lay still   for a while.  It  was too dark to  seek  for cover, if 
indeed there was any to  find; but Sam felt that  they ought at least to get 
further away from the highways and out of the range of torch-light. 
     'Come on, Mr. Frodo!' he whispered.  'One more  crawl, and then you can 
lie still.' 
     With a last despairing effort Frodo  raised  himself on  his hands, and 
struggled on for maybe twenty yards. Then he pitched down into a shallow pit 
that opened unexpectedly before them, and there he lay like a dead thing. 

####- 
 

Chapter 3. Mount Doom 

 
 
     Sam put his ragged orc-cloak under  his master's head, and covered them 
both with the grey robe of Lurien; and as he did so his thoughts went out to 
that fair land, and to the Elves, and he hoped that the cloth woven by their 
hands  might  have some virtue to keep them  hidden beyond all hope  in this 
wilderness of fear. He heard the  scuffling and cries die down as the troops 
passed  on through the Isenmouthe. It seemed that in the confusion  and  the 
mingling of many  companies of various  kinds  they had not been missed, not 
yet at any rate. 
     Sam  took a sip of water, but pressed Frodo  to  drink,  and  when  his 
master had recovered a little he gave  him a whole  wafer of their  precious 
waybread and made  him  ea t it. Then, too worn out even to  feel  much fear,  
they stretched themselves out. They slept a little in uneasy fits; for their 
sweat grew chill on  them, and the  hard stones bit them, and they shivered. 
Out of  the north from the  Black Gate  through  Cirith  Gorgor there flowed 
whispering along the ground a thin cold air. 
     In the morning a  grey light came again, for  in  the high regions  the 
West Wind  still blew, but down on the stones behind the fences of the Black 
Land the air seemed almost dead, chill  and yet stifling. Sam looked  up out 
of the hollow.  The land  all about was  dreary, flat  and drab-hued. On the 
roads nearby nothing was moving now; but Sam feared the watchful eyes on 
the 
wall  of  the  Isenmouthe,  no  more   than   a   furlong   away  northward. 
South-eastward, far off like a  dark standing shadow. loomed  the  Mountain. 
Smokes  were  pouring from  it and while those that rose into  the upper air 
trailed away  eastward, great rolling clouds  floated  down  its  sides  and 
spread over the land. A  few miles to the north-east the  foothills  of  the 
Ashen  Mountains stood  like  sombre grey  ghosts, behind  which  the  misty 
northern heights rose  like  a line of distant cloud hardly darker than  the 
lowering sky. 
     Sam  tried to  guess the distances and to decide what way they ought to 
take.  It looks every step  of fifty miles,' he muttered gloomily staring at 
the threatening mountain, 'and that'll take a week, if it takes  a day, with 
Mr. Frodo as he is.' He shook his  head,  and as he worked things out, slowly  

####-a new dark thought  grew in his mind. Never  for long had  hope died in  his 
staunch  heart, and  always until now he  had  taken some thought  for their 
return.  But the  bitter  truth  came  home to him  at  last:  at best their 
provision  would take them to  their goal; and when the task was done, there 
they would come to  an end,  alone, houseless, foodless  in  the midst  of a  
terrible desert. There could be no return. 
     'So that was the job I felt I had to  do when  I started,' thought Sam: 
'to help  Mr. Frodo to the last step and then die with him? Well, if that is 
the job then I must do it. But I would dearly like to see Bywater again, and 
Rosie Cotton and her brothers, and the Gaffer and Marigold  and all. I can't 
think somehow that Gandalf would have sent Mr. Frodo on this errand if there 
hadn't a' been  any hope  of his  ever coming back at all. Things  all  went 
wrong when  he went  down  in Moria.  I  wish he hadn't. He  would have done 
something.' 
     But even as hope died in Sam, or seemed to  die, it was turned to a new 
strength. Sam's  plain  hobbit-face  grew stern,  almost  grim, as  the will 
hardened in him, and he felt through  all his  limbs a thrill,  as if he was 
turning into  some  creature  of   stone  and steel  that neither despair nor  
weariness nor endless barren miles could subdue. 
     With  a new sense of responsibility he  brought  his  eyes  back to the 
ground  near at hand, studying the  next move. As the light grew a little he 
saw  to  his  surprise  that  what  from  a  distance  had  seemed  wide and 
featureless  flats  were in fact  all broken  and tumbled. Indeed the  whole 
surface of the plains of Gorgoroth was pocked with great holes, as if, while 
it was still a waste of soft mud,  it had been smitten with a shower of bolts 
and huge slingstones. The largest of these holes  were rimmed with ridges of 
broken  rock, and broad fissures ran out from them in all directions. It was 
a land in which it would be possible to  creep from hiding to hiding, unseen 
by all but the most watchful eyes: possible at least for one  who was strong 
and had no need for speed. For the hungry and worn, who had far to go before 
life failed, it had an evil look. 
     Thinking  of all  these things Sam went back to his  master.  He had no 
need to rouse  him.  Frodo was lying on his  back with eyes open, staring at 
the  cloudy sky. 'Well, Mr. Frodo,' said Sam, 'I've been having a look round 
and thinking a bit. There's  nothing on the roads, and we'd best  be getting 
away while there's a chance. Can you manage it?' 
     'I can manage it,' said Frodo. 'I must.' 

####-     Once more they started, crawling from hollow to hollow, flitting behind 
such  cover  as they could find,  but moving always in  a slant towards  the 
foothills of the northern  range. But as they went the  most easterly of the 
roads followed them, until it ran  off, hugging the skirts of the mountains, 
away into a wall of black shadow far ahead. Neither  man  nor orc now  moved 
along its flat grey stretches; for the Dark Lord  had almost  completed  the 
movement of his forces, and even in the  fastness of his own realm he sought 
the secrecy of night, fearing the winds of the world that had turned against 
him, tearing aside his veils, and troubled with  tidings of  bold spies that 
had passed through his fences. 
     The hobbits had  gone a few weary  miles when they halted. Frodo seemed 
nearly  spent. Sam saw that he could not  go much further in  this  fashion, 
crawling, stooping, now picking  a doubtful way very slowly, now hurrying at 
a stumbling run. 
     'I'm  going  back on to the road while the light lasts, Mr.  Frodo,' he 
said. 'Trust to  luck again! It nearly failed us  last time,  but  it didn't 
quite. A steady pace for a few more miles, and then a rest.' 
     He was taking a far greater risk  than he knew; but  Frodo was too much 
occupied  with his burden and with the  struggle in  his mind to debate, and 
almost too hopeless  to care. They climbed  on to the  causeway and  trudged 
along, down the hard cruel road that led to the Dark Tower itself. But their 
luck held, and for the rest of that day they  met no living or moving thing; 
and when night fell they vanished into the darkness of Mordor. All  the land 
now brooded as at the coming of a  great storm: for the Captains of the West  
had passed  the Cross-roads and  set  flames  in  the deadly fields of Imlad 
Morgul. 
     So  the  desperate  journey  went  on, as the Ring went  south and  the 
banners of the  kings rode  north. For the hobbits each day,  each mile. was 
more  bitter than the one before, as  their  strength lessened and  the land 
became more  evil.  They met no enemies by day. At times  by night,  as they 
cowered or drowsed uneasily in some hiding beside the road, they heard cries 
and the  noise  of  many  feet or the swift passing of some  cruelly  ridden 
steed. But far  worse than all  such  perils was the ever -approaching threat 
that  beat  upon them as they went: the  dreadful menace of  the  Power that 
waited, brooding in  deep thought and sleepless malice behind  the dark veil  
about  its  Throne.  Nearer  and nearer it drew,  looming blacker, like  the 
oncoming of a wall of night at the last end of the world. 

####-     There  came at  last a dreadful nightfall; and even  as the Captains of 
the West drew near to the end of the living lands, the two wanderers came to  
an  hour of blank despair. Four days had passed since they had  escaped from 
the orcs,  but the  time lay behind  them like an ever -darkening  dream. All 
this  last  day Frodo  had not  spoken,  but had  walked  half-bowed,  often 
stumbling, as if his eyes no longer saw the way before his feet. Sam guessed 
that  among  all their  pains he  bore the worst, the growing weight  of the 
Ring, a  burden on  the  body and a torment  to his  mind. Anxiously Sam had 
noted  how his master's left hand would often be raised  as if to ward  on a  
blow,  or to  screen his shrinking eyes from a dreadful  Eye that sought  to 
look  in them.  And sometimes  his right  hand  would creep  to  his breast, 
clutching, and  then  slowly,  as  the will recovered mastery, it  would  be 
withdrawn. 
     Now as the blackness of night  returned Frodo sat, his head between his 
knees, his arms  hanging wearily  to the ground where  his hands lay  feebly  
twitching. Sam watched him, till  night covered them both and hid them  from 
one another. He could no longer find any words to say;  and he turned to his 
own dark thoughts. As for himself, though weary and under a  shadow of fear, 
he still  had some strength left. The lembas had a virtue without which they 
would  long  ago have  lain down to die. It did  not satisfy desire, and  at 
times Sam's mind  was filled with the memories of food, and the  longing for 
simple  bread  and meats.  And yet this waybread of the  Elves had a potency 
that increased as travellers  relied on it alone and did  not mingle it with 
other foods. It fed the will, and  it gave strength to endure, and to master  
sinew  and limb beyond the measure of mortal  kind. But  now a  new decision 
must be  made. They could not follow  this road any  longer; for  it went on 
eastward  into  the  great Shadow, but the Mountain  now  loomed  upon their 
right, almost due south, and they must turn towards it. Yet  still before it 
there stretched a wide region of fuming, barren, ash-ridden land. 
     'Water, water!'  muttered  Sam.  He had  stinted  himself,  and in  his 
parched mouth his tongue seemed thick and swollen; but for all his care they  
now  had  very little left, perhaps half  his bottle, and  maybe there  were 
still days to go.  All would long ago have been spent, if they had not dared 
to follow the  orc-road. For at long intervals on that highway  cisterns had 
been built  for  the use  of troops  sent in  haste  through  the  waterless 
regions. In one  Sam had found some water left, stale, muddied by  the orcs,  
but still sufficient  for their desperate case. Yet that was now a  day ago. 

####-There was no hope of any more. 
     At last  wearied with his cares Sam drowsed, leaving the morrow till it 
came; he could do no more. Dream and waking mingled uneasily. He saw  
lights 
like gloating yes, and dark creeping shapes, and he heard noises as of  wild 
beasts  or  the dreadful cries of tortured things; and he would start  up to 
find the world all dark and only  empty b lackness all about him. Once  only,  
as he stood and stared wildly round,  did it seem that, though now awake, he 
could still see pale lights like eyes; but soon they flickered and vanished. 
     The hateful night  passed  slowly  and  reluctantly. Such  da ylight  as 
followed was dim; for here as the Mountain drew near the air was ever mirky, 
while  out  from the Dark Tower  there crept the veils of Shadow that Sauron 
wove about himself. Frodo was lying on his back not moving. Sam stood 
beside 
him, reluctant  to speak, and yet knowing that the word now lay with him:  he 
must set his  master's will to work for another effort. At  length, stooping 
and caressing Frodo's brow, he spoke in his ear. 
     'Wake up, Master!' he said. 'Time for another start.' 
     As   if roused by a sudden  bell,  Frodo rose quickly,  and stood up and 
looked away southwards; but when his eyes beheld the Mountain and the desert 
he quailed again. 
     'I can't manage it, Sam,' he said. 'It is such a weight to carry,  such 
a weight.' 
     Sam knew before he spoke, that  it was vain, and that  such words might 
do more harm than good, but in his pity he could not  keep silent. 'Then let 
me carry it a bit  for you, Master,' he said. 'You know I would, and gladly, 
as long as I have any strength. ' 
     A wild light came  into Frodo's  eyes. 'Stand away! Don't touch me!' he 
cried. 'It is mine,  I say. Be off!' His hand strayed to his sword-hilt. But 
then quickly his voice changed.  'No, no,  Sam,' he said sadly.  'But you must  
understand. It is my   burden,  and no  one  else can bear it. It is too late 
now, Sam dear. You can't help me in that way again. I am almost in its power  
now. I could not give it up, and if you tried to take it I should go mad.' 
     Sam  nodded. 'I understand,'  he  said.  'But  I've been thinking,  Mr. 
Frodo, there's other things we might do without. Why not lighten  the load a  
bit? We're going that way now, as straight as we can make it.' He pointed to  
the Mountain. 'It's no good taking anything we're not sure to need.' 

####-     Frodo looked again towards the Mountain. 'No,' he said, 'we shan't need 
much on that road.  And  at its  end  nothing.' Picking up his orc-shield he 
flung it away and threw his helmet after it. Then pulling off the grey cloak 
he undid  the  heavy  belt and let it fall to the ground,  and  the sheathed 
sword with it. The shreds of the black cloak he tore off and scattered. 
     'There, I'll be  an orc  no more,' he  cried, 'and  I'll bear no weapon 
fair or foul. Let them take me, if they will!' 
     Sam did likewise, and put aside his  orc-gear; and he took  out all the 
things  in  his pack.  Somehow  each of them had become dear to him, if only 
because he had borne them so far with so much toil. Hardest of all it was to 
part with  his cooking-gear.  Tears welled in  his eyes  at  the thought  of 
casting it away. 
     'Do you  remember that  bit  of  rabbit, Mr. Frodo?' he  said. 'And our 
place under the warm bank in  Captain  Faramir's  country, the  day I saw an 
oliphaunt?' 
     'No, I  am afraid not,  Sam, '  said Frodo. 'At  least, I know that such 
things happened,  but I cannot see them. No taste of food, no feel of water, 
no sound of wind,  no memory of tree or grass or flower, no image of moon or  
star  are left to me. I am  naked in  the  dark.  Sam, and there is  no veil 
between me  and  the wheel  of fire. I begin to see  it even  with my waking 
eyes, and all else fades.' 
     Sam went  to him and kissed his hand. 'Then the sooner we're rid of it, 
the sooner  to rest,'  he said  haltingly, finding no  better  words to say. 
'Talking won't mend nothing,' he muttered to himself,  as he gathered up all 
the  things  that they had chosen to cast away. He was  not willing to leave 
them lying open in the wilderness  for any eyes  to see. 'Stinker picked  up 
that  orc-shirt,  seemingly,  and he  isn't going to add a sword  to it. His 
hands are bad enough when  empty. And he isn't going to mess  with my pans!' 
With  that he carried all  the gear away to  one of the many gaping fissures 
that scored  the land and thr ew them in. The clatter of his precious pans as 
they fell down into the dark was like a death-knell to his heart. 
     He came back to Frodo, and then of his elven -rope he  cut a short piece 
to  serve his master  as a girdle and bind  the grey cloak close  about  his 
waist. The rest he carefully coiled and put back in his pack. Beside that he 
kept  only the remnants of  their waybread  and the  water -bottle, and Sting 
still hanging by his belt; and hidden away in a pocket of his tunic next his 
breast the ph ial of Galadriel and the  little box that  she gave him for his 

####-own. 
     Now  at  last  they turned  their faces to  the Mountain  and  set out, 
thinking no more of concealment,  bending  their weariness and failing wills 
only  to the  one task of going on. In  the dimness  of  its dreary day  few 
things even  in  that land  of  vigilance could have espied them, save  from 
close  at hand. Of all the slaves of  the  Dark  Lord, only the Nazgyl could 
have warned him of the  peril  that crept, small  but  indomitable, into the 
very  heart of his  guarded realm. But the Nazgyl and their black wings were 
abroad on another errand: they  were  gathered far away, shadowing the march 
of  the Captains of the West, and thither the  thought of the Dark Tower was 
turned . 
     That day it seemed to Sam that his master  had found some new strength,  
more than could be explained by the small lightening of the load that he had 
to carry.  In  the first marches they  went  further and faster than he  had 
hoped. The land was rough  and hostile, and yet they made much progress, and 
ever the Mountain drew nearer.  But as the  day wore on and all too soon the  
dim light began to fail,  Frodo stooped again, and  began to stagger, as  if 
the renewed effort had squandered his remaining strength. 
     At  their last halt he sank down and said: 'I'm thirsty,  Sam,' and did 
not speak  again. Sam gave him  a mouthful  of water; only one more mouthful 
remained. He went without himself; and now as once more the  night of 
Mordor  
closed over  them, through all his thoughts there came  the memory of water; 
and every brook  or  stream or fount  that he  had  ever  seen, under  green 
willow-shades or twinkling in  the sun, danced  and rippled for his  torment 
behind the blindness of his eyes. He felt the cool mud about his toes  as he 
paddled in the Pool at Bywater with Jolly Cotton and Tom and Nibs, and their 
sister  Rosie. 'But that was years  ago,'  he sighed, 'and far away. The way 
back, if there is one, goes past the Mountain.' 
     He could not sleep and he held a  debate with himself. 'Well, come now,  
we've done better than you hoped,' he said sturdily.  'Began  well anyway. I 
reckon we  crossed half the distance before we stopped. One more day will do 
it.' And then he paused. 
     'Don't  be a  fool, Sam Gamgee,' came  an answer  in  his own voice. 'He 
won't go another day like that, if he moves at all. And you can't go on much  
longer giving him all the water and most of the food.' 
     'I can go on a good way though, and I will.' 

####-     'Where to? ' 
     'To the Mountain, of course.' 
     'But what then, Sam Gamgee, what then? When you get there, what are you  
going to do? He won't be able to do anything for himself.' 
     To his dismay Sam realized that he  had not  got an answer  to this. He 
had no clear idea  at all. Frodo  had not spoken much to him  of his errand, 
and Sam only knew vaguely that the Ring had somehow to be put into the fire. 
'The Cracks of  Doom,' he muttered, the old name rising  to his mind. 'Well, 
if Master knows how to find them, I don't.' 
     'There you are!' came the answer. 'It's  all quite useless.  He said so 
himself. You are the fool, going on hoping and  toiling. You could have lain 
down and gone to sleep  together days ago, if you hadn't been so dogged. But 
you'll die just the same, or worse. You might just as well lie down  now and 
give it up. You'll never get to the top anyway.' 
     'I'll get there, if  I leave everything but my bones behind,' said Sam. 
'And I'll carry Mr. Frodo up myself, if it breaks my back and heart. So stop 
arguing!' 
     At  that moment Sam felt a  tremor in the  ground  beneath  him, and he 
heard or  sensed a deep remote rumble as  of  thunder  imprisoned  under the  
earth. There was a brief  red flame that flickered under the clouds and died 
away. The Mountain too slept uneasily. 
     The last stage of their journey to  Orodruin came, and it was a torment 
greater than Sam had ever thought that he could bear. He was in pain, and so  
parched that he could no longer swallow even a mouthful of food. It remained 
dark, not  only because of the  smokes of the Mountain: there seemed to be a  
storm  coming  up,  and  away  to  the  south-east there  was  a  shimmer of 
lightnings under the black skies. Worst of all,  the air  was full of fumes;  
breathing was painful and difficult, and  a dizziness  came on them, so that 
they staggered and often fell. And  yet their wills did not  yield, and they 
struggled on. 
     The  Mountain crept  up ever nearer, until, if they  lifted their heavy 
heads, it  filled all  their sight, looming vast before them: a huge mass of 
ash  and slag and burned stone, out  of which a  sheer -sided cone was raised 
into  the clouds. Before the  daylong dusk ended and true  night  came again 
they had crawled and stumbled to its very feet. 
     With a gasp  Frodo cast  himself on  the ground. Sam sat by him. To his 
surprise he felt tired but lighter, and his head seemed clear again. No more 

####-debates disturbed  his mind.  He knew all the arguments of despair and would 
not listen to them. His wi ll was set, and only death would break it. He felt 
no longer either desire  or need of sleep, but  rather  of  watchfulness. He 
knew  that all the hazards and perils were now  drawing together to a point: 
the next day would  be a day of doom, the day  of final  effort or disaster, 
the last gasp. 
     But when  would it come? The night seemed endless and  timeless, minute 
after  minute  falling dead and adding up to  no  passing hour,  bringing no 
change. Sam  began to wonder if a second darkness had begun and no day 
would 
ever  reappear. At  last he  groped  for  Frodo's  hand.  It  was  cold  and 
trembling. His master was shivering. 
     'I  didn't ought  to have left  my blanket  behind,' muttered Sam;  and 
lying down he tried to comfort Frodo with his arms and body. Then sleep took  
him,  and the dim light of  the last day of  their  quest found them side by 
side. The wind  had fallen  the day before  as it shifted from the West, and 
now  it came from the North  and began  to rise; and slowly the light of the 
unseen Sun filtered down into the shadows where the hobbits lay. 
     'Now for it! Now  for the last  gasp!' said Sam as he  struggled to his 
feet.  He bent over Frodo, rousing  him gently.  Frodo groaned; but  with  a  
great effort of will he staggered up; and then he fell upon his knees again.  
He raised his eyes with difficulty to the dark slopes of Mount Doom towering 
above him, and then pitifully he began to crawl forward on his hands.  
     Sam looked at him and wept in his heart, but  no tears came to his  dry 
and stinging eyes. 'I said I'd carry him, if it broke my back,' he muttered, 
'and I will!' 
     'Come, Mr. Frodo!' he cried. 'I can't carry it for you, but I can carry 
you and  it as well.  So  up you get! Come on, Mr. Frodo dear! Sam will give 
you a ride. Just tell him where to go, and he'll go.' 
     As Frodo clung upon his back, arms loosely about his neck, legs clasped 
firmly under his arms, Sam staggered to his  feet; and then to his amazement  
he felt the  burden light. He had feared that he would  have barely strength 
to lift  his  master alone, and beyond that he had expected to share in  the 
dreadful dragging weight of the  accursed  Ring.  But it was not so. Whether  
because Frodo  was so worn by his  long pains, wound  of knife, and venomous 
sting,  and  sorrow, fear, and homeless wandering, or  because some  gift of 
final  strength was given to  him, Sam lifted Frodo with no more  difficulty 

####-than if he were carrying a hobbit-child pig-a -back in some romp on the lawns 
or hayfields of the Shire. He took a deep breath and started off. 
     They had reached the Mountain's foot on its northern side, and a little 
to the westward; there its long grey  slopes, though broken, were not sheer. 
Frodo did  not speak,  and so Sam  struggled on as best he could, having  no  
guidance but the will to climb as high as might be  before his strength gave 
out  and his will broke. On he toiled, up and up, turning this way and  that 
to lessen  the slope, often stumbling forward, and at the last crawling like 
a snail  with  a  heavy burden on its back. When his will could drive him no 
further, and his limbs gave way, he stopped and laid his master gently down.  
     Frodo opened his eyes and  drew a breath.  It was easier  to breathe up 
here  above the reeks that coiled and drifted down below. 'Thank you,  Sam,' 
he said in a cracked whisper. 'How far is there to go?' 
     'I don't know,' said Sam, 'because I don't know where we're going.' 
     He looked back, and then he looked up; and he was amazed to see how far 
his last effort had brought him. The Mountain standing ominous and alone had 
looked taller than it was. Sam saw  now that it was less lofty than the high 
passes of the Ephel D®ath which  he and Frodo had  scaled. The  confused and 
tumbled shoulders of its great base rose for maybe three thousand feet above  
the plain,  and above them was  reared half as  high again its  tall central 
cone, like a vast oast  or chimney capped with a jagged  crater. But already 
Sam was  more than half way up  the base, and the pla in of Gorgoroth was dim 
below him, wrapped in fume and shadow. As he looked up he would have 
given a  
shout. if his parched throat had allowed him; for amid the rugged humps  and 
shoulders above him he saw plainly a path or road.  It climbed like a rising 
girdle from the west and wound snakelike about the Mountain, until before it 
went  round out of  view it reached the foot  of the  cone upon its  eastern 
side. 
     Sam could  not see  the course  immediately above  him,  where  it  was 
lowest, for a steep slope went up from where he stood; but  he  guessed that 
if he could only struggle on just a little way further up, they would strike 
this path. A gleam of hope returned to  him. They might conquer the Mountain 
yet. 'Why, it might have  been put there a -purpose!' he said to himself. 'If 
it wasn't there, I'd have to say I was beaten in the end.' 
     The path was not put there for the purposes of Sam. He did not know it, 
but he was looking at Sauron's Road  from Barad-dyr to the Sammath Naur, the 

####-Chambers of Fire. Out from the Dark Tower's huge western gate it came over a  
deep abyss by a vast bridge of iron, and then passing  into the plain it ran 
for a league between  two smoking  chasms,  and so  reached  a  long sloping 
causeway that led up on to the Mountain's eastern side.  Thence, turning and  
encircling all  its wide girth from south to north, it climbed at last, high 
in the upper cone, but still far from the reeking summit, to a dark entrance 
that  gazed back  east  straight  to  the  Window  of  the  Eye  in Sauron's 
shadow-mantled fortress. Often blocked  or destroyed by  the tumults  of the 
Mountain's furnaces, always  that road was repaired and cleaned again by the 
labours of countless orcs.  
     Sam drew a deep breath. There was a path, but how he was to get  up the 
slope to it he did not know. First he must ease his aching back. He lay flat 
beside Frodo for a  while. Neither spoke. Slowly the light  grew. Suddenly a  
sense of urgency which  he did not understand  came to Sam. It was almost as 
if he had been called: 'Now, now, or it will be too late!' He braced himself 
and  got up. Frodo also seemed to have felt  the  call. He struggled to  his 
knees. 
     'I'll crawl, Sam,' he gasped. 
     So foot by foot, like small grey insects, they crept up the sl ope. They 
came to the path and found  that it was broad, paved with broken rubble  and  
beaten  ash.  Frodo clambered on  to  it,  and  then  moved  as  if by  some 
compulsion he turned slowly to face  the East. Far off the shadows of Sauron 
hung; but  torn by some gust of wind out of the world, or else moved by some 
great  disquiet within,  the mantling  clouds swirled, and for a moment drew 
aside; and  then he saw,  rising  black,  blacker and  darker than  the vast  
shades  amid which it  stood,  the  cruel pinnacles  and  iron  crown of the 
topmost tower of Barad-dyr. One moment  only it stared out, but as from some 
great window immeasurably high there stabbed northward  a  flame of red, the 
flicker of  a piercing Eye;  and then the shadows were furled  again and the 
terrible vision was removed. The Eye was not  turned to them:  it was gazing 
north to where the Captains of  the West  stood at bay, and thither  all its 
malice was now bent, as the Power moved to strike its deadly blow; but Frodo 
at that dreadful glimpse fell as  one stricken mortally. His hand sought the 
chain about his neck. 
     Sam knelt  by him. Faint, almost  inaudibly, he heard Frodo whispering: 
'Help me, Sam! Help me, Sam! Hold  my hand! I can't  stop it.' Sam took  his 
master's hands a nd laid  them together, palm to  palm, and kissed them;  and  

####-then he held them gently  between his own. The thought came suddenly to him: 
'He's spotted us! It's all  up, or it soon will be. Now, Sam Gamgee, this is 
the end of ends.' 
     Again  he  lifted Frodo  and drew  his  hands down to  his  own breast. 
letting his master's legs  dangle. Then he bowed his  head and struggled off 
along the climbing road. It was  not as easy a way to take as it had  looked 
at first.  By fortune the fires that had poured  forth in the great  turmoils 
when Sam stood upon  Cirith Ungol had flowed down mainly on the southern 
and 
western slopes,  and the road  on  this  side  was not blocked.  Yet in many 
places it had crumbled  away or was crossed  by gaping rents. After climbing 
eastward for some time it bent back upon itself at a sharp  angle  and  went 
westward fox  a space. There at the bend it  was  cut deep through a crag of 
old weathered  stone once long  ago vomited  from the  Mountain's  furnaces. 
Panting under his load Sam turned the bend;  and even  as he did  so, out of 
the corner of his  eye, he had a glimpse of something falling from the crag, 
like a small piece of black stone that had toppled off as he passed. 
     A sudden weight smote him and he crashed forward, tearing the backs  of 
his hands that still clasped his master's. Then  he knew what had  happened,  
for above him as he lay he heard a hated voice. 
     'Wicked masster!' it hissed. 'Wicked masster cheats us; cheats Smjagol, 
gollum. He musstn't go that  wa y. He  musstn't hurt  Preciouss. Give  it  to 
Smjagol, yess, give it to us! Give it to uss!' 
     With a  violent heave Sam rose up.  At once  he drew his  sword; but he 
could do nothing.  Gollum and Frodo were locked together. Gollum was tearing 
at  his master,  trying to  get at the chain and the Ring. This was probably 
the only thing  that could have roused the dying embers of Frodo's heart and  
will:  an  attack,  an attempt to wrest his  treasure from him by force.  He 
fought back with a sudden  fury  that  amazed Sam, and Gollum  also. Even so 
things  might have  gone far  otherwise,  if  Gollum  himself  had  remained 
unchanged;  but whatever dreadful paths, lonely and hungry and waterless, he 
had trodden, driven by a devouring desire and a terrible fear, they had left  
grievous marks on him. He was a lean, starved, haggard thing, all  bones and 
tight-drawn sallow skin. A wild light flamed in his eyes, but his malice was 
no longer matched by his old griping strength. Frodo flung him off and  rose 
up quivering. 
     'Down,  down!' he gasped,  clutching his hand  to his  breast,  so that 

####-beneath  the cover  of his  leather shirt  he clasped  the Ring.  'Down  you  
creeping  thing,  and out of  my path!  Your time is at an  end.  You cannot 
betray me or slay me now.' 
     Then  suddenly, as  before under the eaves of the  Emyn Muil,  Sam  saw 
these  two rivals  with other vision. A crouching shape, scarcely  more than 
the shadow of a living thing, a creature now wholly ruined and defeated, yet  
filled with a hideous lust and rage; and before it stood stern,  untouchable 
now by pity, a figure robed  in white, but at its breast it held a  wheel of 
fire. Out of the fire there spoke a commanding voice. 
     'Begone, and trouble me no more! If you touch me ever again,  you shall  
be cast yourself into the Fire of Doom.' 
     The crouching  shape  backed away, terror in its blinking eyes, and yet 
at the same time insatiable desire. 
     Then the vision  passed and Sam saw Frodo standing, hand on breast, his 
breath coming in great gasps,  and Gollum at his feet, resting  on his knees 
with his wide-splayed hands upon the ground. 
     'Look  out!' cried Sam. 'He'll spring!' He stepped forward, brandishing 
his  sword. 'Quick, Master!' he gasped. 'Go on! Go on! No time to lose. I'll 
deal with him. Go on!' 
     Frodo looked at him as if at one now far away. 'Yes, I must  go on,' he 
said. 'Farewell, Sam!  This is the  end at last.  On  Mount  Doom doom shall 
fall. Farewell!'  He  turned and went on,  walking slowly  but  erect u p the 
climbing path. 
     'Now!' said Sam. 'At last  I can deal with you!' He leaped forward with 
drawn blade ready for battle. But  Gollum did not spring. He fell  flat upon 
the ground and whimpered. 
     'Don't kill us,'  he wept. 'Don't hurt us with  na ssty cruel steel! Let 
us live,  yes,  live just a little longer. Lost lost!  We're lost. And  when 
Precious goes we'll die, yes, die into the  dust.' He clawed up the ashes of 
the path with his long fleshless fingers.  'Dusst!' he hissed. 
     Sam's hand wa vered. His mind was hot with wrath and the memory of evil. 
It would be just to slay this treacherous, murderous creature, just and many 
times deserved;  and also it  seemed the  only safe thing to do. But deep in 
his heart there was something that restrained him: he could not strike  this 
thing  lying  in the  dust, forlorn, ruinous,  utterly wretched. He himself, 
though only for a little while, had borne the Ring, and now dimly he guessed 
the  agony of  Gollum's  shrivelled  mind and body,  enslaved to tha t  Ring, 

####-unable  to find peace or relief ever in  life again. But Sam had no words to 
express what he felt. 
     'Oh, curse you, you stinking thing!' he said. 'Go away! Be off! I don't  
trust you, not as far as I could kick you; but be off. Or I  shall hurt you, 
yes, with nasty cruel steel.' 
     Gollum got up on all fours, and backed away for several paces, and then 
he turned, and as  Sam aimed a kick at him  he fled away down the  path. Sam 
gave no  more heed  to him. He suddenly remembered his master. He looked  
up 
the  path and could not see him. As fast as he could he trudged up the road. 
If he had looked back, he might have seen  not  far below Gollum turn again, 
and then with a wild light of madness glaring in his eyes come,  swiftly but 
warily, creeping on behind, a slinking shadow among the stones.  
     The  path climbed on.  Soon  it bent again  and. with a  last  eastward 
course passed in a cutting along the face of the  cone  and came to the dark 
door in the Mountain's side, the door  of the  Samma th  Naur. Far  away  now 
rising  towards  the  South the  sun, piercing  the  smokes and haze, burned 
ominous, a dull  bleared  disc of red; but all Mordor lay about the Mountain  
like a dead land, silent, shadow-folded, waiting for some dreadful stroke. 
     Sam came to the gaping mouth and peered in. It was dark and  hot, and a  
deep rumbling shook the  air.  'Frodo!  Master!'  he  called. There  was  no 
answer. For a  moment he stood, his heart beating with wild fears,  and then  
he plunged in. A shadow followed him. 
     At first he could see nothing. In his great need he drew  out once more 
the phial of Galadriel, but it  was pale and cold in  his trembling hand and 
threw no light  into that stifling  dark. He was come  to the  heart of  the 
realm  of  Sauron  and  the  forges  of  his   ancient  might,  greatest  in 
Middle-earth;  all other powers  were here  subdued. Fearfully he took a few 
uncertain steps in the dark, and then all at once there came a  flash of red 
that leaped upward, and smote the high black roof. Then Sam saw  that he was 
in a long cave or tunnel that bored into the  Mountain's  smoking cone.  But 
only a short way ahead its floor and the walls on either side were cloven by 
a great fissure, out of which the  red glare came, now leaping u p, now dying 
down  into  darkness; and all the while  far  below there was a rumour and a  
trouble as of great engines throbbing and labouring. 
     The light sprang up  again, and there on the brink of the chasm, at the 
very Crack of Doom, stood Frodo,  black against the glare, tense, erect, but 

####-still as if he had been turned to stone. 
     'Master!' cried Sam. 
     Then Frodo stirred  and  spoke with a  clear voice, indeed with a voice 
clearer and more powerful than Sam had ever heard him use, and it rose above 
the throb and turmoil of Mount Doom, ringing in the roof and walls.  
     'I have come,' he said. 'But I  do not choose now to do what I  came to 
do. I will not do this  deed. The Ring is mine!' And suddenly, as he set  it 
on  his finger,  he  vanished  from Sam's sight.  Sam gasped,  but he had no 
chance to cry out, for at that moment many things happened. 
     Something struck Sam violently in the back,  his legs were knocked from 
under him and he was flung aside, striking his head against the stony  floor, 
as a dark shape sprang  over him. He  lay still  and for a  moment  all went 
black. 
     And far away, as Frodo put on the Ring and claimed it for his own, even 
in  Sammath Naur the  very heart  of his realm, the Power  in  Barad-dyr was 
shaken, and  the Tower trembled from its foundations to its  proud and bitter  
crown.  The  Dark Lord was suddenly  aware of him, and  his Eye piercing all 
shadows  looked  across the plain to  the door  that he had  made;  and  the 
magnitude of  his own folly was revealed to him in a blinding flash, and all 
the devices of his enemies were at last laid bare.  Then his wrath blazed in 
consuming flame, but his fear rose like a vast black smoke to choke him. For 
he knew his deadly peril and the thread upon which his doom now hung. 
     From all his policies and  webs of  fear  and treachery, from  all  his 
stratagems and wars his mind shook  free; and throughout his realm  a tremor 
ran, his slaves quailed, and his armies  halted,  and his captains  suddenly 
steerless,  bereft of will, wavered and  despaired. For they were forgotten. 
The whole mind and purpose of the Power that wielded them was now bent  
with 
overwhelming  force  upon  the Mountain.  At his  summons,  wheeling with  a  
rending cry, in a last desperate race there flew, faster than the winds, the 
Nazgyl the Ringwraiths, and with a storm of wings they hurtled southwards to 
Mount Doom. 
     Sam got up. He was dazed,  and blood streaming from his head dripped in 
his eyes. He groped  forward, and then  he saw a strange and terrible thing. 
Gollum on the edge of the abyss was fighting like a mad thing with an unseen 
foe. To and fro he swayed, now  so near the brink that almost he tumbled in, 
now dragging back, falling to the ground, rising, and falling again. And all 

####-the while he hissed but spoke no words. 
     The fires below  awoke in  anger,  the  red  light  blazed, and all the 
cavern was  filled with  a great glare  and heat. Suddenly  Sam saw Gollum's 
long hands  draw  upwards  to  his mouth; his white fangs gleamed,  and then 
snapped as  they bit. Frodo  gave a cry, and there he was, fallen  upon  his 
knees at the chasm's edge. But Gollum, dancing  like a mad thing, held aloft  
the ring, a finger still thrust within its circle. It shone now as if verily 
it was wrought of living fire. 
     'Precious,  precious,  precious!'  Gollum  cried. 'My  Precious!  O  my 
Precious!'  And with that, even as his eyes were lifted  up to gloat  on his 
prize, he  stepped  too far, toppled, wavered for a moment on the brink, and 
then  with a shriek he fell. Out of the depths came  his last wail Precious, 
and he was gone. 
     There was a roar  and a great confusion  of noise. Fires leaped  up and 
licked the  roof.  The throbbing  grew to a great tumult,  and the  Mountain 
shook. Sam ran to Frodo and picked him up and carried him. out to the  door. 
And there upon the dark threshold of the Sammath Naur, high above the plains 
of Mordor, such wonder and terror came on him that he stood still forgetting 
all else, and gazed as one turned to st one. 
     A brief vision he had of  swirling cloud, and in the midst of it towers 
and battlements, tall as  hills, founded upon a mighty mountain-throne above 
immeasurable pits;  great  courts and  dungeons, eyeless  prisons  sheer  as 
cliffs, and gaping gates of steel and adamant: and then  all passed.  Towers 
fell  and  mountains slid;  walls crumbled and melted,  crashing down;  vast 
spires  of  smoke and  spouting  steams  went  billowing  up, up, until they 
toppled  like  an overwhelming  wave, and  its  wild  crest  curled and came 
foaming down  upon the land. And then at last  over  the miles between there 
came a rumble, rising to a deafening  crash  and roar;  the earth shook, the 
plain heaved and  cracked, and Orodruin reeled. Fire belched from its   riven 
summit.  The  skies  burst  into  thunder seared  with lightning. Down  like 
lashing whips fell a torrent of black rain. And into the heart of the storm, 
with a cry that pierced all  other  sounds, tearing the clouds asunder,  the 
Nazgyl came, shooting  like  flaming bolts, as  caught in the  fiery ruin of 
hill and sky they crackled, withered, and went out. 
     'Well,  this  is the end, Sam Gamgee,'  said a  voice by his side.  And 
there was Frodo, pale and worn, and yet himself again; and in his eyes there 
was peace now, neither strain of will, nor madness, nor any fear. His burden 

####-was taken away. There was the dear master of the sweet days in the Shire. 
     'Master!' cried  Sam. and fell upon his knees. In all that ruin  of the 
world for the momen t he  felt only joy, great joy. The burden  was gone. His 
master had  been  saved;  he was  himself again, he was free. And  then  Sam 
caught sight of the maimed and bleeding hand. 
     'Your poor hand!'  he said.  'And I have nothing to  bind it  with,  or 
comfort it.  I would have  spared him  a whole hand of mine rather. But he's 
gone now beyond recall, gone for ever.' 
     'Yes,'  said Frodo. 'But do  you remember Gandalf's words: Even  Gollum 
may  have something  yet to do? But for him, Sam, I could not have destroyed 
the Ring. The Quest would  have been in vain, even at the bitter end. So let 
us forgive  him!  For the Quest  is achieved, and now all is over. I am glad 
you are here with me. Here at the end of all things, Sam.' 

####- 
 

Chapter 4. The Field of Cormallen 

 
 
     All about the hills the hosts of Mordor raged. The Captains of the West  
were foundering in a gathering sea. The sun gleamed red, and under the wings 
of the Nazgyl  the shadows of death fell dark upon the earth. Aragorn  stood 
beneath his  banner,  silent and stern, as one lost in thought of things long 
past or far away; but his eyes gleamed like stars that shine the brighter as 
the  night deepens.  Upon the hill-top stood Gandalf,  and  he was white and 
cold and no shadow fell on him. The onslaught of Mordor broke like a wave on 
the beleaguered hills,  voices roaring like a tide amid the  wreck and crash 
of arms.  
     As  if to his eyes some sudden vision had  been given, Gandalf stirred; 
and  he turned, looking back north where the skies were pale and clear. Then 
he lifted up his hands and cried in  a loud voice ringing above the din: The 
Eagles are coming! And many voices answered crying:  The  Eagles are 
coming! 
The Eagles are  coming! The hosts of Mordor looked up and wondered what 
this 
sign might mean. 
     There came Gwaihir the Windlord, and Landroval his brother, greatest of  
all the Eagles of  the North, mightiest of the descendants of old Thorondor, 
who built his eyries in the inaccessible peaks of the  Encircling  Mountains 
when Middle-earth was young. Behind  them in long swift lines came all their 
vassals  from the northern mountains, speeding on a gathering wind. Straight 
down  upon the Nazgyl they bore, stooping suddenly out of the high airs, and 
the rush of their wide wings as they passed over was like a gale. 
     But the  Nazgyl  turned and  fled, and vanished into  Mordor's shadows, 
hearing  a sudden terrible  call  out of the  Dark Tower; and  even  at that 
moment  all the hosts of Mordor trembled, doubt clutched their hearts,  their 
laughter  failed, their hands shook  and their limbs were loosed.  The Power  
that drove them on and filled them with hate and fury was wavering, its will  
was removed from them; and now looking in the eyes of their enemies they 
saw 
a deadly light and were afraid. 

####-     Then all the Captains  of  the West cried aloud, for their hearts  were 
filled  with a  new hope in the midst of darkness. Out  from the beleaguered 
hills   knights  of   Gondor,  Riders  of  Rohan,  D®nedain  of  the  North, 
close-serried  companies, drove against  their wavering  foes, piercing  the 
press with the thrust of bitter spears. But  Gandalf lifted up his arms  and 
called once more in a clear voice: 
     'Stand, Men of the West! Stand and wait! This is the hour of doom.' 
     And even  as he spoke  the earth rocked beneath their feet. Then rising 
swiftly  up,  far  above the  Towers  of  the  Black  Gate, high  above  the 
mountains,  a vast soaring  darkness  sprang into the sky,  flickering  with 
fire. The  earth  groaned  and quaked.  The  Towers  of  the  Teeth  swayed, 
tottered, and fell down; the mighty rampart  crumbled;  the Black  Gate  was 
hurled in ruin; and from far away, now dim, now growing, now mounting to 
the 
clouds, there came a drumming rumble, a roar, a long echoing roll of ruinous 
noise. 
     'The  realm of  Sauron is ended!'  said  Gandalf.  'The Ring-bearer has 
fulfilled his Quest.' And as the Captains gazed south to the Land of Mordor, 
it seemed to them that, black  against  the pall of cloud, there rose a huge 
shape of shadow,  impenetrable,  lightning-crowned,  filling  all  the  sky. 
Enormous it reared above the world,  and stretched  out towards  them a vast  
threatening hand, terrible but  impotent: for even as it leaned over them, a  
great wind took it, and  it was  all blown away, and passed; and then a hush 
fell. 
     The Captains  bowed their heads; and when they looked up again, behold! 
their enemies were flying and  the power of Mordor was scattering  like dust  
in the wind. As when death  smites the swollen brooding thing  that inhabits 
their crawling hill and holds them all in sway, ants will wander witless and 
purposeless and then feebly die, so the creatures of Sauron, orc or troll or  
beast  spell-enslaved,  ran  hither  and  thither  mindless;  and  some slew 
themselves, or  cast themselves  in pits,  or  fled wailing  back to hide in 
holes and dark lightless  places far  from hope. But the Men of  Rhyn and of 
Harad, Easterling and  Southron, saw  the ruin of their war  and  the  great 
majesty and glory  of the Captains of the West. And those  that were deepest  
and longest in evil servitude,  hating the West, and yet were men  proud and 
bold,  in their turn now gathered  themselves for a  last stand of desperate 
battle. But the most part fled eastward  as  they could; and some cast their  

####-weapons down and sued for mercy. 
     Then Gandalf, leaving all such matters of battle and command to Aragorn 
and the  other  lords, stood  upon the hill-top  and called; and down to him 
came the great eagle, Gwaihir  the Windlord, and stood before him. 
     'Twice you have  borne me,  Gwaihir my friend,'  said  Gandalf. 'Thrice 
shall pay for all, if you  are willing. You will  not find  me a burden much 
greater than when  you bore me from  Zirak-zigil, where  my  old life burned 
away.' 
     'I would  bear you,' answered Gwaihir, 'whither you will, even were you  
made of stone.' 
     'Then  come, and let your  brother go with us,  and some other of  your 
folk who is most  swift! For we have need of  speed greater than  any  wind,  
outmatching the wings of the Nazgyl.' 
     'The North  Wind blows, but we  shall outfly it,' said Gwaihir. And  he 
lifted up Gandalf and  sped away south, and  with  him  went Landroval,  and 
Meneldor young and swift. And they passed over  Udyn and  Gorgoroth  and 
saw 
all  the land in  ruin and tumult  beneath them, and before them Mount  Doom 
blazing, pouring out its fire. 
     'I am glad that you are here with me,' said Frodo. 'Here at the end  of 
all things, Sam.' 
     'Yes, I  am with  you, Master,' said Sam, laying  Frodo's  wounded hand 
gently to his breast. 'And you're with me.  And  the journey's finished. But 
after  coming all that way I don't  want to give  up  yet. It's not like me, 
somehow, if you understand.' 
     'Maybe not, Sam,' said Frodo; 'but  it's like things  are in the world. 
Hopes fail. An end comes.  We have only  a little  time to wait  now. We are 
lost in ruin and downfall, and there is no escape.' 
     'Well,  Master, we could at  least go further from this dangerous place 
here, from this Crack of Doom,  if  that's its name. Now couldn't  we? Come, 
Mr. Frodo, let's go down the path at any rate!' 
     'Very  well,  Sam. If you wish to go, I'll come,' said  Frodo; and they 
rose and went slowly down the  winding road; and even as they passed towards 
the  Mountain's  quaking  feet, a  great smoke and steam  belched  from  the 
Sammath Naur, and the side  of  the cone was riven open,  and  a  huge fiery 
vomit rolled in slow thunderous cascade down the eastern mountain-side. 
     Frodo and Sam could go no further. Their last strength of mind and body 

####-was  swiftly  ebbing.  They  had  reached  a low ashen  hill  piled  at  the 
Mountain's foot; but from it there was no more escape. It was an island now,  
not long to  endure, amid the torment  of Orodruin. All about  it the  earth 
gaped, and from  deep rifts and pits smoke and fumes leaped up. Behind  them 
the Mountain was  convulsed. Great rents opened in  its side. Slow rivers of 
fire came down the  long slopes towards them. Soon they would be engulfed. A 
rain of hot ash was falling. 
     They stood now; and Sam still holding his master's hand caressed it. He 
sighed. 'What a  tale we have been in, Mr. Frodo, haven't  we?' he said.  'I  
wish I could hear it told! Do you think they'll say:  Now comes the story of 
Nine-fingered Frodo and the Ring of Doom? And then everyone  will hush, like 
we  did,  when  in Rivendell they told us the tale of Beren One-hand and the 
Great Jewel. I wish I could hear  it!  And I wonder how it will go on  after  
our part.' 
     But even while he spoke  so, to keep fear away until the very last, his 
eyes still strayed north,  north  into the eye of the wind, to where the sky 
far off was  clear,  as the cold  blast, rising to  a  gale, drove  back the 
darkness and the ruin of the clouds.  
 
     And so  it was that Gwaihir  saw them with his keen far-seeing eyes, as 
down  the  wild  wind he came,  and  daring the great peril of the skies  he 
circled in  the  air: two small dark figures,  forlorn, hand  in hand upon a  
little  hill, while the  world  shook under them, and  gasped, and rivers of 
fire drew near. And even as  he  espied them and came swooping down, he  
saw 
them  fall, worn out,  or  choked  with  fumes and heat, or stricken down by 
despair at last, hiding the ir eyes from death. 
     Side by side they lay; and  down swept Gwaihir, and down came Landroval 
and  Meneldor the swift; and in a dream, not  knowing what fate had befallen 
them,  the wanderers were  lifted up and borne far away  out of the darkness 
and the fire. 
     When Sam awoke, he found that he  was lying on some soft bed, but  over 
him  gently swayed wide  beechen boughs,  and  through  their  young  leaves 
sunlight glimmered, green and gold. All the  air was full of a sweet mingled  
scent. 
     He  remembered that smell: the  fragrance  of Ithilien. 'Bless  me!' he 
mused. 'How long have I been  asleep?' For the  scent had borne  him back to 

####-the day when he  had  lit  his little  fire under  the sunny bank; and for a  
moment all else  between was out of  waking  memory. He stretched and drew 
a 
deep breath. 'Why, what a dream I've had!' he muttered. 'I am glad to wake!' 
He sat  up and then he  saw  that  Frodo  was  lying  beside  him, and slept 
peacefully,  one  hand  behind  his  head, and  the other  resting  upon the 
coverlet. It was the right hand, and the third finger was missing. 
     Full memory flooded back, and Sam cried aloud: 'It wasn't a dream! Then 
where are we?' 
     And a  voice spoke softly behind:  'In the land of Ithilien, and in the 
keeping of the King; and he awaits you.' With that Gandalf stood before him, 
robed in white, his beard now  gleaming like  pure snow in  the twinkling of 
the leafy sunlight. 'Well, Master Samwise, how do you feel?' he said. 
     But Sam lay back, and stared with open mouth, and for a moment, between 
bewilderment  and great  joy,  he  could  not  answer.  At  last  he gasped: 
'Gandalf! I thought you were dead! But then I thought I was  dead myself. Is 
everything sad going to come untrue? What's happened to the world?' 
     'A great Shadow  has departed,' said  Gandalf, and then he  laughed and 
the  sound was like music,  or  like  water in  a  parched land; and  as  he 
listened  the thought came to  Sam  that he had not heard laughter, the pure 
sound of merriment, for days upon days without count.  It fell upon his ears 
like  the echo of all the joys he had ever  known. But he himself burst into 
tears. Then, as a  sweet rain will pass down a wind of  spring  and the  sun 
will shine out the  clearer, his  tears  ceased, and his laughter welled up, 
and laughing he sprang from his bed. 
     'How do I feel?' he cried. 'Well, I don't know how to say it. I feel, I 
feel' - he waved his arms in the air  - 'I feel like spring after winter, and 
sun on the leaves; and like trumpets and harps and all the songs I have ever  
heard!' He stopped and he turned towards his  master. 'But how's Mr. Frodo?' 
he said. 'Isn't it a shame about  his poor hand? But  I hope he's all  right 
otherwise. He's had a cruel time.' 
     'Yes, I am all right otherwise,' said Frodo, sitting up and laughing in 
his turn. I fell asleep again waiting  for  you, Sam,  you sleepyhead. I was 
awake early this morning, and now it must be nearly noon.' 
     'Noon?' said Sam, trying to calculate. 'Noon of what day? ' 
     'The fourteenth  of the New Year,' said Gandalf; 'or  if you like,  the 
eighth day of April in the Shire reckoning.( But in Gondor the New Year will 

####-always now begin upon  the twenty -fifth  of March when Sauron fell, and when 
you were brought out of the fire to the King. He has  tended you, and now he 
awaits you. You shall eat and drink with him. When you are ready I will lead 
you to him.' 
     'The King?' said Sam. 'What king, and who is he?' 
     'The King of Gondor and Lord  of the Western Lands,' said  Gandalf 'and  
he has taken back all his ancient realm. He will ride soon  to his crowning, 
but he waits for you.' 
     'What shall  we  wear?' said Sam; for all he could  see was the old and 
tattered clothes that  they  had journeyed  in, lying  folded  on the ground 
beside their beds.  
     'The clothes that you wore on your way  to Mordor,' said Gandalf. 'Even 
the orc-rags that you bore in the black land;  Frodo, shall be preserved. No 
silks  and linens, nor any armour or heraldry  could be more honourable. But 
later I will find some other clothes, perhaps.' 
     Then he held out his hands to  them, and they  saw that one shone  with 
light. 'What have you got there?' Frodo cried. 'Can it be - ? ' 
     'Yes, I  have brought your two treasures.  They  were found on Sam when 
you were rescued.  The  Lady Galadriel's gifts: your glass,  Frodo, and your 
box, Sam. You will be glad to have these safe again.' 
     When they were washed and clad, and had eaten a light meal, the Hobbits 
followed  Gandalf.  They  stepped out of  the beech-grove in which  they had 
lain, and passed on to  a long green  lawn, glowing in sunshine, bordered by 
stately dark-leaved trees laden with scarlet blossom. Behind them they could  
hear the  sound of falling water, and a stream  ran down before them between 
flowering banks, until it came to a greenwood at the lawn's foot and  passed 
then on under an archway of trees, through  which they saw  the  shimmer  of 
water far away. 
     As they  came  to the opening in the wood, they were surprised  to  see 
knights in bright mail and tall  guards in silver and black  standing there, 
who greeted them with honour and bowed before them. And then one blew a 
long 
trumpet, and  they  went on through the  aisle of trees  beside  the singing 
stream. So they came  to  a wide green land, and beyond it was a broad river  
in a silver haze, out of which rose  a  long wooded isle, and many ships lay 
by its shores. But on the field where they now stood  a great host was drawn 
up,  in  ranks  and  companies glittering  in  the  sun.  And as the Hobbits 

####-approached swords were  unsheathed, and  spears  were  shaken, and horns and 
trumpets sang, and men cried with many voices and in many tongues:  
     'Long live the Halflings! Praise them with great praise! 
     Cuio i Pheriain anann! Aglar'ni Pheriannath! 
     Praise them with great praise, Frodo and Samwise! 
     Daur a Berhael, Conin en Annyn! Eglerio! 
     Praise them! 
     Eglerio! 
     A laita te, laita te! Andave laituvalmet! 
     Praise them! 
     Cormacolindor, a laita tbrienna! 
     Praise them! The Ring-bearers, praise them with great praise!'  
     And  so the  red blood blushing in their faces  and their eyes  shining 
with wonder, Frodo  and Sam went forward  and saw  that amidst the 
clamorous 
host were set three high-seats  built of green turves. Behind the seat  upon 
the right floated, white on green, a great horse running free; upon the left  
was a banner, silver upon  blue, a ship swan-prowed faring on  the sea;  but 
behind the highest throne in the midst of all a great standard was spread in 
the  breeze,  and there a white  tree flowered upon a sable  field beneath a  
shining crown and seven glittering stars. On the throne sat a mail-clad man, 
a great sword was laid  across his knees, but he wore no  helm. As they drew 
near he rose. And then they knew him, changed as he was, so high and glad of 
face, kingly, lord of Men, dark-haired with eyes of grey. 
     Frodo  ran to meet  him, and Sam  followed close behind. 'Well, if that 
isn't the crown of all!' he said. 'Strider, or I'm still asleep!' 
     'Yes, Sam, Strider,'  said Aragorn. 'It is a long way, is  it not, from 
Bree, where you did not like the look of me? A long way for us all but yours 
has been the darkest road.' 
     And then to Sam's surprise and utter confusion he bowed his knee before 
them; and taking them by the hand,  Frodo upon  his  right and Sam upon  his 
left, he led them to the throne, and  setting them upon it, he turned to the 
men and captains who stood by and spoke, so that his voice rang over all the 
host, crying: 
     'Praise them with great praise!' 
     And  when  the glad shout had swelled up and died away  again, to Sam's 
final and  complete satisfaction  and pure joy, a  minstrel of Gondor  stood 

####-forth, and knelt, and begged leave to sing. And behold! he said: 
     'Lo! lords and knights and  men of valour unashamed, kings and princes,  
and fair people of Gondor, and Riders of Rohan,  and ye sons of  Elrond, and 
D®nedain  of the North, and Elf and Dwarf, and greathearts of the Shire, and 
all free folk of the West, now  listen to my lay. For  I will sing to you of 
Frodo of the Nine Fingers and the Ring of Doom.' 
     And when  Sam  heard that he laughed aloud for  sheer delight,  and  he 
stood  up and cried:  'O great glory and  splendour! And all my wishes  have  
come true!' And then he wept. 
     And all  the host laughed and wept, and in the midst of their merriment 
and tears the clear voice of the minstrel rose like silver and gold, and all 
men  were hushed. And he  sang to them, now in the  Elven-tongue, now in the 
speech  of  the  West,  until   their  hearts,  wounded  with  sweet  words, 
overflowed, and their joy was like swords, and they passed in thought out to 
regions where pain and delight flow together and tears are the  ver y wine of 
blessedness.  
     And at the last, as the Sun fell from the  noon and the  shadows of the 
trees lengthened,  he  ended. 'Praise them  with  great praise!' he said and 
knelt. And then Aragorn stood up, and all the host arose, and they passed to 
pavilions made ready, to eat and drink and make merry while the day lasted. 
     Frodo and Sam were led apart and brought to a tent, and there their old 
raiment was taken off, but folded and set aside with honour; and clean linen  
was  given  to them. Then  Gandalf came and in his  arms,  to the  wonder of  
Frodo, he  bore  the sword and the elven-cloak and the mithril-coat that had 
been taken from him in Mordor. For Sam he brought a coat of gilded mail, and 
his elven-cloak all healed of  the soils and hurts that it had suffered; and 
then he laid before them two swords. 
     'I do not wish for any sword,' said Frodo. 
     'Tonight at least you should wear one,' said Gandalf. 
     Then Frodo took the small sword that had belonged to Sam, and had  been 
laid at his side in Cirith Ungol. 'Sting I gave to you Sam,' he said. 
     'No, master!  Mr. Bilbo gave it  to you,  and  it goes with his  silver  
coat; he would not wish anyone else to wear it now.' 
     Frodo gave way; and  Gandalf, as if  he  were their esquire, knelt  and 
girt  the sword-belts about them, and  then rising he set circlets of silver  
upon their heads. And when they were arrayed  they went  to the great feast; 
and  they sat at the King's table with Gandalf, and King Jomer of Rohan, and 

####-the Prince Imrahil and all the chief captains; and there also were Gimli and 
Legolas.  
     But  when, after the  Standing Silence, wine was brought there came  in 
two esquires to  serve  the kings; or  so they seemed to be: one was clad in 
the silver and sable of the Guards  of Minas Tirith, and the other  in white 
and green. But Sam wondered  what such young boys were  doing in an  army 
of 
mighty men. Then suddenly  as they  drew near and he could see them plainly, 
he exclaimed: 
     'Why, look Mr. Frodo! Look here! Well, if it isn't Pippin. Mr. Peregrin 
Took I should say, and Mr.  Merry! How they have grown! Bless  me! But I 
can 
see there's more tales to tell than ours.' 
     'There  are indeed,' said Pippin turning towards him. 'And  we'll begin 
telling them,  as soon  as this feast is ended. In the meantime you  can try 
Gandalf. He's not so close as he used to be,  though he laughs now more than 
he talks.  For the present Merry and I are busy.  We are knights of the City 
and of the Mark, as I hope you observe.' 
     At  last the glad day ended; and  when  the Sun  was gone and the  round 
Moon  rode  slowly  above  the  mists of  Anduin  and flickered through  the 
fluttering  leaves,  Frodo and  Sam sat under the whispering  trees amid the 
fragrance of fair Ithilien; and they talked deep into the  night  with Merry 
and Pippin  and Gandalf, and after  a  while Legolas  and Gimli joined them. 
There Frodo and  Sam learned much  of all that had happened to  the  Company 
after their fellowship was broken on the  evil day  at Parth Galen by Rauros 
Falls; and still there was always more to ask and more to tell. 
     Orcs, and talking  trees, and leagues of  grass,  and galloping riders. 
and  glittering caves, and white towers and  golden halls, and  battles, and 
tall  ships  sailing,  all  these  passed  before  Sam's  mind until he felt 
bewildered.  But  amidst  all  these  wonders  he  returned  always  to  his 
astonishment at the size of Merry and Pippin; and he made them stand back to 
back with Frodo and himself. He scratched his head. 'Can't understand it  at 
your  age!' he  said. 'But there it is: you're three  inches taller than you  
ought to he, or I'm a dwarf.' 
     'That you certainly are not,' said  Gimli. 'But what did I say? Mortals 
cannot go drinking ent-draughts and expect no more to come of them than of a  
pot of beer.' 

####-     'Ent-draughts?' said Sam. 'There you go about Ents again; but what they 
are beats me. Why, it  will take weeks before we  get all these things sized 
up!' 
     'Weeks indeed,' said Pippin. 'And then Frodo will have  to be locked up 
in a tower in Minas Tirith and  write it  all down. Otherwise he will forget 
half of it, and poor old Bilbo will be dreadfully disappointed.' 
     At length  Gandalf rose. 'The hands of the King  are  hands of healing, 
dear friends,' he  said.  'But you  went  to the very brink of death ere  he 
recalled  you,  putting forth all his power,  and  sent you  into the  sweet 
forgetfulness of sleep. And though you have indeed slept long and blessedly, 
still it is now time to sleep again.' 
     And not  only Sam and Frodo  here, said  Gimli, but you too, Pippin.  I 
love you, if only because of the pains you have cost me, which I shall never  
forget. Nor shall I forget  finding you on the hill of  the last battle. But 
for Gimli the Dwarf you  would have been lost  then. But at least I know now 
the look of a  hobbit's foot, though it be all that can be seen under a heap 
of bodies.  And when  I heaved that  great  carcase off you, I made sure you  
were dead. I could have.  torn out my beard. And it is only a day  yet since 
you were first up and abroad again. To bed now you go. And so shall I.' 
     'And  I,'  said  Legolas, 'shall walk in  the woods of this  fair land, 
which is rest enough. In days to come, if my Elven-lord allows, some of  our 
folk shall remove hither; and when we come it shall be blessed, for a while. 
For a while: a month, a life,  a hundred years  of Men.  But Anduin is near, 
and Anduin leads down to the Sea. To the Sea! 
     To the Sea, to the Sea! The white gulls are crying, 
     The wind is blowing, and the white foam is flying. 
     West, west away, the round sun is falling. 
     Grey ship, grey ship, do you hear them calling. 
     The voices of my people that have gone before me? 
     I will leave, I will leave the wo ods that bore me; 
     For our days are ending and our years failing. 
     I will pass the wide waters lonely sailing. 
     Long are the waves on the Last Shore falling, 
     Sweet are the voices in the Lost Isle calling, 
     In Eressla, in Elvenhome that no man can discover, 
     Where the leaves fall not: land of my people for ever!'  
     And so singing Legolas went away down the hill. 

####-     Then the others also departed, and Frodo and Sam went to their beds and 
slept. And in the morning they  rose again in hope and peace; and they spent 
many days  in  Ithilien. For the Field of Cormallen, where the host was  now 
encamped was near to Henneth  Annyn,  and  the stream that  flowed  from its 
falls could be heard  in the night as it rushed down through its rocky gate, 
and passed through the flowery meads into the tides of Anduin by the Isle of  
Cair Andros. The hobbits wandered here  and there visiting again the  places  
that  they had passed before; and Sam hoped always  in  some shadow  of  the 
woods or secret glade to catch, maybe, a glimpse of the great Oliphaunt. And 
when he learned that at the siege of Gondor there had been a great number of 
these beasts but that they were all destroyed, he thought it a sad loss.  
     'Well, one  can't be everywhere  at once, I  suppose,'  he said. 'But I 
missed a lot, seemingly.' 
     In the meanwhile  the host made  ready for  the return to Minas Tirith. 
The weary rested and the hurt were healed. For some had laboured and  fought 
much with the remnants  of  the  Easterlings  and Southrons, until  all were 
subdued. And, latest of  all, those returned who had passed into  Mordor and 
destroyed the fortresses in the north of the land. 
     But  at the last when the month of May was drawing near the Captains of 
the West set out a gain; and they  went  aboard ship with all  their men, and 
they  sailed  from  Cair Andros  down Anduin to  Osgiliath; and  there  they  
remained for one day; and the day after they came to the green fields of the 
Pelennor and saw again the white  towers  under tall Mindolluin, the City of 
the  Men of Gondor, last memory  of Westernesse, that had passed through the 
darkness and fire to a new day. 
     And there in the  midst of the fields they set up  their pavilions  and 
awaited the morning; for it was the Eve of May, and the King would enter his 
gates with the rising of the Sun. 
 

####- 

Chapter 5. The Steward and the King 

 
 
     Over  the city of Gondor doubt and  great  dread had hung. Fair weather  
and clear  sun had seemed but a mockery to men whose days  held  little hope, 
and  who  looked each  morning  for  news  of doom. Their lord was  dead and 
burned, dead lay the King of Rohan in their citadel,  and the  new king that 
had  come to them in the night was gone again to  a war with powers too dark 
and terrible for any might or valour to conquer. And no news came. After the 
host left Morgul Vale and  took the northward road beneath the shadow of the 
mountains no messenger had  returned nor any rumour  of what was passing  in 
the brooding East. 
     When the Captains were but two days gone, the Lady Jowyn bade the 
women 
who tended her  to  bring her  raiment, and she would  not  be gainsaid, but 
rose; and when they had clothed her and set her arm in a sling of linen, she 
went to the Warden of the Houses of Healing. 
     'Sir,' she  said, 'I am in great  unrest,  and  I cannot lie longer  in 
sloth.' 
     'Lady,' he answered, 'you are  not  yet  healed, and I was commanded to 
tend you  with especial care. You should  not  have risen  from your bed for  
seven days yet , or so I was bidden. I beg you to go back.' 
     'I am  healed,' she said,  'healed at  least in body, save  my left arm 
only, and  that is at ease. But I shall sicken anew, if there is naught that 
I can do. Are there no tidings of war? The women can tell  me nothing.' 
     'There are  no tidings,' said the Warden,  'save  that  the  Lords have 
ridden to Morgul Vale; and men say that the new captain out  of the North is 
their chief. A great lord is that, and a  healer;  and it is a thing passing 
strange to me that  the healing hand should  also wield the sword. It is not 
thus  in Gondor now,  though once it was  so, if old tales be  true. But for  
long years we healers have only sought to patch the rents made by the men of 
swords. Though we should still have enough  to do without them: the world is 
full enough of hurts and mischances without wars to multiply them.' 
     It needs but one foe to breed a war, not two,  Master  Warden, answered 
Jowyn. 'And those who  have not swords can  still die  upon them. Would  you  
have  the folk  of Gondor gather you herbs  only, when the Dark Lord gathers 

####-armies? And it  is not  always good  to be healed in  body. Nor is it always 
evil to die in battle, even  in bitter pain. Were I permitted,  in this dark 
hour I would choose the latter.' 
     The Warden looked at her. Tall she stood there, her eyes  bright in her  
white face, her hand clenched as she turned and gazed out of his window that 
opened to the East. He sighed and shook his head. After a pause  she  turned 
to him again. 
     'Is there no deed to do?' she said. 'Who commands in this City?' 
     'I do not  rightly know,' he  answered. 'Such things are  not my  care. 
There is a marshal over the Riders  of Rohan; and the Lord H®rin, I am told, 
commands the men of Gondor. But  the Lord Faramir is by right the Steward of 
the City.' 
     'Where can I find him?' 
     'In this house, lady. He was sorely  hurt,  but is now set again on the 
way to health. But I do not know--' 
     'Will you not bring me to him? Then you will know. ' 
     The Lord  Faramir was  walking  alone in  the garden  of the  Houses of 
Healing, and the sunlight warmed him, and he felt life run new in his veins; 
but his heart  was heavy, and he looked  out  over the  walls  eastward. And 
coming, the Warden  spoke his name, and he turned and saw the Lady  Jowyn 
of 
Rohan; and he  was  moved with pity, for  he saw that she was hurt,  and his 
clear sight perceived her sorrow and unrest. 
     'My lord,' said  the Warden, 'here is the Lady Jowyn of Rohan. She rode 
wi th the king and  was sorely hurt, and dwells now in my keeping. But she is 
not content, and she wishes to speak to the Steward of the City.' 
     'Do not misunderstand him, lord,'  said Jowyn. 'It is not lack  of care 
that  grieves me.  No  houses  could be  fairer, for those who  desire to be 
healed.  But I  cannot  lie  in sloth,  idle,  caged. I looked  for death in 
battle. But I have not died, and battle still goes on.' 
     At a sign from  Faramir, the Warden bowed and departed. 'What would you  
have me do, lady?' said Faramir.  'I also am a prisoner of the healers.'  He 
looked  at her, and being a man  whom pity deeply stirred,  it seemed to him 
that her loveliness amid her grief would pierce his heart. And she looked at 
him and saw the grave tenderness in his eyes, and yet knew, for she was bred 
among men of war, that here was one whom no Rider of the Mark would 
outmatch 

####-in battle. 
     'What  do you wish?' he said again. 'If  it lies in my power, I will do 
it.' 
     'I would have  you  command this  Warden, and bid him  let me go,'  she 
said; but though her words were still proud, her heart faltered, and for the 
first time she doubted herself. She  guessed  that this tall man, both stern 
and  gentle, might think  her merely wayward, like a child that has not  the 
firmness of mind to go on with a dull task to the end. 
     'I myself am  in the Warden's  keeping,' answered Faramir. 'Nor  have I 
yet taken  up my authority in the City. But  had I done so,  I  should still 
listen to  his counsel,  and should  not cross  his will in  matters of  his 
craft, unless in some great need.' 
     'But I do not desire healing,' she said. 'I wish to ride to war like my 
brother Jomer, or better  like  Thjoden the king, for he  died  and has both 
honour and peace.' 
     'It  is too late, lady,  to follow the Captains, even  if you  had  the 
strength,'  said Faramir.  'But death  in battle  may  come  to  us all yet, 
willing  or unwilling. You will be  better prepared to  face it in your  own 
manner, if while there is still time you do as the Healer commanded. You and 
I, we must endure with patience the hours of waiting.' 
     She  did not answer, but  as  he looked  at her it  seemed to  him that 
something  in her  softened, as though  a bitter frost  were yielding at the 
first faint presage of Spring. A  tear sprang in her  eye  and fell down her  
cheek, like  a  glistening rain-drop.  Her proud head drooped a little. Then 
quietly, more as if speaking  to herself than to him: 'But the healers would 
have me lie abed seven days yet,'  she said. 'And  my  window does not  look 
eastward.' Her voice was now that of a maiden young and sad. 
     Faramir  smiled, though his heart was  filled with  pity.  'Your window 
does not look eastward?'  he said. 'That  can be  amended.  In  this I  will 
command  the Warden. If  you will stay in this  house in our care, lady, and 
take your rest, then you  shall walk in this garden in the sun, as you will; 
and you shall  look east, whither all our hopes have gone. And here you will  
find me, walking and waiting, and also looking east.  It would ease my care,  
if you would speak to me, or walk at whiles with me.' 
     Then she raised her head and looked him in the eyes again; and a colour 
came in her  pale face.  'How should I ease your care,  my  lord?' she said. 
'And I do not desire the speech of living men.' 

####-     'Would you have my plain answer?' he said. 
     'I would.' 
     'Then, Jowyn  of Rohan, I say to  you  that you  are  beautiful. In the 
valleys  of our hills there are flowers fair  and bright, and maidens fairer  
still; but neither flower nor lady have I seen till now in Gondor so lovely, 
and so sorrowful. It may be that only a few days are left ere darkness falls 
upon our world,  and when it comes I hope to  face it steadily; but it would 
ea se my heart, if while the Sun yet shines, I  could see you  still. For you  
and I have both passed under the wings of the Shadow, and the same hand drew 
us back.' 
     'Alas, not me, lord!' she said. 'Shadow  lies on me still.  Look not to 
me for healing! I am a shieldmaiden and my hand is ungentle. But I thank you  
for this at least, that I need not keep to my chamber. I will walk abroad by 
the grace of the Steward of the City.' And she did him a courtesy and walked 
back to the house. But Faramir for a long while walked  alone in the garden,  
and his glance now strayed rather to the house than to the eastward walls. 
     When he returned to his chamber he called for the Warden, and heard all  
that he could tell of the Lady of Rohan. 
     'But I doubt  not,  lor d,'  said the Warden, 'that you would learn more 
from the Halfling that is with us; for he was in the riding of the king, and 
with the Lady at the end, they say.' 
     And so Merry was sent to Faramir, and while that day lasted they talked 
long  together, and  Faramir  learned  much, more  even  than Merry put into 
words; and  he  thought  that he understood now  something of the grief  and 
unrest of Jowyn of Rohan. And in the  fair evening Faramir and  Merry walked 
in the garden, but she did not come. 
     But in the morning, as Faramir came from the Houses, he saw her, as she 
stood upon the walls; and she was clad all in white, and gleamed in the sun. 
And he called to her, and she came down, and they walked on the grass or sat 
under a green  tree  together , now in  silence, now in speech. And  each day 
after they did likewise. And the Warden looking  from his window was glad in 
heart.  for  he was a healer. and his care was lightened; and certain it was 
that, heavy as was the dread and foreboding of those days upon the hearts of 
men, still these two of his charges prospered and grew daily in strength. 
     And so the  fifth day came since the Lady Jowyn went  first to Faramir; 
and they stood now together once more upon the walls of  the City and looked 
out. No tidings  had  yet come, and all hearts  were darkened. The  weather, 

####-too, was  bright  no  longer. It was cold. A wind  that had sprung up in the 
night was  blowing  now keenly from  the North, and it was  rising; but  the 
lands about looked grey and dr ear. 
     They were clad in warm  raiment and heavy cloaks, and over all the Lady  
Jowyn wore a  great blue  mantle of  the colour of deep summer -night, and it  
was set with silver stars  about hem and  throat. Faramir had  sent for this 
robe and had wrapped  it about her;  and he thought that  she looked fair and  
queenly indeed as  she stood there at  his  side. The mantle was wrought for  
his  mother,  Finduilas of Amroth,  who died untimely, and was  to him but a 
memory of loveliness in far days and of his first grief; and her robe seemed 
to him raiment fitting for the beauty and sadness of Jowyn. 
     But  she  now  shivered  beneath the  starry  mantle,  and  she  looked 
northward, above the grey hither lands, into the eye of the  cold wind where 
far away the sky was hard and clear. 
     'What do you look for, Jowyn?' said Faramir. 
     'Does not the Black Gate lie yonder?' said she. 'And must he not now be 
come thither? It is seven days since he rode away.' 
     'Seven days,' said Faramir. 'But think not il l of me, if I say  to you: 
they have brought me both a joy and a pain that I never thought to know. Joy 
to see you; but pain, because now the fear  and doubt  of this evil time are 
grown dark  indeed. Jowyn, I would  not have this world end now, or lose  so 
soon what I have found.' 
     'Lose what you have found,  lord?' she answered; but she looked at  him 
gravely and her eyes  were  kind. 'I know  not what in  these days you  have 
found that you could lose. But come, my friend,  let us not speak of it! Let 
us not speak at all! I  stand  upon some dreadful  brink,  and it is utterly 
dark in the abyss before my feet, but whether there is any light behind me I 
cannot tell. For I cannot turn yet. I wait for some stroke of doom.' 
     'Yes, we wait for the stroke of doom,' said Faramir.  And  they said no 
more; and it seemed to them as  they stood upon the wall that the wind died,  
and the light failed, and the Sun was bleared, and all sounds in the City or  
in the  lands about were hushed: neither wind, nor voice , nor bird-call, nor  
rustle  of leaf,  nor  their own breath could  be heard; the very beating of 
their hearts was stilled. Time halted. 
     And as they stood so, their hands met and  clasped, though they did not 
know  it.  And still  they waited for they   knew not what. Then presently it 
seemed to them that above the ridges  of the distant  mountains another vast  

####-mountain of darkness  rose, towering up like a wave  that  should engulf the 
world, and about it  lightnings flickered; and then a tremor ran through the 
earth, and they felt the  walls of the City quiver. A sound like a sigh went 
up from all the lands about them; and their hearts beat suddenly again. 
     'It  reminds me of N®menor,' said Faramir, and wondered to hear himself 
speak. 
     'Of N®menor?' said Jowyn. 
     'Yes,' said Faramir, 'of the land of Westernesse that  foundered and of 
the great dark wave climbing  over the green lands and above the hills,  and 
coming on, darkness unescapable. I often dream of it.' 
     'Then  you  think that the  Darkness is coming?' said Jowyn.  'Darkness 
Unescapable?' And suddenly she drew close to him. 
     'No,' said Faramir, looking into her face. 'It was but a picture in the 
mind. I do not know what is happening. The reason of my waking mind tells 
me 
that great evil  has befallen and we  stand at the end of days. But my heart 
says nay; and all my limbs are light, and a hope and joy are come to me that 
no reason can deny. Jowyn, Jowyn, White Lady of Rohan, in this hour I do not 
believe that any darkness will endure!' And he stooped and kissed her brow.  
     And so they stood on the walls of the City of Gondor,  and a great wind 
rose and blew, and  their hair, raven  and golden, streamed out  mingling in 
the air. And the Shadow departed, and the Sun was unveiled, and light leaped 
forth; and the waters of Anduin shone like silver, and in all  the houses of 
the  City  men  sang for  the joy that welled  up in their hearts  from what 
source they could not tell. 
     And before the Sun had fallen far  from the noon out of  the East there 
came a great Eagle flying, and he bore tidings beyond hope from the Lords of 
the West, crying: 
     Sing now, ye people of the Tower of Anor, 
     for the Realm of Sauron is ended for ever, 
     and the Dark Tower is thrown down. 
 
     Sing and rejoice, ye people of the Tower of Guard, 
     for your watch hath not been in vain, 
     and the Black Gate is broken, 
     and your King hath passed through, 
     and he is victorious. 

####- 
     Sing and be glad, all ye children of the West, 
     for your King shall come again, 
     and he shall dwell among you 
     all the days of your life. 
 
     And the Tree that was withered shall be renewed, 
     and he shall plant it in the high places, 
     and the City shall be blessed. 
 
     Sing all ye people! 
     And the people sang in all the ways of the City. 
     The  days  that followed were golden,  and Spring and Summer joined and 
made revel  together in  the fields of Gondor. And tidings now came by swift 
riders from Cair  Andros of all  that  was done, and the City made ready for  
the coming of the King. Merry was summoned and rode away with the wains 
that 
took store  of  goods to Osgiliath and thence by  ship  to Cair  Andros; but 
Faramir did not go,  for now being healed he took upon him his authority and 
the  Stewardship, although it was only for a little while, and his duty  was 
to prepare for one who should replace him. 
     And Jowyn did not go, though her brother sent  word begging her to come 
to  the  field of  Cormallen.  And Faramir  wondered at this, but he saw her  
seldom, being  busy  with many matters; and she dwelt still in the Houses of 
Healing and walked alone in the garden, and her face grew pale again, and it  
seemed that  in  all the City she  only  was ailing  and sorrowful.  And the 
Warden of the Houses was troubled, and he spoke to Faramir. 
     Then Faramir came and sought her, and once more they stood on the walls 
together; and he said to  her: 'Jowyn, why  do you tarry here, and do not go 
to the rejoicing in  Cormallen beyond Cair Andros, where your brother awaits 
you?' 
     And she said: 'Do you not know?' 
     But he answered: 'Two reasons there may be, but which is true, l do not 
know.' 
     And she said: 'I do not wish to play at riddles. Speak plainer!' 
     'Then if you  will have it so, lady,' he  said: 'you do  not go, because 
only your brother called for you, and to look on the Lord Aragorn, Elendil's 

####-heir, in his triumph would now bring you no joy. Or because I do not go, and 
you  desire still to be near me. And maybe for both  these reasons,  and you  
yourself cannot choose between them. Jowyn, do  you not love me, or will you  
not?' 
     'I wished to be loved by another,' she answered. 'But I desire no man's 
pity.' 
     'That I know,' he  said. 'You  desired  to  have  the love  of the Lord 
Aragorn. Because he was high and puissant, and you wished to have renown 
and 
glory and to be  lifted far above the  mean things that crawl on  the earth. 
And as a great captain may to a young soldier  he seemed  to you  admirable. 
For so he is, a lord among men,  the greatest that  now is. But when he gave  
you only  understanding and pity, then you desired to have nothing, unless a  
brave death in battle. Look at me, Jowyn!' 
     And Jowyn  looked at Faramir long and  steadily; and Faramir  said: 'Do 
not scorn pity that is the gift of a gentle heart, Jowyn! But I do not offer  
you my pity. For  you  are  a lady high  and valiant  and  have yourself won 
renown that shall not be forgotten; and you  are  a lady  beautiful, I deem, 
beyond even the words of  the Elven-tongue  to tell. And I love  you. Once I  
pitied your sorrow. But now, were you sorrowless, without fear  or any lack, 
were you the blissful Queen of Gondor, still I would love you. Jowyn, do you 
not love me?' 
     Then the heart of Jowyn changed, or else at last she understood it. And 
suddenly her winter passed, and the sun shone on her. 
     I stand in Minas Anor, the Tower of the Sun,  she  said; and behold the 
Shadow has departed! I  will be a shieldmaiden no longer, nor  vie  with the  
great Riders, nor take joy only in the songs of slaying. I will be a healer, 
and love all things that  grow and are not barren.' And again  she looked at 
Faramir. 'No longer do I desire to be a queen,' she said. 
     Then Faramir laughed merrily.  'That is well,' he said; 'for I am not  a  
king. Yet I will wed with the White Lady of Rohan, if it be her will. And if 
she  will, then let us cross  the  River and in happier days let us dwell in 
fair Ithilien  and there make a garden. All things will grow with joy there, 
if the White Lady comes.' 
     'Then must I leave my own people, man of Gondor?' she said. 'And  would 
you have  your proud  folk say of you: (There  goes a  lord who tamed a wild 
shieldmaiden  of the North! Was  there  no woman of the race  of N®menor  to 

####-choose?(' 
     'I  would,'  said  Faramir. And he took her in his arms and  kissed her  
under  the  sunlit sky, and he cared not that they stood high upon the walls 
in  the  sight  of many. And many indeed saw  them  and the light that shone 
about them as they came down from  the  walls  and went hand in hand  to the 
Houses of Healing. 
     And to the Warden of  the Houses Faramir said:  'Here is the Lady Jowyn 
of Rohan, and now she is healed.' 
     And the  Warden  said: 'Then I release her from  my charge and bid  her  
farewell, and may she suffer never hurt nor sickness again. I commend her to 
the care of the Steward of the City, until her brother returns.' 
     But Jowyn said:  'Yet  now that I have leave to depart, I would remain. 
For this House has become to me of all dwellings  the most blessed.' And she 
remained there until King Jomer came. 
     All things  were  now  made  ready  in  the City; and there  was  great 
concourse of  people, for the tidings had gone out into all parts of Gondor, 
from Min-Rimmon even to Pinnath Gelin and the far coasts of the sea; and all 
that could  come to the  City made haste  to come.  And the City  was filled 
again with women  and fair children  that returned to their homes laden with 
flowers;  and from Dol Amroth came the harpers that harped most skilfully in 
all the land; and there  were players upon viols and  upon  flutes and  upon 
horns of silver, and clear-voiced singers from the vales of Lebennin. 
     At last an evening came when from the walls the pavilions could be seen 
upon  the field, and all night lights were  burning as men  watched for  the 
dawn. And when the sun rose in  the clear morning above the mountains in the 
East, upon which shadows lay no more, then  all  the bells rang, and all the 
banners  broke  and  flowed in the wind;  and upon  the White  Tower  of the  
citadel the standard of  the Stewards,  bright argent like snow  in the sun, 
bearing no charge nor device, was raised over Gondor for the last time. 
     Now the Captains of the West  led their host towards the City, and folk  
saw them advance in line upon line, flashing and glinting in the sunrise and 
rippling  like silver.  And  so they came  before the Gateway and  halted  a  
furlong from the walls. As yet no gates had been set up again, but a barrier  
was laid across the entrance  to the City, and  there  stood men at  arms in 
silver  and  black with long swords drawn.  Before the barrier stood Faramir  
the Steward, and H®rin Warden of the Keys, and other captains of Gondor, and 
the  Lady  Jowyn of Rohan with Elfhelm the Marshal and many  knights of  the 

####-Mark; and upon either  side of  the Gate was a great press of fair people in 
raiment of many colours and garlands of flowers.  
     So now there was a wide space before  the walls of Minas Tirith, and it 
was hemmed in upon all sides by the knights and the  soldiers of Gondor  and 
of Rohan, and by the people of the City and of all parts of the land. A hush 
fell upon all as out from the host stepped  the D®nedain in silver and grey; 
and before  them  came  walking slow the Lord Aragorn. He was  clad in black  
mail  girt  with silver, and  he wore a long mantle of pure white clasped at 
the throat with a great jewel  of green that shone  from afar;  but his head 
was bare  save for a star  upon his forehead bound  by a  slender fillet  of 
silver.  With him were Jomer of Rohan,  and the Prince  Imrahil, and Gandalf 
robed all in white, and four small figures that many men marvelled to see. 
     'Nay,  cousin! they are  not  boys,' said Ioreth to her  kinswoman from 
Imloth  Melui,  who stood beside  her. 'Those  are Periain , out  of the  far 
country of  the Halflings, where they are princes of great fame, it is said. 
I should know, for I had one to tend in the Houses. They are small, but they 
are valiant. Why, cousin, one  of them went  with only his esquire  into the 
Black Country and fought with the Dark Lord all by himself, and set fire  to  
his  Tower,  if  you can believe it. At least that is  the tale in the City. 
That will be the one that walks with our Elfstone. They are dear friends,  I 
hear.  Now  he  is  a marvel, the Lord Elfstone: not too soft in his speech, 
mind  you, but  he  has a golden heart,  as  the saying is; and  he has  the 
healing hands. (The hands  of the king are  the  hands of a healer(, I said; 
and  that was how  it  was all  discovered. And  Mithrandir,  he said to me: 
(Ioreth, men will long remember your words(, and--' 
     But  Ioreth  was  not  permitted  to  continue the instruction  of  her  
kinswoman  from  the country,  for a single trumpet rang, and a dead silence 
followed. Then forth from the Gate went  Faramir with H®rin of the Keys, and 
no  others, save  that behind  them  walked four men  in  the high helms and  
armour of the Citadel, and they bore a great casket of black lebethron bound 
with silver. 
     Faramir met  Aragorn in  the  midst  of those there  assembled, and  he 
knelt,  and said: 'The last  Steward of Gondor begs  leave to  surrender his 
office.' And he held out a  white rod; but Aragorn took the  rod and gave it 
back, saying:  'That  office is  not ended, and  it shall be thine  and  thy 
heirs' as long as my line shall last. Do now thy office!' 
     Then Faramir stood up and spoke in  a clear voice:  'Men of Gondor hear  

####-now the  Steward of this Realm! Behold! one has come  to  claim the kingship 
again at last. Here is Aragorn son of Arathorn, chieftain of the D®nedain of  
Arnor,  Captain of the Host of  the West,  bearer of the  Star of the North, 
wielder of  the Sword  Reforged, victorious  in  battle,  whose hands  bring 
healing,  the Elfstone,  Elessar  of  the line of Valandil,  Isildur's  son, 
Elendil's son of N®menor. Shall he be king and enter into the City and dwell 
there?' 
     And all the host and all the people cried yea with one voice. 
     And Ioreth  said  to her kinswoman: 'This is just a ceremony such as we 
have in the City, cousin; for  he has already entered, as I was telling you; 
and he said  to me--' And then again she was obliged to silence, for Faramir 
spoke again. 
     'Men of Gondor, the loremasters tell that it was the custom of old that 
the king should receive the  crown from his father ere  he died; or if  that 
might not be, that  he should  go alone and  take  it from the hands  of his 
father  in the tomb  where  he was  laid.  But since things must now be done  
otherwise,  using the authority of the Steward, I  have today brought hither 
from Rath Dnnen the  crown of Edrnur the last king, whose days passed in the 
time of our longfathers of old.' 
     Then the  guards stepped forward, and Faramir opened the casket, and he 
held up an ancient  crown. It was shaped like the helms of the Guards of the 
Citadel, save  that it was loftier, and it was all  white, and the  wings at 
either side were wrought of pearl and silver in the likeness of the wings of 
a sea -bird, for it was the emblem of kings  who came over the Sea; and seven 
gems  of adamant  were  set  in  the circlet, and upon  its summit was set a  
single jewel the light of which went up like a flame. 
     Then Aragorn took the crown and held it up and said: 
     Et  Edrello  Endorenna  ut®lien.  Sinome  maruvan  ar  Hildinyar  tenn' 
Ambar-metta! 
     And those were the  words that Elendil spoke when he came up out of the 
Sea on the wings  of  the wind: 'Out of  the Great Sea to  M iddle-earth I am 
come.  In this place will I abide,  and  my heirs, unto  the  ending of  the 
world.' 
     Then to the wonder of many Aragorn did not put the crown upon his head, 
but  gave it back to Faramir, and  said: 'By the labour and valour of many I 
have come into my inheritance. In token of this I would have the Ring-bearer 
bring the crown to me,  and let Mithrandir set it upon my  head, if he will; 

####-for he has been the mover of all that has been accomplished, and this is his 
victory.' 
     Then Frodo  came forward and took the crown from Faramir and bore  it to 
Gandalf; and Aragorn  knelt,  and Gandalf set the White Crown upon his head, 
and said: 
     'Now  come  the days  of the  King, and may  they be blessed  while the 
thrones of the Valar endure!' 
     But when  Aragorn arose  all that beheld him  gazed in  silence, for it 
seemed to them  that he was revealed to them now for the first time. Tall as 
the sea -kings of old, he stood  above all that were near; ancient of days he 
seemed and yet in  the fl ower of manhood; and wisdom sat upon his brow,  and 
strength and healing were in his hands, and a light was  about him. And then 
Faramir cried: 
     'Behold the King!' 
     And  in that moment all the trumpets  were  blown, and the King Elessar  
went  forth  and came to the barrier, and  H®rin  of the Keys thrust it back; 
and amid the music of harp and of viol and of flute and the singing of clear 
voices the  King passed through  the flower -laden streets,  and  came to the 
Citadel,  and  entered  in;  and the banner  of  the Tree and the Stars  was 
unfurled  upon the topmost tower,  and  the reign of King Elessar began,  of 
which many songs have told. 
     In his time  the City was made more fair than it had ever been, even in 
the  days of  its first  glory;  and it  was  filled  with  trees  and  with 
fountains, and its gates were wrought of mithril  and steel, and its streets 
were paved  with white marble; and the Folk of the Mountain laboured in  it,  
and the Folk of the Wood rejoiced to come there; and all was healed and made 
good, and  the  houses were filled with men  and women  and  the laughter of 
children,  and no window was blind nor any courtyard  empty;  and after  the 
ending  of  the Third  Age of  the world into the  new  age it preserved the 
memory and the glory of the years that were gone. 
     In the days  that  followed his crowning  the King sat on his throne in 
the Hall of the Kings and pronounced his judgements. And embassies came 
from 
many lands and peoples, from the East and the South, and from the borders of 
Mirkwood,  and  from  Dunland  in  the  west.  And  the  King  pardoned  the 
Easterlings that had  given themselves up, and sent them  away free, and  he 
made peace with  the peoples of Harad;  and the slaves of Mordor he released 

####-and gave  to them all the lands about Lake N®rnen to be their own. And there 
were  brought  before him many to  receive  his praise and reward  for their 
valour; and  last the  captain  of the Guard brought to him  Beregond  to be 
judged. 
     And  the  King said  to  Beregond: 'Beregond, by  your sword blood  was 
spilled  in the Hallows, where that  is forbidden.  Also  you left your post  
without leave of Lord or of Captain. For these things, of old, death was the 
penalty. Now therefore I must pronounce your doom. 
     'All penalty  is remitted  for  your valour in battle,  and still  more 
because all that you  did was for the love of the Lord Faramir.  Nonetheless 
you must leave the Guard of the Citadel, and you must go forth from the City 
of Minas Tirith.' 
     Then the blood left Beregond's face, and he was stricken to  the  heart 
and bowed his head. But the King said.: 
     'So it must be,  for you are  appointed to the White Company, the Guard 
of Faramir,  Prince of Ithilien, and you shall  be its captain  and dwell in 
Emyn  Arnen in  honour  and peace, and in  the service of him  for whom  you  
risked all, to save him from death.' 
     And then Beregond, perceiving the mercy  and justice  of the  King, was 
glad,  and kneeling kissed his hand, and  departed  in joy  and content. And 
Aragorn gave to Faramir Ithilien to  be his princedom, and bade him dwell in 
the hills of Emyn Arnen within sight of the City. 
     'For,' said he, 'Minas Ithil in Morgul Vale shall be utterly destroyed, 
and though it may in time to come be made clean,  no man may dwell there for  
many long years.' 
     And last of  all Aragorn greeted Jomer of Rohan, and they embraced, and  
Aragorn said: 'Between  us there can be no word of giving or taking,  nor of 
reward; for we are brethren. In happy hour did Eorl ride from the North, and 
never has  any league of peoples been more blessed, so that neither has ever  
failed the other, nor shall fail. Now, as you know, we have laid Thjoden the 
Renowned in a tomb in the Hallows, and there he shall lie for ever among the 
Kings of Gondor, if you will. Or if you desire it, we will come to Rohan and 
bring him back to rest with his own people.' 
     And Jomer answered: 'Since the day when you rose before me  out of  the 
green grass of the downs I have loved you , and that love shall not fail. But 
now I must depart  for a while to my own realm, where there is much  to heal 
and set in order.  But as for  the Fallen,  when  all is made ready we  will 

####-return for him; but here let him sleep a while.' 
     And Jowyn  said to Faramir: 'Now I must go back to my own land and look  
on it once again, and help my brother in his labour;  but  when  one  whom I  
long loved as father is laid at last to rest, I will return.' 
     So  the  glad days  passed; and on the  eighth day o f May the Riders of 
Rohan made ready, and rode off by the North-way, and with them went the 
sons 
of Elrond. All the road  was lined with people to do them  honour and praise 
them, from the Gate of the City  to  the  walls of the  Pelennor.  Then  all 
others that dwelt afar went back to their homes  rejoicing; but in the  City 
there was  labour of many willing hands to  rebuild  and renew and to remove 
all the scars of war and the memory of the darkness.  
     The hobbits still remained in Minas Tirith, with Legolas and Gimli; for  
Aragorn  was  loth for the fellowship  to be dissolved. 'At  last  all  such 
things must end,' he said, 'but I would have you wait a little while longer: 
for  the end  of the deeds  that you have  shared in has not yet come. A day 
draws near that  I have looked for in all the years of my manhood,  and when 
it comes I would have my friends beside me.' But of that day he would say no 
more. 
     In those days the Companions of the Ring dwelt together in a fair house 
with Gandalf,  and  they went to and fro as  they  wished. And Frodo said to 
Gandalf:  'Do you know what this  day is that  Aragorn speaks of? For we are 
happy here, and I don't wish to go; but the days are running away, and Bilbo  
is waiting; and the Shire is my home.' 
     'As for  Bilbo,' said Gandalf, 'he is waiting for the same day, and  he 
knows what keeps you. And as for the passing of the days, it is now only May 
and high summer is not yet in; and though all things may seem changed, as if 
an  age of the world had gone by,  yet to the trees and the grass it is less 
than a year since you set out.' 
     'Pippin,' said Frodo, 'didn't you say  that Gandalf was less close than 
of old? He was weary of his labours then, I think. Now he is recovering.' 
     And Gandalf said: 'Many  folk  like to know beforehand what is to be set 
on the table; but those who have laboured  to prepare the feast like to keep 
their secret;  for  wonder makes the words of  praise  louder.  And  Aragorn 
himself waits for a sign.' 
     There came a day when  Gandalf could not  be  found, and  the Companions 

####-wondered what was going forward. But Gandalf took Aragorn  out from the 
City 
by night, and he brought him to the  southern feet  of Mount Mindolluin; and 
there they found a path made  in ages  past that few now dared to tread. For  
it led up on to the mountain to a high hallow where only the kings had  been 
wont to go. And they went up by steep ways,  until they came to a high field 
below  the  snows that clad the  lofty peaks, and it  looked down  over  the 
precipice that stood behind the  City. And standing there they  surveyed the 
lands, for the  morning  was come; and they saw the towers  of the  City far 
below  them  like white pencils touched by the sunlight, and all the Vale of 
Anduin was like a  garden, and  the  Mountains  of Shadow  were veiled in  a 
golden mist. Upon the one side their  sight reached  to the grey Emyn  Muil,  
and  the  glint of  Rauros was like a star twinkling far  off; and upon  the 
other  side they  saw  the River like  a ribbon  laid down to Pelargir,  and 
beyond that was a light on the hem of the sky that spoke of the Sea. 
     And Gandalf said: 'This  is  your realm, and  the heart  of the greater  
realm that shall be. The Third Age of the world is ended, and the new age is 
begun; and it is your  task to order its beginning  and to preserve what may 
be preserved. For though much has been  saved, much must  now pass away; 
and 
the power  of the Three Rings also is ended. And all the lands that you see, 
and those that lie round about them, shall be dwellings of Men. For the time 
comes of the Dominion of Men, and the Elder Kindred shall fade or depart.' 
     'I  know it well, dear  friend,' said Aragorn; 'but I would still  have 
your counsel.' 
     'Not for long now,' said Gandalf. 'The Third Age  was my age. I was the 
Enemy of Sauron; and my work  is finished. I shall go soon. The  burden must  
lie now upon you and your kindred.' 
     'But I  shall die,' said Aragorn. 'For  I  am a mortal man, and  though 
being what I am and of the race of the West unmingled, I shall have life far 
longer than other  men,  yet that is but a little while;  and when those who 
are now in the wombs of women are  born and have grown old, I too shall grow 
old.  And who then shall govern Gondor and those who look to this City as to 
their queen,  if my  desire be  not  granted? The Tree in the Court  of  the 
Fountain is still withered and barren. When shall  I see a sign that it will 
ever be otherwise?' 
     'Turn your face from the  green world, and look where all seems  barren 

####-and cold!' said Gandalf.  
     Then Aragorn  turned. and there was  a  stony  slope behind him running  
down from  the skirts of the snow; and as he looked he  was aware that alone 
there in the waste a growing thing stood. And he climbed to it, and saw that 
out of  the very edge  of the snow there sprang a sapling tree no  more than 
three  foot  high. Already it had  put forth young  leaves long and shapely, 
dark above and silver beneath,  and upon its slender crown it bore one small  
cluster of flowers whose white petals shone like the sunlit snow.  
     Then Aragorn cried:  'Yj! ut®vienyes! I  have found it!  Lo! here is  a  
scion  of the Eldest of Trees!  But how comes it here? For it  is not itself 
yet seven years old.' 
     And Gandalf coming  looked at it, and said: 'Verily this is a sapling of 
the line of  Nimloth the fair; and that was a seedling  of Galathilion,  and 
that a fruit of Telperion of  many names, Eldest of Trees. Who shall say how 
it comes here  in the appointed hour? But this is an ancient hallow, and ere 
the kings  failed or the Tree  withered in the court, a fruit must have been 
set here.  For it is said that, though the fruit of the Tree comes seldom to 
ripeness, yet the life within may then lie sleeping through many long years, 
and none can foretell the time in which it will awake. Remember this. For if 
ever  a fruit ripens,  it should  be planted, lest  the  line die out of the 
world. Here it has lain. hidden on the mountain, even as the race of Elendil 
lay hidden in the wastes of the North. Yet the line of Nimloth is older  far 
than your line, King Elessar.' 
     Then Aragorn laid his hand  gently to the sapling, and lo! it seemed to 
hold only lightly to the earth, and it was removed without hurt; and Aragorn 
bore it back  to  the Citadel. Then the withered tree was uprooted, but with 
reverence; and they did not burn it, but laid it  to rest in the silence  of 
Rath Dnnen. And Aragorn planted the new tree in the  court by the  fountain, 
and swiftly and gladly it began to grow; and when the month  of June entered 
in it was laden with blossom. 
     'The sign has been given,'  said Aragorn, 'and the day is not far off.' 
And he set watchmen upon the walls.  
     It was the day  before Midsummer  when messengers came from Amon D(n 
to 
the  City,  and  they said that there was a  riding of fair folk out of  the 
North,  and they drew near now to  the walls of the Pelennor. And  the  King 
said: 'At last they have come. Let all the City be made ready!' 

####-     Upon the very Eve of Midsummer, when  the sky  was blue as sapphire and 
white stars opened in the East,  but the West was still  golden  and the air 
was  cool and  fragrant, the riders came down the North-way to the gates  of 
Minas Tirith. First rode Elrohir  and  Elladan with a  banner of silver, and 
then  came Glorfindel  and Erestor  and  all the household of Rivendell, and  
after them came the Lady Galadriel and Celeborn,  Lord of Lothlurien, riding 
upon white steeds and with  them many fair folk of their land,  grey-cloaked 
with  white  gems in their hair; and last came Master  Elrond, mighty  among 
Elves and Men, bearing the sceptre of Ann®minas,  and beside him upon a 
grey 
palfrey rode Arwen his daughter, Evenstar of her people. 
     And Frodo when he saw her come glimmering in the evening, with stars on 
her brow and a sweet fragrance about her,  was moved with  great wonder, and 
he said to Gandalf: 'At  last I  understand why we  have waited! This is the 
ending. Now not day only shall be beloved, but  night too shall be beautiful 
and blessed and all its fear pass away!' 
     Then  the  King welcomed  his  guests, and  they  alighted;  and Elrond 
surrendered  the sceptre, and  laid the hand of  his daughter in the hand of 
the King, and together they went up into  the  High City,  and a ll the stars 
flowered in the sky.  And  Aragorn the King Elessar wedded Arwen Undumiel 
in 
the City of the Kings upon the day of Midsummer, and  the tale of their long 
waiting and labours was come to fulfilment. 
 

####- 

Chapter 6. Many Partings 

 
 
     When the days of rejoicing were over at last the Companions  thought of 
returning to their own homes.  And Frodo went to the  King as he was sitting 
with the Queen Arwen by  the fountain, and she sang a song of Valinor, while 
the Tree grew and blossomed. They welcomed Frodo  and rose to greet him; 
and 
Aragorn said: 
     'I  know what you have come to say, Frodo: you wish to  return to  your 
own  home. Well, dearest friend,  the tree grows  best  in the  land of  its 
sires; but  for  you in  all  the lands of the  West  there will  ever  be a  
welcome. And though your people have had little fame in the  legends  of the 
great, they will  now have  more renown than  any wide  realms that  are  no 
more.' 
     'It  is true that  I  wish to  go back to the Shire,' said Frodo.  'But 
first I must  go to Rivendell.  For  if there could be anything wanting in a  
time so  blessed,  I missed Bilbo;  and  I was  grieved when  among all  the 
household of Elrond I saw that he was not come.' 
     'Do  you wonder at that,  Ring-bearer?' said  Arwen.  'For you know the 
power  of that thing  which is now destroyed; and  all that was done by that 
power is now passing away. But your kinsman possessed this thing longer than 
you.  He is ancient in years now, according to his kind; and  he awaits you, 
for he will not again make any long journey save one.' 
     'Then I beg leave to depart soon,' said Frodo. 
     'In seven days we will go,' said Aragorn. 'For we  shall ride  with you  
far on the road, even as far as  the  country  of Rohan.  In three days  now 
Jomer will return hither to bear Thjoden back to rest  in  the Mark, and  we 
shall ride  with  him to honour  the fallen.  But now before  you go  I will 
confirm the words that Faramir spoke to you, and you are made free  for ever 
of the realm of Gondor; and  all your companions likewise. And if there were 
any gifts that I could give to match with  your deeds you  should have them;  
but whatever you  desire you  shall  take  with you, and  you shall ride  in 
honour and arrayed as princes of the land.' 
     But the  Queen  Arwen  said:  'A  gift I will give  you.  For I  am the 
daughter  of Elrond. I shall not  go  with  him now when  he departs to  the 

####-Havens; for mine is the choice of L®thien, and as she so have I chosen, both 
the  sweet  and the bitter. But in  my stead you shall go, Ring-bearer, when 
the time  comes, and if you  then desire it. If your hurts grieve you  still 
and the memory of  your  burden is heavy, then  you may pass  into the West, 
until all your wounds and weariness  are hea led. But wear this now in memory 
of Elfstone and Evenstar with whom your life has been woven!' 
     And she took  a white gem like a star that lay upon her  breast hanging 
upon a silver chain,  and she  set the chain  about Frodo's neck.  'When the 
memory  of the  fear  and  the darkness troubles you,'  she said, 'this will 
bring you aid.' 
     In three days, as the King had said, Jomer  of Rohan came riding to the 
City, and with him came an  jored of the fairest knights  of the Mark. He was 
welcomed; and when they sat all  at table in Merethrond,  the  Great Hall of 
Feasts, he beheld the beauty of  the ladies that he  saw and was filled with 
great  wonder. And before  he went to his rest he sent for Gimli  the Dwarf, 
and he said to him: 'Gimli Gluin's son, have you your axe ready?' 
     'Nay,  lord,' said Gimli, 'but  I  can  speedily fetch it, if there  be 
need.' 
     'You  shall  judge,'  said  Jomer.  'For  there are  certain rash words 
concerning the Lady in the Golden  Wood that lie still between us. And now I 
have seen her with my eyes.' 
     'Well, lord,' said Gimli, 'and what say you now?' 
     'Alas!'  said Jomer. 'I will not say that she  is the fairest lady that 
lives.' 
     'Then I must go for my axe,' said Gimli. 
     'But first I will  plead this excuse,' said Jomer. 'Had  I seen  her in 
other company, I would have said all that you could wish. But now I will put 
Queen Arwen Evenstar first, and I  am ready to do battle on my own part with 
any who deny me. Shall I call for my sword?' 
     Then  Gimli bowed low.  'Nay, you are excused  for my  part, lord,'  he 
said. 'You have chosen the Evening; but my love is given to the Morning. And 
my heart forebodes that soon it will past away for ever.' 
     At last  the day of departure came, and a  great and fair  company made 
ready to ride  north from the City. Then the kings of Gondor and Rohan  went 
to the Hallows and they came  to the tombs in Rath Dnnen, and they bore away 
King Thjoden upon  a golden  bier,  and passed through the City  in silence.  
Then they laid the bier upon a great wain with  Riders of Rohan all about it 

####-and his banner borne before; and Merry being Thjoden's esquire rode upon the 
wain and kept the arms of the king. 
     For  the  other  Companions steeds  were furnished  according to  their 
stature; and Frodo and Samwise rode at Aragorn's side, and Gandalf rode upon 
Shadowfax, and Pippin rode with the knights of Gondor; and Legolas and 
Gimli 
as ever rode together upon Arod. 
     In that riding went  also Queen  Arwen, and Celeborn and Galadriel with 
their  folk,  and Elrond  and his sons; and the princes of Dol Amroth and of 
Ithilien, and many captains and knights. Never had any king of the Mark such 
company upon the road as went with Thjoden Thengel's  son to the land of his 
home. 
     Without haste and at peace they passed into Anurien,  and they came  to 
the  Grey  Wood under Amon  D(n; and  there they heard a sound  as  of drums 
beating in the hills, though no living thing could be seen. Then Aragorn let 
the trumpets be blown; and heralds cried: 
     'Behold  the King  Elessar is come! The Forest  of Dr®adan he  gives to 
Ghvn-buri-ghvn and to his folk, to be their own  for ever; and hereafter let 
no man enter it without their leave!' 
     Then the drums rolled loudly, and were silent. 
     At length after fifteen days of journey the wain of King Thjoden passed 
through the green  fields of Rohan and  came to Edoras;  and  there they all 
rested. The  Golden Hall  was arrayed  with fair hangings and it was  filled 
with light, and there was  held the highest feast that it had known since the 
days of its building. For after three days the Men  of the Mark prepared the 
funeral  of Thjoden; and  he was laid in a  house of stone with his arms and 
many  other  fair things that  he had possessed,  and over him was raised  a  
great mound, covered with green turves of grass and  of white evermind.  And 
now there were eight mounds on the east -side of the Barrowfield. 
     Then the Riders of the King's House  upon white horses rode round about 
the barrow and sang together a song of Thjoden Thengel's  son that  Gljowine 
his minstrel made,  and he made no  other song after. The slow voices of the 
Riders stirred the hearts even of those who did not  know the speech of that 
people; but the words of the song brought a light to the eyes of the folk of 
the Mark as they heard again afar the thunder of the hooves of the North and  
the voice of Eorl crying  above the battle upon the  Field of Celebrant; and 
the  tale  of  the kings rolled on, and the  horn  of Helm  was  loud in the 

####-mountains, until the Darkness  came and King Thjoden arose  and rode through 
the Shadow  to  the fire,  and died in splendour, even as the Sun, returning 
beyond hope, gleamed upon Mindolluin in the morning. 
     Out of doubt, out of dark, to the day's rising 
     he rode singing in the sun, sword unsheathing. 
     Hope he rekindled, and in hope ended; 
     over death, over dread, over doom lifted 
     out of loss, out of life, unto long glory. 
     But Merry stood at the foot of the green mound,  and he wept, and  when 
the song was ended he arose and cried: 
     'Thjoden King, Thjoden King!  Farewell! As a father you were to me. for  
a little while. Farewell!' 
     When the burial  was  over and the  weeping of  women was stilled,  and  
Thjoden was  left  at  last alone in his barrow, then folk gathered  to  the 
Golden Hall for the great feast and  put away sorrow;  for Thjoden had lived 
to full years  and ended in  honour no  less than the greatest of his sires.  
And when the time  came that in the  custom of the Mark they should drink to 
the memory of the kings, Jowyn  Lady of Rohan came  forth, golden as the sun 
and white as snow, and she bore a filled cup to Jomer. 
     Then a minstrel and loremaster stood up and  named all the names of the  
Lords of the Mark in their  order: Eorl the Young;  and Brego builder of the  
Hall; and Aldor brother of Baldor the hapless;  and Frja, and  Frjawine, and 
Goldwine, and Djor, and Gram; and Helm who lay  hid in Helm's Deep when  
the 
Mark was overrun; and so ended the nine mounds of the west-side, for in that 
time the  line  was  broken,  and after came  the  mounds of the  east-side: 
Frjalaf,  Helm s sister -son, and  Ljofa, and Walda, and Folca, and Folcwine,  
and Fengel, and Thengel, and Thjoden the latest. And when Thjoden  was 
named 
Jomer drained the  cup. Then Jowyn bade those  that served to fill the cups, 
and all  there assembled rose  and  drank to the  new  king, crying:  'Hail, 
Jomer, King of the Mark!' 
     At the  last when the  feast drew to an end Jomer arose and  said: 'Now 
this is the funeral feast of Thjoden the King; but I will speak ere we go of 
tidings of joy,  for  he would not grudge that I should do so, since he  was 
ever a father of Jowyn my sister. Hear then all my guests, fair folk of many 
realms, such  as  have never before  been gathered  in  this  hall! Faramir, 

####-Steward  of  Gondor, and Prince of  Ithilien, asks that  Jowyn Lady of Rohan 
should be his wife,  and she grants it full willing. Therefore they shall be 
trothplighted before you  all.' 
     And Faramir and Jowyn stood  forth and set hand in  hand; and all there 
drank to them  and were glad. 'Thus,'  said Jomer, 'is the friendship of the 
Mark and of Gondor bound with a new bond, and the more do I rejoice.' 
     'No niggard are you, Jomer,' said Aragorn, 'to give  thus to Gondor the 
fairest thing in your realm!' 
     Then Jowyn looked in the eyes of Aragorn, and  she said: 'Wish  me joy,  
my liege-lord and healer!' 
     And he answered: 'I have wished  thee joy  ever since first I saw thee. 
It heals my heart to see thee now in bliss.' 
     When the feast was over, those who were to go took leave of King Jomer. 
Aragorn and his knights, and  the people  of Lurien  and of Rivendell,  made 
ready  to  ride;  but Faramir  and Imrahil  remained  at  Edoras; and  Arwen 
Evenstar remained also, and she said farewell  to her brethren. None saw her  
last meeting with Elrond  her father, for  they went up into the  hills  and 
there  spoke long together, and bitter was  their parting that should endure 
beyond the ends of the world. 
     At the last  before the guests set oat Jomer and  Jowyn came to  Merry, 
and  they said: 'Farewell now, Meriadoc of the  Shire  and Holdwine  of  the 
Mark! Ride to good fortune, and ride back soon to our welcome!' 
     And Jomer said: 'Kings of  old would  have laden you  with gifts that a  
wain could not bear for your deeds upon the fields of Mundburg; and yet  you 
will take  naught,  you say, but the  arms that  were given to you.  This  I 
suffer, for indeed I have no gift that is  worthy; but my sister begs you to 
receive this small thing, as a memorial of Dernhelm and of the horns  of the  
Mark at the coming of the morning.' 
     Then  Jowyn gave to Merry  an ancient horn, small but cunningly wrought 
all of fair silver with a baldric of green; and wrights had engraven upon it 
swift horsemen riding in  a  line  that  wound about it from the tip  to the 
mouth; and there were set runes of great virtue. 
     'This is  an  heirloom of  our house,' said Jowyn. 'It was made  by the 
Dwarves, and came from the hoard of Scatha the  Worm. Eorl the Young 
brought 
it from the North. He that blows it  at need shall set fear in the hearts of 
his enemies and joy in the hearts of  his friends, and they  shall hear  him 

####-and come to him.' 
     Then Merry  took  the  horn, for it could not be refused, and he kissed 
Jowyn's hand; and they embraced him, and so they parted for that time. 
     Now the guests were  ready,  and  they drank the stirrup-cup, and  with 
great praise  and friendship they departed, and  came at  length  to  Helm's  
Deep, and there they rested two  days. Then Legolas  repaid  his  promise to 
Gimli and went with him to the  Glittering Caves;  and when they returned he 
was silent, and  would  say only that Gimli  alone could find fit  words  to 
speak of them. 'And never  before has  a Dwarf claimed a victory over an Elf 
in a contest of words,' said he. 'Now therefore let us go to Fangorn and set 
the score right!' 
     From  Deeping-coomb  they rode to Isengard,  and saw  how the Ents  had 
busied  themselves. All the stone-circle had been  thrown down and  removed, 
and  the land within was made into a garden  filled with orchards and trees,  
and a stream  ran through  it;  but in  the midst of all there was a lake of 
clear  water, and out of it  the  Tower  of  Orthanc  rose  still, tall  and 
impregnable, and its black rock was mirrored in the pool. 
     For a while the travellers sat where once the old gates of Isengard had 
stood, and there were now two tall trees like sentinels  a t the beginning of 
a green-bordered path that ran towards Orthanc; and they looked in wonder at 
the work that had been done, but no living thing could they see far or near. 
But presently they heard a voice calling hoom-hom, hoom-hom;  and there 
came 
Treebeard striding down the path to greet them with Quickbeam at his side. 
     'Welcome to the  Treegarth of Orthanc!' he said. 'I  knew that you were 
coming, but I was at work up the valley; there is much still to be done. But 
you  have  not been idle  either away in the south and the east, I hear; and 
all that I hear is good, very good.' Then Treebeard praised all their deeds,  
of which he seemed to have full knowledge; and at last he stopped and looked 
long at Gandalf. 
     'Well, come  now!' he said.  'You  have proved mightiest,  and all your 
labours have gone well.  Where now would you be  going? And why  do you 
come 
here?' 
     'To see how your work goes, my friend,' said Gandalf, 'and to thank you  
for your aid in all that has been achieved.' 
     'Hoom, well, that is fair enough,' said Treebeard; 'for to be sure Ents 

####-have played  their  part. And  not  only in  dealing with that,  hoom,  that 
accursed tree-slayer that dwelt here. For there was a great inrush of those, 
burbrum,   those  evileyed  -  blackhanded  -  bowlegged  -  flinthearted  - 
clawfingered  - foulbellied  -  bloodthirsty,  morimaite -  sincahonda,  hoom, 
well, since  you are  hasty folk and their full name is as long as  years of 
torment, those vermin  of orcs; and they came  over  the River a nd down from 
the  North and all round the wood of  Laurelindurenan, which they could  not 
get into, thanks  to the Great ones who  are here.' He bowed to the Lord and 
Lady of Lurien. 
     'And these same foul creatures were more than  surprised to meet us  out 
on the Wold, for they had  not heard of us before; though that might be said 
also of better folk. And not many  will remember us, for not many escaped us 
alive, and the River had most of those. But it was well for you, for if they 
had  not met us,  then the king of the grassland would not have  ridden far, 
and if he had there would have been no home to return to.' 
     'We know it  well,' said Aragorn, 'and never  shall it be forgotten  in 
Minas Tirith or in Edoras.' 
     'Never is too long a word even for me,' said Treebeard. 'Not while your 
kingdoms last, you mean; but they will have to last long indeed to seem long  
to Ents.' 
     'The New Age begins,' said Gandalf, 'and in this age it may  well prove 
that the  kingdoms of Men shall outlast you, Fangor n my friend. But now come 
tell me: what of the task that I set you? How is Saruman? Is he not weary of 
Orthanc yet? For I do  not suppose that he will think you  have improved the 
view from his windows.' 
     Treebeard gave Gandalf a long look, a most cunning look, Merry thought. 
'Ah!'  he said.  'I thought you would come to  that. Weary of  Orthanc? Very 
weary  at last; but  not so weary of his tower as he  was weary of my voice. 
Hoom! I gave  him some long tales, or at least what might be thought long in 
your speech.' 
     'Then why  did he  stay  to  listen?  Did  you go into  Orthanc?' asked 
Gandalf. 
     'Hoom,  no, not  into Orthanc!'  said  Treebeard. 'But he came  to  his 
window and listened,  because he could  not get news in any  other  way, and 
though he hated the news, he was greedy to have it; and  I saw that he heard 
it all. But I added a great many things to the news that it was good for him 
to think of. He grew very weary. He always was hasty. That was his ruin.' 

####-     'l  observe, my good  Fangorn,' said Gandalf,  'that with great care you  
say dwelt, was, grew. What about is? Is he dead?' 
     'No, not dead, so far as I know,' said Treebeard. 'But he is gone. Yes, 
he is gone seven days.  I let him go.  There  was little left of him when he 
crawl ed  out,  and as  for  that worm-creature of his,  he was  like  a pale 
shadow. Now do not tell me, Gandalf, that I promised to keep him safe; for I  
know it.  But things have changed since then.  And  I kept him until  he was 
safe, safe from doing any  mor e harm. You should know that above all  I hate 
the  caging of live things, and I will not keep even such creatures as these 
caged beyond great need. A snake without fangs may crawl where he will.' 
     'You may be right,'  said Gandalf; 'but this snake  had still one tooth 
left, I think. He had the poison of his voice, and I guess that he persuaded 
you, even you Treebeard,  knowing the soft spot in your heart.  Well,  he is 
gone, and there is no more to be said.  But the Tower  of  Orthanc now  goes 
back to  the King, to whom it belongs. Though maybe he will not need it.' 
     'That  will  be seen later,' said Aragorn. 'But I will give to Ents all 
this valley  to  do with as they will, so long  as  they  keep a watch  upon 
Orthanc and see that none enter it without my leave.' 
     'It is locked,' said Treebeard. 'I made Saruman lock it and give me the 
keys. Quickbeam has them.' 
     Quickbeam  bowed like a tree bending in the wind and  handed to Aragorn 
two great black keys of intricate shape, joined by a  ring of steel.  'Now I 
thank you once more,' said Aragorn, 'and I bid you farewell. May your forest 
grow again in peace. When  this valley is filled there  is room and to spare 
west of the mountains, where once you walked long ago.' 
     Treebeard's face became sad. 'Forests may  grow,' he  said.  'Woods may 
spread. But not Ents. There are no Entings.' 
     'Yet maybe there is now more hope in your search,' said Aragorn. 'Lands 
will lie open to you eastward that have long been closed.' 
     But  Treebeard shook his head and said: 'It is far to go. And there are 
too  many Men there in these days. But I am forgetting  my manners! Will you  
stay here and rest a  while? And maybe there are  some that would be pleased 
to pass through Fangorn Forest and so shorten their road home?' He looked at 
Celeborn and Galadriel. 
     But  all  save Legolas said  that they  must  now take  their leave and 
depart, either south or west. 'Come, Gimli!' said Legolas. 'Now by Fangorn's 
leave I will visit the deep places of the Entwood and  see such trees as are 

####-nowhere  else  to be found in Middle-earth. You  shall come with me and keep 
your word; and thus we will journey on together to our own lands in Mirkwood 
and beyond.' To this Gimli agreed, though with no great delight, it seemed. 
     'Here  then  at last comes the ending of the Fellowship  of  the Ring,' 
said Aragorn. 'Yet I hope that ere long you will  return to my land with the 
help that you promised.' 
     'We will come, if our own lords allow it,' said Gimli. 'Well, farewell. 
my hobbits! You  should  come safe to your own homes now, and I shall not be 
kept  awake for fear  of your peril. We will send word when we may, and some 
of us  may yet meet at times; but I fear that we shall not all  be  gathered 
together ever again.' 
     Then Treebeard  said farewell to  each of  them  in turn, and  he bowed 
three times slowly and with great reverence to Celeborn and  Galadriel.  'It 
is long,  long since we  met by stock  or by  stone, A  vanimar,  vanimblion 
nostari!' he said. 'It is sad that we should meet only  thus at  the ending. 
For the world is changing: I  feel it in the  water, I feel it in the earth, 
and I smell it in the air. I do not think we shall meet again.' 
     And Celeborn said: 'I do not know, Eldest.' But Galadriel sa id: 'Not in 
Middle-earth, nor  until the lands  that lie  under the wave  are lifted  up 
again. Then in the  willow-meads  of  Tasarinan we may meet in  the  Spring. 
Farewell!' 
     Last of all Merry and Pippin said good-bye to the  old Ent, and he grew 
gayer as he looked at  them. 'Well, my merry folk,' he said, 'will you drink  
another draught with me before you go?' 
     'Indeed we  will,' they said,  and he took them aside into the shade of 
one  of the trees, and there they saw that  a  great stone jar had been set. 
And Treebeard  filled  three bowls, and they drank; and they saw his strange 
eyes looking at them over the  rim of his bowl. 'Take  care take  care!'  he 
said. 'For you have already grown  since I saw you last.'  And  they laughed 
and drained their bowls.  
     'Well, good-bye!' he said. 'And don't forget  that if you hear any news 
of the Entwives in your land, you  will send word to me.'  Then he waved his 
great hands to all the company and went off into the trees.  
 
     The  travellers now  rode with more  speed,  and  they made  their  way 
towards  the Gap of Rohan; and Aragorn took leave  of them at last  close to 
that  very place where  Pippin had looked  into  the Stone  of  Orthanc. The 

####-Hobbits were grieved at this parting; for Aragorn had never failed  them and 
he had been their guide through many perils.  
     'I wish  we  could have a Stone that  we could see all our friends in,' 
said Pippin, 'and that we could speak to them from far away!' 
     'Only  one  now remains  that you could use ,'  answered Aragorn for you  
would not wish to see what the Stone of Minas Tirith would show you. But the 
Palantnr of Orthanc the King will keep, to see what is passing in his realm, 
and what his servants are doing. For do not forget, Peregrin Took, that  you  
are a knight  of Gondor, and I do not release you from your service. You are 
going now on leave, but I may recall you.  And remember, dear friends of the 
Shire, that my realm  lies  also in the  North, and I shall  come there  one 
day.' 
     Then Aragorn took leave of Celeborn and Galadriel; and the Lady said to 
him: 'Elfstone,  through  darkness  you have come to your hope, and have now 
all your desire. Use well the days!' 
     But  Celeborn  said: 'Kinsman,  farewell! May  your doom be  other than 
mine, and your treasure remain with you to the end!' 
     With that they parted,  and  it was then the  time  of sunset; and when 
after  a  while  they turned and looked back,  they saw the King of the West 
sitting upon his horse with his knights about him; and the falling Sun shone 
upon them and made all  their harness to gleam like red gold,  and the white 
mantle of Aragorn  was turned  to a flame. Then Aragorn took the green stone 
and held it up, and there came a green fire from his hand. 
     Soon the dwindling company, following the  Isen,  turned west  and rode 
through  the  Gap  into  the  waste  lands  beyond,  and  then  they  turned 
northwards, and passed over the borders of Dunland. The Dunlendings fled and 
hid themselves, for they were afraid of Elv ish Folk,  though few indeed ever  
came to  their country; but the travellers  did not heed them, for they were 
still a great company and were well provided  with all that they needed; and  
they went  on  their way at their leisure, setting  up their tents when they 
would. 
     On the  sixth day  since their  parting  from the  King  they journeyed 
through  a wood  climbing  down from the  hills  at the  feet  of the  Misty 
Mountains that now marched on their right hand. As they came out  again into 
the open country at sundown they overtook an old man leaning on a staff, and 
he was clothed in rags of grey or dirty white, and at his heels went another  
beggar, slouching and whining. 

####-     'Well Saruman!' said Gandalf. 'Where are you going?' 
     'What is  that to  you?' he answered. 'Will you  still  order my goings,  
and are you not content with my ruin?' 
     'You know the  answers,' said Gandalf: 'no and no. But in  any case the 
time of my labours now draws to an end. The King has taken on the burden. If 
you had waited at Orthanc, you would have seen  him, and he would have 
shown 
you wisdom and mercy.' 
     'Then all the A more reason  to have left sooner,' said Saruman; 'for I 
desire  neither  of  him.  Indeed if  you wish for  an answer  to your first 
question, I am seeking a way out of his realm.' 
     'Then once  more you are going the wrong way,' said Gandalf, 'and I see 
no hope in your journey.  But  will  you scorn our help?  For we offer it to 
you.' 
     'To  me?' said  Saruman. 'Nay, pray do not smile  at me! I prefer  your 
frowns. And as  for the Lady here, I do not trust her:  she always hated me, 
and schemed  for your part. I do not doubt that she has brought you this way 
to have the pleasure of gloating over my poverty. Had  I been warned of your 
pursuit, I would have denied you the pleasure.' 
     'Saruman,' said Galadriel, 'we have other errands  and other cares that 
seem  to us more  urgent  than  hunting  for  you. Say rather  that  you are 
overtaken by good fortune; for now you have a last chance.' 
     'If it be truly the last, I am glad,'  said  Saruman;  'for I shall  be 
spared the  trouble of  refusing it  again. All  my hopes are ruined,  but I 
would not share yours. If you have any.' 
     For  a  moment his eyes kindled. 'Go!'  he said. 'I did   not spend long 
study on these matters for naught. You have  doomed yourselves, and you 
know 
it. And it will afford me  some comfort as I wander to think that you pulled 
down your own house  when you destroyed  mine. And now, what  ship will 
bear 
you back across so wide a sea?' he mocked. 'It will be a grey ship, and full 
of ghosts.' He laughed, but his voice was cracked and hideous.  
     'Get up, you  idiot!' he shouted to the other  beggar, who had sat down 
on the ground; and  he struck him with his staff. 'Turn about! If these fine 
folk are going our way, then we will  take another. Get on, or I'll give you  
no crust for your supper!' 

####-     The beggar  turned and slouched past  whimpering: 'Poor old Grnma! Poor  
old Grnma!  Always beaten and cursed. How  I hate him!  I wish I could leave 
him!' 
     'Then leave him!' said Gandalf.  
     But Wormtongue only shot a glance of his bleared eyes full of terror at 
Gandalf, and then shuffled quickly past behind Saruman. As the wretched pair 
passed  by the  company they came  to the hobbits, and Saruman  stopped  and 
stared at them; but they looked at him with pity. 
     'So you have  come  to  gloat too, have you, my urchins?' he said. 'You  
don't care what a beggar lacks, do you? For  you have all you want, food and 
fine clothes, and the best weed for your pipes. Oh yes, I know! I know where 
it comes from. You would not give a pipeful to a beggar, would you?' 
     'I would, if I had any,' said Frodo. 
     'You can have what I have  got left,' said Merry,  'if you will wa it  a  
moment.' He got down and searched  in  the bag at his saddle. Then he handed 
to Saruman a leather pouch.  'Take what there is,' he said. 'You are welcome 
to it; it came from the flotsam of Isengard.' 
     'Mine, mine, yes and dearly bought!' cried  Saruman,  clutching  at the 
pouch. 'This is only a repayment in token; for you took more, I'll be bound. 
Still,  a beggar must  be grateful,  if a thief returns him even a morsel of 
his own. Well, it  will serve you right  when you  come  home,  if  you find 
things  less good in  the Southfarthing than you  would like. Long  may your  
land be short of leaf!' 
     'Thank you!' said Merry. 'In that case I will have my pouch back, which 
is not yours and has journeyed  far with me.  Wrap the weed in a rag of your  
own.' 
     'One thief  deserves  another,' said  Saruman,  and turned his back  on 
Merry, and kicked Wormtongue, and went away towards the wood. 
     'Well, I  like that!' said Pippin. 'Thief indeed! What of our claim for  
waylaying, wounding, and orc-dragging us through Rohan?' 
     'Ah!' said Sam. 'And bought he said. How,  I  wonder? And I didn't like 
the sound of what he said about the Southfarthing. It's time we got back.' 
     'I'm sure it is,' said Frodo. 'But  we can't go  any quicker, if we are 
to see Bilbo. I am going to Rivendell first, whatever happens.' 
     'Yes, I  think  you  had better do that,' said Gandalf. 'But  alas  for  
Saruman! I fear nothing more can be made of him. He has withered altogether. 
All the same, I am not sure that  Treebea rd  is right: I  fancy he could  do 

####-some mischief still in a small mean way.' 
     Next day they went on into  northern Dunland, where  no men now  dwelt, 
though  it was  a green and pleasant country. September came  in with golden 
days  and  silver  nights, and they  rode  at  ease  until  they reached the 
Swanfleet  river, and  found the  old ford, east of the  falls where it went 
down suddenly into the lowlands. Far to the west in a haze lay the meres and 
eyots through which it wound its way to the Greyflood: there countless swans 
housed in a land of reeds. 
     So  they  passed into  Eregion,  and at last  a  fair  morning  dawned, 
shimmering above gleaming mists;  and looking from their camp on a  low hill 
the travellers saw away in the east the Sun catching three peaks that thrust  
up into the sky through floating clouds: Caradhras, Celebdil, and Fanuidhol.  
They were near to the Gates of Moria. 
     Here  now  for  seven  days they tarried, for the  time was at hand for  
another parting which  they  were loth to make.  Soon Celeborn and Galadriel 
and their folk would turn eastward, and so pass by the Redhorn Gate and down 
the  Dimrill Stair to the  Silverlode  and to  their own  country.  They had 
journeyed  thus far  by the  west -ways, for  they had  much  to speak of with 
Elrond and with Gandalf, and here they lingered still in converse with their 
friends.  Often long after the hobbits were wrapped in sleep  they would sit 
together under  the stars, recalling  the ages that were gone and  all their 
joys  a nd  labours in the world, or holding council, concerning  the days to 
come. If any wanderer had chanced  to  pass,  little would he  have seen  or  
heard, and it would have seemed to him only that he saw grey figures, carved 
in stone, memorials of forgotten  things now  lost in  unpeopled  lands. For 
they did  not move or speak with mouth, looking from mind  to mind; and only 
their shining eyes stirred and kindled as their thoughts went to and fro. 
     But at length all was said, and they parted again for a  while, until it 
was time for  the Three Rings to  pass away. Quickly fading into  the stones 
and  the  shadows  the  grey-cloaked  people  of  Lurien  rode  towards  the 
mountains;  and  those  who  were going  to  Rivendell sat  on the hill  and 
watched,   until there came out of the gathering mist a flash; and  then they 
saw no more. Frodo knew that Galadriel  had held aloft her ring  in token of 
farewell. 
     Sam turned away and sighed: 'I wish I was going back to Lurien!' 
     At last one  evening  they came over  the  high moors, suddenly  as  to 
travellers it always seemed,  to  the brink of the  deep valley of Rivendell 

####-and saw far below the lamps  shining  in Elrond's house. And they went  down 
and crossed the bridge and came to  the doors,  and all  the house was filled 
with light and song for joy at Elrond's homecoming. 
     First of  all, before  they  had  eaten or  washed  or even shed  their 
cloaks, the hobbits went in search of Bilbo. They found him all alone in his 
little room. It was littered with papers and pens and pencils; but Bilbo was 
sitting in  a  chair before  a small  bright fire. He looked  very old,  but 
peaceful, and sleepy. 
     He  opened his eyes and  looked up as they came in. 'Hullo, hullo!'  he 
said. 'So you've  come back? And  tomorrow's my birthday, too. How clever of 
you! Do you know,  I shall  be one hundred and twenty-nine? And  in one year 
more, if I am spared, I shall equal the Old Took. I should like to beat him; 
but we shall see.' 
     After the celebration  of  Bilbo's birthday  the four hobbits stayed in 
Rivendell for some days, and they sat much with  their old friend, who spent 
most  of his time  now in his room,  except at meals. For these he was still 
very punctual as a rule, and he seldom failed to wake  up in t ime  for them. 
Sitting round the fire they told him in turn all that they could remember of 
their journeys and adventures. At first he pretended to take some notes; but 
he often fell asleep; and when he  woke  he would  say:  'How splendid!  How 
wonderful!  But where were we?'  Then they went  on with  the story from the 
point where he had begun to nod. 
     The only  part that  seemed really to rouse him and  hold his attention 
was the account of  the crowning and marriage of Aragorn. 'I was  invited to  
the wedding of course,' he said. 'And I have  waited for it long enough. But 
somehow, when it came  to it,  I found I had so much to do here; and packing 
is such a bother.' 
     When  nearly a fortnight had passed Frodo  looked out of his window and 
saw that  there had been a frost  in the night, and  the  cobwebs were  like 
white  nets.  Then  suddenly he knew that he must go,  and  say  good-bye to 
Bilbo. The weather  was still calm  and fair, after one  of the  most lovely 
summers that people could remember; but October had  come, and it must 
break 
soon  and begin to rain and blow again. And there was still a very long  way 
to go. Yet it was not really the thought of the weather that stirred him. He 
had  a feeling  that  it  was time he went back to the Shire. Sam shared it. 
Only the night before he had said: 

####-     'Well, Mr. Frodo, we've been far and seen a deal, and yet I don't think  
we've found a better place than this. There's  something of everything here, 
if  you understand me:  the Shire and the Golden  Wood and  Gondor and kings' 
houses and  inns and  meadows and mountains all mixed.  And  yet, somehow, 
I 
feel we ought to be going soon. I'm worried about my gaffer, to tell you the 
truth.' 
     'Yes,  something  of  everything,  Sam,  except  the  Sea,'   Frodo  had 
answered; and he repeated it now to himself: 'Except the Sea.' 
     That  day  Frodo spoke to Elrond, and  it was  agreed  that they should 
leave the next morning. To their delight Gandalf said: 'I think I shall come 
too. At least as far as Bree. I want to see Butterbur.' 
     In  the evening  they went to say good-bye to Bilbo. 'Well, if you must  
go, you must,' he said.  'I am sorry.  I shall miss you.  It is nice just to 
know that  you are about the  place. But I am getting very sleepy.' Then  he 
gave Frodo his mithril-coat  and Sting, forgetting that he had  already done 
so;  and  he gave him  also three books of lore that he had made  at various 
times,  written  in  his spidery hand,  and labelled  on  their  red  backs: 
Translations from the Elvish, by B.B. 
     To Sam he gave a little bag of gold. 'Almost the last drop of the Smaug 
vintage,' he  said.  'May come in  useful,  if you think of getting married, 
Sam.' Sam blushed. 
     'I have nothing  much to give to you young fellows,' he said   to  Merry 
and Pippin, 'except  good advice.'  And when he had given them a fair sample 
of  this, he added a last item in Shire-fashion:  'Don't let your heads  get 
too big for  your hats! But  if you don't  finish growing  up soon,  you are 
going to find hats and clothes expensive.' 
     'But if you want to  beat  the Old Took,' said Pippin, 'I don't see why 
we shouldn't try and beat the Bullroarer.' 
     Bilbo laughed, and he produced out of a pocket two beautiful pipes with 
pearl mouth-pieces and bound with fine-wrought silver.  'Think of me when you  
smoke them!' he said. 'The  Elves made them for  me, but I don't smoke now.' 
And then suddenly he nodded and went to sleep for a little; and when he woke 
up again he said: 'Now where were we? Yes, of course, g iving presents. Which 
reminds me: what's become of my ring, Frodo, that you took away?' 
     'I have lost it, Bilbo dear,' said Frodo. 'I got rid of it, you know.' 
     'What a  pity!' said  Bilbo. 'I should have liked to see  it again. But 

####-no, how silly  of me! That's what you went for, wasn't it: to get rid of it?  
But it is all so confusing, for such a lot of  other things seem to have got 
mixed  up  with it: Aragorn's affairs, and the White Council and Gondor, and 
the Horsemen, and Southrons, and oliphaunts - did you really see one, Sam? - 
and caves and towers and golden trees, and goodness knows what besides. 
     'I  evidently came  back  by much too straight a  road from my trip.  I 
think Gandalf might have shown  me round  a bit. But then the  auction  would 
have been  over  before I got back,  and I should have had even more trouble 
than I  did. Anyway  it's  too  late  now; and really I think it's much more 
comfortable to sit  here and hear about it all.  The fire's  very cosy here, 
and the food's very good, and there are Elves when you want  them. What more 
could one want?  
     The Road goes ever on and on  
     Out from the door where it began. 
     Now far ahead the Road has gone, 
     Let others follow it who can! 
     Let them a journey new begin, 
     But I at last with weary feet 
     Will turn towards the lighted inn, 
     My evening-rest and sleep to meet.' 
     And  as Bilbo murmured the last words his head dropped on his chest and 
he slept soundly. 
     The evening deepened in the room,  and the  firelight  burned brighter; 
and they looked at Bilbo  as he slept and saw that his face was smiling. For  
some time they sat in silence; and then Sam  looking round  at  the room and 
the shadows flickering on the walls, said softly: 
     'I don't think, Mr. Frodo, that he's done much writing while we've been 
away. He won't ever write our story now.' 
     At that  Bilbo opened an eye, almost as if he had heard. Then he roused 
himself. 'You see, I am getting so  sleepy,' he said. 'And when I have  time 
to write, I only really like writing poetry. I wonder, Frodo my dear fellow,  
if you  would very much mind  tidying things up a bit before you go? Collect 
all my notes and  papers, and my diary too, and  take them with you, if  you  
will. You see, I haven't much time for the selection and the arrangement and 
all that.  Get Sam to help, and when you've knocked things into  shape, come 
back, and I'll run over it. I won't be too critical.' 
     'Of course I'll do it!' said Frodo. 'And of course I'll come back soon: 

####-it won't be dangerous any  more. There  is a real king now and he  will soon 
put the roads in order.' 
     'Thank  you, my dear fellow!' said Bilbo. 'That really is a  very great 
relief to my mind.' And with that he fell fast asleep again. 
     The next day Gandalf and the hobbits took leave  of Bilbo  in his room, 
for it was cold out of doors; and then they said farewell to Elrond  and all 
his household. 
     As Frodo stood upon  the threshold, Elrond  wished him  a fair journey, 
and blessed him, and he said: 
     'I think,  Frodo, that maybe you will not need to come back, unless you  
come  very soon. For  about this time of the year, when the  leaves are gold 
before they fall, look for Bilbo in  the woods of the Shire. I shall be with 
him.' 
     These wor ds no one else heard, and Frodo kept them to himself.  
 

####- 

Chapter 7. Homeward Bound 

 
 
     At last  the  hobbits had  their  faces  turned towards home. They were 
eager now to see the  Shire again; but at first they  rode  only slowly, for  
Frodo had been il l at  ease.  When they came to the  Ford of Bruinen, he had 
halted, and seemed loth  to ride into the stream; and they  noted that for a  
while his eyes appeared not to see them or things about him. All that day he  
was silent. It was the sixth of October. 
     'Are you in  pain,  Frodo?' said Gandalf quietly  as he rode by Frodo's 
side. 
     'Well, yes I am,' said Frodo. 'It is my shoulder. The  wound aches, and 
the memory of darkness is heavy on me. It was a year ago today.' 
     'Alas!  there  are  some  wounds  that  cannot be  wholly  cured,' said 
Gandalf. 
     'I  fear it may be so with  mine,'  said Frodo. 'There is no real going 
back. Though I may come to the Shire, it will not seem the same; for I shall 
not  be the same.  I am  wounded  with  knife, sting,  and tooth, and a long 
burden. Where shall I find rest?' 
     Gandalf did not answer. 
     By the end of the next day  the pain and  unease had passed, and  Frodo 
was merry again, as merry as if he did not remember the blackness of the day 
before. After that the journey went well,  and the days went quickly by; for  
they rode  at leisure,  and often they lingered in the fair  woodlands where 
the leaves were red  and yellow  in the  autumn  sun. At length they came to  
Weathertop; and  it was then drawing  towards  evening and the shadow of the 
hill lay  dark  on the road. Then Frodo begged them to  hasten, and he would  
not look towards the hill,  but rode through its shadow with  head bowed and 
cloak drawn close about him. That night the weather changed, and a wind came 
from the  West laden with rain, and it blew loud and  chill,  and the yellow 
leaves whirled like birds in the air. When they came to the Chetwood already 
the boughs were almost bare, and a great  curtain  of rain  veiled Bree Hill 
from their sight. 
     So it was that near the end of a wild and wet  evening in the last days 
of October the  five travellers rode up  the  climbing road and came  to the 
South-gate of Bree.  It was locked fast; and the rain  blew in  their faces,  

####-and in the darkening sky low clouds went hurrying  by, and their hearts sank  
a little, for they had expected more welcome. 
     When they had called many times, at last  the Gate-keeper came out, and 
they saw that  he  carried a great cudgel. He looked at them  with  fear and 
suspicion; but  when he saw that Gandalf  was there, and that his companions 
were hobbits,  in spite of their strange gear, then he brightened and wished 
them welcome. 
     'Come in!' he said,  unlocking  the  gate. 'We  won't stay for news out 
here  in the  cold  and the wet, a ruffianly evening. But old Barley will no 
doubt give you a welcome at The Pony, and there you'll hear all there is  to 
hear.' 
     'And  there  you'll hear  later all  that  we say,  and  more,' laughed 
Gandalf. 'How is Harry? ' 
     The Gate-keeper scowled. 'Gone,' he said. 'But you'd best ask Barliman. 
Good evening!' 
     'Good  evening  to  you!' they said, and passed through; and then  they 
noticed  that  behind the  hedge at  the road-side a long low  hut had  been 
built, and a  number of  men had come out and were staring at  them over the 
fence. When they  came  to  Bill Ferny's house they saw that the hedge there 
was tattered and unkempt, and the windows were all boarded up. 
     'Do you think you killed him with that apple, Sam?' said Pippin. 
     'I'm not so hopeful, Mr. Pippin,' said Sam. 'But  I'd like to know what 
became  of that poor  pony. He's  been on my mind many a time and the wolves 
howling and all.' 
     At last they  came  to  The Prancing  Pony,  and that at  least  looked 
outwardly unchanged;  and  there were lights behind the red curtains  in the 
lower windows. They rang the bell, and Nob came to the door, and opened it a  
crack and peeped through; and when  he saw  them standing under the  lamp he 
gave a cr y of surprise. 
     'Mr. Butterbur! Master!' he shouted. 'They've come back!' 
     'Oh  have  they? I'll learn them,' came  Butterbur's voice, and out  he 
came with a rush, and he  had a club in his hand.  But when he  saw who they 
were he stopped short, a nd the black scowl on his face changed to wonder and 
delight. 
     'Nob,  you woolly-pated  ninny!'  he cried. 'Can't you give old friends 
their names? You shouldn't go scaring  me like that, with times as they are. 

####-Well, well! And where have you come from? I never expected to see any of 
you 
folk again, and that's a fact: going  off into the Wild with  that  Strider, 
and all those Black Men about. But I'm right glad to  see you, and none more 
than Gandalf. Come in! Come  in!  The same rooms as  - before? They're free. 
Indeed  most rooms  are empty  these  days, as I'll  not  hide from you, for  
you'll find it out soon enough. And I'll see what can be done  about supper, 
as soon as may be; but I'm short-handed at  present. Hey, Nob you slowcoach!  
Tell Bob! Ah, but there I'm forgetting, Bob's gone: goes home to his folk at 
nightfall now. Well, take the guests' ponies to the stables, Nob! And you'll 
be  taking your horse to his  stable yourself Gandalf; I don't doubt. A fine 
beast, as  I  said  when  I  first  set eyes  on  him.  Well, come in!  Make 
yourselves at home!' 
     Mr. Butterbur had at  any rate not  changed his manner  of talking, and 
still  seemed to live in his old breathless bustle. And yet there was hardly 
anybody about, and all  was  quiet; from the  Common  Room  there came a 
low 
murmur of no more than two or three voices. And seen  closer in the light of 
two  candles that he lit and carried before them the landlord's face  looked 
rather wrinkled and careworn. 
     He led them down the passage to the parlour that they  had used on that 
strange  night more  than  a  year  ago;  and  they  followed him,  a little 
disquieted,  for it seemed  plain  to them  that old Barliman was putting  a  
brave  face on some trouble.  Things were not what they  had been.  But they 
said nothing, and waited. 
     As  they expected Mr. Butterbur came to the parlour after supper to see 
if  all had been to their liking. As indeed  it had: no change for the worse 
had  yet come upon the beer  or the victuals at The Pony at any rate. 'Now I 
won't  make  so  bold as  to  suggest you should  come  to the  Common  Room 
tonight,' said Butterbur. 'You'll be tired; and there isn't many folk  there 
this evening, anyway. But if you could spare me half an  hour before you  go 
to  your beds, I would dearly like to have some talk with you, quiet-like by 
ourselves.' 
     'That  is  just what we should like,  too,'  said Gandalf. 'We  are not 
tired.  We have been taking things easy.  We were wet, cold and hungry,  but 
all  that you  have  cured.  Come, sit down!  And if you have any pipe-weed, 
we'll bless you.' 

####-     'Well, if you'd called  for anything else, I'd have been happier,' said 
Butterbur. 'That's just a thing that we're  short of, seeing how  we've only 
got  what we  grow ourselves,  and  that's not enough. There's none to be had 
from the Shire these days. But I'll do what I can.' 
     When he came back he brought them enough to last them for a day or two, 
a wad of uncut leaf.  'Southlinch,' he said, 'and the best  we have; but not 
the match of Southfarthing,  as I've always said though I'm all  for Bree in 
most matters, begging your pardon.' 
     They put him  in a large chair by the wood-fire, and Gandalf sat on the 
other side of the hearth, and the  hobbits  in low chairs between them;  and 
then they talked for many times half an hour, and exchanged all such news as 
Mr.  Butterbur wished to hear or give. Most of the  things which they had to  
tell were a mere  wonder and bewilderment to  their host, and far beyond his 
vision; and  they  brought forth few  comments other than: 'You  don't  say; 
often repeated in defiance of the evidence of Mr. Butterbur's own ears. 'You  
don't say, Mr. Baggins, or is it Mr. Underhill? I'm getting so mixed up. You  
don't  say,  Master  Gandalf! Well I never!  Who'd  have  thought it in  our 
times!' 
     But he did say much on  his  own account. Things were far from well, he 
would say. Business was  not even fair, it was downright bad.  'No one comes 
nigh Bree  now from Outside,'  he said. 'And the inside  folks, they stay at 
home mostly and keep their doors barred. It all comes of those newcomers and 
gangrels that began coming up the Greenway  last year,  as you may remember; 
but  more came later. Some were just poor bodies running away from  trouble; 
but most were bad men, full o' thievery and  mischief. And there was trouble 
right here  in Bree, bad trouble. Why, we had a real set-to, and there  were 
some folk killed, killed dead! If you'll believe me.' 
     'I will indeed,' said Gandalf. 'How many?' 
     'Three  and two,' said  Butterbur,  referring to the big  folk  and the 
little. 'There was poor  Mat Heathertoes, and  Rowlie Appledore,  and little 
Tom Pickthorn from over the Hill; and  Willie Banks from up-away, and one of 
the Underhills from Staddle: all good fellows, and they're missed. And Harry 
Goatleaf that used to be on the West -gate, and that Bill Ferny, they came in 
on the strangers' side, and they've gone off  with them; and it's my  belief 
they let them in. On the night of the  fight, I  mean. And that was after we 
showed them the gates and  pushed them out: before the year's end, that was; 
and the fight was early in the New Year, after the heavy snow we had. 

####-     'And now they're gone for robbers and live outside, hiding in the woods 
beyond Archet, and out  in the wilds north-away. It's like a  bit of the bad 
old  times tales tell of, I say. It  isn't safe  on the road and nobody goes 
far, and folk lock up  early. We have to keep watchers all round  the  fence 
and put a lot of men on the gates at nights.' 
     'Well, no one troubled us,' said Pippin, 'and we came along slowly, and 
kept no watch. We thought we'd left all trouble behind us.' 
     'Ah, that you haven't, Master,  more's the pity,'  said Butterbur. 'But 
it's  no wonder they left  you a lone. They wouldn't go for  armed folk, with 
swords and helmets and  shields  and all. Make them think twice, that would. 
And I must say it put me aback a bit when I saw you.' 
     Then the hobbits suddenly realized  that people had looked at them with 
amazement  not out of surprise at their return so much as in wonder at their 
gear.  They  themselves  had  become  so  used to warfare and  to  riding in 
well-arrayed  companies  that they had quite  forgotten that the bright mail 
peeping from  under their cloaks, and the helms of Gondor and the Mark,  and 
the  fair devices  on  their  shields,  would seem  outlandish in  their own 
country. And Gandalf, too, was now  riding on his tall grey  horse, all clad 
in white with a great mantle of blue and silver over all, and the long sword 
Glamdring at his side. 
     Gandalf  laughed. 'Well,  well,'  he  said, 'if they are afraid of just 
five of us, then we have met worse enemies on our travels. But  at any  rate 
they will give you peace at night while we stay.' 
     'How long will that be?' said Butterbur.  'I'll  not deny we  should be 
glad to have you about for a bit. You see, we're not used to  such troubles; 
and  the  Rangers have all gone  away,  folk tell  me.  I don't  think we've 
rightly understood  till  now what  they did for us. For there's  been worse 
than robbers about.  Wolves  were howling round  the fences last winter. And 
there's  dark shapes in the woods, dreadful  things that it makes the  blood 
run cold to think of. It's been very disturbing, if you  understand me.' 
     'I expect it has,' said Gandalf. 'Nearly all  lands have been disturbed 
these days, very disturbed. But cheer up,  Barliman!  You  have been  on the 
edge  of very great troubles, and I  am only glad to hear that  you have not 
been  deeper in.  But  better times are  coming. Maybe,  better than any you  
remember. The Rangers have returned. We came back with them.  And there is 
a 
king again, Barliman. He will soon be turning his mind this way. 

####-     'Then the Greenway will  be opened again , and his  messengers will come 
north,  and  there will  be comings and  goings, and the evil things will be 
driven out of  the waste-lands. Indeed the  waste in  time will be  waste no 
longer,  and  there   will  be  people  and  fields  where  once  ther e  was 
wilderness.' 
     Mr. Butterbur shook his head. 'If there's a few decent respectable folk  
on the roads, that  won't do no harm,' he said. 'But  we  don't want no more 
rabble and ruffians. And  we don't want no outsiders at Bree, nor  near Bree 
at all. We want to be let alone.  I  don't want a  whole  crowd o' strangers 
camping here and settling there and tearing up the wild country.' 
     'You will be let  alone, Barliman,' said Gandalf. 'There is room enough 
for realms between Isen and Greyflood, or  along the shore lands south of the  
Brandywine, without any one living within many days' ride of  Bree. And many 
folk used to dwell away north, a hundred miles or more from here, at the far  
end of the Greenway: on the North Downs or by Lake Evendim.' 
     'Up away by Deadmen's Dike?' said Butterbur, looking even more dubious.  
'That's haunted land, they say. None but a robber would go there.' 
     'The Rangers go  there,' said Gandalf.  'Deadmen's Dike, you say. So it 
has  been called for long years;  but its right  name, Barliman, is  Fornost  
Erain, Norbury of the Kings. And the King will come there again one day; and 
then you'll have some fair folk riding through.' 
     'Well,  that sounds more hopeful, I'll  allow,' said Butterbur. 'And it 
will be good for  business, no doubt. So long as he lets Bree alone.' 
     'He will,' said Gandalf. 'He knows it and loves it.' 
     'Does he now?' said Butterbur looking puzzled. 'Though I'm sure I don't 
know  why  he  should, sitting  in his  big  chair up in his  great   castle, 
hundreds  of miles away. And drinking wine out of a  golden cup, I shouldn't 
wonder.  What's  The Pony to him, or mugs  o'  beer? Not  but what my beer's 
good, Gandalf. It's been uncommon good, since you came in the autumn of last  
year and put a good word on it. And that's been a comfort in trouble, I will 
say.' 
     'Ah!' said Sam. 'But he says your beer is always good.' 
     'He says?' 
     'Of course he does. He's Strider. The chief of the Rangers. Haven't you  
got that into your head yet?' 
     It went in at last, and  Butterbur's face was  a study in  wonder.  The 
eyes in his broad face grew round, and his mouth opened wide, and he gasped. 

####-'Strider!' he exclaimed when he  got back his breath.  'Him with a crown and 
all and a golden cup! Well, what are we coming to?' 
     'Better times, for Bree at any rate,' said Gandalf.  
     'I hope so, I'm sure,' said Butterbur. 'Well, this  has been the nicest  
chat I've  had  in  a month of  Mondays. And  I'll not deny that I'll  sleep 
easier  tonight and with a lighter heart. You've given  me a powerful lot to 
think over, but  I'll put that off until tomorrow. I'm  for bed, and I've no 
doubt  you'll be glad  of your beds too. Hey, Nob!' he called, going to  the 
door.  'Nob, you slowcoach!' 
     'Now!' he said to himself, slapping his  forehead. 'Now what  does that 
remind me of?' 
     'Not  another letter  you've forgotten. I hope,  Mr.  Butterbur?'  said 
Merry. 
     'Now, now, Mr.  Brandybuck, don't go reminding me of  that! But  there,  
you've  broken my  thought. Now where was I? Nob,  stables, ah! that was it. 
I've something that  belongs to  you.  If you recollect Bill  Ferny  and the 
horsethieving: his pony as you bought,  well,  it's  here. Come  back all of 
itself, it did. But where it had been to you know better than me. It was  as 
shaggy as an old dog and as lean as a clothes-rail, but it  was alive. Nob's 
looked after it.' 
     'What! My Bill?' cried Sam. 'Well, I was born lucky, whatever my gaffer  
may say. There's another  wish come true! Where is he?' Sam  would not go to 
bed until he had visited Bill in his stable. 
     The travellers stayed in Bree all the next day, and Mr. Butterbur could 
not complain of his  business next evening at any  rate. Curiosity  overcame  
all fears,  and his house was  crowded.  For a while  out of politeness  the 
hobbits  visited the Common  Room in the evening  and  answered a  good 
many 
questions. Bree memories being retentive,  Frodo was  asked many times if he 
had written his book. 
     'Not yet,' he answered. 'I am going home now to put my notes in order.' 
He promised to deal  with the amazing events at Bree, and so  give a bit  of 
interest to  a book that appeared likely to  treat mostly of  the remote and 
less important affairs 'away south'.  
     Then  one of  the  younger folk called for  a song. But at that a  hush 
fell,  and he was frowned  down,  and the  call  was not repeated. Evidently 
there was no wish for any uncanny events in the Common Room again. 

####-     No trouble by day, nor  any sound by night, disturbed the peace of Bree 
while the travellers remained there; but the next morning they got up early, 
for  as the  weather  was still rainy they wished to reach the  Shire before 
night, and it was a long ride. The Bree folk were  all out  to see them off,  
and were in merrier mood than they had  been  for a year; and  those who had 
not seen the  strangers in all  their gear before gaped with wonder at them: 
at Gandalf with his white beard,  and  the light that  seemed to  gleam from 
him, as if his  blue mantle was on ly a  cloud over sunshine; and at the four 
hobbits like riders upon errantry out of almost  forgotten tales. Even those 
who had laughed at all the talk about the King began to think there might be 
some truth in it. 
     'Well, good luck on your road,  and good luck to your home-coming! said 
Mr. Butterbur. 'I  should have warned you before that  all's not well in the 
Shire neither, if what we  hear is true.  Funny goings on, they say. But one 
thing drives out another, and I was full of my own troubles. But i f I may be 
so  bold, you've come back  changed from your travels, and you look now like 
folk as  can deal with troubles  out of hand. I don't  doubt you'll soon set 
all to rights. Good  luck to you! And the  oftener you  come back the better  
I'll be pleased.' 
     They wished  him  farewell  and  rode  away,  and  passed  through  the 
West-gate and on  towards  the  Shire. Bill the  pony was with them, and  as 
before he  had a  good deal of  baggage, but he trotted along beside Sam and 
seemed well content. 
     'I wonder what old Barliman was hinting at,' said Frodo. 
     'I can guess some of it,' said Sam gloomily. 'What I saw in the Mirror: 
trees cut down and all, and my old gaffer turned out of the Row.  I ought to 
have hurried back quicker.' 
     'And something's wrong  with the Southfarthing evidently,'  said Merry. 
'There's a general shortage of pipe-weed.' 
     'Whatever it  is,' said Pippin, 'Lotho will be at the bottom of it: you  
can be sure of that.' 
     'Deep in,  but not at the bottom,' said Gandalf.  'You  have  forgotten 
Saruman. He began to take an interest in the Shire before Mordor did.' 
     'Well,  we've  got you  with us,' said Merry,  'so things  will soon be 
cleared up.' 
     'I am with you at  present,' said Gandalf, 'but soon I  shall not be. I 
am not coming to the Shire. You must  settle its affairs yourselves; that is 

####-what  you have been trained for. Do you not yet understand? My time is over: 
it is no longer my  task to set things to rights, nor to help folk to do so. 
And  as for you ,  my dear friends, you will need no  help. You are  grown up 
now. Grown indeed very high; among the  great you are,  and I have no longer  
any fear at all for any of you. 
     'But if you would know, I am turning aside soon.  I  am going to have a  
long talk with Bombadil: such a talk as I have not had in all my time. He is 
a moss-gatherer, and I have been a  stone doomed to rolling. But  my rolling 
days are ending, and now we shall have much to say to one another.' 
     In a little while  they came to the point on the East  Road  where they 
had taken  leave of  Bombadil; and  they hoped and  half expected to see him 
standing there to greet them as they went by. But there was no sign  of him; 
and  there was  a grey mist on the Barrow-downs southwards, and  a deep veil 
over the Old Forest far away. 
     They halted and Frodo looked south wistfully. 'I should dearly  like to 
see the old fellow again,' he said. 'I wonder how he is getting on?' 
     'As well as ever, you may be sure,' said Gandalf. 'Quite untroubled and 
I  should guess, not much interested in anything  that we have done or seen, 
unless perhaps in our visits to the Ents. There may be a time  later for you  
to go and see him. But if I were you, I should press on now for home, or you  
will not come to the Brandywine Bridge before the gates are locked.' 
     'But there aren't any  gates,' said  Merry, 'not  on the Road; you know 
that quite well.  There's  the  Buckland Gate, of course; but they'll let me 
through that at any time.' 
     'There  weren't any  gates,  you mean,'  said Gandalf. 'I think you will 
find some  now. And  you might have  more trouble even  at the Buckland Gate 
than you think. But you'll! manage all right. Good -bye dear friends! Not for  
the last time, not yet. Good-bye!' 
     He turned Shadowfax off the  Road, and the great horse leaped the green 
dike that here ran beside  it;  and then at a cry from Gandalf he  was gone, 
racing towards the Barrow-downs like a wind from the North. 
     'Well here we are, just the four of us that started out together,' said 
Merry. 'We have left all the rest behind, one after another. It seems almost  
like a dream that has slowly faded.' 
     'Not to  me,'  said  Frodo. 'To me it  feels  more  like falling asleep 
again.' 
 

####- 

Chapter 8. The Scouring of the Shire 

 
 
     It was after nightfall when, wet and tired, the travellers came at last  
to  the Brandywine, and  they found  the way  barred. At  either  end of the 
Bridge there was a great  spiked gate;  and on the further side of the river  
they could see that some new houses had been built: two-storeyed with narrow 
straight-sided   windows,  bare   and   dimly  lit,  all  very   gloomy  and 
un-Shirelike. 
     They  hammered on  the outer gate and called, but there was at first no  
answer;  and then to their  surprise someone blew a horn, and  the lights in 
the windows went out. A voice shouted in the dark: 
     'Who's that?  Be off! You  can't come in: Can't you read the notice: No 
admittance between sundown and sunrise?' 
     'Of  course we can't read the notice  in the  dark.' Sam shouted  back. 
'And if hobbits of the Shire are to be  kept out in the wet on  a night like 
this, I'll tear down your notice when I find it.' 
     At that a  window slammed, and a crowd  of hobbits with lanterns poured  
out of the house on the  left. They opened the  further gate, and some  came 
over the bridge. When they saw the travellers they seemed frightened. 
     'Come along!' said Merry, recognizing one of the hobbits. 'If you don't 
know me, Hob Hayward, you ought to. I am Merry Brandybuck, and I should 
like 
to know what  all this is  about,  and  what a Bucklander  like you is doing 
here. You used to be on the Hay Gate.' 
     'Bless  me!  It's Master Merry, to  be sure,  and all  dressed  up  for  
fighting!'  said  old Hob. 'Why,  they  said you was  dead! Lost in  the Old 
Forest by all accounts. I'm pleased to see you alive after all!' 
     'Then  stop gaping  at  me  through the  bars, and open the gate!' said 
Merry. 
     'I'm sorry, Master Merry, but we have orders.' 
     'Whose orders?' 
     'The Chief's up at Bag End.' 
     'Chief? Chief? Do you mean Mr. Lotho?' said Frodo. 
     'I suppose  so,  Mr.  Baggins;  but  we have  to say  just  "the Chief" 
nowadays.' 

####-     'Do you indeed!'  said  Frodo. 'Well,  I am  glad he  has  dropped  the 
Baggins at any  rate. But  it is evidently high  time that the  family dealt 
with him and put him in his place.' 
     A  hush fell  on the hobbits  beyond the  gate. 'It  won't do  no  good 
talking that  way,' said one. 'He'll  get to hear  of it. And if you make so 
much noise, you'll wake the Chief's Big Man.' 
     'We shall wake him up in a way that will surprise him,' said Merry. 'If 
you mean that your precious Chief has  been hiring ruffians out of the wild, 
then we've not come back too  soon.' He sprang from his pony, and seeing the 
notice in  the light of the lanterns, he  tore it down and threw it over the 
gate. The  hobbits  backed  away and  made no move  to open  it.  'Come  on, 
Pippin!' said Merry. 'Two is enough.' 
     Merry and Pippin  c limbed the gate, and the hobbits fled.  Another horn 
sounded. Out of the bigger house on the right a large heavy figure  appeared 
against a light in the doorway. 
     'What's all this,' he snarled as he  came  forward. 'Gate-breaking? You  
clear out, or I'l l break your filthy little necks!' Then he  stopped, for he 
had caught the gleam of swords. 
     'Bill Ferny,' said Merry, 'if you don't open that gate in ten  seconds,  
you'll regret it. I shall set steel  to you, if you don't obey. And when you  
have opened the gates you will go  through  them and never return. You are a 
ruffian and a highway-robber.' 
     Bill  Ferny flinched and shuffled to the gate and unlocked it. 'Give me 
the key!' said Merry. But  the ruffian flung it  at his head and then darted 
out into the darkness. As he  passed the ponies one of them let fly with his 
heels  and just caught him as he ran. He went off with a yelp into the night 
and was never heard of again. 
     'Neat work, Bill,' said Sam, meaning the pony. 
     'So much for your  Big Man,' said Merry. 'We'll see the Chief later. In 
the meantime we want a lodging for the night, and as you seem to have pulled 
down the Bridge Inn and built  this dismal place instead, you'll have to put 
us up.' 
     'I am sorry, Mr. Merry,' said Hob, 'but it isn't allowed.' 
     'What isn't allowed?' 
     Taking in folk off-hand like and eating extra food, and  all that, said 
Hob. 
     'What's the  matter  with the place?'  said Merry. 'Has it  been a  bad 

####-year, or what? I thought it had been a fine summer and harvest.' 
     'Well no, the year's been good enough,'  said  Hob. 'We grows a lot  of 
food,  but  we  don't  rightly  know what  becomes  of  it.  It's all  these 
"gatherers" and "sharers", I reckon, going round counting and measuring  and 
taking off to storage. They do more gathering than sharing, and we never see 
most of the stuff again.' 
     'Oh  come!' said  Pippin yawning.  'This  is all too  tiresome  for  me 
tonight.  We've  got food in our bags.  Just give  us a room to lie down in. 
It'll be better than many places I have seen.' 
     The hobbits at the gate still seemed ill  at  ease, evidently some rule 
or other was being broken;  but there was no gainsaying four such  masterful 
travellers, all armed, and two of them uncommonly  large and strong-looking. 
Frodo ordered the gates to be locked again. There was some sense at any rate 
in  keeping  a  guard,  while  ruffians  were  still about.  Then  the  four 
companions   went  into  the  hobbit  guard-house  and  made  themselves  as 
comfortable as they  could. It was a bare and ugly place, with a mean little 
grate that would not allow a good fire. In the upper  rooms were little rows 
of  hard  beds, and on every wall  there was  a notice and a list  of Rules. 
Pippin tore them down. There was no beer and very little food, but with what 
the travellers brought and shared out they all made a  fair meal; and Pippin 
broke Rule 4 by putting most of next day's allowance of wood on the fire. 
     'Well now,  what  about a  smoke,  while  you tell  us  what  has  been 
happening in the Shire?' he said. 
     'There isn't  no pipe-weed  now,' said  Hob; 'at  least  only  for  the 
Chief's  men. All the stocks seem to have gone. We do hear that waggon-loads 
of  it went away down the  old road out of the Southfarthing, over Sarn Ford 
way. That would  be the end  o' last year, after you left.  But it  had been 
going away quietly before that, in a small way. That Lotho--' 
     'Now you  shut up, Hob Hayward!' cried several of the others. 'You know 
talk o' that sor t isn't allowed. The Chief will hear of it, and we'll all be 
in trouble.' 
     'He wouldn't hear naught, if some of you here weren't sneaks,' rejoined 
Hob hotly. 
     'All right, all right!' said Sam. "That's quite enough. I don't want to 
hear no more. No welcome, no beer, no smoke, and a lot of rules and orc-talk 
instead.  I  hoped  to have a rest, but I can see there's work  and  trouble 
ahead. Let's sleep and forget it till morning!' 

####-     The new  'Chief' evidently had  means of getting news. It  was  a  good 
forty miles from  the Bridge to Bag End,  but someone made the journey  in a 
hurry. So Frodo and his friends soon discovered. 
     They had not made any definite plans, but  had vaguely thought of going  
down to Crickhollow together first, and resting there a bit. But now, seeing 
what things  were like, they decided to go straight to Hobbiton. So the next 
day they  set out  along  the Road and jogged  along  steadily. The wind had 
dropped but the sky was grey. The land looked rather sad and forlorn; bu t it 
was after all the first of  November and the fag-end of Autumn. Still  there 
seemed  an unusual  amount of burning  going  on, and  smoke rose  from many 
points  round  about.  A great cloud of  it  was  going up  far  away in the 
direction of the Woody End. 
     As evening fell they were  drawing near to  Frogmorton, a village right 
on the Road, about  twenty -two  miles  from the Bridge. There  they meant to 
stay  the night; The Floating Log at  Frogmorton was a good inn. But as they  
came to the  east  end of the village they met a barrier with  a large  board 
saying NO ROAD; and behind it stood a large band of Shirriffs with staves in 
their hands  and  feathers in their caps,  looking both important and rather  
scared. 
     'What's all this?' said Frodo, feeling inclined to laugh. 
     This is  what it is, Mr. Baggins, said  the leader  of the Shirriffs, a  
two-feather hobbit: 'You're arrested for  Gate-breaking,  and  Tearing up of 
Rules,  and  Assaulting  Gate-keepers,  and  Trespassing,  and  Sleeping  in 
Shire-buildings without Leave, and Bribing Guards with Food.' 
     'And what else?' said Frodo. 
     'That'll do to go on with,' said the Shirriff-leader. 
     'I  can add some more, if  you like it,' said Sam. 'Calling your  Chief 
Names, Wishing to punch his Pimply Face, and Thinking you  Shirriffs look  a  
lot of Tom-fools.' 
     'There now, Mister, that'll do.  It's the Chief's orders that you're to 
come  along quiet. We're going to  take you to Bywater and hand  you over to 
the Chief's Men; and when he deals with your case you can have your say. But 
if  you don't want  to  stay in the  Lockholes any longer than you  need,  I 
should cut the say short, if I was you.' 
     To  the  discomfiture  of  the Shirriffs  Frodo  and his companions all 
roared with laughter.  'Don't  be absurd!' said Frodo.  'I am  going where I 
please, and in my own time. I happen to be going to Bag End on business, but 

####-if you insist on going too, well that is your affair.' 
     'Very  well, Mr. Baggins,' said the  leader, pushing the barrier aside. 
'But don't forget I've arrested you.' 
     'I won't,'  said Frodo. 'Never.  But  I may forgive  you. Now I am  not 
going any  further today, so if you'll kindly escort me to The Floating Log, 
I'll be obliged.' 
     'I   can't  do   that,  Mr.  Baggins.  The  inn's   closed.  There's  a  
Shirriff-house at the far end of the village. I'll take you there. ' 
     'All right,' said Frodo. 'Go on and we'll follow.' 
     Sam had been looking the Shirriffs up and down and had spotted one that 
he knew.  'Hey, come here  Robin Smallburrow!' he called.  'I want a word with 
you.' 
     With a sheepish glance at his leader, who looked  wrathful but did  not  
dare to interfere, Shirriff Smallburrow fell back and walked beside Sam, who 
got down off his pony. 
     'Look here, Cock -robin!' said  Sam. 'You're Hobbiton-bred and ought  to 
have more sense,  coming a -waylaying Mr. Frodo and all.  And what's all this 
about the inn being closed?' 
     'They're all closed,' said Robin.  'The  Chief  doesn't hold with beer. 
Leastways  that is how it started. But now I reckon it's his Men that has it 
all.  And he  doesn't  hold with folk moving about; so if they  will or they 
must, then they has to go to the Shirriff-house and explain their business.' 
     'You  ought to   be ashamed of  yourself having anything to do with such 
nonsense,' said Sam. 'You used to like the inside of an inn better than  the 
outside yourself. You were always popping in, on duty or off.' 
     'And so I would be still,  Sam,  if I  could. But don't be  hard on me. 
What  can I  do? You know  how I went for a Shirriff seven years ago, before 
any of this began. Gave me a chance of walking round the  country and seeing 
folk, and hearing the news,  and knowing where the  good beer was.  But  now 
it's different.' 
     'But you can give it  up,  stop Shirriffing, if it has  stopped being a  
respectable job,' said Sam. 
     'We're not allowed to,' said Robin. 
     'If  I hear  not allowed much oftener,' said  Sam, 'I'm  going  to  get 
angry.' 
     'Can't say as I'd be sorry to see  it,'  said Robin lowering his voice. 
'If we  all got angry together something might be done. But  it's these Men, 

####-Sam, the Chief's Men. He sends them round everywhere, and if any of us small 
folk stand  up for our rights, they drag him off to the Lockholes. They took  
old Flourdumpling, old Will Whitfoot the Mayor,  first,  and they've taken a  
lot more. Lately it's been getting worse. Often they beat 'em now.' 
     'Then  why do you do their work far them?' said Sam  angrily. 'Who sent 
you to Frogmorton?' 
     'No one did. We stay  here in the big  Shirriff-house. We're the  First 
Eastfarthing Troop now. There's hundreds of Shirriffs all told and they want  
more, with  all these new rules. Most of them  are in it against their will, 
but not all. Even in  the Shire there are some as like  minding other folk's 
business and talking big. And there's worse than  that: there's a  few as do 
spy-work for the Chief and his Men.' 
     'Ah! So that's how you had news of us, is it?' 
     'That's right. We  aren't allowed to send by it  now, but they use  the 
old Quick Post service,  and keep  special runners at  different points. One 
came in  from  Whitfurrows  last  night with a "secret message", and another  
took it on from  here. And a message came back this afternoon saying you was 
to be  arrested and taken to Bywater, not direct to the Lockholes. The Chief 
wants to see you at once, evidently.' 
     'He won't be so eager when Mr. Frodo has finished with him,' said Sam. 
     The Shirriff-house at Frogmorton was as bad as the Bridge-house. It had 
only one storey,  but it  had the  same narrow windows, and it was built  of 
ugly pale bricks,  badly laid. Inside  it was damp and cheerless, and supper 
was served on a long  bare table that  had not been scrubbed  for weeks. The 
food  deserved no better  setting. The travellers  were  glad  to  leave the 
place.  It was about eighteen  miles to  Bywater,  and they  set off at  ten 
o'clock  in the morning. They  would have started earlier, only the delay so 
plainly annoyed the Shirriff-leader. The west wind had shifted northward and 
it was turning colder, but the rain was gone. 
     It was rather  a comic  cavalcade that left the village, though the few 
folk that came out to  stare at the  'get-up' of the travellers did not seem 
quite sure whether laughing was allowed. A dozen Shirriffs had been told off 
as escort to the  'prisoners'; but Merry made  them  march  in front,  while 
Frodo and his friends rode behind. Merry, Pippin, and  Sam sat at their ease 
laughing and talking  and singing, while the Shirriffs stumped along  trying 
to  look stern and important. Frodo, however, was  silent  and looked rather  
sad and thoughtful. 

####-     The last person  they passed was a sturdy  old gaffer clipping a hedge. 
'Hullo, hu llo!' he jeered. 'Now who's arrested who?' 
     Two of the Shirriffs immediately  left the  party and went towards him. 
'Leader!' said  Merry. 'Order your  fellows back to their places at once, if 
you don't want me to deal with them!' 
     The two hobbits at a sharp word from the leader came back sulkily. 'Now 
get on!' said Merry,  and after that  the  travellers  saw  to it that their 
ponies'  pace was quick enough to  push  the Shirriffs along as fast as they 
could go. The sun came out,  and in spite of the  chilly wind they were soon  
puffing and sweating. 
     At  the Three-Farthing  Stone they  gave  it  up.  They had done nearly 
fourteen  miles with only one rest  at noon. It was now three  o'clock. They 
were hungry and very footsore and they could not  stand the pace. 
     'Well, come along in your own time!' said Merry. 'We are going on.' 
     'Good-bye, Cock -robin!' said Sam. 'I'll wait for you outside  The Green 
Dragon, if you haven't forgotten where that is. Don't dawdle on the way!' 
     'You're  br eaking  arrest,  that's what you're doing,'  said the leader  
ruefully, 'and I can't be answerable.' 
     'We shall  break  a  good many things  yet, and not ask you to answer ' 
said Pippin. 'Good luck to you!' 
     The  travellers trotted on, and as the  sun began to  sink towards  the 
White Downs far away on the western horizon they came to Bywater by its 
wide 
pool; and there  they had their first really  painful shock. This  was Frodo 
and Sam's own country, and they found out  now that they cared about it  more 
than any other place in  the world. Many  of  the houses that they had known  
were missing. Some seemed to  have been burned down. The pleasant row of 
old 
hobbit-holes in the  bank on the north  side  of the Pool were deserted, and 
their little  gardens that used to run down bright to the water's  edge were 
rank with weeds. Worse,  there was a whole line  of the ugly new houses  all 
along Pool Side, where the Hobbiton Road ran close to the bank. An avenue of 
trees had stood there. They were all  gone.   And  looking with dismay up the 
road towards Bag  End they saw  a  tall chimney of brick in the distance. It 
was pouring out black smoke into the evening air. 
     Sam was beside himself. 'I'm going right on, Mr. Frodo!' he cried. 'I'm 
going to see what's up. I want to find my gaffer.' 

####-     'We  ought  to find  out first what we're in for, Sam,'  said Merry. 'I  
guess  that  the "Chief" will have a gang of ruffians handy.  We  had better  
find someone who will tell us how things are round here.' 
     But in the village of Bywater all  the houses and holes  were shut, and 
no  one greeted them. They wondered  at  this, but they soon  discovered the 
reason  of  it. When they  reached  The Green Dragon, the last house  on the 
Hobbiton side, now lifeless and with broken  windows, they were disturbed to 
see half a dozen  large ill-favoured Men lounging against the inn-wall; they 
were squint-eyed and sallow-faced. 
     'Like that friend of Bill Ferny's at Bree,' said Sam. 
     'Like many that I saw at Isengard,' muttered Merry. 
     The ruffians had clubs in their  hands  and  horns by their  belts, but 
they had no other weapons, as far as could be seen.  As the  travellers rode 
up they left the wall and walked into the road, blocking the way. 
     'Where d'you  think   you're  going?'  said  one,  the largest and  most  
evil-looking of the crew.  'There's no road for you any  further.  And where 
are those precious Shirriffs?' 
     'Coming along nicely,'  said  Merry.  'A  little  footsore, perhaps. We 
promised to wait for them here.' 
     'Garn, what did I  say?' said the ruffian to his mates. 'I told Sharkey 
it was no  good trusting those little fools. Some of our chaps ought to have 
been sent.' 
     'And  what difference would that have made,  pray?' said Merry. 'We are 
not used to footpads in this country, but we know how to deal with them.' 
     'Footpads, eh?'  said the man: 'So that's your tone, is  it? Change it, 
or we'll change  it for you.  You little folk are getting too  uppish. Don't  
you trust too much in the Boss's kind heart. Sharkey's come now and he'll do 
what Sharkey says.' 
     'And what may that be?' said Frodo quietly. 
     'This country wants waking up and setting to rights,' said the ruffian, 
'and Sharkey's going to do it; and make it hard, if you drive him to it. You  
need a  bigger Boss. And you'll get one  before the year is  out, if there's 
any more trouble. Then you'll learn a thing or two, you little rat-folk.' 
     'Indeed. I am glad to hear of your plans,' said Frodo. 'I am on  my way 
to call on Mr. Lotho, and he may be interested to hear of them too.' 
     The ruffian laughed. 'Lotho! He knows all right. Don't you worry. He'll 
do what  Sharkey says. Because if a  Boss  gives trouble, we can change him. 

####-See? And if little folks try to push in where they're not wanted, we can put 
them out of mischief. See?' 
     'Yes, I see,' said Frodo.  'For one thing, I see that you're behind the 
times  and the news here. Much has happened  since you  left the South. Your 
day is over, and all other ruffians'. The Dark Tower has  fallen, and  there 
is  a  King in  Gondor. And  Isengard has been destroyed,  and your precious 
master is  a beggar in  the wilderness. I passed him on the road. The King's 
messengers will ride up the Greenway now not bullies from Isengard. ' 
     The  man stared at him  and smiled.  'A  beggar in  the wilderness!' he 
mocked.  'Oh, is he  indeed? Swagger it, swagger it, my little cock -a -whoop.  
But that won't  stop us  living  in this fat  little country  where you have 
lazed long enough. And' - he snapped his fingers in Frodo's face   -  'King's 
messengers! That for them! When I see one, I'll take notice, perhaps.' 
     This was too much for  Pippin. His thoughts  went back to  the Field of 
Cormallen, and here was a squint-eyed rascal calling the Ring-bearer  'little 
cock -a -whoop'. He cast back his cloak, flashed out his sword, and the silver  
and sable of Gondor gleamed on him as he rode forward. 
     'I  am a  messenger of  the  King,' he  said. 'You are speaking  to the 
King's friend,  and one  of the most renowned in all the lands  of the West. 
You are a ruffian and a fool. Down on your knees in the road and ask pardon, 
or I will set this troll's bane in you!' 
     The sword glinted in the westering sun. Merry and Sam drew their swords 
also a nd rode  up to support  Pippin;  but Frodo did  not move. The ruffians 
gave back. Scaring  Breeland peasants, and  bullying bewildered hobbits, had 
been their work. Fearless  hobbits with  bright swords and grim faces were a  
great surprise.  And there  was a note in the voices of these newcomers that 
they had not heard before. It chilled them with fear. 
     'Go!'  said Merry. 'If you trouble this  village again, you will regret 
it.'  The three  hobbits  came  on, and then  the ruffians  turned and  fled 
running away up the Hobbiton Road; but they blew their horns as they ran. 
     'Well, we've come back none too soon,' said Merry. 
     'Not a day too soon. Perhaps too late, at any rate to save Lotho,' said 
Frodo. 'Miserable fool, but I am sorry for him.' 
     'Save Lotho? Whatever do you mean?' said Pippin. 'Destroy  him I should 
say.' 
     'I don't think you quite understand things, Pippin,' said Frodo. 'Lotho 
never meant things to come to this pass. He has been a wicked fool, but he's 

####-caught now. The  ruffians are on top, gathering, robbing  and bullying,  and 
running or ruining things  as they  like, in his name.  And not  in his name 
even for much longer. He's a  prisoner in Bag  End  now,  I expect, and very 
frightened. We ought to try and rescue him.' 
     'Well I  am staggered!' said  Pippin.  'Of all the ends to  our journey 
that is the very last I should  have thought  of: to have to fight half-orcs 
and ruffians in the Shire itself - to rescue Lotho Pimple!' 
     'Fight?'  said  Frodo.  'Well,  I  suppose it  may  come  to  that. But 
remember: there is to be  no  slaying of hobbits, not even if they have gone 
over to the other side. Really gone over, I mean; not just obeying ruffians' 
orders  because they  are  frightened.  No hobbit has ever killed another on  
purpose in the Shire, and it is not to begin now. And nobody is to be killed 
at all,  if it  can be helped. Keep your tempers and hold your hands  to the 
last possible moment!' 
     'But  if  there  are many of  these  ruffians,'  said  Merry,  'it will 
certainly mean fighting. You won't rescue Lotho, or the Shire, just by being 
shocked and sad, my dear Frodo.' 
     'No,'  said Pippin. 'It  won't be  so easy scaring them  a second time. 
They were taken by  surprise. You heard  that horn-blowing? Ev idently  there 
are other ruffians near at hand. They'll be much bolder when there's more of 
them together. We ought  to think of taking cover somewhere for  the  night. 
After all we're only four, even if we are armed.' 
     'I've an idea,' said  Sam.  'Let's go  to old  Tom Cotton's down  South 
Lane! He  always was a  stout fellow. And he has a lot of lads that were all 
friends of mine.' 
     'No!'  said Merry.  'It's  no good "getting under cover".  That is just  
what people have been  doing, and just what these  ruffians like.  They will 
simply come  down on us in force, corner us, and  then drive us out, or burn 
us in. No, we have got to do something at once.' 
     'Do what?' said Pippin. 
     'Raise the Shire!' said Merry. 'Now! Wake all our people! They hate all 
this, you can  see: all of them except perhaps one or two rascals, and a few 
fools that want to be important, but  don't at all understand what is really 
going  on. But Shire-folk have  been  so comfortable so long they don't know 
what to  do. They just want  a match, though, and they'll go up in fire. The 
Chief's Men must know that. They'll try to stamp on us and put us out quick. 
We've only got a very short time. 

####-     'Sam, you can make  a  dash for  Cotton's  farm, if  you like. He's the 
chief person round here,  and the sturdiest. Come on! I am going to blow the 
horn of Rohan, and give them all some music they have never heard before.' 
     They rode back to the middle of the village. There Sam turned aside and 
galloped off down the  lane that led south to Cotton's.  He had not gone far 
when he heard a sudden clear horn-call go up ringing  into the sky. Far over  
hill and field it echoed; and  so compelling  was that call that Sam himself 
almost turned and dashed back. His pony reared and neighed. 
     'On, lad! On!' he cried. 'We'll be going back soon.' 
     Then  he heard  Merry  change the  note, and  up went the  Horn-cry  of 
Buckland, shaking the air. 
     Awake! Awake! Fear, Fire, Foes! Awake! 
     Fire, Foes! Awake! 
     Behind him Sam heard a hubbub of voices and a great din and slamming of 
doors. In front of him lights sprang out in  the gloaming; dogs barked; feet 
came running. Before he got  to the lane's end there was Farmer Cotton  with 
three  of his lads, Young Tom,  Jolly, and Nick,  hurrying towards him. They 
had axes in their hands, and barred the way. 
     'Nay! It's not one of them ruffians,' Sam heard the farmer say. 'It's a  
hobbit by the size of it, but all dressed up queer. Hey!' he cried. 'Who are 
you, and what's all this to-do? ' 
     'It's Sam, Sam Gamgee. I've come back.' 
     Farmer Cotton came up close  and stared at him in the twilight. 'Well!' 
he exclaimed. 'The voice is right, and your face is  no worse  than  it was,  
Sam. But  I should a' passed you in the street in that gear. You've been  in 
foreign parts, seemingly. We feared you were dead.' 
     'That I ain't!'  said Sam.  'Nor Mr. Frodo. He's here and  his friends. 
And  that's  the to-do. They're raising the Shire. We're going to clear  out 
these ruffians, and their Chief too. We're starting now.' 
     'Good, good!' cried Farmer Cotton.  'So  it's  begun at last! I've been 
itching for trouble all this year, but folks wouldn't help. And I've had the 
wife  and Rosie to think of. These ruffians don't stick at nothing. But come 
on now, lads! Bywater is up! We must be in it!' 
     'What about Mrs.  Cotton and Rosie?' said Sam. 'It  isn't safe  yet for  
them to be left all alone.' 
     'My Nibs  is  with them. But you  can  go and help him,  if you  have a  
mind,' said Farmer Cotton with a grin. Then  he and his sons ran off towards 

####-the village. 
     Sam hurried  to  the house. By the  large round  door at the top of the 
steps  from the wide yard stood  Mrs. Cotton and Rosie, and Nibs in front of 
them grasping a hay-fork. 
     'It's  me!' shouted Sam  as he trotted up.  'Sam Gamgee! So  don't  try 
prodding me, Nibs. Anyway, I've a mail -shirt on me.' 
     He  jumped down from his pony and went up the steps. They stared at him 
in silence.  'Good evening, Mrs. Cotton!' he said.  'Hullo Rosie!' 
     'Hullo, Sam!' said Rosie. 'Where've you been I They said you were dead;  
but I've been expecting you since the Spring. You haven't hurried have you?' 
     'Perhaps  not,'  said Sam abashed. 'But I'm hurrying now. We're setting 
about the ruffians, and I've got to get back to Mr. Frodo. But I thought I'd 
have a look and see how Mrs. Cotton was keeping, and you, Rosie.' 
     'We're keeping nicely, thank you,' said Mrs. Cotton.  'Or should be, if 
it weren't for these thieving ruffians.' 
     'Well, be  off with you!' said Rosie. 'If you've been looking after Mr. 
Frodo all this while, what d'you want  to leave  him for, as soon  as things 
look dangerous?' 
     This  was  too much  for Sam. It  needed a  week's answer, or none.  He 
turned away and mounted his pony. But as he started off, Rosie  ran down the 
steps. 
     'I think you look fine, Sam,'  she  said. 'Go on now! But  take care of 
yourself, and come straight back as soon as you have settled the ruffians!' 
     When  Sam  got back  he found the  whole village roused. Already, apart  
from many younger lads,  more  than a hundred sturdy hobbits were  assembled 
with axes, and heavy  hammers, and  long knives, and stout staves: and a few 
had hunting-bows. More were still coming in from outlying farms. 
     Some of the village-folk had lit  a large fire, just to enliven things,  
and also because it was one of the things forbidden by the Chief. It  burned 
bright as  night came on. Others at Merry's orders  were setting up barriers 
across the road at each end of the  village. When  the Shirriffs  came up to 
the lower  one  they were  dumbfounded; but  as soon as they saw how  things 
were, most of  them took off  their  feathers and joined in  the revolt. The 
others slunk away. 
     Sam found Frodo and his friends by the  fire talking to old Tom Cotton, 
while an admiring crowd of Bywater folk stood round and stared. 
     'Well, what's the next move?' said Farmer Cotton. 

####-     'I  can't  say,'  said Frodo, 'until  I  know more. How  many  of these 
ruffians are there?' 
     'That's  hard  to tell,' said  Cotton. 'They moves  about and comes and 
goes. There's  sometimes  fifty of them  in their sheds up Hobbiton way; but 
they go out  from there roving round,  thieving  or "gathering" as they call 
it. Still there's seldom  less  than a score  round the  Boss, as they names 
him. He's at Bag End, or was; but he don't go outside the rounds now. No one 
s seen him at all, in fact, for a week or two; but the Men  don't let no one 
go near.' 
     'Hobbiton's not their only place, is it?' said Pippin. 
     'No, more's the pity,' said Cotton. 'There's a  good few down south  in 
Longbottom and by Sarn Ford, I hear; and some more lurking in the Woody 
End; 
and they've sheds at Waymeet.  And then there's  the Lockholes, as they call  
'em:  the old  storage-tunnels  at  Michel Delving  that  they've made  into 
prisons  for  those as stand up to  them. Still I  reckon there's  not above 
three hundred of  them in the Shire all told, and  maybe less. We can master  
them, if we stick together.' 
     'Have they got any weapons?' asked Merry. 
     'Whips,  knives, and  clubs, enough for their dirty  work:  that's  all 
they've showed so far,' said Cotton. 'But I dare say they've got other gear, 
if it comes to fighting. Some have bows, anywa y. They've shot one or two  of 
our folk.' 
     'There  you are, Frodo!' said Merry. 'I knew we should have  to  fight. 
Well, they started the killing.' 
     'Not exactly,' said Cotton. 'Leastways not the  shooting. Tooks started 
that. You see our dad Mr. Peregrin, he's never had no truck with this Lotho, 
not  from the beginning: said that if anyone was going to play the chief  at 
this time of day,  it would  be the right Thain of the Shire and no upstart. 
And when Lotho sent his Men they got no  change out of him. Tooks are lucky, 
they've got those deep holes in the Green Hills,  the Great  Smials and all, 
and the  ruffians can't come at 'em; and they won't let the ruffians come on 
their land.  If they  do, Tooks hunt  'em. Tooks shot three for prowling and 
robbing.  After  that the  ruffians turned nastier. And they  keep  a pretty 
close watch on Tookland. No one gets in nor out of it now.' 
     'Good  for the  Tooks!' cried Pippin.  'But someone is going  to get in 
again, now. I am off to the Smials. Anyone coming with me to Tuckborough?' 

####-     Pippin rode off with half  a dozen lads on ponies.  'See you soon!'  he 
cried. 'It's only  fourteen miles or so over the fields. I'll bring you back  
an army of Tooks in the morning.' Merry blew  a horn-call after them as they 
rode off into the gathering night. The people cheered. 
     'All the same,' said Frodo to all those who stood near, 'I wish for  no 
killing; not even of the ruffians, unless  it must be done, to  prevent them 
from hurting hobbits.' 
     'All right! '  said Merry.  'But  we shall be having  a visit  from  the 
Hobbiton gang any time  now, I  think. They  won't come just to  talk things 
over.  We'll try to deal with them  neatly, but  we must be prepared for the 
worst. Now I've got a plan.' 
     'Very good,' said Frodo. 'You make the arrangements.' 
     Just  then  some hobbits, who had  been sent out towards Hobbiton, came 
running in. 'They're coming!' they said. 'A score or more. But two have gone  
off west across country.' 
     'To Waymeet, that'll be, ' said  Cotton,  'to fetch  more  of  the gang. 
Well, it's fifteen mile each way. We needn't trouble about them just yet.' 
     Merry  hurried off to  give orders. Farmer Cotton cleared  the  street, 
sending everyone indoors, except the  older  hobbits who  had weapons of some 
sort. They had not long to wait. Soon they could hear loud  voices, and then  
the  tramping  of heavy feet. Presently  a whole squad of the  ruffians came 
down  the  road. They saw the barrier and laughed. They did not imagine that 
ther e  was anything in  this little  land  that would stand up to  twenty of 
their kind together. 
     The hobbits  opened the barrier and stood aside.  'Thank you!' the  Men 
jeered. 'Now run home to bed before you're whipped.' Then they marched along 
the street  shouting: 'Put those lights out! Get indoors  and stay there! Or 
we'll take fifty  of you  to the Lockholes for  a year. Get in!  The Boss is 
losing his temper.' 
     No one paid any heed to their orders; but as the  ruffians passed, they 
closed in  qu ietly behind and followed them.  When the  Men reached the fire 
there was Farmer Cotton standing all alone warming his hands. 
     'Who  are   you,  and  what   d'you   think  you're  doing?'  said  the 
ruffian-leader. 
     Farmer Cotton looked at him slowly. 'I was just going to ask you that,' 
he said. 'This isn't your country, and you're not wanted.' 
     'Well, you're wanted  anyhow,' said the leader. 'We want you.  Take him 

####-lads! Lockholes for him, and give him something to keep him quiet!' 
     The Men took one step forward  and stopped short. There rose a  roar of 
voices all round them,  and suddenly  they were aware that Farmer Cotton was 
not  all  alone. They  were surrounded.  In  the dark  on  the  edge  of the 
firelight stood a ring  of hobbits  that had crept  up out  of  the shadows. 
There was nearly two hundred of them, all holding some weapon. 
     Merry stepped  forward. 'We have met before,' he  said  to  the leader, 
'and I warned you not to come  back here. I warn you again: you are standing 
in  the  light and you are covered  by archers. If you lay a finger on  this 
farmer, or on anyone  else, you will be  shot at once.  Lay down any weapons 
that you have!' 
     The leader looked round. He was trapped. But he was not scared, not now 
with a score of his fellows to  back  him.  He knew too little of hobbits to 
understand his peril.  Foolishly he  decided to  fight. It  would be easy to 
break out. 
     'At 'em lads!' he cried. 'Let 'em have it!' 
     With a  long knife in his left hand and a  club in  the other he made a  
rush  at the  ring, trying  to burst out back towards Hobbiton.  He aimed  a  
savage blow at Merry who stood in his way.  He fell dead with four arrows in 
him: 
     That was enough for the others.  They gave in. Their weapons were taken  
from them, and they were roped  together,  and marched  off to  an empty hut 
that they had built themselves, and there they were tied hand  and foot, and 
locked up under guard. The dead leader was dragged off and buried. 
     'Seems almost too easy  after all, don't it?' said Cotton.  'I said  we 
could master them. But we needed a call. You came  back in the nick o' time, 
Mr. Merry.' 
     'There's more to be done still,' said Merry. 'If  you're  right in your 
reckoning, we haven't dealt with a tithe of them yet. But it's  dark now.  I 
think the  next stroke must  wait  until morning. Then  we must  call on the 
Chief.' 
     'Why not  now?' said Sam.  'It's not much more than  six o'clock. And I 
want to see my gaffer. D'you know what's come of him, Mr. Cotton?' 
     'He's not too  well,  and not too bad, Sam,' said the farmer. 'They dug 
up Bagshot Row, and that  was a sad blow  to  him. He's in one of  them  new 
houses that  the Chief's Men  used to  build while  they still did any  work 
other than burning and thieving:  not  above a mile from the end of Bywater. 

####-But he comes around to me, when he gets a chance,  and I see he's better fed 
than some of the poor bodies. All against The Rules, of course. I'd have had 
him with me, but that wasn't allowed.' 
     'Thank'ee indeed, Mr. Cotton, and I'll never forget it,' said Sam. 'But 
I want to see him. That Boss and that Sharkey, as they  spoke of, they might  
do a mischief up there before the morning.' 
     'All right, Sam,' said Cotton.  'Choose a  lad or two, and go and fetch 
him to my  house. You'll not have need to  go near the old  Hobbiton village 
over Water. My Jolly here will show you.' 
     Sam went off. Merry arranged for look -outs round the village and guards 
at  the barriers during  the  night. Then he and Frodo went off with  Farmer  
Cotton. They sat with  the family in the warm kitchen, and the Cottons asked 
a  few polite  questions about  their travels,  but hardly  listened  to the 
answers: they were far more concerned with events in the Shire. 
     'It all began with Pimple, as we call him,' said Farmer Cotton; 'and it 
began as soon as you'd  gone off, Mr. Frodo.  He'd funny  ideas had  Pimple. 
Seems he wanted to own everything himself, and  then order other folk about. 
It soon came out that he already did own a sight more than was good for him; 
and  he was  always grabbing  more, though  where he got  the  money  was  a  
mystery:  mills and malt-houses and  inns,  and farms, and leaf-plantations.  
He'd already bought Sandyman's mill before he came to Bag End, seemingly. 
     'Of course he started with a lot of property in the Southfarthing which 
he had from his dad; and it seems he'd been selling a  lot o' the best leaf,  
and sending it away quietly for a year or two.  But at the end o'  last year 
he began sending away  loads of  stuff,  not only leaf. Things  began to get 
short, and winter coming on, too. Folk got angry, but  he had his answer.  A 
lot of Men, ruffians mostly,  came with great waggons, some to carry off the 
goods south-away,  and  others  to stay. And  more came.  And before we knew 
where we were they were planted here  and there all over the Shire, and were 
felling trees  and digging and building themselves sheds and houses just  as 
they liked. At first goods and damage was paid  for by Pimple; but soon they 
began lording it around and taking what they wanted. 
     'Then there was a bit  of trouble,  but not  enough. Old Will the Mayor  
set off for  Bag End to protest, but he never got there. Ruffians laid hands 
on him  and took and locked him up in a hole in Michel Delving, and there he 
is  now.  And after that, it  would bc soon after New Year,  there wasn't no 
more Mayor, and Pimple called himself Chief Shirriff, or just Chief, and did 

####-as  he liked; and  if anyone  got "uppish" as  they called it, they followed 
Will. So things went from bad to worse. There wasn't no smoke left, save for 
the Men;  and the  Chief didn't hold with beer, save for his Men, and closed 
all the inns;  and everything except Rules got  shorter and  shorter, unless 
one could hide a bit  of one's own  when the ruffians  went  round gathering 
stuff  up "for fair  distribution": which meant  they got it  and we didn't, 
except for the leavings which you could have at the Shirriff-houses,  if you  
could  stomach them.  All  very bad.  But since Sharkey came it's been plain  
ruination.' 
     'Who is this Sharkey?'  said Merry. 'I heard  one of the ruffians speak 
of him.' 
     'The biggest  ruffian o' the lot, seemingly,' answered  Cotton. 'It was 
about last harvest,  end o'  September maybe,  that  we first heard of  him. 
We've never seen him, but he's up at Bag End; and he's the real Chief now, I  
guess.  All the ruffians  do what he says; and what he says is mostly  hack, 
burn, and ruin; and now it s come to killing. There s  no longer even any bad 
sense in it. They cut down trees and let 'em lie, they burn houses and build 
no more. 
     'Take Sandyman's mill now. Pimple  knocked it down almost as soon as he 
came to Bag End. Then he  brought in a lot o' dirty-looking Men  to  build a  
bigger one and fill it full o' wheels and outlandish contraptions. Only that 
fool Ted was pleased by  that, and he works  there  cleaning  wheels for the 
Men, where his dad was the  Miller and his own master.  Pimple's idea was to 
grind  more  and faster, or  so he said. He's got other mills  like  it. But 
you've got to have grist before you can grind; and there was no more for the 
new mill to do than for the  old. But since Sharkey came they don't grind no 
more corn at all. They're always a -hammering and a -letting out a smoke and a  
stench, and there isn't no peace even at night  in  Hobbiton.  And they pour 
out filth a  purpose; they've  fouled all  the lower Water  and it's getting 
down into Brandywine. If they want to make the Shire into a desert,  they're 
going the right way about it. I don't believe that fool of a Pimple's behind 
all this. It's Sharkey, I say.' 
     'That's right!' put in Young Tom. 'Why, they even took Pimple's old ma, 
that  Lobelia, and he was  fond  of her,  if no one  else was.  Some  of the 
Hobbiton folk, they  saw it. She  comes down the lane with her old umbrella. 
Some of the ruffians were going up with a big cart. 
     ' "Where be you a -going?" says she. 

####-     ' "To Bag End," says they. 
     ' "What for?" says she. 
     ' "To put up some sheds for Sharkey," says they. 
     ' "Who said you could?" says she. 
     ' "Sharkey," says they. "So get out o' the road, old hagling!" 
     '  "I'll give you Sharkey, you dirty thieving ruffians!" says  she, and 
ups with  her umbrella and goes for the leader. near twice her size. So they 
took  her. Dragged her off  to the Lockholes, at her age  too.  They've took  
others we miss more, but  there's no  denying she  showed  more  spirit than 
most.' 
     Into the middle of this talk came Sam, bursting in with his gaffer. Old 
Gamgee did not look much older, but he was a little deafer. 
     'Good evening. Mr. Baggins!' he said. 'Glad indeed I am to see you safe 
back. But  I've  a bone to pick with you, in a manner  o' speaking, if I may 
make so bold. You didn't never ought  to  have a' sold Bag End, as  I always 
said. That's what started all the mischief. And while you're been trapessing 
in foreign parts, chasing  Black Men  up  mountains from  what my  Sam says,  
though what for he don't make clear, they've been and dug up Bagshot Row and 
ruined my taters!' 
     'I  am very  sorry, Mr.  Gamgee,' said Frodo. 'But now I've  come back, 
I'll do my best to make amends.' 
     'Well,  you  can't say  fairer than that,' said  the gaffer. 'Mr. Frodo 
Baggins  is a real gentlehobbit, I always have said, whatever  you may think  
of some others of the name, begging your pardon. And I hope my Sam's 
behaved 
hisself and given satisfaction?' 
     'Perfect satisfaction, Mr. Gamgee,'  said Frodo. 'Indeed,  if you  will 
believe it, he's  now one of the most famous  people  in all  the lands, and 
they are making songs about his deeds from  here to  the Sea and beyond  the 
Great River.' Sam blushed,  but he looked gratefully at Frodo,  for  Rosie's 
eyes were shining and she was smiling at him. 
     'It takes a lot o' believing,' said  the gaffer, 'though I can see he's 
been mixing in strange company. What's come of his weskit? I don't hold with 
wearing ironmongery, whether it wears well or no.' 
     Farmer  Cotton's household  and  all  his  guests  were  up  early next 
morning. Nothing  had  been  heard  in  the  night, but more  trouble  would 
certainly  come before the  day was old.  'Seems as if none o' the  ruffians 

####-were left  up at Bag End,' said Cotton; 'but  the gang from Waymeet will  be 
along any time now.' 
     After breakfast  a messenger from the Tookland rode in. He was in  high  
spirits. 'The Thain has raised  all our country,' he said, 'and the news  is 
going like fire all ways. The ruffians that were watching our land have fled 
off south, those that escaped alive. The  Thain has gone after them, to hold 
off the big gang down  that way; but he's sent Mr Peregrin back with all the 
other folk he can spare.' 
     The next news  was less good. Merry, who had been out  all  night, came 
riding in about ten  o'clock. 'There's a big band about four miles away,' he 
said.  'They're  coming along the  road from Waymeet, but a good many  stray 
ruffians have joined up with them. There must be close on a hundred of them; 
and they're fire-raising as they come. Curse them!' 
     'Ah! This  lot  won't stay to  talk, they'll kill, if they  can,'  said 
Farmer  Cotton.  'If Tooks don't come sooner, we'd best get behind cover and 
shoot without  arguing.  There's  got to  be  some  fighting  before this is 
settled, Mr. Frodo.' 
     The  Tooks  did come sooner.  Before long  they  marched in, a  hundred  
strong,  from  Tuckborough and  the Green Hills with  Pippin at their  head. 
Merry now  had  enough  sturdy  hobbitry to deal with  the  ruffians. Scouts 
reported  that  they  were  keeping  close  together.  They  knew  that  the 
countryside had risen against  them,  and  plainly  meant  to  deal with the 
rebellion ruthlessly, at its centre in Bywater. But however grim they, might 
be, they  seemed to have  no leader among  them who understood warfare. 
They 
came on without any precautions. Merry laid his plans quickly. 
     The ruffians  came tramping along  the  East Road, and  without halting 
turned up the Bywater Road,  which ran for  some way sloping up between 
high 
banks with low hedges on top. Round a bend,  about a  furlong from  the main 
road, they met a stout barrier of old farm-carts upturned. That halted them. 
At the same  moment they  became aware that  the hedges on  both sides,  just 
above their  heads, were all lined with hobbits. Behind them  other  hobbits 
now pushed out  some more waggons  that had  been  hidden in a field, and so 
blocked the way back. A voice spoke to them from above. 
     'Well, you  have walked into a trap, '  said Merry. 'Your  fellows  from 
Hobbiton did the same, and one is dead and the  rest are prisoners. Lay down 

####-your weapons! Then  go  back twenty paces and sit down. Any who try to 
break 
out will be shot.' 
     But  the ruffians could  not now  be  cowed  so easily.  A few of  them 
obeyed, but were immediately set on  by their fellows. A score or more broke 
back  and  charged the waggons. Six were shot, but the  remainder burst out, 
killing two hobbits, and then  scattering across country in the direction of 
the  Woody End. Two more fell as they ran.  Merry blew a loud horn-call, and 
there were answering calls from a distance. 
     'They won't get far,' said  Pippin. 'All that country is alive with our 
hunters now.' 
     Behind,  the trapped Men in the lane,  still about four score, tried to 
climb the barrier and the banks, and the hobbits were obliged  to shoot many  
of them or hew them with axes. But many of the strongest and  most desperate 
got out on the west side, and  attacked  their enemies  fiercely ,  being now 
more  bent on killing than escaping. Several hobbits fell, and the rest were 
wavering, when Merry and Pippin,  who were on the east side, came across and 
charged  the ruffians. Merry himself slew  the  leader, a  great squint -eyed 
brute like  a huge orc.  Then he drew  his forces off,  encircling the  last 
remnant of the Men in a wide ring of archers. 
     At last all  was over.  Nearly  seventy of the ruffians lay dead on the 
field, and a dozen  were prisoners. Nineteen hobbits  were killed, a nd  some 
thirty were wounded. The dead  ruffians were laden on waggons and hauled off 
to an  old sand-pit nearby and there buried:  in the Battle  Pit, as it  was 
afterwards called. The fallen hobbits were  laid together in a grave on  the 
hill-side,  wher e later a great  stone was set up with a garden about it. So 
ended the  Battle of Bywater, 1419, the last battle fought in the Shire, and 
the  only battle since the  Greenfields, 1147, away up in the Northfarthing. 
In consequence, though it happily cost very few lives, it has a  chapter  to 
itself in the Red Book, and  the names of all those  who took part were made 
into a Roll, and learned by heart by Shire-historians. The very considerable 
rise in the fame and fortune of the Cottons dates from this time; but at the 
top of the Roll  in all  accounts  stand the names of  Captains Meriadoc and 
Peregrin. 
     Frodo had been in the battle, but he had not drawn sword, and his chief 
part had  been to prevent the hobbits  in their wrath at  their losses, from 
slaying those  of  their enemies who  threw  down  their  weapons. When  the 

####-fighting  was over,  and  the later labours were ordered, Merry, Pippin, and 
Sam joined him, and  they rode back with the Cottons. They ate a late midday 
meal, and then Frodo said with a  sigh: 'Well, I suppose it is time now that 
we dealt with the "Chief".' 
     'Yes indeed; the  sooner the better,'  said  Merry.  'And don't be  too 
gentle! He's  responsible  for bringing  in these ruffians, and  for all the 
evil they have done.' 
     Farmer Cotton  collected an escort  of some two  dozen  sturdy hobbits. 
'For it's only a guess that  there is no ruffians left at Bag End,' he said. 
'We don't know.' Then  they set out  on foot. Frodo, Sam,  Merry, and Pippin 
led the way. 
     It was one of the saddest hours  in their lives. The great chimney rose 
up  before them;  and as  they drew  near the old  village across the Water, 
through rows of new  mean houses along each side of the  road, they saw  the 
new mill in all its  frowning and  dirty ugliness:  a  great  brick building 
straddling  the  stream, which  it  fouled  with  a  steaming  and  stinking 
overflow. All along the Bywater Road every tree had been felled. 
     As  they crossed the bridge  and looked up the Hill  they  gasped. Even 
Sam's vision in the Mirror  had not prepared  him for what they saw. The Old 
Grange  on the  west side had been knocked down, and its place taken by rows 
of tarred sheds. All the chestnuts were gone. The  banks and  hedgerows were 
broken. Great  waggons wer e standing in  disorder in  a field beaten bare of 
grass. Bagshot  Row was a yawning sand and gravel quarry. Bag End up. 
beyond 
could not be seen for a clutter of large huts. 
     'They've cut it down!' cried Sam. 'They've cut down the Party Tree!' He 
pointed to where the tree. had stood under which Bilbo had made his Farewell 
Speech. It was lying lopped and  dead in the field. As if this was the  last 
straw Sam burst into tears. 
     A laugh put an end to them. There was a surly hobbit lounging over  the 
low wall of the  mill-yard. He was grimy -faced and  black -handed.  'Don't  'ee 
like it, Sam?'  he sneered. 'But  you always  was soft. I thought you'd gone  
off in  one o' them ships  you used to prattle about, sailing, sailing. What 
d'you want to come back for? We've work to do in the Shire now.' 
     'So I see,' said Sam. 'No time for washing, but time for wall-propping. 
But  see here,  Master  Sandyman,  I've a score to pay in this village,  and 
don't you make it any longer with your  jeering, or you'll  foot a bill  too 

####-big for your purse.' 
     Ted Sandyman spat over the wall: 'Garn!' he said. 'You can't touch  me.  
I'm  a friend o'  the  Boss's. But he'll touch you all right, if I have  any 
more of your mouth.' 
     'Don't  waste any more words  on  the  fool, Sam!' said Frodo. 'I  hope 
there are not many more hobbits that have become like  this.  It  would be a  
worse trouble than all the damage the Men have done.' 
     'You are dirty and insolent, Sandyman,' said Merry. 'And also very much 
out of your reckoning. We are just going up the Hill to remove your precious 
Boss. We have dealt with his Men.' 
     Ted gaped, for at  that moment he first caught sight of the escort that 
at a sign from Merry now marched over the bridge. Dashing back into the mill 
he ran out with a horn and blew it loudly. 
     'Save your breath!' laughed Merry. 'I've a better.' Then lifting up his 
silver horn he winded it, and its clear call rang  over the Hill; and out of 
the  holes and sheds and shabby houses of Hobbiton the hobbits answered, and 
came pouring out, and  with cheers and loud cries they followed  the company 
up the road to Bag End. 
     At the top of the lane the party halted, and Frodo and his friends went 
on; and they came at  last to the once beloved place. The garden wa s full of 
huts and sheds, some so near the old westward windows that  they cut off all 
their  light. There were piles of refuse everywhere. The door  was  scarred; 
the bell-chain  was dangling  loose, and the bell would not  ring.  Knocking 
brought no answer. At length they pushed and the door yielded. They went in. 
The  place stank  and was  full of filth and  disorder: it did not appear to 
have been used for some time. 
     'Where  is that miserable Lotho hiding?' said Merry. They  had searched 
every room  and found no living thing save rats and  mice. 'Shall we turn on 
the others to search the sheds?' 
     'This is  worse than Mordor!' said Sam. 'Much worse in  a way. It comes 
home to you, as  they say; because it is home, and you remember it before it  
was all ruined.' 
     'Yes,  this is Mordor,' said Frodo. 'Just one of its works. Saruman was 
doing  its  work all  the time,  even  when he  thought  he was working  for  
himself. And the same with those that Saruman tricked, like Lotho.' 
     Merry looked round in dismay and disgust. 'Let's get out!' he said. 'If 
I had known all the  mischief he had caused, I should  have stuffed my pouch 

####-down Saruman's throat.' 
     'No doubt, no doubt! But you did not, and so I  am  able to welcome you  
home.' There standing at the  door was Saruman himself, looking well -fed and 
well-pleased; his eyes gleamed with malice and amusement. 
     A sudden light broke on Frodo. 'Sharkey!' he cried. 
     Saruman laughed.  'So you have heard the name, have you? All  my people 
used to call me that in Isengard, I believe. A sign of affection, possibly.( 
But evidently you did not expect to see me here.' 
     'I did not,' said Frodo. 'But I might  have guessed.  A little mischief 
in a mean way: Gandalf warned me that you were still capable of it. 
     'Quite  capable,'  said Saruman, 'and more  than a little. You  made me 
laugh, you hobbit-lordlings, riding  along with  all  those  great people so 
secure and so pleased with your little selves. You thought you had done very 
well out of it a ll, and could now just amble back and have a nice quiet time 
in the country. Saruman's home could  be all wrecked, and he could be turned 
out, but no one could touch  yours. Oh  no!  Gandalf would look  after  your  
affairs.' 
     Saruman laughed  again. 'Not he! When his tools have done their task he 
drops them. But you must  go dangling  after him,  dawdling and talking, and 
riding round twice as far as you needed. "Well," thought I, "if they're such  
fools, I  will  get ahead of them and  teach  them  a  lesson.  One ill turn 
deserves another." It  would  have been  a  sharper lesson, if  only you had 
given  me a  little  more time and more Men. Still  I have already done much  
that you will  find  it hard to mend or undo in your lives. And  it  will be 
plea sant to think of that and set it against my injuries.' 
     'Well, if that is what you find  pleasure in,' said Frodo, 'I pity you. 
It will be a pleasure of memory only, I fear. Go at once and never return!' 
     The hobbits of the villages  had  seen Saruman  come out of one  of the 
huts, and at once they came crowding up  to  the door of  Bag End. When they 
heard Frodo's command, they murmured angrily: 
     'Don't let him go! Kill him! He's a villain and a murderer. Kill him!' 
     Saruman looked round at their hostile faces and smiled. 'Kill  him!' he 
mocked. 'Kill him, if you think there  are enough of you, my brave hobbits!' 
He drew himself  up and stared at them darkly  with his black eyes.  'But do 
not think that when I lost all my goods I lost all my power! Whoever strikes 
me shall  be accursed. And if my blood stains the Shire, it shall wither and 
never again be healed.' 

####-     The hobbits recoiled. But Frodo said: 'Do  not believe him! He has lost  
all power, save his voice that  can still daunt you and deceive you, if  you  
let it.  But  I will not  have him slain. It is useless to meet revenge with 
revenge: it will heal nothing. Go, Saruman, by the speediest way!' 
     'Worm! Worm!' Saruman called; and out of a  nearby hut came 
Wormtongue, 
crawling, almost like a dog. To the road again, Worm!' said Saruman.  'These 
fine fellows and lordlings are turning us adrift again. Come along!' 
     Saruman turned  to go, and Wormtongue shuffled after  him.  But even as 
Saruman passed close to Frodo a knife flashed in his  hand,  and  he stabbed 
swiftly.  The blade turned  on  the hidden  mail-coat  and snapped.  A dozen  
hobbits, led by Sam, leaped forward with a cry and flung  the villain to the 
ground. Sam drew his sword. 
     'No, Sam!' said  Frodo. 'Do not kill him even now.  For he has not hurt 
me.  And in any case I do not wish him to be slain in this evil mood. He was 
great once, of  a  noble kind that we  should  not  dare to raise  our hands 
against. He is fallen, and his cure is beyond us;  but  I would still  spare 
him, in the hope that he may find it.' 
     Saruman rose to his feet, and stared at Frodo. There was a strange look  
in his  eyes of mingled wonder and  respect and  hatred.  'You  have  grown, 
Halfling,' he said. 'Yes, you have grown very much. You are wise, and cruel. 
You  have  robbed  my revenge of  sweetness,  and  now  I must go  hence  in 
bitterness, in debt to your mercy.  I hate it and you! Well, I go and I will 
trouble you no more. But do  not expect me to wish you health and long life. 
You will have neither. But that is not my doing. I merely foretell.' 
     He walked away, and  the hobbits made a lane for him to pass; but their 
knuckles whitened as  they gripped  on their  weapons. Wormtongue hesitated, 
and then followed his master. 
     'Wormtongue!' called Frodo. 'You need not follow him. I know of no evil  
you have done to me. You can  have rest and food here for a while, until you  
are stronger and can go your own ways.' 
     Wormtongue  halted  and  looked  back at  him, half  prepared  to  stay. 
Saruman turned.  'No evil?'  he  cackled. 'Oh no! Even when he sneaks out at 
night it is only to look at the stars. But did I hear someone ask where poor  
Lotho is hiding? You know, don't you, Worm? Will you tell them?' 
     Wormtongue cowered down and whimpered: 'No, no!' 
     'Then I  will,'  said Saruman.  'Worm killed  your  Chief,  poor little 

####-fellow, your nice little Boss. Didn't you, Worm? Stabbed him in his sleep, I 
believe.  Buried him, I hope;  though Worm has been very hungry lately.  No, 
Worm is not really nice. You had better leave him to me.' 
     A look of wild hatred came into Wormtongue's red eyes. 'You told me to;  
you made me do it,' he hissed. 
     Saruman laughed. 'You do what Sharkey says,  always, don't  you,  Worm?  
Well,  now  he  says:  follow!'  He  kicked  Wormtongue in  the face  as  he 
grovelled, and  turned and made off. But at that something snapped: suddenly 
Wormtongue rose up, drawing a hidden knife, and then with a snarl like a dog 
he sprang on Saruman's back, jerked his head back, cut his throat, and  with 
a yell  ran off  down the lane. Before Frodo could recover or  speak a word, 
three hobbit-bows twanged and Wormtongue fell dead. 
     To the dismay of those that stood by, about the  body of Saruman a grey 
mist gathered, and  rising slowly to a great height like smoke  from a fire, 
as a pale shrouded  figure it loomed over the Hill. For a moment it wavered,  
looking to the West; but out of the West came a cold wind, and it bent away,  
and with a sigh dissolved into nothing. 
     Frodo looked down at the body with pity and horror, for as he looked it 
seemed that long years of death were suddenly revealed in it, and it shrank, 
and the shrivelled face became rags of skin upon a hideous skull. Lifting up 
the skirt  of the dirty cloak  that sprawled beside  it, he covered it over, 
and turned away. 
     'And  that's  the end of that,'  said Sam. 'A nasty end,  and I  wish I 
needn't have seen it; but it's a good riddance.' 
     'And the very last end of the War, I hope,' said Merry. 
     'I hope so,' said Frodo and sighed. 'The very last stroke. But to think  
that it  should fall here, at the very  door  of Bag End! Among all my hopes 
and fears at least I never expected that.' 
     'I shan't call it  the end, till we've cleared  up  the mess,' said Sam 
gloomily. 'And that'll take a lot of time and work.' 
 

####- 

Chapter 9. The Grey Havens 

 
 
     The clearing up certainly needed a lot of work, but  it took  less time 
than Sam had feared. The day  after the battle Frodo  rode to Michel Delving 
and released the prisoners from  the Lockholes. One  of the first  that they 
found was  poor Fredegar Bolger, Fatty no longer. He had been taken when the 
ruffians smoked  out a band of rebels that  he  led from their hidings up in 
the Brockenbores by the hills of Scary. 
     'You  would have  done better  to  come with us  after  all,  poor  old 
Fredegar!' said Pippin, as they carried him out too weak to walk. 
     He opened an eye and tried gallantly to  smile. 'Who's this young giant  
with the loud voice?' he  whispered. 'Not little Pippin! What's your size in 
hats now?' 
     Then  there  was Lobelia. Poor thing, she looked very old and thin when 
they rescued her  from a dark and narrow  cell. She insisted on hobbling out 
on her own feet; and she had such a welcome, and there was such clapping and 
cheering when she appeared,  leaning on Frodo's arm but still clutching  her  
umbrella, that she was quite touched, and drove away in tears. She had never 
in her life been popular before. But she was crushed  by the news of  Lotho's 
murder, and she would' not return to Bag End. She gave it back to Frodo, and 
went to her own people, the Bracegirdles of Hardbottle. 
     When the poor  creature died next Spring-she  was after all more than a  
hundred years  old  - Frodo was  surprised and much  moved: she had left all  
that remained of her money and of Lotho's for him to use in helping  hobbits 
made homeless by the troubles. So that feud was ended. 
     Old Will Whitfoot had been in the Lockholes longer than any, and though 
he had  perhaps  been treated  less harshly  than  some,  he needed a lot of 
feeding up before he could look the part of Mayor; so Frodo agreed to act as 
his Deputy, until Mr. Whitfoot was  in shape again. The  only  thing that he 
did as  Deputy Mayor was  to reduce the Shirriffs to  their proper functions 
and numbers. The task of  hunting  out the last remnant of  the ruffians was 
left to Merry and  Pippin,  and  it was soon done. The southern gangs, after  
hearing the news of the Battle of  Bywater, fled out of the land and offered 
little resistance to the Thain. Before the Year's End the few survivors were 
rounded  up in  the  woods,  and those  that  surrendered were shown  to the 

####-borders.  
     Meanwhile the  labour  of  repair went on apace, and   Sam was kept very 
busy. Hobbits can work like bees when the mood  and the need comes on  
them. 
Now  there were thousands of willing  hands of all ages, from the  small but 
nimble ones of the hobbit lads and lasses to the well-worn and horny ones of 
the gaffers  and gammers.  Before Yule not a brick was left standing of  the 
new Shirriff-houses  or of anything that had been built by 'Sharkey's  Men';  
but the bricks were used to repair many an old hole, to make it snugger  and  
drier. Great stores of goods a nd  food, and beer,  were found that had  been 
hidden away  by  the  ruffians in  sheds and barns and deserted  holes,  and 
especially in the tunnels  at Michel  Delving  and  in the  old quarries  at 
Scary; so that there was a great deal better cheer that Yule than anyone had 
hoped for. 
     One of the first  things done in Hobbiton,  before even  the removal of 
the new mill, was the clearing of the Hill and Bag End, and the  restoration 
of Bagshot Row. The front of the new sand-pit was all levelled and made into 
a large sheltered garden, and new holes were dug in the southward face, back 
into the Hill, and they  were lined with brick. The Gaffer  was  restored to 
Number Three; and he said often and did not care who heard it: 
     'It's an  ill wind as  blows nobody no good, as I always say. And All's 
well as ends Better!' 
     There was some discussion of the name that the new row should be given. 
Battle  Gardens  was thought  of,  or Better  Smials.  But  after a while in 
sensible hobbit-fashion it was just called New Row. It was a purely  Bywater  
joke to refer to it as Sharkey's End. 
     The trees were the worst loss and damage, for at Sharkey's bidding they 
had been  cut down recklessly far  and wide over the Shire; and Sam  grieved 
over this more than anything else. For  one thing, this hurt would take long 
to heal, and only  his great-grandchildren, he thought,  would see the Shire 
as it ought to be. 
     Then  suddenly  one day, for he had  been too busy for  weeks to give a  
thought to  his adventures,   he remembered the gift of Galadriel. He brought  
the box  out and showed it to  the  other Travellers (for  so they were  now 
called by everyone), and asked their advice. 
     'I wondered when you would think of it,' said Frodo. 'Open it!' 
     Inside it was filled with a grey  dust, soft and fine, in the middle of 

####-which was a seed, like a small nut with a  silver shale. 'What can I do with 
this?' said Sam. 
     'Throw it in the air on  a breezy day  and  let it do  its  work!' said 
Pippin. 
     'On what?' said Sam. 
     'Choose one spot  as  a  nursery, and  see what happens  to the  plants 
there,' said Merry. 
     'But I'm  sure  the Lady  would not like me to keep it all  for my  own 
garden, now so many folk have suffered,' said Sam. 
     'Use all the wi ts and knowledge you have of your own, Sam,' said Frodo,  
'and then  use the  gift to  help  your  work  and  better  it. And  use  it 
sparingly. There is not much here, and I expect every grain has a value.' 
     So Sam planted saplings in all the  places where specially beautiful or  
beloved trees had been destroyed, and he put a grain of the precious dust in 
the soil at the root of each. He went up and  down the Shire in this labour; 
but if he  paid special attention to Hobbiton and Bywater no one blamed h im. 
And  at  the end he found that he still had a little of the dust left; so he 
went to the Three-Farthing  Stone, which is as near the centre of the  Shire 
as no matter, and cast it  in  the air with his  blessing. The little silver  
nut he  planted  in the Party Field where the tree had  once  been;  and  he 
wondered  what would  come  of  it. All through  the winter  he remained  as 
patient  as  he  could,  and tried  to  restrain himself  from  going  round 
constantly to see if anything was happening. 
     Spring surpassed his wildest hopes. His trees began to sprout and grow, 
as if time was in a hurry and  wished to make one year do for twenty. In the 
Party Field a beautiful young sapling leaped up: it had silver bark and long 
leaves and burst into golden flowers  in April. It was indeed a mallorn, and 
it was the wonder of the neighbourhood.  In after years, as it grew in grace 
and beauty, it was known far and wide and people would come long journeys 
to 
see it: the only mallorn  west of the Mountains and east of the Sea, and one 
of the finest in the world. 
     Altogether 1420 in  the Shire was a marvellous year. Not only was there 
wonderful sunshine and delicious rain, in due times and perfect measure, but 
there seemed something more: an air of richness and growth, and a gleam of a  
beauty  beyond  that  of  mortal summers  that flicker  and  pass  upon this 
Middle-earth. All the children born or begotten in that year, and there were 

####-many, were fair to see and strong, and most of them  had a rich golden  hair 
that had before  been rare  among hobbits.  The fruit was so  plentiful that 
young  hobbits very nearly bathed in  strawberries and cream; and later they 
sat on the lawns under the plum-trees  and ate, until they had made piles of 
stones  like  small pyramids or  the  heaped skulls of a conqueror, and then 
they  moved on. And no  one was ill,  and everyone was pleased. except those 
who had to mow the grass.  
     In the  Southfarthing the vines were laden, and the yield of 'leaf' was 
astonishing; and everywhere there was  so much  corn that at  Harvest  every 
barn was stuffed. 'The  Northfarthing barley  was so fine  that the beer  of 
1420 malt was long remembered and became a byword. Indeed a generation 
later 
one might hear an  old gaffer  in an inn, aft er  a good pint  of well-earned 
ale,  put  down his mug with a sigh:  'Ah! that was  proper fourteen-twenty, 
that was!' 
     Sam stayed at first at  the Cottons'  with Frodo; but when  the New Row 
was ready he went  with the Gaffer. In addition to all his  other  labours he 
was  busy  directing  the cleaning up and restoring  of Bag End; but he  was 
often away in the Shire on his forestry work. So he was not at home in early 
March and did not know that  Frodo had  been ill. On the  thirteenth of that 
month  Farmer Cotton found Frodo lying on his bed; he was clutching  a white 
gem that hung on a chain about his neck and he seemed half in a dream. 
     'It is gone for ever,' he said, 'and now all is dark and empty.' 
     But the fit  passed, and  when Sam got back on  the twenty-fifth, Frodo 
had  recovered, and he said nothing about  himself. In the meanwhile Bag End 
had  been  set  in order,  and Merry and Pippin came over  from  Crickhollow 
bringing back  all the old furniture  and gear, so that  the  old hole  soon 
looked very much as it always had done. 
     When all was at last ready Frodo said: 'When are you  going to  move in 
and join me, Sam?' 
     Sam looked a bit awkward. 
     'There is no need to come yet, if you don't want to,'  said Frodo. 'But 
you k now the Gaffer  is close at hand, and he will be very well looked after  
by Widow Rumble.' 
     It s not that, Mr. Frodo, said Sam, and he went ver red. 
     'Well, what is it?' 
     'It's Rosie, Rose Cotton,' said Sam. 'It seems she didn't like my going 

####-abroad at all, poor lass; but as I hadn't spoken, she couldn't say so. And I 
didn't speak, because I had  a job to  do first. But now I have  spoken, and 
she says:  "Well, you've  wasted  a year,  so why wait longer?"  "Wasted?" I  
says. "I wouldn't call it that." Still I see what she means. I feel torn  in 
two, as you might say.' 
     'I see,' said Frodo: 'you want to get married, and yet you want to live 
with me in  Bag End too? But my dear  Sam, how easy! Get  married as soon as 
you  can, and then move in with Rosie. There's room enough in Bag End for as 
big a family as you could wish for.' 
     And so it was settled. Sam Gamgee married Rose Cotton in the Spring  of 
1420 (which was  also famous  for its weddings), and they came and lived  at 
Bag End. And if Sam thought himself lucky, Frodo knew that he was more 
lucky 
himself; for there was not a hobbit in the  Shire that was looked after with 
such care. When the labours of repair  had all been planned and set going he 
took to a quiet life, writing a great dea l and  going through all his notes. 
He resigned the office of Deputy Mayor at the Free Fair that mid-summer, and 
dear old Will Whitfoot had another seven years of presiding at Banquets.  
     Merry and Pippin lived together for some time at Crickhollow, and  there 
was  much coming  and  going between  Buckland and Bag  End.  The two  
young 
Travellers cut a great  dash in the Shire  with  their songs and their tales 
and their finery,  and  their wonderful  parties. 'Lordly' folk called them, 
meaning nothing bu t good; for it warmed all hearts to see them go  riding by 
with their mail-shirts so bright and their shields so splendid, laughing and 
singing songs of far away; and if they were now large and magnificent,  they  
were unchanged otherwise, unless they were  indeed  more fairspoken and 
more 
jovial and full of merriment than ever before. 
     Frodo and Sam, however, went back to ordinary attire,  except that when 
there was need they both wore long grey cloaks,  finely woven and clasped at 
the throat with beautiful brooches; and Mr. Frodo wore always a  white jewel 
on a chain that he often would finger. 
     All things now went well, with  hope always of becoming  still  better; 
and Sam  was  as busy and as  full of delight as even a hobbit  could  wish. 
Nothing  for him marred that whole year, except  for some vague anxiety about 
his  master. Frodo dropped quietly  out of all the doings of the  Shire, and 

####-Sam was  pained to notice how little  honour he  had in his own country. Few 
people  knew  or  wanted  to  know about  his  deeds and  adventures;  their 
admiration  and  respect were given mostly  to Mr. Meriadoc and Mr. Peregrin 
and (if Sam had known it) to himself. Also in  the  autumn there appeared  a  
shadow of old troubles.  
     One evening Sam came into the  study and  found his master looking very 
strange. He was very pale and his eyes seemed to see things far away. 
     'What's the matter, Mr. Frodo?' said Sam. 
     'I am wounded,' he answered, 'wounded; it will never really heal.' 
     But then  he  got   up, and the  turn seemed to  pass, and he  was quite 
himself the next day. It was not until afterwards that Sam recalled that the 
date  was October the sixth. Two years before on that day it was dark in the 
dell under Weathertop. 
     Time went on, and 1421 came  in. Frodo was ill again in March, but with 
a great effort he concealed it, for Sam had other things to think about. The 
first of  Sam and Rosie's children was born on the twenty-fifth of  March, a  
date that Sam noted. 
     'Well,  Mr. Frodo,' he said. 'I'm in a bit of  a fix.  Rose  and me had 
settled  to  call him Frodo, with  your leave; but it's  not  him , it's her. 
Though as pretty a maidchild  as any one  could hope for, taking after  Rose 
more than me, luckily. So we don't know what to do.' 
     'Well,  Sam,' said Frodo,  'what's wrong with the old customs? Choose a  
flower name like Rose. Half the maidchildren in the Shire are called by such  
names, and what could be better?' 
     'I  suppose  you're  right,  Mr.  Frodo,'  said  Sam.  'I've heard some 
beautiful names on my travels,  but  I  suppose they're  a bit too grand for 
daily wear and tear, as you  might say. The Gaffer, he says: "Make it short, 
and  then you won't have to cut it short before you can use it." But if it's 
to be a  flower-name, then I don't  trouble about  the length: it  must be a  
beautiful  flower, because, you see, I  think  she is very beautiful, and is 
going to be beautifuller still.' 
     Frodo  thought  for  a  moment.  'Well,  Sam,  what  about  elanor, the 
sun-star, you remember the little golden flower in the grass of Lothlurien?' 
     'You're  right  again, Mr. Frodo!' said  Sam delighted.  'That's what I 
wanted.' 
     Little  Elanor  was nearly six months  old, and 1421  had passed to its 
autumn, when Frodo called Sam into the study. 

####-     'It will be Bilbo's Birthday on Thursday, Sam,'  he  said. 'And he will 
pass the Old Took. He will be a hundred and thirty-one!' 
     'So he will!' said Sam. 'He's a marvel!' 
     'Well,  Sam,' said Frodo. 'I want you to see Rose  and  find out if she 
can spare  you, so that you and I can go off together.  You can't go  far or  
for a long time now, of course,' he said a little wistfully. 
     'Well, not very well, Mr. Frodo.' 
     'Of course not.  But never mind.  You can see me on my way.  Tell  Rose 
that you won't be away very long, not more than a fortnight; and you'll come  
back quite safe.' 
     'I wish I could go all  the way  with  you to Rivendell, Mr. Frodo, and 
see Mr. Bilbo,' said Sam. 'And yet the only place I really want to  be in is 
here. I am that torn in two.' 
     'Poor Sam! It will feel like that, I am  afraid,'  said Frodo. 'But you  
will be healed. You were meant to be solid and whole, and you will be.' 
     In the next day or  two Frodo went through his papers and  his writings 
with Sam, and he handed over his keys.  There was  a big book with plain red 
leather  covers; its  tall  pages were  now almost filled.  At the beginning 
there were many leaves covered with Bilbo's thin wandering hand; but most of 
it was written in Frodo's firm flowing script.  It was divided into chapters 
but  Chapter 80 was unfinished, and after that  were some  blank leaves. The 
title page had many titles on it, crossed out one after another, so: 
 
     My  Diary. My Unexpected  Journey.  There  and  Back  Again.  And  What 
Happened After. 
     Adventures of  Five  Hobbits. The Tale  of the Great  Ring, compiled by 
Bilbo  Baggins from his own  observations  and the  accounts of his friends. 
What we did in the War of the Ring. 
     Here Bilbo's hand ended and Frodo had written: 
 
     THE DOWNFALL 
     OF THE 
     LORD OF THE RINGS 
     AND THE 
     RETURN OF THE KING 
 
     (as seen by the Little People; being the memoirs  of Bilbo and Frodo of 

####-the Shire, supplemented by the accounts of their friends and the learning of 
the Wise.) 
     Together  with  extracts from  Books of  Lore  translated by  Bilbo  in 
Rivendell. 
     'Why, you  have  nearly finished  it, Mr. Frodo!' Sam exclaimed. 'Well, 
you have kept at it, I must say.' 
     'I have quite finished, Sam,' said Frodo. 'The last pages are for you.' 
     On September the twenty-first  they set out together, Frodo on the pony 
that  had  borne him  all the  way  from  Minas  Tirith, and was  now called 
Strider; and Sam on his beloved Bill. It  was a fair golden morning, and Sam 
did not ask where they were going: he thought he could guess. 
     They took the Stock Road over the hills and went towards the Woody End, 
and they let their ponies walk  at their leisure.  They camped  in the Green 
Hills,  and  on September the twenty-second  they rode gently down  into the 
beginning of the trees as afternoon was wearing away. 
     'If that isn't the very tree you hid  behind when the Black Rider first 
showed up, Mr. Frodo!' said Sam pointing to the left. 'It seems like a dream 
now.' 
     It  was  evening, and the stars were glimmering  in the  eastern sky as 
they passed the ruined oak and turned and went on  down the hill between the 
hazel-thickets. Sam  was  silent,  deep in his memories. Presently he became 
aware   that  Frodo  was  singing  softly  to  himself,   singing   the  old 
walking-song, but the words were not quite the same. 
     Still round the corner there may wait 
     A new road or a secret gate; 
     And though I oft have passed them by, 
     A day will come at last when I 
     Shall take the hidden paths that run 
     West of the Moon, East of the Sun. 
     And  as if in answer,  from down below,  coming up the road out of  the 
valley, voices sang: 
     A! Elbereth Gilthoniel! 
     silivren penna mnriel 
     o menel aglar elenath, 
     Gilthoniel, A! Elbereth! 
     We still remember, we who dwell 
     In this far land beneath the trees 

####-     The starlight on the Western Seas. 
     Frodo and Sam halted and sat silent in the soft shadows, until they saw 
a shimmer as the travellers came towards them. 
     There was Gildor  and  many fair Elven folk; and there  to Sam's wonder  
rode Elrond and Galadriel. Elrond wore a  mantle of grey and had a star upon 
his forehead, and  a silver harp was in his  hand, and upon his finger was a  
ring of gold with a  great blue stone, Vilya, mightiest of  the  Three.  But 
Galadriel sat upon a white palfrey  and  was robed all in glimmering  white,  
like  clouds  about the Moon; for  she herself seemed  to shine with a  soft 
light.  On  her  finger was Nenya, the ring wrought of mithril ,  that bore a  
single white stone  flickering like a frosty star. Riding slowly behind on a  
small grey pony, and seeming to nod in his sleep, was Bilbo himself. 
     Elrond greeted  them gravely and graciously, and Galadriel  smiled upon  
them. 'Well, Master Samwise,'  she said.  'I hear and see that you have used 
my  gift well. The Shire shall now be  more than ever blessed  and beloved.' 
Sam bowed, but found nothing to say. He had forgotten how beautiful the Lady 
was. 
     Then Bilbo woke up and opened his eyes. 'Hullo, Frodo!' he said. 'Well, 
I have passed the  Old Took today! So that's  settled. And now I think I  am 
quite ready to go on another journey. Are you coming?' 
     'Yes, I am coming,' said Frodo. 'The Ring-bearers should go together.' 
     'Where are you going, Master?' cried Sam, though at last he  understood 
what was happening. 
     'To the Havens, Sam,' said Frodo. 
     'And I can't come.' 
     'No, Sam. Not yet anyway, not  further  than the Havens. Though you too 
were a Ring-bearer, if only  for a little while. Your  time may come. Do not 
be too  sad, Sam. You cannot be always torn in two. You will  have to be one 
and whole, for many years. You have so much to enjoy and to be, and to do.' 
     'But,' said  Sam, and tears started  in his eyes, 'I  thought  you were 
going  to  enjoy the  Shire, too.  for years and  years, after all you  have 
done.' 
     'So I thought too, once. But I have been too deeply hurt, Sam. I  tried 
to  save the Shire, and it has been saved, but not  for me. It must often be 
so, Sam, when things are in danger: some one has to give them up, lose them, 
so that others may keep them. But you are my  heir: all that I had and might  
have had I leave to you.  And also you  have Rose, and Elanor; and Frodo -lad 

####-will  come,  and  Rosie-lass,  and Merry, and  Goldilocks,  and Pippin;  and 
perhaps more  that I  cannot see. Your  hands and  your wits will  be needed 
everywhere. You will be the Mayor, of course, as long a s you want to be, and 
the most famous gardener in history; and you will read things out of the Red 
Book, and keep alive the memory of the age that is gone. so that people will  
remember the Great Danger and so love their beloved land all the  more.  And 
that will  keep  you as busy and as  happy as anyone can be, as long as your 
part of the Story goes on. 
     'Come now, ride with me!' 
     Then Elrond and  Galadriel rode on; for the Third Age was over, and the  
Days of the Rings were passed, and an end was come of the story and  song of 
those  times. With them  went many  Elves of the High Kindred  who  would 
no 
longer stay in  Middle-earth; and among them, filled with a sadness that was 
yet  blessed and without bitterness, rode Sam, and Frodo, and Bilbo, and the 
Elves delighted to honour them. 
     Though they rode through the midst of the Shire all the evening and all 
the night, none saw them  pass,  save the wild creatures; or here  and there 
some wanderer in the dark who saw a swift  shimmer  under  the trees,  or  a  
light and shadow flowing  through the grass as the Moon  went westward.  And 
when  they had passed from the  Shire,  going about the  south skirts of the 
White Downs, they came to the Far Downs,  and to the Towers,  and  looked on 
the  distant Sea; and  so they  rode down at  last to Mithlond,  to the Grey 
Havens in the long firth of Lune. 
     As  they  came  to the gates Cnrdan the Shipwright came  forth to greet 
them. Very tall he was,  and his beard  was long, and he  was grey  and old, 
save that  his eyes were keen as stars; and he looked at them and bowed, and  
said: 'All is now ready.' 
     Then Cnrdan led  them to the Havens, and there  was a white ship lying, 
and upon the  quay  beside a  great  grey horse stood a  figure robed all in 
white awaiting them.  As  he turned and came  towards  them  Frodo saw  that 
Gandalf now wore openly  upon his  hand the Third Ring, Narya the Great, and 
the stone upon it was red as fire.  Then those who were to go were glad, for  
they knew that Gandalf also would take ship with them. 
     But Sam  was now sorrowful at  heart,  and it seemed to him that if the 
parting would be bitter,  more grievous  still would  be  the long road home 
alone. But  even as they stood there, and the Elves were  going aboard,  and 

####-all was being made ready to depart, up rode Merry and Pippin in great haste.  
And amid his tears Pippin laughed. 
     'You tried to give us the slip once before and failed, Frodo.' he said. 
'This time you have nearly  succeeded, but you have failed again. It was not  
Sam, though, that gave you away this time, but Gandalf himself!' 
     'Yes,' said Gandalf; 'for it will be better to ride back three together  
'than one alone. Well, here at  last, dear friends, on the shores of the Sea  
comes the end of our fellowship in Middle-earth.  Go in peace!  I  will  not 
say: do not weep; for not all tears are an evil.' 
     Then Frodo  kissed Merry  and Pippin,  and last  of all  Sam,  and went 
aboard; and the sails were drawn up, and  the wind blew, and slowly the ship 
slipped away  down  the  long  grey firth;  and the  light of  the  glass of 
Galadriel that Frodo bore glimmered and was lost. And the ship went out into 
the  High Sea and passed on into the West, until at  last on a night of rain 
Frodo smelled  a sweet  fragrance on the air  and heard the sound of singing  
that came over the water. And  then it seemed to him that as in his dream in 
the house of Bombadil, the grey rain-curtain turned all to silver  glass and  
was  rolled back, and he beheld white  shores and beyond  them  a far  green 
country under a swift sunrise. 
     But to Sam  the evening deepened to darkness as he  stood at the Haven; 
and as he looked at the grey sea he saw only a shadow on the waters that was 
soon lost in the West. There still he stood  far into the night, hearing only 
the  sigh and murmur of  the  waves on  the shores  of Middle-earth, and the 
sound of them sank deep into his  heart.  Beside him stood Merry and Pippin, 
and they were silent. 
     At last the three companions  turned away, and never again looking back  
they rode slowly homewards; and they spoke no word to one another until they 
came  back to the  Shire. but each had great comfort  in his friends  on the 
long grey road. 
     At last they rode over the downs and took the East Road, and then Merry 
and Pippin rode on to Buckland; and already they  were singing again as they 
went. But Sam turned to Bywater,  and so came back up  the Hill,  as day was 
ending  once  more. And  he  went on, and there  was  yellow light, and fire 
within; and the evening meal was ready, and he  was expected.  And Rose drew 
him in, and set him in his chair, and put little Elanor upon his lap. 
     He drew a deep breath. 'Well, I'm back,' he said. 
 

####-